Psychological Principles
James Ward (1918)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): James Ward's Psychological Principles (1918) — the Cambridge psychologist-philosopher's system: the authoritative British psychology of its day.

========================================================================

:BR'

PSYCH t
3RARY


u


The  Cambridge  Psychological  Library


PSYCHOLOGICAL
PRINCIPLES


CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS

C.  F.  CLAY,  MANAGER
LONDON  :  FETTER  LANE,  E.C.  4


NEW  YORK  :  G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS
BOMBAY,  CALCUTTA,  MADRAS  :  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD.

TORONTO  :  J.  M.  DENT  AND  SONS,  LTD.
TOKYO  :  THE  MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA


All  rights  reset -ved


PSYCHOLOGICAL
PRINCIPLES


BY


JAMES  WARD


SC.D.  (CANTAB.),  HON.  LL.D.  (EDIN.),  HON.  D.SC.  (OXON.)

FELLOW  OF  THE  BRITISH  ACADEMY
FOREIGN  MEMBER  OF  THE  NEW  YORK  ACADEMY

AND  OF  THE  DANISH  ROYAL  SOCIETY
CORRESPONDENT  OF  THE  FRENCH  INSTITUTE

AND
PROFESSOR  OF  MENTAL  PHILOSOPHY,  CAMBRIDGE


Cambridge :

at  the  University Press

1918


PREFACE

r  I  ^HERE  are  certain  obvious  defects  in  this  book  due  to  the
JL circumstances  of  its  composition. The  author  trusts  that
a  brief  account  of  those  circumstances  may  therefore  be  at  least
condoned.

Just  forty  years  ago,  that  is  in  1878 — when  I  began  lecturing
on  Psychology — the  plan  of  the  book  was  laid  down.  As  the
lectures  proceeded,  abstracts  of  some  of  them  were  privately
printed  for  discussion  at  a  Moral  Sciences  Club,  in  which  some
other  Cambridge  books  also  took  their  rise.  The  first  two  of
these  abstracts,  written  in  1880,  were  afterwards  reproduced
without  revision  in  the  American  Journal  of  Speculative  Philo-
sophy for  1882-3,  one  corresponding  to  the  present  chapter  ii,
and  the  other,  entitled  "  Objects  and  their  Interaction,"  to  parts
of  the  present  chapters  iv-vii.  A  third  on  Space  and  Time,
written  in  1881,  was  rejected  by  the  late  G.  Croom  Robertson
the  editor  of  Mind,  as  too  difficult  and  revolutionary  for  publica-
tion as  it  stood.  But  afterwards  he  accepted  and  published  what
were  to  have  been  the  two  opening  chapters  of  a  book  bearing
the  same  title  as  this.  Other  chapters  were  to  follow,  but  cir-
cumstances diverted  them  elsewhere.  In  1884  Croom  Robertson,
who  had  engaged  some  years  previously  to  write  the  article
"  Psychology"  for  the  ninth  edition  of  the  Encyclopaedia  Britan-
nica,  was  prevented  by  failing  health  from  proceeding  further
with  it.  Professor  Sully,  who  was  next  appealed  to,  having
declined  the  task,  the  editor  of  the  Encyclopaedia,  at  that  time
T.  Spencer  Baynes,  chancing  to  have  made  my  acquaintance,
offered  it  to  me.  I  rashly  sacrificed  my  book  to  the  offer  and
so,  as  it  has  turned  out,  destroyed  one  of  the  dreams  of  my  life.

The  article  was  begun  late  in  1884  and  completed  in  1885;
then,  in  1902,  a  supplementary  article  was  prepared  for  the
tenth  edition  of  the  Encyclopaedia ;  and  finally,  in  1908,  these


vi  Preface

with  omissions  and  additions  were  hastily  amalgamated  into
the  new  article  of  the  present  or  eleventh  edition.  For  here
again  circumstances  were  untoward.  I  had  at  first  declined  to
undertake  this,  pointing  out  the  advisability  of  an  entirely  new
article,  which  at  the  time  I  was  not  disposed  to  attempt,  and  re-
commending a  younger  man  well  fitted  to  take  my  place.  Some
two  years  later,  however,  the  obdurate  editor  with  many  com-
pliments begged  me  to  reconsider  my  decision,  but  telling  me
plainly  that — in  default  of  a  revised  article  from  me — he  meant
just  to  reprint  the  old  ones  as  they  were.  Finding  that  his
threat  could  be  legally  upheld,  I  yielded  to  his  importunity.
Thus  the  final  article  like  the  first  one  was  done  in  a  hurry.

The  article  of  the  ninth  edition,  published  by  A.  and  C.  Black,
was  procurable  separately.  What  circulation  it  had  in  this  form
I  have  never  been  able  to  ascertain;  but  once  it  was  out  of  print
and  copies  fetched  a  fancy  price.  With  the  tenth  edition,  pub-
lished by  the  Times,  apparently  this  separate  issue  ceased.  Since
then  requests  for  a  reprint  or  an  expansion  have  been  many  and
continuous  both  from  publishers  and  booksellers  as  well  as  from
private  people.  In  view  of  this  demand  I  stipulated,  before  at
last  undertaking  the  final  revision  mentioned  above,  that  I  should
be  at  liberty  to  use  the  articles  as  the  basis  for  a  new  book.  This
permission  was  readily  granted  by  the  proprietors  of  the  copy-
right; but  on  the  understanding  that  the  book  should  be  about
a  third  longer  and  not  sold  below  a  certain  price.

Up  to  1894  I  had  continued  working  systematically  at  psy-
chology as  far  as  new  duties  allowed.  A  paper  in  Mind,  N.S.
vols.  ii.-iii.  (1893-4),  entitled  "Assimilation  and  Association,"
was  one  of  these  essays :  portions  of  this  were  incorporated  in
the  article  as  it  appeared  in  1911  as  well  as  portions  of  papers
hitherto  unpublished.  But  in  1894  I  became  engrossed  in  other
subjects  and  the  idea  of  an  entirely  new  book  on  psychology  was
thenceforth  abandoned.  Accordingly  in  the  spring  of  1913,  when
arrangements  for  this  book  were  made,  my  intention  was  to
meet  the  general  wish  for  a  reissue  of  the  Encyclopaedia  article
and  at  the  same  time  to  satisfy  the  demands  of  the  proprietors
by  enlarging  it  from  material  already  more  or  less  in  shape1.
On  the  prescribed  scale  some  three-quarters  of  the  article  were

1  The  first  chapter,  for  example,  had  previously  served  as  opening  article  in  the
British  Journal  of  Psychology,  i.  (1904).


Preface  vii

expanded  within  about  a  year,  bringing  the  book  down  to  the
end  of  chapter  xi.  Owing  to  the  exigencies  of  space,  the  sec-
tions of  the  article  dealing  with  experience  at  the  self-conscious
and  social  level  had  been  unduly  compressed.  Hence  the  re-
maining chapters  (xii-xviii),  forming  almost  a  third  of  the  book,
are,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  pages,  entirely  new;  and  the
last  two  were  no  part  of  the  original  plan.  On  the  other  hand
the  concluding  sections  of  the  article — on  the  Relation  of  Body
and  Mind  and  on  Comparative  Psychology — which  first  appeared
in  the  supplement — are  now  omitted  :  perhaps  I  may  have  an
opportunity  of  dealing  with  these  topics  by  and  by.


"A  belated  patchwork,  mostly  of  antiquated  rags" — such,
then,  is  the  sort  of  censorious  criticism  the  author  may  expect
to  hear  and  must  endeavour  to  anticipate.

From  the  charge  of  putting  forth  '  a  belated  book '  I  am  at
any  rate  partly  absolved  by  the  general  demand  that  has  long
existed  and  still  exists.  Moreover  I  have  done  my  best  in
the  text  and  still  more  in  notes  to  place  a  studious  reader  au
coiirant  with  the  psychological  literature  of  the  present  day.
But  there  is  a  psychology  which  arrogates  to  itself  the  title  of
'new1.'  New  it  undoubtedly  is,  and  there  are  signs  that  in  its
present  form  it  will  not  long  survive.  In  any  case  it  is  not
psychology — save  in  so  far  as  it  occasionally  furnishes  the  psy-
chologist with  material  of  some  value.  As  a  method  in  the  hands
of  psychologists  it  has  done  some  good :  as  a  pretended  science
in  the  hands  of  tyros  whose  psychological  training  has  not  even
begun,  it  has  done  infinite  harm.  This  book,  however,  is  not  so
antiquated  as  to  ignore  altogether  the  character  and  claims  of
this  'modern'  psychology,  as  the  reader  may  see.

As  to  the  lack  of  originality  which  this  charge  may  covertly
imply — perhaps  the  inaccessibility  of  a  long  article  in  a  vast
work  of  general  reference  will  make  this  charge  seem  more  plaus-
ible than  it  is.  For  much  of  this  article,  I  am  proud  to  say,  has
become  the  common  property  of  students  to  whom  the  original
is  unknown.  A  propos  of  this  I  may  be  pardoned  for  referring
to  the  concluding  words  of  a  too  laudatory  review  by  the  late

1  Concerning  this  I  may  perhaps  here  refer  to  my  "  'Modern'  Psychology:  a  Re-
flexion," Mind,  N.S.  ii.  (1893),  pp.  54 ff.


viii  Preface

Alexander  Bain — all  the  more  generous  as  on  several  points  the
views  put  forward  by  me  differed  widely  from  his  own1.

Finally,  as  to  the  charge  of  'patchwork' — this,  I  have  ad-
mitted and  lament ;  but  the  patches  are  my  own  and  the  plan  is,
I  hope,  uniform.  I  have  done  my  best  to  weld  the  old  and  the
new  together,  and  I  confess  that  what  distress  me  most  are  not
the  '  patches '  but  the  '  holes.'  In  any  case  a  book  on  psycho-
logical principles — that  is,  one  aiming  to  be  '  explanatory ' — must
differ  from  one  concerned  chiefly  in  being  '  descriptive.'  I  never
contemplated  more  than  an  exposition  of  psychology  as  a  whole :
merely  subsidiary  details,  however  interesting,  were  beyond  my
purview2.  But  in  writing  the  later  chapters  I  have  become  pain-
fully aware  of  more  serious  gaps.  Unfortunately  the  earlier
chapters  were  by  that  time  printed  off.  Of  course  it  would
have  been  better  at  the  outset  to  have  scrapped  the  whole,
as  was  my  original  intention,  but  in  1913  my  day  was  too
far  spent  for  that.


An  author  may  be  expected  to  acknowledge  his  obligations.

Psychology  was  not  taught  in  Cambridge  in  my  day,  and
what  I  owe  to  others  I  owe  entirely  to  previous  writers  and  to
my  pupils.  Among  the  former,  besides  our  English  psycholo-
gists, I  may  mention  Herbart  and  some  of  the  Herbartians,
Lotze,  Wundt,  Brentano  and  his  Austrian  connexions.

In  the  actual  preparation  of  the  book,  I  am  indebted  to
friends,  too  numerous  to  mention,  for  their  help  on  special
points ;  but  three,  who  patiently  waded  through  all  the  galley-
slips,  furnishing  me  with  detailed  and  valuable  comments — to
say  nothing  of  '  counsels  of  perfection '  beyond  my  reach — I

1  Cf.  "Mr  James  Ward's  Psychology,"  Mind,  xii.  (1886),  p.  477.

2  Chapter  ix,  it  must  be  allowed,  hardly  conforms  to  the  rule. The  substance
of  it  appeared  first in  the supplementary  or  tenth  edition  of  the  Encyclopaedia.
The  purpose  of  that  edition  was  to  bring  the articles  of  the  ninth  'up  to  date';
and  as  the  supplementary  article  "Psychology"  began  by  stating  that  "psychology
since  1885  had  entered  upon  an  experimental  stage,"  the  experimental  work  '  relating
to  memory  and  association  '  was  selected  as  '  probably  the  most  important '  and  a  brief
account  inserted  later  on  '  by  way  of  illustrating  the  so-called  new  psychology.' And
after  all  it  bears  on  some  problems — the  so-called  '  regressive '  and  '  mediate '  forms
of  association,  for  example,  among  others — that  are  of  fundamental  importance.  Hence
it  was  retained ;  but  if  there  is  one  chapter  more  than  another  in  the  book  that  may
be  '  skipped,'  it  is  this.


Preface  ix

must  name  :  they  were  Mr  H.  Barker  of  the  University  of  Edin-
burgh, Professor  G.  F.  Stout  of  the  University  of  St  Andrews —
former  students  of  my  own — and  Dr  G.  Dawes  Hicks,  Professor
at  University  College,  London.  I  shall  always  feel  deeply  grateful
to  them  for  services  that  I  can  never  repay.

I  have  also  to  thank  Mr  A.  R.  Waller,  the  Secretary  of  the
Press  Syndicate,  and  the  officials  of  the  Press  itself  for  their
kindly  cooperation  and  long  forbearance.


JAMES  WARD.


TRINITY  COLLEGE,
CAMBRIDGE.
July,  1918.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS


CHAPTER  I. THE  DEFINITION  OF  PSYCHOLOGY

PAGE

§  I. Aristotle's  Psychology  of  the  living  organism . .  i

§  2. Descartes'  Psychology  of  the  thinking  mind  ...  6

§  3. The  Cartesian  Dualism  and  the  Duality  of  Experience  12

§  4. The  Cartesian  Dualism  and  Intellectualism  . . .  19

§  5. Consciousness  and  Experience 21

§  6. The  form  of  Experience  and  questions  of  method .  24

§  7. The  standpoint  of  Psychology  as  individualistic . .  26

CHAPTER  II. GENERAL  ANALYSIS

§  i. Psychology  and  Epistemology 29

§  2. The  Subject  of  Experience 34

§  3. Feeling 41

§  4. Presentations 46

§  5. Conation 51

§6. Summary  of  results 55

CHAPTER  III. THEORY  OF  ATTENTION

§  i. '  Consciousness '  or  '  Attention  '  ? 60

§2. 'Attention' and  Presentations  :  Presentationism . .  66

§3. Attention  and  Acts  of  Attention 71

CHAPTER  IV. THEORY  OF  PRESENTATIONS

§  i. The  Psychological  Individual 74

§  2. The  Presentational  Continuum  :  Differentiation . .  75

§  3. Retentiveness  .........  80

§  4. Assimilation 82

§  5. Relativity 83

§  6. Subconsciousness  (a)  of  Impressions ....  90

§  7. Subconsciousness  (b)  of  Ideas . . . .  94


xii  Table  of  Contents

CHAPTER  V. SENSATION  AND  MOVEMENT

PAGE

§  I. Definition  of  Sensation . . . . . .  102

§  2. Characteristics  of  Sensations 105

§  3. Differentiation  of  Sensations 108

§4. Quantitative  Continuity .  115

§5. Sensations  of  Sight 120

§6. Sensations  of  Sound 126

§  7. The  Lower  Senses 133

§  8. Movement 135

CHAPTER  VI. PERCEPTION

§i. Integration:  Meanings  of  Perception ....  139

§  2. Recognition  of  Impressions 142

§  3. Localisation  of  Impressions  :  the  factors  involved .  144

§  4. Tactual  Perception  of  Space 151

§5. Visual  Perception  of  Space 153

§  6. Intuition  of  Things 161

§  7. Perception  as  partly  re-presentative . . . .  167

CHAPTER  VII. IMAGINATION  OR  IDEATION

§  i. Impressions  and  Ideas  distinguished .  169

§2. Genesis  and  Development  of  Ideation  . . . .  178

§  3. Association  and  the  Memory-Continuum . . .  191

§4. The  Formation  of  an  Ideational  Continuum  . . .  198

§  5. Conflict  of  Ideas 201

APPENDIX. §  6. Temporal  Signs 203

CHAPTER  VIII.  REMINISCENCE,  EXPECTATION  AND  TEMPORAL
PERCEPTION

§  I. Imagination  and  Memory 206

§  2. Expectation — Past,  Present  and  Future . . .  209

§3. Time:  Succession  and  Simultaneity . . . .  212

§  4. Duration 216

§5. The  Continuity  of  Time 219

CHAPTER  IX. MEMORISING,  RHYTHMIZING  AND  READING

§  i. Span  of  Prehension  and  Repetition ....  222

§  2. Rhythmizing 227

§  3. '  Regressive  Association ' 230

§4. 'Mediate  Association' 235

§  5. Reading 238

APPENDIX. §  6. '  Age '  and  '  Strength '  of  Associations .  240


Table  of  Contents  xiit
CHAPTER  X. FEELING

PAGE

§  I. Introductory 243

§  2. Inquiry  into  its  Causes 245

§  3. Summary  and  Result 261

§  4. Does  Pleasure  differ  qualitatively  ?  266

CHAPTER  XI. EFFECTS  OF  FEELING  :  EMOTION  AND  ACTION

§  i. The  James- Lange  Theory  of  Emotion  ....  270

§  2. Emotional  Expression  and  Purposive  Action . .  276

§  3. Desire 281

CHAPTER  XII. INTELLECTION

§  i. Acquisition  of  Language 286

§  2. Distinction  between  Sense  and  Understanding . .  292

§  3. Thought  and  Language 296

§  4. Thought  and  Ideation 298

§  5. General  Character  and  Growth  of  Intellection . .  302

§  6. Thought  as  analytic 305

APPENDIX. §  7. '  Apperception ' :  Intellective  Systems .  308

CHAPTER  XIII. FORMS  OF  SYNTHESIS

§  i. The  Bias  towards  Formal  Logic  in  Psychology . .  313

§  2. Objects  of  Higher  Order  :  their  Analysis  and  Genesis  .  316

§3. Forms  of  Intuition 318

§  4. Formal  Categories  :  (a)  Mathematical  . ... .  320

§  5. Formal  Categories :  (&)  Logical . . . . .  325

§  6. Real  Categories 334

CHAPTER  XIV. BELIEF,  CERTAINTY  AND  FAITH

§  i. Psychological  Topic  defined 347

§  2. Direct  (Objective)  Causes  of  Belief ....  348

§  3. Effect  of  Belief 353

§  4. Indirect  (Subjective)  Causes  of  Belief ....  354

§  5. Faith  and  Moral  Certainty . . . . . .  358

§  6. The  Genesis  of  Belief  and  Knowledge ....  359

CHAPTER  XV. PRESENTATION  OF  SELF,  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS,
SUBJECTIVE  BEING

§i. The  Empirical  Self  and  the  Pure  Self . . . .  361

§2. 'Internal  Perception' or  Self-Consciousness . .  371

§  3. Subjective  Being 3?6


xiv  Table  of  Contents

CHAPTER  XVI. CONDUCT  :  VALUE,  CHOICE  AND  FREEDOM

PAGE

§  i. General  Survey 383

§  2. Value 386

§  3. Choice 398

§  4. Freedom 4°4

CHAPTER  XVII. GENERAL  SYNTHESIS  OF  MIND  AND  THE
CONCRETE  INDIVIDUAL

§  i. General  Synthesis 4°9

§  2. The  Subjective  Factor 412

§  3. The  Objective  Factor 4*7

§  4. The  Concrete  Individual  and  Heredity . . .  42°

CHAPTER  XVIII. THE  CONCRETE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  CHAR-

ACTEROLOGY

§  i. Questions  of  Method 43°

§  2. Temperament •  434

§  3. Instinct,  Talent  and  Genius 443

§  4. Intelligence,  Sentiment  and  Character  . . . .  453
§  5. The  Formation  of  Character  as  the  Development  of

Personality 46 1

INDEX 47 1


CORRIGENDA

Page  63,  line  9,  for  intercept  read  interrupt.

„ line  14,/brto  readisx.
Page  75  «.,  line  i,for  36  read  26.
Page  96,  «.  3 yf«.,  for  Grove's  read  Grose's.
Page  100  fin.,  for  generally  read  general.
Page  112,  n.  i,for  2  read  5,  pp.  327  ff.
Page  129,  line  2$,  for  more  read  most.

„ line  26,  for  both  read  the.

„ n.  2,  for  had  raz</  helps.
Page  153,  line  3,  r^rtdHocalised,
Page  160,  n.  4,  line  2,/orlxvii  read\v\i.
Page  262,  n.  2,  line  10  from  bottom,  for  former  read  latter.
Page  295,  n.  3,  line  2,  for  characterizes  read  characterize.
Page  356,  «.  i,  line  $,for  error  read  errors.
Page  359,  «.  2, /or  only  raz*/  entirely.
Page  410,  line  iS,for  close  raw? end.
In  the  figure,  p.  126,  a  straight  line  should  be  drawn  from  R  to  D.


v


d

CHAPTER I

THE DEFINITION OF PSYCHOLOGY

Aristotle's  Psychology  of  the  living  organism.

§  I.  Everybody  can  tell  in  a  general  way  what  psychology  is
about :  in  fact  there  is  perhaps  no  science  the  subject-matter  of
which  can  be  more  clearly  and  promptly  set  forth  in  popular
language  and  for  practical  purposes.  For  the  student  of  history
or  of  biography,  for  the  physician  or  the  educationist,  it  is
enough  to  know  that  psychology  will  furnish  him  with  _a_
description  of  normal  mental  processes — perceiving,  believing,
reasoning,  striving,  &c. — and  of  their  normal  development,  a
description  incomplete,  no  doubt,  but  systematic  as  far  as  it
goes.  The  moment,  however,  that  we  attempt  to  pass  beyond
approximate  definitions  and  determine  exactly  what  the  term
'mental  process'  means  or  implies,  we  find  ourselves  beset  with
serious  difficulties;  as  the  past  history  of  psychology  and  also  its
present  controversies  sufficiently  shew.  Just  for  these  reasons,
then — because  a  rough  and  ready  characterization  of  psychology
is  easy,  while  any  adequate  determination  of  its  standpoint
and  scope  would  be  a  tedious  and  arduous  undertaking — this
preliminary  inquiry  is  often  deliberately  ignored  even  by  writers
of  high  repute.  And  yet  the  problem  is  one  of  central  import-
ance, especially  for  those  who  have  any  interest  in  philosophy.
Epistemology  and  ethics,  the  theory  of  knowledge  and  the  theory
of  conduct,  raise  questions  which  depend  in  large  measure  for
their  solution  on  the  conclusions  we  reach  concerning  this  pro-
blem. In  the  history  of  British  thought,in  particular, the  influence
of  the  conception  of  psychology  on  metaphysical  and  ethical
speculation  is  unusually  striking.  We  may  therefore  assume
that  such  introductory  discussion  is  not  one  that  cultured  and
thoughtful  persons  will  care  to  leave  altogether  aside.

w.  P.  i


2  The  Definition  of  Psychology [CH.  i,  §  i

We  shall  perhaps  start  best  by  means  of  a  brief  historical
retrospect  It  is  by  knowledge  of  others  that  the  child  advances
to  consciousness  of  itself:  it  is  aware  of  third  persons,  even  of
itself  as  one  of  these,  before  it  realises  its  unique  position  as  first
person.  And  when  at  length  this  unique  position  is  first  realised
it  is  very  apt  to  be  unduly  predominant,  as  we  frequently  notice
in  the  excessive  or  morbid  so-called  self -consciousness  of  youth.
A  like  order  and  one-sidedness  is  evident  in  the  growth  of
psychology :  it  was  first  unduly  '  objective '  and  then  unduly
'subjective':  it  is  only  now  beginning  to  shew  signs  of  maturity
in  a  due  balance  of  the  two :  the  fundamental  concept  of  the
first  period  was  Life,  that  of  the  second,  Mind,  that  of  the  third
is  Experience.  To  understand  this  last  then  we  must  consider
the  other  two  in  turn.

An  intelligent  person  beginning  to  study  de  novo  the  broad
facts  which  here  concern  us,  unaided  and  unimpeded  by  tra-
ditional or  current  theories,  would  almost  certainly  not  do,  what
according  to  Tristram  Shandy  Locke  did,  that  is,  write  '  a  history
book  of  what  passes  in  his  own  mind.'  He  would  in  all  pro-
bability fail  to  distinguish  sharply  between  the  facts  of  mind
and  the  facts  of  life  which  he  observed  on  all  sides :  the  close
connexion,  that  is  to  say,  of  living  mind  and  living  body  would
conceal  their  duality.  At  any  rate  this  was  the  case  with  primi-
tive thought,  as  philology  and  anthropology  amply  prove.  But
it  is  needless  to  go  back  further  than  Aristotle,  whose  De  anima
marks  the  birth  of  Psychology  as  a  separate  science.  Let  us
note  then  that  Aristotle — in  sharp  contrast  to  Descartes,  whom,
rather  than  Locke,  we  may  regard  as  inaugurating  the  second
period, — began  his  study  of  mind  from  the  side  of  body.  He
divided  natural  bodies  into  those  that  have,  and  those  that  have
not,  life.  The  former  in  all  cases  consisted  of  organs  mutually
adapted  to  a  specific  end :  they  were,  as  we  now  say,  organisms,
or  rather  potential  organisms.  The  conception  of  opyavov,  tool
or  instrument,  was  fundamental  with  Aristotle.  It  led  him  to
his  famous  doctrine  of  the  four  causes.  An  axe,  for  example,
was  (i)  matter,  (2)  having  a  particular  form,  which  (3)  set  in
motion  by  the  woodman  realised  (4)  his  end,  the  felling  of
timber.  If  we  regarded  an  axe  as  an  organism,  we  should  say
that  wood-cutting  was  its  soul,  the  realisation  of  the  meaning  of
a  body  of  that  kind  :  in  a  timberless  desert  it  might  be  called


CH.  i,  §  i] The  Psychology  of  Aristotle  3

an  axe,  but  it  could  never  ^one.  Still  an  axe  is  not  an  organism,
for  it  does  not  possess  within  itself  the  cause  of  its  movement
and  rest ;  and  further,  the  end  it  realises  is  not  for  itself.  But
in  a  living  body  the  soul  was  at  once  its  formal,  moving  and
final  cause  :  the  actualisation  of  the  body's  mere  potentiality
was  its  soul  (^fv)(ij).  The  soul  however  implied  a  material
cause.  It  must  be  embodied,  just  as  the  body  to  be  anything
more  than  a  body  in  name,  a  corpse  in  fact,  must  be — as  the
German  would  say — 'besouled'  (e/i^i/^oi/).

Body  and  soul  were  then  inseparable  correlatives,  like  the
matter  and  form  in  the  concrete  whole  we  call  a  seal.  What
its  function  was  to  a  particular  organ — vision  to  the  eye,  for
example — that  the  soul  was  to  the  organism  as  a  whole :  it
was  'the  cause  and  principle'  of  its  life1,  "by  which  is  meant,"
says  Grote,  "not  an  independent  and  pre-existing  something
that  brings  the  body  into  existence,  but  an  immanent  or  in-
dwelling influence  which  sustains  the  unity  and  guides  the
functions  of  the  organism2."  Of  souls  Aristotle  recognised  an
ascending  series  of  kinds,  falling  into  three  chief  classes —
plant-souls,  animal-souls,  and  human  souls,  each  higher  kind
possessing  all  the  functions  of  the  lower  in  addition  to  its
own.  Now  in  the  case  of  plants  and  animals — and  of  man,  so
far  as  he  shares  their  characteristics — these  functions  could  be
inferred  from  the  corresponding  organs.  Thus  the  souls  of
plants  were  nutritive  and  generative,  those  of  animals  were,
besides,  sensitive,  appetitive,  and — usually — locomotive.  Plants
did  not  need  sensation,  but  all  animals  had  to  have  the  sense  of
touch  (and  taste,  which  is  a  sort  of  touch)  in  order  to  avoid
obstacles  and  secure  their  appropriate  nutriment.  The  other
senses,  however,  as  directed  to  higher  ends  than  mere  existence,
belonged  only  to  particular  classes  of  animals3.

So  far  Aristotle's  point  of  view  resembles  that  of  modern
biologists.  His  conception  of  '  soul '  has  few  of  its  present-day
associations,  while  it  is  closely  related  to  the  physiological  con-
ception of  function.  Like  this  it  implies  not  only  the  organism
— as  vision,  e.g.,  implies  the  eye — but  it  implies  also  the  environ-
ment, as  actual  vision  implies  light.  Like  this,  again,  it  knows
nothing  of  the  dualism  of  life  and  mind  :  mental  processes  have

1  De  Ant'ma,  II.  iv.  §§  3  ff.  2  Aristotle,  p.  460.

3  De  Anima,  ill.  xii.  §  8.

I — 2


4  The  Definition  of  Psychology [CH.  I,  §  i

an  organic  basis  as  truly  as  vegetative,  and  where  they  exist
they  are  simply  higher  functions  of  the  same  soul  that  realises
these.  But  Aristotle  differs  from  most  modern  biologists1,  first,
in  making  the  concept  or  category  of  final  cause  fundamental.
"  All  natural  bodies,"  he  says,  "  are  instruments  of  the  soul :  and
just  as  it  is  with  the  bodies  of  animals  so  it  is  also  with  those  of
plants,  all  being  there  simply  for  the  sake  of  the  soul."  The
self-preservation  and  well-being  of  the  living  individual  and  its
kind  are  the  end  of  all  organic  processes,  that  is  of  all  inter-
action between  the  organism  and  its  environment.  Aristotle
differs  again  from  most  modern  biologists  in  regarding  the  soul  as
the  'primary  source  of  local  movement/  that  is  to  say  as  the
directive  principle  in  this  interaction2.  For  these  reasons  it
would  be  inexact — in  spite  of  the  resemblance — to  describe
Aristotle's  De  Anima  as  biological.  For  the  present  we  shall
do  better  to  call  it  objective  psychology :  it  contemplates
psychical  facts  inferentially  from  without,  rather  than  intro-
spectively  from  within.  As  a  result  of  this  attitude,  organic
life  and  psychical  life  may  appear  at  first  to  be  too  much
identified.  But  from  the  opposite  standpoint,  the  exclusively
subjective,  to  which  we  must  presently  turn,  perhaps  we  may
find  their  complete  separation  to  be  equally  extreme.

When  however  we  reach  Aristotle's  treatment  of  the  human
soul  as  intellectual,  we  come  upon  a  certain  discontinuity.  For
Aristotle  found  no  organ  of  intellect :  he  even  speaks  of  intellect
(1/01)5)  as  '  separate,  impassive,  and  uncompounded  [with  material
conditions]3.'  But  if  intellect  have  no  bodily  organ,  in  what
sense  is  the  soul  of  man  the  actualisation  of  his  body,  and  how
can  Aristotle  compare  the  unity  of  soul  and  body  in  man  to  that
of  the  wax  and  the  figure  impressed  upon  it,  or  to  that  of  the
axe  and  the  material  of  which  it  is  made  ?  Before  attempting
to  deal  with  this  difficulty  we  must  take  account  of  two  very
different  senses  in  which  Aristotle  speaks  of  reason  or  intellect.
His  doctrine  of  active  intellect  (yovs  TrotrjTiKos),  the  first  of  these,
is  rather  theological  than  psychological :  it  is  in  the  main  his
philosophical  version  of  the  widely  held  belief  of  man's  partici-
pation in  the  divine.  This  creative  reason  comes  from  without;
it  is  impersonal  and  immortal ;  comparable  to  the  sunlight  by

1  The  rising  school  of  Neo-vitalists  is,  however,  an  exception.

2  De  Anima,  n.  iv.  §  6.  3  De  Anima,  III.  v.  §  2.


CH.  i,  §  i] The  Psychology  of  Aristotle  5

which  we  see  and  through  which  alone  things  become  visible.
It  is  this  phase  of  reason  that  'is  separate,  impassive,  and
uncompounded.'  The  receptive  or  passive  reason  (1/01/5  TraO^riKo^)
on  the  other  hand  is  a  personal  endowment  and  varies  greatly
from  individual  to  individual :  this  '  is  perishable  and  can  really
think  nothing  apart  from  the  creative  reason1.'  Here  at  any
rate  we  should  find  no  breach  of  psychological  continuity  if  we
were  to  follow  in  detail  Aristotle's  exposition  of  this  individual
reason.  The  popular  summary  of  it  is  perhaps  sufficiently
exact :  Nihil  est  in  intellectu  quod  non  prius  fuerit  in  sensu ;
through  sensation,  phantasy,  memory  we  advance  to  recollection,
conception,  and  intellection2.  The  higher  processes  presuppose
the  lower,  and  these — sensation,  imagination  and  memory  (or
retentiveness) — depend  directly  on  the  organism.  And  but  for
certain  physiological  errors  into  which  he  fell3  Aristotle  would
doubtless  have  found  the  connexion  between  the  organism  and
the  soul  as  intellectual  more  direct  and  more  definite  than  he
supposed  ;  though,  even  as  it  was,  he  made  the  intellectual  part
of  soul  primarily  dependent  on  the  organism.  For  in  man,  the
active  intellect  operates  only  under  the  stimulus,  as  it  were,  of
the  passive,  and  this  again  receives  all  its  material  from  the
senses.  In  any  case  it  was  inevitable  that  in  advancing  to  these
higher  functions  he  should  approach  nearer  to  the  subjective
standpoint.  Even  with  our  present  knowledge  we  could  learn
little  more  about  intellectual  processes  if  we  attempted  to  begin
by  studying  the  brain  than  if  we  began  by  studying  the  heart.
There  is  still  however  a  wide  difference  between  Aristotle's  expo-
sition of  these  processes  and  the  exposition  of  an  introspective
psychologist.  It  is  not  thinking  as  a  process  in  the  individual
mind  so  much  as  thought  as  a  universal  product  that  Aristotle
mainly  considers;  but  when — upon  occasion — the  individual,

1  De  Anima,  III.  v.  §  2.

3  No  doubt  Aristotle  would  concur  in  Leibniz's  addition  of  nisi  intellectus  ipse,
meaning  thereby  the  universal  and  creative  reason  that  illumines  and  interprets  the
data  of  experience.  But  this  is  a  metaphysical  tenet  which  carries  us  altogether
beyond  psychological  bounds.  However  by  recognising  the  social  environment,  as
we  may  see  later  (cf.  ch.  xii),  it  is  possible  to  advance  much  further  than  Aristotle
did  without  having  recourse  to  such  philosophical  speculations.

8  Unlike  Plato,  Aristotle  held  the  heart,  not  the  brain,  to  be  the  central  organ
or  seat  of  the  soul.  The  fact  that  the  cerebral  hemispheres  were  insensitive  to  stimu-
lation confirmed  him  in  this  view.


6  The  Definition  of  Psychology [CH.  i,  §  i

as  distinct  from  the  universal,  aspect  of  thought  is  foremost  with
him,  then  biological  or  physical  analogies  are  apt  to  obtrude.
"The  plant  assimilates  the  material  in  a  material  manner,  sense
assimilates  the  material  in  an  immaterial  manner  and  thought
assimilates  the  immaterial  in  an  immaterial  manner1."  What
we  miss  in  Aristotle  is  a  clear  recognition  of  what  we  now  call
consciousness  as  the  central  feature  of  all  psychical  facts.  Re-
garding these  facts  as  he  did  from  the  outside  rather  than  from
within,  from  the  circumference  rather  than  from  the  centre,  he
failed  to  find  an  adequate  unity  for  the  diverse  functions  which
he  described  ;  he  had  to  rest  content  with  the  biological  concep-
tion of  an  organism,  into  which,  however,  he  infused  a  strong
teleological  colouring.

Descartes'  Psychology  of  the  thinking  mind.

§  2.  When  we  pass  to  the  psychology  of  Descartes  we  are  at
the  opposite  extreme.  The  connexion  of  body  and  mind,  the
corner-stone  of  Aristotle's  construction,  was  the  chief  stumbling-
block  in  the  way  of  Descartes'  advance,  and  has  remained  as  a
perplexing  problem  even  to  our  own  day.  The  hazy  materialism,
into  which  the  Aristotelian  psychology  had  developed  in
mediaeval  times,  Descartes  banished  once  for  all  by  the  new
definitions  which  he  gave  of  matter  and  mind.  Both  were
substances  and  therefore  essentially  distinct :  the  essence  of
matter  was  extension  or  the  occupation  of  space,  that  of  mind
was  consciousness  ;  and  between  these  there  was  no  common
term  and  there  was  no  natural  connexion.

Cogito,  ergo  sum,  Descartes  began :  '  I  think,  therefore  I
am.'  This  was  for  him  the  primal  certainty,  the  starting-point
alike  of  his  philosophy  and  of  his  psychology.  "  By  the  word
thought  (cogitatio)"  he  tells  us,  "  I  understand  all  that  which  so
takes  place  in  us  that  we  of  ourselves  immediately  apperceive  it ;
and  that  is  why,  accordingly,  not  only  understanding,  willing,
imagining,  but  also  sensing  (sentire,  sentir)  are  here  the  same
thing  as  thinking  (cogitare,  penser).  For  if  I  say,  I  see  or  I  walk,
and  therefrom  infer  that  I  am ;  and  if  I  understand  by  seeing  or
walking  the  action  of  my  eyes  or  my  legs,  which  is  the  work  of

1  Banmker,  Dei  Aristoteles  Lehre  u.s.w.,  quoted  by  Wallace,  Aristotle's  Psychology,
p.  Ivi.


CH.  i,  §  2] The  Psychology  of  Descartes  7

the  body,  the  conclusion  is  not  absolutely  certain.... Whereas  if
I  mean  only  the  action  of  my  consciousness  or  sensation  itself,
that  conclusion  is  so  absolutely  certain  as  to  exclude  all  doubt,
because  it  is  then  referred  to  the  mind,  which  alone  has  the
faculty  of  being  conscious  or  sensing  that  I  see  or  walk1."

Here  then  we  are  unmistakably  inside  the  circle  which
Aristotle  regarded  mainly  from  without,  and  the  central  unity
which  we  missed  in  his  exposition  is  now  clearly  indicated.
Subjective  psychology  deals  with  whatever  we  are  immediately
conscious  of  as  something  taking  place  within  us :  with  the
biological  aspects,  the  physical  occasions,  or  the  epistemological
interpretation  of  this  something,  it  has  no  concern.  All  that  it
essentially  implies  is  a  conscious  individual  (a  res  cogitans)  and  the
various  actions  and  passions  of  which  it  is  conscious — 'its  diverse
modes  of  thinking,'  or  'the  contents  of  its  consciousness,'  as  some
would  say.  So  far  from  a  body  being  necessary  to  the  existence
of  a  conscious  mind,  as  Aristotle  from  his  objective  standpoint
assumed — and  naturally,  for  it  was  with  the  living  body  that  he
began — the  distinctness  and  independence  of  the  two  are,  Des-
cartes maintained,  at  once  evident  so  soon  as  we  reflect  on  the
nature  of  consciousness.  We  then  "  perceive  clearly  that  neither

extension  nor  figure  nor  local  motion pertains  to  our  nature,

and  nothing  save  thought  alone :  it  then  becomes  plain  that  I  am
not  the  assemblage  of  members  called  the  human  body ;  I  am
not  a  thin  and  penetrating  air  diffused  through  all  these  members,
or  wind,  or  flame,  or  vapour,  or  breath  ;  for  the  notion  we  have  of
our  mind  precedes  that  of  any  corporeal  thing,  and  is  more  certain,
seeing  we  still  doubt  whether  there  is  any  body  in  existence,
while  we  already  perceive  that  we  think2."

This  restriction  of  psychology  to  the  immediate  facts  of
consciousness  as  these  exist  for  the  conscious  subject  was  a
great  advance  on  the  confusion  of  psychology  with  biology
which  characterised  the  Aristotelian  and  scholastic  doctrines.
As  a  result,  the  science  made  more  progress  in  two  centuries
than  it  had  made  in  twenty  centuries  before.  But  as  so  often

1  Principles  of  Philosophy,  pt.  I.  §  9. In  equating  Descartes'  cogitatio  to  the
modem '  consciousness,'  which  is  on  the  whole  the  best  rendering,  we  must  not
forget  the  predominantly  cognitive  implication  which  it,  even  more  than  its  present
equivalent,  always  retains.

2  Principles,  i.  8,  and  Meditation,  n.  (Veitch's  ed.  p.  108).


8  The  Definition  of  Psychology [CH.  i,  §  2

happens,  the  reaction — as  we  have  already  hinted — was  ex-
cessive ;  this  we  shall  see  if  we  examine  the  Cartesian  dualism
a  little  further.  Whereas  Aristotle  on  the  whole  kept  to  facts,
Descartes  trusted  to  analytic  distinctions.  Aristotle  found  mind
and  body  invariably  connected,  and  therefore  he  regarded  them
as  essentially  inseparable.  Descartes  could  conceive  mind  with-
out body  and  body  without  mind ;  therefore  he  concluded  that
they  were  actually  independent  and  could  exist  apart.  But
what  sort  of  mind  was  it  that  Descartes  thus  conceived  ?
Broadly  speaking  it  was  the  human  soul  of  Aristotle  less  the
senses,  memory  and  imagination  which — on  Aristotle's  view —
man  shared  with  the  lower  animals  and  required  as  indispensable
conditions  of  his  own  activity.  The  thought  that  essentially
belonged  to  this  soul  apart  from  a  body  excluded  everything  we
now  call  empirical :  hence  the  dualism  of  pure  thought  and  ex-
perience that  reappeared  in  modern  philosophy.  This  res  cogitans
of  Descartes  then,  as  such,  could  only  be  occupied  with  eternal
truths  or  '  innate  ideas '  and  with  whatever  other  ideas  it  might
itself  frame  from  these  :  '  adventitious  ideas '  it  would  not  have
at  all.  But  even  at  this  point  a  little  reflexion  will  convince  us
that  such  a  consciousness  as  this  Cartesian  cogitatio  is  not  really
conceivable.  It  lacks  individuality  and  it  lacks  concreteness.
For  the  environment  and  the  intercourse  with  other  selves —
on  which  any  consciousness  of  self  depends — are  so  far  wanting.
In  other  words,  as  yet  the  conditions  of  actual  experience  are
incomplete.

Let  us  now  turn  for  a  moment  to  material  substance,  the
second  term  in  the  Cartesian  dualism.  As  sensations  were  not
to  be  attributed  to  mind  as  res  cogitans,  so  here  sensible  qualities
are  not  to  be  attributed  to  matter  as  res  extensa.  Only  so  far  as
matter  was  "  the  object  of  speculative  geometry  "  was  its  nature
intelligible,  and  for  this  knowledge  sensory  experience  was
superfluous ;  nay,  worse — it  was  misleading.  Descartes'  res
extensa  was  thus  even  more  than  his  res  cogitans  a  merely
analytical  concept.  There  the  concrete  individual  Cogito  was  at
least  a  certainty ;  though  one  which  the  bare  concept  of  mind-
substance  did  not  explain.  But  here  there  is  no  corresponding
certainty  and  the  matter-substance  is  only  differentiated  into
a  plurality  of  concrete  material  things  by  a  series  of  glaring
subreptions  and  incongruities.  In  both  cases  the  fault  lay  in


CH.  I,  §  2] The  Psychology  of  Descartes  9

his  rationalistic  attempt  to  derive  the  concrete  facts  of  experi-
ence from  purely  abstract  notions.  Dynamical  concepts,  such
as  those  of  mass  and  force,  which  only  experience  could
warrant,  were  smuggled  without  clear  definition  or  derivation
into  a  physics  that  professed  to  be  '  nothing  but  geometry.'
Yet  in  spite  of  these  initial  defects  the  impetus  that  Descartes
gave  to  Natural  Philosophy  was  even  greater  than  that  which
we  have  allowed  is  owed  to  him  by  Mental  Philosophy ;  and  the
achievement  here  again  was  due  to  his  famous  method.  As  he
cleared  the  conception  of  consciousness  of  hazy  materialistic
implications  so  he  cleared  that  of  matter  of  the  animism  involved
in  the  mediaeval  notions  of  occult  qualities  such  as  the  natural
gravitation  of  earth,  the  natural  levitation  of  air,  nature's  abhor-
rence of  a  vacuum,  and  the  like.  But  the  details  of  his  Natural
Philosophy  do  not  now  concern  us :  it  is  enough  to  recognise
that  in  it  mechanical  notions  were  supreme  throughout.  An
organism  accordingly  was  for  Descartes  simply  a  mechanism,
an  integral  part  of  the  one  vast  mechanism  called  the  external
world.  So  far  then  from  connecting  biology  with  psychology,
as  Aristotle  had  done,  Descartes  reduced  biology  to  physics.

And  now  what  of  the  connexion  of  body  and  mind?  We
note  first  of  all  that  Descartes  inverted  the  Aristotelian  position
that  intellect  presupposes  sense1:  according  to  him  sense  pre-
supposed intellect.  "  I  find  in  myself,"  he  says,  "  the  faculties
of  imagination  and  sensation  (sentir),  without  which  I  can  indeed
clearly  and  distinctly  conceive  myself  entire,  but  not  reciprocally
them  without  myself,  that  is  to  say,  without  an  intelligent
substance  in  which  they  reside,  for... in  their  formal  concept,
they  involve  some  sort  of  intellection2."  Finding  further  "not
merely  that  brutes  have  less  reason  than  man,  but  that  they  have
none  at  all8,"  he  concluded  that  they  were  nothing  but  automatic
machines,  entirely  comparable — save  for  their  greater  complexity
— to  the  contrivances  of  a  skilful  clockmaker,  needing,  as  he
expressly  said,  "  neither  a  vegetative  soul,  nor  a  sensitive  soul4."
Even  the  human  body,  physically  regarded,  was  only  such  a
machine.

1  So  far,  that  is,  as  Aristotle  did  assume  it.

2  Meditation,  VI.,  Veitch,  p.  157,  also  p.  152.

3  Discourse  on  Method,  pt.  v.,  Veitch^p.  57.

4  Cf.  Traiti  de  FHomme,  Cousin's  ed.  p.  478.


io  The  Definition  of  Psychology [CH.  i,  §  2

Nevertheless  the  relation  of  man's  soul  to  his  body  was  not
comparable  to  that  of  a  pilot  in  a  seaworthy  boat :  after  all  the
two  become  a  single  substantial  unity : — "  Me  non  tantum  adesse
meo  corpori,  ut  nauta  adest  navigio,  sed  illi  arctissime  esse  con-
junctum  et  quasi  permixtum,  adeo,  ut  unum  quid  cum  illo  com-
ponam1."  But  how  was  such  substantial  unity  possible  ?  To
answer  this  question  reason  was  helpless  ;  and  even  the  criterion,
on  which  Descartes'  whole  method  of  philosophising  was  founded,
proved  at  fault.  This  he  frankly  owned.  "  To  me  it  seems  im-
possible," he  writes,  "  that  the  human  mind  should,  distinctly  and
at  the  same  time,  conceive  the  distinctness  of  body  and  soul
and  likewise  their  union  ;  for  so  to  do,  it  must  conceive  them  as
a  single  thing  while  yet  conceiving  them  as  two,  which  is  self-
repugnant2."  Yet  Descartes  never  denied  that  the  unity  was  at
any  rate  a  fact,  however  inexplicable,  and  a  fact  that  rendered
human  experience  possible.  Nay,  strange  to  say  and  in  spite  of
his  general  rejection  of  final  causes,  Descartes  concludes  his
Meditations  by  pointing  out — in  the  style  of  a  Bridgewater
treatise — the  mutual  adaptability  of  body  and  mind  manifested
in  our  daily  experiences.  He  concludes  by  laying  down  the
maxim : — "  I  ought  not  in  the  least  degree  to  doubt  of  the
truth  of  those  presentations  ['  of  my  body  surrounded  by  many
other  bodies '],  if,  after  having  called  together  all  my  senses,  my
memory,  and  my  understanding  for  the  purpose  of  examining
them,  no  deliverance  is  given  by  any  one  of  these  faculties  which
is  repugnant  to  that  of  any  other3."  But  on  the  senses  ex-
clusively, as  Descartes  allowed,  we  depend  for  the  knowledge
that  material  things  actually  exist ;  and  it  is  equally  certain —
though  this  he  did  not  explicitly  allow — that  but  for  memory
we  should  be  without  that  knowledge  of  our  own  existence,
from  which  he  started.  Both  sensation  and  memory,  however,
belong  to  man  only  as  a  rational  animal,  not  to  man  conceived
as  intellectus  purus.  In  other  words,  intellect  alone  is  not  the
source  of  our  real  experience.  But  it  is  the  source  of  the  con-
cepts of  res  cogitans  and  res  extensa  as  disparate  and  mutually
independent  substances,  the  concepts,  that  is  to  say,  on  which  the

1  Meditation,  vi.,  Veitch,  p.  160. But  in  view  of  the  importance  of  this  passage
it  seems  worth  while  to  give  the  original.

4  Letter  to  the  Princess  Elizabeth,  June,  1643.
3  Meditation,  vi.,  Veitch,  p.  168.


CH.  i,  §  2] The  Psychology  of  Descartes  1 1

Cartesian  dualism  is  founded.  For  this  dualism,  then,  our
concrete  human  nature  is  not  merely  a  glaring  exception — since
all  other  spirits  are  assumed  to  be  incorporeal  and  all  other
organisms  merely  machines ; — it  is  not  merely  a  knot  that  an
omnipotent  Deity  might  tie  :  it  is  a  veritable  Unding,  a  contra-
diction. Since,  however,  this  human  nature  is  a  fact,  it  suffices
— even  as  a  negative  instance — to  render  that  dualism  untenable,
and  we  only  need  to  begin  where  Descartes  ends  to  be  clear  of
it.  For  in  the  end,  as  we  have  just  seen,  he  has  to  admit  that
it  is  not  true  of  human  nature,  and  he  fails  to  find  it  in  human
experience.  Here,  as  he  points  out,  our  internal  sensations
make  us  aware  of  what  we  need  for  the  preservation  of  health,
and  our  external  percepts  enable  us  clearly  and  distinctly  to
know  which  among  surrounding  objects  are  beneficial  and  which
are  hurtful  to  us  in  so  far  as  we  are  composed  of  body  and
mind  ;  here  memory  enables  us  to  connect  together  the  whole
course  of  our  waking  life ;  and  here  judgment  enables  us  to
discriminate  practically  between  what  is  true  and  what  is  false,
so  that  "  all  the  doubts  of  those  bygone  days  are  to  be  rejected
as  hyperbolical  and  ridiculous."

Had  Descartes  started,  as  he  ought  to  have  done,  from  this
experience,  and  reflected  seriously  on  all  that  it  involved,  he
might  have  realised  that  his  notion  of  mind  alone  was  not
adequate  to  cover  it.  Beginning  with  the  organism  and  its  en-
vironment— Aristotle  saw  that  an  informing  'soul'  was  necessary
in  order  that  the  organism  should  actually  have  life.  Descartes,
who  began  with  mind,  ought  in  like  manner  to  have  seen  that
objects  distinct  from  it  were  necessary  in  order  that  the  conscious
\  subject  should  actually  have  experience.  But  Descartes  failed
to  seize  this  duality.  It  is  true  that  he  admitted,  and  admitted
in  so  many  words,  that  in  human  nature  the  res  cogitans  is  not
a  res  completed.  But,  after  all,  this  admission  was  made  from
the  biological  or  psychophysical  standpoint,  the  standpoint  of
Aristotle,  not  from  the  psychological  standpoint,  to  which
Descartes  had  himself  attained.  He  therefore  still  held  fast  to
his  dualism.  The  immediate  objects,  even  of  sensible  experi-
ence, he  maintained  were  only  modes  of  consciousness,  changes
"  that  take  place  in  us."

1  Reply  to  Amauld's  "Objections  to  the  Meditations,"  Philosophical \Vorks>
edited  by  Haldane  and  Ross,  vol.  ii.  p.  99.


12  The  Definition  of  Psychology [CH.  i,  §  2

But  how  is  this  position  to  be  made  consistent  with  Descartes'
belief  that  his  own  body  was  surrounded  by  many  other  bodies,
and  so  forth  ?  Were  those  presentations  of  his  own  body  and
other  bodies  but  modes  of  himself  as  res  cogitans'?  If  they
were  not,  then  his  experience  was  not  confined  to  such  modes.
If  they  were,  it  was  so  confined  and  therefore  cut  off  alto-
gether from  body  as  a  res  extensa:  the  dualism  of  mind  and
body  is  justified  indeed,  but  only  at  the  price  of  making  all
experience  of  the  latter  impossible,  or  at  least  inexplicable.
Out  of  this  second  impasse  Descartes  only  escaped  as  he  escaped
from  the  first — by  appealing  to  the  Deity:  only  the  Divine
omnipotence  could  combine  body  and  mind  in  human  nature,
and  only  the  Divine  veracity  could  guarantee  the  reality  of  the
material  world  in  human  experience.  These  two  problems — the
relation  of  body  and  mind  and  the  reality  of  external  percep-
tion— have  continued  to  vex  philosophic  thinkers  from  Descartes'
day  to  our  own,  nor  will  they  cease  to  trouble  us  till  dualism  is
laid  to  rest.


Tlie  Cartesian  Dualism  and  the  Duality  of  Experience.

§  3.  On  these  grounds  alone  we  should  be  amply  justified  in
rejecting  in  limine  the  perfunctory  definition  of  psychology —
etymology  notwithstanding — as  the  science  of  mind,  over  against
which  there  stands  a  totally  distinct  science  of  matter  (which
might  have  been  called  hylology).  It  will  repay  us,  however,  to
continue  our  historical  survey  a  little  further,  so  as  to  note  the
main  features  in  the  transition  to  the  third  concept  of  psychology
as  the  science  of  individual  experience.  In  this  the  respective
merits  both  of  the  Aristotelian  and  the  Cartesian  doctrines  are
retained,  and  their  defects  redressed.  The  chief  merit  of  the
second  of  these  lies,  as  already  said,  in  its  subjective,  i.e.  in-
dividualistic standpoint :  this  has  not  been,  and  is  not  likely  to
be,  abandoned.  The  defects  consist  partly  in  its  metaphysical,
we  might  even  say,  its  theological  assumptions,  and  partly  in
the  predominantly  '  intellectualistic '  character  it  assigns  to
individual  experience.  Though  the  dogmatic  assumptions  of
Descartes'  mental  philosophy  were  seriously  discredited  by  the
empirical  psychology  which  Locke  began,  and  a  long  line  of
British  workers  carried  forward ;  yet  that  philosophy  continued


CH.  I,  §  3] Dualism  and  the  Duality  of  Experience 1 3

to  flourish  on  the  Continent.  It  attained  its  zenith  in  the  Psycho-
logies rationalis  of  Wolff:  in  this  the  simplicity,  immateriality
and  immortality  of  the  soul  were  evolved  out  of  the  bare  con-
cept of  consciousness.  But  such  a  priori  demonstrations  of
the  nature  of  mind  were  at  length  rudely  shaken,  along  with  the
rest  of  metaphysical  dogmatism,  by  Kant.  He  maintained  the
emptiness  of  all  concepts  save  as  they  derive  their  '  content '
from  experience,  and  the  invalidity  of  all  concepts  when  ex-
tended beyond  it.  For  us  there  were  no  noumena  or  thought-
given  realities:  all  our  knowledge  was  confined  to  phenomena  or
sense-given  realities.  To  experience,  the  duality  of  subject  and
object  was  essential,  and  these  factors  in  isolation  were  not  res
completae  but  purely  problematic  concepts,  about  which  there
might  be  faith  or  speculation,  but  certainly  not  knowledge.  In
whatever  way  our  practical  interest  in  such  problems  as  that  of
immortality  may  be  met,  they  have,  at  any  rate  since  Kant's
day,  ceased  to  be  regarded  '  as  psychological  problems1,  and
psychology  has  now  become  entirely  an  empirical  science,
divested  alike  of  theological  and  of  metaphysical  assumptions.
The  recognition  of  the  inseparability  of  subject  and  object  in
experience,  which  was  a  cardinal  doctrine  with  Kant,  has  helped
too  to  bring  the  mind  theory  into  line  with  the  life  theory  ;  but
in  place  of  the  life  of  body,  organic  life,  we  have  now  the  life  of
mind,  psychical  life.  But  mind  here  properly  denotes  the  subject
of  experience,  the  Ego — as  we  sometimes  say — in  contra-
distinction to  the  Non-Ego  or  object  of  experience  ;  and  mental
life  is  tantamount  to  experience  as  the  interaction  of  the  two.
It  is  with  this  mental  life  that  Subjective  Psychology,  as  con-
trasted with  the  Objective  Psychology  of  Aristotle,  is  primarily
concerned2.

But  Locke  and  his  successors,  Kant  included,  were  still
hampered  by  the  defective  analysis  of  the  facts  of  mental  life,
which  they  took  over  from  Descartes,  while  rejecting  more  or
less  completely  his  metaphysical  assumptions.  That  analysis,
it  has  just  been  said,  was  unduly  intellectualistic :  in  other
words,  as  Descartes  conceived  the  subject  as  essentially  intel-
lectual, so  he  regarded  its  experience  as  fundamentally  cog-
nitive. The  only  experience  he  recognised  was  experience  at

1  For  Kant  himself  immortality  was  a  postulate  of  the  practical  reason.

2  Cf.  on  this  distinction,  H.  Spencer's  Principles  of  Psychology,  pt.  I.  ch.  vu.


14  The  Definition  of  Psychology [CH.  i,  §  3

the  self-conscious  level ;  and  in  this  he  tended  first  to  identify
the  experience  with  the  self-consciousness,  the  whole  with  the
part,  and  next  to  identify  the  cognitions  of  self-consciousness
with  the  facts  cognised.  Each  of  these  twin  errors  we  must
examine  in  turn.

In  external  perception  the  mind,  Descartes  conceived,
"  turned  towards  the  body,"  but  in  self-consciousness  "  it  turned
in  some  way  upon  itself."  In  keeping  with  this  Locke  dis-
tinguishes sensation  and  reflexion  as  the  two  sources  of  simple
ideas,  the  one  of  the  ideas  of  the  sensible  qualities  of  external
/  objects,  the  other  of  the  ideas  of  the  mind's  own  operations.
Reflexion,  though  not  actually  a  sense,  is  yet,  he  says,  "very
like  one,  and  might  properly  enough  be  called  internal  sense1."
And  Kant  proceeded  without  misgiving  so  to  regard  it  and
placed  external  sense  and  internal  sense  on  a  par  as  distinct  but
co-ordinate  sources  of  experience,  the  one  of  the  experience  of
physical  phenomena,  the  other  of  the  experience  of  psychical
phenomena.  So  we  get  a  new  dualism,  the  dualism  of  pheno-
mena, which  serves  to  keep  the  old  dualism  of  substances  in
countenance2;  and  with  it  we  get  also  a  new  definition  of  psycho-
logy that  is  scarcely  better  than  the  old.  Psychology  becomes
the  science  of  internal  experience  as  observed  through  the  inner
sense,  and  so  is  sharply  contrasted,  though  otherwise  co-ordinate,
with  the  sciences  of  external  experience,  which  treat  of  the  ob-
jects observed  through  the  outer  senses.  One  step  more  and  the
subject  and  the  object  of  our  immediate  experience  seem  again
to  fall  completely  apart.  This  step  was  taken,  for  example,  by
Bain,  who  distinguishes  object-experience  from  subject-experi-
ence, and  confines  psychology  to  the  latter.  He  further  refers
to  these  as  two  worlds,  "  the  one  circumscribed  by  one  property,
extension,"  the  other  definable  "  negatively  by  a  single  fact,
the  absence  of  extension3."  But  it  is  certain  that  immediate

1  Essay,  II.  i.  4.

2  Thus  we  find  Hamilton  saying :  ' '  Mind  and  matter,  as  known  and  knowable,
are  only  two  different  series  of  phenomena  or  qualities ;  mind  and  matter,  as  unknown
and  unknowable,  are  the  two  substances  in  which  these  two  different  series  of  qualities
are  supposed  to  inhere. The  existence  of  an  unknown  substance  is  only  an  inference
we  are  compelled  to  make,  from  the  existence  of  known  phenomena ;  and  the  dis-
tinction of  two  substances  is  only  inferred  from  the  seeming  incompatibility  of  the
two  series  of  phenomena  to  coinhere  in  one." Lectures  on  Metaphysics,  vol.  i.  p.  138.

3  Mental  Science,  pp.  i  f.


CH.  I,  §  3] Dualism  and  the  Duality  of  Experience 1 5

experience  is  never  thus  sundered,  and  obvious,  therefore,  that  in
all  this  there  is  some  confusion  which  we  must  endeavour  to
clear  up.

We  may  note  first  of  all  that  the  phrase  '  internal  sense '  is
a  complete  misnomer,  save  where  reference  is  intended  solely  to
what  is  internal  to  the  organism.  But  here  '  internal '  is  meant
to  distinguish  what  occurs  '  in  the  mind '  from  what  occurs  out
of  the  body,  and  involves  a  correlation  of '  in '  and  '  not  in,'  i.e.
'  out  of,'  which  is  as  absurd  as  contrasting  what  occurs  in  a  given
day  with  what  occurs  outside  of  a  given  door.  And  as  to  an
internal  sense — even  if  it  were  allowable  to  speak  with  Locke
of  sensory  "  impressions  of  objects  extrinsical  to  the  mind  " — what
could  be  the  meaning  of  sensory  impressions  from  "  powers
intrinsical  and  proper  to  [the  subject]  itself1 "  ?  The  physiologist
who  recognises  organs  and  '  centres '  of  the  outer  sense  knows
nothing  of  any  such  in  the  case  of  this  supposed  '  inner  sense.'
Locke  bids  us  "follow  a  child  from  its  birth  and  observe  the
alterations  that  time  makes,"  and  he  then  himself  briefly  describes
the  child's  gradual  advance  till  "  in  time  it  comes  to  reflect  on
its  own  operations  about  the  ideas  got  by  sensation."  But
when  this  stage  is  reached  Locke  does  not  suppose  that  the  child
passively  receives  impressions  differing  from  all  previous  ones,
as  the  sensations  of  colour  for  one  couched  differ  from  all  his
preceding  sensations.  In  the  earlier  stage  the  child  was  con-
scious, but  not  self-conscious :  "  the  constant  solicitation  of  the
senses,"  as  Locke  says,  "then  employed  and  directed  [it]  in
looking  abroad."  But  when  at  length  "  it  turns  its  view  inward
upon  itself,  and  observes  its  own  actions  about  those  ideas  it
has2,"  it  becomes  self-conscious;  but  it  does  not  thereby  acquire
a  new  mode  of  what  Kant  called  sensibility,  comparable  to  the
addition  of  a  sixth  sense  to  the  five  it  had  before.  On  the  con-
trary it  is  only  intellectually  active  "  about  the  ideas  it  [already]
/tas3."  Beforehand  it  could  not  hear  that  it  tasted,  or  taste  that
it  heard  ;  nor  can  it  now,  for  the  external  senses  are  severally

1  This  is  the 'paradox'  that  Kant  vainly  attempted  to  explain. The havoc
wrought  in  psychology  and  philosophy  by  Locke's  doctrine  is  nowhere  more  appalling
than  here  and  throughout  the  Critique. Cf.  2nd  ed.  §  24.

2  Essay,  II.  i.  §§  22,  24,  8 ; vi.  §  i.

3  Thereby  indeed  it  acquires  other  ideas,  but  these  are  not  sensory  and  cannot
with  any  propriety  be  called  impressions  of  reflexion,  as  they  were  by  Hume,  for
example.


1 6  The  Definition  of  Psychology [CH.  i,  §  3

distinct.  But  beforehand  when  it  tasted  it  was  not  conscious  of
tasting,  when  it  heard  it  was  not  conscious  of  hearing,  as  it  may
be  now.  In  short,  on  the  new  level  of  self-consciousness  the
objects  of  the  external  senses  are  not  only  related  to  the  self
but  both  they  and  it  are  recognised  as  thus  related :  in  other
words,  the  so-called  object-experience  seems  clearly  implicated
in  the  so-called  subject-experience.  How,  then,  can  psychology
be  confined  to  the  latter  ?

Nevertheless,  must  not  psychology  be  so  confined  if  it  is
the  science  of  individual  experience  :  otherwise  wherein  lies  the
one  merit  accorded  to  Descartes  of  making  this  subjective  stand-
point once  for  all  clear  ?  Moreover,  if  psychology  is  to  embrace
the  experiences  attained  from  the  objective  standpoint,  will  not
the  whole  of  knowledge  fall  within  its  domain  ?  Questions
such  as  these,  which  will  naturally  occur  at  this  point,  lead  us
at  once  to  the  main  source  of  the  confusion  we  are  discussing.

What  we  have  first  to  ascertain  is  whether  the  disjunction
suggested  is  complete.  Must  the  experience  with  which  psy-
chology is  concerned  be  either  confined  to  what  can  be  known
about  the  subject  of  experience,  or  be  extended  to  include  all
that  is  known  about  the  objects  of  experience  ?  In  other  words,
is  the  subject  the  only  factor  implicated  when  we  occupy  the
subjective  standpoint,  and  the  object  the  only  factor  implicated
when  we  occupy  the  objective,  much  as  we  might  say  that  sound
alone  concerns  us  when  we  study  acoustics,  and  light  alone  when
we  study  optics?  Certainly  if  we  were  all  deaf  the  former
science  would  be  non-existent,  and  the  latter  if  we  were  all  blind.
But  we  have  just  seen  that  this  analogy  does  not  apply  to  the
distinction  of  so-called  'internal  phenomena,'  the  facts  of  the
'  inner  sense,'  and  external  phenomena,  the  facts  of  the  external
senses.  These  facts  are  not  co-ordinate  and  they  are  mutually
implicated.  Of  this  the  term  phenomenon  is  evidence;  for
when  a  phenomenon  or  appearance  is  actual,  there  must  also  be
someone  to  whom  it  appears,  for  v/hom  it  is  a  fact ;  and  nobody
will  maintain  that  internal  phenomena  are  exclusively  perceived
by  one  subject,  and  external  phenomena  exclusively  by  another.
Thus  we  find  Bain,  who  began  by  distinguishing  subject-
experience  from  object-experience,  presently  admitting  that
"  object-experience  is  also  in  a  sense  mental1."  But  in  what

1  Mental  Science,  p.  2.


CH.  i,  §  3] Dualism  and  the  Duality  of  Experience 1 7

sense  is  it  mental,  that  is  to  say,  pertaining  to  psychology ;
and  in  what  sense,  not  ?  This  is  the  question  that  ought  to  clear
up  the  confusion  that  Bain  was  content  to  leave  alone.

We  are  agreed  that  psychology  deals  with  individual  ex-
perience, but  we  have  found  that  in  this  experience  both  subject
and  object  are  factors.  We  have  to  ask,  then,  wherein  its  sub-
jective standpoint  differs  from  what  we  call  the  objective  stand-
point, in  which,  apparently,  the  subject  is  not  a  factor.  And  we
can  answer  at  once :  the  one  is  the  standpoint  of  conscious  Life
— or  more  fully  the  standpoint  of  the  living  subject  in  inter-
course with  his  special  environment ;  the  other  is  the  standpoint
of  Science  in  which  the  characteristics  of  individual  environments
are  in  general  ignored.  But  if  there  were  really  no  subject
whatever  implied  in  the  standpoint  of  science,  how  could  we  speak
of  science  as  concerned  with  object-experience,  or  as  dealing  with
actual  phenomena;  and  what  would  be  the  meaning  of  a  'stand-
point' which  was  altogether  unoccupied  ?  The  truth,  however,  is
not  that  for  science  no  subject,  but  only  that  no  single  subject,  is
implied,  to  whom  as  for  psychology  the  experience  is  relative.
Science  is  concerned  with  knowledge  only,  knowledge  as  it  is  for
all ;  and  again  with  knowledge  only  as  the  product  of  many
co-operating  minds,  not  as  a  process  in  one.  Moreover  the
process  entails  both  feeling  and  conation  with  which  science  in
general  is  not  concerned.

The  failure  of  the  pre-Kantian  thinkers  to  apprehend  the
bearing  upon  psychology  of  a  distinction  in  itself  so  clear,  was
due  in  the  first  place  to  their  neglect  of  comparative  psychology
and  the  consequent  restriction  of  the  science  to  the  data  of  self-
consciousness  which  this  neglect  entailed.  They  recognised
indeed,  as  we  have  seen  that  Aristotle — and  still  more,  Des-
cartes— did,  the  discontinuity  that  the  possession  of  self-con-
sciousness and  reason  placed  between  man  and  the  lower  animals.
But  they  did  not  realise  that  both  reflexion  and  reasoning  are  the
result  of  social  intercourse,  the  gradual  development  of  which
,has  produced  this  gulf  between  man  and  brute.  Assuming
that  each  man  by  himself  is  rational  instead  of  recognising
that  humanity  has  achieved  rationality,  they  then  proceeded  to
confound  psychology  with  that  division  of  philosophy  which  is
now  called  epistemology,  or  the  theory  of  knowledge.  In  fact,
it  was  mainly  for  the  sake  of  epistemological  problems  that  they

w.  p.  2


1 8  The  Definition  of  Psychology [CH.  i,  §  3

were  led  to  take  up  psychological  investigation  at  all1.  It  was
reserved  for  Kant  first  to  discern  the  fundamental  difference
between  the  two  inquiries,  thanks,  however,  to  the  philosophical
deadlock  into  which  his  predecessors  were  led  by  confusing
them.

But  we  can  all  now  see  that  'subjective'  and  'objective'  have
different  meanings  in  psychology  and  in  epistemology.  In  epi-
stemology,  'objective,'  we  might  say,  means  so  much  of  experience
as  is  common  property,  and  '  subjective '  so  much  as  is  private
property :  in  psychology,  '  subjective '  refers  to  the  owner  and
'  objective '  to  the  property  that  he  owns.  But  science  regarded
what  is  common  property  as  if  it  were  not  property  at  all,  and
psychology  assumed  private  ownership  to  be  the  only  ownership.
Again  the  '  subjective  objects '  of  psychology  were  not  found
among  the  '  objective  objects '  of  epistemology,  and  so  were
regarded  as  only  copies  or  symbols  of  these  originals,  which
science  placed  somehow  within  the  man's  head  and  psychology
found  within  his  consciousness.  So  the  result  was  reached :  a
subject  without  real  objects,  and  real  objects  without  an  assign-
able subject,  a  non-extended  subject- world  and  an  extended
object-world  without  any  satisfactory  account  of  their  connexion.
The  Cartesian  dualism  still  lingered  on.  This  was  the  impasse
that  led  Kant  to  expose  the  '  transcendental  realism  '  of  the  latter
world,  and  Reid  to  protest  against  the  'subjective  idealism'  of
the  former.  What  Reid  meant  to  say  was : — In  perception  we
are  not  conscious  of  ideas  in  us,  but  we  affirm  objects  present  to
us.  What  Kant  said  was : — The  objects  of  science  only  become
objects  for  and  through  our  common  experience ;  they  are  not,
for  experience,  at  any  rate,  things  in  themselves  and  apart.
Combined,  these  statements  amount  to  a  recognition  of  the  duality
of  subject  and  object  throughout  all  experience,  individual  as  well
as  universal.  But  still  the  psychological  analysis  of  Kant  and
Reid  was  inadequate  to  do  justice  to  this  duality  of  individual

1  This  was  avowedly  the  case  with  Locke  :  his  famous  Essay  only  professed  to
deal  with  the  human  understanding.  Hume's  mature  work  had  the  same  aim  and  an
almost  identical  title,  and  Berkeley  called  his  one  systematic  treatise,  A  Treatise
concerning  the  Principles  of  Human  Knowledge.  Even  writers  as  recent  as  Hamilton
and  Mansel  only  treat  of  psychology  under  the  name  of  Metaphysics.  Indeed  until
comparatively  lately  the  interest  in  psychical  facts  rarely  extended  further  than
seemed  required  by  such  problems  as  those  concerning  the  criteria  of  knowledge,
the  grounds  of  moral  responsibility  or  the  existence  of  a  life  beyond.


CH.  I,  §  4] Dualism  and  Intellectualism  1 9

experience  as  one  of  Ego  and  Non-Ego,  Self  and  Other.  This
point  brings  us  to  the  second  of  the  twin  errors  just  now  sig-
nalised1, the  tendency  to  treat  the  facts  cognised  by  the  self-
conscious  subject  in  reflexion  as  being  themselves  cognitions.

The  Cartesian  Dualism  and  Intellectualism.

§4.  This  in  one  form  or  other  is  an  inveterate  error :  I  have
formerly  described  it  as  "  a  confusion  between  the  standpoint  of
a  given  experience  and  the  standpoint  of  its  exposition,"  and  as
"  one  to  which  no  other  science  is  liable  except  psychology  and
the  sciences  dependent  upon  it."  Professor  James  afterwards
named  this  error  'the  psychologist's  fallacy,'  and  the  name  is
now  commonly  adopted2.  As  a  consequence  of  this  fallacy  the
pure  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain,  for  example,  which  are
entirely  subjective — in  the  psychological  and  not  merely  in  the
epistemological  sense — were  described  as  psychologically  ob-
jective, and  classed  among  sensations  or  percepts,  because  we
come  to  have  'ideas'  about  them  when  we  attain  to  the  standpoint
of  social  intercourse  and  self-consciousness.  And  again  because
at  this  level  a  general  connexion  was  discernible  between  pleasure
and  increased  vitality  on  the  one  hand,  and  between  pain  and
diminished  vitality  on  the  other,  the  feelings  themselves  were
identified  with  the  consciousness  of  some  perfection  or  imper-
fection in  ourselves,  and  finally  defined  by  Wolff  as  "the
intuitive  cognition  of  any  perfection  or  imperfection  whatever,
real  or  apparent3."  This  failure  to  realise  the  purely  subjective
and  unique  character  of  feeling  is  common  to  all  our  earlier
British  psychologists  from  Locke  to  Reid.  It  was  first  corrected
by  Tetens,  who  insisted  on  what  is  called  the  tripartite  division
of  faculties  into  cognitive,  affective,  and  conative  ;  but  this  classi-
fication, now  almost  universally  accepted,  only  obtained  general
recognition  through  the  advocacy  of  Kant,  who  was  a  pupil
of  Tetens.  As  a  further  consequence  of  their  intellectualistic

1  Cf.  p.  14  above.

2  Cf.  J. Ward, "A  General  Analysis  of  Mind," article in  the  Journal  of
Speculative  Philosophy, 1882  ; W. James, Principles  of  Psychology, 1890,  vol.  i.
p.  196.

3  Cf.  Descartes,  Letter  to  the  Princess  Elizabeth,  Sept.  1645  ?  Wolff,  Psychologia
empirica,  §§511,518. It  is  a  nice  question  how  far  this  view  is  justly  attributable  to
Descartes,  notwithstanding  the  unanimity  that  has  hitherto  prevailed  on  the  point.

2—2


2O  The  Definition  of  Psychology [CH.  I,  §  4

bias,  the  earlier  psychologists  strangely  neglected  the  import-
ant role  that  bodily  movements  sustain  in  every  stage  of  ex-
perience— a  fact  that  even  Aristotle  had  not  failed  to  recognise.
Not  till  the  beginning  of  the  last  century1,  and  then  thanks
mainly  to  the  physiologists,  were  these  movements  seen  to  be
not  only  an  indispensable  factor  in  every  act  of  perception — as
evidenced  in  listening,  looking,  sniffing,  tactually  exploring —
and  a  chief  source  of  our  knowledge  of  the  primary  properties
of  things — extension  and  resistance — but  to  be  also  in  the
various  phases  of  reflex,  sensori-motor  and  ideo-motor  action,
so  many  steps  in  the  development  of  volition.  But  the  mature
volition  alone  was  taken  into  account  by  the  psychologists  who
looked  to  self-conscious  reflexion  for  all  their  data.  And  since
this  mature  volition  is  normally  always  determined  by  reasons,
the  so-called  active  powers  were  regarded  as  throughout  secondary
to  the  so-called  intellectual.

But  a  decided  reaction  against  intellectualism,  which  first
set  in  more  than  a  century  ago  among  philosophers2,  has  since
been  greatly  extended  and  confirmed  by  the  ascendancy  of
evolutionary  ideas  and  the  consequent  growth  of  genetic  and
comparative  psychology.  The  result  is  that  in  the  present  day
psychologists  are  beginning  more  and  more  generally  to  insist
that  not  intellect  but  will,  not  cognition  but  conation,  not  sen-
sitivity but  activity,  is  the  clue  to  a  true  understanding  of  the
character  and  development  of  experience.  A  winged  cherub —
all  head  and  no  body — might  suffice,  as  Schopenhauer  suggested,
for  the  purely  contemplative  experience  of  Descartes'  res  cogitans.
But  the  fact  that  the  inlets  to  knowledge  are  primarily  sub-
servient to  the  inlets  to  food  and  air,  which  they  encircle,  shews
unmistakably  that  experience,  as  the  psychologist  deals  with  it,

1  The part played  by  the so-called muscular sense  in the appreciation of
'  weight ' or '  resistance ' was  pointed  out  by certain  Italian physicians  as  early
as  the i6th  century  (see  Hamilton's  Reid,  p.  867  note),  but  their  views  failed  to
gain  attention  and  were  forgotten.

2  It  began  with  Kant's  assertion  of  the  primacy  of  the  practical  reason,  which
Fichte  reiterated  with  new  emphasis  :  the  objects  of  theory  were  there  solely  for  the
sake  of  the  projects  of  practice,  the  external  world  is  nothing  but  a  means  for  the
attainment of  the moral end. Schopenhauer's The World as Will  and  Idea
(indicating  by  its  mere  title  the  inversion  of  the  old  order),  has,  despite  its  disjointed
and '  romantic ' speculation, exercised a profound influence by its forcible and
detailed  defence  of  this  topic,  though  many  who  have  adopted  his  arguments  have
not  thought  it  proper  to  mention  his  name.


CH.  i,  §  5] Consciousness  and  Experience  21

is  primarily  and  pre-eminently  practical.  Obvious  as  this  must*
appear  to  those  who  look  at  the  facts  of  life  in  the  light  of  the
theory  of  evolution,  yet  it  is  a  truth  that  was  for  the  most  part
overlooked  so  long  as  psychology  was  studied  mainly  in  its
bearing  on  philosophical  problems.  But  the  notion  of  an  in-
dependent realm  of  truth  existing  sub  specie  aeternitatis  has
literally  no  place  within  the  purview  of  a  psychology  that  knows
its  business.  Here  we  find  no  such  thing  as  mere  cognition:  the
uninteresting  is  not  known  but  ignored,  and  the  interesting  leads
at  once  to  response,  and  sooner  or  later  to  adjustment — in  the
race,  at  all  events.  Success  is  then  completed  experience  or
expertness,  and  in  general  prepares  the  way  for  a  new  advance.
So  far  the  true  is  the  useful,  and  the  criterion  is  not  theoretical
but  practical.  Looking  broadly  at  the  progress  of  life,  as  it
ascends  through  the  animal  kingdom  and  onwards  through  the
history  of  man,  it  seems  safe  to  say  that  knowledge  is  always  a
means  to  ends,  is  never  an  end  by  itself — till  at  length  it  becomes
interesting  and  satisfying  in  itself.  Psychologically  regarded,
then,  the  sole  function  of  perception  and  intellection  is,  it  is
contended,  to  guide  action  and  subserve  volition — more  generally
to  promote  self-conservation  and  betterment.

Consciousness  and  Experience.

§  5.  For  psychical  life  so  regarded,  'experience'  is  the  obvious
term,  and  the  term  which  in  our  ordinary  affairs  is  the  one
usually  employed.  But  in  psychology  the  far  less  appropriate
term  'consciousness'  holds  the  field,  and  its  manifold  ambiguities
are  something  of  a  scandal.  It  is  continually  confused  with
self-consciousness,  which  was  its  original  meaning1 ;  and  thereby
the  errors  of  intellectualism,  which  we  have  just  discussed,  are
apt  to  be  perpetuated  and  a  part  of  experience  mistaken  for  the
whole.  "  Everybody  knows  what  consciousness  is,"  we  are  told,
"for  everybody  is  conscious."  But  this  is  only  true  when  it
becomes  trivial :  every  experient  is  experient.  A  mouse,  we
believe,  feels  and  strives :  feeling  and  striving  are  then  factors
of  its  experience,  but  we  have  no  reason  to  think  that  they
are  objects  of  its  knowledge.  They  may  become  such  for

1  Cf.  e.g.  Locke's  definition: — "Consciousness  is  the  perception  of  what  passes
in  a  man's  own  mind,"  Essay  II,  i.  §  19.


22  The  Definition  of  Psychology [CH.  i,  §  5

a  man,  no  doubt;  but  there  is  much,  even  in  his  experience,
of  which  we  should  say  that  he  is  conscious  no  longer  or  not
conscious  as  yet.  For  in  ordinary  language  we  tend  to  speak
of  being  'conscious  of  only  what  we  specially  attend  to:  in
this  sense  the  adept  is  no  longer  conscious  of  the  painstaking
efforts  by  which  he  first  acquired  his  skill,  and  the  tyro  is
not  yet  conscious  of  the  subtle  differences  to  which,  as  a
connoisseur,  he  will  come  to  attend.  In  psychology,  however,
consciousness  is  regarded  as  admitting  of  indefinite  gradations.
Indeed  this  is  often  given  as  "its  capital  and  pervading  idea.
...Consciousness  is  co-extensive  with  mental  life"  in  so  far  as
"that  life  is  considered  to  rise  or  to  fall  in  degree1."  Variations
of  intensity  are  certainly  characteristic  both  of  the  psychical
and  of  the  physical :  this  fact  alone  then  will  not  serve  to  define
them,  nor  will  it  alone  enable  us  to  distinguish  the  one  from  the
other.  But  we  hear  not  only  of  degrees  of  consciousness,  but
also  of  operations  of  consciousness,  states  of  consciousness,
contents  of  consciousness  and  form  of  consciousness;  and  here,
obviously  something  more  than  variations  of  intensity  is  implied.
As  instances  of  operations — perceiving,  remembering,  comparing,
desiring,  resolving,  and  the  like  would  probably  be  cited.  But,
though  it  does  not  strike  us  as  strange  to  speak  of  consciousness
of  remembering  or  0/ desiring — since  for  a  self-conscious  subject
such  reflective  cognition  is  possible — it  does  seem  forced  to  speak
of  consciousness  remembering  or  desiring ;  for  the  self-conscious
subject  does  not  say:  My  consciousness  remembers  or  desires,
but,  I  do  so.  If,  then,  it  is  the  subject  of  experience  that  is
active,  why  should  activity  be  attributed  to  consciousness,  which
after  all  is  but  an  abstract  term;  not  a  conscious  being,  but
the  state  of  being  conscious,  which  surely  implies  a  conscious
being  ?

The  answer  to  this  question  is  to  be  found  not  in  the  facts  of
experience  but  in  the  history  of  psychological  theories  concerning

1  So  Bain,  who  gives  this  as  the  first  of  thirteen  meanings  of  consciousness,  a
topic,  which  on  account  "of  the  subtleties  and  complications  involved  in  it"  he
reserves  for  a  closing  dissertation,  Emotions  and  Will,  y&  ed.,  1875,  p.  545.  Again,
Fleming:  "The  meaning  of  a  word  is  sometimes  best  attained  by  means  of  the
word  opposed  to  it.  Unconsciousness,  that  is,  the  want  or  absence  of  consciousness,
denotes  the  suspension  of  all  our  faculties.  Consciousness,  then,  is  the  state  in  which
we  are  when  all  or  any  of  our  faculties  are  in  exercise. "  Vocabulary  of  Philosophy,
3rd  ed.,  1875,  p.  105.


CH.  i,  §  5] Consciousness  and  Experience  23

them.  It  is  to  be  found,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  reaction  against
the  Cartesian  doctrine,  that  experience  is  nothing  but  modes  of
a  res  cogitans.  The  conscious  substance,  it  was  held,  lay  beyond
the  pale  of  science,  but  the  modes  were  supposed  to  remain
within  it ;  in  other  words,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  Cartesian
analysis  of  mind  was  retained,  though  its  philosophy  of  mind
was  rejected1.  This  was  a  very  naive  proceeding,  for — as  just
said — the  so-called  modes  of  consciousness  are  themselves  neither
conscious  nor  active,  and  without  the  explicit  recognition  of
either  subject  or  object  are  really  unmeaning.  Two  alternatives
were  then  open.  Having  eliminated  the  subject  of  experience
along  with  the  substance,  some  psychologists  proceeded  to  hypo-
statize  or  personify  consciousness,  and  assigned  to  it  the  rdle  of
subject ;  these  are  the  psychologists  who  talk  freely  of  operations
of  consciousness  and  states  of  consciousness,  and  tell  us  that
"everybody  knows  what  consciousness  is."

Others  have  preferred  to  restore  the  missing  reality  from  the
object  side ;  and  they  first  resolve  all  the  '  modes '  into  ideas  or
presentations,  and  then  from  such  'mind-stuff'  and  its  inter-
actions they  proceed  to  build  up  experience  in  a  quasi-mechanical,
quasi-chemical  fashion2.  'Content  of  consciousness'  is  the
favourite  phrase  of  these  psychologists.  Often  they  allow  that
such  content  of  consciousness  implies  'the  form  of  consciousness,'
implies,  that  amounts  to  saying,  a  conscious  subject;  but  they
attempt,  on  methodological  grounds,  to  justify  the  omission  of
all  recognition  of  this  which  is  only  'the  general  condition  '  of
the  content's  existence  and  not  a  part  of  the  content  itself.  Such
a  plea  rests  upon  a  complete  misapprehension  of  the  psycho-
logical standpoint.  The  empirical  psychologist,  it  is  contended,
should  imitate  the  procedure  of  the  natural  or  objective  sciences.
But  this  he  cannot  do;  for  the  two  standpoints,  as  we  have  just
seen,  are  entirely  different.  The  language  the  physicist  uses  is
simply:  there  is  this  or  that — a,  b,  c,  or  d.  But  the  psychologist
cannot  by  saying:  there  are  such  and  such  presentations  or

1  Cf.  above,  p.  12.

2  For  this  doctrine  I  have  suggested  the  name  of  Presentationism  : it  is  often
called  Sensationism  or  Associationism  ;  the  first  because  sensations  are  regarded  as
the  elements  or  atoms  of  which  its  '  contents  of  consciousness '  ultimately  consist :
the  second  because the  combination  of  these  elements  is  supposed  to  be  effected
by  a  sort  of  'cohesion'  among  those  that  are  contiguous  and  by  an  'attraction'  of
those  that  are  similar.


24  The  Definition  of  Psychology [CH.  I,  §  5

feelings  or  movements — as  if  they  were  independent  entities
— bring  out  the  characteristics  of  his  own  standpoint.  To
this  end  his  statements  must  (and  always  do),  either  explicitly
or  implicitly,  take  the  form :  The  individual  experient  has
such  and  such  presentations,  feels  thus  or  thus,  and  acts  in
this  wise  or  in  that.  And  this  is  'the  form  of  consciousness':
to  eliminate  it  is  to  ignore  the  concrete  experience  of  the  in-
dividual subject  altogether,  and  to  abolish  what  is  characteristic
of  psychology.  When  its  '  absolute  presupposition '  goes  the
content  is  no  longer  content  of  consciousness  in  the  psycho-
logical sense.

The  form  of  Experience  and  questions  of  method.

§  6.  To  deal  adequately  with  experience  we  must  combine
what  is  positive  in  both  these  alternative  views.  The  so-called
operations  and  states  of  consciousness  are  not  mere  modes  in
vaciw.  they  imply  an  active  and  affectible  subject,  and  it  can
only  conduce  to  clearness  to  make  this  fact  as  explicit  as
possible.  The  so-called  contents  of  consciousness  again,  though
not  necessarily  actions  or  affections  of  the  subject,  are  never
objects  per  se:  to  be  contents  of  consciousness  they  must  be
objects  for  a  subject.  The  form  of  consciousness  cannot,  then,
be  expressed  by  contrasting  consciousness  with  unconsciousness
in  respect  of  intensity ;  nor  by  contrasting  psychical  phenomena
with  physical,  the  inextended  with  the  extended,  nor  indeed  by
any  single  term  which  does  not  recognise  the  duality  of  subject
and  object.  The  one  term  that  does  recognise  this  duality  most
simply  is  experience.  And  experience  we  find  is  not  merely
nor  primarily  cognitive ;  neither  does  it  always  attain,  nor  is  it
ever  entirely  confined,  to  that  joint-knowledge  which  the  term
con-sciousness  originally  denoted.

The  most  complex  form  of  experience  that  we  know  is  our
own.  We  find  simpler  and  ever  simpler  forms  of  experience  as
we  pass  backwards  from  man  to  the  higher  mammals,  and  from
these  to  the  lower  mammals  and  birds,  and  thence  to  reptiles
and  fish.  Long  before  we  reach  the  end  of  the  chain  of  animal
life  however  it  becomes  a  moot  question  whether  there  is  any
clear  evidence  of  the  presence  of  experience  at  all.  Experience
appears,  that  is  to  say,  to  be  a  comparatively  late  result  of


CH.  i,  §  6]  Questions  of  Method  25

organic  evolution,  and  human  experience  to  be  the  summit  of  a
long  progressive  series.  Now  this  idea  of  gradual  evolution  has
certainly  exerted  a  powerful  influence  upon  modern  psychology.
It  is  the  less  surprising  therefore — especially  when  we  remember
the  defects  of  the  older  psychology — to  find  that  the  attempt  is
now  frequently  made  to  treat  psychology  wholly  according  to
the  historical,  or  as  it  is  oftener  called,  the  genetic,  method.  In
biology  such  a  procedure  is  possible  ;  for  the  protozoan  as  well  as
man,  the  paragon  of  animals,  is  equally  accessible  as  an  organism.
But  the  only  experience  immediately  accessible  to  us  is  our  own,
and  this — in  spite  of  its  complexity — is  the  first  we  know  and
the  one  we  know  best.  Lower  forms  of  experience,  notwith-
standing their  greater  simplicity,  we  know  later  and  know  less.
Accordingly  all  attempts — regardless  of  this  difference — to  treat
of  human  experience  as  merely  the  culmination  of  a  long  but
entirely  objective  development,  have  so  far  been  marked  by
serious  defects.  The  start  is  avowedly  physiological — from
what  is  metaphorically  described  as  'organic  behaviour,'  meaning
thereby  such  adaptability  of  organism  to  environment  as  seems
to  be  determined  solely  and  completely  by  the  organism's
structure,  and  from  its  apparently  automatic  and  invariable
character  to  require  merely  mechanical  explanations.  Later
on,  psychological  conceptions  are  gradually  introduced  to  eke
out  the  shortcomings  of  the  mechanical  interpretation,  when
the  spontaneity  of  the  behaviour  and  its  varying  adjustment
to  varying  conditions  suggest  that  the  machine  is  more  or
less  under  guidance.

So,  as  we  advance,  we  pass  as  it  were  insensibly  from  biology
proper  to  psychology  proper,  from  the  living  protoplasm  of
the  Amoeba  to  the  living  experience  of  man.  We  began  with
mechanism  and  we  end  with  mind.  But  the  psychology,  when
we  reach  it,  is  apt  to  be  of  the  Presentational  or  Sensational
type,  since  a  psychology  of  this  type  can  be  most  readily  equated
to  the  physiology  from  which  the  exposition  set  out.  We  have,
that  is  to  say,  a  'physiological  psychology'  of  the  very  worst
sort;  where  physiological  and  psychological  conceptions  are  for
ever  coquetting  with  each  other,  and  where,  as  a  result,  unseemly
hybrids  are  not  infrequent1.  If  it  be  a  sound  maxim  to  proceed

1  Cf.  e.g. Huxley's '  ideagenous  molecules ' as '  a physical  basis  of  memory,'
Collected  Essays,  I.  p. 239.


26  The  Definition  of  Psychology [CH.  I,  §  6

from  the  known  to  the  unknown,  then  Analytic  Psychology,
starting  from  human  experience  should  precede  any  attempt
to  treat  of  the  genesis  of  experience  as  a  whole,  or  to  correlate
psychology  with  physiology.  And  when  psychology  is  regarded
not  simply  as  ancillary  to  philosophy  or  theology,  but  is  studied
throughout  with  scientific  impartiality,  there  are  happily  facts  in
plenty  within  the  range  of  human  experience,  though  long  over-
looked as  trivial  or  unimportant,  which  throw  far  more  light
on,  say  the  problem  of  instinct,  than  biology  alone  could  ever
bring  to  bear.  But  in  truth  there  is  no  question  of  a  choice  of
methods:  in  every  case  physiological  and  comparative  psychology
must  fall  back  on  the  facts  and  analogies  of  our  own  experience.

The  standpoint  of  Psychology  as  individualistic.

§  7.  We  conclude  then  that  psychology  cannot  be  defined
by  reference  to  a  special  subject-matter  as  such  concrete  sciences,
for  example,  as  mineralogy  and  botany  can  be;  and  yet,  since  it
deals  in  some  sort  with  the  whole  of  experience,  it  is  obviously
not  an  abstract  science  in  any  ordinary  sense  of  that  term.  To
be  characterized  at  all,  it  must  be  characterized  by  the  standpoint
from  which  this  experience  is  viewed.  This  standpoint  is  some-
times termed  'individualistic,'  that  of  the  so-called  object-
sciences  being  distinguished  as  'universalistic/  But  both  alike
are  to  be  regarded  as  'objective'  in  the  sense  of  being  true  for
all — consisting  of  what  Kant  would  call  judgments  of  experience.
For  psychology  is  not  biography  in  any  sense,  least  of  all  bio-
graphy as  dealing  with  idiosyncrasies,  and  in  an  idiom  having
an  interest  and  a  meaning  for  one  subject  only,  and  incommuni-
cable to  any  other.  Locke,  Berkeley  and  Hume  have  been
justly  censured  because  they  regarded  the  critical  investigation
of  knowledge  as  a  psychological  problem,  and  set  to  work  to
study  the  individual  mind  simply  for  the  sake  of  this  problem.
But  none  the  less  their  standpoint  was  the  proper  one  for  the
science  of  psychology  itself;  and,  however  surely  their  philosophy
was  foredoomed  to  failure,  there  is  no  denying  a  steady  psycho-
logical advance  as  we  pass  from  Locke  to  Hume  and  his  modern
representatives.  By  'idea'  Locke  tells  us  he  means  "whatsoever
is  the  object  of  the  understanding  when  a  man  thinks"  (i.e.  is
conscious).  But  shut  in  within  such  a  circle  of  ideas  he  found


CH.  i,  §  7] The  Standpoint  of  Psychology  27

himself  powerless  to  explain  his  knowledge  of  a  world  assumed  to
lie  beyond  it  and  to  be  independent  of  it.  Though  he  was  able
to  give  a  very  good  account  of  some  of  those  ideas  themselves,
he  could  not  justify  his  belief  in  the  universal  world  of  things
whence,  as  he  supposed,  certain  of  them  'were  conveyed' ;  any
more  than  Robinson  Crusoe  could  have  explored  the  continents
whose  existence  he  inferred  from  the  strange  products  that  were
drifted  to  his  island,  though  he  might  perhaps  survey  the  island
itself  well  enough.  Berkeley  accordingly,  as  Professor  Fraser
happily  puts  it,  abolished  Locke's  hypothetical  outer  circle.
Thereby  he  made  the  psychological  standpoint  clearer  than  ever
— hence  the  truth  of  Hume's  remark,  that  Berkeley's  arguments
"admit  of  no  answer";  at  the  same  time  the  epistemological
problem  was  as  hopeless  as  before — hence  again  the  truth  of
Hume's  remark  that  those  arguments  "produced  no  conviction."
Of  all  the  facts  with  which  he  deals,  the  psychologist  may  truly
say  that  their  esse  is  percipi,  in  so  far  as  such  facts  are  facts  of
presentation,  are  ideas  in  Locke's  sense,  or  objects  which  imply
a  subject.  Before  we  became  conscious  there  was  no  world  for
us ;  should  our  consciousness  cease,  the  world  for  us  ceases  too ;
had  we  been  born  blind,  the  world  would  for  us  have  had  no
colour;  if  deaf,  it  would  have  had  no  sounds  ;  if  idiotic,  it  would
have  had  no  meaning.  Psychology,  then,  never  transcends  the
limits  of  the  individual.

But  now,  though  this  Berkeleyan  standpoint  is  its  standpoint,
psychology  in  the  first  place  is  not  pledged  to  the  method  em-
ployed by  Berkeley  and  by  Locke ;  and  in  the  second  place  must
repudiate  altogether  the  Cartesian  confusion  of  presentations
with  subjective  modifications  in  which  they  shared.  Psychology
may  be  individualistic  without  being  confined  exclusively  to  the
introspective  method.  There  is  nothing  to  hinder  the  psycho-
logist from  employing  materials  furnished  by  his  observations
of  other  men,  of  infants,  of  the  lower  animals,  or  of  the  insane ;
nothing  to  hinder  him  taking  counsel  with  the  philologist
or  even  the  physiologist,  provided  always  he  can  show  the
psychological  bearings  of  those  facts  which  are  not  directly
psychological.  But  by  whatever  methods,  from  whatever  sources
its  facts  are  ascertained,  they  must — to  have  a  psychological
import — be  regarded  as  having  a  place  in,  or  as  being  a  con-
stituent of,  someone's  experience.  In  this  sense,  i.e.  as  presented


28  The  Definition  of  Psychology [CH.  i,  §  7

to  an  individual,  'the  whole  choir  of  heaven  and  furniture  of
earth'  may  belong  to  psychology,  but  otherwise  they  are  beyond
its  scope.

Psychology  then  we  define  as  the  science  of  individual
experience — understanding  by  experience  not  merely,  not  pri-
marily, cognition,  but  also,  and  above  all,  conative  activity  or
behaviour.


CHAPTER II

GENERAL  ANALYSIS

Psychology  and  Epistemology.

§  i.  We  have  just  seen  that  in  seeking  to  make  a  first
general  analysis  of  experience,  we  must  start  from  individual
human  experience ;  for  it  is  this  alone  that  we  immediately
know.  From  this  standpoint  we  have  now  to  endeavour  to
determine  the  '  irreducible  minimum '  which  all  experience  in-
volves ;  in  other  words,  to  reach  a  concept  applicable  to  every
other  form  of  experience  as  well  as  to  our  own.  Etymologi-
cally  experience  connotes  practical  acquaintance,  efficiency  and
skill  as  the  result  of  trial — usually  repeated  trial — and  effort.
Many  recent  writers  on  comparative  psychology  propose  to
make  evidence  of  experience  in  this  sense  the  criterion  of
psychical  life.  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner  and  the  ass  his
master's  crib,  and  so  would  pass  muster ;  but  the  ant  and  the
bee,  since  they  are  said  to  learn  nothing,  would,  in  spite  of  their
marvellous  instinctive  skill,  be  regarded  as  mere  automata  in
Descartes's  sense.  That  this  criterion  is  decisive  on  the  positive
side  will  hardly  be  denied ;  the  question  how  far  it  is  available
\  negatively  we  must  examine  later  on.  Experience  is  tfte  process  »
of  becoming  expert  by  experiment,  let  us  say  meanwhile.  It  will  SuJk£f7  n  ^
be  well  next  briefly  to  note  some  of  the  implications  of  this
positive  criterion.  The  chief  implication,  no  doubt,  is  that  which
in  psychological  language  we  express  as  the  duality  of  subject
and  object — already  strenuously  insisted  on  in  the  preceding
chapter.  Looking  at  this  relation  as  the  comparative  psycho-
logist has  to  do,  we  find  that  it  tallies  in  the  main  with  the
biological  relation  of  organism  and  environment.  The  indi-
viduality of  the  organism  corresponds  to,  though  it  is  not
identical  with,  that  of  the  psychological  subject;  while  to  the


30  General  Analysis  [CH.  n,  §  i

environment  and  its  changes  corresponds  the  continuously
changing  objective  continuum  or  totum  objectivum,  as  we  shall
call  it,  though  again  the  two  are  not  identical.  This  double
correspondence  helps  us  to  see  still  more  clearly  the  error  of
regarding  individual  experience  as  wholly  subjective,  and  at  the
same  time  helps  us  to  find  some  measure  of  truth  in  the  naive
realism  of  Common  Sense.  As  these  points  have  an  important
bearing  on  the  connexion  of  psychology  and  epistemology,  we
must  attempt  to  elucidate  them  more  fully.

Though  it  would  be  unwarrantable  to  resolve  a  thing,  as
some  have  done,  into  a  mere  meeting-point  of  relations,  yet  it
is  perhaps  as  great  a  mistake  to  assume  that  it  can  be  anything
determinate  in  itself  apart  altogether  from  relations  to  other
things.  By  the  physicist  this  mistake  can  hardly  be  made :  for
him  action  and  reaction  are  strictly  correlative:  a  material
system  can  do  no  work  on  itself.  For  the  biologist,  again,
organism  and  environment  are  invariably  complementary.  But
in  psychology,  when  presentations  are  regarded  as  subjective
modifications,  we  have  this  mistaken  isolation  in  a  glaring  form,
and  all  the  hopeless  difficulties  of  what  is  called  'subjective
idealism '  are  the  result.  Subjective  modifications  no  doubt  are
always  one  constituent  of  individual  experience,  but  always  as
correlative — directly  or  remotely — to  objective  modifications  or
changes — present  or  prospective — in  the  objective  continuum.
If  experience  were  throughout  subjective,  not  merely  would  the
term  'subjective'  itself  be  meaningless,  not  merely  would  the
conception  of  the  objective  never  arise,  but  the  entirely  im-
personal and  intransitive  process  that  remained,  though  it
might  be  described  as  '  absolute  becoming1,'  could  not  be  called
even  solipsism,  least  of  all  real  experience.  Wherever  experi-
ence is  inferred,  Common  Sense,  then,  is  right  in  positing  a
real  agent  answering  to  what  we  know  as  Self  and  interacting
with  another  reality  answering  to  what  each  of  us  knows  as
the  World.  It  is  further  right  in  regarding  the  world  which
each  of  us  immediately  knows  as  a  coloured,  sounding,  tangible
world — more  exactly  as  a  world  of  sensible  qualities.  The
assumption  of  naive  realism,  that  the  world  which  each  one
knows,  exists  as  he  knows  it,  independently  of  him,  is  ques-
tionable, to  say  the  least.  But  this  assumption  goes  beyond

1  Cf.  Herbart,  Einleitungin  die  Philosophic,  Hartenstein's  ed.,  1850,  §  129.


CH.  II,  §  i] Psychology  and  Epistemology  31

individual  experience,  and  does  not,  indeed  could  not,  arise  at
this  standpoint.

Answering  to  the  individuality  and  unity  of  the  subjective
factor,  there  is  a  corresponding  unity  and  individuality  of  the
objective.  Every  Ego  has  its  own  correlative  Non-Ego.  The
doctrine  of  Leibniz,  that  "each  monad  is  a  living  mirror...
representative  of  the  universe  according  to  its  point  of  view,"
will,  with  obvious  reservations,  occur  to  many  as  illustrative
here.  In  particular,  Leibniz  emphasized  one  point  on  which
the  psychologist  will  do  well  to  insist.  "  Since  the  world  is
a  plenum,"  he  begins,  "  all  things  are  connected  together
and  every  body  acts  upon  every  other,  more  or  less,  according
to  their  distance,  and  is  affected  by  their  reaction  ;  hence  each
monad  is  a  living  mirror1,"  &c. — continuing  as  above.  Subject
and  Object,  or  (as  it  will  be  clearer  in  this  connexion  to  say)
Ego  and  Non-Ego,  are  then  not  merely  logically  a  universe,  but
actually  the  universe,  in  so  far  as,  as  Leibniz  put  it,  "  He  who  sees
all  could  read  in  each  what  is  happening  everywhere2."  Though
every  individual  experience  is  unique,  yet  the  more  Ego1  is
similar  to  Ego2  the  more  their  complementaries  Non-Ego^  Non-
Ego.2  are  likewise  similar ;  much  as  two  perspective  projections
are  more  similar  the  more  adjacent  their  points  of  sight ;  and
more  similar  as  regards  a  given  position  the  greater  its  distance
from  both  points.  And  thus  beyond  a  certain  finite  limit  the
universe  will  be  indistinguishably  the  same  for  both.  It  was
only  by  including  this  outer  region  of  '  confused  perception '
that  Leibniz  could  call  the  universe  the  objective  factor  in  each
and  every  individual's  experience.  But  we  too  shall  have
to  allow  that,  besides  the  strictly  limited  'field'  within  the
bounds  of  '  clear  perception/  there  is  an  indefinite  '  extension '
of  the  presentational  contimntm  beyond  it3.  Again,  the
Leibnizian  Monadology  helps  us  also  to  clear  up  a  certain
confusion  that  besets  terms  such  as  '  field  of  consciousness,'
or  'finite  centre  of  experience' — a  barbarous  but  intelligible
phrase  that  has  recently  appeared — their  confusion,  that  is,  with
a  mosaic  of  mutually  exclusive  areas,  or  with  a  scheme  of
mutually  exclusive  logical  compartments.  Consciousnesses,

1  Principles  of  Nature  and  Grace,  §  3.

2  Monadology,  §  61.

3  Cf.  below,  ch.  iv,  §  6.


32  General  Analysis  [CH.  n,  §  i

though  in  one  respect  mutually  exclusive,  do  not  limit  each
other  in  this  fashion.  For,  though  relatively  different  as  to
their  point  of  view,  it  is  the  same  absolute  whole  which  is
sundered  into  subjective  and  objective  factors  for  each.

This  way  of  looking  at  the  facts  of  mind  helps  too  to
dispel  the  obscurity  investing  such  terms  as  subjective,  objec-
tive^ intersubjective  and  transsubjective,  as  these  occur  in  psycho-
logical or  epistemological  discussions.  The  psychologist  must
maintain  that  no  experience  is  merely  subjective.  But  epistemo-
logists  who  nevertheless,  as  we  have  already  seen,  describe
individual  experience  as  subjective — because  of  its  particularity
which  pertains,  like  an  idiosyncrasy,  to  the  individual  alone —
confine  the  term  'objective'  to  universal  experience — the  objects
in  which  are  the  same  for  every  experient.  And  so  has  arisen
the  time-honoured  opposition  of  Sense-knowledge  and  Thought-
knowledge  :  so  too  has  arisen  the  dualism  of  Empiricism  and
Rationalism,  which  Kant  sought  to  surmount  by  logical  ana-
lysis. It  is  in  the  endeavour  to  supplement  this  analysis  by
a  psychological  genesis  that  the  terms  'intersubjective'  and
'  transsubjective '  prove  useful.  The  problem  for  psychology
is  to  ascertain  the  successive  stages  in  the  advance  from  the
one  form  of  experience  or  knowledge  to  the  other.  "  When
ten  men  look  at  the  sun  or  the  moon,"  said  Reid,  "they  all
see  the  same  individual  object."  But  according  to  Hamilton
this  statement  is  not  "philosophically  correct... the  truth  is
that  each  of  these  persons  sees  a  different  object.... It  is  not
by  perception  but  by  a  process  of  reasoning  that  we  connect
the  objects  of  sense  with  existences  beyond  the  sphere  of  im-
mediate knowledge1."  Now  it  is  to  this  '  beyond '  that  the  term
transsubjective  is  applied ;  and  the  question  before  us  is :  How
do  individual  subjects  thus  get  beyond  the  immanence  or  'im-
mediacy '  with  which  all  experience  begins  ?  By  a  '  process  of
reasoning,'  says  Hamilton.  Yes,  but  psychologically  there  is  a
prior  process ;  for  it  is  at  least  true  in  fact,  whether  necessarily
true  or  not,  that  such  reasoning  is  the  result  of  social  intercourse,
which  obviously  presupposes  and  rests  upon  individual  experi-
ence. Further,  it  will  be  generally  allowed  that  Kant's  Analytik
has  made  plain  the  insufficiency  of  merely  formal  reasoning
to  yield  the  categories  of  Substance,  Cause  and  End,  by  which

1  Lectures  on  Metaphysics,  ii.  153.


CH.  ii,  §  i] Psychology  and  Epistemology  33

we  pass  from  mere  perceptual  experience  to  that  wider  ex-
perience which  transcends  it.  And  psychology,  again,  may
claim  to  have  shewn  that  in  fact  these  categories  are  the  result
of  that  reflective  self-consciousness  to  which  social  intercourse
first  gives  rise.

But  such  intercourse,  it  has  been  urged,  presupposes  the
common  ground  between  subject  and  subject  which  it  is  meant
to  explain.  How,  it  is  asked,  if  every  subject  is  confined  to  his
own  unique  experience,  does  this  intersubjective  intercourse  ever
arise?  If  no  progress  towards  intellective  synthesis  were  possible
before  intersubjective  intercourse  began,  such  intercourse,  as
presupposing  something  more  than  immediate  sense-knowledge,
obviously  never  could  begin1.  Let  us  illustrate  by  an  analogy
which  Leibniz's  comparison  of  experience  to  a  '  point  of  view '
at  once  suggests.  If  it  were  possible  for  the  terrestrial  astronomer
to  obtain  observations  of  the  heavens  from  astronomers  in  the
neighbouring  stars,  he  might  be  able  to  map  in  three  dimensions
constellations  which  now  he  can  only  represent  in  two.  But
unless  he  had  ascertained  unaided  the  heliocentric  parallax  of
these  neighbouring  stars,  he  would  have  no  means  of  dis-
tinguishing them  as  near  from  the  distant  myriads  besides,  or  of
understanding  the  data  he  might  receive ;  and  unless  he  had
first  of  all  determined  the  still  humbler  geocentric  parallax  of
our  sun,  those  heliocentric  parallaxes  would  have  been  unattain-
able. So  in  like  manner  we  may  say:  'any  more  general  paral-
lax' presupposes  what  maybe  called  'special  parallax,'  and  even
this  presupposes  the  primordial  duality  of  object  and  subject.
Again  such  special  parallax  or  acquaintance  with  others  of  its
own  kind  is  the  direct  outcome  of  the  extended  range  in  time
which  the  individual's  progress  in  perception  and  memory
secured  ;  and  when  in  this  way  its  (bodily)  self  has  become  an
object,  the  objects  that  resemble  it  become  other  selves  or  'ejects,'
to  adopt  with  slight  modification  a  term  originated  by  the  late
W.  K.  Clifford.  We  may  be  quite  sure  that  his  faithful  dog  is
as  little  of  a  solipsist  as  the  noble  savage  whom  it  accompanies.
Indeed,  in  rudimentary  form  the  social  factor,  if  we  may  judge

1  And  it  is  precisely  for  want  of  this  mediation  that  Kant's  "  two  stems  of  human
knowledge,  which  perhaps  may  spring  from  a  common  but  to  us  unknown  root,"
leave  epistemology  still  more  or  less  hampered  with  the  old  dualism  of  sense  and
understanding.

W.  P.  3


34  General  Analysis  [CH.  n,  §  i

by  biological  evidence,  is  to  be  found  very  early.  Sexual  union
in  the  physiological  sense  occurs  in  all  but  the  lowest  Metazoa,
pairing  and  courtship  are  frequent  among  insects,  while  "  among
the  cold-blooded  fishes  the  battle  of  the  stickleback  with  his
rivals,  his  captivating  manoeuvres  to  lead  the  female  to  the  nest
which  he  has  built,  his  mad  dance  of  passion  around  her,  and
his  subsequent  jealous  guarding  of  the  nest,  have  often  been
observed  and  admired1."  Among  birds  and  mammals  we  find
not  merely  that  these  psychological  aspects  of  sexual  life  are
greatly  extended,  but  we  find  also  prolonged  education  of  off-
spring by  parents  and  imitation  of  the  parents  by  offspring.
Even  language,  or,  at  any  rate  'the  linguistic  impulse,'  is  not
wholly  absent  among  brutes2.  Thus  as  the  sensori-motor  adjust-
ments of  the  organism  to  its  environment — generally — advance
in  complexity  and  range,  there  is  a  concomitant  advance  in  the
\  variety  and  intimacy  of  its  relations — specially — with  individuals
of  its  own  kind.  It  is  therefore  reasonable  to  assume  no  dis-
continuity between  phases  of  experience  that  for  the  individual
are  merely  objective  and  phases  that  are  also  ejective  as  well :
and  once  the  ejective  level  is  attained,  some  interchange  of
experience  is  possible.  So  disappears  the  great  gulf  fixed
betwixt  subjective  or  individual  and  intersubjective  or  universal
experience  by  rival  systems  in  philosophy.


The  Subject  of  Experience.

§  2.  From  this  preliminary  epistemological  discussion  we
may  return  to  the  psychological  analysis  of  experience  itself.
As  to  this,  there  is  in  the  main  substantial  agreement ;  the
elementary  facts  of  experience  cannot  be  expressed  in  less  than
three  propositions — "  I  feel  somehow,"  "  I  know  something,"
"  I  do  something."  But  here  at  once  there  arises  an  important
question  which  claims  consideration  before  we  attempt  to  dis-
cuss the  meaning  or  the  merits  of  this  analysis  itself,  the
question : — What  after  all  are  we  to  understand  by  the  subject
of  these  propositions  ?  The  proposition  "  I  feel  somehow "  is
not  equivalent  to  "  I  know  that  I  feel  somehow."  Though  it

1  Evolution  of  Sex,  by  Geddes  and  Thomson,  ist  ed.  p.  265.

2  Cf.  Darwin,  Descent  of  Man,  1871,  i.  pp.  53  ff.


u^  \o

f  07v,ofe^\  t*  \-


**

<? xpeerce  35 ..

&  )


cannot  actually  foe  made  without*  implying  this  knowledge,  yet  l/

to  identify  the  two  would  be  to  confound  consciousness  with  ^  LM^

self-consciousness. The  point  is  that,  whether  seeking  to  analyse  \£^ ^  -

one's  own  consciousness  or  to  infer  that  of  a  lobster,  whether

discussing  the  association  of  ideas  or  the  expression  of  emotions,

there  is  always  an  individual  self  or  'subject'  in  question. It

is  not  enough  to  talk  of  feelings  or  volitions  :  what  we  mean  is

that  some  individual  —  man  or  worm  —  feels,  strives,  acts,  thus  or

thus. Obvious  as  this  may  seem,  it  has  been  frequently  either

forgotten  or  gainsaid. It  has  been  forgotten  among  details  or

through  the  assumption  of  a  medley  of  faculties,  each  of  them

treated  as  an  individual  in  turn,  so  that  among  them  the  real

individual  was  lost. Or  it  has  been  gainsaid,  because  to  assert

that  all  psychological  facts  pertain  to  an  experiencing  subject  or

experient  was  supposed  to  imply  that  they  pertained  to  a  parti-

cular spiritual  substance,  which  was  simple,  indestructible,  and  so

forth  ; and  it  is  manifestly  desirable  to  exclude  such  assump-

tions from  psychology  as  a  science  aiming  only  at  a  systematic

exposition  of  what  can  be  known  and  verified.

But,  however  much  assailed  or  disowned,  the  concept  of  a
'self  or  conscious  subject  is  to  be  found  implicitly  or  explicitly
in  all  psychological  writers  whatever  —  not  more  in  Berkeley,  who
accepts  it  as  a  fact,  than  in  Hume,  who  treats  it  as  a  fiction.
This  being  so,  we  are  far  more  likely  to  reach  the  truth
eventually  if  we  openly  acknowledge  this  inexpugnable  as-
sumption, if  such  it  prove,  instead  of  resorting  to  all  sorts  of
devious  periphrases  to  hide  it.  Now  wherever  the  word  Subject
and  its  derivatives  occur  in  psychology  we  might  substitute
the  word  Ego  and  analogous  derivatives,  did  such  exist.  But
Subject  is  almost  always  the  preferable  term  ;  its  impersonal
form  is  an  advantage,  and  it  readily  recalls  its  modern  cor-
relative Object.  Moreover,  Ego  has  two  senses,  distinguished
by  Kant  as  pure  and  empirical,  the  latter  of  which  was,  of
course,  an  object,  the  Me  known,  while  the  former  was  subject
always,  the  /  knowing.  By  pure  Ego  or  Subject  it  is  proposed
to  denote  here  the  simple  fact  that  everything  experienced  is
referred  to  a  Self  experiencing.  This  psychological  concept  of
a  self  or  subject,  then,  is  after  all  by  no  means  identical  with
the  metaphysical  concept  of  a  soul  :  it  may  be  kept  as  free
from  metaphysical  implications  as  the  concept  of  the  biological

3—2


36  General  Analysis  [CH.  n,  §  2

individual  or  organism  with  which  it  is  so  intimately  con-
nected.

It  would,  however,  be  a  mistake  to  seek  to  explain  the
individuality  of  the  psychological  subject  by  reference  to  the
individuality  of  the  organism.  Yet  this  mistake  has  been
made  by  those  who  represent  the  individual  '  mind '  as  a  com-
plex of  faculties  which  work  consentiently  like  the  organs  of  the
body,  and  are  sometimes  active  and  sometimes  quiescent.  As
an  animal  has  legs  whether  it  is  walking  or  not,  so  they  suppose
a  mind  has  a  memory,  whether  it  is  remembering  or  not.  But
the  analogy  is  false.  If  we  find  anything  among  the  facts  of
psychology  corresponding  to  the  parts  or  organs  of  the  animal
body,  these  would  rather  be  the  ideas,  objects  or  presentations
which  constitute  the  'contents  of  consciousness."  In  the  unity
of  this  content  at  any  one  moment  and  its  continuity  from
moment  to  moment  we  have  indeed  a  certain  counterpart  to
the  unity  and  continuity  of  the  body.  Still  this  unity  and  con-
tinuity of  the  contents  of  consciousness  is  not  what  we  mean
by  the  psychological  subject;  on  the  contrary,  we  look  to  the
psychological  subject  for  an  explanation  of  that  unity.  And  we
may  have  to  look  to  it  too  for  an  explanation  of  the  unity  of
the  organism.  At  any  rate,  as  soon  as  the  biologist  regards
the  organism  as  adapted  to  the  end  of  living  and  surviving  in
a  struggle  for  life — thereby  giving  to  life  a  meaning  other  than
that  of  a  series  of  physical  processes — he  has  changed  his  front.
Such  teleological  references  imply  feeling,  and  effort  or  im-
pulse, as  the  result  of  feeling :  and  it  is  just  these  purely
psychological  facts  of  feeling  and  impulse  that  compel  us  to
recognise  a  conscious  subject  as  well  as  a  unity  and  continuity
of  the  so-called  contents  of  consciousness.

Still  the  attempt,  at  least,  has  frequently  been  made  to
resolve  the  former  into  the  latter,  and  so  to  accord  to  mind  only
such  an  individuality  as  has  an  obvious  counterpart  in  the
individuality  of  the  organism,  i.e.  what  we  may  call  an  objective
individuality.  But  such  procedure  owes  all  its  plausibility  to
the  fact  that  it  leaves  out  of  sight  the  difference  between  the
physiological  and  the  psychological  standpoints.  For  the  phy-
siologist a  dog,  say,  is  simply  a  certain  wondrously  complex
mechanism,  whose  working  he  essays  to  describe  entirely  in
terms  of  matter  and  motion.  If  this  be  all  that  he  means  by


CH.  ii,  §  2] The  Subject  of  Experience  37

dog,  then  a  dog  is  simply  "  the  sum  of  the  phenomena  which
make  up  this  corporeal  existence1."  And  inasmuch  as  its  pre-
sentation to  anyone  in  particular  is  a  matter  of  no  importance,
the  fact  of  presentation  at  all  may  be  very  well  dropped  out :
the  biological  dog  is  just  that  complex  whole  and  no  more.
But  to  say  that  this  '  sum  of  phenomena '  is  only  the  body  of  the
dog,  implies  that  the  dog  itself  has  some  distinct  existence,  is,
in  fact,  the  soul  or  self  or  subject  that  has  that  body.  Let  us
now  turn  to  the  distinct  whole,  whose  existence  is  thus  implied.
"  Leaving  aside  the  problem  of  the  substance  of  the  soul,"  why
it  is  then  asked,  should  we  not  here  take  "  the  word  '  soul '
simply  as  a  name  for  the  series  of  mental  phenomena  which
make  up  an  individual  mind,  just  as  we  took  'body'  as  the
name  for  the  sum  of  material  phenomena  that  make  up  an
organism"?  Surely  the  moment  we  try  distinctly  to  under-
stand this  question,  we  realise  that  the  cases  are  different.
'  Series  of  mental  phenomena '  for  whom  ?  For  any  passer-by
such  as  might  take  stock  of  our  biological  dog?  No,  obviously
only  for  that  'individual  mind'  itself.  But  then  that  is  sup-
posed to  be  made  up  of,  to  be  nothing  different  from,  the  said
'series  of  phenomena.'  Are  we,  then,  (i) — using  the  words  of
J.  S.  Mill — "to  accept  the  paradox  that  something  which  ex
hypothesi  is  but  a  series  of  feelings,  can  be  aware  of  itself  as
a  series2"?  Or  (2)  shall  we  say  that  the  several  parts  of  the
series  are  mutually  phenomenal,  much  as  A  may  look  at  B,
who  was  just  now  looking  at  A?  Or  (3)  finally,  shall  we  say
that  a  large  part  of  the  so-called  series,  in  fact  every  term  but
one,  is  phenomenal  for  the  rest — for  that  one  ?

As  to  the  first,  paradox  is  too  mild  a  word  for  it;  even
contradiction  will  hardly  suffice.  It  is  as  impossible  to  express
'  being  aware  of  by  one  term  as  it  is  to  express  an  equation  or
any  other  relation  by  one  term  :  what  knows  can  no  more  be
identical  with  what  is  known  than  a  weight  with  what  it  weighs3.
If  a  series  of  'feelings'  is  what  is  known  or  presented,  then  what
knows,  what  the  series  is  presented  to,  cannot  be  itself  that
series  of  feelings ;  and  this  without  regard  to  the  point  Mill

1  Cf.  T.  H.  Huxley,  Hume,  "  English  Men  of  Letters  Series"  (1879),  pp.  171  f.
Collected  Essays,  vi.  p.  199.

2  Examination  of  Sir  W.  Hamilton 's  Philosophy,  ch.  xii.y?».

3  So  far  as  our  experience  goes,  at  least :  as  to  the  Absolute  we  can  here  say  nothing.


38  General  Analysis  [CH.  n,  §  2

mentions,  viz.  that  the  infinitely  greater  part  of  the  series  is
either  past  or  future.  The  question  is  not  in  the  first  instance
one  of  time  or  substance  at  all:  it  turns  simply  upon  the  fact
that  knowledge  or  consciousness  is  unmeaning  except  as  it
implies  something  knowing,  or  conscious  of,  something.  But
it  may  be  replied  :  Granted  that  the  formula  for  consciousness
is  something  doing  something,  to  put  it  generally;  still,  if  the
two  somethings  are  the  same  when  I  touch  myself  or  when
I  see  myself,  why  may  not  agent  and  object  be  the  same
when  the  action  is  knowing  or  being  aware  of;  why  may  I  not
know  myself — in  fact,  do  I  not  know  myself?  Certainly  not ;
agent  and  object  never  are  the  same  in  the  same  act ;  such
terms  as  self-caused,  self-moved,  self-known,  et  id  genus  omne,
either  connote  the  incomprehensible  or  are  abbreviated  ex-
pressions— as  e.g.  when  we  talk  of  touching  oneself  when  one's
right  hand  touches  one's  left.

And  so  we  come  to  the  alternative : — As  one  hand  washes
the  other,  may  not  different  members  of  '  the  series  of  feelings '
be  subject  and  object  in  turn  ?  Compare,  for  example,  the  state
of  mind  of  a  man  succumbing  to  temptation  (as  he  pictures
himself  enjoying  the  coveted  good  and  impatiently  repudiates
scruples  of  conscience  or  dictates  of  prudence)  with  his  state
when,  filled  with  remorse,  he  sides  with  conscience  and  con-
demns this  'former  self — the  'better  self  having  meanwhile
become  supreme.  Here  that  organized  group  of  presentations  and
their  associated  sentiments  and  motives,  which  together  played
the  rdle  of  self  in  the  first  situation,  have — only  momentarily  it
may  be  true,  but  still  have — for  the  time  the  place  of  not-self;
and  under  abnormal  circumstances  this  partial  alteration  may
become  complete  alienation,  as  in  what  is  called  'double  con-
sciousness.' Or  again,  the  development  of  self-consciousness
might  be  loosely  described  as  taking  the  subject  or  self  of  one
stage  as  an  object  in  the  next — self  being,  e.g.,  first  identified
with  the  body  and  afterwards  distinguished  from  it.  But  all
this,  however  true,  is  beside  the  mark  ;  and  it  is  really  a  very
serious  misnomer  to  speak,  as  e.g.  Herbert  Spencer  does,
of  the  development  of  self-consciousness  as  a  'differentia-
tion of  subject  and  object.'  It  is  rather  a  differentiation  of
object  and  object,  i.e.  in  plainer  words,  it  is  a  differentiation
among  presentations — a  differentiation  every  step  of  which


CH.  ii,  §  2] The  Subject  of  Experience  39

implies  just  that  relation  to  a  subject  which  it  is  supposed  to
supersede1.

There  still  remains  the  alternative,  expressed  in  the  words  of
J.  S.  Mill,  viz. "  the  alternative  of  believing  that  the  Mind  or  Ego
is  something  different  from  any  series  of  feelings  or  possibilities
of  them."  To  admit  this,  of  course,  is  to  admit  the  necessity  of
distinguishing  between  Mind  or  Ego,  meaning  the  unity  or  con-
tinuity of  consciousness  as  a  complex  of  presentations,  and  Mind
or  Ego,  meaning  the  subject  to  which  this  complex  is  presented.
In  dealing  with  the  body  from  the  ordinary  biological  standpoint
no  such  necessity  arises.  But,  whereas  there  the  individual
organism  is  spoken  of  unequivocally,  among  psychologists,  on
the  other  hand,  the  individual  mind  may  mean  either  (i)  the
series  of  'feelings'  or  'mental  phenomena'  above  referred  to;  or
(ii)  the  subject  of  these '  feelings '  for  whom  they  are  phenomena  ;
or  (iii)  the  subject  of  these  '  feelings '  or  phenomena  plus  the  series
of  '  feelings '  or  phenomena  themselves,  the  two  being  in  that
relation  to  each  other  in  which  alone  the  one  is  subject  and  the
other  a  series  of  '  feelings '  or  phenomena,  i.e.,  objects.  It  is  in
this  last  sense  that  Mind  is  used  in  empirical  psychology2.  Its
exclusive  use  in  the  first  sense  is  favoured  only  by  those  who
shrink  from  the  speculative  associations  connected  with  its
exclusive  use  in  the  second.  But  psychology  is  not  called  upon
to  transcend  the  relation  of  subject  to  object  or,  as  we  may  call
it,  the  fact  of  presentation.  On  the  other  hand,  as  has  been
said,  the  attempt  to  ignore  one  term  of  the  relation  is  hopeless ;

1  Another  variant  of  this  second  alternative  was  afterwards  espoused  and  vigor-
ously defended  by  William  James. "Each  pulse  of  cognitive  consciousness,  each
thought,"  he  says,  "dies  away  and  is  replaced  by  another. The  other,  among  the
things  it  knows,  knows  its  own  predecessor,  and  finding  it  'warm '...greets  it,  saying:
'  Thou  art  mine  and  part  of  the  same  self  with  me.' Each  later  Thought,  knowing
and  including  thus the  Thoughts  which  went  before,  is  the  final  receptacle — and
appropriating  them  is  the  final owner— of  all  that  they  contain  and  own. Each
Thought  is  thus  born  an  owner  and  dies  owned,  transmitting  whatever  it  realised  in
its  self  to  its  own  later  proprietor.... It  is  this  trick  which  the  nascent  thought  has  of
immediately  taking  up  the  expiring  thought  and  'adopting'  it,  which  is  the  foundation
of  most  of  the  remoter  constituents  of  the  self." This  '  provisional  solution '  he  de-
clares must  be  'the  final  word'  of  psychology  concerning  the  self  or  subject:  "the
thoughts  themselves  are  the  thinkers." The  Principles  of  Psychology,  1890,  vol.  i.
pp.  339  f.,  Textbook  of  Psychology,  1892,  p.  216. Special  criticism  of  this  extraor-
dinary position  we  must  reserve  till  we  come  to  deal  in  detail  with  the  analysis  of  the
presentation  of  self  and  of  the  self-consciousness  in  which  it  is  said  to  be  presented.

2  A  meaning  in  general  better  expressed,  as  here  maintained,  by  Experience.


40  General  Analysis  [CH.  n,  §  2

and  equally  hopeless,  even  futile,  is  the  attempt,  by  means  of
phrases  such  as  consciousness  or  the  unity  of  consciousness,  to
escape  the  implication  of  a  conscious  subject.  This  brings  us
again  to  our  main  topic — the  ultimate  analysis  of  the  experience
of  such  a  subject.

What  however  are  we  to  understand  by  such  ultimate
analysis?  Is  it  the  resolution  of  all  that  can  enter  anyone's
consciousness  into  hypothetical  elements ;  and  analogous  there-
fore to  the  physicist's  resolution  of  all  the  varieties  of  matter  into
hypothetical  ions  ?  Or  is  it  rather  the  determination  of  what
is  always  present  wherever  there  is  consciousness  or  psychical
life  at  all,  and  more  analogous  therefore  to  the  inquiry  of  the
biologist  concerning  the  invariable  characteristics  of  animal  life  ?
In  the  one  case  the  elements  reached  might  exist  apart,  just  as
nitrogen  and  nickel  may ;  in  the  other  they  would  necessarily
coexist  and  together  constitute  one  concrete  '  state  of  conscious-
ness.' There  is  yet  a  third  view,  also  suggested  by  an  analogous
biological  inquiry,  namely,  that  this  consciousness  is  resolvable
into  a  cycle  of  events,  the  several  phases  of  which  psychological
analysis  is  to  ascertain.  Perfect  clearness  on  these  points  does
not  seem  to  exist  among  psychologists.  While  it  is  agreed — prac-
tically on  all  hands — that  the  ultimate  facts  of  mind  are  cognition,
feeling,  and  conati9n,  there  is  no  corresponding  unanimity  either
as  to  the  category  to  which  these  facts  belong  or  as  to  how  they
are  related.  They  are  spoken  of  as  processes,  states,  affections,
actions,  and  so  on:  formerly  they  were  for  the  most  part  dealt  with
in  separation  as  the  '  energies '  or  '  functions '  of  corresponding
faculties.  At  other  times  we  are  told  that  "they  are  never
presented  to  us  separately,  but  always  in  conjunction  and  that
it  is  only  by  an  ideal  analysis  that  they  can  be  discriminated
and  considered  apart1."  Again  feeling  and  cognition  are  some-
times represented  as  antithetical, '  in  inverse  ratio ' ;  sometimes
it  is  said  feeling  may  be  absent  altogether:  by  some,  'will'  is  said
to  be  dependent  throughout  upon  feeling,  by  others  it  is  regarded
as  a  veritable  primum  movens.  In  such  a  state  of  matters  it  is
obviously  desirable  to  distinguish  two  different  questions,  even
though  we  work  towards  an  answer  to  both  simultaneously.  The
questions  are  (i)  What  do  we  find  invariably  present  when  we
are  conscious  at  all? — the  result  of  such  an  analysis  being  to

1  Hamilton,  Lectures  on  Metaphysics,  vol.  ii.  p.  g.


CH.  ii,  §  3]  Feeling  41

determine  the  elements,  factors  or  constituents  of  a  concrete
state  of  consciousness  or  psychosis,  as  it  has  been  termed  :  (2)  Is
there  any  definite  cycle  or  order  of  succession  among  these,  and
how  are  they  causally  related  ?  Having  determined  these  points
—  more  or  less  in  course  of  so  doing  —  it  may  become  possible
to  attain  to  a  more  exact  terminology.


Feeling.  ^

§  3.  Keeping  as  much  as  may  be  to  the  first  question,  we  are
at  once  confronted  by  the  doctrine  that  feeling  alone  is  primordial
and  invariably  present  wherever  there  is  consciousness  at  all.
Every  living  creature,  it  is  said,  feels,  though  it  may  never  do  any-
thing more  :  only  the  higher  animals,  and  these  only  after  a  time,
learn  to  discriminate  and  identify  and  to  act  with  a  purpose.
This  doctrine,  as  might  be  expected,  derives  its  plausibility
partly  from  the  vagueness  of  the  word  '  feeling,'  and  partly  from
the  intimate  connexion  that  undoubtedly  exists  between  feeling
and  cognition  on  the  one  hand  and  feeling  and  volition  on  the
other.  As  to  the  meaning  of  the  term,  it  is  plain  that  further
definition  is  requisite  for  a  word  that  may  denote  (a)  a  touch,
as  feeling  of  roughness  ;  (b)  an  organic  sensation,  as  feeling  of
hunger  ;  (c)  an  emotion,  as  feeling  of  anger  ;  (d)  any  purely
subjective  state,  as  feeling  of  certainty  or  of  activity  ;  (e)  the  one
subjective  state  that  is  purely  '  affective,'  as  feeling  of  pleasure  or
pain.  Since  we  find  precisely  the  same  variety  of  usage  in  the
case  of  the  equivalent  German  Gefuhl  and  more  or  less  of  it  in
the  case  of  the  French  sentiment,  it  may  well  be  asked  if  there
are  no  common  traits  connecting  these  various  significations
together.  There  seem  to  be  three.  Feeling  in  the  last  sense
accompanies  organic  sensations  and  is  present  in  emotions.
Passivity,  which  renders  passion  almost  a  synonym  for  emotion,
is  but  another  aspect  of  feeling  as  affective  and  of  sensation  as
given.  Immediacy,  the  common  mark  of  all  subjective  states,  is
applicable  to  sensations  also  and  the  more  applicable  the  more
their  so-called  'feeling-tone'  predominates  and  the  less  they
have  of  any  specific  quale.  In  this  respect  the  sensations  of
touch  have,  after  organic  sensations,  the  best  title  to  the  name
feeling,  and  they  are  probably  the  first  of  all  our  specific  sen-
sations to  be  clearly  differentiated  from  the  general  sensibility


42  General  Analysis  [CH.  n,  §  3

or  general  feeling,  as  it  is  indifferently  called1.  But  all  three
characteristics  apply  to,  and  exhaust  the  meaning  of,  feeling
only  in  the  last  (*?),  which  we  may  therefore  call  its  strictest  sense.
In  all  the  remaining  meanings  some  of  these  characteristics
are  lacking  while  others  beside  are  present.  And  feeling  is
taken  in  this  sense,  by  those  who  maintain — with  any  show  of
plausibility — that  all  the  more  complex  forms  of  experience  are
resolvable  into,  or  at  least  have  been  developed  from,  feeling2.

The  only  proof  of  such  position,  since  we  cannot  observe  the
beginnings  of  conscious  life,  consists  of  considerations  such  as  the
following.  So  far  as  we  can  judge,  we  find  feeling  everywhere  ;
but,  as  we  work  downwards  from  higher  to  lower  forms  of  life,
the  possible  variety  and  the  definiteness  of  sense-impressions

1  Cf.  below,  ch.  v,  §  3.

2  This  doctrine  was  a  natural  reaction  from  the  one-sided  '  intellectualism '  which
culminated  in  the  teaching  of  the  Leibniz- Wolffians. A  full  and  careful  history  of
this  movement  is  still  a  desideratum. It  seems  to  have  been  fostered  by — if  it  did
not  originate  in — the  '  sentimentalism  '  of  Rousseau  and  the  Romanticists. From  the
'  faith  and  feeling  philosophy '  of  Herder  and  Jacobi  it  passed  over  to  the  psychology
of  Beneke  and  Fortlage,  to  be  finally  worked  out  with  great  ingenuity  and  thorough-
ness by  A.  Horwicz  in  his  Psychologische  Analysen  auf  physiologischer  Grundlag&
(1872-8). And  here  the  reaction  is  complete:  a  position  is  reached  which  is  perhaps
as  indefensible  as  the  opposite  extreme  that  it  was  meant  to  supersede. But,  in  truth,
Horwicz,  who  had  to  recognise  sensation  and  movement  as  distinct  in  his  '  physio-
logical basis,'  is  nevertheless  driven  to  admit  that  feeling  and  conation  are  inseparable
on  the  psychological  side. So  likewise  with  his  immediate  predecessor,  Fortlage.
The  main  difference  between  them  was  that  Fortlage,  following  Schopenhauer,  began
with  conation  (Tried)  and  Horwicz,  influenced  rather  by  Wundt,  began  with  feeling
(Ge/uhl).

There  is  another  doctrine  to  be  mentioned  here  that  can  hardly  be  called  even
'  plausible '  and  which  had  a  very  different  source :  the  doctrine  already  referred  to  as
presentationism  or  sensationalism  (ch.  i,  §  5 :  cf.  also  ch.  iii,  §  2).  Where  sensations
are  called  feelings — as  they  sometimes  are  even  now,  and  still  oftener  were  in  the  past
— there  is  a  verbal  resemblance  between  sensationalism  and  the  doctrine  just  discussed.
And,  thanks  to  the  ambiguity  in  their  leading  term,  the  two  doctrines  tend  to  merge,
as,  for  example  in  the  following:— "In  the  beginning  there  is... nothing  beyond  pre-
sentation which  has  two  sides,  sensation  and  pleasure  and  pain....  All  is  feeling  in
the  sense,  not  of  pleasure  and  pain,  but  of  a  whole  given  without  relations,  and  given
therefore  as  one  with  its  own  pleasure  and  pain"  (F.  H.  Bradley,  Mind,  O.S.  1887,
xii.  p.  367).  What  Mr  Bradley  has  said  en  passant  of  Horwicz's  position  (Mind,  N.S.
1893,  ii.  p.  212)  will  doubtless  be  regarded  by  many  as  applicable  to  this — it  does  not
'  seem  worth  discussing,'  and  it  is  questionable  how  far  Mr  Bradley  would  still  uphold
it  or  indeed  ever  meant  what  it  seems  to  mean  (cf.  his  article  ' '  On  our  Knowledge  of
Immediate  Experience,"  Mind,  1909,  pp.  40  ff. ;  Truth  and  Reality,  1914,  ch.  vi.).

Views  more  or  less  akin  to  the  above  were  advocated  by  Spencer,  Maudsley,
Ribot,  Miinsterberg  and  Titchener.  Cf.  Villa,  Contemporary  Psychology,  1903.


CH.  ii,  §  3]  Feeling  43

both  steadily  diminish.  Moreover,  we  can  directly  observe  in
our  own  organic  sensations — and  these  seem  to  come  nearest  to
the  whole  content  of  primitive  or  infantile  experience — an  almost
entire  absence  of  any  assignable  quale.  Finally,  in  our  sense-
experience  generally,  we  find  the  element  of  feeling  at  a  maximum
in  the  lower  senses  and  the  cognitive  element  at  a  maximum  in
the  higher.  But  the  so-called  intellectual  senses  are  the  most
used,  and  use  (we  know)  blunts  feeling  and  favours  intellection,
as  we  see  in  chemists,  who  sort  out  the  most  filthy  mixtures  by
smell  and  taste  without  discomfort.  If,  then,  feeling  predominates
more  and  more  as  we  approach  the  beginning  of  conscious  life,
may  we  not  conclude  that  feeling  is  its  only  essential  constituent?
On  the  contrary,  such  a  conclusion  would  be  rash  in  the  extreme.
Two  lines,  e.g.,  may  get  nearer  and  nearer  and  yet  will  never
meet,  if  the  rate  of  approach  is  simply  proportional  to  the
distance.  A  triangle  may  be  diminished  indefinitely,  and  yet
we  cannot  infer  that  it  becomes  eventually  all  angles,  though
the  angles  get  no  less  and  the  sides  do.  Before,  then,  we  attempt
to  decide  whether  pleasure  or  pain  alone  can  ever  constitute  a
icomplete  experience,  it  may  be  well  to  inquire  into  the  connexion
between  feeling  and  cognition,  on  the  one  hand,  and  between
feeling  and  conation  on  the  other,  so  far  as  we  can  now  observe
them  at  the  stage  where  all  these  are  present — an  inquiry  which
is  tantamount  to  the  second  question  raised  above.

Broadly  speaking,  in  many  states  of  mind  that  we  can  now
directly  observe,  what  we  find  is  (i)  that  we  are  aware  of  a  certain
change  that  has  occurred  either  '  in  things  without  or  in  our
thoughts  within,'  (2)  that  we  are  pleased  or  pained  by  the
change,  and  (3)  that,  being  pleased  or  pained,  we  want
and  strive  for  the  continuance  of  what  pleases  us,  and  still
more  urgently  for  the  cessation  of  what  pains  us.  But  we
never  find  that  feeling  directly  alters — i.e.  without  the  inter-
vention of  the  action  to  which  it  prompts — either  our  sensa-
tions or  our  situation,  but  that  regularly  these  latter  with
remarkable  promptness  and  certainty  alter  it.  We  have  not
first  a  change  of  feeling,  and  then  a  change  in  our  sensations?
perceptions  and  ideas  ;  but,  these  changing,  change  of  feeling
/  follows.  In  short,  feeling  appears  to  be  an  effect,  which  there-
fore cannot  exist  without  its  cause,  though  in  different  circum-
stances the  same  immediate  cause  may  produce  a  different


44  General  Analysis  [CH.  n,  §  3

amount  or  even  a  different  state  of  feeling.  Turning  from  what
is  often  called  the  receptive  phase  of  an  experience  to  what  is
called  the  active  or  appetitive  phase1,  we  find  in  like  manner  that
feeling  is  certainly  not — in  such  cases  as  we  can  clearly  observe —
the  whole  of  what  we  experience  at  any  moment.  True,  in  common
speech  we  talk  of  liking  pleasure  and  disliking  pain  ;  but  this  is
either  tautology,  equivalent  to  saying  we  are  pleased  when  we
are  pleased  and  pained  when  we  are  pained ;  or  else  it  is  an
allowable  abbreviation,  and  means  that  we  like  pleasurable
objects  and  dislike  painful  objects,  as  when  we  say  we  like
feeling  warm  and  dislike  feeling  hungry.  But  feeling  warm
or  feeling  hungry,  we  must  remember,  is  not  pure  feeling  in
the  stricter  sense  of  the  word.  Within  the  limits  of  our  ob-
servation, then,  we  find  that  feeling  accompanies  some  more
or  less  definite  presentation  which,  on  account  of  it,  becomes  the
object  of  appetite  or  aversion ;  in  other  words,  feeling  implies
a  relation  to  a  pleasurable  or  painful  presentation  or  situation,
that,  as  cause  of  feeling  or  as  end  of  the  action  to  which  feeling
prompts,  is  doubly  distinguished  from  it.  Thus  the  very  facts
that  lead  us  to  distinguish  feeling  from  cognition  and  conation
make  against  the  hypothesis  that  consciousness  can  ever  be  all
feeling.

But,  as  already  said,  the  plausibility  of  this  hypothesis  is  in
good  part  due  to  a  laxity  in  the  use  of  terms.  Most  psycho-
logists before  Kant,  and  some  even  to  the  present  day,  speak
of  pleasure  and  pain  as  sensations.  It  is  plain  however  that
pleasure  and  pain  are  not  ideas,  as  Locke  called  them,  in  the
sense  in  which  touches  and  tastes,  colours  and  sounds,  are — that
is  to  say,  they  are  never  localised  like  the  former  or  projected
like  the  latter,  nor  are  they  elaborated  in  conjunction  with  other
sensations  and  movements  into  percepts  or  intuitions  of  the
external.  This  confusion  of  feeling  with  sensations  is  largely
consequent  on  the  use  of  one  word  pain  both  for  certain  organic
sensations  and  for  the  purely  subjective  state  of  being  displeased.
Yet  organic  pains — which,  of  course,  are  subjectively  displeasing
— are  not  only  always  more  or  less  definitely  localised — and  this
of  itself  is  so  far  cognition — but  they  may  also  be  distinguished
as  shooting,  burning,  gnawing,  &c.,  all  which  symptoms  indicate

1  Though,  strictly  speaking,  there  is  rarely  or  never  in  actual  experience  any  such
exclusive  alternation. Cf.  below,  ch.  v.  fin.


CH.  ii,  §  3]  Feeling  45

a  certain  objective  quality.  Accordingly  psychologists  have  been
driven  by  one  means  or  another  to  recognise  two  'aspects'  (Bain),
or  'properties'  (Wundt),  in  what  they  call  a  sensation,  the  one  a
'  sensible  or  intellectual  '  or  '  qualitative,'  the  other  an  '  affective  '
or  '  emotive,'  aspect  or  property  —  the  latter  being  also  called  the
'  feeling-  tone  '  (Geftihlston  or  Betonung)  of  the  sensation.  The
term  '  aspect  '  is  figurative  and  obviously  inaccurate  ;  and  to
describe  pleasure  and  pain,  strictly  understood,  as  '  properties  '
of  sensation  is  a  flagrant  psychological  barbarism.

The  one  point  however  which  at  present  concerns  us  is  simply
that  when  feeling  is  said  to  be  the  primordial  element  in  con-
sciousness more  is  usually  included  under  feeling  than  pure
pleasure  and  pain,  viz.  some  characteristic  or  quality  by  which  one
pleasurable  or  painful  sensation  is  distinguishable  from  another.
No  doubt,  as  we  go  downwards  in  the  chain  of  life  the  qualitative
characteristics  of  the  so-called  sensations  become  steadily  less
and  less  definite  ;  and  at  the  same  time  organisms  with  well-
developed  sense-organs  give  place  to  others  without  any  clearly
differentiated  organs  at  all.  But  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose
even  the  Amoeba  itself  to  be  affected  in  all  respects  the  same
whether  by  changes  of  temperature  or  of  pressure  or  by  changes
in  its  internal  fluids  ;  albeit  all  of  these  changes  will  further
or  hinder  its  life  and  so  presumably  be  in  some  sort  pleasur-
able or  painful.  On  the  whole,  therefore,  there  are  grounds
for  saying  that  the  endeavour  to  represent  all  the  various  facts
of  consciousness  as  evolved  out  of  feeling  is  due  to  a  hasty
striving  after  simplicity,  and  has  been  favoured  by  the  ambiguity
of  the  term  feeling  itself.  If  by  feeling  we  mean  a  certain
subjective  state  varying  continuously  in  intensity  and  passing
from  time  to  time  from  its  positive  phase  (pleasure)  to  its
negative  phase  (pain)  or  vice  versa,  then  this  purely  subjec-
tive state  implies  some  agreeing  or  disagreeing  object  which
psychologically  determines  it.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  let
feeling  stand  for  both  this  state  and  that  cause  of  it,  then,
perhaps,  a  succession  of  such  '  feelings  '  may  make  up  a  con-
sciousness ;  but  in  that  case  we  are  including  two  of  our  ele-
mentary facts  under  the  name  of  one  of  them.  The  simplest
form  of  psychical  life,  therefore,  involves  not  only  a  subject  feel-
ing but  a  subject  having  qualitatively  distinguishable  objective
presentations  which  are  the  causes  of  its  feeling.


¥  ^  '*  *

UHfe,  toj**^  A&w*.  f, to^o^^J  ^  +***  uv/>~*


46  General  Analysis  [CH%  n,  §  4

A  u \fa»  <-^^AAAA>J£V^  t/v'
^P  ,.|)

Presentations.

§  4.  We  may  now  try  to  ascertain  what  is  meant  by  cognition
as  an  essential  element  in  this  life,  or,  more  exactly,  what  we  are
to  understand  by  the  term  presentation.  It  was  an  important
step  onwards  for  psychology  when  Locke  introduced  that '  new
way  of  ideas'  which  Stillingfleet  found  alternately  so  amusing
and  so  dangerous.  By  ideas  Locke  told  him  he  meant  '  nothing
!  but  the  immediate  objects  of  our  minds  in  thinking';  and  it
was  so  far  a  retrograde  step  when  Hume  restricted  the  term  to
certain  only  of  these  objects,  or  rather  to  these  objects  in  a
certain  state,  viz.  as  reproduced  ideas  or  '  images.'  And,
indeed,  the  history  of  psychology  seems  to  shew  that  its  most
important  advances  have  been  made  by  those  who  have  kept
closely  to  this  way  of  ideas  ;  the  establishment  of  'the  laws'  of
association  with  their  many  fruitful  applications  and  the  whole
Herbartian  psychology  may  suffice  as  instances.  The  truth  is  that
the  use  of  such  a  term,  while  it  helps  to  free  us  from  the  mytho-
logy and  verbiage  of  the  faculty-psychologists,  is  itself  a  mark
of  the  following  important  generalisation,  viz. : — All  the  various
constituents  of  experience  spoken  of  as  sensations,  movements,.-
percepts,  images,  intuitions,  concepts,  notions,  have  two  character-
istics in  common:  (i)  they  are  more  or  less  attended  to,  and
(2)  they  can  be  variously  combined  together  and  reproduced.
It  is  here  proposed  to  denote  them  all  by  the  general  term
presentation,  as  being  the  best  English  equivalent  for  what
Locke  meant  by  idea  and  what  Kant  and  Herbart  called
a  Vorstellung^.

I  A  presentation  has  then  a  twofold  relation — first,  directly  to
the  subject,  and,  secondly,  to  other  presentations.  The  former
relation  answers,  as  has  just  been  said,  to  the  fact  that  a  pre-
sentation is  attended  to,  that  the  subject  is  more  or  less  aware
of  it :  in  this  sense  it  is  'in  his  mind'  or  presented.  As  presented
to  a  subject  a  presentation  might  with  advantage  be  called  an
object,  or  perhaps  a  '  psychical '  object,  to  distinguish  it  from
what  are  commonly  called  '  physical '  objects,  objects  apart

1  Cf.  Kant's  Critique  of  the  Pure  Reason,  Dialectic,  bk.  i.  §  ijin.  This  extended
meaning  of  presentation,  though  becoming  increasingly  common,  is  still  not  universal.
For  an  excellent  discussion  of  the  various  meanings  given  to  it  by  different  authors
and  a  defence  of  that  here  adopted  see  an  article  by  Benno  Erdmann  in  the  Viertel-
jahrsch.f.  wissenschaftliche  Phil.,  1886,  Bd.  x.  pp.  307 — 15.


CH.  ii,  §  4]  Presentations  47

from  immediate  presentation,  i.e.  conceived  as  independent  of
any  particular  subject.  Locke,  as  we  have  seen,  did  so  call
it ;  still,  to  avoid  possible  confusion,  it  may  turn  out  best  to
dispense  with  the  frequent  use  of  '  object '  in  this  sense.  But  on
one  account,  at  least,  it  is  desirable  not  to  lose  sight  altogether
of  this,  which  is  after  all  the  stricter  as  well  as  the  older  sig-
nification of  the  term1 ;  namely,  that  it  enables  us  to  express
definitely,  without  implicating  any  ontological  theory,  what  we
have  so  far  seen  reason  to  think  is  the  fundamental  fact  in
experience.  Instead  of  depending  mainly  on  that  vague  and
treacherous  word  'consciousness,'  or  committing  ourselves  to
the  position  that  presentations  are  to  be  regarded  as  modifica-
tions of  the  subject  to  whom  they  are  presented,  we  may  leave  /<•,  $«**>*'
all  this  on  one  side,  and  say  that  presentations  are  objects,  and
that  the  relation  of  objects  to  subjects — that  whereby  the  one
is  object  and  the  other  subject — is  presentation.  It  is  because
only  objects  sustain  this  relation  that  we  may  safely  speak  of
them  simply  as  presentations.

It  will  be  convenient  however  to  pause  for  a  moment  to  take
account  of  an  objection  that  is  sure  to  be  urged,  in  spite  of  all
that  has  been  already  said,  viz.  that  sensations  ought  not  to  be
called  objects,  that  they  are  'states  of  the  subject'  and  that  this
is  a  deliverance  of  common  sense,  if  anything  is.  Now  if  by
this  be  meant  (i)  that  sensations  are  metaphysically  and  ultimately
subjective  modifications  of  some  sort,  then  the  psychologist  has
perhaps  as  little  warrant  for  denying  it  as  he  has  for  asserting
it  But  if  the  meaning  be  (ii)  that  sensations  are  presented
as  modes  of  the  experiencing  subject,  then  such  a  position —
it  may  be  urged — is  due  to  a  confusion  between  the  subject
proper  or  pure  Ego  and  that  complex  presentation  or  ob-
ject, the  empirical,  or  as  we  might  call  it  the  biotic,  Ego.
A  self-conscious  subject  may  not  only  have  a  sensation  but
may  recognise  it  as  his  own,  recognise,  that  is  to  say,  a  certain
connexion  between  the  sensation  and  that  presentation  of  the
empirical  self  which  self-consciousness  implies.  But  this,  as  a
connexion  between  one  object  and  another,  only  renders  more
obvious  the  objective  nature  of  a  sensation,  in  the  psychological
sense  of  the  term  objective.  Moreover  such  connexion,  as
an  '  external '  or  extrinsic  relation,  cannot  be  truly  described

1  Cf.  for  the  history  of  this  term,  Hamilton's  edition  of  Reid's  Works,  p.  806  n.


48  General  Analysis  [CH.  n,  §  4

as  a  '  mode '  of  either  of  the  entities  related.  Or,  again,  the
meaning  may  be  (iii)  that  a  subject  whose  presentations  were  all
sensations  would  know  nothing  of  the  difference  between  subject
and  object;  and  that,  therefore,  no  such  difference  would  be  there.
In  this  objection  there  is  a  lurking  confusion  between  the  stand-
point of  a  given  experience  and  the  standpoint  of  its  exposition
— 'the  psychologist's  fallacy.'  The  infant  who  is  delighted  by
a  bright  colour  does  not  of  course  conceive  himself  as  face  to
face  with  an  object ;  but  neither  does  he  conceive  the  colour
as  a  subjective  affection.  We  are  bound  to  describe  his  state  of
mind  truthfully,  but  that  is  no  reason  for  abandoning  terms
which  have  no  counterpart  in  his  consciousness,  when  these
terms  are  only  used  to  depict  that  consciousness  to  us.

As  to  the  objection  (iv)  that,  when  all  is  said  and  done,
sensations  are  conceived  by  common  sense  as  modifications  of
self,  whether  so  presented  or  not — it  may  be  granted  that  it
appears  so  at  first  blush,  but  not  when  common  sense  is  more
closely  examined.  The  fact  is  we  are  here  upon  what  has  been
called  '  the  margin  of  psychology,'  where  our  ordinary  thinking
brings  into  one  view  what  science  has  to  be  at  great  pains  to
keep  distinct.  Though  it  is  scientifically  a  long  way  round  from
a  fact  of  mind  to  the  corresponding  fact  of  body,  yet  it  is  only
on  careful  reflexion  that  we  can  distinguish  the  two  if  our  prac-
tical interests  happen  to  have  closely  associated  them.  Such  a
case  we  have  in  sensation.  The  ordinary  concept  of  a  sensation
coincides,  no  doubt,  with  the  definition  given  by  Hamilton  and
Mansel : — "  Sensation  proper  is  the  consciousness  of  certain
affections  of  our  body  as  an  animated  organism " ;  and  it  is
because  in  ordinary  thinking  we  reckon  the  body  as  part  of  self
that  we  come  to  think  of  sensations  as  subjective  modifications.
But,  when  considerations  of  method  compel  us  to  eliminate  the
physiological  implications  from  the  ordinary  concept  of  a  sensa-
tion, we  are  able  here  to  distinguish  the  conscious  subject  and
the  bodily  '  affections '  of  which  it  is  conscious  as  clearly  as
we  can  distinguish  subject  and  object  in  other  cases  of  pre-
sentation. On  the  whole,  then,  we  may  conclude  that  there
is  nothing  either  in  the  facts  or  in  our  necessary  concept  of
them  to  prevent  us  from  representing  whatever  admits  of  psy-
chical reproduction  and  association,  no  matter  how  simple  it
be,  as  an  object  presented  to  a  subject.


CH.  ii,  §  4]  Presentations  49

On  the  side  of  the  subject  this  presentational  relation  implies
what,  for  want  of  a  better  word,  may  be  called  attention,
extending  the  denotation  of  this  term  so  as  to  include  even
what  we  ordinarily  call  inattention.  Attention  so  used  will
thus  cover  part  of  what  is  meant  by  consciousness — so  much  of
it,  that  is,  as  answers  to  being  mentally  active,  active  enough
at  least  to  '  receive  impressions.'  Attention  on  the  side  of  the
subject  implies  intensity  on  the  side  of  the  object :  we  might
indeed  almost  call  intensity  the  matter  of  a  presentation,  without
which  it  is  a  nonentity1.

The  inter-relations  of  presentations,  on  which  their  second
characteristic — the  possibility  of  combination  and  revival — de-
pends, though  of  the  first  importance  in  themselves,  hardly  call
for  examination  in  a  general  analysis  like  the  present.  There
is,  however,  one  point  still  more  fundamental  that  we  cannot
wholly  pass  by  :  it  is — in  part  at  any  rate — what  is  commonly
termed  the  unity  or  continuity  of  consciousness,  already  noted
in  a  different  connexion  (§  i).  From  the  physical  standpoint
and  in  ordinary  life  we  can  talk  of  objects  that  are  isolated  and
independent  and  in  all  respects  distinct  individuals.  The  screech
of  the  owl,  for  example,  has  physically  nothing  to  do  with  the
brightness  of  the  moon :  sound  and  light,  owl  and  moon — either
one  may  come  or  go  without  changing  the  order  of  things  to
which  the  other  belongs.  But  for  me,  the  individual  percipient,
these  are  parts  of  one  whole,  not  merely  because  special  attention
to  one  diminishes  the  intensity  of  the  others,  but  also  because  as
attention  passes  from  one  to  the  other  it  passes  over  no  void.
And  not  only  are  they  parts  of  one  whole,  but  such  distinctness
as  they  have  at  present  is  the  result  of  a  gradual  differentiation.

It  is  quite  impossible  for  us  now  to  imagine  the  effects  of
years  of  experience  removed,  or  to  picture  the  character  of  our
infantile  presentations  before  our  interests  had  led  us  habitually
to  concentrate  attention  on  some  and  to  ignore  others.  In  place
of  the  many  things  which  we  can  now  see  and  hear,  not  merely
would  there  then  be  a  confused  presentation  of  the  whole  field
of  vision  and  of  a  mass  of  undistinguished  sounds,  but  even
the  difference  between  sights  and  sounds  themselves  would  be
without  its  present  distinctness.  Thus  the  further  we  go  back

1  Cf.  Kant's  Principle  of  the  Anticipations  of  Perception:  "  In  all  phenomena  the
real,  which  is  the  object  of  sensation,  has  intensive  magnitude. "

W.  P.  4


50  General  Analysis  [CH.  n,  §  4

the  nearer  we  approach  to  a  total  presentation  having  the
character  of  one  general  continuum  in  which  differences  are  latent.
There  is,  then,  in  psychology,  as  in  biology,  what  may  be  called
a  principle  of  '  progressive  differentiation  or  specialisation1.'
This,  as  well  as  the  facts  of  reproduction  and  association,
forcibly  suggests  the  conception  of  a  certain  objective  continuum
forming  the  background  or  basis  of  the  several  relatively  distinct
presentations  eventually  constructed  upon  it — the  equivalent,  in
fact,  of  that  unity  and  continuity  of  consciousness  which  has
been  supposed  to  supersede  the  need  for  a  conscious  subject.
There  is  one  class  of  objects  of  special  interest  even  in
a  general  survey,  viz.  movements  or  motor  presentations.
These,  like  sensory  presentations,  admit  of  reproduction  and
association,  and  seem  also  to  attain  to  such  distinctness  as  they
possess  in  adult  human  experience  by  a  gradual  differentiation
out  of  an  original  diffused  mobility,  which  is  little  besides
emotional  expression.  (Of  this,  however,  more  presently.)  It
is  primarily  to  such  dependence  upon  feeling  that  movements
owe  their  most  distinctive  character,  the  possession,  that  is,  under
normal  circumstances,  of  definite  and  assignable  psychical
antecedents,  in  contrast  to  sensory  presentations,  which  are
devoid  of  them.  We  cannot  psychologically  explain  the  order
in  which  particular  sights  and  sounds  occur;  but  the  order  in
which  the  movements  that  follow  them  occur,  on  the  other  hand,
can  be  adequately  explained  only  by  psychology.  The  twilight
that  sends  the  hens  to  roost  sets  the  fox  to  prowl,  and  the  lion's
roar  which  gathers  the  jackals  scatters  the  sheep.  Such  diversity
in  the  movements,  although  the  sensory  presentations  are  similar,
is  due,  in  fact,  to  what  we  may  call  the  principle  of  '  subjective
preference  or  selection'  in  which  the  primarily  practical  character
of  experience  already  referred  to2,  is  clearly  manifested.  By
this  name,  then,  let  us  denote  the  fact  that — out  of  all  the
manifold  changes  of  sensory  presentation  which  a  given  individual
experiences — only  a  few  are  the  occasion  of  such  decided  feeling

1  The  biological  principle  referred  to  is  that  known  as  von  Baer's  law,  viz.  "  that
the  progress  of  development  is  from  the  general  to  the  special." In  anticipation  of
future  exposition  it  is  desirable  to  note  from  the  first  that  '  progressive  differentiation '
always  means  advance  in  function  as  well  as  advance  in  structure ;  and  that,  further,
it  is  the  dynamic  or  functional  that  is  normally  the  cause  of  the  statical  or  structural,
not  vice  versa.

2  Cf.  above,  ch.  i,  §  4.


CH.  II,  §  5]  Conation  51

as  to  become  objects  of  possible  appetite  or  aversion.  It  is  thus
by  means  of  movements  that  we  are  more  than  the  creatures  of
circumstances  and  that  we  can  with  propriety  talk  of  subjective
selection.  The  representation  of  what  interests  us  comes  then
to  be  associated  with  the  representation  of  such  movements  as
will  secure  its  realisation,  so  that — although  no  concentration  of
attention  will  secure  the  requisite  intensity  to  a  pleasurable  object
present  only  in  idea — we  can,  by  what  is  strangely  like  a  concen-
tration of  attention,  convert  the  idea  of  a  movement  into  the
fact,  and  so,  by  means  of  the  movement,  attain  the  coveted
reality.

Conation.

§  5.  And  this  has  brought  us  round  naturally  to  the  third  of
the  commonly  accepted  constituents  of  experience.  What,  we
now  ask,  is  conation  or  rather  conative  action  ?  For  there  are  two
questions  often  more  or  less  confused,  the  question  of  the  motive
or  spring  of  action,  as  it  is  sometimes  called, — why  is  there  action
at  all  ?  and  the  question  of  means — how  do  definite  actions  come
about?  The  former  question  relates  primarily  to  the  connexion
of  conation  and  feeling1.  It  is  only  the  latter  question  that  we
now  raise.  In  ordinary  voluntary  movement  we  have  first  of  all
an  idea  or  re-presentation  of  the  movement,  and  last  of  all  the
actual  movement  itself — a  new  presentation  which  may  for  the
present  be  described  as  the  filling  out  of  the  re-presentation,
which  thereby  attains  that  intensity,  distinctness  and  embodiment
we  call  reality.  How  does  this  change  come  about?

The  attempt  has  often  been  made  to  explain  it  by  a  reference
to  the  more  uniform,  and  apparently  simpler,  case  of  reflex
action,  including  under  this  term  both  what  are  called  sensori-
motor  and  ideo-motor  actions.  In  all  these  the  action  seems
to  be  the  result  of  a  mere  transference  of  intensity  from  the
'coherent'  sensation  or  idea.  But  if  by  some  chance  or  mischance
the  same  sensory  presentation  thus  excites  two  or  more  nascent
motor  changes  and  these  happen  to  conflict,  a  temporary  block  is
said  to  occur.  And,  when  at  length  one  of  these  nascent  motor
changes  finally  prevails,  then,  it  is  said,  "  there  is  constituted  a
state  of  consciousness  which  displays  what  we  term  volition2."

1  On  this  see  below,  p.  54,  and  also  ch.  xi.

2  Compare  Spencer's  Principles  of  Psychology,  i.  §§  217,  218.

4—2


General  Analysis  [CH.  n,  §  5

It  is,  however,  a  pure  assumption  that  definite  sensory  and  motor
presentations  are  'coordinated'  or  associated  prior  to  any  conation,
and  that  so  volition  begins  only  where  automatic  or  reflex
action  ends — an  assumption  due  to  that  inveterate  habit  of
confounding  the  psychical  and  the  physical  which  is  the  bane  of
modern  psychology.  How  did  these  particular  sensory  and
motor  presentations  ever  come  to  be  connected  ?  The  only
psychological  evidence  we  have  of  any  very  intimate  connexion
between  sensory  and  motor  re-presentations  is  that  furnished  by
our  acquired  dexterities,  i.e.  by  such  movements  as  Hartley1
styled  'secondarily  automatic.'  But  then  all  these  have  been
preceded  by  'voluntary'  or  conscious  movement:  as  Herbert
Spencer  says,  "  the  child  learning  to  walk  wills2  each  movement
before  making  it."  Surely,  then,  a  psychologist  should  take  this
as  his  typical  case  and  prefer  to  assume  that  all  automatic  actions
that  come  within  his  ken  at  all  are  in  this  sense  secondarily  auto-
matic :  that  either  in  the  experience  of  the  individual  or  of  his
ancestors,  volition,  that  is  to  say,  conscious  action,  preceded  habit.
But,  if  we  are  thus  compelled  by  a  sound  method  to  regard
sensori-motor  actions  as  degraded  or  mechanical  forms  of
voluntary  actions,  instead  of  regarding  voluntary  actions  as
gradually  differentiated  out  of  something  physical,  we  have  not
to  ask  :  What  happens  when  one  of  two  alternative  movements
is  selected  ?  but  the  more  general  question :  What  happens
when  any  movement  is  made  in  consequence  of  feeling?  It
is  obvious  that  on  this  view  the  simplest  definitely  purposive
movement  must  have  been  preceded  by  some  movement  simpler
still.  For  any  distinct  movement  purposely  made  presupposes
the  ideal  presentation,  before  the  actual  realisation,  of  such  move-
ment. But  again  such  ideal  presentation,  being  a  re-presentation,
equally  presupposes  a  previous  actual  movement  as  its  origin.
There  is  then,  it  would  seem,  but  one  way  left,  viz.  to  regard
those  movements  which  are  immediately  expressive  of  pleasure
or  pain  as  primordial,  and  to  regard  voluntary  movements  as
elaborated  out  of  these.  The  vague  and  diffusive  character
of  primitive  emotional  manifestations  is  really  a  point  in
favour  of  this  position.  For  such  '  diffusion '  is  evidence  of  an
underlying  continuity  of  motor  presentations,  parallel  to  that

1  D.  Hartley,  Observations  on  Man  (6th  ed.,  1834),  pp.  66  sqq.

2  '  Wills '  in  the  sense  of  attending  to  it  and  striving  to  make  it.


CH.  ii,  §  5]  Conation  53

already  discussed  in  connexion  with  sensory  presentations,  a
continuity  which,  in  each  case,  becomes  differentiated  in  the
course  of  experience  into  comparatively  distinct  and  discrete
movements  and  sensations  respectively1.

But  whereas  we  can  only  infer,  and  that  in  a  very  round-
about fashion,  that  our  sensations  are  not  absolutely  distinct,  but
parts  of  one  massive  sensation,  as  it  were,  we  are  still  liable,
under  the  influence  of  strong  emotion,  directly  to  experience  the
corresponding  continuity  in  the  case  of  movement.  Such  motor-
continuum  we  may  suppose  is  the  psychical  counterpart  of  that
permanent  readiness  to  act,  or  rather  that  continual  nascent
acting,  which  among  the  older  physiologists  was  spoken  of  as
'  tonic  action.'  This  '  skeletal  tone,'  as  it  is  now  called,  is
found  to  disappear  more  or  less  completely  from  a  limb  when
its  sensory  nerves  are  divided.  "  In  the  absence  of  the  usual
stream  of  afferent  impulses  passing  into  it,  the  spinal  cord
ceases  to  send  forth  the  influences  which  maintain  the  tone2."
And  a  like  intimate  connexion,  we  have  every  reason  to
believe,  obtains  throughout — both  between  sensation  and  move-
ment as  well  as  between  movement  and  sensation.  There
is,  certainly,  as  every  physiologist  knows,  a  very  close  con-
nexion between  sensation  and  such  various  organic  move-
ments as  those  of  circulation,  respiration  and  secretion.
Ordinarily  this  connexion  only  tells  on  our  conscious  life  as
it  affects  that  '  general  sensibility '  that,  so  to  say,  helps  to
keep  us  awake  and  going.  But  in  strong  emotions  it  rises
into  distinct  prominence  as  part  of  what  is  called  '  emotional

1  It  may  be  well  to  call  to  mind  here  that  Alexander  Bain,  who  was  the  first  to
recognise  the  fundamental  position  we  have  assigned  to  what  G.  H.  Lewes  called
diffusion,  also  regarded  emotional  expression  as  a  possible  commencement  of  action  ;
but  only  eventually  to  reject  it  in  favour  of  his  own  peculiar  doctrine  of '  spontaneity.'
This,  however,  is  open  to  the  objection  that  it  makes  movement  precede  feeling  instead
of  following  it — an  objection  that  would  be  serious  even  if  the  arguments  advanced
to  support  his  hypothesis  were  as  cogent  as  only  Bain  supposed  them  to  be. Against
the  position  maintained  above  he  objects  that  "the  emotional  wave  almost  invariably
affects  a  whole  group  of  movements,"  and  therefore  does  not  furnish  the  "isolated
promptings  that  are  desiderated  in  the  case  of  the  will "  (Mental  and  Moral  Science,
p.  323). Bat  to  make  this  objection  is  to  let  heredity  count  for  nothing. In  fact,
wherever  a  variety  of  isolated  movements  is  physically  possible  there  also  we  always
find  corresponding  instincts,  "that  untaught  ability  to  perform  actions,"  to  use  Bain's
own  language,  which  a  minimum  of  practice  suffices  to  perfect. But  then  these
suggest  gradual  ancestral  acquisition.

2  Foster,  Text-book  of  Physiology,  5th  ed.,  §  597.


54  General  Analysis  [CH.  n,  §  5

expression ' — as,  for  example,  in  the  palpitation,  gasping,  cold
sweat  and  dry  mouth  of  fear.  Though  all  such  movements  are
now  for  us  purely  reflex,  yet  the  principle  of  continuity  as  well
as  the  facts  of  evolution  justifies  us  in  supposing  that  they  were
originally  due  to  the  intervention  of  feeling.  But  we  should
not  be  justified  in  supposing  that  feeling  is  ever  determined
solely  by  sensation.  For  we  cannot  imagine  the  beginning  of  life
but  only  life  begun.  Psychology  cannot  start  with  a  tabula  rasa.
The  simplest  picture,  then,  that  we  can  form  of  a  concrete  state
of  mind  is  not  one  in  which  there  are  movements  before
there  are  any  sensations  or  sensations  before  there  are  any
movements,  but  one  in  which  change  of  sensation  is  followed  by
change  of  movement,  the  link  between  the  two  being  a  change
of  feeling.  But  the  feeling  again  is  what  it  is,  because  the  subject
has  already  a  determinate  nature :  hence  such  sayings  as,  What
is  one  man's  food  is  another  man's  poison,  &C.1.

Having  thus  simplified  the  question,  we  may  now  ask  again :
How  is  this  change  of  movement  through  feeling  brought  about?
The  answer,  as  already  hinted,  appears  to  be :  By  a  change  of
attention.  We  learn  from  such  observations  as  psychologists
describe  under  the  head  of  fascination,  imitation,  hypnotism,  &c.,
that  the  mere  concentration  of  attention  upon  a  movement  to  be
effected  is  often  enough  to  bring  the  movement  to  pass.  Of  course,
in  such  cases  neither  emotion  nor  volition  is  necessarily  implied  ;
but  none  the  less  they  shew  the  close  connexion  that  exists
between  attention  and  movements.  Everybody,  too,  must  often
have  observed  how  the  execution  of  any  but  mechanical  move-
ments arrests  attention  to  thoughts  or  sensations,  and  how,  vice
versa,  a  striking  impression  or  thought  interrupts  the  performance
of  skilled  movements2.  Let  us  suppose,  then,  that  we  have  at
any  given  moment  a  certain  distribution  of  attention  between
sensory  and  motor  presentations ;  a  change  in  that  distribution
then  will  mean  a  change  in  the  effective  intensity  of  some  of
these,  and,  in  the  case  of  motor  presentations,  change  of  intensity
means,  at  any  rate,  a  tendency  to  change  of  movement.  '  Such
changes  are,  however,  quite  minimal  in  amount  so  long  as  the
given  presentations  are  not  conspicuously  agreeable  or  disagree-
able.

1  Cf.  above,  p.  50,  and  ch.  xi,  §  2  on  '  subjective  selection.'

2  Cf.  below,  ch.  iii,  §  i,  p.  67.


CH.  ii,  §  6]  Conation  55

So  soon,  however,  as  this  is  the  case,  there  is  evidence  of
a  most  intimate  connexion  also  between  attention  and  feeling.
But  it  is  hardly  possible  to  exhibit  this  evidence  fully  without
first  attempting  to  ascertain  what  are  the  characteristics  of  the
presentations  or  groups  of  presentations  that  are  respectively
pleasurable  and  painful — an  attempt  that  must  for  the  present
be  deferred1.  In  general  it  may  be  said  that  we  find  pleasure  to
lead  at  once  to  concentration  of  attention  on  the  pleasurable
object,  so  that  pleasure  is  not  followed  by  movement  as  certainly
as  we  find  pain  to  be;  save  of  course  when  movements  are
themselves  the  pleasurable  objects  and  are  executed,  as  we  say,
for  their  own  sakes.  In  fact,  pleasure  would  seem  rather  to
repress  movement,  except  so  far  as  this  is  coincident  either  with
a  more  economic  distribution,  or  with  a  positive  augmentation,
of  the  available  attention  ;  then  either  of  these,  on  the  view
supposed,  might  lead  to  increased  but  indefinite  (i.e.  playful)
movement.  Pain,  on  the  other  hand,  is — at  the  outset,  at  all
events — much  more  closely  connected  with  movement ;  and
movement  too,  which  for  obvious  reasons  much  sooner  acquires
a  purposive  character.  Instead  of  voluntary  concentration  of
attention  upon  a  painful  presentation  we  find  attention  to  such
an  object  always  involuntary;  in  other  words,  attention  is,  as  it
were,  excentrated  or  withdrawn.  If,  therefore,  the  painful  pre-
sentation is  a  movement,  it  is  suspended :  if  it  is  a  sensation,
movements  are  set  up,  which  further  distract  attention,  and
some  of  which  may  effect  the  removal  of  what  we  call  the
physical  source  of  the  sensation.  Such  movement,  of  course,
the  last  of  the  series  of  apparent  tentatives,  may  by  and  by
become  'associated'  with  the  disturbing  sensation,  which  thence-
forth suggests  its  own  remedy.

Summary  of  results.

§  6.  We  are  now  at  the  end  of  our  analysis,  and  the  results
may  perhaps  be  most  conveniently  summarised  by  first  throwing
them  into  a  tabular  form  and  then  appending  a  few  remarks
by  way  of  indicating  the  main  purport  of  the  table.  Taking
no  account  of  the  specific  differences  between  one  concrete
experience  and  another,  and  supposing  that  we  are  dealing

1  Cf.  below,  ch.  x.


General  Analysis


[CH.  n,  §  6


with  presentations  in  their  simplest  form,  i.e.  as  sensations  and
movements,  we  have  : —


A  SUBJECT


(1)  non-voluntarily  attending
to  changes  in  the  sensory-
continuum1;

\Cognitiori\

(2)  being, in consequence,
either  pleased  or  pained ;

\Feeling\


=  Presentation
of  sensory


>•  OBJECTS.


and  (3)  by  voluntary  attention  \

or 'innervation' produc- 1  =  Presentation
ing  changes  in  the  motor-  F of  motor
continuum1.
[Conation]

Of  the  three  constituents,  thus  logically  distinguishable  but  not
really  separable,  the  first  and  the  third  correspond  in  the  main
with  the  receptive  and  the  active  '  powers  of  mind '  described  by
the  older  psychologists.  The  second,  being  more  difficult  to  discri-
minate, was,  as  we  have  seen,  long  overlooked  ;  or,  at  all  events,
its  essential  characteristics  were  not  distinctly  marked.  It  was
either  confounded  with  the  first,  which  is  its  cause ;  or  with  the
last,  its  effect.  But  perhaps  the  most  important  of  all  psychologi-
cal distinctions  is  that  which  traverses  both  the  old  bi-partite  and
the  prevailing  tri-partite  schemes,  viz.  that  between  the  subject,
on  the  one  hand,  as  acting  and  feeling,  and  the  objects  of  this
activity  on  the  other.  This  distinction  lurks  indeed  under  such
terms  as  faculty,  power,  consciousness ;  but  none  the  less  they
tend  to  keep  it  out  of  sight.  What  are  here  called  objects  or
presentations  are  not  the  products  of  a  sort  of  creative  activity
pertaining  to  the  conscious  self,  which  it  is  somehow  mysteriously
stimulated  to  exert.  They  have  properties  and  laws  of  their
own,  in  accordance  with  which  indeed  their  interactions  may
be  modified,  but  that  is  all.  It  was  perhaps  a  wild  dream  of
Herbart's  that  there  could  ever  be  a  statics  and  dynamics  of
presentations ;  but  his  attempt  may  at  least  serve  to  exhibit
more  impressively  the  large  amount  of  independence  there  is
between  the  subject  of  consciousness  and  its  objects.  Keeping
this  distinction  in  view — instead  of  crediting  the  subject  with  an

1  To  cover  more  complex  cases,  we  might  here  add  '  or  in  the  train  of  ideas. '


CH.  ii,  §  6]  Summary  of  Results  57

indefinite  number  of  faculties  or  capacities,  we  must  seek  to  explain

not  only  assimilation,  differentiation,  reproduction,  association,

j &c.,  but  all  varieties  of  thinking  and  acting,  by  laws  pertaining

i  primarily  to  ideas  or  presentations,  leaving  to  the  subject  only

the  one  power  of  variously  distributing  that  attention  upon  which

the  effective  intensity  of  a  presentation  in  part  depends. Of  this

single  subjective  activity,  what  we  call  activity  in  the  narrower

sense  (as  e.g.  purposive  movement  and  intellection)  is  but  a  special

case,  although  a  very  important  one.

According  to  this  view,  then,  Presentations,  Attention,
Feeling  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  three  co-ordinate  genera,
each  of  which  is  a  complete  'state  of  mind  or  consciousness/
i.e.  all  alike  and  severally  included  under  this  one  supreme
category1.  There  is,  as  Berkeley  long  ago  urged,  no  resemblance
between  activity  and  an  idea ;  nor  is  it  easy  to  see  anything
common  to  pure  feeling  and  an  idea,  unless  it  be  that  both
possess  intensity.  Classification  seems,  in  fact,  to  be  here  out  of
place.  Instead,  therefore,  of  the  one  summum  genus,  '  state  of
mind  or  consciousness '  with  its  three  co-ordinate  subdivisions,
cognition,  emotion,  conation,  our  analysis  seems  to  lead  us  to
recognise  three  distinct  and  irreducible  components,  Attention,
Feeling  and  Objects  or  Presentations,  as  together  constituting
one  concrete  state  of  mind  or  psychosis.  Of  such  concrete  states
of  mind  or  psychoses  we  may  then  say — so  far  agreeing  with  the
older,  bi-partite  psychology — that  there  are  two  distinguishable
— but  normally  inseparable — forms,  corresponding  to  the  two
ways  in  which  attention  may  be  determined  and  the  two  classes
of  objects  attended  to  in  each,  viz.  (a)  the  sensory  or  receptive
attitude,  when  attention  is  non-voluntarily  determined,  i.e.  where
feeling  follows  the  act  of  attention  ;  and  (b)  the  motor  or  active
attitude,  where  feeling  precedes  the  act  of  attention,  which  is
thus  determined  voluntarily.

To  assert  that  feeling  and  attention  are  not  presentations
will  seem  to  many  an  extravagant  paradox.  If  all  knowledge  is

1  Among  German  psychologists  it  has  been  common  of  late  to  use  the  term
Erlebnis  in  a  wide  sense  to  cover  what  is  common  to  cognitions,  feelings  and  cona-
tions— viz.,  that  they  are  all  events  experienced  or  'lived  through.'  But  the  point,
then  easily  overlooked,  is  that  each  of  these  miscalled  'elements'  is  not  itself  an
Erlebnis,  but  each  only  a  single  function  in  one  Erlebnis  or  experience  :  though,
analytically  distinguishable,  they  never  actually  exist  apart.


5 8  General  Analysis  [CH.  n,  §  6

concerned  with  presentations,  how,  it  will  be  asked,  come  we  to
know  anything  of  feeling  and  attention,  if  they  are  not  presented?
We  know  of  them  mediately  through  their  effects ;  we  do  not
know  them  immediately  in  themselves.  This  is,  perhaps,  but  a
more  concrete  statement  of  what  philosophers  have  very  widely
acknowledged  in  a  more  abstract  form  since  the  days  of  Kant —
the  impossibility  of  the  subjective  qua  subjective  being  presented.
It  is  in  the  main  clearly  put  in  the  following  passage  from
Hamilton,  who,  however,  has  not  had  the  strength  of  his
convictions  in  all  cases  : — "  The  peculiarity  of  feeling,  therefore,
is  that  there  is  nothing  but  what  is  subjectively  subjective  ;
there  is  no  object  different  from  self, — no  objectification  of  any
mode  of  self.  We  are,  indeed,  able  to  constitute  our  states  of
pain  and  pleasure  into  objects  of  reflection,  but,  in  so  far  as  they
are  objects  of  reflection,  they  are  not  feelings  but  only  reflex
cognitions  of  feelings1."  But  this  last  sentence  is  not,  perhaps,
altogether  satisfactory.  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  feeling
"  can  only  be  studied  through  its  reminiscence,"  which  is  what
Hamilton  has  said  elsewhere  of  the  '  phaenomena  of  conscious-
ness' generally.  But  this  is  a  position  hard  to  reconcile  with
the  other,  viz.,  that  feeling  and  cognition  are  generically  distinct.
How  can  that  which  was  not  originally  a  cognition  become  such
by  being  reproduced  ?  The  statements  that  feeling  is  '  subjec-
tively subjective'  and  that  in  it  "there  is  no  object  different  from
self,"  are  surely  tantamount  to  saying  that  it  is  not  presented  ;
and  what  is  not  presented  cannot,  of  course,  strictly  speaking,  be
re-presented.  Instead,  therefore,  of  the  position  that  feeling  and
attention  as  such  are  known  by  being  made  objects  of  reflexion,
it  would  seem  we  can  only  maintain  that  in  this  way  we  know
of  them  by  their  effects,  by  certain  changes,  i.e.,  which  they  bring
about  in  the  character  and  succession  of  our  presentations.  But,
while  we  cannot  say  that  we  perceive  directly  what  attention  and
feeling,  as  such,  are,  inasmuch  as  they  are  not  presented ;  neither
can  we  with  any  propriety  maintain  that  we  are  ignorant  of  them,
inasmuch  as  they  are  by  their  very  nature  unpresentable.  As
Ferrier  contended,  "  we  can  be  ignorant  only  of  what  can  possibly
be  known  ;  in  other  words,  there  can  be  ignorance  only  of  that
of  which  there  can  be  knowledge2."  The  antithesis  between  the

1  Lectures  on  Metaphysics,  ii.  p.  432.

2  Institutes  of  Metaphysics,  §  II,  Agnoiology,  prop.  iii.  sq.


CH.  ii,  §  6]  Summary  of  Results  59

objective  and  the  subjective  factors  in  presentation  is  wider  than
that  between  knowledge  and  ignorance.  That  is  an  antithesis
pertaining  to  the  objective. side  alone;  but  this  is  the  ontological
antithesis,  so  to  say,  between  Self  and  Not-Self,  the  antithesis
which  our  experience — at  any  rate — presupposes  and  therefore
can  never  transcend.

We  ought  also  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  effects  of  attention
and  feeling  cannot  be  known  without  attention  and  feeling :
to  whatever  stage  we  advance,  therefore,  we  have  always  in
any  given  '  state  of  mind  '  attention  and  feeling  on  the  one  side,
and  on  the  other  a  presentation  of  objects.  Attention  and
feeling  seem  thus  to  be  ever  present,  and  not  to  admit  of  the
continuous  differentation  into  parts  which  gives  to  presentations
a  certain  individuality,  and  makes  their  association  and  repro-
duction possible.  To  assume  such  differentiation  on  the  subjective
side  is  to  lapse  into  the  atomistic  psychology  of  presentationism1.
It  is  to  lose  sight  of  the  Leben  implied  in  Erlebnisse*.

1  Cf.  ch.  i,  §  5,  p.  23.

2  We  shall  have,  of  course,  to  return  to  this — perhaps  the  most  difficult  topic  in
psychology — when  we  come  to  attempt  the  special  analysis  of  self-consciousness.
What  has  been  said  above  may  suffice  for  this  first  general  analysis.


CHAPTER III

THEORY OF ATTENTION
'  Consciousness '  or  '  A  Mention '  ?

§  i.  It  will  be  well  to  attempt  here  some  further  explication
of  the  theory  of  attention  advanced  in  the  preceding  chapter
in  place  of  the  objectionable  '  faculty-psychology '  of  the  older
writers.  Instead  of  a  congeries  of  faculties  we  have  assumed
a  single  subjective  activity,  and  have  proposed  to  call  this
attention.

We  started  from  the  duality  of  subject  and  object  as  funda-
mental. Now  we  can  often  form  a  distinct  conception  of  the
relation  between  two  terms  when  we  have  no  such  distinct  con-
ception of  the  two  terms  themselves.  So  here :  without  waiting
to  examine  ontological  theories  about  them  we  can  at  once  ask
how  subject  and  object  are  related.  We  say  of  man,  mouse  or
monkey  that  it  feels,  remembers,  perceives,  infers,  desires,  strives
and  so  forth.  Leaving  aside  the  first  term,  it  is  obvious  that  all
the  rest  imply  both  an  activity  and  an  object.  The  question  then
arises  as  to  the  possibility  of  resolving  these  instances  and  others
like  them  into  a  form  in  which  the  assumed  diversity  of  the  act
appears  as  a  diversity  of  its  object.  An  obvious  difficulty  con-
fronts us  at  the  outset.  At  first  sight  it  looks  rather  as  if  the  kind
of  activity  might  vary  while  the  object  remained  the  same ;  that
e.g.  having  perceived  an  object,  we  later  on  remembered  or  desired
it.  It  would  then  be  most  natural  to  refer  these  several  activi-
ties to  corresponding  faculties  of  perception,  memory  and  desire.
This,  indeed,  is  the  view  embodied  in  common  speech,  and  for
practical  purposes  it  is  doubtless  the  simplest  and  the  best.
Nevertheless,  a  more  thorough  analysis  shews  that  when  the
supposed  faculty  is  different  the  object  is  never  entirely  and  in
all  respects  the  same.  Thus  in  perception,  e.g.  we  deal  with


CH.  in,  §  i] Consciousness  or  Attention?  61

'  impressions '  or  primary  presentations,  and  in  memory  and
imagination  with  '  ideas '  (in  the  later  sense)  or  secondary  pre-
sentations. In  desire  the  want  of  the  object  gives  it  an  entirely
different  setting,  adding  a  new  characteristic,  that  of  value  or
worth,  so  that  the  acquisition  of  the  object  becomes  the  end  of
a  series  of  efforts  or  movements.

The  older  psychology,  accepting  the  Cartesian  doctrine  that
all  the  facts  of  immediate  experience  are  really  subjective  modi-
fications, failed  to  distinguish  adequately  between  the  subject
as  active  and  the  objects  of  its  activity.  Hence  the  tendency
to  rest  content  with  the  popular  distinction  of  various  faculties,
in  spite  of  the  underlying  sameness  implied  in  saying  that  we
are  'conscious'  of  them  all.  In  fact,  Locke's  definition  of  idea
(in  the  older  and  wider  sense)  as  the  immediate  object  of  con-
sciousness or  thinking  was  censured  by  Reid  as  "  the  greatest
blemish  in  the  Essay  on  Human  Understanding*?  But,  admitting
this  definition,  since  it  is  implied  in  the  duality  of  subject  and
object ;  and  admitting  too  the  underlying  sameness  which  the
active  form  '  conscious '  undeniably  implies,  we  have  simply  to
ask :  Which  is  the  better  term  to  denote  this  common  element —
consciousness  or  attention?  The  former  is  soon  disposed  of:
in  spite  of  its  properly  active  signification  it  is  frequently  used
in  a  passive  sense ;  and  when  actively  used  its  meaning  is  as
often  too  wide  as  too  narrow,  ranging  between  the  whole  extent
of  the  facts  to  be  analysed  and  one  of  the  most  specialised  of
these,  what  we  otherwise  call  internal  perception,  reflexion,  and
less  accurately  self-consciousness2.

Attention,  on  the  other  hand,  has  invariably  an  active  sense,
and  there  is  an  appropriate  verb,  to  attend.  The  obvious  objection

1  Works,  Hamilton's  ed.  p.  277. The  real  blemish  lay  rather  in  treating  this  object
as  a  subjective  modification. Had  Descartes'  resolution  of  psychical  facts  into  con-
sciousness and  ideas  been  as  clear  or  as  consistently  maintained  as  his  resolution  of
physical  phenomena  into  matter  and  motion,  psychology  might  by  now  have  attained
to  a  simplicity  of  treatment  comparable  with  that  which  the  doctrine  of  energy
and  its  transformations  has  secured  for  physics. Cf.  below,  p.  70.

2  Of  course  this  is  only  a  question  of  words,  but  questions  of  words  are  not  always
unimportant,  and  in  psychology  especially  a  more  definite  terminology  is  a  great
desideratum. Physicists  pour  scorn  upon  a  man  who  cannot  see  the  difference  between
momentum  and  energy  or  between  force  and  work,  but  analogous  confusions  abound
in  the  language  of  psychologists. Take  for  example  some  of  Hamilton's  assertions
about  this  '  very  transparent  matter,'  Consciousness,  over  which,  he  tells  us,  philoso-
phers (i.e.  other  philosophers,  of  course)  have  spread  obscurity  by  their  attempts  to


62  Theory  of  Attention  [CH.  in,  §  i

to  the  term  attention  is  that  it  seems  too  narrow :  many  things,
it  may  be  said,  are  presented,  but  few  are  attended  to.  If
attention  is  to  be  made  co-extensive  with  the  activity  implied
in  consciousness,  the  vital  distinction  between  attention  and
inattention,  it  has  been  said,  will  be  lost ;  and  it  is  surely  but
an  ill  way  to  advance  knowledge  to  rob  'the  central  word  of
discipline'  of  its  essential  meaning.  But  on  the  other  side  it
may  be  urged  that  even  in  common  parlance  the  drill  Serjeant's
is  not  the  only  use  of  the  word :  there  is  a  generic  sense  of
attention  which  is  recognised  as  well.  Attention  '  in  the  school
and  the  army '  is  also  known  as  concentrating  attention,  and  its
absence  as  relaxing  or  remitting  attention,  '  standing  at  ease.'
As  ordinarily  used,  then,  attention  implies  some  selection  or
preference ;  in  other  words,  implies  at  least  two  degrees  of
attention  in  the  wider  sense  that  we  are  seeking  to  defend.
The  first  of  these  degrees  is  what  we  in  everyday  life  distinguish
as  attention,  the  second  what  we  contrast  with  it  as  inattention1.
What  is  preferred,  selected  or  otherwise  determined  for  special

define  it,  but  which,  though  undefinable,  '  we  ourselves  clearly  apprehend.'  Can  a
man  be  said  clearly  to  apprehend  a  fact  about  which  he  makes  statements  like  the
following  ?

It  is  the  one  necessary  condition  of  all Among  its  special  conditions  are  Discern-
mental  phenomena  (Metaphysics,  i.  ment, Memory, Judgment,  Atten-

p.  183).  tion,  &c.  (Met.,  i.  p.  201).

It  is  an  act  (Met.,  i.  p.  192).  It  has  contents  : "The  phenomena of

Feeling  and  Conation  appear  only
as  they  appear  in  consciousness "
(Met.,  ii.  p.  431).

"  It  is  the  recognition  by  the  mind  or  ego It "is not to  be regarded as aught
of  its  acts  and  affections"  (Met.,  i.  different  from  the  mental  modes  or

p.  193)-  modifications themselves," but is

just  "these  above  a  certain  degree
of  intensity"  (l.c.,  and  Reid,  p.  932).

"  It  may  be compared  to an  internal "  It  is  not  to  be  viewed  as  an  illuminated
light,  by  means  of  which,  and  which  place,  within  which  objects  coming

alone,  what  passes  in  the  mind  is  are  presented  to  ... observation  "

rendered  visible"  (Met.,  i.  p.  183).  (Reid,  p.  932).

There  is  an  unmistakable  contrariety  among  these  statements,  and  others  almost
equally  conflicting  might  be  added  both  from  Hamilton  and  other  writers.  Conscious-
ness, then,  perhaps  the  most  protean  of  psychological  terms,  will  hardly  serve  our
purpose.

1  Of  course,  it  hardly  needs  to  be  said,  that  the  'inattention,'  for  which  the
school  boy  is  punished — attention  to  something  else — is  not  the  inattention  that  we
are  concerned  with  here.


CH.  in,  §  i] Consciousness  or  Attention?  63

attention  is,  of  course,  something  presented  ;  but  what  of  that
which  is  not  in  this  wise  singled  out  and  attended  to  ?  It  also
is  assuredly  something  presented,  however  much  neglected  or
ignored.  We  do  not  talk  of  inattention  to  what  is  going  on  in
Timbuctoo  or  on  the  other  side  of  the  moon  ;  though  we  might
quite  well  refer  to  our  inattention  to  the  ticking  of  the  clock  or
the  pattering  of  the  rain,  while  we  were  absorbed  in  thought.
But  the  sudden  cessation  of  such  uninteresting  impressions  will
often,  as  everyone  knows,  intercept  the  course  of  our  thinking,
little  as  we  heeded  their  continuance.  Moreover  this  is  more
likely  to  happen  the  less  absorbed  we  were;  and  contrariwise,  less
likely  to  happen,  the  more  we  were  absorbed1.  These  familiar
experiences,  then,  surely  point  to  a  certain  continuity  between
the  two  degrees  and  so  to  justify  us  in  regarding  them  as
degrees,  degrees  of  one  process.  For,  obviously,  every  con-
centration of  attention  in  one  direction  involves,  ipso  facto,  an
equivalent  excentration  in  another — if  such  a  term  is  allowable  :
in  other  words,  concentration  and  diffusion  of  attention  are  but
inverse  aspects  of  one  act.

The  proposal  to  use  the  one  term  attention  absolutely  or  in
the  wider  sense  for  this  one  process  is  very  much  like  the
proposal  to  use  '  magnitude '  or  '  heat '  (i.e.  temperature)  in  such
fashion.  Many  an  unsophisticated  old  lady  might  demur  to
a  description  of  the  minuteness  of  a  snow  crystal  in  terms  of
'magnitude'  or  of  its  temperature  as  so  many  degrees  of 'heat'
(reckoning  from  absolute  zero).  What  has  been  found  necessary
in  these  physical  matters  seems  necessary  here,  for  the  two
cases  seem  perfectly  parallel ;  and  it  will  be  as  easy  to  get
accustomed  to  the  absolute  sense  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other2.
And  after  all  it  is  not  nearly  so  violent  a  change  as  some
imagine.  The  recognition  of  all  degrees  of  attention  in  everyday

1  So  far  there  is  ground  for  the  common  recognition  not  merely  of  two  but  of
several  degrees  of  attention,  or — for  those  who  prefer  to  say  so — of  several  degrees
of  attention  and  of  inattention,  as  we  may  see  later. Cf.  ch.  iv,  §§  6,  7.

2  Even  Bain  in  a  notice  of  the  E.  B.  article  (Mind,  1886,  p.  476)  fully  allowed
"the  need  of  a  general  word  to  express  the  reaction  of  the  Subject  upon  presentation,
etc."  and  suggested  "a  still  more  general  designation,  such  as  'mental  tension''  or
'  conscious  intensity '. " In  both  the  root  of  attention  is  there  ;  but  it  is  obvious  that
tension  and  intensity  are,  so  to  say,  terms  of  different  dimensions  and  cannot  be
equated  to  each  other ;  and  also  that  neither  of  them  clearly  expresses  '  the  reaction
of  the  Subject  upon  presentations.'


64  Theory  of  Attention  TCH.  in,  §  i

life  has  been  referred  to  already.  The  following  from  Locke  is
also  very  much  to  the  point : —

"The  various  attention  of  tlie  mind  in  thinking.... 7i\ia.t  there
are  ideas,  some  or  other,  always  present  in  the  mind  of  a  waking
man,  everyone's  experience  convinces  him  ;  though  the  mind
employs  itself  about  them  with  several  degrees  of  attention.
Sometimes  the  mind  fixes  itself  with  such  intention1... that  it
shuts  out  all  other  thoughts  and  takes  no  notice  of  the  ordinary
impressions  made  on  the  senses;. ..at  other  times,  it  barely
observes  the  train  of  ideas  that  succeed  in  the  understanding
without  directing  and  pursuing  any  of  them  ;  and  at  other
times,  it  lets  them  pass  almost  quite  unregarded,  as  faint
shadows  that  make  no  impression." — Essay  concerning  Human
Understanding,  ii.  19,  sec.  3.

The  last  sentences  of  the  next  paragraph  (sec.  4)  are  also
interesting : —

"Since  the  mind  can  sensibly  put  on,  at  several  times,
several  degrees  of  thinking  [obviously  here  equivalent  to  atten-
tion in  the  section  above],  and  be  sometimes,  even  in  a  waking
man,  so  remiss  as  to  have  thoughts  dim  and  obscure  to  that
degree  that  they  are  very  little  removed  from  none  at  all,  and
at  last,  in  the  dark  retirement  of  sound  sleep,  loses  the  sight
perfectly  of  all  ideas  whatsoever...!  ask,  whether  it  be  not
probable  that  thinking  is  the  action,  and  not  the  essence  of  the
soul  ?  Since  the  operation  of  agents  will  easily  admit  of  inten-
tion and  remission ;  but  the  essences  of  things  are  not  conceived
capable  of  any  such  variation."

Locke  then  came  very  near  indeed  to  a  full  and  explicit
recognition  of  attention  in  our  sense.  But  Hamilton — though
in  a  somewhat  bungling  fashion — comes  quite  as  near ;  and
could  he  but  have  freed  himself  from  the  trammels  of  the  old
Scottish  psychology  the  change  of  nomenclature  which  is  here
defended  might  have  been  put  forward  under  better  auspices
and  long  ago.  The  following  passages  from  his  Lectures  on
Metaphysics  may  be  cited  in  evidence : —

"  But  to  view  attention  as  a  special  act  of  intelligence,  and

1  In  an  earlier  paragraph  Locke  distinguishes  '  intention  or  study '  from  mere
attention :  in  the  former  the  mind  resists  the  solicitation  of  other  ideas,  in  the  latter
such  ideas  as  offer  themselves  are  taken  notice  of  as  they  pass  ;  in  fact,  it  is  attention
as  it  is  in  the  school  and  the  army,  that  Locke  here  calls  intention.


CH.  in,  §  i] Consciousness  or  Attention  ?  65

to  distinguish  it  from  consciousness,  is  utterly  inept... we  might,
with  equal  justice,  distinguish  in  the  eye  the  adjustment  of  the
pupil  from  the  general  organ  of  vision,  as,  in  the  mind,  dis-
tinguish attention  from  consciousness  as  separate  faculties''
(i.  p.  238).  "  It  therefore  appears  to  me  the  more  correct
doctrine  to  hold  that  there  is  no  consciousness  without  atten-
tion— without  concentration — but  that  attention  is  of  three
degrees  or  kinds.  The  first,  a  mere  vital  and  irresistible  act;  the
second,  an  act  determined  by  desire,  which,  though  involuntary,
may  be  resisted  by  our  will ;  the  third,  an  act  determined  by
a  deliberate  volition.  An  act  of  attention, — that  is,  an  act  of
concentration, — seems  thus  necessary  to  every  exertion^  of  con-
sciousness...[but]  the  mere  vital  or  automatic  act  of  attention
has  been  refused  the  name ;  and  'attention,'  in  contradistinction
to  this  mere  automatic  contraction,  given  to  the  two  other
degrees,  of  which,  however,  Reid  only  recognises  the  third....
The  faculty  of  attention  is  not,  therefore,  a  special  faculty,  but
merely  consciousness  acting  under  the  law  of  limitation  to
which  it  is  subjected.  But  whatever  be  its  relations  to  the
special  faculties,  attention  doubles  all  their  efficiency  and  affords
them  a  power  of  which  they  would  otherwise  be  destitute.  It
is,  in  fact,  as  we  are  at  present  constituted,  the  primary  condition
of  their  activity  "  (i.  247  f.).

That  a  writer — for  whom  attention  is  only  consciousness
contracted  or  limited,  and  consciousness  absolutely  without  such
contraction  or  limitation  is  consciousness  no  longer — should
find  it  needful  to  talk  both  of  acts  of  attention  and  exertions
of  consciousness  is  but  one  more  proof  of  the  perturbing  in-
fluence of  a  bad  terminology.  Locke,  who  wrote  before  this
word  'consciousness'  had  been  allowed  to  run  wild  over  the
whole  field  of  psychology,  found  the  one  action  of  attending
or  thinking  sufficient.  Between  attentive  consciousness  and
inattentive  or  bare  consciousness  there  is,  it  is  maintained,
only  a  difference  of  degree.  If  we  say  that  consciousness  as
an  activity  must  have  some  intensity,  that  the  more  it  is
concentrated  on  some  objects  the  more  it  is  withdrawn  from
others — then  this  difference  of  degree  is  to  be  traced  to  a  dif-
ference in  the  distribution  of  attention,  subject  as  that  is  to
Hamilton's  '  law  of  limitation.'  The  more  we  intensify  our

1  Italics  mine.

W.  P.  c


66  Theory  of  Attention  [CH.  in,  §  i

hold  on  A,  the  more  we  must  relax  our  hold  on  B  ;  but
between  the  intension  and  the  remission  there  is  perfect  con-
tinuity, and  not  a  difference  of  kind.  The  activity  of  attention,
we  therefore  conclude,  is  one.  It  is  only  in  its  relation  to  A  and  B
that  we  are  tempted  to  resolve  it  into  a  plurality  of  faculties,  as,
e.g.,  when  the  one  is  a  sensation,  the  other  a  movement  ;  or  the
one  an  '  impression,'  the  other  an  '  idea  '  ;  or  again  the  one  a
relation  of  presentations  inter  se,  the  other  their  relation  to  the
subject  as  pleasurable  or  painful  ;  and  so  on.


'  Attention'  and  Presentations  : Presentattomsm.

§  2.  Of  course  —  as  we  have  had  repeatedly  to  urge,  in
disclaiming  the  Cartesian  idealism  —  we  do  not  attribute  such
diversities  among  objects  to  subjective  activity.  That  will  not
account  for  the  differences  between  sensation  and  movement,
between  presentation  and  re-presentation,  nor  for  the  revivability
and  associability  of  the  latter  ;  nor  yet  for  the  relations  of  pre-
sentations to  each  other  or  their  worth  for  the  subject  itself.
All  objects  —  no  matter  what  —  must  be  '  there,'  for,  or  be  given
to,  the  subject;  they  cannot  be  'posited'  by  it  —  in  other  words
they  must  be  '  presented.'  Such  presentation  affects  the  sub-
ject :  herein  lies  its  one  primitive  capacity  —  that  of  feeling.
Feeling  again  implies  but  one  primitive  faculty  —  that  of  being
conscious  or  attending.  This  is  the  subjective  side  of  our
'  irreducible  minimum.'  It  is,  however,  not  enough  to  stop  here.

To  produce  conviction  it  is  also  desirable  to  shew  directly
that  all  the  other  'faculties'  with  which  a  subject  may  be
credited  are  resolvable  into  attention  to  as  many  classes  or
states  or  relations  of  the  objects  which  are  presented.  The
most  striking  difference  that  here  confronts  us  is  probably  that
between  sensory  and  motor  objects,  which  we  have  already
noted  as  underlying  the  older,  bi-partite  division  of  mental
'powers'  as  respectively  cognitive  or  receptive  and  conative
or  reactive.  It  will  be  well,  then,  to  consider  first  of  all,  how
far  our  position  holds  good  here.  This  has  been  attempted
already  in  the  course  of  the  preceding  analysis;  but  perhaps
a  restatement  in  a  somewhat  different  form  may  conduce  to
clearness.  In  as  far  as  conation  implies  not  merely  action,
overt  or  intended,  but  also  motives,  in  so  far  also  it  contains  an


CH.  in,  §  2] Attention  and  Presentations  67

element  not  resolvable  into  attention  to  motor  presentations.
This  farther  element,  due  to  what  is  called  'the  volitional
character  of  feeling,'  we  may  here  leave  aside.  Apart  from
feeling  as  the  direct  spring  of  action,  the  question,  then,  is
simply  whether  action  in  process  is  anything  more  than
attention  to  a  special  class  of  objects.

To  depart  as  little  as  may  be  from  current  usage  and  to
avoid,  as  far  as  possible,  the  charge  of  presumptuous  meddling
with  the  sacred  ark  of  words,  the  question  may  be  put  in  this
fashion:  Are  'apperception'  and  'innervation,'  as  they  are  some-
times called, — in  other  words,  are  the  receptive  and  reactive
factors  in  consciousness — reducible  to  one  (attention)?  First
of  all,  it  is  noteworthy  that  they  have  the  same  characteristics.
Thus  what  Hamilton  has  called  the  law  of  limitation  holds  of
each  alike  and  of  either  with  respect  to  the  other ;  and  it  holds
too  not  only  of  the  number  of  presentations  but  also  of  the
intensity.  We  can  be  absorbed  in  action  just  as  much  as  in
perception  or  thought ;  also  movements,  unless  mechanical,
inhibit  ideas,  and  vice  versd  ideas,  other  than  associated  trains,
arrest  movements.  It  is  as  impossible  to  lift  a  heavy  weight
and  go  on  thinking  as  it  is  to  scrutinise  the  dot  on  an  i  and  go
on  thinking.  Intoxication,  hypnotism  or  insanity,  rest  or  ex-
haustion, tell  on  apperception  as  well  as  on  innervation.  The
control  of  thoughts  equally  with  the  control  of  movements
requires  'effort';  and,  as  there  is  a  '  strain  '  peculiar  to  intently
listening  or  gazing,  which  is  known  to  have  a  muscular  concomi-
tant, so  too  there  is  a  strain  equally  characteristic  of  recollection
and  intellection,  which  probably  has  what  is  functionally  equiva-
lent to  one.  When  movements  have  to  be  associated  the  same
continuous  attention  is  called  for  as  is  found  requisite  to  associate
sensory  impressions:  when  such  associations  have  become  very
intimate,  dissociation  is  about  equally  difficult  in  both  cases.  The
process  of  control  is  also,  so  far  as  we  yet  know,  much  the  same :
it  is  a  process  of  direct  repression  in  one  direction,  of  alternative
intensification  in  another,  or  a  combination  of  both.  One  real
difference  there  is,  no  doubt :  movement  may  ensue  through  a
concentration  of  attention  on  the  idea  of  the  movement.  The
like,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  does  not  hold  of  sensations ;  though
in  abnormal  cases  there  is  often  a  close  approach  to  it.  "  If  ifs
and  ans  were  pots  and  pans  there'd  be  no  trade  for  tinkers  " —

5—2


68  Theory  of  Attention  [CH.  in,  §  2

nay,  more,  there'd  be  no  trade  for  movements  of  any  sort,  except
so  far  as  these  were  pleasurable  in  themselves.  It  is  just  this
difference  in  the  objects  that  makes  all  the  difference  in  our
attitude,  but  it  is  not  a  difference  in  the  psychical  activity
concerned  with  them.

There  is  one  striking  fact  that  brings  to  light  the  underlying
unity  of  apperception  and  innervation  (i.e.  of  receptive  and
reactive  consciousness)  which  was  cited  by  Wundt  for  this  very
purpose.  In  what  are  called  'simple  reaction-time'  experiments
it  is  found  that  if  a  warning  signal  precedes  by  a  suitable  in-
terval the  impression  to  be  registered  the  reaction  registering
the  impression  is  often  instantaneous :  the  reaction-time,  in
other  words,  is  nil.  In  such  a  case  the  subject  is  aware  not  of
three  separate  acts,  (i)  apperceiving  the  impression,  (2)  reacting
to  it,  (3)  apperceiving  the  effect  of  the  reaction  :  it  is  distinctly
conscious  of  one  act  and  one  only.  The  anticipatory  idea  of
the  impression  to  be  perceived  and  the  idea  of  the  movement
to  be  executed  are  so  adjusted  that,  when  the  preliminary
signal  is  given,  the  impression  is  realised  and  the  movement
actualised  at  once  and  together.  Wundt  called  this  relation  of
the  two  ideas  a  'simultaneous  association'1:  the  expression  is
scarcely  a  happy  one,  but  at  least  the  adjustment  brought  about
is  like  an  association,  in  so  far  as  the  two  ideas  are  attended
to  as  one  complex.  But  that  the  two  attitudes,  the  receptive
and  the  reactive,  whatever  their  fundamental  sameness,  are — now
at  any  rate — normally  distinct  though  still  ultimately  identical
is  shewn  by  certain  'complex  reaction'  experiments,  where,
that  is  to  say,  the  subject  has  to  discriminate  between  different
impressions  and  react  in  a  prescribed  but  distinct  manner  to
each.  The  time  of  the  entire  process  was  found  approximately
constant  for  the  several  persons  reacting,  but  some  discriminated
quickly  and  responded  slowly  while  others  discriminated  slowly
and  responded  quickly.  The  expectant  attitude  in  the  one
being  primarily  sensory  in  the  other  primarily  motor,  so  that
the  one  was  less  prepared  for  the  second  half  of  the  trial  and
the  other  for  the  first2.

1  Physiologische  Psychologic,  2nd  edn.,  1880,  ii.  p.  391. He  now  (cf.  6th  edn.,
1911,  iii.  391)  calls  it  a  'brain-reflex,'  which  is  hardly  an  improvement.

2  Cf.  E.  Tischer,  Wundt's  Philosophische  Studien,  i.  (1883),  pp.  537  f. ;  A.  Pilzecker,
Die  Lehre  v.  d.  sinnlichen  Aufmerksamkeit,  Diss.  1889,  pp.  77  f.


CH.  in,  §  2] Attention  and  Presentations  69

Sensory  attention  we  have  described  as  primarily  non-
voluntary  and  so  far  passive :  attention  here  is  not  subjectively
directed  but  objectively  diverted.  To  be  noticed  or  specially
attended  to,  an  impression — when  not  expected — must  then,
as  we  have  already  remarked,  have  more  intensity  the  more
attention  is  concentrated  elsewhere,  and  in  any  case  more
intensity  than  would  insure  its  recognition,  if  it  were  expected.
The  minimal — or,  as  it  is  technically  called,  the  liminal — in-
tensity that  suffices  in  the  latter  case  has  to  be  exceeded,  often
greatly  exceeded,  in  the  former.  What  we  may  call  'the
effective  intensity'  of  a  sensation  then  depends  in  part  upon
the  attention  it  receives,  and  is  not  wholly  determined  by  what
we  may  perhaps  call  its  'inherent  intensity'  meaning  by  this
the  psychical  concomitant  of  the  neural  excitation  which  im-
mediately concerns  the  physiologist.  This  inherent  intensity
however  sets  an  upper  limit  beyond  which  the  effective  in-
tensity cannot  increase1.  And  in  this  fact,  that  the  effective
intensity  is,  so  to  say,  a  function  of  two  variables,  we  have,  by
the  way,  a  further  proof — if  further  proof  were  wanted — of  the
inadequacy  of  the  doctrine  that  presentations  are  nothing  but
subjective  modifications.

In  like  manner  we  have  allowed  that  the  retentiveness  and
associabilityof  'ideas'  in  the  narrower  sense, or  re-presentations,
pertain  primarily  to  the  objective  factor  in  experience.  Never-
theless in  their  actual,  'effective,'  revival  and  association,
attention,  the  subjective  factor  in  experience,  is  all-essential :
to  quote  Hamilton  again,  "it  doubles  all  their  efficiency  and
affords  them  a  power  of  which  they  would  otherwise  be
destitute."  What  we  effectively  retain  and  combine  is  just
what  we  have  attended  to  and  no  more.

Such  combination  or  'synthesis'  is,  as  Kant2  was  the  first
clearly  to  see,  'the  indispensable  condition,  without  which  we
should  have  no  experience  whatever.'  Its  recognition  meant
— and  has  proved  to  be — the  revolution  of  psychology3.  It

1  Under  the  mistaken  assumption  that  such  increase  is  implied  according  to  the
view  here  maintained,  which  the  majority  of  psychologists  in  fact  accept,  not  a  few
have  been  led  to  call  it  in  question. We  shall  return  to  the  question  later  on. Cf.
ch.  v,  §  4.

2  Cf.  Critique,  ist  edn.,  pp.  77  f. Max  Muller's  trans.,  pp.  68  f.

3  "  The  synthesizing  principle,  that  for  Hume  had  been  the  stone  of  stumbling
impressed  Kant  as  the  fundamental  principle  of  all  knowledge— from  the  perceptior


7O  Theory  of  Attention  [CH.  in,  §  2

dispenses  us  also  at  this  stage  from  any  further  examination  of
faculties  in  detail ;  for  synthesis  underlies  them  all  and  attention
is  essential  to  effective  synthesis.

But  it  is  a  matter  of  quite  secondary  importance  what  name
we  give  to  this  common  element  of  activity  supposed  to  be
present  wherever  we  find  psychical  life.  Provided  the  fact  be
recognised  we  shall  not  be  long  without  an  appropriate  name
for  it.  Meanwhile  to  call  it  'attention'  seems  to  do  least
violence  to  existing  usage,  and  to  have  most  precedents  in  its
favour.  The  really  important  question  is  whether  the  contrast
of  Subject  and  Object  is  of  such  a  fundamental  character  as
to  justify  the  resolution  of  psychological  facts  into  two  entirely
distinct  categories — the  one  subjective  faculty  or  function  of
Action-under-Feeling  or  Consciousness  on  the  one  side,  and  a
Field  of  Consciousness,  consisting  of  Objects,  Ideas  or  Pre-
sentations, on  the  other.  The  older  psychologies,  with  their
legion  of  faculties,  were  no  doubt  unscientific,  just  as  were  the
older  physics  with  their  legion  of  forces  or  inherent  powers.
But  modern  physicists  have  not  abandoned  the  older  concept
of  '  forces '  entirely  :  they  have  merely  substituted  in  their  stead
the  exacter  concept  of  energy.  Some  modern  psychologists,
however,  have  not  been  equally  guarded  ;  for  they  have  rejected
the  concept  of  subjective  activity  altogether.  They  hold  the
doctrine  here  called  Presentationism,  and  to  this  we  must  now
turn  for  a  moment ;  for,  if  this  doctrine  be  true,  our  theory  of
attention  will  not  hold.

The  most  important  generalisations  in  psychology — as  prob-
ably everybody  will  allow — are  those  included  together  as  the
Laws  of  Association.  Now  it  was  the  Associationist  psychology
which  in  England  gave  the  death-blow  to  the  Scottish  school
with  its  interminable  faculties;  and  a  like  fate  befel  the  ' alte
Vermogenstheorie*  at  the  hands  of  the  Herbartians  in  Germany.
In  the  new  psychology  of  presentations — 'Psychologic  ohne
Seelel  as  Lange  called  it1 — thus  brought  into  vogue,  we  are
asked  to  recognise  only  interaction  of  presentations  inter  se.
Ideas,  it  was  said,  tend  to  attract  or  repel  each  other ;  they

of  sense  onwards  up  to  the  highest  insight  of  the  understanding."  Hoffding,
Geschichte  des  neueren  Philosophie,  1896,  ii.  p.  50.  Cf.  also  the  same  writer's
Psychologic,  3rd  edn.,  1901,  pp.  90  f.

1  Geschichte  des  Materialismus,  II.  Absch.  iii,  3rd  edn.,  p.  381.


CH.  in,  §3]  Presentationism  71

associate  and  they  conflict :  in  short,  as  Herbart  roundly  put  it,
we  have  in  them  a  psychical  statics  and  dynamics,  and  these,
as  he  thought,  admit  of  a  mathematical  treatment.  The  activity
underlying  the  old  terms  'faculty,'  'power,'  &c.,  which  was
formerly  referred  to  the  subject,  here  reappears  on  the  side  of
the  object.  We  find  this  interaction  of  presentations  pushed
to  the  utmost — with  that  speculative  thoroughness  so  charac-
teristic of  the  master  minds  among  our  Teutonic  brethren — in
Herbart's  own  psychology.  It  would  not  be  difficult  to  shew
that  the  metaphysical  theory  of  '  self-conservation,'  which
Herbart  developed,  makes  no  material  difference  to  the  general
character  of  his  psychology  as  here  described.  In  Bain  and
in  J.  S.  Mill  the  same  tendency  is  apparent,  but  in  them
systematic  thoroughness  is  sacrificed  to  regard  for  facts,  which
is  said — for  better,  for  worse — to  be  the  peculiarly  British
trait.  Now  comes  the  question : — Can  we,  provided  we  credit
presentations  with  certain  mutual  attractions,  repulsions,  asso-
ciations, complications,  &c.,  &c. — dispense  altogether  with  the
postulation  of  an  active  subject  ?  Whatever  our  sentimental
preferences  may  be,  it  is  hard  to  see  any  scientific  objection  to
such  an  attempt  if  only  it  could  succeed.  The  one  question
to  be  asked  then  is :  Can  it  ?  The  onus  probandi  lies  with  the
Presentationists ;  and  it  may  fairly  be  said  that  as  yet  they
are  very  far  from  discharging  it1.  Meanwhile  we  must  still
maintain  the  reality  of  that  subjective  activity  implied  in  con-
sciousness, which  Descartes  and  Locke  called  thinking,  but
which  we  propose  to  call  attention.  To  certain  general
characteristics  of  this  activity  we  may  now  turn.

Attention  and  Acts  of  Attention.

§  3.  We  have  already  distinguished  between  non-voluntary
and  voluntary  changes,  or  'movements,'  of  attention.  But  besides
these,  its  dynamic  aspects,  we  must  with  the  wider  meaning
here  given  to  the  term,  distinguish  also  the  comparatively  static
aspects,  which  this  extended  meaning  includes.  More  definitely,
besides  movements  of  attention,  whether  objectively  or  sub-
jectively initiated,  we  must  assume  there  is  always  some  degree

1  See  further  my  articles,  "  Psychological  Principles,"  Mind,  1887,  pp.  62  ff.,  and
"  'Modern  Psychology':  a  Reflexion,"  Mind,  1893,  pp.  70 ff.


72  Theory  of  Attention  [CH.  in,  §  3

of  continuous  attention  to  the  presentation-continuum  as  a  whole.
Acts  of  attention  are  changes  in  the  distribution  of  this  attention
just  as  presentations  are  changes  in  the  differentiation  of  the
continuum1.  As  the  latter  is  not  completely  resolvable  into
a  discrete  manifold  so  neither  is  the  former  wholly  resolv-
able into  discrete  acts.  But  there  is  a  difference  between  the
two  cases  answering  to  the  difference  between  the  central  unity
of  the  subject  and  what  we  shall  call  the  primitive  extensity  of
the  objective  continuum.  Thus  while  there  may  be  an  indefinite
number  of  simultaneous  changes  in  the  so-called  '  field  of  con-
sciousness' there  can  at  one  time  be  only  one  movement  of
attention2.  Hence  it  used  to  be  argued  that  'we  can  only
attend  to  one  thing  at  once.'  But  this  is  only  true,  if  it  be
understood  to  mean  that  a  plurality  of  presentations  to  which
attention  is  directed — or  on  which  it  is  concentrated — thereby
tends  to  become  a  unity,  to  be  more  or  less  definitely  '  syn-
thesized '  or  '  integrated '  as  one  '  situation '  or  one  complex
whole  of  some  sort.  How  complex  such  a  whole  may  be  is
mainly  a  question  of  previous  practice  and  the  '  complications/
'associations'  or  'secondary  automatisms'  thereby  acquired.
Every  acquisition,  whether  cognitive  or  practical,  presupposes
such  acts  of  attention,  and  to  these  its  retention,  assimilation
f  and  association — matters  to  be  further  dealt  with  presently —
!'  are  largely  due.  This  is  a  principle  of  absolutely  fundamental
importance,  grievously  overlooked  by  earlier  British  psychologists
and  the  occasion  of  much  just  censure  from  without.  We  cannot
be  always  insisting  upon  it,  but  it  must  never  be  forgotten.

1  The  somewhat  figurative  term  '  movement  of  attention '  perhaps  needs  a  word
or  two  of  explanation  lest  it  perplex  or  mislead. Attention  cannot  be  conceived  as
itself  moving :  this  would  be  to  regard  as  concrete  what  is  really  abstract. Again
the  subject  in  attending  does  not  move,  nor  does  the  object  move  in  being  merely
attended  to :  there  is,  strictly  speaking,  no  change  of  position  in  either. But  any
object  specially  noticed  is  a  more  or  less  definitely  discriminated  part  within  the
presented  whole;  and  further,  the  subject's  relation  to  that  whole  is  different  when
different  parts  of  it  are  singled  out. No  wonder,  then,  that  this  varying  relation  of
the  subject  to  the  totum  objectivum  should  suggest  an  analogy  between  this  relation
and  the  movements  of  the  eye  to  and  fro  over  the  field  of  sight. (Cf.  below,  ch.  iv,
§  6.) But,  as  we  have  already  remarked,  it  is  probably  more  than  an  analogy  (cf.  the
last  §) :  the  visual  movements  are  themselves  a  case  of  movements  of  attention,  sub-
jectively or  objectively  determined  acts.

2  And  such  movements  of  attention  have  a  good  deal  to  do  with  what  we  call
'  one  time.' Cf.  below  ch.  viii,  §  4.


CH.  in,  §  3] Attention  and  Acts  of  Attention  73

But  what  can  be  effectively  comprised  in  one  act  of  attention
has  very  narrow  limits :  hence  Locke's  well-known  references  to
"  the  narrowness  that  human  minds  are  confined  to  here "  as
"not  being  capable  of  having  many  ideas  under  view  and  con-
sideration at  once1 "  and  as  contrasted  with  the  '  larger  views '
"which  the  several  degrees  of  angels  may  probably  have."
The  phrase  'narrowness  of  consciousness'  (Herbart's  Enge  des
Bewusstseins)  in  this  sense  has  now  passed  into  psychology  as
a  technical  term.

1  Essay  n,  x.  §§  9,  «.


CHAPTER IV

THEORY  OF  PRESENTATIONS

The  Psychological  Individual.

§  I.  We  come  now  to  the  exposition  of  the  objects  of
attention  or  consciousness,  i.e.  to  what  we  may  call  the  objective
or  presentational  factor  of  psychical  life.  The  treatment  of  this
will  fall  naturally  into  two  divisions.  In  the  first  we  shall  have
to  deal  with  its  general  characteristics  and  with  the  fundamental
processes  which  all  presentation  involves.  In  view  of  its  general
and  more  or  less  hypothetical  character  we  may  call  this  the
theory  of  presentations.  In  the  second  division  we  shall  then
pass  on  to  the  special  forms  of  presentations,  known  as  sensa-
tions, percepts,  images,  &c.,  and  to  the  special  processes  to
which  these  forms  lead  up.

This  exposition  will  be  simplified  if  we  start  with  a  supposi-
tion that  will  enable  us  to  leave  aside,  at  least  for  the  present,
the  difficult  question  of  heredity.  We  know  that  in  the  course
of  every  human  life  there  has  been  more  or  less  of  progressive
differentiation  or  development.  Further,  it  is  believed  that  there
has  been  a  succession  of  sentient  individuals  beginning  at  the
lowest  level  of  life  and  advancing  continuously  up  to  the  level
of  man.  Some  trace  of  earlier  stages  may  be  seen  in  the  be-
haviour of  a  human  infant  now — in  its  crawling  before  walking
for  example — but  for  the  most  part  such  traces  have  been
obliterated.  What  was  experience  in  the  past  has  become
instinct  in  the  present.  The  descendant  has  no  consciousness
of  his  ancestor's  failures  when  performing  at  once  by  'an
untaught  ability'  what  they  slowly  and  perhaps  painfully
acquired.  But,  if  we  are  to  attempt  to  follow  the  genesis  of
mind  from  its  earliest  dawn,  it  is  the  primary  experience  rather
than  the  eventual  instinct  that  we  have  first  of  all  to  keep  in


CH.  iv,  §  2] The  Presentational  Continuum  75

view.  To  this  end,  then,  it  is  proposed  to  assume  that  we
are  dealing  with  one  individual  who  has  continuously  advanced
from  the  beginning  of  psychical  life,  and  not  with  a  series  of
individuals  all  of  whom,  save  the  first,  'inherited'  certain  capacities
from  their  progenitors.  The  life-history  of  such  an  imaginary
individual1,  that  is  to  say,  would  correspond  with  all  that  was
new  in  the  experience  of  a  certain  typical  series  of  individuals
each  of  whom  advanced  a  certain  stage  in  mental  differentiation.
On  the  other  hand,  from  this  history  would  be  omitted  that
inherited  reproduction  of  the  net  results  of  ancestral  experience,
that  innate  tradition,  so  to  say,  by  which  alone,  under  the  actual
conditions  of  existence,  racial  progress  is  possible.

The  process  of  thus  reproducing  the  old  might  differ  as
widely  from  that  of  producing  the  new  as  electrotyping  does
from  engraving.  However,  the  point  is  that  as  psychologists
we  know  nothing  directly  about  it ;  neither  can  we  distinguish
precisely  at  any  link  in  the  chain  of  life  what  is  old  and
inherited,  original  in  the  sense  of  Locke  and  Leibniz,  from
what  is  new  or  acquired,  original  in  the  modern  sense.  But
we  are  bound  as  a  matter  of  method  to  suppose  all  discernible
complexity  and  differentiation  among  presentations  to  have
been  originated,  i.e.  experimentally  acquired,  at  some  time  or
other.  So  long,  then,  as  we  are  concerned  primarily  with  the.
progress  of  this  differentiation  we  may  disregard  the  fact  that  it
has  not  actually  been,  as  it  were,  the  product  of  one  hand  dealing
with  one  tabula  rasa  to  use  Locke's — originally  Aristotle's —
figure,  but  of  many  hands,  each  of  which,  starting  with  a  re-
production of  what  had  been  wrought  on  the  preceding  tabulae,
put  in  more  or  fewer  new  touches  before  devising  the  whole  to
a  successor  who  would  proceed  in  like  manner.

The  Presentational  Continuum: Differentiation.

§  2.  What  is  implied  in  this  process  of  differentiation  and
what  is  it  that  becomes  differentiated  ? — these  are  the  questions
to  which  we  must  now  attend.  Psychologists  have  usually

1  He  may  be  compared  to  Hegel's  'general  mind' :  cf.  Phaenomenologie  des  Geistes,
1832,  p.  23.  Professor  Baillie's  trans,  i.  p.  36.  Pascal  had  a  similar  idea  : — "Toute
la  suite  des  hommes,  pendant  le  cours  de  tant  de  siecles,  doit  etre  considered  comme
un  meme  homme  qui  subsiste  toujours  et  qui  apprend  continuellement."  Pensees  et
Opuscules,  edit.  L.  Brunschvicg,  1900,  p.  80.


76  Theory  of  Presentations '  [CH.  iv,  §  2

represented  mental  advance  as  consisting  fundamentally  in  the
combination  and  recombination  of  various  elementary  units,  the
so-called  sensations  and  primitive  movements :  in  other  words,
as  consisting  in  a  species  of  '  mental  chemistry.'  If  needful,  we
might  find  in  biology  far  better  analogies  to  the  progressive
differentiation  of  experience  than  in  the  physical  upbuilding  of
molecules.  The  process  seems  much  more  like  a  segmentation
of  what  is  originally  continuous  than  an  aggregation  of  elements
at  first  independent  and  distinct.  Comparing  higher  minds  or
stages  of  mental  development  with  lower, — by  what  means  such
comparison  is  possible  we  need  not  now  consider — we  find  in
the  higher  conspicuous  differences  between  presentations  which
in  the  lower  are  indistinguishable  or  absent  altogether.  The
worm  seems  to  be  aware  only  of  the  difference  between  light
and  dark.  The  steel-worker  sees  half  a  dozen  tints  where  others
see  only  a  uniform  glow.  To  the  child,  it  is  said,  all  faces
are  alike ;  and  throughout  life  we  are  apt  to  note  the  generic,
the  points  of  resemblance,  before  the  specific,  the  points  of
difference.  But  even  when  most  definite,  what  we  call  a  pre-
sentation is  still  part  of  a  larger  whole.  It  is  not  separated  from
other  presentations,  whether  simultaneous  or  successive,  by
something  which  is  not  of  the  nature  of  presentation,  as  one
island  is  separated  from  another  by  the  intervening  sea,  or  one
note  in  a  melody  from  the  next  by  an  interval  of  silence.  In
our  search  for  a  theory  of  presentations,  then,  it  is  from  this
'continuity  of  consciousness'  that  we  must  take  our  start.
Working  backwards  from  this  as  we  find  it  now,  we  are  led
alike  by  particular  facts  and  general  considerations  to  the  con-
ception of  a  totum  objectivum  or  objective  continuum  which  is
gradually  differentiated.  This  continuum  then  gives  rise  to  what
we  call  distinct  presentations,  just  as — later  on — some  particular
presentation,  clear  as  a  whole,  as  Leibniz  would  say,  becomes
with  mental  growth  a  complex  of  distinguishable  parts.  Of  the
very  beginning  of  this  continuum  we  can  say  nothing ;  absolute
beginnings,  we  must  repeat,  are  beyond  the  pale  of  science.
Experience  advances  as  this  continuum  is  differentiated,  every
differentiation  being  a  change  of  presentation.  Hence  the  com-
monplace of  psychologists — We  are  only  conscious  as  we  are
conscious  of  change.

But  '  change  of  consciousness '  is  too  loose  an  expression  to


CH.  iv,  §  2]  Differentiation  77

take  the  place  of  the  unwieldy  phrase  'differentiation  of  a
presentation-continuum,'  to  which  we  have  been  driven.  For
not  only  does  the  term  '  consciousness '  confuse  what  exactness
requires  us  to  keep  distinct,  an  activity  and  its  object,  but  also
the  term  'change'  fails  to  express  the  characteristics  which
distinguish  new  presentations  from  other  changes.  Differentia-
tion implies  that  the  seemingly  simple  becomes  complex  or  the
complex  more  complex.  It  implies  also  that  this  increased
complexity  is  due  to  the  persistence  of  former  changes  :  we  may
even  say  that  such  persistence  is  essential  to  the  very  idea  of
growth  or  development.  In  trying,  then,  to  conceive  our  psy-
chological individual  in  the  earliest  stages  of  development  we
must  not  picture  him  as  experiencing  a  succession  of  absolutely
new  sensations,  which,  coming  out  of  nothingness,  admit  of  being
strung  upon  the  'thread  of  consciousness'  like  beads  picked  up
at  random,  or  of  being  cemented  into  a  mass  like  the  bits  of
stick  and  sand  with  which  the  young  caddis  covers  its  nakedness.
The  notion — which  Hume  and  Kant  did  so  much  to  encourage —
that  psychical  life  begins  with  a  confused  manifold  of  sensations,
devoid  not  only  of  logical  but  even  of  psychological  unity,  is  one
that  becomes  more  inconceivable  the  more  closely  we  consider
it.  An  absolutely  new  presentation,  having  no  sort  of  connexion
with  former  presentations  till  the  subject  has  synthesized  it  with
them,  is  a  concept  for  which  it  would  be  hard  to  find  a  warrant
either  by  direct  observation,  by  inference  from  biology,  or  in
considerations  of  a  general  kind.  At  any  given  moment  we
have  a  certain  whole  of  presentations,  a  '  field  of  consciousness,'
psychologically  one  and  continuous ;  at  the  next  we  have  not
an  entirely  new  field  but  a  partial  change  within  the  old  field.
Many  who  would  allow  this  in  the  case  of  re-presentations,  i.e.
where  idea  succeeds  idea  by  the  workings  of  association,  would
demur  to  it  in  the  case  of  primary  presentations  or  sensations.
"  For,"  they  would  say,  "  may  not  silence  be  broken  by  a  clap  of
thunder,"  and  have  not  the  blind  been  made  to  see  ?  "  To  urge
such  objections  is  to  miss  the  drift  of  our  discussion,  and  to
answer  them  may  serve  to  make  it  clearer.  Where  silence  can
be  broken  there  are  residua  of  preceding  sounds  and  in  all  prob-
ability even  so-called  'subjective'  presentations  of  sound  as  well;
silence  as  experienced  by  one  who  has  heard  is  very  different
from  the  deafness  of  Condillac's  statue  before  it  had  ever  heard.


78  Theory  of  Presentations [CH.  iv,  §  2

The  question  is  rather  whether  such  a  conception  as  that  of
Condillac's  is  possible  at  all :  supposing  a  sound  to  be  abso-
lutely distinct  from  a  smell,  could  a  field  of  consciousness
consisting  of  smells  be  followed  at  once  by  one  in  which  sounds
had  part?  And,  as  regards  the  blind  coming  to  see,  we  must
remember  not  only  that  the  blind  have  eyes  but  that  they  are
descended  from  ancestors  who  could  see.  What  nascent  presen-
tations of  sight  are  thus  involved  it  would  be  hard  to  say ;  and
the  problem  of  heredity  is  one  that  we  have  for  the  present  left
aside.

The  view  here  taken  is  (i)  that  at  its  first  appearance  in
psychical  life  a  new  sensation  or  so-called  elementary  presentation
is  really  a  partial  modification  of  some  pre-existing  and  persist-
ing presentational  whole,  which  thereby  becomes  more  complex
than  it  was  before;  and  (2)  that  this  increasing  complexity  and
differentiation  never  gives  rise  to  a  plurality  of  discontinuous  pre-
sentations, having  a  distinctness  and  individuality  such  as  the
atoms  or  elementary  particles  of  the  physical  world  are  supposed
to  have.  Beginners  in  psychology,  and  some  who  are  not  be-
ginners, are  apt  to  be  led  astray  by  expositions  which  set  out  from
the  sensations  of  the  special  senses  as  we  now  know  them  :  as  if
presentation  began  with  these !  The  fact  is  we  never  now  ex-
perience a  mere  sensation  of  colour,  sound,  and  the  like ;  and
what  the  young  student  mistakes  for  such  is  really  a  case  of  per-
ception, where,  that  is  to  say,  a  sensory  presentation  is  combined
with  various  sensory  and  motor  presentations  and  with  re-pre-
sentations, thus  entailing  a  definiteness  and  completeness  only
possible  to  complex  presentations.  Moreover,  if  we  could  attend
to  a  pure  sensation  of  sound  or  colour  by  itself,  there  is  much  to
justify  the  suspicion  that  even  this  is  complex  and  not  simple,
and  owes  to  such  complexity  its  clearly  marked  specific  quality.
In  certain  of  our  vaguest  and  most  diffused  organic  sensations
there  is  probably  a  much  nearer  approach  to  the  character  of  the
really  primitive  presentations.

In  such  sensations  we  can  distinguish  three  variations,  viz.
variations  of  quality,  of  intensity,  and  of  what  Bain  called
massiveness,  or,  as  we  shall  say,  extensity.  This  last  charac-
teristic, which  everybody  knows  who  knows  the  difference
between  the  ache  of  a  big  bruise  and  the  ache  of  a  little  one,
between  total  and  partial  immersion  in  a  bath,  is,  as  we  shall


CH.  iv,  §  2]  Differentiation  79

see  later  on,  an  essential  element  in  our  perception  of  space.
But  it  is  certainly  not  the  whole  of  it ;  for  in  this  experience  of
massive  sensation  alone  it  is  impossible  to  find  other  elements
which  an  analysis  of  spatial  intuition  unmistakably  yields.
Extensity  and  extension,  then,  are  not  to  be  confounded.  Now
we  note,  even  at  our  level  of  mental  evolution,  that  an  increase
in  the  intensity  of  a  sensation  is  apt  to  entail  an  increase  in  its
extensity  too.  In  like  manner  we  note  too  a  greater  extent  of
movement  in  emotional  expression  when  the  intensity  of  the
emotion  increases.  Even  the  higher  region  of  imagination  is  no
exception  ;  as  is  shewn  by  the  whirl  and  confusion  of  ideas
incident  to  delirium,  and,  indeed,  to  all  strong  excitement.  But
this  '  diffusion '  or  '  irradiation,'  as  it  has  been  called,  diminishes
as  we  pass  from  the  class  of  organic  sensations  to  the  sensations
of  the  five  senses,  from  movements  expressive  of  feeling  to
movements  definitely  purposive,  and  from  the  tumult  of  ideas
excited  by  passion  to  the  steadier  sequences  determined  by
efforts  to  think.  Increased  differentiation  seems,  then,  to  be
intimately  connected  with  increased  'restriction.'  Probably
there  may  be  found  certain  initial  differentiations  which  for
psychology  are  ultimate  facts  that  it  can  only  accept  but  cannot
explain.  As  already  said,  the  very  beginning  of  experience  is
beyond  us,  though  it  is  our  business — working  from  within — to
push  back  our  analysis  as  far  as  we  can.  But  some  differentia-
tions being  given,  then  it  may  be  safely  said  that,  in  accordance
with  what  we  have  called  the  principle  of  subjective  selection1,
attention  would  be  voluntarily  concentrated  upon  certain  of  these
and  upon  the  voluntary  movements  specially  connected  with
them.  To  such  subjectively  initiated  modifications  of  the  pre-
sentation-continuum, moreover,  we  may  reasonably  suppose
'  restriction '  to  be  in  large  measure  due.  But  increased  restric-
tion would  render  further  differentiation  of  the  given  whole  of
presentation  possible,  and  so  the  two  processes  might  supplement
each  other.

These  processes  have  now  proceeded  so  far  that  at  the  level
of  human  consciousness  we  find  it  hard  to  form  any  tolerably
clear  conception  of  a  field  of  consciousness  in  which  an  intense
sensation,  no  matter  what,  might — so  to  say — diffuse  over  the
whole.  Colours,  e.g.  are  with  us  so  distinct  from  sounds  that —
1  Cf.  above,  p.  50.


8o  Theory  of  Presentations [CH.  iv,  §  2

except  as  regards  the  excitement  of  attention  or  the  drain  upon
it — there  is  nothing  in  the  intensest  colour  to  affect  the
simultaneous  presentation  of  a  sound.  But,  at  the  beginning,
whatever  we  regard  as  the  earliest  differentiation  of  sound  might
have  been  incopresentable  with  the  earliest  differentiation  of
colour,  if  sufficiently  diffused ;  much  as  a  field  of  sight  all  blue
is  now  incopresentable  with  one  all  red.  Or,  if  the  stimuli
appropriate  to  both  were  active  together,  the  resulting  sensation
might  have  been  not  a  blending  of  two  qualities,  as  purple  is
said  to  be  a  blending  of  red  and  violet,  but  rather  a  neutral —
so-called  '  general ' — sensation  without  the  specific  qualities  of
either.  Now,  on  the  other  hand,  colours  and  sounds  are  so  far
localised  that  we  may  be  directly  aware  that  the  eye  is  concerned
with  the  one  and  the  ear  with  the  other.  Thus  we  have  brought
to  our  notice  a  fact  so  ridiculously  obvious  that  it  has  never  been
deemed  worthy  of  mention,  although  it  has  undeniably  important
bearings — the  fact,  viz.  that  certain  sensations  or  movements  are
an  absolute  bar  to  the  simultaneous  presentation  of  other  sensa-
tions or  movements.  We  cannot  see  an  orange  as  at  once
yellow  and  green,  though  we  can  feel  it  at  once  as  both  smooth
and  cool ;  we  cannot  open  and  close  the  same  hand  at  the  same
moment,  but  we  can  open  one  hand  while  closing  the  other.
Such  incopresentability  or  contrariety  is  thus  more  than  mere
difference,  and  occurs  only  between  presentations  belonging
to  the  same  sense  or  to  the  same  group  of  movements.  Strictly
speaking,  it  does  not  always  occur  even  then  ;  for  red  and  yellow,
hot  and  cold,  are  presentable  together  provided  they  have
certain  other  differences  which  we  shall  meet  again  presently  as
differences  of 'local  sign1.'

Retentiveness.

§  3.  In  the  preceding  paragraphs  we  have  had  occasion  to
distinguish  between  the  presentation-continuum  or  whole  field
of  consciousness,  as  we  may  for  the  present  call  it2,  and  those
several  differentiations  within  this  field  which  are  ordinarily
spoken  of  as  presentations,  and  to  which — now  that  their  true
character  as  parts  is  clear — we  too  may  confine  the  term3.  But

1  Cf.  below,  ch.  vi,  §  3.  2  But  cf.  below,  §  6.

3  Without  risk,  in  view  of  what  has  been  said,  of  confounding  them  either  with
subjective  modifications,  as  the  so-called  mentalists  do,  or  with  some  independent
'  mind-stuff'  or  presentational  elements,  as  the  materialist  and  the  presentationist  do.


CH.  iv,  §  3]  Retentiveness  81

it  will  be  well  in  the  next  place,  before  inquiring  more  closely
into  their  characteristics,  to  consider  for  a  moment  that  per-
sistence of  preceding  modifications  which  the  principle  of  pro-
gressive differentiation  implies.  Such  persistence  is  best  spoken
of  as  due  to  retentiveness.  This  is  often  confused  with  memory,
though  memory  is  something  much  more  complex  and  special ;
for  in  that  there  is  necessarily  some  contrast  of  past  and  present,
whereas  here  there  is  simply  the  persistence  of  the  old.  But
what  is  it  that  persists?  On  our  theory  we  must  answer,  the
continuum  as  differentiated,  not  the  particular  differentiation  as
an  isolated  unit.  If  psychologists  have  erred  in  regarding  the
presentations  of  one  moment  as  merely  a  plurality  of  units,  they
have  erred  in  like  manner  concerning  the  so-called  '  residua '  of
such  presentations.  As  we  see  a  certain  colour  or  a  certain
figure  again  and  again,  we  do  not  go  on  accumulating  images
or  representations  of  it,  which  are  somewhere  crowded  together
like  shades  on  the  banks  of  the  Styx.  Nor  is  such  colour,  or
whatever  it  be,  the  same  at  the  hundredth  time  of  presentation
as  at  the  first,  as  the  hundredth  impression  of  a  seal  on  wax
might  be.  There  is  no  such  lifeless  fixity  in  mind.  The  ex-
planations of  perception  most  in  vogue  are  far  too  mechanical
and,  so  to  say,  atomistic ;  but  we  must  fall  back  upon  the  con-
tinuity of  our  presentation-continuum,  to  get  a  better.

Suppose,  then,  that  in  the  course  of  a  few  minutes  we  take
half  a  dozen  glances  at  a  strange  and  curious  flower.  We  have
not  as  many  complex  presentations,  which  we  might  symbolize
as  F1}  R2, ...  F6.  But  rather,  at  first  only  the  general  outline  is
noted,  next  the  disposition  of  petals,  stamens,  &c.,  then  the
attachment  of  the  anthers,  position  of  the  ovary,  and  so  on;  that
is  to  say,  symbolizing  the  whole  flower  as  [/'  (a  b)  s'  (cd)  o'  (fg)},
we  first  apprehend  say  [/'...  j'.. .<?'],  then  [p'(ab}sr ...  o'\  or
\j>'(a...)sf  (c...}o'  (/...)],  and  so  forth.  It  is  because  the  traits
first  attended  to  persist  that  those  noticed  later  form  an  addition
to  them  so  that  the  complex  at  length  may  be  complete.  There
is  nothing  in  this  instance  properly  answering  to  what  are  known
as  the  reproduction  and  association  of  ideas ;  in  the  last  and
complete  apprehension  as  much  as  in  the  first  vague  and  inchoate
one  the  flower  is  there  as  a  primary  presentation.  There  is  a  limit,
of  course,  to  such  a  procedure,  but  the  instance  taken,  we  may
safely  say,  is  not  such  as  to  exceed  the  bounds  of  a  simultaneous

w.  p.  6


82  Theory  of  Presentations [CH.  iv,  §  3

field  of  consciousness.  We  assume,  then,  that  such  increase  of
differentiation  through  the  persistence  of  preceding  differentia-
tions holds  of  the  presentation-continuum  as  a  whole.  Next,  we
conclude  that,  in  those  circumstances  in  which  we  now  have  a
specific  sensation  of,  say,  red  or  sweet,  there  would  be  for  some
more  primitive  experience  nothing  but  a  vague,  almost  '  organic,'
sensation,  which,  however,  on  every  repetition  of  the  circum-
stances, would  become  somewhat  further  differentiated.  The
earlier  differentiations,  in  short,  do  not  disappear  like  the  waves
of  yesterday  in  the  calm  of  to-day,  nor  yet  last  on  like  old  scars
beside  new  ones ;  but  rather  the  two  are  combined,  so  that  the
whole  field  of  consciousness,  like  a  continually  growing  picture,
increases  indefinitely  in  complexity  of  pattern.

Assimilation.

§  4.  This  process,  in  which  later  differentiations  seem  to
'  blend  with '  and  thereby  further  restrict  and  specialise  what  is
retained  of  earlier  and  less  definite  presentations,  is  thus  a  further
implication  of  the  principle  of  the  progressive  development  of
the  presentational  continuum.  When  not  ignored  altogether,  this
further  process  has  been  commonly  regarded  as  merely  a  simple
form  of  '  association,'  its  peculiarity  being,  as  it  was  supposed,
that  the  presentations  associated — though  numerically  distinct —
were  in  quality  perfectly  identical.  In  point  of  fact,  both  these
assumptions  seem  to  be  erroneous  and  due  to  the  so-called
psychologist's  fallacy1.  For  the  experiencing  subject  there  is
apparently  at  this  stage — as  we  have  already  urged — neither  the
numerical  distinctness  nor  the  qualitative  identity  which  the
words  'past  impression  (A^'  and  'present  impression  (A2)'
suggest.  Still  the  connexion  between  the  process  of  association
proper  and  the  process  of  mere  '  blending  or  fusion  ' — as  it  is  fre-
quently termed,  though  we  shall  call  it  assimilation — is  so  close,
and  the  detailed  analysis  called  for  so  complex,  that  we  must
needs  defer  further  discussion  till  we  come  to  treat  of  associa-
tion as  a  whole2.  It  may  then  be  possible  to  shew  that  we  have
here  to  do  with  a  process  much  simpler  and  more  fundamental

1  As,  e.g., in  interpreting  the  conduct  of children as if  they  were  already
'  grown-up '  persons.

2  Cf.  below,  ch.  vii,  §  i.


CH.  iv,  §  5]  Assimilation  83

than  association.  But  it  is  at  least  clear  at  once  that,  if  the
term  association  is  to  be  correctly  used,  it  must  imply  that  the
presentations  associated  were  from  the  first  distinct,  were
attended  to  as  distinct,  became  associated  solely  in  consequence
of  such  attention,  and  remain  to  the  last  distinguishable.
Herbert  Spencer  seems  to  have  been  the  first  psychologist  to
appreciate  the  elementary  character  of  this  process,  which — so
far  from  being  a  form  of  true  association — is  presupposed  in  all
association  properly  so  called.  He  names  it  '  automatic  associa-
tion.' "This  association,"  he  says,  "is  not  an  act  of  thought
[better  to  have  said  '  a  result  of  an  act  of  attention ']  that  may
or  may  not  take  place,  but  constitutes  the  very  recognition  of
each  feeling  [=  sensation].  A  feeling  cannot  form  an  element
of  mind  at  all,  save  on  condition  of  being  associated  with  pre-
decessors more  or  less  the  same  in  nature.... All  other  phenomena
of  association  of  feelings  are  consequent  on  the  union  of  this
process  with  a  parallel  and  simultaneous  process  to  be  described
later."  In  the  course  of  his  exposition  Mr  Spencer  frequently
uses  '  assimilation '  as  a  variant  for  his  technical  term  '  automatic
association ' ;  and  assimilation  is  the  term  here  adopted  for  the
process1.

In  view  of  the  intimate  connexion  between  differentiation,
retentiveness  and  assimilation  it  will  sometimes  be  convenient
to  refer  to  all  three  together  as  constituting  what  we  may  call
the  plasticity  of  the  presentational  continuum.

Relativity.

§  5.  This  will  be  the  most  convenient  place  to  take  note  of
certain  psychological  doctrines  which,  though  differing  in  some
material  respects,  are  usually  included  under  the  term  Law  of
Relativity.

1  Principles  of  Psychology,  §§  115  ff.  In  ignorance  of  Mr  Spencer's  usage  I  myself
proposed  this  term  and  expressed  the  hope  that  it  might  find  general  acceptance  (Ency.
Brit,  gth  ed.  art  Psychology,  p.  52).  I  first  became  aware  of  Spencer's  priority  in
reading  Benno  Erdmann's  paper,  "Zur  Theorie  der  Apperception,"  already  referred
to  (p.  46).  He  contends  that  Herbart's  term  'apperception'  is  the  more  appropriate
and  also  that  to  Herbart,  as  the  discoverer  of  the  process,  and  not  to  Spencer,  the
right  to  coin  a  name  for  it  must  be  conceded.  But  unfortunately  we  shall  find  it
needful  to  restrict  the  Herbartian  term  equally  with  the  term  association  to  much
narrower  limits.  As  to  'assimilation' — I  have  since  come  across  it  in  Drobisch's
Empirische  Psychologic,  1842,  p.  142,  Jin.

6—2


84  Theory  of  Presentations [CH.  iv,  §  5

a.  Hobbes's  Sentire  semper  idem  et  non  sentire  ad  idem
recidunt1  is  often  cited  as  one  of  the  first  formulations  of  this
law.  If  we  take  this  to  apply  to  the  whole  field  of  conscious-
ness it  becomes  at  once  true  and  trite ;  for  a  field  of  consciousness
unaltered  either  by  change  of  impression  or  of  idea  would
certainly  be  a  blank  and  a  contradiction.  The  Law  of  Relativity
in  this  sense  is  in  fact  what  Hamilton  called  the  Law  of
Variety:  "that  we  are  conscious  only  as  we  are  conscious  of
difference2" — i.e.  of  variety  or  change.  But,  though  consciousness
involves  change,  it  is  still  possible  that  particular  presentations
may  continue  in  the  field  of  consciousness  indefinitely.  When
it  is  said  that  "  a  constant  impression  is  the  same  as  a  blank,"
what  is  meant  sometimes  turns  out  to  be  something  not
psychological  at  all,  as,  e.g.,  our  insensibility  to  the  motion
of  the  earth  or  to  the  pressure  of  the  air — cases  in  which  there
is  obviously  no  presentation,  nor  even  any  evidence  of  nervous
change3.  Sometimes  this  paradox  proves  to  be  but  an  awkward
way  of  expressing  what  we  may  call  accommodation,  whether
physiological  or  psychological.  Thus  the  skin  soon  adapts  itself
to  certain  seasonal  alterations  of  temperature,  so  that  heat  or
cold  ceases  to  be  felt :  the  sensation  ceases  because  the  nervous
change,  its  proximate  physical  counterpart,  has  ceased.  Again,
there  is  what  James  Mill  called  'an  acquired  incapacity  of
attention,'  such  that  a  constant  noise,  for  example,  like  the
clatter  of  a  weaver's  loom,  in  which  one  has  no  interest,  is  soon
unnoticed.  As  a  rule,  no  doubt,  impressions  do  not  continue
constant  for  more  than  a  very  short  time  ;  still  there  are  sad
instances  enough  in  the  history  of  disease,  bodily  and  mental,  to
shew  that  such  a  thing  can  quite  well  happen,  and  that  such
constant  impressions  (and  '  fixed  ideas/  which  are  in  effect
tantamount  to  them),  instead  of  becoming  blanks,  may  dominate
the  entire  consciousness,  colouring  or  bewildering  everything.

b.  From  the  fact  that  the  field  of  consciousness  is  continually
changing  it  has  been  supposed  to  follow  that  every  presentation
is  essentially  nothing  but  a  transition  or  difference.  "All  feeling,"
says  Bain,  the  leading  exponent  of  this  view,  "is  two-sided....

1  Elementa  philosophica,  iv.  xxv.  5.

2  The  Works  of  Thos.  Reid,  Supplementary  note,  p.  932.

3  Yet  these  were  given  as  '  notable  examples '  of  this  law  by  Bain  (Senses  and
Intellect,  3rd  ed.,  p.  9)  but  afterwards  suppressed  in  view  of  the  criticism  in  the  text.


CH.  iv,  §  5]  Relativity  85

We  may  attend  more  to  one  member  of  the  couple  than  to  the
other.... We  are  more  conscious  of  heat  when  passing  to  a  higher
temperature,  and  of  cold  when  passing  to  a  lower.  The  state
we  have  passed  to  is  our  explicit  consciousness,  the  state  we  have
passed  from  is  our  implicit  consciousness1."  But  the  transition
need  not  be  from  heat  to  cold,  or  vice  versa  :  it  can  equally  well
take  place  from  a  neutral  state,  which  is  indeed  the  normal
state,  of  neither  heat  nor  cold  ;  a  new-born  mammal,  e.g.,  must
experience  cold,  having  never  experienced  heat.  Again,  suppose
a  sailor  becalmed  gazing  for  a  whole  morning  upon  a  stretch  of
sea  and  sky,  what  sensations  are  implicit  here?  Shall  we  say
yellow  as  the  greatest  contrast  to  blue,  or  darkness  as  the
contrary  of  light,  or  both  ?  What,  again,  is  the  implicit  con-
sciousness when  the  explicit  is  sweet ;  is  it  bitter  or  sour,  and
from  what  is  the  transition  in  such  a  case?  For  one  thing  it
seems  clear  that  the  transition  of  attention  from  one  presentation
to  another  and  the  differences  between  the  presentations  them-
selves are  distinct  facts.  It  is  strange  that  Bain,  the  psychologist
who  has  laid  such  stress  on  neutral  states  of  surprise  as  being
akin  to  feeling  and  so  distinct  from  special  presentations,  should
in  any  way  confound  the  two.  The  mistake  is  perhaps  accounted
for  by  the  fact  that,  in  common  with  the  rest  of  his  school,  Bain
failed  adequately  to  distinguish  between  attention  and  the  pre-
sentations that  are  attended  to.  If  '  change  of  impression '  and
being  conscious  or  mentally  alive  are  the  same  thing,  it  is  then
manifestly  tautologous  to  say  that  one  is  the  indispensable
condition  of  the  other.  If  they  are  not  the  same  thing,  then  the
succession  of  shocks  or  surprises  cannot  wholly  determine  the
impressions  which  successively  determine  them.

But  we  have  still  to  consider  whether  the  impressions  them-
selves are  nothing  but  differences  or  contrasts.  "We  do  not
know  any  one  thing  of  itself  but  only  the  difference  between  it
and  another  thing2,"  said  Bain.  But  it  is  plain  we  cannot  speak
of  contrast  or  difference  between  two  states  or  things  as  a
contrast  or  difference,  if  the  states  or  things  are  not  themselves
presented ;  the  so-called  contrast  or  difference  would  then  be
itself  a  single  presentation,  and  its  supposed  '  relativity '  but  an
inference.  Difference  is  not  more  necessary  to  the  presentation

1  Logic,  i.  1870,  p.  3.

a  Senses  and  Intellect,  3rd  ed.,  p.  311.


86  Theory  of  Presentations [CH.  iv,  §  5

of  two  objects  than  two  objects  to  the  presentation  of  difference.
And,  what  is  more,  a  difference  between  presentations  is  not  at
all  the  same  thing  as  the  presentation  of  that  difference  as  stick1.
The  former  must  precede  the  latter ;  the  latter,  which  requires
an  act  of  comparison,  need  not  follow.  There  is  an  ambiguity
in  the  words  '  know '  and  '  knowledge,'  which  Bain  seems  not  to
have  considered :  to  know  may  mean  to  perceive  or  apprehend,
it  may  also  mean  to  understand  or  comprehend2.  Knowledge  in
the  first  sense  is  only  what  we  shall  have  presently  to  discuss  as
the  recognition  of  an  object  and  is  embodied  in  an  existential
proposition3 ;  knowledge  in  the  latter  sense  is  the  result  of  in-
tellectual comparison  and  is  embodied  in  a  logical  proposition.
Thus  a  blind  man  who  cannot  know  light  in  the  first  sense  can
know  about  light  in  the  second  if  he  studies  a  treatise  on  optics.
Now  in  simple  perception  or  recognition  we  cannot  with  any
exactness  say  that  two  things  are  perceived :  straight  is  a  thing,
i.e.  a  definite  object  presented ;  not  so  not-straight,  which  answers
to  no  definite  object  at  all.  Only  when  we  rise  to  intellectual
knowledge  is  it  true  to  say :  "  No  one  could  understand  the
meaning  of  a  straight  line  without  being  shown  a  line  not
straight,  a  bent  or  crooked  line4."  Two  distinct  presentations
are  necessary  to  the  comparison  that  is  here  implied;  but  we
must  first  recognise  our  objects  before  it  is  possible  to  compare
them,  and  this  further  step  we  may  never  take.  We  need,  then,
to  distinguish  between  the  '  comparativity '  of  intellectual  know-
ledge, which  we  must  admit — for  it  rests  at  bottom  on  a  purely
analytical  proposition — and  the  '  differential  theory  of  presenta-
tions,' which,  however  plausible  at  first  sight,  must  be  wrong
somewhere,  since  it  commits  us  to  absurdities.  Thus,  if  we
cannot  have  a  presentation  X  but  only  the  presentation  of  the
difference  between  Y  and  Z,  it  would  seem  that  in  like  manner

1  Cf.  especially  Lotze's  Logik,  §  n.

2  Other  languages  give  more  prominence  to  this  distinction ;  compare  yvwvai  and
(Idtvai,  noscere  and  scire,  kennen  and  wissen,  connaitre  and  savoir. On  this  subject
there  are  some  acute  remarks  in  a  little-known  book,  J.  Grote,  Exploratio  philoso-
phica  (1865,  p.  6of. Hobbes,  too,  was  well  awake  to  this  difference,  as  e.g.  when  he
says,  "  There  are  two  kinds  of  knowledge ;  the  one,  sense  or  knowledge  original  and
remembrance  of  the  same;  the  other,  science  or  knowledge  of  the  truth  of  propositions,
derived  from  understanding."

3  See  below,  ch.  vi,  §  2.

4  Bain,  Logic,  i.  3.


en.  iv,  §  5]  Relativity  87

we  cannot  have  the  presentation  of  Y  or  Z,  nor  therefore  of
their  difference  X,  till  we  have  had  the  presentation  of  A  and
B  say,  which  differ  by  F,  and  of  C  and  D,  which  we  may
suppose  differ  by  Z.

The  lurking  error  in  this  doctrine,  that  all  presentations
are  but  differences,  may  perhaps  emerge  if  we  examine  more
closely  what  may  be  meant  by  difference.  We  may  speak  of
(a)  differences  in  intensity  between  sensations  supposed  to  be
qualitatively  identical,  as  e.g.  between  the  taste  of  strong  and
weak  tea ;  or  of  (b)  differences  in  quality  between  presentations
of  the  same  sense,  as  e.g.  between  red  and  green ;  or  of  (c)
differences  between  presentations  of  distinct  senses,  as  e.g.
between  blue  and  bitter.  Now  as  regards  (a)  and  (£),  it  will  be
found  that  the  difference  between  two  intensities  of  the  same
quality,  or  between  two  qualities  of  the  same  order,  may  be
itself  a  distinct  presentation  ;  that  is  to  say,  in  passing  from  a
load  of  10  Ib.  to  one  of  20  lb.,  for  example,  or  from  the  sound  of
a  note  to  that  of  its  octave,  it  is  possible  to  experience  the
change  continuously,  and  to  estimate  it  as  one  might  the  distance
between  two  places  on  the  same  road1.  But  nothing  of  this  kind
holds  of  (f)2.  In  passing  from  the  scent  of  a  rose  to  the  sound
of  a  gong  or  a  sting  from  a  bee  we  have  no  such  means*  of
bringing  the  two  into  relation — scarcely  more  than  we  might
have  of  measuring  the  length  of  a  journey  made  partly  on  the
common  earth  and  partly  through  the  looking-glass.  In  (c)t
then,  we  have  only  a  diversity  of  presentations,  but  not  a  special
presentation  of  difference ;  and  we  only  have  more  than  this  in
(a)  or  (b)  provided  the  selected  presentations  occur  together.
We  say  that  we  know  the  'difference'  (i.e.  the  diversity)  between
a  sound  and  a  taste ;  but  what  we  mean  is  simply  that  we  know
what  it  is  to  pass  from  attending  to  the  one  to  attending  to  the

1  Difference  has  here  a  quasi- mathematical  meaning  like  x-x1  and  is  quite  distinct
from  the  diversity  referred  to  under  c. Experimental  psychology  is  largely  concerned
with  such  sensory  estimation  of  'difference.'

2  Common  language  seems  to  recognise  some  connexion  even  here  or  we  should
not  speak  of  harsh  tastes  and  harsh  sounds,  or  of  dull  sounds  and  dull  colours  and  so
forth. All  these,  however,  are  epithets  applied  to  diverse  special  sensations,  probably
on  the  ground  of  similarities  in  the  organic  sensations  accompanying  them.

3  I  have  been  forced  to  use  italics  here  by  way  of  rebutting  a  criticism  of  Professor
Ladd,  which  has  no  point  unless  these  words  and  their  context  are  ignored. Cf.  his
Psychology,  Descriptive  and  Explanatory,  1894,  p.  663.


88  Theory  of  Presentations [CH.  iv,  §  5

other.  It  is  simply  an  experience  of  definite  change.  Change,
however,  implies  continuity,  and  there  is  continuity  here  in  the
movement  of  attention  and  the  affective  state  consequent  on
that,  but  not  directly  in  the  qualities  themselves.

c.  If  red  follows  green  we  may  be  aware  of  a  greater
difference  than  if  red  followed  orange ;  and  we  should  ordi-
narily call  a  lolb.  load  heavy  after  one  of  5  Ib.  and  light  after
one  of  20  Ib.  Facts  like  these  it  is  which  make  the  differential
theory  of  presentations  plausible.  On  the  strength  of  such  facts
Wundt  formulated  a  law  of  relativity,  free,  apparently,  from
the  objections  just  urged  against  Bain's  doctrine.  It  ran  thus  :
"  Our  sensations  afford  no  absolute  but  only  a  relative  measure
of  external  impressions.  The  intensities  of  stimuli,  the  pitch  of
tones,  the  qualities  of  light,  we  apprehend  (empfinden)  in  general
only  according  to  their  mutual  relation,  not  according  to  any
unalterably  fixed  unit  given  along  with  or  before  the  impression
itself1."

But  if  true,  this  law  would  make  it  quite  immaterial  what  the
impressions  themselves  were :  provided  the  relation  continued
the  same,  the  sensation  would  be  the  same  too,  just  as  the  ratio
of  2  to  I  is  the  same  whether  our  unit  be  miles  or  millimetres.
But  in  the  case  of  intensities,  e.g.  there  is  a  minimum  sensibile  and
a  maximum  sensibile.  The  existence  of  such  extremes  is  alone
sufficient  to  turn  the  flank  of  the  thorough-going  relativists  ;  but
besides  these  there  are  instances  enough  of  intermediate  intensi-
ties that  are  directly  recognised.  A  letter-sorter,  for  example,
who  identifies  an  ounce  or  two  ounces  with  remarkable  exactness
identifies  each  for  itself  and  not  the  first  as  half  the  second  ;  of
an  ounce  and  a  half  or  of  three  ounces  he  might  have  a  compara-
tively vague  idea.  And  so  generally  within  certain  limits  of  error,
indirectly  ascertained,  we  can  identify  intensities,  each  for  itself,
neither  referring  to  a  common  standard  nor  yet  to  one  that  varies
from  time  to  time — to  any  intensity,  that  is  to  say,  that  chances
to  be  simultaneously  presented ;  just  as  an  enlisting  sergeant
will  recognise  a  man  fit  for  the  Guards  without  a  yard  measure
and  whether  the  man's  comrades  are  tall  or  short.  As  regards
the  qualities  of  sensations  the  outlook  of  the  relativists  is,  if
anything,  worse.  In  what  is  called  'Meyer's  experiment'  a  tint

1  Physiologische  Psychologic, ist  ed., p.  421  ; the  doctrine reappears in later
editions,  but  no  equally  general  statement  of  it  is  given.


CH.  iv,  §  5]  Relativity  89

that  appears  greenish  on  a  red  ground  will  acquire  an  orange
shade  on  a  ground  of  blue.  But  this  contrast  is  only  possible
within  certain  very  narrow  limits.  In  fact,  the  phenomena  of
colour-contrast,  so  far  from  proving,  distinctly  disprove  that  we
apprehend  the  qualities  of  light  only  according  to  their  mutual
relation.  In  the  case  of  tones  it  is  very  questionable  whether
such  contrasts  exist  at  all.

Summing  up  on  this  particular  doctrine  of  relativity,  of  which
Wundt  is  the  most  distinguished  exponent,  the  truth  seems  to
be  that  in  some  cases  where  two  presentations,  whose  difference
is  itself  presentable,  occur  in  close  connexion,  this  difference — as
we  indirectly  learn — exerts  a  certain  bias  on  our  estimate  of  one
or  other  of  the  two  presentations.  There  is  no  'unalterably  fixed
unit '  certainly ;  but,  on  the  other  hand, '  the  mutual  relations  of
impressions'  are  not  everything.  " Alles  in  der  Welt  steht  in
Verhaltnissen,  besteht  aber  nicht  daraus,"  as  Stumpf  has  happily
said.  In  this  sense,  to  be  sure,  the  psychologist  must  recognise
a  'principle  of  relativity';  but  this  seems  already  sufficiently
implied  in  what  has  been  said  of  the  presentational  continuum
and  its  differentiation.

d.  Relativity  is  often  used  to  denote  what  we  have  called
the  duality  of  experience  and  various  epistemological  con-
sequences that  it  is  supposed  to  involve  as  in  the  distinction  of
phenomenon  and  noumenon,  for  example.  But  there  are  two
results  of  this  relation  that  are  psychologically  important.
Whether  the  nature  of  the  subject  in  any  way  affects  the  quality
of  its  objects  is  very  doubtful,  but  it  certainly  entirely  deter-
mines what  is  called  their  algedonic  character,  their  painfulness
or  pleasantness.  It  also  affects  their  quantitative  characteristics
in  such  wise  that  a  stimulus  that  is  minimal  for  one  subject  may
be  quite  otherwise  for  another :  a  particle  too  light  for  a  man  to
feel  might  break  the  back  of  a  gnat1;  and  again  while  the  man
experienced  but  one  change  the  gnat — with  its  quicker  tempo —
might  experience  many.  But  this  very  relativity  in  giving  a
meaning  to  '  minimal '  presentation,  for  example,  introduces  a
certain  absoluteness — as  we  have  already  noticed — into  imme-
diate experience,  which  contrasts  with  the  thorough-going  re-
lativity of  science.  Without  this  indeed  it  would  be  hard  to  see

1  This  relativity  was  the  basis  of  Aristotle's  famous  doctrine  of 'the  mean.' Cf.
Nic.  Ethics,  II.  vi.  7.


9O  Theory  of  Presentations [CH.  iv,  §  5

how  we  could  ever  come  by  any  conceptual  knowledge  of  time
or  space  at  all.

Subconsciousness : (a)  of  Impressions.

§  6.  The  term  field  of  consciousness*  has  occurred  sundry
times  in  the  course  of  this  exposition  :  it  is  one  of  several
employed  in  describing  what  have  been  incidentally  referred  to
as  'degrees  or  grades  of  consciousness' — a  difficult  and  per-
plexing topic  that  we  must  now  endeavour  further  to  elucidate.
Sailors  steering  by  night  are  said  to  look  at  the  pole-star,  '  the
cynosure  of  every  eye,'  but  this  does  not  prevent  them  from
seeing  the  rest  of  the  starry  vault.  At  a  conversazione  we  may
listen  to  some  one  speaker  while  still  hearing  the  murmur  of
other  voices,  and  while  listening  we  may  also  see  the  speaker
and  thereby  identify  him  the  better.  What  in  these  instances
is  looked  at  or  listened  to  has  been  called  the  focus  of  conscious-
ness, the  rest  of  what  is  heard  or  seen  or  otherwise  presented
being  called  the.  field,  within  which  attention  is  thus  concentrated
or  brought  to  a  point2.  Of  these  objects  beyond  the  focus  we
have  then  only  a  lower  degree  of  consciousness,  and  the  more
'  distant '  they  are  from  the  centre  of  interest  the  fainter  and
obscurer  they  are  supposed  to  be  or  to  become.  Now,  it  is
obvious  that  the  continuity  here  implied,  if  strictly  taken,
logically  commits  us  to  a  field  of  consciousness  'extending'  with
ever  diminishing  intensity  ad  indefinitum :  in  other  words  the
continuity  of  our  presentational  continuum  will  be  thorough-
going, as  it  was  with  Leibniz3.

But  we  have  next  to  notice  certain  new  features  that  have
led  psychologists  to  give  to  the  term  field  of  consciousness  a  more
restricted  meaning.  A  meteor  flashing  across  the  sky  would
certainly  divert  the  helmsman's  attention,  and  for  the  nonce  he
would  look  at  that  and  not  at  the  star  in  the  Little  Bear's  tail ;
a  voice  at  our  elbow  accosting  us,  we  should  turn  to  the  new

1  Professor  Wundt  is  commonly  credited  with  the  introduction  of  this  terminology ;
but  Professor  Titchener  (Psychology  of  Attention  and  Feeling,  1908,  pp.  -225,  368)
gives  many  earlier  instances  of  its  use,  going  back  as  far  as  Abraham  Tucker ;  it  is,
however,  to  be  found  already  in  Chr.  Wolf  and  again  in  Baumgarten  (see  Eisler's
Worterbuch.  s.v.  Blickfldche).

3  According  to  Wundt  the  whole  field  is  said  to  be  perceived,  the  focus  within  it
to  be  apperceived  (cf.  his  P.P.,  6th  ed.,  iii.  p.  307).

3  Cf.  above,  p.  31.


CH.  iv,  §  6] Subconsciousness  of  Impressions  91

speaker  and  listen  to  him,  still  hearing  it  may  be,  but  no  longer
'  following,'  the  discourse  thus  for  us  interrupted.  In  these  cases
a  change  in  the  field  of  consciousness  brings  about  a  non-
voluntary  change  in  the  focus.  But  it  only  does  so  provided  it
is  sufficiently  intense  and  abrupt ;  and — as  already  remarked —
the  more  attention  is  already  concentrated  the  less  effective  a
given  disturbance  will  be1.  A  whole  swarm  of  meteors  might
have  streaked  the  sky  unheeded  while  Ulysses,  life  in  hand,
steered  between  Scylla  and  Charybdis,  just  as  all  the  din  of  the
siege  failed  to  distract  Archimedes  bent  over  his  figures  in  the
sand.  On  the  other  hand,  we  can  voluntarily  transfer  the  focus
of  consciousness  to  any  object  within  the  field,  provided  again
this  is  sufficiently  differentiated  from  the  rest.  But,  more  than
that,  we  can  not  only  of  our  own  motion  turn  to  look  at  or  to  listen
to  what  we  have  only  seen  or  heard — but  not  noticed — before;
we  can  also  look  out  or  listen  for  something  not  as  yet  distin-
guishable, perhaps  not  as  yet  existing  at  all.  And  here  again
the  concentration  of  attention  may  be  maximal ;  as  when  a
shipwrecked  crew  scan  the  horizon  for  a  sail,  or  a  beleaguered
troop  hearken  for  the  oncoming  of  rescue.  Now,  such  anticipated
presentations  as  soon  as  they  are  clearly  discernible  have  already
a  certain  finite  intensity,  and  so  they  are  said  to  have  passed
over  '  the  threshold  ' — to  use  Herbart's  now  classic  phrase — and
to  have  entered  the  field  of  consciousness.  Afterwards,  any  further
increase  in  their  intensity  is  certainly  gradual ;  are  we  then  to
suppose  that,  before  this,  their  intensity  changed  instantly  from
zero  to  a  finite  quantity ;  and  not  rather  that  there  was  an
ultra-liminal  or  sub-liminal  phase  where  too  it  only  changed
continuously  ?  The  latter  alternative  constitutes  the  hypothesis
of  Subconsciousness.

According  to  this  hypothesis  the  total  field  with  which  we
began  is  divided  into  two  parts  by  what  Fechner  emphatically
called  '  the  fact  of  the  threshold.'  and  the  term  field  of  con-
sciousness is  henceforth  restricted  to  that  part  within  which
the  focus  of  consciousness  always  lies,  the  outlying  part  being
the  region  of  Subconsciousness.  Difficulties  now  begin  to  be
apparent.  The  intensity  or  vivacity  of  a  presentation  within
the  field  of  consciousness  depends — we  have  seen  reason  to
think — partly  on  what  we  may  call  its  inherent  or  absolute
1  Cf.  above,  ch.  iii,  p.  63.


92  Theory  of  Presentations [CH.  iv,  §  6

intensity,  partly  on  the  attention  that  it  receives.  But  this
does  not  hold  of  presentations  in  subconsciousness.  These
sub-presentations,  as  we  ought  perhaps  to  call  them,  cannot  be
severally  and  selectively  attended  to,  cannot  be  singled  out  as
direct  objects  of  special  attention.  Many  psychologists  have
accordingly  maintained  not  only  that  they  cannot  with  pro-
priety be  called  presentations,  but  that  they  have  no  strictly
psychical  existence  at  all.  This,  however,  seems  too  extreme
a  view.

In  the  first  place,  if  nothing  of  a  presentational  character  can
exist,  save  in  the  field  of  consciousness  as  thus  circumscribed
by  a  definite  boundary  or  threshold,  a  breach  of  continuity  is
implied  such  as  we  nowhere  else  experience :  even  the  field  of
sight,  from  which  the  metaphor  of  a  field  of  consciousness  is
derived,  has  no  such  definite  margin.  The  threshold  then  is  not
comparable  to  a  mathematical  line  on  opposite  sides  of  which
there  is  an  intensive  discontinuity.  And  experience  shews  that
even  where  it  is  narrowest — where  we  are  all  eyes  or  ears,
intently  expecting  some  signal — it  still  has  an  appreciable
breadth.  This  has  been  amply  proved,  for  example,  by  the
psychophysical  investigations  of  Fechner  and  others.  We  listen,
say,  to  a  certain  sound  as  it  steadily  diminishes ;  at  length  we
cease  to  hear  it.  Again,  we  listen  for  this  same  sound  as  it
steadily  increases  and  presently  just  barely  hear  it.  In  general
it  is  found  that  its  intensity  in  the  former  case  is  less  than  it  is
in  the  latter,  and  there  is  also  in  both  cases  a  certain  margin  of
doubt  between  clear  presence  and  clear  absence;  the  presentation
seems  to  flicker  in  and  out,  now  there  and  now  gone.  Further,
in  comparing  differences  in  sensations — of  weight,  brightness,
temperature,  &c. — we  may  fail  wholly  to  detect  the  difference
between  a  and  b,  b  and  c,  and  yet  the  difference  between  a  and
c  may  be  clearly  perceived.  We  have  thus  to  recognise  the
existence  of  a  difference  between  sensations,  in  cases  where  there
is  no  so-called  '  sensation  of  difference1.'  But  if  this  much  con-
tinuity must  be  admitted  we  can  hardly  fail  to  admit  more.
If  differences  of  presentation  exist  within  the  field  of  conscious-
ness but  beyond  the  utmost  verge  of  the  '  threshold  of  difference}
we  cannot  consistently  deny  the  existence  of  any  presentations
at  all  beyond  the  threshold  of  consciousness.  Finally,  since  the
1  Such  difference  is  then  said  to  be  beyond  the  '  difference  threshold.'


CH.  iv,  §  6] Subconsciousness  of  Impressions  93

field  of  consciousness  varies  greatly  and  often  suddenly  with  the
amount  and  distribution  of  attention,  we  must,  as  already  said,
either  admit  that  such  subconscious  presentations  exist,  or  sup-
pose that  clearly  differentiated  presentations,  presentations  that
is  to  say  of  finite  intensity,  pass  abruptly  into  or  out  of  existence
with  every  such  variation  of  the  field.  It  is  obviously  impossible
to  ascertain  directly  whether  this  does  or  does  not  happen.  But
if  it  did,  the  intensity  of  a  presentation,  so  far  from  being  deter-
mined from  two  sides — the  objective  and  the  subjective — would
be  a  function  of  attention  simply.  Non-voluntary  attention,  which
we  have  regarded  as  primary,  would  disappear  altogether:  a  man
asleep  might  awake  proprio  motu,  but  to  awaken  him  would  be
impossible.

The  hypothesis  of  subconsciousness,  then,  is  in  the  main
nothing  more  than  the  application  to  the  facts  of  presentation  of
the  law  of  continuity.  Its  introduction  into  psychology  was  in
fact  due  to  Leibniz,  who  first  formulated  that  law.  Half  the
difficulties  in  the  way  of  its  acceptance  are  due  to  defective
terminology.  With  Leibniz  consciousness  was  not  coextensive
with  all  psychical  life,  but  only  with  certain  higher  phases  of  it1.
Of  late,  however,  the  tendency  has  been  to  make  consciousness
cover  all  stages  of  mental  development,  and  all  grades  of  presen-
tation, so  that  a  presentation  of  which  there  is  no  consciousness
resolves  itself  into  the  manifest  contradiction  of  an  unpresented
presentation — a  contradiction  not  really  involved  in  Leibniz's
'  unapperceived  perception2.'  Moreover,  the  active  form  of  the
word  '  conscious '  almost  unavoidably  suggests  that  an  '  uncon-
scious mental  modification ' — Hamilton's  phrase — must  be  one
in  which  that  subjective  activity,  variously  called  consciousness,
thinking,  or  attention,  has  no  part  at  all.  But  such  is  not  the

1  The  following  brief  passage  from  his  Principes  de  la  nature  et  de  la  grace  (§  4)
shews  his  meaning :  "  II  est  bon  de  faire  distinction  entre  la  Perception,  qui  est  1'etat
interieur  de  la  Monade  representant  les  choses  externes,  et  t  Apperception,  qui  est  la
Conscience,  ou  la  connaissance  reflexive  de  cet  etat  interieur,  laquelle  n'est  point
donnee  a toutes les  ames,  ni  toujours  d  la  meme  dme. Et  c'est  faute  de  cette
distinction  que  les  Cart^siens  ont  manque,  en  comptant  pour  rien  les  perceptions
dont  on  ne  s'apper£oit  pas,  comme  le  peuple  compte  pour  rien  les  corps  insensibles  "
(Op.  Phil.  Erdmann's  ed.,  p. 715). A  like  distinction  was  made  far  earlier  by
Plotinus  (Enn.  4,  iii.  30),  a  writer  to  whom  Leibniz  sometimes  refers.

2  Provided,  of  course,  there  is  continuity  between  the  two,  as  Leibniz  doubtless
intended. Cf.  Latta,  Leibniz,  The  Monadology,  etc.,  1898,  p.  127;  Rabier,  Psycho-
logic, 3rd  ed.,  1888,  p.  54.


94  Theory  of  Presentations [CH.  iv,  §  6

meaning  intended  when  it  is  said,  for  example,  that  a  soldier  in
battle  is  often  unconscious  of  his  wounds  or  a  scholar  unconscious
at  any  one  time  of  most  of  the  knowledge  'hidden  in  the  obscure
recesses  of  his  mind.'  There  would  be  no  point  in  saying  that  a
subject  is  not  conscious  of  what  is  not  presented  at  all;  but  to  say
that  what  is  presented  lacks  the  intensity  requisite  in  the  given
distribution  of  attention  to  change  that  distribution  appreciably
is  pertinent  enough.  Subconscious  presentations  may  tell  on
conscious  life — as  sunshine  or  mist  tells  on  a  landscape,  or  the
underlying  writing  on  a  palimpsest — although  lacking  either
the  intensity  or  the  individual  distinctness  requisite  to  make
them  definite  features.  Even  were  there  no  facts  to  warrant
this  concept  of  an  ultra-liminal  presentation  of  impressions
it  might  still  claim  a  priori  justification.  For  to  assume  that
there  are  no  presentations  beyond  those  within  the  field  of  con-
sciousness is  as  arbitrary  and  improbable  as  it  would  be  to
suppose — in  the  absence  of  direct  evidence  to  the  contrary — that
there  was  no  vision  or  audition  save  such  as  is  mediated  by
human  eyes  and  ears.  Psychical  magnification  or  diminution
is  not  more  absurd  than  physical,  though  neither  is  possible
without  limit.  We  cannot  fix  the  limit  at  which  the  subconscious
becomes  the  absolutely  unconscious.  The  probability  is  certainly
against  the  assumption  that  the  profoundest  sleep  carries  us
beyond  this  limit,  and  Leibniz  may  have  been  right  in  main-
taining that  even  death  does  not.  Still  such  speculation  does
not  much  concern  empirical  psychology.  But  what  that  does
seem  to  warrant  is  the  existence,  beyond  the  discriminated
differentiations  of  our  continuum,  of  other  possible  differentia-
tions that  form  the  'confused'  background  of  the  field  of
consciousness.  And  we  may  fairly  assume  that  the  nearer  we
approach  to  the  beginning  of  experience  the  more  this  background
predominates,  the  less  there  would  be  of  a  field  of  consciousness
within  it  and  of  a  focus  of  consciousness  within  that.

Subconsdousness : (b)  of  Ideas.

§  7.  The  subconscious  presentation  of  ideas  as  distinct  from
impressions  is  a  still  more  perplexing  as  well  as  a  more  impor-
tant topic,  which  calls  for  special  consideration.  As  we  can
turn  our  attention  to  the  sensory  threshold  and  await  the


CH.  iv,  §  7] Subconsciousness  of  Ideas  95

entrance  of  an  expected  impression,  so  we  may  await  the
emergence  of  a  '  memory-image ' ;  and  again  the  threshold  turns
out  to  be  not  a  mathematically  exact  boundary  but  a  region  of
varying  depth1.  What  we  are  trying  to  recollect  seems  first  to
waver,  now  at  the  tip  of  our  tongue  and  the  next  moment
completely  gone,  then  perhaps  a  moment  afterwards  rising  into
clear  consciousness.  Sometimes  when  asked,  say,  for  the  name
of  a  certain  college  contemporary  we  reply :  I  cannot  tell,  but
I  should  know  his  name  if  I  heard  it.  We  are  aware  that  we
could  '  recognise,'  though  we  cannot '  reproduce."  At  other  times
we  are  confident  that  even  recognition  is  no  longer  possible ;  and
still,  if  we  met  the  man  himself  in  the  old  scenes  and  heard  his
voice,  his  name  might  yet  return.  The  sad  memories  of  a  great
loss  may  continue  as  a  chill  substratum  to  check  the  springs  of
life  like  a  wintry  frost,  long  after  the  blight  of  it  has  disappeared
from  the  surface.  Even  the  imagery  of  a  troubled  dream  will
sometimes  vaguely  haunt  us  throughout  the  day  or  an  odd
fancy  of  the  day,  forgotten  in  a  moment,  resumes  its  place  and
further  unfold  itself  as  soon  as  we  sleep.  And  as  years  increase
upon  us,  we  are  led  to  contrast  the  shallowness  and  rashness  of
youth  with  the  depth  and  stability  that  age  brings  :  "  still  waters
run  deep."  The  field  of  consciousness  is  different  because  of  the
greater  volume  of  subconscious  experience  on  which  it  is  super-
posed, and  with  which  it  is  vitally  continuous.  There  is  less
hopefulness  but  also  often  less  fear,  less  sensitiveness,  but  more
sagacity,  in  a  word,  more  '  presence  of  mind.'

Nevertheless,  it  may  be  urged,  it  is  surely  incredible  that  all
the  incidents  of  a  long  lifetime  and  all  the  items  of  knowledge
of  a  well-stored  mind,  that  may  possibly  recur — 'the  infinitely
greater  part  of  our  spiritual  treasures,'  as  Hamilton  said — are
severally  retained  and  continuously  presented  in  the  form  and
order  in  which  they  were  originally  experienced  or  acquired.
This,  however,  is  not  implied.  Ideas,  in  contrast  to  impressions,
have  always  a  certain  generality.  The  same  image  may  figure
in  very  various  connexions,  as  may  the  same  letter,  for  example,

1  Herbart  and  Fechner  describe  subconscious  presentations  generically  as  existing
below  the  threshold.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  spoken  of  subconscious  impressions
as  existing  beyond  it.  In  view  of  the  important  differences  between  the  two  forms  of
presentations,  primary  and  secondary,  it  seems  convenient  and  justifiable  to  distinguish
ultra-liminal  impressions  from  sub-liminal  ideas.


96  Theory  of  Presentations [CH.  iv,  §  7

in  many  words,  the  same  word  in  many  sentences.  We  cannot
measure  the  literature  of  a  language  by  its  vocabulary,  nor  may
we  equate  the  extent  of  our  '  spiritual  treasures '  when  these  are
successively  unfolded  with  the  psychical  apparatus,  so  to  say,  in
which  they  are  subconsciously  involved1.  Take  the  first  book
of  the  Aeneid,  which,  as  Macaulay  would  say,  every  schoolboy
knows  :  as  subconsciously  involved,  when  the  boy  is  not  thinking
of  it,  his  knowledge  is  more  comparable  to  a  concordance  than
to  the  text  itself,  which  nevertheless  can  be  reproduced  from  it.
In  the  text  the  word  Aeneas  occurs  many  times,  in  the  concor-
dance as  a  heading  but  once.  But  give  him  the  cue  Aeneas
scopulum,  and  the  boy  reels  off  from  the  iSoth  line ;  or  Praecipue
plus  Aeneas,  and  he  starts  with  the  22Oth.  Ask  him,  however,
for  the  5 Both  line;  he  is  probably  helpless,  while  a  dunce  with
the  book  in  his  hand  can  straightway  read  it  out.  Say  instead
Et  pater  Aeneas,  and  the  boy  can  at  once  complete  the  line
while  the  dunce  is  now  helpless.  It  is  a  mistake,  then,  to  suppose
that  all  the  experiences  that  have  successively  occupied  our
attention  are  still  present,  item  for  item  just  as  at  first,  in  this
multum  in  parvo  apparatus  that  we  sometimes  call  our  '  idea-
tional  mechanism.'  Though  its  explicit  revival  is  successional,
occurs,  so  to  say,  in  single  file,  a  whole  scheme — what  Herbart
called  'an  apperception-mass'2 — in  which  many  ideas  are  involved,
may  rise  towards  the  threshold  together3.  When  our  schoolboy,
for  example,  turns  from  classics  to  geography,  the  mention  of
Atlas,  which  might  then  have  recalled  a  Titan,  now  leads  him
to  think  only  of  his  book  of  maps.  And  there  is  a  like  sudden

1  This  doctrine  of  the  involution  and  evolution  of  ideas  we  probably  owe  to  Leibniz.
Herbart  attempted  in  a  very  arbitrary  and  a  priori  fashion  to  develop  it  in  his
psychical  statics  and  dynamics  with  the  result — usual  to  extreme  views — that  later
psychologists  neglected  it  altogether.  There  are  now  signs  of  a  fresh  reaction,  and
we  shall  continually  come  across  evidence  of  the  wide  range  and  great  importance  of
the  doctrine  as  we  proceed.  Professor  Stout's  important  distinction  between  'implicit'
and  'explicit'  apprehension  may  be  cited  as  an  instance.  Analytic  Psychology,  1896,
vol.  i.  p.  95  f.  Cf.  below,  ch.  xii,  §  ^fin.

8  Cf.  below,  ch.  xii,  §  5.

3  Hume  was  already  aware  of  such  subconscious  ideas,  when  in  his  account  of
abstraction  he  says: — "The  word  not  being  able  to  revive  the  idea  of  all  these
individuals  only  touches  the  soul... and  revives  that  custom  which  we  have  acquired
by  surveying  them.  They  are  not  really  and  in  fact  present  to  the  mind,  but  only  in
power;  nor  do  we  draw  them  all  out  distinctly  in  the  imagination,  but  keep  ourselves
in  a  readiness  to  survey  any  of  them,  as  we  may  be  prompted  by  a  present  design  or
necessity."  Treatise,  pt.  I,  §  7,  Green  and  Grove's  ed.,  vol.  i.  p.  328.  Italics  mine.


CH.  iv,  §  7] Subconsciousness  of  Ideas  97

shifting  of  the  substratum  of  our  thoughts,  when,  taking  up  the
morning  paper,  we  glance  first  at  the  foreign  telegrams,  then  at
the  money  market,  and  then  at  the  doings  of  our  political
friends.  Yet  more  remote  than  all,  obscurer  but  more  pervasive,
like  the  clouds  of  cherubs  or  imps  vaguely  limned  in  mediaeval
pictures,  are  the  indefinite  constituents  of  our  emotional  atmo-
sphere, "  gay  motes  that  people  the  sunbeams  "  of  our  cheerfulness
and  make  all  couleur  de  rose,  or  '  horrid  shapes  and  sights  unholy '
that  overcast  the  outlook  when  we  'have  the  blues.'  And  as
attention  relaxes,  these  advance  into  the  foreground  and  become
the  nucleus  of  more  or  less  palpable  hopes  or  fears.

Because  of  the  manifold  forms  into  which  they  may  evolve,
subconscious  images,  while  still  involved,  are  sometimes  called
'  psychical '  or  more  definitely  '  presentational  dispositions.'  The
word  disposition  means  primarily  an  arrangement,  as  when  we
talk  of  the  disposition  of  troops  in  a  battle  or  of  cards  in  a  game  ;
the  disposita,  that  is  to  say,  are  always  something  actual.
Which  of  several  potential  dispositions  will  become  actual,
will  depend  upon  circumstances ;  but  at  least,  as  Leibniz  long
ago  maintained,  "  les  puissances  ve>itables  ne  sont  jamais  des
simples  possibiliteV  What  is  requisite  to  the  realisation  of
a  given  potentiality  is  sometimes  a  condition  to  be  added,
sometimes  it  is  one  to  be  taken  away.  A  lazy  horse  needs  the
spur  to  keep  him  going,  a  restive  horse  the  reins  to  keep  him
still.  Now  presentational  dispositions  we  assume  to  be  always
of  the  latter  sort :  as  Leibniz  went  on  to  say,  "  il  y  a  toujours
de  la  tendance  et  de  1'action1."  These  dispositions  are  processes
or  functions  more  or  less  inhibited,  and  the  inhibition  is  deter-
mined by  their  relation  to  other  psychical  processes  or  functions2.
The  analysis  and  genesis  of  such  presentational  interactions  will
occupy  us  at  length  by  and  by.  It  may  then  be  possible  to
explain  the  gradual  involution  of  what  was  successively  unfolded
in  explicit  consciousness  into  those  combinations  which  Herbart
called  '  apperception-masses,'  combinations  devoid  of  the  con-
crete hints  of  date  and  place  which  are  essential  to  memory.
Meanwhile  the  evidence  adduced — decidedly  cogent  though
admittedly  indirect — together  with  the  difficulties  besetting  the

1  Nouveaux  Essais,  II.  i.  §  9.

2  This  is  the  truth  underlying  Herbart's  psychological  dynamics  which  Leibniz
had  already  adumbrated.

W.  P.  7


98  Theory  of  Presentations  [CH.  iv,  §  7

extreme  view  that  beyond  or  below  the  threshold  of  conscious-
ness there  is  nothing  presentational,  seems  here  again  clearly  to
justify  the  hypothesis  of  subconsciousness.  At  the  same  time
the  principle  of  continuity,  everywhere  of  fundamental  import-
ance when  we  are  dealing  with  reality,  also  forbids  the  attempt
arbitrarily  to  assign  any  limits  to  the  subconscious.

Many  psychologists  have  proposed  to  explain  subconscious
retention  by  habit.  But  it  is  obvious  that  habit  itself  implies
retention  and  is  practically  synonymous  with  disposition1.  It
must  therefore  presuppose  disposita,  if  we  are  to  escape  the
absurdities  of  puissances  ou  facultes  nues,  with  which  in  this  very
connexion  Leibniz  twitted  Locke2.  Yet,  obvious  as  all  this
may  be,  it  is  frequently  ignored  even  by  those  who  are  fond  of
exposing  the  pretended  explanations  of  the  'faculty-psycho-
logists' and  quoting  Moliere  to  confute  them.  Thus  we  find
J.  S.  Mill  arguing :  "  I  have  the  power  to  walk  across  the  room
though  I  am  sitting  in  my  chair  ;  but  we  should  hardly  call  this
power  a  latent  act  of  walking3."  Neither  should  we  call  it  a
power  if  Mill  had  shared  the  fate  of  Widrington  and  '  both  his
legs  been  chopped  off'  or  had  become  paralysed,  or  if,  instead  of
sitting  in  his  chair,  he  had  been  lying  in  his  cradle.  What  we
want  is  the  simplest  psychological  description  of  the  situation
after  the  '  power '  has  been  acquired  by  practice  and  is  still
retained.  Well,  at  any  rate,  it  may  be  said,  he  was,  as  a  matter
of  fact,  sitting  still  and  neither  walking  nor  dancing.  True,  but
let  us  suppose  that  Mrs  Mill  enters  with  a  piece  of  good  news
and  suggests  a  waltz  or  a  pas  seul  by  way  of  giving  vent  to  the
exuberant  emotion  evoked.  The  familiar  steps  would  at  once
rise  in  idea  above  the  threshold  of  consciousness,  and  might  in
less  balanced  minds  straightway  'break  into  action,'  though
inhibited,  it  may  be,  in  this  instance,  by  a  sense  of  philosophic
decorum.  The  situation,  in  brief,  would  be  the  familiar  one
described  by  psychologists  as  'ideo-motor  action.'  In  such  a
case  we  can  be  conscious  of  the  '  idea '  of  the  movement  without
the  movement  actually  ensuing ;  yet  only  in  such  wise  that  the

1  Thus  we  find  Locke  saying  the  "power  or  ability  in  man  of  doing  anything,
when  it  has  been  acquired  by  frequent  doing  the  same  thing,  is  that  idea  we  name
habit;  when  it  is  forward  and  ready  upon  every  occasion  to  break  into  action,  we  call
it  disposition."  Essay,  II.  xxiL  10.

1  Op.  cit.  II.  x.  §  i.

3  Examination  of  Sir  W.  Hamiltoris  Philosophy,  3rd  ed.,  p.  319.


CH.  iv,  §  7] Subconsciousness  of  Ideas  99

idea  is  more  apt  to  pass  over  into  action  the  intenser  it  is,  and
often  actually  passes  over  in  spite  of  us.  As  there  must  be
some  functional  activity  answering  to  this  conscious  presentation  ;
why  may  not  a  much  less  amount  of  it  be  conceived  possible  in
subconscious  presentation  ?

But  Mill,  though  he  talked  of  '  the  power  to  walk,'  was  not
thinking  of  functional  activity  at  all.  For  him,  as  for  some
psychologists  in  our  own  day,  dispositions  were  structural  not
functional.  The  only  '  distinct  meaning  to  be  attached  to  them,'
he  contended,  was  not  that  of  a  subliminal  presentation  of  ideas
but  that  of  'an  unconscious  modification  of  nerves.'  They  answer
then,  strictly  speaking,  not  to  physiological  processes  having
psychological  concomitants  but  to  physical  structures  having,
as  such,  none.  What  Mill  meant  has  been  set  forth  with  more
detail  by  Wundt.  Presentations,  says  Wundt,  are  not  substances
but  functions :  their  physiological  counterparts  also  are  functional,
i.e.  are  the  activities  of  certain  arrangements  of  nerve-cells.
Further,  consciousness  of  the  presentation  and  the  nervous
activity  cease  together.  So  far  then  Wundt  recognises  con-
comitant functions  and  so  far  we  agree,  including  under  con-
sciousness all  degrees  of  subconsciousness  but  not,  of  course,
unconsciousness  or  the  utter  absence  of  consciousness  altogether.
But  continuing  his  exposition,  Wundt  goes  on  to  say  that  the
nervous  activity  leaves  behind  it  a  molecular  modification  of
the  nervous  structure,  which  becomes  more  and  more  permanent
with  exercise,  and  is  such  as  to  facilitate  the  recurrence  of  the
same  functional  activity.  In  other  words  Wundt  next  recognises
the  structural  side  of  what  we  have  called  plasticity  \  and  again
we  shall  agree: — Wherever  there  is  psychical  plasticity  there  is
also  neural  plasticity.  Wundt  however  seems  to  overlook  one
obvious  but  all-important  point :  plasticity  implies  life,  implies
function.  If  then  a  given  functional  activity  entirely  ceases,  it
does  not  'leave  behind  it'  a  structural  plasticity  that  survives
independently.  On  the  contrary  when  the  function  has  com-
pletely lapsed  the  molecular  structure  has  no  longer  any  'power'
to  facilitate  its  recurrence.  The  naturalistic  attempt  to  account
for  function  by  structure,  though  it  is  as  old  as  Lucretius,  has
hitherto  always  broken  down,  and  Wundt  certainly  never  meant
to  defend  it.  Biologically  the  two  are  inseparable;  but  the
functional  activity  must  surely  be  the  formative  principle.  For

7—2


ioo  Theory  of  Presentations [CH.  iv,  §  7

to  assign  this  priority  to  structure — meaning  thereby  molecular
configuration — is  to  accept  the  materialists'  generatio  tzquivoca,
as  Kant  happily  termed  it,  of  life  and  mind  from  inert  '  stuff.'

Again,  the  attempt  to  get  behind  the  psychical  by  talking
about  a  physical  arrangement  of  molecules  predisposing,  is  to
allow  oneself  to  be  misled  by  a  metaphor,  as  if  inert  matter
could  ape  the  living  mind.  There  is  no  predisposition  in  nitric
chloride  to  explode  if  slightly  disturbed — to  take  Wundt's  illus-
tration— analogous  to  an  irascible  man's  outburst  when  slightly
provoked.  Along  with  the  explosion  of  the  chloride  there  is  no
plasticity  such  as  will  facilitate  its  recurrence  as  there  always  is
in  the  after-effects  of  exercise  by  living  things.

Finally  Wundt  seems  to  go  too  far  when  he  contends  that,
whereas  we  may  some  day  know  the  nature  of  his  so-called
'  physical '  disposition,  that  of  the  psychical  disposition,  which
he  nevertheless  recognises,  must  of  necessity  be  for  ever  un-
known, since  the  threshold  of  consciousness  is  also  the  limit
of  internal  experience.  The  existence  of  psychical  dispositions
is  without  immediate  evidence,  certainly  :  the  very  nature  of
subconsciousness  implies  that.  But  it  surely  cannot  be  main-
tained that  the  only  evidence  of  existence  is  that  of  direct
acquaintance  or  distinct  presentation  ?  To  assert  that  in  this
case  is  plainly  to  beg  the  whole  question.  The  distinction
already  pointed  out  between  explicit  and  implicit,  evolved  and
involved,  presentation  cannot  be  simply  ignored.  Presentations
are  not  substances  or  atoms,  Wundt  has  truly  said  ;  but  just  for
that  reason  the  continuity  of  the  presentational  whole  can  never
be  left  out  of  account1.

In  conclusion  : — We  may  take  it  as  conceded  that  wherever
there  is  psychical  process  there  is  also  concomitant  neural  pro-
cess. So  far  it  is  unreasonable  to  assume  discontinuity  between
the  two2.  Also  it  is  now  generally  conceded  that  neural  process
cannot  be  transformed  into  psychical  process,  as  even  Spencer
and  Lewes,  in  common  with  the  older  materialists,  supposed.  In
short,  against  the  attempt  to  supersede  psychical  dispositions  by

1  Cf.  Wundt,  Physiologische  Psychologie,  and  ed.,  1880,  ii.  p.  203  ;  6th  ed.,  1911,
iii.  pp.  304  f.

2  There  are  indeed  certain  neural  processes,  those,  e.g.  of  the  sympathetic  system
of  nerves,  which  normally  tell  on  conscious  life  only  as  determining  the  characters  of
the  generally  sensibility  or  coenaesthesis. But  these  do  not  concern  us  here.


CH.  iv,  §  7] Subconsciousness  of  Ideas  101

physical,  we  find  three  fatal  objections: — (i)  It  simply  ignores
the  indirect  evidence  in  favour  of  subconscious  presentations  and
violates  the  principle  of  continuity.  (2)  It  implicitly  sets  aside
plasticity  as  a  psychological  and  not  merely  a  biological  fact.
In  other  words,  it  is  the  logical  outcome  of  a  psychophysical — or
rather,  a  physicopsychical — theory,  which,  working  primarily
from  the  physical  side,  regards  mind  as  simply  an  epipheno-
menal  and  collateral  product  of  matter.  (3)  In  conformity  with
this  theory,  it  accords  to  voluntary  attention  no  more  initiative
in  the  grouping  of  ideas  than  belonged  to  non-voluntary  atten-
tion in  the  reception  of  the  original  impressions :  as  the  one
admits  of  only  a  physical  explanation,  so,  it  is  held,  does  the
other.  Such  a  physicopsychical  theory  is  appropriate  only  to
presentationism,  a  doctrine  that,  as  we  proceed,  we  shall  find  to
be  more  and  more  at  variance  with  facts.  If  the  so-called  'in-
teraction of  presentations'  is  never  altogether  independent  of
voluntary  attention  it  can  never  be  accounted  for  by  physiology
alone,  and  consequently  the  dispositions  that  only  arise  through
such  interaction  cannot  be  so  accounted  for  either.


CHAPTER V

SENSATION AND MOVEMENT
Definition  of  Sensation.

§  i.  On  the  view  of  experience  here  maintained,  we  are
bound  to  challenge  the  physiological  method,  still  widely  current,
of  describing  sensations  as  due  to  physical  stimuli.  The
following  definition,  given  by  Bain,  may  be  taken  as  a  type : —
"  By  sensations,  in  the  strict  meaning,  we  understand  the  mental
impressions,  feelings,  or  states  of  consciousness  following  on  the
action  of  external  things  on  some  part  of  the  body,  called  on
that  account,  sensitive1."  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  what  the
psychologist  calls  sensibility  has  as  its  invariable  concomitant
what  physiologists  call  sensibility,  or  what  the  more  careful  of
them  call  irritability ;  and,  true  again,  that  this  irritability  is
invariably  preceded  by  a  physical  process  called  stimulation.
But  the  converse  statements  are  not  necessarily  true :  there
may  be  stimulation  and  no  consequent  irritation,  irritation  and
no  concomitant  sensation.  The  three  processes  are  then  certainly
distinct,  and  it  is  equally  certain  that  the  last  alone  enters  into
immediate  experience.  Nevertheless,  it  is  urged,  why  not
recognise  a  connexion  that  actually  obtains ;  since  otherwise
sensation  must  remain  unexplained?  Well,  in  the  first  place,
such  'psychophysical'  connexion  is  not  a  psychological  explana-
tion :  it  cannot  be  turned  directly  to  account  in  psychology,
either  analytic  or  genetic.  Next,  the  psychological  fact  called
sensation  always  is,  and  at  bottom  always  must  be,  independently
ascertained  ;  for,  as  said,  the  physiological  'neurosis'  or  irritation
has  not  necessarily  a  concomitant '  psychosis '  or  sensation,  and,

1  Senses  and  Intellect,  4th  ed.,  1894,  p.  101.  In  his  shorter  work,  Mental  and
Moral  Science  (1868,  p.  27),  Bain  said  not  'following  on,'  but  'resulting  from'  the
action  of  external  things,  &c.


CH.  v,  §  i]  Definition  of  Sensation  103

strictly  dealt  with,  affords  no  hint  of  such.  Finally,  this  psycho-
logical inexplicability  of  sensation  is  a  fact  of  the  utmost  moment:
it  answers  to  what  we  call  reality  in  the  primary  sense  of  the
term.  The  psychophysicist,  in  setting  out  to  explain  sensation,
has — unawares  to  himself — left  this  fundamental  reality  behind
him.  For  it  belongs  essentially  to  individual  experience,  and
this — in  assuming  the  physical  standpoint — he  has  of  course
transcended.

Nevertheless  the  mistake  of  method  that  here  reveals  itself
was  perhaps  inevitable ;  for  the  facts  of  another's  sense-organs
and  their  physical  excitants  must  have  obtruded  themselves  on
observation  long  before  the  reflective  attitude  was  advanced
enough  to  make  strictly  psychological  analysis  possible.  The
psychophysical  standpoint,  that  is  to  say,  was  attained  before
the  purely  psychological1;  and  the  consequent  bias  is  only  now
in  process  of  correction.  A  series  of  physical  processes,  first
without  and  then  within  the  organism — of  ethereal  or  aerial
vibrations,  of  neural  and  cerebral  excitations,  for  example, — was
the  starting-point.  What  comes  first,  immediately,  and  alone,  in
the  individual's  experience,  and  is  there  simply  and  positively
real,  was  then  misinterpreted  as  subjective  modification,  mental
impression,  species  sensibilis,  or  the  like.  For  from  the  days
of  Democritus  down  to  our  own  the  same  crude  metaphor
has  prevailed  without  essential  variation.  And  here  the
saying  holds :  Nulla  vestigia  retrorsum.  Into  the  man's
head  the  whole  world  goes,  including  the  head  itself.  Such
thorough-going  '  introjection '  affords  no  ground  for  subsequent
'  projection.'

Thus  the  endeavour  to  explain  sensation  has  clearly  over-
reached itself:  the  external  object  or  thing  that  was  supposed
to  cause  sensations,  and  to  be  therefore  distinct  from  them,  was
in  the  end  wholly  resolved  into  these  and  regarded  as  built  up
out  of  them  by  association  (Mill)  or  by  apperceptive  synthesis
(Kant).  But  no  'mental  chemistry,'  no  initial  alchemy  of
'  forms,'  can  generate  objective  reality  from  '  feelings '  or  sense-
impressions  as  psycho-physically  defined*.  A's  experience  as  it
is  for  B  is  not  real,  immediately  known,  but  inferential.  If  now

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  i,  §  i.

a  Nothing  shews  this  more  plainly  than  the  newly-coined  term,  epiphenomenon,
now  applied  in  this  connexion.


IO4  Sensation  and  Movement [CH.  v,  §  i

the  grounds  of  B's  inference,  which  are  the  only  immediate
realities  for  him,  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  causes  of  which  A's
immediate  experiences  are  merely  effects,  then  B's  experience
and  A's  are  on  a  wholly  different  footing.  When  A  treats  B's
experience  in  the  same  fashion  we  get  the  world  in  duplicate :
(i)  as  original  and  outside,  i.e.  as  cause,  and  (2)  as  copied  within
each  percipient's  head,  i.e.  as  distinct  effect.  But  when  B  inter-
prets his  own  experience  as  he  had  interpreted  A's,  we  seem
to  have  lost  the  one  real  world  altogether.  In  presence  of
this  dilemma,  the  philosophers  of  our  time,  as  already  said,
are  feeling  it  needful  to  revise  their  psychology.  The  question
of  method  is  vital.  If  the  psychophysical  standpoint  were  the
more  fundamental,  psychology  would  be  based  on  physiology,
and  the  old  concept  of  sensation  might  stand.  But  what  in
that  event  would  become  of  epistemology  it  is  not  easy  to  say.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  exclusive  business  of  psychology
to  analyse  and  trace  the  development  of  individual  experience
as  it  is  for  the  experiencing  individual,  then — however  much
neurological  evidence  may  be  employed  as  a  means  of  ascertain-
ing psychological  facts — the  facts  themselves  must  be  scrupu-
lously divested  of  all  physical  implications.  The  psychophysical
method  then  takes  a  secondary  place,  and  the  objective  reality  of
'  sensory '  presentations  stands  unimpeached.

The  duality  of  subject  and  object  in  experience  compels  us
also  to  protest  against  the  description  of  sensations  as  '  states  of
consciousness.'  Since  it  is  the  subject,  not  the  object  that  is
conscious,  the  term  state  of  consciousness  implies  strictly  a
subjective  reference  ;  and  so  is  inapplicable  to  sensations,  unless
they  are  regarded  as  subjective  modifications,  either  affective  or
active.  The  former  view  would  identify  sensation  with  feeling,
and  this — for  reasons  already  given — we  must  disallow.  But
it  is  true  that  a  sensation,  like  other  presentations,  implies  the
subjective  activity  we  call  attention ;  it  is  not,  however,  a
modification  or  state  of  this  activity,  but  the  object  of  it.  This
relation  is  expressed  in  German  by  means  of  the  distinction
generally  of  Vorstellen  and  Vorstellung  and  in  the  present  case
of  Empfinden  and  Empfi ndung ;  and  German  psychology  has
gained  in  clearness  in  consequence.  The  distinction  of  con-
ception and  concept  (conceit)  is  to  be  found  in  older  English
writers  and  was  revived  by  Sir  W.  Hamilton,  who  suggested


CH.  v,  §  2] Characteristics  of  Sensations  105

also  the  parallel  distinction  of  perception  and  percept  It
would  be  a  great  gain  if  there  were  a  corresponding  pair  of
terms  to  distinguish  between  '  the  sensing  act '  and  the  object
'  sensed,'  as  some  have  been  driven  to  say.  Reception  and
recept  at  once  occur  and  seem  unexceptionable — apart,  of  course,
from  their  novelty1.  At  any  rate,  if  we  are  to  rest  content
with  our  present  untechnical  terminology  we  must  understand
sensations  to  mean  objective  changes  as  they  first  break  in  upon
the  experience  of  our  psychological  individual ;  in  this  respect
Locke's  figurative  term  '  impression '  has  a  certain  appropriate-
ness. So  regarded,  we  may  call  them  also  simple  presentations.
Whether  any  of  our  sensations  now  are  actually  simple  as  sensa-
tions is  questionable.  Certainly  many  that  are  commonly  taken
to  be  such  prove  to  be  complex.  But  we  shall  best  prepare  for  the
discussion  of  this  question  by  considering  first  the  characteristics
that  what  we  ordinarily  call  a  sensation  is  found  to  possess.


Characteristics  of  Sensations.

§  2.  A  single  sensation  we  find  has  not  only  a  determinate
quality  but  it  is  also  quantitatively  determined  in  respect  of
intensity,  protensity  (or  duration)  and  extensity2.  A  plurality
of  properties,  it  may  be  said,  straightway  implies  complexity  of
some  sort.  This  is  obvious  and  undeniable :  psychological — as
distinct  from  psychical 3 — analysis  of  simple  sensations  is  possible,
and  the  description  just  given  is  reached  by  means  of  it.  Such
analysis,  however,  presupposes  the  comparison  of  many  sensations ;

1  Reception  does  not  in  English  suggest  the  taking  back  of  the  Latin  recipere ;  it
expresses  only  the  comparative  passivity  of  sense. In  contrast  to  percipere  (to  take
entire  possession  of)  it  implies  the  absence  of  that  assimilation  which  is  essential  to
perception ;  and  finally  it  contrasts  appropriately  with  retention. Romanes  proposed
to  use  the  term  '  recept '  to  distinguish  what  are  often  called  '  generic  images '  from
concepts  proper;  but  in  view  of  the  English  meaning  of  reception  there  is  no  special
fitness  in  this  suggestion. I  cannot  but  hope  that  some  day  this  term  may  obtain
currency  in  the  sense  here  proposed,  and  am  pleased  to  note  that  Professor  Sherrington
is  leading  the  way  from  the  physiological  side.

2  It  is  interesting  to  find  Kant  using  these  three  terms  together  in  a  like  sense.
Cf.  Critique  of  the  Pure  Reason,  Max  Muller's  trans.,  i.  p.  69  fin.

8  This  distinction,  though  continually  overlooked,  is  vitally  important.  By
psychological  analysis  we  mean  such  analysis  as  the  psychological  observer  can
reflectively  make,  by  psychical  analysis  only  such  analysis  as  is  possible  in  the
immediate  experience  of  the  subject  observed.


io6  Sensation  and  Movement [CH.  v,  §  2

but  to  the  complexity  it  discloses  there  is  no  answering  plurality
discernible  in  the  immediate  experience  of  a  single  sensa-
tion. To  make  this  clearer  let  us  start  from  a  case  in  which  such
plurality  can  be  directly  verified.  In  a  handful  of  rose  petals
we  are  aware  at  once  of  a  definite  colour,  a  definite  odour  and
a  definite  '  feel.'  Here  there  is  a  plurality  (a  +  b  +  c),  any  item  of
which  can  be  withdrawn  from  our  immediate  experience  without
prejudice  to  the  others;  for  we  can  close  the  eyes,  hold  the  nose,
or  drop  the  petals  on  the  table.  Let  us  now  turn  to  the  colour
alone ;  this  we  say  has  a  certain  quality,  intensity,  extensity,  &c.
But  not  only  have  we  not  one  sense  for  quality,  another  for
intensity,  another  for  extensity:  we  cannot  reduce  the  intensity
to  zero  and  yet  have  the  quality  remaining  ;  nor  can  we  suppress
the  quality  and  still  retain  the  extensity.  In  this  case  then
what  we  have  is  not  a  plurality  of  presentations  (a  +  b  +  c),  but
a  single  presentation  having  a  plurality  of  attributes  (abc)  so
related  that  the  absence  of  any  one  annihilates  the  whole.  But
though,  as  already  said,  such  single  presentation  gives,  as  it
stands,  no  evidence  of  this  plurality,  yet  it  is  to  be  remembered
that  in  actual  experience  we  do  not  deal  with  sensations  in
isolation ;  here,  accordingly,  we  find  evidence  in  plenty  to
justify  our  psychological  analysis.  In  innumerable  cases  we
experience  varieties  of  intensity  with  little  or  no  apparent
change  of  quality,  as  happens,  for  example,  when  a  sounding
pitch-pipe  is  moved  towards  or  away  from  the  ear ;  and  con-
tinuous changes  of  quality  without  any  change  of  intensity,  as
happens  when  the  pipe  is  shortened  or  lengthened  without  any
alteration  of  position.  We  may  have  tactual  or  visual  sensations
which  vary  greatly  in  extensity  without  any  striking  change  of
quality,  and  we  may  have  such  sensations  in  every  possible
variety  of  quality  without  any  changes  of  extensity.  Sudden
and  intense  sensations  of  whatever  quality  tend  to  startle  us  into
attending ;  whereas  liminal  sensations,  even  when  sudden,  are
only  discernible  when  attention  is  definitely  concentrated  upon
them.

But  such  experiences  besides  revealing  the  diverse  character-
istics of  a  sensation  may  serve  also  to  bring  out  the  mutual
relations  of  these  characteristics.  In  contrast  with  its  quality,  the
intensity,  extensity,  and  protensity  of  a  sensation  might  be  classed
together  as  quantitative.  Again,  in  contrast  to  the  indefinite  and


CH.  v,  §  2] Characteristics  of  Sensations  107

seemingly  irreducible  variety  in  the  qualities  of  specific  sensations,
their  quantitative  characteristics  have  severally  a  homogeneity
and  generality  which  led  Kant  to  treat  them  as  epistemologically
a  priori.  All  percepts,  he  said  in  effect,  have  extensive  (spatial
and  temporal)  and  intensive  magnitude.  Space  and  time,  though
not  indeed  the  same  as  extensity  and  protensity,  nevertheless
presuppose  them  as  simpler  and  more  fundamental  facts.  To  the
psychological  analysis  of  Kant's  day  this  however  was  unknown:
in  substituting  the  one  pair  for  the  other  then  we  are  only
bringing  Kant's  epistemological  principles,  his  so-called 'Axioms
of  Intuition '  into  line  with  our  present  knowledge.  The  first  of
these  axioms  is  for  us  tantamount  to  saying  that  every  sensation
as  a  differentiation  of  the  presentational  continuum  partakes  of
the  extensity  which  belongs  to  it ;  and  the  second  means  for  us
simply  that  such  differentiation  as  a  change  of  process  involves
duration.  The  title  of  Kant's  next  epistemological  principle  is
suggestive  :  he  calls  it  '  Anticipations  of  Perception.'  He  says,
in  effect :  "  That  every  sensation  and  the  phenomenal  reality
corresponding  to  it  must  have  intensive  magnitude  or  degree
— this  is  a  point  we  can  (epistemologically)  anticipate ;  what
specific  qualities  there  will  be  we  cannot  (in  any  way)  anticipate."
Of  qualities  therefore  in  our  sense  Kant  says  nothing.  But,  in
bringing  the  intensity  of  sensations  into  close  relation  with  reality
or  what  he  calls  'the  transcendental  matter  of  all  objects1'  as
'  things  by  themselves,'  he  seems  unwittingly  to  suggest  that,
though  experience  alone  can  disclose  what  qualities  sensations
will  have,  we  can  at  least  'anticipate'  that  they  will  have  qualities.
In  other  words,  their  'matter'  or  intensity  will  have  particular
'  forms  '  like  the  species  intentionales  of  the  scholastics  or  'sensible
ideas '  of  Locke2,  though  we  cannot  tell  a  priori  what.  Over  and
above  the  quantitative  or  '  mathematical '  constituents  of  ex-
perience, which  Kant's  epistemological  exposition  explicitly
recognised,  qualitative  constituents  are,  then,  also  implied — a
position  entirely  in  accord  with  psychological  facts.  But  at  this

1  Cf.  in  the  Critique  the  section  on  Schematism,  Mttller's  trans,  p.  \if>fin.\  and
also  ch.  ii,  §  4,  p.  49  above.

2  Cf.  "Anticipations  of  Perception,"  Max  Miiller's  trans,  p.  149. At  an  earlier
period  Kant  was  more  explicit: "In  alien  Erkenntnissen  ist  am  Object: (i)  die
Materie  und  die  Form  derselben,  d.  i.  die  Qualitat...zu  bemerken  " — that  is  to  say,
Quality  was  recognised  as  a  category. (Reflexionen  Kants  *ur  Kritik  der  reinen
Vernunft,  edited  by  B.  Erdmann,  p.  173.)


io8  Sensation  and  Movement [CH.  v,  §  3

point  a  number  of  debateable  questions  arise  to  which  we  must
now  turn. And  first,  the  one  already  raised  : —

Differentiation  of  Sensations.

§  3.  Can  we  regard  the  sharply  differentiated  qualities  of  our
present  sensations  as  primordial,  or  must  we  not  rather  seek  for
evidence  of  their  gradual  elaboration,  possibly  from  a  single
primitive  sensation  ?  Some  psychologists  have  not  only  adopted
the  latter  alternative  but  have  pushed  it  to  such  lengths  as  to
assume  the  existence  of  absolute  '  units  of  sensibility,'  all
identically  the  same.  They  then  explain  the  unlikenesses  in
our  existing  sensations  as  resulting  "from  unlike  modes  of
integration  of  these  absolute  units1."  This  is  psychological
atomism  of  the  extremest  type :  its  physical  analogue  is  to
be  found  not  in  the  several  chemical  elements  with  which  we
are  familiar  but  in  the  single  pristine  element  out  of  which
these  are  thought  to  be  compounded.  The  sole  evidence
advanced  for  such  simple  primordial  sensation  is  physiological,
the  supposed  existence  of  a  single  nerve  shock  or  'neural  tremor,'
And  it  is  true  that  in  an  extirpated  nerve  what  is  known  as  the
'negative  variation'  is  approximately  such  an  isolated  event
of  uniform  quality.  But  the  same  cannot  be  said  of  what
happens  during  the  stimulation  of  a  nerve  in  situ,  with  its
peripheral  and  central  connexions  still  intact.  We  have  then
to  deal  with  an  event  which  varies  with  the  character  of  the
nerve-terminals  and  with  the  state  of  the  whole  organism  at
the  time.  And  psychologically  in  such  a  case  we  should  be
dealing  with  a  differentiation  of  our  presentational  continuum,
no  two  of  which  differentiations  are  ever  entirely  the  same2.

The  only  evidence  apparently  to  which  we  can  safely  appeal
in  this  inquiry  is  that  furnished  by  biology.  Protoplasm,  the
so-called  '  physical  basis  of  life,'  is  amenable  to  stimulation  by
every  form  of  physical  agency — mechanical,  chemical,  thermal,

1  Cf.  G.  H.  Lewes,  Problems  of  Life  and  Mind,  vol.  iii.  (1879),  pp.  250  sqq. ;
H.  Spencer,  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol.  i.  (1870),  §  60.

2  In agreement  with  this  a  brilliant  advocate  of  psychological  atomism,  after
effectively  exposing  in  Leibnizian  fashion  the  latent  absurdities  of  a  purely  quantitative
atomism,  decides  for  the  opposite  extreme,  maintaining  that  the  psychical  Urelemente,
unlike  the  physical,  are  all  qualitatively  different. And  of  the  two,  this  seems  cer-
tainly the  more  philosophical  position. Cf.  Miinsterberg,  Grundzuge  der  Psychologic,
1900,  pp.  266  ff.,  369  ff.


CH.  v,  §  3] Differentiation  of  Sensations  109

photical,  electrical — with  the  single  exception  of  magnetism ;  and
in  keeping  with  this  fact  it  is  found  that  unicellular  organisms
respond,  and  respond  in  ways  more  or  less  peculiar,  to  each  of
these  possible  modes  of  excitation.  Since,  so  far  as  is  known,
there  is  no  morphological  separation  of  function  in  these  lowest
forms  of  life,  it  is  reasonably  assumed  that  the  single  cell  acts
the  part  of  '  universal  sense-organ.'  Again,  it  is  reasonably
assumed  that  the  advance  to  such  complete  differentiation  of
sense-organs  as  we  find  among  the  higher  vertebrates  has  been
a  gradual  advance.  Numerous  facts  can  now  be  adduced  of
the  occurrence  of  '  transitional '  or  '  alternating '  sense-organs
among  the  lower  forms  of  multicellular  animals ;  organs,  that
is  to  say,  which  are  normally  responsive  to  two  or  more  kinds
of  stimuli,  and  thus  hold  an  intermediate  position  between  the
universal  sense-organ  of  the  Protozoa  and  the  special  sense-
organs  of  the  Mammalia1.  For  example,  a  group  of  cells
which  would  respond  towards  all  stimuli  impartially,  were  they
independent  unicellular  organisms,  become,  as  an  organ  in  a
multicellular  organism,  amenable  only  to  mechanical  or  only  to
chemical  stimuli, — become,  that  is  to  say,  an  organ  of  touch
and  of  hearing,  or  an  organ  of  taste  and  of  smell.  Finally,
when  differentiation  is  sufficiently  advanced,  the  group  ends
by  becoming  exclusively  the  organ  of  one  specific  sense,  touch
or  hearing  in  the  one  case,  taste  or  smell  in  the  other2.  Of

1  Cf.  W.  A.  Nagel,  "  Die  Phylogenese  specifischer  Sinnesorgane,"  Bibliotheca
zoologica  (1894),  pp. i — 42.

2  And  when  at  length  this  stage  of  sensory  differentiation  is  reached,  then,  any
stimulus  of  whatever  kind,  if  effective  at  all,  may  occasion  sensations  of  the  same
quality :  e.g.  whether  the  visual  apparatus  is  affected  by  light,  by  mechanical  pressure,
or  by  electric  shock,  visual  sensations  equally  result. Facts  of  this  kind  have  led  to
the  doctrine  of  the  '  specific  energy  of  nerves '  which  was  first  propounded  by  Johannes
Muller  and  is  still  subjudice. Were  we  to  accept  this  doctrine  without  reservation  and
therefore  to  apply  it  to  the  lowest  forms  of  life,  where  the  organism  functions  as '  universal
sense-organ,'  we  should  have  to  conclude  that  primitive  sensations  are  entirely  without
qualitative  diversity. But  the  variety  in  the  reactions  to  stimulation  even  among  the
Protozoa — and  these  furnish  all  the  evidence  of  sensation  we  have  in  this  case — makes
against  such  a  conclusion. Moreover  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  explain  the  diversity
we  now  experience  through  our  several  senses  collectively,  if  primordial  sensations
were  absolutely  homogeneous. On  the  other  hand  it  would  be  equally  difficult  to
explain  our  supposed  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  diverse  stimuli  if  sensory  quali-
ties were  entirely  independent  of  this  diversity — if,  for  example,  one  and  the  same
stimulus  by  affecting  different  sense-organs  could  give  rise  to  all  the  sensory  qualities
that  we  experience. It  seems  obvious  then  that  the  doctrine  of  '  specific  energies '


no  Sensation  and  Movement [CH.  v,  §  3

course  the  imperfectly  specialised  sensations,  say  of  the  leech,
and  still  more  the  wholly  unspecialised  sensations  of  the  amoeba,
cannot  be  regarded  as  blends  of  some  or  all  of  those  which  we
are  said  to  receive  through  our  five  senses.  Differentiation  is
not,  either  biologically  or  psychologically,  the  same  as  separation ;
nor,  as  has  been  already  said,  is  the  objective  continuum,  which
it  presupposes,  the  same  as  a  confused  aggregation.  On  the
contrary,  there  is  always  objective  (as  well  as  subjective)  con-
tinuity even  in  the  most  advanced  experience.  At  the  same
time,  we  must  admit  also  that,  even  in  the  most  elementary
experience  there  is  always  some  differentiation1.

Keeping  both  these  points  in  view,  we  are  led  to  suppose  that
sensations  at  the  outset  corresponded  very  closely  with  what  is
called  the  general  vital  action  of  contact,  light,  heat,  &c.  as
distinct  from  the  action  of  these  stimuli  on  specially  differentiated
sensory  apparatus.  The  genial  light,  warmth  and  freshness
which  we  seek  as  exhilarating,  or  the  sultry  glare  and  stifling
heat  which  we  avoid  as  depressing,  furnish  us  with  sensations  of
this  kind,  and  we  can  readily  imagine  them  to  exist — nay  we
can  actually  experience  them — without  any  apprehension  of
the  specific  qualities  we  may  now  discern  along  with  them.
The  same  may  be  said  of  the  relish  or  nausea  that  we  now
know  as  accompanied  by  definite  tastes  or  smells,  and  of  the
shudders  now  produced  by  scratching  a  pencil,  or  rubbing  a  dry
sponge,  over  a  slate.  In  many  cases  we  are  still  only  aware
of  some  change  of  '  symptom,'  more  or  less  invigorating  or  de-
pressing, but  too  vague  and  unlocalised  to  justify  the  psycho-
logical use  of  the  term  '  organic.'  This  remark  may  be  extended

requires  limitation.  And  looking  closer  we  find  that  the  facts  on  which  the  doctrine
is  based  at  once  suggests  one  limitation  of  importance.  We  find,  that  is  to  say,  that
stimuli  are  divided  into  two  classes,  adequate  and  inadequate.  Thus  light-waves  are
the  adequate  stimuli  for  visual  sensations  and  sound-waves  for  auditory  sensations ;
electrical  stimulation  and  mechanical  pressure  are  inadequate,  though  effective  stimuli
for  both ;  and  so  on  for  all  the  other  senses.  In  other  words  every  sense  normally
functions,  and  has  assuredly  been  developed,  solely  en  rapport  with  its  natural  or
'  adequate '  form  of  stimulus :  the  effects  now  found  to  result  from  inadequate  stimuli
presuppose  this  adaptation  and  development,  which  they  do  nothing  to  explain  and
could  never  have  produced,  though  they  are  impossible  without  them.  In  short  the
range  of  this  doctrine  is  entirely  physiological :  it  has  no  apparent  relevance  either
in  biology  or  psychology.  And  even  in  physiology  it  is  not  true  that  any  inadequate
stimulus  will  produce  any  sensation  :  it  may  be  ineffective  altogether.
1  Cf.  above,  ch.  iv,  §  2,  p.  79.


CH.  v,  §  3] Differentiation  of  Sensations  1 1 1

to  the  use  even  of  '  somatic/  if  somatic  be  taken  to  imply  any
experience  of  the  distinction  of  the  organism  from  external  bodies.
On  the  other  hand  those  who  prefer  to  speak  of  general  feeling
(Gemeingefuhl)  rather  than  of  general  sensation  (Gemeinempfin-
dung)  or  to  use  the  two  terms  indifferently  are  in  the  opposite
extreme,  as  has  been  already  said1,  if  they  assume  that  experience
consists  primarily  of  purely  affective  states  (Zustdnde)  without
objective  antecedents  or  consequents  or  if  they  regard  the  two  as
originally  identical.  What  is  obviously  lacking  at  the  outset,
when  differentiation  is  still  inchoate,  is  not  sensation  as  objective
in  distinction  from  feeling  as  subjective,  but  rather  the  specific
objective  diversity  which  advancing  differentiation  brings.  But
the  vagueness  and  generality  of  the  experience  described  is  no
reason  for  confusing  the  concepts  used  in  its  description.  Again,
though  less  definitely  discriminated,  the  earlier,  and  what  we
call  the  lower,  sensations  are  not  any  less  concrete  than  the
later  and  higher.  They  have  been  called  general  rather  than
specific ;  not  because  psychologically  they  lack  any  essential
characteristic  of  sensation  which  those  acquired  later  possess ;
but  simply  because  physiologically  they  are  not,  like  these,
correlated  to  special  sense-organs.

Short,  however,  of  resolving  such  sensations  into  combinations
of  one  primordial  modification  of  consciousness,  if  we  could  con-
ceive such,  there  are  many  interesting  facts  which  point  clearly
to  a  complexity  that  we  can  seldom  directly  detect.  Several  of
our  supposed  sensations  of  taste,  e.g.,  are  complicated  with
sensations  of  touch  and  smell :  thus  the  pungency  of  pepper
and  the  dryness  of  wine  are  tactual  sensations,  and  their  spicy
flavours  are  really  smells.  How  largely  smells  mingle  with
what  we  ordinarily  take  to  be  simply  tastes  is  effectively  brought
home  to  us  by  a  severe  cold  in  the  head,  as  this  temporarily
prevents  the  access  of  exhalations  to  the  olfactory  surfaces.
The  difference  between  the  smooth  feel  of  a  polished  surface
and  the  roughness  of  one  that  is  unpolished,  though  to  direct
introspection  an  irresolvable  difference  of  quality,  probably
answers  to  the  fact  that  several  nerve-terminations  are  excited
in  each  case :  where  the  sensation  is  one  of  smoothness  all  are
stimulated  equally  ;  but  where  it  is  one  of  roughness  the  ridges
compress  the  nerve-ends  more,  and  the  hollows  compress  them

1  Cf.  ch.  ii,  §  3,  pp.  44  f-


112  Sensation  and  Movement [CH.  v,  §  3

less,  than  the  level  parts  do. Hence  we  infer  that  such  sensations
are  really  compounds  of  several.

The  most  striking  instance  in  point,  however,  is  furnished
by  the  differences  in  musical  sounds,  to  which  the  name  timbre
is  given.  To  the  inattentive  or  uninstructed  ear  notes  or  '  com-
pound tones '  appear  to  be  only  qualitatively  diverse  and  not  to
be  complexes  of  simple  tones.  Yet  it  is  possible  with  attention  and
practice  to  distinguish  these,  as  'partial  tones,'  in  a  note  produced
on  one  instrument,  a  horn,  say,  and  to  recognise  that  they  are
different  from  those  of  the  same  note  produced  on  a  different
instrument,  for  example,  a  violin.  In  like  manner  many  persons
believe  that  they  can  discriminate  in  certain  colours,  hence
called  'mixed/  the  elementary  colours  of  which  they  are  held
to  be  composed  ;  red  and  yellow,  for  example,  in  orange,  or  blue
and  red  in  violet ;  and  the  vocabularies  of  most  languages
seem  to  bear  them  out  in  the  frequency  of  terms  such  as  bluish
green,  yellowish  green,  and  the  like.  It  is  at  any  rate  certain
that  orange  resembles  red  on  the  one  hand  and  yellow  on  the
other ;  it  very  naturally  therefore  reminds  us  of  these  colours,
between  which  in  the  colour  spectrum  it  invariably  stands.
But  it  is  also  certain  that  we  cannot  distinguish  two  colours  in
orange  or  purple  in  the  sense  in  which  we  distinguish  partial  tones
in  a  note  or  notes  in  a  chord.  Yes,  it  may  be  replied,  but  that
only  amounts  to  saying  that  the  complex  colour  is  not  a  plurality :
it  does  not  prove  that  it  is  not  a  blend  or  mixture  of  simple
or  primary  colours — which  is  all  that  is  maintained.  In  other
words  the  note,  like  the  chord,  is  a  sensation-complex,  the
secondary  colour  is  a  complex  sensation.  If  now  from  the  fact
that  such  a  secondary  colour  resembles  the  primary  colours  on
either  side  of  it  we  could  straightway  infer  that  it  must  consist
of  both,  the  question  would  be  positively  settled.  To  many  this
has  seemed  a  valid  argument ;  nevertheless,  as  we  shall  see  later
on1,  in  the  particular  case  of  sensory  continua  this  argument  fails
to  apply.  But  we  may  see  at  once  that  if  this  argument  were
generally  valid  it  would  force  us  to  conclude  that  a  tone,  since
this  also  resembles  the  two  between  which  it  is  intermediate,
ought  to  be  a  blend  of  both  ;  whereas,  in  fact,  as  Ebbinghaus
pointed  out2, the  tone  although  as  regards  pitch  having  a  certain

1  Cf.  below,  ch.  xiii,  §  2.

2  H.  Ebbinghaus,  Grundzuge  der  Psychologie,  3te  Auf.,  1911,  i.  p.  201  Jin,


CH.  v,  §  3] Differentiation  of  Sensations  113

resemblance  to  c  and  e,  its  neighbours  on  either  side,  differs
widely  from  the  chord  c — <?,  which  is  made  up  of  these.  Nay
further,  so  far  as  bare  resemblance  is  concerned,  the  argument  in
question  ought  to  lead  us  to  conclude  that  red  is  complex,  for
it  resembles  purple  on  the  one  side  and  orange  on  the  other.
Thus  even  if  we  could  argue  from  mutual  resemblance  to  com-
plexity we  should  still  have  to  determine  where  the  complexity
lay  ;  in  the  orange  or  in  the  red.  It  is  not,  however,  enough  to
know  that  there  may  be  two  physical  or  two  physiological  pro-
cesses, or  both,  concerned  in  the  sensation  of  orange,  whereas  in
the  sensation  of  (saturated)  red,  these  processes  are  always
single.  The  one  thing  essential  after  all  is  that  in  the  sensation
of  orange  its  components — if  it  be  a  compound — should  be  in
some  sort  distinguishable.  'Mixture'  in  any  literal  sense  of  the
word  is  not  a  term  appropriate  to  psychology ;  and  hence — so
far  as  immediate  experience  is  concerned — we  seem  driven  to
deny  the  existence  of  complex  sensations  and  to  recognise  only
sensation-complexes.

In  all  cases  where  the  presence  of  such  sensation-complexes
is  beyond  dispute  the  partial  sensations  can  be  distinguished
by  discernible  differences  of  extensity  (and  often  of  intensity).
Thus  if  the  skin  be  touched  by  the  point  of  a  hot  or  cold
bradawl,  the  temperature  sensation  has  not  the  punctual  character
of  the  touch,  but  seems  rather  to  surround  this  as  a  sort  of
penumbra.  Similarly  the  ground-tone  of  a  clang-complex  has
not  only  a  greater  intensity  but  also  a  greater  extensity  than
any  of  the  over- tones1.  There  is  too  in  such  cases  a  certain
rivalry  or  antagonism  between  the  complex  as  an  unanalysed
whole  and  the  complex  as  analysed,  and  even  between  the
several  partial  sensations  after  such  analysis.  Such  differences
are  no  doubt  often  due  to  differences  in  the  distribution  of  atten-
tion brought  about  by  practice,  expectation,  interest,  and  the
like ;  but  they  are  sometimes  due  to  physiological  variations  in
stimulation  consequent  on  partial  exhaustion  or  recuperation8:
both  alike  however  point  to  the  underlying  presentational  com-
plexity. In  the  absence  of  such  evidence  it  is  unwarrantable  to
infer  psychical  complexity  from  complexity  in  the  physical
stimuli  or  in  the  processes  which  they  immediately  set  up.

1  Cf.  Stumpf,  Tonpsychologie,  ii.  pp.  58  f.

2  Cf.  Stumpf,  op.  cit.,  i.  pp.  360  ff.

w.  p.  8


114  Sensation  and  Movement  [CH.  v,  §  3

White  light,  for  example,  is  physically  the  most  complex  of  all
light,  whereas  the  sensation  of  white  is  not  only  simple  but
probably  the  most  primitive  of  our  visual  sensations.  It  is
difficult  to  give  any  clear  meaning  to  the  statement  that  two
sensations  become  one  sensation  or  that  one  sensation  has  two
qualities.  It  seems  best  therefore  to  define  a  sensation  as  the
simplest  element  in  our  analysis  of  the  objective  factor  in  ex-
perience. It  is  complex,  indeed,  inasmuch  as  it  has  a  plurality
of  characteristics,  but  any  further  complexity  would  seem  to  be
most  appropriately  described  as  due  to  a  plurality  of  sensations,
since  the  only  evidence  of  such  further  complexity  that  is  psy-
chologically admissible  is  a  discrimination  of  qualities.

We  find,  however,  some  indirect  evidence  of  the  complexity  of
our  existing  sensations  in  the  variations  in  quality  that  in  certain
special  cases  accompany  variations  in  intensity,  extensity,  and
duration.  With  the  exception  of  (saturated)  red,  all  spectral
colours1  give  place,  sooner  or  later,  to  a  mere  colourless  grey  as
the  intensity  of  the  light  diminishes,  and  all  in  like  manner
become  indistinguishably  white  after  a  certain  increase  of  inten-
sity. A  longer  time  is  also  in  most  cases  necessary  to  produce
a  sensation  of  colour  than  to  produce  a  sensation  merely  of  light
or  brightness  :  the  solar  spectrum  seen  for  a  moment  appears
not  of  seven  colours  but  of  two  only — faintly  red  towards  one
end  and  blue  towards  the  other.  Very  small  objects,  again,  such
as  coloured  specks  on  a  white  ground,  though  still  distinctly  seen,
appear  as  colourless  if  of  less  than  a  certain  size  :  the  relation
between  their  intensity  and  extensity  being  such  that  within
certain  limits  the  intenser  they  are  the  smaller  they  may  be
without  losing  colour,  and  the  larger  they  are  the  fainter  in  like
manner.  Similar  facts  are  observable  in  the  case  of  other  senses,
so  that  generally  we  seem  justified  in  regarding  what  we  now
distinguish  as  a  sensation  as  probably  complicated  in  several
respects.  In  other  words,  if  psychical  magnification  were  possible,
we  might  be  directly  aware  that  sensations  which  we  now  regard
as  simple  were  really  complexes — that  they  consisted,  that  is,  of
two  or  more  sensational  elements  or  changes,  different  in  quality,
of  uniform  or  variable  intensity,  and  occurring  either  simultane-
ously or  in  regular  or  irregular  succession.  So  much  for  the

1  The  light  is  supposed  to  be  thrown  on  a  perfectly  black  ground. Cf.  v.  Kries,
Die  Gesichts-empfindungen  und  ihrer  Analyse,  1882,  pp.  81,  8a.


CH.  v,  §  4]  Quantitative  Continuity  115

general  nature  of  sensations ;  we  have  next  to  consider  (i)  their
quantitative  and  (2)  their  qualitative  properties  in  more  detail.


Quantitative  Continuity.

§  4.  Every  sensation  within  the  fields  of  consciousness  has
sensibly  some  continuous  duration  and  seems  sensibly  to  admit
of  some  continuous  variation  in  intensity  and  extensity.  But
whether  this  quantitative  continuity  of  presentational  change  is
more  than  apparent  has  been  questioned.  Sensations  of  almost
liminal  intensity  are  found  to  fluctuate  every  few  seconds,  and,
as  already  remarked,  when  the  threshold  of  intensity  is  actually
reached,  they  seem  intermittently  to  appear  and  disappear,  a
fact  which  Hume  long  ago  did  not  fail  to  notice1.  The  results
of  numerous  experiments,  however,  justify  the  conclusion  that
these  variations  are  due  primarily  to  oscillation  of  attention,
and  furnish  so  far  no  ground  for  the  assumption  that  even  the
liminal  sensation  is  discontinuous.  Again,  we  can  only  detect  a
difference  of  intensity  when  this  is  of  finite  amount  and  bears
a  certain  constant  ratio  to  the  initial  intensity  with  which  it  is
compared — a  fact  commonly  known  as  Weber's  Law — so  that,
although  the  stimulus  may  be  augmenting  continuously,  incre-
ments in  the  intensity  are  only  apprehended  per  saltum.  This
imperfection  in  our  power  of  discrimination  is,  however,  no  proof
that  our  sensations  vary  discontinuously ;  and  not  only  is  there
no  positive  evidence  in  favour  of  such  discontinuity,  but  it  is
altogether  improbable  on  general  grounds.  Lastly,  there  is  always
more  or  less  distinctness  in  the  several  nerve-endings  as  well  as
isolation  of  the  nerve-fibres  and  neurons  themselves.  The  skin,
for  example,  when  carefully  explored,  turns  out  to  be  a  complex
mosaic  of  so-called  '  spots,'  severally  responding  to  stimulation
by  sensations  of  pressure,  heat,  cold,  and  pain.  But  from  this  to
argue  that  the  extensity  of  a  sensation  is  really  a  mere  aggregate
without  any  continuity  is  on  a  par  with  calling  a  lake  a  collection
of  pools  because  it  is  fed  by  separate  streams.  If  it  could  be
shewn  that  in  the  brain  as  a  whole  there  is  no  functional  con-
tinuity a  formidable  psychophysical  problem  would  no  doubt
arise.  Meanwhile,  however,  whatever  the  number  of  nerve-
endings  or  of  neurons  with  which  it  is  correlated,  there  is  nothing

1 Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  Green  and  Grose's  edn.,  i.  p.  347  fin.

8-2


1 1 6  Sensation  and  Movement  [CH.  v,  §  4

to  hinder  us  from  now  regarding  as  one,  a  sensation  that  seems
extensively  and  intensively  continuous  as  well  as  qualitatively
simple.

The  so-called  quantitative  characteristics  of  sensations —
intensity,  protensity,  extensity — is  a  difficult  topic.  Of  all  three
alike  it  must  be  noted  that  none  of  them — not  even  extensity,
as  actually  experienced — is  a  pure  quantity,  in  the  sense,  that  is,
of  being  divisible  into  homogeneous  and  interchangeable  parts.
But  the  right  of  extensity  to  be  regarded  as  an  attribute  of  all
sensations  whatever  has  been  often  disputed.  Many  are  willing
to  recognise  its  presence  in  sight  and  touch  but  nowhere  else.
The  difficulty  commonly  felt  in  distinguishing  between  extensity
and  space  has  probably  been  in  most  cases  the  chief  ground  for
insisting  on  this  restriction.  It  is  indeed  true  that  the  only
space  we  perceive  is  either  tactual  or  visual ;  we  cannot  make
lines  or  figures  out  of  auditory  or  olfactory  '  positions ' :  the
positions  to  which  we  may  at  length  refer  other  sensations  are
always  directly  perceived  either  through  sight  or  touch.  But
these  facts,  since  they  really  do  nothing  to  prove  that  other
sensations  have  not  extensity,  are  after  all  beside  the  mark.
Why  sight  and  touch  have  such  preeminence  in  respect  of
spatial  perception  we  shall  see  later  on1.

Meanwhile  the  question  is  not  whether  other  sensations  are
localised  but  simply  whether  in  them  we  find  anything  analogous
to  that  quantitative  variation  that  distinguishes  the  bare  '  feel '  of
a  penny  from  that  of  a  pin-point  or  the  mere  sight  of  a  glow-
worm in  the  darkness  from  that  of  a  forest  on  fire.  The  clearest
case  is  that  of  organic  sensations,  for  they  may  all  differ  unques-
tionably in  respect  of  massiveness  or  voluminousness  while  re-
maining qualitatively  unchanged.  The  importance  of  this  fact
can  hardly  be  underrated,  if  it  be  true — as  we  have  seen  reason
to  suppose — that  specific  sensations  are  due  to  the  differentiation
or  development  of  a  primitive  general  sensibility  or  coenaesthesis*.
For  differentiation  implies  the  advent  of  new  characteristics,  not
the  lapse  of  old  ones.  If  then  extensity  pertains  to  the  general
sensibility  it  is  not  likely  to  be  wanting  in  any  of  the  special

1  Cf.  below,  ch.  vi,  §§  3-5.

8  Cf.  above,  §  3.  The  influence  on  the  extensity  of  various  specific  sensations
both  of  drugs  and  of  cerebral  diseases  that  affect  the  general  coenaesthesis  is  well
known.  Cf.  Carpenter,  Mental  Physiology,  1874,  pp.  642  ff.


CH.  v,  §  4]  Extensity  1 1 7

sensations  differentiated  from  it.  But  much  of  the  evidence
supposed  to  prove  the  extensity  of  sensations  of  taste  and
smell  and  even  of  sound  is  more  or  less  faulty.  Tastes  and
smells,  for  example,  are  often  regarded  as  localised  when  they
are  in  fact  only  complicated  with  touches  that  are  localised  ;
and  smells  may  even  be  confused  with  tastes  as  in  eating
confections  of  cinnamon  or  vanilla,  which  yield  all  three  kinds
of  sensation  together.  But  that  a  sensation  of  taste  may  be
more  or  less  extense  one  may  readily  experience  by  first  apply-
ing a  spot  of  eau  sucrte  to  the  tongue  and  then  filling  the  mouth
with  it.  A  similar  experience  with  smell  is  hardly  possible ;
because  the  normal  stimulus  here  is  always  gaseous  and  so
is  at  once  diffused  over  the  whole  olfactory  surface,  at  any
rate  of  one  nostril.  But  there  are  some  who  think  they  dis-
cern slightly  more  massiveness  when  the  stimulation  is  binasal
than  when  it  is  not.  Human  beings,  however,  for  the  most
part  have  little  or  no  power  of  discriminating  the  excitation
of  one  olfactory  surface  from  that  of  the  other.  Nevertheless
there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  dogs  possess  this  power  to
a  remarkable  extent1.  In  their  case  to  all  appearance  binasal
(olfactory)  sensations  and  movements  are  complicated  much  as
binocular  sensations  and  movements  in  our  own1:  they  seem
to  perceive  by  smell  somewhat  as  we  perceive  by  sight.  The
point  of  this  is  that  although  we  cannot  infer  localisation  from
extensity  we  can  infer  extensity  from  localisation3.

Reference  has  already  been  made4  to  the  fact  that  the
quantitative  characteristics  of  presentations  are  all  as  Aristotle
said,  '  relative  to  us.'  But  it  is  just  the  peculiarity  of  this  rela-
tivity that  makes  it  difficult  to  describe  them  clearly ;  for  we
have  no  direct  means  of  equating  the  standards  of  one  subject's
immediate  experience  with  those  of  another  :  in  every  immediate
experience  there  is,  as  we  have  said,  a  certain  absoluteness.
Proceeding  indirectly  however  the  way  is  easier.  The  extensity
of  a  given  sensation  as  a  continuous  quantity  is  relative  to  the
presentational  continuum  as  a  whole,  but  this  as  totum  objectivum

1  Cf.  Romanes,  Mental  Evolution  in  Animals,  1883,  p.  93.

2  Cf.  L.  Edinger,  Vorlesungen  iiber  den  Bau  dtr  neruebsen  Cetitralorgane,  4te  Aufl.
1893,  pp.  58-66,  for  anatomical  evidence.

3  As  regards  the  extensity  of  auditory  sensations,  see  below,  §  6.

4  ch.  iv,  §  5.


n8  Sensation  and  Movement  [CH.  v,  §  4

is  for  the  subject,  so  to  say  all  there  is,  is  the  universe.  Never-
theless we  have  come  to  know  that  it  is  immediately  correlative
to  the  organism  as  the  concomitant  of  the  primitive  coenaesthesis,
in  which  we  find  specific  sensations  to  be  grounded.  Shall  we
then  say,  for  example,  that  when  a  beetle  is  immersed  in  the  bath
(with  Bain)  the  extensity  of  their  'body-sense'  varies  in  some
sort  with  the  size  of  their  bodies  ?  Must  we  not  rather  say

The  poor  beetle  that  we  tread  upon

In  corporal  sufferance  finds  a  pang  as  great

As  when  a  giant  dies  ?

So  doing  we  should  recognise  what  we  may  call  the  subjective
factor  in  extensity.

As  regards  the  intensity  of  sensations — or,  indeed,  of  all
presentations  whatever1 — there  is  a  close  connexion  between
the  objective  intensity  for  a  given  subject  and  the  distribution
of  his  attention  at  the  time  of  presentation.  If  a  sensation  is
out  of  the  focus  of  attention,  it  has  effectively  and  actually  for
the  experient  himself  not  only  less  clearness — stands  out  less  from
the  general  field — but  it  has  also  less  intensity  than  when
attention  is  concentrated  upon  it.  Though  seemingly  a  matter
of  everyday  experience  yet  this  is  a  question  about  which  psycho-
logists have  long  differed  and  differ  still.  But  the  disagreement
is  probably  to  be  explained  partly  by  a  bias  that  even  the
psychologist  and  especially  the  'physiological  psychologist'
cannot  readily  overcome,  and  partly  by  a  misapprehension  as  to
what  is  here  maintained.  As  to  the  first  point,  we  are  all  aware
in  ordinary  life  that  the  intensity  of  any  given  sensation  depends
primarily  upon  certain  physical  quantities  and  varies  directly  in
some  proportion  as  these  vary.  Hence,  since  our  habitual
standpoint  is  the  physical,  not  the  psychological,  we  conceive
sensory  objects  as  having  an  intensity  of  their  own  regardless  of
the  attention — whether  more  or  less — that  their  presentation
may  secure :  in  other  words  we  conceive  them  as  objects  per  se
apart  from  presentation  altogether.  Even  if  he  disowns  such
transcendental  realism  the  physicist  must  still  assume  that
subjective  sources  of  variation  are  eliminated.  In  the  '  objective
mind '  to  which  he  implicitly  appeals  there  are  no  subjective
grounds  for  variation,  and  attention  is  therefore  regarded  as
constant,  as  only  objectively  determined.  But  psychologically

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  iv,  §  5.


CH.  v,  §  4]  Intensity  1 1 9

we  cannot,  of  course,  assume  this:  here  we  find  feeling  and
subjective  selection  necessarily  entail  variations  in  an  attention
that  is  always  limited.  But,  as  to  the  second  point,  we  do  not
and  could  not  assume  that  variations  in  what  I  have  termed
'the  effective  intensity'  of  a  sensation — and  this  alone  imme-
diately concerns  us — produce  any  variation  in  the  physical
stimulus,  to  which  what  we  might  call  'the  inherent  intensity'
of  a  sensation  corresponds.  All  that  we  maintain  is  a  certain
connexion  between  this  ' epistemologically  objective'  intensity
and  that  intensity  which  is  only  'psychologically  objective.'  We
learn  (i)  that  concentration  of  attention  increases  and  its  diver-
sion diminishes  the  latter  (effective)  intensity,  in  circumstances
where  physically  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the  former  (inherent)
intensity  from  remaining  uniform;  and  (2)  that,  in  circumstances
where  we  are  aware  of  no  previous  change  in  the  distribution  of
attention,  the  effective  intensity  of  a  presentation  is  nevertheless
increased  or  diminished  when  certain  physical  concomitants  are
increased  or  diminished.  Also  when  we  talk  of  the  intensity  of  a
sensation  we  mean  its  maximal  intensity,  that  intensity  which  it
has  when  we  concentrate  attention  upon  it.  We  conclude  then
that  concentration  of  attention  upon  some  presentations  lowers
the  intensity  of  others  in  the  same  field,  whether  the  concentra-
tion be  voluntary  or  non-voluntary;  and  also  that — though  only
within  limits — increasing  attention  voluntarily  has  an  effect  on
the  intensity  of  a  presentation  similar  to  that  of  increasing  its
intensity  from  the  physical  side.  It  would  not  perhaps  be
difficult  to  account  for  our  inability  to  concentrate  attention
beyond  a  certain  point,  though  we  might  have  to  call  the
physiologist  to  our  aid.  But  at  any  rate  it  seems  on  the  whole
certain  that  there  is  a  subjective  as  well  as  an  objective  factor  in
what  we  speak  of  psychologically  as  the  intensity  of  a  presenta-
tion.

The  protensity  ascribed  to  a  sensation  is — in  a  sense — the
equivalent  of  the  duration  of  the  stimulus  upon  which  its  pre-
sentation primarily  depends.  But  of  this  duration  as  immediately
experienced,  the  subject,  and  not  the  stimulation  as  an  external
change,  furnishes  the  measure,  a  measure  that  varies  widely  from
subject  to  subject — according  to  the  tempo  of  each — and  even
somewhat  for  the  same  subject  from  time  to  time — according  to
circumstances — independently  of  'objective*  duration.  Here


T2O  Sensation  and  Movement  [CH.  v,  §  5

again,  then,  there  is  a  subjective  factor  involved. The  further
consideration  of  all  this  however  we  must  for  a  while  defer1.

Sensations  of  Sight.

§  5.  Turning  to  the  quality  of  sensations — there  is  a  vast
literature  devoted  to  sensations  of  sight  in  relation  to  the  con-
comitant physiological  processes  and  the  physical  stimuli,  on
which  these  processes  depend.  But  psychology  is  directly  con-
cerned with  neither;  and  it  is  specially  important  in  the  interests
of  psychophysical  investigation  itself  that  the  psychologist  as
such  should  most  scrupulously  avoid  any  risk  of  confusion  here.
Confining  ourselves  then  strictly  to  what  is  of  purely  psycho-
logical import,  we  have  to  note  first  that  the  primitive  sensation
of  sight  consists  only  of  the  single  quality  we  call  'light/  a
quality  which  ranges  in  intensity  from  the  zero  of  complete
darkness — for  us  an  ideal  limit2 — up  to  a  dazzling  brightness
that  becomes  painful  and  blinding.

The  first  responses  to  light  stimulation  seem  to  be  very
much  on  a  par  with  our  own  to  diffused  heat  or  cold :  some
creatures  seek  the  light  and  others  avoid  it ;  the  worm,  for
example,  on  a  sudden  flash  of  light  withdrawing  into  its  hole,
and  the  bee  sallying  forth  from  its  hive  only  in  the  sunshine.
As  little  as  our  temperature-sense  at  present  yields  us  a
perception  of  form  just  as  little  does  their  light-sense  yield
these  creatures  any.  Not  until  the  stage  of  visual  spatial
perception  is  reached,  and  some  discrimination  of  form  is  pos-
sible, do  black  and  white  attain  the  meaning  they  have  for
us.  In  ordinary  language — primarily  at  any  rate — we  apply
these  terms  only  to  shapes  or  '  things ' :  to  use  Helmholtz's
terminology,  they  are  '  body-colours3.'  A  coloured  object  can
be  perceived  only  when  its  colour  differs  from  that  of  the
surrounding  visual  field :  so  far  black  as  a  '  secondary  quality '
is  on  a  par  with  other  colours,  and  for  practical  purposes  would
be  equally  entitled  to  the  name,  even  if  there  were  black
objects  devoid  of  all  lustre  and  absolutely  absorbent  of  light.

1  Cf.  below,  ch.  viii,  §  4.

2  A limit actually never attained, inasmuch as intra-organic excitations are
invariably  present  even  in  perfectly  healthy  persons  and  these  give  rise  to  what  is
popularly  called  'light-dust,'  'the  retina's  own  light'  (Eigeiilicht  der  Netzhaut]  as
Helmholtz  named  it.

3  Physiologische  Optik,  2te  Ausg.  S.  322.


CH.  v,  §  5]  Sensations  of  Sight  121

But  there  is  still  an  important  difference :  in  a  light  field  many
colours  may  be  distinguished  but  in  a  dark  field  none.  Though
it  is  correct  to  speak  of  perceiving  a  black  object,  must  we  not
then  maintain  that,  so  far  as  it  is  really  black,  the  object  yields
us  directly  no  sensation  ?  Its  so-called  '  black  '  colour  answers
only  to  a  dark  portion  of  the  visual  field,  and  with  this  causa
deficiens  on  the  sensation  level — to  adopt  an  apt  comparison  of
Meinong's — there  corresponds  a  positive  percept  \  but  only  because
some  form  or  other  is  demarcated  by  the  rest  of  the  field,  which
does  yield  positive  sensations.  Similarly  the  piper  is  said  to
'  feel '  the  holes  in  his  whistle  when  actually  he  only  touches  the
solid  metal  in  which  they  are  pierced  ;  or  the  soldier  is  said  to
hear  the  tattoo  though  he  has  no  auditory  sensation  of  the
silence  intervening  between  successive  taps  on  the  drum.  An
obvious  means  of  differentiating  between  '  positive '  and  '  nega-
tive' sensations  here  suggests  itself: — The  order  in  which  the
first  occur  is  immaterial ;  but  the  second — that  is  the  absence  of
certain  sensations — can  only  be  experienced,  when  preceded  by
their  presence.  We  can  begin  with,  say,  rough  or  smooth,  c  or  </,
red  or  blue  ;  but  we  cannot  begin  by  experiencing  the  impalpable,
the  inaudible,  or  the  invisible.

A  distinctly  probable  hypothesis,  held  to  apply  to  all  the
senses,  is  sometimes  appealed  to  here.  It  assumes  that  our
sense-organs,  even  when  free  from  all  external  stimulation,  still
retain  their  functional  '  tone '  in  virtue  of  the  trophic  processes
that  restore  their  efficiency  when  they  are  seemingly  at  rest.
Such  'tonal  sensations'  (Stimmungsempfindungeiiy  distinguish
the  normal  man's  state  when  seeing  nothing  from  the  state  of
the  congenitally  blind  man,  who  has  never  seen  at  all.  There
is  something  positive  in  the  one  case  that  is  absent  in  the  other.
Moreover  this  '  tonal  sensation '  or  positive  awareness  of  some-
thing is  one  experience  in  connexion  with  seeing  and  another  in
connexion  with  hearing :  the  first  is  an  optical  rather  than  a
visual  sensation,  the  second  an  aural  rather  than  an  auditory
one.  It  was  on  these  lines  that  Helmholtz  dealt  with  black.
He  began  by  restricting  black  to  a  certain  property  perceived  as
pertaining  to  bodies  ;  but  then,  almost  immediately,  he  pro-
ceeds : — "  Black  is  an  actual  sensation,  i.e.  a  perception  of  a
definite  state  of  our  organ,  even  though  it  is  brought  about

1  Volkmann,  Lehrbuch  der  Psychologie,  1875,  i.  §§  33,  36,  pp.  726,  247.


122  Sensation  and  Movement  [CH.  v,  §  5

through  lack  of  all  light1."  The  perception  of  a  certain  body-
colour  and  the  perception  of  a  certain  '  state  of  our  organ '  are
then  both  to  be  called  black.  Now  a  black  state  may  be  pro-
duced in  a  body,  say,  lunar  caustic,  by  the  presence  of  light ;  can
it  be  maintained  that  it  is  to  the  same  black  state  that  our  organ
is  brought  by  the  absence  of  light  and  that  the  perception  of  both
these  blacks  is  the  same  ?  A  specific  sensation  is  never  a  sensa-
tion— still  less  a  perception — of  the  state  of  its  sense-organ  as
such.  We  have  'tonal  sensations/  it  may  be,  but  they  are
organic  sensations  simply.  They  give  however  what  point  there
is  to  the  indisputable  contention  of  Helmholtz  and  others  that
we  do  not  refer  the  darkness  we  are  aware  of  to  our  hands  or  our
ears.  But  on  this  ground  to  contend  that  darkness  equally  with
light  is  a  positive  sensation,  is  to  confound  the  difference  between
positive  and  privative.  Hering,  who  also  identifies  darkness  with
tonal  sensations,  is  the  chief  champion  of  its  specific  and  positive
character.  The  facts  which  he  has  marshalled  in  support  of  this
position  are  prima  facie  so  striking  that  most  people  are  at  once
convinced2.  Nevertheless,  when  critically  examined  this  doctrine
has  been  found  to  be  hampered  with  serious  objections  that,
whether  answerable  or  not,  have  so  far  only  been  ignored.  "  But
what  is  the  use  of  attending  to  people  who  reject  the  plain
testimony  of  their  senses  ?  "  it  is  said.  It  is  precisely  here  that
the  weakness  of  the  whole  case  lies.  What  is  observation  and
what  is  inference  is  proverbially  a  difficult  matter  to  determine.
The  mere  enumeration  of  the  errors  thus  occasioned  would  be  a
very  long  task  and  most  of  them  pertain  to  the  sense  of  sight.
And  that  is  the  case  simply  because  sight, '  the  most  intellectual
sense/  is  the  most  overlaid  with  perceptual  interpretations  of  its
bare  '  sense-data3.'  The  perception  of  black  as  a  secondary  quality
of  bodies  nobody  will  question,  but  to  maintain,  as  Hering  does,
that  as  a  sensation  it  is  the  polar  opposite  of  white  and  admitting
of  an  equally  dazzling  intensity  is  an  affront  to  common  sense.
What,  in  that  case,  would  be  the  use  of  eye-lids  ?  But  this  need-
less paradox  has  involved  other  blemishes  in  an  otherwise
admirable  theory.

1  Op.  at.  p.  324.

8  I  have  to  confess  that  I  was  long  among  the  number. Mr  W.  McDougall,  who
also  now  dissents,  has  made  a  like  admission. Mind,  1901,  p.  ^ifin.

8  Cf.  von  Kries,  Nagel's  Handbuch  der  Physiologie,  Bd.  III.  1905,  pp.  239  ff.


CH.  v,  §  5]  Sensations  of  Sight  123

Is  there  any  justification  for  speaking  of  visual  sensations
without  luminosity  :  must  we  not  rather  maintain  that  in  absolute
darkness  we  should  not  see  black,  since  we  should  not  see  at
all1?  No  doubt  we  are  prone  to  identify  the  two  concepts,
darkness  and  blackness,  for  what  we  may  call  their  sensory
content  is  the  same — viz.  the  absence  of  visual  sensation2.

Whereas  the  only  diffused  light  we  need  consider  is  that
emitted  by  the  sun3,  the  light  transmitted  by  the  things  about
us  is  of  different  wave-lengths  and  the  photochemical  effects  of
these  waves  on  protoplasm  are  likewise  different.  As  soon  as
visual  forms  can  be  distinguished  a  qualitative  differentiation
among  light  sensations  over  and  above  the  quantitative  differ-
ences of  lighter  and  darker,  that  might  suffice  for  their  recog-
nition as  forms,  would  become  advantageous :  sour  grapes
could  then  be  known  from  ripe  ones  and  nauseous  caterpillars
detected  among  wholesome  ones,  without  continual  tasting.
The  first  colours  to  be  differentiated,  it  has  been  supposed,  were
probably  yellow  and  blue4,  or — perhaps  it  would  be  truer  to
say — '  warm '  colour  and  '  cold '  colour ;  upon  which  there

1  Again  the  cessation  of  light  entails  no  change  for  the  stone-blind,  who  cannot
see,  just  as  the  cessation  of  sound  makes  none  to  the  stone-deaf,  who  cannot  hear;
whereas  for  the  normal  man  it  is  quite  otherwise ;  for  he,  since  he  can  see  and  hear,
experiences  the  change;  and  we  say  he  then  sees  or  hears  'nothing.' We  may  call
this  'nothing'  darkness  or  stillness,  but  we  may  not  call  it  a  positive  sensation.

2  I  have  tried  to  deal  with  this  troublesome  question  more  fully  in  an  article
entitled:  "Is  'Black'  a  Sensation,"  Brit.  //.  of  Psychology,  1905,  vol.  i.  pp.  407-37.
Cf.  especially  A.  Fick,  Sitzungsber.  d.  phys.-med  Gesellschaft.  z.  Wiirzburg,  1900,  pp.
9-15;  von  Kries,  op.  tit.  p.  273;  W.  McDougall,  Mind,  1901,  pp.  94  ff.

3  The experiments of  Paul  Bert, Lord  Avebury  and  others  shew  that  where
environments  illuminated  by  light  of  different  wave-lengths  are  provided,  some  of  the
lower  forms  of  life  (Daphnia  pulex,  &c.)  select  the  brightest. But  this  is  so  far  no
evidence  of  colour  discrimination ;  and  in  fact  these  creatures  shew  no  preference  in
respect  of  the  colour  of  objects. Cf.  V.  Graber,  Helligkeits-  und  Farbensinnes  der
Ttere,  1884,  Abschn.  i.

4  It  is  assumed  that  the  physiological  differentiation  of  the  retina  has  advanced
from  the  centre,  where  vision  is  most  distinct,  towards  the  margin  where  it  is  least  so ;
and  it  is  found  that  stimulation  of  the  margin  in  all  cases  yields  only  achromatic
sensations,  stimulation  of  a  certain  intermediate  zone  only  sensations  of  yellow  and
blue,  and  central  stimulation  alone  sensations  of  every  hue. Further,  total  colour-
blindness is extremely  rare  and  usually  accompanied  by  other  defects; they  can
hardly  therefore  be  regarded  as  cases  of  reversion. Two  forms  of  red-green  colour-
blindness are  however  comparatively  common  and  might  be  so  regarded:  the  last
acquisition,  as  often  happens,  being  the  first  to  fail. On  the  other  hand  there  are
very  few  recorded  cases  of  so-called  blue-yellow  colour-blindness  and  the  right  inter-
pretation of  these  is  uncertain.


124  Sensation  and  Movement [CH.  v,  §  5

followed  a  further  differentiation  of  the  warm  colour  into  red
and  green.  The  four  colours,  red,  yellow,  green  and  blue  are
called  psychologically  principal  colours  :  in  numerous  languages
too  they  have  distinctive  names,  whereas  the  so-called  subsidiary
colours  are  either  denoted  by  combining  these  names,  as  greenish
yellow,  bluish  green,  or  by  using  the  name  of  some  object
possessing  the  colour,  as  orange,  violet,  &c.  There  are  facts  to
justify  this  nomenclature.  Starting  from  the  red  at  one  end  of
the  solar  spectrum  we  can  pass  continuously  to  violet  at  the
other  and  on  through  (non-spectral)  purple  and  carmine  back
to  the  red  again.  Yellow  marks  a  distinct  turning-point  in  this
progress.  For,  as  we  advance,  the  intervening  colours — scarlet
and  orange  for  example — resemble  red  less  and  less  and  yellow
more  and  more  (just  as  in  travelling  along  a  straight  road  the
distance  from  our  starting-point  steadily  increases  as  that  from
our  goal  diminishes) ;  but  in  passing  through  and  beyond  the
yellow  itself  we  lose  the  old  indication  of  getting  further  from
red :  the  colours  which  we  now  meet,  on  the  other  hand,
resemble  yellow  less  and  green  more  the  further  we  advance,
till  green  itself  is  reached.  In  other  words,  in  passing  through
yellow  we  have,  so  to  say,  changed  our  direction.  From  green
onwards  the  yellow  milestones  cease,  like  the  red  ones,  when
yellow  was  reached :  our  direction,  in  other  words,  has  again
changed.  The  same  happens  once  more  when  we  get  to  blue,
whence  by  a  last  change  of  direction  we  return  to  our  starting-
point  in  red.  The  course  we  have  traversed  then  may  be  repre-
sented by  the  boundary  of  a  quadrilateral,  the  four  colours  at  the
angles,  where  its  direction  changes,  being  on  this  account  entitled
to  the  name  of  principal  colours.  It  is  within  the  competence
of  experimental  psychology  to  determine  the  form  of  this
boundary;  but  for  merely  descriptive  purposes  it  will  be  simplest
and  sufficient  to  regard  it  as  a  square.  But  the  whole  surface
of  our  square — as  well  as  its  boundary — can  be  shewn  to
represent  colours  as  soon  as  we  take  account  of  new  differences
among  them,  commonly  known  as  degrees  of  saturation.  The
colours  in  the  boundary  are  said  to  have  the  maximum  of
saturation  and  are  often  called  pure  colours  or  colour-tones  in
contradistinction  to  those  lying  within  the  boundary.  These,
appearing  as  if  more  or  less  diluted  with  white — as  we  may
for  the  present  call  it — or  as  this  white  more  or  less  tinged


CH.  v,  §  5]  Sensations  of  Sight  125

with  colour,  are  called  tints ;  while  the  white  itself  as  the
common  starting-point  of  the  series  of  tints  becomes  the
'  neutral  tint.'  For  our  qualitative  account  of  the  facts  of
colour-sensation  again  it  will  suffice  to  place  this  neutral  tint
at  the  intersection  of  the  two  diagonals  of  our  square  and  to
regard  the  surface  as  a  plane.  Proceeding  outwards  from  this
central  and  neutral  point  along  any  straight  line  in  the  plane
we  shall  then  have  a  series  of  tints  of  one  colour,  but  paler
or  less  saturated  the  nearer  they  are  to  the  centre  and  deeper
or  more  saturated  the  nearer  they  are  to  the  boundary.  It  is
reasonable  to  suppose  that  as  the  colour-sense  developed  the
length  of  these  lines  increased,  that  the  earliest  blue  or  yellow
tones,  for  example,  were  less  rich  and  full  than  those  of  which
we  now  have  experience  ;  and,  as  we  certainly  have  no  grounds
for  assuming  that  this  development  is  complete,  we  can  only
apply  such  terms  as  pure  and  saturated  to  the  colours  on  the
boundary  of  our  square  in  a  relative  sense.  They  are  the  purest
we  now  experience,  but  others  still  purer  are  perfectly  con-
ceivable ;  in  other  words  the  area  of  our  square  cannot  be
regarded  as  absolute1.

So  far  we  have  found  our  visual  sensation  advancing  from
the  single  quality  represented  by  our  central  point  of  neutral
tint  to  a  continuum  of  one  dimension,  as  in  the  blue-yellow
vision  of  ordinary  colour-blindness ;  and  finally  to  a  continuum
of  two  dimensions,  as  in  normal  sight.  But  when  we  also  take
into  account  the  continuous  variations  of  intensity  or  differences
of  'light'  and  'shade'  that  may  occur,  we  have  need  of  a  third
dimension  to  represent  these.  Through  the  centre  of  our  colour
square  (answering  to  a  shade  which  we  may  now  call  medium
grey)  a  straight  line  may  be  drawn,  making  certain  angles  with  its
diagonals — of  which  angles  more  presently.  This  neutral  axis
will  terminate  on  the  lower  side  in  a  point  representing  the  zero
intensity  we  call  pure  black  and  in  the  upper  in  a  point  answering
to  the  maximum  intensity  we  call  pure  white.  Lines  parallel  to
this  central  axis  will  then  represent  a  series  of  coloured  shades.
But  now  it  is,  we  might  say,  a  priori  evident,  and  at  any  rate
certainly  the  fact,  that  all  colour-tones  and  tints  alike  will,  as

1  In  point  of  fact  the  saturation  of  any  of  the  spectral  colour-tones  is  increased  by
looking  steadily  for  a  few  seconds  at  its  so-called  complementary  colour  (green  in  the
case  of  red,  yellow  in  that  of  blue)  immediately  before  looking  at  the  colour  itself.


126  Sensation  and  Movement [CH.  v,  §  5

their  intensity  diminishes,  approximate  towards  the  dark  pole,
and  will  all  alike  end  there  when  their  intensity  is  nil:  in  the
night  when,  as  Hegel  used  to  say,  all  cows  are  black.  It  is  also
a  fact,  though  one  we  could  scarcely  have  anticipated,  that  all
alike,  as  their  intensity  approaches  the  maximal,  converge
towards  the  light  pole.  We  may  give  expression  to  these  facts
then  by  drawing  lines — which  for  descriptive  purposes  we  may
take  as  straight — from  the  angles  of  our  square  to  the  two
extremities  or  poles  of  our  colourless  axis.  And  so  we  obtain
what  is  called  the  colour  octahedron,  a  figure
that  is  to  say  consisting  of  two  pyramids  having
a  common  base  in  the  colour  square ;  the  apex
of  the  one  which  contains  the  lighter  shades
corresponding  with  the  maximal  intensity  or
white  and  that  of  the  other,  containing  the
darker  shades,  corresponding  with  zero  intensity
or  absolute  black.  The  intensity  of  the  most
saturated  yellow,  which  forms  one  angle  of  the
colour  square,  is  decidedly  greater,  while  on
the  other  hand  the  intensity  of  the  most  satu-
rated blue,  occupying  the  opposite  angle,  is  decidedly  less,  than
that  of  the  median  grey  situated  at  the  square's  centre.  Thus
in  the  light  pyramid  the  side  connecting  the  white  and  yellow
will  be  proportionately  shorter  than  that  connecting  the  white
and  the  blue ;  and  vice  versa  in  the  dark  pyramid  :  in  other
words  the  base  of  the  double  pyramid  will  be  tilted  upwards  on
the  yellow  side  and  downwards  on  the  blue,  as  shewn  in  the
figure  annexed.


'£>'


Sensations  of  Sound.

§  6.  In  dealing  with  the  quality  of  auditory  sensations  it
will  be  best  to  begin  with  the  simple  sensations  called  tones :
the  tone-complexes  or  clangs,  which  result  from  their  combina-
tion, may  then  follow;  and  finally  the  moot  question  of  noises.

Simple  tones  constitute  a  qualitative  continuum  of  one
dimension,  their  so-called  '  pitch ' :  this  may  be  represented  by
a  straight  line  ranging  between  two  more  or  less  indefinite
extremes.  If  intensity,  that  is  to  say  '  loudness,'  be  taken  into
account  we  have,  of  course,  a  continuum  of  two  dimensions.


CH.  v,  §  6]  Sensations  of  Sound  127

The  two  extremes  are  more  or  less  metaphorically  distinguished
by  terms  which  indicate  further  quantitative  or  qualitative  dif-
ferences or  rather  qualitative  accompaniments  and  associations.
Thus  we  contrast  deep,  dull  and  grave  as  one  extreme,  with
high,  bright  and  acute  as  the  other.  As  we  approach  the
lower  limit  the  tones  become  less  'even'  and  continuous;  at
length  distinct,  more  or  less  pervasive,  tremors  are  'felt'  rather
than  heard ;  till  finally  these  alone  persist  as  distinct  impulses
(on  the  ear-drum)  after  the  limit  of  audible  tones  is  passed.
The  highest  tones  again  if  at  all  loud  or  near  are  accom-
panied by  tactual,  often  more  or  less  painful  sensations,  as  if
the  ear  were  pierced  by  a  fine  needle1 ;  and  this  characteristic
increases  much  more  quickly  than  the  perceptible  difference  of
tone,  as  the  upper  limit  of  audibility  is  neared.  This  connexion
of  auditory  with  tactual  sensations  confirms  the  independent
evidence  of  biology  pointing  to  an  original  differentiation  of
sound  from  touch.  In  keeping  with  these  facts,  though  doubt-
less not  wholly  in  consequence  of  them,  the  tone-continuum  is
also  universally  regarded  as  steadily  diminishing  in  massiveness
or  extensity  as  the  pitch  increases.

The  special  characteristics  of  tone-complexes  or  clangs,  as
distinct  from  other  sensation-complexes,  are  due  to  the  re-
markable analytic  power  which  belongs  to  the  sense  of  hearing
— in  man  at  least.  Two  colours  cannot  be  simultaneously
presented  unless  they  are  differently  localised,  but  several
tones  may  form  one  complex  whole  within  which  they,  as
'partial  tones,'  are  distinguishable  though  spatially  undiffer-
entiated.  The  simplest  case  is  that  of  the  single  clang  or
'note.'  It  consists  of  a  ground  tone — always  the  strongest —
from  the  pitch  of  which  the  note  is  named,  and  of  a  discrete
series  of  over-tones,  increasing  in  pitch  but  diminishing  in
intensity,  and  corresponding  to  the  series  of  partial  vibrations
in  the  source  of  the  sound.  The  periods  of  these  partial  vibra-
tions may  form  an  ascending  order  of  multiples  (2,  3, 4,  ...)  of  the
period  of  the  ground-tone,  and  the  partial  tones  are  then  called
harmonic :  when  this  relation  does  not  hold  they  are  called
inharmonic.  The  clangs  produced  by  musical  instruments  or
by  human  song  belong  to  the  former  class,  which  is  the  only  one

1  Cf.  W.  Preyer,  Utber  die  Grenzender  Tonwahrnehmung,  1876,  pp.  31  ff.;  Hensen,
Physiolog it  des  Gehors,  Hermann's  Handbuch  (1880),  III.  ii.  p.  in.


128  Sensation  and  Movement [CH.  v,  §  6

we  need  specially  to  consider  here.  The  same  note  sounded
by  different  instruments  or  voices  has  in  each  case  a  distinctive
character,  to  which  the  name  clang-tint  or  timbre  is  given.  This
peculiarity  is  the  result  partly  of  attendant  noises  due  to  friction,
the  mode  of  producing  the  sound,  &c.,  but  chiefly  to  the  number
and  intensity  of  the  constituent  tones,  the  clang-tint  or  timbre
in  the  narrower,  musical  sense.  The  resulting  diversities  are
innumerable ;  every  kind  of  instrument,  nay  every  single  instru-
ment, like  every  single  voice,  has  its  distinctive  individuality.
A  continuum  of  timbres,  as  of  noises,  is  thus  out  of  the  question;
though  each  particular  voice  or  instrument  will  have  its  own
note-continuum.  But  the  timbre  will  be  apt  to  alter  gradually
with  the  pitch,  and  the  range  to  be  less  than  that  of  simple
tones.  In  fact  even  a  continuum  of  simple  tones  is  rather  an
ideal  to  which  we  can  approximate  than  a  reality  which  we
actually  experience ;  and  we  may  thus  regard  the  simple  tone
as  the  limit  of  the  single  clang,  as  a  clang,  i.e.  of  one  tone.
The  terminology  by  which  varieties  of  timbre  are  ordinarily
characterized  is  largely  metaphorical :  nevertheless  it  bears
evidence  not  only  to  the  complexity  of  clangs  but  also  to  the
nature  of  their  constituents,  although  the  untrained  hearer  does
not — if  we  may  so  say — verify  the  analysis  which  the  ear  has
already  made.  Thus  clangs  that  are  called  rich  or  full  are  those
in  which  a  predominant  ground-tone  is  accompanied  with  pro-
nounced over-tones  ;  while  in  those  called  thin,  empty,  aethereal,
the  over-tones  are  scarcely  audible.  Again  the  clangs  described
as  hollow  are  those  in  which  only  the  odd  (i,  3,  5,  ...)  partial
tones  are  perceptible,  as  in  the  clarionet  or  in  closed  pipes,  for
example;  smooth  clangs,  such  as  those  of  the  piano,  open  pipes,
&c.,  lack  the  higher  over-tones  (from  the  sixth  onwards),  while
in  rough,  sharp  and  piercing  clangs,  like  those  of  'string'  or
brass  instruments,  these  predominate.  Roughness  is  an  effect
of  what  are  called  beats :  these  are  especially  distinct  in  the
upper  region  of  over-tones,  and  consist  in  the  rapid  waxing
and  waning  of  intensity  resulting  from  the  summations  and
interferences  of  the  sound  waves.  Since  smoothness  depends
upon  the  uniform,  roughness  upon  the  irregular,  stimulation  of
a  group  of  cutaneous  nerves,  the  analogy  of  clangs  with  touches
is  in  this  respect  complete,  and  is  so  far  an  indication  of  their
extensity  as  well  as  of  their  complexity.  This  is  further  shewn


CH.  v,  §  6]  Sensations  of  Sound  1 29

by  the  differences  underlying  the  contrasts  of  full,  hollow,  empty,
dull,  sharp,  penetrating  and  the  like.

When  two  tones  are  sounded  together  they  are  said  to  be
either  dissonant  or  consonant.  The  familiar  facts  so  named
underlie  the  whole  structure  of  music^and  have  engaged  attention
for  ages  ;  though  it  cannot  even  now  be  said  that  they  are  satis-
factorily explained.  As  to  the  facts  themselves,  it  is  found  in
the  first  place  that  dissonance  is  the  rule  and  consonance  the
exception  ;  for  when  the  pitch  of  one  of  two  distinguishable
tones  is  gradually  altered  while  both  are  sounded  together,  they
remain  dissonant  save  at  a  few  isolated  '  intervals,'  which  are
consonant  in  various  degrees.  So  long  as  they  are  positively
dissonant  they  can  be  readily  distinguished ;  but  in  perfect
consonance  they  are  distinguished  only  by  trained  ears  and
with  more  or  less  difficulty.  The  untrained  hear  only  one  tone,
and  that  of  the  same  pitch  as  the  lower  (unless  this  is  markedly
different  in  intensity).  Taken  alone,  all  this  would  naturally
lead  us  to  account  for  the  one  case  by  some  difference,  and  for
the  other  by  some  resemblance,  to  be  found  between  the  two
tones.  But  in  point  of  fact  difference,  and  the  only  qualitative
difference  there  can  be,  viz.  difference  of  pitch,  is  present  in  both
cases.  Moreover — within  the  'interval2'  of  an  octave — this  dif-
ference may  be  less  though  the  dissonance  is  greater ;  and  it  is
always  greatest  where  the  consonance  is  more  perfect.

However  agreement  and  difference  in  another  sense  are
present  when,  as  is  normally  the  case,  both  two  tones  are  complex,
and  so  accompanied  by  over-tones.  Then  in  the  octave,  the  most
perfect  consonance,  there  is  no  interference  either  between  the
ground  tones  or  their  over-tones,  and  therefore  no  beats — in  other
words  the  two  notes  accord  or  agree.  But  when  we  pass  to  the
less  perfect  forms  of  consonance,  such  interferences  enter,  and  in-
crease as  the  degree  of  consonance  decreases  till  the  extreme  of
dissonance  or  discord  between  the  two  is  reached.  Even  with
simple  tones  such  active  agreement  or  disagreement  may  still

1  As  commonly  understood,  that  is  to  say  :  cf.  Helmholtz,  Die  Lehre  von  den
Tonempfindungen,  1877,  pp.  385  ff.  The  so-called  music  of  the  Veddas  or  the
Torres  Straits  islanders  is  quite  another  matter.

J  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that  this  familiar  technical  term  is  not  itself
a  difference  or  distance  of  the  kind  just  mentioned.  It  corresponds  rather  to  a  ratio
between  the  differing  pairs,  a  fact  which  had  still  further  to  distinguish  between
'  -sonance  '  and  pitch.

W. P.  Q


130  Sensation  and  Movement [CH.  v,  §  6

be  present ;  for  though  there  are  no  over-tones,  there  are
still  so-called  'difference-tones/  one  or  more  according  as  the
dissonance  is  more  or  less  pronounced :  these  give  rise  to
beats  and  inter-tones,  which  aggravate  the  discord  or  conflict.
But  still,  it  is  said,  they  only  aggravate  it ;  for  the  imperfect
consonance  or  the  actual  dissonance  remains  when  they  are
eliminated.  Such  elimination  may,  it  is  supposed,  be  effected
either  by  increasing  the  interval,  in  which  case  the  difference-
tones  disappear ;  or  by  moderating  the  intensity  of  the  primary
tones  and  presenting  one  to  each  ear.  From  such  crucial  in-
stances (?)  it  is  inferred  that  the  essence  of  consonance  and
dissonance  must  lie  in  some  relation  of  the  primary  tones
themselves  to  each  other.  And  now  how,  when  thus  stript  of
all  accessories,  are  we  to  describe  this  essential  relation?

What  we  have  is  two  simple  tones  presented  together.  When
they  are  dissonant,  there  is  a  certain  diversity — though  the  two
may  be  closely  alike  in  pitch — such  that,  notwithstanding  this
resemblance,  they  are  always  distinguished.  When  they  are
consonant,  though  the  two  may  differ  widely  in  pitch,  there  is
always  a  certain  affinity,  such  that,  notwithstanding  their  differ-
ence, they  are  often  not  distinguished,  though  still  distinguishable.
All  which,  it  has  been  supposed,  may  be  concisely  summed  up
by  saying  that  in  the  latter  case  the  tones  are  blended  more
or  less  completely,  while  in  the  former  case  they  have  not
blended,  and  will  not  blend,  at  all.  Moreover  two  notes  may  be
sounded  one  after  the  other — when  blending  is  excluded  by  this
difference  of  time-order — and  yet  they  may  be  consonant,  and
that  though  the  '  interval '  between  them  is  more  distinctly
perceived.  But  consonance  cannot  depend  on  a  literal  blending,
for  its  constituent  tones  in  that  case  could  not  be  distinguished  ;
and — when  actually  not  distinguished — would,  we  should  sup-
pose, sound  like  an  intermediate  tone  and  not  like  the  lower  of
the  two1.  We  may  however  say  that  in  ^wzsonance  we  are  aware

1  Cf.  Stumpf,  Tonpsychologie,  ii.  1890,  §§  19,  20.  For  Stumpf  the  blend  is  psy-
chologically as  final  as  sensation  itself.  Its  physiological  concomitant,  he  thinks,  may
be  a  central  'specific  synergy'  or  synthesis  of  the  specific  energies  of  the  nerves  con-
cerned (cf.  above,  p.  109,  n.  2).  But  such  central  synthesis  surely  suggests  psychical
assimilation  at  least.  That  the  process  is  central  Stumpf  infers  partly  from  the  fact
that  blending  is  possible  in  imagination.  But  again  surely  this  points  to  some  previous
psychical  process.  Finally  he  sketches  very  tentatively  a  possible  genetic  theory
which  seems  to  bring  his  views  very  near  to  that  advocated  below.


CH.  v,  §  6] Consonance  and  Dissonance  131

of  a  whole,  which  we  may  or  may  not  fail  to  analyse,  whereas  in
dissonance  we  are  aware  of  a  disconnected  plurality  which  we
cannot  combine.  Can  this  difference  be  explained  ?

Analytical  psychology  at  all  events  seems  to  furnish  no  clue,
but  genetic  psychology,  based  upon  it,  perhaps  may  do  so.  In
the  first  place  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  normal  experience  is
and  always  has  been  confined  to  clangs  or  complex  tones :  the
approximately  simple  tones  that  are  now  artificially  produced  in
our  laboratories  and  elsewhere  lie  altogether  beyond  it.  We
may,  then,  reasonably  suspect  the  earlier  and  commoner  ex-
perience— that  of  the  consonance  or  dissonance  of  complex
tones — to  be  the  clue  we  are  seeking  to  this  consonance  or
dissonance  of  simple  tones,  which  is  so  nearly  akin  to  an
ideal.  Suppose  it  were  possible  to  cure  a  man  born  stone-
deaf  and  to  restrict  his  first  experiences  of  sound  to  simple
tones,  would  he  distinguish  between  consonance  and  disson-
ance as  we  do?  This  crucial  question  we  have  no  means  of
definitely  answering.  But,  as  Hensen  has  well  said1,  we  should
expect  that  he  would  have  to  learn  to  hear  just  as  if  born  blind
and  cured  he  would  have  to  learn  to  see.  Bearing  in  mind  the
actual  course  of  our  auditory  experience,  we  have,  in  the  second
place,  to  note  the  similarity  in  structure  between  a  single  har-
monic clang  and  two  consonant  tones  or  clangs:  the  partial
tones  of  the  one  may  exhibit  all  the  degrees  of  consonance
possible  to  the  other  two ;  and  the  more  perfect  the  consonance
the  closer  the  resemblance.  Here  then  is  an  adequate  basis  for
the  assimilation  of  the  latter,  whether  they  be  simple  or  complex,
to  the  former2.  An  inharmonic  clang — which  is  characterized
by  its  obtrusive  beats — approximates  more  or  less  to  a  medley
of  tones ;  and  so,  here  again  a  basis  is  provided  for  the  assimila-
tion of  two  dissonant  clangs  to  such  a  complex  tone.  But  if  it
be  verily  true  that  simple  tones  sounded  together  can  be  per-
ceived not  merely  as  diverse  but  as  dissonant,  even  when  beats
are  altogether  excluded,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  genetic  psy-
chology can  account  for  this.  If  however  it  be  true  that  such
dissonance  is  only  detected  by  musical  experts,  it  may  be  argued

1  Hensen,  Physiologic  des  Gehb'rs,  Hermann's  Handbuch,  III.  ii.  p.  27.

2  Cf.  Max  Meyer,  Zeitschr.  f.  Psych,  xvii.  (1898),  p.  413;  Krueger,  Meumann's
Archiv  f.  d.  gesammtc  Psych,  ii.  (1904), pp.  42  f.; Wundt's  Psych. Studien, iv.
(1909),  pp.  226ff. ;  C.  S.  Myers,  Textbook  of  Experimental  Psychology,  1911,  p.  55.

9—2


132  Sensation  and  Movement ' [CH.  v,  §  6

that  their  judgment  in  this  case  is  mediate  or  inferential,  not
immediate  or  sensory:  the  difficulty  would  then  disappear.  And
on  the  whole  facts  seem  to  bear  out  this  supposition1.

The  psychological  connexion  between  noises  and  tones  has
long  been  a  keenly  controverted  topic.  The  physical  relation
of  the  two  is  clear  enough :  noises  here,  it  is  allowed,  are  com-
plexes of  pendular  vibrations  and  so  presuppose  these.  But  to
assume  that  the  like  holds  good  psychologically,  that  noises,  like
clangs,  must  be  true  complexes,  is  certainly  a  mistake.  Fish
and  frogs  have  no  '  ear  for  music '  yet  they  are  not  deaf.  The
biological  evidence  for  the  differentiation  of  tones  from  sound
is  quite  as  conclusive  as  that  for  the  differentiation  of  sounds
from  touch.  In  the  higher  vertebrates  the  auditory  apparatus
is  more  complicated,  but  certain  elementary  structures  compar-
able to  rattles  and  found  even  among  the  invertebrates,  still
persist.  What  function  have  these?  Among  others  the  per-
ception of  sound,  it  is  maintained,  but  not  the  discrimination
of  tone,  for  which  they  are  not  adapted.  If  cases  were  forth-
coming in  which  the  discrimination  of  tones  was  lost  while  the
perception  of  noise  was  retained,  or  vice  versa,  such  positive
evidence  would  be  conclusive.  Throughout  an  immense  record,
however,  not  a  single  clear  case  of  this  sort  is  to  be  found.  But
this  negative  evidence  is  not  equally  conclusive,  especially  not
in  view  of  repeated  instances  of  serious  defects  on  the  one  side
without  corresponding  defects  on  the  other2.  And  when  the
continuity  of  the  organ  of  hearing  is  taken  into  account  this  is
perhaps  all  that  we  ought  to  expect ;  save  that  a  defective  sense
for  tones  might  be  looked  for  more  frequently  if  such  sense  is
later  in  development  and  correlated  to  a  more  complex  and
differentiated  structure,  as  is  here  maintained.  It  is  true  that
numerous  gradations  between  noises  and  clangs  are  perceptible
to  human  beings.  This  however  is  scarcely  to  the  point,  the
physiologist  could  reply,  for  we  have  the  requisite  resonatory
apparatus.  But  even  a  so-called  '  momentary  noise,'  such  as
that  of  an  electric  spark  or  the  thud  of  a  steam  hammer,  still  has
some  pitch :  so  it  is  said,  but  the  statement  is  very  questionable.

1  Cf.  Helmholt/,  Tonempfindungen,  4th  edn.,  pp.  328  ff.  Helmholtz's  statements
have  been  questioned,  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  they  have  been  satisfactorily  an-
swered.

*  Cf.  Stumpf,  Tonpsy dialogic,  i.  p.  402.


CH.  v,  §  7]  Noises  133

So  far  as  the  impression  is  verily  momentary  and  single,
so  far  the  difference  of  '  high '  or  '  low'  seems  far  more  like  a
difference  of  extensity  than  a  difference  of  pitch.  Again  the
physiologist  could  reply  that  a  single  impulse  could  not,  and  in
fact  does  not,  give  rise  to  a  tone.  If  now  it  be  objected  that  there
are  no  instantaneous,  single,  and  simple  noises,  it  is  enough  to
remark  that  the  nearer  we  approach  to  such  a  limit  the  more
the  explosive  character  predominates.  That  most  of  our  auditory
sensations  are  complexes  of  noises  and  tones  is  unquestioned1.

One  such  complex  of.  special  interest  is  human  speech.  In
this  the  consonants  are  almost  pure  noises  whereas  the  vowels
approximate  to  tones,  so  much  so  indeed  as  to  lead  some  recent
writers  to  identify  the  two.  In  that  case  however  the  vowels
should  form  a  linear  continuum  as  the  tones  do.  On  the
contrary,  as  it  is  in  many  ways  interesting  to  notice,  the  vowels
are  pretty  definitely  correlated  only  to  certain  fixed  points  in
the  tone-continuum,  points  moreover  which  together  form  a
series  of  octaves — their  order  being  u,  0,  a,  e,  i  (as  pronounced
on  the  continent)2.  This  is  exemplified  in  many  onomatopoeic
names  for  sounds  or  for  the  creatures  producing  them.  It  is
also  generally,  perhaps  always,  true  that  the  creatures  volun-
tarily producing  the  most  varied  sounds  have  the  most  com-
plicated organs  of  hearing — a  fact  which  confirms  the  biological
evidence  for  the  differentiation  of  tonal  sensations  from  noises*.

The  Lower  Senses.

§  7.  Unlike  the  higher  senses  of  sight  and  hearing,  the  lower
senses  of  touch,  taste,  smell,  warmth,  &c.,  do  not  constitute  quali-
tative continua.  '  Temperatures '  may  indeed  be  represented  as

1  Cf.  v.  Hensen,  Arch.  f.  Ohrenheilk.  xiii.  (1886),  pp.  69  ff.; Stumpf,  Tonpsychol.
ii.  §  28.

2  Cf.  the  investigations  carried  out  in  Stumpf  s  laboratory  by  Kohler,  Zeitschr.  f.
Psych,  liv.  (1910),  pp.  241  ff.,  Iviii.  (1911),  pp.  59  ff.

3  A  propos  of  this  connexion  between  the  production  and  the  perception  of  tone  a
suggestion  of  KUlpe's  is  worth  mentioning. Notwithstanding  the  greater  difference
in  pitch  between  the  two  tones  of  a  given  interval  in  a  higher  octave  as  compared
with  a  lower  one,  musical  people — unlike  the  unmusical — regard  the  equality  of  both
cases  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  that  it  by  no  means  is. It  becomes  however  more
comprehensible  if  we  suppose  that  difference  in  the  adjustment  of  the  vocal  chords  in
singing  the  said  interval  is  in  both  cases  the  same. Cf.  Kiilpe,  Grundriss  der  Psycho-
logie,  1893,  p.  no;  also  Stumpf,  Tonpsychologie^  i.  pp.  339  ff.


134  Sensation  and  Movement [CH.  v,  §  7

ranging  in  opposite  directions  between  a  zero  of  no  sensation
and  the  organic  sensations  due  to  the  destructive  action  at
both  extremes  of  heat  and  cold  alike.  But  the  continuity  in
each  direction  in  this  case  is  intensive  rather  than  qualitative.
Tastes  fall  into  the  four  distinct  qualities  known  as  sweet,  sour,
bitter,  saline ;  but  smells  hardly  admit  of  classification  at  all.

Unlike  the  higher  senses  again,  these  lower  senses  frequently
yield  sensation-complexes  from  two  or  more  of  them  :  in  a
draught  of  mulled  claret,  for  example,  we  can  discriminate
various  'flavours'  as  well  as  '  aroma,'. astringence,  and  warmth.
Their  treatment  in  detail,  however,  is  for  the  most  part  mainly
of  interest  to  the  physiologist;  though  there  are  one  or  two
points  calling  for  our  notice  in  the  case  of  touch  and  '  tem-
perature.' Noteworthy  first  of  all  is  their  close  connexion  with,
we  might  almost  say  their  primary  inclusion  within,  the  general
sensibility — as  we  have  already  remarked  a  propos  of  the  ambi-
guity of  the  term  '  feeling1.'  So  when  differentiated  as  specific
senses,  even  in  perception  they  are  still  beset  with  a  certain
ambiguity  because  of  the  peculiar  share  of  the  body  itself  in
'the  physical  basis'  of  their  stimuli.  Thus  when  I  say  I  feel
warm  or  cold,  I  refer  to  a  certain  state  of  my  body,  with  which
I  so  far  identify  myself.  But  when  we  talk  of  specific  sensations
of  temperature  such  language  has  not  the  passable  accuracy
there  is  in  talking  of  a  specific  sensation  of  red.  What  is  meant
is  neither  a  state  of  the  body  alone  nor  a  state  of  the  environ-
ment alone,  but  a  varying  relation  between  the  two.  As  Locke
and  Berkeley  remarked — and  indeed  the  ancient  sceptics  long
before  them — water  of  a  given  temperature  'sensed'  as  warm
by  one  hand  may  be  '  sensed '  as  cool  by  the  other.  For  the
stimulus  is  not  a  temperature  at  all  but  a  loss  or  gain  of  heat,
and  the  intensity  of  the  sensation  depends  on  the  rate  of  such
loss  or  gain.  But  there  is  a  further  relativity  still.  The  zero  or
indifference  point  at  which  there  is  neither  loss  nor  gain  of  heat,
or — to  be  more  accurate — where  the  temperature  is  steady,  varies
considerably  for  different  parts  of  the  body2.  A  like  local

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  3,  p.  41.

2  The  temperature  of  exposed  parts  of  the  body  is  usually  considerably  lower  than
that  of  the  rest,  but  there  is  still  no  sense  of  heat  or  cold  unless  it  is  raised  or  lowered;
and  after  a  fall  of  temperature  there  is  a  sensation  of  cold  till  the  indifference  point  is
regained  though  all  the  while  the  temperature  is  rising,  and  vice  versa  after  a  rise  of


CH.  v,  §  8]  The  Lower  Senses  135

relativity,  as  we  might  call  it,  pertains  in  a  far  higher  degree  to
the  sense  of  touch  and  is  peculiar  to  these  two  senses,  since  they
alone  have  an  organ,  the  skin,  coextensive  with  the  whole  super-
ficies of  the  body:  we  shall  have  presently  to  consider  it  further
under  the  title  of  '  local  signs.'  Again  the  imperfect  differentia-
tion that  makes  it  inaccurate  to  describe  the  one  sense  as  pre-
senting temperature  also  makes  it  inaccurate  to  speak  of  the
other  as  presenting  pressure.  The  '  adequate  stimulus/  to  put
the  matter  physiologically  and  here  most  simply,  is  not  neces-
sarily mechanical  pressure :  the  same  sensation  may  be  the
concomitant  of  either  pressure  or  tension1.

Still  less  sharply  differentiated  from  the  general  sensibility
or  coenaesthesis  are  the  many  very  various  sensations  which  are
classed  together  as  '  organic,'  because  we  come  later  to  refer
most  of  them  to  states  of  one  or  other  of  the  internal  organs,
as  with  hunger,  thirst,  dyspnoea,  for  example ;  though  some,  as
exhilaration  or  depression,  are  referred  rather  to  the  bodily
state  as  a  whole.  But  the  two  are  in  fact  inseparable,  in  so
far  as  the  healthy  working  or  otherwise  of  any  organ  tends  to
increase  or  decrease  the  general  sense  of  bodily  comfort.  In
other  respects  too  these  so-called  organic  sensations  are  ex-
tremely complex  and  difficult  to  analyse  :  they  seem  usually
to  be  not  only  complexes  of  simpler  sensations  but  to  involve
reflex  actions  as  well2.  They  are  nevertheless  very  important,
and  we  shall  have  to  deal  with  them  again  in  other  connexions
later  on.

Movement.

§  8.  Closely  allied  to  organic  sensations  are  the  sensations
that  we  at  first  normally  experience  only  when  we  react  to  such
sensations  as  are  given  :  they  belong  to  the  active  as  distinct
from  the  passive  or  receptive  side  of  experience,  but  are  none
the  less  in  themselves  sensory.  Like  organic  sensations  they
are  usually  complexes,  but  are  more  readily  analysed — so  to

temperature.  But,  if  the  change  persists,  a  new  indifference  point  ensues  in  consequence
of  adaptation.  The  'subjective'  relativity  is  thus  altogether  very  great.

1  Cf.  T.  Thunberg's  article,  Nagel's  Handbuch  der  Physiologic,  1907,  iii.  p.  658.

J  Experimental  psychology  has  already  begun  to  throw  some  light  on  this  intricate
subject.  The  following  are  worth  consulting: — Articles  by  E.  Meumann,  Archiv  ff
die  ges.  Psychol.  ix.  (1907),  pp.  26  ff. ;  xiv.  (1909),  pp.  279  ff. ;  and  by  F.  E.  O.  Schultze,
xi.  (1908),  pp.  147  ff.


136  Sensation  and  Movement [CH.  v,  §  8

say,  experimentally — first  by  anaesthesia  or  paralysis,  which
may  suspend  some  of  them,  and  secondly  by  movements  of  our
limbs  or  body,  so-called  '  passive  movements,'  effected  externally.
Unlike  many  organic  sensations,  of  which  we  are  scarcely
conscious  save  when  the  organs  are  out  of  gear,  these  motor
presentations  pertain  exclusively  to  the  normal  working  of  such
organs  as  we  directly  control.  These  have  their  own  strictly
'  organic  sensations '  as  in  fatigue  from  excessive  exercise,  or
its  opposite,  that  want  of  exercise  which  might  be  called
'  muscular  hunger.'  In  describing  such  complexes  as  motor
presentations,  we  need  carefully  to  guard  against  importing
spatial  implications  into  the  term.  As  'sensed1  but  not  per-
ceived, they  have  extensity  and  protensity,  but  imply  neither
time  nor  space  nor  motion.

But  as  normally  experienced  they  have  always  one  charac-
teristic of  physical  movement  that  does  not  belong  to  the  mere
geometry  of  motion  :  though  they  do  not  directly  and  alone
suffice  to  make  us  acquainted  with  position  or  direction  or  velo-
city, certain  of  them  do  make  us  acquainted  with  '  force '  both
as  freely  exerted  and  as  more  or  less  completely  resisted.  In
other  words,  though  none  of  them  as  such  are  kinematic,  there  is
one  constituent  always  present  in  '  active  movement '  that  is
kinetic,  or  dynamic,  using  this  term,  as  physicists  do,  to  cover
both  momentum  and  pressure.  It  may  be  thought  that  in  '  free'
unimpeded  movements  there  is  no  sense  of  effort.  But  that
some  effort  is  present,  however  unobtrusive,  may  be  inferred
from  the  fact  that  even  such  movements,  if  continued  long
enough,  lead  to  fatigue.  But  the  experience  of  force  would  be
of  no  practical  avail  without  the  other  constituents  which  help
to  prepare  the  way  for  spatial  perception.  It  seems  well  there-
fore to  confine  the  useful  term  '  kinaesthetic  sensations,'  which
was  proposed  as  a  name  for  the  whole  group1,  to  its  last-mentioned
constituents  exclusively.  They  might  be  more  significantly  called
'  dirigo-motor '  if  Spencer  had  not  unfortunately  misapplied  this
term  to  the  kinetic  factor  itself.  I  have  suggested  'auxilio-
motor ' ;  but,  so  far  as  I  know,  it  has  not  been  adopted.  It  is
because  of  the  absence  of  these  sensations  that  the  anaesthetic

1  Bastian,  The  Brain  as  an  organ  of  Mind,  1880,  p.  543.  The  term  is  useful  as
avoiding  the  confusion  of  psychology  and  physiology  which  the  term  '  muscular  sense '
involves.


CH.  v,  §  8]  Movement  137

patient  cannot  directly  tell  whether  his  efforts  have  been  effectual
or  not,  nor  in  what  position  his  limbs  have  been  placed  by  move-
ments from  without,  but  has  to  fall  back  on  the  indirect  evidence
afforded  him  by  sight1.  Movements,  we  must  suppose,  originally
belonged  to  one  undifferentiated,  or  rather  imperfectly  differen-
tiated continuum  ;  but,  as  development  advanced,  tended  more
and  more  to  become  like  sensations,  a  collection  of  special
continua,  i.e.  groups  of  distinct  movements  separately  possible
and  admitting  of  definite  combinations  in  various  ways.

Whereas  kinaesthetic  presentations  were  commonly  allowed
to  be  purely  sensory — the  concomitants  of  various  centripetal
excitations2  from  skin,  tendons,  muscles,  &c. — a  very  different
view3  long  prevailed  concerning  motor  presentations  proper,
a  view,  however,  now  generally  discredited,  if  not  completely
overthrown4.  According  to  this  view,  "the  characteristic
feeling  of  exerted  force "  must  be  regarded,  Bain  maintained,
"not  as  arising  from  an  inward  transmission... but  as  the  con-
comitant of  the  outgoing  current  by  which  the  muscles  are
stimulated  to  act"  {Op.  cit.  p.  79).  The  necessity  for  this  as-
sumption has  certainly  not  been  established  on  physiological
grounds,  nor  apparently  did  Bain  rely  primarily  on  these ;  for  at
the  very  outset  of  his  discussion  we  find  him  saying  "  that  action
is  a  more  intimate  and  inseparable  property  of  our  constitution
than  any  of  our  sensations,  and  enters  as  a  component  part  into
every  one  of  our  senses5"  (Op.  cit.  p.  59).  But  this  important
psychological  truth  is  affirmed  as  strenuously  by  some,  at  any
rate  of  Bain's  opponents  (e.g.  William  James)  as  it  was  by  Bain
himself.  Unhappily  many,  under  the  same  psychophysical  bias
and  so  induced,  like  the  upholders  of  this  innervation  theory,  to
look  for  evidence  of  subjective  activity  in  the  wrong  place,  have
been  led  to  doubt  or  to  deny  the  reality  of  this  activity  altogether.

1  The  stock  instance  is  that  of  an  unfortunate  woman  who  was  liable  to  drop  her
baby  if  she  took  her  eyes  off  it.

2  Hence  the  older  name  of  '  muscular  or  sixth  sense '  applied  to  them  by  Sir  Charles
Bell,  Weber,  Sir  William  Hamilton  and  others.

3  First  tentatively  advanced by the great physiologist  Johannes  Miiller, and
adopted  by  Helmholtz,  Ludwig,  Wundt,  and  especially  by  Bain.

4  Cf.  Bastian,  Op.  cit.  pp.  691  sqq.\  Ferrier,  The  Functions  of  the  Brain  (1886),
and  ed.,  pp.  382  sqq. ;  James,  Principles  of  Psychology  (1890),  ch.  xxvi.

8  Precisely  for  this  reason  activity  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  presentational  at  all.
Cf.  above,  ch.  iii,  §  i.


138  Sensation  and  Movement [CH.  v,  §  8

In  fact,  this  theory,  while  it  lasted,  tended  to  sustain  an  undue
separation  of  so-called  'sensory'  from  so-called  'motor'  pre-
sentations, as  if  living  experience  were  literally  an  alternation  of
two  independent  states,  one  wholly  passive  and  the  other  wholly
active,  corresponding  to  the  anatomical  distinction  of  organs  of
sense  and  organs  of  movement.  The  subject  of  experience  or
Ego  does  not  pass  to  and  fro  between  a  sensorium  commune  or
intelligence  department  and  a  motorium  commune  or  executive,
is  not  in  successive  intervals  merely  receptive  or  merely  active,
still  less  always  passive ;  but  is  rather  always  actively  en  rapport
with  an  active  Non-Ego,  commonly  called  the  External  World.


CHAPTER VI

PERCEPTION

Integration : Meanings  of  Perception.

§  I.  IN  treating  apart  of  the  differentiation  of  our  sensory
and  motor  continua,  as  resulting  merely  in  a  number  of  dis-
tinguishable sensations  and  movements,  we  have  been  compelled
by  the  exigencies  of  exposition  to  leave  out  of  sight  another
process  which  really  advances  flarz  flassu  with  this  differentiation,
viz.  the  integration  or  synthesis  of  these  proximately  elementary
presentations  into  those  complex  presentations  which  are  called
percepts,  intuitions,  sensori-motor  reactions  and  the  like.  It  is,
of  course,  not  to  be  supposed  that  in  the  evolution  of  mind
any  creature  attained  to  such  variety  of  distinct  sensations  and
movements,  as  a  human  being  possesses,  without  making  even
the  first  step  towards  building  up  this  material  into  the  most
rudimentary  knowledge  and  action.  On  the  contrary,  there
is  every  reason  to  think,  as  has  been  said  already  incidentally,
that  further  differentiation  was  helped  by  previous  integration,
that  perception  prepared  the  way  for  distincter  sensations,  and
purposive  action  for  more  varied  movements1.  This  process
of  synthesis,  which  is  in  the  truest  sense  a  psychical  process,
deserves  some  general  consideration  before  we  proceed  to  the
several  complexes  that  result  from  it.

Certainly  the  most  important — if  not  all — of  these  complexes
are  consequences  of  that  principle  of  subjective  selection  whereby
interesting  sensations  lead  through  the  intervention  of  feeling
to  movements ;  and  whereby  the  movements  that  turn  out  to
subserve  such  interest  come  to  have  a  share  in  it.  In  this
way — which  we  need  not  stay  to  examine  more  closely  now —
it  happens  that  a  certain  sensation,  comparatively  intense,  and
i  Cf.  ch.  iv,  §  3,  P.  81.


140  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  I

a  certain  movement,  definite  enough  to  control  that  sensation,
engage  attention,  to  the  more  or  less  complete  exclusion  of
the  other  less  intense  sensations  and  more  diffused  movements
that  accompany  them.  Apart  from  this  intervention  of  con-
trolling movements,  the  presentation-continuum — no  matter  how
much  it  became  differentiated — would  still  remain, for  all  purposes
of  knowledge,  little  better  than  the  disconnected  manifold  for
which  Kant  took  it.  At  the  same  time  it  is  to  be  remembered
that  the  subject  obtains  command  of  particular  movements  out
of  the  general  mass  involved  in  emotional  expression  only  because
such  movements,  when  they  occur,  are  found  to  control  certain
sensations.  Before  experience,  and  apart  from  heredity,  there
seems  not  only  no  scientific  warrant  for  assuming  any  sort  of
practical  prescience  but  also  none  for  the  hypothesis  of  a  priori
forms  of  knowledge.  Nor  is  there  any  evidence  of  a  pre-
established  harmony  between  the  active  and  affective  states  of
the  subject,  or — it  may  be  safer  to  say — there  is  indefinitely
little :  painful  reactions  are  aversive  and  pleasurable  reactions
become  appetitive.  A  sentient  creature  moves  first  of  all,  as  we
have  already  seen,  because  it  feels,  not  because  it  intends.  A
long  process  of  trial  and  error  must  have  been  necessary  to  secure
as  much  purposive  movement  as  even  a  worm  displays.  In  this
process  natural  selection  probably  played  the  chief  part  at  the
outset,  subjective  selection  becoming  more  prominent  as  the  pro-
cess advanced.  It  seems  impossible  to  except  from  this  process
the  movements  of  the  special  sense-organs.  Here  too  subjective
interest  will  explain,  so  far  as  psychological  explanation  is
possible,  those  syntheses  of  motor  and  sensory  presentations
which  we  shall  call  spatial  percepts  and  intuitions  of  material
things.  For  example,  some  of  the  earliest  lessons  of  this  kind
seem  to  be  acquired,  as  we  may  presently  see,  in  the  process  of
exploring  the  body  by  means  of  the  limbs, — a  process  for  which
grounds  in  subjective  interest  can  obviously  never  be  wanting.
All  such  syntheses  or  integrations  depend  primarily  on  what
we  have  called  'movements  of  attention'  (cf.  ch.  iii,  §  3),  which
movements  in  turn  depend  very  largely  upon  the  pleasure  or
pain  that  presentations  occasion.  To  some  extent,  however,
there  is  no  doubt  that  attention  may  pass  non-voluntarily  from
one  indifferent  presentation  to  another,  each  being  sufficiently
intense  to  give  what  has  been  called  a  '  shock  of  surprise,'  but


CH.  vi,  §  i]  Meanings  of  Perception  141

not  so  intense  as  to  awaken  feeling  to  move  for  their  detention
or  dismissal.  But  throughout  the  process  of  mental  develop-
ment, where  we  are  concerned  with  what  is  new,  the  range  of
such  indifference  is  probably  small :  indifferent  presentations
there  will  be,  but  that  does  not  matter  while  there  are  others
that  are  interesting  to  take  the  lead.

Perception  as  a  psychological  term  has  various,  though  related,
meanings  with  different  writers.  It  sometimes  means  only  the
recognition  of  a  sensation  or  movement  as  distinct  from  its  original
presentation.  But  more  frequently  it  is  used  as  the  equivalent  of
what  has  been  otherwise  called  the  '  localisation  and  projection  '
of  sensations — that  is  to  say,  of  sensations  apprehended  either
as  affections  of  some  part  of  our  own  body  regarded  as  extended
— a  pin  prick,  for  example — or  as  qualities  of  it  or  of  some  foreign
body  beyond  it — for  example,  the  colour  of  one's  hand  or  of  the
pen  in  it.  According  to  the  former  usage  strictly  taken,  there
might  be  perception  without  any  spatial  presentation  at  all ;  a
sensation  that  had  been  attended  to  a  few  times  being  perceived
as  familiar.  Such  percept  as  a  '  presentative-representative '
complex  and  wholly  sensory,  we  might  symbolize,  so  far,  as
5  +  s,  indicating  by  5  the  present  sensation  and  by  s  the  ground
in  past  experience  of  its  familiarity1.  According  to  the  latter
usage,  an  entirely  new  sensation — if  such  were  possible — pro-
vided it  were  complicated  with  motor  experiences  in  the  way
required  for  its  localisation  or  projection,  would  become  a
percept.  Such  a  percept  again  might  be  roughly  symbolized  as
X  +  (M  +  m),  or  as  X  +  m  simply,  M  standing  for  actual  move-
ments, as  in  ocular  adjustment,  which  in  some  cases  might  be
only  former  movements  represented  or  m.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact
actual  perception  probably  invariably  includes  both  meanings :
impressions  which  we  recognise  we  also  localise  or  project,  and
impressions  which  are  localised  or  projected  are  never  entirely
new — they  are,  at  least,  perceived  as  sounds  or  colours  or  aches,
&c.  It  will,  however,  frequently  happen  that  we  are  specially
concerned  with  only  one  side  of  the  whole  process,  as  is  the
case  with  a  tea-taster  or  a  colour-mixer  on  the  one  hand ;  or,
on  the  other,  with  the  patient  who  is  perplexed  to  decide  whether
what  he  sees  is  '  subjective,'  like  the  spectral  dagger  that  be-
wildered Macbeth,  or  whether  it  is  'real.'

1  Cf.  below,  ch.  vii,  §  i.


142  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  i

But  there  is  still  a  distinction  called  for :  perception,  as  we
now  know  it,  involves  not  only  recognition  (or  assimilation)  and
'  spatial  reference,'  as  it  is  not  very  happily  termed,  but  it  usually
involves  '  reference '  to  a  thing  as  well.  We  may  perceive  a
sound  or  a  light  without  any  presentation  of  that  which  sounds
or  shines  ;  but  none  the  less  we  regard  such  sound  or  light  as
the  quality  or  change  or  state  of  a  something  that  is  distinct
not  only  from  the  subject  attending  but  from  all  the  impressions
to  which  he  is  attending.  Here  again  actual  separation  is
impossible,  because  this  '  objective  reference '  has  been  so  inter-
twined throughout  our  mental  development  with  the  other  two.
Still  a  careful  psychological  analysis  will  shew  that  such
'  reification,'  as  we  might  almost  call  it,  has  depended  on  special
circumstances,  which  we  can  at  any  rate  conceive  absent.  These
special  circumstances  are  briefly  the  constant  conjunctions  and
successions  of  impressions,  for  which  psychology  can  give  no
reason,  and  the  constant  movements  to  which  they  prompt.
Thus  we  receive  together,  e.g.  those  impressions  we  now  recognise
as  severally  the  scent,  colour,  and  'feel'  of  the  rose  we  pluck  and
handle.  We  might  call  each  a  'percept,'  and  the  whole  a  'complex
percept.'  But  there  is  more  in  such  a  complex  than  a  sum  of
partial  percepts ;  there  is  the  apprehension  or  intuition  of  the
rose  as  a  thing  having  this  scent,  colour  and  texture1.  We  have,
then,  under  perception  to  consider  (a)  the  recognition,  and  (V)  the
localisation,  of  impressions,  and  (c)  the  '  intuition '  of  things.


Recognition  of  Impressions.

§  2.  The  range  of  the  terms  recognition  or  assimilation  of
impressions  is  wide :  between  the  simplest  mental  process  they
may  be  supposed  to  denote  and  the  most  complex  there  is  a
great  difference.  The  penguin  that  watched  unmoved  the  first
landing  of  man  upon  its  lonely  rock  becomes  as  wild  and  wary
as  more  civilised  fowl  after  two  or  three  visits  from  its  molester:
it  then  recognises  that  featherless  biped.  His  friends  at  home

1  Intuition  is  used  here  to  denote  a  complex  of  simple  percepts  synthesized  as
a  unity  in  space  and  time.  But  to  speak  instead  of  a  complex  or  of  an  acquired
percept  does  not  adequately  indicate  either  the  unity  or  the  'ideal  construction'
that  'thinghood'  implies.  The  German  Anschauung  is  frequently  used  in  a  like


CH.  vi,  §  2] Recognition  of  Impressions  143

also  recognise  him  though  altered  by  years  of  peril  and  exposure.
In  the  latter  case  some  trick  of  voice  or  manner,  some  '  striking '
feature,  calls  up  and  sustains  a  crowd  of  memories  of  the  traveller
in  the  past — events  leading  on  to  the  present  scene.  The  two
recognitions  are  widely  different,  and  it  is  from  states  of  mind
more  like  the  latter  than  the  former  that  psychologists  have
usually  drawn  their  description  of  such  simple  perception.  At
the  outset,  they  say,  we  have  a  primary  presentation  or  impression
P,  and  after  sundry  repetitions  there  remains  a  mass  or  a  series
of  P  residua,/! /»2A---  '•>  perception  ensues  when,  sooner  or  later,
Pn  'calls  up'  and  associates  itself  with  these  representations  or
ideas.  Much  of  our  later  perception  awakens,  no  doubt,  both
distinct  memories  and  distinct  expectations.  But,  since  these
imply  previous  perceptions,  it  is  obvious  that  the  earliest  form
of  recognition  must  be  free  from  such  associations,  and  so  is  not
equivalent  to  the  logical  judgment,  Pn  is  a  P.  Assimilation
involves  retentiveness  and  differentiation,  as  we  have  seen,  and
prepares  the  way  for  re-presentation ;  but  in  itself  there  is  no
confronting  the  new  with  the  old,  no  determination  of  likeness,
and  no  subsequent  classification1.  The  pure  sensation  we  may
regard  as  a  psychological  myth  ;  and  the  simple  image,  or  such
sensation  revived,  seems  equally  mythical,  as  we  may  see  later
on.  The  «th  sensation  is  not  like  the  first :  it  is  a  change  in  a
presentation-continuum  that  has  itself  been  changed  by  those
preceding ;  and  it  cannot  with  any  propriety  be  said  to  repro-
duce these  past  sensations,  for  they  never  had  the  individuality
which  such  reproduction  implies.  Nor  does  it  associate  with
images  like  itself,  since  where  there  is  association  there  must
first  have  been  distinctness,  and  what  can  be  associated  can
also,  for  some  good  time  at  least,  be  dissociated.

So  far  for  expository  convenience  we  have  regarded  recog-
nition or  simple  perception  as  if  it  were  an  isolated  process:  in
point  of  fact,  like  all  other  psychical  processes,  it  is  always  an
integral  part  of  the  larger  whole,  living  experience.  Hence  in
becoming  familiar  an  impression  acquires  what  has  been  well
called  '  primary  meaning  '2 ;  for  it  has  only  become  familiar
through  attention  and  it  has  only  been  attended  to  because  it
interested  the  subject — affecting  it  pleasantly  or  painfully —

1  Cf.  below,  ch.  vii,  §  i.

2  Stout,  Mani4al  of  Psychology,  3rd  edn.  (1913),  pp.  182  f.


144  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  3

and  so  has acquired practical significance — merely  cognitive
significance  has  no  place  at  this  level1.

Localisation  of  Impressions : the  factors  involved.

§  3.  To  treat  of  the  localisation  of  impressions  is  really  to
give  an  account  of  the  steps  by  which  the  psychological
individual  comes  to  a  knowledge  of  space.  At  the  outset  of
such  an  inquiry  it  seems  desirable  first  of  all  to  make  plain
what  lies  within  our  purview,  and  what  does  not,  lest  we
disturb  the  peace  of  those  who,  confounding  philosophy  and
psychology,  are  ever  eager  to  fight  for  or  against  the  a  priori
character  of  this  element  of  knowledge.  That  the  knowledge  of
space  is  a  priori  in  the  epistemological  sense  it  is  no  concern  of
the  psychologist  either  to  assert  or  to  deny.  Psychologically
a  priori,  it  certainly  is  not :  not,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  sense  of
being  from  the  very  beginning  either  implicitly  or  explicitly
a  factor  in  all  presentation  whatever.  It  will  help  to  make
this  matter  clearer  if  we  distinguish  what  philosophers
frequently  confuse,  viz.  the  concrete  spatial  experiences,  consti-
tuting actual  localisation  for  the  individual,  and  the  concept
of  space,  at  once  abstract  and  ideal,  based  on  what  is  found  to
be  common  in  such  experiences.  A  gannet's  mind  '  possessed
of  a  philosopher,  if  such  a  conceit  may  be  allowed,  would
certainly  afford  its  tenant  very  different  spatial  experiences  from
those  he  might  share  if  he  took  up  his  quarters  in  a  mole.  So,
any  one  who  has  revisited  in  after  years  a  place  from  which  he
had  been  absent  since  childhood  knows  how  largely  a  '  personal
equation,'  as  it  were,  enters  into  his  spatial  perceptions.  Or  the
same  truth  may  be  brought  home  to  him  if,  walking  with  a
friend  more  athletic  than  himself,  they  come  upon  a  ditch,  which
both  know  to  be  twelve  feet  wide,  but  which  the  one  feels  he  can
clear  by  a  jump  and  the  other  feels  he  cannot.  In  the  concrete
'up'  is  much  more  than  a  different  direction  from  'along.'  The
hen-harrier,  which  cannot  soar,  is  indifferent  to  a  quarry  a
hundred  feet  above  it,  to  which  the  peregrine,  built  for  soaring,
would  at  once  give  chase  ;  but  the  hen-harrier  is  on  the  alert  as
soon  as  it  descries  prey  that  is  on  or  near  the  ground.

In  the  concrete,  the  body  is  the  origin  or  datum  to  which

1  Cf.  ch.  i,  §  4,  pp.  20  f.


CH.  vi,  §  3] Localisation  of  Impressions  145

all  positions  are  referred,  and  thus  'here'  for  the  individual
percipient  is  an  absolute  position,  one  that  has  no  counterpart  in
the  thoroughgoing  relativity  of  pure  space.  Also  'the  body-
sense  '  in  contrast  with  what  may  be  called  '  the  projecting
senses'  yields  the  further  absolute  distinction  of  internal  and
external,  marking  off  the  bodily  self  from  its  environment.  The
environing  space,  again,  for  the  percipient,  varies  in  character,
intimacy,  and  even  dimensions  as  perception  recedes  from  the
foreground  towards  the  background,  from  objects  to  which  we
can  adjust  by  changes  of  posture  to  objects  only  to  be  reached
by  locomotion.  Moreover,  our  various  bodily  movements  and
their  combinations  constitute  a  network  of  co-ordinates,  quali-
tatively distinguishable  but  geometrically,  so  to  put  it,  both
redundant  and  incomplete.  It  is  a  long  way  from  these  facts
of  perception,  which  the  brutes  share  with  us,  to  that  scientific
concept  of  space,  as  having  three  dimensions  and  no  qualitative
differences,  which  we  have  elaborated  by  the  aid  of  thought  and
language ;  and  which  reason  may  see  to  be  the  logical  presup-
position of  what  in  the  order  of  mental  development  has
chronologically  preceded  it.  That  the  experience  of  space  is
not  psychologically  original  seems  obvious — quite  apart  from
any  successful  explanation  of  its  origin — from  the  mere  con-
sideration of  its  complexity.  Thus  we  must  have  a  plurality
of  objects — A  out  of  £,  B  beside  C,  distant  from  D,  between  it
and  A,  and  so  on  ;  and  all  these  relations  of  externality,  juxta-
position, distance  and  internality  imply  further  specialisation  ;
for  with  a  mere  plurality  of  objects  we  have  not  straightway
spatial  relations.  Juxtaposition,  e.g.  is,  strictly  speaking,  only
possible  when  the  related  objects  form  a  sensible  continuum  ;
but,  again,  not  any  continuity  is  extensive.  Now  how  has  the
perception  of  this  complexity  come  about  ?  We  shall  find  that
it  depends  on  three  factors,  each  of  which  is  indispensable.

(a)  The  first  condition  of  spatial  experience  seems  to  lie  in
what  has  been  noted  above  as  the  extensity  of  sensation1.  This
much  we  may  allow  is  original ;  for  the  longer  we  reflect  the
more  clearly  we  see  that  no  combination  or  association  of
sensations  varying  only  in  intensity  and  quality,  not  even  if
motor  presentations  were  among  them,  will  account  for  this
element  in  our  spatial  perception.  A  succession  of  touches  «,  b,

1  Cf.  ch.  iv,  §  2,  p.  78  ;  ch.  v,  §  4,  p.  116.
W. P.  10


146  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  3

r,  d  may  be  combined  with  a  continuous  series  of  movements
*«!,  mz,  m3,  m4 ;  both  series  may  be  repeatedly  reversed ;  and
finally  the  touches  may  be  presented  simultaneously.  In  this
way  we  might  attain  to  a  knowledge  of  coexisting  objects  having
a  certain  quasi-distance  between  them.  Such  knowledge  is  an
important  element  in  our  perception  of  space ;  but  it  is  not
the  whole  of  it.  For,  as  has  been  already  remarked  by  critics
of  the  associationist  psychology,  we  have  an  experience  very
similar  to  this  in  singing  and  hearing  musical  notes  or  the
chromatic  scale — where  also  we  talk  figuratively  of  'distance,'
'  compass,'  &c.  The  most  elaborate  attempt  to  get  extensity
out  of  succession  and  coexistence  in  this  way  is  that  of  Herbert
Spencer.  He  has  done,  perhaps,  all  that  can  be  done,  and  only
to  make  it  the  more  plain  that  the  entire  procedure  is  a  varepov
Trporepov.  We  do  not  first  experience  a  succession  of  (active)
touches  by  means  of  movements,  and  then,  when  these  im-
pressions are  simultaneously  presented,  regard  them  as  extensive,
because  they  are  now  associated  with  or  symbolize  the  original
series  of  movements.  But,  before  and  apart  from  movement
altogether,  we  experience  that  massiveness  or  extensity  of
impressions  within  which,  when  it  is  differentiated,  movements
enable  us  to  find  positions,  and  to  determine  distances1.

But,  it  may  be  impatiently  objected,  this  surely  amounts
to  the  monstrous  absurdity  of  making  the  contents  of  con-
sciousness extended.  The  edge  of  this  objection  will  best  be
turned  by  rendering  the  concept  of  extensity  more  precise.
Thus,  suppose  a  postage  stamp  pasted  on  the  back  of  the
hand ;  we  have  in  consequence  a  certain  sensation.  If  another
be  added  beside  it,  the  new  experience  would  not  be  adequately
described  by  merely  saying  we  have  a  greater  quantity  of
sensation  ;  for  intensity  also  involves  quantity,  and  increased

1  We  are  ever  in  danger  of  exaggerating  the  competence  of  a  new  discovery ;  and
the  associationists  seem  to  have  fallen  into  this  mistake,  not  only  in  the  use  they  have
made  of  the  concept  of  association  in  psychology  generally,  but  also  in  the  stress
they  have  laid  upon  the  fact  of  movement  when  explaining  our  space-perception  in
particular.  Indeed,  both  ideas  have  here  conspired  against  them :  association,  in
keeping  up  the  notion  that  we  have  only  to  deal  with  a  plurality  of  discrete
impressions;  and  movement,  in  keeping  to  the  front  the  idea  of  sequence.  Mill's
Examination  of  Hamilton  (3rd  ed.,  pp.  266  seq.)  surely  ought  to  convince  us  that,
unless  we  are  prepared  to  regard,  as  Mill  does,  '  the  idea  of  space  as  at  bottom  one
of  time'  (p.  276),  we  must  admit  the  inadequacy  of  our  experience  of  movement  alone
to  explain  the  origin  of  it


CH.  vi,  §  3] Extensity  and  Local  Signs  147

intensity  is  not  what  we  have  got.  A  sensation  of  a  certain
intensity,  say  a  sensation  of  'warm/  cannot  be  changed  into
one  having  two  qualities,  warm  and  cold,  leaving  the  intensity
unchanged;  but  with  extensity  the  corresponding  change  is
possible.  For  one  of  the  postage  stamps  a  piece  of  wet  cloth
of  the  same  size  might  be  substituted  and  the  massiveness  of
the  compound  sensation  would  still  remain  very  much  the
same.  Intensity  belongs  to  what  may  be  called  graded  quantity :
it  admits  of  increment  or  decrement,  but  is  not  a  sum  of  parts.
Nor  is  extensity,  as  such,  a  sum  of  parts ;  though  it  turns  out  to
imply  plurality,  since  it  can  be  differentiated.  We  might  describe
it  as  latent  or  merged  plurality,  or  better  still  as  a  '  ground '  of
plurality.  In  other  words,  to  say  that  a  single  presentation  has
massiveness  is  the  same  as  saying  that  a  portion  of  the  presen-
tation continuum,  at  the  moment  undiflferentiated,  is  capable  of
differentiation — as  happens,  if  for  one  of  the  two  stamps  the
wet  cloth  is  substituted.

b.  Attributing  this  property  of  extensity  to  the  presentation-
continuum  as  a  whole,  we  have  now  to  consider  the  relation  of
any  particular  sensation  to  this  larger  whole.  So  long  as  the
extensity  of  such  sensation  admits  of  diminution  without  the
sensation  becoming  nil,  so  long  the  sensation  either  has  or  may
have  two  or  more  so-called  'local  signs.'  For  what  is  gone —
one  of  the  stamps  e.g.  being  removed — though  identical  in  quality
and  intensity,  with  what  remains,  will  obviously  be  a  different  part
of  the  whole.  But  such  difference  of  relations  to  the  whole  can
only  be  regarded  as  affording  a  ground  or  possibility  of  local  dis-
tinction, not  as  being  from  the  beginning  such  an  overt  difference
as  the  term  '  local  sign,'  when  used  by  Lotze,  is  meant  to  imply.
But  we  can  say  that  more  partial  presentations  are  concerned  in
the  sensation  where  there  are  two  stamps  than  where  there  is
only  one.  The  local  differentiation  of  such  compound  sensation  is
what  we  have  next  to  consider  or,  in  other  words,  the  development
of  what  Weber  called  Ortsinn,  local  or  topical  sense.  To  illus-
trate what  is  meant  it  will  be  enough  to  refer  to  the  psychological
implications  of  the  fact  that  scarcely  two  portions  of  the  sensitive
surface  of  the  human  body  are  anatomically  alike.  Not  only  in
the  distribution  and  character  of  the  nerve-endings  but  in  the
variety  of  the  underlying  parts — in  one  place  bone,  in  .another
fatty  tissue,  in  others  tendons  or  muscles  variously  arranged — we

10 — 2


148  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  3

find  ample  ground  for  diversity  in  '  the  local  colouring '  of  sensa-
tions. And  comparative  zoology  helps  us  to  see  how  such
diversity  has  been  developed  as  external  impressions  and  the
answering  movements  have  gradually  differentiated  an  organism
originally  almost  homogeneous  and  symmetrical.  Between  one
point  and  another  on  the  surface  of  a  sphere  there  is  no  such
ground  of  difference ;  but  this  would  no  longer  be  true  if  the
sphere  revolved,  still  less  if  it  also  moved  to  and  fro  in  the
direction  of  its  axis.  Assuming  then  that  to  every  immediately
distinguishable  part  of  the  body  there  corresponds  a  local  sign,
we  may  allow  that  at  any  moment  only  a  certain  portion  of  this
continuum  is  definitely  within  the  field  of  consciousness  ;  but  no
one  will  maintain  that  a  part  of  one  hand  is  ever  felt  as  con-
tinuous with  part  of  the  other  or  with  part  of  the  face1.  Local
signs  have  thus  an  invariable  relation  to  each  other :  two
continuous  signs,  for  example,  are  not  one  day  quite  indis-
tinguishable and  quite  distinct  the  next2.  The  possibility  of
such  distinctness  is  implied  in  the  mere  massiveness  of  a  sensation
only  in  so  far  as  this  admits  of  gradual  differentiation  into  local
signs3.

We  have,  then,  so  far  as  such  differentiation  is  accomplished,
a  plurality  of  presentations  mutually  excludent4,  constituting  an
extensive  continuum,  presented  simultaneously,  and  having
certain  fixed  and  invariable  relations  to  each  other.  Of  such
experience  the  typical  case  is  that  of  passive  touch.  It  must  be

1  It  does  however  happen  in  certain  pathological  cases  of  so-called  'allocheiria'
that  the  patient  localises  a  sensation  on  the  opposite  side  to,  but  in  a  position  symme-
trical with,  that  of  the  exciting  stimulus. Also  it  is  often  found  that  ambidextrous
persons  have  more  than  usual  difficulty  in  distinguishing  between  right  and  left. With
internal  sensations  these  mistakes  are  never  made. Such  facts  may  be  fairly  regarded
as  evidence  of  the  existence  of  local  signs.

2  The  improvements  of  our  so-called  '  spatial  sense '  consequent  on  practice  are
obviously  no  real  contradiction  to  this ;  on  the  contrary,  these  facts  are  all  in  favour  of
making  the  differentiation  of  extensity  a  distinct  factor  in  our  space  experience. And
the  more  so  inasmuch  as  the  improvements  in  question  are  also very  marked  for
symmetrical  positions  even  though  the  practice  has  been  only  unilateral.

3  The  heroic  and  interesting  "  Human  Experiment  in  Nerve  Division  carried  out
by  Dr  Rivers  and  Dr  Head  "  tends  to  confirm  this  view  of  the  genesis  of  local  signs
from an  originally  undifferentiated extensity,  although their  novel terminology —
protopathic  and  epicritic  sensibility — is  not  very  felicitous. Cf.  Brain,  xxxi.  (1908),
pp.  323-450;  also  for  later  experiments,  Trotter  and  Da  vies,  "Experimental  Studies
in  the  Innervation  of  the  Skin,"  Journal  of  Physiology,  xxxviii.  (1909),  pp.  134-246.

*  As  to  this  '  incopresentability'  cf.  above,  ch.  iv,  §  i,  p.  80.


CH.  vi,  §  3] Extensity  and  Local  Signs  149

allowed  that  space  in  like  manner  involves  a  fixed  continuity  of
positions;  but  then  it  involves,  further,  the  possibility  of  move-
ment. Now  in  the  continuum  of  local  signs  alone  there  is
nothing  whatever  of  this.  A  plenum  we  might  call  it;  but  the
presentation  of  occupied  space  it  can  only  yield  after  its  several
local  signs  have  been  complicated  in  an  orderly  way  with  active
touches ;  when,  that  is,  we  have  frequently  experienced  the  con-
trast of  movements  with  contact  and  movements  without,  or  in
vacua.  It  is  quite  true  that  we  cannot  now  imagine  this  plenum
except  as  a  space,  because  we  cannot  now  divest  ourselves  of  the
motor  experiences  by  which  we  have  explored  it.  We  can,  how-
ever, form  some  idea  of  the  difference  between  the  perception
of  space  and  this  one  element  in  the  perception  by  contrasting
massive  internal  sensations  with  massive  superficial  ones,  or  the
general  sensation  of  the  body  as  '  an  animated  organism '  with
our  perception  of  it  as  extended.  Or  we  may  express  the  differ-
ence by  observing  that  extension  implies  the  distinction  of  here
and  there,  while  extensity  suggests  rather  a  certain  ubiquity —
rubiett  definitive  of  the  Schoolmen  of  which  Leibniz  speaks  in
his  Nouveaux  Essais  and  to  which  Clarke  too  referred  in  his
correspondence  with  him1.

It  must  seem  strange,  if  this  conception  of  extensity  is
essential  to  a  psychological  theory  of  space,  that  it  has  escaped
notice  so  long.  The  reason  may  be  that  in  investigations  into
the  origin  of  our  knowledge  of  space  it  was  always  the  concept  of
space  and  not  our  concrete  space  percepts  that  came  up  for
examination.  Now  in  space  as  we  conceive  it  one  position  is
distinguishable  from  another  solely  by  its  co-ordinates,  i.e.  by
the  magnitude  and  signs  of  certain  lines  and  angles,  as  referred
to  a  certain  datum,  fundamental  position  or  origin ;  and  these
elements  our  motor  experiences  seem  fully  to  explain.  But  on
reflexion  we  ought,  surely,  to  be  puzzled  by  the  question,  how
these  coexistent  positions  could  be  distinguished  as  '  places '  be-
fore those  movements  were  made  which  constitute  them  different
positions ;  and  how,  if  they  were  not  distinguished  the  move-
ments could  be  interpreted  spatially.  So  we  are  led  naturally  to
take  note  of  local  signs.  That  is  to  say,  the  link  we  suspected
to  be  missing  is  supplied  by  the  more  concrete  experiences
we  obtain  from  our  own  body,  in  which  two  positions  have  a

1  Cf.  Leibnitii  Opera philosophica  omnia,  Erdmann's  edn.,  pp.  273,  750.


150  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  3

qualitative  difference  or  '  local  sign  '  independently  of  movement.
True,  such  positions  would  not  be  known  as  spatial  without
movement ;  but  neither  would  the  movement  be  known  as
spatial  had  those  positions  no  other  difference  than  such  as
arises  from  movement.  In  a  balloon  drifting  steadily  in  a  fog
we  should  have  no  more  experience  of  change  of  position  than
if  it  hung  becalmed  and  still.  Again,  if  we  were  magically
spirited  from  place  to  place  we  might  become  familiar  with
them  as  TOTTOI  and  be  competent  to  write  a  topography  about
them,  but  we  should  be  altogether  unable  to  produce  an  itinerary
to  guide  others  in  reaching  them  in  a  natural  way.

c.  We  may  now  consider  the  part  which  movement  plays  in
furnishing  this  information,  that  is  to  say,  in  elaborating  the
presentations  of  the  originally  dimensionless  continuum1  into
percepts  of  space.  In  so  doing  we  must  bear  in  mind  that
while  this  continuum  implies  the  incopresentability  of  two
impressions  having  the  same  local  sign,  it  allows  not  only  of  the
presentation  of  sensations  of  varying  massiveness,  but  also  of  a
sensation  involving  the  whole  continuum  simultaneously,  as  in
Bain's  classic  example  of  the  warm  bath,  answering  to  the
'  definitive  ubiquity'  just  now  mentioned.  As  regards  the  motor
element  itself,  on  the  other  hand,  the  first  point  of  importance
is  the  incopresentability  and  invariability  of  a  successive  series  of
auxilio-motor  or  kinaesthetic  presentations,  Pi,P2,  P3, . . .  Pn.  P1
cannot  be  presented  along  with  P2,  and  from  P4  it  is  impossible
to  reach  /\  again  save  through  P3  and  Pz.  Such  a  series,  taken
alone,  could  afford  us,  it  is  evident,  nothing  but  the  knowledge
of  an  invariable  sequence  of  impressions  which  it  was  in  our
own  power  to  produce.  Calling  the  series  of  P's  'positional
signs,'  the  contrast  between  them  and  local  signs  is  obvious.
Both  are  invariable,  but  succession  characterises  the  one,  simul-
taneity the  other ;  the  one  yields  potential  position  without
place,  the  other  potential  place  (TOTTOS)  without  position  ;  hence
we  call  them  both  merely  signs2.  But  in  the  course  of  the
movements  necessary  to  the  exploration  of  the  body — probably

1  'Primitively  amorphous'  as Poincare  calls  it. To  identify  it  explicitly  with
three-dimensional  space  is  to  anticipate  our  spatial  concepts  before  the  level  even  of
our  spatial  percepts  is  reached. To  identify  it  with  two-dimensional  space  is  to
mistake  the  meaning  of  extensity  altogether.

2  Thus,  as  we have seen,  a  place  may  be  known  topographically  without  its
position  being  known  geographically,  and  vice  versa.


CH.  vi,  §  4] Movement  and  Positional  Signs  151

our  earliest  lesson  in  spatial  perception — these  positional  signs
receive  a  new  significance  from  the  active  and  passive  touches
that  accompany  them,  just  as  they  impart  to  these  last  a  sig-
nificance they  could  never  have  alone.


Tactual  Perception  of  Space.

§  4.  It  is  only  in  the  resulting  complex  that  we  have  the  pre-
sentations of  actual  position  and  of  spatial  relation.  For  space,
though  conceived  as  a  coexistent  continuum,  excludes  the  notion
of  omnipresence  or  ubiquity  :  two  positions  ld  and  lg  must  co-
exist, but  they  are  not  strictly  distinct  positions  so  long  as  we
conceive  ourselves  present  in  the  same  sense  in  both.  But,  if
Fd  and  Fg  are,  e.g.  two  impressions  produced  by  compass  points
touching  two  different  spots  as  ld  and  lg  on  the  hand  or  arm,
and  we  place  a  finger  upon  ld  and  move  it  to  lg,  experiencing
thereby  the  series  />,,  Pz,  Ps,  P4,  this  series  constitutes  ld  and  4
into  positions  and  also  invests  Fd  and  Fg  with  a  relation  not  of
mere  distinctness  as  TOTTOI  but  of  definite  distance.  The  result-
ing complex  perhaps  admits  of  symbolization  as  follows  :


T  t  t  t

^lAAA

Here  the  first  line  represents  a  portion  of  the  tactual  continuum,
Fd  and  Fg  being  distinct  'feels,'  if  we  may  so  say,  or  passive
touches  presented  along  with  the  fainter  sensations  of  the  con-
tinuum as  a  whole,  which  the  general  '  body-sense  '  involves  ;
T  stands  for  the  active  touch  of  the  exploring  finger  and  /\  for
the  corresponding  kinaesthetic  sensation  regarded  as  '  positional
sign  '  ;  the  rest  of  the  succession,  as  not  actually  present  at  this
stage  but  capable  of  revival  from  past  explorations,  is  symbolized
by  1  1  t  and  AAA-

When  the  series  of  movements  is  accompanied  by  active
touches  without  passive  there  arises  the  distinction  between
one's  own  body  and  foreign  bodies.  When  the  initial  movement
of  a  series  is  accompanied  by  both  active  and  passive  touches,
the  final  movement  by  active  touches  only,  and  the  intermediate
movements  are  unaccompanied  by  either,  we  get  the  further
presentation  of  empty  space  lying  between  us  and  them  —  but
not  until,  by  frequent  experience  of  contacts  along  with  those


152  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  4

intermediate  movements,  we  have  come  to  know  all  movement
not  merely  as  a  succession  but  as  a  change  of  position.  Thus
active  touches  come  at  length  to  be  'projected,'  passive  touches
alone  being  '  localised  '  in  the  stricter  sense.  But  in  actual  fact,  of
course,  the  localisation  of  one  impression  is  not  perfected  before
that  of  another  is  begun.  We  must  take  care  lest  our  neces-
sarily meagre  exposition  give  rise  to  the  mistaken  notion  that
localising  an  impression  consists  wholly  and  solely  in  performing
or  imaging  the  particular  movements  necessary  to  add  active
touches  to  a  group  of  passive  impressions.  That  this  cannot
suffice  is  evident ;  for  a  single  position  out  of  relation  to  all  other
positions  would  be  a  contradiction.  Localisation,  then,  though
it  depends  on  many  special  experiences  of  the  kind  described,  is
not  like  an  artificial  product  which  is  completed  a  part  at  a
time.  It  is  essentially  a  growth,  and  such  that  its  several  con-
stituents advance  together  in  definiteness  and  interconnexion.
So  far  has  this  development  now  advanced  that  we  do  not  even
imagine  the  special  movements  which  the  localisation  of  an
impression  implies ;  that  is  to  say,  they  are  no  longer  distinctly
represented  as  they  would  be  if  we  definitely  intended  to  make
them:  the  past  experiences  are  'retained,'  but  too  much  'com-
plicated '  in  the  mere  perception  to  be  appropriately  spoken  of
as  remembered  or  imaged.

A  propos  of  this  almost  instinctive  character  of  even  our
earliest  spatial  percepts  it  will  be  appropriate  to  animadvert  on
another  misleading  implication  in  the  current  use  of  such  terms
as  'localisation,'  'projection,'  'bodily  reference,'  'spatial  reference'
and  the  like.  The  implication  is  that  the  body  as  extended,  or
more  generally  that  external  space,  is  in  some  sort  presented  or
supposed  apart  from  the  localisation,  projection  or  reference  of
impressions  to  such  space.  That  it  may  be  possible  to  put  a
book  in  its  place  on  a  shelf  there  must  be  (i)  the  book,  and  (2),
distinct  and  apart  from  it,  the  place  on  the  shelf,  and  (3)  a
ticket  or  mark  on  the  book  indicating  this  place1.  But  in  the

1  It  was  in  this  sense  that  Lotze  used  the  term  '  local  sign.'  But  this  is  just  the
meaning  we  have  to  avoid  and  the  use  of  the  term  sign  is  so  far  misleading.  'Topical
factor '  would  be  a  safer  term,  if  we  could  begin  framing  our  terminology  afresh.
Anyhow  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  '  local  sign '  is  used  proleptically  not  indica-
tively.  It  is  not  meant  to  refer  to  '  a  clue  by  means  of  which  sensations  can  be
localised  in  our  percept  of  space '  (Lotze,  Metaphysik,  §  279).  It  is  our  name  for
one  of  the  factors  whereby  that  percept  is  obtained.  This,  of  course,  applies  also  to
the  term  'positional  sign.'


CH.  vi,  §  5] Visual  Perception  of  Space  153

evolution  of  our  spatial  experience  impressions  and  positions
are  not  thus  presented  apart.  We  can  have,  or  at  least  we  can
suppose,  an  impression  which  is  recognised  without  being  localised
as  has  been  already  said.  But  if  it  is  localised  this  means  that
a  more  complex  presentation  is  formed  by  the  synthesis  of  new
elements,  not  that  a  second  distinct  object  is  presented  and  then
some  indescribable  connexion  established  between  the  impression
and  it,  still  less  that  the  impression  is  referred  to  something  not
strictly  presented  at  all.  The  truth  is  that  the  body  as  extended
is  from  the  psychological  point  of  view  not  perceived  apart  from
localised  impressions.  In  like  manner  impressions  projected  (or
the  absence  of  projected  impressions)  will  constitute  all  that  is
perceived  as  the  occupied  (or  unoccupied)  space  beyond.  It  is
not  till  a  much  later  stage,  after  many  varying  experiences  of
different  impressions  similarly  localised  or  projected,  that  even
the  mere  materials  are  present  for  the  formation  of  such  an
abstract  concept  of  space  as  'spatial  reference'  implies1.  Psycho-
logists, being  themselves  at  this  later  stage,  are  apt  to  commit
the  oversight  of  introducing  it  into  the  earlier  stage,  the  genesis
of  which  they  are  seeking  to  ascertain.

Visual  Perception  of  Space.

§  5.  To  ascertain  the  genesis  of  the  tactual  perception  of
space  is  all  that  we  have  yet  attempted.  The  visual  perception
— so  far  as  it  is  metrical — presupposes  this ;  as  the  common
names  for  linear  magnitudes,  hand,  foot,  ell,  step,  &c.,  at  once
suggest.  It  is  only  by  reference  to  tangible  or  '  real '  magnitude,
that,  as  Berkeley  shewed  long  ago,  the  various  visual  or  'apparent'
magnitudes  of  an  object  have  any  sense  or  meaning  :  "  otherwise
there  can  be  nothing  steady  and  free  from  ambiguity  spoken  of
it2."  "  But,  as  has  been  often  remarked,  this  is  true,  though  to  a
less  degree,  of  tangible  as  well  as  of  visible  objects  "  :  such  is  the
comment  on  this  passage  of  Berkeley's  editor,  Dr  Campbell
Fraser.  There  is  a  certain  relativity  besetting  our  tactual  as
well  as  our  visual  perception  of  magnitude,  it  is  true ;  but  it  is
not  true  that  the  difference  between  the  two  is  one  of  degree ;  it
is  rather  a  difference  of  kind.  For  in  vision  the  apparent  size  of

1  Cf.  on  this  point  Poincare,  La  Science  et  FHypothese,  pp.  74,  75.
8  Cf.  Essay  towards  a  New  Theory  of  Vision,  §§  55-61.


154  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  5

an  object  is  relative  to  its  distance  from  the  eye  ;  in  touch,  which
— necessarily  implying  contact — excludes  distance,  it  is  relative
to  the  part  touched  or  touching :  compare,  e.g.  a  corn-plaster
applied  to  the  back  and  then  to  the  thumb  or  a  dental  cavity
explored  by  the  tongue  and  afterwards  by  the  finger-tip.  But  for
the  parts  severally,  Berkeley's  assertion  holds  :  for  each  any  given
object  has  a  constant  determinate  magnitude,  though  such  mag-
nitudes differ  widely  inter  se.  For  the  eye,  on  the  other  hand,
any  given  magnitude  may  appear  as  that  of  an  object  that  is
really  either  very  large  or  very  small,  if  the  object  be  sufficiently
distant  in  the  one  case  and  sufficiently  near  in  the  other.  But
"distance  of  itself,  and  immediately  cannot  be  seen.  For
distance,  being  a  line  directed  endwise  to  the  eye,  it  projects
only  one  point  on  the  fund  of  the  eye — which  point  remains
invariably  the  same,  whether  the  distance  be  longer  or  shorter1."
That  is  to  say,  till  we  know  the  distance  we  cannot  judge  the
size :  distance  is  in  the  last  resort  entirely  a  tangible  or  locomotor
magnitude.  If,  then,  visual  magnitude  can  only  be  interpreted
by  means  of  tangible  magnitude,  and  if  the  tangible  magnitudes
of  an  object  differ  widely  from  each  other  according  to  the  parts
exploring  or  affected,  what  determines  which  is  to  be  the
standard  ?  Nothing  but  convenience :  experience  very  soon
singles  out  and  perfects  the  best,  that  for  which  the  local  signs
of  passive  touch  and  the  positional  signs  of  active  touch  are  in
themselves  the  most  finely  graduated  and  together  the  most
easily  combined.  That  one  is  the  hand2.  The  most  mobile
parts  have  the  keenest  '  spatial  sense '  and  the  least  mobile  the
bluntest  of  all,  as  Vierordt3  has  shewn.  In  these  facts  we  have,
by  the  way,  further  confirmation  of  the  mutual  co-operation  of
the  two  factors,  extensity  and  motility,  in  producing  and  perfect-
ing our  tactual  perception  of  space.

But  though  Berkeley  was  right  in  his  contention  that  ocular
perception  cannot  be  the  primary  source  of  (metrical)  geometry,

1  Berkeley,  op.  cit.  §  i. In  the  last  clause  Berkeley  went  too  fast,  as  he  might
have  learnt  if  it  had  occurred  to  him  to  put  his  a  priori  statement  to  the  test  of  ex-
periment (cf.  below,  p.  1 60).

2  For  "the  space  inside  the  mouth,  which  is  so  intimately  known  and  accurately
measured by its inhabitant the tongue, can hardly  be said  to  have  its  internal
directions  and  dimensions  known  in  any  exact  relation  to  those  of  the  larger  world
outside. It  forms  almost  a  little  world  by  itself." W.  James,  Psychology,  ii.  181.

3  Physiologic  des  Afenscken,  5te  Auf.  1877,  pp.  342-9.


CH.  vi,  §  5] Visual  Perception  of  Space  155

he  nevertheless  overlooked  what  Reid  afterwards  made  clear,
viz.  that  it  does  give  rise  to  a  geometry  altogether  independent
of  '  tactual  perception ' ;  such  is  the  '  geometry  of  visibles,'  as
Reid  called  it,  projective  geometry  as  we  now  say.  It  would  be
strange  if  it  were  not  so,  since  to  the  eye  pertains  an  extensity
and  motility  peculiar  to  it,  which  are  most  minutely  differentiated
inter  se  and  most  intimately  correlated  together.  The  differ-
entiation into  local  signs  of  the  retinal  extensity  is  but  a  further
stage  in  the  development  which  began  in  the  differentiation
within  the  general  dermal  sensibility  of  a  specific  light  sense.
It  seems  to  consist  in  an  increased  specialisation  of  the  more
central  portions  of  the  retina  as  compared  with  the  rest.  The
most  central  portion  which  answers  to  the  functioning  of  what,
from  its  colour,  is  called  '  the  yellow  spot,'  is  trichromatic  under
conditions  (as  to  amount  of  light,  size  of  object,  &c.),  such  that  its
marginal  zones  are  only  dichromatic,  and  the  peripheral  zone
only  monochromatic.  Also — and  still  more  important — along
with  this  comparative  lack  of  sensory  differentiation,  there  is  a
marked  diminution  in  exact  definition  as  we  pass  from  centre  to
periphery  :  thus,  the  ace  of  diamonds,  say,  which  in  the  first  case
is  distinct  both  in  shape  and  colour  becomes  in  the  last  only
a  colourless  blur  and  is  soon  lost  to  sight  altogether  if  it  remains
at  rest.  Again,  as  with  touch,  the  question  arises  :  which  of  these
conflicting  deliverances  are  we  to  prefer  ?  And  again  we  may
answer  that  practice  selects  and  perfects  that  which  works  best.
The  yellow  spot,  or  rather  a  central  hollow  within  this,  called  the
fovea  centralis,  thus  comes  to  be  the  finger  of  the  eye,  if  we  may
so  say.  And  surely  we  may ;  for  though  there  is  not  much
resemblance  between  a  dimple  and  a  finger,  still  the  functions  of
the  finger  in  active  touch  and  that  of  thefovea  centralis  in  active
vision  are  practically  identical1.  The  whole  extensity  of  the
field  of  sight,  the  somatic  field  as  it  should  be  called  to  distin-
guish it  from  its  objective  projection,  is  simultaneously  presented
and  its  content  passively  received,  but  what  we  actively  fixate
and  look  at — the  contour  or  the  motion  of  the  object,  for  example
— forms  a  successive  series  and  each  item  of  it  is  brought  in  turn
by  the  movements''  of  the  eye  to  occupy  the  yellow  spot.  The

1  Cf.  the  German  Sehen  and  Blicken,  Fiihlen  and  Tasten.

2  These  movements  as  '  positional  signs '  again,  as  in  the  tactual  perception  of
space,  are  not  objective  movements  already  implying  space,  but  the  serial  kinaesthetic


156  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  5

analogy  of  such  '  macular '  or  active  vision  with  active  touch  is
then  so  far  very  complete1.

In  the  case  of  the  visual  perception  of  the  Invertebrates
however  it  is  much  less  so.  Here  there  are  in  general  no  eye-
movements,  and  we  must  look  elsewhere  for  our  positional  signs.
The  reactions  of  the  lowliest  organisms  to  changes  of  light
consist  simply  of  more  or  less  random  efforts  to  move  the  whole
body  into  or  out  of  it — positive  or  negative  '  phototaxis ' —
according  to  habit.  But  we  can  hardly  call  translatory  move-
ments of  the  body  as  a  whole  positional  signs ;  for,  though
they  have  altered  the  body's  place  in  space,  yet  since  the  body
itself  is  the  point  de  repere,  which  all  spatial  perception  implies,
things  are  so  far  just  where  they  were.  Movement  is  determined
solely  by  the  general  bodily  discomfort,  the  organic  sensations
due  to  changes  of  illumination.  Such  sensations  have  extensity;
but  at  this  early  stage,  they  have  no  local  signs  and  therefore
nothing  for  positional  signs  to  relate.  The  first  requisite  for
spatial  perception  then  is  still  wanting.  When  however  this  is
forthcoming  in  the  form  of  retinal  differentiations  visual  percep-
tion of  space  becomes  possible,  provided  any  movements  whether
of  the  body  or  its  limbs  can  be  correlated  with  them.

But  their  behaviour  and  the  structure  of  their  eyes  alike  shew
that  the  higher  invertebrates  still  lack  the  visual  perception  of
definite  forms  and  of  the  environment  as  a  perspective  whole,
which  most  vertebrates  possess.  What  the  said  invertebrates
shew  signs  of  perceiving  and  what  their  eyes  are  specially  con-
structed to  disclose  are  movements.  In  this  respect  their  sight  is
comparable  to  that  which  the  extreme  margin  of  the  retina  affords
to  us.  Images  from  objects  at  rest  are  not  discriminated  in  either
case  ;  but  the  moment  the  objects  move — relatively  to  the  body
— attention  is  arrested  in  both.  But  for  the  invertebrate  there  is
no  yellow  spot  to  bring  images  into,  and  even  if  there  were,  there
are  no  eye- movements  to  bring  them  into  it2.

Even  among  mammals — to  say  nothing  of  the  lower  classes
of  the  Vertebrata — there  is  an  enormous  development  of  visual

sensations  that  we  afterwards  learn  from  the  physiologist  to  be  the  psychical  con-
comitants of  the  lengthening  and  shortening  of  the  eye-muscles  and  the  consequent
intra-ocular  pressures,  straining  of  tendons,  &c.

1  Cf.  above,  §  4,  p.  151.

2  Cf.  F.  Plateau,  Recherches  exptrimentales  sur  la  vision chez  les  Arthrofodes,
5mepartie,  1888.


CH.  vi,  §  5] Visual  Perception  of  Space  157

perception.  It  is  marked  by  a  gradual  advance  from  (a)  pre-
dominantly '  periscopic  or  panoramic  vision '  as  in  the  hare  and
the  rabbit,  for  example — where  the  eyes  are  so  laterally  placed
that  practically  little  or  no  binocular  vision  of  the  same  object
is  possible — to  (c)  '  the  stereoscopic  vision '  of  man  and  the  apes,
where  the  axes  of  the  eyes  at  rest  are  parallel  and  all  but  the
margins  of  the  two  visual  fields  can  be  perceptually  united
into  a  single  'solid'  or  projective  field.  Intermediate  between
these  extremes  are  varying  degrees  of  (b)  merely  'binocular
vision,'  becoming  more  perfect  as  the  lateral  position  of  the  eyes
gives  place  to  one  more  frontal,  so  that  the  divergence  of  the
optical  axes  continuously  diminishes.  To  these  three  types  of
vision  correspond  roughly  three  very  different  modes  of  life —
that  of  defenceless  herbivora  whose  food  is  stationary,  and  most
of  whom  need1  only  to  be  aware  at  once  of  the  presence  of  their
enemies  anywhere  round  the  whole  horizon  in  order  to  make
a  timely  flight  in  whatever  direction  is  most  convenient ;  that  of
their  enemies,  the  carnivora,  who  need,  on  the  other  hand,
accurately  to  adjust  their  movements  to  those  of  their  prey  in
front  of  them ;  that  of  the  primates,  whose  arboreal  habits  and
use  of  the  hands  as  a  prehensile  organ  calls  for  exact  perspective
or  '  plastic '  vision.  Without  such  vision  our  manual  skill  would
be  very  imperfect  and  much  of  it  impossible2.  Though  all  stereo-
scopic vision  is  binocular,  we  cannot  assume  that  the  converse  is
true.  The  two  eyes  may  yield  the  perception  of  one  form  just  as
the  two  ears  yield  the  perception  of  one  note — without  the  form
being  perceived  to  be  geometrically  solid  as  it  is  in  human  vision.
The  psychological  outcome  of  this  gradual  development  is
remarkable8.  It  is  tantamount,  as  Helmholtz  put  it,  to  the

1  Those  that  climb — as  the  goat  and  the  chamois — have  more  prominent  and  more
mobile  eyes,  and  these  set  widely  apart.

2  The  very  great  dexterity  sometimes  acquired  by  the  blind  we  may  reasonably
attribute  to  long  and  patient  training  by  those  who  can  see.

8  So  too  is  the  physiological  result.  In  the  first  place  the  movements  of  the  two
eyes  are  perfectly  co-ordinated  and  simultaneously  conjugate  for  all  directions  (cf.  W.
Harris,  "  Binocular  and  Stereoscopic  Vision  in  Man  and  other  Vertebrates,  &c.,"  Brain,
Vol.  xxvii.  1904,  pp.  107-47)  :  the  independent  movements  so  striking  in  the  case
of  the  cameleon's  eyes  and  still  observable  in  many  mammals,  the  Ungulates  for
example,  have  altogether  ceased.  Again,  the  wide  retinal  area  of  tolerable  definition,
that  sufficed  so  long  as  the  function  of  sight  was  mainly  that  of  a  sentinel,  is
replaced  by  a  restricted  area  of  exact  definition — the  sentry  function  being  however
still  discharged  by  the  rest  of  the  retinae.  And  this  higher,  so-called  '  macular, '
vision  is  attained  pari  fassu  with  that  of  the  exact  synergizing  of  all  the  eye-muscles


158  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  5

acquisition  of  a  single  median  or  Cyclopean  eye,  combining
the  retinal  fields  and  the  conjoint  movements  of  the  two  eyes.
A  central  functional  eye,  that  is  to  say,  is  attained  and  sustained
by  the  joint  action  of  the  two  peripheral  anatomical  eyes.  Any
object  that  we  look  at  is  never  seen  as  double  nor  yet  as  it
appears  to  either  eye  singly,  unless  it  is  so  far  off  that  the  images
on  both  eyes  are  the  same :  otherwise  it  is  seen  as  a  stereoscopic
image  to  which  each  eye  contributes  a  complementary  'half-
image.'  Again  any  object  that  we  look  at  is  not  located  on  the
line  of  sight  of  either  eye  singly ;  but  when  it  is  so  distant  that
these  lines  are  parallel,  the  object  is  located  on  the  line  midway
between  them,  i.e.  in  the  median  plane  of  the  body.  When  the
object  is  nearer,  so  that  the  fixation-lines  converge,  it  is  located
on  the  line  that  bisects  the  angle  between  them  and  normally
terminates  in  the  so-called  '  orientation  point '  situated  midway
between  the  so-called  '  rotation-points '  of  the  two  eyes1.  Thus
guided  by  both  eyes  together,  i.e.  by  what  is  called  '  binocular
parallax,'  a  man,  as  we  say,  '  follows  his  nose.'

When  an  object  indirectly  and  so  more  or  less  imperfectly  seen,
attracts  attention,  its  half-images  are  not  at  first  combined  and
in  some  positions  of  the  object  can  be  readily  observed  apart,
in  many  others  they  can  be  so  observed  with  a  little  practice.
They  then  appear  as  double  images  either  on  opposite  sides  of
the  object  at  the  moment  fixated — when  they  are  seen  most
easily — or,  if  on  the  same  side,  one  appears  nearer  to  that  object
than  the  other.  If  now  the  intruding  object  is  more  distant  the
double  image  to  the  right  will  be  found  to  disappear  when  the
right  eye  is  closed,  that  to  the  left  when  the  left  eye  is  closed  :
thereby  we  learn  to  which  eyes  the  half-images  respectively
belong.  When  the  new  object  is  nearer  than  that  at  the  moment

as  one  organ.  Finally  the  optic  nerves  are  no  longer  completely  'decussate'  as  at  first
— the  right  optic  nerve,  that  is  to  say,  ending  entirely  in  the  left  cerebral  hemisphere,
and  the  left  entirely  in  the  right  hemisphere.  There  is  now  only  '  semi-decussation  ' —
the  outer  or  temporal  half  of  each  retina  being  represented  in  both  hemispheres,  and
only  the  inner  or  nasal  half  of  each,  alone  in  the  opposite  hemisphere.  This  change
also  is  a  gradual  one  advancing  part  passu  with  the  others.  What  alone  accounts  for
the  unity  of  the  whole  complex  structure,  it  is  worth  noting  in  passing,  is  just  the
function  that  it  subserves — accurate  stereoscopic  vision :  in  this  we  have  a  striking
instance  of  the  biological  principle  that  function  dominates  structure.

1  Practically  we  may  regard  the  human  eyes  as  solid  spheres  enclosed  in  a  firm
socket,  incapable  therefore  of  any  but  rotary  movements  round  certain  axes  passing
through  its  centre.


CH.  vi,  §  5] Visual  Perception  of  Space


159


fixated  these  relations  are  reversed  :  the  right  double  image  dis-
appears with  the  closing  of  the  left  eye,  and  the  left  with  the
closing  of  the  right  eye  :  the  images  are  then  said  to  be  '  crossed.'
In  the  first  case  the  eyes  automatically  diverge  till  the  double
images  give  place  to  single  and  distinct  vision  :  in  the  second
case  they  converge  till  the  same  result  is  attained.  At  the  same
time  the  focus  of  the  optic  lenses,  which  varies  with  the  distance,
is  adjusted  by  an  appropriate  reflex  controlling  their  curvature.
And  so  the  originally  periscopic  vision  predominant  among  the
lower  mammals  —  yielding  a  wide  field  merely  imperfectly  defined
—  gives  place  to  the  wonderful  orientation  in  three  dimensions,
which  enables  us  either  to  thread  a  needle  or  to  gaze  into  the
depths  of  space1.

1  The  accompanying  diagram  may  serve  to  make  these  results  clearer. F  is  the

object  fixated.  D  a  more  distant  and
N,  a  nearer,  object  :  all  three  being
isolated  and  in  the  plane  of  the  paper.
The  half-images  of  F,  viz.  f  and  _/',
fall  within  the  small  depressions  re-
presenting the  foveae  centrales.  F  is
accordingly  seen,  singly  and  stereo-
scopically,  in  the  direction  of  the
thickened  line  —  here  lying  in  the
median  plane  of  the  body  —  joining
F  and  O,  the  so-called  'orientation'
point,  and  seen  at  a  distance  indicated
by  the  mutual  inclination  of  Ff  and
F/'  brought  about  by  conjugate  move-
ments of  the  eyes.  D/  and  Dr  are  the
uncrossed  double  images  of  D  answering
respectively  to  the  hay-images  d  and
d'  '  projected.'  To  fixate  D  each  eye
rotates  on  an  axis  perpendicular  to  the
plane  of  the  paper  and  passing  through
the  rotation  point  R.  These  rotations
continue  in  the  directions  indicated
by  the  arrows  marked  conv.  for  the
left  eye,  and  div.  for  the  right  —  the
eyes  together  converging  less  and  less  —  until  the  half-images  come  to  be  within  the
foveae  centrales.  When  accordingly  the  double  images  coalesce  in  D,  the  '  orientation  '
line  OD  bisects  the  angle  at  O  formed  by  the  two  new  fixation-lines,  which,  for
simplicity's  sake,  are  here  not  shewn.  Nr  and  N/  are  the  crossed  double  images
answering  respectively  to  n'  and  «  'projected.'  In  fixating  N  instead  of  F  both
eyes  converge  more  and  more,  as  indicated  by  the  arrows  marked  conv.  till  the  double
images  coalesce  in  N.  Again  the  orientation  line,  here  ON,  gives  the  direction  in
which  the  complete  image  is  seen,  the  convergence  of  the  new  fixation  lines  being  an
index  of  its  distance.


Left


Riyht


160  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  5

Nevertheless  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  monocular
vision  apart  from  experiences  gleaned  by  the  use  of  both  eyes
would  yield  no  perception  of  distance.  Even  a  person  who  had
never  had  but  one  eye  would  still  find  some  indication  of  varying
depth  in  the  varying  'accommodation'  requisite  for  distinct
vision  between  distances  ranging  from  a  few  inches  to  a  few
feet.  Beyond  these  even  this  imperfect  means  of  discrimination
would  be  of  no  avail1.  But  when  either  the  object  or  the  eye  was
moved,  the  rate  at  which  the  image  of  the  object  changed  its
position  on  the  retina  would  vary  inversely  as  the  distance  of  the
object  and  so  would  furnish  a  comparative  index  of  this  distance
as  long  as  any  change  of  rate  was  appreciable.  Among  the
lower  vertebrates,  where  owing  to  the  lateral  insertion  of  the  eyes
periscopic  vision  predominates,  these  means  appear  to  furnish  a
sort  of  stereoscopic  vision,  which  within  narrow  limits  is  ex-
tremely precise,  as  the  familiar  pecking  of  the  hen — after  slightly
raising  its  head — or  that  of  the  thrush — after  turning  its  head
aside — sufficiently  shew.  But  it  is  noteworthy  that  both  lose
sight  of  their  object  before  reaching  it,  as  their  own  beak  comes
in  the  way.  There  is  also  considerable  evidence  of  the  existence
of&fovea  lateralis  in  the  eyes  of  these  vertebrates2.

As  the  final  outcome  of  this  long  development,  the  eye-
movements,  which  we  have  supposed  to  have  been  the  primary
means  of  perfecting  macular  and  stereoscopic  vision,  come  to
assume  a  secondary  place.  Thus  we  now  become  aware  by
means  of  retinal  images  of  eye-movements  that  we  had  not
directly  noticed3.  Again,  a  momentary  flash  of  lightning  or  an
electric  spark  may  now  be  sufficient  for  stereoscopic  vision,
though  eye-movements  are  then  out  of  the  question4.  It  is

1  In  birds  however  it  is  by  no  means  imperfect. The  bird's  eye  has  been  called
'  the  accommodation  eye  KO.T'  ^oxfy,'  inasmuch  as  it  is  furnished  with  an  intraocular
organ,  the  'pecten,'  very  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  adjustment  of  the  lens.

2  Cf. A. von Tschermak, "  Studien  u.  d. Binocularsehen der  Wirbelthiere,"
Pfliigers  Archiv,  xci.  (1902),  pp.  1-20;  "U.  d.  Sehen  der  Wirbeltiere,"  Tierarztliches
Zentralblatt,  1910.

3  As,  for  example,  in  looking  for  a  moment  at  the  setting  sun  or  an  electric  light
and  then  closing  the  eyes,  we  see  a  whole  crowd  of  after-images  due  to  defective
fixation,  which  we  had  neither  observed  nor  intended.

4  As  said,  this  may  be  the  case,  but  it  is  not  necessarily  so. Certain  experiments
by  v.  Karpinska (Zeitsehr  f. Psychol. 1908, Bd.  Ixvii. pp. 1-88) bring  out the
frequent  existence  of  a  series  of  phases  in,  and  the  consequently  gradual  oncoming,  of
the  stereoscopic  interpretation  even  when  the  exposure  is  instantaneous. In  other


CH.  vi,  §  6]  Intuition  of  Things  161

however  most  illogical  to  appeal  to  these  results  in  order  to
discredit  the  genetic  or  empirical  theory  of  visual  perception
which  alone  accounts  for  them1.

Intuition  of  Things.

§  6.  We  come  now  to  the  intuition  of  things  or,  as  it  is  more
often  called,  '  the  perception  of  the  external  world.'  In  a  com-
plex percept,  such  as  that  of  an  orange  or  a  piece  of  wax,  may
be  distinguished  the  following  items  concerning  which  psychology
may  be  expected  to  give  an  account:  (a)  the  object's  reality,
(fr)  its  solidity  or  occupation  of  space,  (c)  its  unity  and  com-
plexity, (d}  its  permanence,  or  rather  its  continuity  in  time  and
(e)  its  substantiality  and  the  connexion  of  its  attributes  and
powers.  Though,  in  fact,  these  items  are  most  intimately
blended,  our  exposition  will  be  clearer  if  we  consider  each  for
a  moment  apart.

a.  The  terms  actuality  and  reality  have  each  more  than
one  meaning.  Thus  what  is  real,  in  the  sense  of  material,  is
opposed  to  what  is  mental ;  as  the  existent  or  actual  it  is
opposed  to  the  non-existent ;  and  again,  what  is  actual  is  distin-
guished from  what  is  merely  possible.  But  here,  by  real  or  actual
is  meant,  with  a  certain  shade  of  difference — in  so  far  as  actual
is  more  appropriate  to  movements  and  events — whatever  is
sense-given  or  presented  in  antithesis  to  whatever  is  ideal  or
represented.  This  seems  at  least  their  primary  psychological
meaning :  it  is,  at  any  rate,  the  one  most  in  vogue  in  English
philosophy,  over-tinged  as  that  is  with  psychology2.  Any

words  there  are  psychological  factors  present :  as  v.  Kries  puts  it,  the  observer
has  to  understand  the  object,  and  for  this  a  very  noticeable  time  is  often  requisite.
Cf.  Helmholtz's  Phys.  Optik,  3rd  ed.  1911,  III.  p.  470.

J  Nevertheless,  if  that  theory  is  to  work  it  must  accept  extensity  as  an  ultimate
fact.  To  overlook  this  was  Helmholtz's  initial  mistake  and  to  recognise  it  Hering's
great  merit.  Unhappily  he — like  William  James — goes  too  far  in  the  opposite
extreme.  He  attributes  a  length,  breadth  and  depth  value  to  each  retinal  point  as
suck,  in  fact  treats  space  as  perceptually  on  a  par  with  light,  heat  or  sound.  Such  a
position  is  psychologically  indefensible.  Without  localisation,  as  we  have  already
said,  we  have  not  space  but  only  extensity:  with  localisation  we  have  not  only  extensity
but  relations  that  imply  movement  and  are  only  brought  to  our  knowledge  by  means
of  it.  See  the  very  able  criticism  by  von  Kries,  op.  cit.  pp.  522-34.

a  Thus  Locke  says,  "Our  simple  ideas  [i.e.  presentations  or  impressions,  as  we

should  now  say]  are  all  real. ..and  not  fictions  at  pleasure;  for  the  mind. ..can  make  to

itself  no  simple  idea  more  than  what  it  has  received"  (Essay,  ii.  30,  »). And  Berkeley

says,  "The  ideas  imprinted  on  the  senses  by  the  Author  of  Nature  are  called  real

W.  P.  II


1 62  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  6

examination  of  this  characteristic  will  be  best  deferred  till  we
come  to  deal  with  ideation  generally1.  Meanwhile  it  will  suffice
to  shew  that  reality  or  actuality  is  not  a  single  distinct  element
added  to  the  others  which  enter  into  the  complex  presentation
of  what  we  call  a  thing,  as  colour  or  solidity  may  be.  Nor  is
it  a  special  relation  among  these  elements,  like  that  of  substance
and  attribute,  for  example.  For  in  both  these  respects  the  real
and  the  ideal,  the  actual  and  the  possible,  are  alike.  All  the
elements  or  qualities  within  the  complex,  and  all  the  relations
of  those  elements  to  each  other,  are  the  same  in  the  rose  repre-
sented as  in  the  presented  rose.  The  difference  turns,  not  upon
what  these  elements  are,  regarded  as  qualities  or  relations  whether
presented  or  represented  :  it  turns  solely  upon  whatever  it  is  that
distinguishes  the  presentation  from  the  representation  of  the
thing's  qualities  or  their  relations.  Now  this  distinction,  as  we
shall  presently  see,  depends  partly  upon  the  relation  of  the  pre-
sentation of  the  thing  to  other  presentations  in  consciousness
with  it1,  partly  upon  the  relation  to  it,  the  attitude  (Einstellung)
which  it  evokes  in  the  subject  whose  presentation  it  is2.  In  these
respects  we  find  a  difference,  not  only  between  the  simple
qualities,  such  as  cold,  hard,  and  sweet  in  strawberry  ice,  e.g.,
as  presented  and  as  represented ;  but  also,  though  less  con-
spicuously, in  the  spatial,  and  even  the  temporal,  relations  which
enter  into  our  intuition  as  distinct  from  our  imagination  of  it.
So  then,  reality  or  actuality  is  not  strictly  an  item  by  itself,  but
a  characteristic  of  all  the  items  that  follow.  Epistemologically
expressed  it  answers  to  the  existential  judgment  :  It  is  or  TJure
is,  and  a  judgment  of  this  kind  all  perception  implies.

b.  In  the  so-called  physical  solidity  or  impenetrability  of
things  our  properly  dynamic  presentations  or  '  feelings  of  effort '
come  specially  into  play3.  They  are  not  entirely  absent  in  those
movements  of  exploration  by  which  we  attain  a  knowledge  of
space.  But  it  is  when  these  movements  are  definitely  resisted,
or  are  only  possible  by  increased  effort,  that  we  reach  the  full
meaning  of  body  as  that  which  occupies  space.  What  we  come
to  call  heat  and  cold,  light  and  sound,  the  natural  man  regards

things ;  and  those  excited  in  the  imagination,  being  less  regular,  vivid  and  constant,
are  more  properly  termed  ideas  or  images  of  things,  which  they  copy  or  represent "
(Prin.  of  Hum.  Know.  pt.  i.  §  33).

1  See  next  chapter,  §  i. 2  Cf.  below,  p.  173. 3  Cf.  above,  ch.  v,  §  8,  p.  137.


CH.  vi,  §  6]  Intuition  of  Things  163

as  real ;  and  by  and  by  he  perhaps  regards  them  as  due  to  cer-
tain '  powers '  of  things,  known  or  unknown.  But  he  does  not
regard  them  as  themselves  things.  At  the  outset  things  for  him
are  all  corporeal  like  his  own  body,  the  first  and  archetypal  thing;
and  they  are  clearly  intuited  only  when  active  touch  is  accom-
plished with  effort.  At  a  later  stage  passive  touch  without  such
effort  may  suffice,  but  only  because  pressures,  depending  on  a
subjective  initiative,  i.e.  on  voluntary  muscular  exertion,  have
been  previously  experienced.  It  is  of  more  than  psychological
interest  to  remark  that  the  primordial  factor  in  external  reality
or  '  materiality,'  as  we  may  now  call  it,  is  thus  due  to  the  pro-
jection of  a  subjectively  determined  exertion  which  meets  with
resistance,  thereby  making  us  acquainted  with  the  occupation
of  space — autantitypy  as  it  has  been  called1.

It  is  further  of  interest  to  remark  that  to  yield  such  acquain-
tance the  passive  displacement  of  our  own  body  by  another  would
not  suffice :  that  alone  would  only  be  a  new  case  of  incopresent-
ability:  active  resistance  is  essential  to  the  nature  of  an  oppo-
nent. Still  we  must  remember  that  the  accompanying  sense-
impressions  are  also  an  essential  condition.  Muscular  effort
without  simultaneous  sensations  of  contact  would  not  yield  the
distinct  presentation  of  something  resistant  occupying  the  space
from  which  we  have  been  obtruded  and  to  which  we  would  return.
Nay  more,  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  an  essential  circumstance
in  this  experience  that  the  muscular  effort,  though  subjectively
initiated,  is  still  only  possible  when  there  is  contact  with  some-
thing that,  as  it  seems,  is  making  an  effort  the  counterpart  of
our  own.  Especially  important  is  the  case  where  this  counter-
part effort  also  is  our  own,  as  when  we  press  the  hands  together
or  pull  with  one  against  the  other — "  an  experience,"  as  Herbert
Spencer  has  truly  said,  "  which,  perhaps  more  than  any  other,
aids  in  developing  the  consciousness  of  objective  power2."  But
the  'something'  is  otherwise,  so  far,  no  more  than  thing-stuff:
without  the  factors  here  already  implied  and  now  to  be  con-
sidered in  more  detail  our  psychological  individual  would  fall
short  of  distinct  intuition  of  other  things.

c.  Of  these  remaining  factors  concerned  in  the  intuition  or
perception  of  external  things  we  have  first  of  all  to  note  the

1  Cf.  Hamilton,  ed.  of  Reid's  Works,  p.  847.

2  Principles  of  Psychology,  2nd  ed.  ii.  §  468,  p.  483.

II— 2


164  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  6

temporal  and  spatial  relations  of  the  sense-data  composing  them.
Such  relations  are  themselves  in  no  way  psychologically  deter-
mined :  they  are  primarily  and  in  the  main  quite  independent
of  the  subject's  interest  or  of  any  psychological  principles  of
synthesis  or  association  whatsoever.  But  it  is  essential  that
impressions  should  recur,  and  recur  more  or  less  as  they  have
previously  occurred,  if  knowledge  is  ever  to  begin;  for  out  of  a
continual  chaos  of  sensation,  all  matter  and  no  form,  such  as
some  philosophers  describe,  nothing  but  chaos  could  result.
Even  a  flux  of  impressions  having  this  real  or  sense-given  order
will  not  suffice;  there  must  be  also  attention  to,  and  retention
of,  the  order  itself  as  well.  These  indispensable  processes  at
least  are  psychological.

But  for  its  familiarity  we  should  marvel  at  the  fact  that  out
of  the  variety  of  impressions  simultaneously  presented  we  do
not  instantly  group  together  all  the  sounds  and  all  the  colours,
all  the  touches  and  all  the  smells.  But,  dividing  what  is  given
together,  we  single  out  a  certain  sound  or  smell  and  regard  that
along  with  a  certain  colour  and  feel,  similarly  singled  out,  as
belonging  to  what  we  call  one  thing.  We  might  wonder,  too
— those  at  least  who  have  made  so  much  of  association  by
similarity  ought  to  wonder — that,  say,  the  white  of  snow  calls
up  directly,  not  other  shades  of  white  or  other  colours,  but  the
expectation  of  cold  or  of  powdery  softness.  The  first  step  in
this  process  has  been  the  simultaneous  projection  into  the  same
occupied  space  of  the  several  impressions  which  we  thus  come
to  regard  as  the  qualities  of  the  body  filling  it.  Yet  such
projection  would  avail  but  little — indeed  could  hardly  arise —
unless  the  constituent  impressions  were  again  and  again  repeated
in  like  order,  so  as  to  prompt  anew  the  same  grouping ;  nor  un-
less, further,  this  constancy  in  the  one  group  was  present  along
with  changes  in  other  groups  and  in  the  general  field.  There
is  nothing  in  its  first  experience  to  tell  the  infant  that  the  song
of  the  bird  does  not  inhere  in  the  hawthorn  whence  the  notes
proceed,  and  that  the  fragrance  of  the  mayflower  does.  It  is
only  where  a  group,  as  a  whole,  has  been  found  to  change  its
position  relatively  to  other  groups,  and  to  be — in  general —
independent  of  changes  of  position  among  them,  that  such
complexes  can  become  distinct  unities,  a  world  of  many  things.
Again,  because  things  are  so  often  a  world  within  themselves.


CH.  vi,  §  6]  Intuition  of  Things  165

their  several  parts  or  members  not  only  having  distinguishing
qualities  but  moving  and  changing  with  more  or  less  indepen-
dence of  the  rest,  it  conies  about  that  what  from  one  point  of
view  is  one  thing  becomes  from  another  point  of  view  several
— like  a  tree  with  its  separable  branches  and  fruits,  for  example.
Wherein  then,  more  precisely,  does  the  unity  of  a  thing  consist?
This  question,  so  far  as  it  here  admits  of  answer,  carries  us  over
to  temporal  continuity.

d.  Amidst  all  the  change  above  described  there  is  one  thing
comparatively  fixed.  Our  own  body  is  both  constant  as  a  group
and  a  constant  item  in  every  field  of  groups;  and  not  only  so,  but
it  is,  beyond  all  other  things,  an  object  of  continual  and  peculiar
interest,  inasmuch  as  our  earliest  pleasures  and  pains  depend
solely  upon  it  and  what  affects  it.  The  body  becomes,  in  fact,
the  earliest  form  of  self,  the  first  datum  for  our  later  conceptions
of  permanence  and  individuality.  A  permanence  like  that  of
self  is  then  transferred  to  other  bodies  which  resemble  our  own,
so  far  as  our  direct  experience  goes,  in  passing  continuously
from  place  to  place  and  undergoing  only  partial  and  gradual
changes  of  form  and  quality.  As  we  have  existed — or,  more
exactly,  as  the  body  has  been  continuously  presented — during
the  interval  between  two  encounters  with  some  other  recognised
body,  so  this  comes  to  be  regarded  as  having  continuously  existed
during  its  absence  from  us.  However  permanent  we  suppose
the  conscious  subject  to  be,  it  is  hard  to  see  how,  without  the
continuous  presentation  to  it  of  such  a  group  as  the  bodily
self,  we  should  ever  be  prompted  to  convert  the  discontinuous
presentations  of  external  things  into  a  continuity  of  existence.
It  might  be  said  :  Since  the  second  presentation  of  a  particular
group  would,  by  the  mere  workings  of  psychical  laws,  coalesce
with  the  image  of  the  first,  this  coalescence  would  suffice  to
'  generate '  the  concept  of  continued  existence.  But  such  as-
similation is  only  the  ground  of  a  qualitative  identification
and  furnishes  no  motive,  one  way  or  the  other,  for  real  identi-
fication :  between  a  second  presentation  of  A  and  the  presentation
at  different  times  of  two  A's  there  is  so  far  no  difference.  Real
identity  no  more  involves  exact  similarity  than  exact  similarity
involves  sameness  of  things ;  on  the  contrary,  we  are  wont  to
find  the  same  thing  alter  with  time,  so  that  exact  similarity
after  an  interval,  so  far  from  suggesting  one  thing,  is  often  the


1 66  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  6

surest  proof  that  there  are  two  concerned.  Of  such  real  identity,
then,  it  would  seem  we  must  have  direct  experience ;  and  we
have  it  first  of  all  in  the  continuous  presentation  of  the  bodily
self;  apart  from  this  it  could  not  be  'generated'  by  association
among  changing  presentations.  Afterwards,  other  bodies  being
in  like  manner  personified,  that  then  is  regarded  as  one  thing
— from  whatever  point  of  view  we  look  at  it,  whether  as  part  of
a  larger  thing  or  as  itself  compounded  of  such  parts — which  we
take  to  have  had  one  beginning  in  time.  But  what  is  it  that  is
thus  assumed  to  have  had  a  beginning  and  to  continue  indefi-
nitely? This  leads  to  our  last  point.

e.  So  far  we  have  been  concerned  only  with  the  combination
of  sensory  and  motor  presentations  into  groups  and  with  the
differentiation  of  group  from  group ;  the  relations  to  each  other
of  the  constituents  of  such  a  group  still  for  the  most  part  remain.
To  these  relations  in  the  main  must  be  referred  the  correlative
concepts  of  substance  and  property,  the  distinction  in  substances
of  qualities  and  powers,  of  primary  qualities  and  secondary,  and
the  like1.

Of  all  the  constituents  of  things  only  one  is  universally
present,  that  above  described  as  physical  solidity,  which  presents
itself  according  to  circumstances  as  impenetrability,  resistance  or
weight.  Things  differing  in  temperature,  colour,  taste  and  smell
agree  in  resisting  compression,  in  filling  space.  Because  of  this
quality  we  regard  the  wind  as  a  thing,  though  it  has  neither
shape  nor  colour,  while  a  shadow,  though  it  has  both  but  is  non-
resistant,  is  the  very  type  of  nothingness.  This  constituent  is
invariable,  while  other  qualities  are  either  absent  or  change —
form  altering,  colour  disappearing  with  light,  sound  and  smells
intermitting.  Many  of  the  other  qualities — colour,  temperature,
sound,  smell — increase  for  us  in  intensity  if  we  advance  till  we
touch  a  certain  body  occupying  a  certain  place ;  with  the  same
movement  too  its  visual  or  'apparent'  magnitude  increases.  At
the  moment  of  contact  an  unvarying  tactual  magnitude  is  ascer-
tained, while  the  other  qualities  and  the  visual  magnitude  reach
a  fixed  maximum;  then  first  it  becomes  possible  by  effort  to

1  The  distinction  between  the  thing  and  its  'properties'  is  one  that  must  be  more
fully  treated  under  the  head  of  Real  Categories  (cf.  ch.  xiii,  §  6).  Still,  inasmuch  as
the  objective  warrant  for  these  concepts  is  contained  more  or  less  implicitly  in  our  per-
cepts, some  consideration  of  them  is  in  place  here.


CH.  vi,  §  7]  Perception  as  partly  representative 167

change  or  attempt  to  change  the  position  and  form  of  what  we
apprehend.  This  tangible  plenum  we  thenceforth  regard  as  the
seat  and  source  of  all  the  qualities  we  project  into  it.  In  other
words,  that  which  occupies  space  is  psychologically  the  sub-
stantial. It  is  strange  that  Locke  did  not  lay  more  stress  on
this  point ;  though,  to  be  sure,  in  common  with  Descartes  he
recognised  it  as  the  one  sense-datum  that  is  a  primary  quality.
But  neither  remarked  that  this  '  sense-datum '  is  sui  generis  in
being  the  only  one  that  the  subject  gives  to  itself,  or  at  any  rate,
gets  for  itself  by  its  own  activity,  as  we  have  already  seen.  The
other  real  constituents  are  only  the  properties  or  attributes  of
this  substance,  the  marks  or  manifestations  which  lead  us  to
expect  its  presence.

Perception  as  partly  re-presentative.

§  7.  But  there  is  still  an  observation  concerning  percepts  that
we  must  not  omit,  though  the  full  discussion  which  it  opens  up
must  be  deferred1.  Even  the  simplest  percepts,  we  have  seen,
involve  not  only  present  experience  but  also  experiences  of
the  past :  in  the  language  of  Herbert  Spencer  they  are  '  partly
presentative,  partly  representative.'  On  this  account  it  has  been
usual  to  say  that  all  perception  implies  both  memory  and  imagi-
nation. But  such  a  statement,  we  must  here  remark,  can  be
allowed  only  so  long  as  the  terms  memory  and  imagination  are
vaguely  used.  The  dog's  mouth  normally  waters  only  at  the
sight  of  food2,  but  the  gourmand's  mouth  will  water  even  at
the  thought  of  it.  We  recognise  the  smell  of  violets  as  certainly
as  we  recognise  the  colour  when  the  spring  brings  them  round
again ;  but  few  persons,  if  any,  can  recall  the  scent  when  the
flower  has  gone,  so  as  to  say  with  Shelley —

Odours,  when  sweet  violets  sicken,
Live  within  the  sense  they  quicken  —

though  most  can  recall  the  colour  with  tolerable  clearness.
In  like  manner  everybody  can  perform  innumerable  complex
voluntary  movements  which  only  a  few  can  mentally  rehearse
or  describe  without  the  prompting  of  actual  execution.  And

1  Ch.  vii,  §  2.

2  It  can  however  be  brought  to  water  at  the  sight  of  any  coloured object,  a
particular  dish  say,  that  has  become  associated  with  the  food.


1 68  Perception  [CH.  vi,  §  7

not  only  does  such  reproduction  as  suffices  for  perception  fall
short  of  that  involved  in  reminiscence  or  memory  in  the  narrower
sense,  but  the  manner  in  which  the  constituent  elements  in  a
percept  are  combined  differs  materially  from  what  is  strictly  to
be  called  '  the  association  of  ideas.'  To  realise  this  difference  we
need  only  to  observe  first,  how  the  sight  of  a  suit  of  polished
armour,  for  example,  instantly  reinstates  and  steadily  maintains
all  that  we  retain  of  former  sensations  of  its  hardness  and
smoothness  and  coldness;  and  then  to  observe  next  how  this  same
sight  gradually  calls  up  ideas  now  of  tournaments,  now  of
crusades,  and  so  through  all  the  changing  imagery  of  romance.
Though  the  percept  is  complex,  it  is  but  a  single  whole,  and
the  act  of  perception  is  single  too.  But,  where,  as  is  the  case  in
memory  and  imagination,  attention  passes — whether  voluntarily
or  non-voluntarily — from  one  representation  to  another,  it  is
obvious  that  these  several  objects  of  attention  are  still  distinct
and  that  it  is  directed  in  turn  to  each.  The  term  '  association '
seems  only  appropriate  to  the  latter.  To  the  connexion  of  the
partial  presentations  in  a  complex,  whether  perception  or  idea,
it  will  be  better  to  apply  the  term  '  complication,'  which  was
used  in  this  sense  by  Herbart,  and  has  been  so  used  by  many
psychologists  since.  When  we  actually  perceive  an  orange  by
sight  we  may  say  that  its  taste  or  feel  is  represented,  when  we
perceive  it  by  touch  or  taste  we  may  in  like  manner  say  that  its
colour  is  represented.  The  whole  complex  may  be  symbolized
sufficiently  for  our  present  purpose,  in  the  first  case  as  C  ff,  in
the  second  as  F  c  t.  We  might  also  symbolize  the  idea  of  an
•  orange  as  seen  by  c  tf  and  the  idea  of  an  orange  as  felt  by
f  c  /,  using  the  accented  letter  to  signify  that  different  consti-
tuents are  dominant  in  the  two  cases.  What  we  have  yet  to
observe  is  briefly  (i)  that  the  processes  by  which  the  whole
complex  (f  tf  or  f  c  t  is  brought  into  consciousness  differ  im-
portantly from  the  process  by  which  C  or  F  reinstates  and
maintains  the  parts,  tf  or  c  t,  and  (2)  that  c,  t,  and/"  seem  never
to  have  that  distinct  existence  as  representations  which  they  had
as  presentations  or  impressions3.

1  Cf.  next  chapter,  §§  i  and  3.


CHAPTER VII

IMAGINATION OR IDEATION1

Impressions  and  Ideas  distinguished.

§  i.  Before  the  intuition  of  things  has  reached  a  stage  so
complete  and  definite  as  that  just  described,  imagination  or
ideation  as  distinct  from  perception  has  well  begun.  In  passing
to  the  consideration  of  this  higher  level  of  mental  life  we  must
endeavour  first  of  all  analytically  to  distinguish  the  two  as
precisely  as  may  be,  and  then  to  trace  the  gradual  development
of  the  higher.

At  the  outset  we  have  to  note  the  distinction  between
impressions  and  ideas,  which  Locke  with  his  epistemological
bias  too  much  overlooked,  but  which  Hume  placed  in  the
forefront  of  his  Treatise.  "All  the  perceptions  of  the  human
mind,"  he  begins,  "resolve  themselves  into  two  distinct  kinds,
which  I  shall  call  Impressions  and  Ideas"  Both  alike  may
be  either  'simple  or  complex,'  he  tells  us:  the  difference
between  them  "  consists  in  the  degrees  of  force  and  liveliness
with  which  they  strike  upon  the  mind,  and  make  their  way  into
our  thought  or  consciousness."  In  all  this  Herbert  Spencer
blindly  followed  Hume.  But  it  is  very  questionable  whether
Hume  was  right  in  applying  Locke's  distinction  of  simple  and
complex  to  ideas  in  the  narrower  sense  as  well  as  to  impressions.
Regardless  of  his  first  statement  that  they  are  distinct  in  kind
he  goes  on  to  say : — "  That  idea  of  red,  which  we  form  in  the
dark  and  that  impression  which  strikes  our  eyes  in  the  sunshine
differ  only  in  degree,  not  in  nature2."  What  he  seems  to  over-
look is  that,  whereas  we  may  once  have  received  the  bare
impression  called  '  red,'  we  now  usually  have  an  image  or  idea

1  Ideation — "a  word  of  my  own  coining"  said  James  Mill.

2  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  vol.  I.  pt.  i.  §  i.


170  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  i

only  of  a  red  form  or  a  red  thing,  i.e.  of  red  as  it  was  present  in
a  percept,  in  some  way  ideationally  projected  or  intuited.  An
incomparable  observer  in  this  department,  in  the  course  of
summarising  his  results,  remarks :  "  I  have  succeeded  a  few
times  in  seeing  bare  colours  without  object :  they  then  filled  out
the  entire  field  of  sight1."  In  other  words,  we  seem  to  have  no
'  ideas '  or  images — though  we  have  concepts — answering  to
simple  or  isolated  impressions.  The  complication  which  has
taken  place  during  the  evolution  of  the  percept  can  only  par-
tially fail  in  the  image  or  idea,  can  never  fail  so  far  as  to  leave
us  with  a  chaotic  'manifold'  of  mere  sensational  remnants.  On
the  contrary,  we  find  that  in  '  constructive  imagination '  a  new
kind  of  effort  is  often  requisite  in  order  partially  to  resolve  these
representational  complexes  as  a  preliminary  to  new  combina-
tions. But  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  results  of  such  a  process
are  ever  the  ultimate  elements  of  the  percept,  that  is,  are  merely
isolated  impressions  in  a  fainter  form.

As  to  the  one  difference,  which  Hume  finally  recognised —
'  the  force  or  liveliness '  of  primary  presentations  or  impressions
as  compared  with  secondary  presentations  or '  ideas,'  what  exactly
are  we  to  understand  by  this  somewhat  figurative  language  ?
A  simple  difference  of  intensity  can  hardly  be  all  that  is  meant ;
for,  though  we  may  be  momentarily  confused,  we  can  usually
perfectly  well  distinguish  the  faintest  impression  from  an  image:
moreover,  we  can  imagine  such  minimal  faintness  as  easily  as
the  maximal2.  Between  moonlight  and  sunlight  or  again
between  midday  and  dawn  we  can  discriminate  many  grades
of  intensity ;  but  it  does  not  appear  that  there  is  any  corre-
sponding variation  of  intensity  between  these  extremes  when
they  are  not  seen,  but  imagined.  Many  persons  suppose  they
can  imagine  a  waxing  or  a  waning  sound  or  the  gradual  abate-
ment of  an  intense  pain ;  but  what  really  happens  in  such  cases
is  probably  not  a  rise  and  fall  in  the  intensity  of  a  single  repre-
sentation, but  a  change  in  the  complex  represented.  In  the
primary  presentations  there  was,  if  not  a  change  of  quality  along

1  G.  H.  Meyer,  Uniersuchungen  iiber  die  Physiologie  der  Nervenfaser,  1843,  p.  241.
I  have  repeatedly  tried  to  repeat  this  among  other  of  Meyer's  experiments  and,  as  it
seemed,  with  occasional  success;  but  the  colour  was  far  more  like  a  sensation  than  an
image,  as  was  undoubtedly  Meyer's  experience.

2  The  whole  subject  of  the  intensity  of  representations,  however,  awaits  experimental
investigation.


CH.  vn,  §  i] Impressions  and  Ideas  distinguished 171

with  change  of  intensity — especially  if  this  was  great — at  least
a  change  in  the  muscular  adaptations  of  the  sense-organs,  to
say  nothing  of  organic  sensations  accompanying  these  changes.
A  representation  of  some  or  all  of  these  attendants  is  perhaps
what  takes  place  when  variations  of  intensity  are  supposed  to
be  reproduced.  Again,  hallucinations  are  often  described  as
abnormally  intense  images  which  simply,  by  reason  of  their
intensity,  are  mistaken  for  percepts.  But  such  statement,
though  supported  by  very  high  authority1,  is  almost  certainly
false,  and  would  probably  never  have  been  made  if  epistemo-
logical  considerations  had  been  excluded  as  they  ought  to  have
been.  Hallucinations,  when  carefully  examined,  seem  just  as
much  as  percepts  to  contain  among  their  constituents  some
primary  presentation — either  a  so-called  '  subjective  sensation  '
of  sight  or  hearing  or  some  organic  sensation  due  to  deranged
circulation  or  secretion.  Intensity  alone,  then,  will  not  suffice
to  discriminate  between  impressions  and  images.  By  'force'  or
liveliness  Hume,  however,  probably  meant  more  than  intensity;
and  indeed  psychologists  in  the  present  day  often  distinguish
between  intense  and  '  lively,'  '  impressive,'  or  '  striking '  presenta-
tions, such  as  '  make  their  way  into  consciousness,'  as  Hume
said,  sich  aufdringen,  as  the  Germans  say.  But  we  are  familiar
with  striking  ideas  as  well  as  with  striking,  but  not  necessarily
intense,  sensations.  The  most  we  can  say  is  that  this  character-
istic is  commoner  in  the  latter  case.

The  superior  steadiness  already  mentioned2,  is  perhaps  a  more
constant  and  decisive  characteristic  of  percepts.  Images  are  not
only  in  a  continual  flux,  but  even  when  we  attempt  forcibly  to
detain  them  they  are  apt  to  vary  continually  in  clearness  and  com-
pleteness, reminding  us  of  the  illuminated  devices  made  of  gas
jets,  common  at  fetes,  when  the  wind  sweeps  across  them,  mo-
mentarily obliterating  one  part  and  at  the  same  time  intensifying
another.  There  is  not  this  perpetual  flow  and  flicker  in  what  we
perceive.  Again  the  impressions  entering  consciousness  at  any
one  moment  are  psychologically  independent  of  each  other  :
they  are  equally  independent  of  the  impressions  and  images
presented  the  moment  before — independent,  i.e.  as  regards  their
order  and  character,  not,  of  course,  as  regards  the  share  of

1  By  Hume  himself  among  others.

2  Cf.  ch.  vi,  §  7.


172  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  i

attention  they  secure.  For  attention  to  be  concentrated  in  one
direction  must  be  withdrawn  from  another,  and  images  may
absorb  it  to  the  exclusion  of  impressions  as  readily  as  a  first
impression  to  the  exclusion  of  a  second.  But  when  attention
is  secured,  a  faint  impression  has  a  fixity  and  definiteness
lacking  in  the  case  of  even  vivid  ideas.  One  ground  for  this
definiteness  and  independence  lies  in  the  localisation  or  pro-
jection which  accompanies  all  perception.  But  why,  if  so,  it
might  be  asked,  do  we  not  confound  percept  and  image  when
what  we  imagine  is  imagined  as  definitely  localised  or  pro-
jected ?  Because  we  have  a  contrary  percept  to  give  the  image
the  lie  ;  where  this  fails,  as  in  dreams,  or  where,  as  in  hallucina-
tion, the  image  obtains  in  other  ways  the  fixity  characteristic  of
impressions,  such  confusion  does  in  fact  result.  But  in  normal
waking  life  we  have  the  whole  presentation-continuum,  as  it
were,  occupied  and  in  operation  :  we  are  distinctly  conscious  of
being  embodied  and  having  our  senses  about  us.

This  contrariety  between  impression  and  image  suggests,
however,  a  deeper  question  :  we  may  inquire,  not  about  its  charac-
teristic marks,  but  about  its  possibility.  With  eyes  wide  open,
and  while  clearly  aware  of  the  actual  field  of  sight  and  its  filling,
one  can  recall  or  imagine  a  wholly  different  scene :  lying  warm
in  bed  one  can  imagine  oneself  out  walking  in  the  cold.  It  is
useless  to  say  that  the  times  are  different;  that  what  is  perceived
is  present,  and  what  is  imaged  is  past  or  future1.  The  images,
it  is  true,  may  have  certain  temporal  marks  by  which  they  are
referred  to  what  is  past  or  future ;  but  as  imaged  they  are
present,  and,  as  we  have  just  observed,  are  regarded  as  actual
whenever  there  are  no  correcting  impressions.  We  cannot  at
once  see  the  sky  red  and  blue  ;  how  is  it,  we  have  still  to  learn,
that  we  can  imagine  it  the  one  while  perceiving  it  to  be  the
other?  When  we  attempt  to  make  the  field  of  sight  at  once
red  and  blue,  as  in  looking  through  red  glass  with  one  eye  and
through  blue  glass  with  the  other,  either  the  colours  merge  and
we  see  a  purple  sky  or  we  see  the  sky  first  of  the  one  colour
and  then  of  the  other  in  irregular  alternation.  That  this  does
not  happen  between  impression  and  image  shews  that,  whatever

1  Moreover,  as  we  shall  see  later,  the  distinction  between  present  and  past  or
future  psychologically  presupposes  the  contrast  of  impression  and  image.  Cf.  below,
ch.  yiii,  §  i.


CH.  vn,  §  i] Impressions  and  Ideas  distinguished 173

their  connexion,  images  as  a  whole  are  distinct  from  the  pre-
sentation-continuum and  cannot  with  strict  propriety  be  spoken
of  as  impressions,  revived  or  reproduced  :  as  revived  or  re-
produced they  are  impressions  no  longer.  This  difference  is
manifest  in  another  respect,  viz.  when  we  compare  the  effects
of  diffusion  in  the  two  cases.  An  increase  in  the  intensity  of  a
sensation  of  touch  entails  an  increase  in  the  extensity;  an  increase
of  muscular  innervation  entails  irradiation  to  adjacent  muscles ;
but  when  a  particular  idea  becomes  clearer  and  more  distinct,
there  rises  into  consciousness  an  associated  idea  qualitatively
related  probably  to  impressions  of  quite  another  class,  as  when
the  smell  of  tar  calls  up  memories  of  the  sea-beach  and  fishing-
boats.  Since  images  are  thus  distinct  from  impressions,  and  yet
so  far  continuous  with  each  other  as  to  form  a  train  in  itself  un-
broken, we  should  be  justified,  if  it  were  convenient,  in  speaking
of  images  as  belonging  to  a  secondary  continuum  distinct  from
that  to  which  the  'original  impressions'  belonged.  And  later  on
we  may  see  that  this  is  convenient1.

Impressions  then — unlike  ideas — have  no  associates  to  whose
presence  their  own  is  accommodated  and  on  whose  intensity
their  own  depends.  For,  as  already  said,  each  bids  inde-
pendently for  attention,  so  that  often  a  state  of  distraction
ensues,  such  as  the  train  of  ideas  left  to  itself  never  occasions.
The  better  to  hear  we  listen  ;  the  better  to  see  we  look ;  to
smell  better  we  dilate  the  nostrils  and  sniff;  and  so  with  all  the
special  senses ;  each  sensory  impression  sets  up  nascent  move-
ments for  its  better  reception2.  In  like  manner  there  is  also  a
characteristic  adjustment  for  images  which  can  be  distinguished
from  sensory  adjustments  as  readily  as  these  are  distinguished
from  each  other.  We  become  most  aware  of  this  as,  mutatis
mutandis,  we  do  of  them,  when  we  voluntarily  concentrate
attention  upon  particular  ideas  instead  of  remaining  mere
passive  spectators,  as  it  were,  of  the  general  procession.  To
this  ideational  adjustment  may  be  referred  most  of  the  strain
and  '  head-splitting '  connected  with  recollecting,  reflecting  and
all  that  people  call  headwork ;  and  the  '  absent  look '  of  one

1  Cf.  below,  pp.  i76f.

2  Organic  sensations,  though  distinguishable  from  images  by  their  definite  but
often  anatomically  inaccurate  localisation,  furnish  no  clear  evidence  of  such  adaptations.
But  in  another  respect  they  are  still  more  clearly  marked  off  from  images,  viz.  by  the
pleasure  or  pain  which,  in  proportion  to  their  obtrusiveness,  they  directly  produce.


174  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  i

intently  thinking  or  absorbed  in  reverie  seems  directly  due  to
that  lack  of  sensory  adjustment  which  the  concentration  of
attention  upon  ideas  entails.

But,  distinct  as  they  are,  impressions  and  images  are
still  closely  connected.  In  the  first  place,  there  are  two  or
three  well-marked  intermediate  forms,  so  that,  though  we  cannot
directly  observe  it,  we  seem  justified  in  assuming  a  steady
transition  from  the  one  to  the  other.  As  the  first  of  such  inter-
mediate forms,  it  is  usual  to  reckon  what  are  often,  and — so  far
as  psychology  goes — inaccurately,  styled  ''After-images'  They
would  be  better  described  as  after-sensations,  inasmuch  as  they
are  due  either  (i)  to  the  persistence  of  the  original  peripheral
excitation  after  the  stimulus  is  withdrawn,  or  (2)  to  the  effects
of  the  exhaustion  or  the  repair  that  immediately  follows  this
excitation.  In  the  former  case  they  are  qualitatively  identical
with  the  original  sensation  and  are  called  '  positive,'  in  the  latter
they  are  complementary  to  it  and  are  called  'negative.'  The
latter,  of  which  we  have  clear  instances  only  in  connexion  with
sight,  are  obviously  in  no  sort  re-presentations  of  the  original
impression,  but  a  sequent  presentation  of  diametrically  opposite
quality ;  while  positive  after-sensations  are,  psychologically  re-
garded, nothing  but  the  original  sensations  in  a  state  of  evan-
escence. It  is  this  gradual  waning  after  the  physical  stimulus
has  completely  ceased  that  give  after-sensations  their  chief  title
to  a  place  in  the  series  of  forms  between  impressions  and  images.
There  is,  however,  another  point:  after-sensations  are  not  affected
by  movement  as  percepts  usually  are.  If  we  turn  away  our  eyes
we  cease  to  see  the  flame  at  which  we  have  been  looking,  but
the  after-sensation  remains  still  projected  before  us  and  continues
localised  in  the  dark  field  of  sight,  even  if  we  close  our  eyes
altogether.  This  fact,  that  movements  do  not  suppress  them,
and  the  further  fact,  that  we  can  nevertheless  be  distinctly  aware
of  our  sense-organs  as  concerned  in  their  presentation,  serve  to
mark  off  after-sensations  as  intermediate  between  primary  and
secondary  presentations.  The  after-sensation  is  in  reality  more
elementary  than  either  the  preceding  percept  or  its  image.  In
both  these,  in  the  case  of  sight,  objects  appear  in  space  of  three
dimensions,  i.e.  as  geometrical  solids  in  perspective1  ;  but  the
after-sensation  lacks  all  this  detail.

1  The  following  scant  quotation  from  Fechner,  one  of  the  best  observers  in  this


CH.  vn,  §  i] Impressions  and  Ideas  distinguished 175

Next,  and  still  further  removed  from  normal  sensations  (/>.
sensations  determined  by  the  stimuli  appropriate  to  the  sense-
organ)  are  the  so-called  ' Recurrent  sensations'  often  unnoticed
but  probably  experienced  more  or  less  frequently  by  everybody
— cases,  that  is,  in  which  sights  or  sounds,  usually  such  as  at  the
time  were  engrossing  and  impressive,  suddenly  reappear  several
hours  or  even  days  after  the  physical  stimuli,  as  well  as  their  effects
on  the  terminal  sense-organ,  seem  entirely  to  have  ceased.  Thus
portrait-painters  and  workers  with  the  microscope  frequently
see  the  objects  which  have  engaged  their  attention  during  the
day,  stand  out  clearly  before  them  in  the  dark.  It  was  indeed
precisely  such  an  experience  that  led  the  anatomist  Henle  first
to  call  attention  to  these  facts1.  But  he  and  others  have  wrongly
referred  them  to  what  he  called  a  'sense-memory';  for  all  that
we  know  is  against  the  supposition  that  the  sense-organs  have
any  such  power  of  retention  and  reproduction.  Moreover  'recur-
rent sensations  '  have  all  the  marks  of  percepts  which  after-
sensations  lack — definite  movements  and  rhythms,  for  example.
They  differ,  in  fact,  from  what  are  more  strictly  called  hallucina-
tions only  in  being  independent  of  any  subjective  suggestion  or
mental  derangement.

Finally,  in  what  Fechnerhas  called  the  ' Memory  After-image'
or  the  primary  memory-image,  as  it  is  better  termed,  we  have  the
image  proper  in  its  earliest  form.  As  an  instance  of  what  is  meant
may  be  cited  the  familiar  experience  that  a  knock  at  the  door,
the  hour  struck  on  the  clock,  the  face  of  a  friend  whom  we  have
passed  unnoticed,  can  sometimes  be  recognised  a  few  moments
later  by  means  of  the  persisting  image,  although — apparently —
the  actual  impression  was  entirely  disregarded.  The  primary
memory-image,  in  the  case  of  vision,  can  always  be  obtained,  and

department,  must  suffice  in  illustration.  "  Lying  awake  in  the  early  morning  after
daybreak,  with  my  eyes  motionless  though  open,  there  usually  appears,  when  I  chance
to  close  them  for  a  moment,  the  black  after-image  of  the  white  bed  immediately
before  me  and  the  white  after-image  of  the  black  stove-pipe  some  distance  away
against  the  opposite  wall.  ...Both  [after-images]  appear  as  if  they  were  in  juxtaposition
in  the  same  plane ;  and,  though — when  my  eyes  are  open — I  seem  to  see  the  white
bed  in  its  entire  length,  the  after-image — when  my  eyes  are  shut — presents  instead
only  a  narrow  black  stripe  owing  to  the  fact  that 'the  bed  is  seen  considerably  fore-
shortened. But  the  memory-image  on  the  other  hand  completely  reproduces  the
pictorial  illusion  as  it  appears  when  the  eyes  are  open  "  (Elemente  der  Psychophysik,

»•  P-  473)-

1  Cf.  for  further  details,  Fechner,  op.  cit.  ii.  pp.  498  ff.


176  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  i

is  obtained  to  most  advantage,  by  looking  intently  at  some  object
for  an  instant  and  then  closing  the  eyes  or  turning  them  away.
The  image  of  the  object  will  appear  for  a  moment  very  vividly
and  distinctly,  and  can  be  so  recovered  several  times  in  succes-
sion by  an  effort  of  attention.  Such  reinstatement  is  materially
helped  by  rapidly  opening  and  closing  the  eyes,  or  by  suddenly
moving  them  in  any  way.  In  this  respect  a  primary  memory-
image  resembles  an  after-sensation,  which  can  be  repeatedly
revived  in  this  manner  when  it  would  otherwise  have  disappeared.
This  seems  to  shew  that  the  primary  memory-image  in  some
cases  owes  its  vivacity  in  part  to  a  positive  after-sensation,  at  any
rate  it  proves  that  it  is  in  some  way  still  sense-sustained.  But
in  other  respects  the  two  are  very  different :  the  after-sensation
is  necessarily  presented  if  the  intensity  of  the  original  excitation
suffices  for  its  production,  and  cannot  be  presented  otherwise,
however  much  we  attend.  Moreover,  the  after-sensation  is  only
positive  for  a  moment  or  two,  and  then  passes  into  the  negative
or  complementary  phase,  when,  so  far  from  even  contributing
towards  the  continuance  of  the  original  percept,  it  directly
hinders  it.  Primary  memory-images  on  the  other  hand,  and
indeed  all  images,  depend  mainly  upon  the  attention  given  to  the
impression  ;  provided  that  was  sufficient,  the  faintest  impression
may  be  for  some  time  retained;  and  without  it  very  intense  ones
leave  no  appreciable  trace.  The  primary  memory-image,  in
fact,  retains  so  much  of  its  original  definiteness  and  intensity  as
to  make  it  possible  with  great  accuracy  to  compare  two  physical
phenomena,  one  of  which  is  in  this  way  '  remembered '  while  the
other  is  really  present.  For  the  most  part  this  is  indeed  a  more
accurate  procedure  than  that  of  dealing  with  both  together,  but
it  is  only  possible  for  a  very  short  time.  From  Weber's  experi-
ments with  weights  and  lines1  it  would  appear  that  even  after
10  seconds  a  considerable  waning  has  taken  place,  and  after
100  seconds  all  that  is  distinctive  of  the  primary  image  has
probably  ceased.

On  the  whole,  then,  it  appears  that  the  image  proper  in  its
earliest  complete  form  is  a  joint  product.  It  is  not  the  mere
residuum  of  changes  in  the  presentation-continuum  :  it  is  a  dis-
tinct effect  of  these  changes,  but  only  when  there  has  been  some
concentration  of  attention  upon  them.  It  has  the  form  of  a  percept,

1  Die  Lehre  vom  Tastsinne  und  Gemeingefuhle,  1851,  pp.  86  ff.


CH.  vn,  §  i] Impressions  and  Ideas  distinguished 177

but  is  not  constituted  of  revived  impressions,  for  the  essential
marks  of  impressions  are  absent.  It  is  not  localised  in  actual
space.  In  its  case  there  is  neither  the  motor  adaptation,  nor  the
feeling-tone,  which  are  incident  to  the  reception  of  impressions.
It  does  not  reproduce  the  intensity  of  its  original  constituents,
but  only  their  quality  and  complication.  What  we  call  its  vivid-
ness is  of  the  nature  of  intensity,  but  it  is  an  intensity  very
partially  and  indirectly  determined  by  that  of  the  original  im-
pression. But  the  range  of  vividness  in  ideas  is  probably  com-
paratively small ;  what  are  called  variations  in  vividness  are
often  really  variations  in  distinctness  and  completeness1.  Where
there  is  persistence  and  great  intensity,  as  in  hallucinations,
primary  presentations,  as  already  said,  may  be  reasonably  sup-
posed to  enter  into  the  complex.  The  image  may  rise  above,
or  fall  below,  the  threshold  of  consciousness  independently  of
any  changes  in  the  presentational-continuum — or,  as  we  may
now  call  it,  the  primary  continuum.

For  it  seems  manifest  that  a  secondary  continuum  has  been  in
some  way  formed  out  of,  or  differentiated  from  it  in  consequence
of  movements  of  attention.  Still  the  precise  connexion  of  the
two  continua  is  very  difficult  to  determine.  In  the  case  of  the
primary  memory-image,  though  there  has  been  no  cessation  in
its  presentation,  yet  the  characteristic  marks  of  the  impression
are  gone.  So  much  so,  indeed,  that  we  may  have  several  primary
images  in  the  field  of  consciousness  together,  as  when  we  count
up  the  strokes  of  the  clock  after  it  has  ceased  striking.  But,
though  images  thus  appear  first  of  all  as  a  sort  of  airoppoia  or
outgrowth  from  the  presentation-continuum,  their  return — and
only  then  do  they  become  distinct  re-presentations — is  never
determined  directly  and  solely  by  later  presentations  like  that
which  first  gave  them  being.  A  second  impression  exactly  like
the  first — if  that  were  all — would  merely  be  itself  assimilated  or
recognised.  It  could  not  account  for  the  individual  distinctness
characteristic  of  the  '  revived'  image — which  is  just  what  we  want

1  As  we  have  seen  that  there  is  a  steady  transition  from  percept  to  image,  so,  if
space  allowed,  the  study  of  hallucinations  might  make  clear  an  opposite  and  abnormal
process — the  passage,  that  is  to  say,  of  images  into  percepts,  for  such,  to  all  intents
and  purposes,  are  hallucinations  of  perception,  psychologically  regarded.  To  some
extent  these  processes  can  be  voluntarily  evoked.  Cf.  J.  Miiller,  Ueber  die  phantas-
tischen  Gesichtserseheinungen,  1825;  G.  H.  Meyer,  Physiologie  der  Nervenfaser,  1851,
pp.  228  ff.

W.  P.  12


178  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  i

to  understand — nor,  indeed,  for  the  existence  of  such  an  image
at  all ;  for  the  only  re-presentative  element  with  which  it  is  con-
cerned is  that  involved  in  its  own  assimilation.  But  how  then
was  the  distinctness  in  the  first  instance  possible,  in  the  series
of  primary  memory-images  just  mentioned,  for  example  ?  It
was  possible  owing  to  differences  in  the  rest  of  the  successive
fields  of  consciousness  in  which  each  in  turn  occurred  and  to
the  persistence  of  these  differences.  If  the  whole  field  which
the  second  impression  entered  had  been  just  like  the  field  of
the  first,  it  is  hard  to  see  what  ground  for  distinctness  there
would  have  been  ;  and  so,  mutatis  mutandis,  of  the  rest.

But  when  such  a  subsequent  impression  does  not  occur  till
the  primary  memory-image  itself  has  become  altogether  subli-
minal, how  then  is  distinct  re-presentation  possible  ?  It  is
possible  only  if  the  new  impression  is  not  merely  assimilated
by  what  persists  of  the  old  but  can  also  reinstate  sufficient  of
the  mental  framing  of  this  to  give  to  its  image  individual
distinctness.  This  is  really  what  happens  in  what  is  properly
called  the  '  association  of  ideas.'  Our  inquiry  into  the  relation
between  presentations  and  representations  has  thus  brought  us
to  the  general  consideration  of  this  association.  But  it  will  be
well  first  to  follow  up  this  analytic  inquiry  by  next  attempting
to  investigate  the  genesis  and  development  of  the  ideas  them-
selves.

Genesis  and  Development  of  Ideation.

§  2.  "  From  the  senses  to  the  imagination  and  from  this  to
the  intellect — such  is  the  order  of  life  and  of  nature1."  It  is  the
first  step  in  this  development  that  we  have  now  to  try  and
follow.  '  We  find  ourselves  sometimes  engrossed  in  present  per-
ceptions, as  when  watching,  for  example,  the  meanderings  of  an
ant ;  sometimes  we  may  be  equally  absorbed  in  reminiscences  ;
sometimes  in  'castle-building,'  or  in  thought.  Here  are  three
well-marked  forms  of  conscious  life :  the  first  being  concerned
with  what  is,  the  second  with  what  has  been,  and  the  third  with
the  merely  possible.  Again,  the  first  involves  definite  spatial
and  temporal  order,  though  the  temporal  order,  we  may  note,
is  in  the  main  restricted  to  the  'sensible  present2';  the  second

1  Vives  quoted  by  Hamilton,  Metaphysics,  ii.  p.  320.

2  On  this  cf.  below,  ch.  viii,  §  3.


CH.  vii,  §  2] Genesis  and  Development  of  Ideation 179

involves  primarily  only  definite  time-order ;  and  the  last  neither
in  a  definite  way.  Thus,  analytically  regarded,  perception,
memory,  imagination  or  ideation,  shew  a  steady  advance.  In
infancy  the  first  predominates,  while  senility  lapses  back  to  the
second ;  in  the  third,  where  similarities  suggest  themselves  and
the  contrast  of  actual  and  possible  is  explicit,  we  have  at  length
the  groundwork  of  logical  comparison.  Nevertheless,  since
imagination  plays  a  conspicuous  part  in  child  life  before  much
personal  reminiscence  appears,  it  would  seem  probable  that  ideas
do  not  first  arise  as  definite  memory-images  or  reminiscences.
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  so-called  homing  instincts  of  the  lower
animals  we  have  evidence  of  isolated  '  memories '  of  a  simpler
form  than  ours.

The  study  of  this  advance  is  as  difficult  as  it  is  interesting
and  important ;  but  we  can  hardly  hope  at  present  for  a  final
solution  of  all  the  questions  raised.  One  chief  obstacle,  as  is  so
often  the  case  in  psychology,  lies  in  the  unsettled  connotation  of
such  leading  terms  as  memory,  association  and  idea.  Even  what
is  most  fundamental  of  all,  that  'plasticity1'  which  we  have
analysed  into  retentiyeness,  differentiation  and  integration,  is
sometimes  described  as  if  it  already  involved  memory-images
and  their  association.  Images,  that  is  to  say,  are  identified  with
the  mere  'residua'  of  former  impressions,  and  yet  at  the  same  time
are  spoken  of  as  if  they  were  also  their  '  copies '  :  which  is  much
like  saying  that  the  evening  twilight  is  a  faint  replica  of  the
noonday  glare  as  well  as  its  parting  gleam.  This  mistaken
identification  by  the  Associationist  psychology  of  later  processes
with  simpler  and  earlier  ones,  which  fail  to  explain  them,  has  not
only  obscured  the  science  with  inappropriate  concepts  but  has
prevented  the  question  on  which  we  are  entering — that  concerning
the  genesis  and  development  of  ideas — from  being  ever  effectually
raised.  The  discussion  of  this  question  will  incidentally  yield
the  best  refutation  of  such  views.  We  must  consider  it  from
two  sides,  which  we  may  call  the  subjective  and  the  objective.
Under  the  former  we  shall  have  briefly  to  note  what  changes  the
process  of  such  development  entails  upon  the  subject.  Under
the  latter  we  shall  have  to  ascertain  more  at  length  the  charac-
teristics thereby  entailed  upon  the  resulting  presentational  pro-
ducts. We  begin  with  the  first.

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  iii,  §  4  fin.

12 — 2


180  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vu,  §  2

Experience,  we  say,  is  the  acquisition  of  practical  acquaintance
and  efficiency,  as  the  result  of  repeated  opportunity  and  effort.
We  had  first  a  new  or  strange  situation  A  ;  then  after  more  or
fewer  repetitions,  we  say  this  situation  was  '  recognised/  became
quite  familiar.  If  A  was  a  complex  movement,  we  say  that  at  first
it  was  hard  to  perform,  but  that  after  repeated  trials  it  was  per-
formed with  perfect  facility.  Familiarity  and  facility  then  may
be  regarded  as  characters  that  perceptions  or  actions  may
gradually  acquire,  characters  that  by  degrees  replace  the
strangeness  or  difficulty  that  accompanied  them  at  the  first.
We  may  indicate  this  acquired  characteristic  by  7,  so  that  A
in  becoming  cognised  or  assimilated  becomes  AI.  Our  first
problem — the  subjective  aspect  of  our  inquiry — is  to  ascertain,  if
we  can,  the  nature  of  this  7  as  an  attribute  or  characteristic  of  a
given  situation  or  performance.  One  obvious  consideration  is  that
it  seems  essentially  the  same,  however  various  the  experiences  to
which  it  applies.  May  we  therefore  suppose  that  the  source  of
this  7  is  to  be  found  rather  in  the  subjective  than  in  the  objective
constituents  of  consciousness?  It  is  at  all  events  certain  that
familiarity  and  facility  are  closely  related  to  feeling.  Unfortu-
nately these  relations — at  first  sight  at  any  rate — appear  dis-
couragingly  complex.  Though  the  familiar  is  often  pleasurable
yet  we  have  plenty  of  familiar  pains.  Again,  beyond  certain
limits  the  familiar  becomes  uninteresting,  unless  positively  pain-
ful :  also  the  easy  becomes  the  mechanical.  On  the  other  hand,
the  unfamiliar  and  the  difficult  have  their  attractions,  though
again  only  within  certain  limits :  we  are  hostile  towards  the
utterly  strange  and  averse  to  difficulty  pure  and  simple.  We
cannot  then  regard  this  feeling  that  varies  as  the  source  of  the
constant  7:  it  is  rather  a  consequence  of  it1.  But  we  can  quite
well  maintain — indeed  we  can  hardly  do  else — that  apart  from
subjective  selection  and  interest  the  percept  or  movement  A
would  never  have  acquired  this  characteristic  7  at  all*.

It  is  at  all  events  in  terms  of  subjective  function — so  to  say —
that  we  ordinarily  express  the  broad  facts  of  habit  and  practice.
Use  we  say  is  second  nature  and  practice  makes  perfect :  the
effect  of  exercise  is  thus  conceived  as  a  change  on  the  subjective

1  Wundt  however  takes  a  different  view. Cf.  his  Physiologische  Psychologie,  6th
ed.  iii.  p.  511.

1  Cf.  above,  chh.  ii,  §  4,  p.  50;  iii,  §  a,  p.  69,  §  3,  p.  72.


CH.  vn,  §  2] Genesis  and  Development  of  Ideation 181

side,  not  as  an  association  of  a  plurality  of  identical  presentations.
Indeed  in  the  case  of  dexterities  acquired  by  practice,  it  is
obvious  that  there  is  no  such  series  of  identicals  at  all.  From
the  first  rude  beginning — say  the  schoolboy's  pothooks  or  the
schoolgirl's  curtsies — up  to  the  finished  performance  of  the
adept  there  is  continuous  approximation :  awkward  and  bungling
attempts  pass  gradually  into  the  bold  strokes  and  graceful  sweep
of  mastery.  Looking  simply  at  the  movements  themselves  we
are  impressed,  not  by  the  sameness  of,  but  by  the  difference
between,  the  final  adroitness  and  the  initial  clumsiness.  There
was  little  of  what  characterises  the  former  to  begin  with  and
there  may  remain  no  trace  of  the  latter  in  the  end.  Or  if  we
take  note  of  the  effect  produced  on  muscles  and  limbs  by
exercise  we  find  that  these  also  gradually  change  and  that  such
changes  may  be  indefinitely  great.  Whenever  the  blacksmith
"swings  his  heavy  sledge"  there  may  be  physically  the  same
amount  of  work  done.  But  for  the  smith  himself  the  same
work,  now  that  "his  arms  are  strong  as  iron  bands,"  does  not
entail  the  same  effort,  is  not  a  repetition  of  the  same  experience,
as  at  first.  Facility  and  faculty  (or  function)  are  much  the  same
both  etymologically  and  actually.  If  the  facility,  efficiency  or
function  is  the  psychical  concomitant — whether  directly  or  in-
directly— of  structural  growth  and  development,  and  if  the
perfected  structure  has  actually  superseded  the  rudimentary,
may  we  not  assume  the  like  of  the  perfected  function  ?  As  little
as  new  structures  are  a  combination  of  old  so  little  are  new
functions  an  association  of  old.  The  less  fit  may  be  fossilised
and  preserved  elsewhere  but  at  least  it  is  not  embodied  in  the
fittest  that  finally  survives.

If  we  look  next  at  cases  of  instinctive  or  innate  skill  these
seem  to  point  to  the  same  conclusion.  The  young  ring-plover,
for  instance,  can  run  as  soon  as  it  emerges  from  the  shell,  that
is,  without  practice  and  without  repetitions.  Yet  it  seems
reasonable  to  assume  that  the  newly-hatched  plover  has  at  the
outset  much  the  same  sense  of  use  and  ease  that  a  kitten  only
has  when  after  many  trials  it  has  attained  a  like  facility.  Of  all
but  the  fundamental  endowments  of  mind,  whatever  these  may
be,  it  is  probably  true  that  innate  faculty  is,  in  general,  due  to
facility  previously  acquired  by  practice  and  transmitted  by
heredity.  The  fact  of  such  transmission — though  it  lies  outside


1 82  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  2

our  present  psychological  inquiry — seems  to  force  us  to  admit
that,  whatever  be  the  means  by  which  a  given  organism  is
called  into  existence,  the  psychological  concomitants  normal  to
such  an  organism  will  be  there  too  ;  and  cannot  be  there  other-
wise. Were  the  newly-hatched  plover  to  be  put  on  the  water,
its  first  experience  would  be  strange ;  but  the  newly-hatched
duck  so  treated  would  begin  by  feeling  at  home.  Might  not
the  case  be  essentially  the  same,  if  for  plover  and  duck  we  sub-
stitute, say  a  boy  who  has  not,  and  a  boy  who  has,  thoroughly
learnt  to  swim  ?  More  generally :  If,  in  the  case  of  instinctive
ability,  the  characteristic  of  facility — 7  as  we  have  called  it — is
not  an  associative  series,  may  we  not  assume  that  even  when
such  a  series  is  an  indispensable  condition  of  facility,  viz.,  when
the  facility  is  acquired  by  a  subject  sufficiently  advanced,  the
series  is  still  no  part  of  the  essence  of  7  ?  Anyone  with  a  turn
for  psychology  might  analyse  the  several  steps  of  his  progress  in
learning  some  feat  of  skill  and  observe  the  gradual  elimination
of  the  gauche  and  irrelevant  and  the  gradual  advance  of  the
graceful  and  fitting.  But  these  observations  would  not  consti-
tute the  skill ;  and  in  fact  they  would  probably  hinder  it.  The
whole  situation  would  be  comparable  to  that  of  a  botanist  from
time  to  time  interfering  with  a  growing  plant  to  see  how  it
developed.  As  the  botanist  may  record  the  several  phases  of
such  development  so  may  the  psychologist  note  in  himself  the
rise  and  progress  of  some  new  aptitude  he  is  in  course  of  ac-
quiring. Such  records  may  quite  naturally  form  an  associated
series,  and  this  series  might  even  be  itself  associated  with  the
perfection  finally  attained.  The  great  thing  is  to  take  care
that  we  do  not  confound  the  two.

It  will  perhaps  be  urged  that  the  familiarity  concerned  in
cognition  is  different  from  the  facility  concerned  in  movement.
In  acquired  dexterity  there  is  a  gradual  approximation  towards
perfection,  but  in  acquired  perception  the  object  perceived  is
identically  the  same  from  first  to  last.  Though  neither  my
juvenile  pothooks,  nor  therefore  the  movements  that  produced
them,  form  a  series  of  identicals,  yet  all  my  former  impressions  of
the  moon's  disc  may  form  one.  Perhaps  such  a  plea  for  separating
facility  from  familiarity  has  never  been  explicitly  made;  still  it
seems  fairly  implied  in  the  diverse  treatment  of  the  two  by  many
psychologists.  But  if  we  consider — as  it  is  plain  we  ought  —


CH.  vii,  §  2] Genesis  and  Development  of  Ideation 183

not  the  physical  thing  but  the  individual's  perception  of  it,  then
surely  this  too  is  an  acquisition,  entails  activity  and  progress,
gradually  approximates  towards  completeness  like  motor  acqui-
sitions. It  too  has  its  physical  concomitant  in  differentiation  of
structure ;  and  just  as  there  are  innate  dexterities  so  there  seem
to  be  innate  cognitions.  The  young  rabbit  begins  by  being
indifferent  to  mice  and  interested  in  carrots,  the  young  cat  by
being  indifferent  to  carrots  and  interested  in  mice,  while  both
are  alarmed  at  the  sight  of  a  dog1.  So  much  for  the  subjective
side  of  the  process :  its  bearing  in  detail  on  the  objective  pro-
ducts resulting  will  be  apparent  as  we  proceed.

We  have  already  described  this  process  from  the  objective
side  as  assimilation  or  immediate  recognition2;  and  have  noted
how  the  older  psychology  described  it  as  association  of  the
completely  similar,  or  automatic  association3.  That  the  two
views  have  something  in  common  is  shewn  by  the  juxtaposition
of  'automatic'  and  'immediate,'  'similarity'  and  'assimilation.'
To  prepare  the  way  for  further  discussion,  let  us  first  ascertain
these  points  of  agreement.  "  When  I  look  at  the  full  moon,"
said  Bain,  "  I  am  instantly  impressed  with  the  state  arising  from
all  my  former  impressions  of  her  disc  added  together4."  This  we
may  symbolize  in  the  usual  fashion  as  A  +  an ...  +  a3  +  a^  +  a^.
Now,  it  will  be  granted  (i)  that  the  present  occurrence  (full
moon)  has  been  preceded  by  a  series  of  like  occurrences,  enumer-
able as  i,  2,  3, ...,«;  (2)  that  the  preceding  experiences  of  those
occurrences  were  a  necessary  condition  of  the  present  experience
(Ay);  and  (3)  that  this  'arises  instantly'  in  consequence  of  our
previous  attention  to  them.  But  it  is  denied  (i)  that  this  present
experience  is  the  mere  sum,  or  even  the  mere  '  fusion,'  of  the
experiences  preceding  it ;  (2)  that  they  were  qualitatively
identical ;  (3)  that  they  persist  severally  unaltered,  in  such  wise
that  experience  "  drags  at  each  remove  a  lengthening  chain  "
or  a  greater  mass  of  them.  The  successive  experiences  of  n
identical  occurrences  does  not  then  result  in  an  accumulation  of
n  identical  residua.  The  ineptness  of  the  atomistic  psychology
with  its  '  physical '  and  '  chemical '  analogies  is  nowhere  more

1  Many  striking  instances  in  point  are  to  be  found  in  the  classic  papers  by  the  late
Douglas  Spalding  or  in  the  pages  of  Romanes.

-  Cf.  above,  ch.  vi,  §  2.  3  Cf.  ch.  iv,  §  4..

4  Senses  and  Intellect,  4th  ed.,  1894,  p.  489.


184  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  2

apparent  than  here.  Considering  the  intimate  relation  of  life
and  mind,  and  the  strong  physiological  bias  shewn  by  the
Association ists  from  Hartley  onwards,  it  is  surely  extraordinary
how  completely  they  have  failed  to  appreciate  the  light-bearing
significance  of  such  concepts  as  function  and  development.
Whatever  superficial  resemblance  there  may  be  between  the
relation  of  a  chemical  compound  or  alloy  to  the  elements  com-
posing it,  and  that  of  a  complex  presentation  to  its  constituents,
their  supposed  analogy  is  faulty  in  the  most  essential  point.
A  chemical  association  that  cannot  be  dissociated  is,  I  fancy,
a  contradiction  in  terms.  But  indissociability  is  the  one  dis-
tinguishing peculiarity  of  '  mental  chemistry.'  So  it  is  also  of
organic  development,  between  which  and  mental  development
there  is,  however,  more  than  analogy :  in  certain  respects,  at  any
rate,  there  is  minute  and  exact  correspondence.  Development
implies  change  of  form  in  a  continuous  whole  :  every  growth
into  means  an  equal  growth  out  of;  thus  one  cannot  find  the
caterpillar  in  the  butterfly.  All  that  is  true  in  Mill's  'inseparable
association ' — and  there  is  much  that  is  true  in  it — is  intelligible
only  when  connected  with  such  development.

But  though  assimilation  cannot  be  analysed  into  a  series
of  identical  ideas  (alt  a2,  ...,  an),  either  'added  together'  or
'  instantaneously  fused,'  yet  it  can  result  in  an  a  which  may
provisionally  be  called  an  idea  inasmuch  as  it  may  eventually
become  one.  To  ascertain  how  it  does  so,  is  our  second  problem
— the  objective  side  of  our  inquiry.  Now  such  idea  in  the
making  is,  as  yet,  neither  a  memory-image  in  the  proper  sense
nor  an  idea  within  the  meaning  of  the  term  implied  in  'con-
structive imagination '  or  in  thought.  For  it  is  devoid  of  the
temporal  signs1  indicated  by  the  subscript  numerals  in  aly  a2,  ...  ,
and  it  has  not  yet  become  part  of  an  ideational  continuum,
one,  that  is  to  say,  divested  of  the  definite  spatial  and  tem-
poral marks  belonging  to  what  actually  is  or  has  been.  It  is,
so  to  say,  embryonic,  something  additional  to  the  mere  per-
cept as  assimilated,  and  yet  something  less  than  a  '  free  or
independent  idea*  It  is,  as  it  has  been  happily  called2,  a  tied


1  On  this  term  cf.  below,  ch.  viii,  §  ^fin.

9  Cf.  Drobisch,  Empirische  Psychologie,  1842,  §  31;  Hoffding,  "  Ueber  Wieder-
kennen,  Association  und  psychische  Activitat,"  in  Vierteljahrsschr.  f.  wissenschaftl .


CH.  vii,  §  2] Genesis  and  Development  of  Ideation 185

(gebundene)  or  implicit  idea.  We  have  clear  evidence  of  the
sense-bound  stage  of  this  immature  idea  in  the  so-called
'  memory  after-image.'  There  is,  however,  nothing  in  this  of
memory,  save  as  the  term  is  loosely  used  for  mere  retentiveness  ;
and  after-percept  would  so  far  be  a  less  objectionable  name  for  it.
This  along  with  its  earlier  name,  '  primary  memory-image,'
indicates  its  transitional  character,  as  already  remarked.  This
after-percept  is  entirely  sense-sustained  and  admits  of  no  ideal
recall,  though — in  minds  sufficiently  advanced — as  it  persists  for
a  few  moments,  it  may  form  the  basis  of  such  comparison  with
a  second  sensation,  as  we  find  in  the  experiments  of  Weber,
Fechner  and  others1.

It  is  saying  too  little  to  maintain,  as  the  hypothesis  of
inseparable  association  in  effect  does,  that  this  immature  idea
is  subconscious,  on  the  ground  that  it  is  not  discoverable  by
direct  analysis.  Yet  it  is  saying  too  much,  regardless  of  this
defect,  to  describe  a  percept  as  a  presentative-representative
complex,  if  representation  is  to  imply  the  presence  of  a  free
or  independent  idea.  To  call  the  representative  constituent
of  the  percept  a  '  tied  or  nascent  idea '  on  the  ground  of  its
possible  later  development  into  an  independent  one  seems,  then,
nearest  the  truth2.  The  same  meaning  is  sometimes  expressed
in  a  wholly  different  and  designedly  paradoxical  way,  by  saying
that  all  cognition  (perception)  is  recognition.  This  statement  has
been  met  by  elaborate  expositions  of  the  difference  between
knowing  and  knowing  again,  the  irrelevance  of  which  any  lexicon
would  shew;  and,  further,  by  the  question,  how  on  such  a  view  a
first  cognition  is  possible,  or  how  otherwise  an  indefinite  regress  of
assimilation  is  to  be  avoided  ?  We  may  confidently  reply  that  it
cannot  be  avoided  :  an  absolute  beginning  of  experience,  we  have
again  to  remember,  is  beyond  us.  Assimilation  means  further
assimilation ;  in  this  sense  all  cognition  is  further  cognition,

Philosophie,  1889,  Bd.  xiii.  pp.  437  ff.  To  Hoffding  we  are  also  indebted  for  the
term  Hekanntheitsqualitat,  which  has  suggested  the  7  character  used  above.

1  Cf. above, p. 178. Recent experiments, however, seem  to  prove  that  the
after-percept  is  not  the  sole  factor,  and  often  is  not  a  factor  at  all  in  such  successive
comparison  (so-called) ;  but  that  what  is  now  termed  '  the  absolute  impression '  may
supplement  it  or  even  replace  it  altogether. As  to  what  is  meant  by  absolute  impres-
sion, cf.  ch.  iv,  §  5,  c.

2  Accordingly  Hoffding  symbolizes  it  as  (4 J ,  which,  by  the  way,  we  might  call
the  objective  aspect  of  our  A1.


1 86  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  2

and  a  bare  sensation  is,  we  allow,  an  abstraction  representing
a  limit  to  which  we  can  never  regress1.

We  find  evidence,  again,  of  ideas  in  the  making  in  what —
adopting  a  term  of  G.  H.  Lewes — we  may  call  preperception.
Of  this  instances  in  plenty  are  furnished  by  everyday  illusions,
as  when  a  scarecrow  is  hailed  by  the  traveller  who  mistakes  it
for  a  husbandman,  or  when  what  is  taken  for  an  orange  proves
to  be  but  an  imitation  in  wax.  In  reality  all  complex  percepts
involve  preperception ;  and,  so  far,  it  must  be  allowed  that  such
percepts  are  directly  analysable  into  presentative-representative
complexes.  Nevertheless,  the  representative  element  is  not  yet,
and  may  never  become,  an  idea  proper.  The  sight  of  ice  yields
a  forefeel  of  its  coldness,  the  smell  of  baked  meats  a  foretaste  of
their  savour.  Such  prepercepts  differ  from  free  ideas  just  as
after-percepts  do :  they  are  still  sense-bound  and  sense-sustained.
Nor  can  this  complication  be  with  any  propriety  identified  either
with  the  association  pertaining  to  memory  or  with  that  specially
pertaining  to  ideation  ;  though,  no  doubt,  complication  and
association  are  genetically  continuous,  as  are  their  respective
constituents,  nascent  and  free  ideas2.  The  whole  course  of
perceptual  integration  being  determined  and  sustained  by
subjective  interest,  involves  from  the  outset,  as  we  have  seen,
concurrent  conative  impulses ;  and  thus  the  same  assimilation
that  results  in  familiarity  and  preperception  on  the  subjective
side  results  in  facility  and  purpose  on  the  conative.  Knowing  im-
mediately what  to  do  is  here  the  best  evidence  of  knowing  what
there  is  to  do  with  ;  the  moth  that  flies  into  the  candle-flame

1  A  propos  of  this  I  append  the  following,  forbearing  to  translate  it,  as  it  seems
more  telling  as  it  stands :  Es  gilt  fur  die  Psychologic,  was  fur  die  Naturwissenschaft
[auch  gilt] :  aus  Nichts  wird  Nichts  und  zu  Nichts  tritt  Nichts  hinzu.  Wo  sich  ein
Werden  zeigen  soil,  da  muss  Etwas  zu  Etwas  treten,  aus  deren  Verbindung  ein  Drittes
entstehen  kann.  Soil  also  eine  Erkenntniss  entstehen,  so  muss  zuvor  eine  Erkenntniss
vorhanden  sein,  zu  der  eine  andere  kommt,  und  mit  der  sie  in  Process  tritt. ..Die  primi-
tivisten  Apperceptionen  [  =  Assimilationen]  des  Sauglings  sind  freilich  dunkel;  aber
sie  folgen  den  Gesetzen  der  klar  entwickelten  Processe.  Steinthal,  Einleitung  in  die
Psychologic  und  Sprachwissenschaft,  1871,  p.  171.

4  Hence  the  earlier  process  has  been  named  '  impressional  association  '  (Stout,
Analytic  Psychology,  1896,  ii.  pp.  27-9),  and  again  'animal  association'  (Thorndike,
Animal  Intelligence,  an  Experimental  Study  of  the  Associative  Processes  in  Animals,
1898,  pp.  71,87,  and  passim).  But  it  seems  preferable  to  confine  the  term  '  association'
to  the  later  process,  in  which  alone  the  component  presentations  have  that  amount  of
distinctness  and  individuality  which  the  term  association  properly  connotes;  and  to
describe  the  former  as  'complication.'  Cf.  above,  ch.  vi,  §  7.


CH.  vii,  §  2] Genesis  and  Development  of  Ideation 187

has  assuredly  no  preperception  of  its  heat,  and  does  not  act
with  purpose.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  we  may  now  see  one
way,  and  probably  the  earliest,  in  which  tied  ideas  become  free.

The  contrast  between  the  actual  and  the  possible  constitutes,
as  we  have  seen,  the  main  difference  between  experience  at  the
perceptual  and  experience  at  the  ideational  stage.  A  subject
confined  to  the  former  level  knows  not  yet  this  difference.  Such
knowledge  is  attained,  not  through  any  quasi-mechanical  inter-
action of  presentations,  but  usually  through  bitter  experience.
The  chapter  of  accidents  is  the  Bible  of  fools,  it  has  been  said ;
but  we  are  all  novices  at  first,  and  get  wisdom  chiefly  by  the
method  of  trial  and  failure.  Things  are  not  always  different  in
what  to  us  are  their  essential  properties  ;  but  they  so  differ  from
time  to  time.  Resemblances  are  frequent  enough  to  give  us
familiarity  and  confidence ;  yet  uniformity  is  flecked  by  diversity,
and  thwarted  intentions  disclose  possibilities  for  which  we  were
not  prepared.  What  was  taken  for  sugar  turns  out  to  be  salt ;
what  was  seized  as  booty  proves  to  be  bait  We  catch  many
Tartars,  and  so  learn  wariness  in  a  rough  school.  In  such  wise
preperceptions  displaced  by  the  actual  fact  yield  the  '  what '
severed  from  the  'that,'  the  'ideal'  or  'possible'  freed  at  length  from
the  exclusive  hold  of  the  real.  In  a  new  situation  after  such
adventures  the  attitude  assumed — if,  for  brevity,  we  describe  it  in
terms  of  our  own  still  more  advanced  experience — is  of  this  sort :
"It  may  be  a  weasel,  if  so,  I  back ;  it  may  be  a  rabbit,  if  it  is,
I  spring."  Instead  of  unquestioned  preperception  that  'makes
the  mouth  water,'  we  have  the  alternative  possibilities  present  as
'  free  ideas ' ;  action  also  is  in  suspense,  the  alternative  courses
again,  that  is  to  say,  are  present  only  in  idea.  It  is  easy  to  see
how  in  such  situations  one  free  idea,  a  '  what '  sundered  from  a
'  that,'  will  tend  to  loosen  the  sensory  ties  of  alternative,  still
implicit  ideas.  On  the  cognitive  side,  from  immediate  assimila-
tion an  advance  is  made  towards  mediate  cognition,  towards
comparison  ;  on  the  active  side  there  is  advance  from  impulsive
action  towards  deliberate  action1.

We  conclude,  then,  in  the  first  place,  that  implicit  ideas — the
products  of  assimilation,  and  integrated  as  such  in  complex

1  Some  light  is  perhaps  here  thrown  on  the  reciprocal  relation  of  'association
by  contrast '  and  '  association  by  similarity '  as  leading  severally,  the  one  to  the
differentiation  of  partial  similars,  the  other  to  the  integration  of  partial  dissimilars.


1 88  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vu,  §  2

percepts  and  the  motor  co-ordinations  to  which  they  lead — are
more  likely  to  emerge  as  free  ideas  the  more  this  perceptual
complexity  increases.  Perception  in  such  of  the  lower  animals,
as  give  but  few  signs  of  either  memory  or  ideation,  has  ap-
parently no  such  complexity.  A  fish,  for  example,  can  feel,
smell,  taste,  see,  and  even  hear,  but  we  cannot  assume  solely  on
that  account  that  it  has  any  percepts  to  which  its  five  senses
contribute,  as  they  do  to  our  percept,  say,  of  an  orange  or  a
peppermint.  Taking  voluntary  movements  as  the  index  of
psychical  life,  it  would  seem  that  the  fish's  movements  are
instigated  and  guided  by  its  senses,  not  collectively  but
separately.  Thus  a  dog-fish,  according  to  Steiner,  seeks  its
food  exclusively  by  scent ;  so  that  when  its  olfactory  bulbs  are
severed,  or  the  fore-brain,  in  which  they  end,  is  destroyed,  it
ceases  to  feed  spontaneously.  The  carp,  on  the  other  hand,
appears  to  search  for  its  food  wholly  under  the  guidance  of
sight,  and  continues  to  do  so  just  as  well  when  the  fore-brain  is
removed,  the  mid-brain,  whence  the  optic  nerves  spring,  seeming
to  be  the  chief  seat  of  what  intelligence  it  has1.  Again,  Bateson
observes:  "There  can  be  no  doubt  that  soles  also  perceive  objects
approaching  them,  for  they  bury  themselves  if  a  stroke  at  them
is  made  with  a  landing-net ;  yet  they  have  no  recognition  of  a
worm  hanging  by  a  thread  immediately  over  their  heads,  and
will  not  take  it  even  if  it  touch  them,  but  will  continue  to  feel
for  it  aimlessly  on  the  bottom  of  the  tank,  being  aware  of  its
presence  by  the  sense  of  smell2."  In  the  experience  of  these
fishes  there  seems,  then,  to  be  no  object  such  that  the  sight  of  it
recalls  its  smell,  or  vice  versa.  To  this  inability  to  combine
simple  percepts  into  one  complex  percept  of  a  single  object  or
situation  we  may  reasonably  attribute  the  fish's  lack  of  true
ideas,  and  consequent  lack  of  sagacity.  The  sagacity  even  of
the  higher  animals  does  not  amount  to  'general  intelligence,'
such  as  enables  a  child  '  to  put  two  and  two  together,'  as  we  say,
whatever  '  two  and  two '  may  stand  for.  So  far  as  life  consists
of  a  series  of  definite  situations  and  definite  acts,  so  far  the
things  done  or  dealt  with  together,  the  contents  of  the  several

1  J. Steiner,  Die  Functionen  des  Centralncrvensystemsu.s.iv.,  2te  Abth.,  Die  Fische,
1888,  pp.  50,  126,  19  seq.,  101.

2  W.  Bateson,  "The  Sense-Organs  and  Perceptions  of  Fishes,"  Journ. Marine
Biol.  Assoc.  1890,  p.  239.


CH.  vii,  §  2] Genesis  and  Development  of  Ideation 189

foci  or  concentrations  of  attention,  form  so  many  integrated
and  comparatively  isolated  wholes.  Round  the  more  compli-
cated of  these,  and  closely  connected  with  them,  free  ideas  arise
as  sporadic  groups,  making  possible  those  '  lucid  intervals/  those
fitful  gleams  of  intelligence  in  the  very  heat  of  action,  which
occasionally  interrupt  the  prevailing  irrationality  of  the  brutes.
And  as  we  cannot  credit  even  the  higher  animals  with  general
trains  of  ideas,  just  as  little  can  we  credit  them  with  a  continuous
memory:  indeed,  it  is  questionable  how  far  memory  of  the  past,
as  past,  belongs  to  them  at  all.  For  they  live  entirely  in  an
up-stream,  expectant  attitude,  and  it  is  in  such  situations  that
free  ideas  arise  when  they  arise  at  all.  We  cannot  imagine  a
dog  regretting,  like  one  of  Punch's  heroes,  that  he  "did  not  have
another  slice  of  that  mutton1."

We  conclude  therefore,  in  the  second  place,  that  the  free
idea  (a)  at  its  first  emergence  has  neither  (i)  an  assignable
position  in  a  continuous  memory-record,  as  ar  or  a2,  nor  has  it
(2)  a  definite  relation  as  a  '  generic  idea '  to  possible  speciali-
sations such  as  a'  or  a".  These  further  developments  are  the
problems  we  must  turn  to  next.  The  questions  raised  are  two.
From  the  primitive  a  how  do  we  advance  (i)  to  true  memory-
images  (a1}  a2,  ...)  and  (ii)  to  specific  ideas  (a't  a",  ...)?  But
first  of  all,  let  us  begin  with  a  brief  analysis  to  prepare  the
way  for  both.  True  memory — as  distinct  from  mere  retention
and  reproduction — implies  accessories  that  give  individuality  to
the  event  remembered  and  antecedents  that  determine  its
chronological  position  :  in  a  word,  a^  or  az  is  a  complex  whole
and  has  a  fixed  place  in  a  series2.  Its  complexity  is  not  merely
the  complexity  which,  as  we  have  already  urged,  belongs  to  all
images3:  a^  and  az  are  complexes  of  images  (a  +  /  +  m\,
(a.+J>  +  g\,  where  a  is  the  central  fact  remembered  and  the  rest
/,/,  &c.  its  'setting'  or  accessories.  In  our  daily  experience  we
may  note  that  vague  or  general  recognition  does  not  lead  to  re-
miniscence; for  the  accessories  are  still  indistinct;  and  indistinct
largely  because  the  chief  presentation  is  itself  indistinct.  I  may

1  Cf.  F.  H.  Bradley,  "Memory  and  Inference,"  Mind,  1899,  PP-  '45  ff-:  and
especially  Thorndike,  Animal  Intelligence,  cited  above.

4  How  its  place  comes  to  be  determined  is  a  further  question  that  we  must
attempt  later.

3  Cf.  above,  pp.  169  f.


190  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  2

recognise  a  stranger  passing  me  as  a  German  and  no  more;  but
observing  a  scar  on  his  forehead,  I  am  almost  sure  to  remember
a  student's  duel  where  I  saw  such  a  wound  given.  Before  true
memory  is  possible,  then,  this  chief  presentation,  a,  must  acquire
certain  individuating  marks  which  it  lacked  at  first.  And  in
point  of  fact,  we  find  in  children  and  in  the  higher  animals,  as
already  remarked,  many  signs  of  free  ideas  before  we  have  evi-
dence of  true  memory.  But  such  ideas  are  vague  and  isolated,
like  the  percepts  which  they  re-present.

It  is  from  them,  however,  that  we  advance  also  to  the  more
specialised  forms,  a',  a",  &c.  In  this  advance  differentiation  and
assimilation,  rather  than  association,  appear  again  to  take  the
lead.  The  very  young  child  is  said  to  call  all  men  'Father';  so  in
dementia,  the  patient — to  borrow  an  illustration  from  Hughlings
Jackson — "ceasing  to  recognise  his  nurse  as  a  nurse,  takes  her
to  be  his  wife1."  In  the  one  case  we  have  the  differentiation  of
a  into  a,  a",  &c.,  not  yet  evolved  ;  in  the  other  we  have  it
dissolved  again.  The  case  of  a  certain  sculptor,  who  could  draw
a  sofa  and  recognise  a  statue  of  Mercury  but  could  not  draw  his
own  sofa  or  recognise  the  particular  statue  he  had  himself
modelled,  illustrates  this  regression ;  and  there  are  familiar
instances  in  plenty  to  be  found  in  the  records  of  mental  affec-
tions. Such  cases  indeed  suggested  to  Hughlings  Jackson  the
distinction  of  inferior  and  superior  perception.  This  vague
'  inferior '  image  (a)  that  confuses  father  and  other  men,  wife  and
nurse,  seems  to  be  the  root  or  stem  whence  the  '  superior,'  more
specific,  images  (a',  a")  diverge  as  it  were  by  proliferation  :  it  is
the  psychological,  potential,  generality  that  precedes  distinctions,
not  the  logical,  effective,  generality  that  can  only  follow  them.
This  later,  logical  (or  epistemological)  form,  I  have  suggested2,
might  be  symbolized  as  cf :  it  is  '  abstracted '  from  the  free  ideas
a',  a",  &c.  into  which  the  psychological  a  or  AT  has  ramified3.

1  The  Croonian  Lectures  on  Evolution  and  Dissolution  of  the  Nervous  System,
1884,  Reprint,  from  Brit.  Med.  Jl.  p.  8.  It  is  deeply  to  be  regretted  that  these
masterly  lectures  are  so  little  known  to  psychologists  and  that  they  exist  only  in  such
an  inaccessible  form.

*  "Assimilation  and  Association,  I,"  Mind,  N.S.  ii.  1893,  p.  358.

3  Here  it  is  that  language  comes  upon  the  scene ;  as  varying  repetitions  set  free
the  psychological  a,  so  language  sets  free  the  distinctly  'generic  image'  implicated  in
the  several  members  a',  a",  a'",  ... ,  so  bringing  to  light  the  one  in  the  many,  and  at
the  same  time  rendering  the  many  distinct.  In  both  these  processes,  of  course,


CH.  vii,  §  3]  Association  and  the  Memory -Continuum 191

But  in  the  child  learning  to  distinguish  letters  from  numerals  or
one  letter  from  another,  and  generally  in  what  is  called  '  training
the  senses,'  differentiation  and  assimilation  make  one  process  of
growth.  The  process  is  not  one  of  construction,  comparable  to
the  manufacture  of  a  watch  :  it  is  much  more  akin  to  the  steady
increase  in  clearness  and  distinctness  of  a  landscape  as  morning
breaks.  At  first  sight  the  child  may  still  confuse  M  with  W,  the
cowslip  with  the  primrose  and  the  cat  with  the  rabbit :  only  on
closer  scrutiny  do  the  differences  'emerge.'  When  they  do,  the
percept  in  question  becomes  more  distinct  and  so  more  complex:
but  so  far  there  may  be  no  association.  The  fact  is,  great  as  are
the  advances  that  psychology  owes  to  the  doctrine  of  association,
the  time  has  come  to  question  its  finality  and  to  circumscribe  its
range.  The  restriction  here  contended  for  is  one  which  the  earlier
writers  on  association  fully  allowed:  association  was  wholly
confined  to  ideas  that  to  begin  with  are  distinct  and  that  to
the  end  are  separable1.  The  process  by  which  ideas  arise  from
impressions  cannot  then  be  explained  by  association.  And  for
long  no  such  explanation  was  attempted,  but  the  practice  of
regarding  ideas  as  merely  the  residues  of  sensations  prepared
the  way  for  such  an  attempt  and  the  confusions  to  which  it
has  led.

This  remark  brings  us  back  to  the  first  of  the  two  questions
above  mentioned,  that  concerning  the  formation  of 'a  continuous
memory-record.'  This  we  may  now  consider  genetically.

Association  and  the  Memory -Continuum.

§  3.  Great  confusion  has  been  occasioned,  as  we  have  found,
by  the  lax  use  of  the  term  '  association,'  and  this  confusion  has
been  increased  by  a  further  laxity  in  the  use  of  the  term
association  by  similarity.  In  so  far  as  the  similarity  amounts
to  identity,  as  in  assimilation,  we  have  a  process  which,  as  has
been  already  pointed  out,  is  more  fundamental  than  association
and  presupposed  in  it.  And  when  the  reviving  presentation  is
only  partially  similar  to  the  presentation  revived,  the  nature
of  the  association  does  not  appear  to  differ  from  that  opera-
tive when  one  'contiguous'  presentation  revives  another.  In

association  is  essentially  concerned,  particularly  when  the  specialisation  exceeds  the
limits  of  a  single  sense.

1  Cf.  Hume,  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  pt.  i.  §  4.


192  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  3

the  one  case  we  have,  say,  a  +  b+x  recalling  a  +  b  +y,  and
in  the  other  a  +  b+c  recalling  d+e+f.  Now  anybody  who
will  reflect  must  surely  see  that  the  similarity  between  (a  +  b)  +  x
and  (a  +  b)  +y,  as  distinct  from  the  identity  of  their  partial  con-
stituent (a  +  b\  cannot  be  the  means  of  recall;  for  this  similarity
is  nothing  but  the  state  of  mind — to  be  studied  presently —
which  results  when  a  +  b  +  x  and  a  +  b  +y,  having  been  recalled
are  in  consciousness  together  and  then  compared.  But  if  (a  +  b),
having  concurred  with  y  before  and  being  now  present  in
(a  +  b)  +x,  again  revives  y,  the  association,  so  far  as  that  goes,  is
manifestly  one  of  contiguity  simply;  albeit  as  soon  as  the  revival
is  complete,  the  state  of  mind  immediately  incident  may  be  what
Bain  loved  to  style  '  the  flash  of  similarity.'  But,  so  far  as  the
mere  revival  itself  goes,  similarity  is  concerned  in  it  no  further
than  it  is  concerned  when  a  +  b  +  c  revives  d  +  e+f.  The  actual
a  +  b  +  c  that  there  operates  as  the  reviving  presentation  was
obviously  never  in  time  contiguous  with  the  d  +  e+f  that  is
revived ;  if  all  traces  of  previous  experiences  of  a  +  b+c  were
obliterated  there  would  be  no  revival.  In  other  words,  the
a  4.  b  +  c  now  present  must  first  be  assimilated  to  the  previous  ex-
perience of  a  +  b+c  which  alone  was  'contiguous'  with  d  +  e+f,
before  the  representation  of  this  can  occur.  And  this,  and
nothing  more  than  this,  we  have  seen,  is  all  the  '  similarity '  that
could  be  at  work  when  a  +  b  +  x  '  brought  up '  a  +  b  +y.

On  the  whole,  then,  we  may  assume  that  the  only  '  law  of  as-
sociation '  we  have  to  examine  is  the  so-called  law  of  contiguity,
which,  as  ordinarily  formulated,  runs :  Any  primary  presenta-
tions whatever,  occurring  (i)  together  or  (2)  in  close  succession,
tend  to  grow  together  or  to  cohere,  in  such  a  way  that  when  any
one  recurs  it  tends  to  revive  the  rest  as  secondary  presentations
— such  tendency  increasing  with  the  frequency  of  the  conjunc-
tion1. It  has  been  often  contended  that  any  investigation  into
the  nature  of  association  must  be  fruitless2.  But  if  so,  it  may
at  least  admit  of  such  a  description  as  will  reduce  this  inquiry  to
simpler  terms.  So  long,  however,  as  we  are  asked  to  conceive
presentations  as  distinct  and  isolated  originally  and  yet  becoming
eventually  linked  together,  we  cannot  but  feel  the  need  of  some

1  Cf.  Bain,  The  Senses  and  the  Intellect,  4th  ed.  1894,  p.  341.
*  So  Hume,  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  pt.  i.  §  4  (Green  and  Grose's  ed.  p.  321) ;
also  Lotze,  Metaphysik,  ist  ed.  1879,  §  265,  p.  526,  Eng.  trans.  1884,  p.  466.


CH.  vn,  §  3]  Association  and  the  Memory -Continuum 193

explanation  of  the  process.  For  neither  the  isolation  nor  the
links  are  clear :  not  the  isolation,  for  we  can  only  conceive  two
presentations  separated  by  other  presentations  intervening ;  not
the  links,  unless  these  are  also  presentations,  and  then  the  diffi-
culty recurs.  But,  if  for  contiguity  we  substitute  continuity  and
regard  the  associated  presentations  as  parts  of  a  new  continuum,
the  one  immediately  important  inquiry  is  how  this  new  whole
was  first  of  all  integrated.

To  ascertain  this  point  we  must  examine  each  of  the  two
leading  branches  of  this  supposed  association  by  contiguity — that
of  simultaneous  presentations  and  that  of  presentations  occurring
in  close  succession.  The  last,  being  the  clearer,  may  be  taken
first.  In  a  series  of  presentations  that  have  become  associated
A  B  CD  . . . ,  such  as  the  movements  made  in  writing,  the  words  of
a  poem  learned  by  heart,  or  the  simple  letters  of  the  alphabet
themselves,  we  find  that  each  readily  recalls  its  successor  but
not  its  predecessor.  Familiar  as  this  fact  is,  it  is  not  perhaps
easy  to  explain  it  satisfactorily.  Since  C  is  associated  both  with
B  and  D,  and  apparently  as  intimately  with  the  one  as  with  the
other,  why  does  it  usually  revive  the  later  only  and  not  the  earlier?
B  recalls  C ;  why  does  not  C  equally  recall  B  ?  We  have  seen
that  any  reproduction  at  all  of  B,  Cor  D  depends  primarily  upon
its  having  been  the  object  of  special  attention,  so  as  to  occupy  at
least  momentarily  the  focus  of  consciousness.  Now  we  can  in
the  first  instance  only  surmise  that  the  order  in  which  they  are
reproduced  is  determined  by  the  order  in  which  they  were  thus
attended  to  when  first  presented  ;  since  without  attention  there
is  no  association  at  all.

The  next  question  is  whether  the  association  of  objects
simultaneously  presented  can  be  resolved  into  an  association  of
objects  successively  attended  to.  Now  whenever  we  try  to  recall
a  scene  noticed  only  for  a  moment  we  commonly  find  that
not  more  than  a1  few  traits  recur — those  that  specially  impressed
us,  the  rest  being  blurred  and  vague  :  what  we  do  not  find  is  the
whole  revived  in  equal  distinctness  or  indistinctness.  On  seeing
the  same  scene  a  second  time  our  attention  is  apt  to  be  caught
by  something  unnoticed  before,  as  this  has  the  advantage  of
novelty ;  and  so  on,  till  we  have  '  lived  ourselves  into,'  become
familiar  with,  the  whole1,  which  may  then,  as  a  whole,  admit  of

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  iv,  §  4.
W.  P.  13


194  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  3

simultaneous  recall.  Bain,  who  is  rightly  held  to  have  given  the
best  exposition  of  the  laws  of  association,  admits  something  very
like  this  in  saying:  "So  far  as  the  mind  is  concerned,  the  generic
fact  is  Succession.  Co-existence  is  an  artificial  growth  formed
from  a  certain  peculiar  class  of  mental  successions1."  But,  whereas
it  is  easy  to  think  of  instances  in  which  the  associated  objects
were  attended  to  successively,  and  whereas  too  we  are  all  well
aware  that  the  surest- — not  to  say  the  only — way  to  fix  the  asso-
ciation of  a  number  of  objects  is  by  thus  concentrating  attention
on  each  in  turn,  it  seems  hardly  possible  to  mention  a  case  in
which  attention  to  the  associated  objects  could  not  have  been
successive.  In  fact,  an  aggregate  of  objects  on  which  attention
could  be  focused  at  once  would  either  be  already  associated  or
would  simply  be  a  whole  as  yet  psychically  unanalysed.  We
seem  justified,  then,  in  substituting  continuity  of  attention  for
contiguity  of  presentations  and  in  talking  of  a  secondary  con-
tinuum, or  '  memory- thread2,'  to  which  it  gives  rise.  It  is  worth
while  to  note  that,  though  our  acts  of  attention  must  always  have
a  chronological  order,  the  cases  in  which  what  we  attend  to  is
itself  likewise  chronologically  ordered  are  of  especial  importance.
Not  only  is  the  order  in  which  we  attend  then  objectively  ordered,
but  the  series  to  which  we  attend  is  more  quickly  and  closely
associated  in  consequence  of  this  double  correspondence.  In
view  of  our  practical  interest  in  such  series — in  relation  to
causation — the  advantage  of  this  more  intimate  association  is
obvious3.

The  exclusively  successional  character  of  association  has
however  recently  been  denied,  and  its  exclusively  simultaneous
character  maintained  instead.  It  is  at  once  obvious  that  this
opposition  of  succession  and  simultaneity  cannot  be  pressed  so
as  to  exclude  duration  altogether  and  reduce  the  whole  process
to  an  instantaneous  event.  Nor  is  there  any  ground  for  saying
that  there  is  a  fixed  and  even  distribution  of  attention  to  what-
ever is  simultaneously  presented  :  facts  all  point  the  other  way.
Still,  though  we  cannot  exclude  the  notion  of  process  from

1  Mental  and  Moral  Science,  1868,  pp.  n  f.  Cf.  also  James  Mill's  Analysis,  1878,
i.  pp.  80  f.,  Trautscholdt,  "  Experimentelle  Untersuchungen  u.  d.  Association."
Wundt's  Philosophise  he  Studien,  i.  1883,  p.  244,  et  passim.

a  Cf.  the  current  phrase  '  thread  of  consciousness.'

*  Cf.  Kant,  Critique  of  the  Pure  Reason,  "Second  Analogy,"  M.  Muller's  trans.,
pp.  1 66  ff.


CH.  vii,  §  3]  Association  and  the  Memory -Continuum 195

consciousness,  we  may  say  that  presentations  attended  to  together
become  pro  tanto  a  new  whole,  are  synthesized  or  complicated.
Where  such  synthesis  is  primary,  it  leads  not  to  an  association  of
images,  but  rather  to  the  formation  of  one  percept,  which  may
become  eventually  a  free  idea.  The  disconcerted  preperception
which  may  later  on  set  it  free  may  likewise  liberate  a  similar  or
contrasting  idea ;  but  it  will  not  resolve  either  of  them  into  the
several  '  ideas '  of  its  sensory  or  motor  constituents,  with  which
only  the  psychologist  is  familiar1.  The  actual  recurrence  of
some  of  these  constituents  may  again  reinstate  the  rest,  not,
however,  necessarily  as  memories  or  as  '  thoughts,'  but  only  as
tied  ideas  in  a  renewed  perception.  But  we  have  advanced
beyond  such  primary  synthesis  or  complication  in  the  yet  more
complex  situations  just  now  mentioned — the  contemplation  of
a  landscape  or  of  an  architectural  interior,  for  example — which
usually  become  familiar  only  after  a  time.  In  these  the  co-
existence of  the  details  leaves  us  more  or  less  free  as  to  the
order  in  which  we  notice  them.  When  at  length  familiarity
has  been  attained,  then — though  the  whole  is  past  or  absent —
the  ideal  recurrence  of  any  part  may  reinstate  the  rest  in  idea.
This  result  is  sometimes  described  as  redintegration ;  but  we
must  not  forget  that  the  successional  associations,  which  have
made  it  possible,  were  severally  different,  not  many  repetitions
of  one  and  the  same  order2.

It  has  become  usual  of  late  to  distinguish  the  association  of
contiguous  experiences  and  the  so-called  association  of  similar,
or  of  opposite,  experiences  as  respectively  external  and  internal
forms  of  association.  The  new  terminology  is  illuminating  :  the
substitution  of  forms  for  laws  marks  the  abandonment  of  the  old
notion  that  association  was  by  '  adhesion '  of  the  contiguous  and
'attraction'  of  the  similar.  We  are  thus  left  to  find  the  cause  of
association  in  interested  attention;  arid  that,  we  may  safely  say,
is  an  adequate,  and  apparently  the  only  adequate,  cause  for  the  two
commonly  recognised  forms  of  external  association,  the  so-called
simultaneous  and  the  successive.  But  these  two  are  certainly

1  Cf.  above,  §  i,  p.  169  f. ;  §  2,  p.  187.

-  Such  redintegration  thus  pertains  not  to  the  memory-thread  simply  but  to  a  new
continuum  of  a  higher  dimension,  so  to  say.  This  new  continuum  we  may  call  the
ideational  tissue  inasmuch  as  it  is  formed  by  partial  redintegration  or  reduplication  of
the  pre-existing  memory-thread.

13—2


196  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  3

not  co-ordinate ;  and  if  our  analysis  be  sound,  the  former — for
which  we  would  retain  the  Herbartian  term  complication —
yields  us  not  members  of  an  association  but  a  member  for  asso-
ciation. So  far,  then,  we  should  have  but  one  form  of  association,
that  of  the  successive  contents  of  focalised  attention  :  and  but
one  direct  result,  the  representation  or  memory-continuum1,  in
contrast  to  the  primary-  or  presentation-continuum,  whence  its
constituents  arise.  Turning  now  to  the  distinction  of  external
and  internal,  it  at  once  strikes  the  unprejudiced  mind  that  'in-
ternal association '  is  something  of  an  anomaly,  since  the  very
notion  of  association  implies  externality.  Also,  on  closer  inspec-
tion what  we  find  is  not  an  association  of  similars  or  opposites  as
such,  but — something  quite  distinct — a  similarity  or  contrast  of
associates;  of  ideas,  that  is  to  say,  which  have  become  con-
tiguous through  reduplications  of  the  memory-  (or  experience-)
continuum.  Such  so-called  association  of  similar  ideas  again
then,  like  redintegration,  belongs  to  a  higher  order  of  mental
processes  which  presupposes  association  proper.

The  only  form,  then,  that  now  remains  to  be  considered  is
that  of  two  distinct  primary  presentations  A  and  B,  such  as
the  flash  of  lightning  and  the  clap  of  thunder,  to  take  the  sim-
plest case,  which  occupy  the  focus  of  consciousness  in  immediate
succession.  Thereby  their  images  a  and  b  become  '  associated  ' ;
for  the  result  of  such  successive  occupation  of  attention  may —
as  we  have  already  seen — be  regarded  as  a  new  continuum,
in  which  a  and  b  have  become  adjacent  parts.  For  it  is
characteristic  of  a  continuum  that  an  increase  in  the  intensity
of  any  part  leads  to  the  intenser  presentation  of  adjacent  parts  ;
and  in  this  sense  a  and  b,  which  were  not  originally  continuous,
have  come  to  be  so2.  We  have  here,  therefore,  some  justification
for  the  term  secondary-  or  memory-continuum,  when  applied  to
this  continuous  series  of  representations  to  distinguish  it  from
the  primary  or  presentation-continuum  from  which  its  con-
stituents are  derived.  Thus  the  most  important  peculiarity
of  this  continuum  is  that  it  is  a  series  of  representations
integrated  by  means  of  the  movements  of  attention  out  of  the

1  Experience-continuum would perhaps be a better  name, since it  is  only  a
preliminary  to  proper  memory,  as  we  shall  presently  see.

2  In  so  far  as  the  presence  of  a  tends  to  call  up  b,  though  the  presence  of  B  was
psychologically  independent  of  A.


CH.  vn,  §  3]  Association  and  the  Memory-Continuum 197

differentiations  of  the  primary  or  presentation-continuum,  or
rather  out  of  so  much  of  these  differentiations  as  pertain  to
what  we  know  as  the  primary  memory-image.  These  move-
ments of  attention,  if  the  phrase  may  be  allowed,  come  in  the
end  to  depend  mainly  upon  interest,  though  at  first  determined
entirely  non-voluntarily1.  To  them  it  is  proposed  to  look  for
that  continuity  which  images  lose  in  so  far  as  they  part  with  the
local  signs  they  had  as  percepts  and  cease  to  be  either  localised
or  projected.  Inasmuch  as  these  successive  movements  form  the
connexion  between  one  representation  and  another  in  the  me-
mory-train, it  is  assumed  that  they  also  yield  us  what  may  be
called  '  temporal  signs2.'  Evidence  for  the  existence  of  these  can
be  more  conveniently  adduced  presently3.  It  must  suffice  to
remark  here  that  it  consists  almost  wholly  of  facts  connected  with
voluntary  attention;  so  that  temporal  signs,  unlike  local  signs,  are
fundamentally  motor  and  not  sensory.  And,  unlike  impressions,
representations  can  have  each  but  a  single  sign*,  the  continuum
of  which,  in  contrast  to  that  of  local  signs,  is  not  rounded  and
complete,  but  continuously  advancing.  But  in  saying  this  we
are  assuming  for  a  moment  that  the  memory-continuum  forms
a  perfectly  single  and  unbroken  train.  Some  approximation  to
such  a  state  is  often  found  in  uncultured  persons  who  lead
uneventful  lives,  and  still  more  in  idiots,  who  can  scarcely  think
at  all".

1  Cf.  ch.  iii,  §  i,  p.  69. This  connexion  of  association  with  continuous  move-
ments of  attention  makes  it  easier  to  understand  the  difficulty  above  referred  to,  viz.
that  in  a  series  A  B  C  D... ,  B  revives  C  but  not  A,  and  so  on — a  difficulty  that  the
analogy  of  adhesiveness  or  links  leaves  unaccountable. To  ignore  the  part  played
by  attention  in  association,  to  represent  the  memory-continuum  as  due  solely  to  the
concurrence  of  presentations,  is  perhaps  the  chief  defect  of  the  Associationist  psycho-
logy, both  English  and  German. Spencer's  endeavour  to  shew  "that  psychical  life
is  distinguished  from  physical  life  by  consisting  of  successive  changes  only  instead  of
successive  and  simultaneous  changes  "  (Principles  of  Psychology,  pt.  iv.  ch.  ii.,  in  parti-
cular pp.  403,  406)  is  really  nothing  but  so  much  testimony  to  the  work  of  attention  in
forming  the  memory-continuum,  especially  when,  as  there  is  good  reason  to  do,  we
reject  his  assumption  that  this  growing  seriality  is  physically  determined.

2  See  the  Appendix  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.

3  Cf.  next  chapter,  §  3,  pp.  214^

4  Apart,  that  is  to  say,  of  course,  from  the  reduplications  of  the  memory-train
spoken  of  below.

5  For  instances  of  the  latter  cf.  Noble,  Preliminary  Study  of  Mind,  1853,  P-  n*  S
Maudsley,  The  Physiology  of  Mind,  1876,  pp.  517  f. ;  W.  James,  Principles  of  Psycho-
logy, 1890,  i.  p.  660  n.


198  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  3

We  may  now  return  to  the  second  of  the  two  questions  above
mentioned1.

The  Formation  of  an  Ideational  Continuum.

§4.  In  reality,  however,  notwithstanding  the  fact  just  men-
tioned, the  memory-train  is  liable  to  change  in  two  respects,
which  considerably  modify  its  structure:  viz.  (i)  through  the
evanescence  of  its  parts,  and  (2)  through  the  partial  recurrence
of  like  situations,  which  produces  corresponding  reduplications
of  it.  As  regards  the  first,  we  may  infer  that  the  waning  or
sinking  towards  the  threshold  of  consciousness  which  we  can
observe  in  the  primary  mental  image  continues  in  subconscious-
ness  after  the  threshold  is  past.  For  the  longer  the  time  that
elapses  before  their  revival  the  fainter,  the  less  distinct,  and
the  less  complete  are  the  images  when  revived,  and  the  more
slowly  they  rise.  All  the  elements  of  a  complex  are  not
equally  revivable,  as  we  have  seen  already:  tastes,  smells  and
organic  sensations,  though  powerful  as  impressions  to  revive
other  images,  have  little  capacity  for  ideal  reproduction  them-
selves ;  while  muscular  movements,  though  perhaps  of  all
presentations  the  most  readily  revived,  do  not  so  readily  revive
other  presentations.  Idiosyncrasies  are,  however,  frequent ;  thus
we  find  one  person  has  an  exceptional  '  memory '  for  sounds,
another  for  colours,  another  for  forms,  and  so  on2.  Still  it  is  in
general  true  that  the  most  intense,  the  most  impressive,  and
the  most  interesting  presentations  persist  the  longest.  But  the
evanescence,  which  is  in  all  cases  comparatively  rapid  at  first,
deepens  sooner  or  later  into  real  or  apparent  oblivion.  In  this
manner  it  comes  about  that  parts  of  the  memory-continuum  seem
to  lose  all  distinctness  of  feature  and,  being  without  distinctly
recognisable  content,  to  shrivel  up  to  a  dim  and  meagre  represen-
tation of  life  that  has  lapsed — a  representation  that  just  suffices,
for  example,  to  shew  us  that  '  our  earliest  recollections '  are  not  of
our  first  experiences,  and  to  save  them  from  being  isolated,  though
they  seem  to  be  discontinuous.  Discontinuity  can,  of  course,
never  be  absolute;  we  must  have  something  represented,  even  to
mark  the  gap.  Oblivion  and  the  absence  of  all  representation

1  Cf.  p.  189.

2  Hence such persons  are  sometimes  described as respectively  of  the  audile,
visile,  or  motile  type. Cf.  W.  James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  ii.  pp.  58  ff.


CH.  vii,  §  4]  Formation  of  an  Ideational  Continuum 199

are  thus  the  same,  and  the  absence  of  all  representation
cannot  psychologically  constitute  a  break.  The  terms  'evolu-
tion '  and  '  involution '  have  in  this  respect  been  happily  applied
to  the  rising  and  falling  of  representations.  When  we  recall  a
particular  period  of  our  past  life,  or  what  has  long  ceased  to  be
a  familiar  scene,  events  and  features  gradually  unfold  and,  as  it
were,  spread  out  as  we  keep  on  attending.  A  precisely  opposite
process  may  then  be  supposed  to  take  place  when  the  past  is  left
in  undisturbed  forgetfulness ;  this  process  is  called  obliviscence*.

More  important  changes  are  produced  by  the  repetition  of
parts  of  the  memory-train.  The  effect  of  this  is  not  merely
to  prevent  the  evanescence  of  the  particular  image  or  series  of
images  thus  revived ;  but  also  by  partial  and  more  or  less
frequent  reduplications  of  the  memory-train  or  'thread'  upon
itself  to  convert  it  into  a  partially  new  continuum,  which  we
therefore  propose  to  call  the  ideational  continuum  or  'tissue2.'
The  reduplicated  portions  of  the  train  are  strengthened  ;  but  at
the  points  of  divergence  it  becomes  comparatively  weakened,
and  this  apart  from  the  effects  of  obliviscence.  One  who  had
met  the  king  but  once  would  scarcely  be  likely  to  '  think '  of
him  without  finding  the  attendant  circumstances  recurring  to
his  mind  as  well ;  this  could  not  happen  to  one  who  had  met
the  king  in  a  hundred  different  scenes.  The  central  repre-
sentation of  the  whole  complex  would  have  become  more
distinct ;  whereas  the  several  diverging  lines,  by  involving
opposing  representations,  would  tend  to  neutralise  each  other,
so  that  probably  no  definite  background  would  be  reinstated.
Even  this  central  representation,  it  has  been  said,  would  be
more  or  less  'general3.'  It  would  also  certainly  tend  to  fluctuate,
now  one  component  and  now  another  becoming  more  distinct,
thereby  revealing  what  we  have  before  described  as  the  ramifi-
cation of  a  into  <z',  a",  &c.4  Again,  it  has  been  often  remarked

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  iv,  §  6.

2  This  contrast  of  thread  and  tissue  is  suggested,  of  course,  by  Herbart's  terms
Reihe  and  Gnvebe. It  is  justified  by  the  fact  that  memory  proper  follows  the  single
line  of  temporal  continuity,  while  ideation  furnishes  the  basis  for  manifold  logical
connexions.

3  This  'generality'  of  the  generic  image  differs  from  the  true  universality  of  the
concept  in  that  the  former  is  the  passive  and  accidental  result  of  reduplication,  the
latter  the  product  of  definite  and  active  comparison.

4  Cf.  above,  §  2,  p.  190.


2OO  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  4

that  our  familiar  friends  are  apt  to  be  mentally  pictured  less
concretely  than  persons  seen  more  seldom  and  then  in  some
one  'striking'  attitude — like  the  parson  in  his  pulpit  or  the
coachman  on  his  box.  Here  in  the  former  case  a  '  generic
image '  seems  to  have  been  formed  out  of  a  group  of  such  more
specific  representations  as  the  latter  affords.

But  can  we  say  that  the  general  idea  (a)  ramifies  into,  and
yet  is  formed  out  of,  the  specific  ideas,  a',  a",  &c.  ?  We  here
come  upon  'the  question  of  the  Primum  Cognitum,  as  it  was
called  in  the  schools,'  '  a  curious  question '  which,  as  Hamilton
tells  us,  at  the  outset  of  a  lengthy  exposition  of  it,  'divided
philosophers '  from  the  time  of  Aristotle  down  to  our  own1.  The
broad  issue  raised  was  this:  Does  the  child  first  cognise  the
particular  and  afterwards  generalise  or  does  it  first  cognise  the
general  and  afterwards  particularise?  Some — like  Locke,  for
example— maintained  the  first  position  and  some — as  for  exam-
ple, Leibniz — the  second  ;  and  we  might  say  either  that  both
were  right  or  that  both  were  wrong.  For  the  whole  controversy
was  obscured  by  the  ambiguity  of  the  term  '  general '  in  this
connexion,  on  which  we  have  already  incidentally  remarked2.
The  child's  first  acquaintance  is  doubtless  with  the  particular,
but  this  is  so  vaguely  perceived  that  his  first  free  idea  at  becomes
general  by  the  very  process  which  renders  his  knowledge  more
particular.  In  other  words,  as  on  the  one  hand  the  indefinite
particular  a  ramifies  into  the  specific  a',  a",  a'"...,  so  part  passu
by  their  means  the  definite  generic  a  arises  out  of  them.  What
was  general  only  in  the  sense  of  being  ill-defined  has  become
truly  general  by  the  recognition  of  distinctions,  the  previous  lack
of  which  had  left  it  merely  vague.  In  other  words  the  vaguely
particular  a?  has  been  transformed  into  a  potential  a*  or  true  uni-
versal. Thus  as  the  joint  effect  of  obliviscence  and  reduplication
we  are  provided  with  an  ideational  tissue  elaborated  out  of,  and
functionally  distinct  from,  the  memory-thread.  And  as  Lotze
has  said :  "  Thus  the  strength  of  memory  for  the  order  in  which
the  incidents  of  life  follow  one  another  not  unfrequently  declines,
while  its  fidelity  for  the  general  relations  founded  in  the  nature
of  things  increases3."  In  short  we  are  provided  thereby  with  the

1  Sir  W.  Hamilton,  lectures  on  Metaphysics,  ii.  pp.  319-32.

2  Cf.  above,  §  i,  p.  190  fin,

*  Microcosmus,  Eng.  trans,  i.  p.  217  fin.


CH.  vii,  §  5]  Conflict  of  Ideas  201

material,  already  more  or  less  organized,  for  intellectual and
volitional  manipulation.

Conflict  of  Ideas.

§  5.  We  do  not,  however,  experience  the  'flow  of  ideas' —
save  very  momentarily  and  occasionally — altogether  undis-
turbed; even  in  dreams  and  reverie  it  is  continually  interrupted
and  diverted.  Nevertheless  it  is  not  difficult  to  ascertain  that,
so  far  as  it  is  left  to  itself,  such  flow  takes  a  very  different  course
from  that  which  we  should  have  to  retrace  if  bent  on  reminiscence
and  able  to  recollect  perfectly.  The  readiness  and  steadiness  of
this  flow  are  shewn  by  the  extremely  small  effort  necessary  in
order  to  follow  it1.  But  still  from  its  very  nature  it  is  liable,
though  not  to  positive  breaches  of  continuity  from  its  own
working,  yet  to  occasional  comparative  delays  at  points  where
reduplications  diverge,  and  for  the  time  neutralise  each  other2.

The  flow  of  ideas  is,  however,  exposed  to  positive  interrup-
tions from  without.  These  may  occur  not  only  in  consequence
of  the  objective  intrusion  of  new  presentations  but  also  through
subjective  or  voluntary  interference.  There  is  one  result  of  such
interruptions  which  we  need  here  to  consider,  and  that  is  the
so-called  '  conflict '  or  '  mutual  inhibition  '  of  ideas — to  use  the
Herbartian  term — which  may  ensue.  For  Herbart  and  his  fol-
lowers, we  know,  went  so  far  as  to  elaborate  a  complete  system
of  psychical  statics  and  dynamics,  based  on  the  concept  of  pre-
sentations as  forces  and  on  certain  more  or  less  improbable
assumptions  as  to  the  modes  in  which  such  forces  would  interact.
Since  our  power  of  attention  is  limited,  it  continually  happens
that  attention  is  drawn  off  entirely  by  new  presentations  at  the
expense  of  old  ones.  But,  even  if  we  regard  this  non-voluntary
redistribution  of  attention  as  if  it  implied  a  struggle  between  pre-
sentations, still  such  conflict  to  enter  the  focus  of  consciousness

1  Hence  many  of  the  older  psychologists,  like  Brown,  attributed  to  it  'a  rapidity
of  passage  almost  as  wonderful  as  omnipresence  itself  :  to  be  'as  quick  as  thought'
was  much  the  same  as  being  '  as  quick  as  lightning.'

2  It  is  a  mark  of  the  looseness  of  much  of  our  psychological  terminology  that  facts
of  this  kind  are  commonly  described  as  cases  of  association. Bain  calls  them  '  ob-
structive association,'  which  is  about  on  a  par  with  'repellent  affinity'; Mr  Sully's
'divergent  association'  is  far  better. But  it  is  plain  that  what  we  really  have  is  an
arrest  or  inhibition  consequent  on  association,  and  nothing  that  is  either  itself  associa-
tion or  that  leads  to  association.


2O2  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  5

is  very  different  from  a  conflict  between  presentations  that  are
already  there.  Either  may  be  experienced  to  any  degree  possible
without  the  other  appearing  at  all ;  thus,  absorbed  in  watching
a  starry  sky,  one  might  be  oblivious  of  the  chilliness  of  the  air,
though  recognising  at  once,  as  soon  as  the  cold  is  felt,  that,  so
far  from  being  incompatible,  the  clearness  and  the  coldness  are
causally  connected.  This  difference  between  a  conflict  of  pre-
sentations to  enter  the  field  of  consciousness — if  we  allow  for  a
moment  the  propriety  of  the  expression — and  that  opposition  or
incompatibility  between  presentations  which  is  not  possible  till
they  are  actually  there  has  been  strangely  confused  by  the
Herbartians.  In  the  former  the  intensity  of  the  presentation  is
primarily  alone  of  account:  in  the  latter, on  the  contrary,  quality
and  content  are  mainly  concerned.  Only  the  last  requires  any
notice  here ;  since  such  opposition  arises  when  the  ideational
continuum  is  interrupted  in  the  ways  just  mentioned,  and  appa-
rently arises  in  no  other  case.  Certainly  there  is  no  such  opposi-
tion between  primary  presentations :  there  we  have  the  law  of
incopresentability  preventing  the  presentation  of  opposites  with
the  same  local  sign  ;  and  their  presentation  with  different  local
signs  involves,  on  this  level  at  all  events,  no  conflict.  But  what
has  never  been  presented  could  hardly  be  represented,  if  the
ideational  process  were  undisturbed  :  even  in  our  dreams  white
negroes  or  round  squares,  for  instance,  never  appear.  In  fact,
absurd  and  bizarre  as  dream-imagery  is,  it  never  at  any  moment
entails  overt  contradictions,  though  contradiction  may  be
implicit.

But  between  ideas  and  percepts  actual  incompatibility  is
frequent.  In  the  perplexity  of  Isaac,  e.g. — "The  voice  is  Jacob's
voice,  but  the  hands  are  the  hands  of  Esau  " — we  have  such  a
case  in  a  familiar  form.  There  is  here  not  merely  mental  arrest
but  actual  conflict :  the  voice  perceived  identifies  Jacob,  at  the
same  time  the  hands  identify  Esau.  The  images  of  Esau  and
Jacob  by  themselves  are  different,  but  do  not  conflict.  Neither
is  there  any  strain,  quite  the  contrary,  in  recognising  a  person
partly  like  Jacob  and  partly  like  Esau.  For  there  is  no  direct
incompatibility  between  smooth  and  rough,  so  long  as  one  per-
tains only  to  voice  say,  and  the  other  only  to  hands;  but  the  same
hands  and  voice  cannot  be  both  smooth  and  rough.  Similar
incompatibilities  may  arise  without  the  intrusion  of  percepts,  as


en.  vii,  §  6]  Temporal  Signs  203

when,  in  trying  to  guess  a  riddle  or  to  solve  a  problem,  or  gene-
rally to  eliminate  intellectual  differences,  we  have  ideas,  which
in  themselves  are  only  logically  opposite,  psychologically  opposed
or  in  conflict,  because  each  strives  to  enter  the  same  complex.
In  all  such  conflicts  alike  we  find,  in  fact,  a  relation  of  presenta-
tions the  exact  opposite  of  that  which  constitutes  similarity.
In  the  latter  we  have  two  complete  presentations,  a  +  b  +  x  and
a  +  b  +y,  as  similar,  each  including  the  common  part  a  +  b ;  in
the  former  we  have  two  partial  presentations,  x  and  y,  as  con-
traries, each  excluding  the  other  from  the  incomplete  a -\-  i>  +  .
And  this  a  +  b,  it  is  to  be  noted,  is  not  more  essential  to  the
similarity  than  to  the  conflict.  But  in  the  one  case  it  is  a  generic
idea  (and  can  logically  be  predicated  of  two  subjects) ;  in  the
other  it  is  a  partially  determined  individual  (and  cannot  be
subject  to  opposing  predicates).  Except  as  thus  supplementing
a  +  b  m  the  latter  case,  x  and  y  do  not  conflict ;  black  and  white
are  not  incompatible  save  as  attributes  of  the  same  thing.  The
possibility  of  most  of  these  conflicts — of  all,  indeed,  that  have
any  logical  interest — lies  in  that  reduplication  of  the  memory-
' thread'  which  gives  rise  to  an  ideational  tissue  of  generic  images
or  general  ideas,  such  as  we  have  here  tried  to  describe.


APPENDIX

Temporal  Signs.

§  6.  The  term  Temporal  Sign  is  borrowed  from  Lotze1,  but
the  present  writer  is  alone  responsible  for  the  meaning  here  given
to  it  and  for  the  hypothesis  in  which  it  is  used.  Nevertheless
Lotze  later  on  in  the  same  work  put  forward — as  an  amendment
on  Herbart's  mechanical  theory  of  association — a  view  of  it  that
approximates  very  closely  to  that  here  suggested  and  one  leading
to  a  substantially  identical  interpretation  of  the  term  '  temporal
sign.'  Associations,  he  held,  do  not  take  place  solely  between
the  specific  impressions  that  we  regard  as  separate  presentations,
but  each  of  these  presentations  becomes  connected  with  'the
momentary  tinge  of  the  general  vital  sense  G'  the  tinge  pre-
dominant i.e.  at  the  moment  when  such  presentation  enters  the

1  Metaphysik,  §  154;  Eng.  trans.  1884,  p.  262  fin.


204  Imagination  or  Ideation [CH.  vn,  §  6

focus  of  consciousness.  By  such  entry  a  change  of  G  is  effected  :
the  arrival  of  a  new  presentation  A  leading  to  glt  say;  that  of
B  to  gz,  of  C  to  g$,  and  so  on.  In  this  manner  the  series  g^  g^  gt
becomes  the  clue  according  to  which  the  reproduction  of  A  B  C
is  disposed1.  The  resemblance  between  the  series  g^  gz  g^  and
the  series  ti  t%  t3  is  obvious :  both  alike  are  regarded  as  the  means
whereby  ABC  are  associated.  The  difference  between  them  lies
in  the  reference  of  the  former  to  '  the  general  vital  sense '  and  of
the  latter  to  movements  of  attention — both  perhaps,  it  may  be
thought,  somewhat  obscure  expressions  in  need  of  further  ex-
plication. Well,  vital  sense  was  certainly  not  meant  by  Lotze
to  be  understood  as  mere  passivity  and  attention  is  certainly
not  meant  to  be  taken  as  activity  divested  of  feeling.  Life
or  experience  as  conative  involves  both  activity  and  feeling.
Further,  a  subject's  activity  and  its  feeling  both  alike  imply
presentations  or  objects.

How  near  Lotze  was  to  the  position  assumed  in  the  text
becomes  clearer  when  his  exposition  leads  him  to  treat  of
attention.  He  dissents  from  certain  earlier  psychologists  who
regarded  attention  "  as  a  moveable  light  which  the  mind  directs
on  to  the  impressions  presented  to  it,"  but  he  holds  that  they
were  "right  in  regarding  attention  as  an  activity  exercised  by  the
mind... and  not  as  a  property  that  belonged  to  presentations  as
such  " — as  Herbart  had  maintained.  He  further  identifies  atten-
tion and  what  he  calls  '  relating  activity  (beziehende  Vorstellen)!
Among  the  forms  resulting  from  this  activity  he  specially
mentions  'the  temporal  presentations  (  Vorstellungeri)  of  a  change
(  WechselY-  Finally  in  the  chapter  on  Time,  in  which  the  notion
of  temporal  signs  is  first  tentatively  suggested,  he  supposes  an
objector  to  urge  that  even  "the  illusion  (Scheiri)  of  succession
could  not  take  place  without  a  succession  of  presentations  in
consciousness,  nor  an  apparent  transition  of  a  into  b  without
the  actual  transition  which  we  [in  such  a  case]  effected  from
the  presentation  of  a  to  that  of  b"  To  such  an  objection  he
replies :  "  If  the  presentation  of  the  later  b  in  fact  merely
followed  on  that  of  the  earlier  a,  then  a  change  (  Wechsel)  of
presentations  would  indeed  occur,  but  still  no  presentation  of
this  change:  there  would  be  a  lapse  of  time,  but  still  not  for

1  Melaphysik,  §  266;  Eng.  trans,  p.  468.
3  Op.  cit.  §  273,  pp.  478  f.;  §  271,  p.  476.


CH.  vn,  §  6]  Temporal  Signs  205

anybody  [even]  the  illusion  of  such  a  lapse.  In  order  that  this
comparison,  in  which  b  is  known  as  the  later,  may  take  place,  it  is
further  necessary  for  the  two  presentations  to  be  the  entirely
simultaneous  objects  of  a  relating  knowledge  ( Wissen\  itself
completely  indivisible  which  synthesizes  them  in  a  single  in-
divisible act1."  Now  this  is  precisely  how  we  too  come  by  the
notion  of  temporal  signs,  precisely  so  that  we  too  believe  the
oneness  of  time  and  the  continuity  of  the  memory-thread  are  to
be  explained2.

1  Metaphysik,  §  154;  Eng.  trans,  p.  262.
a  Cf.  abore,  ch.  iii,  §  3,  p.  72.


CHAPTER  VIII

REMINISCENCE, EXPECTATION AND TEMPORAL
PERCEPTION

Imagination  and  Memory

§  i.  Having  thus  attempted  to  ascertain  the  formation  of
the  ideational  continuum  out  of  the  memory-train,  the  question
arises  :  How  now  are  we  to  distinguish  between  imagining  and
remembering,  and  again,  between  imagining  and  expecting?  It
is  plainly  absurd  to  make  the  difference  depend  on  the  presence
of  belief  in  memory  and  expectation,  and  on  its  absence  in  mere
imagination ;  for  the  belief  itself  depends  on  this  difference  in-
stead of  constituting  it.  One  real  and  obvious  distinction,
however — and  Hume  pointed  it  out  as  regards  memory — is  the
fixed  order  and  position  of  the  imagery  of  what  is  remembered  or
expected  as  contrasted  with  '  the  liberty '  of  the  imagination  to
transpose  and  change  its  ideas.  This  order  and  position  in  the
case  of  memory,  we  have  good  reasons  for  supposing,  are  nor-
mally those  of  the  original  impressions.  But  it  seems  rather
naive  of  Hume  to  tell  us  that  memory  "  is  tied  down  to  these
without  any  power  of  variation,"  while  imagination  has  liberty
to  transpose  as  it  pleases,  as  if  the  originals  sat  to  memory  for
their  portraits,  while  to  imagination  they  were  but  studies.  Such
correspondence  being  out  of  the  question — as  Hume  takes  care
to  state  as  soon  as  it  suits  him — all  we  have,  so  far,  is  just  this
fixity  and  definiteness  of  memory  as  contrasted  with  the  kaleido-
scopic instability  of  ideation.  In  this  respect  what  is  remembered
or  expected  resembles  what  is  perceived  :  the  grouping  not  only,
does  not  change  capriciously  and  spontaneously,  but  resists  any
mental  efforts  to  change  it.  But,  provided  these  characteristics
are  there,  we  should  be  apt  to  believe  that  we  were  remembering,
just  as,  mutatis  mutandis,  with  like  characteristics  we  might  be-
lieve that  we  were  perceiving :  illusion  is  possible  in  either  case.


CH.  vin,  §  i] Imagination  and  Memory  207

This  fixity  of  order  and  position  is,  however,  not  sufficient  to
constitute  a  typical  reminiscence  where  the  term  is  exactly  used.
But  remembering  is  often  regarded  as  equivalent  to  knowing
and  recognising,  as  when  on  revisiting  some  once  familiar  place
one  remarks,  "  How  well  I  remember  it ! "  What  is  meant  is
that  the  place  is  recognised,  and  that  its  recognition  awakens
memories.  Memory  includes  recognition ;  recognition  as  such
does  not  include  memory.  In  human  consciousness,  as  we
directly  observe  it,  mere  recognition  in  situations  of  any  interest
is,  perhaps,  rare :  the  new  presentation  is  not  only  assimilated
to  the  old,  but  some  former  framing  of  circumstance  is  apt  to
be  reinstated,  and  so  perforce  to  be  distinguished  from  the
present.  But  even  if  there  is  no  warrant  for  supposing  that
such  redintegration  of  a  preceding  field  is  ever  for  us  abso-
lutely nil,  still  we  are  justified  in  regarding  it  as  extremely
vague  and  meagre  both  where  mental  evolution  is  but  slightly
advanced  and  where  frequent  repetition  in  varying  and  irrelevant
circumstances  has  produced  a  blurred  and  neutral  zone.  The  last
is  the  case  with  a  great  part  of  our  knowledge ;  e.g.  the  writer
happens  to  know  that  bos  is  the  Latin  for  '  ox '  and  bufo  the
Latin  for  'toad,'  and  may  be  said  to  remember  both  items  of
knowledge,  if 'remember'  is  only  to  be  synonymous  with  'retain.'
But  if  he  came  across  bos  in  reading  he  would  think  of  an  ox
and  nothing  more ;  bufo  would  immediately  call  up  not  only
'  toad '  but  Virgil's  Georgics,  the  only  place  in  which  he  has  seen
the  word,  and  which  he  never  read  but  once.  In  the  former
there  is  so  far  nothing  but  recognition  (which,  however,  of  course
rests  upon  retentiveness) ;  in  the  latter  there  is  also  some  re-
membrance of  the  time  when,  and  of  the  circumstances  in  which,
that  piece  of  knowledge  was  acquired.  Of  course  in  so  far  as  we
are  aware  that  we  recognise,  we  also  think  that  remembrance  is
at  any  rate  possible ;  since  what  we  know,  we  must  previously
have  learned — recognition  excluding  novelty.  But  the  point
here  urged  is  that  actual  reminiscence  occurs  only  when  the
recognition  is  accompanied  by  a  reinstatement  of  portions  of
the  memory-train  that  are  continuous  with  the  previous  pre-
sentation of  what  is  now  recognised.

Summarily  stated,  we  may  say  that  between  knowing  and
remembering  on  the  one  hand  and  imagining  on  the  other  the
difference  primarily  turns  on  the  fixity  and  completeness  of  the


208  Time-perception  [CH.  viu,  §  i

grouping  in  the  former;  as  contrasted  with  the  shifting  play  of
images  more  or  less  '  generic '  in  the  latter.  Hence  the  first  two
approximate  in  character  to  perception,  and  are  rightly  called
cognitions.  Between  them,  again,  the  difference  turns  primarily
on  the  presence  or  absence  of '  temporal  signs1.'  In  what  is  re-
membered, these  are  still  intact  enough  to  ensure  its  localisation  in
the  past;  in  what  is  merely  known,  such  localisation  is  prevented,
either  because  of  the  obliviscence  of  its  temporal  connexions  or
because  the  reduplications  of  the  memory-train,  which  consolidated
the  central  group,  have  entailed  the  suppression  of  its  collateral
connexions.  There  is  further  the  difference  first  mentioned,
which  is  often  only  a  difference  of  degree,  viz.  that  reminiscences
have  more  circumstantiality,  so  to  say,  than  mere  recognitions
have :  more  of  the  collateral  accessories  of  the  original  concrete
field  of  consciousness  are  reinstated.  But  of  the  two  character-
istics of  memory  proper — (a)  concreteness  or  circumstantiality,
and  (£)  fixation  in  the  past — the  latter  is  the  more  essential.

It  sometimes  happens  that  we  have  the  one  with  little  or
nothing  of  the  other.  For  example,  we  may  have  but  a  dim  and
shadowy  picture  of  a  'scene,'  yet  if  it  at  once  falls  into  and  steadily
retains  a  fixed  place  in  the  memory-train  we  have  no  doubt  that
some  such  experience  was  once  actually  ours.  On  the  other
hand,  as  in  certain  so-called  illusions  of  memory,  we  may  suddenly
find  ourselves  reminded  by  what  is  happening  at  the  moment  of
a  preceding  experience  exactly  like  it — some  even  feel  that  they
know  from  what  is  thus  recalled  what  will  happen  next.  And  yet,
because  we  are  wholly  unable  to  assign  such  representation  a
place  in  the  past,  instead  of  a  belief  that  it  happened,  there  arises
a  most  distressing  sense  of  bewilderment,  as  if  one  were  haunted
and  had  lost  one's  personal  bearings2.  It  has  been  held  by  some
psychologists3  that  memory  proper  includes  the  representation
of  one's  past  self  as  agent  or  patient  in  the  event  or  situation
recalled.  And  this  is  true  as  regards  all  but  the  earliest  human
experience,  at  any  rate;  still,  whereas  it  is  easy  to  see  that

1  Cf.  below,  §  3.

2  Any  full  discussion  of  paramnesia,  as  these  very  interesting  states  of  mind  are
called,  belongs  to  mental  pathology. Cf.  E.  Bernard-Leroy,  L 'Illusion  de  fausse
reconnaissance,  1898;  H.  Bergson,  "Le  Souvenir  du  present,  &c."  Rev.  phil.  Ixvi.
(1908),  pp.  561  ff.,  where  a  wide  literature  on  the  subject  is  cited.

3  As,  e.g.  James  Mill  (Analysis  of  the  Human  Mind,  ch.  x'.),  who  treats  this
difficult  subject  with  great  acuteness  and  thoroughness.


CH.  vin,  §  2]  Expectation  209

memory  is  essential  to  any  development  of  self-consciousness,
the  converse  is  not  at  all  so  clear,  and  to  assume  it  would  in-
volve us  in  a  needless  circle.


Expectation — Past,  Present  and  Future

§  2.  Intimately  connected  with  memory  is  expectation.  We
may  as  the  result  of  reasoning  conclude  that  a  certain  event  will
happen ;  we  may  also,  in  like  manner,  conclude  that  a  certain
other  event  has  happened.  But  as  we  should  not  call  the  latter
memory,  so  it  is  desirable  to  distinguish  such  indirect  anticipation
as  the  former  from  that  expectation  which  is  directly  due  to  the
memory-train.  Any  man  knows  that  he  will  die,  and  may
make  a  variety  of  arrangements  in  anticipation  of  death.  But  he
cannot  with  propriety  be  said  to  be  expecting  it,  unless  he  has
actually  present  to  his  mind  a  series  of  ideas  ending  in  that  of
death,  a  series  due  to  previous  associations,  and  revived  at  this
moment  in  consequence  of  the  actual  recurrence  as  a  present
experience  of  its  first  member.  Now  we  know  that  familiarity
with  an  object  or  event  in  very  various  settings  may  be  a  bar  to
memory,  so  too  it  may  be  to  expectation :  the  average  English-
man, e.g.,  is  continually  surprised  without  his  umbrella,  though
only  too  familiar  with  rain ;  since  in  our  climate  one  not  specially
attentive  to  the  weather  obtains  no  clear  representation  of  its
successive  phases.  But  after  a  series  of  events  A  B  C  D  E. . .
has  been  often  experienced  we  instinctively  expect  the  recur-
rence of  D  E...  on  the  recurrence  of  A  B  C,  i.e.  provided  the
memory-train  continues  so  far  intact.  The  expectation,  at  first
perhaps  slight — a  mere  tendency  easily  overborne — becomes
strengthened  by  every  repetition  of  the  series  in  the  old  order,
till  eventually,  if  often  fulfilled  and  never  falsified,  it  becomes
certain  and,  as  we  commonly  say,  irresistible.  To  have  a  clear
case  of  expectation,  then,  it  is  not  necessary  that  we  should
distinctly  remember  any  previous  experience  like  that  expected,
but  only  that  we  should  have  actually  present  some  earlier
member  of  a  series  that  has  become  firmly  associated  through
previous  experiences.  This  expectation  may  be  instantly  checked
by  reflexion,  just  as  it  may,  of  course,  be  disappointed  in  fact ;
but  these  are  matters  which  do  not  concern  the  inquiry  as  to  the
nature  of  expectation  while  expectation  lasts.

w.  p.  14


2io  Time-perception  [CH.  vm,  §  2

We  shall  continue  this  inquiry  to  most  advantage  by  widening
it  into  an  examination  of  the  distinction  of  present,  past  and
future,  and  this  inquiry  in  turn  will  open  up  the  still  wider
question  as  to  our  knowledge  of  time  generally.

To  a  being  whose  experiences  never  passed  through  the
transitions  which  ours  undergo — first  divested  of  the  strength
and  vividness  of  impressions,  again  reinvested  with  them  and
brought  back  from  the  faint  world  of  ideas — the  sharp  contrasts
of 'now'  and  'then,'  and  all  the  manifold  emotions  they  occasion,
would  be  quite  unknown.  Even  we,  so  far  as  we  confine  our
activity  and  attention  to  ideas,  are  almost  without  them.  Time-
order — succession,  antecedence,  and  consequence — of  course,  there
might  still  be.  But  in  that  sense  of  events  as  '  past  and  gone
for  ever,'  which  is  one  of  the  melancholy  factors  in  our  life,  and
in  the  obligation  to  wait  and  work  in  the  hope  or  dread  of  what
is  '  still  to  come '  there  is  much  more  than  time-order.  It  is  to
presentations  in  their  primary  stage,  to  impressions,  that  we  owe
the  striking  difference  we  feel  between  now  and  then,  whether
prospective  or  retrospective ;  and  it  is  to  them  also  that  we
directly  owe  our  sense  of  the  real,  of  what  is  and  exists  as
opposed  to  the  imaginary  that  exists  not.  But  the  present  alone
and  life  in  a  succession  of  presents,  or,  in  other  words,  continuous
occupation  with  impressions,  can  give  us  no  knowledge  of  the
present  as  present.  This  we  first  obtain  when  our  present  con-
sciousness consists  partly  of  memories  or  partly  of  expectations
as  well.  An  event  expected  differs  from  a  like  event  remembered
chiefly  in  two  ways,  (i)  in  its  relation  to  present  impressions  and
images,  and  (2)  in  the  active  attitude  to  which  it  leads.  The
diverse  feelings  that  accompany  our  intuitions  of  time  and  con-
tribute so  largely  to  their  colouring  are  mainly  consequences  of
these  differences.  Let  us  take  a  series  of  simple  and  familiar
events  A  B  C  D  E.  Such  series  may  be  present  in  consciousness
in  such  wise  that  abed  are  imaged  while  E  is  perceived  anew,
i.e.  the  whole,  symbolized  as  usual,  being  a  b  c  d  E ;  such  e.g.
would  be  the  state  of  a  dog  that  had  just  finished  his  daily  meal.
Again,  there  may  be  a  fresh  impression  of  A  which  revives  be de;
we  should  have  then  (i)  A  b  c  d  e — the  state  of  our  dog  when  he
next  day  gets  sight  of  the  dish  in  which  his  food  is  brought  to
him.  A  little  later  we  may  have  (2)  a  b  C  d  e.  Here  a  b  are
either  after-sensations  or  primary  memory-images,  or  have  at


CH.  vin,  §  2] Past,  Present  and  Future  211

any  rate  the  increased  intensity  due  to  recent  impression ;  but
this  increased  intensity  will  be  rapidly  on  the  wane  even  while
C  lasts,  and  a  b  will  pale  still  further  when  C  gives  place  to  D,
and  we  have  (3)  a  b  c  D  e.  But,  returning  to  (2),  we  should  find
d  e  to  be  increasing  in  intensity  and  definiteness  as  compared
with  their  state  in  (i),  now  that  C,  instead  of  A,  is  the  present
impression.  For,  when  A  occupied  this  position,  not  only  was  e
raised  less  prominently  above  the  threshold  of  consciousness  by
reason  of  its  greater  distance  from  A  in  the  memory-continuum,
but,  owing  to  the  reduplications  of  this  continuum,  more  lines  of
possible  revival  were  opened  up,  to  be  successively  negatived  as
B  succeeded  to  A  and  C  to  B  \  even  dogs  know  that  "  there  is
many  a  slip  'twixt  the  dish  and  the  lip."

But,  where  A  B  C  D  E  is  a  series  of  percepts  such  as  we  have
here  supposed — and  a  series  of  simpler  states  would  hardly  afford
much  ground  for  the  distinctions  of  past,  present  and  future —
there  would  be  also  a  varying  amount  of  active  adjustment  of
sense-organs  and  of  other  movements  supplementary  to  full  sen-
sation. In  (2),  the  point  at  which  we  have  a  b  C  d  e,  for  instance,
such  adjustments  and  movements  as  were  appropriate  to  b  would
have  ceased  when  B  lapsed  and  would  be  replaced  by  those  ap-
propriate to  C.  Again,  as  C  succeeded  to  B,  and  d  in  consequence
increased  in  intensity  and  definiteness,  the  movements  adapted  to
the  reception  of  D  would  become  nascent ;  and  so  on.

Thus,  psychologically  regarded,  the  distinction  of  past  and
future — what  is  sometimes  called  the  oneness  of  direction  of  time
or  the  irreversibility  of  experience — seems  to  be  identical  with
the  two  facts  just  described.  It  depends,  that  is  to  say,  (i)  upon
the  continuous  sinking  of  the  primary  memory-images  on  the  one
side,  and  the  continuous  rising  of  the  ordinary  images  on  the
other  side,  of  that  member  of  a  series  of  percepts  then  repeating
which  is  actual  at  the  moment ;  and  (2)  on  the  prevenient  adjust-
ments of  attention,  to  which  such  words  as  'expect,'  'await,'
'anticipate,'  all  testify  by  their  etymology.  These  conditions
in  turn  will  be  found  to  depend  upon  all  that  is  implied  in  the
formation  of  the  memory-train  and  upon  that  recurrence  of  like
series  of  impressions  which  we  attribute  to  the  'uniformity  of
nature.'  If  we  never  had  the  same  series  of  impressions  twice,
knowledge  of  time  would  be  impossible,  as  indeed  would  know-
ledge of  any  sort.

14-2


212  Time-perception  [CH.  vm,  §  3

Time: Succession  and  Simultaneity.

§  3.  At  this  point  we  are  confronted  with  the  three  modes  of
time,  as  Kant  calls  them — succession,  simultaneity  and  duration.
We  must  therefore  now  inquire  into  the  character  and  origin  of
our  knowledge  of  these,  so  far,  that  is,  as  such  an  inquiry  belongs
to  psychology.  For  we  have  not  to  ask  how  time  itself  comes  to
be;  but,  assuming  the  validity  of  its  concept,  we  ask  how  the  in-
dividual comes  by  it.  But  as  in  the  analogous  case  of  space,  we
shall  be  told  that  the  knowledge  of  time  is  a  priori  and  that
therefore  experience  is  impossible  without  it.  And  here  as  there
we  can  only  reply :  Epistemologically  a  priori,  the  concept  of
time  may  be  in  so  far  as  science  presupposes  it ;  but  that  its
perception  is  not  chronologically  a  priori  is  evident  alike  from
its  complexity  which  we  can  analyze,  and  its  gradual  develop-
ment which  we  can  trace.  Now  it  is  true  that  experience  is
impossible  without  change,  and  true  also  that  the  concept  of
change  implies  time ;  but  it  is  not  true  that  the  experience
of  change  is  impossible  without  the  perception  of  time.  For
in  perceiving  time,  what  we  perceive  is  just  relations  between
changes ;  and  relations  presuppose  their  terms,  not  the  terms
their  relations.  It  is  this  perception  that  we  have  first  to  analyze;
and  it  is  with  the  immediate  experience  of  change  that  we  must
begin.  This  experience  is  ultimate.  Now  all  our  sense-data  are
present  changes ;  but  their  presence  does  not  for  an  experient  at
the  sensory  level  imply  the  distinction  of  present  from  past.  The
primary  meaning  of  present1  is  'here'  rather  than  'now' :  "here  is
this,  here  is  red  "  is  what  presentation  means.  The  change  ex-
perienced has  an  antecedent,  no  doubt,  but  its  bare  presentation
does  not  imply  the  judgment:  "This  follows  on  that."  To  talk
of  '  time-sensation '  or  to  suppose  that  the  experience  of  change
is,  ipso  facto,  an  '  immediate '  experience  of  time- transience  is
assuredly  a  mistake2.

But  though  succession  does  not  explicitly  enter  into  this  pri-
mary experience  of  change,  duration  does :  but,  again,  not  duration

1  Prae-esse=\.o  be  before. Compare  too  the  German  Gegenwart  and  Gegenstand.

2  Prepositions  invariably  connote  relations. We  cannot therefore  identify  the
immediate  experience  of change  with  an experience  of  transition; for  then  the
fundamenta  relationis  implied  in  this  term  must  needs  be  themselves  transitions,  if
they are  to be experienced. We should thus be  committed  to  a  needless  and
illegitimate  regress  ad  indefinitum. Cf.  above,  ch.  iv,  §  5,  pp.  85  f.


CH.  vin,  §  3] Time:  Succession  and  Simultaneity 213

as  implying  time  but  simply  that  '  protensity  '  which  we  have
already  noted  as  a  characteristic  of  all  sensation,  nay,  of  all
presentation  whatever1.  To  identify  this  protensity  with  duration
conceived  as  time-length — time  being  taken  as  infinitely  divisible
— would  at  once  give  rise  to  difficulty.  For  a  sense-datum  as  an
event  would  then  never  be  protensively  minimal.  On  the  other
hand,  since  the  existence  of  such  minimum  protensibile  in  our
immediate  experience  is  indisputable,  there  is  a  limit  to  the
number  of  sense-data  that  we  could  successively  note  and  mark
off  in  a  finite  time,  though  we  fail  to  reach  it.  Thus  our  percep-
tion of  time,  when  we  attain  it,  differs  from  the  conception  of  it
that  we  attain  still  later ;  and  it  is  the  movements  of  attention
we  have  just  described  as  '  noting  and  marking  off'  that  are  the
ultimate  ground  of  this  difference.  We  may  now  try  to  examine
the  difference  in  detail,  deferring — till  we  then  return  to  it — the
further  explication  of  this  ultimate  ground,  the  mutual  implica-
tion of  duration  and  change2.

Time  is  often  figuratively  represented  as  a  line,  and  we  may
perhaps  utilise  this  figure  in  order  to  make  clear  the  relation  of
our  perception  of  time  to  what  we  call  time  itself.  The  present,
though  conceived  as  a  point  or  instant  of  time,  is  still  perceptually
such  that  we  actually  can  and  do  attend  within  it  to  a  plurality
of  presentations  which  correspond  to  as  many  objectively  suc-
cessive moments.  Granting  this  implication  of  simultaneity  and
succession  in  our  perception  of  time,  if  we  represent  the  succes-
sion as  a  line,  we  may  represent  the  simultaneity  as  a  second
line  at  right  angles  to  the  first ;  pure  time — or  time-length
without  time-breadth,  we  may  say — is  a  mere  abstraction.  Now
it  is  with  the  former  line  that  we  have  to  do  in  treating  of  time
as  it  is  (or  as  we  conceive  it),  and  with  the  latter  in  treating  of
our  intuition  of  time,  where,  just  as  in  a  perspective  repre-
sentation of  depth,  we  are  confined  to  lines  in  a  plane  at  right
angles  to  the  actual  line  of  distance.  In  a  succession  of  events
ABODE...  the  presence  of  B  means  the  absence  of  A  and  of
C.  But  the  direct  perception  of  their  succession  involves  the
simultaneous  presence  of  these  in  distinct  phases  of  representa-
tion. In  this  immediate  perception  or  intuition  of  time,  then,
all  that  corresponds  to  the  differences  of  past,  present  and  future

1  Cf.  ch.  v,  §  i,  p.  107,  §  4,  p.  119.

2  Cf.  next  section  and  ch.  xiii,  §  6.


214  Time-perception  [CH.  vm,  §  3

is  presented  simultaneously.  To  this  fact  the  name  of  '  specious
present '  or  '  psychical  present '  has  been  given1.  What  we  have
is  not  a  moving  point  or  instant  of  objective  time,  that  strictly
contains  nothing,  but  a  moving  line,  or  rather  a  line  with  a  con-
tinuously changing  content.  The  contents  of  this  continuously
changing  '  specious '  line  simultaneously  represent  a  portion  of
the  '  real '  line  of  objective  succession,  viz.  the  immediate  past
as  still  present  in  primary  memory-images,  and  the  immediate
future  as  anticipated  in  prepercepts  and  nascent  acts2 ;  its  posi-
tion or  date  being  the  actual  present.  This  truism  or  paradox,
that  all  that  we  immediately  know  of  succession  is  but  an  inter-
pretation, or  rather  explication,  of  what  is  really  simultaneous  or
coexistent,  we  may  then  concisely  express  by  saying  that  we
are  aware  of  time  only  through  time-perspective.  Experience
shews  that  it  is  a  long  step  from  a  succession  of  presentations  to
this  presentation  or  awareness  of  the  succession  that  is  implicit  in
them8.  The  first  condition  of  such  awareness  is  that  we  should
have  represented  together  presentations  that  were  in  the  first
instance  attended  to  successively.  This  we  have  in  the  persis-
tence of  primary  memory-images  and  in  the  (comparatively)
simultaneous  reproduction  of  longer  or  shorter  portions  of  the
memory-train,  constituting  the  pre-perceptions  or  expectations
that  the  actual  present  normally  entails4.  In  a  series  thus  secured
there  may  be  time-marks,  though  no  time,  and  by  these  marks
the  series  will  be  distinguished  from  other  simultaneous  series:
these  we  may  call  the  second  condition.

To  ask  which  is  first  among  a  number  of  simultaneous  pre-
sentations is  unmeaning;  one  might  be  logically  prior  to  another,
but  in  time  they  are  together  and  priority  is  excluded.  Never-
theless with  each  distinct  representation  a,  b,  c,  d  there  is  probably
connected  some  trace  of  that  movement  of  attention  of  which  we
are  aware  in  passing  from  one  presentation  to  another.  In  our
everyday  reminiscences  we  have,  it  must  be  allowed,  little  direct
proof  of  this  interposition;  though  there  is  strong  indirect  evidence

1  Psychical  present  and  time-perspective  are,  however,  not  to  be  identified :  the
first  is  but  the  foreground  of  the  second.  Cf.  the  closing  paragraph  of  this  section.

8  Cf.  W.  James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  i.  629  ff. ;  L.  W.  Stern,  "Psychische
Prasenzzeit,"  Z.f.  Psych.  (1897),  xiii.  325  ff.

3  Cf.  below  on  '  Objects  of  a  higher  order,'  ch.  xiii,  §  2.

4  We  find  only  approximate  simultaneity  at  this  forward  end,  for  here  is  enacted
the  living  actuality  of  becoming  or  change.


CH.  vin,  §  3] Time:  Succession  and  Simultaneity 215

of  it  in  the  tendency  of  the  flow  to  follow  the  order  in  which  the
presentations  were  attended  to  at  first:  in  recollection  the  evi-
dence is  stronger.  With  the  movements  themselves  we  are
familiar  enough,  though  the  residua  of  such  movements — if  this
term  may  be  allowed1 — are  not  ordinarily  conspicuous.  These
residua,  then,  are  our  temporal  signs,  and,  together  with  the
representations  connected  by  them,  constitute  the  memory-
continuum.

But  temporal  signs  alone  will  not  furnish  all  the  pictorial
exactness  of  the  time-perspective.  They  give  us  only  a  fixed
series  ;  but  the  working  of  obliviscence,  by  insuring  a  progres-
sive variation  in  intensity  and  distinctness  as  we  pass  from  one
member  of  the  series  to  the  next,  yields  the  effect  which  we
call  time-distance  :  this  we  may  call  the  third  condition.  By
themselves  such  variations  would  leave  us  liable  to  confound
more  vivid  representations  in  the  distance  with  fainter  ones  nearer
the  present,  but  from  this  mistake  the  temporal  signs  save  us ;
and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  where  the  memory-train  is  imperfect
such  mistakes  continually  occur.  On  the  other  hand,  where  these
variations  are  slight  and  imperceptible,  though  the  memory-con-
tinuum preserves  the  order  of  events  intact,  we  have  still  no
such  distinct  appreciation  of  comparative  distance  in  time  as
we  have  nearer  the  present  where  these  perspective  effects  are
considerable2.

1  And  it  may  well  seem  inadmissible ;  for  if  attention,  as  here  maintained,  is  not
itself  presented  (cf.  ch.  ii,  §  6,  p.  57)  how  can  we  talk  of '  residue'  of  its  movements?
We  can  only  do  so  in  so  far  as  the  acts  of  attention  are  not  simply  immanent  but  also
transeunt,  i.e.  have  effects. Evidence  of  such  effects  we  have  at  every  level  of  mental
life:  cf.  ch.  iii,  §  3,  p.  72. As  to  the  close  connexion  between  them  and  movements
—which  can  be  retained  and  reproduced— cf.  ch.  iii,  §  2,  p.  67. The  peculiarity  of
these  particular  '  residua,'  however,  is  that  we  have  no  evidence  of  their  reproduction
unless  we  regard  the  continuity  of  the  memory-continuum  itself  as  evidence. This
however  we  seem  entitled  to  do  inasmuch  as  acts  of  attention  alone  account  for  its
existence. That  we  have  no  other  evidence  again  seems  explicable  from  the  intimate
connexion  between  attention  and  feeling  (cf.  §  6  of  the  last  chapter,  p.  204)— to  which
the  term  emotion  testifies.

2  It  is  interesting  here  to  recall  a  remark  of  Spinoza's. "We  can  distinctly
imagine  distance  of  space  or  even  of  time  only  up  to  some  definite  limit ; that  is,
all  objects... whose  distance  from  us  exceeds  that  which  we  can  distinctly  imagine
seem  to  be  all  in  the  same  plane  :  so  also  objects... removed  from  the  present  by  a
longer  interval  than  we  can  distinctly  imagine... we  refer  as  it  were  to  one  moment  of
time"  (Ethics,  iv,  def.  vi).


216  Time-perception  [CH.  vm,  §  4


Duration

§  4.  When  in  retrospect  we  note  that  a  particular  presentation
X  has  held  its  place  in  the  field  of  consciousness,  while  a  suc-
cession of  other  presentations,  A,  £,  C,  D  has  occurred,  then  we
may  be  said,  in  observing  this  relation  of  the  two,  to  perceive
the  duration  of  X.  And  in  this  way  we  do  sometimes  subjectively
estimate  longer  periods  of  time.  But  first,  it  is  evident  that  we
cannot  apply  this  method  to  indefinitely  short  periods  without
passing  beyond  the  region  of  distinct  presentation  ;  and,  since
the  knowledge  of  duration  implies  a  relation  between  distinguish-
able presentations  such  as  A,  B,  C,  D  and  X,  the  case  is  one  in
which  references  to  the  subconscious  can  hardly  help  any  but
those  who  confound  the  fact  of  time  with  such  knowledge  of  it.
Secondly,  if  we  are  to  compare  different  durations  at  all,  it  is  not
enough  that  one  of  them  should  last  out  a  series  A,  B,  C,  D,  and
another  a  series  L,  M,  A7,  O  :  we  also  want  some  sort  of  common
measure  of  such  series.  Locke  was  awake  to  this  point,  though
he  expressed  himself  vaguely.  He  speaks  of  our  ideas  suc-
ceeding each  other  "at  certain  distances  not  much  unlike  the
images  in  the  inside  of  a  lantern  turned  round  by  the  heat  of  a
candle,"  and  'guesses'  that  "this  appearance  of  theirs  in  train
varies  not  very  much  in  a  waking  man1."  Now  what  is  this
'  distance '  that  separates  A  from  B,  B  from  C,  and  so  on ;  and
what  means  have  we  of  knowing  that  it  is  tolerably  constant  in
waking  life  ?  It  is  probably  that,  the  '  residuum '  of  which  we
have  called  a  temporal  sign ;  or,  in  other  words,  it  is  the  move-
ment of  attention  from  one  presentation,  A,  to  another,  B.  But
we  must  endeavour  now  to  get  a  more  exact  notion  of  this
movement.

Everybody  knows  what  it  is  to  be  distracted  by  a  rapid  suc-
cession of  varied  impressions,  and  equally  what  it  is  to  be  wearied
by  the  slow  and  monotonous  recurrence  of  ( the  same  sort  of
thing.'  Now  these  '  feelings '  of  distraction  and  tedium  owe  their
characteristic  qualities  to  movements  of  attention.  In  the  first,
attention  is  kept  incessantly  on  the  move ;  before  it  is  accom-
modated to  A,  it  is  disturbed  by  the  suddenness,  intensity,  or
novelty  of  B :  we  are  hurried  and  cannot  '  take  our  time.'

1  Essay  concerning  Human  Understanding,  II.  xiv.  §§  9-12.


CH.  vin,  §  4]  Duration  2 1 7

In  the  second,  attention  is  kept  all  but  stationary  by  the
repeated  presentation  of  the  same  kind  of  impression.  Such
excess  and  defect  of  novelty  make  one  realise  a  fact  which  in
ordinary  life  is  so  obscure  as  to  escape  notice.  But  experi-
mental psychology  has  set  this  fact  in  a  more  striking  light,  and
made  clear  what  Locke  had  dimly  before  his  mind  in  talking  of
a  certain  distance  between  the  presentations  of  a  waking  man.
In  estimating  very  short  periods  of  time — of  a  second  or  less —
it  is  found  that  there  is  a  certain  period  for  which  the  mean  of
a  number  of  estimates  is  correct,  while  shorter  periods  are  on
the  whole  over-estimated,  and  longer  periods  under-estimated.
This  so-called  'indifference-time'  we  may  perhaps  take  to  be
evidence  of  the  time  occupied  in  accommodating  or  fixing
attention.  But,  though  the  fixation  of  attention  actually  oc-
cupies more  or  less  clock-time,  it  is  not  experienced  as  duration,
but  rather  as  a  peculiar  intensity — what  we  have  hitherto  called
'  protensity.'

Thus,  if  this  supposition  be  true,  there  is  an  element  in  our
concrete  time-perception  which  has  no  place  in  our  abstract  con-
ception of  time.  In  time,  as  conceived  by  the  physicist,  there  is
no  trace  of  intensity  ;  in  time,  psychically  experienced,  duration
or  protensity  is  primarily  a  subjectively  intensive  magnitude :
witness  the  comparison  of  times  when  we  are  'bored'  with  others
when  we  are  amused — just  referred  to.  It  must  have  struck  every
one  as  strange,  who  has  reflected  upon  it,  that  a  period  of  time
which  seems  long  in  retrospect — such  as  an  eventful  excursion
— should  have  appeared  short  in  passing ;  while  a  period,  on  the
contrary,  which  in  memory  has  dwindled  to  a  wretched  span
seemed  everlasting  till  it  was  past.  But,  if  we  consider  that  in
retrospect  length  of  time  is  represented  primarily  and  chiefly  by
impressions  that  have  survived,  we  have  an  explanation  of  one-
half  ;  and  in  the  intensity  of  the  movements  of  attention  we  shall
perhaps  find  an  explanation  of  the  other.  What  tells  in  retro-
spect is  the  series  a,  b,  c,  d,  &c. ;  what  tells  in  the  wearisome
present  is  the  intervening  A,  tz,  t3,...,  or  rather  the  irksome  ac-
commodation of  attention,  which  these  temporal  signs  afterwards
represent.  As  we  have  seen  elsewhere,  the  intensity  of  a  presen-
tation does  not  persist,  so  that  in  memory  the  residuum  of  the
most  intense  experience  of  tedium  may  only  be  so  many  fs  in  a
portion  of  the  memory-continuum  whose  surviving  members  are


218  Time-perception  [CH.  vm,  §  4

few  and  uninteresting.  But  in  the  actual  experience,  say,  of  a  weari-
some discourse,  when  the  expectation  of  release  is  continually
balked  and  attention  forced  back  upon  a  monotonous  dribble
of  platitudes,  the  one  impressive  fact  is  the  hearer's  impatience.
On  the  other  hand,  so  long  as  we  are  entertained,  attention  is
never  involuntary,  and  there  is  no  continually  deferred  ex-
pectation. Just  as  we  are  said  to  walk  with  least  effort  when
our  pace  accords  with  the  rate  of  swing  of  our  legs  regarded
as  pendulums,  so  in  pastimes — as  we  expressively  call  them —
impressions  that  we  attend  to  willingly  succeed  each  other  at
the  rate  at  which  attention  can  be  most  effectively  and  easily
accommodated.  Hence  this  rate  has  been  called  'adequate
time '  or  '  optimal  time.'  To  this  the  '  indifference-time '  men-
tioned above  is  obviously  related.  This  'time'  is,  however,  a
tempo  that  varies  with  the  subject-matter  attended  to :  when
effective  attention  is  more  difficult  this  tempo  is  slower  than  it
is  when  to  attend  is  easy.  So  Shakespeare  says  :  "Time  travels
in  divers  paces  with  divers  persons  " — having  these  concrete  ex-
periences in  view.  But  Newton — from  the  conceptual  standpoint
— describes  time  as  "  flowing  at  a  constant  rate1."  There  are
good  grounds  too  for  supposing  that  it  varies  considerably  in
different  species.  In  our  own  case  we  find  a  close  correspondence
between  our  normal  pace  or  pulse  and  the  tempo  of  attention.
Assuming  the  like  to  hold  good  generally,  as  Spencer  and  von
Baer  did2,  we  should  have  to  admit  that  a  good  deal  of  our  pity
for  the  short  life  of  a  gnat  or  May-fly  is  thrown  away.  Where  we
are  absorbed  in  the  present  without  being  unwillingly  confined
to  it,  not  only  is  there  no  motive  for  retrospect  or  expectation,
but  there  is  no  feeling  that  the  present  endures.  "Dem  gluck-
lichen"  said  Schiller,  "schlagt  keine  Stunde."  As  long  as  each
impression  lasts  it  is  interesting,  but  it  does  not  continue  to
monopolise  the  focus  of  consciousness  till  attention  is  fatigued
by  it,  because  it  has  become  uninteresting.  In  such  facts,  then,
we  seem  to  have  proof  that  our  perception  of  duration  rests
ultimately  upon  quasi-motor  acts  of  varying  intensity,  the  dura-
tion of  which  we  do  not  directly  experience  as  duration  of  time

1  For  personal  reasons  I  allow  myself  to  say  here  that  the  groundwork  of  this
and  the  previous  section  was  written  and  privately  printed  in  1881,  and  included  the
above  sentence.

2  Spencer,  Psychology,  %  91;  von  Baer,  Reden  und  Aufsatze,  1864,  i.  pp.  254  ff.


CH.  viu,  §  5] The  Continuity  of  Time  219

at  all.  It  is,  in  a  very  literal  sense,  rather  our  living  duration1
since  these  acts  are  ours :  their  intensity  is  a  function  of  this
duration,  which  is  the  only  duration  that  we  directly  experience.
In  other  words,  it  is  here  contended  that  what,  as  Locke  said,
"we  call  an  instant, ...\.\\&  time  of  only  one  idea  in  our  minds
without  the  succession  of  another,"  is  psychologically  not  'a  part
in  duration '  in  that  other  sense  in  which,  as  he  says,  "  we  cannot
conceive  any  duration  without  succession3."


The  Continuity  of  Time.

§  5.  But,  if  our  experience  of  time  depends  primarily  upon
acts  of  attention  to  a  succession  of  distinct  presentations,  it  would
seem  that  time,  subjectively  regarded,  must  be  discrete  and  not
continuous.  This,  which  is  the  view  steadily  maintained  by  the
psychologists  of  Herbart's  school,  was  implied  if  not  stated  by
Locke,  Berkeley  and  Hume.  Locke  hopelessly  confuses  time
as  perceived  and  time  as  conceived,  and  can  only  save  himself
from  pressing  objections  by  the  retort,  "It  is  very  common  to
observe  intelligible  discourses  spoiled  by  too  much  subtlety  in
nice  divisions."  But  Berkeley  and  Hume,  with  the  mathematical
discoveries  of  Newton  and  Leibniz  before  them,  could  only  pro-
test that  there  was  nothing  answering  to  mathematical  continuity
in  our  experience.  And,  whereas  Locke  had  tried  to  combine
with  his  general  psychological  account  the  inconsistent  position
that  "none  of  the  distinct  ideas  we  have  of  either  [space  or  time]
is  without  all  manner  of  composition3,"  Berkeley  declares :
"  For  my  own  part,  whenever  I  attempt  to  frame  a  simple  idea
of  time,  abstracted  from  the  succession  of  ideas  in  my  mind,
which  flows  uniformly  and  is  participated  by  all  beings,  I  am
lost  and  embrangled  in  inextricable  difficulties.  I  have  no
notion  of  it  at  all,  only  I  hear  others  say  it  is  infinitely  divisible,
and  speak  of  it  in  such  a  manner  as  leads  me  to  harbour  odd
thoughts  of  my  existence.... Time  therefore  being  nothing,
abstracted  from  the  succession  of  ideas  in  our  minds,  it  follows
that  the  duration  of  any  finite  spirit  must  be  estimated  by  the

1  Cf.  Bergson  on  la  durte,  Evolution  criatrice,  1907,  pp.  icf.

2  Op.  cit.  II.  xiv.  10,  xv.  n.

3  Op.  cit.  n.  xv.  9. The  'retort'  above  quoted  will  be  found  in  the  note  to  this
section  in  the  French  translation,  reproduced  in  most  English  editions.


220  Time-perception  [CH.  vm,  §  5

number  of  ideas  or  actions  succeeding  each  other  in  that  same
spirit  or  mind1.  Hume,  again,  is  at  still  greater  pains  to  shew
that  "the  idea  which  we  form  of  any  finite  quality  is  not  in-
finitely divisible,  but  that  by  proper  distinctions  and  separations
we  may  run  this  idea  up  to  inferior  ones,  which  will  be  perfectly
simple  and  indivisible... that,  therefore,  the  imagination  reaches
a  minimum,  and  may  raise  up  to  itself  an  idea  of  which  it  cannot
conceive  any  subdivision,  and  which  cannot  be  diminished  with-
out a  total  annihilation8."

At  first  blush  we  are  perhaps  disposed  to  accept  this  account
of  our  time-perception,  as  Wundt,  e.g.  did,  and  to  regard  the
attribution  of  continuity  as  wholly  the  result  of  after- reflexion3.
But  it  may  be  doubted  if  this  is  really  an  exact  analysis  of  the
case.  Granted  that  the  impressions  to  which  we  chiefly  attend
are  distinct  and  discontinuous  in  their  occupation  of  the  focus
of  consciousness,  and  that,  so  far,  the  most  vivid  element  in  our
time-experience  is  discrete ;  granted  further  that  in  recollection
and  expectation  such  objects  are  still  distinct — all  which  seems
to  imply  that  time  is  a  mere  plurality — yet  there  is  more  behind.
The  whole  field  of  consciousness  is  not  occupied  by  distinct
objects,  neither  are  the  changes  in  this  field  discontinuous.  At-
tention does  not  move  by  hops  from  one  definite  spot  to  another,
but,  as  Wundt  himself  allows,  by  alternate  diffusion  and  concen-
tration, like  the  foot  of  a  snail,  which  never  leaves  the  surface  it
is  traversing.  We  have  a  clear  presentation  discerned  as  A  or  B
when  attention  is  gathered  up  ;  and,  when  attention  spreads  out,
we  have  only  vague  and  more  or  less  confused  presentations.
To  some  extent,  such  confused  presentations  are  always  present,
and  so  serve  to  bridge  over  the  comparatively  empty  interval
during  which  attention  is  unfocused.  Thus  our  perception  of  a
period  of  time  is  not  comparable  to  so  many  terms  in  a  series
of  finite  units  any  more  than  it  is  to  a  series  of  infinitesimals.
When  attention  is  concentrated  in  expectation  of  some  single
impression,  then,  no  doubt,  it  is  brought  to  a  very  fine  point
('  zugespitzt,'  as  Herbart  would  say) ;  and  a  succession  of  such
impressions  would  be  represented  as  relatively  discrete  compared

1  Principles  of  Human  Knowledge,  pt.  i.  §  98.
1  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  pt.  ii.  §  i,  Green's  ed.  pp.  334  f.
8  Logik,  i1**  Auf.  1880,  i.  p.  432. In  his  2nd  ed.  (1893,  i.  p.  486)  Wundt,  more
suo,  silently  swings  round  and  accepts  the  position  here  maintained.


CH.  vin,  §  5] The  Continuity  of  Time  221

with  the  representation  of  the  scenery  of  a  day-dream.  But
absolutely  discrete  it  is  not  and  cannot  be,  for  what  account
could  we  then  give  of  the  intervals1?  In  this  respect  the
truth  is  rather  with  Herbert  Spencer,  who,  treating  of  this  subject
from  another  point  of  view,  remarks,  "  When  the  facts  are  con-
templated objectively,  it  becomes  manifest  that,  though  the
changes  constituting  intelligence  approach  to  a  single  succession,
they  do  not  absolutely  form  one1."

On  the  whole,  then,  we  may  conclude  that  our  concrete
time-experiences  are  due  to  the  simultaneous  representation
of  a  series  of  definite  presentations  that  were  both  accom-
panied and  separated  by  more  or  fewer  indefinite  presentations
forming  a  more  or  less  confused  background  ;  that,  further,  the
representations  have  certain  marks  or  temporal  signs  due  to  acts
or  movements  of  attention,  whereby  the  memory-continuum  is
formed  ;  that  the  rate  of  these  movements  or  '  moments '  is
approximately  constant ;  and  that  each  moment  itself  is  pri-
marily experienced  as  part  of  a  peculiar  subjective  intensity,  one
that  differs  from  the  intensity  of  feeling  in  being  active.

1  To  maintain  such  absolute  discreteness  is  to  make  the  common  mistake  of  con-
fusing time  as  directly  experienced  with  the  formal  concept  of  time  which  ignores
protensity,  replacing  it  by  infinite  divisibility. Experimental  psychology — without
realising  the  primacy  of  this  subjective  factor — has  nevertheless  helped  to  bring  it  to
light. It  has  shewn  that  our  'sense'  of  time-lapse  is  never  determined  by  succession
alone,  though  always  dominated  by  this  so  long  as  it  is  clearly  perceived ;  and  also
that  our  estimate  alters  with  the  frequency  of  this  succession,  so  long  as  it  is  distin-
guishable, but  not  disappearing  when  this  is  replaced  by  some  uniform  impression  or
by  what  is  called  '  empty  time.' It  has  shewn  also  that  a  comparison  is  always  pos-
sible between  two  intervals,  one  that  is  empty  and  any  other,  however  variously  filled.
Cf.  Meumann,  "Beitrage  zur  Psychologic  des  Zeitsinns,"  Philosophische  Studien,  ix.
(1894),  pp.  266  ff. ;  xii.  (1896),  pp.  iig  ff. Cf.  also  above,  ch.  iii,  §  3.

2  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol.  i.  §  180.


CHAPTER IX

MEMORISING, RHYTHMIZING AND READING
Span  of  Prehension  and  Repetition.

§  i.  The  movements  of  attention  concerned  in  the  earliest
formation  of  the  memory-continuum  are  mainly  non-voluntary,
determined  that  is  to  say  by  sensory  changes.  But  we  are  now
in  a  position  to  study  the  further  elaboration  of  this  continuum
at  that  higher  level  where  the  attention  given  is  altogether
voluntary.  Such  is  the  case  in  the  process  commonly  called
memorising  or  '  learning  by  heart/  and  again  in  the  process  of
reading — topics  in  which  the  experimental  method  of  investi-
gation has  been  especially  fruitful  and  which,  partly  on  this
account,  are  here  reserved  for  a  chapter  apart.

The  learning  and  retaining  of  a  stanza  of  poetry  say,  is
obviously  a  function  of  many  variables,  such  as  the  mode  of
presentation  (whether  the  words  are  heard  only,  or  heard  and
seen,  or  both  heard,  seen  and  spoken  aloud),  the  length,  the  sub-
ject's familiarity  with  the  words  and  ideas  used,  the  number  of
repetitions,  the  attention  given,  etc.  Familiarity  of  course  implies
previous  learning  and  retaining ;  the  first  essential,  therefore,  in
any  attempt  to  study  these  processes  from  the  beginning,  is  the
exclusion  of  this  factor.  Accordingly  Ebbinghaus,  the  pioneer
in  experiments  of  this  kind1,  devised  the  new  material,  which
is  now  regularly  employed,  namely,  closed  monosyllables,  not
themselves  words,  and  strung  together  promiscuously  into  lines
of  fixed  length  so  as  never  to  form  words:  bam,  rit,  por,
sig,  nef,  gud,  etc.,  is  an  instance  of  such  '  senseless  verses3.'

1  H.  Ebbinghaus, Ueber  das  Geddchtnis : Untersitchungen  sur  expcrimentellen
Psychologic,  1885.

2  In  fact,  however,  it  is  practically  impossible  altogether  to  exclude  old  associations.
The  syllables  just  given  for  example  suggested  to  one  person  : Baboon  laughs  in


CH.  ix,  §  i]  Span  of  Prehension  and  Repetition 223

With  very  slight  attention  most  persons  would  be  able  to
reproduce  three  or  four  such  syllables  on  a  single  reading  or
hearing  ;  and  by  greater  concentration  six  or  seven  might  be
so  reproduced.  This  maximum,  called  sometimes  the  '  span  of
prehension,'  has  been  repeatedly  made  the  subject  of  special
inquiry.  In  idiots  it  is  found,  as  might  be  expected,  to  be  in
general  remarkably  low ;  in  school  children  it  increases  rapidly
between  the  ages  of  eight  and  fourteen,  and  then  remains  almost
stationary.  Individual  differences  are  however  small  compared
with  the  striking  differences  that  in  all  cases  appear  when  longer
lines  make  repetitions  necessary1.

The  comparatively  constant  span  of  prehension  is  doubtless
closely  connected  with  certain  other  psychical  constants,  such  as
the  range  of  the  psychical  present  and  of  the  primary  memory-
image,  the  tempo  of  movements  of  attention,  &c.  There  are
isolated  investigations  of  these  several  conditions,  but  the  subject
as  a  whole  still  awaits  systematic  treatment2.  That  it  is  not
wanting  in  interest  is  evident  when  we  consider  that  if  our  span
of  prehension  were  enlarged,  a  corresponding  increase  in  the
variety  and  range  of  metre  and  rhyme  in  poetry,  of  '  phrase '  in
music,  and  of  evolution  in  the  dance  would  be  possible.  The
limits  at  present  imposed  on  these  and  like  complexities  find
their  ultimate  explanation  in  the  constants  just  mentioned.

With  lines  of  greater  length  than  seven  syllables  some  repeti-
tion is  requisite  before  they  can  be  correctly  reproduced.  The
number  of  such  repetitions  was  found  by  Ebbinghaus  to  increase
very  rapidly  with  the  number  of  syllables  to  be  learnt.  In  his
own  case,  for  lines  of  12,  16,  24,  36  syllables  the  repetitions
necessary  were  on  the  average  i6'6,  30,  44,  55  respectively.  Thus
for  a  line  exceeding  in  length  that  of  the  span  of  prehension
only  about  five  times,  he  required  fifty-five  times  as  many  repeti-
tions— if  we  might  regard  the  single  reading  of  the  syllables

order  to  signify  '  good '  and  called  up  a  picture  of  an  ape  eating  a  banana. Div,  nur
suggested  '  divine  nurture '  to  one,  and  '  diviner  '  to  another.

1  Cf.  J.  Jacobs  and  F.  Gallon  on  the  "Span  of  Prehension,"  Mind  (1887),
xii.  75  ff. ;  B.  Bourdon,  "  Influence  de  1'age  sur  la  m^moire  immediate,"  Rev. phil.
(1894)  xxxviii.  148  ff.;  W.  H.  Winch,  Brit.Jl.  of  Psych.  (1904),  i.  1276°.

2  Cf.  Dietze,  "  Untersuchungen  Uber  den  Umfang  des  Bewusstseins  u.s.w.,"  Phil.
Studien  (1885),  pp.  361  ff.; L.  W.  Stern,  "  Psychische Prasenzzeit,"  Ztschr.  f.  Psy-
chologie  (1897),  xiii.  325  ff.J Daniels,  "  Memory  After-image  and  Attention,"^///.
Jour,  of  Psychology  (1893),  vi.  558  ff.


224 Memorising,  Rhythmizing  and  Reading  [CH.  ix,  §  I

as  comparable  with  a  '  repetition.'  The  '  arithmetical  prodigy/
Diamandi,  could  write  down  a  number  of  ten  digits  after  learning
them  for  15",  whereas  a  number  of  20  digits  occupied  him  for
2'  15",  one  of  100  digits,  25'  and  one  of  200  I  hr.  15'.  Thus
it  is  obvious — obvious  indeed  without  any  experimentation —
that  beyond  a  certain  finite  and  not  very  great  number  of
elements  there  is  an  end  to  all  such  memorising.  Unhappily
the  details  of  Ebbinghaus's  experiment  conflict  with  this  a  priori
certainty  and  must  be  wrong  somewhere1.  Substituting  poetry
for  gibberish  of  equal  amount,  Ebbinghaus  found  that  one-tenth
the  number  of  repetitions  sufficed  ;  the  enormous  saving  thus
effected  shewing  how  numerous  and  intimate  are  the  ready-made
associations  that  '  rhyme  and  reason '  involve.  But  at  one  and
the  same  time  to  memorise  five  verses  even  of  sense  requires
more  than  five  times  as  many  repetitions  as  the  memorising  of
one.  Two  or  three  lines  of  inquiry  here  present  themselves,  e.g.
(i)  as  to  the  immediate  effects  of  a  series  of  repetitions ;  (2)  as
to  retention  after  an  interval,  (a)  as  a  function  of  the  number  of
repetitions  previously  made,  and  (b)  as  a  function  of  the  time  ;
(3)  as  to  the  respective  effects  of  more  or  less  cumulating,
or  more  or  less  distributing,  the  repetitions,  on  the  number  of
these  required.  Let  us  glance  at  each  in  turn.

I.  It  is  at  once  obvious  that  beyond  a  certain  point  exhaus-
tion of  attention  renders  further  repetition  for  a  time  futile;  thus
Ebbinghaus  found  64  repetitions  at  one  sitting  of  six  i6-syllable
nonsense  verses,  a  task  lasting  some  three-quarters  of  an
hour,  "  was  apt  to  bring  on  asthenia,  a  sort  of  epileptic  aura,
and  the  like!"  But  keeping  well  within  this  heroic  limit,  a
certain  '  law  of  diminishing  return,'  to  use  an  economic  analogy
discloses  itself2 ;  though  sometimes  it  may  be  overlaid  by

1  Thus,  while  12  syllables  required  i6'6  repetitions,  and  the  addition  of  a  second
17,  44  repetitions,  i.e.  27*4  more,  the  addition  of  a  third  12  required  only  55,  i.e.  only
1 1  more.  At  this  rate  the  process  should,  as  the  number  of  syllables  increased,  be-
come comparatively  easier — which  seems  plainly  absurd.  This  was  pointed  out  by
one  of  Ebbinghaus's  early  critics  (A.  Elsas,  Phil.  Monalshefte,  1887,  p.  88)  and
repeated  by  another  (A.  Hofler,  Vierteljahrschr.  f.  wissenschaftliche  Phil.  1887,
p.  346).  But  it  was  ignored  by  everybody  including  Ebbinghaus,  Wundt  and — I
must  add — myself!

8  Thus  taking  a  line  of  10  syllables,  the  number  of  syllables  reproduced  correctly
and  in  their  proper  order,  after  i,  3,  6,  9  and  12  'repetitions,'  were  3'2,  a'5,  2 '8,  3-4,
3-9  respectively,  as  the  averages  of  a  series  of  experiments  with  each  of  eight  persons.
"  The  first  repetition  is  undoubtedly  the  best,"  assuming,  of  course,  that  the  subjects


CH.  ix,  §  i] Span  of  Prehension  and  Repetition 225

counteracting  tendencies.  Thus  the  speedy  cessation  of  early
distractions  due  to  difficulties  in  pronunciation  or  in  adaptation
to  strange  experimental  conditions,  &c.,  often  leads  to  a  slight
improvement  consequent  on  the  removal  of  these  hindrances
to  undivided  attention.

But  in  a  given  repetition  it  is  noteworthy  that  all  the  syllables
of  a  line  do  not  fare  alike.  The  first  reading  is  the  best
and  usually  suffices  for  the  reproduction  of  the  second  and
the  last  syllable  in  addition  to  the  first :  the  intermediate
syllables,  on  the  other  hand,  invariably  require  many  repetitions,
as  already  said,  before  the  whole  line  is  correctly  '  learnt.'  And
yet  all  these  syllables  can — for  a  while — be  distinctly  recognised
long  before  they  can  be  directly  recalled.  So  they  are  said  to
remain  'below  the  threshold  of  reproduction,' to  which,  however,
every  fresh  repetition  brings  them  nearer,  till  at  length  they  are
above  it.  But  while  still  subliminal  they  prove  to  be  more  or
less  associated,  for  the  mention  of  one  of  these  syllables  will
often  ensure  not  merely  its  own  recognition  but  also  the  repro-
duction of  the  next.  How  is  it  that  uniform  attention  on  the
subject  side  leads  to  so  much  objective  diversity?  In  dealing
with  the  middle  syllables  attention — though  its  'amount'  be
uniform — is  distributed  differently  from  what  it  is  in  the  case
of  the  two  end  syllables.  With  these  there  is  only  one  thing
to  do — either  to  receive  the  new  or  to  retain  the  old ;  in  the
middle  of  the  line  both  these  things  have  to  be  done,  and  neither
is  done  so  effectually.  Thus  the  initial  syllables — which  receive
more  undivided  attention — are  more  deeply  'impressed,'  while  the
final — the  attention  to  which,  is  not  so  immediately  disturbed1 —
are  'impressed'  for  longer,  than  the  middle  syllables.

2.  (a)  On  relearning  a  line  after  an  interval  of  twenty-four
hours  Ebbinghaus  found  in  the  case  of  the  same  experiments

start  with  their  attention  fully  concentrated.  Some  persons  naturally  do  this,  many
do  not ;  the  experimenter  has  therefore  to  take  special  precautions  to  secure  as  much
uniformity  as  he  can  in  this  respect.  Cf.  W.  G.  Smith,  "The  Place  of  Repetition  in
Memory,"  Psychological  Rev.  iii.  (1896),  pp.  20  ff.  The  figures  given  are  unquestion-
ably low,  partly,  as  the  writer  points  out,  in  consequence  of  the  method  employed,
but  partly,  as  his  detailed  tables  shew,  in  consequence  of  the  lax  attention  of  three  out
of  his  eight  subjects.  Cf.  too  Lipmann,  Zeitschr.  f.  Psych,  xxxv.  (1904),  p.  213;
Witasek,  ibid.  xliv.  (1907),  p.  247  ;  Reuther,  Psych.  Studien,  i.  (1906),  Plates  i
and  2.

1  The  pause  between  two  lines  being  of  much  greater  length  than  the  interval
between  two  syllables.

w.  p.  15


226 Memorising,  Rhythmizing  and  Reading  [CH.  ix,  §  i

that  there  was  an  average  saving  of  one  repetition  for  every
three  made  the  day  before.  A  line  of  16  syllables,  for  example,
required  some  30  repetitions,  and  could  then  be  said  off  correctly.
If  only  8  repetitions  were  taken  at  first,  the  line  being  'under-
learnt,'  it  probably  appeared  quite  strange  the  next  day,  yet  the
proportional  saving  was  no  less.  On  the  other  hand,  if  an
additional  30  repetitions  followed  immediately  on  the  first,  the
line  being  '  doubly  learnt/  in  spite  of  the  familiarity  next  day
apparent,  the  proportional  saving  was  no  greater.  We  are  so  far
led  to  infer  that  the  stronger  associations  effected  by  many
repetitions  at  one  time  fall  off  more  rapidly  than  the  weaker
associations  effected  by  fewer  repetitions  at  one  time.  .Herbart
in  his  '  psychical  dynamics  ' — influenced  probably  by  physical
analogies — conjectured  that  the  'sinking'  or  'inhibition'  of  pre-
sentations generally  was  proportional  to  their  intensity;  the  less
there  was  to  sink,  the  slower  the  sinking  became.  Recent
experiments  certainly  point  in  this  direction,  (b)  As  to  reten-
tion as  a  function  of  the  time — we  all  know  that  memories  fade
with  time,  but  not  at  what  precise  rate.  Ebbinghaus,  by  a  series
of  prolonged  experiments,  ascertained  the  rate  to  be  propor-
tional to  the  logarithm  of  the  time — a  result  already  implied  in
that  connecting  retention  and  intensity,  as  Herbart  assumed  ;
albeit  in  inquiries  of  this  kind  independent  confirmation  is
always  of  value.

3.  Had  the  proportional  saving  just  described  held  good
indefinitely,  some  100  repetitions  of  the  16  syllables  at  one  time
should  have  dispensed  with  any  further  repetition  twenty-four
hours  afterwards ;  whereas,  in  fact,  this  result  seemed  never
attainable.  Beyond  a  certain  degree  of  accumulation,  an  ever-
diminishing  return  was  manifest,  and  that  apparently  short  of
the  stage  at  which  exhaustion  of  attention  began  to  be  felt.
But,  contrariwise,  when  the  repetitions  were  distributed  over
several  days,  an  ever-increasing  efficiency  was  then  the  result.
Thus,  for  Ebbinghaus,  38  repetitions  spread  over  three  days  were
as  effective  as  68  taken  together.  The  results  of  careful  experi-
ments by  Jost  with  two  different  subjects,  using  G.  E.  Miiller's
'  method  of  scoring '  (to  be  described  later  on),  are  still  more
conclusive1.  Comparing  8  repetitions  on  three  successive  days

1  A.  Jost,  "  Die  Assoziationsfestigkeit  in  ihrer  Abhangigkeit  von  der  Verteilung
der  Wiederholungen,"  Zcitschr.f.  Psych,  xiv.  (1897),  pp.  436  ff.


CH.  ix,  §  2]  Rhythmizing  227

with  4  repetitions  on  six,  and  2  on  twelve,  the  efficiencies,
tested  twenty-four  hours  later,  were  respectively  as  11*5,  35,  and
54 ;  and  probably,  as  Jost  surmises,  the  effect  of  the  maximum
distribution — single  '  repetition  '  on  twenty-four  successive  days
— would  have  been  more  advantageous  still,  securing  in  fact  the
superiority  of  a  first  impression  (cf.  I,  above)  on  every  occasion.
This  result  again,  is  in  part  explained  by  the  law  of  sinking
already  found.  For  if  the  sinking  were  simply  proportional  to
the  time,  or  were  independent  of  the  intensity,  there  would  so
far  be  no  reason  why  one  mode  of  distributing  a  given  number
of  repetitions  should  be  more  economical  than  another.  There
is,  however,  another  reason  for  this  superiority,  less  clearly
implied,  to  which  we  shall  come  presently1.


Rhythmizing.

§  2.  Invariably,  and  almost  of  necessity,  a  more  or  less  com-
plex rhythmical  articulation  becomes  apparent  as  the  syllables
are  repeated,  even  when — as  in  the  improved  methods  of
G.  E.  Miiller  and  his  collaborateurs — they  are  presented  singly
and  at  regular  intervals.  A  series  of  twelve  syllables,  for
example,  would  be  connected  into  six  trochees,  with  a  caesura
in  the  middle  of  the  verse ;  while  in  each  half  of  it  the  first,  and
— somewhat  more — the  last,  of  the  accented  syllables  would  be
specially  emphasized  ;  thus  :

bdm  fis | lup  tol | gen  ker  ||  dub  naf | mfs  pon | sdv  nlz

In  trying  to  suppress  this  tendency  and  to  repeat  the  syllables
in  a  monotonous,  staccato  fashion,  just  as  they  were  presented,
the  tempo,  though  really  unchanged,  seemed  to  be  distinctly
quickened, a  consequence,  doubtless,  of  the  greater  effort  involved.
Moreover,  the  attempt,  which  was  seldom  successful,  about
doubled  the  number  of  repetitions  required  for  learning  off,
thereby  shewing  how  much  is  gained  by  this  psychical  organiza-
tion of  disconnected  material.  But  the  gain  thus  ensured  was
manifest  in  other  ways.  Each  foot,  whether  dissyllabic  or
trisyllabic,  became  a  new  complex  unit,  the  elements  to  be
connected  by  successive  association  being  thereby  reduced  to  a
half  or  a  third,  and  the  whole  line  seemingly  shortened.  The

1  Cf.  §  6  below,  p.  240.

15—2


228 Memorising,  Rhythmizing  and  Reading  [CH.  ix,  §  2

varied  intonation,  again,  helped  to  fix  the  place  of  each  foot  in
the  verse,  thus  further  facilitating  the  mind's  survey  of  the
whole.  Such  a  transformation  can  hardly  be  accounted  for  so
long  as  retention  and  association  are  regarded  as  merely
mechanical  and  passive  processes.

Psychical  rhythm,  upon  which  we  here  touch,  has  also  been
experimentally  investigated  at  great  length,  alike  in  its  physio-
logical, psychological  and  aesthetical  aspects.  The  topic  is  far
too  intricate  and  unsettled  for  discussion  here,  yet  two  or  three
points  may  be  noted  in  passing.  We  are  not  specially  concerned
with  objective  rhythms,  recurring  series  of  impressions,  that  is  to
say,  in  which  there  are  actually  periodic  variations  of  intensity,
interval  and  the  like.  What  is  remarkable  is  that  even  a  perfectly
regular  succession  of  sounds  (or  touches),  qualitatively  and  quanti-
tatively all  alike,  a  series  therefore  devoid  of  all  objective  rhythm,
is  nevertheless  apprehended  by  most  people  as  rhythmically
grouped — provided  the  rate  lies  between  the  limits  of  about
O'8"  and  O'I4".  The  slower  of  these  rates  leads  to  simple  groups
of  two,  replaced  by  groups  of  four  or  eight  as  the  rate  increases ;
groups  of  three  and  six  also  occur,  though  less  frequently.  The
average  duration  of  the  groups,  whether  these  are  large  or  small,
is  comparatively  constant,  ranging  between  a  length  of  about
i'6"  for  2-groups  and  about  ri6"  for  8-groups.  With  slower
rates  there  was  no  grouping  at  all  and  with  faster  rates  '  simply
a  periodic  intensive  change  in  the  series1.'  A  close  connexion
of  rhythm  with  the  normal  tempo  of  attention  seems  thus  clearly
indicated.

The  subject  usually  keeps  time  by  taps,  nods  or  other  accom-
panying movements.  The  pulse  and  respiration  are  also  impli-
cated. These  organic  rhythms  have  even  been  regarded  as  the
prime  source  of  all  psychical  rhythm  and  of  its  manifold  aesthetic
effects.  Some  connexion  there  is  unquestionably.  As  the  decimal
system  corresponds  to  our  possession  of  ten  fingers,  and  our
movements  to  the  structure  of  our  limbs,  so  here  we  may  assume
that  physiological  processes  fix  the  limits  within  which  psychical
rhythm  is  possible,  but  yet  may  be  as  little  an  adequate  cause  of
it  or  its  developments  as  fingers  are  of  arithmetic,  or  legs  of
an  Irish  jig.  In  motor  rhythms,  such  as  the  last,  the  initiative
is  obviously  psychical,  and  the  respiratory  and  other  periodic

1  Cf.  Bolton's  paper  (cited  on  the  next  page),  pp.  214  f.


CH.  ix,  §  2]  Rhythmizing  229

organic  processes  simply  follow  suit.  And  even  sensory  rhythms
can  often  be  varied  at  the  subject's  own  choice,  or  on  the
suggestion  of  another ;  and  then  again  the  breathing  may  be
altered  in  consequence.  Familiar  instances  of  such  procedure
are  to  be  found  in  the  'tunes'  so  readily  attributed  to  the  ticking
of  a  clock,  the  puff  of  a  locomotive,  the  churning  of  a  steamer's
screw,  and  the  like.

Psychical  rhythm,  then,  we  may  conclude,  is  due  to  attention
or  apperception,  but  the  conditions  determining  this  are  many,
and  their  relations  very  complex.  If  the  presentations  to  be
'  rhythmized  '  (the  Rhythmizomena,  as  the  Germans  say)  succeed
each  other  slowly,  the  length  (or  shall  we  say  the  breadth  ?)  of
the  '  psychical  present '  tells  one  way  :  the  first  impression  is
nearer  the  threshold  when  the  third  appears.  If  they  arrive
rapidly,  their  intensity  and  duration  and  the  span  of  prehension
tell  another  way  ;  for  it  is  essential  that  they  retain  their  individual
distinctness,  and  only  so  many  can  be  grasped  at  once.  But  if
the  series  continue  long  enough,  or  be  frequently  experienced,
sub-groups  may  be  treated  as  individuals ;  and  indeed  till  some
facility  is  acquired,  the  subject  attending  is  aware  of  no  rhythm.
In  the  act  of  attention  itself  there  are  phases,  in  so  far  as  expec-
tation involves  preadjustment  to  what  is  coming :  usually  the
first  members  of  a  tact  are  predominant,  and  the  rhythm  tends  to
'  fall ' ;  several  alternations  of  accent  within  a  complex  rhythmic
whole  are  of  course  still  compatible  with  this.  But  it  is  important
to  note  that,  whether  simple  or  complex,  the  rhythm  is  an  intuited
unity  as  truly  as  a  geometrical  figure  may  be.  Unlike  a  geo-
metrical figure,  however,  it  rarely  or  never  has  symmetry.  We
cannot  reverse  a  tune  and  obtain  an  effect  comparable  with  that
obtained  by  reprinting  the  score  backwards  in  line  with  the
original.  We  now  pass  to  a  question  in  which  the  psychological
bearing  of  this  fact  becomes  apparent1.

But  first  a  new  method  of  dealing  with  memory- problems
must  be  mentioned,  in  which  the  connexion  between  rhythmizing

1  The  following  are  among  the  more  important  papers  on  rhythm :  T.  L.  Bolton,
"Rhythm,"  Am.  Journ.  of  Psychology,  vi.  (1893),  pp.  145  ff.;  E.  E.  Meumann,
"  Untersuchungen  z.  Psychologic  u.  Aesthetik  des  Rhythmus,"  Phil.  Studien  (1894),
x.  249 ff.,  393  ff.;  M.  K.  Smith,  "Rhythmus  und  Arbeit,"  Phil.  Studien  (1900),
xvi.  71  ff.  197  ff.;  Arbeit  und  Rhythmus  (1899),  by  K.  Bucher,  a  well-known
economist,  bringing  out  the  teleological  aspects  of  rhythm ;  K.  Koffke,  "  Exp.  Unter-
suchungen z.  Lehre  v.  Rhythmus,"  Zeitschr.  f.  Psych.  (1909),  pp.  i  ff.


230 Memorising,  Rhythmizing  and  Reading  [CH.  ix,  §  2

and  memorising  has  been  turned  to  account  by  the  Gottingen
psychologists.  The  method  of  Ebbinghaus  consisted  in — at
least,  it  depended  on — ascertaining  the  repetitions  saved  in  con-
sequence of  previous  repetitions,  when  the  verse  perfectly  learnt
before,  was  relearnt  some  fixed  time  later.  Hence  this  method
is  called  the  learning  method  or  the  method  of  saving.  But  now,
using  verses  in  trochaic  measure,  let  the  subject,  a  given  time
after  a  fixed  number  of  repetitions  (insufficient  for  perfect  repro-
duction)be  confronted  with  one  of  the  accented  syllables ;  then  let
him  be  asked  to  name  the  unaccented  syllable  that  belongs  to
it.  He  will  answer  sometimes  rightly,  sometimes  wrongly,  and
sometimes  be  unable  to  answer  at  all.  This,  the  new  method,
is  therefore  named  die  Treffermethode,  the  method  of '  shots,'  or,
as  it  has  been  called,  the  scoring  method.  It  enables  the  experi-
menter to  obtain  far  more  insight  into  details  than  was  possible
before,  for  the  '  misses '  as  well  as  the  '  hits '  are  instructive.
Moreover,  by  measuring  the  time  of  each  answer  (Trefferzeit]
and  comparing  these  times  together,  much  can  be  learnt.  In
stronger  or  more  recent  associations,  for  example,  the  answers
are  made  quicker  than  in  weaker  or  older  ones.

'  Regressive  Association'

§  3.  Does  association  work  forwards  only  or  does  it  work
backwards  also,  as  the  middle  link  of  a  chain,  when  lifted,  raises
the  contiguous  links  on  either  side  of  it  ?  This  is  the  question
mentioned  above  to  which  we  now  pass,  and  it  is  one  of  first-
rate  importance.  For  empirical  psychology  must  be  radically
wrong,  if  it  be  a  fact  that — even  though  attention  only  moves
forwards — association  may  nevertheless  '  run  backwards,'  as  the
Germans  say.  Such  is  certainly  not  the  case  when  the  forward
direction  makes  sense,  but  with  nonsense  verses,  if  the  mechani-
cal analogy  is  a  sound  one,  such  reversal  might  be  expected.
For  here  there  are  none  of  the  '  obstructing  associations  '  which
'rhyme  and  reason'  imply;  and  Ebbinghaus  actually  found  in
relearning  a  verse  backwards  that  there  was  a  saving  of  i2'^.°/Q
of  the  time  originally  taken  up  in  learning  it  forwards.  Even
when  relearning  backwards  and  skipping  one  syllable,  the  order
of  syllables,  that  is  to  say,  being  16,  14,  12. ..2,  15,  13,  H...I,
Ebbinghaus  found  a  saving  of  5  %.  But  the  number  of  his


CH.  ix,  §  3] ' Regressive  Association'  231

experiments  in  this  case  (four)  was  too  few  to  give  this  result
much  value,  as  he  fully  admits.  The  variation  in  the  time
saved  was  also  in  both  cases  suspiciously  great,  ranging  between
8"  and  236"  for  mere  reversal,  and  between  15"  and  91"  for
reversal  with  omission  of  alternate  syllables.  Still  these  experi-
ments as  a  whole  might  incline  us  to  suppose  that  association
— left  to  itself,  so  to  say — can  work  in  both  directions,  though
the  connexions  backwards  are  considerably  weaker.  But  if  so,
the  associations  both  ways  should  be  alike  at  least  in  form —
continuous,  that  is  to  say,  backwards,  d  c  b  a,  as  well  as  for-
wards, abed.  In  that  case,  however,  d  would  revive  c  more
frequently  than  b,  and  b  more  frequently  than  a.  Such  a
connexion  between  strength  of  association  and  proximity  is
invariable  in  so-called  '  mediate  association '  when  the  direction
is  forwards.

In  favour  of  '  regressive  association '  there  is,  in  fact,  no
consistent  evidence  forthcoming.  Quite  the  contrary.  For
example,  in  two  or  three  hundred  experiments  by  Miiller  and
Pilzecker,  verses  of  twelve  syllables  were  repeated  a  set  number
of  times  in  anapaestic  measure — accented,  that  is  to  say,  on  the
3rd,  6th,  9th  and  I2th.  After  a  fixed  interval  the  subject,
confronted  with  one  of  the  accented  syllables,  mentioned  any
of  the  other  syllables  which  he  called  to  mind.  Now  the  cases
in  which  the  second  syllable  of  a  foot  (that  immediately  pre-
ceding) was  revived  were  only  about  half  as  frequent  as  those
in  which  the  first  syllable  of  a  foot  (the  next  but  one  preceding)
was  revived,  not  more  frequent,  as  we  should  naturally  have
expected.  Moreover  the  scoring  time  ( Trefferzeit}  for  the  first
but  remoter  syllable  was  shorter  than  that  for  the  second  and
nearer1.  Such  results  are  incompatible  with  the  theory  of  con-
tinuous backward  association,  but  they  are  readily  explained  by
the  fact  that  the  group  of  three  syllables  had  become  one  complex
whole :  it  was  a  single  foot  in  a  rhythm.  Hence  the  tendency
to  reinstate  the  initial  member  of  the  group  was  stronger
than  that  to  reinstate  the  middle*.  The  saving  effected  in
Ebbinghaus's  experiment  is  also  thus  explained.  In  short,  the
conclusion  to  which  these  results  seem  to  point  is  that  they

1  Miiller  and  Pilzecker,  "  Experimentelle.Beitrage  zur  Lehre  von  Gedachtniss,"
Zeitschr.  f.  Psych.,  Erganzungsband  i.  (1900),  §  39.
1  Cf.  above,  §  i,  p.  225.


232 Memorising,  Rhythmizing  and  Reading  [CH.  ix,  §  3

immediately  involve  only  relations  of  coexistence.  With  temporal
order  either  forwards  or  backwards  they  are  not  concerned:  the
term  'regressive  association1'  is  thus  inappropriate.  They  seem
to  be  cases  of  redintegration  not  of  pure  association  at  all2.

Unfortunately,  beside  the  scanty  experiments  of  Ebbinghaus
just  mentioned  there  are  no  others  specially  devoted  to  this
problem.  Miiller  and  Pilzecker,  however,  bring  together  what
they  regard  as  conclusive  evidence  of  '  genuine  regressive  asso-
ciation '  incidentally  furnished  by  some  of  their  experiments*.
A  large  part  of  this  evidence  is  derived  from  the  '  misses '  or
'  false  cases '  yielded  by  the  scoring  method  as  above  described.
A  greater  number  of  these  wrong  answers,  that  is  to  say,  than
chance  would  '  explain,'  consisted  in  naming  not  the  syllable
following  the  stimulus-word  but  the  syllable  preceding  it.  In
one  series  of  experiments  where  chance  would  account  for  only
2*3  cases  there  were  actually  7  :  in  another  the  corresponding
numbers  were  I  and  5.  Further  evidence  is  adduced  from
experiments  in  which  a  different  method  was  used.  The  sub-
ject, confronted  with  an  accented  syllable,  instead  of  being
directed  to  name  only  the  following  syllable  or  what  he  took  to
be  such,  was  left  free  to  name  whatever  syllable  the  stimulus-
word  first  evoked  and  to  add  a  second,  if  such  occurred.  This
method,  calling  for  "free  associations,'  required,  as  it  turned  out,
greater  psychological  savoir  faire  on  the  part  of  the  subject
than  the  old  one  restricted  to  '  intentional  associations.'  In
fact  of  the  only  two  series  of  experiments  dealing  at  all  directly
with  regressive  association — in  both  of  which  this  method  was
adopted — one  was  disallowed  because  of  the  subject's  incom-
petence; and  even  the  subject  of  the  other  appears  to  have  been
new  to  the  work.  Anyhow  the  summary  of  his  answers  is  as
follows  (the  lines  consisting  of  twelve  syllables  in  trochaic
measure):  An  accented  syllable  being  presented,  the  following,
i.e.  the  unaccented  syllable  of  the  same  foot,  was  named  first  in
50  %  of  the  cases.  The  preceding  syllable,  i.e.  the  unaccented

1  Cf.  ch.  vii,  §  3.

2  With  this  Miiller  and  Schumann  fully  agree :  cf.  their  "  Experimented  Beitrage
zur  Untersuchung  des  Gedachtnisses, "  Zeitschr.  f.  Psych,  vi.  (1894),  p.  308  fin. Cf.
also  A.  Wreschner,  "Die  Reproduction  und  Assoziation  von  Vorstellungen,"  op.  cit,
Erganzungsband  iii.  (1907),  p.  578.

1  Cf.  op.  cit.  §  41,  pp.  207-12.


CH.  ix,  §  3] 'Regressive  Association'  233

syllable  of  the  previous  foot,  was  named  first  in  4  %  of  the  cases
and  second  in  6  %  or  only  10  %  in  all.  The  remaining  (9)
syllables  together  secured  but  1 3  °/Q  of  the  answers.  Clearly
then  both  methods  bring  to  light  some  sort  of  connexion  back-
wards as  well  as  forwards :  not  simply  from  a  to  b  but  also  from
b  to  a.  But  is  the  latter  genuine  regressive  association  ?  An
examination  of  the  whole  situation  seems  to  render  such  an
interpretation  exceedingly  doubtful.

Well,  in  the  first  place  the  almost  invariable  recency  of  this
so-called  association  is  remarkable.  In  the  experiments  with
'  free  association '  just  described  the  testing  began  3'  after  the
line  had  been  learnt,  and  the  effect  of  longer  intervals  was  not
investigated.  But  in  the  earlier  experiments,  where  the  subject
was  restricted  to  '  intentional  association '  and  the  relevant  cases
were  all  misses,  it  was  found  that  in  one  series  of  48  experiments
in  which  the  stimulus-words  were  shewn  20"  after  the  reading,
there  were  1 5  cases  in  which  the  preceding  syllable  was  named
in  mistake :  in  two  other  series  of  216  experiments  in  all,  tested
after  an  interval  of  24  hours,  there  was  only  one  such  case.

In  the  second  place,  in  consequence  of  this  recency,  the  line  as
a  whole  was  in  a  state  of  '  preparation '  (Bereitschaff)  such  that
no  syllable  was  far  from  the  threshold  of  consciousness.  In
the  terminology  of  the  writers  their  Perseverationstendenz,  or
readiness  to  reappear,  was  still  so  strong  that  with  every  syllable
a  very  slight  reinforcement  of  this  tendency  sufficed  for  the
syllable's  actual  reproduction1.  Further  the  subject  frequently
knew  the  place  of  the  presented  syllable  in  the  line,  and  this
knowledge  often  enabled  him  to  find  the  syllable  wanted.  Some-
times, when  the  whole  line  was  '  firmly  imprinted  '  he  would  run
through  it  as  far  as  the  presented  syllable,  the  accumulating
efficiency  of  revival  due  to  the  whole  securing  what  the  single
syllable  could  not  effect2.  This  resource  would  obviously  be
specially  available  where,  as  in  the  cases  we  are  considering,  the
repetitions  had  all  been  recent.

In  the  third  place  there  were  signs  in  all  these  cases  of  a
certain  embarrassment  or  contretemps  akin  more  or  less  to  what
the  writers  happily  styled  Verlegenheitsnennungen.  Thus,  in  the

1  Cf.  op.  dt.  p.  66.

a  Op.  cit.  p.  16. Cf.  also  F.  Arnold,  "The  Initial  Tendency  in  Ideal  Revival,"
Am.  Jl.  of  Psych,  xviii,  1907,  pp.  339  ff.


234 Memorising,  Rhythmizing  and  Reading  [CH.  ix,  §  3

experiments  calling  for  'free  associations,'  the  50%  of  cases  in
which  the  syllable  succeeding  the  one  presented  was  returned
first  had  an  average  scoring  time  (T)  of  31000-;  in  the  4%
of  cases  in  which  the  preceding  syllable  was  returned  first  this  T
was  6500  and  in  the  13  °/o  of  other  cases  it  was  longer  still.  In
that  extra  three  and  a  half  seconds  we  may  reasonably  assume
that  manifold  interchanges,  sometimes  antagonistic,  sometimes
complementary,  occurred  between  the  '  perseveration-tendencies  '
of  some  of  the  eleven  barely  subliminal  syllables,  all  of  them,
in  consequence  of  their  recent  repeated  appearances  within  the
focus  of  consciousness,  integrated  into  a  more  or  less  compact
whole.  At  all  events  in  the  experiments  calling  for  '  intentional
associations  '  where  the  answers  were  all  wrong,  evidence  of  such
varied  interplay  is  furnished  abundantly  by  the  analysis  of  such
cases  which  the  authors  provide1.  The  scoring  time  in  these
cases,  we  may  reasonably  assume,  was  as  a  rule  longer  than
it  was  in  the  cases  where  the  answer  was  right.

Taking  all  the  circumstances  concerned  into  account,  then,
we  may  still  doubt  whether  the  new  facts  brought  forward  in  the
masterly  investigations  of  Miiller  and  Pilzecker  place  the  exist-
ence of  a  genuine  reversal  of  the  temporal  order,  in  which
association  is  first  effected,  beyond  question.  The  interpreta-
tion advocated  above  when  dealing  with  the  facts  advanced  by
Ebbinghaus,  seems  here  also  the  simplest  and  best.  In  both  in-
stances we  are  concerned  not  with  a  series  but  with  a  tout  ensemble
— the  foot  in  the  one  case,  the  line  in  the  other.  The  very  same
tendency  to  unify  and  organize  which  has  made  out  of  two
syllables  a  single  foot  has  made  out  of  six  feet  a  line :  in  both
cases  the  syllables,  in  addition  to  their  originally  temporal  order,
have  acquired  the  relation  of  part  to  part  in  a  coexistent  whole  ;
they  have  added  to  the  seriality  of  the  memory-thread  the  higher
dimensions  of  the  ideational  continuum.  This  way  of  interpret-
ing the  facts  will  account  for  the  comparative  frequency  of  the
wrong  answers  and  the  free  associations  that  seem  at  first  to
point  to  genuine  regressive  association.  When,  for  some  reason,
what  we  may  call  the  normal  response  to  the  stimulus-syllable
fails  and  the  consequent  perplexity  and  delay  brings  the  line  as
a  whole  into  greater  clearness,  the  probability  is  that  the  parts
specially  related  to  the  given  syllable  will  be  quickened  the
1  Cf.  op,  dt.  §§  28,  45-7.


CH.  ix,  §  4]  ' Mediate  Association'  235

most,  and  among  these,  when  the  succeeding  syllable  fails,  the
preceding  syllable  stands  next1.

It  may  fairly  be  said  that  the  whole  difference  between  the
interpretation  here  expounded  and  that  of  Miiller  and  Pilzecker
turns  simply  on  the  fact  that  they  sometimes  give  to  '  asso-
ciation '  a  wider  meaning.  But  that  wider  meaning,  it  is  here
contended,  implies  a  complex  of  associations  or  what  is  better
termed  redintegration.


' Mediate  Association'

§  4.  A  similar  examination  of  the  evidence  advanced  in
favour  of  what  is  called  '  mediate  association '  seems  to  justify
the  same  interpretation  of  the  facts.  But  '  mediate  association '
is  used  in  two  senses.  First,  and  more  commonly,  it  is  used  of
cases  in  which  prima  facie  there  is  no  association  at  all,  where,
that  is  to  say,  an  idea  seems  to  '  rise  freely '  into  consciousness
— to  use  Herbart's  phrase — though  no  mediating  suggestion
whatever  is  apparent.  Of  such  an  experience  we  have  the  stock
instance  of  Hamilton,  when,  thinking  of  Ben  Lomond,  "this
thought  was  immediately  followed  by  the  thought  of  the  Prussian
system  of  education."  The  'intermediate  and  unawakened  links'
that  explained  '  the  anomaly '  he  succeeded  in  tracing  to  a  con-
versation about  Prussian  schools  between  himself  and  a  certain
German  whom  he  chanced  to  meet  on  his  last  visit  to  the  moun-
tain. This  and  like  instances,  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  were
really  cases  of  association,  not  of  an  idea  reviving  spontaneously
as  the  Herbartians  maintained.  There  is  then  no  anomaly  about
them  unless  it  be  this  absence  of  direct  evidence.  But,  where
not  even  indirect  evidence  is  forthcoming,  it  would  be  rash  too
confidently  to  assert  the  impossibility  of  any  spontaneous  revival
of  a  presentation  (freisteigende  Vorstellung\  especially  so  in
view  of  such  facts  as  '  recurrent  sensations2,'  '  perseveration,'  and

1  The  characteristic  of  the  call  for  free  association  is  that  the  subject  is  directed  to
the  line  as  a  whole,  and  we  have  seen  already  that  when  the  first  or  accentuated
syllable  of  a  foot  was  given  the  last  syllable  of  the  preceding  foot  was  named  in  io°/0
of  the  cases.  It  was  also  found  that  when  the  second  or  unaccented  syllable  was  named
the  first  syllable  of  the  next  foot  was  named  in  9  °/0  of  all  the  cases.  Two  comparable
adjacencies  had  comparable  strengths.

3  Cf.  ch.  vii,  §  3.


236 Memorising,  Rhythmizing  and  Reading  [CH.  ix,  §  4

delirium.  Nevertheless  if  Herbart's  '  spontaneous  revival '  or
G.  E.  Miiller's  'perseveration'  were  to  be  taken  so  'atomistically'
as  to  imply  the  complete  rupture  of  the  continuity  of  the
memory-thread  or  the  ideational  tissue,  it  would  be  still  more
rash  to  assert  that  it  was  possible.  But  the  mediate  association
we  have  here  specially  to  consider  is  quite  different  from  all  this.
In  relearning  verses  forwards  but  omitting  alternate  syllables
Ebbinghaus  found  a  saving  in  time  of  IO'8% ;  by  omitting
two  syllables,  the  saving  effected  was  7'O%;  and  by  omitting
three,  5'8%«  This  he  explained  by  assuming  that  in  memo-
rising a  series  a  b  c  d  e  ...  there  was  formed  not  only  a  'prin-
cipal' or  primary  association  of  each  term  with  its  immediate
successor,  of  a  with  b,  of  b  with  c,  &c.,  but  also  subsidiary  or
mediate  associations  of  each  term  with  all  the  rest,  of  a  with  c,
a  with  d,  &c. ;  likewise  of  b  with  d,  b  with  e,  and  so  on.  To
these  mediate  associations  he  referred  the  savings  obtained
on  relearning — the  more  distant  associations  being  naturally
the  weaker  and  the  saving  therefore  less.  Such  a  series  he
rightly  regarded  as  involving  not  merely  a  memory-thread  but
also  an  ideational  '  plexus.'  But  the  two,  as  we  have  seen,  are
of  different  dimensions.

The  simpler  process,  as  such,  cannot  then  yield  the  more
complex  any  more  than  a  spinning  wheel  can  do  the  work  of  a
loom.  Again  mediate  connexion  between  the  members  of  the
linear  series  is,  of  course,  implied  in  its  continuity,  but  this
connexion  presupposes  association  and  cannot  therefore  con-
stitute it.  When  the  primary  association  of  a  with  b  begins,
there  can  be  no  subsidiary  association  of  a  with  c  or  d,  or  any
subsequent  member,  for  these  members  are  not  yet  present.
When  this  process  is  merely  repeated,  we  can  readily  understand
that  the  '  thread '  is  strengthened,  but  not  that  a  whole  tissue
consisting  of  distinct  threads  begins  to  be  formed  'associating
every  term  with  every  other ' — a  tissue,  that  is  to  say,  which  in  a
verse  of  sixteen  syllables  would  involve  105  subsidiary  associa-
tions altogether  in  the  forward  direction  alone  !  But  after  several
repetitions,  when  the  primary  associations  have  begun  to  be  fami-
liar, the  subject's  attitude  may  change;  and  it  does,  and  does  so
with  some  persons  sooner  and  more  frequently  than  with  others.
It  is  then  possible  to  note  various  relations  between  the  members
of  the  series  beside  their  serial  order.  The  tendency  to  do  this


CH.  ix,  §  4]  'Mediate  Association'  237

distinguishes  what  Kant  called  the  'judicious'  from  the  merely
'  mechanical '  memory.  These  two  processes  are  not  only
distinct ;  they  are  also  incompatible,  in  so  far  as  an  increase  of
the  tempo,  which  favours  the  more  mechanical  process1,  is  a  bar
to  the  more  intellectual  one.  It  is  true  that  the  rate  of  learning
which  Ebbinghaus  found  'convenient'  was  an  unusually  rapid
one — 150  syllables  a  minute.  For  all  that,  he  could  more  than
double  it  when  learning  'sensible'  material  ;  so  that  at  his  usual
rate  there  would  be  time  for  side  glances  ;  and  in  fact  his
remarks  concerning  the  sources  of  error,  to  which  he  felt  liable,
shew  that  he  was  not  altogether  mechanically  absorbed2.

Indeed  the  ample  experimental  records  now  available  shew
unmistakably  that  even  the  least  intelligent  subjects  are  some-
thing more  than  mechanical  registers.  As  G.  E.  Miiller,  the
master  in  this  department  of  psychology,  has  said,  we  should
form  but  a  very  poor  idea  of  the  learning  process  if  we  assumed
that  no  associations  are  actually  effected  between  the  different
members  of  a  series  but  such  as  would  result  if  attention  were
confined  to  the  one  monotonous  routine  of  linking  item  to  item
as  each  filed  past.  "  The  subject's  activity  in  relation  to  the
series  to  be  learnt  displays  far  more  freedom  and  spontaneity
than  that."  But  the  point  is  that  unless  such  further  subjective
initiative  is  present  nothing  more  is  achieved.  As  the  result  of
that  initiative,  however,  a  supplementary  process  of  'interre-
lating' (Zuordnung)  comes  into  play,  whereby  "certain  elements
of  the  series,  standing  far  apart,  are  often  associated  together,
which  would  never  be  appreciably  related  at  all,  if  the  reading
were  nothing  but  an  uninterrupted  transition  from  one  item  to
the  next."  This  secondary  interrelating  is  the  distinguishing
feature  of  Kant's 'judicious  memorising '  and  implies  the  more
complex  process  of  redintegration.  We  may  conclude  then  by
saying  with  Miiller  that  for  experimental  psychology  it  "still
remains  an  open  question  how  far,  apart  from  all  interrelating,
direct  associations  between  the  mediate  members  of  a  series
can  be  formed8."  At  present  we  may  fairly  say  that  there  is  no
clear  evidence  for  such  '  mediate '  association,  as  Ebbinghaus

1  Cf.  Ebbinghaus,  Grundziige  der  Psychologie,  3rd  ed.  i.  672  f.

2  Ueber  das  Gedtifhtnis,  p.  58.

8  Cf.  G.  E.  Miiller,  "Zur  Analyse  der  Gedachtnistatigkeit  und  des  Vorstellungs-
verlauf,"  Zeitschr.f.  Psych.  Erganzungsband  v.  ister  Teil,  1911,  pp.  315-7.


238 Memorising,  Rhythmizing  and  Reading  [CH.  ix,  §  4

assumed,  but  rather  a  strong  presumption  on  general  grounds
against  it.

Reading.

§  5.  The  synthesis  or  integration  of  simple  linear  associations
into  complex  unities  of  higher  dimensions  might  be  fitly  called
the  principle  of  psychical  organization  par  excellence^.  We  have
appealed  to  it  incidentally  in  the  above  discussion  ;  but  now  we
have  in  the  recent  experimental  investigations  into  the  psychology
of  reading  a  favourable  opportunity  of  studying  it  directly  on  its
own  account.  For  this  process — unlike  the  earlier  processes  of
building  up  our  temporal  and  spatial  perception  and  our  intuition
of  real  things — falls  entirely  within  the  domain  of  social  inter-
course, and  is  therefore  throughout  amenable  to  observation  and
control.

The  earliest  stage  in  the  process  of  reading — that  of  learning
the  several  letters — may  be  here  regarded  as  merely  a  series  of
simple  assimilations2.  In  beginning  the  next  stage,  spelling,  the
child  at  first  takes  longer  to  recognise  a  monosyllable  than  to
recognise  a  letter ;  for  the  monosyllable  is  still  directly  appre-
hended as  a  series  of  two  or  more  letters.  But  after  sufficient
practice  a  short  word  is  recognised  directly  as  a  unity,  and  is
then  recognised  as  soon  as,  or  even  sooner  than,  a  single  letter.
But  a  word  of  three  or  four  syllables  may  still  have  to  be
painfully  spelled.  Presently,  however,  when  greater  fluency  is
attained,  it  is  found  that  a  passage  of  sense,  consisting  of  longer
but  fewer  words  is  read  more  quickly  and  easily  than  one  of
equal  length  consisting  entirely  of  monosyllables.  For  at  this
stage  words  are  the  units  attended  to,  not  syllables3.  Finally
we  come  to  read  not  by  an  almost  continuous  movement  of  the
eyes — as  is  generally  supposed — taking  in  syllable  by  syllable  or
even  word  by  word  ;  but  we  compass  a  whole  line  of  print  like
the  present  by  three  or  four  fixations  of  the  eye,  separated  by
pauses  too  brief  to  allow  of  the  recognition  of  each  separate
syllable.  When,  however,  this  is  requisite,  as  in  reading  nonsense

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  iii,  §  3.

2  The  letters,  that  is  to  say,  in  reading  apart  from  writing,  being  recognised  merely
as  wholes.

3  Cf.  M.  Beer,  "Die  Abhangigkeit  der  Lesezeit  von  psychologischen  und  sprach-
lichen  Faktoren,"  Zeitschr.  f.  Psychol.  Bd.  Ivi.  (1910),  pp.  271  ff.


CH.  ix,  §  5]  Reading  239

syllables  for  instance,  then  not  only  have  the  pauses  to  be
lengthened,  but  the  eye-stretches  must  be  shortened  as  well.  Yet
the  amount  of  print  actually  in  focus  and  so  distinctly  percep-
tible is  the  same  in  each  case.  In  reading  'sense'  then  a  portion
of  what  the  eye  takes  in  extends  beyond  the  focus  of  distinct
vision.  Like  the  single  letters  at  the  first,  several  words  or
syllables  at  the  last,  are  apprehended — in  virtue  of  their  general
form  or  of  a  few  salient  traits — as  a  single  whole.  Indeed  ade-
quate apprehension  of  this  sort,  in  the  case  of  a  coherent  context,
is  possible  when  its  distance  from  the  eye  exceeds  the  limits  of
exact  definition  altogether.  But  at  the  ordinary  range  of  reading,
when  a  portion  at  any  rate  of  what  the  coup  cTceil  takes  in  is
distinctly  seen,  more  is  read  and  more  quickly.  Here  the  part
in  the  margin  of  the  field  of  vision  is  usually  mainly  to  the  right
of  the  fixation  point,  shewing  the  influence  of  the  prior  context
in  extending  the  span  of  apprehension.

The  child  learning  to  read  begins  by  reading  aloud
syllable  by  syllable.  But  the  spoken  syllable  and  the  syllable
as  heard  are  already  integrated  into  one  complex  whole  :
the  new  task  then  is  simply  to  associate  this  whole  with  its
visual  symbols.  Both  for  articulation  and  for  audition,  a
series  of  syllables,  always  remains,  as  at  first,  a  temporal  series.
Vision,  however,  has  here  the  same  superiority  over  movement
and  hearing  as  it  has  elsewhere  over  movement  and  touch :  it
can  take  in  several  syllables  at  once,  although  they  can  be  heard
or  spoken  only  one  at  a  time.  At  first,  of  course,  this  superiority
does  not  count ;  but  eventually  it  becomes  easy  to  read  far  faster
than  one  can  speak,  faster  even  than  one  can  distinctly  hear.
There  is  evidence — perhaps  not  all  that  one  could  wish — to  shew
that  "  rapid  readers  not  only  do  their  work  in  less  time  but  do
superior  work.  They  retain  more  of  the  substance  of  what  is
read  than  do  slow  readers1."  No  doubt  because,  in  general,
they  concentrated  their  attention  more,  and  being  also  more
intelligent,  '  integrated  '  better  than  the  slower  readers.  Before
proceeding,  let  us  here  note  that  in  what  is  called  endophasia  or
'  internal  speech '  there  are  three  main  types  of  verbal  imagery,
the  motor,  the  auditory  and  the  visual :  words,  that  is  to  say,  are
'  mentally  '  spoken  or  heard  or  seen.  For  the  entirely  illiterate

1  Quantz, "Problems  in  the  Psychology  of  Reading,"  Psychological  Review —
Monograph  Supplements,  ii.  (1897),  p-  49-


240 Memorising,  Rhythmizing  and  Reading  [CH.  ix,  §  5

internal  speech  of  the  visual  sort  is,  of  course,  impossible ;  and  it
is,  in  fact,  usually  absent  in  most  people.  It  is  so  not  merely
because  the  race  as  a  whole,  and  they  as  individuals,  mastered
speech  before  beginning  to  read  at  all,  but  also  because  they
speak  so  much  oftener  than  they  read.  Usually  the  motor  and
the  auditory  type  are  combined,  the  dominance  of  the  motor
being  specially  apparent  in  the  reading  of  young  children  and
the  comparatively  illiterate,  who  either  speak  aloud  or  whisper
while  they  read;  but  this  trait  becomes  less  and  less  marked
with  increasing  culture.  Among  thoroughly  cultured  persons
a  few  cases  of  the  exclusively  visual  type  are  found  and  still
more  of  the  combined  visual-motor1.

It  seems  further  not  unlikely  that  as  moderate  practice
banishes  articulation  from  reading  and  as  frequent  reading
leads  to  an  increasing  prominence  of  visual  word-imagery,  both
audition  and  articulation  may  for  some  fade  out  more  or  less
entirely,  and  the  visual  word  alone  remain  prominent.  The  few
investigations  that  have  been  made  bear  out  this  conjecture:  the
fastest  readers  seem  to  be  visualisers2.  The  most  perfect  kind
of  integration  would  in  this  way  be  attained.  The  advantage
which  vision  secures  us  in  taking  in  the  tout  ensemble  of  things  it
seems  also  to  secure  in  dealing  with  thought  as  a  whole,  when
this  is  visualised  in  symbols.  Herein  perhaps  lies  the  secret  of
Bacon's  saying  that  writing  makes  an  exact  man,  for  in  setting
out  our  thoughts  in  black  and  white  we  secure  a  survey  of
them  that  internal  audition  alone  can  never  give  us.


APPENDIX
'Age'  and  'Strength'  of  Associations.

§  6.  A  somewhat  paradoxical  situation  is  brought  to  light  when
the  method  of  saving  and  the  method  of  scoring  are  used  together.
In  the  experiments  by  Jost,  mentioned  above3,  two  series  of  verses,
Si,  S*  were  repeated  thirty  times  ;  after  an  interval  of  twenty-four
hours  ^!  was  tested  by  the  first  method  and  S2  by  the  second.

1  Cf.  G.  Saint-Paul,  Le  langage  interieur,  1904,  pp.  200  f.

*  Cf.  W.  B.  Secor,  "Visual  Reading:  A  Study  in  Mental  Imagery,"  Am.  Jl.  of
Psych,  xi.  (1899),  pp.  225  ff. ;  Quantz,  op.  cit.  pp.  46  ff.
3  §  i,  p.  225.


CH.  ix,  §  6] 'Age  and  'Strength'  of  Associations 241

Two  new  series,  S3,  S4,  were  then  taken:  S3  was  repeated  four
times,  and  after  an  interval  of  a  minute  tested  by  the  first  method ;
St  was  then  repeated  in  like  manner,  and  tested  after  the  same
interval  by  the  second  method. This  procedure  was  renewed
day  after  day — in  varying  order — till  records  of  twenty  cases  of
both  old  and  new  series  tested  by  each  method  were  obtained.
It  was  then  found  (by  the  method  of  saving)  that  an  old  series
(an  Si)  required  on  an  average  5 '8 5  repetitions  for  relearning,  and
a  new  series  (an  S3)  9'6. But  (by  the  method  of  scoring)  it  was
found  that  a  new  series  (an  S4)  yielded  27  '  hits,'  with  an  average
time  of  about  i|  seconds  for  each,  while  an  old  series  (an  S2)
yielded  only  '9  '  hits/  with  an  average  time  of  4^  seconds  for
each. Thus  one  may  be  able  to  reproduce  relatively  little  of
a  given  subject-matter,  and  yet  require  only  a  few  repetitions  in
order  to  learn  it  off  anew  ;  on  the  other  hand,  one  may  know
relatively  much,  and  still  find  many  more  repetitions  requisite  for
such  complete  learning. The  'age'  of  the  associations  is  then
important. Other  things  being  equal,  we  may  conclude  that
each  fresh  repetition  effects  more  for  older  associations  than  for
more  recent  ones. It  might  be  supposed  that  the  strength  of
the  old  associations  was  more  uniform  and  on  the  average  greater
than  the  strength  of  the  new  ;  so  that  while  none  of  the  old  were
far  below  the  threshold,  few,  if  any,  were  above  it  ;  whereas  more
of  the  new  might  be  above  the  threshold  though  the  majority  had
lapsed  entirely. And  the  latter  would  certainly  be  the  case  if
the  subject  of  experiment  tried  to  make  sure  of  a  few  '  hits,'  and
paid  no  attention  to  the  rest  of  the  series. Due  care  was,  however,
taken  that  the  ends  of  the  experiment  should  not  in  this  way  be
defeated. Also, there is ample evidence to show that the
supposed  greater  uniformity  in  strength  of  old  associations  is
not,  in  fact,  the  rule, We  seem  left,  then,  to  conjecture  that  the
difference  is  the  effect  of  the  process  of  assimilation  working
subconsciously — that  psychical  aspect  of  nervous  growth  which
Professor  James  has  aptly  characterized  by  saying  that  "  we  learn
to  skate  in  summer  and  to  swim  in  winter." It  continually  happens
that  we  can  recognise  connexions  that  we  are  quite  unable  to
reproduce. To  the  diminished  '  strength '  of  an  association,  as
tested  by  the  method  of  scoring,  there  may  then  quite  well  be
an  equivalent  set-off  in  more  developed  assimilation. As  a  seed
germinates  it  has  less  latent  energy,  but  this  is  replaced  by  growth
w.  P.  16


242 Memorising,  Rhythmizing  and  Reading  [CH.  ix,  §  6

in  root  and  stem  :  similar  relations  may  obtain  when  an  old
association  is  said  merely  to  lose  '  strength.'  On  the  other  hand
— within  the  range  of  the  primary  memory-image — we  can  often
reproduce  what  after  a  longer  interval  we  should  fail  to  recognise.
We  seem  warranted,  then,  in  concluding  that  this  conception  of
'  association-strength '  so  freely  used  by  G.  E.  Miiller  and  his
co-workers,  requires  more  analysis  than  it  has  yet  received.  The
two  factors  which  their  methods  disclose  in  it  appear  to  confirm
the  distinction  we  have  already  made  between  impressions  and  free
ideas.  They  help  us  also  to  understand,  further,  the  superiority
of  distributed  over  cumulated  repetition,  of '  inwardly  digesting  '
over  '  cram1.'

1  There  is  a  most  interesting  article  by  P.  B.  Ballard  dealing  with  many  of  the
topics  of  this  chapter  that  I  have  unhappily  overlooked.  It  is  entitled  "  Obliviscence
and  Reminiscence";  see  British  //.  of  Psychology \  Monograph  Supplements,  ii.  1913.


CHAPTER  X

FEELING

Introductory.

§  I.  Such  summary  survey  of  the  more  elementary  facts  of
cognition,  as  our  plan  of  exposition  called  for,  is  here  at  an  end.
So  far  the  most  conspicuous  factors  at  work  have  been  those
concerned  in  the  formation  of  what  might  be  termed  the  idea-
tional  mechanism.  In  dealing  with  the  higher  processes  of
thought  we  shall  have  to  take  still  more  account  of  the  voluntary
activity,  which  we  have  seen  to  be  essential  even  in  the  lower
processes  of  perception  and  ideation,  and  also  of  the  part  played
by  language  in  perfecting  the  higher,  intellectual,  processes.  But
it  seems  preferable,  before  entering  upon  these  topics,  to  explore
also  the  affective  and  conative  constituents  of  mind  in  their  more
elementary  phases,  so  as  to  complete  in  outline  our  description
of  mind  below  what  we  may  call  the  stage  of  understanding  or
reason.

We  have  found  that  psychical  life  consists  in  the  main  of
a  continuous  alternation  of  predominantly  receptive  and  pre-
dominantly reactive  consciousness.  In  its  earliest  form  experience
is  simply  an  interplay  of  sensation  and  movement.  At  a  later
stage,  we  find  that  in  the  receptive  or  cognitive  phase  ideation
is  added  to  perception  ;  and  that  in  the  active  phase,  thought,
poetic  fancy,  &c. — or  the  voluntary  direction  and  control  of
the  ideational  trains — are  added  to  the  voluntary  direction  and
control  of  the  sense-organs  and  of  the  muscles.  At  this  higher
level  also  it  is  possible  that  either  form  of  receptive  conscious-
ness may  lead  to  either  form  of  active  :  sensations  may  lead
to  thought  rather  than  to  action  in  the  restricted  sense ;  and
ideas  apart  from  sensations  may  prompt  to  action  rather  than
to  thought.  There  is  a  further  complication  still :  not  only

1 6 — 2


244  Feeling  [CH.  x,  §  i

may  either  sensations  or  ideas  lead  to  either  bodily  or  mental
movements,  but  such  movements,  whether  of  mind  or  body,
may  simply  as  presentations  determine  other  movements  of
either  kind.  In  this  respect,  however,  movements  and  thoughts,
either  in  themselves  or  along  with  their  sensational  and  ideational
accompaniments,  may  be  regarded  as  pertaining  so  far  to  the
receptive  side  of  consciousness.  With  these  provisos,  then,  the
broad  generalisation  already  made1  may  hold,  viz.  that  receptive
states  lead  through  feeling  to  active  states,  and  that  those
which  are  neither  pleasant  nor  unpleasant,  that  neither  please
nor  displease,  meet  with  no  responsive  action.

But  at  the  outset  the  objection  must  be  met  that  presenta-
tions that  in  themselves  seem  to  be  purely  indifferent  lead
continually  to  very  energetic  action,  often  the  promptest  and
most  definite  action.  To  this  there  are  two  answers.  First,
on  the  higher  levels  of  psychical  life  presentations  that  may
be  indifferent  in  themselves  are  yet  often  indirectly  interesting
as  signs  of,  or  as  means  to,  other  presentations  that  are  directly
interesting.  It  is  enough  for  the  present,  therefore,  if  it  be  ad-
mitted that  all  such  indifferent  presentations  are  without  effect
as  often  as  they  are  not  instrumental  in  furthering  the  realisa-
tion of  some  desirable  end.  Secondly,  a  large  class  of  move-
ments— those  called  sensori-motor  and  ideo-motor — are  initiated
by  presentations  that  are  frequently,  it  must  be  allowed,  neither
pleasurable  nor  painful.  These,  however,  we  had  good  reason
just  now  to  think,  were  only  an  apparent  exception  to  the  prin-
ciple of  subjective  selection.  For  they  can  all  be  classed  among
instances  of  another  important  psychological  principle,  already
noticed,  which  we  shall  have  to  deal  with  more  fully  by  and
by.  This  principle  is,  that  voluntary  actions,  and  especially
such  as  either  only  avert  pain  or  are  merely  subsidiary  to
pleasure-giving  actions,  tend  at  length — as  the  effect  of  habit
in  the  individual  and  of  heredity  in  the  race — to  become
'secondarily  automatic2.'  Such  mechanical  or  instinctive  dex-
terities make  possible  a  more  efficient  use  of  present  energies
in  securing  pleasant  or  satisfying  experiences ;  and,  like  the  rings
of  former  growths  in  a  tree,  afford  a  basis  for  further  advance,  as
old  interests  pall  and  new  ones  present  themselves.  It  suffices

1  Cf.  ch.  ii,  §§  5,  6,  pp.  54  ff.

2  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  5,  p.  52;  and  below,  p.  249.


CH.  x,  §  2]  Inquiry  into  its  Causes  245

if  we may  suppose  that  all  such  movements  were  originally
initiated  by  feeling,  as  certainly  many  of  them  were.

Inquiry  into  its  Causes.

§  2.  Of  the  feeling  itself  that  intervenes  between  these  sen-
sory and  motor  presentations,  there  is  little  to  be  said.  The
chief  points  have  been  already  insisted  upon,  viz.  that  feeling
is  not  itself  a  presentation1,  but  a  purely  subjective  state;  is  at
once  the  effect  of  a  change  in  receptive  consciousness  and  the
cause  of  a  change  in  motor  consciousness.  Hence  its  continual
confusion  either  with  the  movements,  whether  ideational  or
muscular,  that  are  its  expression,  or  with  the  sensations  or
ideas  that  are  its  occasion.  For  feeling  as  such  is,  so  to  put  it,
matter  of  being  rather  than  of  direct  knowledge ;  and  all  that
we  know  about  it,  we  know  either  from  its  antecedents  or  from
its  consequents  in  presentation.  Still  these  antecedents  and
consequents  make  an  important  difference  to  the  entire  ex-
perience to  which  they  contribute ;  so  that,  whenever  the  feeling
they  induce  is  psychologically  the  most  interesting  or  important
characteristic  of  such  experiences,  it  is  often  simpler  to  describe
them  briefly  as  feelings,  and  to  denote  them  as  severally  sensuous,
aesthetic,  intellectual,  moral,  feelings  ;  and  so  forth.  But  this  is
no  reason  for  ignoring  or  denying  that  pure  feeling  is  a  unique
and  ultimate  factor  in  all  experience.

Since  this  pure  feeling,  then,  ranges  solely  between  the  op-
posite extremes  of  pleasure  and  pain,  we  are  naturally  led  to
inquire  whether  there  is  any  corresponding  contrast  in  the
causes  of  feeling  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  in  its
manifestations  and  effects2?  To  begin  with  the  first  question,
which  we  may  thus  formulate :  What,  if  any,  are  the  invariable
differences  characteristic  of  the  presentations  or  '  states  of  mind  '
we  respectively  like  and  dislike?  Or,  taking  account  of  the
diverse  sources  of  feeling — sensuous,  aesthetic,  intellectual,  active
— is  there  anything  that  we  can  predicate  alike  of  all  that  are
pleasurable  and  deny  of  all  that  are  painful,  and  vice  versa?  It
is  at  once  evident  that  at  least  in  the  presentations  regarded

1  So  Kant :  "  Dasjenige  Subjective  an  einer  Vorstellung  was  gar  kein  Erkennt-
nissstiick  werden  kann  ist  die  mit  ihr  verbundene  Lust  oder  Unlust."  Kritik  der
Urtheilskraft,  Einl.  vil.  Cf.  also  Titchener,  Feeling  and  Attention,  1908,  pp.  69-77.

a  For  this  see  next  chapter.


246  Feeling  [CH.  x,  §  2

objectively  or  apart,  no  such  common  characters  will  be  found  ;
if  we  find  them  anywhere  it  must  be  in  some  relation  to  the
conscious  subject,  i.e.  in  the  fact  of  presentation  itself.

There  is  one  important  truth  concerning  pleasures  and  pains
that  may  occur  at  once  as  an  answer  to  our  inquiry,  and  is
often  advanced  as  such,  viz.  that  whatever  is  pleasurable  tends
to  further  and  perfect  life,  whatever  is  painful  to  disturb  or
destroy  it.  The  many  seeming  exceptions  to  this  law  of  self-
conservation,  as  it  has  been  called,  probably  all  admit  of  ex-
planation in  conformity  with  it,  so  as  to  leave  its  substantial
truth  unimpeached1.  Still  the  converse  is  not  always  true,  in
particular  many  things  highly  detrimental  to  life — though  we
may  be  aware  of  them — happen  quite  painlessly.  But  anyhow
this  law  is  too  teleological  to  serve,  in  the  first  instance,  as  a
purely  psychological  principle,  and,  as  generally  formulated  and
illustrated,  it  takes  account  of  matters  quite  outside  the  psycho-
logist's ken.  We  are  not  now  concerned  to  know  why  a  bitter
taste  e.g.  is  unpleasant  or  the  gratification  of  an  appetite  plea-
sant, but  what  marks  distinctive  of  all  painful  presentations  the
one  has  and  the  other  lacks,  and  what  contrasting  marks  it  has
instead.  From  a  biological  standpoint  it  may  be  true  enough
that  the  final  cause  of  sexual  and  parental  affections,  for  ex-
ample, is  the  perpetuation  of  the  species ;  but  this  does  not
help  us  to  ascertain  what  common  character  they  have  as  actual
sources  of  feeling  for  the  individual.  From  the  biological  stand-
point again,  even  the  senile  decadence  and  death  of  the  individual
might  be  shewn  to  be  advantageous  to  the  race ;  but  it  would
certainly  be  odd  to  describe  them  as  advantageous  to  the  in-
dividual :  so  different  are  the  two  points  of  view.  What  we  are
in  search  of,  although  a  generalisation,  has  reference  to  something
much  more  concrete  than  concepts  like  race  or  life,  and  does
not  require  us  to  go  beyond  the  consciousness  of  the  moment
to  such  ulterior  facts  as  race  or  life  imply.  "  Feeling  is  a  wit-
ness concerning  the  present  situation,  but  no  prophet  concerning
that  in  the  future2."

Were  it  possible,  it  would  be  quite  unnecessary  to  examine

1  See  Spencer,  Data  of  Ethics,  chs.  i.-iv. ;  G.  H.  Schneider,  Freud  und  Leid  des
Menschengeschltchts,  1883,  ch.  i. Ebbinghaus,  Grundzuge  d.  Psychologic,  3te  Aufl.
1911,  i.  pp.  556  ff.

2  Payot  quoted  by  Ebbinghaus,  loc.  cit.


CH.  x,  §  2]  Inquiry  into  its  Causes  247

in  detail  every  variety  of  pleasurable  and  painful  consciousness  in
connexion  with  a  general  inquiry  of  this  sort.  It  will  be  best  to
enumerate  at  the  outset  the  only  cases  that  specially  call  for  in-
vestigation. Feeling  may  arise  mainly  from  (a)  single  sensations
or  movements  ;  or  it  may  be  determined  wholly  or  partially  by
(b)  some  combination  or  arrangement  of  these  primary  presenta-
tions— hence  what  might  be  styled  the  lower  aesthetic  feelings.
We  have  thus  among  primary  presentations  a  more  material  and
a  more  formal  cause  or  ground  of  feeling.  The  mere  represen-
tation of  these  sources  of  feeling  involves  little  of  moment :  the
idea  of  a  bright  colour  or  even  of  a  bitter  taste  rarely  has  de-
finiteness  or  intensity  enough  to  produce  feeling.  But,  on  the
other  hand,  the  ideal  presentation  of  a  harmonious  arrangement
of  sounds  or  colours  does  not  in  itself  differ  essentially  as  regards
the  feeling  it  occasions  from  the  actual  presentation.  When  we
advance  to  the  level  of  ideas  more  complex  and  more  highly
representative — or  re-representative,  as  Spencer  would  say — than
any  we  have  yet  considered,  we  can  again  distinguish  between
material  and  formal  grounds  of  feeling.  To  the  latter  we  might
refer,  e.g.  (c)  the  intellectual  and  (d)  the  higher  aesthetic  feelings ;
to  the  former  (e)  the  egoistic,  altruistic,  and  religious  feelings.
There  is  a  special  class  of  feelings,  which  might  be  distinguished
from  all  the  preceding  as  reflex,  since  they  arise  from  the  memory
or  expectation  of  feelings  but  in  fact  these  are  largely  involved
in  all  the  feelings  of  the  last  mentioned  class,  and  this  brief  refer-
ence to  them  will  suffice ;  of  such  hope,  fear,  regret  are  examples.
We  may  now  try  to  ascertain  the  ground  of  the  pure  feeling  in
each  of  these  various  '  feelings.'

a.  The  intensity  and  quality  as  well  as  the  duration  and
frequency  of  a  movement  or  a  sensation  all  have  to  do  with  de-
termining the  feeling  to  which  it  gives  rise.  It  will  be  best  to
leave  the  last  two  out  of  account  for  a  time.  Apart  from  these
— we  may  note  the  following  points :  (i)  The  pleasantness  or
painfulness  of  movements  appears  to  depend  solely  upon  their
intensity,  that  is  to  say,  upon  the  amount  of  effort  they  require,
in  such  wise  that  a  certain  amount  of  exertion  is  agreeable  and
any  excess  disagreeable,  (ii)  Some  simple  sensations,  such  as
those  of  light  and  sound,  are  agreeable  if  not  too  intense,  their
pleasantness  increasing  with  their  intensity  up  to  a  certain  point,
on  nearing  which  the  feeling  rapidly  changes  and  becomes


248  Feeling  [CH.  x,  §  2

unpleasant  or  even  painful.  Other  sensations,  as  e.g.  bitter  tastes,
are  naturally,  that  is  for  most  animals,  unpleasant,  however  faint
— though  we  must  allow  the  possibility  of  an  acquired  liking  for
moderately  bitter  or  pungent  flavours1.  But  in  every  case  such
sensations,  if  at  all  intense,  produce  unmistakable  manifestations
of  disgust.  Sweet  tastes,  on  the  other  hand,  however  intense,
are  pleasant  to  an  unspoiled  palate,  though  apt  before  long  to
become  mawkish,  like  'sweetest  honey,  loathsome  in  his  own
deliciousness,'  as  confectioners'  apprentices  are  said  soon  to  find.
On  the  other  hand  even  the  specific  sensation  called  'sensory
pain '  does  not  always  lead  to  unpleasant  feeling  or  '  affective
pain ' ;  but  when  of  only  slight  intensity  is  characterized  as
'  piquant '  and  felt  as  pleasant2.  Thus  (iii)  in  fine,  while  the  effect
on  feeling  of  some  qualities  changes  with  their  intensity,  the
effect  of  others  continues  to  be  pleasant  or  else  continues  to  be
unpleasant,  almost  regardless  of  changes  of  intensity.  But  once
a  sensation  or  movement  is  painful  the  painfulness  increases  with
the  intensity  without  any  assignable  maximum  being  reached.

A  comparison  of  different  cases  like  the  above  (which  it
would  be  tedious  to  describe  more  fully  and  which  are  indeed
too  familiar  to  need  much  description)  seems  to  shew  (i)  that —
so  far  as  feeling  is  determined  by  the  intensity  of  a  presentation
— there  is  pleasure  so  long  as  attention  can  be  adapted  or  ac-
commodated to  the  presentation,  and  pain  so  soon  as  the  intensity
is  too  great  for  this;  and  (2)  that  of  the  cases  where,  though  the
intensity  is  slight,  some  sensations  are  decidedly  pleasant  and
others  as  decidedly  painful — the  cases,  z>.,  where  feeling  is  de-
termined by  the  quality  of  a  presentation — those  which  are
pleasurable  (a)  introduce  or  agreeably  increase  in  intensity  cer-
tain organic  sensations  or  ($)  enlarge  the  field  of  consciousness ;
while  those  which  are  painful  (a)  introduce  or  disagreeably
increase  in  intensity  certain  organic  sensations  or  (yS)  contract
the  field  of  consciousness.

As  to  the  first  of  these  points,  it  may  be  suggested  that  in
itself  any  and  every  simple  sensation  or  movement  is  pleasurable

1  In  the  case  of  animals  that  feed  upon  bitter  plants  the  liking,  it  is  reasonable  to
suppose,  is  congenital :  they  like  their  food,  though  it  tastes  bitter  and  not,  we  should
incline  to  say,  because  to  them  it  tastes  sweet. But  who  shall  decide?

2  Cf.  A.  Goldscheider, Gesam.  Abhandl.  1898,  i.  p.  411  (quoted  by  Titchener,
op.  tit.  p.  88).


CH.  x,  §  2]  Inquiry  into  its  Causes  249

if  there  is  attention  forthcoming  adequate  to  its  intensity.  In
the  earliest  and  simplest  phases  of  life,  in  which  the  presen-
tation-continuum is  but  little  differentiated,  it  is  reasonable  to
assume  that  variation  in  the  intensity  of  presentation  prepon-
derates over  changes  in  quality,  and  that  to  the  same  extent
feeling  is  determined  by  the  former  more  than  by  the  latter.
And,  whereas  this  dependence  on  intensity  is  invariable,  there
is  no  ground  for  supposing  the  quality  of  any  primary  presen-
tation, when  not  of  excessive  intensity,  to  be  in  itself  disagree-
able; the  changes  above-mentioned  in  the  hedonic  effects  of
bitter  tastes,  sweet  tastes,  or  the  like  tend  rather  to  prove  the
contrary.  This  brings  us  to  the  second  point,  and  it  requires
more  elucidation.

(a)  In  dealing  with  this  point  we  need  first  of  all  to  call  to  mind
the  continuity  of  our  presentations,  and  especially  the  existence
of  a  background  of  organic  sensations  or  somatic  consciousness,
as  it  is  variously  termed.  By  the  time  that  qualitatively  distinct
presentations  have  been  differentiated  from  this  common  basis  it
becomes  possible  for  any  of  these,  without  having  the  intensity
requisite  to  affect  feeling  directly,  to  change  it  indirectly  by  means
of  the  organic  sensations  accompanying  them,  or  their  so-called
'  feeling-tone1.'  The  physiological  concomitants  of  these  changes
of  somatic  consciousness  are  largely  reflex  movements  or  some
equivalent  of  these — such  as  alterations  in  circulatory  and
respiratory,  or  in  metabolic  processes.  Such  'movements'  are
psychologically  movements  no  longer,  and  are  rightly  regarded
as  pertaining  wholly  to  the  sensory  division  of  presentations.
But  originally  it  may  have  been  otherwise2.  To  us  now,  these
organic  reflexes  seem  but  part  and  parcel  of  the  special  sensation
whose  tone  they  form,  and  which  they  accompany  even  when  that

1  This  very  ambiguous,  one  might  almost  say  amphibious,  term  is  here  used  in
the  Herbartian  sense,  i.e.  as  signifying  something  objective — the  cause  of  feeling,  not
the  feeling  itself  consequent  on  it. Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  3,  p.  45. Cf.  also,  Volkmann,
op.  cit.  §§  35,  129;  Nahlowsky,  Das  Gefuhlsleben,  1862,  pp.  13  ff.

2  As,  for  example,  in  the  case  of  such  functions  as  respiration  and  circulation,
both  for  us  normally  automatic,  and  the  last  beyond  immediate  control. Nevertheless
we  are  often  driven  to  aid  both  by  taking  exercise. For  creatures  less  highly  organized
such  voluntary  means  may  be  more  indispensable. (Cf.  Herbert  Spencer's  Principles
of  Biology, 1867,  ii.  pp.  322  ff.,  329  fin.  ff.; Huxley, The Crayfish,  1880,  p.  81.)
Anyone  who  has  ever  compared  through  a  microscope  the  movements  of  particles
inside  a  living  flea  and  that  of  blood  corpuscles  in  the  web  between  the  toes  of  a
living  frog  will  have  no  difficulty  in  understanding  all  this.


250  Feeling  [CH.  x,  §  2

sensation,  so  far  as  its  mere  intensity  goes,  might  well  be  deemed
indifferent.  But  perhaps  at  first  the  special  qualities,  that  e.g.
are  now  unpleasant  even  when  their  intensity  is  minimal,  may
have  been  frequently  presented  with  an  excessive  intensity  that
would  be  painful  on  this  score  alone1.  The  reflexes  that  at  pre-
sent pertain  to  them  may  then  have  been  psychologically  the
expression  of  this  pain.  At  any  rate  it  seems  manifestly  unfair
to  refuse  either  to  seek  out  the  primitive  effects  of  the  sensations
in  question  and  allow  for  the  workings  of  heredity,  or  to  reckon
their  organic  accompaniments  or  '  feeling-tone '  as  now  function-
ally a  part  of  them2.  The  latter  seems  the  readier  and  perhaps,
too,  the  preferable  course.  As  immediate  effects  of  feeling,
organic  processes  are  perhaps  never  entirely  absent  from  any
affective  state :  they  constitute  its  earliest  expression.  But
regarded  as  the  feeling-tone  of  specific  sensations  they  are  now
to  be  reckoned  among  the  causes  of  feeling,  whatever  views  we
may  entertain  about  their  original  position3.

(j3)  The  division  of  the  senses  into  higher  and  lower  rests
largely  on  the  extent  to  which  their  specific  qualities  are  differ-
entiated from  the  general  sensibility  to  which  feeling-tone  belongs.
This  differentiation  becomes  steadily  more  pronounced  as  we
advance  from  the  lower  senses  to  the  higher4.  The  lower  senses,
in  other  words,  are  more  intimately  connected  with  the  so-called
'  physical  basis  of  life.'  Accordingly  the  purely  '  algedonic  '
effects  of  these  senses  are  experienced  before  those  of  the  higher
senses  are  appreciable  at  all,  and  they  are  also  more  intense  and

1  In  the  lowly  organisms  that  absorb  food  directly  through  the  skin  any  bitter
juices  that  came  in  contact  with  it  might  at  once  produce  very  violent  effects — com-
parable, say,  to  scalding ;  and  the  reflexes  then  established  may  have  been  continued
by  natural  selection  so as  to save from  poisoning  the higher organisms, whose
absorbent  surfaces  are  internal  and  only  guarded  in  this  way  by  the  organ  of  taste.
Some  light  is  thrown  on  questions  of  this  kind  by  the  very  interesting  experiments
of  Romanes  on  the  effect  of  such  poisons as  caffeine,  strychnine,  &c.  on  jelly-fish
placed  in  the  water  in  which  these  poisons  were  dissolved. For  a  full  account  of
these  see  his  Jelly-fish,  Star-fish,  and  Sea-urchins,  ch.  ix.

2  Hence  Volkmann  proposed  to  designate  them  as  'reflex  sensations.' Cf.  his
Lehrbuch  der  Psychologic,  2te  Aufl.  1875,  ii.  p.  313.

*  Cf.  next  chapter.

4  Hence  the  old  and  familiar  doctrine,  best  known  perhaps  in  the  Hamiltonian
formula:  "Perception  proper  and  Sensation  proper... though  each  necessarily  sup-
poses the  other,  are  still  always  in  a  certain  inverse  proportion  to  each  other."  (C£
Lectures  on  Metaphysics,  ii.  pp.  94-104.)  The  elusive  character  of  feeling  when  we
attempt  to  define  it  comes  out  clearly  in  this  exposition.


CH.  x,  §  2]  Inquiry  into  its  Causes  251

more  urgent  than  these.  Per  contra,  apart  from  feeling-tone,  as
here  understood,  the  specific  qualities  of  the  lower  senses  almost
cease  to  be  sources  of  feeling  at  all,  while  those  of  the  higher
senses  remain  so  still.  In  connexion  with  the  higher  senses  we
find  nothing — apart  from  accidental  associations — analogous  to
satiety  or  nausea,  and  nothing  comparable  to  analgesia  :  there
are  colours  and  tones  that  always  charm  and  never  cloy.  Or-
ganic reflexes  then  will  not  account  for  the  feelings  evoked  by  the
higher  sejises,  which  are  devoid  of  the  conative  urgency  usually
pertaining  to  those  of  the  lower1 :  they  appease  no  periodic
'  appetites '  and  the  sensations,  unless  of  excessive  intensity,  are
accompanied  by  no  'physical'  pain.  So  different  indeed  are  their
effects,  that  Wundt  has  latterly  gone  so  far  as  to  maintain  that
"  they  can  nevermore  be  compressed  within  the  single  dimension
of  Lust  and  Unlust*."  Certainly  not,  if  Lust  and  Unlust  are
used  in  the  popular  sense,  which  implies  appetite  and  aversion
as  well  as  feeling.  But  psychological  terminology  should  be
carefully  divested  of  popular  implications.  Even  our  own  terms,
pleasure  and  pain,  would  otherwise  be  almost  equally  misleading8.
Feeling,  according  to  Wundt,  is  a  tri-dimensional  manifold.  The
feelings  due  to  the  higher  senses,  he  maintains,  are  mixed  feelings
in  which  the  Lust-Unlust  component  is  always  the  least  impor-
tant and  not  essential  at  all.  The  '  warm '  end  of  the  spectrum
is  exciting,  exhilarating ;  the  cold  end  tranquillizing,  depressing  :
high  notes  dispose  us  to  gaiety,  low  notes  to  seriousness.  Well,
we  have  agreed  with  this  so  far  as  to  recognise  a  clear  difference
between  what  makes  a  good  glass  of  beer  pleasant  (to  take  his
own  instance)  and  a  dose  of  castor-oil  unpleasant;  or  between
what  makes  the  sound  of  a  silver  clarion  pleasant  and  the  drone
of  a  Scotch  bagpipe  unpleasant.  But  so  to  restrict  the  meaning
of  our  leading  terms  as  to  take  the  feeling  in  the  latter  instances
out  of  the  rubric  pleasure-pain  altogether  is  a  Machtspruch  and
nothing  else,  a  peremptory  decision  that  even  Wundt  is  not

1  Though  it  can  be  absent. Cf.  Drobisch,  Empirische  Psychologie,  1842,  p.  175.

2  Physiologische  Psychologie,  6th  ed.,  ii.  pp.  295  ff.

3  Not  quite,  for  with  us  the  word  'lust,'  which  we  inherit  from  our  Teutonic
ancestors,  has  lost  its  original  meaning  of  pleasure — though  so  used  in  Chaucer's  day
— and  retains  only  the  meaning  of  longing  or  concupiscence. But  the  German  Lust
means  both. So  prominent  was  the  latter  meaning  in  WolfFs  time  that  he  confused
feeling  more  or  less  with  appetition.


252  Feeling  [CH.  x,  §  2

entitled  to  make,  and one  moreover  that has found neither
general  acceptation  nor  experimental  verification1.

Nevertheless,  as  said,  there  is  a  difference — and  Wundt  has
called  attention  to  it — between  the  lower  senses  and  the  higher
as  grounds  of  feeling ;  even  though  in  both  cases  the  feeling
itself  is  either  pleasant  or  unpleasant.  What  precisely  is  this
difference  ?  The  question  is  a  difficult  one  to  answer.  In  the
first  place  circumstantial  associations  of  all  sorts  ought  to  be
eliminated :  were  the  effects  of  these  to  be  taken  into  account
we  should  be  beyond  the  range  of  sense  altogether.  But  it  is
only  these  invariable  accompaniments  of  the  pleasures  and  pains
of  the  higher  senses  in  ordinary  life  that  would  justify  Wundt
in  crediting  them  with  producing  gaiety  or  earnestness  of  mood
(Stimmung).  L' Allegro  and  II  Penseroso,  mirth  and  melancholy,
are  not  wooed  or  loathed  at  the  bidding  of  mere  sense.  On  the
other  hand  the  greater  and  readier  revivability  of  colours  and
tones  is  important :  we  can  thus  enjoy  in  memory  the  pleasures
of  music,  of  scenery  and  of  painting  in  a  way  that  we  cannot
enjoy  the  more  'material'  pleasures  of  taste  and  smell2.  It  is
this  superior  revivability,  no  doubt,  that  makes  possible  the
incidental  associations  that  'actually'  play  so  large  a  part  in
the  more  emotive  effects  of  the  higher  senses.  If  however  we
restrict  ourselves  to  what  is  strictly  sensory  and  take  account
of  the  effects  of  certain  colours  and  sounds  upon  some  of  the
higher  animals,  upon  children  and  savages,  then  we  must  recog-
nise the  effects  that  Wundt  describes  as  exciting  and  depressing.
They  were  just  now  summarily  described  as  enlarging  or  con-
tracting the  field  of  consciousness,  perhaps  we  might  have  said
as  raising  or  lowering  '  the  spirits.'  We  are  here  upon  a  more
objective  level3  than  that  of  the  lower  senses  and  bodily  comfort
or  discomfort :  we  are  pleased  or  displeased  in  a  more  '  disin-
terested,' less  '  materialistic '  way.  If  we  were  only  animals  and
not  vegetables  as  well — in  plainer  words,  if  we  were  clear  of  all
concern  in  our  metabolic  processes,  we  should  still  enjoy  the
brilliance  of  the  diamond's  lustre  and  the  depths  of  the  gentian's
blue.  What  we  enjoy  and  consume — like  Wundt's  gutes  Glas

1  The  masterly  criticism  of  Wundt's  tri-dimensional  theory  of  feeling  by  his  old
collaborator,  Prof.  Titchener  (op,  fit.  Lect.  IV),  dispenses  us  from  discussing  it  here.

2  Cf.  above,  ch.  vii,  §  i,  p.  175.

3  Cf.  ch.  v,  §  7,  p.  134.


CH.  x,  §  2]  Inquiry  into  its  Causes  253

Bier — we  call  'pleasant'  or  agreeable  in  the  narrower  sense:
what  we  enjoy  at  the  most  sensuously  but  not  sensually,  aestheti-
cally but  not  organically,  we  call  beautiful.

But  although  the  distinctive  characteristics  of  these  two
classes  of  sensory  feelings  are  different  there  is  no  sharp  line
to  be  drawn  between  the  two.  The  sense  of  smell  and,  to  a  less
extent,  the  sense  of  touch  is  not  wholly  devoid  of  what  Titchener
has  called  a  'quasi-aesthetic  reference1.'  We  may  then  now  in
a  word  or  two  explain  what  is  meant  by  enlarging  and  contract-
ing the  field  of  consciousness  and  by  agreeably  increasing  or
decreasing  certain  elements  therein.  The  difference  in  point  is
manifest  on  comparing  the  flow  of  spirits,  buoyancy  and  anima-
tion that  result  from  a  certain  duration  of  pleasurable  sensations
with  the  lowness  or  depression  of  spirits,  the  gloom  and  heaviness
of  heart,  apt  to  ensue  from  prolonged  physical  pain.  Common
language,  in  fact,  leaves  us  no  choice  but  to  describe  these  con-
trasted states  by  figures  which  clearly  imply  a  difference  in  the
range  and  variety  of  the  presentations  that  occasion  them,  and
in  the  quickness  with  which  these  succeed  each  other2.  It  is  not
merely  that  in  hilarity  as  contrasted  with  dejection  the  train  of
ideas  takes  a  wider  sweep  and  shews  greater  liveliness ;  but  as
it  were  at  the  back  of  this,  on  the  purely  sensory  level,  certain
organic  sensations  which  are  ordinarily  indifferent  acquire  a  gentle
intensity,  which  seems  to  quicken  and  expand  the  ideational
stream ;  as  we  see,  for  instance,  in  the  effects  of  mountain  air
and  sunshine.  Or,  on  the  other  hand,  these  sensations  become
so  violently  intense  as  to  drain  off  and  ingulf  all  available  energy
in  one  monotonous  corroding  care,  an  oppressive  weight  which
leaves  no  place  for  free  movement,  no  life  or  leisure  to  respond
to  what  are  wont  to  be  pleasurable  solicitations3.

1  Perhaps  even  taste  is  not  to  be  altogether  excluded. "  I  hold  as  possible,"  says
Volkelt,  "  that  the  taste  of  a  noble  wine  may  incidentally  be  refined  (entstofflicht}  up
to  the  aesthetic  level." "Der  aesthetischen  Werth  der  niederen  Sinne,"  Zeitschr.  f.
Psych,  xxix.  (1902),  p.  216. Cf.  also  Bullough,  "The  Aesthetic  Appreciation  of
Colours,"  Brit.  Jl.  of  Psych,  ii.  (1908),  pp.  459  ff.

2  This  is  one  among  many  cases  in  which  the  study  of  a  vocabulary  is  full  of
instruction  to  the  psychologist. The  reader  who  will  be  at  the  trouble  to  compare
the  parallel  columns  under  the  heading  "  Passive  Affections,"  in  Roget's  Thesaurus
of  English  Words  and  Phrases,  1912,  §§  827-843,  will  find  ample  proof  both  of  this
general  statement  and  of  what  is  said  above  in  the  text.

3  Observation  and  experiment  shew  that  the  physical  signs  of  pain  in  the  higher
animals  consist  in  such  changes  as  a  lowered  and  weaker  pulse,  reduction  of  the


254  Feeling  [CH.  x,  §  2

As  regards  the  duration  and  the  frequency  of  presentation,
it  is  in  general  true  that  the  algedonic  effect  soon  attains
its  maximum,  and  then,  if  pleasant,  rapidly  declines,  or  even
changes  to  its  opposite.  Pains  in  like  manner  may  decline;
but  more  slowly,  and  without  in  the  same  sense  changing  to
pleasures.  The  like  holds  of  too  frequent  repetition.  Physio-
logical explanation  of  these  facts,  good  as  far  as  it  goes,  is,  of
course,  at  once  forthcoming :  sensibility  is  blunted,  time  is  re-
quired for  restoration,  and  so  forth;  but  at  least  we  want  the
psychological  equivalent  of  all  this.  In  one  respect  we  find
nothing  materially  new ;  so  far  as  continued  presentation  entails
diminished  intensity,  we  have  nothing  but  diminished  feeling  as
a  consequence ;  so  far  as  its  continued  presentation  entails  satiety
there  is  an  end  to  most  or  all  of  the  agreeable  accompaniments
in  which  the  pleasurable  tone  consisted.  Yet  in  another  way  long
duration  and  frequent  repetition  produce  indirectly  certain  cha-
racteristic effects  on  feeling,  in  consequence  of  habituation  and
accommodation.  We  may  sometimes  get  used  to  a  painful  presen-
tation in  such  wise  that  we  cease  to  be  conscious  of  it  as  positively
disagreeable,  though  its  cessation  is  at  once  a  source  of  pleasure.
In  like  manner  we  come  to  require  things  simply  because  it  is
now  painful  to  be  without  them,  although  their  possession  has

surface  temperature,  irregular  respiration,  dilatation  of  the  iris,  and  the  like.  And
so  far  as  can  be  ascertained  these  effects  are  not  altogether  the  emotional  reaction
to  pain  but  in  large  measure  its  actual  accompaniments,  the  physical  side  that
we  have  called  its  tone.  The  following  is  a  good  description  of  these  general  charac-
teristics of  feeling :  "  En  meme  temps,  il  se  fait  une  serie  de  mouvements  generaux  de
flexion,  comme  si  1'animal  voulait  se  rendre  plus  petit,  et  offrir  moins  de  surface  i  la
douleur.  II  est  interessant  de  remarquer  que,  pour  1'homme  comme  pour  tous  les
animaux,  on  retrouve  ces  memes  mouvements  generaux  de  flexion  et  d'extension
repondant  aux  sentiments  differents  de  plaisir  et  de  douleur.  Le  plaisir  repond  a
un  mouvement  d'epanouissement,  de  dilatation,  d'extension.  Au  contraire,  dans  la
douleur,  on  se  rapetisse,  on  se  referme  sur  soi ;  c'est  un  mouvement  general  de
flexion  "  (C.  Richet,  L'Homme  et  P  Intelligence,  1884,  p.  10).  During  the  last  twenty
years  or  so  numerous  and  minute  investigations  of  the  facts  here  described  have  been
undertaken.  By  means  of  elaborate  apparatus  the  pulse  curves,  respiration  curves
(both  thoracic  and  abdominal),  volume  changes,  and  skeletal  movements  have  all
been  registered  while  the  person  under  experiment — the  V.  P.  as  the  Germans  call  him
— underwent  some  pleasurable  or  painful  stimulation.  The  results  so  far  have  turned
out  to  be  more  complicated  and  more  conflicting  than  was  anticipated,  so  that  precise
interpretation  of  details  is  often  difficult.  Still  in  the  main  what  is  here  said  is  con-
firmed. Cf.  C.  S.  Myers,  Experimental  Psychology,  ch.  xxiv. ;  A.  Lehmann,  Die
korptrlichen  Ausserungen  psychischer  Zustande,  3  Theile,  1899-1905  ;  H.  Berger,
same  title,  2  Theile,  1904-7.


CH.  x,  §  2]  Inquiry  into  its  Causes  255

long  ceased  to  be  a  ground  of  positive  enjoyment.  This  loss
(or  gain)  consequent  on  accommodation1  has  a  most  important
effect  in  changing  the  lower  sources  of  feeling  for  higher :  it
helps  to  transfer  attention  from  mere  sensations — where  the
affective  state  conditions  the  conative  attitude — to  what  we  may
distinguish  as  interests — where,  on  the  contrary,  a  conative
attitude  is  the  prior  fact.

b.  We  come  now  to  the  formal  side  of  sensory  feelings.
Certain  sensations  or  movements  not  separately  unpleasant  be-
come so  when  presented  together  or  in  immediate  succession  ;
and  contrariwise,  some  combinations  of  sensations  or  of  move-
ments may  be  such  as  to  afford  pleasure  distinct  from,  and  often
greater  than,  any  that  they  separately  yield*.  Here  again  we
find  that  in  some  cases  the  effect  seems  mainly  to  depend  on
intensity,  in  others  mainly  on  quality,  (i)  As  instances  of  the
former  may  be  mentioned  the  pleasurableness  of  a  rhythmic
succession  of  sounds  or  movements,  of  symmetrical  forms  and
curved  outlines,  of  gentle  crescendi  and  diminuendi  in  sound,
and  of  gradual  variations  of  shade  in  colour ;  or  the  painfulness
of  flickering  lights,  'beats'  in  musical  notes,  false  time,  false
steps,  false  quantities,  and  the  like.  In  all  these,  whenever  the
result  is  pleasurable,  attention  can  be  readily  accommodated —
is,  so  to  say,  economically  meted  out ;  and,  whenever  the  result
is  painful,  attention  is  surprised,  balked,  wasted.  Thus  we  can
make  more  movements  and  with  less  expenditure  of  energy
when  they  are  rhythmic  than  when  they  are  not,  as  the  per-
formances of  a  ball-room  or  of  troops  marching  to  music  amply
testify.  Of  this  economy  we  have  also  a  striking  proof  in  the
ease  with  which  rhythmic  language  is  retained.

(ii)  As  instances  of  the  latter  may  be  cited  such  arrangements
of  notes  or  of  colours  as  are  called  harmonious  or  the  opposite.

1  It  has  been  definitely  formulated,  but  in  physiological  language,  by  Bain  as  the
Law  of  Novelty : "  No  second  occurrence  of  any  great  shock  or  stimulus,  whether
pleasure,  pain,  or  mere  excitement,  is  ever  fully  equal  to  the  first,  notwithstanding
that  full  time  has  been  given  for  the  nerves  to  recover  from  their  exhaustion"  (Mind
and  Body,  p.  51). Cf.  also  his  Emotions  and  Will,  3rd  ed.  p.  83. This  is  a  prin-
ciple of  wide  application : it  goes  a  long  way  towards  accounting  for  preferences
between  sensory  qualities  of  the  same  class:  "variety  is  charming."

2  This  is  to  some  extent  an  anticipation  of  what  Wundt  afterwards  called  '  the
principle  of  creative  synthesis'  (Philosophische  Studien,  x. (1894),  p.  112). That
conception  is  however  to  be  found  still  earlier  in  Lotze's  Metaphysik, 1879  : cf.
§§  268,  271.


256  Feeling  [CH.  x,  §  2

Harmony,  however,  must  be  taken  to  have  a  different  meaning
in  the  two  cases.  When  notes  harmonize  there  results,  as  is
well  known,  a  distinct  pleasure  over  and  above  any  pleasure
due  to  the  several  notes  themselves.  On  the  other  hand,  those
that  are  discordant  are  unpleasant  in  spite  of  any  pleasantness
they  may  have  singly.  Besides  the  negative  condition  of  absence
of  beats,  an  arrangement  of  notes  to  be  pleasant  must  fulfil
certain  positive  conditions,  sufficiently  expressed  for  our  purpose
by  saying  that  two  notes  are  pleasant  when  they  give  rise  to  few
combination-tones,  and  when  among  these  there  are  several  that
coincide ;  and  that  they  are  unpleasant  when  they  give  rise  to
many  combination-  and  over-tones,  and  when  among  these  there
are  few  or  none  that  coincide.  Too  many  tones  together  prevent
any  from  being  distinct  and  become  a  mere  noise.  An  ingenious
writer  on  harmony,  in  fact,  compares  the  confusion  of  a  discord
to  that  of  "  trying  to  reckon  up  a  sum  in  one's  head  and  failing
because  the  numbers  are  too  high1."  A  different  explanation
must  be  given  of  the  so-called  harmonies  of  colour2.  The
pleasurable  effect  of  graduations  of  colour  or  shade — to  which,
as  Ruskin  tells  us,  the  rose  owes  its  victorious  beauty  when
compared  with  other  flowers — has  been  already  mentioned :  it
is  rather  a  quantitative  than  a  qualitative  effect.  What  we
are  now  concerned  with  are  the  pleasurable  or  painful  com-
binations of  different  ungraduated  colours.  A  comparison  of
these  seems  to  justify  the  general  statement  that  those  colours
yield  good  combinations  that  are  far  apart  in  the  colour
circle,  while  those  near  together  are  apt  to  be  discordant.
The  explanation  given,  viz.  that  the  one  arrangement  secures
and  the  other  prevents  perfect  retinal  activity,  seems  on  the
whole  satisfactory — especially  if  we  acknowledge  the  tendency
of  all  recent  investigations  and  distinguish  sensibility  to  colour
and  sensibility  to  mere  light  as  both  psychologically  and  physio-
logically two  separate  facts.  Thus,  when  red  and  green  are
juxtaposed,  the  red  increases  the  saturation  of  the  green  and
the  green  that  of  the  red,  so  that  both  colours  are  heightened

1  Preyer,  Akustische  Untersuchungen,  1879,  p.  59. Preyer  also  quotes  Descartes
(Compendium  Musicae)  as  saying,  "aarium  imbecillitas  sine  labore  majores  sonorum
differentias  non  posset  distinguere  "  (p.  45). The  limit  referred  to  was  six.

2  Cf.  Professor  Sully's  still  valuable  paper,  "Harmony  of  Colours,"  Mind,  O.S.
iv.  (1879),  PP-


CH.  x,  §  2]  Inquiry  into  its  Causes  257

in  brilliance.  But  such  an  effect  is  only  pleasing  to  the  child
and  the  savage ;  for  civilised  men  the  contrast  is  excessive1.
Colours  less  completely  opposed,  as  red  and  blue,  are  preferred  ;
then  each  is  a  rest  from  the  other,  so  that  as  the  eye  wanders  to
and  fro  over  their  border  different  elements  are  active  by  turns.
Red  and  orange  or  yellow  and  sap  green,  however,  are  bad,
unless  graduated,  in  that  both  exhaust  in  a  similar  manner :
they  lack  variety  and  yet  have  no  connexion.

c.  It  will  be  simplest  to  pass  next  to  the  other  formal
feelings.  The  more  or  less  spontaneous  working  of  imagina-
tion, as  well  as  that  direct  control  of  this  working  necessary  to
thinking  in  the  stricter  sense,  is  always  productive  of  pain  or
pleasure  in  varying  degrees.  Though  the  exposition  of  the
higher  intellectual  processes  has  not  yet  been  reached,  there
will  be  no  inconvenience  in  at  once  taking  account  of  their
effects  on  feeling,  since  these  are  fairly  obvious  and  largely  in-
dependent of  any  analysis  of  the  processes  themselves.  It  will
also  be  convenient  to  include  under  the  one  term  '  intellectual
feelings,'  not  only  the  feelings  connected  with  certainty,  doubt,
comprehension,  perplexity,  and  so  forth,  but  also  what  the
Herbartian  psychologists — whose  work  in  this  department  of
psychology  is  classical — have  catted  flar  excellence  formal  feelings
— that  is  to  say,  feelings  which  they  regard  as  entirely  deter-
mined by  the  form  of  the  flow  of  ideas,  and  not  by  the  ideas
themselves.  Thus,  be  the  ideas  what  they  may,  when  their
onward  movement  is  checked  by  divergent  or  obstructing  lines
of  association,  and  especially  when  in  this  manner  we  are
hindered,  say,  from  recollecting  a  name  or  a  quotation  (as  if,
e.g.  the  names  of  Archimedes,  Anaximenes  and  Anaximander
each  arrested  the  clear  revival  of  the  other),  we  are  conscious
of  a  certain  strain  and  oppressiveness,  which  give  way  to  mo-
mentary relief  when  at  length  what  is  wanted  rises  into  distinct
consciousness  and  our  ideas  resume  their  flow.  Here  again,  too,
as  in  muscular  movements,  we  have  the  contrast  of  difficulty —
when  '  thoughts  refuse  to  flow '  and  we  work,  invita  Minerva —

1  An  analogous  change  has  been  remarked  in  the  case  of  music : — "  Among  the
ancients  we  find  the  octave  distinguished  as  the  pleasantest  and  finest  consonance.
In  mediaeval  times  the  fifth  was  esteemed  the  most.  Nowadays  we  are  inclined  to
prefer  the  third  as  the  interval  that  sounds  sweetest  and  best"  (Stumpf,  Beitragc  »ur
Akustik  u.  Musikwissenchaft,  1898,  i.  p.  31).

W. P.  17


258  Feeling  [CH.  x,  §  2

and  of  facility,  when  the  appropriate  ideas  seem  to  unfold  and
display  themselves  before  us  like  a  vision  before  one  inspired.
To  be  confronted  with  propositions  we  cannot  reconcile — i.e.
with  what  is  or  appears  inconsistent,  false,  contradictory — is  apt
to  be  painful ;  the  recognition  of  truth  or  logical  coherence,  on
the  other  hand,  is  pleasurable.  The  feeling  in  either  case  is,  no
doubt,  greater  the  greater  our  interest  in  the  subject-matter  ;
but  the  mere  conflict  of  ideas1  as  such  is  in  itself  depressing,
while  the  discernment  of  agreement,  of  the  one  in  the  many,  is
a  distinct  satisfaction.  Now  in  the  former  case  we  are  conscious
of  futile  efforts  to  comprehend  together  ideas  which,  the  more
distinctly  we  apprehend  them  for  the  purpose,  prove  to  be  only
the  more  completely  and  diametrically  opposed.  We  seem  able
to  affirm  and  mentally  envisage  some  only  by  denying  and  sup-
pressing the  representation  of  others  ;  and  yet  we  have  to  strive
somehow  to  predicate  them  all  and  embody  them  together  in
one  consistent  whole.  Attention  is  like  a  house  divided  against
itself:  there  is  effort  but  it  is  not  effective,  so  the  field  of  con-
sciousness is  narrowed  and  the  flow  of  ideas  arrested.  When,
on  the  other  hand,  we  discern  a  common  principle  among
diverse  and  apparently  disconnected  particulars,  instead  of  all
the  attention  we  can  command  being  taxed  in  the  separate
apprehension  of  these  disjecta  membra,  they  become  as  one,
and  we  seem  at  once  to  have  at  our  disposal  resources  for
the  command  of  an  enlarged  field  and  the  detection  of  new
resemblances.

d.  Closely  related  to  these  formal  intellectual  feelings  are
certain  of  the  higher  aesthetic  feelings.  A  reference  to  some
of  the  commonplaces  of  aesthetical  writers  may  be  sufficient
briefly  to  exhibit  the  leading  characteristics  of  these  feelings.
There  is  a  fairly  wide  agreement  among  civilised  men  as  to
what  is  beautiful  and  what  is  not,  and  it  is  the  business  of  a
treatise  on  empirical  aesthetics  from  an  analysis  cf  these  matters
of  fact  to  generalise  the  principles  of  taste — to  do,  in  fact,  for
one  source  of  pleasure  and  pain  what  we  are  here  attempting
in  a  meagre  fashion  for  all.  And  these  principles  are  the
more  important  in  their  bearing  upon  the  larger  psychological
question,  because  among  aesthetic  effects  are  reckoned  only

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  vii,  §  5,  p.  202.


CH.  x,  §  2]  Inquiry  into  its  Causes  259

such  as  are  pleasing  or  interesting1  in  themselves,  apart  from  all
recognition  of  utility,  of  possession,  or  of  ulterior  gratification
of  any  kind  whatever.  Thus,  if  it  should  be  objected  that  the
intellectual  satisfaction  of  consistency  is  really  due  to  its  utility,
to  the  fact  that  what  is  incompatible  and  incomprehensible  is  of
no  avail  for  practical  guidance,  at  least  this  objection  will  not
hold  against,  say,  the  aesthetic  principle  of  unity  in  variety.
In  accordance  with  this  primary  maxim  of  art  criticism,  at
the  one  extreme  art  productions  are  condemned  for  monotony,
as  incapable  of  sustaining  interest  because  '  empty,"  '  bald,'  and
'  poor ' ;  at  the  other  extreme  they  are  condemned  as  too
incoherent  and  disconnected  to  furnish  a  centre  of  interest.
And  those  are  held  as  so  far  praiseworthy  in  which  a  variety
of  elements,  be  they  movements,  forms,  colours  or  incidents,
instead  of  conflicting,  all  unite  to  enhance  each  other  and  to
form  not  merely  a  mass  but  a  whole.  Another  principle  that
serves  to  throw  light  on  our  inquiry  is  that  which  has  been
called  the  principle  of  economy*,  viz.  that  an  effect  is  pleasing  in
proportion  as  it  is  attained  by  little  effort  and  simple  means.
The  brothers  Weber  in  their  classic  work  on  human  locomotion
discovered  that  those  movements  that  are  aesthetically  beautiful
are  also  physiologically  correct ;  grace  and  ease,  in  fact,  are  well-
nigh  synonymous,  as  Herbert  Spencer  points  out,  and  illustrates
by  apt  instances  of  graceful  attitudes,  motions  and  forms.  The
same  writer,  again,  in  seeking  for  a  more  general  law  underlying
the  current  maxims  of  writers  on  composition  and  rhetoric  is
led  to  a  special  formulation  of  this  principle  as  applied  to  style,
viz.  that  "  economy  of  the  recipient's  attention  is  the  secret  of
effect3."

Perhaps  of  all  aesthetical  principles  the  most  wide-reaching,
as  well  as  practically  the  most  important,  is  that  which  explains
aesthetic  effects  by  association.  Thus,  to  take  one  example

1  Tragedy  can  hardly  be  said  simply  to  please  and  yet  it  is  absorbingly  interesting
and  yet  withal  the  interest  is  '  disinterested.'

a  Cf.  Fechner,  Vorschule  der  Aesthetik,  ii.  263.  Fechner's  full  style  for  it  is
"  Princip  der  okonomischen  Verwendung  der  Mittel  oder  des  kleinsten  Kraftmasses."
An  interesting  anticipation  of  this  and  other  of  Fechner's  principles  will  be  found  in
Bonnet's  Essai  analytique  sur  Us  facultes  de  I'dme,  1760,  ch.  xvii.  E.g. :  "  Plus  il
y  a  de  simplicite  dans  les  moyens,  plus  I1 'Attention  s'exerce  agreablement "  (p.  227).

3  Essays:  Scientific,  Political  and  Speculative,  "The  Philosophy  of  Style/'
"  Gracefulness  " — differently  numbered  in  different  editions.

17—2


260  Feeling  [CH.  x,  §  2

where  so  many  are  possible,  the  croaking  of  frogs  and  the
monotonous  ditty  of  the  cuckoo  owe  their  pleasantness,  not
directly  to  what  they  are  in  themselves,  but  entirely  to  their
intimate  association  with  spring-time  and  its  gladness.  At  first
it  might  seem,  therefore,  that  in  this  principle  there  is  nothing
fresh  that  is  relevant  to  our  present  inquiry,  since  a  pleasure
that  is  only  due  to  association  at  once  carries  back  the  question
to  its  sources;  so  that  in  asking  why  the  spring,  for  example,  is
pleasant  we  should  be  returning  to  old  ground.  But  this  is  not
altogether  true;  aesthetic  effects  call  up  not  merely  ideas  but
ideals.  A  great  work  of  art  improves  upon  the  real  in  two
respects:  it  intensifies  and  it  transfigures.  It  is  for  art  to  gather
into  one  focus,  cleared  from  dross  and  commonplace,  the  genial
memories  of  a  lifetime,  the  instinctive  memories  of  a  race;  and,
where  theory  can  only  classify  and  arrange  what  it  receives,
art — in  a  measure  free  from  'the  literal  unities  of  time  and
place ' — creates  and  glorifies.  Still  art  eschews  the  abstract
and  speculative;  however  plastic  in  its  hands,  the  material
wrought  is  always  that  of  sense.  We  have  already  noticed
more  than  once  the  power  which  primary  presentations  have
to  sustain  vivid  re-presentations,  and  the  bearing  of  this  on  the
aesthetic  effects  of  works  of  art  must  be  straightway  obvious.
The  notes  and  colours,  rhymes  and  rhythms,  forms  and  move-
ments, which  produce  the  lower  aesthetic  feelings  also  serve  as
the  means  of  bringing  into  view,  and  maintaining  at  a  higher
level  of  vividness,  a  wider  range  and  flow  of  pleasing  ideas
than  we  can  ordinarily  command.

e.  When  we  reach  the  level  at  which  there  is  distinct
self-consciousness1,  we  have  an  important  class  of  feelings
determined  by  the  relation  of  the  presentation  of  self  to  the
other  contents  of  consciousness.  And  as  the  knowledge  of
other  selves  advances  pari  passu  with  that  of  one's  own  self,
so  along  with  the  egoistic  feelings  appear  certain  social  or
altruistic  feelings.  The  two  have  much  in  common;  in  pride
and  shame,  for  example,  account  is  taken  of  the  estimate  other
persons  form  of  us  and  of  our  regard  for  them ;  while,  on
the  other  hand,  when  we  admire  or  despise,  congratulate  or
pity  another,  we  have  always  present  to  our  mind  a  more  or
less  definite  conception  of  self  in  like  circumstances.  It  will
1  Cf.  below,  ch.  xv,  §  2.


CH.  x,  §  3]  Summary  and  Result  261

therefore  amply  serve  all  the  ends  of  our  present  inquiry  if  we
briefly  survey  the  leading  characteristics  of  some  contrasted
egoistic  feelings,  such  as  self-complacency  and  disappointment.
When  a  man  is  pleased  with  himself,  his  achievements,  possessions
or  circumstances,  such  pleasure  is  the  result  of  a  comparison  of  his
present  position  in  this  respect  with  some  former  position  or  with
the  position  of  someone  else.  Without  descending  to  details,
we  may  say  that  two  prospects  are  before  him,  and  the  larger
and  fairer  is  recognised  as  his  own.  Under  disappointment  or
reverse  the  same  two  pictures  may  be  present  to  his  mind,  but
accompanied  by  the  certainty  that  the  better  is  not  his  or  is
his  no  more.  So  far,  then,  it  might  be  said  the  contents  of  his
consciousness  are  in  each  case  the  same,  the  whole  difference  lying
in  the  different  relationship  to  self.  But  this  just  makes  all  the
difference  to  the  contents  of  his  consciousness  for  him,  as  we
shall  at  once  see  if  we  consider  its  active  side.  Even  the  idlest
and  most  thoughtless  mind  teems  with  intentions  and  expecta-
tions, and  in  its  prosperity,  like  the  fool  in  the  parable,  thinks
to  pull  down  its  barns  and  build  greater,  to  take  its  ease,  eat,
drink  and  be  merry.  The  support  of  all  this  pleasing  show  and
these  far-reaching  aims  is,  not  the  bare  knowledge  of  what
abundance  will  do,  but  the  reflexion — These  many  goods  are
mine.  In  mind  alone  final  causes  have  a  place,  and  the  end  can
produce  the  beginning;  the  prospect  of  a  summer  makes  the
present  into  spring.  But  action  is  paralysed  or  impossible  when
the  means  evade  us —

Now  drops  at  once  the  pride  of  awful  state,
The  golden  canopy,  the  glittering  plate —

and  a  bleak  and  wintry  barrenness  is  filled  with  the  emptiness
of  despair.  In  so  far  as  a  man's  life  consists  in  the  abundance
of  the  things  he  possesseth,  we  see  then  why  it  dwindles  with
these.  The  like  holds  where  self-complacency  or  displicency
rests  on  a  sense  of  personal  worth  or  on  the  honour  or  affection
of  others.

Summary  and  Result.

§  3.  We  are  now  at  the  end  of  our  survey  of  certain  typical
pleasurable  and  painful  situations.  What  we  set  out  to  find,  it  will
be  remembered,  was  their  respective  characteristics  when  regarded


262  Feeling  [CH.  x,  §  3

not  objectively  but  '  in  relation  to  the  conscious  subject  itself.'
Now  in  that  duality  of  subjective  and  objective  which  all  ex-
perience involves,  feeling  and  attention  exclusively  belong  to,
and  together  make  up,  the  subject-side1.  Our  inquiry  then
might  be  said  to  be  concerned  with  the  relation  of  feeling  to
attention  so  far  as  feeling  is  regarded  as  an  effect.  The  answer
to  this  inquiry  which  we  seem  to  have  attained  is  this  :  There
is  pleasure  in  proportion  as  a  maximum  of  subjective  activity  or
attention  is  effectively  exercised,  and  pain  in  proportion  as  such
effective  attention  is  frustrated  by  restraints,  distractions,  shocks,
or  incomplete  and  faulty  adaptations,  or  fails  of  exercise,  owing
to  the  narrowness  of  the  field  of  consciousness  or  the  slowness
and  smallness  of  its  changes.  Something  must  be  said  in  expli-
cation of  this  formula,  and  certain  objections  that  might  be  made
to  it  must  be  considered.  First  of  all  the  wide  meaning  here
given  to  attention  needs  to  be  borne  in  mind — the  meaning
rather  than  the  word,  for  which  a  better  might  perhaps  be
found2.  In  the  next  place  it  should  be  noted  that,  according

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  iii,  §  2,  p.  66.

2  A  reference  to  what  has  been  already  said  (cf.  ch.  iii,  §  2,  pp.  66-70)  might
suffice;  still,  in  view  of  an  objection  that  has  been  made  at  this  point,  some  further
discussion  will  not  be  superfluous. "Suppose  his  bone  to  be  snatched  away  from  a
hungry  dog,  can  his  painful  feeling  be  adequately  described  as  due  to  disconcerted
attention  and  not  rather  as  due  to  baffled  conation." The  latter  description  is  ob-
viously preferable  as  a  first  approximation  to  the  analysis  we  are  seeking  to  complete.
It  would  probably  satisfy  '  the  man  in  the  street '  as  the  former  description  certainly
would  not. For  he  is  wont  to  regard  himself  as  active  in  one  way  when  he  volun-
tarily attends,  and  in  quite  another  way  when  striving,  say,  to  appease  his  hunger.
But  psychologists  nowadays  for  the  most  part  are  seeking  to  get  beyond  the  old  notion
of  a  multiplicity  of  faculties  which  popular  language  still  keeps  afloat. The  unity  of
the  acting  subject,  it  is  held,  implies  some  common  ground  underlying  these  super-
ficially diverse  functions,  which  moreover,  it  is  thought,  are  sufficiently  differentiated
by  their  several  objects. Even  the  old  psychology  was  prepared  to  reduce  mental
faculties  or  powers  to  two  main  classes,  the  intellectual  and  the  active,  as  Reid,  for
example,  did. But  it  is  now  contended  that  the  priority  assuredly  belongs  to  the
former:  we  are  primarily  conative  and  became  intellectual,  because  knowledge  proved
subservient  to  action. So  far  we  fully  agree  (cf.  above,  ch.  \fin.  p.  28).

But  it  does  not  therefore  follow,  as  my  critic  supposes,  that  conation  is  more  funda-
mental than  attention.  So  far  as  attention  is  voluntary,  conation  is  more  or  less
implied :  we  do  not  voluntarily  attend,  that  is  to  say,  unless  we  are  interested.  So
far  as  attention  is  non-voluntary — though  it  is  still  active — conation  is  not  implied  at
alL  In  other  words,  experience  as  a  mutuum  commerci-um  begins  with  non-voluntary
attention  to  the  objects  or  presentations  with  which  the  experient  has  to  do,  whereas
conation  necessarily  presupposes  this  first  acquaintance  with  them.  '  Conscious '
activity  then  is  so  far  inclusive  of,  and  yet  wider  than,  conative  activity.  It  is  this


CH.  x,  §  3]  Summary  and  Result  263

to  this  formula,  feeling  is  determined  partly  by  quantitative,  or,
as  we  might  say,  material  conditions,  and  partly  by  conditions
that  are  formal  and  so  far  qualitative,  (i)  As  regards  the
former,  both  the  intensity  or  concentration  of  attention  and
its  diffusion  or  the  extent  of  the  field  of  consciousness  have  to  be
taken  into  account.  Attention,  whatever  else  it  is,  is  limited —

Pluribus  intentus  minor  est  ad  singula  sensus —

to  quote  Hamilton's  pet  adage1.  Moreover,  as  we  have  seen,
attention  requires  time.  If,  then,  attention  be  distributed  over
too  wide  a  field,  there  is  a  corresponding  loss  of  intensity,  and
so  of  distinctness :  we  tend  towards  a  succession  of  indis-
tinguishables — indistinguishable,  therefore,  from  no  succession.
We  must  not  have  more  presentations  in  the  field  of  conscious-
ness than  will  allow  of  some  concentration  of  attention:  a
maximum  diffusion  will  not  do.  A  maximum  concentration,
in  like  manner,  such  as  the  mystic  attempts2 — even  if  there
were  no  other  objection  to  it — would  seem  to  conflict  with  the
general  conditions  of  consciousness,  inasmuch  as  a  single  simple
presentation,  however  intense,  would  admit  of  no  differentiation,
and  any  complex  presentation  is  in  some  sort  a  plurality.  The
most  effective  attention,  then,  as  regards  its  quantitative  condi-
tions, must  lie  somewhere  between  the  two  zeros  of  complete
indifference  and  complete  absorption.  If  there  be  an  excess  of
diffusion,  effective  attention  will  increase  up  to  a  certain  point  as
concentration  increases,  but  beyond  that  point  will  decrease  if

'  conscious  '  or  subjective  activity  that  is  here  meant  by  attention.  Whether  we  talk
of  '  baffled  conation '  or  of  '  disconcerted  attention '  we  mean  in  each  case  that  the
subject's  activity  is  thwarted.  Because  of  this  thwarted  activity  the  feeling  evoked
in  each  case,  it  is  here  maintained,  is  painful ;  and  no  more  ultimate  ground  for  that
fact  seems  likely  to  be  forthcoming.  There  is  a  difference  between  the  two  situations
certainly:  disconcerted  attention  in  the  ordinary  or  restricted  sense  for  example
belongs  to  the  intellectual  feelings  (c),  baffled  conation  belongs  rather  to  what  have
been  called  '  egoistic  feelings '  (f) ;  though  the  inchoate  form  of  these  at  the  level  of
the  hungry  dog  have  not  been  noticed.  But  it  is  resemblance  not  difference  that  here
alone  concerns  us.  It  is  precisely  from  such  manifold  differences  that  we  set  out  in
search  of  a  possible  common  ground  of  feeling.  The  feelings  connected  with  cona-
tion however  were  not  included  among  those  examined  because  conation  is  itself
primarily  dependent  on  feeling  and  as  such  is  dealt  with  later.  Cf.  ch.  iii,  §  i,  p.  61
init.  and  ch.  xi,  §  2,  pp.  276  f.

1  Lectures  on  Metaphysics,  i.  p.  254.

*  Cf.  Hdffding's  Psychologic,  jrd  ed.,  1901,  p.  65;  Nayrac,  Physiologic  et  Psycho-
logic de  r Attention,  1906,  pp.  158  ff.


264  Feeling  [CH.  x,  §  3

this  intensification  continues  to  increase ;  and  vice  versa,  if  there
be  an  excess  of  concentration.  (2)  But,  inasmuch  as  these
quantitative  conditions  involve  a  plurality  of  distinguishable
presentations  or  changes  in  consciousness,  the  way  is  open  for
formal  conditions  as  well.  Since  different  presentations  consort
differently  when  above  the  threshold  of  consciousness  together,
one  field  may  be  wider  and  yet  as  intense  as  another,  or  intenser
and  yet  as  wide,  owing  to  a  more  advantageous  arrangement
of  its  constituents1.

The  doctrine  here  developed,  viz.,  that  feeling  depends  on
efficiency,  is  in  the  main  as  old  as  Aristotle2;  all  that  has  been
done  is  to  give  it  a  more  accurately  psychological  expression,
and  to  free  it  from  the  implications  of  the  faculty  theory3,  in
which  form  it  was  expounded  by  Hamilton4.  Of  possible

1  As  it  is  impossible  to  say  that  any  distinguishable  presentation  is  absolutely
simple,  the  hypothesis  of  subconsciousness  would  leave  us  free  to  assume  that  any
pleasantness  or  unpleasantness  that  cannot  be  explained  on  the  score  of  intensity
is  due  to  some obscure  harmony  or  discord,  compatibility  or  incompatibility, of
elements  not  separately  discernible. In  the  case  of  the  sensations  of  the  higher  senses
the  assumption  is  certainly  a  tempting  one. But  though  tempting,  it  is  not  really  a
very  scientific  procedure. If  a  particular  presentation  is  pleasurable  or  painful  in
such  wise  as  to  lead  to  a  redistribution  of  attention,  it  is  reasonable  to  look  for
an  explanation  primarily  in  its  connexion  with  the  rest  of  the  field  of  consciousness.
Moreover,  it  is  obvious — since  what  takes  place  in  subconsciousness  can  only  be
explained  in  analogy  with  what  takes  place  in  consciousness — that,  if  we  have  an
inexplicable  in  the  one,  we  must  have  a  corresponding  inexplicable  in  the  other.
If  the  feeling  produced  by  what  comports  itself  as  a  simple  presentation  cannot
be  explained  by  what  is  in  consciousness,  we  should  be  forced  to  admit  that  some
presentations  are  unpleasant  simply  because  they  are  unpleasant — an  inexplicability
which  the  hypothesis  of  subconsciousness  might  push  farther  back  but  would  not
remove.

2  Cf.  Nick.  Ethics,  x.  chh.  iv,  v.

3  It  is  these  that  make  the  ponderous  critique  of  J.  S.  Mill  {Examination  of  Sir
W.  Hamilton's  Philosophy,  ch.  xxv)  seem  plausible. Most  of  it  becomes  pointless
when  in  place  of  '  free  and  unimpeded  exercise  of  powers  and  energies '  innumerable
we  substitute  'subjective  efficiency,'  and  regard  feeling  not  as  the  state  of  an  organ  or
faculty  but  as  a  state  of  the  self. It  is  then  hardly  possible  to  parody  the  doctrine
as  "a  theory  .that  only  tells  us  that  pleasure  is  the  result  of  a  pleasurable  state  of  the
sense  and  a  pleasure-giving  quality  in  the  object  presented  to  it."

4  The  following  '  dynamical  theory  '—a  physiologically  complementary  doctrine  to
that  of  Aristotle — is  advanced  by  Lehmann. Representing  the  metabolic  process
of  nervous  repair  or  assimilation  by  A,  that  or  nervous  waste  or  dissimilation  by  D,
the  ratio  A\D  is  what  Verworn  has  named  '  biotonus '. Now  says  Lehmann  : — "  If
during  the  activity  of  a  central  group  of  neurones,  A  and  D  are  equal,  i.e.  A\D=  i,
this  biotonic  state  is  psychically  manifested  as  pleasure  (Lust],  which  increases  with
increasing  values  of  A  and  D. But  if  D  becomes  greater  than  A,  so  that  the  biotonus


CH.  x,  §  3]  Summary  and  Result  265

objections  there  are  at  least  two  that  we  must  anticipate,  and  the
consideration  of  which  will  help  to  make  the  general  view
clearer.  First,  it  may  be  urged  that,  according  to  this  view,
it  ought  to  be  one  continuous  pain  to  fall  asleep,  since  in  this
state  our  efficiency  is  rapidly  restricted  both  as  to  intensity  and
range.  This  statement  is  entirely  true  as  regards  the  intensity
and  substantially  true  as  regards  the  range,  at  least  of  the
higher  consciousness:  certain  massive  and  agreeable  organic
sensations  pertain  to  falling  asleep,  but  the  variety  of  presenta-
tions at  all  events  grows  less.  But  then  the  capacity  to  attend
is  also  rapidly  declining;  even  a  slight  intruding  sensation
entails  an  acute  sense  of  strain  in  one  sense,  in  place  of  the
massive  pleasure  of  repose  throughout;  and  any  voluntary
concentration  either  in  order  to  move  or  to  think  involves  a
like  organic  conflict,  futile  effort,  and  arrest  of  balmy  ease.
There  is  as  regards  the  more  definite  constituents  of  the  field
of  consciousness  a  close  resemblance  between  natural  sleepiness
and  the  state  of  monotonous  humdrum  we  call  tedium  or  ennui]
and  yet  the  very  same  excitement  that  would  relieve  the  one
by  dissipating  the  weariness  of  inaction  would  disturb  the  other
by  renewing  the  weariness  of  action:  the  one  is  commensurate
with  the  resources  of  the  moment,  the  other  is  not.  Thus  the
maximum  of  effective  attention  in  question  is,  as  Aristotle
would  say,  a  maximum  '  relative  to  us.'  It  is  possible,  therefore,
that  a  change  from  a  wider  to  a  narrower  field  of  consciousness
may  be  a  pleasurable  change,  if  attention  is  more  effectively
engaged.  Strictly  speaking,  however,  the  so-called  negative
pleasures  of  rest  do  not  consist  in  a  mere  narrowing  of  the
field  of  consciousness  so  much  as  in  a  change  in  the  amount
of  concentration.  Massive  organic  sensations  connected  with
restoration  take  the  place  of  the  comparatively  acute  sensations
of  jaded  powers  forced  to  work.  We  have,  then,  in  all  cases  to
bear  in  mind  this  subjective  relativity  of  all  pleasurable  or
painful  states  of  consciousness.

decreases  and  A\D  becomes  <  i ,  then  this  state  is  psychically  manifested  as  pain
(Unlust)  which  increases  the  more  the  less  the  value  of  AJD."  Psychophysiologie,
1912,  p.  369.


266  Feeling  [CH.  x,  §  4


Does  Pleasure  differ  qualitatively?

§4.  There  is  however  another  and  more  serious  difficulty
to  face.  It  has  long  been  a  burning  question  with  theoretical
moralists  whether  pleasures  differ  only  quantitatively  or  differ
qualitatively  as  well,  whether  psychological  analysis  will  justify
the  common  distinction  of  higher  and  lower  pleasures  or  force
us  to  recognise  nothing  but  differences  of  degree,  of  duration,
and  so  forth — as  expounded,  e.g.  by  Bentham,  whose  cynical  mot,
"  pushpin  is  as  good  as  poetry  provided  it  be  as  pleasant,"  was
long  a  stumbling  block  in  the  way  of  utilitarianism.  The  entire
issue  here  is  confused  by  an  ambiguity  in  terms  that  has  been
already  noticed :  pleasure  and  pleasures  have  not  the  same  con-
notation. By  a  pleasure  or  by  pleasures  we  mean  some  assign-
able presentation  or  presentations  experienced  as  pleasant — i.e.
as  affording  pleasure;  by  pleasure  simply  is  meant  this  subjective
state  of  feeling  itself1.  The  former,  like  other  objects  of  know-
ledge, admit  of  classification  in  various  ways  :  we  may  evaluate
them  as  coarse  or  as  noble,  or,  if  we  will,  as  cheap  and  whole-
some. But  while  the  causes  of  pleasure  are  manifold,  the  feeling
itself  is  a  subjective  state,  varying  only  in  intensity  and  duration.
The  best  evidence  of  this  lies  in  the  general  character  of  the
actions  that  ensue  through  feeling — the  matter  which  has  next
to  engage  us.  Whatever  be  the  variety  in  the  sources  of  plea-
sure, whatever  be  the  moral  or  conventional  estimate  of  their
worthiness,  if  a  given  '  situation '  is  pleasant  we  seek  so  far  to
retain  it,  if  painful  to  be  rid  of  it:  caeteris  paribus,  we  prefer
a  greater  pleasure  before  a  less,  a  less  pain  before  a  greater2.

1  Professor  Ladd,  overlooking  this  distinction,  is  guilty  of  a  serious  ignoratio
clenchi  in  arguing  this  question  '  with  a  sort  of  ethical,  even  religious,  atmosphere
upon  him '  as  Titchener  caustically  remarks. Cf.  Ladd's  Psychology  Descriptive  and
Explanatory,  1894,  pp.  182  ff.

2  Hence  in  the  Senate  of  the  University  of  Cambridge,  a  member  votes  by  saying
Placet  or  Non-placet  as  the  case  may  be. Of  the  above  passage  in  the  text  an  able
writer  has  said:  "  This  is  the  tabula  rasa  view  of  mind  applied  to  conation,  as  every
student  of  Condillac  will  recognise. The  mind  [on  this  view]  has  no  essential  conative
character. ...It  must  be  marked  by  hedonic  experience  before  action  can  take  place,  and
its  pleasures  and  pains  determine  its  activity  absolutely  "  (D.  Irons,  A  Study  in  the
Psychology  of  Ethics, 1903,  p.  xiii). What  is  here overlooked  is  just  that  mutual
implication  of  pleasure  and  preference,  of  feeling  and  conation  above  mentioned.
A  subject  that  is  '  determined  to  activity  by  its  pleasures  or  pains '  must  have  '  an
essentially  conative  character,'  and  is  so  far  j<r^"-determined  that  its  feelings  are  what


CH.  x,  §  4] Does  Pleasure  differ  qualitatively  ? 267

This  is,  in  fact,  the  whole  meaning  of  preference  as  a  psycho-
logical term.  Cf.  on  this  point  the  important  note  I  in  §  3  of
Kant's  Critique  of  the  Practical  Reason,  which  entirely  supports
the  position  here  maintained.  Wisdom  and  folly  are  alike  in  so
far  as  each  prefers  the  course  which  the  other  rejects:  Both
courses  cannot,  indeed,  be  objectively  preferable;  that,  however,
is  not  a  matter  for  psychology.  But  as  soon  as  reflexion  begins,
exceptions  to  this  primary  principle  of  action  seem  to  arise  con-
tinually, even  though  we  regard  the  individual  as  a  law  unto
himself.  Such  exceptions,  however,  we  may  presently  find  to
be  apparent  only1.  At  any  rate  the  principle  is  obviously  true
before  reflexion  begins — true  so  long  as  we  are  dealing  with
actually  present  sources  of  feeling,  and  not  with  their  re-pre-
sentations. To  admit  this  is  however  psychologically  to  admit
everything ;  for  the  further  progress  of  experience  can  then  be
genetically  explained.

Assuming  then  that  we  start  with  only  quantitative  variations
of  feeling,  we  have  to  attempt  to  explain  the  development  of
formal  and  qualitative  differences  in  the  character  given  to  the
grounds  of  feeling.  But,  if  aversions  and  pursuits  result  from
incommensurable  states  of  pain  and  pleasure,  there  seems  no
way  of  saving  the  unity  and  continuity  of  the  subject  except
by  speculative  assumption — the  doctrine  known  as  the  freedom
of  the  will  in  its  extremest  form.  The  one  position  involves
the  other,  and  the  more  scientific  course  is  to  avoid  both  as
far  as  we  can.

The  question,  then,  is:  How,  if  action  depends  in  the  last
resort  on  a  merely  quantitative  difference,  could  it  ever  come
about  that  what  we  call  the  higher  sources  of  feeling  should
supersede  the  lower?  If  it  is  only  quantity  that  turns  the
scales,  where  does  quality  come  in;  for  we  cannot  say,  e.g.  that

they  are  simply  because  it  is  what  it  is.  "  Any  feeling  (affecttts)  of  a  given  individual
differs  from  the  feeling  of  another  individual  just  as  far  as  the  essence  of  the  one
differs  from  the  essence  of  the  other,"  said  Spinoza  (Etkics,  III.  prop.  57).  An
individual  subject  then  can  never  be  conceived  as  blankly  indifferent,  but  always  as
'  interested '  and  purposive,  at  once  receptive  and  active,  that  is,  as  always  inter-
acting as  a  more  or  less  determinant  self  with  a  more  or  less  differentiated  environ-
ment. But  cf.  above,  ch.  i,  §  4,  p.  20,  ch.  ii,  §  5,  p.  54.  How  far  I  am  from  holding
the  hedonic  doctrine  Dr  Irons  imputed  to  me  is  shewn  at  length  elsewhere.  Cf.  The
Realm  of  Ends,  pp.  339-49.
1  Cf.  ch.  xi,  §  3,  pp.  284  f.


268  Feeling  [CH.  x,  §  4

the  astronomer  experiences  a  greater  thrill  of  delight  when  a
new  planet  rewards  his  search  than  the  hungry  savage  when  he
finds  a  clump  of  pig-nuts?  Tempora  mutantur  nos  et  mutamur
in  illis  contains  the  answer  in  brief.  We  shall  understand  this
answer  better  if  we  look  at  a  parallel  case,  or  what  is  really
our  own  from  another  point  of  view.  We  distinguish  between
higher  and  lower  forms  of  life:  we  might  say  there  is  more  life
in  a  large  oyster  than  in  a  small  one,  other  things  being  equal,
but  we  should  regard  a  crab  as  possessing  not  necessarily  more
life — as  measured  metabolically — but  certainly  as  manifesting
life  in  a  higher  form.  How,  in  the  evolution  of  the  animal
kingdom,  do  we  suppose  this  advance  to  have  been  made  ?
The  tendency  at  any  one  moment  is  simply  towards  more  life,
simply  towards  growth;  but  this  process  of  self-conservation
imperceptibly  but  steadily  modifies  the  self  that  is  conserved.
The  creature  is  bent  only  on  filling  its  skin ;  but  in  doing  this
as  easily  as  may  be  it  gets  a  better  skin  to  fill,  and  accordingly
seeks  to  fill  it  differently1.  Though  cabbage  and  honey  are  what
they  were  before,  they  have  changed  relatively  to  the  grub  now
that  it  has  become  a  butterfly.  So,  while  we  are  all  along  pre-
ferring a  more  pleasurable  state  of  consciousness  before  a  less,
the  content  of  our  consciousness  is  continually  changing;  the
greater  pleasure  still  outweighs  the  less,  but  the  '  pleasures '  to
be  weighed  are  either  themselves  different,  or  at  least  are  the  same
for  us  no  more.  What  we  require  then,  is  not  that  the  higher
pleasures  shall  always  afford  greater  pleasure  than  the  lower
did,  but  that  to  advance  to  the  level  of  life  on  which  pleasure
is  derived  from  higher  objects  shall  on  the  whole  be  more
pleasurable  and  less  painful  than  to  remain  behind.  And  this
condition  seems  to  be  met  first  by  the  opposite  effects  of  accom-
modation and  novelty,  referred  to  above2.  It  is  impossible  for
us  now  to  realise  the  absorbed  attention  to  its  present  sensations
which  engrosses  that  'blooming,  buzzing  confusion'  that  William
James  called  a  baby.  If  such  novelty  never  wore  off,  interests,
that  have  roots  in  the  past  and  carry  expectations  of  well  or  ill

1  There  is  here  some  anticipation  of  the  generalisation  formulated  by  Wundt  as
'the  principle  of  the  heterogony  of  ends':  "The  end  objectively  attained  usually
(regelmdssig)  realises  more  than  the  end  which  the  experient  previously  intended."
System  der  Philosophie,  1889,  p.  337.

2  Cf.  §  2,  p.  255,  n.  i.


CH.  x,  §  4] Does  Pleasure  differ  qualitatively? 269

in  the  future,  would  never  concern  it  at  all.  On  still  higher  levels
this  condition  is  again  met  by  the  important  fact  that  attention
can  be  more  effectively  expended  by  what  we  may  therefore
call  improvements  in  the  form  of  the  field  of  consciousness.
But  when  all  is  said  and  done  a  certain  repugnance  is  apt  to
arise  against  any  association  of  the  differences  between  the
higher  and  lower  feelings  with  differences  of  quantity.  Yet  such
repugnance  is  but  another  outcome  of  the  common  mistake  of
supposing  that  the  real  is  obtained  by  pulling  to  pieces  rather
than  by  building  up.

Do  not  all  charms  fly,
At  the  mere  touch  of  cold  philosophy?

No  logical  analysis — nay,  further,  no  logical  synthesis — is
adequate  to  the  fulness  of  things.  For  the  rest,  such  aversion
is  wholly  emotional,  and  is  no  more  rational  than  the  disgust
we  feel  on  first  witnessing  anatomical  dissections1.

1  "  To  look  at  anything  in  its  elements  makes  it  appear  inferior  to  what  it  seems
as  a  whole.  Resolve  the  statue  or  the  building  into  stone  and  the  laws  of  proportion,
and  no  worthy  causes  of  the  former  beautiful  result  seem  now  left  behind.  So,  also,
resolve  a  virtuous  act  into  the  passions  and  some  quantitative  law,  and  it  seems  to  be
rather  destroyed  than  analysed,  though  after  all  what  was  there  else  it  could  be  re-
solved into?"  Sir  A.  Grant,  Aristotle's  Ethics,  Essay  IV,  "The  Doctrine  of  the
Mean,"  i.  210  (ind  ed.).


CHAPTER XI

EFFECTS OF FEELING: EMOTION AND ACTION

The  James-Lange Theory  of  Emotion.

§  i.  We  turn  now  from  the  objective  causes  of  feeling  to
the  objective  effects,  the  motor  reactions  or  manifestations  of
the  affected  subject.  We  have  already  seen  reasons  for  regarding
as  primordial  both  the  diffusive  movement  and  the  organic
excitement  that  still  follow  immediately  upon  feeling  and  are
always  present  as  a  common  characteristic  in  every  variety  of
emotional  expression1.  We  have  accordingly  looked  upon  this
primitive  response  as  the  immediate  effect  of  feeling,  as  psycho-
logists, in  agreement  with  common-sense,  have  usually  done.
But  the  late  William  James  attempted  to  turn  this  position
upside  down.  A  very  similar  view  was  advanced  independently
and  almost  at  the  same  time  by  C.  Lange,  a  Danish  professor  of
medicine  ;  hence  the  name  'James-Lange  theory2.'  This  theory
then  we  must  examine  before  proceeding  further.

"  Common-sense  says :  we  lose  our  fortune,  are  sorry  and
weep ;  we  meet  a  bear,  are  frightened  and  run  ;  we  are  insulted
by  rivals,  are  angry  and  strike."  So  W.  James  begins,  but  he
continues :  "  The  hypothesis  here  to  be  defended  says  that  this
order  of  sequence  is  incorrect :  that  the  one  mental  state  is  not
immediately  induced  by  the  other,  that  the  bodily  manifestations
must  first  be  interposed  between,  and  that  the  more  rational
statement  is  that  we  feel  sorry  because  we  cry,  angry  because

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  5,  pp.  52  ff.

2  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  same  idea  had  occurred  as  early  as  1846  to  the  German
anatomist,  J.  Henle,  to  whom  James expressly  refers (cf. Stumpf, "  Ueber den
Begriff  der  Gemuthsbewegung," Zeitschr.  fur  Psych. Bd. xxi. 1899,  p.  68)  and
apparently  also  to  Czolbe  whose  view  F.  A.  Lange  accepts. Cf.  Lange's  Geschichte
des  Mxterialismus,  1877,  Bd.  n.  p.  373,


CH.  xi,  §  i] The  James- Lange Theory  of  Emotion 271

we  strike,  afraid  because  we  tremble,  and  not  that  we  cry,  strike
or  tremble  because  we  are  sorry,  angry  or  fearful  as  the  case
may  be1."  Thus  the  sequence  denied  is  the  psychological
sequence  commonly  upheld.  The  sequence  maintained  is  a
merely  psychophysical  sequence.  What  we  regard  as  active,
the  primitive  subjective  response,  is  not  really  active  at  all :  we
have  come  to  call  it  emotion  or  expression,  but  in  fact  it  is  only
commotion  or  impression — nothing  but  "sensational  processes
due  to  inward  currents  set  up  by  physical  happenings,  the  reflex

effect  of  the  exciting  object The  questions  now  are  causal:  'Just

what  changes  does  this  object  and  what  changes  does  that  object
excite  ?  '  and  '  How  come  they  to  excite  these  particular  changes,
and  not  others  ?  '2  "  But  we  have  not  had  to  wait  for  the  James-
Lange  theory  to  raise  these  questions,  and  surely  there  are  none
that  bring  out  its  defects  more  glaringly.  '  Objects '  that  deter-
mine bodily  changes  by  means  of  preorganized  mechanism  and
without  psychical  interposition  might  fairly  be  taken  to  be  phy-
sical objects;  and  indeed  the  whole  process,  we  note,  is  expressly
described  as  a  reflex  effect.  But  only  very  slovenly  physiolo-
gists talk  of  '  objects '  exciting  reflexes :  it  is  even  inexact  to  say
that  bare  sensations  do  so.  All  that  reflex  action  requires  is  a
stimulus.  "  The  essence  of  a  reflex  action,"  says  Foster,  "consists
in  the  transmutation,  by  means  of  the  irritable  protoplasm  of  a
nerve-cell,  of  afferent  into  efferent  impulses."  Let  James  be
confronted  first  by  a  caged  bear  and  next  by  a  bear  at  large :
to  the  one  object  he  presents  a  bun,  and  to  the  other  a  clean
pair  of  heels;  or  let  him  first  be  thrilled  by  a  Beethoven  symphony
and  then  by  a  Raphael  Madonna.  Will  he  now  undertake  to
account,  in  terms  of  stimuli  and  their  reflex  effects,  for  the  very
different  results  of  the  similar  '  causes '  in  the  one  case,  or  for  the
similar  results  of  the  very  different  '  causes '  in  the  other  ?

Such  a  challenge  would  certainly  be  declined,  and  Professor
James  would  remind  us  that  in  his  nomenclature  "  it  is  the  total
situation  which  is  the  '  object '  on  which  the  reaction  of  the  subject
is  made3."  But  there  is  just  a  world  of  difference  between

1  Mind,  1884,  ix.  pp.  i88ff. ;  and  again,  Principles  of  Psychology,  1890,  ch.  xxv.
C.  Lange's  work  (1885)  was  translated  into  German  under  the  title  Ueberdie  Gemuths-
bewegungen:  eine  psychophysiologische  Studie,  in  1887.

2  Principles  of  Psychology,  ii.  p.  453.

3  "  Physical  Basis  of  Emotion,"  Psychological  Review,  \.  (1894),  p.  5i8«. In  this


272  Effects  of  Feeling :  Emotion  and  Action  [CH.  xi,  §  i

' object'  =  stimulus  transformed  by  preorganized  mechanism1  into
an  efferent  discharge,  and  '  object '  =  total  situation  to  which  the
subject  reacts.  The  attempt  to  explain  emotion  causally  on  the
lines  of  the  former  meaning  lands  us  in  the  conscious  automaton
theory:  this  James  has  elsewhere  rejected.  The  latter  meaning,
on  the  other  hand,  involves  the  recognition,  first  of  the  subject's
attitude  as  essential  to  the  reaction,  and  next,  of  this  reaction  as
determined  by  pleasure  or  pain,  i.e.  by  some  '  interest '  resting
ultimately  on  these.  Such,  with  scarcely  an  exception,  has  always
been,  and  still  remains,  the  analysis  of  emotion  in  vogue  among
psychologists.  It  brings  to  the  fore  a  new  category,  that  of
worth  or  value,  one  wholly  extraneous  to  the  physiologist's
domain,  and  repugnant  to  the  mechanical  analogies  which  may
be  there  in  place.  No  doubt  such  a  concept  is  attained  only  by
reflexion,  but  the  experiences  from  which  it  is  drawn,  the  affective
states  and  the  conative  tendencies  of  the  subject  experiencing,
must  have  preceded.  From  this  central  standpoint  alone  the
objective  situation  has  a  worth  which  explains  the  subject's
attitude,  and  here  alone  can  we  find  the  clue  which  enables  us  to
answer  the  questions  of  cause  that  James  propounded.

Now  experimental  investigations2  have  shewn  that  such  vaso-
motor  and  respiratory  changes  as  are  prominent  in  emotional
excitement  are  present  also  to  some  extent  in  all  forms  of
conscious  activity.  The  more  unwonted  and  interesting  the
situation,  the  more  diffused  movements  predominate  over  move-
ments that  are  purposive ;  the  further  assimilation,  both  on  the
cognitive  and  the  reactive  side,  has  advanced,  the  more  diffusion
is  replaced  by  restriction  and  adaptation.  But  the  essential
point  is  that  both  these  factors  of  conscious  activity — organic
reflexes  and  purposive  reactions — are  always  present;  we  cannot,
therefore,  regard  them  as  distinct  and  also  separate  processes,  as

reply  to  criticisms  James  is  supposed  to  have  modified  his  views  :  it  would  be  nearer
the  truth  to  say  that — besides  admitting  '  the  slapdash  brevity '  in  which  they  were
expressed — he  has  made  admissions  incompatible  with  them.  So  too  Professor
Baldwin  thought.  Cf.  the  Postscript  to  his  article  in  the  same  volume  of  the
Psychological  Review,  p.  621.

1  How  the  mechanism  came  to  be  organized  in  the  first  instance  we  are  not  told  ;
but  facts  tend  to  shew  that  organization  is  the  result  of  mind,  not  mind  the  result  of
organization.

8  For  a  bibliography  of  these  up  to  date  see  J.  F.  Shepard's  article  "Organic
Changes  and  Feeling,"  Am.  //.  of  Psychology,  xvii.  (1906),  p.  559,  or  Ebbinghaus'
Psychologic  (1911),  i.  p.  564.


CH.  xi,  §  i] The  James- Lange Theory  of  Emotion 273

the  physiologist,  for  example,  regards  the  functions  of  striped,
and  unstriped  muscle.  Unless  we  are  prepared  to  treat  all
activity  as  reflex — as  the  physiologist  may  quite  well  do,  if  he
keep  strictly  to  his  own  point  of  view — it  does  not  seem  pos-
sible to  treat  emotional  expression  as  simply  so  much  organic
sensation  with  which  the  subject's  conative  attitude  has  no
connexion  at  all.

However,  it  soon  becomes  clear  that  James  never  seriously
proposed  the  '  causal  questions '  we  have  considered.  His  main
position  is  that  an  emotion  is  nothing  more  than  a  sum  of  organic
sensations;  but  while  seeking  to  establish  this  position  he  was  led
on  to  the  second  and  very  different  statement  which  we  have  now
in  turn  to  examine.  Here,  so  far  from  suggesting  inquiries  as  to
the  '  objects  that  excite '  emotion,  his  point  now  is  to  maintain
that  in  so  far  as  the  bodily  cause  is  set  up,  be  the  means  what
they  may,  in  so  far  the  emotion  is  present,  even  though  it  be
'  objectless.'  And  here,  at  length,  the  contention  is  quite  explicit :
Emotions  are  a  certain  complex  of  organic  sensations,  and  such
complexes  are  emotions  :  the  two  are  not  merely  coexistent,  they
are  identical.  The  exciting  object  is  thus,  after  all,  physiological  ;
that  is  to  say,  it  is  whatever  stimulus  sets  up  the  sensations.  It
cannot  be  psychological,  'the  total  situation  for  the  reacting
subject';  for  in  this  sense  the  emotion,  it  is  maintained,  may
be  '  objectless.'  In  support  of  his  position  Professor  James  first
of  all  cites  pathological  cases  as  evidence  of  such  objectless
emotion1.  Objectively  '  objectless '  emotion  may  quite  well  be,
but  that  it  is  ever  subjectively  '  objectless '  these  cases  are  far
from  proving.  They  simply  shew  that  the  objects  were  vague
and  imaginary.  It  is  well  known,  of  course,  that  organic  distur-
bances are  prone  to  evoke  the  sort  of  imagery  associated  with
them  in  the  past.  But  till  this  imagery  is  actually  evoked  the
organic  disturbance  is  not  emotional  at  all.  No  doubt  very
trivial  occasions  suffice  to  arouse  such  associations  even  in  sane
minds,  if  they  have  unsound  bodies ;  but  when  both  mind  and
body  are  diseased  together,  there  need  be  no  objective  occasion
at  all ;  subjective  occasions  there  still  are  in  plenty  as  a  careful
inspection  of  the  cases  cited  will  shew.  As  to  emotional  excite-
ment induced  by  intoxication,  and  so  far  groundless,  the  most
that  can  safely  be  said  is  that  the  'object'  may  be  vague,

1  Principles  of  Psychology,  ii.  pp.  458  ff.
W.  P.  18


274  Effects  of  Feeling :  Emotion  and  Action  [CH.  xi,  §  i

ill-defined  and  shifting,  but  not  that  it  is  absent  altogether.  In
tracing  the  genesis  of  mental  processes,  however,  we  must
interpret  the  abnormal  by  the  normal,  not  the  normal  by  the
abnormal.

James  next  follows  up  these  accounts  of  cases  in  which
certain  visceral  sensations  seemed  to  suffice  for  emotion,  in  the
absence  of  any  '  reason '  for  it,  with  accounts  of  other  cases  in
which  emotional  apathy  seemed  to  keep  pace  with  sensory
anaesthesia1,  arguing  that,  according  to  his  theory,  a  subject
absolutely  anaesthetic  should  experience  no  emotion,  although,
if  not  paralytic,  "emotion-inspiring  objects  might  evoke  the  usual
bodily  expression  from  him2."  We  have  here  then  the  converse
or  complementary  half  which  is  supposed  to  clinch  the  whole
argument.  Some  four  or  five  of  these  apathetic  cases  are  cited  :
two  of  them  are  regarded  by  the  mental  pathologists  who
describe  them  as  adverse  to  Professor  James's  theory3.  Two
were  cases  of  ,'  anaesthesia  artificially  induced  by  hypnotic
suggestion ' ;  but  as  James  himself  says,  "  of  course  we  must
bear  in  mind  the  fallibility  of  experiments  made  by  the  method
of  '  suggestion,' "  and  certainly  these  cases  seem  to  lack  the
simplicity  of  truth..  And  of  the  last  case4  he  also  candidly
observes :  "  We  must  remember  that  the  patient's  inemotivity
may  have  been  a  co-ordinate  result  with  the  anaesthesia  of  his
:neural  lesions,  and  not  the  anaesthesia's  mere  effect " — surely  the
most  natural  inference.  In  so  far  as  there  was  visceral  anaes-
thesia the  corresponding  element  in  emotional  expression  must
necessarily  have  been  lacking.  But  this  patient  testified  to
some  emotion  for  all  that,  though  his  senses  were  so  dull  that
lie  was  sure  of  nothing,  and  his  muscles  so  feeble  that  he  could
scarcely  speak  or  walk.  Still,  when  not  asleep  he  knew  that  he
was  miserable  and  spoke  of  waking  as  '  anguish.'  The  sight  of
his  wife  at  least  momentarily  affected  him,  and  he  is  reported
as  being  '  often  afraid '  that  his  daughter  might  be  dead  and  as
saying :  "  If  she  should  die  I  believe  I  should  not  survive  her."

1  Psych.  Rev.  i.  pp.  526  ff.  2  Principles,  ii.  p.  455.

*  G.  H.  J.  Berkeley,  "Two  Cases  of  General  Cutaneous  and  Sensory  Anaesthesia
"without  marked  Psychical  Implications,"  Brain  (1891),  xiv.  pp.  441  ff.

4  P.  Sollier,  "  Recherches  sur  les  rapports  de  la  Sensibilite  et  de  1'Emotion,"  Revue
philos.  xxxvii.  (1894),  pp.  241  ff. — an  article  written  to  support  the  James-Lange
theory — which  theory,  however,  the  writer  afterwards  abandoned.


CH.  xi,  §  i] The  James- Lange Theory  of  Emotion 275

His  general  apathy  detracts  nothing  from  all  this  but  rather
makes  it  more  striking.  Again  in  a  second  and  more  recent  case
of  visceral  anaesthesia1,  emotion  was  so  far  from  being  absolutely
abolished  that  the  patient  was  continually  distressed  at  the  loss
of  its  usual  sensory  accompaniments,  and  so — as  the  incompetent
reporter  na'fvely  remarks — "at  the  very  time  when  she  complained
of  not  experiencing  some  emotion  appropriate  to  the  circum-
stances, she  gave  all  the  signs  of  [having]  such  emotion."  In
short,  so  far  from  being  completely  apathetic,  she  was  so  anxious
to  be  cured  of  her  partial  apathy,  that  she  left  her  home  and
her  family  in  the  hope  of  being  cured  of  it  in  hospital.  Finally,
Professor  Sherrington  has  shewn  that  even  in  a  dog  deprived  of
all  consciousness  of  visceral  sensations — anger,  joy,  disgust,  and
fear — still  remained  as  evident  as  before3.

To  sum  up : — The  James-Lange  theory  is  psychologically
and  biologically  absurd,  a  flagrant  vo-repov  irporepov :  its  appeal
to  pathology  is  futile  in  fact,  and  false  in  method.  Emotion  is
always  the  expression  of  feeling,  and  feeling — for  the  subject
that  feels — has  always  some  objective  ground.  Emotion  is  never
the  reception  of  impressions,  but  is  always  the  response  to  them.
This  response  consists  normally  in  a  twofold,  more  or  less  diffuse,
excitation,  which  (a)  alters  respiration,  circulation  and  other
vegetal  processes,  and  (b]  braces  or  relaxes  various  voluntary
muscles  in  ways  characteristic  of  the  so-called  sthenic  or  asthenic
emotions — anger  or  terror,  for  instance.  The  James-Lange
theory  after  all  has  done  nothing  to  shew  (analytically)  that  the
motor  components  are  not  as  essential  to  emotional  expression
as  the  organic,  or  (genetically)  that  the  organic  components  are
not  as  truly  subjectively  determined  as  the  motor  are.  From
first  to  last  it  is  but  one  of  many  instances  of  physiology  mis-
applied3.

1  D'Allonnes,  "  Role  des  sensations  internes,  etc."  Rev.  philos.  lx.  ( 1905),  pp.  592  ff.
Appeared  after  W.  James's  death.

2  "  Experiments  on  the  Value  of  Vascular  and  Visceral  Factors  for  the  Genesis  of
Emotion,"  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  ( 1900),  Ixvi.  pp.  390  ff. ;  and  Nature,  Ixii.  pp.  328  ff.  Further
confirmation  of  Sherrington's  work  has  been  recently  obtained  by  an  Italian  physio-
logist, G.  Pagano. Cf.  L'Annte  psychologique,  1914,  pp.  483  f.

3  A  brief  and  effective  summary  of  the  psychophysical  objections  to  this  theory  is
given  by  Lehmann  (Grundziige  der  Psyckophysiologie,  1912,  pp.  725-728)  who  inci-
dentally remarks  that  Lange  (his  fellow-countryman)  has  actually,  though  not  explicitly,
abandoned  it.

18— 2


276  Effects  of  Feeling :  Emotion  and  Action  [CH.  xi,  §  2


Emotional  Expression  and  Purposive  Action.

§  2.  We  may  then  safely  continue  to  regard  the  diffused
organic  excitement  of  emotional  expression  as  the  effect  of  the
feeling  underlying  the  emotion  and  not  as  the  cause  of  the
motor  excitation  to  which  that  feeling  leads ;  in  other  words  we
may  still  look  upon  the  expression  of  emotion  as  active  not
passive.  So  we  may  now  at  length  proceed  to  inquire  whether
in  these  manifestations  or  effects  of  feeling  there  is  any  contrast
corresponding  to  the  opposing  extremes  of  pleasure  and  pain.
But  first  some  distinction  is  called  for  among  the  various  move-
ments expressive  of  emotion  ;  for  in  many  of  these  there  is  more
than  the  direct  effect  of  feeling  regarded  as  merely  pleasure  or
displeasure.  It  has  been  usual  with  psychologists  to  confound
emotions  with  feeling,  because  intense  feeling  is  essential  to  emo-
tion. Strictly  speaking,  however,  a  state  of  emotion  is  a  complete
state  of  mind,  a  psychosis,  and  not  a  psychical  element,  if  we
may  so  say.  Thus  in  anger,  over  and  above  pain,  we  have  a  more
or  less  definite  object  as  its  cause,  and — added  to  the  diffused  'wave
of  excitement' — we  have  a  certain  characteristic  reactive  display
consisting  of  frowns,  compressed  lips,  erect  head,  clenched  fists,  &c.
in  a  word,  the  combative  attitude,  as  its  effect.  And  similarly  of
other  emotions :  the  primary  effects  of  feeling  are  overlaid  by
what  Darwin  called  'serviceable  associated  habits.'  The  pur-
posive actions  of  an  earlier  stage  of  development,  that  is  to  say,
become  the  emotive  outlet  of  a  later  stage  though  doubtless  some-
what 'atrophied.'  In  the  circumstances  in  which  our  ancestors
worried  their  enemies  we  only  shew  our  teeth.  We  must,  there-
fore, leave  aside  the  more  complex  emotional  manifestations  and
look  only  to  the  simplest  effects  of  pleasure  and  of  pain,  to  see  if
we  can  discover  any  fundamental  contrast  between  these1.

1  Of  the  three  principles  that  Darwin  advanced  in  explanation  of  emotional
expression  the  last  seems  both  psychologically  and  physiologically  more  fundamental
than  the  more  striking  'principle  of  serviceable  associated  habits'  which  he  placed
first.  His  last  principle  he  called  'the  principle  of  the  direct  action  of  the  nervous
system ' — a  psychologically  inappropriate  name  for  what  Bain  had  previously  called
'  the  law  of  diffusion ' — which  it  is  now  proposed  to  call  '  the  dynamogenic  law.'  (Cf.
James,  Principles,  ii.  pp.  372,  379,  381.)  But  it  is  questionable  if  the  more  definite
term  is  here  an  improvement.  The  expression  of  the  asthenic  emotions  indicates
not  power  but  the  loss  of  it,  so  far  as  voluntary  movements  go;  and  even  the  reflexes
that  occur  are  largely  due  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  controlling  inhibition  of  the  higher


CH.  xi,  §  2]  Expression  and  Purposive  Action  277

Joy  finds  expression  in  dancing,  clapping  the  hands  and
meaningless  laughter,  and  these  actions  are  not  only  pleasurable
in  themselves  but  such  as  increase  the  existing  pleasure.  Atten-
tion is  not  drafted  off  or  diverted  ;  but  rather  the  available
resources  seem  reinforced,  so  that  the  old  expenditure  is  supported
as  well  as  the  new.  To  the  pleasure  on  the  receptive  side  is
added  pleasure  on  the  active  side.  The  violent  contortions  due
to  pain,  on  the  other  hand,  are  painful  in  themselves,  though  less
intense  than  the  pains  from  which  they  withdraw  attention  ;
they  are  but  counter-irritants  that  arrest  or  inhibit  still  more
painful  thoughts  or  sensations.  Thus,  according  to  Darwin,
"  sailors  who  are  to  be  flogged  sometimes  take  a  piece  of  lead
in  their  mouths  in  order  to  bite  it  with  their  utmost  force,  and
thus  to  bear  the  pain."  When  in  this  way  we  take  account  of
the  immediate  effects  as  well  as  of  the  causes  of  feeling,  we  find
it  still  more  strikingly  true  that  only  in  pleasurable  states  is  there
an  efficient  expenditure  of  attention.  It  is  needless  now  to
dwell  upon  this  point,  although  any  earlier  mention  of  it  would
hardly  have  been  in  place.

Nevertheless  we  should  fail  to  realise  the  contrast  between
the  motor  effects  of  pleasure  and  of  pain  if  we  merely  regarded
them  as  cases  of  diffusion.  The  intenser  the  feeling  the  intenser
the  reaction,  no  doubt,  whether  it  be  smiles  or  tears,  jumping  for
joy,  or  writhing  in  agony.  But  in  the  movements  consequent  on
pleasure  the  diffusion  is  the  result  of  mere  exuberance,  an  over-
flow of  good  spirits,  as  we  sometimes  say,  and  these  movements,
as  already  remarked,  are  always  comparatively  purposeless  or
playful.  Hence  Darwin's  principle  of  serviceable  habits  is  not
exemplified  in  them.  Even  the  earliest  expressions  of  pain,  on

centres.  As  this  is  a  point  of  some  importance  a  brief  quotation  from  what  one  might
call  a  buried  scientific  classic  may  be  allowed : — "  The  higher  nervous  arrange-
ments, evolved  out  of  the  lower,  keep  down  the  lower,  just  as  a  government  evolved
out  of  a  nation  controls  as  well  as  directs  that  nation.  If  this  be  the  process  of  evolu-
tion, then  the  reversive  process  of  dissolution  is  not  only  a  '  taking  off'  of  the  higher,
but  is  at  the  very  same  time  a  '  letting  go '  of  the  lower.  If  the  governing  body  of
this  country  were  destroyed  suddenly,  we  should  have  two  causes  of  lamentation  :
(i)  the  loss  of  services  of  eminent  men,  and  (2)  the  anarchy  of  the  now  uncontrolled
people."  (I.  Hughlings  Jackson,  Croonian  Lectures,  1884,  Reprint,  p.  16.)  The  im-
mediate reference  is  to  an  epileptic  seizure  but  its  application  here  is  obvious.

It  was  in  illustration  of  the  law  of  diffusion  that  Darwin  described  the  move-
ments expressive  of  joy  and  grief,  emotions  which  in  some  form  or  other  are  surely
the  most  primitive  of  any.


278  Effects  of  Feeling :  Emotion  and  Action  [CH.  xi,  §  2

the  contrary,  seem  but  so  many  efforts  to  escape  from  the  cause
of  it ;  in  them  there  is  at  least  the  blind  purpose  to  flee  from
a  definite  ill:  in  pleasure  there  is  only  the  enjoyment  of  present
fortune.  We  may  then  fairly  say  that,  though  there  is  no  cona-
tion without  feeling,  there  may  be  feeling  without  conation.  If
so  the  analytical  distinction  between  feeling  and  conation  rests
upon  a  real  difference.  But  the  inseparable  connexion  between
feeling  and  attention  or  conscious  activity  is  not  thereby  denied :
what  we  recognise  is  that  pain  is  functionally  a  draft  on  this
activity,  pleasure  functionally  an  enhancement  of  it.  The  differ-
ence in  the  latter  case  betokens  primarily  reinforcement;  in  the
former  it  betokens  defence.  Thus  in  the  end  we  find  the  old
law  of  self-conservation  so  far  confirmed1.

From  Plato  downwards  psychologists  and  moralists  have
been  fond  of  discussing  the  relation  of  pleasure  and  pain.  It
has  been  maintained  that  pain  is  the  first  and  more  fundamental
fact,  and  pleasure  nothing  but  relief  from  pain ;  and,  again,  on
the  other  side,  that  pleasure  is  prior  and  positive,  and  pain  only
the  negation  of  pleasure.  So  far  as  the  mere  change  goes,  it  is
obviously  true  that  the  diminution  of  pain  is  pro  tanto  pleasant,
while  the  diminution  of  pleasure  is  pro  tanto  painful ;  and  if
relativity  had  the  unlimited  range  sometimes  assigned  to  it  this
would  be  all  we  could  say.  But  we  must  sooner  or  later  recog-
nise the  existence  of  a  comparatively  fixed  neutral  state,  devia-
tions from  which,  of  comparatively  short  duration  and  of  sufficient
intensity,  constitute  noticeable  states  of  pleasure  or  pain.  Such
states,  if  not  of  liminal  intensity,  may  then  be  further  diminished
without  reversing  their  pleasurable  or  painful  character.  The
turning-point  here  implied  may,  of  course,  gradually  change
too — as  a  result,  in  fact,  of  the  law  of  accommodation2.  Thus
a  long  run  of  pleasure  would  raise  '  the  hedonistic  zero,'
while — to  the  small  extent  to  which  accommodation  to  pain
is  possible — a  continuance  of  pain  would  lower  it.  Still
such  admission  makes  no  material  difference  where  the  actual
feeling  of  the  moment  is  alone  concerned  and  retrospect  out  of
the  question.  On  the  whole  it  seems,  therefore,  most  reasonable
to  regard  pleasure  and  pain  as  emerging  out  of  a  neutral  state,
which  is  prior  to  and  distinct  from  both — not  a  state  of  absolute

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  x,  §  a,  p.  246.

2  Cf.  above,  ch.  iv,  §  5,  p.  84.


CH.  xi,  §  2]  Expression  and  Purposive  Action  279

indifference,  but  of  simple  contentment,  marked  by  no  special
active  display.  It  is  by  reference  to  such  state  of  tranquillity  or
(iTrdBeia  that  we  see  most  clearly  the  superior  volitional  efficacy
of  pain  upon  which  pessimists  love  to  descant.  "  Nobody,"
said  von  Hartmann,  "  who  had  to  choose  between  no  taste  at  all  /
for  ten  minutes  or  five  minutes  of  a  pleasant  taste  and  then  five
minutes  of  an  unpleasant  taste,  would  prefer  the  last."  Most
men  and  all  the  lower  animals  are  content  '  to  let  well  alone.'

To  ascertain  the  origin  and  progress  of  purposive  action  it
seems,  then,  that  we  must  look  to  the  effects  of  pain  rather  than
to  those  of  pleasure1.  It  is  true  that  psychologists  not  infre-
quently describe  the  earliest  purposive  movements  as  appetitive  ;
or  at  least  they  treat  appetitive  and  aversive  movements  as  co-
ordinate and  equally  primitive,  pleasure  being  supposed  to  lead
to  action  for  its  continuance  as  much  as  pain  to  action  for  its
removal.  No  doubt,  so  soon  as  the  connexion  between  a  pleasur-
able sensation  and  the  appropriate  action  is  completely  estab-
lished, as  in  the  infant  imbibing  food,  the  whole  process  becomes
self-sustaining  until  satiety  begins.  But  the  point  is  that  such
facility  was  first  acquired  under  the  teaching  of  pain — the  pain
of  unsatisfied  hunger.  The  term  '  appetite '  is  apt  both  by  its
etymology  and  its  later  associations  to  be  misleading.  What
are  called  the  '  instinctive '  appetites2  are — when  regarded  from
their  active  side — movements  determined  by  some  existing
uneasy  sensation.  So  far  as  their  earliest  manifestation  in
a  particular  individual  is  concerned,  this  urgency  seems  almost
entirely  of  the  nature  of  a  vis  a  tergo  ;  and  the  resulting  move-
ments are  only  more  definite  than  those  simply  expressive  of  pain
because  of  inherited  pre-adaptation ;  on  which  account,  of  course,
they  are  called  'instinctive.'  Still  what  one  inherits  another  must
have  acquired,  and  we  have  agreed  here  to  leave  heredity  on  one
side  and  consider  only  the  original  evolution.

If  none  but  psychological  causes  were  at  work  this  evolution
would  be  very  long  and  in  its  early  stages  very  -uncertain.  At
first,  when  only  random  movements  ensue,  we  may  fairly  suppose
both  that  the  chance  of  at  once  making  a  happy  hit  would  be
small  and  that  the  number  of  chances,  the  space  for  repentance,

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  5,  pp.  52-55.

2  The  play  of  a  kitten  is  instinctive  but  it  is  not  appetitive :  it  is  a  case  not  of
craving  but  of  fruition,  in  other  words  it  is  not  purposeful  but  just  playful.


280  Effects  of  Feeling :  Emotion  and  Action  [CH.  xi,  §  2

would  also  be  small.  Under  such  circumstances  natural  selection
would  have  to  do  almost  everything  and  subjective  selection
almost  nothing.  So  far  as  natural  selection  worked,  we  should
have,  not  the  individual  subject  making  a  series  of  tries  and
perfecting  itself  by  practice,  as  in  learning  to  dance  or  swim  ;
but  we  should  have  those  individuals  whose  structure  happened
to  vary  for  the  better  surviving,  increasing,  and  displacing  the
rest.  How  much  natural  selection,  apparently  unaided,  can
accomplish  in  the  way  of  complicated  adjustment  we  see" in  the
adaptation  of  the  form  and  colour  of  plants  and  animals  to  their
environment.  Both  factors,  in  reality,  operate  at  once,  and  it
would  be  hard  to  fix  a  limit  to  either ;  though  natural  selection
seems  to  lose  in  comparative  importance  as  we  advance  towards
the  higher  stages  of  life.

But  psychologically  we  have  primarily  to  consider  subjective
selection,  i.e.  first  of  all,  the  connexion  of  particular  movements
with  particular  sensations  through  the  mediation  of  feeling.  The
sensations  here  concerned  are  mainly  painful  stimulations  from
the  environment,  the  recurring  pains  of  innutrition,  weariness,
&c.,  or  the  pleasurable  sensations,  due  to  the  satisfaction  of  these
organic  wants.  This  satisfaction,  though  not  a  mere  '  filling-up '
— as  Plato  at  one  time  contended — is  still  preceded  by  pain;  but
over  and  above  the  removal  of  this  it  implies,  however,  a  certain
surplus  of  positive  good.  There  seem  only  a  few  points  to  notice.
(a)  When  the  movements  that  ensue  through  pleasure  are  them-
selves pleasurable  there  is  ordinarily  no  ground  for  singling  out
any  one  ;  such  movements  simply  enhance  the  general  enjoyment,
which  is  complete  in  itself  and  so  far  contains  no  hint  of  anything
beyond,  (b}  Should  one  of  these  spontaneous  movements  of
pleasure  chance  to  cause  pain,  no  doubt  such  movement  is
speedily  arrested.  Probably  the  most  immediate  connexion
possible  between  feeling  and  purposive  action  is  that  in  which
a  painful  movement  leads  through  pain  to  its  own  suppres-
sion. But  such  connexion  is  not  very  fruitful  of  conse-
quences, inasmuch  as  it  only  secures  what  we  may  call  internal
training  and  does  little  to  extend  the  relation  of  the  individual
to  its  environment,  (c)  Out  of  the  irregular,  seemingly  aimless,
movements  that  indirectly  relieve  pain  some  one  may  chance  to
remove  the  cause  of  it  altogether.  Upon  this  movement,  the
last  of  a  tentative  series,  attention,  released  from  the  pain,  is


CH.  xi,  §  3]  Desire  281

concentrated  ;  and  in  this  way  the  evil  and  the  remedy  become
so  far  connected  that,  when  the  painful  situation  recurs,  the  many
diffused  movements  become  less,  and  the  one  purposive  move-
ment more,  pronounced  :  the  one  effectual  way  is  at  length
established  and  the  others,  which  were  but  palliatives,  disappear.

(d)  When  things  have  advanced  so  far  that  some  one  definite
movement  is  at  once  '  released '  by  the  painful  sensation  which
it  cures  or  alleviates,  it  is  not  long  before  a  still  further  ad-
vance is  possible:  then  we  have  preventive  movements. Thanks
to  the  orderliness  of  things,  dangers  have  their  premonitions.
After  a  time,  therefore,  the  occurrence  of  some  warning  sensation
revives  the  image  of  the  harm  that  has  previously  followed  in
its  wake,  and  a  movement — either  like  the  first,  or  another  that
has  to  be  selected  from  the  random  tries  of  fear — occurs  in  time
to  avert  the  impending  ill. (e) In like  manner,  provided  the
cravings of  appetite are  felt, any signs of the presence of
pleasurable  objects  prompt  to  movements  for  their  enjoyment  or
appropriation. In  these  last  cases  we  have  action  determined  by
percepts. The  cases  in  which  the  subject  is  incited  to  action  by
ideas,  as  distinct  from percepts,  of  pleasurable  objects  require
a  more  detailed  consideration  ;  such  are  the  facts  mainly  covered
by  the  term  '  desire.'

Desire.

§  3.  By  the  time  that  ideas  are  sufficiently  self-sustaining
to  form  trains  that  are  not  wholly  shaped  by  the  circumstances
of  the  present,  entirely  new  possibilities  of  action  are  opened  up.
We  can  '  desire '  to  live  again  through  experiences  of  which  there
is  nothing  actually  present  to  remind  us,  and  we  can  '  desire '
a  new  experience  which  as  yet  we  only  imagine.  We  often,  no
doubt,  apply  the  term  to  the  simpler  states  mentioned  under

(e)  in  the  last  paragraph :  the  fox  in  the  fable  is  said  to  have
desired  the  grapes  he  vilified  because  out  of  his  reach. Again,
at  the  other  extreme  we  sometimes  speak  of  a  desire  for  honour,
or  for  wealth,  and  the  like ; but  such  are  not  single  states  of
mind  ;  they  are  rather  habitual  '  pursuits '  of  general  '  ends '  in
which  we  are  personally  interested. Abstractions  of  this  kind
belong, however,  to  a more advanced stage  of  development
than that  at  which  desire  begins,  and  of  necessity  imply  more


282  Effects  of  Feeling :  Emotion  and  Action  [CH.  xi,  §  3

complicated  grounds  of  action  than  we  can  at  present  examine1.
The  essential  characteristics  of  desire  will  be  more  apparent  if
we  suppose  a  case  somewhere  between  these  extremes.  A  busy
man  reads  a  novel  at  the  close  of  the  day,  and  finds  himself  led
off  by  a  reference  to  angling  or  tropical  scenery  to  picture  him-
self with  his  rods  packed  en  route  for  Scotland,  or  booked  by  the
next  steamer  for  the  fairyland  of  the  West  Indies.  Presently,
while  the  ideas  of  Jamaica  or  of  fishing  exploits  are  at  least  as
vividly  imagined  as  before,  the  fancied  preparations  receive
a  rude  shock  as  the  thought  of  his  work  recurs.  Some  such  case
we  may  take  as  typical  and  attempt  to  analyse  it.

First  of  all  it  is  obviously  true,  at  least  of  such  more  concrete
desires,  that  what  awakens  desire  at  one  time  fails  to  do  so  at
another,  and  that  we  may  even  be  so  absorbed  in,  or  so  satisfied
with,  the  present  as  not  to  be  amenable  to  (new)  desires  at  all.
For  a  particular  individual  a  given  x  or  y  cannot,  then,  be  called
desirable  per  sez ;  if  it  is  actually  desired  it  is  so  in  relation  to
some  situation  then  and  there  presented  or  contemplated.  Of
what  nature  is  this  relation?  (i)  At  the  level  of  psychical  life
that  we  have  now  reached,  very  close  and  complete  connexions
have  been  formed  between  ideas  and  the  movements  necessary
for  their  realisation  ;  so  that  when  the  idea  is  vividly  present
these  movements  are  apt  to  be  nascent.  This  association  is  the
result  of  subjective  selection — i.e.  is  primarily  mediated  by
feeling — but  being  once  established,  it  persists  like  other
associations  independently  of  its  original  ground.  (2)  Those
movements  are  especially  apt  to  become  nascent  which  have
not  been  recently  executed,  which  are  therefore  fresh  and  ac-
companied by  the  organic  sensations  of  freshness;  so  also,  on
the  other  hand,  those  movements  which  are  frequently  exe-
cuted, and  therefore  readily  aroused.  The  latter  fact,  which
chiefly  concerns  habitual  desires,  may  for  the  moment  be  left
aside.  (3)  At  times,  then,  when  there  is  a  lack  of  present
interests,  or  when  these  have  begun  to  wane,  or  when  there  is
positive  pain,  attention  is  ready  to  fasten  on  any  new  suggestion
that  calls  for  more  activity,  requires  a  change  of  active  attitude,
or  promises  relief.  Such  spontaneous  concentration  of  attention

1  Cf.  below,  ch.  xvi.

2  The  ambiguity  of  this  term  in  ethical  discussion  is  well  known :  as  here  used,
that  is  psychologically,  it  means  simply  what  can  be  desired  not  what  ought  to  be.


CH.  xi,  §  3]  Desire  283

ensures  greater  vividness  to  the  new  idea,  whatever  it  be,  and  to
its  belongings.  In  some  cases  this  greater  vividness  may  suffice.
This  is  most  likely  to  happen  when  the  new  idea  affords  in-
tellectual occupation,  and  this  is  at  the  time  congenial ;  it  is
common  too  in  indolent  and  imaginative  persons  who  prefer
dreaming  to  doing.  (4)  But  when  the  new  idea  does  not  lead  off
the  pent-up  stream  of  action  by  opening  out  fresh  channels,
when,  on  the  contrary,  it  keeps  this  directed  towards  itself  while
the  attitude  is  one  of  interested  expectation,  then  we  have  desire.
In  such  a  state  the  intensity  of  the  re-presentation  is  not  adequate
to  the  intensity  of  the  incipient  action  it  has  aroused.  This  is
most  obvious  when  the  latter  is  intended  to  realise  the  actual  in
perception,  and  the  former  remains  only  an  idea.  If  it  were
possible  by  concentrating  attention  to  convert  ideas  into
percepts,  there  would  be  an  end  of  most  desires  :  "  if  wishes  were
horses  beggars  would  ride."  (5)  But  our  voluntary  power  over
movements  is  in  general  of  this  kind  :  here  the  fiat  may  become
fact.  When  we  cannot  hear  we  can  at  least  listen,  and,  though
there  be  nothing  to  fill  them,  we  can  at  least  hold  out  our  hands.
It  would  seem,  then,  that  the  ground  of  desire  lies  essentially
in  this  excess  of  the  active  reaction  above  the  intensity  of  the
re- presentation  (the  one  constituting  the  '  motive,'  the  other
being  merely  the  idea  of  the  'end'  of  desire,  or  the  desideratum).
Further  this  disparity  would  seem  to  rest  ultimately  on  the  fact  that
movements  have,  and  sensations  have  not,  a  subjective  initiative.

(6)  Such  impulse  or  striving  to  act  will,  as  already  hinted,  be
stronger  the  greater  the  available  energy,  the  fewer  the  present
outlets,  and,  habits  apart,  the  fresher  the  new  opening  for  activity.

(7)  Finally,  it  is  to  be  noted  that,  when  such  inchoate  action  can
be  at  once  consummated,  desire  ends  where  it  begins  :  to  consti-
tute a  definite  state  of  desire  there  must  be  an  obstacle  to  the
realisation  of  the  desideratum — not  an  absolute  one,  for  then,  at
the  most,  we  should  but  long  or  wish — but  only  an  obstacle  to
its  realisation  by  means  of  the  actions  its  representation  has
aroused.

However  the  desire  may  have  been  called  forth,  its  intensity
is  primarily  identical  with  the  strength  of  this  impulse  to  action.
It  has  no  definite  or  constant  relation  to  the  amount  of  pleasure
that  may  result  from  its  satisfaction.  The  feeling  directly  con-
sequent on  desire  as  a  state  of  want  and  restraint  is  one  of  pain,


284  Effects  of  Feeling :  Emotion  and  Action  [CH.  xi,  §  3

and  the  reaction  which  this  pain  sets  up  may  either  suppress  the
desire  or  prompt  to  efforts  to  avoid  or  overcome  the  obstacles  in
its  way.  To  inquire  into  these  alternatives  would  lead  us  into
the  higher  phases  of  voluntary  action  ;  but  we  must  first  consider
the  relation  of  desire  to  feeling  more  closely.

Instances  are  by  no  means  wanting  of  very  imperious  desires
accompanied  by  the  clear  knowledge  that  their  gratification
will  be  positively  distasteful1.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  possible
to  recollect  or  picture  circumstances,  known  or  believed  to  be
intensely  pleasurable,  without  any  desire  for  their  realisation  being
awakened  at  all :  we  can  recall  or  admire  without  desiring.  There
is  then  no  fixed  and  invariable  connexion  between  desire  and  feel-
ing. Yet  there  are  many  psychologists  who  maintain  that  desire
is  excited  always  by  the  prospect  of  the  pleasure  that  may  arise
through  its  gratification,  and  that  the  strength  of  the  desire  is
proportional  to  the  intensity  of  the  pleasure  thus  anticipated.
Quidquid petitur petitur  sub  specie  boni  is  their  main  formula.  The
plausibility  of  this  doctrine  here  rests  partly  upon  a  seemingly
imperfect  analysis  of  what  strictly  pertains  to  desire,  and  partly
upon  the  fact  that  it  is  substantially  true  both  of  what  we  may
call  '  presentation-prompted '  action,  which  belongs  to  an  earlier
stage  than  desire,  and  of  the  more  or  less  rational  action  which
belongs  to  a  later.  In  the  very  moment  of  enjoyment  it  may  be
fairly  supposed  that  action  is  sustained  mainly  by  the  pleasure
received  and  is  proportional  to  the  intensity  of  that  pleasure.
But  here  there  is  no  re-presentation  and  no  seeking  ;  the  con-
ditions essential  to  desire,  therefore,  do  not  apply.  Again,
in  rational  action,  where  both  are  present,  it  may  be  true
— to  quote  the  words  of  an  able  advocate  of  the  view  here
controverted — that  "our  character  as  rational  beings  is  to
desire  everything  exactly  according  to  its  pleasure  value2."  Yet
consider  what  such  conceptions  as  '  the  good,'  '  pleasure  value '
and  '  rational  action '  involve.  Here  we  have  foresight  and  cal-
culation, regard  for  self  as  an  object  of  permanent  interest — in  a
word,  Butler's  'cool  self-love';  but  desire  in  this  respect  is  'blind,'
without  either  the  present  certainty  of  sense  or  the  assured
prevision  of  reason.  Pleasure  in  the  past,  no  doubt,  has  usually

1  As  such  an  instance  may  be  cited  Plato's  story  of  Leontius,  the  son  of  Aglaion,
in  Rep.  IV.  439^?;*.

2  Bain,  Emotions  and  the  Will,  yd.  ed.  p.  438.


CH.  xi,  §  3]  Desire  285

brought  about  the  association  between  the  representation  of  the
desired  object  and  the  movement  for  its  realisation  ;  but  neither
the  recollection  of  this  pleasure  nor  its  anticipation  is  necessary
to  desire,  and  even  when  present  they  do  not  determine  what
urgency  it  will  have.  The  best  proof  of  this  lies  in  certain
habitual  desires.  Pleasures  are  diminished  by  repetition,  whilst
habits  are  strengthened  by  it ;  if  the  intensity  of  desire,  therefore,
were  proportioned  to  the  '  pleasure  value '  of  its  gratification,  the
desire  for  renewed  gratification  should  diminish  as  this  pleasure
grows  less ;  but,  if  the  present  pain  of  restraint  from  action
determines  the  intensity  of  desire,  this  should  increase  as  the
action  becomes  habitual.  And  observation  seems  to  shew  that,
unless  either  prudence  suggests  the  forcible  suppression  of  such
belated  desires,  or  the  active  energies  themselves  fail,  these  de-
sires may  in  fact  become  more  imperious,  although  less  and
less  productive  of  positive  pleasure,  as  time  goes  on.

In  this  there  is,  of  course,  no  exception  to  the  general  prin-
ciple that  action  is  consequent  on  feeling — a  greater  pleasure
being  preferred  before  a  less,  a  less  pain  before  a  greater ;  for,
though  the  feeling  that  follows  upon  its  satisfaction  be  less  or
even  change  entirely,  still  the  pain  of  the  unsatisfied  desire
increases  as  the  desire  hardens  into  habit.  It  is  also  a  point  in
favour  of  the  position  here  taken  that  appetites,  which  may  be
compared  to  inherited  desires,  certainly  prompt  to  action  by
present  pain  rather  than  by  prospective  pleasure.

The  higher  forms  of  emotion  and  action  belong  to  the
intellective  and  self-conscious  level,  to  which  we  now  pass,  and
we  must  try  to  treat  of  them  there  in  due  course1.

1  Cf.  ch.  xvi


INTELLECTION

Acquisition  of  Language

§  i.  Desire  naturally  prompts  to  the  search  for  the  means
to  its  satisfaction  and  frequently  to  a  mental  rehearsal  of  various
possible  courses  of  action,  their  advantages  and  disadvantages.
Thus,  by  the  time  the  ideational  continuum  had  become  sufficiently
developed  to  furnish  free  ideas  as  material  for  thought,  motives
were  already  forthcoming  for  thinking  to  begin.  It  is  impossible
precisely  to  determine  just  when  this  level  was  first  attained:
the  advance  was  too  gradual  for  that.  Fitfully,  in  the  excite-
ment aroused  by  strange  and  perplexing  circumstances,  the  higher
animals  give  unmistakable  signs  of  intelligence.  But  thinking —
as  a  permanent  activity  at  least — it  may  be  fairly  said,  owes  its
origin  to  the  acquisition  of  speech.

The  elaboration,  then,  of  this  indispensable  instrument,  which
more  than  anything  else  enables  our  '  psychological  individual '  to
advance  to  the  distinctly  human  or  rational  stage,  calls  for  some
preliminary  consideration1.  We  start  with  gestures  and  vocal

1  It  must  here  be  noted  that  the  higher  development  of  the  individual  is  only
possible  through  intercourse  with  other  individuals,  that  is  to  say,  through  society.
Without  language  we  should  be  mutually  exclusive  and  impenetrable,  comparable
almost  to  so  many  physical  atoms ;  with  language  each  several  mind  may  transcend
its  own  limits  and  share  the  minds  of  others.  As  a  herd  of  individuals  mankind
would  have  a  natural  history  as  other  animals  have ;  but  personality  only  emerges
out  of  intercourse  with  persons,  and  of  such  intercourse  language  is  the  means.
But,  important  for  the  future  development  of  our  'psychological  individual'  as  this
addition  of  a  transparent  and  responsive  world  of  minds  to  the  dead  opaqueness
of  external  things  unquestionably  is,  that  development  does  not  cease  to  be  an
individual  development.  The  only  new  point — and  it  is  one  to  keep  in  sight — is
that  the  materials  of  this  development  no  longer  consist  of  nothing  but  presentations
elaborated  by  a  single  mind.  Still  that  combination  of  individual  experiences  which
subordinates  individual  idiosyncrasy  and  isolation  to  the  objectivity  and  solidarity  of


CH.  xii,  §  i] Acquisition  of  Language  287

utterances,  which — though  they  are  now  intentional  signs — were
originally  just  emotional  expressions  and  nothing  more.  But  some
advance  became  possible  so  soon  as  'the  ejective  level'  of  ex-
perience was  attained1,  so  soon,  that  is  to  say,  as  the  individual
experient  could  recognise  that  within  the  common  environment
were  other  individuals  of  its  own  kind.  Then  the  "  desire  of
communication,"  it  is  supposed,  "  impelled  men  to  the  production
of  language"  and  "turned  the  instinctive  into  the  intentional."
But  this  transition,  we  may  well  believe,  was  a  far  more  gradual
process  than  such  deliberate  purpose  as  '  desire  to  communicate '
implies,  and  also  began  far  below  the  level  of  the  human  animal :
in  other  words,  language  was  neither  invented  nor  discovered,
but  throughout  has  been  'evolved.'

An  emotional  cry,  grimace  or  gesture  is  frequently  significant
to  others  who  already  know  from  past  experience  the  situation
that  called  it  forth,  though  itself  emitted  in  entire  ignorance  of
their  presence  and  without  forethought  at  all.  Similarly  sounds
and  antics  would  be  significant  none  the  less  to  others,  because
they  originated  as  merely  instinctive  imitations  not  intended  to
'  intimate '  anything  to  anybody.  Yet  these  fortuitous  advan-
tages, when  realised,  would  sooner  or  later  be  turned  to  account ;
and  spontaneous  utterances  which  proved  to  possess  meaning,
would  be  '  repeated '  intentionally,  both  to  convey  it  to  other
persons  and  to  extend  it  to  other  cases.  So  sympathy  would
become  suggestive  and  mimicry  symbolic.  In  this  way  the  de-
liberate purpose  to  communicate  would  find  both  the  means  of
communicating  and  communication  itself  as  a  fact,  already  in
existence,  and  not  still  needing  to  be  produced.  Primitive  man
would  slip  into  speech  without  knowing  it.

But  the  mutual  converse  of  brute  animals  seems  entirely  to
rest  upon,  and  never  to  go  beyond,  the  spontaneous  utterance  of
'  natural  signs3.'  Hence  such  converse  is  the  same  for  the  same
species  at  all  times  and  in  all  places ;  whereas  human  speech  varies
indefinitely  according  to  time  and  place,  depends  on  custom  and
tradition  rather  than  on  nature  and  heredity.  Here,  then,  there

Universal  Mind  immediately  affects  the  individual  only  'in  accordance  with  psychical
laws.'  We  have  no  need  therefore  to  overstep  our  proper  domain  in  studying  the
advance  from  the  non-rational  stage  to  the  stage  of  reason.

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  i,  p.  33.

2  Cf. Darwin,  Descent  of  Man,  i,  pp.  53f. ;  R.  L.  Garner,  Gorillas  and  Chim-
panzees, 1896,  ch.  vi.


288  Intellection  [CH.  xn,  §  i

seems  to  be  after  all  a  discontinuity  which  evolution  will  not
bridge.  We  are  not  therefore  surprised  to  find  Max  Miiller  and
others  asserting  with  great  confidence  and  yet  with  little  reason
that  "  language  is  our  Rubicon  which  no  brute  will  cross "  ;
that  otherwise  indeed  "  there  would  be  no  precise  point  where
the  animal  ended  and  man  began."  But  such  continuity  is  just
what  evolution,  i.e.  epigenesis,  implies.  To  suppose  that  the  brute
would  remain  a  brute  after  the  acquisition  of  language,  or  that
man  could  be  man  before  it,  is  to  miss  the  meaning  of  evolution
altogether.  Though  all  philological  detail  is  doubtless  lost  in  the
obscurity  of  the  remote  past,  the  fact  of  this  gradual  advance
from  natural  signs  to  so-called  '  conventional  signs '  is  no  longer
questioned ;  and  its  chief  features  are  tolerably  clear.

First  of  all,  but  needing  only  the  briefest  mention,  are  the
biological  traits  characteristic  of  the  so-called  anthropoid  apes,
the  mammals  most  nearly  related  to  man.  Among  them,  the
sociable  and  leisurely  life  that  abundance  of  nutritious  food  and
scarcity  of  enemies  make  possible  is  found  along  with  the  erect
posture,  the  mobile  face  and  head,  the  supple  hands  perfectly
focused  by  both  eyes  together,  and  lastly  the  voluble  voice.
A  diversity  of  perceptions  and  movements  on  the  one  hand  and
a  facility  of  emotional  expression  on  the  other,  elsewhere  un-
paralleled, are  thus  ensured.  Hence  no  other  animals  display
such  activity,  agility,  imitativeness,  curiosity  and  impressibility
— save,  of  course,  man  himself,  who  is  still  more  alert,  skilful,
observant,  inquisitive  and  emotional.

Passing  to  psychological  traits,  perhaps  the  most  fundamental
is  the  one  just  now  mentioned — the  experient's  ability  not
merely  to  recognise  its  kind  in  general  but  to  distinguish  between
different  individuals  within  it1.  This  power,  we  may  well  suppose,
increases  steadily  with  the  progress  of  organic  differentiation ;  for
this  at  the  same  time  enlarges  the  material  to  discriminate  and

1  Ants  occupy  an  intermediate  place  in  so  far  as  they  can  distinguish  members  of
their  own  community  from  those  of  other  communities  of  their  species ;  but  not  till
the  level  of  the  higher  vertebrates  is  reached  have  we  any  clear  evidence  that  one
individual  is  recognised  as  distinct  from  another — as  ewes  and  their  lambs  for  example
recognise  each  other  in  a  flock.  Strictly  speaking,  everything  that  truly  is  at  all,  is
an  individual;  yet,  as  Leibniz  long  ago  remarked,  "paradox  though  it  appear,  it  is
never  possible  for  us  to  know  exactly  the  individuality  of  anything,  for  individuality
involves  infinity"  (Nouveaux  £ssais,  III,  iii,  §  6).  But  the  very  limitation  that
prevents  us  from  knowing  some  individuals  at  all  makes  our  relative  discrimination
of  others  adequate  for  us.


CH.  xii,  §  i] Acquisition  of  Language  289

the  means  of  discrimination.  In  this  respect  the  human  race  has
advanced  so  far  that  every  man  is  recognised  as  sui  generis  to
some  extent.  In  voice,  countenance,  gait  and  manner  each  is  so
distinctly  unique  that  we  say  roundly  "  the  style  is  (that  is,  in-
dicates) the  man."  Not  only  has  each  his  own  peculiar  way  of
expressing  his  feelings  but  he  has  also  feelings  peculiarly  his  own
to  express.  Because  of  his  curiosity,  his  sensitiveness  and  his
mobility  the  occasions  for  '  utterance '  or  expression  on  the  part
of  the  primitive  man  will  be  numerous ;  because  of  his  indi-
viduality, on  the  other  hand,  both  the  occasions  and  the  utterances
will  vary  somewhat  with  the  man.  Different  individuals  among
men,  like  different  species  among  the  lower  animals,  will  be
affected  by  different  situations  or  affected  by  the  same  situa-
tion in  different  ways.  And  as  the  affections  vary  so  will  the
responses.

But  does  not  this  suggest  a  boundless  exuberance  still
further  removed  from  any  likeness  to  intelligible  discourse  than
even  the  narrow  limitations  of  natural  signs:  could  such  'gift  of
tongues '  ever  be  more  than  a  Babel  ?  That  like  the  legendary
Babel  it  is  really  an  advance  beyond  the  mere  babble  and
gesture  of  natural  man,  Homo  alalus,  towards  the  fuller  discourse
of  rational  man,  Homo  sapiens,  is  what  we  have  now  to  see.  If
there  were  neither  general  resemblance  nor  individual  constancy
in  such  utterances  the  case  would  be  hopeless.  Some  consider-
able resemblance  however  is  an  obvious  consequence  of  the
specific  organization  common  to  all ;  and,  notwithstanding
the  seemingly  casual  nature  of  each  individual's  peculiarities
there  is  ample  evidence  of  their  persistence,  which  indeed  the
mere  working  of  association  would  lead  us  to  expect.  One
decisive  instance  may  suffice.  The  blind  deaf-mute,  Laura
Bridgman,  was  reported  as  uttering  'half  a  score  of  "noises"
designating  persons1'  as  well  as  nearly  thirty  others  'expressing
her  own  feelings  '  and  all  these  sounds,  it  was  added,  "  so  far  as
the  data  for  comparison  exist  seem  neither  to  have  changed  in
character  or  in  pantomimic  accompaniment... for  many  years1."

1  To  herself,  of  course,  the  idea  of  communicating  with  others  in  this  way  could
never  have  occurred  to  her. For  that  purpose  she  used  the  manual  signs  by  means  of
which  Dr  Howe  had  rescued  her  from  the  utter  isolation  in  which  the  loss  of  every
sense  but  touch  had  left  her.

2  G.  S. Hall,  Mind,  O.  S.  iv. 1879,  P-  *66. Apparently  the  number  of  these

W.  P.  ir.


290  Intellection  [CH.  xn,  §  i

It  is  further  noteworthy  that  the  communities  of  primitive  man
were  very  small,  consisting  at  most  of  a  few  families  who
wandered  and  hunted  together,  and  that,  as  among  the  lowest
savages  and  the  higher  apes  now,  such  a  community  would  have
a  recognised  head,  probably  the  strongest  and  most  sagacious  of
the  older  males.  Again  at  this  level,  as  Darwin  has  pointed  out,
"  the  principle  of  imitation,  of  which  we  see  only  traces  in  the
lower  animals,"  will  be  an  important  factor  in  intellectual  ad-
vancement ;  and  especially  so  where  there  is  one  superior  and
commanding  individual  whom  all  will  specially  observe,  be
most  likely  to  understand  and  most  prone  to  imitate1.  The
prestige  of  such  a  pioneer  would,  as  Tarde  has  happily  pointed
out,  by  holding  the  rest  spell-bound,  prevent  confusion  and
make  educational  progress  surer  and  easier.  Finally,  even
with  an  average  length  of  life  far  shorter  than  our  own,  the
elder,  who  eventually  became  a  new  chief,  would  usually  have
had  the  time  as  well  as  the  inclination  to  adopt  in  the  main
the  ways  of  his  predecessor.  Thus  linguistic  tradition  would
gradually  arise  slightly  differentiating  one  small  tribe  from  an-
other, much  as  public  schools  nowadays  are  differentiated  by
their  various  slangs2.

Another  feature  of  primitive  human  intercourse  that  stands
•out  clearly  is  the  combination  of  gestures  with  variously  modu-
lated articulations,  which  is  still  most  pronounced  among  the  most
savage  races,  and  steadily  diminishes  as  culture  advances.  At
the  beginning,  when  gesture  predominated,  the  vocal  accompani-
ments were  probably  almost  entirely  emotional,  as  the  excessive
modulation  seems  to  shew  :  only  the  gestures  were  meant  to  be
and  were  in  fact  significant.  But  now  these  positions  are  almost
completely  transposed :  the  '  word '  carries  the  meaning,  is  the
veritable  \6yos,  the  '  action '  is  only  present  where  the  feeling  is

sounds  was  much  greater  than  President  Hall  supposed.  According  to  Lieber,  who
observed  her  for  months  together  when  she  was  much  younger,  she  had  then  nearly
sixty  sounds  for  persons ;  and  once,  when  asked  how  many  sounds  she  recollected
straightway  produced  twenty-seven  (Smithsonian  Contributions,  1851,  ii.  p.  26).

1  Cf.  Darwin,  Descent  of  Man,  1871,  i.  pp.  160  f. ;  Bagehot,  Physics  and  Politics,
1876,  pp.  89 — 102;  Tarde,  Les  Lois  de  ?  Imitation,  1900,  pp.  83  ff.

1  "  Sagard,  en  1631,  comptait  que,  parmi  les  Hurons  de  1'Amerique  du  Nord,  on
trouvait  difficilement  la  meme  langue  non  seulement  dans  deux  villages,  mais  meme
dans  deux  families  du  meme  village."  Tarde,  of.  cit.  p.  278  «.,  where  still  other
instances  are  given.


CH.  xn,  §  i] Acquisition  of  Language  291

intense1.  At  the  outset  that  is  to  say,  by  motions  mainly  of  the
arms  and  hands — the  organs  of  purposive  movement — the  most
intellectual  sense,  the  sense  of  sight,  was  directly  appealed  to :
now  by  vocalisation  movements,  primarily  the  least  purposive  of
any,  the  sense  of  hearing,  the  emotional  sense  par  excellence,  is
directly  addressed.  Striking  as  this  transformation  is,  it  is  readily
explained  as  the  result  of  economic  survival.  Just  because  speech,
when  it  can  be  understood  alone,  relieves  the  guiding  sense  and
its  chief  instruments,  it  was  sure  to  supersede  gesture — which
engaged  them  both — provided  the  vocal  utterances  of  each
individual  were  constant  in  like  situations  and  were  also  suffi-
ciently varied  and  distinct  in  unlike  ones.  Both  these  conditions
can  be  fulfilled  even  when  there  is  no  intention  of  communica-
tion, as  the  case  of  Laura  Bridgman  already  mentioned  and
the  records  about  other  deaf-mutes*  together  place  beyond  all
question.

The  possession  of  the  vocal  apparatus  requisite  for  such
articulation  and  intonation  as  those  of  the  human  voice  is  not
enough;  though  the  main  stress  has  sometimes  been  laid  on  this.
Thus  Herbart  maintained  that  dogs  would  speak  if  they  could,
and  Lotze  seemingly  agreed,  though  he  inclined  to  attribute  the
obstacle  to  defective  hearing  rather  than  to  imperfect  voice.
But  the  parrot,  though  almost  our  equal  in  mere  articulation,
cannot  express  by  voice  as  much  of  what  it  feels  as  a  dog  can.
And  surely  dogs  do  speak,  though  their  speech  belongs  to
a  stage  of  evolution  far  below  the  human  or  even  the  simian
level.  How  much  farther,  say,  the  chimpanzee  would  have  ad-
vanced, if  it  had  been  domesticated  like  the  dog  and  for  as  long
a  time,  it  would  be  hard  to  tell.  But  no  doubt  the  dog  has
advanced  a  long  way.  "  The  dog  in  a  wild  state,"  it  has  been
said,  "  only  howls ;  but  when  he  becomes  the  friend  and  com-
panion of  man, ...his  vocabulary,  if  it  may  be  so  called,  then
increases  in  order  to  express  \i.e.  in  consequence  of]  his  enlarged
and  varied  [experiences  and]  emotions3."  And  this  is  the
essential  point — varied  experiences  and  a  characteristic  vocal

1  Thus  Helen  Keller's  teacher  reported: "She  drops  the  signs  and  pantomime
she  used  before,  as  soon  as  she  has  words  to  supply  their  place. " H.  Keller : The
Story  of  my  Life,  p.  317.

2  Cf.  Tylor,  Early  History  of  Mankind,  pp.  72  ff. ;  Steinthal,  "Ueber  die  Sprache
der  Taubstummen, "  Kleine  Schriften,  i.  pp.  34  f.

3  E.  Jesse,  Anecdotes  of  Dogs,  1846.

19—2


292  Intellection  [CH.  xn,  §  i

response  for  each.  Both  are  forthcoming  in  abundance  through
the  curiosity  and  impressibility  of  the  primitive  man.  "Von
Natur  aus  ist  der  Mensch  eine  Resonanz,  die  ununterbrochen
die  erhaltenen  Eindriicke  wiedertont :  schweigen  lernt  er  erst
allmalig1."  This  was  the  creative  onomatopoeia  that  the  Mosaic
legend  is  said  to  prefigure2.  For  the  primitive  man,  what  he  calls
out,  when  he  sees  a  thing,  comes  back  to  him  as  the  name  of  the
thing,  when  he  sees  it  again.  Even  though  altogether  subjective
in  origin,  it  becomes  in  the  course  of  repeated  experiences  quite
objective  in  sense.  The  observation  of  children  bears  this  out8.
Ham  or  mum  (food)  is  in  this  respect  quite  on  a  par  with  the
directly  imitative  bow-wow  or  puff-puff.  Thus  things  that  have
no  sound  of  their  own  to  imitate  may  yet  '  ring  a  sound '  out  of
us,  and  so  get  names4.

We  must  be  content  with  this  brief  attempt  to  sketch  the
origin  of  language,  and  pass  now  to  what  for  us  is  the  main
question :  In  what  way,  when  it  already  exists,  is  language
instrumental  in  the  development  as  distinct  from  the  communi-
cation of  thought  ?  But  first  of  all,  what  in  general  is  thinking,
of  which  language  is  the  instrument  ?


Distinction  between  Sense  and  Understanding

§  2.  In  entering  upon  this  inquiry  we  are  really  passing  one
of  the  most  'hard  and  fast'  lines  in  the  old  psychology — that
between  sense  and  understanding.  So  long  as  a  multiplicity  of
faculties  was  assumed  the  need  was  less  felt  for  a  clear  exposition
of  their  connexion.  A  man  had  senses  and  intellect  much  as  he
had  eyes  and  ears;  the  heterogeneity  in  the  one  case  was  no
more  puzzling  than  in  the  other.  But  for  psychologists  who  do
not  cut  the  knot  in  that  fashion  it  is  confessedly  a  hard  matter  to
explain  the  relation  of  the  two.  The  contrast  of  receptivity  and

1  Volkmann,  Psychologic,  1875,  Bd.  i.  p.  329.

2  Genesis,  ii.  19.

*  Cf.  "  M.  Taine  on  the  Acquisition  of  Language  by  Children,"  Mind,  O.  S.
ii.  (1877),  pp.  252  ff.,  especially  p.  itfifin.  Taine's  article  led  to  another  from
C.  Darwin,  op.  cit.  pp.  285  ff.,  cf.  especially  p.  293.

4  Such  is  the  theory  of  Steinthal  which  Max  Miiller  parodied  in  nicknaming  it
the  ding-dong  theory,  but  which  later  and  abler  philologists  have  treated  with  marked
respect.


CH.  xn,  §  2] Sense  and  Understanding  293

activity  hardly  avails ;  for  all  presentation  involves  some  activity,
and  essentially  the  same  activity,  that  of  attention.  Nor  can  we
well  maintain  that  the  presentations  of  sense  and  understanding
differ  altogether  in  kind;  albeit  such  a  view  has  been  held  from
Plato  downwards.  Nihil  est  in  intellectu  quod  non  fuerit  prius  in
sensu :  the  blind  and  deaf  are  necessarily  without  some  concepts
that  we  possess.  If  pure  being  is  pure  nothing,  pure  thought  is
equally  empty.  Thought  involves  a  certain  elaboration  of  sen-
sory and  motor  presentations  and  has  no  content  apart  from
these.  We  cannot  even  say  that  the  forms  of  this  elaboration
are  psychologically  a  priori]  on  the  contrary,  what  is  epistemo-
logically  the  most  fundamental  is  the  last  to  be  psychologically
realised.  This  is  not  only  true  in  fact;  it  is  also  true  of  necessity,
inasmuch  as  the  formation  of  more  'concrete'  concepts  is  an
essential  preliminary  to  the  formation  of  others  more  '  abstract '
— those  most  abstract,  like  the  Kantian  categories,  &c.,  being
thus  the  last  of  all  to  be  thought  out  or  understood.  And  though
this  formative  work  is  substantially  voluntary,  yet,  if  we  enter
upon  it,  the  form  at  each  step  is  determined  by  the  so-called
matter,  and  not  by  us;  in  this  respect  'the  spontaneity  of
thought '  is  not  really  freer  than  the  receptivity  of  sense1.  It
is  sometimes  said  that  thinking  is  always  synthetic  even  when
the  thought  is  expressed  analytically,  AB  is  B — and  this  is  true;
but  imagining  is  always  merely  synthetic.  And  the  processes
which  yield  the  ideational  train  are  also  the  processes  employed
in  intellectual  synthesis.  Moreover,  it  would  be  arbitrary  to  say,
from  the  simple  inspection  of  their  content,  at  what  point  the
mere  generic  image  ceases  and  the  true  concept  begins — so
continuous  are  the  two2.

No  wonder,  then,  that  English  psychology  has  been  prone
to  regard  thinking  as  only  a  special  kind  of  perception,  'the

1  Locke,  so  often  misrepresented,  expressed  this  truth  according  to  his  lights  in
the  following :  ' '  The  earth  will  not  appear  painted  with  flowers  nor  the  fields  covered

with  verdure  whenever  we  have  a  mind  to  it Just  thus  is  it  with  our  understanding :

all  that  is  voluntary  in  our  knowledge  is  the  employing  or  withholding  any  of  our
faculties  from  this  or  that  sort  of  objects  and  a  more  or  less  accurate  survey  of  them  "
(Essay,  iv.  xiii.  §  i).

2  The  latter  may  be  regarded  as  implicit  in  the  former;  and  so  it  remains  in  what
we  call  the  intelligent  behaviour  of  animals. But  it  is  often  unconsciously  explicated
when  we  endeavour  to  describe  their  '  state  of  mind '  using  terms  appropriate  only
to  our  own  conduct,  as  if,  that  is  to  say,  their  images  were  actually  concepts.


294  Intellection  [CH.  xn,  §  2

perception  of  the  agreement  or  disagreement  of  ideas1 ' — and  the
ideas  themselves  as  mainly  the  products  of  association.  Yet
this  is  much  like  confounding  observation  with  experiment  or
invention — the  act  of  a  cave-man  in  betaking  himself  to  a
drifting  tree,  when  the  flood  was  upon  him,  with  that  of  Noah
in  devising  and  building  an  ark.  In  reverie,  and  often  in
merely  understanding  the  communications  of  others,  we  are
comparatively  passive  observers  of  ideational  movements,  non-
voluntarily  determined2.  But  in  thinking  or  '  intellection,'  as
it  has  been  conveniently  termed,  there  is  always  a  search  for
something  more  or  less  vaguely  preconceived,  for  a  clue  which
will  be  known  when  it  is  found  by  helping  to  satisfy  certain
conditions.  Here  again  there  is  a  continuous  development  from
the  extreme  of  mere  blind  trial  and  error — where  the  only  clue
we  seek  is  'anything,  anything,  only  not  this' — towards  an
opposite  extreme  where  a  crucial  disjunction  'either. ..or'  can
be  precisely  formulated.  At  what  precise  point  in  this  develop-
ment we  agree  to  say  that '  thought  proper '  begins  will  depend
upon  how  we  define  thought.  And  apparently  no  psychological
definition  is  as  yet  forthcoming  that  is  not  more  or  less  arbi-
trary, and,  for  all  that,  fails  to  effect  any  clear  demarcation  between
thought  proper  and  thought  in  the  wider  sense.  If  we  say  :  The
thinking  process  may  be  adequately  defined  as  the  act  of  know-
ing or  of  judging  of  things  by  means  of  concepts3,  then,  as  already
urged,  it  is  psychologically  impossible  to  tell  just  where  mere
ideation  ends  and  conception  begins.  If,  following  Max  Miiller
we  were  to  say :  No  conception  without  language  and  no  lan-
guage without  conception4,  we  should  be  committed  to  a  hope-
less discontinuity,  as  we  have  seen  above  (§  i).  This  difficulty  in
sharply  distinguishing  between  sense  and  understanding  we  may
now  fairly  attribute  to  the  fact  that  there  is  no  sharp  distinction
— unless,  indeed,  we  go  the  length  of  maintaining  that  in  '  sense '
we  are  purely  passive  and  in  'understanding'  purely  active.
When  Kant  said  :  "  There  are  two  stems  of  human  knowledge,

1  Cf.  Locke,  Essay,  II.  xxi.  §  5 ;  H.  Spencer,  Psychology,  ii.  §  308.

1  On  understanding  in  this  sense — understanding  what  is  heard  or  read  cf.  Ebbing  -
haus,  Grundziige  der  Psychologic,  3te  Aufl.  (1913),  ii.  pp.  735  ff.  Many  bibliographical
references  are  given.

3  Mansel, Prolegomena Logica, 2nd ed. p. 11. Cf. Deussen's definition :
"Operiren  mit  Begriffen,"  Elemente  der  Metaphysik,  §  33.

4  Cf.  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language,  1880,  ii.  p.  73.


CH.  xii,  §  2] Sense  and  Understanding  295

which  perhaps  may  spring  from  a  common,  but  to  us  unknown
root1,"  he  may  have  had  a  glimmering  of  the  continuity  be-
tween the  two — sensibility  and  understanding — which,  as  genetic
psychology  claims  to  shew,  actually  exists.

But  though  "  it  is  manifestly  impossible  to  discriminate
with  any  rigour  Sense  from  Intelligence2,"  yet  thinking — at
our  level — may  be  broadly  described  as  solving  a  problem
— finding  an  ax  that  is  b*.  In  so  doing  we  start  from  a  com-
paratively fixed  central  idea  a  and  work  along  the  several
diverging  lines  of  ideas  associated  with  it — hence  far  the  aptest
and  in  fact  the  oldest  description  of  such  thought  is  that  it
is  discursive.  Emotional  excitement — and  at  the  outset  the
natural  man  does  not  think  much  in  cold  blood — quickens  the
flow  of  ideas  ;  then,  what  seems  relevant  is  at  once  contemplated
more  closely  and  so  becomes  more  distinct;  while  what  seems
irrelevant  awakens  no  interest,  receives  no  attention  and  so
becomes  less  distinct.  Thus  the  natural  working  of  association
is  facilitated  in  the  one  pertinent  direction  and  inhibited  in  all
others:  one  line  is  opened  and  all  the  rest  are  more  or  less
closed4.  At  first  the  control  acquired  is  only  very  imperfect;
indeed  the  actual  course  of  thought  of  even  a  disciplined  mind
usually  falls  far  short  of  the  clearness,  distinctness,  and  co-
herence of  the  logician's  ideal.  Familiar  associations  are  apt  to
hurry  attention  away  from  the  proper  topic,  so  that  thought
becomes  not  merely  discursive  but  wandering;  in  place  of  fixed
concepts  complete  and  crystalline — such  as  logic  demands — we
may  find  a  congeries  of  ideas  but  loosely  compacted  into  some
sort  of  systematic  whole,  liable  to  continual  modifications  and
implicating  much  that  is  both  irrelevant  and  confusing.

1  Critique  of  the  Pure  Reason,  ist  ed.  p.  15,  M.  Miiller's  trans,  p.  13.

2  Hamilton,  Reid's  Works,  p.  878.

3  Even  so,  as  we  have  just  allowed,  there  is  still  a  resemblance  to  the  varying
efforts  persisted  in  till — may  be — success  is  attained,  which  characterizes  conation  at
the  lowest  sensory  level,  in  so  far,  i.e.  as  both  processes  are  tentative. But  in  the
latter  there  is  nothing  answering  to  b  :  there  is  just  a  subjective  state,  the  pleasure  of
success,  and  no  more.

This  view  of  the  thinking  process  has  a  prominent  place  in  the  recent  so-called
experimental  psychology  of  the  Marburg  school — a  series  of  books  and  articles  of
inordinate  length  and  uncertain  value.  A  discussion  of  them  will  be  found  in  Professor
Titchener's  Experimental  Psychology  of  the  Thought- Processes,  1909.

4  Cf.  Bain  on  '  Voluntary  Control  of  Ideal  Movements,'  Senses  and  Intellect,
4th  ed.  pp.  591  f.;  Emotions  and  Will,  3rd  ed.  pp.  369  f.


296  Intellection  [CH.  xn,  §  3

Thought  and  Language

§  3.  Thus,  while  it  is  certain  that  thought  begins  without
language,  just  as  arts  begin  without  tools,  yet  language  enables
us  to  carry  the  thinking  process  enormously  farther.  In  the
first  place  it  gives  us  an  increased  command  of  even  such  com-
paratively concrete  generic  images  as  can  be  formed  without  it.
The  name  of  a  thing  or  action  becomes,  for  one  who  knows  the
name,  as  much  an  objective  mark  or  attribute  as  any  quality  what-
ever can  be.  The  form  and  colour  of  what  we  call  an  '  orange '
are  perhaps  even  more  intimately  combined  with  the  sound  and
utterance  of  this  word  than  with  the  taste  and  fragrance  which
we  regard  as  strictly  essential  to  the  thing.  But,  whereas  these
physical  attributes  often  evade  us,  we  can  always  command  the
nominal  attribute,  in  so  far,  that  is,  as  this  depends  upon  move-
ments of  articulation.  By  uttering  the  name  (or  hearing  it
uttered)  we  have  secured  to  us,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  that
superior  vividness  and  definiteness  that  pertain  to  images  rein-
stated by  impressions  :  our  idea  approximates  to  the  fixity  and
independence  of  a  percept.  With  young  children  and  uncultured
minds — who,  by  the  way,  not  uncommonly  '  think  aloud ' — the
gain  in  this  respect  is  probably  more  striking  than  those  not
confined  to  their  mother-tongue  or  those  used  to  an  analytical
handling  of  language  at  all  realise1.  When  things  are  thus  made
ours  by  receiving  names  from  us  so  that  we  can  freely  manipu-
late them  in  idea,  it  becomes  easier  mentally  to  bring  together
facts  that  logically  belong  together ;  and  so  to  classify  and
generalise.  For  names  set  us  free  from  the  cumbersome  tangi-
bility and  particularity  of  perception,  which  on  the  one  hand  is
limited  to  just  what  is  presented  here  and  now;  and  on  the  other
includes  all  that  is  thus  presented.

In  the  next  place — as  ideas  increase  in  so-called  generality —
they  frequently  diminish  in  definiteness :  they  not  only  become
less  pictorial  and  more  schematic,  but  they  become  more  un-
steady as  well,  for  they  arise  from  a  number  of  concrete  images
only  related  as  regards  one  or  two  constituents,  and  not  '  assi-
milated '  as  the  several  images  of  the  same  thing  may  be.  The

1  Ruskin,  in  his  Fors  Clavigera,  relates  that  the  sight  of  the  word  'Crocodile'  used
to  frighten  him  when  a  child  so  much  that  he  could  not  feel  at  ease  again  till  he  had
turned  over  the  page  on  which  it  occurred.


CH.  xn,  §  3] Thought  and  Language  297

mental  picture  answering  to  the  word  '  horse '  has,  so  to  say,  body
enough  to  remain  a  comparatively  steady  object  when  under
attention  from  time  to  time ;  but  that  answering  to  the  word
'animal'  is  perhaps  scarcely  twice  at  all  alike1.  The -relations
of  things  could  thus  never  be  readily  recalled  or  effectively  con-
trolled if  the  names  of  those  relations,  which  as  words  always
remain  concrete,  did  not  give  us  a  definite  hold  upon  them —
make  them  comprehensible.  Once  these  '  airy  nothings '  have
a  name,  we  reap  again  the  advantages  a  concrete  constituent
affords :  by  this  means  whatever  is  relevant  becomes  more
closely  associated,  and  whatever  is  irrelevant  is  abstracted  from,
and  is  left  out  of  account.

Yet  again — when  what  answers  to  the  logical  connotation
or  meaning  of  a  concept  is  in  this  way  linked  with  the  name,  it
is  no  longer  necessary  that  even  this  '  matter  or  content '  should  be
distinctly  present  in  consciousness2.  It  takes  time  for  an  image
to  raise  its  associates  above  the  threshold ;  and  their  presence
there  means  a  proportionately  greater  demand  upon  attention.
There  is  thus  a  manifest  economy  in  what  Leibniz  happily  styled
'  symbolic,'  in  contrast  to  '  intuitive '  thinking.  For  our  power  of
efficient  attention  is  limited,  and  with  words  for  counters  we  can,
as  Leibniz  remarked8,  readily  perform  operations  involving  very
complex  presentations,  and  wait  till  these  operations  are  concluded
before  fully  realising  and  spreading  out  the  net  result  in  sterling
coin.  But  this  simile  must  not  mislead  us.  In  actual  thinking
there  never  is  any  complete  separation  between  the  symbol  and

1  Both  might  be  what  Kant  called  a  schema;  but  in  any  case  that  of  'animal'
would  be  much  more  diagrammatic — or  more  of  a  c  monogram,'  to  use  Kant's  word
— and  not  pictorial  at  all. Cf.  Huxley's  figures  to  represent  the  contrast  between  the
invertebrate  and  the  vertebrate  forms  (Comparative  Anatomy,  1864,  p.  59). Such
schematism Kant  thought  was  to  be attributed  ultimately  to  an  art  hidden  away
in  the  depths  of  the  human  soul  and  never  likely  to  be  disclosed. When  the  control
of  the  ideational  tissue  that  language  affords  is  duly  taken  into  account,  however,  it  is
questionable  if  there  is  any  special  mystery  here  at  all. Cf.  Critique  of  the  Pure
Reason,  M.  Milller's  trans,  p.  125.

2  It  is  enough  if  it  be  '  implicitly  apprehended '  without  being  apprehended  '  ex-
plicitly,' to  use  Professor  Stout's  terminology. As  at  the  animal  level  the  concept
was  implicit  (or  latent)  so  here,  at  the  rational  level,  it  is  the  idea  that  is  implicit  (or
subconscious). This,  as  said  in  the  text,  is  a  manifest  advance. Cf.  note  above.

3  Cf.  Opera,  Erdmann's  ed.  p.  80. Too  often,  no  doubt,  we  are  content  to  traffic
with  words  alone  and  so  far  to  justify  the  smart  saying  of  Hobbes : "  Words  are  the
counters  of  wise  men  and  the  money  of  fools." English  Works,  Molesworth's  ed.
1839,  »'•  P-  25-


298  Intellection  [CH.  xn,  §  3

the  ideas  symbolized  :  the  movements  of  the  one  are  never  entirely
suspended  till  those  of  the  other  are  complete1.  "Thus,"  says
Hume,  "  if,  instead  of  saying,  that  in  war  the  weaker  have  always
recourse  to  negotiation,  we  should  say,  that  they  have  always
recourse  to  conquest,  the  custom  which  we  have  acquired  of
attributing  certain  relations  to  ideas  still  follows  the  words  and
makes  us  immediately  perceive  the  absurdity  of  that  proposition2."
How  intimately  the  two  are  connected  is  shewn  by  the  surprises
that  give  what  point  there  is  to  puns,  and  by  the  small  confusion
that  results  from  the  existence  of  homonymous  terms  or  phonetic
ambiguity.


Thought  and  Ideation.

§  4.  The  question  thus  arises — What  are  the  properly
ideational  elements  concerned  in  thought  ?  Over  this  question
psychologists  long  waged  fight  as  either  nominalists  or  con-
ceptualists.  The  former  maintained  that  what  is  imaged  in
connexion  with  a  general  concept,  such  as  triangle,  is  some
individual  triangle  '  considered  merely  as  triangular ' ;  whereas
the  latter  maintained  that  an  '  abstract  idea '  is  formed  embody-
ing such  constituents  of  the  several  particulars  as  the  concept
connotes,  but  dissociated  from  their  specific  or  accidental  varia-
tions— for  example,  a  triangle  that  '  is  neither  oblique  nor  rect-
angle, neither  equilateral,  equicrural,  nor  scalenous ;  but  all  and
none  of  these  at  once3.'  As  often  happens  in  such  controversies,
each  side  saw  the  weak  point  in  the  other.  The  nominalists
easily  shewed  that  there  was  no  distinct  'abstract  idea'  re-
presentable  apart  from  particulars  ;  and  the  conceptualists  could
as  easily  shew  that  a  particular  presentation  'regarded  in  a
particular  light '  is  no  longer  merely  a  particular  presentation
nor  equivalent  merely  to  a  crowd  of  presentations.  The  very
thing  to  ascertain  is  what  this  consideration  in  a  certain  light
implies.  Perhaps  a  speedier  end  might  have  been  put  to  this

1  Cf.  above  on  Subconsciousness,  ch.  iv,  §  7,  pp.  96  f.  We  must  return  to  this
topic  again  directly.  Cf.  p.  t^fin.

a  Treatise  oj  Human  Nature  (Green  and  Grose's  ed.),  pt.  i.  §  vii.  p.  331.

8  Cf.  Locke,  Essay,  iv.  vii.  §  9 ;  Berkeley,  Principles  of  Human  Knowledge,
Introd.  §  1 6;  Hume,  op.  rit.  §  7 ;  J.  S.  Mill,  Examination  of  Hamilton^  Philosophy,
ch.  xvii.  On  the  whole  question  cf.  especially  Meinong,  Hume  Studien,  \.


CH.  xn,  §  4]  Thought  and  Ideation  299

controversy  if  either  party  had  been  driven  to  define  more
exactly  what  was  to  be  understood  by  image  or  idea.  Such
ideas  as  are  possible  to  us  apart  from  abstraction  are,  as  we
have  seen,  revived  percepts,  not  revived  sensations ;  they  are  com-
plex total  re-presentations  made  up  of  partial  re-presentations,
which  may  figure  in  other  totals1.  Reproductive  imagination  is
so  far  but  a  faint  revival  of  previous  actual  percepts ;  constructive
imagination  but  a  faint  anticipation  of  possible  percepts  not  as
yet  experienced.  In  either  case  we  are  busied  with  elementary
presentations  only  as  complicated  or  synthesized  to  what  are
tantamount  to  intuitions  in  form — though  in  fact,  as  tested  by
movement,  &c.,  actual  intuition  is  absent :  Macbeth  cannot
clutch  the  imagined  dagger,  though  seen  in  form  '  as  palpable '
as  that  he  is  actually  drawing.  The  several  partial  re-presen-
tations, however,  which  make  up  an  idea  might  also  be  called
ideas,  not  merely  in  the  wide  sense  in  which  every  mental
object  may  be  so  called,  but  also  in  the  narrower  sense  as
secondary  presentations,  i.e.  as  distinguished  from  primary
presentations  or  impressions.  But  such  isolated  images  of  an
impression,  even  if  possible,  would  no  more  be  comparable  to
intuitions  than  the  mere  impression  itself  would  be :  taken  alone
the  one  would  be  as  free  of  space  and  time  as  is  the  other.  The
ideational  elements  concerned  in  thought  are  obviously  not
images  in  this  sense,  for  if  they  were,  the  whole  work  of  percep-
tion would  be  undone.

In  the  case  of  what  are  called  'concrete'  as  distinct  from
'abstract'  concepts2  the  idea  answering  to  the  concept  often
differs  but  little  from  an  intuition,  and  we  have  already  remarked
that  the  generic  image  (Gemeinbild  of  German  psychologists)
constitutes  the  connecting  link  between  ideation  and  conception.
But  even  concerning  this  it  is  almost  useless  to  ask  what
does  one  imagine  in  thinking,  e.g.  of  triangle  or  man  or  colour.
We  never — except  for  the  sake  of  this  very  inquiry — attempt  to
fix  our  minds  in  this  manner  upon  some  isolated  concept ;  in
actual  thinking  ideas  are  not  in  consciousness  alone  and  dis-
jointedly,  but  as  part  of  a  context.  When  the  idea  '  man '  is
present,  it  is  present  in  some  proposition  or  question,  for  example,
Man  is  the  paragon  of  animals ;  In  man  there  is  nothing  great

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  vii,  §  i,  pp.  \6gfin.,  170;  §  4,  p.  \ggjin.

*  If  this  rough-and-ready  distinction,  unscientific  though  it  is,  may  be  allowed.


300  Intellection  [CH.  xn,  §  4

but  mind;  Is  man  immortal?  and  so  on.  It  is  quite  clear  that
very  different  constituents  out  of  the  whole  complex  '  man '
would  be  prominent  in  our  minds  in  dwelling  on  the  first  of  these
from  those  that  would  be  called  up  by  reflexion  on  the  second
or  the  last.  Further,  what  is  present  to  consciousness  when  a
general  term  is  understood  will  not  only  differ  with  a  different
context,  but  also  change  as  we  dwell  upon  it.  Again  we  may
either  analyze  its  connotation  or  muster  its  denotation,  as  the
context  or  the  cast  of  our  minds  may  determine.  Thus  what  is
relevant  is  alone  prominent;  and  the  more  summary  the  attention
we  bestow  the  less  the  full  extent  and  intent  of  the  concept  are
displayed.  To  the  nominalist's  objection,  that  it  is  impossible
to  imagine  a  man  without  imagining  him  as  either  tall  or  short,
young  or  old,  dark  or  light,  and  so  forth,  the  conceptualist  might
reply  that  at  all  events  percepts  may  be  'clear'  without  being
'distinct,'  that  we  can  recognise  a  tree  without  recognising  what
kind  of  tree  it  is ;  and  that,  moreover,  the  objection  proves  too
much :  for,  if  our  image  is  to  answer  exactly  to  fact,  it  must
represent  not  only  a  tall  or  a  short  man,  but  a  man  of  definite
stature — one  not  merely  either  light  or  dark,  but  of  a  certain
precise  complexion.  The  true  answer  rather  is  that  in  con-
ceiving as  such  we  do  not  necessarily  imagine  a  man  or  a  tree
at  all,  any  more  than — if  such  an  illustration  may  serve — in
using  the  equation  to  the  parabola  we  necessarily  visualise  a
parabola  as  well.

In  the  case  of  so-called  'abstract  concepts'  one  word  may  be
directly  symbolical  of  a  complex  of  words ;  that  is  to  say,  if  we
ask  for  its  meaning  we  are  not  referred  to  the  reality  signified,
but  receive  a  verbal  definition  or  are  sent  to  a  lexicon.  Another
word  again  may  represent  a  complex  of  such  complex  words
and  so  on  repeatedly.  Thus  with  every  such  advance,  in  spite
of  the  'narrowness  of  consciousness,'  language  enables  us  to
enlarge  our  command ;  but  at  the  same  time  the  command
becomes  continually  more  indirect.  The  realities  signified  are
soon  as  much  out  of  sight  as  are  the  goods  or  bullion  ultimately
concerned  in  the  actual  transactions  of  the  clearing-house.  As
these  never  go  beyond  values  so  thought,  so  far  as  symbolic,
never  goes  beyond  the  relevant  meanings.  Language  does  not
abolish  the  narrowness  of  consciousness,  and  therefore,  as  often  as
attention  is  taken  up  with  the  general  and  abstract,  it  cannot  at


CH.  xii,  §  4]  Thought  and  Ideation  301

the  same  time  envisage  the  concrete  and  particular.  So  far  then
those  psychologists  are  justified  who  like  to  talk  of  '  imageless
thought.'  The  defect  of  that  phrase  lies,  however,  not  so  much
in  its  seeming  paradox  as  in  its  tautology.  All  thought,  strictly
speaking,  is  imageless ;  for  all  thought  is  concerned  with  pro-
positions sought  or  found,  in  other  words  with  problems,  sup-
positions or  assertions :  it  is  '  intentional '  not  presentational.
But  on  the  other  hand  all  thought  is  concerned,  primarily  or
ultimately  with  images  (or  impressions),  that  is  to  say  with  such
of  their  relations  as  are  relevant  to  its  immediate  problem1.

The  facts  just  described  are  also  sometimes  spoken  of  as
'the  condensation  of  thought2.'  This  again  is  not  a  happy
phrase :  it  ignores  altogether  the  gradual  development  which  is
the  essential  point.  Let  us  try  to  ascertain  more  exactly  the
nature  of  this  process.  Suppose  we  tell  an  intelligent  child  of
eight  that  the  three  angles  of  any  plane  triangle  are  equal  to  two
right-angles.  If,  however,  the  child  is  ignorant  of  geometry  this
proposition  and  most  of  the  terms  in  it  will  seem  meaningless.
Yet  after  proper  training  for  a  week  or  two  he  will  understand
the  whole  and  see  that  the  proposition  is  true.  For  the  relations
involved  are  few  and  simple  and  but  little  removed  from  im-
mediate intuition.  But  say  to  him,  for  example :  The  maintenance
of  justice  is  the  supreme  end  of  the  law.  Then  we  must  wait
for  years  before  he  will  be  able  adequately  to  appreciate  and
intelligently  to  endorse  that  and  similar  propositions :  so  we
realise  the  force  of  the  old  adage  that  one  cannot  put  old  heads
on  young  shoulders.  In  other  words  the  so-called  'condensation
of  thought '  takes  time  ;  and  time  is  in  general  a  measure  of  the
development  such  condensation  implies.  What  exactly  is  the
nature  of  this  development,  we  ask  ?  It  consists  in  the  gradual
transformation — we  might  even  say,  '  transfiguration  ' — of  the
ideational  continuum  or  tissue  effected  by  means  of  language  as
a  social  instrument,  whereby  the  ideational  tissue  is  organized
into  higher  and  higher  forms,  implying  a  steadily  increasing
complexity  in  the  ideational  structure  which  is  their  basis,  yet,
notwithstanding  this,  a  unity  and  simplicity  of  function  which  is


1  Cf.  Dugas,  Le  Psittacisme  et  la  Pensee  symbolique^  1 896,  liv.  ii. ;  Ribot,  L! Evo-
lution des  Idfes  gtntrales,  3me  ed.  1909,  chh.  iii.,  iv.

2  Lazarus,  Das  Leben  der  Seele,  2te  Aufi.  1878,  ii.  pp.  229 — 43.


302  Intellection  [CH.  xn,  §  4

akin  to intuition. Accordingly  we commonly  speak  of  the
facility  at  length  attained  as  insight,  tact  or  penetration.

The  individuality  of  a  concept,  then,  which  is  elaborated  in
this  wise  out  of  the  ideational  tissue  is  not  to  be  confounded
with  the  sensible  concreteness  of  an  intuition  either  distinct  or
indistinct ;  and  '  the  pains  and  skill '  which  Locke  felt  were  re-
quired in  order  to  '  frame '  what  he  called  an  abstract  idea  are
quite  unlike  the  pains  and  skill  that  may  be  necessary  to  de-
cipher what  is  faint  or  discern  what  is  fleeting.  The  material
'  framed '  consists  no  doubt  of  images,  if  by  this  is  meant  that  in
thinking  we  work  ultimately  with  the  ideational  continuum ;  but
what  results  is  never  merely  an  intuitive  complex.  The  concept
or  '  abstract  idea '  first  emerges  when  a  certain  specific  relation
is  established  among  the  constituents  of  such  a  complex  ;  and
the  very  same  intuition  might  furnish  '  content '  for  different
concepts  as  often  as  a  different  geistiges  Band  was  used  to  con-
nect it.  The  stuff  of  this  bond,  as  we  have  seen,  is  usually  the
name ;  and  this  raises  above  the  threshold  of  consciousness,  if
necessary,  those  elements  of  the  concept  which  are  relevant  to  the
particular  context.  Conception,  then,  is  not  identical  with  ima-
gination, although  the  two  terms  are  still  often,  and  were  once
generally,  regarded  as  synonymous.  The  same  ultimate  materials
occur  in  each ;  but  in  the  former  these  materials  start  with  and
retain  a  sensible  form  ;  in  the  latter  a  higher  form  is  imposed
on  this  which  is  distinguished  as  'intelligible.'


General  Character  and  Growth  of  Intellection.

§  5.  The  distinctive  character  of  this  intelligible  form  or
synthesis  lies  then  in  the  fact  that  it  is  selective1.  In  this  respect
it  differs  from  the  synthesis  of  association,  which  unites  together
whatever  occurs  together.  It  differs  also  from  any  synthesis,
though  equally  voluntary  in  its  initiation,  which  is  determined
merely  by  subjective  preference,  inasmuch  as  intellection  is
concerned  wholly  and  solely  with  objective  relations.  Owing  to
the  influence  of  logic,  which  has  long  been  in  a  much  more
forward  state  than  psychology,  it  has  been  usual  to  resolve
intellection  into  comparison,  abstraction,  and  classification,  after

1  As  the  very  word  '  intelligence '  etymologically  implies.


CH.  xii,  §  5]  General  Character  and  Growth  303

this  fashion  :  a  +  b  +  c  +  m  and  a  +  b  +  c  +  n  are  compared,  their
differences  m  and  n  left  out  of  sight,  and  the  class  notion
a  +  b  +  c  formed  including  both  ;  the  same  process  repeated
with  a  +  b  +  c  and  a  +  b  +  d  yields  a  higher  class  notion  a  +  b  ;
and  so  on.  But  our  ideational  continuum  is  not  a  mere  string
of  ideas  of  concrete  items,  least  of  all  such  concrete  items  as
this  view  implies.  Not  till  our  daily  life  resembles  that  of  a
museum  porter  receiving  specimens  will  our  higher  mental
activity  be  comparable  to  that  of  the  curator  who  sorts  such
specimens  into  cases  and  compartments.  What  we  perceive  is
a  world  of  interrelated  things,  the  centres  of  manifold  changes,
affecting  us  and  apparently  affected  by  each  other,  amenable
to  our  action  and  continually  interacting  among  themselves.
Even  the  individual  thing,  as  our  analysis  of  perception  has
attempted  to  shew,  is  not  a  mere  sum  of  properties  which
can  be  taken  to  pieces  and  distributed  like  type,  but  a  whole
combined  of  parts  very  variously  related1.

To  understand  intellection  we  must  look  at  its  actual  develop-
ment under  the  impetus  of  practical  needs,  rather  than  to  logical
ideals  of  what  it  ought  to  be.  Like  other  forms  of  purposive
activity,  thinking  is  primarily  undertaken  as  a  means  to  an  end,
and  especially  the  end  of  economy.  It  is  often  easier  and  always
quicker  to  manipulate  ideas  than  to  manipulate  real  things ;  to
the  common  mind  the  thoughtful  man  is  one  who  '  uses  his  head
to  save  his  heels."  In  all  the  arts  of  life,  in  the  growth  of
language  and  institutions,  in  scientific  explanation,  and  even  in
the  speculations  of  philosophy,  we  may  observe  a  steady  simpli-
fication in  the  steps  to  a  given  end  or  conclusion,  or — what  is  for
our  present  inquiry  the  same  thing — the  attainment  of  better
results  with  the  same  means.  The  earliest  machines  are  the
most  cumbrous  and  clumsy,  the  earliest  speculations  the  most
fanciful  and  anthropomorphic.  Gradually  imitation  yields  to
invention,  and  the  natural  fallacy  of  post  hoc,  ergo  propter  hoc  to

1  "  The  '  marks '  of  a  concept  are  not  generally  coordinated  as  all  of  equal  value
but  rather. ..are  related  to  each  other  in  the  most  various  ways,  assign  to  each  other
diverse  ranks  (Anlagerungen),  and  so  mutually  determine  each  other —  An  appro-
priate symbol  for  the  structure  of  a  concept  is  not  the  equation  S=a  +  6+c+d...,  but
at  best  the  expression  S=F(a,  b,  c...),  indicating  merely  that  S,  a,  b,  c ...  must  be  con-
nected in  a  manner  precisely  assignable  for  each  particular  case,  but  extremely
variable  for  different  cases,  in  order  that  the  value  of  5"  may  be  obtained."  Lotze,
Logic,  §  iRfin.


304  Intellection  [CH.  xn,  §  5

methodical  induction.  Thus  what  is  essential  and  effective
comes  to  be  realised  and  appreciated  and  what  is  accidental
and  inert  to  be  discarded  and  fall  out  of  sight.  In  this  way
man  advances  in  the  construction  of  a  complete  mental  clue
or  master  key  to  the  intricacies  of  the  real  world,  but  this
key  is  still  the  counterpart  of  the  world  it  enables  him  to  control
and  explain.

To  describe  the  process  by  which  such  '  insight '  is  attained
as  a  mere  matter  of  abstraction,  the  result  of  association  (as  Bain
came  near  to  doing),  deserves  the  stigma  of  '  soulless  blunder  '
which  Hegel  applied  to  it1.  Of  course  if  attention  is  concentrated
on  X  it  must  pro  tanto  be  abstracted  from  F,  and  such  command
of  attention  may  require  '  some  pains  and  skill.'  But  again,  to
see  its  essential  feature  in  this  invariable  accompaniment  of
thinking  is  much  like  the  schoolboy's  saying  that  engraving
consists  in  cutting  fine  shavings  out  of  a  hard  block.  The
essential  thing  is  to  find  out  what  are  the  light-bearing  and
fruit-bearing  combinations.  Moreover,  thinking  does  not  begin
with  a  conscious  abstraction  of  attention  from  recognised
differences  in  the  way  logicians  describe.  The  actual  process
of  generalisation,  for  the  most  part  at  all  events,  is  much  simpler.
The  same  name  is  applied  to  different  things  or  events  because
only  their  more  salient  features  are  perceived  at  all.  Their
differences,  so  far  from  being  consciously  and  with  effort  left
out  of  account,  often  cannot  be  observed  when  attention  is
directed  to  them  :  to  the  inexperienced  all  is  gold  that  glisters.
Thus,  and  as  an  instance  of  the  principle  of  progressive
differentiation  already  noted2,  we  find  genera  recognised  before
species,  and  the  species  obtained  by  adding  on  differences,  not
the  genus  by  abstracting  from  them3.  Of  course  such  vague  and
indefinite  '  concepts  '  are  not  at  first  logically  general4.  They  do
not  become  so  till  certain  common  elements  are  consciously
noted  as  pertaining  to  the  things  or  situations  the  concepts
denote;  though  in  other  respects  such  things  or  situations  are
qualitatively  different,  as  well  as  numerically  distinct.  Actually
then,  thinking  may  be  said  to  start  with  the  analysis  of  this

1  Cf.  Bain,  Senses  and  Intellect,  1894,  pp.  541  ff. ;  Hegel,  Encyclopaedic,  iii.  1845,
P-  334.  §  456,  Zusatz.

8  Cf.  ch.  ii,  §  4,  p.  50.  3  Cf.  ch.  vii,  §  2,  p.  190.

4  Cf.  Lotze,  Logic,  "On  the  First  Universal,"  §§  14,  15.


CH.  xii,  §  6]  Thought  as  analytic  305

potential generality  secured by  the association  of  a generic
image  with  a  name1.


Thought  as  analytic.

§  6.  The  process  of  thinking  may  thus  be  psychologically
more  completely  described  as  (i)  an  analysis,  and  (2)  a  re-syn-
thesis, of  the  material  already  furnished  by  the  ideational  trains,
a  re-synthesis  into  a  new  whole  of  a  higher  order — one  wherein
both  the  whole  and  the  parts  are  concepts.  The  logical  re-
solution of  thought  first  into  hierarchies  of  concepts  arranged
like  Porphyry's  tree ;  then  into  judgments  uniting  such  con-
cepts by  means  of  a  logical  copula ;  and  finally,  into  syllo-
gisms connecting  such  judgments  through  a  middle  term —
all  this  is  the  outcome  of  later  reflexion  upon  thought  as  a
completed  product — reflexion  undertaken  mainly  for  technical
purposes  and  entirely  presupposing  all  that  psychology  has  to
explain.  Thus  the  logical  theory  of  the  formation  of  concepts
by  generalisation  (or  abstraction)  and  by  determination  (or
concretion) — i.e.  by  the  removal  or  addition  of  defining  marks —
assumes  the  previous  existence  of  the  very  things  to  be  formed,
for  these  marks  or  attributes — X's  and  Vs,  A's  and  It's — are
themselves  concepts  already.  Moreover,  the  act,  whether  it  be
one  of  generalising  or  of  determining  is  really  an  act  of  judg-
ment ;  so  that  the  logician's  account  of  conception  presupposed
judgment,  while  at  the  same  time  his  account  of  judgment
presupposed  conception.  But  this  is  no  evil ;  for  logic  did  not
essay  to  exhibit  the  actual  genesis  of  thought  but  only  an  ideal
for  future  thinking2.

Psychologically,  the  judgment  is  first3.  The  growing  mind,
we  may  suppose,  passes  beyond  mere  perception  when  some
striking  peculiarity  in  what  is  at  the  moment  noticed  is  a  bar
to  its  definite  recognition.  A  deer-stalker,  say,  is  not  instantly

1  So  far  the  material  of  thought  is  always  general,  is  freed,  that  is,  from  the  local
and  temporal  and  other  defining  marks  of  percepts. Cf.  ch.  vii,  §  4,  p.  200.

2  I  have  referred  to  logic  as  it  was  in  the  past,  for  nowadays  logic  is  commonly
regarded  not  as  a  normative  science  but  rather  as  a  mathematical  one.

3  In  keeping  with  this  many  philologists  maintain  :hat  language  begins  with  what
they  call  holophrastic  speech :  a  single  utterance  signifying  the  presence  of  a  whole
situation.

W.  P.  20


306  Intellection  [CH.  xu,  §  6

recognised  as  a  man,  because  he  is  crawling  on  all  fours ;  or  a
scarecrow  looks  like  one,  and  yet  not  like  one,  for,  though  it
stands  on  two  legs,  it  never  moves.  There  is  thus  a  pause  and
no  '  naming ' :  the  conflict  of  ideas1 — quadruped  or  biped,  clown
or  boggard — inhibits  this  step.  Recognition,  that  is  to  say,
under  such  circumstances  is  a  judgment  that  presupposes  some
analysis,  more  or  less  explicit.  But  of  more  account  are  the
further  judgments  accompanying  this  or  involved  in  it  and
connecting  the  new  fact  with  one  or  other  of  the  competing
ideas.  As  already  said,  though  actually  complex,  generic  images
are  not  explicitly  known  as  complexes  when  they  first  enter  into
judgments  such  as  these.  As  to  the  subject  of  such  judgments,
they  are  but  the  starting-point  for  predication — It  crawls ;  It
does  not  move ;  and  the  like.  Impersonal  judgments,  according
to  many  philologists,  are  in  fact  the  earliest.  Impersonal  judg-
ments are  however  a  very  controversial  topic.  Sometimes  they  are
only  grammatically  impersonal :  the  subject,  that  is  to  say,  is  itself
definite  and  is  also  definitely  present  in  thought.  It  is  only  re-
placed by  an  '  It '  for  brevity's  sake  or  the  more  to  emphasize  the
predicate,  as,  e.g.,  in  the  words  '  It  is  finished '  when  a  play,  or  it
may  be  a  life,  is  over.  But  in  the  genuine  impersonals,  which
the  philologists  have  in  view,  no  definite  subject  is  contemplated.
"  I  do  not  doubt,"  says  Lotze,  "  that  anyone  who  is  asked  what
he  means  by  '  It,'  when  he  says  '  it  rains,'  or  'it  thunders,'  can  easily

be  driven  to  say,  'the  rain  rains'  or  'the  thunder  thunders'

If  he  then  uses  several  expressions  of  this  sort  one  after  another,
he  does  not  indeed  deliberately  say  that  the  indefinite  pronoun
means  the  same  in  all  these  cases.  But  he  would  certainly,  if
he  understood  himself  rightly,  give  this  answer  rather  than  the
former.  This  '  It '  is,  in  fact,  thought  of  as  the  common  subject
...it  indicates  the  all-embracing  thought  of  reality,  which  takes
now  one  shape,  now  another2."  Sigwart  regards  this  interpreta-
tion as  too  'artificial3,'  though  it  does  not  seem  in  the  end  to
differ  very  widely  from  his  own4.  Anyhow  we  have  good
reasons  for  regarding  it  as  genetically  sound.  The  indefinite
'  It '  is  just  our  presentational  continuum,  and  a  good  deal  of
psychology  and  epistemology,  if  not  metaphysics,  gathers  like
a  cloud  about  it.  Psychologically  the  same  sort  of  indefiniteness

1  Cf.  ch.  vii,  §  5,  pp.  202  f.  2  Lotze,  Logik,  §  49.

3  Sigwart,  Die  Impersonalien,  1888,  p.  55  «.  4  Cf.  op.  cit.  p.  45.


CH.  xii,  §  6]  Thought  as  analytic  307

clings  to  the  impersonal  judgments  cited  above :  they  are  but
further  stages  in  the  progressive  differentiation  of  experience,
and  we  may  reasonably  suppose  that  by  means  of  them  our
generic  images  have  been  partially  analyzed,  and  have  attained
to  something  of  the  distinctness  and  constancy  of  logical
concepts.

Yet  such  analysis  is  rarely  complete :  a  certain  confused
and  fluctuating  residuum  usually  remains  behind.  The  psycho-
logical concept  merges  at  sundry  points  into  those  cognate  with
it — in  other  words,  the  continuity  of  the  underlying  memory-
train  still  operates ;  only  the  ideal  concept  of  logic  is  in  all
respects  in  se  ipso  totus,  teres,  atque  rotundus.  Evidence  of  this,
if  it  seem  to  any  to  require  proof,  is  obtainable  on  all  sides,  and,
if  we  could  recover  the  first  vestiges  of  thinking,  would  doubtless
be  more  abundant  still.  Even  now  children  and  untutored  per-
sons on  the  strength  of  an  acquaintance  with  some  of  the  objects
denoted  by  a  term  proceed  to  conjecture  its  meaning,  taking
this  too  narrowly,  or  perhaps  too  widely,  but  never  being  able
exactly  to  define  it.  Again,  when  this  meaning  is  very  complex,
one  part  of  it  is  ignored  at  one  time  and  another  at  another
time.  To  these  facts  we  may  trace  many  of  the  confusions  and
inconsistencies  of  loose  thinkers  who  are  fond  of  'roughly
speaking'  and  talk  much  of  'sort  of/  'thereabouts,'  and  'it'
For  so  long  as  the  affairs  of  common  life  can  be  carried  on
effectively  there  is  no  call  for  more  accuracy  of  discrimination
than  suffices  for  the  avoidance  of  frequent  and  gross  mistakes.
And  even  when  the  level  of  culture  is  attained,  it  is  generally
the  endeavour  to  defend  false  ideas  that  leads  to  ideas  that  are
truer  and  more  precise.  In  thought  as  elsewhere  we  find  struggle
for  existence  and  survival  of  the  fittest1.

The  second  phase  or  '  moment '  of  the  process  of  thinking,
the  synthesis  in  new  forms  of  what  has  been  analyzed  and
discriminated,  calls  for  lengthier  treatment  and  is  best  reserved
for  a  new  chapter.

1  Cf.  Waitz,  Lehrbuch  der  Psychologies  1849,  P-  522! Volkmann,  Lehrbuch  der
Psychologie,  1875,  ii.  p.  244,  Anmerk.  2.


20 — 2


308  Intellection  [CH.  xn,  §  7

APPENDIX

'Apperception' :  Intellective  Systems.

§  7.  It  is  perhaps  desirable  to  take  some  notice  now  of
a  term  that  occupies  a  prominent  place  in  the  treatment  by
many  psychologists  of  what  we  have  here  called  intellection.
By  some  this  has  been  regarded  as  primarily  a  subjective  or
self-conscious  process,  by  others  as  merely  an  objective  or
ideational  one.  In  point  of  fact  we  have  seen  reason  for  holding
it  to  involve  both ;  the  one  process  being  the  cause,  the  other
its  effect.  The  term  apperception,  which  we  are  now  to  consider,
was  introduced  by  Leibniz  without  any  precise  definition  but
mainly  in  the  first  sense,  that  is  to  say,  to  denote  self-conscious-
ness together  with  such  other  'reflexive  acts'  as  self-consciousness
implies1.  Kant  followed  suit.  Apperception  is  for  him  the  self-
consciousness  that  appropriates  all  my  experiences  as  mine :  in
particular,  it  is  the  spontaneous  activity  that  differentiates  under-
standing from  sense,  nay,  it  is  understanding  itself.  But  precisely
wherein  the  objective  effect  of  this  activity  consisted  was  a  ques-
tion that  Leibniz  hardly  considered  at  all.  Even  Kant  contented
himself  with  a  general  description  of  it  as  always  a  synthesis  in
some  form  or  other,  a  synthesis  resting  ultimately  on  the  '  tran-
scendental unity'  of  the  conscious  self2.  So  far  no  case  was
made  out  for  the  need  of  apperception  as  a  special  term  at  all ;
and  but  for  Herbart  it  would  probably  never  have  had  a  place
in  our  psychological  terminology.  He  it  was  who  first  inquired
how  apperception  is  related  to  the  presentations  in  which  it  is
concerned.

Starting  from  the  Leibnizian  position  Herbart  proceeded  to
distinguish  between  the  self  that  is  conscious  and  the  self  that
is  presented,  just  as  Kant  had  done  before  him.  It  is  this
presented  self  that  is  related  to  other  presentations  in  reflexion,
internal  sense  or  apperception.  But  this  relation  is  neither
the  only  nor  the  earliest  result  of  a  process,  which  is  essentially
nothing  but  a  certain  interaction  of  presentations.  So  we  reach
the  second  of  the  one-sided  extremes  referred  to  above;  and
here  apperception  entirely  changes  its  meaning.  What  is  that

1  Cf.  Principes  de  la  nature,  &c.,  §  4  as  quoted  above  p.  93,  and  also  §  5.
3  Cf.  §  1 5  of  the  Deduction  of  the  Categories,  Critique,  2nd  ed.


CH.  xii,  §  7]  'Apperception  :  Intellective  Systems 309

interaction  which  the  term  apperception  as  used  by  Herbart  is  now
to  denote  ?  We  must  go  back  a  little  to  see.  Empirical  psycho-
logy Herbart  rightly  maintained  must  be  analytical  at  the  outset ;
but,  unfortunately,  the  most  fundamental  analysis  of  all — that
which  yields  the  duality  of  subject  and  object,  as  commonly
understood — he  treated  as  pertaining  not  to  experience  but  to
metaphysics.  The  whole  business  of  empirical  psychology  he
therefore  confined  to  the  interaction  of  presentations  and  its
incidental  consequences :  "  in  the  soul  there  are  only  presenta-
tions ( Vorstellungen)  ;  out  of  these  all  that  is  to  be  in  conscious-
ness must  be  constructed  (zusammengesetzt)1"  In  short,  for
Herbart  psychology  was  just  a  new  ideology  or  presentationism,
a  theory  of  psychical  statics  and  dynamics  applied  to,  rather
than  derived  from,  experience.  The  conative  activity  commonly
attributed  to  the  subject  of  experience  Herbart  transferred  to
presentations  :  these  tend  always  to  adjust,  rank  and  incorporate
themselves  into  larger,  compacter  wholes,  that  in  turn  may  repeat
the  process.  This  is  the  Herbartian  apperception,  of  which  the
Leibnizian  apperception  is  not  the  cause  but  the  effect.  We
find  an  analogue  to  all  this  among  human  beings  in  the  gradual
progress  from  the  '  state  of  nature '  to  that  of  civilised  society.
So  close  was  the  analogy  between  the  two  for  Herbart  that  he
devoted  over  thirty  pages  to  its  illustration2.  But  in  the
essential  point  the  analogy  obviously  fails.  We  cannot  talk
of  presentations  per  se,  and  if  we  could,  still  we  could  not  regard
them  either  as  objects  or  as  subjects3.  Nevertheless,  for  Her-
bart, new  presentations,  series  of  presentations  or  entire  masses
of  them  were  at  first  material  for  some  older  presentation,  series  or
mass,  whose  function  was  that  of  appropriating  them — assimilat-
ing, and  organizing  or  systematizing4  them,  as  the  case  might  be5.

1  Psychologic  ah  Wissenschaft,  neu  gegriindet  auf  Erfahrung,  Metaphysik  und
Mathematik,  1825,  §  125,  Hartenstein's  ed.,  ii.  p.  190.

*  Op.  cit.  ii.  pp.  18-51.  It  is  worth  remarking  too  that  M.  Fr.  Paulhan,  in  his
book  entitled  L'Activitt  mentale  et  les  Ailments  de  F  Esprit  (1889),  starting  from  the
same  analogy,  has  worked  out  independently  under  the  title  of  'systematic  association'
a  theory  closely  resembling  Herbart's  doctrine  of  apperception.

3  Cf.  Lotze,  Metaphysik,  §  273,  for  an  important  criticism.

4  In  the  last  and  highest  form  of  apperception,  the  '  masses '  of  which  Herbart
speaks  would  have  been  better  described  as  '  systems,'  for  he  recognises  that  they  are
always  organized  more  or  less. They  are  so  described  by  Professor  Stout ; cf.  his
Analytic  Psychology,  1896,  ii.  p.  114.

8  Cf.  op.  cit.  ii.  §  125,  pp.  190  f.


3io  Intellection  [CH.  xn,  §  7

The  last  form  of  this  process  has  been  described  above  as
constituting  a  further  elaboration,  a  sort  of  '  transfiguration '  of
the  ideational  continuum1.  It  also  includes  the  most  interesting
and  important  of  the  facts  covered  by  the  Herbartian  theory ;  and
those  moreover  most  in  need  of  a  technical  name.  We  have
got  used  to  perception  and  conception  as  the  names  for  processes
resulting  in  percepts  and  concepts  ;  but  are  obviously  debarred
from  using  '  intellects '  on  this  analogy.  Appercepts  might  be  the
Herbartian  term,  and  one  might  be  tempted — for  the  sake  of  the
impressive  alliteration — to  talk  of  the  four  psychological  A's,
attention,  assimilation,  association  and  apperception.  But  in  the
way  stands  Herbart's  doctrine  that  the  progressive  advance  in
cognition  that  characterizes  the  last  three  is  explicable  without
the  first.  Moreover,  apperception  with  him  covers  the  remaining
processes — is  indeed  at  bottom  just  a  more  or  less  complex  as-
similation, more  or  less  modified  by  preliminary  inhibitions.  And
this  is  a  fact  that  damages  his  whole  doctrine.  So  far  as  his
apperception  has  any  pretension  to  be  an  independent  process,
so  far  it  is  '  mechanical ' ;  it  rests,  that  is  to  say,  on  the  working
of  a  preformed  ideational  basis.  It  is  then  no  equivalent  for
intellection.  So  far  as  it  is  a  process  requiring  subjective  ini-
tiative and  control,  the  mechanical  interaction  of  presentations
will  not  account  for  it.

The  few  psychologists  who  still  employ  the  term  apper-
ception lay  the  chief  stress  on  the  subjective  side,  mean  by  it,
in  fact,  just  the  active  concentration  of  attention  that  constitutes
the  '  focus  of  consciousness '  and  ensures  definite  apprehension.
But  these  psychologists  are  also  given  to  describing  those  com-
binations of  ideas  that  presuppose  association  as  apperceptive.
In  other  words,  they  try  to  unite  the  Leibnizian  and  the  Her-
bartian apperceptions  notwithstanding  the  diversity  between
them2.  This  seems  a  clear  case  of  falling  between  two  stools.
For  attention  may  be  concentrated  for  other  ends  than  thinking
— as  in  recollecting,  skilful  performance,  &c.  Thinking  then
cannot  be  characterized  by  what  is  merely  one  of  its  essential
conditions  but  not  the  only  one.  Mutatis  mutandis,  the  same
may  be  said  of  the  interaction  and  combination  of  ideas :

1  Cf.  §  4  above,  p.  301.

2  So,  for  example,  Wundt. Cf.  his  Pkys.  Psychologic,  6th  ed.  vol.  iii. (1911),
PP-  3°7  f->  543  ff-


CH.  xii,  §  7]  'Apperception  :  Intellective  Systems 311

thinking  involves  them  but  they  do  not  suffice  to  constitute
it.  The  one  sine  qua  non  of  thought — selective  control  of  ideas
in  order  to  solve  a  problem — is  so  far  left  out  altogether.

Having,  however,  admitted  the  want  of  a  technical  term  for
what  the  Herbartians  call  an  apperceptive  system  and  having  dis-
approved of  their  term,  it  behoves  us,  if  we  can,  to  find  a  better.
'Intellective  system'  at  once  suggests  itself.  This  at  all  events
does  not  lose  sight  of  what  seems  the  salient  characteristic  of
these  systems  from  the  standpoint  of  psychology,  viz.  that  they
are  all  the  result  of  a  subjective  selection  of  what  is  relevant
to  a  meaning  or  intention — a  result  synthesizing  and  fitting
together  disjecta  membra  that  have  first  to  be  found.  Such  a
result  is  systematic  only  because  it  is  due  to  an  interest  in,  and
a  search  for,  system.  But  according  to  Herbart,  it  is  a  result
that  comes  about  whether  or  no,  simply  through  the  interaction
of  the  presentations  concerned ;  and  according  to  his  modern
representatives  seems  to  come  about  provided  attention  is
specially  restricted  to  a  part  of  its  field.  They  cannot  mean
this,  of  course1.  What  they  mean  is  rather — and  it  is  true
enough — that  when  such  systems  are  already  formed,  and
especially  when  they  are  well  organized,  and  colligated  by  an
appropriate  terminology  and  nomenclature,  they  may  become
as  ideational  wholes  amenable  to  the  working  of  association
and  inhibition,  like  other  ideas.  Most  of  the  detail  of  Her-
bartian  expositions  falls  under  this  head.  Such  detail  has
proved  especially  helpful  to  the  application  of  psychology  to
education  for  which  the  Herbartians  have  long  been  distin-
guished ;  but  it  involves  nothing  new  in  principle.  The  pro-
cesses otherwise  described  as  classifying,  diagnosing,  explaining
belong  here,  as  when  we  ask  What  is  this  ?  or  Is  this  it  ?'2.  The
new  is  adjusted  to  and  further  develops  the  old.

Once  formed  and  familiar,  the  subsequent  ideational  working
of  these  systems  involves  nothing  new  in  principle,  we  have
said.  Still  their  very  '  mass '  affects  their  relations  to  each  other

1  Wundt,  in  fact,  when  he  comes  to  the  treatment  ot  his  'apperceptive  combina-
tions,' finds  it  needful  to  supplement  his  original  '  concept  of  apperception,'  as  merely
implying  the  entrance  of  a  presentation  into  the  focus  of  attention,  with  a  certain
'relating  (beziehende)  function'  which  itself  implies  volition  and  purpose. This  it  is,
he  holds,  that  discriminates  thinking  from  mere  association. Cf.  op.  cit.  pp.  544  f.

2  Cf.  Steinthal's  division  of  apperceptions  into  identifying,  subsuming,  harmonizing,
creative  (op.  cit.  §  200-15). The  last  is  obviously  quite  out  of  line  with  the  rest


312  Intellection  [CH.  xn,  §  7

in  a  way  that  throws  a  new  light  on  the  progress  of  experience.
The  greater  this  mass  and  the  better  such  systems  are  com-
pacted and  organized  as  unitary  wholes,  the  more  each  appro-
priates to  itself  by  a  sort  of  differential  '  attraction '  any  new
experiences  that  are  germane  to  it,  and  pro  tanto  inhibits  any
that  are  not.  The  greater  the  diversity  of  the  subjective  interests
that  sustain  them,  the  more  remote  and  isolated  two  such  systems
tend  to  be.  In  short,  the  further  we  advance  into  this  region  of
conceptual  'constellations,'  the  more  we  leave  behind  the  con-
tinuity and  instability  of  mere  ideation.  Adapting  Descartes'
comparison  of  the  soul  to  a  spider  seated  at  the  centre  of  its
web  we  may  represent  man  as  constructing  his  own  microcosm
as  a  house  of  many  mansions,  each  a  'universe  of  discourse,'
into  one  or  other  of  which  he  enters  (sick  einstellt,  as  the  Germans
say)  as  his  interests  or  circumstances  determine.  The  same
things  may  chance  to  present  themselves  in  each,  but  their
aspects  and  importance  will  not  be  the  same.  In  one  they  may
awaken  many  memories  and  images,  in  another  none  at  all  or
wholly  different  ones :  here  they  may  be  welcomed  and  enter-
tained, there  repulsed  or  ignored.  Subjective  selection  then  is
the  clue  to  the  structure  of  each  one's  intellectual  domain,  as
it  is  also  to  that  of  the  '  ideational  tissue,'  the  memory-train,
the  sensory  differentiations,  successively  elaborated  out  of  the
primary  presentational  continuum  which  we  conceive  as  all  that
the  subject  has  confronting  it  when  its  experience  begins.


CHAPTER XIII

FORMS  OF  SYNTHESIS

The  Bias  towards  Formal  Logic  in  Psychology.

§  i.  If  we  agree  that  it  is  through  acts  of  judgment,  which
successively  resolve  composite  presentations  into  elements,  that
concepts  first  arise,  it  is  still  very  necessary  to  inquire  more  care-
fully what  these  elements  are.  On  the  one  side,  we  have  seen
logicians  comparing  them  to  so  many  letters,  and  on  the  other,
psychologists  enumerating  the  several  sensible  properties,  e.g.
of  gold  or  wax — their  colour,  weight,  texture,  &c. — as  instances
of  such  elements.  In  this  way  formal  logic  and  sensationalist
psychology  have  been  but  blind  leaders  of  the  blind.  Language,
which  has  enabled  thought  to  advance  to  the  level  at  which
reflexion  about  thought  can  begin,  is  now  an  obstacle  in  the  way
of  a  thorough  analysis  of  it.  Children  or  savages  would  speak
only  of  '  red '  and  '  hot,'  but  we  of  '  redness '  and  '  heat.'  They
would  probably  say,  "  Swallows  come  when  the  days  are
lengthening  and  snipe  when  they  are  shortening " ;  we  say,
"  Swallows  are  spring,  and  snipe  are  winter,  migrants."  Instead
of  "  The  sun  shines  and  plants  grow,"  we  might  say,  "  Sunlight
is  the  cause  of  vegetation."  In  short,  there  is  a  tendency  to
resolve  all  concepts  into  substantive  concepts  ;  and  the  reason  of
this  is  not  far  to  seek.  Whether  the  subject  or  starting-point  of
our  discursive  thinking  be  actually  what  we  perceive  as  a  thing ;
or  whether  it  be  a  quality,  an  action,  an  effectuation  (z>.  a  tran-
seunt  action) ;  whether  it  be  a  concrete  spatial  or  temporal
relation,  or  finally,  a  resemblance  or  difference  in  these  or  in
other  respects — it  becomes  in  every  case,  by  the  very  fact  of
being  the  central  object  of  thought,  pro  tanto  a  unity,  and
whatever  can  be  affirmed  concerning  it  may  so  far  be  regarded
as  its  property  or  attribute.  It  is,  as  we  have  seen,  the


314  Forms  of  Synthesis [CH.  xm,  §  i

characteristic  of  every  completed  concept  to  be  a  fixed  and
independent  whole,  as  it  were,  crystallized  out  of  the  still-fluent
matrix  of  ideas.  Moreover,  the  earliest  objects  of  thought  and
the  earliest  concepts  must  naturally  be  those  of  the  things  that
live  and  move  about  us  ;  hence  then,  this  natural  tendency,
which  language  by  providing  distinct  names  further  strengthens,
not  only  to  personify  things,  but  to  '  reify '  every  element  and
relation  of  things  which  we  can  single  out :  in  other  words,  to
concrete  our  abstracts3.  It  is  after  thinking  has  reached  this
stage  that  logic  begins.  Yet  ordinary — so-called  formal — logic
which  concerns  itself  not  with  thinking  but  only  with  the  most
general  structure  of  thought  as  a  product,  is  debarred  from
recognising  any  difference  between  concepts  that  does  not  affect
their  relations  as  terms  in  a  proposition.  As  a  consequence  it  drifts
inevitably  into  that  compartmental  logic  or  logic  of  extension
which  knows  nothing  of  categories  or  predicables,  but  only  of  the
one  relation  of  whole  and  part  qualitatively  considered.  It  thus
pushes  this  reduction  to  a  common  denomination  to  the  utmost:
its  terms,  grammatically  regarded,  are  always  names  and  sym-
bolize classes  or  compartments  of  things.  From  this  point  of
view  all  disparity  among  concepts,  save  that  of  contradictory
exclusion,  and  all  connexion,  save  that  of  partial  coincidence,  are
at  an  end.

Of  a  piece  with  this  are  the  logical  formula  for  a  simple
judgment,  £  is  P,  and  the  corresponding  definitions  of  judgment
as  the  comparison  of  two  concepts  and  the  recognition  of  their
agreement  or  disagreement2.  Even  if  it  be  possible  to  repre-
sent every  judgment  as  a  comparison,  yet  the  term  is  strictly
adequate  only  to  judgments  of  one  kind  and  affords  but  a  very
artificial  description  of  others.  But  for  a  logic  mainly  concerned
with  inference,  in  the  sense  of  explicating  what  is  implicated  in
any  given  statements  concerning  classes,  there  is  nothing  more  to
be  done  but  to  ascertain  relations  of  inclusion  or  exclusion ;  and
the  existence  of  these,  if  not  necessarily,  is  at  least  most  evidently

1  See  Wundt,  Logik,  2te  Aufl.  (1893),  i.  p.  123  f.,  where  this  process  is  happily
styled  '  die  kategoriale  Verschiebung  der  Begriffe.'

2  Cf.  Hamilton  : "  To  judge  (uplveiv,  judicare}  is  to  recognize  the  relation  of
congruence  or  of  confliction  in  which  two  concepts,  two  individual  things,  or  a  concept
and  an  individual, compared  together, stand  to  each  other" (Lectures  on  Logic,
i.  p. 225).


CH.  xni,  §  i] The  Bias  towards  Formal  Logic 315

represented  by  spatial  relations.  Such  representation  obviously
implies  only  a  single  ground  of  comparison  and  therefore  leaves
no  room  for  differences  of  category.  The  resolution  of  all  con-
cepts into  class  concepts  and  that  of  all  judgments  into  compari-
sons thus  go  together.  On  this  view  if  a  concept  is  complex  it
can  only  be  so  as  a  class  combination ;  and,  if  the  mode  of  its
synthesis  could  be  taken  account  of  at  all,  this  could  only  be  by
treating  that  too  as  an  element  in  the  combination  like  the  rest :
— iron  is  a  substance,  &c.,  virtue  a  quality,  &c.,  distance  a  relation,
&c.,  and  so  on.  There  is  much  of  directly  psychological  interest
in  this  thoroughgoing  reduction  of  thought  to  a  form  which
makes  its  consistency  and  logical  concatenation  conspicuously
evident.  Of  the  so-called  matter  of  thought,  however,  it  tells  us
nothing.  And,  as  said,  there  are  many  forms  in  that  matter  of
at  least  equal  moment,  both  for  psychology  and  for  epistemo-
l°gy  5  these  formal  logic  has  tended  to  keep  out  of  sight1.

If  we  are  still  to  speak  of  the  elements  of  thought,  we  have  just
seen  that — in  dealing  with  the  thought-process — we  must  extend
this  term  so  as  to  include  not  only  the  sensory  elements  we  are
said  to  receive2  but  several  distinct  modes  in  which  this  so-called
matter  is  combined.  Of  these  we  may  note  (i)  the  forms  of
intuition — conceptual  Time  and  Space ;  (2)  certain  formal
(mathematical  and  logical)  categories — as  Unity,  Plurality,
Number,  Difference,  Likeness,  Identity  ;  (3)  the  real  categories —
Substance  and  Attribute,  Cause  and  Effect,  End  and  Means ;
and  (4)  the  so-called  axiological  categories  of  Value  or  Worth
— the  exact  determination  of  which  is  not  here  in  place.  These
various  modes  cannot  be  obtained  by  such  a  process  of  abstrac-
tion and  generalisation  as  logicians  and  psychologists  alike  have
been  wont  to  describe.  Primarily  they  are  not  concepts  more
general  than  all  others  in  the  sense  in  which  animal  is  more

1  It  has  generally  been  under  the  bias  of  such  a  formal  or  computational  logic  that
psychologists,  and  especially  English  psychologists,  have  entered  upon  the  study  of
mind.  They  have  brought  with  them  an  analytic  scheme  which  affords  a  ready  place
for  sensations  or  '  simple  ideas'  as  the  elements  of  thought,  but  none  for  any  differences
in  the  combinations  of  these  elements.  Sensations  being  in  their  very  nature  concrete,
all  generality  becomes  an  affair  of  names;  and,  as  Sigwart  has  acutely  remarked,
"  Sensationalism  and  Nominalism  always  go  together1'  (Logik,  2te  Aufl.  i.  p.  342  fin.).
History  would  have  borne  him  out  if  he  had  added  that  a  purely  formal  logic  tends  in
like  manner  to  be  nominalistic.

»  Cf.  ch.  v,  §§  4,  5.


316  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xm,  §  i

general  than  man.  To  understand  this  we  must  fall  back  on
the  distinction  that  Kant  was  led  to  make  between  formal  and
transcendental  logic1.  In  his  exposition  of  the  latter  he  brings
to  light  the  difference  between  the  '  functions  of  the  understand-
ing' in  synthesizing — or,  as  we  might  say,  organizing — percepts
into  concepts  and  the  merely  analytic  subsumption  of  abc  and
abd  under  ab — a,  b,  c  and  d  being  what  they  may.  Unlike  other
concepts,  categories  or,  as  Kant — from  the  epistemological  stand-
point called  them — pure  or  a  priori  concepts,  do  not  in  the  first
instance  signify  objects  of  thought,  but  these  functions  of  the
understanding  in  constituting  objects.  In  fine,  they  all  imply
special  synthetic  processes  and  correspondingly  special  products.
The  general  characteristic  of  these  products  is  what  we  have  first
of  all  to  note.


Objects  of  Higher  Order:  their  Analysis  and  Genesis.

§  2.  By  transposing  a  tune  from  one  key  to  another  we  may
obtain  two  entirely  diverse  aggregates  of  notes,  and  yet  the
melody  may  remain  unchanged.  On  the  other  hand,  by  varying
the  order  of  the  notes  two  distinct  tunes  may  result  from  the
same  collection  of  tones.  Sense  furnishes  merely  the  parts  :
whence,  then,  this  identity  of  the  whole  in  spite  of  their  diversity,
this  diversity  of  the  whole  in  spite  of  their  identity  ?  From  the
sameness  or  difference  of  the  several  '  intervals,'  it  is  replied.
But  the  answer  is  insufficient.  The  tune  is  a  unity,  not  a  mere
series,  and,  further,  with  every  interval  the  same  problem  recurs.
For  the  interval,  too,  is  a  whole, though  a  simpler  one:  it  does  not
necessarily  change  with  a  change  of  its  constituents,  nor  remain
the  same  as  long  as  their  distance  is  unaltered.  Feelings  and
'  associations,'  again,  cannot  account  for  the  result,  inasmuch  as
such  accompaniments  are  not  invariably  present.  Moreover,  they
obviously  presuppose  the  melody;  but  they  do  not  produce  it.
Of  such  complex  wholes  or  combinations — as  distinct  from  mere
aggregates  or  collections — there  are  many  forms;  as, for  example,
geometrical  figures  and  patterns,  motions  and  other  changes,
numbers,  logical  connexions,  in  fact — relations  generally.  In
view  of  this  variety  it  seems  to  strike  the  unprejudiced  as  wild
to  expect  that  '  the  progress  of  psychophysics '  may  disclose  an

1  Cf.  Critique,  Pt.  II.  Introduction,  M.  Midler's  trans,  pp.  44-54.


CH.  xin,  §  2] Objects  of  Higher  Order  3 1 7

explanation  of  such  combinations  conforming  to  the  old  scholastic
maxim,  Nihil  est  in  intellectu  quod  non  fuerit  prius  in  sensu,  as
sensationalists  interpret  it.  Yet  hopes  of  such  a  generatio  aequi-
voca  are  entertained1!  Meanwhile  the  'old  psychology,'  at  any
rate,  is  content  to  regard  such  complex  wholes  as  new  presen-
tations— the  products,  that  is  to  say,  not  of  a  quasi-mechanical
interaction  of  their  constituents,  but  of  intellectual  synthesis.

What  is  here  said  of  the  combinations  whereby  the  items  of
an  aggregate  are  construed  as  parts  of  a  whole2  holds  equally
of  the  comparisons  whereby  such  items  are  related,  as  like  or
unlike,  compatible  or  incompatible.  Before  either  combination
or  comparison  is  possible,  such  items  or  particulars  must  be
'given.'  But  it  is  conceivable  that  they  should  be  given  and
no  intellectual  synthesis  ensue ;  such  a  consciousness  has  been
happily  named  anoetic*.  Whether  or  no  it  actually  exists  is
another  matter :  it  is  a  conceivable  limit,  and  has  the  theoretical
usefulness  of  limiting  conceptions  generally.  But  relative  anoesis
suffices  here.  Suppose,  then,  we  have  :  (a)  item,  a  sound  ;  item,
ditto;  item, ditto;  or(b)item,  blue;  item,  green.  The  sensationalist,
from  Hume  onwards,  has  complained  that  he  does  not  find  in
the  one  case  a  further  item :  total  three ;  nor  in  the  other  a  further
item  :  unlikeness.  After  vainly  seeking  the  living  whole  among
the  dead  particulars,  he  next  surmises  that  they  generate  it  by
their  conjoint  action  !  But  whence  this  notion  of  '  action ' ;
and  how,  if  such  disjecta  membra  suffice,  do  they  so  often  fail
of  their  effect,  so  that  we  cannot  "  see  the  wood  for  the  trees  "  ?
Combinations  and  comparisons  then,  we  conclude,  are  not  given,
but  'grounded'  on  what  is  given,  and  is  thus  their fundamentum.
Hence  Meinong,  who  has  studied  the  psychology  of  intellection
with  especial  care,  has  called  the  new  presentations,  due  to  this
process  of '  grounding '  (Fundiren),  '  objects  of  a  higher  order,'  or

1  Cf.  e.g. F. Schumann, "  Zur  Psychologic  der Zeitanschauung," Ztschr.  f.
Psychologic,  xvii.  130,  136. According  to  him  the  presentations  of  combination  and
relation  are  the  direct  effect  of  the  presentations  of  their  constituent  fundamenta,  and
the  assumption  of  any  intellectual  process  of  comparing,  distinguishing,  or  'ground-
ing '  is  superfluous.

2  Parts  of  the  wider  whole  of  the  presentational  continuum,  of  course  they  always
were ;  but  as  differentiations  within  that  primordial  whole  they  are  '  items '  relatively
to  each  other:  otherwise  there  could  be  no  differentiation  at  all. Obvious  as  they
should  be,  it  is  nevertheless  sometimes  overlooked. Cf.  above,  ch.  iv,  §  2,  p.  78.

8  G.  F.  Stout,  Analytic  Psychology,  1896,  i.  50  f.


3 1 8  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xm,  §  2

ideal  objects1.  They  have  validity  in  respect  of  the  particulars
on  which  they  are  grounded,  but  not  reality  as  data  existing  for
perception  alongside  of  such  particulars.

The  reader  will  here  be  reminded  of  Hume's  distinction
between  knowledge  and  probability.  His  four  philosophical
relations,  "which,  depending  solely  upon  ideas,  can  be  the
objects  of  knowledge  and  certainty — resemblance,  continuity,
degrees  in  quality  and  proportions  in  quantity  or  number  " — are
objects  of  higher  order  and  ideal.  "  The  other  three,  which
depend  not  upon  the  idea,  and  may  be  absent  or  present  even
while  that  remains  the  same2 " — namely,  identity,  the  situations
in  time  and  place,  and  causation — are  thus  obviously  not  the
result  of  grounding  or  noesis  merely,  are  not  ideal  but  empirical,
and  have,  that  is  to  say,  existential  import.  In  fact,  the  second
of  these,  the  situations,  though  they  imply  synthesis  in  the  wider
sense  in  which  all  complex  perception  does,  do  not  involve
intellectual  synthesis  at  all  :  are — as  immediately  perceived —
neither  ideal  complications  nor  ideal  relations.  And  since  such
temporal  and  spatial  situations  enter  into  both  the  other  two —
numerical  identity  and  causation — the  mixed,  a  posteriori
character  of  these  is  obvious.  Whatever  be  the  defects  of
Hume's  psychology,  his  classification  of  relations  is  so  far  sound,
and  its  epistemological  importance  can  hardly  be  overrated.  It
is  accordingly  to  be  regretted  that  the  one  vague  term  'relation'
does  not  allow  us  to  make  these  distinctions  more  precise.  The
German  language,  with  the  two  terms  Verhdltniss  and  Beziehung,
can  do  more.

Forms  of  Intuition.

§  3.  Among  the  forms  of  synthesis  above  enumerated  Space
and  Time  as  forms  of  intuition  were  mentioned  first  of  all.  We
have  seen  earlier3  that  the  intuition  of  the  '  external  world '  is

1  A.  Meinong,  "  Ueber  Gegenstande  hoherer  Ordnung  u.s.w.,"  Ztschr.f.  Psycho-
logie  (1899),  xxi.  182  ff. ;  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen,  1913,  ii.  377  ff. ;  in  this  he  was,
however,  anticipated  by  Lotze:  see  his  Metaphysik,  §  268,  and  also  above,  ch.  vii,
§  6,  pp.  204  f. Special  mention  must  also  be  made  of  an  earlier  paper  by  C.  v.
Ehrenfels  ("Ueber  Gestaltqualitaten," Vierteljahrsschr.  f. wissensch. Philosophic,
1890,  pp.  249  ff.),  round  which  the  whole  subsequent  discussion  of  this  topic  centres.
Cf.,  too,  Stout,  op.  cit.  bk.  i.  ch.  iii.

2  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  Green  and  Grose's  edition,  i.  pp.  yjifin.,

3  Ch.  vi.  §  6,  pp.  163  ff.


CH.  xin,  §  3]  Forms  of  Intuition  319

formally  constituted  by  the  temporal  and  spatial  relations  of  the
particular  presentations  of  which  it  consists.  From  this  con-
crete experience  of  filled  time  and  space  we  advance  in  thought
to  the  concepts  of  empty,  pure  or  absolute  time  and  space  and
their  several  implications.  This  advance  presupposes  the  lower
level  of  spatial  and  temporal  percepts  as  its  foundation.  These
are  possible  without  it :  it  is  impossible  without  them.  But
what  we  attain  is  not  merely  perceptual  time  and  space  with
only  the  filling  left  out.  Perceptual  time  is  not  uniform  and
perceptual  space  has  not  three  homogeneous  dimensions  :  nor  is
either  indefinitely  extended  and  indefinitely  divisible.  The
straight  line  and  the  circle  of  geometry  are  ideal  constructions  to
which  the  actual  only  approximates:  they  are  not  merely  ab-
stract terms.  As  Locke  would  have  said,  they  are  archetypal  not
ectypal ;  and  so  have  suggested  that  conceptual  reconstruction
of  the  world,  which  has  been  the  dream  of  science  since  the  days
of  Descartes.  Here  space  and  time  come  first,  and  the  order  of
science  inverts  the  order  of  existence,  the  higher  objects  precede
the  lower.  It  was  from  this  standpoint  that  Kant  discussed
space  and  time  as  forms  or  a  priori  conditions  of  intuition,
without  which  there  could  be,  as  he  supposed,  no  perception  of
an  external  world  at  all.  But  psychology  may  claim  to  have
shewn  that  Kant's  so-called  pure  intuition  of  space  and  time  as
ideal  construction  is  conceptual  and  not  perceptual,  not  the  pre-
supposition of  experience,  but  a  very  complex  result  of  it,  found
only  where  the  intellectual  level  is  attained.  For  all  that,  this
synthesis — just  because  it  is  ' creative/ archetypal,  constructive —
differs  widely  from  all  other  forms  of  synthesis.  So  far  it  gives
ground  for  Kant's  distinction  of  forms  of  intuition  from  cate-
gories or  forms  of  thought.  It  also  justifies  his  rejection  of  the
rationalistic  conception  of  mathematics  as  merely  logical,  and
the  disastrous  confusion  between  philosophical  and  mathematical
methods  to  which  it  led1.  This  identification  of  mathematics  with
logic  and  philosophy  with  mathematics  involved  the  dogmatic  as-
sumption that  both  mathematics  and  philosophy  were  independent
of  experience.  The  empirical  philosophers  who  had  no  difficulty
in  refuting  this  assumption  nevertheless  also  failed,  owing  to
their  sensationalist  psychology,  to  account  even  -for  the  synthesis

1  Cf.  Critique  of  the  Pure  Reason,  ist  edition,  pp. 713  ff.; M.  Mullet's  trans,
pp.  6ioff.


320  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xm,  §  3

that  spatial  and  temporal  percepts  entail ;  and  they  erred  again
in  assuming  that  mathematical  concepts  are  simply  abstracted
from  these.

But  long  before  any  definite  mathematical  concepts  were
formed,  the  human  mind  passed  beyond  the  level  of  spatial  and
temporal  perception.  This  step  was  taken,  and  we  might  even
say,  the  foundation  of  science  was  laid,  when  the  idea  of  a
measure  or  standard  was  realised.  And  here  it  is  important  to
remember  that,  although  this  idea  was  the  result  of  intersubjec-
tive  intercourse,  its  realisation  was  due  to  the  nature  of  things.
Had  there  been  no  rigid,  freely  movable  bodies,  had  there  been
no  independent  isochronous  series  of  events,  the  objective
measurement  of  space  and  time  as  mere  continuous  quantity
would  have  been  impossible1.  So  closely  are  thought  and
experience  intertwined.

Formal  Categories :  (a)  Mathematical.

§  4.  In  passing  from  forms  of  intuition  to  categories  as
'  forms  of  thought '  we  pass  from  the  domain  of  presentational
continuity  to  syntheses  which  yield  the  discrete  and  relations  of
various  forms  of  this  to  each  other.  But  the  transition  is  still
gradual  in  so  far  as  the  simplest  of  these  categories,  those  we
have  called  mathematical — such  as  Unity,  Plurality,  Number, —
depend  primarily  on  intuition2.  To  begin  with  that  which  is
the  most  fundamental  and  formal  of  all3 — How  do  we  come
by  the  concept  of  Unity,  the  type  of  all  that  is  discrete?
"  Amongst  all  the  ideas  we  have,"  says  Locke,  "  as  there  is
none  suggested4  to  the  mind  by  more  ways,  so  there  is  none

1  Cf.  Helmholtz,  "  The  Origin  and  Meaning  of  Geometrical  Axioms,"  Mind,  O.S.
vol.  i.  (1876),  pp.  319  and  passim;  E.  H.  Rhodes,  "  The  Scientific  Conception  of  the
Measurement  of  Time,"  Mind,  O.S.  vol.  x.  (1885),  pp.  347  ff.

2  Cf.  ch.  vi,  §  i,  p.  142.

3  On  this  account  Professor  Stout  writes  to  suggest  that  Unity  should  be  described
as  '  super-relational.' It  is  certainly  superior  to  all  other  relations  inasmuch  as  every
synthesis  is  a  unity ;  and  Kant  clearly  recognised  this  in  saying  that  the  transcendental
unity  of  apperception  is  the  supreme  principle  of  all  use  of  the  intellect. But  if  it  be
true  that  there  is  no  relating  without  unifying,  it  is  equally  true  that  there  is  no  unifying
without  relating. Cf.  Meinong's  able  article  "  Zur  Psychologic  der  Complexionen
und  Relationen,"  Zdtschr.  f.  Psych,  ii.  (1891),  p.  254.

4  Suggestion  is  a  favourite  term  with  Locke,  as  it  was  with  Berkeley ;  and  doubt-
less those  are  right  who  regard  this  usage  as  an  indication  that  neither  Locke  nor


CH.  xin,  §  4]  Formal  Categories:  (a)  Mathematical 321

more  simple  than  that  of  unity,  or  one.  It  has  no  shadow
of  variety  or  composition  in  it ;  every  object  our  senses  are  em-
ployed about,  every  idea  in  our  understandings,  every  thought
of  our  minds,  brings  this  idea  along  with  it1."  All  the  same,
to  assign  a  sensible  origin  to  the  concept  of  unity  would  cer-
tainly be  a  mistake — one  of  the  class  of  mistakes  already  more
than  once  referred  to,  which  consist  in  transferring  to  the  data
of  sense  all  that  is  implied  in  the  language  necessarily  used  in
describing  them2.  The  term  '  a  sensation,'  for  instance,  no  doubt
logically  implies  the  idea  of  unity,  but  the  bare  sensation  as  re-
ceived 'brings  along  with  it'  nothing  but  itself:  as  said  in  the
second  section,  it  is  '  anoetic.'  And,  if  we  consider  sensory  con-
sciousness merely,  we  do  not  receive  a  sensation,  and  then
another  sensation,  and  so  on  seriatim ;  but  we  have  always
some  continuous  change  of  sensations  even  when  these  are
qualitatively  sharply  differentiated.  Differentiation,  in  other
words,  never  proceeds  so  far  as  to  disintegrate  the  presentational
or  objective  continuum  itself3.  Again,  if  unity  were  an  im-
pression of  sense  and  passively  received,  it  would,  in  common
with  other  impressions,  be  unamenable  to  change.  We  cannot
see  red  as  blue,  but  we  can  combine  many  (parts)  into  one
(whole),  or  vice  versa  resolve  one  (whole)  into  many  (parts)*.
Unity,  then,  is  the  result  of  an  act  the  occasions  for  which,  no
doubt,  are  at  first  non-voluntarily  determined  ;  but  the  act  is
still  as  distinct  from  them  as  is  attention  from  the  objects
attended  to.  It  is  to  that  movement  of  attention  already
described  in  dealing  with  ideation5  that  we  must  look  as  the

Berkeley  was  as  crassly  'sensationalist'  as  some  commentators,  T.  H.  Green  e.g.,  liked
to  suppose.  Cf.  The  Intellectualism  of  Locke:  an  Essay  by  T.  E.  Webb,  1857,
pp.  1 02  ff.

1  Essay  concerning  Human  Understanding,  u.  xvi.  §  i.

*  To  avoid  which  mistake  the  term  'particular'  or  'item'  has  been  here  employed.

3  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  4,  p.  49.

4  Berkeley  was  less  sensationalist  than  Locke  here. "  It  ought  to  be  considered,"
he  says,  "  that  number  (however  some  may  reckon  it  amongst  the  primary  qualities)...
is  entirely  the  creature  of  the  mind.... According  as  the  mind  variously  combines  its
ideas,  the  unit  varies.. ..We  call  a  window  one,  a  chimney  one;  and  yet  a  house,
in  which  there  are  many  windows  and  many  chimneys,  has  an  equal  right  to  be  called
one ;  and  many  houses  go  to  the  making  of  one  city.... Whatever  therefore  the  mind
considers  as  one,  that  is  a  unit,"  Essay  towards  a  New  Theory  of Vision,  §  109.
Cf.  also  Sigwart,  Logik,  §  68.

8  Cf.  above,  ch.  vii,  §  3,  pp.  196  f.,  §  6,  pp.  204  f.

W. P.  21


322  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xm,  §  4

proximate  source  of  this  category.  When  there  is  little  or  no
difference  between  the  field  and  the  focus  of  attention — when,
i.e.,  spontaneous  acts  of  attention1  are  almost  or  altogether  absent
— unifying  is  an  impossibility,  whatever  the  impressions  that
may  be  '  there.'  On  the  other  hand,  as  voluntary  acts  of  con-
centration become  more  frequent  and  distinct,  the  variegated
continuum  of  sense  is  shaped  into  intuitions  of  definite  things
and  events.  Also,  when  at  length  words  facilitate  the  control
of  ideas,  it  becomes  possible  to  single  out  special  aspects  and
relations  of  things  as  the  subjects  or  starting-points  of  our
discursive  thinking.  The  forms  of  unity  are  then  manifold  :
every  act  of  intuition  or  thought,  whatever  else  it  is,  is  an  act
of  unifying.

It  is  obvious  that  the  whole  field  of  consciousness  at  any
moment  can  never  be  actually  embraced  as  one.  Whatever
becomes  the  focus  of  consciousness  is  thereby  unified  and  so
leaves  an  outlying  field  ;  so  far  unity  may  be  held  to  imply
plurality.  But  it  cannot  with  propriety  be  said  that  in  a  simple
act  of  attention  the  field  of  consciousness  is  analysed  into  two  dis-
tinct parts,  i.e,  two  unities — this  (now  attended  to)  and  the  other
or  the  rest  (abstracted  from).  For  the  not-this  is  then  but  the
rest  of  a  continuum  and  not  itself  a  whole  ;  it  is  left  out  but  not
determined,  as  the  bounding  space  is  left  out  when  a  figure  is
drawn.  To  know  two  unities  we  must  take  one  and  one
together.  Herein  comes  to  light  the  difference  between  the
unity  which  is  the  form  of  the  concept  or  subject  of  discourse
and  the  unity  of  a  judgment.  The  latter  is  of  necessity  complex ;
the  former  may  or  may  not  be.  Even  if  it  is,  the  complexity
of  the  two  is  different.  If  the  subject  of  the  judgment  is  not  only
clear  but  distinct — i.e.  not  merely  defined  as  a  whole  but  having
its  constituents  likewise  more  or  less  defined — such  distinctness
is  due  to  previous  judgments.  At  any  future  time  these  may
of  course  be  repeated  ;  such  are  the  analytical  or  explicative
judgments  of  logic.  As  the  mere  subject  of  discourse,  however,
a  concept,  even  when  complex,  is  a  single  unity  simultaneously
apprehended  ;  the  relation  ascertained  between  it  and  its  predi-
cate or  some  other  term  constitutes  the  unity  of  a  judgment,  a
complex  unity,  which  is  comprehended  only  when  its  parts  are
apprehended  distinctly  and  together,  as  related  in  a  certain  way.

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  iii,  §  3.


CH.  xiii,  §  4]  Formal  Categories :  (a)  Mathematical 323

The  mention  of  unity  and  complexity  leads  us  naturally  to
Number.  This  we  may  here  understand  in  its  usual  denotation,
viz.  as  exclusive  of  none  and  one,  an  Anzahl,  to  use  a  useful
German  word.  It  was  in  this  sense  that  Euclid  defined  number
as  a  plurality  of  unities  taken  together :  this  implies  that
plurality  is  an  earlier — and  so  to  say,  mediating  concept.
Whether  this  is  true  of  all  numbers  without  exception  may  well
be  questioned,  but  it  is  certainly  true  of  nearly  all.  Many
wonderful  stories  are  told  of  feats  of '  counting  '  accomplished  by
some  of  the  higher  animals,  and  even  by  some  of  the  lower — if
instinctive  '  counting  '  may  be  regarded  as  such.  Yet  even  if  we
believed  all  of  these  stories,  instead  of  doubting  them  all,  we
might  still  maintain  that  prior  to  any  general  conception  of  de-
finite numbers  or  qualities1,  there  was  in  most  cases  only  a  more
or  less  indefinite  perception  of  Plurality  as  more  or  less  many,
but  not  as  just  so  many.  When  a  hen  continues  clucking  till  all
her  chickens  are  gathered  under  her  wings,  she  does  so,  not  be-
cause she  can  count,  but  rather  because  she  feels  an  uncom-
fortable void  till  they  are  all  there.  If,  however,  the  struggle
for  existence  has  reduced  her  brood  to  three,  she  is  perhaps
sufficiently  aware  of  the  difference  between  two  and  three  to
know  that  one  is  missing.  Throughout  human  experience  at
any  rate  the  concept  of  a  '  pair  or  couple,'  he  and  I,  this  and
that,  is  always  present  and  distinguished  from  '  many '  as  im-
plying three  or  more :  this  much  the  existence  of  singular,  dual
and  plural  inflexions  shews.  As  to  the  statement  that  there  are
savage  races  that  cannot  '  count '  beyond  two,  this  is  about  as
exact  as  the  statement  that  the  most  advanced  races  cannot  count
beyond  ten.  The  only  statement  that  seems  warranted  is  that
there  are  races  who  use  a  rude  dyadic  system  of  numeration
whereas  we  use  a  decadal  one,  and  that  they  do  not  carry  even
this  simple  system  very  far.  Why  they  do  not  we  shall  see
presently.

Usually  to  ascertain  the  number  of  some  finite  aggregate
that  we  are  '  taking  together,'  we  have,  it  is  said,  to  '  count,'  and

1  A  useful  word,  running  on  all  fours  with  quality  and  qtiantity,  suggested  by
Cournot  (Traitt  de  V '  Enchainement  des  Icttes  fondamtntales,  1861,  i.  p.  71).  The
application  of  number  to  quantity  is  entirely  conventional,  not  part  of  the  concept  of
number  as  such.  At  the  same  time  it  necessitates  a  distinction  worth  remarking,
though  it  does  not  here  concern  us  further  than  to  prevent  confusion — the  distinction
between  one  as  a  number  and  a  standard  unit  as  a  quantity.

21 — 2


324  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xin,  §  4

this  involves  a  succession  of  movements  of  attention.  Hence
the  view  widely  held  and  attributed  even  to  Kant  that  time  as  a
'  form  of  intuition  '  is  the  basis  of  arithmetic.  But  counting  does
not  make  number :  strictly  speaking  if  it  is  to  be  described  as
1  consisting  in  the  colligation  of  separate  acts  of  attention
(Denkacte)  to  [form]  complex  unities '  it  does  not  ever  ascertain
number1.

We  cannot  get  beyond  plurality  in  this  way  except  by
assuming  what  we  propose  to  find  :  five  acts  of  attention  are,  no
doubt,  five  ;  but  how  much  the  wiser  are  we  for  that  ?  Counting,
then,  will  not  help  us  to  define  number  and  is  in  no  way  essential
to  it.  As  in  other  cases,  things  meet  us  half  way  and  furnish
'  the  occasion  '  which  evokes  from  us  the  '  idea ' :  any  series  of
discontinuous  presentations  will  do — the  fingers  of  the  hand,  the
beads  on  a  string,  the  strokes  of  a  clock-bell,  or  the  call  of  the
cuckoo.  We  may  know  two  without  successive  acts  of  attention;
and  knowing  two,  we  may  know  three  at  once,  as  one  more  than
two.  But  '  the  narrowness  of  consciousness  '  soon  puts  a  limit  to
this  direct  intuition  of  number  and  explains  why  the  savage's
grasp  of  number  is  so  restricted.  Within  this  limit,  however,
simultaneous  (spatial)  plurality  that  persists  for  a  while,  as  in
the  instances  first  given,  is  a  better  provocative  than  a  succes-
sive (temporal)  plurality,  as  in  the  last ;  for  over  that  attention
has  less  control.  We  can  often  directly  observe  when  such  a
plurality  becomes  '  more '  or  '  less '  by  one,  though  we  do  not
know  'how  many'  it  is.  So  we  may  be  said  to  know  n+  I,  even
when  we  only  know  n  as  '  this  plurality2.'  The  less  this  n  is,
however,  the  more  striking  a  difference  of  one  becomes.  Now
experiments  shew  that  an  aggregate  of  objects  when  not  ex-
ceeding sixcaja  usually,  and  when  not  exceeding  five,  can  always,
be  identified  at  once  as  so  many,  i.e.  without  being  first  resolved
into  smaller  groups3.  Altogether,  then,  psychology  does  not

1  Wundt,  Logik,  2te  Aufl.  1893,  i.  p.  521;  cf.  Russell,  The  Principles  of  Mathe-
matics, 1903,  p.  114.

3  It  is  here  that  Herbart  began  his  psychology  of  number :  Es  entstehen  die
grosseren  Zahlen  nicht  aus  der  Eins,  sondern  gerade  umgekehrt  die  Eins  aus  der
Mehrheit...Der  eigentlich  wissenschaftliche  Begriff  der  Zahl...[ist]  kein  andrer  als
der  des  Mehr  und  Minder... Die  bestimmten  Zahlbegriffe  bilden  sich  allmalig  aus
Psychologic  ah  IVissenschaft,  u.s.w.  1850,  §  116.

3  The  Braille  alphabet  for  the  blind  is  based  on  such  immediate  recognition  of  six
raised  dots  :  the  attempt  has  been  made  to  extend  the  number  to  eight,  but  apparently


CH.  xni,  §  5]  Formal  Categories :  (6)  Logical  325

countenance  any  of  the  views  that  connect  number  primarily
with  temporal  intuition  or  derive  the  cardinal  numbers  from
the  ordinals — views  to  which  philology  also  seems  to  be  equally
opposed.

Number  we  have  so  far  regarded  as  an  object  of  a  higher
order  of  the  first  grade.  But  we  can  repeat  the  process :  having
synthesized  one,  one,  one  into  one-three,  we  can,  without  losing
sight  of  the  quotity  of  this  new  one,  group  three  of  these  as  a
three  of  a  higher  order — 32  as  we  now  symbolically  express  it.
So  the  start  is  made  towards  systematic  numeration  by  means
of  gestures  and  finally  of  symbols.  The  crowning  achievement
in  this  direction  we  owe  to  the  Hindoo  who  devised  the  simplest
possible  representation  of  these  ascending  unities  of  higher  and
higher  order  by  means  of  the  symbol  o  and  a  series  of  ranks  for  n1,
n*,  n3...,  &c.,  10,  100,  1000,  &c.  It  is  upon  this  spatial  intuition
of  symbols — '  symbolic  construction  '  as  Kant  called  it — rather
than  on  temporal  intuition  that  the  science  of  arithmetic  rests.


Formal  Categories :  (b)  Logical.

§  5.  We  now  come  to  certain  formal  categories  often
regarded  as  a  class  apart — those,  viz.  that  result  from  reflective
comparison  and  are  supposed  to  be  the  domain  of  the  old  formal
logic  or  logic  of  predication1.  This  logic,  as  we  have  seen,  by
throwing  the  form  of  synthesis  into  the  predicate2  reduces  every
judgment  to  a  dual  relation  of  S  and  P,  and  every  syllogism  to  a
dual  relation  of  S  and  M,  M  and  P.  But,  if  we  at  all  regard  the
matter  synthesized,  it  is  certain,  for  example,  that  "  It  is  an
explosion "  is  less  complex  than  "  The  enemy  explodes  the

without  success.  When  three  figures  or  a  monosyllabic  word  forms  the  aggregate  the
whole  can  be  read  off  as  quickly  as  a  single  figure  or  letter,  although  here  the
characters  and  their  order  have  both  to  be  noted — a  more  complex  process  surely
than  that  of  merely  recognising  a  group  of  five  or  six.  Cf.  Wundt,  Physiologiscke
Psychologie,  6te  Aufl.  iii.  pp.  430  f. ;  H.  A.  Nanu,  Zur  Psychologic  der  Zahlauffassung,
1904.

1  "Concepts,  Judgments  and  Reasonings  are  all  equally  products  of  the  same
faculty  of  Comparison."  Hamilton,  Lectures  on  Logic,  i.  p.  117.  Cf.  Mill's  Logic,
I.  v.  §  6 ;  Bain's  Logic,  i.  p.  8.

1  Disregarding,  that  is  to  say,  differences  of  category. Cf.  above,  §  i,  p.  315.


326  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xm,  §  5

mine."  The  first  answers  one  question  ;  the  second  answers
three.  As  regards  the  more  complex  judgment,  both  the  pro-
cess of  ascertaining  the  facts  and  also  the  language  in  which  it  is
expressed  shew  that  the  three  elements  concerned  in  it  are  not
synthesized  at  once.  Suppose  we  start  from  the  explosion —
and  changes  or  movements  are  not  only  apt  to  attract  attention
first,  but,  when  recognised  as  events  and  not  as  abstracts
hypostatized,  they  call  for  some  supplementing  beyond  them-
selves— then  in  this  case  we  may  search  for  the  agent  at  work  or
for  the  object  affected,  but  not  for  both  at  once.  Moreover,  if
we  find  either,  a  complete  judgment  at  once  ensues :  "  The
enemy  explodes,"  or  "The  mine  is  exploded."  The  original
judgment  is  really  due  to  a  synthesis  of  these  two.  And,  when
the  results  of  former  judgments  are  in  this  manner  taken  up  into
a  new  judgment,  a  certain  '  condensation  of  thought '  ensues.
Of  this  condensation  the  grammatical  structure  of  language  is
evidence,  though  logical  manipulation — with  great  pains —
obliterates  it.  Thus  our  more  complex  judgment  would  take
the  form — "  The  enemy  is  mine-exploding "  or  "  The  mine  is
enemy-exploded,"  according  as  one  or  other  of  the  simpler
judgments  was  made  first.  An  examination  of  other  cases
would  in  like  manner  tend  to  shew  that  in  judgment  the  syn-
thesis is  always — in  itself  and  apart  from  implications — a  binary
synthesis,  which  formal  logic  represents  by  the  formula  S  is  (or
is  not)  P.  Wundt,  to  whom  belongs  the  merit  of  first  explicitly
stating  this  'law  of  dichotomy  or  duality1'  as  the  most  striking
characteristic  of  discursive  thinking,  strictly  so-called,  has  con-
trasted it  with  mere  association.  This,  as  running  on  contin-
uously, he  represents  thus — A~B~C~D~  ...  ;  the  synthesis  of
thought  proper,  on  the  other  hand,  he  symbolizes  by  forms  such
as  the  following :

AB\  AB CD- AS  CDE;  &c.

Thus,  Socrates  is  a  philosopher ;  the  philosopher  Socrates  dis-
covered a  method  ;  the  philosopher  Socrates  discovered  the
dialectical  method ;  &c.  The  point  is  that  the  one  thing

1  Wundt,  Logik:  eine  Untersuchung  der  Principien  der  Erkenntniss,  u.s.w.  (2nd
ed.  1893),  i.  59  ff. ;  Phys.  Psych,  iii.  p.  547.  It  is  however  incidentally  recognised
by  Boole,  An  Investigation  of  the  Laws  of  Thought,  1854,  pp.  49-51,  412,  417.


CH.  xin,  §  5]  Formal  Categories :  (b)  Logical  327

attended  to  in  such  acts  of  '  apperception '  is  the  synthesis  of
two  ideas,  and  of  two  ideas  only,  because,  as  only  one  move-
ment of  attention  is  possible  at  a  time,  only  two  ideas  at  a  time
can  be  synthesized1.  In  the  simple  'association'  whereby  the
memory-continuum  is  produced,  attention  moves  from  A  to  B
and  thence  to  C  without  any  relation  between  A  and  B  being
attended  to  at  all,  although  in  the  process  they  must  acquire
relations,  that  of  sequence,  e.g.  at  least.

Quite  a  number  of  categories  are  discussed  by  one  author
or  another  as  categories  of  comparison2.  We  need  concern  our-
selves only  with  the  three  already  mentioned,  (a)  Likeness  and
Difference  and  (/8)  Identity.

(a)  When  we  say  that  two  'contents'  are  similar,  and  when
too  they  admit  of  analysis,  we  can,  if  need  be,  enumerate  certain
elements  as  the  ground  of  their  partial  likeness,  and  certain
others  as  the  ground  of  their  partial  diversity.  We  might  further
say  that,  abstracting  from  these  last,  we  can  regard  the  points  of
resemblance  as  constituting  a  general  class,  to  which  the  two
contents  belong  as  specific  instances.  But  at  this  point  a  ques-
tion of  some  psychological  interest  arises,  and  we  must  digress
for  a  moment  to  consider  it.  How  is  either  comparison  or
abstraction  possible  when  the  two  resembling  contents  appear
as  simple,  and  so  far  unanalyzable  ?  Instances,  of  course,  are

1  In  fact,  as  already  said  (ch.  xi,  §  2),  there  is  no  original  thinking — as  distinct
from  merely  following  the  thoughts  of  another — that  is  ever  entitled  to  be  called
strictly  logical  and  methodical  throughout.  The  ideational  trains  are  only  imperfectly
controlled  :  we  find  what  Wundt  calls  '  an  intermixture  of  apperceptive  and  associative
processes  and  a  continual  transition  from  one  to  the  other'  (pp.  cit.  iii.  548).  Actual
thinking  is  always  more  or  less  rhapsodical  and  heuristic — to  talk  of  a  method  oi  dis-
covery, as  Jevons  did,  tends  to  rob  '  method '  of  all  meaning.  On  the  other  hand,
strictly  formal  logic  is  not  concerned  with  thinking  as  a  process  but  only  with  thought
as  a  product — perhaps  even  that  is  saying  too  much.  Logic,  if  it  is  to  be  brought  into
connexion  with  psychology,  must  be  regarded,  like  ethics,  as  a  normative  science.  But
then  it  will  not  enact  as  a  rule  what  is  a  necessity  of  nature.  Accordingly  the  only  law
of  duality  that  logic  recognises  is  quite  distinct  from  this  one  of  Wundt's  which,  by  the
way,  he  does  not  assert  to  be  logical.  This  is  a  matter  which  may  puzzle  some  and
tempt  others  to  speculation.  Anyhow  what  is  mainly  relevant  here  is  this :  The
logical  laws  of  contradiction  and  excluded  middle  (to  both  of  which  the  title  '  law  of
duality '  has  been  given)  allow  of  no  restriction,  whereas  Wundt's  law  is  not  true  of
mathematical  intuition  nor  probably  of  that  higher  intuition  which  though  one  in
itself  takes  many  propositions  to  explicate.  Cf.  on  all  this  however  F.  H.  Bradley 's
criticism,  Mind,  O.S.  xii.  1887,  p.  381  «.

3  Cf.  e.g.  Hegel's  Logik,  II.  ch.  ii.;  v.  Hartmann,  Kategorienlehre,  pp.  197-215.


328  Forms  of  Synthesis  fen.  xm,  §  5

familiar  to  every  one :  thus  we  call  red  and  orange  colours,  and
say  they  resemble  each  other  more  than  do  red  and  blue1.  In
presence  of  this  question  logicians  and  psychologists  are  apt  to
be  at  loggerheads.  The  logician  maintains  that  both  abstraction
and  resemblance  (as  distinct  from  qualitative  identity)  imply
complexity  ;  and  surely  here  he  cannot  be  gainsaid.  Yet  there
are  the  facts :  reds  and  blues  of  sorts  and  a  whole  scale  of
degrees  of  likeness  and  unlikeness  ;  but  no  constituent  parts,  no
assignable  marks  of  identity  or  diversity,  are  forthcoming,  such
as  we  find  when  we  class  sugar  and  salt  together  as  solid  or
soluble,  and  pronounce  them  like  in  colour  and  unlike  in  taste.
Here  the  logician's  symbols  a  +b  +  c,  a-\-b  +  d,  have  their  counter-
parts :  there — for  the  percipient's  consciousness  at  all  events —
they  have  not.  We  cannot  '  consider  and  attend  to  either  the
sameness  or  the  differences  in  '  red  and  blue,  as  we  can  to  the
like  or  the  unlike  properties  in  salt  and  sugar.  None  the  less  it
would  be  hasty  to  conclude  that  colours  or  any  given  sensations
are  simple.  We  are  often  struck  by  the  resemblance  of  complex
wholes — two  faces,  say — long  before  we  can  discern  the  exact
points  of  likeness.  Still,  so  long  as  there  is  no  perceptible  com-
plexity in  the  individual  presentations  there  can  be  no  analysis,
and,  therefore,  no  abstraction  or  comparison  based  upon  it.  Can
we  find  elsewhere  the  complexity  that  generalisation  and  com-
parison are  supposed  to  imply  ?  Though  colour  may  be
regarded  as  a  general  term  applicable  alike  to  red,  green  and
blue,  just  as  animal  is  a  general  term  applicable  alike  to  bird,
beast  and  fish,  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  assume  that  there  is  a  like
process  of  comparison  in  each  case,  because  for  the  second  also  we
can  now  frame  a  '  general  term.'  We  seem  bound  to  distinguish
between  consciously  logical  or  'noetic'  processes  and  processes
that  are  unconsciously  logical  or  'hyponoetic,'  as  we  may  perhaps
call  them.  In  the  former  the  subjective  aspect  is  left  aside ;  in
the  latter  it  cannot  be.  The  only  common  mark  we  can  psycho-
logically assign  to  colours  is  that  they  are  all  seen,  and  to  tones
— as  the  element  of  notes  and  noises — that  they  are  all  heard.
So  often  as  we  talk  of  tasting  tastes,  smelling  smells,  feeling

1  Hume  long  ago  called  attention  to  this.  ' '  Tis  evident,  that  even  different
simple  ideas  may  have  a  similarity  or  resemblance  to  each  other ;  nor  is  it  necessary
that  the  point  or  circumstance  of  resemblance  should  be  distinct  or  separable  from
that  in  which  they  differ"  (op.  cit.  i.  p.  328  «).


CH.  xin,  §  5]  Formal  Categories :  (6)  Logical  329

touches,  language  leads  us  to  bear  witness  to  this  fact.  When
the  sunset  red  changes  to  the  twilight  grey,  I  still  see ;  but  when
the  thunder  follows  the  lightning  there  is  a  double  change,
though  not  an  absolute  one :  from  seeing  I  pass  to  hearing,  but
I  am  sentient  still.  And  if  progressive  differentiation  be  the
order  of  experience  then  the  '  universal '  sentience  precedes  the
differentiations  seeing,  hearing,  &c. ;  and,  again,  the  'universal '
colour  the  differentiations,  red,  green,  blue,  &C.1  Such  'first
universals,'  then,  are  not  reached  by  abstraction,  but  are  given
in  the  fundamental  continuity  of  experience;  therefore  their
subsequent  differentiation  admits  neither  of  the  definition  nor
the  classification  applicable  to  discrete  complexes,  which  are  the
material  of  logical  comparison  only.  When  red  is  pronounced
liker  or  nearer  to  yellow  than  it  is  to  green,  this  is  because  a
smaller  change  is  experienced  in  the  transition  from  red  to
yellow  than  in  that  from  red  to  green,  and  because  in  the  latter
yellow  is  reached  and  passed  before  green  appears2.  Proximity
and  resemblance  are,  then,  so  far  one  and  the  same ;  also  both
are  equally  relative,  admit  of  the  same  indefinite  gradation,
and  have  the  same  limit  in  zero,  regarded  either  as  coincidence
or  identity.  Thus  the  concept  of  '  distance  between '  answers
to  what  we  have  called  a  hyponoetic  relation,  and  this  is  plainly
distinct  from  the  analysis  of  discrete  complexes,  with  which,  as
said,  noetic  comparison  is  alone  concerned:  the  one  implies  and
the  other  excludes  the  notion  of  continuity  and  change — a  fact
which  helps  still  further  to  distinguish  the  two3.

Difference,  said  Hume,  "  I  consider  rather  as  a  negation  of
relation,  than  as  anything  real  or  positive.  Difference  is  of  two
kinds,  as  opposed  either  to  identity  or  resemblance.  The  first
is  called  a  difference  of  number,  the  other  of  kind*."  The  truth
seems  rather  to  be  that  difference  in  Hume's  sense  of  numerical
difference  is  really  distinctness  and  is  so  far  an  element  in  all
relations  as  all  imply  distinct  correlatives.  To  this  extent

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  v,  §  3,  pp.  108  ff.

8  Assuming, of  course, that the  change is  the  simplest  or  directest  possible,
i.e.  a  change  of  'colour  proper'  without  change  of  saturation.

3  Cf.  Lotze, Logik,  §  14; Meinong, ffume-Studien,  ii. 1882,  pp.  52  f. ; Ges.
Abkandl.  ii.  51  f.;  Stumpf,  Ton-psychologie,  i.  1883,  pp.  n6ff. ;  and  the  controversy
between  F.  H.  Bradley  and  W.  James,  "The  Doctrine  of  Simple  Resemblance,'
Mind,  N.S.  ii.  1893.

4  Op.  cit.  i.  p.


330  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xm,  §  5

even  identity — or  at  least  the  recognition  of  it — rests  on
difference,  namely  that  form  of  difference  which  is  essential  to
plurality.  But  absolute  difference  (i.e.  diversity)  of  kind  may
be  considered  tantamount  not,  indeed,  to  the  negation,  but
at  least  to  the  absence  of  all  formal  relation.  That  this
absolute  diversity — or  disparateness,  as  we  may  call  it — affords
no  ground  for  relations  becomes  evident  when  we  consider
(i)  that,  if  we  had  only  a  plurality  of  presentations  absolutely
different,  we  should  have  in  this  sense  no  consciousness  at  all1  ;
and  (2)  that  we  never  compare — although  we  distinguish — pre-
sentations which  seem  absolutely  or  totally  disparate,  as  e.g.  a
thunderclap  and  the  shape  of  a  brick,  or  the  notion  of  free  trade
and  that  of  the  Greek  accusative.  All  actual  comparison  of
what  is  qualitatively  different  rests  upon  at  least  partial  likeness.
This  being  understood,  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  recognition  of
unlikeness  is,  if  anything,  more  '  real  or  positive '  than  that  of
likeness,  and  is  certainly  the  simpler  of  the  two.  We  are  never
entitled  to  say  that  we  perceive  equality  or  exact  likeness ;  but
only  that  we  are  unable  to  perceive  any  difference.  If  another
can,  we  credit  him  with  the  finer  sense  or  better  training.  Here
we  have  what  Meinong  has  happily  termed  '  the  prerogative  of
difference2'  which  is  the  ground  of  the  principle  of  differentia-
tion so  closely  connected  with  all  mental  advance3.

In  the  comparison  of  sensible  impressions — as  of  two
colours,  two  sounds,  the  lengths  or  the  directions  of  two  lines,
&c. — we  find  it  easier  in  some  cases  to  have  the  two  impressions
that  are  compared  presented  together,  in  others  to  have  first  one
presented  and  then  the  other.  But,  either  way,  the  essential
matter  is  to  secure  the  most  effective  presentation  of  what  their
difference  is.  In  every  case  it  is  something  positive  and,  like
any  other  impression,  may  vary  in  amount  from  bare  per-
ceptibility to  the  extremest  distance  that  the  continuum  to
which  it  belongs  will  admit.  Where  no  difference  or  distance
at  all  is  perceptible  there  we  say,  there  is — for  us — likeness  or
equality.  Is  the  only  outcome,  then,  that  when  we  pass  from
ab  to  ac  there  is  a  change  in  consciousness,  and  that  when  ab
persists  there  is  none  ?  To  say  this  is  to  take  no  account  of

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  iv,  §  2,  pp.  75f.

2  Ueber  die  Erfahrungsgrundlagen  unstres  Wissens,  1905,  §22.

3  Cf.  above,  ch.  iv,  §  2 ;  ch.  v,  §  3.


CH.  xiii,  §  5]  Formal  Categories :  (6)  Logical  331

the  operations  (we  may  symbolize  them  as  ab  — »  ac:$,  ab  — »  ab:o)
whereby  difference  or  its  absence  is  recognised.  The  change
of  presentation  (8)  and  absence  of  change  (o)  are  not  here  what
they  are  as  merely  passive  occurrences,  so  to  put  it :  they  are  ob-
jects of  a  higher  order,  the  results  of  comparison.  This  is  evident
from  the  fact  that  in  the  former  there  is  positive  presentation
and  in  the  latter  no  presentation  at  all.  The  relation  of  unlike-
ness,  then,  is  distinguished  from  the  mere  '  position '  or  fact  of
change  (i)  by  the  voluntary  concentration  of  attention  upon  ab
and  ac  with  a  view  to  the  detection  of  this  change  as  their
difference,  and  (2)  by  the  act,  relating  them  to  this  difference,  in
that  they  are  judged  unlike  to  that  extent.

The  type  of  comparison  is  such  superposition  of  geometrical
lines  or  figures  as  we  have  e.g.  in  Euclid  I.  iv. :  if  they  coincide
we  have  concrete  equality;  if  they  do  not  their  difference  is  a  line
or  figure,  as  the  case  may  be.  All  sensible  comparisons  conform
essentially  to  this  type.  In  comparing  two  shades  we  place  them
side  by  side,  and  passing  from  one  to  the  other  seek  to  determine
not  the  absolute  shade  of  the  second  but  its  shade  relative  to  the
first — in  other  words,  we  look  out  for  contrast.  We  do  not  say
of  one  "It  is  dark,"  for  in  the  scale  of  shades  it  may  be  light,  but
"  It  is  darker  " ;  or  vice  versa.  Where  there  is  no  distance  or
contrast  we  simply  have  not  two  impressions,  and,  as  said — if  we
consider  the  difference  by  itself — no  impression  at  all.  Two
coincident  triangles  must  be  perceived  as  one.  The  distinction
between  the  one  triangle  thus  formed  by  two  coinciding  and  the
single  triangle  rests  upon  something  extraneous  to  this  bare
presentation  of  a  triangle  that  is  one  and  the  same  in  both  cases.
The  marks  of  this  numerical  distinctness  may  be  various:  they  may
be  different  temporal  signs,  as  in  reduplications  of  the  memory-
continuum  ;  or  they  may  be  constituents  peculiar  to  each,  from
which  attention  is  for  the  moment  abstracted,  any  one  of  which
suffices  to  give  the  common  or  identical  constituent  a  new
setting.  In  general,  it  may  be  said  (i)  that  the  numerical  dis-
tinctness of  the  related  terms  is  secured,  in  the  absence  of  all
qualitative  difference,  solely  by  the  intellectual  act  which  has
so  unified  each  as  to  retain  what  may  serve  as  its  individual
mark  ;  and  (2)  that  they  become  related  as  '  like,'  either  in
virtue  of  the  active  adjustment  to  a  change  of  impression
which  their  partial  assimilation  defeats  ;  or  in  virtue  of  an


332  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xin,  §  5

anticipated  continuance  of  the  impression  which  such  assimi-
lation confirms.

In  the  case  of  complexes  there  are  some  noteworthy  peculiari-
ties distinguishing  the  comparisons  that  lead  to  the  detection  of
differences,  where  the  resembling  elements  preponderate,  from
the  converse  cases  leading  to  the  detection  of  agreement,  where
the  differing  elements  preponderate.  Suppose  the  one  case  sym-
bolized by  DEL  WPRT,  DBLZPRT,  and  the  other  symbolized
by  AQSFXVB,  DHJVTYK.  In  the  former  the  only  change
is  that  from  W  to  Z  and  in  the  other  all  is  different  except  V.
What  first  impresses  is  difference,  and  in  the  former  case  the
common  elements  make  the  one  difference  more  impressive :  in
the  latter  case  the  many  differences  engross  attention  so  that  the
one  resemblance  is  easily  overlooked1.  In  the  history  of  science
and  the  arts  there  are  numerous  instances  of  important  '  fruit-
bearing  '  similarities  remaining  undetected  for  ages  till  the
patient  pondering  of  some  intellectual  genius  evoked  '  the  flash
of  similarity  through  the  dense  medium  of  diversity '  as  Bain
used  to  say.  Stock  instances,  such  as  Newton  and  the  falling
apple,  Watt  and  the  lid  of  his  mother's  kettle,  Goethe  and  the
phyllotaxis  of  flower  and  leaf,  Oken  and  the  homology  of  skull
and  vertebrae,  will  readily  occur2.

(/8)  It  is  in  keeping  with  the  above  analysis  that  we  say  in
common  speech  that  two  things  in  any  respect  similar  are  so  far
the  same;  that,  for  example,  the  twin  sons  of  Aegeon  (in  The
Comedy  of  Errors) —

the  one  so  like  the  other,
As  could  not  be  distinguish'd  but  by  names —

had  the  same  complexion,  the  same  features  and  the  same
stature,  just  as  we  say  they  had  the  same  mother.  This
ambiguity  in  the  word  'same,'  whereby  it  means  either  indis-
tinguishable resemblance  or  individual  identity,  has  been  often
noticed,  and  from  a  logical  or  objective  point  of  view  justly
complained  of  as  '  engendering  fallacies  in  otherwise  enlightened
understandings.'  Yet  apparently  no  one  has  inquired  into  its

1  Cf.  for  further  exemplification  of  the  above  the  long  but  interesting  papers  of
Ranschburg  (Zeitsch.f.  Psych,  xxx.  1902,  39  ff.)  and  Aall  (ibid,  xlvii.  1908,  i  ff.).

2  These  and  many  more  are  described  at  length  by  Bain. Cf.  his  Senses  and
Intellect,  4th  edn.  pp.  523  ff.  and  elsewhere.


CH.  xni,  §  5]  Formal  Categories :  (b)  Logical  333

psychological  basis,  although  more  than  one  writer  has  admitted
that  the  ambiguity  is  one  '  in  itself  not  always  to  be  avoided1.'
It  is  not  enough  to  trace  the  confusion  to  the  existence  of
common  names  or  to  cite  the  forgotten  controversies  of  scholastic
realism.  We  are  not  now  concerned  with  the  relations  of  thoughts
to  things  or  with  logical  analysis ;  but  merely  with  the  analysis
of  a  psychological  process.  Here  however  the  tendency  to  con-
found thoughts  and  things  has  been  and  is  a  frequent  source  of
psychological  confusion.  Some  only  realise  with  an  effort  that
the  thought  of  extension  is  not  extended  ;  no  wonder,  then,  if
it  should  seem  '  unnatural '  to  maintain  that  the  thought  of  two
things  as  like  does  not  consist  of  two  like  ideas.  Assuming,
however,  that  both  meanings  of  identity  have  a  psychological
justification,  it  will  be  well  to  distinguish  them  and  to  examine
their  connexion.  Perhaps  we  might  term  the  one  '  presentational
or  material  identity'  and  the  other  'numerical  or  individual
identity' — following  the  analogy  of  expressions  such  as  'different
things  but  all  made  of  the  same  stuff/  'the  same  person  but
changed  beyond  recognition.'  Thus  there  is  unity  and  plurality
concerned  in  both  cases;  and  herein  identity  or  sameness  differs
from  singularity  or  mere  oneness,  which  so  far  entails  no  logical
relation.  But  the  unity  and  the  plurality  are  different  in  each
case,  and  each  is  in  some  sort  the  converse  of  the  other.  In  the
one,  two  different  individuals  at  least  partially  coincide  and  may
perhaps  be  distinguishable  only  by  extrinsic  marks — eventually
local  signs ;  in  the  other,  one  individual  has  become  at  least
partially  different  and  may  perhaps  be  identified  only  by  ex-
trinsic marks — eventually  temporal  signs.  The  unity  in  the  one
case  is  an  individual  presentation,  in  the  other  it  is  the  presenta-
tion of  an  individual.

In  presentational  identity  the  unity  is  that  of  a  single  pre-
sentation, whether  simple  or  complex,  which  enters  as  a  common
constituent  into  two  or  more  others.  It  may  be  possible,  of
course,  to  individualise  it,  but  as  it  emerges  in  a  comparison  it  is
a  single  presentation  and  nothing  more.  On  account  of  this
absence  of  individual  marks  this  single  presentation  is  what
logicians  call  'abstract';  but  this  is  not  psychologically  essential.

1  Cf.  J.  S.  Mill,  Logic,  bk.  i.  ch.  iii.  §  n,  and  Examination  of  Hamilton,  3rd  ed.
ch.  xiv.  p.  306  «. ;  also  Meinong,  Hume-Studien,  ii. ,  138  f.,  Gesam.  Abhand-
lungen,  ii.  131  f.


334  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xm,  §  5

It  may  be  a  generic  image  on  which  reduplication  and  oblivi-
scence  have  entailed  the  loss  of  individual  marks  ;  but  it  may
equally  well  be  a  particular  presentation,  like  red,  to  which  such
marks  never  belonged.  We  come  here  from  a  new  side  upon  a
truth  which  has  been  already  expounded  at  length,  viz.  that
presentations  are  not  given  to  us  as  individuals  but  as  changes
in  a  continuum.  Time  and  space — the  instruments,  as  it  were,
of  individualisation,  which  are  presupposed  in  the  objective
sciences — are  psychologically  later  than  this  mere  differentia-
tion.

The  many  vexed  questions  that  arise  concerning  individual
identity  are  metaphysical  rather  than  psychological.  But  it  will
serve  to  bring  out  the  difference  between  the  two  forms  of
identity  to  note  that  an  identification  cannot  be  established
solely  by  qualitative  comparison  ;  an  alibi  or  a  breach  of
temporal  continuity  will  turn  the  flank  of  the  strongest  argu-
ment from  resemblance.  Moreover,  resemblance  itself  may  be
fatal  to  identification  when  the  law  of  being  is  change.


Real  Categories.

§  6.  As  regards  the  real  categories,  it  may  be  said  generally
that  these  owe  their  origin  in  large  measure  to  the  anthropo-
morphic or  mythical  tendencies  of  human  thought — TO  opoiov
TW  opoifp  jivaxj-KeaBai.  The  formation  of  these  concepts  depends
primarily  upon  the  facts  of  what  in  the  stricter  sense  we  call
'  self-consciousness ' — implying  intersubjective  intercourse — and
secondly  upon  certain  spatial  and  temporal  relations  among  our
presentations  themselves.  On  the  one  hand,  it  has  to  be  noted
that  these  spatial  and  temporal  relations  are  but  the  occasion
or  motive — and  ultimately  perhaps,  we  may  say,  the  warrant —
for  the  analogical  attribution  to  things  of  selfness,  efficiency  and
design,  but  are  not  directly  the  source  of  the  forms  of  thought
that  thus  arise.  On  the  other  hand,  it  has  to  be  noted  also  that
such  forms,  although  they  have  an  independent  source,  would
never  apart  from  suitable  material  come  into  actual  use.  If
the  followers  of  Hume  err  in  their  exclusive  reliance  upon
'associations  naturally  and  even  necessarily  generated  by  the
order  of  our  sensations'  (J.  S.  Mill),  the  disciple  of  Kant  errs


CH.  xni,  §  6]  Real  Categories  335

also  who  relies  exclusively  on '  the  synthetic  unity  of  apper-
ception.' In  fact  we  are  on  the  verge  of  error  in  thus  sharply
separating  association  and  the  unity  of  apperception  ; if  we
do so momentarily  for  the  purpose  of  exposition  it  behoves
us  here  again  to  remember  that  mind  grows  and  is  not  made.
The  use  of  terms  like  '  innate,'  'a  priori'  '  necessary,'  '  formal,'
&c.,  without  further  qualification,  leads  only  too  easily  to  the
mistaken  notion  that  all  the  mental  facts  so  named  are  alike
underived  and  original,  independent  not  only  of  experience  but
of  each  other  ;  whereas  but  for  the  forms  of  intuition  the  forms
of  thought  would  be  impossible — that  is  to  say,  we  should  never
be  ^//"-conscious  at  all  if  we  had  not  previously  learnt  to  dis-
tinguish occupied  and  unoccupied  space,  past  and  present  in
time,  and  the  like. Again,  it  is  equally  true  that,  if  we  could
not  feel  and  move  as  well  as  receive  impressions,  and  if  experi-
ence did  not  repeat  itself,  we  should  never  attain  even  to  this
level  of  spatial  and  temporal  intuition. Kant  shews  a  very  lame
and  halting  recognition  of  this  dependence  of  the  higher  forms
on  the  lower  both  in  his  schematism  of  the  categories,  and  again
in  correcting  in  his  Analytic  the  opposition  of  sense  and  under-
standing as  respectively  receptive  and  active  with  which  he  set
out  in  his  Aesthetic. Still,  although  what  are  called  the  subjec-
tive and  objective  factors  of  real  knowledge  advance  together,
the  former  is  in  a  sense  always  a  step  ahead. We  find  again
without  us  the  permanence  and  individuality,  the  efficiency,  and
the  adaptation  we  have  found  first  of  all  within. But  such  primi-
tive imputation  of  personality,  though  it  facilitates  a  first  under-
standing, soon  proves  itself  faulty  and  begets  the  contradictions
which  have  been  one  chief  motive  to  philosophy. We  smile  at
the  savage  who  thinks  a  magnet  must  need  food  or  the  child
who  is  puzzled  that  the  horses  in  a  picture  remain  for  ever  still ;
but  few  consider  that underlying  all  common-sense  thinking
there  lurks  the  same  natural precipitancy1. We  attribute  to
extended  things  a  unity  which  we  know  only  as  the  unity  of  an
'  enduring ' subject ; we attribute to changes among these
extended  things  what  we  know  only  when  we  act  and  suffer
ourselves ; and  we  attribute  further  to  them  in  their  changes
a  striving  for  ends  which  we  come  to  know  only  because  feeling
in  our  case  begets  appetition  and  aversion. In  asking  what  they
1  Cf.  next  chapter,  §  6,  p.  359  f.


336  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xm,  §  6

are,  how  they  act,  and  why  they  act  thus  and  thus,  we  naturally
tend  at  first  to  assimilate  things  to  ourselves,  in  spite  of  differ-
ences which  lead  us  by  and  by  to  find  a  gulf  between  mind  and
matter.  Such  instinctive  analogies  have,  like  other  analogies,  to
be  confirmed,  refuted,  or  modified  by  further  knowledge,  i.e.  by  the
very  insight  into  things  which  these  analogies  have  themselves
made  possible.  That  in  their  first  form  they  were  mythical,  and
that  they  could  never  have  been  at  all  unless  originated  in  this
way,  are  considerations  that  make  no  difference  to  their  validity
— assuming,  that  is,  that  they  admit,  now  or  hereafter,  of  a
logical  transformation  which  renders  them  objectively  valid.
This  legitimation  is,  of  course,  the  business  of  philosophy  ;  we
are  concerned  only  with  the  psychological  analysis  and  origin  of
the  concepts  themselves.

i.  What  we  may  call  the  perceptual  or  objective  factors  in
the  category  of  Substance  and  Attribute  have  been  already  de-
scribed under  the  heading  '  Intuition  of  Things1.'  Along  with
these,  certain  subjective  factors  were  also  noticed,  which  only
become  quite  explicit  at  the  conceptual  level ;  though  no  sharp
line  can  be  drawn  between  the  two  levels.  These  factors  are
(i)  the  unity  and  permanence  more  or  less  characteristic  of
what  are  entitled  to  be  called  things,  and  (2)  this  distinction
between  the  things  and  their  properties  itself.  In  definitions  of
substance  sometimes  the  first  of  these  is  prominent,  sometimes
the  second :  a  substance  is  an  entity  that  subsists  of  itself ;  or
it  is  that  which  supports  attributes,  that  in  which  they  inhere
or  to  which  they  belong.  The  source  and  paradigm  of  the
first  definition  is,  we  believe,  to  be  found  in  our  personality ;
and  here  we  begin  by  assimilating  the  external  objects  with
which  we  interact  to  this :  we  '  personify '  them,  that  is  to
say8.  But  the  second  is  to  be  traced  immediately  to  the  sub-
sequent objective  analysis  of  these  things,  as  already  described  :
here  we  end  by  assimilating  ourselves  to  them  as  a  something
which  is  the  support  of  qualities :  that  is  to  say  we  '  reify '
ourselves.  Hence  the  materialism  of  primitive  thought — "the
spirit  does  but  mean  the  breath" — hence  too  the  dualism
that  superseded  it  by  regarding  mind  and  matter  as  disparate

1  Cf.  ch.  vi,  §  6.

2  The  absence  of  the  neuter  gender  from  most,  if  not  all,  primitive  languages  is
perhaps  worth  mention.


CH.xni,§6]  Real  Categories,  (z)  Substance  &  Attribute  337

and  independent,  but  otherwise  coordinate,  substances.  It  is
from  this  standpoint  that  Locke's  classical  discussion  of  'our
ideas  of  substances '  began1.  As  is  well  known  all  he  could  find
was  'the  confused  idea  of  something'  supporting  or  owning
the  qualities  perceived — an  idea  that  seemed  to  be  rather  an
infirmity  of  though!  than  to  be  grounded  in  experience' — a  mere
metaphor  that  cowmits  us  to  an  indefinite  regress,  and  means —
in  the  case  of  mind  as  in  the  case  of  matter — simply  '  we  know
not  what.'  From  such  an  analysis  Locke  thought  himself
entitled  to  draw  the  extraordinary  conclusion  that  "  sensation
convinces  us  that  there  are  solid  extended  substances ;  and
reflection  that  there  are  thinking  ones3."  With  incomparably
better  logic,  Hume,  who  accepted  Locke's  premisses,  concluded
that  according  to  them  the  idea  of  substance  is  devoid  of  any
validity  at  all  beyond  that  of '  a  collection  of  particular  qualities'
in  the  case  of  body,  and  a  'bundle  of  perceptions'  in  the  case
of  mind.  J.  S.  Mill,  so  far  following  Hume,  in  like  manner
concluded  that  in  both  cases  we  are  only  directly  warranted  in
talking  of  '  a  permanent  possibility ' — of  sensations  in  the  one
case,  of  feelings,  &c.  in  the  other.  The  two  nevertheless,  he
admitted,  were  not  altogether  on  a  par.  '  The  fact  of  memory '
(and  so  of  expectation)  made  an  essential  difference.  But  then
both  Hume  and  Mill  were  helpless  when  confronted  with  the
implications  of  such  terms  as  '  collection '  and  '  permanence ' —
those  objects  of  a  higher  order  that  no  kind  of  sense  will  ex-
plain :  so  Hume  turned  sceptic  and  Mill  agnostic4.  But  Berkeley
was  here  a  better  psychologist  than  either  Locke  or  Hume  and
saw  clearly  what  they — at  the  outset — had  quite  overlooked.
"  I  know,"  he  said,  "  that  I  myself  am  not  my  ideas,  but  some-
what else,  a  thinking,  active  principle  that  perceives,  knows,
wills,  and  operates  about  ideas.  I  know  that  I,  one  and  the
same  self,  perceive  both  colours  and  sounds... that  I  am  there-
fore one  individual  principle,  distinct  from  colour  and  sound  ;
and  for  the  same  reason  from  all  other  sensible  things  and
inert  ideas.  But,  I  am  not  in  like  manner  conscious  either

1  Locke's  fundamental  error  here,  as  we  have  already  seen  (ch.  i,  §  3,  p.  15)  lay  in
his  assumption  of  an  internal  sense  coordinate  with  the  external  senses.
a  Cf.  Essay,  n.  xxiii.  §§  2,  3.

3  Loc.  cit.  §29.

4  Cf.  especially  Hume,  Treatise,  Green  and  Grose' ed.  pp.  559f.,  Mill  Examina-
tion of  Hamilton,  3rd  ed.  pp.  253-7.

W. P.  22'


338  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xm,  §  6

of  the  existence  or  essence  of  matter. ...There  is  therefore
upon  the  whole  no  parity  of  case  between  Spirit  and  Matter1."
This  breach  in  the  Cartesian  dualism,  that  grim  Bastille  of
modern  philosophy,  Berkeley  effected  for  good  and  all ;  and
herein,  of  course,  is  he  to  be  honourably  associated  with  his
senior  contemporaries,  Malebranche  and  Leibniz.

We  may  take  it  as  established  then  that  the  self  or  subject
as  '  thinking,  active  principle '  or  spirit  is  the  source  of  this
concept  of  substance.  We  have  now  to  inquire  how  subject  and
substance  came  to  be  differentiated.  "It  is  worth  our  con-
sideration," said  Locke,  "whether  active  power  be  not  the  proper
attribute  of  spirits,  and  passive  power  of  matter.  Hence  may
be  conjectured  that  created  spirits  are  not  totally  separate  from
matter,  because  they  are  both  active  and  passive2."  These
remarks  Leibniz  was  prepared  to  greet  with  cordial  approval,
"provided  the  word  spirit  is  understood  so  generally  as  to
include  all  souls  or  rather... all  entelechies  or  substantial  unities
that  have  any  analogy  with  spirits3."  This  was  precisely  the
line  taken  by  primitive  thought.  In  proportion  as  permanence,
individuality  and  function  were  present  things  were  regarded  as
if  they  were  animated :  to  the  wild  Indian  it  is  as  natural  to
talk  of  his  trusty  bow  as  to  talk  of  his  trusty  horse;  so  he  gives
the  one  a  proper  name  just  as  well  as  the  other.  But  when  he
sets  to  work  to  make  a  bow  or  other  implements  a  new  concept
is  sure  sooner  or  later  to  emerge.  He  takes  a  piece  of  lance-
wood  :  this  is  hardly  a  definite  thing ;  for  he  might  fashion  it
not  into  a  bow  but  into  a  spear-shaft  or  a  tent-pole,  or  he  might
even  chop  it  up  for  fuel.  He  regards  it  then  not  as  a  specific
thing,  but  simply  as  materies  or  mother-stuff,  the  possibility  of
many  things  and  as  such  more  permanent  than  any  thing ;  for
the  individuality,  the  definite  form  and  the  functions  that  thing
connotes  are  but  'accidents'  for  this  pure  aTrupov.  Of  such
stuff  things  are  made,  but  stuff  itself  is  not  a  thing :  it  is  at
most  only,  as  Aristotle  would  have  said,  a  contributory  cause
of  things ;  if  with  any  propriety  we  can  still  call  that  a  cause,
which  implies  only  permanence,  potentiality  and  passivity.  We
are  here  then  at  one  of  Locke's  extremes,  subject  or  spirit  as  such,

1  Third  Dialogue  between  Hylas  and  Philonous,  Eraser's  ed.  i.  p.  329.

*  Ij>c.  cit.  §  28.

1  Nouveaux  Essais,  II.  xxiii.  §  28.


CH.  xin,  §  6]  Real  Categories,  (z)  Substance  &  Attribute  339

being  at  the  other.  So  long  as  we  can  assume  a  self  with  its
implication  of  determinate  activity,  continuity  of  kind  with  other
selves  is  conceivable;  when  we  cannot,  we  have  only  'permanent
possibility  of  sensation '  left,  implying  indeed  some  objective
reality,  which  if  it  be  not  due  to  one  or  many  other  subjects,
must  be  utterly  beyond  our  ken.  Even  the  permanence  of
this  matter  or  substance,  which  its  very  indeterminateness  im-
plies, is  as  different  from  the  permanence  of  mind  or  spirit  as
death  is  different  from  life.  The  one  is  the  abstract  permanence
that  is  incompatible  with  change,  the  other  the  real  'endurance'
that  is  essential  to  it ;  the  one  presupposes  empty  time,  the  other
gives  it  a  content.

However  hypothetical  this  permanent  possibility  may  be,  we
commonly  attribute  our  sense-data  to  it.  What,  then,  precisely,
we  have  next  to  inquire,  is  meant  by  this  correlative  term  '  attri-
bute '  applied  to  these  objective  factors ;  how  do  we  come  by  it ;
and  what  occasion  have  we  for  the  attribution  ?  Sometimes  in
place  of  attribute  we  find  the  term  '  quality,'  or  even  '  accident '
used.  But  these  terms  are  by  no  means  synonymous.  "  The
term  attribute"  said  Hamilton,  "is  a  word  properly  convertible
with  quality,  for  every  quality  is  an  attribute,  and  every  attribute
a  quality ;  but  in  our  language,  custom  has  introduced  a  certain
distinction  in  their  application.  Attribute  is  considered  as
a  word  of  loftier  significance,  and  is,  therefore,  conventionally
limited  to  qualities  of  a  higher  application.  Thus,  for  example,
it  would  be  felt  as  indecorous  to  speak  of  the  qualities  of  God,
and  as  ridiculous  to  talk  of  the  attributes  of  matter 1."  We  may
fairly  regard  this  distinction  as  more  than  a  mere  convention  of
the  British  mind,  to  which  indeed  it  is  by  no  means  exclusively
confined.  Why  is  it  fitting  to  speak  of  the  attributes  of  persons,
but  of  the  qualities  of  matter  ?  The  reason,  if  a  valid  one,  marks
a  further  differentiation  between  subject  and  substance.  The
reason  seems  to  be  that  personality  implies  property  or  posses-
sion and  that  materiality  does  not.  So  long  as  we  find  even  the
minimum  of  personality  we  find  an  individual  owner,  a  subject
that  has  or  'enjoys'  an  experience  that  belongs  exclusively  to  it.
Spirit  and  stuff  may  both  alike  be  logical  subjects,  but  the  one
really  has  attributes,  the  other  has  not :  the  essence  of  the  one
is  to  assert  itself,  the  essence  of  the  other  is  to  have  no  self  to

1  Lectures  on  Metaphysics,  i.  p.  151.

22 — 2


34O  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xm,  §  6

assert.  And  how  come  we  to  predicate  even  qualities  of  it  if  all
we  can  predicate  is  to  be  called  an  accident  ?  Sense-data  and
their  relations  are  severally  accidents  for  us,  but  they  cannot  be
accidents  simply.  As  immediately  experienced  they  imply
nothing  beyond  their  own  objectivity.  Their  order  and  regu-
larity do  however  suggest  something  beyond,  some  ground  for
their  co-existence  and  succession.  Hence  the  concept  of  things;
but  in  the  descent  from  things  to  stuff — in  proportion  as  the
analogy  with  an  active  subject  fails— so  far  from  finding  this
ground  in  its  purity  we  lose  it  altogether.

ii.  The  mention  of  ground  leads  us  naturally  to  Causality  or
the  relation  of  Cause  and  Effect.  To  begin,  we  must  distinguish
three  statements,  which,  though  very  different,  are  very  liable
to  be  confused.  Perceiving  in  a  definite  case,  e.g.  that  on  the
sun  shining  a  stone  becomes  warm,  we  may  say :  ( i )  "  The  sun
makes  the  stone  warm."  This  is  a  concrete  instance  of  pre-
dicating the  causal  relation.  In  this  there  is,  explicitly  at  all
events,  no  statement  of  a  general  law  or  axiom,  such  as  we  have
when  we  say  :  (2)  "  Every  event  must  have  a  cause  " — a  statement
commonly  known  as  the  principle  of  causality.  This  again  is
distinct  from  what  is  on  all  hands  allowed  to  be  an  empirical
generalisation,  viz. :  (3)  "  Such  and  such  particular  causes  have
invariably  such  and  such  particular  effects  " — often  called  the  law
of  causation.  With  the  two  latter  psychology  is  not  directly
concerned  at  all :  it  has  only  to  analyze  and  trace  to  its  origin
the  bare  conception  of  causation  as  expressed  in  (i)  and  involved
in  both  those  generalisations.  Whether  only  some  events
have  causes,  as  the  notion  of  chance  (or  the  '  fortuitous ')  im-
plies, whether  all  causes  are  uniform  in  their  action  or  some
capricious  and  arbitrary,  as  the  unreflecting  suppose — all  this  is
beside  the  question  for  us.

One  point  in  the  analysis  of  the  causal  relation  Hume  may
be  said  to  have  settled  once  for  all :  it  does  not  rest  upon  or
contain  any  immediate  intuition  of  a  causal  nexus.  The  two
relations  that  Hume  allowed  to  be  perceived  (or  '  presumed  to
exist'),  viz.  contiguity  in  space  of  the  objects  causally  related
and  priority  in  time  of  the  cause  before  the  effect,  are  the  only
relations  directly  discernible.  We  say  indeed  "  The  sun  warms
the  stone  "  as  readily  as  we  say  "  The  sun  rises  and  sets,'1  as  if
both  were  alike  matters  of  direct  observation  then  and  there.


CH.  xin,  §6] Real  Categories,  (ii)  Cause  and  Effect 341

But  that  this  is  not  so  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  only  in  some
cases,  when  one  change  follows  upon  another,  do  we  regard  it
as  following  from  the  other :  casual  coincidence  is  at  least  as
common  as  causal  connexion.  Whence  the  difference,  then,  if
not  from  perception?  Hume's  answer1,  repeated  in  the  main
by  English  psychologists  since,  is,  as  all  the  world  knows,  that
the  difference  is  the  result  of  association,  that  when  a  change  a
in  an  object  A  has  been  frequently  observed  to  precede  a  change
y9  in  another  object  B,  this  repetition  determines  the  mind  to  a
transition  from  the  one  to  the  other.  It  is  this  determination,
which  could  not  be  present  at  first,  that  constitutes  '  the  third
relation  betwixt  these  objects.'  This  '  internal  impression '
generated  by  association  is  then  projected  ;  "  for  'tis  a  common
observation  that  the  mind  has  a  great  propensity  to  spread  itself
on  external  objects."

The  subjective  origin  and  the  after-projection  we  must
admit,  but  all  else  in  Hume's  famous  doctrine  seems  glaringly
at  variance  with  facts.  In  one  respect  it  proves  too  much;  for
not  all  constant  sequences  are  regarded  as  causal,  as  according
to  his  analysis  they  ought  to  be.  Again,  in  another  respect  it
proves  too  little,  for  causal  connexion  is  continually  predicated
on  a  first  occurrence.  The  natural  man  has  always  distinguished
between  causes  and  signs  or  portents ;  but  there  is  nothing  to
shew  that  he  produced  an  effect  many  times  before  regarding
himself  as  the  cause  of  it.  J.  S.  Mill  has  indeed  obviated  the
first  objection  epistemologically  by  adding  to  constant  conjunc-
tion the  further  characteristic  of  '  unconditionally.'  This,  how-
ever, is  a  concept  that  cannot  be  psychologically  explained  from
Hume's  premisses,  unless  perhaps  by  resolving  it  into  the
qualification  that  the  invariability  must  be  complete  and  not
partial,  and  then  the  second  objection  still  applies.  '  Uncondi-
tional '  is  a  word  for  which  we  can  find  no  meaning  as  long  as
we  confine  our  attention  to  temporal  succession.  It  will  not  do
to  say  both  that  an  invariable  succession  generates  the  idea,  and
that  such  invariable  succession  must  be  not  only  invariable  but
also  unconditional  in  order  to  generate  it  We  may  here  turn
the  master  against  the  disciple :  "  The  same  principle,"  says
Hume,  "cannot  be  both  the  cause  and  the  effect  of  another,  and

1  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  Bk  I.  pt.  iii.  §  Xiv.  "Of  the  Idea  of  Necessary  Con-
nexion." Green  and  Grose's  ed.  vol.  i.  pp.  450  ff.


342  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xm,  §  6

this  is  perhaps  the  only  proposition  concerning  that  relation
which  is  either  intuitively  or  demonstratively  certain1."  Un-
conditionality  is  then  part  of  the  causal  relation  and  yet  not  the
product  of  invariable  repetition.

Perhaps  the  source  of  this  element  in  the  relation  will  become
clear  if  we  examine  more  closely  the  so-called  '  internal  im-
pression1 of  the  mind,  which  according  to  Hume  constitutes  the
whole  of  our  idea  of  power  or  efficacy.  To  illustrate  the  nature
of  this  impression  Hume  cites  the  instant  passage  of  the  imagi-
nation to  a  particular  idea  on  hearing  the  word  commonly
annexed  to  it,  when  "'twill  scarce  be  possible  for  the  mind  by
its  utmost  efforts  to  prevent  that  transition2."  It  is  this  determi-
nation, then,  which  is  ' felt'  internally,  not  perceived  externally 3,
that,  according  to  Hume,  we  mistakenly  transfer  to  objects  and
regard  as  an  intelligible  connexion  between  them.  But,  if  Hume
admits  this,  must  he  not  admit  more  ?  Can  it  be  pretended  that
it  is  through  the  workings  of  association  among  our  ideas  that
we  first  feel  a  determination  which  our  utmost  efforts  can  scarce
resist,  or  that  we  feel  such  determination  under  no  other  circum-
stances? If  it  be  allowed  that  the  natural  man  is  irresistibly
determined  to  imagine  an  apple  when  he  hears  its  name  or  to
expect  thunder  when  he  sees  lightning,  must  it  not  also  be
allowed  that  he  is  irresistibly  determined  much  earlier  and  in  a
much  more  impressive  way  when  overmastered  by  the  elements
or  by  his  enemies  ?  But,  further,  such  instances  bring  to  light
what  Hume's  '  determination '  also  implies,  viz.  its  necessary
correlative,  effort  or  action.  Even  irresistible  association  can
only  be  known  as  such  by  efforts  to  resist  it.  Hume  allows  this
when  he  says  that  his  principles  of  association  "  are  not  infallible
causes;  for  one  may  fix  his  attention  during  some  time  on  any
one  object  without  looking  farther4."  But  the  fact  is,  we  know
both  what  it  is  to  act  and  what  it  is  to  suffer,  to  go  where  we
would  and  to  be  carried  where  we  would  not,  quite  apart  from
the  workings  of  association.  And,  had  Hume  not  confused  two
inquiries,  our  present  one  concerning  the  origin  of  the  idea  of
causation  and  the  very  different  one  concerning  the  ground  of
causal  inference,  i.e.  of  the  law  of  causation,  it  could  never  have


1  Op.  dt.  p.  391.  2  Op.  tit.  p.  393.

*  Cf.  op.  fit.  p.  398.  *  Op.  dt.  p.  393.


CH.  xiii,  §  6]  Real  Categories,  (it)  Cause  and  Effect 343

occurred  to  him  to  offer  such  an  analysis  of  the  former  as  he
does.

Keeping  to  the  former  and  simpler  question,  it  would  seem
that  when  in  ordinary  thinking  we  say  A  causes  this  or  that  in
B  we  project  or  analogically  attribute  to  A  what  we  experience
in  acting,  and  to  B  what  we  experience  in  being  acted  on ;  and
the  structure  of  language  shews  that  such  projection  was  made
long  before  it  was  suspected  that  what  A  once  did  and  B  once
suffered  is  liable  to  be  done  and  suffered  in  the  same  circum-
stances again.  The  occasions  suitable  for  this  projection  are
determined  by  the  temporal  and  spatial  relations  of  the  objects
concerned,  which  relations  are  matter  of  intuition.  These  are  of
no  very  special  interest  from  a  psychological  point  of  view,  but
the  subjective  elements  we  shall  do  well  to  consider  further.
First  of  all,  we  must  note  the  distinction  of  immanent  action
and  transeunt  action  ;  the  former  is  what  we  call  action  simply,
and  implies  only  a  single  thing,  the  agent ;  the  latter,  which  we
might  with  advantage  call  effectuation,  implies  two  things,  a
patient  as  well  as  an  agent.  In  scientific  language  the  agent  in
an  intransitive  act  is  called  a  causa  immanens  and  so  distinguished
from  the  agent  in  effectuation  or  causa  transiens.  Common
thought,  however,  does  not  regard  a  mere  action  as  an  effect  at
all ;  and  on  reflexion  we  find  it,  in  fact,  impossible  to  resolve  ac-
tion into  effectuation.  But  the  things  with  which  we  ordinarily
deal  are  complex,  have  many  parts,  properties,  members,  phases ;
also  as  experience  advances  we  become  increasingly  aware  of
such  complexity.  Then  there  is  apt  to  ensue  a  continual  shifting
of  the  point  of  view  from  which  we  regard  any  given  thing ;  so
that  what  was  and  in  one  aspect  still  is  one  thing  comes  in
another  aspect  to  be  regarded  as  many1.

So  it  comes  about  that,  when  regarding  himself  as  one,  the
natural  man  speaks  of  himself  as  walking,  shouting,  &c. ;  but,
when  distinguishing  between  himself  and  his  members,  he  speaks
of  raising  his  voice,  moving  his  legs,  and  so  forth.  Thus  no
sooner  do  we  resolve  any  given  action  into  an  effectuation,  by
analytically  distinguishing  within  the  original  agent  an  agent
and  a  patient,  than  a  new  action  appears.  Action  is  thus  a
simpler  notion  than  effectuation  and  inexplicable  by  means  of  it.

1  Cf.  ch.  vi,  §  6,  p.  i6+fin. These  diverse  attitudes  might  be  called  respectively,
the  historical  and  the  scientific.


344  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xm,  §  6

It  is  certainly  no  easy  problem  in  philosophy  to  determine  where
the  resolution  of  the  complex  is  to  cease,  at  what  point  we  must
stop,  because  in  the  presence  of  an  individual  thing  and  a  simple
activity.  At  any  rate,  we  reach  such  a  point  psychologically  in
the  conscious  subject,  and  that  activity  in  consciousness  we  call
attention.  If  this  be  allowed,  Hume's  critique  of  the  notion  of
efficacy  is  really  wide  of  the  mark.  "  Some1,"  he  says,  "  have
asserted  that  we  feel  an  energy  or  power  in  our  own  mind  ;  and
that,  having  in  this  manner  acquir'd  the  idea  of  power,  we
transfer  that  quality  to  matter,  where  we  are  not  able  immediately
to  discover  it.... But  to  convince  us  how  fallacious  this  reasoning
is,  we  need  only  consider  that  the  will,  being  here  consider'd  as
a  cause,  has  no  more  a  discoverable  connexion  with  its  effects
than  any  material  cause  has  with  its  proper  effect.... The  effect
there  [too,  i.e.  in  '  the  empire  of  the  will  over  our  mind ']  is  dis-
tinguishable and  separable  from  the  cause,  and  could  not  be
foreseen  without  the  experience  of  their  constant  conjunction8."
This  is  logical  analysis,  not  psychological;  the  point  is  that  the
will  is  not  considered  as  a  cause  and  distinguished  from  its
effects,  nor  in  fact  considered  at  all.  It  is  not  a  case  of  sequence
between  two  separable  'impressions.'  We  cannot  really  make
the  indefinite  regress  that  such  logical  distinctions  as  that  be-
tween the  conscious  subject  and  its  activity  implies.  Moreover,
our  activity  as  such  is  not  directly  presented  at  all :  we  are,  being
active  ;  and  further  than  this  psychological  analysis  will  not  go*.
There  are,  as  we  have  seen,  two  ways  in  which  this  activity  is
manifested,  the  receptive  or  passive  and  the  motor  or  active  in
the  stricter  sense4 :  our  experience  of  these  we  project  in  pre-
dicating causal  relation.

1  Hume  here  has  Locke  and  Berkeley  specially  in  view. On  the  particular  question,
see  Locke,  Essay,  bk.  n.  c.  xxi.  §§  3-5.

•  Of.  cit.  p.  455.

*  In  an  article  (Mind, 1886,  p.  317) Mr  F.  H.  Bradley  created  some  stir  by
declaring  that  "  the  present  use  of  these  phrases  [active,  energy]  is  little  better  than  a
scandal  and  a  main  obstacle  in  the  path  of  English  psychology." In  Mind  for  1902
and 1903  he  has  made  important  contributions  towards  clearing  up  the  supposed
confusion,  and  the  subject  is  still  being  debated. But  the  main  contention  of  the
text,  that  activity  is  for  psychology  at  all  events  ultimate  and  unanalyzable,  seems
still  to  await  refutation. A  brief  notice  of  some  of  the  diverse  views  obtaining  will
be  found  in  my  address,  "The  Problems  of  General  Psychology,"  Philosophical  Review
(1904),  pp.  608  ff.

4  Cf.  ch.  ii,  §  6,  p.  57.


CH.  xni,  §  5] Real  Categories,  (Hi)  End  and  Means 345

But  two  halves  do  not  make  a  whole ;  so  we  have  no  singly
complete  experience  of  effectuation,  for  the  simple  reason  that
we  cannot  be  two  things  at  once.  We  are  guided  in  piecing  it
together  by  the  temporal  and  spatial  relations  of  the  things
concerned.  Hence,  perhaps,  some  of  the  antinomies  that  beset
this  concept.  In  its  earliest  form,  then,  the  so-called  'necessary'
connexion  of  cause  and  effect  in  a  concrete  instance  is  perhaps
nothing  more  than  the  physical  effort  we  experience  in  making
or  forcing  a  thing  to  '  behave '  as  we  want.  The  process  which
as  we  first  observe  it  seems  one  event — occurring  in  one  place  at
one  time — we  afterwards  analyze  into  two  processes  or  events —
one  pertaining  to  the  agent,  the  other  to  the  patient,  or  more
exactly  into  a  case  of  their  interaction.  Afterwards  when  any
two  events  have  frequently  recurred  in  the  same  temporal  order
— even  though  not  contiguous  in  space — we  are  prone  to  conclude
that  they  are  causally  connected,  although  there  is  no  suggestion
of  physical  constraint.  Then  emerges  the  very  different '  neces-
sity '  postulated  when  we  talk  of  natural  laws,  due  primarily,  as
Hume  supposed,  to  the  strength  of  expectation  or  to  our  primitive
credulity.  Finally,  when  upon  the  basis  of  such  associated  uni-
formities of  sequence  a  definite  intellectual  elaboration  of  such
material  supervenes,  the  logical  necessity  of  reason  and  con-
sequent finds  a  place,  and  so  far  as  deduction  is  applicable  cause
and  reason  become  interchangeable  ideas.  Science  then  finds  it
can  dispense  with  the  anthropomorphism  of  the  causal  category,
but  the  place  of  this  in  concrete  experience  is  thereby  in  no  way
impugned.

iii.  As  regards  the  category  of  End  and  Means — its  an-
thropomorphic character  is  still  more  evident.  There  are  no
definite  spatial  and  temporal  relations  belonging  to  it  as  such,
that  remain  as  distinctive  objective  factors,  with  which  positive
science  could  deal  when  its  subjective  factors  are  eliminated.
So  far  Kant  was  justified  in  denying  to  it  the  rank  that  he
accorded  to  the  two  other  real  categories — Substance  and  Cause.
But  important  as  this  difference  may  be  epistemologically,  the
fact — on  which  Kant  strenuously  insisted — that  this  category  is
indispensable  to  us  as  a  clue  to  the  understanding  of  organized
beings  and  "  first  obtains  objective  reality  from  a  consideration
of  such  beings  "  is  sufficient  to  justify  its  recognition  here.  Even
if  it  be  but  '  a  peculiarity  of  our  intelligence,'  still  that  is  enough


346  Forms  of  Synthesis  [CH.  xm,  §  6

for  us1.  The  psychological  interest  of  this  category  lies,  however,
elsewhere,  viz.  in  connexion  with  the  characterization  of  things  as
having  worth  or  value  and  we  may  therefore  defer  any  further
reference  to  it  till  we  attempt  to  treat  of  that8.

1  Cf.  Kant's  Critique  of  the  Judgment ,  §§  65,  67.

2  Cf.  below,  ch.  xvi.


CHAPTER  XIV

BELIEF,  CERTAINTY  AND  FAITH

Psychological  Topic  Defined.

§  I.  There  are  psychological  and  there  are  epistemological
discussions  innumerable  concerning  belief  and  certainty.  It  is
important  to  keep  the  two  discussions  distinct  and  yet  they  are
almost  invariably  blended ;  for  psychology  and  epistemology
themselves  are  only  gradually  getting  out  of  each  other's  way,
and  the  fact  that  they  often  use  the  same  terms  renders  such
differentiation  difficult.  Moreover  they  have  both  used  the
same  terms  because  both  alike  relate  to  experience,  though
from  different  standpoints  or  under  different  aspects.  We  have
come  upon  these  differences  several  times  already1  and  so  without
further  exposition  here,  we  may  seek  at  once  to  clear  the  way
for  our  psychological  inquiry.

Belief  is  sometimes  used  in  a  wider,  sometimes  in  a  narrower
sense,  the  one  including  certainty,  the  other  excluding  it :  the
wider  belonging  to  the  psychological,  the  narrower  to  the
epistemological  standpoint2.  Epistemology  has  constantly  to
distinguish  between  belief  and  knowledge  as  differing  in  kind,
since  belief  is  always,  and  (scientific)  knowledge  is  never,  a
private  and  personal  matter.  Psychologically,  however — for
the  individual  that  is  to  say — his  belief  and  his  knowledge  (or
certainty)  differ  only  in  degree.  Certainty  is  then  regarded  as
the  upper  limit  of  such  personal  belief:  it  may  be  represented
by  unity,  lower  degrees  being  represented  by  fractions,  as  in
the  'odds'  of  betting  transactions,  for  example.  But  episte-
mology also  contrasts  knowledge  with  probability  in  a  similar

1  Cf.  ch.  i,  §  3,  p.  18;  ch.  ii,  §  i ;  ch.  vi,  §  3,  p.  144;  ch.  xii,  §  2,  p.  293.

2  The  two  Mills,  for  example,  adopted  the  former,  Locke  and  Bain,  the  latter,
usage.


348  Belief, Certainty  and  Faith [CH.  xiv,  §  i

fashion,  save  that  the  difference  is  then  referred  not  to  the  psy-
chological causes  of  belief  but  to  its  logical  grounds.  With
these  the  epistemologist  is  exclusively  concerned;  the  psycho-
logist, however,  not  at  all.  His  business  is  primarily  with  the
believing,  together  with  its  causes  and  effects,  as  subjective,  not
with  the  grounds  of  the  belief  itself,  as  objective:  what  interests
him  is  a  living  process,  not  a  logical  structure.  Despite  this
wide  difference  the  one  term  'certainty'  is  often  applied  to  both;
though  they  are  distinguished  as  respectively  subjective  cer-
tainty and  objective  certainty  :  so  we  say  indifferently  '  I  am
certain  of  and  '  It  is  certain  that.'  Such  phraseology  is  often
convenient;  yet  where  scientific  exactness  is  important  it  is  to
be  avoided,  and  there  are  better  terms  available.  At  all  events
psychology  is  not  interested  in  objective  certainty  or  truth  as
such,  but  only  in  subjective  certainty  or  conviction.  Truth
belongs  entirely  to  the  universe  of  propositions :  certainty
implies  a  complete  state  of  mind.  In  this  state  propositions
enter  not  as  true  or  false  but  simply  as  believed  or  not  be-
lieved. Whether  propositions  are  believed  or  not  is  to  be
ascertained  not  by  considering  them  but  by  observing  the  feeling
they  produce  and  the  active  attitude  to  which  such  feeling  leads.
How  far  there  are  exceptions  to  this  generalisation  sufficing  to
disprove  it,  or  even,  when  carefully  examined,  to  limit  it,  remains
to  be  seen1.

Direct  (Objective}  Causes  of  Belief.

§  2.  Meanwhile  it  is  at  least  safe  to  say  that  the  most  numerous
and  what  we  may  call  the  typical  cases  of  belief  as  such  involve
purely  subjective  factors,  whereas  these  are  absent  altogether  from
that  ideal  of  knowledge  which  is  the  lodestar  of  epistemology :
there  objective  factors  are  the  sole  determinants.  Yet  even  in
the  most  subjectively  conditioned  belief2  objective  factors  are  the
immediate  determinants,  'objective,'  that  is  to  say  in  the  psy-
chological, yet  far  enough,  it  may  be,  from  objective  in  the
epistemological,  sense.  We  may  begin  then  by  examining  first
of  all  the  cases  in  which  the  characteristics  of  belief  are  clearest,
the  cases,  that  is,  where  the  objective  situation  before  the  subject
is  such  that  he  may,  and  if  challenged  would,  say  :  "  I  am  certain."
1  Cf.  §  2,  p.  353.  -  Cf.  §  4,  P-  355-


CH.  xiv,  §  2]  Direct  (Objective)  Causes  of  Belief 349

In  all  such  cases  we  find  an  absence  of  any  alternative  or  option :
I  am  certain  is  equivalent  to  I  am  convinced — metaphorically,
I  am  overcome  and  forced  to  assent1.

Here  Spencer's  '  inconceivability  of  the  opposite '  comes  in :
and  had  he  been  content  to  claim  for  this,  not  '  the  highest  pos-
sible logical  justification  of  knowledge,'  but  only  the  strongest
possible  psychological  justification  of  belief,  a  great  deal  of
rather  aimless  controversy  might  have  been  avoided.  But  then
it  must  not  be  resolved  into  indissoluble  association,  as  James
Mill,  and  Spencer  too,  maintained2.  Association  will  not
account  for  the  certainty  of  simple  perception.  If  dazzled  by
the  sun  I  say  "  It  is  light,"  the  psychological  necessity  accompany-
ing this  assertion,  though  it  is  confined  to  a  single  instance,  is
more  absolute  and  immediate  than  that  which  is  present  when
I  say  "  Unsupported  bodies  fall,"  a  proposition  which  I  and  my
ancestors  before  me  have  verified  innumerable  times  and  never
found  to  fail.  Spencer  oddly  enough  allowed  all  this :  the
certainty,  he  tells  us,  is  one  and  the  same,  for  'the  union  of
subject  and  object'  is  absolute  in  both.  There  is,  however,  a
difference  in  respect  of  time :  assertions  like  the  first  he  calls
'temporarily  absolute,'  assertions  like  the  last,  "permanently  ab-
solute.' And  yet  the  former  assertions  are,  he  holds,  the  more
impressive ;  for  in  these  cases  "the  predicates. .  .not  only  invariably
coexist  with  their  subjects,  but  they  invariably  coexist  with  them
in  such  ways  that  they  cannot  be  overlooked  " ;  whereas  in  the
latter  "  the  invariable  coexistence  predicated  is  often  inconspi-
cuous, and  may  be  overlooked3."  The  truth  here  adumbrated
can  be  more  simply  and  definitely  stated : — The  certainty  of  sense
is  fundamental,  whilst  the  certainty  of  thought,  as  concerned
with  objects  of  a  higher  order,  presupposes  sensory  fundamenta.
These  psychologically  secondary  cases  of  certainty  are  impos-
sible without  those  primary  cases,  which  are  not  only  experienced
first  but  experienced  also  independently.  Here  with  the  subject

1  Cf.  the  article  '  Gewissheit '  in  Eisler's  Worterbuch  der  phil.  Begriffe,  where  the
following  among  many  similar  definitions  are quoted  : "  Certitudo  nihil  aliud  est
quam  deierminatio  intellectus  ad  unam"  Aquinas ; "  Die  Gtwissheit  ist  mil  dem
Bewusstsein  der  Noth-wendigkeit  verbunden,"  Kant.

*  James  Mill,  Analysis  of  the  Human  Mind,  }.  S.  M.'s  ed.  i.  ch.  n  (cf.  the  editor's
note,  i.  pp.  402  ff. ;  Herbert  Spencer,  Principles  of  Psychology,  2nd  ed.  ii.  §  430,
p.  419.

2  Op.  cit.  ii.  §  425,  pp.  403  f.


350  Belief, Certainty  and  Faith [CH.  xiv,  §  2

9

confronted  and  determined  by  the  immediately  given  or  pre-
sented objective — here  at  the  very  outset  of  experience,  before
association  begins — we  have  that  complete  state  of  mind  in
which  all  the  factors  of  belief  are  found  in  Descartes'  Cogito
filled  out  :  I  am  and  It  is1.  Here,  then,  where  as  yet  reflexion
and  doubt  are  alike  impossible,  we  have  the  fans  et  origo  of
certainty.

And  were  there  no  such  psychologically  primary  certainty,
it  is  hard  to  see  how  there  could  ever  be  any  absolute  certainty
at  all.  Certainty  determined  wholly  by  '  invariable  succession  '
could  obviously  never  be  more  than  expectation,  and  expecta-
tion is  not  yet  actual  presentation.  We  may  indeed  safely  go
further  and  say  that  there  is — 'objectively'  at  all  events — no
such  certainty  and  that  'subjectively',  the  certainty  of  the  most
confident  expectation  will  scarcely  compare  with  the  certainty
of  actual  fact.  The  probability  that  depends  on  invariable  suc-
cession is  of  the  form  m  +  i/m  +  2  (m  being  the  number  of  such
successions  so  far).  Theoretically  it  must  always  be  at  the
mercy  of  a  negative  instance;  for  such  an  instance  involves  no
contradiction.  In  attempting  to  account  for  the  axioms  of  logic
and  mathematics  in  this  fashion,  Spencer  forgot  that  the
'  perpetually-repeated  experiences '  which  make  us  so  confident
that,  eg.,  unsupported  bodies  will  fall,  greatly  exceed  in  number
those  in  which  we  have  found  things  which  are  equal  to  the  same
thing  to  be  equal  to  each  other.  And  if  we  carry  back  the  series  to
include  the  experiences  of  our  savage  and  our  brute  ancestry,  the
disparity  will  be  greater  still.  If  then  "  it  be  a  fundamental  law
that  connexions  of  ideas  become  strong  in  proportion  as  they  are
repeated2"— and  this,  caeteris  paribus,  we  may  safely  allow — the
axioms  of  exact  science  should  be  less  convincing  than  many
empirical  inductions.  But  Spencer,  of  course,  had  to  admit  that
actually  it  is  far  otherwise.  These  axioms  are  a  priori  for  the  in-
dividual, he  allows ;  but  still  he  contends  that  they  are  a  posteriori
for  the  race8.  And  then  the  objection  just  urged  applies.  There
is,  however,  a  further  and  perhaps  more  serious  objection :

1  It  is  important  to  note,  however,  that  we  are  not  now  directly  concerned  with
the  interpretation  to  be put  on these implicit existential propositions,  the  dual
'positions'  of  all  experience.

2  Op.  cit.  ii.  §433,  p.  426.

3  Op.  cit.  ii.  §  430,  p.  414,  i.  §  208,  pp.  465  ft.


CH.  xiv,  §  2]  Direct  (Objective]  Causes  of  Belief 351

irrational  animals  have  no  sense  of  the  axioms  of  equality  or
generally  of  objects  of  a  higher  order  at  all.  Not  till  the  brute
level  is  passed  are  there  any  individuals  to  whom  '  these  data  of
intelligence'  can  appeal,  and  then  the  single  'direct  comparison  '
makes  them  as  certain  or  convinced  as  they  are  by  the  dazzling
sunlight,  which  they  immediately  perceive.  In  fact,  Spencer
himself  says,  "we  immediately  see  [or  intuit]  that  the  alleged
relation  is  as  alleged1"  ;  and,  we  may  add,  the  more  clearly  we
see  that  the  single  case  suffices  the  less  we  think  of  seeking
confirmation  by  repetition.  'Seeing  is  believing'  holds  for  ob-
jects of  a  higher  order  as  well  as  for  the  sensory  objects  which
they  relate.  Seeing  is  believing,  and  all  talk  of  a  further  cri-
terion of  '  subjective  certainty '  seems  as  meaningless  as  to  ask
for  a  criterion  of  hunger  or  any  other  immediate  experience.

But  besides  present  '  matters  of  fact '  and  immediately  in-
tuited '  relations  of  ideas'  there  is  still  one  important  class  of
experiences  wherein  belief  may  amount  to  certainty,  viz.  the
memories9  of  what  as  '  matters  of  fact '  are  past.  The  epistemo-
logical  problems  of  memory-judgments  are  interesting  as  well
as  difficult.  From  this  standpoint  no  memory-judgment — nor
indeed,  any  judgment  concerning  'matter-of-fact' — can  lay  claim
to  that  '  objective  certainty '  or  truth  that  belongs  to  the  self-
evident  relations  of  ideas3.  I  am  at  this  moment  personally
as  certain  that  I  breakfasted  on  porridge  this  morning  as  I  am
that  it  is  now  broad  day  or  that  twice  two  are  four.  But  from
the  universalistic  standpoint — in  view  of  the  frequent  fallibility
of  what  is  taken  to  be  memory — while  I  still  maintain  that
I  am  certain,  yet  I  am  bound  to  admit  that  others,  though  they
may  fully  recognise  my  bona  fides,  are  justified  in  holding  that
I  may  be  mistaken  and  in  seeking,  if  it  is  worth  while,  for  further
confirmation  of  what  I  say.  But  from  the  nature  of  the  case  no
confirmation  is  possible  that  does  not  assume  the  validity  of  me-
mory, either  directly — as  in  the  demand  for  other  testimony — or
indirectly — as  in  the  appeal  to  the  constancy  of  nature.  All  this,
however,  would  be  beyond  the  purview  of  psychology  save  for

1  Op.  dt.  ii.  §  428,  p.  412.

*  More  precisely,  the  reminiscence  or  recollection  ;  for,  of  course,  mere  retentive-
ness  yields  no  memory-judgments,  but  only  recognition.  Cf.  above  ch.  viii,  §  I,  p.  207.

3  Cf.  the  interesting  discussion  in  Meinong's  Ueber  die  Erfahrungsgrundlagen
unseres  IVissens,  1906,  §  18.


352  Belief,  Certainty  and  Faith [CH.  xiv,  §  2

the  one  fact  of  obliviscence :  this  fact  shews  that  memory  and
perception  are  not  on  a  par.  Reminiscence  a"nd  obliviscence  are
inversely  related  in  such  wise,  that  one  might  be  tempted  to  say:
Reminiscence  is  only  perfect  where  obliviscence  is  nit,  that  is,
where  what  is  remembered  is  just  ceasing  to  be  present.  The
present  for  experience,  however,  is  comparable  not  to  a  point
but  to  a  line  and  a  line  too  of  very  varying  length — compara-
tively short  for  certain  facts,  such  as  those  of  the  so-called
'  specious  present1';  comparatively  long  for  others,  such  as  those
of  the  temporal  and  spatial  order — over  and  done  with  to  be
sure  for  perception,  but  retained  in  the  memory  continuum.
If  this  is  intact,  it  constrains  us,  as  much  as  perception  constrains
us,  to  recognise  a  present  reality,  the  reality  of  the  past*.  In
spite  of  the  notorious  deceptiveness  of  memory  in  many  cases
and  the  impossibility  of  proving  it  true  in  any  case,  this  con-
straint or  conviction  is,  we  find,  as  complete  in  those  instances
of  distinct  memory  as  it  ever  is  in  perception.  Such  a  position
is  perhaps  logically  (i.e.  formally)  indefensible.  It  might  seem
then  that  nothing  better  than  scepticism  was  left3.  But  after
all  it  does  not  follow  that  such  subjective  certainty  is  never
right ;  and  in  fact,  if  it  never  were,  experience  such  as  ours
would  be  quite  inexplicable.

Certainty,  then,  we  find  may  in  all  cases  be  described  as  a
subjective  attitude  to  which  we  are  objectively  constrained  :  we
have  to  assent,  even  if  we  do  not  consent,  much  as  a  criminal  is
convicted,  though  he  should  plead  'not  guilty.'  But  precisely  in
those  cases  where  certainty  is  most  certain,  if  the  expression
may  be  allowed — where,  in  other  words,  it  is  most  immediate —
we  are  least  aware  of  it,  ordinarily  not  aware  of  it  at  all.  I  do
not  say  I  am  certain  that  I  had  porridge  for  breakfast,  that  it  is
now  daylight,  and  that  two  and  two  equal  four  ;  on  the  other
hand  statements,  which  it  would  be  natural  for  me  in  this  way
to  certify,  would  be  statements  that  I  might  have  doubted  or
that  I  had  previously  to  ascertain  or  verify.  Then  my  certainty

1  Cf.  ch.  viii,  §  3,  p.  214.

*  It  is  the  unique  wonder  of  experience  to  be  big  with  the  future  and  laden  with
the  past  :  it  dwindles  as  its  range  in  time  diminishes,  and  disappears  as  this  shrinks  to
the  instantaneous.

8  And  a  very  wide-reaching  scepticism  it  would  be,  as  we  may  gather  from  the  fact
that  Descartes  found  even  a  chain  of  reasoning  untrustworthy  unless  God  guaranteed
the  evidence  of  memory  !


CH.  xiv,  §  3]  Effect  of  Belief  353

is  said  to  be  explicit ;  otherwise  it  is  said  to  be  implicit,  inasmuch
as  the  subjective  factors,  though  they  are  there,  are  not  definitely
evoked.  Among  such  implicit  or  indifferent  beliefs  we  may
include  all  those  that  now  make  up  the  stock  of  what  we  call
our  common  sense  and  common  knowledge,  so  long  as  nothing
leads  us  to  doubt  them  ;  for  till  then  they  are  regarded  so
entirely  from  the  universalistic  standpoint,  that  they  lose  all
personal  colour  ;  they  are  either  truths  known  by  '  the  light  of
nature '  or  facts  known,  or  at  least  accepted,  by  everybody.


Effect  of  Belief.

§  3.  The  immediate  cause  of  all  belief  as  a  '  state  of  mind  '
being  then  the  objective  situation,  we  have  now  to  try  to  analyze
its  effect  in  detail.  As  regards  feeling,  in  the  case  of  implicit  or
indifferent  beliefs  the  effect  may  be  nil:  no  one  is  affected  by
the  fact  that  fish  are  cold-blooded  or  by  the  truth  that  the  first
three  numerals  are  primes.  But  in  the  explicit  acquisition  of  a
belief  there  is  always  at  least  one  feeling,  due  immediately  to  the
belief,  as  such,  viz.  the  formal  feeling  of  satisfaction1 :  this,  like
Othello,  we  crave  the  more  the  more  momentous  the  issue.
Frequently  we  can  even  say  with  Clough:

It  fortifies  my  soul  to  know,
That  though  I  perish,  Truth  is  so.

To  be  rid  of  suspense  and  uncertainty  is,  so  far,  always  at  least  a
relief,  and  often  the  prelude  to  a  great  deal  more,  to  which  we
must  turn  presently.  As  regards  action,  much  has  been  written
about  the  effect  of  belief  upon  it ;  and  yet  all  that  is  of  essential
importance  is  very  simple  and  very  obvious.  A  sane  man,  and
even  an  insane  one,  unless  his  disease  is  apathy,  acts  as  he
believes.  He  may  indeed  venture  to  act  in  cases  where  he  is
uncertain,  but  his  venture  is  always  backed  by  some  belief
and*  never  diametrically  opposed  to  all  his  beliefs.  Of  course  we
may  believe  with  complete  certainty  without  at  once  acting  or
even  resolving  to  act  later ;  yet  the  efficacy  of  such  belief,  always
holds  good  potentially,  and  will  shape  our  actions  whenever  it  is
relevant.  Bain  indeed  went  too  far  in  maintaining  that  'action  is

1  Cf.  ch.  x,  §  2,  p.  257.
w.  p.  23


354  Belief, Certainty  and  Faith [CH.  xiv,  §  3

the  basis  of  belief  yet  he  was  right  in  saying  that  "  preparedness
to  act  is  the  sole,  the  genuine,  the  unmistakable  criterion  of
belief1."  "  Faith  without  works  is  dead "  we  say  and  we  dis-
trust a  man  who  has  not  the  strength  of  his  convictions.  This
strength  or  intensity  of  conviction,  however,  is  not  to  be  con-
founded with  the  certainty  of  belief:  it  is  the  practical  conse-
quence of — the  '  confidence  '  begotten  by — this  certainty,  and
therefore  presupposes  it.  But  if  the  subject,  who  is  convinced,
were  merely  a  '  logical  ego '  and  nothing  more,  these  secondary
emotional  and  practical  consequences  of  belief,  which  make  it  a
living  fact,  a  complete  'state  of  mind,'  would  be  non-existent.

Indirect  (Subjective)  Causes  of  Belief.

§  4.  So  far  we  have  considered  mainly  '  the  cases  in  which
the  characteristics  of  belief  are  clearest,'  where,  that  is  to  say,
complete  certainty  is  attained  by  a  subject  facing  the  situation
with  an  'open  mind'  without  parti  pris,  his  emotional  demeanour
following  upon  conviction  instead  of  anticipating  it.  But  in
most  cases  we  believe  without  being  certain  and  again  in  the
most  important  of  these  cases  we  are  neither  impartial  nor  dis-
interested. On  a  jury  or  as  a  scientific  inquirer  a  man  may
maintain  the  'detached'  attitude  that  we  symbolize  by  allegorical
statues  of  Justice,  may  be  intent  only  on  '  ascertaining'  the  real
'  weight '  of  the  evidence  and  blind  to  its  specious  appearances.
Such  '  deliberation  '  even  if  inconclusive  will  at  least  be  fair.
But  in  his  own  personal  concerns  it  is  hard  for  a  man  to  divest
himself  completely  of  private  standards  of  estimation.  Here
accordingly  feeling  and  volition  come  forward  in  a  new  rdle —
not  this  time  as  effects  of  a  belief  he  already  has  but  as  causes  of
a  future  belief  that  he  wants — or  perhaps  that  some  one  else
wants  him — to  have.  With  tell-tale  naivett  common  speech
ascribes  the  acquisition  of  such  belief  not  to  conviction,  but  to  per-
suasion*: it  is  a  result  such  as  rhetoric,  'that  powerful  instrument

1  Emotions  and  Will,  jrd  ed.  1875,  pp.  506,  505.  Italics  mine.  In  a  note  Vo  his
Mental  and  Moral  Science,  3rd  ed.  1872,  pt.  i.  App.  p.  100,  Bain  admits  a  change  of
view  on  this  point  and  speaks  of  belief  as  "  a  fact  or  incident  of  our  intellectual  nature,
although  dependent  as  to  its  energy  upon  our  Active  or  Emotional  tendencies."  But
he  made  no  change  in  the  text  and  left  his  original  statements  unaltered  not  only  as
quoted  above  but  also  in  the  second  edition  of  Jas.  Mill's  Analysis,  1878,  i.  p.  375.

*  The  etymology  of  the  word  itself  emphasizes  the  seductiveness  of  views  that
gratify  our  prejudices.


CH.  xiv,  §  4] Indirect  (Subjective]  Causes  of  Belief 355

of  error  and  deceit ' — as  Locke  called  it — can  achieve,  when
logically  it  may  be  unattainable.  But  now,  though  certainty  be
out  of  the  question,  the  belief  we  want  is  always  a  possible  one.
People  never  believe  that  black  is  white  or  that  two  and  two
make  five,  but  they  are  often  confident  that  it  won't  rain,
although  the  clouds  are  low  and  the  glass  is  falling.  It  is  this
region  of  the  possible,  as  distinct  from  the  actual  or  the  neces-
sary, that  imagination1  sets  before  us;  and  it  is  by  means  of  this
'  ideational  mechanism  '  that  our  inclinations  can  bias  our  belief.
This  process  we  have  now  to  consider.

It  is  obvious,  from  what  we  have  already  seen,  that  the  process
must  be  indirect.  A  man  may  wish  to  believe,  he  cannot —
strictly  speaking — will  to  believe ;  though  he  may  deliberately
set  about  deceiving  another  he  cannot  avowedly  and  straightway
set  about  deceiving  himself.  He  may  indeed  pretend  or  profess
to  believe  without  believing  ;  but  if  he  verily  does  believe,  his
belief  must  be  bona  fide,  founded  on  what  he  takes  to  be  fact,
not  on  what  he  knows  to  be  fiction.  This  granted,  we  have  to
note,  first  of  all,  the  power  that  imagination  has,  when  we  attend
passively  and*  exclusively  to  its  working,  to  impose  upon  us
with  all  the  air  of  complete  reality.  This  power  we  continually
experience  in  our  dreams  and  can  observe  in  others  who  are
hypnotized.  The  vividness,  the  circumstantiality,  the  common-
sense  of  matters-of-fact  seem  then  to  be  all  present ;  for  there
are  then  no  opposing  percepts  to  pale  this  phosphorescent  light
of  imagery  that  only  looks  substantial  in  the  dark ;  and  the
alibis,  the  anachronisms,  the  absurdities,  do  not  then  obtrude
which  are  manifest  the  moment  that  we  awake.  Emotion  rarely
contracts  attention  or  inhibits  its  freedom  of  movement  so  much
at  once ;  yet  it  does  so  sometimes  in  sudden  '  fits '  of  overmas-
tering passion.  But  gradually  it  may  achieve  an  imposture
equally  great  and  far  more  permanent.  What  is  continually
ignored  lapses  at  length  into  oblivion,  while  what  at  first  ap-
peared only  '  specious '  and  '  plausible '  becomes  in  the  end  an
obsession,  a  '  fixed  idea '  that  needs  must  be  believed.  The
result,  so  far  as  the  working  of  the  ideational  mechanism  is
concerned,  is  essentially  the  same  in  the  case  of  the  man  blinded
by  passion  or  desire  as  in  that  of  the  man  hypnotized  or  de-
mented. Both  alike  may  be  described  as  cases  of  fascination,

1  Cf.  ch.  vii,  §  i,  p.  178.

23—2  .


356  Belief, Certainty  and  Faith [CH.  xiv,  §  4

and  were,  in  fact,  so  described  by  Renouvier.  In  both  belief  is
constrained  by  the  complete  abeyance  of  all  option :  in  both  it
is  as  if  the  men  were  'bewitched1.'

The  way  in  which  such  a  spell  may  be  wrought  by  our  own
'  passional  nature '  is  in  the  main  extremely  simple,  though  the
complexity  in  detail  is  great.  Most  people  attend  by  preference
to  what  for  them  are  pleasurable  situations  and  to  the  pleasur-
able aspect  of  a  situation,  if  its  features  are  mixed2.  We  are  apt
to  contrast  this  as  the  '  fair '  side  or  as  the  '  right '  with  the  other
as  its  '  shady  or  seamy  side,'  forgetting  how  entirely  subjective
such  a  characterization  is.  But  we  have  only  to  compare  the
utterly  diverse  but  equally  one-sided  estimates  of  the  same  situa-
tion by  persons  of  opposite  temperaments  or  conflicting  interests
to  realise  this  lack  of  genuine  objectivity  in  both — to  compare,
for  example,  the  outlook  on  the  world  of  Schopenhauer  and
Leopardi  with  those  of  Leibniz  or  Hegel,  or  the  views  of  land-
lords and  shipowners  on  the  question  of  free-trade.  In  a  word,
personal  bias — Quot  homines  tot  sententiae,  as  Terence  expressed
it — is  fundamentally  just  subjective  selection  uncontrolled.  To
follow  it  blindly  and  exclusively  is  to  live  according  to  nature,
after  it  is  possible  to  live  according  to  reason3.  The  brute  is
perforce  confined  to  its  own  subjective  standpoint,  man  only
achieves  humanity  as  he  advances  to  the  '  trans-subjective '  and
begins  to  share  in  Universal  Mind4,  and  'to  prove  all  things.'
To  do  this,  says  Renouvier,  "he  must  learn  to  doubt... The


1  Renouvier  accordingly  in  his  powerful  analysis  of  these  facts  includes  them  all
under  the  common  heading  of  vertige  mental.  ( Traitt  de  Psychologic  ralionnelle,  2nd  ed.
chh.  xi.  and  xii.)  Locke  had,  however,  anticipated  him.  Treating  of  the  association  of
ideas,  not  as  many  have  done,  '  to  explain  knowledge  but  with  the  opposite  intent  of
accounting  for  human  error'  (Fraser's  note),  he  traces  to  this  'very  same  root'  not
only  what  is  commonly  called  madness  but  "  the  sort  of  madness  there  is  scarce  a  man
so  free  from,  but  that  if  he  should  always... argue  or  do  as  in  some  cases  he  con-
stantly does,  [he]  would  not  be  thought  fitter  for  Bedlam  than  for  civil  conversation,"
Essay,  II.  xxxiii.  §§3,  4.

a  This  preference,  of  course,  may  be  abnormal ;  grief,  anger,  jealousy  often  make
the  bitter  sweet.  A  '  moody '  mind  like  Jacques  '  loved  melancholy  better  than
laughing.'  This  unconscious  bias  has  probably  been  exploited  overmuch  by  the
Austrian  neuropathologist,  S.  Freud.

3  This  transition  is  a  very  gradual  one. The  thinking  of  the  primitive  man  is  a
tissue  of  prejudices  and  superstitions  shaped  mainly  by  his  emotions  and  desires.
Ribot  has  dealt  with  this  in  a  very  interesting  way:  cf.  his  articles  entitled  "La
Logique  des  Sentiments,"  Rev.  phil.  June  and  July  1904,  republished  1905.

4  Cf.  above,  ch.  xii,  §  i,  p.  286  «.


CH.  xiv,  §  4] Indirect  (Subjective)  Causes  of  Belief 357

ignorant  man  doubts  little  and  the  fool  does  not  doubt  at  all.
...If  men  only  knew  how  to  doubt,  there  would  be  no  fools
among  them,  intellectually  speaking*."  The  nature  of  the  remedy
is  the  best  evidence  of  the  source  of  the  disease.

But  the  remedy,  since  we  are  not  merely  intellectual,  is  itself
mistaken  for  an  evil,  when  the  real  evil  is  simply  the  uncer-
tainty— there  in  any  case — that  doubt  only  leads  us  to  recognise.
Impatient  of  an  uncertainty  that  we  are  anxious  but  impotent
to  resolve,  we  are  tempted  to  suppress  our  doubts  by  emulating
the  fatuous  procedure  attributed  to  the  ostrich.  So  the  voli-
tional rather  than  the  emotional  bias  comes  then  to  the  fore :
we  wish  to  believe,  but  doubt  bars  the  way.  A  strange  vicious
circle  here  discloses  itself  that  might  well  seem  fanciful  if  it  were
not  so  notorious  in  fact.  Doubt,  that  has  proved  to  be  a  pro-
phylactic against  error,  is  itself  subjected  to  the  very  regimen
that  has  fostered  the  disease.  The  classic  instance,  of  course,
is  that  of  Pascal.  A  disciple  of  Descartes,  who  had  made  doubt
the  foundation  of  method,  he  was  himself  a  profound  sceptic.
Like  Descartes  he  regarded  the  association  of  ideas  as  depend-
ing on  the  body,  which  for  Descartes  was  an  automaton,  and
which  he  himself  called  '  the  machine.'  He  was  well  aware  that
this  mechanism  of  habit  and  custom — which  provided  that  con-
secution des  betes,  noted  by  Leibniz  as  adequate  to  the  narrow
environment  of  the  brute, — was  also  the  source  of  prejudices
and  superstitions  innumerable  among  men.  And  yet  he  coun-
selled those  who  would  fain  be  '  cured  of  infidelity '  to  ply  this
machine  : — "  Do  everything  just  as  if  you  believed,  use  the  holy
water,  have  masses  said,  &c.  Naturellement  meme  cela  vous  fera
croire  et  vous  abetira?"  Thus  to  stifle  doubt  has  seemed  to
thousands  sound  advice.  But  such  ignava  ratio,  as  Kant  would
have  called  it,  rests  as  we  may  presently  see  on  a  psychological
confusion — the  confusion  of  credulity  (Aberglaube)  with  belief
(Glaube)  and  of  both  with  faith.

1  Op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  p.  39.

8  Pfnstes,  Brunschvicq's  ed.  1900,  No.  230,  p.  441,  Nos.  246,  147,  p.  448.


358  Belief,  Certainty  and  Faith [CH.  xiv,  §  5


Faith  and  Moral  Certainty.

§  5.  Though  intimately  connected,  faith  and  belief  are  not
altogether  the  same,  nor  do  we  use  the  two  terms  indifferently.
When  belief  is  the  more  appropriate  term,  the  stress  is  on  the
cognitive  side  of  experience,  on  the  'objective  situation':  when
it  is  more  appropriate  to  speak  of  faith,  the  stress  is  on  the
conative  side  of  experience,  on  our  '  subjective  attitude.'  In  the
one  we  are  constrained,  more  or  less  completely,  to  assent  to
what  is  there :  in  the  other  we  strive  to  achieve  what  as  yet  is
not  there.  In  the  one,  facts  convince  us,  the  seen  and  actual
hem  us  in :  in  the  other,  we — reaching  beyond  towards  the
ideally  possible — create  them.  When  the  facts  are  such  as
were,  are  or  will  be,  apart  from  or  even  in  spite  of  us  or  our
efforts,  we  say  we  know :  when  they  are  such  as  are  not  and
would  not  be  apart  from  us  and  without  our  efforts,  then  in  pro-
portion as  we  are  confident  of  bringing  them  to  pass,  we  say  we
have  faith.  The  annals  of  human  enterprise  in  every  depart-
ment of  life  teem  with  examples  of  the  power  of  faith  in  this
sense.

But  a  difficulty  will  at  this  point  certainly  suggest  itself ;  for
it  is  obvious  that  religious  faith,  for  example,  is  not  supposed  to
create  its  objects,  or  to  maintain  that  apart  from  it  God  would
not  be  at  all.  To  clear  up  this  difficulty,  if  we  can,  we  must
look  closer  into  what  we  have  hitherto  been  content  to  contrast
as  objective  situation  and  subjective  attitude — the  theoretical
and  the  practical  sides  of  experience,  as  we  otherwise  say.  Now
we  have  from  the  first  regarded  experience  not  as  simply  passively
moulded  by  circumstances  but  as  also  actively  shaped  by  our  own
endeavour  towards  self-conservation  and  betterment.  We  might
call  the  one  natural  selection — giving  the  term  a  wider  than  its
ordinary  meaning :  the  other  we  call  subjective  selection —
selection,  that  is  to  say,  within  the  possibilities  that  nature
leaves  open.  And  to  this  our  subjective  attitude  belongs.  The
most  that  the  theoretical  contemplation  of  nature  yields  is  the
possibility  of  things  divine — the  impossibility  of  such  things  it
does  not  claim  to  prove1.  It  is  this  open  possibility,  which

1  There  is  no  complete  theoretical  solution  to  the  doubts  and  uncertainty  that
hence  arise,  and  which  Pascal  accordingly  advises  us  to  stifle.


CH.  xiv,  §  6] The  Genesis  of  Belief  and  Knowledge  359

Kant  effectively  disclosed,  that  leaves  '  room  for  faith.'  Within
this  theoretical  gap  faith  creates  the  belief  in  God  and  all  the
corollaries  to  this  belief.  But  it  is  a  belief  not  beset  by  doubts  :
it  claims  to  be  certain,  but  on  moral  grounds.  It  is  not  a
certainty  that  is  intellectually  enforced  but  one  that  is  morally
achieved.  Starting  from  what  can  be,  religious  faith  asserts  that
here  it  is,  because  it  ought  to  be.  In  a  word  it  is  not  the  objec-
tive situation,  the  world  or  nature,  but  a  particular  subjective
attitude  towards  this  situation — with  all  the  moral  ends  and
aspirations  which  that  attitude  implies — which  gives  rise  to
religious  faith  in  a  transcendental  Ideal,  as  Kant  called  it.
That  alone  assures  the  religious  man  of  the  realisation  of  all
his  moral  ideals.  So  far  then  religious  faith  is  psychologically
in  line  with  all  lesser  faiths  :  as  I  have  said  elsewhere  it  is
"  foreshadowed  in  the  upward  striving  that  is  the  essence  of  life1."


The  Genesis  of  Belief  and  Knowledge.

§  6.  Religious  faith  we  have  seen  does  not  arise  from
(theoretical)  belief  but  gives  rise  to  (doctrinal)  belief,  in  simpler
words  creeds  only  attempt  to  formulate  faith,  they  do  not  make
it.  The  result  we  may  generalise  :  belief  including  knowledge
is  not  the  source  but  the  outcome  of  faith.  It  is  the  agenda  of
practical  enterprise  that  promote  progress,  knowledge  only
registers  the  acta.  Bain's  able  exposition  of  our  topic  is
substantially  in  agreement  with  this,  though  less  definitely
expressed,  "  The  leading  fact  in  Belief,  according  to  my  view
of  it,"  he  says,  "  is  our  Primitive  Credulity.  We  begin  by
believing  everything:  whatever  is,  is  true.... The  supposition
underlying  belief  is  that  we  are  working  to  a  lead,  following  out
some  end,  by  the  means  that  experience  suggests2,  and  that,  so
long  as  we  are  successful,  we  raise  no  questions  as  to  truth  and
falsehood:  we  believe  without  knowing  it... [our]  state  of  mind
is  practically  one  of  unbounded  confidence The  pristine  as-
surance is  soon  met  by  checks  ;  a  disagreeable  experience  leading
to  new  insight The  unconsciousness  of  an  open  way  is

1  The  Realm  of  Ends,  2nd  ed.  1912,  p.  448. Cf.  also  Lecture  xix  on  Faith  and
Knowledge.

2  But  does  not  only  warrant,  I  would  say.


360  Belief, Certainty  and  Faith [CH.  xiv,  §  6

exchanged  for  consciousness  ;  ive  are  now  said  properly  to  believe
in  what  has  never  been  contradicted1."  So  then  pristine  con-
fidence exploring  a  seemingly  open  way  comes  first ;  and  thus,
whether  our  enterprise  succeed  or  fail,  we  gain  some  knowledge ;
whereas  if  we  never  ventured  and  never  strove  we  should  never
learn2.

1  The  Emotions  and  the  Will,  3rd  ed.  1875,  pp.  511  f. Italics  mine.

2  Cf.  above,  ch.  vii,  §  »,  p.  187.


CHAPTER XV

PRESENTATION  OF  SELF,  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS,
SUBJECTIVE  BEING.

Taking  individual  experience  as  defining  the  scope  of  psy-
chology, we  began  our  study  with  our  own  experience,  since
other  experience  can  be  intelligible  only  in  terms  of  this.  The
first  and  most  fundamental  fact  yielded  by  the  analysis  of  this
experience  we  have  found  to  be  its  reference  to  a  subject  or
self  that  has  it.  The  knowledge  of  this  fact  we  call  self-
consciousness,  meaning  thereby  not  the  consciousness  that  we
attribute  to  every  self  but  the  consciousness  of  this  conscious-
ness ;  a  consciousness  to  which  only  some  experients  attain,  to
which  we  have  only  gradually  attained.  It  is  attained  when
besides  knowing,  feeling  and  acting,  we  also  know  that  we
know,  know  that  we  feel  and  know  that  we  act  when  in  short
we  can  say  "I  know  myself,"  or  as  the  French  more  aptly  say,^<?
me  connais.  The  self-known  we  call  the  empirical  Ego  or  the
Me  and  distinguish  from  the  self-knowing,  the  /,  which  Kant  was
wont  to  call  the  pure  Ego.  We  have  then  before  us  a  three-fold
inquiry,  the  lines  of  which  are  closely  intertwined :  first  as  to
the  content  and  gradual  elaboration  of  the  presentation  of  self
as  experience  develops  ;  then  as  to  that  reference  of  other  pre-
sentations to  self,  which  self-consciousness  makes  possible  ;  and
finally,  the  meaning  and  justification  of  the  existential  proposi-
tion "  I  am,"  that  seems  in  the  light  of  it  all  to  become  explicit.

The  Empirical  Self  and  the  Pure  Self.

§  i.  To  realise  the  extreme  complexity  of  the  empirical  Ego,
the  self  as  presented,  it  is  worth  while  to  recall  statements,  such
as  we  may  any  day  hear  continually,  though  they  may  seem


362  Ego,  Self -Consciousness,  Subjective  Being  [CH.  xv,  §  i

ridiculously  devoid  of  any  psychological  bearing.  For  example  :
Though  I  weigh  ten  stone,  I  feel  as  light  as  a  feather.  I  lost
my  legs  in  battle,  but  I  can  still  run  twenty  miles  an  hour —
thanks  to  my  motor.  I  am  working  incessantly  day  and
night  with  five  hundred  extra  hands.  I  am  ragged.  I  am  hungry.
I  am  sad.  I  am  a  soldier,  a  cripple,  a  pensioner,  &c.  ;  I  am
a  merchant,  a  magistrate,  a  railway  director,  &c.  I  am  an
orphan,  a  pauper,  a  stone-breaker,  &c.  Yes,  we  may  reply  to
these  and  innumerable  like  statements,  but  who  exactly  are
you  ?  The  answer  would  be,  I  am  L.  M.,  born  on  a  such  a  day
at  such  place,  the  son  of  A.  and  B.  M.,  about  whom  I  have  been
telling  you  all  these  things.  '  Things  about  self/  various  zones
of  more  or  less  varying  circumstances  and  self  as  their  fixed
centre  of  reference  and  interest,  and  as  such  the  same  throughout
— this  is  all  that  we  should  have  ascertained  so  far.  Yet  these  cir-
cumstances, we  may  observe,  are  peculiar  in  three  respects :  they
imply  property,  a  serial  order,  and  above  all  those  unique  and
immediate  changes  we  call  feeling  and  conation.  Property  has
here  a  very  wide  range.  L'etat  c'est  moi,  said  Louis  the  XlVth,
and — as  Lipps  has  remarked — the  meanest  of  his  subjects  might
have  said  the  same  :  "  this  is  mine  own,  my  native  land,"  we  can
all  say  to  ourselves  and  feel.  Nay,  we  may  claim  the  whole
objective  world  as  ours  ;  since  it  is  '  given  '  to  us  and  we  receive
or  apprehend  it,  use  it  or  abuse  it.  Whatever  affects  me,  what-
ever my  action  can  affect  is  in  some  sense  mine.  So  I  talk  of
my  world,  my  country,  my  rights  and  duties,  my  body,  my  soul ;
and,  when  asked  to  whom  all  these  belong,  to  answer  that  they
belong  to  myself  is  not  altogether  meaningless  in  so  far  as  this
wondrous  concept  too  implies  a  possession,  by  which  I  am  affected
and  which  I  affect.  But  this  concept  of  the  pure  Ego,  of  the  real
Self,  is  in  order  of  time  rather  where  the  series  ends  than  where
it  begins;  for  as  experience  advances  the  zonal  series  extends
both  outwards  and  inwards,  so  to  say1.  The  clue  to  this  seem-
ingly rampant  egoism  is  to  be  found  in  the  ends  or  interests  of
Self — which  knows  no  bounds — or,  it  may  be,  in  the  means
that  are  instrumental  to  these,  in  other  words  the  ultimate

1  It  is  only  in  civilised  communities  that  clothes  are  essential  to  presentability  and
have  a  philosophy,  or  at  least  a  psychology  of  their  own.  (Cf.  W.  James,  Psychology r,
i.  p.  792  ;  Lotze,  Microcosmus,  bk.  v.  ch.  ii.  §  4,  Eng.  trans,  i.  pp.  592-5).  In  a
state  of  nature  there  are  no  goods,  no  duties  and  no  rights.


CH.  xv,  §  i] The  Empirical  Self  and  the  Pure  Self 363

explanation  of  possession  lies  in  feeling  and  will.  What  I  'enjoy'
is  mine  and  what  I  want  I  make  mine,  as  soon  as  the  means  to
do  so  are  within  my  power.

The  concept  of  self  we  just  now  found  underlying  and  to
a  great  extent  shaping  the  rest  of  our  intellectual  furniture.
Precisely  on  this  account  it  is  difficult  to  analyze  it  and  ascertain
the  conditions  of  its  development1 :  to  do  so  completely  is  indeed
impossible.  In  any  attempt  to  do  so  at  all,  we  must  carefully
distinguish  between  the  presentation  of  self  and  that  reference
of  other  presentations  to  it  which  is  often  called  specially  self-
consciousness,  '  inner  sense,'  or  internal  perception.  Concerning
all  presentations  whatever,  that  of  self  no  less  than  the  rest,
we  can  reflect :  "  This  presentation  is  mine  ;  it  is  my  object  ;
I  am  the  subject  attending  to  it."  The  presentation  of  self,
then,  is  one  presentation  among  others,  the  result,  like  them,  of
the  differentiation  of  the  original  continuum.  But  it  is  obvious
that  this  presentation  must  first  be  developed  somewhat  before
other  presentations  can  be  related  to  it.  On  the  other  hand,  it
is  only  in  and  by  means  of  such  relations  that  any  true  concept
of  self  is  attained.  We  begin,  therefore,  with  self  simply  as  an
object  perceived  or  imagined,  and  end  with  the  concept  of  that
object — albeit  greatly  transfigured — as  the  subject  or  '  myself

1  A  large,  though  certainly  diminishing,  school  of  thinkers  would  entirely  demur  to
such  a  proposal.  "This  personality,"  says  one,  "like  all  other  simple  and  immediate
presentations,  is  indefinable... it  can  be  analysed  into  no  simpler  elements;  for  it  is
revealed  to  us  in  all  the  clearness  of  an  original  intuition "  (Mansel,  Metaphysics,
p.  182).  Such  an  objection  arises  from  that  confusion  between  psychology  and
epistemology  which  we  have  met  already  several  times  before  (as,  e.g.  in  the  case  of
space,  and  of  unity).  The  fact  is  that  a  concept  logically  '  simple  and  immediate,'  in
such  wise  as  to  be  underivable  from  others,  and  therefore  indefinable,  may  be — we
might  almost  say  will  be — psychologically  the  result  of  a  long  process  of  development.
The  more  abstract  a  concept  is,  i.e.  the  more  fundamental  in  the  epistemological
structure,  the  more  thinking  there  has  been  to  reach  it.  The  most  complex  integra-
tions of  experience  are  needed  to  furnish  the  'ideas'  of  its  ultimate  factors.  Such  ideas,
when  reached,  have  intellectually  all  the  clearness  of  an  original  intuition,  no  doubt;
but  they  are  not  therefore  to  be  confounded  with  what  is  psychologically  a  simple  and
immediate  presentation.  It  was  in  this  last  sense  that  idealists  like  Berkeley  and
Kant  denied  any  immediate  presentation  of  self  as  much  as  sceptics  like  Hume.  The
concept  of  self  is  psychologically  a  product  of  thought,  not  a  datum  of  sense  ;  hence,
while  Berkeley  called  it  a  'notion'  Hume  treated  it  as  a  philosophical  fiction.  Kant,
'  waked  from  his  dogmatic  slumber '  by  Hume,  mediated  between  the  two  :  for  Berke-
ley the  notion  was  ontological,  for  Kant  it  was  at  least  '  logical ' :  it  gives  rise  to  an
'idea  of  the  reason,'  which  however — though  grounded  in  'the  firmest  faith' — is  not
theoretically  demonstrable.  Cf.  Critique  of  the  Pure  Reason,  and  ed.  pp.  xxiv-xxxi
of  the  original.


364  Ego,  Self -Consciousness,  Subjective  Being  [CH.  xv,  §  i

that  knows  itself.  Self  has,  in  contradistinction  from  all  other
presentations,  first  of  all  (a)  a  unique  interest  and  (£)  a  certain
inwardness  ;  further  it  is  (*:)  an  individual  that  (d)  persists,  (e)  is
active,  and  finally  (/)  knows  itself.

After  this  general  characterization  of  the  varied  content  of
the  empirical  self  we  may  now  attempt  to  describe  it  more  fully
and  at  the  same  time  genetically.  In  view  of  frequent  misunder-
standing, we  need  carefully  to  bear  in  mind  that  we  are  now
immediately  concerned  not  with  the  subject  of  experience  but
with  the  differentiation  and  development  of  what  we  have  called
the  'presentation  '  of  it  to  which  advancing  intelligence  leads1.
More  briefly,  we  are  concerned  not  with  the  subject  (I)  that  is
conscious,  but  with  the  object  (Me)  that  it  becomes  conscious  of.

The  earliest,  and  to  the  last  a  most  important,  element  in  this
presented  self — what  we  might  perhaps  term  its  root  or  material
element — is  that  variously  styled  the  vital  sense,  coenaesthesis,
or  somatic  consciousness.  This  largely  determines  the  tone  of
the  special  sensations  and  enters,  though  little  suspected,  into
all  our  'higher  feelings.'  If,  as  sometimes  happens  in  serious
nervous  affections,  the  whole  body  or  any  part  of  it,  should  lose
common  sensibility,  the  whole  body  or  that  part  is  at  once
regarded  as  strange  and  even  as  hostile.  In  some  forms  of
so-called  'depersonalisation2,'  in  which  this  extreme  somatic  in-
sensibility and  absence  of  zest  leave  the  intellect  and  memory
unaffected,  the  individual  doubts  his  own  existence  or  denies  it
altogether.  Ribot  cites  the  case  of  such  a  patient,  who,  declaring
that  he  had  been  dead  for  two  years,  thus  expressed  his
perplexity:  "J'existe,  mais  en  dehors  de  la  vie  reelle,  materielle,
et,  malgr£  moi,  rien  ne  m'ayant  donne  la  mort.  Tout  est
m^canique  chez  moi  et  se  fait  inconsciemment."  "  Je  sais  bien
...que  ces  bras,  ces  jambes,  &c.,  doivent  etre  les  miens,"  said  a
patient  of  Solliers,  "mais  je  ne  le  sens  pas.  Par  le  raisonnement
je  m'en  rends  compte,  mais  si  je  n'^coute  que  mon  sentiment,
je  n'en  suis  pas  sur3."  It  is  not  because  they  accompany

1  K.  Oesterreich,  for  example,  in  his  valuable  work,  Die  Phdnomenologie  des  Ich
in  ihrer  Grundproblemen,  i.  1910,  notwithstanding  its  title,  seems  in  many  of  his
criticisms  to  have  overlooked  this  point.

*  A  term  first  used  by  L.  Dugas  (Rev.  phil.  xlv.  1898,  p.  502)  to  replace  the  old
and  less  appropriate  'folie  du  doute.'

*  T.  Ribot,  "Bases  affectives  de  la  Personnalite,"  Rev.  phil.ty\\\.  1884,  p.  149;
P.  Sollier,  Le  Mtcanisme  des  Emotions,  1905,  p.  149.


CH.  xv,  §  i] The  Empirical  Self  and  the  Pure  Self 365

physiological  functions  essential  to  the  efficiency  of  the  organism
as  an  organism,  but  simply  because  they  are  the  most  im-
mediate and  most  constant  sources  of  feeling,  that  the  massive
but  ill-defined  organic  sensations  are  from  the  first  the  objects  of
the  directest  and  most  unreflecting  interest.  Other  sensations
obtain  at  the  outset  but  a  mediate  interest  through  subjective
selection  for  the  sake  of  those  that  are  immediately  interesting  :
but  they  never  become  so  intimately  and  inseparably  identified
with  self,  never  have  the  same  inwardness  as  'the  sense  of
embodiment1.'

This  brings  us  naturally  to  our  next  point.  As  soon  as
definite  perception  begins,  the  body  is  distinguished  as  an  ex-
tended thing  from  other  bodies,  and  such  organic  sensations  as
can  be  localised  at  all  are  localised  within  it.  At  the  same  time
the  actions  of  other  bodies  upon  it  are  accompanied  by  pleasures
and  pains,  while  their  action  upon  each  other  is  not.  The  body
also  is  the  only  thing  directly  set  in  motion  through  the  re-
actions of  these  feelings,  the  purpose  of  such  movements  being
to  bring  it  near  to  the  things  for  which  there  is  '  appetite '  and
to  remove  it  from  those  towards  which  there  is  '  aversion.'  It  is
thus  not  merely  the  type  of  occupied  space  and  the  centre  from
which  all  positions  are  reckoned,  but  it  affords  to  us  and  to
others  an  unfailing  and  ever-present  'double'  of  the  actually
feeling  and  living  self,  to  which  all  other  things  are  external,
more  or  less  distant,  and  some  of  them  at  times  absent
altogether.  In  the  body  then  we  find  first  of  all  a  certain
measure  of  the  individuality,  permanence  and  inwardness,  that
belong  to  the  self*.  We  may  call  this  (i)  the  sensitive  and
appetitive  self.

But  with  the  development  of  ideation  there  arises  within  this
bodily  self  what  we  may  call  an  inner  zone  of  self,  having  still
more  unity  and  permanence.  We  have  at  this  stage  not  only
an  intuition  of  the  bodily  self  doing  or  suffering  here  and  now,
but  also  memories  of  what  it  has  been  and  done  under  varied
circumstances  in  the  past  or  even  hopes  as  to  what  it  will  do
and  become  in  the  future.  External  impressions  have  by  this

1  How  complete  this  identification  is,  the  customs  and  beliefs  of  primitive  races
plainly  shew.  Cf.  O.  Fliigel,  "  Das  Ich  im  Leben  der  Volker,"  Zeitsch.  f.  Volker-
psych.  xi.  1880,  pp.  44-8.

8  Cf.  above,  ch.  vi,  §  6,  pp.  165  f.


366  Ego,  Self-Consciousness,  Subjective  Being  [CH.  xv,  §  i

time  lost  in  novelty  and  become  less  absorbing,  while  the  train
of  ideas,  largely  increased  in  number,  distinctness  and  mobility,
diverts  attention  and  often  shuts  out  the  things  of  sense  alto-
gether. In  all  such  reminiscence  or  reverie  what — since  it  has
no  time  or  place  mark — we  might  call  a  generic  image  of  self
is  the  centre;  and  every  situation  remembered  or  imagined
derives  all  its  interest  from  being  a  constituent  or  aspect  of
this  compacted  whole.  So,  apart  from  present  perceptions  and
bodily  appetites,  new  desires  may  be  quickened  and  old  emotions
stirred  again  when  all  that  is  actually  present  is  dull  and  un-
exciting. But  desires  and  emotions,  though  awakened  by  what
is  only  imaginary,  invariably  entail  actual  organic  perturbations,
and  with  these,  of  whatever  kind  they  may  be,  the  generic  image
of  self  comes  to  be  intimately  united.  Hence  arises  a  contrast
between  this  inner  self  which  the  natural  man  locates  in  his
<f>pqv,  or  midriff — the  chief  seat  of  these  emotional  agitations —
and  the  whole  visible  and  tangible  body  besides1.  We  might
perhaps  call  this  inner  self  (ii)  the  imagining  and  desiring  self.
There  are  persons  habitually  in  a  state  of  so-called  psychasthenia
or  apathy,  who  lead  listless,  inert,  mechanical  lives  because  the
normal  emotive  results  of  ideation  and  memory  are  greatly
enfeebled.  Such  cases  Dugas  proposes  to  call  cases  of  '  imper-
sonalisation '  and  to  distinguish  from  others  in  which  the  per-
sonal synthesis  is  lacking  altogether.  These  latter  we  may  regard
as  cases  of  depersonalisation  in  a  higher  form  :  in  this  the  inner
self  is  regarded  as  no  longer  self  at  all  but  seems  as  strange  as
the  body  did  in  the  lower  form  described  above.  "  Je  ne  suis  pas
moi-meme,"  said  a  patient  of  this  sort.  "  Qui  suis-je  ?  Je  suis
drole,  ce  n'est  pas  mot  qui  suis  dans  mon  corps,  il  y  en  a  un  autre."
Again  another :  "  II  me  semble  que  je  n'y  suis  pour  rien,  ce  n'est
pas  moi,  qui  pense,  qui  choisis  les  sujets  de  ces  pens£es,  c'est
quelque  chose  qui  pense  en  moi,  et  je  me  borne  a  sentir8."
A  counterpart  to  this  seeming  foreignness  of  the  'inner  self  is

1  Hence  the  wide-spread  belief  among  primitive  peoples  of  the  soul  as  a  sort  of
mannikin  inside  the  man. Cf.  Frazer,  The  Golden  Bough,  2nd  ed.  i.  247.

2  Here  the  inner  self  begins  to  appear  not  simply  as  a  stranger  but  as  an  enemy.
Distressing  and  frightful  '  fixed  ideas '  seem  the  work  of  some  wicked  will,  and  the
patient,  as  in  olden  times,  thinks  of  diabolical  possession. Yet,  it  is  worth  noting,
all  this  is  but  an  exaggeration  of  the  common  experience  that  leads  us  all  to  say  not
'I  think' but  'methinks,'  when,  that  is,  our  thoughts  seem  to  unfold  themselves
while  we  merely  passively  observe  them.


CH.  xv,  §  i] The  Empirical  Self  and  the  Pure  Self 367

the  peculiar  state  aptly  described  as  ecstasy  (e/co-rao-t?).  Here  it
is  the  outer  self,  not  the  inner,  that  seems  absent  altogether.  As
St  Catharine  of  Genoa  tells  of  her  experiences  in  such  states,
"  she  never  saw  anything  with  her  bodily  eyes  nor  heard  any-
thing with  her  bodily  ears"  and  that  "during  the  rapture  the
body  was  perfectly  powerless1."

This  'inner  body2'  or  vestment  of  the  self,  inaccessible  to
the  higher  senses  and  only  vaguely  localised,  does  not  admit
of  much  ideal  representation,  yet,  when  actually  present,  the
organic  sensations,  of  which  it  is  made  up,  exert  a  powerful
and  often  irresistible  influence  over  other  ideas.  They  have  each
their  appropriate  train  ;  and  so,  as  the  character  of  our  emotions
varies,  each  heightens  in  turn  those  traits  which  it  originally
wrought  into  the  complex  and  still  loosely  compacted  idea  of
self,  suppressing  to  an  equal  extent  all  the  rest.  Normally  there
is  a  certain  equilibrium  to  which  they  return,  and  which,  we  may
suppose,  determines  the  so-called  temperament,  naturel  or  dis-
position, thus  securing  some  tolerable  uniformity  and  continuity
in  the  presentation  of  self.  But  even  within  the  limits  of  sanity
great  and  sudden  changes  of  mood  are  possible,  as,  e.g.  in
hysterical  persons  or  those  of  a  '  mercurial '  temperament,
or  among  the  lower  animals  at  the  onset  of  parental  or  mi-
gratory instincts.  Beyond  those  limits — as  the  concomitant
apparently  of  serious  visceral  derangements  or  the  altered
nutrition  of  parts  of  the  nervous  system  itself — '  complete  aliena-
tion '  may  ensue.  A  new  self  seems  to  arise,  not  only  distinct
from  the  old  and  devoid  of  all  save  the  most  elementary  know-
ledge and  skill  that  the  old  possessed,  but  even  opposed  to  it  in
tastes  and  disposition — obscenity,  it  may  be,  taking  the  place  of
modesty  and  cupidity  or  cowardice  succeeding  to  generosity
or  courage.  And  as  one  mood  may  succeed  another  in  sane
persons  of  unstable  character,  so — when  the  limits  of  sanity  are
passed — one  or  more  of  sundry  so-called  '  multiple  personalities  '
may  succeed  another  in  turn,  each  severally  strange  to,  and
perhaps  quite  unknown  by,  the  rest.  Whereas  the  trains  of
ideas  attendant  on  different  moods  are  partially  exclusive,  but
not  sufficiently  so  to  sunder  the  sense  of  personal  identity

1  Cf.  F.  von  Hiigel,  The  Mystical  Element  in  Religion,  1908,  ii.  pp.  50  and  44.
-  The  reader  interested  in  modern  speculations  as  to  this  is  referred  to  I.  H.  Fichte's
Psychologie,  1864,  i.  pp.  35-68.


368  Ego,  Self -Consciousness,  Subjective  Being  [CH.  xv,  §  i

completely,  in  cases  of  multiple  personality  this  limit  of  complete
fission  is  reached.  Each  of  these  personalities  is  comparable
also  to  one  'intellective  system'  or  'universe  of  discourse1'
sundered  from  the  rest :  within  this  the  subject  is  for  the  time
confined.  Yet  all  alike  have  been  elaborated  by  that  same  sub-
ject and  rest  upon  the  same  basis  of  elementary  presentations,
memories  and  ideas.  There  is  no  evidence  whatever  to  contra-
vene this  position2.

The  most  convincing  illustrations  of  the  psychological  growth
and  structure  of  the  presentation  of  self  on  the  lower  level  of
sensation  and  ideation  are  furnished  by  these  melancholy
spectacles  of  minds  diseased.

They  are  also  continually  exemplified  on  the  higher  level  of
intellection  to  which  we  must  pass  next.  There  is,  in  fact,  as
we  have  frequently  had  to  notice,  no  sharp  line  between  percep-
tion and  ideation,  between  ideation  and  intellection.  So  bodily
or  organic  disturbances  affect  the  ideational  processes,  and
ideational  disturbances  in  turn  affect  the  intellectual  processes.
Regarded  from  that  higher  level  therefore  the  abnormalities
we  have  just  considered  are  often  described  as  '  dissociations  of
personality3.'  But,  inasmuch  as  their  immediate  causes  lie  in
ideational  derangements  due  to  what  we  may  call  affective  and
emotional  disorders,  it  seemed  fitting  to  notice  them  before
advancing  further  in  the  investigation  of  the  genesis  of  the
empirical  self.

Passing  then  to  the  level  of  intellection,  we  come  at  length
upon  the  concept  which  every  intelligent  being  more  or  less
distinctly  forms  of  himself  as  a  person,  M.  or  N.,  having  such
and  such  a  character,  tastes  and  convictions,  such  and  such  a
history,  and  such  and  such  an  aim  in  life.  The  main  instrument
in  the  formation  of  this  concept,  as  of  others,  is  language,  and
especially  the  social  intercourse  that  language  promotes.  Up
to  this  point  the  presentation  of  self  has  shaped  that  of  not-self,
— that  is  to  say,  external  things  have  been  interpreted  more


1  Cf.  above,  ch.  xii,  §  5.

2  Cf.  Oesterreich,  op.  cit.  pp.  500  ff.

3  The  most  interesting — certainly  the  most  accessible  account  of  such  a  case  is  that
of  Sally  Beauchamp  given  by  Dr  Morton  Prince  in  his  book  entitled  The  Dissociation
of  Personality  (1903). Cf.  also  Ribot,  Les  Maladies  de  la  Personnalite,  3rd  ed.  1889  :
also  Boris  Sidis  and  S.  P.  Goodhart,  Multiple  Personality,  1905.


CH.  xv,  §  i] The  Empirical  Self  and  the  Pure  Self 369

or  less  ejectively.  Now  however  the  order  is  in  a  sense  re-
versed :  the  child  while  observing,  understanding  and  imitating
advances  to  a  fuller  knowledge  of  the  self  within  by  means  of
what  is  first  discernible  in  other  persons  without1.  The  rise
of  conscience  as  a  social  product  has  been  admirably  portrayed
by  Adam  Smith.  Having  observed  the  characters  and  conduct
of  other  people,  we  begin  presently  to  examine  our  own.  "  We
suppose  ourselves  the  spectators  of  our  own  behaviour,  and  en-
deavour to  imagine  what  effect  it  would,  in  this  light,  produce
upon  us.  This  is  the  only  looking-glass  by  which  we  can,  in
some  measure,  with  the  eyes  of  other  people,  scrutinize  the  pro-
priety of  our  own  conduct2."  Conscience  is  but  a  higher  phase
of  self-consciousness,  to  which  indeed  it  was  once  generally
equivalent,  as  it  is  still  in  French,  for  example.  So  far  avant
I'komme  est  la  socitti ;  it  is  through  the  '  us '  that  we  learn  of  the
'  me.'  Collective  action  for  common  ends  is  of  the  essence  of
society,  and  in  taking  counsel  together  for  the  good  of  his  family
or  his  tribe  each  one  learns  also  to  take  counsel  with  himself  for
his  own  good  on  the  whole ;  with  the  idea  of  the  common  weal
arises  the  idea  of  personal  happiness  as  distinct  from  momentary
gratification.  The  '  extra-regarding3 '  impulses  are  now  con-
fronted by  a  reasonable  self-love,  and  in  the  deliberations  that
thus  ensue  activity  attains  to  its  highest  forms — the  forms  of
thought  and  the  forms  of  volition.

In  the  former  we  come  upon  a  distinctly  active  manipulation
of  ideas  as  compared  with  the  more  passive  spectacle  of  simple
ideation  or  of  memory.  Thereby  emerges  a  contrast  between  the
thinker  and  these  objects  of  his  thought — including  among  them
the  mere  generic  image  of  self,  from  which  is  now  formed
this  concept  of  self  as  a  person.  In  the  latter,  a  similar,  even
sharper,  contrast  accompanies  the  exercise  of  what  is  somewhat

1  Persona  means  literally  a  mask,  and  a  man  does  not  wear  a  mask  or  play  a  part
in  relation  to  himself,  but  his  relations  to  other  people  and  theirs  to  him  are  very
naturally  conceived  in  this  wise :  all  the  world  is  then  a  stage. His  demeanour  is  of
one  character  for  friends,  of  another  for  strangers. He  romps  in  the  nursery  though
he  rules  in  the  house. He  deports  himself  like  a  hero  on  the  battlefield  and  behaves
like  a  craven  at  the  dentist's. He  is  critical  and  exacting  in  the  presence  of  his
colleagues  in  affairs,  credulous  and  affable  among  his  companions  on  a  holiday. In  a
word,  the  parts  he  plays  vary  as  his  social  environment  changes.

2  The  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,  pt.  III.  ch.  i.  Bonn's  ed.  pp.  163  f.

3  A  term  of  Bentham's  is  here  used  for  Butler's  '  particular  affections  towards  par-
ticular external  things.' Cf.  his  Sermon  xi,  "  Upon  the  Love  of  our  Neighbour,"  para.  7.

W.  P.  24


370 Eg°>  Self -consciousness,  Subjective  Being  [CH.  xv,  §  i

misleadingly  termed  'self-control,'  i.e.  control  by  this  personal  self
of  appetites  and  desires  or  'the  various  natural  affections' — to  use
Butler's  phrase — which  often  hinder  it  as  external  objects  hin-
dered them.  In  a  word,  relatively  to  this  thinking  and  willing
self  (Hi),  even  the  inner  self  of  ideation  and  desire  becomes  an
outer  one,  no  longer  strictly  self  but  merely  the  exclusive  pro-
perty of  self,  we  might  even  say,  the  creation  of  self.

This  reasoning,  self-regulating  self  as  such  is  not  however
commonly  regarded  as  in  anyway  localised.  The  effort  of  thinking
and  concentrating  attention  upon  ideas  is  now  no  doubt  referred
to  the  brain  ;  but  this  reference  is  only  comparable  with  the
localisation  of  other  efforts  in  the  sense  organs  or  the  limbs.
Again  whenever  we  think  or  will,  we  also  feel,  are  never  entirely
indifferent,  and  feeling  and  volition  entail  always  some  emotional
resonance  or  bodily  affection  ;  but  this  too  we  come  to  regard
as  the  effect  of  our  feeling,  its  outward  expression.  If  we  speak
of  this  latest  phase  of  self  as  par  excellence  '  the  inmost  self,'
such  language  is  then  mainly  figurative.  The  whole  ideational
mechanism  and  the  '  desires '  to  which  it  prompts  are  regarded
not  merely  as  objects  present  to,  and  so  distinct  from,  the  self,
but  as  themselves  inextended  objects.  Into  thinking  and  willing
as  such — though  objects  are  still  implied — spatial  relations  then
do  not  enter  at  all.

So  we  come  at  length  within  sight  of  what,  for  us  at  any
rate,  is  ultimate — the  duality  of  subject  and  object  in  that
relation  of  presentation,  which  is  the  presupposition  of  all
other  experienced  relations,  temporal,  spatial  or  what  not.
This  duality,  though  last  in  the  order  of  knowledge,  we  have
had  to  regard  as  the  indispensable  condition  of  all  actual  ex-
perience however  simple,  as  first  therefore  in  the  order  of
existence1.  It  is  this  subject  of  experience  that  we  call  the
pure  Ego  or  Self  (iv).  How  is  this  related  to  the  thinking
and  willing  self  just  discussed?  In  that  we  have  already  noted
two  zones  or  aspects,  one  connecting  the  man  more  with  society,
the  other  more  with  self.  As  a  member  of  society  each  one
plays  many  parts — has  many  social  selves  or  roles,  and  so  he
comes  first  to  conceive  himself  as  the  actor  that  sustains  or
impersonates  them  all.  The  utterances  of  persons  make  up
the  social  drama  and  only  from  this  has  he  learnt  to  know
1  Cf.  ch.  ii,  §  2,  pp.  35  ff.


CH.  xv,  §  2]  'Internal  Perception  or  Self -Consciousness  37 1

himself  as  personal  at  all1.  But  before  he  can  act,  the  man
has  often  to  think  and  will,  to  plan,  compose  and  rehearse  any
new  part  he  is  striving  to  play.  In  thus  deliberating,  devising
and  deciding,  he  comes  next  to  realise  his  inmost  self  as  at  that
moment  shaping  a  definite  advance  in  his  own  career.  In  the
course  of  his  life  many  such  moments  recur.  In  none  of  them
is  he  a  mere  functionary  :  there  is  here  no  stage  and  he  does
not  act.  Rather  he  is  autonomous  and  creates  or  enacts.  The
relation  between  his  social  selves  and  'this  spiritual  self,'  as  some
call  it,  viz.,  that  it  is  central  to  them  all,  such  also  is  the  relation
between  the  concrete  moments  of  that  self  and  the  subject  or
pure  Ego :  this  is  central  to  all  of  them.  It  is  the  thinker  of
all  our  inmost  thoughts,  the  doer  of  all  our  very  deeds — no
longer  any  presentation  of  self,  but  the  self  that  has  these  and
all  other  presentations.  But  is  it  known  ?  This  question  leads
us  to  our  second  inquiry :  the  discussion  of  this  should  make  the
issue  clearer.


'Internal  Perception'  or  Self -Consciousness.

§  2.  If  we  agree  to  symbolize  'external  perception'  by  S/>O;
if  further  we  agree  that  the  self  or  subject  which  we  are  conscious
of,  the  empirical  Ego  or  Me,  is  but  a  complex  presentation,  as
just  now  described ;  if  finally  we  continue  to  maintain  that  neither
feeling,  the  one  capacity,  nor  attention,  the  one  faculty,  of  the
pure  Ego  or  /  is  directly  presented,  then  we  may  symbolize

[M
so-called '  internal perception or reflexion  'as \p\  p' . The

lex

relation  of  /'  to  /  and  the  relation  of  M  to  I  are  what  we  have
now  to  consider.  A  great  variety  of  concrete  experiences  is
covered  by  the  term  M/'O'.  This  we  have  just  seen  to  hold  of
the  complex  M,  and  it  is  obviously  true  of  O',  as  representing
various  differentiations  of  O.  As  instances  of  the  diversity  in
the  case  of  /',  the  following  may  suffice :  I  am  conscious  of
seeing  the  lightning,  of  hearing  the  thunder,  of  remembering  the
morning's  news,  of  imagining  a  tropical  forest,  of  enjoying  music,
of  enduring  toothache,  and  so  forth.  Finally,  if  we  for  the

1  See  note  i,  p.  369,  above.

24—2


372 Ego,  Self -consciousness,  Subjective  Being  [CH.  xv,  §  2

moment  include  feeling  among  '  operations,'  we  might  say  with
Locke  that  /'  here  answers  to  the  "  perception  of  the  opera-
tions of  our  own  mind  within  us,  as  it  is  employed  about  the
ideas  it  has  got ;  which  operations,  when  the  soul  comes  to  reflect
on  and  consider,  do  furnish  the  understanding  with  another  set
of  ideas  which  could  not  be  had  from  things  without1."

It  has  been,  however,  often  maintained  that  the  difference
between  consciousness  and  reflexion  or  so-called  'internal  percep-
tion' is  not  a  real  difference  :  that,  on  the  contrary,  to  know  and  to
know  that  you  know  are  "the  same  thing  considered  in  different
aspects2."  But  different  aspects  of  the  same  thing  are  not  the
same  thing,  for  psychology  at  least.  Not  only  is  it  not  the  same
thing  to  feel  and  to  know  that  you  feel ;  but  it  might  even  be
held  to  be  a  different  thing  still  to  know  that  you  feel  and  to
know  that  you  know  that  you  feel — such  being  the  difference
perhaps  between  ordinary  reflexion  and  psychological  introspec-
tion3. The  difficulty  of  apprehending  these  facts  and  keeping
them  distinct  seems  obviously  due  to  the  necessary  presence  of
the  earlier  along  with  the  later ;  that  is  to  say,  we  can  never
know  that  we  are  feeling  without  actually  feeling.  Still  the
converse  need  not  be  true.  How  distinct  the  two  states  are  is
shewn  in  one  way  by  their  notorious  incompatibility,  the  direct
consequence  of  the  difference  in  attitude  (or  Einstellung)  that
they  require.  Whatever  we  have  to  do  that  is  not  altogether
mechanical  is  ill  done  unless  we  lose  sight  of  ourselves  while


1  Essay,  II.  i.  §  4.

2  Hamilton,  Lectures  on  Metaphysics,  vol.  i.  p.  195,  but  cf.  the  whole  passage  from
p.  192  on. But  James  Mill,  Analysis,  i.  p.  224,  hardly  allowed  that  there  was  even  a
difference  of  aspect;  he  is  corrected,  however,  by  both  his  editors  (pp.  227  and  230).

8  It  has  been  thought  a  fatal  objection  to  this  view  that  it  implies  the  possibility  of
an  indefinite  regress;  but  why  should  it  not?  If  it  were  impossible  to  feel  without
also  knowing  that  you  feel  or  to  know  without  also  knowing  that  you  know,  and  if
further  this  so-called  regress  really  meant  not  progress  in  experience  but  antecedent
conditions  of  its  existence,  the  objection  would  be  serious.  We  may  reach  the  limit  of
our  experience  in  reflexion,  or  at  most  in  deliberate  introspection,  just  as  in  space  of
three  dimensions  we  reach  the  limit  of  our  experience  in  another  respect.  But  there
is  no  absurdity  in  supposing  a  consciousness  more  evolved  and  explicit  than  our
self-consciousness,  and  advancing  on  it  as  it  advances  on  that  of  the  unreflecting
brutes.  In  fact,  might  it  not  be  said  that  '  conscience '  or  reflective  social  conscious-
ness is  an  advance  upon  mere  self-consciousness  (cf.  ch.  xvi,  §  2);  and  might  there
not  be,  higher  still,  a  God-consciousness,  as  the  veritable  limit  of  all  ?  By  way  of
illustration,  cf.  E.  Recejac,  Essai  sur  les  fondements  de  la  Connaissance  Mystique,
1897,  pp.  40  ff.


CH.  xv,  §  2]  'Internal  Perception  or  Self-Consciousness  373

doing  it.  This  mutual  exclusiveness  receives  a  further  explana-
tion from  the  fact  so  often  used  to  discredit  psychology,  viz.  that
the  so-called  introspection,  and  indeed  all  reflexion,  is  really  more
or  less  retrospective.  It  is  not  while  we  are  angry  or  lost  in
reverie  that  we  take  note  of  such  states,  but  afterwards,  or  by
momentary  side  glances  intercepting  the  main  interest,  if  this  be
not  too  absorbing.  In  retrospect,  time-distance  and  consequent
diminished  intensity  make  it  possible  to  attend  at  once  to  more,
when  represented,  than  could  be  compassed  at  once,  when  first
presented.  There  is  a  sort  of  'angular  magnitude'  involved.
Thus,  when  close  to,  so  to  say,  the  objective  and  the  subjective
factors  of  a  complete  psychosis  cannot  be  in  the  same  focus,
perhaps  not  even  in  the  same  field,  of  consciousness :  in  retro-
spect there  is  a  sense  in  which  they  may  be.  The  German
word  for  remembering,  Erinnerung,  bears  testimony  at  once  to
the  change  of  attitude  and  to  the  retrospective  tendency  in-
volved in  'internal  perception.'  The  attempt  to  identify  con-
sciousness and  self-consciousness,  and  so  to  make  all  experience
imply  reflexion,  being  then  abortive,  we  may  now  resume  our
inquiry.

We  have  to  ask  concerning  the  subjective  factors — symbolized
as  M/' — what  exactly  it  is  that,  at  the  self-conscious  level,  we
are  said  to  '  perceive '  ?  Perception  implies  a  sensory  basis,  and
as  we  have  found  no  warrant  for  the  assumption  of  a  special
inner  sense1,  all  that  we  can  be  said  to  perceive  answering  to
subjective  factors,  must,  it  would  seem,  be  something  pertaining
not  directly  to  the  subject  but  to  the  organism  and  its  environ-
ment2. This  we  have  found  to  be  true  of  M  as  the  presentation
of  the  sensitive  and  appetitive  self.  It  is  true  also  of  the  /'
relating  this  zone  of  M  with  its  objective  differentiation  O'.  The
animal  and  the  infant  at  first  are  doubtless  quite  unaware  of
their  sense-organs  in  perceiving  the  external  world ;  but  the  fact
soon  forces  itself  on  our  notice  when  in  concentrating  attention
we  become  conscious  of  the  muscular  adjustments  involved  in
looking,  listening,  or  otherwise  sensorially  discriminating  what

1  Cf.  ch.  i,  §  3,  p.  15.

2  But  so  far  there  is  little  justification  for  calling  this  perception  '  internal ' :  the  term
qualifies  not  the  perception  but  the  percept. It  also,  however,  implies  a  reference  to
the  self,  as  the  synonymous  term  '  reflexion '  shews. Such  reference  is  really  a  syn-
thetic judgment ; what  is  literally  perceived  I  attribute  to  myself  as  my  act  or  state.
Cf.  above,  ch.  xiii,  §  6,  pp.  339  f.


374 Eg°>  Self  -consciousness,  Subjective  Being  [CH.  xv,  §  2


is  before  us.  This  is  especially  the  case  when  owing  to  fatigue,
functional  defect,  or  intensity  of  stimulus  any  further  activity  is
for  the  time  painful.  Here  the  pain  felt  prompts  the  reference
of/'  to  M  or  the  bodily  self.  Recollecting,  expecting,  imagining,
and  again  thinking  and  willing,  are  operations  pertaining  to  the
inner  zones  of  self:  these  likewise  are  accompanied  by  peculiar
motor  presentations.  The  latter  may  be  distinguished  as  partly
direct,  partly  expressional.  As  we  are  aware  of  one  sort  of  strain
in  listening  and  of  another,  differently  localised,  strain  in  looking,
so  in  striving  to  recollect  or  imagine,  to  solve  a  problem  or  to
resist  the  devil,  we  are  aware  of  yet  another  sort  of  strain  again
differently  localised.  The  tension  is  perhaps  no  longer  strictly
muscular1,  and  is  not  so  definitely  localised  as  are  the  adjustments
of  sense-organs,  though  it  is  still  vaguely  located  within  the  head  ;
rather,  however,  as  a  sense  of  direction  than  as  one  of  definite
position2.  As  instances  of  the  emotional  accompaniments  of
these  direct  manifestations  we  have  the  knitting  of  the  eye-
brows, which,  as  Charles  Bell  said,  "unaccountably,  but  irre-
sistibly, conveys  the  idea  of  mind  "  and  again,  the  firm  closure
of  the  mouth,  which,  as  Darwin  said,  "  tends  to  give  an  expres-
sion of  determination  or  decision  to  the  countenance3."  To  be
sure  we  do  not  think  by  corrugating  the  eyebrows  or  resolve  by
clenching  the  teeth  ;  but  the  one  helps  us  when  we  are  trying
to  see  under  certain  difficulties,  and  the  other  when  making
some  great  physical  exertion.  Still  these  '  serviceable  associated


1  Cf.  above,  ch.  iii,  §  i,  p.  67. Fechner,  however,  thought  otherwise. Possibly
the  sensations  in  the  scalp  to  which  he  refers,  were  secondary  effects. Cf.  W.  James,
Psychology,  i.  p.  436  «.

2  The  following  description  by  Fechner  is  still  perhaps  the  best :  "If  I  try  to  get
a  remembered  or  fancied  scene  before  my  mind  as  distinctly  as  possible,  I  have  a
feeling  of  strain  entirely  analogous  to  that  experienced  in  striving  accurately  to  perceive
something  that  is  seen  or  heard. But  this  entirely  analogous  feeling  is  localised
quite  differently. In  apprehending  as  precisely  as  possible  objects  (or  after-images)
actually  presented  the  strain  is  distinctly  forwards,  and  in  turning  the  attention  to
another  sensory  region  the  direction  only  varies  from  one  sense-organ  to  another,
leaving  the  rest  of  the  head  unaffected. In  the  operations  of  memory  or  imagination,
on  the  contrary,  the  strain  seems  to  be  entirely  withdrawn  from  the  external  organs  of
sense  and  to  occupy  that  part  of  the  head  filled  by  the  brain. If,  for  example,  I  wish
very  vividly  to  recall  a  place  or  a  person,  the  image  will  be  more  vivid,  not  the  more
I  strain  attention  forwards  but  the  more  I, so  to  speak, retract it backwards."
Elemente  der  Psychophysik,  1860,  ii.  pp.  475  f.,  2nd  ed.  (1907),  p.  469. Cf.  also
N.  Ach,  Ueber  den  Willensakt  und  das  Temperament,  1910,  pp.  237  ff.

3  Cf.  The  Expression  of  the  Emotions,  2nd  ed.  1890,  pp.  232ff.,  pp.  246  ff.


CH.  xv,  §  2]  'Internal  Perception  or  Self -Consciousness  375

habits,'  as  Darwin  called  them1 — associated  serviceable  habits,  it
would  seem  more  correct  to  say — point  clearly  to  the  continuity
between  the  higher  operations  and  the  lower,  and  serve  to  bring
out  the  fundamental  sameness  of  the  activity  concerned  through-
out, that  activity  which  we  have  called  attention2.  This,  how-
ever, we  have  maintained,  is  not  presented.  How  then  do  we
know  it :  in  talking  of  it  at  all,  are  we  not  merely  concreting
an  abstraction  ?  And  if  the  activity  is  not  known,  what  about
knowing  the  agent  ?  This  is  the  crux  of  our  whole  problem.
But  first  a  word  about  feeling.

When  feeling  is  intense,  its  attendant  marks,  like  the  planets
nearest  the  sun,  are  especially  difficult  to  observe ;  so  the  psy-
chology of  feeling,  as  we  have  seen,  began  late  and  still  remains
obscure3.  Still  the  gradual  subsidence  of  feeling  compared  with
the  rapid  change  of  movements  of  attention  makes  it  possible
to  note  the  varied  '  expressions '  of  affective  states  when  the
situation  that  produced  them  is  past.  Moreover  those  mani-
festations are  commonly  of  special  interest  to  others,  and  from
childhood  onwards  are  closely  observed  and  soon  understood :
we  know,  in  fact,  that  they  are  largely  instrumental  in  developing
language  as  a  social  medium  and  so  in  raising  the  individual  to
the  level  of  full  self-consciousness4.  All  that  is  directly  ob-
servable then,  either  in  ourselves  or  in  others,  are  the  respective
characteristics  of  pleasurable  or  painful  situations  as  they  affect
the  empirical  self  or  M.  Such  situations  lead  us  to  adopt  a  cor-
responding emotional  and  conative  attitude5,  and  also  to  assign
a  new  property  to  the  objects  concerned,  a  property  that  does
not  belong  to  them  qua  objects — that,  namely,  of  being  pleasing
or  displeasing,  agreeable  or  disagreeable  and  so  'good  or  bad.'
The  so-called  '  internal  perception '  of  feeling,  then,  is  not  a  per-
ception of  the  feeling  itself,  which  is  supposed  to  be  its  direct
object.  It  is  rather,  as  in  the  case  of  attention  and  its  opera-
tions, a  reference  of  its  objective  accompaniments  to  the  appro-
priate zone  of  the  empirical  self.  But  in  these  accompaniments

1  Cf.  ch.  xi,  §  2,  p.  276.

3  The  main  difference  is  that  the  tension  of  the  higher  operations  of  thought  and
Tolition  is  referred,  along  with  their  emotional  accompaniments,  not  to  the  bodily  but
to  the  inner  self.

3  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  2,  p.  40;  §  3,  pp.  41  f. ;  §  6,  p.  56.

4  Cf.  above,  ch.  xii,  §  i.

5  Already  described  at  length  in  chh.  x  and  xi  above.


376 Ego,  Self-conscio2isness,  Subjective  Being  [CH.  xv,  §  2

of  feeling  as  a  purely  passive  state  there  is  but  little  analogous
to  those  strains  or  tensions,  more  or  less  localised,  observable  in
the  case  of  subjective  activity:  we  find  only  secondary  or  expres-
sional  effects.  Here  therefore  the  crucial  question  recurs  with
renewed  insistence:  Is  'pure  feeling'  anything  more  than  an
abstraction :  do  we  really  know  either  it  or  the  subjective  activity
with  which  it  is  conjoined  ?  If  not,  how  can  we  know  the  pure
Self  that  is  supposed  to  feel  and  to  act  ?


Subjective  Being.

§  3.  In  our  attempts  to  consider  this  question  it  will  be
advisable  first  to  bring  together  the  results  we  have  attained  in  a
form  that  will  best  exhibit  the  difficulty  to  be  met.  Recalling
then  the  characteristics  of  self  already  enumerated  it  will  help
us  forward  to  note  the  increasing  definiteness  of  these  traits  as
experience  advances  from  the  lower  level  of  perception  to  those
highest  moments  of  self-consciousness  in  which  conscience  ap-
proves or  condemns  our  aims  and  acts.  To  begin  with  what  we
have  called  '  inwardness.'  At  the  perceptual  level  it  answers  to
the  contrast  of  the  animated  organism  and  its  environment.  At
the  ideational  level,  where  coming  events  seem  to  cast  shadows
before  them  because  past  events  have  left  traces  behind,  a  new
environment — a  pictorial  world  of  things  past  and  things  possible
— allures  the  self  to  withdraw  into  it  from  the  actual  and  there
to  'ruminate,'  day-dream  and  desire.  Finally  at  the  social  level,
reason,  controlling  the  wild  vagaries  of  fancy  and  the  blind  im-
petuosity of  desire,  focuses  the  generic  image  of  self  into  the
conceptual  identity  of  a  self  conscious  of*  itself  as  a  person,  and
capable  of  saying  '  I  am.'  For  part  passu  with  the  advance  in
inwardness  there  has  been  also  an  advance  in  unity,  first  from
the  extended  body  to  the  inner  man,  and  then  from  this  to  the
autonomous  I  that  thinks  and  wills — '  from  exterior  to  interior,
from  interior  to  superior.'  At  the  same  time  activity,  at  first
impelled  by  appetite,  then  solicited  by  desire,  manifests  itself
at  length  as  free  self-determination.

These  salient  features  of  developing  self-consciousness  may,
it  is  hoped,  suffice  to  shew  what  appropriateness  there  is  in  the
figure  by  which  the  '  form  of  consciousness '  has  long  been


€H.  xv,  §3]  Subjective  Being  377

symbolized,  that  namely  of  lines  converging  inwards  towards,
or  diverging  outwards  from,  a  centre  having  a  circumferential
area,  which  is  the  source  of  the  one  set  of  lines  and  the  goal  of
the  other.  That  area  we  call  the  Ob-ject  or  der  Gegen-stand,  the
pre-sented  or  das  Vor-gefundene.  The  centre,  to  which  all  its  lines
belong,  is  the  Subject  or  Ego.  What,  we  have  now  to  ask,  is  the
meaning  and  the  justification  of  the  existential  proposition  'I  am'
which  this  ideal  construction  is  supposed  to  evoke  ?  We  began
with  self  represented  by  concentric  objective  zones,  sensory,  idea-
tional,  personal,  spiritual,  and  end  with  a  focus  imaginarius,  as
Kant  called  it.  This  'idea  of  the  reason'  suggested  by  the  structure
of  experience,  is  not  only  devoid  of  all  '  content '  in  fact,  but  is
necessarily  so  devoid  from  its  very  nature  as  limiting  concept —
like  its  analogue  the  point,  that  which  has  position  but  neither
parts  nor  magnitude.  This  concept  of  the  pure  Ego,  or  I,  in
other  words  is  the  limit  to  which  the  empirical  Ego  points.
What  does  this  limit  mean  ?  The  empirical  Ego,  or  Me,  is
altogether  an  objective  construction,  or  intellective  system.  It  is
also  the  supreme  one ;  for  all  other  syntheses  or  systems — all
forms  of  knowledge  whatever — are  related  to  it,  in  so  far  as  they
are  all  mine,  all  the  result  of  my  '  acts ' :  hence  Kant's  transcen-
dental unity  of  apperception.  Still  this  Mine  (O')  and  that  Me(W)
are  polar  opposites  that  advance  in  definiteness  together,  through
the  mediation  of  the  processes  we  have  symbolized  by/':  so  we
got  our  M/'O'.  But  if  all  knowledge  whatever  is  included  in
this  supreme  whole  and  if  the  differentiation  of  subject-knowledge
and  object-knowledge  is  itself  the  result  of  a  gradual  development
falling  within  it,  what  can  be  the  meaning  of  talking  of  a  '  pure
subject '  to  whom  it  is  all  presented  ?

The  psychological  answer  to  this  question  is  in  the  main  very
simple,  however  far  it  may  fail  of  being  speculatively  adequate.
Though  at  this  level  all  knowledge  may  be,  all  experience  is  not,
covered  by  the  formula  M/'O'.  That  formula  does  not  symbolize
experience  but  only  the  knowledge  possible  at  a  certain  level  of
experience.  It  is  our  gradually  elaborated  concept  of  experience
as  known.  To  represent  experience  as  real  more  is  required.
We  must  indicate  the  being  which  all  knowing  presupposes.

|M

Then  the  formula  S/  <  /',  will  represent  a  later  stage  of  that

O'


378 Ego,  Self -consciousness,  Subjective  Being  [CH.  xv,  §  3

experience  which  as  minimal  we  have  represented1  as  S/O.
We  have  found  the  latter  to  be  primary,  ultimate  and  universal,
the  former  to  be  secondary,  penultimate  and  occasional ;  in  other
words,  we  have  found  presentation  of  the  object  (O)  to  be  im-
mediate and  indispensable  to  experience :  whereas  presentation
of  the  subject  (in  M/>'O')  is  only  mediate  or  retrospective  and,
even  when  possible,  never  essential  to  experience.

But  S/O,  it  will  be  replied,  is  just  M/'O'  when  M  is  carried
to  the  limit  and  all  its  previous  content  transferred  to  O.  Just
when  it  is  credited  with  having  all — even  itself — S  is  nothing.
Self-consciousness  began  with  the  contrast  of  body  and  environ-
ment— a  contrast  which  psychology,  as  little  as  biology,  can  ever
really  transcend.  So  long  as  we  keep  within  this  empirical  domain
both  terms  of  our  duality  are  objective  or  presented2,  and  so  long
we  may  reasonably  talk  of  a  relation  of  one  to  the  other.  But
it  seems  highly  artificial  so  to  talk,  when  the  whole  content  of
consciousness  is  assigned  to  O,  and  S  has  become  a  mere  focus
imaginarius — a  psychological  fiction  like  the  physicist's  fiction
'  centre  of  force.'  We  thus  seem  committed  to  the  contradiction
of  a  relation  with  only  one  known  term.  This  objection  looks
formidable  and  perhaps  dimly  forebodes  a  difficulty  we  have  still
to  surmount :  anyhow,  as  it  stands,  it  misses  the  point.  For  it
should  be  remembered  that  we  are  trying  to  deal  with  a  singular
case,  where  therefore  general  statements  are  apt  to  break  down,
as  with  Locke's  poor  Indian  philosopher  in  a  closely  analogous
one.  The  question  here  is  not  as  to  the  relation  of  terms  in  a
proposition  but  as  to  a  communion  of  beings  in  reality — which
at  length  gives  rise  to  the  proposition.  The  reality  is  experience.
We  allow  that  it  is  a  unity  but  it  is  at  once  a  unity  that  implies
a  duality  and  a  duality  that  implies  a  unity.  O  to  be  known
must  surely  be  and  S  to  know  must  surely  also  be.  Again,  O,
as  known,  implies  a  knower ;  and  S,  as  knowing,  implies  a  known.
Both  these  factors  of  experience  then  are  real,  but  only  one  is
'  known/  in  so  far  as  known  connotes  object.  But  experience
is  wider  than  knowledge ;  hence  the  inappropriateness  of

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  6,  p.  56.

2  Nay,  it  will  be  said  perhaps,  both  are  corporeal  or  at  least  implicate  body,  for
we  have  in  fact  no  knowledge  of  disembodied  life  or  experience. No  doubt,  but  the
implication  is  very  different  in  the  two  cases. Though  S  always  has  a  body,  we  do
not  find  that  it  ever  is  body. The  inability  of  so  conceiving  it  has  always  been  the
crux  of  materialism.


CH.  xv,  §3]  Subjective  Being  379

consciousness  as  a  name  for  it,  a  term  strictly  denoting  only
knowledge,  and  that  mediate  knowledge.  The  objection  we  are
combating  is  largely  due  to  this  most  equivocal  term  and  falls  to
the  ground  when  that  equivocation  is  exposed1.

It  would  come  nearer  to  our  crucial  question  if  the  objection
just  considered  were  amended  by  asking  with  what  right  we
make  an  intellectual  abstraction  the  subject  of  an  existential
proposition.  There  is  certainly  no  such  right,  and  the  psycho-
logists who  substitute  the  abstract  'consciousness'  for  the  concrete
conscious  subject,  alone  forget  this.  The  I  of  the  '  I  am/  the  sole
text  of  the  'rational  psychology'  that  Kant  criticized  and  equally
the  I  of  the  '  I  think  '  of  Descartes'  Cogito  ergo  sum,  if  taken  as  a
res  completa,  is  an  abstraction.  But  that  pure  subject  or  Ego
which  we  reach  in  our  analysis  of  experience  at  its  rational  level
stands  for  no  abstraction  so  long  as  we  are  content  to  distinguish
it  without  attempting  to  separate  it  from  its  objective  comple-
ment, the  non-Ego2.  When  in  some  supreme  issue  a  man  affirms
himself  saying,  like  Caesar  crossing  the  Rubicon  or  Luther  en-
tering Worms,  '  I  will/  to  tell  him  then  that  this  I  of  which  he
speaks  is  itself  an  utter  abstraction,  because  our  concept  of  it  is
the  limit  of  a  long  process  of  intellection — surely  this  would  be
outrageous.

At  any  rate,  it  may  be  rejoined,  the  I  in  such  a  case  is  the
empirical  Ego  that  figures  in  history,  not  some  ideal  or  trans-
cendental Ego  that  is  never  to  be  found  and  will  never  be
missed3.  Plausible  as  such  a  defence  might  appear  to  the  man
in  the  street,  it  is  nevertheless  partly  demonstrably  false,  partly
false  in  fact.  To  identify  /  and  Me  is  logically  impossible,  for,  ex
vi  terminorum,  it  is  to  identify  subject  and  object4.  Moreover  it
is  the  I — not  the  Me — that,  as  feeling  and  acting,  is  essential  to
any  experience,  whilst  the  Me  is  essential  only  to  some.  Again
the  attempt  to  discredit  the  concept  of  the  pure  Ego  or  experient

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  i,  §  5,  pp.  21  f.

a  Cf.  Herbart,  Psychologic  als  Wissenschaft  u.s.-w.  §  19.

3  Cf.  W.  James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  1890,  i.  pp.  360  ff.

4  An  appeal  to  the  '  law  of  identity '  might  perplex  some  (cf.  F.  H.  Bradley's
Appearance  and  Reality,  ch.  ix.  On  Self,  and  elsewhere)  but  would  not  really  help.
We  may  say  /=/and  MesAfe. But  as  soon  as  we  say  I=-Me,  as  in  the  French  je
me  connais,  already  cited,  we  have  two  terms  asymmetrically  related  and  therefore
on  the  principle  of  the  identity  of  indiscemibles,  the  /  cannot  be  the  Me  nor  the  Me
the  /. At  the  same  time  the  objective  Me  is  impossible  without  the  subjective  /.


380 Ego,  Self -consciousness,  Subjective  Being  [CH.  xv,  §  3

subject  by  confusing  or  ignoring  the  wide  difference  of  meaning
between  transcendental  and  transcendent  is  an  attempt  that  can
only  impress  the  ill-informed.  We  do  not  maintain  that  the
subject  transcends  experience,  but  on  the  contrary  that  it  is
always  immanent  in  experience.  This  necessary  immanence —
the  fact  that  experience  without  an  experient  is  unintelligible —
is  just  what  transcendental  here  implies.  The  concept  of  a
synthesizing  subject,  that  is  to  say,  is  epistemologically  a  priori.
To  call  Kant's  transcendental  unity  only  "  substantialism  grown
shame-faced,  and  the  Ego  only  '  a  cheap  and  nasty '  edition  of
the  soul "  is  a  blunder  simply1.

The  objector  may,  however,  persist :  Is  it  then  pretended  that
there  is  no  difficulty  in  maintaining  that  this  pure  subject  is  im-
manent in  experience  while  yet  maintaining  that  it  is  never  a
direct  object  of  experience?  And  we  can  only  repeat:  There
would  certainly  be  a  difficulty  if  we  maintained  that  the  subject
of  experience  could  ever  be  the  direct  object  of  its  own  experi-
ence2. At  the  same  time  it  is  noteworthy  that  Kant,  who  made
this  logical  impossibility  clear,  did  admit  a  difficulty.  "The
whole  difficulty,"  he  said,  "lies  in  this,  how  a  subject  can  in-
ternally intuite  itself;  only  this  is  a  difficulty  common  to  all
theories  alike3."  But  then  Kant  is  speaking  as  an  advocate  of
an  inner  sense  and  of  theories  which  accept  this  position.  The
question  is  whether  there  is  a  like  difficulty  for  those  who,
rejecting  that  doctrine,  regard  self-consciousness  as  an  intellec-
tual process  possible  only  at  the  social  and  rational  level  of
experience.

It  may  be  held  that  Kant's  difficulty  does  remain,  changed
in  form  but  essentially  the  same.  How  the  I  can  appropriate
the  Me  as  a  presentation  of  itself  is  now  the  difficulty,  even  if  the
account  here  given  of  the  content  and  the  genesis  of  this  pre-
sentation is  sound.  We  are  confronted,  it  might  be  said,  with  a

1  Cf.  W.  James,  op.  cit.  i.  p.  365.

2  Cf.  Kant,  Kritik,  ist  ed.  p.  346,  M.  M.'s  trans,  p.  301  (better  rendered  by
Watson,  Selections,  p.  148),  and  especially  his  Fortschritte  der  Metaphysik,  written
ten  years  later,  Hartenstein's  ed.  of  his  works,  viii.  pp.  530  f.,  to  which  Dr  G.  Dawes
Hicks  has  referred  me.

8  Op.  cit.  2nd  ed.  p.  68.  Later  on  Kant  professed  himself  at  a  loss  to  know
why  people  saw  so  much  difficulty  (see  footnote  at  the  end  of  §  24).  Nevertheless
the  trouble  it  gave  him  is  well  known  and  his  failure  to  remove  it  widely  admitted.
Cf.  B.  Erdmann,  KanCs  Kriticismus,  1878,  pp.


CH.  xv,  §  3]  Subjective  Being  381

problem  like  that  raised  by  Locke's  doctrine  of  external  percep-
tion. How  can  you  talk  of  ideas  as  copies  if  you  cannot  compare
them  with  the  originals  ?  asked  Berkeley  and  Reid.  Similarly
here  we  have  to  ask  :  What  justification  is  there  for  calling  the
Me  a  '  reflexion '  of  the  I  if  this,  the  subject  of  experience,  is,  as
knower,  precluded  from  being  immediately  known  ?  But  no,  the
cases  are  not  similar.  There  the  impression  was  a  'sense-datum'
passively  and  privately  received,  here  reflexion  yields  an  'in-
tellective system,'  a  '  notion '  as  Berkeley  termed  it,  actively  and
socially  achieved.  There  the  '  original '  was  another  being  :  here
it  is  my  own  being.  The  existence  of  that  might  be  denied,  but
the  existence  of  this  is  indubitable ;  for  if  the  existential  pro-
position I  am  were  false  it  could  not  be  asserted.  The  I  is
known  reflectively  in  the  Me  because  the  Me  has  been  syntheti-
cally constructed  by  it,  much  as  an  artist  paints  his  own  portrait
by  means  of  a  mirror.  The  mirror  for  self-consciousness  is  the
social  medium,  and  as  this  is  perfected  the  portraiture  improves.
But  the  entire  process  from  first  to  last — the  cross  lights  of  social
intercourse,  where  each,  as

...eye  to  eye  opposed
Salutes  each  other  with  each  other's  form,

and  the  power  'to  behold  itself  by  going  from  itself,'  the  outward
advance  that  becomes  an  inward  revealing — all  has  depended
not  alone  on  what  was  '  given '  to  the  self  but  also  on  what  it
has  itself  done.

We  conclude  then  that  we  know  intellectually  what  we  are  as
experients  :  into  the  empty  'form  of  consciousness'  our  being  fits.
Such  empirical  knowledge  falls  far  short  of  the  metaphysical
doctrines  which  the  old  so-called  rational  psychology  claimed  to
establish.  On  the  other  hand  epistemologically  it  is  worth  far
more.  Psychology  without  a  soul — as  the  'rational  psycho-
logists '  described  soul — is  quite  possible  but  not  psychology
without  a  self,  a  being  that  in  its  acquaintance  and  intercourse
with  objects — that  is,  directly  or  indirectly,  with  other  selves —
feels  and  acts.  Let  the  substantiality  of  this  being  be  interpreted
how  it  may,  the  actuality  of  it  is  past  question  and  therefore
never  questioned1.  It  is  here  at  length  that  being  and  knowing

1  The  flagrant  absurdity  of  the  doctrine  of  W.  James,  already  quoted,  which  trans-
fers this  actuality  to  the  thought  and  recognizes  a  cogitatur  but  no  cogito,  maintaining
that  "the  thoughts  themselves  are  the  thinkers  is  the  final  word  of  psychology"


382 Ego,  Self -consciousness,  Subjective  Being  [CH.  xv,  §  3

'  meet  and  our  original  assumption  is  justified1.  This,  moreover,
is  the  only  kind  of  being  that  we  can  understand  ;  and  two
things  seem  clear.  First,  we  cannot,  if  we  call  this  being  a
substance,  use  this  term  in  the  sense  in  which  we  use  it  of
matter2 ;  for  we  cannot  conceive  the  self  as  actual  at  all,  if  we
imagine  it  as  experiencing  nothing3.  Inertia,  if  applicable  to
what  we  call  matter,  is  at  least  not  applicable  to  what  only  is
as  it  lives  and  acts.  In  a  word,  if  we  call  this  being  a  substance
we  must  give  that  term  the  meaning  that  Leibniz  gave  it  and
not  that  given  to  it  by  Descartes  and  Spinoza.  Secondly,  we
cannot  call  this  actuality  of  the  subject  of  experience,  pheno-
menal. The  reactions  of  A  are  indeed  phenomenal  for  B  who
perceives  them  and  whom  they  affect.  So  we  come  to  describe
experience  as  reciprocal  interaction  or  mutuum  commercium.
This  implies  two  agents  and  not  merely  two  kinds  of  pheno-
mena— one  external,  the  other  internal — whatever  that  may
mean4.  Of  what  nature  the  agency  is  to  which  we  owe  our
sense-data  is  a  problem  but  to  suppose  that  we  ourselves  are
only  phenomenal  and  resolvable  into  sense-data  is  after  all
impossible ;  for  how  then  do  we  come  to  talk  of  the  pheno-
menal as  distinct  from  the  real  ?  But  when  we  know  both  it
is  possible  perhaps  to  talk  of  '  degrees  of  reality ' ;  not,  however,
if  we  deny  our  own  reality  altogether.

(cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  2,  p.  39«.)»  is  surely  now  apparent  without  detailed  comment.  It
is,  in  fact,  inconsistent  as  well  as  absurd  since  James  accepted  Herbart's  exposition
of  apperception  to  which  his  own  is  diametrically  opposed  (cf.  his  Principles  of
Psychology,  ii.  pp.  107-11).  If  however  any  reader  desires  further  comment,  I  find
I  have  already  supplied  it :  see  a  '  critical  notice '  of  James's  Textbook  of  Psychology,
Mind,  1892,  p.  537.

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  2,  p.  35.  a  Cf.  above,  ch.  xiii,  §  6,  pp.  338  ff.

*  Cf.  Lotze,  Metaphysik,  §  307  fin.  4  Cf.  above,  ch.  i,  §  3,  pp.  14-16.


CHAPTER  XVI

CONDUCT:  VALUE,  CHOICE  AND  FREEDOM

•

General  Survey.

§  I.  The  development  of  intellection  and  self-consciousness
— with  which  in  the  last  three  chapters  we  have  been  exclusively
occupied — is  in  reality  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  develop-
ment of  the  affective  and  active  side  of  mind1.  To  describe  in
detail  all  the  various  sources  of  feeling  and  desire  that  arise
in  the  course  of  this  further  advance — all  the  new  interests,
emotions,  and  sentiments  called  into  being  by  intersubjective
intercourse — is  altogether  beyond  the  scope  of  a  brief  systematic
essay  like  the  present.  But  at  least  a  general  survey  of  this
highest  or  rational  level  of  affection  and  action  is  indispensable.
To  gain  any  oversight  over  a  domain  of  such  complexity,  there
is  one  fact  to  be  kept  steadily  in  view  :  as  the  causes  of  feeling
become  more  ideational  and  more  '  internal,'  lie  more  among  the
possibilities  of  the  future  and  less  among  the  actualities  of  the
present,  so  our  personal  attitude  or  action  changes  in  like
manner2.  We  have  noted  this  correspondence  already  at  the
lower  level  at  which  desires  emerge,  and  we  have  seen  too  that
desire,  in  prompting  to  the  search  for  means  to  its  realisation,  is
the  primum  movens  of  intellection5  whereby  the  haphazard
gropings  and  failures  of  sense  are  largely  avoided.  And  now —
in  keeping  with  what  has  just  been  said — we  have  to  notice  that

1  This  we  left  last  at  what  we  may  call  the  middle  or  ideational  level :  cf.  above,
ch.  xi,  §  3,  pp.  281  ff.

3  Cf.  above,  ch.  x,  §  4,  pp.  268  f.
J  Cf.  above,  ch.  xii,  §  i  init.,  §  i  fin.


384 Conduct: Value,  Choice  and  Freedom [CH.  xvi,  §  i

intellect  does  much  more  than  devise  and  contrive  in  unques-
tioning subservience  to  the  impulse  of  the  moment,  like  some
demon  of  Eastern  fable :  even  the  brutes,  whose  sagacity  is
mostly  of  this  sort,  are  not  without  traces  of  something  like
self-control.  But  '  understanding  and  reason  '  gradually  widen-
ing the  horizon  of  human  experience  both  in  time  and  space,
bring  within  its  purview  more  and  more  of  the  trans-subjective,
and  also  reveal  with  ever  increasing  distinctness  its  own  inmost
springs.  Thus,  like  the  divine  vovs,  they  continuously  trans-
figure and  recreate  the  whole.  So,  awakening  to  consciousness
of  himself,  his  senses  cease  to  be  mere  blinkers  or  clogs,  and
'the  solitary  irrational1'  emerges — like  the  perfect  insect  from
its  cocoon — amenable  to  deeper  sources  of  feeling  and  capable
of  higher  forms  of  action  in  the  world  of  social  and  civic  life.
The  advance  is  slow  and  the  way  is  long ;  but,  as  said  already,
the  barest  reference  here  must  suffice.

First  of  all,  when — as  we  say — '  motives  conflict '  or  when
the  evils  of  hasty  action  recur  to  mind,  deliberation  concerning
the  '  ends '  to  which  the  motives  tend  precedes  the  mere  search
for  ways  and  means  of  achieving  them,  or  at  least  predominates
over  this.  Again,  in  moments  of  leisure,  the  more  imperious
cravings  being  stilled,  besides  the  rehearsal  of  successes  or  failures
in  the  past,  there  come  anticipations  extending  farther  and  farther
into  the  possibilities  of  the  future.  Such  ventures  also  furnish
occasions  for  deliberation  over  the  projects  they  suggest.  So  at
length  we  attain  ( I )  concepts  of  wider  interests,  such  as  property,
knowledge,  art.  Then,  subjective  intercourse  and  self-conscious-
ness having  advanced,  we  also  come  by  (2)  concepts  of  the
welfare  or  perfection  of  self,  as  well  as  concepts  of  the  claims
of  others  and  of  duties  towards  them.  Finally  we  formulate
(3)  maxims  or  practical  generalisations  concerning  these  various
ends  and  the  best  means  for  their,  realisation.  Thus,  instead  of
'  behaviour '  determined  largely  by  the  vis  a  tergo  of  instinct  or
habit,  we  have  '  conduct '  shaped  by  what  is  literally  prudence  or
foresight,  the  pursuit  of  ends  that  are  not  esteemed  desirable  till
they  are  judged  to  be  worth  what  they  will  cost,  conduct
determined  by  ends  that  are  judged  to  be  '  binding '  because

1  So  I  think  we  may  call  him  before  'the  countenance  of  his  fellow'  becomes
transparent  through  speech  and  spirit  greets  and  quickens  spirit.  Cf.  above,  ch.
xii,  §  i,  p.  286  n.


CH.  xvi,  §  i]  General  Survey  385

worthy  per  sel. The  result  in  such  a  case  is  a  decision,  resolve
or  volition.

Summarizing  its  salient  features  then,  we  find  the  domain  of
conduct,  broadly  speaking,  is  that  of  future  possibilities  ;  so  far,
that  is,  as  these  may  be  determined  by  the  subject's  initiative —
the  result  (in  general)  of  prior  deliberation.  Now  in  contrast  to
the  '  theoretical  consideration  of  things '  deliberation  invests
them  with  '  characters '  that  do  not  strictly  belong  to  them  as
merely  '  things ' — i.e.  out  of  relation  to  '  persons ' — at  all.  Such
'characters2'  constitute  the  axiological  categories  of  worth  or
value,  the  good  or  its  opposite  in  some  sense  or  other.  Further,
deliberation  leads  to  practical  maxims  or  '  imperatives '  as  Kant
called  them,  either  hypothetical  or  categorical,  as  the  case  may
be.  It  also  brings  to  the  fore  the  teleological  categories,  which
though — unlike  the  axiological  categories — concerned  with  the
qualities  and  relations  of  things  as  such,  nevertheless  regard  these
so  far  only  as  they  can  be  '  instrumental '  to  ends3.  Finally  we
have  the  individual  fiat  or  decision  which  we  speak  of  as  our
deed  or  will.  We  must  now  try  to  elucidate  and  correlate  these
various  traits  so  as  to  exhibit  human  conduct  and  its  develop-
ment as  a  psychological  whole,  in  which  self  and  not-self,  feeling,
volition  and  intellection  are  all  concerned.

1  In  restricting  the  term  behaviour  to  the  lower,  and  reserving  the  term  conduct  for
the  higher,  of  the  two  levels  of  conative  activity  here  described,  some  may  think  a
liberty  is  being  taken  with  two  words  generally  regarded  as  synonymous. Herbert
Spencer,  for  instance,  has  said  :  "  Opening  the  window  to  air  the  room,  putting  on  an
overcoat  when  the  weather  is  cold,  are  thought  of  as  having  no  ethical  significance.
These,  however,  [and  other  similar  instances  given]  are  all  portions  of  conduct." ( The
Data  of  Ethics,  1879,  P-  5-) For  all  that,  reasons  for  our  suggestion  are  not  wanting.
In  the  first  place,  writers  on  comparative  psychology  talk  almost  invariably  of  '  animal
behaviour '  while  writers  on  ethics  speak  as  generally  of  ' human  conduct.' Moreover
conduct  etymologically  implies  guidance  or  direction  towards  an  end  (cf.  conduce) :  so
we  speak  of  conducting  an  army,  an  orchestra,  or  a  business. No  doubt  both  terms
are  applied  to  human  beings  but,  as  Webster  remarks,  "  behaviour  respects  our  manner
of  acting  in  particular  cases,  conduct  refers  to  the  general  tenor  of  our  actions." As
to  the  former  we  may  compare  a  man  with  an  animal  and  say  he  behaved  like  an  owl :
as  to  the  latter  we  should  hardly  so  compare  him  unless  his  conduct  were  irrational,
when  we  might  perhaps  say  he  behaved  like  an  ass.

2  The  term,  so  far  as  I  know,  was  first  used  in  this  sense  by  Avenarius :  cf.  his
Kritik  der  reinen  Erfahrung,  1888,  i.  p.  15.

3  In  this  way  we  come  by  the  notion  of  the  '  organic. '


W.  P.  25


386 Conduct: Value,  Choice  and  Freedom [CH.  xvi,  §  2


Value.

§  2.  The  concept  of  Worth1  or  Value,  more  precisely  the
Good  in  the  domain  of  conduct — so  far  as  this  is  distinct  from
the  True  or  the  Beautiful,  which  are  good  in  other  domains — is
here  cardinal  and  ultimate.  We  have  then  first  of  all  to  analyze
this  concept  and  to  ascertain  how  we  come  by  it.  Like  pre-
sentation, it  implies  the  duality  of  subject  and  object  which
all  experience  presupposes.  There  is,  however,  a  certain  anti-
thesis between  the  bare  recognition  of  an  object  and  its
subsequent  valuation.  We  might  say  the  object  takes  the
lead  in  the  first  and  the  subject  in  the  second  :  in  the  first  we
are  confronted  by  a  'situation'  which  we  can  only  indicate
or  describe,  being  so  far  merely  cognitive ;  in  the  second  we  are
affected,  and  so  assume  an  attitude,  become  conative.  And
then  it  is  that,  as  already  said,  we  come  presently  to  assign
to  things  a  '  character '  connoting  nothing  inherent  in  them
but  just  our  estimation  of  them2.  The  world  we  theoretically
contemplate  and  describe  we  now  enjoy,  utilise  and  appreciate.

As  to  the  source  of  this  category  of  value,  the  opinions  of
psychologists  are  somewhat  divided  ;  some,  with  Meinong  refer
it  to  feeling,  others,  with  von  Ehrenfels,  to  desire.  No  doubt
what  is  desirable  is  always  valuable  and  what  is  valuable  always
desirable  ;  that,  however,  settles  nothing  as  to  the  relation  of

1  Worth,  though  in  itself  the  preferable  term,  if  only  as  a  means  of  distinguishing
between  psychical  (and  especially  ethical)  estimation  on  the  one  hand  and  economic
worth  or  exchange  value  on  the  other,  is  defective  owing  to  its  lack  of  derivatives
answering  to  valuable,  evaluation,  &c. Moreover  it  was  a  theory  of  value  elaborated
by  Austrian  economists  that  led  certain  psychologists  (also  Austrian)  to  investigate  its
psychological  presuppositions. Very  naturally,  therefore,  English  writers  (e.g.  Dr  J.  S.
Mackenzie),  who  had  the  choice  of  both  terms,  used  value  not  worth.

2  How  intimately  these  two  aspects  of  the  world  are  connected  is  shewn  by  the
very  unconscious  way  in  which  we  ordinarily  intermingle  the  terminology  of  appre-
ciation in  what  is  meant  to  be  only  descriptive. To  speak,  for  example,  of  charming
scenery  or  a  beautiful  voice  is  not  strictly  to  describe. But  we  find  even  science
talking  of  '  the  noble  metals '  and  calling  water-cress,  Nasturtium  officinale,  and  a
certain  lily,  Lilium  speciosum. All  this  may  help  to  remind  us  that  all  thinking  is
primarily  pragmatic  :  we  cannot  even  now  separate  what  it  is  nevertheless  important
to  distinguish,  the  world  of  description  and  the  world  of  appreciation.

Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  6,  p.  57;  ch.  v,  §  8,  p.  138;  ch.  xiv,  §  4,  p.  356.  Cf.
also  W.  M.  Urban's  article,  "  Appreciation  and  Description,"  Philosophical  Review,
xiv.  (1915),  pp.  541  ff.


CH.  xvi,  §  2]  Value  387

desire  to  feeling.  But  if,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  desire  presupposes
feeling  whereas  feeling  does  not  necessarily  imply  desire,  then
surely  Meinong  is  right.  And  after  a  long  controversy  this
is  the  conclusion  of  the  majority  of  psychologists.  Feeling
is  genetically  prior  to  desire  and  therefore  suffices  to  make
an  object  valuable  (positively  or  negatively)  for  any  subject  that
is  affected  by  it.  When  too,  the  feeling  is  one  of  contentment
and  satisfaction,  there  may  be  a  lively  sense  of  positive  value,
though  there  can  then  be  no  conation,  in  so  far  as  that  implies
discontent  and  dissatisfaction.  Nevertheless  conduct  and  indeed
all  behaviour  is  shaped  throughout  by  reference  to  what  is  wanted
— i.e.  by  appetite  and  desire — rather  than  by  what  is  attained,
and  for  the  present  sufficing1.  Thus,  in  an  exposition  of  conduct,
the  connexion  of  value  with  purpose  is  the  important  fact  though
its  ground  in  feeling  is  the  key  to  its  meaning,  with  which  we
here  begin.

What  exactly  is  this  meaning  ?  In  the  language  of
economics,  value,  as  we  have  seen,  is  a  price  affixed  to  objects
as  being  for  us  what  we  call  'goods  or  commodities/  things,
services,  &c.,  that  we  can  use  and  enjoy.  The  judgment  here
implied  is  a  value-judgment  or  appreciation.  Wherever  there
is  feeling  there  is  value — either  positive  or  negative — though  it
may  be  below  the  self-conscious  level,  and  then  the  fact  can
neither  be  affirmed  nor  communicated.  Such  simple  apprecia-
tion is  comparable  in  this  respect  with  simple  apprehension  :  in
both  cases  the  full  objective  recognition  that  explicit  judgment
requires  waits  the  dawn  of  self-conscious  reflexion.  Man  and
brute  alike  enjoy  their  food,  but  man,  less  absorbed  in  its
consumption,  recognises  it  as  food  and  regards  it  as  'good.'
Even  when  the  perception  is  explicit  the  appreciation  need  not
be ;  but  apart  from  the  objective  recognition  it  can  not  be.  In
the  complex  of  both  we  have  explicit  valuation  in  its  simplest
form.  But  it  is  not  the  pleasure  afforded  by  the  food  that
we  value  but  the  food,  because  it  affords  the  pleasure.

The  continuity  of  things  and  the  subject's  limitations,  'the
length  of  his  tether' — to  use  Locke's  now  classic  phrase —
restrict  every  experient  to  a  certain  definite  area  or  'environ-
ment '  :  no  creature,  for  example,  can  enjoy  every  kind  of  food
or  avail  itself  of  every  form  of  locomotion.  More  or  less

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  xi,  §  i,  p.  279.

25 — 2


388 Conduct : Value,  Choice  and  Freedom [CH.  xvi,  §  2

subjective  selection  there  will  be,  but  always  a  circumscribed
selection,  viz.  of  that  within  its  range,  which  as  we  say  is  of
4  interest '  to  the  given  experient.  A  certain  constancy  or  at
least  continuity  of  these  interests  in  objects  is  thus  implied,
since  the  subject  is  a  determinate  experient  striving  for  self-
conservation  and  betterment.  This,  the  domain  of  conation,
is  obviously  amenable  to  a  development  correspondent  to,  and
concurrent  with,  that  which  we  have  already  described — in  terms
of  perception,  ideation  and  intellection — as  the  domain  of  cogni-
tion ;  inasmuch  as  the  same  plastic  processes  are  concerned  in
both.  '4  The  value  of  an  object "  then,  we  may  say  with
Meinong  "  consists  (besteht}  in  the  fact  that  a  subject  takes,
could  take  or  at  least  reasonably  should  take  an  interest  in  that
object1."  The  main  outline  of.  this  development  on  the  intellec-
tual level,  we  must  next  try  to  trace2.

Such  development  is  still  conditioned  by  the  impulses  and
desires  of  the  lower  levels:  regardless  of  these  it  cannot  advance.
The  bare  necessaries  of  life,  the  satisfaction  of  natural  appetites
— daily  bread  and  offspring — are  the  first  concerns  for  man  and
brute  alike :  self-preservation  comes  before  self- betterment.
Again  blind  '  extra-regarding3 '  desires,  or  '  propensions,'  as

1  Fourth  International  Congress  of  Philosophy  at  Bologna,  Logos,  iii.  1912,  p.  9.
At  the  same  time,  so  long  as  we  are  concerned  with  tracing  the  development  of  con-
duct, we  must  hold  that  only  that  has  value  for  a  given  experient  which  he  actually
values. His  parents  may  see  that  education  has  value  for  the  whining  schoolboy,  but
he  himself  does  not  value  it,  as  long  as  he  creeps  unwillingly  to  school.

2  A  possible  difficulty  must,  however,  be  anticipated. Having  previously  referred
value  to  feeling  as  its  source,  we  now  say  that  it  is  constituted  by  interest. Are  these
two  positions  identical : if  not,  what  is  the  difference  between  them  ? They  are
identical  in  so  far  as  feeling  is  essential  both  to  value  and  interest. But  the  interest
implies  more  than  feeling,  and  feeling  alone  would  not  suffice  for  the  development  of
values  or  of  conduct. The  further  factor  over  and  above  feeling,  which  interest
involves,  is  activity,  the  conative  attitude,  which  is  clearly  distinct  from  feeling,
however  little  it  is  independent  of  it. It  is  through  activity  that  subjective  selection
becomes  possible  (cf.  ch.  ii,  §  4, pp. 50  f.),  or  that  higher  sources  of  feeling  arise
that  may  be  preferred  to  lower  (cf.  ch.  x,  §  2,  p.  255,  §  4,  pp.  267  f.). And  after  all
activity  is  the  cardinal  fact  of  life :  only  in  terms  of  activity  have  we  been  able  to  get
any  clue  to  the  facts  of  feeling  regarded  as  an  effect  (cf.  ch.  x,  §  3,  p.  262). The
attempt  to  connect  value  with  feeling  exclusively  leads  to  hedonism,  which  the  con-
nexion of  value  and  interest  refutes. This  what  is  called  '  the  fundamental  paradox
of  hedonism  '  clearly  shews. To  get  pleasure  you  must  forget  it  and  aim  not  at  it  but
at  something  else ;  in  other  words  you  must  have  objective  interests,  and  these  pre-
suppose activity.

3  Cf.  above,  ch.  xv,  §  i,  p.  369,  «.  3.


CH.  xvi,  §  2]  Value  389

Butler  called  them,  are  presupposed  in  the  '  self-love  and
benevolence '  of  the  higher  level,  which  also  they  tend  to  over-
ride. Regarded  as  a  process  of  intellection,  this  advance  beyond
the  perceptual  and  ideational  levels  of  behaviour,  so  far  as  it  is
effected,  we  call  valuation  or  better  evaluation ;  that  is,  not  the
simple  appreciation  implied  in  'good'  or  'bad,'  but  the  compara-
tive appreciation  implied  in  '  better '  or  '  worse.'  The  rudiments
of  a  sort  of  '  hedonic  calculus,'  as  it  is  not  very  happily  called,
the  small  child,  domestic  animals,  and  even  some  wild  ones,
appear  to  acquire1.  The  lack  of  language  is,  however,  a  pall  of
darkness  which  isolates  the  brute,  that — with  no  heritage  but
instinct — can  never  become  more  than  sagacious.  On  the  other
hand,  the  transparency  of  the  social  medium  into  which  the
child  is  born,  enables  it,  as  it  grows,  gradually  to  appropriate
the  accumulating  wisdom  of  the  race  and  to  become  at  length
<j>p6i>i/jio<t.  It  is  the  whole  of  this  progress,  actually  achieved  in
a  long  succession  of  generations,  that  we  suppose  our  '  psycho-
logical individual '  to  accomplish2  :  time  was  when  he  bartered
his  bed  in  the  morning — to  quote  an  instance  of  Mill's — for  the
breakfast  of  which  he  had  more  immediate  need,  time  will  be
when  he  will  scorn  delights  and  live  laborious  days  to  attain
some  far-off  end.  Like  the  analogous  theoretical  advance,
so  this  begins  with  what  is  only  '  psychologically  objective3' —
temporary  and  individual  values  :  permanent  and  universal
values,  the  axiologically  objective,  it  reaches  last  of  all.  But  as
with  the  epistemologically  objective,  so  again  here :  genesis  and
development  is  all  that  psychology  has  to  consider.  The  sanc-
tions of  ethics  like  the  grounds  of  knowledge  are  beyond  our
province4.  f

What,  however,  we  have  specially  to  remember  when  re-
garding valuation  as an intellectual process  is  that,  whereas

1  Cf.  Bentham's  estimate  of  pleasures  according  as  they  are  '  intense,  long,  certain,
speedy,  fruitful,  pure.' The  child  and  the  dog  that  learn  not  to  steal  and  the  fox  that
learns  to  avoid  the  trap  have  made  a  beginning  with  this  scale.

2  Cf.  above,  ch.  xiii,  §  i,  p.  286 «.

3  Cf.  above,  ch.  i,  §  3,  p.  18.

4  Evil  doing  on  the  other  hand,  as  well  as  erroneous  thinking  are  within  it,  but
are  hardly  of  psychological  interest  save  as  they  indirectly  aid  the  exposition  of  normal
development. The  reasoning  of  a  madman,  it  has  been  said,  often  shews  more  in-
telligence than  the  fallacies  of  a  fool :  in  like  manner  the  conduct  of  the  consistent
egoist  or  the  deliberately  bad  man  may  illustrate  savoir  faire  better  than  the  actions
of  one  more  amiable,  but  less  stable,  in  character.


390 Conduct : Value,  Choice  and  Freedom [CH.  xvi,  §  2

theory  starts  from  fixed  data,  '  what  is,'  practice  starts  from  the
agenda  to  which  these  prompt,  '  what  ought  to  be.'  As  the  ex-
perient  advances,  past  agenda  are  not  merely  repeated  but  new
ones  continuously  arise.  Thus  while  intellection  is  the  source  of
system  both  for  theory  and  for  practice,  the  two  systems  are
very  unlike.  Both  depend  indeed,  as  already  said,  on  the  same
fundamental  plasticity — differentiation,  retention,  and  assimila-
tion. The  one,  like  Aristotle's  a-o(j>ia,  is  comparable  to  the
organized  structure  that  subserves  life  and  at  the  same  time
presupposes  it  :  the  other  like  Aristotle's  <}>p6i>rj(ri<;,  represents
the  creative  synthesis,  that  is  the  function  of  life  itself.  Values
are  the  elements  of  this  synthesis  here,  and  so-called  'value-
movements'  (i.e.  either  new  valuations  or  revaluations)  indicate
its  progress.  Many  of  these,  as,  e.g.  '  the  innocent  diversions  of
fashion '  are  unimportant  save  as  illustrating  the  law  of  novelty1
and  emphasizing  the  distinction  just  made.  It  is  only  where
there  is  life  that  Nature  '  fulfils  herself  in  many  ways,  lest  one
good  custom  should  corrupt  the  world.'  Far  more  important
are  the  value-movements  connected  with  the  teleological  cate-
gories of  Means  and  Ends,  which  as  already  said,  at  this  level
come  prominently  to  the  fore,  and  lead  to  a  distinction  of  values
as  instrumental  values  ( Wirkungswerte),  and  intrinsic  values
(Eigenwerte).  More  important  still  is  the  rise  among  the  latter
of  individualistic  and  social  values  and  the  ideals  towards  which
they  point.  Each  of  these  we  must  consider  in  some  detail.

i.  Looking  broadly  at  the  results  of  human  activity  directed
to  the  attainment  of  novel  ends,  two  features  stand  out.  In  the
first  place,  where  these  activities  are  successful  and  yet  such  that
they  have  to  be  frequently  repeated  by  the  individual  and  by  the
race,  there  facility  and  dexterity  gradually  replace  the  clumsy
and  bungling  attempts  of  earlier  efforts2.  Individual  differences
there  will,  however,  be  ;  and  in  consequence,  those  who  are
most  proficient  in  any  pursuit  or  occupation  may  come  to  enjoy
it  for  its  own  sake — which  the  less  proficient  are  not  likely  to  do.
Hence,  for  the  former,  such  means — instead  of  having  only  a
utility-value — may  become  intrinsically  valuable,  that  is  to  say,
no  longer  or  not  merely  drudgery,  but  also  more  or  less
pleasurable  in  themselves.  Specialisation  or  division  of  labour

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  x,  §  i,  p.  255  «.,  §  4,  p.  258.

2  Cf.  above,  ch.  vii,  §  i,  p.  180.


CH.  xvi,  §  2]  Value  391

leading  to  increased  complexity  and  perfection  of  the  social
organism  as  a  whole  and  more  life  and  fuller  for  its  members
generally — in  a  word  the  progress  of  civilisation — such  is  the
result  of  this  psychologically  simple  fact — a  result  which  we
must  leave  to  the  sociologist  to  describe  in  detail1.  One  such
detail — and  'not  the  least  important — of  this  form  of  value-
movement  we  may,  however,  be  allowed  to  mention — the  pursuit
of  knowledge2  first  for  its  utility  and  then  for  its  own  sake.
Psychologically  regarded,  this  development  is  the  direct  outcome
of  what  we  have  called  'subjective  selection8'  and  intersubjective
intercourse.

The  other  feature  we  have  to  note  depends  upon  a  peculiarity
of  final  causation  as  distinct  from  real,  viz.,  that  it  is,  so  to  say,
an  inverse  process  only  possible  in  imagination,  not  in  fact.
The  so-called  '  final  cause '  or  end  is  desired  provided  the  means
to  its  accomplishment  can  be  found.  But  while  still  only  a
desirable  end  and  merely  conceived,  it  is  beset  more  or  less  with
the  uncertainty  that  pertains  to  the  future,  and  the  means
tentatively  employed  for  its  realisation,  even  if  they  succeed,  are
almost  certain  to  produce  consequences  more  or  less  unforeseen.
This  is  what  Wundt  has  happily  described  as  '  the  heterogony
of  ends4.'  The  history  of  '  inventions  '  and  '  discoveries ' — and
they  are  numberless — affords  the  clearest  illustrations  of  this
principle.  Its  working  however  underlies  simpler  forms  of
experience  where  the  means  to  ends  are  immediately  available
and  premeditation  almost  or  altogether  uncalled  for — as  in  the
beginnings  of  human  intercourse.  The  origin  of  language,
already  discussed5,  is  a  case  in  point,  and  in  discussing  presently
the  development  of  moral  sentiments  we  shall  find  another  still
more  impressive6.

1  Cf.  Herbert  Spencer,  First  Principles,  §  161.

2  As  distinct  from  the  mere  curiosity  excited  by  novelty —  Wissbegier  as  distinct
from  Neugier. Cf.  W.  James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  ii.  pp.  429  f. ;  K.  Groos,  Die
Spiele  der  Menschen,  1899,  pp.  184-9.

3  There  are,  no  doubt,  cases  in  which  this  '  transvaluation '  spells  degeneration
rather  than  development. That  of  the  miser  is  often  cited  as  one. But  it  is  not  pro-
ficiency or  reputation  that  leads  to  hoarding :  frequently  it  begins  in  an  excess  of
prudence  or  of  fear. The  miser  is  seldom  a  financial  expert  nor  is  the  financial  expert
usually  a  miser.

4  System der  Philosophic, ist  ed.  pp. 337  ff. But cf.  Hegel,  Philosophie  der
Geschichte,  p.  30,  where  the  same  idea  is  clearly  stated.

8  Cf.  above,  ch.  xii,  §  i,  pp.  285  f.  *  Cf.  below,  p.  393.


392 Conduct: Value,  Choice  and  Freedom [CH.  xvi,  §  2

ii.  The  value-movements  that  we  have  specially  to  consider
in  passing  to  intrinsic  values  are  those  that  give  rise  to  grada-
tions of  rank.  In  the  case  of  individual  or  egoistic,  as  distinct
from  social  or  altruistic  values,  the  advance  consists  in  the
explicit  recognition  of  the  value  of  the  self  as  paramount1.
That  every  subject  always  has  a  value  for  itself,  few,  we  imagine,
will  care  to  dispute  ;  but  till  this  value  is  recognised,  it  cannot  be
used  in  evaluation.  Even  then,  if  it  were  the  only  value  recog-
nised, it  would  be  really  valueless ;  for  a  subject  without
objective  interests  would  be  itself  of  no  interest2.  I  must  always
have  objective  interests  ;  but  till  I  know  myself  I  cannot  re-
cognise these  interests  as  mine  ;  prior  to  that  all  my  interests
are  on  a  level.  Not  till  I  know  myself  can  I  organize  them
into  a  more  or  less  consentient  whole  and  lessen  the  danger
of  sacrificing  this  whole  to  some  of  its  members.  Self-in-
terest, the  value  of  self,  thus  becomes  the  standard  by  which
its  other  specific  interests  are  evaluated.  Herein  its  higher
rank  and  authority  consists  :  from  it  emanate  the  imperatives,
obedience  to  which  constitutes  the  virtues  of  temperance  and
prudence.  But  this  subordination  of  particular  ends  to  itself
implies  that  self  is  its  own  end — an  end  consisting  not  merely
in  what  it  is  and  has  but  still  more  in  what  it  can  become  and
acquire.  As  the  idea  of  self  becomes  more  '  inward '  so  do  its
ends ;  we  then  begin  to  entertain  corresponding  ideals  of  self
which  we  strive  more  or  less  earnestly  to  realise.  These  furnish
a  still  higher  standard  on  which  in  turn  our  estimate  of  our  own
worth  depends.  To  a  very  large  extent,  no  doubt,  the  ideals  of
one  person  are  suggested  by  the  actual  achievements  of  another  :
imitation  and  emulation  frequently  determine  the  selection ;
but  the  essential  lack  of  finitude,  the  limitless  possibilities  of  a
reasoning  being  are  the  primary  incentive3.  We  may  for  the

1  To  some  a  difficulty  may  here  perhaps  suggest  itself. How,  it  may  be  asked,  if
feeling  is  a  subjective  state  occasioned  by  some  object,  can  the  subject  be  itself  an
object  that  can  affect  itself? Obviously  only  if  the  subject  can  be  an  object  for  itself.
Under  what  circumstances  this  is  possible,  we  have  already  tried  to  determine. (Cf.
above,  ch.  xv,  §§  2,  3,  pp.  375  ff.;  cf.  also  Lipps,  Vom  Fiihlen  Wollen  und  Denken,
1902,  pp.  i7sff.)

2  This  implication  or  duality  of  subject  and  object  is,  as  already  said,  overlooked
on  the  practical  side  by  hedonism  as  much  as  it  is  on  the  theoretical  side  by  presenta-
tionism.

*  It  is  a  sad  truth,  no  doubt,  that  the  lives  of  many  are  stagnant,  and  unprogressive


CH.  xvi,  §  2]  Value  393

present  however  allow  this  large  topic — which  would  soon  carry
us  beyond  our  province — to  lead  us  instead  to  the  last  of  the
value-movements  we  have  agreed  to  consider.  This  will  bring
us  back  to  it  once  more.

iii.  In  treating  of  altruistic  or  social  values  from  the  stand-
point of  psychology  our  sole  concern  is  with  these  values  as
they  come  to  be  appreciated  and  evaluated  by  the  individual :
with  their  ethical  or  jural  aspects  which  presuppose  the  psycho-
logical, we  have  rto  call  to  meddle.  The  new  fact  that  meets  us
here  is  the  subordination  of  self-interest  to  what  is  held  to  be
higher — the  interest  of  some  social  group  of  many  selves
objectively  of  equal  account  The  state,  the  church,  the  family,
regarded  as  an  '  over-individual '  unity — a  sort  of  self  writ  large
— is  now  accorded  the  predominance  over  members  whose
respective  interests  have  to  be  organized  to  promote  its  own,
just  as  the  self-interest  of  the  individual  is  held  to  be  sovereign
over  its  several  impulses  and  desires.  From  the  objective
standpoint  the  parallel  here  is  obvious  :  it  has  been  drawn  out
in  detail  again  and  again  from  the  days  of  Plato  onwards.  But
from  the  subjective  standpoint  of  psychology  there  is,  strictly
speaking,  no  such  parallelism  at  all.  Here  there  are  no  lesser
selves  inside  a  greater :  it  is  one  and  the  same  self,  that
regulates  its  separate  interests  and  also  subordinates  its  self-
interest.  Hence  has  arisen  a  problem,  as  ancient  at  any  rate  as
the  book  of  Job — the  'problem  of  egoism,'  as  Meinong  has
called  it1.  To  look  at  this  problem  for  a  moment  may  help
us  forward.

Voluntary  behaviour,  it  is  said,  is  never  determined  by
external  springs  of  action.  Mutual  dependence,  more  or  less
intimate  is  indeed  universal,  and  to  the  extent  of  this  depen-
dence Ego  has  always  an  interest  in  Alter.  Any  action  conse-
quent on  such  dependence  is  however,  obviously  egoistic,
implicitly  or  explicitly.  Can  we,  without  assuming  a  breach  of
continuity,  imagine  this  limit  to  be  transcended  ?  Yes,  said
Schopenhauer,  but  it  is  a  mystery  which  only  metaphysics  can
explain  :  all  individuation  is  merely  phenomenal.  Alter  and
Ego  are  really  one,  as  the  Vedantists  taught  :  thus  and  not

or  actually  decadent.  But  '  the  psychological  individual '  is  our  study,  and  with  it
development,  not  degeneration,  is  normal.

1  Psychologisch-ethische  Untersuchungen  zur  Werth-theorie,  1894,  §§  15,  37.


394 Conduct :  Value*  Choice  and  Freedom [CH.  xvi,  §  2

otherwise  is  altruism  intelligible1.  Yes,  said  James  Mill,  for
altruism  is  merely  phenomenal,  the  result  of  an  inseparable
association  of  pleasurable  ideas  with  the  ideas  of  certain  indivi-
duals or  groups  of  individuals.  According  to  Bain  this  result  is
a  sort  of  '  fixed  idea '  that  arises  from  our  being  detained,
engrossed,  fascinated,  by  'the  mental  states'  of  those  with
whom  we  live,  so  that  "  we  are  constrained  to  follow  these  out
as  if  they  were  our  own1."  Perhaps  we  can  find  a  solution
mid-way  between  the  'mystery'  and  'metaphysics'  of  the
former  and  the  shallow  psychology  of  the  latter  of  these
attempts.  But  first  a  word  as  to  terms.

Granted  that  in  a  sense  all  conduct  is  egoistic,  nevertheless
the  whole  world  has  for  long  with  one  accord  stigmatized  as
selfish  certain  lines  of  conduct  and  the  dispositions  they  display,
while  certain  others  have  been  approved  as  unselfish,  the  rest
being  regarded  as  neutral  Whether  then  the  term  egoistic  be
applied  to  all  these  kinds  of  conduct  or  be  confined  to  the  first
there  is  clearly  some  difference  between  selfish  and  unselfish
conduct,  even  when  moral  considerations  are  left  aside.  It  is
with  this  differentia  that  we  are  now  concerned.  It  points  to  an
ambiguity  in  the  word  egoistic,  which  can  be  expressed  at  once
in  the  terminology  of  value.  Generically,  all  conduct  is  egoistic
in  the  sense  that  all  value  implies  a  valuing  subject  or  Ego.
Specifically,  unselfish  conduct  is  not  egoistic  in  the  sense  that  the
object  immediately  valued  is  the  good  of  the  Ego :  on  the
contrary  it  is  the  good  of  the  Alter*.

We  may  now  try  to  trace  the  value-movements  through
which  an  individual  may  come  to  prefer  humanity  to  himself.
Here  again  the  parallel  foils ;  but  this  time  on  the  objective  side.
Society  itself  is  always  egoistic  and  never  comes  to  recognise
ends  higher  than  its  own.  But  for  the  individual,  on  the  other
hand,  a  certain  subordination  of  private  to  public  ends  is  present
from  the  first,  so  that  without  any  definite  contract  or  utilitarian
calculation  society  and  'morals'  have  arisen  and  advanced
together.  Thus  the  individual,  while  gaining  in  security,  gets

1  •*  Ueber  das  Fundament  der  Moral,0  SdmmUlickt  Wcrke,  Franenstadt's  ed.  1877,
hr.  pp.  109,  rji.

*  James  Mffl's  Analysis  of  the  Hmmmx  Mind,  iL  pp.  ai6ff. ;  Bain,  Emotions  and
Win,  jid  ed.  pp.  121  £

*  Cf.  Botkrs  Sermon  xi,  "  Upon  Lore  of  oar  neighbour,"  para.  7.


CH.  xvi,  §  2]  Value  395

1  accustomed  '  to  constraint ;  his  outward  acts,  at  all  events,  must
not  injure  the  common  weal  in  which  he  shares.  Yet  for  all
that  he  may  never  spontaneously  deny  himself  or  sacrifice  his
personal  ends  for  the  good  of  others.  The  most  punctilious
observance  of  custom  may  never  get  beyond  '  eye  service.'  But
the  individual  himself,  who  has  been  tended  and  cared  for
throughout  his  childhood,  grows  up  accustomed  to  expect  from
others  what  he  comes  presently  to  find  that  they  expect  from
him.  So  he  comes  to  see  himself  as  others  see  him,  when  he  is
praised  or  blamed  for  acts  that  he  has  long  been  ready  to
approve  or  disapprove  in  them.  In  a  word  his  self-consciousness
becomes  conscience :  he  seems  to  hear  two  voices  within  his
breast  and  one  speaks  with  the  authority  of  law :  it  is  his  '  tribal
self.'  Still  this  new  voice  is  but  an  echo :  it  announces  nothing
new.  All  that  society  enforces  is  outward  regimen  and  this  is
all  that  the  primitive  conscience  demands.  The  jural  conscience
that  custom  begets  then  can  never  account  for  the  '  vivrc  pour
autrui ' :  that  rises  higher  than  duty1.

At  the  same  time  its  roots  lie  deeper.  The  simplest  social
organism  is  a  community  of  families — a  clan  or  tribe.  It  is  held
together  primarily  indeed  by  'economic'  interests  of  mutual
service  and  defence.  Not  only  so,  however,  but  being  linked  up
by  family  ties  as  well,  a  clan  is  permeated  by  such  kindliness  as
kinship  implies.  Both  in  etymology  and  in  fact  friendship  and
love  have  a  common  source1.  The  affable  converse,  the  fondling
and  frolic  of  home  life  have  their  counterpart  in  the  festal  con-
vivialities, dancing  and  games  for  which  the  poorest  and  rudest
tribes  find  some  leisure.  These  are  at  once  the  fruits  of
fellow-feeling  and  a  powerful  means  of  promoting  it*.  How
often,  if  ever,  within  the  narrow  limits  of  a  primitive  tribe  a  man
would  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends  or — what  is  still  harder
perhaps — would  lay  out  his  life  for  them,  we  do  not  know.  But
since  the  human  horizon  has  widened,  there  have  appeared
from  time  to  time  '  moral  inventors '  as  Ribot  calls  them,
who — having  outgrown  the  limitations  of  the  tribal  self — have

1  In  this  respect  it  might  rank  from  the  human  standpoint  as  supererogation :  the
law  does  not  demand  it.

*  Ct  the  Sanskrit  fri,  German  Fratnd,  Greek  0ftos,  Latin  mmicus.

*  Cf-  Ribot,  La  Ptyckobfie  lies  Scntimatts,  1896,  pp.  084-90. K. Groos,  DU
Spiele  JerMmscJktm,  1890,  pp.  511  ff.


396 Conduct : Value,  Choice  and  Freedom [CH.  xvi,  §  2

proclaimed  the  common  brotherhood  of  men,  secured  the  tacit
recognition  of  '  over-individual '  values  by  all  and  inspired  some
with  a  genuine  '  enthusiasm  of  humanity1.'

The  value-movement  of  which  this  is  the  culmination  is  not,
it  is  important  to  insist,  due  to  selfish  or  utilitarian  calculation
of  any  sort2.  Nor  can  it  be  accounted  for  by  any  association  of
ideas  that  presupposes  an  already  developed  self-love  or  egoism.
The  lack  of  historical  insight  that  referred  the  origin  of  language
and  of  society  to  deliberate  convention  or  contract  also  vitiates
all  these  associationist  theories.  Intersubjective  intercourse
alone  transforms  the  experient  into  a  person  :  till  then  only
'  extra-regarding '  impulses  are  operative.  Some  of  these
instinctively  promote  self-conservation,  others  as  instinctively
promote  race-conservation.  Whatever  fault  we  may  find  with
Spencer's  talk  of  a  merely  '  physical '  altruism,  he  seems  at  least
to  have  been  right  in  maintaining  "that  [implicitly]  from  the
dawn  of  life  altruism  has  been  no  less  essential  than  egoism  "
and  that  the  two  have  been  and  "  are  evolving  simultaneously3."
The  altruistic  instincts  lead  on  to  sociality  and  this  begets
personality,  but  such  'creative  synthesis'  is  not  reversible.
"  The  origin  of  our  moral  notions  and  sentiments  lies  hid  in
those  obscure  regions  of  hypothetical  history  where  conjecture
has  free  scope " :  this  is  all  that  Sidgwick  thought  it  safe  to
say4.  But  this  one  point  at  least  can  hardly  be  questioned —
that  spontaneous  sympathy  or  '  good-will '  was  the  ground-root
of  all.  Writers  on  morals  would  have  recognised  this  fact
sooner  and  more  generally  if  genetic  psychology  had  been
studied  more.  Anyhow  among  the  English  moralists  affiliated
to  Shaftesbury  its  importance  was  clearly  seen5;  and  perhaps  we

1  Cf.  Green,  Prolegomena  to  Ethics,  1883,  p.  231  ;  also  his  Introduction  to  Hume's
Treatise  on  Hitman  Nature,  ii.  p.  71.

2  "  It  is. ..as  the  adult  and  not  as  the  germinal  form  of  Morality  that  Utilitarianism
may  most  reasonably  claim  the  acceptance  of  Common  Sense." Sidgwick,  The  Methods
of  Ethics,  6th  ed.  p.  456  fin.

3  Data  of  Ethics,  §  75. But  if  so — then  comparing  its  origin  with  its  fruits  so  far
— we  have  surely  here  again  a  striking  instance  of  the  heterogony  of  ends,  of  doing
better  than  we  know. (Cf.  above,  ch.  x,  §  4,  p.  268.)

4  Op.  cit.  p.  456.

5  Two  instances  may  suffice  :  Hutcheson  describes  sympathy  as  the  sense  "cujus  vi
super  aliorum  conditione  commoventur  homines,  idque  innato  quodam  impetu"  (Philo-
sophiae  moralis  Institutio,  1745,  i.  p.  i ;  and  Hume  refers  to  it  as  "  the  chief  source  of
moral  distinctions,"  contrasting  it  as  a  'natural'  virtue  with  justice  as  an  'artificial'


CH.  xvi,  §  2]  Value  397

should  not  be  far  wrong  in  taking  this  to  be  the  truth  in  the
famous  saying  with  which  Kant  opened  his  Ground-work  of
Ethics: — "there  is  nothing  in  the  world  which  can  be  termed
absolutely  and  altogether  good,  a  good  will  alone  excepted."  It
is  '  good-will  to  men,'  the  caritas  humani  generis  that  St  Paul
described  as  '  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.'

But  now  it  may  be  asked,  if  spontaneous  sympathy — as  a
spring  of  unpremeditated  acts  of  benevolence — existed  before
egoistic  reflexion  began,  how  is  it  that,  since  then,  it  alone  among
our  primitive  and  purely  'extra-regarding1'  impulses  has  not  been
entirely  subordinated  to  the  interest  of  self?  No  doubt  its  ardour
often  is  seriously  abated — compare,  for  example,  the  generous
warmth  of  youthful  affection  with  the  cautious  worldly  wisdom
of  maturer  years.  Still  with  the  advance  of  time  the  sentiments
of  the  average  man  have  become  more  'humane1'  and  his  kindly
feelings  have  taften  a  wider  range,  embracing  even  the  lower
animals.  For  a  fact  so  noteworthy  there  must  be  a  psycho-
logical explanation.  How  is  it  that  an  '  extra-regarding '
propensity  which  egoism  should  tend  to  suppress  has,  on  the
contrary,  tended  to  suppress  it  ?  The  process  of  self-conscious
development  seems  to  afford  the  only  and  at  the  same  time
a  sufficient  answer  to  this  question.  We  have  already  seen  that
the  consciousness  of  self  is  first  evoked  through  acquaintance
with  other  selves  and  is  perfected  in  proportion  as  this  acquaint-
ance becomes  more  intimate.  But  the  entire  process  is  twofold  :
not  only  a  differentiation  but  also  a  unification.  It  is  on  the
second  side  of  the  process  that  we  find  the  development  of  what
Hegel  called  'objective  spirit' — the  realm  of  history,  of  law  and
of  morals — the  realm  wherein  whatsoever  things  are  true,  beau-
tiful and  good  are  to  be  realised.  It  is  here  then  that  '  the  limit-
less possibilities  of  a  reasoning  being/  of  which  we  have  already
spoken2,  open  out,  and  ends  that  far  transcend  those  of  merely
'  individual '  value  can  be  pursued.  Were  he  to  sacrifice  those
higher  ends  to  these  a  man  would  lose  in  dignity  in  his  own

though  not  arbitrary  virtue  which  alone  would  "never  be  capable  of  inspiring  men
with  an  equitable  conduct  towards  each  other."  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  Green
and  Grove's  ed.  ii.  pp.  371,  258,  261).

1  Surely  the  fact  that  this  word  has  become  a  synonym  for  sympathizing,  kind,
benevolent,  teaches  us  much,  recalling  Terence's  line  :  Homo  sum,  humani  nihil  a  me
alienum  puto.

a  Cf.  above,  p.  392  fin.


398 Conduct : Value,  Choice  and  Freedom [CH.  xvi,  §  2

eyes  and  also  in  the  eyes  of  his  fellows.  If,  however,  he  does
not  sacrifice  the  higher,  he  may  have  or  seem  to  have  to  sacrifice
self.  But  there  is  no  contradiction  and  in  reality  no  mystery  in
this,  if  such  self-sacrifice  is  the  realisation  of  the  highest  and
inmost  self.  Who  that  remembers  their  last  words  would  think
of  pitying  Wolfe  dying  on  the  Plains  of  Abraham  or  Nelson
dying  on  board  the  Victory ;  but  who  does  not  admire  them1  ?
In  such  self-sacrifice  the  greater  and  higher  is  still  preferred
to  the  lower  and  less  and  the  value  of  the  self  lies  just  in  this
choice  and  is  thereby  enhanced.  But  what,  we  have  next  to
inquire,  are  we  to  understand  by  choice  ?


Choice.

§  3.  Having  attempted  to  describe  in  barest  outline2  the  de-
velopment of  the  intellective  system  to  which  the  special  domain
of  conduct  pertains  we  are  now  confronted  by  a  task  that  still
more  immediately  concerns  us  as  psychologists.  After  more  or
less  deliberation  in  view  of  the  interests  which  this  system
appraises,  the  decision  what  to  do  at  length  ensues.  This
process  we  have  now  to  analyze.  For  our  psychological  indivi-
dual, of  course,  the  two  processes,  the  intellectual  process  of
evaluation  and  the  volitional  process  of  forming  a  decision,  proceed
pari  passu.  Still  for  expository  purposes  it  seemed  clearly
advantageous,  as  far  as  possible,  to  deal  with  them  apart.  More-
over we  may  plead,  that  as  in  biology  so  in  psychology,  mutatis
mutandis,  palingenesis  is,  broadly  speaking,  a  fact  :  social
heredity,  that  is  to  say,  at  least  will  not  be  questioned.  A  child
nurtured  in  a  civilised  community  grows  up  accepting  intellec-
tually the  prevalent  sentiments  concerning  manners,  morality
and  honour  almost  as  naturally  as  he  accepts  his  mother  tongue.
The  spirit  of  the  ordinary  man  is  in  the  main  the  spirit  of  his
age.

1  I  have  tried  to  deal  with  this  topic  from  a  wider  standpoint  in  The  Realm  of
Ends,  2nd  ed.  1912,  pp.  119-29.  Psychologically  we  ought  not  to  overlook  the  fact
that  this  practical  transcendence  of  the  subjective  may  be  displayed  in  less  worthy
forms :  it  shaped  the  life  of  Cecil  Rhodes  as  well  as  that  of  John  Howard.  Even  in
Milton's  Satan  most  people  on  this  account  see  something  to  admire.

8  To  have  attempted  more  would,  as  already  said,  have  occupied  space  dispro-
portionate to  our  main  purpose.  Valuable  suggestions  towards  a  fuller  treatment
will  be  found  in  Lecky's  History  of  European  Morals,  5th  ed.  vol.  i.  pp.  130-80.


CH.  xvi,  §  3]  Choice  399

A  large  part  of  conduct,  then,  is  comparable  with  routine,
determined,  that  is  to  say,  by  dispositions  or  habits  engrained
by  early  education,  which — however  important — have  become  a
'  second  nature  and  involve  no  deliberation.'  Again  one  often
has  to  deliberate  as  to  means  when  there  is  no  question  as  to
the  end  itself ;  the  only  question  being  to  find  the  best  way  of
attaining  it.  With  all  this  we  have  in  general  no  concern  save
when  convenience  and  principles  conflict ;  then  the  question  does
become  one  of  ends  and  the  choice  between  convenience  and
conscience  may  await  the  result  of  deliberation.  Such  questions
about  ends  are  of  two  kinds  :  either  they  relate  to  ends  the
same  in  rank  or,  as  in  the  instance  just  mentioned,  to  ends  that
differ  in  this  respect.  As  examples  of  the  former  we  may  sup-
pose such  alternatives  as  (a)  a  day's  fishing  or  a  day's  shooting,
(b)  the  army  v.  the  navy  as  a  career,  (c)  philanthropic  work  either
to  promote  the  education  of  the  young  or,  instead,  to  alleviate
the  lot  of  the  aged  poor.  As  examples  of  the  latter  we  may
take  the  choice  of  Hercules  between  pleasure  and  wisdom,  the
choice  of  Lucrece  or  Regulus  between  life  and  honour,  the  choice
of  John  Howard  between  the  enjoyment  of  an  ample  fortune
and  self-denying  labours  for  prison  reform.  Within  these  limits
there  is  ample  scope  for  the  analysis  of  choice.

First  of  all,  however,  we  must  be  clear  as  to  the  difference
between  valuation  and  '  motivation ' — to  use  Schopenhauer's
term.  The  connexion  is  so  intimate  that,  in  spite  of  all  that  has
been  said,  the  two  are  often  confounded.  Both  presuppose
feeling ;  but,  whereas  valuation  is  concerned  with  the  object  or
situation  that  causes  the  feeling,  motivation  is  concerned  with
the  actions  to  which  the  feeling  prompts.  The  subject  is  the  real
ground  of  both,  of  the  first  as  affected,  of  the  second  as  active.
The  complete  experience,  then,  where  choice  is  concerned,  may
be  described  as  '  affective-volitional '  :  it  admits  of  this  analysis
into  aspects  or  phases  but  not  of  separation  into  independent
halves.  We  may  distinguish  valuation  and  motivation  in  con-
duct as  readily  as  we  distinguish  sides  and  angles  in  a  triangle,
but  in  neither  case  can  we  resolve  the  whole  into  two  separable
parts1.  But  if  the  two  aspects  are  identified,  because  they  are
inseparable,  the  result  is  psychological  error,  the  practical  con-
sequences of  which  are  serious.  One  such  error  is  that  of

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  x,  §  4,  p.  266  «.  2.


400 Conduct : Value,  Choice  and  Freedom [CH.  xvi,  §  3

regarding  deliberation  as  concerned  with  motives  rather  than
values,  and  another  is  that  of  regarding  motives  as  comparable  to
forces  "  which  act  upon  the  mind  as  weights  do  upon  a  balance  "
rather  than  as  "  all  the  dispositions  which  the  mind  can  have  to
act  voluntarily... not  only  the  reasons  [the pros  and  cons']  but  also
the  inclinations  [and  disinclinations]  arising  from  passions,"  &C.1
Motives,  then,  being  really  tendencies  to  act2,  conative,  that  is  to
say,  rather  than  affective,  all  that  deliberation  presupposes  is  their
inhibition  till  a  decision  is  forthcoming.  But  this  inhibition  in  turn
implies  a  motive,  as  well  as  a  decision,  usually  taken  promptly,
the  consequence  as  already  said  of  previous  experience  together
with  the  development  of  a  higher  and  more  inward  zone  of  the
self.  If  this  is  true,  it  is  a  further  error  to  represent  motives
as  conflicting  inter  se  while  the  subject  passively  watches  the
struggle  and  awaits  the  result  :  the  phrase  '  conflict  of  motives,'
though  it  may  often  suffice  for  descriptive  purposes,  is  a  metaphor
that  has  strictly  no  psychological  warrant.  We  have  allowed
ourselves  to  talk  of  a  conflict  of  ideas,  it  may  be  urged,  and
surely  motives  when  deliberation  and  choice  are  in  question,
are  impossible  without  ideas.  True,  but  we  have  also  found  that
contrary  ideas  conflict  only  as  possible  predicates  of  the  subject
of  one  judgment3.  Then  indeed  it  is  a  case  of  'either  this  or
that ' ;  but  it  is  the  logical  subject  that  really  determines  its
predicate,  not  vice  versa.  Often  and  often  the  '  /  will  this  '  van-
quishes the  '  /  wish  that '  in  circumstances  where,  such  interven-
tion apart,  the  latter  tendency  is  the  stronger ;  just  as  it  is  often
the  plaintiff,  prima  facie  the  weaker,  in  a  suit,  who  wins,  not  the
defendant  who  is  prima  facie  the  stronger.  As  Hoffding  has
happily  said  :  "  The  real  Ego  is  the  Ground-motive* " :  this  it  is
which  in  such  cases  restrains  the  precipitancy  of  the  impulsively
stronger  motive,  and  perhaps  eventually  stifles  it.

1  Cf.  Leibniz's  fifth  letter  to  Clarke,  Op.  omn.  Erdmann's  ed.  p.  754,  quoted  by
Hamilton,  Reid's  Works,  p.  610  n.  "It  is  to  philosophize  very  crudely  concerning
mind,  and  to  image  everything  in  a  corporeal  manner,  to  conceive  that  actuating
reasons  are  something  external,  which  make  an  impression  on  the  mind,  and  to  dis-
tinguish motives  from  the  active  principle  (principle  actiotiis)  itself."  L.  P.  Thiimmig,
Wolff's  favourite  scholar,  in  reply  to  Clarke  after  Leibniz's  death.  Cf.  Hamilton,  loc.
cit.  p.  6n  ».

a  On  dispositions  as  tendencies,  cf.  above,  ch.  iv,  §  7,  p.  97.

8  Cf.  above,  ch.  vii,  §  5,  p.  203.

4  Psychologic,  3rd  German  ed.  1901,  p.  437.


CH.  xvi,  §  3]  Choice  401

We  may  now  return  to  the  two  forms  of  choice  between  ends
that  we  began  by  distinguishing.  Between  the  deliberation  that
in  each  of  them  precedes  the  choice  there  is  this  marked
difference :  in  the  second  form,  where  the  ends  differ  in  rank,  it
is  usually  and  naturally  the  motives  favouring  the  lower  ends
which  are  stronger  and  more  urgent ;  for  these  ends  are  nearer
and,  so  to  say,  more  tangible.  Hence,  not  appetite  but  self-
interest  it  is  that  prompts  to  deliberation,  when  e.g.  the  not  too
eupeptic  bon  vivant  is  led  to  choose  cold  mutton  instead  of  lob-
ster salad  for  his  lunch;  nor  is  it  the  love  of  money  which  urges
the  man  that  maketh  haste  to  be  rich  to  compare  the  value  of  his
wealth  with  the  value  of  his  good  name.  Further  the  process  of
evaluation  which  common  language,  in  calling  it  deliberation,
assimilates  to  the  testing  of  weights  in  a  balance — though  that
may  suffice  for  the  first  form,  where  the  ends  to  be  compared  are
of  the  same  denomination — must  now  be  represented  by  some
other  simile.  Otherwise  we  shall  fail  to  realise  the  meaning
to  be  assigned  to  difference  of  rank.  We  may,  however,  get
a  hint  of  this  meaning,  if  we  change  the  figure,  substituting  a
steelyard  for  the  pair  of  scales.  With  a  steelyard  we  have  to  take
account  of  position  as  well  as  mass  :  for  in  virtue  of  the  former
a  pound  may  more  than  counterpoise  a  hundredweight,  though
with  a  balance  it  cannot.  In  the  simpler  forms  of  choice  the  values
are  commensurable,  for  they  relate  to  satisfaction  in  the  same  zone
of  self — bodily,  personal,  social,  as  the  case  may  be.

It  is  noteworthy  that  in  these  cases  the  alternatives  may  be
so  evenly  balanced  that  one  is  almost  in  the  plight  of  the  famous
ass  of  Buridan;  at  any  rate — even  in  matters  of  moment,  if  there
is  no  time  for  suspense — the  most  trivial  circumstance  may
determine  the  choice.  When,  however,  the  values  compared
appeal  to  different  levels  of  the  self,  a  choice  of  that  sort  is
unknown.  Yet,  notoriously,  it  sometimes  happens,  and  it  is
always  psychologically  possible,  that — in  spite  of  approving  the
higher — a  man  may  follow  the  lower ;  whereas,  on  the  other
hand,  when  there  is  no  difference  of  rank,  no  one  knowingly
prefers  the  less  to  the  greater.  But  does  a  man  in  the  first  case,
we  are  then  led  to  ask,  deliberately  prefer  the  lower  to  the
higher  ?  Even  to  raise  the  question  at  once  leads  us  to  suspect
that  the  two  cases  are  not  at  all  the  same.  Is  there  then  com-
plete discontinuity  between  the  two  ?  Not  that  either,  as —

w.  p.  26


402 Conduct : Value,  Choice  and  Freedom [CH.  xvi,  §  3

repeating  the  question— we  shall  presently  see.  Did  the  man
really  prefer  the  lower  to  the  higher?  No,  says  the  impartial
spectator,  he  was  '  overtaken  in  a  fault ' ;  as  with  the  famished
Esau  only  the  momentary  clamour  of  hunger  was  heeded,  which
the  future  birthright  could  do  nothing  to  still.  No,  says  the  man
himself,  in  acting  as  I  did,  I  was  not  my  true  self;  as  with  Esau,
my  want  but  not  my  will  consented.  Nevertheless  both  society
and  the  man  himself  condemn  the  deed,  as  the  penalty  imposed
by  the  one,  and  the  remorse  so  often  felt  by  the  other,  plainly
attest.  How  then  explain  all  this  accusing  and  excusing?
Unless  there  is  continuity  between  the  two,  the  lower  self,  as
such  being  innocent,  cannot  be  blamed  ;  and  the  higher  self,  if
guilty,  cannot  be  excused.  That  in  fact  there  is  personal  con-
tinuity between  the  two — and,  within  the  limits  of  sanity,  con-
scious continuity — we  have  already  seen ;  and  that  in  consequence
there  is  continuity  in  the  development  of  values  or  value-move-
ments we  have  also  seen1.  In  view  of  these  facts  let  us  continue
to  examine  the  two  forms  of  choice  and  preference.

The  simpler  has  been  called  '  analytic '  or  '  axiomatic '
because  where  values  admit  of  quantitative  comparison  it  is
obvious  that  the  greater  will  be  preferred  before  the  less.  The
more  complex  form,  on  the  other  hand,  has  been  called
*  synthetic,'  because  here  the  preference  cannot  be  regarded  as
implicit  in  the  alternatives  themselves,  as  it  might  be  when  to
ascertain  the  greater  of  two  commensurables  is  the  sole  point  in
question2.  The  preference  of  the  higher,  in  this  second  instance,
is  the  result  of  a  new  act  of  subjective  selection.  It  is  still  true
of  the  '  harder '  choice,  that  it  gives  the  subject  greater  pleasure,
i.e.  greater  satisfaction,  than  the  rejected  alternative  would  have
given.  But  there  was  a  time  when  it  did  not  and  could  not  do
so,  and  it  only  does  so  now  because  the  subject  has  developed.
Psychologically  we  may  call  the  value  assigned  higher,  because
the  subject  in  assigning  it  is  at  a  higher  level.  Again  we  speak
of  this  value  as  having  a  positional  superiority  in  deliberation
because,  despite  its  inferiority  in  respect  of  intensity  and  urgency,
it  is  sustained  by  the  inhibitory  control  of  the  higher  self  over  the

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  xv,  §  i,  pp.  364,  367,  368;  and  §  i  above,  pp.  388  f.

2  This  terminology  is  due  to  H.  Schwarz,  Psychologic  des  Willens,  1900,  p.  290.
But  the  distinction  was  made  already  by  Fonsegrive,  Essai  sur  le  libre  arbitre,  1887,
pp. 441  ff.


CH.  xvi,  §  3]  Choice  403

momentary  impulses  of  the  lower1.  This,  we  may  say,  is  the
analogue  of  the  ratio,  in  our  simile  of  the  steelyard,  between
the  two  arms  of  the  lever.  The  longer  arm  corresponds  to
the  greater  complexity,  the  wider  range  in  time  and  space,  of  the
ends  embraced  in  self-interest  as  compared  with,  say,  the
immediate  but  passing  episodes  of  the  bodily  life.  It  is  these
that  tell  on  the  shorter  arm,  representing  the  fixed  and  finite
limits  of  the  lower  self.  Or  again  this  ratio  may  correspond  to
the  still  greater  complexity  and  still  remoter  reach  of  many
great  '  impersonal '  ends,  contrasted  with  which  personal  interests,
objectively  regarded,  are  comparatively  limited2.  As  we  may
imagine  a  balance  converted  into  a  more  and  more  efficient
steelyard  by  the  gradual  lengthening  of  one  arm,  so  we  may
represent  the  development  of  the  second  form  of  choice.  This
is  the  psychological  meaning  of  '  higher '  as  applied  to  motives.
It  answers  to  an  intellectual  but  not  necessarily  to  a  moral
advance.  Developed  intelligence,  a  growing  ideality  of  motives,
and  consistency  of  conduct  may  characterize  bad  men  as  well  as
good.  Hence  those  moralists  are  too  hasty  who  attempt  to
provide  ethics  with  a  scientific  basis  by  ranking  motives  on
a  positional  scale  that  is  merely  psychological3.

Since  the  values  submitted  to  deliberation  when  the  choice
must  be  synthetic,  differ  in  kind,  any  difficulty  in  deciding  can,
as  already  said,  never  be  due  to  a  quantitative  equality  and  so
be  settled  by  chance  or  'toss-up.'  When  the  validity  of  the
higher  value  is  admitted,  any  hesitancy  about  the  decision  is
ascribed  to  '  temptation.'  Either  we  shrink  from  the  more
heroic  course  or  we  are  allured  by  that  which  is  momentarily  the
more  captivating.  The  reverse  is  hardly  possible  :  accordingly
we  never  speak  of  being  enticed  by  the  higher  or  of  flinching
from  the  lower.  To  hesitate,  still  more  to  succumb  to  tempta-
tion, evinces,  we  say,  a  weakness  of  disposition :  we  assent  and
yet  do  not  consent.  So  long  as  the  call  for  action  is  not
immediate,  we  may  not  only  approve  but  even  resolve  ;  and
yet,  when  the  testing  moment  comes,  though  the  issues  are

1  Cf.  above,  p.  277  «.

2  Cf.  Spencer,  Data  of  Ethics,  §  42,  pp.  lo^fin.-g;  Stout,  Manual  of  Psychology,
3rd  ed.  p.  707.

3  This  both  Spencer  and  Martineau  did  or  came  very  near  doing. Cf.  Sorley,
Ethics  of  Naturalism,  2nd  ed.  1904,  pp.  278  ff. ;  Sidgwick,  Lectures  on  Ethics,  1902,
PP-  351  ff-

26—2


404 Conduct : Value,  Choice  and  Freedom [CH.  xvi,  §  3

tremendous,  we  make  '  through  cowardice  the  great  refusal.'
In  contrast  to  Celestine  V  to  whom  these  words  were  supposed
to  apply,  we  have  at  the  other  extreme  Luther  making  his  very
different  refusal  in  the  presence  of  Charles  V  :  "  So  I  believe  :
here  I  take  my  stand  and  I  cannot  do  else."

We  conclude,  then,  that  there  are  always  two  factors  in
choice — valuation  and  motivation,  neither  of  which  can  be
zero,  though  in  synthetic  choice  either  may  vary  independently,
inasmuch  as  the  'ratio'  between  alternative  values  may  differ
widely  from  that  between  the  corresponding  motives1.

Freedom.

§  4.  There  is  still,  however,  a  question  concerning  choice  to
be  considered  that  has  divided  mankind  since  thinking  began
and  seems  likely  long  to  divide  it — the  endless  controversy  as  to
a  so-called  '  freedom  of  will.'  So  far  as  this  question  concerns
psychology  we  have  no  need  to  avoid  it.  To  talk  in  this  con-
nexion of  will  is,  indeed,  to  lapse  into  the  confusions  of  the  old
faculty-psychology.  •  As  Locke  long  ago  urged  :  "  The  question
is  not  proper,  whether  the  will  be  free,  but  whetJiera  man  be  free*"
In  the  absence  of  external  constraint,  when  a  man  does  what  he
likes,  we  say  he  is  '  externally  free ';  but  he  may  still  be  the  slave
of  every  momentary  impulse,  and  then  it  is  said  that  he  is  not
'  internally '  free.  The  existence  and  nature  of  this  internal
freedom  is  the  problem.  But  as  such  freedom  is  held  to  imply
a  certain  sovereignty  or  autonomy  of  self  over  against  bodily
appetites  or  blind  desires,  there  can  obviously  be  no  question
of  its  existence  till  the  level  of  self-consciousness  is  reached  and
maxims  or  principles  of  action  are  possible.  The  young  child,
the  brute  and  the  imbecile,  even  when  they  do  as  they  like,  have
not  this  freedom ;  though  they  may  be  said  to  act  spontaneously,
that  is  without  constraint,  they  cannot  be  said  to  act  voluntarily
in  this  higher  sense.  A  resolutely  virtuous  man  will  have  more
freedom  of  this  higher  sort  than  the  man  of  good  moral  disposi-
tion who  often  succumbs  to  temptation  ;  but  it  is  equally  true
that  the  hardened  sinner  has  more  of  it  than  one  still  deterred
in  his  evil  ways  by  scruples  of  conscience.  A  man  is  internally

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  xi,  §  3,  pp.  281  ff.

1  Essay  concerning  Human  Understanding,  II.  xxi.  21:  cf.  §§  18  ff.


CH.  xvi,  §  4]  Freedom  405

free,  then,  whenever  the  ends  he  pursues  have  his  whole-hearted
approval,  whether  he  say  with  Milton's  Satan,  "  Evil  be  thou  my
good,"  or  with  Jesus,  "  Thy  will  be  done."  The  recognition  of
freedom  in  this  sense  does  not,  however,  commit  us  to  allowing
the  possible  existence  of  a  libenim  arbitrium  indifferentiae,  some-
times called  '  absolute  indeterminism  ' ;  for  that  would  seem  to
differ  in  no  respect  from  absolute  chance  or  caprice.  We  come
nearest  to  this  '  contingent  choice,'  when,  being  '  free  from  '  ex-
ternal constraints,  we  are  '  free  to '  take  either  of  two  courses,
which,  however,  are  indifferent  because  of  their  triviality,  or
practically  indistinguishable  because  of  their  identity,  in  value.
Then  it  is  that  we  feel  sure  we  could  have  chosen  differently,
when,  in  fact,  we  have  not  deliberately  chosen  at  all — an  experi-
ence, however,  that  is  possible  only  in  the  analytical  form  of  choice.
In  sharp  contrast  with  this  we  may  consider  such  an  experience
as  that  of  Luther  at  the  Diet  of  Worms  just  now  mentioned.
So  far  from  feeling  free  to  act  otherwise,  Luthqr  declared  "  Ich
kann  nicht  anders"  that  is  to  say,  Being  what  I  am  I  must  do
as  I  do.  There  is  nothing  indeterminate  here  unless  it  be  the
situation  for  the  outside  observer  :  to  him  both  the  alternatives
with  which  Luther  was  confronted  appear  objectively  possible.
In  a  similar  situation  Galileo  recanted  and  what  Galileo  did
Luther  seemingly  might  have  done,  and  would  have  done,  had
the  temptation  to  which  Galileo  succumbed  overmastered  him.
But,  as  it  was,  his  decision,  however  optional  from  the  outsider's
standpoint,  was  for  Luther  himself  a  case  of  determination —
determination  in  defiance  of  the  threat  of  death  that  his  enemies
without  held  over  him.  Was  he  then  free  ?  Not  absolutely  free
certainly,  since  he  was  forced  to  choose,  but  free  in  the  sense
that  the  decision  was  made  by  him  and  not  for  him.  It  was
a  case  of  determination,  indeed,  but  it  was  self-determination.
And  this,  for  psychology  at  any  rate,  is  all  that  internal  freedom
means1.

Self-determination  is  often  interpreted  as  if  it  meant  merely
freedom  from  constraint  but  involved  no  freedom  to  initiate.
A  man,  it  is  said,  may  be  free  to  act  as  he  likes  but  he  is  never

1  For  the  '  presentationist '  psychology,  of  course,  '  self-determination '  is  either
unmeaning  or  has  to  be  explained  away  (cf.  Bain,  The  Emotions  and  the  Will,  3rd
ed.  1875,  pp.  491  f.).  But  as  in  the  last  chapter,  so  here,  it  has  not  seemed  necessary
in  view  of  what  has  been  said  earlier,  to  take  the  presentationist  view  into  account.


406 Conduct : Vahie,  Choice  and  Freedom [CH.  xvi,  §  4

free  to  like  as  he  likes.  His  actions  disclose  his  character,  but
character  is  nothing  but  nature  modified  by  circumstances  ;  and
however  much  they  may  continue  to  modify  it,  it  remains  nothing
but  the  resultant  of  these  two.  Operari  sequitur  esse,  when  all  is
said  and  done — a  proposition  just  as  applicable  to  a  man  as
it  is  to  a  stone.  This,  the  '  determinist '  as  distinct  from  the
'  libertarian  '  view  of  conduct,  may  be  disposed  of — so  far  at  least
as  we  are  here  concerned  with  it — by  three  or  four  brief  re-
marks, (i)  Whether  or  no  metaphysics  can  tell  us  all
about  the  real  essence  either  of  men  or  stones,  certainly  psy-
chology cannot.  So  far  as  psychology  goes,  a  man's  nature  is
his  character,  that  by  which  he  is  '  individuated,'  whether  it  be
called  '  original '  or  '  acquired.'  In  psychology  this  distinction
is  entirely  relative,  a  question  simply  of  earlier  or  later,  with  no
hint  of  first  or  last.  Every  man  shares  with  others  the  specific
nature  that  we  call  human;  but  this  nature  is  equally  entitled
to  be  called  the  character  that  our  psychological  individual  in
the  course  of  experience  has  gradually  acquired.  But  no  man
shares  with  others  the  particular  character  that,  together  with
his  human  nature,  constitutes  his  concrete  personality.  The
psychological  individual  in  short — with  whom  we  have  been
hitherto  concerned — may  be  regarded  as  the  type  that  covers
all  concrete  individuals — so  far  as  these  are  normal — but  ex-
haustively represents  none.  (2)  But  analytic  psychology,
we  repeat,  knows  nothing  about  absolute  origin  ;  and  cannot,
therefore,  talk  of  the  nature  of  an  experient  who  as  yet  has  not
begun  to  experience,  or  to  be  conditioned  by  circumstances,  which
is  what  all  experience  means.  Precisely  in  this  respect,  a  man,
like  all  other  experients,  differs  from  a  stone  or  thing  ;  and  in
this  wide  sense  we  may  say  that  experients  or  persons  have
a  different  nature  from  things.  Persons  literally  work  or  strive
(operari),  things  are  only  metaphorically  said  to  do  so  :  persons
are  not  inert,  merely  passive  or  indifferent ;  they  are  active,
interested  and  directive.  It  is  appropriate  therefore  to  talk
of  circumstances  in  their  case  but  not  in  the  case  of  inanimate
things.  (3)  Circumstances,  anyhow,  carry  a  different
meaning  in  each  case :  to  deny  this  is  to  beg  the  question  and
to  ignore  plain  facts.  A  weather-cock  may  be  described  as  the
mere  sport  of  circumstances,  a  man  is  always  more.  He  is  not
merely  "  a  pipe  for  Fortune's  finger  to  sound  what  stop  she


CH.  xvi,  §  4]  Freedom  407

please."  For  him  circumstances  are  often  but  occasions.  They
may  call  for  resource,  test  his  strength  or  his  principles,  but
often  he  turns  them  into  opportunities  for  progress  or  at  the
worst  he  may  struggle  and  defy  them.  Even  if  he  succumb  to  a
sudden  temptation  or  to  an  overmastering  passion  he  is  not  left
unchanged.  He  may  fall  a  second  time  more  easily,  he  may,
however,  be  wiser  for  his  bitter  experience ;  which,  will  depend  on
his  character.  But  there  are  no  such  crises  for  things  inert :  for
the  living,  life  is  full  of  them.  So  far  from  a  man's  character
being  determined  entirely  by  circumstances  it  is  circumstances
that  receive  their  character  from  him :  otherwise  they  have  no
character  at  all.  To  him  pertains  the  standard  by  which  their
values  are  appraised  ;  and  to  him  the  motives  they  may  occasion
owe  their  strength1.  (4)  It  is  true  of  brutes  that  they

can  like,  but  not  distinguish  too,
Nor  their  own  liking  by  reflection  know.

But  it  is  not  true  of  man  as  a  rational  being.  Raised  to  the
transsubjective  standpoint  through  intercourse  with  his  fellows,
he  has  within  his  reach  the  gift  to  see  himself  as  others  see  him,
he  has  in  conscience  a  standard  by  which  to  estimate  even  him-
self ;  he  can  by  taking  thought  add  to  his  mental,  and  still  more
to  his  moral,  stature ;  he  may  now  have  an  ideal  and  he  can
determine  proprio  motu  to  strive  to  realise  it.

What  that  ideal  is  depends  largely  upon  his  present  or  '  ac-
quired character,'  i.e.  upon  what  he  has  become  in  the  course  of
experience.  To  study  this  process,  the  formation  of  character,
in  detail  is  beyond  our  pale ;  though  so  far  as  it  is  continuous
with  what  lies  within  this,  we  shall  attempt  presently  to  discuss
it  somewhat  further.  Meanwhile  we  may  claim  on  empirical
grounds  to  have  found  that  psychological  freedom  is  not  only
negative  but  positive,  not  mere  freedom  from  constraint  but  free-
dom to  initiate,  to  turn  circumstances  to  account,  even — thanks
to  the  TTOV  o-Tto  that  reason  affords — so  to  deal  with  oneself.

1  This  question  is  discussed  at  greater  length  in  The  Realm  of  Ends,  ind  ed.
1912,  pp.  283-291,  and  in  consequence  greater  brevity  has  seemed  permissible  here.
Cf.  also  K.  Joel,  Der freie  Wille,  1908.


CHAPTER  XVII

GENERAL SYNTHESIS OF MIND AND THE
CONCRETE INDIVIDUAL

The  topic  with  which  we  began  this  essay  in  psychology
was  a  general  analysis  of  Mind,  understanding  by  mind  'the
subject  of  experience  plus  its  experience.'  The  analysis  was
called  general  because  it  took  'no  account  of  the  specific
differences  between  one  concrete  experience  and  another1.'  The
topic — with  which  the  essay  is  to  close — the  formation  of
character — pertains  to  a  general  synthesis  of  Mind,  understood
in  the  same  sense ;  though  the  emphasis  in  this  connexion  will
have  to  be  on  the  experient  rather  than  on  the  experience.
The  word  'character'  usually  means  'an  outward  and  visible
sign.'  It  would  seem  therefore  to  point  to  the  objective  structure,
the  so-called  '  contents  of  mind ' ;  here,  however,  '  characteristics  '
seems  the  more  appropriate  term.  Psychologically  '  character '
is  commonly  held  to  imply  '  the  inward  and  spiritual '  ground
to  which  that  structure  ultimately  owes  its  form — the  synthe-
sizing subject  manifested  in  the  synthesis,  that  is  to  say.

Actually,  of  course,  all  synthesis  must  be  concrete  and
particular,  both  as  regards  function  and  structure.  It  seems
fitting,  however,  partly  as  a  final  retrospect,  partly  as  opening
out  further  problems,  to  consider  synthesis  in  general  without
immediate  reference  to  any  actual  synthesis  such  as  the  phrase
'formation  of  character'  naturally  suggests.  Accordingly  we
shall  try  first  to  describe  as  much  as  we  can  know  of  the
becoming  of  our  psychological  individual  :  he  can  hardly  be
said  to  have  a  particular  character  any  more  than  anthropo-
logically he  can  be  said  to  have  a  particular  physiognomy.
Then  in  taking  leave  of  him  altogether  we  must  glance  at  the
problems  he  has  enabled  us  for  a  time  to  evade,  problems  that

1  Cf.  above  ch.  i,  §  5,  pp.  24  f. ;  ch.  ii,  §  2,  p.  39,  §  6,  pp.  55  f.


CH.  xvii,  §  i]  General  Synthesis  409

beset  'the  formation  of  character'  when  we  find  concrete  in-
dividuals confronting  us.  Thus  a  long  digression  seems  advis-
able before  we  can  resume  our  exposition  as  we  left  it  in  the
preceding  chapter1.


General  Syntfiesis.

§  i.  Here  all  the  distinguishable  processes  that  constitute
experiencing,  which  in  earlier  chapters  have  been  dealt  with
for  the  most  part  separately,  have  now  to  be  considered  together
as  constituting  a  single  whole.  To  this  end  we  may  attempt
first  to  portray  this  synthesis  as  it  presents  itself  to  the  psycho-
logical observer  no  longer  trammelled  by  the  exigencies  of
exposition,  that  is  to  say,  as  one  continuous  temporal  process.
What  we  have  called  plasticity  is  then  the  proximate  fact :  and
what  we  observe  might  be  described  as  psychogeny  or  psychical
ontogeny.  Differentiation,  retentiveness,  and  assimilation — or
correlation,  as  we  may  now  say,  since  the  total  assimilation  is
complex — are  alone  directly  implied2.  But  these  are  not  all :
the  underlying  agencies  at  work,  on  the  one  hand  subjective
selection,  on  the  other  environmental  influences — natural  and
social — will  also  have  to  be  considered.  We  can,  however,
provide  no  first  chapter  to  this  Genesis ;  for  where  our  ultimate
analysis  ended,  the  synthesis  had  already  begun  ;  a  complete
account  of  it  is  therefore  impossible.  As  we  have  had  frequently
to  remark,  the  very  beginnings  of  things  are  beyond  us,  stationed
as  we  are  in  mediis  rebus3.  Moreover  synthesis  as  a  direct
process  precedes  analysis,  which  is  an  indirect  one;  though

1  But  after  all  what  is  proposed  is  not  so  much  to  make  a  digression ;  rather  it  is
to  effect  a  transition,  the  transition,  that  is,  from  '  general  psychology ' — to  which  this
essay  is  in  the  main  confined — to  '  special  or  individual  psychology,'  a  new  and  almost
unexplored  domain,  at  which  we  shall  hardly  be  able  even  '  to  glance.' To  make  good
its  essential  conformity  with  our  general  psychology  is  about  all  we  can  attempt. Cf.
below,  ch.  xviii,  §§4,  5.

2  The  reader  may  here  be  reminded  of  J.  S.  Mill's  Ethology  or  '  the  science  of  the
formation  of  character '  deduced  as  a  bundle  of  corollaries  from  '  the  general  laws  of
mind '  as  these  were  expounded  by  James  Mill,  Bain  and  himself. Nothing  of  the
sort  is  however  intended  in  this  place,  as  will  presently  appear. For  a  criticism  of
Mill's  Ethology  the  writer  may  refer  to  an  article  of  his  in  The  International  Journal
of  Ethics,  July,  1891.

J  A  truism,  we  may  note  by  the  way,  that  even  Herbert  Spencer  came  at  length
to  recognise.  Cf.  his  First  Principles,  6th  ed.  1900,  appendix  A.  pp.  513^  and  the
criticism,  Naturalism  and  Agnosticism,  4th  ed.  1915,  note  VI,  pp.  595  f.


4io Mind  and  the  Concrete  Individiial  [CH.  xvn,  §  I

analysis  be  first  in  the  order  of  knowledge,  synthesis  is  first  in
the  order  of  existence.

The  proximate  fact  for  the  psychological  observer  is,  how-
ever— this  much,  at  least,  we  may  safely  say — a  unity  that  is
differentiated.  But,  though  differentiated,  it  is  not  disintegrated.
On  the  contrary,  the  further  the  differentiation  proceeds  the
more  apparent  becomes  the  solidarity  and  consentience,  the
work  of  synthesis  within  the  whole.  In  studying  this  synthesis,
the  analogies  that  guided  Herbert  Spencer  in  treating  the  same
topic  are  the  best  we  have ;  and  psychology  is  much  indebted
to  him  on  this  score.  Biology,  that  is  to  say,  not  organic
chemistry  with  its  'compound  radicals,'  on  which  Mill  relied,
will  furnish  the  most  apposite  illustrations  of  the  development
of  the  mind  or  experience  of  the  psychological  individual1.  Be-
tween the  advance  from  the  egg  to  the  chicken  and  that  from  the
child's  mind  to  the  man's,  the  parallel,  mutatis  mutandis,  is  very
close.  At  the  beginning  pronounced  homogeneity,  plasticity,
potentiality,  rather  than  defined  features ;  at  the  close  pronounced
heterogeneity,  structure,  actuality — disclosing  a  person  with
unique  traits.  Yet  first  and  last  an  indivisible  unity.  The
gradual  delineation  and  correlation  of  those  traits  in  their  en-
tirety— as  the  manifestation  of  character  in  genere  so  to  say —
is  what  we  must  now  endeavour  briefly  to  follow.

In  this  endeavour  our  main  aim  will  be  to  make  clear  what
hitherto  has  been  and  could  be,  only  imperfectly  indicated ;
viz.  that  at  every  step  the  subjective  and  the  objective  aspects,
function  and  structure,  the  experient  and  the  experienced,
mutually  mould  and  modify  each  other.  But  in  the  analytic
study  the  objective  results  were  the  more  obtrusive,  whereas —
as  just  now  said — in  the  synthetic  the  subjective  process  is
paramount.  Here  it  is  '  the  good,  which  every  soul  pursues  '
that  is  the  supreme  clue  to  all  the  intricacies  of  psychical
development.  Apart  from  this,  mere  knowledge  of  good  and
evil — if  it  were  possible — would  be  valueless :  the  one  would
entice  as  little  as  the  other  would  intimidate ;  in  fact,  desire  or
aversion,  hope  or  fear — all  motives  to  exertion — would  be  non-
existent or  meaningless.  For  interest  alone  begets  knowledge,
though  knowledge  awakens  new  interests  and  discovers  the

1  Cf.  Spencer,  Principles  of  Psychology, pt. iii. General  Synthesis,  especially
ch.  xi.


CH.  xvii,  §  i]  General  Synthesis  411

means  to  their  satisfaction.  So — as  '  it  goes  cycling  on  ' — the
range  of  experience  continuously  extends,  its  '  contents '  be-
coming at  once  more  diversified,  more  harmonized,  more  unified.
If  we  contemplate  this  process  from  the  subjective  side,  we
may  wonder — like  Darwin1  in  an  analogous  case — how  an  in-
dividuality of  such  unsearchable  complexity  should  emerge
'  from  so  simple  a  beginning '  as  subjective  preference.  If  we
contemplate  it  from  the  objective  side,  we  may  wonder  how  so
much  order  and  system  could  be  evolved  out  of  the  bewildering
variety  of  impressions  with  which  the  world  confronts  us2.  The
explanation  lies  (i)  in  the  steady  subjective  orientation  towards
the  good,  tentative,  and  erring  indeed  but  none  the  less  per-
sistent ;  and  (2)  in  the  plasticity  of  the  objective  continuum.
There  is,  then,  a  single  agent  on  the  one  side  and  a  continuous
'  field  '  before  it  on  the  other  :  the  one  we  may  call  the  primum
movens,  the  other  the  material  condition,  of  psychogeny8.

Both  are  essential,  but  the  presentationist  (or  associationist)
recognising  only  the  latter  assumes  all  the  shaping  of  the  plastic
material  to  be  determined  from  without.  "  The  persistence  of  the
connexion  between  the  states  of  consciousness  is  proportionate
to  the  persistence  of  the  connexions  between  the  agencies  to
which  they  answer,"  said  Herbert  Spencer4.  Such  a  position,
though  it  be  false,  is  after  all  not  surprising.  For  not  only,  as
I  have  said  elsewhere,  does  presentationism  account  (proximately)
for  some  nine-tenths  of  the  facts,  or  better  perhaps  for  nine-
tenths  of  each  fact5;  but,  since  these  nine-tenths  are  all  that  are
presented,  it  may  seem  that  the  onus  probandi  rests  on  others
of  shewing  that  these  are  not  the  whole.  The  presentationist's
services  to  psychology  have,  however,  been  greater  than  he
knows.  The  more  he  has  succeeded  in  making  the  structure
of  the  nine-tenths  clear  the  more  he  has  unintentionally  brought
to  light  the  fact  that  this  presentational  structure  implies  a
subjective  function.  This  fact  the  common  sense  of  mankind
including  the  great  majority  of  psychologists  since  the  days  of
Aristotle  has  recognised.  It  is  true  that  an  epistemologically

1  Origin  of  Species,  last  sentence.

2  Cf.  Waitz,  Lehrbuch  der  Psychologie,  1849,  pp.  679  f.

3  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  i,  p.  31.

4  Op.  cit.  pt.  iv.  ch.  ii.  The  Law  of  Intelligence,  §  183.

6  Cf.  the  article  "  Modern  Psychology,"  Mind,  1893,  p.  80.


412 Mind  and  the  Concrete  Individual  [CH.  xvn,  §  I

objective  factor — an  environment — emerges  at  the  transsub-
jective  level  out  of  the  fundamental  '  duality  of  subject  and
object.'  But  this  objective  factor  will  not  explain  the  diversity
of  individual  experiences  any  more  than  the  soil  and  climate
of  a  garden-plot  will  account  for  the  diversity  of  the  plants  it
contains.

The  Subjective  Factor.

§  2.  (i)  What  first  concerns  us  then  is  the  genesis  of
this  experience  regarded  as  an  organic  whole — the  self-made
property  of  our  psychological  individual — regarded  structurally
that  is  to  say.  Such  development,  we  have  repeatedly  urged,
is  not  correctly  described  as  if  it  were  merely  a  definite  arrange-
ment, merely  an  'organization'  of  an  originally  confused  medley
of  'elements1.'  That  would  be  the  psychological  equivalent  of
the  abiogenesis,  to  which  distinguished  biologists  like  Sir  Edward
Schaefer  and  Professor  Loeb  still  cling2.  As  bioplasm,  not  a
concourse  of  atoms,  is  for  the  present  the  limiting  term  for
biology,  so  we  may  speak  of  psychoplasm3,  and  not  a  'manifold
of  sensations'  or  'mindstuff'  as  our  present  limit  in  empirical
psychology.  Of  the  more  ultimate  nature  of  either  plasm,  of
the  precise  relations  of  one  to  the  other,  or  of  the  relation  of  life
in  the  physiological  sense  to  experience  or  life  in  the  psycho-
logical sense,  on  all  these  points,  we  certainly  know  little  and
need  for  the  present  say  nothing4.  But  the  analogy  between
biogenesis  and  psychogenesis  is  both  indisputable  and  striking :
we  have  several  times  been  led  incidentally  to  note  it.  Genesis
in  both  cases  implies  a  unity  that  is  shaped  from  within — a
conception,  be  it  observed,  that  is  essentially  non-mechanical5.

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  iv,  §  2,  pp.  77  f. ;  ch.  vii,  §  2,  pp.  183  f.  On  monadistic  lines,
however,  an  interpretation  approximating  to  this  may  perhaps  be  justified,  but  it  goes
far  beyond  our  psychological  facts:  it  is  a  speculative  'first  chapter'  in  place  of  the
psychological  one,  which  we  have  had  to  admit  to  be  lacking.

3  To  say  that  facts  to  support  them  are  not  yet  forthcoming  is  as  true  to-day  as  it
was  when  Huxley  as  President  of  the  British  Association  said  so  in  1870.  Cf.  the
Address  "Biogenesis  and  Abiogenesis,"  Collected  Essays,  viii.  pp.  229-271.

3  Using  this  term  to  replace  the  more  unwieldy  '  plastic,  psychologically  objective,
continuum '  used  above.

4  Cf.  below,  §  4,  and  §  47  on  the  Relation  of  Body  and  Mind  in  the  Ency.  Brit.
article,  vol.  xxii,  pp.  600  ff.

5  Cf.  Driesch,  The  Problem  of  Individuality,  1914,  also  Science  and  Philosophy  of
the  Organism,  2  vols.  1907-8.


CH.  xvn,  §  2] The  Subjective  Factor  413

To  describe  psychical  ontogeny  as  fully  as  our  knowledge
allows  we  ought  to  start  from  the  elementary  psychosis  or
Seelenaugenblick — to  use  Rehmke's  expressive  term — tabulated
in  our  analytic  summary1.  But — if  we  do  not  forget  how  much
we  are  leaving  behind — it  will  suffice  for  our  present  purpose  to
observe  this  evolution  within  the  limits  of  a  human  lifetime;  for
to  these  limits  the  concrete  individual  is  confined.  This  may
be  briefly  done.

Between  the  behaviour  of  small  children  and  the  conduct  of
men  there  is  one  striking  contrast :  life  is  mostly  play  for  the
one,  it  is  mostly  work  for  the  other.  The  child  at  first  is
altogether  '  bird-witted  ' — to  use  Bacon's  phrase  :  its  attention  is
ever  flitting  from  one  momentary  impression  to  another.  It
finds  but  it  does  not  seek  ;  and  so  at  first  its  one  objective  con-
nexion is  that  of  its  '  memory-thread.'  There  is  as  yet  scarcely
a  trace  of  recognition  of  either  order  or  meaning;  for  these,  like
the  patterns  in  a  kaleidoscope,  depend  on  repetition.  There  are
also  few  signs  of  preference  or  purpose — save,  of  course,  of  the
instinctive  sort2:  for  any  others  await  the  acquisition  of  fami-
liarity and  facility,  and  this  again  takes  time.  But  a  man  at
length  and  intent  upon  success  in  his  career,  the  child  that  was
is  now  too  absorbed  to  give  much  heed  to  'things  in  general'  :
between  him  and  them  there  now  intervenes  a  strictly  personal
environment  gradually  defined  and  selected  as  the  psychogeny
itself  has  progressed.  The  flimsy  clouds  of  glory  that  lay  about
him  in  his  infancy,  in  taking  a  soberer  colouring,  have  taken  also
a  stabler  form.  If  the  reality  that  closes  upon  him  is  less  of  a
fairy  palace  it  is  more  of  a  home ;  for  the  child,  as  father  of  the
man,  has  shaped  himself  a  tabernacle  out  of  those  '  shadowy
recollections '  that  now  seem  but  a  dream.  Gradually  the  con-
stituents of  the  memory-thread  have  become  more  complicated
as  perception  has  advanced;  and  also  more  coherent  as,  through
reduplication  and  comparison,  this  thread  has  been  elaborated
into  ideational  tissue.  Thenceforward  inherent  congruity  begins
steadily  to  predominate  over  merely  contingent  or  '  contiguous '
association.  Generic  images  are  converted  by  degrees  into  con-
cepts ;  and,  as  the  command  of  language  increases,  the  ideational
tissue  is  at  once  condensed  and  transfigured  into  new  and  higher

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  6,  p.  56,  and  note.

2  These  belong  to  the  earlier  stages  which  we  have  agreed  to  leave  behind.


414 Mind  and  the  Concrete  Individual  [CH.  xvn,  §  2

forms  of  thought  or  fancy.  So  stable  intellective  systems,
directly  or  indirectly  subserving  practice,  are  elaborated  and
correlated.  In  short,  restriction  and  organic  structure  have
replaced  the  primitive  '  diffusion  or  irradiation ' :  a  microcosm
more  or  less  perfect  and  complete  now  manifests  the  subject
that  has  shaped  it,  and  the  place  which  this  occupies  in  that
larger  world  from  which  it  now  sharply  distinguishes  itself.

If  the  plastic  continuity  of  this  long  process  debars  us  from
describing  it  as  a  mere  '  organization '  of  a  quasi-atomic  aggre-
gate or  sensation-manifold,  determined  by  certain  quasi-mechani-
cal laws  ;  if  also  its  uniqueness  compels  us  to  recognise  the
subjective  factor  as  formative  throughout ;  then  may  we  not
interpret  it  as  the  genesis  of  a  psychical  organism,  a  gradually
articulated  system,  implying  correspondingly  coordinated  func-
tions ?  As  we  say  that  the  child  when  born  is  possessed  of  a
viable  physical  organism,  may  we  not  say  that  as  he  advances
towards  adolescence  he  becomes  possessed  of  a  mental  organism
making  him  '  viable '  as  a  person  in  a  society  of  persons  ?

(ii)  What  next  concerns  us — and  this  will  justify  our  inter-
pretation— is  to  regard  this  genesis  in  the  light  of  the  subjective
activity,  which,  as  we  have  maintained,  it  really  implies,  to
regard  it  functionally  that  is  to  say.  From  first  to  last  the  growing
structure  just  summarily  described — we  must  now  note — is  the
work  of  the  subject  so  surely  as  feeling  and  attention,  or  in  one
word,  interest,  is  essential  to  mental  synthesis  in  any  form.  There
must  be  material  to  synthesize,  of  course :  we  cannot  synthesize
what  is  not  'given.'  But  we  do  not  synthesize  merely  on  the
ground  of  presentation.  Differentiation  implies  some  concentra-
tion of  attention ;  but  effective  synthesis  implies  interest  as  well.
The  mere  surprise  or  '  shock '  that  non-voluntarily  determines  a
momentary  notice,  unless  accompanied  or  immediately  followed
by  either  pain  or  pleasure,  leads  to  nothing1.  So  far  this  'shock'
answers  simply  to  the  receptive  movement  of  attention  as

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  x,  §  i,  p.  244.  But  to  describe  this  state  as  one  in  which  feeling
is  '  neutral '  or  indifferent  and  yet  to  identify  it  with  excitement,  as  Bain  did,  is  surely
bad  analysis.  Plenty  of  people  go  in  search  of  excitement,  but  does  anyone  hanker
after  feeling  that  is  neutral  or  indifferent  ?  In  Mind,  O.S.  vols.  xii.-xiv.  there  is  a
full  discussion  of  this  topic  led  off  by  Bain  himself.  The  reply  of  Professor  Sully
(xiii.  pp.  248  ff.)  is  especially  good.  How  little  the  non-voluntary  movements  of
attention  have  to  do  with  psychical  life — though  we  may  regard  them  as  awakening
it — is  shewn  by  the  almost  universal  neglect  of  this  topic  by  psychologists.


CH.  xvn,  §  2] The  Subjective  Factor  415

distinct  from  the  active.  If  it  prove  to  be  uninteresting —
neither  hurtful  nor  helpful — it  is  soon  ignored,  however  startling
it  may  have  been  at  first ;  as  we  may  see,  for  example,  in  the
readiness  with  which  animals  '  get  used  '  to  trains.  If,  however,
it  prove  to  be  interesting,  there  is  always  reaction  :  something
positive  is  learnt  and  something  actual  is  done.  These  two
complementary  processes,  ignoring  on  the  one  side,  selecting  on
the  other1,  become  more  pronounced  the  more — with  advancing
experience — the  subjective  initiative  increases.  So  the  objective
differentiation  progresses  on  subjectively  determined  lines.  This
is  for  psychology  the  first  and  fundamental  fact :  to  lose  sight
of  it  is  to  miss  the  essential  meaning  of  experience2.

But  on  the  one  hand  we  dislike  change  and  on  the  other  we
seek  it.  These  differences  must  be  explained  or  reconciled.
Obviously  aversion  to  all  change  would  tend  towards  a  stationary
state,  while  the  exclusive  pursuit  of  change,  were  it  possible,
would  put  an  end  to  all  continuity.  Stability  and  progression,  in
a  word)  are  correlative  conditions  of  psychical,  as  they  are  of  all
other,  evolution.  The  changes  that  we  dislike,  then,  are  such  as
frustrate  what  is  done  ;  whereas  those  that  we  seek  are  such  as
may  further  what  is  still  to  do.  The  one  implies  the  interest  of
self-conservation,  the  other  that  of  self-betterment.  So  long  as
all  goes  well,  the  latter  may  predominate,  for  it  means  more  and
fuller  life ;  only  in  the  contrary  case  does  the  former  become
paramount,  for  then  the  life  we  already  have  is  threatened.  It  is
thus  easy  to  see  how,  normally,  as  experience  advances,  increased
familiarity  and  facility  within  its  present  limits — just  because
there  it  has  become  chiefly  routine,  our  'dead  selves' — prompt
us  to  gaze  into  the  future  for  the  ways  and  means  of  advance  to
'  higher  things.'

We  are  then  at  the  ideational  level,  and  the  one  thing  we
have  to  notice  there  is  that  the  subjective  selection  we  have
found  shaping  experience  at  the  perceptual  level  is  still  more
evident  at  this,  and  becomes  increasingly  evident  the  further  the
ideational  synthesis  proceeds.  Already  reduplications  of  the

1  We  may  note  here  a  certain  converse  relation  between  subjective  selection  and
natural  selection  :  the  one  rejects  by  positively  selecting,  the  other  selects  by  positively
rejecting. Nature  eliminates  the  unfit,  leaving  the  fittest  to  survive,  experients  select
what  interests  them  and  are  indifferent  to  all  beside.

2  Cf.  above,  ch.  i,  §  4,  p.  20 fin. ;  ch.  iii,  §  3,  p.  72  fin.


4i 6 Mind  and  the  Concrete  Individual  [CH.  xvn,  §  2

memory-thread  had  led  to  preperceptions  and,  if  the  situation
meant  anything  to  the  subject,  to  an  appropriate  motor  attitude
or  response.  So  far  to  provide  was  not  merely  to  foresee  but
also  to  prepare.  But  when  from  such  experiences  free  ideas  at
length  emerge,  they  too  are  gradually  synthesized  by  the  subject
in  seeking  how  to  bring  things  nearer  to  the  heart's  desire — not
primarily  then  for  the  sake  of  theory  but  entirely  for  the  sake  of
life.  In  other  words  the  synthesis  here  as  earlier  is  a  working
synthesis,  specification  for  action,  'instrumental,'  organic  anyhow,
even  when  defective.  And  if  effective — we  may  add  by  the  way
— assuredly  true  as  well ;  and  not  true  because  it  is  useful  but
useful  because  it  is  true.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  the  distinction
between  psychological  order  and  logical  order  is  important.  To
identify  the  two  in  this  case  seems  to  be  the  mistake  of  some
pragmatists;  but  to  insist  on  the  genetic  priority  for  experience
of  the  teleological  and  practical  is  certainly  a  merit.

It  may  be  remarked  by  anticipation,  that  even  at  the  higher
level,  to  which  we  are  presently  to  pass,  the  pursuit  of  truth  '  for
its  own  sake '  as  we  say,  which  is  then  possible,  is  also  essentially
conative  and  practical.  We  try  and  fail  and  try  again.  We
have  to  devise  means,  which  we  call  methods  and  hypotheses  ;
and  the  entire  process  is  sustained  by  subjective  interest.  In
spite  of  its  special  character — in  that  what  we  seek  is  certainly
not  personal  advantage — the  pursuit  of  truth  even  more  than
simpler  conations  depends  on  subjective  selection.  The  interest
in  it  is  not  less  keen,  if  more  disinterested,  than  the  pursuit  of
useful  knowledge  merely  as  a  means,  to  attain  which  the  efforts
of  its  pursuit  are  secondary.  But  presently,  for  some  at  any
rate,  the  pleasure  of  the  pursuit  converts  this  too  into  an  end  in
itself.  The  end  as  well  as  the  means  being  then  intrinsically
valued,  we  realise  so  far  the  ideal  of  subjective  activity.

To  realise  this  ideal  completely — '  so  that  every  power  find
sweet  employ ' — becomes  the  goal  of  human  endeavour  at  the
intellectual  level,  and  brings  subjective  selection  more  than  ever
to  the  fore.  For  the  realisation  of  ideals,  since  they  actually  are
not  but  only  are  to  be,  obviously  presupposes  that  the  subject
selects,  pursues,  and — maybe — achieves  them.  Again  'synthetic
preference,'  which  is  possible  only  at  this  level,  is,  as  already  said,
due  entirely  to  subjective  selection.

Here  psychogeny,  so  far  as  the  psychological  individual  is


CH.  xvn,  §  3]  The  (epistemo  logic  ally]  Objective  Factor  417

concerned,  is  for  us  at  an  end :  the  superman  dwells  in  the  realm
of  fancy  not  of  fact.  But  the  comparative  study  of  concrete
individuals  opens  up  an  enormous  field,  so  great  is  the  diversity,
and  so  many  the  grades  of  development  within  the  limits  of  the
human  type.  It  is  in  this  connexion  that  we  commonly  talk  of
character,  and  under  this  head  we  are  to  try  presently  to  study
psychogeny  a  little  further.  Before  taking  leave  of  the  psycho-
logical individual,  we  have,  however,  still  to  glance  at  the  other
factor  which  his  psychogeny  involves  besides  subjective  selection,
viz.  the  objective  factor  which — somewhat  stretching  the  term —
we  might  regard  as  the  analogue  of  natural  selection.

The  (epistemologically)  Objective  Factor.

§  3.  By  objective  factor  three  distinct  things  might  be  meant :
the  presentational  continuum,  i.e.  the  psychoplasm  which  ex-
perience differentiates  and  organizes  ;  or  the  physical  world  as
science  conceives  it,  to  which  our  bodily  organism  pertains ;  or
the  world  in  which  we  live,  the  world  of  nature  and  history  as
common  sense  understands  it.  The  last  of  these  is  the  epistemo-
logically objective  factor  just  now  referred  to — the  world  that
each  one  comes  to  know  and  distinguish  from  himself  and
his  psychical  organism,  only  after  attaining  the  transsubjective
level.  With  this  we  begin.  It  includes  all  that  we  commonly
describe  collectively  as  circumstances  whether  physical  or  social;
whatever,  in  other  words,  is  an  antecedent  condition  or  occasion,
on  the  psychological  side,  of  the  successive  syntheses  that  diffe-
rentiate and  articulate  what  we  call  the  psychical  organism.
Some  circumstances  betoken  the  accomplishment  of  our  pur-
poses, some  are  due  to  the  purposes  of  others  interested  on
our  behalf.  The  increase  in  the  number  and  worth  of  such
circumstances  may  be  the  surest  index  of  the  world's  progress.
Meanwhile  circumstances  for  the  most  part  remain  independent
of  the  several  activities  of  particular  individuals  and  are — so  far
as  they  are  concerned — contingent,  if  not  fortuitous.  And,  for  us
now,  this  independence  is  the  primary  fact :  it  holds  good  of  all
circumstances  as  they  stand,  whatever  their  origin.  This  is  just
what  objectivity  means  psychologically  as  well  as  epistemo-
logically. Regarding  circumstances  in  this  light  and  from  the
transsubjective  level,  it  would  seem  we  were  entitled  to  say  that

w.  p.  27


4i 8 Mind  and  the  Concrete  Individual  [CH.  xvn,  §  3

their  presentation  is,  directly  or  indirectly,  the  material  from
which  is  selected  whatever  is  synthesized.  —  Nevertheless  the
distinction  between  natural  and  social  environment  is  vital :  to
attempt  to  discuss  them  together  further  would  only  confuse.

The  part  which  the  natural  environment  plays — to  begin  with
that — is  directly  and  in  the  main  negative.  We  may  call  this
strictly  natural  selection  ;  but — as  already  said — it  does  not  like
subjective  selection  actively  construct  or  synthesize  :  it  does  not
itself  promote  either  conservation  or  betterment.  It  only  re-
strains ;  it  may  do  this,  however,  so  severely  as  not  only  to  arrest,
but — so  far  at  least  as  we  can  see — to  terminate  the  subjective
process  altogether.  This  contrast  is  so  important  and  so  wide
reaching — applying  both  to  biological  and  to  psychological
ontogeny — as  to  justify  a  moment's  reflexion  even  in  an  essay
on  psychology.  It  is  fundamentally  the  contrast  with  which  we
are  nowadays  familiar  as  the  contrast  between  the  mechanical
and  the  historical.  The  more  rigorously  the  concatenation  of
the  essentially  changeless  and  inanimate  system  of  the  former
is  specified,  the  more  manifest  the  creative  functions  of  life  and
mind  become.  In  the  one  there  is  no  novelty,  in  the  other  no
repetition1.  To  quote  the  fine  concluding  sentence  of  Darwin's
Origin  of  Species  just  now  referred  to2:  "There  is  grandeur  in

this  view  of  life that,  whilst  this  planet  has  gone  cycling  on

according  to  the  fixed  law  of  gravity,  from  so  simple  a  beginning
forms  most  beautiful  and  most  wonderful  have  been,  and  are  being
evolved."  And  as  we  contemplate  the  social  and  intellectual
evolution  of  mankind — the  most  recent  of  these  forms — our
wonder  at  the  vastness  of  the  advance  '  from  so  simple  a  be-
ginning '  still  steadily  grows.  During  all  this  long  history,  with
its  ever  accelerating  though  devious  progress,  not  a  single  physical
law  has  ever  changed.  The  whole  stupendous  drama  of  I'elan
vital,  as  Bergson  calls  it,  has  nevertheless  inserted  itself  into  this
— abstractly  regarded — purely  mechanical  framework,  producing
a  pattern  which  it  cannot  account  for ;  but  there  it  is  to  be
accounted  for  somehow.

As  to  the  social  environment,  here  again  we  find  what  we  may
call  a  negative  or  restrictive  element — the  counterpart  of  the  stabi-
lity which  is  practically  absolute  in  the  abstract  physical  system.

1  Cf.  W.  James's  posthumous  work,  Some  Problems  of  Philosophy,  1911,  ch.  ix.
1  §  i,  p.  411  above.


CH.  xvn,  §  3]  The  (epistemologically)  Objective  Factor  419

Some  stability  is  essential  to  any  plasticity;  but  absolute  stability
would  be  fatal:  it  is  as  impossible  to  mould  water  as  to  mould
adamant.  The  laws  and  customs  of  society — what  we  may  call
its  routine — tend  to  be  no  respecters  of  persons  (as  distinct  from
classes)  :  they  simply  leave — what  society  conceives  as — the
fittest  to  survive,  and  are  often  at  least  as  pitiless  as  nature
itself.  But  in  reality  society  has  none  of  the  impassivity  of
nature.  So  far  from  being  blankly  impervious,  its  very  essence
is  intercourse:  on  the  extension  and  increasing  intimacy  of  this
its  whole  progress  depends.  Sorrow  is  halved  and  joy  is  doubled
by  the  sympathy  and  friendship  that  intercourse  begets.  In  the
social  environment,  again,  there  is  no  complete  inertia,  no  bare
conservation  of  energy,  no  law  of  diminishing  return.  Capitali-
sation, unknown  to  the  brutes,  is  here  a  mighty  factor.  The
human  infant  comes  into  the  world  as  helpless  as  the  callow  lark
nestling  between  two  clods;  but  it  is  screened  from  the  severity
of  nature  by  the  succour  and  security  of  a  home.  It  has  too  as
its  heritage — much  of  which  it  appropriates  betimes — the  accu-
mulated tradition  of  ages,  a  form  of  palingenesis  more  wonderful
than  any  that  the  fledgling  bird  can  shew.

But  the  social  environment  is  endlessly  diversified  ;  and  the
human  infant  has  no  more  choice  than  a  seed  as  to  where  its  lot
shall  be  cast :  it  may  be  on  good  ground,  it  may  be  in  stony
places,  it  may  be  among  weeds.  Which,  seems  a  matter  of  allot-
ment, not  of  selection  ;  and  yet  the  difference  in  the  character
acquired  may  be  profound — a  difference,  in  fact,  that  has  led
many  to  maintain,  like  the  socialist,  Robert  Owen,  that  a  man's
character  is  made  for  him  and  not  by  him.  But  this  extreme
determinism  is  amply  refuted  by  our  general  synthesis,  unless  this
is  hopelessly  unsound.  Moreover,  the  very  existence  of  society
presupposes  individual  diversity  and  cannot  therefore  account
for  it.  A  multitude  of  qualitatively  identical  units,  if  such
were  ontologically  possible,  might  aggregate  but  could  not
associate.

Besides  the  natural  and  social  environments,  however,  a  new
factor  here  emerges,  which  is  more  intimately  concerned  with
individual  diversity  than  either  of  them,  and  which  goes  far  to
explain  whatever  diversity  they,  later  on,  may  be  able  to  effect.
This  factor,  moreover,  seems  to  be  neither  psychologically

27 — 2


420 Mind  and  the  Concrete  Individual  [CH.  xvn,  §  3

subjective  nor  epistemologically  objective1 ;  and  yet,  if  it  does
not  constitute  character,  character  seems  frequently  to  be  con-
ditioned by  it  even  more  than  by  either  physical  or  social  cir-
cumstances. To  this  factor,  thus  intimately  connected  with  the
concrete  individual,  we  must  now  turn.

The  Concrete  Individual  and  Heredity.

§  4.  "  Life  is  eight  parts  cards  and  two  parts  play  :  the  un-
seen world  is  made  manifest  to  us  in  the  play."  So  said  Samuel
Butler,  the  author  of  Erewhori*.  The  cards  are  the  seen  '  hand,'
the  circumstances  of  the  natural  and  social  environments :  the  real
hand  that  plays  is  unseen,  proximately  and  for  psychology  it  is
the  concrete  individual.  That  this  unseen  hand  always  counts
for  something  is  shewn  in  the  varied  handling  by  different  players
of  the  same  cards3.  Innumerable  such  unique  personalities  col-
lectively constitute  and  animate  that  over-individual  organization
we  call  society ;  unless  counting  for  something  severally  they
could  count  for  nothing  collectively.  But  as  already  said  organiza-
tion implies  differentiation  as  well  as  unification,  as  far  back  as
we  can  go.

What  now  can  we  say  about  this  '  unseen  hand,'  the  concrete
individual  ?  It  figures  on  the  tree  of  Porphyry  but  in  truth  logic
never  reaches  it,  and  even  the  more  concrete  tree  of  Darwin,  the
phylogenetic  tree,  fails  to  get  so  far.  We  find  such  individuals
indicated  by  name  on  so-called  genealogical  trees ;  but  we  find
nothing  more :  taken  alone  these  trees  give  us  no  hint  either  of
logical  order  or  of  natural  classification4.  If,  however,  we  ignore

1  In  the  sense,  that  is  to  say,  of  §§  2  and  3.

2  The  Note- books  of  Samuel  Butler,  1915,  p.  u.

3  Yet  it  probably  rarely  counts  for  as  much  as  Butler  supposed. "If  we  call
to mind how little on the average  each of  us acquires by himself  alone and
independently  of  others, how  much  of  what  he  knows  and believes  is  common
property,  one  almost  gets  the  impression  that  any  distinctive  individuality  we  pos-
sess may  really  belong  only  to  our  bodies  not  to  our  minds. As  for  the  ideas  and
thoughts  that  animate  us,  they  seem  like  the  breath  our  lungs  inspire,  drawn  from  a
common  atmosphere  and  returned  to  it  again. And  yet  on  closer  inspection  the
decisive  significance  of  individuality  shews  itself  even  here ;  not  only  in  the  extent,
but  still  more  in  the  variety  of  the  material  selected  and  the  originality  with  which  it
is  made  to  enlarge  and  enrich  the  common  fund." Sigwart,  "  Die  Unterschiede  der
Individualitaten,"  Kleine  Schriften,  1881,  ii.  p.  232. Somewhat  condensed.

*  History,  which  has  been  called  '  idiographic '  may  deal  with  concrete  individuals,
but  not  science,  if  it  is  to  remain  '  nomothetic. '


CH.  xvn,  §  4] The  Concrete  Individual  and  Heredity 421

the  complications — the  continual  anastomoses — that  pedigrees
display,  and  regard  these  as  merely  prolongations  of  an  ultimate
phylogenetic  branch  or  species,  as,  in  fact,  anthropology  does,  we
may  then  get  some  conception  of  the  series  to  which  the  concrete
individual  is  the  limit.  The  phylogenetic  tree  differs  from  all
real  trees  in  that  every  branch  and  every  twig  has  some  specific
characteristics  of  its  own,  differentiating  it  from  the  other
branches  or  twigs.  But  it  resembles  the  logical  tree  in  that
the  characteristics  increase  as  we  pass  from  a  branch  to  its
twigs — in  the  language  of  logic,  intension  increases  as  extension
decreases.

Returning  now  to  concrete  individuals  and  their  pedigrees,
we  observe  that,  alike  in  bodily  and  in  mental  traits,  each  in-
dividual resembles  the  lineage  of  his  own,  more  than  that  of  an
alien,  stock ;  and  the  closer  the  kinship,  the  greater  the  resem-
blance. According  to  the  anthropologist,  he  has  first  racial,  then
tribal,  then  family  characteristics.  So  as  we  go  on  ascending
from  the  general  human  nature  which  is  common  to  all,  we  come
to  characteristics  steadily  increasing  in  definiteness,  and  yet  dif-
fering inter  se,  till  at  length  we  reach  some  concrete  individual  or
other  entering  upon  life.  Here  the  so-called  characteristics  will
attain  a  maximum :  shall  we  call  the  whole  '  nature '  or  '  char-
acter '  ?  Hardly  nature,  at  least  as  science  commonly  understands
the  term :  for  that  excludes,  while  this  involves,  idiosyncrasies.
"  Nicht  als  Gattungswesen,  sondern  individuell  bestimmt  tritt  der
Mensck  in  das  Leben  ein."  The  receptive,  retentive,  emotive  and
active  '  capacities  or  potentialities '  even  of  twins  are  never  quite
the  same,  and  sometimes  are  very  different.  Again  we  can  hardly
call  this  whole  'character,'  unless  it  turn  out  to  pertain  to  the
subject  itself1.  In  that  case,  for  those  who  believe  in  '  pre-
existence,'  and  many  do,  it  might  answer  to  '  original '  character
in  this  sense.  But  there  is  a  third  possibility  :  it  may  be  some-
thing distinguishable  from  the  subject  itself,  by  which  the  subject
is  somehow  conditioned.  In  that  case  it  might  be  classed  with
the  subject's  circumstances,  if  anything  so  nearly  central  could
be  called  a  circumstance.  The  subject,  we  allow,  must  always
be  determinate  (bestimmt)  ;  still  after  all  psychology  can  talk  of

1  '  Characteristic  '  is  a  descriptive  term;  but  character,  as  here  used,  refers  always
to  the  personality  described.  Many  persons  have  like  characteristics  but  no  two  have
the  same  character.


422  Mind  and  the  Concrete  Individual  [CH.  xvn,  §  4

original  nature  or  character  only  in  a  relative  sense1.  Even  if  we
accept  the  pre-existence  hypothesis  the  question  is  merely  thrown
back. — It  is  here  that  the  biological  facts  of  parentage  and  birth
lead  many  to  revert  to  the  continuity  of  the  growing  tree  and  to
perpetrate  that  confusion  of  metaphors  that  connects  idiosyn-
crasies with  '  inheritance ' — confusion,  we  may  say,  for  we  do  not
ordinarily  conceive  inheritance  as  congruent  in  any  way  either
with  '  origin '  or  with  '  nature.'  The  psychological  side  of  this
biological  problem  we  must  now  try  to  unravel.

In  legal  affairs  'heir'  and  'inheritance' — or,  to  be  precise,
'  hereditament ' — are  correlative  terms  implying  two  utterly  dis-
tinct and  contrary  entities.  The  one,  in  the  eyes  of  the  law,
is  always  a  person,  the  other  is  always  a  thing — in  the  wide  sense,
whether  visible  and  tangible  or  not — which  the  person  comes  to
possess.  Now  the  relation  of  person  and  property — of  which
this  is  a  special  case — is  fundamental  for  psychology,  and  so  far
all  is  clear2.  But  in  biological  expositions  of  'heredity,'  if  we
press  certain  obvious  questions,  we  find  this  clarity  has  gone :  it
is  no  longer  possible  clearly  to  distinguish  the  heir  from  the  heri-
tage. It  is  peculiar  to  biology  that  what  is  inherited  is  never  a
thing ;  it  is  always  a  likeness  to  themselves  said  to  be  '  trans-
mitted '  or  '  bequeathed '  by  forbears  to  their  descendants3.  The
plain  fact  is  simply  that  '  like  begets  like.'  The  rest  is  mostly
metaphor  or  analogy.  Parents  commonly  bequeath  their  property
to  their  children,  and  parental  characteristics,  it  is  supposed,  may
surely  be  regarded  as  their  property.  But  the  analogy  is  very
superficial.  Parents  can  divest  themselves  of  legal  property  and
yet  leave  it  intact :  they  cannot  so  divest  themselves  of  personal
traits.  Again,  the  legal  relation  is  threefold,  involving  two  parties
and  the  property  that  changes  hands.  As  to  the  so-called
'  genetic  relation  '  or  biological  heredity,  however,  the  outstanding
fact  is  simply  the  continuity  of  a  single  genetic  process.  The
fertilized  ovum  or  zygote,  with  which  the  process  begins,  is  con-
tinuous backwards  with  the  ancestral  germ-plasm  and  continuous
forwards  with  the  gradually  differentiating  embryo.  This  even-
tually appears  as  a  viable  organism  resembling  those  of  its

1  Cf.  ch.  xvi,  §  4,  p.  406.  '  2  Cf.  above,  ch.  xv,  §  i,  p.  362.

3  Cf.  the  definitions  cited  in  Professor  J.  Arthur  Thomson's  Heredity,  1908,  pp.  15  f.
It  may  suffice  to  quote  the  briefest  and  last: — "Heredity. — The  transference  of
similar  characters  from  one  generation  of  organisms  to  another." — R.  H.  Lock.


CH.  xvii,  §  4] The  Concrete  Individual  and  Heredity 423

parents  and  in  a  less  degree  those  of  their  parents  and  of  all  the
earlier  links  in  this  ever-lengthening  chain.

For  this  process  heredity  is  but  a  name,  and  a  good  enough
name  too,  if  the  superficial  analogy  it  implies  is  not  pressed.  If  it
is,  we  soon  find  that  the  vital  distinction  between  the  individual
inheriting  and  the  property  inherited  has  disappeared.  This
perhaps  need  not — and  certainly  does  not — disconcert  those
biologists  who  concern  themselves  only  with  the  organism  as
merely  an  external  object,  or  perhaps  as  '  a  mere  link  in  the
species,'  and  who  are  content  to  waive  ultimate  questions  about
individuality  and  life.  But,  from  the  psychological  standpoint,  if
we  try  to  face  the  correlative  problem  we  are  forced  to  look
deeper  and  to  be  more  critical1.

We  enter  upon  this  investigation  by  provisionally  assuming
in  accordance  with  our  previous  discussion,  that  there  are  two
forms  of  heredity,  the  one  with  which  the  biologist  deals  and
this  which  he  leaves  to  the  psychologist2 — who  usually  leaves
it  alone.  The  main  fact  well-ascertained  by  the  biologist — and
indeed  known  to  everybody — is  the  resemblance,  due  to  con-
tinuity and  propinquity,  between  the  organisms  of  parents  and
those  of  their  offspring — a  resemblance  tempered  always,  it  must
be  remembered,  by  more  or  less  variation.  A  like  resemblance
and  variation  the  comparative  psychologist  also  finds  on  the
mind  side.  But  here  the  ambiguity  of  the  term  '  mind ' — com-
monly so  little  heeded — at  once  complicates  the  inquiry.  If  by
mind  the  living  subject  or  experient  were  meant3,  then  a  con-
tinuity such  as  the  biologist  finds  between  parental  and  filial  cells,
so  far  from  being  an  ascertained  fact  concerning  this  subject  and
any  other,  subject,  seems  rather  to  be  inconceivable  even  as  a
possibility4.  The  '  origin  of  a  soul/  however,  as  we  have  allowed,

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  i,  pp.  36  f.

-  Cf.  Ribot,  L'Htrtditt:  £tude  psychologiqtu,  1873,  pt.  iii.  ch.  iii.  Here  Ribot
distinguishes  the  two  as  respectively  physiological  and  psychological,  but  in  the  many
subsequent  editions  he  dropped  this  distinction  and  recognises  only  what  he  calls
'  biological  heredity.'

3  Cf.  above,  ch.  i,  §  3,  p.  13.

4  There  are  many  who  also  fully  recognise  the  inconceivability,  but  who  regard  it
not  as  telling  against  the  supposition  that  the  subject  of  experience  is  really  generated
along  with  the  body,  but  rather  as  discrediting  the  reality  of  this  subject  altogether.
That  for  them  is  an  unverifiable  hypothesis  which  the  facts  of  heredity  deprive  of  any
scientific  value. Cf.  Ribot,  LHMditt,  ist  ed.  1873,  pp.  374-84;  also  above,  ch.  ii,
§  2,  p.  36,  and  ch.  xv,  §  3,  pp.  378  ff.


424 Mind  and  the  Concrete  Individual  [CH.  xvn,  §  4

is  altogether  beyond  our  ken.  But  if  it  be  due  to  generation  at
all,  at  least  we  may  fairly  say  that  physiological  generation  will
not  suffice  to  account  for  it.  Nevertheless  certain  theologians
and  philosophers,  commonly  known  as  'traducianists'  or  'genera-
tianists'  thought  otherwise1.

On  the  other  hand, if  mind  is  taken  to  mean  the  psychologically
objective  '  content '  of  experience,  originally  '  given  '  as  the  pre-
sentational continuum,  or  psychoplasm  as  we  may  now  call  it ;
then,  indeed,  some  connexion  between  this  and  the  bioplasm  or
germ  plasm,  which  is  continuous  with  the  parental  stock,  is  no
longer  inconceivable.  We  have  even  some  important  facts  to  go
upon,  that  seem  psychologically  at  all  events  to  point  to  the
nature  of  this  connexion.  Of  these  facts  more  presently.  Mean-
while, we  have  to  observe  that  this  second  meaning  of  '  mind,'
as  datum,  ob-jectum,  Gegen-stand,  Vor-gefundene,  in  so  far  as
it  recognises  that  duality  of  subject  and  object  which  experience
everywhere  implies,  brings  back  the  distinction  of  person  and
property  that  heredity,  strictly  taken,  involves.  For  what  is  said
to  be  inherited  is  a  peculium.  Also  the  implication  of  heredity,
as  biologically  used,  has  vanished  :  the  continuity  of  subjects
running  parallel  to  the  continuity  of  organisms  here  perplexes
us  no  longer.  The  subject,  on  this  view,  is  only  called  an  heir
because  his  '  mind '  or  psychoplasm,  like  his  body  or  bioplasm,
may  shew,  as  it  develops,  considerable  resemblance  to  that  of  his
parents.

But  if  the  subject  or  '  soul '  has  no  actual  continuity  with  the
parents  of  its  so-called  inheritance,  when  and  how  did  it  come  to
be,  and  how  did  it  come  into  possession  of  this  peculium  or  pro-
perty ?  It  was  created  by  God  and  its  place  in  the  universal  order
allotted  to  it  directly  or  indirectly  by  divine  interposition — such
was  the  answer  of  the  theologians  and  philosophers,  who  opposed
the  traducian  doctrine,  and  so  were  called  creatianists.  We  seem
here  only  to  have  exchanged  one  difficulty  for  another  ;  and

1  The  controversy  between  the  traducianists  and  the  creatianists  was  at  the  outset
entirely  theological  and  turned  mainly  upon  views  concerning  '  original  sin' !  Among
philosophers  the  idea  of  pre-existence  as  a  third  possibility  has  been  widely  entertained.
The  contradictions  implicit  in  traducianism  have  often  been  pointed  out  even  by
writers  not  disposed  to  dogmatize  farther.  Cf.  W.  Wollaston,  The  Religion  of  Nature
delineated,  1722,  §  xv.  i5;'Lotze,  Medicinische  Psychologic,  pp.  164  ff. ;  Aficrocosmus,
Eng.  trans,  i.  pp.  390 ff.;  Rehmke,  Lehrbuch  der  allgemeinen  Psychologic,  1894,
pp.  i39ff.


CH.  xvn,  §  4] The  Concrete  Individual  and  Heredity 425

naturally  we  ask  which  is  the  less.  The  creatianist  doctrine,  as
it  stands,  obviously  exceeds  the  limits  of  scientific  inquiry.  But
at  least  it  involves  no  contradiction  and  recognises  the  two
cardinal  principles  of  psychology  as  we  understand  it,  the  in-
dividuality of  the  experient  and  the  duality  of  experience.  We
have  not  to  commit  ourselves  to  its  piecemeal  occasionalism  or  to
its  improbable  and  unverifiable  assumptions  before  rejecting  the
generatianist  doctrine  with  its  materialistic  implications  and  its
psychological  solecisms.

We  might  then  conclude  a  priori  that  all  that  can  be  said  to
be  psychologically — as  distinct  from  physiologically  and  socio-
logically— heritable  is  merely  the  psychoplasm  that  the  subject
elaborates  not  the  '  psyche '  or  subject  itself.  That  '  souls '  or
subjects  are  creatures  we  may  well  believe,  if  we  believe  in  crea-
tion at  all.  But  how  we  could  ever  come  by  the  idea  of  creation
save  from  the  standpoint  of  our  own  reality  we  have  yet  to  learn.
Still  this  is  a  problem  altogether  beyond  the  purview  of  psycho-
logy1. It  only  remains  for  us,  then,  in  this  place  to  consider
somewhat  further  the  connexion  of  the  two  forms  of  heredity,
the  physiological  and  the  psychological,  in  order  to  ascertain  how
far  facts  bear  out  this  a  priori  conclusion.

We  began  this  discussion  by  insisting  on  the  analogy  between
psychogeny  and  ontogeny,  speaking  of  a  psychoplasm  as  the
analogue  of  bioplasm,  the  one  being  elaborated  into  a  psy-
chical organism  just  as  the  other  is  elaborated  into  a  physical
organism.  The  relations  of  these  two  organisms,  of  mind8  and
body  as  we  ordinarily  say,  lie  for  the  most  part  beyond  the
scope  of  psychology  proper.  But  there  is  one  relation,  specially
important,  in  which  psychological  facts  point  to  more  than  mere
analogies  between  the  two,  viz.  the  facts  covered  by  terms  such
as  use,  wont,  habit,  aptitude,  accommodation  and  the  like.  The
gradual  acquisition  of  facility  and  familiarity,  as  a  conse-
quence of  subjective  selection  or  adaptation,  directly  or  indirectly
determines  a  gradual  modification  of  structure  and  a  gradual
automatism  of  function  in  the  body  itself.  Even  in  skeletons
the  anatomist  finds  evidence  of  this  relation, — peculiarities  in
the  legs  of  shoemakers,  tailors  and  jockeys,  for  example,  which

1  I  may  perhaps  be  allowed  to  refer  the  interested  reader  to  my  own  attempt  to
deal  with  it  in  The  Realm  of  Ends,  2nd  ed.  1911.

*  Mind  as  'the  psychologically  objective  content  of  experience '  that  is.


426 Mind  and  the  Concrete  Individual  [CH.  xvn,  §  4

only  the  vocations  of  the  men  themselves  will  explain.  Such
subjectively  determined  adaptation  of  its  bodily  '  organs '  to  its
own  ends  implies  of  course,  that  the  subject  had  a  definite
organism  which,  as  we  say,  was  '  given '  beforehand.  For  the
biologist  the  organism  given  to  the  concrete  individual  is  con-
tinuous with  the  organisms  of  his  ancestors,  is,  in  fact,  a  more
differentiated  stage  of  the  bioplasm  from  which  the  chain  of
ancestral  organisms  began.  Similarly  for  the  psychologist  the
organism  given  is  a  more  differentiated  stage  of  the  psychoplasm
with  which  the  psychological  individual  began.  There  is  then  a
progressive  and  we  may  safely  say  a  parallel  differentiation  on
both  sides1.  But  there  is  also  interaction,  in  so  far  as  it  is  the
subjective  adjustment  to  an  interesting  environment  that  adapts
the  biological  organism  specially  to  this.

If  now  generation  after  generation  the  characteristics  thus
'  acquired '  by  the  parental  organisms  also  modified  the  germ-
plasm  that  is  continuous  with  the  filial  organisms — if,  in  other
words,  acquired  characteristics  are  inherited — the  broad  differ-
ence between  the  organisms  of  two  generations  would  be  this: —
What  were  functional  modifications  in  the  earlier  would  be
structural  modifications  in  the  later  :  that  would  be  '  given '  to
the  one  which  was  acquired  by  the  other.  The  concrete  indi-
vidual in  that  case  might  be  regarded  as  if  descended  from  a
certain  psychological  individual  who,  as  what  Galton  called
a  mid-parent,  replaced  the  two  parents  from  whom  he  actually
descended.  What  is  psychologically  'inherited,'  the  psycho-
plasm,  would  then  be  proximately  determined  through  the
bioplasm,  which  from  generation  to  generation  has  persisted
continuously,  though  developing  ceaselessly.  But  ultimately  it
would  be  determined  by  the  ancestral  experience,  to  which  this
development  was  primarily  due.  In  a  word,  habit  in  the  indi-
vidual life  would  be  the  ground  of  heredity  in  racial  life2.  This
is  the  connexion  between  the  two  plasms  and  so  between  the
two  heredities  just  now  referred  to  as  psychophysically  probable*.

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  4,  p.  50.

2  This  view  is  sometimes  called  '  The  mnemic  theory  of  heredity.' Cf.  the  writer's
Heredity  and  Memory,  1913.

3  To  say  more  would  be  unseemly  in  view  of  the  present  attitude  of  the  bulk  of
biologists  to  the  question  concerning  the  heredity  of  acquired  characteristics. On  the
other  hand,  to  say  so  much  seems  justified  in  view  of  the  trend  of  opinion  during  the
last  quarter  of  a  century  or  so. Weismann  who  was  then  supposed  to  have  vanquished.


CH.  xvii,  §  4] The  Concrete  Individual  and  Heredity 427

But  there  are  still  some  further  points  of  importance  to
notice.

Even  if  use  and  habit  be  the  key  to  heredity,  yet  it  lags
enormously  behind  them1.  The  repetitions  that  will  suffice  to
make  '  use  a  second  nature '  or  a  habit  automatic  for  a  lifetime
are  very  far  from  sufficing  to  ensure  heredity  for  future  genera-
tions. Yet  unless  the  facility  and  familiarity  acquired  in  a  single
lifetime  are  transmitted  in  some — it  may  be,  almost  infinitesimal
— degree,  there  could  obviously  never  be  any  transmission  at
all.  Still  the  point  is  that  ages  may  elapse  before  the  effect  is
perceptible.  And  meanwhile  in  consequence  of  environmental
changes  it  may  gradually  disappear;  or  again.it  may  be  neutralised
by  the  amphimixis  or  blending  of  bi-parental  characteristics;  or
it  may  become  latent — as  in  what  is  called  atavism — for  one
or  more  generations.  Transmissibility,  rather  than  actual  trans-
mission, is,  then,  the  meaning  of  the  so-called  '  law  of  heredity.'
Thus  the  physical  or  mental  traits  in  which  a  child  perceptibly
resembles  its  parents — one  or  both — are  always  such  as  they
have  themselves  inherited,  and  never — apart  from  imitation  and
the  effects  of  a  similar  environment — traits  which  they  have
themselves  by  use  or  disuse  first  acquired.  The  shoemaker's
son,  unless  he  follows  his  father's  trade,  has  not  a  shoemaker's
lap3;  and  if  he  shews  his  'father's'  fondness  for  argument  'or
his  mother's '  love  of  music,  it  is  because  both  he  and  they  have
inherited  them  from  common  forbears.  In  any  case  the  resem-
blance is  only  partial  and  may  be  less  striking  than  the  varia-
tion. Here  are  sundry  justifications  for  our  assertion  that  pedigree
alone  will  not  bring  us  to  the  concrete  individual.  On  the  whole,
then,  facts — which  have  been  recently  impugned  only  because
the  physiological  process  involved  has  not  been  discovered —
seem  so  far  to  confirm  our  a  priori  conclusion  that  what  is

Lamarck  and  to  have  corrected  Darwin  has  ended  in  discrediting  himself  on  the  main
issue  by  his  arbitrary,  complicated,  and  often  inconsistent  speculations,  despite  his
important  work  in  detail.  Cf.  Delage  and  Goldsmith's  Les  Theories  de  revolution,
1909,  chh.  ix.  and  x. ;  and  for  a  fuller  treatment,  Delage's  larger  work,  Structure  du
Frotoplasma  et  Its  Theories  sur  fHMditf,  1895.

1  Cf.  Sir  F.  Gallon's  explanation  of  'original  sin'  on  these  lines,  Hereditary
Genius,  p.  349.

a  Yet  "races  that  habitually  squat  and  sit  tailor-fashion  on  the  ground  have
adaptive  peculiarities  in  the  hip,  lower  limbs  and  foot-joints  before  birth."  Hartog,
Problems  of  Life  and  Reproduction,  1913,  p.  190.


428 Mind  and  the  Concrete  Individual  [CH.  xvn,  §  4

inherited  is  not  individuality  or  character  but  the  tendency  to
develop  certain  ancestral  characteristics,  in  a  word  a  particular
Anlage,  as  the  Germans  say.  So  much  for  the  present1.

Meanwhile  it  is  no  easy  matter  precisely  to  define  this  term*.
What  is  meant  is  something  too  central  to  be  described  as  circum-
stantial in  the  sense  in  which  the  physical  and  social  environment
are  so  described,  and  yet  not  central  enough  to  be  identified  with
the  subject  that  has  this  peculium  and  is  conditioned  by  it*.
Where  then  do  we  find  this  intermediary  and  how  are  we  to
describe  it  ?  Though  Leibniz,  who  wrote  almost  always  either
in  Latin  or  in  French,  did  not  himself  use  the  word  Anlage,  what
he  called  '  the  special  point  of  view  of  each  monad4'  gives  us  a
very  good  preliminary  clue  to  it.  This  for  him  had  nothing
spatial  about  it,  although  he  illustrated  it  by  a  reference  to  per-
spective :  the  '  point  of  view '  of  a  monad  is  its  body.  But  this
again  refers  not  to  the  body  as  extended,  as  materia  secunda,  that
is  to  the  physical  aspect  of  the  organism.  What  is  meant  is  the
psychical  or  '  intentional '  aspect  of  the  body  as  the  medium  of
intercourse  with  the  objective  world,  the  natural  and  social  en-
vironment. Hence  Leibniz  maintained  that  a  soul  without  a
body  would  be  a  soul  without  relation  to  other  monads  :  it  would
be,  as  he  picturesquely  describes  it,  like  'a  deserter  from  the
general  order5.'  Anlage  then  would  be  this  intentional  aspect
of  the  body  as  it  is  for  the  concrete  experient  when — so  far  as
we  can  trace  it — his  experience  begins.  It  would  be  psycho-
plasm,  but  psychoplasm  as  modified  by  heredity  and  as  thereby
more  or  less  predetermining  the  concrete  individual's  position  in
the  world.

1  Cf.  next  ch.  §§  2  and  3,  pp.  434  ff.

3  Certainly  the  proposal  of  Baldwin's  Dictionary  to  regard  it  as  equivalent  to
'  rudiment '  is  both  lexically  and  logically  inexact.  It  overlooks  the  potentiality,  it
overlooks  the  references  to  the  Anlegende  and  it  overlooks  the  contrast  with  Umstdnde,
which  Anlage  implies.  "  Disposition  and  predisposition  "  again  "  are  [not  only]  too
vague  to  be  really  adequate,"  as  Professor  Titchener  has  already  said  (Am.  Jl.  of
Psych,  vii,  8g^?w.) :  they  are  also  liable  to  bias  further  investigation.  To  adopt  the
word  itself  as  a  technical  term  seems  then  the  best  course.  And  this,  I  feel  bound  to
say — though  perhaps  the  present  is  hardly  the  time  to  say  it — is  by  no  means  the  only
case  in  which  the  short-comings  of  our  own  psychological  nomenclature  can  be  better
supplemented  from  the  German  than  it  can  be  by  words  of  Latin  or  Greek  origin,  as
Professor  Titchener  proposes  (p.  79).

*  Cf.  above,  §  ifin.  *  Monadology,  §  57.

5  Op.  cit.  §  72. Latta's  edition,  p.  258  f.  and  note  115.


CH.  xvn,  §  4] The  Concrete  Individual  and  Heredity 429

Anlage  thus  seems  to  present  the  subject  of  experience  in  a
new  light.  So  long  as  we  were  dealing  with  the  psychological
individual  there  was  no  call  to  talk  of  Anlage  but  only  of  psycho-
plasm.  Now,  however,  in  dealing  with  concrete  individuals  this
need  is  obvious  ;  and  the  difference  is  important.  This  Anlage,
like  experience  generally,  more  or  less  inhibits  development  in
some  directions  while  more  or  less  facilitating  it  in  others.  And
yet  it  is  not  itself  experience,  for  of  the  elaboration  or  synthesis
that  it  implies  the  concrete  individual,  to  whom  it  belongs,
knows  nothing ;  but  that  which  is  not  experience  for  any  ex-
perient  is  not  experience  at  all.  So,  though  in  itself  complex,
as  implying  previous  synthesis,  yet  for  the  concrete  individual
concerned  it  is  simple,  for  what  he  has  not  synthesized  he  can-
not psychically  analyze1.  Hence  we  sometimes  call  it  instinct3.
It  is  anything  but  a  tabula  rasa  in  itself:  it  is  such,  however,  for
the  concrete  individual ;  for  his  experience — so  far  as  we  know
— begins  with  it.

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  v,  §  2,  note  3,  p.  105.

2  Cf.  above,  ch.  iv,  §  i,  pp.  74  f.;  ch.  vii,  §  i,  pp.  181  f.


CHAPTER XVIII

THE CONCRETE INDIVIDUAL AND CHARACTEROLOGY

Questions  of  Method.

§  i.  After  all  we  have  yet  to  find  the  concrete  individual  as
psychology  conceives  him :  find  him  '  all  in  all '  we  never  can.
Yet  he  is  no  mere  concept.  Self- consciousness  assures  us  of  his
reality  more  immediately  than  we  are  assured  of  any  reality
besides.  I  am  certain  that  I  am,  but  as  to  what  I  am — there  is
much  I  do  not  know.  It  is  indeed  a  commonplace  which  none
dispute  that  no  man  stands  revealed  fully  and  all  round  either  to
himself  or  to  others;  for  as  Leibniz  has  well  said,  "1'individualite'
enveloppe  1'infini1."  Still,  with  equal  truth  it  may  be  rejoined
that  we  find  only  concrete  individuals — a  fact,  however,  which
merely  brings  out  the  difficulty.  Whatever  we  know  about  other
concrete  individuals  has  been  acquired  by  comparing  one  with
another,  and  thus  can  only  be  stated  in  general  terms.  But  no
formulation  of  general  terms  is  ever  adequate  to  concrete  reality;
nevertheless  such  generalities  are  all  the  material  we  commonly
have.  Unscientifically,  it  may  be,  but  with  great  sagacity  and
acumen, the  human  race  has  already  accumulated  an  embarrassing
wealth  of  such  material.  "  The  proper  study  of  mankind  is  man,"
and  it  is  the  study  which  mankind  has  longest  and  most  ardently
pursued.

To  transform  this  practical  Menschenkenntniss  into  a  psycho-
logy of  the  individual  is  the  problem.  But  if  we  cannot  find
the  concrete  individual,  as  psychology  conceives  him,  how,  it  may
be  asked,  is  this  problem  to  be  solved  ?  On  the  other  hand,  if  we
find  only  concrete  individuals,  is  there  really  any  problem  at  all  :
what,  in  fact,  is  Menschenkenntniss  but  just  mankind's  acquaint-

1  Nouveaux  Essais,  ill.  iii.  §  6. Cf.  the  whole  passage.


CH.  xvin,  §  i] Questions  of  Method  431

ance  with  man  ?  To  dispose  of  this  objection  as  satisfactorily  as
may  be  would  involve  an  excursion  into  logic,  which  would  be
here  quite  out  of  place1 ;  but  psychology  itself— in  the  principle
of  progressive  differentiation — points  to  a  shorter  way  that  will
amply  suffice.  This  principle,  as  we  have  already  seen,  entails
that  knowledge  must  begin  with  general  distinctions  and  can
only  later  advance  to  those  more  special2.  For  the  first  step,  to
recognise  an  individual  as  belonging  to  a  kind,  a  '  diagnostic
definition  ' — the  simpler  the  better — is  all  that  is  required  ;  and
when  we  talk  of  finding  only  concrete  individuals,  recognition  of
this  sort  is  all  that  is  implied.  To  find  the  concrete  individual
conceived  as  the  limit  of  a  series  of  progressive  differentiations,
we  may,  then,  set  out  from  concrete  individuals  defined  by  class
marks,  but  this  process  of  '  determination ' — which  is  logically
the  same  throughout — will  never  enable  us  to  reach  any  one  of
the  class  as  it  actually  is.

The  only  clue  we  have  through  this  seeming  impasse  is  to  be
found  in  the  '  general  psychology,'  analytic  and  genetic,  which
we  just  now  left  behind.  That  does  not  start  from  the  individual
defined  by  class  marks,  but  from  the  individual  as  known  to
himself.  Into  the  '  schema '  thus  provided — if  only  the  schema
is  sound — every  concrete  individual  ought  to  fit ;  and  the  more
the  schema  was  thus  filled  out,  the  more  definite  would  be  the
place  assigned  to  each  and  the  more  trustworthy  the  schema  itself.
Thus  general  and  special  psychology  would  become  mutually
complementary.  But  to  this  end  it  would  be  needful  to  replace
casual  and  unsystematic  comparison  of  characteristics  by  a  com-
parative method  enabling  us  to  deal  with  individuals  as  persons,
as  having  a  cliaracter.  The  special  or  individual  psychology  thus
obtainable  might  perhaps  be  called  a  branch  of  'comparative
psychology' ;  but  in  view  of  the  restricted  use  of  that  term,  which
is  now  in  vogue — as  dealing,  that  is  to  say,  not  with  persons  but
with  kinds — we  need  one  more  distinctive.  Characterology,  first
used  fifty  years  ago3,  seems  useful;  at  any  rate  it  is  coming  to  be
generally  used ;  and  so,  though  at  present  unfamiliar  to  English
ears,  we  may  venture  to  adopt  it

1  C.  F.  Sigwart's  Logic >  ii.  §  77.

*  Cf.  above,  ch.  xii,  §  5,  p.  304.

*  By  Julius  Bahnsen,  a  well-known  pessimist  and  disciple  of  Schopenhauer,  in  a
work  entitled  Beitrdge  zur  Charakterologie  u.s.w.  1857.


43 2 Concrete  Individual  and  Ckar act ero logy  [CH.XVIII,§  i

But  many,  who  fully  recognise  the  difficulty  we  have  just  indi-
cated, refuse  or  neglect  to  accept  the  solution  we  have  suggested.
At  this  point,  in  fact,  a  divergence  of  method,  akin  to  that  which
has  presented  itself  at  every  stage  throughout  our  preceding
exposition1,  here  reappears  in  a  very  crucial  form — the  divergence,
that  is,  between  presentational  or  atomistic  psychology,  psy-
chology without  a  subject2,  and  the  psychology  with  one,  which
we  have  striven  to  uphold.  Since  the  experient  subject  is  neither
immediately  presented  (to  an  internal  sense)  nor  mediately  acces-
sible (through  a  finite  analysis)  it  is  impossible — so  it  is  argued —
to  do  more  than  classify  characteristics,  for  these  are  all  that  we
can  ever  observe  or  infer.  But  in  comparing  characteristics  only
the  resemblances  or  differences  among  these  can  be  ascertained.
What  we  want,  however,  is  to  account  for  them :  that  for  us  is
what  characterology  means.  It  seeks  not  merely  to  analyze,
but  to  discover  the  subject  synthesizing  which  the  analysis  im-
plies. The  methods  we  are  criticizing,  though  seemingly  direct,
are  really  inverse  methods,  attempts  to  determine  a  cause  by
what  are  largely  its  effects.  Their  continual  references  to  psy-
chical structure,  to  psychical  elements,  or  to  compounds  of  these
of  varying  degrees  of  complexity — implying  not  a  fundamental
unity  but  rather  an  ultimate  manifold  of  presentational  units  ;
the  stress  laid  on  laws  coordinating  or  subordinating  such  ele-
ments of  character,  or  on  laws  of  association  and  inhibition  by
which  these  are  supposed  to  be  built  up — as  if  generalisations
could  effect  anything ;  even  the  adoption  of  the  phraseology  of
the  old  faculty -psychology,  sense,  intellect,  emotion  and  will — as
if  no  cardinal  function  were  to  be  found  in  psychical  life :  all
these,  more  or  less  distinctly  betray  a  failure  to  recognise  the
subjective  centrality  and  unity  essential  to  any  experience.

It  is  just  this  central  unity  of  experience  that  makes  a  direct
method  possible  in  psychology  to  an  extent  that  is  not  possible
in  the  natural  sciences.  There  experiment — the  advance  from
cause  to  effect — has  a  very  limited  range.  In  psychology — so  far
as  the  subject  is  active — all  experience  is  experiment.  It  is  only
our  prevalently  objective  attitude — ever  '  on  the  outlook  ' — that
has  led  to  the  naturalistic  bias  in  psychology  and  the  consequent

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  i,  §  6,  pp.  24  ff.

2  More  exactly  the  psychology  which  ignores  the  subject that  it  everywhere
implies. Cf.  above,  ch.  i,  §  5,  p.  23.


CH.  xvui,  §  i]  Questions  of  Method  433

inversion  of  its  basal  standpoint,  the  introspective.  But  from
this  standpoint  alone  do  we  reach  the  idea  of  real  centrality ;  then
we  grasp  that  transcendental,  synthetic,  'unity  through  apper-
ception,' which  is  the  key  to  all  the  categories,  and  the  supreme
principle  of  knowledge.  If  we  let  this  go,  or  rather — for  we
cannot  really  let  it  go — if  we  ignore  it,  we  may  analyze  and  corre-
late without  end,  but  all  individuality  is  gone  for  ever.  Such
ignoration  is  part  of  the  method  of  the  natural  sciences,  and  the
more  characterology  adopts  it,  the  more  it  belies  its  name1.

1  Perhaps  the  greatest  sinner  in  this  respect  is  Fr.  Paulhan  (Les  Caracteres,  i™*
e*d.  1901),  who  is  however  an  avowed  presentationist.  For  an  able  criticism  of
Paulhan's  standpoint  see  FouilleVs  Temperament  et  Caractere,  4me  e"d.  1901,  pp.  112
— 130.  But  the  latest — and  the  most  logical  outcome — of  such  inverse  methods  is  the
insistence  of  some,  who  employ  them,  on  a  sharp  distinction  between  the  scope  of
characterology  as  here  defined  and  the  scope  of  their  own  investigations.  These  are
not  concerned  with  characterology,  or  individual  psychology,  but  with  '  differential
psychology.'  According  to  Dr  Stern,  the  leading  exponent  of  this  new  psychology
(Ueber  Psychologic  der  individuellen  Differenzen,  1900;  Die  Differentielle  Psychologie
in  ihrer  methodischen  Grundlagen,  1911)  our  standpoint — though  he  has  maintained
elsewhere  that  it  is  not  only  valid,  but  vital  to  a  true  Weltanschauung  (L.  W.  Stern,
Person  und  Sache,  System  der  philosophischen  Weltanschauung,  i.  1906) — is  here  to  be
ignored  as  a  purely  philosophical  position  beyond  the  scope  of  empirical  science.  Well,
obviously  that  depends  upon  how  'empirical'  is  defined,  and  also  upon  what  the  science
is.  If  the  science  be  that  of  individual  experience,  and  if  every  experience  implies  the
duality  of  subject  and  object — in  other  words,  if  our  standpoint  is  the  right  one — it  is
hard  to  see  how  such  an  epistemological  dogma  can  be  sustained.  On  the  other  hand,
if  our  standpoint  is  wrong,  it  is  hard  to  see  how  such  a  dogma  can  be  attained.  There
is  a  vast  deal  of  truth  in  epistemology  that  it  is  beyond  the  province  of  psychology  to
question  ;  but,  at  least,  we  must  agree  with  Professor  Stumpf  "  that  nothing  can  be  true
in  epistemology  that  is  false  in  psychology."  ("  Psychologie  und  Erkenntnistheorie,"
Abhandl.  der  bayer.  Akad.,  1891,  Offprint,  p.  18.)

It  is,  however,  not  so  much  with  Dr  Stern's  inconsistency — which  is  remediable — as
with  his  admission  that  the  comparative  method,  worked  on  the  lines  of  a  presentational
or  atomistic  psychology,  does  not  lead  to  characterology,  that  we  are  concerned.  That
is  the  important  truth  for  which  we  are  contending.  How  far,  in  that  case, '  differ-
ential psychology  '  is  entitled  to  be  called  psychology  at  all  is  very  questionable.  It
certainly  formulates  methods,  '  experimental  and  statistical,'  which  have  brought  to-
gether a  mass  of  rather  miscellaneous  anthropological  and  psychological  items.  These
it  essays  to  measure — or  at  least,  to  graduate — and  partially  even  to  correlate.  Such
results,  as  they  stand,  can,  however,  hardly  be  called  psychology,  though  they  may  be
useful  to  a  psychologist  who  knows  how  to  interpret  them — an  ability,  by  the  way,
which  many  of  the  '  exact '  inquirers  who  have  accumulated  them  entirely  lack.  Yet
with  such  material,  Dr  Stern,  at  any  rate,  believes  that — in  the  distant  future — it  will
be  possible  to  construct  what  has  been  called  a  psychogram  of  the  concrete  individual.
More  or  less  incomplete  this  psychography  must  be,  he  allows  ;  but  at  least  its  ideal  is
idiographic,  not  nomothetic,  as  that  of  general  psychology,  in  a  sense,  may  be  said  to
be.  It  might  be  thought  that  after  all  psychography  was  only  characterology  under

W.  P.  28


434  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [cH.xvm,§2

Temperament.

§  2.  In  attempting  then  psychologically  to  envisage  the
concrete  individual  and  the  gradual  unfolding  of  his  character,
we  take  it  to  be  our  first  business  to  enframe  him  within  our
schema  ;  to  regard  him,  that  is  to  say,  not  merely  as  our  psycho-
logical individual,  but  as  a  particular  '  person '  entering  upon  life
at  the  human  level.  So  regarding  him — in  place  of  referring  only
to  the  duality  of  subject  and  object,  self  and  not-self — we  have
distinguished  three  factors  as  involved  in  the  genesis  of  his  experi-
ence, himself,  his  environment  and  his  Anlage — to  repeat  them
in  the  order  of  our  previous  discussion.  The  last  of  these  is  now,
however,  the  first  to  be  considered  ;  for  it  is  only  as  angelegt
that  any  concrete  individual  is  for  us  there.  And  the  first  thing
we  have  to  do  is  to  recall  what  we  have  already  noted,  viz. :  the
intermediate  position  of  this  factor  as  a  sort  of  '  middle  term '
between  the  other  two1 ;  for  this  position,  a  fertile  source  of  diffi-
culties elsewhere2,  is  here  beset  with  a  special  ambiguity.  How
far  we  can  resolve  this  remains  to  be  seen.  Certainly  we  could
not  go  very  far  without  trenching  upon  metaphysics  ;  but,  at  any
rate,  we  cannot  wholly  ignore  this  ambiguity  and  simply  pass
on ;  for  the  extent  to  which  we  can  psychologically  resolve  it
must  affect  our  whole  exposition.  If  Anlage,  as  we  concluded
just  now3,  is  only  the  psychoplasm  which  the  concrete  individual
has  to  elaborate,  then,  however  much  he  is  conditioned  by  it,  he
must  still  be  and  ever  remain  distinct  from  it.  But  when  we

another  name.  But  by  no  means  :  it  is  utterly  different.  Psychography  is  described
as  "  that  method  of  investigating  individuality  which  sets  out  not  from  the  unity  but  from
the  manifoldness  (Mannigfaltigkeit)  of  the  characteristics  (Merkmale)  present  in  the  indi-
vidual and  arranges  them  according  to  psychological  aspects  (Gesichtspunkten)"  (op.
cit.  1911,  p.  327).  All  possible  characteristics  thus  arranged  would  furnish  'the  general
psychographic  schema  '  which  is  the  essential  basis  of  every  special  investigation.  A
bare  description  of  this  schema  occupies  some  twenty  pages  of  Dr  Stern's  book.  The
preparation  of  the  schema  itself  has  already  begun  under  the  auspices  of  an  Institute
for  Applied  Psychology,  of  which  Dr  Stern  is  the  Director,  and  a  Museum  fur  Seelen-
kunde  is  desiderated  to  enshrine  and  exhibit  its  results  !  Surely  a  better  reductio  ad
absurdum  of  a  strictly  naturalistic  method  in  '  der  Erforschung  der  Individualitdten '
than  this  really  clever  and  useful  book  affords  is  scarcely  possible.

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  xvii,  §  3,  p.  419^.,  §  4,  p.  428.

2  As,  e.g.,  in  the  epistemological  problems  concerning  the  perception  of  an  external
world  and  concerning  the  relation  of  body  and  mind.

3  Cf.  above,  ch.  xvii,  §  4,  pp.  428  f.


CH.  xvin,  §  2]  Temperament  435

look  closer  into  the  various  facts  that  this  term  Anlage  covers,
is  this  conclusion  after  all  sustained  ?

Under  the  head  Anlage  we  may  include  sex,  temperament  and
certain  (native)  capabilities.  The  last  present  no  special  diffi-
culty ;  in  so  far  as  an  ear  for  music,  an  eye  for  form,  a  retentive
memory  or  a  'turn  for  mathematics'  may  all  be  referred  to
'  psychoplasm  as  modified  by  heredity.'  These  may  be  left  out
of  account  for  the  moment :  we  talk  of  them — naturally  enough —
as  '  endowments ' ;  but  can  we  regard  sex  or  temperament  in
the  same  way?  Both  are  strictly  correlated  to  physiological
functions,  no  doubt ;  and  so  far  as  sex  is  concerned  we  may
allow  that  the  physiological  functions  determine,  so  to  say,  the
biological  vocation  of  the  individual  and  all  that  follows  from
this.  But  in  this  case  the  functions  in  question  are  clear  and
unmistakable.  Fundamentally  important  as  this  vocation  is  for
the  life  of  the  individual,  it  tells  us  nothing  of  the  individual's
character.  Temperament,  on  the  other  hand,  is  said  to  be
'  innate '  character;  so,  though  no  one  talks  of  psychological  sex,
it  has  been  general  since  Kant's  day  to  talk  of  psychological
temperament.  Like  sex,  this  is  said  to  be  determined  entirely
from  the  physiological  side,  and  like  sex  to  be  unalterable.  What
then  is  'psychological  temperament'  we  may  ask  ?  And  we  think
we  know.  We  soon  find,  however,  that  everything  here  is  ob-
scure ;  most  of  all  the  physiological  functions  on  which  this
temperament  is  supposed  to  depend.  Still  perhaps  with  patience
we  may  get  some  light;  but  it  will  be  well  to  glance  briefly  at
the  history  of  the  physiological  doctrine,  and  to  examine  the
psychological  facts  before  attempting  the  main  question.

(i)  In  one  form  or  other  the  doctrine  just  described  has  per-
sisted through  thousands  of  years,  an  interesting  example  among
many  of  how  'antiquity,  combining  groundless  theories  with  prac-
tical observation,'  has  shaped  our  terminology  while  distorting  our
interpretation  of  facts.  Here  the  facts  primarily  concerned  are
psychological  facts,  long  familiar  in  broad  outline  to  men  every-
where, as  common  language  attests.  But  pathologists — if  we
may  apply  so  modern  a  term  to  Hippocrates  and  Galen — were
the  first  to  make  a  special  study  of  them — not,  however,  by  careful
analysis  and  systematic  comparison  of  the  facts  themselves,  but
by  crude  and  hasty  assumptions  as  to  their  latent  causes.  Those
were  the  days  when  ignorance  made  it  easy  to  theorize.  From  the

28-2


436  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [cH.xvm,§2

Ionian  search  for  a  single  apxtf,  Empedocles  had  only  advanced
as  far  as  the  familiar  four  elements — known  to  every  child — of
which  all  things  were  held  to  be  composed.  Answering  to  these
there  were,  it  was  supposed,  four  humours  of  the  body,  after  which
the  four  temperaments  were  named,  as  one  or  other  humour
predominated  in  the  blend.  But  obviously  in  a  perfect  blend
(evKpaaia,  temperamentum  temperatutn)  there  should  be  no  pre-
dominance ;  and,  in  fact,  it  was  from  the  observation  of  diseased
bodies  rather  than  of  healthy  minds  that  the  doctrine  of  four
temperaments  took  its  rise.  In  other  words,  to  have  a  specific
temperament  ought  to  mean  to  have  a  defect  or  lack  of  balance,
only  distinguished  from  the  disease,  to  which  it  was  allied,  by
being  chronic  or  congenital  rather  than  acute  and  dangerous.
And  so  to  this  day  it  is  commonly  regarded:  to  be  predominantly
sanguine  or  melancholy,  or  choleric  or  phlegmatic,  is  to  fail  by
excess  or  defect  of  what  Aristotle  called  the  true  mean.

Already  Aristotle  had  discerned  that  the  blood  was  the
supreme  humour  on  which  the  composition  of  the  rest  depended  ;
and  when,  some  2000  years  after  Hippocrates,  Harvey  discovered
the  circulation  of  the  blood,  the  motion  not  the  mixture  of  the
blood,  engaged  most  attention1 — in  other  words,  the  interest  in
function  came  to  the  fore,  and  that  in  mixture  or  structure  de-
clined. More  than  a  century  after  Harvey's  discovery,  Albrecht
von  Haller2,  in  turn,  maintained  that  the  function  of  chief
importance  in  determining  temperament  was  not  that  of  the  circu-
latory, but  that  of  the  nervous  system.  At  last — when  neurology
and  psychology  were  thus  brought,  so  to  say,  face  to  face,  nearly
a  century  later  still — Johannes  Miiller,  the  greatest  physiologist
of  the  nineteenth  century,  declared  roundly  that  neither  pathology
nor  physiology  will  ever  account  for  psychological  temperament.
Feeling  and  conation  were  the  fundamental  facts  :  the  organism
always  modified  these,  but  could  never  give  rise  to  them3.  The
entire  history  of  all  theories  of  temperament  prior  to  this  is  but
another  instance  of  that  inversion  of  methods  upon  which  we  have
already  animadverted.  But  the  feeling  and  striving  experient

1  Cf.  J.  Henle's  admirable  lecture  "Von  den  Temperamenten,"  Anthropologische
Vortrage,  1876,  p.  in.

2  In  his  memorable  Elementa physiologiae  carports  hutnani,  1757 — 60.

1  Cf.  MUller's  Handbuch  der  Physiologic  des  Menschen,  Bd.  ii. 2nd  ed. 1840,
pp.  576  f.


CH.  xviii,  §  2]  Temperament  437

is  now  recognised  as  the  true  starting-point.  It  is  undoubtedly
conditioned  by  its  Anlage  here  as  elsewhere:  the  question  is,  in
what  special  way  is  it  conditioned  here  ?

(ii)  Before  taking  up  this  question,  however,  we  need  to  be
clearer  as  to  the  psychological  facts  themselves,  from  which  we
are  to  start.  As  already  said,  we  think  we  know  what  we  mean
in  talking  of  this  temperament  or  that ;  yet  on  looking  closer
we  find — as  has  been  pointed  out  over  and  over  again — that
the  meaning  is  very  vague1.  If  we  observed  ourselves  or  other
persons  whom  we  know  intimately,  for  any  length  of  time,  we
should  be  far  more  likely  to  notice  the  characteristics  of  every
temperament  in  turn  rather  than  always  those  of  any  one.  Sup-
pose that,  comparing  them  together,  X  is  classed  as  melancholic
and  Y  as  choleric,  is  it  not  certain  that  comparing  either  with
himself  at  different  times  we  should  find  that  for  each  there  was
"  a  time  to  weep  and  a  time  to  laugh,  a  time  to  love  and  a  time
to  hate  "  ?  Or,  though  the  French  as  a  nation  are  characterized
as  sanguine  and  the  English  as  phlegmatic,  do  the  French  not
find  that  they  have  plenty  of  phlegmatic  people  ;  and  we  that  we
have  plenty  who  are  sanguine2?  In  fact,  as  Henle  has  said,
individuals  of  pure  temperament  are  very  rare8.  So  much  so  that
it  seems  advisable  to  approach  the  whole  question  from  another
side,  where  what  is  psychologically  important  appears  not  as  the
exception  but  as  the  rule.

Temperament  was  originally  traced,  as  we  have  seen,  to  bodily
humours ;  but  in  the  course  of  time  humour  and  temper  have

1  The  best  evidence  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  expositions  of  psychologists  them-
selves. For  example,  Kant  retained  the  classical  division  of  temperaments  into  four,
each  simple  and  unmixed  (Anthropologies  Hartenstein's  edition  of  his  works  (1868)
vii.  p.  613) :  Beneke  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  any  man  might  have  twenty  to  thirty
or  more  temperaments  at  once  I  (Lehrbuch  der  Psychologie*, 1877, §  345). The
temperament  commonly  called  the  melancholic  Lotze  preferred  to  describe  as  the
sentimental  (Murocosmus,  VI.  ii.  §  2,  E.  t.  ii.  p.  29) ! The  type  which  Ribot  called
sensitive  and  described  as  '  including  especially  the  pessimists '  {Psychologic  des  Senti-
ments, 1896,  p.  389),  was  divided  by  Fouill^e  into  two,  one  of  which  he  described  as
'optimist  by  instinct '  (Temperament  et  Caractcre,  4me  ed.  1901,  p.  33).

2  A  comparison  of  individual  with  individual,  what  has  been  called  the  '  cross-
section  ' method, though an essential preliminary to the structural analysis of
character  must  be  supplemented  by  the  '  longitudinal,'  genetic,  or  synthetic  method,
if  the  formation  of  character  as  an  individual  process  is  to  be  followed  out. Cf.
L.  W.  Stern,  op.  cit.  p.  18. It  is  on  this  complete  method  that  we  have  to  insist.

3  Op.  cit.  p.  128. Similarly  Volkmann  in  his  compact  and  masterly  handling
of  this  topic,  Lehrbuch  der  Psychologie,  jnd  ed.  vol.  i.  1875,  §  31.


438  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [cH.xvm,§2

acquired  a  distinctively  psychological  meaning  by  no  means
identical  with  that  of  temperament.  This  the  synonymous
term  '  mood,'  which  has  come  to  suggest  variation,  shews.  The
Germans  recognise  the  same  distinction,  contrasting  Tempera-
menten  as  permanent  with  Stimmungen  (or  Launen}  which  may
even  suddenly  vary.  There  is  a  happy  analogy  underlying  this
German  phrase,  so  appropriate  to  the  genius  of  that  people.  The
'  soul '  as  affective  and  conative,  or  as  they  call  it,  das  Gemtith,  is
conceived  to  be — like  a  musical  instrument — in  tune  or  out  of
tune,  now  in  one  key,  now  in  another.  This  attuning  is  its
Stimmung.  Upon  what  does  this  depend  ?  Primarily,  that  is,
on  the  lower  level  of  consciousness — and  more  or  less  on  all
levels — upon  the  state  of  the  body,  i.e.  on  the  healthy  and  har-
monious working  of  the  organism,  or  the  opposite.  In  a  word,
the  Gemiiths  stimmung,  or  '  ground-tone,'  is  the  feeling-tone  of
coenaesthesis,  including  under  this  term  the  so-called  'tonic
action '  of  muscles1.  The  bodily  state  upon  which  this  depends,
depends  itself  in  turn  on  innumerable  physical  conditions,
'  weather,  temperature,  diet,  the  due  mean  of  sleep  and  work  and
so  forth2.'

To  sum  up  :  what  we  experience  in  ourselves  and  observe  in
others  are  continuous  variations  in  '  how  we  feel ' :  these  we  learn
by  slow  degrees  to  connect  with  the  play  of  the  environment  on
'  the  thousand  strings '  of  our  organism,  or  with  their  tension,  or
with  both.  Such  variations  are  greater  in  some  persons  than  in
others,  but  all  of  us  '  feel  more  or  less  different,'  mornings  and
evenings,  spring  and  autumn,  in  youth  and  in  age,  &c.,  &c.
True,  there  is  a  certain  underlying  identity ;  a  man  cannot  change
his  body  or  constitution  as  he  may  change  his  garments ;  but
bodily  changes,  and  profound  ones  too,  most  people  undergo;  and
all  such  changes  entail  a  change  of  coenaesthesis  and  so  of
Stimmung.  They  also  all  of  them  involve  changes  in  what  we
have  described  as  '  the  sensitive  and  appetitive  self  :  how  radical
these  changes  may  be  has  been  briefly  noted3.  This  'physio-
logical self,'  as  it  has  been  called — though  so  to  call  it  is  going  just

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  5,  p.  53,  and  ch.  v,  §  3,  pp.  uof.

1  Cf.  Nahlowsky,  Das  Gefuhlsleben,  1862,  pp.  2348".  It  is  greatly  to  be  regretted
that  this  admirable  book,  so  little  known  to  English  psychologists,  has  never  been
translated.

3  Cf.  above,  ch.  xv,  §  i,  pp.  364  f.


CH.  xviii,  §  2]  Temperament  439

too  far — is  the  identity  or  continuity  underlying  those  changes  ;
and  to  this  the  inappropriate  concept  of  a  fixed  and  innate  tem-
perament or  blend  has  been  applied.  The  psychological  facts
find  perhaps  a  more  fitting  parallel  in  differences  of  voice  :  voices
may  be  bass  or  treble,  tenor  or  alto,  &c.  ;  but  all  are  comparable
as  to  range  of  pitch,  though  one  tending  to  one  extreme,  another
to  another  ;  all  are  liable  to  be  out  of  tune  as  well  as  capable  of
being  in  unison  ;  and  none  are  constantly  in  one  key.  When  we
talk  of  a  man's  moods  we  are  talking  of  concrete  facts ;  when
we  talk  of  his  temperament  we  are  using  a  vague  and  rather
empty  generalisation1.

(iii)  If  we  are  right  in  interpreting  the  more  or  less  popular
notion  of  temperaments  in  the  light  of  moods  resulting  from
coenaesthesis  as  determined  by  physical  circumstances  or  by
health  or  by  both,  and  as  restricted  in  their  range  by  the  consti-
tution of  the  organism  itself,  we  may  now  resume  the  discussion
that  has  meanwhile  been  interrupted.  What  is  peculiar  to  the
way  in  which  his  Anlage  here  conditions  the  concrete  individual  ?
Can  this  be  brought  at  all  into  line  with  his  Anlage  for  this
or  that  talent  ?  There  is  at  any  rate  one  clear  difference :  how

1  Nothing  perhaps  shews  the  emptiness — das  leere  Fachwerk,  as  Volkmana calls  it —
of  this  doctrine  of  innate  and  unalterable  temperaments  than  the  explanations  given
of  the  persistency  with  which,  on  the  whole,  it  has  been  maintained  that  there  are  but
four  distinct  temperaments.  Kant  with  his  fondness  for  systematizing — he  actually
compared  the  four  temperaments  with  the  four  figures  of  the  syllogism — is  here
interesting,  and  has  been  largely  followed  by  those  who  deal  with  temperament  from
the  psychological  side.  He  divides  temperaments  first  into  temperaments  of  feeling
and  temperaments  of  activity  and  each  of  these  again  into  two  according  as  the  vital
energy  (Lebenskraft)  is  marked  by  Erregbarkdt  (intensio)  or  Abspannung  (remissio).
So  we  have  in  the  first  class  the  sanguine  and  the  melancholic,  in  the  second  the
choleric  and  the  phlegmatic.  But  the  difference  of  degree  will  not  account  for  the
differences  in  quality  that  Kant  and  all  the  rest  surreptitiously  introduce  the  moment
they  proceed  to  describe  the  individuals  they  have  distributed  about  the  four  corners
of  a  square.  The  sanguine  man,  for  example,  Kant  tells  us,  is  a  'bad  debtor  and  is
always  requiring  further  grace '  :  the  melancholy  man,  he  says,  is  '  slow  to  promise  for
he  values  his  word  and  is  distrustful  of  his  means. '  Yet  surely  these  traits  are  not  due
to  bare  quantitative  differences  in  affectivity.  Nor  will  differences  in  degree  of  energy
explain  the  various  details  with  which  Kant  fills  out  his  portraits  of  the  choleric
and  the  phlegmatic  types  of  men.  In  short,  without  qualitative  distinctions  the  whole
scheme  collapses,  and  with  them  it  altogether  bursts  its  bounds.  (Cf.  his  Anthropo-
logie,  2U  Theil :  Die  anthropologische  Charakteristik,  Hartenstein's  ed.  Werke,  vii.
pp.  608  ff.)

Cf.  Mr  A.  F.  Shand's  discriminating  discussion  in  his  Foundations  of  Character,
1914,  bk.  I.  ch.  xiii.  ;  and  also  P.  Malapert,  Les  £ttments  du  Caractert,  2"*  e"d.
1906,  pt.  I.  ch.  i.


44°  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [CH.  xvm,§2

far-reaching  that  difference  is,  is  the  burning  question.  A  special
delicacy  in  sight  or  hearing  or  manipulation,  for  example,  or  the
opposite,  tells  on  his  presentation  of  the  external  world  ;  whereas
here  what  is  conditioned  is  the  affective  and  active  self.  And  so
long  as  we  confine  our  attention — as  we  have  done  so  far  in  this
inquiry — to  the  lowest  level  of  consciousness,  can  we  be  sure  that
the  self  is  merely  conditioned,  and  is  not  entirely  constituted  by
this  so-called  Anlaget  May  not  what  is  called  temperament
after  all  be  the  concrete  individual's  innate  character,  as  many
psychologists,  in  fact,  maintain?  What  is  the  sensitive  and
appetitive  self  but  psychoplasm  ?  This  is  one  of  the  problems —
perhaps  the  root  problem — which  the  study  of  individual  psy-
chology forces  to  the  fore.  Our  first  task,  it  will  now  be  seen,
must  be — as  already  said — to  clear  up  the  special  ambiguity  here
besetting  Anlage  as  a  mediating  term1.  To  this  the  nature  of
coenaesthesis  gives  us  a  clue.  That,  we  have  already  remarked,
is  sometimes  called  'general  feeling'  and  sometimes  'general
sensation2.'  The  reason  for  this  'psychological  barbarism'  or
confusion  of  categories  we  may  perhaps  claim  to  have  exposed.
Coenaesthesis  is  also  feeling-tone,  and  feeling-tone  is  not  feeling
but  the  earliest  cause  of  it.  This  general  sensibility  or  somatic
consciousness  presents  what  we  come  to  know  as  our  body,  before
the  differentiation  of  the  presentational  continuum  enables  us
actually  to  distinguish  it,  as  such,  from  the  other  bodies  that
make  up  its  environment  or  Umwelt.  These  facts  account  for
the  identification  of  the  self  first  of  all  with  the  body3.  And  if


1  Cf.  above,  p.  434.

2  Cf.  above,  ch.  v,  §  3,  p.  in.

8  It  should  be  sufficient  without  repeating  what  has  been  already  said  on  these
points — though  it  is  essential  that  that  should  not  here  be  overlooked — to  give  now  a
series  of  references : — Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  3,  p.  45  ;  ch.  x,  §  2,  pp.  249  f. ;  ch.  v,  §  3,
pp.  iiof.;  §  7,  p.  135;  ch.  xv,  §  t,  pp.  364  f.

At  this  point  we  begin  to  get  some  general  insight  into  the  ambiguities  besetting
the  notion  of  Anlage.  The  body — though  perceived,  yet — 'as  point  of  view'  for  its
subject  does  not,  so  far,  itself  pertain  to  the  Umwelt  or  external  world  which  the
subject  perceives.  So  far,  it  is,  as  Reid  maintained,  diaphanous :  as  we  do  not  see
the  glass  when  we  look  through  the  window,  so  we  do  not  perceive  the  sense  organs
when  we  use  them.  On  the  other  hand,  the  body,  so  far  as  it  is  identified  with  the
self,  is  regarded  not  as  sensing,  but  as  having,  the  feeling  to  which  it  gives  rise.  These
are  the  facts  underlying  the  doctrine  maintained  by  Malebranche,  Reid  and  Hamilton
concerning  the  so-called  '  inverse  relation  of  sensation  proper  and  perception  proper.'
Cf.  above,  ch.  x,  §  2,  p.  250,  n.  4.


CH.  xvin,  §  2]  Temperament  441

we  never  got  any  farther,  obviously  we  should  never  know  any
better  :  we  do  get  farther,  however.

Primarily,  as  we  have  seen,  it  was  the  physical  side  that
seemed  to  '  call  the  tune ' ;  but  later,  on  the  higher  levels  of  con-
sciousness, the  initiative  lies  with  increasing  frequency  on  the
purely  psychical  side ;  and  so  we  talk  popularly  of  the  power  of
the  soul  over  the  body.  In  proof  of  this  power  so  many  volumes
of  facts1  have  been  collected — facts  for  the  most  part  well  authen-
ticated— that  we  may  spare  ourselves  any  detailed  citation  here.
Moreover  these  facts,  however  popularly  impressive  or  medically
important,  are  quite  subsidiary  to  the  strictly  psychological
evidence  we  have  already  obtained  as  to  the  distinctness  of  the
experient  from  his  Anlage:  a  position  which  these  facts  do  not
so  much  establish  as  presuppose.  Psychotherapeutics,  autosug-
gestion and  faith-cure  are  out  of  the  question  below  the  self-
conscious  level,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  case  of  the  lower  animals  or
of  infants.  Notwithstanding  the  invariable  concomitance  and  the
primary  identification  of  self  and  body,  the  one  main  fact,  then,
is  that  the  further  experience  advances,  the  more  subjective  selec-
tion assumes  the  principal  rdle  within  it.  This  it  is  that  justifies
our  general  analysis  and  establishes  at  once  the  duality  of  subject
and  object  and  also  the  attribution  to  the  subject  exclusively  of
the  affectivity  and  activity  without  which  all  psychical  synthesis
would  be  inexplicable2.  Finally,  the  continuity  we  observe  alike
in  phylogeny  and  in  ontogeny — in  the  development  of  species
as  well  as  in  that  of  individuals — seems  to  justify  us  in  also  con-
cluding that  this  distinction  between  the  subject  and  its  Anlage
is  primordial.  It  justifies  us  the  more  as  the  alternative  of  a
generatio  equivoca  is  beset  with  insuperable  difficulties,  if  it  be
not,  as  many  hold  it  to  be,  an  actual  contradiction.  For  if  the
subject  is  not  from  the  first  distinct  from  the  body,  must  it  not
be  developed  out  of  it,  as  the  naturalists  suppose  ?

This  appeal  to  continuity  becomes  still  more  impressive,  if
we  revert  for  a  moment  to  the  parallel  differentiation  of  bioplasm
and  psychoplasm  which  facts  connected  with  heredity  brought

1  A  few  of  the  more  accessible  may  be  mentioned : — G.  Moore,  The  Power  of  the
Soul  over  the  Body,  6th  ed.  1868  ;  W.  B.  Carpenter,  Principles  of  Mental  Physiology;
D.  H.  Tuke,  Illustrations  of  the  Influence  of  the  Mind  upon  the  Body,  2nd  ed.  2  vols.
1884  ;  H.  H.  Goddard,  American  Jl.  of  Psychology,  x.  (1898),  431  ff.,  "  Effects  of
Mind  on  Body  as  evidenced  by  Faith-cures. "

8  Cf.  above,  ch.  iii,  §  i,  pp.  66  f. ;  ch.  xii,  §  7,  p.  312  ;  ch.  x\\i,  passim.


44 2 Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [CH.  xvm,  §  2

just  now  to  our  notice1.  We  conclude  that  the  self  is  always
distinct  from  the  body;  but  till  its  experience  is  so  far  advanced
that  it  is  itself  aware  of  the  distinction,  all  is — we  have  allowed —
as  if  the  self  were  merely  the  body:  an  admission  that  may  seem
to  detract  from  the  cogency  of  our  conclusion.  But,  recalling
the  parallel  mentioned,  we  realise  that  this  body  is  not  a  '  bare
body '  such  as  the  physicist  conceives.  It  is  a  living  body  con-
tinuous with  other  such  bodies  that  were  in  like  manner  angelegt
and  each  in  turn  further  differentiated  by  the  subject  whom  it
invested.  If  we  picture  the  '  influence  of  the  mind  over  the  body'
as  thus  exerted  at  every  step  throughout  the  entire  line  of  the
concrete  individual's  descent  from  some  primeval  protozoan  to
his  immediate  forbears,  and  if — with  this  picture  before  us — we
try  to  conjecture  the  ultimate  grounds  within  the  range  of  our
experience,  of  his  having  an  Anlage  at  all,  we  come  in  sight  of
a  new  'philosophy  of  clothes2.'  In  other  words,  if  we  are  to
account  for  our  embodiment  we  seem  to  be  thrown  back  on  the
interaction  of  subject  and  object,  that  is  to  say,  on  the  subjective
selection  and  natural  selection  (widely  understood)  which  we
have  found  to  be  the  factors  on  which  its  progressive  differentia-
tion depends,  once  it  is  begun.  The  intermediary  and  subsidiary
rdle  which  Anlage  or  organism  implies  seems  in  this  way  expli-
cable, and  also  its  functional  distinctness  from  subject  and  object
alike3.

1  Cf.  last  ch.,  §  4,  pp.  425  f.

2  Of  which  Leibniz — apart  from  his  unacknowledged  debt  to  Spinoza — may  be
called  the  founder. For  an  attempt  to  interpret  this  philosophy  somewhat  further
in  the  light  of  present  knowledge,  the  reader,  who  cares  to  do  so,  may  consult  The
Realm  of  Ends ;  2nd  ed.  pp.  254-8  and  pp.  461-7.

3  How  a  '  bare  soul '  or  naked  monad — if  there  be  such  a  thing — could  begin  to
invest  itself  with  psychoplasm  is  inconceivable :  equally  inconceivable  is  it  how  4  bare
body '  or  dead  matter — if  there  be  such  a  thing — could  ever  quicken  itself  and  become
bioplasm. In  dealing  with  real  things  our  approach  to  the  limits  can  never  be  more
than  asymptotic  :  we  can  attain  neither  to  the  infinitesimal  nor  to  the  infinite. The
principle  of  continuity  then  gives  us  no  title  to  infer  from  the  distinction  reached  by
analysis  to  the  separate  existence  of  the  factors  analyzed. Only  experience  can  justify
such  a  separation. But  the  world  is  not  and  has  never,  perhaps,  been  supposed  to  be,  an
absolute  plurality. Kant's  category  of  reciprocity  ( Gemeinscha.fi)  is  the  last  word  for
us  on  the  empirical  plane,  and  that  is  incompatible  with  absolute  separation. So  in
psychology  we  find  a  duality  of  subject  and  object  but  never  any  warrant  for  dualism.
On  the  other  hand,  the  underlying  unity  and  all-embracing  totality,  sometimes  spoken
of  as  the  Absolute,  does  not  belong  to  the  empirical  plane. With  the  psychological
bearings  of  this  point  too  the  writer  has  tried  to  deal  elsewhere. Cf.  "  The  Present
Problems  of  General  Psychology,"  7^he  Philosophical  Review  (1904),  xiii.  pp.  607-14.


CH.  xvin,  §  3] Instinct,  Talent  and  Genius  443

The  subject,  however,  if  essentially  distinct  from  its  psycho-
plasm  and  a  factor  in  its  elaboration,  must  be  itself  a  unique  agent,
conditioned,  it  may  be,  but  never  altogether  constituted  by  what
it  always  partially  controls  and  can  control  more  and  more,  as  it
rises  in  the  scale  of  life.  In  other  words,  the  whole  secret  of  the
concrete  individual  is  not  contained  in  Anlage,  whereas  to  an
indefinite  extent  the  secret  of  Anlagen  may  be  found  in  concrete
individuals.  Individual  liberty — for  that  is  really  the  issue —
may  be  a  mystery,  as  Malebranche  declared,  or  it  may  be,  as
Du  Bois-Reymond  thought,  the  last  of  the  seven  world-riddles,
or,  as  Hoffding  is  content  to  say — and  we  agree  with  him — it
may  be  merely  one  of  the  factual  bounding-points  of  knowledge.
But  whether  mystery  or  riddle,  if  it  be  not  fact  it  is  hard  to  see
what  remains  of  psychology  but  illusion.  On  the  other  hand,  if
it  be  a  fact,  then  a  man's  bodily  constitution  is  only  one  of  the
factors  conditioning  the  formation  of  his  character,  a  'property'
rather  than  an  attribute  of  his  self  and  normally,  to  a  greater  or
less  extent,  directly  and  indirectly  amenable  to  his  control.


Instinct,  Talent  and  Genius.

§  3.  Included  in  this  complex  intermediate  factor,  the  Anlage
or  psychoplasm  with  which  the  concrete  experient  starts  invested,
there  are  still  other  constituents  to  examine.  They  differ  from
that  already  considered  under  the  title  of  temperament  in  being
more  restricted  and  so  more  differentiated.  The  clue  to  them  is
to  be  found,  not  in  coenaesthesis,  but  in  more  definite  or  more
objective  situations.  Correlated  with  these  every  individual  has
certain  instincts  and  different  individuals  tend  to  display  native
endowments  or  defects  in  very  diverse  ways.

Though  instinctive  behaviour — to  begin  with  that — is  entirely
a  matter  of  Anlage  and.  though  too  it  is  genetically  of  quite  funda-
mental importance,  nevertheless  we  need  here  do  little  more
than  recognise  its  place.  Broadly  speaking,  this  is  on  the  lower
level  common  both  to  man  and  brute,  and  so  does  little  to
differentiate  one  human  being  from  another,  whether  we  define
instinct  more  widely  or  more  narrowly.  As  to  this,  there  is  some-
thing to  be  said  for  distinguishing  instinctive  emotions,  instinctive
appetites  and  aversions,  and  instinctive  actions.  Thus  instinctive


444  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [CH.XVIII,  §3

emotions  are  always  accompanied  by  the  corresponding  emotional
'expressions,'  but  these,  we  have  seen — at  least  in  their  primary
manifestations — differ  by  their  diffused  nature  from  the  more
restricted  and  voluntary  actions  that  result  from  conative  im-
pulses. Again  instinctive  appetites  and  aversions  are  often,  but
are  certainly  not  always,  accompanied  by  instinctive  actions.
Sometimes,  in  human  beings  especially,  the  appropriate  actions
are  only  gradually  learnt.  Lastly,  instinctive  actions,  to  which
the  term  instinct  is  usually  confined,  are  not  necessarily  attended
by  specific  emotions  at  all.  These  at  least,  it  will  be  generally
agreed,  furnish  no  basis  for  differentiating  character.  But  in  the
case  of  instinctive  emotions  this  may  be  questioned.  No  doubt
some  people  are  vastly  more  timid,  for  example,  or  more  pug-
nacious, or  more  readily  elated  and  depressed  than  others.  Such
differences,  however,  are  either  '  constitutional '  or  '  tempera-
mental ' — and  so  far  have  been  already  dealt  with,  or  they  are
the  result  of  habit,  and  then  presuppose  character  already  to
some  extent  formed.  Much  the  same  remark  applies  to  appetites.
Some  men  are  temperate  and  this  we  regard  as  natural  and
normal ;  others  are  intemperate,  possibly  from  disease — as  in
dipsomania,  erotomania  and  other  such  manias — but  more  fre-
quently from  indulgence  aided  and  abetted  perhaps  by  perverted
ingenuity  and  imagination,  as  in  the  gourmand  and  the  libertine.
But  these  are  forms  of  degradation  unknown  among  brutes  and
altogether  incompatible  with  instincts.  On  every  tenable  view,
then,  instinct  as  such  seems  to  have  little  to  do  with  the  problems
of  individual  psychology1.

Whereas  all  men  are  alike  as  regards  their  instincts  and
equally  all  women,  it  is  far  otherwise  as  regards  their  abilities ;
especially  when  by  'ability'  we  mean  not  simply  the  possibility
of  doing  at  all,  but  the  power  of  doing  with  an  ease,  promptness
and  perfection  exceeding  the  average.  Abilities  of  this  sort  we
call  talents.  "  All,"  it  has  been  said,  "  have  one  talent,  some  have
even  two."  But  the  collective  talents  of  the  human  race  are
manifold,  and  individual  diversities  therefore  are  correspondingly
great.  This  topic  is  thus,  unlike  that  of  instinct,  an  important  one
for  individual  psychology.  It  is,  however,  less  important  to  the
question  of  the  formation  of  personal  character  in  the  narrower

1  Even  in  Dr  W.  Stern's  elaborate  psychograms  it  has  no  place,  save  perhaps  in
connexion  with  differences  of  sex.


CH.  xvni,  §  3] Instinct,  Talent  and  Genius  445

sense — which  is  now  our  main  theme — and  we  may  therefore
treat  it  somewhat  summarily.

(i)  First  of  all,  we  must  remark  that  it  is  probably  a  great
mistake  to  suppose  that  any  talent,  as  the  term  is  ordinarily
understood,  is  ever  inherited  in  the  form  of  a  completely  organized
function.  After  all,  no  one  is  born  a  poet,  though  not  anybody
can  become  one;  and  of  those  who  could,  many  for  lack  of  oppor-
tunity remain  '  mute  and  inglorious.'  However  we  shall  return
to  this  point  presently.  Meanwhile  we  assume  that  what  is  really
inherited  is  not  the  talent — this  as  psychologically  analyzed  is
usually  very  complex — but  only  its  main  constituents.  The
number  of  these  is,  of  course,  far  less  than  that  of  the  various
combinations  of  them  forming  the  talents  which  either  do  or  might
exist1.  A  generically  complete  enumeration  of  these  'elements'
is  supplied  by  our  psychological  analysis,  so  far  as  that  is  itself
complete.  Moreover  this  is  the  same  for  all  normal  individuals,
inasmuch  as  each  finds  a  place  within  the  schema  which  that
analysis  yields2.  But  there  are  certain  other  constituents  disclosed
by  that  analysis  which  are  subjective  ;  these  we  shall  call  'innate'
to  distinguish  them  from  the  more  objective  elements  which  are
said  to  be  '  inherited '  in  the  stricter  sense.  The  former  for  the
present  do  not  concern  us,  but  they  must  not  be  forgotten3.
Among  the  latter  we  may  note  (i)  differences  in  sensory  dis-
crimination, in  motor  agility  and  in  tempo ;  (2)  peculiarities  of
plasticity  as  regards  retentiveness,  assimilation,  and  so  of  asso-
ciation. Perhaps  under  these  two  heads  might  be  included  all  the
'  elements  '  of  inherited  talent  so  far  ascertained  ;  but  even  if  the
enumeration  were  complete  as  to  details,  the  chief  problem  would
still  remain,  viz.  to  account  for  their  various  combinations.  Where
this  is  not  realised  the  search  for  elements  is  very  apt  to  prove
a  snare.

For  example,  Bain,  referring  to  the  first  mentioned  item,  has
said:  "This  is  the  deepest  foundation  of  disparity  of  intellectual
character,  as  well  as  of  variety  in  likings  and  pursuits.  If  from  the
beginning  one  man  can  interpolate  five  shades  of  discrimination

1  The  full  consequences  of  this  obvious  but  important  point  are  illustrated  and
enforced  at  length  by  Beneke. Cf.  his  Psychologische  Skiszen,  Bd.  ii. 1827,  §  30,
pp. 4i7ff.

2  Cf.  above,  §  i,  p.  431.
8  Cf.  below,  p.  451-


446  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [CH.  xvin,  §  3

of  colour  where  another  can  feel  but  one  transition,  the  careers
of  the  two  men  are  foreshadowed  and  will  be  widely  apart1."
Mutatis  mutandis,  these  remarks  would  equally  apply  to
other  forms  of  sensory  or  motor  acuity.  They  would,  however,
certainly  not  go  very  far  unless  they  implied  more  than  is
explicitly  stated.  Whether  the  fineness  of  sensory  or  motor
discrimination  was  or  was  not  accompanied  by  a  corresponding
definiteness  and  vividness  of  imagery,  for  example,  would  make
all  the  difference.  Perhaps  it  frequently  is,  but  often  it  is  not2.
Moreover,  in  conjunction  with  aesthetic  susceptibility,  acuteness
of  sense  might  incline  a  man  one  way  and  combined  with  intel-
lectual curiosity  quite  another.  On  the  whole,  we  must  demur
to  Bain's  position  that  sensory  discrimination  is  '  the  deepest
foundation '  of  character  of  any  sort 3.

J.  S.  Mill  provides  a  pendant  to  Bain's  instance  under  our  first
head  by  one  that  belongs  to  the  second,  referring,  that  is  to  say,
not  to  sensation,  the  first  item  mentioned,  but  to  association,  the
last,  and  moreover  taking  the  subjective  side  also  into  account4.
He  begins  by  laying  down,  as  '  one  of  the  simple  laws  of  mind,'
the  fact  we  have  so  often  insisted  upon,  that — to  put  it  briefly —
subjective  interest  is  the  one  efficient  factor  in  determining  the
details  of  our  various  associations.  This  "  elementary  law,"  he
thinks,  "would  explain... in  particular  some  of  the  fundamental
diversities  of  human  character  and  genius."  To  make  good  this
assumption,  he  then  proceeds  to  say  :  "Associations  being  of  two
sorts,  either  between  synchronous,  or  between  successive  impres-
sions ;  and  the  influence  of  the  law... being  felt  with  peculiar
force  in  the  synchronous  class  of  association  ;  it  is  remarked  by
the  writer  referred  to  [viz.  Martineau]  that  in  minds  of  strong
organic  sensibility  synchronous  associations  will  be  likely  to  predo-
minate. .  .while  persons  of  more  moderate  susceptibility  to  pleasure

1  Education  as  a  Science,  2nd  ed.  1879,  P*  I6-

2  Cf.  VV.  James,  The  Principles  of  Psychology,  ii.  pp.  50  ff.

3  For  a  very  interesting  and  more  adequate  treatment  of  sensory  differentiation  in
relation  to  'character'  cf.  J.  Jastrow,  Character  and  Temperament,  1916,  pp.  284  ff.

4  Mill  evidently  set  great  store  by  this  instance,  for  he  gives  it  as  his  one  example
from  *  mental  science  '  of  what  he  called  the  explanation  of  laws,  and  in  an  early  essay,
which  he  thought  it  'desirable  to  preserve,'  he  sought  to  apply  it  to  '  the  peculiarities
of  the  poetical  temperament.' But  it  was  to  an  essay  of  Martineau's — which  however
Martineau  did  not  desire  to  preserve — that  appeared  in  the  same  year  (1833)  and  in
the  same  periodical  ( The  Monthly  Repository)  that,  as  Mill  himself  tells  us,  he  originally
owed  it.


CH.  xvm,  §  3] Instinct,  Talent  and  Genius  447

and  pain  will  have  a  tendency  to  associate  facts  chiefly  in  the
order  of  their  succession."  The  'mental  habit  which  is  commonly
called  imagination  and  is  one  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  painter
and  the  poet '  is,  he  thinks,  accounted  for  by  the  first  'sort  of  asso-
ciation,' while  the  second  sort  will  account  for  those  who,  if  '  they
possess  mental  superiority,  will  addict  themselves  to  history  or
science  rather  than  to  creative  art1 ! '  Surely  nothing  could  well
be  more  flimsy !  If  the  influence  of  the  simple  law  is  '  felt  with
peculiar  force  in  the  synchronous  class  of  associations '  as  such,
then  it  will  be  felt  by  all,  whether  they  be  affectively  more  or  less
susceptible2.  But  there  is  no  evidence  that  such  preference  is
general,  nor  indeed  any  that  it  is  characteristic  of  poets.  On  the
other  hand,  the  assumption  that  persons  who  addict  themselves  to
science  have  either  inherited  or  acquired  any  predilection  towards
successional  associations  is  at  least  equally  groundless.  No  doubt
the  domain  of  painters  and  sculptors  is  in  a  sense  restricted  to
objects  as  that  of  historians  is  in  a  sense  restricted  to  events.  Yet
the  former  continually  portray  attitudes  powerfully  suggestive  of
action,  and  the  latter  if  they  are  not  mere  chroniclers  are  at  least
as  interested  in  the  tout  ensemble  from  which  events  proceed  as
they  are  in  the  events  themselves.  Talents  are  diverse  and
numerous  enough,  have  many  elements  and  may  be  classified  in
many  ways  ;  but,  again,  we  may  repeat  that  no  one  element  will
be  decisive,  least  of  all  one  so  nearly  imaginary.  Everybody
forms  both  synchronous  and  successive  associations  and  for  every-
body sometimes  objects  and  sometimes  events  are  the  more
interesting.  But,  as  Kant  put  it,  time  is  the  form  of  the  inner
sense,  or  as  we  say  of  experience,  and  consequently  successional
association  is  at  once  more  ultimate  and  more  elementary.  And
poetry,  we  may  remember,  is  more  primitive  than  science.

(ii)  In  the  next  place,  if  talents  are  always  complex,  and
usually  very  complex,  psychological  '  constellations,'  we  have  to
inquire  how  their  several  constituents  become  a  united  and  corre-
lated whole.  Well,  let  it  not  be  forgotten  that  in  some  cases,
where  circumstances  are  too  untoward,  they  never  do.  And  in
very  many,  probably  in  most,  of  the  cases  where  the  requisite
correlation  is  achieved,  it  is  the  result  of  repeated  trial  as  in  other

1  Logic,  in.  xiii.  §  6  fin. Italics  mine. The  paper  of  Martineau  referred  to  is
reprinted  in  his  Essays,  Reviews  and  Addresses,  1890,  i.  pp.  40  ff.
a  Cf.  above,  §  2,  p.  437.


448  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [CH.  xvm,  §  3

cases  of  acquisition  and  not  a  part  of  the  original  Anlage,  save
that  here  the  prompting  is  due  to  pleasure  rather  than  pain1.
A  keen  pleasure  in  tones,  to  take  a  very  simple  example,  leading
to  spontaneous  efforts  to  reproduce  them,  may  reveal  a  corre-
sponding vocal  adaptability,  thereby  prolonging  and  enhancing
the  pleasure  and  at  the  same  time  perfecting  the  correlation,  in
other  words,  combining  these  two  main  constituents  of  the  singer's
talent.

There  are,  however,  cases,  some  think,  in  which  talents  appear
at  the  very  outset,  like  Minerva  emerging  fully  armed  from  the
head  of  Jove.  Thus  Huxley,  referring  to  Mozart,  Bidder  and
Pascal — stock  instances  of  this  class — says :  "  All  these  may  be
said  to  have  been  impelled  by  instinct  as  much  as  are  the  beaver
and  the  bee2."  There  are,  no  doubt,  some  analogies  between
talent  and  instinct ;  but  there  also  are  some  important  differences.
First  of  all,  diversity  between  individual  and  individual  is  of  the
essence  of  the  one  as  truly  as  practical  identity  between  indi-
vidual and  individual  is  of  the  essence  of  the  other.  If  every
human  child  were  as  musical  as  Mozart  or  as  mathematical  as
Bidder  there  would  be  no  talk  of  'special  proclivity'  whether  of
genius  or  talent  in  such  matters  at  all.  On  the  other  hand,  if
only  quite  occasionally  a  beaver  or  a  bee  were  found  to  display
the  extraordinary  structural  skill  now  characteristic  of  its  species,
to  say  that  it  was  '  impelled  by  instinct '  would  be  the  last  thing
we  should  think  of.  Secondly,  progress  is  an  invariable  mark  of
native  talent,  and  that  in  two  respects — precocity  and  preemi-
nence ;  but  it  is  never  a  characteristic  of  instinct.  "If  Mozart,"
said  Darwin,  "instead  of  playing  the  pianoforte  at  three  years
old  with  wonderfully  little  practice,  had  played  a  tune  with  no
practice  at  all,  he  might  truly  be  said  to  have  done  so  instinc-
tively3." And  we  might  say  too,  that  in  proportion  as  his  talent
was  instinctive,  i.e.  manifested  without  any  prior  progress  by
means  of  practice,  in  the  same  proportion  it  would  certainly  fail
to  shew  any  subsequent  progress.  Both  these  differences  may  be
concisely  expressed  by  contrasting  instinct  as  correlation  without
variation  and  talent  as  variation  without  correlation.  In  the  one
case,  the  selection  of  the  species  has  eliminated  the  variation  and

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  xi,  §  2,  pp.  280  f.

2  Hume  (English  Men  of  Letters),  1879,  p.  113. {Collected  Essays,  vi.  p.  132.)
5  Origin  of  Species,  6th  ed.  p.  206.


CH.  xvin,  §  3] Instinct,  Talent  and  Genius  449

consolidated  the  correlation  :  in  the  other,  heredity  has  provided
the  variation  leaving  the  individual  and  circumstances  to  realise
the  correlation.  Finally,  both  the  resemblance  and  the  difference
between  instinct  and  talent,  which  analysis  reveals,  can,  we  think,
be  fairly  well  explained  by  genetic  psychology.  Here,  as  always,
the  principle  of  continuity  is  our  primary  clue.  Between  instinct
and  intelligence — pace  M.  Bergson — we  can  allow  no  absolute
discontinuity.  What  is  instinct  now  cannot  have  been  instinct
always  :  here  too,  if  natura  non  facit  saltus,  the  differentiation  of
the  constituents  must  have  preceded  their  synthesis,  and  then
subjective  selection  must  have  played  its  part1.  On  the  other
hand,  what  is  talent  in  the  present  and  requires  intelligence  for
its  completion  might  quite  well  become  instinct  in  the  distant
future.  Even  now  its  occasional  approximation  to  instinct  sug-
gests an  analogy  between  the  two,  though  it  does  not  justify  their
identification.

(iii)  The  discussion  of  the  relation  of  talent  to  instinct  brings
us  naturally  to  another  relation,  likewise  much  discussed,  viz.  that
of  talent  to  genius.  It  is  conceded  that  they  differ.  The  question
is :  do  they  differ  in  kind  or  do  they  differ  merely  in  degree  ?
Obviously  much  depends  upon  what  we  mean  by  these  terms.
In  popular  language  both  alike  imply  ability  above  the  average
and  so  far  are  taken  to  be  synonymous ;  but  whereas  talent  may
be  either  native  or  acquired,  genius  is  always  regarded  as  inborn.
In  that  case  again  the  difference  between  native  talent  and  genius
may  seem  to  be  only  a  difference  of  degree8.

1  It  is  interesting  to  find  that  behaviour,  instinctive  in  one  species,  occasionally
appears  as  what  might  be  called  a  talent  in  a  particular  individual  of  another. Cf.
the Appendix by Darwin to Romanes's  Mental  Evolution in Animals, 1883,
P-  367.

2  This  is  the  position  taken  by  the  late  Sir  Francis  Gallon  in  his  famous  book,
Hereditary  Genius :  an  inquiry  into  its  Laws  and  Consequences  (1869). The  opening
sentence  of  his  preface  together  with  that  of  his  introductory  chapter  are  decisive  on
this  point. In  the  one  he  speaks  of  '  investigating  the  subject  of  hereditary  genius':
in  the  other  he  says:  "  I  propose  to  show. ..that  a  man's  mental  abilities  are  derived
by  inheritance  under  exactly  the  same  limitations  as  are  the  form  and  physical  features
of  the  whole  organic  world." (Italics  mine.) He  appeals  to  the  physiologist,  but  to
the  psychologist  he  never  appeals. He  considers  reputation,  carefully  scrutinised,  as
a  safe  indication  of  '  natural  gifts ' ;  and  if  asked  to  draw  the  line  between  talent  and
genius,  would  presumably  have  said  a  man  is  talented  or  '  eminent '  if  he  is  one  in
about  4000,  and  he  has  genius  or  is  '  illustrious '  if  he  is  one  in  a  million  or  more,  has  or
deserves  to  have  a  public  funeral  and  rank  as  a  historical  character, (pp.  lof.) He

W.  P.  29


45O  Concrete  Individual  and  Char  act  ero  logy  [CH.  xvm,  §3

But  psychology  has  generally  been  more  discriminating.
Kant  called  genius  meisterhafte  Originalitdt1.  Ravaisson  remarks
"  c'est  dans  1'invention  que  sont  voir  surtout  cette  force  et  cette
grandeur  d'esprit  auxquelles  on  donne  de  nos  jours  le  nom  de
genie.  Le  genie  de  1'aveu  de  tous  consiste  surtout  a  inventer,  a
cre^er2."  Genius,  says  Gerard,  "  is  confounded  not  only  by  the
vulgar,  but  even  sometimes  by  judicious  writers,  with  mere
capacity.  Nothing  however  is  more  evident  than  that  they  are
totally  distinct...  Genius  is  properly  the  faculty  of  invention  ;  by
means  of  which  a  man  is  qualified  for  making  new  discoveries  in
science  or  for  producing  original  works  of  art3."  The  original
meaning  of  genius  which  carries  us  back  to  the  mythology  of
ancient  Rome  may  here  be  fitly  recalled.  According  to  this,  as
we  read  in  the  Encyclopaedia Britannica,  "every  man  has  his  genius,
who  is  not  his  creator,  but  only  comes  into  being  with  him  and
is  allotted  to  him  at  his  birth."  In  other  words,  a  man's  genius  is
innate  but  it  is  not  inherited,  it  pertains  to  the  subject  not  to  his
psychoplasm,  as  his  talents  may  do4.  If  that  is  so,  the  evidence
for  heredity,  which  is  ample  in  the  case  of  talent,  should  be  lacking
in  the  case  of  genius.  And  that  surely  is  what  we  find5.  But

makes  no  attempt  by  analysis  to  distinguish  between  them  and  seems  utterly  oblivious
of  the  fact  that  such  attempts  have  ever  been  made.

In  a  prefatory  chapter  to  a  second  edition,  published  in  1892 — of  which  I  was
ignorant  when  the  above  was  written — Gallon  lays  the  blame  for  his  use  of  the  word
'  genius '  on  Dr  Johnson  and  regrets  that  it  is  too  late  to  alter  the  title  of  his  book
and  call  it  Hereditary  Ability.

1  Kritik  der  Urtheilskraft,  §  49. But  Kant's  position  is  in  other  respects  unduly
narrow,  in  that  he  restricts  genius  to  the  domain  of  fine  art.

2  Philosophie  en  France,  4me  ed.  p.  245.

8  An  essay  on  Genius,  1774,  pp.  7,  8.  *  Cf.  above,  p.  443.

5  As  to  heredity  Galton  remarks:  "the  statistics  show  that  there  is  a  regular
average  increase  of  ability  in  the  generations  that  precede  its  culmination  and  as
regular  a  decrease  in  those  that  succeed  it "  (op.  cit.  p.  84  :  cf.  the  illustrative  table,
p.  83).  To  such  a  generalisation  genius  would  be  a  glaring  exception,  if  it  were
inherited  at  all.  But  there  are  scores  of  instances  of  genius  without  any  such  evidence
of  heredity  that  anybody  may  recall ;  e.g.,  mentioning  names  as  they  occur,  Shake-
speare, Newton,  Cromwell,  Napoleon, Wellington,  Descartes,  Leibniz,  Kant,  Beethoven,
J.  M.  W.  Turner.  In  fact,  Galton  himself  remarks:  "the  kinship  of  the  two  Pitts,
father  and  son,  is  often  spoken  of  as  a  rare,  if  not  a  sole  instance  of  high  genius  being
hereditary  "  (op.  cit.  p.  105).  But  is  it  true  that  for  either  of  them,  able  though  they
were,  the  title  of  "  high  genius"  is  or  could  be  claimed?  Other  possible  cases  occur
among  Gallon's  round  four  hundred  names,  e.g.  the  two  Scaligers  and  the  two  Bidders.
But  here  again  it  is  very  questionable  if  there  is  any  evidence  of  genius.  As  to  the
performances  of  arithmetical  prodigies — the  reader  interested  in  these  seeming  marvels


CH.  xvin,  §  3] Instinct,  Talent  and  Genius  45 1

it  is  only  when  the  genius  is  very  pronounced  that  the  difference
in  kind  between  the  two  is  clearly  evinced  by  the  striking  origin-
ality or  creativeness  that  only  'transcendent  genius'  displays.
These  are  not  the  marks  of  heredity :  on  the  contrary  they  are
the  diametrically  opposite.  Genius,  in  short,  seems  to  point  back
to  the  subjective  selection  which  we  have  taken  as  the  main
characteristic  of  our  psychological  individual,  who  has  noAnlage.
If  so,  then,  whatever  originality  or  creativeness  the  concrete  in-
dividual may  shew  will  be  due  not  to  his  Anlage  but  to  what  he
makes  with  that1.

This  is  the  ground  of  the  distinction  between  innate  and
inherited  which  was  adopted  above2.  In  pre-Darwinian  days  this
distinction  was  widely  recognised,  as  the  erudite  work  of  Prosper
Lucas  clearly  shews3.  The  continuous  evolution  of  species,
now  the  one  engrossing  problem,  tends  to  obscure  facts  which
the  assumption  that  species  are  fixed,  while  they  last,  forced  to  the
fore.  Hence  the  famous  controversy  which  then  arose  between
E.  Geoffrey  Saint-Hilaire  and  Cuvier — the  one  stressing  unity
of  plan,  the  other  diversity  of  types.  Lucas  synthesizes  the  thesis
and  antithesis  of  these  two  disputants.  In  creation  he  finds  two
co-ordinate  laws — a  law  of  '  invention  '  and  a  law  of  'imitation' :
the  one  analogous  to  imagination  or  improvisation  and  suggesting
Plato's  ideas,  the  other  analogous  to  memory  and  suggesting
repetition  and  routine.  When  we  pass  from  creation  to  pro-
creation the  same  two  laws,  he  held,  reappear  ;  albeit  with  a  more
limited  range  and  with  other  names.  Procreation  cannot  trans-
gress the  bounds  fixed  by  the  species;  but,  within  the  limits  of
these,  two  laws  are  manifest — that  of  heredity,  answering  to  imita-
tion and  perpetuating  the  species,  and  that  of  inneity,  answering
to  invention  and  originating  the  individual.  "  La  Nature,"  he
says,  "  ressaisit  dans  la  procreation  de  1'individualite,  roriginalite",
qu'elle  perd  dans  1'espece  ;...mais  dans  les  limites  memes  ou  elle
est  circonscrite. .  .il  semble  en  ye" rite*  que  toute  sa  liberte*  d'imagina-
tion  et  de  composition  lui  reste."  He  continues:  "Chaque  individu
a  son  type  de  vie.  La  personnalite"  est  1'expression  la  plus  absolue

will  find  an  excellent  psychological  discussion  in  G.  E.  Miiller's  Zur  Analyse  der
Gedachtnistatigkeit  u.s.w.  i.  1911,  §  33.

1  Cf.  wotT/Tifr  in  Liddell  and  Scott,  '  troubadour'  in  Brachet,  Ger.  Scha/ewdrang,
&c.  *  Cf.  above,  p.  445.

8  Traitt  philosophiquc  et  physiologiquc  de  T Htredite  naturelle,  i  vols.  1847-50.

29 — 2


45  2  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [CH.XVIII,  §  3

de  ce  type,  et  cette  expression  se  formule  toujours1."  That  is  to
say,  we  find  individuality  wherever  we  find  life  ;  but  we  find  it
especially  at  the  human  level,  where  first  we  talk  of  personality.
In  natural  history  we  are  'so  careless  of  the  single  life'  that  we
are  usually  content  to  stop  at  the  species  and  to  ignore  the  indi-
vidual ;  but  in  human  history  personal  individuality  always
counts,  preeminently  so  when  it  is  the  personality  of  genius,  which
may  be  epoch-making2.  Genius,  then,  is  but  a  'prerogative
instance'  compelling  attention  to  the  fundamental  distinction
between  the  experient  and  his  Anlage — between  inneity  and
heredity,  to  use  P.  Lucas's  terms.  Genius  and  invention  have
their  source  in  the  one,  talent  and  imitation  in  the  other.  But
all  this  amounts  to  saying  that  everyone  has  some  genius ;  and
that  is  true  in  the  sense  that  everyone  has  some  originality,  some
initiative.  Subjective  selection,  more  or  less,  is  the  sine  qua  non
of  individuality.

To  sum  up.  So  far  we  have  only  tried  to  make  clear  the
transition  referred  to  at  the  outset3.  Setting  out  from  the  in-
herited Anlage  which  differentiates  the  concrete  individuals  of
characterology  from  the  psychological  individual  of  general
psychology  we  have,  we  trust,  made  good  the  concrete  individual's
title  to  that  'centrality'  of  'subjective  being'  which  the  facts  of
heredity  seemed  to  impugn.  The  concrete  individual  does  not
account  for  his  Anlage,  nor  does  that  account  all  in  all  for  him.
We  are  now  again  back  at  the  standpoint  from  which  we  set  out
first  of  all.  What  is  new  is  simply  this :  in  place  of  the  formal
duality  of  subject  and  object  we  have  now  to  consider  the  '  special
point  of  view '  of  an  actual  subject  and  the  world  that  is  there
confronting  it  in  perspective4.  In  other  words  we  have  to  deal
with  a  definite  person  in  the  historical  world.  The  complete  task
of  characterology — which  is  more  than  we  can  here  attempt —
is  to  trace  the  progress  of  the  interaction  of  these  two  factors  as
far  as  it  is  displayed  in  what  we  call  the  formation  of  character.
This  interaction  has,  of  course,  its  reverse  side — the  influence  of

1  Op.  cit.  i.  pp.  101  f. Farther  to  elucidate  and  support  his  position  Lucas  cites  a
crowd  of  authorities,  eastern  and  western,  early  and  late,  all  upholding  in  various  forms
the  creatianist  doctrine  already  mentioned. Cf.  above,  ch.  xvii.  §  4,  p.  424.

2  Cf.  W.  James's  essay,  "  Great  Men  and  their  Environment,"  7'Ae  Will  to  Believe
and  other  Essays,  1897,  pp.  ii^Jin.-iig.

3  Cf.  above,  ch.  xvii,  §  i,  p.  409,  note  i.
*  Cf.  above,  ch.  xvii,  §  4,  p.  428.


CH.  xviii,  §4]  Intelligence,  Sentiment  and  Character 453

the  historical  person  on  the  world.  With  that  aspect,  however,
psychology  has  no  immediate  concern ;  therein  lies  the  difference
between  characterology  on  the  one  hand  and  history  and  bio-
graphy on  the  other,  which  are  concerned  with  both  aspects.
But  all  alike — it  is  worth  while  recalling  in  passing — depend  on
the  cross  lights  afforded  by  what  we  have  called  the  transparency
of  the  social  medium.  Part  passu  as  this  grows  clearer  it  reveals
more:  the  consciousness  of  self,and  the  practical  acquaintance  and
spontaneous  sympathy  with  other  selves,  likewise  become  wider
and  deeper.  General  psychology,  the  science  of  individual  ex-
perience as  such,  then  first  becomes  possible,  and  provides  at
length  the  clue  to  characterology  and  comparative  psychology
which  aim  at  envisaging,  as  it  were  from  within,  the  concrete
individuals  among  whom  we  live  and  move1.

Such  a  living  interpretation  from  within  of  'the  thoughts
and  intents  of  the  heart '  is  the  distinctive  ideal  of  charactero-
logy, not  a  lifeless  '  psychograph '  constructed  with  the  help  of
statistical  and  correlational  methods.  Only  in  this  way  is  any
continuity  throughout  psychology  as  a  whole  to  be  maintained.
As  the  details  of  characterology  lie  beyond  our  province  it  only
remains  here,  first,  to  discuss  certain  marginal  questions  which
are  not  altogether  special,  and  which  at  the  same  time  concern
this  continuity,  and  finally,  to  bring  the  two,  characterology  and
general  psychology,  into  line.

Intelligence,  Sentiment  and  Character,

§  4.  Individuality,  character,  personality,  at  the  human  level
are  fundamentally  identical  and  often  used  as  synonymous.  But
the  relation  of  what  is  called  intelligence  or  intellect  to  character
is  much  disputed.  This  is  one  of  the  questions  on  the  border
line  that  we  may  fairly  be  called  upon  to  discuss,  both  on  its  own
account  and  also  as  a  step  towards  rendering  the  concept  of
character  itself  more  precise.  At  the  outset,  however,  we  must
object  to  the  terminology.  To  talk  of  the  intellect  as  to  talk
of  the  will  is,  as  already  said,  to  lapse  back  into  the  old  faculty
theory  of  mind  that  we  claim  to  have  outgrown1.  It  is  the

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  xv,  §  i,  p.  369,  §  3,  p.  381 ;  ch.  xvi,  §  i,  pp.  394/*--39<5  5  and
in  the  present  ch.  §  i ,  p.  433  f.

a  Fouillee  and  Malapert,  for  example,  are  guilty  of  the  most  flagrant  ignoratio
tlenchi  in  arguing  this  question  against  Ribot,  and  largely  on  this  account.  Malapert


454  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [CH.  xvm,  §  4

individual  subject  that  thinks  as  it  is  the  individual  subject  that
wills.  The  activity  is  one,  yet  the  differences  between  volition
and  intellection  are  manifest.  The  one  is  primary,  concerned
that  is  with  ends — the  conservation  or  the  betterment  of  self;
the  other  is  secondary  and  instrumental,  concerned  at  the  outset
with  the  means  to  these  ends.  No  subject  limits  itself1,  but  the
need  of  means  shews  it  to  be  limited,  conditioned  by  the  object
with  which  it  interacts.  The  elaboration  of  intellection  as  an
'  organon '  subserving  this  interaction  is,  as  we  have  seen,  the
outcome  not  of  individual  purpose  ad  hoc,  but  of  that  inter-
subjective  intercourse  which  kindles  'the  cross  lights  of  the  social
medium,'  as  said  just  now.  Hence  so  far  as  it  is  effective  and
deserves  the  name  of  '  intellect,'  that  organon  is  a  structure  cor-
related with  what  is  objective  in  the  epistemological  sense  and
so  far  objectively  determined.  So  far,  then,  it  is  altogether  im-
personal. If  a  man  chooses  to  think  he  must  play  the  game  if
he  is  '  to  score ' ;  but  the  laws  of  the  game  are  not  of  his  de-
vising. Accordingly  in  common  parlance  a  man's  character  and
his  intelligence  are  always  regarded  as  distinct  and  largely  as
independent.  His  character  is  displayed  in  the  use  he  makes  of
this  organon  ;  he  may  improve  it,  he  may  neglect  it,  or  he  may
abuse  it :  so  far  he  has  a  certain  responsibility — the  sole  criterion
of  personal  imputation.  In  our  terminology,  then,  this  organon
is  inherited,  not  innate,  pertains  to  the  individual's  Anlage,  not
to  his  '  subjective  being.'  It  is  an  '  endowment '  for  which,  as
such,  he  is  neither  to  be  praised  nor  blamed.

But  we  reach  this  conclusion,  it  will  be  observed,  from  the
standpoint  of  structural  psychology,  that  is  to  say  by  regarding
intelligence  analytically  and  interpreting  it  in  the  strictest  sense2.

speaks  of  the  intellect  as  itself '  preferring '  and  as  possibly  '  becoming  predominant  and
exclusive  to  the  point  of  effacing  both  sensibility  and  activity '  (Les Elements  du  Caractere,
ame  ^  1906,  pp.  51,  50).  Fouille'e  at  times  seems  to  identify  intelligence  with
consciousness,  and  argues  that  because  intelligence  is  instrumental  in  the  formation
of  character  it  must  therefore  be  a  constituent  of  the  character  formed  ( Temperament
et  Caracttre,  4me  ed.  1901,  pp.  107,  109).  For  Ribot's  position  cf.  his  Psychologie  des
Sentiments,  lo"16  ed.  1917,  pp.  391  f.,  439  ff.  and  his  references  to  Schopenhauer.

1  Hence  Descartes'  famous  doctrine  that  "  the  will  may,  in  a  certain  sense,  be  said
to  be  infinite  "  (Principles  of  Philosophy,  I.  xxxv. )  and  Carlyle's  corollary  that  it  is
useless  to  offer  even  a  shoeblack  half  the  universe  and  expect  him  to  be  satisfied.  Cf.
above,  ch.  xvi,  §  i,  p.  $<)ifin.,  p.  397  fin.

a  Such  strict  intelligence  is  of  course,  we  must  remember,  an  unrealised  ideal,  not
a  fact.  Cf.  above,  ch.  xii,  §  i,  p.  293  and  p.  295.


CH.  xvni,  §  4]  Intelligence,  Sentiment  and  Character 455

From  the  functional  standpoint,  however,  and  taking  intellection
as  we  actually  find  it,  new  aspects  of  the  relation  of  what  is  called
intelligence  to  character  come  into  view.  Summarily  to  ignore
these  might  be  defensible  but  would  hardly  be  wise.  In  the  first
place  we  must  not  overlook  the  fact  that  the  intellectual  Anlage
of  the  concrete  individual  is  entirely  the  result  of  the  progressive
experience  achieved  by  the  subjective  selection  of  his  ancestors
and  that  he  himself  is  gradually  nurtured  in  and  by  the  social
tradition  which  they  have  built  up  and  preserved.  The  solidarity
or  organic  unity  of  human  society  is  due  to,  and  cannot  be  sus-
tained without,  intelligence  :  only  as  a  '  member '  of  this  '  over-
individual  organism1'  is  the  concrete  individual  a  person,  and
only  through  his  intelligence  is  this  membership  possible.  We
cannot,  then,  regard  character  and  intelligence  as  independent.
The  only  points  we  can  insist  upon  are  (i)  that  there  is  only  one
kind  of  intellection  in  question  when  we  talk,  for  example,
of '  reason  '  or  '  common  sense,'  and  (2)  that  this  so  far  does  not
serve  to  define  character.

But  further,  when  we  talk,  as  people  not  uncommonly  do2,  of
intelligence  without  this  restriction,  then  indeed — leaving  the
fact  of  more  or  less  imperfection  aside — some  originality,  as  well
as  '  private  judgments,'  subjective  prejudices  or  prepossessions
in  divers  forms,  is  always  to  be  found.  We  see  the  former  in
what  psychologists  generally  call  constructive  or  creative  imagi-
nation :  we  see  the  latter  wherever  belief  (or  'make-belief')  is  the
result  of  an  affective-volitional  attitude  instead  of  being  objec-
tively grounded  (or  'assumed')8.  Both  these  unquestionably  are
intimately  connected  with  personal  character4.  Also,  though  both
involve  a  certain  selective  synthesis  yet  in  neither  case  can  this
be  identified  with  the  synthesis  which  connects  intellect  with
logic.  The  same  ideational  continuum  is  '  manipulated '  in  all,
but  objective  relations  are  the  sole  determinants  in  the  last,  and
subjective  interests  the  final  cause  in  the  other  two.  Between
these,  however,  there  is  still  a  difference  :  prejudices  and  pre-

1  With  this  concept  the  writer  has  tried  to  deal  briefly  in  The  Realm  of  Ends,
ch.  vi.  pp.  117-24.

3  But  cf.  above,  ch.  xii,  §  5,  p.  302.

8  Cf.  above,  ch.  xiv,  §  4,  pp.  354  ff.,  §  5,  p.  358.

*  We  are  reminded  here  of  Fichte's  saying :  "  Tell  me  of  what  sort  a  man  is  and
I  will  tell  you  what  philosophy  he  will  choose."


456  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [CH.  xvm,  §  4

possessions  lead  us  to  cast  about  for  confirmation  of  positions
already  adopted,  our  characters  being  what  they  are ;  but  creative
imagination  continually  opens  out  new  possibilities  which  may
influence  the  further  development  of  character  profoundly.  And
when  that  happens  such  influence  has  often  been  attributed  to
inspiration,  good  or  bad,  but  never  to  '  intellect '  as  an  organon.
For  then,  we  have  got  behind  everything  instrumental  and  seem,
so  far  as  psychology  goes,  to  have  reached  the  living  personality
on  which  all  structure  ultimately  depends.  In  a  word — putting
it  roundly — intelligence  may  imply  a  complete  psychosis  in  a
way  that  intellection  does  not.  So  far,  then,  intelligence  will
manifest  character,  whereas  intellection  need  not.

This  brings  us  naturally  to  another  question  involving  the
relation  of  character  and  intelligence,  viz.  that  concerning  the
development  of  sentiments.  Much  has  been  written  in  recent
years  by  psychologists  of  repute  about  what  they  call  the  '  logic
of  the  sentiments1.'  Some  of  these  writers,  like  Ribot,  lay  the
chief  stress  on  'emotional  or  affective  reasoning':  others,  like
Paulhan  and  Urban,  talk  mainly  of  affective  generalisation  and
abstraction,  of  affective  signs,  &c.  The  views  of  the  first  we
need  not  further  consider,  as  the  facts  of  their  so-called  '  rea-
soning or  emotioning '  have  been  already  dealt  with  under  the
heading  Belief.  Those  of  the  second  it  is  more  worth  while  to
examine  for  a  moment ;  for  the  exposition  they  offer  of  the
development  of  sentiment  is  hardly  compatible  with  the  exclu-
sively functional  being  of  the  experient  subject,  on  which  we  have
been  led  to  insist.  We  seem  to  see  the  presentationism  that  has
dogged  our  steps  from  the  first  here  masquerading  anew  under
the  guise  of  an  affective  logic.  It  purports  to  shew  that,  as  ex-
perience advances,  its  affective-volitional  side,  as  such,  discloses
a  'content'  and  structure  analogous  to  what  is  found  on  its
cognitional  side  in  sensations,  images,  ideas  and  symbols  and
the  substitutions  or  transformations  they  may  undergo.  This
attempt  to  assimilate  the  two  is  all  the  more  misleading,  because
a  seemingly  slight  but  really  vital  change  of  statement  would

1  A  reference  to  the  following  may  suffice: — W.  M.  Urban,  Psychological  Re-
view, viii.  (1901),  "The  Problem  of  a  'Logic  of  the  Emotions'  and  'Affective
Memory'";  Ribot,  La  Logique  des  Sentiments,  1905;  H.  Maier.  Psychologie  des
emotionalen  Denkens,  1908;  W.  M.  Urban,  Valuation:  its  Nature  and  Laws,  1909,
chs.  iv  and  v.


CH.  xviii,  §  4]  Intelligence,  Sentiment  and  Character 457

make  it  perfectly  true.  We  have  only  to  regard  the  '  content '
of  internal  perception  or  self-consciousness  as  the  whole  of  ex-
perience and  the  presentationist  has  a  case :  we  have  only  to
recognise  that  self-consciousness  is  never  more  than  a  part  of
experience — that  experience  is  always  more  and  wider  than
knowledge,  involving  function  as  well  as  structure  or  content —
to  see  that  his  case  is  gone1.  Let  us  now  look  at  the  facts.

We  have  already  noted  that  in  talking  of  feelings  as  respec-
tively sensuous,  aesthetical,  intellectual  and  so  forth,  we  are,  in
fact,  referring  both  to  pure  feeling  as  an  ultimate  subjective
factor  in  all  experience  and  also  to  the  definite  objective  content
that  pleases  or  displeases.  At  the  self-conscious  level  we  come
indeed  to  know  about  this  affective  factor,  but  this  knowledge
— so  far  from  identifying  what  is  '  subjectively  subjective '  with
what  is  subjectively  objective  —  only  reveals  their  essential
duality3.  When,  however,  we  talk  of  sentiments  we  refer  not
merely  to  a  specific  content  and  the  feeling  its  presence  or
absence  may  occasion,  we  usually  imply  also  the  conative  atti-
tude, the  love  or  hate  that  the  feeling  would  evoke.  Further,
sentiments  thus  presuppose  only  the  ^potentiality  of  the  affective-
volitional  attitude,  not  its  actuality;  whereas  feeling  and  emotion,
as  such,  involve  psychologically  actual  situations — situations,  that
is,  which  are  either  real,  remembered,  expected  or  assumed.
Every  actual  experience  of  feeling,  every  emotional  reaction  is
an  event  in  the  experient's  life.  Sentiments,  however,  are  not
events,  and  so  may  persist  apart  from  actual  situations  :  in  other
words,  they  are  dispositional3.  As  such  they  carry  us  back

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  i,  §§  5,  6,  pp.  23  f.;  ch.  xv,  §  2,  p.  273,  §  3,  pp.  3?6/».-379.
It  would  be  unfair  to  assume  that  all  the  writers  referred  to  are  deliberate  presenta-
tionists ;  but  they  seem  to  have  unwisely  adopted  a  plausible  standpoint  which  fatally
obscures  the  true  significance  of  the  many  interesting  facts  which  they  have  the  merit
of  first  bringing  together.  Thus  Urban  denies  "  that  feeling  is  wholly  subjective,
wholly  different  from  sensitivity  [or  '  feeling-tone ']  and  therefore  incapable  of  under-
going processes  analogous  to  generalisation  and  abstraction  "  ( Valuation :  its  Nature
and  Laws,  p.  134).  Cf.  also  pp.  97  ff.

a  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  6,  pp.  57  f.;  ch.  x,  §  2,  p.  245  and  p.  247.

8  And  so,  whereas  the  recurrence  of  events,  identical  situations,  that  is  to  say —
in  consequence  of  'the  law  of  novelty' — diminishes  the  intensity  of  the  feeling  or
emotion  they  call  forth,  dispositions — in  consequence  of  what  we  might  have  called
'  the  law  of  habit ' — become  stronger  and  more  persistent  the  more  frequently  they
are  brought  into  play.  Cf.  above,  ch.  x,  §  2,  p.  255;  ch.  iii,  §  7,  p.  98;  Hoffding,
Psychologic*,  pp.  384  f.

It  hardly  needs  to  be  said  that  though  all  sentiments  are  dispositional  not  all


45  8  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [CH.  xvm,  §  4

beyond  present  circumstances  to  the  subjective  selection  which
alone  will  ultimately  account  for  them.  But  this  distinction
between  sentiments  and  feelings  or  emotions  can  be  made  more
precise.  We  do  not  speak  of  sentiments  as  either  sensuous  or
intellectual  for  example1 ;  nor  do  we  speak  of  sentiments  in  the
case  of  any  particular  emotion.

As  to  the  first  point,  the  specific  contents  with  which  senti-
ments are  concerned,  regarded  broadly,  come  into  line  with
interests  and  personal  affections  :  they  imply  permanent  values,
personal  or  impersonal ;  and  in  fact,  they  have  been  so  regarded2.
Valuation  is  doubtless  an  intellectual  process,  as  we  have  already
seen,  but  it  is  not  a  process  with  a  logic  of  its  own,  though  its
specific  domain,  that  of  conation,  is  distinct  from  the  domain  of
cognition3.  To  ignore  the  identity  between  these  two  domains,
so  far  as  intellection  is  concerned,  while  maintaining  an  intel-
lectual analogy  between  them,  where  it  is  not,  strikes  us  as  a
tour  de  force  only  to  be  concealed  by  treating  the  feeling  and
attention  which  subjective  selection  involves,  as  nothing  but
'  content.'  There  is  no  experience  of  which  this  is  true,  though
a  defective  analysis  of  self-consciousness  has  led  the  presenta-
tionist  to  think  there  is.  The  objective  complex,  that  is  valued
positively  or  negatively  and  loved  or  hated  accordingly,  may  be
represented  by  a  concept  that  is  abstract  and  symbolic — a  case
of  '  imageless  apprehension  ' — but  to  infer  from  this  that  senti-
ment is  '  intensityless  appreciation '  is  to  miss  the  meaning  of

dispositions  are  sentimental.  The  only  thing  common  to  them  all  is  this  '  law  of
habit.'

1  "  I  never  heard  the  pain  of  gout  or  any  other  severe  feeling  called  a  sentiment"
said  Reid  (Active  Powers,  V.  vii.  Hamilton's  ed.  p.  674). "We  do  not  speak  of  a
man's  sentiments  concerning  a  mechanical  contrivance,  or  a  physical  hypothesis,  or
concerning  any  speculative  question  whatever,  by  which  the  feelings  are  not  liable
to  be  roused  or  the  heart  affected,"  said  D.  Stewart  (Philosophical  Essays,  Note  D).

2  Cf.  A.  F.  Shand,  "Character  and  the  Emotions,"  Mind,  N.S.  v.  (1896),  p.  217.
Unfortunately  there  is  no  word  either  in  French  or  German  that  exactly  corresponds
to  our  word  '  sentiment '  in  this  respect ;  though  the  German  Gesinnung  comes  near
to  it,  as  the  following  passage  from  Lotze's  Grundzuge  der  Psychologie  (1881),  §  5,
will  shew. Gesinnungen  he  there  describes  "as  permanent  dispositions  of  heart
( Verfassungen  des  Gemiitks)  due  to  the  fact  that  once  for  all  a  definite  value  is  placed
on  certain  ideational  contents  ( Vorstellungsinhalte) :  they  are  therefore — e.g.  piety  or
patriotism — not  themselves  simple  definite  feelings  [  =  feelings  or  emotions]  but  causes
whence,  as  circumstances  determine  (nock  Lage  der  Umstdnde),  the  most  diverse  feel-
ings may  arise."

*  Cf.  above,  ch.  xvi,  §  2,  pp.  388  f.


CH.  xvin,  §  4]  Intelligence,  Sentiment  and  Character 459

disposition  altogether,  to  confound  the  abstractness  of  the  concept
with  the  potentiality  of  the  sentiment.  Between  these  there  is
obviously  no  analogy  whatever.  There  is  just  as  little  analogy
between  the  word  as  '  a  substitutive  sign '  and  the  sentiment  as
a  disposition.  And  so  we  come  to  the  second  point.

We  do  not  speak  of  a  sentiment  of  fear  or  a  sentiment  of
anger  although  we  speak  of  a  timorous,  and  of  an  irascible,  dis-
position. But  the  disposition  in  these  cases  does  not  depend  on
a  feeling  of  value ;  though  the  actual  manifestation  of  emotion,
when  it  is  due  to  sentiment,  is  determined  by  a  feeling  of  value1.
It  is  this  relation  between  emotions  and  sentiments  that  we  have
now  to  consider  somewhat  further.  The  manifestation  of  special
emotions  long  precedes  the  development  of  sentiments  ;  in  fact,
emotional  manifestation  as  the  immediate  result  of  feeling  we
have  seen  to  be  primordial  and  the  genetic  precursor  of  volun-
tary movement2.  Emotion  then  is  initially  a  reaction  determined
from  the  objective  side ;  but  this  ceases  to  be  the  case  when
emotion  is  consequent  on  sentiment :  here  we  must  rather  say
that  the  initiative  lies  on  the  subjective  side.  In  saying  this  we
realise  a  certain  defect  in  the  term  'sentiment'  due  largely  to  its
etymology.  Sentiment  regarded  as  affective-volitional  disposi-
tion implies  more  than  feeling,  the  'more'  which  the  German
term  Gesinnung  supplies.  A  genuine  sentiment3  implies  both
valuation  and  motivation,  but  as  commonly  employed,  the  former
alone  is  apt  to  be  predominant.  It  is  however  qua  motive  that
sentiment  is  entitled  to  be  called  'dispositional.'  Now  while  the
same  emotion  may  be  determined  by  the  most  varied  objects
the  same  sentiment  may  determine  the  most  varied  emotions.
Hence  we  never  speak  of  the  sentiment  itself  as  a  reaction  ;  for,
as  such,  it  rather  initiates  reaction.  Strictly  speaking,  it  is,  of
course,  always  the  subject  that  reacts.  Since,  however,  senti-
ments appear  first  on  the  human  level  and  are  in  fact  acquired,
we  are  surely  warranted  in  saying  that  they  belong  to  character,
and  that  their  part  in  determining  emotions  is  thus  explained;
for,  as  we  shall  see  more  clearly  presently,  the  formation  of

1  On  the  contrary  the  timorousness  or  irascibility  of  a  concrete  individual  depends
primarily  on  Anlage.  Cf.  above,  §  3,  p.  444.

a  Cf.  above,  ch.  ii,  §  5,  p.  52 ;  ch.  xi,  §  2,  p.  276  fin.

3  With  the  '  fatty  degeneration  of  the  soul '  called  sentimentality  we  are  not  now
concerned.


460  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [CH.  xvm,  §  4

character means  just  this  transference  of  initiative  from  the
objective  to  the  subjective  side1.

But  it  is  time  now  to  ascertain  more  precisely  in  what  sense
we  are  to  understand  character.  For,  in  fact,  character  is  used
sometimes  in  a  narrower,  sometimes  in  a  wider  sense :  the  one
going  back  to  the  personality  '  characterized '  and  its  develop-
ment; the  other  stopping  short  at  the  characteristics  it  displays.
There  is  here  a  difference  of  sense  comparable  to  that  between
root  and  branches,  circle  and  periphery,  author  and  work.  The
one  deals  with  the  obvious  and  external,  and  hence  is  apt  to  be
confused  with  reputation.  The  literary  '  portraits '  common  in
all  ages — from  the  Characters  of  Theophrastus  to  the  Memories
and  Portraits  of  R.  L.  Stevenson — might  be  included  under  it2.
The  other  means  something  which  it  requires  a  clue  to  find;  for
it  is  neither  obvious  nor  external.  The  most  important  recent
writers  on  character — they  are  chiefly  French — adopt  in  the  main
the  wider  and  more  external,  one  might  almost  call  it  the  physio-
gnomical meaning  of  the  term3.  From  this  to  a  merely  classi-
ficatory  or  comparative  treatment  of  characteristics  is  almost  an
unavoidable  step;  and,  then,  in  place  of  an  investigation  of  cha-
racter as  such  and  its  gradual  development,  we  have  descriptions
of  various  types  of  characters — about  which  no  two  of  the  writers
agree.  The  types  again  are  selected  not  so  much  by  any  insight
into  character  as  a  whole  as  by  singling  out  some  salient  feature
on  the  basis,  as  already  said,  of  the  outworn  faculty-psychology*.

1  Cf.  below,  §  5,  pp.  462,  469  Jin.

2  They  are  at  any  rate  continuous  with  it,  and  help  to  account  for  its  lack  of
method,  its  antiquated  standpoint,  and  its  frequent  failure  to  distinguish  what  is
primary  from  what  is  secondary. Cf.  above,  §  i,  p.  431,  §  ^fin.  p.  453.

3  Cf. Mr A. F. Shand's excellent criticisms of two of these writers, viz.
Fouille"e  (Mind,  N.S.  v. 1895,  pp.  125  ff.)  and  Malapert  (Mind,  N.S.  viii. 1899,
pp.  242  ff.).

4  Thus  Malapert  talks  of  character  as  determined  now  by  one  faculty,  feeling,  as
its  mainspring  (ressort  principal),  now  by  another,  intelligence  or  will. So  he  gets  six
principal  genera,  les  Apathiques,  les  Affectifs,  les  Intellectuels,  etc. All  this  reminds
one  of  the  Roman  fondness  for  nicknames — Flaccus,  Strabo,  Naso,  Calvus  and  many
more. But  after  all  a  feature  is  not  a  face. Malapert  does  not,  it  is  true,  overlook
correlations  ;  but  he  does  little  towards  tracing  them  to  their  source. Mere  character-
istics as  features  do  not  correlate  themselves. Yet  he  speaks  of  the  fonction  prtpondt-
rante  as  a  trait  profond  et  essentiel  qui  donne  a  toute  la  physionomic  son  cachet  propre
et  disti net  if  (op.  cit.  pp.  121,  196). Such  playing  fast  and  loose  with  metaphors  may
shew  literary  elegance,  in  which  indeed  Malapert  is  not  lacking — witness  the  various
'  portraits,'  historical  or  anonymous,  that  he  has  sketched  in  the  course  of  his  book —


CH.  xvni,  §  5] The  Formation  of  Character  461

Kant,  also  referring  to  the  ambiguity  in  the  term  character,
distinguishes  between  the  use  of  it  in  which  it  may  be  confidently
ascribed  to  everybody  and  a  stricter  use  in  which  it  belongs  to
very  few.  To  have  this  or  that  character  (als  Sinnesarf)  is,  he
says,  a  matter  of  naturel  or  temperament :  to  have  Character  (als
Denkungsart)  implies  a  subject  conscious  of  something  that  he
has  himself  acquired,  viz,  self-control  in  accordance  with  fixed
principles  that  are  self-prescribed.  It  is  not  a  question  of  what
nature  (his  talent  and  temperament)  makes  of  the  man,  but  of
what  the  man  makes  of  himself.  Talent  may  give  him  a  market-
value  (Marktpreis)  in  respect  of  the  services  he  can  render ;
temperament  may  give  him  an  affection- value  (Affectionspreis)  as
a  congenial  and  pleasant  comrade ;  but  character  gives  him  [or
may  give  him]  an  inner  worth  (  Wertli)  that  is  beyond  all  price1.


The  Formation  of  Character  as  the  Development  of  Personality.

§  5.  It  is  the  acquisition  of  character  in  this  stricter  sense
that  we  propose  here  to  consider.  It  suggests  at  once  a  con-
nexion between  characterology  and  axiology,  to  which  some
reference  must  presently  be  made.  Meanwhile  there  are  two
points  to  note  which  our  discussion  of  the  meaning  of  character
has  brought  out:  (i)  that  the  two  factors  of  character  in  the  wider
sense,  the  so-called  natural  or  extrinsic  and  the  spiritual  or  in-
trinsic, are  to  be  sharply  distinguished,  and  (2)  that  rank  or  degree
of  development  as  personality  rather  than  variety  or  fixity  of  type
is  the  one  thing  of  essential  moment  in  the  formation  of  character
in  the  stricter  sense.  Both  these  points  again  suggest  a  compari-
son, one  between  biology  and  characterology  that  is  to  say:  this
— though  something  of  a  digression — we  may  notice  at  once,
trusting  it  will  prove  helpful  on  the  whole.  In  animal  life  and
in  human  experience  alike,  the  lower  we  descend  in  the  scale
the  less  initiative  or  selection  we  find  ;  the  higher  we  ascend,

but  it  is  not  psychology. In  fact  there  is  but  one  mainspring  or  frimum  movfns  in
experience,  i.e.,  the  experient  himself,  let  his  physiognomy  be  what  it  may.

»  Anthropologie,  §  87,  Hartenstein's  ed.  1868,  pp.  609,  614  ff.  The  words  in
brackets  are  inserted  because  Kant  himself  tended  to  use  character  too  exclusively  in
a  moral  sense.  On  Kant's  distinction  between  prices  and  inner  worth  it  may  be
remarked,  in  passing,  that  the  former  are  liable  to  the  law  of  diminishing  return.
But  character,  he  held,  may  progress  towards  perfection  without  limit  and  so  have  a
worth  which  is  beyond  all  price.


462  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [CH.  xvm,  §  5

the  wider  the  range  of  adaptation  and  the  greater  the  diversity
displayed.  Yet  there  is  one  important  difference.  Life  has
been  defined  as  the  adjustment  of  internal  relations  to  external
relations  ;  it  tends  directly,  that  is  to  say,  only  towards  self-
conservation.  But  character  shews  itself  rather  in  a  certain
adjustment  of  external  relations  to  internal  relations1 ;  in  other
words,  the  end  here  is  the  self-conscious  realisation  or  better-
ment of  self.  Simplex  in  vitalitate,  duplex  in  kumanitate:  the
human  individual  is  amenable  to  both  principles,  does  not  merely
live  from  hand  to  mouth  but  lives  also  in  the  domain  of  values
and  is  possessed  of  ideals  which  it  strives  to  realise2.

But  there  is  still  a  further  difference.  The  advance  from  a
lower  to  a  higher  form  is  in  biology  a  phylogenetic  process :  in
characterology  it  is  an  ontogenetic  process3.  The  biological
parallel  to  the  formation  of  character  is  to  be  found,  that  is  to
say,  in  the  progressive  development  of  species,  not  in  the  natural
history  of  the  individual  animal.  What  the  animal  cannot  do,
man  may.  "  For  the  animal,"  as  Hegel  remarked,  "  the  process
of  the  species  is  the  highest  point  of  its  vitality."  The  leopard
cannot  change  its  skin :  it  never  indeed  gets  so  far  as  to  know

1  As  bearing  on  this  difference  cf.  A.  R.  Wallace's  essay,  "  The  Action  of  Natural
Selection  on  Man,"  Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Natural  Selection,  1871,  pp.  311-17.

2  There  are,  of  course,  times  for  everybody,  when  the  restraints  of  circumstance
make  self-conservation — even  as  a  condition  of  self-realisation — all  engrossing ;  when
all  the  choice  there  is  seems  to  be  confined  to  the  struggle  for  the  means  of  existence,
and  the  pursuit  of  freely  chosen  ends  to  be  out  of  the  question. For  some,  such  adversity
is  not  momentary,  but  perennial,  those  whose  tragic  lament  is  that  they  '  never  had  a
chance.' Doubtless  there  is  truth  in  the  moralist's  commonplaces  about  the  blessings
of  adversity  and  the  snares  of  prosperity ;  but  the  broad  fact  remains  that  character
developes  best  where  it  is  possible  for  a  man  to  make  more  opportunities  for  self-
realisation  than  he  finds,  and  that  in  proportion  as  such  possible  opportunities  fail,
the  formation  of  character  may  be  arrested,  though  life  still  goes  on. It  must  not,
however,  be  forgotten  that  what  the  circumstances  are  that  hamper  a  man  depends  a
good  deal  upon  the  ends  which  he  is  seeking  to  attain ;  and  the  higher  these  are  the
less  circumstances  count. Cf.  below,  p.  469.

3  This  statement  may  seem  to  conflict  with  others  in  ch.  xvii  where  an  analogy
between  psychogeny  and  biological  ontogeny  is  upheld  (cf.  §  i,  p.  410,  §  4,  p.  425).
There,  however,  the  comparison  referred  to  the  development  of  the  psychological
individual  rather  than  to  that  of  the  concrete  individual. The  capital  fact  that  now
engages  our  attention — viz.  that  historical  persons  are  not  only  severally  sui  generis,
as  we  say,  but  personalities  that  may  acquire  widely  different  psychological  ranks —
was  not  then  before  us. (Cf.  §  2,  p.  417.) But  in  so  far  as  ontogeny  is  palingenetic
and  so  presupposes  phylogeny,  there  is  obviously  no  biological  opposition  between  the
two — a  fact  that  only  adds  point  to  the  psychological  difference  referred  to  here.


CH.  xvin,  §  5] The  Formation  of  Character  463

that  it  has  a  skin,  for  "  it  never  gets  so  far  as  being  for  itself  at
all1."  The  whole  experience  of  the  animal,  in  a  word,  is  marked
by  'immediacy  and  isolation'  (what  Hegel  called  Einzelheit)  \
having  no  trains  of  ideas*,  the  animal  devises  no  plans — makes
no  tools  and  cooks  no  food,  for  example*.  Compared  with  a
man  even  the  highest  animal  resembles  an  automaton.  Hence
Leibniz,  while  he  likened  the  animal  'soul'  to  a  machine  that  God
invented,  represented  '  spirits '  as  themselves  "  architectonic,  each
being  like  a  small  divinity  in  its  own  sphere,... each  having  its
special  (propre)  world  [standpoint  in  the  one  world,  that  is  to
say]  where  it  sometimes  does  marvels4."  In  other  words,  man  in
becoming  spirit,  i.e.  self-conscious  and  reflective,  acquires  being
for  himself  over  against  the  world  and  sets  to  work  mediately
making  himself  by  his  conduct  in  it.

This  is  a  process  in  which  concrete  individuals  may  rise  (or
fall)  much  or  little.  It  is  this  scale  of  rank  that  has  its  biological
parallel  in  phylogeny.  But  in  biology  such  gradations  of  rank
apply  to  species  and  are  mainly — though  not  exclusively — the
result  of  natural  evolution  :  in  characterology  such  gradations
apply  to  concrete  individuals  and  are  the  result  mainly — though
not  exclusively — of  their  several  developments  as  personalities.
And  the  difference  is  profound,  a  difference  of  category  and  not
merely  a  difference  of  degree8.  The  only  continuity  between  the
two  is  that  which  all  evolution  implies — gradual  advance  or,
it  may  be,  gradual  decline6.  In  speaking  of  Nature  as  'the


1  Encyclopaedic,  i.  §  221.

s  Cf.  above,  ch.  vii,  §  2,  pp.  188  f.

3  In  spite  of  the  obscurity  on  which  Dr  McTaggart  animadverts  (Commentary  on
Hegefs  Logic,  1910,  §§  274  ff.),  Hegel's  dialectical  account  of  the  transition  from  the
level  of  life  to  that  of  spirit  is  illuminating,  at  least  if  we  interpret  it  psychologically.
When  Hegel  (Ency.  §  212)  says,  "  the  death  of  the  merely  immediate  and  isolated
vitality  is  the  procession  of  spirituality  (des  Geisles)"  may  it  not  be  the  advance  to
the  '  idea  of  the  true  and  the  good,'  a  new  birth — like  that  of  the  phoenix  arising  from
its  ashes — that  he  has  chiefly  in  mind  ? Intersubjective  intercourse  puts  an  end  to  the
isolation  as  the  transsubjective  standpoint  thereby  attained puts  an  end  to  the
immediacy.

4  Monadologie,  §  83. Cf.  Thtodicle,  §  147.

6  Cf.  Bergson,  L 'Evolution  cre"atrice,  1907,  pp.  198  ff.

6  Degeneration  is  comparatively  a  rare  though  regular  biological  phenomenon  both
in  phylogeny  and  in  ontogeny  ;  and  here  again  we  find  parallels  in  characterology.
So  too,  just  as  there  are  phyla  or  lines  of  species  known  as  stationary  or  '  persistent '
types,  which  have  neither  progressed  nor  degraded,  so  there  are  also  races  or  societies


464  Concrete  Individual  and  Character ology  [CH.  xvm,  §  5

forecourt  of  spirit '  (  Vorstufe  des  Geistes)  Hegel  acknowledges
this  continuity.  At  the  same  time  in  contrasting  the  isolation  and
the  immediacy  of '  the  living  individual '  with  the  community  and
the  transsubjective  outlook  that  '  spirit '  and  personality  imply,
he  brings  out  the  higher  category  to  which  they  belong1.  The
general  synthesis  of  this  personality  from  its  irreducible  minimum
onwards  we  have  in  the  course  of  this  essay  tried  to  trace.  It
remains  to  bring  the  concrete  individual  into  line  with  this,  now
that  we  have  tried  to  clear  up  'the  problems  that  beset  it.'
Though  these  preliminaries  have  been  tedious,  this  final  step  may
be  brief.

Gathering  up  results — we  call  human  beings  persons  when
they  can  talk  intelligibly  of  Me  and  Mine ;  when,  that  is,  they
have  attained  to  the  consciousness  of  Self  as  continuously  related
to  whatever  affects  them  and  whatever  they  can  affect.  It  is
not  the  bare  cognition  of  situations,  but  the  conative  attitude
towards  them,  that  primarily  distinguishes  one  person  from
another.  The  Mine  varies  with  Me,  though  ultimately  there  is
but  one  objective  universe  for  all;  and  were  such  subjective
selection  concerned  with  the  world  sub  specie  aeternitatis  so  to
say,  then — in  that  realm  of  essence — Schopenhauer's  operari
sequitur  esse  might  be  all  there  was  to  say.  In  this  actual  world
of  time  and  change,  however,  it  is  equally  true  that  esse  sequitur
operari.  Here  being  is  always  becoming,  and  development
implies  progression  as  well  as  stability.  His  personality,  then,
will  not  be  shewn  merely  in  what  a  man  is  but  in  what  he  is
striving  to  be.  But  to  be  personal,  the  ideal  for  which  he  strives
must  be  his  own,  must  originate  in  himself — however  impersonal
its  goal  may  be.  These  two  characteristics,  stability  as  the  basis
of  progression,  and  originality  in  shaping  its  course,  seem  to  be
the  two  essentials  of  any  living  personality.  We  may  now
attempt  a  general  survey  of  concrete  individuals  in  respect  of
these2.

Whereas  the  mere  animal  practically  begins  and  ends  with  the
stability  of  its  instincts — is  from  first  to  last  confined  to  the  level

and  individuals  of  which  the  like  is  true.  Such  cases,  however,  belong  to  the  details
of  characterology  and  do  not  now  concern  us.

1  This  higher  category,  called  Cognition,  is  here — following  a  hint  of  Dr  McTaggart's
— identified  with  the  self-consciousness  that  renders  the  true  and  the  good  explicit  for
the  experient.  Cf.  Dr  McTaggart's  Commentary  on  Hegel's  Logic,  p.  292.

3  Cf.  above,  ch.  xvii,  §  2,  p.  415  and  p.  417.


CH.  xviii,  §  5] The  Formation  of  Character  465

of  its  species — man  only  gradually  achieves  personal  stability  in
passing  from  that  level  through  the  instability  of  the  imagin-
ing and  desiring  self  of  childhood  to  the  steadfastness  of  a
reasonable  and  autonomous  being1.  But  it  is  notorious  that
there  are  many  who  never,  completely  and  all  round,  develop
beyond  the  larval  stage,  are  never  altogether  'grown  up';  but
in  one  respect  or  in  many  behave  like  children  all  their  days.
Ribot  calls  such  people  les  instables  ou  polymorphes :  he  even
regards  them  as  more  or  less  morbid  cases  of  arrested  develop-
ment or  'infantilisme  psychologique*!  That  however  is  true  of
them  only  at  the  lower  limit;  but  at  least  a  partial  and  imperfect
development  of  their  personality  holds  good  of  them  all.  As
Volkmann  would  say :  they  may  shew  some  of  the  traits  of
character  but  have  no  definite  character  of  their  own.  And  for
our  purpose,  we  may  follow  Ribot  and  leave  them  out  of  account1.

1  Cf.  ch.  xv,  §  i,  p.  366;  ch.  xvi,  §  2,  p.  389;  ch.  xvii,  §  2,  p.  413.

2  Psychologic  des  Sentiments,  pp.  387,  422.

3  Closely  connected  with  stability  of  character  there  is  what  is  known  by  the
vaguer  term  '  strength  of  character.' We  may  then  digress  for  a  moment  and  endea-
vour to  define  the  latter  somewhat  further  and  to  distinguish  the  two. No  one  con-
founds strength  of  character  with  the  violence  of  passion — a  sure  sign  not  of  strength,
but  rather  of  weakness,  of  character. Nor  is  mere  wayward  'self-will'  or  stupid
obstinacy  mistaken  for  strength  of  character :  it  again  is  a  sign  of  the  lack  of  it In
short  there  can  be  no  strength  of  character  without  stability  and  yet  the  two,  though
inseparable,  are  in  a  sense  distinct. In  other  words,  stability  is  a  static  notion :  it
shews  itself,  in  opposition  to  pressure  and  to  attraction  alike,  in  steadfastness  in  the
face  of  difficulty  and  discouragement  as  well  as  in  the  presence  of  temptation  (cf.
Sully,  The  Human  Mind,  1892,  ii.  p.  262). Some  who  are  strong  in  the  one  way
are  often  not  equally  strong  in  the  other. No  doubt  strength  is  implied  in  all  this,
but  strength  is  also  a  dynamic  notion,  and  so  we  often  speak  of  force  of  character.
So,  as  Malapert  points  out,  we  distinguish  between  men  who  are  '  masters  of  them-
selves' and  others  who  are  '  men  of  action.' The  energy  displayed  by  men  of  action,
their  '  power  of  work,'  is  however,  largely  a  matter  of  endowment,  physical  or  intel-
lectual vigour,  due  primarily  to  Anlage  and  varying  with  age  and  health. But  power
in  this  sense  may  be  regarded,  like  wealth,  as  consisting  in  resources  at  the  subject's
disposal,  rather  than  as  an  attribute  of  the  subject  itself. Nevertheless  that  interac-
tion between  subject  and  object  which  all  experience  involves  implies  some  sort  of
inherent  activity  on  both  sides. We  attribute  to  matter,  without  any  misgiving,  the
possession  of  potential  and  actual  energy. Yet  to  speak  of  '  psychical  energy  '  has
seemed  to  some  a  '  scandal ' ;  though,  beyond  any  question,  mind  not  matter  is  the
source  of  this  concept. We  can  and  we  do  exert  ourselves ;  we  have  power  but  not
unlimited  power  (cf.  above,  ch.  xiii,  §  6,  p.  344;  ch.  iii,  §  3,  p.  73  ;  ch.  x,  §  3,  p.  263).
Simply  as  power,  however,  this  psychical  energy,  like  physical  energy,  is,  as  such,
directionless :  though  essential  to  the  acquisition  of  experience  it  is  therefore  no  index
of  character. Thus,  while  it  raises  many  fundamental  questions  which  would  soon
carry  us  far  beyond  the  domain  of  psychology,  it  does  not  further  concern  us  here.

W.  P.  3°


466  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [CH.  xvm,  §  5

As  to  originality — even  a  child  may  give  evidence  of  this
and  continue  to  do  so  after  attaining  to  man's  estate ;  and  yet
may  remain  sadly  lacking  in  any  stability  of  character.  In  fact,
strange  as  it  may  seem  at  first  sight,  the  child  and  the  adolescent,
though  less  stable,  are  often  more  original  than  those  of  maturer
years.  The  mastering  influence  of  the  social  environment,  how-
ever, fully  accounts  for  this  fact1.  In  shaping  their  lives  the
great  majority  of  mankind  become  gens  moutonniers  :  they  may
be  legally  persons,  but  their  psychological  personality  approxi-
mates to  nil.  Kant  would  stigmatize  them  as  Nackdjfer,  servile
apes  of  the  man  who  has  a  character.  Ribot  styles  them  les
amorpkes,  because  psychologically  they  have  no  form  that  they
can  call  their  own.  What  they  are  depends  on  where  they  are.
"  Us  ne  sont  pas  une  voix,  mats  un  echo.  Us  sont  ceci  ou  cela  au
grt  des  circonstances"  Here  again  Ribot  exaggerates.  Even  in
imitation  there  is  some  subjective  selection  and  so  far  some
character ;  and  when  the  model  is  selected  as  exemplifying  the
subject's  own  ideal,  there  may  be  a  good  deal.  Still  it  is  not  the
attraction  of  sympathy — that  may  promote  personal  develop-
ment— it  is  the  domination  of  prestige2,  which  tends  at  length  to
repress  it,  that  we  have  here  in  view.  The  'principle  of  imitation,'
as  Darwin  called  it,  may  facilitate  the  development  of  talents ;
but  it  prevents  the  development  of  character.  It  is  effective  in
drilling  Beamten  but  not  in  educating  men ;  as  the  example  of
Germany  proves.  A  man's  conduct  may  shew  all  the  stability
that  conformity  to  custom  requires ;  and  yet  he  himself  will  be
devoid  of  character  in  the  stricter  sense,  in  proportion  as  he  is
lacking  in  personal  initiative,  personal  convictions  and  any  ideal
of  his  own  life.  As  regards  the  essentials  of  character,  he  again,
as  Ribot  holds,  is  of  little  account.  He  may  be  described  along
with  others  of  a  like  type — whether  in  respect  of  idiosyncrasies,
vocation,  or  what  not.  But  with  individual  psychology  of  that
sort — comparative  or  morphological  characterology,  it  might
perhaps  be  called — we  are  not  here  concerned :  beyond  the  taxo-
nomy of  personalities  we  do  not  propose  to  go.

How  now  are  we  to  differentiate  concrete  individuals  in  respect
of  psychological  rank  as  persons  or  to  indicate  the  development
of  the  same  individual  in  this  respect  ?  This  question  brings  us

1  Cf.  above,  ch.  xvii,  §  3,  p.  419.

2  Cf.  above,  ch'.  xii,  §  i,  p.  290.


CH.  xviii,  §  5] The  Formation  of  Character  467

back  to  the  connexion  between  axiology  and  characterology
referred  to  at  the  beginning  of  this  section.  Personality  and
values,  as  we  have  seen,  are  mutually  implicated.  The  only
psychological  standard  for  assigning  gradations  of  rank  to  values
and  motives  we  found  to  be  the  thinking  and  willing  selP.  And
now  the  only  basis  we  have  for  determining  the  rank  or  progress
of  personalities,  so  far  as  psychology  is  concerned,  consists  in
the  synthetic  preferences  which  their  ideals  of  life  disclose.  In
appraising  the  world  the  individual  at  the  same  time  ranks  him-
self: find  the  microcosm  and  you  find  the  man8.  His  world
is  circumscribed  by  his  interests:  the  narrower  these  are,  the
narrower  it  is,  and  the  narrower  it  is,  the  lower  his  place  in  the
scale  of  personal  development,  the  less  he  knows  of  himself  or  of
his  possibilities8.  On  the  other  hand,  the  wider  the  world  his
life-plan  embraces,  the  more  systematic  and  unified  his  sentiments
and  practical  maxims  will  be.

Normally  there  is  progress  as  the  individual  advances  from
adolescence  to  maturity ;  and  he  may  exemplify  several  '  types
of  character '  in  succession  as  wider  experience  leads  him  to  new
valuations4.  Again  if  we  compare  savage  with  civilised  races
we  find  a  similar  development :  'sense'  tends  to  be  supplanted
by  sentiment,  and  fugitive  desires  by  fixed  maxims.  The  fer-
mentation, the  '  growing  pains/  of  youth  and  immaturity  are
symptomatic  of  the  transition  from  the  lower  level  of  immediacy
and  mere  vitality  to  that  higher  level,  where  the  thinking  and
willing  self  clearly  discriminates  itself  from,  and  even  opposes
itself  to,  the  stream  of  circumstance  in  which  hitherto  it  has  been
more  or  less  passively  borne  along.  The  Duft  der  Geisterwelt,
as  Hegel  called  it,  begins  to  breathe  through  the  man  and  he
emerges  as  a  person  of  character,  a  man  with  a  will  of  his  own.


1  Cf.  above,  ch.  xvi,  §  2,  p.  392,  §  3,  pp.  402  f.

8  Cf.  above,  ch.  xvii,  §  i,  p.  414.  Here  the  biological  analogies  suggested  above
are  illuminating.  An  animal  ranks  higher  the  wider  the  range  in  space  and  time  to
which  its  behaviour  is  adjusted  :  so  we  say,  a  person  ranks  higher  in  the  scale  of
(psychological)  character  the  remoter  and  the  more  harmonious  the  ends  for  which  he
strives.  Cf.  H.  Spencer,  Data  of  Ethics,  chh.  vi.  and  vii.  In  both  these  chapters
and  especially  in  the  latter  the  reader  will  find  an  abundance  of  detailed  illustration  of
the  truth  we  can  here  only  briefly  epitomize.

*  Cf.  above,  ch.  xv,  §  i,  p.  362.

4  Cf.  Malapert,  op.  cit.  3me  partie,  ch.  i.  "La  Formation  du  Caractere,"
pp.  237  ff.,  Paulhan,  op.  cit.  3me  partie,  ch.  Hi.  "  Le  Caractere  individuel,"  pp.  203  ff.

30-2


468  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [CH.  xvm,  §  5

The  more  single  and  resolute  his  purpose,  the  more  '  inward '  the
self  that  he  seeks  to  realise,  the  greater  his  progress  may  be.
Yet,  such  progress,  though  a  psychological  advance,  might  quite
well  be  a  moral  decline.  Even  Kant  allowed  that  "  a  man  of  bad
character  (like  Sulla),  though  he  excites  our  horror  by  the
tyranny  of  his  settled  maxims  is  still  an  object  of  our  admiration
as  compared  with  a  good-natured  man  of  no  character  at  all1."
But  good  or  bad,  he  is  more  of  a  person,  has  psychologically
more  character  the  more  he  shews  of  singleness  of  aim,  the  less
easily  he  swerves  from  this,  and  the  wider  and  more  coherent
it  is.

Crises  in  the  development  of  such  personality  are  the  rule  rather
than  the  exception,  especially  when  a  complete  transvaluation  of
all  things  divides  the  old  life  from  the  new.  Psychologically  it
could  hardly  be  otherwise,  for  the  profounder  the  change  the
more  central  it  must  be.  "  Whatsoever  turns  the  soul  inward  on
itself  tends  to  concentrate  its  forces  and  fit  it  for  greater  and.
stronger  flights,"  Burke  has  somewhere  said.  This  is  a  fact
admitted  on  all  hands2.  What  is  familiarly  known  in  religious
experience  as  conversion  or  '  second  birth '  is  the  most  striking
instance  of  it8.  This  '  change  of  heart '  is  often  deceptive  and  has
only  'a  temperamental  origin4' ;  but  sometimes,  at  any  rate,  it  is
genuine  ;  and,  in  the  case  of  those  whom  James  calls  '  religious
geniuses,'  is  so  impressive  as  to  compel  universal  reverence.  Such

1  Anthropologie,  loc.  cit. Cf.  W.  M.  Urban,  Valuation,  its  Nature  and  Laws,
1909,  p.  287,  Bosanquet,  Individuality  and  Value,  1912,  p.  345.

2  Even  by  Schopenhauer  ( Welt  als  Wille  und  Vorstellung,  §  70)  who  reconciled  it
with  his  fundamental  doctrine  only  by  the  help  of  Oriental  metaphysics.

3  What  is  true  of  it  is  true  in  a  lesser  degree  of  other  crises  and  we  might  there-
fore pass  them  over  without  special  notice. But  it  may  be  well  to  take  an  instance  of
such  a  crisis  in  what  has  been  called  'the  bad  self.' The  readiest  that  offers — though
many  better  in  fact  or  fiction  might  doubtless  be  found — is  that  of  the Duke  of
Gloucester  in  Shakespeare's  Richard  III. Unable,  owing  to  his  personal  deformities
and  forbidding  appearance,  to  take  a  leading  part  in  the  frivolous  court  life  of  the
early  years  of  his  brother's  reign,  he  ends  his  soliloquy  in  the  first  scene  of  the  play
with  the  resolve :

And  therefore — since  I  cannot  prove  a  lover,
To  entertain  these  fine  well-spoken  days, —
I  am  determined  to  prove  a  villain
And  hate  the  idle  pleasures  of  these  days.

So  indeed  he  proved.  "  I  am  a  villain  "  are  almost  his  last  words  the  night  before
his  death  on  Bosworth  Field.

4  Cf.  W.  James,  Variety  of  Religious  Experience,  1902,  pp.  236  ff.


CH.  xvm,  §  5] The  Formation  of  Character  469

were  men  who  proclaimed  that  '  they  had  overcome  the  world,
being  in  it  but  no  longer  of  it,  had  realised  'a  peace  passing
all  understanding '  and  found  '  strength  to  do  all  things '  in  the
consciousness  of  an  indwelling  presence  deeper  than  their  self-con-
sciousness— verily  a  state  of  eitSaipovia  in  the  highest  sense  ;  for
the  guiding  'genius'  that  inspired  this  new  life  was,  they  believed,
divine1.  And  their  lives  confirmed  their  profession,  whatever  we
may  think  of  the  mysterious  and  seemingly  mystical  source  to
which  they  appealed.  They  were  superior  to  the  weakness  of
the  flesh,  the  fear  of  men  and  the  temporal  anxieties  that  hold  so
many  in  bondage,  leading  perhaps  to  the  '  self-loathing  and  self-
despair'  from  which  this  new  'birth'  is  the  deliverance.  Thus,  for
these  religious  geniuses  at  any  rate,  'the  divided  self  ceased  to
be,  and  the  inner  peace  and  unity  they  professed  to  have  found,
appeared  in  its  stead.  With  a  single  eye  and  a  single  aim  their
whole  being  seemed  full  of  light  and  joy.  At  one  in  mind  and
will  with  the  ground  of  all  reality  and  the  source  of  all  good,  as
they  conceived  it,  what  had  they  to  fear,  whoever  might  be  against
them  ?  They  stood  fast,  strenuously  devoted  through  life  and
faithful  in  death  to  the  widest,  deepest  and  highest  that  they
knew,  or  indeed — when  all  is  said  and  done — that  it  has  entered
into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive.  Reaching  by  subjective  selec-
tion to  the  supreme  in  the  scale  of  values,  we  must  regard  them
as  so  far  attaining  to  the  highest  rank  as  personalities;  their
world  was  circumscribed  by  no  selfish  interests,  since  they  loved
God,  in  whom  and  by  whom  and  for  whom  were  all  things.  As
regards  unity,  stability  and  originality  there  seems  nothing
beyond :  no  further  crises,  only  progression.  It  detracts  in  no
wise  from  this  living  by  faith — we  must  emphatically  maintain —
that  its  so-called  God-consciousness  may  be  epistemologically  un-
verifiable.  We  are  for  the  present  concerned  exclusively  with  the
psychological  facts,  and  these  seem  to  be  beyond  question.  It
is  also  pointless  to  rejoin,  as  some  doubtless  may  be  inclined  to
do :  No,  they  are  not  facts,  they  are  at  the  best  only  rare  and
beautiful  ideals.  But  there  are  no  more  important  psychological
facts — especially  when  character  is  in  question — than  the  ideals
or  values  that  determine  conduct.  Though  the  highest  is  the
hardest  to  attain,  yet  the  difficulties  lie  not  in  circumstances  but

1  Cf.  above,  §  3,  p.  450. On  Eudaemonism  and  Personality,  cf.  Professor  James
Seth's  Study  of  Ethical  Principles,  1894,  ch.  iii.


47°  Concrete  Individual  and  Characterology  [CH.  xvm,  §  5

in  self,  but  just  on  that  account  is  the  religious  genius  the  most
instructive  for  us  in  studying  personality1.

We  have  now,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  made  clear,  so  far  as  our  limits
allow,  that  the  development  of  personality  is  the  central  fact  in
the  formation  of  character — a  fact  which  brings  characterology
into  line  with  general  psychology.  The  concrete  individual's
character  is  reflected  in  his  microcosm — '  an  objective  differentia-
tion progressing  on  subjectively  determined  lines,'  in  accordance,
that  is  to  say,  with  the  individual's  pragmatic  valuation  not  with
any  colourless  and  impersonal  contemplation.  Many  other  topics
essential  to  a  complete  characterology  have  been  incidentally
referred  to ;  but  a  fuller  discussion  of  these  would  carry  us  far
beyond  such  an  outline  of  psychological  principle  as  is  here
attempted.  Upon  one  point  only  it  is  needful  to  insist — all  such
topics  must  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  the  one  organic  whole  on
which  their  meaning  and  their  value  depends,  viz.,  the  creative
synthesis  which  reveals  and  must  perfect  personality.

Von  der  Gewalt,  die  alle  Wesen  bindet
Befreit  der  Mensch  sich,  der  sich  iiberwindet.

1  Cf.  Spinoza's  Ethics,  Bk.  v.  prop.  xlii.


INDEX


Abstraction,  iqojin.,  298,  300,  304,  305,
333/w-

Accommodation,  84,  268,  278

Action,  20,  21,  51  if. ;  'secondarily  auto-
matic,' 52,  244,  249;  'tonic,'  53;  pur-
posive, 279ff. ;  immanent  and  transeunt,
343 ;  spontaneous  and  voluntary,  404 ;
see  a/so  Conation

Activity,  28,  344

Actuality,  161  f.

'After-images'  or  After-sensations,  174

Algedonic  character,  89

Allocheiria,  148  «.

Altruism,  393  ff.

Analysis,  general,  of  experience,  ch.  ii,
summary,  55-9;  psychological  and
psychical,  distinguished,  105 «.;  and
synthesis  compared,  409  f.

Anlage,  427  fin. ;  its  meaning,  428  f. ;  and
temperament,  435 ;  and  body,  440  «.,
441

Apathy,  emotional,  cases  of,  274 f.;  as
neutral  state,  17% fin.

Apperception,  67,  68,  93 «.,  308-12;
transcendental  unity  of,  377

Apperception-mass,  96,  97

Appetite,  279

Appreciation,  386  f.

ARISTOTLE,  his  De  Anima,  2-6;  his  con-
ception of  opyavov,  2  f. ;  of  vovt,  4  f. ;
his  doctrine  of  '  the  mean,'  89  n.  ;  his
doctrine  of  feeling,  264

Assimilation,  82  f.,  142  f.,  183  f. ;  distinct
from  association,  83  ;  H.  Spencer  on,  83

Association,  69,  83,  168,  178,  191-8;  its
relation  to  assimilation,  83,  185  f. ;  in-
separable A.,  184;  contiguous  (see  Con-
tiguity) ;  of  similars  (see  Similarity) ;  not
regressive,  193,  197 «. ,  215;  external
and  internal,  195  f.;  experiments  con-
cerning, 230-5;  mediate,  experiments
concerning,  235-8;  age  and  strength
of,  240  ff.

Associationism,  see  Presentationism

'  Atomism,'  see  Psychology,  atomistic

Attention,  49,  57,  61-73;  non-voluntary
and  voluntary,  57,  69,  222;  not  a  pre-
sentation, 57y?«M  58;  degrees  of,  62-6 ;
Locke  on,  64;  Hamilton  on,  64;  in
relation  to  'faculties,' 66;  essential  to


retentiveness  and  association,  69, 193  ff. ;
'movements'  of,  71,  72«.,  140,  197,
204,  213,  2i4f.;  different  adjustments
of,  for  impressions  and  images,  173^;
prevenient,  211;  connexion  with  feeling,
262  f. ;  connexion  with  conation,  162  «.

Attitude,  subjective,  162,  372

Attribute,  meaning  of,  339  f.

Autantitypy,  163

Autonomy  of  self,  371,  379,  385,  404

Axiology,  axiological,  315,  385,  467;  see
Value

BAIN,  A.,  his  two  worlds,  14;  on  conscious-
ness, 22;  on  diffused  movement,  53»-J
his  doctrine  of  '  spontaneity,'  53  ». ;  on
attention,  63  n.  ;  on  relativity,  84  ff. ;
his  definition  of  sensation,  102  ;  on
'feeling  of  exerted  force,'  137  ;  on  as-
sociation, 194;  his  'law  of  novelty,'
255  n. ;  on  belief,  353/«.,  354,  359  5  on
sensory  discrimination  and  character,

445  f-

BATESON,  W.,  quoted,  188
Beats,  128

Behaviour,  meaning  of,  385  «.
Belief,  and knowledge, 347 ; objective

causes  of,  348-53 ;  subjective  causes  of,

354-7;  and  memory,  351  f.  ;  effect  of,

353  f-;  genesis  of,  359  f.
BENEKE,  F.  E.,  on  temperaments,  437  «. ;

referred  to,  445  n.
Benevolence,  397
BERGSON,  H.,  referred  to, 219  ».,  418,

449.  463

BERKELEY,  his  standpoint,  27 ;  his  Theory
of  Vision  referred  to,  153  f. ;  on  '  real '
ideas,  161  n. ;  on  abstract  time,  119;
on  number,  32 in.;  on  'self,'  337,

363  »•

Black,  perception  of,  i2of. ;  no  sensation
of,  121  ff.

Body,  and  Mind,  their  relation — according
to  Aristotle,  3  f.,  8 — according  to  Des-
cartes, 7-11;  423 f.,  441  ff. ;  Body  as
the  archetypal  thing,  163;  as  the  earliest
form  of  self,  165

BRADLEY,  F.  H.,  on  feeling,  42  ». ;  on
activity,  344  n.

BRIDGMAN,  LAURA,  289,  291


472


Index


n.,  369  «.,


BUTLER,  BP,  referred  to,

394  »•  .

BUTLER,  S.,  quoted,  420


Categories,  32,31  5.316;  formal,  (a)  mathe-
matical, 320-5,  (t>)  logical,  325-34  ;  real,
334-46  ;  their  origin,  334  ff.  ;  axiologi-
cal,  385,  their  source,  386

Cause,  category  of,  340-5

Certainty,  347,  352  f.  ;  subjective  and
objective,  348;  moral,  358  f.

Character,  and  circumstances,  406  f.  ;  as
psychological  term,  408  ;  in  genere,
410-17  ;  two  senses  of,  460  f  .  ;  forma-
tion of  as  development  of  personality,
461-70;  two  factors  in,  461;  stability
of,  464  f.  ;  strength  of,  465  n.  ;  origi-
nality in,  466  ;  on  the  '  bad  '  character,
468,  Shakespeare's  Richard  III  as  an
instance,  468  n.

Characteristics,  and  character  distin-
guished, 42  1  n.

Characterology,  43  1  ;  its  method,  43  1  ff.  ;
its  relation  to  general  psychology,  434,
452  f.,  470;  comparison  of,  with  bio-
logy, 461-4;  its  connexion  with  axio-
logy,  467  ff.

'  Characters,'  of  things,  385

Choice,  398-404;  two  forms  of,  399,  401,
402  ff.  ;  involves  valuation  and  moti-
vation, 399  f.;  so-called  'contingent
choice,'  405

Clothes,  362  n.

Coenaesthesis,  General  or  Vital  Sense,
41  fin.,  nof.,  116,  135,  249

Colour,  differentiation  of,  123  f.;  C.  octa-
hedron, 126

Common  Sense,  the  realism  of,  30;  its
view  of  sensation,  48

Comparison,  and  relativity,  86  ;  and
judgment,  314  f.,  325  ;  is  grounded  not
given,  yifin.  ;  categories  of,  327-34  ;
C.  and  disparateness,  330  ;  the  process
of  sensible  C.  described,  330  ff.  ;  C.  of
complexes,  332

Complication,  168,  170,  186,  195,  196

Conation,  51-4;  connexion  with  action,
51  ff.;  connexion  with  feeling,  54,  266  «.,
278  ;  relation  to  attention,  262  n.

Conception,  Concept,  199  «.,  200,  302,
314  ;  structure  of  a,  303  «.,  307

Condillac's  '  statue,'  77  f.

Conduct,  its  domain,  383-5  ;  and  be-
haviour distinguished,  385  ».

Conscience,  369,  395

Consciousness,  ambiguity  of  the  term,  21,
47,  61,  379;  'modes'  of,  23;  'content'
of,  23,  268;  'form'  of,  23  f.,  376y£«.,
381  ;  unity  of,  49;  as  receptive  or  re-
active, 67,  68  ;  field  of,  72,  90  ;  'narrow-
ness '  of,  73,  300;  implies  change,  76  f.  ;
focus  of,  90  ;  threshold  of,  91  f.

Consonance  and  Dissonance,  129—32


Contiguity,  association  by,  192-5 ;
(a)  simultaneous,  193  f.  ;  (6)  successive,
193,  194  f.

Continua,  sensory,  125  f.,  126,  133;
motor,  137;  ideational,  173;  (a)  me-
mory-train or  'thread, '  191-8  ;  (b)  idea-
tional C.  or  'tissue,'  198-201  ;  how
formed,  199

Continuity,  Principle  of,  referred  to  or
illustrated,  29-31,  59,  72,  no,  184,
iS^Jin.,  193,  198,  220,  288,  293,  294,

295,  3°i»  32°.  321,  329.  334.367.  368,

388,402,  409,  44 1,  463  f.
Continuum '  objectivum,  30,  31,  76
Contrast,  association  by,  1 87  n.
Creatianism,  424
Credulity,  primitive,  359

DARWIN,  C. ,  on  language,  34,  292  ;  on
emotional  expression,  276f.  ;  quoted,
411,  418,  448

Degeneration,  391  n.,  463  «.

Deliberation,  385,  398,  399,  400

Depersonatisation,  364

DESCARTES,  his  Cogitatio,  6f. ;  his  dual-
ism of  res  cogitans  and  res  extensa,  8,
its  two  problems,  1 2 ;  regarded  animals
as  automata,  9,  357  ;  regarded  presen-
tations as  subjective  modifications,  1 1 ;
his  Cogito  ergo  sum,  379,  382

Desire,  281-5;  vague  use  of  the  term  ,281;
its  relation  to  action,  282  f.  ;  to  feeling,
283  f. ;  habitual,  285

Difference,  meaning  of,  87  ;  as  category,
329  f.  ;  '  the  prerogative  of,'  330

Differentiation,  principle  of  progressive,
50;  the  process  of,  75  ff.;  and  restric-
tion, 79;  and  ideation,  190

Diffusion,  in  movement,  52,  53  «.,  79;
in  sensation,  79  ;  in  ideation,  79,  173

Dispositions,  meaning,  97  ;  presentational
as  functional,  97,  99,  285,  457,  459

Distance,  the  perception  of,  154,  158  f.,
160;  in  time,  215,  216

DROBISCH,  M.  W.,  used  the  term  'assi-
milation,' 83  n. ;  on  the  implicit  idea,
referred  to,  i84«.

Dualism,  of  matter  and  mind,  8 ;  of  in-
ternal and  external  phenomena,  14

Duality,  of  subject  and  object,  13,  29,  378;
law  of,  326  f.

Duration,  105,  212,  216-19;  see  Protensity

EBBiNGHAUS,H.,onsensation-complexes,
112;  experiments  onmemorising,  222-7

Effort,  136,  137,  162,  163

Ego,  and  its  Non-Ego,  31  ;  two  senses  of,
35 ;  and  mind  distinguished,  39 ;  see
also  Self

Egoism  and  Altruism, the  problem  of,

393

Ejects,  ejective,  33,  34,  287
Emotion,  its  expression,  52  f.,  270-9,  fun-


Index


473


damental  contrast  in,  i-j6f. ;  involves
more  than  feeling,  276

End,  category  of,  345  f.

Endophasia,  239

Epistemology,  and  psychology,  i,  17  f.,
16  f.,  29-34,  144,  190  fin.,  212,  217,
*93>  3°7»  3 1 5.  3i6

ERDMANN,  B.,  referred  to,  46,  83

Erlebnis,  57  «.,  59

Evaluation,  389

Evolution,  influence  of  the  theory  of,  20;
evolution  and  in  volution  of  ideas,  96 ».,
97,  100,  199;  implies  stability  and  pro-
gression, 415

Expectation,  209,  210

Experience,  2,  it,  14,  16,  17,  21,  180;
'  form '  of,  24  f. ; '  irreducible  minimum '
of,  29,  66  ;  ultimate  analysis  of,  40  f. ;
and  time,  210;  a  differentiated  unity,

31.410

Extensity,  78  f.,  ii6f.,  145  ff.,  i6i«.  ;  in-
fluence of  drugs  on,  1 16  n. ;  of  smells,
117;  of  auditory  sensations,  127;  and
ubiquity,  149

'  Extra- regarding,'  369,  396

Eye,  'the  Cyclopean, 158

Facility,  180  f.,  i8if.,  415,425

Faith,  358 f.,  469

Familiarity,  i^Jin.,  180,  415,  425

FECHNER,  G.  T.,  on  the  threshold  of  con-
sciousness, 91  f. ,  95  n. ;  on  after-images,
175  «.;  on  aesthetical  principles,
259  n.  i

Feeling,  its  uniqueness,  19,  41,  42,  45;
various  meanings  of  the  term,  41;  its
supposed  priority  examined,  41-5;  its
causes,  43/£«.,  44,  ch.  x;  fundamental
contrast  in,  245,  262;  its  effects,  54 f.,
ch.  xi;  fundamental  contrast  in,  276  ff. ;
not  a  presentation,  yifin.,  58,  245  ;  and
intensity  of  presentations,  247, 248 ;  and
quality  of  presentations,  247,  249-53;
organic,  249  f. ;  and  the  lower  and
higher  senses,  250-3;  and  duration  and
frequency  of  presentations,  254 ;  neutral
F.  and  excitement,  414*1.

Feelings,  245;  sensory,  247-55;  lower
aesthetic, 247, 255ff.;  intellectual,  257  f.;
higher  aesthetic,  258  ff. ;  egoistic  and
altruistic,  260  f.

Feeling-tone,  45,  249,  250,  251,  439

FF.RRIER,  J.  F.,  quoted,  sSyfw.

FOSTER,  SIR  M.,  quoted,  53,  271

FOUILLEE,  A.,  433  «.,  437 «.,  453  n.

Freedom,  404-7  ;  spontaneous  and  volun-
tary, 404 ;  '  internal '  as  self-determina-
tion, 405  ff.

Function  and  structure,  i8of.,  412,  414,
425/».,  416

GALTON,  SIR  F.,  his  Hereditary  Genius
referred  to,  427  n.,  449  n.,  450  w.


GEDDES  AND  THOMSON'S  Evolution  of
Sex  quoted,  34

Genius,  449-52  ;  '  religious  geniuses,'  468

GERARD,  A.,  on  genius,  450

Good,  the,  as  clue  to  psychical  develop-
ment, 410

GRANT,  SIR  A.,  quoted,  269 n.

GROTE,  J.,  his  Exploratio  philosophica
referred  to,  86  n.

Habit,  98,  180;  law  of,  457  n.

Hallucinations,  171,  174,  177

HAMILTON,  SIR  W.,on  mind  and  matter,
i4«.;  on  external  perception,  32;  on
psychological  analysis,  40 ;  definition  of
sensation,  48  ;  on  consciousness,  61  n.  i ;
on  degrees  of  attention,  64  f. ;  his  '  law
of  limitation, '  65  ;  his  'law  of  variety,'
84 ;  on  inverse  relation  of  sensation  and
perception,  250/1.;  on  comparison,  314,

3*5

HARTLEY,  D. ,  on  secondarily  automatic
action,  52

HARTMANN,  E.  von,  quoted,  279

Hedonism,  its  relation  to  value,  388  ».  2;
overlooks  the  duality  of  subject  and
object,  392  n.  2

HEGEL,  his  '  general  mind,'  75  n. ;  on  in-
tellection, 304  ;  on  heterogeny  of  ends,
391  w. ;  on  animality  and  spirituality,
462  f.,  464,  467

HENLE,  J.,  175,  270,  436,  437

HERBART,  his  '  absolute  becoming,'  30  ;
his  psychical  mechanics,  56,  70  f.,
96  «.;  his  '  apperception-mass,'  96,  97  ;
his  use  of  Keihe  and  Gewebe,  1 90  «.  ;
his  doctrine  of  apperception,  308  (. ;  on
number,  324  w. ;  on  self-consciousness,
referred  to,  379  «.

Heredity  and  'the  psychological  indi-
vidual,' 74 ;  and  the  concrete  individual,
420-0  ;  the  psychological  problem  of,
422  ff. ;  biological  and  psychological
heredity  compared,  413 ;  the  mnemic
theory  of,  426  n. ;  heredity  and  genius,
450-2

Heterogony  of  Ends,  268  «.

Hb'FFDlNG,  H.,  on  Kant's  synthesizing
principle,  69  n.  3 ;  on  '  tied  ideas,
184 ».,  185  n. ;  his  Bekanntheitsquali-
tdt,  185  w. ;  symbolized  by  y,  i82ff. ;
on  motivation,  400 fin.

HORWICZ,  A.,  on  the  primacy  of  feeling,
42  n.

HUME,  DAV.,  on  Berkeley,  27;  his  use
of  idea,  46,  169 ;  aware  of  the  subcon-
scious, 96  n. ;  on  liminal  intensity,  115;
on  the  difference  between  impressions
and  ideas,  i69ff.  ;  on  superior  'liveli-
ness '  of  impressions,  1 70  ;  on  memory,
206,  and  the  continuity  of  time,  220;
on  thought  and  language,  298  ;  his  sen-
sationalism, 317  ;  on  relations,  318  ;  on


474


Index


similarity  between  simple  ideas,  328  n. ;
on  difference,  329 ;  on  cause  and  effect,
340  ff.

HUXLEY,  T.  H.,  on  the  meaning  of
'  soul,'  37  ;  his  diagrams,  297  «.  ;  his
views  on  talent,  448

Idea  (i)  as  general  term,  for  all  presenta-
tions, 23  ;  conflict  of,  201  ff. ,  306

Idea  (ii)  as  general  term  for  all  re-presen-
tations, 46,  52,  69,  77,  169;  'spon-
taneous' revival  of,  235  f.  ;  see  Image

Idea  (iii)  in  thought  and  constructive
imagination,  184;  as  implicit  or  '  tied,'
184,  185;  as 'free,'  184;  presupposes
perceptual  complexity,  187  fin.  ;  its
emergence  and  further  developments,
189-201 ;  generic,  189,  psychological
and  logical  distinguished,  190;  specific
(a't  a'  ,...),  189,  190;  connexion  of
generic  and  specific,  200

Idealism,  subjective,  30

Ideation,  see  also  Imagination ;  genesis
and  development  of,  178-91  ;  (a)  the
subjective  side  of  this  genesis,  180-3  »
(b)  the  objective  side,  184-91  ;  types
of,  i98«.,  239/?«.

Identity,  real,  165  f.;  as  a  category,
332  ff. ;  two  meanings  of,  332  ;  unity
and  plurality  involved  in  both,  333  ;
material  I.,  333  f. ;  numerical,  334

Image,  see  also  Idea  (ii) ;  no  simple,
169  f.;  lacks  fixity,  i7if.  ;  transitional
stages  between  impression  and  I.,
1746*". ;  proper,  described,  177  f. ;  not
a  revived  impression,  177,  nor  the  mere
residuum  of  one,  179;  'generic,'  190  «.,
199,  200,  299,  305,  306,  307

Imagination,  or  Ideation,  ch.  vii ;  forms  a
secondary  continuum,  173,  177;  con-
nexion of  this  with  the  primary  con-
tinuum, i77f. ;  'liberty'  of,  contrasted
with  fixity  of  memory,  -206

Imitation,  and  language,  290

Immediacy,  32,  41,  463

Impersonalisation,  366

Impressions,  103,  105 ;  recognition  of,
142  ;  localisation  of,  144;  distinction  of
I.  and  ideas,  169-78;  'liveliness'  or
vividness  of,  171,  177;  forms  interme-
diate between  I.  and  ideas,  174  ff.  ;
absolute,  i85«.

Inattention,  62,  63

Incopresentability,  80

Individual,  the  psychological,  74  f.,  77,
286,  408,  416  Jin.,  429;  the  concrete,
409,  417;  and  heredity,  420-9;  and
characterology,  430  ff.

Individuality,  288  «.,  289,  420  n.

Inneity,  451

Instinct,  53  «.,  74^,  181  f.,  279,  384;
and  Anlage,  429,  443  f. ;  and  talent,
448  f.


Integration,  as  accompanying  differentia-
tion, 139  f.

Intellect,  Intellection,  Aristotle's  passive
and  active,  4  f. ;  as  distinct  from  merely
understanding,  294 ;  general  character
of,  294,  295,  302  f. ;  difficulty  of  de-
fining, 294  f. ;  development  of,  3038". ;
relation  of,  to  character,  453-6 ;  and  in-
telligence distinguished,  455  f.

Intellective  systems,  311  f.

Intellectualism,  19-21 ;  and  evolution,  20;
reaction  against,  20,  42

Intensity,  as  the  'matter'  of  presentation,
49,  107;  Kant  on  this,  49 «. ;  'limi-
nal'  or  minimal,  69,  89;  effective,  its
constituents,  69,  n8f.  ;  of  images,
170 f. ;  and  feeling,  248  f.,  263  f.,  266

Interest,  Interesting,  51,  255,  268y?w.,
388,  392,  410  f.,  414  f.

'Internal  Sense,'  14-16

Intersubjective  intercourse,  33,  286  «.,
366/«.,  381,  396,  463  «.

Introjection,  103

Introspection,  15;  as  retrospection,  373

Intuition,  of  things,  142,  161-7;  items
involved  in,  161 ;  reality,  i6if. ;  physi-
cal solidity,  162  f,  166;  temporal  and
spatial  relations  of  sense-data,  1636°.  ;
thing  and  its  attributes,  i66f. ;  forms  of,
318  ff.

Inwardness  (of  self),  376

JACKSON,  HUGHLINGS,  quoted,  190,
277  n.

JAMES,  W.,  on  the  self  or  subject,  39«.,
379  f->  381  n. ;  on  'feeling  of  effort,'
137 n.\  on  'space  inside  the  mouth,'
I54».  ;  his  theory  of  emotion,  270-5;
anticipations  of,  lion. ;  on  subcon-
scious assimilation,  241  ;  on  religious
geniuses,  468

Judgment,  thought  as,  305  f. ;  impersonal,
306  f.  ;  definition  of,  314^.

KANT,  and  rational  psychology,  13  ;  on
external  and  internal  sense,  14,  380;
on  things  per  se,  18 ;  his  'two  stems'
of  knowledge,  33  n.,  294  fin. ;  on  syn-
thesis, 69,  316 ;  his  '  manifold,'  77 ;  his
handling  of  the  characteristics  of  sensa-
tions, 107  ;  on  schemata,  297  n. ;  on
apperception,  308  ;  on  forms  of  intu-
ition, 319;  on  self,  363  n.  ;  on  tem-
peraments, 437 «.,  439  n. ;  on  genius,

45°

KELLER,  HELEN,  case  of,  referred  to,  291
Kinaesthetic  sensations,  136,  137
Knowledge,  distinction  of  sense-K.  and

thought-K.,  32 f., 86,  292-5; genesis

of,  359  f-
KRIES,  J.  VON,  referred  to,  161  ««.

LADD,  G.  T.,  referred  to,  87  «.,  266 «.


Index


475


LANGE,  C.,  theory  of  emotion,  270

Language,  34,  190  «.;  as  social  instru-
ment, 286;  leading  features  of  its
acquisition,  286-92  ;  transition  from
emotional  expression  to  intentional  sign,
286  f.  ;  characteristics  of  the  higher
apes  and  man,  288  ;  individuality  and
its  recognition,  288  ff.  ;  smallness  of
primitive  communities  and  prestige  of
their  head,  290;  gesture  and  articula-
tion, 290  f.  ;  varied  experiences  and
impressibility,  291  f.

LEHMANN,  A.,  on  feeling,  264  «.,  275  n.

LEIBNIZ,  his  Monadology,  31  ;  on  sub-
consciousness,  93  f.  ;  on  evolution  and
involution  of  ideas,  96  n.  ;  on  Locke's
use  of  'powers,'  98  ;  on  ubiquity,  149  ;
on  individuality,  288  n.;  on  symbolic
thinking,  297  ;  on  apperception,  308  ;
his  entelechies,  338;  on  motivation,
400  ;  on  Anlage,  428,  442  n.  ;  on  indi-
viduality, 430  ;  on  souls  and  spirits,
463

LEWES,  G.  H.,  referred  to,  53«.,  100,
1  08  ;  his  term  preperception  adopted,
1  86

Likeness,  of  complex  'contents,'  327;  of
simple,  327  ff.

Limitation,  law  of,  65,  67,  263

LIPPS,  TH.,  referred  to,  392  «.

Local  signs,  80,  147  f.,  i+gjin.,  i$itt.;
retinal,  155

Localisation,  141,  152  ;  the  factors  in-
volved, 145-51;  gradual  development
of,  152

LOCKE,  his  relation  to  Descartes,  i2f.  ;
his  two  sources  of  ideas,  1  4  ff.  ;  on  the
growth  of  self-consciousness,  15;  his
definition  of  consciousness,  2  1  n.  ;  his
use  of  '  idea,  '  26,  46  ;  on  degrees  of
attention,  64,  65  ;  on  reality  of  impres-
sions, 161  «.  ;  on  tempo  in  flow  of  ideas,
216,  217;  on  'an  instant,'  219;  on
continuity  of  time,  219  ;  on  unity,  320  f.;
on  substance,  337  f.

Logic,  influence  of,  on  psychology,  302  f.,
3*3.  315,  3*7

LOTZE,  H.,  his  local  signs,  147,  152  n.  ;•
quoted,  200  ;  his  temporal  signs,  203  flf.  ;
on  the  structure  of  concepts,  303  «.  ;
on  the  meaning  of  It,  306  ;  referred  to
on  traducianism,  424  n.  ;  on  Gesinnun-
gen,  458  «.

LUCAS,  PROSPER,  on  heredity  and  inneity,


MALAPERT, P.,  his L:s £l4ments  du

Caracttre  referred to,  439  n.,  453  «.,

460  «.,  467
MANSEL, Dean,  on  sensation, 48  ; on

the  presentation  of  self,  363  n.
McTAGGART,  J.  M.  E.,  his  Commentary

on  Hegel  referred  to,  463  «.,  464  ».


Meaning,  primary,  14$  fin. ;  of  concepts,
300  f.

MEINONG,  A.,  on  founded  objects  as  not
data,  317  f.  ;  on  difference,  329

Memorising,  222-7;  effects  of  repetitions,
(a)  immediate,  224^  ;  (b)  after  varying
intervals,  225  f.  ;  (c)  with  varying  dis-
tribution, 226  f. ;  effects  of  rhythm,
227  f.

Memory  (see  Retentiveness),  proper,  81,
189  ;  characteristics,  206  f.  ;  distin-
guished from  recognition,  207 ;  M.-
images(ai,o,,...),  189  f. ;  M. -continuum
or  'thread,'  101-8;  as  'experience-
continuum,'  196;  M.-types,  198,  239;
M.  and  knowledge,  207  f.  ;  illusions  of,
208

'  Mental  Chemistry,'  76,  103,  410

Method,  questions  of,  25  f.,  27  ;  in  cha-
racterology,  430-3

MEYER,  G.  H.,  quoted,  170 ;  referred  to,
177*.

MILL,  JAS.,  169  «.,  208  «.,  347  ».,  349,
394

MILL,  J.  S.,  on  the  subject  of  experience,
37-  39  !  on  subconsciousness,  98  f. ;  on
space,  1+6  n.  ;  on  feeling,  264/1.  »  on
substance,  337;  on  causation,  341  ;  on
belief,  347  ». ;  his  Ethology,  409  «.  ;  on
forms  of  association  and  character,  446  f.

Mind, ambiguity  of  the term,  13, 39,

4*3  f-

Motivation,  399 ;  Leibniz  and  Hoffding
on,  400

Motives,  conflict  of,  384,  400

Movements,  neglected  by  early  psy-
chologists, 20 ;  their  characteristics,
50,  135-8;  voluntary,  51,  52;  emo-
tional prior  to  purposive,  52,  140  ;  as
dynamic,  136,  137,  162  ;  in  spatial
perception,  isof.

MULLER,  G.  E.,  and  collaborateurs,  ex-
periments on  memory,  227-38  ;  their
Treffertmthode,  230;  quoted,  237,  242

MULLER,  I.,  on  specific  energy  of  nerves,
iO9«. ;  on  motor  inner vation,  137*. ;
referred  to,  177  n. ;  on  temperaments,
436

MULLER,  MAX,  on  language,  288,  294

Multiple  personality,  367  f.

MUNSTERBERG,  H.,  referred  to,  io8«.

Muscular  sense,  20,  136  «.,  137*.

NAHLOWSKV,  J.  W.,  249  n.,  438  «.

Name,  as  objective  mark,  296 ;  as  facili-
tating ideation,  296;  economizes  atten-
tion, 297

Noises,  1 32  f.

Nominalism,  and  conceptual  ism,  298  f.;
and  sensationalism,  315  M.

Novelty,  255  «.,  268,  457  n.

Number,  323  ff. ;  and  quantity,  323  «. ;
and  counting,  323  ;  direct  intuition  of,


Index


spatial rather than temporal, 324 ;
systematic  numeration,  325

Object,  as  psychological  term,  46  f.  ;  Os.

of  higher  order,  316  ff.
'Objective,' its different meanings in

psychology  and  epistemology,  18
Obliviscence,  199,  215
Onomatopoeia,  creative,  292 ;  in  children,

292
Organic  sensations,  135,  136

Pain,  and  action,  55,  277 f.;  and  atten-
tion, 262,  278

Paramnesia,  208  «.

PASCAL,  and  the  psychological  individual,
75  w. ;  on  belief,  357

PAULHAN,  F.,  referred  to,  309,  433  «.,
467

Perception,  81;  meanings  of,  141  f. ;  'of
the  external  world' — see  Intuition,  of
things;  as  partly  representative,  167  f. ;
internal,  371-8;  of  subjective  activity,
373  ff.;  of  feeling,  375!.

Perseveration,  233,  235  f.

Persona,  369  n.

Personality,  286  n. ;  multiple,  367  ;  what
it  means,  464 ;  implies  stability  and
progression,  464  ff.  ;  crises  in  the  de-
velopment of,  468  f. ;  '  conversion '  as
an  instance  of  these,  468  ff. ;  ranks  of,
466  ff.

Phenomenon,  14

Plasticity,  83,  99,  179;  and  psychogeny,
409

Pleasure,  and  action,  55,  277;  and  atten-
tion, 262,  268 ;  qualities  of,  266  f. ;  the
advance  to  'higher'  Ps.,  267  ff. ;  and
pain,  their  relation,  278 f.

Plurality,  323  f.

Positional  signs,  150

Possible,  contrasted  with  actual,  161, 178,
179,  187

Preference,  266  f. ;  analytic  and  synthetic,
402  f.,  416

Preperception,  i86f.

Presentationism,  23  f.,  70  f. ;  instances  of,
36 f.,  38 f.,  381  f.,  405 ».,  411,  432,  456

Presentations,  meaning  of,  46 ;  twofold
relation  of  Ps.,  46 ;  not  subjective  modi-
fication, 47,  6 1  «.,  69;  theory  of,  ch.  iv;
primary,  170;  secondary,  170

'  Primary  meaning,'  143

Primary  memory-image,  175

Primum  cognitum,  200

Projection,  103,  152  f.,  164

Protensity,  105,  107,  119,  213,  217

Psychogeny,  the  subjective  factor  regarded
structurally,  41 2  f.,  regarded  func-
tionally, 414-17;  the  objective  factor,
(i)  the  natural  environment,  418;  (2)
the  social,  41 8  f.

Psychologist's  fallacy,  the,  19,  48,  82


Psychology,  definition  of,  ch.  i,  28;  ap-
proximate description  of,  i ;  three
stages  in  its  history — (a)  that  of  Aris-
totle, 2-6  ;  (b)  that  of  Descartes,  6-12 ;
(f)  the  empirical,  12  ff.;  P.,  objective
and  subjective,  contrasted,  4 ;  subjec-
tive, 7,  13;  objective,  13;  its  stand-
point, 17,  26 ff.;  its  distinction  from
epistemology,  18,  29-34;  Analytic  P.,
26;  'Faculty'  P.,  57,  6of.,  70;  'As-
sociationist '  P.,  23«.,  70,  179;  Ato-
mistic P.  rejected,  49,  77,  78,  81,  143,
181,  183  f. ;  Rational,  379 ;  general  and
special,  409  n. ;  '  differential,'  433  n.

Psychophysical  standpoint,  of  Aristotle,  2 ;
preceded  the  psychological,  103,  and
yet  presupposes  it,  1 03  f.

Psychoplasm,  412  ;  inherited  by  the  con-
crete individual,  425 ;  elaborated  by  his
ancestors,  426

Psychosis,  57

Purposive  action,  and  emotional  expres-
sion, 52,  276 ff.

Quotity,  323

RAVAISSON,  F.,  on  genius,  450

Reading,  238  ff.

Realism,  transcendental,  18 ;  naive,  30

Reality,  161  f. ;  Locke  and  Berkeley  on,
161  n.  ;  degrees  of,  382

'Reception'  for  'sensation 'proposed,  105

Recognition,  of  impressions,  142  ff.,  185

'  Recurrent  sensations,'  175

Redintegration,  195

Reduplications  of  memory-thread,  199  ;
as  condition  of  ideational  tissue,  200,
and  of  conflict  of  ideas,  202

Reflex  Action,  51  ;  as  secondarily  auto-
matic, 52

Reflexion,  as  source  of  ideas,  14  ;  as  dis-
tinct from  mere  consciousness,  372  f.

REHMKE,  J.,  on  traducianism,  424

REID,  THOS.,  on  perception,  18;  his  cen-
sure of  Locke,  6 1 ;  his  geometry  of
visibles,  155;  on  sentiments,  458  n.

Reification,  142,  313  f.

Relations,  318

Relativity,  83  ff. ;  as  formulated  by  Hobbes,
84 ;  as  differential  theory  of  presenta-
tions, 84 ;  as  formulated  by  Wundt,  88 ;
as  duality  of  experience,  89,  117;  of
the  lower  senses,  I34f.;  of  tactual  and
visual  magnitudes,  153  f.;  of  feeling,
265

Reminiscence,  and  recognition,  189,
207  f.;  and  imagination,  208

Repetition  and  memorising,  222-7

Re-presentation,  52,  168,  185,  186,  196,
197.  See  also  Idea  (ii)

Residua,  images  as,  i76f.,  179;  of  move-
ments of  attention,  215

Restriction,  79,  414


Index


477


Retentiveness,  77,  80  ff. ;  distinct  from
memory,  81,  189

Rhythmizing,  227-30;  and  tempo,  228

RIBOT,  TH.,  on  depersonalisation,  364 ;
on  moral  inventors,  395  fin. ;  on  here-
dity, 423  ««. ;  on  temperament,  437  «.,
453  n. ;  on  logic  of  sentiments,  456;  on
character,  465  f.

RICHET,  C.,  description  of  feeling,  254*.

RIVERS  and  HEAD,  Drs,  their  experi-
ments on  nerve  division,  148*1.

ROGET'S  Thesaurus  referred  to,  253  «.

ROMANES,  G.  J.,  his  use  of  'recept,'
105  «.  ;  referred  to,  250

RUSKIN,  referred  to,  256,  296  «.

Same,  ambiguity  of  the  word,  332

SCHOPENHAUER,  on  the  primacy  of  will,
20;  on  altruism,  393  ;  on  freedom,  464;
referred  to  468  n.

SCHUMANN,  F.,  criticized,  317  n,

SCHWARZ,  H.,  on  choice,  402  n.

Selection,  subjective,  50  f.,  79,  139,  140,
180,  244,  280,  312,  391,  4o9,'4i5«.,
416,  425,  469;  natural,  280,  415 «.,
417,418,  453

Self,  35/«.;  pure  S.,  35,  361  ff.,  370,
377  ff.  ;  empirical  S.,  35,  361  ff.;  as
sensitive,  364 f.;  as  imagining,  365^;
as  thinking,  368  ff.

Self-consciousness,  371-6,  383,  384,  392;
and  conscience,  395,  404,  407,  463

Self-conservation,  principle  of,  246,  278,
462

Self-interest,  392

Self-sacrifice,  397  f.

Sensationalism — see  Presentationism

Sensations,  not  subjective  states,  47,  61 «.,
104;  differentiation  of,  78  f.,  108-15;
simplicity  of,  78,  169;  indirect  evidence
of  complexity,  114  ;  characteristics  of,
78,  105-8,  mutual  relations  of  these,
106  f.;  definition  of,  102  ff.;  'general'  S.
as  distinguished  from  'special,'  111  ;
S. -complexes,  113,  134;  quantitative
continuity  of,  1 1 5  f . ;  extensity  of,  1 1 6  f. ;
intensity  of,  n8f.;  protensity  of,  H9f.;
qualities  of,  120-35;  of  sight,  120-6,
white  and  black,  1 20-3,  colours,  1 24-6 ;
of  sound,  126-33,  simple  tones,  126  f.,
clangs,  127  f.,  timbre,  128  f.,  conson-
ance and  dissonance,  129-32,  noises,
132  f.,  speech,  133;  of  the  lower  senses,
133-5;  kinaesthetic,  136

Sense,  'internal,'  15 ;  and  Understanding,
292-5

Sentiments,  456-60;  the  'logic'  of,
456  f. ;  as  dispositional,  457  f. ;  distin-
guished from  feelings  and  emotions,
458  f.  ;  and  Gesinnuttgen,  458  «.,  459

SETH,  J.,  referred  to,  469  n.

SHAND,  A.  F. ,  referred  to,  439  «.,  458  n.,
460  n.


SHERRINGTON,  C.  S.,  105  «.,  275
SIDGWICK,  H.,  quoted,  396  «.,  referred

to,  403  w.
Signs,  see  Local,  Temporal;  natural  and

conventional,  287  f.
SIGWART,  C.,  on  impersonal  judgments,

3p6  ;  on  the  differences  between  indi-

viduals, 420  «.  ; his Logic quoted,


Similarity,  association  by,  187  ».,  191  f.,
196

'Skeletal  tone,'  53

SMITH,  ADAM,  on  conscience,  369

Social  factor,  33  f.

Social  Medium,  Social  Environment,  etc.,

i  384,  389.  418,419.  (Cf.  Intersubjective
Intercourse)

Solipsism,  implications  of,  30

Somatic  Consciousness  —  .rciCoenaesthesis

SORLEY,  W.  R.,  referred  to,  403  «.

Soul,  Aristotle's  conception  of,  3  ;  his
three  kinds  of,  3,  6;  a  metaphysical
term,  3syf».;  Huxley  on,  37

Space,  perceptual  and  conceptual  distin-
guished, 144  f.,  149,  319;  tactual  per-
ception of,  151  ff.  ;  'spatial  reference,'
i52f.  ;  visual  perception  of,  153-61,
among  Invertebrata,  156,  among  Ver-
tebrata,  156-61;  occupation  of,  163

Span  of  prehension,  223

Specific  energy  of  nerves,  109  n.

Speech,  internal,  239. See  also  Language

SPENCER,  HERBERT,  on  subjective  and
objective  psychology,  13;  on  self-con-
sciousness, 38  ;  on  voluntary  action,  51,
52;  his  '  automatic  association,'  82  ;  on
the  transformation  of  neural  processes,
loo;  on  primitive  sensation,  108;  on
spatial  perception,  146;  on  voluntary
muscular  antagonism,  163;  on  the  dif-
ference between  impressions  and  ideas,
1  68  ;  on  the  successional  character  of
experience,  197  ».,  221;  on  graceful-
ness, 259;  on  '  inconceivability  of  the
opposite,'  349  ff.  ;  on  absolute  begin-
ning, 409  «.;  his  appeal  to  biological
analogies  in  psychogeny,  410;  on  indi-
vidual development,  467  «.

SPINOZA,  on  distance  as  imagined,  2  15  w.  ;

his  'substance'  distinguished  from  sub-

ject, 382;  referred  to,  470

STEINTHAL,  H.,  quoted,  i86«.  ;  onoma-

topoeia, 292  n.;  on  apperception,  3  1  1  n.

STERN,  L.W.,  on  psychical  present,  2  14».,

223  n.  ; on differential psychology,

433  «••  437  »•:  444  «•

STEWART,  D.,  quoted,  458

STOUT,  J.  G.  F.,  on  implicit  and  ex-
plicit apprehension,  96**.,  297  «.  ;  his
use  of  '  primary  meaning,'  143;  of  'im-
pressional  association,'  186  n.  ;  on  forms
of  apperception,  309  n.  ;  his  use  of
anoetic,  317


478


Index


STUMPF,  C.,  on  relativity,  89;  on  clang-
complexes,  1 13  ;  on  consonance,  i3o».;
on  noises,  i^in.;  quoted,  433«.

Subconsciousness,  of  impressions,  goff. ;
implies  continuity,  93  ;  Leibniz  on,  93 ;
of  ideas,  94  ff. ;  and  habit,  98;  J.  S.
Mill  on,  98  f.;  Wundt  on,  99  f. ;  and
inseparable  association,  185  ;  and  feel-
ing, 264  «.

Subject,  the,  34-4! ;  and  the  individuality
of  the  organism,  36  f. ;  attempts  to  regard
it  as  a  phenomenal  series,  37  f.

'Subjective,'  and  'objective,'  ambiguity
of,  1 8,  32

Subjective  Being,  376-82

Subliminal,  95  n.

Subpresentations,  92

Substance,  category  of,  334-40;  and  sub-
ject, 338  ;  as  stuff,  338

Succession  and  association,  193  ff.,  197 «.;
as  mode  of  time,  212-15

Suggestion,  use  of  by  Locke  and  Berkeley,
320  n.

SULLY,  J.,  referred  to,  20 1«.,  256,  41 5  w.,

465

Sympathy,  395  ff.

Synthesis,  69,  72,139, 140,  195,  302,  316;
forms  of,  ch.  xiii ;  intuitional,  space  and
time,  3i8ff. ;  categories,  formal,  (a)
mathematical,  320-5,  (b)  logical,  325-
34  ;  real,  334-46  ;  binary  S.  of  judg-
ment, 326  f. ;  of  association  and  apper-
ception contrasted,  326  f. ;  general,  of
experience,  ch.  xvii,  and  general  ana-
lysis compared,  409  f.  ;  the  subjective
factor,  412-17,  the  objective,  417-20

Talent,  444-50;  its  relation  to  instinct,
448  f. ;  and  to  genius,  449  f.

TARDE,  G.,  referred  to,  290

Temperament,  434-43;  history  of  phy-
siological theories  of,  435  ff. ;  psycho-
logical facts  concerned,  437  ff. ;  its
connexion  with  Anlage,  439 f. ;  coenaes-
thesis  as  clue  to,  440

Temperatures,  133,  134

Tempo,  216,  217,  218

Temporal  signs,  197,  203  ff.,  208,  214,
215,  2t6;  Lotze's  view  of,  203  ff.

TETENS,  referred  to,  19

THORN  DIKE,  E.  L.,  his  'animal  asso-
ciation,' i86«.

Thought, and  language,  296  ff.  (see  Name);
and  ideation,  298-302  ;  nominalism  and
conceptualism,  298  f. ;  '  concrete '  con-
cepts, 299  f. ;  '  abstract '  concepts,  300 f. ;
as  'intentional,'  301  ;  'condensation  of
thought,'  301  f.,  326;  conception  and
imagination,  302  ;  as  analytic,  305  ff.;
the  judgment  first,  305  f. ;  as  synthetic,
307,  ch.  xiii


Threshold,  of  consciousness,  91  f. ;  of  dif-
ference, 92
Timbre,  112
Time,  perception  of,  2iof. ;  present,  210,

212,  213; psychical, 214; past and
future,  2iof.;  modes  of,  212-19; Per'
cept  and  concept  of,  distinguished,  212,

213,  221,  319; duration, 212  f.;  suc-
cession and  simultaneity,  2 1 3  ff. ;  T.  -  per-
spective, 213^  ; indifference-T.,  217;
optimal  T.,  218;  continuity  of,  219  ff.

TITCHENER,  E.  B.,  referred to,  90 n.,

252  «•>  253
'Tonic  action,'  53
Touch, 135; passive, 148, 151, 163;

active,  149,  151,  163
Traducianism,  424
Transsubjective,  32
Truth  (and  Knowledge),  pursuit  of,  391,

416

Ultra-liminal,  95  n.

Unity,  subjective,  31;  objective,  31,  49,
77;  as  category,  320 ff.;  implies  rela-
tion, 32O«. ;  of  concept  and  judgment
compared,  322  ;  transcendental,  380

URBAN,  W.  M.,  referred  to,  456,  457  n.

Value,  272,  386-98;  ground  of,  386;
meaning,  387 f.;  instrumental  and  in-
trinsic, 390;  differences  in  rank  of,
401  f.;  V. -movements,  267 f.,  390;  and
Ideological  categories,  390  f. ;  and  the
Ego,  392 ;  and  the  Alter,  393  ff.

Variety,  Hamilton's  law  of,  84

VIERORDT,  K.,  his  law,  154

Vision,  passive  and  active,  155 f.;  peri-
scopic,  157;  stereoscopic,  157;  bino-
cular, 157;  monocular,  160

VOLKELT,  J.,  quoted,  253  «.

VOLKMANN,  W.  VON,  on  '  reflex  sensa-
tions, 250 n.;  on  language,  292;  on
temperament,  437  n.

Vorstellung,  46

Vowel  sounds,  133

WEBER,  E.  H.,  his  Law,  115;  his  Ortsinn,
147;  his  experiments  and  the  primary
memory-image,  175,  185;  on  human
locomotion,  259

WEISMANN,  A.,  and  his  critics  referred
to,  426  n.

WOLFF,  C.  F.,  his  rational  psychology,
13;  his  definition  of  feeling,  19;  refers
to  '  field  of  consciousness, '  90  n.

WUNDT,  W.,  on  relativity,  88;  on  sub-
consciousness,  99  f. ;  on  continuity  of
time,  220;  on  heterogony  of  ends,
268 n. ;  his  use  of 'apperception,'  3io«.,
31 1  w.;  his  law  of  dichotomy,  326  f. ;
on  feeling,  251  f.


CAMBRIDGE:  PRINTED  BY  j.  B.  PEACE,  M.A.,  AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS


BY THE  SAME  AUTHOR

NATURALISM  AND  AGNOSTICISM

THE  GIFFORD  LECTURES  DELIVERED  IN  THE
UNIVERSITY  OF  ABERDEEN  IN  THE  YEARS  1896—98

4th  edition,  1915. Demy  8vo. IDS  net

"A  work  which  does  much  to  redeem  Cambridge  as  a  centre  of  philosophical
thought,  and  which,  if  we  mistake  not,  will  prove  one  of  the  most  important  contribu-
tions to  philosophy  made  in  our  time  in  England Indeed  we  are  unable  to  think

of  any  English  work  in  which  so  complete  a  grasp  both  of  science  and  philosophy  is
shown  as  in  this  remarkable  treatise." — The  Spectator

"  One  thing  is  certain — every  student  of  Metaphysics  is  bound  to  read  it."

The  Saturday  Review

"  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  it  will  have  a  wide  influence  on  the  higher  thought  of
the  country,  and  may  even  do  something  to  restore  to  Philosophy  the  pre-eminent
place  it  once  occupied  in  English  thought." — The  Athenaum

LONDON  :  A.  &  C.  BLACK
NEW  YORK  :  THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY


PLURALISM  AND  THEISM

THE  GIFFORD  LECTURES  DELIVERED  IN  THE
UNIVERSITY  OF  ST  ANDREWS  IN  THE  YEARS  1907—10

2nd  edition,  1912. Demy  8vo. 125  6d  net

"  Professor  Ward's  first  course  of  Gifford  Lectures  on  '  Naturalism  and  Agnosti-
cism '  has  already  taken  its  place  as  a  classical  criticism  of  the  philosophical  theories

which  attempt  to  explain  experience  in  terms  of  a  physical  mechanism Professor

Ward  has  availed  himself  of  a  second  tenure  of  the  lectureship  to  return  to  his  argu-
ment and  develop  the  consequences  of  a  view  which,  as  he  says  in  the  preface,

interprets  the  world  '  throughout  and  strictly  in  terms  of  Mind1 Any  one  reading

these  later  lectures  without  extravagant  expectations  of  a  novelty  or  a  finality  which
the  nature  of  the  theme  forbids  will  find  them  a  singularly  sincere  and  patient  piece
of  thinking,  unaffectedly  modest  in  temper  and  touched  by  genuine  religious  feeling."

The  Times

CAMBRIDGE:  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS
NEW  YORK  :  G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS


HEREDITY  AND  MEMORY

THE  HENRY  SIDGWICK  MEMORIAL  LECTURE,  1911

Crown  8vo. Paper  covers,  is  net. Cloth,  is  6d  net

CAMBRIDGE:  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS

NEW  YORK  :  G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS


/ I-


480  Oxford  Street
LONDON.
