The Realm of Ends; or, Pluralism and Theism
James Ward (1911)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): James Ward's The Realm of Ends (1911) — the Gifford Lectures on pluralism and theism.

========================================================================

THE REALM OF ENDS

OR

PLURALISM AND THEISM


CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

lonton: FETTER LANE,  E.G.

C.  F.  CLAY,  Manager


CFliinbureJ) : loo, PRINCES STREET

ISfdin:  A.  ASHER  AND  CO.

icipjig: F.  A. BROCKHAUS

^eio  lork: G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS

JSombHB  anlj  ffalriitfa: MACMILLAN  AND  CO., Ltd.


A /I  rights  reserved


THE REALM OF ENDS

OR

PLURALISM AND THEISM


THE GIFFORD LECTURES

DELIVERED IN THE UNIVERSITY OF St ANDREWS

IN THE YEARS 1907-10


BY


JAMES WARD,

SCO. (CAMB.), HON. LL.D. (EDIN.), HON. D.SC. (OXON.),

FELLOW OF THE BRITISH ACADEMY
AND OF THE NEW YORK ACADEMY OF SCIENCES,

PROFESSOR OF MENTAL PHILOSOPHY, CAMBRIDGE


Cambridge  :

at  the University Press

19  I  I


All  tended  to  mankind,
And  man  produced,  all  has  its  end  thus  far :
But  in  completed  man  begins  anew
A  tendency  to  God.  Browning.

Aber  die  erkannten  thatsachlichen  Verhaltnisse  konnen  allein  unsere
Gedanken  nach  diesem  Mittelpunkte  der  Welt  wenigstens  convergiren
machen.  Lotze.


PREFACE

THESE  lectures  are  intended  to  serve  as  a  sequel
to  the  course  delivered  in  the  University  of
Aberdeen  some  ten  years  previously.  If  at  that  time
I  had  foreseen  that  I  should  presently  be  favoured
with  the  opportunity  to  lecture  on  the  Realm  of  Ends
or  PluralisDi  and  Theism  I  mioht  well  have  entitled
the  earlier  lectures  the  Realm  of  Nature  or  Naturalism
and  Agnosticism.  There  my  endeavour  was  to  establish
the  priority  of  the  idealistic,  or — as  it  seems  clearer  to
say — the  spiritualistic  standpoint;  and  here  I  have  tried
to  ascertain  what  we  can  know,  or  reasonably  believe,
concerning  the  constitution  of  the  world,  interpreted
througliout  and  strictly  in  terms  of  Mind.

At  the  outset,  this  world  immediately  confronts  us
not  as  one  Mind,  nor  even  as  the  manifestation  of  one,
Init  as  an  objective  whole  in  which  we  discern  many
minds  in  mutual  interaction.  It  is  from  this  pluralistic
standpoint  that  our  experience  has  in  fact  developed,
and  it  is  here  that  we  acquire;  the  ideas  that  eventually
lead  us  be)(jnd  it.  I'or  pluralism,  though  empirically
warranted, w(! find defective  and unsatisfactory  : but


vi  Preface

the  theism  to  which  it  points  is  only  an  ideal — an  ideal
however  that,  as  both  theoretically  and  practically
rational,  may  claim  our  faith  though  it  transcend  our
knowledge.  Such  is  a  meagre  outline  of  the  present
lectures.  The  summary  contained  in  the  last  of  them
may  take  the  place  of  further  prefatory  detail.

The  two  lectures  on  Hegel  [Lectures  VII  and
VIII)  are,  it  must  be  confessed,  largely  a  digression.
It  was  my  intention  to  treat  of  Kant's  philosophy  in
like  manner — in  both  cases  in  order  to  substantiate  the
contention  that  anyhow,  avowedly  or  not,  pluralism  is
the  starting  point  of  speculation.  But  on  second
thoughts  I  felt  that  perhaps  I  had  already  done  too
much.

In  Lectures  XIX,  XX  I  have  embodied  portions
of  a  paper,  entitled  Faith  and  Science,  read  before  the
Synthetic  Society  in  1902.  This  has  already  appeared
in  a  volume  of  that  Society's  papers  privately  reprinted
by  the  Rt  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour  in  1909.

The  preparation  and  delivery  of  these  lectures  were
frequently  interrupted  by  an  illness  that  began  soon
after  my  appointment  and  continued  till  its  close.
I  desire  to  take  this  occasion  to  thank  the  Senatus
of  the  University  of  St  Andrews  for  their  extreme
patience  and  forbearance  then  and  since  ;  and  I  can-
not but  rejoice  that  now  at  last  these  lectures,  all
defective  though  they  be,  are  through  this  indulgence
out  of  my  hands.


Preface  vii

I  have  still  to  express  my  obligations  to  generous
friends :  first,  and  especially,  to  Professor  J,  S.  Mackenzie
of  Cardift"  both  for  his  long  and  careful  criticisms  and
for  the  arduous  work  which  he  kindly  undertook  of
reading  through  all  the  proofs  ;  again  to  Professor
G.  F.  Stout  of  St  Andrews  for  many  valuable
and  astute  comments ;  and  finally  to  my  colleague,
Professor  W.  R.  Sorley,  not  only  for  his  literary  help
but  for  his  continuous  encouragement  throughout  my
labours.

9

JAMES  WARD.


Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Septe7nbc}\ 1911.


CONTENTS


PART  I.  : PLURALISM.


Lecture  T. Introductory.

The  Realm  of  Nature  and  the  Realm  of  Ends,  the  mechanical  and  the
moral,  as  contrasted  'aspects'  of  the  one  world.  Naturalism  holds
the  former,  SpiriUialisni  the  latter,  to  be  fundamental

Summary  of  the  Spiritualistic  position  as  argued  in  the  writer's  previous
Gifford  Lectures.  The  recognition  of  Experience  as  a  duality  in
unity  tends  to  Spiritualistic  Monism ......

This,  if  sound,  ought  to  furnish  the  interpretation  of  the  reality  underlying
the  phenomena  that  science  formulates.  Rise  of  the  Historical
Method  and  the  passing  of  '  Physical  Realism  ' . . . .

The  idea  of  the  Good  and  the  course  of  History .....

I'ampsychism ...........

The  problem  of  the  One  and  the  Many,  and  the  question  of  method


PAGES


I— .^


13


13-.S
18 — 20
20 — 21
21 — 24


Lecture  1 1. The  One  and  the  Many.

What  sort  of  unity  does  the  world  imply? (i) Nature  as  objective  not
the  One

(2)  Nor  a  Supreme  Subject,  taken  alone .....

(3)  Nor  the  unity  of  Subject  and  Object,  as  Absolute  Self-conscious
ness. The  One  and  Acosmism. The  One  of  Mysticism

The  World-Soul  of  Platonism  useless  as  a  mediating  principle

.\bsolute  Object,  Absolute  Subject,  Absolute  Self-consciousness,  all  alike
unreal  l)ecause  reached  by  abstraction .....

What  sort  of  unity  is  possible  without  absolutely  transcending  the  Many
The  oscillations  of  theology  and  speculation  between  I'luralism  anc
Singularism ..........

The  start  from  Pluralism ........


25—28
28-30

.SO— 3.S


4'— 47
48


LkCTUKK in. I'l.URALI.SM.

Pluralism  as  a  recoil  from  Absolutism  now  in  the  ascendant.  Its  stand-
point and  main  features  to  be  here  described ..... 49 — 50

The  stand|Kiint  is  throughout  the  historical,  and  the  l)ehaviour  of  indi-
viduals bent  on  self- conservation  and  betterment  its  leading  idea.
Leibniz's  Monadology  still  the  type  ...... 50-  54


X  Contents


PAGES


80-

-87

87-

-89

87-

-94

94-

-96

The pluralistic outlook illustrated from Economics, Bionomics and

Physionomics ..........  54 — 59

Can  the  so-called  inanimate  world  be  regarded  in  this  fashion?  Stationary
states,  persistent  types  and  inertia.  '  Elective  affinities.'  '  No  two
indiscernible  individuals.' The  principle  of  Continuity. Uniformity

and  statistics. The  pluralist's  conclusion 59 — 67

Purposive  Activity  and  Orderliness 67 — 69

Lecture  IV. The  Contingency  in  the  World.

Chaos  a  myth,  yet  orderliness  and  regularity  the  result  of  conduct,  not  its

presupposition . . . . . . . . . . 70 — 72

Natura  naturans  and  N'attira  naturata  ....... 72 — 75

Causal Efficiency  and  Causal  Connexion ; Chance and Contingency ;

Subjective  Selection. •  Heterogony  of  Ends' .... 75 — 80
Illustrations  of  contingency  in  the  useful  arts  and  in  Nature. Fixity  of

Type  and  Variety  of  Conditions. The  Grotesque  in  Nature .

'  Worth '  and  the  natural  '  Right  to  live  '

Contingency  of  Species  ;  the  gulf  between  Man  and  Brute;  Contingency

and  Individuals ..........

Contingency  in  the  so-called  physical  world ......

Lecture  V. Evolution  as  Epigenesis  and  Equilibration.

Pluralism  implies  epigenesis  or  new  formation  not  literal  evolution  or

preformation ..........  97 — loi

Epigenesis  entails  new  properties  which  its  component  factors  did  not

previously  possess — hence  it  has  been  called  '  creative  synthesis  '  .  loi  — 105

The  prime  source  of  this  synthesis  lies  for  the  pluralist  in  the  activity
of  experients. Organization  the  result  of  experience. The  idea

of 'potentiality' throws  no  light  on  the  process ....  105 — 108

In  the  practical  world  this  synthesis  yields  new  values  that  are  not  only

conserved  but  increased ........  109

Interdependence  of  higher  and  lower :  mechanization  and  direction .  109 — 112

Tendency  to  progression. Final  Harmony 112  — 116

Lecture  VL The  Pluralistic  Goal.

In  what  sense  is  Society  a  unity? Two  contrasted  answers  considered 117— 120
The  transition  from Man  as  animal  to  Man  as  social. '  Objective

Mind'  and  Rational  Persons. Meaning  of 'Objectivity ' . . 120 — 124
Mutual implication of Objectivity and Self-consciousness. Kant's

Subjective  and  Objective,  Deductions  of  the  Categories  criticized
Society  a  living  reality,  though  a  complex  and  'over-individual '  one  .
The  advance  towards  a  higher  unity. No  '  law  of  diminishing  return  '

here. No  '  solidarity '  of  Evil .......

The  Humanitarian  Ideal  and  the  Lord's  Prayer  .....


124-

-129

129-

-130

130-

-134

I.H-

-1.^7

Coufeiits  xi


Lecture  \W. The  Pluralism  of  Hegel,


I'AGES


Hegel  at  the  historical  standpoint :  here  he  recognises  both  the  con-
tingency and  the  routine  in  Nature ......  138 — 145

But  Nature  to  become  Spirit  :  the  Higher  the  key  to  the  Lower .  145 — 147
World-history,  as  Mind  working  out  the  knowledge  of  itself,  begins
with  '  the  unconscious.' Heterogony  of  P'nds. The  World-Spirit
and  its  instruments  compared  to  an  architect  using  natural  forces.

But  where  is  this  World-Architect  to  l)e  found  ? ....  147 — 152

It  turns  out  that  the  completed  plan  is  the  architect . . . •  i.'i-  — 156
Individuals  not  means  but  ends. The  World-Spirit  the  living  organiza-
tion which  they  gradually  evolve ......  156 — 15S


Lecture  VIIL The  Hegelian  Unity.

Is  it  a  unity  differentiated  into  a  plurality  or  a  plurality  organized  into

a  unity? Hegel's  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  appealed  to  in  answer  . 159 — 160

The  Kingdom  of  the  Father  is  pure  thought:  the  differences  here  are

posited  only  as  ideal:  'the  Notion  has  yet  to  objectify  itself . 160—164

In  the  Kingdom  of  the  Son  we  come  upon  difference,  the  Objective  as
fact.  But  how  are  the  two  Others,  the  Son  and  the  World,  related,
and  how  is  the  transition  effected?  Der  Abfall der  Idee !  The
first  in  thought  the  later  in  existence ...... 164 — 170

Hegel's  doctrine  of  development.  The  potential  and  the  actual  differ
only  in  form.  But  what  is  first,  it  seems,  is  "the  impulse  that
puts  forth  into  existence '" ........ 170 — 174

So,  in  the  Kingdom  of  the  Spirit  we  find  unity  to  lie  the  icsnlt  of  de-
velopment. When,  however,  Hegel  tells  us  that  this  result  is
the  beginning,  he  does  not  say  what  he  means  . .  174 — 180


Lecture  rX. The  Limits  of  Pluralism.

The  Plurality  of  Worlds  a  problem  both  for  pluralists  and  theologians.

To  deny  it  seems  futile ........

Need  for  a  .Supreme  Unity  as  Upper  IJniit. Appeal  to  the  principle

of  Continuity :  A.  K.  Wallace's  arguments  .....
Is  the  Unity  a  Society  or  a  Person? Kither  way  it  cannot  be  absolute;

but  for  the  theist  it  transcends  the  series  williin  which  pluralism

remains. But  even  so,  if  inunanent  it  cannot  be  absolute .
The  Lmver  Limit  of  Pluralism  also unattainable  from  within. The

demands  for  a  J'rimum  tiiovens  connecting  both  limits
V(»lunlarism  denies  the  necessity  of  this. But  difljcullics  for  pluralism

still  remain 197—201


181-

-184

184-

■189

1H9-

195

195-

'97

xii  Contents


Lecture  X. The  Difficulties  of  Pluralism.

PAGES

/^jjiVa/ Ca/aj-/r(?/-4fj  and  the  Dissipation  of  Energy  . . . .  202—204
Psychophysical  Difficulties. Birth  and  death  cannot  be  what  they  seem
to  be. Phiralism  committed  to  some  form  of  Pre-existence. The

problem  of  Heredity 204—212

The  problem  of  Death  :  here,  for  pluralism,  metempsychosis  in  some
form  unavoidable. A  higher  Spiritual  Order  and  the  Conservation

of  Values  now  seem  essential .......  212 — 215

Metaphysical  Difficulties. The  Problem  of  Interaction  propounded  by

Lotze  met  by  his  own  doctrine  of  '  Sympathetic  Rapport ' . .  215 — 219
Teleological  and  cosmological  arguments  against  pluralism :  how  far

valid 219—224


PART II.: THEISM.
Lecture  XL The  Idea  of  Creation.

Metaphysics  without  assumptions  criticized .....  225 — 228

Practical  and  theoretical  value  of  the  Theistic  Ideal,  even  though  strict

proofs  of  its  reality  are  vinting  .......  228 — 231

Mistaken  views  of  Creation ........  231 — 234

God  at  once  transcendent  and  immanent :  creation  then  implies  more

than  absolute  thought  or  absolute  self-consciousness . . .  234 — 238

Analogy  between  Creative  Intuition  and  the  Originality  of  Genius .  238 — 240
But  any  adequate  idea  of  God-and-the-World  is  beyond  us  ;  yet  this
idea  meets  the  defects  of  pluralism,  and  is  the  only  idea  of  the

Absolute  we  can  admit ........  240 — 242

Tendency  of  Theism  towards  Singularism. But  if  the  world  is  real,  it
stands  over  against  the  reality  of  God. In  making  it,  God  limits

himself :  apart  from  it  we  have  no  basis  for  our  ideal  of  God  at  all  242 — 246


Lecture  XII. The  Cosmology  of  Theism.

Theism  usually  occasionalistic. Earlier  and  later  forms  of  the  doctrine.

Leibniz's  objections  not  decisive  . ......  247 — 251

Anyhow  the  Realm  of  Ends  does  not  imply  a  prior  system  of  means.

On  the  pamphysical  view  such  a  system  not  necessary  at  all  .  251 — 254

Monads  as  'the  real  atoms  of  Nature.' Interaction  as  'sympathetic

rapport.' Organism and Environment as implying a twofold

relation  of  monads .........  254 — 259

Comparative  merits  of  Pampsychism  and  Occasionalism . . .  259 — 262


Contents  xiii

PAGES

Nature  as  '  tlie  preparation  for  Minil '  means  only  that  self-conscious

existence  is  attained  to  gradually from  earlier  stages  of  merely

sentient  life .......... ^62 — 265

Tracing  this  process  backwards,  we  approach  that  lower  limit  which
pluralism  cannot  explain.  How  does  theism  interpret  it?  Theism
is  ready  nowadays  to  accept  evolution  in  the  literal  sense.  But
evolution  as  epigenesis  raises  formidable  problems . . . 265 — 269

Lecture  XIII. Freedom.

To  combine  Pluralism  with  Theism  we  must  reconcile  fmite  freedom

and  diNnne  foreknowledge. What  tlo  we  mean  by  freedom? .  270 — 27.5
Meanings  of  Cause. Law  of  Causality  as  a  postulate . . .  273 — 177
Hence two senses  of  determination — the one including, the other
excluding,  the  ideas  of  efficiency  and  guidance ;  yet  the  thorough-
going '  delerminist '  identifies  them ......  277 — 283

Analysis  of  Voluntary  Action:  Motives  and  Forces  contrasted . .  283 — 286
A  Man's  volitions  and  his  Nature. Determinism  and  Sensationalism.

Flux  and  conflict  of  motives  without  a  Self,  absurd , . .  286 — 291

Lecture  XIV.  Freedom  and  Foreknowledge.

The  doctrine  of  Kant  and  Schopenhauer — noum°nal  liberty  and
empirical  necessity.  Opeiari  scquitiir  esse  applied  to  men  and
things  alike .......... 292 — 295

But  are  human  characters  and  chemical  qualities  thus  on  a  par?
Schopenhauer's  'noumenal  freedom'  a  dogmatic  blunder,  and
Kant's  '  nature-necessity '  an  inconsistency  .... 295 — 300

Vet  Kant's  distinction  of  homo  phetwmenon  and  hopno  noumetwn  is
important,  the  one  an  observed  object,  the  other  a  subject  per  se.
The  phenonema  of  filled  time  produced  by  such  subjects,  which
are  thus  not  a  part  of  the  lime-order  that they  make .  . 300 — 304

Relation  of  abstract  time  to  experience.  Necessitarianism  fails  through
assuming  that  there  is  nothing  but  filled  time  ;  how  time  is  filled
it  does  not  inquire ......... 304 — 307

But  if  the  filling  of  time  is  eternally  decreed,  Necessitarianism  is  in-
evitable ........... 308-312

Attempts  to  reconcile  freedom  and '  foreknowledge.' The  Pluralistic

via  media ........... 312 — 316

Lecture  XV. The  Problem  ok  Evil  and  Pessimism.

This  problem  simple  for  those  who  first  assume  (iod's  existence  as
certain.  Put  wc  have  to  dispose  of  the  i)robleni  lirsi  ;  and  so
must  take  the  defensive ........ 317—319


xiv  Contents

PAGES
Pessimism  as  excessive  reaction  against  exuberant  optimism . .  320 — 322
Schopenhauer  and  Kallmann's  faulty  psychology ....  322 — 330
Hartmann's  Romantic  Metaphysic  includes  a  Theogony  and  a  Cosmo-
gony 330—333

His  answer  to  the  questions  he  set  to  Schopenhauer  :  his  '  Evolutionary

Optimism '  and  his  Scheme  of  Redemption  ....  333 — 338

Lecture  XVI. The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Optimism.

The  doctrine  that  happiness  is  the  end, common to optimists  and
pessimists  alike,  implicitly  denied  by  'the  Hedonistic  Paradox.'

The  doctrine  shown  '  to  entangle  itself  in  a  vicious  circle  ' . .  339 — 349

Evolution  and  the  Relativity  of  Evil  .......  349 — 351

But  is  the  evolution  we  find  in  this  world  ideally  the  best?  . . .  351 — 353

Omnipotence  and  so-called  '  Metaphysical  Evil '  ....  353 — 355

Alleged  '  Superfluous  Evil.' Is  Experience  in  general  worth  what  it

costs? 355—357

And  what  of  evils  not  obviously  due  to  imperfect  experience? The

World's  Conservative  Factors .......  357 — 360

Will  Progress  be  followed  by  Decline  ? ......  360 — 361

Lecture  XVII. Moral  Evil  and  Moral  Order.

Theological  doctrines  and  philosophical  theories  that  ignore  evolution

leave  Moral  Evil  an  '  insoluble  mystery '.....  362 — 364

Innocence  and  Wrong-doing. The  rise  of  Conscience  . . .  364—368

This  not  a  fall  but  an  advance,  and  rids  us  of  the  doctrines  of  a  Fall

and  of  Original  Sin .........  368 — 371

Without  the  possibility  of  Moral  Evil  an  evolving  world  could  not  be-
come moral  at  all ,  .» .  .  .  .  .  .  .  371 — 374

The  Moral  Evil  in  the  world  not  such  as  to  justify  atheism  . . .  374 — 377
But  this  evil,  it  is  said,  is  not  confined  to  human  misdeeds  :  the  so-
called  Divine  Government  is  either  immoral  or  it  does  not  exist  at

all. The  objection  discussed .......  377 — 380

Evidence  to  replace  the  old  belief  in  'special  interventions'  . .  380 — 382

The  tragedy  of  the  world  as  a  divine  comedy .....  382 — 384

Lecture  XVIII. Theories  of  a  Future  Life.

For  Man  the  present  life  inadequate,  but  the  difficulty  of  conceiving

any  other  has  grown  with  the  advance  of  knowledge .  .  .  385 — 388

Metaphysical  arguments  do  not  meet  it,  for  personal  continuity  is  what

we  require  ...........  388 — 393

The  '  question  of  Immortality  '  depends  on  the  '  meaning  of  fhe  world ' :
apart  from  this  we  cannot  decide  it  one  way  or  other. Anyhow

some  Continuity  of  Memory  and  of  Environment  is  essential  to  it  .  393 — 395


Contents


XV


Memory  implies  both  a  subjective  function  and  objective  'records':
the  organism  not  the  sole  repository  of  the  latter.  Analogy  be-
tween germinal  soul  and  disembo<lied  spirit.  Organism  the  result
of  subjective  interaction,  not  vice  versa .....

Continuity  of  Environment  secured  in  Transmigration,  but  to  secure
personal  continuity  it  has  to  be  assumed  that  latent  memories  are
eventually  revived,  and  that  in  'the  nascent  state'  the  soul  can
select  ...........

Personal  continuity  secured  by  the  Christian  'Transfiguration'  but
without  continuity  of  environment.  Possible  combination  of  the
two  views. Purgatorj'  as  an  intermediate  state. Conclusion


PAGES


395—401


401 — 405


405 — 408


Lecture  XIX. Faith  and  Knowledge.

The  moral  argument,  and  the  main  one,  for  a  future  life  is  a  matter  of
faith  not  of  knowledge  and  is  further  dealt  with  only  in  this  con
nexion  here. A  quotation  from  Kant  introducing  the  whole  topic
Agnostic  objections ....

'Primitive  credulity'  as  the  source  of  knowledge

Faith  and  Logic:  Faith  and  Reason .

The  Meaning  of  the  World  and  what  it  implies

Necessity  for  Belief  in  God

Belief  in  a  Future  Life. Counter-arguments

The  Moral  Ideal  and  Faith

Lecture  XX. The  Realm  of  Ends


409—413
413—416
416—419
419—421
421—425
425 — 42S
428 — 429


The  Course  of  our  in(|uiry  : — The  Natural  and  the  Ethical ;  The  Start
from  the  Pluralistic  Standpoint; The  advance  to the  Theistic;

The  Problem  of  Evil;  The  two  voices — Faith  and  Knowledge .  430 — 441

The  ix)sitive  results  seemingly  attained: — L As  to  Methotl . .  441 — 442

II. As  to  God 442 — 444

III. As  to  the  World 444—448

I\'. t\s>  to  Faith  in  the  Unseen .......  448 — 450

Practical  arguments:  Nietzsche's  natural  'Over-man  '  and  the  Christian

'Spiritual  man  '..........  450 — 453

The  Absolute  End ..........  452 — 453


Supplementary  Notes


I.  The  Meaning  of  Contingency .

n.  Dr  Ilowison  on  Creation  .

in.  The  Relation  of  Body  and  .Mind

IV.  The  Temporal  and  the  Eternal

\'.  The  Divine  Experience

Ini»kx


4.^4

461

4  68

477

481 — 490


ERRATA

p.  6 1  as  legend — Stationary  States  and  Persistent  Types.

p.  98,  line  2  from  bottom — 'integration'  for  'differentiation.'

p.  279,  note  2 — p.  8  for  p.  9.


PART I.
PLURALISM,


LECTURE I.

INTRODUCTORY.


Mr  Bradley  concludes  his  metaphysical  essay  en-
titled Appearance  and  Reality  with  the  admission  that


ERRATA

p. 78, line  6  from  hc)llf)m,  Jor  do  what  they  read  what  lliey  do.

j>. 181,  footnote, /<>r  340  read  339.

p. 313.  line  3  from  bottom,  for  p. 14  read  p. 44.

|).  334,  last  line  but  one,  delete  'fit'

last  line,  for  'nihilo'  read  'nihiliiiii:
p. 479,  line 12  from  bottom,  insert  us  after  against.
p.  488,  Index, /cr  Rashdall,  C.  H.  read  Rashdall,  Di II.


W.


■CT)  D  A  T-  A


PART I.
PLURALISM.


LECTURE I.

INTRODUCTORY.

Mr  Bradley  concludes  his  metaphysical  essay  en-
titled Appearance  and  Reality  with  the  admission  that
science  is  a  poor  thing-  if  measured  by  the  wealth  of
the  real  universe:  he  finds  that  "in  the  end  Reality
is  inscrutable,"  and  is  confirmed  in  "the  irresistible
impression  that  all  is  beyond  us."  Everyone  must
acknowledge  this  to  be  a  more  honest  conclusion  than
the  pretended  demonstrations  of  many  philosophers.
Nobody  now-a-days — save  here  and  there  a  man  of
science  off  his  beat,  like  Haeckel  for  example — has  the
hardihood  to  rush  into  print  with  a  final  explanation
of  the  Universe.  Still  without  perpetrating  this  folly
can  we  not  attem[>L  lo  advance,  to  get  more  insight
than  at  present  we  have  ?  Surely  this  is  possible,  for
though  ignorance  be  inevitable,  no  specific  errors  are
necessary.

But  w(*  must  have  some  method:  in  particular  we
must  be  clear  where  we  start  from.  It  is  a  l.ivourite
phrase  now  widely  curn.-nt  that  \\\v  universe  has  many
aspects,  and  such  a  conception  has  the  merit  of  making

w.  I


2  Introductory

us  vividly  realise  a  source  of  error  too  often  overlooked
in  the  past — I  mean  confusion  of  standpoints.  Precise
orientation  of  these  various  aspects  of  the  world  is
one  of  the  first  duties  of  philosophy,  and  the  ascer-
tainment of  the  supreme  and  ultimate  standpoint  is
perhaps  its  chief  concern.  Now  of  these  various
aspects  the  two  most  sharply  contrasted  are  those
which  lead  us  to  speak  of  the  world  of  mechanism  and
the  world  of  morals,  the  subject-matter  of  the  natural
sciences  on  the  one  hand,  and  that  of  the  moral  sciences
including  history  on  the  other.  The  one  Kant  was
wont  to  call  the  Realm  of  Nature,  the  other  the  Realm
of  Ends  ;  assigning  to  the  former  as  its  characteristic
mark  the  notion  of  '  empirical  necessity,'  to  the  latter
that  of  '  practical  freedom.'

It  would  be  superfluous  to  spend  time  in  picturing
out  this  contrast  in  detail^ :  we  have  only  to  think  of
comparing  some  classical  work  of  science — say  Newton's
Principia — with  one  of  history — as,  for  example,  his
contemporary  Clarendon's  Great  Rebellion — to  realise
impressively  the  complete  diversity  of  the  two  realms.
Regarding  the  scientific  ideal  of  Nature  as  a  rounded
whole,  we  may  safely  say  that  the  world  of  science  and
the  world  of  history  have  little  or  nothing  in  common  :
their  terminology,  their  categories,  their  problems  are
wholly  different ;  and  so  too  are  the  philosophical
questions  to  which  they  severally  and  immediately  give
rise.  The  one  never  reaches  the  individual  and  con-
crete, the  other  never  leaves  them ;  for  the  one  spon-
taneity and initiative are impossible, for  the other

^  Cf.  my  article : '  Mechanism  and  Morals,'  Hibbert  /I,  Vol.  iv.
1905-  PP-  79  ff-


Science  and  History  3

inertia  and  rio^orous  concatenation  ;  to  the  one  the
notions  of  end  and  value  are  fruitless,  nay  meaningless,
for  the  other  they  are  of  paramount  importance.  And
yet  the  two  cannot  be  separated,  for  Nature  not  only
provides  the  scenery  and  properties  of  history  but  the
actors  themselves  seem  to  have  sprung  from  its  soil,  to
owe  their  position  largely  to  its  cooperation,  and  to
come  into  touch  with  each  other  solely  through  its
means.  After  all.  these  so-called  realms  are  but
'  aspects '  of  one  world  ;  and  it  is  precisely  this  fact
that  makes  their  seeming  contrariety  and  incompati-
bility a  problem  for  philosophy  :  where  and  how  are
we  to  find  the  final  unification  or  mediation  of  the  two?
It  will  be  one  step  towards  a  solution  if  we  can  deter-
mine which  aspect  is  the  more  fundamental.  It  hardly
needs  to  be  said  that  since  the  dawn  of  speculation  the
claims  of  both  aspects  have  had,  as  indeed  they  still
have,  their  advocates.  Those  who  assign  the  priority
to  Nature  we  call  Naturalists  :  those  who  contend  for
the  priority  of  free  agents  we  may  call  Spiritualists.
In  a  previous  course  of  Gifford  Lectures \  which  I  had
the  honour  to  deliver  in  Aberdeen  ten  years  ago,  I  en-
deavoured to  show  the  suj)eriority  of  the  spiritualistic
position.  The  main  lines  of  the  argument  can  be  very
briefly  indicated  and  I  trust  it  will  seem  to  you  fitting
that  I  should  recapitulate  them  by  way  of  introduction
to  the  further  inrjuiry  into  the  nature  of  the  spiritualistic
realm  and  to  the  discussion  of  some  of  its  problems,
which  I  i)ropose  in  the  present  course  to  attem{)t.

Reviewing the progress of the natural sciences
since  the  times  of  Galileo  and  Descartes  we  may  note
'  Natiiraliiin  and  Agnosticism,  3rd  cd.,  iyo6.

I — 2


4  Introductory

two  characteristics.  First,  in  so  far  as  the  qualitative
variety  and  the  complexity  of  concrete  things  are  con-
sidered, we  find  several  distinct  sciences  each  with  its
own  special  concepts  and  methods,  though  all  are  more
or  less  inductive  and  experimental.  But  all  qualities
and  complexities  whatever  that  natural  objects  present,
and  all  the  changes  that  they  undergo,  appear  to
involve  quantitative  constants  and  configurations  ad-
mitting of  more  or  less  precise  determination  and
measurement.  As  soon  indeed  as  the  movements  of
sensible  bodies  were  found  to  admit  of  exact  description
by  the  science  of  mechanics  the  hypothesis  at  once  pre-
sented itself  that,  as  Newton  expressed  it,  "the  other
phenomena  of  nature  might  be  deduced  from  mechani-
cal principles."  And,  as  we  all  know,  the  hypothesis
has  been  amply  justified,  though  not  indeed  absolutely
verified  in  every  detail  ;  mechanical  explanation  has
therefore  long  been  accepted  as  the  ne  plus  tdtra  of
what  a  scientific  explanation  can  be.  So  much  is  this
the  case  indeed  that  even  the  intractable  problem  of
life  is  still  generally  regarded  as  only  an  outstanding
difficulty  and  not  as  a  veritable  exception  to  the
universality  of  mechanical  laws.

We  come  now  to  the  second  characteristic.  For
long  this  mechanical  theory  was  held  to  furnish  us
with  the  knowledge  of  the  empirical  reality  which  our
sensible  experience  was  supposed  only  obscurely  to
symbolise :  it  bore,  in  fact,  the  name  of  Natural
Philosophy.  But  as  its  purely  formal  character  became
more  apparent,  and  mathematical  equations  enabled  it
to  dispense  with  the  real  categories  of  substance  and
cause,  physicists  themselves  were  the  first  to  perceive


TJie  Concrete  and  its  Symbols  5

and  to  proclaim  that  this  mechanical  theory  was  after
all  but  an  abstract  and  ideal  scheme — a  pure  science,
which  can  only  be  actually  'applied,'  as  we  say,  with
the  help  of  the  calculus  of  probabilities.  And  what
diversity  and  irregularity  the  seeming  simplicity  and
uniformity  of  large  numbers  may  cover  human  statistics
sufficiently  show.  In  place  then  of  the  concrete  world
of  sense  symbolising  this  abstract  scheme,  it  has  now
become  clear  that  it  is  the  abstract  scheme  itself  which
svmbolises  the  concrete  world  from  which  it  set  out.
It  also  indeed  reveals  the  law  and  order  that  there
prevail ;  but  what  the  concrete  world  really  is  and  what
is  the  source  of  the  law  and  order  that  it  manifests  are
questions  still  wholly  on  our  hands.  But  to  call  such
descriptive  scheme  pure  or  rational  science  is  to  em-
phasize its  source  in  niiiul  ;  and  when  this  intelligible
scheme  of  our  devising,  with  which  the  scientific
inquirer  greets  Nature,  is  confirmed  by  Nature's
response,  are  we  not  justified  in  concluding  that
Nature  is  intelligent  or  that  there  is  intelligence
behind  it  ?

When  however  the  physical  realists — those  I  mean
who  r('gard  the  mechanical  theory  not  as  an  abstract
summary  of  Nature's  routine  but  as  presenting  fully-
orbed  reality — when  these  realists  are  called  upon  to
explain  the  relation  of  this  mechanism  to  mind  they
become  involved  in  hopeless  inconsistencies.  The
mechanism  is  by  definition  an  absolutely  closed  system,
determinate  in  all  its  movements  down  to  the  minutest
detail.  Not  merely  does  it  brook  no  interference,  but
interference  is  strictly  speaking  inconceivable  :  the
semblance of  such could on!)- ni'-aii the presence  of


6  Introductory

further  mechanism  hitherto  concealed.  Mind  then  is
to  be  interpreted  as  an  impotent  and  shadowy  con-
comitant of  brain,  which  is  itself  but  a  part  of  this
mechanism  inextricably  linked  in  with  the  rest:  we  are
conscious  to  be  sure,  but  only  conscious  automata.
This  would  seem  to  be  the  one  possible  conclusion  from
the  naturalistic  premises,  if  any  conclusion  were  possible
at  all.  But  it  also  becomes  a  complete  refutation  of
them  the  moment  we  raise  an  obvious  question  which
Naturalism,  owing  to  its  absorption  in  the  material
aspect,  has  entirely  overlooked  :  the  question,  I  mean.
How  from  the  standpoint  of  consciousness  is  any
knowledge  of  this  independent  mechanical  system  to
be  accounted  for  ?  Or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,
how  from  the  naturalistic  standpoint  can  it  be  known
that  consciousness  is  concomitant  with  certain  mechani-
cal motions  ?  Agreeably  to  its  contention  for  the  priority
of  its  own  standpoint.  Naturalism  terms  the  contents
of  its  world  phenomenal,  and  those  of  consciousness
merely  epiphenomenal.  But  now  the  tangible,  visible,
sonorous  world,  the  world  of  external  perception — from
which  the  naturalist  starts  and  to  which  in  all  his
observations  and  experiments  he  appeals  to  verify  the
applicability  of  his  theory — this  world  belongs  entirely
to  the  epiphenomenal  series.  So  too  does  every  con-
cept in  his  theory  as  such  ;  so  that  his  appeal  to  ex-
perience to  validate  it  is  but  an  admission  of  its  con-
nexion with  the  perceptual,  the  so-called  epiphenomenal.
In  short,  awaken  the  naturalist  from  his  mathematical
ecstasy  and  the  '  epi '  at  once  drops  away  from  our  phe-
nomena, while  his  phenomena — since  he  regards  them
as  independent  existences — turn  out  not  to  be  pheno-


PJicuoiucua  ami  RpipJioioiuciia  7

mena  at  all  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  leave  him  where
we  found  him.  obHvious  of  the  essential  implications  of
experience,  and  contemplating  per  iiupossibile  a  closed
system  of  mass-points  in  motion,  then  assuredly  the
notion  that  these  have  dependent,  epiphenomenal,  con-
comitants or  'collateral  products'  will  never  dawn  upon
him.  or  even  admit  of  statement  without  contradiction.
But  a  workable  interpretation  of  experience  compels
us  not  only  to  reject  this  distinction  of  material
phenomena  and  mental  epiphenomena,  but  to  reject
also  the  tacit  assumption  that  our  percepts  are  merely
subjective  modifications.  This  whole  distinction  of
phenomenon  and  epiphenomenon  is  but  the  old  story
of  the  Cartesian  dualism  over  again.  But  after  puzzling
the  world  for  nearly  three  centuries,  it  seems — at  least
as  a  philosophical  tenet — in  a  fair  way  to  disappear.
Make  two  mutually  exclusive  halves  out  of  the  one
concrete  world  :  in  the  one  you  will  find  only  your
own  so-called  subjective  states  and  have  to  become  a
solipsist ;  in  the  other  the  organisms  you  would  find
there  you  could  call  only  automata  at  the  best.

This  brings  us  to  another  inconsistency  in  which
Naturalism  is  involved;  for,  even  if  conscious,  the
automata  as  part  of  the  continuous  mechanism  are,  as
already  said,  powerless  to  withstand  or  to  control  it :
consciousness  is  only  comparable  to  a  shadow  that
incidentally  in  some  mysterious  way  accompanies  their
working.  To  be  sure  we  seeiii  active,  ever  striving  for
ends,  and  the  historical  world  would  become  meaning-
less if  we  were  not.  We  do  not  infer  this  activity  :  it
xs  /)ri)iia  facie  an  ultimate  and  cons  itutive  fact  of  our
daily experience and of its historiCcd development.


8  Introductory

None  the  less  we  are  asked  to  believe  that  it  is  false,
because  otherwise  the  mechanical  theory  cannot  be
upheld.  Granting  then  for  the  moment  that  our  sense
of  activity  is  illusory,  we  have  at  least  in  turn  the  right
to  ask  how  the  illusion  can  have  arisen.  Pure  mecha-
nical science  recognises  neither  activity  nor  passivity,
but  only  mass  that  is  inert  and  motions  that  are  re-
versible. But  inertia  is  a  negative  term  and  becomes
meaningless  if  we  have  no  experience  of  activity.
Such  activity,  however,  as  the  historical  world  implies
could  not  be  found  in  the  physical  world  unless  that
showed  signs  of  being  intelligently  directed  :  but  then
such  evidence  could  only  be  appreciated  by  beings
who  were  themselves  active.  Moreover  that  evidence
would  be  fatal  to  the  mechanical  theory  itself — for  a
mechanism  admitting  of  direction  could  not  be  a  closed
system — and  so  with  the  fall  of  the  theory  would  fall
also  the  objections  to  our  common-sense  conviction
that  were  based  upon  it.

All  this  however  is  negative  argument;  but  positive
arguments  are  not  wanting.  For  instance,  we  say  that
'  knowledge  is  power,'  and  so  '  to  be  forewarned  is  to
be  forearmed.'  In  proof  we  can  point  to  instances
innumerable  in  which  the  very  knowledge  of  what  in
'  the  natural  course  of  things '  will  inevitably  happen
is  the  sure  means  of  falsifying  such  a  forecast.  To
take  the  very  simplest  illustration  :  lifeless  masses  do
not  get  out  of  one  another's  way  as  masses  under  living
guidance  almost  invariably  do.  Were  it  otherwise,  the
actual  course  of  things  would  be  vastly  more  calculable
but  would  cease  altogether  to  be  intelligible.  Solely
because,  though  inviolable,  what  we  significantly  call  the


Iticrf  Mass  and  Living  Ciitidaiice  9

Maws' of Nature  can vet  be  turned  to  account, do
they  deserve  the  name  of  laws  ; and  what  Hmits  our
power  is  not  their  indexibihty  but  our  own  ignorance.
Or again, compare Hving  organisms and their pro-
cesses, on  the  one  hand,  with inanimate  objects  and
the changes that thev  undero^o, on the  other. We
note  at  once  an  ever-increasing  complexity  as  we  rise
in  the  scale  of  life,  from  the  a7)wcba  say  to  ourselves  ;
and  also  in  our  artificial  products  as  we  rise  in  the  scale  of
civilisation,  say  from  the  African  kraal  to  the  European
city. The steady downward trend, the katabolic,
levelling  tendencies  attributed  to  unchecked  mechanism
we  find  not  merely  suspended  but  reversed  wherever
there  is  life  and  mind. The  notions  of  form,  adaptation
and  control  here  force  themselves  upon  our  notice  in
contrast  to  matter  and  its  blind,  purposeless  collisions.
Undeterred  by  this  amazing  contrast,  however,  those
who  uphold  the  theory  that  Nature  is  really  a  closed
mechanism must, and do, refuse to  draw  any line :
living  and  lifeless,  artificial  and  natural,  are  distinctions
of  no  account  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  mechanical
whole  :  life  and mind  are  the  concomitants  of  certain
of  its  workings  but the  determinants  of  none. Still
the  prevision  just  now  referred  to  and  this  sharp  con-
trast are  there,  and  have  to  be  accounted  for  sovicliow  :
to allow that they exactly tally with the presence
of  life  and mind and advance continuously  as these
advance  is  but to  state  the  problem, not  to  soke  it.
In  ])(■  (oniciu  with  this is  as  veritable  a  specimen  of
what  Germans  call '  bctcr  philosophy'  as  llic  profound
remark  that  great  rivers  run  ihrough  i)opLil()Us  towns.
In th('  first  place  a  series  of  coincidences  .so  vast


lo  Introductory

cannot  be  casual  and  disconnected  ;  and  yet  if  the
mechanism  on  the  one  side  is  a  closed  system,  the
living  experience  on  the  other  cannot  be  even  its
'  collateral  product,'  as  we  have  already  seen.  The
hopeless  impasse  of  dualism  again  confronts  our
naturalist,  and  he  is  fain  to  appeal  to  metaphysics  ;,
but  the  appeal  he  trusts  is  harmless,  since  he  only  asks
for  an  Unknowable  Reality  to  unite  his  mechanical
phenomena  with  the  psychical  epiphenomena  that  run
parallel  with  them.  It  is  needless  to  enlarge  on  the
absurdity  of  such  metaphysics:  that  has  been  effectively
exposed  more  than  once  already \  It  is  enough  to  note
that  all  this  agnostic  monism  comes  to  is  the  admission
that  there  is  a  connexion  and  the  confession — perhaps
I  should  rather  say,  the  contention — that  this  connexion
is  inexplicable.  But  what  precisely  is  this  connexion
as  a  fact,  and  why  is  it  inexplicable  }  We  must  turn
to  experience  for  an  answer.  There  we  find  not  indeed
a  dualism  of  material  phenomena  and  mental  phe-
nomena, but  a  duality  of  object  presented  and  subject
affected,  of  subject  striving  and  object  attained  :  an
interaction  that  is  only  inexplicable  because  for  every
finite  experience  it  is  ultimate — is  its  basal  fact.

With  this  fact  of  the  duality  in  unity  of  experience
before  us  we  are  at  the  historical  standpoint,  the  stand-
point of  the  concrete  and  individual.  Tracing  the
gradual  development  of  experience  we  can  see  how  the
distinction  between  the  real  and  the  phenomenal  arose,
how  with  the  advance  of  intersubjective  intercourse  and
the  growth  of  language  the  so-called  trans-subjective
objects,  objects  that,  so  to  say,  were  common  property,
^  Cf.  Bradley,  Appearance  and  Reality,  pp.  127  ff.


Experience  a  duality  in  unify  1 1

ceased  to  be  regarded  as  property — or  relative  to
experiencing  subjects  —  at  all,  while  the  objects  of
immediate  experience  were  regarded  as  the  peciilium
of  the  individual  and  so  as  not  objects  at  all  :  in  other
words,  we  can  see  how  the  psychology  of  dualism  came
to  shut  itself  /;/  and  the  physics  of  dualism  to  shut
itself  out,  by  sundering  the  one  world  of  experience
into  two  halves,  an  internal  and  an  external,  both  ab-
stractions and  so  both  devoid  of  reality.  In  particular
such  epistemological  reflexion  at  once  discloses  the
abstract  character  of  the  entire  mechanical  scheme,  to
which  I  have  already  referred.

Again,  the  light  which  experience  on  its  practical
side  throws  on  the  whole  process  and  progress  of
knowledge  is  of  fundamental  importance.  We  are  not
simply  cognitive  beings :  moreover,  knowledge  does
not  evolve  itself,  as  it  were  by  some  purely  immanent
process,  while  we  merely  look  on.  Even  if  it  may  be
so  unfolded  when  acquired,  its  accjuisition  is  only
secured  piecemeal,  by  arduous  effort,  and  many  mis-
adventures. All  this  implies  motives,  implies  ends  to
be  attained  :  we  seek  knowledge  primarily  because  it
proves  an  aid  to  more  and  fuller  life.  Apart  from  this
its  quest  would  be  unintelligible  :  this  brings  it  within
the  scope  of  the  realm  of  ends,  hi  nail)',  if  we  consider
the  main  structure  of  knowledge,  we  hnd  that  its  funda-
mental principles  of  unity,  causality  and  regularity  are
derived  from  this  standpoint:  in  other  words,  the  main
structure  of  our  concejjt  of  Nature  is  entirely  anthro-
pomorphic. The  unity  of  Nature  is  the  ideal  countt-r-
part  of  the  actual  unity  of  each  individual  experience,
where  synthesis  ever  j^recetles  analysis,  and  things  are


1 2  Introductory

only  distinguished  relatively  to  each  other  so  long  as
they  are  apperceived  together  by  the  one  subject.  The
category  of  causality  we  owe  to  the  interaction  of
active  subjects  with  their  environment  and  especially
with  on.e  other,  and  we  attribute  it  analogically  to
what  we  then  call  the  interaction  of  natural  agents.
Then  as  to  the  regularity  of  Nature  or  the  universal
reign  of  law,  this  never  has  been,  and  never  can  be,
empirically  established,  nor  does  its  denial  involve  any
contradiction  :  that  is  to  say,  it  is  neither  demonstrable
nor  axiomatic.  It  is  a  postulate  that  has  its  root  in  our
primitive  credulity  :  were  this  a7iticipatio  mentis  never
confirmed,  knowledge  would  be  im.possible  ;  but  con-
firmed as  it  is  continually  in  our  earliest  experience  we
thus  advance  to  an  interpretatio  7iatiirae  as  an  orderly
and  intelligible  system,  a  cosmos  that  evinces  directly
or  indirectly  the  all-pervading  presence  of  mind.

To  sum  up  in  words  that  I  have  lately  used  else-
where : — "We  are  active  beings  and  somehow  control
the  movements  of  the  bodies  we  are  said  to  animate.
No  facts  are  more  immediately  certain  than  these,  and
there  is  nothing  in  our  actual  experience  that  conflicts
with  them.  From  these  facts  we  advance  to  the
abstract  concepts  on  the  strength  of  which  Naturalism,
by  a  grievous  misapprehension  of  its  own  standpoint,
attempts  to  question  them.  Stationed  at  the  very
outskirts  of  the  knowable  and  intent  only  on  the
quantitative  aspects  of  things — like  those  fabulous
beings  of  geometrical  romance,  the  inhabitants  of
Flatland — it  finds  impassable  barriers  which  have  no
existence  in  the  fuller  dimensions  of  concrete  ex-
perience. But  we,  orientating  from  this  more  central


spiritualistic  Monism  13

position,  may  retort  upon  Naturalism  with  the  words
of  Goethe,

Das  Unzulangliche
Hier  wird's  Ereigniss  :
Das  Unbeschreibliche
Hier  wird's  gethan.

Having  satisfied  ourselves,  then,  that  mechanism  is
not  the  secret  of  the  universe  ;  that,  if  it  is  to  have
any  meaning,  it  must  subserve  some  end  ;  and  finding
generally  that  increased  knowledge  of  Nature's  laws
means  increased  control  of  Nature's  processes,  we
accept  the  facts  of  experience  in  which  subject  and
object  interact,  rather  than  the  conclusions  of  dualism,
that  mind  and  matter  are  for  us  two  alien  worlds  and
all  knowledge  of  Nature  an  inexplicable  mystery^  " —
we  accept  the  spiritualistic  standpoint  and  its  Realm
of  Ends  as  the  more  fundamental.

I  have  called  this  position  spiritualistic  monism  to
distinguish  it  from  materialistic  monism,  which  we  may
disregard  as  obsolete,  and  from  neutral  or  agnostic
monism,  which  we  may  fairly  treat  as  an  inept  and
ineffectual  attempt  to  get  round  the  deadlock  of  dualism.
But  if  this  [josition  be  indeed  the  more  fundamental,  it
ought  to  be  possible,  it  may  be  urged,  to  see  directly
from  this  standpoint  how  the  appearance  of  mechanism
arises,  or  at  least  to  make  some  progress  towards
accounting  for  it  in  terms  of  life  and  mind.  Un-
questionably il  ought  :  and  in  lact,  as  we  shall
presently  see,  attemj)ts  have  been  specially  numerous
of  late  to  mf.-et  this  (h^nand  in  a  mor(;  or  less  scientilic

'  Philosophical  Orientation and  Scientific  Standpoints^ Berkeley,
California, 1904.


1 4  Introductory

fashion.  Meanwhile  we  may  remind  those  who  demand
of  us  an  explanation  of  the  appearance  of  mechanism,
that,  if  the  term  be  strictly  taken,  there  need  for
spiritualism  be  no  such  appearance  at  all.  The  more
completely  we  can  interpret  the  world  as  a  realm  of
ends  the  more  completely  the  tables  are  turned  upon
naturalism.  As  this  contends,  in  the  words  of  Huxley,
"  for  the  gradual  banishment  from  all  regions  of  human
thought  of  what  we  call  spirit  and  spontaneity\"  so
that,  for  the  gradual  banishment  of  what  we  call  inert
stuff  and  directionless  energy.

To  see  how  the  case  stands  let  us  recall  the  contrast
between  science  and  history  just  now  referred  to.  The
first  effect  of  this  contrast  was  the  extravagant  common-
place that  history  as  unscientific  had  no  interest  for  the
philosopher.  The  final  result  may  be  the  other  extreme,
that  science  as  ijeneral  and  abstract  has  no  interest
for  the  philosopher  ;  since  he  is  concerned  only  with
reality,  and  that  is  concrete  and  individual  out  and  out.
At  any  rate  the  thought  of  the  last  century  made  a
very  decided  advance  in  this  direction  :  in  the  course
of  it  what  were  formerly  called  the  descriptive  or
natural  history  sciences  culminated  in  the  philosophy
of  evolution,  while  abstract  physics  is  lapsing,  as  we
have  seen,  from  its  old  supremacy  as  the  mechanical
philosophy  to  the  rank  of  a  merely  descriptive
scheme".  As  compared  with  the  nineteenth  century
the  eighteenth — though  it  produced  great  historians —
was  a  century  devoid  of  historic  sense. Its  specula-


^  Collected  Essays,  Eversley  edn,  Vol.  i.  p. 154
2  C
p.  166


^  Cf.  Boltzmann,  quoted  in  Naturalism  and  Agnosticism,  Vol.  i.


The  /lis fori cd/  Method  15

tions  concerning  the  origin  of  society,  of  language,
of  religion,  show  this.  And,  as  the  most  recent
historian  of  scientific  thought  has  pointed  out,  the
work  of  Laplace  shows  this  too.  Both  his  Mt^caniquc
ct/estt\  "  dealino'  with  the  qreneral  laws  of  motion  and
of  lifeless  masses,"  and  his  Thcoric  dc  la  Probabilite,
"dealing  with  the  arithmetical  properties  of  large
numbers  of  units,  leave  out  of  consideration  that
hidden  and  mysterious  phenomenon  [fact]  to  which
alone  is  attached... all  that  commands  interest  in  the
created  world — the  e.xistence  of  individuality\"  And
yet  it  was  in  the  latter  of  these  works  that  Laplace,
brushing  aside  freewill  as  a  palpable  illusion,  pro-
claimed the  implicit  omniscience  of  the  mechanical
theory  in  a  passage  that  I  took  for  the  text  of  my
former  lectures".  In  like  manner  the  belief  in  fixed
and  immutable  species  prevented  Laplace's  great  con-
temporary, Cuvier,  from  appreciating  the  genetic
view  of  nature,  where  the  supreme  importance  of
the  individual  first  appears  as — to  quote  an  expression
of  Hegel's^ — -'involving  the  species  and  genus  in
itself.'  where  variation  and  heredity  become  the  central
problems  of  biology  and  where  the  classifications  of
system-makers  cease  to  be  of  value  save  as  a  pre-
liminary clue.  I  have  mentioned  Hegel,  and — what-
ever may  be  thought  of  other  sides  of  his  philosophy
— its value in this connexion can hardly  be over-

'  J.  T.  Mcrz,  A  History  of  Kuropcan  J'/toui^/if  in  the  Nineteenth
Century,  Vol.  i.  1896,  p.  124.

-  It  was  reserved  for  ("lerk  .Maxwell  to  point  out  clearly  the
inevitable  limitation  of  the  La[)lacean  data.  ('f.  his  Life  by  Canipbell
and  (iarnett  as  quoted  by  Merz,  op.  cit.  \'u\.  11.  1902,  p.  559.


1 6  Introductory

estimated.  "  If  the  historical  literature  of  our  time,"
said  Zeller,  "no  longer  contents  itself  with  eruditely
unravelling  or  critically  sifting  traditions,  piecing  to-
gether and  pragmatically  elucidating  particular  facts,
but  seeks  first  and  foremost  to  understand  the  funda-
mental continuity  of  events,  to  comprehend  broadly
the  development  of  history  and  the  spiritual  principles
that  control  it,  this  advance  is  due  not  least  to  the
influences  that  Hegel's  Philosophy  of  History  has
exercised^"  Now  for  Hegel  human  history  meant
struggle  for  rational  freedom,  as  for  Darwin  natural
history  meant  struggle  for  existence  :  both  are  teleo-
logical  concepts,  both  imply  individual  agents  and
unique  events,  for  both  the  physical  world  is  pro-
visionally a  means  to  ends.  The  historical  method,
then,  we  may  say,  is  altogether  the  product  of  the
nineteenth  century  and  there  we  find  it  claiming  "  to
have  invaded  and  transformed  all  departments  of
thought."  "A  belief  in  this  method,"  said  Sidgwick
in  the  course  of  a  polemic  against  it,  "is  the  most
widely  and  strongly  entertained  philosophical  conviction
at  the  present  day-."

Even  the  negative  side  of  this  transformation,  the
waning  of  scientific  realism,  is  largely  due  to  the
growing  conviction  of  the  central  importance  of  the
concrete  and  historical.  It  is  not  merely  the  truth
that  laws  imply  agents,  nor  again  the  truth  that
scientific  laws  are  only  abstract  formulae — what  here
becomes  apparent  is  that  scientific  generalisations  are
an economic device necessitated by  our limitations.

^  Geschichte  der  deutschen  Philosophie,  p.  824.
^  'The  Historical  Method,'  Mind,  1886,  p.  203.


The  Passitig  of  Physical  Realism 1 7

But  it  is  to  Ernest  Mach,  a  physicist  who  has  turned
philosopher,  that  we  owe  the  most  impressive  presen-
tation of  this  truth.  "In  reality,"  he  says,  "the  law
always  contains  less  than  the  fact  itself,  because  it
does  not  reproduce  the  fact  as  a  whole,  but  only  that
aspect  of  it  which  is  important  to  us,  the  rest  being
either  intentionally  or  from  necessity  omitted^"  If
we  were  capable  of  that  intellectual  intuition  of  which
some  philosophers  have  dreamt,  there  would  be  no
enforced  omissions,  no  intractable  residuum,  no
sundering-  of  'that'  and  'what'  in  our  knowledge;
history  would  not  be  left  outside  science,  but  rather
science  be  taken  up  into  history.  We  should  not  start
with  the  abstract  and  general,  unable  to  reach  the
concrete  and  individual,  but  being  fully  acquainted
with  every  individual  we  should  be  relieved  of  the
incommensurability  of  fact  and  law.  Omniscience  of
this  sort  would  surely  bring  us  nearer  to  reality  than
the  omniscience  of  Laplace's  imaginary  spirit  with  its
completed  world-formula.  Order  there  w^ould  needs
be  in  such  a  world,  if  it  is  to  be  a  world  at  all. But

'  Mach,  '  The  Economical  Nature  of  Physics,'  Popular  Scientific
Lectures,  p.  193.  This  necessary  Hmitation  of  discursive  thought  has
led  to  two  distinct  hut  more  or  less  complementary  attitudes  towards
concrete  reality.  Elated  by  the  power  and  precision  that  generalisa-
tion secures,  science  was  encouraged  on  the  one  hand  to  hope  that
by  extending  its  network  of  general  relations  it  would  at  length
completely  encompass  the  individual,  on  the  other  to  despise  the
particular  as  mere  'stuff  of  no  account  save  as  it  was  formed  by
participation  in  general  ideas.  It  was  mainly  the  former  tendency
that  led  to  the  phiUjsophic  indifference  to  mere  history  and  experience
as  unscientific  that  characterizes  Descartes,  Bacon  and  llobbes  for
example.  The  latter  tendency  shows  itself  in  Schoi)enhauer's
singularly  inconsistent  contention  that  history  is  a  mere  hurly-burly
(  Wirnvarr),  only  the  accidental  form  of  the  appearance  of  the  idea.

w.  2


1 8  Introauctory

in  a  realm  of  ends  the  order  and  meaning  would  be
primarily  the  outcome  of  the  purposes  of  the  active
beings  composing  it :  only  to  discursive  intellects  such
as  ours  could  this  order  emanating  from  individual
agents  appear  as  a  warp  and  woof  of  external  law
shaping  some  primordial  stuff.  As  naturalism  claims
to  approximate  to  a  complete  formulation  of  this
phenomenal  order,  so  spiritualism  may  claim  to  ap-
proximate to  an  interpretation  of  the  underlying
reality ;  but  it  will  have  this  advantage,  that  while  it
may  be  possible,  setting  out  from  mind,  to  account  for
mechanism  it  is  impossible,  setting  out  from  mechanism,
to  account  for  mind.

Such  an  approximation  to  a  spiritualistic  inter-
pretation we  actually  have  in  the  history  of  the  living
world.  Here  we  are  ever  in  the  presence  of  individual
things,  from  which  science  indeed  sets  out,  but  to
which  it  can  never  return,  individuals  marked  down
by  dates  and  places  and  actually  designated  or  ad-
mitting of  designation  by  proper  names\  individuals
who  have  no  '  doubles,'  whose  like  all  in  all  we  never
shall  meet  again.  The  events  with  which  we  have
here  to  deal  are  the  unique  acts  and  deeds  that  have
their  origin  in  individual  centres  of  experience,  not
events  that  seem  to  occur  uniformly  as  resultants  of
universal  and  unvarying  law.  Further,  it  is  not  the
intrinsic  nature  of  objects  but  their  value  for  the  par-
ticular individual  that  immediately  determines  each
one's  attitude  towards  them  ;  and  as  the  individuals
vary  so  do  their  interests  and  pursuits.  But  quidquid
petitur  petitur  sub  specie  boni : the  idea  of  the  good,

^  To  which  therefore  no  concept  is  adequate.


TJie  Idea  of  the  Good  19

as  Plato  long-  ago  taught,  is  here  the  supreme  category  ^
If  however  there  were  as  many  goods  as  there  are
individuals  and  all  were  disparate  and  independent,
this  would  not  help  us  much.  But  the  individuals  of
history  are  none  of  them  isolated,  for  though  no  two
be  altoijether  alike  no  two  are  altogether  different.
So  community  and  co-operation  become  actual  goods,
struggle  a  possible  evil  calling  for  readjustment,  and
the  harmonious  realisation  of  individual  ends  the  ideal
consummation,  the  "one  far  off  divine  event  to  which
the  whole  creation  moves."

Meanwhile  the  course  of  history  shows  us  the
gradual  building-up  of  society  and  civilisation  and
therewith  the  attainment  at  each  advance  of  ends  that
were  inconceivable  at  an  earlier  stage.  But  these  ever-
\videning  social  groups  and  ends  of  ever-increasing
scope  are  still  in  every  case  individual  and  concrete.
The  subordinate  individuals  or  the  particular  aims
which  the  wider  embrace  are  still  to  be  reofarded  as
members  or  constituents  of  an  articulate  whole  and
not  as  instances  of  a  general  class,  in  which  the
content  diminishes  as  the  extent  increases' ;  for  in
these  historical  wholes,  we  must  again  insist,  there
is  never  comjjlete  homogeneity  of  parts.  On  the
contrary,  the  higher,  over-individual  ends,  as  they
are  sometimes  called, — politics,  industry,  science,
literature,  art — imply  a  differentiation  among  men  that
in  spite  of  its  significance  would  defy  classification.
The  more  organized  the  community  the  more  diverse
the  individuals il  includes,  and  the  more  man  api^ears

'  Rep  VI.  505  A.

*  ('f.  Kickcrt, J^ie  Grenzen  tier  natunvissenscluift lichen /ici^riffs-
bildung, 1902, p. 394.

2 — 2


20  Introductory

as  the  historical  animal.  At  the  same  time  the  reali-
sation of  these  ends  invests  him,  so  to  say,  with  a  new
environment,  a  metamorphosis  of  nature,  an  artificial,
humanly  created,  medium,  which  throws  the  immediate
environment  of  the  naked  and  resourceless  troglodyte
more  and  more  into  the  background.  Entre  rhomine
et  la  Nature,  said  Comte,  il  fatit  Vhumanitd.

Still,  it  will  be  objected,  beyond  humanity  and
history,  beyond,  if  you  will,  the  whole  realm  of  sentient
life,  Nature  is  there  all  the  while,  and  there  as  no
mere  background  but  as  the  basis  of  the  whole,  the
fundamental  plasma  which  can  only  be  shaped  because
it  is  itself  determinate  and  orderly.  Granting  this  we
may  yet  urge  that  there  is  nothing  in  Nature,  when
we  try  to  envisage  it  as  a  whole,  that  is  incompatible
with  a  spiritualistic  interpretation.  In  the  historical
world  we  place  determinate  agents  first,  and  the  order
and  development  which  we  observe  we  trace  to  their
action  and  interaction.  It  has  never  been  shown  that
we  need,  nor  made  clear  that  we  can,  interpret  Nature
otherwise.

One  problem  of  supreme  importance  to  such  an
interpretation  does  however  arise,  and  this  problem
the  objection  we  are  considering  directly  suggests.
We  have  only  to  an  insignificant  extent  shaped
Nature,  we  have  not  made  it ;  we  are  not  even
settlers  from  a  foreign  clime  but  aborigines  seemingly
sprung  from  the  soil.  But  the  principle  of  con-
tinuity is  supposed  to  turn  the  edge  of  this  ob-
jection, and  to  this  principle  pampsychism  appeals,
though  it  does  not  rest  on  that  alone.  "  Nature  never
makes  leaps,"  said  Leibniz.  Every  organism  has  its
peculiar  environment,  the  simpler  the  one  is  the  simpler


Panipsychisni  2 1

the  other  will  be.  Recent  knowledge  has  shown  the
ransre  of  life  to  extend  far  into  the  region  of  what  was
once  regarded  as  the  inanimate,  purely  physical  world,
and  it  has  further  shown  the  lowest  known  orQanisms
to  be  highly  complex  and  extremely  varied.  But  there
is  nothing-  to  sugoest  that  we  have  reached  the  limits
of  life :  all  we  can  say  is  that  our  senses  and  the
artificial  aids  and  methods  of  research  at  present
available  do  not  enable  us  to  discriminate  between
yet  simpler  forms  of  life  and  their  environment  ;  not
that  these  do  not  exist.  There  is  then,  it  is  contended,
no  warrant  for  the  assumption  of  a  completely  inanimate
environment  at  all  :  we  ought  rather  with  Spinoza  to
conclude  that  "  all  individual  things  are  animated,  albeit
in  diverse  degrees\"  We  ought  so  to  conclude  too,
because — continuity  apart — what  can  neither  do  nor
suffer,  what  is  nothing  for  itself,  is  truly  nothing  at
all  ;  for — again  as  Spinoza  maintained — every  indi-
vidual thing,  so  far  as  in  it  lies,  endeavours  to
persist  in  its  own  being-.  On  this,  the  pampsychist
view.  Nature  thus  resolves  into  a  plurality  of  conative
individuals  ;  and  the  range  and  complexity  of  the
correspondence  between  a  given  individual  and  its
environment  marks  the  stage  to  which  it  has  advanced
in  its  interaction  with  the  rest.  But  to  cite  Spinoza  is
to  give  point  l(j  the  difficulty  that  has  still  to  be  met.

Will  a  plurality  of  interacting  subjects  account  for
itself  antl  U)x  the  unity  which  interaction  im[)lics  ^
This  is  the  question  which  in  the  following  lectures
we  shall  have  carefull)'  to  discuss.  Suj)pose  we  decide
this  question in the  nc.-gative,  that will woX.  affect the

' Ethics,  II. I  5,  Schol.
'  Ethics,  in.  6.


22  Introductory

main  issue  as  between  spiritualism  and  naturalism  :  for
such  ground  of  the  world  of  living  and  acting  things
would — if  we  should  be  led  to  assume  it — surely  be
itself  living  and  acting.  In  any  case  then  we  have  a
realm  of  ends,  the  only  question  is  : — what  is  its  con-
stitution, how  is  its  harmony  secured  ;  is  it,  so  to  say,
a  more  or  less  orderly  democracy,  is  it  a  limited
monarchy,  or  is  it  possibly  an  absolute  one  ?

This  is  none  other  than  the  old  and  formidable
problem  of  the  One  and  the  Many  ;  and  this,  it  has
been  said,  will  be  the  philosophical  problem  of  the
twentieth  century.  Certainly  there  are  few  questions
more  to  the  fore  at  the  present  time.  It  is  fitting
then  that  with  this  we  should  begin.  But  with  such  a
problem  much  depends  on  the  side  from  which  we  begin
and  the  method  that  we  adopt.  The  great  idealistic
systems  of  the  nineteenth  century  began  with  the
One  as  absolute  and  adopted  what  may  be  generally
described  as  a  speculative  or  a  priori  method.  Of  the
greatest  of  these  systems,  that  of  Hegel,  even  its  most
sympathetic  critics  have  allowed  that,  however  perfect
its  ideal  may  be  in  itself,  its  attainment  is,  and  must
ever  remain,  humanly  impossible.  And  this  verdict,
I  do  not  think  it  audacious  to  say,  is  easy  to  justify :
it  simply  amounts  to  protesting  that  we  can  never
transcend  ourselves.  The  first  requisite  of  philosophy
is  organic  coherence  :  it  cannot,  so  to  say,  have  two
independent  growing  points,  and  so  long  as  experience
is  the  one  there  can  be  no  finality  about  philosophy.  As
experience  advances  its  meaning  will  unfold  itself  to
reflexion  more  and  more  :  so  further  progress  makes
further  regress  possible  and  what  is  last  in  the  order
of  experience  brings  us  nearer  to  what  is  first  in  the


TJie  question  of  McfJiod  23

order  of  knowledge.  On  experience  as  it  develops
the  ideal  of  the  pure  reason  may  rise  to  perish  never,
but  it  was  certainly  not  discernible  at  first  ;  and  if
present  now,  its  full  meaning  is  ineffable  still.  The
superlative,  the  absolute,  the  infinite  are  limiting
notions,  and  for  aught  we  know  are  notions  only :
ideals  of  the  reason  they  may  be,  but  then  reason
itself  is  an  ideal.  There  seems  no  end  to  the  process  of
rationalising  experience,  but — as  I  said  at  the  outset —
at  least  there  may  be  progress,  and  our  confidence,
that,  as  Hegel  maintained,  the  real  is  rational  and  the
rational  real  may  deepen  as  we  proceed.  But  we  must
start  where  we  are  and  continue  as  we  have  begun,
letting  knowledge  grow  from  more  to  more.  To  say
this  is  to  imply  that  those  idealists  who  have  attempted
to  begin  with  the  Absolute  have  not  really  done  so.
That  they  have  not  has  been  amply  proved  by  their
critics  and  admitted  by  their  apologists.  But  at  any
rate  in  the  flights  of  pure  thought  up  to  the  Absolute
the  atmosphere  of  empirical  fact  by  which  it  is  sustained
is  too  diffused  to  be  detected,  and  when  that  summit  is
reached  the  particular,  the  many,  of  actual  experience
tend  to  disappear  or  to  be  explained  away.  Thus
their  "alleged  independence" — in  which  we  empiri-
cally believe — Mr  ikadley  declares  "is  no  fact,  but  a
theoretical  construction  ;  and  so  far  as  it  has  a  meaning,
that  meaning  contradicts  itself,  and  issues  in  chaos....
The  plurality  then  sinks  to  become  merely  an  integral
aspect  in  a  single  substantial  unity,  and  th(?  reals  [the
many]  have  vanished'."  Nevertheless  the  iiu-vitable
reaction,  which  the  impossibility  of  [)hilosophical
finality  involves,  has  already  set  in  :  indeed  Mr  Bradley
' Appiarancc  iind  h'tnlily,  ^rul  cdn,  p. 143.


24  Introductory

prophesied  as  much:  "  Monadism,"  he  says,  "on  the
whole  will  increase  and  will  add  to  the  difficulties
which  already  exists"  Whether  the  second  half  of  his
forecast  will  turn  out  to  be  as  true  as  the  first  remains
to  be  seen.  At  any  rate  the  plurality  of  the  realm  of
ends  is  what  is  most  patent  to  us  at  the  outset :  if  the
difficulties  of  Pluralism  point  the  way  to  Singularism"^
they  will  at  least  serve  to  make  the  character  of  the
One  clearer  than  any  '  cheap  and  easy  monism '
evolved  at  a  dialectical  show — such  as  Mr  Bradley
in  a  famous  passage  has  himself  described" — can  ever
do.  It  will  be  well  too  as  regards  method  to  let  the
spirit  of  the  time  lead  us  ;  turning  aside  from  what  has
been  described  as  "  Naturalism's  desert  on  the  one
hand  and  the  barren  summit  of  the  Absolute  on  the
other,"  to  follow  the  historical  method  as  far  as  possible
in  tracing  the  gradual  evolution  of  ideas,  but  trusting
to  speculative  methods  only  in  the  endeavour  to  divine
the  most  satisfactory  solution  of  the  problems  to  which
they  gave  rise.

In  the  next  lecture  then  we  must  try  to  ascertain
the  genesis  of  the  ideas  which  lead  to  the  problem  of
the  One  and  the  Many,  and  then  we  may  proceed  to
examine  the  solution  which  those  who  are  called
Pluralists  or  Personal Idealists  uphold.

^ Op.  cit.  p.  iiZ,  fin.

^  This  term,  first  used  by  Kiilpe  as  the  correlative  of  Pluralism
{Einkitung  tfi  die  F/iiiosophie,  §  14),  may  not  be  happy;  but  it  is
after  all  better  than  Henism  ;  and  it  is  not  misleading  as  Monism
according  to  present  usage,  i.e.  with  a  qualitative  as  well  as  a  quanti-
tative sense,  certainly  is.  Wolf,  who  invented  the  term,  used  it,  as
I  have  done,  only  in  the  qualitative  sense  as  applicable  either  to
materialism  or  to  spiritualism.

^  Principles  of  Logic,  p.  533.


LECTURE II


THE ONE AND THE MANY.


It  is  very  commonly  assumed  that  idealism  or
spiritualism  is  synonymous  with  theism,  or  at  least
inseparable  from  it.  It  is  true  that  idealists  are  rarely
atheists,  but  it  would  be  dogmatism  to  assert  offhand
that  they  cannot  be.  Still  less  can  we  say  that  if  not
monotheists,  they  must  be  pantheists,  in  the  sense
of  denying  the  reality  of  the  w^orld  altogether  as
Spinoza  is  commonly  credited  with  doing,  and  so  was
called  by  Hegel  not  atheist  but  acosmist.  Panth^xsm
in  the  sense  of  identifvincr  the  world  with  God  is  but
'a  polite  atheism,'  as  Schopenhauer  has  said,  but  such
a  pantheism  is  not  compatible  with  idealism.  So  ''  from
a  world  of  spirits  to  a  Supreme  Spirit  is  -^l pos sid /e  stQ^,''
is  all  I  ventured  to  say  in  my  former  lectures  at  Aber-
deen'; for  it  is  not  straightway  evident  that  it  is  a
necessary  one.  Many  of  those  called  pluralists  or
personal  idealists  deny  the  necessity,  and  some  even
question  the  possibility  of  any  such  step. — We  cannot,
of  course,  admit  a  multij)licity  without  any  imity.  A
One  of  some  sort  is  obviously  imj)Ii('d  in  talking  of  a
world  at  all  ;  but  may  not  the  Many  account  for  their
own  unity  instead  of  requiring  a  One,  an  individual  of

' NatKialiim  and  Ai^noslicisni,  X'ol.  ii.  |>.  202.


26  The  One  and  the  Many

another  order,  to  account  for  them  ?  May  not  the
unity  of  the  world  be  analogous  to  that  of  a  society,  so
presupposing-  the  individuals  associated  ?  Or  must  we
assume  beyond  and  above  the  Many  and  their  unity  an
Absolute  One,  of  which  they  are  somehow  the  appear-
ance ?  This  is  the  problem  of  the  One  and  the  Many
to  which  we  have  now  to  turn.  A^s  an  essential  pre-
liminary to  any  attempt  to  deal  with  it  we  have  agreed
first  of  all  to  ascertain,  if  we  can,  how  the  ideas  of  the
One  and  the  Many  arise  in  the  course  of  advancing
experience  and  thought.

The  correlation  or  duality  involved  in  all  experience,
that  namely  of  an  individual  subject  and  its  objective
environment,  is  often  described  as  a  duality  of  Ego  and
Non-Ego,  of  Self  and  Not-Self,  But  it  is  important
to  note,  on  the  one  hand,  that  this  objective  Not-Self
is  not  presented  as  another  self,  but  simply  as  an
'  Other,'  Also  it  is  equally  important  to  note,  on  the
other  hand,  that  this  objective  'Other'  has  always  for  ex-
perience a  certain  continuity  or  unity,  which — though  it
differentiates  more  and  more  as  experience  develops — -
never  completely  disintegrates  into  a  discrete  manifold
or  mere  plurality.  Again  the  relation  of  the  subject  to
this  objective  continuum  is  always  one  of  more  or  less
dependence.  But  the  subject,  as  we  have  already  seen,
is  not  wholly  inert :  it  is  always  active  and  selective
to  some  extent ;  otherwise,  indeed,  it  could  never  be
aware  of  its  dependence.  As  experience  extends  and
the  objective  differentiates,  the  subject  too  advances  in
initiative  and  acquires  new  powers  ;  but  never,  so  to
say,  overtops  and  outstrips  the  Non-Ego.  On  the
contrary, increasing  knowledge  though  it  secures  in-


Nature  as  the  One  27

creasing  power  also  deepens  this  sense  of  dependence.
Primitive  man  attempts  to  subjugate  or  circumvent
Nature  bv  maL-ic,  but  science  has  lonfj  since  tau^'ht  us
that  our  ends  of  self-preservation  and  physical  better-
ment are  only  to  be  attained  by  such  adaptation  and
adjustment  as  Nature  allows.

But  the  advance  of  Science,  it  is  said,  does  not
merely  deepen  this  sense  of  our  ultimate  dependence
on  Nature,  it  also  tends  increasingly  to  emphasize
Nature's  complete  independence  of  us.  We  talk  of
our  life  as  a  struggle,  but  at  least  Nature  does  not
deign  to  struggle  with  us.  We  talk  of  shaping  and
selecting  ;  but  the  further  our  knowledge  of  this  in-
terminable Other  confronting  us  extends,  the  more
inevitable  to  many  seems  the  conclusion  that  in  truth
it  is  we  who  are  shaped  and  selected  by  Nature.
Such  in  brief  is  die  gcliiutertc  Naturbet^'achtung  dcs
denkeiiden  N^ahirjuenschcn,  as  Haeckel  calls  it  ;  and
the  only  Absolute  One,  in  which  Naturalism  believes,
is  the  result.  And  what  ultimately  is  this  Absolute
which  Haeckel's  clarified  vision  discerns  ?  It  is  per-
manent substance  ;  more  definitely,  it  is  the  kinetic
world-ether,  whose  mass  and  energy  are  eternally  con-
served, and  whence  the  Many  result  as  atomic  souls  by
an  inexplicable  condensation  or  concentration.  This
world-ether  is  the  only  'creative  divinity'  that  Haeckel
allows.  And  Herbert  Spencer  comes  very  near  to  this
when,  in  the  recent  revision  of  his  First  Principles,  he
suggests  that  "  the  only  supposiiioii  having  consistency
is  that  thai  in  which  consciousness  inheres  is  the  all-
pervading  ether'."  We  have-  then  here  that  form  of
so-called  pan\.\\v'\'^\w — in  which  all  lh<-  stress  is  on  the
' J'trst  J'rincip/ts,  1900,  j).  201.


28  The  One  and  the  Many

'pan'  —  the  pantheism  that  maintains  —  as  Schopen-
hauer put  it — "  that  the  world  is  there  in  virtue  of  its
own  internal  energy  and  through  itself" — a  world  in
which  consciousness,  according  to  him,  is  a  secondary
and  unfortunate  episode.

But  this  polite  atheism,  as  I  have  already  said,  we
cannot  accept.  Though  but  a  reed,  to  use  Pascal's
words,  man  is  a  thinking  reed,  and  cannot  be  merged
in  or  emerge  from  such  a  world,  however  vast  it  be.
Man  only  knows  the  world  as  it  faces  him  and  he  inter-
acts with  it,  and  he  knows  it  only  so  far  as  he  finds  it
intelligible.  And  finding  it  intelligible  he  can  only  con-
clude that  it  is  not  after  all  an  alien  Other  but  has  its
ground  and  meaning  either  in  another  self  or  in  a  com-
munity of  selves.  This  much  we  are  taking  as  already
clear.  Let  us  turn  then  to  consider  the  idea  of  the
Many,  which  in  fact  we  reach  first  and  which  leads  to  a
concept  of  the  Absolute  still  older  than  that  of  objective
substance.

The  individual  subject  soon  learns  to  distinguish
certain  objective  differentiations  or  bodies,  in  form  and
behaviour  resembling  that  particular  differentiation
which  is  present  in  all  its  own  experience  as  the
body  or  organism  that  it  is  said  to  animate.  These
other  bodies  it  regards  as  each  one  animated  by  a  self,
and  it  often  finds  that  it  is  itself  so  regarded  by  them.
But  such  other  selves  only  tell  on  the  individual's
experience,  because  their  bodies  form  parts  of  the  one
objective  whole  that  is  so  far  common  to  them  all,  and
through  which  all  their  intercourse  and  interaction  are
mediated.  That  is  to  say,  only  the  bodies  and  their
movements  are  presented  as  objects,  the  indwelling
selves  (or  souls)  and  their  experiences are not thus


The  Many  as  Ejecfs  29

presented. To  mark tliis difference we may adopt
Clifford's term and  call  these  other  selves and their
experience  'ejects.' In  the  infancy  of  the  human  race
this  ejective  analogy  ran  riot :  primitive  philosophy,  if
we  may  credit  the  untutored  savage  with  such  a  luxury,
found  life  and  mind  everywhere. But  it  was  still  life  or
mind  set  in  the  matrix  of  a  common  environment,  pos-
sessing always  a  definite  embodiment  and  location  there-
in and  manifesting  itself  solely  by  this  means. We  can
imagine  other  selves  transcending  ourselves  indefinitely,
as  we  can  imagine  them  indefinitely  lower  than  our-
selves, in  what  we  call  the  scale  of  being. But  if  we
hold  to  the  continuity  which  a  scale  of  being  implies,
we  must  imagine  them  all — hicrher  and  lower  alike — as
subjects  in  correlation  with  objects  and  not  as  in  them-
selves absolute  or  complete. As Hegel's  unfortunate
colleague,  Beneke,  was  fond  of  maintaining  in  opposition
to  him  : — "The  human  mind  is  incapable  of  devising
or  excogitating  anything  absolutely  ;  on  the  contrary
it  must  derive  either  from external  or from  internal
experience  the  essential  elements  of  all  that  it  imagines
or  thinks'."
^ {)\\  the  lines  then  of  that  experience  which  brings
us  into  communication with  our fellow-creatures,  the
experience that underlies the animism, mythology,
and polytheism of  primitiv(,'  culture, we  can  at best
only  imagine  an  experient  who  is  primus  inter  pares,
at  any  rate  so  far  as  the  duality  of  subject  and  object  is
concerned  : we  cannot  reach  on  these  lines  the  thought
of  an  Absolute  One. Even  the  li\'ing  and  true  (iod,
who  is  the  object  of  worshij;  in  monotheistic  n'ligions,
cannot  be  identified  with  the  Absolute,  for  worship  ini-
'  System  der  Metaphysik,  1840,  \^.  496.


30  The  One  and  the  Many

plies  mutual  distinction  and  mutual  interest.  Moreover
the  history  of  religion  shows  clearly  that  the  idea  of  a
supreme  and  only  God  has  been  developed  through
polytheism,  and  has  so  far  an  anthropomorphic  basis.
For  "pure  monotheism,"  as  Dr  Caird  has  said,  "God
was  merely  one  subject  among  other  subjects  ;  and
though  lifted  high  above  them,  the  source  of  all  their
life,  was  yet  related  to  them  as  an  external  and  inde-
pendent wilP."  But  the  point  on  which  we  have  to
insist  is  rather  that  to  be  a  subject  at  all,  in  any  sense
that  we  can  understand — so  long  that  is  as  the  term
subject  carries  any  meaning  for  us — is  to  be  confronted
by  an  Other  as  object.  A  supreme  subject  then  taken
alone,  no  less  than  the  objective  World  so  taken,  is
y  but  a  one-sided  abstraction  and  cannot  be  veritably  an
absolute  reality.

Certainly,  it  will  be  said,  the  true,  the  absolute
Absolute  is  not  exclusively  subjective,  still  less  ex-
clusively objective  :  it  is  the  unity  of  both. — Mythology
had  its  cosmogony  and  even  its  theogony,  but  in  rising
towards  the  idea  of  a  Supreme  Spirit,  speculative
monotheism,  at  all  events,  has  tended  to  conceive  both
God  and  the  World  sub  specie  aeternitatis.  The  entire*,
objective  world  and  the  many  finite  subjects  which
interact  with  it  or  within  it,  in  all  their  totality  and  in
all  their  distinctness,  are,  it  is  said,  to  be  conceived  as
eternally  present  to  God  as  His  own  creative  intuition
and  self-manifestation.  The  world  is  for  God  too,  but
not  as  for  us,  merely  as  given  fact,  but  entirely  as
thought  or  deed.  This  sublime  ideal  is  again  a  limit
towards  which  our  thought  can  only  approximate  ;  and
the  history  of  thought  shows  not  only  how  gradually
^ The  Evolution  of  Religion,  1893,  Vol.  11.  p-  72.


A)iciciit  Ideas  of  Creation  31

the  advance  towards  it  has  been  made  :  it  shows  also
that  difficulties  emerge  as  this  ideal  is  more  distinctly
conceived.

But  let  us  note  the  steps.  All  finite  beings,  we
have  found,  are  in  part  passive  and  only  in  part
active  ;  but  they  appear  as  increasingly  active  the
higher  in  the  scale  of  being  they  stand  :  God  as  the
Supreme  is  then  to  be  regarded  as  purely  active  and
wholly  free  from  external  constraint.  Whereas  ive
can  only  shape  and  arrange  so  far  as  the  elements
and  forces  of  nature  permit,  for  God  there  is  no
nature  ;  no  need  for  mechanism  to  transform  '  chaos
without  form  and  void '  into  a  cosmos  teeming  with
purpose  and  life  :  for  him  there  is  only  his  own
creation.  But  this  idea  of  creation,  creation  '  out  of
nothing,'  is  hard  to  seize.  Not  only  does  the  Mosaic
account — with  its  void  and  formless  earth,  its  primeval
darkness  and  the  spirit  of  Elohim  brooding  over  the
waters — fail  to  reach  it ;  but  the  philosophic  specu-
lations of  Plato  and  Aristotle  failed  to  reach  it  too.
Both  recognise  a  77iateria  prima  as  a  sort  of  half-real,
indeterminate,  potential  stuff — wholly  receptive  and  yet
more  or  less  recalcitrant — to  which  form  and  life  are
imparted,  but  which  itself  was  never  made.  All  this
suggests  a  generative  process,  nature  but  not  creation  ;
indeed  Plato,  in  the  Tirnaens  at  all  events,  compares
this  primary  matter,  as  Aristotle  called  it,  to  a  nurse
ox  receptacle  of  all  generation'.  Such  ideas  point  to
a  dualism  not  to  an  Absolute  unity  :  God  and  Nature
are  distinct.  And,  in  fact,  both  Plato  and  Aristotle  in
different  ways  explicitly  separate  Nature  as  the  sensible

'  (Jf.  Timaeus,  49  flf.


32  The  One  and  the  Many

world  from  an  intelligible  world  which  is  the  direct
object  of  the  divine  thought  and  contemplation.
Between  the  two  worlds  they  fail  to  establish  any
satisfactory  connexion^ ;  but  if  we  leave  the  sensible
world  out  of  account,  we  have  in  the  Platonic  world  of
ideas  and  in  the  divine  vor^crt?  poijaeco^  of  Aristotle
a  unity  of  subjective  and  objective  which  we  may  fairly
call  the  Absolute,  since  it  is  perfect  and  complete  in
itself.  Of  this  the  sensible  world  is  a  superfluous  and
imperfect — nay  an  impossible — replica,  that  can  neither
really  be  nor  be  really  known.

And  if  we  are  to  be  in  earnest  with  the  notion  of
creation  out  of  nothing  does  it  not  equally  eliminate
any  idea  of  generation  or  of  reproduction,  does  it  not
suggest  that  sort  of  eternal  '  static  perfection '  which
such  processes  as  producing,  impressing,  or  in-forming,
exclude  ?  A  subject  who  is  achis  purus,  clear  there-
fore of  all  the  limitations  pertaining  to  space  and  time,
who  apprehends  not  by  sense  and  comprehends  not
by  discursive  thinking,  what  object  can  he  have  which
is  not  himself?  Must  we  not  say  then  that  he  does
not  make  even  out  of  nothing,  for  what  is  made  cannot
be  its  Maker  ?  and  yet  if  the  Maker  is  absolute,  what
else  can  it  be  ?  He  acts,  but  his  acts  are  immanent
not  transeunt :  he  becomes  his  own  Other  only  that
he  may  be  conscious  of  himself,  and  so  we  call  him
catisa  sui,  and  interpret  this  as  meaning  an  absolute
self-consciousness.  Such  at  any  rate  has  been  the
usual  outcome  of  philosophic  monotheism  :  it  tends  to
end  in  acosmism.  Aristotle's  position,  for  example,  is
summed  up  by  Dr  Caird  as  "the  pure  self-conscious-

' Cf.  Caird,  The  Evolution  of  Theology  in  the  Greek  Philosophers,
1904,  Vol.  II.  pp.  238  ff.


The  One  and  Acosniis))!  33

ness  of  God.  in  which  subject  and  object  and  the
activity  that  relates  them  to  each  other — vov<i,  porjTov
and  vdr^crt? — are  perfectly  unified  and  which,  therefore,
is  complete  in  itself  without  reference  to  any  other
object," — but  such  absolute  self-consciousness  "cannot
logically  be  conceived  as  going  beyond  itself  to  create
the  finite  world  of  movement  and  change\"  The
same  dualism  between  God  and  the  world  reappears
in  the  philosophy  of  Plotinus — a  philosophy  in  some
respects  an  amalgam  of  the  Platonic  and  the  Aristo-
telian— the  same  inability,  that  is  to  say,  to  show,  as
Dr  Caird  puts  it,  "how  God,  who  is  absolutely
complete  in  himself,  can  yet  be  the  source  of  existences
which  are  external  to  him  and  not  included  in  the
process  of  his  own  life"."  In  the  philosophy  of
Spinoza,  to  which,  as  already  said,  the  name  acosmism
was  first  applied,  this  difficulty  is  specially  apparent.
His  many  expositors  have  failed  to  show  any  con-
ceivable connexion  between  what  he  called  natura
natiiraia  and  God,  in  whom  all  the  modes  and  dis-
tinctions of  the  former  disappear,  and  whose  existence,
as  Spinoza  himself  has  said,  is  '' toto  genere  different
from theirs."

In  fact,  observing  that  'creation  out  of  nothing'
has  another  side — ex  niliilo  nihil  Jit — we  might  not
unfairly  say  that  this  is  the  side  which  the  acosmic
tendency  of  Absolutism  inevitabl)'  emphasizes.  The
world  of  finite  existences  created  out  of  nothing  is
nothing ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  ScJiein  not  Seiii.  ap-
pearance not  reality,  as  the Eleatics  first  proclaimed  :

' Op.  iit.  11.  p.  241.
■■' Op.  cit.  II.  [).  :?57.

w.  3


34  The  One  and  the  Many

it  is  the  Maya  of  Brahmanism,  the  inexpHcable  illusion
enveloping  the  One,  that

...like  a  dome  of  many-coloured  glass
Stains  the  white  radiance  of  eternity.

But  the  conclusion  that  reality  cannot  be  Many  led
naturally  to  a  yet  further  development  of  the  idea  of
the  Absolute.  The  Absolute  in  the  end  was  conceived
not  so  much  as  the  unity  of  subject  and  object  but
rather  as  a  unity  that  transcends  both.  Such  an
Absolutism  we  find,  for  example,  in  the  One  of
Plotinus,  the  Substance  of  Spinoza  and  the  Neittruin
of  Schelling.  And  I  fear  we  must  allow  that  those
who  would  add  Hegel's  Absolute  Idea  to  the  list  are
probably  right,  unless  indeed  we  are  willing  to  admit
that  it  is — as  he  himself  as  good  as  says — not  the
Absolute  but  only  its  shadow.  But  there  is  still  a
step.  After  all,  we  and  all  our  speculation  belong  to
the  world  of  so-called  '  spurious  existence '  ;  and  as  to
the  One,  so  transcendently  different  from  all  that  we
know — none  of  our  concepts  are  applicable  to  it.  It  is
Nicht  in  contrast  to  Icht,  as  Eckhart  quaintly  says.
We  ascend  to  it,  as  the  '  negative  theology '  of  the
Scholastic  mysticism  taught,  by  dropping  one  after
another  every  determinate  predicate,  so  that  we  end
by  saying  with  Proclus  that  the  One  or  God  is  above
substance  and  life  and  intelligence,  and  cannot  even
be  called  One  except  figuratively  ;  or  with  Basilides
that  it  is  rather  to  be  called  absolute  non-existence,  or
again  with  the  author  of  the  Theologia  gertnanica  that
it  must  be  called  Nothing,  by  which  is  meant  that  it  is
nothing  of  all  that  created  things  can  conceive,  know,


The  Que  of  Mystic  isni  35

think  or  name'.  No  doubt  the  mystics  did  not  intend
by  this  rejection  of  all  positive  determinations  to  imply
that  there  was  no  God  or  that  God  was  nothinof :
rather,  as  Hoffding  puts  it  : — "  In  the  mystical  concept
of  God,  as  well  ;is  in  the  Buddhist  concept  of  Nirvana,
it  is  precisely  the  inexhaustible  positivity  which  bursts
through  every  conceptual  form  and  turns  every  deter-
mination into  an  impossibility."  It  was  in  this  sense
that  h'ichte  said  that  "every  so-called  concept  of  God
is  necessarily  that  of  an  idol'."  Thus  not  merely
graven  images  are  disallowed,  but  in  the  end  all
determinate  thoughts,  of  this  super-essential,  super-
rational,  super-personal,  nay,  super-absolute  unity^  that
is  neither  subject  nor  object  and  in  which  all  difference
begins  and  ends.

But  there  is  yet  a  possible  concept  of  the  One  to
be  noticed  which  experience  directly  suggests — that  of
the  world-soul,  the  eject  to  which  the  world  belongs
as  its  organism.  But  for  the  present  this  notion  only
interests  us  in  that  it  formed  a  sort  of  tei'tiuni  quid
or  mediating  principle  by  which  Plato  and  his  Neo-
platonic  followers  attempted  to  connect  the  permanent
and  intelligible  world  with  the  sensible  world  of  the
finite  many  that  ever  change  and  pass.  And  the
attempt  is  obviously  futile,  for  from  the  point  of  view
of  the  Absolute  there  is  no  sensible  world  with  which
to  connect  itself — were  such  connexion  in  itself  possible.

'  Cf.  art.  '  Mysticisn)  '  Ijy  I'rof.  I'ringlc-Pattison  in  F.ncy.  /hit.;
ManscI,  The  Gnostic  Heresies,  1874,  p.  146;  Hoffding,  riiilosophy  of
/ielif^ion,  19 10,  -5  21,  and  note  37.

' Werke,  v.  p.  267.

'  So  Nichfjlas  of  ( "usa. ( "f.  Caird,  livolution  0/  /\i-/ii;ii>n,  11.  i)|».  7^  f.


36  The  One  and  the  Many

The  world-soul  is  really  one  term  in  an  emanation  to
which  the  very  fulness  of  the  Absolute  somehow  gives
rise,  but  which  as  little  concerns  it,  as  the  chance
reflexion  of  its  beams  affects  the  effulgence  of  the  sun
itself  This  ingenious  analogy  of  emanation  suggested
by  the  solar  radiation,  though  common  in  ancient
thought,  is  most  fully  elaborated  by  Plotinus.  As  it
is  the  precise  converse  of  the  modern  doctrine  of
evolution,  this  process  might  be  conveniently  called
devolution  ;  for  as  that  is  a  progress  from  the  lower
to  the  hiorher  this  is  a  decline  from  the  higher  to  the
lower.  With  every  remove  there  is  not  only  less
perfection  but  seemingly  also  more  plurality,  more
diffusion.  The  vov%,  which  proceeds  immediately  from
the  One,  is  already  beset  with  the  duality  that  even
intuition  implies  ;  the  world-soul,  which  follows  next,
is  necessarily  pluralised  into  particular  souls  ;  each  of
these  in  turn  is  resolved  into  higher  and  lower  faculties
by  its  relation  to  the  body  which  it  shapes  and  informs,
while  this  body  again  is  infinitely  divisible.  Beyond
all  is  matter  as  mere  indeterminate  emptiness,  dark-
ness and  evil,  the  utter  contrary  in  all  respects  of  the
absolute  fulness,  light  and  perfection  of  the  One.  In
a  word  plurality  and  separation  with  their  broken  lights
are  the  marks  of  imperfection  and  unreality  :  our  very
birth,  i.e.  the  assumption  of  a  body,  is  in  part  a  sin,  in
part  a  punishment ;  and  the  only  remedy  for  this  evil
lies  in  a  mystic  reunion  with,  and  absorption  in,  the  One.
We  have  thus  passed  in  review  several  ideals  of  a
supreme  Unity  which  speculation,  regardless  of  expe-
rience, has  elaborated — an  Absolute  Object,  an  Absolute
Subject,  an  Absolute Self-consciousness,  and  various


TJie  Absolufc  as  Object  or  Subject 37

attempts  to  transcend  such  duality  as  consciousness
implies.  The  first  two  we  reject  not  as  being  on^
but  as  being  one-sided  :  since  subject  and  object  are
essentially  correlative,  neither  alone  can  be  absolute.
Still  even  these  ideals  point  the  moral  that  our
whole  review  suggests — Nulla  vestigia  retrorsuvi.
An  absolute  reached  In'  way  of  abstraction  is  the
lion's  den,  where  all  plurality  disappears.  In  what-
ever sense  you  say  absolute  in  that  sense  you  cannot
say  many.  If  there  were  an  absolute  substance  or  an
absolute  subject  there  could  not  be  many  substances
or  subjects,  unless  these  terms  were  equivocally  used  ;
as  substance  for  example  was  by  Descartes,  and  subject
by  Fichte.  And  if  absolute  means  perfect  and  com-
plete, why  should — nay,  how  can — what  is  in  itself
absolute  become  splintered  up  into  infinite  modes  that
are  neither  perfect  nor  complete  .'*  We  can  imagine
them  as  mutually  determining  each  other,  but  for  it
they  are  but  '  invulnerable  nothings '  with  which  it
has  no  concern.  This  is  the  difficulty  that  has  been
specially  emphasized  by  critics  of  Spinoza.  It  recurs
in  a  more  concrete  form,  but  then  as  illustrating  the
one-sidedness  of  an  absolute  object,  in  the  naive  pro-
cedure of  such  thinkers  as  Spencer  or  Haeckel  when
they  jump  from  a  homogeneous  plenum  or  uniform
all-pervading  ether  to  the  discrete  atoms  into  which  it
somehrnv  has  to  be,  and  yet  nohow  can  be,  resolved —
unless  some  directing  agency  or  prime  mover  be  forth-
coming from  without.  Similarly  the  Absolute  Ego  of
Fichte  can  on!)'  be  got  under  way  with  the  help  ol  an
unintelligible  Ansloss  (or  imj^act)  determining  il  to
I>osit  its  non-Iigo.


38  The  One  and  the  Many

We  come  then  to  the  ideal  of  an  absolute  ex-
perience as  the  unity,  it  might  seem,  of  Absolute
Subject  and  Absolute  Object,  an  Absolute  that  is  no
longer  one-sided  and  without  distinctions.  But  again
there  can  be  only  one  such  consciousness,  and  it  must
be  transparently  clear,  a  light,  so  to  say,  in  which  is  no
darkness  at  all.  In  our  experience  the  contemplation
of  what  we  sometimes  call  the  eternal  truths  of  reason
and  again  the  intuitive  certainty  of  our  consciousness
of  self  come  nearest  to  this  ideal.  We  find  accordingly
that  ancient  speculation  laid  more  stress  on  the  former,
as  in  Aristotle's  v6-r](Ti%  vor](jeoi%  ;  and  modern  on  the
latter,  as  in  Hegel's  sich  selbst  denkende  Idee:  though
both  aspects  are  always  present.  Outside  such  an
Absolute  there  can  be  nothing  at  all,  and  within  it
nothing  that  is  imperfect,  mutable  or  obscure.  The
more  clearly  we  realise  this  ideal  the  more  inevitably
three  conclusions  force  themselves  upon  us:  (i)  Here
there  is  nothing  wanting :  this  intelligible  world  is
perfect  and  complete  in  itself,  (2)  from  this  tran-
scendent standpoint  the  existence  of  the  finite  Many —
the  sensible  world — seems  impossible,  and  (3),  granting
its  existence,  the  connexion  between  the  two  worlds  is
inexplicable — inexplicable  at  least  apart  from  assump-
tions incompatible  with  the  character  of  such  an  ideal.
The  way  upward  to  this  by  abstraction  and  idealisation
is  comparatively  easy — though  such  methods  cannot
pretend  to  yield  knowledge  ;  but  the  way  back  has
in  fact  only  been  possible  by  means  of  myths  and
metaphors,  which  are  not  even  logically  consistent.
Not-being  or  the  non-existent  is  always  endowed  with
some  sort  of  potentiality  or  receptivity,  which


Absolute  Sclf-Coii scion sjiess  39

...the  One  Spirit's  plastic  stress

Sweeps  through

Torturing  the  unwilling  dross,  that  checks  its  flight,
To  its  own  likeness,  as  each  mass  may  bear.

We  talk  of  creation  out  of  nothinj^.  But  if  the
qualification  'out  of  nothing"'  has  any  meaning  at
all  it  implies  a  transeunt  activity  on  the  part  of  the
Creator  and  a  certain  lack  of  reality  on  the  part  of
the  creature — a  lack  of  reality  which  sinks  back  to
complete  unreality  when  the  creature  is  compared
with  the  Creator,  as  Meister  Eckhart,  for  example,
maintained.  But  on  the  other  hand  what  possible
meaning  can  we  assign  to  transeunt  activity  on  the
part  of  the  Absolute.-^  If  then  we  emphasize  the
notion  of  creation  simply  and  regard  the  creative
activity  as  purely  immanent,  then  as  with  Spinoza
causa  is  the  same  as  ratio  ;  what  is  said  to  be  created
is  the  intelligible  world,  where,  sub  specie  aeternitatis,
all  things  follow  from  the  'nature'  of  God  "in  the
same  way  as  from  the  nature  of  the  triangle  it  follows
from  eternity  and  for  eternity  that  its  three  interior
angles  are  equal  to  two  right  angles'."

I  have  referred  to  the  method  by  which  such  ideals
of  the  Absolute  are  reached  as  a  method  of  abstraction
and  as,  therefore,  necessarily  defective.  It  will  be
well,  it  possible,  to  make  this  clearer.  What  we  may
call  the  three  unities  of  experience,  the  unity  of  the
subject,  the  unity  of  the  object,  and  the  unity  of  both
in  self-consciousness,  are  hardly  to  be  questioned.  Now
the  objective  side  of  experience,  to  begin  with  that,  is
always  a  com[)le.\ or  difft^nnitiatcd whole  : llu; more

' Ethics^  I.  xvii.  note.


40  The  One  and  the  Many

primitive  the  experience  the  fewer,  the  simpler,  and
the  vaguer  the  differentiations  ;  but  an  objective
continuum  wholly  devoid  of  diversity  would  yield  no
experience.  Yet  such  a  homogeneous  whole  is  just
what  we  reach  by  abstracting  first  from  all  the  quali-
tative differences  of  particular  bodies,  and  then  from
their  particularity  or  discreteness  :  in  place  of  an
ordered  cosmos  there  then  remains  only  a  continuous
plenum,  as  in  the  Cartesian  concept  of  matter  or  the
modern  concept  of  a  primordial  ether.  Mistaking
abstraction  for  simplification,  we  call  that  absolute
which  is  really  only  above  all  relations  because  it  is
completely  indeterminate.  As  we  have  already  seen,
the  cosmos  or  concrete  whole  cannot  be  called  absolute,
if  we  regard  it  as  what  is  experienced,  that  is  as  ob-
jective; but  this  abstract  resolution  of  it  into  an  aireipov
escapes  such  one-sidedness,  only  because  this  cannot  be
objective.  Turning  to  the  ideal  of  an  Absolute  Subject,
we  find  that  this  again  is  reached  by  an  abstract  pro-
cedure, though  a  different  one.  Generalisation  up  to
an  ideal  limit  is  out  of  the  question  here  ;  instead  of
that  we  have  one  phase  of  the  empirical  subject
selected  and  made  absolute.  Ignoring  the  receptive
side  of  experience  altogether  we  try  to  conceive  a
pure  activity.  In  Fichte's  phraseology,  Gegenstand
implies  Widerstand,  object  implies  opposite  :  a  subject
then  for  whom  there  can  be  no  opposition  is  one  for
whom  there  can  be  no  object,  no  other.  It  again
escapes  the  charge  of  one-sidedness  only  because  such
an  Absolute,  though  called  by  Fichte  an  Ego,  is  no
subject  in  any  sense  that  we  can  understand,  as  Fichte
was careful to maintain. Finally, the ideal of  an


The  Absolufc  reac/icii  by  Abstract  ion 41

Absolute  experience  is  reached  by  abstraction,  whether
we  regard  its  contents  as  the  intelhgible  world  of
eternal  ideas  or  as  the  identity  of  subject  and  object  in
self-consciousness.  The  Platonic  system  of  archetypal
ideas  or  eternal  patterns  is  after  all  for  our  experience
not  independent  of  the  many  nor  \W\or  to  them,  but  is
simply  a  systeni  of  abstractions  resulting  from  such
comparisons,  generalisations,  and  analogies,  as  the
sensible  world  itself  sufjcjests  to  us.  A  consciousness
again  which  is  self-consciousness  and  nothing  more,
which  is  solely  and  completely  a  'self-revelation.'
whose  whole  content  is  self — self  explicated  in  self  and
through  self  and  for  self,  such  a  consciousness  is  from
the  point  of  view  of  experience  an  abstraction.  A
part  of  such  experience  as  we  can  understand  is  taken
for  the  whole  ;  for  we  are  never  conscious  of  self  save
as  we  are  conscious  of  not-self.  The  two  factors  are
analytically  distinct  but  not  actually  separable  :  so  far
then  self-consciousness  alone  seems  to  be  an  abstraction.
If  we  nevertheless  elect  to  reijard  this  ideal  as  the  sole
and  ultimate  reality  there  seems  no  place  left  for  finite
experients  and  the  sensible  world,  as  I  have  already
urged.  And  not  merely  so,  but  the  impulse  to  pass
beyond  multiplicity  to  unity,  to  which  we  have  so  far
yielded,  carries  us  on  to  a  final  simplicity  beyond  all
explication,  where  mysticism  hails  '  Naught  as  every-
thing and  everything  as  Naught'  If  on  the  other
hand,  keeping  U)  ex{jerience,  we  admit  the  abstract
character  of  this  ideal,  then  we  have  the  i)roblem  of
the unity ot the many still ow our hands.

liui what  s(jrt  of  unity  can we  reach if  we  refrain
fnjm  all  attempts  absolutely  to  transcend the Many  }


42  The  One  and  the  Many

A  mere  totality  or  aggregate  is  obviously  no  true  unity,
even  though  we  could  know — which  is,  in  fact,  im-
possible— that  it  was  an  absolutely  totality.  Some
community  or  reciprocity  there  must  be  :  the  question
is  how  little  will  suffice.  It  seems  clear  that  either
each  must  be  connected  with  all  in  at  least  one  way  or
that  all  must  be  so  connected  with  some  one.  There
must  be  either  a  universal  principle  directly  relating  all
or  a  supreme,  though  not  absolute,  individual,  to  whom
all  are  related.  The  latter  will  imply  the  former,  so  far
as  through  their  common  relation  to  the  Supreme  One
all  would  be  related — though  it  were  only  indirectly —
to  each  other.  But  the  converse  will  not  hold;  that  is
to  say,  the  direct  relation  of  all  to  each  other  will  not
necessarily  imply  a  Supreme  One.  Of  such  a  funda-
mental and  universal  relation  we  have  an  instance
according  to  the  atomic  theory  in  universal  gravitation.
But  of  course  in  a  realm  of  ends  the  universal  relation
can  only  be  analogous  to  this  in  the  one  aspect  of  being
universal :  the  two  cannot  be  identified — though  they
may  be  related.  Empirical  evidence  of  such  a  universal
relation  there  can  hardly  be :  we  are  left  then  to  assume
it  and  to  frame  some  more  or  less  hazardous  hypothesis
as  to  its  nature.  I  say  nothing  for  the  present  of  any
difficulty  besetting  the  idea  of  an  absolute  plurality  of
any  sort,  a  plurality  of  beings  only  relatively  dependent
and  therefore  relatively  independent — independent,  that
is,  so  far  as  their  bare  existence  is  concerned.  This,
on  our  present  supposition,  has  to  be  taken  as  a  fact.
The  idea  of  a  Supreme  One  cis,  primus  inter  pares  again
can  hardly  admit  of  empirical  verification  :  the  very
supposition  seems  to  involve  an  empirically  unattainable


The  vacilliifiou  of  Theology  43

limit.  If  we  nevertheless  make  believe  that  in  'pure
thoLU'ht "  this  limit  is  attained  and  ask  how  we  are  to
represent  the  relation  of  all  to  this  Supreme  One,  the
old  ideal  Absolute  again  looms  upon  us  and  threatens
to  absorb  the  Many  altowther.  We  may  recoil  from
this  and  say  :  There  might  have  been  an  Absolute,
provided  there  had  been  no  Many,  but  holding  to  the
reality  of  these  we  can  regard  God  as  supreme,  but  not
as  absolute  :  then  we  seem  to  save  the  Many,  but  we
have  only  a  '  finite  God,'  or  rather  the  idea  of  one.

Thus  we  seem  shut  up  to  what  looks  like  a  choice
of  evils.  Without  an  Absolute  One  it  seems  hopeless
to  attempt  to  account  for,  and  hazardous  to  attempt  to
unify,  the  Many  ;  and  with  such  an  Absolute  it  seems
as  hopeless  to  attempt  to  retain  what  independence
and  freedom  the  Many  2o^y^ifdiX pi'wia  facie  to  possess.
And  this  seemingly  inevitable  perplexity  shows  itself
throughout  the  history  of  religion  in  a  constant  alter-
nation between  first  claimino:  and  then  abdicatin^r  a
distinct  position  for  Man  over  against  God.  Think.
for  example,  of  the  counter  doctrines  of  Augustine  and
Pelagius  and  the  controversies  to  which  both  in  ancient
and  modern  times  they  gave  rise.  Or  again  take
the  vast  literature  of  religious  mysticism,  from  which
one  instance  may  suffice: — Rckhart  who  said:  Couldst
thou  annihilate  thyself  for  a  moment  thou  wouldst
possess  all  that  God  is  in  himself,  also  said,  "  I  am  as
necessary  to  God  as  God  is  necessary  to  me."  In  this
connexion  I  am  glad  of  an  opj)ortunity  of  quoting
Mr  I'radh-y,  fnjm  whose  main  position  I  ain  toned  to
dissent.  "Religion,"  h(;  says,  "  prefc-rs  to  put  forth
statements  which  it  feels  are  untenable,  and  to  correct


44  The  One  and  the  Many

them  at  once  by  counter-statements,  which  it  finds  are
no  better. It  is  then  driven  forwards  and  back  between

both,  Hke  a  dog  which  seeks  to  follow  two  masters

We  may  say  that  in  religion  God  tends  always  to  pass
beyond  himself.  He  is  necessarily  led  to  end  in  the
Absolute,  which  for  religion  is  not  God.  God,  whether
a  '  person '  or  not,  is,  on  the  one  hand,  a  finite  being
and  an  object  to  man.  On  the  other  hand,  the  con-
summation, sought  by  the  religious  consciousness,  is
the  perfect  unity  of  these  terms  [the  Absolute  and
God].  And,  if  so,  nothing  would  in  the  end  fall
outside  God.  But  to  take  God  as  the  ceaseless  oscil-
lation and  changing  movement  of  the  process,  is  out  of
the  question.  On  the  other  side  the  harmony  of  all
these  discords  demands... the  alteration  of  their  finite
character.  The  unity  implies  a  complete  suppression
of  the  relation,  as  such  ;  but,  with  that  suppression,
religion  and  the  good  have  altogether,  as  such,  dis-
appeared. If  you  identify  the  Absolute  with  God,  that
is  not  the  God  of  religion.  If  again  you  separate  them,
God  becomes  a  finite  factor  in  the  Whole.  And  the
effort  of  religion  is  to  put  an  end  to,  and  break  down,
this  relation — a  relation  which,  none  the  less,  it  essen-
tially presupposes.  Hence,  short  of  the  Absolute,  God
cannot  rest,  and,  having  reached  that  goal,  he  is  lost
and  religion  with  him\"

In  the  history  of  philosophy  again  we  find  the  same
perplexing  alternation  between  asserting  and  denying
a  position  for  the  Many  incompatible  with  the  absolute-
ness of  the  One  :  we  find  this  not  only  in  the  form  of
a  reaction  from  absolutism  to  pluralism  in  successive

' Appearance  and  Reality,  pp.  446  f.


Altenuitious  of  Speculation  45

thinkers  but  what  is  more  remarkable  we  tind  it — and
find  it  invariably — within  systems  of  philosophy  that
are  avowedly  philosophies  of  the  Absolute. And  yet
in  truth  it  is  not  remarkable,  for  it  could  not  really  be
otherwise. Ex  vi  tci'mini, there can be no reality
distinct  from  the  Absolute. But  if  A',  J' and  Z  assert
this  absolute Reality they must thereby distinguish
themselves  from it, and  even  distinguish themselves
the  more  the  more  distinctly  they  seek  to  realise  their
own  inclusion  within  it. To  deny  their  own  individual
reality  at  such  a  time is  out  of  the  question  further,
because  only  through this  have they any notion of
realit)-  at  all. But  at  other  times  they  easily  forget  it ;
as  the  naturalist, for  example, forgets the  subjective
implications  of  experience  when  engrossed  in  its  objects.
Nay, they even assume, once the summit of their
speculation is  attained, that  their  necessary  starting-
point,  the  distinct  reality  of  the Many,  is  transcended
and  annulled. But  the  feat  of  kicking"  down  the  ladder
by  which  you  have  climbed  is  logically  possible  only
when the  conclusion reached is  at  once  a  necessary
consequence  of  the  premises  and  also  in  itself  absurd.
No  doubt  there  is  always  the  semblance  of  a  purely
a  ^r/i7rz  procedure  in  most  philosophies  of  the  Absolute:
the  entire  construction  claims  to  be  the  work  o{  pure
thought, true independently of  all finite e.xperience.
But l^escartes'  Cogito  ergo  sum,  the  proposition  round
which,  as Hegel  said,  the  whole  of  modern  philosojjhy
revolves',  is  in  this  connexion  past  all  cjuestion. And
hitherto  all attempts, starting from the Absolute to
respect  the Many  as  this  proposition  demands,  have

'  Encyclopaedia,  %  64.


46  The  One  and  the  Many

proved  unavailing.  The  reality  of  the  Many  is  either
flatly  contradicted  as  by  the  Eleatics  ;  or  it  remains
inexplicable  as  with  Spinoza  or  Hegel.  Thus  Spinoza,
who  begins  with  an  absolutely  infinite,  that  is  inde-
terminate, Substance,  ends  with  a  conative  Many  mu-
tually determining  each  other.  Again  with  Hegel,  the
Absolute  seems  at  one  time  to  be  a  perfect  Self  with
no  hint  of  aught  beside  or  beyond  its  own  completed
self-consciousness,  and  at  another  not  to  be  a  self  at  all,
but  only  the  absolutely  spiritual, — art,  religion  and
philosophy — the  over-individual  ends,  as  they  are
sometimes  called,  which  become  realised  in  subjective
spirits :  not  self-conscious  Spirit  but  simply  the  im-
personal Spirit  in  all  spirits.

Thus,  as  it  has  been  said,  "both  philosophy  and
religion  bear  ample  testimony  to  the  almost  insuperable
difficulty  of  finding  room  in  the  universe  for  God  and
man.  When  speculation  busies  itself  with  the  relation
of  these  two,  each  in  turn  tends  to  swallow  up  the
other.  The  pendulum  of  human  thought  swings  con-
tinually between  the  two  extremes  of  Individualism  [or
Pluralism]  leading  to  Atheism,  and  Universalism  [or
Absolutism],  leading  to  Pantheism  or  Acosmism^"

This  reaction  is  most  pronounced  when,  as  has
continually  happened,  the  defects  of  an  absolutist
philosophy  have  given  rise  to  an  avowed  pluralism  or
even  naturalism.  Such  after  Hegel's  death  was  conspicu-
ously the  case  in  the  speculation  of  the  Hegelian  left,
as  Strauss  called  it.  So  Feuerbach  describes  his  seces-
sion from  the  Hegelian  school  by  saying  "God  was  my

^  Pringle-Pattison,  Hegelia?iism  and  Personality,  ist  edn,  p.  153
fi>i.


TJie  Start  from  Ptura/isin  47

first  thought,  reason  my  second,  man  my  third  and  last."
For him afterwards  however Man is the  beginning,
the  middle  and  the  end  of  religion  :  theology  is  thus
at  bottom  anthropology:  through  social  intercourse  man
attains  to  self-consciousness,  to  reason  and  morality,  and
the  divine  is  but  the  idealisation  of  the  best  and  highest.
Hegel's  positions  then  are  to  be inverted  : we  must
sav  not  that  the  Absolute  is  self-consciousness,  but  that
self-consciousness is the Absolute  ; not that God is
love  but  that  love  is  God,  and  so  forth. — The  rii2:orous
pluralism of Herbart again is to  be regarded as in
lartre  measure a  rebound  from  the  absolutism  of  his
teacher  Fichte. Still  more  markedly  was  the Monad-
ology  of  Herbart's  forerunner,  Leibniz,  a  recoil  from
the  pantheism  or  acosmism  of  Spinoza. Spinoza's  one
substance,  essentially  indeterminate — every  determina-
tion being  for  him  a  negation — is incompatible  with
even  the  imagination  of  finite  things  severally  striving
for self-conservation and mutually determining each
other  ;  incompatible  with  the  drama  of  man's  bondage
and  eventual  freedom,  for  example,  which  is  the  main
theme of  Spinoza's Ethics. Leibniz then takes his
notion of  conation in thorough earnest and  defines
"substance  as  an  individual  agent." "Were  it  not  for
the  monads,"  he  allowed, "  Spinoza  would  be  right."
The  mediaeval  controversies  about  universals  and  the
principle  ol individuation are  at bottom instances of
the  same  reaction,  and  finally  the  ancient  atomism  of
Leucippus  and Dem(jcritus  was  a  revolt against the
Eleatic  singularism.

()lni()usl)-  ihc  pcrciniial renewal  (jf  this  conflict  Is
a  sign that pluralism has e(|ually failed lo reach a


48  The  One  and  the  Many

satisfactory  solution  of  the  problem  of  the  One  and  the
Many.  We  must  allow,  as  Adamson  has  said,  that  no
philosophy  has  ever  managed  to  reconcile  these  two
notions  of  an  infinite  power  and  of  an  infinite  variety
of  limited  individualised  expressions  of  that  power\
But  at  all  events  as  regards  method  the  teaching  of
history  seems  clear :  the  solution  is  not  to  be  obtained
by  passing  over  the  Many  at  the  outset  trusting  to
deduce  them  afterwards  from  an  absolute  one  that  is
reached  a  priori.  This  method  has  proved  itself
illusory  :  the  seeming  attainment  of  the  One  has
meant  the  disappearance  of  the  Many.  Against
pluralism  it  can  only  be  urged  that  it  fails  or  has  so  far
failed  to  account  for  the  unity  that  it  in  fact  involves —
the  unity  of  individual  experience  as  enlarged  by  inter-
subjective  intercourse.  But  at  all  events  it  is,  I  trust,
clear  that  we  cannot  begin  by  ignoring  pluralism
altoofether.


't>


^ The  Development  of  Modern  Philosophy,  1903)  i-  P-  io7-


LFXTURE III.


PLURALISM.


The  most  striking  characteristic  of  the  nineteenth
century,  so  far  as  philosophical  speculation  is  concerned,
was,  as  we  have  already  noted,  the  predominance  of  what
we  may  call  Absolutism  or  Singularism  as  presented
by  such  different  thinkers  as  Fichte,  Schelling,  Hegel,
Schopenhauer,  and  others  less  distinguished. In  the
lull  which  followed  upon  the  common  collapse  of  these
various forms of Absolutism the rapid advance of
scientific  knowledge  brought Naturalism  or Physical
Realism  for  a  time  to  the  fore. But  the  insufficiency  of
this  physical  realism  to  bear  the  strain  put  upon  it  is
at  length  becoming  apparent ;  and  so  the  necessity  of
interpreting  nature in terms  of  mind  is  again  widely
recognised. But  the  recoil  from  Absolutism  still  per-
sists ; and accordingly the twentieth century opens
with  the  attemijt  to  work  out  the  idealistic  interpretation
not in the  old  way  as  essentially  a  devolution  of  the
One,  but  rather — as  far  as  possible — to  represent  it  as
an  evolution  of  the Man)-. In England,  in  America,
in France,  even in Ciermany — once  the  stronghold  of
Absolutism — systems  of  pluralism, more  or  less pro-
nounced, are  rife. It  is hardly  practicable  and  would
certainl)'  be  tedicnjs  to  examine  ihem  scparatel)'  .iiid  in
detail. We shall get a bdicr insight iiUo the new
movement  il  we  try  to  secure  distinct  ideas  of  its  main

w.  4


50  Phtraiisju

standpoint  and  its  salient  features,  even  though  in  so
doing  we  have  to  play  the  dangerous  part  of  eclectics
and  attempt  to  frame  a  composite  synopsis  of  the  toiU
ensemble,  a  sort  of  Galtonian  portrait  or  generic  image
of  the  group.

The  pluralistic  standpoint  in  the  main  is  that
historical  standpoint  which  we  have  already  contrasted
with  the  naturalistic.  But  the  ordinary  historian  is
content  to  recognise  Nature  as  indispensable,  so  far  at
least  as  it  is  the  scene  and  provides  the  properties  of
the  drama.  But  this  contrast  pluralism  claims  altogether
to  transcend.  To  the  distinction  of  person  and  thing,
of  nature  and  history,  it  allows  only  a  relative  value. —
Still  we  shall  best  realise  the  position  of  pluralism  by
first  attending  exclusively  to  the  interaction  of  living
agents  in  the  world  commonly  recognised  as  historical;
and  then,  as  far  as  we  can  and  as  well  as  we  can,
attempting  to  apply  the  concepts  we  derive  from  this
to  the  interpretation  of  the  world  commonly  regarded
as  physical,  the  phenomena  of  which  science  has
succeeded  in  abstractly  formulating  in  terms  of  matter
and  motion.  Of  these  concepts  perhaps  the  most
characteristic  is  that  of  behaviour  or  conduct.  Be-
haviour is  a  term  appropriate  only  to  what  is  individual
and  unique,  and  is  not  a  mere  instance  of  law  and
uniformity.  No  one  would  ordinarily  speak  of  the  be-
haviour of  falling  bodies  ;  for,  in  merely  gravitating,
bodies  display  no  special  character.  But  we  might
speak  of  a  ship  or  a  balloon  as  behaving  well  or  ill  :
such  things  have  a  certain  individuality  and  so  receive  a
proper  name.  /^^r^{?/?/r^  the  term  individuality  always
implies  behaviour. Indeed  whenever  it  is  worth  while


hidiviiiiiality  am/  Behaviour  51

to  give  a  proper  name  it  is  possible  also  to  assign
a  definite  character.  Thus  Goldsmith  talks  of  "the
lazy  Scheldt"  and  the  ''wandering  Po."  Now  pluralism
assumes  that  the  whole  world  is  made  up  of  individuals,
each  distinguished  by  its  characteristic  behaviour  ;  but
ot  course  it  does  not  find  its  real  individuals  in  the
rough  and  ready  way  of  popular  impersonation  :  it
would  not  regard  a  mountain  or  a  river  as  a  person.
Conduct  or  behaviour  implies  always  some  objective
or  external  situation  as  the  occasion  for  every  mani-
festation of  activity,  but  never  as  its  sole  and  complete
dctei'minant.  There  is  always  some  subjective  spon-
taneity or  initiative,  but  there  is  never  any  absolute  or
unconditional  activity.  Thus,  in  spite  of  the  ety-
mological identity  of  atom  and  individual,  pluralism
has  nothing  in  common  with  atomism  beyond  the  bare
fact  that  both  recognise  a  many  ;  for  the  atom  is
credited  with  no  spontaneity  and  is  completely  deter-
mined from  without.  Atom  and  individual  or  monad
are  then  contraries  and  cannot  be  identified  or  really
combined.  The  so-called  interaction  of  atoms  will  not
account  for  the  contingency  displayed  in  the  world  :
l)ut  what  we  know  as  the  conduct  or  behaviour  of
cognitive  and  conative  individuals  may,  it  is  contended,
explain  both  the  contingency  and  the  uniformity  that
we  find  there.  But,  before  we  proceed  to  consider  at
more  length  this  attempt  of  pluralistic  spiritualism  thus
to  interpret  the  world,  it  will  be  w(;ll  first  to  incjuire
what  we  are  to  understand  by  an  individual  or  one  of
the  man)-,  and  what  by  the  unit)'  that  even  their
plunilit)' implies.

Of  course  we  cannot  start  at  llic  beginning,  for  that

4—2


52  Pluralism

is  not  where  we  are. How  far  towards  a  hypothetical
beginning  the principle  of  continuity  will reasonably
carry  us  is  just  one  of  the  questions  we  have  to  decide.
But  we  must  start,  where  alone  reflexion  on  experience
can  arise,  at  the  level  of  self-consciousness. We  have
already  seen  that  singularistic  spiritualism  or  absolutism
really  commenced  its  speculative  flight  from  this  level,
and  pluralism  is  in  no  better  position. I  n  self-conscious-
ness we  attain  to  the  explicit  knowledge  of  that  duality
of  self  and  not-self,  of  subject  and  object,  without  which
experience  ceases  to  have  any  meaning  for  us. The
self  of  which  we  are  conscious,  then,  furnishes  us  with
our  first  paradigm  of  what  we  are  to  understand  by  the
individuals  of  our  plurality. It  is  assumed  that  there
exists  an  indefinite  variety  of  selves,  some  indefinitely
higher,  some  indefinitely  lower  than  ourselves. But
even  the  highest,  if  there  be  a  highest,  will,  it  is  assumed,
be  only  primtis  inter  pares,  one  among  the  many,  and
not  an  Absolute  reallv  includinq-  them  all. Even  the
lowest  also  will  possess whatever be  the  irreducible
fjiininiuni  essential  to  being  in  any  sense  a  subject  or
self  at  all.

Such  minimum  implies  behaviour  directed  towards
self-conservation  or  self-realisation.  An  individual  no
doubt  is  often  defined  as  something  that  cannot  be  divided
without  being  destroyed,  as  a  clock  for  instance.  But  such
things  are  not  true  individuals  or  selves:  a  clock  has  no
interest  in,  or  impulse  towards,  its  own  conservation. —
Self-conservation  alone  however,  strictly  taken  and  re-
garded as  everywhere  realised,  would  result  in  nothing
better  than  a  static  world,  in  which  there  would  be  no
new  events  and  no  history. Such  a  state  as  final  would


Self  ami  Self-consenuifion  53

correspond  to  the  complete  rest  and  quiescence  with
which,  according  to  Spencer's  law  of  equilibration,  the
drama  of  evolution  must  close. As  an  initial  state  it
would  correspond  to  Leibniz's  pre-established  harmony
contemplated  from  without,  if  that  were  possible:  there
would be no interaction between individual and in-
dividual. But  the  actual  world,  as  our  own  experience
teaches  us,  is  full  of  cross-purposes  ;  and  therefore  self-
conservation  in  general  calls  for  effort  and  perseverance.
—  But  though  self-conservation implies the  viininmm
to  be  striven  for,  self-development  or  realisation  is  still
the  aim  of  many,  and was  perhaps  at  the  beginning
the  aim  of  all. Any  advantage  gained,  though  it  be
merely  the  result  of  good  fortune,  will  not  usually  be
passively  surrendered  :  its  loss  would  be  a  painful  con-
traction. Thus  a  new  standard,  so  to  say,  of  the  self
to  be  conserved  would  be  reached. It  is  plain  then
that  when  we  talk  of  self-conservation  the  main  stress
is not to be laid  on the  bare  conservation of  some
metaphysically  simple  entity,  such  as  the  soul  of  the  old
rational  psychologists. \\'hat  is  meant  is  rather  the
maintenance  of  the  most  advantageous  position  attained
by  the  actual  .self  in  relation  to  the  world  as  a  whole.
This  implies  that  each  one  is  in  touch  with  all  the  rest
collectively  and  w  ith  some  more  specially. As  I  have
expressed it  elsewhere,  there  is  for  every  subject  one
totiim  objectivu7n,  which,  save  in  the  limiting  case,  which
would answer to an inconceivable beginning  of  ex-
j>erience,  will  be  more  or  less  difft^rentiated.

liy  way  ot  summar\'  it  may  suffice  to  say  that  the
well-known  Monadoloi^y  of  Leibniz  may  be  taken  as
the type, to which all modern attempts to  construct


54  Pluralism

a  pluralistic  philosophy  more  or  less  conform^  But  the
theology  on  which  Leibniz  from  the  outset  strove  to
found  his  Monadology,  is,  in  the  first  instance  at  all
events,  set  aside ;  and  in  particular  his  famous  doctrine
of  pre-established  harmony  is  rejected  altogether.  The
positions  retained  are  first,  that  every  monad  'perceives"^
every  other,  secondly,  that  every  monad  is  appetitive,
seeking  pleasurable  situations,  or  at  least  shunning
painful  ones.  In  other  words,  for  every  monad  the
totality  of  the  remaining  monads  constitutes  its  objective
world,  in  which  continuously  changing  situations  result
through  the  persistent  endeavours  of  each  to  conserve
or  improve  its  position.  Each,  so  far  as  in  it  lies,  is  to
be  conceived  as  'proving  all  things  and  holding  fast
that  which  is  good.'  Finally,  every  system  of
thoroughgoing  pluralism  accepts  the  Leibnizian  prin-
ciple of  continuity,  at  least  to  the  extent  of  maintaining
that  there  is  no  infinite  gap,  no  complete  diversity  be-
tween, one  monad  and  another,  a  principle  against
which  the  Leibnizian  theology  itself  offends.  We  may
now  proceed  to  consider  the  pluralistic  schemes  as
exhibited  in  the  world  we  ordinarily  call  '  historical.'
Let  us  imagine  a  great  multitude  of  human  beings,
varying  in  tastes  and  endowments  as  widely  as  human
beings  are  known  to  do,  and  let  us  suppose  this
multitude  suddenly  to  find  themselves,  as  Adam  and
Eve  did,  in  an  ample  Paradise  enriched  sufficiently
with  diverse  natural  resources  to  make  the  attainment
of a high civilisation possible. At the outset each

'  Cf.  his  Nouvemix  Essais,  iv.  §  21,  and  the  excellent  summary
in  Hoffding's  History  of  Philosophy.

^  In  the  Leibnizian  sense,  that  is  to  say.


The  Historical  ll'orhl  55

must  needs  fend  for  himself,  selecting  the  vocation  and
habitat  best  adapted  to  his  liking  and  capacity  which
chance  or  his  superior  competitors  left  open  to  him  ;
though  liable  to  be  afterwards  ousted  by  others  less
favoured  in  their  first  lot,  but  more  capable  of  turning
their  experience  to  good  account.  "On  all  hands
adventure  and  misadventure,"  so  at  the  outset  we  might
sum  up  the  whole  :  the  chapter  of  accidents  would
seem  to  be  the  first  chapter  of  this  history,  and  Fortune
with  her  rudder  or  wheel  the  only  power  to  be  clearly
discerned.  In  other  words,  to  a  reflective  spectator  at
this  stage  nothing  would  be  more  impressive  than  the
contrast  between  the  stability  of  their  natural  sur-
roundings on  the  one  hand  and  the  instability  of  this
striving  multitude  on  the  other.  But  gradually  this
contrast  would  become  less  striking.  The  fittest  would
tend  to  rise  in  the  struggle  and  partly  to  exploit  and
control,  partly  to  educate  the  rest.  Custom  and
imitation  would  more  and  more  determine  the  be-
haviour of  the  less  gifted  majority,  while  the  inventions
and  discoveries  of  the  gifted  few  would  tend  in  the  end
to  improve  the  condition  of  all.  Cooperation  and
division  of  l;il)f)ur  would  compass  results  impossible  to
individual  enterprise,  and  would  at  the  same  time  entail
a  more  intimate  dependence  of  each  one  on  his  fellows.
— The  ever  accumulating  traditions  and  products  of  the
past  would  afford  a  steadily  progressing  vantage  ground
f»f  wisdom  and  w(.'alth  for  each  succeeding  age  and  a
corresponding  security  against  th(.'  vicissitudes  of  earlii-r
times.  in  short,  in  j)lac(;  of  an  incoherent  iniiltitudc,
all  seemingly  acting  at  random,  we  should  ha\'e  a  social
.md economic organization, every member of which


56  Pluralism

had  his  appropriate  place  and  function,  while  the  ever
increasing  coincidence  of  private  ends  and  public  ends
would  tend  continually  to  enhance  the  unity  of  the  whole.
Turning  to  the  biological  world,  and  regarding  the
several  species  of  living  forms  as  so  many  plastic
individuals,  we  should  find  at  an  early  stage  a  similar
contrast  between  the  continuity  and  stability  of  the
physical  environment  and  the  mutual  isolation  and
ceaseless  variation  of  an  indefinite  multitude  of  more
or  less  elementary  organisms.  And  again  we  should
find  this  contrast  gradually  diminish  ^js,,  pari  passu  with
the  advance  of  certain  forms  of  life  to  a  higher  level  of
development,  what  are  known  as  bionomic  adaptations
came  more  and  more  into  play. — The  primary  forms
of  life  apparently  are  the  so-called  prototrophic  bacteria,
lowly  organisms  which  have  the  power  of  working  up
non-living  into  living  materials.  But  these  have  no
such  direct  relation  to,  or  concern  with,  other  living-
beings  as  all  the  higher  forms  of  life  have  and  have  to
an  increasing  extent  the  higher  in  the  scale  they  stand.
It  would  be  tedious  to  attempt  to  describe,  for  example,
the  wide  range  of  such  dependence  even  in  the  case  of
:?/«civilised  man  :  the  bare  enumeration  of  the  many
plants  and  animals  indispensable  to  man  in  the  present
state  of  civilisation  would  be  practically  impossible.
And  all  these  plants  and  animals,  it  must  be  remembered,
depend  in  turn  and  in  manifold  ways  on  others.
Half  'the  romance  of  natural  history'  lies  in  such
bionomic  facts.  Think  of  the  many  curious  adjust-
ments between  special  plants  and  special  insects  on
which  the  very  existence  of  both  depends,  the  plant
preparing  food  for  such  insects  as  are  fitted  to  pollinate


The  Biological  JJ\^yh'l  57

its  flowers.  Or  agrain  take  the  wonderful  instances  of
mimicrv  bv  which  animals  make  shift  to  evade  their
enemies  or  delude  their  prey ;  or  the  complicated
division  of  labour  prevailing  among  certain  colonies  of
ants  and  bees  ;  or,  finally,  those  intimate  partnerships
between  distinct  species  to  which  the  name  of  symbiosis
has  been  given,  where  In  numerous  cases  the  association
is  so  intimate  that  the  very  life  of  both  participants
depends  upon  it.  Readers  of  the  Origin  of  Species
will  recall  how  Darwin  illustrates  the  wide  range  of  this
correlation  of  organisms  from  the  connexion  of  cats
and  red  clover  through  the  intervention  first  of  mice  and
then  of  bees.  The  humble-bees  fertilise  the  clover  but
"the  number  of  humble-bees  in  any  district  depends  in
great  measure  on  the  number  of  field-mice,  which
destroy  their  combs  and  nests,"  but  again  ''the  number
ot  mice  is  largely  dependent,  as  every  one  knows,  on
the  number  of  cats":  and  thus  the  cats  by  keeping
down  the  mice  promote  the  increase  of  the  clover.
Similar  illustrations  might  be  multiplied  indefinitely.
Perhaps  the  most  impressive  of  all  is  the  great  length
of  what  are  called  '  nuiriti\e  chains';  under  which
head  we  may  include  the  reciprocity  that  is  maintained
between  plants  and  animals.  Plants  alone  are  able  to
assimilate  inorganic  matter  :  hence  in  a  physiological
.sen.se  it  is  true  that  '  all  flesh  is  grass,'  for  the  food  of
all  animals  either  consists  of  vegetables  or  is  ultimatcl)'
derived  from  them.  On  the  other  hand  plants  decom-
pose the  carbon  dio.xide  which  animals  e.xhale,  and  thus
restore  to  the  atmosphere  th(;  o.xygen  which  animals
need  to  breathe.  "  .Some  of  the  fresh-water  fishes  in
a  pond,"  one  naturalist  points  out,  "depend  upon  the


58  PlMralisni

supply  of  small  crustaceans  (copepods,  etc.),  and  these
again  [depend]  on  much  minuter  organisms  (infusorians,
diatoms,  etc.),  and  these  again,  to  some  extent,  on
the  bacteria  which  cause  the  putrefaction  of  the  dead
organic  matter."  Another  "has  shown  that  even  on  the
high  seas  bacteria  are  present,  playing  their  usual  part
of  'middlemen  between  death  and  life'  by  transforming
dead  organic  matter  into  inorganic  substances  which
can  be  used  again  by  plants^"  We  may  then  fairly
allow  that  there  is  a  close  parallel  between  the  develop-
ment apparent  in  the  economic  aspects  of  human
history  and  that  apparent  in  the  bionomic  aspects  of
natural  history.  As  in  the  former  so  in  the  latter
we  find  a  multitude  of  comparatively  isolated  and
independent  units  gradually  advancing,  by  the  survival
of  the  fittest  among  innumerable  random  variations,
towards  the  realisation  of  '  a  vast  and  complex  web
of  life,'  whose  myriad  fibres  are  all  intertwined,  though
every  one  is  unique.

If  now,  from  the  external  correlations  of  organisms
to  each  other,  we  pass  to  the  internal  correlations
within  each  organism,  or  from  bionomics  to  what  might
possibly  be  called  physionomics,  we  note  again  the
same  progress  from  relatively  independent  parts,  barely
conjoined  and  hardly  differentiated,  to  highly  specialised
organs  intimately  associated  together  in  a  single  living
whole.  '  Loose  colonies '  of  sinHe-celled  oro-anisms
are  supposed  to  bridge  the  gulf  between  separate  uni-
cellular, and  individual  multi-cellular,  organisms  ;  the
transition  beginning  with  diminished  competition  and  in-
creased co-operation  among  the  relatively  unspecialised
^  J.  Arthur  Thomson,  The  Scktice  of  Life,  p.  1 93.


Biouoiiiics  ciihi  F/iysiononiics  59

cells  of  each  colony'.  But  the  specialisation  of  function
and  consequent  individuality  to  be  found  at  first  is  very
slight.  The  common  hydra  may  be  halved  with  im-
punity so  that  each  segment  will  restore  its  missing
half,  but  we  cannot  in  this  fashion  make  two  bees  or
two  froijs  out  of  a  sincrlc  mature  one.  Or  aoain  the
hydra  may  be  turned  inside  out  and,  unless  forcibly
prevented  from  resuming  its  natural  shape,  will  even-
tually right  itself  and  once  more  become  normal.  Ob-
viouslv  no  such  liberties  could  be  taken  with  an  animal
in  which  more  definite  sense-organs,  limbs,  and  viscera
had  been  developed.  As  in  bionomics  then  so  in
physionomics:  every  advance  entails  greater  restriction
and  specialisation  of  function,  but  also  greater  perfection
— a  more  intimate  mutual  dependence  and  a  closer
consensus  of  members  in  a  more  complicated  whole.
Though  the  facts  of  bionomics  and  physionomics
are  most  readily  described  as  they  are  presented,  that
is  to  say  in  objective  terms,  they  are,  we  may  hold,  only
to  be  intelligibly  interpreted  like  the  facts  of  economics
and  social  interaction  ;  as  implying,  that  is  to  say,
percipient  and  conative  subjects  behaving  as  severally
or  jointly  intent  on  self-conservation  and  betterment.
It  is  easy  throughout  to  recognise  more  or  less  striking
evidence  o{  experiences  discriminated,  retained,  and
turned  to  account.  lUit  now  the  problem  has  to  be
faced  of  interpreting  the  inanimate  world  in  like  fashion.
There  we  can  discern,  prima  facie  at  all  events,  no
signs  of  active  striving  or  selective  preference  or  pro-
gressive organization  ; there  wv, liiid no unicpie indi-

'  Cf.  (iLcJdts  and  'I'homson, 7'//<'  Evolutiun  of  Sex,  pp.  57,  SS  fT.,
3'off.


6o  Pluralism

viduals,  no  competing  purposes  to  be  adjusted,  no
tentative  efforts  to  be  followed  at  length  by  success.
First  and  last,  everywhere  and  always,  there  seems  to
be  only  fixity  and  uniformity.  This  is  a  serious  crux
for  the  pluralist,  let  us  see  how  he  may  deal  with  it.

First  it  is  to  be  noted  that  in  the  historical  world
the  progress  and  development  of  some  societies,  species
and individuals halt at a certain point, so that a
stationary  state is  reached in  which custom, instinct
and habit are supreme. Among societies we find
savage  peoples  still  as  backward  as  the  primeval  men
of  the  stone  age,  and  we  find  others  as  advanced  as
the  Chinese,  who  nevertheless  have  remained  stationary
for  thousands  of  years. Again  some  existing  forms  of
life, — such  as  the  Nautilus  or  the  Lamp-shell — so-called
'  persistent  types,'  have  remained  practically  unaltered
almost  from  the  beginning  of the  geological record,
while  others — as  the  horse  or  the  dog,  for  example —
have  progressed  remarkably  within  a  period  that  is  by
comparison  recent. And  as  there  are  some  individuals
who  are  restless,  enterprising  and  inventive  to  the  end
of  their  days,  so  there  are  others  who  early  become
supine  and  contented,  the  slaves  of  custom  and  hide-
bound with  habits,  individuals  whose  chief  concern  is  to
avoid  disturbance  and  let  well  alone. The  simpler  their
standard  of  well-being  and  the  less  differentiated  their
environment  the  more  monotonous  their  behaviour  will
be  and  the  more  inert  they  will  appear.

Now  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  environment,  resolved
into  its  ultimate  constituents,  is  by  the  pluralist  assumed
to  be,  as  Leibniz  taught,  substantially  the  same,  for  all
percipients,  consisting,  in  fact,  of  the  percipients  them-


B  ion  on  lies  and  P/iysiononiics  6i

selves. But  the  degree  and  the  extent  to  which  clcar
and distinct perception is reached and retained, in
other  words  the  differentiation  of  the  environment  for  a
particular  monad,  will  be  proportionate  to  the  organi-
zation which  it  possesses  and  controls. It  is  thus  not
unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  gradation  found  within
the  known  world  of  life  extends  indefinitely  below  it.
If  then  certain  of  the  simplest  forms  of  life  that  we  can
detect  have  persisted  throughout  the  gradual  evolution
of  higher  and  higher  forms  ;  and  not  merely  so  but  if,
further,  the  existence  of  such  higher  forms  depends  on
that  ot  lower,  may  we  not  fairly  suppose  that  beyond
our ken there are still simpler and more primitive
forms  capable  of  existing  independently  of  the  lowest
that  we  know,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  essential,  and
therefore  prior, to  the  existence  of  these  ? Such  an
assumption  is  akin  to  the  bold  hypothesis  so  confidently
advanced  by Leibniz  in  a  well-known passage  of  his
Monadology. "  Each portion of matter," he says,
"  may  be  conceived  as  a  garden  full  of  plants  and  as
a  pond full of  fish. But  each  branch of  the  plant,
each member  of the  animal, each  drop  of  its  juices
is also some such garden or  pond. And, although
the earth  and the air separating the i)lants  of  the
garden  or  the  water  separating  the  fish  of  th(' pond,
be neither plant nor fish, nevertheless they also
contain plants and fish but [these] for the most
part tO(j minute l(j be perceptible by us'."

On  ih(;  important  point  just  mentioned,  Leibniz
however  does  not  insist.  Though  the  elements,  earth,
air  and  water  are  essential  U'>  \.\\v  plants  and  ih<-  |)laiits

'  Monadolo}^^  ^  67,  68.


62  Pluralism

to  the  animals,  the  converse  does  not  hold.  Apart  from
parasitic  and  symbiotic  forms,  low-grade  organisms  do
not  require  the  presence  of  more  developed  organisms
within  their  environment;  and  even  if  these  are  present,
they  do  not  bulk  as  differentiations  of  the  environment
for  them,  as  they  do  for  others  higher  in  the  scale.
But  at  every  stage  the  correlation  of  percipient  and
environment  will  still  be  found  ;  every  order  of  plants
or  fish  will  have  their  appropriate  garden  or  pond,
which  over  against  them  is  by  comparison  passive,
whilst  they  over  against  it  are  by  comparison  active.
It  is  this  activity,  this  more  or  less  spontaneous  be-
haviour, that  according  to  Leibniz  determines  the
character  of  every  monad.  From  the  physical  stand-
point it  seems  frequently  possible  to  isolate  special
forms  of  matter,  so  that  they  remain  chemically  un-
altered for  an  indefinite  time.  According  to  Leibniz's
view  what  is  done  is  only  on  a  par  with  what  the
biologist  might  do  by  isolating  a  number  of  Protista
in  a  globe  of  water.  Let  all  the  water  evaporate  and
the  life  of  its  inhabitants  is  suspended  and  perhaps  ex-
tinguished. That  some  analogous  change  would  not
befall  the  said  substances  if  all  the  rest  of  the  universe
should  disappear,  I  take  it  no  physicist  would  venture
to  say.  The  pampsychist,  holding  fast  to  the  principle
of  continuity,  maintains — I  again  repeat — that  at  all
events  there  are  no  things  wholly  inert,  devoid  of  all
internal  springs  of  action,  and  only  mechanically  related
to  each  other.  In  a  world  of  such  things  motion,  that
is  to  say  change,  would  be  impossible  save  through  the
intervention  of  a  transcendent  cause  or  prime  mover.
This difficulty, which the physicist allows, is, it is


/s  there  an  Iiimiiiiiafe  J  J 'arid?  63

contended,  only  to  be  escaped  by  regarding  matter  in
more  or  less  Leibnizian  fashion,  as  but  the  manifestation
of  the  interaction  of  perceptive  and  appetitive  monads
or  entelechies.  The  attractions  and  repulsions  of  which
the  physicist  speaks  only  metaphorically  are,  so  the
pampsychist  maintains,  to  be  taken  literally,  that  is  as
implying  impluses  initiated  and  determined  by  feeling.
Empedocles  speculating  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.  is  to  be
hailed  as 'the  Newton  of  organic  nature,' for  his  principles
of  love  and  hate,  Nature's  W^ahlvernjandtschaften,  or
'elective  affinities,'  have  made  the  whole  world  kin'.

Now,  if  we  are  prepared  to  admit  that  this  pam-
psychist or  monad istic  theory  is  hi  itself  at  least  per-
fectly conceivable  and  consistent,  of  a  piece  with  and
analogous  to  what  we  know  and  understand  best,  then
it  is  contended  in  the  next  place  that  the  facts  which
s^itxw  prima  facie  to  make  against  it  can  be  readily  and
reasonably  explained.  First  of  all  we  can  all  think  of
numberless  instances  in  which  what  is  sensibly  simple
and  homogeneous  is  really  extremely  complex  and
heterogeneous.  In  fact  we  may  fairly  say  that  there
is  perhaps  no  case  in  which — either  directly  by  closer
inspection  or  indirectly  by  inference — we  do  not  find
some  difference  between  objects  that  seem  to  be  (juali-

'  Haeckcl,  Die  ire/iriU/isel,  1900,  pp.  259,  454.  ( "f.  Rcnouvier,
Le  Personnalismi\  1903,  p.  500.  Also  ZoUncr,  Die  Natw  der  Kometen,
3"=  Aufl.  pp.  1 13  ff.  "All  the  work  performed  by  natural  being.s,"  says
Zollner,  "is  determined  by  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain,  and  that  too
in  such  a  manner  that  the  motions  within  a  closed  field  of  phenomena
are  related  as  they  would  be  if  they  were  carrying  out  the  unconscious
purpose  of  reducing  the  painful  feelings  to  a  minimum  "  (p.  1 19).—
A  view  adopted  by  biologists,  such  as  Niigeli,  and  probably  Keinke
and Driesch,  and by  jihilosophers  such  as Paulsen  and \\  iiiidt.


64  Pluralism

tatively  and  quantitatively  the  same.  There  seems  then
to  be  ample  warrant  a  posteriori  for  the  principle  ad-
vanced on  a  prio7d  grounds  by  Nicholas  of  Cusa  and
afterwards  endorsed  by  Leibniz.  "There  is  nothing  in
the  universe,"  said  the  former,  "that  does  not  enjoy  a
certain  singularity,  which  is  to  be  found  in  no  other
thing\"  In  his  correspondence  with  Samuel  Clarke
Leibniz  wrote  : — "There  are  no  two  indiscernible  in-
dividuals. A  clever  gentleman  of  my  acquaintance,
talking  with  me  in  the  presence  of  Madame  the
Electress  [of  Hanover],  thought  that  he  could  easily
find  two  leaves  entirely  alike.  The  Electress  challenged
him  to  do  so,  and  he  went  up  and  down  a  long  time
seeking  in  vain.  [Even]  two  drops  of  water  or  of  milk
looked  at  through  a  microscope  will  be  found  to  be
diverse.  This  is  an  argument  against  atoms,  which
not  less  than  a  vacuum  are  repugnant  to  the  principles
of  true  metaphysics"."

But  the  modern  pluralists  do  not  usually  follow  out
the  principle  of  continuity  as  rigorously  as  Leibniz  did.
They  hold  with  him  that  "there  are  never  two  beings
which  are  perfectly  alike  and  in  which  it  is  not  possible
to  find  an  internal  differenced"  But  they  do  not
usually  maintain  and  indeed  from  their  purely  em-
pirical standpoint  they  could  not  maintain  that  there  is
an  actual  infinity  of  monads.  In  particular  they  are  in
no  way  bound  to  assume  that  there  are  real  beings
corresponding  to  any  concepts  the  physicist  may  find

^  On  Nicolaus  Cusanus  as  a  precursor  of  Leibniz  see  Latta,  Leibtiiz,
The  Monadology,  etc.,  1898,  p.  222  n.  and  the  references  there  given.
^  "Quatrieme  Ecrit  a  Clarke,"  Opera,  Erdmann's  edition,  p.  755.
^  Monadology,  %  9.


The  Principle  of  Confijiiiify  65

it  convenient  to  frame  regarding  the  ultimate  consti-
tuents of  matter.  Otherwise  indeed,  should  the  theory
that  matter  is  but  a  modification  of  the  ether  beconie
established,  that,  it  might  be  argued,  would  put  an  end
to  pluralism  altogether,  ether  being  real  and  not  phe-
nomenal. Pluralism  in  fact,  as  we  have  already  seen,
has  no  status  at  all  save  as  a  form  of  idealism  or
spiritualism  :  for  it  matter  can  only  be  phenomenal,  it
cannot  be  real.  The  tendency  of  science  is  to  diminish
the  seeming  variety  of  the  world  and  ultimately  to
eliminate  it.  Qualities  in  the  end  are  to  be  resolved
into  diverse  arrangements  of  prime  atoms,  corpuscles,
or  electrons,  differing  in  nothing  but  their  positions
and  motions.  For  pluralism,  on  the  other  hand,
quality,  even  haecceity — ^to  use  an  old  scholastic  phrase
— is  vital.  If  there  are  real  beings  answering  to  the
physicist's  concept  of  ultimate  atoms  then  indeed,  if
personal  pluralism  is  to  stand  (I  use  the  word  'personal'
in  the  widest  possible  extent),  this  atomic  pluralism  can
only  be  the  outside  appearance  of  so  many  active
beings,  each  of  which  is  something  for  itself.  But  all
that  the  pluralist  does  is  to  appeal  broadly  to  the
principle  of  continuity  and  that,  said  Leibniz,  "destroys
atoms."  In  the  real  world  we  can  nowhere  find  that
exact  similarity  which  the  mathematician  can  readily
conceive  ;  and  the  contention  is  that  it  nowhere  exists.
Ai)pearances  suggest  it,  it  may  be.  Bui  that  leads  us
to  a  second  point.

There  are  statistical  facts  in  plenty  to  show  that,
where  large  numbers  are  concerned,  the  conduct  evt:n
of  human  beings  [)resents  aggregate  results  that  are
tolerably  constant,  in  spite  of  \\\v.  variety  of  the  motives

w.  5


66  Pluralism

determining  the  individual  agents  and  the  absence  of
any  concerted  action  among  them.  Now  many  of  the
constants  of  science  are  of  the  nature  of  statistical
averages,  and  involve — as  science  interprets  them —
numbers  enormously  in  excess  of  those  of  social
statistics,  while  at  the  same  time  the  individuals  con-
cerned must  be  indefinitely  simpler.  Starting  from
the  statistics  available  in  economics,  the  most  scientific
branch  of  sociology,  and  supposing  that  instead  of
trade  returns  from  a  score  or  two  of  countries  we  had
returns  from  one  or  two  thousand,  the  inhabitants  of
each  being  increased  a  myriad-fold  and  being  also
severally  vastly  more  the  creatures  of  habit  than  men
now  are,  we  can  imagine  such  statistics  would  approxi-
mate still  more  closely  to  those  of  the  physicist.  The
physicist,  like  the  statist,  is  always  dealing  with
aggregates,  but  unlike  the  statist  he  finds  the  con-
stituent individuals  to  be  beyond  his  ken.  The  statist
is  aware  that  individual  variations  underlie  his  aggre-
gates, but  they  do  not  interest  him  :  the  physicist  is
ignorant  of  those  underlying  his,  and  assumes  that
they  do  not  exists  Accordingly  he  rests  content  with
abstract  and  general  concepts  that  turn  out  in  the
end  to  be  simply  quantitative.  But  it  is  impossible
to  deduce  quality  from  quantity  or  exhaustively  to
present  concrete  experience  by  means  of  any  scheme
of  mathematical  co-ordinates.

Briefly  then  the  pluralist  at  this  juncture  insists
upon  three  points  : — (i)  We  know  that  the  appearance
of  uniformity and regularity is  compatible with the

^  On  the  features  common  to  Nature  and  History,  cf.  Les  Lois
de  V Imitation^  by  the  late  G.  Tarde,  3"^^  edn,  1900,  ch.  i.


Uuiforiuify  and  Statistics  67

spontaneity  of  living  agents  :  (2)  the  uniformity  and
order  which  the  physicist  ascertains  avowedly  pertain
to  matter  as  phenomenal,  i.e.  as  appearance — to  the
viateria  sccunda,  which  Leibniz  referred  to  confused  per-
ception: (3)  some  adequate  ground  for  this  appearance
there  must  be.  It  is  reasonable  to  assume,  the  pluralist
then  concludes,  that  this  ground  is  analogous  to  that
which  we  know  to  underlie  the  law  and  order  of  the
historical  world.  Regarding  this  last  point  we  ought
to  notice,  in  passing,  that  a  two-fold  interpretation  is
possible,  the  pluralist's  is  one  possibility,  the  theist
may  prefer  another.  The  mutual  relation  and  the
possible  conciliation  of  these  two  views  is  a  problem
that  still  lies  before  us.  Just  now  it  is  only  important
to  observe  that  'the  theistic  hypothesis'  affords /rm^
facie  a  more  satisfactory  explanation  of  Nature's  laws
— which,  Laplace  notwithstanding,  are  not  self-e.x-
planatory — than  pluralism  at  first  sight  seems  to  do.
For  we  should  expect  the  acts  of  a  Supreme  Being  to
show  a  more  exact  uniformity  than  the  conjoint  results
o{  the  actions  of  myriads  of  lowly  monads  severally
and  half  unconsciously  striving  after  mutual  adjust-
ment. We  here  come  u[)on  an  aspect  of  pluralism,
which — though  referred  to  in  the  foregoing  exposition
—  it  will  be  wi.-ll  to  consider  in  more  detail  and  apart.

Purposive  action,  it  is  commonly  held,  presupposes
an  established  order,  a  reign  of  law,  presupposes  in  fact
that  exact  uniformity  which  naturalism  formulates  in
mechanical  terms.  This  is  the  physical  basis  which  is
sup|josed  to  furnish  teleology  with  its  indispensable
TTou  fj-Toj.  lint  pluralism  att(!mpts  to  get  behind  all
this. .\()  doubt  a  man deliberating how to  comjiass

5-  2


68  Pluralism

some  definite  end,  on  which  he  has  decided,  may  think
out  a  chain  of  practical  syllogisms  in  the  way  long  ago
described  by  Aristotle  ;  beginning  with  the  last  term
in  the  causal  series  he  works  backwards  till  he  reaches
the  first,  some  act  that  is  which  he  is  in  a  position
immediately  to  perform \  But  the  practical  syllogism,
*  acting  on  principle '  as  we  say,  is  an  ideal  ;  we  do
not  always  act — above  all,  we  do  not  begin  acting— in
this  fashion.  The  earliest  activity  is  apparently  alto-
gether impulsive,  determined  not  by  desire  for  future
satisfaction  but  by  aversion  to  a  present  ill.  The  stimulus
of  pain,  as  a  veritable  goad,  leads  to  random  efforts
for  relief.  And  relief,  if  it  comes  at  all,  may  come  in
either  of  two  ways.  The  situation  may  itself  change
for  the  better,  or  at  length  a  fitting  attitude  or  move-
ment may  be  hit  upon.  In  the  former  case  the  result
might  be  attributed  to  pure  chance  :  if  the  situation
should  recur  the  sufferer  will  be  practically  as  ignorant
and  as  helpless  as  before.  But  in  reality  all  changes
in  the  environment  will  be  the  result  of  conative  im-
pulses somewhere  ;  and  from  such  of  these  as  succeed,
the  agents,  if  we  credit  them  with  any  retentiveness,
learn  something.  A  successful  adjustment  concurring
with  the  release  from  pain  will  be  specially  impressive.
In  this  way  the  evil  and  the  remedy  will  be  so  far
associated  that  on  each  repetition  of  the  former  the
many  tentative  movements  will  become  less,  and  the
one  effective  movement  more,  pronounced,  till  at  length
it  becomes  an  immediate,  habitual,  and  eventually  even
a  mechanical  response.  ij

But  this  gradual  development  of  purposive  activity

■*  Nicotnachean  Ethics,  iii.  iii.


Purposive  Activity  aiui  Orderliness 69

is  mere  psychological  detail,  upon  which  it  is  not
necessar\-  to  eniars^e  here".  True,  it  will  be  said,  but
all  such  development  presupposes  '  the  orderliness  of
things,'  and  pluralism,  we  understand,  undertakes  to
explain  how  this  orderliness  has  itself  been  developed.
Order  is  heaven's  first  law,  we  say,  but  pluralism  essays
to  get  back  of  all  this  and  to  start  from  chaos,  where
we  can  count  on  no  repetitions  and  therefore  on  no
progress.  This  is  unquestionably  a  formidable  ob-
jection, and  what  we  shall  have  in  the  next  lecture
to  consider  is  how  the  pluralists  may  attempt  to
meet  it.

'  Cf.  the  article,  'Psychology,'  Eticy.  Brit,  nth  edn.


LECTURE  IV.

THE  CONTINGENCY  IN  THE  WORLD.

We  left  Pluralism  charged  with  the  hopeless
attempt  of  bringing  order  out  of  chaos.  But  the
notion  of  chaos  is  after  all  altogether  a  myth  :  as
much  a  bugbear  as  a  chimaera.  "  No  one,"  says
Lotze,  "who  means  to  think  clearly  can  form  any
idea  of  the  existence  of  such  an  infinite  agglomeration
of  countless  possibilities....  [Such  an]  abyss  of  in-
definiteness  is  unthinkable,  and  any  attempt  to  set
distinctly  before  ourselves  the  origin  of  natural  forms
must  start  from  some  definite  primitive  state,  which —
because  it  was  this  and  no  other — from  the  very  first
excluded  from  actuality  much  in  itself  possible,  while
of  much  else  on  the  other  hand  it  contained  not
merely  the  bare  possibility  but  a  more  or  less  im-
mediate and  urgent  positive  ground  for  its  realisation  \"
It  is  precisely  such  a  definite  primitive  state  that
pluralism  postulates,  a  totality  of  unique  individuals
each  bent  on  self-preservation.  But  self  here,  we
must  remember,  implies,  not  as  in  atomistic  pluralism,
a  simple,  unchangeable  element  that  ex  hypothesi  must
be  conserved,  though  it  does  nothing  and  suffers
nothing. What  is  here  implied  is  a  true  self,  whose

'  Microcosnms,  Bk  iv.  Ch.  ii.,  Eng.  trans.  Vol.  i.  p.  432.


TJic  Bcgi/niini^  of  the  J I  'or/ci/  not  Chaos 7 1

feeling  and  action  vary  with,  though  they  are  not  ex-
clusively determined  by,  its  situation  relatively  to  the
rest.  Such  a  definite  situation  will,  as  Lotze  points  out,
then  and  there  exclude  certain  possibilities  and  lead
on  immediately  to  the  realisation  of  others.  The
mechanical  theory  too  must  postulate  a  primitive  col-
location of  atoms  which  its  laws  can  never  explain  ;
but,  these  atoms  being  unalterable,  the  laws  that  for-
mulate their  successive  changes  of  position  are  re-
fjarded  as  also  determinate  and  fixed.  The  individuals
of  spiritualistic  pluralism,  on  the  other  hand,  are  held
to  be  plastic  and  capable  of  development ;  and  the
new  relations  that  become  established  among  them
are  therefore  regarded  as  the  direct  consequences  of
such  development.  At  the  start  then  the  order  that
is  to  be  has  still  to  become  :  everything  is  inchoate,
but  nothing  chaotic,  unless  inexperience  and  innocence
are  the  same  as  anarchy  and  original  sin.

The  pluralists,  we  must  remember,  take  all  their
bearings  from  the  historical  standpoint  and  endeavour
to  work  backwards  from  the  facts  of  human  personality
and  social  intercourse.  Their  mode  of  thought  is
franklv,  though  not  crudely,  anthropomorphic  :  hence
such  titles  as  Personalism.  Personal  Idealism,
Humanism  and  the  like,  wliich  one  or  other  has
adopted.  \ow  in  this  personal  domain,  whether
individual  or  social,  we  find  orderliness  and  regularity
in  jjlent\-.  I'rom  this  orderliness  and  ntgularit)'  we
may  derive  premisses,  at  once  general  and  definite,
for  practical  syllogisms  :  it  affords  an  ample  basis  of
reliable  means  for  the  realisation  ol  the  most  \aried
ends,  and it mak('S  education and  further  experience


72  The  Contingeiicy  in  the  World

always  possible.  But  the  whole  of  such  development
is  the  result  of  the  conduct  and  behaviour,  severally
or  collectively,  of  the  persons  concerned  :  none  of  it
existed  previously  as  the  presupposition  of  such
conduct.  Other  forms  of  order  and  regularity — we
may  call  them  lower  forms — no  doubt  there  were,  but
not  these.  Of  such  lower  forms  we  may  say  that  they
were  indispensable  conditions  of  the  higher  forms  that
followed — indispensable  conditions  indeed,  but  not
sufficient.  The  future  is  grounded  on  the  past,  it  may
be,  but  we  cannot  in  history,  as  in  science,  infer  the
one  from  the  other  :  we  cannot  anticipate  the  super-
structure from  a  knowledge  of  the  foundations,  or
prophesy  whenever  we  can  remember.  Looking  back
then  on  the  career  of  an  individual  or  on  the  progress
of  a  community  we  may  distinguish,  at  any  given
point,  on  the  one  side  the  habits,  tastes  and  dexterities
already  acquired  or  the  customs,  institutions  and  polity
already  established,  and  on  the  other  the  new  and
often  unexpected  development  that  followed  upon  these.
We  may  express  the  relation  between  the  two  by
adopting — and  adapting — the  old  scholastic  distinction
of  iiatnra  naturata  and  natura  naturans.  What  is
done  forecloses  some  old  possibilities  and  opens  up
new  ones  :  Vulcan,  who  had  spent  his  youth  at  the
forge,  could  hardly  hope  to  charm  Olympus  with
Apollo's  lyre,  though  he  made  a  suit  of  armour  worthy
of  the  god  of  war :  the  Semites  worsted  in  their
struggles  with  Rome  could  no  longer  aspire  to  the
supremacy  of  the  world  ;  though,  scattered  everywhere
and  yet  united,  they  still  remain  its  masters  in  finance.
What  is  done,  natura  naturata — the  decisions  made,


Xatura  naturans  ami  Natura  naturata 73

the  habits  formed,  the  customs  fixed — constitutes  at
any  stage  the  routine,  the  general  trend  of  things,
within  which  future  possibihties  He.  What  is  still
to  do,  natura  naturans,  implies  further  spontaneity
and  growth  ;  new  decisions  to  be  taken,  fresh  experi-
ments to  be  made,  with  their  usual  sequel  of  trial  and
error  and  possible  eventual  success  ;  happy  thoughts
or  inspirations  occurring  to  the  individual  ;  and  the
rise  of  great  men  inaugurating  new  epochs  for  their
race  or  for  the  world.  Even  Bacon,  who  was  certainly
sufficiently  impressed  by  the  supremacy  of  law,  we
find  saying  :  Super  datum  corpus  novani  naturani,  sive
novas  naturas  generarc  et  superinducere,  opus  ct  intent io
est  humanae  potentiae\  How  little  this  generating  of
new  natures  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  inevitable  con-
sequence of  the  antecedent  routine  is  shown  by  the
myths  which  attributed  the  earliest  arts  to  the  inter-
vention of  gods  and  heroes,  Triptolemus,  Prometheus,
Athene,  Apollo.

If  now  we  were  to  contemplate  an  individual's
career  or  a  nation's  progress  at  a  later  stage  the  same
distinction  could  still  be  made,  only  that  the  line
dividing  the  lifeless  routine  from  the  '  increasing
purpose  '  would  be  drawn  at  a  new  point.  The  painful
efforts  and  strange  experiences  of  the  past  are  now  re-
placed by  such  masterly  facility  and  perfect  familiarity
as  can  serve  as  'stepping-stones  to  higher  things';
the  reforms  and  liberties,  so  hardly  achieved,  are  now

'  Novum  Orjj^anum,  Vol.  ii.  i.  Kitchin's  edn,  p.  132.  On  tliis
whole  topic  sec  the  brilliant  article,  'tireat  Men  and  their  lOnviron-
ment,'  by  that  thorough-going  pluralist,  W.  James,  'J7ie  U'i/l  to
bilicve,  pp. 216  {L


74  The  Contingency  in  the  World

unquestioned,  and  so  open  up  possibilities  of  '  nobler
modes  of  life,  with  sweeter  manners,  purer  laws.'  If,
on  the  other  hand,  we  contemplate  things  at  an  earlier
stage  than  that  with  which  we  began,  the  converse  will
hold.  What  we  then  found  consolidated  into  habit  or
custom,  as  so  much  fixed  routine,  would  still  be  fluent
and  so  to  say  adolescent ;  alternatives  then  finally
determined  would  still  be  pending ;  and  much  that
later  will  be  commonplace,  still  a  marvel  beyond  the
range  of  present  surmise.  Now  this  characteristic  of
the  historical  world  the  pluralist  boldly  generalises  to
the  utmost.  "  All  nature,"  to  repeat  a  summary  I  have
made  elsewhere,  "  is  regarded  as  plastic  and  evolving
like  mind  :  its  routine  and  uniformity  being  explained
on  the  analogy  of  habit  and  heredity  in  the  individual,
of  custom  and  tradition  in  society  ;  while  its  variety  is
attributed  to  spontaneity  in  some  form\"  "  The
one  intelligible  theory  of  the  universe,'"  a  prominent
pluralist  tells  us,  "is  that  of  objective  [i.e.,  I  take  it,
personal]  idealism,  that  matter  is  effete  mind,  inveterate
habits  becoming  physical  laws^."  Evidence  of  such
mechanization — that  is,  of  what  originally  was  spon-
taneous and  tentative  becoming  eventually  automatic
and  regular — is  forthcoming  up  to  the  very  verge
of  our  knowledge  of  whatever  can  be  regarded  as
individual  and  unique  at  all.  But  though  individuals
other  than  conceptual  ones  are  beyond  the  physicist's
ken,  evidence  has  long  been  accumulating  even  here

^  '  Mechanism  and  Morals.'  Adamson  Lecture,  Hibbert  Jourftaly
1905,  p.  92.

'  C.  S.  Peirce,  'The  Architectonic  of  Theories,' J/<?«/y/,  Vol.  i.
1890,  p.  170.


Causal  Efficiency  ami  Causa/  Couuexiou 75

to  strengthen  the  analogy  between  inorganic  and
organic  evokition regarded  en  d/oc\

It  will  be  helpful  at  this  point  to  recall  a  distinction
too  often  ignored  or  confused  in  current  expositions  of
causation— the  distinction  between  efficient  cause  and
occasional  cause.  The  former  leads  us  to  say  :  Every
event  has  a  cause,  an  efficient  cause,  the  latter  finds  its
meaning  in  the  generalisation  :  The  same  (occasional)
cause  is  followed  invariably  by  the  same  effect.  Here
in  fact  the  notion  of  cause  is  transformed  into  that
of  law,  for  it  is  only  on  the  ground  of  such  regular
recurrence  that  causal  connexion  is  affirmed.  Causal
efficiencv  on  the  other  hand  is  at  once  assured  for
us  on  a  single  occurrence,  if  that  be  our  own  act ;  and
though  the  occasion  recur  never  so  often,  the  act
need  never  be  repeated.  With  inanimate  objects  the
occasion  inevitably  determines  the  result :  this  is  the
meaning  of  law.  Hence,  as  Kant  in  substance  put
it,  life  is  the  death  of  all  natural  philosophy,  for  "life
means  the  capacity  to  act  or  change  according  to  an
internal  principle,"  means,  that  is  to  say,  the  presence
of  an  efficient  cause'.  Now  "chance,"  we  are  told,
"is  opposed  to  law  in  this  sense,  viz.  thai  what
happens  according  to  law  may  be  predicted  and
counted  on'"  :  in  the  same  sense  the  conduct  of  living
beings,  i.e.  historical  events,  are  opposed  to  law.
Thus  what  one  person  might  regard  as  due  to  chance
may  be  really  due  lo  the  act  of  another.

According  t<j  the  pluralistic  ll'c/fansc/ianiin<^  then
there  are  no  laws  antecedent  to  the  active  individuals

'  (Jf.  e.g.  .Sir  .N(^rnian  Lockycr's  Inori^anic  Evolutinn,  i^oo,  l!l<  v.
*  Cf.  Naiuralism  and  Aj^'nosdcism,  3rd  cdn,  Vol.  I.  |).  177.
'  Fleming, Vocabulary  oj  I'hilosophy.


76  The  Contingejicy  in  the  PVorld

who  compose  the  world,  no  laws  determining  them,
unless  we  call  their  own  nature  a  law ;  and  then
indeed  the  world  would  start  with  as  many  laws  as
there  are  individuals^  Such  a  view  of  course  involves
throughout  an  element  of  contingency  such  as  we
find  in  all  personal  affairs'-.  Some  pluralists,  very  ill-
advisedly  as  I  think,  have  identified  this  element
with  pure  chance  and  even  proposed  to  elevate  it  to
the  place  of  a  guiding  principle  under  the  title  of
'  tychism,' — rv^f]  Kv^epva  Trdvra.  But  every  act  of  a
conative  agent  is  determined  by — what  may,  in  a  wide
sense,  be  called — a  motive,  and  motivation  is  incom-
patible with  chance,  though  in  the  concrete  it  be  not
reducible  to  law.

Possibly  the  objection  will  still  be  pressed  that
if,  as  all  psychology  teaches,  the  recurrence  of  like
situations  is  essential  to  any  advance  in  experience,  it
is  difficult  to  see  how  without  a  previously  established
'reign  of  law'  experience  could  ever  begin.  In  point
of  fact,  even  as  things  are  now,  with  all  the  so-called
laws  of  nature  in  full  force,  unless  the  range  of  an
experient's  distinguishable  percepts  and  interests  were
restricted  there  could  be  no  possibility  of  its  advance
in  experience.  We  must  postulate  what  I  have  called
subjective  selection,  in  other  words  we  must  assume
that  many  of  the  changes  that  take  place  around  it  are
for  a  given  subject  severally  imperceptible  and  that
to  many  that  are  perceptible  it  is  entirely  indifferent.
Without  such  restriction  the  progress  of  science  itself
would  be  impossible.  Thus,  so  far  as  our  observations
and  means  of  measurement  are  concerned,  the  solar

^  Cf.  Lotze,  Metap/iysic,  §  32.
^  Cf.  Supplementary  Note  I.


Sitbjccfivc  Selection  77

system  is  an  isolated  system  :  actually  of  course  its
motions  are  affected  by  those  of  all  other  stellar
systems.  But  if  the  early  astronomers  had  had  to
take  these  into  account  the  complexity  would  have
been  beyond  human  powers  to  unravel.  As  it  is,  it
has  been  remarked  that  if  all  the  perturbations  of  the
planets  now  known  had  been  known  to  Kepler  he
could  never  have  discovered  the  form  of  their  orbits  :
as  it  was  the  problem  proved  one  of  colossal  pro-
portions and  occupied him  during  ten years.

But  from  the  pluralist  standpoint  the  term  imper-
ceptible is  not  accurate:  the  whole  universe  is  perceived
by  every  percipient.  But  such  perception  may  be  con-
fused, as  Leibniz  used  to  say,  or  undifferentiated  to
an  indefinite  extent.  The  presence  of  this  indefinite
background  of  confused  or  undifferentiated  objects,
though  it  is  not  attended  to  and  determines  no  special
response,  is  still  of  vital  importance  :  for  example,  we
do  not  feel  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  yet  its
absence  would  be  fatal.  The  development  of  ex-
perience however  depends  entirely  on  differentiated
presentations  and  these  in  turn  are  commensurate  to
the;  position  already  attained.  The  shoeblack  stationed
by  the  Royal  Exchange  will  welcome  a  muddy  day,
but  is  unperturbed  by  the  fluctuations  of  the  market  ;
the  amoeba,  confined  to  a  drop  of  stagnant  water,  has
only  to  do  with  the  tiny  fragments  that  fioat  within  it,
and  need  not  bewilder  itself  about  the  weather  forecast.
.So  too  the  atom,  if  it  be  real  al  all,  that  is,  anything
for  itself,  has  (^nly  to  mind  its  partners  in  ilu;  dance
and  avoid  collisions  :  as  far  as  it  is  concern(!d,  the
continuity  of  things  reduces  all  be-yond  its  inlmitesi-
mally narrow  field to  a permanent  background for  it


78  The  Contingency  in  the  World

devoid  of  change  :  mechanically  expressed,  all  its  action
is  so-called  contact  action.

To  resume  then,  the  purposive  act  or  deliberate
intention  of  one  agent  may  for  the  experience  of  a
second  be  a  mere  happening  or  accident.  It  may
befall  contrary  to  all  that  the  latter  regarded  as  possible
and  independently  of  all  his  aims  ;  but  it  still  remains
the  outcome  of  another's  purpose,  is  neither  causeless
nor  aimless.  Though  contingent  to  others  it  was  not
in  itself  a  case  either  of  chance  or  necessity^  But  as
bearing  on  the  objection  that  we  have  been  con-
sidering, there  are  two  or  three  characteristics  of  a
pluralistic  world,  a  world  partly  fixed  and  partly  fiuent,
partly  7taturata,  partly  naturajts,  which  it  may  be  well
to  emphasize  as  consequences  of  the  contingency  that
such  a  world  entails.

First,  since  for  pluralism  there  are  no  natural  laws
so  to  say  'in  force'  from  the  beginning,  but  on  the
contrary  all  natural  laws  are  evolved,  there  will  be  no
rigorous  and  mechanical  concatenation  of  things  such
as  naturalism  is  wont  to  assume  :  the  fixity,  so  far  as  it
is  real,  will  embody  the  result  of  experience  ;  so  far  as
it  is  apparent,  it  will  be  due,  as  we  have  seen,  to  the
statistical  constancy  of  large  numbers.  But,  again,
in  a  world  consisting  of  finite  individuals  no  sinele
individual  and  no  community  of  such  can  foresee  all
the  consequences  of  do  what  they  :  over  and  above
what  was  intended  much  will  result  that  was  not
intended.  While  chipping  his  flint  instruments  or
polishing  his  weapons  of  wood  the  savage,  it  is  sup-
posed, may  incidentally'  have  generated  the  sparks  or
heat  which  he  sooner  or  later  turned  to  account  for  the

^  Cf.  Lectt.  xni.  and  XIV^


1


'  Heferogoi/y  of  Em/s  '  79

production  of  hrc.  W  hen  certain  Phoenician  sailors
kindled  a  fire  on  the  seashore,  their  sole  purpose  was
to  cook  their  food,  but  among  the  dead  embers  they
presently  discovered  a  mass  of  molten  glass  produced
l)v  the  fusion  of  the  potashes  and  the  sand  ;  and  so  a
useful  art  arose.  When  primitive  men  scratched  rude
pictures  on  manimoth  tusks  they  did  not  foresee  the
passage  of  pictures  into  hieroglyphs  or  ideograms  and
of  these  into  phonograms  or  an  alphabet.  Again,  no
one  deliberately  e.xcogitated  such  institutions  as  human
language,  courts  of  justice  or  constitutional  govern-
ment. Each  step  in  the  progress  made  realised  some
unexpected  advantage  and  made  a  new  step  possible  ;
but  the  progress  as  a  whole  involved  no  such  practical
syllogism  as  the  old  theories  of  convention  and  contract
naively  assumed.  The  literal  meaning  of  such  words
as  '  discovery  '  and  '  invention  '  bears  unmistakeable
testimony  to  the  truth  of  this.  Such  '  heterogony  of
ends,'  as  W'undt  has  called  it',  the  objective  realisation
of  adaptations  that  were  never  subjectively  intended,
must  have  played  a  yet  more  conspicuous  part  in  the
earliest  phases  of  evolution.  As  the  result  of  what  are
aptly  called  blind  impulses,  whether  due  to  positive
pain  or  to  mere  restlessness,  the  successful  individual
or  race  graduall)-  raises  itself  in  the  scale  of  life,
shows  a  '  tendency  to  progression,'  function  perfecting
structure,  though  the  end  attained  may  never  be  fore-
seen. As  1  have  said  elsewhere  and  anticipating
W'undt: " 'rh(^  tendency  at  an)-  one  moment  is  simply

'  System  der  Philosophic,  1889,  .S.  337.  IJiit  the  whole  idea  is
clearly  formulated  by  Hegel  :  ef.  his  Phtlosophie  der  Ucsihiih/c,  1837,
S.  30.


8o  The  Contingency  in  the  IVorld

towards  more  life,  simply  growth  ;  but  this  process  of
self-preservation  imperceptibly  but  steadily  modifies
the  self  that  is  preserved.  The  creature  is  bent  only
on  filling  its  skin  ;  but  in  doing  this  as  pleasantly  as
may  be,  it  gets  a  better  skin  to  fill,  and  accordingly
seeks  to  fill  it  differently.  All  that  is  required  is  that
to  advance  to  a  higher  level  of  life  shall  on  the  whole
be  more  pleasurable  or  less  painful  than  to  remain
behind.  Now  this  condition  seems  provided,  without
any  need  for  a  clear  prevision  of  ends  or  any  feeling
after  improvement  or  perfection  as  such,  simply  by
the  waning  of  familiar  pleasures  and  by  the  zest  of
novelty^"

Since,  as  I  have  said,  the  pluralistic  view  of  the
world  necessarily  involves  an  element  of  contingency
in  its  very  idea  of  a  finite  Many  mutually  striving  for
the  best  modus  vivendi,  it  must  be  allowed  that  the
actual  presence — pj'inia  facie  at  least — of  such  con-
tingency in  the  world  of  our  experience  is  so  far  an
argument  for  the  pluralist's  position  :  absolutism  leaves
no  place  for  this  contingency.  Some  amplification  of
this  point  seems  then  to  be  relevant  and  in  order.  In
the  first  place  an  instructive  analogy  may  be  drawn
between  the  diversity  in  tools,  weapons,  and  processes,

^  E7icy.  Brit.  s.v.  'Psychology,'  1886,  nth  edn,  p.  585.  How-
ever the  Lamarckians  and  Darwinians  may  settle  their  differences,
it  is  agreed  on  all  hands  that  there  are  at  any  rate  no  really  fortuitous
variations  or  mutations.  The  pluralist,  of  course,  is  positive  that  the
ultimate  explanation  is  to  be  found  only  in  the  conative  impulses  of
sentient  individuals.  It  is  worth  noting  by  the  way  that  even
Weismann  at  length  so  far  agrees  with  this  as  to  admit  that  "  the
direction  of  the  variation  of  a  part  must  be  determined  by  its  utility,"
cf.  his  article,  'Germinal  Selection,'  Monist,  1896,  p.  267.


Instances  from  the I'seful  .Irts 8i

which  difierent  races  of  primitive  men  have  devised
for  the  same  purpose,  and  the  diversity  in  the  natural
adaptations,  instincts  or  contrivances  by  which  in
diHerent  animals  or  plants  the  same  functions  are
discharged.  Thus  among  men  centrifugal  torce  is
turned  to  account  by  some  races  who  make  slings,
while  others  avail  themselves  of  it  in  their  use  of  the
bolas  or  the  lasso.  Some  shoot  with  bows,  others
with  blow-guns,  while  yet  others  mainly  use  javelins,
throwinLT-sticks  or  boomeran<^s.  Canoes  are  made  in
various  parts  of  the  world  from  hollowed  tree-trunks,
from  twigs  and  bark,  from  skins  stretched  over  whale-
bone, from  a  wooden  framework  covered  with  matting
or  with  reeds,  and  in  yet  other  ways.  Exhilarating
drinks  are  obtained  in  some  cases  by  fermenting  fruits
— grapes,  apples,  dates — in  others  by  fermenting  grains,
such  as  wheat,  barley,  rice  ;  or  again  by  fermenting
honey  or  milk.  And  doubtless  in  the  great  majority
of  these  instances  the  discovery  or  invention  was  the
result  of  a  combination  of  happy  accident  and  happy
thought  rather  than  of  deliberate  design  and  fore-
thought. But  what  we  have  specially  to  observe  is
the  identity  of  the  need  and  the  diversity  of  the
materials  which  in  different  cases  are  turned  to  account
to  meet  it.  The  collocation  of  the  two  can  only  be
regarded  as  contingent.

And  the  like  holds  good  in  numberless  instances  in
the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms.  Thus  the  bird
owes  its  power  of  llight  to  those  enormously  developed
scales  with  fra\  (xl  edges,  which  we  call  feathers,  that
are  attached  t(j  its  hands  antl  fore-arm.  In  the  bat
this  aj)paratus is replaced by a stretched nn mbrane

w.  6


82  The  Contingency  in  the  World

extending  between  vastly  elongated  fingers  and  fring-
ing the  sides  of  its  body.  In  insects  again  the  so-
called  wings  are  only  physiologically  limbs  :  morpho-
logically they  are  but  flattened  folds  of  the  integument,
so  to  say  extemporized  wings.  In  the  courting  season
some  animals  attract  one  another  by  sounds  that  are
variously  produced  in  different  species — by  voice,  as
with  frogs  and  song-birds,  by  stridulation,  as  with
crickets  and  the  cicada,  or  by  tapping  on  foreign  sub-
stances, as  with  certain  wood-peckers  and  the  death-
watch  ;  some  attract  by  their  brilliant  coloration,  as  in
certain  apes  and  the  peacock,  or  by  phosphorescence,
as  with  the  glow-worm  ;  and  others  by  the  production
of  peculiar  odours,  as  with  the  musk-rat  and  deer.
Some  escape  their  enemies  by  the  celerity  of  their
movements,  others  by  death-like  stillness ;  some  by
conspicuous  coloration  and  a  nauseous  taste,  others  by
sombre  hues  resembling  their  inanimate  surroundings  ;
some  by  fetid  exhalations,  others  by  spines  or  a  hard
encasement.  Plants  in  some  cases  trust  to  the  wind
—as  we  aptly  say — to  disseminate  their  seeds,  which
are  provided  with  vanes  or  fluffy  plumes,  or  are  of
dust-like  minuteness  ;  the  seeds  of  others  attach  them-
selves by  hooks  or  grapnels  to  the  fur  of  passing
quadrupeds ;  while  those  of  others  are  violently  pro-
jected by  variously  contrived  springs.  Some  again
pass  through  animals  who  have  eaten  their  pulpy
envelopes,  while  others  encased  in  a  hard  shell  float
away  on  the  water\

To  suppose  that  all  this  variety  should  have  been
directly  created  for  variety's  sake, '  almost like toys

^  These  and  abundant  like  instances  will  be  found  more  fully
described  by  Darwin, Origin  of  Species,  Ch.  vi.  et  passim.


niusfnifiojis  from  Xatiirc  83

in  a  shop.'  to  use  Darwin's  phrase,  is  indeed,  as  he
urges,  an  '  incredible  view,'  as  incredible  as  the  view
would  be  that  the  similar  variety  we  find  in  human  con-
trivances was  itself  supernaturally  preordained  instead
ot  being  the  contingent  result  of  differently  situated
individuals  having  to  work  with  different  materials  to
arrive  at  the  same  end.  To  make  this  analogy
clear  it  may  suffice  to  consider  the  instance  just  now
mentioned,  that  of  tlight.  The  feathers  of  the  bird
are  homologous  to,  i.e.  genetically  connected  with,  the
lizard's  scales  :  the  subsequent  modification  of  those
attached  to  the  wings  and  tail  so  as  to  subserve  fiight
has  no  connexion  with  the  original  function  of  feathers
as  a  dermal  covering,  which  remains  their  sole  function
for  the  most  part.  It  is  just  to  the  coincidence  of
their  special  plasticity  with  the  new  conditions  of
nascent  bird  life  that  their  development  is  to  be
attributed.  Bats  are  scientifically  called  Ckeii'optera
or  hand-winged,  but  the  fore  limb  in  the  adjacent
order,  the  Insectivoi'a,  is  primarily  adapted  to  running
or  climbing,  and  again  is  modified  in  the  moles,  in
a  direction  the  precise  opposite  to  that  of  tlight,
\i/..  burrowing.  Hut  the  family  of  the  Insectivora
nearest  akin  to  the  bats,  consisting  of  the  single  genus,
(ialcopitkccus,  and  some  of  the  rodents,  the  order  next
adjacent,  "are  assisted  in  jumping  by  a  kind  of  para-
chute, which  consists  of  a  cutaneous  e.xpansion,  the
palaginni,  stretched  between  the  limbs  on  each  side'."
The  bat's  llight  is  but  a  development  of  this  habit.
To  .secure  this  result  the  one  inc.-ans  available  was  ilu;
ciongaticm (A the fingers of the hand as a Irame-

' Sedgwick,  .-/  Stiidcnfs  Text/'ook  of  Zoo/o^iiY,  \'(il.  n.  p.  ^>}-'.

6 2


84  The  Contingency  in  the  Worhi

work  for  the  greatly  extended  patagiwn  or  elastic
membrane,  the  original  function  of  the  hand  being
sacrificed  almost  entirely.  The  origin  of  the  insect's
wings  is,  I  understand,  still  something  of  a  problem.
Professor  J.  A.  Thomson  writes  about  them  : — "  It
seems  plausible  to  compare  them  to  the  tracheal  out-
growths seen  in  some  aquatic  larvae,  and  to  regard
them  as  primarily  respiratory,  and  secondarily  loco-
motor. One  may  venture  to  suggest  that  the  additional
respiratory  efficiency  derived  from  such  outgrowths
would  increase  the  total  activity  of  the  insect,  and
more  or  less  directly  lift  it  into  the  air'."  And  so,
mutatis  mutandis,  other  instances  of  biological  develop-
ment may  be  explained.

"It  certainly  is  true,"  as  Darwin  has  said,  "that  new
organs  appearing  as  if  created  for  some  special  pur-
pose, rarely  or  never  appear  in  any  being-."  Imagine
that  a  clock  had  been  the  first  machine  invented  by
men  and  that  all  other  machines  had  to  be  modelled
on  this  type.  As  it  is,  mechanisms  for  very  different
purposes  are  formed  on  this  type,  and  human  efforts,  if
necessarily  restricted  to  it,  would  doubtless  in  time
gradually  devise  many  more  by  means  of  modifications
analogous  to  those  which  Nature  displays  in  adapting
a  given  type  of  structure  to  very  various  conditions  of
life.  Or  again  if  we  imagine  that  instead  of  a  clock
some  other  machine,  say  a  loom,  had  been  that  from
which  the  start  was  made,  all  subsequent  machines
being  modelled  on  that.  Many  varieties  of  this  form
of  mechanism  too  already  exist,  and  it  is  not  too  much
to assume that if necessary it  could be indefinitely

^ Chambers's  Encyclopaedia,  Vol.  vi.  p.  167.
'  Origin  of  Species,  6th  edn,  p.  156.


f^ixlfv  of  Type  ami  I^jn'cfy  of  Coiidifioiis 85

varied.  Such  is  in  fact  the  picture  that  the  organic
world  presents  to  us.  As  Darwin  puts  it :  "  All
oro-anic  beines  have  been  formed  on  two  p^reat  laws
—  Unity  of  Type,  and  the  Conditions  of  Life.  By
unity  of  type  is  meant  that  fundamental  agreement
in  structure  which  we  see  in  organic  beings  of  the
same  class,  and  which  is  quite  independent  of  their
habits  of  life'."  Let  us  consider  for  a  moment  two
such  types — say  the  arthropod  and  the  vertebrate.
Widely  as  these  two  types  differ  we  find  some  species
of  each  adapted  to  every  condition  of  life  in  every
variety  of  climate  and  locality,  mountain  heights  or  sub-
terranean caves,  the  surface  of  the  earth  or  the  depths
of  the  sea.  We  find  creatures  of  each  type  flying,
swimming,  diving,  or  burrowing,  active  by  night  or
by  day,  some  sociable,  some  solitary,  some  preying
upon  specific  living  animals,  others  feeding  more  or
less  indiscriminately  on  the  corpses  of  the  dead ;
or  vegetable  feeders,  some  confined  to  specific  plants,
others  to  particular  parts  or  tissues,  and  so  on  ;  for  an
exhaustive  specification  of  the  conditions  ot  life  to
which  these  two  types  are  alike  adapted  is  impossible.
Even  when  we  take  one  of  the  leading  modifications
of  each  type — insects  and  birds,  for  example — the
range  of  conditions is  l)ut  slightly restricted.

A  collateral  consequence  of  this  adaptation  of  a
fixed  type  t(j  various  conditions  of  life  is  perhaps
worth  notice  in  jjassing.  I  refer  to  the  awkward  aiul
grotescjue,  even  the  ludicrous  and  hideous  forms  of
some  plants  and  animals.  The  graceful  shape  and
agile  movements  (jf  the  horse,  the  gazelle,  the  scjuincl,

' Op.  at.,  p. i(>0.


86  The  Contingency  in  the  World

for  instance,  have  been  universally  admired.  Com-
pared with  them  such  creatures  as  the  camel,  the
sloth  and  the  wart-hog  have  been  reckoned  among
Nature's  abortions.  But  among  less  familiar  animals
there  are  many  more  ungainly  or  ill-favoured  than
these,  as  such  scientific  names  as  Diabolus  ursinus,
Moloch  horridus,  Chimaera  monstrosa,  suggest.  These
seeming  anomalies  did  not  escape  the  notice  of  the
earlier  naturalists.  Buffon,  for  example,  after  the
manner  of  Leibniz,  imagines  Nature  setting  before
herself  all  possible  forms  and  selecting  first  of  all
the  most  beautiful  and  harmonious,  but  "  into  the
midst  of  this  magnificent  spectacle,"  he  tells  us,  "some
unfinished  {negligees)  products  and  some  less  happy
forms,  thrown  like  the  shadows  in  a  picture,  appear
to  be  the  remnants  of  those  ill-assorted  designs  and
those  disparate  compositions  which  she  has  only
allowed  to  remain  in  order  to  give  us  a  more  extended
idea  of  her  projects^"  Theologians  too  have  been
exercised  by  these  blemishes  which  seem  everywhere
to  obtrude  themselves,  marring  the  beauty  and  de-
tracting from  the  perfection  of  Nature.  After  an
enumeration  of  a  whole  string  of  these  '  veritably
hellish  shapes,'  as  they  have  been  called — toadstools,
thorn-apples,  scorpions,  rattlesnakes,  &c.  &c. — it  has
been  asked  : — "  Can  such  an  appalling,  Callotesque
fancy  be  attributed  to  God  :  can  he  be  held  capable
of  creating  the  hateful"  ? " The true  cause  of  such

^  Histoire  naturelle;  Des  Oiseaux,  t.  viii.  1781,  a  propos  of  the
Stilt  {Himantopus  candidus).

"^  Cf.  Rosenkranz,  '  Die  Verklarung  der  Natur,'  B.  Bauer's  Zeitsch.
f.  spekulative  Theologie,  11.  1837,  p.  262.


The  Grotesque  in  Xafiire  87

deformities  certain  theologians  have  preferred  to  hnd
in  man's  alienation  from  God  and  the  consequent
reaction  upon  nature,  of  which  he  was  the  crown  and
keystone,  that  his  fall  entailed.  Whatever  may  be
thought  of  their  explanation  of  the  fact  of  Nature's
aesthetic  defects,  the  recognition  of  the  fact  itself  In-
such thinkers is noteworthy

Hut  the  contingency  in  the  world  presents  itself  in
a  still  more  strikinof  liijht  when  we  follow  out  the  con-
sequences  of  the  pluralist  theory  of  the  world.  Accord-
ing to  that,  as  we  have  seen,  the  world  consists  solely
of  finite  individuals  primarily  dominated  by  private
ends  and  for  whom  self-preservation  is  the  first  law
of  life.  Each  species  develops  for  itself  and  never
directly  either  for  the  advantage  or  the  detriment  of
others  ;  though  such  incidental  consequences  to  one
species  may  arise  continually  from  the  development  of
another,  as  we  have  already  seen.  In  fact,  evolution
in  large  measure  consists  in  adaptations  to  meet  these
consequences,  so  as  to  avoid  or  counteract  as  tar  as
possible  those  that  are  harmful  and  as  far  as  possible
to  avail  of,  or  cooperate  with,  the  rest.  But  such
processes  in  the  main  and  for  long — so  long,  thai  is,
as  they  are  natural  processes — are  purely  egoistic,  not
altruistic.  Moreover  the  apostolic  saying,  God  is  no
respecter  of  persons,  turns  out  to  be  true  of  Xaturc  in
a  way  which  seems  entirely  to  disproxc  the  cartlinal
maxim  of  the  old  natural  theology  that  all  the  lower
creatures  exist  for  the  sake  of  man.  Man  is  un-
doul)tedly  '  the  |jara;.';on  of  anim.ils,'  the  highest  link
in  a  vast  chain,  but  il  is  a  chain  in  which  one  and  the
same  right  to  live  belongs  t(;  all. 1  recall  a  revolting


88  The  Contingency  in  the  PVorld

sight  that  I  saw  in  my  youth,  which  rudely  shocked
my  preconceived  notions  of  the  fitness  of  things.  That
man  should  slay  and  eat  creatures  lower  in  the  scale
than  himself,  that  the  song-thrush  should  feed  on  worms
and  snails  or  the  gorgeously  tinted  kingfisher  dart  into
the  thick  of  a  shoal  of  silly  minnows  to  secure  food
for  himself  and  his  brood — all  this  seemed  reasonable
enough  ;  for  here  the  lower  subserved  the  higher.  But
once  I  chanced  to  see  three  young  rabbits  playfully  gam-
bolling, heedless  of  a  cold  clammy  snake  who  stealthily
glided  forward,  and  struck  first  one  and  then  another
till  after  a  few  momentary  convulsions  all  lay  stretched
and  dead  ;  whereupon  the  sluggish  reptile,  without
the  faintest  show  of  emotion,  pleasurable  or  otherwise,
proceeded  slowly  to  suck  down  one  after  another  these
pets  of  my  childhood — then  indeed  I  felt  that  the  world
so  far  was  neither  well  nor  wisely  nor  beautifully
ordered.  Such  an  incident,  however  individually  im-
pressive, is,  of  course,  utterly  trivial  compared  with
the  terrible  ravages,  formerly  regarded  as  the  scourges
of  an  offended  deity,  which  we  now  know  are  wrought
by  the  lowest  forms  of  life  with  which  we  have  any
exact  acquaintance,  whereby  not  only  our  flocks  and
fields  are  continually  devastated  but  millions  of  our
fellow-men  are  painfully  swept  away.  It  is  not  however
the  physical  evil,  the  dysteleology  of  all  this  that  is
now  in  point,  but  simply  the  fact  that  there  is  no
necessary  connexion  between  worth  of  life  as  we
estimate  it  and  fitness  to  survive  in  the  evolutionist
sense.  In  the  physical  struggle  for  existence  worth
does  not  count :  distinguished  men  like  Raphael,
Howard,  Keats  and Hegel  succumbed  to  microscopic


The  Xafural  Right  to  live  89

bacilli,  and  it  is  conceivable  that  the  whole  human
race  might  thus  ignobly  disappear.  Such  anomalies
seem  even  a  prioi'i  to  be  an  obvious,  almost  an  in-
evitable outcome  of  pluralism,  and  though  perhaps  not
insuperable,  still  as  far  as  they  go,  they  are  an  argu-
ment in  favour  of  the  pluralist's  and  a  difficulty  for  the
theist's  position.

But  further  the  contingency  in  the  world  in  general
seems  to  involve  that  the  existence  of  mankind  at  all
is  itself  but  a  special  contingency.  In  the  case  of
other  living  kinds  few  persons  would  hesitate  to  admit
this.  According  to  the  psalmist  indeed  God  "  causeth
the  grass  to  grow  for  the  cattle... the  high  mountains
are  for  the  wild  goats,  the  rocks  are  a  refuge  for  the
conies."  But  what  is  at  all  events  immediately  evident
is  rather  the  pluralist  position,  that  these  creatures  are
adapted  to  their  conditions  of  life,  not  their  conditions
of  life  to  them.  The  existence  of  grass  does  not
depend  on  that  of  the  cattle  or  goats  or  conies  that
browse  upon  it',  but  contrariwise  these  creatures  are
variously  modified  to  derive  their  sustenance  from  the
grass,  according  as  it  is  found  on  plains,  on  crags  or
in  hollows.  SimilarK  it  is  argued  that  trees  came  into
existence  and  continue  to  exist  independently  of  the
l)irds  that  there  make  their  nests  or  of  the  various
other  creatures  that  live  among  their  branches.  So
had  there  been  no  forests  there  could  ha\c;  bci-ii  no
apes,  but  the  existence  of  forests  is  due  primarily  to
the  conditions  of  vegetable  life  and  not  to  the  nccnls
of  animals.  Assuming  man's  simian  ancestry—  and
assuredly,  as  Daruiii  has  said,  "if  man had not l><-<ii

'  cr.  Lc(  I.  III.  |).  02.


90  The  Contingency  in  the  JVorld

his  own  classifier,  he  would  never  have  thought  of
founding  a  separate  order  for  his  own  reception " —
then  the  mode  of  life  of  those  climbing,  chattering,
inquisitive  denizens  of  the  woods  gradually  led  up  to
his  wonderful  hand  and  erect  posture,  his  power  of
speech  and  capacity  for  knowledge.  First  the  presence
of  trees  made  the  Quadi-iunana  or  four-handed  primates
possible,  and  then  the  advance  of  the  higher  forms
among  these  beyond  the  confines  of  the  forest  ushered
in  the  two-handed  primates  or  Bimana  with  their
bipedal  mode  of  progression.  Some  fragments  of  one
of  the  latest  of  the  '  missing  links '  in  this  chain  were
said  to  have  been  discovered  about  ten  years  ago
among  some  volcanic  ash  in  the  island  of  Java,  the  so-
called  Pithecanthropus  erectus,  and  Professor  Haeckel
had  previously  thought  it  becoming  to  entertain  his
scientific  readers  with  a  fanciful  picture  of  the  family
group  under  the  title  Pithecanthropus  alalus.

No  doubt  it  is  the  psychological  gulf  rather  than
any  biological  gap  between  the  speechless  man-apes
and  Homo  sapiens  that  is  most  impressive  :  it  is  not
the  physical  difference  but  the  mental  difference  that
is  so  profound.  This  glaring  psychological  discon-
tinuity between  man  and  brute,  as  we  know  them,  has
led  thinkers  of  every  age  and  school  to  regard  the
origin  of  mankind  and  even  of  every  individual  man
as  something  more  or  less  supernatural,  not  wholly
explicable  by  the  ordinary  processes  that  sufiice  to
explain  the  nature  and  development  of  the  lower
animals.  In  the  Mosaic  account  of  creation,  "God
said,  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  like-
ness " : here this difference is distinctly recognised.


The  gulf  bcficecN  Man  aiid  Bnite 91

It  was  this  difference  again  that  led  Aristotle  to  regard
the  rational  principle  common  to  all  men  as  not  con-
joined like  sense  and  phantasy  with  bodily  organs,  not
naturally  generated  like  these,  but  as  wholly  separable
from  the  body  and  divinely  infused  from  without  after
the  commencement  of  the  bodily  life.  It  was  this
difference  that  checked  Descartes  too  from  applying  to
man  his  famous  automaton  theory,  which  seemed  to
him  adequate  to  explain  the  behaviour  of  brutes  :  in
man  alone  he  was  constrained  to  allow  that  a  soul
is  united  with  the  animal  machine.  Even  Leibniz,
regardless  of  his  cardinal  principle  of  continuity,  was
driven  to  admit  a  difference  in  kind  between  the  souls
of  animals  and  the  spirits  of  men,  a  difference  so  great
that  he  compares  the  relation  of  God  to  the  animals
with  that  of  an  inventor  to  his  machine,  but  God's
relation  to  men  he  compares  to  that  of  a  prince  to  his
subjects  or  a  father  to  his  children.  At  the  moment
of  birth  he  supposed  that  God  gave  reason  to  each
soul  "by  a  special  act  or  by  a  kind  of  transcreation',"
Finally — to  take  one  more  example  specially  inter-
esting in  connexion  with  our  present  topic — we  have
Mr  Wallace,  whose  name  is  so  honourably  associated
with  Darwin's,  firmly  maintaining  that  the  theory  of
natural  selection,  which  they  independently  promul-
gated, is  insufficient  to  account  for  the  development  of
man.  As  the  existence  of  the  poodle  or  the  pouter
pigeon  is  due  to  man's  interference  with  the  working
of  natural  selection  so,  Mr  Wallace  assumes,  the
existence  of  man is  to  be  attributed  to  a  similar  inter-

' Thhdicee,  5^  91.


92  The  Contingency  in  the  IVorld

ference  of  some  superior  or  supreme  intelligence.  In
short,  as  one  of  his  ablest  critics  concisely  puts  it,
Mr  Wallace's  view  amounts  to  saying  that  "our  brains
are  made  by  God  arid  our  lungs  by  natural  selection  "
and  that,  in  point  of  fact,  "  man  is  God's  domestic
animaP."  Still  this  is  something  of  a  parody,  and  it
cannot  be  denied  that  Mr  Wallace's  hypothesis  is  a
perfectly  legitimate  one. But  is  it  necessary  }

In  common  with  the  other  supernatural  explanations
of  man  as  rational  animal,  that  of  Mr  Wallace  recognises
the  presence  of  the  two  factors  which  rationality  and
animality  imply ;  but  all  alike  entirely  refrain  from
inquiring  whether  sociology  may  not  account  for  the
one  at  least  as  completely  as  biology  accounts  for  the
other.  Reason  is  not  correlated  to  an  organ  in  the
way  that  sight  and  locomotion  are  :  so  far  Aristotle
was  right;  it  comes  from  without  and  is  not  generated.
Had  the  most  transcendent  genius  been  left  to  grow
up  wild  in  the  woods  he  would  certainly  never  have
attained  to  reason.  On  the  other  hand  no  biologist
would  pretend  to  find  in  difference  of  organization  the
equivalent  of  the  vast  interval  between  the  genius  and
the  savage.  The  difference  then  between  Homo
alalus  and  Homo  sapiens  is  not  a  biological  difference  :
in  short  for  biology  there  is  no  such  species  as  Homo
sapiens.  This  is  now  generally  allowed.  But  then  so
far  there  is  no  case  against  the  contingency  of  man's
origin  biologically  considered  :  not  his  lungs  only  but
his  brain  also  or  rather  his  entire  frame  may  be  re-
garded as  equally  the  outcome  of  a  pluralistic  evolution.

^  Cf.  Wallace,  Natural  Selectiofi,  1891,  p.  205  n.


Civitiugeticy  ami  Iiuiividnah  93

Let  us  now  consider  the  sociological  side.  Cut  off
from  society  entirely  the  individual,  we  have  seen,
never  attains  to  sapience  at  all;  also  the  more  advanced
the  social  medium  in  which  he  lives  the  more  advanced
on  the  average  his  intelligence  and  humanity.  Society
of  course  presupposes  language  as  the  instrument  of
communicating  and  accumulating  knowledge  :  without
it  a  tribe  of  men  would  be  no  better  than  a  pack  of
wolves  or  a  herd  of  deer.  But  there  are  few  nowadays
who  imagine  that  speech  was  directly  imparted  to  our
first  parents  by  some  supernatural  instructor  just  as
it  was  afterwards  taught  by  them  to  their  children.
Though  we  have  no  precise  knowledge  concerning
its  original  acquisition  we  know  enough  to  be  satisfied
that  it  developed  gradually  out  of  cries  and  gestures.
For  curiosity,  imitativeness  and  excitability  even  the
existing  primates  exceed  all  other  animals  except
man.  As  regards  the  sociological  side  of  man's
origin  then,  the  advance  from  animality  to  rational
personality  through  inter-subjective  intercourse,  there
is,  it  must  be  confessed,  prijna  facie,  neither  any  definite
evidence  nor  any  absolute  need  for  assuming  super-
natural interference.  The  progress  of  knowledge  and
cooperation  shows,  so  long  as  we  can  trace  it,  the  same
contingency,  the  same  '  heterogony  of  ends '  that
characterize  biological  development.

Hut  if  the  existence  of  particular  species,  mankind
included,  can  be  regarded  as  pri?na  facie  contingent,
still  more  obviously  will  contingency  pertain  to  ihc
existence  of  particular  individuals,  the  great  men  who
have  often  seemed  to  direct  the  course  of  luiinaii
history  also  included. There  is  no need lor  detailed


94  The  Contingency  in  the  IVorld

illustration  here,  but  it  is  worth  notice  that  this  con-
tingency is  threefold;  in  respect,  viz.  of  the  individual's
parentage,  his  nativity,  and  his  survival  to  maturity.
Those  who  breed  and  rear  our  domestic  plants  and
animals  take  special  pains  to  direct  and  control  these
circumstances,  replacing  nature's  contingency  by  ideals
of  their  own  ;  and  daring  innovators  like  Plato  and  the
late  Sir  Francis  Galton  have  even  proposed  to  apply
the  same  '  eugenic '  methods  to  the  human  race.  Of
"  Eugenics,"  Galton  recently  said  that  it  "  dealt  with
what  was  more  valuable  than  money  or  lands,  namely,
with  natural  inheritance  of  high  character,  capable
brains,  fine  physique  and  vigour...  It  aimed  at  the
evolution  and  preservation  of  high  races  and  it  well
deserved  to  be  strictly  enforced \"  Compared  with
those  practices  and  this  possibility  it  would,  1  believe,
be  hard  to  think  of  anything  that  sets  the  seeming
contingency  in  the  world  in  a  more  striking  light.
But  history  suggests  endless  similar  reflexions,  all  trite
enough  to  be  sure  yet  none  the  less  true.  Had  Letitia
Ramolino  not  been  so  beautiful,  some  one  has  said,
there  would  have  been  no  Napoleon  Bonaparte.  The
infant  Isaac  Newton,  puny  and  prematurely  born,  was
not  expected  to  live  many  hours  ;  how  many  potential
geniuses,  it  may  be  asked,  succumbed  to  the  untimely
death  that  he  barely  escaped  ?

But  as  regards  the  physical  world  at  all  events  it
was  long  supposed  that  a  pre-established  harmony,  a
complete  unitary  system  could  be  safely  assumed.
Long  after  the  Ptolemaic  astronomy — with  its  primum
mobile,  its  crystalline  spheres,  its  firmament  of  stars,

^  Nature,  Vol.  Lxxi.  p.  401.


Astrofwiny  and  Pliysics  95

the  several  planets  with  the  sun  and  moon  all  revolving
in  concentric  circles  round  the  earth — had  given  place
to  that  of  Copernicus,  it  was  still  believed  that  there
was  somewhere  a  great  central  sun  round  which  the
entire  stellar  universe  revolved.  But  this  notion  too  has
been  exploded.  "  So  far  as  we  can  judge  at  present,"
writes  Professor  Young,  "it  is  most  likely  that  the
stars  are  moving,  not  in  regular  closed  orbits  around
any  centre  whatever,  but  rather  as  bees  do  in  a  swarm,
each  for  itself,  under  the  action  of  the  predominant
attraction  of  its  nearest  neighbours.  The  solar  system
is  an  absolute  monarchy  with  the  sun  supreme.  The
great  stellar  system  appears  to  be  a  republic,  without
any  such  central,  unic^ue,  and  dominant  authority.
Here  perturbation  prevails  over  regularity,  and  'in-
dividualism' is  the  method  of  the  greater  system  of
stars,  as  solar  despotism  is  that  of  the  smaller  system
of  planets'."

Turning  from  stars  to  atoms  we  find  a  similar  change
of  view.  The  five  regular  solids  of  Plato's  cosmogony,
the  hard,  massy  corpuscles  of  Lucretius  and  Newton,
the  'manufactured  articles,'  severally  identical,  ingener-
able,  and  immutable,  of  Herschel  and  Maxwell,  are  all
disappearing  to  make  room  for  a  theory  of  chemical
evolution,  which  recognises  degrees  of  simplicity  and
stability  but  finds  no  forms  absolutely  elementary  or
absolutely  permanent.  The  results  of  spectroscopic
investigations  conjoined  with  the  recently  discovered
phenomena  of  radio-activity  are,  as  Sir  Norman  Lockyer
says, "on all-fours with the geological record. ..We

'  (J.  A.  Young,  A  Textbook  of  General  Astronomy,  1893,  pp.  .}6i,
5 '4-


96  The  Contingency  in  the  IVorld

note  the  same  changes  of  form,  sudden  breaks  in
forms,  disappearances  of  old,  accompanied  by  appear-
ances of  new  forms ;  and  with  these  we  have  to  associate
...a  growth  of  complexity... that  is  to  say,  the  existence
of  our  chemical  elements  as  we  know  them  does  not
depend  upon  their  having  been  separately  manufactured
...they  are  the  result  of  the  working  of  a  general  law,
as  in  the  case  of  plants  and  animals^"

^  Inorganic  Evolution,  1900,  pp.  164,  166.


LECTURE V.

EVOLUTION AS EPIGENESIS AND EQUILIBRATION.

In  Spite  of  the  contingency  which  pluraHsm  leads
us  to  expect,  and  which,  in  fact,  we  have  found  every-
where to  characterize  the  world,  there  is  at  any  rate
one  principle  that  from  the  pluralistic  standpoint  may
be  regarded  as  a  pi'iori.  As  a  necessary  consequence
of  the  interaction  of  a  plurality  of  individuals,  intent  on
self-betterment  as  well  as  self-conservation,  there  should
be  a  general  tendency  to  diminish  the  mere  contingency
of  the  world  and  to  replace  it  by  a  definite  progression.
And  this,  so  far  as  our  experience  goes,  we  find  to  be
in  fact  the  case.  Such  progression  we  are  wont  now-
adays to  speak  of  as  evolution.

Hut  widely  as  the  term  'evolution'  is  used,  it  is
rarely  defined  ;  hence  it  is  often  without  misgiving
applied  to  processes  that  are  diametrically  opposed,
to  the  differentiation  of  a  unity  and  to  the  integration
of  a  plurality.  The  history  of  this  term  is  worth  a
moment's  consideration.  We  begin  with  the  literal
sense,  the  unrolling  of  a  scroll  or  volume,  whereb)'
what  lies  written  inside  it  is  no  longer  latent  but  laitl
bare — becomes  patent  and  evident.  This  as  a  fiLiurc:
is  iheii  transferred  t(j  ihc  processes  of  thuiighl  ;  and
wc:  talk  ot  evolving  or  explicating  whatevt.T  nia\-  be
implied  ov  involved  in  a  concept,  an  argument  or  a
theory. We find it later apj)llcil with a similar

w.  7


98 Evolution  as  Epigeuesis  and  Equilibration

meaning  to  the supposed unfolding- of an organism
regarded as completely pre-existing in miniature
within  the  germ. Such was  the theory  of  biological
evolution  or  preformation  advocated  by  Leibniz. And
throughout the 18th century this was  the  prevalent
view  among  biologists  and  philosophers  alike ;  but  now
it  is  all  but  superseded  by  the  very  different  theory  of
epigenesis  or  new  formation  ; for  which nevertheless
the  term  evolution  is  still  retained. So  different  are
the  two  theories  in  fact,  that  the  earlier,  strictly  evolu-
tional view  would — unless  essentially  modified — render
the Darwinian doctrine of the origin of species
impossible. For  according  to  that  earlier  theory  "the
germ  was  more  than  a  marvellous  bud-like  miniature
of  the  adult,  it  necessarily  included  in  its  turn  the  next
generation, and this the next — in short all future
generations. Germ within germ, in ever smaller
miniature,  after  the  fashion  of  an  infinite  juggler's  box,
was  the  corollary  logically  appended  to  this  theory  of
preformation'." The  successive unfolding of  such a
system of  emboitcment  or  involution, though  the  ne
plus  ultra  of  evolution  literally  understood,  is  then  the
direct  negative  of  evolution  as  we  understand  it  to-day.
According  to  this  later  theory  each new  organism  is
not  an  'educt'  but  a  'product,'  to  use  Kantian  phrases:
its  parts  are  in  no  sense  present  in  the  embryo  but  are
gradually  organized,  one  after  another  in  due  order,  as
the  term  epigenesis  implies  and  as Harvey,  who  first
used  the  term,  prophetically maintained.  —  It is now
known  too  that  in  this  progressive  differentiation  the
individual  retraces  the  main  stages  through  which  the
'  Geddes  and  Thomson,  The  Evolution  of  Sex,  p.  84.


,


Epigenesis  not  strict  Evoliitio)i  99

species  has  advanced:  as  Haeckel  in  technical  language
concisely  puts  it :  Ontogeny  recapitulates  phylogeny.

Such  a  theory  of  evolution  is  in  all  respects  con-
formable to  the  pluralistic  standpoint.  The  diverging
lines  of  phylogenetic  ascent  indicate  the  various
directions  by  which  different  species  have  extended
and  improved  their  adjustment  to  the  environment :
here  all  is  history,  the  result  of  effort,  trial  and  error,
here  we  have  adventure  and  ultimate  achievement  ;  in
a  word  natiira  natiirans,  as  I  said  before.  The  suc-
cessive stages  of  ontogenetic  development,  on  the  other
hand,  though  each  step  is  an  advance  for  the  individual
and  justifies  Harvey's  term  epigenesis  ;  yet  from  the
point  of  view  of  the  species  it  is  mainly  recapitulation,
paliiige7iesis  as  Haeckel  has  called  it :  here  then  we
have  on  the  whole  only  routine,  heredity  as  the  result
of  organic  memory  or  habit,  in  other  words,  as  7iatura
naturata.  The  preformation  theory  on  the  other  hand
is  only  compatible  with  a  singularistic,  or  as  Professor
James  has  called  it,  a  block  universe,  in  which

With  earth's  first  clay  they  did  the  last  man  knead
And  then  of  the  last  harvest  sowed  the  seed :
On  the  first  morning  of  creation  wrote
^^'hat  the  last  dawn  of  reckoning  shall  read.

Though  this  theory  seems,  so  far  as  biology  is  con-
cerned, to  have  originated  in  a  certain  faulty  observation
of  Malpighi',  the  anatomist,  it  probably  owed  its  long
supremacy  in  large  measure  to  the  advocacy  of  philo-
soj)hers,  Regis,  Malcbranche,  and  especially  Leibniz.
I'ur Leibniz indeed it was but a corollary ol his

'  ('f.  Huxley's  article  '  Evolution,' ^//rv.  Brit,  iiih  cdn,  \ol.  x.
p. 29^.

7—2


loo Evohition  as  Epigenesis  and  Equilibratioit

doctrine of pre-established harmony, that hopeless
theological  pendant  of  his  pluralism'. Such  a  theory
of evolution is only appropriate to a singularistic
philosophy,  I  have  said  ;  but  also  it  is  the  only  theory
of  evolution which truly deserves the name. For
evolution, strictly taken, presupposes a  fundamental
unity,  in  which  all  that  is  eventually  evolved  or  dis-
closed was  involved  or  contained  from  the  first. Logic
furnishes  us  with  the  clearest  instance  of  evolution  in
this  sense,  and  it  was  to  the  unfolding  or  explication  of
logical  content  that,  as  already  said,  the  metaphor  of
evolution was  first  applied. The following passage
from  Hegel's  Encyclopaedia  is  in  point  here  : — "  The
movement  of  the notion is  development  : by which
that  only  is  explicitly  affirmed  which  is  already  of  itself
present." The  development  of  an  organism  was  for
Hegel  the  counterpart  of  this  logical  development,  and
he  commends  the  so-called  'box-within-box' hypothesis
of Leibniz  and Bonnet  for "  perceiving  that  in the
process  of  development  the  notion  keeps  to  itself,  and
only  gives  rise  to  alteration  of  form,  without  making
any  addition  in  point  of  content'." But  it  was  not  the
individual organism regarded apart but rather the
entire  universe that  appeared to Hegel — Hegel the
logician,  that  is  to  say — as  just  the  realisation  of  such

'  Considerations  sur  le  Principe  de  Vie,  Erdmann's  Leibnitii
Opera,  pp. 429  ff.

^  Encyclopaedia,  i.  §  161.  Cf.  also  the  following: — Die  Welt-
geschichte  ist  die  Darstellung,  wie  der  Geist  zu  dem  Bewusstsein
dessen  kommt,  was  er  an  sich  bedeutet;  und  wie  der  Keim  die
ganze  Natur  des  Baumes...in  sich  tragt,  so  enthalten  auch  schon
die  ersten  Spuren  des  Geistes  virtualiter  die  ganze  Geschichte.  Phil,
der  Gesch.,  Einleitung,  p.  21.


Pluralism  rejects  strict  Evolution loi

a  dialectical  evolution.  It  is  an  immanent  and  self-
determining  process  of  explication  of  the  Absolute
One,  setting  out  from  and  returning  into  itself.  Duly
to  contrast  it  with  this  sublime  idea  of  evolution,  the
progress  that  pluralism  implies  requires  a  distinctive
name.  It  will  be  better  at  least  at  the  outset  to  call
the  latter  a  process  of  integration  and  equilibration  —
terms  which,  it  will  be  remembered,  hold  a  prominent
place  in  the  synthetic  philosophy  of  Herbert  Spencer.
Which  is  the  truer  view  it  is  impossible,  of  course,  to
decide  while  the  issue  between  pluralism  and  absolutism
is  still  itself  undecided.  Whether  the  whole  is  prior  to
the  parts  or  not,  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  case.
If  the  whole  be  a  wood,  then  to  the  charge  that  he
cannot  see  the  wood  for  the  trees,  the  pluralist  may
retort  that  at  any  rate  the  trees  make  the  wood,  not
the  wood  the  trees.  But  if  the  whole  be  a  tree,  it  may
be  true  that  he  fails  to  see  the  trunk  because  of  the
branches,  and  yet  it  is  from  the  trunk  that  all  these
spring.  Anyhow  it  is  the  parts,  the  many,  with  which
the  pluralist  starts  ;  the  question,  whether  or  no  there
is  an  absolute  whole  prior  to — at  once  the  logical  and
the  real  ground  of — all  the  parts,  is  for  him  not  the
first  question  but  the  last.  W^hat  we  have  now  to  do
then  is  to  consider  this  progressive  integration  that  the
IVIany  imply,  and  in  particular  to  ascertain  the  possible
limits  of  the  process'.

The  whole  is  more  than  the  sum  of  its  parts — that
is  the  cardinal  characteristic  of  evolution  as  understood
by  the  pluralist.  A  unity  that  is  not  mon;  than  its
constituent  elements  is  no  r(-al unity  at  all  : il  is  only

'  Cf.  Lecture  ix.


1 02 Evolution  as  Epigenesis  and  Eq^tilibration

a  formal  or  mathematical  whole.  All  real  synthesis
entails  new  properties  which  its  component  factors  in
their  previous  isolation  did  not  possess.  This  statement
many  will  hesitate  to  accept  ;  for  a  methodological
distinction — that  is,  or  was,  commonly  regarded  as
answering  to  a  real  difference  in  things — will,  no  doubt,
occur  to  them  :  the  distinction,  I  mean,  between  those
concurring  causes  whose  separate  effects  are  said  merely
"to  be  compounded  with  one  another,"  as  in  mechanical
actions,  and  those,  such  as  in  chemical  actions,  "where
the  separate  effects  cease  entirely  and  are  succeeded
by  phenomena  altogether  different,"  by  new  and  so-
called  '  heteropathic  '  effects.  This  distinction — which
the  pluralist  principle  seems  plainly  to  ignore,  or  rather,
tacitly  to  contradict — is,  according  to  J.  S.  Mill,  whose
account  of  it  I  have  just  quoted,  "  one  of  the  funda-
mental distinctions  in  nature."  Not  merely  so,  but  the
former  case,  that  of  the  'composition  of  causes,'  as
Mill  terms  it,  is,  he  holds,  the  general  one ;  "  the
other" — perhaps  the  only  one,  certainly  the  chief  ac-
cording to  pluralism — he  declares  "  is  always  special
and  exceptional^"  So  it  will  seem  so  long,  but  only
so  long,  as  we  overlook  the  essentially  abstract  character
of  the  mechanical  doctrine  of  the  'composition  of  forces.'
If  the  causes  compounded  are  purely  quantitative,  of
course  there  can  be  no  qualitative  '  intermixture  of
effects.'  But  let  all  that  actually  happens  in  the  real
cases  abstractly  exemplifying  such  quantitative  homo-
geneity be  taken  into  account  and  no  one,  I  imagine,
will  deny  that  heterogeneity  is  also  present.  The
motions  that  the  astronomer  describes,  for  example,
'  System  of  Logic,  bk  in.  ch.  vi.  §  2.


Coupoitud  inui  I Ictcropatliic  Effects 103

are  far  from  being  the  only  effects  that  the  constitution
of  the  solar  system  involves.  Even  if  the  various
physical  phenomena  it  displays  should  also  eventually
admit  of  mechanical  description,  such  description  would
still  remain  abstract  and  general  :  it  could  never  ear-
mark the  individuals  concerned  and  follow  their  several
histories.

Meanwhile  it  still  remains  an  open  question,  as
Mach  has  said',  whether  the  mechanical  view  of
things  instead  of  being  the  profoundest  is  not  the
shallowest  of  all.  One  thing  at  any  rate  is  certain,
a  strictly  mechanical  theory  of  the  world,  since  it
necessarily  implies  complete  reversibility,  can  never
explain  what  we  understand  by  progress  and  develop-
ment. Mechanism  can  always,  life  and  experience  can
never,  be  made  to  move  backwards :  for  the  one
composition  and  resolution  are  altogether  on  a  par,
in  that  they  entail  no  change  of  either  mass  or  energy;
for  the  other  there  is  the  vital  difference  of  value
between  organization  and  disorganization,  sense  and
nonsense.  The  so-called  conservation  of  mass  and
energy  might  be  regarded  as  symbolising  the  initial
state  of  the  pluralistic  world  and  as  symbolising  too
the  mere  permanence  and  abstract  being  of  its  many
units.  But  it  is  notorious  that  these  concepts  are  the
result  of  ignoring  those  differences  of  quality  which
alone  conv(.Tt  units  into  individuals.  Without  these
we  may  have  Erkaltung  but  not  Jintfaltunf^,  as  a
German would say  : we  may  have  conservation and

'  i'i.  his  excellent  chapter  on  'The  rL-lulioii  of  mechanics  to
the  other  sciences ' :  Die  Afcc/ianik  in  Hirer  J'^tihvic/ce/uni^,  ch.  v.
Of  this  work  there  is  an  American  translation.


1 04 Evolution  as  Epi genesis  and  Equilibration

indefinite  composition  but  not  development  and  definite
organization.  In  short,  the  concrete  integration  of
experience  is  the  diametrical  opposite  to  the  mechanical
resultant  of  a  composition  of  abstract  units  :  it  is  a
creative  resultant  or  synthesis,  to  use  Wundt's  happy
and  striking  phrase\  Evolution,  then,  for  the  pluralist
is  always  synthesis,  and  all  real  synthesis  is  creative
synthesis.

Of  such  synthesis  experience  furnishes  instances  at
every  turn.  The  timbre  of  a  musical  note  is  more
than  the  sum  of  its  constituent  tones  :  a  melody  more
than  the  sum  of  its  separate  notes.  To  an  infant  or  a
dog  a  picture  may  afford  all  the  colour  sensations  that
it  does  to  us,  but  for  lack  of  intellectual  synthesis  the
picture  is  not  a  significant  whole.  We  are  ourselves
only  at  this  level  when  we  first  catch  sight  of  an  un-
expected object  which  we  momentarily  fail  to  recognise,
or  when  owing  to  lapse  of  attention  we  cease  to  '  take
in  the  sense '  or  '  lose  the  thread '  of  what  we  hear  or
read.  Again,  to  repeat  an  instance  I  have  used  else-
where : — "  A  fish  can  feel,  smell,  taste,  see,  and  even
hear,  but  we  cannot  assume  solely  on  that  account  that
it  has  any  percepts  to  which  its  five  senses  contribute,
as  they  do  to  our  percept,  say,  of  an  ^orange  or  a
peppermint.  Taking  voluntary  movements  as  the
index  of  psychical  life,  it  would  seem  that  the  fish's
movements  are  instigated  and  guided  by  its  senses  not

^  But  to  Lotze  belongs  the  credit  of  first  signalising  the  fact  to
which  Wundt  has  given  the  name  ;  and  even  Lotze  gets  so  far  as  to
apply  the  term  creation  to  this  '  relating  activity,'  as  he  calls  it.
Cf.  his  Metaphysik,  §§  268,  271.  It  is,  to  say  the  least,  surprising
that  Wundt  nowhere  refers  to  Lotze's  unquestionable  priority  in  this
matter.


*  Creative  SyutJiesis '  1 05

collectively  but  separately... To  this  inability  to  combine
simple  percepts  into  one  complex  of  a  siny^le  object  or
situation  we  may  reasonably  attribute  the  hsh's  lack
of  sagacity\"  It  is  just  this  difference  between  appre-
hending the  parts  and  comprehending  the  whole  that
distinguishes  what  we  call  intellect  from  mere  sense.
It  was  the  failure  to  appreciate  this  difference  that
made  the  sensationalist  docivin^  priuia  facie  plausible —
Nihil  est  in  intellectu  qnod  non  fiierit  p)'Uis  in  sensu  ;
as  it  was  the  failure  to  find  the  intellectually  new
among  the  sensationally  old,  that  eventually  proved
this  doctrine  to  be  unsound.  Spatial  and  temporal
perception  are  conspicuous  examples  of  creative  syn-
thesis, the  o-enesis  of  which  sensationalists  have  failed
to  explain  and  '  nativists '  to  explain  away.  By  this
process  at  every  stage  'objects  of  a  higher  order,'  as
they  have  been  happily  termed,  are  attained;  and  these
in  turn  may  serve  as  the  constituents  of  a  new  synthesis.
So  advancing,  experience  continually  gains  at  once  in
complexity  and  in  unity.

The  prime  source  of  this  synthesis  the  pluralist
leaves  where  Kant  eventually  left  it"' — in  the  activity
of  the  experiencing  subjects;  though  it  must  be  allowed
that  the  pluralist  extends  the  concepts  of  experience
and  activity  far  beyond  the  range  of  Kant's  so-called
'  synthetic  unity  of  apperception.'  The  peculiarity  ot
each  individual's  syntheses  again  is  regarded  as  due
primarily to what we call the individual's interest,

' Ency.  Brit,  iith  cdn,  art.  'Psychology,'  p.  572.

'  I  say  cvcnUiully,  because  in  his  Dissertation  of  1770  Kant  was
nearer  to  the  Abscjlutist  |)osition.  (Jl.  ('aird.  The  Critical  Philosophy
of  Kant ^  I.  pp.  2oy  ff.


1 06 Evolution  as  Epigenesis  and  Equilibration

giving  to  this  term  also  a  more  extended  meaning'
than  it  commonly  receives.  In  other  and  plainer
words  perhaps,  there  is  progressive  experience  at  all
because  there  are  active  individuals,  severally  sia
generis,  each  from  its  own  standpoint  bent  on  working
out  a  modus  vivendi  with  the  rest.  And  here  we  may
remark  the  one-sidedness  of  the  current  concept  of
biological  evolution  as  consisting  simply  in  adaptation
to  environment,  or  even  in  adaptation  by  environment.
For  pluralism  the  adaptation  is  not  rigidly  one-sided
but  more  or  less  reciprocal,  a  nmtmim  coinmerciMm,  to
use  Kant's  phrase.  The  more  experience  advances,
the  more  there  is  of  adaptation  of  environment  as  well
as  of  adaptation  to  environment.

The  synthesis  by  which  experience  is  extended
and  enriched  is  then,  we  have  to  remember,  not  merely
nor  primarily  knowledge.  We  begin  by  trying  and
end  by  knowing.  Practice  is  the  parent  of  theory  and
realisation  the  surest  verification.  We  may  be  repelled
by  the  idealist's  paradox  of  the  identity  of  thought  and
being,  yet  we  insist  that  what  we  immediately  experi-
ence is  reality.  If  so,  the  reality,  whatever  it  be
besides,  is  this  interaction  of  cognitive  and  conative
agents  :  reality  is  experience.  It  is  in  this  light  that
the  pluralist  seeks  to  interpret  the  fact  of  organization.
Whereas  naturalism,  as  we  have  seen,  regards  experience
as  the  result  of  organization,  pluralism  regards  organi-
zation as  the  result  of  experience  :  in  other  words,  for
the  one  the  question  seems  to  be  how  the  body  comes  by
its  soul ;  for  the  other,  it  is  rather  how  the  soul  comes
by  its  body.  But  in  truth  we  know  nothing  of  dis-
embodied souls  or  of  inanimate  organisms  :  experience


Structure  detenu iucit  by  Fuuctioji 107

and  organization  appear  always  to  advance  together  ;
it  will  be  more  exact  therefore  to  say  that  the  naturalist
makes  function  depend  entirely  on  structure  while  the
pluralist  holds  structure  to  be  mainly  determined  by
function.  The  opposition  is  not  complete,  for,  as  we
have  seen,  a  combination  may  present  itself,  which,
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  individual  who  turns  it
to  account,  is  wholly  fortuitous.  Still  even  then  it  is
entirely  his  action  in  selecting  and  utilising  it  that
determines  its  function,  and  often  leads  to  its  further
modification. — The  multiplicity  of  parts  of  which  a
structure  is  composed  is  only  a  whole  or  organized
when  regarded  in  the  light  of  the  specific  function
which  it  subserves.  This  function  is  the  new  fact  that
is  more  than  the  sum  of  their  properties,  the  creative
synthesis  that  makes  the  parts  an  individual  unity.
The  determination  of  structure  by  function  is  beyond
question  in  the  human  affairs  from  which  in  the  first
instance  all  these  teleological  concepts  of  structure,
function,  organ,  end  and  the  like  are  derived  ;  and  it
is,  of  course,  on  this  analogy  that  the  pluralist's  inter-
pretation exclusively  rests.  Let  us  then  consider  the
characteristics  of  what  we  loosely  call  evolution  in  this
practical  realm.

First  then,  to  repeat,  it  is,  proximately  at  all  events,
a  process  of  synthesis  or  epigenesis,  not  one  of  strict
evolution  or  preformation,  ll  is  needless  now  to  dwell
on  this  point.  That  the  various  forms  of  social  organi-
zation, political,  industrial,  academical  or  artistic,  imply
the  coojjeration  and  consensus  of  their  several  members
is  obvious.  But  there  is  another  point  worth  notice  in
pa.ssing. W'e have called this synthesis creative  ;


1 08 Evolution  as  Epigenesis  and  EqiiUibration

whereas  the  idea  of  potentiahty,  that  is  rarely  long
out  of  sight  when  development  is  in  question,  still
suo-o-ests  that  the  new  was  in  some  sort  present,  was
in  some  sort,  therefore,  already  preformed  in  the  old —
potentially  there  from  the  first.  We  owe  this  notion
entirely  to  retrospective  reflexion.  Having  seen  one
acorn  in  a  suitable  environment  become  an  oak,  we
say  of  a  second  that  it  is  potentially  or  virtually  an
oak  already.  Not  only  is  such  language,  strictly
speaking,  indefensible',  it  is  also  worthless  in  so  far
as  it  throws  no  light  on  the  process  which  it  indicates,
but  does  not  even  describe.  Reality  is  entirely  actuality  :
the  potential,  the  possible,  the  problematic,  on  the
other  hand,  belong  exclusively  to  abstract  thought.
But  that,  while  it  always  presupposes,  is  never  com-
mensurate with,  reality.  Actuality  again  is  entirely
experience  :  its  factors  are  never  abstract  possibilities,
they  are  living  agents  ;  and  the  result  of  their  inter-
action is  a  perennial  epigenesis,  the  only  creation  that
pluralism  recognises.  Ex  nihilo  nihil  jit  applies  only
to  what  begins  to  exist.  In  this  sense  creation  out  of
nothing,  thing  supervening  on  no  thing,  is  a  contra-
diction, so  surely  as  position,  affirmation  is  necessarily
prior  to  deposition,  negation.  But  <:'  77iiniino  fjiaxhnum
Jit  is  the  truth  which  the  notion  of  potentiality  en-
deavours to  express  by  inverting  the  process  in  idea
after  it  has  been  realised  in  fact,  realised  directly  by
the  creative  synthesis  for  which  pluralism  contends.


1  (( •


The  more  a  writer  feels  himself  led  naturally  to  have  recourse
to  this  phrase,"  says  Mr  Bradley,  "  the  better  cause  he  probably  has
for  at  least  attempting  to  avoid  it."  Cf.  his  excellent  remarks  on  the
whole  subject,  Appearance  and  Reality,  pp.  384-7.


Synthesis  creates  //e^L'  values  109

In  the  next  place,  then,  it  will  be  granted  that
what  synthesis  creates  in  the  practical  world  is  not
new  entities  but  what  we  may  call  new  values.  As
already  said,  whatever  be  the  ultimate  meaning  to  be
assigned  to  mass  and  energy,  we  may  allow  the  bare
conservation  of  this:  in  respect  of  it  the  new  would  be
only  formative:  there  would  be  no  new  content.  Even
the  manifold  products  of  human  art  and  industry,  steam-
engines  and  dynamos,  looms  and  printing-presses,
drugs  and  explosives,  regarded  in  themselves,  are  but
re-arraneements  of  so-called  forces  and  elements.  It
is  far  otherwise  when  the  human  ends  for  which  alone
thev  were  devised  are  taken  into  account.  But  most
of  all  when  we  consider  human  achievements  in  litera-
ture, science  and  art,  the  entire  uplift  of  humanity
from  its  rudest  beginning  to  its  present  state  of
civilisation,  the  social,  ethical  and  religious  ideals  that
it  has  come  to  cherish  and  pursue,  we  need  not  hesitate
to  call  all  this  inestimable  store  of  new  worth  a  veritable
creation.  Though  there  is  no  increase  of  energy  there
is  an  increase  of  directed  energy  :  though  there  is  no
increase  of  mass  there  is  an  increase  of  determinate
structure  as  the  '  will  to  a  higher  unity  '  is  realised.
The  good  that  is  achieved  tends  not  only  to  be  con-
served but  to  grow  and  advance  to  worthier  forms  and
that  without  assignable  limits.

But  in  a  social  organization  there  is  no  absolute
opposition  between  structure  and  function.  As  in  all
organization,  function  is  a  unity  depending  on  a  com-
plexity of  structure.  But  in  the  structure  the  proximate
parts  are  again  complex,  each  having  however  a  single
function  ; and so  again of their  parts in (IcsccMiding


1 1  o Evolution  as  Epigenesis  and  Equilibration

order.  This  characteristic  the  modern  pluralist,  as  we
have  seen,  following  the  lead  of  Leibniz,  is  prepared
to  extend  indefinitely.  What  we  have  now  to  notice
are  certain  consequences  which  this  relation  involves,
consequences  which  our  social  and  individual  experi-
ences plainly  verify.  The  function  of  a  general  in  the
field,  for  example,  is  the  direction  of  the  campaign  as
a  whole :  the  execution  of  his  orders  in  detail  he  leaves
to  the  several  members  of  his  staff  in  such  wise,  that
they  in  turn  have  to  issue  further  more  specific  orders
to  their  various  adjutants  ;  and  so  on  again  and  again,
till  at  length  thousands  of  private  soldiers  are  set  in
motion.  But  even  the  movements  that  these  perform
are  carried  out  by  a  so-called  '  psycho-physical  mecha-
nism,' to  which  the  detailed  co-ordination  is  left :  of
this  they  individually  know  nothing.  And  throughout,
it  is  this  gradual  mechanization  of  lower  functions  by
habit,  that  makes  it  possible  to  concentrate  attention  on
higher  functions.  We  have  ample  experience  of  this
relief  in  our  acquired  dexterities,  and  it  is  assumed  that
the  same  principle  holds  good  indefinitely. — Similarly
if  we  order  shoes  we  do  not  need  to  know  how  to  make
them,  and  the  shoemaker  in  ordering  leather  has  not
to  tell  the  currier  how  to  tan  it;  but  in  earlier  times  we
may  suppose  that  everyone  prepared  his  hides  and
made  shoes  for  himself,  doing  both  badly.  In  such  a
hierarchy  of  consentient  functions  as  we  are  considering,
each  unit  is — to  use  the  Aristotelian  phraseology —
'  form  '  for  the  function  below  it  and  '  matter '  for  the
function  above  it.  Every  form  too  is  conditioned  by
its  appropriate  matter  :  soldiers  cannot  be  effectively
manoeuvred till  they have  mastered their drill, nor


I


luterdcpiiidejice  of  Higher  ami  Lower 1 1 1

good  shoes  be  made  without  "-ood  leather.  Thus  in
all  organization  there  is  not  only  continuity  through-
out ;  there  is  also  what  the  sociologist  calls  solidarity
as  well  :  the  higher  depends  on  the  lower.  And
this  relation  according  to  pluralism  will  hold  good
however  far  the  synthesis  may  go.  however  sublime
the  worth  that  may  be  attained.  What  we  shall  reach
will  never  be  a  single  unity  independent  of  the  plurality
beneath,  but  only  the  harmonious  coordination  and
consentience  of  these — ideally,  an  absolute  harmony:
in  this  sense  at  any  rate  the  Many  become  more  and
more  one.

But  this  dependence  of  the  higher  on  the  lower  is
only  half  the  truth.  As  our  individual  and  social
experiences  show  us,  the  lower  can  also  depend  upon
the  higher,  and  this  to  an  ever-increasing  extent  as  we
ascend  in  the  scale  of  being.  As  we  have  already
seen,  there  is  according  to  pluralism  no  absolutely  fixed
environment :  modification  of  environment  is  possible
as  well  as  modification  by  it.  And  this  holds  not  only  of
the  natural  environment  but — and  still  more — of  the
social  environment  as  well.  But  for  this  power  of
directing  it,  the  progress  of  development  would  be,  to
say  the  least,  immeasurably  slower  than  it  is.  In  re-
spect of  this  power  man  is  manifestly  superior  to  all
creatures  beneath  him  ;  and  among  men  the  civilised
man  and  his  community  to  the  savage  and  his  tribe.
The  flrainage  or  irrigation  of  the  land,  the  extirpation
of  tares  and  the  cultivation  of  wheat,  the  domestication
of  useful  animals  and  the  destruction  of  their  enemies —
all  these  processes  are  strictly  in  line  with  the  working
of  natural  forces  ov  natural selection, bui ih*;)' iin[)Iy


1 1 2 Evolution  as  Epigenesis  and  Equilibration

a  definite  direction  that  does  not  appear  in  these. —
What  the  schoolmaster,  the  physician  and  the  philan-
thropist effect  for  the  amelioration  of  the  masses  needs
no  description.  Here  again  we  have  definite  direction
overriding  the  random  and  untrained  impulses  of  the
natural  man.  While  the  progress  already  made  in  the
physical  and  social  amelioration  of  human  life  is  in-
estimable, it  is  as  nothing  compared  with  what  is  still
possible.  Nine-tenths  of  our  physical  ills  are  due  to
ignorance  and  perhaps  a  still  greater  proportion  of  our
social  evils  are  due  to  selfishness.  Present  scientific
knowledge  is  adequate  to  remedy  a  very  large  part  of
the  former  and  the  ordinary  prudential  maxims  of
utilitarian  morality,  if  they  were  only  observed  as  they
might  be,  would  go  far  towards  extinguishing  the
latter :  they  would  put  at  end  to  the  worships  of
Venus,  Bacchus,  and  Mammon,  if  even  they  did  not
establish  peace  and  chain  up  the  clogs  of  war  for  ever.
Social  reformers  and  men  of  action,  who  seem  to  be
invariably  optimists,  have  often  drawn  glowing  pictures
of  what  this  world  might  be  if  only  all  the  knowledge
and  the  wisdom  that  it  contains  could  be  effectively
put  into  practice.  Before  this  can  be  they  must  be
shared  by  all,  of  course  ;  but  on  the  other  hand  it  is  a
sublime  though  obvious  truth,  that  these  highest  goods
are  not  diminished  by  being  diffused.

Such  millennial  dreams  are  of  very  ancient  date.
The  Jewish  prophet  finely  symbolizes  his  Messianic
vision  as  a  time  when  "  the  wolf  shall  dwell  with  the
lamb,  and  the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the  kid... and
a  little  child  shall  lead  them... they  shall  not  hurt  nor
destroy  ;...for  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge


Tendency  to  Progression  1 1 3

of  the  Lord  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."  And  the
Christian  apostle  talks  of  the  whole  creation  groaning
and  travailing  in  pain  with  us  in  earnest  expectation
that  it  also  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of
corruption.  Fourier,  one  of  the  most  celebrated  socialist
writers,  believed  that  an  attraction  or  sympathy,  ana-
logous to  Newton's  principle  of  gravitation  between
material  bodies,  existed  throughout  the  universe  and
tended  to  bring  about  a  complete  harmony  between
society,  animal  life,  organic  life  and  so-called  dead
matter.  His  speculations  and  his  prophecies  as  to  the
changes  that  were  to  ensue  in  the  physical  world  as
the  socialistic  reorganization  of  society  approached  per-
fection were  doubtless  fanciful  in  the  extreme.  Herbert
Spencer's  attempt  to  connect  absolute  ethics  and  cosmic
equilibration,  though  seemingly  more  reasonable,  is  in
fact  more  absurd.  For,  in  making  the  physical  aspect
of  things  the  only  fundamental  and  complete  one,  he  is
loLHcallv  driven  to  ifrnore  the  direction  of  the  lower  by
the  hi(/her  altogether.  The  universe  for  him  is  like  a
vast  ^g^  which  hatches  out  perfectly  by  what  he  was
once  pleased  to  call  a  '  beneficent  necessity.'

Pnit  if  the  extravagant  fancy  of  many  ultra-utopian
visions  of  a  final  harmony  among  things  'seen  and
temporal  '  is  reprehensible,  not  less  so  is  the  dearth  of
imagination  that  can  picture  nothing  new  under  the
sun.  It  is  doubtless  a  mistake  to  attempt  to  forecast
the  further  course  of  evolution  in  ck^tail  :  so  far  as
synthesis  is  creative  this  must  be  impossible  save
within  comparatively  narrow  limits.  lUit  it  is  e(|ually
a  mistake  to  ign(jre  the  tendency  to  j)rogressi()n,  whiih
w(^  find  not  only  to  exist  in fact,  but  also  to  follow  as

w.  8


1 14 Evolution  as  Epi genesis  and  Equilibration

an  ^/rz'^7'z' consequence  from  the  fundamental  character
of  the  world  as  pluralism  conceives  it.  As  the  world
of  the  mere  physicist  tends  towards  a  state  of  final
equilibrium,  so  the  world  of  the  personal  idealist  tends
towards  a  final  harmony  or  equilibration.  The  Kantian
'principle  of  community'  is  applicable  to  both  cases: —
"  All  substances,  in  so  far  as  they  are  coexistent,  stand
in  complete  community,  that  is,  reciprocity  one  to
another \"  The  nature  of  the  communio  or  ntuhmm
commercittm,  as  Kant  called  it,  is,  proximately  at  any
rate,  very  different  in  the  two  cases.  In  a  dynamical
system,  whatever  be  its  initial  configuration,  there  will
be  continual  changes  of  configuration  all  tending  towards
the  eventual  equilibration  of  the  whole.  In  a  'personal'
system  of  sentient  and  conative  agents  the  situation  is
more  complex,  even  though  we  do  not  aim  at  more  than
a  bare  and  abstract  statement.  Here  the  end  of  every
action  is  the  good  :  quidquid  petit iir petitur  sub  specie
boni.  But  the  good  of  each  member  is  dependent  on
its  relation  to  others,  and  at  the  outset  involves,  as  we
have  seen,  more  or  less  blind  and  aimless  struggle  :
this  is  the  initial  state  of  such  a  system  on  the  pluralist
view.  For  all  members  with  like  interests,  however,
there  will  be  a  common  good  and  a  common  evil  :  so
far  their  actions  will  tend  as  completely  as  possible  to
realise  the  one  and  to  eliminate  the  other.  If  this
were  all,  the  case  would  be  simple  enough :  the  parallel
between  a  dynamical  system  and  a  personal  system
would  be  very  close.  But  the  nature  of  individuality
forbids  that  the  immediate  interests  of  any  two  indi-

' Critique  of  the  Pure  Reason,  ist  edn. The  Third  Analogy  of
Experience.


Filial  Hariiioiiy  1 1 5

viduals  should  ever  be  entirely  identical.  Still  even
where  individual  interests  collide  a  common  interest  in
their  adjustment  might  be  expected  to  arise,  and  did  in
fact  arise  as  soon  as  the  social  level  was  reached,  and
it  has  grown  with  the  progress  of  society  and  largely
contributed  to  that  progress.  Such  adjustment  is  what
we  call  justice,  'the  noblest  among  the  virtues'  as
Aristotle  has  said.

At  the  lower  level  of  merely  animal  life,  where
conscious  cooperation  is  absent,  justice  is  out  of  the
question.  But  even  here  some  equilibration  is  secured
by  subjective  selection,  whereby  the  general  environ-
ment is,  so  to  say,  parcelled  out  and  specialised  :  so
far  in  the  apt  words  of  Pope,

All  nature's  difference  keeps  all  nature's  peace.

Within  the  same  species  there  must  however  still  be
competition  so  long  as  its  numbers  increase  beyond
the  resources  of  its  peculiar  habitat.  Here  we  come
upon  the  Malthusian  principle  and  its  consequence,
natural  selection.  But  again  so  soon  as  reason  can  be
brought  to  bear,  an  enlightened  sense  of  justice  can
operate  to  adjust  [)opulation  to  the  means  of  subsistence
and  to  secure  the  ends  blindly  attained  through  natural
selection  b)'  peaceful  wwA  painless  means  :  the  arts  of
eugenics  and  hygienics  may  render  the  struggle  for
existence  unnecessary.  Not  so  in  the  merely  animal
world  :  here  natural  selection  seems  unavoidable.  But
after  all  natural  selection  secures  progress — of  this
palaeontology  affords  ample  evidence — and  even  equi-
libration in  a  certain  wider  sense,  i.e.  between  species
and  species.  In  concluding  the  Orii^iii  oj  Species
Darwin  went  so  {.w  as  to  say  : "As natia'al  selection

8 2


1 1 6 Evolution  as  Epigenesis  and  Equilibration

works  solely  by  and  for  the  good  of  each  being,  all
corporeal  and  mental  endowments  will  tend  to  progress
towards  perfection."  Even  if  we  allow  this  claim  there
still  remains  the  fact  that  all  the  lower  forms  of  life
prey  one  upon  another;  and  mankind  takes  its  full  share
of  such  spoils.  In  this  respect  there  seems  no  elim-
inating struggle  for  existence.  We  have  thus  on  the
whole  two  principles  at  work — the  ethical  at  the  human
level,  where  justice  may  be  supreme;  and  the  principle
that  might  is  right,  practically  the  Heldenmoral  of
Nietzsche.  We  may  call  these  respectively  Rational
Selection  and  Natural  Selection.

But  there  is  a  vast  difference  between  the  individuals
concerned  in  the  two  cases:  a  human  being  is  a  person,
an  animal  is  at  best  a  chattel,  in  legal  phrase.  In
looking  at  the  world  historically  as  pluralism  does,  we
regard  only  species  of  plants  and  animals  but  we  take
account  of  individual  men\  If  we  are  content  to  stop
at  this  division  into  natural  and  rational  we  can  main-
tain a  universal  tendency  towards  progress  and  harmony
or  equilibration  to  be  characteristic  of  the  world  as  the
pluralist  conceives  and  regards  it.

'  It  is  interesting  to  note  here  the  fundamental  division  of  Ethics
which  Kant  makes,  grounded  on  the  relation  between  the  obliger  and
the  obliged;  according  to  this  jural  relations  are  denied  between  men
and  animals  because  these  are  "  irrational  beings  devoid  of  power  to
oblige  and  towards  whom  no  obligation  can  be  constituted."  Meta-
physik  der  Sitien,  Hartenstein's  edn,  vii.  p.  38.


LECTURE VI.

THE PLURALISTIC GOAL.

We  have  now  to  face  the  question  what  sort  of
unity  would  be  attained  if  the  ideal  were  fully  realised
which  the  pluralistic  interpretation  of  experience  directly
suggests.  Such  an  inquiry  brings  us  first  of  all  to  the
problem,  so  much  discussed  of  late  by  sociologists,  as
to  the  nature  of  society.  Is  society  an  organism?  it  is
asked.  That  there  are  many  analogies  between  society
and  an  organism  is  certain,  and  impressive  instances  of
their  employment  will  at  once  occur  to  everyone,  the
fable  of  Menenius  Agrippa,  the  parable  of  the  vine,
and  St  Paul's  exhortation  to  the  Corinthians,  for
example.  But  it  is  obvious  too  that  if  an  organism  must
be  literally  either  an  animal  or  a  vegetable,  then,  since
society  is  certainly  neither  of  these,  it  is  not  an  organism  :
it  lacks  the  physical  continuity  that  they  possess'.  On
the  other  hand,  the  more  we  lay  stress  on  the  co-
operation of  the  several  individual  members  and  the
adjustment  of  their  respective  functions,  the  more
justification  we  shall  find  for  the  conception  of  what
we  may  call  sociological,  as  distinct  from  biological,
organisms — organisms,  that  is  to  say,  which  imply  a
further  and higher  evohitional synthesis. In fact, if

'  Nevertheless  it  has  a  continuity  of  a  higher  order,  the  con-
tinuity due  to  the  mutual  understanding  and  cooperation  of  its
constituents.  Cf.  l"'ouillee,  F.es  lllhnents  sodolo^ijues  de  la  Mora/t-,
1905,  p.  148.


1 1 8  The  Pluralistic  Goal

with  Kant  and  Hegel  we  define  the  living  organism  as
a  unity  in  which  the  whole  and  the  parts  are  reciprocally
ends  to  each  other,  such  a  definition  seems  even  more
applicable  to  society  than  it  is  to  the  biological  indi-
vidual, since  the  constituent  members  of  the  latter  are
not  conscious,  at  least  not  self-conscious,  and,  moreover,
are  not  coordinate.  This  brings  us  to  the  heart  of  the
problem  that  divides  sociologists  so  hopelessly.  It  is
true  that  the  individual  man,  for  example,  thinks  and
wills,  and  that  his  several  organs — as  ordinarily  regarded
— do  not ;  but, /^r  contra,  is  it  not  true  that  while  the
several  members  of  a  commonwealth  think  and  will
the  society  as  a  whole  does  not  ?  When  Plato  and
Hobbes  compare  the  state  to  a  vast  person  and  the
individual  man  to  a  miniature  state  do  they  not  over-
look this  essential  difference  ?  Is  society  then  really
a  unity  ;  or  is  there  in  any  exact  sense  a  social  spirit,
a  social  will,  a  social  end,  a  social  conscience  ?

Two  radically  different  answers  have  been  given  to
such  questions  by  the  so-called  realistic  and  nominal-
istic  sociologists  respectively.  We  are  familiar  enough
with  the  latter  in  England  :  their  standpoint  is  the
thoroughly  individualistic  one  characteristic  of  i8th  cen-
tury speculation  in  general  and  of  English  psychology,
ethics,  and  economics  in  particular.  According  to  the
nominalistic  view,  a  society  is  a  collection  of  individuals
held  together  by  the  private  interests  that  association
promotes  and  which  the  social  contract  was  deliberately
formed  to  secure.  Between  a  collection  of  n  indepen-
dent persons,  having  each  his  own  ends  and  aims,  and
the  same  number  formed  into  a  society  with  ends  and
aims  in  common,  the  only  difference — great  though  it  be
in  its  consequences — is,  it  may  be  said,  essentially  an


Is  Society  really  a CJnity  ?  119

accidental  or  extraneous  one  :  it  is  solely  the  result  of
a  coincidence  ot  interests.  Some  animals,  like  rooks
or  deer,  find  it  advantageous  to  congregate  together  ;
others,  like  hawks  and  tigers,  to  live  apart.  Man
belongs  to  the  sociable  animals,  and,  owing  to  his
superior  intelligence,  human  society  is  more  elaborate
than  anv  found  among-  the  lower  animals.  But  in  a
human  society  of  ti  units  there  is  as  little  ground  for
regarding  the  society  as  an  //  +  ith  unity  with  a  distinct
— and  also  superior — consciousness  and  will,  as  there
would  be  in  the  humbler  but  otherwise  parallel  case  of
a  colonv  of  ants.

The  other  extreme,  the  '  realistic '  concept  of
society,  is  well  represented  in  Hegel's  famous  doc-
trine of  '  Objective  Spirit.'  Whereas  for  the  nomi-
nalistic  extreme,  society  was  the  accident  and  the
isolated  individuals  the  substance,  here  the  relation
is  completely  transposed.  It  is  this  spirit,  Hegel
expressly  says,  that  "  has  reality,  and  the  individuals
are  but  its  accidents."  If  we  "proceed  atomistically,
ascending  from  the  isolated  individuals  [^Einzelnheil]
as  basis  "  we  shall  never,  he  allows,  attain  to  spirit  as
objective  reality  at  all,  but  only  to  a  combination  or
Zusajmnenhang.  That  amounts  to  saying  :  the  nomi-
nalistic  view  is  right  in  its  conclusion  but  its  premisses
are  false.  "  For  [objective]  spirit,"  Hegel  continues,
"  is  not  an  individual  thing  :  rather  it  is  the  unity  of
the  individual  and  the  general'."  As  this  is  sometimes
expressed  nowadays  :  Society  is  a  rc;ality  but  an  over-
individual  reality.  Instead  of  calling  the  nominalisiic
premisses  false,  it  would  l)e  more  exact  to  say  that  they
are  ambiguous  :  the  so-called  individual  is  one  btMiig
' J'hilusophie  des  A'lchtis,  ^  \^(i.


I20  The  Pluralistic  Goat

out  of  society  and  quite  another  being  in  it.  A  hand
severed  from  the  Hving  body  is  a  hand  no  more,
Aristotle  long  ago  remarked  ;  and  no  combination  or
Zusammenhang  of  disjecta  membra  will  ever  make  a
living  whole.  This  is  the  truth  that  the  whole  i8th
century  failed  to  grasp,  and  that  the  19th  has  taught
us  to  appreciate  fully.  The  individuals  whom  Hobbes,
Locke,  Rousseau  and  others  imagined  deliberately
contracting  to  form  society  were  conceived  as  already
intelligent,  and  reasoning,  i.e.  as  already  social  products.
— To  ask  which  was  first,  a  polity  or  man  as  'a  political
animal,'  is  no  better  than  to  ask  the  trivial  question,
which  was  first,  the  hen  or  the  &'g^.  If  by  man  you
mean  man  as  self-conscious  and  rational,  then  take  him
where  or  when  you  will  he  is  what  he  is  only  because
society  preceded  him.  Had  your  specimens  chanced
to  have  lived  the  life  of  the  legendary  wild  men  of  the
woods,  they  could  neither  have  devised  nor  accepted
a  social  scheme  at  all.  Biologically  regarded  these
two  kinds  of  men  would  be  identical,  psychologically
the  difference  between  them  would  be  profound.  The
first,  the  so-called  '  natural  man,'  is  not  a  man  in  the
second  sense,  is  not  a  self-conscious,  ethical  person,  at
all.  To  suppose  a  group  of  the  former  should  straight-
way constitute  an  organic  unity  of  the  latter  is  as  ab-
surd as  to  say  that  a  handful  of  type  is  a  set  of  verses.
And  yet  somehow  or  other  the  transition  has  been
effected,  it  will  be  said.  It  has;  but  the  process
according  to  the  pluralist's  theory  was  an  instance —
and  the  most  important  one — of  that  creative  synthesis
which  I  have  already  attempted  to  describe.  As  the
outcome  of  such  a  synthesis  both  the  state  and  its  several
self-conscious  members  are  a  new  creation. Neither  the


'  Objective  Mind '  ivui  rational  Persons 1 2 1

one  nor  the  other  can  be  found  in  the  primitive  horde
instinctively  drawn  together  by  mutual  interests.  Pari
passu  the  two  are  evolved  together:  as  the  mere  crowd  of
troglodytes  become  organized  into  a  society  they  become
differentiated  as  free  persons;  and  again,  in  proportion
as  their  riorhts  and  duties  become  more  clearh  defined
thev  in  turn  attain  to  a  clearer  consciousness  of  them-
selves  as  rational  and  responsible  individuals.  But  still
the  question  presses  :  Granted  that  in  becoming  social
the  individual  man  becomes  self-conscious  and  rational,
still  what  e.xactly  is  meant  when  society  is  called  a
spiritual  organism  ?  What  at  any  rate  is  nof  meant  is
an  ;/-f  ith  individual  somehow  superinduced  upon  the
n  individuals  constituting  its  several  members,  any
more  than  by  an  organisni  is  meant  an  ;/ +  ith  organ
additional  to  its  complement  of  ;^  organs.  The  objective
mind,  to  use  Hegel's  phrase,  is  not  something  tran-
scendent, existing  aloof  and  apart:  it  is,  on  the  contrary,
the  informing  spirit  immanent  in  the  whole,  whereby
the  several  parts  rise  upwards  towards  a  higher,  common
life  :  in  this  sense  it  is  as  he  terms  it  '  the  unity  of  the
individual  and  the  general.'  To  many  such  language
may  not  seem  to  mean  much  or  to  be  very  illuminating.
I>ut  we  may  perhaps  find  a  helpful  illustration  by  re-
calling the  development  of  the  Metazoa  or  multicellular
animals  from  so-called  'loose  colonies'  or  aggregates
of  Pi'oiozoa  or  unicellular  animals,  already  referred  to
in  an  earlier  h-cture' — though  the  parallel  is  not  exact,
since  .'iociety  is  not  a  biological  organism.  The  several
cells  of  a  comj)lex  organism  still  retain  their  id(MUity
and  continue  their  indixidual  lives;  but  if  this  wcic  all
they  would remain a  mere  aggregate  ; nor  would  lliey

'  <  1.  Lecture  MI.  |).  58.


122  The  Pluralistic  Goal

be  more,  if  they  differentiated  independently.  When
however  they  differentiate,  as  it  were  in  touch  with
each  other,  they  become  mutually  complementary.  In
and  with  such  consentient  action  there  emerges  that
higher  common  life,  which  constitutes  them  into  organs
and  the  whole  into  an  organism.  As  the  unicellular
organisms  of  the  protozoan  cluster  become  organs,
the  cluster  becomes  a  new  organism,  a  metazoan  ;  and
vice  versa  as  the  cluster  becomes  an  organism,  the
primitive  unicellular  organisms  become  organs.  In
other  words  the  more  intimate  the  unity  of  the  whole
the  more  complete  the  differentiation  of  its  members.
The  two  in  short  are  strictly  correlative,  reciprocally
cause  and  effect,  means  and  end  to  each  other.  We
should  accordingly  regard  it  as  simply  absurd  to  grant
that  the  cells  had  become  organs  while  hesitating  to
recognise  that  ipso  facto  the  cluster  had  become  an
organism.  If  it  does  not  seem  equally  absurd  to  allow
that  the  individual  man  as  a  social  unit  is  a  rational
and  moral  being — and  stop  there,  that  is  only  because
familiarity  has  blinded  us  to  what  such  an  admission
implies. Let  us  then  pass  on  to  its  explication.

What  now  do  reason  and  morality  imply  }  It  will
suffice  to  go  at  once  to  what  is  for  us  the  main  point :
they  imply  what  since  Kant  it  has  been  usual  to  call
'objectivity.'  The  sensory  and  appetitive  experiences
of  a  given  individual  are  altogether  immediate,  be-
ginning and  ending  with  himself,  not  merely  exclusively
and  inalienably  his,  but  also  in  their  particularity
peculiar  to  him  and  different  from  the  immediate
experiences  of  all  others  beside.  Such  are  the  charac-
teristics of  experience  logically  included  together  as
subjectivity. Experience  as objective  is the precise


'Objectivity'  123

opposite  of  this  :  it  is  never  immediate,  determined
that  is  by  sense  or  appetite  ;  nor  is  it  either  confined  to
the  individual  or  contingent  to  him  :  on  the  contrary  it
is  or  it  may  become  an  unreservedly  common  possession
by  virtue  of  just  those  factors  which  we  call  reason  and
moralitv  ;  for  these  are  alike  for  all  and  bindincr  on  the
thought  and  action  of  each.  In  experience  as  sub-
jective we  find  only  the  particular  and  contingent  :  in
experience  as  objective  we  find  always  the  universal
and  necessary.  To  subjective  experience  as  such
Leibniz's  description  will  apply;  it  mirrors  the  universe
from  a  particular  and  unique  standpoint  ;  to  objective
experience  as  such  on  the  other  hand  that  description
is  not  applicable.

Objectivity  cannot  then  be  a  characteristic  of  a
purely  individual  experience,  and  to  say  that  it  is
universal  or  common  to  all  cannot  mean  that — like  the
blackness  of  crows,  to  use  a  trivial  illustration — it  is
singly  and  separately  developed  in  each.  To  God,  it
is  true,  Leibniz  applied  the  old  saying  "that  as  a  centre
He  is  everywhere,  but  His  circumference  is  nowhere'."
Such  language  may  be  taken  to  imply  an  experience
that  is  at  once  completely  subjective  and  completely
objective,  at  once  altogether  individual  and  altogether
absolute.  But  such  an  experience  entirely  transcends
our  conception. — With  this  we  may  couple  a  well-known
quotation  from  Aristotle's  Politics;  "He  who  has  no
need  of  society  because  he  is  sufficient  for  himsell,
must  either  be  a  brute  or  a  god."  No  wonder  the
transition  from  brute  to  man,  from  sense  and  ap[)etite
to  reason  and  law,  seemed  inconceivable  apart  from
special  divine  interfcrcnrf.  so  long  as  it  was  regarded

' Priihiples  0/  Nuliirr  <iih/  (ir(ii<\  i  i  \.


124  T^^^^  Pluralistic  Goal

as  taking  place  in  each  individual  singulatim,  as  prior
to  the  dawn  of  evolutionary  ideas  it  invariably  was.
Still  this  long  failure  of  individualism  scientifically  to
bridge  the  gulf  between  man  and  brute  is  strong  tes-
timony to  the  living  unity  of  the  social  organism.
Through  this  objective  mind,  then,  pervading  all  its
members,  and  not  through  any  infusion  from  without,
each  one  in  being  social  becomes  human.  It  is  true
that  society  is  wholly  constituted  by  its  members,  and
is  nothing  apart  from  them,  but  it  is  equally  true  that
in  forming  it  they  pro  tanto  transfigure  and  at  the
same  time  transcend  their  isolated  selves.  By  inter-
subjective  intercourse  they  attain  to  the  transsub-
jective  or  truly  objective,  both  in  knowledge  and  in
action  ;  and  the  more  clearly  they  differentiate  them-
selves from  others  the  more  distinct  their  own  self-
conscious  personality  becomes.

This  reference  to  self-consciousness  brings  us  to  a
new  point  well  deserving  of  a  moment's  consideration.
It  was  Kant's  great  merit  to  have  signalised  the  mutual
implication  of  self-consciousness  and  objectivity  in  the
higher  or  epistemological  sense  just  defined.  "  That  all
the  various  elements  of  our  empirical  consciousness  must
be  bound  together  in  one  self-consciousness  is,"  he  says,
"  the  absolutely  first  foundation  of  our  thinking  at  alP."
Such  is  the  import  of  what  he  has  made  known  as  the
'  synthetic  unity  of  apperception.'  But  in  his  exposition
of  this  principle  in  what  he  entitled  the  '  deduction  (i.e.
justification)  of  the  categories'  Kant  alternates  between
two  distinct  inquiries,  to  the  mutual  confusion  of  both.
The  one  he  calls  the  subjective  deduction,  the  other

^ Critique  of  the  Pure Reason, ist  edn. Max Miiller's trans,
p.  T03  note.


Kdiifs  '  Subject  ivc  Dcdiictiou^  125

the  objective. Fhe  tirst  is  largely  a  psychological  in-
quiry :  it  shows  all  the  worst  faults  of  the  old  psycho-
lotry  of  readv-made  faculties,  and  it  is  oblivious  of  all
questions of development. That it was defective,
Kant was from the  first more or  less  dimly  aware,
and  he  was  driven by  adverse criticisms in the  end
practically to abandon it'. What he did not see
was that, from the nature  of  the case, his so-called
subjective  deduction could not be conclusive. The
question really was, How does objective  experience
arise  ?  and  Kant  in  the  first  edition  of  his  C^'ifnjue  set
himself  to  answer  this  question — very  much  as  Locke
might have  done — that is  to say,  by observing the
process  in  the  working  of  his  own  mind  as  it  was  when
the  genesis  of  all  the  functions  or  faculties  concerned
was  already  complete. Or  what  comes  ultimately  to
the same thing, he adopted the  analysis  of  '  the  in-
tellectual  powers  '  provided ready  to  his  hand in the
psychology  then current, an analysis reached in the
usual individualistic fashion, and vitiated by the
psychologist's fallacy of attributing to the growing
mind  the powers that only  gradually emerge as its
development proceeds. It was as if an anatomist
should say that the eyes and hands were already
preformed in the embryo  ; and as we have seen
anatomists  did  actually  say  this. In  biology  however
the  hypothesis  of  literal  evolution  at  length  gave  way  to
the hypothesis  of  epigenesis  and  only  lingered on in
psychology,  where  its  fallaciousness  was  less  palpable.
I5ul in the Prolegouiena, written five years later to

'  Cf.  Kant's  preface  to  the  ist  edn  of  the  Criti(/itc,  pp.  xxvi  f.,
and  his  preface  to  the  Mctaphysische  A/i/atii^si^runde  dtr  JWitur-
wissenscha/U-n,  Hartenstein's  edn,  Vol.  iv.  pp.  363  ii.


126  The  Pluralistic  Goal

obviate  difficulties  and  meet  criticisms,  Kant  made  an
important  distinction  between  what  he  called  judgments
of  experience,  which  have  objective  validity,  and  mere
judgments  of  perception,  which  are  only  subjectively
valid.  He  then  proceeds  to  add: — "All  our  judgments
are  at  first  mere  perception-judgments:  they  hold  good
simply  for  us,  i.e.  for  our  subjectivity.  It  is  only
subsequently  that  we  give  them  a  new  reference,  namely
to  an  object,  and  intend  {wollen)  that  they  shall  hold
good  for  us  not  only  at  the  moment  but  at  all  other
times,  and  in  like  manner  for  all  other  persons."  Again
a  couple  of  pages  later  he  states  this  difference  between
the  two  acts  of  judgment  as  follows : — In  the  one
"  I  merely  compare  the  percepts  and  combine  them  in
one  consciousness  of  my  own  state,"  in  the  other  I
compare  and  combine  them  in  one  consciousness  in
general  {einem  Bezvusstsein  ilberhaupty.

Within  these  statements  there  is  room  for  all  that
we  have  to  contend  for.  The  so-called  judgments  of
perception  are  the  nearest  approach  to  a  true,  explicit,
judgment  possible  to  the  individual  apart  from  inter-
subjective  intercourse.  The  observation  of  the  lower
animals  and  of  children  furnishes  ample  evidence  of  this,
and  nowadays  it  is,  I  believe,  questioned  by  nobody'.
Between  the  stage  of  these  perceptive  judgments
and  that  at  which  judgments-proper  arise — judgments,

'  Prolegomena  §§  i8,  20.

^  Kant  himself  in  another  connexion  had  noted  this  fact  some
twenty  years  before  he  gave  his  Critique  to  the  world ;  though  even
then  he  seemed  to  attribute  the  difference  between  man  and  the
lower  animals  to  reason  as  a  'heaven-sent  faculty' — to  use  a  phrase
of  Mr  Bradley's — rather  than  to  reason  as  the  result  of  social  develop-
ment. (Cf.  the  paper  'On  the  false  subtilty  of  the  syllogistic
figures,' Werke, Hartenstein's  edn,  11.  pp.  67  f.)


Kdiifs  'Objective  Deduct  ion  ^  \i'-j

that  is  to  say,  having  an  objective  import,  and  which
Kant  was  content  to  speak  of  merely  as  'subsequent'
— there  intervenes  the  whole  long  process  of  social
development.  This  is  implied  in  their  characteristic
as  judgments  valid  for  consciousness  generally,  valid
not  merely  for  me  and  now  but  for  all  and  always.
Unless  then  I  am  conscious  not  simply  of  myself
but  of  others  who  are  conscious  of  themselves  and
of  me,  I  cannot  so  much  as  understand  what  ob-
jt'Cti\e  validity  means,  to  say  nothing  of  affirming  that
it  e.xists.

We  come  then  to  Kant's  main  position,  the  objective
deduction,  viz.  that  apperception — or  that  consciousness
of  objects  which  goes  with  self-consciousness — as
opposed  to  perception,  is  the  pre-condition  of  all
intelligent  and  scientific  experience.  What  we  are
here  concerned  about  is  not  to  call  the  principle  in
question  but  simply  to  indicate  and  emphasize  the  one
point  that  Kant  completely  overlooked.  It  is  a  fact,
at  any  rate,  that  'the  absolutely  first  foundation  of  such
objective  experience  '  is  to  be  found  only  in  society,  in
intersubjective  intercourse,  and  not  in  'apperception  as
a  faculty'  pertaining  to  the  isolated  individual  mind',
hut  though  Kant,  and  I  may  add,  most  of  his  com-
mentators and  critics,  overlook  this  fact,  they  do  not
mean  to  deny  it.  Not  only  is  it  implied,  as  I  have
just  said,  in  the  necessity  and  universality  which  Kant
assigns  as  the  marks  of  judgments  {)roper,  or  judgments
of  experi<-nce  ;  but  it  is  more  or  less  cxpliciil)'  re-
cognised in  his  various  formulations  of  the  moral  law
or  categorical  imperative: "Act  only  accortling  to  that

'  ("f.  the  passage  already  cited,  p.  124  above.


128  The  Phiralistic  Goal

maxim  which  thou  canst  at  the  same  time  will  should
be  a  universal  law,"  i.e.  "  Act  so  as  to  use  humanity,
whether  in  your  own  person  or  in  the  person  of  another,
always  as  an  end,  never  as  merely  a  means\"

It  is  in  this  ethical  connexion  that  Kant's  most
distinguished  English  commentator,  E.  Caird,  in-
sisted at  some  length  on  what  he  himself  called  the
'objective  and  social  character  of  self-consciousness.'
I  will  venture  to  quote  some  sentences,  because  they
help,  I  think,  to  explain  the  general  oversight  which
we  have  just  noticed: — "It  may  be  truly  said  that  we
find  ourselves  in  others  before  we  find  ourselves
in  ourselves,  and  that  the  full  consciousness  of  self
comes  only  through  the  consciousness  of  beings
without  us  who  are  also  selves.  Self-consciousness  in
one  is  kindled  by  self-consciousness  in  another,  and  a
social  community  of  life  is  presupposed  in  our  first
consciousness  of  ourselves  as  individual  persons.  It  is
true,  indeed,  that  in  his  first  return  upon  self,  the
individual  is  conscious  rather  of  opposition  to,  than  of
community  with,  the  other  selves  to  whom  he  finds
himself  in  relation.... But  we  should  not  be  misled  by
the  self-seeking  and  self-will,  which  are  the  first  mani-
festations of  selfhood,  so  as  to  forget  that  the  individuaFs
consciousness  of  himself  as  an  independent  self  is
essentially  a  return  upon  self  from  the  consciousness  of
others  which  it  implies....  In  the  first  instance  the
subject... does  not  reflect  on  the  relativity  by  which
this  independent  selfhood  is  mediated  and  especially
on  the  social  unity  which  it  presupposes ;  and  therefore

^ Groundwork  for  the  Metaphysics  of  Ethics,  H.'s  edn.  Vol.  iv.
pp.  269,  277.


Seif-cojiscioiisiicss  tJirough  others 129

he  can  see  no  claim  which  other  beings  and  things
have  upon  him  to  be  used  otherwise  than  as  means  to
his  own  ends\"  That  man's  primitive  egoism  in  practical
life  has  helped  to  hide  the  social  implications  of  self-
consciousness  seems  to  me  a  remark  that  is  both  new
and  true.

There  is  still  a  further  remark  of  some  importance
that  may  opportunely  be  made  here.  It  is  often  said
that  experience  cannot  actually  "testify  to  anything
more  than  the  existence  of  the  subject — the  existence  of
a  plurality  of  similar  Ego's  is  an  inference,  a  hypothesis
to  explain  the  phenomena'"."  But  drawing  inferences
and  framing  explanatory  hypotheses  presuppose  a  self-
conscious  intelligence  already  possessed  of  that  objective
experience,  which  by  implying  its  own  universality
and  necessity,  imjjlies  also  a  plurality  of  selves.  On
this  assumption  then  we  come  to  a  deadlock  or  find
ourselves  revolving  in  a  hopeless  circle.  But  the
escape  is  simple,  once  we  recognise  that  experience
from  the  outset  involves  both  subject  and  object,  both
self  and  other,  and  that  the  differentiation  of  both
factors  proceeds  siv\ct\y  pari  passu.

We  conclude  then  that  society  is  truly  a  living
reality,  though  a  complex  and  over-individual  one.
To  it  belongs  the  objective  mind  that  is  at  once
immanent  in  and  dominant  over  its  several  members,
who  thereby  attain  to  self-consciousness  and  think  and

'  Tfii'  Critical  Phiiosophy  of  Kant,  u.  pp.  371  f.  Another  writer
who  has  done  much  to  bring  out  the  .social  character  of  self-
consciousness  is  Prof.  Royce :  see,  for  example,  his  Outlines  of
Fsycholo^',  § 115.

"  So  said  the  late  Professor  Ritchie,  for  example,  Mind,  ().  .S.
XIII.  p.  258.

w.  9


130  The  Pluralistic  Goal

act  as  rational  persons.  But  societies  as  they  actually
exist  to-day  are  comparable  to  those  less  perfectly
developed  Metazoa  in  which  the  differentiation  and
unification  of  functions  is  still  very  incomplete  and  the
scope  of  life  very  restricted  in  its  range.  Many  of
these  societies  seem  little  more  than  reduplications  of
similar  parts  without  any  supreme  and  central  principle
or  purpose,  like  certain  organisms  that  are  made  up  of
a  chain  of  ganglionated  segments  and  have  little  or  no
brain.  Some  indeed  are  so  loosely  organized  as  to
allow  of  division  without  much  deterioration.  Even
the  modern  national  states,  that  have  attained  to  the
hio-hest  staQfe  of  civilisation  so  far  known,  are  still  in  a
large  measure  mutually  alien  and  exclusive,  whereas
the  society  with  which  philosophy  is  concerned  is
synonymous  with  humanity,  nay  it  is  even  spoken  of
as  cosmopolitan.  It  is  happily  true  already  that  as
regards  the  higher  life  of  man,  society  is  wider  than
any  single  political  state,  and  its  unifying  spirit  inspires,
though  but  partially  and  imperfectly,  the  whole  civilised
world.

How  far  will  this  progress  extend?  To  attempt  to
forecast  the  future  development  of  humanity  in  detail
would  indeed  be  idle.  The  element  of  contingency,
which  the  individuality  of  its  ultimate  factors  introduces
into  history,  alone  suffices  to  restrain  the  consistent
pluralist  from  all  prophecies  of  this  sort.  But,  on  the
other  hand,  his  general  Weltanschaiiujig  leads  him — as
we  have  seen — to  believe  in  a  universal  tendency
towards perfection as the very principle of life\

^  Such  tendency  towards  perfection  was  several  times  enounced
by  Leibniz. As  an  instance  may  be  cited  the  following  : "Not  only


The  advance  foicanis  a  Higher  Lenity 131

The  pluralist's  view  of  the  world  leads  him  also  to
regard  this  progress  as  consisting  in  the  advance
towards  a  '  hicrher  unitv.'  To  set  over  agrainst  this,
though  the  problem  of  evil  is  still  serious  enough,  there
is  for  the  pluralist  no  'evil  one' — wo  principle  of  evil
in  the  world;  and  also  wo  pure  malevolence,  no  raciikale
Base,  as  Kant  called  it,  in  the  individual.  All  things
in  the  main  and  in  the  long  run,  he  holds,  work
together  for  good.  Or.  to  put  it  otherwise,  there  is  a
conservation  and  a  solidarity  of  the  good  such  as  does
not  exist  for  evil'.  Magna  est  vc7'itas  et  praei>alebit  \
there  are  truths  that  wake  to  perish  never,  but  errors
never  harmonize  and  tend  inherently  to  refute  one
another.  The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed,  but  the
name  of  the  wicked  shall  rot.

Obviously  if  the  hindrances  to  progress  were  insur-
mountable, there  could  have  been  no  progress  at  all.
But  it  mi^ht  still  be  that  the  hindrances  increased  as
progress  advanced,  that  sooner  or  later  a  sort  of  '  law
of  diminishing  return  '  would  begin  to  operate.  We
are  told  however  that  even  in  the  economic  sphere  of
man's  activity  the  law  of  diminishing  return  holds
only of "the part which Nature plays in produc-

do  immaterial  things  subsist  always,  but  also  their  lives,  progress
and  changes  are  regulated  so  as  to  attain  to  a  definite  goal,  or  rather
to  approximate  towards  it  more  and  more,  as  asymptotes  do.  And
though  the  movements  are  retrograde  sometimes,  like  paths  that
have  bends  in  them,  yet  the  advance  prevails  finally  and  the  end  is
reached."  Letter  to  Queen  Charlotte,  J'hilusophischt:  Si/iri/tf/i,
(ierhardts  edn,  vi. pp. 507  ff.

'  That  the  essence  of  religion  is  ' faith  in  iIk-  conservation  of
value'  is  the  main  theme  in  Professor  lloffding's  original  and
interesting  Philosophy  <>/  Religion.


132  The  Phtralistic  Goal

tion,"  while  "the  part  which  man  plays  conforms  to
the  law  of  increasing  return  "  and  this  part  "  tends  to
diminish  or  even  override  any  increased  resistance
which  Nature  may  offer  to  raising  increased  amounts
of  raw  produced"  There  is  then,  we  may  say  with
some  confidence,  no  a  priori  ground  for  any  analogy
between  spiritual  culture  and  agriculture  in  respect  of
cumulative  hindrances  to  progress.  We  have  indeed
only  to  look  closer  at  the  two  most  serious  obstacles  to
social  advance  to  see  that  they  tend  to  be  less  formid-
able, in  proportion,  the  further  the  advance  proceeds.
I  refer,  of  course,  to  ignorance  and  selfishness.  It
may  suffice  to  consider  the  last  and  worst — for  society
and  selfishness  are  in  their  very  essence  opposed.
The  conflict  of  self-interest  and  duty  to  others  has
long  been  a  commonplace  with  ethical  writers  ;  and  it
has  even  been  maintained  that  without  extra-social
sanctions  there  is  no  means  of  bringing  that  wholly
imaginary  person,  the  consistent  egoist,  to  work  for
the  general  good.  Yet  after  all  what  keeps  the  selfish
man  most  in  countenance  is  the  selfishness  of  others  :
he  does  to  others  as  they  in  general  do  to  him,  not  as
he  would  that  they  should  do.  But  at  least  he  cannot
will  that  the  egoistic  maxim  should  be  a  universal  law.
He  approves  such  examples  of  public  spirit  and  phil-
anthropy as  he  may  see,  though  he  does  not  follow
them  ;  and  he  is  ready  perhaps  to  support  beneficent
schemes  of  legislation  to  promote  ends  for  which  he  is
unwilling  to  make  private  sacrifices.  This  fortunate,
and — we  might  add — inevitable,  inconsistency  permits

^  Prof. A. Marshall, Principles  of  Economics,  vol. i. ist edn,
P-  379-


No  'solidarity^  of  Evil  133

social  sanctions  to  stand  out  clearly  and  to  become
more  efficient  with  every  advance  that  better  men
effect.  Probitas  landatur  ct  alget,  the  satirist  has  said,
yet  in  truth  even  bare  commendation  and  approval  do
their  part  in  quickening  virtue  into  life.  In  short  the
objective  mind  or  reason,  in  which  the  selfish  share,
divides  them,  as  selfish,  against  themselves  both  indi-
vidually and  collectiv^ely,  and  leads  them  in  their  own
despite  to  further  its  coherent  ends  :

eo"^Ao(. /Mtr yap ajrXco?, Trai'ToSaTTws 0€ KaKOi.

"  This  may  be  called  the  cunning  of  reason,"  said
Hegel.  "  that  she  permits  the  passions  to  work  for
herself  so  that  what  they  produce  [for  themselves]  is
forfeited  and  lost'."  So  again  T.  H.  Green  : — "Where
the  selfishness  of  man  has  proposed,  his  better  reason
has  disposed.  Whatever  the  means,  the  result  has
been  a  gradual  removal  of  obstacles  to  that  recognition
of  a  universal  fellowship  which  the  action  of  reason  in
man  potentially  constitutes'."  .Such  at  least  is  the
broad  teaching  of  history  so  far.

Extreme  as  the  selfishness  of  many  may  still  be  and
rare  as  is  any  whole-hearted  enthusiasm  for  humanity,
yet  the  progress  already  made  is  amply  sufficient  to
show  that  the  direction  in  which  it  has  moved  and  is
still  moving  points  towards  the  ultimate  conciliation  of
self-interest  and  the  common  good.  This  progress
may  .seem  small,  partly  because  to  us  the  time  it  has
taken  kxjks  immense,  and  p.ully  because  it  still  falls
indefinitely  short  of  the  ideal  that  we  entertain. liut

' Philosophie  der  Geschic/iir,  1 840,  p.  41.
-  Green,  Prolci^onwna  to  Ef/iics,  p.  230.


134  The  Pluralistic  Goal

the  problems  that  time  Involves  do  not  much  concern
us  in  this  connexion.  Der  Weltgeist  hat  Zeit  genug,
as  Hegel  once  said,  and  in  contemplating  the  world
historically  we  have  to  accustom  ourselves  to  regard  a
thousand  years  as  one  day.  Compared  with  the  age
of  the  earth  itself  man's  appearance  upon  it  began  but
yesterday,  and  he  has  hardly  yet  emerged  from  the
stage  of  infancy.

And  now  what  has  been  the  direction  of  this  pro-
gress on  its  moral,  that  is  its  highest,  side  '^  We  start
from  a  state  of  natural  selfishness,  in  which  the  life
of  the  individual  man,  to  use  the  memorable  words  of
Hobbes,  is  "solitary,  poor,  nasty,  brutish  and  short";
and  we  find  ourselves  in  the  era  of  Christian  civilisa-
tion, where — to  quote  T.  H.  Green  again — "'the
recognition  of  the  claims  of  a  common  humanity'  is
a  phrase  that  has  become  so  familiar... that  we  are  apt
to  suspect  it  of  being  cant.  Yet  this  very  familiarity
is  proof  of  the  extent  to  which  the  idea... has  affected
law  and  institutions\"  This  humanitarian  idea  then  is
operative  now,  though  its  full  realisation  is  our  still
distant  ideal.  But  if  it  is  fully  realisable,  the  fact  that
this  realisation  is  a  '  far-off  event '  does  not,  I  would
say  again,  very  directly  concern  our  present  inquiry  :
for  that,  such  eventual  realisation  is  enough.  "  To
any  ethical  student  who  finds  its  realisation  difficult,  I
recommend,"  said  Stuart  Mill,  "as  a  means  of  facilitating
it,  the  second  of  M.  Comte's  two  principal  works,  the
Systeme  de  Politique  Positive... \\.  has  superabundantly
shown  the  possibility  of  giving  to  the  service  of
humanity,  even  without  the  aid  of  belief  in  a  Providence,

•"  Prolegomena  to  Elides,  p.  228.


The  Hiniianifaria)i  Ideal  135

both  the  psychical  power  and  the  social  efficacy  of  a
religion  ;  making  it  take  hold  of  human  life,  and  colour
all  thoufjht.  feelincT  and  action,  in  a  manner  of  which
the  greatest  ascendancy  ever  exercised  by  any  religion
may  be  but  a  type  and  foretaste'."  Kant,  like  Words-
worth and  Coleridge,  was  inspired  with  a  like  confidence
by  what  he  describes  as  the  moral  enthusiasm  for  the
ideal  displayed  in  the  French  Revolution"-.  It  cannot
be  said,  however,  that  either  Kant  or  Mill  attempted
anything  like  a  philosophical  deduction  of  this  faith  in
human  progress  and  perfectibility.  Other  modern
philosophers  in  plenty  have  attempted  this,  no  doubt —
for  example  Lessing,  Herder,  Krause,  Hegel,  and  many
besides  ;  but  always  on  grounds  more  or  less  definitely
theological.  But  to  the  pluralist  this  tendency  is  clear
in  itself  so  soon  as  we  allow  that  all  at  least  seek  the
good  and  therefore  tend  to  replace  an  initial  state  of  com-
parative isolation  and  conflict  by  progressively  higher
forms  of  unity  and  cooperation.  When  the  level  of
society  and  reason  is  reached,  this  tendency  is  no  longer
a  blind  impulse,  it  has  become  a  conscious  ideal.  We
emerge  from  the  darkness,  where  we  could  only  grope,
into  the  light  where  we  can  see  at  least  in  which
direction  our  ideal  lies.  "  The  practical  struggle  after
the  Better... makes  the  way  by  which  the  Best  is  to
be  more  nearly  approached  plain  enough  "  for  further
advance  and  also  more  feasible.  This  point  has  been
worked  out  at  length  by  T.  H.  Green.  To  the
objection  that  it  does  not  precisely  define  the  course  in
which  th(!  advance  is  to  be  made  we  mav  rei)lv  in  the

' Utilitarianis,m, p. 49.

'  '.Streit  der  Kacultaten,'  Wcrke,  Hartenstcin's  cdn,  vii.  ])[).  .^9<;  f.


136  The  Pluralistic  Goal

words  of  Professor  Bosanquet : — "The  difficulty  of
definino-  the  best  hfe  does  not  trouble  us,  because  we
rely  throughout  on  the  fundamental  logic  of  human
nature  qua  rational.  We  think  ourselves  no  more
called  upon  to  specify  in  advance  what  will  be  the
details  of  the  life  which  satisfies  an  intelligent  being  as
such,  than  we  are  called  upon  to  specify  in  advance
what  will  be  the  details  of  the  knowledge  which  satisfies
an  intelligent  being  as  such.  Wherever  a  human
being  touches  practice,  as  wherever  he  touches  theory,
we  find  him  driven  on  by  his  intolerance  of  contra-
dictions towards  shaping  his  life  as  a  whole\"  Reason
makes  man  master  of  his  fate,  and  though  slowly,  yet
surely,  urges  him  onwards  to  the  accomplishment  of
her  perfect  work.

We  come  at  length  then  to  the  question,  stated  at
the  outset,  what  sort  of  unity  will  the  realisation  of  the
rational  ideal  secure  }  The  answer  may  be  very  brief.
"  Thy  Kingdom  come,  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it
is  in  heaven."  To  imagine  this  petition  answered  is
to  imagine  humanity  animated  by  a  single  wise  and
righteous  will  :  every  citizen  would  work  harmoniously
with  every  other,  each  one  doing  the  highest  and  the
best  of  which  he  is  capable.  The  will  of  the  Many
and  the  will  of  the  One  would  accord  completely.  But
on  the  pluralist  view  the  Divine  will  would  only  be  a
reality  as  it  was  the  ideal  towards  which  the  whole
creation  moves,  attained  at  length.  The  Kingdom
would  take  the  place  of  the  ideal  King:  there  would
be  a  perfect  commonwealth,  but  strictly  no  monarch,

^  Cf. T. H. Green, Prolegomena to Ethics, Bk in. ch. iii. ;
Bosanquet, The  Philosophic  Theory  of  the  State,  p. 181.


TJie  Lonfs  Pmyer  137

other than '  the objective  mind ' sov^ereign  in every
breast.

Such  is,  I  beheve,  in  the  main  a  fair  presentation
of  the  pluraHstic  IVeltanschaiiung.  The  time  it  has
occupied  may  I  fear  have  tired  the  patience  ol  many
of  you.  It  still  remains  to  consider  the  objections
to  which  it  is  liable — many  of  which  will  no  doubt
have  occurred  to  you  already — and  the  replies  to
them  which  the  pluralist  can  make.  But  first  it  will
repay  us,  I  think,  to  take  account  of  some  underlying
affinities  between  the  pluralist  position  and  that  of
certain  philosophers  commonly  regarded  as  singular-
ists, which  seems  to  be  directly  contrary  to  it.


LECTURE VII.

THE PLURALISM OF HEGEL.

The  Standpoint  of  pluralism  in  our  day  is,  as  we
have  seen,  fundamentally  historical.  It  is  a  philosophy
of  becoming  rather  than  of  being.  It  holds — as  has
been  said  of  the  philosophy  of  Aristotle — that  "the
ultimate  metaphysical  explanation  of  existence  must
be  sought  not  so  much  in  a  priiis  out  of  which  things
emerge  as  in  the  goal  towards  which  they  move\"
That  goal,  so  experience  seems  to  show,  is  indeed
an  ultimate  unity,  which  however  presupposes  a  real
plurality :  but  no  attempt  is  made  to  conceive  the
plurality  as  due  to  a  differentiation  of  a  unity  pre-
existing '  before  the  world  was '  and  anterior  to  any
conceivable  experience.  The  three  great  singularistic
philosophies  of  the  nineteenth  century  however  did
venture  on  this  bold  enterprise,  and  it  is,  as  we  have
seen,  largely  their  conspicuous  failure  that  has  brought
pluralism  into  vogue  again.  Now  the  last  and  chief
of  these,  the  philosophy  of  Hegel,  is  by  common
consent  a  philosophy  of  history  in  the  widest  sense,
whatever  it  may  be  besides  ;  and  mainly,  if  not  solely,
as  such  is  it  generally  acknowledged  to  be  of  great
positive  value.  It  will  then  be  interesting  as  well  as
instructive  to  compare  Hegelianism  with  pluralism  in
respect  of  their  common  historical  ground.  Such  a
^  Pringle-Pattison,  Hegelianism  and  Personality,  ist  edn,  p.  82.


Hegel  at  the  Historical  Staiutpoiiit 139

comparison  will  become  more  significant  when  it  is  re-
membered, as  Hegel's  critics  urge  and  his  exponents
allow,  that  the  so-called  dialectical  development  of
thought  as  such,  in  which  he  attempts  to  find  the  unity
that  transcends  the  seeming  plurality,  is  only  distinct
from  the  historical  dev^elopment  by  being  abstracted
from  it  after  reflexion  has  revealed  its  presence  there'.
Regarding  things  historically  Hegel  found  develop-
ment everywhere,  he  found  not  a  statical  world  like
that  of  the  Eleatics  but  a  dvnamical  one  like  that  of
Heracleitus.  His  leading  ontological  concept  was
more  akin  to  the  active  subject  of  the  pluralist  Leibniz
than  to  the  indifferent  substance  of  the  sino^ularist
Spinoza.  No  doubt  he  reached  in  the  end  a  unity
which  he  called  absolute  ;  but  in  his  Philosophy  of
Nature  and  of  Mind,  where  he  first  comes  into  touch
with  the  real  world,  it  is  plurality  that  chiefly  obtrudes
itself.  Yd,  while  recognising  the  "spectacle  of  a  con-
tingency thai  runs  out  into  endless  detail,"  Hegel
treats  it  in  the  most  contemptuous  manner.  The
starry  heavens  that  filled  Kant  with  awe  he  thinks
it  fitting  to  call  a  "luminous  rash. ..as  little  deserving
of  wonder  as  the  rash  on  a  human  skin-'." The  wealth

'  Hegel  has  himself  described  philosophy  as  'thinking  considera-
tion of  things'  {denkende  Bctrachttnii:;  dcr  Dim^c,  Encycl.  §  2),  and  in
his  first  systematic  work,  the  Phenomenology  of  Mind,  he  undertakes
to  provide  '  the  ladder '  by  which  the  beginner  may  ascend  into  the
'ether'  where  the  dialectic  transfiguration  enacts  itself.  But  he  so
far  overreached  his  purpose  that,  like  theatrical  managers  at  a  fair,
he  ha.s  given  us  on  the  boards  outside,  as  it  were,  a  preliminary  and
more  or  less  tentative  outline  of  his  whole  system.  Hence  he  also
called  the  Phenomenology  his  voyage  of  discovery :  in  this  l)ewil(l(.ring
adventure  psychology  and  history  play  the  leading  part.

-  Nalurphilosophie^  %  268,  p.  92.


140  The  Phiralism  of  Hegel

of  forms,  organic  and  inorganic,  that  Nature  presents,
ought  not  as  such,  he  maintained,  "to  be  rated  higher
than  the  equally  casual  fancies  of  the  mind  surrender-
ing itself  to  its  own  caprices."  "Contingent  deter-
mination from  without  has,"  he  says  again,  "  in  the
sphere  of  Nature  its  right  placed"  But  such  language
is  mere  bravado  in  the  face  of  a  serious  difficulty,  with
which  Hegel  had  not  the  patience  to  deal — or  rather
a  difficulty  with  which  a  philosophy  such  as  his  could
not  have  dealt  at  all.  As  Professor  Pringle-Pattison
has  well  said:  "A  system  of  rationalism  which  talks
of  what  '  is  determined  not  by  reason  but  by  sport  and
external  accident'  [as  Hegel  has  done]  must  fairly  be
held  to  acknowledge  a  breakdown  in  its  attempt  to
grasp  the  whole  of  existence''."  The  first  point  we
have  to  notice  then  is,  that  in  admitting  our  inability
to  eliminate  contingency  Hegel  has  also  admitted
our  inability  to  eliminate  the  plurality  which  it
implies.  "  This  impotence  of  Nature  sets  limits  to
philosophy  "  he  tells  us.  Whether  '  impotence  '  is  the
right  name  for  the  fact  may  well  be  questioned  ;  but
the  one  point  that  concerns  us  meanwhile  is  Hegel's
recognition  of  the  fact  itself.  Nature  is  for  Hegel
historically  the  first  stage  of  the  real  world,  and  here
at  the  outset  he  finds  himself  confronted  and  limited
by  the  very  plurality  and  contingency  from  which  the
pluralist  too  makes  his  start.  What  he  calls  the
'  impotence  of  Nature'  is  historically  just  that  inchoate
state  of  things  which  the  progress  of  history  is  sup-
posed gradually  to  straighten  out.

1  Op.  cit.  §  250,  p  36.

"  Hegelianism  and  Persona/ity,  ist  edn,  p.  138.


The  CoJifiiigciicy  of  X at  it  re  141

Taking  this  progress  in  its  widest  extent,  the  pro-
cesses of  what  we  call  nature  fall  within  it,  and  are  to
be  regarded,  Hegel  himself  tells  us,  as  a  system  ot
stages  leading  up  to  Mind,  which  emerges  from  Nature
like  the  phoenix  from  its  ashes'.  But  though  one  of
the  stages  proceeds  from  the  other,  it  is  not,  Hegel
goes  on  to  insist,  ''naturally  generated  out  of  the
other  ;  on  the  contrary  it  [is  generated]  in  the  inner
Idea  that  constitutes  the  ground  of  Nature-."  In  other
words  his  meaning  seems  to  be  that  the  process  is
really  timeless, or  as  Goethe  put  it

Natur  hat  weder  Kern

Noch  Schale,

Alles  ist  sie  mit  einem  Male^.

Accordingly  in  a  lecture-note  to  the  passage  quoted
he  adds:  "The  notion  puts  all  particularity  in  a  general
way  into  existence  at  once."  In  saying  all  this  Hegel
seems  plainly  to  be  trying  to  take  back  with  one  hand
what  he  has  yielded  with  the  other.  Or.  to  put  it
otherwise,  he  oscillates  between  two  different  kinds
of  development — the  dialectical,  which  is  timeless  as
well  as  abstract  and  iieneral,  and  the  historical  which
involves  time-process  and  deals  primarily  with  the
concrete  and  particular.  For  us  at  any  rate  the  ex-
perience of  this  latter  development  is  essential  to  our
knowledge  of  the  former,  which — according  to  Hegel's

' Naturphilosophie,  %  247,  p.  24,  §  376,  p.  695.

■' Op.  cii.  §  249,  p.  32.

"  This  we  might  perhaps  translate  :

Nature  has  neither  shell

Nor  kernel.

She's  all  at  once  in liic  eternal.


142  The  PI II  rati  sin  of  Hegel

own  teaching — belongs  to  its  subsequent  and  latest
phase.  Indeed  he  has  said  more  than  once  of  philo-
sophy in  general  what  in  his  introduction  he  has
expressly  said  of  the  Philosophy  of  Nature  in  par-
ticular : — both  as  regards  its  origin  and  its  elaboration
it  has  experience  for  its  presupposition  and  condition'.
We  might  here  fairly  remind  Hegel  of  a  caution  he
has  himself  uttered  : — "  In  respect  of  Mind  and  its
manifestations  [just  as  in  the  case  of  Nature]  we  must
be  on  our  guard  lest  we  be  misled  by  the  well-meant
endeavour  after  rational  knowledge  into  attempting  to
represent  as  necessary  or,  as  the  phrase  is,  to  construct
a  priori,  phenomena  to  which  the  mark  of  contingency
pertains'-."  Even  if  it  turn  out  that  the  dialectical
method  holds  good  for  the  timeless  development,  yet  it
is  not  a  heuristic  method  ;  at  the  outset  philosophy  as
'  the  thinking  consideration  of  things  '  has  to  begin  with
its  'voyages  of  discovery.'  The  greater  part  of  Hegel's
Philosophy  of  Nature  and  of  Mind  is  of  this  sort^

And  here  in  common  with  the  pluralist  he  finds,  as
we  have  already  seen,  plurality  and  contingency  every-
where, and  we  have  now  further  to  note  that  he  finds
also  a  gradual  historical  progress  from  nature  to  spirit,
from  nature  as  a  '  bacchantic  God  '  to  '  free  spirit — the
truth  that  knowing  knows  itself — a  progress  that  in
all  essential  points  corresponds  with  that  which  in  the
exposition  of  pluralism  I  have  already  attempted  to
describe.  All  this,  we  have  to  insist,  antecedes  for
us the timeless notional development which Hegel

^  Cf.  Encyclopaedie,  §§  6,  7,  12,  38,  246.

2  Op.  cii.  %  145-

'  Cf.  such  categories  as  Mechanism,  Chemism,  Life,  &c.


A'litures  Routine  143

attempts  to  blend  with  it.  The  problem  of  time  in
relation  to  the  dialectic  is  one  of  the  many  that  Hegel
left  wholly  to  his  successors  :  it  is  perhaps  the  most
serious  aspect  of  that  '  ugly  broad  ditch  '  with  which
Schelling  taunted  his  c^uondam  friend  in  a  phrase  em-
bodying the  most  trenchant  criticism  the  Hegelian
philosophy  has  ever  received.

We  come  to  a  new  point.  Things  are  not  alto-
gether contingent  or  progressive,  though  there  is  con-
tingency and  progress  everywhere  :  what  we  find  is
'  uniformity  flecked  with  diversity.'  The  uniformity
in  eeneral  we  refer  to  nature  as  mechanical,  and  the
diversity  and  progress  to  life  or  mind.  This  contrast
too  Hegel  has  noticed.  "The  changes  in  nature,"  he
says,  "  indefinitely  manifold  as  they  are,  exhibit  only
a  routine  that  is  ever  repeated:  in  nature  there  happens
nothing  new  under  the  sun — It  is  only  in  the  changes
taking  place  on  the  spiritual  platform  that  novelty
comes  to  the  fore."  Again  he  speaks  of  nature  as
"  a  system  of  unconscious  thoughts,  as  an  intelligence
that,  as  Schelling  said,  is  petrified'."  Such  language
at  once  reminds  us  of  the  distinction  between  iiatura
natiirans  and  natiira  naturata  as  the  pluralist  inter-
prets it.  The  former  answers  to  nature  as  full  of  con-
tingency, which  is  the  very  opposite  of  routine;  the
latter  to  nature  as  mechanical  and  devoid  of  novelty,
in  itself  but  the  'corpse  of  the  understanding,'  as  Hegel
calls  it;  the  dead  self  on  which  we  rise  to  higher  things,
as  the  pluralist  maintains.  The  mechanization  of  habit,
dexterity  as  consisting  in  making  the;  body  the  uncon-

' Philosophie  der  Gesc/iic/Ue, 1837, p. 51. /■'.iicyclopaedie,  %  24,
Lecture  Note  i.


144  T^^^  Phiralisiii  of  Hegel

scious  instrument  of  the  soul,  in  and  through  which  it
expresses  itself  as  if  the  body  were  the  soul's  work  of
art,  and  so  forth — all  this  Hegel  recognises  to  the  full
and  describes  in  detail.  It  cannot  indeed  be  said  that
he  expressly  traces  back  these  psychological  facts  as
far  as  the  pluralist  attempts  to  do  ;  but  it  might  be
fairly  maintained  that  his  view  of  nature  justifies  such
a  procedure.

In  the  first  place  Hegel  was  no  dualist:  the  whole
process  of  nature  is  to  become  spirit,  and  spirit  it
is  in  itself  or  potentially  from  the  beginning.  But
actually  at  the  outset  it  is  infinite  isolation  or  dis-
memberment ( Vereinzelung),  and  its  unity  is  still  to
seek.  It  advances  from  this  to  the  natural  individuality
or  particularity  of  physical  bodies  and  finally  to  the
subjective  individuality  of  organisms^  At  this  level
sentience  emerges  and  we  pass  over  into  the  realm  of
mind,  the  individual  existing  for  itself.  The  earlier,
so-called  inorganic  processes  pluralism  explicitly  inter-
prets, in  Leibnizian  fashion,  as  also  in  some  measure
sentient  and  conative.  In  his  PJiilosophy  of  Nahire
Hegel  was  too  much  under  the  influence  of  Schelling
and  dominated  by  his  '  polarity  myth  '  for  this.  But
occasionally  he  comes  very  near  to  the  Leibnizian
standpoint.  Thus  he  describes  a  soul  as  such,  as  "in
itself  the  totality  of  nature  ;  as  individual  soul  it  is
a  monad;  it  is  itself  the  posited  totality  of  its  particular
world,  so  that  this  is  shut  up  within  it,  is  its  content."
And  again  :  "  In  contrast  to  the  macrocosm  of  Nature
as  a  whole,  the  soul  can  be  designated  the  microcosm,
in  which  the  former  is  compressed  {zusammengedrdngt)

^  N^aturphilosophie^  §  252.


N^afurc  to  become  Spirit  145

and  its  externality  thereby  overcome^"  This  meta-
phorical language,  by  the  way,  looks  very  like  non-
sense :  how  the  soul  is  uoino-  to  condense  the  world
or  how  compression  is  to  put  an  end  to  externality  is
not  evident.  But  what  Hegel  means,  we  may  suppose,
is  what  Leibniz  also  meant:  the  world  is  for  every  soul
a  presented,  or — in  the  language  of  the  first  passage —
a  'posited  totaliiy  ' — or  continuum.  Now  all  this,  it
must  be  remembered,  is  said,  not  of  the  higher  stages
of  mental  development,  which  Hegel  distinguishes  as
spirit  {Geist)\  it  is  said  of  what  he  calls  the  natural
and  the  sentient  soul,  the  stage  of  obscurity  {Dunkel-
heit)  before  the  soul  has  attained  to  a  conscious  and
intelligible  content^ — the  stage,  in  a  word,  of  Leibniz's
'confused  perception.'  And  who  is  to  say  how  far
back  this  obscurity  extends?  All  we  know  of  it  we
know  because  we  do  not  begin  with  it  but  approach  it
from  the  light  and  interpret  it  in  terms  of  what  it  has
become. And  this  is  the  method  of  pluralism.

But  now,  it  may  be  said,  in  the  second  place —
indeed  it  has  been  said  by  a  thoroughgoing  Hegelian
— that  this  principle  of  interpreting  the  lower  on  the
analogy  of  the  higher  was  recognised  by  Hegel  too.
Comparing  the  opposite  processes  of  evolution  and
emanation — or,  as  I  have  proposed  to  call  it,  devolu-
tion— both  of  which  have  been  employed  in  the  inter-
pretation of  nature,  he  expresses  a  preference  for  the
latter.  "  To  proceed  from  the  more  perfect  to  the
less  perlect  is  more  advantageous,"  he  says;  "for  tluMi
we  have  the  type  of  the  completed  organism before

'  Philosophy  of  Mind,  Encycl.  in.  ^  391,  403. Q{.  also  ^;  352,
Zusatz,  Encycl.  11.  -  Op.  cit.  §  404.

w.  10


146  The  Phiralisin  of  Hegel

us":  albeit  he  held  both  methods  to  be  'one-sided
and  superficiaP.'  How  then  should  we  proceed,  how,
in  fact,  do  we  proceed?  "It  is  clear,"  said  G.  H.
Lewes,  "  that  we  should  never  rightly  understand
vital  phenomena  were  we  to  begin  our  study  of  life
by  contemplating  its  simplest  manifestations  in  the
animal  series  ;  we  can  only  understand  the  Amoeba
and  the  Polype  by  a  light  reflected  from  the  study  of
Man."  In  quoting  this  passage  the  late  Professor
Ritchie,  the  Hegelian  I  just  now  referred  to,  adds  the
remark:  "What  makes  it  seem  possible  for  the  scientific
investigator  '  to  begin  at  the  beginning '  is  the  fact  that
he  is  not  doing  so.  The  student  of  the  Amoeba  hap-
pens to  be,  not  an  Amoeba,  but  a  specimen  of  a  highly
developed  vertebrate,  and  knows  at  least  something
about  the  differentiated  organs  and  functions  of  his
own  body"."  What  we  do  then  is  by  means  of  our
knowledge  of  the  higher  to  interpret  the  lower,  while
at  the  same  time  recognising  that  the  actual  process
has  been  a  development  of  the  lower  upwards  towards
the  higher.  With  all  this  we  may  fairly  say  that
Hegel  was  in  complete  agreement,  once  we  have  dis-
allowed his  attempts  to  play  fast  and  loose  with  the
two  distinct  kinds  of  developments — the  historical  and
the  dialectic.  He  does  interpret  the  lower  by  the
higher,  he  does  admit  an  actual  historical  evolution,
and  he  does  insist  that  Nature  is  potentially  mental
from the  first, so  that  the historical  evolution is  no

^  NaturphilosopJiie,  Encycl.  11.  §  249,  p.  35.

-  G.  H.  Lewes,  Study  of  Psychology,  p.  122;  D.  G.  Ritchie,
'  Darwin  and  Hegel '  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Aristotelian  Society,
vol. I. p.  59.


The  Ilig/icr  the  Key  to  the  Loieer 147

gefieratio  cquivoca.  "  The  appearance,"  he  remarks,
"as  if  [the  existence  of]  Mind  were  brought  about
through  an  Other,  is  disposed  of  by  Mind  itseU" ;  for
this — so  to  say — has  the  supreme  ingratitude  to  resolve
and  mediate  that  through  which  it  seems  to  be  pro-
duced, to  reduce  it  to  dependence  on  itself  and  to
establish its  own  complete  independence'."

Let  us  now  look  at  Hegel's  handling  of  this  evo-
lution a  little  closer.  His  Philosophy  of  History  is
professedly  little  more  than  a  philosophy  of  political
history.  The  progress  that  it  traces  is  the  progress
of  freedom  as  realised  in  the  objective  mind  or  society;
but  freedom,  it  should  be  observed,  is  regarded  as
identical  with  spiritual  perfection  generally;  and  so  he
describes  'world-history'  as  "the  exhibition  of  mind
as  it  works  out  the  knowledge  of  what  it  is  in  itself."
The  realisation  of  this  ideal,  he  explains,  is  the  final
end,  the  working  principle,  the  informing  notion  of
history.  But.  as  such,  a  principle  is  only  general,
abstract,  and  potential  ;  in  order  to  its  realisation  a
further  factor  is  essential  :  in  history  proper  this  factor
is  the  activity  of  human  beings.  But  an  end  for  which
I  am  to  be  active  must  be  in  some  sense  my  end :  even
if  it  have  other  aspects  that  do  not  concern  me,  still  it
is  my  own  satisfaction  that  makes  it  interesting  to  me.
He  concludes  then  "  that  absolutely  nothing  is  brought
to  pass  without  lh(:  interest  of  those  who  actively  co-
operated in  it:... that  nothing  great  in  the  ivorld  is
accomplished withc^wl passion'."

Reason  the  card,  but  passion  is  tlie  gale.

'  Phiiosophy  of  Mind,  Encycl.  in.  §  3<Si,  p.  23.
" Philosopliii-  iter  Gesc/iic/i/e,  1837,  p.  28.

10 — 2


1 48  The  Plityalism  of  Hegel

The  history  of  the  world  in  the  widest  sense,  how-
ever, goes  further  back  than  this;  and  though  Hegel
regarded  it  as  neither  fitting  nor  worthy  of  philosophy
to  take  up  the  story  before  rationality  comes  upon  the
scene,  he  nevertheless  has  some  introductory  remarks
concerning  the  pre-historic.  These  are  important  as
further  bearing  out  what  has  just  been  said  about  the
spiritualistic  continuity  of  the  whole  process  of  evolu-
tion as  Hegel  conceived  it,  and  as  making  clearer
the  pluralistic  basis  that  it  implies.  Having  insisted
that  "  nothing  happens,  nothing  is  accomplished  save
as  the  individuals  actively  concerned  in  it  secure  their
own  satisfaction,"  he  continues  :  "  But  the  world's  his-
tory does  not  begin  with  any  conscious  end,  such  as
we  find  in  particular  centres  of  men.  The  simple
impulse  to  live  together  has  already  the  conscious  end
of  security  for  life  and  property,  and  so  soon  as  this
life  in  common  is  attained  the  end  is  [further]  enlarged.
The  world's  history  begins  only  potentially  (i.e.  as
Nature)  with  its  general  end,  the  full  realisation  of
the  notion  of  spirit.  That  end  is  its  inner,  nay  its
inmost  unconscious  impulse,  and  the  entire  business  of
the  world-history  is  the  labour  of  bringing  it  to  con-
sciousness. Thus  making  its  appearance  in  the  form
of  natural  beings,  natural  wills,  what  has  been  called
the  subjective  side  [of  history]  is  straightway  present
for  itself\"  Translated  into  pluralistic  language  this
amounts  to  saying  :  A  plurality  of  conative  beings  at
first  casually  interacting  in  pursuance  of  their  several
particular  and  immediate  impulses  gradually  come  to
have  ends  and  continually  widening  ends  in  common,

^  Op.  cit.  p.  29.


The  irorld-Spirit  149

thereby  advancing  towards  the  complete  reaUsation  of
the  one  objective  end  of  history  that  is  now  to  be
regarded  as  its  potential principle  from the  first.

We  are  not  then  surprised  to  find  Hegel  too
describing  and  illustrating — as  we  have  already  done
under  the  title  '  heterogony  of  ends'' — the  fact  that  in
the  course  of  the  world's  history  the  actions  of  man-
kind are  continually  realising  ends  that  they  neither
intended  nor  foresaw.  But  the  explanation  which  he
seeks  to  give  of  this  fact  is  very  different  from  that  of
the  pluralist.  He  regards  human  interests  and  actions
in  the  first  instance  simply  as  instruments  and  means.
Through  them  the  absolute  final  purpose  of  the  world's
history  is  carried  out,  but  carried  out  as  something
beyond  and  external  to  them — just  as  a  house  is  erected
by  means  of  natural  forces  and  elements  that  have  no
concern  with  its  inner  end,  which  in  fact  is  to  keep
them  at  bay.  But  this  illustration,  which  please  under-
stand is  Hegel's  own'^,  at  once  and  very  pointedly
raises  the  question  :  Where  in  the  case  of  the  world's
history  is  the  guiding  and  controlling  mind  to  be  found
that  corresponds  to  the  architect  in  the  case  of  the
house  ?  It  must  have  a  place  somewhere  in  one  or
other  of  the  three  ij^reat  divisions  of  Hegel's  philo-
sophy. But  where  '^  Obviously  not  in  the  Logic ,  for
that  lies  ux\  the  other  side  of  everything  like  his-
torical  and natural development, as Hegel  expressly

' Lcct.  IV.  above,  p.  79.

-  J'hilosophie  der  Geschichie,  1840,  p.  34.  Ihis  illustration  was
omitted  Ijy  (lans,  the  editor  of  the  1837  edition,  who  professed  to
follow  Hegel's  own  revision  ;  but  it  was  inserted  in  the  second
edition  by  Hegel's  son  Karl,  (ians  having  in  the  meantime  died.


150  The  Phtralism  of  Hegel

maintained.  It  is  the  realm  of  pure  thought,  not  the
realm  of  ends.  In  the  Philosophies  of  Nature  and  of
Mind  the  Logic  is  applied  ;  but  their  contents,  as  such,
do  not  enter  into  it  or  concern  it.  Perception,  imagina-
tion and  the  like,  which  belong  to  self-conscious  mind,
are  to  be  as  completely  excluded  from  logic  as  are  the
forms  of  space  and  time  and  the  phenomena,  inorganic
or  orgfanic,  which  fill  them  out.  The  '  notion  '  is  not  to
be  regarded  as  an  act  of  the  self-conscious,  subjective,
intellect :  even  the  term  '  objective  thought '  is  awk-
ward as  applied  to  it,  for  thought  is  usually  referred
only  to  mind  or  consciousness,  and  objective  in  like
manner  primarily  only  to  the  unconscious\

Let  us  turn  next  to  the  Philosophy  of  Mind  \  for  in
his  Philosophy  of  History  Hegel  often  refers  to  the
'  world-spirit '  as  that  which  directs  and  controls  the
actions  of  men  to  subserve  its  own  supreme  end.  But
what  does  Hegel  himself  tell  us  in  the  Philosophy  of
Mind  about  this  '  world-spirit '  ?  "  This  movement,"
he  says  referring  to  the  course  of  history,  "  is  the  way,
whereby  the  spiritual  substance  is  liberated — the  deed,
whereby  the  absolute  final  purpose  of  the  world  is
accomplished  in  it,  [whereby]  the  spirit  that  at  first
exists  ov\\y  pote7ttially  (an  sich)...hQco\r\es  the  world-
spirit"."  Actually  then,  it  would  seem,  the  world-
spirit  corresponds  to  the  realised  plan  of  the  house
rather  than  to  the  architect  who  shapes  and  controls
the  materials.  A  plan  does  not  ordinarily  carry  itself
out.  Still,  it  may  be  urged,  a  mere  illustration  is  not
to  be  pressed. That,  of  course,  is  true ;  but  on  the

^  Cf.  Logik,  III.  pp.  21,  18;  Encyclopaedic,  §  24.
'  Philosophy  of  Mi?id,  Encycl.  in.  §  549  init.


The  Dialectic  and  the Tiiiic-illiisiou 151

other  hand  it  is  to  be  remembered  that,  according
to  Heg-el's  own  statement,  the  world-spirit  is  only
potentially  present  at  first,  only  gradually  attains  to
"  consciousness  and  self-consciousness  and  so  to  the
revelation  and  reality  of  its  perfect  nature,  its  nature
\\V€seii\2i's,  it  is  in  and  for  itself" — a  j)osition  which,
as  we  may  see  presently,  carries  important  conse-
quences. It  has  to  be  remembered  too  that  Hegel,
as  we  have  already  seen,  makes  a  point  of  insisting
that  the  plan  or  principle  or  end  of  history  needs
means  and  instruments  in  order  to  its  determinate
realisation  and  is  in  itself  only  '  general,  abstract,  not
completely  real.'

But  at  this  juncture  some  disciple  of  Hegel  may
refer  us  back  to  the  Logic  for  the  true  meaning  of
teleology.  There  Hegel  tells  us  "we  may  say  that
in  teleological  activity  the  end  is  the  beginning,  the
consequence  is  the  ground,  the  effect  is  the  cause,
a  case  of  becoming  is  a  case  of  what  has  become,
in  it  only  what  is  already  existing  comes  into  existence,
and  so  forth \"  Afterwards,  in  the  corresponding
section  of  the  so-called  S7nalle7'  Logic,  he  expresses
himself  still  more  strongly.  "As  a  matter  of  fact,"
he  here  says,  "  the  object  is  potentially  \aii  sicli\  the
notion  ;  and  so  when  the  notion,  as  end,  is  realised  in
the  object,  this  is  only  the  manifestation  of  the  inner
nature  of  the  object  itself.  Objectivity  is  thus,  as  it
were, only a covering under which the notion lies

concealed The consummation of  the inhnite I'.nd,

therefore,  consists  merely  in  selling  aside  {auflicboi)
the illusion  [which makes it  seem]  as  it ihe  vwkX  was

'  Lo^iki  III.  |).  228.


152  The  Pluralism  of  Hegel

not  yet  accomplished.  It  is  under  this  illusion  that
we  live,  and  at  the  same  time  it  is  this  illusion  alone
that  stirs  us  to  activity  \das  Bethiitigende]  and  on
which  our  interest  in  the  world  depends.  The  Idea
in  its  process  makes  for  itself  that  illusion — posits  an
Other  over  against  itself — and  its  activity  consists  in
setting  this  illusion  aside  \"  The  serpent  with  its  tail
in  its  mouth  is  an  ancient  mystic  symbol,  and  if  Hegel,
like  Herbert  Spencer,  had  bethought  himself  of  a
book-plate  to  adorn  his  theory  of  evolution,  doubtless
it  is  this  that  he  would  have  chosen.  Moreover  a
devoted  disciple  has  provided  the  motto  : — Serpens
nisi  serpentern  co7nederit  non  jit  draco".  It  would  be
needless  for  our  purpose  to  spend  time  in  discussing
the  validity  of  a  position  that  cannot  even  be  stated
without  contradicting  itself:  it  is  sufficient  to  observe
that  an  illusion  that  embraces  the  whole  range  of
experience  and  is  declared  to  be  the  source  alike  of  all
truth  in  theory  and  all  zest  in  practice  is  no  illusion
for  us.  This  appeal  to  the  Logic  then  does  not  help
us  in  our  search  :  it  only  confronts  us  once  more  with
the  problem  as  to  the  relation  of  the  dialectic  to  time.

Coming  back now  to  the  historical  again — which
the  employment  of  means  and  instruments  to  accom-
plish with  much  pain  and  labour  a  superhuman  end,
in  any  case  implies — there  is  only  the  PJiilosophy  of
Nature  left. In  Nature,  from  or  in  which  the  world's

^  E7icyclopaedie,  i.  §  212.  In  the  phrase  'sets  an  Other  over
against  itself,' — setzt  em  Anderer  sich  gegetiiiber,  Hegel,  like  Fichte
before  him,  seems  to  be  trying  to  read  his  own  philosophy  in  the
German  word  for  object,  i.e.  Gegenstand.

^  J.  E.  Erdmann,  Geschichte  der  neueren  Philosophie,  Bd  ni.
Abth.  ii.  p. 841.


Tivofohi  Relation  of  Nature  to  Miiui 1 53

process  begins,  can  we  find  the  guidino-  executive
whose  working  consummates  itself  in  the  fuhiess  of
time  ?  But  if  it  be  true  that  even  in  the  reahn  of
mind  the  world-spirit  works  at  first  underground  like
a  mole,  to  use  Hegel's  own  simile,  and  only  at  length
emerges  into  consciousness  and  self-consciousness,
surely  we  cannot  expect  to  find  it  enacting  the  part
of  a  supreme  and  intelligent  director  in  Nature,  where
contingency  runs  riot  like  a  bacchantic  god  and  its
impotence  sets  limits  to  philosophy,  which  that  cannot
overcome \  In  his  explication  of  the  notion  of  mind
Hegel  begins:  "Mind  \\2iS  for  us  Nature  as  W.'^  pre-
supposition, the  truth  of  which  and  so  the  absolute
Jirst  of  which  it  [nevertheless]  is."  Again,  speaking
of  its  development,  he  says  :  "  Mind  is  preceded  not
only  by  the  logical  Idea  but  also  by  external  Nature.
For  the  knoiijledge  already  involved  in  the  logical  idea
is  only  the  notion  of  knowledge  that  we  think,  not  the
knowledo^e  that  is  there  for  itself,  not  actual  mind  but
merely  its  possibility.  The  actual  mind,  which  alone
is  our  object-matter  in  the  science  ot  mind,  has  Nature
for  its  proximate,  as  it  has  the  logical  Idea  tor  its
jjrimary,  presupposition'-."  This  very  oracular  language
is  another  instance  of  the  seemingly  double-dealing  of
Hegel's  circular  theory  of  development,  and  once  again
we  must  claim  to  distinguish  sharply  between  the  dia-
lectical development — where  "the  Idea  thought  In  its
repose  is  indeed  timeless" — and  the  historical  develop-
ment, where  the  Idea  as  concrete  appears  to  be  "not
at  rest  but  an  existence  jjrogressing  in  time  '." W'iiat

' Cf.  above,  p. 140.  '^  Philosophy  of  Mind,  "i^  I'^x.

'  Cf.  Geschichte  der  J'hi/oso/>hie,  1.  p.  .\().


1 54  The  Pluralism  of  Hegel

Hegel's  explication  comes  to  then  seems  to  be  this  :
Nature  is  '  Mind  out  of  itself  from  the  abstract  stand-
point of  the  Logic;  but  it  is  Mind  not  yet  'come  to
itself  from  the  concrete  point  of  view  of  historical
development.  Seeing  that  in  the  Logic  we  have  not
actual  mind,  not  knowledge  but  only  its  possibility,
it  may  well  be  questioned  whether  this  mere  possibility
can  become  actual  by  passing  out  of  itself:  it  may
even  be  doubted  whether  mind  out  of  itself  can  be
called  mind  at  all.  No  wonder,  then,  that  thinkers
largely  in  sympathy  with  Hegel — as,  for  example,
von  Hartmann,  and  still  more,  Volkelt — regarded  his
system  as  really  a  philosophy  of  the  unconscious  ;  or
that  others,  trained  in  the  Hegelian  school,  like  Strauss
and  Feuerbach,  resolved  it  into  a  refined  naturalism.
From  such  constructions  there  seems  to  be  no  escape
unless  we  take  Hegel's  unconscious  nature  in  the
Leibnizian  or  pluralistic  fashion.  And  the  continuity
of  the  Hegelian  historical  evolution,  which  we  have
already  noted,  may  be  held  to  favour  such  an  inter-
pretation.

No  doubt  the  objection  will  at  once  occur,  that  for
Hegel  Nature  is  essentially  a  unity  that  only  appears
as  a  plurality.  But  is  that  after  all  so  clear  as  at  first
sight  it  seems — assuming,  of  course,  that  we  ignore
the  desperate  leap  from  the  Logic  to  Nature,  in  other
words  disallow  any  continuity  between  the  dialectical
and  the  historical  evolution  ?  Not  only  does  the  con-
tingency of  Nature  imply  plurality,  as  already  said,
but  Hegel  repeatedly  lays  emphatic  stress  on  what
he  calls  the  externality  (Atissereinander)  of  Nature,
not  simply  in  relation  to  mind,  but  to  itself;  and  on


Xafurc  as  Plurality  155

its  infinite  separation  ( l^ereinzehmg)  where  the  unity
of  form  is  still  ideal,  potential,  and  therefore  still  to
seek,  Nature  remaining  meanwhile  an  '  unresolved
contradiction.'  "Its  differences...,"  he  says,  "are
existences  more  or  less  independent  of  each  other  ;
throuij^h  their  original  unity  indeed  they  stand  in
relation  with  one  another,  so  that  no  one  is  con-
ceivable without  the  rest  ;  but  this  relation  is  for  them
in  a  higher  or  lower  deQ^ree  external  \"  Even  when
he  has  advanced  so  far  as  the  Philosophy  of  Mind
he  represents  the  soul  as  at  first  only  natural,  not  yet
sentient  or  actual  ;  and  a  propos  of  this  earliest  stage
he  remarks  : — "  As  the  light  breaks  up  into  an  infinite
multitude  of  stars,  so  also  the  general  Nature-soul
breaks  up  into  an  infinite  multitude  of  individual  souls  ;
only  with  this  difterence,  that,  whereas  the  light  has
the  appearance  of  existing  independently  of  the  stars,
the  general  Nature-soul  attains  to  actual  existence
only  in  the  separate  souls-."  This  comes  very  near
to  presentationism  or  the  'mind-dust  theory'  and  would
more  than  satisfy  the  pluralists  of  our  day.

So  far  we  have  been  considering  Hegel's  interpre-
tation of  that  heterogony  of  ends  which  in  common
with  the  pluralists  he  recognises  throughout  the  course
of  the  world's  history.  He  attributes  it  to  what  he
was  fond  of  calling  '  the  absolute  cunning  of  reason  '
or  the  world-spirit  in  ensuring  that  the  contmgency
of  all  things  fmite  shall  subserve  its  own  supreme  v\\(\.
This end so far we have; found him regarding as

' Cf. Philusophic  dcr  Naiin\ "i^  247, 248, 252; Pliilou>p/iy of
Mind,  ?;  381, /usatz.

-  P/ii/oso/y/iv  of  Mind,  §  390.


156  TJie  Pluralism  of  Hegel

external  to,  and  independent  of,  its  instruments  ;  and
even  as  directed  against  them,  as  a  house  is  built  by
means  of  the  forces  of  nature  in  order  to  set  them  at
defiance.  But  we  have  been  unable  to  find  in  Hegel's
philosophy  any  evidence  of  this  world-spirit  in  its  7'6le
of  superintending  overruler.  We  have  found  the  house
in  progress,  but  no  architect  ;  or  rather  we  have  found
the  whole  metaphor  bursting  its  bounds,  as  Hegel  would
say  ;  for  the  completed  house  is  to  be  the  architect.

Does  the  house  then  build  itself?  So  the  pluralist
would  say ;  in  so  saying,  however,  he  refuses  to
regard  the  finite  agents  in  history  as  simply  means
and  instruments  to  purely  alien  ends.  And  Hegel
after  all  does  likewise  :  as  instance,  the  following : —
"If  now  we  are  content  to  see  individuals,  their  ends
and  the  satisfaction  of  these,  sacrificed,  their  happiness
generally  abandoned  to  the  dominion  of  chance,  to
which  it  belongs  ;  if  we  are  content  to  consider  them
in  general,  as  falling  under  the  category  of  means,  still
they  have  one  side  which  we  hesitate  even  in  com-
parison with  the  Highest  to  regard  only  in  this  light...
viz.  their  moral  and  religious  side."  But  he  goes  much
farther,  and  presently  continues: — "If  we  speak  of  a
means  we  imagine  it  in  the  first  instance  as  only
external  to  the  end  and  as  having  no  part  in  that.
In  fact,  however,  natural^ things  generally,  let  alone
what  is  higher, — nay,  the  commonest  lifeless  objects
that  are  used  as  means — must  be  so  constituted  as  to
answer  to  the  end  or  have  something  in  them  that
they  share  with  it.  Men  least  of  all  stand  in  that
entirely  external  relation  as  means  to  the  end  of
reason. ..on  the  contrary  they  have  a  part  in  that  end


IiuHviihials  (ihcuiys  Ends  157

of  reason  and  are,  just  because  of  this,  ends  of  them-
selves \"  Now  we  must  here,  I  think,  admit  that
a  very  close  approximation  to  the  pluralist's  theory
of  evolution  is  at  least  implied.  Such  approximation
appears  still  closer  when  we  take  into  account  what
Hegel  has  said  a  propos  of  the  'absolute  cunning  of
reason' — how  it  stands  aside  and  leaves  things  to  inter-
act according  to  their  own  nature  ;  rubbing  together
and  frustrating  each  other,  while  it  never  itself  directly
interferes — how  it  allows  full  scope  to  human  passions
and  interests,  paying  the  tribute  of  transient  existence
[Dasein  nnd  Vergdnglichkeii)  not  out  of  itself  but  out
of  these,  while  it  foresees  the  result  to  be  not  the
accomplishment  of  our  designs  but  of  its  own".  This
very  deistic  account  of  an  assumed  spectator  of  the
world's  history,  whether  called  reason  or  God  or  Provi-
dence— and  Hegel  in  turn  calls  it  all  three — we  may
leave  entirely  aside,  for  we  have  been  able  to  find  it
only  as  the  culminating  Idea  of  the  dialectical  develop-
ment and  as  the  goal  of  the  historical.  All  that
immediately  interests  us  is  the  near  approach  that
Hegel  here  makes  to  the  pluralistic  position,  which —
as  we  have  seen — is  that  all  the  agents  at  work  in
history,  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest,  arc  not
primarily  means  to  external  ends,  not  primarily  things
but  persons  in  the  widest  sense';  that  by  their  mutual
interaction and striving — since all seek the good —

' Phihsoplik  tier  CJcschic/ite,  1837,  p.  t,t^.

•  Encyclopaedie,  i.  §  209.

'  In  saying  this  I  have  in  view  an  interesting  book  written  mainly
from  the  pluralistic  standpoint,  which  1  have  only  just  come  across—
Person  und  Sadie  by  I,.  W.  Slcrn,  190C.


158  The  Pluralisni  of  Hegel

gradually  eliminate  the  contingency,  which  their  com-
parative isolation — Hegel's  primitive  Ve^^einzehmg —
at  first  entails,  and  gradually  bring  about  the  reign
of  reason  and  right.  And  this  position  could  hardly
be  more  concisely  stated  than  in  words  that  are  Hegel's
own  : — "  The  history  of  the  world  shows  only  how
spirit  comes  gradually  to  the  consciousness  and  will
of  the  truth  :  this  dawns  upon  it ;  [then]  it  discerns
the  chief  features ;  eventually  it  attains  to  the  full
consciousness  of  it\"  The  long  introduction  to  his
Philosophy  of  History  is  full  of  similar  passages  which
suggest  not  a  preconceived  plan  steadily  carried  out
by  a  single  overruling  mind  employing  passive  instru-
ments, but  a  living  organization  slowly  and  tentatively
achieved  by  the  long  and  painful  efforts  of  generations
of  struggling  individuals.  Der  Tried  der  Perfecti-
bilit'dt  ist  die  Bestinmiung  der  Menschen,  Hegel  has
said,  and  all  that  history  shows  is  this  Trieb  at
work.

But  the  unity  of  the  whole  is  the  last  word  of
philosophy:  "All  philosophy  is  nothing  else  than  the
study  of  the  determinations  {^Besti7mmingen)  of  unity...
always  unity,  but  in  such  a  way  that  this  is  always
further  determined"  said  Hegel.  And  so  too  says
the  pluralist  to-day  :  how  far  the  two  agree  about  the
determination  we  must  consider  in  the  following  lectures,
when  we  shall  have  to  look  closer  into  this  aspect  of
pluralism  itself.

^  Philosophie  der  Geschic/ite,  1837,  p.  51.


LECTURE VIII.


THE HEGELIAN UNITY.


We  have  seen  that  there  is  a  strong  undercurrent
of  pluralism  running  through  the  whole  of  Hegel's
philosophy  regarded  as  '  the  thinking  consideration
o{  IhiJigs'  in  distinction  from  his  attempted  'dialectical
development  of  pure  thought'  But  of  course  every
philosophy  must  recognise  both  plurality  and  unity
in  some  fashion,  the  important  question  then  still
remains  :  Is  the  unity  with  Hegel,  as  with  the  pluralist,
result,  or  is  it  ground  and  presupposition  ;  historically
is  it  the  starting-point  or  is  it  the  goal  :  in  other  words
Is  there  a  unity  differentiated  into  a  plurality  or  is
there  a  plurality  organized  into  a  unity  ?  Here  again
I  think  we  shall  find  much  to  justify  us  in  affirming
the  second  alternative.  No  doubt  there  is  something
to  be  said  on  the  other  side  ;  of  that  the  disruption
of  the  Hegelian  school  within  five  years  of  the  master's
death  is  sufficient  evidence.  The  thinkers  on  the
Hegelian  right  held  that  Hegel  had  taught  the  abso-
lute priority  of  the  unit)'  as  personal  Creator  ■m\(\
Providence.  It  is  true  that  he  had  said  in  so  many
words  that  the  content  of  i)hilosophy  aiul  ol  religion
is  the  same,  the  difference  lying  onl\-  in  \\\v\\-  form  ;
the form of the one being logical {J^t-'grijj ), liiai of


i6o  The  Hegelian  Unity

the  other  beinor  figurative  i^Vorstellung).  It  is  true
that  he  had  found  speculative  interpretations  for  the
Christian  dogmas  of  the  Trinity,  the  incarnation,  the
atonement,  and  even  the  sacraments.  Nevertheless
the  verdict  of  succeeding  generations  has  been  given
almost  unanimously  in  favour  of  the  thinkers  of  the
Hegelian  left.  But  they  disavowed  altogether  Hegel's
attempt  to  incorporate  the  leading  tenets  of  Christianity
into  his  philosophy  of  absolute  idealism,  and  main-
tained its  essentially  pantheistic  structure.  Indeed  it
would  nowadays  seem  needless  to  refer  to  any  other
interpretation,  were  it  not  that  the  leading  exponents
of  Hegel  amongst  us  have  been  till  lately  members
of  the  right.  The  appeal  to  Hegel's  doctrine  of  the
Trinity  as  evidence  of  the  theistic  character  of  his
philosophy  is  particularly  unfortunate.  So  long  as  the
Christian  dogma  is- — so  to  say — read  into  it  between
the  lines,  it  might  pass  as  such.  But  taken,  as  it
ought  to  be,  with  the  context  of  the  Hegelian  philo-
sophy as  a  whole,  the  doctrine  is  obviously  and  trans-
parently pantheistic.  In  place  of  a  triple  personality
there  is  no  personality  at  all.  The  Trinity  is  simply
equated  to  the  main  triad  of  the  Hegelian  system,
Logic,  Nature,  Spirit  as  severally  Thesis,  Antithesis
and  Synthesis.  Let  us  briefly  consider  each  in  turn.
In  an  important  and  often-quoted  paragraph  de-
fining the  nature  of  Logic,  Hegel  concludes  :- — "  Logic
accordingly  is  to  be  understood  as  the  system  of  pure
reason,  as  the  realm  of  pure  thought.  This  realm  is
the  truth  as  it  is  unveiled  in  and  for  itself.  We  can
therefore  say  that  this  content  sets  God  before  us  as
he is in his eternal essence before the creation of


Hegel s  Doctrine  of  fJie  Trinity i6i

Nature  and  finite  spirit \"  God  the  Father  then,  or
rather  what  Hegel  describes  as  the  Kingdom  of  the
Father,  answers  to  this  realm  of  pure  thought,  this
'  realm  of  shadows,'  as  he  proceeds  a  few  pages  later
to  call  it.  All  the  unity  we  can  expect  to  find  here
then  is  an  ideal  unity.  But  no,  the  orthodox  Hegelian
may  reply,  within  the  Kingdom  of  the  Father  we  find,
according  to  Hegel's  own  teaching,  the  generation
of  the  Son  and  the  procession  of  the  Spirit :  we  have
the  archetype  of  all  community,  divine  love.  "  In
friendship,  in  love,"  Hegel  himself  has  said,  "  I  give
up  my  abstract  personality  and  by  so  doing  win  it
back  as  concrete  personality.  The  true  in  personality
then  is  just  this,  to  gain  personality  through  this
absorbing  and  being  absorbed  in  the  other."  Yes,
but  in  the  case  of  the  Trinity  what  exactly  is  this
other  .•*  Had  Hegel  been  content  to  leave  this  'silent
mystery  '  as  he  calls  it  still  fermenting  in  the  thoughts
of  men  as  he  professed  to  find  it,  or  had  he  been
content  on  religious  grounds  to  accept  it  as  the  directly
revealed  truth,  which  Christian  theology  proclaims  it
to  be,  we  should  have  nothing  to  say.  Nothing-  at
least,  unless  it  were  to  protest  against  a  philosopher
meddling  with  what  is  avowedly  either  mystical  or
'revealed.'  But  he  essays  to  explain  it.  "The  relation
of  father  and  son  is  taken  from  organic  life  and  is  only
figuratively  used... and  so  never  entirely  corresponds
with  what  ought  to  be  expressed."  IMiilosophy  alone
is  competent  lo  put  the  truth  in  adecjuate  form  and
this  form  is  the  dialectic  developnuiu  through  the
moments or functions of the so-called Subj(x-tive

'  Loi^ik,  I-  I'-  35-

W.  I  I


1 62  The  Hegelian  Unity

notion,  through  universaHty  and  particularity  to  indi-
viduality. In  Hegel's  fearfully  laboured  expositions
this is  the  only  thing  that  stands  out  clearly.

The  so-called  Kingdom  of  the  Father  is,  it  is  true,
itself  a  triad  within  the  first  moment — universality  ;  and
though  the  notion  becomes  increasingly  adequate  and
concrete  as  we  advance,  still  the  whole  movement  falls
within  the  realm  of  pure  thought.  Even  this  triune
God,  if  we  like  so  to  call  it,  is  still  without  the  world
and  so  not  God,  as  Hegel  himself  has  said  in  so  many
words.  The  terms  which  in  the  course  of  a  few  pages
he  applies  to  the  first  person  of  the  Trinity  are  con-
clusive so  far.  "  The  eternal  Idea  that  is  not  yet
posited  in  its  reality  but  is  itself  still  the  abstract
Idea";  "God  as  simply  the  Father  is  not  yet  the
true";  "The  abstract  God,  the  Father,  is  the  universal" ;
"  This  universal  implies  the  complete  Idea,  but  also
only  implies  it,  is  only  potentially  Idea."  In  keeping
with  such  language  are  the  various — chiefly  neo-
Platonic — attempts  to  reach  the  truth,  which  Hegel
thought  deserving  of  recognition  ;  in  the  course  of
which  we  come  across  such  phrases,  as  for  example,
the  ^Ov,  the  Abyss  or  Deep,  that  is  as  good  as  to  say,
what  is  as  yet  empty  ;  the  irpoTrdrcop  who  is  a  Father
only  mediately,  the  Trpoap^rj,  He  who  was  before  the
beginning;  and  so  on'.  The  'process'  within  this
universal  Hegel  describes  pardy  in  biological,  partly —
as  we  have  already  seen — in  ethical,  language,  partly,
that  is  to  say,  as  life,  partly  as  love. "  Life,"  he  says,

'  Philosophie  der  Religion,  2te  Aufl.  1840,  Bd  11.  p.  244,  Eng.
trans,  by  Speirs  and  Sanderson,  in.  p.  30.  Though  references  are  given
to  this  the  translations  in  the  text  have  been  made  independently.


The  Kijigdoiii  of  the  Father  163

"  preserves  itself,  preservation  means  passing  into
difference,  into  the  struggle  with  particularity,  means
finding  itself  to  be  distinct  over  against  inorganic
nature.  Life  is  thus  only  a  result,  since  it  has  gene-
rated itself;  is  a  product  that  in  the  second  place  again
produces  :...\vhat  is  produced  is  already  there  from  the
becrinninor.  The  same  holds  true  in  love  and  love
returned\"  Obviously  this  is  the  figurative  language
appropriate  to  religion,  which  for  Hegel  was  but  one
remove  from  art :  for  philosophy  such  forms  are  still
inadequate.  Accordingly  Hegel  has  no  sooner  elabo-
rated his  comparisons  than  he  proceeds  to  tone  them
down.  For  the  divine  life  there  is  no  external  ;  and
so  here,  "  the  process,"  he  says,  "  is  thus  nothing  but
the  play  of  self-preservation,  of  making  sure  of  one's
self''."  So  again,  having  described  love  as  between
two  persons,  he  then  characterizes  the  divine  love,
as  involving  "  this  distinction  and  the  nullity  of  this
distinction,  a  play  which  is  not  in  earnest,  the  dis-
tinction being  just  posited  as  abolished^"  In  the  end
then  we  find  Hegel  coming  back  to  the  realm  of  pure
thought  as  alone  furnishing  an  adequate  account  of
this  process  as  he  all  along  maintained.  Here,  he
says,  it  is  manifest  "that  every  definite  notion  is  this —
to  set  itself  aside  {sick  selbst  au/hcben),  as  being  its  own
contradiction,  consequently  to  become  its  own  difference
and  to  posit  itself  as  such.  And  thus  the  Notion  itself
still  retains  this  one-sidedness  or  finitude,that  it  is  some-
thing subjective;  the  detc-rminations,  ihc  differences  are
posited  only  as  ideal,  not  in  fact  as  differences. This

'  Op.  cii.  11.  p.  241,  E.i.  111.  p.  26.

'  C*/.  r/V.  II.  p.  241,  E.t.  III.  ]).  27. *  6>/.  r//.  II.  p.  227,  i:.t.  III.  p.  II.

I  I 2


164  The  Hegelian  Unity

is  the  Notion  that  objectifies  itself\" But  again  the
question  recurs  :  What  exactly  is  this  objectification  ?

Passing  so  to  the Kingdom  of  the  Son  we  come
upon  the  Other,  Difference,  the  Objective,  as  fact  and
not  merely  as  thought :  this  is  the  region  of  '  infinite
particularity'  not  of  'total  particularity'  or  universality.
Here  plurality  precedes  unity. Referring  back  to  the
Kingdom  of  the  Father — wherein the  differentiation
"is  only  a  relation  of  God,  of  the  Idea  to  itself,  only
a  play  of  love  with  itself,  in  which  it  never  attains  to
the  seriousness  of  Other-being,  to  separation  and  dis-
union [Bnizweiung)'^ — Hegel  remarks  "that  we  have
not yet  got  to  difference  in  its  completeness, in  the
form  that  peculiarly  belongs  to  it  [in  seiner  Eigenthilm-
lichkeit)....\n  order  then  that  difference  may  be,  and
in  order  that  it  may  come  to  its  rights,  Os^x^'c -being  is
requisite,  so  that  what  is  differentiated  may  be  Other-
being  as beent  (Seyendes)^" — to use Dr Hutchison
Stirling's term. This Other, let go as something
independent,  is  the  World  in  general,  that  is Nature
and  finite  minds. But  now  comes  the  difficulty  :  how
are  the  Son  and  the  World  related  'i How  does  the
playful, ideal  differentiation, which amounts only to
abstract  difference  in  general,  stand  towards  the  com-
plete and  actual  differentiation  of  a  World  let  go  in
deadly  earnest,  in  such  wise  'let  go'  that  Hegel,  like
Schelling,  can  even  refer  to  it  as  der  Abfall  der  Idee,
wherein  the  Idea  is  'estranged  from  itself'.'* This  is
again  the  question  we  raised  just  now  :  what  exactly
is  the  Other  }

^  Op.  cit.  n.  p.  232,  E.t.  m.  p.  16.

^  Op.  cit.  2nd  ed.  11.  p.  249,  E.t.  ni.  p.  35.


The  K'nigdojji  of  tJie  Son  165

If  we  stop  at  the  Other  in  the  Kingdom  of  the
Father,  we  have  not  gone  far  enough  ;  but  if  we  ad-
vance to  the  Other  in  the  Kingdom  of  the  Son,  we  seem
to  have  gone  too  far.  In  the  one  we  have  merely  what,
stripped  of  all  more  concrete  metaphors,  Hegel  can
only  describe  as  '  a  movement '  in  the  realm  of  pure
thought :  in  fact,  however,  when  we  look  closer,  it  is
hard  to  see  how  we  can  have  even  this.  For  though
it  be  true  that  every  '  definite  notion '  implies  negation,
it  is  not  easy  to  see  why  or  how  the  '  pure  notion,  the
notion  apart  from  all  limitation,'  should  imply  it  \
However  even  granting  that  this  dialectical  movement
is  in  itself  conceivable,  the  only  point  that  interests  us
is  that  in  it  difference  does  not — to  use  Hegel's  own
phrase — "get  its  rights,  the  right  of  diversity  {Ver-
se hiedenheit)  "  or  plurality,  as,  in  view  of  the  context,
we  may  I  think  render  it.  Now  it  is  in  the  Kingdom
of  the  Son,  he  tells  us,  that  this  "advance  to  further
determination  takes  place  :... We  thus  enter  into  the
sphere  of  determination,  i.e.  of  space  and  the  world
of  finite  mind'."  And  here  Hegel,  as  I  have  said,  has
too  much  on  his  hands.  And  he  is  far  from  oblivious
of  the  fact.

'  We  may  talk  of  'subjective  need'  in  a  finite  life,  a  finite
friendship;  but  to  suppose  that  the  content  of  the  'divine  notion,'
the  first  person  in  the  Hegelian  Trinity,  implies  anything  analogous
to  this  must  surely  appear  meaningless,  when  we  recall  how  that
content  is  described.  Well,  then,  may  a  critic  describe  this  "  life  in
the  categories  as  the  most  inconceivable  thing  in  the  world  "  (A.  Drews,
Die  dftitsche  Speculation  seit  Kant :  das  Wesen  des  Absolutm  und  die
Personlichkeit  Gottes,  2te  Ausg.  1895,  Bd  1.  j).  248).  It  is  certainly
the  veriest  travesty  of  the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  'IVinity.

'  Op.  cit.  II.  pp.  250  f.,  I">.t.  III.  p[).  37  f.


1 66  The  Hegelian  Unity

Two  very  different  '  movements,'  or  processes,  are
clearly  implied,  but  Hegel  feels  bound  to  show  that
these  two  are  somehow  one.  So  he  refers  to  them  as
two  moments  in  the  analysis  of  the  Son,  which  are
kept  apart  and  yet  both  contained  in  Him.  The
difficulty  is  really  the  old  one  of  getting  across  the
famous  '  ditch.'  How  much  at  a  loss  Hegel  is  is  shown
by  the  fact  that  he  thinks  it  illuminating  to  refer  to
Jacob  Boehm's  description  of  '  the  transition '  between
the  two  moments  of  the  Son  :  how  "  the  first  only-
begotten  Lucifer  imagined  himself  in  himself,  advanced
to  being  and  so  fell ;  and  how  immediately  the  eternally
Only-begotten  took  his  placed"  On  the  strength  of
this  piece  of  utter  mysticism  Hegel  proceeds  to  refer
to  "  a  state  before  time  was  when  the  angels,  God's
children,  sang  his  praises,"  and  then  more  exactly
defines  this  '  state '  as  the  relation  of  thought  to  its
object.  Apparently  then  not  only  was  there  a  Trinity
in  the  eternal  realm  of  pure  thought,  the  Kingdom  of
the  Father,  but  a  complete  and  harmonious  choir  of
ideas  as  well,  reminding  us  of  Plato's  ideal  world.
Apparently  too  the  world  in  space  and  time  was  after
all  not  '  freely  let  go '  but,  in  advancing  to  its  rights
of  Other-being  and  plurality,  really  revolted  and  fell.
Without  attempting  to  resolve  this  difficulty  as  to  the
Abfall  der  Idee  and  two  Only-begotten,  we  may  con-
tent ourselves  with  noticing  that  it  furnishes  Hegel
with  an  additional  reason  for  distinguishing  the two

'  This  passage  calls  to  mind  Goethe's  account  of  his  early
theological  speculations,  in  Dichtung  und  Wahrheit^  bk  vii.  He  too
speaks  of  Lucifer  'believing  that  he  found  himself  in  himself  and
of  the  creation  and  fall  that  resulted.


The  two  forms  of  'flic  OtJicr' 167

and  keeping  them  apart  ;  for  otherwise  the  false
position  would  arise  "as  //^"  to  quote  his  words,  ''the
eternal  Son  of  tJie  Fathei\  the  Godhead  existing
objectively'  for  itself,  were  the  sa7uc  as  the  world,
as  if  by  that  only  this  were  to  be  understood'."  And
yet,  notwithstanding  all,  he  still  maintains  that  the
two  are  implicitly  the  same  :  the  Idea,  that  is  to  say,
is  in  itself  the  same,  merely  the  form  is  different :  it  is
only  figurative  thought  {  Vorstcllung)  that  holds  the  two
apart  as  two  wholly  diverse  spheres  and  acts.  More
explicitly,  Hegel's  final  solution  of  the  difficulty — in
spite  of  all  that  he  has  said  about  divine  history  as  the
process  of  self-differentiation,  of  God  without  the  world
not  being  God,  and  much  beside — is  simply  to  sweep
away  time  and  declare  the  world  of  finitude  to  be  only
the  erepou,  limited,  negative  etc.,  that  as  such  has  no
truth.  Regarded  from  the  point  of  view  of  time,  "it  is
merely  an  instant  [Au^e^ibiiek),  like  the  gleam  of  the
lightning-flash,  which  in  its  appearing  has  immediately
disappeared.  But  what  we  have  really  got  to  do  is  to
get  rid  of  every  time-determination,  whether  duration

or  the  now The  world  as  temporal  is  just  the  region

of  contradiction,  the  Idea  in  a  form  inadequate  to  it\"
The  one  Other  then  has  two  forms,  one  true  and  the
other  untrue  ;  the  unveiled,  eternal  Other  of  the  realm
of  pure  thought,  the  Kingdom  of  the  Father,  and  the
phenomenal,  half-concealed,  half-revealed  Other  of  the
Kingdom  of  the  Son  ;  the  Other  that  makes  no  dif-
ference in  the  unsullied  light  of  the  divine  self-identity

'  But  has  Hegel  ever  made  this  'objective  existence'  clear?
'  Of>.  at.  II.  p.  251,  E.t.  III.  [).  39.
*  Op.  cit.  II.  p.  252,  K.t.  III.  p.  40.


1 68  The  Hegelian  Unity

and  the  Other  that  refracts  and  disperses  it  in  endless
particoloured  beams  ;  God  in  his  eternal  essence  and
the  world  of  infinite  particularity,  of  subjective  con-
sciousness and  ordinary  thought,  that  is  the  world
of  experience,  the  historical  realm  of  ends.

Now  surely  in  all  this  we  may  say  that  one  thing
at  least  seems  clear :  what  Hegel  undertook  to  ex-
plain— the  transition  from  the  Kingdom  of  the  Father
to  the  Kingdom  of  the  Son — "how  this  Idea  passes
out  of  its  universality  and  infinity  into  finitude  "  proves
to  be  inexplicable.  The  Kingdom  of  the  Father,  then,
to  which  the  Son  as  the  eternally  Only-begotten  be-
longs, is  thus — as  I  attempted  to  show  in  the  second
lecture — the  undiscovered  country  from  whose  bourn
no  traveller  returns.  The  Absolute  cannot  be  the
startingpoint  of  real  knowledge, — it  may  be  the  ulti-
mate goal  of  philosophical  speculation.  Experience
may  lead  us  to  frame  the  idea  of  the  Absolute,  but  it
will  not  enable  us  to  deduce  the  world  of  the  Many
from  it.  Among  the  opening  sentences  of  his  ex-
position of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Son,  Hegel  has  the
following  which  comes  near  to  admitting  the  truth
of  all  this  : — "  First  there  was  the  Idea  in  the  element
of  thought :  this  is  the  foundation  and  with  it  we  have
begun  ;  [for]  the  Universal  and  therefore  more  abstract
must  precede  [all  else]  in  science^"  ;  but  in  fact  "it  is
the  later  in  existence  ;  it  is  the  potential  {das  Ansich)
but  it  comes  later  to  consciousness  and  knowledge"."
That  is  to  say  the  Idea  in  the  element  of  thought,  to

^  Hegel uses 'science' here  in  a Fichtean sense, that  is  as
equivalent  to  philosophy.

^  Op.  cit.  II.  p.  247,  E.t.  III.  p.  33.


TJie  tyaiisition  to  the  Kiiigdoni  of  the  Son 1 69

which  Hegel  has  relegated  the  persons  of  the  Christian
Trinity,  lies  behind  existence  and  experience  :  as  he
goes  on  immediately  to  say,  "the  for7n  of  the  Idea
comes  to  appearance  as  result,  which  however  is
essentially  potentiality  [das  AnsicJi)!'  Clear  in  itself,
such  language  is  nevertheless  not  a  little  confusing  in
view  of  the  context,  that  we  were  just  now  discussing,
in  which  it  occurs.  For  there  the  whole  finite  world
of  our  conscious  experience  is  declared  to  be  illusory,
inadequate,  and  untrue,  and  the  movement  within  the
realm  of  thought  to  be  verily  reality,  truth,  infinity.
But  there  still,  of  course,  remains  the  Kingdom  of  the
Spirit,  in  which  this  estrangement  of  the  Idea,  which
constitutes  the  inadequacy  of  the  finite  world,  is  finally
overcome.

This  estrangement  is  puzzling  not  only  for  the
reasons  we  have  already  considered,  but  also  in  yet
another  respect.  Thus,  at  the  end  of  the  Lo^ic,  Hegel
describes  the  Idea  as  impelled  to  realise  itself  beyond
the  confines  of  pure  thought  and  pictures  it  as  freely
but  with  absolute  self-confidence  taking  the  plunge
into  another  sphere.  This,  as  we  have  seen,  is  a
difficult  situation  to  conceive,  but  the  result  is  equally
bewildering.  For  the  plunge,  when  made,  has  at
once  to  be  undone:  the  Idea,  dissipated  and  out  of
itself,  has  painfully  to  collect  itself  again  and  rise  anew
to  its  pristine  unity.  Fortunately  it  was  not  let  go  as
a  whole:  it  is  only  the  second  element  or  inoniciit,
that  ol  particularity,  that  answers  to  Nature,  aiul  the
externalisation  which  was  the  work  of  the  first  moment
is  internalised  anew  through  the  third.  This  Kingdom
of  the  Spirit  we  have  presently  to  consider: I  ;uiticipate


I  JO  The  Hegelian  Unity

it  here  because  the  continuation  of  the  sentence  just
now  quoted  is  somewhat  clearer  when  this  is  taken
into  account.  The  whole  sentence  runs  : — "  T\i^form
of  the  Idea  comes  to  appearance  as  result,  which
however  is  essentially  potentiality ;  as  the  content  of
the  Idea  is  such  that  the  last  is  the  first  and  the  first
the  last,  so  is  what  appears  as  result,  the  presupposition,
the  potentiality,  the  foundation^"  This  is  the  cardinal
principle  of  Hegel's  doctrine  of  development,  to  which
I  have  already  several  times  referred  :  the  end  is  the
beginning,  for  the  beginning  is  its  presupposition,  and
out  of  this  nothing  comes  but  what  is  already  there.
There  is  a  sense  in  which  this  paradox  may  be  true
and  have  a  meaning  :  there  is  a  sense  in  which  it  is  not
true  but  self-contradictory.  It  may  be  justifiable  when
we  are  dealing  with  essence  and  its  explication,  with  a
dialectical  movement :  it  is  not  true  of  existence  and
of  historical  evolution.  The  plausibility — but  also  the
falsity — of  Hegel's  position  lay  in  identifying  the  two.
Bare  potentiality,  the  bare  idea  of  an  end  to  be  ac-
complished, however  sublime,  however  completely
explicated  in  respect  of  its  essential  import,  will  never
become  actuality.

But  is  it  so  certain,  it  may  be  urged,  that  what
according  to  Hegel  philosophy  places  first  of  all  is  not
the  supreme  reality }  Unquestionably  if  we  could
suppose  that  what  he  meant  was  simply  that — though
we  only  gradually  attain  to  a  knowledge  of  God,  yet
when  we  do — we  may  believe  that  God  is  not  merely
the  ratio  essendi,  but  is  also  the  personal  creator  and
conserver  of  all,  we  should  have  less  difficulty.  But
^  Op.  cit.  II.  p.  247,  E.t.  III.  p.  33.


Hegefs  Doctrine  of  Development 1 7 1

the  whole  trend  of  his  system  is  against  such  an
interpretation.  Now  Spirit  for  Hegel,  it  will  be
remembered,  falls  into  the  triad  of  subjective,  objective
and  absolute  Spirit.  In  keeping  with  such  an  inter-
pretation, then,  as  Lotze  has  remarked,  "  we  should
have  expected  that  absolute  spirit... would  have  re-
turned,...only  with  greater  depth  of  meaning  and
perfection,  to  the  form  that  spirit  possessed  in  the  first
stage  of  this  development,  the  form  that  is  to  say  of
personal,  individual  Spirit \"  But  as  we  are  aware,
Hegel's  Absolute  Spirit,  the  counterpart  of  the  Abso-
lute Idea  in  the  Logic,  was  something  wholly  different
from  this.  What  Hegel  places  first  is  then  neither
a  single  substance  nor  a  single  subject.  As  the  latest
and  one  of  his  ablest  commentators,  Kuno  Fischer,
has  said,  "  the  main  theme  running  through  t,he  whole
of  his  philosophy  is  the  development  of  the  world  in
accordance  with  reason.  What  is  developed  is  rational
consciousness,  spirit,  the  self-knowledge  of  humanity."
All  actual  development  of  course  presupposes  its  own
possibility,  and  it  is  just  this  that  Hegel  places  first  as
potential  end  and  aim.  He  declares  thought  and  being
to  be  identical  and  yet  places  abstract  thought  at  the
beginning  and  then  fails  to  effect  its  union  with  actual
being  again.  Let  me  quote  another  commentary :
"  It  may  be  all  very  well  to  declare  that  the  life  of

'  "Of  course,"  Lotze  adds,  "we  could  then  properly  regard  the
whole-  series  of  philosophical  notions,  that  were  to  lead  up  to  this
climax,  not  as  furnishing  a  history  of  the  development  of  dod
himself,  but  only  as  the  history  of  our  ideas  concerning  his  nature.
In  so  far  as  this  interpretation  of  it  is  impossible  the  dialectical
exposition  must  be  changed."  Geschichte  der  <kutsch(n  Philosophif
sett  Kant, 1882, pp. 71  f.


172  The  Hegelian  Unity

God  and  the  divine  knowledge  is  a  play  of  love  with
itself;  [but]  such  an  idea  sinks  to  the  devotional  or
even  to  insipidity,  if  the  seriousness,  the  pain,  the
patience  and  labour,  of  the  negative  are  lacking  in  it.
In  itself  that  life,  it  may  be,  is  undisturbed  harmony
and  unity  with  itself,  in  which  there  is  no  concern
about  other-being  and  its  estrangement,  and  as  little
about  overcoming  this  estrangement.  But  this  [life]
in  itself  {dies  Ansicli)  is  abstract  universality,  wherein
its  nature,  to  he.  for  itself  is  ignored."  But  'nature,'
let  me  parenthetically  remark,  implies  process.  This
commentary  is  Hegel's  own,  and  occurs  in  one  of  the
very  last  paragraphs  that  he  revised  for  the  press.
After  another  sentence  or  two  he  continues  :  "  The
true  is  the  whole.  The  whole  however  is  only  the
essence  completing  itself  through  its  own  develop-
ment. Of  the  Absolute  it  is  to  be  said  that  it  is
essentially  result,  that  not  till  the  end  is  it  what  it  is

in truth What though the embryo be  potentially

man,  it  is  still  not  actually  so :  it  is  that  only  as
matured  reason,  which  has  77iade  itself  to  what  it  is
potentially \"  The  true  inwardness  of  Hegel's  paradox
that  the  Idea  must  first  make  itself  to  what  it  is,  that
its  end  was  its  aim  from  the  beginning,  so  that  like  the
circle  it  only  completes  itself  in  returning  into  itself —
should  now  be  clear.

The  difference  between  the  actual  and  the  potential
is  regarded  not  as  a  difference  of  existence  but  as  what
Hegel  somewhat  oddly  terms  a  difference  of  form.
Here  is  an  example  that  he  gives  :  "The  man  who  is

'  Cf.  Phaenomenologie,  pp. 15 — 17. Prof.  JBaillie's translation
I.  pp.  16  ff.


TJie  Potential  and  the  Actual 173

potentially  rational  has  advanced  no  further  when  he  is
actually  rational.  The  potentiality  {das  Ansicli)  is
conserved  and  yet  the  difference  is  quite  enormous.  No
new  content  has  emerged,  yet  the  form  is  an  enormous
difference.  On  this  difference  all  the  difference  in  the
world's  history  turns\"  This  reminds  us  of  his  former
allegforv  of  the  house  :  it  is  as  if  one  said,  the  house
and  the  plan  of  it  are  logically  the  same.  When  we
have  both  we  have  a  difference  of  form,  or  what  he  calls
a  duplication  :  we  have  the  plan  and  the  plan  out  of
itself.  But  suppose  the  house  became  self-conscious  :
it  would,  Hegel  assumes,  in  that  case  recognise  the
identity  between  itself  and  its  plan  :  the  duplication
would  yield  to  identity,  and  the  end  coincide  with  the
beginning.  Yes,  logically  or  ideally  perhaps  ;  but  still
there  is  '  the  enormous  difference.'  A  conjuror  throws
up  a  picture  and  it  comes  down  a  watch  :  how  are  we
going  to  account  for  that,  especially  how,  if  we  have
no  conjuror  ?  But  in  truth  it  turns  out  that  it  is  after
all  not  a  plan,  a  picture  or  an  idea  with  which  we
begin,  but  a  germ  and  an  impulse.  "  The  potentiality
determines  the  course  of  the  development " — so  we
say  after  the  event — but  it  does  not  provide  the
motive.  There  is  besides  an  impulse  towards  self-
development,  something  "that  cannot  endure  to  be
only  potential  "  :  this  is  '  the  germ  '  that  is  thus  alreatly
partly  actual.  "The  impulse,"  says  Hegel,  "is  the
contradiction,  that  it  [the  germ  J  is  only  potential  and
yet  ought  not  to  be  so.  The  impulse  puts  forth  into
existence^"  This  is  the  point  where  Hegel  essays  to
ford  his  ditch  :  the  impulse  in  historical  development

' Geschichte  cicr  Philusophie,  1833,  i.  p.  34.  •'  Ibid.  p.  35.


174  The  Hegelian  Unity

and  the  contradiction  in  dialectical  development  are
identified;  and  the  former,  as  temporal  and  phenomenal,
is,  as  much  as  may  be,  suppressed.

To  recognise  this  *  monstrous '  vcrTepou  nporepov,
as  Schopenhauer  called  it,  of  Hegel's  panlogism  is  to
recognise  that  in  his  zeal  for  thoroughness  he  over-
reached himself.  In  order  to  make  doubly  sure  of
his  foundation,  and  start  without  presuppositions  he
sundered  what  he  could  not  afterwards  unite.  The
unity  which  he  places  at  the  beginning,  so  far  from
being  suppositionless,  is  but  '  the  shadow '  of  the  unity
that  by  means  of  the  historical  method  he  reaches  in
the  end — the  slowly  and  painfully  achieved  unity  that
rests  on  plurality.  The  so-called  transition  to  the
Kingdom  of  the  Son,  from  the  Idea  to  Nature,  turns
out  to  be  no  veritable  transition  at  all,  to  be  not  the
spiritual  in  alienation  from  itself,  but  the  spiritual  at
the  outset  of  its  development.  The  Kingdom  of  the
Spirit  is  not  the  return  of  finite  spirits  to  the  eternal
Father  from  whom  they  have  wandered  nor  to  the
universal  source  whence  they  emanated  :  it  is  simply
the  advance  of  humanity  towards  an  absolute  conscious-
ness of  its  own  unity.  Passages  in  support  of  this
assertion  might  be  quoted  from  all  parts  of  Hegel's
works.  Here  are  some  :  "  The  consciousness  of  finite
spirit  is  concrete  being,  the  material  for  the  realisation
of  the  notion  of  God\"  Again,  "  In  the  higher  specu-
lative consideration  it  (Spirit)  is  ^/le  absolute  Spirit
itself,  which  in  order  to  be  for  itself  the  knowledge
of  itself,  differentiates  itself  in  itself,  and  thereby  posits
the  finiteness  of  spirit,  within  which  it  becomes  the
^  Fhilosophie  der  Religmi,  2te  Auf.  ii.  p.  551,  E.t.  in.  p.  365.


The  Ki}igiio))i  of  tJie  Spirit  1 75

absolute  object  of  the  knowledge  of  itself.  Thus  It  is
the  absolute  Spirit  in  its  community  (or  church), — the
actual  Absolute  as  Spirit  and  knowledge  of  itself*."
Again,  "  God  is  God  only  in  so  far  as  He  knows
himself:  his  self-knowledge  is,  further,  his  self-
consciousness  in  man,  and  man's  knowledge  of  God
which  proceeds  to  man's  self-knowledge  z'«  God"."
Once  more,  contrasting  religious  faith  with  historical
evidence,  he  says  of  the  former:  "This  rather  than  that
is  the  rise  of  the  community,  is  the  community  itself,
the  existing  Spirit,  the  Spirit  in  its  existence,  God
existing  as  community."  And  a  sentence  or  two  later
on,  in  referring  to  the  three  persons  of  the  Trinity  : —
"  The  first  was  the  Idea  in  its  simple  universality  for
itself. ...The  second  was  the  Idea  in  its  externality,  so
that  the  external  phenomenon  is  brought  back  to  the
first,  is  known  as  divine  Idea — the  identity  of  the
human  and  divine.  The  third  is  this  consciousness,
God  as  Spirit,  and  this  Spirit  as  existing  in  the
£0Jn?nu7iity\''  F"inally,  "God  Is  infinite.  Ego  finite:
these  are  false,  objectionable  expressions,  forms  that
are inappropriate  to the Idea, to the nature  of the

fact God  is  the  movement  to  the  finite... in  the  Ego,

as  that  which  Is  annulling  Itself  as  finite,  God  returns
to  himself,  and  only  as  this  return  is  He  God.  With-
out the  world  God  Is  not  God'."  The  full  skmificance
of  the.se  and  many  more  passages  of  like  Import'  only

'  Aistheiik,  \.  p.  122.  '  J^hilosophy  of  Mind,  Kncycl.  in.  §564.

*  Philosophie  lUr  Reli^^ion,  istc  Auf.,  1832,  11.  p.  261.

*  Op.  cit.  2tc  Auf.  I.  p.  194,  Eng.  trans.  1.  j).  200.

*  Several  of  which  will  be  found  in  Drews'  Deutsche  Spea.laiion
u.s.7t>.,  vol.  I.  i)p.  260  ff.  and  in  McTaggart's  Studies  in  tin-  //ci^clian
Cosrno/ogy,  pj).  20H  ff.


176  The  Hegelian  Unity

becomes  apparent  when  we  remember  that,  according
to  Hegrel,  God  before  this  reaHsation  in  the  finite,  this
existence  as  the  community,  this  self-consciousness  in
man,  this  return  to  Himself,  is  only  this  very  result
ideally  regarded  as  its  own  presupposition.  God  comes
to  consciousness  only  in  humanity,  and  otherwise  is
not  God,  not  Spirit,  but  only  Idea.  But  an  Idea  is
not  conscious,  though  it  implies  consciousness  :  hence
God  as  Idea  is  either  the  unconscious,  as  Schopenhauer
and  von  Hartmann  maintained,  or  an  abstract  essence
that  'comes  later  to  existence,'  as  Hegel  himself  by
turns  concedes  and  denies  as  he  alternates  between
the  historical  and  the  dialectical.

But  much  more  impressive  than  any  string  of
quotations  is  the  whole  drift  of  Hegel's  Philosophy
of  Religion  and  especially  of  the  long  section  devoted
to  the  so-called  Kingdom  of  the  Spirit.  In  the  latter
referring  to  the  divinity  of  Christ  he  says  it  is  "clear

that  the Community  of  itself  produces this faith

Whereas  grateful  peoples  have  placed  their  bene-
factors only  among  the  stars,  the  Spirit  has  recognised
subjectivity  as  an  absolute  moment  of  the  divine
nature.  The  person  of  Christ  has  been  decreed  by
the  Church  to  be  the  Son  of  God'."  Miracles,  the
words  of  the  Bible,  Councils  and  such  like  have  no-
thing to  do  with  it.  "  The  true  Christian  content
of  faith  is  to  be  justified  by  philosophy,  not  by  history."
Not  by  history  as  ordinarily  understood  Hegel  means,
but  taking  the  philosophy  of  history  in  its  widest
sense,  then  by  that  and  nothing  else.  It  is  all  'divine
history,'  'development  in  conformity  with  reason,'
' Op.  cit.  II.  p.  328,  Eng.  trans,  iii.  p.  121.


The  '  Phoioueiwlogy  of  Spirit' 177

Hegel  affirms.  Yes,  but  chequered  and  distorted  by
contingency  to  an  indefinite  extent,  emerging  gradually
out  of  superstition  and  phantasy,  out  of  sorrow  and
disappointment.  "  The  sorrow  of  the  world,"  he  has
said,  "was  the  birth-place  of  the  impulse  of  Spirit  to
know  God  as  spiritual  in  universal  form  and  stript
of  finitude.  This  want  was  begotten  through  the
progress  of  history  and  the  development  of  the  world-
spirit."  Hercules  was  deified  by  the  Greeks,  the
Roman  Emperor  was  revered  as  God  ;  and  Christ
was  decreed  to  be  the  Son  of  God  only  by  the  same
effort  of  Spirit  as  that  which  lies  at  the  basis  of  those
earlier  forms  and  can  be  recognised  as  present  in  them.
"Out  of  the  ferment  of  finitude  as  it  changes  into  foam
Spirit  exhales  its  fragrance^"

When  we  pass  from  Hegel's  Philosophy  of  Religion
to  the  Phenot)ienology  of  Spirit  we  find  there  a  record
of  the  same  gradual  process  and  the  same  ultimate
result — an  account  which  runs  closely  on  all  fours  with
that  which  the  pluralist  would  give.  It  starts  with
mere  sentient  experience,  which  advances  towards
self-consciousness,  as  the  subject,  in  shaping  and  con-
trolling its  environment,  realises  its  own  independence
as  an  agent.  Finally  it  reaches  the  stage  of  reason,  as
such  incipicntly  self-conscious  agents  enter  into  social
relations  and  become  fully  self-conscious ;  then  too
they  develop  a  system  of  law  and  order  and  also
begin  to  realise  the  spiritual  world  of  art,  religion  and
philosojjhy.  I  know  ol  no  better  summary  of  this
wonderful  but  terril^ly  intricate  work  than  the  follow-
ing given  by  W'indelband  in  his  I fistory  of  Modern
' Op.  at.  2iid  cd.  II.  p.  330,  Eng.  trans,  in.  124,

w.  12


178  The  Hegelian  Unity

Philosophy. — "Hegel's  aim  is  to. ..build  up  the  whole  of
philosophy  out  of  the  continuity  shewn  in  the  historical
development  of  the  human  mind.  Man's  self-conscious-
ness is  the  world-spirit  that  has  come  to  itself.  The
evolution  of  the  human  mind  is  the  conscious  self-
apprehension  of  the  world-mind,  and  the  essence  of
things  is  to  be  understood  from  the  process  which  the
human  mind  has  passed  through  in  order  to  grasp  its
own  organization  and  thereby  the  organization  of  the
universe  itself  The  Hegelian  philosophy  regards  itself
as  the  self-consciousness  of  the  entire  development  of
the  culture  attained  by  the  reason  of  the  human  race,
and  in  this  it  sees  at  the  same  time  the  self-conscious-
ness of  the  Absolute  Spirit  as  it  unfolds  itself  in  the
world.  Thus  this  philosophy  becomes  on  the  one
side  a  thoroughly  historical  view  of  the  world  ( Welt-
anschauung) but  on  the  other  lapses  over  into  a
completely  anthropocentric  speculation  about  the  world
{Weltbetrachtung\  that  is  to  say,  it  looks  upon  the
development  of  the  human  spirit  as  the  development
of  the  '  world-spirit' \"

In  the  light  of  this  summary  the  famous  sentences
with  which  Hegel  concludes  his  Pheno?nenology  become
more  or  less  clear: — "The  way  to  the  goal,  absolute
knowledge,  or  spirit  knowing  itself  as  spirit,  lies  in  the
memory  of  minds " — the  solidarity  of  heredity  and
tradition,  I  suppose  we  might  say — "as  they  are  in  them-
selves and  as  they  accomplish  the  organization  of  their
realm.  Their  conservation  on  the  side  of  their  free
existence  manifesting  itself  in  the  form  of  contingency  is
History,  but  on  the  side  of  their  organization  in  notional
^  Geschichte  der  neueren  Philosophie,  4te  Aufl.  1907,  11.  p.  329.


TJie  '  Hisfoyy  of  Philosophy  '  1 79

form  {begriffenen)  it  is  Science  manifesting  itself  as
knowledge.  Both  together,  Jiistory  in  notional  form,
constitute  the  memory  and  the  Golgotha  of  the  Absolute
Spirit,  the  actuality,  truth  and  certainty  of  his  throne,
without  which  he  would  be  the  lifeless  Solitary  ; only

'  From  the  chalice  of  this  spirit  realm
Sparkles  his  Infinitude'*."

The  reference  to  Calvary  recalls  the  negative
element,  the  sorrow  of  the  world  that  spiritualises  it,  on
which  Hegel  had  previously  dwelt.  With  this  we  may
compare  a  similar  passage  giving  the  'result'  of  the
History  of  Philosophy  : — "  The  struggle  of  the  finite
self-consciousness  with  the  absolute  self-consciousness,
which  appeared  for  that  to  be  beyond  it,  ceases.
[For]  the  finite  self-consciousness  has  ceased  to  be
finite  ;  and  therebv  on  the  other  hand  the  absolute
self-consciousness  has  acquired  the  actuality,  which
it  jjreviously  lacked.  In  general  the  entire  history
of  the  world  so  far,  and  in  particular  the  history  of
philosophy,  is  simply  the  exhibition  of  this  struggle.
And  now  they  seem  to  have  reached  their  goal,  where
the  absolute  self-consciousness,  of  which  they  had
a  presentation  (  Vorstellnng),  has  ceased  to  be  some-
thing foreign,  where,  that  is  to  say,  the  spirit  as  spirit

is  actual The  Spirit  j>roduces  itself  as  Nature,  [and]

as  Society  {Staa/).  The  former  is  its  unconscious
action,...  in  the  deeds  and  life  of  history  as  also  [in  the
works]  of  art  it  brings  itself  forth  consciously,... but
only  in  science" — i.e.  in  j)]iI]()soj)hy — "does  it  know
itself  as  absolute  spirit,  and  this  knowledge  alone  is
spirit,  is  its  veritable  existence'*."

'  An  inaccurate  fjuotation  from  Schiller's  poem  Die  Freundschaft.

' Geichichtf  lier  r/iilosophie,  ill.  pp.  689  f.

12  —  2


i8o  The  Hegelian  Unity

Everywhere,  then,  in  all  his  works,  Hegel  reaches
unity  as  the  result  of  a  development,  and  everywhere
emphatically  declares  it  to  be  a  result.  Surely  there-
fore it  is  reasonable  to  believe  that  he  means  what  he
says.  When,  however,  he  adds  that  this  result  is  itself
the  beginning,  he  does  not  say  what  he  means.  What
he  means  is  itself  result — the  speculative  inversion  of
the  concrete  development  in  the  mirror  of  the  so-called
Logic  :  he  himself  compares  it  to  standing  on  your
head\  Even  the  Absolute  Idea  itself  is  so  far  a  result
that  the  notion  of  it  is  described  as  '  an  object  in  which
all  differentiations  have  coalesced".'  As  to  the  actual
unity  that  is  its  correlative — in  spite  of  occasional
passages  in  which  Hegel  refers  to  it  as  '  having
personality,'  it  can  hardly  be  called  a  person  in  the
strict  sense.  This,  I  think,  is  evident  from  Hegel's
account  of  the  State  or  Society.  Much  the  same
language  as  he  used  in  describing  the  religious  com-
munity is  repeated  here.  The  state  is  "the  ethical
spirit,  the  substantial  will  that  thinks  itself  and  knows
and  what  it  knows  accomplishes";  "it  is  the  spirit
that  is  stationed  in  the  world  and  there  consciously
realises  itself,  whereas  in  Nature  it  is  only  actualised
as  its  own  Other,  as  sleeping  spirit."  He  even  calls
the  idea  of  the  state  'the  actual  God  I'  But  we  have
still  to  see  how  far  Hegel's  actual  unity  is  from  de-
serving the  title  Absolute ;  and  this  will  brino-  us
round  again  to  Pluralism,  in  which  there  is  the  same
shortcoming.  |i

'  Phnenomenologie,  p.  21;  E.  t.  p.  24.  ^  Encyclopaedic,  §  236.

"  Philosophic  des  Rechtes,  iste  Aufl.  §  257,  pp.  312,  318,  320.


LECTURE IX.


THE LIMITS OF PLURALISM.


W^hat  after  all,  we  have  now  to  ask,  was  Hegel's
actual  unity  ?  It  was  entirely  geocentric  and  anthro-
pocentric.  The  earth,  he  says,  is  the  truth  of  the
solar  system,  just  as  animal  nature  is  the  truth  of
vegetable,  and  this  the  truth  of  the  mineral.  The
earth  is  /Ac  planet  :  the  sun  has  neither  produced  it
nor  thrown  it  off;  but  sun,  moon,  comets,  and  stars  are
only  conditions  for  the  earth  iyFh'dingungcii  der  Erde)
which  they  serve.  Among  the  continents  of  the  earth.
Europe,  in  virtue  of  its  physical  characteristics,  forms
its  consciousness,  its  rational  part,  and  the  centre  of
Europe  is  Germany'.  With  his  own  philosophy,  he
had  the  sublime  assurance  to  think,  the  history  of
philosophy  closes  ;  and  in  the  restoration  of  Prussia
under  Stein  he  thought  the  culmination  of  the  world's
history  was  attained.  It  is  however  not  so  much  this
unique  anticlima.x  that  now  concerns  us  ;  but  rather
the  general  position  that  there  are  not  '  more  worlds
than  ours,'  which  Hegel  shared  with  the  fifteenth
century  ecclesiastics.  The)',  il  will  be  remembered,
had  burned  (Giordano  Pnuno  alive,  who  w.is  oxw,  of  the
first in modern times to proclaim this  doctrine  ; and

' Encyciopatdia,  ^  241;,  280,  340.


1 82  The  Lhnits  of  Pluralism

they  regarded  even  Columbus  as  verging  on  heresy.
"As  the  planet,  the  earth  is  the  body  of  individttal
totality... its  characteristic  as  organic  is  to  digest  the
entirely  general  astral  powers,  which  as  heavenly
bodies  have  the  illusory  appearance  of  independence,
and  to  bring  them  under  the  control  of  its  individuality,

in  which  these  Titanic  members  sink  to  moments

From  a  quantitative  standpoint  one  may  regard  the
earth  as  'a  drop  in  the  sea  of  the  infinite,'  but  magnitude
is  a  very  external  determination."  The  earth  "is  our
home,  not  as  physical,  but  as  the  home  of  spirit^"

This  seems  to  be  about  all  that  Hegel  had  to  say
concerning  the  existence  of  a  plurality  of  worlds.  He
appears  never  to  have  thought  seriously  of  controverting
it :  it  was  too  completely  beyond  his  purview  for  that.
The  question  : — To  what  end  then  all  the  rest  of  the
universe  '^  which  vexed  the  soul  of  old  Bohme — why,
Hoffding  asks,  did  it  never  trouble  Hegel  ?  His
contempt  for  Nature  was  too  extreme,  we  reply  :  the
man  who  compared  the  starry  heavens  to  a  Might-rash'
or  '  a  swarm  of  flies '  was  hardly  likely  to  have  troubled
his  head  further  about  them.  Had  he  done  so,  facing
the  facts  with  an  open  mind  and  without  parti pris,  he
would  have  found  the  realisation  of  the  Absolute  Idea
as  the  Kingdom  of  the  Spirit  a  far  more  serious
problem  than  from  his  purely  geocentric  and  anthropo-
centric  standpoint  it  proved  to  be.  It  would  have
been  impossible  then  to  call  the  earth  '  the  home  of
spirit'  par  excellence.  Now  this  is  precisely  the
problem  with  which  pluralism  is  on  one  side  confronted.
So far  as  our experience goes  we seem unable to

'  Op.  cit.  %  280.


t


The  Plitralify  of  Jl'orlds  183

conceive  how  a  plurality  of  worlds  can  ever  become
a  single  Realm  of  Ends,  such  as  might  fitly  be  called
absolute.

But  the  plurality  of  worlds  seems  not  only  to  stand
in  the  way  of  that  complete  consummation  of  the  will
towards  a  higher  unity,  which  is  the  pluralist's  ideal  :
it  also  presents  difficulties  for  the  Christian  theologian.
The  continuity  between  natural  and  moral  evil  is  so
close  that  it  can  hardly  be  seriously  maintained  that
the  advance  from  a  state  of  merely  animal  innocence
to  a  '  knowledge  of  good  and  evil '  has  not  frequently,
perhaps  invariably,  entailed  actual  sin  and  error  and
misery.  If  so,  then  for  other  worlds  as  for  ours,  what
Heofel  has  called  a  '  Golgotha'  would  be  essential;  and
thus,  if  we  are  not  to  charge  God  with  the  arbitrary
partiality  of  an  oriental  potentate,  we  seem  driven  to
assume  that  'the  plan  of  salvation,'  the  divine  progress
from  the  manger  to  the  cross,  has  been  reenacted  in
worlds  innumerable.  Sir  David  Brewster  apparently
was  prepared,  if  need  be,  to  assume  this;  but  theologians,
so  far  as  I  know,  have  been  less  presumptuous.
Iwo  other  alternatives  then  present  themselves.  I  he
existence  of  a  pluralit\-  of  worlds  might  be  simply
denied,  as  it  was  1)\'  John  Wesley,  by  Whewell — in
his  famous  anonymenis  essay — and  as  it  has  l)een
denied  again  recently  by  Dr  Alfred  Russell  Wallace.
Both  these  later  writers  rely  mainly  on  a  use  of  the
argument  from  probabilities,  which  scxmiis  clearly  fal-
lacious. II  a  given  effect  can  only  result  from  the
cooperation  f;f  a  single  grouj)  of  indcpcndeiu  causes
we  ma)  proceed  lo  iiKpiire  about  the  |)robability  of
their concurrence  elsewhere  ; but if ihe  given effect


184  The  Liniits  of  Pluralism

can  result  in  manifold  other  ways,  then  the  absence  of
all  the  conditions  present  in  a  given  case  proves
nothing.  It  may  be  true  that  a  fauna  and  a  flora
analogous  to  ours  are  possible  nowhere  else,  that  human
beings  could  only  exist  on  this  one  planet.  But
metabolism,  stimulation,  and  spontaneous  direction
may  be  possible  in  a  protoplasm  very  different  from  that
with  which  we  are  familiar,  and  evolution  might  progress
indefinitely  on  quite  other  lines  than  those  that  have
obtained  for  us\  Viewed  from  such  more  general
standpoint  the  probability  is  not  against,  but  enor-
mously in  favour  of,  a  plurality  of  worlds,  as  men  of
science  almost  unanimously  allow.  We  come  then  to
the  other  alternative.

Granted  that  in  the  one  universe  there  are  many
worlds,  the  Christian  theologian  has  the  strongest
grounds  for  believing  that  they  are  spiritually  and
historically,  and  not  merely  physically,  interconnected.
It  was  'the  infidel  Tom  Paine,'  a  quondam  Quaker,
who  first  made  the  plurality  of  worlds  a  serious
stumbling-block  for  Christian  believers  by  his  once
famous  work,  the  Age  of  Reason.  To  meet  his  ob-
jections without  denying  his  premises,  Andrew  Fuller
and  afterwards  Chalmers — mainly  on  the  strength  of
isolated  texts  from  the  Old  and  the  New  Testament —
sought  to  establish  "the  position,"  as  the  latter  puts
it,  "  that  the  history  of  our  redemption  is  known  in
other  and  distant  places  of  creation,  and  is  matter  of
deep interest and feeling amongst other orders of

^  The  protoplasm  of  our  planet  has  determined  once  for  all  the
possible  foods  and  the  possible  senses  of  all  its  organisms  ;  but  quite
other  protoplasms  are  perfectly  conceivable.


The  Upper  Limif  of  Phiralis)ii 185

created  intellioences'."  The  nature  of  such  a  connexion
is  the  problem  that  pluralism  in  our  da)'  has  to  consider.
We  may  call  it  the  upper  limit  of  pluralism.

It  seems  obvious  that  unless  some  supreme  spiritual
unity  is  found  the  universe  will  remain  in  the  highest
sense  an  absolute  plurality,  if  such  a  term  is  allowable.
Such  a  universe  would  be  a  merely  sporadic  manifold
of  realms  of  ends  having"  a  common  physical  basis  but
devoid  of  all  teleolocjical  continuitv ;  like  so  many
village  communities  without  a  supreme  federation,
geographically  neighbours  but  strangers  politically.
As  society  lifts  the  individual  to  a  hio-her  level,  so  we
feel  that  a  supreme  unity  would  increase  the  worth  of
this  universe  both  intellectually  and  morally.  Such
a  unity  is  an  ideal  that  we  feel  ou'dit  to  be  real.  Can
we  conceive  it  more  definitely  or  find  any  evidence  of
its  existence  ?  The  theoloyfical  writers — as  the  words
just  quoted  from  Chalmers  show — rely  on  the  Christian
doctrine  of  a  hierarchy  of  angels  to  render  the  con-
nexion of  a  multitude  of  otherwise  isolated  workls
intelligible.  Angels  are  to  be  regarded  not  only  as  the
ministers  of  Providence  but  as  spectators  of  uni\ersal
history.  Such  a  conception  is  entirely  in  keej)ing  with
the  general  standpoint  of  pluralism,  as  I  ha\e  tried  to
describe  it.  The  principle  of  continuity  indeed  almost
forces  us  to  posit  higher  ord('rs  of  intelligence  than  our
own  ;  and  the  fact"  that  ive  are  able  to  control  ami
modify  the  course  of  evolution  susriiests  that  it  there
are  high(!r  intelligences  they  can  exercise  this  power
in  a still higher  degree.

' Chriitian Revflation in  connexion  with  Astronomy, I  )isc. i\".
isl  cdn, J). i.t5.

'  Cf.  I^ccturc  V.  p.  III.


1 86  The  Limits  of  Pluralism

This  latter  possible  function  of  intelligences  of  a
higher  order  does  not  directly  concern  our  main
problem,  that  of  an  ultimate  and  supreme  unity  ;  but
it  bears  on  it  indirectly,  in  so  far  as  any  evidence  of
such  control  would  be  evidence  of  the  existence  of
those  superior  beings  ;  and  their  existence  again  would
strengthen  the  assumption  of  a  still  higher  unity  in  the
plurality  of  worlds.  Is  there  then  we  may  inquire  any
evidence  of  this  sort?  Evidence,  I  mean,  of  a  purely
objective  and  scientific  kind,  not  merely  evidence
which  could  satisfy  only  persons  with  certain  sub-
jective convictions  lying  outside  the  purview  of  science
proper.  For  on  the  lines  of  our  present  inquiry  it  might
be  held  that  we  cannot  fairly  appeal,  for  example,
to  the  specially  Christian  evidences  in  support  of
theophanies,  incarnation,  inspiration  and  the  like.  At
the  same  time  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  spiritual-
istic pluralism,  unlike  naturalism,  can  have  no  a  pjHori
objection  to  the  'supernatural'  in  this  sense\

We  have  an  instance  of  the  sort  of  evidence  we  are
seeking in Dr Russel Wallace's arguments, already

^  These  remarks  will  of  course  suggest  to  everybody  a  topic
which  is  in  fact  fundamental  to  the  whole  subject  we  are  considering —
the  question,  namely,  of  religious  faith  and  religious  experience.
Such  an  experience  implies  a  consciousness  of  the  presence  of
a  higher  spiritual  being — a  consciousness  which  is  wholly  distinct
from  the  belief  in  other  selves  which  we  reach  by  the  ejective
interpretation  of  what  is  externally  presented.  It  is  in  such  wise
that  to  earnestly  religious  minds  'the  evidence  of  things  unseen'
is  certain,  immediate  and  practically  verified.  For  them  the  problem
of  the  unity  of  the  many  is  already  essentially  solved.  But  their
certainty  after  all  is  primarily  subjective  :  it  is  faith,  not  knowledge.
It  cannot  compel  assent  on  purely  scientific  or  merely  speculative
grounds.  Hence  I  think  we  do  well  to  follow  Kant's  example  and
for  the  present  to  leave  it  aside.


Dr  RusscI  If  ^(7 1  laces  Arguiuciifs 187

noted  in  an  earlier  lecture,  to  show  that  man's  appear-
ance on  the  earth  is  due  to  such  supernatural  interference.
After  enumeratino^  a  number  of  human  characteristics,
such  as  naked  skin,  a  brain  largely  in  excess  of  animal
needs,  musical  voice,  moral  sense,  etc.,  he  proceeds  : —
"  The  inference  I  would  draw  from  this  class  ot
phenomena  is,  that  a  superior  intelligence  has  guided
the  development  of  man  in  a  definite  direction,  and
for  a  special  purpose,  just  as  man  guides  the  develop-
ment of  many  animal  and  vegetable  forms.  The
laws  of  evolution  alone  would,  perhaps,  never  have
produced  a  grain  so  well  adapted  to  man's  use  as
wheat  and  maize  ;  such  fruits  as  the  seedless  banana
and  bread-fruit;  or  such  animals  as  the  Guernsey  milch
cow,  or  the  London  dray-horse.  Yet  these  so  closely
resemble  the  unaided  productions  of  nature,  that  we
may  well  imagine  a  being  who  had  mastered  the  laws
of  development  of  organic  forms  through  past  ages,
refusing  to  believe  that  any  new  power  had  been
concerned  in  their  production,  and  scornfully  rejecting
the  theory... that  in  these  few  cases  a  controlling  in-
telligence had  directed  the  action  of  the  laws  of
variation,  multiplication,  and  survival  for  its  own
purposes.  We  know,  however,  that  this  has  been
done  ;  and  we  must  therefore  admit  the  possibility  that,
if  we  are  not  the  highest  intelligences  in  the  universe,
some  higher  intelligence  may  have  directed  the  process
by  which  the  human  race  was  develojjed,  by  means
of  more  subtle  agencies  than  we  are  accjuainted  with."
In  a  note  he  adds: — "Angels  and  archangels... have
been  so  long  banished  from  our  b(.-llel  as  to  have
become  actually  unthinkable  as  actual  e.\istences,  and


The  Limits  of  Phtralism

nothing  in  modern  philosophy  takes  their  place.  Yet
the  grand  law  of  '  continuity,'  the  last  outcome  of
modern  science... cannot  surely  fail  to  be  true  beyond
the  narrow  sphere  of  our  vision,  and  leave  such  an
infinite  chasm  between  man  and  the  great  Mind  of  the
universe.  Such  a  supposition  seems... in  the  highest
degree  improbable  \"  As  I  have  already  said^  there
is  no  denying  the  formal  soundness  of  this  reasoning,
even  if  we  hesitate  to  go  further.  It  at  least  serves  to
set  the  continuity  argument  in  a  telling  light.

A  similar,  if  less  impressive  argument  is  perhaps
to  be  found  in  the  prodigality  in  nature  of  beautiful
colours  and  forms,  which  natural  selection  on  grounds
of  bare  utility  seems  altogether  unable  to  explain.
Take  for  example  the  gorgeous  coloration  of  humming-
birds or  the  so-called  '  ball  and  socket '  ornament  in
the  secondary  wing-feathers  of  the  Argus  pheasant^
In  reply  to  the  late  Duke  of  Argyll^  one  of  the  few
writers  who  have  dwelt  at  any  length  on  this  particular
•mystery  of  creation,'  Darwin  admitted  that  natural
selection  was  powerless  to  account  for  such  facts,  but
he  thought  that  sexual  selection  would  suffice.  Dr
Wallace,  who  at  first  agreed  with  him  in  this,  has  since
recanted  ;  and  now,  I  take  it,  he  would  agree  rather
with  the  Duke  of  Argyll  that  "  love  of  beauty  is  equally

^  Natural  Selection  and  Tropical  Nature,  1891,  pp.  204  f.

"-  Cf.  Lect.  IV.  p.  91.

^  Of  Tennyson  his  friend  Edward  Fitzgerald  relates  that  "picking
up  a  daisy  as  we  walked  and  looking  close  to  its  crimson-tipt  leaves
he  said:  'Does  not  this  look  like  a  thinking  Artificer,  one  who  wishes
to  ornament?'"  In  Memoriam,  A.  VV.  Robinson's  excellent  edition,

P-  255-

■*  Reign  of  Laiv,  ist  edn,  p.  236.


TJie  Aesthcfical  in  Nature  189

a  purpose  which  we  see  fulhlled  in  Nature,"  and  so
imphes  some  superior  control.  At  any  rate  he  con-
cludes his  chapter  on  the  colour-sense  by  sayino;  :  —
"  The  emotions  excited  by  colour  and  by  music  alike
seem  to  rise  above  the  level  of  a  world  developed  on
purely  utilitarian  principles^"  This  whole  subject  of
what  we  mieht  call  Natural  Aesthetics  seems  to  be
a  fruitful  held  of  inquiry  that,  so  far  as  I  know,  has
been  strangely  neglected'.  The  subject  no  doubt  is
beset  with  difficulties,  and  there  are  many  pros  and
cons  to  weigh  before  the  intervention  of  such  superior
and  disinterested  principles  can  be  maintained  with
any  confidence.  Still,  if  their  presence  were  credibly
ascertained  it  would  add  greatly  to  the  antecedent
probability  that,  to  repeat  Dr  Wallace's  words,  "  the
grand  law  of  continuity  cannot  fail  to  be  true  beyond
the  narrow  sphere  of  our  vision."

This  'grand  law'  then  encourages  the  pluralist  to
assume,  though  lacking  sufficient  direct  evidence,  that
there  exist  individuals  of  a  higher  order,  or  rather  a
hierarchy  of  such  orders — a  speculative  view  with
which  Leibniz  and  Fechner  have  made  us  all  familiar.
But  human  beings  owe  their  pre-eminence  on  this
planet  to  social  organization,  which  we  regard  as
not  merely  an  aggregate  but  as  an  over-individual
unity.  The  law  of  continuity  then  would  seem  to
suggest  that  individuals  of  a  higher  order  in  like  manner
are  organized  into  over-individual  unities,  and  so  on  —
possibly  ad  indefinitnui. This  view would thus  k.id

•  Op.  cit.  \).  415.

•  August Pauly is an exception. Cf. his Danvinismus uti,/
Lamar ckismus, 1905,  p[). 272  ff.


190  The  Limits  of  Pluralism

up  to  a  society  rather  than  to  a  person  as  the  Supreme
Unity  of  all. But  apart  from  other  difficulties  that  we
shall  have  presently  to  consider — it  might  readily  be
brought  into line with the Christian doctrine of  a
tri-personal  God. The  objections  that  have  recently
been  brought  against  theism  by  Dr  McTaggart — from
the  standpoint  of  what  may  fairly  be  called  a  Hegelian
pluralism — might  perhaps  in  this  way  be  met. It  is
noteworthy  that  it  is  the  theologians  who  have  been
most  influenced by Hegel, who insist the most  on
what  is  technically  called  the  '  essential  trinity '  {rp6TTo<i
vnap^eo}^)  of the divine nature in opposition to  the
Sabellian  heresy  of  an '  undifferentiated  unity,'  which
only assumed a triple form in its revelation to
mankind,  a  so-called '  economic trinity '  (t/jotto?  diro-
KaXvxpecos). Thus  Martensen  in  his  Christian  Dogmatics
writes  : — "Without  the  Son  the  Father  could  not  speak
of  himself  as  I,  for  the  first-personal  form,  apart  from
an  objectivity  distinct  from  the  Ego  (a  not- 1,  a  Thou),
is unthinkable." "When then," he remarks, "we
teach with the  Church the  eternal  preexistence  and
independence  of  creation  not  only  of  the  Father  but
also  of  the  Son  and  the  Spirit,  we  thereby  affirm  that
God,  in  order  to  be  the  self-revealing,  self-loving  God,
must  eternally  differentiate  himself  into  I  and  Thou,
and  just as eternally  unite  himself with himself  as
the  Spirit  of  love  that  proceeds  from  the  relation  of
contrast^" At  the same  time  there  is  no  logical  in-
compatibility between  pluralism  and  the  assumption  of
a  single  personality  as  the  Supreme  Spirit  of  the  world.
In  fact  Leibniz  refers  to  God  in  this  wise  as  la  vionade
^  Christliche  Dogmatik,  §§  56,  55.


TJie  '  Supreme '  191

priviitive,  a  phrase  which  is  precisely  equivalent  to  the
Monas  }}ionadu))i,  which  Giordano  Bruno  and  others
had  previously  used.

But  as  I  have  already  observed \  such  supreme
unity,  whether  triune  or  not,  could  from  the  pluralistic
standpoint  be  regarded  only  as  supreme,  only  ■ix'^  prima
inter  pares,  not  as  absolute.  A  supreme  monad  or
society,  that  is  to  say,  would  necessarily  imply  a
certain  relativity  and  limitation  consequent  on  the
existence  of  other  monads  and  societies  also  possessing
some  spontaneity  and  initiative.  For  a  strict  and
absolute  pluralism  moreover  such  limitation  would  not
be  self-imposed  ;  not  an  act  of  will  on  the  part  of  one
supreme  being  but  an  actual  characteristic  of  the
nature  of  things,  of  the  absolute  whole  consisting  of
such  Supreme  and  the  rest  of  the  world.  The  ordinary
notion  of  creation — viz.  that  at  a  given  moment  there
was  no  world  and  at  a  subsequent  moment  the  world
was  there — is  rejected  as  having  no  sort  of  analogy
with  experience,  and  as  therefore  unthinkable.  On
the  other  hand  the  notion  of  creation  as  eternal  and
continuous  seems  to  involve  an  essential  imi^lication  of
God  and  the  world — limitation  on  the  one  side,  de-
pendence on  the  other.  But  these  relations  hold  good
also  of  the  finite  spirit.  The  world  is  the  object  of
my  experience  :  in  Leibnizian  language  it  is  mirrored
in  my  experience  from  that  unique  standpoint  which
makes  me  what  I  am  as  regards  capacity  and  oppor-
tunity. The  world  limits  me  in  manifold  ways,  but  it
is  also  dependent  upon  me.  For  I  am  not  wholly
passive  and  inert: I am  able  to  react  upon  it  and  do

'  Cf.  Lecture  II.  p.  29.


192  The  Lhnits  of  Pluralism

in  fact  in  some  measure  modify  it :  apart  from  me  it
would  not  be  all  in  all  just  what  it  is.  On  the  strength
of  the  principle  of  continuity  then  the  pluralist  would
assume  the  like  to  hold  good  of  the  highest.  The
world  is  the  object  of  God's  experience,  God  is  the
subject  that  has  this  experience,  not  the  abstract  totality
in  which  the  distinction  of  subject  and  object  disappears.
Like  every  other  spirit  God  must  have  his  unique
standpoint ;  but  it  is  unique  in  a  quite  special  way  :  it
is  the  highest.

But  if  now,  as  theism  commonly  does,  we  regard
this  highest  as  infinitely  transcending  ourselves,  we
should  be  prepared  to  find  such  difference  of  degree
really  amounting  to  a  difference  of  kind.  Take,  for
example,  a  circle  :  its  circumference,  a  curved  line,
meets  a  diameter,  a  straight  line,  at  two  equidistant
points  and  bears  to  this  the  ratio  commonly  represented
by  the  Greek  letter  tt.  If  however  we  let  the  diameter
become  infinite,  the  circumference  ceases  to  be  curved  ;
and  if  now,  from  one  extremity  of  the  diameter  we
imagine  three  bodies  travelling,  one  along  the  diameter
itself  and  the  two  others  in  opposite  directions  along
the  circumference  to  its  other  extremity ;  then  the
further  they  go  the  further  they  will  be  apart,  although,
if  we  are  dealing  with  a  circle,  we  must  also  imagine
all  three  eventually  meeting.  But  in  truth  we  are  no
longer  dealing  with  a  circle  but  with  something  generic-
ally  distinct,  that  is  to  say  with  the  limit  towards
which  we  approach — but  which  we  never  attain —
when  the  diameter  of  the  circle  increases  indefinitely.
We  regard  the  circle  as  a  closed  figure,  but  in  passing
to  the  limit in this  wise  we  leave  definite enclosure


Theism  mid  Pliiralisiii  193

behind  us.  Xow  what  we  have  to  note  is  that  whereas
the  theist  passes  beyond  the  series,  the  pluraHst  remains
within  it.  Both  may  recognise  a  Supreme  Being
surpassing  all  our  powers  of  conception  ;  but  for  the
theist  the  superlative  is  absolute  and  transcendent,  for
the  pluralist  it  is  relative  and  immanent.  When  the
theist  says  that  man  is  made  in  the  image  of  God  and
then  proceeds  to  describe  God  as  infinite  and  absolute,
it  needs  but  a  very  slight  acquaintance  with  the  meaning
of  these  attributes  to  realise  that  both  statements
cannot  be  literally  true.  For  the  pluralist  on  the
other  hand,  if  there  be  a  Supreme  Spirit  at  all,  as  he
may  reasonably  suppose,  that  Spirit  is  still  genuinely
a  member  of  the  realm  of  ends,  albeit  the  highest  and,
so  to  say,  the  central  member'.

But  there  is  still  a  further  mark  of  relativitv  clineinir
to  any  ideal  of  the  Supreme  Spirit  that  pluralism  can
entertain,  which  must  ever  distinguish  this  ideal  within
the  realm  of  spirits  from  the  unconditional  Absolute
of  so-called  philosophical  theism.  For  the  standpoint
of  the  pluralist  is  historical  :  he  contemplates  the  world
exclusively as a world of life and experience and

'  As  such  there  must  be  attributed  to  Him  powers  and  capacities
that  would  not  be  adequately  represented  if  we  attempted  to  combine
and  magnify  indefinitely  the  powers  and  capacities  of  the  most
exalted  human  beings;  just  as,  for  example,  our  luiman  nature  would
not  be  adequately  represented  if  we  imagined  the  social  ascidian,  one
of  the  earliest  progenitors  that  the  zoologist  assigns  to  us,  picturing
a  human  being  as  a  sort  of  social  ascidian  ///  excelsis.  In  particular
it  would,  I  think,  be  reasonable  to  suppose,  as  I  have  already
remarked,  that  mutual  communication  between  this  Supreme  Spirit
and  ourselves — and  even  between  other  superior  beings  and  ourselves  —
w(;uld  be  possible  of  a  more  immediate,  so  to  say  more  internal  nature,
than  that  which  alone  holds  between  ourselves  and  our  ftllow  men.

w.  13


194  ^^^^  Limits  of  Pluralism

therefore  of  process  and  change  or,  as  we  are  wont  to
say,  under  the  form  of  time  not  under  that  of  eternlty\
As  immanent  in  this  world  God  must,  it  would  seem,  so
far  be  conceived  as  subject  to  its  fundamental  conditions.
Conformably  with  what  I  said  just  now,  we  may
suppose  his  time-span  to  exceed  ours  indefinitely,  we
may  credit  him  with  thoughts  that  are  intuitive  and
adequate  where  ours  are  only  discursive  and  symbolic  :
he  may  know  all  truth  sub  specie  aeternatis.  But  all
this  is  hardly  life.  As  the  World  Spirit /^r  excellence,
interested  and  active  throughout  the  universe,  how
can  he  be  a  living  God  wholly  apart  from  the  world's
evolution  and  history  ?  Even  if  philosophical  specula-
tion after  many  vain  attempts  should  at  length  succeed
in  explaining  time  as  in  some  way  *  the  moving  image
of  eternity,'  as  Plato  poetically  expressed  it,  still  this
would  not  alter  the  case.  Mutatis  mutandis,  unless
the  world  of  experience  were  reduced  to  an  impossible
illusion,  the  relations  temporally  prefigured  would  still
remain  and  have  a  meaning.  A  Supreme  Spirit
confronted  and  conditioned  by  free  agents  certainly
does  not  correspond  to  the  notion  usually  entertained
of  the  Deity.  Such  a  '  finite  God  '  many  would  disown
as  a  manifest  contradiction  in  terms  ;  yet  beyond  this
it  does  not  seem  possible  for  the  pluralist  to  go.  It  is
however  a  sign  of  the  times  that  there  are  not  a  few
theologians  who  have  been  led  by  the  problem  of
freedom  and  the  problem  of  evil  to  entertain  the
pluralistic  conception.  Later  on  we  shall  have,  of
course,  to  consider  the  question  further  in  connexion
with  these  problems".  But  so  much  for  the  present
'  But  see  Supplementary  Note  iv. -  Cf.  Lectures  xm. — xvn.


TJie  Lo7i'cr  Liiiiit  of  Plitnilisiii 195

concerning  what  I  have  called  the  upper  limit  of
pluralism.  Let  us  now  turn  to  what  in  contrast  we
may  term the  lower  limit.

Resuming  our  example  of  a  circle  or  sphere  :  just
as  when  the  radius  becomes  infinite  we  have  no  longer
a  figure  occupying  space,  but  simply  the  whole  of  space
itself:  so  when  the  radius  is  zero  wc^  have  a  fij^ure  no
more,  but  simpl)-  a  point  in  space  which  has  position
but  neither  parts  nor  magnitude. As  the  principle  of
continuit)- will  not  carry  us  to  a  transcendent upper
limit,  neither  will  it  carry  us  to  a  transcendent  lower
one. The  naked,  slumbering  monads  of  Leibniz,  the
monads  whose  so-called  perception is  absolutely  con-
fused or  undifierentiated,  are  as  much  an  abstract  ideal
as the mass-points of the physicist. Body without
extension and a subject without consciousness are
limiting  concepts,  not  known  realities  within  experience.
If  we  attempt  to  trace  the  evolution  of  the  world  back
to  such an ideal beginning,  as  Spencer for example
did,  what  becomes  of  our  Many  ^ Though  eventuall)-
some  are  dominant  over  others,  still — if  evolution  is  to
be  thorough-going  and  complete — can  we  suppose  that
they begin by dominating? But if all are  at first
unconscious  and  slumbering,  how  is  the  awakening  to
begin  .'* If  all  mirrored  the  same  universe  in  the  same
as  yet  absolutely  undifferentiated  fashion,  all  wouKl  be
so  far  homogeneous;  and  according  lo  the  principle  ot
the identitv of indiscernibles, which Lcibni/ himsrll
had formulated,  all  would be  one,  all  woukl ha\ c  the
same  content  which  (-ffc-ctively  woukl be no  conti-nl  ;
and  there  would  thus  be  no  ground  for  change  and  as
little  possiijiiil)'  of  it. So  then  il  would  seem  thai  as

13—2


196  The  Limits  of  Pluralism

the  unattainable  upper  limit  of  pluralism  points  towards
an  absolute  and  unconditioned  Being  transcending  the
Many,  so  the  unattainable  lower  limit  points  towards
an  indeterminate  Being,  an  arretpov,  that  affords  no
ground  for  the  discrimination  of  individuals  at  all.

Again  we  may  proceed  in  a  different  way  only  to
reach  a  similar  result.  The  goal  of  the  pluralistic  world
at  any  stage  in  its  progress  is,  we  say,  higher  unity
between  its  constituent  monads  and  systems  of  monads
— advance  in  organization  both  individual  and  social.
We  have  left  it  for  the  present  an  open  question
whether  the  highest  term  is  strictly  an  individual  or
an  over-individual,  a  person  or  a  society  of  persons.
But  the  lowest  can  only  consist  of  individuals  ;  unless
indeed  anyone  should  think  it  worth  while  to  call  the
primitive  Many  a  society  in  the  loosest  sense,  on  the
ground  that  it  is  in  some  sort  a  unity.  When  we
advance  to  an  organism  as  a  complex  of  individuals  or
monads  we  assume  the  presence  of  a  dominant  monad,
or  what  Leibniz  called  a  sotd.  Its  dominance  must  be
regarded  as  due  in  part  at  least  to  its  innate  or  essential
superiority,  not  solely  to  the  accident  of  its  position  :
such  absolute  tychism  could  not  conceivably  be  made
to  work.  But  if  evolution  as  a  historical  process  is  to
be  thorough-going  there  must  be  a  stage  at  which  this
dominance  is  not  yet  realised  but  remains  so  to  say
'  potential,'  awaiting  the  fulfilment  of  its  complementary
conditions.  Agamemnon  and  the  men  he  was  to  lead
were  all  much  on  a  par  as  infants  together  in  their
cradles.  And  the  fact  that  as  evolution  advances
diversity  increases  suggests  that  all  the  differences
that  eventually  emerge  were  originally  latent. Such


The  dcnmiui  for  a Prinium  ino\'ens 197

absolute  oriofin  as  the  lower  liniit  of  evolution  is  as
much  beyond  all  experience  as  the  absolute  beginning
of  his  own  life  is  beyond  the  conscious  experience  of
any  individual  among  us.  Such  antitheses  as  nature
and  origin,  form  and  matter,  arc  for  us  always  but
relative.

Either  way  then  if  we  attempt  to  regress  to  the
lower  limit  we  seem  onlv  to  reach  the  illeq^itimate
notion  of  pure  potentiality ;  there  is  no  uatuni  natui'ata,
and  in  order  that  the  process,  the  iiasci,  may  begin  we
seem  to  require  a  Pi'imum  niovens  that  is  not  one  of
the  nascent  INI  any.  Otherwise  the  nearer  we  approach
to  the  beginning  the  more  inconceivable  the  beginning
becomes.  We  are  thus  led  to  regard  our  two  limits  as
really  related,  as  they  are  in  the  cosmogonies  of  Plato
and  Aristotle  for  example  ;  that  is  to  say,  we  are  led
to  regard  God  as  quickening  the  bare  potentiality  of
a  world  into  actual  motion  and  life. We  approximate

'too  to  the  theism  of  Leibniz,  who  was  likewise  driven
beyond  the  limits  of  his  monadology  proper.  Not  as
Monas  inonadum,  but  as  transcending  all  monads,  God
according  to  Leibniz  as  '  infinite  intellect'  contemplates
the  absolute  totality  of  possible  worlds  and  gives  reality
to  that  which  his  goodness  has  selected  as  the  best.

In  truth  however  all this  rests, it  is  urged, on an
outside,  not  an inside,  view  of  the  pluralistic  i)osition.

-Th<-  j)hilosophies  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  which  have
determined  the  main  trend  of  all  sui)sequent  s|)(!culali()n
till  comparatively  recent  times,  shew  a  marked  bias
towards  what  is  nowadays  called  Intcllectiialism.  Ac-
cording to  this,  ccjgnitioii  is  the  |)ri!nar\'  taclor  in
experience and pure cont(.'mj)lation ilic most  i>erfect


198  The  Limits  of  Pluralism

state.  Even  for  Leibniz  activity  was  dependent  on
perception  in  such  wise  that  confused  perception  and
complete  passivity  were  synonymous.

What  is  called  Voluntarism  however  inverts  all
this.  Conation,  not  cognition,  is  regarded  as  funda-
mental to  life  :  it  is  the  blind  impulse  to  live  that  leads
on  to  knowledge,  just  as  it  is  for  the  sake  of  life  that
knowledge  is  valued  ;  not  vice  versa.  This  doctrine  of
the  primacy  of  the  practical  first  definitely  announced
by  Kant,  repeated  and  extended  by  Fichte,  was  still
more  emphatically  proclaimed  by  Schopenhauer,  the
very  title  of  whose  chief  work,  Die  Welt  als  Wille
und  als  Vorstellung,  is  but  the  complete  formulation  of
the  doctrine  already  adumbrated  by  Kant.  The  things
per  se  in  the  world  are  will,  the  things  we  know  are  but
their  appearance.  For  voluntarism  an  '  unconscious  '
world  would  not  be  either  a  dead  material  world  or  the
bare  potentiality  of  a  living  world  only  to  be  made
actual  by  some  fiat  from  without.  On  this  view
experience  does  not  begin  with  sensation  as  a  purely
passive  state  ;  it  presupposes  activity  ;  and  cognition
with  its  distinction  of  subject  and  object  is  a  conse-
quence of  this.  In  the  absence  of  that  distinction
this  activity  is  called  unconscious.

To  be  sure  Fichte  and  Schopenhauer  were  singu-
larists.  But  so  far  as  the  assumed  relation  of  will  to
presentation  is  concerned,  this  seems  more  readily
conceivable  if  there  is  a  multiplicity  of  wills  which
interact,  than  if  there  is  only  a  single  will  and  nothing
beside.  In  fact  we  seem  then  driven  to  assume  a  really
inconceivable  fractionation  of  the  one  unconscious  will
into many, in order that consciousness may arise


Voluntarism  1 99

Modern  pluralists  are,  I  think,  almost  invariably
voluntarists.  or  as  some  of  them  prefer  to  call  them-
selves, pragmatists.  As  such,  while  they  admit  the
impossibility  of  regressing  to  the  beginning  of  evolu-
tion, they  deny  that  evolution  requires  a  transcendent
Prime  iNIover  distinct  from  the  Many  :  for  the  Many
they  hold  are  all  prime  movers,  and  so  far  causer  sui.
I  say  '  so  far,'  because  the  term  causa  sui  is  generally
construed  as  equivalent  to  absolute  ;  but  what  is  here
meant,  I  take  it,  is  only  that  each  has  an  unconditional
existence  over  against  the  rest  while  none  has  an
unconditional  experience.  They  are  aware  of  each
other  in  virtue  of  their  own  interaction  :  they  interact
in  virtue  of  their  inherent  spontaneity.  Will  is  the
7'atio  essendi  of  presentation,  presentation  the  ratio
cognoscendi  of  will.  Will  is  the  logical  priiis,  but  as
absolute  beginnings  are  beyond  us  there  is  no  question
of  chronological  priority.  The  efficient  causation  in
the  world  then  is  just  this  totality  of  prime  movers,  its
final  causation  their  organization  into  a  higher  unity.

Bearing  this  distinction  in  mind,  an  obvious  ob-
jection made  by  von  Hartmann.  which  would  otherwise
be  a  fatal  objection,  loses  some  of  its  force.  "  The
aseity  of  the  [one  absolute]  Substance,"  he  says,  is  "  for
our  discursive  understanding,  restricted  [as  that  is]  to
the  category  of  causality,  the  i^roblem  of  problems  ;
because  it  implies  only  the  negative  statement  that  this
being  is  no  more  the  effect  of  an  other.  When  however
the  understanding  still  persists  in  applying  the  usual
cau.sal  categor)  in  this  case  too.  then  it  terms  the
[absolute]  Substance  its  own  effect  and  its  own  cause, —
the  und(,-rstanding  thereijy  only  making  a  mockery  of
itself. That  the  [absolute]  Substance  groundlessly  is


200  The  Limits  of  Pluralisfn

and  not  is  not,  that  is  for  us  the  wonder  of  all  wonders."
A  system  of  philosophy,  he  then  goes  on  to  urge,
which  multiplies  this  wonder  innumerable  times,  as
pluralism  in  his  opinion  does,  stands  self-condemned  \
It  might  perhaps  be  replied  that  wonderfulness  is
inversely  proportional  to  frequency.  So  far  then
V.  Hartmann  would  be  convicted  of  subtly  begging  the
question.  But  pluralism,  in  fact,  does  not  maintain
that  a  world  of  n  monads  is  a  world  of  n  absolutes.
The  totality  may  be  called  absolute,  if  there  is  nothing
to  condition  it  from  without,  but  no  one  individual
within  it  can  be  called  absolute.  Whether  in  the
abstract  an  absolute  totality  of  individuals  or  an  absolute
individual  be  the  greater  problem  or  the  greater  wonder
is  surely  an  idle  question.  The  only  real  question  is
the  question  of  fact.  If  pluralism  is  self-consistent  and
self-sufficient  it  does  not  become  a  problem,  merely
because  it  is  wonderful.  And  the  like  again,  of  course,
would  hold  true  of  singularism.

But  there  is  this  difference  between  them,  we  start
with  the  Many  as  given:  so  far  they  do  not  need  to  be
'deduced.'  With  the  One  we  do  not  thus  start.  At
the  same  time  it  must  be  allowed  that  pluralism  cannot
furnish,  has  never  attempted  to  furnish  anything  de-
serving to  be  called  a  philosophical  justification  of
itself — it  is,  as  William  James  called  it,  radical  em-
piricism ;  whereas  for  singularism  in  the  abstract  there
have  been  ontological  and  ^/r/^^rz  arguments  in  plenty.
Pluralism,  as  Kant  long  ago  remarked,  is  confined
exclusively  to  cosmological  arguments'.  It  starts  with  a
discrete  Many,  severally  related  and  therefore  severally

^  Kategorienlehre^  p.  528.

^  Cf.  his  remarks  on  the  thesis  of  the  fourth  antinomy.


Pliiyalisin  to  be  rejected  oy  transcended 201

comparable,  and  beyond  this  its  cardinal  principles  of
continuity and evolution will not enable it to go.
Neither  by  regressing-  can  it reach  a  lowest  limit  or
origin,  in  which  all  diversity  is  latent;  nor  by  progressing
can  it  reach  a  highest  limit  or  goal  in  which  all  plurality
is transcended. This, the pluralists extremity,  will
doubtless  be  regarded  as  the  singularist's  opportunity.
But the  latter so far has never  succeeded — without
doing  violence  to  the  facts — in  advancing beyond a
more  or  less  covert  dualism  of  the  One  and  the  Many,
of  God  and  the  World. The  connexion  of  these  two,
that  is  to  say,  remains  a  problem. Thus  in  the  latest
and  one  of  the  most  important  expositions  of  singularism,
its  author,  Mr  Bradley,  tells  us: — "The  fact  of  actual
fragmentariness, I admit, I cannot explain. That
experience should take place in finite centres, and
should  wear  the  form  of  finite  '  thisness,'  is  in  the  end
inexplicable. But" — he  adds — "to  be  inexplicable  and
to  be  incompatible  are  not  the  same  thing'." Here  we
have  the  whole  matter  in  a  nutshell. If  pluralism  is
'infected  with  contradictions,'  as  Mr Bradley  affirms,
we  must  turn,  he  contends,  to  singularism,  that  is  to
say,  to  Absolutism. If  such  an  Absolute  Being  as  he
supposes,  is  possible,  then,  in  view  of  the  said  contra-
dictions, it  must  be  declared  actual. If,  as  we  maintain,
it  is  not  possible,  then  we  are  reduced  to  scepticism,  un-
less the  asserted  contradictions  can  be  resolved. Even
though  not  compelled  by  contradictions  altogether  to
abandon  pluralism,  we  ought  to  prefer  Theism  if  that
sy.stematizes  more  and  disapijoints  less. The  tlitficul-
ties  of  pluralism  ih<n  nuisi  be  our  next  to{)ic.
' Appmrance  and  Riulily^  2nd  cdn,  p.  226.


LECTURE X.

PSYCHOPHYSICAL AND METAPHYSICAL DIFFICULTIES

IN PLURALISM.

There  is  one  difficulty  which  the  exposition  I  have
attempted  to  give  would  so  readily  suggest,  that  it  is
perhaps  best  to  mention  it  at  the  outset.  The  goal
of  final  harmony  and  unification  on  which  the  personal
idealist  counts  as — a  far-off"  event,  it  may  be,  but  still
as — a  rational  possibility  may  yet  never  be  attained,
however  rationally  possible,  because  of  what  we  ordi-
narily call  physical  hindrances.  Let  these  consist,  if
you  like,  of  the  actions  of  inferior — sentient  it  may
be — but  still  irrational  monads  :  the  disaster  would  be
none  the  less  appalling  on  that  account,  nor  is  its
possibility  for  that  reason  very  seriously  diminished.
For  we  have  had  meantime  to  allow  that  millennial
dreams  of  a  liberation  of  Nature  from  the  thraldom
of  so-called  physical  evil  are  as  fanciful  as  the  legends
of  this  subjection  as  a  consequence  of  moral  evil.  It
is  true  there  are  modern  pluralists,  Renouvier  certainly
and  probably  Dr  Howison,  who  still  defend  such  views
of  the  solidarity  of  the  cosmos.  But  if  we  smile  at
Fourier  when  he  imagined  that,  so  soon  as  we  have
learnt  to  dwell  in  brotherly  love  together,  the  whales
will  seize  our  ships  by  their  cables  and  tow  them
to  their  destinations  over  seas  no  longer  briny  but
pleasant  to  drink,  must  we  not  regard  it  as  still  more


Physical  Difficulties  20^


o


extravagant  to  picture  finite  minds  taming  the  earth-
quake and  the  tornado,  to  say  nothing-  of  checking
the  stars  in  their  courses  and  staying  the  clash  of
worlds  ?  h'or  what  to  all  appearance  are  physical
set-backs,  sometimes  involving  whole  worlds,  certainly
exist.  But  they  are  the  exception,  not  the  rule.  It
may  be  that  with  time  they  will  become  rarer  still.  It
may  be  too  that  as  death  is  held  to  be  but  '  the  covered
way  that  leads  to  life,'  so  these  catastrophes  do  but
open  up  an  unseen  order,  which  we  can  only  dimly
surmise.  All  that  the  pluralist  can  safely  do  is  still
to  assert  the  spiritual  possibility  of  harmony  among
rationals ;  and  for  the  rest  he  can  only  maintain  that
the  difficulty  raised  is  one  that  also  besets  the  theist's
position.  But  there  is  this  difference,  the  belief  in  an
unseen  world  has  a  warrant,  if  theism  is  true,  which
pluralism  alone  cannot  furnish  :  per  contra  the  difficulty
is  graver  for  the  one  than  it  is  for  the  other.  On  the
whole  then  it  will  be  best  to  defer  these  difficulties,
which  affect  any  theory  of  the  world  as  a  realm  of  ends,
till  they  meet  us  again  in  our  discussion  of  theism'.

One  remark,  before  passing  for  the  present  from
this  topic,  may  however  here  be  made.  It  is  a  well-
known  opinion  widely  held  by  scientific  men  that
the  second  law  of  thermodynamics,  otherwise  called
the  law  of  the  dissipation  of  energy,  jjoinis  conclusively
to  universal  death  as  the  final  goal  ot  all.  I  he
pessimist  von  Hartmann  professed  to  see  in  this
law  the  chief  con.solation  that  science  brings  to  men.
But  one  recent  pluralist  makes  an  ingenious  attempt
to  n.bul  ihc  argument,  that  seems  at  least  theoretical!)-

' (Jf. l.CCt. XVI.


204  Difficulties  in  Pluralism

sound.  The  process  of  degradation,  he  urges  in  the
first  place,  is  only  asymptotic  ;  it  will  therefore  never
be  completed  And  in  the  next  place  he  maintains  that,
since  in  psychophysics  it  is  the  difference  of  intensities
not  their  absolute  amount  that  is  significant,  therefore
life  will  always  be  possible".  But  in  truth  the  most
effective  reply  is  much  simpler.  The  second  law  of
thermodynamics  is  entirely  statistical :  it  is  not  binding
on  the  interaction  of  individuals  at  all.  For  the  philo-
sophy of  personal  idealism  this  law  is  so  far  then  of
no  account.

Another  difficulty  that  besets  pluralism,  and  one
again  from  which  theism  is  not  altogether  free,  relates
to  the  past  and  future  existence  of  individuals  beyond
the  range  of  our  direct  experience  concerning  them.
How  are  we  to  interpret  what  we  know  as  the  birth
and  the  death  of  a  o-iven  L  or  M}  Accordingr  to  the
pluralistic,  as  according  to  the  Leibnizian  view,  all  the
individuals  there  are  have  existed  from  the  first  and
will  continue  to  exist  indefinitely^  Birth  and  death,
then,  cannot  really  be  what  they  seem  to  be.  But  it
still  remains  true  that  every  man,  as  we  know  him,
came  at  a  certain  date  upon  this  world's  stage  and,
after  playing  his  several  parts  for  a  brief  interval,  will
presently  pass  off. Is  he  born  and  does  he  die  but  once,

^  In  this  he  had  been  already  anticipated  by  Prof.  Poynting.
See  Naturalism  and  Agnosticism,  3rd  ed. i. p. 321.

"  L.  Stern,  'Der  zweite  Hauptsatz  der  Energetik  u.s.w.'  Zeitschrift
f.  Philos.  u.  p kilos.  Kritik,  1903.

•'  Pluralism,  at  all  events,  must  assume  that  every  monad  relatively
to  every  other  is  self-existent ;  for  obviously,  if  one  were  the  ground
of  the  existence  of  others,  they  and  it  would  be  related  as  Creator
and  created  and  could  not  belong  to  the  same  ontal  series.


TJie  Problem  of  Birth  205

or  has  he  births  and  deaths  innumerable  ? The  hitter
akernative,  that  of  metempsychosis  in various  forms,
most of them very  extravagant, has long prevailed
in  the  eastern  world,  while  the  other  alternative,  that
of  a  single  birth,  has  been  current  almost  universally
among  the  civilisations  of  the west. For many  sin-
gularistic  philosophies, of  course, the  beginning  of  a
soul-life,  like  everything  that  pertains  to  the  Many,  is
nothing  more than a  phase  or  moment  of  the  One.
But  Christian  theism  has  always  striven,  however  in-
consistentlv.  to  see  more  in  it  than  this. The  doctrine
known  as  creationism  attributes  the  independent  exist-
ence of  each  human soul to a  definite  creative act ;
while  the  opposite  doctrine,  called  traducianism,  holds
that  all souls  are  generated from  other souls in the
same  way  and  at  the  same  time  as  bodies  from  other
bodies. Neither of these positions, between which
theologians  seem  continually  to  have  wavered,  is  com-
patible with strict pluralism. The pluralist, in fact.
seems  shut  up  to  some  moditication  of  Leibniz's  doctrine
that all souls have preexisted '  always in a sort of
orgcmized body,' which at the time of generation
undergoes  a  certain  transformation  and  augmentation.
But  the Leibnizian  doctrine  of  C7uboite7nent,  that,  lor
example, all mankind preexisted in Adam, modern
biology,  as  we  have  seen,  will  not  allow  him  to  accept.
Again,  as we have  also  seen,  he is not  conipilUd to
adopt  the  xicw  to  which Leibniz  inclined,  that  reason
is  imparted  to  human  souls  at  the  lime  ot birth '  b\  a
special  operation  or  by  a  kind  ol  transcreation'.'

B)iil the |>lnralist may fairh' be  expected to  come
' Thaniide,  pt  i,  J?  91. ("f.  I -(.ct.  iv.  pp.  <;o  {{.


2o6  Difficulties  in  Pluralisiii

to  closer  quarters  with  the  problem  of  heredity  than
Leibniz  either  did  or  could  do.  Here  in  the  first
place  one  point  seems  clear:  what  is  metaphorically
described  as  heredity — as  if  there  were  a  bequest  from
one  organism  to  another — is  rather  so  much  habit  or
memory,  which  pertains  to  the  offspring  in  virtue  of
its  original  continuity  with  the  ancestral  stem.  The
process  of  regeneration,  whereby  an  organism  restores  a
lost  part,  and  the  process  of  budding,  whereby  it  produces
a  new  whole,  are  simply  instances  of  such  continuity.
Even  sexual  reproduction,  in  spite  of  the  important
preliminary  preparation  that  the  maturation  of  its  two
constituents  requires,  seems  to  be  essentially  nothing
more  than  the  union  of  two  buds.  But  in  none  of
these  processes,  so  far,  is  there  any  individual  to  be
found  that  can  be  called  the  heir,  and  therefore  no
ground  for  calling  their  result  a  heritage.  All  we  can
say  is  that  what  has  been  clone  myriads  of  times  is
done  once  more :  in  regeneration  or  asexual  reproduc-
tion the  old  routine  is  repeated  precisely ;  and  in
sexual  reproduction  there  is  the  joint  result  of  two
compatible  routines  that  are  similar  but  not  entirely
identical.  As  evidence  of  the  continuity  of  the  process
and  the  completeness  of  its  routine  we  may  appeal  to
the  so-called  biogenetic  law  or  principle  of  palingenesis
— that  ontogeny  recapitulates  phylogeny.  But  is  the
new  individual  nothing  but  'a  chip  off  the  old  block,'
nothing  but  a  new  specimen  of  the  species  regarded
as  self-repeating  ?  The  lower  the  form  of  life  that  we
consider  the  less  ground  have  we  for  assuming  more  :
there  seems  to  be  almost  as  much  routine  in  the  con-
duct of  the  simplest  organisms  as  there  was in their


The  Pyoblcm  of  Ilcrcdity  207

construction.  Contrariwise  the  higher  the  form  of  hfe
we  take  note  of,  the  more  we  seem  driven  to  assume
that  the  org"anism  has  a  director,  and  is  not  a  mere
automaton.  It  is  here  that  we  are  led  to  talk  of  an
heir  and  to  regard  the  body  as  his  heritage.  This
heir  is  the  soul  or  dominant  monad.  But  where  does
it  conie  from  and  how  does  it  get  possession  of  this
body  ?  These  questions  however  implicitly  contradict
the  pluralist's  assumption,  that  souls  do  not  get  bodies
but  always  have  them.  The  biogenetic  law  is  then  a
psychophysical  law ;  in  other  words,  it  has  a  psycho-
logical side ;  hence  to  say  that  the  genetic  history
of  the  individual  summarizes  the  life-history  of  the  race
would  better  express  this.

One  essential  difference  between  the  two  is.  of
course,  that  the  life-history  of  the  race  is  original,  is
a  long  process  of  gradual  acquisition  by  way  of  trial
and  error,  in  short,  answers  to  what  we  have  identified
with  natu7'a  7iatiirans ;  whereas  the  genetic  history  of
the  individual  is  a  derivative,  rapid  and,  so  to  say,
substantially  invariable  process,  in  a  word,  is  routine
or  natura  naturata.  This  difference  is  apparent  again
in  the  dependence  of  the  primary  process  on  immediate
commerce  with  the  environment  and  the  independence
of  the  derivative  process  of  any  such  intercourse.  The
eye  which  in  the  race  has  been  developed  in  contact
with  the  light  is  reproduced  in  the  individual  in  dark-
ness. The  higher  vertebrates,  whose  history  has  led
them  through  the  most  varied  environments — first
water,  then  land,  then  water  again,  as  in  the  case  of
the  whales — complete  their  embryonic  life  directi)'
shut  off  frf)m  environmental  changes  altogether.


2o8  Difficulties  in  Phiralism

According  to  Haeckel  the  life-history  of  the  human
race  can  be  biologically  marked  out  into  sixteen  stages
of  steadily  increasing  complication.  "The  entire  suc-
cession of  men,  throughout  the  whole  course  of  ages,"
Pascal  has  said,  "is  to  be  regarded  as  one  man  always
living  and  always  learning\"  I  have  myself,  to  meet
the  needs  of  psychological  exposition  and  yet  leave
aside  the  problem  of  heredity,  made  use  of  a  similar
idea.  It  will  help  us  forward,  I  think,  if  I  may  be
allowed  to  quote  a  passage  from  what  I  wrote  years
ago  on  this  point:— "We  know  that  in  the  course  of
each  individual's  life  there  is  more  or  less  of  pro-
gressive differentiation  or  development.  Further,  it
is  believed  that  there  has  existed  a  series  of  sentient
individuals  beginning  with  the  lowest  form  of  life  and
advancing  continuously  up  to  man.  ...But  what  was
experience  in  the  past  has  become  instinct  in  the
present.  The  descendant  has  no  consciousness  of  his
ancestors'  failures,  when  performing  at  once  by  an
'  untaught  ability  '  what  they  slowly  and  perhaps  pain-
fully acquired.  But,  if  we  are  to  attempt  to  follow
the  genesis  of  mind  from  its  earliest  dawn,  it  is  the
primary  experience  rather  than  the  eventual  instinct
that  we  have  to  keep  in  view.  To  this  end,  then,  it
is  proposed  to  assume  that  we  are  dealing  with  one
individual  who  has  continuously  advanced  from  the
beginning  of  psychical  life,  and  not  with  a  series  of
individuals,  all  of  whom,  save  the  first,  '  inherited '
certain  innate  capacities  from  their  progenitors.  The
life-history  of  such  an  individual,  then,  would  correspond

'  Pens'ees  et  Opuscules,  edit.  Brunschvicg,  p.  80:  quoted  by  Prof.
Sorley,  Ethics  of  Naturalising  2nd  ed.,  p.  249.


The  Prob/c/ii  of  Heredity  2og

with  all  that  was  new  in  the  life  of  a  certain  typical
series  of  individuals,  each  of  which  advanced  a  stage
in  mental  differentiation\"  Let  us  now  suppose
our  imaginary  immortal  to  be  set  back  once  more
to  the  beo:innino-  but  to  retain  the  memorv  of  his
former  experiences.  We  may  be  sure  that  in  that
case  he  will  make  good  the  ground  lost  in  much  less
time  than  he  required  at  first,  and  also  without  follow-
ing all  the  windino-s  of  the  tentative  route  into  which
his  previous  inexperience  had  led  him  :  his  route  the
second  time  will  be  routine.  Illustrative  instances  in
plenty  will  occur  to  everyone  at  once.

But  the  situation  we  have  supposed  is  exactly  that
of  a  new  organism.  It  does  repeat  with  no  hesitation
or  uncertainty  so  much  of  the  ancestral  experience  as
had  become  habitual,  secondarily  automatic  or  organ-
ized, and  it  does  so  because  it  is  continuous  with  the
organisms  to  which  this  work  had  been  previously
delegated".  To  understand  this  we  must  regard  the
organism,  in  Leibnizian  fashion,  as  an  orderly  hier-
archy of  monads  and  not  as  merely  a  vastly  complex
physico-chemical  mechanism.  The  acquisition  of  new
experience  by  commerce  with  the  environment,  the
process that is to say of development through

*  Article 'Psychology,' Ency. Brit, iith edn, vol. xxn.

PP-  555  <"•

'  Hut,  it  may  be  objected,  between  the  new  organisms  and  the
old  there  is  always  more  or  less  'variation':  the  two  then  are  not
strictly  continuous.  This  we  must  allow,  but  on  the  other  hand
we  may  not  assume  that  variation  is  ever  independent  of  experience
taken  in  the  wide  sense  which  the  pluralist  gives  to  it.  In  this
way  we  can  understand  the  fact  that  variations  are  vastly  greater
in  sexual  as  compared  with  asexual  reproduction.

w.  14


2IO  Difficulties  ill  Pluralism

experience — in  which  clearer  and  distincter  percepts,
wider  and  exacter  adjustments  are  attained — is  to  be
conceived  as  a  process  in  which  subordinate  monads
are  drilled  and  manoeuvred :  here  it  is  that,  as  we  say,
function  perfects  structure.  We  may  call  it  biotic  as
distinct  from  genetic  organization.  We  know  directly
by  observation  that  the  memories  and  dexterities  that
are  acquired  latest  are  the  least  engrained  and  the
first  to  fail.  Entirely  in  keeping  with  this  we  observe
too  that  it  is  specific  characters  rather  than  the  generic
characters,  upon  which  they  are  superposed,  that  are
liable  to  variation\  The  transmissibility  of  acquired
automatisms  is  then  proportional  to  their  persistence.
To  say  that  no  acquired  characters  are  transmitted
would  be  tantamount  to  saying  that  nothing  is  trans-
mitted ;  and  to  say  that  the  automatisms  accomplished
in  a  single  lifetime  are  not  in  any  degree  transmissible
is  to  say  that  transmission  can  never  begin.  In  this
gradation  in  the  persistence  of  organic  differentiations
we  have,  it  would  seem,  the  key  to  the  genetic  history
of  the  individual  or  ontogeny  :  till  the  lower  and  earlier
automatisms  are  evolved  there  is  no  metier  for  the
higher  and  later,  which  depend  upon  them,  to  which
they  stand  in  the  relation  of  matter  to  form.

But  a  viable  organism,  after  it  has  developed,  con-
tinues to  grow  or  augment.  It  thus  becomes  possible
•at  length  not  indeed  mechanically  to  divide  it,  but
still  to  divide  it,  so  to  say,  selectively.  Herein  seems
to  lie  the  possibility  of  a  new  organism.  In  what  way
the  sifting  out,  collecting  and  enrolling  of  supernu-
meraries is  effected  we  can  at  present  hardly  even
^  Cf.  Darwin's  Orighi  of  Species,  6th  edn,  pp.  121  f.


Tlie  Problem  of  Heredity  2 1 1

conjecture.  The  pluralist  must  at  all  events  maintain
that  these  processes  depend  in  some  way  on  the
sentience  and  appetition  of  the  several  monads  con-
cerned and  also  on  the  affinities  and  antipathies  which
their  natures  determine.  Provided  some  procedure
on  these  lines  is  conceivable,  that  is  sufficient  to  make
his  position  tenable.  Now  that  far  at  any  rate  we  are
able  to  go,  helped,  as  in  other  cases,  by  the  analogy
of  what  we  know  of  the  higher  phases  of  living  inter-
course. Indeed  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  on
these  lines  a  far  simpler  hypothesis  is  conceivable
than  W^ismann's  of  the  continuity  of  germ-plasm,
for  example. But  there  still  remain  difficulties.

Thus  it  is  assumed  that  the  supreme  monad  or
soul  of  the  system  is  within  it  from  the  first,  but  its
dominance  is  manifest  only  towards  the  close  of  the
genetic  process  ;  but  how  is  it  attained  }  How  in
particular,  in  sexual  reproduction,  when  two  colonies
unite  ?  Is  there  here  a  rivalry  or  conflict  between
two  potential  monarchs  ?  Or  is  there  possibly  after
all,  as  some  psychologists  suppose,  no  unity  at  all
beyond  that  of  the  system  :  is  that  only  a  common-
wealth and  not  a  monarchy  }  But  such  a  view,  though
by  no  means  devoid  altogether  of  justification,  seems
inconsistent  with  pluralism;  for,  rigorously  followed  out,
it  would  altogether  destroy  the  notion  of  dominance
on  which  the  entire  doctrine  of  monadism  is  built'.
C)\\  the  whole  it  seems  best  to  regard  the  organism  on
its  psychical  side  as simply the Anla<re  or  primary

' And  this  by  the  way,  it  may  be  incidentally  remarked,  suggests
an  analogical  argument  in  favour  of  a  supreme  world-spirit.

14— a


212  Difficulties  in  Pluralism

medium of  the soul's life  : this is its heritage but
how  it  comes  by  it  we  do  not  know\

We  come  now  to  the  difficulties  besetting  the
pluralistic  interpretation  of  death.  Why,  it  may  be
asked,  should  there  be  death  at  all,  why  should  not
the  individual  enjoy  that  prolonged  existence  which
we  have  imagined  only  for  expository  purposes  ?  1
do  not  propose  however  to  enter  upon  the  far-reaching
inquiry  which  this  question  opens  up,  since  the  diffi-
culties that  more  immediately  concern  us  are  of  another
sort.  Death,  as  the  more  or  less  complete  dissolution
of  the  organism,  means  that  the  soul  in  consequence,
so  far  as  it  is  thus  deprived  of  its  locus  standi,  is,
to  use  Leibniz's  phrase,  in  the  position  of  a  deserter
from  the  general  order.  Temporarily  it  is  in  a  like
position  during  sleep  ;  and  death  for  Leibniz  was  but
a  longer  and  profounder  sleep  :  in  neither  case  did
he  believe  that  the  continuity  of  the  individual's  life
was  completely  broken.  Still  the  amount  of  personal
continuity  between  its  successive  lives  might  in  general
be  extremely  slight.  In  fact  if  the  notion  of  a  merely
bodily  resurrection  was  incredible  in  Leibniz's  day  it
is  more  incredible  still  in  our  own.  Who  expects  to
see  trilobites  and  ammonites,  the  pterodactyle  and  the
diplodocus  come  to  life  again  ? — No  doubt  we  find
the  passage  back  from  the  organic  to  the  inorganic
barred  on  every  side.  Nature  has  no  crematorium  :
she  turns  dead  sheep  and  oxen  into  jackals  and  crows
it  may  be,  but  not  into  ashes.  Such  facts  would
almost  suggest  that  the  best  thing  to  befall  a  dying
man would be to be eaten by  such  of  his  younger

^  Cf.  below,  Lect.  xviii.


Tlie  Problem  of  Deaf  It  2 1 3

contemporaries  as  liked  him,  and  according  to  Professor
Tylor  personal  affection  was  one  among  other  motives
for  cannibalism\  At  any  rate  'metempsychosis'  in
some  form  seems  an  unavoidable  corollary  of  thorough-
going pampsychism'-,  so  long  as  we  look  broadly  at
the  facts  of  life  as  a  whole.

We  have  just  noted  in  the  economy  of  nature  a
tendencv  to  conserve  the  or8:anic  :  is  there  also  some
principle  of  'conservation  of  value'  tending  to  prevent
rational,  self-conscious  spirits  from  lapsing  back  into
merely  animal  souls  ?  This  question  Leibniz  answered
with  a  decided  affirmative.  Thus  in  a  letter  to  Arnauld,
after  substituting  what  he  called  metaschematism,
change  of  body,  for  metempsychosis  or  change  of  soul,
he  continues  : — "  But  spirits  are  not  subjected  to  these
revolutions,  or  rather  it  must  be  that  these  revolutions
of  bodies  subserve  the  Divine  economy  in  relation  to
spirits — They  must  always  keep  their  moral  qualities
and  their  memory  in  order  to  be  perpetual  citizens  of
that  universal  all-perfect  commonwealth  of  which  God
is  the  monarch,  which  can  lose  none  of  its  members
and  the  laws  of  which  are  higher  than  those  of
bodies'."  Apart  from  its  theological  standpoint  this
is  obviously  a  purely  dogmatic  statement.  But  the
idea  of  a  higher  spiritual  order,  as  we  have  already
'Seen,  is  perfectly  compatible  with  pluralism  and —
though it  lack adequate empirical  evidence — directly

'  This  practice,  so-called  endophagy,  is  "  intelligible  enough  on
the  principle  that  'the  life  is  not  allowed  to  go  out  of  the  family'."
Chambers's  Encyclopaedia,  s.v.

'  Cf.  above,  p.  205.

'  Lettre  h.  Arnauld,  Philosophische  Schri/ten,  (lerhardl's  ed.  11.
pp.  99  f.


214  Difficulties  in  Pluralism

suggested  by  the  principle  of  continuity,  against  which
the  Leibnizian  theology  more  or  less  offends\

But without this idea and 'the conservation of
values,'  the  Weltanschauung  of  pluralism is  sadly  far
away  from  the  heart's  desire. The  biologist  pictures
for  us the  gradual evolution of the human species
onwards  from  some  primitive  moner,  and  the  socio-
logist the  gradual  advance  of  humanity  from  savagery
to  civilisation. But  what  of  all  this  progress  if  we  are
forced  to  say  of  all  the  individuals  concerned  that  one
labours  and another reaps the reward  ? The indi-
vidual, it  may  be,  that  falls  out  of  the  ranks  for  a  time
is  not  dead  but  only  sleepeth,  yet  if  he  return  not  as
the  same  identical  person  but  only,  so  to  say,  as  the
same metaphysical  entity ; and especially if, as the
chances  are,  the  higher  his  former  position  the  more
likelihood  that  he  will  start  again  in  a  lower  one,  what
— we  are  forced once more to ask — what worth or
meaning  is  there  in  such  revolutions  ? And  when  we
remember  that  whole  species  become  extinct,  we  may
be  told  that  at  least  the  fittest  survive. But  then  it
is  only  in  what  we  may  call  the  ascending  phase  of
things  that  the  fitter  is  the  better : when this earth
enters  upon  its  inevitable  decline  the  fitter  will  be  the
worse. But  every  winter  turns  to  spring,  it  is  replied,
and  old  worlds  are  continually  rejuvenated. Yes,  but ..
once  more  we  urge  that  if  there  is  no  personal  conti-
nuity between  the  old  constituents  and  the  new,  if  as
with  the  individual  beginning  a  new  life,  a  world  en-
tering upon  a  fresh  evolution  cannot  start  where  it  left
off  and  may  even  begin  in  less  favourable  conditions
'  Cf  Latta,  Leibniz^  The  Monadology  &^c.,  p.  265  note.


'  Cause rvafioji  of  J\}lucs'  215

than  before,  what  trround  have  we  to  expect  progress
on  the  whole?  In  a  word,  without  such  spiritual
continuity  as  theism  alone  seems  able  to  ensure,  it
looks  as  it  a  pluralistic  world  were  condemned  to  a
Sisyphean  task.  Per  aspcra  ad  astra  may  be  its
motto,  hw\  facilis  descensus  Avci'uo  seems  to  be  its  fate.

Let  us  turn  now  to  metaphysical  difficulties. There
is  one  such  objection  to  pluralism that will at  once
occur  to  every  student  of  Lotze's  philosophy,  one  that
is  all  the  more  impressive  because  Lotze — unlike  most
who maintain the doctrine of  an Absolute One —
starts  as  we  have  done  from  the  side  of  the Many,
which  seems  to  confront  us  at  first. He  finds  however
that the concept of  causal interaction  or '  transeunt
action ' as he terms it, which we ordinarily employ
alike  in  everyday  life  and  in  our  scientific  expositions,
is really unthinkable. He is therefore driven to
postulate  an  absolute  substance,  of  which the Many
are in truth but states or modifications. Moreover
such  a  fundamental  unity  of  things  was,  it  seemed  to
him, analytically involved in the facts of what we
conceive  as  reciprocal  action. But  what  is  strange  is
that  Lotze, who  was never  a  dualist, who from first
to  last  was  clear  upon  one point,  viz., that there are
no  things  that  are  things and nothing more,  should
nevertheless  have  discu.s.sed  this  problem  of  causation
in  connexion with physical  action. He is  aware, of
course,  that  for  the  scientific  investigator  who  is  con-
tent to  stop  at  'occasional  causes'  there  is  no  problem
at  all;  he  has  indeed  himself  emphasized  the  methodo-
logical utility  of  occasionalism  in  its  modern  oi"  positixist


2i6  Difficulties  in  Pluralism

guise.  But  for  philosophy  the  question,  how  or  why,
when  the  state  of  a  certain  thing  A  changes  to  a,  that
of  another  thing  B  should  change  to  y8,  has  been  a
serious  problem  since  the  days  of  Hume  at  any  rate.
Assuming  that  A  and  B  are  independent  things,  Lotze's
argument  in  its  barest  outline  is  simple  enough.  Since
attributes  cannot  be  separated  from  substances,  "no
state  can  detach  itself  from  the  thing  A,  whose  state
it  was,  so  as  to  subsist  even  for  an  infinitesimally  small
moment  between  A  and  B,  as  a  state  but  yet  nobody's
state,  and  then  connect  itself  with  B  so  as  to  become
its  stated"  The  facts  themselves  not  being  in  question
the  only  conclusion  according  to  Lotze  is  that  A  and
B  are  not  independent  substances,  that  is  not  sub-
stances at  all,  but  only  different  modifications  of  the
one  absolute  substance,  which  we  may  call  M.  The
state  of  the  universe  at  the  one  moment  he  represents
by  the  equation  M=^i^ABR)  and  that  at  the  other
as  M=(f>  [a^R);  that  is  to  say  he  regards  the  Absolute
as  compensating  one  change  of  state,  that  of  A  into  a,
by  the  other,  that  of  B  into  ^  ;  the  rest  of  the  universe,
represented  by  R,  being,  for  simplicity's  sake,  regarded
as  in  the  particular  case  remaining  unaffected.

But  considering  so-called  'things'  apart,  this  doctrine
of  Lotze's  seems  very  closely  to  resemble Berkeley's

^  It  was  long  assumed  that  this  difficulty  only  applies  to  'action
at  a  distance'  and  not  to  'contact  action.'  And  so  far  as  perception
or  the  constructions  of  abstract  mechanics  are  concerned  this  may
be  true.  But  actual  bodies  are  not  ideal  solids ;  they  are  more  like
clouds,  or  swarms  of  particles  in  motion.  Moreover  absolute  contact
implies  a  common  point  or  surface  (interface),  in  fact  no  longer
contiguity  but  continuity.  Cf.  NaturaHs77i  and  Agnosticism,  3rd  edn,
I.  pp.  122  ff.


The  Pyoblou  of  Itifcracfioii  217

well-known  doctrine  of  sense-symbolism.  The  entire
physical  world,  '  the  whole  choir  of  heaven  and  furni-
ture of  earth,*  is  but  the  medium,  divinely  constituted
and  sustained — as  it  were  the  lantTuaQfe  and  the  instru-
mentality — whereby  finite  spirits  communicate  and
interact.  Now  it  sqqiws  pri?)ia  facie  perfectly  possible
to  adapt  this  doctrine  to  the  pluralistic  standpoint :  in
fact  in  some  way  or  other  the  pluralist  must  regard
all  perceptual  objects  as  the  manifestation  of  subjects
or  ejects.  There  would  be  important  differences  ot
detail,  no  doubt ;  for  example,  as  we  have  already  said,
we  should  begin  with  a  Babel  and  have  to  achieve
'one  language  and  one  speech.'  In  short  the  equation
by  which  Lotze  typifies  the  'self-conservation'  of  his
Absolute  seems  so  far  to  answer  simply  to  what  we
might  call  its  behaviour  in  sustaining  the  intercourse
of  free  agents,  if  such  a  medium  were  necessary,  as
he  for  the  most  part  inclined  to  doubt :  his  equation
amounts  in  fact  merely  to  the  doctrine  of  physical
conservation.

When  however  A  and  />  are  not  things  but  per-
sons, can  we  still  say  that  they  are  merely  modifications
of  the  Absolute?  When  A  changes  to  a — wlun  the
child,  feeling  hunger,  wants  food,  let  us  say,  and  J)  his
father,  let  us  suppose,  thereupon  changes  to  ^,  that
is,  gives  him  bread — are  we  to  believe  that  the  persons
here  are  not  beings  for  themselves  but  only  so-called
things,  that  they  are  nothing  but  modifications  ol  an
Absolute,  that  adjusts  one  to  ihc  ollu-r  solely  on  us
own  account?"  Such  an  interi^relaiion  of  personal
intercourse  is  clearly  untenable  and  i.ot/e  did  not
seriously entertain it. The description that h<- has


2i8  Difficulties  in  Pluralism

given  of  personal  intercourse,  regarded  from  the  side
of the Many, differs entirely from the conceptual
framework  by  which  science  summarises  what  is  called
physical  interaction. There  is  here  no  constant  equa-
tion involving  rigidly  concatenated  variables,  no  net-
work of  relations of  which individuals are but the
termini,  no  lines  of  direction  subsisting  between  them
along which in some mysterious way actions and
passions  are  interchanged. The  spatial  metaphor  of
influences, energies or forces transferred and trans-
formed, which makes up the concept of transeunt
action, is no longer  applicable even as a  figure to
personal intercourse. The doings and sufferings of
persons  are  both  alike  immediate : what  brings  them
into  relation  is  a  '  sympathetic  rapport '  or  interest  that
rests  upon  cognition. All  that  is  strictly  personal  in
social  intercourse  is  of  this  nature. It  entirely  consists,
in  the  first  place,  of  the  apprehension  or  the  know-
ledge on  the  part  of  one  person  of  the  '  attitude,'  the
feelings  and  intentions  displayed  or  announced  by  other
persons ;  secondly,  in  their  cooperation  or  opposition,
actual  or  prospective ; and  finally,  following  on this,
in  the  new  feelings  and  intentions  of  the  person  in-
terested, to  which this knowledge leads. We can
readily  imagine  situations  in abundance that  are al-
together of  this  sort,  into  which — even  when  life  itself
is  at  stake — no  physical  constraint  whatever  directly
enters. Think, for instance, of  all that  the phrase
'  noblesse oblige ' implies, of Regulus returning to
Carthage,  of  Socrates  refusing  to  fly,  of  the Hindoo
suttee,  which  means,  I  understand,  'virtuous  wife,'  or  of
the  Japanese  'hai'i  kari or  'happy  despatch';  or  again


' SyjiipafJicfic  Rapport'  219

ot  the  wiles  of  the  hunter  and  the  angler,  who  have
to  count  simply  on  the  behaviour  of  their  game  till  it
brings  itself  into  a  position  to  be  dealt  with,  so  to  say,
as  a  thing.  It  is,  however,  as  needless  as  it  would  be
tedious  to  picture  out  such  cases  in  detail.

But  usually  in  these  cases  there  is,  in  addition  to
the  conduct  of  those  primarily  concerned,  that  of  sub-
ordinates and  accessories,  upon  which  they  can  safely
count — the law  and the police, impartial spectators,
servants  and  retainers;  and  again  dogs,  decoys,  stalking
horses  and  the  like. All  this  we  may  call  social  environ-
ment in  a  wide  sense  :  upon  it  we  rely  and  depend,  much
as  we  rely  and  depend  upon  what  we  call  the  physical
environment. And we have seen already  that this
social  environment,  so  far  as  habit  and  custom  enter
into  it, tends  to  approximate  to  the  character  of  the
physical  environment  : nay  that  very  character,  which
we  express  by  such  terms  as  law  and  order,  subject
and  attribute,  is,  we  know,  so  much  metaphor  borrowed
from  the  world  of  persons. For  the  pluralist,  however,
it is more than metaphor. If the Leibnizian as-
sumption, that  there  are  no  beings  entirely  devoid  of
perception  and  spontaneity — which  Lotze  too  accepted
— is  otherwise  sound,  then  the  objections  to  transeunt
action  between  things  become  irrelevant. For  these
objections  do  not  apply  to  personal  interaction  based  on
mutual  7'apport,  which  is  all  that  the  pluralist  requires.
On the contrary the \'ery fact that this suffices for
his view of the  world is so far  an argument in its
favour.

But there is still another objection  to pluralism,
likewise urged by Lotze, thai is more serious.


220  Diffi  nil  ties  in  Pluralism

Granted  that  sentient  and  conative  beings  can  shape
their  conduct  relatively  to  each  other — in  so  far  as
they  are  clearly  aware  of  each  other's  presence  and
attitude — without  the  need  of  another  being  distinct
from  them  all  to  play  the  part  of  a  go-between,  still
the  fact  that  such  'sympathetic  rapport'  exists  is
in  Lotze's  opinion  nothing  less  than  an  '  inexhaustible
wonder.'  Nay  the  mere  fact  that  all  the  Many  are
comparable  and  commensurable,  that  no  individual,
however  unique,  is  altogether  disparate  and  isolated
from  the  rest,  though  undeniable,  is  such  a  wonder :
only  extreme  familiarity  leads  us  to  take  it  for  granted
as  a  matter  of  course.  Lotze  is  content  to  press  only
this  second  broader  and  simpler  issue,  which  he  regards
as  a  form  of  the  cosmological  argument^  The  first
which  approximates  rather  to  the  teleological  argument
he  seems  content  to  waive.  Still  it  may  be  well  to
look  at  both.

Let  us  begin  with  the  argument  in  its  more  de-
tailed form.  We  can  readily  imagine  a  case  sufficiently
analogous  to  bring  out  the  point  of  the  argument,
how  very  far  the  actual  relatedness  of  things  is  from
being  self-evident  or  self-explanatory.  Let  us  suppose
that  we  had  a  sack  of  type  continually  shuffled,  which
differs  however  from  ordinary  type  in  one  respect.
When  letters  forming  syllables  come  together  we  will
suppose  that  their  arrangement  remains  comparatively
stable,  that  when  syllables  forming  words  come  together
this  arrangement  is  still  more  stable,  and  similarly
of  words  forming  sentences  and  so  on  ;  that  generally
the  more  meaning  the  more  stability.  Under  such
'  Microcosmus,  Eng.  trans,  vol.  ii.  pp.  668  f.


TJie  Iiiiplicatioiis  of  TJicoIogy 221

circumstances  the  more  'sense'  the  final  arrangement
presented  the  more  we  should  be  inclined  to  believe
that  we  had  been  dealino-  from  the  first  not  with  a
random  collection  but  with  a  definite  selection,  with
what,  in  fact,  was  all  along-  really  a  whole  and  not
merely  an  aofsrrecrate.  And  should  the  final  arrange-
ment  be  complete  and  perfect  without  one  redundant
or  deficient  letter,  this  presumption  would  amount  to
certainty.

No  doubt  the  better  fitting  arrangements  of  our
world  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  more  stable  arrano^e-
ments.  The  Many  however  are  not,  like  type,  moulded
unalterably  once  for  all :  on  the  contrary  they  must
be  regarded  as  more  or  less  plastic  and  adaptable,  as
mutually  moulding  each  other  in  a  greater  or  less
degree.  The  round  man,  to  be  sure,  avoids  the  square
hole ;  and  vet  if  circumstances  force  him  into  it,  he
usually  contrives  to  adapt  it  or  to  adapt  himself.  The
limpet  shapes  its  shell  to  fit  the  rock,  the  Pholas  shapes
the  rock  to  fit  its  shell.  And  after  all,  the  teleological
harmony  to  be  found  in  the  world  is  not  such  as  to
force  on  us  the  conviction  that  it  is  due  solely  to  a
single  underlying  or  overruling  principle.  "Taken
alone,"  Lotze  himself  allows,  "it  would  more  easily
lead  to  the  polytheistic  view  of  a  plurality  of  di\ine
beings,  each  dominating  a  special  department  of  nature
as  its  special  genius,  their  diverse  modes  of  adminis-
tration agreeing  too  so  far  as  to  attain  t(3  a  certain
general  compatibility  but  not  to  a  harmony  that  is
altogether  complete'."  But  then  is  il  not  strange  to
maintain  that  the  pluralistic  view,  which  is  ailmiltetUy
suggested directly by the facts of  the world, is yet

'  Op.  at.  vol.  II.  i».  667.


222  Difficulties  in  Pluralism

really  inconceivable,  and  that  the  opposite  view,  which
the  facts  seem  at  first  sight  to  negative,  is  nevertheless
the  only  view  that  is  not  self-contradictory  ?  This,
however,  is  what  Lotze  does :  let  us  next  examine  this
position  somewhat  more  closely.

The  Many  are  all  related :  they  interact.  This
interrelation  is  at  once  the  ratio  essendi  and  the  ratio
cognoscendi  of  their  comparability.  No  two  are  al-
together different,  for  all  are  conative  and  cognitive  to
some  extent.  Such  is  the  familiar  pluralistic  doctrine.
And  now,  says  Lotze,  because  all  this  is  so,  the  Many
are  substantially  one,  are  only  different  modifications
of  a  single  Being  that  we  designate  the  Absolute \
The  Many  are  either  severally  comparable  or  they
are  not.  If  they  are  not,  there  can  be  no  knowledge
of  their  plurality :  if  they  are,  then  they  are  funda-
mentally and  ultimately  one.  Such  is  Lotze's  short
and  easy  method  with  pluralism.  It  yields,  I  fear,
only  a  'cheap  and  easy  monism.'  There  can  be  no
experience  of  a  plurality,  whether  of  beings,  qualities
or  events,  that  are  absolutely  disparate  and  discon-
nected— that  is  certain.  All  experienced  diversity
implies  some  identity ;  and,  for  the  matter  of  that,  all
experienced  identity  some  diversity.  All  this  is  so
much  logical  commonplace.  From  this  it  follows  that
to  every  known  or  knowable  Many  there  will  be  some
common  term  applicable  to  them  all,  which  logically
unifies  them  all.  But  it  leaves  the  question  of  their
real  unity  untouched.  Ice,  water,  steam,  is  a  plurality
which  turns  out  to  consist  only  of  varying  states  of
one  substance.  Gold,  silver,  copper,  is  a  plurality
which  has  not  been  thus  unified  :  logically  it  belongs
^  Cf.  Grundzilge  der  Metaphysik,  1883,  §  48.


The  Many  and  the  One  223

to  the  one  class,  metal.  The  class  is  logically  one,
but  we  do  not  say  there  ?)iusi  be  a  single  prime  and
ultimate  metal.  The  Many  of  pluralism  are  in  like
manner  a  logical  whole  :  they  constitute  the  class  of
entelechies  or  persons  in  the  widest  sense,  beings,  that
is  to  say.  who  are  something  for  themselves,  conative
and  coirnitive  individuals  bent  on  self-conservation  and
seekino-  the  gfood.  To  resolve  the  loo-ical  universal
itself  into  a  personal  individual,  of  which  the  several
persons  that  it  denotes  are  but  modifications,  so  far
from  explaining  the  facts  denoted,  seems  fiatly  to  con-
tradict them.  Yet  this  is  what  Lotze  does.  To  be
sure  the  Many  are  more  than  a  logical  whole :  they
are  a  real  unity,  but  a  unity  of  another  order,  just  as
a  regiment  is  a  unity  though  it  is  not  a  soldier.  This
other  unity  answers  to  the  fact — a  fact,  it  is  important
to  notice,  which  perception  and  appetition  imply — viz.,
that  the  Many  are  severally  related  by  their  mutual
interaction :  for  each,  as  subject,  the  rest  constitute
an  objective  continuum.  We  have  not,  I  repeat,  two
distinct  and  separable  facts,  first  the  Many  existing
in  isolation,  and  then  their  interaction,  either  subse-
quently intervening  as  a  real  muhium  commercijim  for
them  or  else  preestablished  as  a  merely  'ideal'  harmony
independently  of  them  :  the  former  answering  to  the
Herbartian,  the  latter  to  the  Leibnizian  pluralism.
F"or  modern  pluralism  the  universe  is  the  totality  of
monads  really  interacting;  and  this  is  one  fact.  The
plurality  implies  this  unity  and  this  unity  implies  the
[)lurality.  Hut  this  fact,  says  Lotze,  is  an  inc-xhausiible
wonder.  Unc^uestionably  the  iini\'(.'rse  is  an  inex-
haustible wonder.  Still  after  all  a  wonder  is  not  a
contradiction. Reiiirniii'> iheii i<» i-olze's lormula,


224  Difficulties  in  Phtralisin

M=^[ABR)  or  i^i^ABR)  =  M,  for  the  mere  equation

gives  no  priority  to  one  side  over  the  other;  if  it  can

be shown that  M  is more than the name  we  give

to  a  plurahty  of  reals  A,  B, C,..., whose  functional

relation  is  symbolised  by  ^ — that  M  is  in  fact  itself

the  one  absolute  reality,  and  </>  the  relation  which  '  its

individuality  as  a  self-conserving  unity '  imposes  upon

its  several  differentiations  or  modes  A,  B,  C... — all  well

and  good. But  the  mere  formula  will  not  accomplish

this. Taken  as  an  abstract  formula it may  suggest

either  alternative, but  taken  as  a description of  the

universe or mundiis, M, regarded empirically or a

posteriori,  it  is  no  longer  equally  ambiguous. From

this immanent standpoint M  does not resolve the

wonder, it merely names it. If  we are to get any

further  we  must  assume that  M  is transcendent,  an

ens  extramundammi,  to  use Kant's  phrase ; and  this

all  theism  does  that is  worthy  of  the  name. Then,

however,  A,  B,  R  will  no  longer  be  merely  modes  or

states  of  this  M. But  to  express  the  relation  of  this

transcendent  Being  to  the  world  of  experience  no  equa-

tional  formula  seems  either  appropriate  or  adequate.

Theism,  however,  promises  to  effect  much  in  resolving

the  difficulties  of  pluralism,  and  to  the  careful  discussion

of  theism  I  propose  to  devote  the  second  part  of  these

lectures. Meanwhile  I  think  we  must  insist  that  the

way  cannot be cleared in any summary fashion by

convicting  the  pluralist's Weltanschauung  not  merely

of incompleteness but of actual contradictions. In

fact,  if  it  were  radically  infected with  contradictions,

we  have  seen,  I  trust,  that  the  way  to  theism  would

be  hopelessly  barred  ; for  from  pluralism speculation

really  always  has  and  always  must  begin.


PART II.
THEISM.


LECTURE XI.

THE IDEA OF CREATION.

We  have  seen  that  modern  plurahsm  is,  on  its  own
confession,  'radically  empirical.'  It  makes  no  attempt
to  deduce  the  universe  from  a  single  absolute  principle,
or  indeed  to  deduce  it  at  all.  The  world  is  taken
simply  as  we  find  it,  as  a  plurality  of  active  individuals
unified  only  in  and  through  their  mutual  interactions.
These  interactions  again  are  interpreted  throughout
on  the  analogy  of  social  transactions,  as  a  niutuum
C07nme7'ciu)u  ;  that  is  to  say,  as  based  on  cognition  and
conation.  To  the  speculative  mind  piir  sang  there  is
nothing  satisfactory  about  such  a  view  unless  perhaps
its  frankness.

Hut  then,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  objections  to
all  attempts  to  proceed  altogether  a  priori.  It  seems
obviously  puerile  to  ask,  for  example,  for  a  sufficient
reason  why  there  is  something  rather  than  nothing.
This  notion  of  being  absolutely  thoroughgoing,  of
building  up  a  metaphysic  without  pr(.*suj)positions.
one  that  shall  start  from  nothing  and  exj)lain  all,  is.
I repeat, futile. Such a metaphysic has its own

w.  15


226  The  Idea  of  Creation

assumption,  and  that  an  absurd  one,  viz.,  that  nothing
is  the  logical  prms  of  something. Well  at  any  rate,  it
may  be  said,  if  we  must  start  from  something,  let  us  at
least  start  from  what  is  absolutely  necessary,  or  rather
let  us  not  stop  till  we  reach  it  :  let  us  not  rest  in  what
is  merely  actual,  for  that  can  only  be  contingent. But,
paradoxical  though  it  may  sound, necessary  being  is
but  another  aspect  of  contingent  being  ;  for  within  the
limits of  our experience only that is called 7^eaUy
necessary  which  is  inevitably  conditioned  by  its  cause,
and  is  thus  contingent  on  this,  that  is  to  say,  follows
from  it. In  other  words  real  as  distinct  from  formal
necessity  is  synonymous  with  causation  ;  and  moreover,
as  Kant  said,  this  real  or  causal  necessity  "  extends  no
further  than  the  field  of  possible  experience,  and  even
then  does  not  apply  to  the  existence  of  things  as  sub-
stances ;  because  such  substances  can  never  be  looked
upon  as  empirical  effects  or  as  something  that  happens
or  comes  to  be\" Thus  to  talk  of  absolutely  necessary
being  as  the  foundation  of  the  universe,  so  to  say,  is
only  to  be  guilty  of  the  fallacy  of  Locke's  poor  Indian
philosopher, the fallacy of  applying  to the whole  a
concept that is applicable  only  to  the  part. "  The
favourite  notion  of  the  philosophers,"  said  Schopenhauer
with wonted bitterness, "of 'absolutely necessary
being '  involves  a  contradiction  :  the  predicate  '  abso-
lute,' which means '  dependent on nothing else,'
removes  the  characteristic  through  which  alone  'neces-
sary' is  thinkable  and  has  any  sense"." The  absolute
totality  of  being  has  no  cause,  it  simply  is. To  attempt

' Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  M.  Miiller's  trans,  p.  198.
^ Vierfache  Wurzel,  u.s.w.  §  49.


JMcfapIiysic  i^'if/ioiif  pycsiippositioiis 227

to  retlect  causation  back  on  itself  as  in  such  phrases  as
causa  sui,  aseit\',  or  being  through  self,  reall)-  adds
nothing  to  our  bare  recognition  of  this  being.  But  if
there  is  no  sense  in  callin^:  the  absolute  totality  of
being  necessary,  there  is  none  in  calling  it  contingent.
Within  it  there  is  necessity  and  contingency  in  plenty  :
every  part  is  related  to  the  rest  :  but  the  whole,  we
have  again  to  say. simply is.

If  then  the  whole  simply  is,  those  philosophers
have  only  deluded  themselves,  who  have  essayed  by
the  royal  road  of  pure  thought  to  determine  a  priori
what  it  must  be.  The  only  a  pi'iori  statements  con-
cerning the  world  that  are  beyond  challenge  are  purely
formal  statements  ;  yet  the  entire  body  of  logical  and
mathematical  truths  would  not  yield  us  the  faintest
anticipatory  gleam  of  what  the  actual  world  would
be,  even  if  it  were  possible  to  know  such  iruihs  in
advance.  But  this  supposition  too  is  only  a  delusion  :
for  validity  implies  reality  and  is  otherwise  meaningless.
The  two  are  distinct  but  they  are  not  absolutely
separable.  The  notion  of  a  sort  of  antecedent  logical
fate  determining  all  subsequent  existence  is  [jsycho-
logically  explicable  as  the  result — not  of  the  supremacy
of  our  reason — but  of  the  limitations  of  our  imagination.
We  distinguish  relatively  to  a  particular  case  between
form  and  matter.  But  when  we  make  the  distinction
absolute,  pure  form  and  pure  matter  both  alike  become
empty  abstractions.  W^.-  find  the  logical  lo  be  in
evr-ry  case  necessary,  th(!  (Mnj)irical  in  (.-very  case
contingent  ;  but  we  are  guilty  of  a  sort  of  fallacia
composiiionis  when  we  imagine  that  the  totality  of  the
empirical  on  the  one  side  is  conditioned  by  the  totality

15—2


228  The  Idea  of  Creation

of  the  losfical  on  the  other\  The  enormous  labour
that  Kant  is  known  to  have  spent  in  deducing  his
table  of  categories  from  his  logical  table  of  judgments
is  perhaps  the  most  disastrous  instance  of  mistaken
ingenuity  to  be  found  in  the  whole  history  of  philo-
sophy ;  for  to  that  in  very  large  measure  may  be  traced
the  daring  but  hopeless  enterprises  of  his  idealist  suc-
cessors, Fichte,  Schelling  and  Hegel.  Nobody  ever
has,  nobody  ever  will,  derive  the  categories  of  sub-
stance, cause,  end,  or  any  other  concept  concerning
reality,  from  any  source  altogether  independent  of
experience.

All  ontology  alike  then  has  to  begin  with  the
question  :  What  is  Reality'  ?  And  nowadays  pluralist
and  singularist  alike  answer  :  It  is  Experience.  But
the  difference  between  them  is  that  the  pluralist  is
content  to  stop  at  the  totality  of  finite  experiences,
whereas  the  singularist,  or  at  all  events  the  theist,  with
whom  we  are  now  primarily  concerned,  maintains  that
beyond  the  universe  of  the  Many  there  is  a  single
transcendent  experient,  who  comprehends  the  whole.

The  superiority  of  the  theistic  position,  if  it  can  be
sustained,  seems  indisputable  :  it  will  then  be,  to  use
Kant's  words,  "an  ideal  without  a  flaw."  Well,  in  the
first  place,  it  is  superior  in  respect  of  its  unity.  On
the  pluralistic  view  every  one  of  the  finite  individuals
is related to all the  rest but only  for  himself. In

^  Cf.  Lotze,  Microcosmus,  Eng.  trans,  ii.  p.  705  and  Metaphysic,
§  88  >.

^  This  may  entail  a  preliminary  inquiry  into  the  nature  of
knowledge,  but  epistemology  is  after  all  only  a  preparation  for
ontology.


The  TJicisfic  Ideal  229

Leibnizlan  language  each  mirrors  the  whole  from  a
unique  standpoint,  and  therefore  7iot  the  whole,  but
only  an  aspect  of  the  whole.  The  pluralistic  whole,
then,  is  a  whole  of  experiences,  but  not  a  whole  ex-
perience, a  whole  of  lives  but  not  a  living-  whole,  a
whole  of  beings  but  without  a  complete  and  perfect
being.  Is  such  a  whole  really  a  unity  at  all  :  is  it
more  than  a  totality  ?  We  have  a  type  of  a  higher
unity  than  this  in  our  own  experience  as  self-conscious
subjects.  Here  there  is  a  unity  which  is  more  than
the  related  objective  continuum,  a  unity  to  which  all
this  belongs  and  refers.  Now  remove  from  such  an
experience  the  relativity  which  '  standpoint  '  implies
and  you  approach  the  theistic  ideal  of  an  absolute  ex-
perience, the  experience  of  a  living  and  acting  Spirit
whose  '  centre  is  everywhere,  whose  circumference  is
nowhere,'  an  experience  complete  at  all  points  and
including  every  one.  The  pluralist's  universe  in  the
light  of  this  transcendent  Being  would  thus  have  a
unity  which  it  would  otherwise  lack.

Not  only  so,  but  in  the  second  place  the  pluralist's
universe  would  itself  be  immeasurably  enriched  if  the
theistic  idea  of  God's  relation  to  this  universe  were
accepted.  For  according  to  that  God  is  not  simply  a
transcendent  Being,  existing  aloof  and  apart  from  the
world,  he  is  also  immanent,  and  active  within  it.  And
such  active  presence  of  the  One  Spirit,  ulio  aloni.-
knows  all,  affords — manifestly — an  assurance  that  the
pluralist's  ideal  will  be  attained,  an  assurance  which  we
have  had  to  allow  must  else  be  w.miing.  I'Or  it  woulil
be  extravagantly  arbitrary  to  assume  that  this  one
transcendent Being  alone would be more  tlevoid of


230  The  Idea  of  Creation

benevolent  purpose  than  finite  beings  are.  At  any
rate  the  theist  beheves  that  this  God  who  knows  all
loves  all.  And  so  in  the  third  place  it  is  evident  that
the  theistic  idea  not  merely  adds  to  our  confidence
in  the  eventual  realisation  of  the  pluralist's  ideal  but
it  enhances  the  character  of  that  ideal  by  all  the
ineffable  blessedness  that  the  presence  of  God  must
yield.

But  to  determine  what  is  reality,  we  have  agreed,
is  the  first  business  of  philosophy.  Can  we  then  prove
the  existence  of  God  ?  Attempts  innumerable  to  prove
this  have  been  made — as  of  course  we  know — all  of
them  reducible  to  one  or  other  of  the  three  forms  called
respectively  the  ontological,  the  cosmological  and  the
teleological  argument.  The  fatal  defects  of  all  these
have,  it  is  almost  universally  conceded,  been  clearly
exposed  once  for  all  by  Kant.  The  ontological
argument,  as  he  has  shown,  involves  the  common
metaphysical  fallacy  of  hypostatizing  an  idea ;  the
teleological  argument  does  not  carry  us  beyond
pluralism  ;  and  the  cosmological  only  does  so  by
implicitly  assuming  the  ontological. — But  though  de-
monstrations of  the  existence  of  God  are  unattainable,
it  by  no  means  follows  that  the  idea  is  theoretically
worthless.  It  has  even  in  this  respect — to  say  nothing
of  its  practical  value — a  '  regulative  use'  as  what  Kant
called  a  focus  imaginarius,  a  use  which  he  declared  to
be  not  only  admirable  but  indispensable.  What  Kant
meant  by  a  focus  imaginarius,  it  may  be  worth  while
to  illustrate  by  an  example.  Suppose  the  earth  were
wrapt  in  cloud  all  day  while  the  sky  was  clear  at  night,
so  that  we  were  able  to  see  the  planets  and  observe


Theoretical  value  of  Theism  231

their  movements  as  we  do  now,  though  the  sun  itself
was  invisible.  The  best  account  we  could  o-ive  of  the
planetary  motions  would  still  be  to  refer  them  to  what
for  us  in  accordance  with  our  supposition  would  only
be  an  imaginary  focus,  but  one  to  which  was  assigned
a  position  identical  with  the  sun's  position.  The
pluralist's  universe,  according  to  Kant,  answers  to  the
wandering  orbs  that  we  see  and  God  to  the  sun,  which
we  are  supposed  not  to  see,  but  merely  to  conceive  as
giving  to  their  motions  both  reason  and  unity.  It
behoves  us  then,  especially  in  view  of  the  acknowledged
difficulties  and  incompleteness  of  the  pluralistic  scheme
taken  alone,  to  examine  this  sublime  conception  with
reverence  and  with  care.  Is  the  theistic  ideal  verily
without  a  flaw  ?

One  thing  is  at  once  clear:  theism  is  not  simply  the
possible  crown  and  completion  of  pluralism  :  such  a
transcendent  addition  will,  it  may  be  expected,  change
all.  It  introduces  one  essential  modification,  at  [my
rate,  viz.,  the  idea  of  creation.  It  does  not,  that  is  to
say,  assume  merely  that  one  transcendent  Being  exists
above  and  beyond  the  whole  series  of  the  Many,  how-
ever extended  ;  but  it  assumes  further  that  this  one
Being  is  related  to  theni  in  a  way  in  which  none  ol
them  is  related  to  the  rest  :  they  do  not  simply  coexist
along  with  it,  they  exist  somehow  in  ii  and  ihroiiLjh
it.

In  this  idea  of  creation  there  arc  two  sides  to
consider,  its  relation  to  the  world  and  iis  n-huioii  in
God.  As  to  th(!  first — it  cannot  be  said  liiat  the  workl
as  we  know  it  involves  the  idea  of  creation  as  a  lact.
If  il  did,  we  should  have  direct  and tangible-  evidence


232  The  Idea  of  Creation

of  God's  existence.  "  The  heavens  declare  the  glory
of  God  and  the  firmament  sheweth  his  handiwork,"
sang  the  Psalmist  long  ago.  Possibly  it  is  so,  but
there  is  nothing  in  all  our  physical  experience  that
compels  us  to  admit  it  :  on  the  other  hand  there  is
nothing  that  would  justify  us  in  denying  it.  Further,
the  metaphor  of  making,  of  handiwork,  which  is  the
sole  empirical  content  of  the  term  'creation,'  is  in-
adequate :  making  out  of  nothing,  in  short,  is  a
contradiction.  But  then  this  is  not  the  meaning  of
creation  :  it  is  not  a  making  or  shaping  at  all.  The
idea  is,  in  fact,  like  the  idea  of  God,  altogether  trans-
cendent. It  is  impossible  therefore  that  experience
should  directly  give  rise  to  it  at  all.

But,  it  has  been  urged,  the  universe  cannot  have
existed  for  ever,  since  in  that  case,  at  any  assigned
moment,  an  infinite  time  would  be  completed,  and  that
is  impossible.  The  universe  must  then  have  had  a
beginning  and  so  must  have  had  a  First  Cause.  Well,
if  this  argument  were  valid,  it  would  apply  equally  to
the  existence  of  God.  If  per  impossibile  we  could
transcend  experience  and  contemplate  the  world  from
without  we  might,  it  has  been  thought,  find  that  the
world  had  a  beginning  :  but  then  we  should  be  there
and  as  what  should  we  have  to  be  reckoned  ?  Keeping
within  experience  we  can  only  endlessly  regress  with
no  prospect  of  ever  reaching  the  beginning  or  of
forming  any  concept  of  what  it  was  like.  On  the
contrary,  say  certain  physicists,  we  have  empirical
evidence  of  a  beginning.  But  in  all  cases  it  will  be
found,  I  think,  that  the  beginning  affirmed  is  a  purely
relative  one  ;  and  moreover  that  its  affirmation  assumes


Mi  stake  1 1  vie7;.'s  of  Creation  233

modern  science  to  be  exactly  and  absolutely,  and  not
merely  approximately,  true'.

There  is  equally  little  to  support  the  view  of  creation
as  an  event  that  occurred  at  a  finite  date  in  the  past,
when  we  attempt  to  regard  it  from  the  side  of  God  as
creator.  Whatever  the  reason  or  motive  for  creation
may  have  been — and  some  motive  or  reason  the  theist
must  assume — it  seems  "absolutely  inconceivable,"  as
v.  Hartmann  put  it,  "  that  a  conscious  God  should  wait
half  an  eternity  content  without  a  good  that  ought  to
be."  If  creation  means  anything,  it  means  something
so  far  involved  in  the  divine  essence,  that  we  are
entitled  to  say,  as  Hegel  was  fond  of  saying,  that
''  without  the  world  God  is  not  God."  In  calling  God  i
the  creator  then  it  is  simply  the  world's  dependence  on  1
Him  that  we  mean  to  express.  If  so,  it  seems  clear
that  this  dependence  is  not,  as  commonly  maintained,
a  causal  dependence  strictly  understood.  For  causation
relates  to  change  in  existence  ;  but  creation  regarded
from  the  side  of  the  created  is  not  a  change  in  anything
existing.  To  speak  of  it  as  a  change  in  nothing,
whereby  nothing  becomes  something,  is  once  again —
it  seems  hardly  needful  to  say — mere  thoughtless
absurdity.  Creation  in  other  words  is  not  to  be
brought  under  the  category  of  transeunt  causation,
Xor  can  we,  regarding  it  from  the  side  of  God,  bring
it  under  the  category  ol  immanent  causation,  as  being
a change in Him, unless indeed we abandon the

'  Cf.,  e.g.,  The  Unsan  Universe,  2nd  (jtln,  .^  116  ami  Clifford's
criticism,  Lectures  and  Essays,  2nd  cdn,  p.  156;  also  the  article
by  Professor  .Arrlienius,  'Infinity  of  the  Universe,'  Monisl,  vol.  x.xi.
1911,  pp.  161  fl".


234  J^^^^  Idea  of  Creation

position  that  God  is  God  only  as  being  creative.  To
say  that  the  world  depends  on  God  is  tantamount  to
saying  that  could  God  cease  to  be,  the  world  too  would
cease  to  be  ;  or  that  if  the  world  should  cease  to  be,  it
would  be  because  God  had  ceased  to  be.  In  other
words  God  is  the  ground  of  the  world's  being,  its  ratio
essendi.  The  notion  of  '  ground,'  it  will,  I  assume,  be
conceded,  is  wider  than  that  of  cause,  which  is  only
one  of  its  special  forms.

But  we  have  not  yet  brought  out  the  full  meaning
of  creation  as  the  theist  conceives  it.  Spinoza,  for
example,  also  conceived  God  to  be  the  ground  of  the
world,  but  interpreted  this  relation  in  a  way  which  the
theist  cannot  accept.  Spinoza,  as  his  phrase  Deiis
sive  Natui'-a  shows,  identified  the  world  and  God  as
completely  as  he  identified  the  properties  of  a  triangle
with  the  triangle  itself:  the  reality  of  the  One  meant
so  much  that  there  was  no  reality  left  for  the  Many  at
all.  For  pantheism  God  is  the  immanent  ground  of
the  world,  for  deism  he  is  the  transcendent  ground,
for  theism  he  is  both.  How  are  we  to  conceive  this
twofold  relation  ?  The  most  hopeful  attempt  perhaps
is  that  which  is  nowadays  associated  with  the  name  of
Kant,  though  it  is  really,  I  believe,  as  old  as  Plato  and
recurs  continually  in  ancient  and  modern  philosophy
alike.  I  may  call  it  the  theory  of  intellective  intuition.
Our  knowledge  according  to  Kant  has  two  stems,  both
requisite  to  complete  our  experience.  The  one,  sensi-
bility, is  receptive  and  passive  ;  but  taken  alone  it  is
blind,  that  is  to  say  it  furnishes  only  the  material  of
knowledge.  The  other,  understanding,  is  active  but
yields  only  the  form  of  knowledge  :  taken  alone  it  is


God  as  trauscc]hiciit  and  ijuniaiiciif 235

empty,  its  content  is  abstract.  But  together  these  two
sources  yield  what  we  call  phenomenal  knowledge  ;  so
far  we  may,  according  to  Kant,  be  said  to  shape  Nature
though  we  do  not  create  it  ;  our  objective  knowledge,
in  other  words,  is  the  joint  result  of  the  manifold  data
that  we  receive  and  of  the  discursive  synthesis  of  these
which  our  thought  achieves.  Reality  is  first  there,  is
given,  and  our  work — all  we  are  capable  of — is  to
understand  it.  But  now  we  are  to  imagine  our  sensory
and  passive  perception  replaced  by  an  active,  in-
tellective '  position,'  our  discursive  synthesis  by  an
original  thesis  or  intuition.  The  Being  to  whom  this
intellective  intuition  belongs  will  be  creative  ;  its  ob-
jective experience  will  contain  nothing  that  is  merely
given  to  it,  but  only  what  is  ultimately  '  posited  '  by  it  :
its  objects  will  be  not  phenomenal  but  noumenal,  not
independent  manifestations  of  an  Other  but  the  creation
of  itself

But  the  world  as  presented  to  us  is  \critably  an
Other ;  hence  the  passivity  in  our  perception  :  we
know  the  world  only  in  this  its  external  relation  to  us,
not  as  it  is  in  itself;  hence  it  is  phenomenal.  Here
the  distinction,  the  duality,  of  subject  and  object  is  real.
But  in  intellective  intuition  all  real  difference  between
Ijeing  and  knowing,  thought  and  thing,  seems  to  have
vanished.  Such  intuition,  in  fact,  implies  far  more
than  we  ordinaril)-  understantl  even  by  onmiscience'.
h'or  as  our  relative  and  imperfect  knowledge  does  not
partially  constitute  the  being  of  its  object,  so  absolute
and  pc'rfect  knowledge,  if  merely  knowk'dgr,  wouKl  not,
we  seem  entitled  to  say,  constitute  its  object  completely.

'  Omniscience,  literally  taken,  is  still  science,  not  intuition.


236  The  Idea  of  Creation

Our  partial  knowledge  of  a  thing  is  knowledge  of  its
utterances,  attitude  and  behaviour  as  they  are  for  us  :
hence  we  call  this  relative  knowledge.  But  a  know-
ledge of  all  such  characteristics  of  all  things  in  all  their
interactions  would  still  only  be  absolute  as  knowledge  :
i.e.,  it  would  be  as  absolute  or  complete  as  knowledge
can  be,  which,  by  its  very  nature,  is  essentially  relative.
It  would  leave  the  things  themselves  still  independent
as  regards  their  existence,  and  so  would  fall  short  of  this
intellective  intuition  wherein,  it  is  supposed,  they  are
not  merely  known  but  whereby  they  exist.  Thus  then
the  idea  of  a  transcendent  experient,  whose  stand-
point, so  to  say,  is  ubiquitous,  does  not  reach  to  the
still  more  transcendent  idea  of  a  creator,  of  one  who
is  the  ground  of  the  objects  that  he  'knows.'

Moreover  immediate  experience  of  another  subject
is  beyond  any  knowledge  that  we  have  or  can  conceive  :
in  fact  it  might,  I  think,  be  fairly  maintained  that  the
very  idea  involves  a  contradiction.  If  now  it  be  further
allowed  that  the  actions  of  free  and  advancing  intelli-
gences make  new  beginnings  possible,  imply  real
initiative,  it  would  follow  that  even  complete  and
absolute  knowledge  (or  omniscience),  as  knowledge  is
ordinarily  understood,  would  still  leave  every  finite
subject  in  the  position  of  an  eject  :  each  would  be
known  completely  as  regards  its  utterances,  its  objective
relations  with  the  rest,  but  not  as  it  is  in  itself.  But
more  than  this,  it  will  be  said,  is  implied  in  the  divine
so-called  omniscience  as  theism  understands  it :  "  the
Lord  seeth  not  as  man  seeth  ;  for  man  looketh  on  the
outward  appearance,  but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart."
And  why  ? "  He  that  keepeth  thy  soul  doth  not  he


God  as  fyauscoidcjif  and  ifuiiiaiiciif 237

know  it'?"  Such  'omniscience'  in  a  word  presupposes
creation  ;  thus  it  is  only  for  creative  intuition  that
the  knowing  and  the  being  of  objects  could  be  said
to  be  in  any  sense  the  same.

But  then,  so  far — on  the  principle  of  the  ideniiiy  of
indiscernibles — is  not  this  so-called  knowledge  or  in-
tuitive thought  of  the  object  as  such  itself  just  the
object,  and  is  not  the  object  just  this  so-called  knowledge
or  intuition  ?  In  that  case  what  becomes  of  the  divine
transcendence  on  which  theism  lays  such  stress?  Do  not
theism  and  pantheism  after  all  come  to  the  same  thing:
God  is  the  world  and  the  world  is  God  ?  But  identity,
if  it  is  to  mean  anything,  must  imply  some  difference  :
there  is  no  point,  for  example,  in  saying  '  This  is  the
same  '  unless  I  refer  to  something  experienced  pre-
viously. The  bare,  and  therefore  meaningless,  identity
of  God  and  World  simply  leaves  us  with  God  only,  as
in  the  acosmism  of  Spinoza;  or  with  World  only,  as  in
the  '  polite  atheisin  of  Schopenhauer.  But,  it  is  urged,
there  is,  after  all,  a  difference  and  one  which  our  own
self-consciousness  enables  us  to  understand.  Here  the
knower  and  the  known  are  one  and  the  same,  and  yet
are  distinct  in  so  far  as  the  subject  is  its  own  object.
Moreover  self-consciousness  is  the  only  form  ol  know-
ledge that  can  be  in  a  sense  absolute.  Knowledge  of
an  Other,  so  long  as  the  Other  is  veritably  such,  must
ever  be  relative  and  incomplete  ;  whereas  we  cannot
call  our  consciousness  of  self  merely  phenonKiial.
True,  but — as  I  have  already  urged  in  the  second
lecture'-' — throughout  our  experience  the  consciousness
of  self  iinolves  the  consciousness  of  not-self: iln-  two

' I  Sam.  xvi.  7  ;  Prov.  xxiv.  12.  -  Lcct.  11.  pj).  30,  41.


238  The  Idea  of  Creation

being  always  correlative  and  coordinate.  It  does  not
surprise  us  then  to  find  certain  of  the  philosophies  of
the  Absolute  represent  it  as  coming  to  self-consciousness
in  and  through  consciousness  of  the  world.  From
such  a  view  it  is  but  a  step  to  a  philosophy  of  the
Unconscious,  such  as  v.  Hartmann  and  others  have
constructed  mainly  on  a  Hegelian  basis.  And  we  may
note  by  the  way,  as  an  odd  illustration  of  extremes
meeting,  that  v.  Hartmann's  '  clairvoyance  of  the
Unconscious'  or  'Over-conscious'  is  but  a  bad  set-
ting of  the  old  idea  of  intellective  intuition\  The
attempt,  therefore,  to  equate  creation  regarded  as
intellective  intuition  with  a  pure  or  absolute  self-con-
sciousness— if  this  were  conceivable — will  not  avail  for
theism  :  it  leaves  no  room  for  the  divine  transcendence
and  without  this  the  distinctness  of  God  and  the  world
and  the  dependence  of  the  world  on  God  both  alike
disappear.  Our  result  so  far  then  is  simply  this :
neither  absolute  knowledge  nor  absolute  self-conscious-
ness can  take  the  place  of  the  idea  of  creation  ;  and
therefore,  if  the  notion  of  intellective  intuition  or  in-
tuitive understanding  is  to  help  us,  we  must  find  more
in  the  activity  which  it  after  all  implies  than  thought  or
knowledge  of  any  sort  will  cover ;  and  also  more  than
such  identity  as  self-knowing  and  self-known  implies.

We  may  discern  perhaps  a  faint  and  distant
analogy,  one  suggesting  a  better  interpretation,  in
what  we  are  wont  to  style  the  creations  of  genius.  We
never  apply  this  phrase  to  the  most  marvellous  dis-
coveries in  science  or  the most  fruitful inventions  in

^  Perhaps  too Bergson's  elan vital  is but  another  variant  of
this  idea.


Creation  ami  the  Oyignialify  of  Genius 239

the  technical' arts  : nobody, I fancy, would  say that
Newton  created  gravitation  or  that  Gutenberg  created
printing. If  Newton  had not  discovered  gravitation
some  one  else  would,  and  as  for  printing  we  know  that
it  was  invented  more  than  once. But  it  is  common  to
speak  of  such works  as the  Antigone  of  Sophocles,
Shakespeare's Hanilet, Michael Angelo's MoseSy
Raphael's Sistine JMadonna or Beethoven's Ninth
SympJiony  as  creations;  and  we  feel  pretty  confident
that  if  their  authors  had  not  produced  theni  they  would
never  have  been  produced. This approximation to
the divine that we find in the  originality of  genius
leads  us  often  to  speak  of  its  '  creations '  as  inspired.
In  the  case  of  discoveries  and  inventions  we realise
that  sense  and  intellect,  the  receptive  and  active  factors,
are  both  concerned  ;  but  the  immortal  works  of  art,  the
things  of  beauty  that  are  a  joy  for  ever,  we  regard  as
rather the  spontaneous output of productive imagi-
nation, of  a  free  spirit  that  embodies  itself in  its  work,
lives  in  it  and  loves  it. \'ct  however  much  the  man
of  genius  loves  his  work  and  lives  in  it,  he  is  still  dis-
tinct from  it,  still  greater  than  it. On  the  other  hand,
however  dependent  on  him  is  his  production,  though
he  knows  it  through  and  through,  yet  it  too  is  distinct
from  him  : from  its  first  inception,  even  in  the  full  tide
of  his  activity,  he  feels  that  it  is  working  itself  out  and
sees  that it  is  good  ; in  other  words he  finds  himst-lt
expressed  in  it  and  he  respects  his  work.

Yet  after  all,  as  we  have  allowed,  this  analogy  is
very  imperfect,  and  ii  is  jiisi  in  iIk;  imijortant  point
where  it  fails  that  our  difficultii:s  with  the  idea  ol
intellective intuition begin. lictwciMi what wi- may


A


240  The  Idea  of  Creation

call  relative  creation,  the  origination  of  something  re-
latively new  within  the  world,  and  the  absolute  creation
of  the  world  itself  there  is  an  impassable  gulf.  The
one  presupposes  experience  previously  acquired,  the
other  is  coeval  and  identical  with  the  divine  experience
itself.  God  in  short  is  the  Absolute  Genius — the
World-Genius,  as  he  has  been  called.  Any  analogy
drawn  from  our  experience  must  then  be  inadequate  to
such  an  experience  :  God's  ways  are  not  as  our  ways
nor  his  thoughts  as  our  thoughts.  But  the  difference
lies  simply  in  transcending  the  limit  to  which  our
experience  points  but  can  never  attain :  it  need  not
imply  utter  disparity.  We  may  perhaps  safely  assume
that  the  distinction  of  will  and  presentation  is  appli-
cable to  the  divine  experience  as  well  as  to  our  own  ;
and  also  that  there  too  they  are  equally  inseparable.
At  any  rate  we  cannot  say  that  volition  precedes
presentation  nor  that  presentation  precedes  volition  ;
that  the  subject  is  first  nor  yet  that  the  object  is  ;  nor
finally  that  both  are  originally  undifferentiated \  If  so,
we  cannot  then  represent  creation  as  starting  with  a
blind  will  to  create  followed  by  a  discursive  selection
of  the  best  possible  plan  of  creation  ;  nor  as  starting
with  a  dialectic  development  of  the  only  possible  plan
followed  by  the  resolve  to  let  it  be.  It  is  at  once  'pure
activity  '  and  '  original  insight,'  idea  and  deed,  life  and
light.  God  is  transcendent  to  it,  for  it  is  not  God,  but
his  utterance  and  manifestation  ;  and  yet,  because  it  is
his  utterance  and  because  he  ever  sustains  it,  he  is
immanent  in  it, it  is  his  continuous  creation.

So  then  at  last  the  theist  is  bound  to  admit  that
^  Cf.  Lect.  IX.  p.  199.


TJicisni  and  Pluralism  241

this  conception  of  God-and-the-world  is  beyond  us  :  we
can  assign  it  no  beginning  and  so  we  say  it  is  'eternal':
we  can  find  no  ground  for  it  and  so  \\v.  sav  it  is  the
Absolute.  At  the  same  time  we  have  to  remember
that  the  pluralist's  position  is  no  better,  nay  we  must
acknowledge,  I  think,  that  it  is  not  so  good.  He  too
has  to  assume  an  endless  regress  for  the  world.  For
him  too  there  is  something  groundless  and  therefore
absolute,  but  it  is  the  totality  of  a  Many  in  their  inter-'
action  regarded  as  the  ultimate  reality.  Of  this  plurality
in  unity  he  can  give  no  account  beyond  saying  that  it
is  just  this,  and  that  it  is  there.  As  I  have  already  said
this  position  cannot — so  far  as  I  see — be  charged  with
inherent  inconsistency  ;  but  it  is  incomplete  and  un-
satisfying. A  plurality  of  beings  primarily  independent
as  regards  their  existence  and  yet  always  mutually
acting  and  reacting  upon  each  other,  an  ontological
plurality  that  is  yet  somehow  a  cosmological  unity,
seems  clearly  to  suggest  some  ground  beyond  itself.
The  idea  of  God  presents  itself  to  meet  this  lack.  The
Many  depend  upon  God  for  their  existence  though
still  dependent  on  each  other  as  regards  their  ex-
perience. The  idea  of  God  would  then  be  meaningless,
unless  God  were  regarded  as  transcending  the  Many  ;
so  there  can  be  no  talk  of  God  as  merely  primus  iutcr
pares.  On  the  other  hand  it  would  be  equally  meaning-
less to  talk  of  God  apart  from  the  Man)-.  A  God  thai
was  not  a  Creator,  a  God  whose  creatures  hatl  no
independence,  would  not  himself  be  really  a  ( lod.
Herein  theism  differs  from  thorough-going  singularism
or  absolutism.  A  theism  that  is  reached  ihnnigh
pluralism  can  never  end  in  an  Absolute  in  which  God
w.  16


242  TJie  Idea  of  Creation

and  the  World  alike  were  absorbed  and  lost  :  the  only
Absolute  then  that  we  can  admit  is  the  Absolute  which
God  and  the  World  constitute.

And  yet  the  tendency  of  theism  to  pass  over  into
singularism  is  notorious  and  we  have  noted  it  again
and  again.  How  may  we  account  for  this  ?  It  follows
partly,  no  doubt,  from  the  besetting  sin  of  speculative
thinking  to  hypostatize  abstractions — hence  the  so-
called  '  abstract  monism '  or  acosmism,  of  which
Spinoza  furnished  the  type.  Partly  it  is  the  result
of  a  religious  spirit  of  self-abasement,  self-abnegation,
as  in  certain  forms  of  Indian  and  Christian  mysticism.
But  in  large  measure  it  is  due  to  the  difficulties  in  the
idea  of  creation  itself.  We  say  God  and  the  World
constitute  the  Absolute  ;  but  if  God  is  the  absolute
ground  of  the  World  is  not  God  alone  after  all  the  real
Absolute  ^  In  this  question  there  lurks  perhaps  the
error  of  concreting  abstractions  just  now  mentioned.
If  there  were  no  world,  God  would  cease  to  be  the
ground  of  it.  He  would  still  be  the  potential  ground,
it  will  be  replied  perhaps.  But  if  he  were  only  this,
do  we  not  require  some  further  condition — some
restraint  to  be  withdrawn  or  some  external  impulse
to  supervene  before  the  world  can  become  actuaP?
Or,  if  not  that,  are  we  not  then  driven  to  conceive
God  as  not  actually  being  all  that  it  is  his  nature  to
be — if  such  an  expression  is  allowable  ? But  no,  the

^  '"Tis  an  established  maxim... that  an  object  which  exists  for
any  time  in  its  full  perfection  without  producing  another,  is  not  its
sole  cause ;  but  is  assisted  by  some  other  principle,  which  pushed  it
from  its  state  of  inactivity."  Hume,  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,
Green  and  Grose's  edn,  vol.  i.  p.  378.


T/ieisin  ami  Absolittis)}i  243

objector  may  persist,  if  God  is  the  absolute  ground  of
the  world — even  granting  that  his  creation  has  no
time  limits,  still — the  world  cannot  possibly,  without
ceasing  to  be  created,  share  with  him  the  title  of
Absolute.  The  more  clearly  we  realise  the  entire
and  complete  dependence  that  creation  implies  the
more  flagrantly  absurd  will  such  a  claim  appear.  Even
the  potter  may  find  the  clay  not  ideally  plastic;  indeed
the  artistic  creator  at  his  best  meets  with  some  limi-
tation in  his  material.  For  God  there  can  be  none,
which  is  all  that  is  meant  by  the  phrase  '  creation  out
of  nothing.'

To  this  we  may  reply  : — No  theist  can  pretend  that
the  world  is  coordinate  with  God  :  the  divine  trans-
cendence is  essential  to  the  whole  theistic  position.
No  theist  again  assumes  that  creation  involves  ex-
ternal limitation.  But  the  point  is  that  if  creation  is
to  have  any  meaning  it  implies  internal  limitation.  It
is  from  the  reality  of  the  world  that  we  start  :  if  this  is
denied,  the  divine  transcendence  becomes  meaningless,
nay,  God,  as  the  ideal  of  the  pure  reason,  sinks  to  a
mere  illusion  within  an  illusion.  On  the  other  hand,  if
the  realitv  of  the  world  be  admitted,  then  this  reality
stands  over  against  the  reality  of  God.  God  indeed
has  not  been  limited  from  without  but  he  has  limiteil
himself.

I'ui  nr)w  new  difficulties  emerge.  Self-limitation
seems  to  imply  a  prior  state  in  which  it  was  absent,
whereas  a  limitation  held  to  be  permanent — as  we  hold
creation  to  be — suggests  some  ultimate  dualism  rather
than  an  ultimate  unity.  Such  an  objitclion  is  in  kei.'ping
with  our  ordinary  experience  confmed as that is to

16 — a


244  ^-^^^  Idea  of  Creation

temporal  processes,  but  it  is  not  applicable  to  the
notion  of  an  absolute  ground  ;  as  a  trivial  example  may
suffice  to  show.  The  sides  of  a  triangle  are  independent
of  its  angles  only  if  regarded  merely  as  lines,  and  yet
they  are  the  ground  of  the  angles  ;  also  in  forming
these  they  limit  themselves  in  so  far  as  they  thereby
determine  their  several  ratios.  We  do  not  say  that
God  comes  into  being  with  the  world,  but  only  that  as
ground  of  the  world  he  limits  himself :  duality  in
unity  is  implied  here  as  in  all  experience,  but  not
dualism.

But  how,  it  may  be  asked,  can  self-limitation  be
involved  in  creation,  if  creation  is  pure  activity  and
original  intuition,  if  God  is  all  life  and  all  light  ?  How
can  God  be  omnipotent,  as  theism  ordinarily  assumes,
and  yet  be  limited  ?  Well,  in  the  first  place,  we  might
reply,  an  omnipotent  being  that  could  not  limit  itself
would  hardly  deserve  the  name  of  God;  would,  in  fact,
be  only  a  directionless  energy  of  unlimited  amount.
At  the  same  time  the  Mosaic  notion  that  God  must
needs  rest  from  his  labour  and  even  Tertullian's  bold
assertion  that  his  glory  was  the  greater  on  this
account,  nobody  nowadays,  I  suppose,  would  seriously
defend.  It  is  not  any  limitation  of  this  sort  that  we
have  primarily  in  view,  ^//determination  is  negation,
that  is  limitation,  we  must  say  with  Spinoza.  But  if
God  were  what  Hegel  described  Nature  as  being,  ein
bacchantischer  Gott,  der  sick  selbst  nicht  ziigelt  und
fasst,  then  indeed  we  might  regard  him  as  the  Absolute
notwithstanding  possible  creational  vagaries,  but  he
would  be  the  absolutely  Indeterminate.  But  God
according  to  the  theistic  idea  does  not  repudiate  but


Creative  and  Diviue  Liniitatioii 245

owns  and  respects  his  world,  a  world  that  is  cosmic,
not  chaotic,  from  the  first,  and  through  which  we  may
believe  that  one  increasing  purpose  runs.  Even  men
abide  by  their  pledges,  cherish  their  offspring,  show
steadfastness  and  consistency  in  their  purposes,  and  in
manifold  other  ways  limit  and  determine  themselves
by  their  own  deeds.  By  their  deeds,  yes  ;  but  not  by
their  dreams.  We  surely  then  cannot  suppose  that
God  is  less  earnest,  less  steadfast  than  his  creatures  :
rather  we  regard  him  as  without  variableness  or
shadow  of  a  turning.  Again,  to  argue  that  unless  the
world  is  merely  a  divine  phantasy,  God  is  determined
by  its  existence,  does  less  than  justice  to  the  pluralist's
position  :  it  is  from  the  reality  of  the  world  that  we
start.  Apart  from  this,  I  must  again  insist,  we  have
no  basis  for  our  ideal  of  God  at  all.

There  still  remains  of  course  the  difficulty,  which
from  the  outset  we  have  allowed  to  be  insuperable  :
how  God  creates  the  world  and  thereby  limits  himself
we  can  never  understand'.  The  idea  of  creation,  like
the  idea  of  God,  we  admit  is  altogether  transcendent.
13ut — paradoxical  though  it  may  seem — this  admission
in  a  sense  explains  and  removes  our  difficulty,  liven  il
the  idea  of  creation  be  valid,  we  must  necessarily  fail
to  understand  the  process,  just  because  that  cannot  fall
within  our  experience;  on  th<:  other  hand  any  process
that  we  could  understand  could  not  hv.  the  creative  pro-
cess, because  it  would  fall  within  our  experience.  This
may  sound  very  like  a  fmal  surrender  ;  for  what,  it  may
be  urged,  is  the  use  of  a  hypothesis  that  can  never  be
directly  verified  ?  Nevertheless  this  objection  rests  on
'  See  Supplementary  Note  II.


246  The  Idea  of  Creation

a  complete  failure  to  understand  the  function  of  philo-
sophy. A  scientific  hypothesis  is  directly  verifiable  ;
because  the  facts  which  it  is  framed  to  unify,  simplify,
or  explain,  fall  within  experience,  and  this  is  sure
therefore  sooner  or  later  to  furnish  a  crucial  test  of  its
validity.  But  philosophy  is  not  science — though  it  is
bound  to  be  systematic  and  methodical — for  it  deals
not  with  parts  or  aspects  of  experience  in  isolation  but
with  experience  as  a  concrete  whole.  To  this  whole
it  must  appeal  to  justify  its  *  ideas ' ;  and  they  are
justified  in  proportion  as  they  enable  us  to  conceive
this  whole  as  a  complete  and  systematic  unity.  The
pluralist  halts  at  the  Many  and  their  interaction  :  he
declines  to  go  further  because  he  finds  no  direct
warrant  for  so  doing.  But  if  the  idea  of  creation  will
carry  us  further,  and  if  nothing  else  will,  then  that
idea,  it  is  maintained,  is  rationally  justified  though  it
be  not  empirically  verified.


LECTURE XII.

THE COSMOLOGY OF THEISM.

The  idea  of  creation,  we  have  allowed,  must  in
any  case  lead  to  modihcations  of  the  pluralistic  JVc//-
anschauuug.  But  it  is  questionable  if  these  modifications
need  to  be  as  radical  as  most  theists  assume.  To  these
differences  and  their  possible  reconciliation  we  have
now  to  turn.

Pluralism  and  theism  are — nowadays  at  all  events —
both  monistic  :  for  neither,  is  the  distinction  between
person  and  thing,  matter  and  mind,  an  ultimate  dis-
tinction. For  both  alike,  material  phenomena  are  only
the  manifestation  of  minds,  of  so-called  '  things /tv  sc!
These  however  are  not  literally  things  at  all,  l)ut
beings  that  are  beings  for  themselves,  i.e. — in  the  widest
sense  of  the  term — persons,  who  arc  conative  and
cognitive  in  varying  degrees.  Hut  whereas  pluralism
regards  all  material  phenomena  as  due  to  the  direct
interaction  of  such  persons  or  monads,  reduces  the
entire  course  of  the  world,  in  short,  without  reservation,
to  such  interaction  ;  theism  usualK  attributes  material
phenomena  to  the  dirc-ct  and  orderl\-  inlervenlion  of
God,  who  in  this  way  provides  a  medium  and  instru-
mentality for  the  mutual  intercourse  and  understaiuling
of  his  cn-atures, (  )f  the  former  position  we  have  taken


248  The  Cosmology  of  Theism

the  Leibnizian  monadology  as  the  type,  discarding
however  the  doctrine  of  '  pre-estabHshed  harmony,'  as
Wolf  and  others  did,  who  attempted  to  systematise
Leibniz's  philosophy.  Of  the  latter  position  we  have
typical  instances  in  the  occasionalism  of  Berkeley  or  of
Lotze  in  his  later  views ;  they  agree  in  referring  matter
or  the  so-called  mechanism  of  nature  to  the  immanent
activity  of  God  himself.  Such  theism  then,  it  will  be
readily  seen,  assumes  two  apparently  quite  distinct
forms  of  divine  activity:  first,  the  creative  and  sustaining
activity,  whereby  the  finite  Many  exist,  and  secondly
the  continuous  mediation  whereby  they  are  brought
into  living  relation  with  each  other.  In  proceeding
then  to  examine  what  we  might  call  the  Cosmology  of
theism,  the  general  theory  of  occasionalism  comes  up
for  consideration  first  of  all.

This  theory,  originated  to  bridge  over  the  gulf  that
the  Cartesian  dualism  had  made  between  mind  and
matter,  contributed  in  the  end  to  that  denial  of  the  in-
dependent reality  of  matter  altogether,  which  is  common
to  all  forms  of  spiritualistic  monism  or  idealism  and
was  in  fact  implicit  in  the  teaching  of  Descartes  himself.
At  first  all  that  was  asserted  was,  that  since  the  utter
disparateness  of  matter  and  mind  rendered  any  direct
influence  of  one  on  the  other  impossible,  their  seeming
interaction  must  be  due  solely  to  the  '  assistance '  or
intervention  of  the  Creator  of  both.  It  was  however
still  assumed  that  bodies  causally  and  immediately
affected  each  other.  But  as  the  consequences  of  the
entire  inertness  assigned  to  matter  came  to  be  realised,
and  our  own  voluntary  activity  came  to  be  regarded
as  the  prime  source  of  our  sense  of  power,  the  theory


Occasiofia/is/n  249

ot  occasionalism  underwent  a  corresponding  chanq-e.
The  idea  of  God  as  mediating  between  mind  and
matter  gave  place  to  the  simpler  idea  of  God  as
mediating  between  finite  minds,  the  so-called  material
world  being  regarded  no  longer  as  the  means  by  which
this  mediation  was  effected,  but  rather  as  the  actual
fact  of  this  mediation  itself.  This  is  the  form  of
occasionalism  that  was  maintained  by  Berkeley  and
Lotze.  This  also  we  find  already  in  germ  within
Descartes'  own  system'  ;  and  it  was  so  far  developed
by  the  Cartesian  INIalebranche  that  a  disciple  of  his,
Arthur  Collier,  is  said  by  his  biographer  to  have
anticipated  the  Berkeleian  position  by  several  years".

At  the  outset  too,  as  its  name  suggests,  occasionalism
implied  the  continuous  interposition  of  the  Deity  in
each  and  all  of  the  innumerable  cases  of  apparent
interaction  ceaselessly  occurring  throughout  the  entire
universe.  Against  such  a  view  Leibni/  brought  the
charge  of  perpetual  miracle,  of  irrational  recourse  to
a  Deiis  ex  machina  ;  and  the  objection  is  commonly
regarded  as  fatal.  Well,  no  doubt  intervention  in  the
affairs  of  a  multitude  of  distinct  and  unique  beings
does  for  us  imply  a  corresponding  multiplicity  of
separate  acts  ;  and  the  thought  of  such  a  multiplex —
so  to  .say  discursive — intervention  is  to  us  utterly
bewildering.  Hut  for  God.  who  is  to  be  conceived  as
omniscient,  the  case  is  altogether  dilferent.  lor  God,
as  its  common  Creator,  the  world  is  one  whole  :  how-
ever much  differentiated,  it  nev(-r  for  him  loses  its
meaning  and therefore  never  lacks  its intuited unity.

'  Cf.  e.g.  his  sixth  Meditation.

*  Cf.  Eraser's  edition  of  JJerMey's  IVor/^s,  i.st  cdn,  vol.  i.  |).  :;53.


250  The  Cosmology  of  Theism

For  God  there  is  no  exclusive  standpoint  and  there-
fore no  need  to  hurry  hither  and  thither,  attending
now  to  this,  now  to  that.  Further,  since  continuity
is  the  common  characteristic  of  the  growth  and  de-
velopment of  all  his  creatures  alike\  his  compensatory
adjustments,  the  supposed  means  of  their  interaction,
will  also  be  continuous  and  orderly.  They  may  exhibit
the  regularity  of  increasing  purpose  rather  than  the
rigidity  of  fixed  mechanism,  but  at  least  they  will  be
compatible  with  the  idea  of  Law,  of  orderly  control.

But  to  talk  of  a  Deiis  ex  machma  in  such  a  case  is
to  assume  that  there  is  some  independent  system  to
get  tangled  up  into  knots,  to  forget  that  Nature  for
the  theist  just  is  this  continuous  mediation  of  the
Divine  and  not  a  mechanism  independent  of  it.  Again
to  call  this  a  perpetual  miracle,  if  that  means  more  than
a  subject  for  perpetual  wonder  and  admiration,  is  equally
absurd.  The  fact  is  that  Leibniz's  own  theory  of
pre-established  harmony  does  not  differ  so  much  from
occasionalism  as  is  often  supposed.  Bayle  pointed
this  out  long  ago  and  the  resemblance  has  often  been

^  Thus  it  cannot  be  objected  that  a  man  might,  for  example,
will  to  fly,  and  that  therefore  there  could  be  no  orderliness  in  the
world  if  God  simply  gave  effect  to  whatever  might  be  willed.  In
truth,  however,  a  man  cannot  will  to  fly,  and  the  mere  wish  to  fly
entails  no  change  of  attitude,  no  actual  conation.  Still  he  might
possibly  try  to  fly ;  but  then  his  first  attempt  would  start  from  his
status  quo.  But  what  can  a  finite  being  will  to  do,  more  generally
what  is  such  a  being  always  striving  for?  For  self-conservation  and
self-betterment,  we  say  ;  but  this  again  carries  us  back  to  the  status
quo.  There  will  then  be  a  certain  continuity  in  the  actions  of  each
and  all  such  beings,  and  so  there  will  also  be  a  corresponding
continuity  in  that  mediating  activity  of  God  which  we  ordinarily
summarise  as  the  uniformity  of  Nature. Natura  non  facit  saltus.


Leib)iiz  on  Occasionalism  251

noticed  since.  I  f  we  figure  to  ourselves  two  badly-
made  clocks  i^  Jiorloocs  ni(fchautes'\  and  imagine  the
clockmaker  continually  interfering  to  correct  their
faulty  adjustment — and  this  is  Leibniz's  caricature  of
occasionalism — then  indeed  the  objection  to  miraculous
meddling  would  be  in  place.  But  the  whole  point  is
that  there  are  not  two  clocks.  To  call  Nature — the
only  clock  there  is,  if  there  is  a  clock  at  all — a  perpetual
miracle  is  to  ignore  the  fact  that  a  permanent  miracle
is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  For  theism,  when  it  is
thought  out,  there  is  however  not  even  one  clock  :  to
attribute  to  God  the  need  or  even  the  use  of  organs  or
instruments  is  but  childish  anthropomorphism'.  "II
n'y  a  point  d'autre  nature,  je  veux  dire  d'autres  lois
naturelles,  que  les  volontes  efficaces  du  tout-puissant,"
said  Malebranche.

Nevertheless  the  term  occasionalism  will  always
tend  to  suggest  the  part  played  by  a  broker,  middleman
or  'go-between'  in  human  affairs;  and  this,  it  will  be
felt,  is  no  worthy  7'6le  to  assign  to  the  dixinc  being.
And  yet  such  an  objection  is  due  simply  to  misunder-
standing. It  would  be  just  as  reasonable  to  maintain
that  to  create  finite  beings  at  all  is  unworthy  of  the
Infinite.  So  long  as  creation  implies  mediation — and
this  is  the  usual  theistic  position  -the  two  activities,
ho\vev(;r  distinct,  are  in  fact  inseparable,  the:  one  being
consecjuential  on  the  other,  and  both  together  resulting
In  one  complete  cosmos.  W'l-  find  the  life  and  inter-
course of  finite  beings  to  depend  on  two  things,  tirst
on  their  organisms,  and  secondly  on  their  (in  iidinnents:
these  together  make  up  the  one  whole  we  connnonly
'  Cf.  Naturalism  grid  Af^nos/icism,  3rd  cdn,  vol.  11.  pp.  274  f.


252  The  Cosmology  of  Theism

speak  of  as  the  physical  or  material  world.  And  so  in
virtue  of  the  continuity  between  any  given  organism
and  its  environment — that  is,  eventually,  the  whole
material  world — we  may  regard  this  as  itself  the
organism  common  to  all  living  things  alike,  the  uni-
versal matrix  within  which  their  several  individual
organisms  are  differentiated  but  not  separated.  Again,
as  the  several  individual  organisms,  as  the  very  term
itself  implies,  constitute  the  instrumentality  of  the
sentient  agents  or  persons  to  whom  they  belong  ;  so
we  may  say  that  the  entire  material  world  is  in  like
manner  the  common  possession  or  medium  of  life  and
intercourse  for  them,  the  only  truly  active  beings.
According  to  the  cosmology  of  theism,  in  short,  the
physical  world  is  simply  a  system  of  means  provided
for  the  sake  of  the  realm  of  ends  :  it  is  only  to  be
understood  as  subservient  to  them,  and  apart  from
them  is  alike  meaningless  and  worthless.

But  thouorh  the  existence  of  the  material  world  is
not  dependent  on  us  but  is  rather  on  this  view  the
medium  on  which  we  ourselves  depend,  though  it  is
indispensable  as  a  system  of  means  for  us,  we  cannot
from  this  conclude  that  it  is  in  the  same  sense  indis-
pensable for  God,  We  are  not,  in  other  words,  justified
in  assuming  that  the  realm  of  ends  is  created  conform-
ably to  a  prior  system  of  means,  life  being  primarily
adjusted  to  matter,  not  matter  to  life.  The  creations
of  finite  minds  are,  it  is  true,  subject  to  material
trammels,  the  exigencies  of  rhyme  and  metre,  the
small  range  of  luminosity  in  pigments,  the  intractable
nature  of  marble  or  bronze,  and  so  forth.  But  we
cannot suppose either that the divine creation is


Creative  ami  Mediating  Aetivity 253

necessarily  beset  by  limits  of  this  kind  or  that  God  has
arbitrarily  limited  the  world  of  living  forms  by  a
pre-ordained  world  of  lifeless  stuff.  The  creative
activity  is  then,  the  theist  holds,  only  the  condition  of,
not  at  all  conditioned  by,  the  mediating  activity  ;  and
the  unity  and  purpose  of  the  former  as  a  realm  of  ends
involves  and  determines  the  law  and  order  of  the
latter  as  a  system  of  means.

But  do  we  need  thus  to  distinguish  between  ends
and  means,  between  creative  activity  and  mediating
activity  ?  Does  the  idea  of  creation  necessarily  imply
what  we  may  call  a  unified  and  systematic  occasionalism  ?
If  the  interpretation  of  interaction  towards  which
pluralism  seems  to  tend  is  possible  and  sufficient,  we
certainly  may  answer  this  question  in  the  negative.
There  may,  in  fact,  be  such  a  divine  system  or  economy
embracino:  and  encirclino-  the  livino-  aofents  of  the  world,
furnishing,  as  it  were,  the  properties  and  the  scenery
in  which  these  dramatis  personae  of  history  enact  their
parts.  Such  subsidiary  aids,  I  say,  may  e.xist,  but
according  to  the  pluralist  view  they  are  not  necessary.
But  can  the  [pluralist  position  be  thought  out  ?  \\' hy
can  it  not,  it  may  be  replied,  if  it  re([uires  nothing
more  than  the  sort  of  mutual  understanding  or  rapport
which  we  daily  observe  in  the  personal  intercourse  of
our  fellow-men  '^  "As  in  water  face  answereth  to  face
so  the  heart  of  man  to  man."  Of  course  such  mutual
understanding  is  approximately  complete  only  between
persons  similarly  situated  and  similar  in  ihcir  interests
and  pursuits,  who  can  thus  become — as  we  aptly  say —
intimate  with  each  other.  It  tails  off  rapidly  in  our
intercourse  with  strangers,  and  tends  to  dwindle  away


254  T^^^  Cosmology  of  Theism

altogether  as  we  pass  to  creatures  further  and  further
removed  from  us  in  the  scale  of  being.  You  may  train
a  dog  to  fetch  and  carry,  but  it  is  useless  to  tell  a  fly
not  to  settle  on  your  nose  :  like  Milton's  mariner  dis-
embarking on  the  leviathan's  back,  he  takes  you  to  be
terra  firma.  Yet  the  flies  understand  each  other  and
glide  about  in  airy  mazes  without  colliding.

But  it  will  be  said,  both  flies  and  men  have
organisms,  and  without  these  their  mutual  adjustments
of  behaviour  would  be  altogether  inexplicable,  and  it  is
just  this  interaction  by  means  of  physical  organization
that  is  the  problem  \  This  is  true  and  the  pluralist  is
fully  aware  of  it.  It  was  Leibniz  himself,  the  founder
of  modern  pluralism,  who  said  that  "a  disembodied
soul  would  be  a  deserter  from  the  general  order,  which
implies  matter  and  movement  and  their  laws"."  But
the  question  is:  What  is  matter?  More  exactly  stated:
What  is  the  simplest  concept  of  matter  to  which  we
are  led,  setting  out  from  the  realm  of  ends  as  the  reason
of  its  existence  ?  We  note  then,  first,  that  for  Leibniz,
as  for  his  modern  successors,  any  given  organism  itself
consists  of  organisms,  which  for  it  are  organs,  having
special  functions  and  working  consentiently  together
as  members  of  this  one  whole.  This  however  implies
an  indefinite — Leibniz  even  said,  an  infinite — reo-ress.
But  for  the  modern  pluralist  all  it  means,  I  take  it,  is
that  we  cannot  assume  any  given  organism  that  seems
simple,  to  be  so  really  ;  but  that,  none  the  less,  since
the  complex  involves  the  simple,  bare — or  as  Leibniz
called  them, naked — monads must exist. And now

^  See  Supplementary  Note  III.

*  Cf.  Philosophische  Schriften,  Gerhardt's  edn,  vol.  vi,  p.  546.


JJliaf  is  the  simplest  concept  of  Matter? 255

how  are  we  to  conceive  such  a  bare  monad  ?  It  cannot
be  a  dominant  monad,  for  this  would  imply  subordinate
monads  :  it  cannot  therefore  have  a  body  distinct  from
itself.  In  some  sense  then,  it  would  seem,  it  must
be  its  own  body  or  disappear  altogether  from  the
universal  connexion  of  things.  Hut  w  c  must  not
understand  this  to  mean  that  apparently  all  mental
characteristics  are  gone  and  only  material  characteristics
are  left.  The  true  solution  seems  rather  to  be  that  we
have  reached  the  limit  of  both.  The  physical  concept
of  such  a  limit  is  the  dynamical  concept  of  a  mass-point
as  a  centre  of  force.  The  corresponding  psychological
concept  answers  to  what  Leibniz  happily  described  as
mens  momentanea  seu  carens  recordatio7ie^ .

Some  elucidation  of  both  these  concepts  is  requisite
before  we  can  attempt  to  formulate  the  conclusion  to
which  this  regress  points.  Leibniz  spoke  of  monads
generally  as  "the  r^^/ atoms  of  nature,  and  in  a  word,
the  elements  of  things."  Such  language,  which  seems
specially  appropriate  to  his  naked  monads,  should  be
sufticient  to  put  us  on  our  guard  against  identifying
them  with  the  mass-points  of  the  modern  physicist —
which  Leibniz  held  to  be  onl\'  phenomenal.  They
are  more  analog(jus  to i)(>scnvich's  centres  of  force-':

'  Tluoriiie  motus  abstracti  Definitiones,  Gerhardt's  edition  of  his
philosophical  works,  vol.  iv.  p.  230.

'  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  notwithstanding  this  analogy,  to
which  lioscovich  himself  refers,  he  was  so  far  from  identifying
monads  and  centres  of  force  as  to  maintain  that  the  'seat  of  the
soul'  is  more  or  less  extended,  ('f.  his  Philosophiae  naturalis  Tfuoria,
Venire,  1763,  Appendix,  De  Anima  et  Deo,  ij^  53'»  ff-  It  is  also
worthy  of  passing  notice  that  it  was  through  lioscovich  that  I'rieslley
was  led  to  his  so-called  materialism.


256  The  Cosmology  of  Theism

although  they  differ  from  these  in  being  all  qualitatively
distinct,  or  unique,  like  Herbart's  reals,  not  all  qualita-
tively the  same,  as  Boscovich's  elements  were\  But
they  resemble  these  in  another  respect  and  that  a  very
important  one.  Boscovich  conceived  his  simple  atoms
as  acting  at  a  distance,  which — paradoxical  though  it
sounds — really  means  interacting  directly  without  any
intervening  medium,  doing,  in  fact,  what  according
to  the  Newtonian  mechanics  is  inconceivable.  This
immediacy  of  interaction  is  held  to  characterize  the
bare  monad  of  the  modern  pluralist,  the  monad  that  is,
so  to  say,  its  own  body.  Such  interaction  implies  what
Lotze  called  a  sympathetic  rapport.

This  brings  us  to  the  psychical  nature  of  the  bare
monad,  and  here  again  immediacy  is  the  thing  we  have
specially  to  note.  This  immediacy  answers  to  what
psychologists  now  call  pure  sensation,  an  ideal  limit  to
which  02ir  simplest  experiences  never  descend  :  our
sensations  correspond  rather  to  complexes  or  syntheses
of  the  elemental  sensations  or  'petites  perceptions '  of
Leibniz.  Moreover,  for  its  it  is  true  that  all  cognition
is  recognition,  implies  assimilation,  and  therefore
memory  in  the  widest  sense,  i.e.  the  retention  of  what
has  been  either  inherited  or  acquired.  Pure  sensation
or  cognition  is  the  '  momentary  consciousness  '  of  some
datum,  the  perception  or  recognition  of  which,  on  the
other  hand,  would  presuppose  previous  experiences
that  still  in  some  sense  endure.  Clear  evidence  of
such  a  '  psychical '  or  enduring  present  is  only  found  in
connexion  with  comparatively  complex  organisms,  and

1  Cf.  op.  cit.  %  3,  quoted  also  by  Fechner,  Atomenlehre,  2nd  edn,
p.  240.


Intcnicfioji  as  *  synipafJictic  rapport ' 257

this  ranQ-e  in  time  is  found  also  to  increase  as  the
biological  differentiation  of  the  organism  increases.
When  then,  on  the  contrary,  we  imagine  this  complexity
decreased  without  limit,  we  reach  the  concept  of  the
bare  monad  whose  organism,  so  to  say,  reduces  to  a
point,  and  its  present  to  a  moment  ;  which  can  only
react  immediately  and  to  what  is  immediately  given.
In  other  words  such  monads  deal  only  with  their
environment  and.  so  long  as  they  gain  nothing  by
experience,  so  long,  that  is,  as  they  remain  bare
monads,  they  severally  deal  with  it  always  in  the  same
way.  The  existence  of  an  indefinite  number  of  such
monads  would  provide  all  the  '  uniform  medium  '  for
the  intercourse  of  higher  monads  that  these  can  require,
without  anv  need  for  such  divine  intervention  as
occasionalism  assumes.

The  precise  details  of  this  psychical  intercourse  the
pampsychist  is  unable  to  specify.  But  it  is  questionable
whether- — notwithstanding  this — the  occasionalist  with
his  apparent  psychophysical  interaction  is  not  in  a
worse  position  ;  for  he  only  dispenses  with  the  need
for  any  specification  by  assuming  what  we  may  call
a  '  dualism  '  in  the  divine  activity,  and  that  to  many
minds  will  always  appear  too  cumbrous  and,  so  to  say,
unscientific,  to  be  intellectually  satisfactory.  And  after
all  the  main  outline  of  the  pampsychic  alternative  can
be  ch-arly  stated.  The  relation  of  a  dominant  monad
(.  /)  to  any  monad  of  its  organism  (or  of  its  ])r.iiii,  when
its  organism  is  so  far  differentiated,)  is  different  in  kind
from  the  relation  to  the  same  monad  of  the  doinin ant
monad  (/i)  of  another  organism.  The  one  relation  wc
may  call an inl(,'rnal, functional,  or  vital,  the  other  an

w.  17


258  The  Cosmology  of  Theism

external,  foreign,  or  physical,  relation.  The  totality  of
these  internal  relations  at  a  given  time  answers  to  y4's
objective  experience  at  that  moment.  Certain  changes
in  this  whole  are,  so  far  as  A  is  concerned,  initiated
by  certain  of  the  subordinate  monads  :  these  changes
answer  to  A's  sensations,  and  as  to  these  it  is  receptive
or  passive.  Certain  other  changes,  on  the  other  hand,
are  due  to  ^'s  active  initiative  :  these  entail  sensations
in  certain  subordinate  monads,  and  their  response  is
what  we  call  ^'s  movement^

But  the  monads  of  y^'s  organism  are  not,  we  have
said,  related  exclusively  to  it  and  to  each  other.  If
that  were  the  case,  the  organism  would  fail  altogether
of  its  purpose  and  meaning  :  its  existence  at  all  would
be  inexplicable,  unless  it  were  an  absolute  whole  and
self-maintaining.  In  fact,  however,  these  subordinate
monads  are  related  also  to  the  environment,  which  we
have  called  the  common  organism  or  matrix  of  all
monads.  This  in  the  last  resort  is  conceived  as  con-
sisting of  bare  monads,  which  have  only  external
relations  to  one  another,  or  rather  for  which,  as  the  limit
of  our  regress,  the  distinction  of  internal  and  external
ceases  to  hold.  What  is  true  of  ^'s  organism  is  true
also  of  ^'s,  and  so  we  can  understand  how  A's  acts
may  give  rise  to  sensations  in  B  through  this  double
mediation  of  organism  and  environment  and  how  ^'s
acts  in  turn  may  give  rise  to  sensations  in  A.  Presently
as  like  sensations  (or  recepts)  recur  they  become
gradually  more  and  more  assimilated  with  previous
experiences  of  them  and  the  advance  to  definite  percepts

^  See  Supplementary  Note  III.


OrgaNism  and  Efivirofinieiit  259

is  made.  What  were  originally  only  immediate  sensory
data  have  now  a  meaning'  ;  A  and  B,  that  is  to  say,
are  e?i  rapport.  Pari  passu  with  advancing  experience
we  find  also  increasing  complexity  of  organization  :
functions  originally  controlled  by  the  dominant  monad
then  devolve  upon  subordinate  organisms  or  organs,
and  so  habitual  or  secondarily  automatic  processes,
which  lor  the  dominant  monad  lapse  into  subconscious-
ness, arise  and  extend.  Thus  the  process  of  mediation,
once  begun,  tends  continually  to  increase  ;  and  so,  as
the  range  of  an  individual's  experience  extends,  he
knows  more  and  more  of  the  external  world,  and  yet  is
ever  further  removed  from  that  immediate  relation  with
it  which  psychologists  call  pure  sensation.

Both  the  pampsychist  and  the  occasionalist  alike
agree,  as  we  have  seen,  in  holding  all  real  existence  to
consist  in  experients  and  their  experience  ;  they  agree
too,  we  may  assume,  in  accepting  the  current  psycho-
logical analysis  of  experience  into  presentation,  feeling
and  action.  Hut  in  interpreting  presentations  as  sub-
jective modifications,  assumed  to  be  due  directly  to  the
divine  activity,  occasionalism  becomes  hampered  with
all  the  epistemological  difficulties  of  what  is  known  as
subjective  idealism,  difficulties  which  made  the  exist-
ence of  the  external  world  such  a  hopeless  problem  for
modern  j>hilosophers  till  Reid  began  to  clear  the  way
by his criticism of the Cartesian '  theory of ideas.'

'  Thanks  to  the  '  creative  synthesis '  which  the  jirocesses  of
recognition  and  perception  imply.  (Cf.  Lcct.  v.  pp.  104  f.)  lint
in  so  far  as  they  affect  their  subject  even  bare  sensations  always  have
a  meaning,  i.e.  a  value  as  pleasurable  or  painful.  This  is  '  meaning'
in  a  most  vital  sense.

17 — 2


26o  The  Cosmology  of  Theism

Leibniz's  famous  paradox  that,  although  they  mirror
the  universe,  the  monads  have  no  windows,  is  but
another  way  of  stating  this  theory.  Modern  pluraHsts
on  the  other  hand  maintain  that  all  monads  have
windows — more  literally  stated,  that  presentation  is  a
relation  among  monads  not  a  subjective  state  in  a
single  monad.  And  this  'natural  realism,' as  Hamilton
called  it\  is  so  much  the  simpler  hypothesis — ^if  that
can  be  called  a  hypothesis  which  claims  to  be  the  bare
statement  of  the  facts — that  we  may  say  with  some  con-
fidence that  occasionalism  would  never  have  been  heard
of  but  for  the  Cartesian  dualism  of  matter  and  mind
and  the  Cartesian  theory  of  ideas  as  subjective  states.
That  God  should  have  created  the  monads  without
windows  and  taken  on  himself  the  function  of  supplying
their  place — whether  continuously,  as  the  occasionalists
assumed,  or  once  for  all,  as  Leibniz  held — seems  then
a  needless  complication.

Nevertheless,  since  we  cannot  actually  verify  the
indefinite  regress  which  the  existence  of  bare  monads
implies,  and  since  we  cannot  show  that  the  indirect
mediation  of  our  finite  intercourse  is  not  a  fact,  we  have
no  m.eans  of  deciding  empirically  between  the  two
alternatives.  The  most  we  can  say  is  that  the  pluralist
alternative  is  the  prior  as  well  as  the  simpler,  and  it
seems  adequate.  To  the  objection  that  it  reduces
theism  to  the  level  of  mere  deism  and  leaves  the  world
once  started  to  go  of  itself,  it  is  sufficient  to  reply  that
this  supposed  tenet  of  deism  is  really  inconceivable.
As  we  have  already  seen,  the  idea  of  creation  by  simple

^  Albeit  in his own  version  of  it  he  halts and  trims  in  very
half-hearted  fashion.


Panipsyc/iism  and  T/icisni  261

'  fiat '  at  a  definite  epoch  will  not  work  ;  but  deism  on
any  other  view  is  reduced  to  atheism.  If  there  is  a
Creator  at  all  he  can  never  stand  aside  and  wholly
apart  from  his  world.  As  Lotze  has  well  said,  such  a
proceeding  "  is  intelligible  in  a  human  artificer  who
leaves  his  work  when  it  is  finished  and  trusts  for  its
maintenance  to  universal  laws  of  Nature,  laws  which
he  did  not  himself  make,  and  which  not  he,  but  another
for  him,  maintains  in  operation";  but  "  the  picture  of
God  withdrawing  from  the  world,"  the  sole  ground  of
which  is  himself,  is  incomprehensible\

But,  it  may  be  urged  further,  the  sense-symbolism
of  Berkeley  serves  not  only  as  a  medium  of  intercourse
for  God's  sentient  creatures  but  it  is  also  at  the  same
time  a  revelation  of  God  himself,  is  the  language
wherein  he  addresses  us".  Granted  that  as  an  in-
dependent argument  the  appeal  to  the  teleology  of
Nature  is  not  decisive,  still  if  there  is  a  Creator,  as  we
are  now  assuming,  he  must  surely  somehow  manifest
himself.  But  may  we  not  reply  :  Surely  if  there  is  a
Creator,  the  world  of  his  interacting  creatures  will  itself
be  a  clearer  manifestation  of  him  than  a  mere  medium
of  intercourse,  alike  available  for  very  diverse  ends  and
alike indifferent to all  .-^ Tlie iwo  seem to stand  in

'  Hut  the  ascription  of  such  a  tenet  to  deists  generally — to  the
English  deists  of  the  i8th  century,  for  example — is  a  grievous
misrepresentation.  What  they  denied  was  not  the  divine  immanence
in  toto,  but  only  such  occasionalistic  interference  as  miracles,  special
revelations  and  special  providences  im[)ly.  They  were  in  fact  what  we
should  now  call  rationalistic  theists.

'  Physical  catastrophes  are  a  serious  difficulty  for  the  theist  on
this  view.  Cf.  a  striking  article  by  Professor  llowison,  'Catastrophes
an<l  the  Moral  Order,'  Ilthhcrt  Journal,  vol.  i.  1902,  pji.  114 1.11.


262  The  Cosmology  of  Theism

much  the  same  position  as  grammar  to  Hterature.
Accordingly  the  theists  who  set  out  by  distinguishing
the  realm  of  Nature  from  the  realm  of  Ends  allow  that
it  is  the  latter  that  reveals  God  the  more  clearly  and
impressively.  If  so,  the  case  for  theism  can  hardly  be
impaired  should  this  distinction  turn  out  to  be  unneces-
sary. But  after  all,  it  will  be  rejoined,  your  analogy
between  language  and  literature  is  rather  unfortunate,
since  literature  presupposes  language.  In  the  abstract
perhaps  it  does,  but  not  in  actual  fact,  in  so  far  as
all  utterance  has  some  meaning.  It  is  precisely  the
absolute  distinction  of  means  and  ends  that  is  denied.
So  far  then  we  seem  entitled  to  conclude  that  while
both  alternatives  are  compatible  with  theism  the
thorough-going  pampsychism  of  the  pluralist  which
dispenses  with  a  distinct  medium  of  intercourse  is,  as
simpler,  so  far  preferable  to  occasionalism  for  which  a
mediating  activity  is  essential.

But  as  yet  we  have  considered  mainly  the  structural
or,  as  the  favourite  phrase  used  to  be,  the  statical
aspect  of  the  world :  let  us  now  turn  to  consider  more
directly  its  functional  or  dynamical  aspect.  Here
again  the  pampsychical  or  Leibnizian  seems  preferable
to  the  occasionalistic  alternative.  We  must  in  any
case  admit  that  what  we  commonly  call  inorganic  or
physical  processes  precede  and  underlie  those  which
all  alike  recognise  as  the  processes  in  which  life  and
mind  are  undoubtedly  manifest.  We  must,  that  is  to
say,  acknowledge  that  Nature  is  die  Vorstiife  des
Geistes,  the  prelude  to  Mind,  in  so  far  as  so-called
physical  processes  invariably  introduce  those  that  are
distinctly  psychical. If  so,  then, when  life  and  mind


Nature  as  '  tJic  prelude  to  Miud' 263

appear,  have  we  not  a  break  in  the  course  of  evokition
— have  wc  not  that  gene  ratio  ccquivoca  of  something
wholly  new.  to  which  the  most  infelicitous  name  imagin-
able is  often  given,  viz.  'the  spontaneous  generation'
of  the  living  by  the  lifeless  ?  But  this  naturalistic
assumption  is  rejected  by  the  theists  who  accept  the
occasionalistic  distinction  between  nature  and  spirit.
"  I  should  certainly  never."  says  Lotze,  "  set  any  one
the  task  out  of  ten  elements  to  make  an  eleventh  arise
equally  real  with  them  " — a  curious  understatement,  by
the  way,  of  the  enormous  assumption  involved  in  the
naturalistic  theory  of  life.  "  It  is  not  from  them" —
the  inorganic  elements,  Lotze  continues,  "that. ..the
substance  of  the  soul  would  spring  ;  nor  would  it  arise
above  them  or  between  them,  or  by  the  side  of  them,
out  of  nothing.  It  would  be  a  new  creature,  produced
by  the  one  encompassing  Being  from  its  own  nature  as
the  supploucnt  of  its  physical  activity  there  and  then
operating^y  In  thus  speaking  of  the  Absolute  as
"giving  to  every  organism  its  fitting  soul"  Lotze
seems  to  invert  our  ordinary  notions  of  the  relation  of
the  two  in  the  very  way  to  which  we  had  just  now  to
object-'.  We  do  not  talk  of  fitting  inhabitants  to  their
liouses  but  of  fitting  houses  to  their  inhabitants.  Lotze's
language  reminds  one  of  Herbert  Spencer's  view  iliai
when  the  organism  becomes  too  complex  to  work
automatically  consciousness  comes  to  its  rescue.  Yet
Lotze  was  perfectly  clear  as  to  the  relative  importance
of  the  two,  as  the  following  sentence  may  suffice  to
show  :  "  Nor  again  is  it  out  of  nothing  thai  ilic  soul
is  creat('d...  ;  but  to  satisfy  the  phantasy  we  may  sa)'.
' ^/if/<7//rvJ/V,  S  25  I  y?//. Italics  mine.  '  Cf.  above,  p.  252.


264  The  Cosmology  of  Theism

it  is  from  itself,  from  its  own  real  nature,  that  the
Absolute  sets  free  [entldsst)  the  soul,  and  so  adds  to  its
one  activity,  the  course  of  nature,  that  other  which,
according  to  the  prescriptive  meaning  of  the  Absolute,
is  its  completion \"

Now  for  the  downright  dualist,  who  ascribes  reality
to  matter  and  to  mind  alike,  this  priority  of  the  course
of  nature  to  the  evolution  of  life  and  mind,  which  it
somehow  helps  to  bring  about,  is  conceivable  at  the
outset  at  any  rate ;  and  it  is  moreover  what  facts  them-
selves in  the  first  instance  suggest. That  such  dualism
turns  out  to  be  eventually  an  unworkable  hypothesis  is
in  the meantime  nothing  to  the point. But  for  the
monist — who  is  aware  of  the  impasse  to  which  dualism
leads  and  who  is  therefore  prepared  to  recognise  in  the
so-called  course  of  nature,  as  distinct  from  the  realm  of
ends,  "  only  a  system  of  occasions  or  means  for  pro-
ducing presentations in spiritual beings-" — for the
monist,  I  say,  to  suppose  nevertheless  that  this  system
is  maintained  by  the  divine  activity,  when  as  yet  there
are  no  spiritual  subjects  to  benefit  by  it ;  nay,  to  sup-
pose further  that  this  system  is  actually  itself  not  so
much  a  means adapted  to them  but  rather  a  means
to  which they  are  adapted — surely  this is  a  vcrrepop
TTporepov  not  easy  to  match. It  seems  to  imply  a  need
for  instrumentality,  which — as 1 have  already  said —
contradicts  the  whole notion  of  a  Creator. May  we
not then conclude that when in Hegelian fashion
people  talk  of  die  Natur  als  Vorstufe  des  Geistes,  what
is  meant  is  not  that  there is  a  breach  of  evolutional
continuity  but  simply that  the  level  of  ^t'-^-conscious
^  Op.  cit.  §  246  fin.  ^  Lotze,  op.  cit.  §  97.


The  Evolutional  Regress  265

existence,  of  Spirit  in  the  narrower  sense,  is  reached
continuously  by  development  through  earlier  stages
of  more  or  less  conscious  life  ?

The  question  then  which  we  have  next  to  raise
concerns  what  in  an  earlier  lecture  was  called  the
lower  limit  of  pluralism  :  in  other  words  :  \\' hat  do  we
ultimately  reach  when  we  try  to  trace  the  process  of
evolution  backwards  ?  And  our  chief  concern  will
now  be  to  ascertain,  if  we  can,  the  theistic  interpretation
of  this  initial  situation  or  ideal  limit,  to  which  we
attempt  to  regress.  Herbert  Spencer,  it  will  be  re-
membered, maintained  that  what  we  should  ultimately
reach  would  be  a  state  of  homogeneity  and  that  from
such  a  state,  in  consequence  of  its  essential  instability,
all  the  heterogeneity  that  we  now  find  has  been
gradually  evolved.  And,  on  the  supposition  that
evolution  will  explain  everything,  he  reasoned  correctly
enoutrh  ;  for,  since  what  we  now  observe  is  continuallv
increasing  heterogeneity,  this  seems  fairly  to  suggest
an  original  state  in  which  there  was  no  heterogeneity
at  all.  Leibniz  and  the  modern  pluralists  on  the  other
hand,  as  we  know,  while  admitting  homogeneity  in  so
far  as  no  two  monads  are  altogether  different,  yet  con-
tend for  the-,  presence  of  heterogeneity  throughout  :  no
two  monads  or  '  reals,'  according  to  them,  are  or  c'\er
were  altogether  alike.  If  now  we  try  to  imagine  all
these  in  their  initial  condition  we  seem  to  reach  a  world
of  bare  monads,  since  all  the  processes  of  organization
fall  within  the  .scope  of  evolution,  not  ol  orii^in.  Tml
bare  monads,  we  have  seen,  are  described  as  having
only  a  momentary  consciousness  without  nu mor)  and
as  so  far  incajjabh:  of  accjuiring  ^v  experience  {  how  linn


266  The  Cosmology  of  Theism

from  such  an  initial  condition  can  the  evolution  of
experience  ever  begin  ?  Can  the  bare  monad  acquire
experience  ?

The  pluralist,  like  Herbert  Spencer,  starts  with  a
certain  initial  instability.  But  he  gives  a  better  account
of  it :  describing  it  not  in  terms  of  matter  but  in  terms
of  mind.  Even  his  bare  monads  are  conative,  that  is
are  feeling  and  striving  subjects  or  persons  in  the
widest  sense,  not  inert  particles  or  things.  Even  so  it
would  be  conceivable,  of  course,  that  every  one  existed
in  a  certain  neutral  state  that  called  for  no  efforts  of
self-conservation  ;  and  then,  unless  we  could  credit
some  at  least  with  impulses  towards  self-betterment,
nothing  would  happen.  Anyhow,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
some  things  have  happened.  In  the  course  of  these
changes,  it  is  assumed  that  certain  monads  come  into
relations  that,  as  mutually  helpful,  they  tend  to  main-
tain. At  the  same  time  to  this  comparative  intimacy
within  a  group  there  corresponds  a  comparative
differentiation — for  each  member  of  it — between  such
group  and  the  world  of  monads  at  large;  and  with  this
differentiation  within  the  present  there  arises  pari
passu  an  increase  in  its  duration  as  conscious  present  ;
so  change  is  perceived,  and  plasticity  tends  to  become
memory.  It  is  needless  to  reproduce  in  further  detail
the  pluralistic  Weltanschauung,  which  I  have  attempted
to  describe  in  earlier  lectures  :  what  now  interests  us
is  the  interpretation  or  modification  that  theism  has  to
impose.

But  first  it  will  be  well  to  recall  what  theism  as
such  in  any  case  implies,  viz.  that  the  initial  state,  from
which  pluralism  seeks  to  start  as  a  fact,  finds  in  God


God  as  tJie  ' Begijuiing'  267

its  ground  and  reason.  The  bare  existence  of  reality
in  the  pkiral,  it  may  be  argued,  seems  no  more  to
demand  a  oround  than  its  bare  existence  in  the  singular.
But  when  the  Many,  regarded  as  existentially  inde-
pendent, are  found  to  be  mutually  complementary,
conspiring  together  to  realise  an  intelligible  organic
whole,  then  the  presence  from  the  first  of  an  underlying
unity  suggests  itself.  Why  should  the  Many  tend  to-
wards one  end  unless  they  had  in  the  One  their  source?
Otherwise,  the  further  we  attempt  to  regress  must
we  not  allow  that  the  more  inconceivable  a  supreme
end  becomes'?  Those  who  decline  to  accept  theism
may  either  leave  such  questions  unanswered,  main-
taining that  for  the  world's  evolution  as  ultimate  there
can  be  no  sufficient  reason  other  than  the  fact  itself ;
or  they  may  fall  back  on  an  Absolute  in  which  the  dis-
tinction of  God  and  world  disappears.  The  former  of
these  alternatives  ignores  two  things:  that  we  as  rational
beings  are  part  of  the;  world's  evolution,  and  that  the
demand  for  a  sufficient  reason  is  thus  a  demand  that
the  world  itself  has  raised.  The  latter  reduces  the
world  to  an  inexplicable  appearance  which,  somehow
seeming  to  be  there, it  can  only  explain  away.

There  is  indeed  another  possible  course,  \iz.  to
deny  that  things  show  any  tendency  towards  the
realisation  of  an  organic  whole  or  that  the  world  is  a
single  realm  of  ends  at  all.  Chance,  it  may  be  said,
would  suffice  to  account  for  all  the  mutual  compati-
bility that  we  find  :  in  a  manifold  of  indefinite  extent  we
might  expect  indefinitely  many  coincidences.  In  such
a  supjiosition  there  is  a  covert  appeal  to  tlu:  unknown

^ Cf. J.LCl. IX. p. 197.


268  The  Cosmology  of  Theism

that  is  specially  out  of  place  in  such  ultra-radical
empiricism.  In  the  world  that  we  know  there  is,  as  the
pluralist  himself  assumes,  that  amount  of  unity  which
every  plurality  in  order  to  be  known  necessarily  in-
volves. This  world,  moreover,  in  the  course  of  its
development  has  already  advanced  some  way  towards
what  we  have  called  a  higher  unity,  and  at  the  stage  of
self-conscious  reason  has  adopted  this  unity  as  its  ideal
goal.  For  these  facts  the  theistic  hypothesis  furnishes
an  adequate  explanation  and  so  far  no  other  or  better
is  known  or  even  wanted.  We  may  then  resume  our
inquiry  :  how  does  theism  interpret  that  lower  limit,
towards  which  the  pluralist  attempts  to  trace  all  evo-
lution back  }

There  can  be  no  doubt,  I  think,  that  the  hypothesis
of  evolution  was  foreign  at  any  rate  to  modern  theories
of  creation.  Thus  we  find  even  the  deist  Voltaire
preferred  to  account  for  the  fossil  shells  found  on
mountain  slopes  by  the  passage  of  pilgrims  who
dropped  them  there,  rather  than  admit  the  theories  of
the  new  science  of  geology.  "  Nothing  of  all  that
vegetates,  nothing  of  all  that  is  animated,"  he  wrote,
"  has  changed  :  all  species  have  remained  invariably
the  same  :  it  would  indeed  be  strange  that  the  grain
of  millet  should  have  conserved  its  nature  eternally  and
that  the  nature  of  the  entire  Qrlobe  should  have  varied^"
But  nowadays  theism  professes  to  accept  the  evolution
hypothesis.  To  accept  it,  but  in  what  sense  '^  Only  I
fear  in  the  literal  and  original  sense  of  merely  unfolding
what  is  there  all  along,  not  in  the  scientific  sense  of
epigenesis  or  creative  synthesis,  described  in  an  earlier
^  Les  Principes  de  la  Fhilosopliie,  vol.  ni.  §  45.


Theism  and  Epi genes  is  269

lecture. If  so,  all  the  difference  there  would  be  between
creation  without  evolution  and  creation  with  it  would
be  in  the  method not  in the  result  ; it  would  be  such
a  difference as, to take a  simple  example, there is
between  starting with a binomial, say (a  +  bf, and
starting with its  expansion  a'  -\-  2ab  +  d-. Creation in
either  case  must  be  throuirh  and  throu^rh  determinate
and  complete,  embracing  both  all that  is  and  all  that
happens  ;  only  in  one  case  its  content  would  at  first  be
explicit, in  the  other only implicit. Thus we have
found  Hegel  saying  : "  The  history  of  the  world  is  the
exhibition  {Darstellung)  how  spirit  comes  to  the  con-
sciousness of  what  in  itself  it  means  ; and  as  the  seed
carries  in  itself  the  whole  nature  of  the  tree, ...so  too
the  first  traces  of  spirit  virtually  contain  the  whole  of
history'." This  is  the  literal  evolution  in  which  every-
thing is  predetermined  if  not  foreordained,  a  drama  of
which  the  book  of  final  judgment  constitutes  the  play
and the history of the world  just  its  representation
{^Darstellung), as  the  astronomer-poet  of Persia  had
said centuries before Hegel was  born. Up to  tliis
point  the  reconciliation  of  pluralism  and  theism  seemed
possible, but  here  the  disagreement threatens to be
radical  : an evolution that is essentially dialectical
demands more  than pluralism, resting  on the  prima
facie  evidence  of  experience,  can  accept ;  while  evolution
as  epigenesis  seems  even  more  clearly  to  conflict  with
the  ideas of  theism generally current. We  come  in
fact  upon  the  old  problem  of  '  fixed  fate,  free-will,  fore-
knowledge absolute': intractable  as  it  has  proved  we
must  needs  try  to  discuss  this  problem  with  open  iiu'nds.

'  Cf.  above,  Lcct.  V.  p.  loo.


LECTURE XIII.


FREEDOM.


In  our  endeavour  to  reconcile  or  combine  pluralism
and  theism  we  have  reached  a  point  at  which  they
seem  hopelessly  to  diverge,  viz.,  in  the  interpretation
of  evolution.  For  theism,  as  ordinarily  understood,
evolution  is  literally  the  mere  unfolding  or  expansion
of  what  is  implicitly  present  from  the  first :  in  creating
the  world  God  is  held  to  know  and  ordain  all  that
from  our  temporal  standpoint  is  yet  to  be.  The  theist
is  not  content  with  saying  that  not  a  sparrow  now  falls
to  the  ground  without  God  knowing  it,  but  he  insists
that  the  very  hairs  of  our  heads  were  eternally  num-
bered by  divine  ordination.  Creation  in  reality  is  once
for  all  and  for  ever  complete  :  it  is  not  only  a  totuin
siniiil  but  it  is  a  totiim  sempiterne  :  a  n2mc  stans  in  which
all  the  past  and  all  the  future  alike  eternally  exist.
For  us  who  move  through  it  there  is  change  ;  but  for
God,  who  is  omnipresent  in  what  we  call  time  as  well
as  in  what  we  call  space,  and  who  therefore  does  not
move  and  is  not  moved,  for  him  there  is  no  change.

To  the  pluralist  on  the  other  hand,  as  we  have
seen,  the  so-called  evolution  of  the  world  is  really
epigenesis,  creative  synthesis  ;  it  implies  continual  new
beginnings,  the  result  of  the  mutual  conflict  and  co-


Creatures  as  Creators  271

operation  of  agents,  all  of  whom, though in varying
degrees,  act  spontaneously  or  freely. For  the  pluralist,
in  short,  these  agents  are  themselves  creative  ;  and  if
they  were  not  they  could  never  come  to  entertain  the
idea  that  thev  are  creatures  too. God  mav  have  made
man in his  own  image,  but  it  is  from  the  image  that
men reason back to God as their maker. But the
notion  of  making,  the  potter notion, is anything l)ut
apposite,  and  the  pkiralist  will  have  none  of  it. God's
creatures  are  not  manufactured  articles,  and  if  we  must
have  a  figure  to  represent  what  utterly  transcends  us,
that  of  generating  the  living  is  far  apter  than  that  of
kneading  clay. Singularist  philosophers  are fond of
speaking of the world  as  the differentiation of the
Absolute. But  if  this  Absolute  be  verily  spirit,  then
its  differentiation  into  conscious  automata,  now  pleased,
now  pained,  by  their  pre-established  movements,  must
strike  us,  however  wonderful,  as  still  but  a  very  poor
performance. If  this  Absolute  be  not  spirit, then it
may  possibly  correspond  to  the  union  of  spirits,  but  in
that case  to  call spirits  its  differentiations would  be
almost meaningless. "  Uutess creators are created,'''
says one impassioned pluralist, "  nothing is really
created'." The  pluralist  then may  allow  that  God  is
the  sole  ground  of  there  being  a  world  to  evolve,  l)ut
he  cannot  admit  that  God,  as  many  theists  maintain,
determined  'before  the  foundation  of  the  world  '  every-
thing that  shall  ever  be  done  in  it  :  for  then  nothing
would  verily  be  do7ie  in  it  at  all. But  il  was not  till
deeds  were  done  that  men  talked  of  fate  ;  then,  fals('ly
projecting the  fixity  of  the jjast into th(.' future  and
' Howis(jn,  'I he  Conci-piion  of  God,  lyoj,  |>.  yy.


272  Freedom

thence  reflecting  it  back  again,  they  denied  the  very
source  of  the  idea  of  fate  itself  by  denying  real  freedom
or  personal  initiative  altogether.

But  quite  apart  from  the  difficulty  of  reconciling
finite  freedom  with  divine  foreknowledge,  the  reality
of  true  self-determination  is  questioned  on  more  em-
pirical grounds.  It  is  obvious  then  that  this  question
concerning  the  so-called  '  freedom  of  the  will '  must
engage  our  attention  first  of  all.  This  phrase,  freedom
of  the  will,  however,  is  a  very  misleading  one  :  Locke
long  ago  protested  against  it,  and  we  shall  do  well,  as
far  as  possible,  to  avoid  it ;  though  it  is  so  firmly  estab-
lished in  common  thought  that  its  complete  elimination
from  controversy  is  hardly  practicable.  And  yet  it
will  not  be  denied  that  whenever  we  talk  of  freedom
or  liberty,  we  always — unless  these  words  are  meta-
phorically used — refer  to  a  person  or  persons.  Again
it  will  not  be  denied  that  by  will  we  mean  not  a  person
but  a  faculty  or  power  that  is  attributed  to  a  person.
Finally  it  will  not  be  denied  that  this  concept  of  a
power  or  faculty  called  will — like  all  such  concepts —
is  but  a  generalisation  based  on  actual  instances  of
volitions  or  acts  of  willing.  There  is  thus  no  will  that
wills  but  only  a  person  or  subject  that  wills.  To  quote
Locke  :  "We  may  as  properly  say  that  it  is  the  singing
faculty  sings,  and  the  dancing  faculty  dances,  as  that
the  will  chooses \"  The  real  question  then  is  what  is
meant  when  it  is  asserted  or  denied  that  in  willing-  a
man  is  free  ?

Again  this  question  is  not  clearly  stated  when  de-
scribed, as  it  often  is,  as  concerned  with  the  alternative

^  Essay  concerning  Human  Understanding,  vol.  n.  ch.  xxi.  p.  17.


Dcfcnni/iis///  and  Iiidcfcniiifiisni 273

issues,  determinism  or  indeterminism;  when  the  ques-
tion, that  is  to  Sciy.  is  supposed  to  be,  whether  a  vohtion
has  a  cause  or  trround  or  has  not.  The  determinist,
confident  that  for  every  event  there  is  a  cause,
assumes  that  he  must  therefore  deny  that  the  person
in  wilHncr  is  free.  The  indeterminist,  confident  that
this  freedom  is  a  fact,  supposes  that  he  must  therefore
deny  that  a  vohtion  has  a  cause.  It  is  possible  that
each  may  be  right  in  what  he  affirms,  and  wrong  only
in  what  he  denies — possible  that  volitions  have  causes
though  these  causes  are  free.  That  in  some  sense  a
volition  is  caused  can  only  be  disputed  by  one  who  is
prepared  to  allow  a  positive  reality  to  absolute  chance,,
and  to  regard  praise  and  blame  as  entirely  meaningless
and  out  of  place  ;  to  deny  in  fact  at  once,  if  he  is  an
idealist,  the  existence  alike  of  order  and  morality
altogether.  On  the  other  hand,  that  in  willing  the
agent  is  in  some  sense  free  can  only  be  disputed  by
one  who  is  prepared  to  maintain  that  a  like  necessi-
tation  applies  both  to  the  events  of  the  so-called
physical  and  to  those  of  the  moral  world  ;  but  that
would  be  tantamount  to  denying  any  distinction  between
them.  It  seems  plain  then  that  there  is  some  com-
plexity in  the  subject-matter  of  this  perennial  con-
troversy, which  the  bare  antithesis — either  determinism
or  indeterminism — does  not  resolve  :  in  oLJur  words  it
seems  still  possible  to  maintain  that  a  volition  is  in  one
sense  determined  antl  in  an(jther  not  determiiud.  I  o
ascertain  and  analyse  this  further  complexity  is  what
we  must  now  attemjjt.

We  may  begin  with  the  concept  of  cau.se.  Its
source  and  primary  meaning  wc  liiul  un(iuestional)l) in

w.  18


274  Freedom

ourselves  as  active  or  efficient. Hence  we  derive  the
phrase  '  efficient  cause,'  to  which  '  effect,'  the  name  we
give  to  the  result  of  our  activity,  is  strictly  correlative  ;
so  that,  without  an  efficient,  an  effect  is  meaningless  or
impossible. To  the  question  how  an  efficient  or  deter-
mining cause  produces  its  effect  no  answer  has  been,
or seemingly can be, given that  will enable  us to
resolve our  sense  of  activity  into  simpler  elements.
The title bestowed by Aristotle on this form of
causation, o.pyj] Tr]<; klvtJ(T€co<;, is perhaps instructive
here  : it  is  not  itself  a  movement  but  what  produces
movement^ Again  we  find  efficient  causation  used  in
two  senses  :  we  speak,  that  is  to  say,  of  a  transeunt
cause  and  also  of  an  immanent  cause. Thus  we  say  a
man  eats  his  dinner  and  smokes  his  pipe  ;  and  we  say
too he  wakes, he breathes, he  walks, and  so  forth.
Metaphorically  we  also  apply  the  concept  of  immanent
causation  to  inanimate  objects, as  when  we  say  that
the sun shines  or the  tide rises. But inasmuch  as
whatever  is  inanimate  is regarded  also  as inert  and
therefore  incapable  of  changing  of  itself,  the  supposed
immanent  causality of mere things is resolved into
transeunt causality. The sun's shining is resolved
into  molecular  motion, the result  of  preceding  mass
motions  ; and  the  tide  is  found  to  rise  only  because  of
the  motions  of  the  earth  and  the  moon.

Once  more,  even  if  we  can  give  no  answer  to  the
question  how  we  are  active,  we  find  that  an  answer  to

^  In the  case  of  physical causation, on the  other hand, the
so-called  cause  is  itself  a  motion,  consequent  on  a  precedent  motion
and  so  on  in  indefinite  regress;  so  that  the  notion  of  efficiency  also
recedes  indefinitely.


Meanings  of  Cause  275

the  question  why  in  any  special  case  we  act  at  all,  can
usually  be  given.  This  reason  for  acting  is  what
Aristotle  called  the  final  cause,  and  identified  with  the
good  as  the  end  alike  of  all  process  and  all  motion.
But  science  does  not  and,  it  may  fairly  be  said,  cannot
take  so  wide  a  view.  In  dealing  severally  with  the;
facts  of  the  so-called  material  world,  such  ideas  as  final
causes  and  the  good  are  out  of  place  :  like  vestal
virgins,  as  Bacon  said,  they  are  here  fruitless  and  so
useless.  Summing  up  then  as  regards  the  concept  of
cause,  we  may  say  that  in  the  case  of  conative  subjects
it  implies  both  immanent  efficiency  and  purposiveness,
but  that  in  the  case  of  inanimate  things  it  implies
neither.  What  it  does  imply  in  this  case  is  still  in
large  measure  to  seek.

And  so  we  come  next  to  the  idea  of  necessary  con-
nexion according  to  law,  or  the  uniformity  of  nature,  as
it  is  otherwise  called,  for  it  is  this,  nowadays  at  any
rate,  that  is  meant  first  of  all  when  the  term  causality
is  scientifically  used.  Thus  Helmholtz,  for  example,
says  "the  principle  of  causality  is  in  fact  nothing  more
than  the  presupposition  that  in  all  natural  phenomena
there  is  conformity  to  law  {Gesetzlickkeity ^  Ikit  now
in  what  sense  can  this  regularity  or  uniformity  of
nature  be  called  also  a  case  of  necessary  connexion  }
There  is  no  logical  necessity  about  a  law  of  nature  :  it
is  neither  in  itsdt  intuitively  certain  nor  is  it  logically
deducibh.*  from  j)remisses  that  are  themselves  intuitively
certain  :  to  doubt  or  deny  it  (Mitails  no  contradiction.
(}ranted,  it  may  j)erhaps  be  replied,  the  necessity  is
not  formal  or  logical,  it  is  xva\\  or  natural  necessity.
' Ueber  die  Erhaltuttg  der  Km/t,  Ostwald's  cdn,  p.  53.

18— a


276  Freedom

But  what  does  this  mean  ?  When  we  speak  of  a  fact
or  event  as  real  what  we  primarily  intend  to  assert  is
its  presentation  to  sensory  perception.  Such  assertorial
or  categorical  judgments  are  for  the  percipient  not
less  necessary  and  inevitable  than  so-called  apodeictic
judgments^  I  am  quite  as  little  able  to  deny  the  fact
of  daylight,  when  at  noon  my  eyes  are  open,  as  I  am
at  any  time  to  deny  the  truth  that  2  +  2=4.

The  grounds  of  the  necessitation  in  the  two  cases
are  different,  no  doubt  ;  but  that  for  the  present  does
not  concern  us,  save  as  it  may  lead  us  to  repeat  that
causal  necessitation  is  not  of  the  apodeictic  sort.  The
same  real  necessitation,  so  to  call  it,  which  constrains
me  to  affirm  that  it  rains,  when  I  am  caught  in  a
thunder-shower,  constrains  me  also  to  affirm  that  the
thunder-clap  followed  the  lightning-flash  ;  for  all  this
is  perceived.  What  I  am  not  constrained  to  affirm,
for  that  is  not  perceived,  is  any  real  connexion  between
the  two  events.  But  though  all  that  we  perceive  is
\\\^  post  hoc  we  no  doubt  frequently  assert  the  propter
hoc  as  well,  and  that  too  on  the  strength  of  a  single
instance.  Such  a  venture  is  however  purely  anthropo-
morphic :  it  rests  entirely  on  the  analogy  that  we  observe
between  our  own  behaviour  and  what  we  regard  as
the  behaviour  of  some  inanimate  thing.  The  primitive
and  popular  concept  of  transeunt  causation  is  altogether
anthropomorphic  in  this  wise  ;  as  the  whole  structure
of  human  speech  amply  shows.  Thus  the  more
completely  thought  is  confined  to  the  standpoint  of
immediate  experience,  the  more  causality  implies  the
connexion  of  efficiens  and  effectmn,  or  real  necessity  ;
^  Cf.  on  this  point  Sigwart's  Logic,  §  31.


C(7Nsa/ify  as  a  postulate  277

but  then  the  less,  in  the  same  proportion,  does  it  imply
of  Liniiormitv  or  law.  The  transition  from  the  one
standpoint  to  the  other  falls  almost  entirely  within  the
period  of  modern  thought,  and  in  our  day  may  be  said
to  be  at  leni^th  complete.  Hut  as  I  have  discussed  this
at  some  length  elsewhere  it  is  needless  to  enlarge  upon
it  here'.

If  then  neither  logical  necessity  nor  necessity  in
the  sense  of  effectuation  is  involved  in  the  scientihc
concept  of  causality,  what  necessity  is  there  left  ^  Only
the  hypothetical  necessity  of  Helmholtz's  'presup-
position.' The  scientific  principle  of  causality,  in  short,
is  a  necessary  postulate  :  scientific  knowledge — in
other  words,  knowledge  expressed  in  general  pro-
positions concerning  matters  of  fact — is  possible  only
on  the  assumption  that  events  actually  happen  with
strict  and  uniform  regularity.  Now  there  is  one  theory
of  the  world,  and  one  only,  which  would  justify  this
assumption  completely,  and  that  one  is  the  mechanical
theory.  Accordingly  the  postulate  of  the  uniformity
of  nature  is  frequently  converted  into  the  theorem  that
nature  is  a  mechanical  system  ;  and  thus  a  methodo-
logical  principle  becomes  an  ontological  dogma.

We  can  now  see,  as  we  suspected  at  starting,  that
to  say  an  event  is  determined  still  leaves  the  nature  of
the  determination  an  open  (juestion,  and  is  so  far
amljiguous.  When  the  wayfarer  says,  1  am  determined
to  go  on  against  the  wind,  and  the  man  of  science  says.
It  is  determined  that  \\\(\  dust  will  always  go  with  it,

'  Cf.  Naturalism  and  Aj^nosticism,  y{.\  cdn,  vol.  i.  pp.  62  H.,  vol.  11.
pp.  241  f.  An  excellent  exp(jsition  of  this  tiaiisitiini  is  given  by
I)r  Venn  in  his  Empirical  Lo^ic,  ch.s.  ii.  and  iv.


2/8  Freedom

this  ambiguity  is  at  once  apparent.  In  the  first  case
determination  impHes  efficient  causation,  self-direction
and  purpose  :  it  does  not  imply  any  uniformity  such
that  in  all  like  circumstances  a  like  determination  always
has  recurred  and  always  will.  In  the  second  case,  on  the
other  hand,  this  is  precisely  what  is  implied  ;  whereas
here  nothing  is  implied  as  to  efficient  causation  ;  also
self-direction  and  purpose  are  either  denied  or  treated  as
meaningless.  But  at  this  point  the  determinist  may
interpose,  insisting  that,  to  say  nothing  of  habitual
actions,  there  is  abundant  evidence  of  uniformity  in
human  conduct  even  when  most  deliberate.  There
is  unquestionably;  but  for  all  that  the  two  forms  of
determination  remain  as  different  as  ever  :  moreover
the  uniformities  in  the  two  cases  are  also  altogether
different.  In  every  instance  of  deliberate  conduct,
though  the  agents  decide  alike,  each  is  still  conscious
of  self-determination,  of  purpose,  and  of  effort  in  the
pursuit  of  it,  conscious  of  that  '  action  '  contrary  to  the
line  of  least  resistance,  which  in  the  case  of  inanimate
things  is  impossible.  And  though  in  like  situations
there  is  often  a  corresponding  likeness  in  the  agents'
conduct,  often  there  is  not ;  there  is  here  then  no
warrant  for  any  such  generalisation  as  natural  law  im-
plies. If  we  ask  a  man  why  in  a  new  and  strange
situation  he  acts  as  he  does,  it  will  hardly  occur  to  him
to  explain  his  conduct  by  describing  to  us  the  im-
mediately preceding  situation.  The  answer  he  is  likely
to  give,  and  that  we  naturally  expect,  will  consist
rather  in  describing  the  end  at  which  he  aims  and  the
value  that  it  has  for  him,  as  the  reasons  for  his  deter-
mination. But  if  we  ask  the  physicist  to  explain  an


Tivo  forms  of  Dctcnuiiiafioii  279

unusual  phenomenon  he  can  do  so  only  by  discovering
its  antecedents,  tracing  these  to  their  antecedents,  and
so  on  indefinitely  :  in  other  words  he  can  explain  it
only  on  the  assumption  that  it  is  determined  by  its
place in  a  single rigorous  mechanical  system.

Pri))ia  facie  then  the  two  forms  of  determina-
tion are  distinctly  different:  whether  the  difference
is  irltimate,  and  if  it  is  not,  which  form  is  the  more
comprehensive — these  are  further  questions.  At  all
events  the  difference  runs  very  deep.  The  one  form,
that  of  self-determination — implying  such  teleological
categories  as  personality,  utility  and  worth — dominates
all  our  interpretations  of  the  world  as  a  realm  of  ends.
The  other  form,  that  of  determination  according  to
fi.xed  law,  implying  in  the  last  resort  only  the  categories
of  mechanism,  underlies  our  scientific  description  of  the
so-called  realm  of  nature  or  world  of  things.  The  one
has  been  called  the  ethical  postulate  of  freedom,  the
other  the  epistemological  postulate  of  necessity\

But  in  truth  self-determination  extends  beyond  the
self-conscious  and  rational  autonomy  that  we  find  only
in  the  ethical  sphere,  and  is  besides  not  simply  an
ideal  or  moral  postulate.  The  contrast  with  which  we
have  to  deal  then  is  the  wider  one  between  spontaneity
or  individual  activity  as  priiiia  facie  a  fact  on  the
one  side  and  the  scientific  concept  o{  inert  mattcM"  as
a  constant (juantity on the other'-. Individuality is

'  So  far  the  old  distinction  of  Libcrtarianism  and  Necessitarianism
is  really  clearer  and  therefore,  pact:  J.  .S.  Mill,  also  'fairer'  than  tiiat
now  in  vogue  of  Indeterniinism  and  Determinism.

•  As  already  remarked  (I.«ct.  i.  p.  9)  the  negative  concept  of  inertia
or  inactivity  presupposes  the  positive  fact  of  activity.


28o  Freedom

inseparable  from  mind  and  altogether  foreign  to  matter,
which  loses  nothing  by  disintegration  and  gains  nothing
by  integration  ;  whereas  to  divide  one  mind  into  many
or  to  aggregate  many  minds  into  one  is  meaningless
and  impossible.  But  for  all  that,  the  more  individual
minds  cooperate  the  higher  they  rise  and  the  more
they  achieve  severally  and  collectively.  Hence  the
steady  advance  in  the  efficiency  of  the  world  of  ends,
which  Wundt  has  called  the  dominant  law  of  spiritual
life  and  entitled  '  the  increase  of  spiritual  energy '  in
contrast  to  the  energy  of  the  physical  world  that  is
held  neither  to  increase  nor  to  decreased

Wherein  then  does  the  difference  between  them  lie?
Perhaps  if  we  say  that  it  lies  in  the  different  meaning
given  to  direction  in  the  two  cases,  the  contrast  we  are
considering  will  be  made  clearer  on  another  side.
When  we  regard  the  world  as  a  realm  of  ends,  direction
implies  guidance  and  control,  and  therewith  activity  ;
but  when  we  regard  it  as  a  physical  whole,  direction
has  simply  its  literal,  spatial  meaning.  We  describe
the  inertia  of  a  moving  body  by  saying  that  it  cannot
of  itself  change  its  direction  or  its  velocity.  And
whenever  by  the  so-called  '  action '  of  another  body
either  of  these  components  of  its  motion  is  altered
there  will  also,  according  to  the  mechanical  theory,  be
a  compensatory  alteration  in  the  components  of  the
motion  of  that  other  body.  Then  generalising,  and
agreeably  to  the  notion  of  inertia,  we  have  the  principle
known  as  the  Conservation  of  Momentum,  a  principle
which perhaps  expresses  as clearly  as  any  that the

'  Wundt,  'Wachsthum  der  geistigen  Energie,'  System  der  Philo-
sophies 1889,  p.  315.


Two  senses  of  Dinrfion  28 1

so-called  uniformity  ot nature  completely  excludes  all
ideas  of  spontaneity  and  guidance.

Yet  that  such  guidance  prima  facie  exists  is  no
longer  seriously  disputed  :  every  movement  of  every
living  thing  is  an  instance  of  it.  Nevertheless  the
fact  of  guidance  is,  by  the  very  terms  of  the  mechanical
theory  itself,  a  fact  outside  the  range  of  that  theory.
Moreover,  primarily  for  the  sake  of  such  guiding  con-
trol, and  largely  by  means  of  it,  the  theory  itself  has
been  elaborated.  And  those  who  know  it  best  only
claim  that  it  tells  us  what  will  happen  so  far  as  things
are  left  to  themselves,  but  not  that  it  can  show  how
guidance  is  possible  nor  when  it  will  occur  \  As  often
as  it  does  occur  then,  we  have  an  event  which  does
not  lie  within  the  sweep  of  the  so-called  uniformity  of
nature  regarded  as  a  system  determined  throughout
by  mechanical  necessity,  determined  in  such  wise  that
all  its  uncontrolled  working  admits  of  rigorous  calcu-
lation. Everv  such  event,  so  far  as  the  system  is
concerned,  is  a  new  beginning  to  which,  as  inert,  the
system  simply  submits,  and  yet  for  which  it,  as  inert,
cannot  possibly  account.  It  is  just  the  continual
accumulation  of  such  unique  events  and  conservation
of  their  values  that  distinguishes  the  historical  evolution
of  experience  from  the  steady  downward  trend  ol  the
physical  world  conceived  as  independent  ot  experience.
The  course  of  the  one.  its  final  (Miuilibraiion,  is  theo-
retically calculable  from  the  beginning  ;  the  course  ot
the  other,  the  tinal  harmony  of  the  realm  of  ends,  is
not.

'  (,"f. an excellent article by Professor J. 11. roynling on
'Pliysiral Law  and Life,'  Hibbert  Journal, 1903.  pj). 7280".


282  Freedom

Much  as  Plato  found  the  characteristics  of  justice
more  conspicuous  in  the  state  than  in  the  individual,  so
perhaps  we  find  that  in  the  broad  contrast  between
nature  and  history  the  difference  we  have  been  seeking
to  analyse  and  elucidate  is  more  apparent  than  it  is
when  we  confine  our  attention  to  the  individual  alone.
But  for  all  that,  the  solution  of  our  problem — and  that
of  Plato's  too — ultimately  turns  on  the  reality  of
individual  existence.  Efficiency  and  spontaneity,  pur-
pose and  worth,  these  ontological  and  teleological
categories  are  more  and  more  ruthlessly  extruded  from
the  description  of  nature  as  a  phenomenal  whole  the
more  that  description  succeeds  in  attaining  to  scien-
tific precision.  Yet  these  are  the  categories  that  in
the  main  define  what  we  mean  by  an  individual  or
a  person.  The  course  of  history  we  refer  to  self-
determinations,  the  course  of  nature  science  regards
as  due  to  mechanical  necessitations.

But  are  these  alternatives,  determination  by  per-
sonal agency  and  determination  according  to  universal
law,  really  mutually  exclusive  ?  We  picture  the  course
of  history  as  continually  foreclosing  genuine  alter-
natives, and  the  course  of  nature  as  throughout
completely  determined  :  the  future  in  the  one  case
cannot,  we  think,  in  the  other  certainly  can —
theoretically  at  least — be  deduced  from  the  present.
But  there  are  many  who  think  otherwise  and  who
include  the  doings  of  men  as  well  as  the  motions  of
matter  under  the  phrase  '  uniformity  of  nature.'  These
we  may  term  thorough-going  determinists  ;  for  there
is  no  ambiguity  in  the  meaning  they  assign  to  deter-
mination. It  is  simply  the  (hypothetical)  necessity  of


Analysis  of  I'oluntary  Action 283

science.  Still  whether  such  a  position  is  compatible
with  the  existence  of  a  plurality  of  really  conative
agents  remains  to  be  seen.  We  must  first  examine
the  position  itself.

Hitherto  we  have  not  attempted  to  analyse  the
process  of  voluntary  action  itself,  but  as  the  contention
of  the  thorough-going  determinists  turns  upon  this
analysis  we  must  now  follow  them.  Their  procedure
in  the  main  is  to  regard  motives  as  forces,  between
which — in  deliberation — there  may  be  a  varying  con-
flict till  at  length  one  proves  itself  the  strongest,
whereupon  the  action,  that  it  is  said  to  determine,
ensues.  The  man  meanwhile  seems  to  play  the  part
of  a  simply  passive  spectator.  How  little  Jie  deter-
mines the  result  accordinq-  to  this  view  is  shown,  for
example,  by  the  reiterated  statements  of  that  classic
determinist,  Hobbes  :  "In  deliberation  there  be  many
wills,  whereof  not  any  is  the  cause  of  a  voluntary  action
but  the  last,"  "Will  therefore  is  the  last  appetite  in
deliberating."  Now  there  is  no  doubt  that  motives  in
relation  to  each  other  have  a  certain  analogy  to  forces
or  to  weicrhts  in  a  scale,  whence  indeed  the  word  de-
liberation  is  derived.  But  the  relation  of  motives  to
the  subject  deliberating  is  not  at  all  that  of  independent
forces  applied  to  an  inert  object,  allxit  Hobbes  treats
of  them  under  the  head  of  Physics'.  Appetite  and
aversion,  that  is  to  say  conation,  implies  something
that  seeks  and  shuns,  a  subject  that  actively  strives
according  as  it  feels  and  as  long  as  it  lives.  Psy-
chologists do  not  ordinarily  talk  of  motives  save  in
connexion  with  deliberation,  which  in  strictness  is  an
'  Engiish  Works,  Molcsworth'.s  edn,  vol.  i.  p  408.


284  Freedom

intellectual  rather  than  a  conative  process  ;  but  for  the
purpose  of  our  present  discussion  it  will  be  convenient,
and  need  not  mislead,  if  we  regard  motives  not  as  pleas
or  reasons  for  acting  but  as  impulses  or  tendencies  to
action.  So  regarded  their  characteristic  is  not,  that
like  external  forces  they  move  or  tend  to  move  the
subject,  but  that  they  are  themselves  the  subject
moving  or  tending  to  move,  or  more  accurately,  acting
or  tending  to  act.

We  say  indeed  that  hunger  makes  a  man  eat,  but
we  do  not  interpret  this  statement  as  we  should  the
statement  that  heat  makes  a  glass  crack.  In  both  cases
we  have  a  certain  situation,  but  in  the  one  case  the
active  subject  changes  the  situation  ;  in  the  other  the
situation  changes  the  passive  object.  Again  in  what
we  may  call  physical  situations,  where  several  forces
concur,  the  change  is  always  their  resultant  and  each,
strong  and  weak  alike,  produces  its  full  effect.  In
psychical  situations,  on  the  other  hand,  where  several
motives  are  said  to  conflict,  the  eventual  action  is
determined  in  accordance  with  one  only,  the  so-called
strongest  motive  :  the  rejected  motives,  if  they  tell  at
all,  do  so  simply  as  testing  steadfastness  of  purpose.  It
is  perhaps  hardly  needful  to  say  that  strength  does  not
here,  as  in  the  case  of  a  force,  imply  any  reference  to
an  external  standard.  In  a  certain  situation,  which
they  share  in  common,  so  far  as  two  persons  can  ever
be  situated  alike,  one  will  say  :  This  motive  weighs
most  with  me,  and  the  other,  This  the  most  with  me.

The  analogy  then  between  the  relation  of  forces
applied  to  an  inert  object  and  the  relation  of  conations
to  an  active  subject  seems  to  fail  in  all  essential  points.


Motives  and  Forces  285

So  long  as  the  subject  does  not  act  but  merely  '  de-
liberates or  ponders  '  how  he  shall  act,  there  is  some
resemblance  in  his  procedure  to  that  of  using  a  balance
to  determine  weights,  and  the  suggested  metaphor  is
as  old  as  Plato  ;  but  it  is  only  a  metaphor  after  all.
When,  however,  we  consider  the  facts  in  their  active
rather  than  their  cognitive  aspect  the  disparity  between
the  psychical  and  the  physical  seems  complete.  Forces,
though  distinct,  combine  their  effects  only  because  they
converge  on  one  body  :  motives,  though  distinct,  con-
flict only  because  they  diverge,  so  to  say,  from  one
subject.  The  forces,  that  is,  are  applied  to  the  body,
the  motives  spring  from  the  subject.  The  body  moves
in  the  one  path  which  the  forces  collectively  determine,
the  subject  moves  in  the  one  path  which  it  selectively
determines.  The  magnitude  of  a  force  is  referred  to  an
objective  standard,  the  strength  of  a  motive  depends
on  its  subjective  worth  :  the  sufficient  reason  is  in  the
one  case  mechanical,  in  the  other  it  is  teleological.

Nevertheless,  the  thorough-going  determinist  will
doubtless  rejoin,  these  differences  are  comparatively
superficial,  and  when  we  think  the  matter  out  what
we  come  down  to  at  last  is  in  both  cases  alike  the
same  necessitation  ;  the  same  complete  determination
of  the  consequent  by  its  antecedents.  We  speak  of  a
man's  path  through  life  as  well  as  of  a  body's  path
through  space,  and  this,  however  intricate  it  nia\-  have
been,  we  know  was  throughout  perfectly  d('rmit(,'  and
at  every  pcjint  inevitably  determined.  Now  what  is
true  of  the  motions  of  a  body  is  true  of  iIk-  doings  of
a  man.  Well,  it  is  certainly  true  always  that  whatever
is  once  determined  is  inevitably  determined  and thai


286  Freedom

in  this  sense  the  complete  antecedents  uniquely  deter-
mine the  consequent.  But  is  this  a  reason  for  ignoring
the  difference  between  the  circumstances  that  determine
the  rolling  of  a  stone  and  the  volitions  that  determine
the  movements  of  a  hero  ?  Or  can  anyone  seriously
maintain  that  we  get  to  the  bottom  of  things  by  thus
ignoring  it?  If  the  said  difference  is  merely  an  ac-
cidental accessory,  what  is  the  essential  characteristic
that  pertains  alike  to  the  physical  event  and  to  the
voluntary  act?  It  is,  the  determinist  will  repeat,  that
the  antecedents  in  both  cases,  in  the  rolling  of  the
stone  and  in  the  willing  of  the  man,  are  beyond
control:  as  Hobbes  has  said,  "The  will  is  also  caused
by  other  things  whereof  it  disposeth  not\"  If  we  ask
for  further  explication,  as  we  well  may,  we  get  two
answers,  more  or  less  connected,  which  it  will  be  best
to  consider  in  turn.

First,  it  is  said,  a  man's  volitions  depend  on  his
nature,  and  that  is  not  a  matter  of  his  choice.  If  it  be
urged  that  often  they  depend  rather  on  the  character
which  he  has  acquired,  a  character  which  may  control
his  nature  ;  it  is  replied  that  acquired  character  is  due
to  modification  of  nature  induced  by  circumstances,
so  that  after  all  we  come  back  to  nature  or  original
character  in  the  end.  But  what  real  distinction,  we
may  ask,  can  anyone  find  between  a  subject  and  its
nature  or  character"  ? As  to  what  an  individual  subject

^  '  Liberty  and  Necessity,'  E?tglish  Works,  Molesworth's  edn,
vol.  IV.  p. 274.

^  It  is  not  of  course  with  such  specific  attributes  as  it  shares  with
others  of  its  kind  but  with  its  own  pecuUar  traits  that  we  are  here
concerned.


A  Maifs  Volitiojis  mid  ///s  Xiifinr 287

is,  there  may  be  room  for  much  metaphysical  dispute.
But  at  least  we  are  certain  that  it  is  not  an  indthniie
'this,'  or  an  abstract  entity,  having  only  an  extrinsic
connexion  with  its  so-called  nature.  Thinking  is  re-
lating, and  we  are  sometimes  led  in  consequence  to
talk  as  if  reality  were  altogether  resolvable  into
relations.  It  is  this  same  habit  of  thought  that  leads
the  indeterminist  to  talk  of  the  freedom  of  the  will
apart  from  motives,  and  that  leads  the  determinist,
as  Priestley  does,  to  talk  of  "  motives  as  the  proper
causes  of  human  actions,  though  it  is  the  man  that  is
called  the  agent'." The  efficiency  and  initiative  that

'  "No  writer,"  says  Schopenhauer,  "has  set  forth  the  necessity
of  voluntary  acts  so  thoroughly  and  convincingly  as  Priestley  in  his...
Doctrine  of  Philosophical  Necessity y I  trust  I  shall  be  excused  then,
if  I  venture  to  give  a  specimen  of  his  reasoning. It  occurs  in  one  of
the most important  sections  of  his work,  in  which  he  is  arguing
against his Libertarian friend, Price. "Suppose," he says, "a
philosopher  to  be  entirely  ignorant  of  the  constitution  of  the  human
mind,  but  to  see,  as  Dr  Price  acknowledges,  that  men  do,  in  fact,
act  according  to  their  affections  and  desires,  i.e.  in  one  word,  according
to  motives,  would  he  not  as  in  a  case  of  the  doctrine  of  chances,
immediately  infer  that  there  must  be  d.  fixed  cause  for  this  coincidence
of  motives  and  actions  ? Would  he  not  say  that,  though  he  could
not  see  into  the man,  the  connexion  was fiatural,  and necessary,
because  constant} And  since  the  motives,  in  all  cases,  precede  the
actions, would he  not naturally, i.e. according to  the  custom of
philosophers  in  similar  cases,  say  that  the  motive  was  the  cause  of  the
action? And would he  not be led by the  obvious analogy to
compare  the  mind  to  a  balance,  which  was  inclined  this  way  or  that,
according  to  the  motives  presented  to  it  ?... Therefore,"  he  presently
concludes,  "in  proper  philosophical  language,  the  motive  ought  to
be  called  the  proper  cause  of  the  action. It  is  as  much  so  as  anything
in  nature  is  the  cause  of  anything  else  "— senten<  es  which  Schopen-
hauer thought  it  worth  while  to  quote. (J.  Priestley,  Disquisitions


288  Freedom

the  indeterminist  seems  to  find  in  the  man  apart  from
his  character  the  determinist  professes  to  find  in  the
character  apart  from  the  man.  But  whereas  it  is
certain  that  there  cannot  be  less  in  the  concrete  self
than  we  know,  there  may  very  well  be  a  great  deal
more  ;  and  therefore,  while  it  may  be  possible  to  clear
indeterminism  of  its  seeming  paradox,  it  is  not  possible
to  reconcile  thorough-going  determinism  with  our  actual
experience.

We  certainly  have  no  experience  of  events  without
causes,  but  we  experience  determination  in  both  the
forms  which  make  up  the  two  sides  of  causation  :  the
efiect  as  determined,  the  cause  as  determining  ;  and  we
experience  both,  not  objectively  as  presentations  of  what
is  not  self,  but  subjectively  as  immediate  states  of  self.
We  have  moreover  no  ground  for  regarding  the  one
as  a  whit  more  real  than  the  other  :  if  pleasure  and
pain  are  verily  subjective  feeling  or  affection,  conation
is  verily  subjective  activity  or  effectuation.  What  we
are  here  calling  a  motive  implies  both  ;  and  essentially
distinct  though  they  are,  both  arise  together  in  certain
situations.  But  not  even  the  feeling,  still  less  the
conation,  can  be  described  as  caused  by  the  situation,
if  that  is  regarded  simply  as  any  science  except  psy-
chology would  regard  it.  Psychologically  the  situation
must  be  interesting  ;  but  this  is  not  a  quality  pertaining
to  the  situation  as  such,  it  is  a  character  that  the  sub-
ject as  such  gives  to  it.  And  gives  why  ?  Because
the  subject  is  not,  like  an  inanimate  thing,  indifferent

relating  to  Matter  and  Spirit,  1782,  vol.  11.  pp.  64  ff.)  I  fancy,
if  I  had  myself  put  this  forward  as  a  presentation  of  the  determinist's
case,  it  would  have  been  condemned  at  once  as  an  unfair  travesty.


Deteriuiuism  and  Scjisatioualisiii 289

to  circumstances,  but  has  ends  and  aims  to  realise,  and
therefore  assumes  a  different  attitude  towards  its  en-
vironment according  as  this  helps  or  hinders  it  in  the
pursuit  of  its  purposes — purposes  which  conform  to  no
general  law  save  that  of  self-conservation  and  better-
ment. Its  oivii  character  determines  the  character  that
it  gives  to  objects,  and  its  behaviour  towards  them  is
so  far  essentially  self-determination.  To  deny  all  this
is  tacitly  to  deny  the  reality  of  the  self  or  subject  of
experience  altogether.

This  brings  us  to  the  second  answer,  a  psycho-
logical analysis  of  experience  in  much  favour  with
thorough-going  determinists,  wherein  this  denial  is
openly  made.  Hume,  it  will  be  remembered,  de-
scribed the  mind  as  "nothing  but  a  bundle  or  collection
of  different  perceptions,  which... are  in  a  perpetual
movement  or  flux."  In  this  bundle  his  successors
signalised  appetites  and  aversions,  which  are  also  in
perpetual  flux.  They  agree  then  with  him  in  main-
taining that  "  it  cannot  therefore  be  from  any  of  these
impressions,"  as  he  says,  "  or  from  any  other,  that  the
idea  of  self  is  derived,  and  consequently  there  is  no
such  idea'" — so  that,  speaking  plainly,  there  is  no  such
reality.  If  there  were,  said  Bain,  "a  fourth  or  residual
department  [of  psychology]  would  need  to  be  consti-
tuted, the  department  of  'self  or  IMe-ation.  and  we
should  set  about  the  investigation  of  the  laws  (or  the
anarchy)  prevailing  there,  as  in  the  three  remaining
branches  [Emotion,  Volition,  Intellection]."  "I  can-
not," he  continues,  "light  upon  anything  of  the  sort;

' Hume,  Treatise  on  Human  yatiin,  (Irccii  ;md  (Jrosc's  edition,
vol.  I.  pp.  533  f.

w.  19


290  Freedom

and  in  the  setting-up  of  a  determining  power  under  the
name  of  '  self,'  as  a  contrast  to  the  whole  region  of
motives...!  see  only  an  erroneous  conception  of  the
facts  \"

The  hopeless  shortcomings  of  this  doctrine —
variously  known  as  Sensationalism,  Associationism,
Presentationism — have  been  often  exposed,  and  it  is
doubtful  if  in  the  present  day  there  is  a  single  psy-
chologist who  would  defend  it.  We  might  then  fairly
content  ourselves  by  saying  that  thorough-going  de-
terminism finds  at  once  in  this  sensationalism  its  logical
outcome  and  its  refutation.  But  the  reasons  of  its
failure  can  be  put  very  briefly.  In  the  first  place,
determinism  and  sensationalism  alike,  in  common  with
all  naturalistic  thinking,  set  out  from  the  objective
standpoint,  as  if  it  were  absolute.  The  subjective
factor  in  all  experience,  which  the  natural  sciences
can  safely  ignore,  can,  they  assume,  be  ignored  by
the  moral  and  historical  sciences  too.  The  category
of  '  attribute  or  property '  which  implies  possession  is
metaphorically  used  of  things,  though  these,  albeit
qualified,  in  x^2}i\X.y  possess  nothing.  "Without  pro-
perty no  person,"  Hegel  has  said:  but  we  may  convert
this  and  say,  Without  a  person  no  property.  Ex-
perience is  in  this  sense  property  :  it  is  always
owned.  Percepts  and  appetites  that  nobody  has  are
not  percepts  and  appetites  at  all.  To  talk  of  motives
conflicting  of  themselves  is  as  absurd  as  to  talk  of
commodities competing in the absence of traders.

^  The  Emotions  and  the  Will^  3rd  edn,  1875,  p.  492.  To  'contrast'
self  and  motives  in  this  fashion  is  indeed  just  that  '  erroneous
conception  of  the  facts'  referred  to  above,  p. 2%6 Jin.


The  Result  291

Again,  if  there  is  only  a  bundle  of  percepts  and
motives,  but  no  self  to  determine  or  control,  it  is
obxious  that  there  can  be  no  self  to  be  determined
or  controlled.  But  since  presentationism  cannot  con-
sistently regard  presentations  themselves  as  purposive,
there  can  be  no  purpose  in  the  Many  at  all.  Finally,
since  the  onlv  causalitv  naturalism  rcco'''niscs  is  the
hypothetical  regularity  of  sequence,  there  is  no  place
left  for  efficiency  either :  the  world  is  resolved  into
mechanism,  and  so  experience  is  explained  away.
Such  a  rcductio  ad  absiti^diuii  is  surel)'  an  indirect
proof  of  the  reality  of  that  self-determination  which
we  directly  experience.


19 — 2


LECTURE XIV.

FREEDOM AND FOREKNOWLEDGE.

We  may  perhaps  claim  to  have  found  that  the
thorough-going  determinism,  which  denies  self-deter-
mination and  self-direction  in  toto,  refutes  itself  by
overshooting  the  mark  and  proving  too  much :  by
resolving  the  subject  of  experience  into  an  abstraction
it  denies  the  reality  of  experience  altogether.  But
there  are  those  who  profess  to  admit  freedom  in  the
sense  of  self-determination,  in  common  with  the  Liber-
tarian, and  who  yet  maintain  necessity  in  the  sense  of
natural  law,  in  common  with  the  Necessitarian.  I  am
thinking,  of  course,  of  Kant  and  his  solution  of  this
antinomy  between  the  demands  of  pure  science  and
pure  ethics  as  he  conceived  them — a  solution  which
Schopenhauer  praises  as  among  the  most  admirable
and  profound  achievements  of  human  genius.  The  self
is  here  noumenal  and  its  freedom  transcendental,  but
its  active  manifestations  are  phenomenal  and  necessarily
determined.  Though  many  besides  Schopenhauer
have  been  impressed  with  the  amazing  ingenuity  of  this
Kantian  doctrine,  he,  almost  alone,  seems  to  have  had
the  courage  or  the  hardihood  to  accept  it  completely^
At  this  time  of  day  then  it  would  be  unprofitable  to
begin  by  discussing  it  at  length,  though  it  may  repay

^  Fichte  and  Schelling  ought  perhaps  to  be  included.


TJie  Doctrine  of  Kant  and  ScJiopcuJiaucy 293

us  presently  to  consider  whether  after  all  beneath  this
splendid  failure  there  does  not  lie  a  great  truth.  But
it  is  Schopenhauer's  exposition  that  more  inimediately
concerns  us.  Adopting  the  scholastic  principle,  Opcrari
sequitur  esse,  he  says: — "It  has  been  a  fundamental
error,  a  vaTepou  irporepov  of  all  times,  to  assign  the
necessity  to  the  esse  and  the  freedom  to  the  operari.
On  the  contrary  freedom  pertains  to  the  esse  alone;
but  from  this  and  the  motives  the  operari  follows  of
necessity;  and  from  what  we  do  we  know  what  we
are\"  And  "necessary"  he  defines  as  "that  which
follows  from  a  given  sufficient  ground"."

So  far  and  at  first  sight  there  seems  nothing  here
incompatible  with  self-determination  as  the  Libertarian
understands  it :  a  being  that  in  a  given  situation  is
itself  the  sufficient  ground  of  what  it  does  is  all  that
we  mean  by  a  spontaneous  or  free  being.  The  only
such  beings  that  we  know  or  can  conceive  are  conscious,
that  is  to  say  conative  and  cognitive,  subjects.  Hut
we  find  no  such  restriction  of  freedom  in  Schopenhauer's
doctrine.  The  freedom  that  he  allows  is  not  confined
to  conscious  beings;  antl  on  looking  closer  we  shall  see
that  consciousness  has  essentially  nothing  to  do  with
it.  It  is  the  inner  essence  of  each  thing,  he  maintains,
whether  it  be  physical  force  or  vital  force  or  will,  that
determines  its  characteristic  reaction.  The  law  operari
sequitur  esse  applies  alike  to  all  :  as  its  reactions
disclose  the  nature  of  a  chemical  substance,  so  his
motives  disclose  the  character  of  a  man. "  Objectively

' Sdinmtlu/u  Wcrkc^ '  I'rcihcil  dcs  Willcns,'  Frauenstadt's cdn,
vol.  IV.  p.  97.
*  Op.  cit.  p.  7.


294  Freedom  and  Foreknowledge

considered,  a  man's  behaviour,"  he  tells  us,  "  like  the
action  of  every  natural  essence,  is  recognised  as  falling
necessarily  under  the  causal  law  in  its  utmost  rigour  :
subjectively  on  the  other  hand  everyone  feels  that  he
always  does  only  what  he  wills.  This  however  only
amounts  to  saying  that  his  action  is  the  pure  outcome
of  his  own  peculiar  nature  :  even  the  meanest  thing
therefore  would  feel  the  same,  if  it  could  feel  at  all\"
What  all  this  comes  to  then  is  substantially  and  briefly
as  follows : — The  esse  of  everything  is  noumenal  and
is  will  or  energy  of  a  definite  kind,  the  kind  differing
for  all  the  so-called  physical  forces,  for  all  organic
species  and  for  all  individual  men.  The  opei^ari  of
everything  is  phenomenal,  and  involves  two  factors  ;
(i)  the  original  esse,  i.e.  force  or  will,  and  (2),  in
addition  to  this,  the  determining  condition  or  occasion,
answering  to  what  in  physics  we  term  causes  in  the
narrower  sense,  to  what  in  biology  we  call  stimuli,  in
psychology  motives.  All  that  these  so-called  causes
account  for  is  the  when  and  where  of  the  manifestations
{Aeusserungen)  of  the  primitive  things  per  se,  which —
themselves  beyond  explanation  and  causation — are  the
principles  of  all  explanation  and  the  source  of  all
causation.  As  such  a  thing  per  se  or  noumenon,  man
according  to  Kant  and  Schopenhauer  alike  is  free —
free  as  a  cause  that  is  not  in  turn  an  effect.

And  now  what  is  the  result  of  all  this  freedom  of
the  noumenal  world  ?  A  phenomenal  world  of  cast-iron
necessity  ;  and  since  this  is  the  only  world  we  know
about,  the  determinist,  so  far  as  objective  experience
extends,  is  completely  in  the  right. But  how  from  such

'  Op.  cit.  pp.  57,  98.


The  PJiowiueual  and  tJic  Noimiciinl 295

complete  libertydoes  this  rigorous  necessity  come  about  ?
Because  the  essential  nature  or  character  of  everything
is  unalterable  :  what  is  conscious  and  what  is  not  are
in  this  respect,  according  to  Schopenhauer  at  any  rate,
completely  on  a  par.  In  like  manner  Kant  affirms  that
"all  the  acts  of  a  man,  so  far  as  they  are  phenomena,
are  determined  accordincr..,to  the  order  of  nature,  and
it  we  could  investigate  [them]... to  the  very  bottom,
there  would  not  be  a  single  human  action  which  we
could  not  predict  with  certainty  and  recognise  from  its
preceding  conditions  as  necessary,  just  as  we  do  an
eclipse  of  the  sun  or  the  moon\"

It  is  not  this  assignment  to  freedom  of  a  purely
extra-phenomenal  character  that  is  at  variance  with
the  pluralistic  interpretation  of  evolution,  although  it  is
against  this  that  most  of  the  objections  to  the  Kantian
doctrine  have  been  directed.  On  the  contrary,  as  I
shall  attempt  presently  to  show,  in  this  respect  it
contains,  as  I  have  already  hinted,  a  great  truth.  But
if  the  characters  of  men,  say,  are  fixed  and  immutable,
just  as  the  qualities  of  the  chemical  elements  arc:  assumed
to  be  ;  and  the  course  of  history  therefore  is  as  amenable
to  calculation  as  the  movements  of  the  planets,  then — so
far  as  experience  goes — we  may  as  well  accept  at  once
'the  firmly  rooted  conviction  of  the  ancients  concerning
F"ate,'  as  Schopenhauer  was  prepared  to  do*.

We  must  in(iuire,  therefore,  in  the  first  place
whether  the  statement  so  often  made  l)\-  dclc^rminists
is  really  defensible,  vi/.  thai  persons  and  things  are  so

' Critique  of  J 'u re  Reason,  ist  cdn,  p.  550,  M.  M.  s  trans,  p.  .\i.\  ;
Practical  Reaion,  Hartcnstcin's  cdn,  vol.  v.  p. 104.
'  Op.  cit.  p.  60.


296  Freedom  and  Foreknozvledge

far  on  a  par  that  from  a  complete  knowledge  of  a  man's
present  'empirical  character'  all  his  future  actions  could
be  foretold.  It  is  obvious  however  that  more  than
this  would  be  needed ;  that  in  fact  a  complete  specifi-
cation of  all  the  circumstances  in  which  the  man  is
hereafter  to  be  placed  would  be  equally  indispensable.
It  is  obvious  again  that  nothing  short  of  a  complete
knowledge  of  the  characters  of  all  his  contemporaries  as
well  would  suffice  to  render  such  complete  specification
possible.  But,  once  more,  the  thoughts  and  deeds  of
contemporaries  on  the  one  hand  and  physical  events  on
the  other  obviously  could  not  be  regarded  as  two  inde-
pendent series  ;  for  conduct  is  unquestionably  affected
by  natural  changes,  while  at  the  same  time  certain
natural  changes  are  the  result  of  human  interference.

What  we  should  have  to  deal  with  then  would
be  one  vast  predetermined  series.  The  idea  of  such
a  rigorously  concatenated  system  is  just  what  the
thorough-going  determinist  understands  by  the  Uni-
formity of  Nature.  All  the  same,  when  the  man  of
science  proceeds  to  picture  out  this  uniformity,  he  does
so  only  on  the  supposition  that  the  whole  is  a  mechanism,
whose  ultimate  constituents  are  qualitatively  alike  and
differ  only  quantitatively,  in  respect  of  mass,  configura-
tion, acceleration,  and  so  forth.  Given  a  complete
knowledge  of  the  whole  of  such  a  system  at  two  instants
and  its  state  at  any  assigned  date  in  the  future  or  in
the  past  is  ideally  calculable.  Men  also  interact  and
affect  each  other,  in  so  far  as  they  are  members  of  a
social  system;  but  then  their  characters  and  interests
are  not  alike,  and  therefore  for  each  the  world,  though
objectively  the  same, is  different  too. The  words  of


Mcc/ianisni  and  Morals  297

Terence,  Ouof  homines  tot  sejitoitiac,  are  here  to  the
point.  As  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  has  somewhere
humorously  put  it.  whenever  two  persons  J/  and  A^
converse  together  there  are  six  individuals  concerned,
M  as  he  is,  M  as  he  thinks  himself  to  be,  M  as  N
thinks  him  to  be  ;  and  a  like  trinity  as  respects  A'^.
While  it  is  true  that  we  hnd  no  two  individuals  of
our  acquaintance  entirely  alike,  it  is  true  also  on  the
other  hand  that  we  know  no  one  completely:  indeed
adequate  knowledge  about  the  individual  is  allowed
to  be  logically  impossible.  So  far  Professor  Royce  is
right  in  his  emphatic  contention  that  an  individual —
however  intimately  known — is,  as  known,  but  an
instance  of  a  type  :  that  J/  or  iV  is  the  only  instance
we  know  does  not  make  him  essentially  unique^  If
on  the  strength  of  this  partial  knowledge  we  venture
to  predict  his  future  conduct,  we  are  generalising,
following,  that  is  to  say,  the  hypothetical  procedure  of
science,  as  truly  as  when  we  affirm  that  he  will  die.

But  in  certain  circumstances  the  one  prediction
would  be  as  justifiable  as  the  other,  since  both  alike
would  be  instances  of  the  '  uniformity  of  nature,'  viz.
when  the  man's  action,  like  a  forced  move  in  chess,  is
externally  constrained  ;  or  when  again,  like  .some  trick
of  manner,  it  is  secondarily  automatic,  a  case  ol
mechanical  routine,  the  outcome  of  the  dead  sell,  the
woodenness  of  the  man  as  distinct  from  the  growing
life.  The  cases  to  which  Schopenhauer  so  triumph-
antly apjjeals  are  in  j)art  of  this  sort.  And  e\<.ii  in  the
rest  we  find  our  confident  expectations  often  belied:  the
most  humdrum  mortals  rising  to  great  occasions,  and
' T/if  World  anit  tli(  Individual,  vol.  l.  pi).  292-4.


298  Freedom  and  Foreknowledge

others,  in  whom  the  hue  of  resolution  seemed  native
and  ingrained,  growing  pallid  in  the  supreme  crisis
and  finally  renouncing  their  cause.  But  the  literature
of  conversions  and  counter-conversions,  of  which  Pro-
fessor James  in  his  Gifford  Lectures  has  given  such  an
admirable  selection,  is  amply  sufficient  to  turn  the  flank
of  Schopenhauer's  position.  Moreover  not  only  Kant
but  even  Schopenhauer,  the  more  rigorous  determinist
of  the  two,  is  inconsistent  enough  to  recognise  these
radical  changes  of  character.  To  be  sure  they  regard
them  as  '  mysteries,'  cases  of  regeneration  or  new  birth,
manifestations  not  of  '  nature '  but  of  '  grace '  ;  but  it  is
enough  for  us  now  that  they  admit  their  possibility.
If  the  appeal  then  is  to  be  to  facts,  can  anyone  soberly
maintain  that  it  is  even  ideally  possible  to  forecast
what  he,  still  less  what  another,  will  think  and  do  a
week  hence  ?  Besides,  even  if  the  forecast  could  be
made  it  would  take  the  week  to  make  it ;  for  none  of
the  intervening  thoughts  and  deeds  could  be  safely
omitted  ;  nor  could  their  rate  be  accelerated  unless  a
like  acceleration  held  throughout  the  world — and  then
we  should  be  relatively  just  where  we  were  before.
The  so-called  forecast  in  a  word  would  be  after  the
event\  Surely  if  there  is  an  empirical  common-place
beyond  dispute  it  is  this,  that  no  man  knows  before-
hand even  his  own  possibilities  completely,  to  say
nothing  of  those  of  another.

So  far  as  experience  goes  what  we  find  is  not
simply  uniformity  and  routine,  nahtra  natiirata,  but
also  innovation  and  variation,  natui^a  naturans.  Hence
while it  is  possible to  publish Bradshaw  s  Giiide  as

'  Cf.  Bergson,  Les  Donnees  hninediates^  2""^  edn,  pp.  140  ff.


Freedom  as  Defenuiiiisni  299

well  as  the  Nautical  Almanack,  Zadkiels  Ahuanack  is
a  fraud,  and  other  forms  of  clairvoyance  an  absurdity,  in
spite  of  Schopenhauer's  confident  appeal  to  them.  But
after  all  his  thorough-going  determinism — or  'noumenal
freedom' — was  not  based  on  experience.  Further  his
definition  of  necessary  as  '*  that  which  follows  from  a
given  sufficient  ground"  does  not  justify  him  in  assuming
that  the  ground  is  once  for  all  fixed  and  unalterable ^
That  is  an  assumption  which  he  simply  took  over
straight  from  Plato's  theory  of  ideas  and  grievously
misapplied.  If  on  this  assumption  there  could  be
events,  their  rigorous  concatenation  would,  of  course,
be  inevitable.  But  though  the  fixed  and  unalterable
character  of  the  'free,'  noumenal,  grounds  of  nature
would  necessitate  a  phenomenal  world  fast  bound  in  fate,
we  cannot  till  we  have  found  this  ijifer  that.  To  assert
such  a  character  of  the  noumenal,  and  thence  to  deduce
what  the  phenomenal,  world  must  be,  is  mere  dogmatism.
Nevertheless  it  was  to  this  solid  mechanism  or
*  nature-necessity  '  as  he  called  it  that  Kant  appealed  in
support  of  his  'empirical 'determinism.  And  most  incon-
sistently, for  he  has  himself  allowed  that  this  miscalled
'necessity  of  nature'  neither  logically  nor  really  deserves
the  name.  The  'uniformity  of  nature'  is  indeed  so  far  a
priori,  as  being  part  and  parcel  of  the  postulate  that  the
very  possibility  of  any  empirical  forecast  at  all  implies.
But  nowpostulation  isa  practical  notatheoretical  matter:

'  What,  wc  wonder,  would  Schopenhauer  have  said  of  the  Kea,
the  New  Zealand  parrot  that  has  developed  the  extraordinary  habit
of  picking  holes  in  the  back  of  the  living  sheep  ;  or  of  other  instances
of  changed  habits  which  Darwin  gives?  {Ori^t^n  of  Species^  6ih  cdn,
pp.  1 4 1-3)-


300  Freedom  and  Foreknowledge

what  then  in  the  last  resort  does  it  really  mean?  Experi-
ence itself  being  practical,  and  theory  the  result  not  the
presupposition  of  experience,  we  can  put  the  matter  most
simply  by  saying  of  experience  what  Helmholtz  has
said: — Hiergilt  nur  der eine Rath:  Vertraue  und handle!

Das Unzuldngliche
Dann  ivird^s  Ereigniss^.

This  then  is  our  postulate  reduced  to  its  lowest
terms,  and  with  this  the  progress  of  experience  entirely
agrees.  The  Many  have  all  alike  had  to  trust  and
try,  sometimes  succeeding,  sometimes  failing,  but  on
the  whole  always  learning  and  so  gradually  achieving
the  order  that  determinism  assumes  to  exist  a  priori.
This  established  order  or  nattira  naturata  then  implies
free  causes,  as  Kant  and  Schopenhauer  maintained,
for  it  is  their  work  ;  but  why  suppose  that  by  their
very  first  stroke  they  forge  for  themselves  adamantine
chains  ?  Yet  this  is  what  Schopenhauer  certainly
assumed-  and  what  Kant  seems  to  assume.  Such  a
supposition,  so  far  from  making  experience  possible,
would  rather  make  it  impossible  ;  for  if  the  nature  or
essence  of  all  agents  were  irrevocably  fixed,  how  could
— nay  why  should — there  be  any  evolution  at  all  ?
A  Spinozistic  world,  existing  sub  specie  aeterniiatis  but
really  devoid  of  change,  is  all  we  could  expect.

Nevertheless,  as  I  shall  now  try  to  show,  the
Kantian  distinction  between  intelligible  and  empirical
character  is  of  real  importance  ;  although,  of  course,
we  must  take  it  to  mean  not  that  a  subject  has  two
characters,  one  noumenal  the other  phenomenal,  but

^  Handbuch  der physiologischen  Optik,  2'^  Aus.  p.  594.

-  Cf.  Sdmmtliche  Werke^  Frauenstadt's  edn,  vol.  11.  p.  598,  vol.  iv.  p.  97.


Homo  noumenon  and  Homo  phenomenon 301

simply  that  in  the  latter  we  have  sundry  manifestations
of  what  the  subject's  character  really  is :  opcrari
scqiiitur  esse,  as  Schopenhauer  said.  But  Kant,  I
think,  never  meant  to  regard  the  free  subject  as
Schopenhauer  did,  that  is,  as  related  to  its  acts  as  a
logical  essence  is  to  its  predicates.  When  therefore
he  speaks  of  it  as  out  of  time  he  does  not  mean  to
exclude  process  and  change  in  the  sense  in  which  logic
excludes  these  :  that  he  postulates  immortality  in  order
to  the  attainment  of  perfection  is  enough  to  show  this.
What  then  does  he  mean  ?  What  he  really  means  is,
I  think,  far  more  clearly  expressed  in  his  distinction  of
JiojHO  noumenon  and  homo  pJienomenon.  As  phenomenal,
'when  we  are  merely  obsci'ving^'  a  man,  he  is  an  object
simply,  not  a  subject.  Like  all  .observed  objects,  he
is  so  far  conceived  as  merely  part  and  parcel  of  that
continuous  whole  we  call  nature  ;  and  the  successive
states  through  which  he  is  observed  to  pass  are  con-
ceived as  regularly  linked  in  with  those  of  other
phenomena  in  this  one  unbroken  continuum.  It  is  to
this  regular  succession  of  phenomenal  events  that  the
category  of  causality  as  used  in  science  applies.

But  besides  this  causal  relation  to  other  phenomena
everything  phenomenal  is  related,  on  the  one  hand  to
the  subject  to  whom  it  appears,  and  on  the  other  to
the  'transcendental  object,'  of  which  it  is  the  appear-
ance. Whether  consistently  or  not  with  the  main
position  of  his  critical  philosophy,  it  is  at  all  events  a
fact  that  Kant  never  dreamt  of  (juestioning  the  exist-
ence of  things  per  se  as  the  ground  of  the  phenomena
that  we  observe  externally,  h  is  ecjually  certain  ih.u
•  Kant's  phrase. Cf.  the  context  of  first  passage  quoted  above,  p.  295.


302  Freedom  and  Foreknowledge

he  regarded  the  'transcendental  subject'  or  the  ground
of  the  facts  that  we  experience  internally  as  also
such  a  thing  per  se  ;  and  that  not  simply  from  the
standpoint  of  practice  but  also  from  that  of  theory.  In
a  word  the  experience  of  phenomena,  whether  external
or  internal,  implies  the  existence  of  corresponding
things  per  se  as  their  grounds  or  causes  ;  as  Leibniz,
Herbart  and  Lotze  maintained.  Wie  viel  Schein  so
viel  Hinde-iLtung  mifs  Sein  was  as  true  for  Kant  as  it
was  for  them.  But  the  causality  in  this  case  is  not  the
phenomenal  and  relative  causality  of  science,  but  the
noumenal  and  absolute  causality  that  pertains  solely  to
the  ultimate  efficiency  of  the  thing  per  se.  To  man
conceived  as  noumenal  this  absolute  or  free  causality
belongs.  The  reasonable  in  thought  and  conduct
affords  the  most  adequate  instances  of  such  causality  ;
for  "  reason,"  as  Kant  says,  "  does  not  yield  to  the
impulse  that  is  given  empirically  and  does  not  follow
the  order  of  things  as  they  present  themselves  as
phenomena,  but  frames  for  itself,  with  perfect  spon-
taneity, a  new  order  according  to  ideas  to  which  it
adapts  the  empirical  conditions\"  But  he  also  gives
the  following  simpler  example  : — "  If  at  this  moment  I
rise  from  my  chair  with  perfect  freedom,  without  the
necessarily  determining  influence  of  natural  causes,  a
new  series  has  its  absolute  beginning  in  this  event,
with  all  its  natural  consequences  ad  indefinitum^y

The  phenomenal  world  then  we  may  compare,  as
Lotze  has  done,  to  a  continuous  texture  or  fabric  con-
sisting entirely  of  the  joint  effects  produced,  the  overt

^  Critique^  ist  edn,  p.  548,  M.M.'s  trans,  p.  473.
' Op.  cit.  p.  450,  M.M.  p.  392.


The  PJieuojucual  as  filled  Time 303

deeds  done, by  innumerable  things  per  se  or  agents.
The  pattern  of  this  texture  is  what  we  call  filled  time,
and  the  process  of  filling-in  is,  as  we  know,  ever  going
forward. So  far  as  we  are  merely  cognitive,  we  are
confined  to  observations,  past  and  present,  of  this  pro-
cess and to such more or  less  probable inferences
concerning  the  future  as  these  suggest. As  a  matter
of  fact  our  inductions frequent!}-  turn out right, and
they  prove  to  be  more  reliable  the more  niethodically
we  proceed. It  is  so  ; but  as  already  said  there  is  no
necessity, either  logical or  real,  about  it. "  For  we
could  quite  well  imagine,"  Kant  himself  allows,  "  that
phenomena might  possibly be  such that the under-
standins:  would  not  find  them  conformable... :  all  mii/ht
be  in  such  confusion  that  nothing  would  be  found  in  the
succession  of  phenomena  which  could  supply  a  rule  of
synthesis  corresponding  to  the  category  of  cause  and
effect,  so  that  this  category  would  therefore  be  altogether
null  and  void  and  meaningless'." Thus  it  is  simply  to
the  ideal  of  a  '  rule'  of  succession,  which  the  weaving  of
the  phenomenal  texture  de  facto  suggests,  that  we  apply
the  concept  called  by  Kant  'causality  of  nature.'

Entirely  distinct  from  this  phenomenal  or  empirical
causality  is  that  which  Kant  calls  'causality  of  freedom  '
— intelligiljle  or  noumenal  causality.  So  difterent  are
the  two  that  positive  science  fights  shy  of  the  terms,
'  cause  and  effect,'  because  of  their  association  with
this  efficient  or  noumenal  causality,  the  existence
of  which  positive  science  ignores  and  naturalism
dogmatically  denies  alt(jgether '. l)iii  lo  the  grounds

' Critii/ue  of  the  Pure  Rcnson. .Analytic  (5  13,  M.M.  p.  So.
'  Cf.  Aaturaiism  and  Af;noiticism,  vol.  n.  pp.  241,  J47.


304  Freedom  and  Foreknoiuledge

for  assuming  its  existence  we  need  not  now  return.
At  all  events,  as  the  very  causality  that  produces  the
pattern  in  'the  context  of  nature' — Kant's  phrase  by
the  way — this  noumenal  causality  obviously  cannot  be
identified  with  the  phenomenal  causality — so-called —
that  the  pattern  itself  displays.  The  essential  charac-
teristic of  the  latter  is  objective  time-order  according
to  universal  law  :  the  essential  characteristic  of  the
former  is  subjective  initiation.  Since  it  freely  inserts
those  '  links  in  the  chain  of  nature '  it  cannot,  I  say,  be
a  part  of  the  time-order  that  it  makes.  As  compared
with  the  phenomenal  solidarity  or  continuity  that  they
jointly  produce,  these  independent,  real,  causes  may  then
be  said  to  be  out  of  time.  Their  acts  are  not  'events'
that  seem  to  come  out  of  {evenire),  or  to  follow  from,
what  has  preceded  in  the  time-process:  they  are  rather
'  interventions  '  that  appear  in  this  process  and  con-
stitute its  further  evolution.  Accordingly  in  reference
to  them  and  them  only  '  ought '  has  a  meaning  ;  for,
as  Kant  truly  says  : "If  we  look  merely  at  the  course

of  nature, 'ought'  has  no  meaning  whatever It

expresses  a  possible  action,  the  ground  of  which  cannot
be  anything  but  a  mere  concept,"  cannot  be  a  phe-
nomenon \  This  concept,  as  we  should  say  now,  is
the  teleological  concept  of  worth  or  of  the  good,
whereby  the  realm  of  ends  in  which  it  obtains  is  still
further  differentiated  from  the  realm  of  nature  in  which
it  is  meaningless.  In  the  one,  events  appear  as  deter-
mined by  preceding  events  ;  in  the  other,  actions  are
initiated  to  secure  future  ends.

But  can  we  then  say  that  the  realm  of  ends  is  out
^  Op.  cit.  p.  547,  M.M.  p.  472.


Abstract  Time  305

of  time  ?  Certainly  not,  as  I  have  already  maintained,
in  the  sense  that  it  is.  like  Plato's  world  of  ideas,  an
eternal  world  of  immutable  essences,  a  logical  world
but  not  a  real  world  at  all.  In  tending  to  equate
'intelligible  character'  to  mere  essential cxistc7itia,  as
Schopenhauer  expressly  did,  Kant's  procedure  is  in-
defensible as  well  as  inconsistent.  Hut  what  is  the
time,  beyond  which,  so  to  say,  free  agents  arc  said  to
exist  ^.  It  is  that  time  which  Kant  conceived  as
yielding  an  exact  science  of  chronometry,  the  pendant
of  geometry  the  exact  science  of  space.  It  is  time  as
a  continuous  quantity  of  one  dimension,  and  so  far
comparable  to  a  line,  save  that  its  points  or  parts  are
not  simultaneous  but  successive.  Succession  in  this
time  is  conceived  as  constant  ;  in  other  words  this
time  is  regarded  as  homogeneous  and  so  as  measurable,
divisible  into  intervals  of  equal  length.  In  a  word  it
is  the  abstract  time  of  science  in  which  we  imagine  the
successive  states  of  the  whole  phenomenal  world  to  be
plotted  out,  suggesting,  as  Bergson  has  admirably  put
it.  the  substitution  for  the  complete  world  of  experience
of  a  set  of  kinematographic  pictures.

What  then  is  left  out  of  this  abstract  or  empty
time  ?  Paradoxical  though  it  ajjpear,  what  is  left  out,
we  shall  find,  are  the  mutually  im()licated  facts  of
duration  and  change.  An  interval  of  time  is  not  the
same  as  the  experience  of  duration,  and  the  two
different  states  situated  at  its  extremes  are  no  equi-
valent for  the  experience  of  change.  iUit  these  problems
of  time  which  we  have  here  broached  are  far  loo
complex  for  discussion  now.  The  only  larther  eluci-
dation  I can  offer  is  to  raise  one more  (juestion  anil

\v.  20


3o6  Freedom  and  Foreknowledge

content  myself  with  a  very  summary  answer.  How
do  we  come  by  this  schema  of  time  ?  We  come  by  it
solely  because  our  experience  involves  both  duration
and  change  ;  and  thus,  as  has  been  well  said,  "time  is
in  us  though  we  are  not  in  time,"  But  for  experience
duration  is  not  something  objective,  is  not  a  homo-
geneous linear  quantity  that  is  abstracted  from  a
multiplicity  of  presentations.  What  the  term  duration
ultimately  represents  is  our  immediate  subjective  ex-
perience as  actively  striving  and  wearing  on:  it  implies
the  actual  living,  which  only  is  actual  in  so  far  as  it  is
not  homogeneous  and  empty  but  full  of  changes  endured
or  wrought.  And  change  again  as  experienced  is  not
merely  a  temporal  succession,  a,  b,  c...,  where  a  is  not
when  b  is,  and  c  is  not  till  b  is  no  more.  Such  a
schema  would  never  yield  experience  :  it  answers
exactly  to  that  zero  limit  of  experience  that,  as  I  have
already  remarked,  Leibniz  ascribed  to  bodies,  when  he
said  omne  corpus  mens  momentanea  est.  But  experience
yields  that  schema  ;  and  empirical  psychology  affords
us  a  fairly  complete  analysis  of  its  constituents  and
a  fairly  probable  account  of  their  genetic  synthesis.
Experience  however  yields  that  schema  only  because
experience,  as  living,  is  the  natura  naturans  that  leaves
behind  it,  as  it  were,  the  natzira  naturata  to  which  the
schema  entirely  belongs.  Between  the  intemporal
world  of  ideas  and  the  temporal  world  of  phenomena
free  agents  then  have  their  place\

^  Cf.  Bergson,  L! Evolution  creatrice,  p.  391.  "The  feature  in
Professor  Bergson's  contribution  to  the  philosophy  of  experience
which  distinguishes  it  fundamentally  from  the  views  of  previous
thinkers,  is  his  new  conception  of  time  as  concrete  time,  or  what


Necessitariauis)}!  so  far  not  proved 307

The  necessitarian  position  is  not  then,  we  seem
entitled  to  conclude,  empirically  warranted.  As  an
argument  from  experience  it  rests  on  the  assumption
that  phenomena  are  the  whole  ;  that  there  is,  in  other
words,  nothing  but  filled  time  :  whence  and  how  time
is  hlled,  it  does  not  inquire.  Once  this  foundation  is
found  faulty,  all  the  empirical  arguments  that  rest  upon
it  may  be  overturned.  Nor,  with  one  exception,  are
the  supposed  a  pi'iori  arguments  more  satisfactory.
That  every  event  must  have  a  cause  we  may  allow  to
be  axiomatic,  but  not  that  the  same  cause — the  same
efficient  cause,  that  is — must  always  produce  the  same
effect.  Again  to  identify  such  a  cause  with  an  essence,
to  equate  it,  as  it  were,  to  a  reason  was  the  mistake  of
rationalism,  which  Kant  completely  exposed  in  his
important  pre-critical  paper  on  Negative  Quantities.

he  calls  Duration"  (D.  Balsillie,  Mind,  191 1,  p.  357).  I  think
however  that  I  may  fairly  claim  to  have  anticipated  him  to  some
extent.  In  1886,  three  years  before  the  publication  of  Professor
Bergson's  Donnees,  I  had  written  a  long  paragraph  on  this  topic,
containing  inter  alia  the  following: — "Thus. ..there  is  an  element  in
our  concrete  time-perception  which  has  no  place  in  our  al)stract
conception  of  time.  In  time,  conceived  as  physical,  there  is  no  trace
of  intensity  ;  in  time,  as  psychically  experienced,  duration  is  primarily
an  intensive  magnitude"  {Ency.  Brit.  'Psychology,'  i  ith  edn,  p.  577).
I  should  probably  have  taken  an  earlier  opportunity  of  mentioning
this  point,  if  I  had  known  before,  that  one  of  Professor  Bergson's
compatriots  had  already  called  attention  to  it — of  this  however  I
only  became  aware  ([uite  recently.  Cf.  M.  (1.  Ragcot  in  the  Rrt'iic
philosophique,  t.  i.x.  1905,  j).  84.  In  a  reply  to  him  Professor  Bergson
{ibid.  p.  229),  while  establishing  his  own  independence,  strangely
misses  the  point  of  resemblance,  which  is  not,  as  he  supposes,
between  my  '  presentatitm-continuum '  and  his  duree  rl-elle,  but
between  this  and my  analysis  of  lime  as  concrete.

On  the  main  (juestion  see  further  in  Sup|)lementary  Note  iv.

20 — 2


3o8  Freedom  and  Forekjtowledge

But  if  we  start  from  theism  the  case  is  quite  other-
wise :  then  indeed  the  necessitarian  position  appears
to  be  axiomatic\  It  is,  I  think,  generally  allowed  that
in  the  long  theological  controversies,  which  for  cen-
turies have  raged  round  our  problem,  logic  has  been
on  the  side  of  those  who,  like  Augustine,  Aquinas,
Calvin  and  Edwards,  have  maintained  the  doctrine  of
divine  predestination,  the  doctrine  "that  God  orders  all
events,  and  the  volitions  of  moral  agents  amongst  others,
by  such  a  decisive  disposal,  that  the  events  are  infallibly
connected  with  his  disposal'";  or  otherwise  put,  that
second  causes  in  nature  are  incompatible  with  the  admis-
sion that  there  is  only  one  cause,  the  First  Cause.  What
however  does  this  start  from  theism  imply  ?  It  implies
a  supposed  knowledge  of  God  that  is  independent  of
experience — partly  as  innate,  partly  as  revealed.  It  im-
plies further  that  knowing  what  God  is  apart  from  the
world  we  infer  what  any  world  that  he  creates  must  be.
The  absolute  omniscience  and  omnipotence  of  God  are
regarded  as  beyond  question ;  and  from  these  follow  as
a  corollary  the  absolute  and  eternal  decrees.  As
Jonathan  Edwards  concisely  put  it :  "  All  things  are
perfectly  and  equally  in  his  view  from  eternity  ;  hence
it  will  follow  that  his  designs  or  purposes  are  not  things
formed  anew,  founded  on  any  new  views  or  appear-
ances, but  are  all  eternal  purposes."  But  there  is
another  corollary  equally  evident  from  which  those
intent  on  theism  at  any  cost  seek  in  vain  to  escape.
There is — as already said — no room left for  other

■^  So  we  come  round  again  to  the  divergence  between  pluralism
and  theism  from  which  we  first  set  out. Cf.  Lect.  xni.  init.
^  Jonathan  Edwards,  Enquiry,  4th  edn,  1775,  p.  406.


NecessifariaJiism  and  T/icisni 309

causes,  other  purposes,  no  room  for  a  real  world  with
such  a  God  at  all. As  a  Scottish  professor  of  divinity
has  said  : — "If  God  is  thus  the  real  cause  of  all  that  is,
the  universe  would  seem  to  be  merely  God  evolving
himself,  and  there  has  been  no  true  creation,  no  bringing
into  being  of  wills  separate  from  his  own'."' In  a  word —
as  I  attempted  to  show  in  the  second  lecture — starting
from  the  One  there  is  no  arriving  at  the  Many. If  we
attempt  to  conceive  of  God  apart  from  the  world  there
is  nothing  to  lead  us  on  to  the  idea  of  creation. On
the  other  hand, if  we  start  from  the Many,  it  has. I
trust, become  more  and  more  clear  as  we  have ad-
vanced, that  we  find  there  no  justification  for  the  notion
of  a  '  block  universe' — as  Professor  James  called  it — a
universe,  that  is, in  which  every  detail  is  decreed, in
which  real  initiative,  evolution  as  we  understand  it,  is
impossible. But, in  fact,  we  /lave  to start  from  the
Many,  and  accordingly  always  do — this  too  I  trust  has
been  made  clear. Moreover,  if  thorough-going  deter-
minism  were  true, we  should, it  has  seemed  equally
clear,  never  attain  to  the  idea  of  a  Creator  at  all. b^or
if  ourselves  devoid  of  all  originality  what  meaning  could
that  idea  have  for  us  ?

The  doctrine  of  predestination  has  been  for  theo-
logians a  hopeless  and  insoluble  })roblem  as  well  as  a
source  of  bitter  strife  largely  because  of  this  opposition
between  a  priori  speculation  and  actual  experience.
"That  in  the  actual  passage  of  events  something  should
actually  come  to  pass,  something  new  which  previ-
ously was  not;  that  history  should  be  something  more
than  a  translation  iiiio  lime  of  the  eternally  comjilete
' Rev.  .Marcus  Uods,  limy.  lirit.  ylh  cdii,  s.v.  I'rcUcstinatioii.


3IO  Freedom  and  Foreknowledge

content  of  an  ordered  world — this,"  said  Lotze,  "  is
a  deep  and  irresistible  demand  of  our  spirit,  under
the  influence  of  which  we  all  act  in  life.  Without  its
satisfaction  the  world  would  be,  not  indeed  unthinkable
and  self-contradictory,  but  unmeaning  and  incredible^"
But  though  I  have  used  that  ominous  word  '  pre-
destination '  I  am  not  going  to  attempt  to  adjudicate
the  theological  differences  of  Augustine  and  Pelagius,
Arminius  and  Calvin,  It  is  the  wider  issue — that  of
reconciling  pluralism  and  theism — that  alone  concerns
us.  Nevertheless  there  are  two  or  three  points  con-
nected with  the  purely  theological  controversy  that  are
worthy  of  notice.  First,  in  its  most  rigid  and,  as  it
seems  to  me,  its  most  logical  form — in  what  is  called
Supralapsarianism — the  dogma  of  predestination  has
always  appeared  so  shocking,  so  '  excruciating '  as
Augustine  said,  to  ordinary  humanity,  that  it  has  not
only  been  charged  on  moral  grounds  with  tending  to
atheism,  but  it  has  been  used  either  openly  or  covertly
to  promote  atheism.  Readers  of  church  history  will
remember  the  fates  of  Gottschalk  and  Vanini.  But,
secondly  and  as  more  important,  we  may  notice  the
attempts  that  have  been  made  to  tone  down  the  ex-
treme rigour  of  the  Calvinistic  dogma — as  represented,
for  example,  in  Jonathan  Edwards's  classical  treatise —
by  distinguishing  between  the  divine  prescience  and
the  divine  purposes.  The  text  of  all  such  attempts  is
to  be  found  in  a  famous  saying  of  Origen  : — "  God's
prescience  is  not  the  cause  of  things  future,  but  their
being  future  is  the  cause  of  God's  prescience  that  they
will  be."  To  the  relations  of  finite  beings  this  dis-
'  Metaphysic,  §65,  E.  t.  p.  117.


The  Prcdcstiiiariaii  Controversy 311

tinction  is  certainly  applicable.  I  may  confidently
expect  what  another  will  do,  without  any  responsibility
for  his  deed  ;  but  in  proportion  as  he  has  become  what
he  is  through  my  deliberate  influence  and  effort  the
distinction  lapses  :  so  far,  what  I  expect  is  just  what  I
intended.  If  then  the  divine  decrees  and  the  divine
prescience  are  coeval,  if  God  is  the  sole  cause  of  all
that  is  and  foresees  infallibly  all  that  can  ever  happen,
a  fortiori  it  seems  futile  to  attempt  to  discriminate
between  what  he  decrees  and  what  he  merely
permits.

The  philosopher  Reid,  who  in  opposition  to
Priestley  attempted  to  reconcile  divine  foreknowledge
and  human  freedom,  made  the  extraordinary  blunder
of  comparing  foreknowledge  of  the  future  with  memory
of  the  past.  He  practically  assumed  that  because
memory  of  the  past  is  memory  of  what  was  once  both
future  and  contingent,  the  fact  remembered  remains
contingent  though  it  is  future  no  more.  Nothing  is
easier  than  to  turn  this  analogy  against  him  with  fatal
effect,  as  his  own  disciple  Hamilton  has  actually  done.
"  Factum  infccttun  rcddcre,  nc  Dcus  quidem  potest,  has
been  said  and  sung  in  a  thousand  forms,"  says  Hamilton.
The  past  that  is  to  say  is  necessary  :  if  then  ("lod's
prescience  resembles  our  memory,  it  is  only  because
the  past  and  the  future  are  both  alike  to  him  :  as  the
past  is  not  contingent  so  neither  is  the  future'.

I^»ut  notwithstanding his exposure, iiamilton still

sides  with Reid,  not  with Priestley. And  this  l)rings

to our notice another atlemj)l to save the Divine

.Sovereignty,  as  it is  called, without  surrendering  the

' The  Works  uf  T/ios.  Reid,  Hamilton's  edition,  |t.  631  n.


312  Freedom  and  Foreknowledge

freedom  of  man  ;  and  that  is  the  simple  declaration
that  the  problem  is  transcendent.  The  conciliation  of
divine  foreknowledge  and  human  freedom  is,  said
Hamilton,  "one  of  the  things  to  be  believed,  not
understood  " :  all  "  attempts  to  harmonize  these  anti-
logies by  human  reasoning  to  human  understanding"
are  to  be  rejected  as  "  futile...' vain  wisdom  all  and
false  philosophy.' "  But  what  if  antilogy  is  only  a
euphemism  for  contradiction,  and  what  of  the  logical
cogency  of  the  predestinarian  view,  about  which,
however  repulsive,  there  is  nothing  obscure  or  in-
conceivable ?  I  do  not  think  Jonathan  Edwards
overstated  his  case,  when  he  said  : — "  There  is  no
geometrical  theorem  whatsoever,  more  capable  of
strict  demonstration  than  that  God's  certain  Prescience
of  the  volitions  of  moral  agents  is  inconsistent  with
such  a  contingency  of  these  events,  as  is  without  all
Necessity^"

The  pluralist  then,  it  would  seem,  has  no  alternative
but  either  to  deny  the  complete  prescience  of  the  One
or  to  abandon  the  self-determination  of  the  Many,  and
thus  wholly  surrender  his  own  position.  There  is
however  still  an  old  attempt  at  conciliation,  recently
set  forth  anew  by  a  former  Gifford  Lecturer,  which  we
perhaps  ought  not  to  pass  altogether  without  notice.
"  Foreknowledge  in  time,"  says  Professor  Royce,  "  is
possible  only  of  the  general  and  of  the  causally  pre-
determined, and  not  of  the  unique  and  the  free.  Hence
neith-er  God  nor  man  can  perfectly  foreknow,  at  any
temporal  moment,  what  a  free-will  agent  is  yet  to  do.
On the  other  hand,  the Absolute  possesses  a  perfect

1  Op.  cii.  p.  182.


Atfeiiipts  at  a  Coiiciliafion  313

k7iowledge  at  one  gla7ice  of  tJic  wJiolc  of  the  temporal
order,  present,  past  and  future.  This  knowledge  is
ill-called  foreknowledore.  It  is  eternal  knowledo-e'."
But  I  fear  that  even  eternity  will  not  afford  a  secure
refuge  from  the  difficulty.  It  is  noteworthy  that,  while
it  is  of  God  that  Professor  Royce  denies  perfect  fore-
knowledge,, it  is  of  the  Absolute  that  he  asserts  eternal
knowledge.  There  is  here  more  than  an  accidental
difference  of  expression.  Professor  Royce  in  fact,  like
only  too  many  theists,  is  guilty  of  that  vacillation
between  God  and  the  Absolute  which  Mr  Bradley  we
found  quaintly  comparing  to  the  futile  attempts  of  a
dog  to  follow  two  masters-.  The  Absolute  must  be  in
every  respect  all-inclusive,  but  God,  if  his  creatures  are
free,  is  so  far  not  all-inclusive.  As  I  have  already  said
the  Creator  together  with  his  creatures  may  be  called
the  Absolute  ;  but  unless  the  creatures — said  to  be
made  out  of  nothing — verily  remain  themselves  but
nothing,  God  is,  no  longer  at  any  rate,  the  Absolute.
To  God  we  ma}'  attribute  personality  and  therefore
experience  and  knowledge  ;  since  for  him  tin-  world
is  a  Not-self,  although  his  own  creation.  But  we
cannot  attribute  personality  to  the  Absolute,  for  there
the  duality  of  Self  and  Not-self  is  necessarily  tran-
scended. \\\i  cannot  then  speak  of  the  Absolute  as
knowing  ;  but  since  it  is  all-inclusive  we  may  perhaps
say  that  ii  '  possesses  knowledge  ' — a  vague  i)hrase
that will mean too  little  to  help  us  much'.

' The  World  arid  the  Individual,  vol.  n.  p.  374. Italics  the  author's.
"^  Cf.  Lect.  n.  p.  24.

'  It  would  be  equally  true  to  say,  as  Mr  Hosanquct  has  observed,
that  it  possesses  colour.


314  Freedom  and  Foreknowledge

But  if  now  we  turn  for  a  moment  to  consider  what
Professor  Royce  understands  by  an  eternal  knowledge
that  takes  in '  at  a  glance ' — the  expression  is  odd —
the  whole  temporal  order — again  an  odd  but  significant
expression — we  shall  find  that  in  fact  we  are  not  helped
at  all. He distinguishes  two  senses of  present, an
exclusive — as  when  we  hear  or  apprehend  a  musical
air  note  by  note, where  each  note  excludes  the rest
from coexistence with itself — and an inclusive — as
when we take in or comprehend  the melody as a
whole  and  appreciate  it. In  this  latter  case  the  whole
melody  is  present, included  at once  in  what I have
called  a  time  perspective. The  range  of  such  inclusive
present,  or  time-span,  is  for  us  extremely  limited,  but
within such  limits  we  experience  a  sort  of  temporal
ubiquity. As  I  have  already  had  occasion  to  observe,
when  this  limit  is  reduced  to  zero,  there  is  strictly  no
experience. Now, on the other  hand, imagine all
limits  withdrawn  and  you  have  the  sort  of  experience
Professor  Royce  calls  eternal  knowledge. Comparing
the  whole  temporal  order  to  an  infinite  symphony,  he
holds  that  the  Absolute  knows  it  at  once  as  we  might
know  one  brief  rhythm. But  now,  we  ask,  when  is  it
that  we  grasp  this  rhythm  as  an  ordered  whole  ? When
it  is  complete — a  parte  post. And  here  surely  the  fatal
defect  of  Professor  Royce's  solution  for  our  purpose  is
evident. No  wonder  he  talks  of  '  the  temporal  order'
as if  it  were  fixed ! If the  Absolute  takes  in at a
glance the whole temporal order of the world, it
can  only  be,  according  to  Professor  Royce's  analogy,
because,  as  Hegel  supposed,  the  world's  evolution  is  for
it  merely  a  rehearsal  after  the  symphony  is  composed.


TJie  P/it rail's fs  \'ia  Media  315

But  such  an  absolute  One,  as  we  have  seen  many
times  over,  has  no  need  and  leaves  no  room  for  a
real  Many  at  all.  Further,  it  seems  contradictory  to
attribute  to  it  the  limitations  of  the  temporal  stand-
point along  with  the  perfection  of  the  eternal':  the
composer  can  never  be  a  mere  auditor  too.

This  remark  brings  us  back  to  the  pluralist's
solution,  and  raises  an  obvious  difficulty.  Is  God
then  not  the  composer  it  will  reasonably  be  asked:  are
we  not  assuming  that  the  world  is  his  creation  ?  Or
has  he  only  devised  an  /Eolian  harp  and  left  the  winds
of  chance  to  call  the  tune,  being  himself  then  only  an
auditor  ^  Such  questions  suggest  two  extremes,  neither
of  which  is  compatible  with  pluralism  ;  between  which
however  there  lies  a  via  media  that  may  be.  Aii  is
not  decreed  :  the  world  is  not  created  like  a  symphony.
Again,  all  possibilities  are  not  left  open  :  the  Many
have  not  severally  unlimited  freedom,  that  '  freedom  of
indifference '  which  is  indistinguishable  from  chance.
God's  creatures  are  creators,  the  pluralist  maintains  :
their  '  nature  '  is  partly  his  doing,  partly  their  own  :
he  assigns  the  talents,  they  use  or  misuse  them.
Not  everything  that  is  possible  is  possible  to  any,
yet  some  initiative  is  open  to  every  one:  none  are
left  with  no  talent  at  all.  The  totai  possibilities  then,
however  far  back  we  go,  are  fixed  ;  but  within  these,
contingencies,  however  far  forward we  go,  are  open.

"An  infinite  Miii4l.  with  prevision  thus  extended
beyond  all  that  is  to  all  that  can  be,"  said  M.iriliicau,
"is  lifted  above  sur[)rise  or  disaiJpoiniment...y<i,  in-
stead of  being  shut  up  in  a  closed  .md  mechanized
'  See  Supplementary  Note  iv.


3i6  Freedom  and  Foreknowledge

universe,  lives  amid  the  free  play  of  variable  character
and  contingent  history.  Is  this  a  limitation  of  God's
foresight,  that  he  cannot  read  all  volitions  that  are  to
be?  Yes,  but  it  is  a  self  liniitatio7i...\  lending  us  a
portion  of  his  causation,  he  refrains  from  covering  all

with  his  omniscience " "There  is  no  absurdity  in

supposing,"  said  Dugald  Stewart,  "that  the  Deity  may,
for  wise  purposes,  have  chosen  to  open  a  source  of
contingency  in  the  voluntary  action  of  his  creatures,  to
which  no  prescience  can  possibly  extend."  "  God  who
is  everything,"  said  Jowett,  "is  not  really  so  much  as
if  He  allowed  the  most  exalted  free  agencies  to  exist
side  by  side  with  Him."  "  Free  will,"  said  Tennyson,
"was  undoubtedly  the  main  miracle,  apparently  an  act
of  self-limitation  by  the  Infinite,  and  yet  a  revelation
by  Himself  and  of  Himself \" — A  much  longer  catena
of  passages  similar  in  purport  could  easily  be  provided.
As  a  consequence  of  the  growing  acceptance  of  the
pluralistic  standpoint,  this  admission  of  what  is  very
inaccurately  styled  the  '  doctrine  of  a  finite  God" '  has
become  widely  prevalent  of  late.  It  has  its  difficulties,
no  doubt,  as  the  idea  of  creation  for  us  must  always
have.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  by  means  of  it,  the
problem  of  evil,  to  which  I  propose  to  invite  your
attention  next,  is  greatly  simplified.

'  In  Metnoriam,  Robinson's  edition,  p.  260.
"  Cf.  below,  Lect.  xx.


LECTURE XV.

THE PROBLEM OF EVIL AND PESSIMISM.

The  problem  of  evil  has  been  recently  called  '  the
crux  of  theism':  the  phrase  serves  to  emphasise  how
thought  has  moved  on  since  Leibniz,  the  philosopher
and  codrtier,  in  obedience  to  royal  orders  wrote  his
famous  Theodicy — a  piece  of  'superficiality  incarnate,'
\Vm  James  has  ventured  to  call  it.  Nowadays  it
is  asked  :  How  is  the  evil  in  the  world  compatible
with  there  being  a  God  at  all  ^  For  Leibniz  the
existence  of  God  was  demonstrable  :  thus  for  him  the
problem  was  simply  to  show  that  this  world  is  the  best
possible.  Whether  he  succeeded  or  not,  it  may  fairly
be  maintained  that,  his  main  premises  granted,  no
other  reasonable  supposition  is  possible.  God  would
not  be  God,  if  his  world  were  not  the  best.  Even
Hume  explicitly  admitted  this.  "There  are,"  he  says,
"  many  inexplicable  difficulties  in  the  works  of  Nature,
which, if we allow a perfect author to be proved

a  priori become only seeming ditliculties for the

narrow  capacity  of  man,  who  cannot  trace  infmite
relations."  And  again,  after  a  lengthy  summary  of
the  circumstances  on  which  natural  e\'il  In  the  main
dejjends,  he  continues :  "  Shall  we  say  that  these
circumstances  are  not  necessary  and  ih.ii  they  might


3 1 8 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Pessimism

easily  have  been  altered  in  the  contrivance  of  the
universe  ?  This  decision  seems  too  presumptuous  for
creatures  so  blind  and  ignorant.  Let  us  be  more
modest  in  our  conclusions. Let  us  allow  that,  if  the

goodness  of  the  Deity could  be  established  on  any

tolerable  reasons  a  priori,  these  phenomena,  however
untoward,  would  not  be  sufficient  to  subvert  that  prin-
ciple ;  but  might  easily,  in  some  unknown  manner,  be
reconcilable  to  it\"  And  in  fact  this  position  is  one
continually  adopted.  Lotze,  for  example,  holds  fast  to
the  goodness  of  God  and  so — while  frankly  admitting
that  for  our  finite  wisdom  the  problem  of  evil  is  inso-
luble— rests  satisfied  that  there  is  a  solution,  though  we
do  not  understand  it".

But  if  we  start  from  the  evil  that  for  our  immediate
experience  seems really  beyond  question, it  may  be
contended  that  the  solution  should  come  first,  and  that
without  this  the  theistic  position  is  not  only  beyond  proof,
but  impossible.  It  now  becomes  utterly  futile  to  represent
evil  as  essentially  negative  and  unreal,  however  forcible
in  other  respects  this  time-honoured  argument  may  be.
For  immediate  experience  what  is  evil  is  just  as  real  and
positive  as  its  contrary  good. Again,  from  the  pluralistic
point  of  view  it  seems  a  useless  mockery  of  the  Many
not  a  vindication  of  the  One  to  put  Leibniz  into  verse,
as  Pope  did,  and  declare  'all  partial  evil  universal  good.'
So  long  as  the  evil  that  I  suffer  brings  no  good  to  me,
furthers  nothing  that  I  approve,  so  long  God  will  not
be  God  for  me  ;  on  the  other  hand  in  proportion  as  I

^  Dialogues  coficerfihig  Natural  Religion,  Green  and  Grose's  edn,
vol.  II.  pp.  412,  451  ;  cf.  also  pp.  444  ff.

*  Cf.  Microcosmus,  Eng.  trans,  vol.  11.  p.  717.


TJie  only  TJieodicy  open  to  us 319

discern  a  soul  of  good  in  things  evil  I  may  bless  and
trust  him  though  he  slay  me.  Complete  certainty  one
way  implies  complete  certainty  the  other  :  God  and
Evil,  in  a  word,  are  contraries  :  if  the  problem  of  evil
is  altogether  insoluble,  there  is  an  end  of  theism  :  if
God  exists,  there  is  nothing  absolutely  evil.

But  it  is  important  here  to  bear  in  mind  a  distinction
on  which  Kant  was  wont  to  lay  much  stress  :  failure  of
proof  is  very  different  from  disproof.  It  may  be  that
in  this  life  we  shall  ever  fall  as  far  short  of  a  triumphant
and  definitive  theodicy  as  we  have  of  a  rigidly  demon-
strative theology.  But  scepticism  is  not  atheism  :  where
there  is  room  for  doubt  there  is  'room  for  faith.'  At  any
rate  one  thine  seems  clear  :  whatever  be  the  details  of
the  divine  vindication  it  must  show  that  at  least  the
possibility  of  evil  is  essential  to  the  world's  perfection  ;
and  even  if  we  cannot  show  this  completely  and  in  every
case,  yet  to  prove  the  contrary,  it  may  be  maintained,  is
equally  impossible.  Now  at  the  outset  of  our  inquiry  we
came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  theistic  ideal,  if  it  can
be  sustained,  would  add  immeasurably  to  the  worth  of
the  world  as  pluralism  alone  has  to  conceive  it.  But
we  have  found  no  theoretical  proof  of  the  divine  exist-
ence and  cannot  therefore  directly  outflank  the  so-called
enigma  of  evil  as  an  empirical  problem.  The  i)rohl('m
then  for  us  seems  t(j  formulate  itsell  in  this  wise  : —
Granting  that  if  there  is  a  God,  this  world  must  be  not
only  good  but — so  far  as  it  is  his  creation — the  best
possible,  have  we  any  certain  evidence  that  it  is  not  ?
Keeping  strictly  on  the  defensive  the  only  theotllcy  we
can  attemi^t  is  to  rec^uire  those  who  accuse  to  prove
their  indictment.


320 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Pessimism

The  pessimists  with  their  contention  that  the  world
is  the  worst  possible  or  absolutely  bad  confront  us  first.
A  distinction  is  sometimes  made  between  those  who
are  pessimists  by  temperament  and  those  who  are  pes-
simists on  purely  theoretical  grounds,  as  the  result  of
dispassionate  inquiry  and  conviction  ;  but  in  truth  I
doubt  if  there  has  ever  been  a  pronounced  pessimist
who  could  be  placed  in  the  latter  class  alone.  Schopen-
hauer and  Mainlander,  who  are  accounted  philosophers,
were  every  whit  as  morbid  as  Byron  or  Leopardi.  The
pessimist  sees  the  world  not  by  the  dry,  objective  light
of  reason,  but  rather  looks  out  upon  it  through  the
subjective  humours  of  his  own  sickly  'pity  for  himself.'
This  leads  him  to  magnify  or  even  enjoy  whatever  misery,
to  minimize  and  perhaps  envy  whatever  happiness,  he
finds  without^  How  can  we  accept  the  evidence  of
such  diseased  and  pusillanimous  souls,  or  trust  the
theories  they  propound  ?  But  the  temperamental  op-
timist, it  may  be  said,  is  at  least  as  one-sided,  and  the
theoretical  optimist  is  far  more  superficial.  Not  only
is  that  true,  but  it  is  true  further,  as  has  been  often
urged,  that  the  jubilant  and  fatuous  optimism  of  the
eighteenth  century  helped  to  bring  into  vogue  the
pessimism  of  the  nineteenth,  and  even  justified  it  as
at  least  a  salutary  reaction.  When  the  actual  evil  in
the  world  is  compared  to  the  shadows  in  a  picture,  or
to  the  dissonances  in  a  sonata,  that  only  enhance  the
aesthetic  perfection  of  the  whole,  it  is  surely  reasonable

^  "  I  rejoice  to  discover  more  and  more  the  misery  of  men  and
things,  to  touch  them  with  the  hand  and  to  be  seized  with  a  cold
shudder  as  I  search  through  the  unblessed  and  terrible  secret  of  life."
Leopardi,  quoted  by  Sully,  Pessimism,  2nd  edn,  1892,  p.  27.


Pessifiiisni  as  a  Reaction  321

to  insist  on  the  one  thing  immediately  certain,  the
inherent  badness  of  these  blemishes  and  discords  as
such.  It  is  surely  reasonable  too  to  argue  that  if  the
actual  evil  of  the  world  is  part  of  its  perfection  as  a
whole,  then  to  replace  it  by  good,  to  change  actual
misery  into  happiness,  actual  vice  into  virtue,  would
only  diminish  not  increase  the  world's  perfection — a
reductio  ad  absurduvi,  if  ever  there  was  one'.  No
wonder  that  such  shallow  formalism  should  strike
earnest  men  as  insincere'".  "  I  cannot  refrain  from
declaring,"  said  Schopenhauer,  "  that  to  me  optimism
appears  not  merely  as  an  absurd  but  as  a  positively
wicked  way  of  thinking,  a  bitter  mockery  of  the
unspeakable  suffering  of  mankind — anyhow,"  he  con-
tinues, "  let  no  one  perchance  suppose  that  the  teaching
of  Christianity  favours  optimism ;  for  on  the  contrary
in  the  Gospels  'world'  and  'evil'  are  used  almost  as
synonymous  expressions''."  Yes,  but  world  in  the  New
Testament  does  not  mean  the  whole  sum  of  things  but
only  'the  things  seen  and  temporal.'  the  natural  without
the  spiritual.

And  here  we  touch  upon  the  point  in  which  optimism
and  pessimism  are  ecjually  at  fault.  The  one  seeks  to
show  that  this  world  is,  to  use  Wallace's  phrase,  'a  feli-
cific  institution,'  the  other  has  no  difficulty  in  showing
that  it  is  not  ;  and  therefore,  since  both  start  from  the

'  (f.  H. Kashdall,  The  Tluory  of  Good  and  Evil,  1907.  vol.  11.

pp. 2.\2  f.

*  Several  writers  have  maintained  that  Leibniz  wa.s  not  sincere
and  one  even  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  Ix.il)iii/  both  in  writing;  and
in  conversation  .idmittcd  as  much.  Cf.  O.  U'illarclh,  Die  I.ehre  vom
Uebel  hei  Leibniz,  Strassburg,  1898,  p.  u.

"  Die  Welt  ali  Wille  umi  Vorste/lnni^',  Ilk  iii..^59-

w.  2 1


322 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Pessimism

same  eudaemonistic  premisses,  the  pessimist  claims  to
have  won  his  suit,  and  disposed  of  the  old  theodicies
and  theologies  altogether.  Pessimism  has  certainly
shown,  as  Wallace  said,  "  that  he  who  makes  happiness
the  aim  of  his  life  is  on  the  wrong  tack,"  but  then
rational  ethics,  which  is  not  pessimistic,  also  allows
that.  In  bringing  home  to  our  modern  consciousness
the  hopelessness  of  the  hedonistic  theories  of  this  life
that  had  dominated  the  thinking  of  the  eighteenth
century,  pessimism  then,  we  must  admit,  has  been  of
lasting  service.  But  deliberately,  as  Schopenhauer
does,  to  endorse  Byron's  petulant  stanza.

Count  o'er  the  joys  thine  hours  have  seen,
Count  o'er  thy  days  from  anguish  free.

And  know,  whatever  thou  hast  been,
'Tis  something  better  not  to  be;

to  maintain,  whatever  a  man  is,  that  in  proportion
as  his  life  fails  of  pleasure  it  fails  in  worth,  is  to  make
a  great  assumption  which  experience  does  not  bear  out.
That  a  world  of  happiness  unalloyed,  were  it  possible,
would  be  the  best — though  so  widely  held — is  just  the
position  that  we  must  presently  carefully  examine.
But  before  we  attempt  to  discuss  this  dogma  common
to  optimism  and  pessimism  alike\  it  will  be  worth  our
while  to  subject  the  subsequent  steps  in  the  pessimist's
argument  to  some  criticism.

Optimists  were  fond  of  saying  that  pleasure  is
positive  and  pain  negative  :  Schopenhauer's  first  step
is  to  assert  that,  on  the  contrary,  pain  is  positive  and
pleasure  negative.  Perfect  and  continuous  happiness
would  then  have  the  value  zero  :  there  would  be  no
pain.  "Whatever  is  opposed  to  our  will,  thwarting
'  Cf.  below,  Lect.  xvi.  pp.  337  ff.


ScJiopoihaitcr  on  Feeling  and  I  Fill 323

and  resisting  it. that  is,  whatever  is  displeasing  and
painful — of  all  this,"  he  says,  "  we  are  directly  sensitive,
at  once  and  very  distinctly  :  [on  the  other  hand]  we  do
not  feel  the  healthfulness  of  our  whole  bod)-,  but  only
the  one  spot  '  where  the  shoe  pinches '  ;  so  also  we  do
not  think  about  the  state  of  our  affairs  in  general,  so
long  as  all  goes  perfectly  well, but  only  about  some
insignificant trifle  or  other  thai  annoys us. On this
ground," he continues, "  is based the negativity of
well-being  and  happiness  in  contrast  to  the  positivity
of  pain,  upon  which  1  have  so  often  insisted'." Pes-
simism based  on  the  crumpled  rose-leaf  we  might  say  :
could  anything  be  more  perverse ! We  cannot  indeed
forget  the  harrowing  pictures  that  Schopenhauer  loved
to  draw  of  all  the  vast  and  varied  ills  of  life. But  this
after  all is  not  the  point. He  tells us, for  example,
that "if we could even approximately conceive the
sum  of  want and pain and misery  of  every  sort  on
which in its course the sun  daily  shines, we  should
acknowledge that it would have been better if  the
earth like the  moon had been bui a lif<jless mass*."
Hut  he  forgets  that  such  a  conclusion  would  only  be
forced  upon  us  if  we  accepted  his  assumptions. Grant
that  all the  good  the  sun  sees  counts  for  nothing,  lies
below  the  threshold,  as  we  now  say,  and  that  only  the
evil  is  positive  for  us  ; then  we  might  agree  witii  him.
Nay,  if  his  psychology  of  will  is  sound,  wc  must  in
any  case  do  so. For "all volition." he  niaintainecl,
"springs from want, implies tUtft^ct and therefore
suffering." Yet  lasting  satisfaction and  conleiilmeiu

' Parerf^a  und  I'aralipomftut,  Bd  ii.  fi  150.
'•'  Op.  cil.  ?i  157  init.

21 — 2


324 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Pessimism

are  impossible,  since  fresh  wants  and  new  disappoint-
ments arise  continually.  From  the  lowest  stages  of  its
manifestation  to  the  highest,  the  will  altogether  lacks
any  definite  end  or  aim  :  it  is  simply  ever  striving  after
something,  for  in  such  striving  its  whole  essence  lies.
To  look  for  meaning  or  progress  in  life  or  history  is
then  absurd.  "  So  the  subject  of  volition  lies  per-
manently on  the  revolving  wheel  of  Ixion,  pours  for
ever  into  the  Danaids'  sieve,  is  Tantalus  eternally
yearning\"  In  a  word,  Alles  Leben  ist  Leiden.
Whether  Schopenhauer  has  succeeded  better  in  prov-
ing the  good  in  the  world  to  be  negative  than  Leibniz
in  proving  this  of  the  evil  in  it,  is  a  question.  Certainly
if  the  rosy  pictures  of  the  one  are  not  decisive  neither
is  the  gallery  of  horrors  of  the  other.  But  till  Schopen-
hauer's psychology  of  feeling  and  will  is  established,  so
long  his  pessimism  will  lack  the  foundation  upon  which
he  himself  professed  to  rest  it.  This  is  the  point  on
which  I  would  now  insist,  the  point  which  Schopen-
hauer's readers,  carried  away  by  his  masterly  delinea-
tions of  human  ill,  are  only  too  apt  to  overlook.

His  follower,  von  Hartmann,  however  allows —
what  indeed  there  is  no  denying — that  pleasure
and  pain  are  alike  positive,  and  also  that  there  is
progress  and  development  in  the  world  :  he  even
takes  some  trouble  expressly  to  refute  Schopenhauer's
teaching  in  these  respects.  Nevertheless  he  holds
Schopenhauer's  pessimism  to  have  been  in  the  main
justifiable ;  for  he  claims  to  show  that  there  is  a
preponderance  of  evil  in  the  world,  a  preponderance
too that  steadily increases as the world's evolution

^ Welt  als  Wille  und  Vorstellung,  §§  38,  56.


yo/i  Harf))iaiui's  Indiicfious  325

proceeds.  He  professes  to  prove  this,  first  inductively
as  a  fact,  from  an  exhaustive  survey  of  experience ;
and  secondly  deductively,  as  a  necessary  consequence
from  established  psychological  and  ethical  principles.

The  empirical  survey  he  regards  as  essentially  a
matter  of  accounts :  just  as  we  might  proceed  to
ascertain  whether  there  are  more  apples  or  more  pears
on  a  given  table,  so,  he  says,  we  must  proceed  to
strike  a  balance  between  the  amount  of  pleasure  and
the  amount  of  pain  in  the  world  at  a  given  time  ;  and
then,  comparing  successive  balance  sheets,  we  shall  see
which  way  the  world  is  tending-.  Here  again  as  with
Schopenhauer  we  notice  the  failure  to  distinguish
between  pleasure  and  worth  :  the  contented  pig  is
after  all  better  off,  it  would  seem,  than  the  aspiring
philosopher,  since  he  suffers  less.  However,  leaving
this  all-important  distinction  aside  and  keeping  strictly
to  the  question  immediately  raised — Is  the  algebraic
sum  of  pleasure  and  pain  in  the  world  positive  or
ne^^ative  ? — we  have  to  ask  how  this  sum  is  to  be
worked  out.  It  is  not  simply  a  question  of  counting,
as  Hartmanns  trivial  reference  to  apples  and  pears
assumes,  it  is  a  question  of  measuring.  How  are  we
to  find  the  quantity  that  admits  of  common  measure  ?
I  can  think  of  but  one  way.  "  Like  brain  vibrations,"
says  Hartmann,  "call  forth  in  all  indivitluals  like  sen-
sations." At  any  rate  there  is  a  fundamental  continuity
in  all  protoplasm,  so  that  like  functions  have  everywhere
like  characteristics.  Regarded  from  this  side  pains  an-
but  the  subjective  concomitant  of  disinrbcd  function  :
already  the  physiologist  can  fretjuently  estimate  the
amount  of  this  disturbance,  and  as  knowledge  advances


326 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Pessimism

physiology  will  doubtless  become  more  and  more  a
quantitative  science.  All  the  pain  in  the  world  seems
unquestionably  correlated  to  physiological  process,  of
which  protoplasm  is  the  common  basis.  Here  then,
I  say,  there  does  seem  to  be  some  chance  of  working
out  Hartmann's  hedonistic  balance  sheet.  But  aeain
from  the  physiological  standpoint  it  is  unquestionable
that  pain  as  disturbance  of  function  is  abnormal,  the
exception  rather  than  the  rule.  Pleasure  in  general
tends  to  enhance  and  promote  life,  pain  to  diminish
and  extinguish  it.  If  the  abnormal  really  prepon-
derated, were  in  fact  the  normal,  the  world  could
hardly  have  advanced  so  far.  The  most  hopeful
method  for  his  purpose  then  can  hardly  justify  the
conclusion  to  which Hartmann  professes  to  be  led.

But  he  preferred  to  work  from  the  subjective
standpoint :  here,  however,  he  acknowledges  two  un-
deniable difficulties.  Let  us  see  how  he  meets  them.
First,  the  estimate  of  the  pure  pleasure-pain  total  of
two  subjective  states  is  more  uncertain  the  more  diverse
they  are.  Accordingly  he  proposes  '  as  far  as  possible  '
to  leave  such  comparisons  aside  and  to  be  content  with
'  a  special  balance  '  for  each  class  of  feelings  separately.
"  If  now,"  he  winds  up  by  saying,  "  it  turns  out  that
every  one  of  these  classes  apart  yields  a  negative
result,  all  need  for  an  estimation  of  one  against  the
other  is  entirely  avoided  :  since  all  the  negative  special
results  simply  add  up  to  a  negative  total."  //^all  turn
out  as  supposed  this  is  beautifullysimple,  of  course:  there
seems  no  need  even  to  add  ;  and,  by  the  way,  adding
is  still  impossible  without  a  common  unit.  But  then,
so  far  as  I  can  learn,  neither  Hartmann  nor  anyone


Hciicviistic  '  Bahnice-s/iccfs  '  327

else  has  ever  so  much  as  attempted  to  work  these
special  sums^  But  secondly,  there  is  'the  still  greater
difficulty '  of  estimatinof  the  sensations  of  different  sub-
jects,  one  against  the  other.  To  avoid  this,  however,
we  are  told  again,  is  easy:  ''one  strikes  the  personal
balance  of  his  life  for  every  individual,  and  since  all
come  out  negative,  one  has  only  to  add  them  up  to
reach  the  universal  world-balance."  The  preliminary
'if"  is  here  dispensed  with  and  the  result  straightway
assumed.  Identifying  the  supposed  solubility  of  the
question  with  its  actual  solution  in  favour  of  pessimism,
Hartmann  expresses  surprise  that  empirical  pessimism
is  nevertheless  combated  so  much.  But  this  opposition
is  partly  explicable,  he  thinks,  '  from  the  psychological
motives  and  the  sources  of  error  incident  to  the  working
out  of  each  one's  own  balance"!'  A  good  specimen
this  of  that  charming  naivetd,  for  which  Hartmann  is
unsurpassed.  Remembering  thai  Harimann  elsewhere
has  thought  it  advisable  to  "  meet  the  suspicion  that
his  pessimistic  proclivities  are  du(,'  to  a  gloomy  personal
experience,  by  means  of  a  j^leasant  little  sketch  of  his
home  life,  lit  up  by  the  presence  of  a  sympathetic  wife,
of  a  beautiful  engaging  boy... and  of  a  few  congenial
friends\"  one  naturally  wonders  how  tar  '  j)sychological
motives,'  how  far  the  inevitable  'errors'  contrii)uted  to

•  The  superficial  character  of  tlic  sumiiKiry  which  Hartmami's
disciple,  A.  Drews,  gives  of  this  'empirical  proof  of  pessimism  is
notew(jrthy.  Cf.  his  Eduard  von  Hartmann  s  philosophisches  System
im  Grundriss,  2te  Ausg.,  1906,  j)]).  320 2.

■  "/ur  Vcssun\sm\xv,Vrai^i:"  JVii/oso/>/iisc/ie  Monati/if/tf,\\\.  79  f
Italics  mine.  This  article  is  republished  in  Hartmann's  rhilosophische
/fit/rai^en.

*  Sully,  Pessimism,  ist  edn,  p.  i  1.}.


328 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Pessimism

perturb  his  balance. At  any  rate  he  provides  himself
with  an  interesting  dilemma.

We  may  now  inquire  whether Hartmann  is  more
convincing  when he attempts to deduce pessimism
from  psychological  principles. Here  he  is  substantially
at  one  with  Schopenhauer  and  we  may  deal  with  both
together. Both  alike  on  the  one  hand  confound  all
psychical  activity  with  will  and  on  the  other  identify
will  exclusively  with  desire. In  the  first  sense  both
presentation  and  feeling  would  presuppose  will,  since
they  both  imply  psychical  activity  or  life. But  the
converse  would  be  true  when  will  is  restricted  to  the
narrower  sense  of  desire. Desire  does  not  merely  give
rise  to  feeling  ;  it  also  presupposes  it ;  we  do  not  want
and  then  feel  pain,  but  rather  feel  pain  and  then  and
there  want  its  removal. Further  and  more  important —
so  far  as  feeling  is  antecedent  to  pursuit — there  may
be  pleasurable  feelings  which  cannot  be  what  Schopen-
hauer called  negative,  the  mere  filling  up  of  a  want,  for
they may  come  without  our  striving  and  be  wholly
unforeseen. We  do  not  need  to  cite  only  such  rare
cases  of  good  fortune  as  unexpected  legacies  or  sudden
unearned  increments  :  there  are  few  lives  without  any
agreeable  disappointments,  any  halcyon  days,  golden
opportunities,  or  runs  of  luck. It  is  not  only  the  lilies
of  the  field  that  are  clothed,  though  they  toil  not  neither
do  they  spin. Finally — and  as  the  fundamental  fact
in  the  whole  matter — spontaneity  and  an  unimpeded
energy,  that  is  for  a  time  at  least  self-sustaining,  are
sources  of  pleasure  and  well  being  to  most  creatures
during  a  large  part  of  their  lives,  quite  apart  from  desire
or  antecedent  pain. In  a  word  absolute  privation,  like


Pain,  Desire  and  J  J 'ill  329

absolute  negation.  Is  unthinkable  :  the  world  cannot
begin  in  utter  bankruptcy  without  any  assets.  Hart-
mann's  initial  state  of  the  Absolute  as  empty  will  is
the  most  glaring  contradiction  of  a  writer  who  has
perpetrated  more  absurdities  than  any  other  writer  of
repute  that  I  know.  How,  it  has  been  often  asked,
can  the  Absolute  lack  anything  ?  And  how  too.  we
may  add.  can  the  hnite  Many,  if  parts  of  the  Absolute,
lack  everything  ?  Only  to  him  that  hath  can  be  given  :
we  cannot  therefore  equate  life  with  privation,  resolve
all  activity  into  desire  nor  all  pleasure  into  the  mere
cessation  of  the  pain  to  which  unsatisfied  desire  gives
rise.

But  it  is  not  even  true  that  wherever  there  is  desire
there  is  pain.  The  huntsman,  for  example,  only  desires
to  catch  the  fox  because  of  the  pleasure  of  the  pursuit ;
and.  in  general,  we  account  that  man  happy  who  can
follow  his  favourite  pursuit  ;  for  "  it  is  not  the  goal,  but
the  course  which  makes  us  happy,"  as  Jean  Paul  Richter
said.  Still  without  'progressive  attainment'  there  would
be  no  pleasure  in  pursuit'  ;  and  if  will  were  nothing  but
desire,  we  should  be  as  much  at  the  mercy  of  vain
desires,  as  Schopenhauer  and  von  Hartmann  suppose.
But  grown  men  are  not  the  slaves  of  endless  whimsies,
they  are  not  (;vcr  crying  for  the  moon  like  a  spoiled
child.  Again,  strictly  speaking,  to  will  is  not  to  desire
but  rather  to  control  desires  :  its  sphere  is  possible
action  and  its  essential  characteristic,  even  according
to  Schopenhauer,  is  not  w.uii  but  energy.  "  W'e  exist
only  as  we  energise  ;  pleasiwe  is  the  reflex  of  unimpeded

'  To  have  insisted  on  this  point,  ovcrlcjokcd  by  Sitlj^wick,  is  a
merit  of  Professor  Mackenzie's  Manual  of  I'ltliics;  ff.  cli.  vi.  Note  i.


330 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Pessimism

energy  ;  energy  is  the  ineans  by  which  our  faculties  are
developed  ;  and  a  higher  energy  the  ^/^^f  which  develop-
ment proposes.  I  n  action  is  thus  contained  the  existence,
happiness,  improvement  and  perfection  of  our  being\"
These  words  of  Hamilton  are  but  an  echo  of  the  teach-
ing of  Aristotle,  with  which  the  teaching  of  Kant  and
Fichte  had  much  in  common.  But  now  it  was  from
Kant  and  Fichte  that  Schopenhauer  and  von  Hartmann
derived  their  doctrine  of  the  primacy  of  will,  a  doctrine
incompatible,  as  we  have  seen,  with  the  identification
of  will  and  desire.  Unless  this  identification  is  true,
the  pessimism  is  groundless,  which  they  rest  upon  it.
The  question  of  its  truth  or  falsity  is  one  for  psychology,
and  I  can  only  say  that  I  do  not  know  of  a  single
psychologist  who  would  uphold  it.

In  spite  of  pluming  themselves  on  the  inductive
and  scientific  character  of  their  method,  Schopenhauer
and  von  Hartmann  have  perhaps  surpassed  the  most
'  romantic  '  of  their  countrymen  in  the  wildness  of  their
metaphysical  speculations  :  here,  if  anywhere,  we  have
mysticism  and  mythology  in  excelsis.  And  it  is  in
these  metaphysical  speculations  that  their  identification
of  will  with  blind  desire,  and  the  consequent  complete
separation  between  will  and  idea,  work  out  their  own
refutation.  Let  error  but  develop  a  outrance  and  it
explodes  itself.  This  truth,  which,  as  we  shall  see,  is
for  Hartmann  the  golden  thread  of  his  pessimism,
applies — as  perhaps  it  ought  to  do — to  his  own  meta-
physics. "If  will  as  such  is  blind  how  shall  it  in
willing  come  by  sight  ?  If  as  will  it  is  endless,  irrational
impulse,  how  shall  it  in  willing  be  other  than  just  as
'  Sir  ^V.  Hamilton,  Disacssions  on  Philosophy,  etc.,  p.  40.


Hartmami s  quest iois  to  ScJiopoiJiaucr 331

endless  and  irrational  ?  How  shall  what  is  aimless  set
to  work  to  give  itself  an  aim'  ?  "  These  are  the  ques-
tions which  Hartmann  addresses  to  Schopenhauer,  and
which  he  rightly  enough  maintains  Schopenhauer  did
not  and  could  not  answer.

Let  us  see  how  he  answers  them  himself.  Schopen-
hauer, he  says,  failed  to  reach  the  rational  ;  Hegel,  to
reach  the  real.  By  combining  the  Paiithelismus  of
the  one  with  the  Panlozisvms  of  the  other,  Hartmann
claims  to  have  corrected  the  one-sidedness  of  both  ;
and  thus,  in  place  of  an  Absolute  that  is  only  W'ill  or
only  Idea,  to  reach  an  Absolute  Spirit  of  which  both
will  and  idea  are  the  attributes.  The  only  objection
he  finds  to  calling  this  Absolute  Spirit  God,  as  Spinoza
did,  "lies  in  the  exclusively  religious  origin"  of  tliat
term.  Such  an  all-powerful,  all-wise  Being  could,  if
he  would,  we  should  suppose,  create  a  world  that  is
not  only  the  best  possible  but  absolutely  good,  not  a
world,  that,  though  the  best  possible,  is  irretrievably
bad.  How  came  Hartmann.  who  seems  to  begin  by
agreeing  so  far  with  the  optimist's  views  concerning
God  and  the  world,  nevertheless  to  end  by  siding  with
the  pessimist  ?  Unlike  Leibniz  and  theists  generally,
Hartmann,  as  is  fitting  in  a  romantic  philosopher,
starts  his  philosophy  not  with  a  theology  but  with  a
theogony.  Here  we  shall  find  the  answer  to  our  (jues-
tions.  r)efore  time  was — filled  time  that  is  to  say —
Thought  or  the  Idea  in  the  Absolute  was  only  'latent'
and  could  not  of  itself  pass  over  into  actual  existence,
and Will was  only potential, had oiil)- the capacity

'  "Ueber  die  nothwcndigc  Umbildiin^;  dcr  Schoptnliaiarschcn
Philosophic,"  Philosophisclic  Mottatslujk, 1867, 11. p. 4^>5-


332 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Pessimism

of  willing  or  not  willing  'according  to  circumstances.'
How  there  can  be  circumstances  where  there  is  no
actual  being  we  will  not  stop  to  inquire.  Actual
willing  requires  a  content  and  this  only  the  Idea  can
give — the  si^ie  qua  non  of  actual  willing  thus  lies  outside
of  the  Will  as  such.  But  in  that  case  how  with  only
pure  latency  on  the  one  side  and  only  pure  potentiality
on  the  other  did  actual  willing  ever  arise  ?  A  single  bare
possibility  cannot  advance  to  reality,  how  is  the  case
mended  if  there  are  two  ?

Here  is  the  Achilles'  heel  of  all  Absolutist  specula-
tion as  it  appears  in  the  speculation  of  Hartmann,  The
jump  into  existence  that  he  denies  to  Hegel's  Idea  is,
he  thinks,  less  of  a  jump  in  the  case  of  Will,  to  which,
after  all,  '  initiative  '  essentially  belongs.  Between  the
state  of  rest — and  blessedness — of  the  mere  potentiality
to  will  or  not  and  actual,  determinate,  willing  with  a  con-
tent, there  comes  'empty  willing,'  the  mere  initiative
of  willing  to  will — a  state  of  "  absolute  unblessedness,
torment  without  pleasure  and  without  pause."  And
now,  since  W^ill  and  Idea  are  both  but  attributes  of
the  same  Absolute  Spirit,  the  Idea  cannot  for  a
moment  withhold  itself  or  escape  when  the  empty
Will  lays  violent  hands  upon  it.  But  if  the  empty
Will  can  thus  secure  its  object  the  instant  the  impulse
arises,  why  lay  stress  on  its  ceaseless  and  infinite  pain,
what  ground  is  there  for  extending  pessimism  even  to
the  Absolute.'^  It  is  in  answer  to  this  question  that
Schopenhauer  speaks  through  Hartmann.  Will  is
everywhere  infinite,  so  it  is  necessarily  insatiable ;
since  a  completed  infinite  is  logically  impossible,  is
a  content  therefore  that  the  Idea  cannot  supply. Let


Hartiuauifs  T/icogony  and  Cosmogony 333

the  world  be  never  so  good,  and  it  is  the  best  possible,
yet  beyond  the  world,  for  God  himself,  there  is  only
absolute  pain  and  unblessedness.  This  can  only  cease
when  the  willing  to  will  itself  ceases.

It  is  God  then  who  more  even  than  the  world
needs  deliverance  from  evil.  Even  granting,  as
Hartmann  maintains,  that  this  willing  to  will  on  the
part  of  the  Absolute  was  a  piece  of  absolute  stupidity —
and  if  stupid  at  all,  we  must  perhaps  assume  that  the
Absolute  is  absolutely  stupid — still,  since  it  is  just  as
truly  absolutely  wise\  will  it  then  not  at  once  retrieve
the  blunder  ?  At  least  it  wi/l  retrieve  it,  Hartmann
assures  us.  But  how  often  do  we  find  that  a  momentary
folly  on  the  part  of  one  person  takes  another  years  to
undo !  The  Absolute  is  in  a  like  predicament :  the
whole  world  must  run  its  course  before  the  divine  fall
can  be  redeemed  and  the  blind  aimless  will  cease  from
troubling  and  be  again  at  rest.  This  purely  negative
outcome  is  the  supreme  goal  of  the  world  as  a  realm
of  ends.  Puit  "  how  shall  what  is  aimless  set  to  work  to
give  itself  an  end?"  was,  as  we  have  seen,  the  question
Hartmann  proposed  to  Schopenhauer.

And  now  at  length  we  reach  his  own  answer:  W'ere
the  Absolute  only  Will  the  thing  would  be  impc^ssible  ;
but  it  is  also  Idea  and  as  such  provides  the  end.  Like
Hegel  he  believes  in  the  "absolute  cunning  of  reason.'
The  Idea  is  powerless  to  resist  the  sort  of  rapt-,  which
he  supjJO.ses  the  will t(j  perpetrate, but it lakes  care

'  The  remark  that  used  to  be  made  of  Charles  II.,  "he  never
said  a  fooUsh  thin^;  and  never  did  a  wise  one,"  seems  true  also
of  the  Absokite,  according  to  Hartmann.  .Xs  Will  it  is  absolutely
stupid,  as Idea  absolutely  wise.


334 T^^^^  Problem  of  Evil  and  Pessiiuisni

that  at  least  the  offspring  shall  be  such  as  to  put  a
term  to  the  paternal  folly.  For  though  "the  world
gets  its  '  that '  from  the  father,  its  '  what '  and  '  how  '
come  from  its  mother"  says  Hartmann,  adopting  an
old  conceit  of  Goethe's,  which  Schopenhauer  professed
to  explain^  It  does  not  concern  us  now  to  examine  in
detail  this  process  of  deliverance  from  evil,  '  evolutional
optimism'  as  Hartmann  had  the  effrontery  to  call  it:
enouofh  to  note  that  its  one  essential  feature  is  the
evolution  of  self-conscious  beings  whose  wills  are  not
blind  and  aimless.  These,  as  they  advance  in  intel-
ligence, must  realise  more  and  more  distinctly  the
irrationality  of  the  positive  will  to  be,  and — as  negative
will  not  to  be — must  finally  suppress  it.  Hartmann  is
frank  enough  to  confess  that  no  apocalyptic  vision  of
the  final  scene  has  been  vouchsafed  him  ;  so  he  can
only  vaguely  conjecture  under  what  conditions  it  would
even  be  possible".  One  preliminary,  however,  is  certain:
the  world  must  first  be  reduced  to  a  state  of  rational
despair.  From  beginning  to  end  suffering  has  prepon-
derated to  an  ever  increasing  extent,  God  himself  or
the  Absolute  Spirit  being  the  greatest  sufferer  of  all.
Only  through  this  climax  of  despair  is  release  possible  ;

'  Philosophie  des  Utibeivussten,  6te  Aus.  1876,  p.  796.

^  Needless  to  say,  the  supposed  conditions  are  improbable  in  the
extreme.  Hartmann  has  dilated  at  length  on  'the  three  stages  of
illusion '  through  which  the  intelligent  world  must  pass  before  it
realises  that  positive  happiness  is  unattainable.  His  one  remaining
consolation,  that  at  least  the  world  can  then  will  itself  out  of  existence,
has  been  aptly  called  by  a  rival  pessimist,  Bahnsen,  'the  fourth  stage
of  illusion.'  But  for  Hartmann,  who  begins  by  setting  aside  the  first
half  of  the  old  ontological  maxim.  Ex  tiihiio  nihil  fit,  there  can  be
no  difficulty  in  setting  aside  the  second,  Li  tiihilo  nil  posse  revcrti.


Hayfniainis  '  Evolufioial  Opfi))iis)ir 335

and  the  world  with  this  as  its  goal  was  devised  by  the
divine  Wisdom  as  the  one  means  of  effectincr  its  own
deliverance.

And  when  the  end  comes,  what  then  ?  The  will
of  the  Absolute  is  reduced  again  to  the  state  of  pure
potentiality  to  be  sure,  but  ii  has  learnt  nothing  ;  for
it  is  altoijether  devoid  of  intclliefence.  It  mav  then
instantly  repeat  its  '[onw(i\:  faux  pas  :  also  it  ma)- not.
In  place  of  the  existing  certainty  of  evil,  there  will  be
an  even  chance  of  its  non-recurrence  ;  and  this,  says
Hartmann,  is  "  a  gain  not  to  be  despised,"  When  a
cheerful  medieval  sinner  was  being  borne  away  by  the
devil  at  the  end  of  his  earthly  career,  he  is  said  to  have
exclaimed  :

Even  so,  of  course,  it  might  have  been  yet  worse :
For,  though  now,  as  you  see,  he's  carrying  me,
An  it  pleased  old  Harry, I'd  had  him  to  carry.

An  optimist  of  this  sort  was  the  pessimist,  Kduard  \-on
Hartmann.

It  is  but  a  step  froni  the  sublime  to  th(;  ridiculous  ;
and  this  pessimism  would  certainly  strike  the  stoutest
heart  with  terror  if  it  did  not  at  once  strike  every  sane
mind  as  nonsensical.  The  very  superlluity  of  its
naughtiness  embarrasses  the  critic.  P)Ut  one  point  at
least  stands  out  clear:  the  supposed  y^///.v /<zj>  of  the
Absolute  is  simply  Hartmann's  oww  faux  pas  \  and,  as
I  hinted  at  th('  (jutset,  the  one  like-  the  other  is  its  own
undoing.  llartmann  has  not  synthesized  liegel's
Alxsolute  with  .Schopenhauer's  :  he  has  sim|)l\'  set
them  over  against  each  other  in  irreconcilable  conflict,
so  soon  and  so  long  as  they  are  at  all.  (  )iil\  while
they  are b.ire possibilities and actually nothing can


33^ The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Pessimism

they  be  said  to  agree.  Anyone,  to  whom  it  does  not
seem  meaningless,  may  regard  them  in  this  non-existent
state  as  '  subsisting '  in  a  single  substance,  but  the
moment  they  exist  their  incompatibility  makes  any
real  unity  impossible,  to  say  nothing  of  unity  in  one
and  the  same  spirit.  The  subtlest  modal  distinction
or  secundum  qiiid  will  not  avail  to  bring  contradictories
into  simple  unity,  least  of  all  the  unity  of  an  absolute
Spirit  who  may  be  called  God.  Hartmann's  God  qua
willing  and  absolutely  irrational  and  his  God  qua
thinking  and  absolutely  rational  may  be  two  Gods
perhaps,  or  God  and  something  else  ;  but  one  God
simply  it  cannot  be.  Instead  of  le  Dieu  m^chant  of
Manichaeism,  what  Hartmann  gives  us,  as  Secretan
happily  put  it\  is  the  still  greater  absurdity  of  un
Dieu  bete.  The  dualism  into  which  he  is  driven  in
spite  of  himself  comes  out  clearly  in  the  fine  ethical
appeal  that  he  makes  to  us  to  sympathize  and  co-
operate with  God  in  effecting  his  redemption  and  our
own.  But  surely  we  cannot  sympathize  with  a  God
who  is  the  source  of  all  evil ;  certainly  we  cannot
cooperate  with  such  a  God.  Moreover  Hartmann
makes  a  point  of  maintaining  that  for  the  existence
of  the  world  a  "  God  as  such  "  is  not  responsible  :  in
this,  he  says,  lies  the  superiority  of  his  philosophy  over
that  of  the  ordinary  theist.  That  a  mind  daring — or
shall  we  say,  rash — enough  to  start  from  nothing  or
the  other  side  of  being  and  show  how  God  came  to  be
could  not  manage  to  reach  a  better  theogony  is  sur-
prising. Nevertheless  Hartmann  maintains  that  his
speculation  has  a  scientific  basis.  The  truth  is  that
^  Revue  philosophique^  1883,  xv.  395.


HarfjiKvuis  Scheme  of  Rcdoiiptioii 337

it  rests  on  the  bad  psychology  of  will  which  he  inherited
from  his  master,  Schopenhauer ;  and. as  I  have  said,  in  de-
veloping that  errors?  ^/^/n?;/fd:  he  has  furnished  the  most
telling  refutation  of  their  common  pessimism  :  he  has
imitated  his  Absolutes  suicide,  as  Bradley  would  say.

The  odd  thing  is  that  almost  at  the  close  of  his
chief  work  Hartmann  explicitly  recognises  the  truth
that  he  began by  implicitly  denying. "  There  is  no

doubt,"  he  says,  "that  a  particular  volition  in  man

can  be  suppressed  by  the  influence  of  conscious  reason,"
not  indeed  directly  but  by  the  suggestion  of  counter
motives'. And without this truth,  as he expressly
allows,  his  whole  scheme  of  redemption  would  become
quite  impossible. But  all  volition  is  particular  volition  :
volition  of  nothing  in  particular  or  empty  volition  is
surely  a  veritable  chimaera. If  the  imperfect  reason  of
man  can sometimes  control the  will,  whv  should  this
never  be  possible  for  the  all-perfect  reason  of  God  }
Because  God  is  the Unconscious,  perhaps  one  might
expect  Hartmann  to  repK'. lUit  no,  God  is  omniscient,
possessed  of  an  intellectual intuition  equivalent  to  an
absolute  clairvoyance not  only of  this world and all
that  is  therein  but  of  all  possible  worlds  besides. Only
to  differentiate  this  '  Over-consciousness '  from  all  such
consciousness as we can conceive is the term '  the
Unconscious' 'temporally' applied lo it. It is the
absolute  Initiative  of  the  primordial  Will  that  prevents
the divine Reason from influencing  it. Ilu,'  fateful
deed is done before that Reason emerges from its
pristine latency. By what good fortiuH- then, we
may  ask,  does  this  Will,  '  unenlightened l)y  a  single

■ Op.  at.,  \^.  768.

w.  22


33^ The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Pessimism

ray  of  rational  intelligence '  out  of  all  the  possible
worlds  lying  latent  in  the  Idea,  realise  precisely  that
one  that  is  the  best  ?  This  is  substantially  the  question
already  mentioned,  which  Hartmann  addressed  in  vain
to  Schopenhauer,  and  it  now  becomes  clear  that  he  can
give  no  satisfactory  answer  to  it  himself.  The  fact
that  there  is  a  world  at  all  he  attributes,  as  we  have
seen,  to  absolute  chance.  The  fact  that  it  is  the  best
possible  can  have  for  him  no  better  ground,  so  long
as  he  refuses  to  extend  to  reason  that  influence  over
will  in  the  creation  of  the  world,  which  he  allows  is
essential  to  its  evolution  when  created.  In  a  word
intellectual  intuition  and  a  blind  will  cannot  be  con-
joined. Again  as  severally  but  possibilities  they  can
effect  nothing.  It  is  an  error  long  since  exploded  that
bare  possibilities  can  precede  all  actuality.  So  then
there  is  no  empty  will ;  and  no  will  with  a  content  can
be  called  blind.  Thus  we  are  entitled  to  conclude  that,
while  their  empirical  pessimism  is  not  proven,  the  so-
called  '  metaphysical  pessimism  '  of  Schopenhauer  and
Hartmann  has  no  basis  in  experience  and  is  but  a  bad
dream.


LECTURE XVI.

THE PROBLEM OF EVIL AND OPTIMISM.

The  two  leading  systems  of  pessimism,  which  on
account  of  their  wide  vogue,  seemed  to  challenge  our
attention,  deserve — most  of  you,  I  think,  will  allow —
the  title  of  irrational  philosophies,  which  Windelband,
a  very  fair  and  able  historian  of  philosophy,  has  re-
cently assigned  to  the  chief  of  them.  We  may,  then,
now  turn  from  these  to  consider  whether  other  and
less  sweeping  indictments  against  the  constitution  of
the  universe  can  be  better  sustained.

First  of  all  it  is  especially  important,  not  only  as
bearing  on  our  present  problem,  but  also  for  the  sake  of
our  whole  discussion,  to  examine  the  dogma,  already  re-
ferred to  as  the  basis  of  optimism  and  pessimism  alike —
the  dogma,  I  mean,  that  an  ideally  perfect  world  would
be  one  in  which  from  first  to  last,  permanently  antl
universally,  there  was  unmixed  happiness  ;  in  which
physical  and  moral  evil  were  alike  unknown.  iUit
only  if  complete  happiness  were  the  sole  v.n(.\  of  ihe
world  would  its  continuous  and  universal  presence
prove  that  the  world  was  perfect ;  antl  perfect  simj)Iy
because  of  that.  Ilere  then  there  is  a  manifest  as-
sumption, for  if  hap])iness /tv  sc  were  the  one  supreme
good,  any  conduct  that  conduced  lo  il  would  Ix*  so  lar

22  —  2


340 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  OptUnism

justified  and  would  be  otherwise  without  any  justifica-
tion. The  only  standard  of  right  would  be  the  hedon-
istic one.  That  happiness  is  involved  as  a  positive
constituent  of  the  supreme  end,  only  the  thorough-
going pessimist  would  have  the  hardihood  to  deny.
But  that  happiness  per  se  is  not  the  end  as  such,
hedonists  themselves  unwittingly  allow  in  accepting
what  Sidgwick  called  the  *  fundamental  paradox  of
hedonism.'  "  The  impulse  towards  pleasure,  if  too
predominant,  defeats  its  own  aim,"  he  says\  Pleasure
may  come  unsought  but  to  get  it  we  must  forget  it.
But  now  by  '  aim  '  or  end  in  this  connexion — practical
end,  that  is  to  say — we  mean  something  that  we  aim
at,  that  we  actively  strive  to  accomplish,  the  consum-
mation of  some  definite  purpose  towards  which  we
direct  our  efforts.  Hence  the  literal  meaning  of  sin
as  a/xa/DTta  or  missing  the  mark,  on  which  theologians
love  to  dwell.  Grant  that  pleasure  is  not  the  mark,
but  only  the  satisfaction  felt  on  attaining  it,  and  there
is  no  paradox  ;  but  insist  that  pleasure  is  verily  what
we  aim  at,  then  to  maintain  that  we  are  not  to  aim  at
what  we  are  all  the  while  really  aiming  at  is  surely
something  more  than  a  paradox.

Clearly  too  in  that  case,  as  Sidgwick  somewhat
naively  observes,  "  if  we  started  with  no  impulse
except  the  desire  of  pleasure,  it  might  seem  difficult
to  execute  the  practical  paradox  of  attaining  pleasure
by  aiming  at  something  else"."  It  might  indeed;  but
I  think  we  may  go  further  and  say  that  with  such  a
complete  inversion  of  the  order  of  nature  the  difficulty

^  Methods  of  Ethics,  6th  edn,  p.  48.
'  Op.  cit.  p.  137.


The  'Hedonistic  Paradox'  341

would,  in  fact,  prove  insuperable.  The  anticipation
of  a  state  of  feelinq^  that  would  be  the  same,  no
matter  how  it  was  attained,  could  never  give  rise  to
definite  acts  at  all.  Thus  a  subject  animated  solely  by
the  '  mere  desire  of  pleasure '  would  never  get  under
weigh  :  but  such  a  being  is  quite  inconceivable.  Por
experience,  as  already  said,  could  never  begin  from
a  state  of  absolute  privation,  nor  with  the  representa-
tion of  something  in  the  future  while  as  yet  there  was
nothing  definite  in  the  present.  Vet  Sidgwick  was  of
opinion  that  "  even  supposing  a  man  to  begin  with
absolute  indifference  to  everything  but  his  own  plea-
sure, it  does  not  follow  that  if  he  were  convinced  that
the  possession  of  other  desires  and  impulses  were
necessary  to  the  attainment  of  the  greatest  possible
pleasure,  he  could  not  succeed  in  producing  these."
Unfortunately  Sidgwick  makes  no  attempt  even  to
suggest  hypothetically  how  such  a  being,  who  obviously
could  not  be  a  man,  would  set  about  this  task'.

.Sidgwick  contents  himself  with  saying  :  "  Rut  this
supposition  is  never  actually  realised.  F.very  man,
when  he  commences  the  task  of  systematising  his
conduct... is  conscious  of  a  number  of  different  im-
pulses and  tendencies  within  him,  (^thcr  than  the  mere
desire  of  pleasure...  :  so  that  he  has  only  to  place
himself  under  certain  external  intluences,  and  these
desires  and  impulses  will  begin  to  ()j)erale  without  any
effort  of  will'." To  the  biologist  or  the  psychologist

'  .Such  a  being  would  closely  resemble  the  blind  will  of  Schopen-
hauer or  von  Hartmann  and  doubtless  would  end  by  being  a  pessimist.
Indeed  we  may  say  that  it  was  the  underlying  hedonism  of  .Schopen-
hauer and  von  Hartmann  that  led  to  their  iKssimism.

'  Op.  cit.  p.  137.


342 TJie  Problem  of  Evil  and  Optimism

even  this  statement  must  sound  like  a  parody  of  the
real  facts  of  life.  A  mere  aggregate  of  organs  does
not  make  an  organism,  nor  does  a  number  of  merely
different  functions  or  impulses  make  life.  Again  a
living  being  does  not  first  exist  aloof  from  its  environ-
ment and  then  '  have  to  place  itself  under  external
influences '  in  order  that  its  life  may  begin.  When
a  man  '  commences  the  task  of  systematising  his  con-
duct on  principle '  he  is  already  a  definite  individual,
already  organically  related  to  a  definite  environment :
in  a  word  his  life  is  already  a  '  system,'  so  that  in
advancing  from  the  natural  plane  of  behaviour  to  the
rational  he  only  develops  further  what  is  already  there.
There  is  meaning  and  system  in  his  behaviour  at  both
levels  :  can  we  then  suppose  that  there  is  no  sort  of
connexion  or  continuity  between  the  two  '^.  And  if
there  is  any  connexion  or  continuity  between  them
how  can  the  psychological  character  of  their  ends  be
fundamentally  distinct  ?  This  is  a  point  that  it  will
repay  us  to  consider  a  little  more  closely.

Since  the  publication  of  Butler's  famous  sermons
on  Hzmtan  Nature,  if  not  before,  our  moralists  have
admitted  what  rightly  understood  is  indisputable,  viz.,
that  on  the  lower  plane  of  animal  life,  the  various
springs  of  action  are  severally  '  extra-regarding  or
disinterested '  and  in  a  sense,  '  blind '  ;  but  that  in
proportion  as  a  '  self-regarding  and  interested '  spring
of  action  develops,  controlling  these — such  as  self-love
so-called — a  higher  level  of  life  is  attained,  one  charac-
terised by  rational  insight  and  unity  of  purpose.  The
implication  is  that  whereas  those  various  'propensions  '
are,  so  to  say,  automatic  and  spontaneous,  self-love  is


'Extra-regarding'  and  'Sc/f-regardiiig' 34 -^


o


autonomous  and  deliberate  :  t/ity  sugij^est  a  sentient
organism,  t/iis  presupposes  a  controlling  and  self-
conscious  mind.  But  the  terminology  employed  is
apt  to  mislead.  On  the  one  side  we  have  a  system
of  extra-regarding,  blind,  and  indifferent  impulses  ;  on
the  other  a  single  self-regarding,  foreseeing,  and  in-
terested person  :  on  the  one  side,  objective  ends  without
a  self;  on  the  other,  a  self  without  any  objective  end.
Now  surely  in  all  this  there  is  too  much  antithesis,
the  contrasts  are  too  extreme  ;  so  that  not  only  the
advance  from  the  one  level  to  the  other,  which
nowadays  at  any  rate  is  conceded,  becomes  altogether
inexplicable,  but  both  as  t/icy  stand  are  beset  with
contradictions.

We  may  see  this  best  by  starting  from  the  higher.
The  end  of  self-love  is  said  to  be  happiness,  a  con-
tinuous subjective  state  of  pleasant  feeling.  But  the
self  that  we  love  is  presumably  the  self  that  we  know,
and  that  certainly  does  not  live  by  feeling  alone.  Nor
is  it  absolutely  identical  with  the  self  that  loves,  in
such  wise  that — disregarding  grammar — we  might  say
I  love  I,  or — concealing  the  breach  of  grammatical
concord — John  loves  John.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  out
of  barren  identities  nothing  can  come.  The  self  that
I  love,  that  is  the  self  that  I  know,  is  my  self  holding
intercourse,  having  reciprocal  relations,  with  a  com-
munity of  c///^;' selves  and  with  an  environment  to  an
indehnite  extent  resolvable  into  selves.  So  essential
are  these  relations  of  other  selves  to  my  self,  of  the
objective  to  the  subjective,  that  wiihouL  ihcin  not  only
w(HjId  the  all-imj)oriani  jjossessive  '  my  '  disajjinar  for
lack  of  its  correlatives,  but  the  possessing  I  too  wouKl


344 ^^^^  Problem  of  Evil  and  Optimism

become  as  meaningless  as  the  centre  of  a  circle  that
had  no  circumference.  With  no  '  content '  to  be
conscious  of,  it  could  know  nothing,  feel  nothing,  and
do  nothing :  such  a  bare  I  would  thus  be  worth  nothing.
Consciousness  or  experience  then  is  not  purely  sub-
jective, is  not  simply  a  state.  It  implies  also  an
objective  factor,  that  is  certain  ;  and  it  implies  further
the  reciprocal  interaction  of  subject  and  object,  self
and  not-self.

But  till  one's  knowledge  of  others  has  advanced
some  way  self-consciousness,  the  knowledge  of  one's
self,  cannot  begin.  Definite  objective  knowledge  in
turn  arises  only  along  with  definite  subjective  interests,
so  that  apart  from  such  interests  there  would  be  no
knowledge  of  self  and  so  no  interest  in  self,  such  as
self-love  or  the  desire  of  one's  own  happiness  assumes.
Briefly  then,  self-consciousness  or  knowledge  of  self
presupposes  consciousness  or  knowledge  of  objects,
and  this  again  presupposes  interests  in  objects.
We  may  call  such  interests  extra-regarding  not  self-
regarding,  so  far  as  they  are  distinct  from  the  interest
in  self  But  here  two  points  are  important.  First,
interest  in  self  is  secondary  and  presupposes  these
primary  interests  ;  alone  it  would  be  empty  and  mean-
ingless. Secondly,  as  interests  of  the  self,  without
which  there  could  be  no  interest  i7i  self,  these  primary
interests  cannot  be  called  disinterested  in  the  literal
sense  of  unselfish :  interests  without  a  self  would  again
be  a  manifest  contradiction.  They  are  then  the
interests  of  a  self,  though  a  self  as  yet  without  know-
ledge of  itself,  and  so  without  any  reflex  interest  in
itself,  in  other  words,  without  any  self-conscious  interest


Pleasure  never  itself  the  Eml 34-


3


in  its  interests.  These  primar\-  interests  or  ends
are  objective,  but  not  in  the  sense  in  wliich  the  end
of  a  watch — to  use  Butler's  illustration — is  objec-
tive ;  they  are  not  merely  the  ends  of  another,  they
are  the  ends  of  a  conscious  self.  So  then  the  end  of
the  .^•^'//"-conscious  self  in  controlling-  and  extending
these  objective  ends  must  obviously  be  itself  objective
too.  In  fact  a  subjective  end  without  an  object  and
an  objective  end  without  a  subject  are  both  alike  con-
tradictory. The  psychological  character  of  all  possible
ends  of  conduct  is  then  fundamentally  the  same,  and
so  the  advance  from  the  lower  or  natural  plane  to  the
higher  or  the  rational  is  conceivable.  But,  and  this
for  us  now  is  the  main  point,  in  neither  is  pleasure  ever
itself  the  end,  but  always  simply  the  satisfaction  conse-
quent on  the  accomplishment  of  ends'.

Nevertheless,  the  hedonist  will  reply,  it  is  obvious
that  we  must  distinguish  between  means  and  ends  ;
and  since  the  attainment  of  all  objective  ends  would
be  worthless  without  happiness  it  is  obvious  too  that
this  alone  is  intrinsically  desirable,  that  this  subjective

'  At  first  blush  it  seems  conceivable  that  at  any  rate  a  self-
conscious  being  could  adopt  pleasure  as  his  end,  and  the  ideal
voluptuary  is  supposed  to  be  such  a  being.  In  him,  as  Mr  Hradley
has  said,  "the  feeling  of  self-realisation  is  the  end,  which  calls  for
reality,  without  respect  for  anything  in  which  the  self  is  to  be
realised,  except  as  a  means.  It  is  not  necessary  to  say,"  he  continues,
"  that  the  abstract  feeling  of  satisfaction,  as  an  end,  contradicts  the
very  notion  of  an  end  and  must  fail  to  satisfy ;  nor  is  it  necessary  to
add  that  the  voluptuary  as  the  man  who  consistently  pursues  that
end,  is  an  impossible  character"  {Ethical  Studies,  p.  245).  Such  an
abnormality  certainly  could  not  be  called  a  rational  Ixring  nor  could
a  society  of  such  hold  itself  together.  History  afTords  proof  enough
of  that.


346 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Optiinisni

end  is  the  only  ultimate  end,  in  relation  to  which  the
so-called  objective  ends  are  in  reality  only  means.
Let  us  examine  the  following  important  passage  from
Sidgwick's  Methods  of  Ethics,  in  which  this  position  is
clearly  stated.  "It  may  be  said  that... we  may  take
'  conscious  life '  in  a  wide  sense,  so  as  to  include  the
objective  relations  of  the  conscious  being... and  that
from  this  point  of  view  we  may  regard  ['Virtue,  Truth,
Beauty,  Freedom ']  as  in  some  measure  preferable
alternatives  to  Pleasure  or  Happiness...."  But  Sidg-
wick  continues:  "to  me  at  least  it  seems  clear  after
reflection  that  these  objective  relations  of  the  conscious
subject,  when  distinguished  from  the  consciousness
accompanying  and  resulting  from  them,  are  not  ulti-
mately and  intrinsically  desirable... that,  when  (to  use
Butler's  phrase)  we  'sit  down  in  a  cool  hour'  we  can
only  justify  to  ourselves  the  importance  that  we  attach
to  any  of  these  objects  by  considering  its  conducive-
ness,  in  one  way  or  another,  to  the  happiness  of
sentient  beings^"  Now,  first  of  all,  is  there  not  here
a  radical  confusion — one  to  which  we  are  all  too  prone
— the  confusion,  I  mean,  between  analytical  distinction
and  actual  separation  ?  To  say  that  "  we  may  take
conscious  life  in  a  wide  sense  as  including  objective
relations"  implies  that  we  may  also  take  it  in  a  narrow
sense  as  excluding  these.  But  the  psychologist  as-
suredly has  no  such  choice :  he  must  take  what  he
always  finds.  No  reflexion  will  enable  him  to  take
the  consciousness  accompanying  or  resulting  from
objective  relations  apart  from  these  relations  them-
selves ;  for  there  is  no  consciousness,  or  as  we  had
'  Methods  of  Ethics,  6th  edn,  pp.  400  f.


'Objective  ends'  not  siiuply  means 347

better  say,  no  experience,  unless  these  form  an  integral
part  of  it.  It  is  clear,  from  the  context,  I  allow,  that
what  Sidgwick  here  meant  by  consciousness  was
pleasure  (or  pain).  But  it  is  equally  clear  that  feeling
alone,  a  purely  subjective  state,  though  always  an
element  in  consciousness  or  experience,  is  never  the
whole  of  it.  We  cannot  then  talk  of  pleasure  or
happiness  or,  to  speak  generally,  of  pure  feeling  as
in  anv  measure  an  altei-nativc  to  the  cotrnitions  or
actions  from  which  it  is  inseparable.  And  yet  Sidg-
wick not  only  admits  this  inseparability,  but  even  urges
that  "  if  we  finally  decide  that  ultimate  good  includes
many  things  distinct  from  Happiness\"  hedonism
becomes  '  entanorled  in  a  vicious  circle.'  But  if  the
inseparability  be  admitted,  how  is  that  decision  to  be
avoided  ?

Why  then  does  he  still  argue  as  if  pleasure  by
itself  could  be  a  subjective  end  and  the  only  ultimate
end  ?  Regardless  of  the  fact  already  insisted  upon,
that  a  purely  subjective  end  is  a  psychological  contra-
diction, Sidgwick's  main  contention,  we  shall  bt;  told,
is  not  that  pleasure  is  a  'thing'  we  can  experience
apart  from  'things'  which  are  plea.sant,  but  that  these
other  'things'  are  only  means  to  it.  Hui  this  we
remark  in  the  second  jjlace  is  like  saying,  to  use  a
trivial  illustration  of  Mill's,  that  one  of  the:  blades  of
a  pair  of  scissors  is  a  means  to  enabUr  thi-  other  blade
to  cut:  it  is  to  ignore  that  subject  and  object  are  both
e.ssential  to  all  con.scious  life,  desirable  or  undesirable.
If  one  is  a  means  then  th(!  other  must  be  a  means
too,  and  as  cutting  is  the  end  of  a  pair  df scissors  so

' Op.  cit.  I. St  cdn,  p.  376.


348 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Optimism

happiness  becomes  the  end  for  the  sake  of  which  sub-
ject and  object  aHke  are  only  means :  the  pure  feehng  of
pleasure,  though  a  state  of  one  of  them,  is  the  ultimate
raiso7i  d'etre  of  both\  All  that  matters  is  the  capacity
for  pleasure  in  the  one  and  the  fitness  to  produce  it  in
the  other.  Maximum  pleasure  being  the  end  of  the
world,  it  would  seemingly  be  indifferent  whether  the
number  of  conscious  individuals  were  increased  and
their  capacity  pro  tanto  diminished,  or  vice  versa  :  in
any  case  the  attainment  of  the  end  would  be  the
solution  of  the  quantitative  problem  : — The  greatest
possible  sum  of  pleasure  wanted  :  how  is  it  to  be  got"?
When  all  the  objective  interests  of  life  are  emptied  out
of  it  as  only  means  and  not  meaning,  this  is  the  one
question  that  remains.

^  But  Sidgwick  used  a  different  illustration,  which  he  doubtless
thought  more  apposite.  Green's  contention  that  "  pleasure  as  feeling
in  distinction  from  its  conditions,  which  are  not  feelings,  cannot  be
conceived"  (Hume,  vol.  11.  p.  7)  he  said  "is  neither  more  nor  less
true  than  the  statement  that  an  angle  cannot  be  conceived  apart
from  its  sides  "  (Mmd,  O.S.,  11.  p.  36).  He  then  proceeds  to  urge
that  this  does  not  hinder  us  from  comparing  one  angle  with  another
without  comparing  their  sides.  But  surely  as  regards  the  main
contention  this  is  irrelevant.  The  pursuit  of  an  end  may  be  aptly
enough  represented  by  the  direction  of  a  line,  but  without  ends  we
have  no  lines  and  therefore  no  angles.  Again,  whereas  directed
lines  enclose  an  angle  of  definite  magnitude,  this  as  purely  quanti-
tative can  never  determine  definitely  directed  lines,  two  pairs  of
lines,  though  oppositely  directed,  having  e.g.  the  same  angle.  How
then  can  maximum  angle,  if  it  have  any  meaning,  be  the  end  ?

"  Cf.  Sidgwick,  oJ>.  cit.,  6th  edn,  p.  415:  "The  point  up  to
which,  on  utilitarian  principles,  population  ought  to  be  encouraged

to  increase,  is  that  at  which  the  product  formed  by  multiplying

the  number  of  persons  living  into  the  amount  of  average  happiness
reaches  its  maximum."


77/6'  Hedonist  and  the  Parasite 349

But  now  we  may  regard  life  as  a  series  of  processes,
and  in  these,  as  in  all  processes,  the  mere  nieans  either
disappear  and  are  left  behind  as  the  process  advances  ;
or  they  become  so  far  worthless  when  the  process  is
complete  and  its  end  attained. Moreover  there  is  no
ultimate  advantage  in  means  as  such, and  in  fact  we
always  seek  to  shorten  and  simplify  such  intermediaries
as  much  as  we  can. Bui  ihat  the  objective  interests
of  life  are  not  means  in  this  sense  is  conclusively  shown
in  parasitism,  where  many  of  them  are  dispensed  with,
but  where too  degeneration invariably  follows. The
literal  meaning  of  happy  in  our  own  language  and  of
its equivalents in  others — as, for  example, evhaiixajv,
felix,  gliicklich,  hetireiix — more  or  less  distinctly  implies
the  favour  of  fortune  but  contains  not  a  hint  of  success-
ful striving. That  the  favourites  of  fortune  often  show
the  degeneracy  of  parasites  is  proverbial, har  fuller
is  the  life  of  self-reliant  eflort  for  the  worthiest  ends,
and far fuller too the blessedness and content that
crown its  achievements. The  thoughtless  may envy
the  easy  life  of  the  favourites  of  fortune,  but  this  is  not
the life that wise men praise. A world in which
unalloyed pleasure  was meted out to  every  sentient
being  would  then  be  ver\-  like  a  world  of  parasites  and
so  far  from  being  the  best  of  worlds  woukl,  because  of
its inevitable vapidity, ennni and unprogressiveness,
be  almost  the worst — a  contradiction,  of  course, and
yet, so  far  as  we can see, a necessary conseciuence.
Hut  this  only  s<-rves  to  show  ihal  such  .1  workl  is  not
possible  at  all.

We  can  lunv  move  on  a  stage. If  ihls  conclusion
is  sound,  it  follows  that nuu  h  at  any  rale  that  wi:  call


350 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Optimism

evil  is  only  relatively  such.  The  term  evil  in  such
cases  is,  in  fact,  ambiguous  ;  since  what  is  in  one  sense
an  evil  is  in  another  sense  a  good.  "  The  world  (it  has
been  said)  is,  what  for  an  active  being  it  must  be,  full
of  hindrances^"  Invincible  obstacles  that  barred  all
progress  would  indeed  be  absolute  evils,  but  not  so
the  hindrances  that  can  be  overcome,  for  only  in  sur-
mounting such  is  solid  advance  possible.  As  to  these,
it  has  been  said  again,  a  man  may  "  bless  God  for  the
law  of  growth  with  all  the  fighting  it  imposes  upon
him,"  evil  in  this  sense,  "  i.e.  what  it  is  man's  duty
to  fight,  being  one  of  the  major  perfections  of  the
Universe"."  Again,  in  another  way  this  relativity  of
many  so-called  evils  is  apparent :  in  relation  to  the
past,  as  marking  progress,  they  are  really  good  ;  only
in  view  of  future  progress  which  they  may  delay  do
they  become  evil.  So  far  it  is  true  to  convert  the
French  proverb  and  say  Le  bien  est  lennemi  du  77iieux'.
not  only  true  but  truer,  so  surely  as  progress  is  better
than  stagnation.  "  If  a  man  has  not  wants,  he  will
make  no  efforts,"  says  Professor  Sorley,  "and  if  he
make  no  efforts  his  condition  can  never  be  bettered.
Thus  social  reformers  have  often  found  that  the  classes
they  have  tried  to  elevate  did  not  feel  the  evil  of  their  lot
as  their  benefactors  saw  it ;  and  they  have  had  to  create
the  consciousness  of  wants  before  attempting  to  satisfy
them^"  The  new  position  we  reach  then  is,  that  a  world
whose  fundamental  characteristic — now  at  any  rate — is

^  Vauvenargues, quoted by Eucken, Geistige Stromungeti der
Gegenwart,  4te  Aus.  p. 288.

^  C.  S.  Peirce,  Hibbert  Journal,  vii.  p.  107.
^  Ethics  of  Naturalism,  2nd  edn,  p.  250.


Evolution  and  fJic  Relativity  of  Evil 351

evolution  cannot  at  any  given  stage  of  its  development
have  that  perfection  towards  which  it  is  still  only
moving,  which  it  can  onl)-  have  by  acquiring.  It  is
childish  and  futile  to  ask  if  the  world  might  not  have
been  created  perfect  at  once  ;  to  question  whether  an
evolving  world  is  the  best.  We  cannot  form  the
dimmest  idea  of  what  experience  in  a  '  ready-made  '
world  would  mean,  if  experience,  as  I  have  ventured
elsewhere  to  define  it,  is  the  process  of  becoming-
expert  by  experiment.  So  far  as  we  can  judge,  a
world  perfect — in  the  sense  of  finished  and  complete
at  once — is  a  contradiction.

But  at  any  rate  the  question  may  be  raised  whether
the  sort  of  evolution  that  we  observe  in  this  world  is
ideally  the  best.  Granted  that  in  an  evol\-ing  world
there  will  be  the  imperfection  or  incompleteness  that
all  becoming  implies,  need  there  be  besides  such
positive  defects  as  physical  suffering,  error  and  sin  ?
As  we  have  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  then  the  full
corn  in  the  ear  and  can  conceive  each  to  be  faultless,
can  it  be  impossible  to  conceive  the  development  of  a
world  in  like  manner  ?  And  if  that  is  not  impossible,
how  can  this  world  with  its  manifold  i)hysical,  intel-
lectual and  moral  defects  be  the  best  .''  This  objection
we  must  now  in  the  next  place  endeavour  to  meet.

The  term  evolution  we  have  found  used  in  two
.senses  ;  in  the  strict  sense,  for  the  gradual  unfokling
(jf  what  is  implicitly  present  honi  llu?  first,  and  again
in  a  l(MJser  sense  for  what  is  IjeLter  called  epigenesis  or
the  continuous  creation  ol  what  is  es.sentially  new.
The  initial  possibilities  woukl  in  the  one  case  virtu. ill)
include  the  .iclual  course  of  the  j)rocess  ihrouglioni  the


352 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Optimism

future,  in  the  other  they  would  only  exclude  indefinite
abstract  possibilities  as  not  compossible,  to  use  Leibniz's
phrase,  that  is  to  say,  as  actually  impossible.  In  both
cases  certain  possibilities  would  give  place  to  actualities
as  the  evolution  advanced  ;  but  in  the  latter  new  pos-
sibilities would  continually  arise,  in  the  former  they
would  not.  In  the  one  there  would  be  from  the  first
a  unity  and  harmony  which  in  the  other  were  only
eventually  achieved.  The  one  would  be  what  William
James  called  a  block  universe,  the  other  what  he  called
a  multiverse,  or  better  perhaps  a  uni-multiverse.  In  a
word,  the  concept  of  the  world  in  the  former  case  is
that  of  a  dialectical  development  of  one  Supreme  Idea,
such  as  Hegel  essayed  to  delineate.

In  the  earlier  part  of  these  lectures  I  endeavoured
to  establish  two  points,  first  that  the  transition  from
such  a  purely  ideal  process  to  the  historical  world  is
inconceivable,  as  Hegel  in  spite  of  himself  made  clear  ;
and  secondly,  that  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Idea
or  Absolute,  such  transition  would  be  superfluous^  I
must  content  myself  by  assuming  that  these  points  are
established  ;  as  also  a  third,  reached  in  the  present
part,  viz.  that  setting  out  from  where  we  are,  from
the  standpoint  of  the  Many,  we  have  no  ground  for
assuming  a  Creator  who  does  everything  but  only  a
Creator  whose  creatures  create  in  turn.  The  real
world  must  be  the  joint  result  of  God  and  man
(including  under  this  term  other  finite  intelligences
both  higher  and  lower  in  the  scale),  unless  we  are  to
deny  the  reality  of  that  in  us  which  leads  us  to  the  idea
of  God  at  all. The  evolution  of  such  a  world  then

^  Cf.  Lectt.  n.  vii.


Evoliitioi  and  Coutiugciicy  353

plainly  cannot  be  a  case  of  evolution  in  the  first  sense.
But  if  not,  then  where  the  Many  have  some  initiative,
— where  development  is  epigenetic — contingency  and
conflict,  fallibility  and  peccability  seem  inevitable;  and
these  are  at  any  rate  relative  evils,  for  they  assuredly
entail  sufferinsf.

Even  so,  it  will  be  asked  again,  can  anyone  pretend
that  he  sees  no  unnecessary  suffering  in  a  world  like
this,  where  storms  devastate  and  plagues  strike  ;  where
ignorance  consigns  the  noblest  to  exile,  to  torture  and
to  death  ;  where  vice  lapped  in  luxury  grinds  down  the
poor  and  from  its  very  crimes  argues  that  there  is  no
God  ?  In  attempting  to  deal  with  the  serious  difficulty
here  raised  it  will  be  best  to  consider  physical  and
moral  evil  apart'.  Now  if — to  begin  with  the  former —
we  were  challenged  to  show  directly  that  certain  definite
physical  ills — fever  germs  or  'malignant'  tumours,  say —
have  somehow  their  requisite  place  in  the  world's  eco-
nomy, we  certainly  should  be  most  presumptuous  and
unwise  to  take  up  the  gage.  But  we  may  at  least
contend  that  on  the  other  hand  we  are  equally  incom-
petent to  show  conclusively  that  any  assigned  physical
cause  of  suffering  is  really  superfluous.

But  then  at  once  we  find  ourselves  confronted  with
an  old  objection.  The  notion  of  any  evil  as  unavoid-
able, we  shall  be  told,  involves  the  contradiction  of  a
non-omnipotent,  or  finite,  God,  and  is,  therefore,  not
theistic  but  atheistic.  Omnipotence,  I  fear,  is  oiu;  (A
those  question-begging  epithets  that everybody  uses

' Intellectual  evil,  or  error,  may  he  practically  re^^ardcd  as  belong*
ing  partly  to  the  one  partly  to  the  other.

w.  23


354 ^^^^  Pi'obleiii  of  Evil  and  Optimism

and  nobody  defines\  Thus  it  is  not  uncommonly  taken
to  imply  not  merely  the  power  to  do  whatever  it  is
possible  to  do,  but  also  the  power  arbitrarily  to  determine
what  shall  be  possible  ;  nay  even  that  the  impossible
shall  be  possible  ;  in  short  that  omnipotence  absolutely
excludes  impossibility.  Thus  we  find  Schopenhauer
saying: — "Even  if  Leibniz's  demonstration,  that  among
the  possible  worlds  this  one  is  the  best,  were  correct :
yet  still  it  would  not  amount  to  a  theodicy.  For  in
truth  the  Creator  is  the  author  not  merely  of  the  world
but  of  possibility  too  :  he  ought  accordingly  to  have
devised  this  in  such  a  way  as  to  admit  of  a  better
worldl"  Metaphysic  of  this  sort  is  not  to  be  met  by
argument.  It  is  sufficient  to  remark  that  at  any  rate
so  long  as  there  is  no  difference  between  possible  and
impossible  so  long  omnipotence  can  have  no  meaning  :
two  and  two  may  be  four  or  it  may  be  five.  Within
this  mystical  region,  where  '  naught  is  everything  and
everything  is  naught,'  determinate  being  or  thought
or  action  there  can  be  none.  If  there  were  an
omnipotent  God  he  must  emerge  thence  to  act  at
all  and  then  could  only  do  what  is  possible  ;  though
what  is  possible  would  be  determined,  of  course,  by
what  he  is  and  only  so.  To  proclaim  creation  restricted
by  determinate  possibilities  to  be  an  idea  derogatory  to
the  sovereign  majesty  of  God  is  but  blind  adulation  ;

^  In  a  similar  connexion  it  is  interesting  to  find  Mr  Bradley
saying : — "  I  shall  be  told  that  the  Governor  of  the  Universe  is
omtiipotetit.  Perhaps ;  but  as  I  never  could  find  out  what  that
means,  I  can  hardly  be  expected  to  admit  it  as  true."  Mind,  O.  S.
VIII.  259.

-  Parerga  Jind  Paralipomena,  11.  §  157.


So-ciil/cd  'Metaphysical  EviT 355

for  it  really  amounts  to  denying  that  God  is  himself  a
definite  being  at  all,  is  either  intellectually  or  morally
consistent.  All  determination  is  negation,  Spinoza  has
truly  said  :  to  hnd  in  this  an  evil,  a  so-called  meta-
physical or  logical  evil,  only  shows  what  ambiguity  the
term  may  involve.

From  such  miscalled  evils  no  world  can  be  free.
To  take  a  simple  illustration.  Our  decimal  system  of
numeration  has  the  inconvenience  that  its  radix  10  has
only  two  factors,  while  12,  the  radix  of  the  duodecimal
system,  has  twice  as  many ;  and  if  we  had  had  six
fingers  on  each  hand,  we  should  doubtless  have  taken
twelve  as  our  radix  and  been  so  far,  it  is  supposed,
better  off  ^  That  in  other  respects  we  should  not  have
been  worse  off  is  niore  than  we  know.  Moreover  the
longer  system  still  has  defects — in  fact,  as  many  positive
defects  as  the  shorter" — whilst  against  its  superiority  in
respect  of  divisibility  may  be  set  its  greater  complexity.
But  the  point  of  our  illustration  is  that  no  system  of
numeration  is  possible  that  shall  be  in  all  respects
ideally  perfect.  Without  being  Pythagoreans  and
hailing  number  as  'omnipotent,  the  principle  and
guide  of  divine  and  human  life,'  we  still  cannot  doubt,
in  these  days  when  science  calls  itself  measurement,
that  many  of  our  .so-called  '  physical  evils '  depend
ultimately  on  such  miscalhxl  '  metaj)hysical  evil'.'  So
far  as  they  go  at  any  rate  there  is  w^^  problem.

'  Herbert  Spencer  regarded  this  'evil'  as  so  serious  that  he  left,
I  understand,  the  bulk  of  his  property  to  be  expended  in  combating
the  decimal  system  and  advocating  the  duodecimal.

'  Cf.  Herbert  .Spencer's  Autol>io\^raph)\  vol.  l.  p.  5.y.

'  Cf.  A.  Ott,  Ix  ProbUttK  du  Mai,  18H8,  pp.  153  f.

2^  —  2


356 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Optiinism

We  come  back  then  to  the  alleged  superfluous
physical  evils.  It  is  futile  to  attempt  to  imagine  a
world  different  in  type  from  ours.  This  statement,  we
assume,  cannot  be  gainsaid  and  from  this  we  set  out.
Now  the  world,  as  we  directly  know  it,  consists  as  we
have  seen  in  a  plurality  of  individuals,  whom  we  may
call  plastic  in  so  far  as  they  are  capable  of  experience.
All  of  them,  again,  are  intent  on  self-conservation  or
betterment.  This,  however,  is  not  guaranteed  to  them
altogether  apart  from  their  own  efforts  ;  but  it  is  to
be  achieved  in  large  measure  through  these.  Even  if
there  be  a  God  he  certainly  has  not  made  the  world
what  it  is  to  be,  but  rather  endowed  it  with  talents  to
enable  it  to  work  out  its  own  perfection  in  conjunction
with  himself  This  working  out  is  what  we  call  ex-
perience, and  experience  can  never  pre-suppose  the
knowledge  or  the  skill  that  is  only  gained  by  means
of  it.  Where  several  possibilities  are  open  a  creature
acting  on  its  own  initiative  can  only  find  out  the  right
one  by  way  of  trial  and  often  of  error.  Such  error
we  may  say  is  an  evil  ;  but  we  cannot  straightway
call  it  a  superfluous,  still  less  an  absolute,  evil,  if  it  is
an  inevitable  incident  of  experience  as  such,  and  if  in
general  the  experience  is  worth  what  it  costs.

Can  we,  however,  say  that  in  general  experience  Is
worth  what  it  costs  ?  it  will  be  urged.  But  can  we  say
that  it  is  not?  we  reply:  ive  are  not  arraigning  the  con-
stitution of  the  world  and  therefore  it  is  for  those  who
are  to  make  their  indictment  good.  Which  way  does
the  presumption  lie  ?  This  for  us  is  the  final  question.
At  this  point  there  is  one  consideration  that  may  help
us. The  more  all  things  eventually  work  together  for


Alleged  supeyfliious  evils  357

good  the  greater  our  assurance  that  Goodness  is  at  the
root  of  all.  The  attainment  of  such  complete  and
enduring  harmony,  however,  may  well  entail  an  ex-
haustive experience  of  possibilities  as  its  indispensable
condition.  First  thoughts  are  rarely  the  best,  and  the
more  haste  we  make  often  the  worse  we  speed.  The
fittest  to  survive,  we  are  told,  appear  only  as  the  final
outcome  of  innumerable  continuous  variations  :  Natura
non  facit  saltus.  Herein  lies  the  significance  for  us  of
Leibniz's  contention  that  whereas  "a  machine  made  by
the  skill  of  man  is  not  a  machine  in  each  of  its  parts....
the  machines  of  nature,  our  living  bodies,  are  still
machines  in  their  smallest  parts."  Such  thoroughness
must  imply  slowness  and  much  seemingly  useless
trouble  if  the  process  is  to  be  that  of  experience  and
epigenesis.  Like  impatient  children,  we  can  hardly
restrain  the  wish  "to  see  the  Supreme  Ciood  active  in
some  other  way  than  this  which  it  has  itself  chosen,...
or  by  some  shorter  path  than  the  roundabout  one  "  of
creation  through  creatures,  which  it  has  itself  entered

upon'.

Hut  still  there  are  those  other  physical  t-vils,  such
as  storms,  droughts,  earthcjuakes  and  the  like,  that  can
hardly  be  regarded  as  the  direct  consequence  of  in-
cipient and  imj^erfect  experience.  Can  ii  Ix-  said  thai
these  are  not  absolute  nor  itven  superfluous  evils  .■*  In
attempting  to  deal  with  ilu-m  we  must  n-call  another
characteristic  of  the  world's  evolution.  At  any  stage
in  this  process  the  world,  we  have  si;(.-n,  may  be
described  as  being  in  part  comparatively  \\\vx\,  iti  part
still  fluent,  in  part  comparatively  stable,  in  i>iri  siill
'  Cf.  IxjtZf,  Micro(Oimus,  Kng.  trans,  it.  j).  727.


358 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Optiinism

developing :  at  once  natura  nattirata  and  nahwa
nahirans.  That  the  Hfe  and  progress  of  society,  all  its
spontaneity,  initiative  and  individuality,  would  be  in-
effective without  its  conservative  elements  of  stability —
habit,  custom,  law  and  the  like — is  obvious.  Yet  these
are  not  an  unmixed  good.  Habit  is  ability  indeed,  but
its  blindness  and  fatal  facility  are  proverbial.  Custom,
which  according  to  Hume  is  the  great  guide  of  human
life,  Bagehot  has  called  '  the  most  terrible  tyranny  ever
known  among  men,'  and  yet,  as  again  another  has
said.

We  draw
Our  right  from  custom  : custom  is  a  law
As  high  as  heaven,  as  wide  as  sea  or  land.

Stcmmum  Jus,  summa  injuria  is  the  maxim  of  equity  ;
and  yet  injury  means  injustice.

The  dubious  character  thus  attaching  to  the  con-
servative factors  of  the  social  world  holds  also  of  the
more  fundamental  routine  of  what  we  often  speak  of
apart  as  the  physical  world.  Here,  too,  in  what  are
called  the  conservations  of  mass  and  energy  we  have
principles  that  are  at  once  the  indispensable  conditions
of  stable  construction,  and  yet  tending  always  to
destruction  in  so  far  as  they  count  nothing  stable
that  they  can  further  level  down — just  as  friction,
again,  renders  locomotion  possible  and  yet  steadily
retards  it.  All  this  perhaps  may  help  to  account  for
the  world-wide  association  of  matter  with  evil.  How
far  down  within  this  seemingly  fixed  mechanism  the
fluent  processes  of  life  extend  we  do  not  know  ;  if
there  are  such  processes  their  tempo,  so  to  say,  is  so


TJie  If'or/ifs  Conservative  Factors 359

different  from  ours  that  their  significance  escapes  us.
But  in  any  case  in  their  comparative  fixity,  not  in  their
possible  secular  transformation,  lie  all  their  present
advantages  and  disadvantages  for  us.  That  the
advantages  so  far  exceed  the  disadvantages  is  evident
from  the  advances  that  the  world  has  made,  is  making,
and  bids  fair  loner  to  continue  to  make.  Can  we  have
the  one  without  the  other.-*  If  not,  then  the  disad-
vantages are  neither  absolute  evils  nor  in  general
superfluous  evils  :  metaphysical  or  logical  evils  they
may  be  called.  But  we  may  ask  again  if  that  means
anything  more  beyond  what  all  individuation  seems
necessarily  to  imply  ?

What  we  might  perhaps  call  the  temporary
solidarity  of  physical  good  and  evil  is  brought  home
to  us  in  two  ways  :  first,  by  the  rash  attempts  that
have  been  frequently  made  to  show  how  things  might
have  been  better ;  and,  secondly,  by  the  ignorant
prayers  for  favourable  wind  and  weather  or  the  like,
that  religion  is  supposed  to  countenance.  The  foolish-
ness of  the  latter  is  obvious,  inasmuch  as  the  wind  that
was  'good'  for  the  ship  homeward  bound  would  be
bad  for  that  bound  outwards,  and  the  weather  that
hastened  the  ripening  of  one  farmer's  corn  might  dry
up  the  pasture  of  another.  .Such  reall\-  impious  peti-
tions are  as  senseless  as  the  belief  in  magic  or  the
demand  for  perpetual  miracles.  If  they  were  granted
they  would  put  an  end  to  all  order  ami  render  rational
conduct  impossible.  .\s  to  the  former — there  are
diseases  indeed  that  seem  to  be  unmixed  evils,  to
be  neither  the  collateral  consecjuenccs  ol  what  once
was  good  nor  the  indispensable  conditions  of  any  good


360 The  Problem  of  Evil  and  Optimism

to  come\  Leaving  such  cases  aside  it  would  be  hard
to  find  a  single  instance  in  which  suggestions  for  the
better  remoulding  of  the  physical  world  have  not  been
shown  by  men  wiser  than  their  authors  to  be  only
specifications  for  a  fool's  paradise.

But  there  is  yet  another  difficulty  connected  with
physical  evil  that  is  unquestionably  serious,  since  it
weighs  heavily  on  many  earnest  minds.  The  course  of
evolution  so  far  has  conquered  some  evils  and  ame-
liorated others,  they  allow ;  but  will  this  progress
continue  unabated  or  will  it  not  one  day  cease  and
evil  in  its  turn  gain  the  ascendency  ?  "  The  theory
of  evolution,"  Huxley,  for  example,  has  said,  "encour-
ages no  millennial  anticipations.  If,  for  millions  of
years,  our  globe  has  taken  the  upward  road,  yet,  some
time  the  summit  will  be  reached  and  the  downward
route  will  be  commenced.  The  most  daring  imagina-
tion will  hardly  venture  upon  the  suggestion  that  the
power  and  intelligence  of  man  can  ever  arrest  the
procession  of  the  great  yearl"  This  is  the  language
of  naturalism  pure  and  simple,  but  if  naturalism  be
accepted  as  the  ultimate  truth  of  things,  it  is  useless  to
talk  of  a  realm  of  ends  at  all  :  if  the  life  of  man  and  all
that  it  implies  are  but  episodes  in  what  Spencer  called
the  integration  of  matter  and  the  dissipation  of  motion,
then  indeed  there  is  no  more  to  be  said.  But  if,  as  we
have  seen  reason  for  doing,  we  take  a  wider  and  deeper
view  of  evolution  and  regard  this  so-called  realm  of
nature as having itself  all its reality and meaning

^  But  often they  are  the  fruits  of  evil doing  and  often  their
removal  is  within  our  power  and  is  more  than  a  negative  gain.
^  Evolution  and  Ethics,  Collected  Essays,  ix.  p.  85.


Progress  ivitliout  Dcclijic  ^6i


O'


within  the  one  world  of  living  agents,  why  should
we  suppose  the  supreme  end  of  this  to  l)e  simply
its  own  undoing,  or  take  the  meaning  of  the  part  to
be  the  stultification  of  the  whole  ?  Only  if  nature  is
independent  of  spirit,  and  atheism,  too,  an  established
certainty,  can  we,  as  Huxley  does,  apply  to  evolution
as  a  whole  the  words  of  Tennyson's  Ulysses  : —

It  may  be  that  the  gulfs  will  wash  us  down,
It  may  be  we  shall  touch  the  Happy  Isles.

If  Spirit  is  supreme,  its  end  must  be  sure  of  realisation
and  the  procession  of  its  great  year  know  no  decline.
Nor,  happily,  does  the  doctrine  of  the  dissipation  of
energy,  rightly  understood,  in  any  way  justify  the
gloomy  forebodings  to  which  its  misunderstanding  has
given  rise.

But,  while  we  have  allowed  that  theism  is  essential
before  we  can  be  confident  that  the  world  will  not  fail
of  the  end  that  seems  the  only  clue  to  its  meaning,  we
have  also  had  to  allow  that  we  have  no  theoretical
proof  of  theism.  On  the  other  hand  our  discussion  of
th(i  problem  of  evil  has  so  far,  we  claim,  brought  to
liu-ht  nothin<:  that  disproves  theism  and  removetl  much
that  at  the  outset  appeared  to  make  against  it.  We
have  still,  however,  to  consider  what  is  unciiiestionabiy
the  chief  count  in  the  whole  intlictment  with  which  a
theodicy  has  to  deal — the  fact  of  moral  evil.


LECTURE XVII.

MORAL  EVIL  AND  MORAL  ORDER.

"  That  must  needs  have  been  glorious  the  decays  of
which  are  so  admirable.  He  that  is  comely  when  old
and  decrepit  surely  was  very  beautiful  when  he  was
young.  An  Aristotle  was  but  the  rubbish  of  an  Adam,
and  Athens  but  the  rudiments  of  Paradise."  These
famous  words  of  a  seventeenth  century  orator  and
divine  fairly  represent  the  standpoint  from  which  even
to-day  the  question  of  moral  evil  is  frequently  discussed.
That  our  world  in  its  present  state  should  be  a  hopeless
ruin,  which  nothing  short  of  the  intervention  of  infinite
wisdom  and  goodness  could  restore,  is,  it  is  held,  con-
ceivable ;  but  that  this  world  should  be  what  it  is  as
the  result  of  a  development  on  the  whole  steady  and
continuous  is  thought  to  be  quite  inconceivable.  In
short,  God,  it  is  said,  created  man  in  his  own  image
and  "he  himself  tempteth  no  man":  to  account  for
moral  evil  then  we  must,  it  is  supposed,  assume  that
man  by  his  own  wilful  act  has  fallen  from  his  high
estate.

But  why  should  all  have  sinned  and  come  short
of  the  glory  of  God  ?  To  answer  this  question  the
doctrine  of  original  sin  is  added  as  a  corollary  to  the
doctrine of  the fall. The whole human race,  past,


Moral  Evil  in  tlic  light  of  Evolution 363

present,  and  future,  is  regarded  as  involved  in  one
common  perdition  that  is  somehow  the  moral  con-
sequence of  the  action  of  the  first  and — as  we  must
believe — the  least  experienced  of  its  members.  Is  it
not  possible  to  account  for  the  prevalence  of  moral  evil
in  a  way  less  shocking  to  ordinary  morality  than  this  ?
But  first  we  may  ask,  does  this  account  for  it  ?  With-
out still  further  supplement  we  find  it  does  not.  That  a
man  wiser  than  the  wisest  should  heed  the  voice  of
sense  or  sophistry  is  only  credible  if  he  is  already
infected  with  'original  sin.'  Accordingly  either  a
timeless  or  a  prenatal  fall  has  to  be  assumed ;  and,
finally,  the  existence  of  a  personal  principle  of  evil  in
the  shape  of  the  devil  with  his  maxim,  Evil,  be  thou
my  good.  In  short,  such  speculations — all  alike,  be  it
noted,  in  ignoring  the  concept  of  evolution — fail  al-
together to  explain  the  existence  of  moral  evil,  to  say
nothing  of  their  inherent  improbability  :  they  leave  it,
as  Kant  had  the  candour  to  admit,  an  insoluble
mystery.  We  have  now  then  to  incjuire  whether,  when
we  do  not  ignore  evolution,  the  problem  of  moral  evil
still  remains  ecjually  insoluble.

First  of  all,  if  we  are  to  staiul  !))■  evolution,  we
shall  have  to  invert  Rcjbert  South's  rhetoric,  ami  rank
primeval  man  a  long  way  behind  Aristotle,  ami  his
j)rimitive  resources  a  long  way  behind  even  the
rudiments  of  Athenian  civilisation.  Ih.-gel's  saying,
thai  i'aradise  without  the  so-called  fall  was  -what
indeed  the  word  means  -just  citi  /'ark  /iir  Thurc,  .1
park  for  beasts,  furnishes  a  better  text  for  th(t  evolu-
tionist. I*"or  the  human  race,  like  the  human  iiulivitlual,
in  the  course  of  its  d(.-v<-lopment  has  certainly  passcrd


364 Moral  Evil  and  Moral  Order

through  the  brute  stage;  and  the  transition  from  the
ignorant  '  innocence '  of  this  level  of  life  to  '  the  know-
ledge of  good  and  evil '  is  surely  as  such  a  rise  rather
than  a  fall.  Let  us  then  endeavour  to  trace  the  course
of  this  development  and  see  if  it  is  not  really  an
advance.

Moral  evil  is  doubtless  essentially  selfishness.  Yet
selfishness  has  its  roots  in  that  instinct  of  self-preserva-
tion, which  is  called  the  first  law  of  nature  and  which
moralists  of  all  schools  recognise  as  a  rational  principle
of  action  that  arises  as  soon  as  self-consciousness  is
attained.  When  and  how  does  what  is  thus,  so  to  say,
rooted  in  rigfht  nevertheless  become  wronsf.?  To  love
himself  a  man  must  know  himself,  but  he  can  know
himself  only  through  knowing  other  selves:  neither
self-love  nor  selfishness  then  is  possible  below  the
social  level,  as  we  have  already  had  to  remark  more
than  once.  With  society  moral  order  begins  and  in
society  moral  evil  may  arise.  Further,  as  society  is
based  entirely  on  the  mutual  dependence  and  the
mutual  services  of  the  persons  who  compose  it,  the
cardinal  principle  of  moral  order  is  justice  ;  and  all
immorality,  whatever  else  it  may  be,  is  injustice.  The
very  words  themselves  bear  witness  to  this,  In  so  far  as
mores  or  customs  are  the  origin  of  law.  But  already
in  the  gregarious  habits  of  many  of  the  higher  animals
and  in  the  family  life  of  others  we  find  that  the  uncon-
scious germs  of  the  altruism  on  which  society  rests  are
present  along  with  the  instinctive  egoism  all  life  Im-
plies. Now  at  the  outset  It  Is  obvious  that  the  age  of
innocence  Is  characterized  by  acts  which  have  all  the
objective  qualities  of  moral  evil,  though  no  guilt  can  be


Innocence  and  Jf^rong-doing  365

imputed  to  the  agents.  When  the  moth  thes  into  the
candle-flame  we  mi<'"ht  re^jard  it  as  sacrihcino-  its  own
future  welfare  for  the  sake  of  momentary  gratifica-
tion— behaviour  which  we  should  call  imprudence,  or
injustice  to  self,  if  the  moth  were  a  reasonable  person.
The  habits  of  the  cuckoo  in  ejecting  its  foster-brothers
from  the  nest  and  maltreating  its  foster-parents  strike
us  as  revolting  instances  of  injustice  and  ingratitude;
and  would  indeed  be  such,  if  only  the  cuckoo  knew
better.  To  repeat:  it  seems,  we  say,  in  the  first  place
indisputable  that  in  the  evolution  of  conduct  acts
objectively  wrong  are  constantly  committed  before  the
individual  has  any  consciousness  of  wrong-doing.  How
then,  we  have  to  ask  in  the  next  place,  does  this  con-
sciousness of  wrong-doing  arise — or,  more  generally,
under  what  circumstances  does  conscience  appear  ?

Before  we  can  attempt  to  answ^er  this  question  we
ought,  it  may  be  thought,  to  make  clear  in  what  sense  we
understand  such  a  very  complex  and  ambiguous  term  as
conscience.  But  happily  we  are  not  concerned  with  all
that  conscience  ever  means  but  only  with  what  it  means
always.  For  one  thing,  it  always  means  approval  or
disapproval  :  conscience  always  involves  a  judgment
that  '  accuses  or  else  excuses.'  Such  judgment  again  is
always  passed  by  the  person  himself  ui)on  his  own
conduct  and  motives.  It  thus  implies  seli-conscious-
ness  : without  self-consciousness  there  is  no  conscience'.

'  Cf.  .Sidgwick,  Meihoih  of  Ethics,  6th  cdn,  p.  381.

'  Hence  the  close  relationship  bctwcLii  the  two  terms,  conscience
and  consciousness  in  its  original  sense  of  self-consciousness — as  wc
find  it  say  in  Locke  or  Reid— a  relationship  so  cIom-  th.it  in  IVench
the  one  word  ron'scit-nii-  is  still  used  for  both.


366 Moral  Evil  and  Moral  Order

Finally  conscience  always  implies  a  standard  :  only  so
is  it  complete\  Our  question  then  amounts  to  this  :
How  does  the  individual  come  by  his  standard?

A  general  answer  is  at  once  evident :  he  acquires
the  knowledge  of  his  standard  as  he  acquires  the
knowledge  of  himself — throuo-h  social  intercourse".
But  we  must  try  to  be  more  specific.  In  the  first
place  then  we  may  note  that  this  advance  from  the
level  of  mere  consciousness  to  that  of  self-conscious-
ness is  very  gradual,  so  that  with  the  child  and  the
savage  the  merely  conscious  or  objective  attitude
decidedly  preponderates.  Accordingly  other  selves,  as
belonging  to  the  objective  world,  are  observed  con-
tinually and  directly,  but  the  experiencing  self  only
occasionally  and  reflectively — more  or  less  retrospec-
tively— in  the  exceptional  circumstances  that  evoke
the  subjective  attitude.  Two  consequences  follow
from  all  this  :  first,  the  one  that  we  have  just  noted
— viz.  that  acts  which  are  objectively  selfish  will  be
constantly  committed  though  there  is  as  yet  no  con-
sciousness of  their  selfishness ;  secondly,  that  this
objective  selfishness  will  nevertheless  be  frequently
apparent  to  others,  and  will  be  disapproved.  The
story  of  David  and  Nathan  may  serve  as  an  illustration,
if  we  compare  the  swiftness  of  David's  condemnation
of  another's  cupidity  with  his  tardiness  to  realise  his

^  It  is  worth  remarking  that  Locke  in  the  first  three  editions  of
his  Essay  defined  conscience  as  "nothing  else  but  our  own  opinion
of  our  own  actions."  In  later  editions  he  changed  this  to  "our  own
opinion  or  judgment  of  the  moral  rectitude  or  pravity  of  our  own
actions  " — thus  expHcitly  recognising  the  possession  of  a  standard  as
essential.

-  Cf.  above,  Lect.  vi.  pp.  122  ff.


TJic  rise  of  Conscience  367

own.  To  be  sure  we  cannot  exonerate  David,  im-
pulsive though  he  was,  as  we  exonerate  a  child  or  a
savage.  But  that  after  all  only  lends  point  to  the
instance  ;  for  if.  where  conscience  is  developed,  in  the
heat  of  passion  such  things  are  still  possible,  can  we
do  else  than  suppose  that  they  are  indefinitely  more
possible  where  conscience  has  yet  to  be  developed,
and  also  that  they  are  indefinitely  more  innocent?  So
then,  while  still  unconscious  of  our  own  wrong-doing,
we  become  judges  of  the  wrong-doing  of  others  ;  and
these  two  positions  we  continually  interchange  till  at
length  we  find  both  combined  in  our  own  person.
Adam  Smith  in  his  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments  was
the  first  modern  writer^  to  deal  with  our  question  at  all
satisfactorily,  and  the  answer  may  be  recapitulated  in
his  words  : — "  Our  first  moral  criticisms  are  exercised
upon  the  characters  and  conduct  of  other  people —
But  we  soon  learn,  that  other  people  are  equally  frank
with  reeard  to  our  own.  We  become  anxious  to
know  how  far  we  deserve  their  censure  or  applause....
We  begin,  upon  this  account,  to  examine  our  own
passions  and  conduct,  and  to  consider  how  these  must
appear  to  them  by  considering  how  they  would  appear
to  us  if  in  their  situation....  It  is  evident  that  in  all
such  cases,  1  divide  myself,  as  it  were,  into  two  persons  :
and  that  I.  the  examiner  and  judge,  represent  a  different
character  from  that  other  I,  the  [person  whose  character
is  examined  into  and  judged  of-'." But  we  may  sum

'  He  seems  to  have  been  anticipated  by  l'olyl)ius.  (.\{.  Diigald
Stewart's  Introduction  in  his  cditi(Jii  of  Adam  Smith's  Theory,
p. xxxi.

-  Op.  cit.  I'urt  MI.  ch.  I.  pp.  163  f.


368 Moral  Evil  and  Moral  Order

up  our  answer  still  more  succinctly  in  the  language  of
a  later  writer,  by  saying  that  a  man's  conscience  finds
its  first  moral  standard  in  'the  voice  of  his  tribal  self\'
Though  this  first  standard  is  woefully  defective,
still  it  carries  within  it  the  knowledge  of  moral  good
and  evil :  the  knowledge  of  previously  unknown  evil
that  was  already  there  but  is  now  condemned,  though
it  be  not  straightway  abandoned  ;  the  knowledge  of
previously  unknown  good  that  is  henceforth  approved,
though  it  be  not  always  pursued.  The  transition  to
this  stage  from  the  stage  of  innocence  we  find  has  been
gradual  ;  and  pari  passu  inevitable  evil — as  suck  non-
moral — has  become  avoidable  evil,  evil  that  is  freely
and  consciously  chosen — and  as  such  bad.  Is  this  an
advance?  we  ask.  If  the  evil,  now  known,  were  never
forsaken  and  the  good,  now  seen  to  be  possible,  never
pursued  :  if  the  words  of  Ovid,  Video  meliora proboque,
deteriora  sequor,  were  universally  true  of  all  human
deeds,  there  certainly  would  be  no  advance.  But  that
is  not  what  we  find.  At  any  rate  what  we  do  not  find,
it  will  be  said,  is  the  knowledge  of  evil  without  the
commission  of  it,  or  the  knowledge  of  good  without  its
omission ;  and  it  is  this  fact  after  all  that  is  the
gravamen  of  the  whole  problem.  It  is,  no  doubt,  and
we  must  presently  turn  to  it.  Meanwhile  we  have
gained  something  if  we  have  found  in  the  theory  of
evolution  the  means  of  divesting  the  problem  of  two  of
the  mysteries  that  have' hitherto  enshrouded  it — the
doctrine  of  a  fall  from  a  state  of  moral  perfection  and
the  doctrine  of  original  sin. And  we  may  hail  it  as  a

^  W.  K.  Clifford,  Lectures  and  Essays,  2nd  edn,  pp.  290 — 293.


The  dog))ia  of  '  tJic  Fair  369

hopeful  siVrn  of  the  times  that  there  are  now  theologians
who  have  the  couraore  to  admit  this\

But  this  appeal  to  evolution,  it  may  be  rcjjlied,
after  all  only  throws  the  difficulty  one  step  further  back.
For  if  the  germs  of  moral  evil  are  present  from  the
first,  what  is  this  but  to  allow  of  a  sort  of  original  sin
scarcely  less  repugnant  to  our  moral  ideas  than  the
questionable  theological  dogma  that  has  been  dis-
credited? On  the  contrary  the  difference  is  surely
profound.  Original  sin  is  described  in  the  West-
minster Confession  as  an  "  original  corruption,  whereby
we  are  utterly  indisposed... to  all  good  and  wholly
inclined  to  all  evil."  The  theory  of  evolution  furnishes
no  warrant  for  such  innate  depravity  of  disposition.  To
regard  our  primary  and  spontaneous  impulses  as  if  they
were  already  the  germs  of  moral  evil  is  to  ignore  the

'  I  will  quote  one  passage  in  evidence  and  I  quote  it  the  more
readily  because  its  author  is  a  friend  and  former  pupil  of  my  own  : —
"  There  is  thus  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  awakening  of  man's
moral  sense  or  sentiment,  his  discovery  of  a  law  by  which  he  came  to
know  sin,  was  an  advance  accomplished  by  a  long  series  of  stnges.
Consequently  the  origin  of  sin,  like  other  so-called  origins,  was  also  a
gradual  process  rather  than  an  abrupt  and  inexplicable  plunge.  The
appearance  of  sin,  from  this  point  of  view,  would  not  consist  in  the
performance  of  a  deed  such  as  man  had  never  done  before,  and  of
whose  wickedness,  should  he  commit  it,  he  was  previously  aware  ;  it
would  rather  be  the  continuance  in  certain  i)ractices,  or  the  satisfying
of  natural  impulses,  after  that  they  were  first  discovered  to  be  contrary
to  a  recognised  sanction  of  rank  as  low  as  that  of  tril)al  custom.  The
sinfulness  of  sin  would  gradually  increase  from  a  zero;  and  the  first
sin,  if  the  words  have  any  meaning,  instead  of  being  the  most  lu-inous
and  the  most  nvjuientous  in  the  race's  history,  would  raiher  Ik-  tin-
least  significant  of  all."  I'".  K.  Tinnant,  T/u-  Ori^n  and  J'ro/'ai^ii/ion
of  Sin: Hulsean  I-cclurcs,  1902,  p.  91.

W.  24


370 Moral  Evil  and  Moral  Order

true  meaning  of  *  moral '  altogether^  Those  impulses
constitute  the  basis  alike  for  moral  order  and  for  moral
evil,  but  they  are  actually  the  one  as  little  as  the
other.

To  identify  moral  evil  and  sin  defined  as  enmity  to
God  is  a  still  graver  mistake,  and  one  which  has
greatly  aggravated  the  difficulty  of  reconciling  the
existence  of  moral  evil  with  theism.  But  neither
psychology  nor  the  moral  and  religious  development  of
humanity,  so  far  as  we  can  trace  it,  will  support  such  a
doctrine.  According  to  that  doctrine  all  particular  evil
thoughts  or  deeds  are  but  indicia  of  the  breach  of  the
first  and  great  commandment  of  love  to  God.  But  love,
like  morality,  we  have  found  to  be  possible  only  when
the  stage  of  social  intercourse  and  self-consciousness  is
attained.  Prior  to  that,  man  cannot  be  said  consciously
to  love  even  himself;  and  till  he  has  learned  to  love  his
"  brother,  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  love  God,
whom  he  hath  not  seen  ?  "  In  recent  years,  since  the
importance  of  the  historical  method  has  been  recognised,
an  enormous  mass  of  facts  concerning  primitive  religion
and  morality  has  been  collected,  but  we  are  still  sadly
lacking  in  insight  into  their  true  meaning  and  con-
nexion. In  the  earlier  phases  of  its  development
religion  doubtless  powerfully  reinforced  the  sanctions
of  the  existing  morality,  but  on  the  other  hand  probably
morality  at  first  did  more  to  elevate  religion  than
religion  did  to  elevate  morality.  Under  the  influence
of  the  higher  religions  however  morality  has  unquestion-
ably gained  in  what  we  may  call  inwardness  as  well  as

'  Cf.  Tennant,  op.  cit.  on  "The  ambiguous  usage  of  the  term
'Sin'  and  its  derivatives,"  pp.  i6o  IT.


The  dogma  of  '  Origiiia/  Siji '  37 1

in  authority'.  Hence  the  deep  sense  of  sin  tliat  is
characteristic  of  the  aiuakencd  Christian  conscience.
Sin.  in  fact,  as  Mr  Hobhouse  has  well  said,  "borrows
somethinqr  of  the  infinitude  of  the  Beine  ajrainst  whom
it  offends  and  [so]  puts  a  measureless  gulf  between
Him  and  the  sinner."  Consciousness  of  sin  cannot
then  be  the  first  stage  of  moral  evil.  On  the  contrary
just  as  morality  Is  an  advance  u[)on  the  animal  l(-\el.
which  as  such  cannot  be  called  immoral,  so  this  sense
of  sin  is  an  advance  upon  the  level  of  mere  immorality,
which  as  such  cannot  be  described  as  one  of  enniiiy  or
estrangement  between  man  and  God.  On  the  merely
moral  level  self-righteousness  is  possible,  on  the  higher
religious  level  it  is  not :  hence  "there  is  joy  in  heaven
over  one  sinner  that  repenteth  more  than  over  ninety
and  nine  righteous  persons  that  need  no  repentance."
Vox  such  repentance  is  a  new  birth  into  a  iiigher  life  ;
but  it  is  not  deliverance  from  innate  depravity  :  it  is
truly  an  advance  on  all  that  existed  before,  not  a
restoration of  pristine innocence.

Here  however  let  us  return  to  the  main  question
just  now  mentioned.  Granted,  it  is  urged,  that  the
attainment  of  a  knowledge  of  good  and  v\\\  is  an
advance,  why  need  all  further  advance  be  interrupted
by  lapses.**  The  lapses  in  (juestion  consist  in  what  we
ordinarily  call  yielding  to  temptation,  as  in  the  fall  our
first  jjarents  are  said  to  have  yielded.  The  average
child  or  man  does  not  yielil  to  every  imiptation,  but
only  to  some,  while  others  art;  resisteil.  We  can.  it
is  thought,  imagin<!  an  individual  iK.'ver  <-xposecl  to
templali<ins  to(j  strong  to  be  overcome,  and  )(t  liable

'  Cf.  .Matt.  V.  27,  II,  4 J  ;  vi.  i,  2,  16.

J4— a


372 Moral  Evil  and  Moral  Order

to  temptations  of  ever  increasing  strength  as  his  own.
moral  strength  increased  ;  just  as  a  pine  may  tower
a  hundred  feet  above  the  plain  with  its  leading  bud
still  intact,  if  the  strains  it  has  to  bear,  though  growing
— and  growing,  because  of  its  growth — never  reach
the  breaking  point.  Why  is  the  world  such  that  moral
characters  don't  grow  in  this  manner?  A  wise  parent,
it  is  said,  can  do  much  to  protect  his  child  from
excessive  temptation ;  and  God,  if  he  would,  could
surely  do  much  more,  could  in  fact  do  all  that  is  needed.
But  that  parents  in  this  respect  can  be  over-wise  is
proverbial :  for  '  fugitive  and  cloistered  virtue '  proves
but  a  feeble  and  imperfect  thing  compared  with  the
virtue  that  '  sallies  forth  and  sees  her  adversary.'
Young  Washington  turned  out  a  better  man  through
being  entrusted  with  that  famous  hatchet  than  he
would  have  done  if  kept  out  of  the  mischief  into  which
it  led  him.  The  leading  bud  of  the  forest-giant  is  in
the  end  no  greater  than  it  was  when  the  tree  started  as
a  sapling,  nor  is  moral  strength  to  be  increased  by
cockering,  though  objectively  good  habits  may  grow
apace  as  long  as  the  conditions  are  favourable.  In
short,  reflexion,  I  believe,  will  convince  us  that  a
world  in  which  the  possibility  of  wrong-doing  was
prevented  by  the  exclusion  of  all  temptations  that  were
really  such,  could  neither  be  nor  become  a  moral  world
at  all.

*'  Call  it  a  non-moral  world  then,  if  you  choose,"
some  will  say;  "at  all  events  it  would  be  a  better
world  than  this  which  presumably  you  call  moral."  So
Huxley  :  "  I  protest,"  he  said,  "  that  if  some  great
Power  would  agree  to  make  me  think  always  what  is


A JVorld  ill  'leading  stri figs' 373

true  and  do  what  is  right  on  condition  of  being  turned
into  a  sort  of  clock... I  should  instantly  close  with  the
barofain.  The  onlv  freedom  I  care  about  is  the  freedom
to  do  right ;  the  freedom  to  do  wrong  I  am  ready  to
part  with  on  the  cheapest  terms  to  any  one  who  will
take  it  of  me\"  But  freedom  and  clockwork,  freedom
and  yet  no  choice  ;  clockwork  and  experience,  absolute
routine  and  yet  continuous  progress  in  self-knowledge
and  self-control,  are  not  these  flagrant  contradictions  ?
That  imaginary  non-moral  world  would  indeed  be  a
perfect  world  of  its  kind  ;  but  it  would  be  only  a  world
of  automata  between  which  complete  harmony  had
been  pre-established.  This  actual  world  of  ours  can
lay  no  claim  to  such  perfection  ;  it  has  still  to  work  out
its  own  salvation.  But  it  is  certainly  a  moral  world,
for  it  acknowledges  the  authority  of  conscience  even
when  it  disobeys  :  conscience  is  ever  a  power  in  it
working  for  the  righteousness,  in  which  alone  the  world
finds  its  own  meaning  and  its  supreme  ideal.  A  world
entirely  in  leading  strings  may  realise  an  ideal,  but  it
can  have  710  ideal  that  is  truly  its  own,  no  moral  ideal.

Which  now  is  the  better  world  ?  In  asking  this
question  we  are  reminded  of  Lessing's  fine  saying,
though  it  relates  only  to  the  first  of  the  two  goods
that  Huxley  wanted  ready-made.  "  Did  the  Al-
mighty," said  Lessing,  "  holding  in  his  right  hand
Truth,  and  in  his  left  Search  for  Truth,  deign  to  offer
me  the  one  I  might  prefer  ; — in  all  humility  but  with-
out hesitati(Mi,  I should  request — Search  for 'Truth'."

' Methods  and  Results,  Collectod  Essays,  \.  p.  192.
'  Quoted among  a number  of  similar passages by Hamilton
Metaptiysics, i.  p. 13.


374 Moral  Evil  and  Moral  Order

As  to  moral  good  however  no  such  alternative  seems
possible.  "  Nothing  takes  place  morally,"  said  Rothe,
"  except  what  takes  place  through  one  s  oivn  self-
dete7^mination  :  this  it  is  that  converts  it  from  a  mere
taking  place  into  an  action^ ^  This  is  the  main  fact,—
'  main  miracle '  if  you  will — "  this  power  on  thine  own
act  and  on  the  world  "  which  evolution  and  morality
alike  imply.  A  world  of  so-called  creatures  devoid  of
all  initiative  would  not  be  an  evolving  world  as  we
understand  evolution.  Such  a  world  might  embody
its  Creator's  will  perhaps,  if  we  could  say  that  is  willed
which  we  need  only  conceive  as  thought ;  but  even  if  it
could  be  held  to  express  his  will  it  still  could  never
either  know  it  or  do  it.  The  possibility  of  moral  evil,
in  a  word,  is  implied  in  any  moral  order  that  is  evolved
at  all :  to  make  this  impossible  is  to  make  that  im-
possible too.  Of  course  to  one  who  should  prefer  to  be
an  immaculate  puppet  rather  than  a  man  with  all  his
shortcomings  but  also  with  all  his  capabilities,  there  is
no  more  to  be  said.  But  is  such  an  irrational  person
conceivable?^

The  sort  of  ideal  world  that  we  have  just  discussed
would  cease  to  be  non-moral  if  regarded,  not  as  the
result  of  a  pre-established  harmony,  but  as  the  achieve-
ment of  virtuous  struggle  crowned  eventually  with
victory.  So  regarded  we  may  call  it  the  upper  limit  of
moral  evolution,  the  world  in  the  era  beyond  good  and
evil,  when  evil  is  no  more. At  the  other  extreme  we

^  Quoted  by  Martineau,  A  Study  of  Religion^  2nd  edn,  n.  p.  103.
Martineau's  whole  section  on  Moral  Evil  is  admirable.

"^  I  am  well  aware  that  Huxley  of  all  men  was  not  really  one  of
this  sort.


The  fii'o  Lijiiifs  of  Moral  Evolution 375

can  imaoine  a  limit  at  and  below  which  moral  evil  is
impossible,  because  moral  oood  is  impossible  ;  where
the  impulses  of  sense  are  so  exclusive  and  so  strong
that  prudence  and  virtue  are  out  of  the  question.  It  is
useless  here  to  talk  of  temptation  :  this  then  we  may
call  the  lower  limit  of  moral  evolution.  Between  these
two  extremes  lies  our  world,  where  moral  evil,  at  once
possible  and  avoidable,  is  yet  continuously  present  :  is
it  a  hopeless  venture  to  believe  in  God  where  such
a  state  of  things  obtains.-*  A  world  in  which  it  could
not  obtain,  we  have  argued,  would  assuredly  not  be
better,  for  such  a  world  would  not  be  moral  at  all.  On
the  other  hand  a  world  in  which  it  did  not,  though  it
still  might,  obtain,  would,  we  must  admit,  certainly  be
a  better  world.  But,  for  all  that,  the  actual  existence
of  moral  evil  in  our  world  is  only  incompatible  with
a  theocracy,  if  God  is  the  author  of  this  evil  ;  if,  in
other  words,  God  is  the  sole  free  agent  and  his  so-
called  creatures  only  so  many  impotent  vessels  of
honour  or  dishonour.  Then  indeed  God  and  the
world  would  be  bad  together,  but  God  onl)-  would
be  morally  evil.  And  that  surely  is  a  sup})Osition  as
absurd  as  it  is  monstrous.  Before  the  presence  of  evil
in  the  world  can  be  cited  as  evidence  that  God  is  not
present  in  it,  it  must  be  shewn  that  the  evil  is  such  as
not  merely  to  retard  but  absolutely  to  j)revent  the
onward  progress  of  moral  order  and  render  ilic  attain-
ment of  the  ujjper  limit  of  moral  evolution  for  ever
impossible.

Again  we  ask — Which  way  does  the  presumption
lie.-*  We  are  wont  to  say  that  a  struggle  between  good
and evil is now  const. uuly  going on, ami then our


37^ Moral  Evil  and  Moral  Order

question  takes  the  form  : — Which  side,  so  far  as  we
can  judge,  bids  fair  to  win?  But  in  fact  the  question
in  this  form  is  not  truly  put.  There  is  no  such  duaHsm
of  good  and  evil  :  they  are  not  two  coordinate  powers ;
in  a  word,  there  is  no  principle  of  evil\  There  is  a
moral  order,  but  evil  is  only  disorder.  This  is  the
grain  of  truth  in  the  contention  so  persistently  main-
tained, that  evil  is  essentially  negative.  However
woefully  men  mistake  what  is  their  real  good,  it  is  this
none  the  less  that  each  one  constantly  strives  for  :  evil
as  evil  is  no  man's  aim.  The  devil's  aim  it  is  indeed
said  to  be,  but  we  are  none  of  us  pledged  to  believe  in
the  devil.  The  struggle  with  evil  then  is  not  a  struggle
for  supremacy  like  the  battle  of  the  gods  and  the  Titans;
it  is  an  advance  against  hindrances,  which  exist  only  as
hindrances,  not  as  beings  having  ends  of  their  own
as  Manichaeism  supposed.  The  moment  the  true
character  of  any  form  of  evil  is  apparent  that  moment
the  struggle  to  overcome  it  begins  :  hence  the  world-
wide association  between  evil  and  darkness.

So  far  then  there  is  truth  again  in  the  ancient  Socratic
paradox  that  virtue  is  knowledge  and  vice  involuntary.
We  cannot,  of  course^  identify  virtue  and  truth,  vice  and
error :  conduct  is  more  than  cognition,  though,  in  pro-
portion as  it  is  intelligent,  it  always  implies  cognition.
In  impulsive  action,  we  act  first  and  know  after  ;  but
sooner  or  later  experience  brings  wisdom  :  otherwise  in
fact  the  plane  of  deliberative  action  would  never  have
been  attained. On  this  level  too,  with  its  '  practical

'  Cf.  Lect.  VI.  pp.  131  ff.

^  As  Aristotle  in  his  criticism  of  Socrates  long  ago  pointed  out.
Cf.  Eth.  VI.  13;  VII.  5. Also  Mackenzie,  Manual  of  Ethics,  viii.  7.


No  Principle  of  Evil  377

syllogism,'  there  may  be  genuine  error — either  as
regards  the  major  premise,  the  principle,  or  as  regards
the  minor,  the  particular  'case,'  but  error  of  this  sort
too  is  corrigible  and  tends  with  growing  experience  to
disappear.  There  may  however  be  the  self-sophistica-
tion and  casuistry  which  have  made  the  '  wiles  of  the
devil'  proverbial,  and  to  which  the  manifold  euphemisms
for  every  form  of  \ice  bear  striking  testimony.  Ikit
they  bear  striking  testimony  also  to  the  fact  that  evil
can  only  flourish  disguised  sub  specie  bo7ii,  which  doubt-
less was  part  at  least  of  what  Socrates  meant  and  led
him,  as  it  has  led  so  many  since,  strenuously  to  advocate
moral  education.  When  then  we  compare  the  unity
and  solidarity  of  the  good  with  the  motley,  many-
headed  shapes  of  evil  ever  at  cross-purposes  with  each
other,  the  conservation  common  to  all  forms  of  good
and  to  no  forms  of  evil ;  when  too  we  consider  the  close
connexion  between  the  good  and  the  true,  on  the  one
hand,  between  error  and  evil  on  the  other — have  we  not
ground  for  believing  in  the  eventual  triumph  of  the
good,  have  we  not  ground  for  maintaining  that  such
moral  e\'il  as  we  finel  in  the  world,  terrible  though
it  is,  is  after  all  not  such  as  to  justify  the  atheistic
position  ?

Hut  there  is  still  an  old  difficulty  to  consider.  The
moral  evil  in  the  world,  it  is  said,  is  not  confined  to
human  misdeeds,  innumerable  and  often  heinous  though
they  be  :  over  and  above  them  there  is  the  want  of
justice  in  what  are  supposetl  to  be  God's  ways  with
men.  "All  things  come  ahkc-  to  all:  there  is  one
event  to  the  righteous  and  to  ihc  wicked...  :  this  is  an
evil  in  all  things  thai  arc  done  under  the  sun." Well,


3/8 Moral  Evil  and  Moral  Order

if  there  is  a  God  at  all  his  ways  are  certainly  not  our
ways.  The  writer  of  Ecclesiastes  seems  to  rate  them
morally  below  our  ways,  the  writer  of  Isaiah  as  much
above  them  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth.
What  is  the  real  difference  ?  Earthly  monarchs  have
been  known  directly  to  interfere  in  the  affairs  of  their
subjects  in  order  to  exalt  the  worst  and  humble  the
best,  but  can  we  possibly  regard  the  prosperity  of  the
wicked  and  the  sufferino-  of  the  rio-hteous  as  due  to
divine  intervention  in  this  way  ?  An  immoral  govern-
ment of  the  world  would  indeed  leave  us  no  choice
but  atheism,  and  would  so  put  an  end  to  theodicies
altogether.

But  untrained  minds  none  the  less  picture  to  them-
selves God's  relation  to  the  world  as  simply  analogous
to  that  of  a  sovereign  to  his  subjects.  And  accord-
ingly they  find  the  solution  of  the  difficulty  raised,  not
in  atheism,  but  in  the  view  expounded  by  Job's  com-
forters. In  spite  of  appearances  to  the  contrary,  that  is
to  say,  there  is,  they  maintain,  strict  moral  government
and  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  does  right.  Seeming
misfortune  is  really  punishment.  So  men  thought  when
the  tower  of  Siloam  fell,  and  so  the  wide  world  through
many  think  still.  When  then  one  man  wilfully  injures
others  he  is  the  unwitting  instrument  of  divine  justice;
and  though  society  in  punishing  his  crime  performs
a  like  office  for  him,  what  is  to  be  said  if,  yielding  to
compassion,  it  proceeds  to  succour  his  victims  ?  De-
liberate attempts  to  frustrate  the  ends  of  justice  would
surely  themselves  call  for  punishment.  Again  on  this
view  might  not  the  man  in  pursuit  of  worthy  ends
rely  on  the  words  of  the  Psalmist,  which  the  tempter


Moral  Goveniniciit  in  flic  IVorld 379

misquoted,  and  be  confident,  if  he  were  indeed  truly
doing  right,  that  710  evil  could  befall  him"?  In  short,
as  Professor  Royce,  who  has  dealt  excellently  with  this
difficulty,  sums  it  up,  "the  result  is  here  indeed  a  moral
fatalism,  of  an  unexpected,  but  none  the  less  inevitable
sort'-."  Its  logical  outcome  rigorously  pursued  would
be  to  render  moral  evil  impossible  and  moral  good
inevitable — and  that,  we  have  already  seen,  is  contra-
dictory. We  may  conclude  then  that  the  contingency
in  the  world,  of  which  physical  evil  is  a  part,  cannot  be
construed  into  a  sign  of  moral  imperfection  in  its  con-
stitution :  such  contingency  is  inseparable  from  any
creation  that  is  evolutionary  in  such  wise  as  to  leave
free  aij^ents  more  or  less  initiative.

At  this  point  it  might  be  objected  :  But  if  God
does  not  interfere  either  to  reward  or  to  punish,  then
the  only  moral  government  there  is  in  the  world  is  the
work  of  his  creatures  :  '  their  initiative '  is  the  whole,
and  the  imperfection  we  find  is  no  longer  surprising.
But  what  sort  of  God  is  one  that  only  conserves  the
world  on  its  physical  side, — maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on
the  evil  and  the  good  and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and
the  unjust — but  leaves  it  morally  to  itself,  to  sink  or
swim  as  it  may  ?  No  moral  government  is  better
certainly  than  an  immoral  government,  1)ul  is  it  the
best  possible  ?  But  this  objection  is  siill  coloured  by
the  same  crude  anthropomorphism  as  the  loregoing.
just  as  creation  used  to  be  conceived  as  accomplished
only in the piecemeal fashion of  a human artificer,

'  Cf.  Matt.  iv.  6; I's.  xci.

- T/u  World  and  ihc  Individual,  ii.  p.  404:  (  f.  the  wliole  section,

PP-  399—405-


380 Moral  Evil  and  Moral  Order

completing  now  this  now  that,  so  it  was  assumed  that
divine  government  must  take  the  form  of  special  inter-
ferences, as  in  plagues  and  thunderbolts,  sudden  death
and  other  so-called  'judgments.'  Special  providences
like  special  creations,  however,  belong  to  a  creed  out-
worn ;  though  the  ideas  of  creation  and  providence  may
be  valid  still.  But  from  the  standpoint  of  pluralism
they  will  be  conceived  as  one  continuous  process  of
evolution,  not  as  two  distinct  series  of  acts,  one  of
which  is  an  interference  with  the  other\

Events  that  once  impressed  the  untutored  savage
as  supernatural  are  now  recognised  as  belonging  to
nature's  routine  ;  yet  such  events  were  doubtless  im-
portant factors  in  the  early  evolution  of  religion.  Has
this  glimmer  of  the  Divine  beyond  nature  characteristic
of  primitive  superstition  utterly  died  out,  or  has  it
ofrown  clearer  with  advancino"  knowledo-e  ?  Is  the
evidence  for  theism  greater  or  less  ?  Less,  unques-
tionably— in  fact  none  at  all — if  we  seek  only  for
miraculous  signs,  and  maintain  that  apart  from  such
special  interpositions  the  whole  cosmic  order  is  non-
moral.  Then  indeed,  unless  we  are  prepared  to  cast
science  to  the  winds,  we  are  left  to  picture  the  micro-
cosm pitted  against  the  macrocosm,  as  Huxley  did,
and,  having  done  its  best,  doomed  perchance  to  failure".
But  the  evidence  will  be  more,  certainly — in  principle

'  On  the  other  hand  apart  from  pluralism,  apart  that  is  to  say
from  the  co-operation  of  finite  agents — from  the  standpoint  of
absolute  singularism — in  other  words,  there  would  be  no  meaning  in
process  or  evolution  at  all.  Call  time  only  appearance  if  you  like;
still  meanwhile  this  appearance  is  the  universe  of  our  discourse.

^  Cf.  preceding  Lecture,  p.  360.


Moral  Govcr)i}jicut  of  fJie  Jf'or/ii 381

all  the  external  evidence  that  in  an  evolvinsf  world
seems  possible — if,  regarding  rational  agents  and  their
history  as  an  integral  part  of  the  one  cosmic  order  and
the  part  that  gives  meaning  to  the  whole,  we  find  no
hint  oi  purpose  or  worth  in  it  unless  it  be  the  realisa-
tion of  the  good  ;  if.  further,  we  find  this  ideal  con-
sciously adopted  as  their  end  by  the  best  part  of  man-
kind and  unconsciously  acknowledged  by  all  inasmuch
as  all  seek  the  good  ;  and  if,  lastly,  we  find  that  even
physical  evils  are  often  '  trials  '  that  tend  to  strengthen
virtue,  to  enhance  and  ensure  the  good  attained,  but
never  invincible  obstacles  presenting  a  solid  front  such
that  all  the  powers  of  good  cannot  prevail  against  it.
All  this,  as  I  have  said,  we  do  find  ;  and  it  means  that
moral  order  is  f/ie  order  of  the  world.  No  one  ever
put  this  position  so  forcibly  as  Fichte  :  moral  order —
the  oi'do  orduians  he  called  it,  as  the  parallel  of  the
Spinozistic  naUu^a  naturans — was  for  him  the  Absolute,
a  pantheistic  moral  principle  but  not  a  personal  God.
But  need  we,  nay  can  we,  stop  here  ?  So  far  certainly
we  need  not,  and  Pichte  in  the  end  did  not.  The
immanence  of  the  g^ood  in  the  world  as  the  informine:
principle  of  its  evolution,  the  standard  of  its  worth  at
any  stage  and  the  end  towards  which  the  whole
creation  moves,  is  not  in  itself  incompatible  with  the
transcendent  reality  of  this  j)rinciple  as  a  Supreme
Being.  'iO  deny  this  reality  may  entail  no  formal
contradiction  ;  but  it  leaves  us  to  face  the  difficulties  of
absolut('  pluralism  which  theism  removes  and  to  forego
the  confidence*  which  theism  insjjires.  P'or  order  in
the  practical  sj)here.  in  tlie  realm  of  ends,  cannot  be
merely  a  relation,  but  must  imply  that  which  orders,  .is


382 Moral  Evil  and  Moral  Order

Lotze  used  ever  to  maintain \  That  which  orders
then,  if  it  be  not  the  One  we  have  called  God,  can
only  be  the  Many  who  would  then  be  miscalled  his
creatures.  It  must  certainly  be  in  part  the  latter,  if
morality  is  to  have  any  meaning- ;  but  why  can  it  not
be  both  ?  For  the  existence  of  moral  evil  in  an
evolving  world  like  ours  would  only  debar  us  utterly
from  accepting  this  solution  if  such  evil  were  radical
and  absolute.  Still,  it  may  be  replied,  even  granting
that  we  have  no  evidence  of  an  essentially  evil  principle
at  work  in  the  world  so  far  as  we  know  it,  yet  the  part
of  it  that  we  know  is  exceedingly  small  :  elsewhere
such  a  principle  may  exist.  I  can  only  reply  by  asking
what  conceivable  reason  could  there  be  for  the  exist-
ence of  absolute  evil  ^  Its  existence  would  be  the
overthrow  of  reason  altogether,  and  carry  us  back  at  once
to  the  absurdities  of  the  pessimism  of  Schopenhauer
and  von  Hartmann.

It  may  be  well  to  anticipate  a  possible  but  some-
what perverse  objection  for  the  sake  of  another  topic
to  which  it  naturally  leads.  We  have  admitted  that  if
theism  is  to  be  defensible  this  must  be  the  best  possible
world,  and  yet  have  allowed  that  a  world  in  which
moral  evil,  though  it  might  obtain,  actually  did  not,
would  be  a  better  world  than  this.  Now  these  two
positions,  it  may  be  said,  are  inconsistent.  But  are
they,  provided  we  carefully  distinguish  ^  This  world
we  say  is  one  in  which,  though  moral  evil  actually
obtains,  it  need  not.  Why  does  it  ?  Not  because  of
any  necessitation  on  God's  part  but  because  of  the  free
acts  of  us,  who  are  joint-workers  with  him  in  the
^  Cf.  Microcosmus,  Eng.  trans,  n.  pp.  673  ff.


TJie  I  For /if  as  a  Divine  Comedy 383

world's  evolution.  So  far  as  God's  part  in  the  world
is  concerned,  this  world  and  the  better  world  supposed
are  on  a  par  :  the  inferiority  in  tact  of  this  world  is
due  to  us.  But  can  we  conceive  this  world  evolving
orthogenetically,  as  a  biologist  would  say,  without  its
peccability  passing  over  into  sin  just  as  its  lallibility
passes  over  into  error  .■*  Perhaps  we  cannot,  but  we
need  not  therefore  deny  either  that  the  straight  course
is  ideally  the  better  or  that  the  fault  is  ours.  But  some
who  seek  to  vindicate  the  ways  of  God  to  men  have
implicitly  denied  one  or  both  :  the  fall  equally  with
the  creation  they  refer  to  God's  decree  and  justify  as
abounding  to  his  glory:  the  history  of  the  world,  though
a  human  tragedy,  thus,  as  Martensen  has  said,  becoming
a  divine  comedy.  It  is  strange  that  self-glorification
should  be  attributed  as  a  motive  to  God  in  a  religion
to  which  we  owe  the  far  higher  and  more  appropriate
conception  of  God  as  Love.  But  this  is  not  the  point
to  which  I  want  now  to  refer,  but  rather  the  idea
embodied  in  such  words  as  O  felix  culpa  Adanii  quae
7ue7'uit  talem  et  tantum  habei'e  redcmpto7'evi  !  referring
to  the  d^noiiment  of  the  said  drama.  Whatever  else
we  may  think  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  called  Christ  and
of  the  religion  that  he  founded,  at  least  we  must
recognise  the  soul  of  good,  evoked  by  things  evil,
which  they  reveal.  Nobody  ever  read  Seeley's  Ecce
Homo  without  being  profoundly  imj)ressed  by  this.
N(j  wonder  then  that  Christian  speculation,  seeing  in
sin  the  occasion  of  this  revelation,  should  have  regarded
th(-  whole  s(j-called  '  pl.tu  of  salvation'  and  the  evil
which  it  presupposes  as  diviiicl)-  loreordained.  And
yet surely this cannot be, fur to make moral evil


384 Moral  Evil  and  Moral  Order

essential  to  the  perfection  of  the  world  would  leave  us
no  choice,  just  as  to  make  it  impossible  would  leave  us
none  ;  the  inevitable  can  have  no  moral  quality.  Such
doctrine,  in  a  word,  overreaches  itself.  But  the  more
good  comes  even  through  evil  the  more  reason  have
we  for  believing  the  Good  and  it  alone  to  be  verily  the
Supreme.  It  is  in  this  way  that  the  Christian  ideal
promises  to  solve  the  problem  of  moral  evil.


LECTURE XVIII.

THEORIES OF A FUTURE LIFE.

Of  all  the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to,  death  is  commonly
accounted  the  chief.  And  yet  if  we  look  only  at  life  on
this  earth  and  the  general  economy  of  nature  here,  it
seems  hardly  disputable  that  death  in  itself — apart
from  its  possible  circumstances — is  no  evil  either  for
the  individual  or  for  the  species  to  which  this  belongs  ;
while  it  is  good  for  the  progress  of  development  on
the  whole.  For  the  individual  animal,  natural  death
means  release  after  its  end — the  perpetuation  of  the
species — has  been  accomplished.  For  the  species,
death  in  general  means  the  survival  of  the  better
adapted,  the  more  vigorous  and  the  more  enterprising;
and  therefore  it  means  also  increased  opportunity  for
the  advance  to  life  of  a  higher  form.  As  regards  the
mere  animal  we  may  say  with  Hegel,  that  "death
shows  the  species  to  be  ih(^  power  that  is  superior  to
the  immediate  individual.  For  the  animal,  the  process
of  the  species  is  the  highest  point  of  its  \  itality.  l^iii
it  never  gets  so  far  as  to  have  a  being  for  itself  within
its  species:  on  the  contrar\'  it  is  subscrxiciit  to  the
supremacy of  this'." Antl this is so, we may add,

'  Encyclopaedia,  %  22\.
w.  25


386  Theories  of  a  Future  Life

because  the  merely  animal  individual  shows  little  or  no
trace  of  true  personality  :  so  we  have  natural  histories
of  species,  but  biographies  only  of  persons.  It  is  only
in  the  case  of  self-conscious  beings  then  that  the  fact  of
death,  in  removing  them  completely  from  out  our  bourne
of  time  and  place,  gives  rise  to  anxious  questionings.
We  cannot  say  of  them  that  they  existed  solely  for  the
sake  of  the  species  biologically  regarded.

Nor  can  we  say,  as  Hume  did,  "  that  if  any  purpose
of  nature  be  clear,  we  may  affirm  that  the  whole  scope
and  intention  of  man's  creation,  so  far  as  we  can  judge
by  natural  reason,  is  limited  to  the  present  life\"  if
that  were  so,  the  universal  belief  in  a  future  life  and  all
man's  moral  and  religious  ideals  would  be  unaccount-
able anomalies,  a  cruel  and  senseless  mockery  without
a  parallel  :  not  in  this  wise  do  we  interpret  the  swallow's
migratory  instincts  or  the  squirrel's  preparations  for
Its  winter  sleep.  Within  the  whole  range  of  the  wide
world's  literature  we  find  no  more  constant  theme  than
just  this  disparity  between  man's  j)ossibilities  and
aspirations  on  the  one  hand  and  the  narrow  scope
afforded  them  in  the  brief  space  of  the  present  life  on
the  other.  It  is  true,  as  we  have  had  to  note  more
than  once  already,  that  these  possibilities  and  aspira-
tions belong  to  the  individual  man  only  through  his
organic  connexion  with  the  over-individual,  Man  or
humanity  as  a  whole.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  each
person is but an instrument subservient  to this — le

^  "  On  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul."  Essays,  Green  and  Grose's
edn,  II.  p.  400,  one  of  the  essays  that  Hume  suppressed,  and  well  he
might,  for  its  arguments  rest  on  a  cynical  and  ignoble  estimate  of
humanity  that  has  seldom  been  surpassed.


Incoinplcteiiess  of  the  Present  Life 387

grand  Etrc  so  called — is  himself  in  no  sense  an  end  but
just  a  means  :  it  does  not  follow  that  his  one  function
is  vivre pour  auti'tii  and  nothing-  more.  As  a  complex
machine  is  only  an  arrangement  of  simple  machines,  so
— if  the  individual  were  only  a  means — humanity  at
best  could  only  be  a  system  of  means,  and  like  the
machine,  could  only  have  an  end  beyond  itself,  an  end
in  which  it  had  itself  no  share.  If  however  humanity —
or  to  speak  more  generally,  if  spiritual  society — is  an
end  for  itself,  then  the  persons  who  constitute  it  must
share  in  this  end.  We  cannot  bring  the  parts  under
one  category  and  the  whole  under  another.  This  in-
consequence is  one  fatal  defect  of  the  Comtian
'  enthusiasm  of  humanity,'  from  which  the  Christian  is
free'.  But  there  is  the  other  defect.  The  conditions
of  our  present  life  are  inadequate  to  our  highest
personal  and  therefore  also  to  our  highest  social  ideals.
••  My  kingdom,"  the  Christian  spirit — nay,  the  religious
spirit  everywhere — says,  "  is  not  of  this  world."  More-
over evil  is  not  overcome  unless  it  is  overcome  in  each
individual.

I^ut  while  this  sense  of  the  incompleteness  of  our
personal  life  if  death  is  to  terminate  it,  has  grown  with
our  moral  and  religious  progress  and  is  most  keenly
felt  by  the  best  of  men  and  by  men  at  their  best ;  yet,
(jn  the  (jther  hand,  the  difficulties  besetting  all  our
attempts  to  specify — even  in  the  vaguest  way— the
natural  conditions  of  such  a  life  have  grown  still  mure

'  I'herc  is  the  less  need  to  dwell  (jii  lliis  point  since  it  has  been
already  dealt  with  very  fully  by  T.  II.  (Ireen — cf.  his  Prolegomena  to
Jit  hies,  §J5  184  {^.  The  fallacy  involved  is  also  clearly  exposed  by
I)r  .McTaggart,  Studies  in  t/ic  //<\i;<Iian  Cosmohi^y,  S§  •  2  ff-

25—2


388  Theories  of  a  Future  Life

remarkably ;  and  they  weigh  most  heavily  on  those
whose  knowledge  is  most  profound  and  whose  in-
telligence is  most  exacting.  We  approximate,  in  a
word,  to  a  sort  of  antinomy  :  what  our  practical  reason
says  ought  to  be,  science  tends  to  say  cannot  be.  The
qualifications  I  have  used  are  important.  First  the
opposition  is  not  definitely  an  antinomy  :  what  the
heart  affirms  the  head  does  not  explicitly  deny.
Physical  difficulties  in  the  way  of  a  future  life  do  not
detract  from  the  moral  worth  of  such  life  :  they  may
even  add  to  it,  if  moral  advance  is  the  condition  of
their  removal.  The  many  arguments  now  in  vogue
against  a  future  life  seem  never  to  be  directly  opposed^
to  its  desirability:  what  they  chiefly  contest  is  its  possi-
bility. Again  we  say,  difficulties  do  not  make  a  thing
either  impossible  or  inconceivable  ;  all  therefore  that
science  can  do  is  to  urge  the  want  of  antecedent  proba-
bility, so  long  as  we  keep  to  what  we  at  present  know.
The  dogmatic  rationalists  before  Kant's  day  usually
disposed  in  advance  of  such  difficulties  by  metaphysical
arguments  demonstrating  the  soul's  essential  simplicity
and  imperishability.  It  is  true  that  the  subject  of
experience  cannot  be  resolved  into  a  complex  of
subjects,  although  all  experience  as  interaction  implies
such  complexity. Nor  can the subject be  analysed

^  "An  over-anxious  desire  to  prove  the  immortality  of  the  soul  is
not  by  any  means  an  evidence  of  a  religious  temper  of  mind.  Indeed,
the  belief  in  immortality  may  easily  become  an  unhealthy  occupation
with  a  future  salvation,  which  prevents  us  from  seeking  for  salvation
here."  E.  Caird,  The  Evolution  of  Religioti,  1893,  vol.  11.  p.  243.  This
sort  of  selfish  '  other-worldliness '  has  no  doubt  called  forth  condemna-
tion and  thus  has  tended  indirectly  to  discredit  the  morality  of  the
belief  in  a  future  life.


TJie  old  ' dogiimtic'  arguiiicjits  faulty 389

into  merely  objective  relations,  as  in  presentationism,
since  objects  always  imply  relation  to  a  subject.  So
far  we  seem  justified  in  regarding"  the  subject  of
experience  as  ontal  not  phenomenal  :  it  is  certainly
the  source  of  all  our  categories  concerning  reality —
substance,  cause,  end,  and  the  like.  But  Kant  revived
a  distinction  which  the  rationalists'  arguments  for
immortality  too  much  overlooked;  though  Locke  might
have  taught  them  better — the  distinction,  I  mean,
between  substantial  identity  and  personal  identity.
Such  reasonings  as  those  of  the  Leibniz-Wolffians  can
aflbrd  us  no  assurance  of  a  personal  future  till  personal
identitv  is  shown  to  be  somethinQ^  more  than  a
temporary  form  or  property,  any  number  of  which  in
succession  the  same  soul  may  acquire  and  lose.  Of
this  sort  is  the  immortality  assumed  in  the  ancient  and
widely-spread  belief  in  the  transmigration  of  souls.
The  soul  is  held  to  remain  identically  the  same,  the
various  lives  it  leads  being  in  general  determined  by
the  bodies  into  which  it  enters.  Kant  however  enter-
tained a  still  stranger  supposition,  not  the  transmigra-
tion of  the  same  soul  to  different  bodies,  but  the
complete  transference  of  the  same  personality,  that  is
to  say  the  same  self-consciousness,  to  different  souls  or
substances,  on  the  analogy  of  the  complete  transference
of  the  motion  of  one  elastic  sphere  to  another  with
which  it  collides.  Thus  on  either  view  all  that  we
know  as  our  self-conscious  lif(^  would  have  to  be
regarded  as  a  mere  accident  of  the  soul  whose  reality
it  was  none  the  less  supposed  to  reveal.

I)Ut what is prefmin(;ntly  of worih In us is not
m(*re  persistence  of  being  but  just this  coutiiuiiiy of


390  Theories  of  a  Future  Life

our  personal  life.  This,  which  the  theory  of  metem-
psychosis seems  to  sacrifice  more  or  less  completely,
would  on  Kant's  supposition  be  entirely  retained.  So
that  if  his  supposition  were  sound,  we  might  be  content
with  urging,  as  Lotze  has  already  done,  that  it  yields
everything  that  we  practically  care  about.  "  No  one
who  wished  the  doctrine  of  immortality  to  be  assured,"
said  Lotze,  "could  concern  himself  with  anything  but
that  continuity  of  his  consciousness  which  he  desired
not  to  lose  ;  he  would  be  heartily  indifferent  to  the
question  whether  the  thing  in  itself  which  was  to  be
the  substratum  of  that  continuance  occupied  in  the
series  the  position  n  or  (72+i)\"  May  be,  but  he
would  be  but  a  very  shallow  thinker  who  co^Ud  be
assured  in  such  a  case.  What  guarantee  should  we
have,  if  Kant's  analogy  were  sound,  that  our  person-
ality, being  only  a  bundle  of  accidents,  would  always  or
usually  be  passed  on  entire  '^.  If  our  whole  conscious-
ness is  separable  from  its  substratum,  how  are  we  to
know  whether  this  is  one  or  many  :  how  can  we  tell
what  it  is,  or  be  sure  that  it  is  anything  at  all  ?  To  all
these  questions  save  the  last  Kant's  reply  is  Ignoramus :
the  last  it  never  occurred  to  him  independently  to  raise
or  seriously  to  entertain  at  all.  A  view  of  the  soul,  that
could  lead  to  such  analogies,  give  rise  to  such  questions,
and  yet  furnish  no  answer  to  them,  we  surely  may
suspect.

Nor  is  it  difficult  to  find  the  source  of  these  defects  :

ultimately  and  in  the  main  it  was  none  other  than  the

Essay  concerning  Human Understanding  of  our  own

John Locke. Here  we find the same  analogy, the

'  Metaphysic,  Eng.  trans.  §  244.


Category  of  Substance  inadequate 39 1

same  phenomenal  dualism  of  matter  and  mind,  the  one
perceived  by  external,  the  other  by  internal  sense,  and
above  all  the  same  categt)ry  of  substance  and  accident
applied  alike  to  both. Vet  all  the  while  both Locke
and  Kant  were  aware  of  facts  incompatible  with  thus
levelling  down  all  the  constituents  of  experience  to  one
plane  and  handling  all  with  the  same  categories. This
Locke  showed  in  his  recoo-nition  of  the  knowledoe  of
our  own  existence  as  intuitive  and  our  knowledge  of
the  existence  of  other  finite  beings  as  only  sensible  ;
and still more Kant in  his recognition — in  what  he
called  the  synthetic unity  of  apperception — of  every
subject of  experience  as, to use Lotze's words, '  an
independent  centre  of  action  and  reaction.' The  very
abstractness  of  the category of  substance  which  led
Kant to formulate the principle now known as  the
conservation  of  mass,  and  his  description  of  substance
as the name given to  the  phenoiucnou  that is thus
conserved, show clearly the inapplicability of this
category  of  substance  and  accident  to  what  Kant  him-
self has  over  and  over  again  emphatically  declared  is
not  phenomenal. His  attempts  to  resolve  it  into  some
tcrtiiDii  quid  between  phenomenon  and  thing  per  se
plainly  indicate  that  he  had  taken  more  of  Hume  into
his system than it could assimilate. His constant
shuftling of transcendental Ego, logical Ego and
empirical  Iigo  forcibly  reminds  one  of  thimble-rigging.
Let  us  then  maki.*  bold  to  regard  our  self-conscious
lif<:,  not  as  a  llux  of  accidents  j)ertaining  with  wc  know-
not  what  all  l)esid<!  to  som(!  substratuni  or  olhcr,  bui  as
the  actions  and  reactions  of  a  thing />fr  .v^-  ov  rather  ol  a
subject  in  a  world  of  such,  as  the  intercourse  of  sucli  a


392  Theories  of  a  Future  Life

subject  with  other  subjects.  Instead  of  regarding  all
souls  as  substances  we  have  proceeded  rather  on  the
spiritualistic  interpretation  of  all  substances  as  souls.
And  it  is  worth  remarking  that  a  monadology  of  this
sort  still  haunted  Kant's  speculation  from  his  earlier
days  and  was  constantly  cropping  out  in  his  later
critical  writings\  This  is  notably  the  case,  for  example,
in  his  solution  of  the  third  antinomy  ;  for  the  logical
possibility  of  freedom,  whereby  the  solution  is  effected,
presupposes  the  actual  existence  of  a  plurality  of  things
per  se  or  substances,  whose  actions  determine  the  so-
called  course  of  nature".  Between  the  abstract  category
of  substance  and  what  we  may  call  the  real  category  of
things  or  substances,  from  which  it  is  abstracted,  there
is  a  world  of  difference.  The  history  of  philosophy,  I
incline  to  think,  shows  this  abstract  concept  of  sub-
stance to  be,  as  Schopenhauer  maintained,  either
useless  or  mischievous.  If  the  individuality  of  the
concrete  thing  is  dropped  then  substance  becomes
synonymous  with  matter  or  stuff — for  which  '  form  '  is
but  an  accident — this  is  indeed  its  popular  meaning
and  the  meaning  too  unquestionably  the  predominant
one  with  Kant.  The  mischief,  as  respects  our  present
problem,  begins  when  mind  too  is  regarded  as  substance,
as  it  was  by  Descartes  and  Locke.  But  apart  from  the
categories  of  individuality  and  activity  that  of  sub-
stantiality is  inadequate  to  define  either  the  idea  of  God
or  that  of  a  soul. It  is  also  too  indeterminate  and  empty

^  Cf.  B.  Erdmann's  Kanfs  Kriticismus  u.  s.  w.,  1878,  pp.  73 — 75  :
also  a  dissertation  by  a  pupil  of  Erdmann's,  O.  Riedel,  Die  mo7ia-
dologischen  Bestim7mmgeti  in  Kanfs  Lehre  vom  Ding  an  sick,  1884.

^  Cf.  above,  Lecture  xiv,  pp.  302  ff.


The  question  a  question  as  to  Value 393

to  admit  of  either  individuality  or  causality  being
deduced  or  dialectically  developed  from  it.  thouoh
itself  readilv  to  be  abstracted  from  the  concrete
'  things '  with  qualities  which  manifest  their  being  by
their  activity \

But  if  we  were  to  discard  the  category  of  substanti-
ality and  content  ourselves  with  that  of  mere  actuality,
what  reasons  would  remain  for  expecting  our  lilc  to
continue  indefinitely  ?  Well,  at  any  rate  the  category
of  substance  will  not  furnish  a  reason  :  it  would  at  best
only  state  the  fact,  or  rather  only  subtly  beg  the
question.  So  far  perhaps  we  may  agree  with  what
Lotze  intended  in  saying: — "The  question  of  the  im-
mortality of  the  soul  does  not  belong  to  Metaphysic.
We  have  no  other  principle  for  deciding  it,"  he  con-
tinues, ''beyond  this  general  idealistic  conviction: —
every  created  thing  will  continue,  if  and  so  long  as  its
continuance  belongs  to  the  meaning  of  the  world  ;
every  one  will  pass  away,  whose  actuality  had  only  in
some  transitory  phase  of  the  world's  course  a  place
[Stellc)  that  justified  it'."  But  it  would  still  remain  an
open  cjuestion  whether  the  evolution  of  the  world's
meaning  would  not  be  at  least  as  well  met,  (and  a  more
intimate  unity  and  continuity  secured,)  by  the  mutual
adaptations  and  adjustments  of  the  same  individuals,
as  by  the  annihilation  of  some  and  the  creation  of
others.  An)  huw  it  is  meanwhile  safe  to  say — strange
as  it  may  sound — that  we  have  no  positives  evidence,
either  a  postei'io7-i  or  a  priori, that  the  latter  is  the

'  Cf.  Sigwart,  Lo^ik,  2ncl  edn,  5^  77  (i);  Lotze,  Mclaphysik,  I  245  ;
Naturalism  and  Ai^nosticism,  3rd  edn,  v(j1.  ii.  \)\).  192  i^.
''■  Afflaphysi/i,  loc  cit.


394  Theories  of  a  Future  Life

method  which  in  fact  obtains.  We  say  All  men  are
mortal,  but  not  one  of  us  has  experienced  death  ;  not
one  of  us  knows  anything  therefore  of  what  for  the
subject  immediately  concerned  it  really  is.  If  we  knew
that  the  individual's  existence  began  with  that  of  the
body,  we  might  argue  that  it  would  also  probably  end
with  it :  but  here  again  the  empirical  basis  for  such  an
argument  fails  us.  Finally,  if  the  materialist's  con-
tention were  established,  if  soul  and  body  were  shown
to  be  identical,  that  certainly  would  leave  no  further
room  for  doubt.  But  we  may  say  with  some  confidence
that  science  itself  has  once  for  all  renounced  materialism
of  this  sort\  Altogether — so  far  as  the  mere  persist-
ence of  the  individual  subject  now  actually  existing
goes — we  may  fairly  maintain  that  the  burden  of  proof
after  all  rests  with  those  who  would  dogmatically
deny  it.

But,  as  already  said,  the  mere  persistence  of  the
individual  subject  will  not  content  us  :  it  is  in  the
continuity  of  our  personal  life  that  we  are  supremely
interested,  and  facts  force  us  to  admit  that  we  cannot
straightway  infer  the  one  from  the  other.  It  seems
useless  to  say

The  eternal  form  will  still  divide
The  eternal  soul  from  all  beside,

unless  we  have  some  basis  for  conjecturing  how  much

^  "  If  the  belief  in  immortality  is  essential  to  morality,  physical
science  has  no  more  to  say  against  the  probability  of  that  doctrine
than  the  most  ordinary  experience  has,  and  it  effectually  closes  the
mouths  of  those  who  pretend  to  refute  it  by  objections  deduced  from
merely  physical  data."  Huxley,  'Science  and  Morals,'  Collected  Essays^
vol.  IX.  p.  143.


Co)iti)iuity  of  Memory  395

or  how  little  can  be  'eternal  form.'  Whatever  has
been  gradually  acquired,  may  for  all  we  know  be  lost
again ;  and  indeed  much  of  it,  so  far  as  present
experience  goes,  appears,  at  first  sight,  to  be  entirely
lost.  Some  continuity  of  memory  is  indispensable  to
personal  continuity,  and  is  commonl)-  held  to  require
some  continuity  of  organism.  Continuity  of  environ-
ment again  appears  not  only  to  be  a  necessary  condition
of  organic  continuity,  but  to  be  also  essential  to  any
further  personal  development.  But  how  is  such  con-
tinuity conceivable  beyond  the  grave?

As  regards  memory  the  difficulties  so  commonly
felt  are  largely  due  to  bad  psychology.  Memory,
thoucrh  common  thouo-ht  and  lan^uaee  associate  it  so
intimately  with  objective  records,  obviously  cannot  be
really  identified  with  these  ;  for  they  presuppose  it\  Of
the  subjective  function,  apart  from  which  records  are
not  records,  no  explanation,  no  definition  or  description
even,  that  does  not  already  imply  it,  has — so  far  as  I
know — ever  been,  or — as  I  believe — ever  will  be  given.
We  are  tempted  perhaps  sometimes  to  describe  memory
as  the  perception  of  what  is  distant  in  the  past  and  to
develop  the  many  analogies  there  are  between  it  aiul
the  perception  of  what  is  distant  in  space.  Hut  one
difference  at  any  rate  there  is  and  that  difference  is
fundamental.  Distance  in  space  implies  only  objective
order  :  two  men  walking  together  may  both  see  the
same  landmark,  sa)'  a  mile  in  Iront  ol  tlicin  ;  hut
though  they  may  look  back  a  year  in  lime,  the  experi-
ences they  remember  will  strictly  speaking  never  be  in
a  like  sense  the  same.  Memory  furm'shes  us  with  ikj
' Cf.  Naturalism  and  Agnosticism,  vol.  n.  pj). 156  — 159.


39^  Theories  of  a  Fiittire  Life

such  common  range  in  time  as  vision  yields  us  in
space :  there  is  at  least  this  much  justification  for
Kant's  treatment  of  time  as  the  form  of  internal
perception.  The  subjective  marks  peculiar  to  memory
proper  cannot  be  identified  with  any  merely  objective
order  ;  and  so,  we  may  question  if  all  connexion  between
the  subject  and  its  past  experience  is  permanently  dis-
solved simply  by  the  apparent  obliteration  of  certain
objective  records.  Hence  the  truth — so  far — of  Fries's
contention  that  the  problem  to  explain  is  not  memory
but  obliviscence :  about  that  there  is,  however,  no-
special  difficulty  \

Moreover,  strictly  speaking,  the  universe  contains
at  this  moment  the  potential  record  of  every  event
that  has  ever  happened  ;  and  every  subject,  that  has
advanced  beyond  the  ideal  limit  of  the  '  naked  monad, ^
is  able  to  some  extent  to  read  this  record,  and  to  read
it  to  a  greater  extent  and  more  distinctly  the  further  its
own  experience  has  developed.  And  again,  at  the  level
of  self-consciousness,  over  and  above  the  merely  passive
memory  or  reminiscence,  that  has  to  wait  till  the  record
is  clear,  we  have  the  active  memory  or  recollection  that
can  search  its  own  archives;  and  we  have  also  the
intelligence  that  can  seek  out  and  interpret  other
records  beyond  any  imaginable  limit.  The  gradual
achievement of such increased independence and

'  Herein  the  analogy  with  space  holds  good.  Distant  objects  in
a  landscape  can  in  general  only  be  clearly  seen  if  they  are  of  sufficient
magnitude,  and  distant  events  in  a  lifetime  can  in  general  only  be
clearly  remembered  if  they  are  of  sufficient  moment.  Again  as  there
may  be  positive  obstructions  in  the  way  of  our  vision  so  there  may  be
in  the  way  of  our  memory,  and  the  body — as  in  disease — is  known  tc^
be  a  frequent  source  of  such  obstructions.


Memory  aiui  Objective  Records 397

initiative  is  just  that  advance  from  sentient  individual
to  rational  person,  from  soul  to  spirit,  which  philosophy
from  Plato  onwards  has  steadily  recognised  as  a  fact,
though  it  has  seldom  ventureci  to  account  for  it  as
a  continuous  development.  If  now— in  addition  to  the
subjective  factor  implied  in  all  memory — we  take  into
account  this  increased  independence  which  the  spiritual
level  secures,  and  along  with  this  the  fact  that  in  what
we  may  call  the  world  order  the  new  is  continuous
with  the  old.  we  surely  have  some  ground  for  thinking
it  possible  that  the  departed  spirit  may  re-collect  itself,
even  without  the  body.  Nay,  it  will  not  be  absurd  to
suppose  with  Kant  that  at  this  level  "  the  separation
from  the  body  would  be  the  end  of  the  sensuous
employment  and  the  beginning  of  the  intelligible  em-
ployment of  our  faculty  of  knowledge.  The  body  would
then  have  to  be  considered,  not  as  the  cause  of  our
thinkinof  but  onlv  as  a  restrictive  condition  of  it  and
therefore... as  an  impediment  of  our  pure  and  spiritual
life\"  The  spirit  is  often  willing  when  the  flesh  is
weak  ;  but  here  we  have  a  literal  rising  through  its
death  to  higher  things.  At  any  rate  we  must  hold
firmly  to  the  position  that  it  is  function  that  determines
structure,  n(jt  structure  that  determines  function  ;  that
the  soul  is  the  entelechy  of  the  body,  not  vice  versa,  to
use  the  phrase  of  Aristotle's  which  Leibniz  adopted.
It  then  surely  becomes  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the
spirit  that  has  so  far  transcended  the  body  is  not  wholly
undone  with  its  undoing,  emphatically  reasonabh;  if  we
find,  when  we  come  presently  t(j  incjuire,  that  there  are

' Criiiiiue  of  the  Pure  Reason, isl  cdn,  p. 77S. Max Miillcr's
trans.,  \).  667.


398  Theories  of  a  Future  Life

teleological grounds of  supreme moment, why this
should  not  be.

And  yet,  we  must  allow  that  we  can  hardly  frame
more  than  the  vaguest  conjectures  how — so  far  as  it  is
verily  disembodied — the  soul  or  spirit  proceeds,  if  needs
be,  to  clothe  itself  anew  ;  albeit  we  have  no  reason  to
regard  it,  let  me  remark  again,  as  reduced  in  the
interim  to  the  level  of  a  naked  monad.  But  there  is
at  any  rate  a  closely  analogous  case,  where  a  like
renewal  actually  happens,  though  our  ignorance  of  the
process  is  almost  as  complete.  But  if  we  knew  abso-
lutely nothing  of  embryology,  and  if  it  happened — as
Leibniz  in  fact  supposed — that  the  process  of  dying
consisted  in  a  reversal  or  '  involution '  of  the  process
of  growth  and  differentiation,  so  that  the  true  corpse,,
so  to  say,  should  be  again  nothing  but  a  tiny  and
apparently  homogeneous  speck  of  protoplasm — so  small
that  a  few  consecrated  pill-boxes  might  almost  suffice
for  the  canipi  santi  of  the  world — we  should,  I  fancy,
be  quite  as  sure  as  we  can  now  be  that  the  renewal  of
such  a  life  was  an  idle  dream.  And  yet  in  the  embryo^
a  like  speck,  we  have

Although  the  print  be  little,  the  whole  matter
And  copy  of  the  father, — eyes,  nose,  lip,


The  very  mould  and  frame  of  hand,  nail,  finger.

May  we  not  then  suppose  that  if  the  germinal  soul  can
accomplish  so  much  the  separated  spirit  can  accomplish
more^  } But  it  will  be  replied  the  germ  is  an  organism,

^  I  have,  since  writing  the  above,  chanced  upon  the  following
interesting  anticipation  : — "Abstractly  considered,  that  is  considered
without  relation  to  the difference  which habit and  merely habit


'  Iiivolittioii '  and  Gcyniiiiation 399

not  a  disembodied  soul.  That  is  true  unquestionably
and  it  is  important  ;  for  any  continuity  of  life  with  no
continuity  of  either  organism  or  environment  seems
quite  inconceivable.  But  there  is  nothing-  in  our
present  knowledge  to  show  that  there  cannot  be  any
other  mode  of  embodiment  than  that  with  which  we
are  here  familiar,  and  that  we  have  not  manifold  other
relations  with  our  environment  besides  those  which  the
organism  as  we  know  it  is  supposed  to  explain — or
rather  perhaps  that  our  environment  has  not  such  rela-
tions with  us,  of  which  we  at  present  have  no  clear
consciousness.  It  is  futile  to  attempt  to  specify  these
possibilities  by  imagining  an  astral  body,  an  ethereal
body  or  the  like  ;  and  to  talk  of  a  subliminal  self  seems
only  to  betray  ignorance  of  the  real  problem,  which
relates  not  to  the  self  but  to  the  continuance  after
death  of  its  rappoi't  with  the  world.

But  we  may  at  least  lay  stress  on  the  tremendous
ga{j  in  our  scientific  knowledge  concerning  the  inter-
action of  body  and  mind — a  gap  which  there  seems  no
prospect  of  our  filling  up,  whether  w^e  work,  so  to  say,
outwards  from  psychology  or  inwards  from  physiology
— if  such  inaccurate  phraseology  may  be  for  brevity's

produces  in  our  faculties  and  modes  of  apprehension,  I  do  not  see
anything  more  in  the  resurrection  of  a  dead  man  than  in  the  con-
ception of  a  child ;  except  it  he  this  that  the  one  comes  into  his  world
with  a  system  of  prior  consciousness  about  him,  while  the  other  docs
not :  and  no  person  will  say  that  he  knows  enough  of  either  subject
to  perceive  that  this  circumstance  makes  such  a  difference  in  the  two
cases,  that  the  one  should  be  easy,  and  the  other  not  so.  To  ilie
first  man,  the  succession  of  the  species  would  be  as  incomprehensible
.IS  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  is  to  us."  I'alcy,  Evidences  of  Christi-
luiity,  Tcgg's  edn  of  his  works,  p.  i  14.


400  Theories  of  a  Future  Life

sake  allowed.  Here  there  must  be  facts  in  plenty  of
which  we  are  wholly  ignorant,  and  here,  it  may  be,  that
as  an  original  but  little  known  writer  has  supposed,
"  in  the  course  of  this  life  the  nervous  system  by  its
ultimate  habitudes  should  frame  a  finer  organization,
and  that  this  in  the  moment  and  act  of  death  should
be  disentangled  from  the  coarser  framed"  Or  more
likely,  it  may  be,  as  Bonnet  and  the  younger  Fichte
supposed,  that  within  the  changeable  '  external  body '
there  is  from  the  first  an  'inner  body'  that  shapes  it
and  outlasts  it".  Or  again,  with  still  more  probability,
it  may  be,  as  Thiele  supposed,  that  this  invisible  body
is  not  built  up  from  without  nor  present  from  the  first
as  '  form-principle '  of  the  external  and  changing  body,
but  that  it  will  be  gradually  elaborated  as  the  soul's
development  requires,  just  as  the  bodies  which  it  has
outworn  were  elaborated  to  subserve  its  needs  during
the  lower  stages  of  its  development^  But  all  such
hypotheses,  and  there  are  many,  like  the  gap  in  our
knowledge  that  leaves  room  for  them,  do  not  reach
beyond  the  dualism  of  common  thought ;  fail  in  fact  to
get  down  to  the  bed-rock  of  experience  that  underlies
all  such  problems.  More  fundamental  than  any  seem-
ing dualism  of  body  and  soul  is  the  duality  of  subject
and  object  in  experience,  and  this — for  spiritualistic
monism — means  the  interaction  of  subjects  with  other

^  W.  Cyples,  A?i  biqiiiry  into  the  Process  of  Human  Experience,
London,  1880,  p.  431.

^  C.  Bonnet,  La  palingenesie  philosophiqiie,  1769.  J.  H.  Fichte,
Psychologie,  1864,  i.  pp.  63  f.  A  similar  view,  it  is  interesting  to
note,  was  entertained  by  the  physicists,  Balfour  Stewart  and  Tait :
cf.  The  Unseen  Universe,  2nd  edn,  1875,  PP-  159^-

^  G.  Thiele,  Die  Philosophie  des  Seibstsbezvusstseitts,  1895,  pp.  506  f.


Con ti unify  of  Envirounieiit  401

subjects,  transcends  the  opposition  of  person  and  thing.
It  means  too.  that  the  organism  is  the  result  of  such
subjective  interaction,  not  that  this  interaction  is  the
result  of  it ;  more  generally  still,  that  subjects  are
the  prime  agents  in  maintaining  the  so-called  physical
world,  not  this  the  prime  agent  by  which  they  are
passively  sustained.  Till  naturalism  succeeds  in  con-
verting this  position  the  way  to  belief  in  a  future  life
will  always  be  open.

But  again  as  regards  the  future  environment  we
must  admit,  as  in  the  case  of  the  future  organism,  that
in  the  complete  absence  of  any  experience  we  can  do
no  more  than  conjecture.  And  obviously,  if  we  are
ignorant  of  the  organism  that  is  to  be,  we  must  be
ignorant  also  of  its  specific  environment ;  and  vice  versa.
But  after  all,  as  just  now  said,  there  is  for  spiritualism
no  sharp  line  between  the  two,  indeed  even  for
materialism  there  is  none:  for  the  one  as  for  the  other,
the  organism  is  continuous  with,  and  a  part  of,  the
objective  world.  All  that  we  can  reasonably  assert  is
that  between  the  old  life  and  the  new  there  must  be
some  continuity  of  experience,  if  the  new  life  is  to  be
regarded  as  a  future  life  and  not  as  merely  another  life.
There  are  two  views  to  be  considered  :  that  of  trans-
migration or  reincarnation,  accepted  by  the  majority  of
the  human  race,  and  that  of  transfiguration,  if  we  may
so  call  it,  prevalent  among  Christians.  The  one  secures
a  continuity  of  environment  that  satisfies  the  imagina-
tion of  survivors,  but  at  the  sacrifice  more  or  less  com-
plete of  that  personal  continuity  which  we  must  regard
as  essential.  The  other  pre.serves  this,  but  transfers  it
to  an  unseen  world  difficult  to  realise.

w.  26


402  Theories  of  a  Future  Life

The  objection  to  transmigration  or  metempsychosis^
has  been  met  by  assuming  that  the  personal  discon-
tinuity is  only  temporary,  and  that  the  successive  lives
of  a  given  subject  may  be  eventually  connected  through
continuous  but  latent  memories  that  are  revived  after
death  or  when  all  the  soul's  Wanderjakre  are  over^
But  even  so,  if  this  series  is  to  have  any  real  continuity
or  meaning,  if  it  is  to  be  not  merely  a  series  but  a  pro-
gression, then  at  every  return  to  life,  either  Providence
must  determine,  or  the  naturient  soul  must  itself  select,
its  appropriate  reincarnation.  Otherwise,  if  disem-
bodied souls  are  to  be  blown  about  by  the  winds  of
circumstance  like  other  seeds,  we  should  only  have  a
repetition  of  that  outrageous  fortune  which  the  doctrine
of  transmigration  was  supposed  to  redress  :  the  con-
tingency that  seems  to  pertain  to  the  one  birth  we  know
of  would  only  be  manifolded,  not  removed.

This  difficulty  in  turn  has  been  met  by  the  further
and  bolder  assumption,  that  disembodied  souls  do  in
fact  steer  their  own  way  back  to  a  suitable  re-birth.
An  atom  liberated  from  its  molecular  bonds  is  described
as  manifesting  an  unwonted  activity,  technically  known
as  '  the  nascent  state ' ;  but  still  it  does  not  recombine
indifferently  with  the  first  free  atom  that  it  encoun-
ters, but  only  with  one  for  which  it  has  an  '  affinity.'
And "  there seems to be nothing more strange  or

^  This  term  though  commonly  in  use  is  obviously  inaccurate.
If  we  must  needs  have  a  Greek  word,  fx(.Tf.vaui^aT(jiCTi%  used  by  Clem.
Alex,  is  preferable.

^  So,  for  example,  Professor  Campbell  Eraser  thinks.  Cf.  his
Theism,  vol.  ii.  p.  249.  And  still  more  definitely  Renouvier,  Le
Persotinalisme,  1903,  p.  220.  A  similar  view  was  held  by  Max
Drossbach,  J. Reynaud  and  many  others.


Difficulties  to  be  Diet  403

paradoxical,"  it  has  been  said,  "in  the  suggestion  that
each  person  enters  into  connexion  with  the  body  that
is  most  fitted  to  be  connected  with  him"."  But  the
affinities  of  a  given  atom  are,  so  far  as  we  know,  any-
thing but  select  :  not  only  will  it  combine  with  others
of  many  kinds,  but  it  seems  to  be  absolutely  indifferent
to  individuals  within  a  kind.  So  far  this  analogy  then,
if  it  justified  any  inference  at  all,  would,  it  may  well  be
thought,  hardly  warrant  us  in  expecting  each  person  to
find  his  next  incarnation  even  within  the  species  Homo
sapiens.  Still  less  would  it  lead  us  to  expect  that  he
could  secure  such  parentage  and  surroundings  as  to
admit  of  his  turning  the  best  of  his  past  powers — as
poet  or  patriot  say — to  full  account,  assuming  that  with
the  temporary  lapse  of  definite  memories  these  could
be  still  retained.

But  on  the  other  hand  it  may  be  fairly  urged  that
a  liberated  spirit  ought  to  be  credited  with  vastly  more
savoir  vivre  than  a  liberated  atom.  Further  it  must
be  allowed  that  this  suggestion  is  quite  in  keeping  with
the  conservation  of  values,  which  men  like  Lotze  and
Hoffding  regard  as  axiomatic — at  any  rate  experience
often  verifies,  and  never  certainly  belies  if'.  Finally  it
minimises  the  objection  to  personal  continuity  that  is
often  based  on  the  facts  of  heredity '. And  for  my  part

' McTaggart,  Some  D(\^nias  of  Religion^  1906,  p.  126.
'  Cf.  Lecturex. pp.  2i2f., and Tenny.son,/«^cw<?rmw, canto  xlv: —
This  use  may  lie  in  blood  and  breath,
Which  else  were  fruitless  of  their  due.
Had  man  to  learn  himself  anew
Heyond  the  second  birth  of  death.
'  It is worth while to note tii;it  against  this objection Kaiil
proposed a  similar  reply, the  "transcendental hy|)otlKsis, namely,

26 — 2


404  Theories  of  a  Future  Life

I  must  confess  that  this  difficulty  seems  by  far  the  most
serious  of  any  that  beset  the  hypothesis  of  a  plurality
of  lives.  The  traducian  doctrine  of  the  soul's  origin  is
hard  to  reconcile  with  any  true  spiritualism,  while  the
creationist  doctrine  is  alien  to  the  theory  of  evolution
and  open  to  other  obvious  difficulties  besides.  Indeed,
if  by  difficulty  we  mean  something  that  we  fail  to  work
in  with,  and  adjust  to,  facts  or  ideas  that  we  accept
absolutely ;  then  I  make  bold  to  deny,  Dr  Rashdall
notwithstanding\  that  the  theory  of  pre-existence
'creates  new  difficulties.'  It  involves  'a  ramifying
network  '  of  assumptions  unquestionably  ;  but  if  it  '  is
certainly  not  capable  of  positive  disproof,'  the  objector
is  bound  to  show  that  the  result  of  the  whole  is  worth-
less. Till  then,  summarily  to  reject  it  involves  the  still
more  extravagant  assumption  that  we  have  exhausted
all  possibilities  and  that  what  may  be  only  our  lack  of
knowledge  of  its  empirical  conditions  is  tantamount  to
a  proof  of  its  impossibility^  As  Kant,  whose  words  I
have  adopted,  has  said,  this  arrogance  of  negation  does

that  all  life  is  really  intelligible  only,  not  subject  to  the  changes  of
time,  and  neither  beginning  in  birth  nor  ending  in  death... that  if  we
could  intuite  ourselves  and  other  things  as  they  really  are,  we  should
see  ourselves  in  a  world  of  spiritual  natures,  with  which  our  only
true  community  did  neither  begin  at  birth  nor  will  end  with  the  death
of  the  body,  both  being  merely  phenomena"  {^Critique  of  the  Pure
Reason,  M.  Miiller's  trans,  p.  668).  It  is  also  interesting  to  learn
that  shortly  before  the  publication  of  the  Critique  Kant  dogmatically
taught  both  the  pre-existence  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  Cf.
Max  Heinze,  Vorlesungen  Kanfs  iiber  Metaphysik,  1894,  p.  547
of  the  reprint  from  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of
Saxony.

^ Theory  of  Good  and  Evil,  1907,  vol.  11.  pp.  346  f.

'  Cf.  Kant,  Critique,  ist  edn,  p.  780,  M.M.  p.  681.


Prc-cxisfciicc  405

not  eliminate  in  the  least  the  practical  value  of  such
hypotheses.  The  appeal  to  ignorance  no  doubt  cuts
both  ways  :  it  does  not  allow  us  to  treat  hypotheses
as  knowledge,  but  on  the  other  hand  it  does  not  destroy
their  working  utility  if,  consistently  with  what  we  do
know,  they  enable  us  even  tentatively  to  reach  a  com-
pleter and  more  satisfactory  Weltanschauung.  As
regards  this  particular  hypothesis  of  pre-existence  and
a  plurality  of  lives,  its  complexity  is  no  advantage
certainly  ;  but  even  so  the  disadvantage  is  reduced  in
proportion  as  the  separate  assumptions  are  analogous
with  actual  experience  and  consilient  with  each  other.
After  all  it  should  give  the  scornful  objector  pause,  to
think  how  many  of  the  vital  processes,  about  which  we
have  definite  knowledge,  involve  an  elaborate  adjust-
ment of  multifarious  details  that  would  be  utterly  in-
credible but  for  its  familiarity.  Is  it  then  unreasonable
to  expect  still  more  marvellous  conjunctions  in  the  wider
dimensions  of  the  world  beyond  the  grave  ?  And  is  it  not
also  possible — just  because  of  such  wider  dimensions —
that  what  to  us  seems  complicated  or  impossible  is
really  as  simple  as  say  movement  into  a  third  dimen-
sion, which  yet  a  being  confined  to  two  might  fail  to
understand  ?  To  the  theist  at  any  rate  it  is  conceiv-
able that,  without  any  arbitrary  interventions,  subjective
processes  and  objective  influences  may  be  there  at
work  which  are  not  merely  retributive  hut  remedial
also.  Such  notions  are  of  course  more  or  less  akin  to
the  Christian  doctrines  of  piirgatorw  angels,  interces-
sion and the like.

This  brings  us  naturally  to  the  theory  of  the  future
life  characteristic  (»f  Christianity,  viz. as a final and


4o6  Theories  of  a  Future  Life

irrevocable  state  of  existence  in  a  so-called  unseen  and
eternal  world.  The  difficulty  here  is  not  so  much  our
inability  to  imagine  such  a  purely  spiritual  form  of  life  ;
but  rather  the  utter  gulf  that  according  to  this  doctrine
must  lie  between  this  life  and  ours.  That  a  man
should  pass  at  once  from  earth  to  heaven  or  hell  seems
irrational  and  inequitable  ;  and  the  lapse  of  ages  of
suspended  consciousness,  if  this  were  conceivable,
would  not  diminish  this  discontinuity.  But  between
one  active  life  and  another  there  may  well  be  such  an
intermediate  state  of  mental  rumination,  so  to  say,  and
reflexion,  as  many  theologians  have  assumed.  This
state,  it  has  been  said,  "is  not  a  domain  of  deeds  and
works,  for  the  external  conditions  for  these  are  wanting
...it  is  the  domain  of  inwardness,  of  silent  consideration
and  pondering,  a  domain  of  recollection  {^Erinnerung)
in  the  full  sense  of  the  word\"  We  can  perhaps  suppose
that  this  process  may  be  a  preparation  for  a  new  life,
as  just  now  hinted,  provided — though  with  re-birth,
the  body,  as  Plotinus  held,  "  be  the  true  river  of  Lethe,
and  the  soul  plunged  in  it  forgets  all " — the  change  in
character  is  notwithstanding  still  somehow  retained.
But  it  is  hardly  credible  that  any  spiritual  clarifying
based  on  a  single  life — or  series  of  lives — that  is  not
more  refined  and  matured  than  ours,  could  fit  many,  or
indeed  any,  of  the  children  of  men  for  that  final  con-
summation which  Christianity  describes  as  eternal  life.
At length, however, and sooner for some than for

^  Martensen,  Die  christliche  Dogmatik,  1856,  §  275.  Such  a  self-
purgatory  of  all  souls  seems  a  worthier  idea  than  the  one-sided  ex-
piatory purgatory  of  the  Romish  Church,  which  has  so  little  moral
efficacy  that  it  may  be  curtailed  by  extraneous  ceremonial.


The  CJiyistian  '  Tyaiisfiguratio)! ' 407

others,  a  stage  might  be  reached,  when — so  to  say —
the  '  disembodied  '  spirit  would  pass  beyond  the  range
of  attraction  of  the  seen  and  temporal  and  enter  the
confines  of  the  eternal  world  ;  at  once  tending  towards,
and  drawn  on  bv.  that  outer  constellation  of  the  choir
invisible,  to  which  it  is  best  attuned.

But  now  in  conclusion,  again  recognising  to  the
lull  the  conjectural  character  of  all  these  details,  we
may  nevertheless  still  maintain  that  they  are  of  great  use
in  helping  us  to  realise  more  definitely  the  possibility
of  a  future  life.  On  the  main  issue  round  which  these
speculations  turn,  we  must  at  least  insist,  viz.  that  if  such
life  is  to  have  any  worth  or  meaning,  a  certain  personal
continuity  and  continuity  of  development  is  essential.
From  this  point  of  view  death  becomes  indeed  but
a  longer  sleep  dividing  life  from  life  as  sleep  divides
day  from  day  ;  and  as  there  is  progress  from  day  to
day  so  too  there  may  be  from  life  to  life.  And  we
may  perhaps  see  another  resemblance.  As  we  often
do  things  better  for  sleeping  over  them — though  we
remember  nothing  of  the  subconscious  processes  through
which  our  plans  have  matured — so  we  may  do  better
in  a  future  life,  though  the  new  awakening  has  crowded
out  the  memories  of  our  sojourn  in  the  other  world.
In  one  important  point  indeed  the  analogy  seems  to
fail  :  our  waking  life  is  a  continuous  whole,  the  series
of  repeated  lives  at  first  is  not.  But  even  here  on  the
assumption  that  in  the  purely  spiritual  life  of  the  other
world  this  continuity  is  resumed,  the  analogy  again
holds  good.  We  have  then  however  to  equate  our
earthly  liv(!s  to  dreams  and  death  becomes  not  a  sleep-
ing Ijut  an  awaking:  Afors  jauua  ritae. Aiul  ])(rh;ij)s


4o8  Theories  of  a  Future  Life

it  will  seem  less  strange  so  to  regard  it,  the  more  we
think  of  the  possibilities  that  the  spiritual  world  may
enfold.

It  still  remains,  however,  to  consider  what  solid
grounds  we  have  for  attaching  any  weight  to  these
open  possibilities.


LECTURE XIX.


FAITEl AND KNOWLEDGE.


It  was  the  hopelessness  of  the  problem  of  evil,  if
this  life  is  all,  that  brought  us  to  the  question  of  further
life  beyond  the  grave.  Having  now  found  reason  for
thinking  that  such  a  life  can  quite  well  be,  we  come  to
the  moral  arguments  why  it  should  be.

Of  these  at  once  the  most  ancient  and  the  most
universal  is  perhaps  the  juridical  or  retributive  argu-
ment: — a  man's  lot  in  this  life  is  'a  judgment'  on  his
conduct  in  preceding  lives  ;  and  in  the  next  he  will  be
rewarded  or  punished  for  what  he  has  done  here.  But
the  morality  of  our  time  has  largely  outgrown  the
paedagogic  functions  of  such  external  sanctions  and
has  found  a  truer  and  worthier  interpretation  of  what
they  but  crudely  and  imperfectly  express.  The  con-
cluding proposition  of  Spinoza's  Ethics  is  the  last  word
here  :  "  Blessedness  is  not  the  reward  of  virtue  but
virtue  itself."  And  so,  of  course,  viutatis  imitandis,  of
vice.  The  one  fundamental  argument  for  more  life  is
not  the  need  for  adequate  compensations — but  for
adequate  opportunities,  not  th(!  dtnnaiul  for  fairc-r
wages  but  for  fuller  work.  A  man  is  immortal  till  his
work  is  done,  wtt  say  ;  and  it  is  because  we  sec  that
his  work  is  not  done,  that  his  capacities  are  not  worked


4IO  Faith  and  Knowledge

out  here,  that  we  feel  confident  that  death  is  not  the
end  of  him.  For  all  things  work  together  for  good,  we
hold  :  indeed,  to  what  other  end  and  how  else  could
they  really  or  reasonably  work  together  at  all  ?  This
is  our  fundamental  postulate  and  the  ultimate  ratio
cognoscendi  of  the  theistic  position.  So  then  we  may
say  with  Professor  Royce  : — "  If  death  is  real  at  all  it  is
real  only  in  so  far  as  it  fulfils  a  purpose.  But  now,
what  purpose,"  he  asks,  "can  be  fulfilled  by  the  ending
of  a  life  that  is  so  far  unfulfilled.-^"^  In  fine,  the  problem
of  evil  seems  insoluble,  and  any  theodicy  impossible,  if
this  life  be  all,  "  Whoever  believes  in  a  God,''  said
Rothe,  ''must  also  believe  in  the  continuance  of  man
after  death.  Without  that  there  would  not  be  a  world
that  could  be  thought  of  as  [realising]  God's  purpose"."
Thus  the  one  main  argument,  as  I  have  called  it,  is
entirely  a  moral  argument :  without  it  the  '  open  possi-
bilities '  we  have  just  been  considering  would  have  no
weight,  and  even  with  it  they  are  not  converted  into
scientific  certainties.  It  may  lead  to  faith  but  it  cannot
anticipate  experience  of  what  is  '  behind  the  veil '  of  all
we  know.

This  moral  argument  has  been  put  several  times
with  unusual  power  and  eloquence  in  our  recent  litera-
ture, as  for  example  by  Martineau,  Royce,  Laurie  and
others  ;  for  this  reason  I  do  not  propose  to  enlarge
upon  it  here,  but  only  briefly  to  return  to  it  presently,
when  dealing  generally  with  Faith.  There  is  how-
ever one  earlier  statement  summing  up  the  whole
subject, part  of which I will  quote,  as it leads on

' The  World  and  the  Individual,  n.  p.  440.
^  Stale  Stunden,  p.  219,  quoted  by  Martineau.


TJie  Moral  ArguDiejit  foy  I/imiorfalify 411

naturally  to  this  topic,  which  I  would  now  invite  you  to
consider  next.  The  passas^e  occurs  at  the  end  of
Kant's  severe  criticism  of  the  supposed  theoretical iproo{s
of  immortality  prevalent  in  his  time.  Having-  there
shown  '  the  impossibility  of  settling  anything  dogmatic-
ally with  reference  to  an  object  of  experience  beyond
the  limits  of  experience'  he  concludes: — "Nothing  is
lost,  however,  by  this  with  regard  to  the  right,  nay  the

necessity  of  admitting  a  future  life The  proofs  which

are  useful  for  the  world  at  large  retain  their  value  un-
diminished, nay,  they  gain  in  clearness,  simplicity,  and
power  when  stripped  of  such  dogmatic  pretensions ;
for  they  bring  reason  back  to  its  own  peculiar  domain,
the  realm  of  ends,  which  is,  however,  at  the  same  time
a  realm  of  nature.  But  there  too  reason,  as  in  itself  a
practical  faculty,  is  entitled,  without  being  confined  to
the  conditions  of  nature,  to  extend  the  realm  of  ends
and  with  it  our  own  existence  beyond  the  limits  of  our
present  experience  and  life.  According  to  analogy
with  the  7iatu7'e  of  living  beings  in  this  world,  concern-
ing which  reason  must  necessarily  assume  the  principle
that  no  organ,  no  faculty,  no  impulse,  in  short  nothing
superfluous  or  disproportionate  to  its  use,  and  therefore
aimless,  is  to  be  met  with  ;  that  on  the  contrary  every
being  is  precisely  adapted  to  its  vocation  in  life —
according  to  this  analogy,  man,  who  yet  alone  can
contain  within  himself  the  final  end  of  all  this,  must
needs  be  the  only  creature  that  is  an  excejition  to  the
principle.  Vnx  not  only  his  native  capacities... but  pre-
eminentlv  the  moral  law  within  him,  ljo  so  far  bevond
all  utility  and  advantage  to  be  derived  Irom  ihcm
in  this  life,  that  the  latter  I  the  moral  law]  even  instructs


412  Faith  and  Knowledge

him,  in  the  absence  of  all  advantages,  yes,  even  of  the
shadowy  hope  of  posthumous  fame,  to  esteem  the  mere
consciousness  of  rectitude  above  all  else  and  to  feel  an
inner  call,  by  his  conduct  in  this  world... to  make  him-
self worthy  to  be  the  citizen  of  a  better,  of  which  he
possesses  [only]  the  idea.  This  powerful  proof,  never
to  be  controverted,  accompanied  by  our  constantly
increasing  acquaintance  with  the  purposiveness  per-
vading all  that  we  see  around  us,  by  the  prospect  of
the  immensity  of  creation  and  therefore  also  by  the
consciousness  of  a  certain  illimitability  in  the  possible
extension  of  our  knowledge  along  with  an  instinct
commensurate  to  it,  all  this  remains  and  always  will
remain,  even  though  we  must  give  up  [the  hope]  from
the  merely  theoretical  knowledge  of  ourselves  of
understanding  the  necessary  continuance  of  our
existence^"

Here  we  have  necessary  continuance  of  existence
asserted,  though  from  the  nature  of  the  case  all  know-
ledge is  denied,  and  asserted  because  of  an  incon-
trovertible proof  of  what  theoretically  we  cannot
understand !  Surely  this  is  a  paradox  if  ever  there
was  one.  Yet  underlying  this  paradox  we  shall  find
the  basis  on  which  the  whole  philosophy  of  theism
rests.  To  Kant  belono-s  the  credit  of  havinsf  first
made  this  clear,  and  that  by  his  distinction,  so  often
misunderstood,  between  the  practical  and  the  theoretical,
use  of  reason  and  by  his  insistence  on  what  he  called
the  primacy  of  the  former.  Ignoring  this  distinction
or  assuming  without  question  that  the  right  to  believe

^ Critique  of  the  Pure  Reason,  2nd  edn,  pp.  4240". Max  Miiller's
translation  (amended),  vol.  11.  pp.  504  ff.


TJie  Friinacy  of  the  Practical  Reason 413

in  God  and  a  future  life  is  no  better  than  the  wish,  the
agnostic simply asks with Huxley: "Why trouble
ourselves  about  matters  of  which,  however  important
they may be, we do know nothing, and can know
nothing?'" Or  still  more  emphatically  with Cliftbrd
he  sums  up  his  ethics  of  belief  by  declaring  that  "  it  is
wrong  always,  everywhere  and  for  any  one,  to  believe
anything upon insufficient evidence*." One tale is
good  till  another  is  told  ;  so  all  this  agnosticism  is  true
and  trite  so  far  as  logic  goes. But  there  is  more  in  life
than  logic,  and  it  is  just  its primary  factor  that  our
agnostics  overlook. "  The  state  of  things  is  evidently
far  from  simple  :  and  pure  insight  and  logic,  whatever
they  might do ideally,  are  not  the  only  things  that
really do produce our creeds'," as William James
said in a classical  essay that  has made this theme
one  of  the  burning  questions  of  our  time. This,  the
connexion  of  faith  and  knowledge,  is  our  present  topic.
First  of  all  we  have  only  to  recall  facts  that  in  the
course  of  these  lectures  we  have  already  had  to  deal
with more than once. The whole process of the
world,  concretely  regarded,  we  have  found,  so  far  as
we  have  been  able  to  trace  it,  is  a  process  of  evolution.
Experience then means  becoming  expert  by  experi-
ment. We  do  not  begin  by  knowing  but  by  learning.
We  gain  knowledge  by  merely  doing — and  that  whether
we  succeed  or  fail — and  we  gain  it  solely  by  doing  :  in
the  first  instance  at  least,  or  by  the  race,  it  has  been

' Collected  Essays,  vol.  i.  p.  162.

-  Lectures  and  Essays, 2nd  edn, 1886,  'The  Ethics  of  Hclief,'
p.  346.

» The  Will  to  Bclia'e,  j).  11.


414  Faith  and  Knowledge

gained only in this way. Hence that '  primitive
credulity '  or  trustfulness  that  characterizes  our  earliest
enterprises,  when  we  do  not  wait  till  there  are  certain
and sufficient reasons for action  : it is enough for
youthful  energy  if  there  are  none  such  against  action.
And happily it is so ; for  otherwise we might  still
be  what  according  to  the  zoologists  our  earliest  known
forebears,  the  Social  Ascidians,  ivere  in  the  long  long
past  and  so  in  the  clear  green  sea  to  this  day  remain.
Kant,  it  is  worth  remarking,  was  fully  awake  to  this
point  and  refers  to  it  teleologically  in  connexion  with
this  very  question  of  the  relation  of  the  theoretical  to
the  practical  reason. "If  we  were  not  designed,"  he
said,  "  to  exert  our  powers  till  we  were  assured  of  our
ability  to  attain  our  object,  those  powers  would  remain
for  the  most  part  unused. For  in  general  it  is  only  by
trying  that  we  first  of  all  learn  what  they  are\" Life
is  made up  of  such  attempts  : self-betterment is its
main  endeavour  ;  knowledge  is  obtained  only  as  fast
and  as  far  as  this  paramount  interest  prompts  us  to
new  efforts,  and  is  valued  primarily  as  a  means  to  that
end. What  is  learnt takes at  first  the form  not  of
theoretical  propositions,  but  of  practical  maxims,  which
are  thought  of  not  as  true  but  as  useful. This  differ-
ence is  far  deeper  than  it  seems. In  the  first  place,
such maxims are subjectively imposed imperatives
rather  than  objectively  necessary  affirmations  ;  in  the
next  place,  they  imply  always  the  concept  of  worth  or
value, a teleological category to which there is no
purely  objective  counterpart ;  finally,  maxims  are  true

^  Kritik  der Urtheihkraft, Werke,  Hartenstein's  edn,  v.  p. 184
note.


Co)uiexio)i  of  Faifli  a)ui  Knowledge 415

— or.  as  we  say.  sound — or  they  are  the  contrary,
solely  in  view  of  their  practical  consequences  ;  de-
duction from  objective  premisses  is  rarely  thought  of
and  would  usually  be  impossible.  Such  is  experience
for  the  individual  and  in  the  concrete  at  all  events.
Conation  is  here  the  fundamental  fact,  at  once  the
source  of  faith  and  the  cause  of  knowledore.  And
there  is  here  no  dualism  between  the  two  :  both  mercre
in  that  primitive  credulity  which  leads  us  to  trust  and
to  try  before  we  know.

And  now  if  we  take  a  wider  sweep  and  glance  back
at  the  history  of  the  organic  world,  describing  it,  if  you
will,  analogically,  in  terms  of  experience  rather  than  in
the  language  of  biology — in  which,  however,  such
terms  are  more  or  less  covertly  implied — the  parable
will  not  be  uninstructive.  We  shall  find  that  almost
every  forward  step  in  the  progress  of  life  could  be
formulated  as  an  act  of  faith — an  act  not  warranted  by
knowledge — on  the  part  of  the  pioneer  who  first  made
it.  There  was  little,  for  example,  in  all  that  the  wisest
fish  could  know,  to  justify  the  belief  that  there  was
more  scope  for  existence  on  the  earth  than  in  the
water,  or  to  show  that  persistent  endeavours  to  live  on
land  would  issue  in  the  transformation  of  his  swim-
bladder  into  lungs'.  And  before  a  bird  had  cleaved
the  air  there  was  surely  little,  in  all  that  the  most  daring
of  saurian  .speculators  could  .see  or  surmise  concerning
that  untrodden  element,  to  warrant  him  in  risking  his
neck  in  order  to  satisfy  his  longing  to  soar  ;  although,
when h(! did ir)', his forelimbs werc^ transformed to

'  This  lx:in}4  the  process  by  which  according  to  the  teaching  of
biology  reptiles  first  arose.


4i6  Faith  and  Knowledge

wings  at  length,  and  his  dim  prevision  of  a  bird  became
incarnate  in  himself  \  So  put,  these  instances  will  seem
largely  fanciful,  I  am  well  aware — too  Lamarckian  even
for  Lamarck.  Still  they  serve  to  bring  out  the  one
fact,  viz.  that  when  we  regard  the  development  of
living  forms  as  a  continuous  whole,  we  are  forced  to
recognise,  as  immanent  and  operative  throughout  it,  a
sort  of  unscientific  trustfulness,  that  from  the  very  first
seems  to  have  been  engrained  in  all  living  things.
This  trustfulness — might  I  say  ? — is  comparable  to  the
faith  of  Abraham,  who,  "  when  he  was  called  to  go  out
into  a  place  which  he  should  after  receive  for  an  in-
heritance, obeyed  and  went  out,  not  knowing  whither
he  went."  No  doubt  with  perfect  knowledge  all  this
would  be  otherwise  ;  but  the  point  is  that  with  limited
knowledge  such  as  ours  there  is  always  '  room  for
faith,'  and  always  need  for  it :  here  the  maxim  holds,
"  Nothing  venture  nothing  have."  We  trust  and  try
first,  not  understanding  till  afterwards  :  our  attitude  in
short  is  not  unlike  that  of  Anselm's  famous  Credo  ut
intelligam.

So  far,  then — psychologically  and  historically —
there  is  nothing  unique  in  the  faith  of  theism  at  all ;  it
is  only  the  full  and  final  phase  of  an  ascending  series,
beginning  in  an  instinctive  belief  in  the  relatively
better  and  ending  in  the  rational  belief  in  the  abso-
lutely Good,  with  its  corollaries,  the  existence  of  God
and  the  life  hereafter.  The  gradual  advance  through
impulse  and  desire  to  practical  reason  runs  throughout
on  all  fours  with  the  advance  through  sensation  and

^  The  first birds,  we learn from certain fossil  remains, were
developed  from  a  sort  of  lizard.


Faith  and  Logic  417

imas^ination  to  theoretical  reason.  At  every  stage  the
two  form  one  experience,  knowledge  registering  its
progress  and  practical  enterprise  promoting  it.  Such
enterprises  imply  faith,  but  we  have  this  faith  not
solelv  '  on  account  of  the  very  limited  amount  of  our
knowledge  and  the  possible  errors  in  it.'  In  such
enterprises  our  attitude  is  not  cognitive  but  conative  :
we  are  not  froni  '  want  of  knowledge  on  any  subject
coming  to  a  particular  conclusion  on  that  subject.'
Hut  as  active  beings  strivincr  for  betterment  we  see
that  the  way  is  not  closed  against  us  and  so  we  try  to
advance  :  we  do  so  because  such  is  our  nature,  and
because  our  past  experience  justifies  our  faith.

But  still,  when  we  speak  of  reason  qua  practical
having  faith,  we  recognise  that  we  have  passed  beyond
the  merely  conative  stage;  just  as  when  we  speak  of
reason  qua  theoretical  leading  to  science,  we  imply  that
we  have  got  beyond  what  Leibniz  called  Ics  consecutions
dcs  betes.  Further  if  these  two  aspects  of  reason  are
not  two  kinds  of  reason  but  one, — since  even  at  this
level  experience  is  still  one,  —  it  follows  that  the  sup-
})()sed  dehverances  ot  reason  in  the  one  case  as  in  the
other  are  amenable  to  logic  and  open  to  challenge.
Logic  can  create  nothing,  but  it  is  entitled  to  criticise
all.  Science,  it  is  commonly  assumed,  has  also  the
right  to  call  faith  to  account.  But  the  verdict  of  logic
sf)  tar  has  always  been  :  No  case.  Faith  contradicts
nothing  that  science  is  in  a  position  to  affirm,  and
asserts  nothing  that  science  is  in  a  i)osition  to  deny.
.Science  cannot  disclaim  it  as  error,  nor  cm  it  appeal  to
science  as  truth.  1)UL  wh.ii  science  can  neither  j)osi-
liv(;ly atiirm nor  positivel) dcu) may still count for

w.  27


4i8  Faith  and  Knowledge

something  as  being  more  or  less  probable  ;  and  '  proba-
bilities are  the  guide  of  life.'  In  this  sense  the  theist
has  been  said  to  walk  by  faith  not  by  sight :  he  is  not
sure,  it  is  said,  but  he  hopes  for  the  best  and  acts
accordingly.  Religious  apologists  sometimes  argue  on
these  lines — Pascal,  Butler  and  Paley,  for  example —
but  the  prudence  thus  advocated  is  not  faith ;  and
assuredly  it  is  not  religion.  Its  effect  on  the  indi-
vidual's conduct,  if  he  gets  no  further,  will  be  pro-
portional to  his  estimate  of  the  probability  of  what
still  remains  uncertain.  We  are  then  here  still  in  the
region  of  knowledge  widely  understood.  Such  prudence
may  be  reasonable,  but  we  must  ascend  to  something
more  systematic  before  we  are  entitled  to  talk  of
practical  reason  and  rational  faith.  This  ascent
philosophy  should  enable  us  to  make  and,  if  needs  be,
to  criticise.  Though  the  attempt  to  deal  with  theism
from  the  standpoint  of  science  is  really  an  ignoratio
elenchi,  this  cannot  be  said  of  philosophy,  at  least  not
till  positivism  and  agnosticism  are  triumphant.  That,
we  may  content  ourselves  meanwhile  in  saying,  they  are
never  likely  to  be\

Let  us  now  briefly  recall  the  main  steps  by  which,
starting  from  the  pluralistic  standpoint,  we  have  ad-
vanced to  the  theistic  position  ;  and  see  whether,  even
admitting  that  it  is  not  a  theoretical  but  a  practical
position,  it  is  none  the  less  deserving  of  the  title
rational,  neither  transcending  the  domain  of  reason  nor
fallinof  short  of  it.  But  a  word  first  as  to  what  in  this
connexion  we  are  to  understand  by  reason.  Reason  is
concerned  with  the  world  in  its  totality  either  as  being
'  Cf.  J.  Seth,  A  Study  of  Ethical  Principles^  ist  edn,  pp.  393  fif.


Faith  and  Reason  419

a  system  or  as  having  a  meaning  :  we  may  ask  What  is
it?  and  also  What  is  it  for  or  why  is  it?  The  two
questions  are  intimately  connected.  From  the  theoretical
standpoint  we  do  not  inquire  about  the  '  why  '  till  we
know  somethino;  ot  the  'what.'  But,  as  I  have  had
already  to  insist,  the  standpoint  of  theory  is  not  the
standpoint  ol  life.  Life  is  primarily  active,  not  con-
templative ;  and  thus  it  is  only  while  striving  for  what  is
good  that  we  learn  what  is  true  ;  only  as  interested  in
the  '  what  for'  that  we  inquire  about  the  '  what.'  Even
in  common  language  to  ask  '  why '  is  to  ask  for  '  the
reason,' — that  is  not  merely  for  the  cause  but  chiefiy
for  the  end.  It  is  with  reason  in  this  sense  that  we
have  now  to  deal.

There  are  those  who  say  that  to  talk  of  the  world  as
having  a  meaning  or  end  at  all  is  an  unwarrantable
assumption.  This  may  be  true  as  an  abstract  state-
ment, that  is  so  long  as  we  separate  structure  and
description  from  purpose  and  worth.  And  for  science
it  is  important  to  keep  the  two  distinct  :  hence  Bacon's
depreciation  of  teleology,  and  hence  too  Kant's  treat-
ment of  the  category  of  End — unlike  those  of  Substance
and  Cause — as  only  regulative  and  not  constitutive.
But  can  those  who  without  reservation  refuse  to  credit
the  world  with  a  meaning  give  a  reason  for  their
jiosition,  and  so  justify  themselves  in  stigmatizing  as
dogmatic  or  superstitious  those  who  are  not  thus
sceptical  ?  If  the  world  has  no  meaning,  must  we  not
say  that  it  is  an  irrational  world  ?  I^ut  we  are  ourselves
the  hiidiest  beintrs  in  il  of  whom  we.  ha\'e  any  direct
<jbjective  knowledge.  Unless  then  we  arc  to  stultify
ourselves,  all that we  can mean in calling  the world

27 — 2


420  Faith  and  Knowledge

irrational  is  that  it  would  be  so  apart  from  its  relation
to  ourselves  and  other  rational  beings.  It  is  but  an
awkward  way  of  saying  what  Hamilton  preferred  to
put  more  grandiloquently  :  "  On  earth,  there  is  nothing
great  but  man  ;  in  man,  there  is  nothing  great  but
mind."  We  may  call  it  faith,  but  we  cannot  call  it
irrational,  to  believe  that  the  world  has  a  meaning  and
a  meaning  for  us.

But  even  granting  that  the  world  has  a  meaning,  it
is  contended  in  the  next  place  that  since  for  us  this
meaning  is  not  here  and  now  realised,  we  do  not
certainly  know  what  it  is.  We  would  fain,  it  may  be,
mould  the  world  nearer  to  our  heart's  desire,  but  we
cannot,  it  has  been  said,  *  argue  from  the  reality  of
desires  to  the  truth  of  dogmas.'  A  good  deal  depends
surely  upon  the  rationality  of  the  desires.  This  is  the
next  point — have  we  ourselves  any  supremely  rational
aim  ?  Till  we  have,  we  cannot  claim  to  have  emerged
from  the  tutelage  of  nature,  to  be  ourselves  rational
and  free.

In  discussing  this  point  it  is  enough  to  appeal  to
humanity  at  its  present  highest  level.  The  best  of  men
certainly  recognise  a  moral  ideal  with  which  they
identify  their  own  highest  good,  and  whose  imperatives
they  therefore  regard  as  absolutely  binding  and  yet —
because  self-imposed — as  also  absolutely  free.  Now
the  moral  ideal  places  the  highest  good  of  each  in  the
highest  good  of  all  ;  but  for  us  it  is  only  an  ideal.  But
will  any  one  say  that  it  is  irrational  ?  Happily,  as  it  is,
history  furnishes  us  with  many  and  striking  instances  of
brotherly  love  and  heroic  devotion,  and  there  is  more
zeal  now  than  ever  to  promote  goodwill  among  men  :


i


TJie  Meaning  of  fJie  JVorld  42 1

does  any  one  call  these  absurd  or  think  the  onward
course  of  philanthropy  and  self-consecration  to  the
public  weal  should  be  stayed  ?  We  will  not  pause  to
remark  how  much  more  the  moral  ideal  involves  than
these  ideas  ot  themselves  suggest ;  for  already  at  this
stage  we  shall  be  met  by  the  objection,  that  man  being
what  he  is  and  the  world  what  it  is,  the  realisation  of
even  this  much  of  our  ideal  is  impossible.  A.nd  if  man
stands  alone  and  if  this  life  is  all,  the  objection  is  hardly
to  be  gainsaid.  But  then  we  are  confronted  by  a
serious  dilemma.  Either  the  world  is  not  rational  or
man  does  not  stand  alone  and  this  life  is  not  all.  But
it  cannot  be  rational  to  conclude  that  the  world  is  not
rational,  least  of  all  when  an  alternative  is  open  to  us
that  leaves  room  for  its  rationality — the  alternative  of
postulating  God  and  a  future  life.

Without  the  idea  of  a  Supreme  and  Ultimate
Being,  least  inadequately  conceived  as  personal,  tran-
scending the  world,  as  the  ground  of  its  being,  and  yet
immanent  in  it,  as  it  is  his  idea — the  world  may  well
for  ever  remain  that  reruin  concoi'dia  discors,  which  at
present  we  find  it.  Ever  since  man  attained  to  self-
consciousness  and  reason  he  has  had  ideals  and  will
always  have  them  ;  and  his  ideals  are  the  measure  of
his  worth  and  the  sure  marks  of  his  true  progress  or
decline.  But  if  we  are  to  stop  short  with  the  pluralism
which  is  all  that  in  fact  we  find,  where  all  are  essentially
finite  as  well  as  interdependent,  how  do  we  know  that
there  will  not  always  be  incompatible  ideals,  ideals
therefore  always  imperfect  ?  Perfectly  to  harmonize
egoism  and  altruism,  for  e.xample,  has  always  been  the
great crux fur moralists. A recent I'rench moralist


422  Faith  and  Knowledge

who  disclaimed  the  theistic  belief  has  argued  with  some
force  that  a  complete  solution  is  in  the  nature  of  things
impossible^ ;  and  a  distinguished  English  moralist,  as
we  know,  without  clearly  committing  himself  as  regards
the  theistic  '  hypothesis,'  concluded  his  work  by  saying:
"If  we  reject  this  belief,  the  Cosmos  of  Duty  is  really
reduced  to  a  Chaos ;  and  the  prolonged  effort  of  the
human  intellect  to  frame  a  perfect  ideal  of  rational
conduct  is  seen  to  have  been  foredoomed  to  inevitable
failure"."  We  may  accept  his  conclusion,  though  we
can,  I  think,  improve  upon  his  reasons.  It  is  not  as
providing  adequate  sanctions  for  the  suppression  of
egoism — effectual  it  may  be  but  scarcely  moral — that
theism  provides  the  keystone  to  the  structure  of  ethics.
Over  against  other  men  a  man  may  possibly  be  in-
corrigibly selfish,  but  with  living  faith  in  God  selfishness
towards  him  would  not  be  possible.  To  any  other
being  I  may  decline  to  say,  Thy  will  not  mine  be  done,
but  not  to  God,  if  I  believe  in  him.  The  idea  of  this
one  divine  Will  necessarily  implies  the  meaning  of  the
world ;  for  that  is  grounded  entirely  on  it.  It  also  implies
the  presence  of  a  definite  moral  ideal  as  an  eternal  pur-
pose, which  finite  wills  alone  might  strain  after  for  ever
and  never  realise.  With  one  creative  Spirit  over  all  we
may  well  believe  in  a  unity  of  the  many  created  spirits,
such  that  the  highest  good  of  all  will  prove  to  be  the
highest  good  of  each.  And  in  the  light  of  this  divine
purpose  we  may  well  find  the  vocation  and  the  meaning
of our own individual life. The existence of this

^  L.  Bourdeau,  Le  Problhne  de  la  Vie. Essai  de  Sociologie  ghierale,
1901.

*  H.  Sidgwick,  The  Methods  of  Ethics,  ist  edn,  1874,  p.  473.


Necessity  for  Belief  in  God  423

Creative  Spirit  is  matter  of  faith  not  of  knowledge,  to
be  sure  ;  but  may  we  not  hold  it  to  be  a  rational  faith,
since  without  it  we  are  without  assured  hope  in  a  world
that  is  then  without  clear  meaning?

But  not  only  is  the  idea  of  God  a  postulate  of
reason  as  practical:  it  is  also  a  'regulative  idea'  for
reason  as  theoretical.  It  has  been  the  predominant
tendency  of  theoretical  speculation  in  fact  to  lay  undue
stress,  if  I  may  so  say,  on  this  idea;  and  so  to  render  it
completely  indeterminate  by  denying  not  the  existence
of  God  but  the  reality  of  the  world  :  not  atheism,  the
doctrine  that  there  is  no  God,  but  acosmism,  the
doctrine  that  there  is  no  world,  has  been  the  usual
outcome  of  so-called  pure  thought.  Still  we  have  found
that  mere  pluralism,  which  begins  with  the  world  and
proceeds  in  a  more  empirical  fashion,  has  to  content
itself  by  accepting  the  undeniable  unity,  which  the  very
idea  of  a  world  implies,  as  something  ultimate  which  it
can  neither  explain  nor  show  to  be  self-explanatory.
The  theoretical  demand  for  the  ground  of  the  world
then,  as  well  as  the  practical  demand  for  the  good  of
the  world,  is  met  by  the  idea  of  God.  In  this  sense
the  words  of  Wundt  are  true  :  "  Philosophy  can  prove
ih(,'  necessity  of  faith,  but  to  convert  it  into  knowledge,
for  that  she  has  not  the  power\"  Conviction  here  can
come  only  by  living,  not  by  merely  thinking:  "  If  any
man  willeth  to  do  his  will  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine
whether  it  be  of  God."

It  will  be  opportune  at  this  [)oint  to  notice  a  difficulty
sometimes  raised.  11  there  verily  is  a  God  and  a
future  lif(^  surely  facts  of  such  mom(MU  would  have  been

'  System  dcr  rhilosophu\  istc  Auf.  .jtcr  Ahsclinill,  ////.  p.  444.


424  Faith  and  Knowledge

placed  beyond  question  and  not  left  where,  if  there  is
room  for  faith,  there  must  also  be  room  for  doubt  as
well.  This  is  but  a  special  form  of  the  objection  that
may  be  made  to  an  evolving  world  as  such,  to  a  world
that  temporarily  is  not,  but  only  gradually  becomes,
what  its  ideal  implies,  a  world  that,  so  to  say,  makes
itself  instead  of  being  posited  ready-made.  Tran-
scendent objections  of  this  sort  we  cannot,  I  believe,
reasonably  raise  or  profitably  discuss.  If  we  could
intuite  this  world  sud  specie  aeternitatis  the  objection
would  lapse  ;  so  long  and  so  far  as  we  have  to  live  in
it  sub  specie  temporis,  the  objection  is  self-contradictory.
The  most  we  can  do  is  to  find  fault  with  the  mode  or
the  pace  of  this  world's  actual  evolution.  But  even  so,
the  fact  that  knowledge  has  to  grow  from  more  to
more — cannot  be  passively  imparted  but  must  be
actively  acquired — is  so  fundamental  and  universal  a
characteristic  of  our  evolution,  that  it  is  very  doubtful
if  we  can  form  any  clear  concept  of  an  experience  that
develops  at  all  developing  on  other  lines.  In  particular
the  idea  of  God— like  other  'ideas  of  reason' — obviously
could  not  be  revealed  to  minds  unfitted  to  assimilate
it ;  and  yet  could  not  fail  to  be  acquired  by  those  that
were.  The  history  of  philosophy  and  religion  shows
us  accordingly  the  gradual  emergence  of  this  idea,
crude  at  first,  but  progressively  elaborated,  both  for
theory  and  for  life,  as  the  mind  of  man  grew  in  in-
telligence and  insight,  and  his  heart  in  purity  and
singleness  of  aim.  If  the  slowness  of  this  progress
depress  us — as  well  it  may^still  we  have  to  remember
that,  inasmuch  as  we  are  free  agents,  this  progress
must  depend  on  our  own  lives  and  efforts. But  there


Belief  ill  a  Future  Life  425

is  one  doctrine  of  the  theology  in  vogue  which  gives
special  point  to  the  objection  we  have  considered' —
the  doctrine  viz.  that  those  who  die  outside  the  pale
of  Christianity  are  '  lost  eternally.'  This  *  moral  enor-
mity,'  as  Mill  called  it,  at  any  rate  rational  theism
must  disavow.  Texts  in  support  of  such  a  doctrine
may  be  cited  no  doubt — but  Christianity  is  a  bigger
thing  than  texts,  and  happily  the  spirit  of  Christianity
is  clearly  against  it,  as  Christians  themselves  are  coming
more  and  more  to  see.

Our  moral  ideals  lead  not  only  to  faith  in  God,  but
also,  supported  by  this  faith,  to  belief  in  a  future  life.
The  question  of  the  rationality  of  this  belief  depends,
we  have  allowed,  on  the  value  we  are  entitled  to  assign
to  man  and  to  his  work. The  mere  wish  to  live  longer
is no reason for believing that  we  shall  live again  ;
while a  claim to  live  again based  on personal merit
seems  more  arrogant  than  rational. This  is  true  but
scarcely relevant. It is not a question of private
wishes  or  of  extraneous  rewards  :  it  is  a  question of
the  status  of  a  rational  free  agent  who  has  chosen  or
is capable of  choosing the moral ideal as his  end.
The  ideal  is  there  and  is  to  be  realised  :  it  is  rational
to  believe  this  and  all  that  it  implies,  if  it  is  rational
to  believe  anything. One  thing  that  it  implies  in  an
evolving  world  like  ours  is  a  gradual  advance  from  the
status  quo  of  humanity,  whereon  the  ideal  has  dawned,
ever  forwards  unto  the  perfect  day. Humanity  already
has yearnings  and aspirations that the llesh-pots of
Egypt — material and temporal  well-being — can  never
content  ; is it, imijclled by these longings for  higher
' ('f.  J.  .S.  Mill, 'J'lirct'  Essays  on  Relii^ioti, 18X5,  ])[). i  14  f.


426  Faith  and  Knowledge

things,  destined  to  wander  aimlessly  in  the  wilderness
for ever  unsatisfied  ?

Well,  at  all  events,  it  may  be  said,  we  see  other
creatures  remaining  apparently  stationary  at  lower
stages  of  development  which  man  has  already  left
behind  ;  and  is  it  not  then  likely  that,  in  turn,  other
rationals,  more  highly  endowed  and  better  placed  than
we,  may  realise  the  ideals  which  but  a  few  men  among
all  mankind  imperfectly  surmise  and  fitfully  long  for  ?
We  can  worship  where  we  cannot  emulate,  just  as
a  dog  worships  his  master  and  is  the  better  for  it,
though  he  will  never  become  a  man.  It  is  better
that  we  should  '  pitch  our  behaviour  low,  our  projects
high,'  and  die  outright  as  philosophers  unsatisfied,
rather  than  live  while  we  live  as  brutes  in  whom  the
light  of  reason  has  never  shone.  Better  assuredly,  but
still  assuredly  not  good.  Nor  is  the  analogy  on  which
this  counsel  of  renunciation  rests  altogether  a  sound
one.  It  is  true  that  diversity  of  endowment  is  an
ultimate  characteristic  of  our  world. As  St  Paul  put

it: — **A11  flesh  is  not  the  same  flesh There  is  one

glory  of  the  sun,  another  glory  of  the  moon,  and  another
glory  of  the  stars."  What  advance  is  possible  within
each  kind  we  cannot  tell.  But  at  least  advance  seems
possible  so  long  as  an  ideal,  more  or  less  consciously
recognised  or  felt,  incites  to  efforts  towards  its  attain-
ment. This  is  life  in  the  fullest  sense,  and  this  too  is
faith  in  the  widest  sense:  so  lange  man  strebt,  glaiibt
man,  unci  so  lange  man  gla2ibt,strebt  nian^.  The  lower
animals  seem  in  general  content  with  their  lot :  they
struggle  to  exist  rather  than  to  advance,  and  so  we
^  Chalybaus,  Speadative  Philosophic  von  Kant  bis  Hegel,  i860,  concl.


CoiDiter-argitnioits  427

may  describe  theirs  as  a  stationary  state;  they  seem  to
have  attained  to  an  equilibration  with  their  present
conditions.  This  is  emphatically  not  the  case  with
man — he  always  has  ideals — and  so  far  the  analogy
just  now  appealed  to  as  a  ground  for  resignation,  fails
in  the  essential  point.

Yes,  the  positivists  will  say,  we  believe  that  humanity
in  the  distant  future  will  realise  our  ideal  ;  but  what
we  know  of  evolution  leads  us  to  suppose  our  relation
to  this  consummation  to  be  that  of  forerunners  and
harbingers  of  the  good  which  posterity  is  to  have  and
to  hold.  As  the  extinct  anthropoids  stand  to  us,  so
we  stand  to  the  over-man  who  is  to  succeed  us  ;

For  all  we  thought  and  loved  and  did,
And  hoped  and  suffer'd,  is  but  seed
Of  what  in  them  is  flower  and  fruit.

We  remain  without  the  promised  land,  but  we  do  not
wander  aimlessly  in  the  wilderness  :  we  know  what  we
work  for  and  we  work  unselfishly  :  when  our  work  is
done,  we  should  be  content  to  depart  in  peace.  In
evolution  there  is  an  order  of  generations  as  well  as  an
order  of  kinds,  and  it  is  as  unreasonable  to  repine
because  we  are  not  angels,  as  to  complain  because  a
better  time  is  coming  that  we  shall  not  see.  After  all
ours  is  better  than  those  which  went  before  ;  and  so  it
may  always  be  ;  for  there  is  really  no  finality.  Those
who  realise  one  ideal  will  find  another  beckoning  them
onwards,  which  they  in  turn  will  strive  after  but  not
attain  :

Hope  springs  eternal  in  the  human  breast,
Man  never  is,  but  always  to  be blest.

iMjrciblc as such n-asoning may seem h-oni its own


428  Faith  and  Knowledge

standpoint  of  thorough-going  relativity,  it  is  essentially
incoherent  and  irrational.  It  does  not  descend  deep
enough  to  see  the  full  meaning  of  personality  nor  rise
high  enough  to  come  in  sight  of  what  is  meant  by  the
Supreme  Good.  It  moves  entirely  on  the  naturalistic
plane,  where  there  are  no  causes  that  are  not  in  turn
effects  and  no  ends  that  are  not  in  turn  means — in  a
word  no  autonomous  beings,  who  initiate  their  own
actions  and  are  ends  in  themselves.  A  realm  of  such
ends,  as  ideally  at  least  an  absolute  unity,  implies  one
Supreme  End  for  the  whole  and  for  each  of  its  members,
the  precise  opposite  of  what  a  system  of  means  implies,
where  both  the  whole  and  the  parts  alike  lack  any  end
of  their  own  at  all\  The  wearisome  procession  of
generation  after  generation  of  mortals  in  pursuit  of  an
ignis  fatuus,  all  hoping,  all  working  for  what  none
attain,  might  divert  a  Mephistopheles  but  would  cer-
tainly not  be  a  realm  of  ends.

Again  in  appealing  to  evolution  the  naturalistic
theory  of  progress  overlooks  the  one  point  in  which
the  moral  differs  from  the  natural.  Natural  evolution
is  concerned  primarily  with  the  type,  moral  with  the
single  life.  Neither  heredity  nor  natural  selection  nor
even  tradition  can  take  the  place  of  personal  election.
Apart  from  this,  though  we  follow  the  stream  of  tendency
that  makes  for  righteousness,  we  cannot  claim  to  be
'  unselfish  or  to  know  what  we  are  striving"  for.'  Further
the  realisation  of  the  moral  ideal  is  not  a  process,  like
the  development  of  a  language  or  an  art,  that  can
accomplish  itself  piecemeal  through  the  instrumen-
tality of  successive  generations, acting  more or  less

^  Cf.  Lecture  xvni.  p.  387.


TJie  Moral  Ideal  ami  FaitJi  429

unconsciously  and  without  set  purpose.  From  first  to
last  faith  in  this  ideal  is  a  personal  thing  ;  in  personal
conviction  and  choice  it  must  begin,  whether  the  person
is  born  early  or  born  late.  Is  it  then  rational  to  suppose
that  in  the  one  case  he  cannot  achieve  it  at  all,  and  in
the  other  has  it  thrust  upon  him  ?  Hut  it  is  certain,  if
this  life  is  all,  that  complete  attainment  is  impossible  ;
for  as  the  dissolution  of  the  organism  will  then  ex-
tinguish the  individual,  so  the  dissolution  of  the  solar
system  will  extinguish  the  race.  Hence  the  moral
ideal,  as  it  leads  to  faith  in  God,  leads  also  to  the  belief
that  the  spirit  world  has  other  dimensions  than  those
of  the  time  and  space  that  encompass  the  world  of
phenomena.  For  what  is  the  alternative  .-^  When  a
man  desiring  to  build  a  tower  lays  the  foundation  but
is  not  able  to  finish  he  becomes  a  mockery  and  his
work  is  called  a  '  folly.'  And  has  not  God  been  mocked
and  life  called  the  vanity  of  vanities  on  the  assumption
that  the  present  world  is  all  ?  Hut  since  faith  in  the
unseen  and  eternal  is  open  to  us,  is  it  not  rational  to
embrace  it,  since  there  the  essentially  rational,  the
absolute  Good  is  not  merely  a  hope  but  reality  ?  And
in  the  name  of  reason  what  else  indeed  can  it  be  }


LECTURE XX.


THE REALM OF ENDS.


It  only  remains  now  In  bringing  these  lectures  to
a  close  to  summarize  briefly  the  main  course  of  our
inquiry,  to  state  as  positively  as  may  be  the  results
that  we  seem  to  have  attained  and  finally  to  glance  at
some  topics  for  further  reflexion  which  they  suggest.

At  the  outset  we  disavowed  any  attempt  completely
to  solve  the  so-called  riddle  of  the  universe.  This
much  modesty  is  common  to  all  schools  of  philosophy
alike  in  our  day.  The  universe  as  a  whole  is  but
partially  accessible  to  us  at  the  best ;  but  we  make  up
for  this  defect  to  some  extent  by  viewing  it  from
different  standpoints.  It  is  therefore  important  first
of  all,  if  we  can,  to  ascertain  which  of  these  is  the
most  fundamental  and  to  orientate  the  rest  to  this.
One  characteristic  belongs  to  them  all — that  duality  of
subject  and  object  that  enters  into  all  experience.  But
the  subject's  attitude  towards  the  object  is  twofold  :  it
is  both  cognitive  and  conative,  or,  as  we  often  say^
both  theoretical  and  practical.  Though  these  subjective
attitudes  are  not  strictly  separable,  yet  the  practical
terminates  in  the  theoretical  so  soon  and  so  far  as  what
we  immediately  want  is  only  to  know.  And  so  it
comes  about  that,  ignoring  the  subject  and  its  practical


Natural  Philosophy  ami  Ethics 431

relations,  fororetting  even  what  knowledge  implies  (as
we  forget  the  eye  when  intent  only  on  what  we  see),
we  are  led  to  conceive  the  universe  as  in  itself  only
objective.  F"rom  this  standpoint  we  call  it  Nature,
and  we  ask  simply  what  is  it  :  the  one  problem  here
is  to  find  a  precise  and  comprehensive  description ;
and  the  result  is  what  Newton  called  Natui'al  Philo-
sophy. No  complementary  abstraction  is  possible  when
we  turn  to  the  subjective  factor  of  experience  :  we  may
here  misinterpret  the  objective  but  we  cannot  leave  it
out  of  account.  It  pains  or  pleases,  helps  or  hinders
us :  in  interaction  with  it  our  life  primarily  consists,
and  we  are  forced  therefore  to  try  to  understand
it  :  so  we  ask  what  it  means.  From  this  standpoint
Spinoza's  Ethics  may  be  regarded  as  the  pendant  to
the  work  of  his  contemporary  Newton.  "All  individual
things"  said  Spinoza  "are  animated,  albeit  in  divers
degrees,"  and  again  "every  thing  has  in  itself  a  striving
to  preserve  its  own  condition  and  to  improve  itself."
This  is  at  all  events  the  more  primitive  view  :  is  it
also  the  more  fundamental  ?  We  conclude  that  it  is,
first,  because  it  takes  account  of  both  the  factors  of
experience;  and  secondly,  because,  while  it  is  impossible
fr(;m  the  standpoint  of  Nature  to  reach  Spirit,  it  is
only  from  the  standpoint  of  Spirit  that  Nature  can  be
understood  :  in  a  wf)rd  we  take  the  universe  to  be
spiritual — a  realm  of  ends.

Hut  what  is  its  constitution  ^  hor  even  from  the
standpoint  ol  Spirit  it  is  jjossible  to  regard  the  universe
in  two  as|n:cts  : it  is  (  )ii('  and  it  i,s  Man\'. The Many

' Ethics, II. xiii. .ScIujI., Short Treatise  on God, Miin and  his
Wellheittf^, bk i. <  h. v. Wolf's  cdii, p. 46.


432  The  Realm  of  Ends

are  relative  to  each  other  :  the  whole  is  absolute.  We
are  of  the  Many  :  with  them  we  interact.  It  is  with  the
plurality  then  rather  than  with  the  unity  that  man  is  first
of  all  practically  concerned.  The  unity  of  the  world,
as  Kant  has  said,  is  an  idea  of  our  reason,  not  an
object  of  our  experience  ;  and  it  was  not  till  man  had
lived  long  and  thought  deeply  that  this  idea  of  the
One  or  the  Absolute  first  dawned.  It  is  certain  then
that  the  pluralist's  standpoint  is  the  more  primitive  :  is
it  also  in  itself  the  more  fundamental  ?  We  cannot  say
this,  we  can  hardly  even  suppose  it.  Why  then  begin
with  it  ?  But  have  we  any  choice  ?  The  attempt — to
a  speculative  mind  so  attractive — to  begin  with  the
One  has,  we  know,  often  been  made,  and  surely  we
may  add,  has  as  often  failed.  Moreover  when  more
closely  examined  these  essays  in  pure  thought  turn
out  to  be  '  infected  '  with  the  empirical.  Like  a  rocket
they  dazzle  in  the  void,  but  the  stick  can  always  be
found  which  directed  their  course  and  betrays  their
origin.  Nevertheless  this  tell-tale  stick  is  not  only
dropped  but  forgotten,  and  the  pluralistic  aspect  of  the
universe  not  explained  but  explained  away.  If  the
speculative  enterprises  of  the  past  can  be  any  guide
for  the  future,  they  show  that  we  have  no  choice  but
to  begin  where  we  are,  and  that  we  only  deceive
ourselves  when  we  try  to  start  by  transcending  ex-
perience. Accepting  this  teaching  of  history  then,  we
began  our  inquiry  about  the  universe  as  a  realm  of
ends  from  the  pluralistic  standpoint.

We  began,  that  is  to  say,  with  '  individuals  animated
in  various  degrees  and  striving  for  self-preservation  or
betterment.' But with what  do they  strive  ? With


7 lie  Stcu't  from  the  PlNralisfic  Staiuipoinf  433

others  who  either  actively  compete  with  them  or  at
least  stand  in  their  way.  And  also,  we  should  have  to
add,  with  their  physical  environment  ;  were  it  not  that
pluralism,  in  regarding  every  'thing'  as  in  some  degree
animated,  does  away  with  the  distinction  between
persons,  widely  understood,  and  inert  things  altogether.
In  support  of  this  bold  assumption  an  appeal  is  made
to  the  principle  of  continuity,  confirmed  as  it  is  by  the
fact  that  every  advance  of  knowledge  so  far  has  only
disclosed  simpler  forms  of  lite  and  further  analogies
between  the  organic  and  what  we  call  the  inorganic.
It  is  also  contended  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  any
two  beings  in  the  world  are  exactly  alike  ;  which  is
just  what  selfhood  or  personality  implies,  and  the
physicist's  concept  of  atoms  denies.  Again  the  constants
and  uniformities,  with  which  his  analysis  ends,  are
regarded  as  simply  statistical  results,  such  as  frequently
hide  the  diversity  and  spontaneity  of  animated  beings
when  they  and  their  actions  are  taken  en  masse.  This
diversity  and  spontaneity  are  held  to  be  fundamental ;
and  the  orderliness  and  regularity  we  now  observe,  to
be  the  7'es2(/l  of  conduct,  not  its  presupposition.  We
are  supposed  to  be  dealing,  not  with  a  system  of
concepts  which  can  be  unfolded  deductively,  but  with
concrete  agents  whose  intercourse  and  development
can  only  be  studied  historically.  On  the  one  side  we
ha\(,'  what  is  done,  ideals  realised  ;  on  the  other  what
is  still  lo  do,  ideals  still  to  be  realised  ;  or  adojjting
scholastic  terms,  we  have  nahtra  iiaturata  and  mxtura
ualurans.  The  idea  of  the  good  is  the  master  clue;
for  this  is  what  all  siri\ing  and  all  ideals  im])Iy.  Tlic
process  thnnighout  is  thai  of  trial  and  error,  which  all
w.  28


434  The  Realm  of  Ends

experience  involves ;  but  there  is  no  pure  chance  and
no  utter  chaos.  Contingency  however  is  inevitable  ;
we  find  it  accordingly  on  every  hand,  not  only  in
human  affairs  or  in  animated  nature  but  in  the  so-called
physical  world  as  well.

Still  through  all  a  steady  tendency  is  apparent  to
replace  this  mere  contingency  by  a  definite  progression ;
the  further  we  advance  the  more  we  see  of  gruidance
and  direction.  With  this  progression  we  are  familiar
under  the  name  of  evolution,  a  term  too  firmly  estab-
lished to  be  lightly  set  aside.  It  is  all  the  more
important  therefore  to  bear  in  mind  that — though  he
continues  to  use  the  word — what  the  pluralist  under-
stands by  it  is  something  widely  different  from  that
explicating  of  what  is  implicit  from  the  first,  which  is
the  literal  meaning  of  evolution,  and  the  meaning  that
it  still  holds  when  the  universe  is  primarily  contemplated
from  the  standpoint  of  the  One.  But  the  pluralistic
meaning  is  more  accurately  expressed  by  the  rival
term  '  epigenesis ' ;  that  is  to  say,  the  origination  by
integration  of  new  properties  in  the  whole,  which  its
constituents  in  their  isolation  did  not  possess.  Such
integration  has  been  called  '  creative  synthesis ' :  a
melody  compared  with  its  component  notes  or  a  regi-
ment with  its  soldiers  as  disbanded  may  serve  as
instances.  Such  syntheses  arise  wherever  there  are
active  individuals  bent  on  working  out  a  modus  vivendi
with  each  other  ;  as  we  see  most  conspicuously  in  the
development  of  society.  What  is  thus  created  are  not
new  entities  but  new  values  ;  and  these  tend  not  only
to  be  conserved  but  to  make  higher  unities  and  worthier
ideals  possible ; and that without assignable limits.


/s  the  Fluyalisfic  Sfainipoiiif  final? 435

Moreover,  when  at  length  the  level  of  human  culture
is  attained,  we  reach  a  good  that  is  not  diminished  by
being  shared,  and  one  that  yields  more  the  more  it  has
alreadv  yielded.  And  here — in  form  at  any  rate — the
final  goal  of  evolution  comes  into  sight,  not  a  pre-
established  harmony  but  the  eventual  consummation  of
a  perfect  commonwealth,  wherein  all  cooperate  and
none  conflict,  wherein  the  many  have  become  one,  one
realm  of  ends.

With  the  Many  pluralism  began,  with  the  Many  it
ends.  But  did  it  really  begin  at  the  beginning  and
does  it  really  reach  the  end  ?  Is  the  pluralistic  stand-
point absolute  ?  This  is  the  question  to  which  at  this
point  we  returned.  But  if  we  had  to  begin  as  we  did,
this  question  really  converts  itself  into  one  concerning
what  I  called  the  upper  and  the  lower  limits  of  pluralism.
Does  pluralism  naturally  suggest  some  end  beyond
itself,  and  presuppose  something  as  the  ground  of  itself?
The  problems  of  the  universe  would  be  fewer  as  well
as  simpler  if  all  the  life  in  it  were  confined  to  this
planet ;  so  much  so  that  we  find  philosophers  and
theologians  again  and  again  attempting  to  prove  that
this  is  in  truth  the  case,  as  mankind  for  ages  had  been
wont  to  suppose.  But  the  ignorance  and  special  pleading
common  to  all  these  attempts  justify  us  nevertheless  in
ignoring  them.  1 1  then  we  regard  the  universe  as
teeming  with  living  orbs,  how  are  we  to  imagine  these
as  ever  constituting  the  commonwealth  of  worlds  :  in
view  of  our  own  utter  isolation  how  \slhis  higher  unity
ever  to  be  achieved  .■*  .Such  (juestions  lead  the  jjluralist
to  apj>ly  th(.'  princij)l(;  of  continuity  upwards  as  well
as  downwards. To  connect these  otherwise isolated

28— a


436  The  Realm  of  Ends

worlds  he  is  driven  to  assume  a  hierarchy  of  intelHgences
of  a  higher  order,  and  so  is  led  on  to  conceive  a
Highest  of  all.  But  still,  so  long  as  we  hold  to  the
principle  of  continuity,  this  Supreme  Being  will  only
be  pi'irmcs  inter  pares,  only  one  of  the  Many  ;  he  will
also,  like  the  rest,  be  confronted  and  conditioned  by
others,  so  long  at  least  as  we  hold  to  the  historical
standpoint.  Thus  while  pluralism  suggests  a  tran-
scendent upper  limit,  it  is  one  to  which  knowledge
cannot  actually  attain.  Again  the  principle  of  continuity
and  the  historical  method,  the  standpoint  that  is  to
say  of  evolution,  suggest  also  a  lower  limit,  and  this
proves  to  be  equally  unattainable.  In  attempting  to
regress  to  an  absolute  origin,  we  seem  only  to  get
nearer  to  the  utterly  indeterminate  that  affords  no
ground  for  distinct  individuals  at  all  ;  where  there  is
no  natura  naturata,  and  where  in  order  that  the  nasci
may  begin,  we  seem  to  require  a  transcendent  Prime
Mover  standing  apart  from  the  nascent  Many.  May
not  the  two  limits,  then,  which  its  cardinal  principles
of  continuity  and  evolution  do  not  enable  pluralism  to
attain,  be  really  related  ?  This  question  leads  us  to
the  idea  of  creation,  and  so  to  the  discussion  of  Theism.
Not  content  with  the  admission  that  pluralism  on
examination  points  both  theoretically  and  practically
beyond  itself,  many  advocates  of  singularism  have
attempted  to  show  it  up  as  radically  absurd.  These
attempts  do  not  appear  successful.  That  an  absolute
totality  of  individuals  is  self-contradictory  and  that  an
absolute  individual  is  not,  is  more  than  anyone  has  yet
proved.  That  a  plurality  of  individuals  in  isolation
should  ever  come  into  relation  is  inconceivable  indeed,


The  Idea  of  Creation  437

but  only  because  a  plurality  without  unity  is  itself
inconceivable.  That  individuals  severally  distinct  as
regards  their  existence  could  not  interact  is  however
a  mere  dictum.  Pluralism  takes  the  world  as  we  find
it,  as  a  plurality  of  individuals  unified  in  and  through
their  mutual  intercourse.  '  Radically  empirical '  this
certainly  is,  but  if  it  be  true,  it  cannot  be  radically
absurd ;  and  if  it  be  not  true,  then  we  are  entitled  to
ask  the  sins^ularist  how  he  ever  fjot  started  on  the
a  priori  ro3.d.  We  approach  theism  then  as  promising
to  complete  pluralism,  not  as  threatening  to  abolish  it,
as  providing  theoretically  more  unity  in  the  ground  ot
the  world,  and  practically  a  higher  and  fuller  unity  in
its  meaning  and  end.

Starting  from  the  Many  as  real  we  can  never  reach
an  Absolute  into  which  they  are  absorbed  and  vanish  :
they  are  our  7'atio  cognoscendi  of  God  as  their  7'atio
essendi.  As  related  to  them,  God  must  be  limited  and
determined  by  them  :  he  cannot  be  as  if  they  were  not.
If  then  he  is  not  to  be  merely  one  of  them,  not  merely
primus  iiiter  pares,  this  limitation  must  be  an  internal
limitation  ;  God,  we  must  say,  is  their  Creator  ;  and  in
creating  them  he  has  determined  himself.  And  by  this
the  pluralist  means  even  more  than  at  first  it  seems
to  mean.  Theists  in  our  day  profess  to  accept  the
evolution  hypothesis,  but  hardly  as  pluralism  interprets
it,  not  as  epigenesis  or  creative  synthesis  but  rather  as
the  literal  unfolding  of  a  i)lan  completely  specified  in
every  detail.  "  Unless  creators  are  created,  nothing  is
really  created  "  the  pluralist  maintains,  ami  the  idea  oi
creation  would  never  enter  our  minds  at  all.

Ai  this  point  \v('  have  tlu:  remarkable  conjunction


438  The  Realm  of  Ends

of  naturalism  and  orthodox  theology  in  opposition  to
pluralism — Hobbes  and  Jonathan  Edwards  in  league
against  the  'personal  idealist.'  Careful  analysis,  we
thought,  enabled  us  to  make  good  distinctions  that  the
determinist  either  overlooks  or  denies — the  distinction,
for  example,  between  self-determination,  implying  teleo-
logical  categories,  and  determination  according  to  fixed
law,  implying  only  mechanical  categories ;  and  again  the
Kantian  distinction  between  the  efficient  causality  of
the  thing  per  se  and  the  schematized  causation  according
to  '  a  rule  of  succession,'  to  which  the  thing />er  se  may
give  rise  but  which  never  could  give  rise  to  it ;  the
distinction,  that  is,  between  the  pattern  of  filled  time
and  the  agents  who  do  the  filling.  But  if  we  could
start,  not  from  these  agents,  the  Many,  but  from  the
One  conceived  as  absolute,  the  necessitarian  position
would  be  unavoidable  and  the  predestinarian  right.
But  then,  as  we  have  all  along  maintained,  the  world,
as  we  know  it,  would  be  impossible.  The  only  way
out  of  this  impasse — not  between  pluralism  and  theism,
mind,  but  between  theism  and  atheism— appears  to  be
the  via  media,  that  ''all  is  not  decreed,  that  the  total
possibilities,  however  far  back  we  go,  are  fixed  ;  but
within  these  however  far  forward  we  go,  contingencies
are  open\"  This  way  alone  seems  to  lead  towards
the  solution  of  another  problem,  the  gravest  that
theism  has  to  face — the  problem  of  evil.

From  the  standpoint  of  the  Many,  evils  are  hard
to  bear  but  easy  enough  to  account  for,  but  from  the
standpoint  of  the  One,  evil  seems  to  be  simply  a  con-
tradiction, an  impossibility. If  theism be  true, then

^  Lecture  xiv.  p.  315.


The  Problem  of  Evil  439

evil  can  only  be  relative  and  must  gradually  disappear:
if  theism  be  not  true,  though  evils  remain  relative,  they
may  never  disappear.  In  any  case,  evil  as  absolute,  as
a  principle,  is  an  absurdity — this  the  speculations  of
pessimists  sufficiently  show.  "  God  can  do  no  evil,  it  is
agreed  ;  it  then  this  world  were  verily  his  creation,
there  could  not  be  any,  even  relative,  evil  in  it."  This
conclusion  forms  the  major  premise  of  the  prosecution
in  the  great  theodicy,  as  Leibniz  called  it.  Once  again
we  may  say  the  main  issue  is  between  theism  and
atheism  ;  and  since  the  fact  of  relative  evils  is  indispu-
table, the  verdict  must  be  for  atheism,  if  this  conclusion
is  sound.  For  if  the  world  as  it  is  be  as  God  decreed
it,  the  moral  evil  in  it  zvoidd  be  his  work.  But  if  our
contention  will  hold,  that  though  God  created  us,  he
created  us  free  and  to  be  co-workers  with  himself,
then  this  moral  evil,  which  proximately  at  all  events  is
our  doing,  will  be  really  and  ultimately  ours.  If  how-
ever our  contention  is  not  sound,  then  the  whole  case,
prosecution  and  defence  alike,  is  either  an  illusion  and
a  farce,  or  there  is  no  God  at  all.

Still,  granting  this  contention  meanwhile,  what  of
those  physical  evils  which  do  not  seem  to  be  either
proximately  or  remotely  attributable  to  us?  But  first,
there  is  one  restriction  that  the  idea  of  any  determinate
world,  no  matter  what,  imposes  upon  itself  in  being
determinate — its  parts  must  be  compossible:  nothing  in
it  can  do  everything.  The  idea  of  a  world  the  parts  of
which  are  in  no  wav  to  limit  each  other  is  as  unthink-
able  as  the  idea  of  an  abscjlutely  omnipotent  God  who
is  to  create  it.  To  object  that  God  himself  can  only
be  finite,  and  must  Ix-  limited  from  without,  because  he


440  The  Reabn  of  Ends

cannot  override  eternal  truths,  is  the  merest  sophistry.
The  demand  for  absoluteness  of  this  sort  is  a  demand
not for God but for the Indeterminate, a  supreme
unity of opposites which is the same as nothing.
Leaving  aside  such  so-called  physical  evils  as  are  in
this sense metaphysical,  the  negations which  all  de-
termination involves,  we  can  fairly  ask  concerning  the
physical  ills  that  are  admittedly  contingent,  whether  we
have  in  general  any  reason  to  suppose  that  they  are
superfluous  and  not  rather  the  indispensable  condition
of  advance,  and  so  as  an  incentive  really  good. The
world,  ever  pressing  forward,  entered  on  the  stage  of
conscious  life  as  soon  as  it  was  possible,  not  waiting  till
the  fierce  strife  and  turmoil  of  what  we  call  the  elements
had  wholly abated, but  rather driven by  struggling
with  these  to  new  adaptations  that  tended  to  raise  it
above  them. At  this  stage  such  incentives  were  largely
of  the  nature  of  a  vis  a  tergo  :  only  as  the  advance  has
proceeded,  have these  given  place  to  motives  which
partake  more  and  more  of  the  nature  of  a  vis  a  /route.
The  pressure  of  physical  evils  having  first  led  to  the
solidarity  of  the  social  state,  this  has  ushered  in  the
attraction  of  those  ideals  that  Hegel  called  the  objective
spirit.

It  is  characteristic  of  man  that  he  stands  at  the
parting  of  the  ways  ;  and  under  the  influence  of  both
physical  ills  and  spiritual  ideals,  is  led  eventually  to
conclude  that  he  has  no  abiding  city  here  and  to  seek
a  city  yet  to  come.  Meanwhile  the  dimensions  that
circumscribe  this  spatial  and  temporal  world  afford  us
no  sure  clue  to  the  wider  dimensions  of  that  more  spiri-
tual world  beyond  ;  nor  do  they  enable  us  to  conjecture


The  Tivo  J^oiccs — FaifJi  ami  Kuoii'lcdge 441

how  the  two  are  connected  or  how  the  transition
is  to  be  made.  But  none  the  less  our  hold  on  those
higher  spiritual  ideals  leads  us  to  believe  in  God  and
forces  us  to  think  we  were  not  made  to  die.  But  any-
how, it  is  uroed,  all  that  we  are  sure  of  are  the  ills  and
the  vanities  of  the  present  ;  and  if  we  must  inter  from
the  known  to  the  unknown,  is  it  not  more  likely  that
death  will  end  them  than  that  it  will  mend  them  ^
That  present  evil  should  set  us  hoping  for  future  good
is  natural,  but  to  argue  from  evil  now  to  good  hereafter
is  surely  not  rational.  No,  it  is  replied,  vanity  and
vexation  of  spirit  are  not  all  that  we  find.  Thoughtful
men  have  been  driven  to  call  life  an  enigma  but  few
have  been  willing  to  curse  it  as  a  folly  or  a  fraud  ;  it
has  too  much  meaning,  shows  too  much  purpose  for
that,  though  its  secret  and  its  goal  be  not  yet  clear.
Mists  may  envelope  us,  mountains  seem  to  bar  our
way  ;  but  often  we  have  heard  when  we  could  not  see,
and  found  a  way  by  pressing  forward,  though,  while  we
halted,  there  seemed  no  way  at  all.  These  are  the  two
voices — faith  and  knowledge — how  come  they  to  put
such  different  interpretations  on  the  very  same  facts  }
Because  knowledge  is  of  things  we  see,  and  seeks  to
interpret  the  world  as  if  they  were  the  whole  ;  while
faith  is  aware  that  now  we  see  but  in  part,  and  con-
vinced that  only  provided  the  unseen  satisfies  our
spiritual  yearnings  is  the  part  we  see  intelligible —
that  which  ought  to  be  being  the  key  to  that
which is.

And  now  i(j  state  succinctly  the  [JOsiti\e  rc-sulls  we
seem  to  ha\(*  attained.  'i"h(.'y  may  be  gatlK-retl  up
under  four  heads  relating  to Method  or  slandpoinl.  lo


442  The  Realm  of  Ends

God or  the  One,  to  the  World  or  the  Many,  and  to
Faith  in  the  Unseen.

I.  As  to  method — we  have  started  from  what  we
are,  cognitive  and  conative  subjects;  and  from  where  we
are — so  to  say  in  mediis  rebus — in  a  world  consisting  to
an  indefinite  extent  of  other  like  subjects.  No  specula-
tion, no  dialectic,  no  ontological  deduction,  is  needed  to
reach  this  position  ;  and  without  it  all  these  alike  are
impossible.  But  beginning  thus,  we  are  led  both  on
theoretical  and  on  practical  grounds  to  conceive  a  more
fundamental  standpoint  than  this  of  the  Many,  namely
that  of  the  One  that  \\ould  furnish  an  ontological
unity  for  their  cosmological  unity  and  ensure  a  teleo-
logical  unity  for  their  varied  ends,  in  being — as  it  has
been  said — 'the  impersonated  Ideal  of  every  mind^' —
the  One,  as  ultimate  source  of  their  being  and  ultimate
end  of  their  ends.  But  though  we  can  conceive  this
standpoint,  we  cannot  here  attain  to  it  or  see  the
world  from  it.  It  is  there,  like  their  centre  of  gravity
for  the  inhabitants  of  a  planetary  ring,  but  the  aspect
of  the  world  from  thence  is  more  than  we  can  conceive.
Attempts  to  delineate  this  have  been  really  but  pro-
jections of  our  own  eccentric  and  discursive  views  :
creative  synthesis  as  human  implies  aspects,  creative
intuition  as  divine  is  beyond  them.  The  result  of  all
attempts  to  begin  with  the  One  is  only  to  lower  our
idea  of  the  world,  not  to  raise  our  idea  of  God.  His
modus  operandi,  if  even  this  phase  is  allowable,  in
creating,  conserving,  and  ruling  the  world  is  beyond  us.

II.  As  to  God  from  the  point  of  view  of  man,
then,  we  can  only  regard  him  as  Spirit,  as  possessing

^  Howison,  Limits  of  Evolutioti,  2nd  edn,  p.  xiv.


God  443

intelligence  and  will,  and  so  as  personal.  But  while  we
must  admit  such  attributes  carried  to  their  limit  to  be
beyond  us,  we  cannot  regard  God  as  absolute  in  such
wise  as  to  deprive  ourselves  of  all  personality  or  initia-
tive. How  God  created  the  world,  how  the  One  is  the
ground  of  the  Many,  we  admit  we  cannot  tell  ;  but  since
it  is  from  the  Many  as  real  that  we  start  we  are  forced  to
say  that  creation  implies  limitation;  otherwise  the  world
could  be  nothing.  Such  theism  would  be  acosmism.
But  while  we  have  to  maintain  that  in  determining  the
world — his  world — God  also  determines  himself,  it  would
be  absurd  to  suppose  that  in  thus  determining  himself
he,  so  to  say,  diminishes  himself.  Such  determination
may  be  negation,  nay  must  be,  to  be  real  at  all  ;  but  it  is
not  abneeation.  God  does  not  transform,  differentiate
or  fractionate  himself  into  the  world,  and  so  cease  to
be  God.  Such  theism  would  only  be  pantheism,  which
is  truly  but  atheism.  But  now,  finally,  if  the  world,
though  God's  world,  the  expression  and  revelation  of
himself,  is  yet  not  God,  if  though  he  is  immanent  in
it,  he  is  also  as  its  creator  transcendent  to  it,  surely
the  greater  the  world — the  greater  the  freedom  and
capacity  of  his  creatures — the  greater  still  is  he  who
created  and  sustains  and  somehow  surely  overrules  it
all.  Oriental  servility  and  a  priori  speculation  have
made  God  synonymous  with  an  '  Infinite  and  Absolute'
that  leaves  room  for  no  other  and  can  brook  none.  To
express  dissent  from  this  view,  the  unfortunate  term
'  finite  God,'  devised  by  those  who  uphold  the  view,  has
been  accepted  from  thcMii  by  its  opponents.  As  used  by
the  ff)rmer,  it  implies  and  was  UKNinl  to  imply  imperfec-
tion and  dependence,  to  place  God  in  line  with  the  Many


444  T^J^^  Realm  of  Ends

and  to  deny  his  transcendent  supremacy.  So  under-
stood a  finite  God  is  a  contradiction,  of  course.  But
the  term  'finite  God/  as  accepted  by  the  latter,  means
for  them  all  that  God  can  mean,  if  God  implies  the
world  and  is  not  God  without  it :  it  means  a  living
God  with  a  living  world,  not  a  potter  God  with  a
world  of  illusory  clay,  not  an  inconceivable  abstraction
that  is  only  infinite  and  absolute,  because  it  is  beyond
everything  and  means  nothing,  an  dTreLp60eo<;  as
Thomas  Davidson, I believe,  called  it.

III. And  now  as  to  this  living  world,  of  which
God is the ground, this realm of ends which he
respects  because  it  is  his  end — it  is,  we  say,  a  world  of
self-detennining,  free,  agents,  severally  intent  on  attain-
ing more  good  or  at  least  on  retaining  the  good  they
have.  We  note  three  main  characteristics — contingency
in part, stability in part and progress  in part — all
involved  in  experience  as  epigenetic. There  is  con-
tingency, for  a  common  modus  vivendi  is  still  to  seek  ;
there  is  stability,  for  all  effectual  cooperation  is  con-
served as  good  ;  and  there  is  progress,  so  long  as  the
ills  we  have  or  the  goods  we  know  not  of  prompt  to
further  efforts. But  goods  we  know  not  of  are  ideal  ;
and  ideal  ends  are  only  possible  on  the  plane  of  rational
life  :  the  brutes  at  least  leave  well  alone,  and  species  as
soon  as  they  are  adjusted  to  their  environment  remain
stationary,  so  long  at  least  as  that  remains  unchanged.
Such  a  stationary  state  may  be  possible  where  progress
is  due  solely  to  the  vis  a  tergo  of  actual  physical  ills ;  it
is  impossible,  even  though  these  should  cease,  once  the
Good  as  an  ideal  has  loomed  in  sight,  and  begun  as
a  vis  a  f route  to  draw  spirits  onwards. But  it  has  taken


Tlic  IFor/ii  445

untold  ages  to  accomplish  that  finite  amount  of  progress
which  the  pressure  of  material  want  promotes  ;  can  we
then  expect  the  indefinite  progress  that  spiritual  possi-
bilities open  up  will  be  easily  or  speedily  achieved  ?
Compared  with  the  interval  between  the  lowest  forms
of  merely  animal  life  and  the  highest,  the  interval
between  civilised  man  and  man  in  the  infancy  of  the
race,  is  vast  ;  and  yet.  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  the  time
it  has  occupied  is  correspondingly  brief.  The  greater
definiteness  and  steadiness  of  purpose  that  intelligence
brings  and  the  permanent  tradition  that  social  coope-
ration makes  possible  have  then  unquestionably  ac-
celerated the  rate  of  progress  on  the  whole.

But  now  struggles  of  a  new  order  arise  through
this  very  progress  itself  Moral  evils  spring  up  and
grow  apace  in  the  rich  soil  of  worldly  prosperity  ;  for
the  intelligence  and  social  continuity  that  make  nobler
ideals  possible  can  also  subserve  the  ends  of  selfishness,
injustice  and  oppression.  Thus  the  greatest  enemy  of
mankind  is  man  :  so  it  has  always  been,  so  it  may  long
continue  to  be.  Yet  here  too  there  has  been  progress  ;
and  the  vision  of  a  new  era,  when  righteousness  shall
cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea,  evokes  the
lip-service  of  multitudes  and  the  life-devotion  of  a  few.
But  time,  that  tries  all  things,  will  assuredly  bring  more
and  more  to  take  the  lesson  to  heart  that

Man  must  pass  from  old  to  new,
From  vain  to  real,  from  mistake  to  fact,
I-'rom  what  once  seemed  good  to  what  now  proves  best.

But  why,  we  ask,  must  the  lesson  be  so  slowly  learni  ?  Be-
cause to  be  effectually  learnt,  it  must  be  l(,-arnt  b)-  heart,
every  jot and tittle  of  it l)\-  actual Hving  exj)erience.


446  The  Realm  of  Ends

Advanced  to  the  plane  of  social  intercourse  and  ra-
tional discourse,  man  has  sought  out  many  inventions,
preferring"  at  first  what  looks  easy  to  what  seems
arduous,  what  looks  near  to  what  seems  remote,  what
looks  tangible  to  what  seems  visionary.  This  we  call
worldly  wisdom.  The  more  all  its  schemes  are  found
to  fail,  the  more  clearly  will  stand  out  the  one  straight
and  narrow  way — at  first  so  hard  to  find  and  still
so  hard  to  ascend — that  verily  leads  to  life.  As  from
geology  we  learn  of  species  after  species  that  have
disappeared  in  the  process  of  adjusting  organism  to
environment ;  so  in  history  we  learn  from  the  rise  and
fall  of  empire  after  empire  that  only  righteousness
exalteth  a  nation  and  that  those  that  pursue  evil
perish.  It  is  thus  in  the  light  of  evolution  that  the
mystery  of  evil  becomes  clearest.  God  is  the  creator
of  the  world,  we  say  :  his  end  can  only  be  the  Good —
no  other  is  even  conceivable.  But  in  a  world  created
for  the  Good  there  can  be  no  inherent,  no  ineradicable
evil.  The  process  of  evolution  must  then  in  itself  be
good,  the  one  way  possible  to  actual  good  for  creatures
that  are  created  to  achieve  it.  And  if  again  we  ask
why  the  way  is  so  long  and  the  progress  so  devious
and  so  slow,  we  can  but  suppose  it  is  so  because  only
so  can  the  progress  be  thorough  and  the  way  assuredly
the  best ;  this  we  may  well  believe  is  why  "  the  mills
of  God  grind  slowly  and  grind  exceeding  small,"  Only
after  proving  all  things  can  we  hold  fast  to  that  which
is  good.

But  now — and  this  leads  on  to  our  last  head —
does  this  not  come  near  to  saying,  it  may  be  asked,
that  the  best  of  all  possible  worlds  is  a  world  without


God  and  the  IVorld  447

God  ?  is  it  not  practically  atheism,  in  short  ?  and  if  not
that,  still,  if  the  world  is  left  severely  alone  to  work  out
its  own  sahation,  what  have  we  but  the  God-forsaken
world  in  which  the  so-called  deists  are  said  to  have
believed  ?  Not  atheism,  certainly,  for  faith  in  God  as
the  ground  of  the  world  affords  us  an  assurance,  which
we  could  not  otherwise  have,  that  complete  harmony
and  unit)-,  the  good  of  all  in  the  good  of  each,  is  really
attainable,  nay,  will  verily  be  attained.  Whereas,  if
we  stop  at  a  plurality  of  finite  selves  in  interaction,  we
have  no  guarantee,  cannot  even  reasonably  expect,
that  such  a  totality  will  ever  attain  to  perfect  organic
unity.  Nor  does  the  theism  to  which  pluralism  points
leave  no  place  for  God  in  the  world  ;  it  is  then  not  deism  :
creation,  if  we  think,  we  shall  see  can  be  conceived  only
as  continuous  presence'.  If  God  is  the  ground  of  the
world  at  all  he  is  its  ground  always  as  an  active,  living,
interested.  Spirit,  not  as  a  merely  everlasting,  change-
less and  indifferent  centre,  round  which  it  simply  whirls.
Still  God's  action  in  the  world  must  be  for  us  as  in-
scrutable as  his  creation  of  it  :  indeed  there  is  no
reason  why  we  should  attempt  to  discriminate  between
them.  In  calling  God  transcendent  we  seek  only  to
express  that  duality  of  subject  and  object  which  we
take  as  fundamental  to  all  spiritual  being,  not  to
suggest  that  his  relation  to  the  world  must  be  thought
under  the  category  of  external  causation,  like  the
interaction  of  object  with  object.  This  is  obviously
inadequate.  Nor  is  the  relation  of  God  to  the  world
comparable  to  ilic  interaction  of  one  finite  subject
with  another;  for  between  them  there  is  no  such
'  (Jf.  above,  Led.  xii.  j)]).  lUot


448  The  Realm  of  Ends

dependence  as  that  which  connects  them  both  with
God.  We  trench  upon  the  mystical  when  we  attempt
to  picture  this  divine  immanence,  '  closer  to  us  than
breathing  and  nearer  than  hands  and  feet.'  It  is  this
which  stirs  the  '  cosmic  emotion  '  of  poets  like  Words-
worth, Goethe,  Browning  and  Tennyson,  to  this  that  the
inward  witness  of  the  spirit  refers  which  is  the  essence
of  religious  experience  everywhere.  In  both  there
opens  out  in  varying  degrees  of  clearness  and  certainty

The  true  world  within  the  world  we  see,
Whereof  our  world  is  but  the  bounding  shore.

This  is  the  unseen  world,  the  world  not  realised,  in
which  faith  moves.

IV.  In  keeping  with  the  great  principle  of  continuity,
everywhere  displayed  in  the  working  out  of  the  world's
evolution,  we  have  found  this  faith  foreshadowed  in  the
upward  striving  that  is  the  essence  of  life.  Consider
for  a  moment  the  development  of  the  senses.  The
first  clear  response  is  to  mechanical  contact,  and  we
have  as  the  first  specific  sense,  the  sense  of  touch.
From  this  is  presently  differentiated  the  sense  of
hearing,  when  objects  not  yet  present  to  actual  touch
give  premonitions  of  their  proximity  by  the  vibrations
they  set  up  :  hearing  is  thus  the  faith  of  touch.  As
hearing  to  touch  so  smell  stands  to  taste :  it  is  a
foretaste  that  further  extends  the  objective  range.
A  freckle  or  pigment-spot  is  all  that  light  at  first
produces  ;  but  when  its  hints  are  heeded  and  the  pig-
mented retina  that  first  arose  is  furnished  by  the
organism's  own  prophetic  efforts  with  directing  muscles,
it  exchanges  its  passive  sight  for  active  vision,  and
opens  out  a  vastly  wider  objective  world. In  keeping


Faith  449

with  all  this  is  the  place  of  faith  on  the  higher  plane
where  it  contrasts  with  intellectual  sight :  it  is  like  a
new  sense  that  brings  us  face  to  face  with  an  unseen
world.  What  does  this  mean  ?  Let  us  go  back  a  step.
Here  as  everywhere — in  its  highest  as  in  its  lowest
form — faith  is  striving  and  striving  is  faith.  The  whole
conscious  being  is  concerned  :  there  is  not  merely  the
cognition  of  what  is,  there  is  also  an  appreciation  of
what  it  is  worth,  a  sense  of  the  promise  and  potency  of
further  good  that  it  may  enfold  ;  there  is  a  yearning  to
realise  this ;  and  there  is  finally  the  active  endeavour
that  such  feeling  prompts.  It  is  through  this  faith  that
man  is  where  he  is  to-day,  through  it  that  mountains
have  been  removed  and  the  unattainable  verily  attained.
More  life  and  fuller  achieved  by  much  toil  and  struggle,
an  ascent  to  higher  levels  not  movement  along  the  line
of  least  resistance — this  is  the  one  increasing  purpose
that  we  can  so  far  discern,  when  we  regard  the  world
historically  as  a  realm  of  ends  in  place  of  summarising
it  scientifically  under  a  system  of  concepts.

And  how  do  we  stand  now  }  That  the  present
world  and  progress  on  the  plane  of  the  present  world
do  not  and  never  will  meet  our  highest  needs — about
this  there  is  little  question.  But  where  in  what  is,  in
what  we  have  so  far  attained,  can  we  discern  those
eternal  values  that  point  upwards  aiul  beyond  ihis
present  world  ?  Surely  in  all  that  we  lind  ol  the
beautiful  and  sublime  in  this  earth  on  which  we  dwell
and  the  starry  heavens  above  it  ;  in  all  that  led  men
long  ago  to  regard  nature  as  a  cosmos  ;  in  all  that  is
best  and  noblest  in  the  annals  of  human  life  ;  in  these
very  needs  thf-mselves  that  the  seen  and  temporal  fu'l

w.  2y


450  The  Realm  of  Ends

to  meet ;  and  above  all,  in  that  nascent  sense  of  the
divine  presence  which  constitutes  the  truly  religious
life,  and  converts  faith  into  the  substance  of  things
hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen.  But  now
a  third  question  at  once  suggests  itself  Faith  on  the
lower  levels  was  justified  by  its  results :  can  we  here
too  apply  this  test  of  success  or  failure  ?  The  founder
of  Christianity  at  any  rate  did  not  hesitate  to  appeal  to
it  :■ — ■"■  Beware  of  false  prophets.  Ye  shall  know  them
by  their  fruits  :  do  men  gather  grapes  of  thorns  or  figs
of  thistles  ? "  And,  in  fact,  this  is  the  test  that  is  and
will  be  applied  ;  for,  as  I  have  already  said,  however
much  in  theory  men  consider  premisses,  in  practice  they
consider  only  results.

A  powerful  practical  argument  in  favour  of  re-
ligious faith  might  be  worked  out  on  the  following
lines  : — first  we  might  point  to  its  universality :  no
race  of  mankind  is  wholly  without  that  feeling  of
dependence  on  the  supernatural  and  mysterious,  which,
as  Schleiermacher  thought,  is  the  common  characteristic
of  religious  emotion.  Next  we  might  point  to  its
survival:  no  race  has  yet  outgrown  it.  There  have
been  periods  of  religious  decline,  no  doubt ;  but  they
have  sooner  or  later  involved  moral  and  intellectual  de-
cadence as  well.  And  in  these  days  when  faith  is  said
to  be  waning,  we  find  that  "things  are  in  the  saddle
and  ride  mankind,"  and  whither  that  tends  history  has
made  only  too  clear.  Hitherto — in  keeping  with  the
judgment  by  results — such  times  have  been  followed
by  periods  of  revival  and  awakening  ;  and  there  are
happily  signs  of  such  in  our  own  day.  Lastly  we
might  point  to  the  advance  of  religion  that  has  usually


A'ietzsclie  45 1

accompanied  the  increase  of  morality  and  intelligence  ;
nay  we  might  show  that  religion  has  largely  furthered
such  advance.  And  here  by  way  of  contrast  I  may
refer  briefly  to  a  strange  prophet,  whose  writings  are
at  this  moment  exciting  the  keenest  attention  —  I  refer
to  Nietzsche.  As  the  struggle  for  existence  and  the
survival  of  the  fittest  have  brought  man  to  the  highest
place  as  the  paragon  of  animals,  so  in  time  they  will
lead,  he  teaches,  to  a  yet  higher  being,  the  Uebennensch
or  Over-man.  But  this  higher  man,  he  foretells,  will
reject  the  existing  morality  of  liberty,  equality  and
fraternity,  founded  on  the  golden  rule  of  benevolence
and  brotherly  love — the  morality  of  slaves  as  he  con-
temptuously names  it.  The  new  morality  will  be  the
morality  of  heroes,  that  is  egoists  :  might  will  be  right.
As  man  now  subjugates  the  lower  animals  to  his  own
ends,  so  the  Over-man  will  exploit  feebler  men  and
— as  it  has  been  sarcastically  put — rise  on  stepping
stones  of  theii'  dead  selves  to  higher  things.  In  short
a  race  is  to  appear,  so  Nietzsche  and  others  would
have  us  believe,  that  is  to  try  the  experiment  of  life
wholly  on  the  lines  of  what  is  called  '  modern  thought '
and  wholly  without  faith  in  God  or  a  world  to  come.
I  do  not  think  the  growing  Nietzsche  cult  will  last
long  or  in  the  end  do  harm.  If  the  terrible  experiment
must  be  made  we  may  safely  anticipate  the  result  :  it
will  Ije  Hobbes's  state  of  nature  over  again  ;  till  the
world  retraces  its  steps.

It  will  be  said,  {jerhaps  : — '  The  regenerate  Christian
is  already  an  Ueberviensch,  no  longer  "natural  man,"
IjLit  "spiritual"  in  the  Pauline  sense;  nor  is  his  ex-
jjcrience  fairly  drscrilx^d  as  subjective  bchcl in God  ;

2y — 2


452  The  Realm  of  Ends

it  is  actual  love  of  God  and  conscious  communion  with
him.'  We  have  no  right  to  question  this  ;  though  we
must  admit  that  such  inward  conviction  of  the  reality
of  religious  experience  is,  for  the  ptwposes  of  our
discussion,  to  be  classed  as  faith,  not  as  knowledge,  in
so  far  as  it  is — epistemologically,  though  not  psycho-
logically— subjective,  incommunicable,  and  objectively
unverifiable.  In  so  far,  however,  as  he  lets  his  light
shine  and  men  see  his  good  works,  the  religious  man
affords  practical  evidence  of  the  worth  of  his  faith.
With  enough  of  such  light,  the  justification  of  faith
would  be  sure.

One  final  question,  among  the  many  that  suggest
themselves,  1  must  not  wholly  omit.  We  have  been
contemplating  the  universe  as  a  realm  of  ends.  If  we
were  asked  what  is  the  end  of  this  realm  of  ends  we
might  answer  rightly  enough  that  its  end  can  only  be
itself;  for  there  is  nothing  beyond  it,  and  no  longer  any
meaning  in  beyond.  It  is  the  absolutely  absolute.
Still  within  it  we  have  distinguished  the  One  and  the
Many,  and  we  have  approached  it  from  the  standpoint
of  the  latter.  In  so  doing  we  are  liable  to  a  bias,  so
to  say,  in  favour  of  the  Many  :  led  to  the  idea  of  God
as  ontologically  and  teleologically  essential  to  their
completion,  we  are  apt  to  speak  as  if  he  were  a
means  for  them.  Those  who  attempt  to  start  from
the  standpoint  of  the  One  betray  a  bias  towards  the
opposite  extreme.  The  world,  on  their  view,  is  for
the  glory  of  God  :  its  ultimate  7^aisou  d'etre  is  to  be
the  means  to  this  divine  end.  Can  we  not  transcend
these  one-sided  extremes  and  find  some  sublimer  idea
which  shall  unify  them  both  ? We  can  indeed  ; and


The  Absolute  E)id  453

that  idea  is  Love. But  here  ao-ain  we  trench  on  the

o

mystical,  the  ineffable,  and  can  only  speak  in  parables.
Turning  to  Christianity  as  exhibiting  this  truth  in  the
purest  form  we  know,  we  find  it  has  one  great  secret —
dying  to  live,  and  one  great  mystery — the  incarnation.
The  love  of  God  in  creating  the  world  implies  both.
Lciblichkeit  ist  das  Ende  a  Her  IVege  Goiies,  said  an
old  German  theologian.  The  world  is  God's  self-
limitation,  self-renunciation  might  we  venture  to  say  }
And  so  God  is  love.  And  what  must  that  world  be
that  is  worthy  of  such  love  ?  The  only  worthy  object
of  love  is  just  love  :  it  must  then  be  a  world  that  can
love  God.  But  love  is  free  :  in  a  ready-made  world
then  it  could  have  no  place.  Only  as  we  learn  to
know  God  do  we  learn  to  love  him  :  hence  the  long
and  painful  discipline  of  evolution,  with  lis  dying  to
live — the  converse  process  to  incarnation — the  putting
off  the  earthly  for  the  likeness  of  God.  In  such  a
realm  of  ends  we  trust  "  that  God  is  love  indeed,  and
love  creation's  final  law."  We  cannot  live  or  move
without  faith,  that  is  clear.  Is  it  not  then  rational  to
believe  in  the  best,  we  ask  ;  and  can  there  be  a  better  }


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES.

I. The  Meaning  of  Contingency. (Lect.  iv.  p.  76.)

While  preparing  these  lectures  for  the  press  I  have  been
asked  by  a  friendly  critic  for  a  definition  of  contingency.
Possibly  the  request  was  prompted  by  the  conviction,  com-
monly enough  entertained,  that  there  is  really  no  contingency
in  the  world  at  all ;  and  this,  it  is  supposed,  any  serious
attempt  to  define  contingency  would  sooner  or  later  disclose.
Absolute  chance  is  certainly  nonsense ;  and  relative  chance,  it
may  be  said,  is  after  all  not  really  chance,  and  implies  nothing
but  ignorance  or — it  may  be — irrelevance  to  the  matter  in
hand.  The  truth  of  this  I  have  already  fully  admitted  in  the
text ;  but  I  have  also  distinguished  between  the  contingency
of  chance  and  the  contingency  of  freedom ^  It  is  the  latter
contingency  that  is  here  in  question,  and,  whatever  may  be
said  of  its  validity,  its  meaning  at  least  seems  clear.  If  the
future  of  the  world  is  partly  determined  by  the  conduct  of
free  agents  there  will  continually  be  new  beginnings  that  were
not  foreseen ;  and  new  possibilities  will  become  imminent,
that  no  knowledge  of  the  past  can  surely  forecast.  All  these
possibilities  will  find  a  place  within  a  certain  '  domain '  (to
adopt  a  mathematical  term),  inasmuch  as  the  world  was
never  a  chaos,  but  definite  from  the  first  ^;  and  so  we  say
there  is  no  absolute  contingency,  no  utter  caprice.

'  This  has  been  stigmatized  as  a  'very  scholastic  distinction,'  and  one
implying  'a  system  of  pluralism,'  as  if  that  would  suffice  to  dispose  of  it  !
With  this  objection  I  have  already  attempted  to  deal  elsewhere.  Cf
Natiiralistn  and  Agnosticism,  3rd  edn,  vol.  li.  pp.  292 — 4.

^  Cf.  Lect.  IV.  pp.  70  f


Dr  How  ISO)  I  on  Creation  455

Though  contingent  for  others,  a  man's  acts  are  not  con-
tingent for  him  :  if  they  were,  we  should  have  to  admit
absohite  contingenc}'  or  chance.  But  if  not  contingent  for
him,  then  must  they  not  for  him  be  necessary?  So  it  has
been  argued  as  if  '  conditioned  by '  were  the  same  as  '  con-
ditioned for.'  This  further  problem,  however,  is  dealt  with
later. Cf Lectures  XIII.  and  XIV.

But  the  contingency  in  the  so-called  '  physical  world,'
referred  to  at  the  close  of  this  Lecture,  cannot,  it  may  be
thought,  be  the  contingency  of  freedom  :  here  then  to  deny
immutable  law  is,  it  would  seem,  to  assert  absolute  chance.
We  cannot,  of  course,  affirm  that  a  star  or  a  meteor  or  a
cluster  of  particles  is  an  individual.  But  neither  can  we  be
confident  that  they  are  always  and  necessarily  the  merely
inanimate  aggregates  we  commonly  take  them  to  be.  All
that  pluralism  contends  for,  however,  is  simply  that  the  real
beings  these  phenomena  imply  have  some  spontaneity  and
some  initiative' ;  and  to  these  essential  characteristics  of  all
real  individuals  the  uniformity,  as  well  as  the  diversity,  of  the
physical  world  is  due — the  former  as  Natura  naturata^  the
latter  as  Natura  iiaturaiis.

W. Dr Howison  on  Creation. (Lect.  xi.  p.  245.)

"  Not  to  know  how  a  thing  can  be  is  no  disproof  that  the
thing  must  be  and  is,"  Mr  Bradley  has  said,  as  Fries  indeed
had  said  before  him.  To  this  truth  we  have  appealed  while
admitting  that  creation  is  to  us  inexplicable.  But  Dr  Howison
seeks  to  cut  us  off  from  this  appeal  by  asserting  vehemently
and  repeatedly  that  the  idea  of  creation  is  self-contradictory —
if  the  creatures,  that  is  to  say,  are  to  be  free  agents  and  not
merely  machines.  We  must,  he  contends,  either  accept  the
logical  consequences  of  Jonathan  Edwards  or  deny  their
premise  :  he  prefers  to  do  the  latter.  "  Better  the  atheism  of
a  lost  P'irst  Cause... than  the  atheism  of  deified Injustice  with

'  Cf.  Lf(  t.  III.  pp.  ''>5  ff.


456  Supplenieiitary  Notes

its  election  and  reprobation  by  sheer  sovereign  prerogative'."
Very  true,  but  the  one  vital  question  to  settle  first  of  all
is  whether  or  no  we  are  really  shut  up  to  these  alternatives —
forced  to  relinquish  any  idea  of  creation  or  give  up  freedom
altogether.

Despite  his  impressive  earnestness,  however,  Dr  Howison
seems  not  to  have  troubled  himself  about  this  wider  question
at  all.  As  a  pluralist  he,  of  course,  disallows  the  absolutist's
version  of  the  world — that  the  Many  are  but  '  modes  or
expressions  of  the  sole  self-activity  of  the  One.'  This  granted,
he  begins  by  simply  assuming  that  there  is  nothing  left  but
"  the  Oriental,  Augustinian,  monarcho-theistic  idea  of  creation
at  a  certain  date  by  sheer  fiat  and  out  of  fathomless  nothing."
From  this  assumption  he  next  advances  to  his  main  position
"  that  creationism  must  logically  exclude  the  possibility  of
freedom.  For  the  Creator  cannot,  of  course,  create  except  by
exactly  and  precisely  co7iceiving,  otherwise  his  product  would  not
differ  from  non-entity.  The  created  nature  must  therefore
inevitably  register  the  will  and  the  plan  of  the  Creator^"
This  is  true,  but  it  is  at  all  events  not  to  the  point :  on  the
contrary  the  sentence  I  have  put  into  italics  covertly  assumes
that  this  '  plan '  cannot  be  the  existence  of  a  world  of  free
agents.  An  exact  and  precise  conception  of  a  machine  is
possible,  but  an  exact  and  precise  conception  of  such  a  world
is,  it  is  taken  for  granted,  logically  impossible.  How  then  do
we  come  to  have  it  ?

Dr  Howison  plays  unawares  with  a  double-edged  weapon
here.  For  that  exact  and  precise  definition  of  a  free  agent,
which  he  declares  to  be  a  contradiction  from  the  standpoint  of
the  Creator,  he  regards  as  essential  from  the  standpoint  of
the  free  agents  themselves.  They  subsist  only  by  '  defining  or
positing '  themselves,  at  once  "  in  terms  of  their  own  inerasible
and  unrepeatable  particularity  and  of  the  supplemental  indi-
vidualities of  a  whole  world  of  others" — in  other  words  they

^  The  Limits  of  Evolution,  2nd  edn,  1905,  p.  341  fin. Cf.  also  above
Lect.  XX.  p.  438.  2  Qp_  ^i(  p_  297.


Dy  Hcnvisoii  ou Creation  457

assign  themselves  a  place  in  a  series  "  that  must  run  through
every  real  difference  from  the  lowest  increment  over  non-
existence to  the  absolute  realisation  of  the  ideal  type\"  If
exact  and  precise  conception  leave  no  room  for  freedom,  what
room  can  be  left  by  unambiguous  definition  and  position  in
a  continuous  series  ?  If  Spinoza  was  right  in  denying  freedom,
as  we  understand  it,  in  the  one  case,  was  not  Schopenhauer
equally  right  in  denying  it  in  the  other  ?  Whether  my  essentia
is  really  '  posited  '  by  God  or  by  myself  can  make  no  difference
to  its  logical  character.  If  I  must  cither  be  a  non-entity  or
'utterly  pre-determined,'  like  a  machine,  by  exact  and  eternal
specification,  it  is  all  one  as  regards  the  question  of  freedom
how  my  essoitia  is  raised  to  existcntia.  But  if  I  verily  am
a  free  being,  '  rational  and  untrammelled,  with  will  to  choose
unpredestined,'  there  can  be  no  contradiction  in  this  my
essence ;  and  there  is  then  certainly  none  in  postulating  God
as  the  ground  of  its  existence.  And  such  postulation  removes
a  serious  difficulty  in  Dr  Howison's  own  theory,  precisely  the
difficulty  in  fact  that  has  led  us  to  advance  from  pluralism  to
theism.  That  the  world  of  the  Many  should  verily  be  a  realm
of  ends  if  it  have  in  the  One  its  rational  ground  seems
altogether  credible.  But  that  the  Many  should  freely  posit
themselves  so  as  to  form  a  '  spontaneous  harmony  providing
for  all  individual  differences  compatible  with  the  mutual
reality  of  all'  seems  infinitely  improbable.  In  such  a  vast
election  how  is  the  precedence  settled  ?  After  all  Dr  Howison,
try  as  he  may,  does  not  escape  '  the  sheer  sovereign  preroga-
tive'  that  creation  implies.  The  One  and  the  Many,  he
admits,  "  are  different  and  unchangeably  different ;  they  are
even  different  in  species'' \  for  there  is  in  every  finite  soul
'  a  derivative  life  absolutely  foreign  to  God,'  on  account  of
which,  for  lack  of  a  better  name,  it  has  been  called  a
'  creature-.'

Dr  Howison's  initial  assumption  will  strike  most  people  as
out  of  date. The  creationism  '  of  the  old  theology  and  of  the

>  Op.  cit.  pp.  35 1 -4  f.  ''■  Op.  tit.  pp.  429.  363 f-


458  Suppleinentary  Notes

plodding  realist  alike ' — as  he  styles  it — so  far  from  being  the
only  one  in  vogue,  has  long  been  superseded.  There  are  but
few  thoughtful  people  nowadays  who  regard  the  world  as
somehow  made  at  a  certain  point  of  time  by  the  transeunt
activity  of  a  so-called  First  Cause.  Such  a  view  I  have  already
attempted  to  deal  with.  And  now  after  all,  what  does
Dr  Howison  himself  tell  us  ?  '•'■Real  creatioji"  he  says,  "  means
suck  ail  eternal  dependence  of  other  souls  upon  God  that  the
non-existence  of  God  ivoiild  involve  the  non-existence  of  all  souls,
luhile  his  existence  is  the  essential  supplementing  Reality  that
raises  them  to  reality ;  without  him  they  zuould  be  but  void
names  and  bare  possibilities'^ !'  '  Void  names  and  bare  possi-
bilities '  in  such  a  context  may  fairly  be  taken  as  a  rhetorical
periphrasis  for  '  nothing,'  and  '  supplementary '  as  therefore
superfluous  :  in  short  God  is  here  unequivocally  declared  to
be  the  ground  of  the  existence  of  the  Many,  Again,  in  a  later
passage  he  says :  "  The  self-existent  perfection  of  deity  itself
freely  demands  for  its  own  fulfilment  the  possession  of  a  world
that  is  in  God's  own  image  and  such  a  control  of  it  as  is  alone
consistent  with  its  being  so:  a  divine  creation  must  com-
pletely reflect  the  divine  nature,  and  must  therefore  be  a
world  of  moral  freedom^."  Surely  here  it  is  unmistakably
recognised  that  though — or  rather  that  because — God  is  the
one  ground  of  the  world,  the  Many  are  free.

What  then  are  we  to  make  of  the  contention  that
"  creationism  must  logically  exclude  the  possibility  of  free-
dom "  ?  At  first  we  might  naturally  suppose  that  creationism
must  here  be  used  not  with  '  the  real  meaning '  just  defined,
but  in  the  inappropriate  sense  of  '  the  old  theology  and  the
plodding  realist'  that  is  now  discarded  by  Dr  Howison  in
common  with  the  rest  of  us.  A  free  agent  '  utterly  predeter-
mined '  as  well  as  a  machine  not  '  exactly  and  precisely '
specified  is,  we  agree,  a  contradiction  and  a  non-entity.  Plainly
then  the  souls  that  God  '  raises  to  reality  in  fulfilment  of  his

1  The  Limits  of  Evolution^  2nd  edn,  1905,  p.  xvii. Italics  Dr  Howison's.

2  Op.  cit.  p.  75-


Dy  Ilo-i^isoii  on  Cyeatiou  459

own  perfection  and  reflecting  his  own  nature '  cannot  be
either :  for  all  that,  the  real  meaning  of  creation  may  remain.
But  no,  it  is  the  real  meaning  of  creation,  as  we  understand  it,
that  Dr  Howison  declares  to  be  impossible.  But  how  can  it
be  both  real  and  impossible?  Obviously  one  or  other  of
Dr  Howison's  positions  must  be  surrendered,  and,  in  point  of
fact,  we  find  him  explaining  away  the  first,  keeping  it  to  the
ear  and  breaking  it  to  the  hope.  "  Creation  has  a  most  real
meaning,  though  indeed  not  a  literal  but  only  a  metaphorical
oiie'V

The  only  ground  of  the  world,  Dr  Howison  maintains,  is
'  a  principle  of  connexion  between  all  minds,  God  included,'
and  this  principle  is  not  ontological  but  logical  and  teleo-
logical.  "As  Final  Cause,  God  is  at  once  (i)  the  Logical
Ground  apart  from  which,  as  Defining  Standard,  no  conscious-
ness can  define  itself  as  /,  nor  consequently  can  exist  at  all  ;
and  (2)  the  Ideal  Goal  toward  which  each  consciousness  in  its
eternal  freedom  moves-."  Now  a  logical  ground  cannot  be
the  ground  of  the  existence  of  anything ;  that  much  surely  is
certain.  Again,  to  affirm  that  I  am  in  virtue  of  my  own  self-
definition  or  self-position  seems  only  a  Hegelian  way  of  saying
that  I  exist  of  myself  and  know  of  no  other  ground  for  my
being.  So  far  (i)  is  just  the  position  of  the  mere  pluralist.
And  so  in  like  manner  is  (2)  :  the  Ideal  there,  is  only  the
pluralistic  goal,  not  a  reality  but  an  end.  We  may  say  indeed
that  ideals  are  always  final  causes  ;  but  to  talk  of  final  causes
as  real  is,  I  fear,  but  philosophical  barbarism.  Up  to  this
point,  then,  it  seems  clear  that  Dr  Howison  has  not  got
beyond  '  uncompromising  pluralism.'  We  have  seen,  however,
that  it  is  not  only  open  to  the  pluralist  to  postulate  the  reality
of  God,  but  reasonable,  theoretically  and  practically,  to  do  .so.
But  Dr  Howi.son  thinks,  Kant  notwithstanding,  that  his  'con-
crete logic'  enables  him  to  supersede postulation by  proof,

'  Op.  cit.  p.  392.  Italics  mine.  There  is  here,  I  fear,  some  confusion
between  symbol  and  meaninj,',  means  and  end.  Meaning  is  never  meta-
phorical thou}ih  often  conveyed  by  metaphor.

-  Op.  cit.  p.  39  r.


460  Supplementary  Notes

and  to  resuscitate  '  the  thrice-slain  ontological  argument.'
This  in  its  amended  form  he  has  himself  thus  concisely
summarized  :  "  The  idea  of  every  self  and  the  idea  of  God
are  inseparably  connected,  so  that  if  aiiy  self  exists,  then  God
also  must  exist ;  but  any  and  every  self  demonstrably  exists,
for  (as  apud  Cartesiiun)  the  very  doubt  of  its  existence  implies
its  existence ;  and  therefore  God  really  exists  \"  But  is  not
the  first  premise  here  utterly  dogmatic  and  flagrantly  untrue,
at  least  in  the  form  which  the  present  argument  requires  ?
That  we  cannot  have  the  idea  of  God  without  the  idea  of  self
is  true  ;  but  the  converse,  that  we  cannot  have  the  idea  of  self
without  the  idea  of  God,  Dr  Howison,  though  he  is  continually
asserting  it,  has  nowhere  shown  to  be  true.  On  the  con-
trary, in  one  interesting  passage,  he  rightly  urges  that — as
regards  knowledge  of  his  existence — God  "  only  takes  the
common  lot  of  every  soul,  the  fact  of  whose  being  must  be
gathered  by  all  the  rest  from  the  testimony  of  their  own
interior  thought-."

Dr  Howison  then,  we  may  conclude,  w^hile  rightly  dis-
allowing the  creationism  of  Augustine  and  Edwards,  along
with  that  of  Spinoza,  as  alike  incompatible  with  the  freedom
of  the  created,  has  not  succeeded  in  providing  another  in  their
place.  Nor  has  he  shown  that  the  idea  of  creation  advocated
in  the  text  involves  any  contradiction  :  indeed  it  would  hardly
be  going  too  far  to  say  that  all  that  is  intelligible  on  the
subject  in  his  own  valuable  book  is  really  reconcilable  with
this.

^  The  Limits  of  Evohitioft,  2nd  edn,  1905,  p.  359.  To  demonstrate
the  intuitive  certainty  of  one's  own  existence,  by  the  way,  is  a  feat  of
which  Descartes  was  not  really  guilty.  Further,  Dr  Howison's  version
is  much  nearer  the  old  cosmological  argument  than  it  is  to  the  ontological ;
and  it  is  perhaps  needless  to  add  that  the  cosmological  argument,  if  sound,
would  be  very  damaging  to  him.

2  op.  cit.  p.  258.


461


III. Relation of Body and Mind.

(Lect.  XII.  pp. 254. 258.)

The  difference  we  have  noted  between  the  'functional'
relation  of  subordinate  monads  to  their  own  dominant  and
their  'foreign'  relation  to  other  dominants,  is  the  prime  source
of  the  difficulties  that  beset  dualism,  when — assuming  two
distinct  and  disparate  substances — it  attempts  to  explain  the
connexion  of  mind  and  brain.  When,  on  the  other  hand,  this
connexion  is  regarded  from  the  standpoint  of  monadism
these  difficulties  seem  to  vanish,  so  soon  as  this  difference  is
clearly  recognised.  There  are  two  cardinal  facts  that  together
give  rise  to  this  so-called  'psychophysical  problem,'  both  name
and  thing.  First,  there  is  the  psychological  fact  that  neither
in  perception  nor  in  action  is  there  any  immediate  experience
of  brain  processes,  intervening  prior  to  the  one  and  subsequent
to  the  other.  Most  human  beings  live  out  their  lives  without
knowing  that  the  brain  has  any  connexion  with  mind  at  all.
Secondly,  there  is  the  fact  that  the  physiologist,  who  traces
the  centripetal  processes,  that  stimuli  set  up,  till  they  reach
the  brain,  and  then  traces  the  centrifugal  processes  that  next
ensue,  till  they  reach  the  muscles,  thereby  learns  nothing
either  of  the  perceptions  that  follow  upon  the  former,  or  of
the  volitions  that  precede  the  latter,  of  these  processes.
Thus  Aristotle — to  take  but  one  instance  out  of  many — who
knew  a  good  deal  about  both  psychology  and  physiology,
was  quite  unaware  of  any  connexion  between  mind  and  the
brain  ;  which  he  regarded  "simply  as  a  cold,  moist  and  sense-
less organ  destined  to  countervail  the  excessive  heat  of  the
heart."  Ikit  the  conferences  of  psychologists  and  physiologists
have  at  length  placed  the  intimate  correspondence  between
psychosis  and  neurosis  beyond  doubt.  The  living  being,  that
the  psychologist  regards  ejectively  as  mind,  the  physiologist
regards  objectively as mechanism  ; and together  the)' find


462  Suppleniepitary  Notes

that  the  more  complex  the  mind  the  more  complex  the
mechanism ;  and  vice  versa.  The  problem  is  rightly  to
interpret  this  correspondence,  so  certainly,  yet  so  indirectly,
ascertained.

At  the  outset  there  are  two  points  on  which  we  shall  have
to  insist:  one  that  we  may  fairly  call  an  established  truth,  and
another  that  is  fundamental  for  monadism.  First,  whereas
the  mechanism  that  is  the  one  object  of  the  physiologist's
study  is  altogether  phenomenal,  the  mind  that  the  psycho-
logist studies  is  not — as  the  naturalist  vainly  strives  to
maintain — merely  phenomenal  or  epiphenomenal ;  since  it
implies  the  subject,  or  dominant  monad,  to  whom  such
phenomenal  experiences  belong.  Secondly,  the  real  agents,
whose  appearances  alone  constitute  the  physiologists'  phe-
nomena, are  here  regarded  as  monads  that  minister  as
subordinates  to  this  subject,  or  dominant  monad.  We  have
then  to  account  for  the  fact  that  these  monads,  which  to  the
physiologist  appear  as  extended  matter,  Leibniz's  materia
secimda,  are  for  their  dominant  monad  not  in  this  wise
phenomenal  at  all.  In  other  words,  we  have — if  we  can —
to  explain  how,  corresponding  to  the  brain  that  for  the
physiologist  is  but  a  small  part  of  the  external  world  and
continuous  with  it,  there  is  for  the  psychologist  the  pre-
sentation to  an  active  subject,  distinct  from  it,  of  the  whole
of  this  external  world — except,  of  course,  that  small  part,
the  brain,  presented  only  to  the  physiologist.

To  begin  :  we  note  first  that  the  complexity  and  dis-
tinctness of  the  world,  as  object  for  a  given  subject,  vary
with  its  point  of  view.  But  the  standpoint,  or,  as  we  might
also  say,  the  rank  of  a  monad  depends  on  its  retinue  of
subordinate  or  ministering  monads.  For  it,  these  are  not
objective,  i.e.  constituents  of  its  objective  world.  To  become
such  they  must  lose  their  functional  relation  as  ministering
subjects  and  take  on  that  other,  the  foreign  relation,  which
they  have  only  for  an  outside  observer,  like  the  physiologist ;
and  at  the  same  time  their  dominant  monad — unless  they  are


Relation  of  Body  ajid  Mind  463

replaced — must  be  impoverished  to  a  corresponding  extent.
The  two  relations  are  in  this  respect  incompatible.  And  now
it  is  this  incompatibility  that  gives  rise  to  the  psychophysical
problem,  so  hopeless  for  the  Cartesian  dualism  with  its
disparate  substances,  and  so  simple  for  the  personal  idealist.

We  observe  next  that  functionality  is  the  main  category
of  life  :  it  suffices  to  mark  off  the  organic  and  individual  from
the  inorganic  and  its  divers  aggregations.  But,  though  there
is  a  real  analogy  between  the  relation  of  a  subordinate
monad  and  its  dominant  and  the  relation  of  an  op-yavov  or
instrument  to  the  worker  who  uses  it,  there  is  yet  an
important  difference  between  the  two.  To  the  tyro,  his
instrument  is  at  first  a  foreign  object  and  nothing  more ;  but
as  he  masters  it,  he  becomes  less  conscious  of  what  it  is  and
attends  onl\'  to  what  it  does.  The  surgeon,  for  example,
while  operating,  feels  not  his  sound,  but  what  it  is  probing ;
when  he  lays  it  down  however,  it  becomes  for  him  but  an
object  once  more.  The  function  of  the  subordinate  monad,
then,  is  more  intimate  than  that  of  an  organ  or  instrument,
literally  understood  ;  for  the  relation  here  is  not  that  of
subject  to  object,  but  rather  that  of  subject  to  subject.  It
means  all  that  can  be  meant  by  immediate  rapport  or,  as
some  in  these  days  prefer  to  sa}' — telepathy.  But  we  get  no
light  on  this  rapport  from  our  individual  experience  as  such  :
that  it  is  and  what  it  is,  first  dawn  upon  us  at  the  higher  level
where,  over-individual  or  social  ends  being  present,  social
'organization'  becomes  an  object  of  reflexion'.  Here,  as
already  pointed  out,  we  observe  cases  innumerable  of
behaviour  consequent  solely  on  '  sympathetic  rapport ' —
between  private  citizens  and  public  officials,  for  example'-.
These  oflncials  are  persons  too,  no  doubt  ; but  so  far  forth

'  We  have  in  this  one  more  instance  of  our  knowledjje  of  the  higher
enabhng  us  to  interpret  the  lower. Cf  Lect.  vii.  pp.  145  f.

*  Cf.  Lect.  \.  pp.  218  f.  It  is  true,  as  Lotze  has  remarked,  that
"there  may  be  many  intermediating  processes  producing  the  conditions
on  which  this  rapport  depends";  but  if  we  look  closer  we  find  no  media-
tion so  far  as  the  rapport  itself  is  rrincerncd.


464  Sjipplementary  Notes

as  their  social  functions  are  concerned,  their  position  is
analogous  to  that  of  subordinate  monads ;  and  here  all
interest  in  them  for  '  the  man  in  the  street '  comes  to  an
end.  They  are  like  Mr  Wemmick  in  Jaggers'  office,  so
different  from  Mr  Wemmick  with  his  aged  P.  at  the  Fort.
Nor  has  the  average  man  any  interest  in  the  technical  details
on  which  the  effective  working  of,  say  the  post  office  or  the
police,  actually  turns :  he  only  knows  what  they  mean  and
confidently  relies  on  their  services.  Now  our  social  organi-
zation secures  to  its  individual  members  wider  acquaintance
with  their  environment  as  well  as  fuller  control  over  it  than
are  possible  in  a  more  primitive  society,  and  this  again  more
than  is  possible  to  the  naked  and  isolated  savage.  And  the
like  holds  good  of  organisms.  Again,  in  organisms  as  in
societies  the  cooperation  of  their  members,  so  far  as  it  is
effective,  is  due  to  consentience  and  mutual  adaptation  rather
than  to  external  constraint.  Once  more,  in  organisms  '  the
technical  details,'  as  we  have  called  them — here  the  neural
processes  that  come  before  perception  and  those  that  follow
upon  volition — are  beyond  the  individual's  interest  or  ken,
till  the  reflective  study  of  other  organisms  brings  them  to
light  as  objective  facts.  It  is  in  this  way  indeed  that  the
ideas  of  organ  and  function  first  arise.

But  these  extra-cortical  and  subsidiary  processes,  that
have  no  concomitants  in  the  immediate  experience  of  the
dominant  monad,  have  still  for  all  that  their  psychical  side ;
just  as  truly  as  the  internal  arrangements  of  the  post-office,
though  unknown  to  people  at  large,  have  their  own  social
rapport.  Indeed  the  facts  of  what  we  may  call  comparative
neurology,  normal  and  abnormal,  though  they  admit  perhaps
of  objective  description,  can,  we  may  fairly  say,  be  interpreted
only  subjectively.  And  this  biologists  and  even  physiologists
are  coming  to  recognise  more  and  more.  As  the  Ptolemaic
astronomy  was  overwhelmed  by  the  complex  machinery  of
cycles  and  epicycles  which  new  facts  led  it  to  assume,  so
our  modern  physiology  has  been  encumbered  by  the  reflex
mechanisms that have accumulated as the science has


Rcldfioii  of  Body  and  Mind  465

advanced — a  sign  to  many  that  a  Copernican  era  for
ph)'siology  also  is  at  hand'.  We  may  attempt,  by  parity
of  reasoning,  either  to  advance  from  simple  reflexes  to  more
and  more  complex  reflexes,  keeping  that  is  to  the  mechanical
standpoint  throughout ;  or  to  regress  from  our  own  level  of
self-conscious  experience  to  ever  lower  levels,  without  for-
saking the  subjective  standpoint.  Both  attempts  have  been
made;  and  the  first  has  proved  definitely  a  failure.  Therefore
some  have  supposed  that  possibly,  as  the  complexity  advances,
the  ph\'sical  gradually  becomes  psychical  ;  but  this  is  to  take
refuge  in  what  at  Oxford  they  call  /ji€Td/3a(Ti<;  et?  dWo  'yevo<i ;
it  is  not  reasoning  at  all  but  legerdemain'-.  The  physiologists
on  the  other  hand  who  adopt  the  second  alternative  replace
the  system  of  reflex  mechanisms  increasing  in  complexity,
by  a  hierarchy  of  zooids  or  psychoids  comparable  to  inde-
pendent organisms  of  varying  rank,  in  a  word,  by  a  system
of  subordinate  monads  controlled by  a  dominant monad^.

'  "The  impetus  given  to  biology  by  the  doctrine  of  adaptation  under
natural  selection... seems  hardly  as  yet  to  have  begun  its  course  as  a
motive  force  in  physiology.  But  signs  begin  to  be  numerous  that  such
an  era  is  at  hand.  The  infinite  fertility  of  the  organism  as  a  field  for
adapted  reactions  has  become  more  apparent.  The  purpose  of  a  reflex
seems  as  legitimate  and  urgent  an  object  for  natural  inquiry  as  the
purpose  of  the  colouring  of  an  insect  or  a  blossom."  Professor  C  S.
.Sherrington,  The  Integrative  Action  of  the  Nervous  System^  I905)  p.  236.
"  If  we  examine  a  reflex,  such  as  that  of  assuming  a  normal  position  or
removing  an  irritant,  it  soon  appears  that  the  process  is  by  no  means  the
blind  mechanical  response  which  it  may  at  first  sight  be  taken  to  be....
Indeed  the  physical  response  varies  endlessly  according  to  circumstances.
It  is  the  end  attained,  and  not  the  physical  response,  which  is  simple  and
definite.  A  mechanism  which  attains  ends  in  this  way  is  inconceivable."
J.  .S.  Haldane,  "Life  and  Mechanism,"  Guy's  Hospital  Gazettt\  1906.
Cf  also M. iJriesch,  Science  and  Philosopliy  of  the Organism^  vol. ll.

1908,  pt  iii.  ;  O.  Langendorff,  Nagel's  Hamibuch  tier  Physiologic,  Bd  I  v.

1909,  pp.  293-297.

'^  Cf.  Naturalism  antl  Agnosticism^  Lect.  IX.  pp.  265  ff.

^  Chief  among  these  physi<jlogists  was  K.  Pfliiger,  who  already  in
1853  talked  of  'spinal-cord  souls'  {Riickcnmarkseelen).  For  the  lower
centres  of  the  nervous  system,  he maintained,  display  the  same  kind

w.  30


466  Supplementary  Notes

And  this  interpretation  has  the  support  of  numerous  biologists,
who  trace  back  the  genesis  of  the  Metazoa  or  multicellular
organisms  to  '  loose  colonies '  of  unicellular  organisms  or
Protozoa.  The  new  cells,  resulting  from  the  division  of  an
old  one,  in  these  cases  remain  associated  instead  of  scattering ;
whereupon  some  differentiation  and  division  of  labour  ensues
as  the  natural  result  of  their  varied  relation  to  each  other
and  to  the  environment.  In  consequence  they  are  no  longer
a  law  to  themselves ;  without  ceasing  to  be  individuals  they
become  subordinate  to  an  'over-individuals'

The  complete  intimacy  of  the  rapport  between  the
dominant  monad  and  its  subordinates,  which  is  here  as-
sumed, will  suffice,  we  have  argued,  to  account  for  the  fact
that  the  organism  has  '  windows,' — is,  so  to  say,  diaphanous
for  its  own  subject  and  yet  opaque  to  all  subjects  besides.
To  the  latter  it  has  solely  an  objective  relation,  to  the  former
it  has  primarily  what  we  seem  driven  to  call  a  subjective  or
intersubjective  relation.  But,  it  will  be  objected,  what  right
have  we  to  call  that  anything,  of  which  we  have  confessedly
no  direct  knowledge  ?  Whereas  in  social  organization  we
are  aware  of  our  fellow-men  as  persons  who  communicate  and
cooperate  with  us,  we  cannot  by  any  amount  of  introspection
or  reflexion  attain  to  any  such  acquaintance  with  these  so-
called  subordinate  monads.  Is  it  not  plain  then,  that  in  the
essential  point  this  far-fetched  analogy  completely  breaks
down  .''  On  the  contrary ;  for — as  already  noted — in  the  social
organism  there  are  public  functionaries  innumerable  of  whose
existence  we  know  nothing  till  the  social  organism  is  deranged,
as  in  a  strike,  for  example. Similarly,  it  is  often  only  through

of  adaptation  of  action  to  situation,  as  the  supreme  centre  displays  :  the
difference  between  them,  though  striking,  being  still  only  a  difference  of
degree.  If  we  are  to  regard  these  lower  centres  as  purely  mechanisms,
then  we  ought,  in  consistency,  he  argued,  to  follow  Descartes  and  hold
that  all  animals  are  but  mechanisms.

1  Cf.  above,  Lect.  iii.  pp.  58  f.,  and  Lect.  vi.  pp.  121  f.  An  elaborate
exposition  of  the  whole  subject  will  be  found  in  E.  Perrier's  Les  Colonies
animates  et  la  Formation  des  Organismes,  2""^  edn,  1 898.


Re/atioN  of  Body  and  Mind  467

organic  pain  that  we  are  first  made  aware  of  the  rapport  that
has  failed  in  the  working  of  our  organs.  This  fact  is  all  too
familiar  to  impress  us  as  it  ought.  Oddly  enough — in  spite  of
his  dualism — to  Descartes  belongs  the  merit  of  first  insisting  on
this  fact,  that,  as  he  put  it,  mind  and  body  compose  a  single
substantial  unity.  Accordingly  he  rejected  Plato's  view  of
the  body  as  merely  the  vehicle  and  instrument  of  the  soul ;
for  if  this  were  true,  he  urged,  "  I  should  not  feci  pain  when
my  body  is  hurt,  seeing  I  am  merely  a  thinking  thing,  but
should  perceive  the  wound  by  the  understanding  alone,  just
as  a  pilot  perceives  by  sight  when  any  part  of  his  vessel  is
damaged'."  It  is  this  'intimacy,'  b)-  Descartes  miscalled
substantial  unity,  that  leads  us  to  call  the  relation  of  the
subject  to  its  organism  an  internal  or  intersubjective  relation  ;
and  though  it  is  too  intimate  and  immediate  to  be  called
knowledge,  yet,  when  we  reach  the  lev^el  of  self-consciousness,
it  may  be  fairl)'  appealed  to  as  evidence  of  the  reality  of  that
relation.

F.  A.  Lange  in  his  History  of  Materialism  concludes  the
long'chapter  on  Brain  and  Soul  by  saying:  "The  manner  in
which  the  external  ph}'sical  process  {Naturvorgang)  is  at  the
same  time  an  inner  something  for  the  conscious  subject — this
is  just  the  point  that  lies  beyond  the  limits  of  natural  know-
ledge altogether,"  At  all  events,  so  far  the  monadistic
position  seems  to  be  nearest  to  these  limits  ;  and,  in  view
of  the  altogether  elementary  character  of  presentation  and
feeling,  it  is  hard  to  imagine  any  further  adv^ance.  The  only
alternative  left  seems  to  be  that  adopted  by  the  occasionalist;
and  perhaps  to  some  this  may  seem  preferable.

'  Meditation  vi.  Veitch's  cdn,  p.  i6o.


30—2


468  Supplementary  Notes

IV. The  Temporal  and  the  Eternal.

(Lect.  X.  p.  194,  XIV.  pp.  305,  315.)

Notwithstanding  these  passages  in  the  text,  I  am  told  that
"  the  whole  question  as  to  the  kind  of  reality  that  belongs
to  time  seems  to  be  evaded  in  these  lectures,"  and  thus  my
"  lack  of  appreciation  for  the  Hegelian  view — that  God  is  the
eternal  reality  of  which  the  world  is  the  temporal  expression  "
— is  explained.  Accordingly  I  am  asked  to  give  some  "clearer
indication  of  the  way  in  which  time  is  related  to  eternity."
The  difficulty  is  that  the  meaning  of  these  terms  themselves
is  not  clear.  But  that  they  have  some  relation  to  each  other
is  obvious  from  the  fact  that  eternity  is  always  described  by
reference  to  time.  Setting  out  from  such  description  I  must
then  attempt,  as  far  as  a  brief  note  will  allow,  to  meet  these
candid  criticisms.

Eternity  has  been  defined  as  infinite  duration  without
succession,  as  an  absolute  mmc  stans,  or  as  a  totum  sinml.
But  duration,  succession,  and  simultaneity,  '  the  three  modes
of  time,'  as  Kant  called  them,  are  mutually  implicated ;  so  far
then  these  definitions  are  either  incomplete  or  contradictory.
Duration  is  length  of  time  regarded  as  uniformly  flowing ;
apart  from  such  succession  it  would  have  no  measure,  and  to
speak  of  an  infinite  duration  would  in  that  case  be  meaning-
less. "The  now,"  said  Hegel,  "  is  nothing  but  the  single  now:
duration  is  the  universal  of  this  now  and  that  now."  How
then  can  the  instant  'now'  endure,  or  stand,  absolutely  .'*  Also
'now'  as  a  position  in  time  is  always  relative  to  other  positions,
so  that  an  absolute  'now'  is  unmeaning.  Finally  though  an
indefinite  number  of  events  may  be  strictly  simultaneous,  yet
simultaneity — as  distinct  from  contemporaneity — does  not  in-
volve duration.  But  '  infinite  duration  '  is  usually  regarded,
not  as  excluding  succession,  but  as  involving  endless  suc-
cession. As  we  do  not  say  that  the  whole  of  '  immensity,'  to


TJie Tojiporal  niid  flic  Etcnial 469

use  Locke's  word,  is  spaceless,  so  here  we  should  not  say  that
eternity  as  a  whole  is  timeless  ;  but  simp!)-  that  it  is  infinite
a  parte  post  and  also  a  parte  ante.  And  this  is  its  ordinary
or  lexical  meaning:  that  is  eternal  which  exists  'from  ever-
lasting to  everlasting.'

At  this  point  we  may  be  reminded  of  Hegel's  definition  of
eternity  as  *  absolute  timelessness.'  But  this  is  an  admission
of  the  futility  of  all  attempts,  by  reference  to  time,  to  determine
what  is  here  meant ;  for  a  negative  definition,  as  such,  is  plainly
no  determination.  But  since  we  know  of  nothing  but  '  the
truths  of  reason,'  which  we  can  speak  of  as  absolutely  timeless,
we  should  be  led  at  once  to  suppose  that  this,  the  Spinozistic
meaning  of  eternal,  was  Hegel's  meaning  too.  And  it  was  :
"only  the  natural  is  subject  to  time,"  he  said  :  "the  true,  the
idea,  the  spirit  is  eternals"  But  if  God  is  only  eternal  in  the
sense  in  which  the  laws  of  thought  are  called  eternal,  he  can-
not be  real  at  all  ;  he  may  be  an  Idea,  he  cannot  be  a  Spirit.
To  be  sure  an  idea  has  reality  as  the  mental  image  or  thought
of  a  conscious  being,  but  it  is  onl}-  used  dis  a  symbol  or  meaning,
and  as  such  may  have  validit}'  but  not  existence-.  So  far  Hegel
is  in  the  same  boat  with  Spinoza,  a  craft  built  essentially  on
the  lines  of  the  Cartesian  rationalism,  and  'written  off'  b)'
Kant  as  shipwrecked  through  just  this  fallacious  confusion  of
idea  and  realitx'.

But  we  have  set  out  from  time  as  formal  and  abstract,  it
will  be  said  :  in  the  concrete,  for  perception,  the  temporal  is
the  transient,  the  phenomenal,  the  natural  ;  and  the  eternal  is
the  immutable,  the  noumenal,  the  spiritual.  Time,  said  Hegel,
is  Chronos  begetting  and  devouring  his  children.  But  if  this
tragic  spectacle  is  verily  the  expression  of  '  God's  eternal
reality,'  eternal  cannot  mean  '  out  of  all  relation  to  time  and
change.' The  stress  is  now,  not  on  absolute  timelessness,  but

'  Naiurp/iihsophie,  ^  258.

'^  This  position  has,  in  my  jiul),'incnt,  been  cstablisljcd  beyond  cavil  by
Lolzc  {Ln^ic,  J^  416)  and  ajjain  by  Bradley  {T/ic  Princi/>/cs  of  l.Oi^ic,
§§  6  ff.).  ■


470  Sitpplenientary  Notes

on  a  certain  functional  relation  to  the  temporal  process  of  the
world's  evolution  ^  We  have  passed,  in  fact,  to  the  contrast
between  the  noumenal  and  the  phenomenal,  the  spiritual  and
the  natural.  The  question  then  arises  :  How  is  change  related
respectively  to  these  opposites  ?  In  dealing  with  this  question
we  have,  of  course,  to  set  out  from  our  own  experience,
and  so  doing  we  come  at  once  on  Kant's  paradox — change
pertains  only  to  the  permanent  and  substantial,  not  to  the
transitory  and  accidental".  From  our  standpoint,  that  of
spiritual  monism,  a  succession  of  events  is  a  change  only  for
an  experient :  from  the  standpoint  of  scientific  description
it  is  but  a  case  of  alteration.  Strictly  speaking,  then,  change
for  a  spiritualistic  philosophy  implies  in  general  some  voluntary
action  on  the  part  of  one  or  more  subjects  and  some  non-
voluntary perception  on  the  part  of  others  ;  in  other  words  it
implies  that  intercourse  which  we  call  life.  These  subjects,
however,  are  not  phenomenal  but  noumenal.  To  their  efficient
activity  we  refer  the  phenomenal  or  natural  world,  that  we
perceive  as  'filled  time'  or  the  course  of  events.  The  attempt
to  represent  our  experience  as  but  a  part  of  this  course  was
the  mistake  of  the  sensationalist  psychology  of  Hume  and  his
successors  :  they  failed  to  distinguish  between  alteration  and
change,  between  a  succession  of  presentations  and  the  pre-
sentation of  succession.  The  content  of  filled  time  is  doubtless
phenomenal,  but  the  reality  which  is  the  source  of  this  content
cannot  be  so  :  the  efficient  cannot  be  its  own  effect. So  far,

1  Cf.  A.  O.  Lovejoy,  'The  Obsolescence  of  the  Eternal,'  Phil.  Rev.
1909,  p.  490.

^  "  To  arise  and  to  pass  away  are  not  changes  of  that  which  arises
and  passes  away.  Change  is  a  way  of  existing  that  follows  on  another
way  of  existing  of  the  very  same  object.  Hence  whatever  changes  is
permanent  and  only  its  state  alters  iwecJiselt).  As  this  alteration  then
concerns  only  determinations  that  can  cease  as  well  as  begin  [to  be],  we
may  say — using  an  expression  seemingly  somewhat  paradoxical — that
only  the  enduring  (the  substance)  is  changed,  the  variable  undergoes  no
change  but  only  an  alteration^  in  so  far  as  certain  determinations  cease
and  others  begin."  {Critique  of  the  Pure  Reason,  First  Analogy,  Max
Miiller's  trans,  (amended),  pp.  164  f )


The  Te)iipoyaI  and  the  Eternal 471

time  alone,  as  the  abstract  form  of  alteration  or  succession,  is
not  adequate  to  represent  change  as  concretely  experienced
and  involving  both  efficient  and  effect.  So  far  too,  experients
are  out  of  time,  though  functionally  related  to  it — as  said
already  in  the  second  passage  of  the  text.

The  Hegelian  distinction  between  eternal  reality  and
temporal  process  then  applies  not  only  to  God  but  also  to
us.  But  if  so,  the  natural  and  temporal  cannot  be  exclusively
the  expression  of  God's  reality ;  and,  in  fact,  only  the  experi-
ence that  it  is — at  least  in  part — the  expression  of  our  own,
could  ever  have  led  us  to  the  idea  of  God,  as  spiritual  and
eternal,  at  all.  But  it  is  proverbial  that  extremes  meet.  So
here :  it  is  all  one  to  assert  with  the  sensationalist  that  our
life  is  but  a  flux  of  presentations,  and  to  deny  with  the  abso-
lutist that  in  the  world's  evolution  our  purposes  are  expressed.
On  either  view  experience  becomes  utterly  inexplicable.  If
we  avoid  these  extremes,  then  just  as  our  life  cannot  be
resolved  into  a  temporal  flux  of  phenomena,  so  the  life  of
God  cannot  be  resolved  into  the  timeless  content  of  an
Absolute  Idea.  Both  the  living  God  and  his  living  creatures,
we  are  led  to  say,  have  alike  a  functional  relation  to  the
world's  process.

There  will  be  important  differences  between  the  two,  of
course,  and  the  main  difference  is  obvious  at  once.  Our  life
is  one  of  development,  God's  life  is  always  perfect.  So  far
unchangeableness  may  be  attributed  to  God,  as  it  can  be  to
none  beside.  We  come  thus  upon  a  third,  what  in  technical
language  would  be  called  the  axiological,  meaning  of  eternal ;
and  this  raises  many  difficulties,  both  as  regards  tiie  divine
life  anfl  our  own.  In  contrast  to  God,  who  is  blessed  for
evermore,  "  Man  never  is  but  always  to  be,  blessed "  the
satirist  has  said.  If  on  this  ground  eternal  and  perfect  are
fitting  designations  only  of  the  one  unchanging  life,  are  not
temporal  and  imjjerfect  alone  appropriate  to  the  life  that  only
is  life  so  long  as  it  is  change?  Hut  f)n  the  other  hand,  as  this
life  f)f  continuous  development  is  the  only  life  that  wc  know
or can understand,  can  what is eternally  or  absolutely  the


472  Supplementary  Notes

same,  though  we  call  it  perfect,  be  called  a  life?  Nay,  if
reality  implies  activity,  or  in  other  words  'functional  relation
to  the  world's  process,'  can  purely  static  being  be  called  real
at  all  in  any  sense  that  we  can  understand  ?  Thus  in  equating
perfect  and  eternal  we  seem  after  all  to  be  back  at  the  Spino-
zistic  or  Absolutist  standpoint,  where  the  Many  are  absorbed
and  the  whole  world  vanishes.  And  yet  can  we  be  content  to
say,  not  only  that  we  are  never  to  attain  perfection,  but  to
suppose  that — after  all — God,  if  he  be  veritably  a  living  God,
can  never  attain  it  either  ?  Thus  we  are  confronted  by  two
problems  :  in  the  case  of  man  to  connect  progress  and  per-
fection, in  the  case  of  God  to  connect  perfection  and  life.

Beginning  with  the  latter — it  is  plain  that  the  absolutely
perfect  could  not  change,  if  by  changing  it  became  imperfect ;
for  were  this  possible  it  could  never  have  been  perfect.  More-
over, if  change  in  the  sense  of  development  is  the  only  possible
form  of  life,  then  absolute  perfection  must  mean  a  sort  of
Nirvana  or  utter  quiescence.  But  unless  all  activity  is  essen-
tially an  imperfection,  there  is  no  contradiction  in  Aristotle's
doctrine  of  pure  or  perfect  activity  {evep'yeia  dKivr^a-iaq).  But
it  will  have  to  be  more  than  a  '  beatific  vision,'  if  it  is  to  be
the  ground  of  the  world  or  to  have  the  faintest  interest  for  us.
"  An  ii'epyeia  that  ever  generates  the  supreme  pleasure  of  self-
contemplation  {v6r](Ti<;  vo7]a€(o<iy"  will  not  suffice;  rather  we
must  have  that  '  intellective  intuition '  which  I  have  already
endeavoured  to  describe-.  Such  pure  activity  limited  by  no
alien  '  matter,'  such  constancy  of  purpose  '  without  variable-
ness or  shadow  of  turning,'  implies  not  change,  either  in  the
sense  of  alteration  or  of  development,  but  unchangeableness
in  the  sense  of  continuous  perfect  life.  It  is  true  that  such
life  passes  our  understanding,  but  we  can  at  least  regard  it  as
the  limit  towards  which  our  own  life  points.  And  this  leads
naturally  to  our  second  problem.

But  first  the  attempt  to  represent  the  Divine  perfection  as

^  Cf.  the  essay  on  Activity  and  Substance  in  Dr  Schiller's  Humanism^
1903,  pp.  211  ff.

^  Cf.  Lect.  XI.  pp.  23  ff.


Tlic Tciuporal  and  flic  Eternal 473

involving  'eternal  knowledge,'  in  such  wise  that — as  my  critic
maintains — "  for  the  divine  intuition  past,  present  and  future,
are  all  equally  real  and  in  that  sense  all  equally  present,"  calls
for  some  notice.  I  have  indeed  already  tried  to  deal  with
this  in  the  last  of  the  three  passages  to  which  this  note  refers ;
still  for  completeness  sake  it  ma)'  be  well  to  recur  to  it  again
and  add  one  or  two  remarks.  "  The  three  times,  past,  present
and  future,"  said  Augustine,  "  are  three  affections  of  the  soul ;
I  find  them  there  and  nowhere  else.  There  is  the  present
memor\'  of  past  events,  the  present  perception  of  present  ones,
and  the /rn'i'ir;// expectation  of  future  ones^"  The  filled  time
of  experience  involves  all  three  more  or  less.  Such  is  the
psychical  present  as  distinct  from  the  'clock  present ';  and  its
*  span,'  it  is  assumed,  may  range  from  zero  where  the  two
agree,  up  to  infinity  where  "  der  Aiigenblick  ist  Ezvigkeit."  But
this  span  may  be  infinite  and  yet  not  all-inclusive;  just  as  the
series  of  odd  numbers  is  infinite,  though  all  the  even  numbers
are  left  out.  Moreover  where  the  span  is  finite,  as  in  our  own
experience,  it  never  embraces  more  than  a  fraction  of  the
events  that  lie  within  its  limits.  But  then  we  are  all  confined
to  a  definite  '  centre,'  while  God  we  regard  as  omnipresent.
Can  we  then  still  suppose  that  his  span  is  not  all-inclusive?
If  the  relation  of  the  future  to  the  present  is  identical,  save
for  difference  of  sign — as  a  mathematician  would  say — with
that  of  the  past  to  the  present,  we  should  certainly  have  no
ground  for  such  a  supposition.  There  is  no  contradiction  in
a  complete  knowledge  of  all  that  has  been  ;  for  what  has  been
is  as  fact  equally  real  with  what  is.  Why  then  should  there
be  anything  contradictory  in  a  complete  knowledge  of  the
future  ?  Well,  if  there  were  not,  we  should  have  to  say  with
AuQUstinc, /uti/ni  ja;H  /acta  sunt-.  But  this  is  just  what  we
cannot  say  ; ff>r  it  is  an  obvious  contradiction.

Yes,  to  us  it  may  be,  some  will  still  contend,  inasmuch
as  we  live  in  time  and  experience  things  successivcl)'. The

'  Quoted  by  IJaron  F.  von  Huj,'cl,  The  Mystical  Eletnenl  of  Rclii^ion^
1908,  vol.  11.  p.  24.S.

-'  A Trinitate,  v.  i6. Quoted  hy  H.imilton,  RiiiVs  Works,  p.  976.


474  Supplementary  Notes

whole  point  is  that  the  divine  experience  is  timeless,  is
eternal.  "  Time  is  the  moving  image  of  eternity,"  but  the
movement  is  illusory,  like  that  of  the  landscape  to  the  railway
traveller.  Yes,  but  there  is  real  movement  at  the  back  of
this  illusion ;  and  the  question  at  once  arises  what  is  the
real  at  the  back  of  '  the  time  illusion ' }  The  restlessness
and  change  begotten  of  want  and  imperfection,  it  will  be
replied.  But  this  is  too  much  at  once :  both  change  and
defect  are  real  and  not  illusory,  we  admit ;  for  the  moment^
however,  it  is  only  the  former  that  concerns  us.  And  the
admission  of  the  reality  of  change  is  enough  to  dispose  of
this  spectacular  theory  of  time  in  relation  to  eternity,  and  to
justify  our  contention  that  expectation  is  not  on  a  par  with
memory.  The  only  basis  for  anticipation  is  past  experience ;
but  though  the  past  is  one  factor  in  determining  the  future,  it
is  only  one.  There  is  beside  the  initiative  of  personal  agents^
to  whom  the  whole  filling  of  time  is  due ;  and  who,  therefore,
are  not  in  time,  as  phenomena  ;  though,  as  noumena  they  are
functionally  related  to  it.  Unless  then  God  has  preordained
all  that  is  to  be  done,  it  is  surely  a  contradiction  to  say  even
of  him  that  he  has  such  a  knowledge  of  the  future  as  we  have
of  the  past.

The  mention  just  now  of  defect  and  restlessness  brings  us
back  once  more  to  the  second  of  the  problems  to  which  the
conjunction  of  eternal  and  perfect  gave  rise.  Granted  that
perfection  and  changeless  activity  are  not  incompatible,
anyhow,  it  is  urged,  creatures  can  never  be  perfect,  for
development  implies  not  only  activity  but  change,  progress
towards  perfection,  it  may  be,  but  never  actual  attainment.
What  is  perfect  is  perfect  always ;  and  what  is  imperfect,  how-
ever long  it  last,  must  be  imperfect  still.  "  To  exist  in  time
is  the  same  thing  as  to  exist  imperfectly,"  Plotinus  is
reported  to  have  said,  and  conversely  to  exist  imperfectly
is  the  same  thing  as  to  exist  in  time.  But  though  perfection
does  not,  strictly  speaking,  admit  of  degree  ;  it  is  still,  we
may  reply,  not  absurd  to  speak  of  a  perfection  that  is  relative
to kind. The hyssop and the  fir-tree  are  not  necessarily


TJic  Tempo ya I  and  the  Eternal 475

imperfect  because  they  are  not  cedars.  Unless  it  were  pos-
sible for  God's  creatures  to  have  a  perfection  of  their  own,
how  could  perfection  be  attributed  to  God  himself?  Yet  in
an  evolving  world  none  could  have  it,  if  all  progress  as  such
implied  imperfection.  But,  yet  again,  what  else  could  we  say,
if  all  progress  were  but  a  succession  of  means  to  an  end
that  ceaselessly  recedes  and  never  is  actually  realised  t  This
dualism  of  means  and  end,  'the  most  mischievous  of  all
dualisms'  as  Hoffding  calls  it,  is  here  however  out  of  place.
Evolution  is  not  means  to  an  end,  it  is  itself  end.  "  Single
moments  in  a  man's  life,"  as  Hoffding  truly  says,  "ought  not
to  be  merely  means  for  other  moments  ;  past  and  present
merely  means  for  the  future.  Nor  will  they  be,  if  work  and
development  themselves  retain  immediate  value  and  can  thus
themselves  be  ends..., The  child  is  then  not  simply  a  man  in
the  making  ;  childhood  becomes  an  independent  age  with  its
special  tasks  and  its  own  appropriate  value.  In  this  wise
every  period  of  life,  every  part  of  the  course  of  time,  is  to  be
understood.  Then  will  it  be  possible  in  the  midst  of  time  to
live  in  eternit)-....' Eternity '  appears  then  not  as  the  pro-
longation of  time... but  as  an  expression  for  the  permanence
of  value  during  the  alteration  (IVec/ise/)  of  the  times^"
Finally — it  is  hardly  needful  to  repeat — the  active  agents
in  weaving  this  variegated  texture  of  time  are  not  themselves
part  of  its  stuff,  do  not  themselves  exist  in  time.

But  if  what  does  exist  in  time  is  imperfect  those  who
have  wrought  it  must  be  and  must  remain  imperfect,  it  will
be  rejoined.  To  say  this  is  to  judge  the  future  by  the  past
and  the  whole  by  the  part.  Our  development,  it  must  be
confessed,  is  not  strictly  'orthogenctic '  ;  it  does  not  take  the
ideally  straightest  path.  But  it  may  do  so  when  it  is  more
advanced;  and  there  may  be  creatures  in  whom  it  has  done  so
always  or  at  any  rate  does  so  now.  And  as  with  God  so  here
perfection  will  not  imply  inaction.  There  may  be  progress
in perfection  as  well  as  progress  towards  it ; thus  St Luke

'  Philosophy  of  Relii^ion^  Eng.  trans.  1906,  p.  56  f.  ('amended).


476  Supplementary  Notes

tells  us  that  "Jesus  increased  in  wisdom  and  stature  and  in
favour  with  God  and  man."

Such  a  life  of  perfect  development,  that  is,  of  entire
accord  with  the  Divine  ideal,  Christianity  describes  as
'eternal':  "to  know  God,  this  is  life  eternal,"  It  is  a  life
that  endures  and  yet  is  not  temporal.  Is  there  any  sense
in  which  we  can  understand  this  contrast  of  temporal  and
eternal,  and  if  so  what  ?  "  The  world  passeth  away  and  the
lust  thereof,  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for
ever."  We  have  here  imperfect  unsatisfying  life,  on  the  one
side,  as  perishing ;  and  on  the  other,  perfect  life  as  all-
satisfying  and  finally  conserved.  The  one  is  empty,  the  other
has  eternal  value :  the  one  is  always  wearing  away,  the  other
abideth  for  ever.  For  the  '  time-seeking,'  '  self-serving '  man,
it  is  said,  dooms  himself  to  endless  disappointment,  whereas
the  man  who  loses  himself  in  steadfast  devotion  to  God
can  never  fail.  The  lapse  of  time,  though  quantitatively  it
should  be  alike  for  both,  is  qualitatively  wholly  different.
Even  now,  whenever  we  are  satisfied,  there  is  an  absorption
in  the  fulness  of  the  present,  such  that  dein  GlilcklicJie}i  sdiliigt
keine  Stunde,  as  Schiller  said.  Then  there  is  rest,  not  in  the
sense  of  lifeless  inaction,  for  effective  energy  may  at  such
times  be  maximal ;  but  rather  in  the  sense  of  that  i^peybia
which  Aristotle  associates  with  the  Divine  evepryeia  aKivqaia^;^.
It  is  perhaps  this  oneness  wath  the  Divine  will  and  this
likeness  to  the  Divine  constancy  that  have  led  to  the
mystical  interpretation  of  such  eternal  life  as  a  sort  of  re-
absorption  of  the  creature  in  the  Creator — when  time  shall
be  no  more.  There  is  truth  in  this  mysticism  perhaps ;  but,
if  so,  all  our  attempts  to  conceive  it  end,  as  here,  in  contra-
dictions.

To  resume  then :  we  have  briefly  considered  three  senses
in  which  time  and  eternity  are  contrasted,  the  formal,  the
ontological  and  the  axiological — if  such  technical  language
may  be  allowed  ; but  in  none  can  we  find  any  justification

1  Cf.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  op.  cit.  p.  211  n.


TJie  Divine  Experience  477

for  the  Hegelian  view,  that  "  God  is  the  eternal  reality  of
which  the  world  is  the  temporal  expression  " ;  unless  indeed
this  is  interpreted  in  such  wise  as  to  leave  the  world  genuinely
a  realm  of  ends  in  the  pluralistic  sense.  That,  it  cannot  be,
if  the  temporal  is  reduced  from  the  phenomenal  to  the  illusory
(^from  ErscJiciming  to  Sc/icin,  as  a  German  would  say);  nor  if
the  eternal  is  raised  from  the  noumenal  to  the  logical,  cut  off
from  living  activity  by  apotheosis  in  the  firmament  of  ideas.


V. The  Divine  Experience.
(Lectt.  XI. — XX.)

This  too  is  an  important  topic,  which — like  the  last — has
been,  I  am  told,  in  these  lectures  unduly  neglected.  In  the  first
plan  of  them,  there  was,  I  may  say,  to  be  one  lecture  bearing
this  very  title.  But  at  one  time,  the  lack  of  definite  know-
ledge gave  me  pause,  and  at  another,  the  mass  of  speculation
and  controversy  there  was  to  handle ;  and  so  the  lecture  was
never  written.  Still,  under  provocation,  I  now  append  a  few
remarks — and  more  or  less  under  protest  too — since  they
only  bring  together  what  has  been  already  said  more  or  less
incidentally  in  the  text.

To  have  experience  is  to  be  a  person  among  persons.
But  we  are  persons  in  a  world  of  others  who  exist  in-
dependently of  us.  God  is  not  in  this  wise  a  person  :  and
though  it  be  true  that  he  is  confronted  by  the  world  and
active  in  it,  still  other  persons  are  not  for  him  merely
objective  (known  through  sense  and  intellection)  or  merely
ejective  (known  through  instinct  (^r  interpretation).  Again,
the  world  for  God  is  the  world  in  its  unity  and  entirety :
his  is  not  a  perspective  view,  such  as  '  standpoint '  imi)lies  ;
nor  is  it  a  discursive  view,  such  as  our  limited  attention
entails.  God  is  ubiquitous  and  omnicontiiitivc,  to  coin  a
term, r'inally, self-consciousness and reason in God are


478  Sfipplemetitary  Notes

not  as  with  us  incomplete  and  intermittent.  There  are  no
*  broken  Hghts '  in  him  :  he  alone  can  say  I  am  that  I  am.
We  may  then  either  describe  God  as  super-personal  ;  or,
following  Lotze,  say  "  Perfect  Personality  is  in  God  only  :  to
all  finite  minds  only  a  pale  copy  of  it  is  allotted \"

Yet  the  divine  creative  intuition  and  the  divine  knowledge
are  to  be  distinguished  ;  for  the  knowledge  presupposes  the
creation,  and  the  relation  of  creator  and  created  involves  just
that  dependence  which  the  relation  of  knower  and  known
excludes.  For  knowledge  does  not  posit  or  constitute  its
objects,  which  for  spiritualism  are  the  manifestations  or
utterances  of  free  agents  or  subjects.  Now,  if  we  regard
the  divine  knowledge  as  knowledge  in  this  sense,  and  if  we
can  understand  it  in  no  other,  it  seems  to  follow,  as  already
said-,  that  what  God  merely  knows  is  the  world  as  there
and  as  a  whole,  all  that  it  has  been,  all  that  it  is,  and —
being  what  it  is,  all  that  it  tends  further  to  become.  His
purpose  or  creative  ideal  is  perfectly  definite,  unchangeable
and  assured.  But  the  world's  future  history,  the  course
by  which  that  purpose  is  to  be  attained,  depends  not  on
him  alone  but  also  on  the  free  agents,  whom  he  sustains
but  never  constrains.  This  course  then  is  not  part  of
his  creation  ;  nor  is  it,  we  seem  entitled  to  conclude  also,
part  of  his  knowledge.  Then  God,  it  will  be  triumphantly
objected,  does  not  know  what  will  happen  to-morrow,  may
not  even  know,  if  I  hesitate  between  bacon  and  fish  for
breakfast,  which  I  shall  choose.  Yet  this  retort  should  not
disconcert  us :  the  issue  is  too  serious  to  make  it  likely
that  it  can  be  thus  summarily  decided.  Fore-knowledge  of
the  future  is,  we  may  contend,  something  of  a  misnomer.
It  is  either  not  strictly  _/i?r^- knowledge  or  it  is  not  strictly
knowledge.  The  astronomer  we  say  calculates  or  predicts  a
future  eclipse :  but  what  he  calculates  is  not  fore-knowledge
and  what  he  predicts  is  only  a  probability. If  the  world

^  Microcosmtcs,  E.  t.  ii.  p.  688,
2  Cf.  Lect.  XI.  p.  236  above.


TJie  Divine  Experience  479

were  all  routine  or  mechanical,  to  forecast  the  future  would
be  possible  ;  but  pure  mechanism  is  an  abstraction  and  is
incompatible  with  the  novelty  that  the  real  world  contains.
But  even  we  are  not  in  a  state  of  blank  ignorance  concerning
the  morrow,  and  God,  who  knows  both  tendencies  and
possibilities  completely,  is  beyond  surprise  and  his  purpose
beyond  frustration.  If  that  purpose  is  verily  to  allow  his
creatures  some  initiative,  to  associate  them  as  co-workers
with  himself,  it  surely  must  needs  imply  some  self-limitation
and  some  contingency.

And  now  what  of  the  divine  activity  in  view  of  such
limitation  and  contingency,  what  of  the  divine  office  in  the
realisation  of  God's  world  and  ours?  It  is  that  Providence
"  that  shapes  our  ends  rough-hew  them  how  we  will."  That
it  consists  of  special  interferences  we  have  every  reason  to
doubt ^;  but  if  we  call  it  'general,'  this  must  be  in  the  sen.se,
as  Kant  said,  "that  no  single  thing  is  left  out."  But  the
modus  operandi,  so  to  say,  here  as  in  creation,  is  to  us
inscrutable.  We  may  well  believe,  however,  that,  for  example,
— over  and  above  the  natural  advance  or  decline  that  they
entail — all  our  good  deeds  render  us  more,  and  all  our  evil
deeds  render  us  less,  amenable  to  divine  influence  or  in-
spiration :  the  former  thus  tending,  as  Christianity  teaches,
towards  life  and  light,  the  latter  towards  degeneration  and
darkness.  But  how  God  works  with  us  or  against  in  the
government  of  the  world,  we  must  again  admit  wc  do  not
know.

But  now  if  this  divine  experience  is  to  be  really  experience,
living  experience,  in  any  .sense  that  we  can  at  all  understand
— and  to  talk  of  it  in  any  other  would  be  nonsense — the
world's  history,  in  which  God  is  present,  must  surely  be  more
than  a  mere  show  or  Darstcllung,  as  Hegel  called  it,  of  what
in  every  detail  is  eternally  decreed.  Providence,  Jacobi  has
said,  is  "  what,  in  opposition  to  Fate,  constitutes  the  ruling

•  Cf.  Lcct.  XM.  pp.  249  51,  above.  What  is  there  said  a  prof>os  of
Occasionalism  applies,  mutatis  mutandis,  to  Providence.


480  Supplementary  Notes

principle  of  the  universe  into  a  real  God."  The  doctrine  of
prescience  and  preordination  may  imply  for  us  only  the
Christian  idea  of  fate,  as  Leibniz  called  it,  not  the  Moham-
medan, since  we  have  to  act  in  ignorance  of  the  divine
decrees.  But  that  doctrine  robs  the  divine  experience  itself
of  all  seriousness  and  assigns  to  the  Highest  a  role  that
thousands  of  earnest  and  thoughtful  men  have  regarded  as
altogether  unworthy.  Even  if  we  rejected  the  eternal  re-
probation that  is  part  of  it  and  supposed  all  to  end  happily,
the  whole  would  still  be  devoid  of  any  moral  value  :  the
actions  would  be  the  acting  of  puppets  not  the  deeds  of  free
persons.  And  as  to  the  dramaturge  himself,  we  might  credit
him  with  a  singular  hobby,  but  we  could  not  possibly  regard
him  as  the  God  of  the  living,  the  God  who  is  Love.


INDEX


Absolute,  The,  ideals  of  reached  by  ab-
straction, 39-41  ;  the  world  for  these
superfluous  or  illusory,  32-6  ;  God-
and-the-World  as  the  concrete,  241  f. ;
objection  to  this,  242  ;  reply,  243

Absolutism  (jtv  also  Singularism),  52,
267

Action,  springs  of,  the  contrast  of '  extra-
regarding  '  and  '  self-regarding  '  too
extreme,  342-5

Activity,  jf. ;  purposive,  as  presupposing
order,  67  f.  ;  as  producing  it,  71  f.,

75  U  78

Adamson,  R., 48

Agnosticism,  its  so-called  Monism,  10;
what  it  overlooks,  413

Argyll,  late  Duke  of,  on  the  Argus
pheasant, 188

Aristotle,  on  Creation,  31 ;  his  Absolute,
38  ;  his  practical  syllogism,  68  ;  on
the  discontinuity  between  man  and
brute,  9 1  ;  on  disjecta  membra,  1 20 ;
on  efficient  cause,  274;  on  action,
330  ;  soul  as  entelechy  of  the  body,
397;  on  the  brain,  461  ;  on  perfect
activity,  472,  476

Aspects  of  the  world,  i  f.,  430;  the
natural  and  the  spiritual  as  contrasted,
2f. ,  431  ;  the  latter  as  the  more
fundamental, 10-3,  431  f.

Augustine,  on  predestination,  310  ;  on
time,  472  f.

Bacon,  F.,  on  the  generating  of  new
natures,  73 ; on  final  causes,  275

Eagchot,  on  custom,  358

liahnsen,  on Hartniann,  334  «.

liain,  denied  the  reality  of  self, 289  f.

llchaviour,  50,  62,  433  ;  continuity  be-
tween the  natural  and  rational  planes

of,  34^-5
Bcneke  <|uotcfi, 29
Bcrgson,  I'ruf.  II.,  his  ^/att  vita/,  238  «.;

referred  to,  298  >/.,  305;  on  'concrete

time,'  306 »/.


Berkeley,  his  sense-symbolism,  216  f.,
as  divine  revelation,  261  f.  ;  his  oc-
casionalism, 248,  249

Bionomics,  as  illustrating  pluralism,
56-8

Birth,  the  problem  of, 204  f.

Boehm,  Jacob,  and  Hegel,  166, 182

Bosanquet,  Prof.  B.,  quoted,  136

Boscovich,  his  centres  of  force, 255  f.

Bradley,  Mr  F.  H.,  quoted,  i,  24  ;  on
pluralism,  23  f. ,  201  ;  on  God  and
the  Absolute,  43  f. ;  on  the  idea  of
potentiality,  108  «. ;  on  the  ideal
voluptuary  as  impossible, 345  «.

BufTon  quoted  on  Nature's  '  ill-assorted
designs,'  86

Caird,  E.,  on  monotheism,  30 ;  on
Aristotle's  theology,  32  f.  ;  on  that
of  Plotinus,  33 ;  on  the  social  character
of  self-consciousness,  i28f. ;  on  selfish
interest  in  immortality,  388  «.

Categories,  source  of,  1 1  f. ;  Kant's
table  of,  228

Causa  sia',  the  Absolute  as,  32,  199  ;
the  Many  as  severally, 199

Causality,  principle  of,  275;  as  a  postu-
late, 277

Cause,  as  category,  1 1  ;  efficient  and
occasional  distinguished,  75 ;  its
meanings,  273-5  >  '^^  noumenal  as
cause  of  the  phenomenal,  303  f ,  438

Chance,  68,  75,  76,  267,  454  f.

Change,  305,  469  ;  and  alteration  dis-
tinguished, 470  ;  God  as,  unchanging
and  yet  living,  472 ;  and  imperfection,

47.3-.^
Chaos,  inconceivable, 70
Character, transmission of acquired,

2 1  o ;  a  man's  character  and  his  nature,

286-8,  and  his  objects,  289
Clifford,  \V. K.,  on  conscience, 368;

his  ethics  of  belief,  413
Collier, A.,  as  anticipating Berkeley,

249


W.


31


482


Index


Comte,  A.,  on  Nature  and  Humanity,
■20 ;  J.  S.  Mill  on, 134

Conduct  {see  Behaviour)

Conscience,  what  it  means  and  how  it
arises,  365-8

Conscious  automata,  6  f.

Conservation  of  Mass  and  Energy,  103,
109;  of  the  organic,  212;  of  value,
213  ;  of  momentum,  280

Contingency,  76,  78,  316,  434  ;  in  the
world,  an  argument  for  pluralism,  80;
illustrated  from  the  useful  arts,  80  f. ;
from  zoology  and  botany,  81  f . ;
analogies  between  the  two,  83  f. ;
and  the  '  Natural  Right '  to  live,
87-9  ;  and  the  existence  of  mankind,
89-92;  and  of  particular  individuals,
93  f.  ;  and  the  physical  world ,  94-6,
455  ;  implies  a  definite  'domain,'  454

Continuity,  the  Principle  of,  20  ;  and
Pluralism,  52,  54, 185, 188, 433

Creation,  ancient  ideas  of,  31  f. ;  idea
of,  from  the  standpoint  of  pluralism,
191  ;  theistic  idea  of,  231 ;  as  respects
the  world, 231-3  ;  as  respects  God,

233  f .  ; as '  intellective intuition,'

234  f.  ;  does  not  identify  God  and
the  world,  237  ;  analogous  to  the
originality  of  genius,  238-40 ;  dif-
ficulties, 242-6  ;  represents  God  as
not  absolute,  242  f.  ;  and  so  implies
limitation,  243  f.  ;  this,  even  if  self-
limitation,  incompatible  with  omni-
potence, 244  ;  the  idea  certainly
transcendent,  and  yet  not  unphiloso-
phical, 245  f.

Creative  Synthesis,  104  f.,  434 ;  the
idea  due  to  Lotze  and  Wundt,  104 ;
instances  of,  104  f . ;  not  appreciated
by  sensationalism,  105  ;  results  from
the  activity  of  subjects,  105,  106;
source  of  new  values,  109  ;  secures
an  increase  of  directed  energy  and
of  determinate  structure, 109

Cuvier,  ignored  evolution, 15

Darwin,  C,  on  connexion  of  cats  and
red  clover,  57  ;  on  the  variety  in
Nature,  82  f. ;  on  Unity  of  Type
and  variety  of  conditions,  84  f.  ;  on
Man's  simian  ancestry,  89  ;  on
Natural  Selection  and  progress,  11 5  f. ;
thought  Sexual  Selection  would  ac-
count for  animal  ornamentation,  188

Death,  the  problem  of,  212-4;  for  the
mere  animal,  385  f.

Descartes,  his  dualism,  7,  260,  463  ;  his
Cogito  ergo  sum,  45,  460  n.  ;  on  the


difference  between  man  and  brute,
91  ;  regarded  mind  as  substance,
392  ;  on  body  and  mind  as  a  sub-
stantial unity,  467

Desire,  328-30 ;  presupposes  feeling,
328 ;  its  relation  to  will,  329

Determination,  two  forms  of,  277-9,
their  difference,  279-81,  438,  where-
in it  lies,  280,  are  they  mutually
exclusive,  282  f.;  Self-determination,

279  f.,  288  f. ;  a  determining  self
denied, 289  f.

Determinism,  and  Indeterminism,  am-
biguity of  these  terms,  273;  thorough-
going,  282  f.

Direction,  as  guidance  of  lower  by
higher,  in  f.,  280  f.  ;  two  senses  of,

280  f.

Drews,  A.,  a  criticism  of  Hegel,  165  it.

Dualism, 7, 10

Duality  in  unity,  of  experience,  10,  26,

430.
Duration,  305  f.,  468

Eckhart,  34,  39,  43

Edwards,  Jonathan, quoted, 308,  312

Effect,  compound  and  heteropathic  dis-
tinguished, 102  f.  ;  the  latter  alone
merely  quantitative  and  abstract,  102

'  Elective  Affinities,'  63

Empedocles,  '  the  Newton  of  organic
nature,'  63

Ends,  '  Heterogony  of,'  79  f.,  93,  149,

Energy,  dissipation  of,  203,  360  ;
spiritual,  increase  of, 280

Environment,  differentiation  of,  61  ;
adaptation  to  and  adaptation  of,  ro6,
in;  social  and  physical  approxi-
mated through  habit,  60, 219

Epigenesis,  theory  of,  propounded  by
Harvey,  98 ;  its  meaning,  98  ;  as
'creative  synthesis,'  conflicting  with
theism,  270  f.

Equilibration,  as  implied  in  Epigenesis,
loi,  115

Eternity,  as  formal,  468  f. ;  as  onto-
logical,  469-71  ;  as  axiological,
471-6

Eugenics,  94

Evil,  no  principle  of,  131,  376,  439;
no  '  solidarity  'of,  133  ;  physical,  as
a  difficulty  for  pluralism,  202  f.  ;  not
simply  negative,  318,  376  ;  problem
of,  in  what  sense  soluble,  319,  439  ;
what  in  one  way  evil  in  another
good,  350,  440 ;  such  relative  evil
implied  in  evolution,  351  ;  but  is  the


Index


483


evolurion  of  our  \vorld  the  best  ?
35i~3;  where  the  Many  have  some
initiative,  contingency  seems  in-
evitable, 351  f.;  in  this  world,  it  is
replied,  there  are  many  superfluous
CNils,  but  can  this  be  proved  ?  },i,i  ;
so-called  metaphysical  evil,  354  f.,
440  f.  ;  alleged  superfluous  evils,
356-60;  error  incidental  to  ex-
perience may  be  worth  what  it  costs,
356  f.  ;  but  there  are  physia\l  evils
not  to  be  thus  accounted  for,  357  ;
here  we  have  to  recognise  the  con-
servative factors  of  natura  naturata,
357-60,  439  ;  inevitable  dissolution  a
mistake  of  naturalism,  360  f.  (.S'e'c^
also  Moral Evil)

Evolution,  meaning  of,  97  f.,  351,  434  ;
the  earlier  theory  alone  a  strict
evolution,  98,  incompatible  with
Darwinism,  98,  implies  pre-forma-
tion  and  a  'block  universe,'  99,
originated  for  biology  in  a  mistake
of  Malpighi,  99;  and  upheld  by  the
philosophers.  Regis,  Malebranche
and  Leibniz,  99,  and,  as  singularistic,
by  Hegel,  100  ;  the  later  theory  of
Evolution  (s(c  Epigenesis),  as  plural-
istic, is  here  upheld,  loi  ;  beginning
of,  as  inconceivable,  195,  265  f.  ;
theistic  interpretation  of,  267-9  '■>
objection  to  the  actual  evolution  of
the  world,  351-61

Experience,  and  difierentialion  of
presentations,  77 ;  a  definition  of,
4(3; the  divine,  477

Faith,  as  'primitive  credulity '  or  trust-
fulness, 12,  414-6  ;  analogies  to,  in
the  biological  world,  415  f.,  448;
always  '  room  for  faith  '  and  need  of
it,  416;  rational  belief,  its  final
phase,  416  f.,  this  amenable  to  logic,
4r7  ;  distinct  from  prudence,  418  ;
meaning  of  rational  in  this  con-
nexion, 4i8f.  ;  practical  grounds  for
theistic  faith,  421-3,  its  theoretical
value,  423  ;  why  only  faith,  when  the
nee<l  for  knowledge  is  vital?  423-5  ;
rationality  of  belief  in  a  future' life,
425-8,  this  depends  on  the  value  of
man  and  his  work,  425  f.  ;  faulty
counter  arguments,  from  the  analogy
of  the  lower  Unms  of  life,  426  f.,  and
from  evolution,  427  f.  ;  faith  in  the
moral  ideal  a  personal  matter,  not
merely  a  matter  of  evolution,  428  f.  ;
faith  and  knowledge  the  two  voices,


441  ;  faith  and  life,  448  f.  ;  the  test
of  faith,  450;  religious  faith,  186,
450  f.,  452

Fall,  doctrine  of  the,  362  f.  ;  ignores
evolution,  363,  368  f.

Fate,  as  implying  freedom,  271  f.;  as
denying  freedom,  295

Feuerbach,  his  secession  from  llegel,
46

I*ichte,  J.  G.,  35,  47,  lyS,  330;  his
Anstoss,  37,  Gegiitstand  and  Wider-
stand,  40; on  moral  order,  381

'Finite  God,'  43, 194,  316,  353,  443

Fixity  of  Type,  and  variety  of  con-
ditions, 8^-^  ;  and  grotesque  forms,

I'oreknowledge,  and  purpose,  3iof.  ;
and  eternal  knowledge, 312-5, 473

Fouillee,  on  unity  of  society, 117M.

Freedom,  of  the  will,  a  misleading
phrase,  272  ;  freedom  as  noumenal,
294  f.,  303  f. ;  freedom  and  fore-
knowledge,  296-8, 473

Fries,  J-  F.,  on  memory,  396  ;  referred
to.  4"55

Function,  a  unity  depending  on  com-
plexity of  structure,  109 ;  gradual
mechanization  of  lower  functions  by
habit,  1 10;  interdependence  of  higher
and  lower,  i  lo  f.

Future  Life,  difficulties  about,  387  f.  ;
not  removed  by  dogmatic  argu-
ments, 388  f.  ;  Kant's  supposition  of
personality  as  transferable,  389  f.  ;
metaphysical  doctrines  about  sub-
stance here  useless,  393  ;  the  question
one  of  value,  393  ;  no  positive
evidence  against,  393  f-;  for  personal
continuity  need  continuity  of  memory
and  of  environment,  395  ;  as  to  the
former,  objective  records  at  all  events
persist  and  can  be  read  more  the
higher  the  level  of  life  attained,  396  f. ;
the  analogy  between  birth  and  re-
embodiment,  398  f. ;  various  hypo-
theses al)out  the  latter,  all  iinjilying
dualism  of  body  and  soul,  400 ;  but
the  interaction  of  subjects  lies  ileeper,
and  makes  the  way  to  belief  easier,
401  ;  as  to  environment,  two  views
to  consider,  (1)  re-incarnation,  401-5,
temporary  tiiscontiiuiity  supjjosed  to
be  bridged  by  latent  ineniories
eventually  revived,  402,  and  jjfo-
gression  liy  'elective  atlinilies'  that
determine  each  re-birlh,  402  f.,  these
minimise  the  difiiculty  connected
with  heredity, 403f. ; the  theory  of


31—2


484


Index


pre-existence  credible,  404  f.;  (2)
'transfiguration,'  405-7;  death  and
sleep,  407  f. ;  moral  arguments  for,
409-12,  441

Gait  on,  F.,  quoted  on  Eugenics,  94

Geddes  and  Thomson,  Proff.,  their
Evolution  of  Sex  quoted,  59  ;  on  the
pre-formation  theory  of  evolution,  98

God  [see  Theism) ;  self-limitation  of,
243  f.,  316,  437  ;  from  the  point  of
view  of  Man,  442-4  ;  and  eternity,
468-76

Goethe's  account  of  '  the  fall '  and
Hegel's,  166 «.;  his  notion  about
paternal  and  maternal  traits  adopted
by Schopenhauer and Hartmann,

334
Good, Idea of the, 18  f., 114,  433;

the  highest  not  diminished  by  being

diffused, 1 1 2
Green,  T.  H.,  his  Prolegomena  quoted,

133.  134.  135;  on  hedonism,  348  «.

Habit  as  mechanization,  74

Hsecceity,  65

Haeckel,  Prof.  E.,  referred  to,  i,  27,
37,  63,  90,  99,  208

Hamilton,  Sir  W.,  his  Natural  Realism,
26o«.  ;  on  predestination,  311  f.;  on
action,  329  f.

Hartmann,  E.  von,  criticism  of
Pluralism,  199  f.;  clairvoyance  of
the  imconscious,  238 ;  criticisms
of  Schopenhauer,  324,  330  f. ;  em-
pirical proof  of  pessimism,  325-8  ;
psychological  deduction  of  it,  328-30 ;
the  Absolute,  as  Will  and  Idea,  331,
absolutely  stupid  and  absolutely  wise,
333  ;  theogony,  331-3  ;  cosmogony,
333-5  ;  '  evolutional  optimism,'  334  ;
the  end  and  after,  335  ;  two  Absolutes
in  conflict,  335  f-;  his  scheme  of  re-
demption brings  out  his  fundamental
inconsistencies,  337  f.

Hedonism,  a  characteristic  of  optimism
and  pessimism,  339  ;  its  assumption,
339  f. ,  and  the  '  hedonistic  paradox  '
inconsistent,  340,  this  implies  ends
distinct  from  pleasure,  340 ;  without
these  experience  inconceivable,  341-5;
and  these  ends  never  simply  means
to  pleasure,  345-7  ;  if  objective  and
subjective  factors  both  essential  to
experience,  the  one  cannot  be  merely
means  to  the  other,  347  f.  ;  but  we
find  an  approximation  to  this  in
parasitism,  349


Hegel,  22  ;  his  Philosophy  of  History,
16,  138;  the  real  the  rational,  23;  his
Absolute  Idea,  22,  34,  38,  46;  on
Descartes,  45  ;  recognised  heterogony
of  ends,  79  n.,  149  ;  on  evolution,
100,  269  ;  his  doctrine  of  '  objective
mind,'  ii9f. ;  on  the  cunning  of
reason,  133,  155,  157  ;  his  Pheno-
menology of  Alind,  139  n. ;  relation  of
dialectic  to  time,  143  ;  the  time-illu-
sion, 151 ;  a  symbol  and  a  motto  for
his  philosophy,  152  ;  this  said  to  have
been  a  philosophy  of  the  unconscious,
154  ;  follows  Jacob  Boehm,  166;  re-
jected the  plurality  of  worlds,  181  f.  ;
on  Paradise,  360 ;  definition  of  eter-
nity, 468  f. ;  time  as  Chronos,  469 ;  his
Pluralism,  138-58  :— dialectical  and
historical  development,  their  relation,,
139;  he  oscillates  between  them,  141 ;
neglecting  the  problem  of  time  that
is  implied,  143  ;  acknowledges  con-
tingency in  Nature,  139  f,  and
therewith  plurality,  140;  finds  a
gradual  progress  from  Nature  to
Spirit,  142,  the  former  showing  only
routine  but  the  latter  novelty,  143  ;
yet  Nature  potentially  Spirit  from  the
first,  144  f.;  we  interpret  the  lower
by  the  higher,  which  yet  is  developed
from  it,  145-7  j  to  this  development
the  interest  of  the  agents  concerned
is  essential,  147 ;  though  they  are
not  conscious  of  its  end  at  the  first,
148,  but  only  instruments  of  the
World-Spirit,  like  natural  forces  for
an  architect  erecting  a  house,  149;
with  this  World-Spirit  the  Logic  does
not  deal,  149  f-;  in  the  Philosophy
of  Mind  it  seems  to  be  the  realised
plan  of  the  house,  1 50 ;  the  doctrine
of  Teleology  does  not  help,  151  f . ;
nor  does  the  Philosophy  of  Natjire,  for
here  Mind  is  not  yet  '  come  to  itself,'
152-4  ;  nor  is  it  clear  that  for  Hegel
Nature  only  appears  as  a  plurality,
154  f.;  the  house  seems  to  build
itself,  and  Hegel's  Philosophy  of
History  suggests  not  one  mind  but  a
living  organization  achieved  by  many,
156-8.  The  Hegelian  Unity,  159-
80 : — seems  to  be  a  plurality
organized  into  a  unity,  159;  to  be
pantheistic  rather  than  theistic,  160;
this  apparent  in  his  doctrine  of  the
Trinity,  160-77  5  ^^  Kingdom  of
the  Father  answers  to  pure  thought,
where all determinationists are


Index


485


posited  as  ideal,  not  as  real,  161-4;
in  the  Kingdom  of  the  Son  we
reach  the  objective  as  fact,  164;
but  the  relation  of  the  Son  to  the
World  discloses  two  forms  of  '  the
Other,'  one  ideal,  eternal  and  true,
and  one  actual,  temporal  and  illusory,
165-9;  his  doctrine  of  development
should  explain  this  transition  from
the  ideal  or  potential  to  the  actual,
169-72  ;  but  here  we  find  that  the
actual  is  first,  173;  accordingly  in
the  Kingdom  of  the  Spirit  the  Idea
comes  to  consciousness  of  itself  only
in  humanity,  174-7.  In  the  Pfwno-
meiiolo^',\.\\\s  gradual  process  towards
ultimate  unity  is  traced,  177-9,  ^^^
here,  as  elsewhere  in  Hegel's  works,
unity  is  actually  result,  180

Helmholtz,  on  causality,  275,  as  a
postulate,  300

Heracleitus  and  Hegel, 139

Herbart,  his  pluralism,  47

Heredity,  problem  of,  206-12,  403  f.

Historical  Method,  neglected  in  the
1 8th  cent,  dominant  in  the  19th,
14-6,  120;  forwarded  by  Hegel,
16

History,  contrasted  with  Science,  3,  14,

282,  433  ;  and  the  Individual,  18  f.  ;
its  Wholes  not  classes,  19 ;  no
transition  from  dialectical  develop-
ment to  historical,  141-3,  352  ;
from  the  standpoint  of  the  Absolute
such transition superfluous, 32  f. ,

352
Hobbes,  on  the  problem of  freedom,

283,  286

Hobhouse, Prof.  L. H.,  on  sin,  371

Hoffding,  Prof.  II.,  on  mysticism,  35;
his  theory  of  the  conservation  of
value,  131 «.;  a  query  aljout  Hegel,
182  ;  on  the  dualism  of  means  and
end, 475

Howison,  Prof.  C).  H.,  261  ;/.,  271,  on
Creation,  455-60

Humanity,  as  Knd,  the  Comtian  and
the  ("hristian  view  compared, 386  f.

Hume  quoted,  242  «. ;  on  the  idea  of
self,  289 ;  on  the  problem  of  evil,
317  f.;  on  custom,  358;  on  im-
mortality, 386

Huxley,  on  the  banishment  of  spon-
taneity, I4  ;  no  arresting  the  pro-
cession of  the  great  year,  360  f. ;
wanted  a  one-sided  freedom,  372  f.;
on  lielief  in  immortality,  394  «. ;  an
agnostic  question,  413


Idealism  {see  Spiritualism)

Indiscernibles, Identity  of, 195,  433

Individual,  the,  50  f.,  52 ;  always
unique,  18,  50,  63  f.,  65,  433;  and
atom,  distinguished,  51,  433;  of
orders  higher  than  man,  185-8,  re-
cognised by  Leibniz  and  Fechner,  189

Individuality  of  men  contrasted  with
that  of  plants  and  animals, 116

Inertia,  a  negative  concept,  8 ;  and
guidance  or  spontaneity,  9,  279;  and
conservation  of  momentum,  280  f.

Intellective  Intuition,  234  f . ;  implies
more  than  absolute  knowledge,  235-7  i
and  more  than  absolute  self-con-
sciousness,  237  f.

Interaction,  the  problem  of,  215-9,
differs  in  cases  of  things  and  of  per-
sons, 217  f. ;  in  the  latter  'sympathetic
rapport'  is  possible,  2i8f.,  interaction
so  regarded,  257-9

James,  William,  on  'a  block  universe,'
309,  351  ;  on  Leibniz's  Theodicy,
317  ; on  belief,  413

Jowett,  on  divine  self-limitation,  316

Justice, 115, 116,  364

Kant,  on  the  Realm  of  Nature  and  the
Realm  of  Ends,  2,  411  ;  on  life,  75  ;
distinguishes  between  'educt'  and
'product,'  98;  his  synthetic  unity  of
apperception  in  relation  to  creative
synthesis,  105;  on  mutiium  corn-
fnercitim,  106,  114;  denies  jural  re-
lations between  man  and  brute,  116;
his  'deduction  of  the  categories,'
124-8,  as  subjective,  is  inconclusive,
125,  as  objective,  overlooks  inter-
subjective  intercourse,  127;  'radical
wickedness'  denied,  131;  impressed
by  the  French  Revolution,  135;  on
the  primacy  of  the  practical  reason,
'98)  330;  'lis  table  of  categories  a
piece  of  mistaken  ingenuity,  228;
the  theistic  ideal,  its  '  regulative  use,'
230  f.,  on  knowledge  and  intellective
intuition,  234  f.,  his  doctrine  of  free-
dom, 292-5 ;  inconsistent  in  main-
taining 'empirical '  determinism,  299  f.;
on  man  as  noumenal  and  as  pheno-
menal, 301  ;  the 'causality  of  freedom,'
303  f. ;  on  Nei^ath'e  Quaiilities,  307  ;
failure  to  ]»r<)Ve  does  not  dis|)rove,
319;  moral  evil  a  mystery,  363;  view
on  personality  and  substance  criticized,
389  f. ;  his  category  of  substance,
391  f . ;  traces  of  monadism  in,  391 ;


486


Index


on  the  body  as  possibly  an  impediment,
397 ;  at  one  time  taught  the  pre-
existence  and  immortality  of  the  soul,
404  n. ;  the  moral  argument  for
future  life,  411  f. ;  knowing  by  doing,
414;  distinguishes  between  change
and  alteration,  470
Knowledge  presupposes  conation,  11,
106,  413  f.

Lange,  F.  A.,  on  '  Brain  and  Soul,'  467

Laplace, 15, 17,  67

Leibniz,  20,  his  Monadology,  47,  as
typical  for  pluralism,  =,3,  its  'pre-
established  harmony'  rejected,  54,
248,  its  pampsychism,  61,  its  identity
of  indiscernibles,  64,  it  '  destroys
atoms,'  65  ;  resembles  occasionalism,
250,  his  Letters  to  S.  Clarke  quoted,
64;  admits  a  discontinuity  between
man  and  brute,  91  ;  held  the  pre-
formation theory  of  evolution,  98,
205,  asa  corollary  of  his  pre-established
harmony,  99  f. ;  on  the  tendency
towards  perfection,  130 «.;  Hegel
and  Leibniz,  139,  145;  on  pre-
existence,  205;  on  death,  212,  213;
his  objections  to  occasionalism,  249-
51;  his  petites  perceptions,  256;  his
monads  have  'no  windows,'  260;
the  sincerity  of  his  Theodicee  ques-
tioned, 321;  on  nature's  thoroughness,

357

Leopardi  quoted,  320  n.

Lessing  quoted,  373  f.

Lewes,  G. H.,  quoted, 146

Life,  and  the  mechanical,  4,  9 ;  '  per-
sistent types'  of,  60,  61 ;  dependence
of  higher  forms  on  lower,  61  ff.

Locke,  his  Indian  philosopher,  226;
on  meaning  of  freedom,  272;  on
conscience,  386  n. ;  on  mind  as  sub-
stance,  390  f.

Lockyer,  Sir  N.,  on  Inorganic  Evolu-
tion, 75  «.,  95  f.

Lotze,  on  Chaos,  70 ;  referred  to,  76,
302,  391;  recognised  'creative  syn-
thesis,' 104  n.;  on  Hegel's  Absolute
Spirit,  1 7 1 ;  his  objections  to  pluralism,
215-24,  as  regards  'transeunt  action,'
215  f. ;  the  world  really  the  self-
conservation  of  the  Absolute,  216  f.,
here  he  resembles  Berkeley,  216  ;  his
occasionalism,  248,  249;  on  the
genesis  of  the  soul,  263  f . ;  on  a
block  universe,  309  f. ;  on  problem
of  evil,  318;  on  our  impatience  with
God's  ways,  357; on moral  order.


381  f. ;  on  Kant's  supposition  of
personality  as  transferable,  390;  on
immortality,  393

Mach,  Prof.  E.,  on  Physics,  17;  on  the
mechanical  theory,  103

Mackenzie,  Prof.  J.  S.,  his  Manual  of
Ethics, 329  n.

Malebranche,  his  occasionalism,  249;
quoted,  251

Man,  gulf  between  him  and  the  brute,
90-2,  recognised  in  the  book  of
Genesis,  90,  by  Aristotle,  Descartes,
Leibniz,  Dr  A.  R.  Wallace,  91  f.,
biological  and  sociological  grounds
for  denying  it,  92  f. ;  '  natural  man '
and  ethical  person,  120;  in  becoming
social  man  becomes  rational,  121

Many,  the,  as  'ejects,'  29;  no  way
from  them  to  the  Absolute, 29

Marshall,  Prof.  A.,  on  a  '  law  of  in-
creasing return,'  132

Martensen,  his  Christian  Dogmatics
quoted  about  the  Trinity,  190;  on
the  world  as  a  divine  comedy,  383;
on  purgatory,  406

Martineau on divine self-limitation,

315  f-

Matter,  the  concept  of,  from  the  stand-
point of  pluralism,  254-7

M<:Taggart,  Dr  J.  M.  E.,  on  future
life,  403

Mechanical  Theory,  the,  described,  3-5 ;
its  abstract  character,  5,  1 1 ;  advocated
by  Laplace,  15;  its  inadequacy  as
regards  evolution,  in  that  it  implies
reversibility,  103

ISIemory,  implied  in  our  cognition,  255  ;
and  'psychical  present'  or  range  in
time,  256  f. ;  not  the  same  as  objective
records,  395  ;  the  subjective  function
presupposed  in  these  seems  inex-
plicable, 395  f. ;  and  obliviscence,  396

Merz,  J.  T.,  History  of  European-
Thought  quoted, 15

Metaphysic,  without  assumption,  futile,
225-8

Metempsychosis,  205,  213;  inaccuracy
of  the  term,  402  «.

Method,  of  these  lectures,  i,  22  f.,  442

Mill,  J.  S.,  on  compounding  and
intermixing  effects,  102;  on  the
humanitarian  ideal,  134;  on  the
eternal  perdition  of  the  heathen,  425

Millennial  dreams, 112  f., 360

Monads,  the  world  of,  54  ;  differentiation
of  the  environment  of,  6r,  62  ;
dependence  of  higher  on  lower,  62  ;


Index


487


God  la  moiiade primitive  ([.eibniz)  or
Monas  motiadum  (Bruno),  190  f.;
the  'bare  monad,'  195,  254-7;
'dominant  monads'  or  souls,  195,
196;  and  their  organism,  257-9;
'  functional '  and  '  foreign  '  relations
distinguished,  257  f.,  461-4;  have
'  windows,'  260,  466

Monism,  Agnostic,  10;  Spiritualistic,
12  f,  if  true,  should  explain  the
appearance  of  mechanism,  14,  18,  lo;
Materialistic, 13

Moral  Evil,  and  evolution,  the  transition
from  innocence  to  knowledge  of  good
and  evil,  364-8;  wrong-doing  without
guilt,  364  f. ;  not  sin  as  theologically
defined,  37of. ;  and  temptation,  371  f. ;
a  world  in  which  it  was  imiiossible,
not  a  moral  world,  372  f.,  and  inferior
to  this,  373  f. ;  lies  between  two
limits,  374  f. ;  is  the  upper  limit
attainable?  375-7

Moral  Government  of  the  World,  377-
84;  GoiFs  ways  and  our  ways,  377  f. ;
the  view  of  Job's  comforters,  378  f.  ;
is  it  possible  without  special  inter-
ferences? 379  f. ;  and  what  evidence
for  it  is  there  apart  from  these?  380-2 ;
an alleged inconsistency  exi)lained,

382  f . ;  the  world  as  a  divine  comedy,

383  f.

Moral  Ideal,  the,  136,  229  f,  420  f.,
422,  425,  429, 441

Motives,  contrasted  with  forces,  283-5  5
according  to  thorough-going  deter-
minism, both  alikeimply necessitation,
285  f.

Mysticism,  34  f.,  41,  43

Naturalism,  3 ;  its  theory  of  conscious
automata,  6  ;  its  distinction  of  phe-
nomena and  epiphenomena,  6  f.  ;
treats  psychical  activity  as  illusory,
7  f. ;  fails  to  account  for  living
guidance,  8  f. ;  its  alliance  with
Agnosticism,  10;  misunderstands  its
own  standpoint,  12  f.;  360  f.

Natural right  t<j  live, 87-9, ir6

Natural  .Selection,  115,  and  Rational
Select  if  )n, 116

Natura  natiiratts  and  Xatura  tiatiirala,
72  f.,  298,  357  f.,  433

Nature,  3,  5,  10,  as  the  One,  27;  as
•prior  to  NliTid,'  252,  262-5  >  '"  what
sense  this  true,  264  f.

Necessitarianism,  not  |>rovcd  empiri-
cally, 307;  but  by  many  Theists
regarde<l  .as  axiomatic,  308  f,  438


Necessity,  on  absolute,  226;  so-called

natural,  275 f.;  logical,  275  ;  real,  276f.
Newton, Sir Isaac, his Priiicipia, 3,

quoted,  4
Nicholas  of  Cusa,  n^,  as  precursor  of

Leibniz,  64
Nietzsche, his  Heldi'ii moral, 116; his

Over-man,  451
Nutritive  chains,  57  f

Objectivity,  Hegel's  'objective  mind,'
119  f;  cannot  belong  to  a  merely
individual  experience,  122-4;  mutual
imjilication  of,  and  self-consciousness,
124,  the  two  advance  pari  passu,  129;
according  to  Hegel's  Smaller  Logic,

151

Occasionalism,  248-53,  usually  assumed
by  Theists,  248,  its  origin  in  the
Cartesian  dualism,  248,  and  subse-
quent modification,  248  f. ;  defensible,
248-52;  but  not  indispensable,  253;
less  simple  than  real  interaction,  257,
260 ; its  epistemological  difficulties,

-59  f-

Omnipotence, 244,  353-5

Omnipresence,  250,  270

Omniscience, 235  f.

One,  The,  and  the  Many,  as  problem,
22,  25  f.,  methods  of  approaching
this,  22  f. ;  vacillations  of  theologians
and philosophers concerning it,

43-7

One,  The  (see  also  Absolute),  as  Abso-
lute Object,  27  f.,  37 ;  as  Absolute
Subject,  29  f.,  37;  as  Absolute
Self-consciousness,  30,  38  f. ;  as
mystical,  33-5  ;  as  World-soul,  y^  f. ;
as  primus  inter  pares,  42,  52

Optimism, superficial,  317, 320-2

Order,  what  it  implies,  18,  20,  381,
433;  how  far  presupposed  in  pur-
posive action,  67  f.,  71  f-

Organism,  external  correlations,  56-8 ;
internal,  58  f. ;  as  defined  by  Kant
and  Hegel,  118,  as  hierarchy  "f
monads,  209,  as  primary  medium  of
the  soul's  life,  21 1  f.

Origen,  on  the  divine  prescience,  310

Paley,  on  conception  and  resurrection,

398  ;/.
I'alingenesis, 99, 206
Tampsychism, 20  f., 62  f; advocates

of, 63;/.; theistic objections to,

260-2
I'ascal  fjuoted, 208
Teirce,  C.  S.,  quoted, 74, 350


488


Index


Perception,  implies  creative  synthesis,
104  f.

Pessimism,  morbid,  320;  as  reaction
to  optimism,  320-2;  of  Schopenhauer,
322-4;  of  Hartmann,  324-38

Physical  World,  so-called,  analogies  to
it  in  the  living  world,  60;  may  be
continuous  with  this,  61,  66  f.

Physionomics,  as  illustrating  pluralism,

58  f.
Plato,  on  Creation,  31 ;  his  World-soul,

Pleasure  and  pain,  as  respectively  nega-
tive and  positive,  322  f.;  as  both
positive,  324 ;  in  relation  to  desire
and  will,  328  f. ;  the  pleasures  of
pursuit,  329

Plotinus,  his  theology,  33;  his  doctrine
of  'emanation,'  36;  the  body  the
river  of  Lethe,  406

Pluralism,  24,  49;  the  start  from,  47  f. ,
432  ;  its  standpoint,  historical,  50;  is
it  final?  200  f.,  435  ;  its  leading  con-
cepts, Individuality  and  Behaviour,
50  f. ;  accounts  for  the  contingency
and  the  uniformity  in  the  world,  51,
as  exemplified  in  the  social  world,
54-6,  in  the  biological  world,  56-9;
in  the  so-called  physical  world,  59-67 ;
upper  limit  of,  discussed,  185-94;
empirically  unattainable,  42  f.,  196,
436  ;  the  '  Supreme '  as  only  primus
infer  pares,  191  ;  and,  as  immanent  in
this  world,  subject  to  its  fundamental
conditions,  193  f-;  lower  limit  of,
195-7,  also  unattainable,  196  f.;  if
not,  what  should  we  reach?  265  f.;
a  Prinucin  movens  relating  the  two
limits,  197,  436,  this  rejected  by
voluntaristic  pluralists,  197-9  ;  diffi-
culties of,  physical,  203-5,  catastro-
phes, 203  f. ,  dissipation  of  energy,
203  f . ;  psychophysical,  204-15,  as
regards  birth,  204  f.,  heredity,  206-
12,  death,  212-4;  need  for  con-
servation of  values  and  personal
continuity,  2 1 4  f. ;  metaphysical,  2 1 5-
■24,  as  regards  interaction,  215-9,  the
fact  of  sympathetic  rapport,  220-2,
and  the  unity  that  plurality  implies,
222-4.  If  pluralism  contradictory,
singularism  the  only  alternative,  201,
but  the  way  to  theism  is  barred,  224,
245,  436.  For  pluralism,  material
phenomena  due  to  the  interaction  of
the  many,  247,  253

Plurality  of  Worlds,  rejected  by  the
Church, Hegel, Wesley, Whewell,


and  Dr  A.  R.  Wallace,  181-3;  a
problem  for  the  pluralist  as  well  as
for  the  theologian,  183;  fallacious-
ness of  arguments  against,  183  f . ;
Tom  Paine's  objections  to  Christianity
based  on  it,  and  the  replies  of  Fuller
and  Chalmers,  184  f.;  nature  of  the
connexion  between  different  worlds,
185  ;  principle  of  continuity  leads
us  to  posit  higher  orders  of  intelli-
gence, 185  f.,  435  ;  Dr  A.  R.Wallace's
arguments,  186-9

Potentiality,  source  of  the  idea, 108

Poynting,  Prof.  J.  H.,  referred  to,  204,
281

Predestination,  308-12;  attempts  at
conciliation,  310-5;  prescience  not
causation,  310  f . ;  conciliation  a
matter  of  belief  not  of  knowledge,
312  ;  distinction  between  foreknow-
ledge and  eternal  knowledge,  312-5  ;
the  pluralist's  via  f/iedia,  315  f.,  438

Priestley,  his  materialism,  255;/.;  on
motives,  287; Reid  on,  311

Pringle-Pattison,  Prof.,  quoted,  46,  on
Aristotle's  philosophy,  138;  on
Hegel, 140

Progress,  79,  93,  97,  ii3f.,  115,  130,
434 ;  as  advance  towards  a  higher
unity,  131,  133,  134;  no  law  of
diminishing  return  here,  131  f. ;  seems
small  and  slow,  133;  past  and  future,
134;  without  decline,  361

Protozoa,  the,  transition  from  to  the
Metazoa,  58,  466  ;  as  illustrating  the
transition  from  '  natural  man '  to
society, 121  f.

Providence, 380, 479

Purgatory,  406

Rashdall,  G.  H.,  on  Optimism,  321;
on  pre-existence  of  souls,  404

Realism,  physical,  5  ;  the  passing  of,
17; 'Natural  Realism,'  260

Realm  of  Ends,  the,  contrasted  with
the  Realm  of  Nature,  2  f.,  304  ;  in  what
sense  out  of  time,  305  f. ;  society  and
the  individual in, 386  f. ; its End,

Reason,  an  ideal,  23  ;  implies  '  objecti-
vity, '  1 22  f. ;  primacy  of  the  practical,
198,  412  f.

Reflex  action,  465

'  Regeneration,'  recognised  as  a  mystery
by  Kant  and  Schopenhauer,  298

Reid,  Thos.,  his  criticism  of  the  Cartesian
'theory  of  ideas,'  259;  compared  fore-
knowledge with  memory,  311


Index


489


Richter,  Jean  Paul,  quoted, 329
Ritchie, D. G.,  quoted, 129, 146
Rosenkranz,  K.,  on  the  ugly  in  Nature,  86
Rothe,  R.,  quoted,  374,  410
Royce, Prof.  J., 129  «. ;  on  the  indi-
vidual as  known,  297  ;  foreknowledge
of  the  unique  and  the  free  impossible,
but  not  eternal knowledge, 312-5;
on  death,  4 10

Schelling,  on  Hegel,  143;  on  Nature,
143;  his  Abfall  dir  IcUe  adopted  by
Hegel,  164
Schiller,  Dr  F.  C.  S.,  quoted,  472
Schopenhauer,  198;  absolutely  neces-
sary l>eing,  absurd,  226;  laudation
of  Priestley,  287 ;  his  doctrine  of
freedom,  292-5,  a  misapplication  of
Plato's  theory  of  ideas,  299 ;  on
optimism,  321  ;  on  pleasure  and  pain,

322  f.; on will as insatiable  want,

323  f.;  on  the  category  of  substance,

392

Science,  tends  to  eliminate  qualitative
variety,  4,  65

Self-conservation,  21,  52  f.;  of  the
Absolute,  216  f.

Selfishness,  and  extra-social  sanctions,
132,  422;  and  social  sanctions,  132  f.

Self-love,  its  objective  implications,
343  f. ;  the  subjective  implications
of  the  '  extra-regarding  propensions '
it  presupposes,  344  f.

Sensation,  pure,  256;  in  what  sense  it
has  a  meaning,  259  n.

Sensationalism,  ignores  creative  syn-
thesis, 105;  denies  the  reality  of
self,  289  f.;  its  shortcomings,  290  f.

Sidgwick,  H.,  on  Hedonism,  340-8;
on  the  '  theistic  hypothesis '  as  in-
dispensable to  perfect  ethics,  422

Sin,  the  doctrine  of  original,  363,  369^  ;
meaning  of,  370  f.

Singularism,  24,  201,  228,  271,  432;
of  the  Eleatics,  46,  47  ;  predominant
in  the  19th  century,  49

Smith,  Adam,  on  the  rise  of  conscience.

Society,  analogies  with  organism,  1 1 7  f . ;
its  continuity  of  a  higher  order,  1 17,
387  ;  nominalistic  and  realistic  views
of,  118-20,  the  result  of  'creative
synthesis,'  i2of. ;  as  over-individual,
1 29  f. ,  44O ;  wider  than  the  state,
130;  sfjciety  and  selfishness  essentially
op|K<se<l, 132  f.

Socratic  paradox  concerning  virtue  and
vice,  376,  377


Sorley,  Prof.  W.  R.,  quoted,  350
Souls,  as  dominant  monads,  195-6;
pre-existencc  of,  205,  404  f;  tradu-
cianism  and  creationism  as  theories
of  their  origin,  205,  404;  things /^r
se  or  subjects,  391  f.
South,  Robert,  on  Man  before  the  Fall,

362,  363

Spencer,  H.,  quoted,  27;  referred  to,
37  ;  laid  stress  on  equilibration,  loi ;
his  absolute  ethics,  113;  on  the
beginning  of  evolution,  265;  and  the
defects  of  the  decimal  system,  355

Spinoza,  for,  everything  conalive,  21,
431  ;  his  Acosmism,  25,  33,  47;  all
determination,  negation,  244,  355 ;
on  blessedness  and  virtue,  409

Spiritualism  {see  also  Monism),  not
necessarily  theistic,  25

Spontaneity, 14,  51,  79, 279,  328

Statistics,  moral  and  physical  compared,

65  f-;  433
Stern,  Dr  L.  W.,  his  Person  und  Sadie,

i^j  n.;  on  the  dissipation  of  energy,

203  f.
Stewart,  Uugald,  on  divine  prescience,

316
Structure, determined by function,

106  f., 397; this  evident  in  human

affairs,  107
Subjective  Selection,  75  f.,  115
Substance,  category  of,  391,  392  ; in-
adequate for  mind,  391
'Sympathetic rapport,^ 218  f., 253  f.,

256  f.,  259,  463  f.,  466

Tennant,  Dr  F.  R.,  The  Origin  of  Sin,

quoted,  369  n.
Tennyson,  on  divine  self-limitation,  316
Theism,  transcends  the  upper  limit  of
Pluralism,  192  f.,  436;  its  superiority,
228-30,  241  ;  does  not  admit  of
theoretical  proof,  230,  but  yet  has  a
theoretical  value,  230  f.;  God  as
transcendent  and  immanent,  234  f. ;
how  distinguished  from  Absolutism,

241  ;  yet  it  tends  to  pass  over  into  it,

242  ;  and  ev(jlution,  266-9. ("^''^  God)
Thomson, Prof.  J.  A., his  Science  of

Life  quoted,  58  ;  on  the  insect's
wings,  K4
Time  and  the  temporal,  133  f.,  141;  the
phenomenal  as  filled  time,  303;
abstract  time,  305,  lacks  what  we
experience  in  duration  and  change,
305  f. ;  the  scheme  of  lime,  how
obtained,  306;  as  illusory,  151  f.,
473  f-


490


Index


Trinity,  doctrine  of  the,  Hegel  on,
160-77;  Martensen  on,  190;  and
pluralism, 190

Uniformity  of  Nature,  a  postulate, 12
Unity, as category, 11; '  the higher
unity'  as  pluralistic  ideal,  117,  435,
the  realisation  of  this, 136  f.

Value  or  Worth,  18,  109,  131  «.,  282,
304,  393, 414, 425 ;  eternal  values,  449

Variations,  biological,  and  experience,
209  n.

Voltaire,  ignored  evolution,  268

Voluntarism, 198  f.

Voluntary  Action,  analysis  of,  283-91 ;  a
man's  volitions  and  his  nature,  286-9

Wallace,  Dr  A.  R.,  Man  not  the  result
of  Natural  Selection,  91  f.,  187  f.;
denies  plurality  of  worlds,  183  ;  the
beautiful  in  Nature  as  implying
'superior  control,'  189


Wallace,  W^,  on  optimism  and  pessi-
mism,  321  f.

Windelband,  Prof.  W.,  his  summary  of
HtgeV a  Phenomenology,  178

World,  the,  its  meaning,  419-23;  but
has  it  one?  419  f. ;  and  if  so,  do  we
know  it  ?  420 ;  it  is  the  moral  ideal,
420  f. ;  but  is  this  realisable  ?  42 1  ;
it  is,  if  we  postulate  God  and  a
future  life,  421  ;  as  Realm  of  Ends,
444-8

Wundt,  W.,  on  heterogony  of  ends,
79;  on  creative  synthesis,  104;  on
'increase  of  spiritual  energy,'  280;
'  philosophy  proves  the  necessity  of
faith,'  423

Young,  Prof.  C.  A.,  his  Text-book  of
Astronomy  quoted,  95

Zeller,  on  Hegel's  Philosophy  of  History ,

16
Zollner,  his  pampsychism,  63  n.


Cambridge:  printed  by  john  clay,  m.a.  at  the  university  press


BV THE  SAME  AUTHOR

NATURALISM AND AGNOSTICISM

The  Giflford  Lectures  delivered  in  the  University  of
Aberdeen  in  the  years 1896- 1898.

2  vols. 3rd  edition, 1906.
London: A.  AND  C.  BLACK.


J^


mU2i


CENTRAL  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY
University  of  California,  San  Diego

DATE  DUE

AUG  1  0 1979

1

AUG  1  0  1979

!
1

1

1
1

1
1

C139

UCSD  Libr.

UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY


«/


n  II I)  HI  I li  liii


AA 000  284  875 2


•-,  -^


'  '■•* 1  '■■',■"  I


^  ■  •


■■I  >*  ch


;/;•';•■;  f'


!


• :*i''  ■


■• ^■«-.  -
