Dynamic Sociology, Vol. 2 (Lester F. Ward, 1883)
==========================================================
Ward's Dynamic Sociology, Vol. 2: completes the system — applied social science and the program of social reform. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/dynamicsociology02warduoft).

r»    4  ^    »  ^      <♦    itf    ^^



I    ^l/M^  '  '      5  -i^

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Arciiive  ^^
in  2007  with  funding  from  \

IVIicrbsoft  Corporation


DYNAMIC  SOCIOLOGY,

APPLIED   SOCIAL  SCIENCE,

AS  BASED  UPOK

STATICAL  SOCIOLOGY  AND   TEE  LESS
COMPLEX  SCIENCES.


LESTER  F;  ward,  A.  M.

*'Tt   6ia<pepEL   fiaviag   dfiaOia;^^ — Socrates.

Zy  TWO    VOLUMES.
VOLUME   II.

DATE

SEEN  BY
PRESERVATION
SERViaS
tFEB      5  1992

FEW  YORK:
D.   APPLETON    AND  COMPANY,

1,    8,  AND   5   BOND   STREET.
1883.

.  v.^



D.   APPLETON   AND    COMPANY,

1883.

OOE^TEIsTTS  OF  YOLUME  11.

CHAPTER  VIII.
ADAPTATIO]!^.

RECIPROCAL    RELATIONS    OF   MAN    AND   THE    UNIVERSE.

PAGE

Aim  of  the  chapter — Attitude  of  nature  toward  man — Man  a  part  of  nat-
ure—  Man  an  evolved  product  of  nature  —  Nature  unconscious  and
non-intelligent — Attitude  which  man  should  assume  toward  nature :
1,  that  of  a  student ;  2,  that  of  a  master — The  environment — Funda-
mental schism  between  the  various  schools  of  thought — The  philoso-
phy of  Kant — Teleological,  dualistic,  and  genetic  modes  of  thought —
Divine  free-will  —  Predestination — Fatalism — Necessitarianism — Doc-
trine of  depravity — Optimism — Cases  in  support  of  optimism — Cases
opposed  to  optimism — Unconscious  and  non-intelligent  character  of
the  universe — Intelligence  a  product  of  evolution — Classification  of
phenomena — Genetic  phenomena — Teleological  phenomena — Methods
of  conation — The  direct  method  of  conation — The  indirect  method  of
conation — Classification  into  natural  and  artificial — Recapitulation —
Tabular  exhibit — Statement  of  the  argument — Definitions — Theorems
of  dynamic  sociology 1

CHAPTER  IX.
UTILITY.

HAPPINESS    THE    ULTIMATE   END   OF   CONATION.

Nature  and  genesis  of  feeling — The  object  of  nature,  function ;  objective,
or  biological,  point  of  view — The  object  of  sentient  beings,  pleasure ;
subjective,  or  sociological,  point  of  view — The  indirect,  or  intellectual,
contrasted  with  the  direct,  or  physical,  method  of  conation — Utilitari-
anism— The  various  alleged  ends  of  conation  shown  to  be  merely
means  to  the  ultimate  end,  happiness — Right  and  wrong — Imperfection

iv  CONTENTS.

PASB

of  the  codes  of  law  and  ethics — Objections  to  the  word  happiness —
Relativity  of  pleasure  and  pain — Increase  of  feeling  with  the  degree
of  organization — The  pursuit  of  happiness — Organization  of  happiness.  Ill

CHAPTER  X.
PROGRESS.

PRIMARY   MEANS   TO   HAPPINESS,    OR   FIRST   PROXIMATE   END   OF   CONATION.

(Dynamic  sociology  as  distinguished  from  moral  science — Dynamic  sociology
defined — Social  progress  defined — In  what  social  progress  consists —
Introduction  of  the  indirect  method  of  conation — Origin  and  nature  of
art — Social  agencies  affecting  human  progress — Confusion  of  ideas
respecting  progressive  agencies — Preliminary  consideration  of  progress
in  the  abstract — Progressive  agencies — Communication  of  ideas — Lan-
guage— Written  language  and  literature — The  invention  of  printing —
Pursuit  of  subsistence — True  position  of  the  fine  arts — Relation  of
science  to  art^  and  vice  vei-sa — Successive  modes  by  which  primitive
man  obtained  subsistence — The  scientific  epoch — Artificial  character
of  civilization — Material  civilization  increases  the  general  sum  of  hu-
man happiness — Latent  amelioration  —  Non-progressive  agencies  —
Government — Objects  of  government — Protection — Accommodation —
Improvement — Origin  and  genesis  of  government — ^Ideal  government
— ^Why  government  is  odious — Nature  of  liberty  and  the  principles
upon  which  it  rests — Successive  elimination  of  the  illegitimate  functions
of  government — Superficial  character  of  historical  and  pohtical  events —
Ameliorative  function  of  government — The  two  opposite  schools  of  so-
ciologists, both  of  which  avoid  the  vital  question  lying  between  them —
How  the  social  forces  may  be  controlled — General  laws  of  social  prog-
ress— Religion— Definitions — Sir  John  Lubbock's  classification  of  re-
ligions— Major  J.  W.  Powell's  mythological  philosophy — Herbert  Spen-
cer's views  on  religion — The  three  fundamental  elements  of  religion
— These  reduced  to  one,  viz.,  belief  in  spiritual  beings — Causes  that
have  led  to  the  universal  belief  in  spiritual  beings — Relation  of  re-
ligion to  human  progress — In  how  far  the  essentials  of  religion  are
objectively  true — Evolution  of  the  belief  in  immortality — Evolution
of  the  belief  in  deity— Religion  a  necessity  of  the  existing  condition
of  things — Fundamental  identity  of  religion  and  science — Simultane-
ous development  of  religion  and  science  from  a  common  point  of  de-
parture— Position  of  religion  with  reference  to  social  progress — Al-
leged temporal  benefits  of  religion — The  moral  sanction  of  religion —
Solace  derived  from  the  belief  in  immortality — Contemplation  of  the
attributes  of  deity — Subjective  moral  efficacy  of  prayer — Anti-progres-
sive tendencies  of  religion — Suicidal  effects  of  superstition — Mutila-

CONTENTS.  V

PAGK

tions,  orgies,  and  sacrifices  at  funerals — Destruction  of  property  at
funerals — Opposition  of  religion  to  science — Negative  opposition,  the
priesthood — Divorce  of  man  fiom  nature — Asceticism — Self-torture —
Positive,  or  direct,  opposition — Religion  and  progress — The  conflict
between  religion  and  science — Conclusion :  Method  of  human  progress
and  means  of  accelerating  it 158

CHAPTER  XL
ACTION,

DIRECT   MEANS   TO   PROGRESS,    OR   SECOND    PROXIMATE    END    OF   CONATION.

General  relations  of  action  to  progress — Classification  of  actions — Invol-
untary actions — Automatic  actions — Compulsory  actions — ^Voluntary
actions — Nature  of  the  will  and  the  moral  sentiment — Impulsive  ac-
tions— Inconsistency  of  the  moral  code  in  condemning  and  commend-
ing certain  emotions — Love — Anger — Ambition — Avarice — Impulsive
actions  possessing  moral  quality — Impulsive  actions  devoid  of  moral
quality — Philosophy  of  habit — Deliberative  actions — Deliberative  ac-
tions possessing  moral  quality — Nature  of  the  conscience — Virtue  and
vice  —  Responsibility — Crime — Normal  deliberative  actions  —  Supra-
normal,  or  altruistic,  deliberative  actions — Deliberative  actions  devoid
of  moral  quality — Dynamic  actions — Man's  dominion  over  nature —
Examples  of  the  application  of  the  indirect  method  of  conation —
Knowing,  knowing  how,  and  doing — Individual  and  social  dynamic  /
actions       .......•••••  308

CHAPTER    Xn.
OPINION.

DIRECT    MEANS   TO   PROGRESSIVE    ACTION,    OR    THIRD    PROXIMATE    KND   OF   CONATION.

The  psychology  of  ideas — Correctness  of  opinions — The  notion  that  har-
mony of  opinion  is  a  desirable  end  in  itself — The  opposite  idea  that  it
is  something  to  be  apprehended — Differences  of  opinion  usually  un-
necessary— Subjective  barriers  to  the  acceptance  of  truth — Settlement
of  opinion  in  the  individual— Ambiguity  and  varying  definitions  of  the
term  "  belief  " — Beliefs  and  opinions  depend  on  the  evidence  presented,
regardless  of  its  legitimacy — Tests  of  certainty — Nature  of  truth —
Verification — Settlement  of  opinion  in  society — Subject-matter  of  opin-
ions—  Origin  of  opinions — Fruitless  attempts  to  coerce  opinions —
Principal  sources  of  error — Subjective  influences — Ante-natal  influ-
ences— Post-natal  influences — Quantity  distinguished  from  quality  of
opinions,  or  ideas  —  Objective  influences  —  Theory  of  experience —
Opinions  and  ideas  the  result  of  experiences,  and  will  correspond  to

yi  CONTENTS.

them  in  importance — Artificial  determination  of  opinions — Ethical
and  dynamic  opinions  —  Ethical  opinions  —  Confusion  of  morals  with
religion — The  Hebrew  decalogue,  in  how  far  moral  and  in  how  far
reli^ous — The  idea  of  advantage  considered  as  underlying  the  ethical
system — Scope  of  the  advantage — ^Reliability  of  the  judgment — Causes
of  the  variability  of  ethical  opinions — Varying  powers  of  moral  dis-
cernment— Confounding  religion  with  morality — Confounding  custom
with  morahty — Dynamic  opinions  —  Cosmological  ideas  —  Biological
ideas — Anthropological  ideas — Sociological  ideas — Conclusion     .        .  400

CHAPTER  XIII.
KNOWLEDGE.

IMMEDIATE    DATA    OF   IDEAS,   OR    FOURTH    PROXIMATE    END   OF   CONATION.

The  data  of  thought — Composite  character  of  intelligence — Two  influential
popular  errors — Dangers  of  pure  intellectual  activity — Relative  claims
of  intellect  and  knowledge  upon  culture — Explanation  of  the  fact  that
the  capacity  for  knowledge  has  always  exceeded  its  amount — Relative
ease  with  which  intellect  and  knowledge  may  be  increased — The  two
legitimate  modes  of  increasing  intellect — Chasm  between  the  knowl-
edge extant  and  that  possessed  by  the  average  mind — Risume  of  the
preceding  considerations — Experience  as  the  vehicle  of  knowledge —
Laws  of  the  mind  in  arriving  at  certainty — Aid  rendered  to  intellect
by  knowledge — Qualitative  increase  of  knowledge — What  knowledge
is  most  important — Gcnerahty  as  a  test  of  importance — Practicality
as  a  test  of  importance — Scientific  and  unscientific  knowledge — Co-
ordination of  the  present  with  the  two  preceding  chapters — Ethical
knowledge — Dynamic  knowledge — Principles  of  certitude — Limits  of
absolute  certainty — Doctrine  of  innate  ideas,  or  necessary  truths —
Deductive  and  inductive  knowledge — The  senses  as  the  primary  source
of  all  knowledge — Testimony  as  a  mode  of  diminishing  the  degi-ee  of
certainty — Nature  of  scientific  knowledge — Distribution  of  knowledge
— Legitimate  effect  of  the  existing  inequality  in  the  distribution  of
knowledge 470

CHAPTER   XIV.
EDUCATION.

DIRECT   MEANS   TO    KNOWLEDGE  ;   FIFTH   AND   LAST   PROXIMATE    END,    AND    INITIAL
MEANS   TO   THE   ULTIMATE   END    OF   CONATION.

Education  the  highest  application  of  the  indirect  method  of  conation — At-
tainment of  ends  through  means ;  organization  only  possible  through
generalization — Elimination  of  self-executing  processes — Liadequacy

CONTENTS.  vii

of  the  word  "  education  " — Definitions  of  education — The  five  kinds  of
education,  viz.,  of  experience,  of  discipline,  of  culture,  of  research,  and
of  information — Education  of  experience — Education  of  discipline —
Education  of  culture — Education  of  research — Education  of  informa-
tion— Education  a  social  function — Comparative  intelligence  of  the
different  branches  of  government — Legislative  formulas — The  railroad
problem — Tendency  of  the  state  to  enlarge  its  jurisdiction — Government
peculiarly  adapted  for  conducting  scientific  work — Still  better  for  con-
ducting educational  work — Claims  of  state  education — Absurdities  of
private  education — Universal  education — Need  of  educating  the  dan-
gerous and  dependent  classes — Need  of  equalizing  the  amount  of  edu-
cation— Compulsory  education — Limits  to  be  set  to  universal  educa-
tion— Education  of  women — The  matter  of  education — Educational
curriculums — ^Determination  and  utilization  of  special  aptitudes —
Means  of  education — Method  of  education — Conclusion        .        .         .  540

List  of  Principal  Authorities  referred  to 634

Index        .    ' 641

•k

CHAPTER  YIII.
ADAPTATION.

EECIPEOCAL    EELATIONS    OF    MAN   AND   THE   UNIVEESE.

Aim  of  the  chapter — Attitude  of  nature  toward  man — Man  a  part  of  nature —
Man  an  evolved  product  of  nature — Nature  unconscious  and  non-intelli-
gent— Attitude  which  man  should  assume  toward  nature :  1,  that  of  a
student ;  2,  that  of  a  master — The  environment — Fundamental  schism  be-
tween the  various  schools  of  thought — The  philosophy  of  Kant — Teleolog-
ical,  dualistic,  and  genetic  modes  of  thought — Divine  free-will — Predesti-
nation— Fatalism — Necessitarianism — Doctrine  of  depravity — Optimism —
Cases  in  support  of  optimism — Cases  opposed  to  optimism — Unconscious
and  non-intelligent  character  of  the  universe — Intelligence  a  product  of
evolution — Classification  of  phenomena — Genetic  phenomena — Teleological
phenomena — Methods  of  conation — The  direct  method  of  conation — The
indirect  method  of  conation — Classification  into  natural  and  artificial —
Recapitulation — Tabular  exhibit — Statement  of  the  argument— Definitions
— Theorems  of  dynamic  sociology.

In  the  introductory  chapter  of  this  work  the  eminently
practical  character  of  the  science  of  Dynamic  Sociology  was
carefully  set  forth.  The  four  chapters  of  the  first  volume
preceding  the  last  one,  dealing  as  they  did  with  the  funda-
mental data  upon  which  all  true  philosophy  must  rest,  were
necessarily  somewhat  abstruse,  and  bore  only  an  indirect  re-
lation to  the  main  purpose  of  the  work.  The  closing  chap-
ter of  that  volume,  though  fairly  entering  upon  the  field  of
social  science,  was  purposely  confined  to  the  statical  and  pas-
sively dynamical  conditions,  which  it  was  necessary  to  com-
prehend thoroughly  before  the  more  important  but  less  un-
derstood problems  of  active  social  dynamics,  or  applied  social
science,  could  be  intelligibly  stated  and  logically  discussed
(vol.  i,  p.  56).

2  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

And  now  the  reader's  indulgence  is  asked  while  still
another  preliminary  chapter  is  presented,  which  also  seems
essential  to  a  complete  preparation  for  the  intelligent  compre-
hension of  all  the  terms  and  postulates  in  the  final  argument.

Before  we  are  fully  prepared  to  consider,  in  all  its  length
and  breadth,  the  important  proposition  that  society  can  and
should  seriously  undertake  the  artificial  improvement  of  its
condition  upon  scientific  principles  strictly  analogous  to
those  by  which  the  rude  conditions  of  nature  have  been  im-
proved upon  in  the  process  which  we  call  civilization ;  be-
fore we  are  wholly  ready  to  enter  upon  an  argument  to
prove  the  feasibility,  the  desirability,  and  the  right  of  so-
ciety, as  such,  to  adopt  an  aggressive  reform  policy  guided
entirely  by  scientific  foresight  rendered  possible  by  an  in-
telligent acquaintance  with  the  fundamental  laws  of  human
action ;  before  we  can  justly  contemplate  man  in  his  social
corporate  capacity  assuming  the  attitude  of  a  teleological
agent  and  adopting  measures  in  the  nature  of  final  causes
for  the  production  of  remote  beneficial  effects — before  we
can  properly  rise  to  this  position,  it  seems  necessary  that  we
should  first  seek  to  obtain  as  just  and  true  a  conception  as
the  human  mind  is  capable  of  grasping,  of  the  real  and  pre-
cise relations  which  man  and  nature  mutually  sustain  to  each
other.

This  general  complex  problem  naturally  resolves  itself
into  two  more  special  and  simple  problems.     These  are:

First.  What  is  the  attitude  which  nature  assumes  to-
ward man  ?  and —

Second.  "What  is  the  attitude  which  man  should  assume
toward  nature?

These  are  the  fundamental  questions,  upon  the  answers
to  which  all  human  conduct,  other  than  that  prompted  by
mere  impulse,  depends.  They  are  therefore  the  questions
which  society  must  carefully  consider  and  correctly  answer
before  it  can  hope  successfully  to  cope  with  the  obstacles  to
its  self-directed  progress.

ATTITUDE  OF  NATURE  TOWARD  MAN.  3

"We  will  consider  these  questions  in  the  order  in  which
they  have  been  stated.

First,  then,  what  is  the  attitude  of  nature  toward  man  ?

Scattered  throughout  the  preceding  chapters  of  this  work,
the  reader  has  doubtless  found  numerous  hints  at  the  general
conclusions  toward  which  the  ever-widening  facts  of  science
have  tended  constantly  to  converge.  A  brief  summary  of
the  chief  divisions  of  this  general  conclusion  may  be  fitly
introduced  before  entering  into  their  more  general  con-
sideration in  connection  with  the  erroneous  views  which
have  been  held  in  opposition  to  them.

In  the  first  place,  nature  stands  to  man  in  the  relation  of
the  whole  to  a  part.  Man  is  an  integral  part  of  the  universe,
and,  in  order  to  be  correctly  conceived  and  properly  studied,
he  must  be  conceived  and  studied  as  an  objective  phenome-
non presented  by  nature,  "  Der  Mensch  ist  selbst  Er&chei-
nungP  *  Neither  the  animal  and  vegetable  forms,  nor  the
rock  formations,  nor  the  chemical  elements,  are  more  to  be
regarded  as  natural  objects  for  scientific  study  than  are  in-
dividual men  or  human  societies.  The  laws  governing  the
migrations  of  birds,  or  the  geographical  distribution  of
plants,  or  the  movement  of  storms,  or  the  elective  afiinities
of  chemicals,  are  not  more  the  legitimate  subjects  of  scien-
tific investigation  than  are  the  individual  or  collective  ac-
tions of  men  or  the  changes  that  take  place  in  human
opinions  and  public  sentiment.  From  the  scientific  point  of
view,  all  phenomena  are  equally  legitimate  objects  of  study.

In  the  second  place,  nature  presents  the  relation  of  pro-
genitor of  man.  Man  is  not  only  a  part  of  nature  as  a
whole,  but  nature  antedated  him  and  has  produced  him.
This,  however,  is  true  only  in  the  sense  that  it  is  true  of
every  other  part  of  nature,  every  other  object  in  the  uni-
verse. Every  animal,  tree,  rock,  metal,  or  gas  that  is  known
is  in  precisely  the  same  manner  a  product  of  nature.  Time
was  when  it  had  no  existence  as  such  an  object,  and,  in  the

*  Kant,  "Kritik  der  reinen  Vemunft,"  S.  382.

4  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

course  of  the  eternity  of  changes  which  have  been  going  on
in  matter,  it  has  here  and  now  assumed  its  present  shape
and  character.  Man  is  simplv  one  of  these  many  products.
He,  too,  has  been  slowly  evolved  out  of  materials  which
have  indeed  always  existed,  but  have  but  very  recently  as-
sumed this  form.  The  particular  form,  character,  structure,
and  attributes  which  belong  to  the  creature  denominated
man  are  such  as  they  are  in  virtue  of  an  inexorable  necessity
involved  in  the  nature  of  things ;  they  are  the  result  of  the
interaction  of  coincident  forces,  the  activities  of  molecular
aggregates,  possessing  just  such  degrees  and  kinds  of  aggre-
gation, and  thrown  into  just  such  relations  to  one  another
as  were  adapted  to  the  development  of  just  such  a  being.
The  necessity  of  his  existence  is,  therefore,  just  equal  to  the
impossibility  of  his  non-existence.  Both  are  absolute.  Nat-
ure, therefore,  occupies  the  relation  to  man  of  cause  to  effect,
of  antecedent  to  consequent.  But  the  process  o^  causation
is  of  the  strictly  mechanical  kind.  He  is  the  product  of  an
infinite  series  of  infinitesimal  impacts  in  one  general  direc-
tion. He  has,  as  it  were,  been  gradually  pushed  into  exist-
ence by  a  storm  of  pelting  atoms  continued  through  mill-
ions of  years.  Forces,  as  thus  defined — and  this  is  the  only
rational  theory  of  force  (vol.  i,  p.  290) — have  surrounded
the  elements  out  of  which  he  was  created  on  that  spot,
wherever  it  may  have  been,  which  was  the  true  cradle  of
the  race,  and  molded  him  into  human  shape  after  having
first  compelled  him  to  assume  for  ages  successively  the
shapes  of  a  long  line  of  ancestral  animal  types.  The  same
forces  have  impelled  him  on  through  advancing  grades  of
physical  and  mental  development  to  his  present  condition.
If  he  tended  to  swerve  to  the  right  or  left,  these  forces  sus-
tained the  wayward  tendency  by  increase  of  power  on  the
faltering  side.  Tendencies  to  abort,  revert,  or  retrograde,
were  counteracted  by  persistent  impulses,  so  that,  in  most
parts  of  the  great  spreading  tree  which  the  human  families
present,  the  tendencies  have  been  steadily,  though  slowly,

ATTITUDE  OF  NATURE  TOWARD  MAN.  5

forward  in  the  scale  of  organization.  But  so,  too,  must  we
regard  the  small  progress  made  by  man,  particularly  by  some
of  the  ramifications,  as  due  to  counter,  or  opposing,  forces,
and  the  real  progress  achieved  as  representing  only  the  re-
sultant of  all  the  classes  of  forces  which  have  constantly
affected  his  condition.

In  the  third  and  last  place,  nature  must  be  regarded  as
unconscious.  Throughout  all  the  changes  which  have  re-
sulted in  the  evolution  of  man,  the  process  has  been  purely
automatic,  ^o  thought,  no  ideas,  no  plan,  no  purpose  has
entered  into  the  great  cosmic  movement.  As  the  winds
blindly  obey  the  physical  laws  of  the  earth's  especial  charac-
ter, due  to  its  motions,  its  proximity  to  the  sun,  its  orbital  in-
clination, and  its  methodless  land  and  water  distribution  ;  as
the  clouds  gather,  break,  and  pour  their  contents  back  upon
the  earth,  and  then  vanish  or  go  flying  across  the  sky,  im-
pelled by  wild,  senseless,  and  reckless  forces  ;  as  the  cataract
plunges  and  the  volcano  belches  in  obedience  to  stern  phys-
ical impulses  to  which  no  one  thinks,  except  metaphorically,
of  attributing  motive  or  intelligence — so  all  the  great  secular
processes  of  nature,  including  the  development  of  organic
forms  and  of  man,  have  been  impelled  by  blind  and  mindless
energies  guided  by  no  intelligence  or  conscious  power  either
from  within  or  from  without.  The  inherent  motions  of  the
ultimate  atoms  of  primordial  matter,  as  eternal,  unereatable,
and  indestructible  as  those  atoms  themselves,  must  be  re-
garded as  the  all-sufficient  cause  of  all  the  results  we  see,
however  complex  and  wonderful  we  may  consider  those  re-
sults to  be.  But  really  there  is  no  occasion  for  wonder.
The  first  step  in  primordial  aggregation  (vol.  i,  p.  232)  is  the
only  fact  that  need  draw  upon  our  imagination.  Granted
that  material  units  tend  to  cohere  into  units  of  higher
orders — a  fact  of  common  observation  in  all  the  established
sciences — and  the  evolution  of  a  man  is  no  more  remarkable
than  the  evolution  of  a  metal  or  a  crystal.  In  the  history  of
the  universe  there  are  no  time-limits.     A  process  once  set

6  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

up  in  a  given  direction  may  reach  all  the  degrees  that  can
be  embraced  in  a  finite  series :  it  may  be  overslaughed
at  its  inception  by  counter-tendencies,  it  may  continue  for
an  unlimited  period  at  a  uniform  rate,  or  it  may  go  on  in-
creasing in  an  arithmetical  or  a  geometrical  progression  for
a  vast  but  finite  period  and  eventually  equilibrate  itself.
The  fundamental  principles  of  Evolution  as  formulated  by
Spencer  require  that  all  processes  shall  in  fact  reach  a  limit
and  be  followed  by  a  reversal  of  the  activities  which  they
have  manifested.  But  to  finite  beings  this  great  cycle,  or
the  ascending  series  of  any  cosmical  process,  may  as  easily
be  so  prolonged  in  time  as  to  be  practically  infinite  in
duration  as  to  be  reduced  to  the  mere  span  which  can  be
watched  by  the  human  eye.  The  process  which  has  evolved
the  solar  system,  or  the  sidereal  system  of  which  it  forms
a  part,  has  lasted  no  longer,  relatively  to  absolute  eter-
nity of  time,  than  has  that  which  measures  the  birth,  life-
time, and  death  of  an  infusorium  as  it  takes  place  under  the
continuous  gaze  of  the  microscopist.  Neither,  if  measured
by  this  standard,  is  the  degree  of  organization  of  a  Newton
greater  than  that  of  a  vibrio.  There  are  some  who  smile  at
the  mention  of  such  sweeping  comparisons  ;  but  the  human
mind  must  learn  to  accustom  itself  to  contemplate  nature  in
its  true  relations  and  magnitude,  and  the  human  race  can
never  rise  to  a  just  conception  of  nature  or  of  the  reciprocal
relations  of  man  and  nature  until  the  notion  of  infinitude,
both  in  time  and  space  as  well  as  in  power,  has  been  defi-
nitely formed.  It  is  narrow,  finite,  anthropomorphic  con-
ceptions of  the  universe  which  have  dwarfed  the  labors  of
otherwise  great  minds  and  kept  back  the  truths  which  the
world  now  chiefly  values,  and  it  is  due  to  the  enlargement
of  men's  views  respecting  the  vastness  of  nature's  periods
and  spaces  that  all  true  progress  in  our  acquaintance  with
the  universe  has  been  achieved.

The  two  categories  of  time  and  space  have  been  at  last
acknowledged  as  admitting  unlimited  series  of  relations  of

ATTITUDE   OF  NATURE  TOWARD  MAN.  7

succession  and  co-existence ;  *  but  tlie  category  of  causation
is  as  yet  restricted  to  finite  series  of  plienomena.  This,  too,
must  be  enlarged  and  the  truth  recognized  that  forces  have
been  at  work  from  all  eternity,  and  that  processes  of  vast
duration  have  been  required  to  produce  the  effects  which  we
behold  around  us.  A  series  of  changes  in  the  direction  of
organization  may  as  easily  be  conceived  to  extend  through
millions  of  centuries  as  through  a  few  thousand  years,  and
such  a  conception  clears  away  at  once  that  thaumaturgic
character  which  such  phenomena  usually  present.  Nil  ad-
inirari.  Amazement  at  the  lofty  reaches  of  natural  proc-
esses belongs  to  the  infantile  stage  of  the  human  mind.
The  enlightened  intellect  may  contemplate  with  a  serene
satisfaction  of  the  highest  order  the  relatively  vast  operations
and  achievements  of  physical  law,  and  this  is  the  final  and
purified  form  of  what  is  called  the  religious  sentiment  in
man ;  but  to  lose  one's  self  in  wonder  and  awe  is  only  to
confess  ignorance  and  refuse  instruction.f

Neither  is  there  more  need  to  assume  an  external  con-
scious and  intelligent  guiding  power  in  biology  and  anthro-
pology than  Laplace  %  found  in  astronomy.  The  directive
law  is  that  of  adaptation.  It  is  surprising  to  see  how  difficult
it  seems  to  be  for  the  human  mind  to  grasp  this  conception
in  its  entirety.  "When  Du  Bois-Reyraond  defends  the  expla-
nation of  Galiani,  who  illustrated  the  apparent  harmony  in
nature  by  the  example  of  the  loaded  dice,  he  evinces  a  total
inability  to  comprehend  the  fundamental  notion  of  natural
adaptation.     What  better  is  the  theory  of  the  loaded  dice

*  "  In  the  economy  of  the  world  I  can  find  no  traces  of  a  beginning,  no
prospect  of  an  end." — Hutton.

\  Auguste  Comte,  "  Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  iii,  p.  321.

\  It  is  related  that,  when  asked  how  he  could  have  written  so  great  a  work
as  the  "  Mecanique  Celeste  "  on  the  subject  of  the  system  of  the  universe  with-
out once  mentioning  its  Author,  he  replied:  "Je  n'avais  pas  besoin  de  cette
hypoth&se-l^."  (M.  Edm.  Perrier  quotes  Laplace  as  follows:  "Dieu  est  une
hypoth^se  dont  la  science  n'a  que  faire." — "Revue  Scientifique,"  22  mars,
1879,  p.  891.)

8  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

than  the  doctrine  of  external  teleologieal  design  ?  How
came  the  dice  loaded  ?  "Who  loaded  them  ?  If  not  a  per-
sonal deity  existing  outside  of  nature  and  antedating  it,  then
what  other  agent  can  be  named  ?  Clearly  this  is  no  new  ex-
planation, but  only  the  old  one  with  a  somewhat  novel  illus-
tration. How,  then,  is  the  harmony  we  see  to  be  accounted
for  ?  We  shall  presently  see  reason  to  believe  that  the  de-
gree of  adaptation  in  the  world  is  far  less  than  is  popularly
supposed,  but  it  nevertheless  exists  in  an  obvious  way.  Yet
it  is  effectually  accounted  for  by  the  not  at  all  circular  prop-
osition that  things  are  adapted  because  they  have  adapted
themselves.  What  we  see  exists  of  necessity.  It  might
have  been  other  than  it  is,  had  the  conditions  been  other
than  they  were.  The  conditions  being  what  they  were,  the
results  could  be  no  other  than  they  are.  A  certain  degree
of  adaptation  is  necessary  to  the  existence  of  a  form  ;  there-
fore, for  forms  to  exist  at  all,  they  must  be  to  a  certain  ex-
tent adapted.  If  those  forms  that  now  exist  had  not  existed,
others  would  have  existed.  These,  like  the  present  ones,
would  also  have  been  adapted.  They  would  have  stood  the
same  chance  to  be  higher  as  to  be  lower  forms.  We  have  as
much  reason  to  wonder  that  we  do  not  see  higher  forms
as  that  we  see  forms  as  high  as  those  actually  existing.
Were  men  not  sufficiently  adapted  to  their  surroundings,
they  would  not  exist  to  contemplate  the  want  of  adaptation.
If  animals  and  plants  were  not  similarly  adapted,  they  would
likewise  be  wanting.  Therefore,  instead  of  wondering  at
the  degree  of  adaptation  displayed,  the  only  true  object  of
wonder  would  be  the  existence  of  wholly  una.da.pted  forms.
But  these  are  never  seen,  because  they  can  not  exist.  In
nature  there  are  none  but  loaded  dice.  This  is  no  chance
world.  It  is  a  world  of  law,  of  mechanical  causation,  of  ne-
cessity. The  example  of  the  dice  is  a  poor  one.  In  only
one  sense  can  it  be  made  to  apply.  If  we  assume  the  num-
ber of  dice  thrown  to  be  unlimited,  only  a  small  percentage
of  which  are  loaded,  and  all  that  are  not  thus  loaded  to  be

ATTITUDE  OF  NATURE  TOWARD  MAN.  9

lost,  a  crude  conception  of  nature's  process  mav  be  formed.
But  there  is  no  distinction  between  the  dice  and  the  play-
ers. One  set  of  dice  is  the  causal  antecedent  of  a  new  set,
from  which,  as  from  the  parent  set,  only  the  loaded  ones  are
selected  and  the  rest  lost.  But,  still,  the  analogy  is  forced
and  awkward.

As  will  be  more  fully  shown  toward  the  close  of  this
chapter  (infra^  p.  81),  nature's  processes  are  not  teleologic
but  genetic.  The  cause  not  only  always  precedes  the  effect,
but  it  immediately  precedes  it.  The  effect  is  in  immediate
proximity  to  the  cause.  The  changes  take  place  by  differ-
entials, and  all  advance  is  through  differentiation.  Differen-
tiation is  distinguished  from  variation  in  that  the  changes
are  necessarily  produced  by  means  of  differences  too  minute
to  be  severally  taken  account  of.  It  is  a  molecular  process.
The  motion  of  one  molecule  is  directly  imparted  to  others.
The  single  effect  is  imperceptible ;  but  multiplication  and
repetition,  number  and  time,  accomplish  the  results  ob-
served. An  initial  motion  inhering  in  the  primary  form  of
matter  *  is  therefore  the  sole  source  of  aU  causation  and  the
true  "  first  cause."

The  wholly  unconscious  and  unintelligent  character  of
nature's  processes  may  be  safely  concluded  from  their  ge-
netic stamp.  Intelligence  works  quite  otherwise.  The  in-
separable characteristic  of  conscious  action  is  that  it  is  tele-
ological.  Cause  and  effect  are  remote  from  each  other.
Means  are  adapted  to  distant  ends.  The  chain  of  causal
impulses  connecting  antecedents  with  consequents  is  not
direct.  The  advantages  are  proportioned  to  the  interval.
The  more  remote  the  effect  from  the  cause,  the  greater  may

*  This  explanation  of  the  universe,  although  substantially  that  of  Epicurus,
Democritus,  and  Lucretius,  has  thus  far  failed  to  receive  an  appropriate  name.
That  of  the  "  atomic  theory,"  never  adequate  to  the  full  conception,  has  now
been  transferred  to  the  chemical  law  of  proportions.  The  idea  of  matter  in
motion,  which  embraces  the  totality  of  the  conception,  would  be  well  expressed
by  the  word  hylokinesis  (vKoKlvritris),  and  this  mode  of  viewing  phenomena  could
then  be  referred  to  as  the  hylokinetic  theory.    (See  vol.  i,  p.  221.)

10  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

the  disproportion  be  made  between  the  cause  and  the  eflfeet.
Such  causes  are  called  "  final  causes,"  and  the  same  amount
of  energy  expended  in  them  may  be  made  to  multiply  the
effect  to  almost  any  required  degree.  ligature  never  employs
the  "  final  cause  "  but  only  the  "  efficient  cause."  But  the
tendency  to  organization  which  has  existed  on  this  planet
for  a  vast  period,  in  connection  with  the  increasing  adapta-
tion of  the  conditions  now  found  upon  its  surface  from  the
time  when  it  assumed  a  cooled  exterior  to  the  present  time,
has  gradually  evolved  a  class  of  forms  called  animals,  in
which  the  remarkable  quality  denominated  consciousness
(vol.  i,  pp.  366,  376)  is  manifested.  This  quality  exhibits
all  conceivable  degrees,  from  that  seen  in  the  monad  to  that
found  in  enlightened  man,  and  throughout  this  series  the
capacity  for  teleological  action  has  steadily  and  uniformly
kept  pace  with  the  degree  of  intelligence.  We  are  there-
fore forced  to  conclude  that  consciousness  and  intelligence
are  products  of  organization  ;  that  organized  beings  are,  as  it
were,  devices  for  the  concentration  and  intensification  of
molecular  activities  (vol.  i,  pp.  324,  354) ;  and  that  mind  and
thought  are  among  the  necessary  products  of  such  concen-
trated and  intensified  activities — the  properties  of  matter
thus  organized.  The  "soul  of  truth,"  therefore,  in  the  be-
lief that  the  universe  possesses  consciousness,  intelligence,
and  mind,  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  primary  activities  of
diffused  matter — activities  which  are  never  divorced  from
it — constitute  the  sole  element  out  of  which,  by  simple  fo-
calization,  these  qualities  are  produced.  But  the  thought
must  be  dismissed  and  wholly  abandoned  that  in  their  dif-
fused unorganized  state  these  activities  actually  constitute
intelligence.  As  well  proceed  upon  the  assumption  that
"  grass "  is  really  "  flesh,"  because  it  is  known  to  be  con-
vertible into  it  by  a  given  process.  The  essential  condition
is  that  process,  and  without  it  there  is  no  result.  Mind  is
found  only  at  the  end  of  the  series,  and  not  at  the  beginning.
It  is  the  distinctive  attribute  of  the  creature,  and  not  of  the

ATTITUDE  OF  MAN  TOWARD  NATURE.  H

creator.  It  resides  in  man,  and  not  in  nature.  Unless  this
truth  is  recognized,  the  true  attitude  of  nature  toward  man
can  never  be  correctly  understood.

We  may  now,  with  equal  brevity,  consider  the  second
division  of  the  general  problem  of  the  mutual  relations  of
man  and  nature,  viz. :

What  is  the  attitude  whicli  man  should  assume  toward
nature  ?

Without  specializing  in  this  place,  it  will  suffice  to  say
that  this  attitude  should  be  of  a  twofold  character :  first,  that
of  a  student ;  and,  second,  that  of  a  master.

Man  finds  himself  an  integral  part  of  this  great  uncon-
scious creative  whole  called  nature,  only  a  minute  fraction
of  which  can  by  any  possible  means  be  brought  within  the
range  of  his  experience.  Although  it  consists  chiefly  of
large  masses,  yet  in  fact  these  masses  are  composed  of  mole-
cules so  minute  that  no  magnifying  power  can  probably  ever
render  the  largest  of  them  visible.  It  is  this  fact  chiefly
which  gives  rise  to  so  many  fundamental  errors  in  primitive
human  judgments.  One  of  the  most  powerful  agents  on
the  earth's  surface,  and  at  the  same  time  one  of  the  most
important  and  interesting  objects  with  which  men  have  al-
ways and  every-where  been  compelled  to  come  in  contact,  is
an  invisible  gas,  the  earth's  atmosphere  (vol.  i,  p.  48),  whose
existence  as  a  real  substance  was  scarcely  suspected  until
chemistry  had  become  a  science.  It  is  easy  to  imagine  what
a  fruitful  source  of  error  such  an  object  must  be  to  an  igno-
rant world.  But  this  is  only  a  single  example.  Others  less
apparent,  but  productive  of  far  more  injurious  illusions,  sur-
rounded the  primitive  man  on  every  hand.  A  few  of  the
great  delusions  under  which  the  race  has  labored,  and  still
labors,  were  pointed  out  in  the  Intkoduction  (vol.  i,  pp.  45-
52).  The  evils  entailed  by  this  necessary  ignorance  of  his
surroundings  are  incalculable.  Indeed,  the  greater  part  of  all
suffering  is  the  result,  direct  or  remote,  of  such  ignorance.
Obviously,  therefore,  the  first  great  duty  of  man  is  to  ac-

12  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVEKSE.

quaint  himself  with  his  environment.  This  can  only  be
done  by  study.  The  phenomena  that  lie  on  the  surface  are
of  little  value.  They  mislead  at  every  turn.  Not  only  must
the  deep-lying  facts,  difficult  of  access,  be  sought  out  with
great  labor  and  perseverance,  but  they  must  be  co-ordinated
into  laws  capable  of  affording  safe  and  reliable  guides  to
human  operations.  To  do  this  requires  a  vast  amount  of
patient  study.  Only  a  little  has  yet  been  revealed  of  the
more  important  truths  of  nature,  yet  consider  the  amount
of  research  which  it  has  required !  Nevertheless,  only  a  few
individuals  have  contributed  any  thing  at  all  to  the  result.  It
is  as  yet  only  the  simpler  and  more  obvious  relations  between
man  and  nature  that  have  been  determined.  In  the  domain
of  physical  forces  and  chemical  substances  he  is  able  to  exer-
cise prevision  in  many  ways  to  secure  advantages  and  avert
evils,  but  in  most  of  the  higher  fields  of  vital,  mental,  moral,
and  social  phenomena,  these  relations  are  either  utterly  ig-
nored or  but  dimly  suspected,  so  that  his  knowledge  of  them
avails  him  nothing.  The  great  work  before  him,  therefore,
still  is  study.

In  his  pursuit  of  information  with  regard  to  the  nature
of  the  universe  and  his  position  in  it,  he  must  be  deterred
by  no  fears.  If  he  can  evade  the  action  of  natural  laws,  he
has  no  other  source  of  apprehension.  Nature  has  neither
feeling  nor  will,  neither  consciousness  nor  intelligence.  lie
can  lay  open  her  bowels  and  study  her  most  delicate  tissues
with  entire  impunity.  Except  as  the  great  creative  mother
of  all  things,  she  is  absolutely  passive  toward  all  sentient
beings.  Man's  right  to  probe  and  penetrate  the  deepest
secrets  of  the  universe  is  absolute  and  unchallenged.  It  ia
only  he  himself  who  has  ev^r  ventured  to  question  it.  His
active  brain,  filled  with  a  thousand  other  delusions  and  im-
aginings, has  fancied  gods  and  demons  outside  of  nature
)  forbidding  him  to  prosecute  his  studies.  But  none  of  these
have  ever  presented  themselves  except  in  imagination  to  the
student   of   nature,   demanding  that  he  desist.     Errors  of

ATTITUDE   OF  MAN  TOWARD  NATURE.  13

this  kind,  however,  coupled  with  a  general  aversion  to  the
laborious  methods  of  such  study,  and  a  total  misconcep-
tion of  what  constitutes  true  knowledge,  have  prevented  the
race  from  making  the  degree  of  progress  in  determining
its  relations  to  the  universe  wliich  its  brain-development
and  its  mental  activities  prove  that  it  might  have  made
under  a  wiser  directive  influence.  Even  Lord  Bacon,*  in  a
modified  way,  reflects  the  ancient  superstition  of  man's  sub-
serviency to  Nature.  He  should  indeed  be  the  interpreter
("  interpres "),  but  in  no  proper  sense  the  servant  ("  minis-
ter "),  of  Nature,  and  the  only  way  in  which  we  can  correctly
interpret  his  frequent  remark  that  Nature  can  only  be  con-
quered by  obeying  her,t  is  to  make  this  obedience  equivalent
to  an  acquaintance  with  and  recognition  of  her  laws.  He
has  been  the  servant  of  Nature  too  long.  All  true  progress
has  been  measured  by  his  growing  mastery  over  her,  which
has  in  turn  been  strictly  proportional  to  his  knowledge  of
her  truths.

This  is  why,  in  the  second  place,  man  should  assume
toward  Nature  the  attitude  of  a  master,  or  ruler.  By  this  is
of  course  meant  an  effort  to  exercise  over  all  natural  forces
and  phenomena  a  degree  of  direction  and  control  sufficient
to  protect  himself  from  injury,  and  procure  for  himself  all
the  benefits  which  tliey  are  capable  of  rendering.  These
forces  and  phenomena  are  neither  good  nor  bad.  No  moral
quality  resides  in  them.  Good  and  bad  can  only  be  predi-
cated of  an  intelligent  agent,  and,  as  we  have  seen,  Nature
is  not  such  an  agent.  But,  in  the  uncontrolled  operation  of
natural  laws,  beings  capable  of  feeling  are  liable  to  injury.
In  an  ever-changing  environment,  that  degree  of  correspond-
ence can  never  be  reached  in  which  no  friction  can  occur.
It  is  this  perpetual  conflict  of  every  species  with  its  adverse
surroundings,  this  grinding  at  the  outer  boundaries  of  its

•

*  "Novum  Organum,"  lib.  i,  aph,  i.

f  "  Neque  natura  aliter  quam  parendo  vinc;tur."     "  Dist.  Op."     "  Works,"
Tol.  i,  p.  227  ;  also,  "  Nov.  Org.,"  lib.  i,  aph.  iii.    Cf.  aph.  cxxix  ("  Works,"  p.  337).

14  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

sphere  of  activity,  which  constantly  keeps  its  numbers  down
to  moderate  limits  and  its  members  restricted  to  definite  geo-
graphical areas.  When  we  compute  the  power  of  multiplica-
tion of  any  species,  even  the  least  prolific,  and  compare  this
with  the  actual  number  capable  of  surviving  and  really  extant,
we  are  helped  to  realize  the  potency  of  this  influence  as  per-
petually exerted  by  an  adverse  environment.  The  degree
of  adaptation  is  not  so  perfect  but  that  for  every  one  that
survives  from  ten  to  ten  million  are  destroyed.  In  man  this
ratio  is  less  than  in  any  other  animal,  and  it  is  this  which
has  enabled  him,  to  so  much  greater  an  extent  than  any  other
animal,  to  increase  his  numbers  and  expand  his  territorial
limits.  This  has  been  due  to  his  superior  sagacity  and
cunning,  to  his  intelligence,  which  in  turn  has  given  rise  to
society,  to  government,  and  to  other  protective  institutions.
Altruistic  morality  in  its  incipient  form  arises  as  soon  as
intelligence  begins  to  counteract  the  natural  influences
which  restrict  population.  One  of  the  secrets  of  the  success
of  the  human  race  in  peopling  the  entire  globe  has  been
this  moral  sense  which  protects  others  where  natural  laws
would  destroy  them.  Government,  which  has  this  extra-
natural  protection  for  its  object,  had  its  rise  in  this  altruistic
sentiment,  though  in  a  very  undeveloped  form  of  it — a  sort
of  egoistic  altruism,  protecting  others  for  the  benefit  of  self.
But  even  this  first  and  perhaps  greatest  step  taken  by  the
race  must  be  attributed  to  an  increased  acquaintance  with  its
relations  to  the  world  around  it.  This  knowledge  was  of  an
empirical  kind,  but  it  served  its  purpose.  All  the  truly
sociological  progress  thus  far  made  has  been  based  on  em-
pirical knowledge.  It  has  sufiiced  to  place  man  where  we
find  him,  which  is  a  truly  grand  result.  It  must,  however,
teach  us  the  important  lesson  that  nature  is  really  easily  con-
trolled. A  very  little  acquaintance  with  natural  laws  is
sufficient  to  enable  us  to  achieve  •stupendous  eflPects.  But
the  future  of  the  human  race  must  not  be  too  confidently
inferred  from  the  past.     The  difficulties  increase  at  a  much

ATTITUDE  OF  MAN  TOWARD  NATURE.  15

greater  rate  tlian  the  density  of  population.  The  complexity
of  civilization  augments  at  a  rate  altogether  out  of  propor-
tion to  the  advance  of  intelligence.  Moreover,  in  the
present  state  of  enlightened  societies,  the  progress  being
made  by  the  elite  of  the  world  in  scientific  discovery  and
mechanical  application  is  far  beyond  the  possible  power  of
the  masses,  under  existing  methods  of  instruction,  to  com-
prehend it.  This  tends  rapidly  to  increase  the  disproportion
and  confusion  in  society,  and  threatens  to  precipitate  the
grand  crisis  which  wise  men  can  not  but  foresee  approach-
ing unless  a  radical  change  is  soon  inaugurated  in  the  social
constitution  of  the  civilized  world.  Science  must  supplant
empiricism,  and  fundamental  knowledge  be  universally  dif-
fused.

The  principal  object  which  man  has  in  the  study  of
nature  is  to  enable  him  to  control  its  forces.  To  only  a  few
minds  is  the  satisfaction  derived  from  the  mere  acquisition
and  consciousness  of  knowledge  an  adequate  incentive.
Doubtless,  this  satisfaction  has  played  a  large  part  in  the
labors  of  the  few  who  have  made  the  scanty  contributions
thus  far  obtained,  and  in  the  individual  worker  it  must  ever
constitute  a  supreme  motive,  while  a  possible  future  is  con-
ceivable, in  which  this,  the  highest  source  of  happiness,  will
also  be  a  universal  and  popular  one,  taking  rank  alongside
of  those  coarser  gratifications  whose  authority  is  now  su-
preme, because  it  is  through  them  that  the  race  is  preserved
and  perpetuated  (vol.  i,  pp.  471,  472,  697).  But,  for  the
present  and  the  immediate  future,  it  must  be  assumed  that
the  primary  end  of  knowledge  is  to  secure  practical  advan-
tage. The  degree  of  correspondence  between  man  and  his
environment,  notwithstanding  his  sagacity  and  intelligence,
his  artful  devices  and  protective  institutions,  is  not  so  great
but  that  a  large  amount  of  friction  constantly  exists.  This
friction  not  only  decimates  his  ranks  and  brings  the  majority
of  mankind  to  premature  death  after  the  manner  of  the
fishes  and  the  hares,  but,  what  should  really  be  regarded  as

16  ADAPTATIOIT.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

worse  (since  tlie  rapid  multiplication  of  individuals  could
not  long  continue  and  would  not  be  economically  desirable),
it  involves  a  vast  amount  of  physical  and  mental  suSering,
and  prevents  that  state  of  universal  well-being  which  should
be  the  highest  aim  of  life.

If  empirical  knowledge  has  sufficed  to  reduce  the  friction
of  an  adverse  environment  to  the  extent  which  separates  the
condition  of  man  so  widely  from  that  of  other  creatures  de-
void of  this  knowledge,  it  is  certainly  logical  to  argue  that
higher  degrees  of  knowledge  will  continue  proportionally  to
widen  this  contrast.  If  it  were  true  that  perfection  in  the
correspondence  had  already  been  attained,  this  reasoning
would  of  course  be  fallacious.  But  we  have  seen  that  such
is  far  from  the  case.  The  amount  of  suffering  in  the  hu-
man family  simply  proves  lack  of  correspondence.  Men
are  still  continually  dashing  blindly  against  the  barriers
which  the  environment  presents  to  their  free  activities.
Empirical  knowledge  has  afforded  them  a  superficial  view  of
the  world  and  their  relations  to  it ;  but  below  lie  hidden
truths,  whose  meager  manifestations  at  the  surface  are  almost
always  wrongly  interpreted,  and  from  which  conclusions
precisely  the  reverse  of  the  truth  are  frequently  drawn.
Actions  based  on  these  conclusions  lead  men  into  innumer-
able pitfalls,  and  entail  anguish  and  suffering  where  imme-
diate destruction  is  escaped.  The  various  ways  in  which
ignorance  of  these  truths  affect  the  race  tend  constantly  to
lessen  the  sura  of  possible  enjoyment  and  to  lower  the  tone
of  human  life.

The  success  achieved  by  man  in  increasing  his  numbers
and  in  widening  his  geographical  range  has  been  the  result  of
a  certain  degree  of  direct  control  which  his  increased  intelli-
gence has  enabled  him  to  exercise  over  the  forces  of  nature
constituting  his  environment.  Whatever  further  progress
he  may  ever  make  in  the  direction  of  increasing  his  liber-
ties, mitigating  his  evils,  and  augmenting  his  capacity  for
happiness,  must  result  from  his  success  in  obtaining  stiU

THE  ENVIRONMENT.  17

more  complete  mastery  over  the  adverse  elements  of  his
natural  surroundings.  A  simple  mechanical  device  is  often
sufficient  to  convert  a  highly  injurious  element  into  a  re-
markably beneficial  one,  and,  by  here  repressing  a  harmful
influence  and  there  creating  a  useful  one,  increasingly  high
degrees  of  correspondence  may  be  attained,  and  more  and
more  perfect  conditions  of  existence  brought  about.

In  the  control  of  nature  as  in  its  study,  there  are  no  arbi-
trary limitations.  The  right  is  always  co-extensive  with  the
power,  and  only  a  false,  unnatural  view  of  the  case  can  erect
any  other  barrier  to  man's  invasion  of  nature's  domain.

Such  are  some  of  the  most  general  relations  subsisting
between  man  and  nature,  without  a  clear  conception  of
which  no  basis  can  exist  for  the  science  of  Dynamic  Soci-
ology.

From  these  general  considerations  we  may  now  pass  to
others  of  a  more  special  character.

Lamarck  seems  to  have  been  the  first  clearly  to  recognize
and  systematically  to  formulate  the  laws  of  the  interdepend-
ence and  mutual  relations  of  living  organisms  and  their  sur-
rounding influences.  The  latter  factor  he  characterizes  in
various  ways  and  denotes  by  several  appropriate  terms.
Geoffrey  Saint-Hilaire  had  used  the  expression  monde  arnbi-
O/ut,  to  which  Lamarck  adds  that  of  milieu*  giving  it  a
wide  sense,  and  often  qualifies  it  as  the  milieu  environnant,\
thus  anticipating  both  Corate's  "  milieu "  \  and  Herbert
Spencer's  admirable  English  equivalent "  environment."  But,
upon  the  whole,  Lamarck  employed  most  frequently,  as  most
completely  conveying  his  idea  in  the  greatest  number  of  cases,
the  simple  word  cir Constances^  and  the  title  of  his  famous
Chapter  VII  of  the  "Philosophic  Zoologique"  is  as  fol-
lows :  "  De  I'influence  des  circonstances  sur  les  actions  et

*  "Philosophie  Zoologique,"  vol.  i,  p.  154.
f  Loc.  cit,  vol.  ii,  pp.  5,  304.
X  "  Philosophie  Positive,"  vol.  ill,  p.  201.
33

18  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

les  habitudes  des  animaux  et  de  celle  des  actions  et  des
habitudes  de  ces  corps  vivants,  comme  causes  qui  modifient
leur  organisation  et  leurs  parties."

Perhaps  no  better  word  could  be  chosen  to  express  the
whole  idea  of  the  various  mutual  actions  and  reactions  tak-
ing place  between  the  universe  and  the  human  race — ^the
macrocosm  and  the  microcosm — each  at  times  both  active
and  passive,  than  this  same  plain  word  of  common  parlance,
circumstances.

All  philosophy  aims  to  account  for  phenomena.  The
human  mind  is  so  constituted  that  no  power  can  prevent
it  from  perpetually  striving  toward  this  end.  All  systems
of  thought  naturally  fall,  in  this  respect,  under  two  gen-
eral divisions,  the  teleological  and  the  genetic.  The  only
system  that  ever  claimed  to  disavow  both  these  bases  is
that  of  Comte,  which  in  this  respect  must  be  regarded  rather
as  a  revolt  against  philosophy  than  as  a  system  of  philosophy.
Under  both  these  general  divisions  there  have  grown  up
numerous  more  special  doctrines,  which  have  each  in  its
turn  formed  nuclei  for  minor  systems,  to  which,  according
to  the  special  mental  proclivities  of  each  individual,  men
have  given  in  their  adhesion.  To  the  teleological  division
properly  belong  the  doctrines  of  pure  theology,  or  divine
free-will,  of  predestination,  and  of  fatalism.  To  this  also
should  be  added  that  modern  dualistic  school  who  hold  that
all  phenomena  are  the  result  of  unvarying  laws  once  arbitra-
rily impressed  upon  the  universe.  This  school,  however,
except  in  so  far  as  the  primal  origin  of  these  laws  is  con-
cerned, may  consistently  be  classed  in  the  genetic  division.

This  last-named  general  class  does  not  possess  the  number
or  variety  of  special  sects  found  in  the  other,  and  in  all  their
essential  tenets  its  adherents  may  be  regarded  as  practically
at  one.  Though  apparently  of  modem  origin,  the  genetic
school  is  in  reality  as  old  as  the  fully  developed  mind  of
man.  There  have  always  existed  the  two  antithetical  ways  of
looking  at  the  \vorld,  and  no  a^e  has  been  wholly  without

SCHOOLS  OF  THOUGHT.  19

adherents  to  both  of  these  schools.  But  there  are  reasons
in  the  nature  of  things  why  the  teleological  habit  of  thought
should,  down  to  within  a  quite  recent  period,  have  main-
tained an  overwhelming  supremacy  over  the  genetic  habit  of
thought.  The  only  philosopher  who  seems  to  have  clearly
perceived  the  true  nature  of  this  fundamental  antithesis  and
attempted  a  systematic  analysis  of  the  principles  upon  which
it  rests,  is  Immanuel  Kant.  In  his  celebrated  "Antino-
mies "  *  and  the  profound  discussion  which  follows  them,  he
has  laid  the  foundation  in  psychology,  where  it  properly  be-
longs, for  a  thorough  understanding  of  this  most  vital  and
practically  important  condition  of  human  thought.  His
"theses"  and  "antitheses"  differ  only  in  the  character  of
the  examples  given  from  the  primary  postulates  of  the
modern  teleologists  and  genetists,  respectively,  and  his
choice  of  terms  by  which  to  characterize  the  defenders  of
these  propositions,  while  they  are  not  those  which  either
party  would  now  select,  are  perhaps  as  little  objectionable  to
the  one  as  to  the  other  of  these  parties.

He  calls  the  one  the  dogmatic  and  the  other  the  empirical
view  of  the  world,  but  in  his  time  and  country  the  former
of  these  terms  had  not  acquired  the  stigma  which  has  since
been  gradually  fastened  upon  it,  and  meant  a  very  different
thing  from  that  which  Douglas  Jerrold  defined  as  "  pup-
pyism full  grown  "  ;  while,  as  to  the  latter,  the  practice  of
opposing  empiricism  to  quantitative  scientific  determina-
tion has  also  principally  grown  up  since  his  day.  Still,
as  if  somewhat  unsatisfied  with  this  word,  he  sometimes
employs  a  substitute  for  it,  and  calls  this  mode  of  thought
the  critical  or  the  skeptical  method.

In  using  the  term  dogmatic  as  applicable  to  the  teleo-
logical school,  Kant  doubtless  had  in  view  the  fact,  so  appar-
ent to  all,  that  it  was  this  school  that  assumed  to  teach  philoso-
phy, being  greatly  in  the  ascendency  ;  and,  in  the  words  em-
pirical,  critical,  and  skeptical,  he  no  doubt  recognized  the

*  "  Kritik  dcr  rcinen  Vernunf  t,"  S.  304.

20  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

tendency  of  a  few  minds  at  all  times  to  revolt  against  the
prevailing  conceptions,  examine  their  assumed  principles,
and  subject  them  to  mechanical  and  numerical  tests,  and  to
logical  criticisms  from  rational  grounds.  For  he  declares
that,  in  favor  of  accepting  the  former,  or  dogmatic,  view  of
things,  there  exist  three  principal  arguments:  1,  that  de-
rived from  sijpractieal  interest,  since  upon  it  appear  to  rest
the  claims  of  religion  and  morality  ;  2,  that  derived  from
a  speculative  interest,  since  by  its  aid  the  entire  field  of
speculation  can  be  compassed  by  the  mind,  and  the  con-
ditioned directly  derived  from  the  unconditioned ;  and,  3,
that  derived  from  popularity,  since  he  conceived  that  the
great  majority  would  always  be  found  on  that  side.

It  is  interesting  and  remarkable  that  so  great  a  mind
should  be  able  to  find  no  higher  motives  than  these  upon
which  to  base  the  claims  of  dogmatism,  which  meant  and
still  means  the  acceptance  of  the  main  body  of  beliefs  of
the  age.  The  first  is  of  so  low  an  order  that  it  would  seem
to  be  beneath  the  dignity  of  a  philosopher  to  entertain  it.
For  what  has  man's  practical  interest  to  do  with  philosophy,
with  the  attainment  of  truth  in  the  domain  of  abstract
thought  ?  The  argument  employed  by  Bishop  Butler — that  a
particular  religion  should  be  embraced,  on  the  sole  ground,  if
on  no  other,  that  there  could  be  nothing  to  lose  and  might
be  much  to  gain  by  so  doing,  while,  in  the  failure  to  do  so,
there  was  nothing  to  gain  and  might  be  much  to  lose  * — ^has
been  generally  condemned  as  of  a  low  order,  in  appealing  to
practical  interest  where  a  question  of  abstract  truth  was  in-
volved. But  Bishop  Butler  was  avowedly  a  sectarian  writer,
defending  his  particular  religion,  and  such  low  appeals  were
to  be  expected.  How,  then,  could  Kant  justify  an  analogous
argument  ?  As  a  disinterested  philosopher,  this  would  seem
impossible.  Yet  Kant's  justification,  from  his  own  peculiar
point  of  view,  though  somewhat  amusing,  will  appear  to  be
quite  satisfactory.     It  is  this:    Neither  the  thesis  nor  the

*  "  Analogy  of  Religion,"  p.  294.

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  KANT.  21

antithesis  of  any  of  his  antinomies  is  capable  of  proof,  or,
rather,  both  are  capable  of  formal  demonstration  ;  and,  being
contradictories,  all  argument  becomes  absurd.  With  him
the  universe  is  a  great  dilemma,  of  which  any  one  may  take
either  horn  with  exactly  equal  chances  of  reaching  the  truth.
He  had  better,  therefore,  of  course,  choose  the  one  which  is
most  to  his  interest,  and  this,  Kant  thought,  was  unquestion-
ably the  dogmatic.

Precisely  the  same  might  be  said  of  his  third  reason  for
choosing  that  side,  viz.,  the  advantage  to  be  derived  from
its  greater  popularity.  If  possible,  this  claim  possesses  a  still
lower  moral  weight  than  that  of  practical  interest,  of  which
it  is,  indeed,  merely  a  temporal  form.  Only  politicians  now
urge  it  as  a  means  to  influencing  men's  opinions.  It  certainly
could  never  be  decently  put  forward  except  in  just  such  a
case  as  Kant  conceived  this  to  be — a  case  in  which  it  would
otherwise  be  absolutely  immaterial  which  side  one  took.
The  truth  itself  was  hopelessly  unattainable,  and,  if  any
ulterior  consequences  were,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  to  follow
either  decision,  one  was  as  likely  to  escape  them  by  the  one
course  as  by  the  other.  The  only  guide  left,  therefore,  was
simply  present  advantage ;  and,  be  that  the  least  greater  on
the  one  than  on  the  other  side,  this  would  be  sufficient  to
determine  the  decision.

Kant's  second  ground  for  accepting  the  thesis  rather
than  the  antithesis,  viz.,  that  of  a  speculative  interest,  being
highly  philosophical,  deserves  more  attention.  And,  logic-
ally enough,  we  find  him  enumerating,  among  the  advantages
which  the  mind  is  to  derive  from  choosing  the  dogmatic
side  of  these  antinomies,  that  of  convenience,  or  ease
(Gemachlichkeit),  and  also  that  of  respectability.  Nothing
is  truer  than  that  teleology  is  a  relief  to  the  overstrained
intellect  striving  to  build  a  universe  between  two  infinities.
It  is  the  philosophy  of  the  indolent  brain,  the  ignoAja  ratio,
and  is  thus  adapted  both  to  the  childhood  of  the  world  and
to  all  those  who  weary  of  intellectual  effort.     These  may  be

22  ADAPTATION.— MAI^  AND  THE  UNIVERSE,

good  reasons  where  all  hope  of  arriving  at  objective  truth  is
renounced  ;  thej  could  scarcely  be  admitted  under  any  other
circumstances.  That  there  is  any  greater  intrinsic  dignity  or
nobility  in  a  universe  created  by  design  than  in  one  created
by  evolution,  few  men  with  scientific  habits  of  thought  will
probably  be  able  to  admit.  These  qualities  are  not  objective
but  subjective.  They  do  not  belong  to  the  world,  but  to
those  who  contemplate  it,  and  thus  so  much  of  the  sup-
posed speculative  interest  is  relegated  to  the  class  of  prac-
tical interest.

The  empiricist  of  Kant  loses  all  these  advantages.  In
embracing  the  antitheses,  he  removes  the  foundations  of  re-
ligion and  of  morality,  the  latter  conceived  as  deriving  all
its  sanction  from  authority.  "  If  there  is  no  primordial  Be-
ing (  Urwesen)  distinct  from  the  universe,  if  the  universe  is
without  a  beginning  and  therefore  without  a  creator,  our
will  not  free,  and  the  soul  of  the  same  divisibility  and  perish-
ability as  matter,  moral  ideas  and  principles  lose  all  validity,
and  fall  with  the  transcendental  ideas  which  formed  their
theoretical  support."  In  this  passage  he  evidently  fails  to
distinguish  the  fine  shades,  on  the  strength  of  which  many
modern  scientists  so  stoutly  reject  the  charge  of  material-
ism ;  *  yet  he  has  clearly  in  view  the  stern  mechanical  con-

*  To  those  who  would  disdain  material  things  as  unworthy,  it  has  been  well
replied  that  "  we  linow  no  more  essentially  what  matter  is  than  what  mind  is  "
(Dr.  Henry  Maudsley,  "Fortnightly  Review,"  August,  1879,  p.  249).  It  may  be
added  that,  so  far  as  the  mind,  or  soul,  is  concerned,  there  are  two  widely  differ-
ent classes  of  materialists,  whose  views  are  perhaps  more  completely  distinct
than  those  of  either  are  from  those  of  avowed  spiritualists.  The  one  class  re-
gard the  soul,  or  mind,  as  a  material  substance,  differing  from  other  material
things  only  as  these  differ  from  one  another.  Or,  if  they  deny  that  this  spiritual
entity  is  just  the  kind  of  matter  of  which  the  visible  objects  around  us  are  com-
posed, they  still  maintain  its  materiality  as  constituting  it  a  substance  inde-
pendent of  other  substances — a  real  thing.

The  other  class,  who  have  also  been  called  materialists,  do  not  regard  the
mind,  or  spirit,  as  in  itself  any  thing  at  all.  They  maintain  that  it  is  simply  a
property  of  a  certain  specialized  kind  of  matter,  a  mode  of  manifestation  pos-
sessed by  that  organized  substance  called  brain,  or  nerve-substance.    Nothing

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  KANT.  23

nection  between  phenomena  which  constitutes  the  basis  of
the  causational  philosophy  of  science.

Empiricism,  thus  defined,  is  not,  however,  entirely  with-
out its  advantages.  It,  too,  possesses  a  certain  speculative
interest,  in  defining  which  Kant  still  more  clearly  shows  that
he  was  contemplating  that  same  universal  antithesis  in  the
human  mind  which  concerns  us  here.  "  Empiricism,"  says
he,  "afibrds  advantages  to  the  speculative  interest  of  the
reason,  which  are  very  fascinating,  and  far  exceed  those  which
the  dogmatic  teacher  of  rational  ideas  can  promise.  In  the
former,  the  intellect  is  always  on  its  own  peculiar  ground,
viz.,  the  field  of  mere  possible  experiences,  whose  laws  it
can  trace  back,  and  by  means  of  which  it  can  expand  its  own
certain  and  comprehensible  knowledge  without  end.  .  .  .
The  empiricist  will  never  allow  any  epoch  of  nature  to  be
assumed  as  the  absolutely  first,  or  any  limit  of  his  outlook
into  the  surrounding  world  to  be  regarded  as  the  outermost,
or  any  of  the  objects  of  nature  which  he  can  resolve  by
mathematics  or  by  observation  and  bring  synthetically  under
his  contemplation  {Anschauung) — the  extended  —  to  pass
over  to  those  which  neither  sense  nor  imagination  can  ever
represent  in  concreto — the  simple."  Surely  his  "  empiricist "
is  here  none  other  than  a  modern  genetist,  evolutionist,  or
scientist.

Even  admitting  all  that  Kant  maintains  for  and  against
the  two  opposing  views,  it  may  still  be  a  question  whether
the  manly  independence  necessary  to  the  empiricist  would
not  be  preferable  to  the  idle  respectability  characteristic  of
the  dogmatist.

Still  better  to  illustrate  the  two  antagonistic  phases  of
thought,  Kant  asserts  that  they  embody  the  contrast  between
Platonism  and  Epicureanism.     Whether  the  teleologists  can

could  be  more  immatetial  than  thia  conception  of  mind,  while  in  purity  and
delicacy  it  certainly  occupies  a  much  higher  rank  than  either  the  idea  of  actual
materiality,  already  described,  or  that  of  spirituality,  whatever  that  may  mean,
which  also  attributes  to  it  identity  and  independence.

24  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

fairly  regard  Plato  as  the  founder,  or  first  great  representa-
tive, of  their  views  in  philosophy,  may,  it  is  true,  be  open  to
some  question,  but  that  Epicurus  foreshadowed,  as  faithfully
as  could  be  expected  from  the  state  of  knowledge  in  his  time,
the  teachings  of  modem  science  and  the  principles  of  the
evolutionary,  causational,  or  genetic  school,  can  not  be  can-
didly denied.  And,  if  his  sect  did  nothing  else,  they  clearly
proved  that  this  apparent  question  of  opinion  really  has  a  psy-
chological basis,  and  exists  deep  in  the  constitution  of  the  hu-
man mind,  more  or  less  independently  of  the  state  of  knowl-
edge in  the  world.  There  always  have  existed  a  few  minds
unwilling  to  accept  the  dogmatism  of  the  mass.  There  al-
ways crops  out  in  society  a  more  or  less  pronounced  manifesta-
tion of  rationalism  as  opposed  to  authority.  "While  this  class
of  views  finds  few  open  advocates,  it  always  finds  many  tacit
adherents,  and,  when  uttered,  a  large  but  usually  irresponsi-
ble following.  Criticism  of  received  beliefs  is  always  sweet
to  a  considerable  number  who  rejoice  at  the  overthrow  of  the
leaders  of  opinion  or  the  fall  of  paragons  of  morality.  And
this  it  is  which  often  renders  the  peace  of  society  insecure.
The  established  code  of  morals  is  dimly  felt  by  the  lower
classes  to  be,  in  some  respects,  radically  unsound.  The  broad
contrast  between  men's  nominal  behefs,  as  spoken,  and  their
real  beliefs,  as  acted,  is  apparent  even  to  children.  The
standard  of  conduct  is  so  much  higher  than  that  which  the
controllers  of  conduct  can  themselves  live  up  to,  resulting
always  in  the  punishment  of  the  weak  and  the  poor  for  the
same  transgressions  as  are  daily  committed  with  impunity  by
the  rich  and  influential,  that  the  lowest  miscreant  feels  that
there  is  some  fundamental  wrong  underlying  the  entire  social
fabric,  although  he  can  not  tell  what  it  is.  All  this  must  be  re-
garded as  the  legitimate  consequence  of  the  undue  supremacy
of  dogmatic  ideas  and  teleological  conceptions  in  society.  So
far  from  favoring  morality,  they  are  the  direct  cause  of  the
most  dangerous  form  of  immorality,  viz.,  a  mutinous  revolt
against  too  severe  and  unnatural  moral  restraints.     Rules  of

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  KANT.  25

conduct  based  on  these  conceptions  are  necessarily  arbitrary,
while  the  normal  intellect  naturally  asks  a  reason  for  its
obedience.

But  the  worst  criticism  which  Kant's  doctrines  admit  is
that  directed  against  his  antinomies  themselves.  It  is  not
true  that  both  sides  of  this  question  admit  of  equal  proofs
and  disproofs.  Disregarding  Kant's  logical  demonstrations
as  worthless  at  his  own  showing,  since  they  reduce  the  argu-
ment on  either  side  to  an  absurdity,  and  appealing  to  the  in-
ductive method,  which,  without  claiming  infallibility,  has
wrought  such  mighty  results  for  man,  we  may  with  safety
maintain  that  the  side  of  these  questions  which  Kant  calls
the  empirical  has  gained  upon  that  which  he  calls  the  dog-
matic in  about  the  same  proportion  as  the  knowledge  of  the
nature  of  things  has  increased  in  the  world.  The  spirit  of
opposition  to  teleology  could  make  no  headway  so  long  as  so
little  was  known  of  natural  processes.  Lucretius  might  write
"  De  Rerum  JSTatura,"  but  what  he  could  say  that  was  true
must  go  unsupported  by  facts  and  be  discredited,  while  much
that  he  must  say  that  was  false  would  be  disproved  and  throw
still  greater  discredit  upon  his  system.  In  such  a  state  of
profound  ignorance  of  the  universe,  teleological  explanations
were  the  ouly  ones  that  the  world  would  accept.  They  could
be  understood ;  genetic  explanations  could  not.  Appearances
were  all  on  one  side.  The  deeper  truths  could  not  be  seen
nor  realized.

The  greatest  paradox  which  nature  presents  is  that  of
adaptation.  The  word  itself  contains  an  ambiguity.  It  has
both  an  active  and  a  middle,  or  reflective,  sense.  The  former
is  teleological,  the  latter  genetic.  Adaptation,  in  a  purely
passive  sense,  is  admitted  by  all.  No  one  denies  that  there
exists  a  great  amount  of  correspondence  between  apparently
very  distinct  objects.  It  is  evident  that  they  have,  in  some
way,  been  made  to  correspond.  The  vital  question  is.  How,
and  by  what  power,  have  they  been  so  made  ?  The  teleologist
says.  By  a  power  from  without — by  design.     The  causation-

26  ADAPTATION.- MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

ist  says,  By  a  power  from  within  —  by  adaptation.*     Just
here  is  the  grand  schism.

It  is  easy  to  see,  too,  why  the  teleologists  should  at  first
acquire,  and  for  a  long  period  maintain,  a  supremacy.  The
teleological  answer  to  any  question  requires  comparatively
little  intellectual  eflPort.  It  is  the  easiest  way  of  explain-
ing things,  the  first  explanation  that  suggests  itself.  Not
only  is  it  intrinsically  more  simple,  but  it  is  more  in  accord
with  human  experience  and  the  natural  habit  of  thought.
In  other  words,  it  is  anthropomorphic.  The  mind  will  spon-
taneously explain  natural  phenomena  in  the  same  way  that
artificial  phenomena  are  explained.  A  garment  is  adapted  to
the  body  that  is  to  wear  it.  A  duck's  foot  is  adapted  to  the
element  it  lives  most  in.  The  explanation  of  the  first  of  these
facts  is  known  ;  that  of  the  second  is  unknown.  Why  not
infer  it  from  that  of  the  first  ?  There  exists  no  other  hnoion
explanation.  To  sit  down  and  evolve  one  of  an  entirely  dif-
ferent kind  is  not  only  a  laborious  task,  but,  when  announced,
remains  unproved  until  a  large  amount  of  scientific  investi-
gation shall  have  established  a  broad  basis  of  induction.  The
skeptic,  therefore,  who  in  the  infancy  of  human  thought  had
the  temerity  to  suggest  that  things  worked  out  their  observed
relations  of  correspondence  through  the  activities  residing
within  them,  was  met,  naturally  enough,  with  derision.  Yet
every  step  that  science  has  taken  has  been  in  the  direction
of  disproving  the  popular  and  confirming  the  unpopular
view.     It  has  been  gradually  but  steadily  vindicating  reason

*  As  showing  how  nearly  all  facts  admit  of  both  a  teleological  and  a  ge-
netic explanation,  and  puzzle  the  world,  witness  those  which  hasten  maturity
and  fecundity.  When  a  plant  is  bruised  near  the  root,  or  deprived  of  fertile
earth  or  moisture,  it  blooms  prematurely,  and  hastens  to  perfect  its  fruit.  The
teleologist  says  it  is  warned  that  it  must  soon  die,  and  enjoined  not  to  fail  to
leave  a  posterity;  hence  its  haste.  The  evolutionist  says  that  the  secondary
function,  reproduction,  is  accelerated,  because  not  so  strongly  antagonized  by
the  primary  function,  nutrition.  In  either  case,  the  optimist  may  claim  a  special
adaptation.  The  genetist  shows  that  the  result  is  a  necessary  consequence  of
the  given  conditions.

KANT'S  ANTINOMIES.  27

as  against  analogy,  and  establishing  a  causal  as  against  an
arbitrary  connection  between  related  facts.

From  this  point  of  view  we  may  now  consider  Kant's
own  formulated  antinomies.     The  first  thesis  is :

"  The  universe  has  a  beginning  in  time,  and  is  also  in-
closed within  limits  in  space " ;  the  antithesis  of  which  is :
"  The  universe  has  no  beginning  and  no  limits  in  space,  but
is  eternal  in  time  and  infinite  in  space."  Has  science  any
thing  to  say  on  this  question,  and,  if  so,  which  side  does  it
espouse  ?  Undoubtedly  science  has  to  do  with  it,  and  it  also
clearly  takes  sides  upon  it.  Quantitative  chemistry,  scarcely
born  in  Kant's  time,  has  practically  demonstrated  the  infinite
duration  of  the  universe  in  establishing  the  indestructibility
of  matter.  Astronomy,  to  which  Kant's  own  immortal
"  Theorie  des  Himmels  "  helped  to  give  its  rational  impetus,
has  now  so  expanded  the  conception  of  space  that  it  has  be-
come habitual  to  regard  the  universe  as  absolutely  without
limits.  If  any  one  doubts  this,  let  him  make  an  effort  to  go
back  to  the  old  dogmatic  conception,  and  figure  to  his  mind
a  beginning  or  end  to  its  duration,  or  boundaries  to  its  extent.
He  will  find  this  impossible,  and  this  impossibility  is  wholly
due  to  the  increased  knowledge  of  the  universe  which  science
has  given  to  the  world.  It  was  once  possible,  it  is  still  pos-
sible to  the  ignorant,  to  set  bounds  to  time  and  space,  but
inductive  science  has  swept  away  such  crude  scaffoldings,  and
opened  up  to  the  human  mind,  as  it  were,  a  view  of  the  in-
finite.

It  is  no  longer  a  transcendental  question.  It  is  a  scien-
tific one,  to  be  solved,  Hke  all  other  scientific  questions,  by  the
accumulation  of  facts.  Nothing  in  concrete  science  is  dem-
onstrated a  priori.  The  practical  truths  of  the  universe
are  established  a  posteriori — by  massing  the  evidence.  In
many  of  the  questions  now  regarded  as  settled,  the  evidence
has  long  been  conflicting,  and  in  some  much  still  remains  to
be  established  ;  but,  notwithstanding  such  residual  facts,  the
preponderance  of  evidence  on  one  side  is  sufficient  to  render

28  ADAPTATION.— MAN"  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

the  general  truth  practically  proved.  Such  is  the  character
of  the  greater  part  of  the  scientific  truth  of  the  world.
But  the  questions  involved  in  Kant's  antinomies  differ  from
ordinary  scientific  problems  in  two  respects.  On  the  one
hand,  infinity  must  be  proved,  which  demands  special  evi-
dence ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  no  facts  opposed  to
infinity,  all  the  evidence  being  on  one  side.  Not  one  cir-
cumstance can  be  named  which  points  to  a  beginning  or  end
of  either  time  or  space,  while  every  fact  and  every  law  that
human  observation  and  reflection  have  brought  forth  point
to  the  boundlessness  of  both.  Only  ignorance  of  these
facts,  and  failure  to  exercise  the  rational  faculty,  can  prevent
the  mind  from  conceding  this  truth.

We  will  pass  over  the  second  antinomy  relative  to  the  di-
visibility of  matter,  since  in  formulating  it  Kant  seems  to
have  mistaken  the  skeptical  for  the  dogmatic  side.  Popular
belief  has  usually  rejected  while  science  has  steadily  tended
to  establish  the  reality  of  matter,  which  is  the  same  thing
as  to  establish  the  existence  of  the  ultimate  indivisible  atom.

The  third  antinomy,  which  is  the  representative  one,  has
the  following  thesis :  "  Causality  according  to  the  laws  of
nature  is  not  the  only  causality  from  which  the  phenomena
of  the  universe  may  be  derived.  It  is  still  necessary  to  as-
sume a  causality  through  freedom  for  their  explanation."
The  antithesis  is :  "  There  is  no  freedom,  but  every  thing
in  the  universe  takes  place  according  to  laws  of  nature."

The  issue  is  here  squarely  stated,  and  here  it  is  that  accu-
mulating knowledge  of  the  nature  of  things  is  working  stead-
ily and  uniformly  against  the  dogmatic  and  in  favor  of  the
empirical  side.  Absolutely  no  facts  are  being  discovered  in
favor  of  freedom,  while  every  thing  is  ranging  itself  on  the
side  of  universal  law.  From  one  department  after  another,
and  in  inverse  proportion  to  the  complexity  of  the  phenom-
ena, and  hence  in  direct  ratio  to  the  ease  with  which  they
are  comprehended,  science  is  eliminating  all  the  facts  which
requii'e  the  hypothesis  of   freedom  for  their  explanation.

KANT'S  ANTINOMIES.  29

From  astronomy,  from  geology,  from  physics  and  chemistry,
these  eons  have  been  successively  expelled ;  they  are  now
being  driven  from  their  fortifications  in  biology  to  their
citadel  in  psychology.  Even  here  they  are  vigorously  at-
tacked by  the  school  of  Bain  and  Spencer  on  the  one  hand
and  of  Flourens  and  Ferrier  on  the  other,  and  the  interval
between  physics  and  ethics  is  spanned  by  the  heartless  clinics
of  Maudsley.

We  need  not  go  further  and  state  the  fourth  and  last  of
Kant's  antinomies,  viz.,  that  relating  to  the  existence  or  non-
existence of  a  "Necessary  Being."  The  first  and  third
antitheses  established,  constitute  the  premises  for  the  estab-
lishment of  the  fourth.  Eternal  matter  with  its  eternal
activities  suffices  to  account  for  all  the  phenomena  of  the
universe,  which  are  as  infinite  in  causation  as  in  duration  or
extent.  All  departments  of  science  confirm  this  truth.
Like  many  other  once  useful  hypotheses,  that  of  theo-teleol-
ogy,  which,  as  already  shown  (vol.  i,  pp.  29,  58),  was  sug-
gested by  the  fact  of  cmthropo  -  teleology^  has  outlived  its
usefulness,  and,  where  still  called  in,  becomes  a  burden  to
the  advancement  of  science.  In  astronomy,  the  nebular
hypothesis,  which  Kant  founded  and  Laplace  demonstrated,
has  completely  superseded  it.  In  chemistry  and  physics,
the  atomic  theory,  formulated  as  a  philosophy  by  Demo-
critus  and  established  as  a  science  by  Dalton,  renders  it
redundant.  In  biology,  the  law  of  adaptation,  clearly  stated
by  Lamarck,  and  that  of  selection,  cumulatively  demon-
strated by  Darwin,  and  the  inter-operation  of  these  and  that
of  heredity,  thoroughly  set  forth  by  Spencer  and  Haeckel,
have  freed  this  field  from  teleological  trammels  almost  as
completely  as  those  of  the  less  complex  sciences  have  been
freed  from  them.  And  thus  is  science  marching  relent-
lessly forward,  and  reclaiming  one  field  after  another  that
had  been  so  long  given  over  to  dogmatic  conceptions,  until
there  is  now  scarcely  room  to  doubt  that  its  conquest  must
ultimately  become  complete.

30  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

But  what  is  it  that  has  thus  been  accomplished  ?  It  is
nothing  less  than  the  establishment  of  the  antitheses,  or  em-
pirical propositions,  of  Kant's  antinomies.  They  have  been
removed  from  the  domain  of  transcendental  philosophy,  sub-
jected to  scientific  methods,  such  as  are  applied  to  all  other
problems,  and  proved  as  other  propositions  are  proved  by
the  inductive  method.  The  eternity  of  matter  and  motion
and  the  infinitude  of  space  have  passed  into  scientific  postu-
lates, while  the  uninterrupted  and  unlimited  causal  depend-
ence of  all  phenomena  in  their  relation  of  antecedence  and
sequence  is  the  fundamental  axiom  from  which  all  scientific
investigation  now  proceeds.  The  entire  self-suflSciency  of
the  universe  is  the  great  truth  which  advancing  intelligence
is  daily  perceiving  more  clearly.

But  we  are  more  especially  concerned  here  with  the  two
rival  modes  of  thought.  It  is  incorrect  to  suppose  that  the
causal  process  is  wholly  excluded  from  the  minds  of  those
who  think  habitually  upon  the  dogmatic  side.  The  expres-
sions teleological  and  genetic  only  represent  the  two  ex-
tremes. All  teleologists  reason  more  or  less,  but  it  is  within
the  safe  limits  of  known  premises.  They,  too,  recognize
natural  laws  as  operating  within  certain  spheres,  whose  ex-
tent is  measured  by  the  amount  of  each  one's  knowledge.
In  some  the  field  of  natural  law  is  confined  to  the  every-day
physical  phenomena  around  them — the  running  of  water,  the
falling  of  bodies,  the  action  of  the  winds,  etc.  In  others,
with  a  wider  outlook,  it  may  include  all  the  phenomena  of
astronomy,  physics,  chemistry,  and  the  present  known  facts
of  geology.  Still  others,  somewhat  better  informed,  may
reject  geological  cataclysms,  but  account  for  all  vital  phe-
nomena on  teleological  principles.  Not  a  few  believe  biol-
ogy to  rest  on  a  mechanical  basis,  but  deny  this  of  psychology.
And  there  are  even  some  physicians  who,  from  their  famil-
iarity with  mental  changes  brought  about  by  direct  dealings
with  the  brain,  have  been  thoroughly  convinced  that  thought
is  a  product  of  nervous  organization,  but  who,  nevertheless,

DUALISM  AND  MONISM.  31

can  not  be  brought  to  regard  social  phenomena  as  reducible
to  law.  To  all  these  various  grades  of  dogmatism  must  be
added  that  still  more  complex  compromise,  nowadays  con-
siderably in  vogue,  which  one  of  its  eminent  defenders  *  has
called  "  evolutionary  teleology,"  and  which  consists  in  con-
ceiving the  universe  as  so  planned  in  advance  as  subse-
quently to  work  out  without  further  interference,  and  in  a
strictly  genetic  and  mechanical  way,  all  the  results  that  sci-
ence has  been  revealing.

These  various  shades  and  grades  of  teleology,  always
mixed  with  some  rationalism,  have  led  Professor  Haeckel  to
characterize  the  whole  school  as  the  duaListio  f  school,  while
from  their  consistent  adherence  to  one  uniform  principle  he
very  appropriately  denominates  the  other  the  monistic  school.
While  there  certainly  exist  innate  proclivities  in  diilerent
minds  to  adopt  one  or  the  other  of  these  modes  of  explain-

*  Professor  Asa  Gray,  "  Darwiniana,"  chapter  xiii.

f  One  of  the  most  extreme  cases  of  "  dualism  "  which  has  yet  been  placed
on  record  may  be  found  in  the  inaugural  address  of  Professor  G.  J.  AUman  be-
fore the  Sheffield  meeting  of  the  British  Association  in  1879.  After  having
entered  into  an  elaborate  argument  to  prove  that  irritability  is  simply  a  prop-
erty of  protoplasm,  and  that  therefore  the  phenomena  of  life  must  be  reduced
to  this  physico-chemical  explanation,  and  after  establishing  his  position  with  all
the  force  and  positiveness  that  the  most  extreme  monist  could  demand,  he  con-
cludes his  address  by  warning  his  audience  not  to  infer  that  the  phenomena  of
feeling  and  thought  are  in  the  least  involved  in  this  demonstration.  Irrita-
bihty,  which  is  the  basis  of  all  motor  phenomena,  is  clearly  a  property  of  the
chemical  substance  protoplasm ;  but  sensibility,  the  basis  of  sensor  phenom-
ena, is  something  wholly  distinct  and  independent.  He  thus  quite  ignores  the
obvious  fact  that  along  with  every  manifestation  of  irritability,  every  contrac-
tion or  extension  of  the  protoplasmic  substance,  whether  in  the  primordial  utri-
cle of  Mohl  that  lines  the  cellulose  membrane  of  vegetable  cells,  or  in  the  soft
protoplasmic  substance  of  the  Myxomycetce,  or  of  the  Amabce,  or  in  the  muscles
of  creatures  of  high  organization,  there  must  go  some  form  of  recognition  of
external  presence  which,  however  vague  or  feeble,  is  nevertheless  the  rudi-
mentary form  of  sensation  and  the  substratum  of  consciousness  and  mind.  Far
more  rational  and  consistent  are  Professor  Haeckel's  most  extreme  views  re-
specting the  "Zellseele,"  the  "  Plastidul-Seele,"  and  the  "  Atom-Seele."  (See
his  Munich  address,  delivered  September  18,  ISTY,  "  Die  Entwickelungslehre,"
u.  8.  w.,  Stuttgart,  1877.)

32  ADAPTATION,— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

ing  natural  phenomena,  proclivities  which  are  almost  consti-
tutional, nevertheless  the  germs  of  rationalism  exist  in  all
minds,  and  may  be  developed  by  expanding  the  mental  hori-
zon. Increased  knowledge,  if  able  to  influence  the  habit  of
thought  at  all,  must  necessarily  influence  it  in  the  one  way
of  diminishing  the  number  and  strength  of  teleological  be-
liefs, and  increasing  the  area  over  which  genetic  conceptions
hold  sway.  The  schism,  therefore,  though  fundamental,
and  impossible  ever  wholly  to  obliterate  from  the  human
mind,  is  not  so  hopelessly  fastened  on  mankind  as  for  ever  to
exclude  the  truth.  After  all  should  have  been  compelled
to  accept  mechanical  causation  and  reject  teleology,  this
fundamental  intellectual  divergence  would  find  other  but
more  innocent  grounds  of  difference.  The  history  of  men's
opinions  respecting  the  truths  of  astronomy  and  geology
shows  that  the  most  obdurate  will  not  always  resist  the  march
of  established  facts.  The  intellect  is  honest  at  least,  and
will  yield  at  last,  although  it  may  require  mountains  of
proof.  In  this  fact  lies  the  hope  of  the  success  of  rational
ideas  and  genetic  conceptions.

It  is  further  worth  remarking  that,  while  nearly  or  quite
all  teleologists  admit  genetic  explanations  in  certain  fields,
whose  extent  varies  with  each  individual's  intelligence  and
information,  no  one  is  adjudged  a  true  cansationist  who  rec-
ognizes the  possibility  of  teleological  explanation  anywhere.
This  is  not  a  line  arbitrarily  drawn  by  the  ruling  party,
like  the  color-line  in  the  United  States,  according  to  which
the  least  African  blood  in  a  man's  veins  makes  him  a  "  col-
ored man."  It  is  a  natural  division  in  which  both  par-
ties acquiesce.  This,  again,  illustrates  the  fundamental  psy-
chological character  of  the  classification.  It  is  established
on  the  line  between  the  natural  and  the  supernatural.  The
question  whose  answer  determines  to  which  class  any  one
belongs  is  not.  To  what  extent  do  you  admit  the  supernatu-
ral ?  but,  Do  you  admit  the  supernatural  at  all  ?  If  so,  you
are  a  dogmatist.     For,  if  you  are  capable  of  admitting  it  to

DUALISM  AND  MONISM.  33

a  Bmall  degree,  you  are  equally  capable  of  admitting  it  to  a
large  degree.  The  effect  of  this  is  to  limit  the  number  of
naturists  and  proportionally  to  diminish  their  influence.
Nevertheless,  all  teleologists  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  equally
bad.  So  little  rationally  consistent  is  the  human  mind  that
the  chief  progress  which  rational  ideas  have  made  has  been
by  increasing  in  each  individual  the  degree  of  his  always
partial  rationalism  at  the  expense  of  that  of  his  still  par-
tial dogmatism,  until  the  former  at  length  comes  so  far  to
predominate  over  the  latter  as  to  control  the  greater  part
of  his  thought  and  action.  It  is  thus  that  many  persons  of
sincere  theological  convictions  are  able  to  embrace  at  the
same  time  a  large  share  of  the  philosophy  of  evolution.
They  may  be  wholly  incompatible,  but  are  nevertheless  each
stowed  away  in  separate  chambers  of  the  brain  in  such  a
manner — unintelligible  to  consistent  causationists — as  not  to
molest  each  other.

The  only  adequate  explanation  of  the  possibility  of  this
wide-spread  dualism  is  to  suppose  that,  in  the  main,  teleo-
logical  ideas  (or  rather  the  natural  attachment  to  them)  are
inherited,  while  genetic  ideas  are  chiefly  acquired.  But  a
constitutional  predilection  for  any  class  of  ideas  may  be-
come hereditary  if  made  a  part  of  education.  The  scientific
method  of  thought  prevails  far  more  of  late  than  formerly
for  this  reason,  and  will  doubtless  continue  to  increase  by
heredity  as  science  is  more  thoroughly  and  universally
taught  in  the  schools.  It  is  therefore  natural  that,  while
theology  is  taught  in  the  churches  and  science  in  the  schools,
the  two  modes  of  thought  should  co-exist  in  all  minds  whicb
have  not  deliberately  and  independently  worked  out  a  search-
ing analysis,  and  made  a  candid  and  thoughtful  comparison
of  their  respective  clain>s.  No  dualist  can  have  done  this,
and  all  teleologists  are  at  the  same  time  dualists.  Yery  few
dysteleologists  are  so  from  inheritance.  Nearly  all  can  re-
member when  they  were  dualists  also.  It  is  the  special  char-
acteristic of  this  class — thus  far,  at  least,  in  human  history —

34  ADAPTATION.— MAN   AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

that  they  must  be  independent  thinkers.  The  unthinking
masses  are  necessarily  teleological  in  their  mental  make-up.
With  all  the  disadvantages,  therefore,  of  the  wholly  emanci-
pated rationalist,  he  can  ever  feel  the  proud  consciousness  of
owing  his  principles  to  his  own  individual  efforts  to  set  him-
self right  with  the  surrounding  world,  and  that  it  is  reason
and  not  education,  much  less  heredity,  to  which  he  owes  his
intellectual  liberty.  The  tables  may  yet  turn,  and  rationalism
constitute  the  rule,  but  it  is  safe  to  predict  that,  when  this
day  arrives,  teleology  will  have  disappeared  entirely,  and  the
rival  of  the  present  rationalism,  if  it  has  one,  will  be  some
still  truer  and  pm'er  form  of  causational  philosophy.

Returning  now  to  the  general  classification  previously
made  of  the  several  modes  of  regarding  the  phenomena  of
the  universe,  let  us  consider  each  one  somewhat  more  in  de-
tail.

We  saw  that  out  of  the  general  teleological  method  there
have  grown  up  several  subordinate  sects,  each  of  which  takes
a  somewhat  different  view  of  the  question.  The  three  prin-
cipal of  these  we  will  briefly  glance  at  here.  The  three  doc-
trines most  prominently  maintained  are:  1,  divine  free-
will, or  continuous  special  interference ;  2,  predestination,
or  foreordination  ;  and,  3,  fatalism.

The  first  of  these  assumes  that  the  deity  dispenses  events
as  he  pleases,  that  he  watches  with  a  personal  eye  over  the
affairs  of  his  creation,  and  interposes  whenever  and  wherever
to  him  seems  proper.  It  regards  him  in  the  light  of  a
sovereign,  exercising  a  choice  in  his  actions  respecting  both
men  and  nature,  depending,  as  human  choice  depends,  upon
the  evidence  and  the  circumstances  of  each  particular  case.
This  is  the  first  and  most  natural,  though  least  rational,  be-
lief. But  more  thoughtful  minds  discover  some  of  its  de-
fects. They  see  that  it  necessarily  detracts  from  the  at-
tributes of  deity.  In  the  fii-st  place,  it  destroys  the  order  of
the  universe,  and  makes  every  thing  to  depend  upon  the  tem-

TELEOLOGIOAL  SECTS.  35

porary  will  of  deity,  wliicli  will,  being  unknown  to  man,
reduces  events  to  a  condition  as  bad  as  though  they  were
governed  by  mere  chance.  In  the  second  place,  it  robs  the
deity  of  omniscience.  It  presumes  that  he  makes  up  his
mind  before  he  acts,  and  this  presupposes  that  he  did  not
know  before  some  things  which  he  has  since  discovered.  If
this  be  the  case,  he  can  not  know  all  things  from  the  be-
ginning. For  if,  being  omniscient,  he  proposed  to  punish  a
man  for  his  crime,  he  must  have  known  from  all  eternity
both  that  the  man  would  commit  the  crime  and  that  he
would  inflict  the  penalty.  Hence  events  must  take  place  by
the  divine  foreknowledge,  which  is  not  distinguishable  from
foreordination,  or  predestination.

This  latter  doctrine  implies  that  all  evil  is  premeditated
by  deity,  and  hence  it  divests  him  either  of  mercy  or  of
omnipotence.  For  he  either  could  prevent  evil  and  does
not  wish  to,  or  else  he  would  prevent  it  but  is  not  able.
Still,  for  a  certain  class  of  minds,  this  seems  to  be  the
safest  horn  of  the  dilemma.  And  in  fact  it  is  more  reason-
able than  pure  theology,  since  it  admits  necessity  in  phe-
nomena.

Fatalism  seeks  to  avoid  the  faults  of  both  these  theories,
and  casts  the  responsibility  of  events  upon  chance.  It  rec-
ognizes a  deity  and  a  law,  but  above  both  these  and  in-
dependent of  them  is  fate,  which  controls  events  and  is  re-
sponsible neither  to  God  nor  to  nature.  The  God  of  the
fatalist  does  not  control ;  he  only  exists.  The  ordinary  rou-
tine goes  on  with  regularity  and  precision,  but  the  event,
the  final  disposition,  is  subject  to  the  unforeseen  and  irresist-
ible decrees  of  destiny.  It  is  a  necessity,  but  without  a
cause.

The  existence  of  evil  in  the  world  has  always  been  the
great  stumbling-block  of  all  the  different  schools  of  teleolo-
gists.  So  long  as  men  alone  were  involved,  they  were  able
to  evade  the  issue  by  regarding  all  evils  as  punishments  for
offenses  given  to  gods  whose  pleasure  was  assumed  to  be

36  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

unknown — at  least,  to  all  but  the  priesthood.  But  as  knowl-
edge of  nature  increased,  and  men  reflected  on  their  every-
day observations,  it  became  manifest  that  the  forms  of  life
below  the  human  were  constantly  subjected  to  what,  from
any  teleological  view,  must  be  regarded  as  gratuitous  suffer-
ing. The  division  of  all  animals  into  herbivorous  and  car-
nivorous was  a  patent  fact  to  be  accounted  for,  as  was  also
the  apparent  necessity  that  man  should  partially  subsist  on
flesh.  To  be  consistent,  it  was  necessary  to  convict  these  in-
nocent herbivores  of  crimes  such  as  men  were  supposed  to
have  committed  against  offended  gods,  and  for  which  all  suf-
fering in  the  human  family  was  regarded  as  a  punishment.

It  was  to  escape  such  illogical  conclusions  as  this  that  ra-
tionalism first  raised  its  protest.  It  first  assumed  the  form
of  necessitarianism,  accounting  for  evil  on  irresponsible
grounds,  and  it  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  ever  altered  its
position  in  this  respect.  We  may  therefore  still  regard  the
entire  body  of  speculative  opposition  to  teleology  as  consti-
tuting the  necessitarian  school  of  philosophy.

The  necessitarian  philosophy,  while  it  may  not  avoid  all
unpleasant  consequences,  at  least  avoids  all  absurdities :  while
some  of  its  legitimate  deductions  may  be  harsh  or  unpopu-
lar, they  are  at  least  not  impossible  or  contradictory ;  while
they  may  seem  severe  or  humiliating,  they  are  at  least  not
stupid  or  ridiculous.  Its  leading  principles  have  been  al-
ready stated.     They  may  be  briefly  summed  up  as  follows :

Matter  has  always  existed  and  has  always  been  in  mo-
tion. Its  moving  particles  affect  one  another  according  to  a
fixed  law  well  understood — the  law  of  the  impact  of  bodies.
The  forms  thus  produced  are  the  existing  objects  in  the  uni-
verse. This  unceasing  and  beginningless  motion  produces
unceasing  and  endless  change.  Every  change  of  form  re-
sults in  new  form,  and  thus  an  infinite  series  of  changing
forms  is  kept  up.  "Whatever,  therefore,  exists,  is  the  par-
ticular form  of  the  given  time  and  place.  It  exists  because
it  has  been  produced.    Its  existence  is  the  mere  result  of

NECESSITARIANISM.  37

previous  existences — of  causes  in  the  nature  of  things.  It
could  not  be  other  than  it  is,  unless  those  prior  causes  had
been  other  than  they  were.  Hence,  it  exists  of  necessity.
Every  thing  is  as  it  must  be.  The  celestial  bodies  present
the  appearance  and  possess  the  configuration  and  constitu-
tion which  we  see,  because  absolute  laws,  operating  from  in-
finity {a  parte  ante\  have  given  them  these  characters  at  this
particular  epoch.  The  earth  shares  in  this  regimen.  Unor-
ganized matter,  whether  elementary  or  composite,  is  only  a
particular  form  which  it  has  been  forced  to  assume.  Organ-
ization is  but  a  modification  wrought  under  the  same  law.
The  production  and  transformation  of  organisms  is  the  result
of  fashioning  circumstances.  It  is  not  an  external  planning
power,  or  intelligence,  that  adapts  them  to  circumstances,  but
the  circumstances  themselves  that  produce  that  adaptation.
In  other  words,  animals  and  plants  are  not  adapted  to  their
peculiar  circumstances,  but  hy  them.

There  is  one  point  of  view  from  which  necessitarianism
must  be  regarded  which,  from  its  liability  to  be  misunder-
stood, as  well  as  from  its  intrinsic  importance,  requires  spe-
cial notice.  This  is  its  relation  to  the  power  of  acquiring
knowledge.  The  theory  of  necessity  is  scientific,  as  contra-
distinguished from  all  the  other  doctrines  considered,  which
are  teleological.  As  a  condition  of  thought,  therefore,  it
favors  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  where  the  rest  discour-
age it  and  leave  the  mind  in  a  state  of  satisfied  ignorance.
This  is  liable  to  be  misunderstood,  because  the  word  neces-
sary conveys  to  some  the  impression  of  fixity,  such  as  no
effort  is  available  to  change  or  influence.  But  this  is  a  mis-
take. This  objection  would  be  valid  against  either  foreor-
dination  or  fatalism,  but  it  is  not  valid  against  causal  neces-
sity. For  in  the  former  cases  every  event  is  arbitrarily  fixed.
Not  so  in  the  latter.  The  chief  condition  of  the  event  is  the
attempt  to  produce  it.  This  is  a  necessary  condition  to  its
occurrence.  If  an  effort  is  made,  it  will  be  sure  to  produce
an  effect.     Nothing  is  fixed,  but  every  thing  is  yielding.

38  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

Hence  to  try  is  to  accomplish.  This  doctriue,  therefore,  is
superior  to  all  the  others  in  encouraging  action.  But,  great
as  is  its  advantage  in  offering  inducements  to  exertion,  it  is
of  still  greater  importance  in  directing  effort.  It  is  in  this
that  its  chief  superiority  lies.  For  knowledge  is  the  chief
element  of  power  in  enabling  the  mind  to  exercise  a  control
over  the  materials  and  forces  of  nature,  and  a  settled  convic-
tion that  effects  must  of  necessity  follow  and  correspond  to
causes,  renders  all  efforts  to  acquire  knowledge  profitable,
and  the  possession  of  any  knowledge  possible.  Under  any
of  the  other  systems  there  are  barriers  and  discouragements
to  the  pursuit  of  truth.

The  divine  free-will  must  be  arbitrary.  Unless  we  as-
sume to  be  capable  of  finding  out  that  will,  we  must  remain
ignorant  of  it.  If  we  are  ignorant  of  the  will  by  which  the
universe  is  governed,  all  science  is  at  an  end,  for,  though  we
discover  a  law,  how  are  we  assured  that  it  will  remain  such?
If  there  is  a  power  capable  of  setting  the  laws  of  nature
aside  at  any  moment  and  enacting  new  and  different  ones,
where  is  the  encouragement  to  pursue  the  investigation  of
those  laws  ?  If  truth  is  simply  the  present  wish  of  a  being
who  is  absolutely  free,  then  the  truth  of  yesterday  is  but  the
error  of  to-day.  Under  any  form  of  this  doctrine,  the  con-
clusion unavoidably  follows  that  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  is
fruitless.  No  wonder  that  the  idea  should  prevail,  among
those  who  take  this  view,  that  science  is  wicked,  that  educa-
tion is  useless,  and  that  propitiation  is  man's  highest  duty.

Little  better  is  the  doctrine  of  foreordination  calculated
to  inspire  the  pursuit  of  truth.  For  if  all  that  which  exists
is  but  the  dispensation  made  at  the  beginning  by  the  great
Dispenser,  then  to  reach  the  causes  of  things  it  becomes  nec-
essary to  reach  the  will  of  that  being  at  the  beginning.
This  would  be  even  more  difficult,  if  possible,  than  to  learn
the  present  will  of  an  ever-superintending  Ruler.  If  events
have  no  immediate  cause,  but  must  ba  referred  to  the  begin-
ning of  time  for  a  cause,  then  it  is  impossible  to  trace  them

DIVINE  FREE-WILL.— FOREORDINATION.  39

or  to  deduce  any  standards  by  which  to  be  guided  in  future.
If  they  are  the  mere  culminations  of  decrees  issued  an  eter-
nity ago,  they  are  not  certainly  the  result  of  law.  If  that
which  exists  does  so,  not  of  necessity,  but  by  external  com-
pulsion, there  is  no  necessary  relation  by  which  we  may  de-
termine that  which  will  exist  by  that  which  now  exists  or
has  existed.  All  things  are  appointed  both  as  to  time  and
place.  They  are  necessary,  it  is  true,  but  they  are  not  de-
pendent ;  each  has  an  independent,  co-ordinate  existence.

Let  us  see  what  effect  such  a  belief  must  have  upon  the
pursuit  of  knowledge.  Evidently  it  is  incompatible  with  it.
For  vain  would  be  the  attempt  to  acquire  knowledge  if  there
were  no  necessary  connection  between  truths.  To  attempt
to  store  away  in  the  mind  any  number  of  independent  facts
is  found  to  be  a  most  difficult  task  at  best.  What,  then,  shall
we  say  of  an  attempt  to  discover  all  the  truths  of  the  uni-
verse where  each  is  absolutely  independent  of  every  other  ?
And  of  what  use  would  all  this  knowledge  be,  even  if  it
were  possible  to  obtain  it  ?  What  assurance  would  we  have
that  similar  events  would  occur  under  similar  circumstances  ?
A  knowledge  of  facts  is  of  very  little  use  to  us  unless  by
Buch  knowledge  we  can  establish  some  law.  Of  what  use  is
the  study  of  history  to  the  statesman  if  he  can  derive  no
principles  therefrom  to  guide  him  in  framing  measures  for
the  government  of  men  ?  Yet  this  could  not  be  the  case  if
all  facts  were  merely  foreordained,  since  in  that  case,  though
every  fact  would  have  a  cause,  yet  no  fact  would  have  a  nec-
essary cause.  The  cause  of  every  fact  would  be  the  same,
viz.,  the  will  of  the  foreordainer,  and  one  effect  would  be  as
liable  to  result  from  that  cause  as  another.  There  would  be
no  clew  by  which  effects  could  be  traced.  When  the  cause
was  reached,  it  would  not  be  the  particular  cause  of  any  par-
ticular effect,  but  a  general  cause  of  all  effects.  Hence
every  effort  to  acquire  useful  knowledge  would  be  fruitless.
Every  one  who  really  believes  this  doctrine  feels  this ;  and,  if
there  be  any  who  profess  to  believe  it  and  still  advocate  the

40  ADAPTATION.— MAN   AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

pursuit  of  knowledge,  it  is  because  they  have  a  certain  un-
conscious intuition  that  their  philosophy  is  unsound.  They
are,  in  fact,  dualists.

But  there  is  an  intermediate  school  who  claim  that  it  is
laws  and  not  facts  that  are  primordially  established,  and  that
these  laws  are  thereafter  never  interfered  with.  The  reply
to  this  is  that  it  is  not  foreordination  at  all.  It  is  acknowl-
edging the  laws  of  the  universe,  but  assigning  to  them  a
beginning  and  a  creation,  which  is  unnecessary,  and  betrays
failure  to  conceive  of  an  infinite  series.

Fatalism  is  no  better  promoter  of  intelligence  than  either
of  the  other  doctrines  considered.  If  it  be  not  mere  chance,
it  is  at  least  the  same  thing  to  men,  since  no  one  knows  the
origin,  cause,  or  purpose  of  any  event,  neither  can  know  it.
Therefore,  it  is  useless  to  seek  this  knowledge ;  and  here
again,  as  before,  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  is  a  fruitless  task.

It  makes  no  difference,  therefore,  which  of  the  prevailing
beliefs  we  take  up :  they  all  lead  to  this  result.  In  depriv-
ing truth  of  its  necessary  character,  and  making  it  dependent
upon  something  external  to  itself,  they  render  it  contingent
and  precarious.  They  assume  that  there  either  is  no  neces-
sary law,  or  that  whatever  we  call  law  is  the  creation  of
some  external  power,  so  as  not  to  be  reliable  or  permanent.

In  contrast  with  all  these  dogmas  stands  the  consistent
philosophy  of  causal  circumstances.  The  necessity  of  nature
is  a  rational  necessity.  Its  truths  are  such,  not  because  they
have  been  willed  or  decreed,  but  in  and  of  themselves.  By
necessity  it  is  only  meant  that  phenomena  are  uniform  and
unvarying.  The  same  circumstances  must  produce  the  same
effect.  If  truths  were  not  necessary,  they  could  not  be  relied
upon.  If  they  were  not  unvarying,  they  could  not  be  traced,
discovered,  or  utilized.

Let  us  take  an  illustration.  There  is  one  class  of  truths
which  all  are  compelled  to  admit  to  be  not  only  invariable
and  reliable,  but  absolute  and  necessary — the  truths  of  math-
ematics.    The  most  obstinate  predestinarian  could  not,  if  he

FATALISM.— CAUSAL  NECESSITY.  41

would,  doubt  that  twice  two  has  always  made  four,  and  would
have  done  so  if  no  decree  to  that  effect  had  ever  gone  forth.
There  is  no  supporter  of  special  divine  saper vision  so  illogi-
cal as  to  believe  that  Omnipotence  itself  implies  the  power
of  making  the  three  angles  of  a  triangle  either  greater  or
less  than  two  right  angles.  He  may  claim  to  believe  this,
but  at  the  same  time  he  must  instinctively  deny  it.  He
knows  it  to  be  impossible,  and  that  such  truths  are  neces-
sary. The  necessitarian  doctrine  simply  invests  all  truths
with  the  attributes  which  are  conceded  to  those  of  mathe-
matics. It  declares  that  truth  can  not  exist  except  of  itself,
and  therefore  of  necessity.  It  thus  invests  every  branch  of
knowledge  with  the  character  of  a  science,  and  every  science
with  the  potential  positivity  of  mathematics.  The  laws  of
barology,  of  optics,  of  mechanics,  and  of  chemical  propor-
tions, are  already  found  to  be  in  themselves  mathematical-
ly exact.  And,  as  science  advances,  the  same  harmony  is
found  to  pervade  all  natural  phenomena.  See  with  what
symmetry  the  petals,  stamens,  and  pistils  of  flowers  are  ar-
ranged ;  consider  the  adaptation  of  the  eye  to  the  phenom-
ena of  light  ,*  contemplate  the  regularity  of  form  in  crystals,
in  snow-flakes,  in  rain-drops,  and  in  the  heavenly  bodies  !

But  it  may  be  said  that  nature  abounds  in  irregularities ;
that  while  it  is  true  that  the  normal  form  of  the  crystal  is  a
polyhedron,  yet  in  fact  most  crystals  are  not  perfect,  they
are  usually  found  wanting  in  some  facet  or  angle  or  axis ;
that  while  theoretically  the  normal  condition  of  solid  matter
may  perhaps  be  said  to  be  crystalline,  yet  in  reality  the  great
mass  of  it  is  amorphous ;  that  while  generally  there  is  a
wonderful  symmetry  about  the  vegetable  world,  yet  the
student  is  puzzled  with  a  thousand  anomalies  and  imper-
fections ;  that  the  same  is  true  of  the  animal  kingdom,  and,
indeed,  of  every  department  of  experimental  science  or
practical  knowledge.  And  it  may  be  plausibly  claimed  that
herein  consists  the  distinction  between  mathematical  and  all
other  truth.     But  the  necessitarian  is  in  no  way  staggered

42  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE   UNIVERSE.

by  these  facts.  He  puts  tlie  irregular  as  well  as  the  regular
under  the  dominion  of  law.  There  is  a  legitimate  reason
why  every  anomaly  (if  there  still  remains  such  a  thing)
should  exist,  a  necessary  cause  for  each  deviation  from  tJie
normal  condition ;  and  that  cause  is  as  absolute  as  the  origi-
nal law  by  which  the  normal  condition  is  brouglit  about.
Furthermore,  the  variation  is  adapted  to  the  cause  of  varia-
tion as  precisely  as  the  normal  condition  is  adapted  to  the
cause  which  produces  it.  A  few  illustrations  may  be  fur-
nished upon  this  point.

It  may  be  said  that  the  normal  condition  of  a  planetary
orbit  is  an  ellipse,  yet  no  planet  describes  a  perfect  ellipse.
All  orbits  are  irregular.  This  at  first  puzzled  and  disheart-
ened astronomers,  and  shook  their  faith  in  the  order  of  the
universe.  But  they  finally  found  that  each  perturbation  was
occasioned ;  that  it  was  not  a  mere  deviation  from,  or  viola-
tion of,  the  general  law,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  was  in
obedience  to  another  and  a  higher  law — that  of  the  mutual
attraction  of  all  matter.  The  absolute  path  of  the  moon,
with  reference  to  a  fixed  line,  would  present  a  figure  which
would  be  neither  circle,  ellipse,  spiral,  nor  any  other  known
curve.  It  would  be  considered  irregular  in  every  respect,
yet  every  deviation  from  that  fixed  line  is  caused  by  some
real  and  necessary  circumstance.  So  true  is  this,  that  these
irregularities  have  been  calculated,  and  their  true  causes  def-
initely ascertained.  And  if  there  is  a  reason  for  all  these
apparent  anomalies,  which  when  known  will  enable  us  to
calculate  in  advance  what  the  anomalies  will  be,  why,  then,
is  not  the  law  that  produces  those  anomalies  as  necessary  as
the  law  that  governs  the  normal  condition  ?

The  irregularities  of  the  more  immediate  objects  around
us,  whether  in  the  mineral,  vegetable,  or  animal  kingdom,
are  subject  also  to  law.  If  a  crystal  has  lost  an  angle,  there
has  been  some  reason  for  it ;  some  material  circumstance  has
come  in,  and,  for  that  particular  case,  set  aside  the  general
by  its  special  law.     If  a  flower  is  deficient  in  its  regular

CxiUSAL  NECESSITY.  43

nuTiber  of  petals,  the  same  explanation  applies  ;  if  a  tree  has
a  gnarled  trunk  or  an  unsightly  excrescence  upon  it,  some-
thing has  caused  it ;  and  the  most  hideous  deformity  in  an
animal  or  in  a  human  being,  the  most  monstrous  abnormity
of  birth  or  physical  growth,  the  most  loathsome  ulcer  or  the
most  terrible  disease — all  are  the  results  of  certain  causative
influences  which  are  as  necessary  as  the  laws  which  govern
the  normal  condition  of  the  vegetable  or  the  animal  world.
These  pathological  influences  must  exist,  or  the  observed  re-
sults would  not  follow ;  yet,  given  their  existence,  there  is  no
escaping  these  results.  But  their  existence  is  something  real
and  tangible.  It  is  not  hidden,  inscrutable,  or  mysterious ;
and  by  patient  investigation  the  causes  of  these  irregularities
may  be  discovered.

It  follows  from  these  two  principles — viz.,  first,  that  the
effects  observed  must  result  of  necessity  from  a  definite
cause  actually  existing  in  the  nature  of  things  ;  and,  second,
that  whatever  does  so  exist  is  capable  of  discovery — that
every  apparent  anomaly  in  nature  can  be  satisfactorily  ac-
counted for  and  scientifically  explained.  And,  if  this  is  true
of  apparent  violations  of  law,  a  fortiori^  it  is  true  of  those
things  which  exist  in  manifest  obedience  to  law.  It  is  here
that  the  immense  superiority  of  the  necessitarian  theory  be-
comes evident,  since  it  opens  up  to  man  a  field  of  other-
wise forbidden  fruit.

Truth  is  no  longer  a  privileged  commodity  ;  it  is  the
common  property  of  all  who  want  it.  The  pursuit  of
knowledge  is  no  longer  the  pursuit  of  a  phantom.  It  is  a
safe  investment  of  time  and  talent.  In  learning  that  all
truth  is  necessary,  we  have  also  learned  that  it  is  obtainable.
For,  if  whatever  exists  or  happens  has  and  can  have  but  one
definite,  necessary  cause,  without  which  it  could  not  exist  or
happen,  and  with  which  it  could  not  but  exist  or  happen,
then  it  only  remains  to  ascertain  that  cause.  And,  since  all
causes  consist  of  real  and  tangible  circumstances  or  combi-
nations of  circumstances,  they  can  in  most  cases  be  repro-

44  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVEESE.

duced  or  prevented  in  future  according  as  they  produce
beneficial  or  injurious  results.  If  we  can  create  the  same
conditions,  we  may  be  sure  of  the  same  result ;  if  we  can
break  up  those  conditions,  we  can  avoid  the  result.  In  this
way,  as  before  remarked,  we  may  in  time  reach  the  antece-
dent causes  of  the  most  subtile  truths  of  nature,  whether  in
the  field  of  normal  or  abnormal  phenomena,  whether  in  those
great  fields  of  undiscovered  knowledge  which  are  obviously
governed  by  uniform  laws  or  among  those  multiplied  appar-
ent anomalies  which  so  obstruct  the  path  of  pure  science.

It  is  necessary  to  keep  constantly  in  view  the  object  for
which  we  set  out — namely,  to  consider  the  mutual  relations
subsisting  between  man  and  nature — with  a  view  to  the  effect
which  a  correct  understanding  of  them  must  produce  upon
human  opinions  and  human  action,  which,  as  we  shall  here-
after perceive,  are  intimately  connected.  Men  must  fii-st
orient  themselves  before  they  can  expect  to  go  aright.  A
man  lost  in  a  forest,  or  a  pilot  at  sea  in  a  fog  without  a  com-
pass, is  as  likely,  in  obeying  his  notions  of  the  direction  he
should  go,  to  go  in  the  opposite  direction  or  at  right  angles
to  the  true  direction  as  to  adopt  that  only  course  which  can
bring  him  to  safety.  The  chances  of  going  wrong  are  vastly
against  him.  So  is  it  with  ignorant  humanity  in  the  fogs
and  forests  of  philosophy.  Increasing  intellectual  power
often  serves  to  lead  men  further  astray  than  pure  animal
instinct  could  do.  False  ideas  are  reached  by  reasoning
from  false  premises  consisting  of  deceptive  appearances.
Their  minds  become  imbued  with  errors  which  they  only
know  how  to  follow  to  their  perpetual  injury.  And,  un-
fortunately, many  of  these  errors  are  of  such  a  kind  that
they  do  not  at  all  tend  to  correct  themselves.  The  evils
entailed  in  consequence  of  their  pursuit  come  in  such  ways
that  they  are  not  recognized  as  the  results  of  such  pursuit.
So  complicated  are  the  relations  between  man  and  his  sur-
roundings, that  the  results  of  his  actions,  though  reaUy  dis-

DOCTRINE  OF  DEPRAVITY.  45

astrous,  often  strengthen  rather  than  weaken  his  erroneous
beliefs.  So  wayward  and  unreliable  are  the  dictates  of  pure
reason  that  the  most  absurd  and  pernicious  errors  are  cher-
ished for  ages,  obstructing  other  progressive  tendencies,  and
finally  entailing  premature  social  degeneracy  {infra,  pp.  274,
287).

Without  here  considering  the  remedy  for  this  state  of
things,  which  will  form  the  proper  subject  of  future  chap-
ters, let  us  glance  briefly  at  a  limited  number  of  these  errors.

One  of  the  most  absurd  has  been  the  notion  of  the  de-
jpravity  of  material  objects.

How  the  human  mind  could  succeed  in  reconciling  this
idea  with  the  beauties  of  the  universe,  and  with  the  concep-
tion of  a  bountiful  and  benevolent  Creator,  seems  diflicult
to  understand.  It  probably  constitutes  one  of  those  con-
vincing illustrations  of  the  power  of  education  in  overriding
the  human  judgment,  of  which  history  is  so  full.  Certain
it  is,  however,  that  tliis  doctrine  has  always  extensively  pre-
vailed among  mankind.  I  speak  not  merely  of  the  alleged
depravity  of  the  human  mind,  but  of  the  supposed  badness
of  every  thing  natural.  All  matter  has  been  from  time  im-
memorial under  the  ban,  as  inherently  and  essentially  unholy
and  impure.  Man  has  been  held  to  be  totally  depraved,  and
every  desire,  passion,  faculty,  or  attribute  of  his  nature,  to
be  corrupt,  unworthy,  and  unclean  ;  hence  his  actions,  nay,
his  very  existence,  have  been  condemned  as  drenched  with
moral  turpitude.

It  is  quite  unnecessary  to  adduce  proof  of  the  manner
in  which  this  belief  has  retarded  the  progress  of  the  world
both  materially  and  intellectually.  It  need  only  be  pointed
out  how  subtile  has  been  its  influence,  and  how  impossible
it  has  been  for  such  an  error  to  destroy  itself.  Its  partial
overthrow  in  modern  times  has  resulted  from  influences
wholly  foreign  to  all  discussion  of  its  merits.

We  may  take,  next,  the  doctrine  of  optimism,  growing
directly  out  of  the  belief  in  an  intelligent  "Kuler  of  the

4:6  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

Universe."  It  lias  been  maintained  that  every  thing  was
"  for  the  best,"  and  many  natural  circumstances  have  been
especially  employed  to  sustain  the  belief  in  both  intelligent
and  benevolent  manifestations  in  nature.

Optimism  seems  so  directly  opposed  to  depravity  that  we
might  well  wonder  that  both  should  grow  out  of  the  idea
of  a  Providence.  Yet  they  undoubtedly  have  done  so :  the
latter  probably  from  exalted  and  fanciful  ideas  of  the  neces-
sary purity  of  the  Creator  and  Provider,  contrasted  with  his
groveling  and  dependent  creatures  and  creations ;  the  former
from  the  imaginary  goodness  of  that  Provider,  coupled  with
his  supposed  ability  to  arrange  all  things  for  the  best.  But
in  this  case  philosophers  have  not,  as  in  the  other,  been  con-
tent to  leave  it  a  mere '  undemonstrated  dogma,  requiring
faith  alone  to  accept  it.  They  have  essayed  to  prove  it,
and  are  certainly  entitled  to  the  credit  of  having  advanced
some  very  ingenious  arguments  in  its  support.  The  chief  of
these  is  the  adaptation  of  things  in  nature  to  the  wants  of
sentient  beings,  and  especially  of  man.  In  this  it  is  impos-
sible for  the  necessitarian  to  meet  them  on  their  own  ground.
In  fact,  they  both  claim  the  same  ground,  since  this  very  fact
of  adaptation  is  the  corner-stone  of  necessitarianism.  But
the  two  parties  see  the  same  process  from  precisely  opposite
points  of  view.  The  one  says  the  circumstances  are  adapted
to  the  creature ;  the  other,  that  the  circumstances  adapt  the
creature.  The  necessitarian  claims  that  the  circumstances
are  the  causce  efficientes  of  the  created  forms  ;  the  optimist,
that  the  created  forms  are  the  causae  finales  of  the  circum-
stances. So  far,  therefore,  as  this  is  concerned,  there  can  be
no  further  argument.  The  conflicting  claims  will  have  to
rest  upon  their  own  respective  inherent  credibility.  But,
when  the  optimist  goes  further,  and  declares  that  no  improve-
ment in  any  thing  can  be  conceived  of,  that  all  things  are  the
very  best  they  could  be  for  all  creatures,  he  has  come  out
from  his  fortress  of  naked  dogma  into  the  open  field  of  fact.
And  here  he  may  be  met.     The  necessitarian  does  this  by

OPTIMISM.  47

showing  instances,  or  if  it  were  but  a  single  instance,  in  wliicli
it  is  false,  and,  if  he  succeeds  in  this,  absolute  optimism  falls
to  the  ground.  To  do  this  is  a  very  simple  task.  The  exist-
ence of  evil  in  the  world  affords  of  itself  a  complete  refutation
of  absolute  optimism.  It  is  no  answer  to  this  argument,  not
even  if  true,  that  suffering  tends  to  bring  greater  future  hap-
piness. For  to  claim  that  it  is  for  the  best,  introduces  the
superlative  at  once,  and  precludes  the  comparative  which  this
answer  would  fallaciously  apply.  There  can  be  no  greater
than  the  greatest.  If  it  was  already  for  the  best,  then  happi-
ness would  be  already  at  its  highest  possible  point.  Where,
then,  is  the  room  for  pain  or  any  other  instrumentality  to
raise  it  higher  ?  Neither  is  it  possible  to  escape  by  denying
that  it  is  for  the  best  that  there  should  be  the  greatest  hap-
piness, since,  if  this  denial  were  just,  it  has  also  been  pre-
cluded by  the  previous  claim  that  pain  was  for  the  best  as
a  means  of  increasing  happiness,  and  the  optimist  is  again
estopped.

But  it  is  not  necessary  to  confine  the  discussion  to  such
general  principles.  Descending  to  particulars,  we  find  that
the  optimistic  theory  is  based  either  upon  willful  blindness
or  inexcusable  ignorance.  Confining  it  to  sentient  beings,  we
perceive  that  the  very  life  and  pleasure  of  one  half  the  world
depends  upon  the  death  and  suffering  of  the  other  half.
iNot  only  do  fishes,  reptiles,  birds,  and  beasts  lacerate,  tort-
ure, and  devour  one  another  and  those  lower  in  the  scale  of
being  than  themselves,  but  myriads  of  low  and  disgusting
vermin,  almost  destitute  of  feeling,  prey  upon  the  higliest
and  most  sensitive  beings.*

But  the  optimist  may  reply  to  this  that  we  only  fancy  all
these  evils  because  we  can  not  see  the  inscrutable  ways  of
Providence.  This  is  the  only  course  he  can  adopt,  but  it  is
simply  recoiling  within  his  rampart  of  dogma,  where  he  is
of  course  secure  from  all  the  weapons  of  reason,  for  there  is
as  much  force  in  a  sweeping  denial  of  this  claim  as  in  its

*  Herbert  Spencer,  "  Principles  of  Biology,"  vol.  i,  part  iii,  chapter  ii.

48  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  TINIYEESE.

assertion.  Here,  again,  as  in  liis  first  assumption,  all  argu-
ment is  at  an  end.

There  is,  however,  a  partial  optimism  which  is  practically
a  much  more  pernicious  belief  than  this  absolute  optimism,
since  the  latter  is  purely  speculative,  and  confined  to  com-
paratively few  individuals  who  do  not  themselves  consistently
act  upon  it.  Were  it  not  for  an  unconscious  current  of  com-
mon sense  running  counter  to  all  these  paralogisms  of  the
undisciplined  reason,  and  really  guiding  the  chief  functions
of  life,  the  holders  of  such  beliefs  would  soon  be  brought
to  destruction  {infra^  pp.  271,  479).  Absolute  optimism,  as
well  as  the  whole  dogma  of  predestination,  would,  if  logic-
ally pursued,  put  an  end  to  all  individual  effort  whatever,
since  all  effort  results  from  a  recognition,  conscious  or  un-
conscious, of  the  necessity  of  certain  effects  following  cer-
tain causes.

The  qualified  optimism  referred  to  consists  in  the  belief
that  the  wide-spread  adaptation  which  all  admit  to  exist  in
nature  is  in  all  respects  perfect,  being  brought  about  accord-
ing to  the  plan  of  an  omniscient  and  omnipotent  designer.
The  practical  evil  of  this  belief  arises  from  a  general  indis-
position to  seek  to  improve  that  which  is  already  conceived
to  be  perfect.  Not  generally  being  biologists,  it  is  difficult
to  make  these  optimists  see  the  proofs  of  imperfect  adapta-
tion between  the  lower  organisms  and  their  environment,
yet  here  the  harmony  is  far  greater  than  in  the  case  of  man.
Animals  are  constantly  so  limited  by  the  incessant  friction  of
their  surroundings  that  their  physical  aspirations  are  perpet-
ually ground  down  into  something  like  complete  correspond-
ence. Yet,  as  before  remarked,  this  friction  is  always  very
great,  destroying  many  times  more  than  ever  reach  maturity,
and  repressing  the  inherent  tendency  to  rise  to  higher  stages
of  physical  perfection— a  tendency  whose  existence  is  proved
by  every  attempt  to  cultivate  a  wild  stock  artificially,  which
consists  chiefly  in  the  removal  by  man  of  the  adverse  influ-
ences of  its  natural  environment.

OPTIMISM.  49

Not  only  do  optimists  fail  to  perceive  these  deeper  truths
of  biology,  but  they  are  unable  to  see  the  glaring  facts  which
human  life  presents  in  proof  of  the  imperfection  of  the  natu-
ral relations  between  man  and  nature.  Yet,  to  realize  this,
they  need  but  consider  how  absolutely  dependent  men  are,
^in  nearly  all  parts  of  the  world,  upon  the  appliances  of  an
artificial  civilization.  Let  any  one  of  them  imagine  himself
abandoned  entirely  to  nature,  and  obliged  to  subsist,  as  do
the  animals  and  birds,  in  a  wild  state.  If  he  wishes  to  rus-
ticate for  a  fortnight  in  the  mountains,  he  first  provides  him-
self with  an  extensive  outfit  and  supplies,  consisting  wholly
of  artificial  objects.  Now,  all  these  things,  so  absolutely
necessary  to  his  existence,  are  denied  him  by  nature,  and
only  supplied  by  artificially  augmenting  the  degree  of  cor-
respondence, and  perfecting  the  very  imperfect  adaptation.
It  is  only  by  such  illustrations  that  we  are  able  to  realize  how
very  slight  the  natural  adaptation  is  (vol.  i,  p.  Yl).  People
rarely  stop  to  refiect  upon  things  which  are  not  adapted  to  the
wants  of  human  nature,  but  are  quick  to  discover  any  thing
that  is  so  adapted.  The  fact  that  a  law  or  principle  in  nat-
ure is  thus  adapted  at  once  excites  their  reverence  and  awe,
and  they  exclaim.  What  a  wonderful  illustration  of  provi-
dential design  and  solicitude  !  They  forget  that  their  very
astonishment  at  such  things  is  in  consequence,  and  a  direct
proof,  of  their  rarity,  and  that  the  rarity  of  things  well
adapted  proves  an  abundance  of  things  ill  adapted.  The  ne-
cessitarian sees  no  room  for  astonishment  that  there  should
be  a  perfect  adaptation  in  many  important  circumstances,
since  it  is  the  circumstances  themselves  that  adapt.  No
one  would  be  astonished  to  see  a  sphere  come  from  a  spher-
ical mold,  or  wonder  that  it  was  not  a  cube  or  a  prism.
Any  one  would  certainly  wonder  if  it  was  not  a  sphere.
Just  so  with  those  circumstances  and  conditions  that  sur-
round every  organism.  The  organisms  are  the  casts  from
the  molds  of  circumstances.  If  there  were  any  occasion
for  surprise,  it  would  be  to  find  so  much  want  of  adaptation

60  ADAPTATION,— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

as  certainly  does  exist.  But  this  is  only  an  apparent  anom-
aly, since  variety  of  circumstances  produces  a  variety  of  ob-
jects, and  the  adaptation  of  those  objects  to  the  particular
conditions  which  produced  them  is  sufficient  to  preserve
them ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  they  should  be  also  adapted
to  other  conditions  which  have  resulted  in  the  production  of
other  objects.  Neither  is  this  the  case,  and  hence  all  the
discordant  elements  of  nature.  In  the  sensitive  world  this
discord  is  pain,  and  this  is  the  true  solution  of  the  great
problem  of  evil.

The  position  of  the  qualified  optimist  is  sufficiently  im-
portant to  justify  a  few  illustrations.  Writers  of  a  teleo-
logical  bias  are  continually  advancing  what  they  regard  as
proofs  of  intelligent  design  and  benevolent  provision  in  be-
half of  sentient  beings,  especially  man.  In  fact,  until  within
quite  a  recent  period,  all  philosophy  was  strictly  anthropo-
centric,  and  the  lower  grades  of  creatures  capable  of  enjoy-
ment and  suffering  were  wholly  ignored.  But,  in  more  recent
times,  a  few  of  this  school  have  expanded  their  scheme  to
embrace  the  animal  world  in  general,  rendering  it  zoocentric
instead  of  anthropocentric,  although  the  existence  of  large
orders  of  purely  predatory  creatures,  wholly  dependent  upon
their  power  to  inflict  pain  and  death  npon  the  rest,  is  a  some-
what discouraging  fact  for  their  philosophy  to  assimilate.

Most  of  the  examples  that  have  been  brought  forward
as  establishing  the  operation  of  a  designing  intelligence  and
benevolent  intent  in  the  universe  can  be  classed  under  two
general  heads.  They  are  either  (1)  cases  of  natural  or  ge-
netic adaptation,  or  (2)  they  are  mere  coincidences.

Let  us  examine  a  few  of  each  class.

Mr.  G.  J.  Romanes,  whose  utterances  are  generally
worthy  of  the  highest  respect,  in  an  article  in  the  "  Quar-
terly Journal  of  Science,"  1876,  speaking  of  the  maternal
instinct,  says :  "  The  mother  in  tending  her  young  does  so  in
obedience  to  an  inherited  instinct,  and  not  from  any  fear  of
subsequent  self-reproach  if  she  leaves  her  family  to  perish.

OPTIMISTIC  FACTS.  51

She  follows  the  maternal  instinct,  so  long  as  it  continues  in
operation,  just  as  she  would  follow  any  other  instinct ;  and
it  is,  as  it  were,  a  mere  accident  of  the  case  that  in  this  par-
ticular instance  the  course  of  action  which  the  instinct
prompts  is  a  course  of  action  which  is  conducive  to  the
welfare  of  others."

N"ow,  Mr.  Eomanes  well  understands  that  this  "  mere
accident "  has  been  the  result  of  the  normal  operation  of  the
law  of  genetic  adaptation,  and,  if  questioned  on  the  subject,
would  doubtless  not  hesitate  to  acknowledge  it.  This  ren-
ders it  the  more  remarkable  that  he  should  have  allowed
this  passage  to  go  unqualified  as  an  argument  for  the  tele-
ologist.  It  has  been  shown  in  a  former  part  of  this  work
(vol.  i,  p.  469)  that  not  only  in  the  case  of  the  maternal  in-
stinct but  in  that  of  all  the  life-preserving  instincts,  the
gustatory  and  sexual  not  excepted,  there  is  absolutely  no
direct  connection  between  the  motive  which  secures  the
performance  of  these  necessary  acts  and  the  important  ends
which  they  subserve.  The  acts  are  performed,  even  by
men,  in  strict  obedience  to  the  immediate  desires ;  and  the
resulting  nutrition,  reproduction,  and  protection  of  offspring,
are  wholly  secondary  and  incidental,  rarely  or  never  thought
of  in  connection  with  the  acts.  It  is  strange  that  teleologists
have  not  more  frequently  urged  this  important  fact,  but  it
seems  not  to  have  been  recognized  by  them  as  such.  The
belief  has  generally  prevailed  that  these  acts  were  performed
with  the  remote  end  in  view,  and  the  recognition  of  the
real  truth  has  not  come  until  the  law  of  genetic  adaptation
had  been  developed  to  explain  it  as  a  rational  fact.

The  excess  of  male  over  female  children  born  has  been
cited  as  a  case  of  providential  design  to  compensate  for  the
greater  degree  of  exposure  to  fatal  influences,  particularly
in  wars,  of  the  male  sex.  This  is  not  yet  established  as  a
fact  for  the  entire  population  of  the  globe,  but  appears  to  be
true  for  most  countries  where  accurate  statistics  have  been
obtained.     Neither  is  it  fully  proved   that  the   increased

53  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

mortality  by  violence  among  males  more  than  compensates
for  the  increased  mortality  of  females  due  to  the  greater  deli-
cacy of  maternal  functions.  But,  should  both  these  doubts
be  resolved,  and  the  excess  of  male  births  established  as  a
scientific  truth,  it  would  be  one  not  difl&cult  to  account  for
on  adaptation  principles.*  For  any  result  which  can  be
shown  to  be  advantageous  to  the  race  is  sufficiently  ex-
plained by  its  advantageousness.

The  fact  that  the  specific  gravity  of  aquatic  animals  is
almost  exactly  that  of  their  medium  has  also  been  referred
to,  as  well  as  the  aUied  fact  that  the  bones  of  birds  are  hollow
and  communicate  with  the  outer  air ;  but  these  cases  are  too
obviously  the  results  of  natural  selection  to  require  further
notice.

There  are,  however,  certain  correlated  facts  whose  direct
connection  is  more  obscure,  and  some  of  which  are  doubtless
only  partially  natural  and  partially  accidental.  One  of  these
is  the  favorite  theme  of  teleologists,  already  referred  to  a
few  pages  back,  viz.,  the  coal-measures.  Their  existence
certainly  had  no  direct  connection  with  the  develppment  of
the  lower  types  of  life,  including  that  from  which  man
sprung,  or  with  man's  development  down  to  the  end  of  the
sixteenth  century,  when  coal  first  began  to  come  into  general
use  as  fuel.  If  this  fact  is  to  be  directly  connected  with  his
development,  it  must  be  at  a  time  subsequent  to  that  date,
and  probably  during  or  subsequent  to  the  present  epoch.
The  extensive  destruction  of  the  forests  in  Western  Asia
and-Eastern  and  Southern  Europe,  if  continued  throughout
Northern  and  Western  Europe  and  America,  must  soon  en-
tail the  same  degree  of  degeneracy  over  the  whole  globe
which  is  now  manifest  in  those  regions,  once  the  center  of
the  highest  intellectual  activity.  Not  that  there  were  not
other  causes  associated  with  this  one  in  bringing  about  that
result,  but  this  cause  alone,  especially  in  colder  latitudes,
must,  in  the  absence  of  any  substitute  for  wood  as  fuel,
*  Spencer,  "  Principles  of  Biology,"  vol  i,  pp.  23Y,  449.

OPTIMISTIC  FACTS.  53

eventually  result  in  rendering  tlie  world  uninhabitable  ex-
cept bj  a  race  of  miserable  beings.  In  so  far,  therefore,  as
the  coal-beds  have  operated  in  any  sense  as  a  direct  cause
of  the  present  status  of  the  human  race,  this  can  only  be
predicated  in  the  general  sense  that,  by  the  removal  of  the
excess  of  carbonic  acid  and  liberation  of  its  combining  oxy-
gen, the  process  by  which  they  were  formed  at  the  same
time  purified  the  atmosphere  so  as  to  render  the  develop-
ment of  creatures  of  a  higher  organization  possible,  which,
from  the  constitution  of  the  universe  in  general,  is  equiva-
lent to  rendering  their  development  necessary.  In  this  sense
it  is  a  case  of  adaptation,  but  in  any  other  it  must  be  re-
garded, up  to  within  a  recent  period  at  least,  as  simply  a
coincidence.

Very  similar  to  this  case  is  that  insisted  upon  by  Hugh
Miller*  and  others,  of  the  late  appearance,  geologically
speaking,  of  the  most  important  economic  families  of  plants,
and  particularly  the  Rosacece  and  Graminece.  That  the  exist-
ence of  the  higher  herbivorous,  graminivorous,  and  frugivo-
rous  animals,  from  some  line  of  which  man  has  unquestion-
ably descended,  was  in  a  large  measure  due  to  the  previous
appearance  of  the  kind  of  flora  necessary  to  supply  them
with  food  of  that  nutritious  character  consistent  with  their
full  development,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  It  is,  therefore,
perhaps,  not  too  much  to  say  that,  but  for  the  previous  de-
velopment of  such  a  vegetation,  no  such  higher  animals,  and
a  fortiori,  no  such  being  as  man,  could  have  made  their
appearance.  A  picture  representing  the  horse,  the  buffalo,
and  the  orang,  seeking  a  subsistence  amid  the  ferns,  Lepi-
dophytes,  and  Calamites  of  the  Carboniferous  epoch,  would
constitute  an  anachronism  whose  realization  it  would  be
impossible  to  imagine.  Much  less  could  man  have  subsisted
there,  even  granting  the  respirability  of  the  atmosphere.  In
this  sense,  the  higher  animals,  including  man,  may  be  regarded
.as  the  products  of  the  improved  character  of  the  vegetation,

*  "Testimony  of  the  Rocks,"  p.  Y8.

54  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

considered  as  the  efficient  cause  of  tlieir  existence.  In  any
other  sense,  the  two  facts  are  simple  coincidences.

We  will  now  enumerate  a  few  cases  of  the  advantageous
co-existence  of  facts,  between  which  no  mechanical  nexus
can  be  discovered.

Kant  announces,*  as  a  discoveiy  of  his  own,  the  fact  that
the  spheroidal  form  of  the  earth  is  of  the  greatest  advantage
to  its  inhabitants  in  preventing  irregularities  in  its  motions
due  to  mountain-ranges  and  other  inequalities  of  its  surface,
which  the  great  mountain,  as  it  were,  the  fneniscus,  at  the
equator,  in  consequence  of  its  position  and  superior  mass,
neutralizes  and  causes  wholly  to  disappear.  "  And  yet,"  he
adds,  "this  wise  arrangement  is  explained  without  hesita-
tion from  the  equilibrium  of  the  formerly  fluid  mass  of  the
earth "  ;  implying  that  its  advantageousness  alone  might
have  furnished  a  sufficient  explanation.  On  this  we  need
only  remark  that  inasmuch  as  the  mechanical  explanation
is  complete  without  the  teleological  one,  and  will  apply  to
any  case  even  where  it  might  be  a  disadvantage,  the  latter
is  at  least  unnecessary.  The  fact  is  clearly  a  simple  coinci-
dence.

One  of  the  most  interesting  of  all  these  happy  coinci-
dences in  nature  is  found  in  the  fact  that  there  is  no  natural
relation,  and  therefore  no  fixed  proportion,  between  the  dis-
persive and  the  refracting  powers  of  different  substances  ;  a
circumstance  of  which  opticians  have  taken  advantage  in  the
construction  of  the  achromatic  lens,  which,  it  would  seem,
could  never  have  been  accomplished  if  these  two  properties
had  increased  or  diminished  in  the  same  ratio.

Instead,  however,  of  this  indicating  benevolent  design,
there  certainly  would  seem  to  be  a  much  greater  natural
antecedent  probability  that  these  properties  should  be  inde-
pendent of  each  other  than  that  they  should  be  dependent
upon  each  other.  We  are  therefore  simply  admiring  a  re-
sult that  we  should  certainly  have  expected  had  it  possessed
*  "Kritik  dcr  rcinen  Vernunft,"  S.  461,  note.

OPTIMISTIC  FACTS.  55

no  advantage  or  disadvantage.     Mucli  enthusiasm  is  ex-
pended on  cases  of  this  kind.

The  great  velocity  of  light  has  been  referred  to  as  facili-
tating astronomical  observation,  "and  it  is  remarked  by
Brinkley  that,  if  the  velocity  of  light  had  been  much  less
than  it  is,  astronomy  would  have  been  all  but  an  impossible
science."  *  This  is  a  typical  case  among  many  where  the  good
or  bad  effect  is  determined  wholly  by  the  degree  of  the  qual-
ity referred  to.  In  all  such  cases  it  is  equally  proper  to  say
that  the  result  might  have  been  more  satisfactory.  If  the
facts  must  be  characterized,  we  are  always  left  in  doubt
whether  praise  or  blame  is  in  order.  People  who  see  the
world  from  this  point  of  view  are  always  thankful  for  mis-
fortunes— thankful  that  they  are  not  worse.  This  form  of
fallacy  is  also  very  popular.

There  is  one  other  subdivision  of  this  class  of  beneficial
coincidences  that  may  be  distinguished.  These  are  cases  in
which  the  advantage  is  more  apparent  than  real,  and  becomes
greatly  reduced  or  disappears  altogether  on  closer  examina-
tion. A  single  instance  under  this  head  must  suflSce.  It  has
long  been  known  that  water  attains  its  greatest  density  at
about  39^°  Fahr.,  or  ^\°  above  the  point  of  congelation.
This  fact  has  been  insisted  upon  by  certain  physicists,  and
notably  Count  Rumford,  as  a  capital  argument  in  favor  of  a
wise  beneficence  in  nature.  In  consequence  of  this  property,
it  was  argued  that,  as  a  mass  of  water  cools,  the  colder  parti-
cles do  not  descend  to  the  bottom,  but,  after  attaining  the
temperature  of  39|^°,  float  on  the  surface,  where  congelation
begins.  The  sheet  of  ice  once  formed  protects  the  water
below  it  from  the  further  influence  of  cold.

If  freezing  began  at  the  bottom,  they  say,  large  reser-
voirs of  water,  during  winter,  would  become  solid  blocks  of
ice,  which  the  succeeding  summers  could  not  melt.  Count
Rumford  went  so  far  as  to  claim  that,  but  for  this  wise  pro-

*  See  a  note,  by  Mr.  James  Spedding,  to  Bacon's  "  Novum  Organum,'"
"  Works,"  vol.  i,  pp.  483, 484.

66  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

vision,  the  ocean  itself  would  be  frozen  solid,  and  navigation
rendered  impossible.

To  this  last  supposition,  the  sufficient  answer  is  that  the
same  law  of  density  does  not  obtain  in  salt  as  in  fresh  water.
Humboldt,  in  his  "  Kosmos,"  *  stated  that  "  fresh  and  salt
water  do  not  attain  their  maximum  density  at  the  same  tem-
perature, and  the  quantity  of  salt  of  the  sea  lowers  the  ther-
mometric  degree  of  the  greatest  density."  It  has  since  been
discovered  that  sea-water  continues  to  contract  down  to  the
freezing-pointjf  thus  placing  the  ocean  in  precisely  the  same
deplorable  condition  from  which  it  was  supposed  a  kind
Providence  had  rescued  it.  Next,  as  regards  fresh  water,  the
theory,  upon  closer  inspection,  proves  fallacious.  Its  authors,
in  laying  it  down,  failed  to  discover  that,  by  thus  sinking,  the
upper  stratum  of  water  would  immediately  find  itself  sur-
rounded by  a  warmer  stratum,  and  again  become  liquid,  the
result  of  which  would  be  that  there  would  be  no  ice  at  all
upon  our  streams  and  lakes  until  the  whole  body  of  the
water  reached  the  freezing-point,  which  would  require  the
same  intensity  of  cold  which  it  now  requires  to  freeze  them
solid.

Water,  as  well  as  ice,  is  a  protection  against  cold,  and  the
temperature  of  freezing  does  not  occur  at  certain  depths  be-
neath the  surface  of  a  lake  any  more  than  it  occurs  at  certain
depths  beneath  the  surface  of  the  ground,  although  that
depth  is  doubtless  considerably  greater.  If  ice  were  consid-
erably heavier  than  water,  so  as  to  tend  at  once  to  sink  as
soon  as  formed,  it  is  doubtful  whether  large  lakes  would  ever
freeze  at  all,  except  perhaps  in  shallow  places  around  their
shores,  for  each  particle  at  the  surface,  as  soon  as  it  congealed
from  contact  with  the  colder  air,  would  descend  immediately
to  a  stratum  sufficiently  wann  to  melt  it,  and  this  process
would  go  on  incessantly  and  insensibly,  without  producing

*  Vol.  i,  S.  195.

•)•  Inaugural  address  of  Dr.  William  B.  Carpenter  before  the  British  Associa-
tion, August  14,  1872.

OPTIMISTIC  FACTS.  5Y

any  visible  effect.*  It  could  never  be  cold  enough  to  freeze
the  entire  mass  to  the  bottom.  Yet,  notwithstanding  the  de-
fectiveness of  all  the  reasoning  with  regard  to  this  subject,
we  still  find  it  forming  a  part  of  modern  text-books,f  and
occasionally  creeping  into  the  advanced  modern  literature  of
the  times.:}:

It  was  even  supposed  that  water  was  the  only  substance
which  reached  its  maximum  density  above  the  point  of  solidi-
fication. But  it  was  at  length  discovered  that  glass  possesses  *
the  same  property,  and  now  it  is  asserted  that  this  also  is  the
case  with  many  other  substances,  such  as  bismuth,  antimony,
and  even  iron.  ||  Independently,  therefore,  of  all  design,  the
chances  that  water  should  possess  this  property  are  about  the
same  as  that  it  should  not.  But,  as  already  shown,  the  prop-
erty itself  is  of  doubtful  advantage  to  man.

A  very  good  example  of  the  pure  coincidence  favorable
to  human  welfare  is  found  in  the  manufacture  and  use  of
alcohol.  The  love  of  intoxicating  drinks  evinced  by  savage
races  shows  that,  had  the  art  of  distilling  them  been  suf-
ficiently simple  to  place  them  without  restriction  within
the  reach  of  primitive  man,  this  appetite  would  probably
have  been  indulged  to  the  total  destruction  of  the  race  at
an  early  stage  in  its  career.  It  is  certainly  a  fortunate  cir-
cumstance that  the   manufacture  of  alcohol   can   only  be

*  See  an  article  by  Professor  Huxley  in  the  "  Contemporary  Review  "  for
May,  1873,  page  839,  in  which  he  says,  speaking,  however,  of  sea-water,  "For,
however  bad  a  conductor  of  heat  ice  mcy  be,  the  unfrozen  sea-water  immediately
in  contact  with  the  under  surface  of  the  ice  must  needs  be  colder  than  that
farther  ofp,  and  hence  will  constantly  tend  to  descend  through  the  subjacent
warmer  water."

f  "  Loomis's  Natural  Philosophy,"  fifth  edition,  pp.  203,  204 ;  also,  You-
mans's  "New  Chemistry,"  1867,  pp.  200,  201,  etc.

X  See  an  article  on  "  The  Physics  of  Ice,"  by  E.  Lewis,  Jr.,  in  "  The  Popular
Science  Monthly,"  vol.  v  (1874),  p.  402.

*  Perry  F.  Nursey,  C.  E.,  "  Tempered  Glass,"  "  Popular  Science  Review,"
vol.  xiv  (1875),  p.  231.

J  Ganot's  "Physics,"  p.  261  ;  Bauermann's  "Metallurgy  of  Iron,"  p.  233  ;
Miller's  "  Chemistry,"  vol.  ii,  pp.  595,  604.

58  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

accomplislied  bj  men  whose  cerebral  development  has  ad-
vanced so  far  that  thej  are  able  to  foresee  its  evil  effects,
and,  in  a  great  degree,  control  their  appetites.  Races  so  low
as  to  be  unable  to  do  this  have  not  sufficient  intelligence  to
manufacture  the  substance  which  renders  it  necessary.

It  would  seem,  however,  upon  the  whole,  that,  as  the  case
thus  far  considered  stands,  it  is  a  weak  one  for  the  optimist.
Granting  all  he  claims,  and  giving  to  the  facts  a  fair  and
reasonable  interpretation,  stripped  of  certain  obvious  popu-
lar fallacies,  there  is  very  little  material  out  of  which  to
construct  the  teleological  edifice.  Unless  he  rejects  the
adaptation  theory  altogether,  the  greater  part  of  his  illus-
trations are  turned  over  in  a  body  to  the  side  of  the  evolu-
tionist. A  large  share  of  those  which  remain  are  such  as
would  be  as  likely  to  occur  in  the  manner  that  they  do  as
otherwise,  under  the  operation  of  the  mathematical  law  of
probabilities.  A  considerable  proportion  of  the  balance
turn  out  to  be  of  doubtful  advantage  when  fully  under-
stood. The  few  coincidences  that  are  left  are  probably  no
more  numerous  than  are  found  in  any  department  of  natu-
ral phenomena.  Coincidences  are  always  liable  to  occur,
and  any  one  who  has  ever  dealt  with  masses  of  wholly
independent  facts,  such  as  occur  in  the  ordinary  course  of
human  events,  private  life,  or  public  business,  has  learned
that  very  remarkable  and  complicated  combinations  of  facts
and  figures  are  frequently  brought  out — a  fact  which  has
given  rise  to  the  familiar  proverb  that  "  i;ruth  is  stranger
than  fiction."

Yvlly  to  secure  the  force  of  the  little  which  his  case
prima  facie  affords  him,  however,  the  optimist  must  also
show  that  there  exist  no  instances  in  nature  of  the  opposite
class — cases  in  which  the  facts  exhibit  an  obvious  disadvan-
tage where  advantage  would  appear  to  have  been  as  much
to  be  expected.  A  single  case  of  this  class  is  fatal  to  abso-
lute optimism,  and  even  a  very  few  would  militate  power-
fully against  any  form  of  qualified  optimism.

ANTI-OPTIMISTIO  FACTS.  59

What,  then,  is  the  real  state  of  the  case  ?  Are  there,  in
fact,  any  good  examples  of  dysteleology  in  nature  ?  Do  we
actually  see  any  want  of  adaptation  of  the  organism  to  the
environment  ?  Are  there  any  imperfections  in  the  degree
of  correspondence  ?  To  the  biologist,  these  are  puerile  in-
quiries. To  the  moralist,  the  historian,  the  statesman,  they
must  sound  strange.  To  any  intelligent  observer  of  the
world,  men,  and  things,  they  must  suggest  a  doubt,  either
as  to  the  seriousness  or  the  sanity  of  the  interrogator.

"While  it  may  cost  some  pains  to  catalogue  a  respectable
number  of  genuine  arguments  for  optimism,  it  is  not  the
least  trouble  to  multiply  evidences  to  the  contrary.  Opti-
mists meet  with  them  as  frequently  as  other  men,  but  refuse
to  admit  them.  As  Lord  Bacon  says,  they  "mark  when
they  hit,  but  never  mark  when  they  miss."

We  will  enumerate  in  a  rapid  manner  a  few  typical  cases
of  this  kind,  each  of  which  will  doubtless  suggest  a  number
of  others  of  its  own  general  class.  For  convenience,  these
facts  may  be  roughly  subdivided  into  three  groups.  Those
falling  under  the  first  of  these  groups  are  such  as  exhibit  a
condition  generally  unfavorable  to  life  on  the  globe,  either
of  plants,  animals,  or  men.  Those  falling  under  the  second
group  are  such  as  negative,  in  one  form  or  another,  the  as-
sumption that  the  human  race  is  in  any  manner  the  special
object  of  benevolent  design.  Facts  of  the  third  group  are
those  in  consequence  of  which  the  progress  of  the  world
tends  constantly  to  defeat  itself.

Of  the  first  group,  which  may  be  called  anti-iiocentriG
facts,  let  us  first  take  an  example  or  two  from  the  vegetable
kingdom.

The  outer  bark  of  many  trees,  though  of  course  essential
to  the  retention  of  the  sap  and  protection  of  the  inner  bark,
becomes,  in  consequence  of  its  failure  to  keep  pace  with  the
fresh-growing  tissues  of  the  rest  of  the  trunk,  a  great  hin-
drance to  the  process  of  natural  enlargement,  by  binding  the
trunk  too  tightly  and  compressing  the  cells  of  the  cambium

60  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

layer.  The  longitudinal  grooves  in  the  bark  of  most  trees  are
due  to  the  tardy  yielding  of  this  constricting  force.  A  sim-
ple provision  for  the  natural  vertical  separation  of  the  corky
layer  into  narrow  strips  would  have  greatly  facilitated  all
arborescent  vegetation.  So  obvious  is  this  that  horticultur-
ists actually  secure  this  object,  and  very  successfully,  by
artificially  slitting  the  bark.*

The  phenomenon  of  the  autumnal  blooming  of  vernal
species  of  plants  has  been  very  frequently  remarked.  The
writer  has  accumulated  numerous  very  interesting  examples
of  this  class  in  the  vicinity  of  Washington,f  where  many  of
the  Northern  and  Southern  species  join.  The  period  of  warm
weather  which  generally  occurs  here  in  October,  frequently
extending  far  into  November,  or  even  up  to  the  Christmas
holidays,  is  very  favorable  to  this  result.  Now,  plants  thus
blooming  a  second  time  can  not,  as  a  general  thing,  yield  a
second  crop  of  fruit,  and  the  second  blooming  is  therefore
wholly  in  the  nature  of  a  miscarriage.  Other  early  spring
bloomers  often  come  out  fully  during  a  warm  period  in
February,  or  even  in  January,  and  are  as  certainly  smitten
by  the  heavy  frosts  which  are  sure  to  follow.  This  is  not
only  noticeable  of  certain  Japanese  species  which  can  not
become  adapted  to  the  differences  between  our  climate  and
that  of  Japan,  but  is  true  of  a  number  of  native  trees,  such
as  the  silver  maple.:}:  It  also  occurs  in  their  native  haunts
with  certain  herbaceous  plants  such  as  Anemone  Hepatica^
SaTiguinaria  Canadensis,  and  ClaytoniaVirginica ;  and  the
spadix  of  Symplocarpus  fmtidus,  the  skunk-cabbage,  is  often

*  Sachs,  "  Lehrbuch  der  Botanik,"  S.  785.

f  See  "Field  and  Forest,"  vol.  ill,  p.  172;  "Bulletin  of  the  United  States
National  Museum,"  No.  22  ("  Guide  to  the  Flora  of  Washington  and  Vicinity  ")
pp.  32,  238.

X  Specimens  of  the  staminate  flowers  fully  blown  of  Acer  daxyearpum.  were
collected  by  the  writer  from  trees  in  the  streets  of  Washington  on  January  15,
1 876.  Of  course,  these  blossoms  were  ephemeral,  and  could  not  have  fertilized
the  female  flowers  of  adjacent  trees,  since  in  these  there  was  no  approach  to-
ward the  bursting  of  their  thick  downy  bud-coverings.

ANTI-BIOOENTRIO  FACTS.  61

found  blighted,  owing  doubtless  to  its  extremely  precocious
development.  On  the  theory  of  an  intelligent  direction,  none
of  these  cases  could  occur,  but,  referring  every  thing  to  uni-
form causes,  this  is  precisely  what  we  should  expect  to  find.

Let  us  next  take  a  few  examples  from  animal  life.

The  sting  of  an  insect  consists  of  the  ovipositor  of  the
female  transformed  into  a  weapon  of  defense.  In  some,  it  is
so  strongly  barbed  that  when  thrust  into  another  body  it  can
not  be  withdrawn,  and  the  attempt  to  do  so  ^results  in  ex-
tracting the  sting  from  the  insect's  body  together  with  the
viscera  with  which  it  is  attached,  resulting  in  the  death  of
the  insect.*  Every  attack  is  therefore  a  suicide,  and  the
destruction  of  so  many  females  must  be  disadvantageous  to
the  species.  The  optimist  must  explain  why  so  serious  a
defect  was  not  avoided.

Female  opossums  having  only  thirteen  nipples  have  been
known  to  give  birth  to  fifteen  or  sixteen  young  and  place
them  in  the  pouch.  Now,  the  life  of  each  embryo  (for  when
thus  born  they  are  scarcely  more)  depends  upon  its  perma-
nent attachment  to  one  of  the  nipples  of  the  mother.  In
these  cases,  therefore,  one  or  two  of  the  embryos  must  of
necessity  perish,  f  a  result  which  is  out  of  all  harmony  with
either  intelligent  or  benevolent  design.

Many  other  cases  in  which  there  is  a  similar  lack  of  cor-
respondence have  been  pointed  out.:}:

The  fatal  propensity  of  moths  and  beetles  to  fly  into  a
flame  is  a  fact  which  all  have  observed,  heaps  of  Ephemerce
frequently  lying  upon  the  ground  in  the  morning  at  the  foot
of  the  lamp-posts.

The  tameness  of  birds,  etc.,  on  newly  discovered  islands
has  been  much  dwelt  upon  in  late  years.*     Of  course,  it  is

*  Darwin,  "  Origin  of  Species,"  p.  197.

f  See  an  article  on  "  Opossums  and  their  Young,"  by  Professor  W.  S.  Bar-
nard, in  "  The  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  viii  (ISTS),  p.  156.
X  Spencer,  "Principles  of  Psychology,"  vol.  i,  pp.  320,  409.

*  Darwin,  "  Journal  of  Researches,"  etc.,  p.  398.

62  ADAPTATION.-MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

explicable  on  the  theory  that  they  have  to  learn  the  nature  of
man  by  experience,  but  on  the  teleological  theory  these  poor
creatures  should  have  had  an  instinctive  fear  of  man  im-
planted in  their  natures.

M.  Littre  *  refers  to  the  unfortunate  fact  that  animals
attacked  with  rabies,  however  innocent  at  other  times,  im-
mediately acquire  a  disposition  to  bite,  whereby  the  dread-
ful malady  is  propagated  to  other  creatures.  But  for  this
fact,  hydrophobia  would  be  of  comparatively  rare  occurrence.
It  must  require  considerable  ingenuity  to  explain  this  op-
timistically. But,  if  this  disease  is  due  to  the  multiplication,
within  the  blood  of  the  victim,  of  a  particular  species  of
germ,  natural  selection  will  account  for  the  fact,  since  it  is
clearly  to  the  advantage  of  the  disease-organism  that  it  be
conveyed  to  many  individuals,  and  the  particular  effect  neces-
sary to  create  a  desire  in  the  animal  bitten  to  bite  others  is
one  which  the  disease-organism  may  be  impelled  to  produce,
and  the  tendency  to  conduct  itself  in  such  a  manner  as  to
produce  this  effect  would  become  hereditary.

Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  points  out  f  the  disadvantages  un-
der which  certain  imperfectly  integrated  annelids  labor,  from
the  possession  of  a  multitude  of  similar  organs  in  different
segments,  and  insists  that  they  can  not  be  accounted  for
teleologically.  In  higher  forms  they  mostly  become  atro-
phied from  disuse.  From  the  point  of  view  of  evolution,  the
fact  is,  of  course,  perfectly  explainable.

Passing  now  to  the  second  class  of  anti-optimistic  facts,
which  may  be  called  the  anti-anthropocentric  group,  we
find  them  equally  abundant  and  obtrusive.

An  important  sub-group  of  these  consists  of  those  "  rudi-
mentary organs,"  %  as  they  are  called,  which,  while  they  per-

*  "  Preface  d'un  Disciple  "  to  Augustc  Comto's  "  Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.
i,  p.  xxiv.

f  "  Principles  of  Biology,"  vol.  ii,  p.  92.

X  The  term  "  rudiment,"  as  employed  in  biology  and  now  firmly  established,
is  a  manifest  departure  from  the  normal  sense  of  the  word,  which  is  that  of  an

ANTI-ANTHKOPOCENTRIC  FACTS.  63

form  no  known  functions,  are  at  the  same  time  the  cause  and
seat  of  dangerous  diseases.

Such,  for  example,  are  the  tonsils,  which  are  of  no  in-
telligible use,  and  yet  very  much  subject  to  take  on  a  dis-
eased condition.  Persons  afflicted  with  tonsilitis  rarely  re-
cover from  it  until  tlie  tonsils  have  either  been  removed
entirely,  or  so  lacerated  by  repeated  lancing  that  they  have
lost  their  form  and  special  character.

Quite  near  to  the  tonsils,  and  like  them  in  this  respect  at
least,  is  the  thyroid  gland.  Wholly  functionless  and  physio,
logically  useless,  this  gland  is,  nevertheless,  the  seat  of  the
serious  disease  called  goitre  or  bronchocele.  Wilhelm  Miil-
ler  has  shown  that  the  thyroid  gland  is  a  lingering  repre-
sentative of  what  is  called  the  "  hypobranchial  groove  "  of
certain  lower  animals,  in  which  it  serves  an  important  pur-
pose in  conveying  food  to  the  stomach.*

The  vermiform  appendage  of  the  human  intestines  has
already  become  a  trite  example  under  this  head.  Besides
the  danger  that  some  extraneous  substance,  in  passing
through  the  system,  may  perchance  be  thrust  into  it  and
cause  a  fatal  inflammation  at  such  a  delicate  and  inaccessible
part  of  the  body,  there  is  the  liabiHty  that  it  may  cause  a
constriction  in  the  intestine  sufficient  completely  to  choke
up  the  passage.  Eighteen  cases  of  this  latter  class  are  said
to  have  been  recorded  as  verified  by  autopsy  down  to  the

original,  or  initial,  form.  It  is  too  late  to  deplore  the  adoption  of  a  term  which
tends  to  mislead  the  mind  upon  a  vital  principle  of  science,  and  need  only  be
pointed  out  that  its  employment  in  this  sense  was  due  to  an  original  misconcep-
tion, on  the  part  of  early  naturalists,  of  the  true  nature,  history,  and  genesis  of
these  organs.  They  appeared  to  them  to  be  incipient  but  abortive  organs  which
never  had  attained  to  the  performance  of  any  function,  and  in  this  case,  as  in
all  others,  language  was  built  up  on  the  apparent  and  superficial.  As,  how-
ever, there  do  exist  a  few  true  rudimentary  organs,  i.  e.,  organs  obviously  in
process  of  development,  it  is  greatly  to  be  wished  that  a  different  term,  as,
€.  ff.,  vestiges,  might  be  adopted  to  denote  those  obsolescent  organs  which  have
become  atrophied  from  disuse.

*  Ilaeckcl,  "  Anthropogenic  "  (1874),  S.  615.

64  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVEESE.

year  1873.*  Modem  biology  readily  accounts  for  this  organ
as  a  vestige  of  the  caecum  of  the  lower  animals.

A  fact  of  less  general  renown,  but  equally  applicable
here,  is  the  exposed  condition  of  the  lower  extremity  of  the
spinal  canal.  In  the  enlargement  of  the  sacral  vertebrae  in-
cident to  the  assumption  by  man  of  the  erect  posture,  an
opening  was  left  by  which  the  spinal  canal  is  unprotected  by
any  osseous  covering.  In  cases  of  protracted  iUness,  the  bed-
ridden patient  often  lies  so  long  upon  this  part  that  the
fibrous  membrane  and  skin,  by  which  alone  this  most  deli-
cate region  is  protected,  take  on  inflammation,  which  ulti-
mately extends  to  the  envelopes  of  the  spinal  marrow,  consti-
tuting rachidian  meningitis,  which  is  almost  always  fatal.f

A  few  more  anti-anthropocentric  examples  selected  from
widely  different  fields  may  be  added.

Let  us  take  the  fact  that  the  science  of  meteorology,
although  probably  the  most  practically  important  of  all  the
domains  of  human  activity,  whether  we  consider  its  bearings
upon  industry  or  commerce,  is,  nevertheless,  of  so  compli-
cated and  irregular  a  character  that  it  has  only  been  during
the  last  few  years  that  the  attempts  to  prosecute  its  study
have  been  attended  with  any  practical  advantages  whatever,
and  these  are  as  yet  very  slight,  and  attained  only  at  great
pecuniary  cost.  We  have  learned  the  chemical  constitution
of  the  fixed  stars,  but  can  not  yet  predict  the  approach  of  a
storm  long  enough  in  advance  to  prevent  disaster.;}:

The  elements  of  the  solar  system  are  not  all  that  could  be
wished,  or  as  advantageous  as  human  intelligence  could  sug-
gest.

Laplace  declares  *  that,  "  if  the  moon  was  given  to  light
the  earth  by  night,  nature  has  not  attained  the  object  which
it  proposed,  since  we  are  frequently  deprived  of  the  light

*  Charles  Martins,  in  Introduction  to  Lamarck's  "  Philosophic  Zoologiquc,"
vol.  i,  p.  Ixv.

f  Loe.  cit.,  p.  Ixvi.  X  Humboldt's  "  Kosmos,"  vol.  i,  S.  220.

*  "  Exposition  du  SystSme  du  Monde"  (1835),  p.  233.

ANTI-ANTHROPOCENTEIO  FxVCTS.  65

of  both  the  sun  and  moon  "  ;  and  he  proceeds  to  lay  down  in
detail  the  changes  which  would  be  required  in  the  present
relations  of  the  motions  and  positions  of  the  sun,  earth,  and
moon,  in  order  to  accomplish  that  object  and  bring  about
the  most  advantageous  adjustment.

If  we  suppose  that  the  moons  of  the  larger  planets  were
designed  to  be  inhabited,  a  supposition  which  has  been  de-
fended by  eminent  astronomers,*  it  is  an  ill-devised  arrange-
ment that  in  all  cases  they  should  always  present  one  and
the  same  side  to  their  primary,  which  during  their  habitable
period  must  have  constituted  their  chief  source  of  light  and
heat.

Again,  returning  to  the  earth,  it  would  be  much  better
for  man  if  there  could  be  more  day  than  night  all  the  year
round.  The  extreme  difference  at  the  summer  solstice  in
temperate  latitudes  is  not  yet  suflSicient  to  secure  the  great-
est economic  eifect.  Sixteen  hours  of  activity  and  eight  of
sleep  is  the  average  requirement  of  man.  As  the  world  is
constituted,  he  therefore  spends  on  an  average  four  hours
of  the  night  in  waking  activity.  The  inconveniences  of
working  in  the  night  are  manifest,  and  the  cost  of  artificial
light  is  enormous,  constituting  an  immense  drain  upon  the
natural  resources  of  the  earth.

Taking  now  an  example  from  a  very  different  field,  we
may  point  to  the  prevalence  of  the  decimal  system  of  no-
tation. The  number  ten  being  neither  a  square  nor  a  cube,
and  its  half  being  a  prime  number,  it  is  evidently  an  ex-
ceedingly awkward  basis  for  a  system  of  notation.  Either
nine,  twelve,  or  sixteen  would  have  been  far  better,  but  the
most  advantageous  number  of  all  is  unquestionably  eight.
The  advantages  of  the  octonal  system  have  been  frequently
dwelt  upon,f  and  not  a  few  have  indulged  the  dream  that  it
mig]it  be  one  day  made  to  supersede  the  decimal.     But  this

*  R.  A.  Proctor,  in  "Comhill  Magazine  "  for  May,  1872,  p.  550.
f  See  an  article  on  "  Curious  Systems  of  Notation,"  by  T.  F.  Brownell,  in
"  The  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  toI.  xiii  (IS'ZS),  pp.  420-428.
35

66  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

at  present  seems  hopeless.  By  what  oversight  did  we  come
to  stumble  upon  so  clumsy  a  system  ?  Why  have  all  nations
and  races  that  are  capable  of  counting  ten  adopted  either  the
quinary,  decimal,  or  vigesimal  scale  ?

A  malevolent  designer  might  have  imposed  this  evil
upon  man  to  confuse  his  ideas  and  thwart  his  progress,  but
a  benevolent  designer  must  have  been  incapable  of  such  an
act.  Teleology  utterly  fails  to  account  for  it,  but  science
has  satisfactorily  explained  it.  It  is  because  the  human  race
happens  to  have  five  fingers  on  each  hand  and  five  toes  on
each  foot.  Or,  to  go  further  back,  it  is  because  in  the
transition  from  the  finny  Dipneusta  to  the  digitate  Sozo-
hranchia,  the  process  of  elimination  of  digits  chanced  to  be-
come arrested  at  the  number  five  instead  of  at  four,  or  six,
or  eight,  which  number  man  has  inherited  from  the  ances-
tors of  the  Proteus  and  the  Axolotl.  And  behold  what  stu-
pendous effects  from  so  trivial  a  circumstance !  I  can  recall
no  more  forcible  illustration  of  the  utter  blindness  and  irre-
sponsibility of  the  operations  of  nature.

The  human  body  happens  to  possess  a  specific  gravity  a
trifle  greater  than  that  of  water.  In  consequence  of  this,  it
sinks  when  placed  in  water,  unless  sustained  by  the  action
called  swimming.  This  action,  moreover,  is  an  art  which
must  be  separately  acquired  by  each  individual,  and  is  not
naturally  implanted,  even  as  it  is  in  most  other  land  animals,
and  as  it  should  be  on  any  providential  theory  of  the  uni-
verse. Placed  on  a  planet,  of  whose  supei^cial  area  two  and
four  fifths  times  as  much  is  water  as  land,  and  which  he  is
obliged  to  traverse  in  all  directions,  this  circumstance  be-
comes an  immense  hindrance  to  his  operations  and  success.
Why  was  he  not  made  lighter  instead  of  heavier  than  water  ?
Why  not  endowed  with  the  instinct  to  swim  ?  The  optimist
must  meet  these  questions  squarely.  Science  is  satisfied  to
explain  that  the  ancestral  creature  from  which  man  de-
scended, and  whose  structure  and  instincts  he  has  in  great
part  inherited,  was  so  far  restricted  to  terrestrial  life  that  no

^NTI-ANTHROPOCENTRIC  FACTS.  67

adaptation  to  aquatic  conditions  was  wrought  in  its  constitu-
tion. But  this  leaves  it  free  to  admit  that  such  an  adapta-
tion would  be  far  better  for  man  as  now  circumstanced.

M.  Auguste  Comte  *  has  very  justly  remarked  that  the
brevity  of  human  life  constitutes  one  of  the  principal  causes
of  the  slowness  of  our  social  development,  both  on  account
of  the  time  lost  by  each  successive  generation  in  making  the
preparations  acquired  by  its  predecessor,  and  more  especially
because  this  spontaneous  succession  is  always  necessarily  in-
complete from  the  impossibility  of  placing  itself  in  the  same
position  and  in  the  precise  direction  of  previous  labors.  It
certainly  does  seem  as  though  one  half  of  the  average  life-
time of  all  those  who  really  achieve  any  useful  results  is
spent  in  the  preparation  necessary  to  place  them  fully  en
rajpport  with  their  work.  If,  after  having  made  this  im-
mense sacrifice,  they  could  be  assured  a  hundred  years  ad-
ditional in  which  to  push  forward  the  real  work  of  their
lives,  the  increased  results  which  they  must  accomplish  would
be  even  greater  proportionally  to  the  time  than  they  now
are.  This  would  have  a  secondary  influence,  moreover,
which  would  probably  be  more  productive  than  its  direct
influence.  The  brevity  of  life  serves  as  a  powerful  deterrent,
not  only  to  the  laying  out  of  a  life-work,  but  to  making  the
preparation  requisite  for  its  prosecution.  Increased  longevity
would  thus  furnish  an  inducement  both  to  acquire  and  to
employ  knowledge.

There  seems  no  good  reason,  either,  why  human  life
might  not  as  well  have  been  double  or  treble  what  it  is.  If
it  be  said  that  this  would  be  contrary  to  our  constitution,  to
the  nature  of  the  bodily  structures  and  tissues,  then  the  ques-
tion remains,  Why  might  not  these  have  been  adapted  to  a
greater  longevity  ?  There  is  nothing  antecedently  impossible
about  it.f     It  is  simply  a  positive  fact,  a  necessary  truth,

*  "  Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  iv,  p.  453.

f  Such  small  and  comparatively  useless  creatures  as  toads  arc  known  to  pos-
sess greater  absolute  longevity  than  man.

68  ADAPTATIOI^.— MAN   AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

that  the  usual  maximum  of  human  life  is  about  equal  to
seventy  revolutions  of  the  earth  in  its  orbit  around  the  sun.
In  the  only  sense  which  properly  belongs  to  the  words,  this
is  the  result  of  simple  chance,  or  accident.

We  must  content  ourselves  with  one  other  example  of
this  class.

Frequent  allusion  has  been  made  to  the  fact  that  all
species  are  circumscribed  to  limited  areas  and  numbers  by  the
action  of  an  adverse  environment.  This  means  that  in  the
majority  of  cases  the  number  of  premature  deaths  is  suffi-
cient to  prevent  that  rapid  multiplication  by  the  free  opera-
tion of  which  any  one  of  the  species  living  would  soon  peo-
ple the  whole  world  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others.  In  many
cases,  the  adverse  elements  operate  to  destroy  unborn  germs,
and  thus  work  no  positive  pain,  but  it  is  rare  that  they  tend
to  prevent  attempts  to  multiply  or  to  produce  infertility.
The  number  of  individuals  completely  gestated  and  actually
born  is  many  times,  often  many  hundred  times,  the  number
that  reach  maturity,  while  the  number  that  reach  the  ulti-
mate limit  of  life  of  the  species  is  very  small.*  This  indi-
cates, as  before  pointed  out,  an  almost  incalculable  amount
of  friction  at  the  periphery  of  each  faunal  area,  and  this
wholesale  destruction  of  life  is  attended  with  a  correspond-
ing amount  of  pain  and  suffering.  To  this  sinister  law  man
is,  unfortunately,  no  exception.  More  than  one  fourth  of
all  that  are  born  die  before  they  have  attained  their  fifth
year,  and  one  half  by  the  time  the  fiftieth  year  is  reached.
The  full  limit  of  life  in  a  perfectly  healthy  person  is  prob-
ably on  an  average  upward  of  a  hundred  years,  yet  the
actual  average  of  human  life  is  only  a  trifle  more  than  forty

*  An  excellent  illustration  of  the  tendency  in  nature  to  multiply  individuals
for  the  purpose  of  prematurely  destroying  them  is  furnished  by  the  fish  called
the  menhaden,  whose  biography  has  been  so  well  written  by  Professor  G.  Brown
Goode,  of  the  Smithsonian  Institution,  in  a  paper  read  before  the  American  As-
sociation for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  at  Saratoga,  in  1879,  "Proceedings,"
p.  425.  (See  also  "  A  History  of  the  Menhaden,"  by  G.  Brown  Goode  and  W.
0.  At  water.  New  York,  1880.)

J

ANTI-ANTHROPOCENTRIO  FACTS.  69

years.  If  we  consider  the  case  of  any  single  individual,  it
always  seems  as  if  death  was  caused  by  some  legitimate  in-
fluence in  the  particular  case.  The  particular  disease  is  usu-
ally well  known,  and  has  long  had  its  appropriate  name  in
the  science  of  medicine,  and  its  symptoms  and  results,  as
well  as  often  its  proximate  causes,  are  usually  understood.
If  death  is  produced  by  accident,  the  circumstances  attending
it  appear  wholly  exceptional  and  peculiar  to  the  case  in  ques-
tion. There  is  generally  no  difficulty  in  accounting  for  pre-
mature deaths,  and  assigning  what  are  regarded  as  wholly
satisfactory  causes.  Yet,  looked  at  from  the  broader  plat-
form of  cosmical  phenomena,  all  deaths  that  occur  earlier
than  the  extreme  limit  of  human  life  are  really  the  result  of
this  same  friction  of  the  environment  which  we  have  been
considering  in  the  animal  world.  They  must  ultimately  be
traced  back  to  the  influence  of  adverse  circumstances  buffet-
ing against  the  perpetual  strain  of  human  effort  to  expand  its
numbers  and  its  area,  and  overstep  the  limits  prescribed  by
the  conditions  of  nature  and  the  constitution  of  man.  They
are  produced  by  the  constant  tendency  of  the  population  to
outstrip  the  means  of  subsistence,  by  the  excess  of  the  de-
mand for  food,  clothing,  shelter,  and  other  conditions  of  ex-
istence over  their  supply.  The  weak  physical  constitutions
of  men  and  women  are  the  ultimate  and  real  cause  of  the
multitudes  of  diseases  to  which  they  thus  become  a  prey,  and
these  weak  constitutions  are  in  turn  derived  either  directly,
or  indirectly  through  inheritance,  from  the  adverse  influences
that  have  beaten  against  them  and  dwarfed  them.  Life  is
and  ever  has  been  a  struggle,  and  this  struggle  is  only  an-
other name  for  friction  of  the  environment.  Even  deaths
by  accident  and  violence  are  properly  attributable  to  a  lack
of  correspondence,  and  are  analogous  to  those  of  moths  that
fly  into  the  candle,  or  the  horses  of  Arizona  that  eat  the  fatal
astragalus.  In  animals  thus  succumbing,  we  say  that  their
instincts  are  not  adapted  to  the  new  conditions.  In  the  case
of  men,  we  dignify  the  same  truth  by  the  name  of  "  defect-

70  ADAPTATION.— MAN   AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

ive  judgment."  AVar  itself  is  simply  a  blind  effort  on  the
part  of  "an  increasing  race  to  beat  back  the  waves  of  adverse
surroundings  and  establish  the  conditions  to  its  further  in-
crease, while  pestilence  and  famine  are  the  ultimate  scourges
vrliich  finally  declare  that  it  has  already  advanced  too  far,
and  must  now  halt  or  retreat.

Such  being  the  facts,  the  questions  recur.  Why  this
dreadful  waste  of  vital  energy  ?  "Why  this  appalling  accumu-
lation of  misery  and  woe  ?  If  races  must  be  circumscribed,
why  has  not  nature  provided  for  a  reduced  fertility  ?  The
power  to  increase  and  multiply  is  never  checked.  Nature
virtually  says.  You  shall  have  every  facility  and  every  in-
ducement to  unlimited  expansion,  but  your  numbers  shall  be
slaughtered  and  decimated  as  fast  as  they  overrun  the  pre-
scribed limits.  Surely  this  is  no  optimistic  scheme,  and  lit-
tle denotes  the  action  either  of  intelligence  or  benevolence.
Necessitarianism  is  the  only  form  of  philosophy  which  can
furnish  an  adequate  explanation  of  such  facts.

"Without  dwelling  upon  other  instances  of  this  group,  it
will  suffice  simply  to  enumerate  the  following  additional
but  wholly  disconnected  facts :  that  the  worst  of  all  the  liv-
ing enemies  of  mankind  are  too  minute  to  be  discovered  by
the  highest-powered  microscopes — the  so-called  germs  of
disease ;  that,  in  those  latitudes  where  the  greatest  density  of
population  occurs,  northerly  winds  usually  prevail  during
the  winter  and  southerly  winds  during  the  summer,*  thus
exaggerating  the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold  ;  that  in  mount-
ainous regions  the  rain-fall  is  chiefly  on  the  tops  of  the
mountains  where  it  is  little  needed,  while  the  fertile  valleys
require  artificial  irrigation ;  that  the  most  useful  as  well  as
the  most  beautiful  objects  in  nature  are  usually  the  most
rare ;  that,  whereas  pleasures  are  usually  moderate  and  brief,
pains  are  usually  int'jnse  and  protracted  ;  and  that,  finally,  so
few  are  the  enjoyments,  comforts,  and  attractions  of  life,

*  See  the  third  paper  of  Professor  Loomis  in  the  July  number  of  the  "  Ameri-
can Journal  of  Science  and  Arts"  for  18T5  (Sd  series,  vol.  x).

ANTI  SOCIOCENTRIO  FACTS.  71

and  so  many  its  sufferings,  discomforts,  and  distractions,  that
they  have  furnished  a  basis  for  a  pessimistic  school- of  phi-
losophy, and  earned  for  the  world  from  devout  teleologists
the  title  of  a  "  Siberia — the  penal  settlement — of  expatriated
rebels."  *

A  sufficient  number  both  of  generally  anti-biocentric  and
of  specially  anti-anthropocentric  facts  having  been  thus  rap-
idly enumerated,  let  us  consider  a  few  of  the  third  group,
which  may  be  denominated  anti-socioGentric.

In  considering  in  the  Introduction  (vol.  i,  p.  Y5)  the
principal  barriers  to  the  advance  of  dynamic  sociology,  a
few  of  the  most  general  illustrations  of  the  manner  in  which
human  progress  is  constantly  defeating  itself  were  set  forth.
It  will,  therefore,  only  be  necessary  here  to  name  a  small
number  of  more  special  examples  under  the  same  head.

It  was  M.  Auguste  Comte  who  first  pointed  out,  and  who
has  emphasized  it  with  the  force  peculiar  to  his  writings,  that
the  past  tendency  of  the  human  intellect  has  been  to  ignore
substantial  realities,  and  waste  its  energies  on  empty  specula-
tions respecting  the  causes  of  phenomena.f  He  went  too  far,
and  himself  ignored  the  distinction  between  legitimate  and
illegitimate  causes ;  but,  while  thus  aiding  to  check  the  tide
of  progress  which  he  contributed  so  much  to  swell,  he  has
nevertheless  abundantly  proved  the  dangerous  character  of
this  anti-progressive  tendency.  The  amount  of  intellectual
energy,  capable,  if  rightly  applied,  of  constituting  a  direct
motive-power  to  human  progress,  which  has  been  expended
upon  the  wholly  non-progressive  discussion  of  irresolvable,
transcendental  problems,  is  sufficient  to  appall  the  modern
philosopher,  with  his  eyes  finally  opened  to  the  needs  of
mankind.

*  See  Hugh  Miller's  "  Testimony  of  the  Rocks,"  p.  410,  quoting  from  P.
MTarlane's  "  Solar  System."  In  this  general  connection,  see  also  a  remarkable
passage  from  the  works  of  Jeremy  Taylor  reproduced  in  a  modern  work  entitled
"Natural  Law:  An  Essay  on  Ethics,"  by  Edith  Simcox,  p.  209  (motto  to
Chapter  V).

f  "Philosophie  Positive,"  vol.  i,  p.  13.

72  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

It  has  been  well  said  also  by  Comte  *  that,  while  men
have  always  had  the  most  need,  they  have  unfortunately
at  the  same  time  manifested  the  least  disposition,  to  exercise
their  intellectual  faculties.  The  only  social  progress  which  has
been  achieved  has  resulted  from  the  exercise  of  these  facul-
ties, and  yet  this  has  all  been  accomplished  by  a  mere  hand-
ful, as  it  were ;  the  great  mass  having  remained,  and  still
remaining,  entire  strangers  to  the  process  except  as  the  pas-
sive recipients  of  its  benefits.  The  possibilities  which  can
be  imagined  from  a  universal  intellectual  activity  tend  to
bewilder  the  mind.

Allied  to  this  last  fact,  we  may  profitably  reflect  upon
the  manner  in  which,  in  the  present  state  of  scientific
progress,  the  discovery  of  truth  by  the  few  experimenters
and  thinkers  is  distancing  popular  intelligence.  The  world
is  really  swallowing  science  in  doses  entirely  too  large  to
be  assimilated  by  the  social  system,  so  that  positive  evil
constantly  results,  not  of  course  sufficient  to  overbalance
the  good,  but  sufficient  powerfully  to  counteract  its  influ-
ence.

The  remedy,  which  lies  in  the  direction  of  commuting
a  portion  of  the  force  of  propulsion  into  force  of  diffusion,
or  of  greatly  increasing  the  latter  while  leaving  the  former
unaffected,  need  not  here  be  considered,  since  it  is  the  ex-
isting fact  with  which  we  are  at  present  concerned.  (See
infra,  Chapters  XIII  and  XIY.)

As  this  enumeration  might  be  indefinitely  prolonged,
and  must  sooner  or  later  be  abruptly  brought  to  a  close,  we
will  limit  it  to  a  single  additional  example,  which,  however,
is  one  of  great  importance.  It  consists  in  the  fact,  so  unfort-
unate for  the  progress  of  the  human  race,  that  each  and  all
of  the  various  errors,  which  the  increasing  intelligence  of  the
world  has  successively  swept  away,  have  been  defended  to
the  last  by  at  least  a  few  of  the  most  honored  and  otherwise
most  progressive  minds  of  the  age,  and  have  been  compelled

*Loc.  city  vol.  iv,  p.  388.

ANTI-SOCIOCENTRIO  FACTS.  73

at  last  tardily  to  succumb  to  a  sort  of  popular  verdict  or
the  force  of  numbers  of  lesser  lights  and  younger  heads,  re-
luctantly declining  to  follow  longer  those  whom  they  had
been  accustomed  to  look  up  to  for  counsel  and  intellectual
guidance.  This  truth  has  been  so  happily  expressed  by  a
modern  writer,*  that  I  cannot  refrain  from  quoting  his  words :
"  The  world's  greatest  follies  and  darkest  untruths,  especially
while  in  the  process  of  dissolution,  have  always  found  some
justly  honored  authority  in  theology,  in  literature,  in  phi-
losophy, in  law,  and  in  science  itself — a  Matthew  Hale,  a
Lord  Bacon,  a  Wesley,  a  Cotton  Mather,  an  Elliotson,  a
Hare,  a  Gregory,  a  "Wallace,  an  Emerson,  an  Agassiz,  a  Zoll-
ner,  committees  of  learned  academies,  professors  in  great
colleges — to  stand  by  their  bedside,  armed  with  syllogisms,
trusting  their  senses,  and  conscientiously  striving  to  nurse
them  back  to  vigorous  life."

There  are  some  readers  to  whom  an  apology  might  be
due  for  so  protracted,  and  to  them  doubtless  somewhat
tedious,  an  illustration  of  the  'pros  and  cons  of  optimism
— a  philosophy  which  may  be  supposed  to  have  long  been
obsolete.  To  such  we  can  only  say  that  it  is  greatly  to  be
regretted  that  the  mass  of  mankind  have  by  no  means  yet
reached  their  advanced  position.  While  optimism,  as  a
philosophic  tenet,  such  as  it  was  defined  and  defended  by
the  scholars  of  a  century  ago,  has,  it  must  be  admitted,
ceased  to  engross  the  attention  of  thinking  minds,  the  quali-
fied form  of  it  which  has  been  described,  and  toward  which
the  foregoing  considerations  have  been  principally  directed,
still  forms  the  very  warp  of  the  current  philosophy  outside
of  the  domain  of  science,  and  to  a  great  extent  within  that
domain.  It  is  the  essence  of  all  teleological  conceptions,  and
so  generally  pervades  the  received  theories  of  life  and  action
as  to  distort  completely  the  popular  view  of  the  relations  be-

*  Dr.  George  M.  Beard,  in  "  The  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xiii  (1878),
p.  338.

Y4  ADAPTATIOIT.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE,

tween  man  and  the  universe.  The  great  mass  of  mankind
etill  believe  in  a  conscious  intelligence,  either  without  or
within  the  universe,  which  is  perpetually  adjusting  means  to
ends  in  nature.  The  majority  regard  that  intelligence  as
in  a  manner  benign  and  sympathetic,  and,  while  ignoring  the
strifes  and  struggles,  the  sufferings  and  failures  of  the  sen-
tient world,  are  ever  on  the  alert  to  gather  evidence,  however
slender,  in  support  of  providential  interference  and  intel-
ligent design.  Intelligence,  however,  appears  rather  as  a
product  than  as  a  quality  of  nature.  In  vain  we  look  for  an
intelligent  recognition  of  our  human  emotions  in  the  gal-
axies of  incandescent  worlds  above  us.  In  vain  we  look  for
an  appreciating  voice  from  within  the  penetralia  of  the  earth.
True,  it  is  not  the  silence  pf  eternal  rest ;  the  stars  glow  and
the  planets  roll,  the  crystal  sparkles  and  the  flower  blooms,
but  not  until  we  reach  the  animal  world  is  there  one  token
of  sympathy,  one  evidence  of  joy,  one  ray  of  intelligence.
Poets  may  tell  of  the  smiling  landscape,  the  modest  flower,  the
angry  ocean,  or  the  pensive  stream ;  these  are  but  figures  of
speech,  and  serve  only  as  associations  for  the  mind.  There
is  beauty,  there  is  grandeur,  there  is  activity,  there  is  even
life,  but  mind  there  is  none.  Thought  and  feeling  are  not
there.  The  universe  is  insensible.  Nature  has  no  soul,
although  within  her  are  all  the  elements  of  sensibility  and
all  the  materials  of  intelligence.  For  mind  is  merely  a  rela-
tion. Thought  is  a  mode  of  material  activity.  Intellect  is
a  brain-wave.  To  secure  it  only  requires  an  appropriate
form.  One  revolution  of  the  wheel  of  organization  evolved
the  living  vegetable  world ;  another  culminated  in  the  cre-
ation of  sentient  beings.  Higher  and  higher  has  arisen  the
type,  finer  and  finer  has  grown  the  product,  till  brain  has
become  the  ruling  force,  and  man  has  emerged  from  that
darkness  which  hitherto  had  never  permitted  Nature  to  con-
template herself.  This  highest  product  of  evolution,  and
which  may  properly  be  called  spirit,  has  been  described  as
that  which   "sleeps  in   the  stone,  dreams  in  the  animal,

MIND  A  PRODUCT  OF  EVOLUTION.  75

awakes  in  man."  *  In  the  inorganic  world  the  molecular
activities  are  on  so  faint  a  scale  and  so  little  integrated  that
such  matter,  while  it  is  by  no  means  dead,  may  be  fitly
called  sleeping.  The  animal,  which  indeed  cerebrates,  but
does  not  reflect,  may  justly  be  said  to  dream,  while  the  fully
awakened  consciousness  only  appears  as  a  product  of  the
great  complicated  brain-mass  of  the  developed  man.

Sensation  has  been  defined  as  that  quality  of  matter  by
which  it  becomes  consciously  susceptible  to  impressions  from
without  (vol.  i,  p.  364).  This  stage  is  reached  in  the  combina-
tion known  as  nerve-matter,  and  feeling  is  evolved.  Higher
orders  of  this  combination,  and  greater  refinement  and  com-
plication of  this  substance,  account  for  all  the  phenomena  of
sensibility  and  of  intellect.  The, first  step  forward  is  union,
or  aggregation ;  the  second  is  the  evolution  of  determinate
forms ;  the  third,  the  production  of  physical  life ;  the  fourth,
that  of  conscious  sensibility.  These  taken  together  may  be
said  to  constitute  organization.  It  begins  as  properly  with
the  first  as  with  the  third  (vol.  i,  p.  311).  And  the  very
constitution  of  matter  is  such  that  under  proper  conditions
it  tends  to  organize  until  all  these  several  degrees  have  been
reached.  Whether  a  further  development  is  possible  or  not
is  only  a  matter  of  speculation,  since  this  is  the  highest  point
known  to  have  been  reached  in  the  universe.  This  progress
raay  for  aught  we  know  be  infinite,  or  it  may  be  limited.
"We  are  compelled,  therefore,  to  regard  both  life  and  mind
as  derivative ;  as  products  of  certain  advanced  degrees  of  de-
velopment ;  as  results  of  changes  in  the  universe,  and  not  as
inherent  qualities  of  nature.  "We  know  that  the  greater
part  of  the  matter  of  our  globe  is  both  inanimate  and  unin-
telligent ;  and,  judging  from  the  conditions  required  here  to
produce  these  results,  and  from  the  knowledge  which  science

*  Draper's  "Conflict,"  p.  138.  The  words  quoted  here  are  also  quoted  by
Dr.  Draper,  who  says  they  are  those  of  "  a  great  German  author."  I  have  been
unable  to  find  the  original,  but  several  German  authors  (Oken,  Novalis,  Schell-
ing,  etc.)  have  expressed  a  similar  thought  in  different  forma.

76  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

has  already  afforded  us  of  the  rest  of  the  solar  system,  we
can  but  conclude  that  the  earth  is  perhaps  the  most  highly
favored  member  of  it  in  this  respect,  and  that  it  is  probable
that  the  great  bulk  of  that  system  is  at  this  moment  destitute
of  both  life  and  consciousness.

The  true  place  which  mind  fills  in  the  scheme  of  nature
is  the  most  important  truth  to  be  learned  in  the  study  of
philosophy,  and,  being  so  generally  misconceived,  constitutes
one  of  the  primary  subjects  relative  to  which  the  task  of
orientation  undertaken  in  this  chapter  is  demanded.  For
the  true  order  of  development  is  from  the  non-psychic  to
the  psychic,  and  from  the  less  psychic  to  the  more  psychic,
and  not,  as  is  popularly  supposed,  from  the  highest  toward
the  lowest  manifestations  of  this  property.  This  great
psychic  paradox  lies  at  the  base  of  philosophy,  and  has  ever
been  its  fundamental  bane.

Classification  of  Phenomena.

It  only  remains,  before  proceeding  with  the  argument,  to
reduce  to  a  systematic  form  and  to  bring  together  in  a  single
place  the  several  principles  that  underlie  phenomena,  and  to
classify  them  anew  with  special  reference  to  their  application
to  the  science  of  Dynamic  Sociology.

In  order  to  do  this,  some  repetition  of  statements  of  these
principles  already  made,  though  in  other  connections  and  for
other  purposes,  will  be  unavoidable,  and,  in  view  of  their
paramount  importance,  will  perhaps  be  regarded  by  the
reader  as  justifiable.

It  is  tautological  to  say  that  we  know  only  phenomena.
Phenomena  are  simply  appearances,  or  manifestations,  and
these  can  only  exist  in  correlation  with  sense-perception.
This  is  the  starting-point  of  all  knowledge.  Whatever
comes  within  the  range  of  perception  is  a  manifestation  to
the  sentient  faculty.  Therefore,  every  thing  of  which  any
thing  can  be  predicated  is  phenomenon.  Feeling,  knowing,
and  thinking  beings  are  placed  in  the  midst  of  a  universe  of

CLASSIFICATION  OF  PHENOMENA.  77

perceivable  processes.  These  are  not  a  part  but  the  whole
of  their  experience,  and  constitute,  so  far  as  the  psychic
faculty  is  concerned,  their  universe.

Phenomena  consist  entirely  of  changes,  i.  e.,  of  actual
alterations  of  location  in  the  objects  which  make  up  the
universe.  These  alterations  of  location  are  called  motions.
Unless  something  moves,  there  can  be  no  manifestation,  no
perception,  no  knowledge.  The  existence  of  phenomena,  as
testified  to  by  consciousness,  proves,  with  all  the  authority
of  consciousness,  that  objects  both  exist  and  move.  All
there  is  for  mind  to  study  is  these  moving  objects.  To
say  that  phenomena  are  perceived  is,  therefore,  a  circular
proposition,  and  would  be  quite  useless  but  for  the  fact  that
it  suggests  an  ulterior  truth.  This  truth  is,  that  objects  in
motion  produce  effects.  Sensation  is  the  primary  effect,  but
perception  and  experience  teach  that  similar  effects  are  pro-
duced wherever  contact  occurs.  The  effects  produced  upon
the  sensitive  organism,  unless  too  violent,  reveal  the  nature
of  the  effects  produced  upon  other  objects,  and  the  greater
part  of  all  knowledge  consists  of  such  indirect  observations.

Ignoring,  temporarily  at  least,  the  nature  of  the  moving
objects,  it  is  a  convenient  as  well  as  a  correct  view  to  regard
the  perceptible  universe  as  made  up  of  changes  which  alone
constitute  the  subjects  of  intellectual  contemplation  as  well
as  the  sole  objects  of  possible  conscient  interest.  This  being
the  case,  almost  the  first  question  which  the  normal  mind  will
raise  with  regard  to  them  will  be,  How  are  they  caused  ?  The
causes  of  observed  phenomena  have  always  formed  the  first,
and  we  may  almost  say  the  only,  problems  of  philosophy.

There  are  two  modes  of  conceiving  the  occurrence  of
phenomena,  both  of  which,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  have  a
basis  in  fact,  but  their  historical  order  is  the  reverse  of  that
in  which  they  appeal  to  the  mind.  According  to  one  of
these  conceptions,  material  objects  are  acted  upon  by  a  power
outside  themselves ;  according  to  the  other,  they  are  auto-
matic, or  not  so  acted  upon.     The  first  of  these  conceptions

78  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

is  readily  grasped,  as  being  based  on  the  analogy  of  volun-
tary muscular  action ;  as  to  the  second,  though  it  might  have
been  easily  deduced  from  the  supposed  independence  of  the
voluntary  conscious  agent,  such  was  the  distance  which  the
early  mind  placed  between  the  animate  and  the  inanimate,
that  this  analogy  appears  not  to  have  been  perceived  until  so
late  that  the  absolute  freedom  of  action  had  begun  to  be
called  in  question.  It  has  thus  happened  that  the  idea
of  the  independence  of  phenomena,  as  a  conception  of  the
mind,  was  a  late  development  of  scientific  thought,  and
scarcely  finds  a  place  in  any  of  the  schemes  of  the  Cosmos.
Spontaneity — i.  e.,  the  power  of  a  body  to  originate  its  own
motion  from  a  state  of  rest — though  really  inconceivable  and
contrary  to  the  laws  of  thought,  has  indeed  been  assumed ;
but  the  only  form  in  which  either  reason  or  science  is  willing
to  accept  the  notion  of  change  not  caused  by  an  outside
power,  is  that  which  simply  negatives  the  state  of  rest,  and
recognizes  absolute  continuity  of  motion.  This,  however,
though  a  late  form  of  thought,  is  now  becoming  an  essential
part  of  the  cosmology,  and  is  regarded  as  the  primary,  and
from  one  point  of  view  the  only,  cause  of  all  phenomena.
The  transitive  -class  of  changes,  as  they  may  be  called,  viz.,
those  due  to  an  external  influence,  become  subordinate  to
automatic  changes,  and  are  interpretable  as  special  manifes-
tations of  force  due  to  accidental  impacts.  These  transitive
phenomena  have  always  been  associated  in  the  human  mind
with  an  anthropomorphic  volition,  and  this  is  usually  the
part  most  particularly  noted  in  their  contemplation,  so  much
so  that  it  has  generally  been  deemed  suflficient  to  designate
them  as  teleological,  which  denotes  this  quality  only  without
connoting  the  more  essential  one  of  extraneous  power  as
such.  As  the  automatic  conception  gains  ground  the  teleo-
logic  one  loses,  and  fears  have  been  entertained  lest  the  full-
est concession  of  the  former  should  be  followed  by  the  com-
plete abnegation  of  the  latter.

So  far  as  science  is  concerned,  no  well-settled  case  of  ab-

CLASSIFICATION  OF  PHENOMENA.  79

solute  teleology  is  known,  and  we  are  therefore  compelled  to
relegate  such  alleged  phenomena  to  the  department  of  tran-
scendental philosophy,  and  to  admit  that  all  the  phenomena
of  the  universe  are  the  result  of  material  motions  which  have
never  been  either  more  or  less  in  amount  than  they  now  are,
and  which  only  manifest  variety  in  consequence  of  the
varied  nature  of  the  developed  aggregates  which  have  re-
sulted from  antecedent  combinations.

When  we  remember  that  all  matter  exerts  an  influence
upon  all  other  matter,  it  becomes  evident  that  there  can  be
no  such  thing,  in  fact,  as  absolutely  free  motion.  All  phe-
nomena must  therefore  be  regarded  as  transitive  in  the  sense
that  they  are  due  to  the  influence  of  moving  matter  as  their
antecedent  causes,  which  determine  their  character  according
to  the  laws  of  impact.  Tlie  problem  is  therefore  narrowed
down  to  the  classification  of  the  transitive  changes  observed
to  occur.  These  may  be  readily  separated  into  two  obvious-
ly distinct  groups,  which  may  be  approximately  designated
as  physical  and  psychical,  respectively,  according  as  they
emanate  from  inanimate  or  from  animate  objects.

These  two  classes  differ  chiefly  in  the  obviousness  of  the
immediate  causes.  Physically  produced  changes  are  no  less
due  to  causes  than  psychically  produced  ones.  The  cause  is
in  all  cases  the  immediately  antecedent  changes  and  result-
ant impacts ;  but,  as  these  are  simply  the  links  in  an  end-
less chain  of  causation,  and  due  to  motions  which  belong  to
matter  and  are  inseparable  from  it— having,  therefore,  never
had  any  origin  in  time— it  is  a  natural  error  of  the  mind  to
look  upon  them  as  spontaneous.  But,  as  already  remarked,
this  is  a  false  conception,  or  "  pseud-idea,"  implying  origina-
tion in  the  series,  which  never  has  occurred.

Just  what  term  to  employ  for  the  adequate  expression  of
this  conception  has  been  a  serious  difficulty  in  modem  sci-
ence. ISTumerous  efforts  have  been  made  to  resolve  this  per-
plexity, some  of  which  have  been  partially  successful.  Of
the  many  forms  of  expression  which  have  been  suggested,

80  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

none  of  which  are  adequate  to  satisfy  all  possible  cases,  the
one  which  probably  comes  nearest  to  this  ideal,  and  which
we  therefore  adopt,  is  that  which  describes  the  entire  class
of  physical  phenomena  as  genetic.  This  word  combines
better  than  any  other  the  idea  of  causation  in  all  its  delicate
forms  with  that  of  continuance,  without  suggesting  either
an  origin  or  a  purjpose.  It  furnishes  an  adjective  for  the
German  Werden,  which  may  itself  be  fairly  translated  by
the  Greek  yeveaK  {genesis).

Psychic  phenomena,  while  they,  too,  are  indirectly  ge-
netic, in  the  sense  that  mind  itself  must  have  had  a  genesis,
differ  in  many  marked  respects  from  those  which  are  the
immediate  results  of  physical  causes,  and  stand  in  wide  con-
trast with  them  in  all  their  principal  characteristics.  For-
merly a  large  part  of  the  changes  now  known  to  belong  to
the  genetic  class  were  supposed  to  be  of  psychic  origin  ;  but
the  tendency  of  science  has  steadily  been  in  the  direction  of
limiting  this  class  to  those  which  are  known  to  emanate
from  organized  beings  endowed  with  a  nervous  system  and
some  form  of  animation.  Whatever  difficulties  may  be  en-
countered in  seeking  to  find  this  line,  it  is  at  least  no  longer
safe  to  speculate  upon  the  assumed  psychic  origin  of  any
phenomena  which  can  not  be  shown  to  have  proceeded  from
such  organic  forms  as  possess  in  their  organization  the  active
principle  of  life  called  protoplasm,  however  slightly  this
substance  may  have  been  co-ordinated  and  integrated  into  a
compound  and  complex  organism.  But,  while  there  are  va-
rious degrees  in  the  manifestation  of  this  power  of  causation,
depending  upon  the  degree  of  organization  of  the  creature,
some  of  which  degrees  are  so  wide  as  almost  to  constitute
generically  distinct  forms  of  force,  the  psychic  phenomena
all  agree  in  one  essential  particular,  viz.,  in  manifesting  a
purjpose.  As  causes  of  change,  mental  efforts  always  rep-
resent jmal  causes  j  psychic  phenomena  are  always  teleo-
logical.

There  are^  therefore,  two  principal  classes  of  phenomena,

GENETIC  PHENOMENA.  81

according  as  they  are  genetically  or  teleologically  produced  ;
and  it  hence  becomes  important,  before  proceeding  further,
to  examine  somewhat  closely  the  precise  nature  of  each  of
these  two  antithetical  forms  of  causation,  and  to  emphasize
the  qualities  by  which  they  are  distinguished.  We  will  con-
sider each  class  separately.

GENETIC    PHENOMENA.

We  have  already  seen  that  all  physical  phenomena  must
be  genetic.  The  only  conceivable  exception  would  be  the
movement  of  a  free  element  independent  of  all  others.  This
condition,  the  actual  multiplicity  of  things,  so  far  as  human
observation  can  determine,  completely  negatives.  It  is  true
that  objects  move  by  virtue  of  inherent  activities  inseparable
from  them,  and  which  in  the  aggregate  are  incapable  of
either  increase  or  diminution,  but  such  is  the  existing  plexus
of  material  elements  that  the  particular  forms  of  change
actually  produced  are  determined  by  the  interaction  of  mul-
tiple influences,  and  each  phenomenon  is  the  resultant  of  all
the  forces  in  operation  to  produce  it.  The  simplest  form  of
a  phenomenon  is  seen  in  the  impact  of  two  bodies.  How-
ever complicated  the  phenomenon,  the  same  laws  operate
with  rigorous  exactness,  though  this  truth  is  veiled  by  their
subtile  interaction.  The  conception  of  force,  or  energy,
can  have  no  other  basis  of  fact,  and  all  effects  of  whatever
kind  flow  from  the  immediate  physical  contact  of  moving
objects.

This  truth,  clearly  comprehended,  contains  the  key  to
the  nature  of  all  genetic  phenomena.  Genesis  is  only  an-
other name  for  causation,  and  causation  is  the  production  of
change  through  impact.  The  failure  to  grasp  this  principle
has  arisen  chiefly  from  the  fact  that  a  large  proportion  of
the  phenomena  of  the  perceptible  universe  are  molecular,
and  it  has  been  difiicult  to  regard  molecules  as  identical  with
masses  in  all  respects  except  that  of  magnitude.  There  has
prevailed  a  species  of  mysticism  respecting  them  not  un-

82  ADAPTATION.— MAN   AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

like  that  whicli  savages  feel  in  the  presence  of  the  invisible
atmosphere.  They  have  been  reluctantly  admitted  into  the
category  of  things,  and  molecular  physics  has,  in  fact,  been  a
sort  of  metaphysics.  But  the  more  we  learn  of  molecular
phenomena,  the  more  we  find  them  to  resemble  molar  phe-
nomena, and  we  are  justified  experimentally,  as  we  certainly
are  a  priori,  in  pronouncing  matter  uniform  in  its  laws.

A  causa  efficiens,  which  is  the  essence  of  the  genetic
process,  is  simply  a  direct  and  immediate  cause — one  in
which  there  is  neither  interval  nor  indirection  between  the
cause  and  the  effect.  This  forms,  too,  the  leading  distinc-
tion between  genetic  and  teleological  phenomena.  In  the
former,  the  cause  is  always  in  immediate  antecedent  connec-
tion with  the  effect.

Another  consideration  must  now  be  taken  into  the  ac-
count. Genetic  phenomena  are  observed  in  most  cases  to
occur  in  prolonged  series.  There  is  seen  to  be  a  tendency
toward  the  recurrence  of  the  same  set  of  changes  in  a  single
direction.  Observed  at  considerable  intervals  of  time,  the
changes  produced  during  one  interval  are  seen  to  be  con-
tinued through  the  next,  and  results  effected  are  more  or  less
permanent,  to  be  carried  further  at  each  successive  interval.
These  series  may  be  ascending  or  descending,  according  as
the  products  grow  more  or  less  complex,  and  an  ascending
series  may  be  gradually  converted  into  a  descending  one ;
but  in  nearly  all  cases  some  progress  is  constantly  made  in
one  direction  or  the  other.  So  far  as  the  history  of  our
globe  is  known,  the  phenomena  taking  place  upon  it  have
presented  a  decided  preponderance  of  ascending  series  from
the  remotest  periods  of  which  science  furnishes  any  account,
and  such  would  also  seem  to  be  the  case  throughout  the
solar  system  at  large,  with  exceptions  only  in  some  of  the
smallest  bodies,  as  the  earth's  satellite.  There  has  thus
taken  place  a  sort  of  development,  or  evolution,  which  in  the
inorganic  world  proceeds  from  a  more  homogeneous  and  less
differentiated  state  toward  a  more  heteroo^eneous  state  with

GEN'ETIC  PHEN"OMENA.  83

greater  concentration  of  parts.  In  organic  nature  organiza-
tion increases,  structure  is  complicated,  and  the  physiological
division  of  functional  labor  is  combined  with  the  integration
of  differentiated  organs  and  their  subordination  to  large  com-
plex organisms.

These  are  surface  truths.  A  more  recondite  truth  often
escapes  detection.  These  perceptible  effects  represent  only
the  resultant  of  multiple  causes.  Movement  is  only  in  one
direction,  but  impact  is  in  all  directions.  A  law  which  has
been  called  by  Spencer  "  the  instability  of  the  homogeneous  "
requires  that  motion  shall  take  place  in  some  one  direction,
and  what  that  direction  shall  be  must  depend  upon  what,
in  our  ignorance,  we  are  compelled  to  call  chance.  The
chief  fact  of  interest,  therefore,  arising  out  of  this  dynamic
state  of  nature,  is  the  one  least  observed  and  usually  quite
ignored :  it  is,  that  the  increment  in  the  direction  of  motion
— the  algebraic  sum  of  the  forces  of  progression  and  regres-
sion as  compared  with  their  arithmetic  sum — is  excessively
minute.

Neglecting,  for  the  present,  retrogressive  tendencies,
which  presuppose  progressive  ones,  and  considering  all  phe-
nomena as  undergoing  the  latter  process,  we  first  observe
that  the  increments  of  this  genetic  progress  are  what  may  be
called  differentials — that  the  movement  takes  place  by  infini-
tesimal differences.  This  is  phenomenal,  or  concrete,  as  dis-
tinguished from  mathematical,  or  abstract,  differentiation.
The  objects  moving  are  in  immediate  contact  with  the  ob-
jects moved ;  the  latter  yield  only  at  the  instant  when  the
former  impinge ;  the  antecedent  and  consequent — the  cause
and  effect — are  intimately  bound  up  together.

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  state  the  corollary  that  in  ge-
netic progress  the  great  preponderance  of  force  actually  ex-
erted is  lost  in  the  work  of  so  nearly  maintaining  the  state
of  equilibrium.  The  energy  expended  in  the  retrogressive
is  nearly  equal  to  that  expended  in  the  progressive  direction.
But  this  is  not  all.     Every  object  in  the  universe  is  exposed

84  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNI\1:RSE.

to  impacts  from  all  sides.  The  direction  of  motion  is  simply
the  line  of  least  resistance.  If  we  contemplate  a  progress-
ing body  or  system,  we  must  not  only  conceive  its  line  of
motion  as  simply  that  along  which  the  antagonizing  impacts
are  least  in  amount,  but  we  must  also  conceive  that  upon  all
sides,  except  that  immediately  in  front  and  that  immediately
behind,  the  impacts,  however  great,  are  absolutely  equal.
These  lateral  impacts,  however,  from  this  circumstance  of
exactly  neutralizing  each  other,  may  be  neglected,  and  atten-
tion fixed  only  on  the  directly  impelling  and  retarding
forces.  All  this  is  as  true  of  a  complicated  train  of  phe-
nomena, such  as  a  sidereal  system  or  a  living  organism  or  spe-
cies, as  of  a  single  aggregate,  or  body ;  and  progress  in  struct-
ural development  comes  as  strictly  under  the  law  as  mere
progress  in  space,  since,  in  a  manner,  the  former  may  be
analyzed  into  elements  of  the  latter.  This  law  may  be  con-
sidered in  every  department  of  phenomena,  and  naturally  we
follow  the  steps  from  the  lowest  inorganic  to  the  highest  or-
ganic stages.

The  primary  form  of  inorganic  development  of  which  we
possess  any  knowledge  is  that  of  world  systems.  Nearly
every  one  who  allows  himself  to  speculate  at  all  now  believes
that  such  development  has  taken  place,  and  that  the  earth
and  the  solar  system  are  products  of  dynamic  tendencies  in
the  universe.  It  is  proper  to  call  this  process  and  all  kindred
ones  organization.  The  term  evolution  has  been  applied
to  it,  but  in  so  doing,  as  was  pointed  out  in  the  early  part
of  this  work  (vol.  i,  pp.  166,  248),  very  great  confusion  has
been  introduced.  "With  the  qualifications  there  made,  how-
ever, there  can  be  no  serious  objection  to  the  term  evolu-
tion, implying,  as  it  then  will,  the  same  process  in  organic
as  in  cosmic  phenomena.  The  true  antagonistic  forces  are
those  of  gravitation  and  radiation  ;  and  evolution,  when  it
takes  place,  denotes  a  certain  predominance  of  the  former
over  the  latter.  The  unchecked  eflfect  of  gravitation  alone
would  quickly  bring  all  things  to  rest  in  a  wholly  unorgan-

GENETIC  PHEl^OMENA.  85

ized  state;  that  of  radiation  alone  would  quickly  dissipate
all  matter  into  gas.  The  preponderance  of  the  latter  would
effectually  prevent  symmetrical  forms  from  evolving,  while
too  great  excess  of  the  former  would  rapidly  condense  the
matter  of  space  into  heterogeneous,  amorphous  masses.  It  is
the  golden  mean  between  them  that  secures  the  true  evolu-
tion of  the  orbs  of  space.

Organic  evolution  proceeds  according  to  the  same  general
law.  The  development  of  any  organism  consists  of  a  series
of  wholly  inappreciable  increments,  due  to  the  resultant
force  in  the  direction  of  progress.  Here  the  individual
must  be  ignored  and  the  species  alone  considered.  Hered-
ity, however,  can  be  relied  upon  to  preserve  the  identity  of
all  directly  descended  individuals,  so  that  it  is  as  though  one
individual  were  continuous.  Minor  variations  occur  during
the  life-time  of  each  individual,  which  are  themselves  trans-
mitted, producing  a  steady  progress  in  a  given  direction.
Besides  the  direct  variations  due  to  the  actual  impacts  upon
the  individual,  in  the  line  of  the  resultant  of  which  impacts
progress  goes  on,  there  is  also  an  indirect  form  of  variation
which  is  probably  still  more  potent  in  producing  change,  and
which  Darwin  calls  "  selection."  This  operates  through  he-
redity in  the  direction  of  advantage  to  the  organism  in  the
competition  for  existence.  It  is  under  the  conjoint  opera-
tion of  these  two  laws,  which  Spencer  names  direct  and  in-
direct "  equilibration,"  respectively,  that  all  the  present  liv-
ing organisms  have  been  developed  from  the  lowest  forms,
and  these  in  turn  from  the  inorganic  elements.  At  the  head
of  the  organic  series  stands  man,  representing  the  highest
stage  reached  in  the  process  of  evolution.

As,  in  passing  from  cosmic  to  organic  evolution,  we  saw
the  continued  operation  of  the  same  uniform  law,  so,  in  cross-
ing the  boundary  which  divides  organic  from  super-organic
phenomena — the  animal  from  the  social  world — we  are  able
to  trace  the  same  unbroken  process.  The  human  races,
like  living  organisms,  are  some  of  them  in   the  ascending

86  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

and  some  in  the  descending  series.  The  latter  we  may  for
the  present  disregard,  and  contemplate  society  as,  upon  the
•whole,  advancing.  This  advancement,  like  all  forms  of  de-
velopment below  it,  takes  place  differentially.  It  is,  like  the
others,  the  mere  resultant  of  slightly  unequal  impinging
forces  on  all  sides.  IS^eglecting  the  lateral  impacts  which
equilibrate  each  other,  and  considering  only  the  constructive
and  destructive  forces,  we  find  that,  while  these  are  both  in
themselves  enormous,  the  difference  between  them  is  very
slight.  In  fact,  so  slight  is  it  that  it  is  not  constantly  in
one  direction.  Even  in  periods  of  most  rapid  development,
social  progress  takes  place  by  rhythmical  flows  and  ebbs.
The  latter  prevail  during  parts  of  these  periods,  which  im-
plies that  society  at  these  times  is  losing  ground — i.  e.,  that
the  destructive  forces  are  actually  part  of  the  time  in  the
ascendant.  Except  in  a  limited  sense,  presently  to  be  con-
sidered, this  is  the  nature  of  all  the  social  progress  which  has
taken  place  thus  far.

Such  is  the  general  character  of  genetic  phenomena  and
genetic  progress  in  all  departments  of  nature :  the  dynamic
state  is  brought  about  through  infinitesimal  increments ;  the
greater  part  of  the  force  expended  is  neutralized  in  so  nearly
maintaining  the  statical  condition  ;  there  is  incessant  rhythm,
destroying  at  intervals  most  of  the  little  that  has  been
gained  ;  the  effect  is  in  immediate  contact  with  the  cause,
and  exactly  equal  to  it;  there  is  no  leverage  or  unequal
advantage  in  the  method  of  exerting  influence,  so  that  only
the  crudest  and  most  direct  results  are  capable  of  being
reached.  When  correctly  viewed,  therefore,  and  thoroughly
understood,  the  process  of  nature  proves  the  least  economic
of  all  conceivable  processes — a  fact  which  the  vastness  of  the
scale  on  which  it  operates  and  the  absolute  magnitude  of  the
results  actually  accomplished  by  it  have  in  great  measure
concealed  even  from  the  most  clear-sighted  and  thoughtful
students  of  nature.

It  was  once  supposed  that  nature's  methods  were  the

GENETIC  PHENOMENA.  87

most  economical  ones  conceivable,  and  constituted  perfect
patterns  for  men  to  copy  from.  It  was  while  this  view  pre-
vailed in  all  departments  of  science  that "  political  economy  "
had  its  origin.  Since  that  time  biologists  have  abundantly
demonstrated  the  error  of  this  belief,  and,  had  sociology  been
thoroughly  grounded  in  biology,  as  Comte  so  justly  insisted
that  it  should  be,  it  would  have  kept  pace  with  the  other
science?  in  rejecting  this  fundamental  error.  But  this  has
not  been  the  case,  and  we  find  social-science  writers  still
lauding  the  stern  economy  of  nature's  laws.  That  economy,
however,  consists  only  in  this :  that,  while  nothing  is  done
which  does  not  secure  some  advantage,  however  slight,  the
amount  of  energy  expended  in  producing  such  result  need
bear  no  proportion  to  the  value  of  the  result.  Nature  acts
on  the  assumption  that  her  resources  are  inexhaustible,  and,
while  she  never  buys  a  wholly  worthless  article,  she  usually
pays  an  extravagant  price  (vol.  i,  p.  521).

No  system  is  maintained  at  greater  expense  than  the  re-
productive ;  yet  consider  nature's  prodigality  in  this.  The
octopus,  in  order  to  hold  its  own,  must  lay  50,000  eggs  ;  a
single  sturgeon  emitted  921,600  ova  at  one  spawning,  as
counted  by  Dr.  Buckland;  the  codfish  produces  1,000,000
young  fish  each  year,  that  two  may  survive  and  the  species
not  become  extinct;  the  oyster  spawns  2,000,000  embryos
in  a  season,  if  all  of  which  could  reach  maturity,  two  or
three  individuals  might  supply  the  markets  of  the  world.
Professor  Baird  has  estimated  that  an  eel  may  contain  at
one  time  9,000,000  eggs;  a  nematode  was  found  to  hold
60,000,000,  and  a  tape- worm  more  than  1,000,000,000  ova.
Similar  facts  confront  us  in  the  vegetable  kingdom,  but  we
need  only  mention  that  a  single  plant  of  the  common  mold
{Penicill/um  crustaceum)  was  found  to  contain  3,200,000,000
spores.

The  apparent  peace  which  is  supposed  to  reign  in  organic
nature  is  highly  illusory.  Even  the  vegetation  is  at  war,  and
the  result  of  that  strife  is  immensely  to  lower  the  possible

88  ADAPTATION.— MA5T  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

standard  of  every  living  species  of  plant.*  In  the  animal
kingdom  the  struggle  is  desperate  and  unceasing,  and  the
result  is  not  different  from  that  in  the  vegetable.  Not  only
is  the  waste  of  reproductive  power  enormous  in  proportion
to  the  amount  of  life  brought  forth,  but,  of  the  latter,  by  far
the  greater  part  meets  with  premature  destruction.  Ani-
mals, as  all  know,  prey  upon  one  another,  producing  univer
sal  and  indescribable  suffering,  and  placing  every  living
thing  in  a  state  of  chronic  terror  in  the  midst  of  its  count-
less enemies.  But  even  this  tells  less  heavily  upon  the  vital
energies  than  does  the  silent  conflict  which  results  from  the
competition  for  the  means  of  subsistence.  It  is  here  that
occurs  the  greatest  waste,  if  the  cost  of  producing  and  devel-
oping an  organism  is  counted  at  anything.

That  the  same  laws  have  operated  in  the  super-organic  as
in  the  organic  world  is  quite  obvious.  Not  only  the  progress
out  of  barbarism  into  civilization,  but  the  march  of  civiliza-
tion itself,  has  been  attended  with  the  same  incidents  that
characterize  the  development  of  a  species  or  of  an  individ-
ual. The  archaeologist  digs  the  remains  of  extinct  civiliza-
tions out  of  the  earth  in  much  the  same  manner  as  the
paleontologist  does  those  of  extinct  animals  and  plants.  Be-
sides his  wars  with  the  elements  and  with  wild  beasts,  man
has  been  perpetually  afflicted  by  wars  with  his  own  kind ;
and  yet  this  warfare  of  men  with  their  surroundings,  with
other  species,  and  with  one  another,  is  the  strict  analogue
of  that  of  the  lower  forms  of  organized  beings.  Even  the
silent  battle  for  subsistence  has  its  counterpart  in  the  com-
petitive struggles  of  industry.  The  same  wasteful  methods
prevail  in  society  as  in  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms.
The  natural  resources  of  the  earth  are  squandered  with  a
wanton  disregard  of  the  future.  The  forests  are  cut  down
to  supply  temporary  wants,  consumed  by  escaping  camp-

*  Some  evidence  on  this  point  was  presented  by  the  writer  in  an  article  on
"  Tho  Local  Distribution  of  Plants,"  which  appeared  in  "  The  Popular  Science
Monthly,"  vol.  ix  (October,  1876).

TELEOLOGIOAL  PHENOMENA.  89

fires,  or  purposely  cleared  for  tillage,  until  the  habitable  por-
tions of  the  earth  are  successively  transformed  into  lifeless
deserts.  The  soil  is  rapidly  exhausted  by  the  first  occupants,
who  know  only  the  immediate  present.  The  wild  animals
useful  to  man  are  soon  extinguished  by  the  heartless  destruc-
tion of  the  fertile  females  and  helpless  young.  Population
distributes  itself  to  great  disadvantage.  Cities  grow  up  with
narrow,  crooked  streets,  which  must,  from  time  to  time,  be
widened  and  straightened  at  large  absolute  cost.  Filth  and
disease-germs,  due  to  dense,  unregulated  population,  bring
pestilence,  and  sweep  away  at  rhythmic  intervals  the  excess.
Famines  come  to  scale  down  the  ranks  of  such  as  have  forced
their  way  in  during  years  of  plenty.  Bitter  partisanship
prevails  every- where  throughout  society,  the  nearly  success-
ful effort  of  each  party  being  to  undo  what  the  other  has
done.  Labor  and  capital,  whose  dependence  upon  each  other
is  absolute,  are  constantly  found  in  open  hostility,  which
greatly  reduces  the  productiveness  of  both.  Exchange  of
products  is  largely  carried  on  by  redundant  third  parties,
who,  through  no  fault  of  their  own,  are  allowed  to  absorb
the  largest  share  of  the  wealth  produced.  Trade  consists  to
a  large  extent  of  unnecessary  and  duplicated  transportation.
Wealth  is  not  only  unequally  but  inequitably  distributed.
In  short,  all  the  functione  of  society  are  performed  in  a  sort
of  chance  way,  which  is  precisely  the  reverse  of  economical,
but  wholly  analogous  to  the  natural  processes  of  the  lower
organic  world.  Great  results,  it  is  true,  are  accomplished,
even  in  society,  by  these  unregulated  forces,  but  they  fall
far  short  of  what  may  be  easily  seen  to  be  attainable ;  they
are  not  the  best.  The  optimistic  view  leads  to  stagnation  by
discouraging  effort,  while  all  true  progress  springs  from  that
restless  skepticism  which  dares  even  to  question  the  methods
of  nature.

TELEOLOGIOAL   THENOMENA.

Teleological  phenomena  are  such  as  emanate  from  ani-
mate organisms  endowed  with  feeling ;  and,  as  feeling  is  the
36

90  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

initial  step  in  the  entire  series  of  psychic  phenomena,  the
domain  of  teleology  is  strictly  co-extensive  with  the  domain
of  mind.  The  basis  of  action,  as  distinguished  from  motion,
or  movement,  is  the  existence  of  desire  residing  in  the  ani-
mate organism.  Desire  is  also  the  only  motive  to  action,
but,  although  all  action  proceeds  from  desire,  all  desires  are
not  followed  by  action.  This,  however,  is  always  in  conse-
quence of  a  conflict  of  simultaneous  desires  involving  for
their  satisfaction  the  performance  of  incompatible  actions.
Unless  thus  antagonized  and  equilibrated,  every  desire  results
in  the  action  demanded  for  its  satisfaction.  As  it  is,  the
dominant  desire  produces  action,  which  is  vigorous  in  pro-
portion to  its  degree  of  predominance.  The  idea  involved
in  the  term  volition  is  not  distinguishable  from  this  concep-
tion of  desire,  except  that  it  properly  connotes  this  plurality
of  desires,  and  represents  the  effect  of  the  dominant  one  in
producing  action.  Actions  which  are  the  result  of  volitions
are  called  voluntary  actions,  and  therefore  all  proper  action
is  essentially  voluntary  {infra,  p.  319).  The  only  exceptions
to  this  would  be  such  cases  as  involved  no  plurality  and
hence  no  conflict  of  desires,  a  simple  impulse  producing  its
simple  action.  This  class  seems  to  be  strictly  identical  with
what  zoologists  call  reflex  actions.

Teleological  phenomena  are  consciously  produced.  This
follows  from  the  truth  stated  in  Chapter  Y.  (vol.  i,  pp.  366,
386,  404),  that  feeling  itself,  even  of  the  simplest  character,
implies  consciousness  to  such  an  extent  that  to  speak  of  un-
conscious sensibility  involves  a  contradiction  of  terms.  Even
reflex  action  must,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  both  conscious
and  teleological.

Teleological  pheiromena  mvoivQ  purpose.  This  is  scarce-
ly more  than  the  definition  of  teleology.  It  is  as  aiming  at
an  end  that  the  conception  has  come  to  receive  this  name
(from  TeA^9,  an  end),  and  for  which  the  German  language,
unlike  our  own,  possesses  an  admirable  vernacular  equiva-
lent, 2/wec7cmdssigheit.

TELEOLOGIOAL  PHENOMENA.  91

Every  psychic  action  has  for  its  raison  d^etre  some  object,
or  end,  which  the  conscious  organism  desires  to  secure.  It  is
proper  to  call  this  end  the  cause  of  the  action,  but,  to  distin-
guish this  cause  from  such  as  consist  in  antecedent  motions,
and  constitute  impacts,  resulting  in  genetic  phenomena,  al-
ready treated,  and  which  are  called  efficient  causes  {causce
efficientes),  this  new  class  of  causes,  operating,  as  we  may
say,  from  in  front  instead  of  from  behind,  have  long  been
appropriately  "termed  jmal  causes  {causae  jmalei) ;  although,
as  we  saw  in  the  Introduction  (vol.  i,  p.  29),  the  teleological
agent  was  an  anthropomorphic  creation  of  the  human  mind
accustomed  to  observe  its  own  teleological  operations.

The  ends  constituting  the  motives  of  the  action  of  con-
scious beings  differ  with  the  nature  of  those  beings.  The
steps  in  the  development  of  the  psychic  faculty,  from  the
lowest  creatures  capable  only  of  reflex  action  to  the  human
being  with  his  multiphed  wants,  have  already  been  suffi-
ciently traced  in  Chapter  Y.  "We  are  here  chiefly  concerned
with  the  consideration  of  the  nature  of  these  ends,  or  pur-
poses, of  conscious  beings,  especially  of  human  beings,  with
a  view  to  their  classification  and  their  complete  comprehen-
sion as  factors  in  the  problems  of  sociology.

We  recognize  at  the  outset  that  all  teleological  phenomena
consist  in  efforts  to  attain  the  ends,  or  purposes,  of  the  motor
impulses.  It  by  no  means  follows  that,  because  the  action
is  certain  to  result  from  the  motive,  the  end  is  therefore  cer-
tain of  attainment.  The  only  certainty  is  the  effort.  Some
degree  of  success  must,  it  is  true,  attend  such  efforts,  to  in-
sure the  preservation  of  the  life  of  the  creature,  but,  beyond
this,  failure  may  be  the  usual  result.  Any  one  who  has  long
watched  the  movements  of  piscivorous  birds,  and  observed
the  great  preponderance  of  their  failures  over  their  successes
in  securing  their  prey,  wiU  appreciate  the  importance  of  dis-
tinguishing the  effort  from  the  end.

In  the  second  place,  it  is  not  universally  true  that  the
action,  if  successful,  will  secure  the  end.     The  motive  is

92  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

universally  a  physical  desire ;  the  true  end  is,  therefore,  the
satisfaction  of  that  desire.  The  direct  object  of  the  action
can  only  be  an  intermediate  means  to  the  end.  But  the
mental  operation  required  to  determine  that  such  object  con-
stitutes such  means  may  be  somewhat  complicated,  and,
with  the  increasing  degrees  of  complication  in  such  opera-
tion, there  will  go  increasing  liability  to  failure  in  such  de-
termination. The  birds  that  pecked  at  the  grapes  on  the
canvas  of  Zeuxis,  and  the  ducks  that  swallowed  the  bits  of
red-hot  iron  from  the  blacksmith's  anvil,  are  illustrations  of
such  failure.  But,  outside  of  the  influence  of  man,  who  so
greatly  modifies  the  environment  of  animals,  there  exist
abundant  examples  which  show  that  in  a  state  of  nature  and
in  their  normal  habitat  great  want  of  correspondence  exists,*
and  that  animals  mistake  the  true  ends  of  their  being.
Upon  this  largely  depends  the  power  of  certain  species  to
entrap  and  destroy  others,  a  process  which  can  not  be  gener-
ically  distinguished  from  man's  successful  efforts  to  accom-
plish the  same  end.  Even  plants,  such  as  Dionoea,  Darling-
tonia,  and  Sarracenia,  avail  themselves  of  this  liability  on
the  part  of  insects  to  err  respecting  the  proper  manner  of
securing  the  safe  gratification  of  their  desires,  and  entrap
them  for  their  own  nourishment.  In  man,  whose  desires  are
so  multitudinous,  and  whose  environment  is  so  iiTcgular  and
complex,  such  failures  are  of  constant  occurrence,  and  are
specifically  denominated  "  errors  of  judgment."

We  see,  therefore,  that  the  actual  attainment  of  the  end
of  being  is  a  complicated  operation,  and  that  in  the  approach
toward  it  there  is  a  series  of  distinct  psychological  steps.
The  actual  satisfaction  of  a  desire  is  complicated  by  a  train
of  conditions  which  are  liable  to  defeat  it  at  any  of  the  defi-
nite stages  named.  First,  it  must  take  its  chances  among
conflicting  desires,  and  must  be  the  dominant  one.  Second-
ly, while,  if  it  be  the  dominant  desire  it  is  sure  to  result  in
action,  still,  to  secure  the  end,  it  must  not  fail  in  the  effort,
*  Spencer,  "  Psychology,"  vol.  ii,  p.  409.

METHODS  OF  CONATION".  93

as  it  is  constantly  liable  to  do.  Thirdly  and  finally,  suppos-
ing it  to  secure  the  particular  object  at  which  it  has  aimed,
it  still  runs  the  risk  that  that  object  when  secured  may  not
be  adapted  to  satisfy  the  desire.

Success,  therefore,  in  securing  the  end  of  being  is  diffi-
cult and  contingent.  It  will  as  a  rule  be  proportional  to  the
degree  of  complexity  of  the  organism.  It  is  greatest  in  the
lowest  organisms,  whose  actions  are  all  reflex ;  it  is  least  in
man,  whose  actions  are  rational  to  a  large  extent,  but  whose
environment  is  so  enormously  complicated.

Methods  of  Conation.

Confining  our  attention  for  the  future  to  the  effort  itself,
we  observe  that  all  living  organisms  are  incessantly  striving
to  secure  these  ends  of  being.  This  universal  nisusi  in  the
organic  world  extends  to  man,  and  constitutes  one  of  the
great  factors  in  the  problems  of  social  science.  The  old
philosophers  occasionally  caught  a  glimpse  of  it  in  their
blind  gropings  after  an  explanation  of  the  "  will,"  and  they
named  the  supposed  faculty  of  the  mind  which  controlled
voluntary  action  the  "  conative  faculty "  (from  the  Latin
word  conari,  to  endeavor).  Later,  Sir  William  Hamilton,
feeling  the  need  of  a  corresponding  substantive,  revived  the
cognate  word  which  had  been  used  by  Seneca  {conatio),  and
employed  conation  to  designate  the  faculty  itself.  That
such  a  term  was  needed,  whether  from  the  old  or  the  new
method  of  viewing  human  action,  there  can  be  no  question ;
and,  although  perhaps  not  used  since  Hamilton,  I  gladly
accept  it  as  a  contribution  to  the  terminology  of  psychology,
as  well  as  of  sociology.

In  doing  so,  the  term  conation  will  be  employed  in  this
work  to  represent  the  efforts  which  organisms  put  forth  in
seeking  the  satisfaction  of  their  desires,  and  the  ends  thus
sought  will  be  designated  as  the  ends  of  conation.  Although
these  specific  ends  are  as  multitudinous  as  the  desires  of  or-
ganisms are  numerous,  they  may  all  be  regarded  as  belong-

94  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

ing  to  one  great  class,  since  all  desires  are  psych ologicallj
homogeneous.  The  general  end  of  conation  is  therefore  the
satisfaction  of  desire.  In  animals  this  homogeneity  of  de-
sires is  very  obvious,  but  in  man,  and  especially  in  civilized
man,  so  greatly  do  particular  desires  differ,  that  there  are
entire  groups  which  are  not  popularly  recognized  by  that
name.  Such,  for  example,  are  the  motives  proceeding  from
sympathy  and  from  altruistic  sentiments  in  general,  while
the  inclination  to  act  in  conformity  to  any  intellectual  con-
viction or  strong  belief  or  opinion  is  not  spoken  of  as  a  de-
sire. Still,  psychologically,  all  motives  whatever  are  desires,
and  their  satisfaction  becomes  an  end  of  conation.  In  man,
too,  the  satisfaction  of  desire  in  general,  which  in  each  par-
ticular case  is  attended  with,  or  rather  consists  in,  pleasure,
acquires,  in  consequence  of  the  highly  derivative  and  greatly
varied  character  of  his  desires,  a  distinctive  name,  not  ap-
plicable to  animals,  and  is  called  happiness.  So  far  as  the
direct  purposes  of  the  sociologist  are  concerned,  therefore,
the  ultimate  end  of  conation  is  happiness.

Contemplating  the  phenomena  of  conation  from  a  differ-
ent point  of  view,  we  observe  that  they  do  not  all  proceed
according  to  the  same  general  method.  Actions  are  capable
of  an  important  classification  according  to  whether  they  are
produced  by  the  direct  or  the  indirect  method  of  conation.
This  distinction  lies  at  the  basis  of  social  science.  It  is  of
little  importance,  however,  to  biology,  since  an  examination
of  the  actions  of  beings  lower  than  man  shows  that,  with
very  slight  qualification,  they  are  all  performed  according  to
the  direct  method.  It  is  chiefly  in  human  action  that  we
are  able  to  detect  the  employment  of  the  indirect  method.
In  man,  however,  there  is  no  failure  to  employ  the  direct
method,  and  hence  it  is  in  sociological  phenomena  alone  that
we  are  able  to  observe  and  study  the  operation  of  both  meth-
ods, and  to  compare  the  results.  To  consider  and  point  out
this  important  distinction  is  our  next  task.

METHODS  OF  CONATION.  95

THE  DIEECT   METHOD   OF    CONATION.

The  fundamental  principle  underlying  tlie  direct  method
of  conation  is,  that  the  desires  of  sentient  beings  constitute  true
natural  forces.  This  truth  was  set  forth  in  Chapter  VII  (vol.
i,  pp.  458,  468,  486),  and  need  not  be  here  treated  at  length.
It  is  important,  however,  to  state  clearlj  that  this  is  not  a
convenient  analogy  or  parallel,  but  a  literal  truth  of  science,
and  that,  without  any  modification  of  its  principles  or  defini-
tions, the  theorems  of  physics  may  be  extended  over  the
entire  field  of  biology,  provided  they  do  not  overstep  the
boundaries  set  by  the  above  proposition  as  stated.  For  that
which  primarily  marks  the  character  of  a  true  natural  force
is,  that  it  obey  the  mechanical  axioms  of  physics  as  estab-
lished by  Newton,  and  popularly  known  as  the  laws  of  mo-
tion. Yet  it  can  be  shown  that  desires  as  forces  do  obey
these  laws.  Of  the  various  manifestations  of  mechanical
force,  the  conative  forces  most  closely  resemble  those  of  gravi-
tation or  of  magnetism.  The  comparison  with  the  last-named
form  of  force  seems  to  present  no  discernible  distinction.
The  object  of  desire  is  then  the  homologue  of  the  magnet,
the  organism  manifesting  the  desire  representing  the  sub-
stance attracted  by  it.  It  is  not  pretended  that  in  tliis  there
is  identity,  but  only  that  the  nature  of  the  force  is  identical
in  as  far  as  are  the  characteristics  of  any  two  forms  of  force.

The  first  of  the  laws  of  motion  is,  that  it  takes  place  in  a
straight  line.  Any  one  who  has  watched  the  actions  of  ani-
mals has  observed  that  they  obey  this  law.  It  is  particularly
noticeable  of  the  lower  organisms.  Those  having  the  power
of  flight  exemplify  it  most  completely,  since  in  the  air  there
are  no  perturbing  forces.  Insects  are  the  best  examples,  and
the  vulgar  expression,  a  "bee-line,"  simply  sums  up  the  uni-
versal experience  of  practical  people  as  to  the"  fidelity  with
which  the  bee  conforms  to  Newton's  first  law.  The  experi-
ments of  Huber,  Lubbock,  and  others,  with  bees  and  with
ants,  demonstrate  that  these  psychically  highest  endowed  in-

96  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

vertebrates  are  restricted  in  their  operations  to  the  direct
method  of  conation.  In  nearly  all  the  higher  grades  of  ani-
mals the  same  is  practically  true,  and  where  exceptions  oc-
cur, as  in  beasts  of  prey  that  employ  arts,  and  other  creatures
that  adopt  devices  of  various  kinds  to  escape  the  former,  it
is  found  that  long  subjection  to  conditions  of  environment
rendering  this  necessary  to  existence  has  developed  instincts
according  to  the  laws  of  adaptation,  so  as  to  relegate  them
to  the  class  of  direct  actions.  It  is  only  in  the  highest  forms
of  vertebrate  life  below  man — as  in  dogs,  and  perhaps  spar-
ingly in  horses,  but  quite  notably  in  the  elephant — that  any
unmistakable  signs  of  higher  psychic  powers  have  been  ex-
hibited.

It  would  be  easy  also  to  show  that  in  this  psychic  depart-
ment of  natural  force  the  second  mechanical  maxim  as  to  the
amount  and  direction  of  changed  motion  is  equally  applicable.
Locomotion  in  animals  on  the  ground  and  over  uneven  sur-
faces presenting  obstructions  is  as  nearly  straight  toward  the
object  of  desire  as  the  impinging  forces  will  permit.  A  horse
driven  away  from  home  will  seek  to  return,  and  is  only  pre-
vented from  doing  so  by  the  rein.  If  it  be  across  an  open
country  without  roads,  and  the  rein  is  finally  slackened,  the
animal  will  describe  a  curve  under  the  influence  of  the  two
desires,  viz.,  the  fear  of  its  master,  whom  it  supposes  to  wish
it  to  go  from  home,  and  the  desire  on  its  own  part  to  return.
Such  an  action  is  a  normal  case  of  "  constrained  motion,"  and
the  curve  described  may  be  compared  with  curves  described
by  the  celestial  bodies,  under  the  influence  of  two  or  more
forces.

The  third  law  of  motion  is,  that  action  and  reaction  are
equal.  This  is  obeyed  by  direct  psychic  phenomena,  and
constitutes  from  the  practical  point  of  view  their  most  im-
portant attribute.  It  is  manifested  in  the  fact  that  the  re-
sults accomplished  are  equal  to  and  no  greater  than  the  en-
ergy expended.  There  is  no  disproportion  between  the  cause
and  the  effect.     There  is  none  of  the  loss  involved  in  genetic

DIRECT  METHOD  OF   CONATION".  97

phenomena,  but  there  is  also  none  of  the  gain  secured  by-
indirect  teleological  phenomena.  The  organism  can  take  no
advantage  of  its  surroundings,  and  can  obtain  nothing  for
which  it  does  not  pay  a  full  equivalent  in  muscular  energy.

There  is,  however,  a  form  of  advantage  which  muscle
acquires  over  mechanical  forces,  and  which  is  due  to  the
organic  economizing  of  molecular  nerve  activities,  enabling
them  not  only  to  transmit  their  energy  to  distant  parts  of
the  organism,  but,  in  so  doing,  to  take  advantage  of  such
mechanical  principles  as  the  lever  and  fulcrum,  whereby  the
effect  is  rendered  greater  than  the  cause.  This  result  is  also
accomplished  through  organization  in  still  another  way,  viz.,
by  the  conversion  of  nerve  energy  into  muscular  movement.
This  involves  some  such  principle  of  concentration  as  that  on
which  atmospheric  electricity  is  now  held  to  be  produced.*
While  muscular  action  may  really  have  nothing  in  common
with  electrical  discharge,  the  latter  at  least  suggests  an
analogy  which  may  aid  in  forming  a  conception  of  it.  The
essential  difference  between  purely  physical  and  even  the
lowest  form  of  psychic  phenomena  consists  in  the  power  the
latter  possess  through  organization  of  producing  effects  both
at  a  distance  from,  and  of  greater  value  than,  the  causes
themselves;  and,  owing  to  the  absolute  correlation  of  will
with  purpose,  and  vice  versa,  this  is  really  the  fundamental
distinction  between  genetic  and  teleological  phenomena.
But  these  organic  mechanical  appliances  are  themselves  of
genetic  origin.  They  have  been  developed  in  conformity
with  the  principles  of  adaptation,  and  the  advantage  which

*  Electricity  being  a  piirely  surface  phenomenon,  it  resides  in  the  outer  sur-
faces of  the  minute  aqueous  globules  which  constitute  vapor,  or  cloud.  As  these
globules  are  solids,  and  as  the  solid  contents  of  spheres  increase  much  more
rapidly  than  their  superficial  areas,  the  condensation  of  many  of  these  minute
globules  into  one  larger  one,  as  happens  when  rain-drops  are  formed,  has  the
effect  greatly  to  diminish  the  amount  of  surface,  and,  if  this  was  fully  charged
with  electricity  prior  to  condensation,  it  would  fail  to  contain  it  after  condensa-
tion. The  result  must  be  an  electrical  discharge,  of  greater  or  less  violence,  to
other  objects.

98  ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

they  secure  is  in  no  way  of  psychic  origin.  It  can  not,  there-
fore, be  compared  with  the  advantage  secured  through  the
application  of  the  indirect  method,  and  it  only  serves  to
mark  the  manner  in  which  the  law  of  genetic  evolution  has
operated,  in  rising  by  a  series  of  well-defined  steps  from  the
crudest  genetic  to  the  highest  intellectual  achievements.

As  the  necessary  result  of  organization,  the  direct  method
involves  the  instantaneous  exercise  of  muscular  activity  in
the  direction  of  securing  the  object  of  desire.  If  the  object
be  near,  the  creature  seizes  it  directly,  and  appropriates  it.
If  the  former  resist  the  process,  the  latter  simply  exerts  mus-
cular force  to  overcome  the  resistance.  If  it  be  remote,  by
whatever  sense  detected,  it  moves  in  a  right  line  to  it.  If
barriers  intervene,  it  either  overcomes  them  by  direct  exer-
tion, or,  where  they  are  incapable  of  being  thus  overcome,  it
expends  its  energy  and  comes  to  rest.  In  popular  language,
the  operations  of  the  direct  method  of  conation  constitute
what  is  called  "brute  force,"  or  mere  "  muscle,"  the  crudest
form  of  force  as  well  as  the  least  economical.

A  large  part  of  the  operations  of  the  human  race,  espe-
cially in  its  lower  uncivilized  stages,  are  conducted  according
to  the  direct  method,  and  even  in  civilized  races  this  method
is  largely  employed.  In  this  latter  case  it  is  important  to
observe  that  the  adoption  of  this  method  is  inversely  pro-
portional to  the  complexity  of  the  phenomena  which  it  is
necessary  to  modify  in  order  to  secure  the  ends  sought.
Thus,  while  in  the  domain  of  simple  mechanical  forces  and
inorganic  material  objects  this  method  is  almost  wholly  es-
chewed, in  the  higher  departments  of  vital  and  psychic  phe-
nomena it  is  the  one  most  commonly  employed.  Without
dwelling  upon  the  intermediate  steps,  we  need  only  consider
the  manner  in  which  governments  endeavor  to  enforce  their
decrees.  The  army  and  the  posse  comitatus  are  the  tniest
examples  of  "  brute  force,"  the  only  way  in  which  man  has
learned  to  influence  the  complicated  phenomena  of  society.
All  laws,  too,  are  coercive,  whether  mandatory  or  prohibitory.

INDIEECT  METHOD  OF  CONATION.  99

Before  leaving  the  subject  of  the  direct  method  of  co-
nation, it  may  be  further  pointed  out,  as  a  fact  not  wholly
distinct  from  that  last  stated,  that,  besides  the  mere  muscular
means  of  directly  seeking  the  ends  desired,  there  has  been
developed  with  the  progress  of  mind  a  second  means  which
may  be  distinguished  as  psychic.  This  consists  in  persuasion,
exhortation,  or  appeal  to  dominant  sentiments.  As  a  psychic
phenomenon,  this  persuasive  or  exhortatory  method  is  a  stage
higher  than  the  purely  muscular  one,  but  it  is  still  direct.
It  seeks  to  arouse  the  emotions  and  thereby  secure  the  per-
formance of  acts  by  others  which  the  primary  agent  desires
to  have  performed.  The  principal  examples  of  this  class  of
direct  operations  are  to  be  found  in  the  history  of  moral
reforms  and  religious  institutions,  although  in  the  latter  case
the  indirect  method  has  been  largely  employed.  "We  also
see  excellent  exemplifications  of  the  psychic,  or  exhortatory,
application  of  the  direct  method  in  modern  philanthropic,
charitable,  and  temperance  reforms — all  of  which,  like  the
moral  progress  of  society,  clearly  demonstrate  the  relative
impotence  of  the  direct  method  of  conation  in  accompHshing
the  ends  of  man  and  of  society.

THE   INDmECT   METHOD   OF    CONATION.

The  second,  or  indirect,  method  by  which  conscious  be-
ings seek  to  attain  desired  ends  involves  an  entirely  new
principle,  and  produces  wholly  different  results.  In  the
process  of  the  development  of  the  brain  and  the  psychic
faculties,  a  stage  was  ultimately  reached  at  which  the  con-
sciousness took  on  the  attribute  which  enabled  it  to  perceive
a  few  of  the  general  laws  of  phenomena,  and  thereby  to  pre-
dict from  a  given  modification  some  of  the  secondary  changes
which  would  result.  This  is  the  simplest  manifestation  of
the  intellectual  faculty,  and  it  is  this  faculty  that  constitutes
the  new  element  required  to  form  the  transition  from  the
direct  to  the  indirect  method.  This  transition  constitutes
.one  of  the  great  leaps  which  nature  has  taken  along  its  course

100         ADAPTATION".— MA>T  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

of  evolution,  and  the  first  break  in  that  process  since  the
development  of  protoplasm.  Henceforth  the  possibilities
of  vital  existence  are  to  be  multiplied,  and  the  rate  of  or-
ganic progress  enormously  accelerated.  For  success  in  the
sentient  world  is  the  ability  to  attain  its  ends,  and  the  in-
tellectual element  is  especially  adapted  to  augmenting  that
power.  By  the  direct  method,  action  in  this  direction  is
restricted  to  cases  which  are  within  the  muscular  strength  of
the  organism,  and  easily  accessible  without  the  intervention
of  obstacles.  The  utmost  possible  to  be  accomplished  by  it
was  measured  by  the  energy  actually  expended.  The  least
obstruction  beyond  the  power  of  the  individual  to  clear  away
by  muscular  force  is  an  effectual  bar  to  its  access  to  the
object  of  desire.  By  the  aid  of  the  new  element  all  this  is
changed.  Interposed  barriers  are  evaded  by  circuitous  routes
of  approach.  Powerful  natural  forces  are  by  appropriate
adjustments  made  to  do  the  work  of  overcoming  resistance,
and  what  is  wholly  unattainable  in  the  present  is,  by  the
necessary  adaptation,  secured  in  the  future.

The  intellectual  element,  though  commonly  called  a  force,
is  not  in  reality  such.  It  is  not  comparable  with  the  other
true  psychic  forces.  These  latter  are  obliged  to  do  the  real
work  that  is  performed,  the  same  in  the  indirect  as  in  the
direct  method.  The  intellect  only  guides  them  in  such  a
manner  as  to  secure  the  maximum  results.  It  also  brings
other  natural  forces  to  their  aid,  and  thus  increases  the  effects.
The  general  process  by  which  all  this  is  done  is  that  of  in-
vention, the  product  is  art,  and  therefore  the  faculty  may  be
called  the  inventive  faculty,  and  the  phenomena  produced
artifiGial  phenomena.

The  one  principle  common  to  all  forms  of  art  and  inven-
tion is  that  of  causing  natural  forces  themselves  to  do  the
work  that  man  desires  to  have  done.  There  are,  however,
many  ways  in  which  this  principle  may  operate,  in  some  of
which  the  principle  itself  is  somewhat  difficult  of  detection.
On  the  basis  of  these  differences,  the  modes  of  invention,  or

INDIRECT  METHOD  OF  CONATION.  101

the  kinds  of  indirect  action,  admit  of  a  rough  classification.
The  largest  groups  in  this  classification  are  those  that  con-
cern respectively  the  amount  and  the  direction  of  force.  In
the  former  case,  friendly  forces  are  intensified  and  hostile
ones  diminished.  In  the  latter,  neutral  forces,  or  even  hos-
tile ones,  are  turned  to  beneficial  purposes,  or  the  latter  are
rendered  neutral.  Where  friendly  forces  are  intensified,  or
any  forces  made  useful  or  more  useful  than  before,  the  in-
vention is  positive.  Where  hostile  forces  are  either  dimin-
ished or  diverted,  the  invention  is  negative.  To  simplify
the  subject,  we  need  consider  only  positive  invention.

The  principle  of  intensification  is  exemplified  by  the
lever  and  fulcrum.    As  has  been  mathematically  proved,  this
principle  extends  to  embrace  the  inclined  plane,  the  pulley,
and  the  wheel  and  axle.     This  law,  therefore,  really  under- "
lies  all  strictly  mechanical  art.

The  principle  of  direction  is  well  illustrated  in  the  sim-
ple art  of  irrigation  which  was  practiced  by  the  American
aborigines  in  the  Lower  Status  of  Barbarism.  The  neutral
force,  which  was  carrying  the  mountain-torrent  down  to  the
sea,  was,  by  a  simple  device,  made  to  carry  it  to  the  fields  of
maize.  The  various  means  of  securing  a  "  head  "  of  water  to
propel  machinery  constitute  still  more  frequent  examples.

There  is  a  further  law  of  commutation  which  has  been
extensively  employed,  and  which  may  sometimes  be  brought
under  one  and  sometimes  under  the  other  of  the  general
divisions  above  defined.  Thus  time  is  often  commuted  or
converted  into  force,  as  in  raising  a  pile-driver,  intensity  and
consequent  effect  being  secured,  not  by  a  mechanical  princi-
ple, but  by  distribution  of  force  over  a  greater  interval  of
time.  The  reverse  of  this,  or  a  negative  principle,  is  seen
in  the  phenomena  of  weights  and  springs  to  operate  clock-
work. Other  subordinate  laws  might  be  noted,  but  a  more
minute  analysis  is  not  necessary.

The  general  principles  underlying  the  application  of  the
indirect  method  and  their  bearing  upon  social  science  have

102        ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

already  been  quite  fully  stated  in  Chapter  YII  (vol.  i,  pp.  476,
551),  while  specific  examples  will  be  given  in  Chapter  XI
{infra,  p.  385).  It  will  not,  therefore,  be  necessary  here
either  to  repeat  the  former  or  to  anticipate  the  latter.  It  is
suflScient  to  have  fixed  the  position  of  this  most  important
of  all  the  factors  of  social  development  in  its  proper  place  in
a  system  of  classification  of  phenomena.

Taking  a  retrospective  glance  over  the  entire  field  of
phenomena  thus  far  considered,  we  are  able  to  perceive  the
several  stages  of  progress  in  the  direction  of  economy  of  re-
sults. The  lowest  stage  in  this,  as  in  all  other  respects,  is
that  of  genetic  phenomena,  in  which  we  saw  how  great  was
the  waste  and  how  exceedingly  small  the  degree  of  progress
as  compared  with  the  amount  of  energy  expended.  This  is
nature's  method,  pure  and  simple.

The  next  stage  is  that  of  the  direct  method  of  conation.
Here  the  phenomena  are  teleological,  and  hence  far  more
productive  of  results  in  proportion  to  the  force  exerted.  The
immense  element  of  waste  is  eliminated.  Action  that  is  not
equilibrated  by  attempting  what  is  beyond  the  power  of  the
agent  results  in  accomplishing  the  same  amount  of  work  as
is  represented  by  the  energy  put  forth,  but  no  more.  As  in
genetic  phenomena  we  were  dealing  with  true  natural  forces,
so  in  those  teleological  phenomena  which  are  accomplished
by  the  direct  method  we  are  still  dealing  with  true  natural
forces.  The  difference  is,  that  while  the  genetic  forces  are
physical  the  teleological  forces  are  psychical.

Finally,  we  have  as  a  third  stage  that  in  which  the  indi-
rect method  is  applied,  and  here  we  see  the  maximum  econ-
omy and  the  maximum  efficiency  in  the  accomplishment  of
results.  With  the  development  of  this  mode  of  action,  great
and  increasing  disproportion  is  secured  between  the  energy
expended  and  the  work  accomplished ;  space,  time,  and  in-
tervening obstacles  are  overcome,  and  the  conditions  are  at
length  established  for  social  evolution.

NATURAL  AND  ARTIFICIAL  PHENOMENA.         103

CLASSIFICATION    INTO    NATURAL    AND   ARTIFICIAL.

The  system  of  classification  above  sketched  is  based
primarily  upon  the  fundamental  distinction  of  genetic  and
teleological  phenomena,  this  being  the  most  important  basis
from  which  to  contemplate  the  successive  steps  in  the  prog-
ress toward  the  final  stage  represented  by  the  application  of
the  indirect  method.  But  the  reader  can  not  have  failed  to
perceive  that  there  is  another  scarcely  less  fundamental  dis-
tinction, furnishing  a  second  basis  of  classification  too  essen-
tial to  be  overlooked.  This  is  the  distinction  of  natural  and
artificial.  It  is  clear,  too,  that  this  classification  will  over-
lap the  former,  so  as  to  place  a  larger  share  of  all  phenomena
under  the  first  of  these  general  groups  than  fell  under  the
group  of  genetic  phenomena,  while  restricting  the  second
of  its  great  groups  to  a  much  narrower  field  than  that  occu-
pied by  teleological  phenomena.  A  closer  inspection  shows
that  this  transfer  consists  in  relegating  from  the  department
of  teleological  phenomena  to  that  of  artificial  phenomena
the  entire  domain  of  the  direct  method  of  conation.

We  saw  that  all  actions  performed  according  to  the  direct
method  agree  with  genetic  phenomena  in  obeying  the  me-
chanical axioms,  or  primary  laws  of  motion.  The  phenomena
of  this  group  must  therefore  take  place  through  the  action  of
true  natural  forces ;  and  hence  the  domain  of  natural  forces,
besides  embracing  the  department  of  genetic  phenomena,
must  also  extend  over  so  much  of  the  field  of  teleological  phe-
nomena as  falls  within  the  operation  of  the  direct  method.
This  being  the  case,  the  domain  of  artificial  phenomena,
excluding  as  it  must  all  genetic  and  all  direct  teleological
phenomena,  is  so  narrowed  down  as  to  coincide  in  all  re-
spects with  that  of  indirect  teleological  phenomena  alone.

The  importance  of  the  great  extent  of  the  domain  of
natural  phenomena  may  be  better  appreciated  when  we  re-
member that  it  constitutes  the  legitimate  field  for  the  exer-
cise of  the  inventive  faculty,  and  that  every-where  within  it

104:        ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

sucli  phenomena  are  susceptible  to  modification  and  capable
of  being  rendered  advantageous  to  man  in  proportion  as  their
laws  are  comprehended.  But  more  especially  does  this  truth
concern  the  sociologist,  since  he  finds  in  it  the  very  hope  of
social  science.  He  learns  that  within  ^hat  great  group  of
phenomena  subject  to  human  control,  and  under  the  subor-
dinate head  of  direct  teleological  phenomena,  stand  the  phe-
nomena which  result  from  the  operation  of  the  social  forces
(vol.  i,  p.  468),  and  in  this  fact  resides  the  entire  possibility
of  an  artificial  social  progress.

Genetic  changes  take  place  through  infinitesimal  incre-
ments, and  are  secularly  slow,  all  but  a  mere  differential  of
energy  being  lost  in  equilibration.  Yital  phenomena  belong
to  the  genetic  class.  Sense  phenomena  are  teleological  but
direct,  thus  securing  no  mechanical  advantage  above  that
whicli  the  organism  itself  has  secured  through  its  structu-
ral development.  Intellectual  phenomena,  also  teleological,
alone  secure  this  advantage,  and  it  is  this  which  distinguishes
all  forms  of  art  and  constitutes  such  actions  artificial.  While
many  such  actions  are  doubtless  performed  by  the  highest
mammals,  it  requires  a  close  discrimination  to  distinguish
them  from  instiiict.  Instinct  may  not  inappropriately  be
called  secondary  organization,  since  it  secures,  through  purely
genetic  methods,  such  cumulative  adaptations  as  are  secured
by  morphological  organization,  whereby  certain  mechanical
advantages  are  gained,  so  long  as  the  creature  restricts  itself
to  the  constantly  recurring  influences  of  a  circumscribed
habitat,  but  which  are  as  inoperative  outside  of  that  habitat
as  are  the  physiological  processes  outside  of  the  organism.
Instinct,  therefore,  may  be  said  to  stand  to  the  indirect
method  in  the  same  relation  that  the  physiological  apparatus
of  living  organisms  stands  to  the  direct  method.  Just  as  the
latter  are  purely  genetic  products,  attended  with  efiects  that
appear  to  be  psychic,  so  the  former  is  an  equally  pure  genetic
product,  attended  with  effects  that  appear  to  be  intellectual.
And  it  is  with  greatly  heightened  interest  that  we  now  ob-

RECAPITULATION.  105

eerve  that  instinct  forms  still  another  of  those  abrupt  steps,
strictly  analogous  to  that  marked  hy  cell-contraction  in
muscles  and  leverage  in  tendons  and  joints,  to  relieve  the
too  wide  interval  between  the  phenomena  of  the  direct  and
those  of  the  indirect  method  of  conation.

Recapitulation. — Briefly  to  recapitulate  the  entire  sub-
ject of  the  classification  of  phenomena,  we  find  that  they
may  be  primarily  divided  into  the  two  great  classes,  genetic
and  teleological,  the  first  of  which  are  always  physical  and
unconscious,  and  produce  change  through  infinitesimal  in-
crements, while  the  second  are  always  psychical  and  con-
scious, proceeding  from  volition  and  involving  purpose.
Looking  to  genetic  phenomena,  we  find  that  they  are  sub-
divided into  two  groups — inorganic,  the  result  of  physical,  or
mechanical,  forces,  and  organic,  the  result  of  vital,  or  biolog-
ical, forces.  Looking  to  teleological  phenomena,  we  find
that  they,  too,  belong  to  two  general  subdivisions — direct,
proceeding  according  to  the  direct  method  of  conation,  and
indirect,  proceeding  according  to  the  indirect  method  of
conation.  Direct  teleological  phenomena  are  susceptible  of
a  secondary  subdivision — convenient  for  the  sociologist  but
not  fundamental — into  such  as  are  manifested  in  the  animal
world  below  man  (zoological),  and  such  as  constitute  human
action  (anthropological).  This  last  sub-group  is  the  domain
of  the  social  forces.

Regarding  this  as  the  primary  classification  of  phenom-
ena, we  may  next  take  account  of  the  scarcely  less  important
secondary  classification  into  natural  and  artificial.  ITatural
phenomena  include  all  genetic  phenomena,  and  direct  teleo-
logical phenomena  in  addition.  Artificial  phenomena  coin-
cide and  are  strictly  identical  with  indirect  teleological  phe-
nomena. All  natural  phenomena  take  place  according  to
uniform  laws,  obey  the  mechanical  axioms,  are  impelled  by
true  natural  forces.  They  are  capable,  therefore,  of  being
investigated,  their  results  may  be  predicted,  and  the  phe-
nomena themselves  may  be  modified  at  the  will  of  rational

106

ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

beings  who  have  made  themselves  acquainted  with  the  laws
which  underlie  them.  Artificial  phenomena  are  those  that
result  from  such  modification  and  control  of  natural  phenom-
ena by  such  rational  beings.  The  transformations  effected
upon  the  globe  by  man — ^which,  without  his  rational  actions,
would  not  have  taken  place,  and  which  may  be  designated
in  general  phrase  as  due  to  the  agencies  of  civilization — con-
sist principally  of  such  artificial  phenomena.

The  following  tabular  exhibit  will  aid  the  reader  in  fixing
the  relations  of  these  several  groups,  while  at  the  same  time
it  combines  in  a  single  scheme  both  the  bases  of  classification
that  have  been  employed :

Phenomena  are :

Genetic;  physical;  unconscious:
producing  change  through  in-
finitesimal increments.

Teleological ;  psychical ;  conscious :
proceeding  from  volition  and  involving  pur-
pose.

Inorganic :
the  result  of
physical,  or
mechanical,
forces.

Organic :
the      result
of  vital,  or
biological,
forces.

Direct :
proceeding    according
the    direct    method
conation.

to
of

Indirect :
proceeding  accord-
ing to  the  indi-
rect method  of
conation.

Zoological :
as  manifest-
ed by  crea-
tures below
man.

Anthropological ;
as  manifested
by  man.  Do-
main of  the
social  forces.

Natural :
taking  place  according  to  uniform  laws,  and  produced  by
true  natural  forces ;  capable  of  prediction  and  modifica-
tion.

Artificial :
consisting  of  natu-
ral    phenomena
modified   by  the
inventive  faculty.

Statement  of  the  Akgument.

The  purpose  of  the  present  chapter,  as  already  announced,
has  been  to  accomplish  the  complete  orientation  of  the  read-
er for  the  voyage  before  him.  Without  this,  much  that  is  to
come  might  appear  meaningless,  or  at  least  lose  its  point.

STATEMENT  OF  THE  ARGUMENT.  107

Men  think  in  systems.  Most  systematic  treatises  are  un-
intelligible unless  followed  from  the  beginning  and  grasped
in  their  entirety.  A  fundamental  tone  runs  through  them
which  prescribes  the  special  sense  of  every  line,  and  which
is  wholly  unheard  in  isolated  passages.  The  careful  reader
of  such  works,  without  necessarily  acquiescing  in  the  author's
views,  is  able  at  least  to  comprehend  them  and  to  do  justice
to  them.

It  was  thought  that  the  considerations  set  forth  in  this
chapter  might  aid  in  thus  elucidating  the  general  point  of
view  from  which  this  work  is  written,  and  enable  the  reader
who  shall  persevere  to  the  end  to  supply,  from  what  he  may
thus  learn  of  the  ideas  which  the  writer  designs  to  convey,
some  of  the  deficiencies  in  the  discussions  which  are  to  fol-
low. There  is  a  tendency — to  which,  I  presume,  all  will  con-
fess— to  allow  the  reader's  individuality  to  crowd  out  that  of
the  writer,  and  thus  so  far  to  mingle  the  subjective  with  the
objective  as  to  leave  the  latter  imperfectly  assimilated.  For
the  reader's  own  good,  this  tendency  should  be  restrained.
We  only  enlarge  our  own  conceptions  by  admitting  those  of
others,  not  necessarily  in  the  sense  of  accepting  them,  but
simply  of  appreciating  them.

In  the  following  argument,  now  to  be  briefly  stated,  and
subsequently  to  be  fully  elaborated,  the  statements  made  in
this  chapter,  as  well  as  those  contained  in  the  preceding  vol-
ume, are  to  be  taken  as  the  basis,  or  premises,  and  must  be
granted  "  for  the  sake  of  the  argument "  at  least,  however
unsound  they  may  be  deemed  in  themselves.

DEFmrrioNS.

The  remainder  of  this  work  will  chiefly  consist  in  the
discussion  of  six  terms,  and  therefore,  before  entering  upop
such  discussion,  it  is  a  primary  necessity  to  furnish  rigid
definitions  of  each  of  these  terms.

108         ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE  UNIVERSE.

For  a  purpose  wliich  will  presently  appear  we  will  assign
to  each  of  these  terms  a  letter,  which  will  fix  their  order  in  a
series  not  admitting  of  any  alteration.

The  first  of  these  terms,  which  we  will  designate  by  the
letter  A,  is  Happiness  /  the  second,  which  we  will  designate
by  B,  is  Progress ;  the  third,  which  we  will  designate  by  C,
\a  Dynamic  Action ;  the  fourth,  which  we  will  designate  by
D,  is  Dynamic  Opinion  ;  the  fifth,  which  we  will  designate
by  E,  is  Knowledge ;  and  the  sixth,  which  we  will  designate
by  F,  is  Education.

The  definitions  of  these  six  terms  are  as  follows :

A.  Happiness.  Excess  of  pleasure,  or  enjoyment,  over
pain,  or  discomfort.

B.  Progress.  Success  in  harmonizing  natural  phenom-
ena with  human  advantage.

C.  Dynamic  Action.  Employment  of  the  intellectual,
inventive,  or  indirect  method  of  conation.

D.  Dynamic  Opinion.  Correct  views  of  the  relations  of
man  to  the  universe.

E.  Knowledge.     Acquaintance  with  the  environment.

F.  Education.  Universal  distribution  of  extant  knowl-
edge.

Theokems  of  Dynamic  Sociology.

Corresponding  to  these  six  terms  thus  defined,  there  are
six  theorems  of  dynamic  sociology  which  require  to  be  elabo-
rated and  established,  and  to  each  of  which  a  separate  chap-
ter will  be  devoted.

Continuing  the  literal  designations,  these  theorems  are
the  following :

A.  Happiness  is  the  ultimate  end  of  conation.

B.  Progress  is  the  direct  means  to  Happiness ;  it  is,  there-
fore, the  first  proximate  end  of  conation,  or  primary  means
to  the  ultimate  end.

C.  Dynamic  Action  is  the  direct  means  to  Progress ;  it
is,  therefore,  the  second  proximate  end  of  conation,  or  sec-

.ondary  means  to  the  ultimate  end.

THEOREMS  OF  DYNAMIC  SOCIOLOGY.  109

D.  Dynamic  Opinion  is  the  direct  means  to  Dynamic
Action ;  it  is,  therefore,  the  third  proximate  end  of  conation,
or  tertiary  means  to  the  ultimate  end.

E.  Knowledge  is  the  direct  means  to  Dynamic  Opinion ;
it  is,  therefore,  the  fourth  proximate  end  of  conation,  or
fourth  means  to  the  ultimate  end.

F.  Education  is  the  direct  means  to  Knowledge ;  it  is,
therefore,  the  fifth  proximate  end  of  conation,  and  is  the
fifth  and  initial  means  to  the  ultimate  end.

Letting  the  symbols  alone  stand  for  the  terms,  and  em-
ploying the  mathematical  sign  of  equivalence  (=0=),  to  be
read  "  will  result  in,"  the  above  propositions  may  be  con-
densed into  a  very  simple  notation,  which  at  the  same  time
presents  the  entire  argument  in  a  perfectly  clear  and  intel-
ligible form :

A.  The  ultimate  end.

B=o=A.

C=o=B=o=A.

D=o=C=(^B=oA.

E=o=D=o=CoB^D=A.

F=o=EoDoCoB=o=A.

The  special  claim  which  is  made  for  this  scheme  is  that
of  completeness.  It  is  proposed  to  show  that  not  only  have
we  in  the  first  term  the  absolutely  ultimate  end  incapable  of
serving  as  a  means  to  any  ulterior  end,  but  that  in  the  last
term  we  have  the  absolutely  initial  means  incapable  of
being  made  an  end  to  any  anterior  means.

It  will  be  further  shown  that  the  several  proximate  ends
constitute  true  means  for  securing  the  next  respective  higher
ends,  and  therefore  need  not  be  pursued  as  ends  in  them-
selves, so  that  the  entire  series  above  the  initial  means  may
be  safely  left  to  take  care  of  itself,  and  the  total  social  energy
be  concentrated  on  the  initial  means ;  that  all  power  ex-
pended on  any  of  these  proximate  ends  is  lost  so  long  as  any
power  can  be  laid  out  on  a  more  remote  one;  and  that  sue-

110         ADAPTATION.— MAN  AND  THE   UNIVERSE.

cess,  for  the  same  energy  expended,  will  be  proportional  to
the  remoteness  of  the  end  toward  which  it  is  directed,  so  that
the  highest  economy  is  only  secured  in  directing  it  to  the
most  remote  proximate  end,  which  is  the  initial  means.

But  we  wiU  not  here  further  anticipate  the  treatment  of
the  main  problem.

CHAPTER  IX.
UTILITY.

HAPPINESS    THE   ULTIMATE    END    OF   CONATION.

Nature  and  genesis  of  feeling — The  object  of  nature,  function ;  objective,  or
biological,  point  of  view — The  object  of  sentient  beings,  pleasure;  sub-
jective, or  sociological,  point  of  view — The  indirect,  or  intellectual,  contrasted
with  the  direct,  or  physical,  method  of  conation — Utilitarianism — The  vari-
ous alleged  ends  of  conation  shown  to  be  merely  means  to  the  ultimate
end,  happiness — Right  and  wrong — Imperfection  of  the  codes  of  law  and
ethics — Objections  to  the  word  happiness — Relativity  of  pleasure  and  pain
— Increase  of  feeling  with  the  degree  of  organization — The  pursuit  of
happiness — Organization  of  happiness.

At  the  base  of  every  pliilosophical  system  involving
the  interests  of  man  lie  the  phenomena  of  feeling.  These
phenomena  constitute  the  substratum  of  Sociology.  They
likewise  form  an  important  factor  in  Biology.  Impossible
though  it  may  be  to  find  a  line  which  shall  absolutely  and
in  all  cases  divide  the  vegetable  from  the  animal  kingdom,
it  is  nevertheless  true  that,  for  all  forms  to  any  extent  diifer-
entiated,  the  possession  or  non-possession  of  feeling  is  the
distinguishing  mark  of  these  two  departments  of  biology.
For  all  the  practical  purposes  of  a  philosophy,  the  phenomena
of  life  may  be  classed  under  the  one  or  the  other  of  the  two
general  heads,  the  insentient  and  the  sentient.  The  transi-
tion from  the  former  to  the  latter,  in  the  progress  of  the
evolution  and  organization  of  matter,  constitutes  one  of  those
strides,  or  leaps,  which  nature  occasionally  makes,  and  which
serve  to  mark  off  the  eras  in  the  history  of  development.

112  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

Life  without  feeling  is  essentially  passive,  and  its  capabili-
ties are  limited  by  the  nature  of  surrounding  circumstances.
Life  with  feeling  becomes  active,  and  either  directly  or  in-
directly reacts  upon  the  environment,  modifying  the  face
of  nature.

The  natural  genesis  of  feeling  is  one  of  the  most  inter-
esting of  biological  problems.  Not  that,  as  a  scientific  ques-
tion, it  admits  of  a  certain  solution,  but,  as  one  of  those  his-
torical questions  thrust  upon  us  by  the  facts  of  biology,  while
it  transcends  the  limits  of  observation,  it  can  not  be  excluded
from  the  domain  of  rational  inquiry.  Like  many  other  kin-
dred questions,  that  of  the  origin  of  feeling  seems  to  find  its
most  satisfactory  solution  in  the  great  and  newly  discovered
law  of  selection,  or  adaptation.  Though  to  a  certain  degree
relative,  the  phenomena  of  feeling  may  be  resolved  into  two
great  groups,  each  mutually  excluding  the  other,  in  one  of
which  all  the  feelings  are  more  or  less  pleasurable,  while
in  the  other  they  are  more  or  less  painful.  So-called  indif-
ferent feelings*  (vol.  i,  p.  386),  can  not  be  admitted  ex-
cept into  the  department  of  psychology  proper,  where,  as
the  correlates  of  perception,  they  are  denominated  sensa-
tions.

Pleasure  and  pain,  then,  are  the  leading  characteristics  of
all  feelings.  Teleologists  have  essayed  numerous  explana-
tions of  pleasure  and  pain,  particularly  of  the  latter,  one  of
the  chief  of  which  is  that  pain  is  given  us  as  a  discipline,  in
order  to  improve  our  morals  or  increase  our  reverence  for
the  Creator.  But,  of  course,  this  would  not  apply  to  the
lower  animals  which  suffer  like  ourselves,  and  the  same  ob-
jection would  apply  to  all  the  attempts  made  by  that  school
to  account  for  the  existence  of  pleasure  and  pain.  They
rarely  condescend  to  take  such  humble  creatures  as  animals
into  their  lofty  consideration.  When  Descartes  was  met  by
this  insuperable  obstacle,  his  native  candor  and  logical  con-
sistency drove  him  to  the  worst  vagary  of  his  life — that  of
*  Spencer,  "  Principles  of  Psychology,"  vol.  i,  pp.  212,  474.

GENESIS  OF  FEELING.  113

insisting  that  all  animals  were  mere  automata^  and  devoid  of
feeling.

When  the  principle  of  natural  adaptation,  or  selection,  is
once  fairly  understood  and  applied  to  the  phenomena  of
feeling,  they  prove  one  of  the  easiest  classes  of  facts  in  the
whole  range  of  biological  science  to  yield  to  its  magic  touch.*
The  child  shuns  the  fire  and  the  heated  oven,  and  every-
body recognizes  that  its  fear  of  the  pain  which  attends  burn-
ing is  what  frequently  preserves  its  life.  It  is  impossible
not  to  admit  that  even  man,  were  he  absolutely  indifferent
to  pain  caused  by  violent  contusions,  etc.,  would  be  liable
to  be  destroyed  in  thousands  of  cases  where  this  attri-
bute now  protects  and  preserves  him.  If  such  is  the  case
with  children  surrounded  and  protected  by  rational  par-
ents and  friends,  how  much  more  potent  must  this  prin-
ciple be  in  the  protection  and  preservation  of  non-rational
animals !

It  is  not  the  abstract  love  of  life,  the  mere  desire  to  live,
which  causes  the  hare  to  flee  the  hound,  or  the  partridge  to
cover  from  the  falcon.  It  is  primarily  the  dread  of  the  pain
which  experience  teaches  would  be  inflicted  by  the  teeth  of
the  one  and  the  talons  of  the  other.  And  so  it  is  through-
out the  sentient  world.  The  dread  of  pain  is  the  spur  to  all
those  activities  which  really  result  in  the  preservation  of  life.
And  see  how  these  facts  are  correlated.  It  seems  a  truism
to  say  that  death  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  high  de-
grees of  suffering.  But  there  is  really  no  logical  connec-
tion between  them.  Until  we  understand  the  bearing  of
this  new-found  law  of  survival,  there  is  absolutely  no  ade-
quate explanation  of  this  correlation — no  a  priori  ground
for  assuming  its  existence  ;  and  it  is  only  because  we  habitu-
ally obsei-ve  the  facts,  that  such  a  connection  between  them
as  that  of  cause  and  effect  should  be  established  in  our  minds.
The  case  is  analogous  to  that  of  gravitation.  It  seems  ab-
surd to  speak  of  a  body  moving  upward,  i.  «.,  away  from

*  Loc.  dt,  pp.  279,  280,
37

114  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

the  earth,  when  left  to  itself,  simply  because  of  universal
experience.  The  laws  of  thought  are  wholly  unaffected  by
it,  as  is  proved  by  numerous  experiments.  So  there  could
be  no  logical  inconsistency  in  the  association  of  the  highest
degrees  of  suffering  with  the  longest  duration  of  life,  and
only  experience  negatives  such  a  supposition.  Indeed,  the
religionists  have  fallen  back  on  pure  logic  whenever,  think-
ing no  corporeal  punishment  sufficiently  severe,  i,  e.j  real-
izing that  death  would  certainly  supervene  before  the  requi-
site amount  of  pain  could  be  inflicted,  they  have  invented
places  of  eternal  torment  for  the  soul,  where  death  no  longer
comes  forward  as  a  check  upon  suffering.  But,  when  the
law  of  survival  is  once  clearly  conceived,  it  introduces  an
adequate  mechanical  cause  for  the  relation  of  sequence  be-
tween pain  and  death.

Imagine  the  world  peopled  by  myriads  of  living  and
active  beings  of  all  kinds  and  forms  of  diversity.  They  are
aU  in  contact  with  all  the  other  objects  existing  about  them,
and  a  prey  to  all  the  vicissitudes  which  a  constantly  changing
world  presents.  Without  feeling,  they  must  be  without
sense  or  intimation  of  danger,  and  rapidly,  through  frequent
exposure  to  those  agencies  which  destroy  their  organization,
they  would,  one  by  one,  disappear  before  the  adverse  ele-
ments that  every-where  surround  them.  The  utter  extinc-
tion of  every  form  under  these  circumstances  could  be  but  a
question  of  time,  and  all  actual  life  would  vanish  from  the
globe.  But  let  us  suppose  some  to  be  slightly  endowed  with
the  susceptibility  to  pain.  These  would,  in  proportionate
degrees,  shun  the  agencies  calculated  to  destroy  their  organi-
zation, because  such  would  also  be,  on  the  hypothesis,  the
ones  which  would  produce  pain.  The  forms  thus  endowed
would,  therefore,  survive  longer  in  proportion  to  the  degree
of  sensitiveness  to  pain.  Thus,  under  the  now  clearly  un-
derstood law  of  "natural  selection,"  the  number  of  sentient
beings  would  increase,  while  the  insentient  ones  would  be-
come extinct,  and  we  should  have  the  world  substantially  as

GENESIS  OF  FEELING.  115

we  actually  see  it.  So  that,  on  the  irrational  assumption  of
a  simultaneous  creation  of  living  things  in  all  respects  as
they  are,  except  in  the  total  absence  of  feeling,  if  a  degree
of  sensitiveness,  however  small,  be  assumed  once  to  make  its
appearance,  accidentaUy  or  otherwise,  the  complete  develop-
ment of  a  sentient  kingdom  of  beings  out  of  such  a  state  of
things  is  perfectly  explicable  on  the  single  principle  of  natu-
ral selection,  or  the  preservation  of  the  best  adapted.  That
such  has  not  been  the  manner  in  which  sentient  beings  have
originated,  needs  not,  of  course,  be  said  ;  but,  be  that  mode
what  it  may,  it  is  the  same  principle  to  which  we  must  look
for  the  only  explanation  that  nature  affords  of  the  existence
of  pain  in  the  world.

Kot  less  clear  is  the  genesis  of  the  opposite  state  of  feel-
ing, y\z.,  pleasure.  Indeed,  a  closer  view  makes  it  probable
that  the  existence  of  pleasurable  sensations  was  even  more
necessary  than  that  of  painful  ones,  in  order  to  insure  the
preservation  of  living  beings ;  and  only  in  consequence  of
their  relativity  is  the  presumption  excluded  of  the  chrono-
logical priority  of  this  class  of  feeling.  For  active  life  can
only  be  maintained  by  the  absorption  of  nutriment,  and  this
nutriment,  for  every  thing  higher  than  the  crinoid,  must  be
sought  and  obtained  by  the  exercise  of  a  greater  or  less  de-
gree of  individual  effort.  But  no  such  effort  will  "be  put
forth  without  a  definite  stimulus  in  this  direction,  and  the
only  such  stimulus  possible  is  the  pleasure  of  gratifying  de-
sire. We  have  no  right  to  doubt  that  the  amoeba  experiences
a  positive  pleasure  in  ingulfing  a  diatom,  although  there  may
be  room  to  question  whether  the  bisection  of  its  body  pro-
duces any  positive  pain.  As  we  ascend  in  the  scale  of  being,
we  find  that,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  the  capacity  for  pleasure
increases  pari  passu  with  increase  of  structure.  It  may  not
be  true  that  the  pleasure  of  taking  in  nourishment  is  in-
tensified in  the  precise  proportion  of  organization,  yet  this
is  an  approximation  to  the  truth.  Compare,  for  example,
the  sense  of  taste  in  the  oyster  with  that  of  the  epicure.

116  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

Eut,  as  organization  increases,  other  capacities  for  pleasure
arise,  many  of  which  are  as  essential  to  the  continuation
of  life  as  are  those  connected  with  nutrition.  There  is
the  great  co-ordinate  system,  the  reproductive,  which,  while
in  the  lowest  creatures  it  seems  to  be  little  more  than  a
sort  of  supplementary  nutrition,  becomes  in  higher  organ-
isms differentiated  into  a  wholly  distinct  function,  having
its  own  special  organs  located  in  a  different  part  of  the
body,  and  a  nervous  organization  yielding  the  strongest  of
all  stimuli  in  the  intense  pleasure  of  its  exercise.  While
the  nutritive  system  has  for  its  function  the  preservation  of
the  individual,  the  reproductive  system  has  for  its  function
the  preservation  of  the  species.  The  one  preserves  life,  the
other  perpetuates  it,  and,  in  so  far  as  two  indispensable  things
admit  of  a  comparison,  the  latter  is  far  the  more  important
function.  And  here,  more  distinctly  than  in  the  case  of  the
nutritive  system,  the  capacity  for  pleasure  advances  with  the
grade  of  development.  It  is  a  significant  fact,  just  at  this
point  to  be  noted,  that  it  is  not  until  we  reach  the  higher  ver-
tebrates, the  mammalian  class,  that  we  find  the  highly  spe-
cialized male  intromittent  organ.  The  perpetuation  of  these
highly  organized  beings  demanded  a  powerful  stimulus  to
the  performance  of  the  reproductive  act,  and  nature  has  sup-
plied such  a  stimulus  in  the  development  of  special  organs
of  copulation  with  an  attendant  nervous  apparatus.

In  higher  creatures  there  are  various  other  sources  of
pleasure,  the  attainment  of  which  is  more  or  less  essential  to
the  life  and  health  of  the  organism.  Play  itself,  as  exem-
plified by  the  gambols  of  the  lamb  or  the  colt,  is  simply  the
gratification  of  the  natural  demand  of  the  animal  system  for
its  necessary  exercise.  Both  classes  of  feeling  are  easily  ac-
counted for  as  the  result  of  natural  adaptation.  Plants,  in
so  far  as  they  are  devoid  of  feeling,  exist  by  virtue  of  other
means  of  protection.  Feeling,  so  far  as  nature's  objects  can
be  understood,  is  simply  one  of  the  means  by  which  organ-
isms are  protected  and  enabled  to  subsist.     The  classes  of

I

GENESIS  OF  FEELING.  117

beings  possessing  it  obviously  could  not  exist  witliout  it;
that  is  to  say,  the  existence  of  a  class  of  beings  possessing
the  organization  and  all  the  characteristics  of  existing  sen-
tient creatures,  except  the  capacity  for  pleasure  and  pain,
would,  under  the  same  external  conditions,  be  utterly  impos-
sible. Remove  feeling,  and  some  other  adequate  protection
would  require  to  be  substituted,  and  no  other  can  be  imag-
ined that  would  not  necessitate  a  complete  change  of  organi-
zation and  its  re-adaptation  to  conditions,  equally  marked
with  that  which  distinguishes  the  plant  from  the  animal.
Remove  the  pleasure  derived  from  eating,  the  gustatory
nerves,  and  the  individual  immediately  perishes.  Remove
the  sexual  appetite,  and  the  race  forthwith  becomes  extinct.
Remove  the  stimulus  to  muscular  exertion,  and  the  organism
languishes,  and  sooner  or  later  the  species  must  succumb.
On  the  other  hand,  let  the  so-called  "  pangs  of  hunger  "  be
quieted  without  the  normal  absorption  of  nourishment,  and
death  from  starvation,  though  it  be  painless,  would  be  no
less  certain.  Suppose  all  discomfort  arising  from  prolonged
sexual  abstinence  to  be  removed,  and  not  even  civilized  man,
with  all  his  foresight,  could  arrest  the  speedy  extinction  of
bis  own  race.  Even  ennui*  has  its  uses.  It  is  equivalent  to
the  pain  resulting  from  want  of  normal  exercise  of  the  facul-
ties of  the  whole  system.  Remove  it  entirely,  and  a  fatal
lethargy  would  paralyze  the  sentient  world.  So  indispen-
sable are  all  the  forms  of  feeling.

It  would  be  easy  to  show  that  the  existence  of  feeling —
of  pleasure  and  pain — is  the  special  quality  which  admits  of
the  highest  forms  of  organization  being  attained.  Far  safer
than  woody  tissue,  calcareous  shells,  or  bony  plates,  are  the
sensitive  tentacles,  antennae,  vibrissse,  and  papillae  of  highly
organized  animals.  And  greater  still  is  the  protection  which
the  eye  and  the  ear  afford  to  the  creature  in  the  midst  of

*  G.  Leroy,  "Lettres  sur  les  animaux,"  pp.  37,  143  ;  Auguste  Comtc,  "Phi-
losophie  Positive,"  vol.  iii,  pp.  525,  626,  548  ;  vol.  iv,  pp.  449,  450 ;  Carpenter,
"Mental  Physiology,"  p.  175.

118  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

dangers.  But  in  proportion  as  these  safeguards  exist,  will  the
degree  of  organization  increase.  Untrammeled  by  clumsy
coats  of  mail,  the  tissues  are  free  to  expand,  to  difierentiate,
to  improve.  With  the  means  of  escaping  all  the  rude  assaults
from  without,  the  organism  substitutes  delicacy  for  strength,
and  structural  refinement  for  coarse  offensive  and  defensive
appliances.  So  that  the  sentient  faculty  is  not  only  necessary
to  the  existence  of  highly  organized  creatures,  but  higher  or-
ganization is  the  chief  result  of  the  development  of  the  sen-
tient faculty.    The  progress  of  one  is  the  progress  of  both.

The  genesis  of  feeling  is  thus  satisfactorily  explained,
and  in  it,  as  a  corollary,  or  rather  as  the  obverse  side  of  it,  is
clearly  seen  also  the  genesis  of  sentient  life  itself.  The  only
unsolved  problem  is  that  of  the  nature  of  feeling.  For  the
questions  still  remain :  How  should  such  an  expedient  have
happened  to  be  hit  upon  as  the  endowment  of  organized
matter  with  sensation  ?  and.  What  is  it  in  sentient  matter  that
distinguishes  it  from  insentient  (vol.  i,  p.  363)  ?  To  say  that
nervous  matter  possesses  this  property,  only  brings  us  one
step  nearer  to  the  problem.  It  is  little  more  than  a  state-
ment of  the  problem.  We  will  not  hastily  place  this  in  the
category  of  the  unknowable,  but  will  cheerfully  leave  it  for
the  present  in  that  of  the  unknown,  while  with  true  positiv-
ist  resignation  we  will  accept  the  immense  fact  which  feel-
ino-  itself  (our  senses)  presents  in  the  existence  of  feeling  in
the  world.

In  dealing  with  the  genesis  of  any  class  of  phenomena
we  must  necessarily  keep  in  view  the  end,  or  purpose,  to  be
served  by  the  phenomena.  With  this  truth  teleology  has
nothing  whatever  to  do.  We  have  only  to  recognize  that
nothing  can  exist  without  a  cause,  and  we  are  obliged  to
regard  the  effect  in  the  light  of  an  end,  or  purpose.  There-
fore, without  recognizing  any  influences  external  to  the
positively  dependent  course  of  natural  change,  we  are  com-
pelled to  take  account  of  what  must  be  regarded  as  the  ob-
jects, or  ends,  of  nature.     Language  forces  us  to  express  the

OBJECTIVE  POINT  OF  VIEW.  119

conception  by  these  symbols,  and  the  laws  of  thought  require
us  to  formulate  such  a  conception  before  we  can  compre-
hend the  operations  of  natural  law.  The  chief  objects  of
nature  are  three :  the  preservation,  the  perpetuation,  and  the
improvement  of  organized  beings.  By  preservation  is  meant
the  maintenance  of  the  life  of  the  individual  as  long  as  the
conditions  of  existence  will  admit.  Perpetuation  is  the
origination  of  new  individuals,  which  shall  continue  the  life
once  evolved  and  transmit  it  to  future  generations.  By  im-
provement is  meant  progress  in  the  quality  of  the  organiza-
tion— development.

The  first  two  of  these  objects  of  nature  meet  at  a  point
far  down  in  the  scale  of  existence,  where,  in  the  reproduc-
tion of  cells  by  simple  division,  the  continued  process  of
nutrition  is  distinctly  traceable  (vol.  i,  p.  328).  In  the  end,
too,  they  are  identical,  and  may  both  be  reduced  to  the  one
result — preservation — just  as  they  can  be  reduced  to  one
physiological  process  —  nutrition.  Convenience,  however,
demands  that  they  be  considered  separately,  as  in  the  higher
forms  of  life  no  functions  seem  more  widely  divergent  than
the  nutritive  and  the  reproductive.

The  last-named  object  of  nature,  the  improvement  of
life,  differs  from  the  others  in  not  being  absolutely  neces-
sary. An  organism  may  continue  to  exist,  though  it  be
actually  degenerating,  and  the  quality  of  its  organization  be
diminishing.  And  yet,  when  more  closely  viewed,  this  is
true  only  within  limits.  Let  the  degeneration  continue  long
enough,  and  it  will  ultimately  reach  the  limit  which  divides
organic  from  inorganic  matter.  Continued  deterioration  is
equivalent  to  ultimate  extinction.  Cessation  of  any  of  the
three  great  functions,  therefore,  leads  eventually  to  the  same
result.  Let  nutrition  be  suspended,  and  death  follows  im-
mediately, i.  e.,  in  a  few  houi-s  or  days.  Let  reproduction
cease,  and  life  only  continues  during  the  survival  of  the  in-
dividual— a  much  longer  time,  however.  Let  development
cease,  and  life  may  be  continued  a  still  longer  period,  and,

120  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

could  we  imagine  the  state  of  organization  to  remain  exactly
the  same,  it  might  be  prolonged  indefinitely.  But  such  an
assumption  is  practically  impossible,  and,  since  we  suppose
that  it  never  rises  above  the  given  point,  this  is  equivalent
to  a  certain  degree  of  decadence,  however  small.  In  fact,
all  organic  development  is  more  or  less  rhythmical,  and,  un-
less a  given  organism  is  on  the  whole  rising,  it  is  pretty  cer-
tain that  it  is  declining.  Every  form  is  either  on  its  way  to
a  higher  life,  or  else  it  is  on  its  way  to  extinction.  And,
after  all,  there  is  no  new  element  in  this  process  of  develop-
ment. It  is  nothing  more  than  the  continuation  of  the
original  formative  impulse  that  first  brought  life  into  the
world.  To  say  that  the  tendency  to  progress  is  a  general
one,  and  properly  belongs  to  the  objects  of  nature,  is  only  to
say  that  in  the  present,  as  in  the  past,  the  great  organizing
force,  or  nisuSy  is  at  work,  as  well  on  the  creatures  already
possessing  considerable  organization  as  on  those  in  process
of  origination.

This  point  of  view,  from  which  we  have  been  contem-
plating the  phenomena  of  organic  life,  and  which  takes  ac-
count of  what  have  been  called  the  objects  of  nature  (vol.  i,
pp.  461,  601,  QQ'i:),  may  be  designated  as  the  objective  point
of  view.  It  is  the  stand-point  of  biology,  and  affords  the
natural  conditions  for  the  successful  investigation  of  the
laws  of  life,  not  only  of  the  lower  organisms,  but  of  the  hu-
man race  as  well.

But  there  is  another  point  of  view  from  which  the  same
class  of  phenomena  may  be  regarded,  which  we  will  distin-
guish as  the  suljectivey  since  it  constitutes  the  stand-point
from  which  sentient  creatures  themselves  must  be  conceived
as  contemplating  the  phenomena  of  feeling,  and  that  from
which  man  intuitively  contemplates  them,  though  rationally
he  certainly  does  also  consider  the  objects  attained  by  them.
T7e  have  seen  that  the  objects  which  nature  must  be  re-
garded as  aiming  to  accomplish  by  the  introduction  of  pleas-
ure and  pain  are  the  preservation,  perpetuatioD,  and  im-

SUBJECTIVE  POINT  OF  VIEW.  121

provement  of  sentient  organisms.  Pleasure  and  pain  are
merely  the  means  to  these  several  ends,  all  of  which  are
more  or  less  remote  in  appearance  from  the  means  employed.
As  already  shown,  there  is  no  necessary  connection  between
a  given  pleasurable  or  painful  sensation,  and  the  result  it
accomplishes  in  preserving,  perpetuating,  or  perfecting  the
organism  experiencing  it.  This  result  is  brought  about
through  a  kind  of  pre-established  harmony,  not  indeed  of
a  supernatural  kind,  but  consisting,  on  the  contrary,  of  a
purely  mechanical  adaptation  of  the  means  to  the  end,  which
are  connected  by  the  highest  causal  necessity,  yet  in  such  a
manner  that  the  creature  obeying  the  mandate  of  the  former
does  so  without  the  least  necessary  conception  or  even  knowl-
edge of  the  latter.  It  is  only  after  the  reason  has  become
so  far  developed  that  the  dependence  of  the  one  upon  the
other  can  be  deduced  from  the  facts  of  observation,  that
the  beings  themselves  are  able  to  contemplate  the  results
as  the  consequences  of  the  means  adopted  considered  as
antecedents.  This  condition  differs  according  to  the  obvi-
ousness of  the  dependence,  but  is  scarcely  at  all  reached
by  any  creatures  below  man,  and  is  only  completely  attained
by  the  highest  intellectual  types  of  mankind.  And  even
here  the  consideration  of  the  ends  alone  would  prove  wholly
inadequate  to  secure  the  general  adoption  of  the  means
were  the  spur  of  pleasure  and  pain  removed,  while,  a  forti-
ori^ none  of  the  objects  of  nature  could  ever  be  secured
to  the  lower,  or  irrational,  creatures  in  the  absence  of  these
stimuli  (vol.  i,  pp.  469,  602).

The  point  of  view,  therefore,  from  which  the  subject
itself  contemplates  these  phenomena,  is  one  which  converts
the  means  of  nature  into  the  ends  of  the  creature.  In  short,
the  creature  ignores  these  ends  of  nature,  and  looks  no  fur-
ther than  the  phenomena  of  feeling  alone.  According  to
the  same  general  law  of  selection,  by  which  plants  are  so
differentiated  as  to  prevent  self-  and  secure  cross-fertiliza-
tion, and  by  which  other  remarkable  adaptations  have  been

122  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

brought  about  in  both  the  great  kingdoms  of  life,  this  great-
est of  all  adaptations  has  been  effected,  whereby  sentient  ex-
istence has  been  made  possible,  and  the  paramount  ends  of
life  are  accomplished  through  the  simple  efforts  of  the  or-
ganism to  obtain  pleasure  and  avoid  pain,  blindly  heedless  of
all  consequences.  Not  even  the  contemplation  of  the  myriad
forms  that  must  have  been  sacrificed  to  secure  such  an  adap-
tation can  deprive  us  of  our  admiration  of  so  perfect  a
scheme !

Wide  as  is  the  generalization  that  all  the  activities  of  the
organic  world  have  for  their  sole  object  the  attainment  of
pleasure  and  the  avoidance  of  pain,  this  is  nevertheless  the
conclusion  to  which  a  final  analysis  brings  us,  and  neither
the  rules  of  logic  nor  the  facts  of  experience  will  permit  us
to  except  from  this  universal  truth  the  actions,  or  any  one
class  of  actions,  performed  by  mankind  or  any  portion  of
mankind.  The  effort  to  do  this — actuated  chiefly  by  a  false
pride  which  blinds  men  both  to  fact  and  reason — is  the  bane
of  philosophy  both  past  and  current,  corrupting,  as  it  does,
its  very  sources,  and  profoundly  vitiating  every  stage  of  its
growth.

Let  us  recognize  this  truth,  patent  to  the  unbiased  mind,
and,  so  doing,  let  us  see  to  what  conclusions  it  leads  us,  re-
gardless of  the  nature  of  these  conclusions.

As  will  be  readily  perceived,  such  a  recognition  will  in-
volve a  complete  change  of  base  of  all  philosophy.  We  are
now  compelled  to  place  ourselves  on  the  stand-point  of  the
developing  organism,  and  to  limit  our  view  to  the  simple
ends  of  the  creature.  Instead  of  any  longer  soaring  aloft
to  contemplate  Nature  in  her  remote  objects  and  looking
down  upon  the  universe  of  life  as  a  vast  objective  panorama
rolling  on  below  us,  we  are  obliged  to  cling  to  earth  with
all  its  crude  mechanical  devices,  repugnant  though  they  be,
and  take  our  places  in  the  ranks  of  Nature's  living  army,  to
contemplate  life  as  a  mass  of  real  phenomena,  and  ourselves
and  our  own  actions  as  an  integral  part  of  phenomena.

PHILOSOPHY  OF  FEELING.  123

Having  resigned  ourselves  to  such  a  condition,  the  first
great  truth  that  soon  begins  to  dawn  upon  us  is  the  one
already  hinted  at,  that  the  phenomena  of  feeling  constitute
the  true  basis  of  all  that  part  of  philosophy  which  at  all  in-
volves the  interest  of  man.  They  are,  in  short,  the  founda-
tion-stones of  the  social  science.  What  function  is  to  biology,
feeling  is  to  sociology.

As  has  already  been  remarked,  there  must  be  some  object
in  philosophy.  The  day  of  intellectual  gymnastics  for  its
own  sake  has  gone  by.  To-day  men  think  for  a  purpose.
That  purpose  is  one — the  elevation  of  man.  This  is  the
same  object  that  has  built  up  every  system  of  religion,  the
same  that  is  avowed  by  the  advocates  of  every  form  of  gov-
ernment. The  subjective  point  of  view  is  the  only  one  from
which  this  purpose  can  be  accomplished.  The  recognition
of  feeling  as  an  end  is  the  state  of  mind  necessary  to  be  as-
sumed before  any  progress  in  social  philosophy  can  be  made.

We  have  already  seen  that  mind  has  two  sides,  an  ob-
verse and  a  reverse.  The  one  begins  with  sensation  and
ends  with  sentiment ;  the  other  begins  with  perception  and
ends  with  reason.  The  one  constitutes  the  feelings,  the  other
the  intellect  (vol.  i,  p.  381).  The  tendency  in  all  ages  has
been  to  ignore  the  former  of  these  great  divisions  of  the
mind,  which  is  essentially  the  primary  one ;  or,  if  recognizing
it  at  all,  to  sublimate  it  into  an  intangible  something  called
the  will,  which  no  two  philosophers  could  agree  in  defining,
and  no  one  succeed  in  comprehending ;  while,  at  the  same
time,  the  glories  of  the  intellect  have  been  unduly  extolled,
and  the  impression  created  that  mind  consists  solely  of  in-
tellect and  will.  Few  philosophers  have  condescended  to
take  notice  of  the  desires,  the  passions,  the  emotions,  and  the
sensibilities,  while  so-called  "faculties"  of  the  mind  have
been  multiplied  and  heaped  up  by  writers  on  "  intellectual
philosophy,"  and  volumes  written  about  the  nature  of  "  con-
sciousness." The  dependence  of  aU  these  "  faculties  "  upon
the  primary  phenomena  of  sensation  is  sufficient  to  show  the

124  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

necessity  of  first  fully  understanding  the  phenomena ;  and
the  almost  total  failure  to  treat  of  them,  or  their  brief  and
superficial  treatment  in  the  form  of  mere  appendices  to  the
treatises  of  which  they  should  have  formed  the  basis,  abun-
dantly explains  the  complete  decline  of  metaphysics  and  the
demand  for  a  thorough  reorganization  of  the  philosophy  of
mind  (Chapter  V).  We  are  not,  however,  here  concerned
with  this  reorganization,  which  is  certainly  progressing  fa-
vorably, except  in  so  far  aa  regards  the  position  which  the
feelings  should  occupy  in  the  practical  questions  connected
with  the  social  and  individual  actions  of  men.  In  psycho-
logical systems  we  care  little  what  position  they  are  made  to
occupy,  but  in  sociology  it  becomes  of  the  utmost  importance
that  they  should  be  fully  recognized  as  the  true  ends  and
final  objects  of  human  action.

Ignoring  for  the  present  the  negative  means  of  nature
(pain),  and  confining  our  attention  to  the  positive  means
(pleasure),  it  is  not  difficult  to  perceive  that  it  has  many  and
varied  forms.  Besides  the  simple  and  direct  pleasures  de-
rived from  the  nutritive  and  reproductive  acts  and  from
exercise  of  the  body,  as  we  rise  in  the  scale  of  being  not
only  does  each  of  these  kinds  of  pleasure  expand,  ramify,
and  become  compound  and  complex,  but  a  vast  number  of
new  pleasures  arise,  having  their  sources  in  the  highest  and
purest  sentiments,  and  a  physical  seat  within  the  body  which
it  is  difficult  or  impossible  to  locate  with  precision.

Considering,  first,  the  expansions  wliich  the  primary  pleas-
ures undergo  as  organization  increases,  we  observe  that  they
are  least  marked  in  the  nutritive  system.  And  yet  when  we
compare  the  lowest  creatures,  which  absorb  nourishment  by
the  mere  vortices  that  the  movement  of  their  cilia  makes
in  the  water  in  which  they  live,  with  the  higher  vertebrates,
possessing  elaborate  gustatory  and  alimentary  systems,  we  can
not  doubt  that  the  latter  must  derive  a  much  higher  satisfac-
tion from  the  nutritive  act  than  do  the  former.  A  closer
comparison  of  the  gustatory  pleasures  in  man  and  in  the

PLEASURE.  125

lower  animals  shows  a  further  increase,  while  between  differ-
ent classes  of  men  the  contrast  is  still  greater.  In  the  latter
case,  it  has  been  brought  about  chiefly  through  artificial  means
devised  by  human  ingenuity.  The  introduction  of  cookery
and  its  ample  development  and  refinement  have  given  him
the  means  of  vastly  increasing  the  pleasure-giving  power  of
the  various  nutritious  substances,  while  the  faculty  itself  has,
by  adaptation  to  this  superior  diet,  become  capable  of  appre-
ciating these  improvements  in  progressively  increasing  de-
grees. To  all  the  multitudinous  kinds  of  prepared  food,  the
meats,  soups,  ragouts,  condiments,  pastry,  confections,  etc.,
must  be  added  the  many  delicious  beverages,  including  fer-
mented liquors,  which,  whatever  their  physiological  position
or  moral  influence,  are  among  the  highest  contributions  to
the  stock  of  human  pleasures,  and  must  tlierefore  enter  into
the  enumeration  of  the  objects  of  gustatory  enjoyment.
Corresponding  to  all  these  objects  there  arise  acquired  tastes,
differing  in  different  individuals,  but  strong  in  all,  serving
to  intensify  the  general  sum  of  the  pleasures  of  nutrition.
The  importance  of  these  pleasures  as  motives  to  human
action  can  not  be  overestimated,  and  must  not  be  belittled  by
the  sociologist.  Not  only  are  they  the  chief  objects  of  the
life  of  the  great  mass  of  humanity  whose  monotonous  toil  is
scarcely  relieved  except  by  varying  their  quality,  but  their
power  is  equally  great  over  the  higher  classes,  especially  the
unintellectual  wealthy,  who  lavish  vast  sums  upon  the  grati-
fication of  their  uncurbed  appetites ;  while  every  one  knows
that  the  skillful  lobbyist  can  turn  the  whole  tide  of  the  legis-
lation of  great  states  by  the  magic  spell  of  well-managed
dinners  and  sumptuous  banquets.

Considering,  next,  the  pleasures  connected  with  the  repro-
ductive function,  we  have  already  seen  how  great  the  step
was  from  the  non-mammalian  vertebrates  to  the  mammalia.
Kot  only  are  the  pleasure-yielding  surfaces  of  the  sexual
organs  greatly  increased  and  the  local  adaptations  perfected,
but  the  entire  lacteal  system,  which  is  developed  for  this

126  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

purpose  in  both  sexes  and  supplied  with  special  nerves,  is
the  seat  of  emotions  of  the  most  powerful  kind,  resulting  in
the  love  of  offspring  and  other  influential  stimuli.  In  the
higher  types  of  man,  particularly  among  monogamous  races,
this  system  becomes  especially  differentiated  and  culminates
in  the  absorbing  emotion  of  love,  which  has  formed  tlie
theme  of  innumerable  poems  and  romances,  flooding  the
world  with  a  literature  of  its  own.  And,  not  content  with
the  satisfaction  afforded  by  literary  productions,  the  civilized
world  has  demanded  more  vivid  representations  of  the  phe-
nomena which  flow  from  this  sentiment,  and  thus  we  see
throngs  in  every  large  city  nightly  flocking  to  those  places
where  dramatized  realizations  of  its  operations  can  be  seen,
and  deeper  draughts  of  its  mysterious  spirit  be  drank  in.
Corresponding  to  this  outer  demonstration,  there  exist
throughout  the  most  advanced  societies  those  countless  real
romances,  unwritten,  unsung,  and  unrepresented,  which
throw  a  beautiful  and  irresistible  charm  over  human  life.

We  see,  therefore,  that  this  sentiment,  with  all  its  belong-
ings and  in  all  its  ramifications  and  relations,  constitutes,  next
to  the  one  last  considered,  the  most  powerful  stimulus  to
action  that  human  nature  possesses ;  indeed,  were  it  other-
wise, the  ends  of  nature  would  have  failed  of  attainment.

Certain  philosophers,  and  notably  M.  Auguste  Comte,
have  recognized  in  the  sentiment  of  ennui  *  one  of  the  prime
factors  of  organic  development  and  social  evolution.  As  this
sentiment  is  but  the  negative  side  of  a  great  biological  truth,
it  seems  a  little  singular  that  the  author  of  the  "  Positive
Philosophy  "  should  have  failed  to  seize  upon  the  positive
principle,  and  should  content  himself  with  the  negative  one.
Ennui  is  but  the  pain,  or  discomfort,  which  always  follows
the  deferred  enjoyment  of  the  exercise  of  natural  function.
Such  exercise  is  a  true  positive  pleasure,  and  therefore  all
the  stimulating  and  progressive  tendencies  observed  to  arise
from  ennui  should   properly  be  set  down  to  the  account

*  See  mp'a,  p.  IIY,  note.

ENNTJI.  127

of  natural  exercise.  While  the  common  stimulus  may  be
analyzed  into  love  of  exercise  and  fear  of  ennui,  the  latter
may  have  never  been  experienced,  and  therefore  never
feared  ;  while  the  effects  are  accomplished  the  same  in  either
case,  showing  that  the  former  is  alone  sufficient.  In  fact,
ennui  is  rather  an  artificial  stimulus,  and  only  appears  in
cases  where  the  normal  liberty  of  action  has  been  artificially
restrained.  Where  no  such  restraint  exists,  there  is  an  exact
balancing  of  the  forces  within  the  organism,  and  the  indi-
vidual resumes  action  at  the  precise  point  where  the  pleas-
ures of  activity  come  to  exceed  those  of  repose.  The  study
of  the  movements  of  an  animal — for  example,  a  dog — which
is  wholly  unrestrained  will  suggest  this  explanation  a  posteri-
ori. The  simple  love  of  activity,  therefore,  is  one  of  the
most  powerful  of  aU  stimuli,  and,  next  to  the  two  more  special
impulses  already  considered,  constitutes  the  most  important
factor  in  both  organic  and  super-organic  evolution.  Indeed,
when  extended  to  the  full  length  which  the  phenomena
would  warrant,  this  might  be  regarded  as  the  generic  prin-
ciple, of  which  not  only  the  two  already  mentioned,  but  all
others,  are  but  special  forms  and  localized  applications.  The
general  principle  might  then  be  denominated  the  stimulus
to  exertion  which  the  pleasure  of  the  normal  exercise  of
function  constitutes.

As  soon  as  organic  and  super-organic  development  reaches
a  certain  point,  there  arises  and  progressively  develops  an-
other sentiment,  which  eventually  forms  a  powerful  spur
to  human  action  in  the  direction  of  real  progress.  This  is
the  sentiment  of  taste,  the  esthetic  sentiment.  I  need  not
dwell  upon  the  great  mass  of  evidence  afforded  by  human
history  and  social  life  of  the  potency  of  this  source  of  pleasure
in  carrying  men  forward  to  higher  states  of  social  and  indi-
vidual perfection.  The  works  of  Phidias,  of  Michael  Angelo,
and  of  Mozart,  together  with  those  of  their  long  and  bril-
liant train  of  followers  and  collaborators  in  all  the  depart-
ments of  fine  art,  are  facts  too  familiar  to  all  to  need  be

128  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

more  than  referred  to  their  proper  place  in  the  general  argu-
ment.

The  pleasures  of  the  intellect  form  a  stimulus  of  great
strength  for  the  most  highly  developed  individuals  of  the
race,  and,  though  restricted  to  so  few  comparatively,  can  not
be  left  out  of  account  as  motives  to  human  action  and  ends
of  being.  It  is  here  that  the  purposes  of  nature  and  the
purposes  of  man  most  nearly  meet,  and  the  means  of  nature
become  most  nearly  identical  with  the  ends.  For  intellect
alone  can  appreciate  the  results  of  its  own  efforts,  so  that,
while  the  immediate  exercise  of  the  cerebral  faculties  forms
the  primary  stimulus  to  mental  labor,  the  point  is  at  length
reached  at  which  this  source  of  enjoyment  is  re-enforced  by
a  lively  sense  of  the  good  which  this  labor  is  destined  to
accomplish,  constituting  a  derivative  pleasure  even  greater
than  the  original  one.  Again,  the  quality  of  intellectual  en-
joyment is  60  far  superior  that  it  is  in  this  sense  raised
above  all  other  stimuli,  and  may  be  thus  classed  higher  than
its  limited  diffusion  would  otherwise  justify,  and  assigned  a
place  among  the  primary  motives  of  human  action.  And,  as
the  work  of  cephalization  goes  on,  this  must  continue  to  be-
come more  and  more  widely  diffused,  until  eventually  the
mass  of  mankind  will  experience  the  progressive  impulse  to
brain-exercise  whose  consequences  are  social  evolution.

These,  then,  are  the  five  primary  stimuli  to  progress  in
the  social  scale,  the  first  three  of  which  are  chiefly  preserva-
tive, while  the  last  is  pre-eminently  progressive  (vol.  i,  pp.
472,  478,  479).  Secondary  and  derivative  stimuli  might  be
enumerated,  but,  as  most  of  them  could  be  readily  referred
to  the  five  primary  types,  their  consideration  wiU  be  omitted.
The  ends  of  man,  then,  which  are  at  the  same  time  the
means  of  nature,  are  primarily  and  principally  these  :  1,  the
pleasures  connected  with  nutrition ;  2,  the  pleasures  con-
nected with  reproduction ;  3,  the  pleasures  connected  with
general  physical  exercise ;  4,  the  pleasures  of  taste ;  and,  5,
the  pleasures  of  the  intellect.    These  pleasures,  taken  in  con-

PRIMARY  STIMULI.  129

nection  with  those  secondary  ones  derived  from  them,  consti-
tute the  immediate  incentives  to  all  action,  and  may  be  com-
prehended under  the  one  general  term  hajppiness.

Happiness  consists  in  the  realization  of  all  the  positive
forms  of  feeling,  attended  by  a  more  or  less  complete  absence
of  the  negative  forms,  known  as  pain.  Happiness,  in  this
sense,  is  the  sole  end  of  life,  the  primary  object  of  existence
— a  truth  which  comes  forth  with  great  power  when  we  re-
member that,  under  the  fundamental  law  above  formulated,
the  attainment  of  this  end  is  certain  to  be  followed  by  the
fulfillment  of  the  ends  of  nature.  To  attain  happiness,  is
to  employ  the  means  whereby  ^N^ature  works  out  her  ends —
preservation,  progression.

The  above  considerations  are  the  logical  outcome  of  a
thoughtful  study  of  the  phenomena  of  feeling.  It  may  seem
strange  to  some  that  these  phenomena  should  be  thus  placed
at  the  very  base  of  a  philosophic  system  whose  chief  object
is  to  exalt  the  intellect,  and  which  expressly  avows  that  only
by  intellectual  culture  and  the  increase  of  knowledge  can
the  true  progress  of  mankind  be  secured.  There  is  an  ap-
parent incongruity  between  the  doctrine,  on  the  one  hand,
that  progress  consists  essentially  and  solely  in  the  elevation
of  the  feelings,  the  increase  of  pleasure,  the  elimination  of
pain,  the  intensification  of  sentiment,  the  creation  and  diffu-
sion of  new  enjoyments,  the  encouragement  of  natural  emo-
tions, the  gratification  of  the  normal  instincts,  the  satisfaction
of  desire,  and  the  general  pursuit  of  happiness ;  and  the
doctrine,  on  the  other  hand,  that  progress  is  to  be  attained
solely  through  the  cultivation  of  the  intellect,  the  acquisition
of  knowledge,  and  the  thorough  and  universal  dissemination
and  enforced  adoption  of  educational  measures  for  the  eleva-
tion and  systematic  development  of  the  cold,  objective  fac-
ulties of  the  mind.

To  bring  these  two  seemingly  incoherent  and  incongru-
ous doctrines  into  harmony,  and  to  show  the  true  mechan-
ical dependence  of  the  one   upon  the  other,  as  cause  and

130  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

effect,  is  one  of  the  primary  objects  of  this  work.  The
arguments  claiming  to  do  this  will  be  found  diffused
throughout  its  pages,  and  the  reader  must  accept  or  reject
them,  according  to  the  constitution  of  his  mind,  after  he  has
completed  their  perusal.  At  present,  the  conclusion  alone
can  be  distinctly  stated,  and  the  general  line  of  argument
briefly  indicated.

We  have  already  seen  that,  while  the  objects  of  Nature
are  preservation,  perpetuation,  and  improvement,  her  means
are  the  corresponding  phenomena  of  feeling,  just  considered
in  detail.  We  have  also  seen  that  Nature's  means  become
the  sentient  creature's  ends,  the  attainment  of  which,  always
for  their  own  sake,  results,  through  adaptation,  in  the  accom-
plishment of  those  ulterior  ends  of  nature  of  which  the  or-
ganism usually  has  no  conception.  But,  throughout  the  uni-
verse, ends  are  only  attained  through  means,  and  we  have
not  as  yet  considered  the  means  by  which  the  creature  se-
cures its  ends.  These  means  are  of  two  kinds,  direct  and
indirect  {supra,  p.  94).  Wherever  the  object  necessary  for
the  gratification  of  a  desire  can  be  obtained  by  simple  ap-
propriation, the  means  are  direct.  Wherever  cunning,  strata-
gem, or,  in  fact,  any  degree  of  reasoning  is  required,  the
means  are  indirect.  Many  higher  animals,  doubtless,  em-
ploy indirect  means  in  many  cases,  the  elaborate  instincts
of  insects  forming  a  sort  of  indirect  means  of  ministering
to  their  wants  {supra,  p.  104).  But  the  only  being  that
makes  extensive  and  continued  use  of  indirect  means  is  man.
In  fact,  his  progress  has  chiefly  been  due  to  the  adoption
of  such  means,  and  it  is  thereby  that  he  has  obtained  such
complete  control  over  all  other  living  things.  A  still  greater
secret  of  his  success  is  the  control  he  has  been  enabled  to
exert,  through  these  indirect  means,  over  the  physical  forces
of  nature.  The  true  source  of  this  power  is  the  intellect.
The  employment  of  indirect  means  of  gratification  com-
mences with  the  beginning  of  the  rational  faculty,  and
grows  in  exact  proportion  to  its  growth.     The  two  are  one

DIRECT  AND  INDIRECT  MEANS.  131

and  the  same.  The  higher  development  of  this  power  is
marked  by  the  adoption  of  indirect  means  of  gratification
on  a  wider  and  increasingly  wider  scale.  It  begins  by  that
grade  of  cunning  which  ensnares  an  unwary  fish  or  hare  ;  it
grows  until  it  can  plan  military  campaigns  and  gain  control
of  millions  of  people.  This  truth  need  not  be  illustrated.
The  important  thing  to  be  here  noted  is,  that  the  adoption
of  indirect  means  of  gratification  is  synonymous  with  the  ex-
ercise of  the  intellectual  faculties.  And  this  holds  throughout
the  highest  possible  conditions  of  progress.  It  is  evident  to
every  clear-sighted  mind  that  the  greater  part  of  the  evils
which  society  suffers  are  due  to  the  want  of  wisdom  of  its
members.  It  should  be  equally  clear  that  increase  of  wis-
dom can  alone  realize  higher  degrees  of  social  development.
The  success  with  which  society  has  thus  far  met  has  been
due  to  the  adoption  of  wise  and  far-seeing  indirect  means  to
this  end,  and  whatever  further  success  is  destined  to  come
to  society  must  come  in  the  same  manner.

If  all  this  is  true,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  progress  of  soci-
ety must  depend  on  the  progress  of  the  intellect,  and,  while
the  end  of  social  as  of  individual  being  is  to  minister  in  the
highest  possible  degree  to  the  feelings,  this  end  can  only  be
accomplished  by  the  most  thorough  cultivation  of  the  intellect.

The  inconsistency,  or  at  least  apparent  incoherence,  of
this  part  of  the  argument  is  thus  removed,  and  the  connec-
tion established  between  all  its  parts.  Human  happiness,
which  is  the  ideal  end  of  all  social  effort,  can  only  be  secured
by  the  elevation  and  expansion  of  the  reasoning  powers  of
man,  which  constitute  the  indirect  but  sole  effective  means
by  which  that  end  can  be  attained.

It  is  the  object  of  the  present  chapter — ^leaving  the  con-
sideration of  all  the  proximate  ends  of  human  effort  enu-
merated in  the  preceding  chapter,  to  come  in  their  order
of  proximity  in  the  several  succeeding  ones — to  elaborate
the  first  proposition  of  the  argument  only,  which  declares
happiness  to  be  the  ultimate  end  of  conation.    The  necessity

132  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

for  a  formal  defense  of  this  principle  rests  partly  upon  con-
siderations of  method,  as  occupying  an  important  place  in
the  systematic  treatment  of  the  general  issue,  and  partly
upon  intrinsic  grounds ;  all  similar  attempts  thus  far  made
having  proceeded  from  somewhat  different  stand-points,  and
most  of  them  having  involved  additional  claims  which  are
not  needed  for  the  complete  symmetry  of  this  treatise.

It  has  already  been  sufficiently  insisted  upon  that,  with
respect  to  all  forms  of  life,  even  vegetable  forms,  the  ends  of
nature  are  two,  viz.,  subsistence  and  procreation  ;  that  every
species  brought  into  existence  is  provided  with  the  means
necessary  to  continue  that  existence  for  so  long  a  time  as
may  constitute  a  natural  life,  and  also  to  give  existence  to
others  of  tlie  same  species.  These  two  objects  are  all  that
nature  seems  to  have  sought  to  accomplish,  leaving  develop-
ment, or  progress,  to  circumstances.  This,  therefore,  may  be
called  cosmical  utility^  since  it  is  functional  and  biological,
standing  in  contradistinction  to  individual  utility,  which
rests  on  feeling,  and  is  moral,  or  sociological.  Individual
utility  demands  more  than  mere  existence  and  that  perpetu-
ated. It  demands  the  enjoyment  of  functional  activity.  The
animal  does  nothing  else  but  seek  the  satisfaction  of  its  de-
sires. It  is  incapable  of  performing  an  action  except  as  im-
pelled by  the  motive  of  obtaining  such  satisfaction ;  and  also
in  man,  whether  his  desires  be  high  or  low,  worthy  or  un-
worthy, they  alone  prompt  his  actions.

It  follows  from  this,  too,  that  utility  is  a  relative  term ;
i.  e.,  it  varies  with  the  subject.  "What  is  useful  for  one
creature  is  not  so  for  another.  That  which  would  render
man  happier  on  the  whole  might  diminish  the  enjoyment  of
all  the  rest  of  animated  creation.  The  domestication  by
man  of  the  animals  that  he  slaughters  for  food  or  puts  to  his
service  is  not  generally  supposed  to  be  an  advantage  to
them,*  though  it  certainly  is  to  him.      Those  who  impa-

*  For  facts  in  support  of  the  opposite  view,  see  a  paper  by  the  writer,  on
the  "  Animal  Population  of  the  Globe,"  read  before  the  Philosophical  Society  of

UTILITARIANISM.  133

tieutl  J  ask  of  wtat  use  fleas,  mosquitoes,  and  parasitic  pests
can  be,  forget  that  tliese  creatures  have  a  right  to  existence,
and  a  utility  of  their  own.  The  world,  as  we  saw  in  the
last  chapter,  is  not  anthropocentric :  it  would  require  the
greatest  good  to  the  whole  universe  to  constitute  an  absolute
utility.

With  the  lower  animals,  the  desires  are  seldom  more  than
present  impulses ;  but  with  man,  possessing  sufficient  intel-
lect to  judge  somewhat  of  the  consequences  of  his  acts,  they
are  controlled  by  reason  and  judgment.  There  is,  however,
no  generic  distinction.  A  man  refrains  from  performing  an
act  which  his  impulses  prompt  him  to  perform,  only  because
he  judges  that  such  performance  would  deprive  him  of  a
greater  pleasure  in  the  future  than  it  would  afiord  in  the  pres-
ent. It  is  universally  the  greatest  happiness  and  the  least  dis-
comfort, either  present  or  future,  that  determines  his  action
or  inaction,  and  certain  brutes  act  to  some  extent  with  refer-
ence to  the  future ;  otherwise  the  fear  of  punishment  could
not  influence  a  beast  of  burden  to  submit  against  its  present
will  to  the  yoke  of  its  master.  The  difference,  like  all  oth-
ers that  can  be  discovered  between  men  and  animals,  is  only
one  of  degree,  and  therefore  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  refer
again  to  this  comparison,  and  we  may  confine  ourselves  in
future  to  the  human  race,  and  dismiss  the  rest  of  the  sensi-
tive world  as  not  essential  to  our  especial  subject.

It  was  remarked  that  man  seeks  happiness  as  the  great
object  of  his  existence,  and  that  this  constitutes  individual
utility.  But  we  must  go  a  step  further,  and  maintain  that
happiness  is  the  only  object  of  human  effort ;  that  utility
aims  to  secure  this  object  alone,  that  nothing  is  useful  unless
it  does  so  tend,  and  that  all  other  objects — many  times,  it  is
true,  mistaken  for  ends — are  only  means  of  securing  this  one
ultimate  end  of  conscious  activity.

Washington,  October  23,  1880.  The  "Bulletin"  of  the  society  (vol.  iv,  p.  27),
contains  an  abstract.  The  paper  was  published  in  full  in  the  "  Chicago  Times  "
of  December  18,  1880,  p.  8.

134  UTIUTY.— HAPPINESS  TOE  END.

This  naked  pi*oposition  is  tlio  most  general  embodiment
of  the  doctrine  known  as  utilitaritmism.  It  has  oome  down
to  us  from  Epicurus,  if  not  from  still  more  remote  antiquity,
and  has  been  defended  in  all  ages  with  more  or  less  force.
In  fact,  it  is  what  Kant  calls  tlie  "  empirical,"  or  skeptical,
view  of  the  foundations  of  ethics,  and  is  naturally  ujihold  by
those  who  instinctively  look  inward  to  the  reason  rather  than
outward  to  authority  for  a  guide  to  belief.  For  tlie  same
reason  it  has  always  been  upheld  by  a  small  minority,  amon«;
whom  are  numbered  some  of  the  most  clear-sighted  mimls
of  their  ago,  while  at  the  same  time  it  is  well  adapted  to  ftis
cinate  the  untaught  mass,  always  eager  to  seize  ujH>n  a  point
against  the  established  code  of  ethios.  It  has,  therefore,  not
without  reason,  been  deemed  necessary  to  suppress  it  as  far
as  p^ble.  Many  of  the  greatest  minds,  sucli  as  Kant  or
Hamilton,  who  have  no  doubt  realized  the  superior  claims  of
tliis  doctrine  upon  the  pure  reason,  have  hesitateil  to  enunci-
ate it  frem  practical  considerations.  This,  it  is  true,  is  a
mild  form  of  the  Jesuitical  dictum  that  "the  end  sanctities
the  means,''  and  it  serves  to  show  to  what  an  extent  this  dio-
turn  influences  tliose  even  who  profess  to  abhor  it.  But  it
is  high  time  to  admit  frankly  that  tliere  is  involved  in  such
action  a  lack  of  faith  in  the  innocence  of  truth,  a  sjKXjies
of  moral  cowardice  whicli  does  little  credit  to  the  heart  or
head.

It  is  not  a  different  course  of  action  tlmt  is  needed,  but
a  frank  avowal  that  eases  may  occur  in  which  advocacy  of
truth  is  productive  of  evil,  and  tlie  inculcation  of  dogmas
known  to  be  untrue  is  necessjiry  to  secure  the  practical  in-
terests of  society.  Not  even  tliose  statements  should  be  un-
qualifiedly denietl,  however  strong  may  bo  the  preference  to
trust  in  the  simple  truth.

The  usual  mode  of  dealing  with  such  principles  is  to  en-
velop them  at  the  outset  in  a  sort  of  halo  of  mystic  gen-
eralities, and  obscure,  by  an  exhibition  of  profundity,  the
true  simplicity  of  the  issue  itself.     An  effort  to  avoid  tlio

k

UTILITARIANISM.  135

admission  of  a  recognized  but  unwelcome  truth  may  often
be  detected  by  this  mark.

It  is  hard,  however,  to  admit  that  the  acceptance  of  truth
will  lead  to  evil  consequences,  and  it  is  a  characteristic  of  the
necessitarian,  or  scientific,  school  of  thinkers  to  proceed,  ut-
terly regardless  of  practical  considerations,  with  the  dissemi-
nation of  demonstrated  truth.  This  manifestation  of  supe-
rior moral  courage  and  superior  faith  in  the  class  who  are
accused  of  deficiency  in  just  these  attributes  constitutes  one
of  the  most  notable  of  the  moral  paradoxes  of  nature.

Against  the  utihtarian  philosophy  a  great  number  of  ob-
jections have  been  raised,  a  few  of  which  it  will  be  necessary
to  consider.  Among  the  most  natural,  and  one  which  is
likely  to  rise  first  in  the  mind  of  a  casual  reader,  is  that  of
assigning  to  this  doctrine  a  low  and  undignified  position.  It
is  thought  selfish  to  insist  that  all  we  seek  in  life  is  our  hap-
piness, and  it  is  regarded  an  unworthy  object  to  work  for,
that  of  extending  to  all  men  the  facilities  for  gratifying  their
personal  desires.  This  objection,  however,  does  not  assume
the  character  of  an  argument,  but  is  simply  an  appeal  to  our
respect  for  dignity  in  philosophy  without  regard  for  truth.
The  true  philosopher  cares  neither  for  dignity  nor  for  popu-
larity. While  it  is  well  to  respect  these  things,  so  long  as
they  are  consistent  with  truth,  philosophy  must  dictate  that
their  semblance  should  never  be  kept  up  where  it  is  necessary
to  do  so  at  the  expense  of  truth.  Their  semblance,  I  say,  for
there  can  be  no  dignity  in  error ;  while  any  truth,  properly
viewed,  is  necessarily  invested  with  dignity.  If,  therefore,
men  ascribe  that  quahty  to  that  which  is  not  true,  we  ipay
rest  assured  that  the  quality  is  as  false  as  the  error  to  which
it  is  imputed.

Dismissing,  then,  this  mere  argumentum  ad  verecundiam^
let  us  consider  some  of  the  more  legitimate  objections.

It  is  said  that  it  is  not  happiness  that  we  should  aim  to
secure,  but  oirtue.  Happiness  is  regarded  as  secondary  in  im-
portance, while  the  great  end  of  all  human  action  is  declared

136  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

to  be  goodness,  morality,  virtue.  This  is  the  popular  idea,
the  usual  weapon  which  has  been  wielded  against  the  utilita-
rian doctrine.  It  has  the  advantage  of  plausibility,  and  the
support  that  comes  from  respectability  and  elevated  tone.
Indeed,  it  would  hardly  seem  possible  for  so  pure  a  doctrine
as  this  seems  to  be  to  work  any  serious  detriment  when  uni-
versally accepted.  It  is  not,  therefore,  a  matter  of  surprise
that  this  belief  should  have  generally  prevailed,  and,  although
easy  enough  to  refute,  it  is,  from  its  character,  very  diflScult
wholly  to  overthrow.

In  considering  this  doctrine,  that  virtue  is  the  real  object
of  human  endeavor,  no  more  reasonable  questions  can  arise
than.  What  is  the  necessity  for  virtue  ?  What  good  can  it
accomplish  ?  Of  what  use  is  it  when  secured  ?  What  does
the  world  want  of  virtue  ?  Every  one  must  feel  that  these
are  legitimate  questions,  and  that  they  not  only  demand  an
answer,  but  that  an  answer  is  possible — that  there  is  a  suita-
ble answer  to  them.  Now,  if  any  answer  is  possible  to  these
inquiries,  if  an  object  can  be  named  for  which  virtue  is
needed,  if  there  is  any  end  to  which,  or  for  securing  which,
it  is  to  be  applied,  then  it  follows,  as  a  matter  of  course,  that
virtue  itself  is  not  that  end,  but  only  a  means  to  it.  If  the
question  cui  bono  can  be  answered  at  all,  it  is  demonstrated
that  virtue  is  not,  as  claimed,  the  ultimate  object  of  human
action,  but  merely  a  means  of  securing  some  ulterior  object,
whatever  that  may  be.

Since  it  is  a  legitimate  question  to  ask  what  the  world
wants  of  virtue,  and  there  is  a  proper  answer,  we  may  next
inquire  what  that  answer  is.  But  it  is  obvious  that  the  true
object  of  virtue  is  to  make  men  happier.  For  to  say  that
it  is  to  make  them  better,  is  only  to  say  that  virtue  is  needed
to  make  them  more  virtuous.  And  one  can  think  of  no  other
possible  object  of  virtue  than  that  of  making  men  happier.
No  one  can  deny  that  it  does  this,  and  therefore  it  is  clear  that
it  is  for  this  purpose  that  it  is  needed.  But  this  difficulty  does
not  present  itself  when  we  acknowledge  happiness  to  be  the

MEANS  MISTAKEN  FOR  THE  END.  137

object.  For,  when  we  ask  wliat  we  want  happiness  for,  we
clearly  do  violence  to  the  common  understanding  of  the  term.
No  one  can  give  a  rational  answer  to  such  a  question.  It
can  not  be  said  that  happiness  stand's  in  any  such  relation  to
any  ulterior  object ;  it  has  no  object,  it  is  complete  and  final
in  itself.  When  we  ask  of  what  use  happiness  is  to  man,  we
can  not  say  that  it  serves  to  make  him  more  virtuous,  or
more  just,  or  more  intelligent ;  and,  if  we  say  that  it  enables
him  to  enjoy  life  better,  we  only  say  that  it  enables  him  to
be  happier,  and  employ  the  "  vicious  circle  "  as  before.  We
can  not,  therefore,  escape  the  conclusion  that  hajDpiness  is  the
ultimate  object.

Again,  it  has  been  said  that  man  is  placed  here  for  im-
provement, that  the  object  of  his  existence  is  his  own  devel-
opment and  perfectionment.  Certainly  no  more  noble  ob-
ject can  be  named  than  that  of  living  for  the  purpose  of
developing  one's  faculties.  Nor  can  our  paramount  duty  to
exert  ourselves  for  the  accomplishment  of  this  object  be
questioned.  And  yet  it  is  necessary  to  treat  this  substitute
in  the  same  manner  as  the  last ;  for  it  is  not  possible  to
conceive  of  any  importance  as  attaching  to  the  idea  of  pro-
gression or  improvement,  except  in  connection  with  some
object  which  this  is  to  subserve,  some  ultimate  purpose  con-
nected with  man's  peculiar  nature  as  a  being  endowed  with
capabilities  to  enjoy.

When  we  watch  the  unfoldment  of  worlds  in  the  uni-
verse, and  with  the  aid  of  science  discover  the  great  scheme
of  development  which  is  going  on  in  unorganized  matter,
what  purpose  do  we  imagine  all  this  could  serve  if  there
were  no  beings  in  the  universe  capable  of  becoming  in  any
manner  conscious  of  this  progressive  change  ?  Of  what  use
could  it  all  be,  if  there  existed  nothing  capable  of  enjoying
it  ?  We  can  not  conceive  of  the  idea  of  utility  except  as
connected  with  some  organism  susceptible  to  the  impressions
of  pleasure  and  pain — no,  not  even  in  the  deity,  unless  we

ascribe  to  him  such  susceptibility.     And  so,  when  we  con-
38

138  UTILITY.— HAPPINi:SS  THE  END.

sider  human  development,  we  unconsciously  connect  it  with
the  idea  that  in  some  way  or  other  it  is  tending  to  diminish
human  sufferings  and  augment  human  enjoyments.  Devel-
opment, like  virtue,  becomes  then  only  a  means  to  the  ulti-
mate end,  happiness.

Another  doctrine  prevails  very  extensively  among  a  cer-
tain class  of  people,  and  from  its  prevalence  may  demand
some  notice  here,  which  its  lack  of  any  immediate  relation  to
any  branch  of  rational  or  even  speculative  philosophy  might
otherwise  render  inappropriate.  I  refer  to  that  doctrine
which,  in  the  language  of  its  votaries,  may  be  said  to  assign  as
the  great  purpose  of  life  the  principle  embodied  in  the  for-
mula "  the  glory  of  God."  But  the  holders  of  this  doctrine
would  not  admit  that  they  believed  God  to  be  any  less  than
absolutely  infinite  in  all  respects.  Deity  must,  therefore,  be
already  infinite  in  "  glory."  It  therefore  involves  an  obvious
absurdity  to  suppose  that  the  acts  of  men  can  add  to  this
attribute.  And,  if  it  is  claimed  that  human  acts  are  calcu-
lated to  please  or  displease  God,  this  not  only  denies  the
infinite  happiness  of  deity  (since,  otherwise,  he  could  not  be
rendered  more  happy  or  less  happy  by  any  event),  but  it  is
in  fact  an  admission  of  the  strict  utiHtarian  doctrine  that  the
greatest  amount  of  happiness  is  the  end  of  all  actions,  only
transferring  the  subject  in  whom  that  happiness  is  to  be
created  from  the  sensitive  being  man  to  the  deity,  also  re-
garded as  sensitive.  Thus,  it  has  been  held  that,  according
to  the  theory  that  virtue  is  the  object  of  all  human  attain-
ment, virtue  is  needed  to  please  God  ;  that  is,  that  it  is  not
for  man's  happiness,  but  for  that  of  deity,  that  men  should
seek  virtue,  purity,  and  uprightness.

There  are  some  who,  disliking  the  terms  pleasure,  happi-
ness, etc.,  as  applied  to  deity,  seeing  that  they  are  founded
on  sensibility,  which  they  can  not  attribute  to  God,  have
sought  to  avoid  this  inconsistency  by  asserting  an  absolute
rights  independent  of  the  happiness  of  any  being  and  of  all
other  principles,  as  the  naked  will  of  deity,  all  failure  to  con-

MEANS  MISTAKEN  FOR  THE  END.  139

form  to  which  is  wrong.  Thus,  they  allege  that  virtue  is
but  a  means  of  arriving  at  this  absolute  principle,  admitting,
as  they  must,  that  it  serves  to  promote  human  happiness,  but
denying  that  such  is  in  any  sense  the  object  of  virtue.  This
theory  has  some  recommendations  which  make  it  superior  to
the  last.  And  still  it  seems  a  barren  speculation  to  claim
that  deity  would  require  a  rigid  adherence  to  any  fixed  rule
as  the  object  of  human  action,  when  such  adherence  had
nothing  to  do  with  the  happiness  of  the  being  of  whom  it
was  exacted,  or  of  any  other  being  in  the  universe.  There
is  something  in  the  human  mind  that  unconsciously  rejects
such  a  theory,  and  in  spite  of  itself  persists  in  raising  the
interior  inquiries.  Of  what  use  is  such  an  adherence  ?  Whom
is  it  to  benefit  ?  Whose  happiness  is  it  to  increase  ?  and,
Why  this  rule  of  right,  unless  its  observance  has  as  its  ob-
ject and  its  only  object  to  diminish  suffering  and  increase
enjoyment  ?

Lastly,  there  is  a  class  of  moralists  who  set  up  as  the  ulti-
mate end  of  action  that  which  they  denominate  "  doing  right,"
This  ideal,  however,  is  usually  easily  reducible  to  one  or  other
of  the  preceding.  To  do  right  is  either  to  act  virtuously  or
to  act  righteously.  The  former  of  these  is  clearly  identical
with  aiming  at  virtue  as  the  end  ;  the  latter,  as  the  word  is
commonly  employed,  is  equivalent  to  seeking  to  please  the
deity.  Righteousness  is  a  religious  term,  and  not  a  moral
one.  It  serves,  however,  a  good  purpose  in  aiding  us  to
grasp  this  distinction.  Its  root,  rights  as  ordinarily  un-
derstood, has  a  moral  signification,  L  e.,  it  connotes  relations
between  men  and  men.  But  it  is  often,  also,  employed  to
connote  relations  between  man  and  the  Supreme  Being,  in
which  sense  it  corresponds  with  the  derivative  righteousness,
meaning  godly.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  it  is  used  when  made
the  end  of  action.  Doing  right  has  here  no  connection  with
human  welfare,  else  the  end  would  be  human  welfare,  i.  e.,
happiness,  and  right  merely  the  means  of  attaining  that  end.
Right  thus  understood  is  wholly  arbitrary.    Our  only  knowl-

140  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

edge  of  it  must  be  derived  from  books  of  revelation.  Those
who  have  believed  in  this  form  of  right  have,  therefore,
made  extraordinary  efforts  to  ascertain  the  correct  interpre-
tation of  revealed  precepts,  which,  being  wholly  cut  off  from
the  assistance  of  reason,  are  as  liable  to  be  of  one  character
as  of  another,  and  must  be  certainly  known  before  any  course
of  conduct  dare  be  pursued.  It  is,  therefore,  not  to  be  won-
dered at,  so  vastly  important  is  a  correct  understanding  of
precept,  that,  where  different  interpretations  have  been  made
— which,  strange  to  say,  has  frequently  occurred — the  most
intense  feelings  have  been  aroused,  and  the  most  violent  and
sanguinary  struggles  have  ensued.  For  every  thing,  both
here  and  hereafter,  depends  upon  the  precise  meaning  of  a
word,  and  the  change  of  a  single  letter  may  work  the  total
destruction  of  a  sect  or  nation — witness  the  signal  havoc
upon  the  history  of  mankind  and  the  map  of  the  Old  "World
which  was  wrought  by  the  contest  over  the  two  Greek  words
ofioovcrta  and  ofiocovcr^a.

With  this  idea  of  7'tght,  the  utilitarian  philosophy  can
have  nothing  to  do.  It  employs  this  term  in  its  moral
acceptation,  as  implying  relations  between  men  and  men.
According  to  this  school  of  thought,  therefore,  an  action  is
right  if  its  ultimate  results  upon  all  beings  within  its  influ-
ence, and  capable  of  feeling  the  effects  of  that  influence,  are
of  such  a  character  as  to  produce  more  pleasure  than  pain,
or  relieve  more  pain  than  they  occasion.  And,  'vice  versa,
an  action  is  wrong  when  these  results,  with  the  same  limita-
tions, produce  more  pain  than  pleasure,  or  cause  less  pleasure
than  they  prevent.  It  is  only  by  such  a  definition  that  we
can  lay  any  foundation  for  morality,  while  by  means  of  it
we  reduce  ethics  to  a  scientific  basis.  It  is  clear  that  no
object  is  good  for  any  thing  except  in  proportion  as  it  affects
tlie  organism.  It  is  this  power  of  an  object  to  produce  an
effect  which  alone  can  give  it  utility.  This  is  as  applicable
to  actions  as  to  objects.  An  object  has  no  power  to  produce
effects  upon  the  senses  except  through  its  properties,  whicli

RIGHT  AND  WEONG.  141

are  the  active  forces  of  nature  manifesting  themselves  in
different  ways  through  different  forms  of  matter.  There-
fore, it  is  not  the  objects  themselves  which  produce  these
effects  upon  our  senses,  but,  so  to  speak,  the  actions  of  these
objects.  And  if  we  class  men  with  natural  objects,  as  the
science  of  society  and  that  of  morals  require  us  to  do,  and
regard  their  actions  as  the  peculiar  modes  in  which  the
universal  force  manifests  itself  through  the  matter  which
composes  them,  we  have  nothing  more  than  the  extension
to  one  class  of  objects  of  a  principle  previously  applied  to
another  class.

The  effects  of  actions  performed  by  men  will  be  admit-
ted by  all  to  be  the  basis  of  utility.  In  what,  then,  do  those
effects  consist,  to  constitute  an  action  useful  or  the  contrary  ?
The  answer  to  this  question  may  be :  conformity  or  non-con-
formity with  right.  This  brings  us  back  to  the  question  of
right  and  wrong.

It  is  necessary  to  establish  a  clear  distinction  between,
right  and  wrong  on  the  one  hand,  and  guilt  and  innocence
on  the  other.  Actions  are  right  or  wrong  according  as  they
are  actually  upon  the  whole  beneficial  or  injurious,  and  inde-
pendently of  existing  codes  of  action.  They  are  guilty  or
innocent  ^  only  in  the  opinion  of  mankind  according  as  they
violate  or  conform  to  established  rules  of  conduct.  Hence,
a  person  may  really  be  innocent  while  performing  a  wrong
action,  or  guilty  while  performing  a  right  one.  Guilt  and
innocence  can  have  no  connection,  with  utility.

We  are,  therefore,  merely  to  consider  what  makes  an  ac-
tion right  or  wrong,  or  what  kind  of  effects  must  result  from
an  action  to  constitute  it  right  or  wrong.  It  is  evident  that
those  effects  should  be  such  as  will  result  in  the  greatest
good  to  man,  or  the  greatest  good  in  general.  Hence,  we  are
narrowed  down  to  the  simple  question  of  the  greatest  good.

*  The  etymology  of  the  word  "  innocent,"  i.  e.,  harmless,  is  not  borne  out  by
usage,  at  least  when  applied  to  human  actions,  as  the  antithesis  to  "  guilty."

142  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

And,  since  nothing  is  good  except  in  so  far  as  it  produces  or
tends  to  produce  agreeable  effects,  i.  e.,  pleasure,*  which  is
the  condition  to  happiness,  therefore,  according  to  the  defi-
nition, such  tendency  makes  an  action  right.  This,  of  course,
must  be  extended  to  embrace  the  entire  sum  of  effects  which
the  action  can  ever  produce.  And,  since  the  object  of  hu-
man action  is  to  conform  with  absolute  right,  it  follows  that
the  attainment  of  happiness,  to  which  this  right  is  only  itself
a  means,  is  the  ultimate  end  to  be  sought.

What  has  been  said  may  be  sufficient  for  a  direct  proof
of  the  utilitarian  doctrine.  It  may  not,  however,  be  deemed
superfluous  to  add  some  considerations  of  an  indirect  charac-
ter as  showing  the  inconsistency  and  absurdity  which  the
denial  of  this  reasoning  must  involve.  Let  us  see  for  a  mo-
ment to  what  we  are  led  when  we  deny  that  the  principle  of
right  is  based  upon  the  idea  of  the  greatest  amount  of  happi-
ness, or  the  greatest  good.f  It  would  then  follow  that  an
action  might  be  right,  and  yet  not  produce  the  greatest  good.
This  is,  of  course,  according  to  the  definitions,  equivalent  to
saying  that  an  action  to  be  right  need  not  produce  good  at
all,  or  that  an  action  may  be  right  and  yet  produce  evil  to
an  indefinite  degree.  Again,  if  right  and  wrong  have  no
connection  with  happiness  and  unhappiness,  then  it  equally
follows  that  an  act  may  be  wrong,  and  yet  be  upon  the  whole
beneficial  to  any  degree.  Yet,  notwithstanding  these  patent
incongruities  which  meet  us  at  every  point  when  we  call  the
utilitarian  doctrine  in  question,  nevertheless,  the  ingenuity
of  man  has  been  taxed  to  the  utmost  in  attempting  to  ov^er-
throw  that  doctrine.  Yolumes  have  been  written,  and  every
possible  case,  real  or  hypothetical,  has  been  cited  in  support
of  the  opposite  theory,  considered  so  dear  to  the  special  in-
terests of  man,  viz.,  the  theory  of  abstract  moral  right.:}:

*  Spencer,  "Data  of  Ethics,"  p.  30.

t  ^y  "  greatest  good  "  is  not  meant  greater  good  than  any  other  action,  but
greater  good  than  no  action;  i.  c,  the  algebraic  sura,  as  it  were,  of  its  effects
must  show  a  surplus  of  benefit.

X  See  Cousin,  "  Du  yrai,  du  beau,  et  du  bien,"  pp.  288,  342.

EIGHT  AND  WEONG.  143

The  following  is  one  of  these  cases,  referred  to  as  being
among  the  most  difficult  to  meet :  It  has  been  supposed
that  a  philanthropist  of  the  utilitarian  school  robs  a  miser,
for  the  benefit  of  the  needy,  of  certain  moneys  which  he
had  forgotten  he  had,  and  never  discovered  to  be  missing.
In  this  case,  the  money,  which  otherwise  could  never  have
benefited  any  body,  has  been  made  to  accomplish  good  to
worthy  persons,  without  producing  any  pain,  even  to  the
miser  himself.  Kestricting  this  to  the  one  case,  with  all  its
attendant  circumstances  as  supposed,  was  the  action  of  the
philanthropist  right  or  wrong?  It  is  claimed  that  the  com-
mon sentiment  of  mankind  would  unite  in  declaring  it
wrong.

Now,  I  apprehend  that  the  decision  in  such  a  case  would
necessarily  turn  upon  the  fact  of  notoriety.  Limited  to  the
single  instance,  and  so  concealed  from  view  and  public  scru-
tiny that  there  was  no  possibility  of  its  being  made  known
to  any  person  but  the  performer  himself  of  the  act,  it  would
involve  nothing  really  immoral,  although  it  might  be  re-
garded as  somewhat  pragmatic.  The  difficulty  consists  in
conceiving  such  a  state  of  things  to  exist.  It  is  not  to  the
act  itself  that  the  mind  so  involuntarily  ascribes  the  evil,  but
to  the  consequences  of  its  being  made  known.  For  every
body  feels,  from  a  common  knowledge  of  human  nature  and
human  weakness,  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  men  to  ad-
here strictly  to  such  a  precedent  if  it  were  set  up.  The  first
attempt  to  apply  it  would  probably  be  a  violation  of  it,  and
would  result  in  mischief.  Hence,  in  forming  an  opinion,
these  consequences  are  unconsciously  and  necessarily  taken
into  the  account,  and  become  so  completely  interwoven  with
the  act  itself  as  to  be  confounded  with  and  mistaken  for  it.
It  is  the  want  of  precision  and  perspicacity  in  human  deduc-
tions generally  which  renders  it  so,  and  it  is  this  which  has
given  rise  to  all  the  rules  of  conduct  which  society  has
established  for  itself.  Men  are  aware  of  their  own  feeble
abilities  to  follow  any  thing  but  arbitrary  rules,  and,  though

144  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

those  rules  may  be  injurious  in  certain  particular  cases,  still
it  is  considered  best  on  the  whole  that  they  be  always  ad-
hered to.  And,  as  regards  infallibility  in  these  rules,  there
is  a  regular  gradation  throughout  the  moral  and  judicial
codes  {infra,  p.  451).

First  may  be  placed  the  rule  that  some  autocratic  ruler
should  and  can  always  with  safety  be  obeyed.  This  would
of  necessity  admit  of  an  infinite  number  of  exceptions.
Next  come  the  laws  of  nations  more  civilized,  enacted  by
legislators  of  various  capacities  for  judging  and  framing
them,  most  of  which  are  styled,  and  all  of  which  may  be
classed,  as  jura  positiva,  or  arbitrary  laws.  These  are  im-
mediately followed  by  common-law  codes,  derived  from  cus-
toms of  different  ages  and  peoples,  and  having  different  and
often  quite  inferior  views  of  men  and  things,  and  from  the
successive  decisions  of  judges  of  varied  abilities,  much  of
which  might  also  be  regarded  as  j^is  jpositimim,  and  all  of
which  is,  to  say  the  least,  very  far  from  capable  of  meeting
all  the  cases  that  come  up  among  men.

So  far  is  this  true  that  courts  of  equity,  established  for
the  purpose  of  suiting  laws  to  circumstances,  and  prevent-
ing these  arbitrary  rules  from  working  evil  in  many  of
their  practical  applications  to  unforeseen  cases,  have  been
found  necessary  in  all  partially  or  wholly  civilized  coun-
tries.

After  these  comes  the  moral  code,  built  up  from  the
united  judgment  of  all  men  in  all  ages,  but  still  very  crude
and  imperfect,  though  improving  along  with  man's  mental
improvement.  Throughout  this  code  there  may  be  found
the  same  regular  gradation  in  the  relative  perfection  of
the  rules  and  their  adaptation  to  cases.  This  is  observable
when  we  survey  the  whole  field  at  a  single  glance.

It  is  probably  safe  to  say  that  no  general  rule  for  human
action  was  ever  established  or  conceived  by  the  ethical  ex-
pounders of  the  world,  under  which  no  case  could  possibly
occur  which  would  render  its  strict  application  more  injuri-

IMPERFECTION  OF  THE  CODES.  145

ous  than  beneficial.  Still,  many  tliat  we  have  are  so  nearly
incapable  of  exception,  that  any  attempt  to  depart  from
them,  in  the  present  state  of  the  human  mind,  would  be
extremely  pernicious.  All  see  this.  Long  experience  and
education  have  so  imprinted  them  upon  the  mind  that  we
are  shocked  at  the  idea  of  any  departure,  and  can  not  con-
ceive that  such  a  course  could  fail  to  result  in  evil.  Of  this
class  is  the  rule  that  it  is  wrong  to  steal ;  and,  though  in  the
case  stated  above,  with  the  almost  impossible  restrictions  and
limitations  annexed,  it  might  really  be  right  to  steal  (if  such
an  act  could  be  called  stealing),  still  so  firmly  is  the  conviction
fixed  in  the  mind  of  man  that  this  rule  is  infallible,  that  he
has  come  to  adopt  the  error  that  riglit  is  something  abstract,
and  independent  of  the  effects  of  the  acts  enjoined  or  pro-
hibited. So  it  is  with  the  rule  against  falsehood.  Yet  cases
actually  occur  where  it  is  no  wrong,  but  rather  a  duty,  to
speak  falsely.  Suppose  a  scientific  explorer  like  Dr.  Living-
stone, whose  labors  and  success  are  of  great  use  to  mankind,
to  be  placed  in  such  a  predicament,  while  in  the  interior  of
Africa,  that  nothing  but  a  falsehood,  told  to  the  savages  into
whose  hands  he  had  fallen,  could  save  his  life  to  his  family
and  friends,  and  his  valuable  records  to  the  world — ^how
foolish,  nay,  how  wrong,  would  be  his  course,  should  he,
through  a  mistaken  notion  that  right  was  something  absolute
and  that  falsehood  was  never  justifiable,  sacrifice  so  great
interests  to  so  questionable  a  principle !  ^  These  strictures
might  be  extended  to  every  rule  in  the  moral  code,  even  to
the  so-called  "  golden  rule,"  by  the  simple  exercise  of  inge-
nuity in  framing  hypothetical  cases.

Such  statements  will  perhaps  by  some  be  pronounced  dan-
gerous, but,  if  they  are  so,  it  is  not  because  they  are  not

*  Some  might  seek  to  make  this  an  exception,  on  the  ground  that  savages
are  not  properly  rational  beings,  and  that  the  practice  of  deceiving  them  can  be
justified  on  the  same  principle  on  which  that  of  deceiving  animals  and  maniacs
is  justified.  This  view  is  interesting  as  confirming  the  law  laid  down  in  Chap-
ter VII,  that  deception  is  the  fundamental  process  in  all  intellectual  action  (vol.
i,  p.  501).

146  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

true,  but  from  the  liabilitj  of  individuak,  in  the  present  crude
intellectual  condition  of  society,  to  mistake  apparent  for  real
exceptions  to  the  established  rules  of  conduct.  There  is  need
of  a  court  of  equity  to  take  cognizance  of  these  exceptional
cases,  but,  as  the  code  is  unwritten  and  cognizable  only  in
foro  conscienticB,  that  court  can  only  be  established  by  the
higher  development  of  each  individual  mind.*

When  we  look  at  the  acts  of  men  at  large,  we  find  that
the  principle  above  laid  down  is  the  one  upon  which  they  are
all  performed.  When,  for  example,  we  see  swarms  of  active
humanity  moving  in  all  directions,  each  individual  at  his
own  peculiar  pace,  up  and  down  the  chief  streets  of  any  great
metropolis,  we  sometimes  ask  ourselves  what  can  be  the  varied
motives  which  impel  each  one.  A  number  of  probable  objects
arise  in  our  minds — money,  love,  fame,  duty,  etc.  But  is
there  not  a  generic  motive  which  embraces  all  these  ?  There
certainly  is,  and  that  motive  is  the  attainment  of  happiness,
or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  the  escape  from  unhappiness.  All
these  other  incentives  are  but  the  several  moans  adapted  to
the  varied  dispositions  and  circumstances  of  each  for  attain-
ing this  object.  Even  the  religionist,  who  of  all  others  would
be  the  most  earnest  in  denying  this  (to  him)  low  and  earthy
doctrine,  is,  by  his  very  belief,  a  consistent  supporter  of  it,
for  it  is  nothing  else  but  the  hope  of  happiness  that  actuates
him  to  perform  every  act  of  devotion  and  of  sacrifice.  That
the  happiness  he  seeks  is  future,  does  not  at  all  alter  the  char-
acter of  those  acts.  He  is  pre-eminently  the  true  and  prac-
tical exemplification  of  utilitarianism  and  even  of  hedonism.

"But,"  says  one,  "this  makes  our  acts  purely  selfish.
Can  we  do  no  noble,  disinterested,  unselfish  action  ? "  We
certainly  can  do  many  noble  acts,  but  no  voluntary  action
can  be  disinterested.  No  act  can  be  performed  that  is  not
prompted  by  the  motive  of  increasing,  either  directly  or  in-
directly, the  personal  well-being  of  the  agent.  It  must  not,
however,  be  supposed  that  in  point  of  fact  those  acts  do  se-

*  For  aa  examination  of  the  various  codes  of  action,  see  vol.  i,  p.  514.

OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  WORD  *' HAPPINESS."         147

cure  the  object  souglit.  It  is  only  claimed  that  such  is  the
motive,  and  the  act  is  always  in  obedience  to  that  motive.
The  actual  attainment  of  the  object  depends  upon  the  judg-
ment {swpra,  pp.  91-93).

It  is  quite  remarkable  that  utilitarianism  should  have
been  most  strongly  defended  by  English-speaking  writers,
whose  language  is  notably  deficient  in  terms  by  which  to
convey  the  delicate  shades  of  meaning  required  for  its  ade-
quate elucidation.  The  need  of  a  milder  substitute  for  hapjpi-
ness  has  been  seriously  felt,  and  no  doubt  serves  to  obstruct
the  progress  of  rational  views  on  this  subject.  That  the  de-
fect is  in  the  language  and  not  in  the  conceptions  is  evident
from  the  fact  that  most  other  languages  possess  better  words.
The  Yrench '^'honheur"  or  the  German  ^'GlucJcseligkeit"'^
had  they  their  counterpart  in  English,  would  afford  a  delight-
ful relief.

We  are  constantly  confined  to  the  words  pleasure,  happi-
ness, enjoyment — all  too  strong — unless  we  fall  back  upon
good,  welfare,  or  henefit,  which  always  seem  to  require  defi-
nition in  terms  of  one  of  the  others.

With  the  somewhat  clumsy  instruments  which  we  pos-
sess, then,  let  us  endeavor  to  gain  a  clearer  idea  of  the  special
nature  of  utilitariansm.

That  all  ideas  of  advantage  or  disadvantage  are  grounded
in  the  experiences  of  pleasure  and  pain  will  doubtless  not  be
questioned.  The  relations  of  pleasure  and  pain  to  each
other,  though  obvious  in  extreme,  and  even  in  all  ordinary
cases,  become  somewhat  obscure  in  certain  special  cases.

They  present  under  certain  conditions  an  apparent  rela-
tivity, which  has  created  much  confusion  in  the  minds  of
many  writers.     Aside  from  what  have  been  called  the  "  lux-

*  An  ingenious  writer,  Dr.  Charles  Waldstein,  draws  attention  to  this  fact  in
an  article  in  "  The  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xiv  (1878),  p.  199.

148  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

urj  of  giief  "  and  the  "  luxury  of  pity,"  *  it  is  true  that  sud-
den partial  relief  from  great  pain  results  in  a  sensation  not
distinguishable  from  pleasure,  whose  real  nature  of  lesser
pain,  however,  is  soon  revealed,  if  continued  unchanged  for
a  short  time.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  said  that  pleasures
may  be  so  intense  as  to  amount  practically  to  painful  sen-
sations.f  The  phenomena  of  itching  and  titillation  present
many  enigmas,  and  certain  prurient  emotions  render  it  im-
possible to  say  whether  pleasure  or  pain  is  experienced.

These  two  latter  classes  of  sensations,  however,  seem  to
furnish  the  key  to  the  solution  of  the  chief  difficulty.  Pru-
riency of  all  forms  is  a  species  of  desire,  and  desire  in  itself
lies  very  near  the  base  of  all  the  sentient  faculties.  All  the
forms  of  feeling  which  can  be  called  indifferent  %  are  special-
ized forms,  as  where  a  part,  like  the  ends  of  the  fingers,  has
acquired  the  faculty  of  recognizing  slight  resistances  with-
out experiencing  either  pleasure  or  pain  tlierefrom.  In  most
cases,  whether  in  the  developed  or  in  the  undeveloped  animal,
to  feel  at  all  is  to  experience  agreeable  or  disagreeable  states.
This  was  necessary  at  the  commencement  of  the  develop-
ment of  the  sentient  faculty  {supra,  p.  112).  This  distinc-
tion of  agreeable  and  disagreeable  was  the  only  raison  Wetre
of  feeling  at  the  outset.  The  pursuit  of  the  one  and  avoid-
ance of  the  other  were  all  that  could  render  feeling  advan-
tageous to  the  organism.  But,  originally,  agreeable  states
could  have  only  resulted  from  the  normal  exercise  of  func-
tion. The  only  advantage  possible  was  in  securing  such
exercise,  and  to  this  end  all  the  faculties  of  the  organism
must  be  adapted.  Only  those  states  would,  therefore,  be
sought  which  secured  this  end,  and  only  those  avoided  which

*  Spencer,  "Principles  of  Psychology,"  vol.  ii,  pp.  590,  623;  "Data  of
Ethics,"  p.  229.

t  Cicero  ("  De  Senectute  ")  speculated  upon  the  question  whether  a  prolon-
gation of  the  most  excessive  pleasures  of  which  the  body  is  capable  would  not
become  unbearable,  and  eventually  result  in  death.

X  Spencer,  "  Principles  of  Psychology,"  vol.  i,  pp.  272,  474.

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN.  149

prevented  its  attainment.  It  was  for  this  that  these  states
were  created,  and  they  could  not  be  otherwise  than  in  har-
mony with  the  end.  At  this  early  stage,  at  least,  pleasure
could  be  defined  as  that  which  secures  the  full  exercise  of
normal  function,  and  pain  as  that  which  prevents  such  full
exercise.  But  the  organism  in  seeking  means  to  the  exercise
of  function  must  be  assumed  to  lack  such  means,  otherwise
it  would  not  seek  them,  and  the  lack  of  the  means  to  the  ex-
ercise of  function  is  the  same  state  which  is  produced  by  ad-
verse influences  of  whatever  kind.  The  organism  is  in  the
same  state  when  disposed  to  seek  the  means  of  fulfilling  its
normal  physical  activities  as  it  is  after  some  external  circum-
stance has  dej^rived  it,  to  the  same  extent,  of  such  means
previously  possessed,  viz.,  the  unsatisfied  state,  the  disagree-
able state,  the  painful  state.  Clearly  seizing  these  equiva-
lences, we  perceive  that  the  state  which  prompts  the  or-
ganism to  seek  any  object  whatever  is  properly,  though  to
limited  degrees  of  intensity,  a  state  of  pain.  But  the  in-
clination to  seek  an  object  is  desire,  and  thus  desire  is
psychologically  a  painful  state.*  Desire  may,  therefore,  be
called  negative  pain^  being  the  disagreeable  state  experienced
from  a  lack  of  the  means  of  fulfilling  a  normal  function,  as
distinguished  from  positwe pain,  which  is  the  disagreeable
state  experienced  from  having  been  deprived  of  such  means
previously  possessed.  The  two,  however,  come  again  to  one
when  we  consider  that,  in  the  first  as  well  as  the  second,
the  organism  has  previously  possessed  these  means  and  been
equally  deprived  of  them,  and  the  only  distinction  remain-
ing is  the  difference  of  mode  in  which  the  deprivation  has

*  The  true  nature  of  desire  has  been  f:^enerally  misunderstood  by  philoso-
phers. M.  Victor  Cousin,  for  example  ("  Du  vrai,  du  beau,  et  du  bien  "),  con-
founds desire  with  pleasure.  He  says  that,  if  the  beautiful  is  only  agreeable
sensation,  the  love  of  beauty  can  be  only  desire.  This  he  combats,  and  main-
tains that  the  beautiful  is  something  more  than  ati  object  whose  possession  is
sought.  Kant,  however,  held  that  desires  were  pains,  and  pleasure  only  an
escape  from  pain,  i.  c,  that  the  gratification  of  desire  was  simply  the  relief
from  pain.

150  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

been  accomplished.  In  the  first  case,  the  organism  has  usu-
ally itself  consumed  them  in  its  normal  exercise  of  function,
in  which  the  process  is  gradual ;  while,  in  the  second  case,
adverse  and  external  influences  have  removed  them,  in  which
the  process  may  have  been  abrupt.

We  are  obliged,  therefore,  to  recognize  in  desire  a  pain-
ful state,  which  is  converted  into  a  pleasurable  state  by
supplying  the  thing  desired.  Among  the  higher  types  of
human  life,  apparent  objections  to  this  view  arise,  and  certain
derivative  desires,  assuming  the  form  of  highly  developed
emotions,  appear  to  be  in  a  certain  sense  pleasurable,  rather
than  painful.  But  this  pleasure  belongs  in  such  cases  to  the
faint  series^  and  consists  in  the  anticipation,*  through  the
action  of  a  highly  developed  imagination,  of  the  gratification
of  the  desires  in  question.  Such  cases,  therefore,  form  no
exception  to  the  law  above  formulated,  but  belong  to  another
department  of  psychology.

The  other  important  general  conclusion  which  we  thus
reach  is  that,  just  as  desire  is  pain,  so  is  the  gratification  of
desire  pleasure.  But  are  they  always  co-extensive  ?  Is  all
pain  desire,  as  all  desire  is  pain  %  Does  all  pleasure  consist
in  the  gratification  of  desire,  as  all  gratification  of  desire  re-
sults in  pleasure  ?

The  first  of  these  questions  requires  some  verbal  qualifi-
cations before  an  affirmative  answer  can  be  given.  In  what
we  have  denominated  negative  pain,  the  terms  are  clearly
equivalent.  But  we  have  seen  that  the  two  classes  of  pain
are  fundamentally  identical,  and  hence  this  must  also  be  in
reality  true  of  both  when  we  give  the  same  general  meaning
to  the  terms,  though  this  may  require  a  certain  deviation

*  Pleasures  of  anticipation  are  inferior  in  kind  as  well  as  in  degree  to  those
of  participation.  Notwithstanding  the  attempts  of  modem  moralists  to  clothe
them  with  something  purer  and  higher  than  flesh  and  blood,  they  are,  neverthe-
less, in  a  certain  sense,  pathological,  or  morbid,  in  their  character,  and  should
never  be  indulged  to  the  point  where  they  tend  to  assume  the  rtle  of  vivid  im-
pressions.

FEELING  INCREASES  WITH  ORGANIZATION.        151

from  the  popular  use  of  them.  It  is  clear,  however,  that
the  sensation  of  positive  pain,  of  whatever  kind  or  degree,
involves  the  desire  to  be  relieved  from  it,  and  between  severe
pain  and  mere  itching  there  may  be  all  degrees,  as  nearly
every  one  knows  from  experience.

To  the  second  of  the  above  questions  no  such  qualifica-
tion is  necessary.  The  expressions  "pleasure"  and  "gratifi-
cation of  desire  "  are  at  all  times,  by  the  exercise  of  a  slight
liberality  in  the  application  of  the  words,  interconvertible.
For,  even  in  the  case  of  unexpected  pleasures,  they  consist  in
the  satisfaction  of  potential  only,  instead  of  actual  desires.
The  consummation,  to  become  an  active  object  of  desire,
need  only  be  suggested  to  the  mind.  There  are  no  negative
pleasures  not  thus  explainable,  and  even  the  passive  state
called  "contentment"  consists  in  the  simple  and  continuous
exercise  of  normal  functions,  moderate  in  degree,  which,  if
withheld,  would  give  rise  to  desires  whose  satisfaction  would
restore  the  given  state.

In  the  lowest  forms  of  life  endowed  with  feeling,  the
degree  of  agreeableness  experienced  in  performing  the  func-
tions necessary  for  the  maintenance  of  life  is  doubtless  very
low,  as  is  also,  relatively,  the  degree  of  disagreeableness  ex-
perienced either  by  the  absence  of  the  means  of  such  per-
formance of  function  or  by  the  adverse  agencies  which  fre-
quently act  upon  the  organism  and  injure  or  destroy  it.  But
the  higher  the  organization  the  more  intense  the  sensations,
whether  agreeable  or  disagreeable.  This  is  because  the  more
complicated  the  mechanism  the  more  delicate  it  is,  and  the
greater  the  damage  occasioned  by  an  equal  amount  of  vio-
lence. A  high  degree  of  sensibility  is  unnecessary  to  a  low
degree  of  organization,  since  the  tenacity  of  life  is  inversely
proportional  to  the  degree  of  organization.  Actinosphce-
rium  and  other  protists,  which  may  be  artificially  propagated
by  cutting  them  in  pieces,*  do  not  require  any  elaborate
apparatus  for  warding  off  danger.  Helix  Veatchii,  which
*  Haeckel,  "  Das  Protistenreich,"  S.  49.

152  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

was  observed  to  live  six  years  without  food,  stands  in  no
great  need  of  a  keen  sense  of  hunger.  The  hydra  lives  as
well  after  being  turned  wrong-side  out.  "Wheat-eels  and
tardigrades  revive  after  twenty-eight  days'  desiccation  by
chloride  of  lime  and  sulphuric  acid  in  a  vacuum,  and  ex-
posure to  a  temperature  of  120°  Cent.,*  while  Octopus,  the
highest  of  mollusks,  and  lobsters,  the  highest  of  crustaceans,
replace  their  arms  and  legs  when  lost.  Such  creatures  have
moderate  powers  both  of  enjoyment  and  suffering,  because
high  powers  are  not  demanded  by  their  physiological  econ-
omy. As  we  rise  in  the  scale,  the  same  law  holds  through-
out, that  the  degree  of  feeling  increases  with  the  degree  of
organization.  From  the  point  of  view  of  natural  economy
and  Nature's  ends,  it  is  necessary  to  dispel  the  idea  that  en-
joyment is  an  end.  It  is  only  a  means  to  the  end  of  main-
taining life.  Nature  does  not  seem  to  care  whether  her
creatures  enjoy  at  all,  so  long  as  they  persist.  She  is  as
choice  of  the  vegetable  as  of  the  animal  kingdom,  yet  here
the  end — continuous  life — is  maintained  by  other  safeguards.
In  the  animal  world,  feeling  is  simply  a  si^bstitute  for  cellu-
lose (vol.  i,  p.  348).  Both  perform  the  one  oflSce  of  preserv-
ing the  organism.

It  is  the  animal  organism  itseK  which  makes  feeling  an
end,  but  this  it  is  constituted  to  do  and  does  universally.
To  all  organisms  feeling  is  and  must  of  necessity  be  the  su-
preme and  ultimate  end  of  all  their  activities.  To  this  law
man  is  not  in  the  least  degree  an  exception.

In  higher  organisms,  and  notably  in  man,  the  number  of
organs,  and  therefore  of  functions,  is  vastly  increased.  Man
thus  becomes  capable  of  thousands  of  distinct  kinds  of  pleas-
ures and  pains,  many  of  which  have  only  a  remote  connec-
tion with  the   mere  life-sustaining  functions.      These   are

*  Doyfere,  "  M6m.  sur  les  Tardigrades  et  sur  leur  propriety  de  revenir  h  la
vie,"  1842,  pp.  119,  129,  131,  133.  Ehrenberg,  "Die  Infusionsthicrehen  als
vollkommene  Organismen,"  Leipzig,  1838,  S.  492-496.  Humboldt,  "  Kosmos,"
Bd.  i,  S.  310  (note  95  to  p.  225).

PURSUIT  OF  HAPPINESS.  153

many  of  them  at  once  vague  and  intense ;  particularly  in
the  case  of  pleasures  do  the  emotions  seem  to  rise  above  the
sensual,  localizable  sensations  of  the  body,  and  lead  to  the
erroneous  popular  belief  that  with  some  of  them  the  body
has  no  connection.  The  general  sum  of  all  pleasures,  i.  e.,
the  satisfaction  of  all  desires — being  the  same  thing  as  the
free  normal  exercise  of  all  functions — is  what  constitutes
happiness  in  the  abstract,  and  yet  even  this  term  connects
the  emotions  too  closely  with  the  bodily  organs  to  satisfy
some  people,  and,  as  before  remarked,  most  languages  pos-
sess words  denoting  a  still  more  idealized  form  of  agreeable
experience.

This  agreeable  state,  however,  by  whatever  name  it  may
be  called,  is  the  ultimate  goal  toward  which  all  expenditure
of  effort  is  necessarily  directed,  and  this  independently  of
the  number  or  kind  of  proximate  or  intermediate  ends  which
may  be  made  the  more  immediate  objects  of  pursuit,  and  in-
dependently, also,  of  whether  these  proximate  ends  are  or
are  not  believed  to  constitute  the  ultimate  end.

Can  happiness,  then,  be  directly  sought  ?  By  the  indi-
vidual, yes.  By  society,  no.  The  individual  may  seek  it
directly,  but  can  best  attain  it  by  seeking  it  indirectly.  The
social  organism  must  fail  by  seeking  it  directly ;  it  may  suc-
ceed by  seeking  it  indirectly.  This  end  is  best  attained,  in
both  the  individual  and  the  social  organism,  by  the  pursuit  of
certain  means  more  directly  within  their  grasp.  But  are
these  means  the  same  in  both  cases  ?  Assuredly  not.  And
this  because  the  happiness  of  society  is  nothing  else  than  the
happiness  of  its  individual  units,  while  the  means  necessary
to  render  these  units  happy  vary  with  the  varying  character-
istics of  these  component  individualities.  The  means  which
the  individual  adopts  may  be  somewhat  special — they  may
be  such  as  are  more  or  less  directly  connected  with  man's
emotional  or  sensual  nature.  Pleasure  itself,  and  of  the
more  sensual  kinds,  may,  with  entire  success,  be  made  the
immediate  aim.     The  individual  has  here  only  to  beware

154  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

lest  by  excess  a  greater  future  pain  be  entailed  than  present
pleasure  derived,  and  that  the  happiness  of  others  be  not
diminished.  Within  these  limits,  the  pursuit  of  present
pleasure  is  not  only  legitimate,  but  is  required  and  demanded
by  the  wants  of  each  individual's  nature.

"Where  indirectly  pursued,  the  means  may  be  closely
bound  up  with  the  end,  as  where  virtue,  excellence,  or  up-
rightness is  made  the  proximate  end.  This  is  the  domain  of
ethics,  or  ethology^  as  distinguished  from  sociology ;  and  with-
out question  the  opinion  of  Mr.  John  Stuart  Mill  that  this
should  precede  and  serve  as  a  sort  of  foundation  for  sociology
was  logically  sound  (vol.  i,  p.  217).  The  proximate  ends  to
be  sought  by  the  individual  must  rest  upon  the  svhjective
branch  of  mental  manifestation — they  must  be  related  to  the
feelings  and  be  moral  in  their  character.  But  the  proximate
ends  which  society  must  seek,  in  order  to  act  at  all  in  the
scheme  of  securing  a  fuller  measure  of  human  happiness,
must  rest  upon  the  objective  branch  of  mental  manifestation,
must  be  related  to  the  understanding,  and  be  intellectual  in
their  character.

With  the  former  of  these  classes  of  proximate  ends  of
conation — the  moral  class — we  have  here  little  to  do.  Our
field  is  limited  to  the  latter  class — to  the  consideration  of  the
intellectually  related  social  ends  of  conation,  which  are  prime
essentials  in  the  scheme  of  dynamic  sociology.  We  have  to
consider  the  important  question  whether  society  in  its  cor-
porate capacity  may  not  devise  and  carry  out  measures  which,
from  their  inherent  character,  must  have  as  their  natural  re-
sult to  enhance  the  general  sum  of  happiness  among  its
members.

This  can  only  be  done  by  a  wise  selection  of  means.
Any  attempt  to  increase  human  happiness  by  direct  legisla-
tion must,  as  already  shown,  utterly  fail.  What  would  please
one  would  displease  another,  and  no  rule  could  possess  the
necessary  flexibility  to  satisfy  all.  Besides,  this  disposition
to  seek  happiness  is  already  provided  by  instinct,  and  each

PURSUIT  OF  HAPPINESS.  155

individual  necessarily  seeks  his  own  happiness  without  sug-
gestion or  direction  from  any  source.  Scientific  utilitarian-
ism does  not  hold  that  happiness  should  be  made  the  direct
aim  of  legislative  enactment.  But,  recognizing  that  the  hu-
man organism  is  so  constituted  that  it  can  perform  no  action
except  from  this  motive,  but  that,  owing  to  defective  corre-
spondence between  organism  and  environment,  a  large  part
of  these  actions  miss  their  aim,  it  proposes,  by  an  investiga-
tion of  the  laws  of  correspondence,  if  possible,  to  devise
means  whereby  a  larger  proportion  of  those  actions  may
succeed  in  securing  the  object  at  which  they  aim.  The  pre-
vailing code  of  morals  which  makes  ideals  of  virtuousness,
righteousness,  excellence,  and  right-doing  the  ends  of  cona-
tion, are  the  superficial  patchwork  of  an  empirical  morality,*
undertaken  by  the  individual  for  the  individual,  a;nd  hence
impossible  to  enforce  as  universal  guides  to  conduct.  Reach-
ing their  most  perfect  state  at  an  early  stage  in  the  develop-
ment of  every  society,  they  make  no  further  advance  through
all  the  rest  of  its  history,  while,  notwithstanding  them,  and
in  spite  of  them,  conduct  rises  or  falls  with  the  degree  of
intelligence.  Authoritative  moral  codes  are  wholly  non-
progressive, and  serve  rather  to  denote  the  state  of  society
than  to  secure  its  advancement.  In  so  far  as  they  are  em-
braced in  the  scope  of  sociology,  they  belong  to  its  statical
department,  as  data  for  study  and  facts  to  be  co-ordinated.
Coming  wholly  within  the  domain  of  the  feelings,  they  are
to  be  classed  among  the  phenomena  to  be  controlled  by  the
intellectual  power,  and  not  as  in  any  sense  a  power  in
themselves  for  the  control  of  other  phenomena  of  the  sen-
sibilities.

On  the  other  hand,  every  thing  progressive  comes  from
the  intellect.  If  a  change  is  to  be  really  made  in  the  con-
duct of  men,  it  must  be  brought  about  by  the  adoption  of
some  rational  scheme  which  the  wisdom  of  the  age  shall

*  Mr,  Spencer  is  undoubtedly  correct  in  maintaining  that  ethics,  as  com-
monly understood,  is  a  pathological  science  ("  Data  of  Ethics,"  p.  2*76).

156  UTILITY.— HAPPINESS  THE  END.

foresee  to  be  certain  to  secure  this  end.  To  say  that  this
can  not  be  done  is  to  admit  that  the  social  forces  are  not
capable,  like  other  forces,  of  being  directed  to  human  advan-
tage— to  deny  that  there  exists  a  science  of  sociology.

The  problem  of  dynamic  sociology  is  the  m^ganization  of
haj[ypine88.  A  cotton-mill  is  a  device  by  which,  after  a  mul-
titude of  interferences  with  a  persistent  force  and  persist-
ent materials,  an  ultimate  end — the  cloth  manufactured — is
at  last  attained.  It  is  a  product  of  intellectual  effort  through-
out. Recognizing  the  impossibility  of  securing  the  final
object  directly,  a  series  of  proximate  ends  have  been  devised
and  successively  secured  as  the  several  means  to  the  ultimate
end.  ]^ot  otherwise,  in  its  most  general  aspects,  must  be  the
course  which  enlightened  man  shall  adopt  if  he  hopes  to  in-
fluence his  own  progress.  He,  too,  must  interfere  with  the
course  of  the  social  forces,  now  running  to  waste,  and  direct
them  into  channels  of  his  choosing  which  lead  toward  the
final  object  which  he  desires  to  secure.  If  virtue  and  right
conduct  are  the  means  to  individual  happiness,  then  must
some  method  be  devised  to  render  right  conduct  preferable  to
wrong  conduct.  But  most  of  the  wrong  conduct  is  due  to
defective  judgment,  i.  ^.,  defective  correspondence  between
organism  and  environment.  Something  must,  therefore,  be
done  to  complete  the  adaptation.  Error  is  the  result  of  im-
perfect acquaintance  with  the  field  in  which  action  must  be
taken.  The  creature  must  become  better  acquainted  with
its  habitat  if  it  would  avoid  stepping  over  dangerous  preci-
pices, partaking  of  poisonous  herbage,  or  falling  a  prey  to
ferocious  enemies.  This  is  the  present  state  of  man,  and
therefore  the  supreme  desideratum  must  be  that  of  familiar-
izing himself  with  the  world  in  which  he  exists.  Knowledge,
therefore,  is  the  end  to  be  more  directly  pursued,  since
through  knowledge  comes  the  entire  succession  of  desirable
objects — right  conduct,  progress,  happiness.  But  this  knowl-
edge must  be  the  kind  of  knowledge  which  brings  these  ends,
not  anything  that  any  one  may  see  fit  to  call  by  that  name —

ORGANIZATION  OF  HAPPINESS.  157

knowledge  that  adapts  tlie  organism  to  the  environment,
knowledge  that  reveals  the  relations  of  man  to  the  universe.
The  highest  and  most  generalized  knowledge  is,  in  reality,
the  most  important  and  the  most  truly  practical.*

*  The  question  as  to  what  constitutes  the  practical  can  not  be  fairly  stated
until  the  doctrine  of  theoretical  utilitarianism  is  applied  to  it.  This  makes  en-
joyment the  ultimate  standard  of  value — a  standard,  however,  which  can  not
be  numerically  expressed  or  quantitatively  compared.  And  yet  its  recognition
underlies  the  doctrine  of  the  "  balance  of  trade."  Of  the  thousand  dollars  ex-
pended for  fire-works,  and  burned  up  in  an  evening,  or  the  thousand  expended
for  platinum-ware  which  will  last  for  many  generations,  or  the  same  sum  ex-
pended for  books  whose  influence  will  continue  to  be  felt  for  ages  after  they
have  moldered  to  dust,  the  question  as  to  which  has  done  most  good  must  always
remain  a  qualitative  one,  and  yet  the  sums  thus  expended  must  bring  returns
differing  immensely  in  their  true  value,  measured  by  the  utilitarian  standard.

CHAPTEE  X.

PROGRESS.

PEIMAEY   MEANS    TO    HAPPINESS,    OR   FIRST   PROXIMATE   END   OP

CONATION.

Dynamic  sociology  as  distinguislied  from  moral  science — Dynamic  sociology  de-
fined— Social  progress  defined — In  what  social  progress  consists — Intro-
duction of  the  indirect  method  of  conation — Origin  and  nature  of  art —
Social  agencies  affecting  human  progress — Confusion  of  ideas  respecting
progressive  agencies — Preliminary  consideration  of  progress  in  the  abstract
— Progressive  agencies — Communication  of  ideas — Language — Written  lan-
guage and  literature — The  invention  of  printing — Pursuit  of  subsistence —
True  position  of  the  fine  arts — Relation  of  science  to  art,  and  vice  versa —
Successive  modes  by  which  primitive  man  obtained  subsistence — The  sci-
entific epoch — Artificial  character  of  civilization — Material  civilization  in-
creases the  general  sum  of  human  happiness — Latent  amelioration — Non-
progressive agencies — Government — Objects  of  government — Protection —
Accommodation — Improvement — Origin  and  genesis  of  government — Ideal
government — Why  government  is  odious — Nature  of  liberty  and  the  princi-
ples upon  which  it  rests — Successive  elimination  of  the  illegitimate  functions
of  government — Superficial  character  of  historical  and  political  events — Ame-
liorative function  of  government — The  two  opposite  schools  of  sociologists,
both  of  which  avoid  the  vital  question  lying  between  them — How  the  social
forces  may  be  controlled — General  laws  of  social  progress — Religion — Defi-
nitions— Sir  John  Lubbock's  classification  of  religions — Major  J.  W.  Pow-
ell's mythological  philosophy — Herbert  Spencer's  views  on  religion — The
three  fundamental  elements  of  religion — These  reduced  to  one,  viz. ,  belief
in  spiritual  beings — Causes  that  have  led  to  the  universal  belief  in  spiritual
beings — Relation  of  religion  to  human  progress — In  how  far  the  essentials
of  religion  are  objectively  true — Evolution  of  the  belief  in  immortality —
Evolution  of  the  belief  in  deity — Religion  a  necessity  of  the  existing  con-
dition of  things — Fundamental  identity  of  religion  and  science — Simultane-
ous development  of  religion  and  science  from  a  common  point  of  departure
— Position  of  religion  with  reference  to  social  progress — Alleged  temporal

DYNAMIC  SOCIOLOGY.  159

benefits  of  religion — The  moral  sanction  of  religion — Solace  derived  from
the  belief  in  immortality — Contemplation  of  the  attributes  of  deity — Sub-
jective moral  efficacy  of  prayer — Anti-progressive  tendencies  of  religion —
Suicidal  effects  of  superstition — Mutilations,  orgies,  and  sacrifices  at  funerals
— Destruction  of  property  at  funerals — Opposition  of  religion  to  science —
Negative  opposition,  the  priesthood — Divorce  of  man  from  nature — Asceti-
cism— Self-torture — Positive  or  direct  opposition — Religion  and  progress —
The  conflict  between  religion  and  science — Conclusion ;  Method  of  human
progress  and  means  of  accelerating  it.

Dynamic  Sociology  aims  at  the  organization  of  happi-
ness. In  this  it  differs  from  moral  science,  which  also  aims
at  the  production  of  the  greatest  happiness,  but  which  seeks
this  end  by  the  aid  of  rules  for  the  control  of  individual
conduct.  Such  rules  are  moral  in  their  character,  i.  e.,  they
are  based  on  the  feelings.  They  are  in  the  nature  of  ap-
peals. They  may  be  appeals  to  the  reason,  but  in  behalf
of  the  feelings.  Usually,  however,  they  are  appeals  to  the
sympathies.  They  are  suggested  to  the  framer  directly  by
experience  and  observation.  Feeling,  either  egoistic  or  al-
truistic, originates  them.  They  are  not  in  the  nature  of
inventions.  They  may  be  thought  out,  but  they  are  not
devised.  They  rest  upon  the  most  obvious,  not  upon  the
most  recondite,  truths  of  human  nature.  They  do  not
recognize  any  natural  forces  as  at  work  in  the  domain  of
human  action.  They  rather  assume  the  non-conformity  of
human  action  with  law.  But  for  such  assumption  they
would  possess  no  justification.  For,  as  well  appeal  to  the
winds  or  the  tides  as  to  the  equally  fixed  forces  of  society.
It  is  this  which  has  rendered  all  regulative  systems  so  un-
successful. It  is  only  as  these  appeals  have  been  accom-
panied by  corresponding  active  measures  that  they  have
succeeded  at  all.  Without  knowing  it,  moral  systematists
have,  to  a  certain  extent,  recognized  the  laws  of  conduct,
and  have  adopted  real  physical  means  for  controlling  ac-
tion. These,  of  course,  have  produced  effects,  though,  from
ignorance  of  the  true  character  of  those  laws,  the  effects
have  often  been  quite  different  from,  sometimes  precisely  the

160  PROGEESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

reverse  of,  those  desired  and  expected.  But  this  is  only  to
say  that  ignorance  and  error  respecting  natural  laws  have
operated  in  the  same  manner  in  the  department  of  social,  as
of  physical,  phenomena.

Moral  science — even  that  which  discards  teleology  and
professes  to  be  rational — is  essentially  empirical.  As  a  sci-
ence, as  Mr.  Spencer  admits,*  it  belongs  to  the  department
of  pathology.  It  is  little  more  than  a  system  of  therapeutics.
Not  only  so,  but  it  is  a  system  whose  method,  like  the  prevail-
ing methods  in  medicine,  is  curative  rather  than  preventive.

'Now,  as  previously  shown  (vol.  i,  pp.  5Y,  104,  149),  the
distinguishing  mark  of  every  practical  science  is  the  manner
in  which  the  forces  within  its  domain  admit  of  being  con-
trolled by  artificial  devices.  Until  a  field  of  phenomena  has
been  subjected  to  this  test,  it  can  not  be  said  to  have  been
fairly  secured  to  science.  Of  the  two  means  of  controlling
natm-al  forces,  the  direct  and  the  indirect,  the  former  has
accomplished  comparatively  very  little.  As  was  early  pointed
out  (vol.  i,  p.  40),  the  direct  method  is  that  of  the  brute.
The  savage  employs  it  extensively  and  makes  no  progress.
All  stagnant  peoples  depend  chiefly  upon  it.  The  acts
which  lie  behind  it  are  impulsive  acts;  they  spring  from
feeling,  not  from  intellect.  Every  thing  that  emanates  from
feeling  is  conservative  and  non-progressive.  All  progress  is
due  to  intellectual  activity.

Of  the  two  great  classes  of  means  which  men  employ
for  the  attainment  of  the  ultimate  end  toward  which  all
actions  are  directed,  viz.,  direct  means  and  indirect  means,
the  phenomena  usually  classed  under  the  head  of  moral  sci-
ence belong  to  the  former.  They  bear  the  same  relation  to
mind  that  brute-force  bears  to  muscle.  As  the  race  rose  in
mental  capacity,  both  the  primary  co-ordinate  departments
of  mind — feeling  and  intellect — rose  together,  and  for  the
primordial  method  of  gratifying  desire — muscular  effort —
the  two  substitutes — appeal  to  sympathy  and  rational  strat-
*  "  Data  of  Ethics,"  p.  216  (§  106).

PEOGEESS  DEFINED.  161

egy — developed  simultaneously.  Out  of  tlie  former  have
grown  the  existing  codes  of  morals ;  out  of  the  latter,  the  arts
and  sciences.  But  the  direct  method  could  no  more  prove
progressive  when  foimded  on  mind  than  when  founded  on
muscle,  and  the  code  of  morals  has  remained  nearly  the
same  throughout  all  ages.  The  progress  attained  by  the  in-
direct method  is  the  progress  of  the  arts  and  sciences.  But,
for  reasons  existing  in  the  nature  of  things,  the  indirect
method  has  only  been  applied  to  the  department  of  physical
phenomena,  not  to  those  of  moral  and  of  social  phenomena.
Hence,  these  departments  have  languished  or  remained  sta-
tionary under  the  influence  of  the  direct  method  alone.

Dynamic  sociology  consists  in  applying  the  indirect
method  to  the  control  of  the  social  forces.  ^^

Defining  social  progress  now  more  specially  as  whatever
increcbses  the  sum  total  of  hitman  Jiappiness,  since  this  sim-
ply follows  from  our  general  definition  {supra,  p.  108),  this
may  be  regarded  as  the  proximate  end,  whose  attainment  is
equivalent  to  the  attainment  of  the  ultimate  end.  This  lat-
ter being  impossible,  except  by  the  application  of  the  direct
method,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  promises  no  advance,  it  be-
comes important  to  strive  toward  some  practical  means  to
which  the  indirect  method  may  be  applied.  Social  progress
is  such  a  means,  and  it  may  be  attained  through  intellectual
effort.

Adhering  strictly  to  the  definition  here  given  of  social
progress,  as  whatever  increases  the  sum  total  of  human  hap-
piness, the  problem  presented  becomes  that  of  ascertaining
in  what  such  progress  must  specifically  consist.  What  modi-
fications must  be  effected  in  the  social  state  to  secure  the
required  consummation  ?

To  solve  this  problem  it  will  be  necessary  to  enter  some-
what into  an  examination  of  the  existing  structure  of  soci-
ety. The  question  must  be  considered  whether  society,  as
at  present  constituted,  contains  any  of  the  elements  requisite
to  rendering  it  progressive  in  this  sense,  and,  if  so,  what  these
39

162  PEOGRESS.— PKIMARY  MEANS.

elements  are ;  or  whether,  in  order  to  secure  this  end,  ele-
ments wholly  new  and  foreign  to  society  must  be  introduced,
and,  if  so,  what  they  are  required  to  be.

In  the  latter  case,  the  task  might  well  be  regarded  as
hopeless.  If  history  and  experience  furnished  no  sugges-
tion, either  positive  or  negative,  no  example  which  clearly
points  to  any  utilitarian  progress,  and  none  which  warns
against  stagnation  or  degeneracy,  that  would  indeed  be  a
bold  mind  which  should  venture  to  recommend  a  novel  and
untried  scheme  conceived  to  be  adapted  to  securing  that  ob-
ject. But  such  happily  is  not  the  case.  There  has  certainly,
upon  the  whole,  been  social  progress,  although  brought  about
in  the  same  cosmical  way  in  which  physiological  progress
has  been  achieved,  viz.,  through  the  operation  of  the  blind
forces  of  nature.

It  has  already  been  shown  {supra^  pp.  119,  120)  that
development  in  biology  is  scarcely  more  than  a  corollary
from  the  fact  of  continued  existence.  Absolute  Btagna-
tion  for  any  length  of  time  can  not  be  conceived  of.  It
is  negatived  by  the  law  of  the  instability  of  the  homogene-
ous. Therefore,  all  organized  life  must  either  progress  or
retrogress.  Assuming  the  tendency  toward  retrogression
equal  to  that  toward  progression,  the  state  of  things  which
biology  reveals  would  ensue.  For  retrograde  forms  would
succumb  at  their  inception,  and  forms  at  first  progressive  and
afterward,  owing  to  whatever  changes  in  the  environment,
become  retrogressive,  would,  as  surely  as  this  continued  long
enough,  disappear,  while  only  progressive  forms  could  per-
sist. We  should  therefore  behold  just  such  a  world  as  we  in
fact  behold.  Development,  therefore,  or  progress  in  organi-
zation, necessarily  follows  from  persistence  in  life.

It  has  also  been  shown  {supra^  p.  12-1)  that  in  biology
progress  in  organization  is  attended  by  increase  in  the  ca-
pacity for  feeling.  Tliis  fact  points  strongly  to  the  quality
of  progress  required  by  our  definition.  For  increase  of
feeling  implies  increase  of  enjoyment.     The  only  means

SOCIAL  PROGRESS.  163

of  defeating  this  would  be  to  render  the  increased  pains
more  than  great  enough  to  balance  the  increased  pleasures.
But  this  assumes  a  degree  of  inadaptation  so  great  as  neces-
sarily to  render  the  organism  thus  affected  retrogressive  and
ultimately  to  extinguish  it.*  Increase  of  feeling  must,
therefore,  in  all  organisms  that  persist  under  it,  be  attended
with  a  corresponding  increase  of  enjoyment.

The  application  of  these  principles  to  man  and  to  society
is  very  simple  and  perfectly  legitimate.  A  state  of  absolute
stagnation  can  not  exist  in  any  race  or  society.  All  must
either  be  advancing  or  receding,  however  slowly  or  rhyth-
mically. Moreover,  social  advancement  which  is  able  to
persist  must  be  of  the  kind  that  secures  increase  of  enjoy-
ment upon  the  whole  and  in  the  long  run ;  although,  in  so
complex  a  field  as  that  of  human  society,  the  apparent  ex-
ceptions to  this  law  may  be  many,  and  the  law  itself  difficult
to  prove  a  jposteriori.

States  of  social  organization,  apparently  the  highest,
often  result  in  the  most  complete  subjection  of  the  masses,
and  certainly  diminish  the  sum  of  happiness  except  of  a  few.
Ill-founded  schemes  of  government,  religion,  pubHc  econ-
omy, finance,  art,  or  even  literature,  may  proceed  so  much  in
disregard  of  the  real  welfare  of  the  people  as  in  fact,  though
apparently  highly  developed  and  progressive,  to  reduce  the
tone  of  existence  and  greatly  to  lessen  the  normal  degree  of
enjoyment.  But  such  a  state  is,  in  fact,  retrogressive.  It
marks  the  decline  in  the  life  of  a  society,  stamps  it  as  in
process  of  becoming  effete,  and  ushers  in  a  period  of  obvious
degeneracy  which,  if  not  arrested,  must  end  in  social  ex-
tinction.

Existing  society  consists  of  a  variety  of  distinct  ele-
ments. The  state  in  which  we  observe  it  has  been  brought
about  by  the  influence  of  numerous  causal  factors.  It  is
not  enough  to  state  generally  that  social  progress  is  due  to
this  great  cosmical  tendency  which  we  have  traced  through-

*  Spencer,  "  Data  of  Ethics,"  pp.  14,  26  (§§  4,  9).

164  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

out  the  lower  departments  of  life.  It  is  certainly  true  that
this  tendency  exists,  and  that  it  is  the  remote  cause  of  social
as  well  as  of  biological  progress.  But  even  the  biologist
looks  closer  and  analyzes  the  various  more  immediate  ele-
ments which  combine  to  constitute  this  tendency.  Much
more,  then,  is  it  the  duty  of  the  sociologist  to  analyze  the
progressive  tendency  in  society  and  to  determine  the  nature
of  its  elements.

Just  as  in  biology  there  are  found,  upon  close  investiga-
tion, two  general  classes  of  elements,  favorable  and  adverse,
so  in  society  there  are  found  to  exist  both  progressive  and
anti-progressive  elements.  The  field  of  social  phenomena
differs,  however,  from  that  of  life  in  general  in  one  very
important  respect — the  existence  of  an  intellectual  force.
This  force  has  been  developed  in  the  same  cosmical  manner
as  the  other  social  forces — the  desires ;  but  it  nevertheless
differs  so  fundamentally  from  these  as  to  mark  a  step  in  the
general  progress  of  nature  analogous  to  that  which  the  de-
velopment of  the  former  marked  when  they  separated  the
sentient  from  the  insentient  world.  This  great  step  finds  its
fullest  expression  in  the  broad  antithesis  which  we  have
denoted  by  the  terms  direct  and  indirect  method,  as  applied
to  the  efforts  of  sentient  beings  to  attain  their  ends.  In  the
world  of  feeling  below  man,  these  efforts  have  been  made
according  to  the  direct  method  alone,  and  have  succeeded
only  in  accomplishing  the  maintenance  and  perpetuation  of
life.  Progress  has  here  been  due  to  other  causes,  chiefly  to
the  various  kinds  of  adaptation  or  selection  ;  but  in  man
the  indirect  method  was  early  applied,  and  while  in  certain
cases,  in  consequence  of  error  and  ignorance,  it  had  a  reactive
effect,  and  brought  about  gradual  degeneration  or  speedy
destruction,  in  others  it  proved  progressive,  and  with  greater
or  less  rapidity  elevated  the  condition  of  the  race.

The  immediate  result  of  the  application  of  the  indirect,
or  intellectual,  method  was  the  introduction  of  a  large  num-
ber of  purely  human  institutions,  or  devices  for  attaining

EMPLOYMENT  OF  THE  INDIRECT  METHOD.         165

desired  ends,  which  in  their  most  general  sense  we  may  de-
nominate arts.

AVhile  considering  the  various  "  modes  of  acquisition  "  in
Chapter  YII  (vol.  i,  p.  524),  it  was  shown  that  intellectual
operations  rest  fundamentally  upon  a  quality  which,  when
directed  toward  objects  capable  of  feeling,  takes  the  name
of  deception.  Such  recondite  truths  are  sometimes  exempli-
fied in  an  interesting  manner  by  the  natural  history  of  words.

The  word  art  furnishes  a  case  in  point.  Applied  to  in-
animate objects  it  sounds  harmless  enough,  but  observe  the
difference  when  applied  to  animals  or  men.  In  its  deriva-
tive, "artful,"  we  have  the  same  general  conception  as  in
"artificial,"  except  that  acts  to  which  the  former  may  be
applied  refer  to  things  which  can  suffer,  while  those  to
which  the  latter  is  applied  are  f  eelingless.

We  may  perceive  from  such  illustrations  that  the  idea
underlying  the  word  art^  and  present  in  all  its  applications
and  derivatives,  is  the  essential,  distinguishing  principle  of
purely  intellectual  action.  Therefore,  all  the  productions  of
purely  intellectual  effort  may  in  this  general  sense  be  denomi-
nated arts.  And  now  the  additional  truth  must  be  formally
set  down  that,  while  certain  arts  are  devised  in  ignorance
and  error,  and  result  in  the  subversion  of  progress,  the
greater  part  of  them  are  conceived  in  a  sufficiently  true  ap-
preciation of  the  nature  of  the  force  which  they  seek  to  con-
trol to  succeed  in  their  purpose,  and  result  in  securing  a
greater  or  less  degree  of  material  and  social  advantage,  ren-
dering them  progressive.  This  may  be  illustrated  by  the
history  of  human  invention,  which  is  simply  a  branch  of
human  art,  and  constitutes  the  department  of  it  which  most
perfectly  elucidates  the  true  character  of  all  forms  of  artifi-
cial operation.  For  even  here  a  great  many  devices  fail  to
accomplish  the  objects  expected  by  their  designers,  and  some
prove  productive  of  harmful  effects.

ISTow,  while  the  present  state  of  society  has  been  brought
about  through  the  operations  of  a  general  tendency  inherent

166  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

in  hnman  nature,  yet  this  general  tendency  has  in  turn  been
due  to  certain  specific  causes.  The  end,  progress,  has  been
achieved  through  the  instrumentality  of  certain  means  with-
out which  it  could  not  have  been  achieved.  These  means
consist  in  the  various  forms  of  art  of  which  we  have  spoken.
These  forms  of  art,  therefore,  constitute  the  more  definite
objects  of  study  in  any  inquiry  into  the  conditions  of  human
progress.  They  differ  greatly  in  their  general  character,  and
many  of  the  most  important  of  them  deviate  so  widely  in
their  external  characteristics  from  the  normal  type  that  they
are  not  recognized  in  common  parlance  by  the  name  of  arts.
Some  of  them  are  vaguely  denominated  institutions,  or  agen-
cies, while  others  are  so  universally  regarded  as  sui  generis
that  there  is  no  generic  category  to  which  the  language  can
refer  them.  As  already  remarked,  these  various  artificial
devices  of  the  human  intellect  may  be  primarily  divided  into
two  general  classes — ^those  belonging  to  one  of  which  are
upon  the  whole  progressive,  while  those  belonging  to  the
other  are  upon  the  whole  non-progressive.

At  first  sight  it  would  seem  that  this  division  would  be
an  obvious  one  and  easily  drawn,  but  such  is  by  no  means
the  case.  Of  course,  all  were  originally  intended  to  be  pro-
gressive ;  at  least,  were  intended  to  benefit  those  who  de-
signed them,  and  probably  those  that  survived  the  earliest
stages  of  trial  so  proved.  But  it  would  not  necessarily  fol-
low that,  because  they  benefited  the  designers,  they  were
therefore  progressive.  Hence,  they  might  long  survive  and
benefit  their  designers,  while  all  the  time  injuring  the  rest
of  society.  If  such  injury  were  unmixed  with  benefit,  how-
ever, it  would  seem  impossible  for  them  to  survive  long,  as
they  would  soon  inevitably  react  to  the  ultimate  injury  of
the  designer  also.  Indeed,  if  their  general  effect  were  more
evil  than  good,  this  reaction  must  ultimately  come,  but,  where
marked  benefits  accrue  along  with  greater  evils,  it  is  easy  to
understand  how,  in  the  cloudy  state  of  the  undeveloped  rea-
son, inability  to  balance  the  good  and  evil  might  result  in

SOCIAL  AGENCIES.  167

their  perpetuation  for  long  periods  against  the  general  in-
terests of  society.  The  good  effects  may  be  cunningly  de-
signed to  manifest  themselves  in  a  striking  manner,  while
the  far  greater  evil  effects  may  be  insidious  and  impercep-
tible. Few  realize  how  great  is  the  susceptibility  of  man  to
error  in  the  lower  stages  of  his  development.  Those  who
have  fully  recognized  this  will  readily  understand  how  a
cunningly  devised  artificial  system  may  be  regarded  as  a
blessing  for  ages,  during  which  it  is  in  reality  degrading  its
defenders.  As  a  concrete  example,  which  comes  near  enough
home  to  be  readily  comprehended  by  all,  let  us  instance  the
institution  of  chattel  slavery  as  it  existed  in  the  Southern
United  States  prior  to  the  war  of  1861.  If  so  great  self-
delusion  is  possible  in  an  enlightened  age  and  nation,  how
much  greater  self-delusions  may  not  have  been  possible  in
the  dark  stages  of  barbarism  and  savagery !

It  will  therefore  be  seen  how  difficult  must  be  the  task
of  distinguishing  the  progressive  and  non-progressive  insti-
tutions which  men  have  established  in  society.  Many  of
them  are  so  complicated  in  their  effects  that  the  wisest  men
of  the  world  differ  diametrically  upon  the  question  of  their
utility.

It  will  be  impossible,  as  it  is  quite  unnecessary  in  this
brief  sketch,  to  consider  all  these  varied  human  creations  in
minute  detail.  Tlie  ephemeral  ones,  whose  general  injuri-
ousness  has  so  distinctly  manifested  itself  as  to  have  already
resulted  in  their  suppression,  must  be  passed  over  in  silence.
Numerous  comparatively  unimportant  ones,  to  whichever
class  they  may  belong,  must  also  be  disregarded.  Only  a
few  of  the  great  types  of  each  class,  whose  existence  has
been  co-extensive  with  the  known  history  of  society,  and
whose  effects  are  still  making  themselves  felt  in  our  age  of
the  world  and  in  the  most  advanced  societies,  can  receive
special  consideration  at  our  hands.

Before  enumerating  the  examples  which  will  be  selected
as  best  furnishing  a  basis  for  the  general  discussion  of  the

168  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

conditions  to  social  progress,  it  will  be  necessary  to  remark
that  the  popular  view  of  the  relative  influence  of  the  differ-
ent social  agencies  is  even  now  extremely  crude  and  unphilo-
sophical.  It  is  in  a  high  degree  superficial,  and  is  in  the  main
based  upon  certain  external  and  obtrusive  characters  which
are  misleading  and  deceptive.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say
that  the  majority  of  mankind  ascribe  all  human  progress  to
influences  as  to  whose  progressive  character  the  deepest
thinkers  are  in  doubt,  while  the  truly  progressive  agencies,
universally  recognized  as  such  by  all  who  have  thought
deeply  upon  the  subject,  are  almost  wholly  ignored.  Con-
siderably more  than  one  half  of  mankind,  if  asked  what  they
regarded  as  the  chief  civilizing  agency,  would  doubtless  un-
hesitatingly answer,  "  Religion."  Yet  a  single  additional
question  would  quickly  reveal  the  fact  that  by  "  religion "
each  one  means  "  my  religion  "  * ;  for  all  without  exception
would  agree  that  all  other  religions  than  their  own  were
not  only  non-progressive  but  retrogressive  in  a  high  degree.
This  would  be  equally  true  of  Buddhist,  Mohammedan,  or
Christian.  "What,  then,  are  disinterested  spectators  to  con-
clude ?  As  between  that  which  aU  declare  to  be  true  and
that  which  only  one  declares  to  be  true,  the  chances,  so  far
as  testimony  goes,  are  of  course  in  favor  of  the  former.  If
the  question  had  no  intrinsic  merits,  or  if  none  were  known
to  the  inquirer,  he  must,  if  logical,  conclude  that  all  religions
are  non-progressive.

Again,  if  asked  what  human  institution  ranked  second  in
the  services  it  had  rendered  to  civilization  and  progress,  an
equally  large  majority  would  probably  reply,  "  Government."
But,  aside  from  the  consideration  urged  in  the  case  of  relig-
ion, which  here  shows  itself  in  the  fact  that  most  nations  re-
gard their  own  precise  form  of  government  as  immeasurably
the  best,  and  all  others  as  little  better  or  far  worse  than  no
government,  we  have  history  to  teach  us  to  how  very  great
an  extent  government  in  all  ages  has  burdened  and  oppressed

*  Tylor,  "  Primitive  Culture,"  Boston,  1874,  p.  420.

POPULAR  MISCONCEPTIONS.  169

the  human  race ;  while  in  those  governments  which  rest  most
lightly  upon  the  people,  as  the  representative  and  strictly
laissez  faire  government  of  the  United  States,  where  caveat
emptor  prevails,  and  the  unrestricted  power  to  adulterate  the
people's  food  for  gain  is  guarded  as  an  "  inalienable  right  "
— even  in  such  governments  the  political  party  which  hap-
pens to  be  in  the  minority,  if  by  only  a  few  thousand  votes,
and  hence  out  of  power,  is  constantly  charging  oppression,
and  declaring  the  government  worse  than  anarchy.

In  view  of  all  this,  the  disinterested  philosopher  must
certainly  be  pardoned  for  concluding  that  governments,  as
human  institutions,  have  not  been  unmixed  blessings.

On  the  other  hand,  how  few,  outside  of  the  deep-think-
ing classes,  adequately  value  the  services  of  language,  litera-
ture, the  mechanical  arts,  and  the  exact  sciences  !  These  are
the  really  progressive  agencies  of  society  ;  yet  their  influence
is  so  gentle  and  unostentatious  that  they  are  overlooked,  and
credit  for  their  results  is  given  to  those  agencies  which  em-
ploy the  direct  method,  and  herald  their  march  by  loud  ap-
peals to  sympathy  and  passion.

Such  being  the  nature  of  the  subject  before  us,  it  is
deemed  the  most  suitable  plan  to  consider,  first,  the  more  fun-
damental and  legitimate  civilizing  agencies,  and  to  show  in
what  consists  their  really  progressive  character  as  measured
by  the  standard  adopted  in  our  definition  of  progress ;  and
afterward  to  investigate  the  claims  of  government  and  re-
ligion to  their  share  of  the  credit  for  whatever  advance  has
been  thus  far  made.

Before  entering  fully  into  this  specific  line  of  inquiry,
however,  it  will  be  necessary  to  make  a  few  preliminary  and
explanatory  remarks.

A  word,  first,  in  justification  of  the  definition  of  progress
given  above.  Progress  in  its  general  sense,  or  improvement,
implies  an  approximation  toward  perfection.  As  appKed  to
unorganized  matter,  it  denotes  that  state  of  development

170  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

which  material  objects  undergo  through  the  agency  of  the
physical  forces.  There  is  reason,  for  example,  to  suppose  that
the  solar  system  has  been  for  an  indefinite  period  passing
through  successive  stages  of  a  gradual  development,  supposed
to  have  originated  in  a  comparatively  chaotic  mass  of  nebu-
lous matter,  and  gone  on  till  at  this  particular  stage  it  pre-
sents the  appearance  of  a  number  of  spheroidal  bodies  revolv-
ing regularly  about  their  common  center  of  gravity.

So,  also,  the  constitution  of  the  earth,  and,  by  analogy,  that
of  all  worlds,  may  be  said  to  be  in  a  state  of  progress,  al-
though it  may  well  be  doubted  whether  all  their  internal
changes  result  in  a  body  more  symmetrical  than  before  they
took  place.  But  there  may  be  many  different  standards  of
perfection.  If  any  planet,  for  example,  could  be  shovra  to
have  once  been  habitable,  but  to  have  now  passed,  in  the
course  of  its  transformations,  into  a  state  incapable  of  sup-
porting life,  some  might  conclude  that  its  progress  had  ceased,
and  the  opposite,  or  a  degeneration,  had  begun.  Still,  it
might  be  at  the  same  time  growing  more  dense,  more  shapely,
and  more  regular.  And  this  question  will  meet  us  every-
where in  the  inorganic  world.  For,  if  a  stone  crumble  into
dust  or  a  sand-heap  solidify  into  stone,  who  shall  say  which
is  the  more  perfect  condition  ?  It  is  clear  that  development,
or  progress,  in  unorganized  matter  is  relative  to  the  party
judging,  and  depends  upon  what  he  considers  perfection  to
consist  in.  The  farmer  would  consider  the  rich  loam  into
which  the  rock  had  crumbled  a  far  superior  condition,  while
the  geologist  would  most  admire  the  stratified  ledge  in  which
he  could  read  the  history  of  the  past.  Still,  it  is  popularly
supposed  that  all  nature  is  progressing  toward  some  standard
of  perfection,  of  the  character  of  which  man  is  not  in  a  posi-
tion to  judge  with  any  degree  of  accuracy  ;  an  idea  which  is
purely  speculative,  illy  substantiated  by  what  we  know  of
nature,  and  rather  opposed  by  the  established  doctrine  of
the  persistence  and  indestructibility  of  both  matter  and
force  which  always  must  have  the  same  quantity.     The  case

PKOGRESS  m  THE  ABSTRACT.  171

is  different  with  organized  matter.  For  here,  even  in  the
vegetable  world,  we  iind  a  certain  adaptation  to  the  two  ends
of  nature  before  alluded  to — the  individual  and  the  spe-
cific existence.  We  hesitate  not,  for  instance,  to  declare  an
exogenous  superior  to  an  endogenous  plant,  because  we  see
that  the  former  is  better  protected  bj  having  a  firm  trunk  to
sustain  it  against  cold  and  external  attacks.  "We  saj,  there-
fore, that  there  has  been  progress  in  the  vegetable  kingdom
since  the  carboniferous  age,  at  the  beginning  of  which  no
evidence  can  be  found  that  any  exogenous  plants  existed,  and
daring  which  the  gymnosperm,  the  lowest  type  of  this  class,
was  all  that  had  been  brought  forth,  while  now  our  forests
abound  in  oak,  beech,  birch,  and  maple,  and  cryptogam ous
and  monocotyledonous  plants  occupy  a  very  inferior  position
in  the  vegetable  world.

When  we  come  to  animals,  the  progressive  principle  is
clearly  discernible.  The  relative  perfection  of  animals  is  no
longer  confined  to  their  respective  powers  of  endurance  or
security  of  perpetuation,  but  lies  also  in  immediate  connec-
tion with  their  peculiar  characteristic  as  sentient  beings,
capable  of  enjoying  their  own  organisms.  Therefore,  that
organism  is,  in  general,  most  perfect  which  possesses  the
greatest  variety  of  parts,  on  the  principle  that  every  normal
movement  yields  pleasure,  and  that  pleasure  is  increased  as
the  facilities  for  activity  are  rendered  more  extensive  and
varied.

Therefore,  it  is  fairly  established  that  on  the  whole  there
has  been  progress  in  the  animal  kingdom  throughout  the
geological  ages  of  the  earth,  because  each  successive  age  has
produced  some  beings  of  a  more  varied  and  elaborate  organ-
ization than  those  of  the  age  preceding  it.

While,  therefore,  in  the  animal  as  well  as  in  the  vegetable
kingdom,  there  still  exist  forms  and  species  as  low  perhaps
as  any  that  ever  existed  even  at  the  beginning,  still  there  has
been  progress,  because,  while  these  lower  forms  continue  to
exist  the  same  as  then,  yet  the  highest  forms  now  in  exist-

172  PROGRESS.— PEIMAEY  MEANS.

ence  are  infinitely  superior  to  the  highest  forms  in  those
remote  ages,  and  in  some  respect  superior  to  the  highest  of
any  preceding  age.

But,  as  we  look  over  this  subject,  we  can  not  fail  to  be
struck  with  the  fact  that  this  progress  has  not  been  so  much
due  to  the  individual  efforts  of  species  as  to  external  circum-
stances, viz.,  physical  changes  taking  place  in  the  earth,  oc-
casioning differences  in  the  shape  of  the  surface,  in  the  tem-
perature, and  in  the  quality  of  the  atmosphere  and  of  the
water.  It  is  not  so  much  a  development  of  species  as  the
evolution  of  new  species  under  the  operation  of  what  we
may  call  the  law  of  favorable  conditions^  according  to  which
new  and  superior  species  have  successively  made  their  ap-
pearance as  fast  as  the  terrestrial  transformations  would  per-
mit. For  instance,  no  land  animals  could  of  course  appear
until  there  was  land  on  which  to  dwell,  and  that  did  not  exist
to  any  extent  till  two  great  geological  ages  had  gone  by.
Nor  could  these  then  exist  (since  all  land  animals  must  be
air-breathing  animals)  until  a  long  and  luxuriant  vegetation
had  extracted  the  superabundant  quantities  of  carbonic  acid
from  the  air  and  buried  its  carbon  in  the  earth,  liberating  its
oxygen  to  purify  the  atmosphere  (vol.  i,  p.  272).  These  con-
ditions must  first  be  fulfilled  before  the  higher  types  could
be  brought  forth.

Thus  we  see  that  this  progress  in  the  animal  world  is  due
in  the  main  to  a  corresponding  progress  in  the  physical  con-
ditions of  the  earth.  And  this  enables  us  to  make  the  first
grand  division  of  the  subject  into  that  progress  which  is  due
to  external  causes,  or  objective  progress,  and  that  which  is
due  to  special  efforts  of  individuals,  or  subjective  progress.

The  former  of  these  divisions  belongs  properly  to  astron-
omy, geology,  and  botany.  The  latter  belongs  in  the  main
to  zoology,  and  in  so  far  neither  has  more  than  a  collateral
bearing  upon  the  question  before  us.  But,  if  we  scan  closely
this  latter  branch — namely,  that  part  of  the  progress  of  ani-
mal life  which  has  been  produced  by  the  special  efforts  of

PROGRESS  m   THE  ABSTRACT.        173

individuals — we  may  observe  that  it  is  capable  of  a  further
subdivision  into  two  branches.  One  of  these  leads  to  the
consideration  of  the  development  of  species  by  "  natural  selec-
tion," whereby,  through  the  unremitting  and  almost  desperate
efforts  of  every  individual  of  every  species  to  overcome  the
obstacles  to  its  existence,  great  and  radical  changes  have  been
wrought  in  the  habits,  character,  and  morphology  of  species.

The  other  branch  of  this  inquiry,  which  it  is  impossible
wholly  to  separate  from  the  first,  takes  cognizance  of  the  im-
material part,  and  shows  what  influence  mind  exerts  upon
the  animal  world  in  promoting  its  advancement.

The  remark  may  here  be  made  that  the  influences  of  ex-
ternal circumstances  and  of  physical  effort  are.  not  always
such  as  to  advance  the  species.  On  the  whole,  there  has
doubtless  been  progress  from  both  these  influences,  but  there
have  been  periods  of  retrogression  from  unfavorable  condi-
tions, and  perhaps  degeneration  of  species  by  periods  of
superabundant  supply  and  exemption  from  necessary  exer-
tion.

When  we  reach  the  plane  which  man  occupies  in  the
animal  world,  these  laws  of  adaptation,  selection,  and  survival,
while  they  are  not  altogether  superseded,  and  perhaps  operate
as  powerfully  as  on  the  lower  creatures,  nevertheless  become
of  comparatively  small  importance  in  consequence  of  the
vastly  more  potent  influences  due  to  the  development  of  the
intellectual  faculty  which  operates  according  to  the  indirect
method.  The  progress  which  man  has  made,  though  from
any  absolute  standard  it  may  appear  slow  and  even  secular,
is  nevertheless,  as  compared  to  that  which  is  brought  about
either  by  cosmical  alterations  in  the  environment  or  by  the
law  of  adaptation,  or  direct  and  indirect  equilibration,*  ex-
tremely rapid ;  as  much  more  rapid  than  that  which  results
from  the  biological  laws  just  named  as  this  is  more  rapid
than  that  which  results  from  the  cosmical  laws  (vol.  i,  p.
4:77).     This  progress,  too,  is  effected  in  spite  of  the  frequent

*  Spencer,  "  Principles  of  Biology,"  vol.  i,  chaps,  xi  and  xii.

174  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  IklEANS.

disastrous  conflagrations  which  ignorance  and  error  occasion
by  a  perverse  use  of  the  Promethean  fire  {infra,  p.  287).

Biological  progress,  which  consists  in  increase  of  struct-
ure, must,  as  before  shown,  result  in  increase  of  pleasure.
Anthropological  progress,  too,  which  is  the  result  of  the  con-
scious pursuit  of  pleasure,  must  attain  the  object  of  pursuit.

It  was  shown  in  the  preceding  chapter  that  happiness  is
both  the  motive  of  every  particular  action  and  the  ultimate
end  of  all  action.  It  follows  that  there  can  be  no  improve-
ment of  man's  condition  unless  it  tend  to  secure  that  end.
Human  progress  may,  therefore,  be  properly  defined  as  that
which  secures  the  increase  of  human  happiness.  Unless  it
do  this,  no  matter  how  great  a  civilization  may  be,  it  is  not
progressive.  If  a  nation  rise,  and  extend  its  sway  over  a
vast  territory,  astonishing  the  world  with  its  power,  its  cult-
ure, and  its  wealth,  this  alone  does  not  constitute  progress.
It  must  first  be  shown  that  its  people  are  happier  than  they
would  otherwise  have  been.  If  a  people  be  seized  with  a
rage  for  art,  and,  in  obedience  to  their  impulses  or  to  national
decrees,  the  wealth  of  that  people  be  laid  out  in  the  cultiva-
tion of  the  fine  arts,  the  employment  of  master  artists,  the
decoration  of  temples,  public  and  private  buildings,  and  the
embellishment  of  streets  and  grounds,  no  matter  to  what  de-
gree of  perfection  this  purpose  be  carried  out,  it  is  not  prog-
ress unless  greater  satisfaction  be  derived  therefrom  than  was
sacrificed  in  the  deprivations  which  such  a  course  must  occa-
sion. To  be  progressive  in  the  true  sense,  it  must  work  an
increase  in  the  sum  total  of  human  enjoyment.  When  we
survey  the  history  of  civilization,  we  should  keep  this  truth
in  view,  and  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  dazzled  by  the  splendor
of  pageantry,  the  glory  of  heraldry,  or  the  beauty  of  art,  lit-
erature, philosophy,  or  religion,  but  should  assign  to  each  its
true  place  as  measured  by  this  standard.

In  considering  man's  peculiar  characteristic  as  a  progres-
sive being,  and  in  how  far  he  really  is  a  progressive  being  in
any  other  sense  than  all  animals  are  progressive  beings,  it

.   PROGRESS  IN  THE  ABSTRACT.  175

will  not  do  to  omit  the  important  fact  that  it  is  only  a  part
of  the  human  race,  and  a  comparatively  small  part,  that  con-
tributes at  all  to  this  result.  By  far  the  larger  part  of  the
race,  as  it  now  exists,  considered  as  nations  and  peoples,  are
making  little  or  no  intellectual  progress,  but  are  and  have  for
ages  been  in  a  condition  in  this  respect  akin  to  that  of  ani-
mals ;  while  in  those  nations  where  civilization  is  advancing,
the  great  majority  contribute  absolutely  nothing  to  its  ad-
vancement, simply  performing  the  functions  of  animals,
viz.,  those  of  maintaining  their  own  existence  and  pei'petu-
ating  their  kind :  a  very  few,  the  mental  and  material  investi-
gators of  things,  originate  every  progressive  institution.  It
is  to  these  few  only  that  all  artificial  progress  in  society  is
due.

It  is  claimed  by  some  that,  if  we  accept  this  definition  of
progress,  viz.,  the  increase  of  human  happiness,  it  will  fol-
low that  there  has  never  been  any  progress  at  all.  For  they
say  that  civilization,  as  it  has  existed  among  nations,  has  not
had  the  effect  to  increase  happiness,  but  rather  to  diminish
it ;  that  the  happiest  condition  in  which  mankind  can  exist
is  that  primitive,  unconventional  stafe  which  precedes  all
efforts  at  civilization,  and  allows  nature  to  take  its  course ;
that  the  humblest  peasant,  dwelling  in  his  Arcadian  retreat,
and  ignorant  of  the  vicissitudes  of  life  amid  the  scenes  of  a
high  and  giddy  civilization,  is  more  happy  than  the  nervous
pui-suer  of  fortune,  fame,  or  knowledge.*

It  can  not  be  denied  that  civilization,  by  the  many  false
practices  which  it  has  introduced,  by  the  facilities  which  its
very  complexity  affords  to  the  concealment  of  crime,  and  by
the  monstrous  systems  of  corruption  which  fashion,  caste,
and  conventionality  are   enabled  to   shelter,  is   the   direct

*  Jean  Jacques  Rousseau  and  other  writers  have  maintained  this  view,  and
it  is  so  strongly  defended  by  one  of  the  characters  of  Disraeli's  "  Lothair  "  as
to  justify  a  suspicion  that  it  was  the  view  of  the  author.  Fenelon  ("  Tele-
maque,"  liv.  viii),  in  the  account  that  Adoam  gives  of  the  inhabitants  of
Baetica,  reflects  the  same  sentiment  with  great  force  and  clearness.  See,  also,
Comte,  "  Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  iv,  pp.  60,  239.

176  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

means  of  rendering  many  individuals  miserable  in  the  ex-
treme ;  but  these  are  the  necessary  incidents  to  its  struggles
to  advance  under  the  dominion  of  natural  forces  alone.

It  would  involve  a  great  fallacy  to  deduce  from  this  the
conclusion  that  civilization  begets  misery  or  reduces  the  hap-
piness of  mankind.  Against  this  gross  but  popular  mistake
may  be  cited  the  principle  before  introduced,  which  is  unani-
mously accepted  by  biologists,  that  an  organism  is  perfect  in
proportion  as  its  organs  are  numerous  and  varied.  This  is
because,  the  more  organs  there  are,  the  greater  is  the  capacity
for  enjoyment.  For  this  enjoyment  is  quantitative  as  well
as  qualitative,  and  the  greater  the  nmnber  of  faculties  the
greater  is  the  possible  enjoyment  derivable  from  their  nor-
mal exercise.  To  say  that  primitive  man  is  happier  than
enlightened  man,  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  an  oyster  or  a
polyp  enjoys  more  than  an  eagle  or  an  antelope.  This  could
be  true  only  on  the  ground  that  the  latter,  in  consequence  of
their  sensitive  organisms,  suffer  more  than  they  enjoy ;  but
if  to  be  happy  is  to  escape  from  all  feeling,  then  it  were  better
to  be  stones  or  clods,  and  destitute  of  conscious  sensibility.
If  this  be  the  happiness  which  men  should  seek,  then  is  the
Buddhist  in  the  highest  degree  consistent  when  he  prays  for
the  promised  Nirvana,  or  annihilation.  But  this  is  not  hap-
piness— it  is  only  the  absence  of  it.  For  happiness  can  only
be  increased  by  increasing  the  capacity  for  feeling,  or  emo-
tion, and,  when  this  is  increased,  the  capacity  for  suffering  is
likewise  necessarily  increased,  and  suffering  must  be  endured
unless  sufficient  sagacity  accompanies  it  to  prevent  this  con-
sequence. And  that  is  the  truest  progress  which,  while  it
indefinitely  multiplies  and  increases  the  facilities  for  enjoy-
ment, furnishes  at  the  same  time  the  most  effective  means
of  preventing  discomfort,  and,  as  nearly  all  suffering  is
occasioned  by  the  violation  of  natural  laws  through  ignor-
ance of  or  error  respecting  those  laws,  therefore  that  is  the
truest  progress  which  succeeds  in  overcoming  ignorance  and
error  {infra,  Chapter  XIY).

PROGRESS  IN  THE  ABSTRACT.  17Y

Human  progress  is,  therefore,  perfectly  analogous  to  tliat
progress  which  is  going  on  in  the  world  of  animal  life,  since
both  consist  in  a  multiplication,  variation,  and  refinement  of
the  faculties  of  enjoyment,  and  any  change  in  either  which
does  not  effect  this  is  not  progress.  All  happiness  consists
in  the  gratification  of  desire.  Every  faculty  experiences  a
natural  want  to  be  exercised,  and  that  want  is  a  desire.  The
proper  exercise  of  that  faculty  is  the  supply  of  that  want  and
the  gratification  of  that  desire.  There  are  two  ways,  there-
fore, by  which  the  happiness  of  a  being  can  be  increased  :  first,
by  affording  the  opportunity  for  exercising  existing  faculties ;
and,  second,  by  the  creation  of  new  and  additional  faculties,
and  extending  these  opportunities  to  the  exercise  of  these
also.

By  the  law  of  development  alluded  to,  and  which  is  a
sort  of  biological  law  of  supply  and  demand,  the  mere  pres-
ence of  these  opportunities  is  all  that  is  required  to  create
the  faculties  themselves,  for  this  renders  the  conditions  for
the  existence  of  such  faculties  favorable ;  and,  where  the  con-
ditions are  favorable  for  the  development  of  a  faculty,  that
faculty  will  arise ;  when  the  opportunities  for  the  exercise
of  a  faculty  cease,  that  faculty  will  itself  cease  to  exist,  al-
though the  organs  through  which  it  was  exercised  may  long
persist.*

This  law  extends  with  full  force  to  the  social  condition
of  man.  Whatever  affords  an  opportunity  for  the  exercise
of  a  new  human  faculty  creates  such  a  faculty,  creates  a  de-
sire for  its  exercise,  and  actually  gratifies  that  desire,  thus
adding  to  the  sum  of  human  happiness.  The  creation  of
such  opportunities  is,  then,  the  origin  of  progressive  action,
and  it  is  these  same  opportunities,  increased  and  refined,
that  keep  that  desire  in  existence,  and  increase  its  intensity.
Therefore,  we  may  enunciate  the  principle  that  progress  is
in  proportion  to  the  opportunities  or  facilities  for  exercising
the  faculties  and  satisfying  desire.

*  Spencer,  "  Data  of  Ethics,"  pp.  183-186,  and  263  (§§  61  and  102).

178  PROGRESS.— PPwIMARY  MEANS.

Peogeessive  Agencies.

In  all  the  departments  of  life,  the  faculties  are  perpetually
crowding  the  opportunities.  All  organisms,  by  their  inher-
ent tendency  to  develop,  are  constantly  pressing  upon  the
environment.  The  organ  is  always  in  excess  of  the  func-
tion. Gratification  is  never  equal  to  desire.  There  is  a
permanent  residuum  ever  striving  after  more  complete  satis-
faction. In  the  animals  below  man,  a  great  degree  of  cor-
respondence is  generally  established,  but  never  so  great  but
that  the  least  giving  way  of  the  wall  of  circumstances  by
which  a  species  is  surrounded  results  in  an  immediate  ad-
vance of  the  species  to  occupy  the  ground  yielded.  This
truth  is  forcibly  exemplified  by  aU  the  phenomena  which  the
domestication  of  animals  and  plants  presents.  In  nature
they  are  in  a  state  of  equilibrium,  each  aiding  the  inorganic
conditions  to  keep  all  others  in  their  existing  state.  Human
interference  disturbs  this  equilibrium,  selects  one,  and  pro-
tects it  from  the  influence  of  the  rest,  improves  the  inorganic
conditions,  and  gives  free  scope  to  the  forces  in  excess  which
reside  in  every  species;  whereupon  development  becomes
rapid,  and  is  only  arrested  when  brought  again  into  conflict
with  adverse  elements  upon  a  new  and  higher  plane  of  life.
This  power  to  advance  in  structure  as  fast  as  opportunities
are  offered  is  due  to  the  original  and  universal  nisus  of  the
life-principle  itself,  and  rests  fundamentally  upon  the  pecul-
iar characteristics  of  the  primordial  life-substance— that  re-
markably unstable,  restless,  and,  as  it  were,  dissatisfied  form
of  matter— protoplasm.  The  never  wholly  satisfied  desires  of
sentient  beings  are  but  the  modes  of  manifestation  of  this
fundamental  tendency  in  the  higher  forms  of  life.  "With
the  progress  of  cephalization,  the  manifestations  of  uneasi-
ness and  dissatisfaction  become  more  pronounced,  and  the
attempts  to  break  through  environing  barriers  more  success-
ful. But  not  until  it  has  advanced  so  far  as  to  admit  of  the
substitution,  to  however  small  a  degree,  of  the  indirect  for

PROGEESSIYE  AGEN-CIES.  179

the  direct  method,  does  this  success  become  complete,  and
tiie  emancipation  of  the  creature  take  place.  This  stage  is
reached  only  in  man,  and  the  progressive  tendency  can
thenceforward  only  be  traced  in  him.  But  even  in  him  no
degree  of  development  is  ever  reached  in  which  there  does
not  still  perpetually  remain  an  excess  of  desires  over  grati-
fications, a  multitude  of  wants  unsatisfied.  The  faculties
still  continue  to  crowd  the  opportunities,  organic  vitality
presses  upon  functional  exercise,  reproduction  encroaches
upon  nutrition,  population  trenches  upon  the  means  of  sub-
sistence.

Social  contact  occasions  mutual  dependence,  and  renders
a  means  of  communication  a  paramount  necessity.

Taking  into  consideration  all  the  varied  wants  which
must  have  existed  at  the  inception  of  human  society,  we  may
conveniently  arrange  them  under  two  great  groups,  which
will  then  be  denoted  in  the  most  general  manner  by  the  two
words  respectively —

1.  Communication.

2.  Subsistence.

l^ot  but  that  the  race  had  enjoyed  some  degree  of  ability
to  communicate  together  prior  to  the  stage  of  development
mentioned,  but  only  that  it  was  at  this  stage  that  there  arose
the  necessity  for  greatly  increased  faculties  in  this  direction.
And,  as  regards  subsistence,  it  was  then,  too,  that  it  became
essential  to  augment  the  supply  far  beyond  that  which  un-
altered nature  yields  to  the  ordinary  methods  by  which  ani-
mals secure  it.

By  following  the  history  of  the  human  race  from  that
stage  to  the  latest  and  highest  yet  reached,  it  will  be  per-
ceived that  it  has  been  along  these  two  particular  lines  that
progress  has  always  moved,  nearly  every  recognized  step
having  consisted  either  in  increasing  the  facilities  for  the
intercommunication  of  ideas  among  men  or  in  augmenting
their  power  to  extract  from  nature  additional  supplies  of  the
necessaries  of  life.

180  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

I.    COMMUNICATION.

The  art  of  communicatiiig  ideas  possesses  an  interesting
history,  of  wliich  we  can  here  only  sketch  the  outline.  It
may  be  said  to  consist  of  four  successive  periods,  each  marked
by  a  new  and  peculiar  application  of  the  indirect  method — by
a  grand  discovery  whose  reduction  to  practice  constituted  it
a  true  invention  of  the  intellect.

The  first  of  these  steps,  and  that  which  most  closely  re-
sembles a  simple  process  of  nature,  is  language.

It  is  important  to  distinguish  between  language  and
speech.  Language  is  the  product  of  thought.  Speech  is
only  the  mode  in  which  language  presents  itself  in  man,  who
happens  to  possess  the  organs  which  render  it  possible.  Had
he  lacked  these  organs,  he  would  still  have  possessed  a  lan-
guage. Had  the  human  race  been  as  silent  as  are  all  the
forms  of  life  below  the  amphibians,  there  would  still  have
existed  a  mode  of  intercommunication.  In  fact,  along  with
speech  there  is  found  to  exist — widely  diffused  throughout
the  less  developed  societies  and  sending  some  of  its  branches
up  through  the  more  developed  ones — another  and  parallel
form  of  intercommunication,  known  as  gesture-language ^
which,  for  many  of  the  purposes  of  these  peoples,  possesses
advantages  over  the  method  of  communication  by  sounds.

In  one  sense,  the  faculty  of  oral  speech  must  be  regarded
as  a  physical  development,  since  along  with  it  there  had  to
be  developed  a  physical  organ,  the  larynx.  But,  in  the  first
place,  this  organ  exists  in  lower  animals,  and  the  morpho-
logical alteration  which  it  undergoes  in  the  passage  from  the
ape  to  man  is  very  slight.  As  shown  in  a  previous  chapter
(vol.  i,  p.  438),  the  power  of  articulate  speech  has  chiefly  been
acquired  by  the  exercise  of  the  rational  faculty.  Idiots  are
often  unable  to  speak,  although  possessing  all  the  organs  of
other  men.  They  lack  the  degree  of  intellectual  power  neces-
sary to  learn  to  speak.  This  is,  doubtless,  the  true  reason  why
animals  in  general  have  no  better  means  of  intercom  munica-

COMMUNICATION.— SPEECH.  181

tion.  Vocal  sounds  they  do,  indeed,  in  many  cases  utter,
and  these  generally  have  a  definite  though  very  simple  mean-
ing. To  call  their  mates,  to  sound  an  alarm,  to  cry  from
pain,  and  a  few  other  purposes,  exhaust  the  animal  vocabu-
lary. The  extension  of  this  vocabulary,  to  so  great  a  degree
that  those  within  hearing  can  be  made  acquainted  with  one
another's  thoughts,  constitutes  an  immense  advance,  and,  al-
though not  generically  distinct  from  the  advance  already
made,  is  practically  a  new  development,  and  marks  an  epoch
in  evolution.  To  acquire  this  power  and  inaugurate  a  sys-
tematic language,  however  rude  at  first,  constitutes  an  art
involving  the  application  of  the  indirect  method.  For  the
direct  method  is  connected  with  the  indirect  by  impercepti-
ble gradations,  and  is  not  an  abrupt  step  forward,  independ-
ent of  antecedent  steps.  To  invent  a  language  required  a
certain  degree  of  ingenuity,  which  may  be  regarded  as  the
simplest  and  most  typical  form  in  which  the  intellectual
faculty  manifests  itself.  This  is  not  the  less  true  if  we
admit,  as  we  undoubtedly  must,  that  language  was  the  result
of  slow  development.  If  the  term  invention  could  only  be
applied  to  discoveries  suddenly  made,  with  nothing  which
preceded  and  suggested  them,  then  would  there  be  no  use
for  such  a  term.  For  all  inventions,  even  those  made  in
advanced  societies,  prove,  upon  examination,  to  rest  upon  a
long  series  of  antecedent  steps  gradually  leading  up  to  them.
The  popular  error  respecting  the  abruptness  of  inventions  is
paralleled,  with  regard  to  language,  by  the  various  myths  of
eai-ly  races  respecting  the  origin  of  speech,  the  confusion  of
tongues,  etc.  Language,  though  of  course  in  a  less  clearly
defined  sense,  is  as  much  an  art  as  architecture.  It  has  been
the  product  of  thought,  sagacity,  ingenuity.  It  grew  up
from  earlier  steps  in  the  same  manner  that  modern  arts  have
grown  up.  The  prevalence  of  onomatopoeia  in  early  lan-
guages points  to  one  of  the  most  important  natural  bases
upon  which  it  rests.  From  the  use  of  a  sound  to  represent
a  thing  with  which  the  sound  is  directly  connected,  to  the

182  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

use  of  sounds  without  such  natural  connection,  is  a  step
easily  adopted,  perhaps,  but  nevertheless  requiring  the  ex-
ercise of  a  certain  degree  of  intellectual  acumen,  and  the
recognition  of  abstract  relations.

The  pressing  need  for  some  means  of  intercommunication
sufficiently  accounts  for  the  development  of  language.  With
the  advance  of  brain-mass  and  brain-structure,  there  grew  up
ideas  and  thoughts.  These  demanded  expression,  and  this
demand  constituted  a  new  set  of  desires.  The  same  influ-
ence which  created  these  new  desires  furnished  the  faculty
whose  exercise  devised  the  means  for  their  satisfaction.
Thought  was  not  content  simply  to  struggle  for  expression.
It  applied  the  indirect  method.  Unable  to  think  in  such  a
manner  as  to  convey  the  nature  of  the  thought  directly  to
other  minds,  it  devised  means  by  which  its  character  could
be  manifested  through  the  physical  organs  of  the  body  in
such  a  way  as  to  affect  the  senses  of  others,  and  be  conveyed
through  these  to  others'  minds.  Language,  therefore,  whether
consisting  of  visible  or  audible  symbols,  is  essentially  in  the
nature  of  a  device — an  art.

We  are  next  to  inquire  whether  language  can  be  regarded
as  a  progressive  art,  measured  by  the  standard  of  our  defini-
tion.

To  answer  this  question,  we  need  only  consider  its  essential
nature  as  above  set  forth.  Progress  consisting  in  the  increase
of  the  sura  total  of  enjoyment,  which  in  turn  is  altogether
the  result  of  satisfying  desire,  it  must  follow  that,  if  language
really  succeeds  in  the  object  for  which  it  was  designed,  and
supplies  in  any  satisfactory  degree  the  demand  of  thought
for  expression,  and  of  the  race  for  a  means  of  intercommuni-
cation, it  must  secure,  to  the  extent  of  that  success,  the  ulti-
mate end,  and  take  rank  as  a  progressive  art.  That  such  is
the  case,  none  will  probably  find  reason  to  question.

The  next  great  invention  belonging  to  this  class  was
written  language,  which  came  to  supplement  gesture  and
oral  language.     This  invention  must  be  regarded  as  a  con-

WRITTEN  LANGUAGE.  183

tinuation  of  the  series  of  steps  which  man  had  begun  to  take
toward  securing  a  mode  of  intercommiinication  with  his
fellow-man,  of  which  gesture  and  oral  language  were  the  pri-
mary results.  Thus  far  he  could  convey  his  thoughts  with
various  degrees  of  ease  and  accuracy  to  those  present  or
within  the  sound  of  his  voice  at  the  time  they  were  uttered.
But  he  could  not  be  expected  to  rest  for  ever  satisfied  with
this  alone.  The  daily  necessities  of  war  and  the  chase,  and
even  of  the  more  simple  operations  going  on  in  primitive
society,  would  suggest  the  use  of  marks  made  upon  con-
venient objects  that  should  be  intelligible  to  others.*  From
these  were  developed  the  first  rude  forms  of  written  com-
munication. The  earliest  of  these  forms  consisted  of  pictorial
representations,  to  which  succeeded  simple  ideograms.  It
seems  most  reasonable  that  men  should  have  first  taken  such
symbolic  representations  of  real  objects  as  their  means  of
conveying  their  ideas,  and,  so  far  as  these  early  antiquities
have  yet  been  discovered  and  deciphered,  they  seem  to  bear
out  this  presumption,  with  a  few  apparent  exceptions,  which
may  be  explained  by  supposing  those  records,  where  they
occur,  to  have  been  made  in  a  somewhat  advanced  stage  of
the  art.  This  primitive  writing  consisted  largely  of  inscrip-
tions upon  the  monuments  of  deceased  kings.  These  em-
braced little  more  than  names,  titles,  and  dates.  At  length
in  Egypt  it  began  to  appear  upon  the  walls  of  temples,  upon
obelisks,  and  upon  the  faces  of  pyramids.  The  arrow-head
writing  of  the  Assyrians  was  very  different  in  its  characters,
but  analogous  in  its  design.     At  length  books  began  to  be

*  Pictographs  of  various  kinds  are  used  by  many  races  of  men  having  no  lit.
erature  or  alphabet  proper,  and  it  is  probable  that  under  favorable  conditions
any  of  these  systems  might  develop  into  something  higher.  But  there  seems
no  probability  that  any  of  them  will  ever  do  so  now,  in  consequence  of  the  ad-
vantage which  systems  already  perfected  possess  over  them,  and  the  universal
tendency  in  language,  as  in  all  other  forms  of  culture,  of  the  systems  first  per-
fected  to  swallow  up  all  nascent  systems.  Account  is  here  taken  only  of  the
principal  line  of  development,  which  has  resulted  in  the  production  of  the
actual  literature  of  the  world.

184  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

made  of  the  papyrus  and  filled  with  liieroglypliics.  In  China,
India,  and  Phoenicia,  too,  books  finally  came  into  use  written
with  different  characters,  but  mostly  symbolic,  and  containing
the  primordial  conceptions  of  the  human  mind,  generally  in
the  nature  of  cosmogonies  or  theogonies,  and  afterward  of
national  histories,  chronicles,  and  codes  of  law.  Symbols  at
length  gave  way  or  became  abridged  and  reduced  to  arbitrary
characters  and  phonetics,  constituting  alphabets  of  true  literal
characters,  or  letters.

It  would  not  comport  with  the  character  or  the  scope
of  this  sketch  to  trace  all  the  minute  gradations,  improve-
ments, and  refinements  which  this  new  mode  of  conveying
thought  underwent  during  its  infancy ;  and,  indeed,  there
were  then  so  many  distinct  peoples,  each  having  a  language
totally  distinct  from  all  the  rest,  that  it  would  be  useless
to  attempt  an  analysis  or  a  history  of  them.  SuflSce  it  to
say  that  an  alphabet  was  the  result  in  each  case,  and  its
invention  or  introduction,  whether  abrupt  or,  as  it  doubt-
less always  was,  of  gradual  development,  may  be  said  to
form  the  second  great  era  in  the  progress  of  intercommuni-
cation. Manuscripts  at  length  became  abundant,  and  an  en-
tirely new  impetus  was  thereby  given  to  human  thought.

Thus,  the  means  of  communicating  ideas  to  others  when
present,  or  to  those  at  a  distance,  or  to  future  generations,
had  been  provided,  and  at  this  stage  progress  rested  for
many  centuries.  But  in  Europe,  after  a  dark  period  of  re-
ligious intolerance  and  the  combined  influences  of  barbarism
and  ecclesiastical  interference  with  the  literature  which  had
accumulated  during  Grecian  and  Eoman  civilization,  in  the
course  of  which  the  schools  of  philosophy  had  been  sup-
pressed, the  books  condemned,  and  the  libraries  destroyed,
light  at  length  dawned  in  the  religious  world,  and  a  new
season  of  mental  activity  set  in.  The  summary  destruction
of  the  manuscript  literature  of  tlie  past  established  the  con-
viction that  something  more  permanent  was  necessary,  while
the  laborious  task  of  transcription,  which  had  confined  learn-

ART  OF  PRINTIN-G.  185

ing  to  the  wealthy  few,  raised  a  demand  for  a  more  univer-
sal medium  for  the  transfer  of  knowledge.

The  last  of  the  four  great  inventions,  that  of  printing,
supplied  this  demand.  With  the  assistance  it  received  from
this  event,  literature  became  clothed  with  new  powers.  By
furnishing  facilities  for  bringing  their  ideas  before  the  pub-
lic, it  inspired  men  to  write  very  much  more  than  they
otherwise  would  have  done ;  by  placing  books  in  the  hands
of  a  far  greater  number  of  persons,  it  aroused  the  talents
of  a  proportional  number  into  action,  and  these  in  their
turn  kindled  new  fires  of  thought,  and  awakened  the  world
to  a  sense  of  the  importance  of  making  intelligence  univer-
sal. Schools  again  came  into  being,  knowledge  began  to
be  classified  and  systematized,  education  in  its  true  sense
for  the  first  time  began  to  be  sought  and  conferred.  The
works  that  were  written,  instead  of  being  allowed  to  per-
ish, without  hope  of  restoration,  were  multiplied  and  scat-
tered broadcast  every-where.  Immense  libraries  accumu-
lated, universities  sprang  up,  and  finally  the  publication  of
periodicals  and  of  newspapers  placed  the  faciUties  of  in-
formation within  the  reach  of  all  who  could  read.  And
thus  by  the  aid  of  art,  which  by  preceding  it  and  evolving
first  the  alphabet  and  afterward  the  printing-press,  the  agency
of  literature  was  enabled  to  attain  its  present  efficiency.

It  seems  an  unnecessary  task  to  prove  that  the  form  of
civilization  which  written  language  has  produced  has  con-
tributed to  the  substantial  benefit  and  the  true  progress  of
man.  The  advantages  which  it  has  afforded  him  in  the  sin-
gle direction  of  increasing  his  facilities  of  intercommunica-
tion have  alone  added  immensely  to  his  enjoyment.  For,
while  speech  confined  that  intercourse  to  the  now  and  here,
letters  have  extended  it  indefinitely  both  in  time  and  in
space.

An  equal  if  not  greater  advantage  still  is  that  which
arises  from  the  increased  facilities  they  have  provided  for
preserving  the  remembrance  of  events  that  have  occurred,
40

186  PROGRESS.-PEIMARY  MEANS.

and  deeds  that  have  been  done.  There  is,  perhaps,  nothing
which  so  greatly  improves  man's  condition,  in  both  a  national
and  a  social  point  of  view,  as  a  true  and  faithful  record  of
the  past.  For,  with  such  a  record,  or  history,  it  is  not  only
possible  for  nations  to  correct,  avoid,  and  prevent  their  errors,
but  in  fact  they  actually  do  so  to  an  extent  which  it  is  diffi-
cult fully  to  appreciate,  since  in  a  majority  of  cases  they  do
it  unconsciously.  Indeed,  the  want  of  a  history  is  one  of
the  chief  causes  of  the  long  stagnation  of  nations  that  have
no  literature,  because  to  them  the  past  is  a  blank  without
precept  or  warning.  It  is  true,  they  have  traditions,  but  it
may  be  well  doubted  whether  these  are  of  any  benefit,  even
if  they  are  not  a  direct  injury,  to  such  nations.  For  legends
and  traditions  always  become  magnified  as  they  grow  old,  and
thus  come  to  be  not  only  useless,  but  often  extremely  mis-
chievous in  perpetuating  the  very  errors  wliich  a  true  history
would  dispel.  Great  men  become  first  heroes,  then  gods ;
events  are  exaggerated  more  and  more  till  they  become
wonders  and  miracles,  and  all  truth  is  eventually  lost ;  while
there  is  left  in  its  place  only  a  huge  mass  of  grotesque  fan-
cies and  absurd  superstitions,  which  fetter  the  mind  and  en-
slave the  body.  Considering  all  this,  therefore,  the  value  of
written  records  can  not  be  overestimated,  looked  at  from  the
point  of  view  of  their  influence  on  human  progress.

Again,  literature  has  exerted  a  strong  progressive  influ-
ence in  the  assistance  it  has  rendered  to  both  language  and
art.  Language  is  necessarily  rude  and  imperfect  until  it
becomes  capable  of  being  written.  Before  this,  it  does  not
admit  of  cultivation.  There  can  be  no  success  in  attempting
to  reduce  it  to  rules;  and,  without  rules,  it  is  harsh  and
incapable  of  refinement.  But,  when  written,  it  improves
rapidly,  and  soon  becomes  capable  of  expressing  the  nicest
shades  of  thought  and  emotion.  Thus,  men  are,  as  it  were,
admitted  into  one  another's  habits  of  thought,  and  no  longer
obliged  to  keep  within  themselves  those  higher  sentiments
which  all  refined  minds  experience.     Moreover,  this  utter-

INFLUENCE  OF  LITERATURE.  187

ance  of  ideas  begets  new  and  higher  ones,  and  thus  culti-
vates the  finer  feelings.

Literature  has  also  assisted  art,  as  it  has  been  seen  that
art  has  assisted  literature.  It  was  by  its  aid  that  art  was
gradually  elevated  and  perfected.  Not  only  did  this  take
place  in  consequence  of  the  improved  tastes  which  men  thus
acquired,  but  also  by  the  opportunities  which  literature
afforded  for  training  and  instruction  in  the  department  of
the  fine  arts  especially,  and  also  of  the  useful  ones.  Art
was  thus  reduced  to  written  rules,  which  could  be  applied
by  all,  and  thus  brought  to  a  high  state  of  perfection.

But  all  these  considerations,  though  weighty  in  themselves,
are  perhaps  of  less  consequence  tlian  the  pleasures  of  the
mind,  the  enjoyment  which  results  from  intellectual  activity
as  aroused  by  literary  pursuits.  Some  degree  of  interchange
of  thoughts  was  secured  by  oral  language.  Men  could  ac-
quaint their  comrades,  their  friends,  and  their  own  families,
with  the  thoughts  which  were  temporarily  flitting  through
their  minds.  But  the  intercourse  was  limited.  They  could
even  convey  instruction,  but  only  to  those  present.  Some  of
the  greatest  moralists  and  philosophers,  as  Christ  and  Socrates,
have  promulgated  their  doctrines  in  this  way  ;  but,  unless
some  disciple  had  reduced  them  to  writing,  they  could  not
have  been  preserved  unchanged  and,  unadulterated  for  a
single  generation.  Even  in  the  two  eases  mentioned,  there
are  grave  doubts  as  to  the  authenticity  of  many  of  their
recorded  utterances.  Still,  we  are  able  to-day,  through  the
medium  of  letters,  to  commune  with  the  intellects  of  past
ages,  to  compare  the  minds  of  the  present  with  those  of  any
given  period.  By  the  aid  of  letters,  one  mind  can  convey
instruction  to  thousands  of  others  at  indefinite  distances,
and  for  thousands  of  years  after  the  writer's  death.  Thus,
a  few  are  enabled  to  furnish  information  to  the  whole
world,  and  nothing  is  needed  but  a  successful  plan  of  dis-
semination to  make  it  possible  for  every  adult  person  to
possess   a  knowledge   of  every   important   truth  which   is

188  PROGRESS. -PRIMARY  MEANS.

known  to  any  other  person.  Nothing  gives  so  high  a  de-
gree of  pleasure,  or  pleasure  of  so  deep  and  intense  a  nat_
ure,  as  the  acquisition  and  conscious  possession  of  knowl-
edge. As,  of  the  five  recognized  senses,  the  ear  and  eye  are
the  two  which  afford  the  highest  and  purest  pleasure,  so
the  brain  must  be  regarded  as  an  organ  of  sense  of  an  order
still  higher,  and  capable  of  affording  the  highest  quality  of
enjoyment.  And  it  is  observable,  as  proving  the  homo-
geneity of  all  the  faculties,  that  this  organ,  the  brain,  derives
its  pleasure  from  precisely  the  same  conditions  as  do  the
others,  viz.,  its  own  exercise.  Acquiring  knowledge  is  the
same  thing  to  the  brain  that  seeing  is  to  the  eye,  hearing
to  the  ear,  or  tasting  to  the  tongue.  The  brain  is  also
equally  capable  of  pleasant  or  unpleasant  sensations,  accord-
ing to  the  nature  of  the  object  producing  them.  The  pleas-
ures thus  derived  differ  from  those  derived  from  the  exer-
cise of  the  lower  senses  in  the  same  manner  as  the  latter
differ  from  one  another,  in  the  additional  respect  of  being
more  exempt  from  injury  to  others.  The  lower  animal
senses  are  often  exercised  and  enjoyed  at  the  expense  of  the
happiness  of  others ;  those  of  the  eye  and  ear  are  less  sub-
ject to  this  restriction ;  while  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  an
instance  where  an  exercise  of  the  mind,  the  learning  of  a
fact  or  a  truth,  can  of  itself  detract  from  the  happiness  of  any
other  being.  The  pleasures  of  the  mind  are,  therefore,  in
all  respects  the  highest  pleasures  which  we  are  permitted  to
experience.  As  these  pleasures  are  created  by  the  acquisi-
tion of  knowledge,  and  since  it  is  the  especial  office  of  lit-
erature to  facilitate  and  universalize  that  acquisition,  it  fol-
lows that  it  is  through  this  medium  that  man  derives  his
purest  enjoyment.  Uniting,  therefore,  these  direct  streams
with  those  consequential  ones  which  so  copiously  flow  from
knowledge  thus  obtained,  we  have,  as  the  result  of  the
agency  of  written  language,  a  vast  current  flowing  in  the
direction  of  human  progress,  in  the  technical  acceptation  of
the  word.

SUBSISTENCE.  189

Briefly  to  recapitulate,  we  have  seen  that  in  the  great
art  of  intercommunication,  of  which  inchoate  humanity  felt
such  a  pressing  need,  there  have  been  made  a  series  of  dis-
coveries in  the  domain  of  natural  law,  the  application  of
which  entitles  them  to  the  name  of  inventions.  As  is  the
case  with  even  the  most  modem  inventions,  though  perhaps
to  a  somewhat  greater  extent,  these  several  inventions  were
in  the  nature  of  gradual  growths,  whose  process  it  is  impos-
sible to  trace  except  by  the  eye  of  the  imagination,  but  whose
successive  consummations  stand  out  boldly  against  the  back-
ground of  history,  and  mark  a  corresponding  succession  of
eras  in  the  progress  of  this  important  art.  These  eras  first
divide  into  two,  the  era  of  unwritten  and  the  era  of  written
language ;  but  each  of  these  subdivides,  and  we  have  for
the  history  of  language  the  four  more  or  less  independent
and  successive  periods,  viz.,  those  respectively  of  gesture-
language,  oral  language,  written  language,  and  printed  lan-
guage.

Each  of  these  has  been  the  result  of  an  ever-increasing
degree  of  brain-power,  of  the  objective  department  of  the
mind,  the  intellect,  of  that  special  application  of  this  faculty
called  ingenuity,  or  genius,  from  which  all  the  other  intel-
lectual manifestations  are  derived.

The  incentive  to  the  exercise  of  this  faculty  has  been
unsatisfied  desires.  The  result  of  the  successive  inventions
has  been  to  satisfy  those  desires.  They  have  therefore  been
progressive  in  the  technical  sense  of  the  term.  For,  if  we
add  to  this  series,  as  we  are  certainly  entitled  to  do,  the  great
modern  arts  of  telegraphy  and  telephony,  the  means  of  inter-
communicating ideas  between  man  and  man  throughout  the
world  are,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  complete.

n.    SUBSISTENCE.

We  have  next  to  consider  the  manner  in  which  the  de-
sires, whose  satisfaction  is  attained  through  a  better  supply
of  the  means  of  subsistence,  have  influenced  the  progress  of

190  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

the  human  race.  In  a  previous  chapter  (vol.  i,  p.  485),  this
general  subject  was  treated  somewhat  in  detail,  but  from  an
entirely  distinct  point  of  view.  The  nature  of  the  Social
Forces  was  then  under  consideration,  and,  although  what
were  there  denominated  the  "preservative  forces"  were
shown  to  be  identical  with  the  desires  above  mentioned,
still,  the  object  was  then  simply  to  establish  the  existence  of
such  forces  and  to  prove  their  identity,  in  point  of  uniform-
ity, reliableness,  and  susceptibility  to  scientific  study  and
intelligent  control,  with  all  other  acknowledged  natural
forces ;  while  we  have  here  to  do  only  with  the  actual  prod-
uct of  these  forces  after  they  have  been  subjected  to  the
guidance  of  the  intellect.  In  the  former  case,  the  total  prod-
uct, both  progressive  and  non-progressive,  was  considered ;
in  the  present  case,  only  a  small  portion  of  that  product,  the
portion  to  which  the  indirect  method  has  been  applied,  is
taken  into  account.  "We  were  then  studying  these  propel-
ling influences  themselves ;  we  are  now  studying  the  directive
influence  which  in  various  times  and  manners  has  enabled
them  to  succeed  where  otherwise  they  must  have  failed.  It
is  in  this  that  progress  really  consists.  The  forces  them-
selves are  blind.  Intelhgence  alone  can  light  their  path.
Without  it,  however  intense  may  be  their  degree,  they  must
perpetually  dash  against  immovable  barriers  which  restrict
their  march.  MultipUcation  must  be  constantly  checked  by
premature  destruction.  Migration  must  be  arrested  by  the
annihilation  of  the  emigrant  or  the  infant  colony.  Subsist-
ence, as  provided  by  unaided  nature,  is  limited,  and  life
must  be  limited  to  correspond.  The  forces  can  not  be  extin-
guished ;  the  desires  must  continue  to  press  for  satisfaction ;
but,  in  the  absence  of  any  artificial  source  of  supply,  equili-
bration must  be  speedily  reached  and  progress  must  cease.

The  means  through  which  this  statical  condition  has  been
disturbed,  and  a  dynamic  state  preserved  by  the  human  race,
is  the  agency  which  is  generally  known  as  practical^  or  useful^
art.     In  order  to  distinguish  it  from  that  which  is  somewhat

POSITION  OF  THE  FINE  ARTS.  191

inappropriately  recognized  as  art  jpar  excellence^  or  "  fine
art,"  let  us  call  it  inventive  art^  and  the  other  imaginative,
or  creative,  art.

It  is  somewhat  unfortunate,  perhaps,  that  two  depart-
ments of  mental  activity,  so  remotely  connected  psycholog-
ically and  sociologically,  should  have  received  the  same  name.
Although  we  are  here  really  little  concerned  with  the  latter,
yet,  in  order  to  add  somewhat  to  the  symmetry  of  the  gen-
eral treatment  of  ths  subject,  as  well  as  to  point  out,  once
for  all,  the  chief  distinctions  between  them,  for  which  a  more
appropriate  place  may  not  be  found,  a  few  words  with  regard
to  the  true  position  of  the  fine  arts  may  be  justified.

It  is  obvious  that  inventive  art  rests  primarily  upon  the
preservative  forces  of  society.  It  is  directed  almost  exclu-
sively to  the  satisfaction  of  the  ordinary  wants  of  mankind,
which,  as  we  saw,  are  all  more  or  less  completely  reducible
to  the  demands  of  nature  for  the  three  prime  necessities —
food,  clothing,  and  shelter.

It  is  less  obvious,  but  by  no  means  purely  fanciful,  or
maintained  for  the  love  of  theory  and  system,  that  imagina-
tive art  rests  primarily  upon  the  other  principal  co-ordinate
branch  of  the  social  forces,  viz.,  the  reproductive  forces.
When  we  consider  to  how  large  a  degree  all  ideas  of  beauty
are  associated  with  the  sentiment  of  love,  and  how  closely  all
forms  of  love  are  related  to  sexual  love,  and  this  in  turn  to
the  sexual  instinct,  this  at  first  perhaps  somewhat  startling
proposition  may  meet  with  a  qualified  acceptance.  Fully  to
appreciate  whatever  degree  of  truth  it  may  possess,  however,
the  present  highly  derivative  and  etherealized  character  of
these  sentiments  as  exhibited  by  the  elite  of  mankind  must
be  temporarily  put  out  of  the  mind,  and  a  mental  image
formed  of  the  true  character  of  those  sentiments  in  unde-
veloped races,  and  also  in  the  lower  animals.  Here  we  see
the  parental  instinct  disappearing  more  or  less  in  the  male
and  confining  itself  to  the  mother,  in  whom  it  is  an  ac-

192  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

knowledged  adjunct  of  the  sexual  system.  Filial  and  fra-
ternal alfection  also  disappears,  and  the  only  form  of  love
remaining  is  that  of  sex.  The  universal  preference  for  the
nude  in  art  is  undoubtedly  in  great  part  due  to  the  vague
but  still  influential  charm  which  notions  of  sex  add  to  the
product.  Kor  is  it  to  lower  our  estimate  of  art  frankly  to
admit  this,  and  to  maintain  that  all  classes  of  innocent  emo-
tion are  equally  pure.

Sculpture,  the  oldest  of  the  arts,  illustrates  this  truth
most  forcibly,  and  is  closely  followed  by  painting,  which
was  originally  confined  principally  to  the  delineation  of  the
human  form.  Architecture,  which  unites  the  inventive
with  the  imaginative,  forms  an  exception,  and,  in  its  earliest
as  well  as  in  its  highest  application,  is  more  intimately  con-
nected with  the  religious  sentiment.  Music,  however,  though
a  late  development,  bears  a  clear  relation  to  the  romantic  in
human  nature.  Of  poetry,  it  may  be  said  that  it  has  much
closer  aflBnities  with  the  department  of  art  that  has  the  means
of  intercommunication  for  its  object  and  literature  for  one
of  its  boldest  achievements,  than  it  has  with  the  practical  arts
proper,  which  we  are  now  considering.  Poetry  is  to  lan-
guage what  the  remaining  fine  arts  are  to  the  useful  arts ;  yet
its  fundamental  attachment  to  the  sentiments  derived  from
the  development  of  the  reproductive  system  is  plainly  shown
in  the  almost  universal  connection  of  poetry  with  romance.

There  is  nothing  dynamical  in  the  influence  of  the  fine
arts.  Enjoyable  in  themselves,  and  therefore  sources  of  hap-
piness, their  influence  is  confined  to  the  immediate  present,
and  is  incapable  of  contributing  any  permanent  aid  to  social
progress.  Their  study  belongs  entirely  to  the  department  of
social  statics,  and  this  brief  notice  of  them  is  merely  intended
to  fix  their  true  position  and  exhibit  their  negative  character.

As  was  remarked  at  the  outset,  human  art  has  advanced
on  two  general  lines — ^the  one  in  the  direction  of  securing  bet-
ter means  of  intercommunication,  the  other  in  the  direction

RELATI02TS  OF  SCIENCE  AND  ART.  193

of  securing  better  means  of  subsistence.  The  first  of  these
divisions  must  be  regarded  as  embracing  the  response  of  the
developing  intellect  to  the  demands  of  the  mind ;  the  second,
as  its  response  to  the  demands  of  the  body.  In  seeking  a
convenient  subdivision  of  this  latter  branch  of  human  art,  it
appears  that,  while  its  progress  has  presented  a  somewhat
'uniform  movement  without  the  several  abrupt  steps  which
are  so  conspicuous  in  the  other  branch,  still  there  has  been,
in  the  history  of  those  races  which  now  occupy  the  most  ad-
vanced position,  an  enormous  acceleration  within  the  last
three  centuries  as  compared  with  the  same  period  at  any  pre-
vious time — far  greater  even  than  that  which  took  place  in
the  progress  of  letters  under  the  stimulus  of  the  epoch-mak-
ing art  of  printing.  This  sudden  swelling  out  of  the  stream,
which  had  previously  undergone  only  the  normal  increase
due  to  its  numerous  tributaries  coming  in  at  irregular  inter-
vals and  with  varying  volumes,  ha£  been  so  rapid  and  so
vast  as  to  constitute  an  historical  if  not  a  logical  subdivision
of  the  entire  subject.  Its  cause,  it  is  true,  is  not  far  to  seek,
and  is  found  almost  wholly  in  the  application,  since  the  mid-
dle of  the  seventeenth  century,  of  what  is  known  as  the  Sci-
entific Method  to  the  development  of  inventive  art.

This  fact  confronts  us  on  the  threshold  with  the  much-dis-
cussed and  ill-settled  question  of  the  relation  of  science  to  art.
It  is  this  fact,  too,  that  has  lent  the  chief  support  to  the  view,
which  may  be  said  latterly  to  prevail,  that  art  precedes  sci-
ence ;  and  in  a  certain  sense  this  is  unquestionably  true.  But
the  prevalence  of  this  idea  is  unavoidably  accompanied  by  a
train  of  erroneous  and,  we  may  add,  pernicious  implications.
It  serves  to  keep  alive  the  originally  false  conception  of  the
meaning  of  the  word  empirical.  If  empiricism  means — and
this  is  what  is  maintained — the  method  by  trial,  depending  on
failure  to  detect  error  and  on  repeated  trials  to  discover  truth,
then  is  inductive  science,  and  especially  all  successful  exper-
imentation, purely  empirical.  For  this  is  the  special  charac-
teristic of  the  latter — that  it  depends  upon  successive  trials  of

194  PROGRESS. -PRIMARY  MEANS.

one  hypothesis  after  another  until  the  true  solution  is  at  last
reached.  Let  us  hear  on  this  subject  the  views  of  one  of  the
ablest  and  most  successful  experimenters  that  science  has
produced,  whose  right  to  speak  ex  cathedra  upon  it  no  one
will  question.  Only  a  short  time  previous  to  his  death  (No-
vember 24,  1877),  Professor  Joseph  Henry,  in  his  annual
address  as  president  of  the  Philosophical  Society  of  Wash-
ington,* thus  described  the  true  method  of  experimental
research :

"  The  first  step  in  the  investigation  is  to  reproduce  the
phenomenon ;  the  next,  is  to  form  in  the  mind  a  provisional
hypothesis  as  to  its  cause,  and  in  the  choice  of  this  we  are
governed  by  analogy.  For  example,  if  it  appears  to  resem-
ble some  of  the  phenomena  of  electricity,  we  assume  that  it
is  produced  by  electricity ;  we  next  endeavor  to  ascertain  by
what  known  action  of  electricity  such  an  effect  could  possibly
be  produced ;  for  this  purpose  we  invent  an  hypothesis,  or
imagine  some  peculiar  action  of  electricity  sufficient  to  pro-
duce the  effect  in  question ;  we  then  say  to  ourselves.  If  this
be  true,  it  will  logically  follow  that  a  specific  result  will  fol-
low if  we  make  a  certain  experiment.  The  experiment  is
devised  and  tried,  but  no  positive  result  is  obtained.  In  order
to  this  negative  result,  the  logical  deductions  must  have  been
in  error,  or  the  experiment  must  have  been  defective,  or  the
hypothesis  itself  erroneous.

"  We  examine  each  of  the  two  former  steps,  and  finding
nothing  amiss  in  them,  we  conclude  that  the  hypothesis  was
not  true ;  another  hypothesis  is  then  invented,  another  de-
duction inferred,  and  another  experiment  made ;  still  no  re-
sult is  obtained.  At  this  stage  of  the  research,  the  inexperi-
enced investigator  is  prone  to  abandon  the  pursuit ;  not  so
he  who  has  successfully  attempted  to  penetrate  the  secrets  of
nature.     Undeterred  by  failure,  he  changes  from  time  to

»  See  "Bulletin"  of  the  society,  vol.  ii,  p.  164.  In  the  citation  given,  the
words  that  emphasize  the  position  here  taken  are  italicized,  the  Italics  being
Professor  Henry's  only  in  the  first  instance.

RELATIONS  OF  SCIENCE  AND  ART.  195

time  his  hypothesis,  makes  new  guesses^  and  again  repeats
the  question  as  to  their  truth  by  means  of  experiment,  until
at  length  nature,  as  if  wearied  by  his  sohcitations,  grants  him
a  new  and  positive  result."

From  this  lucid  exposition  of  the  scientific  method  of  ex-
perimentation, it  must  be  clear  to  all  that  we  have  not  yet
reached  a  stage  at  which  not  only  repeated  trial  but  actual
guess-work  is  not  necessary  to  successful  investigation.  In
the  ordinary  acceptation  of  the  term,  this  is  the  very  essence
of  empiricism.

Whatj  then,  is  it  that  distinguishes  science  from  empiri-
cism?

It  must  be  confessed  that  the  only  important  character-
istic which  the  former  possesses,  and  which  is  absent  from
the  latter,  is  the  quality  of  being  systematic.  Science  is  me-
thodical empiricism.  Strictly  speaking,  science,  as  every  one
knows,  is  simply  knowledge.  More  definitely,  it  is  knowl-
edge of  the  materials  and  laws  of  nature.  In  this  wider
sense  it  must  precede  art.  Art  is  never  the  result  of  blind
chance — of  accident.  It  is  always,  however  simple  its  form,
the  result  of  thought,  of  a  recognition  of  the  nature  and  re-
liableness of  cause  and  effect,  of  the  exercise  of  the  invent-
ive faculty  in  taking  some  advantage,  however  slight,  of  the
natural  forces.  Even  the  least  of  such  efforts,  such  as  the
selection  of  a  well-shaped  club  from  the  broken  sticks  of  a
jungle,  or  the  placing  of  fagots  already  prepared  upon  a  for-
est fire,  requires  a  degree  of  brain-power  superior  to  that  pos-
sessed by  any  wild  animal.  All  the  more  essential  useful
arts  were  created  long  prior  to  the  dawn  of  modern  science,
and  each  of  these  must  have  been  preceded  by  a  large
amount  of  strictly  scientific  thought,  accompanied  by  re-
peated trials  of  hypotheses,  which  were  abandoned  when
unsuccessful,  new  ones  being  substituted,  until  success  was
attained.  The  method  has  always  been  the  same  as  now,  the
faculty  employed  the  same,  the  result  the  same.  The  real
difference  is  that  then  every  thing  was  partial  and  fragment-

196  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

ary ;  no  whole  field  of  knowledge  had  been  mastered ;  the
trials  were  all  extremely  specialized,  and  directed  to  the  sup-
ply of  immediate  pressing  wants.  Empiricism  may  be  called
intuitive  science.  The  laws  comprehended  are  only  the  more
obvious  and  superficial  ones.  With  the  deeper  hidden  laws
no  progress  could  at  first  be  made,  and  all  attempts  to  go
below  the  surface  of  things  resulted  in  failure.  Hence,  the
arts  were  rude ;  bnt,  fortunately,  these  rude  arts  were  suffi-
cient to  give  the  race  a  complete  supremacy  on  the  globe.
They  consisted  not  merely  in  the  ability  to  manufacture  the
appliances  necessary  to  increase  their  means  of  subsistence,
but  in  a  higher  degree  in  the  skill  acquired  by  their  use,  and
in  the  pursuit  of  such  means  often  wholly  without  artificial
appliances.  Mere  cunning  in  securing  such  appointments
and  dispositions  of  occurrences  known  to  be  regular  was  an
important  quality  of  primitive  art,  and  this,  combined  with
labor  in  creating  favorable  combinations  of  circumstances,
supplemented  by  that  of  devising  the  implements  necessary
to  seize  the  greatest  advantage  of  every  thing  thus,  as  it
were,  decoyed  within  reach,  proved  sufficient  to  multiply
many  hundred-fold  the  normal  supply  of  nature.

From  very  early  periods  this  method  in  art  was  adopted
and  successfully  directed  against  all  the  departments  of  matter
and  force.  As  all  subsistence,  at  least  all  alimentation,  must
be  derived  primarily  from  the  vegetable  kingdom,  either
directly  or  mediately  through  the  animal,  human  ingenuity
was  directed  toward  inorganic  matter  and  the  physical  forces
chiefly  in  the  creation  of  such  artificial  appliances  as  were
found  necessary  to  perform  the  required  service  in  the  or-
ganic kingdoms.

The  great  diversity  now  known  to  exist  among  the  vari-
ous low  races  of  men  still  inhabiting  certain  parts  of  the
globe  has  greatly  shaken  faith  in  the  chronological  order  in
which  early  writers  assumed  that  man  had  successively  sought
his  subsistence,  viz.,  the  existence  of  the  hunting,  pastoral,
and  agricultural  stages.     That  the  hunting,  and  particularly

MODES  OF  OBTAINING  SUBSISTENCE.  197

the  fishing  stage,  has  been  a  very  early  one  with  many  races,
there  can  be  no  doubt,  but  there  is  reason,  both  in  the  facts
of  ethnography  and  in  fair  deductions  from  the  character  of
those  animals  from  which  biology  teaches  that  man  must
have  descended,  to  suppose  that  a  purely  vegetarian  stage
may  have  been  the  one  during  which  the  transition  to  man-
hood was  effected  and  the  infancy  of  the  newly  evolved  race
was  spent.*  But  this  can  not  be  supposed  to  involve  an  ac-
quaintance with  agriculture  in  any  proper  sense,  though
doubtless  skill,  ingenuity,  and  a  certain  amount  of  artificial
labor  must  have  supplemented  the  spontaneous  productions
of  nature.  It  is  certainly  natural  to  assume  that  human  skill,
art,  and  cunning  were  directed  to  the  killing  and  capturing,
in  various  ways,  of  different  kinds  of  animals  and  fish,  upon
which  to  subsist,  before  it  was  directed  to  agriculture  or  to  the
domestication  of  animals.f  We  scarcely  find  either  pastoral
or  agricultural  tribes  among  true  savages,  although  the  inte-
rior of  Africa  seems  to  furnish  some  exceptions  to  this  state-
ment. These  modes  of  life  are  usually  associated  with  the
social  state  which  we  call  barbarism,  or  with  the  civilized
state.

The  chronological  order  of  the  development  of  these  arts,
however,  concerns  us  less  here  than  their  special  character  as
aids  to  human  progress,  the  relative  quality  and  quantity  of
brain-power  required  to  produce  them.     Clearly  the  chase

*  "  The  hunter  state,  which  Montesquieu  placed  the  first,  was  probably  only
the  second  stage  at  which  mankind  arrived ;  since  so  many  arts  must  have  been
invented  to  catch  a  salmon  or  a  deer,  that  society  could  no  longer  have  been  in
its  infancy  when  they  came  into  use"  (Brand's  "Select  Dissertations,"  from
the  "  Amoen.  Acad.,"  vol.  i,  p.  118 ;  also,  in  Encycl.  Brit.,  6th  ed.,  Suppl.,  vol.  iii,
1824).  See,  also,  Oscar  Schmidt  on  the  stage  of  "Uncultur,"  in  "Das  Deutsche
Rundschau,"  for  November,  1878   (vol.  xvii,  S.  279).

f  Humboldt  lays  much  stress  on  the  fact  that  none  of  the  American  aborigi-
nes domesticated  animals  for  pastoral  purposes,  notwithstanding  the  abundance
of  the  bison,  llama,  and  other  native  species,  which  have  been  proved  capable
of  becoming  very  useful  to  man.  Such  as  passed  to  the  agricultural  stage,
therefore,  must  have  done  so  directly  from  the  hunting  stage.  ("Kosmos,"  Bd.
II,  S.  313,  314,  note  15  to  page  210;  also  "  Ansichten  der  Natur,"  S.  9,  35, 101.)

198  PEOGEESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

is  the  mode  of  subsistence  which  requires  the  least  display
of  genius.  Cunning,  in  learning  the  haunts  and  habits  of
game,  and  in  devising  various  snares  and  ambushes  for  its
capture,  must,  of  course,  be  exercised  in  a  high  degree,  wliile
true  ingenuity  is  called  forth  in  this  stage  in  the  invention
of  various  weapons  by  which  more  effectually  to  secure  it.
These  qualities,  sharpened  by  the  constant  spur  of  want,  must
have  wrought  a  rapid  development  of  the  faculties  required
to  be  put  to  service.  And,  as  it  is  the  same  faculties  which
are  called  into  exercise  in  all  forms  of  artificial  contrivance,
the  genius  of  an  Ericsson  may  have  been  foreshadowed  in
the  inventor  of  the  bow  and  arrow.

In  the  taming  of  wild  animals,  and  their  reduction  to
man's  service  in  various  ways,  a  somewhat  different  set  of
faculties  was  exercised.  A  larger  degree  of  foresight  was
required.  The  successful  efforts  very  early  made  to  improve
the  breeds  of  animals  required  considerable  reflection,  al-
though a  large  part  of  the  progress  thus  made  was  doubtless
due  to  accident.

But,  of  all  the  primitive  modes  of  subsistence,  that  of
agriculture  called  forth  the  greatest  amount  of  intellectual
effort,  and  demanded  the  most  foresight.  Here  the  indirect
method  must  be  exclusively  applied,  and  the  discipline  of
waiting  an  entire  season  for  the  rewards  of  labor  had  a  most
wholesome  influence  upon  the  development  of  mind  and
character.  A  larger  number  of  utensils,  too,  were  required
for  this  class  of  labor  than  for  either  of  the  preceding,  which
stimulated  the  inventive  powers,  and  led  the  way  to  the
extension  of  the  practical  arts  to  all  the  departments  of  Kfe.

The  power  to  multiply  in  numbers  and  expand  in  local
territory,  which  the  exercise  of  a  superior  intellect  gave  to
man,  also  contributed  greatly  to  stimulate  the  progress  of  art.
For,  in  his  wanderings,  he  must  soon  find  himself  exposed
to  climates  quite  different  from  that  of  his  native  abode.
He  must  have  shelter  from  wind  and  storm  and  from  ex-
treme cold.     It  is  easy  to  see  how  great  a  sharpener  of  the

MODES  OF  OBTAIOTNG  SUBSISTENCE.  199

wits  subjection  to  such  vicissitudes  must  be.  In  those  coun-
tries where  population  is  now  densest,  the  natural  protection
from  cold  is  very  slight.  To  realize  this,  it  is  only  necessary
to  contemplate  spending  a  winter  in  some  large  forest  remote
from  civilization.  Admitting  that  there  be  an  abundant
supply  of  food,  to  how  large  an  extent  would  it  be  necessary
to  depend  for  comfort  upon  artificial  means  of  shelter  ?  To
secure  such  means  must  have  cost  primitive  man  much  close
calculation.

The  invention  of  clothing,  too,  afforded  a  great  stimulus
to  art,  since  clothing  must  be  manufactured ;  and,  although
at  first  it  consisted  of  the  skins  of  animals  or  the  leaves  of
trees,  still,  as  men  advanced  farther  from  the  equator  and
improved  in  skill,  it  gradually  led  to  the  manufacture  of
cloth,  than  Vhich  no  one  commodity  furnishes  a  greater
amount  of  skilled  and  useful  labor,  or  a  higher  or  more  sub-
stantial gratification  when  applied  to  its  various  uses.  In
the  ancient  world  the  loom  and  the  distaff  were  the  special
emblems  of  industry,  a  fact  which  shows  how  important  an
art  the  manufacture  of  cloth  must  have  been.  The  houses
were  then  very  poorly  constructed,  and  many  nations  even
in  temperate  latitudes  dwelt  in  tents.  Clothing  was  made  a
substitute  for  houses.  It  is  only  in  comparatively  recent
times  that  the  carpenter  has  been  placed  on  an  equal  footing
with  the  weaver.

It  is  amazing  to  contemplate  the  meagemess  of  the  real
physical  comforts  which  were  enjoyed  during  all  the  centu-
ries down  to  the  commencemont  of  the  modern  epoch — the
small  extent  to  which  iron  was  employed,  the  absence  of  glass
for  admitting  light  into  houses,  of  paper  for  the  transaction
of  business,  of  nearly  all  kinds  of  machinery,  etc.  The
difference  between  the  modem  and  ancient  civilization  in
this  respect  is  far  greater  than  that  which  separates  the  latter
from  the  most  primitive  state  yet  discovered  among  savages.
The  two  epochs  should,  therefore,  be  considered  separately.
The  modern  epoch  must  be  regarded  as  having  been  chiefly

200  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

caused  by  the  adoption  of  that  systematic  method  of  dealing
with  facts  and  phenomena  which  is  distinguished  as  science,
in  contrast  with  the  empiricism  which  underlay  primitive
art.  A  consideration  of  modem  art,  therefore,  involves  a
review  of  modem  science.  The  difference  between  man's
early  empirical  applications  of  natural  laws  and  his  present
analytical  ones  is  not  so  radically  great  as  might  at  first
appear.  For  then  he  only  knew  observed  effects — ^that  is,
phenomena — and  phenomena  are  all  he  knows  now.  Still,
the  knowledge  obtained  by  careful  and  thorough  investiga-
tion and  experiment  has  led  him  into  a  so  much  deeper,  more
minute,  and  more  definite  comprehension  of  Nature  and  her
laws,  that  it  seems  to  be  a  new  and  distinct  department  of
human  knowledge.  It  is  not,  then,  so  much  the  opening  of
a  new  channel  as  the  widening  and  deepening  of  the  old
one.  It  is  not  so  much  the  fact  that  men  then  began  to  dis-
cover truth  as  that  they  then  learned  a  new  and  successful
process  for  its  discovery.  It  is  not  so  much  the  quality  of
the  truth  evolved  as  the  quantity  which  they  have  thus  been
enabled  to  evolve.

It  is  difficult  to  fix  a  period  for  the  commencement  of
this  era.  There  have  been  searchers  after  truth  from  the
earliest  ages,  and  every  one  who  finds  a  truth  is  a  scientific
discoverer.  From  the  times  of  Thales  and  Pythagoras,  there
have  been  many  philosophers  who  delighted  in  the  investi-
gation of  nature.  In  the  fields  of  mathematics,  astronomy,
and  natural  history,  considerable  progress  was  made  before
the  age  of  Bacon,  Kewton,  Galileo,  or  Humboldt.  Pythago-
ras, Euclid,  Archimedes,  ranged  over  a  wide  field  in  the  do-
main of  mathematics.  Thales,  Hipparchus,  and  Ptolemy
went  far  in  astronomy,  while  Aristotle  and  Pliny  have  left
extensive  treatises  on  natural  history.  Toward  the  close  of
the  middle  ages,  not  only  was  considerable  interest  again
manifested  in  these  departments  of  science,  but  the  two
sister  sciences  of  physics  and  chemistry  began  to  be  sifted
out  of  the  chaff  of  demonism  and  alchemy.     Still,  in  all  this,

THE  SCIENTIFIC  EPOCH.  201

little  attempt  was  made  by  any  of  these  writers  to  arrive  at
truth  by  investigation.  They  assumed  truths,  and  with  these
they  proceeded  to  elaborate  other  truths.  These  assumed
truths  were  such  as  the  popular  mind  universally  or  gener-
ally recognized,  or  such  as  a  casual  observation  of  things  nat-
urally suggested.  For  though,  in  the  philosophy  of  Thales
and  others,  an  inductive  method  was  pursued,  yet  the  facts
arrived  at  by  this  induction  had  never  been  put  to  a  severe
test  by  close  inspection  or  elaborate  experiment.  It  was,
therefore,  even  inferior  to  those  other  systems  which  did  not
pretend  to  set  out  with  any  particular  truths,  but  started
from  the  broadest  generalities,  and  deduced  all  specific  truths
by  a  strict  course  of  reasoning  upon  these.  And  for  the  ob-
vious reason  that  such  generalities  when  assumed  are  more
likely  to  be  true  than  the  particular  propositions  when  only
assumed.  The  fundamental  error,  therefore,  had  always
been  that  of  assuming  any  thing  at  all,  and  the  world  was  a
very  long  time  in  thoroughly  freeing  itself  from  this  error.
It  was  this  that  Bacon  *  sought  to  eradicate.  He  discovered
that  Nature  possessed  a  vast  storehouse  of  truths,  every  one  of
which  was  of  great  practical  use  to  man,  and  he  saw,  more-
over, what  few  had  seen  before  him,  that  man  was  no  more
able  to  tell  the  contents  of  that  storehouse,  by  gazing  at  its
exterior,  than  he  could  tell  those  of  a  warehouse  of  goods  by
a  similar  process.  He  saw  that  it  was  necessary  to  seize  the
keys  to  the  secret  chambers  of  ISTature's  magazine,  and  to  go  in
and  examine  the  articles  which  she  had  thus  been  storing  up
and  preserving  during  all  time ;  to  handle  them,  expose  them
to  the  light,  separate  those  that  were  mixed,  test  their  quali-
ties, and  ascertain  their  constitution  and  their  value.  Conjec-
ture would  no  longer  answer.  Nothing  could  properly  be  as-
sumed as  truth  that  had  not  been  proved — not  by  logical  syl-
logisms founded  on  assumed  truths  as  premises,  but  proved
by  careful  and  repeated  examination  by  the  senses,  the  only

*  For  a  statement  of  Bacon's  claims  to  the  title  of  "  Founder  of  the  Induct-
ive Method,"  see  vol.  i,  p.  140,  note.

202  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

avenues  of  knowledge.  Close  observation,  elaborate  experi-
ment, and  repeated  tactual  and  ocular  tests,  would  alone  suf-
fice to  establish  a  fact  so  as  to  justify  its  employment  as  a
premise.  It  was  very  soon  found  that  secondary  truths  thus
obtained  were  of  a  nature  calculated  to  sustain  one  another
and  lead  to  important  practical  results.  From  this  point,
then,  we  may  most  consistently  date  the  scientific  era.  This
new  process,  which  Bacon  advocated,  was  the  precise  reform
needed  to  give  an  impetus  to  science.  It  was  more  in  the  nat-
ure of  an  art  than  of  a  science.  It  was  to  science  what  print-
ing was  to  literature — a  means  of  advancing  it.  Men  have  to
learn  how,  before  they  can  do  any  thing.  They  have  to  devise
the  means  before  they  can  accomplish  any  great  object.  And,
when  such  means  are  proposed,  the  world  is  always  ready
to  adopt  them.  I  am  disposed  to  exonerate  the  men  of  pre-
scientific  ages  from  the  charges  of  idleness,  negligence,  and
false  dignity,  which  have  been  made  against  them,  because
they  did  not  long  before  employ  the  laborious  method  of
investigation  and  research  now  admitted  to  be  so  necessary,
being  convinced  that  they  did  not  adopt  this  plan  because
it  did  not  occur  to  them.  They  did  not  comprehend  its
importance  or  its  necessity.  They  knew  nothing  of  it.  Some
of  the  ancients  did  pursue  it  for  some  distance,  but  their  suc-
cessors did  not  appreciate  the  importance  of  continuing  it.
It  required  ages  of  failure  in  all  other  methods,  and  the  con-
sequences of  that  failure,  at  length  to  open  the  eyes  even  of
the  wisest.

I  will  not  attempt  to  detail  the  results  that  followed  the
introduction  of  the  scientific  method.  Less  than  three  cen-
turies have  elapsed,  and  we  see  such  an  advance  in  science
as  could  not  have  been  dreamed  of  even  by  Bacon  himself.
It  is  true,  other  influences  independent  of  this  have  con-
spired to  accomplish  this  result.  Of  course,  if  it  bad  not
been  for  the  invention  of  printing,  comparatively  little  could
have  been  done ;  and  yet  even  this,  unaccompanied  by  a
sound  principle  to  proceed  upon,  would  have  been  likely  to

THE  SCIENTIFIC  EPOCH.  203

bring  on  another  of  those  brilliant  periods  of  useless  specula-
tion which  characterized  the  literature  of  Greece  and  Rome,
as  well  as  that  of  the  middle  ages.

But,  combined  as  these  two  influences  were,  they  were
eminently  suited  to  the  work  which  was  theii  so  greatly
needed,  viz.,  the  reorganization  of  the  civilizing  forces  of
the  world.  Ko  doubt,  the  world  was  ripe  for  this  scientific
reform,  which  would  have  soon  come  without  Bacon,  for
contemporary  with  him  in  the  last  half  of  the  sixteenth
century  we  find  a  galaxy  of  great  names,  including  those  of
l^ewton,  Galileo,  Leibnitz,  and  Descartes.  The  seventeenth
century  increased  the  number  though  not  the  eminence  of
the  corps  of  scientific  workers,  and  prepared  the  way  for
that  of  the  eighteenth,  during  which  the  scientific  method
became  fully  established  as  the  most  potent  agency  of  human
progress.

It  will  thus  be  perceived  that  art,  however  viewed,  is
simply  the  application  of  science.  "What  is  called  empiri-
cism is  the  application  of  superficial  truths,  recognized  in
a  loose,  unsystematic  way,  to  immediate  and  special  needs ;
while  science  proper,  considered  with  reference  to  art,  con-
sists in  the  application  to  the  more  general  wants  of  mankind,
both  present  and  future,  of  the  deeper  and  more  general
truths  of  the  physical  world  which  must  have  been  unknown
to  the  empiricist,  and  respecting  which,  if  he  possessed  any
ideas  at  all,  he  possessed  erroneous  ones,  often  conceiving
them  to  be  just  the  reverse  of  what  they  prove  to  be.

Very  few  fully  realize  to  what  extent  modern  civilized
society  depends  upon  practical,  or  inventive,  art,  or  how  thor-
oughly artificial  civilization  is.  The  erroneous  idea  which
so  extensively  prevails  of  the  essential  inferiority  of  the
artificial  to  the  natural  has  already  been  analyzed  and  ex-
posed (vol.  i,  p.  71 ;  vol.  ii,  p.  86).  This  is  the  proper  place
to  appreciate  more  fully  the  true  scope  of  art  in  civilization.

The  various  objects  which  present  themselves  to  the
senses  in  the  course  of  the  experience  of  each  individual

204  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

may  be  separated  into  two  general  groups,  according  to
whether  thej  seem  to  have  assumed  their  present  form  by
natural  or  by  artificial  processes.  When  we  look  at  a  mount-
ain, we  at  once  refer  it  to  the  first  of  these  classes,  and  when
we  look  at  a  house,  we  as  readily  refer  it  to  the  second.  This
distinction  we  preserve  after  we  have  learned  that  there  was
a  time  when  the  mountain  did  not  exist  as  well  as  a  time
when  the  house  did  not  exist,  {.  e.,  when  we  have  learned
to  regard  both  as  the  result  of  changes  which  have  taken
place  in  the  materials  of  which  they  are  composed.  And  we
should  recognize  the  distinction  no  less  plainly  though  we
were  to  regard  all  natural  forms  as  the  products  of  design,
as  well  as  all  artificial  forms.  The  former,  we  say,  are
growths/  the  latter,  manufactures.  The  former  are  either
the  results  of  self-existent  activities  in  the  matter  composing
them,  or  they  are  the  products  of  design  independent  of  the
human  mind.  The  latter  are  certainly  the  products  of  hu-
man design.

But,  between  these  two  obviously  distinct  conditions,  there
is  a  third,  or  intermediate,  class  of  objects.  A  house,  a  ma-
chine, or  a  watch,  appears  to  be  wholly  the  product  of  human
design  and  labor,  while  a  blade  of  grass  or  a  wild  buffalo  is
as  clearly  a  natural  product.  But  in  a  head  of  bald  wheat
and  in  a  thorough-bred  Durham  cow  we  see  the  combined
results  of  natural  laws  and  of  human  calculation.  Yet,  if
we  look  more  closely  at  those  objects  which  seem  to  be
wholly  artificial,  we  shall  find  that  none  of  them  are  abso-
lutely so.  A  mill  is  only  an  assemblage  of  material  objects,
so  adjusted  that  they  may  be  set  in  motion  by  the  applica-
tion of  some  natural  force — it  may  be,  the  power  of  horses,  of
water,  or  of  steam.  In  any  case,  man  has  only  adapted  ma-
terial forms  to  natural  forces,  so  that,  together,  results  will
follow  which  are  advantageous  to  him.  All  machinery  em-
bodies this  principle,  while  a  house  or  any  such  object  has
a  similar  negative  effect,  and  passively  illustrates  the  same
truth.

ARTIFICIAL  CHARACTER  OF  CIVILIZATION".        205

Viewing  the  matter  from  this  stand-point,  therefore,  we
may  correctly  regard  that  form  of  human  agency  which  has
accomplished  the  great  improvements  (from  the  point  of
view  of  human  advantage)  that  have  been  effected  in  so
many  vegetable  and  animal  forms,  as  a  simple  extension  to
organic  objects  of  the  power  which  man  has  exercised  over
inorganic  objects,  in  so  adjusting  the  circumstances  that  the
natural  forces  to  wliich  they  are  subject  will  bring  about
results  through  them  advantageous  to  him.  This  eliminates
the  apparent  third  class  and  restores  the  original  classifica-
tion ;  changed,  however,  in  this :  that  the  so-called  artificial
objects  are  only  partially  so,  that  only  the  adjustments  are
artificial,  while  the  results  wrought  by  means  of  such  adjust-
ments are  as  much  the  immediate  consequence  of  natural
forces  as  is  .the  action  of  a  volcano.

If,  now,  we  contemplate  these  two  classes  of  objects  from
a  somewhat  more  practical  point  of  view,  we  observe  that
what  we  call  civilization  is  due  almost  exclusively  to  the
increased  proportion  of  the  artificial  over  the  natural  objects
in  contact  with  man.  As  a  rule — not,  however,  without  ex-
ceptions— this  proportion  is  a  measure  of  civilization .

Civilization,  then,  may  be  defined  as  the  artificial  adjust-
ment of  natural  objects  in  such  a  manner  that  the  natural
forces  will  thereby  produce  results  advantageous  to  man.
Although  human  design  and  agency  are  most  apparent  in
the  domain  of  inorganic  matter  and  physical  force,  whereby
so  great  progress  has  been  made  in  the  material  conditions
by  which  society  is  now  influenced,  still,  it  may  well  be
doubted  whether  such  agency  has  not  done  even  more  to
advance  society  in  operating  upon  the  more  subtile  organic
objects  and  vital  and  psychic  forces.  For  it  must  be  remem-
bered that  agriculture,  horticulture,  and  the  breeding  and
domestication  of  animals,  whether  for  service  or  for  food,
all  rest  upon  this  form  of  art.  Upon  whatever  class  of
objects  man  has  put  his  artificial  stamp,  he  has  at  once  ele-
vated and  ennobled  it  and  transformed  it  into  a  servant  and

206  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

benefactor  of  the  race.  In  a  certain  sense  he  has  treated
himself  and  society  in  this  objective  manner,  and  exercised  a
limited  control  over  the  moral,  intellectual,  and  social  forces.
But,  as  this  control  can  only  be  successful  in  proportion  as
his  knowledge  of  the  materials  and  forces  dealt  with  is  com-
plete, his  success  in  this  direction  has  thus  far  been  slight,
and  his  failures  numerous.

Civilization  is  essentially  artificial,  and  by  whatever  agency
we  may  suppose  other  objects  created  or  developed,  we  find
that  very  few  of  them  are  adapted  to  man's  purposes  until
he  so  adapts  them  by  his  own  thought  and  labor.  But,  as
we  have  seen  {supra,  p.  175),  there  are  not  wanting  those
who  deny  the  power  of  material  civilization  to  make  men
happier.  They  assert  that,  notwithstanding  all  these  new
and  convenient  arrangements,  these  gigantic  and-  complicated
appliances,  these  novel  and  ingenious  mechanisms,  this  light-
ning communication  and  almost  lightning  conveyance ;  not-
withstanding the  entire  round  of  busy,  nervous  existence
which  science  is  enabling  us  to  lead  and  hurrying  us  through
— ^notwithstanding  all  this,  they  claim  that  man  was  happier
before  he  had  these  things,  and  would  be  happier  if  he  could
return  to  his  former  calm,  unruffled,  and  unconventional
state ;  that  such  things  only  fire  his  brain  and  wear  out  his
system.  They  admit  that  it  is  a  fine  thing  to  visit  a  friend
a  thousand  miles  away  and  return  in  a  week  or  a  fort-
night, to  receive  communications  from  absent  ones  even  be-
yond the  ocean  in  a  moment  of  time,  to  make  the  tour  of  the
world  in  a  single  month.  All  this  they  agree  is  very  won-
derful, very  desirable ;  but  still  they  say  we  should  be  just
as  well  off  without  it,  should  live  just  as  long,  feel  just  as
well,  and  enjoy  life  all  the  same  in  other  respects,  and  be
spared  a  thousand  excitements  and  disappointments.  In
short,  they  consider  contentment  the  object  to  be  sought,
and  justly  observe  that  it  is  best  obtained  by  a  quiet,  unemo-
tional mode  of  life  {supra,  p.  175,  note).

The  answer  to  all  this  consists  in  carrying  the  argument

CIVILIZATION"  INCREASES  HAPPINESS.  207

to  its  logical  conclusion.  Contentment  is  one  thing ;  hap-
piness quite  another.  The  former-  results  from  the  want
of  desire ;  the  latter  from  its  gratification.  The  one  arises
from  the  absence  of  pain ;  the  other  from  the  presence  of
pleasure.  Contentment  is,  therefore,  negative ;  happiness
positive.

No  one  would  go  so  far  as  to  maintain  that  it  is  better  to
be  without  feeling  than  to  experience  agreeable  feeling.  ISTo
one  denies  that  this  civilization  engenders  great  intensity  of
feeling.  It  must,  therefore,  be  shown  that  more  of  it  is  dis-
agreeable than  agreeable  ;  that  there  is  more  pain  than  pleas-
ure, before  it  can  be  charged  with  detracting  from  the  hap-
piness of  mankind.  Such  may  have  been  the  character  of
some  of  the  false  civilizations  of  the  past  when  popular  igno-
rance and  superstition  were  combined  with  royal  and  sacer-
dotal supremacy,  and  worked  the  oppression  and  dejection
of  the  many  to  gratify  the  pleasures  and  caprices  of  the  few.
But  such  is  not  the  nature  of  the  civilization  which  science
inspires.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  wholly  in  the  direction  of
reheving  the  burdens  of  men,  of  substituting  mechanical  for
muscular  force,  of  multiplying  conveniences,  cheapening  and
improving  commodities,  and  thus  of  begetting  and  gratify-
ing desires.  It  tends  also  to  enlarge  the  views,  elevate  the
thoughts,  liberalize  the  sentiments,  and  extend  universal
charity  and  fraternal  feeling.

Not  only  can  we  appeal  to  these  general  facts  and  consid-
erations, but  we  can,  to  a  considerable  extent,  support  them
by  statistics.  It  has  often  been  demonstrated  that  the  actual
casualties  which  result  from  the  introduction  of  railway  con-
veyance and  travel  are  much  less  than  those  that  formerly
attended  the  use  of  stage-coaches  for  a  given  number  of  per-
sons and  a  given  distance.  It  is  true,  more  people  are  injured
and  killed  now  than  then,  but  it  is  because  many  times  as
many  travel.  The  only  point  to  be  established  is,  whether
in  going  a  certain  distance  a  person  is  most  likely  to  incur
danger  by  the  one  or  the  other  conveyance.     And  the  statis-

208  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

tics  show  that  in  the  railroad-car  any  one  is  far  safer  for  the
journey  than  in  the  stage-coach.*

It  has  recently  been  shown  from  reliable  data,  that  there
are  ten  chances  of  dying  on  the  voyage  across  the  Atlantic
in  a  sailing-vessel  to  one  in  a  steamship.f  This  refers  to
disease  only,  and  does  not  include  the  risks  of  shipwreck,
which,  considering  the  greater  length  of  voyage  and  the
greater  frailty  of  sailing-vessels,  would  probably  at  least  dou-
ble the  danger.  It  has  been  proved  also  that  the  increase  of
knowledge  respecting  the  laws  of  health,  of  physiology,  and
of  ventilation,  since  the  scientific  epoch  began,  has  both
greatly  diminished  the  amount  of  disease  among  men  and
increased  the  average  length  of  human  life.:}:

*  Mr.  Charles  Francis  Adams,  Jr.,  in  his  work  entitled  "Notes  on  Railroad
Accidents"  (p.  241),  says:  "  During  the  four  years  18Y5-"78,  it  will  be  rcmem-
bered  a  single  passenger  only  was  killed  on  the  railroads  of  Massachusetts  in
consequence  of  an  accident  to  which  he,  by  his  own  carelessness,  in  no  way  con-
tributed. The  average  number  of  persons  annually  injured,  not  fatally,  during
these  years  was  about  five ;  yet  during  the  year  1878,  excluding  all  cases  of
mere  injury,  of  which  no  account  was  made,  no  less  than  fifty-three  persons
came  to  their  deaths  in  Boston  from  falling  down-stairs,  and  thirty-seven  more
from  falling  out  of  windows;  seven  were  scalded  to  death  in  1878  alone.  In
the  year  1874,  seventeen  were  killed  by  being  run  over  by  teams  in  the  streets.
During  the  five  years,  1874-'78,  there  were  more  persons  murdered  in  the  city
of  Boston  alone  than  lost  their  lives  as  passengers  through  the  negligence  of  all
the  railroad  corporations  in  the  whole  State  of  Massachusetts  during  the  nine
years  1871-78  ;  although  in  these  nine  years  were  included  both  the  Revere
and  the  Wollaston  disasters,  the  former  of  which  resulted  in  the  death  of
twenty-nine  and  the  latter  of  twenty-one  persons."

f  See  "Monthly  Report  of  the  United  States  Bureau  of  Statistics,"  No  19,
Original  Series  (July  10,  1868),  p.  14.*

X  See  a  paper  by  Dr.  Edward  Jarvis  on  the  "  Political  Economy  of  Health,"
published  in  the  "  Fifth  Annual  Report  of  the  Massachusetts  Board  of  Health."
Statistics  collected  by  Mr.  Baldwin  Latham  "  show  that,  of  seven  leading  towns
and  districts  in  England,  such  as  Croydon,  Ely,  Salisbury,  and  others,  where
careful  and  thorough  modes  of  sewerage  prevail,  the  percentage  of  death-rates
has  been  reduced  from  forty  to  twenty  per  cent."  (From  a  paper  by  Dr.
Andrew  D.  White,  President  of  Cornell  University,  read  before  the  "American
Public  Health  Association"  in  1873.)  At  the  "Educational  Conference,"  held
in  London  in  1877,  Mr.  Thomas  Bond,  Assistant  Surgeon  to  Westminster  Hos-
pital,  asserted  that  on  an  average  one  half  of  the  number  of  out-patients  treated

LATENT  AMELIORATION".  209

In  seeking  to  eompreliend  the  real  extent  of  the  amelio-
rative effect  of  artificial  civilization,  i.  e.,  of  the  civilization
due  to  the  arts,  the  problem  is  obscured  by  what  may  be  de-
nominated latent  ainelioration.  This  may  be  more  specific-
ally defined  as  progress  which  does  not  become  perceptible
in  consequence  of  movements  which  it  has  alone  rendered
possible.  The  effect  of  this  law  is  to  increase  the  quantity
of  progress  at  the  expense  of  its  degree.  Even  this  defini-
tion, however,  requires  illustration.  This  quantitative  prog-
ress has  taken  place  in  two  directions :  first,  toward  increasing
the  number  of  individuals ;  and,  second,  toward  increasing
the  local  area  occupied.

The  fact  that  increased  sagacity,  which  involves  the  fun-
damental quality  of  mind  that  underlies  all  art,  was  the  sole
cause  of  man's  ability  to  break  over  the  barriers  of  the  en-
vironment which  restrict  all  other  animals  to  a  circumscribed
habitat,  and  prevent  their  multiplication  beyond  a  certain
degree  of  density  fixed  for  each  species,  has  been  insisted
upon,  on  numerous  occasions  (vol.  i,  Chapters  YI  and  VII),
as  one  of  the  fundamental  truths  of  anthropology  and  sociol-
ogy. This  truth  also  illustrates  with  great  clearness  the
principle  above  formulated.  Notwithstanding  the  increased
means  devised  by  human  sagacity  for  obtaining  food,  the
human  species  found  itself  no  better  off  than  the  remaining
animals.  The  means  of  subsistence  artificially  created  were
applied  to  the  increase  of  population  hitherto  impossible,
and  want  still  stared  many  individuals  in  the  face  as  before.
But  in  the  animal  state  the  mortality  was  far  greater,  since,
while  the  reproductive  forces  were  unchecked,  and  the  same
number  were  born  as  now,  the  friction  of  the  environment
was  sufficient  perfectly  to  equilibrate  the  deaths  and  births.
In  the  new  dynamic  condition  due  to  the  exercise  of  a  greater
brain-power,  there  is  a  co-efficient  of  increase.     If  the  in-

by  a  hospital  surgeon  suffer  from  diseases  due  primarily  to  a  want  of  knowl-
edge of  the  laws  of  health  and  cleanliness,  chiefly  in  regard  to  dress,  ablution,
and  ventilation  ("  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xii,  p.  380).
41

210  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEAN'S.

creased  means  of  subsistence  could  have  been  wholly  applied
to  a  number  of  survivors,  sufficient  only  to  keep  the  popula-
tion stationary,  the  effect  must  have  been  to  render  these
comparatively  comfortable.  But  this  real  progressive  effect,
in  consequence  of  the  increase  of  population  which  it  alone
renders  possible,  is  wholly  lost  to  view,  and  may  appropri-
ately be  called  latent.

Again,  a  large  amount  of  potential  progress  is  locked
up  in  migration.  Unsatisfied  to  remain  in  one  spot  and
enjoy  the  surplus  which  intelligent  labor  and  skill  compel
nature  to  yield,  men  have  ever  been  abandoning  their
mother-settlements,  and  pushing  out  into  new  and  untried
fields.  This  has  not  been  accomplished  without  cost,  and
this  cost  has  to  be  deducted  from  the  sum  total  of  enjoyment
which  the  same  effort  would  have  yielded  if  wholly  applied
to  that  object.

These  two  powerful  neutralizing  influences  have  accom-
panied human  society  from  its  origin  to  the  present  day,  and
are  as  forcibly  felt  in  the  most  advanced  communities  a&
they  were  in  the  primordial  nucleus  of  society.  The  highly
effective  artificial  appliances  of  science  and  inventive  art  are
only  made  the  means  of  more  rapidly  and  thoroughly  peo-
pling the  earth.  The  great  advances  made  by  literary  and
educational  agencies  are  overslaughed  by  fresh  additions  to
the  illiterate  classes  of  the  population.  The  real  progress  of
the  world,  which  is  immense,  is  being  perpetually  diluted  by
quantitative  increments,  leaving  the  apparent  condition  of
society  unchanged.  As  the  world  is  now  constituted,  it  re-
quires constant  renewals  of  the  progressive  impulses  to  main-
tain the  stationary  condition.  Let  science  for  a  moment
withdraw  its  daily  re-enforcements,  let  popular  education  be
relaxed  for  a  single  year,  and  the  complicated  machinery  of
civilization  must  come  to  a  stop  and  social  degeneracy  set  in.*

*  The  "  hard  times  "  occasioned  by  the  financial  crisis  of  1873  produced  a
reaction  in  the  States  of  Maine  and  Texas,  which  resulted  in  the  repeal  of  an
important  part  of  the  salutary  educational  legislation  of  those  States,  and  the

NON-PROGRESSIVE  AGENCIES.  211

The  prevalent  overweening  faith  in  the  necessary  stability  of
the  social  system  is  unfounded.  Kenewed  efforts  at  every
moment,  and  the  constant  creation  of  new  propelling  agen-
cies, are  aU  that  sustain  it.

It  is  from  this  point  of  view,  however,  that  the  real  in-
fluence of  the  four  great  progressive  agencies — language,
literature,  art,  and  science — can  best  be  appreciated,  and  the
fallacy  of  the  superiority  of  the  natural  to  the  artificial  can
most  easily  be  exposed.  The  withdrawal  of  these  influences,
even  now,  would  be  followed  by  the  rapid  dwindling  of  the
human  race  to  a  few  sparse  denizens  of  the  earth,  and  their
contraction  within  certain  restricted  territorial  boundaries
such  as  limit  the  various  faunas  of  the  globe.

NON-PEOGKESSIVE   AgENCIES.

The  influences  which  have  thus  far  been  considered  have
been  the  chief  progressive  ones  from  the  historical  point  of
view.  They  have  not  only  contributed  to  social  progress  in
the  limited  and  only  proper  sense  in  which  that  term  is
here  used,  but  they  have  constituted  the  active  and  positive
dynamic  forces  as  distinguished  from  certain  passive  and
negative  influences  about  to  be  considered,  which,  histor-
ically viewed,  have  rather  furnished  the  conditions  to  prog-
ress than  any  direct  impulse  inherent  in  themselves.

This  distinction  is  a  very  important  one,  not  only  as  serv-
ing to  correct  wide  popular  misconceptions,  but  as  affording
some  apology  for  such  misconceptions,  and  supplying  a
ground  for  reconciliation  of  apparently  opposing  views.

The  most  comprehensive  conception  under  which  all  the
influences  of  the  negative,  or  protective,  class  can  be  em-
braced would  be  that  of  society  itself.  But,  as  we  have  seen
in  a  previous  chapter,  society  can  scarcely  be  regarded  as  a

number  of  persons  annually  reaching  the  age  of  qualified  voters  during  the
four  or  five  succeeding  years  from  the  uninstructed  classes  rendered  it  very
difficult  for  the  party  of  progress  to  regain  control  of  legislation  after  the  re-
turn of  prosperity.

212  PROGRESS.-PRIMARY  MEANS.

product  of  the  indirect  method.  It  is  rather  the  result  of
the  two  facts  that  there  was  at  the  time  of  its  creation  an
increase  of  sagacity  due  to  brain  development,  and  that,
as  a  necessary  consequence,  there  followed  an  increase  of
individuals,  who,  notwithstanding  powerful  anti-social  ten-
dencies, were  thus  compelled  to  associate.*  But  this  com-
pulsory association  which  represents  the  initial  social  stage
(vol.  i,  p.  465)  was  necessarily  accompanied,  even  from
its  inception,  by  a  train  of  influences  of  various  kinds,  and
among  them  those  which  have  already  been  passed  in  review
as  inherently  progressive  agencies.  In  addition  to  these
there  were  also  developed  at  that  period  the  other  two  im-
portant human  institutions  already  referred  to  earlier  in  the
present  chapter,  viz..  Government  and  Religion,  the  first  of
which  comes  clearly  within  the  class  of  passive,  negative,  or
protective  influences,  and  which,  in  its  widest  scope,  com-
prehends so  nearly  all  of  these,  that  the  treatment  of  that
class  will,  for  our  present  purpose,  be  sufiiciently  complete  if
we  adequately  discuss  the  origin  and  nature  of  government.

As  regards  Religion,  the  somewhat  anomalous  position
which  it  occupies  with  reference  to  human  progress  will  re-
quire for  it  a  special  treatment.

GOVEKNMKNT.

The  distinction  which  we  have  drawn  between  society
and  government  will,  upon  closer  inspection,  be  perceived
to  be  the  fundamental  one  so  often  recurring  between  the
natural  and  the  artificial.  Society  is  the  result  of  blind  cir-
cumstances not  at  all  due  to  design,  or  intention;  it  is  sjDon-
taneous.  Government,  as  we  shall  see,  is  a  product  of
genius,  and  required  the  application  of  the  indirect,  or  in-
ventive, process.  The  time  devoted  to  this  preliminary  ex-
planation will  be  much  more  than  regained  in  the  avoidance
of  all  those  subtilties  about  the  origin  of  society  and  its  re-
lation to  government,  which  are  so  often,  I  had  almost  said
*  Spencer,  "  Principles  of  Biology,"  voL  ii,  p.  606  (§  376).

GOVERNMENT.  213

universallj,  brought  into  all  treatises  on  government  and  dis-
cussions of  its  principles.

In  considering  this  subject  of  human  government,  it  will
not  do  to  lose  sight  of  the  primary  object  in  view,  viz.,  that
of  ascertaining  in  how  far  it  has  proved  a  benefit  to  man-
kind. Let  us,  therefore,  get  a  clear  idea,  at  the  outset,  of
what  it  consists  in.  For  the  present,  it  will  be  actual,  and
not  theoretical,  government  which  must  be  considered.  We
are  not  now  inquiring  what  it  should  be,  nor  what  is  neces-
sary to  constitute  a  theoretically  perfect  government,  but  are
only  asking  historically  what  have  been  the  governments  of
the  world,  and  what  they  still  are.  For  only  such  an  in-
quiry could  subserve  our  present  purpose.  The  very  name
of  the  institution  is  something  of  an  index  to  its  character.
It  is  a  system  for  governing,  i.  e.,  for  enforcing  obedience  to
positive  laws :  implying,  of  course,  a  disinclination  on  the
part  of  the  governed  to  comply  with  those  laws.  Its  neces-
sary effect,  therefore,  is  to  prevent  certain  individuals  from
reducing  certain  of  their  thoughts  to  action,  from  carrying
out  some  of  their  natural  impulses,  or,  in  short,  from  gratify-
ing such  of  their  desires  as  are  opposed  to  the  preservation
of  social  order.  But  the  gratification  of  desire  is  what  alone
constitutes  pleasure,  the  uninterrupted  experience  of  which  is
all  that  constitutes  happiness.  Therefore,  the  whole  effect  of
government,  as  exerted  in  this  direction,  is  in  this  sense  op-
posed to  human  happiness,  and  consequently,  were  there  no
benefit  to  offset  it,  would  be  opposed  to  social  progress.
These  remarks,  however,  can  be  only  understood  in  the  sense
intended  when  we  compare  the  social  state,  under  these
restraints  of  government,  with  a  state  of  primeval  nature.
Saying  nothing  of  the  increased  capacities  for  enjoyment  in
civilized  nations,  it  is  evident  that  man  in  a  supposed  unre-
strained state,  in  which  none  of  his  own  race  have  the  power
to  deprive  him  of  any  pleasure  which  he  may  seek  and  be
able  to  secure,  would  be  far  happier  than  in  a  condition
where  half  of  his  desires  which  might  otherwise  be  gratified

214  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

are  forbidden  that  gratification  by  the  laws  of  government.
Nothing  can  render  any  one  more  abjectly  miserable  than  to
be  denied  by  others,  who  happen  to  possess  the  power,  the
gratification  of  a  desire  otherwise  within  his  reach ;  and,  when
this  extends  to  a  whole  people,  it  becomes  not  only  a  most
grievous  burden,  but,  if  long  continued,  destroys  the  desires
themselves,  and  with  them  the  entire  vitality  and  progres-
sive character  of  the  nations  under  its  yoke.  It  is  this  truth
which  M.  Guizot  *  perceived  when  he  attributed  the  mania
of  the  people  of  the  mediaeval  ages  for  assuming  the  monas-
tic life  to  the  long  series  of  governmental  restraints  under
which  all  the  people  of  that  epoch  had  been  held.

But  is  it  not  necessary  that  men  should  thus  be  governed  ?
are  not  the  pleasures  of  which  they  are  deprived  such  only
as  conflict  with  the  happiness  of  others  or  even  of  them-
selves ?  and,  is  not  the  evil  done  by  government  much  more
than  overbalanced  by  the  good  which  it  secures  to  society
at  large  ?  These  questions  will  be  in  a  manner  disposed  of
at  a  subsequent  stage  of  this  inquiry.

It  is  not,  however,  wholly  candid  to  confine  the  func-
tions of  government,  even  as  it  is  and  has  been,  to  the  single
object  of  governing,  or  restraining.  Practically  as  well  as
abstractly,  government  has  other  objects,  among  which  are
the  protection  and  the  accommodation  of  the  people.  And
it  is  usually  in  the  name  of  the  first  of  these  objects  that
its  governing,  or  restraining,  power  is  exercised.  For,  when
closely  scrutinized,  the  mere  government  of  men  for  its  own
sake  is  not  a  legitimate  object  at  all,  and  very  few,  if  any,
authorities  have  ever  dared  to  avow  it  as  such.  Theoret-
ically, therefore,  and  ostensibly,  there  have  never  been  but
three  objects  of  government,  of  which  governing  itself  was
not  one.  These  three  objects  are  the  protection  and  accomr-
modation,  before  mentioned,  and  the  amelioration^  or  im-
provement, of  society.

The  protection  of  society  which  government  offers  is

*  "  nistoire  de  la  civilisation  en  France,"  vol.  1,  p.  409.

OBJECTS  OF  GOVERNMENT.  215

based  on  the  notion,  and  doubtless  the  true  one,  that,  if  men
were  without  government,  thej  would  injure  one  another
more  than  any  government  would  injure  them.  Since  the
origin  of  society,  which  was  only  a  consequence  of  thepopit-
lous  staUj  it  has  always  been  necessary  to  have  some  protec-
tion for  individuals  against  themselves.  On  the  one  hand,
full  of  strong  and  irresistible  desires,  all  aiming  at  the  one
universal  object,  their  own  satisfaction,  each  individual
seeking  his  own  pleasure,  and,  on  the  other,  ignorant  and
heedless  of  the  consequences  of  their  acts,  the  members  of
the  primordial  society  were  perpetually  swallowing  up  the
happiness  and  welfare  of  one  another.  The  nice  and  deli-
cate relations  that  must  necessarily  exist  between  so  many
persons  in  such  close  local  proximity  to  one  another  require
the  greatest  care  and  circumspection  on  the  part  of  the  most
enlightened,  the  most  thoughtful,  and  the  most  guarded  of
men,  to  prevent  jarring  conflicts  and  real  injustice.  What,
then,  must  have  been  the  condition  of  those  peoples  in  the
infancy  of  society,  when  these  relations  existed  very  much  as
now,  because  the  cause  of  them — viz.,  density  of  population
— existed,  and  yet  the  rational  faculty  was  completely  sub-
ordinated, the  passions  fierce  and  uncurbed,  and  regard  for
others  wholly  absent  ?  It  is  clear  that  all  rights  must  have
been  disregarded,  and  crime  and  abuse  must  have  prevailed
every- where  where  government  did  not  interfere.  But  gov-
ernment was  never  wanting.  The  most  backward  races
usually  possess  some  system  of  authority  to  prevent  these
fatal  consequences.*  We  will  presently  inquire  into  the
causes  of  its  origination.  At  present  it  need  only  be  said
that  it  has  always  been  in  the  name  of  protection,  of  delivery
from  these  conflicts,  and  of  security  to  the  persons  and  prop-
erty of  individuals,  that  government  has  appealed  for  sap-

*  Mr.  Spencer  names,  aa  races  entirely  without  headship,  the  Fuegians,
some  Australians,  the  Wood-Veddahs,  Bushmen,  Chepangs,  Kusundas  of  Nepaul,
most  Esquimaux,  and  the  Arafuras  and  Land  Dyaks  of  the  upper  Sarawak
River  ("  Principles  of  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  p.  571).

216  PROGEESS.— PRIMARY  MEAKS.

port.  And  this  protection  is  still  needed  even  in  the  most
enlightened  countries.  Men  have  not  yet  grown  so  intelli-
gent, so  curbed  their  passions,  or  so  guarded  their  conduct
any-where  in  the  world,  as  not  to  require  a  protectorate  to  be
established  over  them  for  the  preservation  of  peace.

This  phase  of  the  subject  will  be  more  specially  con-
sidered further  on,  and  we  may,  therefore,  now  pass  to  the
second  ostensible  object  of  government  alluded  to,  viz.,  the
accommodation  of  society.  The  theory  of  this  stage  is,  that
society  forms  itself  into  a  sort  of  corporation  and  employs
agents  to  transact  its  business.  A  large  number  of  people
having  many  interests  common  to  them  all  must  greatly  fa-
cilitate the  work  of  securing  those  interests  by  placing  the
management  of  their  affairs  in  the  hands  of  trustworthy
agents.  The  same  principle  and  no  other  applies  here  as
applies  to  private  companies  and  corporations  aggregate,  for
any  purpose  whatever.  This  is  the  most  simple  and  legiti-
mate sphere  of  government,  though  one  very  little  thought
of,  and  usually  ignored  in  discussions  of  the  sphere  of  gov-
ernment.

As  regards  the  third  object,  viz.,  the  improvement  of  so-
ciety, thoagh  difficult  in  many  cases  to  separate  from  the
second,  still,  in  so  far  as  clearly  appears,  it  has  hitherto  nearly
or  quite  entirely  failed  of  its  object.  Whatever  may  be  the
future  of  government  as  an  active  progressive  agent,  it  cer-
tainly has  not  proved  such  in  the  past.  Mere  protection,
however  essential  to  progress,  is  in  itself  a  negative  influence.
Government  may  have  sometimes  proved  a  patron  of  the
arts,  and  at  times  actively  fostered  and  encouraged  the  sev-
eral progressive  influences  heretofore  considered,  and  thus
performed  great  service  for  civilization,  for  which  due  credit
should  be  given,  but  this  no  more  constitutes  it  a  progress-
ive agency  than  the  endowment  of  scientific  research  makes
the  donor  a  scientific  investigator.  The  accommodative  func-
tion of  government  approaches  much  more  closely  to  the
ameliorative  than  does  the  protective  function.     It  is  diffi-

ORIGIN  OF  GOVERNMENT.  217

cult  to  draw  the  line  between  accommodation  and  improve-
ment in  many  of  the  present  operations  of  the  most  ad-
vanced governments  (vol,  i,  p.  61).  This  subject  will  be
discussed  in  the  sequel,  when  government  will  be  surveyed
from  a  theoretical  point  of  view,  and  with  reference  to  its
possible  future.  At  present  the  historical  stand-point  only
claims  our  attention,  and  from  this  stand-point,  at  least  if  we
except  some  of  the  latest  developments  of  government,  the
truly  ameliorative  stage  has  not  yet  been  reached.

OEIOm   OF   GOVERNMENT.

In  pursuance  of  the  historical  method,  and  with  less  re-
gard to  the  merely  logical  classification  of  its  functions,  let
us  inquire,  next,  somewhat  more  particularly  into  the  origin,
or  genesis,  of  government.

It  must  be  confessed  that  upon  this  problem  there  is
nothing  to  bear  which  is  entitled  to  the  name  of  direct  proof.
The  actual  antecedents  both  of  government  and  of  society
are  lost  in  ages  of  unwritten  human  history,  and  owing  to
the  nature  of  the  institution  there  are  no  relics  left  pointing
to  a  solution.  In  place  of  these,  however,  we  have  existing
savage  races  of  men  whose  social  states  represent  nearly  all
the  stages  through  which  human  government  has  passed,
and  the  inference  is  certainly  a  safe  one  that  the  ancestors
of  the  present  advanced  races  did  not  greatly  differ  in  such
general  respects  from  existing  low  races.  The  proof  that
such  is  the  case  has  in  recent  times  become  so  strong  that
the  law  of  evolution  in  human  society  is  now  accepted  as  the
basis  of  modern  anthropology,  while  this  in  turn  rests  firmly
upon  biology,  which  prolongs  the  series  and  connects  in  one
system  all  the  forms  of  animal  life.*

The  origin  of  government  may  be  considered  from  two
quite  different  points  of  view,  which  may  be  distinguished
as  the  historical  and  the  philosophical.     From  the  historical

*  Comte,  "  Philosophie  Positive,"  vol.  vi,  p.  488.

218  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

point  of  view  it  is  the  exact  facts  that  have  actually  taken
place  in  the  course  of  the  process  of  the  development  of  the
institution  which  are  sought.  From  the  philosophical  point
of  view  it  is  the  reasons  underlying  each  step  and  the  gen-
eral rationale  of  the  whole  process  which  are  especially  stud-
ied. Of  course,  the  philosophical  study  would  be  easy  if  the
historical  facts  were  obtainable,  as  these  would  furnish  all  the
needful  data ;  but  from  the  nature  of  the  case  such  pre-historic
data  are,  for  the  most  part,  unattainable.  Government  has
doubtless  originated  a  number  of  times  among  mankind,  but
always  far  back,  near  the  origin  of  society  itself.  A  few  ex-
isting tribes  are  supposed  to  be  wholly  without  government,
but  these  are  also  shown  scarcely  to  possess  a  society.  The
origin  of  government,  like  that  of  any  other  spontaneous
natural  product,  as  language  or  art,  must  have  been  a  process
too  gradual  to  admit  of  direct  observation.  Owing  to  this
dearth  of  facts,  the  ablest  writers  have  speculated  upon  this
question.  Mr.  Bagehot  says  that  "  it  is  almost  beyond  im-
agination how  man,  as  we  know  man,  could  by  any  sort
of  process  have  gained  this  step  in  civilization."  *  Corate
thought  that  the  first  governments  must  have  been  essentially
military.f  He  says :  "  Les  qualites  purement  militaires,
d'abord  la  force  et  le  courage,  plus  tard  la  prudence  et  la  ruse,
y  deviennent  habituellement,  dans  les  expeditions  de  chasses
ou  de  guerre,  la  base  immediate  d'une  autorite  active,  an
moins  temporaire."  X  Generalizing  from  extensive  facts,
Mr.  Spencer  arrives  at  some  important  conclusions :  "  The
headless  clusters,  wholly  ungoverned,  are  incoherent,  and
separate  before  they  acquire  considerable  sizes ;  but  along
with  maintenance  of  an  aggregate  approaching  to  or  exceed-
ing a  hundred,  we  ordinarily  find  a  simple  or  compound
ruling  agency — one  or  rnore  men  claiming  and  exercising
authority  that  is  natural,  supernatural,  or  both.     This  is  the

*  "Physics  and  Politics,"  pp.  186,  137.
f  "  Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  iv,  p.  607.
X  Loc.  cit.,  vol.  V,  p.  122.

OEIGIN   OF  GOVERNMENT.  219

first  social  differentiation."  *  In  another  place  he  speaks  of
"  the  rational  theory,  inductively  based,  that  a  state  of  polit-
ical subordination  gradually  became  established  through  ex-
perience of  the  increased  satisfactions  derived  under  it."  f

The  only  opinions  which  have  ever  been  expressed  upon
the  question  of  the  origin  of  government  have  been  such  as
the  above,  from  the  philosophical  point  of  view,  either  based
upon  common  experience  and  human  political  history,  or
upon  an  acquaintance,  more  or  less  imperfect,  with  the  con-
dition of  existing  savages.  It  is  from  these  same  points  of
view  that  we  must  also  here  approach  this  difficult  problem.

Having  arrived  at  a  rational  conception  of  what  kind  of
a  being  man  was  before  any  society  existed — that  is,  before
the  essential  condition  of  society,  populousness,  existed — we
are  better  able  to  understand  how  society  and  government
should  have  come  about.  The  former,  as  before  remarked,
was  the  necessary  result  of  the  accumulation  of  individuals.
It  was  not  for  the  protection  of  individuals,  as  it  is  so
frequently  stated,  that  society  was  originally  formed.  This
protection  is  the  true  province  of  government.  Here  at  the
very  threshold  of  the  subject  we  find  a  most  vital  error  to
have  crept  into  all  the  discussions,  and  bred  confusion  in
popular  ideas  of  government  and  society.

Society  has  nothing  to  do  with  protection.  It  is  simply
the  gregarious  condition  of  the  human  race,  endued  with
their  natural  passions  and  affections.  And  it  is  not  from
these  alone  that  government  has  sprung.  It  is  the  product
of  these  circumstances,  combined  with  a  third,  which  is  the
immediate  result  of  these,  viz.,  the  evil  which  necessarily  re-
sulted from  the  existence  of  such  a  being  in  such  relations.
Here  it  is  that  man,  even  regarded  as  an  animal,  must  have
differed  materially  from  other  gregarious  animals.  A  herd
of  sheep  might  easily  live  in  the  utmost  security  from  diffi-
culties among  themselves.     Their  only  danger  is  from  with-

*  "Principles  of  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  p.  490.
t  "  Data  of  Ethics,"  p,  53.

220  PROGRESS.-PRTMARY  MEAITS.

out.  This,  of  course,  is  easily  explained.  Kot  only  Lave
they  no  natural  means  of  attacking  one  another,  but,  even  if
they  had,  as  many  gregarious  animals  have,  they  would  have
no  inducement  to  do  so.  Even  though  they  had  strong  pas-
sions, they  are  not  such  as  could  ever  be  directed  against
those  of  their  own  species.  It  may  be  worth  repeating  (vol.
i,  pp.  453,  462)  in  this  connection  that  those  animals  which
Hve  wholly  on  flesh  and  are  armed  with  strong  offensive
weapons,  as  the  lion  and  others  of  the  cat  kind,  eagles,  fal-
cons, and  hawks,  are  not  gregarious.  The  reason  for  this  is,
that  such  a  mode  of  life  would  result  in  their  own  extinction.
For  when  hungry  or  enraged  they  would  attack  one  another,
though  their  natural  affections  prevent  them  from  attacking
their  mates  or  their  own  young.  Now,  although  man  does
not  rank  altogether  as  a  carnivore,  and  although  he  does  not
by  nature  possess* any  very  formidable  weapons  of  attack,  yet
he  possesses  just  such  a  nature  as  is  best  calculated  to  ren-
der a  gregarious  existence  impossible  unless  counteracted  by
some  opposing  influence.  His  wants  are  varied  proportion-
ably  to  his  faculties,  making  great  allowance  for  the  perfec-
tion which  these  have  acquired  by  civilization.  His  passions
are  strong,  and  heightened  by  imagination,  the  natural  result
of  a  superior  intellect.  His  affections,  as  toward  those  to
whom  he  is  attached,  are  proportioned  to  his  passions.  And
lastly,  though  not  naturally  an  aggressive  being  as  toward
other  animals,  he  still  possesses  the  form,  stature,  and  supple-
ness of  limb  to  enable  him  to  battle  ferociously  with  those
of  his  own  species,  even  without  artificial  weapons.  Such
being  his  nature,  if  we  now  suppose  him  without  reason,  dis-
tinguishing here  carefully  between  reason  and  mere  ability
to  reason,  suppose  that  he  do  not  reason  nor  reflect  upon  his
condnct,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  suppose  that  his  impul-
sive always  overbalance  his  rational  desires,  and  influence  all
his  acts,  we  can  readily  see  how  incompatible  must  have  been
his  nature  with  the  existence  of  a  peaceable  state  of  society.
For  if  one  desired  an  object  which  was  in  the  possession  of

ORIGm  OF  GOVERNMENT.  221

another,  nothing  but  physical  inability  could  prevent  him
from  obtaining  it,  at  whatever  expense  to  the  other ;  and
thus  the  whole  notion  of  property  is  subverted.  The  strong
and  indolent  would  compel  the  weak  to  serve  them,  and  the
worst  forms  of  slavery  would  exist.  The  gratification  of  the
sexual  passion  would  not  only,  as  it  has  done  in  spite  of
government,  work  the  subjection  of  the  female  sex,  but  it
would  engender  bitter  and  interminable  conflicts  between
rivals  of  the  male  sex.  And  this  would  only  be  a  begin-
ning of  the  quarrels,  battles,  and  abuses  that  must,  from  the
nature  of  things,  attend  society  at  its  origin,  in  the  absence
of  any  system  of  protection.  The  only  question  left  is
whether  such  was  the  real  condition  of  human  nature  at  the
time  of  the  formation  of  society.  There  seems  no  doubt
that  it  was  little  or  no  better  than  here  portrayed.  In  fact,
many  savage  races  are  very  little  above  this  standard  now,
and  we  also  see  multiplied  instances  in  civilized  countries  to
confirm  this  view.  If,  therefore,  this  is  a  fair  statement  of
the  condition  of  the  human  race  at  some  epoch  of  its  career,
and  if  such  is  its  natural  character  unrefined  by  develop-
ment or  civilization,  we  are  compelled  to  reject  the  doctrine
of  Aristotle,  so  prevalent  every-where,  that  man  is  naturally
a  gregarious  animal,  or,  as  it  is  less  objectionably  stated,  that
man  is  naturally  a  social  being.*  Civilized  man  is  undoubt-
edly a  social  being,  but  this  quality  has  been  the  result  of
a  long  and  severe  experience  by  which  a  great  change  has
been  produced  in  his  constitution.  l!^ot  only  so,  but  he  is
utterly  incapable  of  social  existence  in  a  native  state,  unless
protected  in  his  life,  his  liberty,  and  his  property  by  an  arti-
ficial system  of  government.f

*  This  view  is  also  strongly  defended  by  Comtc  ("Philosophie  Positive,"  vol.
iv,  p,  386).  Darwin  also  inclined  to  adopt  it  ("  Descent  of  Man,"  vol.  i,  pp.
81-83);  while  Bain  regards  sociability  as  a  "distinct  fact"  which  can  not  be
resolved  into  simpler  elements  ("  Education  as  a  Science,"  p.  68).  See  also
Spenc3r,  "Principles  of  Psychology,"  vol.  ii,  p.  5*70.

f  The  various  anti-social  tendencies  in  man  have  been  recognized  by  several
authors.     (See  Lyell's  "  Principles  of  Geology,"  vol.  ii,  p.  471 ;  also,  Herbert

222  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

At  first  sight,  admitting  all  the  conditions  described,  it
would  seem  probable  that  society,  through  its  members,
those  who  had  experienced  the  hardships  and  abuses  which
we  suppose  to  attend  society  while  unprotected,  must  have
assembled  and  established  a  protectorate,  placing  power  in
the  hands  of  some  few  to  avert  the  calamities  complained  of,
preserve  peace,  and  secure  justice.  This  would  be  the  first
explanation  that  would  occur  to  the  mind,  and  it  is,  substan-
tially, the  prevailing  opinion.  It  is  from  some  such  idea  of
the  origin  of  government  that  has  been  derived  the  theory
of  a  "  social  compact "  *  and  the  implied  "  contract "  into
which  writers  are  so  fond  of  saying  that  each  member  of  so-
ciety has  entered ;  voluntarily  consenting  to  give  up  a  cer-
tain number  of  his  rights  to  the  state  and  pay  into  its  treas-
ury a  certain  sum  for  the  benefit  of  others,  and  for  his  own
protection.  But*  it  is  worthy  of  serious  inquiry  whether  the
very  foundation  of  this  doctrine  be  not  false,  and  the  doc-
trine itself  unsound.  To  form  a  rational  idea  of  how  a  gov-
ernment might  have  been  constituted  under  the  circum-
stances we  have  been  supposing,  it  is  necessary  to  consider
many  things.  That  would  probably  be  a  very  unsafe  con-
clusion which  should  be  based  on  a  calculation  of  what  would
be  likely  to  result  were  an  advanced  society  to  be,  for  any
cause,  deprived  of  government.  Yet,  if  such  a  case  were
supposed  merely  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  us  in  solving
the  real  problem,  would  the  theory  in  question  be  likely  to
be  sustained  ?  If  any  enlightened  state,  as,  say,  England,
France,  or  the  United  States,  should  be  suddenly  bereft  of
all  government,  and  for  the  time  lapse  into  a  state  of  strict
anarchy,  is  it  to  be  supposed  that  the  formation  of  a  govern-
ment under  those  circumstances  would  be  due  to  the  action

Spencer's  "First  Principles,"  p.  511,  and  "Principles of  Psychology,"  vol.  li,  p.
571.)

*  Blackstone's  "  Commentaries,"  Book  I,  pp.  125  (note  5),  126,  233  ;  Book
III,  pp.  160,  161 ;  Book  IV,  pp.  8,  382.  Comte,  "Philosophie  Positive,"  voL
iv,  p.  50.

OEIOm  OF  GOVERNMENT.  223

of  the  people  induced  by  tlie  inconveniences  which  they
were  suffering  in  consequence  of  the  absence  of  government  ?
It  certainly  would  not.  If  nothing  were  done  for  a  great
length  of  time,  this  action  might,  it  is  true,  eventually  be
taken ;  but  who  supposes  for  a  moment  that  such  would
be  the  practical  state  of  the  case?  On  the  contrary,  how
quickly  a  government  would  be  formed  by  a  few  individ-
uals having  influence  in  the  state,  and  whose  interests  were
but  slightly  compromised  by  the  want  of  government,  who
would  be  the  last  to  suffer  from  a  state  of  anarchy,  but  whose
chief  motive  in  seeking  its  establishment  would  be  the  love
of  power !

The  people  never  seek  a  government ;  government  al-
ways originates  itself.  The  history  of  nations  is  not  with-
out illustrations  of  this  precise  point,  and  never  did  it  yet
occur  that  a  people  took  the  initiatory  steps  for  the  forma-
tion of  a  government  with  a  view  to  protecting  themselves
from  the  evils  which  had  come  upon  them  from  the  want  of
a  government.  On  the  contrary,  the  duty  of  affording  such
protection  has  always  been  quickly  and  gratuitously  assumed,
often  shamefully  usurped,  by  individuals  claiming  to  be
public  benefactors  and  patriots,  but  whose  chief  motive  was
love  of  fame  and  power.  These  historical  facts  are  of  the
utmost  value,  since  they  furnish  the  key  to  the  real  question
here  under  consideration:  what  was  the  manner  in  which
government  was  originally  instituted?  Human  nature  being
in  the  main  the  same  then  as  now,  it  is  probable  that  similar
results  would  follow  from  similar  circumstances.  Yet  the
circumstances  were  not  wholly  the  same.  That  general  in-
telligence among  the  people  which  it  is  presumed  would  now
induce  them  to  counsel  together  and  establish  a  government
for  their  own  protection  if  no  one  should  take  it  upon  him
to  do  it  for  them,  was  entirely  wanting  at  the  origin  of  soci-
ety, so  that  it  is  possible  that,  if  it  had  been  left  for  them  to
make  a  government  to  defend  themselves  from  the  evils  of
anarchy,  they  would  never  have  had  any  at  all.     Each  indi-

224  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  IIEANS.

vidual  would  have  defended  himself  and  his  to  the  best  of
his  ability,  the  weak  would  have  succumbed  to  the  strong,
war  and  strife  would  have  destroyed  great  numbers,  and
thus  the  race  would  have  kept  itself  thinned  out  and  segre-
gated so  as  to  prevent  the  existence  of  society,  and  of  course
of  government.  Some  savage  tribes  furnish  a  near  approxi-
mation to  this  state  of  things,  and  its  actual  realization  may
be  thus  readily  conceived.  Indeed,  there  is  no  determin-
ing how  long  this  state  of  anarchy  and  sparsity  may  have
in  fact  existed  before  the  invention  of  a  government.  Cer-
tain it  is  that  the  existence  of  government  must  have  been
coeval  with  that  of  society  in  the  proper  sense,  since  those
causes  which  would  prevent  the  establishment  of  the  one
would  also  prevent  the  possibility  of  the  other.*  Govern-
ment must,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  an  invention  of  the
human  mind,  the  result  of  an  extraordinary  exercise  of  the
rational,  or  thinking,  faculty.  As  such,  it  could  not  have
been  the  simultaneous  conception  of  a  whole  community  or
of  any  large  number  of  people.  It  must  have  been  the  ema-
nation of  a  single  brain  or  of  a  few  concerting  minds,  the
special  exercise  of  a  particular  kind  of  cunning,  or  sagacity,
whereby  certain  individuals,  intent  on  securing  the  gratifica-
tion of  the  special  passion  known  as  the  love  of  power,  de-
vised a  plan,  or  scheme,  of  government.  The  passion  of  ambi-
tion has  for  its  object  fame  or  power,  and  the  plan  must  have
consisted  in  speciously  claiming  as  the  real  object  the  pro-
tection of  the  injured  and  the  punishment  of  the  injuring.
This,  as  the  sagacity  of  the  founders  of  government  foresaw,
would  secure  them  adherents  and  confirm  their  authority.

This  theory  of  the  origin  of  government  is  highly  fore-
shortened, and  would  be  extremely  crude  and  inadequate
unless  it  were  recognized  that  government  has  been  at  the
same  time  the  result  of  development  and  social  growth  like
all  the  other  social  agencies.

Government  has  been  at  once  a  protector  of  all  the  true
*  Blackstono's  "  Commentaries,"  Introduction,  p.  48.

OPJGm  OF  GOYERN"MEITT.  2^

civilizing  agencies  and  a  barrier  to  their  normal  develop-
ment. In  restricting  liberty  it  has  reduced  the  amount  of
possible  enjoyment,  and  justly  earned  the  title  so  freely  ap-
plied to  it  of  a  "  necessary  evil."  It  has  always  sounded  its
own  praises,  and  all  the  world,  even  to  its  worst  victims,  have
joined  in  the  chorus;  and  yet  it  has  really  proved  a  scourge
which  all  men  from  the  earliest  ages  have  been  striving  to
escape.  The  greater  part  of  the  wars  of  which  history  gives
us  any  account  have  been  attempts  to  resist  the  encroach-
ments of  government,  and  a  large  proportion  of  the  troubles
society  has  had  have  been  caused  by  efforts  on  the  part  of
the  people  to  get  rid  of  the  only  government  they  possessed.
The  history  of  the  revolutions,  the  civil  wars,  the  intestine
strifes,  the  assassinations,  and  massacres  which  fill  the  annals
of  the  world,  is  only  the  repetition  of  the  one  desperate  and
unwearying  effort  to  throw  off  the  odious  yoke  of  self-im-
posed and  tyrannical  government.  Never  was  there  yet  a
case  where  a  j)eople  clamored  for  a  government,  yet  the  cases
are  innumerable  in  which  they  have  clamored  for  its  remov-
al. Governments  always  institute  themselves,  they  never
wait  to  be  instituted.  They  always  emanate  from  the  few
seeking  power,  never  from  the  many  seeking  protection.
It  has  always  been  a  struggle  between  the  few  governing  to
govern  more,  and  the  many  governed  to  be  governed  less.
Government  has  been,  as  it  were,  a  yoke  upon  the  necks  of
the  people,  who  have  perpetually  sought  to  throw  it  off  or
drag  themselves  from  under  it.  What  we  call  progress  in
government,  the  securing  of  human  liberties,  the  establish-
ment of  human  rights — all  these  are  only  so  many  different
expressions  for  the  fact  that  the  different  peoples  have  suc-
ceeded, in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  in  getting  rid  of  the  bur-
den of  government.  For  they  could  not  secure  their  liber-
ties had  they  not  been  previously  taken  from  them ;  there
would  be  no  need  to  establish  their  rights  if  they  had  not
been  once  withheld  or  jeopardized.  And  these  are  the  acts
that  government  is  perpetually  committing.     Self-constituted

226  PROGRESS.— PKIMARY  MEANS.

as  it  always  is,  and  framed  in  the  interests  of  those  who  gov-
ern, it  is  but  natural  that  such  should  be  the  case.  It  would
be  indeed  strange  if  it  were  always  to  their  interest  to  pro-
mote the  happiness  of  the  governed.  It  is  impossible  that
it  should  not  very  often  be  desirable  to  do  acts  which  must
greatly  oppress  them.  Nor  need  we  severely  censure  such
acts,  since  it  is  for  the  governed  to  prevent  them.  It  is
only  human  nature  acting  itself  out.  It  is  not  the  injus-
tice of  acts  done  by  government  that  prevents  their  per-
formance. It  is  always  the  fact  that  some  effectual  barrier,
either  of  force  or  of  interest,  has  been  interposed.  Scarcely
any  of  the  progress  that  has  been  made  in  government  is
attributable  to  the  increased  sense  of  justice  in  the  govern-
ing class.  Almost  if  not  quite  all  of  it  is  due  to  the  resist-
ance which  has  come  from  the  people.  This  resistance  has
always  been  in  proportion  to  the  intelligence  of  the  governed
classes,  and  its  tendency  is  constantly  in  the  direction  of  pop-
ular representation.  The  effect  of  this  is  to  shift  the  resist-
ance from  that  of  force  to  that  of  interest,  the  resistance  of
force  being  always  dangerous  and  uncertain,  while  that  of  in-
terest is  safe  and  regular.  The  least  enlightened  nations  are
always  subject  to  different  forms  of  autocracy  or  despotism
which  are  every  now  and  then,  according  as  they  are  more
or  less  oppressive,  overthrown  amid  violent  revolutions  and
bloodshed.  The  most  enlightened,  on  the  other  hand,  have
representative  governments  which  make  it  a  matter  of  pure
self-interest  for  the  legislators  to  be  just.  It  is  the  great
truth  which  these  peoples  have  at  last  learned,  that  no  depend-
ence can  be  placed  upon  the  sentiments  of  rulers,  but  all
things  must  be  based  upon  the  observed  workings  of  the  laws
of  human  nature,  one  of  the  most  absolute  of  which  is  that
no  one  will  sacrifice  a  greater  for  a  lesser  gain,  where  sen-
timent only  constitutes  the  motive.

"We  see,  then,  what  government  practically  is :  funda-
mentally a  necessity,  and  yet  exercising  a  powerful  influence
in  direct  hostility  to  human  progress.     It  is  that  by  which

IDEAL  GOVEKNMENT.  227

alone  society  can  exist,  and  yet  it  is  so  ill-adapted  to  its  end
that  it  antagonizes  instead  of  promoting  its  improvement.
Incapable  from  its  nature  of  making  society  any  better,  it
loses  no  opportunity  to  make  it  worse.

IDEAL    GOVEENMENT.

Let  us  now  see  if  we  can  find  a  rationale  for  all  these
paradoxes.  When  we  have  admitted  the  necessity  of  govern-
ment, we  have,  of  course,  established  its  utility.  The  evils
which  it  engenders  are  all  extraneous,  they  do  not  belong  to
government  proper ;  yet,  as  they  are  wholly  due  to  it,  they
are  styled  the  evils  of  government,  and  properly.  But,  were
government  restricted  to  its  legitimate  sphere,  no  evils  would
arise.  Hence,  what  we  call  the  evils  of  government  are,
after  all,*  only  the  evils  of  false  government,  or  misgovern-
ment.  They  are  the  blemishes  of  the  system,  the  evils  of
governments  as  they  are  and  have  been,  not  of  government
as  it  should  be.  We  must  conclude,  therefore,  that  existing
governments  are  defective,  and,  if  so,  we  should  inquire  what
would  be  a  perfect  government.  The  answer  has  already
been  hinted  at.

A  true  government  should  be  in  most  respects  the  precise
opposite  of  existing  ones.  In  the  first  place,  it  should  origi-
nate in  a  manner  directly  the  reverse  of  that  in  which  all
have  originated.  All  governments  thus  far  have  been  de-
vised, and  established  by,  and  in  the  interest  of,  those  desir-
ing to  govern.  A  true  government  would  be  demanded,
created,  and  put  in  force  by,  and  for  the  benefit  of,  those
desiring  to  be  governed.  In  the  second  place,  as  regards  the
light  in  which  the  governing  class  and  the  class  governed
regard  government,  the  present  state  of  things  should  be
exactly  reversed.  Whereas,  now,  the  people  look  up  to  the
government  as  a  master,  and  beg  of  it  to  vouchsafe  them  lib-
erty and  rights  as  a  matter  of  favor,  and  the  government
looks  down  upon  the  people  as  its  "  subjects,"  and  denies
their  petitions,  or,  granting  them  reluctantly,  lays  them  there-

228  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

by  under  a  perpetual  debt  of  gratitude ;  in  a  true  government
the  people  would  regard  the  ojficers  of  government  as  their
remunerated  public  servants,  and  require  of  them  that  they
faithfully  perform  the  service  for  which  they  were  employed
and  in  the  manner  in  which  they  were  directed ;  and  they
in  turn  would  not  fail  to  comply,  on  pain  of  removal.  Again,
the  strange  and  incomprehensible  distance  which  now  sepa-
rates the  government  from  the  people  would  be  entirely  re-
moved by  a  true  system  of  government.  As  governments  are
now  constituted,  there  is  no  other  relation  recognized  than
that  of  authority  on  the  one  hand  and  subjection  on  the
other.  The  people,  at  least  the  great  majority  of  them,  sub-
mit to  the  burdens  of  service  and  taxation  which  govern-
ment imposes,  not  as  a  duty,  not  as  a  quid  pro  quo^  but  sim-
ply as  a  necessity.  They  are  not  consulted,  not  6ven  re-
quested— they  are  simply  coerced.  They  comply,  without
the  least  idea  of  ever  receiving  a  return.  They  consider  it
in  precisely  the  same  light  as  if  required  by  force  to  give  of
their  substance  and  earnings  to  a  stranger  who  possessed  the
power  to  exact  it.  And  government  encourages  this  senti-
ment, and  treats  them  in  all  respects  as  though  this  were  the
only  relation  subsisting  between  them.  In  a  true  system  of
government  all  this  would  be  reversed.  The  people,  having
created  their  government  for  their  own  convenience,  would
understand  what  was  the  real  relation  in  which  they  stood
to  it,  and  the  government  would  understand  this  relation
also.  It  would  be  an  intimate  relation  of  immediate  inter-
est, not  that  of  a  foreign  power.  Society  would  be  the
source  of  authority,  and  the  government  its  agent ;  but  this
relation,  being  a  true  one,  could  never  be  attended  with  those
interminable  quarrels  for  the  mastery  which  now  character-
ize the  opposite  and  false  relation.  If  the  people  paid
money,  it  would  be  into  their  own  treasury,  kept  by  their
own  chosen  agents,  who  would  not  dare  or  desire  to  appropri-
ate it  otherwise  than  as  instructed.  If  a  war  must  be  waged
(and  under  such  a  government  this  would  be  a  very  rare

roEAL  GOVERNMENT.  229

event),  it  would  be  the  people's  own  war,  and  not  the  war  of
ambitious  rulers  ;  and  it  would  be  cheerfully  fought.  And
thus  it  would  be  throughout,  the  present  system  being  sup-
planted by  one  entirely  different,  and  in  most  respects  the
very  antithesis  of  it,  founded  on  the  principle  that  the  people
desire  to  be  governed,  which  is  diametrically  opposed  to  that
upon  which  all  existing  governments  are  based,  viz.,  the  fact
that  certain  persons  desire  to  govern.

The  theory  of  government  is  very  simple.  Where  many
individuals  are  situated  in  narrow,  local  compass,  those  acts
which  tend  to  satisfy  the  desires  of  one  must  in  many  cases
produce  pain  to  others.  The  individual  thus  injured  resents
the  injury,  and  conflict  is  the  result.  Where  each  individual
acts  in  his  own  case,  it  reduces  itself  to  a  question  of  mere
force,  and  this  is  an  effectual  bar  to  the  existence  of  society.
But  man  reasons,  and  perceives  that  justice  is  not  always  with
the  strono^.  Hence  there  arises  a  demand  for  a  tribunal  for
the  decision  of  cases  according  to  reason.  Every  demand
brings  after  it  a  supply.  In  this  case  the  supply  came  too
soon,  and  from  the  wrong  quarter.  If  ambition  could  have
been  kept  down,  society  would,  perhaps,  have  ultimately
erected  a  government,  and  the  government  which  society
established  would  have  been  the  true  theoretical  one  de-
scribed above.

But  this  is  the  primary  quality  of  government  which  is
necessary  for  the  existence  of  society,  viz.,  protection.  If
this  were  no  longer  required,  if  mankind  were  grown  so  wise
as  to  be  able  to  live  in  peace  in  society,  as  was  once  possible
without  society,  still  there  would  be  need,  not  of  govern-
ment, but  of  organization.  Society  would  need  agents  to
transact  its  common  business,  and  this  is  what  I  have  called
the  secondary  function  of  government,  or  accommodation.
This,  too,  is  all  that  will  one  day  be  left  of  government.  It
is  toward  this  that  all  nations  have  been  steadily  drifting.
The  other  feature  of  government  must  necessarily  be  odious,
however  indispensable,  and  the  sense  of  this  odiousness,  ag-

230  PROGRESS.— PEIMARY  MEANS.

gravated  by  the  perpetual  usurpations  of  the  ruling  class,  is
what  accounts  for  the  incessant  warfare  which  society  has
always  been  waging  against  government.

But,  whatever  be  the  objects  of  government,  it  is  clear
that  it  can  have  no  other  just  origin  than  the  will  (not  the
"  consent,"  which  is  merely  negative  and  permissive,  but  the
positive,  declared  will)  of  society.  A  class  of  individuals
possessing  wealth,  intelligence,  or  lineage,  can  not  be  called
society.  It  is  not  even  an  aristocracy,  it  is  an  oligarchy.  It
only  increases  the  number  of  rulers,  and  thereby  increases
the  burdens  of  the  people.  Neither  can  it  be  called  society
when,  where  distinct  races  occupy  the  same  territory,  one
race  excludes  all  others,  or  when  any  race  or  class  is  excluded.
It  is  not  the  will  of  society  which  governs  when  the  individ-
uals of  one  sex  are  prevented  from  the  expression  of  their
will.  This  is  only  a  rule  of  sex,  and,  although  logically  the
most  radical  defect,  this  andrarchy  is  the  form  of  govern-
ment which  the  world  has  always  had  to  endure,  even  in
those  nations  which  have  called  themselves  democracies,
where  not  only  one  half  of  society  is  excluded,  but  an  entire
class  with  all  its  peculiarities.  It  would  be  far  better  were
every  second  individual  excluded  without  regard  to  sex,
since  then  there  would  be  equilibrium.

There  seems  to  be  but  one  other  question  of  importance
to  be  discussed  in  this  hasty  review  of  the  principles  of  gov-
ernment, and  that  is,  "What  are  the  prospects  that  the  human
race  is  ever  to  be  rid  of  this  onerous  function  of  govern-
ment?

This  question,  of  course,  admits  of  no  definite  solution.
It  must  remain  a  mere  matter  of  speculation.  It  is,  indeed,
maintained  that  man,  being  imperfect,  must  always  have
government  if  he  is  to  have  society.  Perhaps  this  is  the
prevailing  opinion  of  those  who  have  thought  on  the  subject.
And,  taking  government  in  its  most  comprehensive  sense,  as
loosely  understood  in  common  language,  this  view  is  un-
doubtedly correct.    But  I  have  shown  that  the  notion  of

WHY  GOVERNMENTS  ARE   ODIOUS.  231

government  is  compound,  and  capable  of  being  separated
into  several  components.  These  component  elements  are,  as
has  been  said — 1,  the  restraint ;  2,  the  protection ;  and,  3,
the  accommodation  of  the  people.  To  these  must  be  added
a  fourth,  the  direct  improvement  or  amelioration  of  society.
This,  however,  is  a  branch  of  government  which  belongs  to
the  art  when  it  shall  have  reached  its  scientific  stage,  and
will  receive  special  attention  further  on.

Tlie  first  two  of  these  functions  of  government,  the  re-
straining and  the  protecting  qualities,  are  analogous  in  their
nature.  Indeed,  they  only  differ  in  the  degi'ee  to  which  the
authority  of  government  is  carried.  The  term  "  protection  "
implies  encroachment  on  the  part  of  some  upon  the  rights
of  others,  and  consists  in  the  successful  restraint  of  that  en-
croachment, so  that  some  must  be  restrained  in  order  that
others  may  be  protected.  Were  it  universally  true  that  the
party  restrained  was  in  the  wrong,  and  the  party  protected
was  protected  only  in  that  to  which  he  had  a  right,  such  a
government  would  be  a  true  protectorate.  But  even  on  such
a  supposition  government  would  be  odious.  It  would  not
be  odious  to  those  protected ;  neither  is  a  despotism  odious
to  those  whom  it  favors ;  but  it  would  be  odious  to  those
whom  it  restrained,  for  it  would  thwart  their  schemes  and
obstruct  the  gratification  of  their  desires,  and  in  so  far  de-
prive them  of  liberty  and  happiness.  If  the  people  were  so
low  as  to  make  it  necessary  to  restrain  half  their  acts,  such  a
government,  though  it  did  all  things  in  exact  accordance
with  absolute  justice,  would  nevertheless  be  despised  by  a
majority  of  those  over  whom  it  exercised  a  control.  Thus,
even  on  this  hypothesis,  we  can  readily  see  how  a  people
might  struggle  to  throw  off  a  really  just  government.  It  is
not  right  and  justice  that  men  have  always  been  seeking  and
struggling  to  attain,  it  is  liberty ;  freedom  to  do  as  their
desires  prompt  them,  and  to  be  their  own  judges  of  the
rightfulness  and  justness  of  their  actions.  Whether  an  act
be  right  or  wrong  has  no  necessary  connection  with  the  desire

232  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEAN'S.

to  perform  it,  and  in  either  case  the  obstruction  to  that  per-
formance will  be  equally  resented  and  equally  resisted.  The
perfection  of  a  protectorate,  therefore,  must  depend  upon
both  the  rulers  and  the  people,  and  will  be  measured  by  the
degree  of  correspondence  which  exists  between  their  desires
and  absolute  justice — which  is  in  turn  measured  by  the  de-
gree of  intelligence.

NATUEE   OF   LIBEETT.

This  question  of  the  true  nature  of  liberty  is  of  the  high-
est importance,  and  demands  a  somewhat  closer  examination.

By  liberty  is  not,  of  course,  meant  Hberty  of  volition
(vol.  i,  pp.  395,  397),  but  liberty  of  action.  The  alleged  lib-
erty of  man  to  will  whatever  he  may  will  to  will,  is  one  of
nature's  great  delusions,  and  only  worthy  of  serious  refuta-
tion because  the  practical  effect  of  a  belief  in  it  is  to  deprive
men  of  their  real  liberty,  and  to  subject  the  masses  to  the
domination  of  the  few.

The  liberty  to  act^  however,  is  quite  another  thing.  To
secure  it  in  its  highest  degree  has  ever  been  the  dream  of
the  noblest  minds  and  the  effort  of  the  greatest  peoples.
"Without  knowing  why,  all  men  at  all  times  have  regarded  it
as  the  greatest  of  all  earthly  blessings  to  be  free,  and  there
is  no  effort  too  herculean  to  be  put  forth,  no  danger  too  im-
minent to  be  incurred,  and  no  sacrifice  too  heroic  to  be  made,
in  order  to  preserve  it.  In  fact,  liberty  has  in  many  cases
been  preferred  to  life.  Such  a  stupendous  motive  can  not
surely  exist  without  a  great  principle  to  rest  upon,  though
few  dig  deep  enough  to  find  it.

What,  then,  is  this  principle  ?  What  is  it  that  makes  lib-
erty so  sweet  ?  It  is  usually  regarded  as  a  sufficient  justifica-
tion of  almost  any  act  that  it  is  done  for  the  sake  of  liberty.
It  is  tacitly  understood  by  all  mankind  that  liberty  is  a  suffi-
cient motive  and  operating  cause  for  the  performance  of  any
action.  It  is  as  if  it  were  one  of  those  original  causes  of
which  we  sometimes  hear,  which  have  no  prior  motive  be-

LIBERTY.  233

hind  them,  but  operate  as  ultimate  laws  within  themselves.
Yet  such  is  not  the  case.  Like  all  other  human  motives  the
love  of  liberty  is  capable  of  analysis,  and  traceable  to  other
underlying  principles.  Go  back  with  me  to  the  primary
principle  from  which  we  set  out  at  the  commencement  of
the  last  chapter,  viz.,  that  man  in  common  with  all  other  liv-
ing creatures  intuitively  shuns  pain  and  seeks  pleasure.  Tliis
is  because  the  former  causes  misery,  while  the  latter  results  in
happiness.  For  the  inclination  to  seek  pleasure  is  desire,  and
its  gratification  alone  consists  in  securing  the  pleasure  sought,
which  constitutes  happiness.  But  the  gratification  of  desire
involves — is  itself — an  act ;  it  consists  in  acting  as  the  desire
prompts.  Thus,  all  happiness  is  derived  from  acting  as  one
desires  to  act.  To  be  happy,  therefore,  men  must  have  the
power  to  act  as  they  desire.  This  power  is  liberty.  It  lies
at  the  very  vitals  of  existence.  Without  it  enjoyment  is  im-
possible, and  without  enjoyment  life  is  intolerable.  Kemove
liberty  and  you  remove  the  very  object  of  existence.  "Within
this  sacred  idea  is  bound  up  all  that  man  holds  dear  on  earth,
his  own  individual  happiness.  ]N^o  wonder,  then,  that  he  is
so  jealous  of  every  infringement  of  his  liberty  ;  no  wonder
that  he  is  even  ready  to  lay  down  his  life  rather  than  allow
it  to  be  taken  away.  But  it  is  the  main  object  of  govern-
ment, as  we  have  seen,  whether  in  its  capacity  of  a  restraining
or  a  protecting  power,  to  deprive  of  liberty ;  for  the  liberty
to  do  wrong  is  as  sacred  as  the  liberty  to  do  right,  and  as
highly  prized  and  strenuously  defended.  Liberty  does  not
consist  in  the  power  to  do  right,  or  the  privilege  to  act  sub-
ject to  certain  limitations  and  within  certain  restrictions.
This  may  be  the  definition  of  moral  action,  or  lawful  con-
duct, but  it  is  not  the  definition  of  liberty.  Liberty  is  the
power  to  act  in  obedience  to  desire.  And,  as  man  never  can
be  perfectly  happy  until  he  is  perfectly  free,  he  can  never  be
so  until  he  can  abolish  the  restrictive  and  protective  attri-
butes of  government.  Government  in  its  most  fundfimental
notion  is  the  necessary  foe  of  liberty;  it  is,  therefore,  in
42

234  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

80  far  a  barrier  to  human  happiness.  In  tlie  degree  of  lib-
erty enjoyed  the  race  seems  now  to  be  in  the  middle  of  a
great  cycle.  It  began  its  career  and  perhaps  pursued  it  for
ages  in  a  condition  of  complete  liberty  * — the  liberty  of  the
wild  beast.  The  freedom  of  the  lion  or  the  eagle  belonged
to  man  amid  the  forests  of  his  tropical  home.  His  desires
were  limited,  but,  such  as  they  were,  they  were  gratified.
This  is  perfect  qualitative  happiness.  At  length  his  supe-
rior intellect  enabled  him  to  overcome  the  many  external
obstacles  which  operate  to  restrict  other  species  to  their  ex-
isting numbers  and  local  areas,  and  multiplication  and  terri-
torial expansion  ensued.  At  a  certain  point  there  began
to  be  internal  obstacles  to  his  further  increase,  scattering
him  in  all  directions  beyond  the  domain  assigned  him  by
nature.  At  a  certain  density  gregarious  existence  became
intolerable  from  the  conflicts  of  fierce  passion  guided  to
satisfaction  by  a  high  degree  of  sagacity  which  effectually
checked  his  increase  and  unsettled  liberty  by  perpetual  fear.
No  one  knows  how  long  the  equilibrium  was  thus  kept  up,
and  the  excess  of  births  overcome  by  internecine  slaughter.
Certain  it  is  that  sooner  or  later  human  sagacity  found  a
partial  remedy  from  the  horrors  of  anarchy  in  the  inven-
tion of  government,  the  primary  function  of  which  was,  as
we  saw,  to  restrain,  and  to  prevent  one  individual  from  de-
priving another  of  his  hberty ;  in  the  performance  of  which
function  it  has  itself  succeeded  in  depriving  both  of  much
of  their  liberty.  Thus  it  has  robbed  man  of  half  his  free-
dom to  prevent  him  from  robbing  himself  of  as  great  a  por-
tion at  a  far  greater  sacrifice  By  withholding  his  liberties
it  has  fostered  his  growth  and  enabled  him  to  people  every
continent  and  every  zone.  It  has  also  rendered  intellectual
progress  possible,  and  this  has  actually  gone  on,  till  to-day
he  finds  himself  almost  again  in  sight  of  his  pristine  liberty.
The  paradise  he  lost  through  his  wisdom,  he  is  now  about  to

*  Darwin,  "Journal  of  Researches,"  etc.,  p.  229;  Spencer,  "Principles  of
Sociology,"  vol.  i,  p.  69.

ILLEGITIMATE  FUNCTIONS.  235

regain  through  his  wisdom.  The  simple  but  primitive  state
will  be  exchanged  for  a  complex  but  enlightened  state.  As
he  was  once  truly  happy  in  a  state  of  anarchy,  so  he  will
again  be  happy  when  he  shall  again  attain  to  a  state  of  an-
archy. But  the  difference  will  be  that  the  former  was  the
unconscious  anarchy  of  ignorance,  while  the  latter  will  be
the  conscious  anarchy  of  intelligence.

ELIMINATION     OF     THE    ILLEGITIMATE     FUNCTIONS     OF     GOVERN-
MENT.

To  return  to  the  question  as  to  why  governments  are  nec-
essarily odious.  We  have  seen  that  this  is  primarily  because
all  governments  are  founded  on  the  principle  of  prohibition,
which,  however  properly  or  rightfully,  implies  the  diminu-
tion of  human  liberty.  If,  through  increased  intelligence,
government  shall  ever  learn  to  employ  the  indirect  method
in  lieu  of  the  direct,  which  is  the  basis  of  all  prohibitory
legislation,  and  to  apply  the  faculty  of  genius,  or  ingenuity,
to  the  working  out  of  a  system  of  attractive  legislation,  a
great  degree  of  protective  and  even  restrictive  power  can
doubtless  be  exerted  without  reducing  the  sum  total  of  lib-
erty. But  this  question  will  be  considered  a  little  later.
We  must  cling  a  little  longer  to  government  with  only  its
present  attributes.

Considering  the  enormous  influences  which  operate  to
render  the  holders  of  power  indifferent  to  the  justice  of  the
cases  over  which  they  are  called  upon  to  exercise  that  power,
it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  their  decisions  are  no  more  apt
to  be  founded  on  justice  than  were  the  original  desires  of  the
parties  restrained ;  and  thus  the  difficulty  is  at  least  doubled
when  we  lay  aside  our  hypothesis,  according  to  which  all
governmental  restraint  was  assumed  to  be  just,  and  take  the
imperfection  of  the  protectorate  into  the  account.  If,  for
example,  government  should  render  itself  odious  to  one  third
of  the  people  when  its  decisions  are  all  just,  it  would  ren-
der itself  odious  to  two  thirds  of  them  if  half  of  its  decisions

236  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

were  unjust,  because  then  one  haK  of  the  eases  of  attempted
protection  might  have  been  left  to  adjust  themselves.  I
would  not  be  understood  to  imply  that  this  would  be  mathe-
matically true,  but  only  that  it  serves  to  point  out  the  man-
ner in  which  any  attempt  to  control  the  people  must  render
the  controlling  power  odious,  and  this  in  a  degree  propor-
tional to  the  justness  of  the  acts  both  of  the  governing  and
of  the  governed.

It  has  already  been  remarked  that  this  control  is  always
claimed  to  be  exercised  for  the  protection  of  the  people.  So
far  as  it  really  is  so  exercised,  it  is  a  legitimate  function  of
government,  and  comes  logically  within  the  meaning  of  the
term  "  protection,"  as  one  of  the  component  elements  of  the
general  notion  of  government  which  we  are  at  present  ana-
lyzing. But  all  outside  of,  or  beyond  this,  whether  claimed
or  even  sought  to  be  brought  within  it  or  not,  belongs  to  the
other  component,  to  the  element  of  arbitrary  restraint.

It  is  this  attribute  that  is  every-where  most  abundant  and
most  apparent  in  all  the  governments  which  man  has  estab-
lished. I  need  not  mention  those  efforts  which  have  been
and  are  constantly  being  made  with  a  real  intention  on  the
part  of  government  to  secure  the  rights  of  the  people,  but
which  fail  from  ignorance  or  undue  zeal  to  accomplish  that
end,  although  that  there  are  many  such  is  attested  a  thousand
times  by  history,  and  those  acts  of  power  which  were  exer-
cised and  applauded  in  one  century  are  denounced  if  they
can  not  be  repaired  in  the  next.  I  need  only  speak  of  such
as  come  quite  outside  of  any  definition  of  protection,  and
result  solely  from  the  desire,  coupled  with  the  opportunity,
to  strengthen  and  aggrandize  the  governing  class.  There  is
always  a  pretext  for  all  such  acts,  and  the  people  are  easily
made  to  believe  that  it  is  for  their  interest  to  obey  them ;  yet
they  are  all  pure  usurpations,  and  serve  as  illustrations  of  the
tendencies  of  governmental  restraint.  "Were  particular  ex-
amples of  these  acts  required,  they  are  every-where  to  be
found.     The  existence  of  standing  armies  in  every  country

ILLEGITIMATE  FUNCTIONS.  237

of  the  globe  is  perhaps  the  most  familiar  one.  The  alleged
necessity  of  standing  armies  usually  has  no  better  basis  than
the  desire  of  certain  persons  to  protect  themselves  in  the
right  to  rule  over  certain  tracts  of  country  and  certain  peo-
ples. This  is  the  justification  of  vs/^ar.  It  certainly  is  not  for
the  interests  of  the  people  to  have  their  fields  laid  waste,
their  houses  burned,  their  means  of  subsistence  taken  away,
their  relatives  and  friends  shot  down,  and  their  own  lives
sacrificed.  These  things  standing  alone,  as  the  immediate
and  inevitable  incidents  of  war,  can  not  certainly  be  urged
as  contributing  to  the  happiness  of  any  people.  And  yet
this  is  absolutely  all  they  receive  in  return  for  waging  it.
The  mechanic  of  England  can  certainly  derive  no  satisfaction
from  the  destruction  of  a  Frenchman's  vineyard  and  his  im-
poverishment and  ruin.  It  is  not  the  happiness  of  the  masses
that  war  tends  to  promote.  No  one  will  claim  that  Europe
— i.  e.,  the  people  of  Europe — taken  as  a  whole,  are  better  off
after  a  long  war,  which  only  offers  in  exchange  for  the  blood
that  has  been  shed,  and  the  industry  that  has  been  crushed
out,  an  alteration  in  some  slight  particular  of  the  boundaries
of  the  political  divisions.  And  if  it  be  urged  that  one  peo-
ple is  compelled  to  go  to  war  to  prevent  foreign  powers  from
destroying  its  government  and  establishing  a  worse  one  over
them,  this  only  shifts  the  question  from  the  invaded  to  the
invader,  and  it  has  now  only  to  be  asked,  What  advantage  is
it  to  a  people  to  extend  their  government  by  war  over  other
nations  unwilling  to  accept  it  ?  Thus,  by  carrying  it  back,
the  objection  proves  to  be  wholly  imaginary,  as  far  as  regards
the  welfare  of  the  people,  and  can  only  be  seriously  raised
by  kings  and  rulers.

This  element  of  government,  being  wholly  unnecessary
and  prejudicial  to  the  interests  of  the  people,  is  the  one
which  they  most  need  to  rid  themselves  of,  and  the  one  they
will  undoubtedly  first  shake  off.  Precisely  how  long  it  wiU
be  before  any  one  people  will  have  fully  succeeded  in  accom-
plishing this  object  can  not,  of  course,  be  predicted.     That

238  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

none  has  thus  far  done  so  can  be  safely  affirmed.  Success  in
this  direction  must  depend  entirely  upon  the  intelligence  of
the  people.  In  them  ultimately  lies  all  power.  This  asser-
tion, it  is  true,  is  trite,  but,  often  as  it  is  made  and  repeated,
very  few  realize  its  full  meaning.  It  means  this :  If  all  the
people  knew  what  course  of  action  was  for  their  best  interests,
they  would  certainly  pursue  that  course.  It  is  not  for  their
best  interests  to  support  the  usurpations  of  the  governing
class ;  therefore  these  usurpations  would  not  be  supported.
No  usurpation  could  possibly  be  practiced  unless  supported
by  the  force  of  some  portion  of  the  people.  Consequently,
if  no  portion  of  the  people  were  ignorant  of  their  own  in-
terests, there  could  be  no  usurpation.  An  army  is  no  less
a  portion  of  a  people  than  is  a  sheriff's  posse.  Yet  it  is  ar-
mies almost  altogether  that  enable  despots  to  carry  out  their
schemes  of  self-aggrandizement.  And  not  unfrequently  the
posse  comitatus  performs  the  same  oflBce.  So  long  as  people
in  the  capacity  of  soldiers  or  civil  officers  stand  by  and  uj>-
hold  by  force  the  acts  of  cunning  rulers,  devised  to  increase
their  power  or  their  revenues  at  the  expense  of  the  masses
who  include  these  same  soldiers  and  officers,  so  long  will
there  be  usurpation,  oppression,  and  war.  This  is  simply  a
law  of  human  nature,  and  can  not  be  prevented  by  moraliz-
ing. It  is  unphilosophical  to  attribute  it  to  the  wickedness
of  rulers.  This  method  of  vituperation  and  denunciation
has  been  long  tried,  and  has  wholly  failed.  "Were  the  places
of  the  censured  and  the  censurer  reversed,  the  case  would
be  unaltered.  Human  nature  is  uniform.  Like  causes  pro-
duce like  effects  in  social  as  in  physical  phenomena.  If,
then,  we  can  not  blame  the  oppressor,  shall  we  blame  the
oppressed?  Certainly  not.  To  blame  is  useless.  Against
this  fixed  and  immutable  law  of  nature  there  must  be  set
up  the  artificial  barrier  of  universal  knowledge.  The  law
will  not  cease  to  exist,  but  the  circumstances  would  then
be  changed.  If  the  inclination  is  not  removed,  the  power
is  taken  away,  and  the  problem  is  solved ;  for,  however

ILLEGITIMATE  FUNCTIONS.  239

great  the  desire,  it  can  not  be  gratified  without  the  power
to  gratify  it.  If  a  king  issues  an  oppressive  decree,  and  the
subjects  refuse  to  obey  it,  and  the  soldiers  refuse  to  enforce
it,  what  becomes  of  tyranny  ?  Its  "  occupation's  gone."
And  if  aU  these  know  it  to  be  contrary  to  their  own  interest,
that  they  will  thus  act  is  as  certain  as  that  the  king  will  seek
his  interest,  since  it  is  governed  by  the  same  law.  There
is  then  a  prospect,  and  a  comparatively  near  prospect,  of
eliminating  from  human  government  this  element  of  re-
straint, and  of  changing  it  from  the  nature  of  government^
which  it  now  possesses,  into  that  of  a  protectorate,  pure  and
simple.

Let  us  now  see  how  this  second  element  is  to  be  elimi-
nated. The  condition  of  society  is  not  such  as  to  need  the
control  of  a  government,  but  it  is  certainly  such  as  to  re-
quire the  supervision  of  a  protectorate.  There  is  no  country
on  the  globe  in  which  there  are  not  found  some  persons  who
have  not  yet  sufficiently  emerged  from  barbarism  to  render
justice  to  their  fellows  in  all  cases,  and  to  refrain  from  injur-
ing those  who  happen  to  cross  their  path.  It  is  for  these  and
for  these  only  that  a  protectorate  is  required :  it  can  be  dis-
pensed with  as  soon  as  such  characters  cease  to  exist  in  so-
ciety. The  question,  therefore,  of  how  long  the  world  will
need  a  protectorate  is  the  same  with  that  of  how  long  there
will  be  dangerous  persons  in  society.  The  common  notion
that  this  must  always  be  because  man  is  imperfect,  is  unten-
able, and  will  so  appear  upon  a  slight  examination.  It  assumes
that  a  person,  because  he  is  not  perfect  in  all  things,  must
necessarily  be  liable  to  commit  crime ;  that  is,  every  one
must  be  thus  liable.  Yet  how  false  is  this,  considered  in  the
light  of  facts !  Is  there  then  no  one  who  is  not  liable  to  com-
mit crime  ?  Can  you  cast  your  eyes  about  you  and  fix  them
upon  no  single  individual  who  has  ever  come  within  your
knowledge  or  observation,  whom  you  do  not  hesitate  to  pro-
nounce entirely  harmless?  On  the  contrary,  who  can  not
select  hundreds  from  among  his  neighbors,  acquaintances,  and

240  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

friends,  wliom  lie  does  not  regard  as  in  the  least  dangerous
to  society  ?  Can  he  not  enumerate  many  who,  though  pos-
sessing foibles  and  imperfections  in  common  with  all  man-
kind, might  yet  be  trusted  among  their  fellows  without  the
least  risk  of  property,  life,  or  limb  ?  Let  us  come  nearer
home.  Does  the  reader  himself  entertain  any  apprehension
that  society  would  be  likely  to  suffer  from  violence  at  his
hands,  even  if  there  were  not  a  penal  statute  nor  an  executive
officer  in  the  land  ?  Does  he  not  feel  that  it  is  not  for  him
that  all  these  laws  were  framed  ?  And  while  he  may  willingly
confess  himself  imperfect,  will  he  admit  that  he  therefore
needs  to  be  put  under  restraint  to  prevent  him  from  disturb-
ing the  peace  or  violating  the  rights  of  society  ?  Yet  can
he  assume  that  he  constitutes  a  solitary  exception  in  his  en-
tire community  ?  Probably  not.  It  is  not  true  that  all  men
are  dangerous ;  that  all  need  to  be  forcibly  restrained  to  pre-
vent them  from  injuring  one  another.  It  is  only  a  very  small
part  that  occasion  the  necessity  for  penal  law.*  The  other
part  must  tolerate  it  as  less  grievous  than  the  dangers  which
its  absence  would  involve.  Yet  this  is  the  boasted  liberty
which  so  many  great  writers  have  extolled,  liberty  regulated
and  limited  by  law.  Some  have  even  said  that  this  is  all
that  liberty  means.f  Such  liberty  means  that  the  innocent
must  suffer  for  the  guilty ;  that  because  a  part  of  society  is
depraved,  the  rest  must  have  onerous  and  odious  laws  en-
acted, which,  though  made  for  their  protection,  take  away
half  their  liberties  and  destroy  much  of  their  happiness.

*  Few  attempts  have  been  made  to  determine  the  proportion  of  the  popu-
lation properly  to  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  criminal  classes.  Statistics
of  this  kind  have  recently  been  compiled  in  the  State  of  Indiana,  and  may  be
found  published  in  the  "  First  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Statistics  and
Geology  of  Indiana,**  page  442,  according  to  which  there  exists  in  that  State
one  such  person  to  every  146  inhabitants.  This  includes  prostitutes.  The  chief
of  the  Bureau  makes  the  following  suggestive  comment  upon  these  statistics :
"  For  this  small  portion  of  our  population  all  our  criminal  laws  arc  made."

f  Blackstone's  "  Commentaries,"  Introduction,  p.  6 ;  Cousin,  "  Du  vrai,  du
beau,  et  du  bien,"  Lc9on  15,  p.  393.

ILLEGITIMATE  FUNCTIONS.  241

Such  laws  are  necessary,  not  because  man  is  imparfect,  but
because  some  men  are  very  imperfect.

The  questions  remain,  What  proportion  of  society  is  thus
depraved  ?  How  large  a  part  of  society  need  no  law  to  re-
strain them  from  injuring  others  ?  This  difEers  in  different
countries,  and  in  different  parts  of  the  same  country.  Tak-
ing the  civilized  world  in  its  ensemble,  the  two  classes  are
perhaps  equally  divided.  Taking  the  most  enlightened
parts  of  it,  the  dangerous  element  is  reduced  to  a  small
fraction.  Not  to  speak  of  enlightened  England,  cultured
Germany,  and  scientific  France,  there  are  doubtless  towns
and  counties,  and  perhaps  whole  cities,  in  the  United  States,
where  only  one  man  in  a  hundred  could  be  induced  to  com-
mit a  crime  against  his  fellow-man.  Every  one's  reflection
and  recollection  will  verify  this  conclusion.  And  it  is  only
for  the  sake  of  these  few  that  all  must  bear  the  burdens  of
government.  How  can  these  seeds  of  dissension  bo  re-
moved from  the  body  politic  ?  In  the  same  manner  that  the
class  now  harmless  have  been  rendered  so.  In  the  same
way  that  you  and  I  have  been  lifted  out  of  savagery  and
barbarism  into  civilization  and  enlightenment.  They  must
simply  be  civilized.  They  are  no  worse  than  we  are.  "  All
men  are  created  equal."  I  doubt  whether  even  Jefferson
felt  the  full  import  of  that  truth.  "  He  builded  better  than
he  knew."  The  inmates  of  our  prisons  are  but  the  victims
of  untoward  circumstances.  The  murderer  has  but  acted
out  his  education.  "Would  you  change  his  conduct,  change
his  education.

When  man  has  succeeded  in  eliminating  from  govern-
ment its  two  elements,  control  and  protection,  what  will
be  left?  That  of  accommodation.  And  must  this,  too,  be
finally  winnowed  away  by  the  great  fan  of  intelligence?
No.  It  must  remain.  It  can  never  be  dispensed  with.  The
reason  in  this  case  is  because  man  is  imperfect.  He  is  nei-
ther ubiquitous,  omniscient,  nor  omnipotent :  hence  he  needs
agents  to  transact  business  in  localities  where  he  can  not  be ;

242  PKOGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

to  acquire  skill  and  dexterity  in  subjects  with  which  every
one  can  not  afford  the  time  to  acquaint  himself ;  and  to  per-
form duties  by  means  of  organization  which  individuals,  act-
ing independently,  would  not  possess  the  strength  to  per-
form. In  short,  society  needs  and  must  always  have  an
organized  agency  to  represent  it.

This  organization,  however,  would,  in  an  advanced  state
of  society,  represent  society  in  fact  as  well  as  in  name.  It
would  be  the  servant  of  society  instead  of  its  master,  as  is
now  the  case  even  with  those  governments  which  call  them-
selves representative.  It  would,  moreover,  represent  the
whole  of  society  and  not  a  class,  or  to  the  exclusion  of  any
class ;  that  is,  every  adult  person  would  have  a  voice  in  the
instruction  of  its  agents ;  and  though,  as  it  would  seem  must
always  be  the  case,  many  of  the  measm'es  adopted  would  be
objectionable  to  some,  still  it  supposes  a  state  of  general
enlightenment  which  would  be  incompatible  with  the  pos-
sibility of  any  disturbance  of  the  public  tranquillity  from
causes  of  this  nature.

Governments,  as  at  present  constituted,  may  be  compared
to  certain  large  stock  companies.  Instead  of  being  managed
in  the  interests  of  the  stockholders,  they  are  managed  in  the
interests  of  the  officers.  In  stock  companies  this  is  apt  to  be
the  case  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  stockholders  and  the
smallness  of  each  one's  interest.  Thus,  in  an  insurance  com-
pany in  which  each  policy-holder  is  in  a  sense  a  stockholder,
these  generally  know  and  care  nothing  about  the  way  in
which  the  company  is  managed,  so  long  as  it  is  kept  sound,
and,  if  they  felt  an  interest,  they  would  have  no  power  to
influence  its  policy.  Government  is  such  a  stock  company
with  millions  of  stockholders  whose  individual  interests  are
very  small,  or  at  least  are  so  regarded  by  them ;  hence  oppor-
tunity to  manage  this  company  in  the  interests  of  the  direct-
ors is  almost  unlimited.  Those  who  imagine  that  represent-
ative governments  form  an  exception  to  this  law,  simply
illustrate  the  ease  with  which  stockholders  are  deceived.

SUPERFICIALITY   OF  POLITICAL  EVENTS.  243

Progress  in  government,  therefore,  considered  simply  as  an
institution  for  the  accommodation  of  society,  must  be  in
the  direction  of  acquainting  every  member  of  society  more
thoroughly  with  the  special  nature  of  the  institution,  and
awakening  him  to  a  more  vivid  conception  of  his  personal
interest  in  its  management.

Thus  far  we  have  considered  government  such  as  it  actu-
ally is,  and  such  as  history  shows  it  to  have  been  in  all  the
past  known  to  us.  It  has  always  possessed  the  three  distinct
attributes  of  restraint,  protection,  and  accommodation ;  no
government  being  so  rude  as  wholly  to  want  the  last,  or  so
perfect  as  to  have  wholly  dispensed  with  the  first,  while  the
second  has  ever  constituted  both  the  apology  for,  and  the
raison  d^etre  of,  the  institution  itself.

In  this  capacity  government  occupies  a  peculiar  attitude
toward  the  true  progress  of  mankind,  contributing  to  it  only
indirectly  as  a  conserver  of  the  really  progressive  elements
of  society,  while  at  the  same  time  reacting  directly  and
powerfully  against  it  in  restraining  human  liberty  and  in
80  far  diminishing  human  happiness.  Yet  these  opposing,
influences  are  incapable  of  comparison,  with  a  view  to  ascer-
taining the  resultant,  since  they  are,  as  it  were,  of  different
denominations.  An  indirect  influence  can  not  be  compared
with  a  direct  one,  and  the  nature  of  the  former  has  been  such
in  this  case  that  there  is  no  other  standard  by  which  its  im-
portance can  be  relatively  ascertained.  This  much  at  least
must  be  said  for  it  that,  in  its  role  of  protector,  government
has  been  indispensable  to  progress,  i.  e.,  though  it  has  not
been  a  promoter,  it  has  certainly  been  a  sine  qua  non  of  it.

We  have  seen  that  in  the  institution  as  it  now  exists,  and
has  existed  in  the  past,  no  directly  progressive  element  can
be  found.  As  was  shown  at  the  outset,  the  popular  view  to
the  contrary  is  wholly  erroneous.  The  importance  of  the
phenomena  attending  government  is  greatly  overestimated.
Political  events,  military  denouments,  and  the  services  and

244  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

achievements  of  great  men,  whicli  make  up  the  bulk  of  what
is  called  human  history,  are  really  of  little  consequence,  and
in  most  cases  might  as  well  have  been  the  opposite  of  what
they  were.  The  idea  which  many  entertain,  that  but  for  just
such  little  triumphs  as  have  happened  to  occur,  the  world
would  have  been  a  blank,  is  extremely  puerile.  Even  if  it
be  true  that  the  battle  of  Tours  decided  the  question  whether
Mohammedanism  or  Christianity  was  to  be  the  prevailing
religion  of  Europe,  nevertheless,  it  was  a  question  of  minor
importance  which  way  that  battle  was  decided.  The  people
of  Europe  would  have  been  the  same  people,  whether  they
worshiped  in  a  mosque  or  in  a  cathedral,  whether  they  fol-
lowed a  crescent  or  a  cross.  A  few  of  the  names  and  dates
of  European  history  would  have  been  changed,  the  imaginary
lines  which  bound  the  present  political  divisions  might  have
occupied  different  positions  on  the  map,  and  other  minor
differences  would  have  been  seen  throughout  the  rest  of  Eu-
rope's history  ;  but  whether  more  or  less  true  progress  would
have  resulted  is  a  problem  which  no  one  will  ever  be  able  to
solve.  The  time  will  come  when  not  only  this  event,  but  all
the  political  events  of  modem  history,  including  those  of  the
immediate  present,  upon  which  most  men  think  all  future
progress  is  to  depend,  will  be  looked  upon  as  we  now  look
upon  the  political  events  of  ancient  Greece  in  the  time  of
Demosthenes.  Human  progress  depends  upon  deeper  laws,
and  would  not  have  been  arrested  had  there  never  lived  a
Wellington  or  a  Washington.  In  fact,  most  historic  events
represent  the  resultant  of  opposing  forces  in  society,  often
nearly  equally  balanced,  so  that  the  triumph  of  the  opposite
party  would,  in  most  cases,  have  given  about  the  same  de-
gree of  satisfaction  as  did  the  actual  event,  and  it  is  generally
impossible  to  say  which  would  have  been  upon  the  whole
best  for  the  race.  These  political  events  so  intimately  re-
lated to  government  may  be  aptly  compared  to  the  meteoro-
logical phenomena  which  are  constantly  taking  place  upon
the  surface  of  the  earth.    Areas  of  low  barometer  are  gen-

THE  AMELIORATIVE  FUNCTION".  245

erated,  clouds  are  formed,  storms  follow  one  another  across
ocean  and  continent,  winds  rage  at  times,  tornadoes  and  cy-
clones devastate  the  land ;  then  calm  ensues,  and  sunshine
gladdens  all  hearts.  The  elements  have  the  appearance  of
being  at  war  during  the  greater  part  of  the  time,  with  fluc-
tuating successes  sometimes  on  one  side  and  sometimes  on
the  other.  Yet  a  retrospective  view  shows  that  the  corre-
sponding seasons  of  different  years  do  not  materially  differ,
and  the  state  of  the  world,  meteorologically  considered,  is
the  same  now  that  it  was  a  century  or  ten  centuries  ago.
The  most  violent  storm  has  had  no  influence  in  altering  the
general  identity  of  all  seasons  and  all  years.  If,  in  fact,  as
modern  science  seems  to  teach,  there  is  going  on  a  slow  and
imperceptible  change  of  climate  upon  the  earth,  this  is  not
due  to  the  character  of  visible  meteorological  phenomena,
but  to  vast  cosmical  processes,  either  astronomical  or  geolog-
ical, working  secular  changes  in  the  former,  and  producing  a
succession  of  glacial  epochs  in  one  or  both  hemispheres,  and
perhaps  shifting  the  preponderance  of  land  from  one  hemi-
sphere to  the  other.

If  we  can  compare  the  meteorological  phenomena  of  cli-
mate to  the  governmental  phenomena  of  society,  so  we  must
compare  the  influence  of  these  cosmical  processes  to  that  of
the  several  progressive  agencies  considered  in  the  early  part
of  this  chapter.

AMELIOEATIVE   FUNCTION   OF   GOVERNMENT.

From  actual  government  we  will  now  pass  to  possible
government.  While  considering  the  accommodative  element
of  government,  it  was  remarked  that  in  some  directions  this
function  closely  approaches  the  ameliorative.  That  it  has
never  actually  reached  it  can  not  be  affirmed.  But  it  may
safely  be  said  that  if  government  has  ever  directly  improved
the  condition  of  society,  or  given  it  a  progressive  impulse,  it
has  been  from  strictly  empirical  motives.  Government  has
never  recognized  the  existence  of  social  forces,  or  made  them

246  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

the  object  of  scientific  study,  with  a  view  to  systematically
controlling  and  directing  them.

There  are  now  in  society  two  opposing  classes  of  political
economists,  both  of  which  profess  to  represent  the  scientific
method  in  government,  neither  of  which,  however,  at  all
understand  the  precise  manner  in  which  science  promotes
civilization — viz.,  through  invention.  Neither  have  ever
made  the  test  comparison  of  legislation  with  mechanical  in-
vention. Both  fail  to  look  upon  legislation  as  an  art,  rest-
ing, like  all  other  arts,  upon  science,  and  capable  of  as  much
higher  development  when  based  upon  a  systematic  acquaint-
ance with  natural  phenomena  and  laws  than  when  based
upon  a  superficial  acquaintance  with  a  few  special  ones,  as
other  forms  of  art  are  capable  of  higher  development  when
based  on  methodical  science  than  when  based  on  an  incoher-
ent empiricism.  And  yet  both  arrogate  to  themselves  the
title  scientific.     This,  of  course,  is  natural  enough.

Respectability  has  its  disadvantages.  Whenever  any  thing
becomes  respectable,  it  is  certain  to  have  its  name  appropri-
ated. This  is  particularly  the  case  at  the  present  time  with
science.  There  is  nothing  now  so  respectable,  and  hence  it
has  become  the  fashion  to  call  every  thing  by  that  name.  In
view  of  this  tendency,  it  would  be  desirable  to  have  a  defini-
tion of  science.  It  would  be  important  to  have  some  definite
test  by  which  true  science  could  be  distinguished  from  pseudo-
science.

Perhaps  the  most  successful  attempt  thus  far  made  to
establish  such  a  test  was  that  of  M.  Auguste  Comte.  He
maintained  that  the  power  of  prevision  is  the  attribute  by
which  science  is  to  be  uniformly  distinguished  from  mere
erudition  *  on  the  one  hand,  and  from  the  mere  accumulation
of  data  on  the  other.  This  generalization  is  only  slightly
enlarged  by  saying  that  science  is  distinguished  by  making
knowledsre  a  means  to  some  end  instead  of  an  end  in  itself.
This  is  undoubtedly  the  true  view,  and  it  loses  nothing  of
*  "Philosophie  Positive,"  vol.  ii,  p.  20;  vol.  iii,  pp.  8,  211,  212.

TWO  SCHOOLS  OF  EXTREMISTS.  247

its  verity  because  its  application  not  only  sweeps  away  all
the  cliarlatanism  and  dilettanteism  that  now  go  by  the  name
of  science,  but  presses  hard  upon  much  of  the  specialism,
always  so  prevalent,  which  has  latterly  set  itself  up  as  con-
stituting science  par  excellence  (vol.  i,  p.  23).

Among  those  addicted  to  "  stealing  the  livery "  of  sci-
ence to  lend  respectability  to  their  work,  should  probably  be
mentioned  first  the  so-called  moral-science  writers.  Their
works  usually  indicate  that  the  authors  have  no  just  concep-
tion of  what  science  or  the  scientific  method  is.  Next  after
these  the  "  social-science  "  writers  and  workers  are  doubtless
most  clearly  open  to  this  charge.  This  class  is  perpetually
hovering  about  the  confines  of  true  social  science,  without
ever  fairly  entering  its  territory.  The  proceedings  of  the
social  science  associations  show  that  their  labors  are  con-
fined to  the  most  derivative  and  superficial  results  of  the
operations  of  social  laws,  such  as  questions  of  finance,  pri-
vate charity,  houses  for  operatives,  eleemosynary  schemes,  etc.
These  belong  to  economics,  police  regulation,  etc.,  and  do
not  deserve  to  be  called  social  science.  They  are  important
practical  matters  of  administration,  no  doubt,  but  they  are
not  science.

Another  mark  of  a  real  science  is  that  it  must  embrace
the  two  stages,  the  pure  and  the  applied.  All  existing  sci-
ences possess  these.  It  is  the  practical  service  that  science
has  done  which  renders  it  so  highly  respectable,  but  this  has
only  been  possible  in  the  applied  stage.  The  object  of  pure
science  is  to  predict.  "  Voir  pour  prevoir^''  says  M.  Comte.
But  the  object  of  prevision  is  application.*  The  pure  and
appHed  stages  of  a  science  are  both  equally  essential.  With-
out the  pure  stage  all  attempts  at  application  must  be  wholly
at  random.  On  the  other  hand,  pure  science  alone  must
remain  for  ever  useless.

It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  both  of  these  apparently  self-
evident  propositions  seem  to  be  widely  ignored.     On  the

*  "  Philosophie  Positive,"  vol.  1,  p.  51.

248  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

one  hand,  we  find  a  prevalent  belief  respecting  some  of  the
less  complex  sciences,  that  their  chief  or  only  value  consists
in  an  acquaintance  with  their  pure  principles  and  facts ;  while,
on  the  other  hand,  we  find  with  respect  to  the  most  complex
sciences,  such  as  morals  and  sociology,  a  constant  effort  to
apply  principles  for  the  establishment  of  which  no  data  have
yet  been  collected.  This  is  all  very  paradoxical,  inasmuch
as  it  is  precisely  the  reverse  of  that  which  would  naturally  be
looked  for.  "What  is  needed,  therefore,  seems  to  be — in  the
lower  sciences,  more  attention  to  the  applied  stage ;  in  the
higher  sciences,  more  attention  to  the  pure  stage.

It  was  doubtless  this  anomaly  which  prompted  Kant  to
make  the  bold  proposition  to  establish  a  science  of  pure
morals.*  This  proposition  has  not  been  responded  to,  how-
ever, and  we  can  not  be  said  to  have  any  moral  science  yet.f
But  against  the  superficial  treatment  of  the  social  phenomena
there  has  been  a  strong  reaction,  and  the  principles  of  pure
sociology  have  been  in  a  great  measure  formulated.  Like
all  reactions,  however,  this  one  has  carried  its  advocates  too
far.  In  their  intense  sense  of  the  lack  of  data  and  of  laws,
they  have  forgotten  that  these,  when  secured,  are  properly
but  the  means  to  the  same  end  which  their  opponents  are
vainly  seeking  to  attain  without  them.  And  thus  we  have
the  singular  spectacle  presented  in  the  field  of  social  science
of  one  class  applying  erroneous  principles  in  ignorance  of
true  ones,  while  insisting  that  this  is  all  of  social  science ;  and
another  class  collecting  data  and  formulating  laws  while  de-
claring that  this  constitutes  the  only  true  method  of  soci-
ology. The  one  class  insists  that  there  can  be  no  pure  social
science,  the  other  that  there  can  be  no  applied  social  science.

In  one  sense  natural  economic  laws  can  not  be  controlled,

*  "  Kritik  der  rcinen  Vernunft,"  S.  340,  533.

f  Mr.  Spencer's  "  Data  of  Ethics,"  which  has  appeared  since  this  was  writ-
ten, goes  far  to  supply  the  want  here  designated,  in  pointing  out  clearly  for  the
first  time  that  morals,  as  popularly  understood,  consist  of  mere  rules  for  heal-
ing a  diseased  condition.  His  "Absolute  Ethics"  must  be  regarded  as  the  basis
of  the  pure  science.

SCIENTIFIC  LEGISLATION.  249

i.  e.,  they  can  not  be  arbitrarily  created  or  destroyed ;  their
essential  nature  can  not  be  changed.  In  these  respects,  as
in  all  others,  they  are  identical  with  the  physical,  or  mechan-
ical, laws  with  which  inventors  have  to  deal.  But  in  another
sense  the  former  as  well  as  the  latter  can  be  controlled,  i.  e.,
they  can  be  guided  by  means  of  artificial  devices  into  chan-
nels which  they  would  not  otherwise  take,  and  made  to
expend  themselves  upon  other  objects  than  those  upon  which
they  would  naturally  expend  themselves ;  they  may  be  dis-
tributed, or  divided  into  any  number  of  parts,  and  thus  dimin-
ished in  their  intensity  or  practically  destroyed  ;  or  they  may
be  condensed  or  intensified  to  any  required  degree.  In
short,  whatever  dispositions  may  be  made  of  other  natural
forces  by  man  and  under  the  influence  of  intellectual  insight,
may  in  like  manner  be  made  of  the  social  forces.  Therefore,
if  government  could  be  in  the  hands  of  social  scientists  in-
stead of  social  empiricists,  it  might  be  elevated  to  the  rank
of  an  applied  science,  or  the  simple  application  of  the  scien-
tific principles  of  social  phenomena.

As  a  scientific  investigator,  the  legislator  would  then  set
for  himself  the  task  of  devising  means  to  render  harmless
those  forces  now  seen  to  be  working  evil  results,  and  to  ren-
der useful  those  now  running  to  waste.  IS^ot  only  would  the
present  prohibitive  legislation,  which  seeks  to  accomplish  its
ends  by  the  direct,  or  brute,  method,  be  rapidly  supplanted
by  attractive  legislation  accomplishing  its  purposes  by  the
indirect,  or  intellectual,  method,  and  thus  fulfilling  the  pro-
tective functions  of  government  at  a  saving  of  enormous  loss
through  the  friction  of  opposition,  but  the  accommodative
function  would  now  be  in  condition  to  advance  toward  the
position  of  a  truly  ameliorative  one.  Society,  possessed
for  the  first  time  of  a  completely  integrated  consciousness,
could  at  last  proceed  to  map  out  a  field  of  independent  opera-
tion for  the  systematic  realization  of  its  own  interests,  in  the
same  manner  that  an  intelligent  and  keen-sighted  individual
pursues  his  life-purposes.     Not  only  would  protection  and

250  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

accommodation  be  secured  witliout  loss  of  liberty  and  at  the
least  possible  cost  to  society,  but  directly  progressive  meas-
ures would  be  adopted  looking  .to  the  organization  of  human
happiness.  Fully  realizing  the  character  and  mode  of  opera-
tion of  the  truly  progressive  agencies  of  society,  government
would  not  simply  foster  and  protect  these,  but  would  increase
and  intensify  them  and  their  influence.  Ko  longer  doubting
that  progress  upon  the  whole  must  be  in  proportion  to  the
degree  and  universality  of  intelligence,  no  effort  or  expense
would  be  spared  to  impart  to  every  citizen  an  equal  and
adequate  amount  of  useful  knowledge.

Briefly  to  formulate  the  underlying  principles  of  this  dis-
cussion, we  may  add  in  conclusion  that,  strictly  speaking,  no
influence  can  be  progressive  which  is  not  in  itself  a  true
art.  Existing  government,  though  artificial,  is  not  itself  an
art.  It  can  not,  therefore,  become  a  progressive  institution
until  there  are  impressed  upon  it  the  marks  which  distinguish
a  true  art.  The  arts  are  not  merely  conservative,  but  crea-
tive. They  not  only  preserve,  but  produce.  They  do  not
leave  matters  where  they  find  them,  but  carry  them  a  stage
higher.  Conservative  institutions,  such  as  actual  government,
like  the  disturbances  of  the  atmosphere  or  the  tides  of  the
ocean,  after  having  gone  through  a  cycle  of  changes,  return
to  the  same  conditions  as  before  they  began. .  In  creative  in-
stitutions, such  as  are  the  inventive  arts,  the  rhythm  is  an
advancing  one.  By  however  little,  the  flood  exceeds  the  ebb,
and  society  moves.    They  are  dynamical,  not  statical  forces.

Moreover,  whatever  is  not  progressive  must  be  retrogres-
sive. There  is  no  such  thing  as  absolute  rest.  Conservative
institutions,  from  their  very  nature,  impose  restraints  upon
progress.  Conservation  implies  limitation.  The  forcible
curbing  of  the  centrifugal  tendencies  of  progressive  institu-
tions involves  great  loss  through  friction,  and  this  loss,  how-
ever necessary  to  the  existence  of  such  institutions,  is,  con-
sidered in  itself,  an  expense  to  progress.

GOVERNMENT  AND  SOCIAL  PROGRESS.  251

If  we  look  back  over  the  history  of  language,  literature,
art,  and  science,  we  perceive  that  they  have  each  been  build-
ing from  the  outset.  Gesture  language,  oral  language,  writ-
ten language,  printed  language,  telegraphic  and  telephonic
communication — these  are  the  rounds  of  the  great  ladder
which  the  art  of  intercommunication  has  erected,  and  upon
which  society  has  ascended.

From  the  humble  foundations  with  which  inventive  art
began  have  arisen  the  various  modes  of  securing  and  increas-
ing the  means  of  subsistence.  The  predatory,  the  nomadic,
the  pastoral,  the  agricultural  stages  followed  one  another,
supplemented  by  the  enormously  multiplied  mechanical  ap-
pliances devised  for  the  elaboration  of  the  products  of  in-
dustry.

For  government  there  exists  no  such  record.  When  we
remember  that  it  is  designed  to  conserve  whatever  interest
society  may  possess,  it  seems  not  too  much  to  say  that  the
most  advanced  governments  of  the  world  are  less  perfectly
adapted  to  their  highly  complicated  functions  than  are  the
least  advanced  governments  to  the  simplicity  of  the  interests
intrusted  to  their  charge.  Government,  therefore,  is  not  only
holding  society  back,  but  is  itself  going  backward.

It  therefore  becomes  the  interest  and  the  duty  of  society,
throwing  off  the  yoke  of  government  in  the  odious  sense  of
this  ill-conceived  term,  to  establish  a  truly  progressive  agency
which  shall  not  only  be  a  product  of  art,  but  shall  itself  be
an  art.  This  institution,  like  all  true  arts,  must  be  based
upon  the  recognition  of  the  reality  and  reliableness  of  the
natural  forces  with  which  it  is  to  experiment,  and  whose  laws
it  is  to  utilize.  These  forces  are  the  social  forces  as  defined
in  a  previous  chapter  (vol.  i,  p.  472).  The  science  which
treats  of  them  is  sociology.  The  art  which  consists  in  their
application  may  still,  for  want  of  a  better  term,  be  called
government.  But  the  present  empirical,  anti-progressive
institution,  miscalled  the  art  of  government,  must  be  trans-
formed into  a  central  academy  of  social  science,  which  shall

252  PKOGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

stand  in  the  same  relation  to  the  control  of  men  in  which  a
polytechnic  institute  stands  to  the  control  of  nature.

Religion.

There  is  one  other  agency  whose  influence  has  been
powerfully  felt  in  human  civilization,  but  whose  character,
from  the  point  of  view  of  this  chapter,  is  so  exceptional  and
anomalous  that  it  has  been  found  impossible  to  introduce  it
in  the  regular  course  of  the  discussion.

Its  importance,  however,  demands  for  it  a  somewhat  care-
ful treatment,  which  it  must  receive  in  this  place,  and  which
must  be  somewhat  in  the  nature  of  an  episode,  or  independ-
ent discussion.

This  influence  will  be  best  recognized  under  the  some-
what vague  and  exceedingly  ambiguous  name  of  Religion.

Before  a  word  can  be  said,  however,  respecting  the  true
position  of  religion  among  the  various  influences  which  have
affected  human  progress,  this  vagueness  and  ambiguity  which
attaches  to  the  term  must,  as  far  as  possible,  be  removed,  and
a  definition  be  found  which  shall  fix  with  some  precision  the
particular  thing  of  which  is  predicated  whatever  shall  be  said.

Let  us  begin  with  a  brief  enumeration  of  some  of  the
definitions  which*  various  authors  have  given  to  the  word
"  religion."

Immanuel  Kant  evidently  regarded  religion  as  having  for
its  sole  basis  the  idea  of  immortality,  and  he  fixes  its  place
in  philosophy  in  the  following  characteristic  language:
"  Metaphysics  has  for  the  proper  object  of  its  investigation
only  three  ideas — God,  Freedom,  and  Immortality,  so  that
the  second  conception  combined  with  the  first  shall  lead  as  a
necessary  conclusion  to  the  third.  .  .  .  The  understanding
of  it  would  make  theology,  morals,  and,  through  a  combina-
tion of  both  these,  religion,  that  is,  the  highest  object  of  our
existence,  dependent  solely  upon  the  speculative  power  of
the  reason  and  upon  nothing  else."  *

♦"Kritik  der  rclnen  Vernunft,"  S.  271.

DEFINITIONS  OF  RELIGION.  253

A  well-known  modern  English  writer,  the  Eev.  T.  W.
Fowle,  in  an  article  in  the  "  Contemporary  Keview,"  1872,  on
"  Science  and  Immortality,"  without  seeming  to  be  acquaint-
ed with  Kant's  views,  after  considerable  discussion,  comes  to
the  conclusion  that  for  all  practical  purposes  "religion  is
synonymous  with  immortality,"  and  adds,  "  If,  for  any  reason,
mankind  does,  at  any  time,  cease  to  believe  in  its  own  im-
mortality, then  religion  will  also  have  ceased  to  exist  as  a
part  of  the  consciousness  of  humanity."

Mr.  Edward  B.  Tylor,  probably  the  foremost  ethnogra-
pher of  the  age,  goes  deeper  into  the  question,  and,  while
admitting  the  impossibility  of  fixing  upon  any  one  term  or
expression  which  adequately  represents  the  essential  attri-
butes of  all  religions,  nevertheless  ventures  to  give  what  he
acutely  denominates  a  "  minimum  definition,"  which  is  simply
"  the  belief  in  Spiritual  Beings."  *  This  view  he  elaborates
in  a  masterly  manner  in  the  seven  chapters  on  "  Animism  "
of  his  most  able  and  admirable  treatise  on  "  Primitive  Cul-
ture."

Sir  John  Lubbock,  who  has  also  given  this  subject  much
consideration  from  the  ethnographical  (which  is  the  only
truly  scientific)  point  of  view,  has  endeavored  to  co-ordinate
the  facts  pointing  to  the  genesis  and  nature  of  religion  as  a
human  institution.  He  says  that  there  certainly  are  races  so
low  in  intellectual  development  as  to  possess  nothing  that
can  be  dignified  with  the  name  religion.  "  If,"  says  he,  "  the
mere  sensation  of  fear,  and  the  recognition  that  there  are  prob-
ably other  beings  more  powerful  than  man,  are  sufiicient  alone
to  constitute  a  religion,  then  we  must,  I  think,  admit  that  re-
ligion is  general  to  the  human  race."  But  he  properly  adds
that,  "  if  this  definition  be  adopted,  we  can  no  longer  regard
religion  as  peculiar  to  man.  We  must  admit  that  the  feeling
of  a  dog  or  a  horse  towards  its  master  is  of  the  same  charac-
ter ;  and  the  baying  of  a  dog  to  the  moon  is  as  much  an  act
of  worship  as  some  ceremonies  which  have  been  so  described

*  "Primitive  Culture"  (London,  1871),  vol.  i,  p.  383.

254  PROGRESS.-PRIMARY  MEANS.

by  travelers."  *  lie  thinks  that  the  conception  of  a  deity  or
some  overruling,  unseen  power  is  the  most  reliable  test  of
religion,  and,  rejecting  the  ideas  of  De  Brosse  and  the  classi-
fication of  Corate  and  others  based  on  the  nature  of  the
object  worshiped,  which  set  out  with  fetichism  and  rise
through  Sabseism  to  polytheism  and  monotheism,  he  estab-
lishes a  new  one,  of  which  the  grades  are  as  follows :

1.  Atheism,  by  which  he  means,  as  the  proper  etymology
of  the  word  requires,  simply  an  absence  of  theology,  which,
if  theology  is  the  fundamental  idea,  must  be  equivalent  to  an
absence  of  all  religion.

2.  "  Fetichism  /  the  stage  in  which  man  supposes  he  can
force  the  Deity  to  comply  with  his  desires."

3.  "  Nature-worshij},  or  Totemism,  in  which  natural  ob-
jects, trees,  lakes,  stones,  animals,  &c.,  are  worshiped."

4.  ^^  Shamanism,  in  which  the  superior  deities  are  far
more  powerful  than  man,  and  of  a  different  nature.  Their
place  of  abode  is  far  away,  accessible  only  to  Shamans."

5.  Idolatry,  which  he  makes  equivalent  to  anthropo-
morphism ;  in  which  the  gods  more  nearly  resemble  men,
but  are  more  powerful.  They  are  still  a  part  of  nature  and
not  creators,  and  are  worshiped  through  images  or  idols.

6.  Theism,  i.  e.,  "  Deity  is  regarded  as  the  author  and  not
merely  a  part  of  nature."

T.  Theism  joined  with  Tnorality,  a  stage  "  in  which  mo-
rality is  associated  with  religion."  f

Sir  John  Lubbock,  therefore,  evidently  places  the  idea  of
a  god  before  the  idea  of  a  spirit  in  his  view  of  the  essential
basis  of  religion.

Alongside  of  this  effort  of  Sir  John  Lubbock  to  classify
religions  according  to  a  natural  system  should  be  placed  a
similar  effort  by  Major  J.  "W".  Powell,  Director  of  the  United
States  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  and  also  of  the  Geographical
Survey,  a  careful  student  of  American  ethnology,  mythology,
and  philology.

*  "  Origin  of  Civilization,"  p.  121.  f  Loc.  cit.,  p.  119.

CLASSIFICATIONS  OF  RELIGIONS.  255

According  to  Major  Powell's  system,  as  unfolded  in  his
address  as  Yice-President  of  the  American  Association  for
the  Advancement  of  Science,  at  its  annual  meeting  at  Sara-
toga Springs  in  1879,*  mythology  forms  the  first  great  divi-
sion of  philosophy,  the  scientific  determination  of  phenomena
constituting  the  second.  This  mythologic  division  has  four
successive  and  natural  stages,  which  he  denominates  respect-
ively: 1,  Hecastoiheism 'j  2,  ZootJieism  ^  3,  Physitheism ;
and,  4,  Psychotheism.

This  classification,  it  will  be  seen,  like  that  of  Sir  John
Lubbock,  is  based  chiefly  upon  the  nature  of  the  theology  by
which  it  is  dominated.  In  hecastotheism,  as  its  name  de-
notes, all  things  whatsoever  are  not  only  animated  but  dei-
fied. This  stage,  therefore,  may  be  said  to  embrace  all  the
others,  but  in  just  that  confused  and  undifferentiated  way
that  evolution  shows  to  characterize  the  initial  steps  in  every
process,  from  the  homogeneous  to  the  heterogeneous.  Not
only  are  "  stocks  and  stones,"  trees,  lakes,  mountains,  and
rivers  worshiped  and  turned  into  gods,  but  so  are  also  ani-
mals, stars,  and,  so  far  as  they  can  be  conceived  of  by  such
peoples,  the  invisible  powers  of  nature ;  this  stage  thus  over-
lapping the  second  and  third  stages,  and  only  missing  the
fourth  from  the  inability  of  the  human  mind,  in  this  period
of  its  development,  to  grasp  abstract  mental,  moral,  and  social
attributes.

In  the  second  stage,  or  zootheism,  men  and  beasts  are
classed  together  upon  a  perfect  equality  and  worshiped  as
animated  deities.  "All  the  phenomena  of  nature  are  the
doings  of  these  animal  gods ;  all  the  facts  of  nature,  all  the
phenomena  of  the  known  universe,  all  the  institutions  of
humanity  known  to  the  philosophers  of  this  stage,  are  ac-
counted for  in  the  mythologic  history  of  these  zoomorphic
gods."  The  process  of  differentiation  from  hecastotheism  to
zootheism  has  resulted  in  segregating  really  animated  be-
ings from  the  mass  formerly  regarded  as  animated,  and  limit-

*  "  Proceedings,"  vol.  xxviii,  p.  251.

256  PROGRESS. -PKIMARY  MEANS.

ing  the  tendency  to  worship  to  this  definite  class.  This,  again,
is  in  the  normal  direction  of  evolution,  as  exhibited  in  every
other  department  of  nature.

In  physitheism,  the  third  stage,  "  the  animal  gods  are  de-
throned, and  the  powers  and  phenomena  of  nature  are  per-
sonified and  deified.  The  gods  are  strictly  anthropomorphic,
having  the  form,  as  well  as  the  mental,  moral,  and  social
attributes,  of  men.  Thus  we  have  a  god  of  the  sun,  a  god  of
the  moon,  a  god  of  the  air,  a  god  of  dawn,  and  a  deity  of  the
night."

In  this  stage,  beyond  the  elevation  of  the  class  of  objects
contemplated,  there  is  little  change  except  the  conversion  of
the  animal  forms  and  attributes  into  human.  But,  as  in
zootheism  men  and  animals  were  confounded  under  the  less
definite  conception  of  animated  beings,  it  follows  that  the
passage  from  zootheism  to  physitheism  really  consisted  in  the
simple  differentiation  of  the  conception  of  humanity,  as  the
higher  form  of  animation,  from  that  of  animation  in  general.
Here,  again,  we  have  true  and  typical  evolution.

In  psychotheism,  the  fourth  and  latest  stage  of  mytho-
logic  philosophy,  "  mental,  moral,  and  social  characteristics
are  personified  and  deified.  Thus  we  have  a  god  of  war,  a
god  of  love,  a  god  of  revelry,  a  god  of  plenty,  and  like  per-
sonages who  preside  over  the  institutions  and  occupations  of
mankind.  .  .  .  Psychotheism,  by  the  processes  of  mental
integration,  develops  in  one  direction  into  monotheism,  and
in  the  other  into  pantheism."

The  transition  from  physitheism  to  psychotheism,  there-
fore, is  simply  the  selection,  or  segregation,  from  the  confused
notion  of  animation  in  general,  and  from  the  more  definite
but  still  confused  notion  of  human  animation,  of  the  still
more  definite  and  higher  notion  of  rational  animation  such
as  belongs  only  to  the  phenomena  of  mind.  The  progress  of
evolution  is,  therefore,  no  less  normal  here  than  in  the  three
preceding  steps.

Major  Powell's  system  is,  therefore,  not  only  strictly  lo^

MAJOR  POWELL'S  SYSTEM.  257

ical,  but  is  in  complete  conformity  with  all  that  is  known  of
the  laws  of  evolution.  Had  it  not  been  elaborated  by  a  well-
known  practical  ethnographer  in  the  very  wigwams  of  the
savages,  where  he  has  listened  long  to  their  simple  stories  of
legendary  cosmogony,  it  might  have  been  accredited  to  the
fertile  brain  of  a  closet  evolutionist.

His  terminology,  however,  is  not  strictly  consistent  or
logical  throughout.  The  golden  thread  that  runs  through
the  system  and  binds  it  into  a  whole  is  not  the  object  of  wor-
ship in  itself,  but  the  attributes  of  that  object.  Hecastothe-
ism,  in  its  vague  simplicity,  is  the  worship  of  life :  not  the
biologist's  idea  cf  hfe,  but  that  of  the  savage,  to  whom  its
characteristic  quality  is  voluntary  motion.  This  conception
has  never  been  so  well  expressed  as  by  Mr.  Tylor  in  his
judiciously  chosen  term  "  animism."  Again,  in  zootheism,
the  real  object  is  not  wild  beasts,  but  the  now  developed  and
sharply  differentiated  conception  of  life  as  it  is  manifested  in
animated  nature,  including  human  life  not  yet  differentiated.
The  term  zootheism,  however,  may  be  made  to  denote  this
conception  by  supposing  it  to  reach  back  to  the  j^rimary
sense  of  its  first  component,  ^wo?,  alive.

But  physitheism  can  not  be  thus  reconciled,  and  indeed
the  worship  of  natural  objects  is,  logically  considered,  only
an  incident  of  the  transition.  The  real  change  has  consisted
in  the  differentiation  of  the  anthropomorphic  out  of  the  pre-
vious zoomorphic  deities.  The  logical  and  consistent  name
for  this  stage  would  therefore  have  been  AntJiropotheism.

It  is  not  until  he  reaches  the  fourth  stage,  psychotheism,
that  Major  Powell  touches  the  key-note  of  his  system  in  the
matter  of  terminology.  But  here  consistency  should  have
admonished  him  to  choose  a  term  like  the  preceding  ones,
which  should  express  the  concrete  object  of  worship  and  not
its  attribute.  As  it  is  not  these  mental  qualities  which  are
directly  worshiped  in  this  stage,  but  gods  endowed  with
them,  perhaps  the  simple  term  theism  would  be  as  appropri-
ate, from  that  point  of  view,  as  could  be  found.
43

258  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

A  completely  logical  terminology  of  Major  Powell's  sys"
tem,  based  on  the  conception  of  mythology,  or  primitive  re-
ligion, as  a  product  of  evolution,  would,  as  compared  with  his,
stand  as  follows :

Terminology  of
Stage.     Major  Powell.  Logical  Terminology.

1. . .  .Hecastotheism Animotheism,  or  Animism.

2. . .  .Zootheism Zootheism.

3. . .  .Physitheism Anthropotheism,  or  Anthropomorphism.

4. . .  .Psychotheism Psychotheism.

To  avoid  neologism,  unless  the  importance  of  making  the
name  of  each  stage  distinctly  convey  the  theological  concep-
tion in  its  composition  is  considered  primary,  the  terms
Animism  and  Anthropomorphism  may  be  substituted  for
the  more  logical  but  thus  far  unused  terms  Animotheism
and  Anthropotheism.

Let  us  next  consider  the  views  of  Mr.  Herbert  Spen-
cer.

To  do  this  it  will  be  necessary  to  look  at  religion  from
two  quite  different  points  of  view,  which  we  may  distinguish
as  the  theoretical  and  the  actual.  From  the  theoretical  point
of  view,  in  the  opinion  of  this  author,  "  religion  under  all  its
forms  is  distinguished  from  every  thing  else  in  this,  that  its
subject-matter  is  that  which  passes  the  sphere  of  experience."*
In  other  words,  religion  is  based  upon  the  idea  of  the  "  un-
knowable," It  turns  out,  as  knowledge  increases,  that  much
that  had  formerly  been  supposed  unknowable,  and  therefore
within  the  sphere  of  religion,  becomes  known,  and  passes  into
the  sphere  of  science ;  but,  however  far  this  process  may  ex-
tend, there  will  ever  remain  a  field  which  science  can  not  re-
claim, but  which  must  always  belong  to  religion.  This  field,
which  the  laws  of  thought  declare  to  be  necessarily  the  do-
main of  the  unknowable,  is  the  region  of  the  Absolute  and
Unconditioned  of  the  metaphysicians,  and  religion  must
therefore  ultimately  rest  upon  what  the  latter  have  distin-

*  "First  Principles,"  p.  17.

HERBERT  SPENCER'S  VIEWS.  259

guished  from  phenomena  by  the  name  of  Noumena,  which
conception  appears  further  to  be  equivalent  also  to  that  of
deity.

This  appears  to  me  to  be  Mr.  Spencer's  idea  of  the  theo-
retical nature  of  religion  in  the  abstract.

"With  regard  to  the  actual  nature  of  religion,  as  exem-
plified in  the  various  races  of  men,  Mr.  Spencer  agrees  more
nearly  with  Mr.  Tylor  than  with  Sir  John  Lubbock.  In-
deed, his  "ghost  theory"  differs  little  in  itself  from  the
"  animism  "  of  Tylor.  Mr.  Spencer,  however,  has  ideas  of
his  own  respecting  the  origin  of  the  belief  in  spiritual  beings
wliich  are  very  entertaining.  He  considers  ancestor-worship
as  the  basis  of  all  the  higher  forms  of  worship,  and  this  to
grow  out  of  the  belief  in  the  persistence  of  the  spirit  of  dead
ancestors.  With  Mr.  Tylor,  he  traces  the  belief  in  spiritual
beings  to  the  notions  early  entertained  by  savages  respecting
a  double  self,  suggested  by  such  familiar  phenomena  as  shad-
ows, echoes,  reflections,  dreams,  swoons,  epilepsy,  apoplexy,
etc.  He  argues  forcibly  against  the  natural  direct  origin  of
any  of  the  definite  forms  of  religious  belief,  and  maintains
that  they  have  all  arisen  from  ancestor-worship  in  indirect
ways — the  fetich,  plant,  animal,  star,  or  imaginary  deity  hav-
ing in  all  cases  represented,  more  or  less  immediately,  the
tribal  ancestor  whose  name  and  attributes  it  bears.  If  this
view  be  correct,  government  must  in  all  cases  have  antedated
religion,  and  he  adduces  many  cases  in  support  of  the  view
that,  where  no  form  of  headship  exists,  not  even  fetichism  is
found.  The  following  passage  from  the  "  Data  of  Ethics  "  *
gives  a  very  complete  condensed  view  of  Mr.  Spencer's  ar-
gument :  "  As  fast  as  the  ghost-theory  becomes  established
and  definite,  there  grows  up  another  kind  of  check  on  the
immediate  satisfaction  of  the  desires — a  check  constituted  by
ideas  of  the  evils  which  ghosts  may  inflict  if  offended  ;  and
when  political  headship  gets  settled,  and  the  ghosts  of  dead
chiefs,  thought  of  as  more  powerful  and  more  relentless  than

♦Page  116.

200  PEOGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

otlier  ghosts,  are  especially  dreaded,  there  begins  to  take
shape  the  form  of  restraint  distinguished  as  religious."

Mr.  John  Fiske  has,  in  his  "  Unseen  World,"  *  given  a
somewhat  novel  definition  of  the  rehgious  sentiment,  which
he  expresses  in  these  words  :  "  All  animals  seek  for  fullness
of  life ;  but  in  civilized  man  this  craving  has  acquired  a
moral  significance,  and  has  become  a  spiritual  aspiration;
and  this  emotional  tendency,  more  or  less  strong  in  the  hu-
man race,  we  call  rehgious  feeling,  or  religion."

Dr.  Alexander  Winchell,  in  his  work  on  the  "  Kecon-
ciliation  of  Science  and  Religion,"  f  enumerates  the  follow-
ing elements  which  he  thinks  to  be  common  to  all  religions :

1.  A  Supreme  Being,  author  of  all  things.

2.  A  Bevelation  of  the  Supreme  Being,  either  through
natural  phenomena  or  inspired  men.

3.  A  system  of  worship.

4.  Prayer,  the  universal  cry  of  humanity  in  distress.

5.  An  idea  of  a  future  existence.

6.  An  idea  of  moral  responsibility.

7.  A  system  of  future  rewards  and  punishments.

8.  A  priesthood  clothed  with  divine  authority.

"  These  facts,"  he  says,  "  I  find  to  be  the  constants  in  the
varying  faiths  of  mankind.  I  will  add  that  two  other  facts
reveal  themselves  in  most  of  the  religious  systems  of  the
world — both  the  greater  and  the  less.  These  are :  1.  A  be-
lief in  the  efficacy  of  vicarious  expiation.  2.  An  expectation
of  a  Redeemer."  It  is  unnecessary  to  say  of  this  enumera-
tion that  it  is  confined  to  the  higher  and  derivative  forms  of
religion,  and  is  of  very  little  assistance  in  the  effort  to  arrive
at  the  essential  conditions  of  religion  itself.

Dr.  Deems  defines  religion  as  a  "loving  obedience  to
God's  commandments."  Bishop  Butler  maintained  that  even
what  is  called  "  natural  religion  "  was  originally  a  revelation.
His  idea  of  it  was  a  belief  in  one  God,  the  Creator  and  Moral
Governor  of  the  world,  and  in  a  future  state  of  moral  retri-
*  Page  143.  f  Page  21.

FUNDAMENTAL  ELEMENTS  OF  RELIGION.         261

bution,  implying,  of  course,  the  idea  of  immortality.  Views
of  this  class,  varying  in  all  degrees  of  superficiality,  may  be
found  leading  down  to  the  modern  religious  revivalist's  idea
of  "  getting  religion,"  which  means  getting  excited  about
religion,  and  ranks  along  with  the  self-wrought  "  ecstasy  "  of
the  savage.

In  surveying  the  whole  field  which  we  have  gone  over  in
search  of  a  definition  of  religion,  we  may,  I  think,  clearly  dis-
cover three  leading  elements,  all  fundamental  in  their  nature,
which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  most  competent  authorities,  vie
with  one  another  for  the  first  place  among  the  true  marks  of
a  religious  state  of  the  human  mind.  One  of  these  is  the
idea  of  immortality ;  another,  the  idea  of  a  spiritual  existence ;
and  another,  the  idea  of  a  God.

A  closer  scrutiny  of  each  of  these,  however,  reveals  a  con-
sensus in  their  characteristics,  and  points  to  a  common  con-
ception ^rom  which  all  are  deducible.  For,  on  the  one  hand,
the  idea  of  immortality  is  a  rational  deduction  from  the  idea
of  spirit.  Of  the  three,  this  is  the  idea  which  has  been  least
universal.  Modified  so  as  to  signify  simply  a  future  state  of
spiritual  existence  whose  duration  is  not  determined  or  taken
into  account,  this  belief  can  be  traced  much  further  than  can
the  higher  idea  of  unlimited  duration.  Still  further  shorn
of  its  rational  inferences  until  it  becomes  reduced  to  the  sim-
ple notion  of  a  continued  existence  as  spirit  after  the  body
has  been  abandoned,  this  belief  is  found  to  prevail  almost
universally  among  the  lower  races  of  men.  But,  in  all  these
gradations  of  the  belief,  the  persistent  part  is  the  notion  of  a
spiritual  existence.  The  branch  of  the  primitive  conception
of  religion  which  culminates  in  the  doctrine  of  immortality
may  therefore  be  regarded  as  the  subjective  branch,  the  indi-
vidual looking  constantly  inward  upon  his  own  nature  and
existence.

If  we  analyze  in  a  similar  manner  the  third  funda-
mental element  named  —  that  of  deity  —  we  shall  perceive
that  this  likewise  represents  an  advanced  stage  of  thought.

262  PROGEESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

For,  whetlier  deitj  be  conceived  as  one  or  many,  the  con-
ception involves  the  notion  of  spiritual  existence.  Nullus
in  microcosmo  spiritus,  nullus  in  macrocosmo  deus.*  The
effort  made  by  many  writers  to  show  that  a  vague  form  of
hierarchy  amounting  to  virtual  monotheism  pervades  all  re-
ligions, even  the  lowest,  has  broken  down  before  the  vast
accumulations  of  fact  from  the  philosophies  of  the  lowest
tribes  of  men.f  The  stage  is  frequently  found  in  which  the
conception  of  deity  is  reduced  to  the  imagined  mysterious
existence  of  unnumbered  invisible  ghosts,  malignant  and  be-
nignant, that  fill  the  air  and  all  space,  and  haunt  the  abodes
of  all  the  living.:}:  Thus,  the  conception  of  deity,  like  that
of  immortality,  is  traced  back  to  the  simpler  idea  of  spirit.
But  here  spiritual  existence  is  predicated  of  the  non-ego,  so
that  theology  may  be  properly  regarded  as  the  objective
branch  of  a  primordial  religious  trunk.  This  trunk,  the  par-
ent and  essential  part  of  all  religion,  is  therefore  th^  notion
of  spiritual  existence^  the  idea  of  an  invisible  and  imma-
terial being,  endowed  with  thought,  feeling,  and  locomo-
tive powers.  We  must,  therefore,  credit  Mr.  Tylor  with
having,  in  his  "minimum  definition,"  really  reached  the

*  Dr.  Henry  More,  as  quoted  by  Sir  William  Hamilton  in  his  "  Metaphysics,"
vol.  i,  p.  32  (Lecture  2).  The  passage  does  not  occur  in  More's  "  Immortalitas
Animae,"  where  it  would  have  been  most  appropriate,  and  where  the  substance
of  the  idea  is  often  repeated.

f  Kant  says :  "  Daher  sehen  wir  bci  alien  Volkem  durch  ihre  blindeste
Vielgotterei  doch  einige  Funken  des  Monotheismus  durchschimmern,  woza
nicht  Nachdenken  und  tiefe  Speculation,  sondem  nur  ein  nach  und  nach  ver-
standlich  gewordcner  natiirlicher  Gang  des  gemeinen  Verstandes  gefiihrt  hat."
("  Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft,"  S.  404.)

That  a  tendency  is  clearly  perceptible  among  fetichistic  and  polytheistic
peoples  to  organize  their  deities  into  a  hierarchy,  and  eventually  to  integrate
the  entire  system  into  a  monotheistic  one,  facts  abundantly  prove  (Tylor,
"Primitive  Culture,"  Boston,  1874,  vol.  ii,  pp.  258,  332,  335,  345,  et  seq.),  but
this  only  illustrates,  in  the  most  conclusive  manner,  the  transition  from  mere
spiritism  to  true  theism.

X  Tylor,  loe.  eit,  vol.  ii,  p.  186  ;  Spencer,  "  Principles  of  Sociology,"  vol  i,
pp.  200,  209.

BELIEF  IN   SPIRITUAL  BEINGS.  263

bottom  of  the  question,  and  defined  religion  in  all  that  is
absolutely  essential  to  the  conception — "  the  belief  in  spirit-
ual beings."

Having  thus  in  a  manner  answered  the  question,  What  is
religion  ?  there  remains  the  ulterior  question,  Why  do  men
beheve  in  spiritual  beings  ?  This  question  has  been  answered
in  three  ways.  One  of  these  answers  is,  that  this  belief  has
been  supernaturally  implanted  in  the  mind  of  man.  Another
is,  that  the  phenomena  of  nature,  springing  from  invisible
sources  of  power,  have  led  man,  after  the  analogy  of  his
own  modes  of  manifesting  power,  to  assume  invisible  and
immaterial  beings,  in  other  respects  Kke  himself,  as  the
causes  of  natural  phenomena.  A  third  answer  ascribes  the
belief  in  immaterial  spirits,  or  ghosts,  to  deductions  of  the
primitive  mind  based  on  the  experiences  of  nearly  or  quite
every  individual  of  dreams,  epilepsy,  mania,  trance,  etc.,
coupled  with  the  daily  observation  by  all  of  such  mysterious
phenomena  as  reflection  in  water,  shadows  cast  by  the  sun
and  moon,  echoes,  etc.

The  first  of  these  answers,  or  the  supernatural  explana-
tion of  the  existence  of  religion,  being  outside  of  the  do-
main of  science  and  philosophy,  need  not  be  treated  here.
It  may,  however,  be  remarked  that  this  theory  is  usually
urged  by  those  whose  idea  of  religion  involves  the  distinct
belief  both  in  immortality  and  in  a  fully  developed  God.
But,  as  already  shown,  such  a  developed  belief  is  far  from
universal,  a  fact  which  at  least  denotes  a  serious  flaw  in  this
mode  of  reasoning.

Of  the  two  natural  theories,  the  first  named,  or  anthropo-
morphic, theory  furnishes  the  objective,  the  second,  or  psy-
chological, theory  the  subjective  explanation  of  the  origin
and  genesis  of  the  religious  sentiment.  That  either  is  abso-
lutely false,  it  would  indeed  be  rash  to  assert.  That  both
are  in  a  large  degree  true,  is  altogether  probable.  Taken
together,  these  two  principles  undoubtedly  furnish  an  ade-

264  PROGRESS.— PEIMARY  MEAN'S.

quate  explanation  of  this  fundamental  fact,  so  prominent  in
the  history  of  man  and  of  society.

The  only  remaining  problem  is  with  regard  to  the  re-
spective shares  which  should  be  allotted  to  each  of  these
influences  in  the  production  of  the  result.  Both  lead  the
inquirer  to  the  conclusion  that  religion  and  philosophy  have
a  common  root.  As  Major  Powell  has  well  expressed  it,
"  the  instinct  of  cosmic  interrogation  follows  hard  upon  the
instinct  of  self-preservation."  The  objective  theory  is  cer-
tainly, in  so  far  as  it  has  in  fact  conduced  to  the  result,  a
product  of  mental  effort,  of  thought.  It  is  a  philosophy  in
itself.  But  so,  too,  is  the  subjective  theory  an  intellectual
deduction,  though  certainly  of  a  less  elevated  and  less  dig-
nified character.  This  quality  of  greater  simplicity,  how-
ever, so  far  from  discouraging  its  acceptance,  is,  when  prop-
erly viewed,  in  itself  a  point  in  its  favor.  The  strongest
argument  which  has  been  brought  forward  on  this  side  of
the  question  is  found  in  the  fact,  so  forcibly  urged  by
Mr.  Spencer,  that  the  regular  phenomena  of  nature  never
appear  to  arouse  the  wonder  of  the  savage,  and  that  it  would
seem  impossible  for  a  system  of  philosophy  to  have  sprung
up  based  upon  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  primitive  man  to
explain  such  phenomena.  He  cites  numerous  cases  in  illus-
tration of  this  fact,  and  concludes  that  "  direct  and  indi-
rect evidence  thus  unite  to  show  us  that  in  the  primitive
man  there  does  not  exist  that  sentiment  which  Kature-
worship  presupposes.  And  long  before  mental  evolution
initiates  it,  the  earth  and  the  heavens  have  been  peopled
by  supernatural  beings,  derived  from  the  ghosts,  which
really  draw  out  his  hopes  and  fears,  and  prompt  his  offer-
ings and  prayers."  *

Having  thus  sought  to  attain  both  to  a  definition  and  a
genesis  of  religion — ^having  endeavored  not  only  to  point  out
what  religion  really  and  fundamentally  is,  but  also  how  it
"  Principles  of  Sociologj-,"  vol.  i,  Appendix  B,  p.  u.

RELIGION  AND  PROGRESS.  265

came  to  exist — it  remains  to  fix  its  position  in  the  history  of
human  progress.

At  the  outset,  we  may  certainly  say  of  it,  even  with  more
safety  than  we  said  it  of  existing  government,  that  while  it
is  a  product  of  intellectual  effort,  and  therefore  artificial,  still
it  is  in  no  proper  sense  itself  an  art.  This  alone  would  at
'once  relegate  it  to  the  class  of  not  intrinsically  progressive
agencies.  Whatever  benefits  it  confers  upon  the  race,  there-
fore, it  must  either  confer  directly — i.  e.,  by  the  application
of  the  direct  method  of  force  or  persuasion,  and  not  by  that
of  the  indirect  method  of  invention  and  device — or  else  it
must  do  this  in  virtue  of  its  conservative  tendencies  in  pro-
tecting and  preserving  the  fruits  of  real  progress.  To  under-
stand this  proposition  better,  let  us  consider  for  a  moment
upon  what  fundamental  elements,  subjective  and  objective,
religion  is  based.  Whatever  may  be  the  opinions  entertained
by  educated  men  respecting  the  nature  of  spiritual  beings  as
conceived  of  by  the  developed  intellect,  all  will  no  doubt
admit  that  the  conceptions  of  primitive  man  and  those  of
existing  savages,  on  these  questions,  were  and  continue  to  be
grossly  false  and  erroneous.  ]^o  one  believes  that  the  air
swarms  with  vapory  phantoms,  or  that  special  deities  guard
the  fountains,  groves,  and  highways  of  modem  or  of  savage
countries.  The  satyrs,  sylphs,  and  undines,  the  lares  and  pe-
nates,  as  well  as  all  the  higher  spiritual  beings,  in  which  even
the  cultured  Greek  believed,  have  been  swept  away,  until
many  students  of  Greek  and  Koman  literature  find  it  diffi-
cult to  conceive  that  these  wise  peoples  really  helieved  in
their  own  religion,  and  it  requires  such  facts  as  the  sacrifice
of  Socrates  to  their  religious  fanaticism  to  awaken  in  them  a
sense  of  the  reality  of  polytheism  as  a  religion.  But  just  as
the  believers  in  God  now  reject  Jupiter  and  Zeus,  in  the
same  manner  did  the  believers  in  Jupiter  and  Zeus  then  re-
ject the  far  older  Jehovah.  Mohammed  made  war  upon
Asiatic  idolatry  in  the  same  manner  as  the  modem  Chris-
tian missionary  makes  war  upon  Fiji  and  Zulu  conceptions.

266  PROGRESS.— PRIMAKY  MEANS.

Each  religion  regards  all  others  as  wholly  false.  Even  the
different  sects  of  Christendom  regard  all  other  sects  as  em-
bracing fundamental  eiTors.  This  fact,  as  already  remarked
{sujpra,  p.  168),  standing  alone,  could  lead  the  disinterested
observer  to  no  other  conclusion  than  that  all  religions  are
based  upon  a  fundamental  error.  Let  us  inquire  in  how  far
this  conclusion  requires  qualification  from  extraneous  consid-
erations.

Taking  up,  first,  the  subjective  view  of  the  genesis  of  re-
ligion, are  the  premises  sound  from  which  the  savage  and
primitive  man  logically  deduces  the  existence  of  spiritual  be-
ings %  Does  the  reflection  of  a  man's  face  in  a  pool  really
indicate  that  the  man  possesses  two  faces,  a  bodily  and  a
spiritual  face  ?  Does  the  shadow  which  he  casts,  or  the  echo
of  his  voice,  really  prove  that  he  has  an  immaterial  double  ?
Does  a  dream  or  a  trance,  in  which  an  alihi  is  proved  to  the
mind  of  the  ignorant  but  rational  savage,  really  demonstrate
that  his  other  self  exists  and  has  been  wandering  about,  while
all  his  friends  declare  that  his  proper  self  has  remained  in
the  same  place  ?  Is  there  any  fallacy  by  which,  on  this  view,
the  fundamental  conception  of  religion  has  been  arrived  at?
All  will,  of  course,  admit  that  the  premises  are  utterly  false
in  all  these  cases.  If,  then,  the  very  root  of  the  tree  consist
wholly  of  error,  is  it  not  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the
branches  and  the  fruit  will  partake  of  the  same  nature  ?  But,
to  continue  the  figure,  some  may  ask.  Have  there  not  been
choice  and  valuable  grafts  added  which  redeem  the  primitive
bad  stock  ?  To  answer  this  question,  let  us  first  follow  out
this  subjective  or  psychological  branch  which  leads  to  the
belief  in  immortality,  and  subsequently  let  us  follow  out  also
the  objective  or  theological  branch  which  leads  to  belief  in
deity.

From  the  idea  of  a  double  manifesting  its  existence  in
reflected  images,  shadows,  echoes,  dreams,  and  swoons,  to
that  of  a  continued  existence,  was  but  a  step,  and  one  quickly
taken.     The  link  by  which  these  two  notions  are  connected

SUBJECTIVE  GEKESIS.— IMMORTALITY.  267

is  death.  For  what  is  death  but  an  indefinitely  prolonged
trance,  in  which  the  spirit  finally  abandons  the  body  en-
tirely, never  to  return  to  it  ?  The  great  prevalence  of  such
funeral  rites  as  indicate  the  belief  that  the  spirits  of  the  dead
still  exist  and  linger  around  the  remains  of  the  body,  and  the
spot  where  it  is  entombed,  shows  how  readily  and  univer-
sally this  little  piece  of  ratiocination  has  been  performed
by  primitive  races.  Quickly  following  upon  this,  too,  has
grown  up  and  widely  spread  over  the  uncivilized  world  the
doctrine  of  a  veritable  future  life,  usually  conceived  as  simi-
lar to  this,  and  not  generally  thought  of  as  of  indefinite  du-
ration, the  mind  not  yet  grasping  so  abstract  a  conception.
Among  the  forms  of  this  belief  there  is  often  found  the  ac-
companying idea  of  location.  This  future  abode  of  spirits
is,  moreover,  usually  conceived  as  superior  to,  though  in
most  respects  resembling,  the  existent  one.  In  the  more  de-
veloped systems,  this  abode  is  further  differentiated,  and  the
spirits  are  classified  on  one  principle  or  another  and  sent  to
different  regions.  The  latest  development  in  this  direction
is  the  division  into  an  abode  of  bliss  for  the  good  and  an
abode  of  torment  for  the  bad — Elysium  and  Tartarus,  Heaven
and  Hell.

The  passage  from  the  idea  of  a  continued  future  exist-
ence to  that  of  an  unlimited  future  existence,  though  appar-
ently an  easy  and  natural  one,  has  in  point  of  fact  proved
slow  and  difiicult.  As  the  intellect  rose  to  the  capacity  of
grasping  the  conception  of  infinite  duration,  instead  of  reason-
ing at  once  to  immortality,  it  tended  in  a  large  part  of  the
world  to  reason  away  the  idea  of  any  future  existence  at  all.
On  no  other  view  is  it  possible  to  explain  the  absence  of  any
true  doctrine  of  immortality  in  the  great  Hebrew,  Chaldean,
Egyptian,  and  Buddhistic  nations  of  Asia,  as  well  as  among
the  ancient  Greeks  and  Komans.  It  has  only  been  in  the
later  stages  of  a  few  of  these  religions  that  this  doctrine  has
at  length  gained  a  foot-hold.  The  teachings  of  Socrates,  as
set  forth  in  the  "Phsedo"  of  Plato,  prepared  that  corner—

268  PROGRESS.— PRIMAPwY  MEAN'S.

then  the  most  enlightened — of  the  world  for  those  of  Christ,
four  centuries  later ;  but  only  half  a  century  prior  to  the  lat-
ter date  we  find  Cicero  arguing  for  immortality  as  if  it  were
a  new  and  unaccepted  doctrine,  and  Cato  the  younger  seai'ch-
ing  in  the  "  Phsedo  "  for  a  justification  of  suicide.

Without  discussing  here  the  effect  of  this  belief  upon
human  progress  and  human  happiness,  we  will  simply  ask
whether  any  additional  proof  has  been  brought  forward  dur-
ing the  progress  of  the  development  of  the  belief  in  a  spiritual
existence  which  places  it  upon  any  firmer  basis  as  an  objective
reality  than  that  furnished  by  shadows  and  dreams.  Clearly
there  has  not,  and  this  is  not  only  admitted  by  the  most  emi-
nent theologians  of  the  present  age,  but  these  insist  that  it
is  both  useless  and  wicked  to  seek  for  proofs,  and  that  im-
mortality must  be  accepted  upon  faith  as  a  supernatural  reve-
lation to  man.

Returning  once  more  to  the  primitive  belief  in  spiritual
beings  as  the  root  of  all  religions,  we  will  next  inquire  upon
what  basis  of  reality  it  rests  when  regarded  as  an  objective
deduction  from  the  otherwise  inexplicable  phenomena  of
nature.  Is  the  wind  really  an  immaterial  spirit  ?  Are  the
sun,  moon,  and  stars  actual  deities  ?  Is  the  rainbow  a  god-
dess, or  a  bridge  connecting  earth  and  heaven,  or  was  it
placed  in  the  heavens  by  deity  as  a  covenant  between  him
and  man?  Are  meteors  "excrements  of  dirty  little  star-
gods  "  ?  *  or  is  an  eclipse  the  result  of  the  defecation  of  the
divine  orb  of  day  ?  f  Does  the  plant  grow,  the  tide  ebb  and
flow,  the  rain  descend,  or  the  lightning  flash,  in  obedience  to
spiritual  powers  above  and  outside  of  nature,  having  distinct
personalities  ?

All  these  phenomena  are  now  satisfactorily  explained  on
strictly  natural  principles.  Among  peoples  acquainted  with
science,  all  such  supernatural  beings  have  been  dispensed

*  Powell's  address,  above  quoted.

f  This,  Major  Powell  informs  me,  is  a  myth  of  one  of  the  Pacific  Slope
tribes  in  the  physitheistic  stage.

OBJECTIVE  GENESIS.— DEITY.  269

with,  and  the  belief  in  them  is  declared  to  be  wholly  false,
and  to  have  always  been  false.  Yet,  other  spiritual  beings
are  retained  who  are  required  to  explain  such  residual  phe-
nomena as  science  has  not  yet  grasped  and  subjected  to  law.
Within  the  historic  period,  the  territory  once  belonging  to
the  gods,  which  has  been  contested  and  reclaimed  by  science,
embraces  the  entire  fields  of  astronomy,  physics,  chemistry,
and  geology.  That  of  biology  has  now  fairly  passed  out  of
theological  supremacy,  while  those  of  moral  and  social  phe-
nomena are  at  the  present  time  the  battle-ground  between
science  and  religion.  And  now  Mr.  Spencer  comes  forward
and  proclaims  that  the  latter  must  continue  to  retreat  and
surrender  its  empire,  until  the  line  is  reached  which  sets  ab-
solute bounds  to  all  possible  human  comprehension.  This
he  is  pleased  to  call  a  reconciliation  !  It  certainly  affords  the
only  indication  that  the  work  of  scientific  invasion  will  ever
find  a  limit ;  and  any  terms  with  a  victorious  enemy  are  bet-
ter than  annihilation  (vol.  i,  p.  156  *).

We  saw  that  the  subjective  branch  of  religion  was  joined
to  error  as  its  trunk,  and  that  none  but  errors  grew  out  of  it
or  were  ingrafted  upon  it.  We  now  see  that  the  objective
branch,  joined  to  the  same  trunk,  has  only  been  modified  by
gradually  dwindling  away  in  its  ascent  until,  in  the  most
logical  minds,  it  has  virtually  disappeared.     According  to

*  It  seems  to  be  merely  a  coincidence  that  I  should  have  employed  the  same
simile  that  Mr.  Gladstone  employed  for  precisely  the  same  purpose.  I  certainly
never  saw  Mr.  Gladstone's  address  nor  the  appendix  to  it,  and  the  first  intima-
tion I  had  that  any  one  else  had  ever  seen  the  matter  in  the  same  light  as  it  had
presented  itself  to  me  was  on  July  28th  (1882),  or  some  months  after  the  chap-
ter containing  the  passage  referred  to  had  been  stereotyped,  when,  on  looking
through  the  "Notes"  to  the  "  Study  of  Sociology"  (the  only  part  of  the  work
that  I  had  not  read  in  the  current  periodicals)  I  met  with  it  on  page  423.  The
alternative  interpretation  which  Mr.  Spencer  there  points  out  would,  I  think,
occur  to  very  few,  while  the  fact  that  the  same  simile  could  have  been  used  in-
dependently by  two  writers,  certainly  strengthens  confidence  in  its  legitimacy.
I  need  not,  of  course,  add  that,  had  I  known  of  Mr.  Gladstone's  use  of  it,  I  would
have  omitted  it,  however  independently  it  might  have  first  presented  itself  to
my  mind.

270  PROGRESS. -PRIMARY  MEANS.

Spencer,  it  must  eventually  be  reduced  to  a  mere  metaphys-
ical entity,  wliicli  can  certainly  scarcely  be  recognized  as  a
spiritual  being.

Looking  back  now  over  the  whole  field,  there  remains  no
difficulty  in  recognizing  the  true  position  of  religion  as  a
social  factor.  It  was  simply  a  necessity  of  the  condition  of
things  that  it  should  have  come  into  existence  as  it  has  done.
The  placing  of  a  rational  being  in  a  world  such  as  this  is
constitutes  the  all-sufficient  explanation  of  the  development
of  a  religious  sentiment  and  religious  institutions.  The  fact
was  pointed  out  with  some  care  in  the  Introduction  (vol.  i,
p.  45),  that  the  phenomena  of  the  nniveree  present  to  the
untaught  mind  a  maze  of  incomprehensible  data  for  specu-
lation. The  tme  nature  of  phenomena  can  only  be  known
after  ages  of  profound  scientific  thought  and  labor.  More-
over, it  is  undeniable  that  the  apparent  is  generally  wholly
different  from  the  real,  and,  in  a  vast  number  of  cases,  it  is
precisely  the  reverse.  Hence,  the  uninstructed  rational  fac-
ulty, instead  of  being  employed  in  acquiring  knowledge,  is
much  of  its  time  employed  in  manufacturing  error.  This
mass  of  error,  logically  reached  through  the  legitimate  exer-
cise of  the  developing  reason  of  primordial  man  from  all  that
nature  presents  to  the  experience  of  his  faculties,  constitutes,
in  every  tribe  and  nation,  the  warp  of  its  religion.  Religion
owes  the  possibility  of  its  existence  to  the  paradoxes  of  nat-
ure— to  the  chief  of  which  attention  has  already  been  espe-
cially called  (vol.  i,  p.  47) — to  the  incontrovertible  fact  that
in  the  nature  of  things  a  rational  being  must,  as  a  direct  and
inevitable  consequence  of  his  rationality,  be  led  into  the
most  vital  errors,  for  which  he  must  further  be  deceived  into
cherishing  the  most  intense  regard,  until,  by  the  slow  march
of  solid  knowledge  and  the  ultimate  adoption  of  the  scientific
method  of  laborious  research  and  crucial  tests,  truth  at  last
emerges  and  the  clouds  of  error  vanish.

This  may  be  a  hard  lesson  to  learn,  as  it  is  a  thankless  one
to  inculcate,  but  to  this  complexion  it  must  eventually  come.

EELIGION  A  NECESSITY.  271

True,  there  is  no  room  for  optimism  here,  but  we  have  already
seen  {supra,  p.  46)  that  this  is  far  from  being  an  optimistic
world.  Those  who  are  capable  of  wholly  divesting  them-
selves of  these  optimistic  conceptions  can  see  that  it  is  just
as  antecedently  probable  that  the  world  and  man  should  be
thus  inharmoniously  adjusted,  as  that  they  should  be  either
more  or  less  so.  The  only  qualification  absolutely  required
is  that  which  the  law  of  adaptation  every-where  requires,  viz.,
that  the  want  of  correspondence  shall  not  be  so  great  as
wholly  to  prevent  the  continuance  of  the  organism.  And
here  it  may  be  properly  remarked  that  it  is  not  at  all  im-
probable that  many  incipient  human  races  may  have  actually
perished  at  the  outset  of  their  career  in  consequence  of  the
adoption  of  errors  of  so  vital  a  nature  to  their  existence  as  to
render  it  no  longer  possible.  Of  course,  like  other  transition-
forms,  such  races  could  leave  no  trace  of  their  history,  and
therefore  we  can  only  reason  out  their  possibility.  To  illus-
trate, however,  how  such  might  have  been  the  case,  we  need
only  be  reminded  of  the  great  prevalence  of  ophiolatry.*
The  zealous  protection  of  venomous  serpents  causes  them
to  multiply  rapidly,  and  a  condition  may  be  easily  imagined
in  which  this  njight  result  in  the  actual  destruction  of  the
race  persistently  clinging  to  this  caprice.  India  illustrates
this  in  the  fact  that  according  to  official  returns  over  twenty-
five  thousand  persons  die  annually  of  snake-bite,  and  the
British  officials  meet'  with  fanatical  resistance  in  their
attempts  to  rid  the  country  of  these  dreadful  pests.f

Still  more  dangerous  foes  might  as  easily  become  objects
of  worship  and  religious  guardianship  as  snakes.  Suppose  a
tribe  inhabiting  the  tropics  to  become  possessed  of  the  belief
that  the  tiger  embodies  the  ghost  of  its  much-revered  ances-
tral chief,  now  a  powerful  god,  and  that  therefore  the  tiger
must  be  held  sacred  and  never  harmed  in  the  least  particular,

*  Tylor,  "Primitive  Culture"  (London,  1871),  vol.  ii,  pp.  1,  217.     Loc.  cit.
(Boston,  1874),  vol.  i,  p.  467;  vol.  ii,  pp.  233,  234,  239.
f  Spencer,  "  Principles  of  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  p.  36.

272  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

under  pain  and  dread  of  cliastisement  dire  at  tlie  hands  of
said  ancestral  god.  These  men  might  slay  the  antelope  and
the  buffalo,  and  thus  reduce  the  amount  of  the  tiger's  natural
prey,  and  give  it  cause  to  turn  upon  man  as  a  substitute,  but
they  might  never  injure  a  hair  of  the  tiger  itself.  Under
such  a  state  of  things,  the  tiger  would  soon  come  to  regard
man  as  an  easy  and  defenseless  prey,  and  would  systematically
hunt  him  and  eventually  exterminate  him.

Erroneous  beliefs  of  many  other  kinds  might  easily  lead
to  the  speedy  or  gradual  extinction  of  races  of  men.  Sup-
pose a  tribe  to  be  seized,  for  any  cause,  with  the  idea  that  a
divine  command  had  been  given  to  destroy  all  the  female
infants  born  after  a  certain  day.  Such  a  notion  is  not  more
absurd  than  many  that  have  actually  been  entertained.  The
idea  that  all  "heretics"  must  be  destroyed  would  be  as  fatal
to  the  intellectual  life  of  society,  could  it  be  persistently  car-
ried out,  as  would  the  one  proposed,  to  its  physical  life.  For
a  "  heretic  "  is  simply  a  doubter  of  the  truth  of  these  false
conceptions  in  the  world,  and  he  doubts  because  he  possesses
a  superior  reasoning  power,  and  therefore  represents  a  higher
intellectual  development.  Yet  this  idea  has  extensively  pre-
vailed in  the  vanguard  of  humanity  within  the  last  five  cen-
turies, and  thousands  of  the  brightest  lights  of  the  world
have  been  thus  extinguished.  Could  it  have  been  enforced,
there  could  have  been  no  such  awakening  as  has  taken  place
since  that  epoch — no  era  of  science.  Then  there  is  the  great
eclipse  of  the  learning  of  the  ancients  under  this  same  re-
ligious influence,  the  closing  of  the  schools  throughout  the
Roman  Empire,  and  the  destruction  of  the  works  of  liter-
ature and  art,  including  the  Alexandrian  library.  The  his-
tory of  savage  customs  is  supplemented  by  that  of  cultured
peoples  in  demonstrating  that  progress  is  by  no  means  a
stable  condition,  and  has  frequently  been  threatened  with  a
total  eclipse  by  the  rise  of  some  erroneous  and  fatal  belief
incompatible  with  its  continuance.

To  most  minds  the  proposition  that  religion  and  science

RELIGION  AND  SCIENCE.  273

are  fundamentally  identical  will  present  a  paradox.  Yet
such  is  unquestionably  the  case.  For,  if  science  consists  in  a
rational  effort  to  explain  phenomena,  this  is  certainly  the
fundamental  character  of  religion.  Phenomena  simply  fur-
nish the  premises,  and  from  these  premises  the  active  brain
deduces  its  conclusions.  These  conclusions  are  crystallized
into  beliefs  which  are  either  true  or  untrue.  If  true,  they
furnish  the  data  for  the  scientific  elaboration  of  a  cosmology.
If  untrue,  they  furnish  the  materials  of  a  theology.  While,
however,  religious  beliefs  .have  no  demonstrable  correspond-
ence with  the  objective  reality,  it  is  not  true  that  every  error
is  necessarily  in  the  nature  of  a  religious  belief.  This  must
possess  a  special  quality  drawn  from  the  peculiar  nature  of
the  conception  of  spiritual  beings.  It  must  be  of  a  transcen-
dental character,  which  is  best  designated  by  the  term  su2)er-
natural.  ~^o  other  errors  than  those  which  involve  a  belief
in  the  supernatural  possess  the  fundamental  characteristics  of
religious  error.

It  is,  therefore,  upon  this  line  that  the  two  systems  of
explaining  phenomena  divide.  The  religious  explanation  is
the  supernatural,  the  scientific  explanation  is  the  natural.  In
all  ages  there  have  been  some  phenomena  for  which  only  a
supernatural  explanation  had  been  offered,  while  in  all  na-
tions at  all  advanced  in  culture  many  phenomena  have  been
explained  according  to  both  methods  by  different  minds.  It
has,  however,  been  the  uniform  mark  of  intellectual  progress
that  the  supernatural  should  constantly  give  way  to  the  nat-
ural method,  and  it  has  been  on  this  advancing  line  that  the
warfare  of  religion  and  science  has  been  constantly  waged.
The  success  of  the  latter  must  be  ascribed  to  the  application
of  what  we  have  denominated  the  indirect  method.  The
weapons  of  religion  have  been  coercion  and  exhortation ;
those  of  science  have  been  skill  and  strategy.

The  developing  intellect  was  at  the  outset  placed  face  to
face  with  two  classes  of  phenomena,  not  indeed  generically
distinct,  but  whose  extremes  present  vast  differences  in  many

274  PEOGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

respects.  One  class  embraced  the  simple  mechanical  phe-
nomena which  lie  upon  the  surface  of  nature,  and  which
were  fortunately  of  the  greatest  immediate  practical  impor-
tance to  the  physical  life  of  the  race.  The  other  class  em-
braced all  the  deeper  cosmical  phenomena,  of  vast  importance
to  a  developed  race,  but  with  which  primitive  man  really
need  have  had  little  to  do.

The  lower  animals  do  not  appear  to  have  any  thoughts
whatever  about  this  class  of  natural  events,  although  they
manifest  considerable  acquaintauQe  with  the  other  class
which  materially  improves  their  ability  to  provide  their  own
subsistence.  But  to  the  uninstructed  intellect  of  primitive
man  no  distinction  in  point  of  importance  was  recognized
between  these  two  classes  of  phenomena,  and  it  immediately
began  to  manufacture  beliefs  from  both  classes  alike.  The
impossibility  of  comprehending  those  of  the  deeper  and  more
recondite  class  led  at  once  to  the  adoption  of  all  the  errors
attendant  upon  the  fundamentally  erroneous  supernatural
explanation,  and  gave  rise  to  religion  as  an  inseparable  ele-
ment in  the  future  culture  and  progress  of  the  race.  It  was
impossible  that  the  primitive  mind  should  make  a  correct
solution  of  the  problems  presented  by  such  phenomena  as  a
reflected  image,  a  shadow,  an  echo,  a  dream,  a  swoon,  a  fit,
or  death  supervening  upon  a  comatose  state.  These  phe-
nomena have  only  been  correctly  solved  within  the  scientific
period  by  a  wide  acquaintance  with  the  laws  of  optics,  of
physiology,  and  of  psychology  as  a  product  of  brain-action ;
and  there  still  remain  many  unexplained  mysteries  involved
in  the  higher  manifestations  of  some  of  them.  Neither  could
the  savage  ever  give  correct  explanations  of  the  phenomena
presented  by  external  nature  in  general,  such  as  storms,
thunder  and  lightning,  the  rainbow,  the  aurora  borealis,
eclipses,  comets,  meteors,  etc.  Yet  such  phenomena,  appear-
ing to  him  to  possess  no  regularity,  but  always  taking  him
by  surprise,  must  have  formed  the  subject  of  intense  interest
and  vigorous  thought,  portending,  as  they  always  seemed  to

RELIGION  AND  SCIENCE.  275

him  to  do,  some  great  danger.  Speaking  of  comets,  Hum-
boldt wisely  remarks,  "  It  is  an  inherent  attribute  of  the
human  mind  to  experience  fear,  and  not  hope  or  joy,  at  the
aspect  of  that  which  is  unexpected  and  extraordinary  "  *  (vol.
i,  p.  684,  note).  It  was  this  class  of  phenomena  chiefly  which
at  first  formed  the  basis  for  the  belief  in  objective  spiritual
beings — i.  e.,  of  theology — belief  wholly  out  of  harmony  with
reality,  and  necessarily  so  in  consequence  of  the  incompre-
hensibleness  of  such  deep-lying  facts.

As  intellect  developed,  thought  became  directed  also  to
the  more  regular  phenomena  of  external  nature,  such  as  the
rising  and  setting  of  the  sun,  the  successions  of  the  seasons
(in  temperate  latitudes),  the  tides  of  the  sea,  the  changes  of
the  moon,  the  migration  of  birds,  etc.  But,  as  the  correct
interpretation  of  these  changes  required  the  long  and  diffi-
cult development  and  perfection  of  the  sciences  of  astron-
omy, physics,  zoology,  etc.,  it  was  as  impossible  for  them  to
be  correctly  interpreted  then  as  for  the  more  irregular  phe-
nomena to  be  so  interpreted  at  an  earlier  stage  of  develop-
ment. The  doubts  which  the  absence  of  the  sentiment  of
wonder  at  regular  phenomena  has  raised  with  regard  to  the
alleged  intense  contemplation  of  such  phenomena  by  primi-
tive man,  may  perhaps  be  partially  reconciled  with  such
facts  as  indicate  that  such  intense  contemplation  must  have
taken  place,  if  we  admit,  as  we  undoubtedly  should,  that  this
pensive  state  exists  only  in  a  very  few,  on  the  equally  reason-
able assumption  that  among  the  lowest  savages,  as  among  the
most  advanced  races,  there  exist  immense  differences  in  both
the  quantity  and  the  quality  of  the  intellectual  force  in  dif-
ferent individuals ;  and  that,  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other,
it  is  the  giants  of  mind  who  impose  beliefs  upon  the  back-
ward masses.

However  this  may  be,  we  find  all  these  deeper  phenom-
ena explained  by  the  savage,  and  always  erroneously  ex-
plained, upon  the  supernatural  theory,  which  predicates  the

*  "Cosmos,"  Otte's  translation,  vol.  i,  p.  97.

276  PROGRESS.— PRIMAEY  MEANS.

existence  of  spiritual  beings  and  begets  the  religious  senti-
ment.

At  the  same  time  that  this  mass  of  error  is  accumulatinsr
in  the  impossible  attempt  to  explain  the  underlying  phenom-
ena of  nature,  correct  interpretations  are  being,  little  by
little,  given  to  certain  of  the  superficial  class,  of  which  man
has  a  pressing  need  to  take  immediate  advantage.  "While
there  was  more  likelihood  that  a  surface  fact  should  be  falsely
interpreted  than  that  a  deep-lying  fact  should  be  correctly
interpreted,  yet  many  of  the  former  received  true  explana-
tions, and  the  laws  determining  them  were  turned  to  human
advantage.  The  superior  force  of  a  blow  dealt  with  a  stick
over  a  blow  dealt  with  the  naked  fist  was  early  seen  by  man,
though  no  wild  animal  would  probably  take  advantage  of  it,
even  if  physically  adapted  to  do  so.  The  cleaving  power  of
an  edged  tool,  the  actio  in  distans  of  a  missile,  the  increased
force  given  to  a  dart  by  the  elasticity  of  a  bow,  the  power
of  a  concave  vessel  to  contain  liquids,  the  effect  of  an  ani-
mal's skin  to  protect  the  body,  and  many  other  simple  prin-
ciples, yet  all  requiring  some  intellectual  effort,  generally
considerably  beyond  the  capacity  of  the  lower  animals,  and
therefore  constituting  an  inchoate  science  and  art,  marked
the  infancy  of  true  progress  in  the  human  race.  The  course
of  this  movement,  from  this  early  beginning  to  the  point  at-
tained in  the  present  scientific  nations  of  the  world,  has  al-
ready been  hastily  sketched  in  the  early  part  of  the  present
chapter,  and  this  recurrence  to  its  initial  stage  has  only  been
in  consequence  of  the  prime  importance  of  pointing  out  the
precise  relations  of  science  and  religion  down  to  their  point
of  divergence  at  the  dawn  of  intelligence.

If  a  satisfactory  definition  of  religion  has  been  given,  and
if  its  genesis  has  been  correctly  described  in  the  foregoing  re-
marks, nothing  is  left  to  be  done  but  to  answer  the  question,
"What  is  the  position  of  religion  thus  defined,  considered  in
connection  with  the  progress  of  the  human  race  ?

RELIGION  AS  A  SOCIAL  FACTOR.  277

Naturally  it  might  be  supposed  that  nothing  good  could
come  out  of  unmixed  error,  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  all  races
and  peoples  have  ever  regarded  their  religion  as  the  most
valuable  of  all  their  institutions.  Yet  this  applies  only  to
each  people's  own  religion,  and  is  never  the  estimate  of  one
people  of  the  religion  of  another.  At  the  risk  of  repetition,
let  us  bring  forward  an  illustration  of  this  most  important
qualification.  If  a  convention  of  all  the  religions  on  the
globe  were  to  be  called,  each  sect  being  represented  by  one
delegate,  and  the  question  were  to  be  voted  upon  in  the  case
of  each  religion  separately,  Is  this  religion  true  ?  or,  Is  this
religion  beneficial  to  man  ?  the  result  would  inevitably  be
that  only  one  afiirmative  vote  would  be  cast  in  each  case,  and
that  would  be  the  vote  of  the  delegate  of  the  particular  re-
ligion upon  which  the  vote  was  taken ;  and,  if  the  action  of
this  convention  with  regard  to  the  feasibility  of  preserving
or  abolishing  religions  could  be  conclusive,  it  would  be  found
that  all  the  religions  of  the  world  would  be  overwhelmingly
voted  down  and  abolished,  and  this  by  the  action  of  avowed
religionists  alone.

"But  it  may  well  be  asked  whether  this  view  of  the  case
is  a  fair  one,  and  whether  the  adherents  of  any  creed  are  not
better  judges  of  its  effects  than  those  outside  of  its  influence.
It  obviously  becomes  necessary,  therefore,  to  look  to  the  in-
trinsic merits  of  the  question,  and  this  from  a  disinterested
stand-point  outside  of  the  influence  of  all  religions.  The
founder  of  the  greatest  of  religions  has  said  that  "  the  tree
is  known  by  its  fruit,"  *  and  since  his  day  no  better  criterion
of  merit  has  been  proposed.  In  seeking  to  apply  this  test,
it  is  hoped  that  the  adherent  of  no  particular  religion  will
imagine  that  the  illustrations  are  especially  directed  toward
his  own  any  more  than  toward  any  other  faith,  or  with  any
other  object  than  to  portray  in  the  most  accurate  manner
possible  the  legitimate  influence  of  the  essential  attributes  of
religion  as  such,  the  assumption  being  constantly  borne  in

*  "  Revised  New  Testament,"  Matthew,  xii,  33.

278  PROGRESS.— PEIMARY  MEANS.

mind  that  in  the  preceding  discussion  we  have  arrived  at  a  true
definition  of  that  in  which  religion  fundamentally  consists.

Notwithstanding  the  antecedent  doubts  with  which  the
essentially  erroneous  character  of  the  propositions  of  all  re-
ligious belief  surround  the  conception  of  beneficial  results
as  flowing  from  such  sources,  we  will  first  inquire  whether,
as  a  matter  of  fact,  any  such  results  are  discoverable  in  the
operations  of  this  important  human  agency.

Aside  from  the  recognition  of  Mr.  Spencer's  "soul  of
truth  in  things  erroneous,"  which  we  cheerfully  concede  to
religion  in  the  sense  in  which  he  offers  it,  it  is  a  legitimate
inquiry  whether  there  be  not  certain  concrete  and  tangible
ways  in  which  religion  conduces  to  the  advantage  of  the
individual  and  of  society.  The  most  natural  method  of  ar-
riving at  the  character  of  such  advantageous  effects  is  to  hear
the  claims  of  religionists  themselves.  In  considering  these,
it  will,  of  course^  be  necessary  to  exclude  that  which  they
regard  as  most  important,  viz.,  the  assumed  benefits  which
result  from  the  propitiation  of  spiritual  beings,  or  deity ;  ob-
jective answers  to  special  requests,  or  prayers ;  and  especially
the  insuring  of  a  beatific  future  state  of  existence,  and  the
avoidance  of  a  state  of  perpetual  punishment.  These  be-
liefs, although  admitted  by  their  holders  to  be  wholly  devoid
of  physical  proof,  and  to  rest  wholly  on  what  they  call
"  faith,"  are  suflScient  to  account  in  themselves  for  the  in-
tense attachment  of  a  people  for  its  religion.  And,  inasmuch
as  the  modes  of  propitiation  differ  in  all  religions,  as  do  the
names  of  the  gods  and  the  nature  of  the  future  state,  this
also  explains  in  an  entirely  satisfactory  manner  the  hostility
of  every  religion  toward  every  other.  It  also  shows  that  it
is  not  for  their  benefits  to  man  in  his  present  social  and  eco-
nomic relations  that  religions  are  chiefly  prized.

Among  savages,  religion  is  chiefly  prized  as  a  means  of
averting  great  calamities,  conceived  as  constantly  impending,
from  hostile  spirits,  ghosts,  and  demons,*  and  in  nearly  all

*  L-.ibbock,  "Ori^n  of  Civilization,"  p.  129.

ALLEGED  TEMPORAL  BENEFITS.  279

religions  the  belief  in  malignant  spiritual  beings  is  as  much
a  part  of  the  creed  as  the  belief  in  benignant  ones.  In  the
species  of  polytheistic  hierarchy  constituting  Christianity,
there  is  mingled  besides  its  mysterious  "  Trinity,"  a  well-
marked  dualism,  doubtless  in  part  derived  from  the  great
Persian  duahsm,  while  Mohammedanism  is  probably  the
nearest  approach  yet  made  to  a  pure  monotheism.

ISTo  one  will  probably  claim  that  the  religions  of  savages,
as  a  rule,  involving  as  they  do  the  perpetual  apprehension
of  imaginary  evils,  and  requiring  countless  heavy  sacrifices,
are  of  any  material  advantage  to  those  races,  while  the  evils
of  most  barbarian  creeds  are  so  apparent  that  their  merits,  if
they  have  any,  are  obscured  to  all  but  such  as  possess  an
intimate  acquaintance  with  their  detailed  workings.  The
question  of  the  benefits  of  religion  to  the  temporal  interests
of  man  is,  therefore,  narrowed  down  to  the  most  advanced
systems.

The  adherents  of  these  maintain  that  religion  is  of  the
highest  importance :  1,  in  lending  a  powerful  sanction  to
virtue  and  morality ;  2,  in  affording  the  highest  consolation
to  all  who  believe  in  immortality ;  3,  in  elevating  character
by  the  contemplation  of  the  perfect  ideal  in  the  person  of
the  deity  and  in  those  of  the  rest  of  the  hierarchy  of  saints,
or  gods ;  and,  4,  a  certain  subjective  improvement  which  is
supposed  to  follow  from  the  habitual  attitude  of  humiliation,
confession,  and  prayer.  There  are  probably  other  claims,
but  an  exhaustive  consideration  of  the  subject  is  of  course
precluded  by  the  scope  of  this  work.  A  glance  at  each  of
these  four  alleged  temporal  benefits  of  religion  will  am^^ly
fulfill  our  present  purpose.

Before  proceeding  to  do  this,  it  is  proper  to  premise  that
the  limiting  of  the  question  to  the  later  derived  religions
really  takes  it  out  of  the  field  legitimately  assigned  to  this
discussion,  since  the  beneficial  influences  claimed  do  not  any
of  them  spring  from  attributes  which  are  essential  to  religion,
but  from  new  ones  which  have  been  ingrafted  upon  it  later

280  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

in  consequence  of  advancing  intelligence.  We  are,  there-
fore, really  considering  the  question  whether  intelligence  has
not  so  far  diluted  pure  religion,  as  it  were,  as  to  render  it
harmless  or  even  beneficial,  and  in  this  case  it  is  to  intel-
ligence that  all  the  merits  found  should  properly  be  credited.

Mr.  Tylor  very  appositely  says :  "  To  some  the  statement
may  seem  starthng,  yet  the  evidence  seems  to  justify  it,  that
the  relation  of  morality  to  religion  is  one  that  only  belongs
in  its  rudiments,  or  not  at  all,  to  rudimentary  civilization.
The  comparison  of  savage  and  civilized  religions  brings  into
view,  by  the  side  of  deep-lying  resemblance  in  their  philoso-
phy, a  deep-lying  contrast  in  their  practical  action  on  human
life.  So  far  as  savage  religion  can  stand  as  representing  nat-
ural religion,  the  popular  idea  that  the  moral  government  of
the  universe  is  an  essential  tenet  of  natural  religion  simply
falls  to  the  ground.  Savage  animism  is  almost  devoid  of
that  ethical  element  which  to  the  educated  modern  mind  is
the  very  mainspring  of  practical  religion.  Not,  as  I  have
said,  that  morality  is  absent  from  the  life  of  the  lower  races.
Without  a  code  of  morals,  the  very  existence  of  the  rudest
tribes  would  be  impossible ;  and,  indeed,  the  moral  stand-
ards of  even  savage  races  are  to  no  small  extent  well  defined
and  praiseworthy.  But  these  ethical  laws  stand  on  their  own
ground  of  tradition  and  public  opinion,  comparatively  inde-
pendent of  the  animistic  beliefs  and  rites  which  exist  beside
them.     The  lower  animism  is  not  immoral,  it  is  un-moral."  *

Again,  with  regard  to  immortality,  the  same  author
shows  t  that  it  does  not  belong  to  the  lower  forms  of  relig-
ion, but  is  a  comparatively  recent  extension  of  the  early  idea
of  a  future  life.  !N^either  was  any  such  degree  of  perfection
at  first  ascribed  to  spiritual  beings  and  gods  as  to  render  the
contemplation  of  their  character  in  any  degree  elevating,
as  the  Fiji  gods  "  Woraan-stealer,"  "  Adulterer,"  "  Brain-
eater,"  and  the   Greek  god  "  The  Blood-stainer "  (Ares),

*  "Primitive  Culture."  (London,  1871),  vol.  ii,  p.  326.
f  Zoc.  cit.,  p.  19.

THE   "MORAL  SANCTION."  281

sufficiently  attest;  while  prayer  among  primitive  tribes  is
directed  to  the  averting  of  the  brutal  blows  which  their  gods
are  supposed  able  and  likely  to  inflict  without  other  cause
than  personal  caprice.

Without  drawing  these  lines  too  closely,  however,  we  will
first  look  at  the  "  moral  sanction  "  of  religion.  In  so  far  as
men  are  actually  deterred  by  religious  beliefs  from  the  com-
mission of  immoral  acts  which  they  would  otherwise  have
committed,  this  must  certainly  be  set  down  to  the  credit  of
such  beliefs.  That  such  is  ever  the  case,  however,  is  easier
asserted  or  denied,  than  proved  or  disproved.  There  seems
to  be  no  means  of  testing  such  a  question,  no  tangible  clew
by  which  it  can  be  approached.  As  all  civilized  peoples  pos-
sess some  form  of  religion  which  is  professed  by  the  general
mass,  a  comparison  of  the  morals  of  diilerent  peoples  set-
tles nothing,  unless  it  be  the  degree  to  which  the  moral  sen-
timents have  developed  with  or  without  the  aid  of  relig-
ion. Different  individuals  in  the  same  country  profess  dif-
ferent creeds,  but  a  comparison  of  their  morals  either  shows
no  fixed  difference,  or  one  which  may  be  attributed  to  other
causes.

The  condition  which,  perhaps,  approaches  nearest  to  a
legitimate  guide  to  the  settlement  of  this  question,. is  that  in
which  individuals  of  the  same  race  and  general  characteris-
tics are  some  of  them  religious  and  others  not  religious.
Cases  are  abundant  in  the  most  advanced  countries  of  indi-
viduals who  disavow  adherence  to  any  creed  or  religion  what-
ever. A  comparison  of  the  morals  of  such  persons  ought  to
show,  on  the  theory  under  examination,  a  large  deficiency.
Such,  however,  certainly  is  not  the  case.  Such  persons  are
usually,  though  not  always,  well  informed.  The  greater  part
of  them  are  found  among  the  devotees  of  the  exact  sciences.*
Yet  there  is  no  more  exemplary  class  of  citizens  in  society

*  Dr.  Priestley  states  that  he  found  all  the  philosophical  persons  to  whom
he  was  introduced  at  Paris,  unbelicTers  in  Christianity,  and  even  professed  athe-
ists ("  Popnlar  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  v,  p.  484).
44

282  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

than  scientific  men,  whether  believers  or  non-believers  in
any  system  of  religion,  and  no  distinction  certainly  can  be
drawn  in  point  of  morality  between  the  religions  and  the
non-reHgious  scientific  inquirer.  On  the  other  hand,  though
this  may  not  logically  prove  any  thing,  it  is  a  fact  that  crimi-
nals and  the  dangerous  classes  of  society  are  generally  be-
lievers in  the  prevailing  faith  of  the  country  which  they  in-
fest, and  when  brought  to  the  scaffold  they  almost  invariably
confess  the  same,  and  expect  absolution  for  their  misdeeds.

Cases  of  conversion  from  the  non-religious  to  the  relig-
ious state  of  mind  would  be  valuable  evidence  on  this  point
were  they  sufllciently  frequent  to  admit  of  a  systematic  ex-
amination of  the  moral  character  of  tlie  individuals  before
and  after  conversion ;  but  such  cases  are  very  rare.  What
passes  in  Christian  communities  for  "  conversion  "  or  "  em-
bracing religion,"  is  a  very  different  thing,  and  consists  sim-
ply in  an  open  avowal  of  a  belief  always  tacitly  but  none  the
less  firmly  entertained.  Such  cases,  therefore,  which  are  quite
common,  really  prove  nothing ;  and  it  is  universally  found,
as  might  have  been  expected  a  priori,  that  the  alleged
"  change "  has  at  least  worked  no  appreciable  alteration  in
character  or  conduct,  so  far  as  their  moral  effect  is  con-
cerned. The  opposite  to  the  case  of  genuine  conversion,
first  described,  is  much  more  frequent,  viz.,  where  believers
become  converted  into  non-believers.  In  fact,  nearly  all  non-
believers  have  once  been  believers  {supra,  p.  33).*  Children
always  believe  what  is  commonly  inculcated  at  home,  at
school,  in  company  with  others,  and  wherever  they  may  be.
No  belief  is  too  absurd  to  be  thus  accepted.  It  is  therefore
only  after  independent  reflection  has  been  brought  to  bear
upon  a  mass  of  previously  accumulated  evidence  that  the
initial  state  of  belief  can  be  supplanted  by  a  later  state  of
doubt  or  non-belief.  Yet  in  no  such  case  can  it  be  urged
that  the  transition  has  been  attended  with  any  signs  of  moral
degeneracy.     If  any  difference  is  perceptible,  it  is  more  likely

*  Cf.  "  The  Journal  of  Speculative  Philosophy,"  vol.  xv  (October,  1881),  p.  391.

•     SOLACE  OF  IMMORTALITY.  283

to  be  in  the  elevation  of  moral  principle,  as  resting  upon  in-
trinsic rather  than  authoritative  sanctions.

We  are  obliged,  therefore,  for  want  of  any  means  of  pro-
curing evidence,  to  dismiss  this  claim  as  unestablished,
though  the  unsatisfactory  intimations  above  pointed  out  are,
in  so  far  as  they  are  admitted,  quite  distinctly  against  its  va-
lidity. It  is  a  question  upon  which  men  are  very  prone  to
err.  Just  as  they  imagine  they  would  commit  crime  but
for  certain  governmental  restraints  {supra,  p.  240),  so  they
think  they  would  do  wrong  but  for  religious  restraints,  when
in  fact  they  would  do  just  the  same  as  now  if  neither  existed.
The  moral  sanction  is  in  reality  first,  both  in  time  and  in
authority,  and  it  has  therefore  been  lashed  to  religion  as  a
means  of  carrying  the  latter  through,  and  not  the  reverse.
It  is  moral  sanction  which  gives  authority  to  religious
dogma,  and  not  religious  sanction  which  gives  authority
to  moral  principle.  It  is  morality  which  has  saved  religion,
and  not  religion  which  has  saved  morality.  Here,  as  so
often  elsewhere  pointed  out,  the  apparent  is  the  reverse  of
the  real.

Next,  we  will  consider  the  advantages  claimed  to  accrue
through  the  solace  of  a  belief  in  immortality.  Since  happi-
ness is  the  true  object  of  life,  every  pleasure  must  be  thrown
into  the  scale  for  its  full  value,  and,  if  this  hope  can  be  shown
to  afford  a  source  of  pleasure,  it  must  not  be  neglected.
Those  who  experience  it,  as  well  as  most  others,  believe  that
this  sentiment  is  a  true  pleasure,  and  surely  every  one  must
be  allowed  to  be  the  judge  of  his  own  states  of  mind.
Psychologically,  however,  this  pleasurable  sentiment  belongs
to  the  "  faint  series,"  as  being,  not  objective,  or  real,  but  sub-
jective and  factitious.  But  there  is  a  still  deeper  mean-
ing involved  in  this.  As  previously  shown  {sujpra,  p.  148),
there  is  strictly  no  line  of  demarkation  between  pleasure
and  pain.  Hope  is  a  compound  sentiment  composed  of  ex-
pectation and  desire.  Mere  expectation,  in  itself  considered,
is  an  indifferent  state  of  mind.    The  desire  belonging  to  hope

281  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

is,  therefore,  the  only  component  that  need  be  here  taken  into
account.  But  we  have  seen  that  desire  constitutes  the  basis
of  pain,  and  is  in  fact  all  there  is  essential  to  pain,  except
the  degree.  When  "  hope  deferred  maketh  the  heart  sick,"
the  point  has  been  reached  when  its  painful  character  has  be-
come evident  to  consciousness.  In  view  of  this,  our  defini-
tion of  progress  would  not  embrace  the  supposed  happiness
derived  from  hope.  True  progress  consists  in  the  increase
of  actual  enjoyment,  not  of  imaginary  enjoyment.  Those
whose  only  pleasure  consists  in  hope,  or  anticipation,  really
have  no  enjoyment.  They  mistake  a  form  of  pain  for  a
pleasure.  The  ascetic  who  eschews  and  despises  all  real
pleasure,  and  imagines  he  is  enjoying  his  victory  over  nature,
is  grossly  deceived.  lie  is  really  enjoying  nothing.  Such
persons  are  to  that  extent  insane,  and  we  are  certainly  justi-
fied in  refusing  to  accept  the  testimony  of  an  insane  person,
even  on  the  question  of  his  own  pleasure  or  pain.  Bishop
Butler's  celebrated  question,  "  Why  might  not  large  bodies  of
men,  and  whole  communities,  be  seized  with  fits  of  insanity
as  well  as  individuals  ? "  was  by  no  means  as  chimerical  as
many  think.  But,  if  we  grant,  as  a  matter  of  words  only,
that  this  sentiment  is  a  true  enjoyment,  it  is,  after  all,  only
the  anticipation  of  a  real  and  natural  pleasure  which  it  is  be-
lieved will  be  actually  enjoyed  in  the  future  life ;  and  this
expected  pleasure  is  not  in  the  least  different  from  that
which  is  rejected  in  this  life.  The  sensations  that  the  an-
choret pretends  to  despise  are  the  ones  he  hopes  to  experi-
ence, only  in  an  intensified  form..  He  is  simply  dissatisfied
because  he  can  not  get  pleasure  enough  here,  and  believes
that  by  a  certain  course  of  action  he  can  get  more  here-
after. That  they  are  the  same  must  follow  from  the  law
that  imagination  can  not  transcend  experience,  except  in  the
degree  and  in  the  mode  of  combination  of  effects  already
experienced.

With  regard  to  the  real  influence  of  the  doctrine  of  im-
mortality upon  civilization,  both  Comte  and  Tylor  declare

CONTEMPLATION  OF  DEITY.  285

that  it  is  popularly  very  much  exaggerated.*  The  latter,
however,  indulges  in  the  following  reflections,  which  may,
perhaps,  be  taken  to  embody  as  much  truth  as  the  human
mind  is  capable  of  attaining  to  upon  this  difficult  problem  :

"  The  belief  in  future  retribution  has  been  indeed  a  pow-
erful engine  in  shaping  the  life  of  nations.  Powerful  both
for  good  and  evil,  it  has  been  made  the  servant-of -all-work
of  many  faiths.  Priesthoods  have  used  it  unscrupulously
for  their  professional  ends,  to  gain  wealth  and  power  for
their  own  caste,  to  stop  intellectual  and  social  progress  beyond
the  barriers  of  their  consecrated  systems.  On  the  banks
of  the  river  of  death  a  band  of  priests  has  stood  for  ages  to
bar  the  passage  against  all  poor  souls  who  can  not  satisfy
their  demands  for  ceremonies  and  formulas  and  fees.  This
is  the  dark  side  of  the  picture.  On  the  bright  side,  as  we
study  the  moral  standards  of  the  higher  nations,  and  see  how
the  hopes  and  fears  of  the  life  to  come  have  been  brought  to
enforce  their  teachings,  it  is  plain  that  through  most  widely
differing  religions  the  doctrine  of  future  judgment  has  been
made  to  further  goodness  and  check  wickedness,  according
to  the  shifting  rules  by  which  men  have  divided  right  from
wrong  "  (vol.  i,  p.  694).f

The  alleged  elevation  of  character  which  results  from
the  contemplation  of  a  deity  conceived  to  be  perfect  is  quite
possible,  notwithstanding  the  necessarily  anthropomorphic
character  of  all  personal  deities.  These  deities  are  the
creatures  of  the  most  advanced  minds  of  every  people,  and
therefore  always  reflect  the  highest  mental  and  moral  attri-
butes of  every  age.  As  such  they  become  standards  toward
which  the  lower  strata  of  society  will  gradually  rise  in  pro-
portion as  they  seek  to  assimilate  their  character  to  that  of
their  deity.  This  is  an  influence  difficult  to  measure,  and
may  be  passed  over  without  further  remark.

*  "Philosophie  Positive,"  vol.  iv,  pp.  476,  47V,  482,  483  ;  vol.  v,  pp.  128;
124,  297-300.     "Primitive  Culture"  (Boston,  1874),  vol.  ii,  pp.  104,  107.
f  Loc.  cit.  (London,  1871),  vol.  ii,  p.  97.

2S6  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

With  regard,  lastly,  to  the  subjective  efficacy  of  prayer,
it  may  well  be  doubted  whether  the  spirit  which  prayer
produces  is  calculated  to  advance  or  elevate  the  race.  It
is  inconsistent  with  that  independence  and  originality  of
mind  which  accompany  all  progressive  movements.  Its
effect  in  deterring  the  undertaking  of  such  labors  as  have
most  advanced  society  will  presently  be  considered,  along
with  other  anti-progressive  tendencies  of  religion  in  general.

Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  we  must  conclude  that  there
is  no  direction  in  which  the  belief  in  spiritual  beings  has
advanced  the  temporal  interests  of  mankind,  and  that  there-
fore such  belief,  if  it  is  of  any  advantage  to  the  race,  must
be  so  in  virtue  of  gains  which  it  is  to  bring  in  a  future  state
of  existence — a  field  of  discussion  which,  of  course,  lies  out-
side of  the  province  of  this  work  and  of  all  scientific  inves-
tigation. It  further  appears  that  the  real  advantages  which
seem  to  flow  from  some  of  the  modem  forms  of  such  belief
are  really  due  to  the  action  of  other  and  quite  distinct  agen-
cies which  have  been  so  adroitly  affiliated  upon  it  as  to  create
the  impression  that  they  have  grown  out  of  it.  In  the  case
of  morality,  we  have  seen  how  far  this  impression  is  from
being  true.  The  affiliation  has  been  accomplished  as  a  pro-
tection to  systems  of  belief  which  would  otherwise  have
lost  their  hold  upon  mankind.  In  the  lower  stages  of  devel-
opment, when  intelligence  was  at  its  minimum  and  credulity
at  its  maximum,  religion,  however  irrational,  could  and  did
stand  alone ;  but  as  intelligence  increased  and  credulity  di-
minished, it  began  to  feel  the  need  of  a  support,  which  the
priesthood,  always  the  most  astute  portion  of  the  community,
but  whose  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  the  status  quo  greatly
overruled  any  promptings  of  their  better  judgment  to  act
otherwise,  succeeded  in  constructing  by  attaching  ethical
principles  and  doctrines  to  the  notion  of  a  future  state  of
existence,  and  elaborating  a  system  of  future  rewards  and
punishments.  Instead,  therefore,  of  considering  what  mo-
rality owes  to  religion,  it  may  yet  become  a  question  how  far

ANTI-PEOGRESSIVE  INFLUENCES.  287

natural  morality  has  been  lowered  by  sucb  an  association
witb  supernatural  belief.

In  like  manner,  instead  of  considering  the  elevating  effect
of  the  contemplation  of  the  attributes  of  a  personal  anthro-
pomorphic deity,  it  is  a  fair  speculation  how  much  higher
the  human  mind  would  have  risen  in  its  efforts  to  comprehend
the  natural  universe,  had  no  such  explanation  as  a  spiritual
being  or  a  personal  god  ever  suggested  itself.

Having  thus  considered  the  alleged  progressive  influences
of  religion,  our  next  task  is  to  glance  at  the  opposite  class,
the  anti-progressive  influences.

Whatever  may  be  the  beneflts  which  supernatural  beliefs
have  conferred  and  are  to  confer  upon  man  in  a  future  state
of  existence,  they  have  not  only  conferred  none  upon  him  in
the  present  state,  but  have  demonstrably  impeded  his  up-
ward course  throughout  his  entire  career.  The  product  of
his  reason,  as  being  the  rational  deductions  of  the  normal
mind,  but  drawn  from  premises  necessarily  false  in  conse-
quence of  the  physical  impossibility  of  his  correctly  inter-
preting most  of  the  striking  phenomena  that  nature  thrusts
upon  his  attention,  such  beliefs  constitute  a  distinctly  human
characteristic,  never  occurring,  so  far  as  observation  can  de-
termine, even  in  their  crudest  forms,  among  the  most  devel-
oped and  most  sagacious  of  the  lower  animals.*  From  this
point  of  view  it  is  extremely  interesting  to  note  to  what  ex-
tent the  rational  faculty  of  man,  instead  of  serving  him  as  a
compass  to  point  out  his  safe  course,  has,  in  fact,  guided  his
hapless  bark  upon  shoals  and  rocks,  and  into  storms  and
whirlpools.  It  would  be  amusing,  were  it  not  so  melancholy,
to  observe  how  many  unwise,  absurd,  and  suicidal  f  acts  rea-
son itself  leads  man  to  perform,  which  no  other  animal  upon
the  globe  could  be  induced  to  perform.

*  Darwin,  "  Descent  of  Man,"  vol.  i,  p.  129.

\  Suicide  itself,  which  no  animal  intentionally  commits,  is  the  type  of  the
whole  of  this  class  of  actions.

2S8  PROGRESS.-PRIMARY  MEANS.

If  we  seek  for  a  single  term  which  shall  most  completely
embody  this  idea  and  represent  this  class  of  human  actions,
we  shall  find  it  in  the  word  superstition.  But  the  common
acceptation  of  this  word  requires  to  be  somewhat  expanded
in  order  to  make  it  cover  the  whole  ground.  The  notion
that  "  superstition  is  anything  that  I  do  not  believe,"  must
give  way  to  the  definition,  "  belief  in  the  supernatural,"  to
which  the  term  adds  the  notion  of  consequent  foolish  or  in-
jurious acts.  Although  all  superstitions  may  not  be  obvi-
ously connected  with  the  belief  in  spiritual  beings,  yet  this
is  so  nearly  the  universal  rule  that  it  may  be  regarded  as
without  exception.  It  must  also  be  remembered  that,  just  as
each  religion  claims  that  it  is  the  only  true  one,  so  it  also  de-
clares every  other  a  mere  superstition.  This  applies  even  to
slightly  varying  sects,  as  the  Protestant  and  Catholic  sect*  of
Christianity ;  for  every  one  knows  how,  shortly  after  the
Reformation  had  gained  control  of  England,  the  landed  es-
tates of  the  Roman  Church  were  expropriated  by  acts  of
Parliament,  which  recited  that  they  were  held  "  for  super-
stitious uses."

A  superstitious  act  is  one  that  no  animal  ever  commits.
The  acts  of  animals  are  intensely  practical,  and  are  equally
free  from  affectation  and  from  superstition.  They  are  never
guilty  of  any  such  nonsense  as  men  often  reason  themselves
into.  Superstition  is  therefore  a  strictly  human  develop-
ment, and  really  constitutes  one  of  the  modes  that  reason
had  taught  mankind  for  securing  future  benefits  or  averting
future  evils,  developing  side  by  side  with  that  rational  fore-
sight which  has  been  the  chief  aid  to  human  progress ;  the
difference  between  superstition  and  scientific  prevision  being,
that  the  one  was  constructed  of  false,  and  the  other  of  true
conceptions.

It  would  of  course  be  impossible,  in  the  brief  space  that
is  left  us,  to  pass  in  review  the  vast  mass  of  superstitions  of
mankind,  or  to  attempt  any  systematic  enumeration  of  the
principal  classes  into  which  they  naturally  fall.     It  must  suf-

SUPERSTITION.  289

fice  to  mention  a  few  typical  cases,  eacli  of  whicli  will  doubt-
less suggest  to  the  reader  a  multitude  of  kindred  ones,  and
serve  to  keep  in  bis  mind  the  general  direction  which  the
present  discussion  aims  to  pursue.

Probably  the  greater  part  of  all  superstitions  belong  to
what  may  be  called  the  indifferent  class,  i.  e.,  the  class  whose
'  influence  upon  the  welfare  and  progress  of  the  race  can  not
be  said  to  be  either  injurious  or  beneficial,  at  least  directly ;
although  such  beliefs  can  scarcely  be  conceived  to  exist  with-
out exerting  a  lowering  influence  of  a  general  character  upon
those  who  entertain  them.  Such  indift'erent  superstitions  are
found  in  a  thousand  absurd  customs,  rites,  and  ceremonies
among  the  uncivilized  races  of  man.  These  harmless  customs
pass  by  insensible  gradations  into  more  and  more  painful  and
injurious  ones.  Thus  we  find  that  among  the  Charruas,  when
the  head  of  the  family  died,  "  the  daughters,  widow,  and  mar-
ried sisters  were  obliged  to  have  each  one  joint  from  the  finger
cut  off ;  and  this  was  repeated  for  every  relation  of  the  like
character  who  died :  the  primary  amputation  being  from  the
little  finger  " ;  and  the  Mandans  express  grief  on  the  death
of  a  relative  by  losing  "  two  joints  of  the  little  fingers,  or
sometimes  the  other  fingers."  *  Such  sanguinary  customs
are  usually  connected  with  the  death  of  some  one  whose
spirit  requires  these  sacrifices.  In  certain  tribes  brutal  orgies
take  place  on  the  occasion  of  a  death,  the  descriptions  of
which  are  frightful  to  read.  Mr.  Darwin  describes  one  that
he  saw  some  of  the  features  of,  when  in  ISTew  Zealand,  and
although  less  shocking  than  many  others  related,  it  is,  from
its  greater  authenticity,  a  valuable  example.  He  says :  "  The
daughter  of  a  chief,  who  was  still  a  heathen,  had  died  there
five  days  before.  .  .  .  The  relatives  of  the  family  had  torn
the  flesh  of  their  arms,  bodies,  and  faces,  so  that  they  were
covered  with  clotted  blood ;  and  the  old  women  looked  most
filthy,  disgusting  objects.  On  the  following  day  some  of
the  officers  visited  this  place  and  found  the  women  still

*  Spencer's  "  Ceremonial  Institutions,"  p.  56,  §  358.

290  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

howling  and  cutting  themselves."  *  Under  similar  circum-
stances it  is  related  that  "  among  the  Haidahs  of  the  Pacific
States,  the  Taamish,  or  inspired  medicine-man,  '  springs  on
the  first  person  he  meets,  bites  out  and  swallows  one  or  more
mouthfuls  of  the  man's  living  flesh  wherever  he  can  fix  his
teeth,  then  rushes  to  another  and  another.' "  f  Such  bru-
talities, however,  are  among  the  least  serious  of  the  sacrifices
which  savages  make  on  account  of  the  spirits  of  the  departed.
As  Mr.  Tylor  pointedly  remarks,  ^  "  Men  do  not  stop  short
at  the  persuasion  that  death  releases  the  soul  to  a  free  and
active  existence,  but  they  quite  logically  proceed  to  assist
nature  by  slaying  men  in  order  to  liberate  their  souls  for
gJiostly  uses."  The  sacrifice  of  slaves,  subordinate  ofiicers,
and  wives,  on  the  death  of  a  chief  or  king,  is  a  custom  that
prevails  in  a  shocking  manner  among  many  now  living  tribes
of  savages.  "Ximenez  tells  us  concerning  the  Indians  of
Vera  Paz,  that  '  when  a  lord  was  dying,  they  immediately
killed  as  many  slaves  as  he  had,  that  they  might  precede  him
and  prepare  the  house  for  their  master.' "  *  "  By  the  Mexi-
cans '  the  number  of  victims  was  proportioned  to  the  grand-
eur of  the  funeral,  and  amounted  sometimes,  as  several  his-
torians affirm,  to  two  hundred ' ;  and  in  Peru,  when  an  Ynca
died,  'his  attendants  and  favorite  concubines,  amounting
sometimes,  it  is  said,  to  a  thousand,  were  immolated  on  his
tomb.'  The  intensity  of  the  faith  prompting  such  customs
"we  shall  the  better  conceive  on  finding  proof  that  the  victims
are  often  willing,  and  occasionally  anxious,  to  die.  Among
the  Guaranis,  in  old  times,  some  faithful  followers  '  sacrificed
themselves  at  the  grave  of  a  chief.'  Garcilasso  says  that  a  dead
Ynca's  wives  '  volunteered  to  be  killed,  and  their  number  was
often  such  that  the  officers  were  obliged  to  interfere,  saying
that  enough  had  gone  at  present.'  ...  In  Africa  it  is  the

"  *  "  Journal  of  Researches,"  etc.,  p.  429.
f  Spencer's  "  Principles  of  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  p.  289.
X  "Primitive  Culture"  (London,  1871),  vol.  i,  p.  413.
*  "  Principles  of  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  p.  205.

SACRIFICES  AT  FUNERALS.  291

same.  Among  the  Yorubans,  at  the  funeral  of  a  great  man,
not  only  are  slaves  slain,  but  '  many  of  his  friends  swallow
poison,'  and  are  entombed  with  him.  Formerly  in  Congo,
'  when  the  king  was  buried,  a  dozen  young  maids  leaped  into
the  grave  .  .  .  and  were  buried  alive  to  serve  him  in  the
other  world.  These  maids  were  then  so  eager  for  this  ser-
vice to  their  deceased  prince  that,  in  striving  who  should  be
first,  they  killed  one  another.'  And  in  Dahomey,  '  immedi-
ately the  king  dies,  his  wives  begin  to  destroy  all  his  furni-
ture and  things  of  value,  as  well  as  their  own ;  and  to  murder
one  another.  On  one  occasion  two  hundred  and  eighty-five
of  the  women  were  thus  killed  before  the  new  king  could
stop  it.' "  *

"  Some  Khonds  believe  the  god  eats  the  human  being
killed  for  him ;  the  Tahitians  thought  their  gods  fed  on  the
spirits  of  the  dead,  and  therefore  provided  them  with  such
spirits  by  frequent  slaughterings.  .  .  .  The  Tongans  made
offerings  of  children  to  their  gods,  who  were  deified  chiefs.
.  .  .  Among  the  Mexicans  additional  slaves  were  slain  on
the  fifth  day  after  the  burial,  on  the  twentieth,  on  the  for-
tieth, on  the  sixtieth,  and  on  the  eightieth  days.  .  .  .  Human
sacrifices  thus  repeated  to  propitiate  the  ghosts  of  the  dead,
evidently  pass  without  break  into  the  periodic  human  sacri-
fices that  have  commonly  been  elements  of  primitive  relig-
ions." f  "  Of  such  rites  in  the  Pacific  islands,  the  most  hid-
eously purposeful  accounts  reach  us  from  the  Feejee  group.
Till  lately,  a  main  part  of  the  ceremony  of  a  great  man's
funeral  was  the  strangling  of  wives,  friends,  and  slaves,  for
the  distinct  purpose  of  attending  him  into  the  world  of
spirits.  Ordinarily  the  first  victim  was  the  wife  of  the  de-
ceased, and  more  than  one  if  he  had  several,  and  their  corpses,
oiled  as  for  a  feast,  clothed  with  new  fringed  girdles,  with
heads  dressed  and  ornamented,  and  vermilion  and  turmeric
powder  spread  on  their  faces  and  bosoms,  were  laid  by  the
side  of  the  dead  warrior.     Associates  and  inferior  attendants

*  Loc,  cit.  \  Loc.  cii.,  p.  288.

292  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

were  likewise  slain,  and  these  bodies  were  spoken  of  as  '  grass
for  bedding  tlie  grave.'  When  Ra  Mbithi,  the  pride  of  So-
mosomo,  was  lost  at  sea,  seventeen  of  his  wives  were  killed,
and  after  the  news  of  the  massacre  of  the  Namena  people,
in  1839,  eighty  women  were  strangled  to  accompany  the
spirits  of  their  murdered  husbands.  .  .  .  The  Caribs  would
slay  on  the  dead  master's  grave  any  of  his  slaves  they  could
lay  hands  on.  Among  the  native  peoples  risen  to  consider-
ably high  grades  of  social  and  political  life,  these  practices
were  not  suppressed  but  exaggerated,  in  the  ghastly  sacri-
fices of  warriors,  slaves,  and  wives,  who  departed  to  continue
their  duteous  offices  at  the  funeral  of  the  chief  or  monarch  in
Central  America  and  Mexico,  in  Bogota  and  Peru."  *

*  "Primitive  Culture"  (London,  1871),  vol.  i,  pp.  415,  416.

Lest  it  should  be  supposed  that  the  era  of  sacrifices  is  over,  and  all  concern
about  them  uncalled  for,  I  append  the  following  telegram  from  the  "  Xew  York
Tribune,"  of  April  13,  1880,  announcing  an  event  which  occurred  six  months
after  this  chapter  was  written :

"  Thk  Great  Bdrmah  Massacrk.

"  London,  Ap7'il  12th. — The  seven  hundred  men,  boys,  girls,  priests,  and  for-
eigners sacrificed  at  Mandalaj  for  the  restoration  of  the  king's  health,  were
buried  alive — not  '  burned,'  as  previously  stated — ^under  the  towers  of  the  city
walls.     The  deed  was  done  to  appease  the  evil  spirits."

Commenting  on  this  occurrence,  the  "United  States  Economist,"  April  17,
1880,  says:  "The  sacrifice  of  seven  hundred  persons,  including  men,  boys,  wo-
men, girls,  priests,  and  foreigners,  at  Mandalay,  for  the  restoration  of  the  king
Thebaw's  health,  is  an  outrage  and  a  blot  on  the  civilization  of  the  nineteenth
century.  Had  such  a  wholesale  massacre  occurred  in  the  most  remote  and  inac-
cessible regions  of  Africa,  there  might  be  an  excuse  alleged  for  non-interference
on  the  part  of  civilized  governments,  but  no  such  reason  can  be  given  in  this
instance.  Burmah  is  one  of  the  important  kingdoms  of  the  far  EUst.  Manda-
lay, the  capital  and  residence  of  the  monster  king,  is  an  accessible  sea-port,  in
which  reside  consuls  representing  European  and  Asiatic  powers.  The  intention
of  this  pagan  to  ofPer  such  a  horrible  rite  to  appease  his  gods  was  known  to  the
consuls,  and  fear  and  consternation  had  seized  upon  his  subjects  and  they  were
fleeing  for  their  lives.

"  The  governments  who  heretofore  seemed  to  exercise  a  sort  of  protectorate
over  these  smaller  kingdoms  made  no  attempts  to  stay  this  wholesale  slaughter,
and  the  king  was  permitted  to  bury  alive  seven  hundred  victims  under  the
towers  of  the  city  walls.    This  fearful  news  excites  a  shudder  through  all  Chris-

DESTRUCTION  OF  PEOPERTY.  293

The  waste  and  systematic  destruction  of  property  at  fu-
nerals, thougli  less  shocking  than  the  destruction  of  life,  has
probably,  in  fact,' been  even  a  more  terrible  evil  to  mankind.
Among  these  degraded  savages,  a  few  wretched  lives  such
as  are  thus  sacrificed  count  for  little,  and  slightly  tend  to
diminish  population,  always  too  great  for  the  means  of  sub-
sistence. The  thing  most  to  be  desired  is  a  comfortable  liv^
ing  for  those  who  survive,  and  whatever  destroys  property
strikes  a  direct  blow  at  the  happiness  of  the  living  (vol.  i,  p.
493).  Moreover,  the  sanguinary  practices  above  described,
though  common  to  many  peoples,  are  believed  to  be  limited
to  cases  of  the  death  of  chiefs,  kings,  and  high  dignitaries,
and  to  prevail  only  in  a  mild  form,  if  at  all,  on  occasions  of
death  among  common  men.  Not  so  the  destruction  of  prop-
erty. Any  one  who  has  any  property  is  high  enough  to  have
it  all  destroyed  at  his  death,  and  this  may  in  some  cases  have
actually  proved  fatal  to  the  existence  of  certain  tribes.

"  With  the  dead  Patagonians  are  left '  all  their  property ' ;
with  the  Nagas, '  all  the  movable  property ' ;  with  the  Guiana
people, '  the  chief  treasures  which  they  possessed  in  life.'  .  .  .
The  body  of  the  late  Queen  of  Madagascar  '  was  swathed  in
five  hundred  silk  lambas,  in  tlie  folds  of  which  twenty  gold
watches,  one  hundred  gold  chains,  rings,  brooches,  bracelets,
and  other  jewelry,  together  with  five  hundred  gold  coins,

tendom,  and  with  this  thrill  of  horror  there  will  come  the  inquiry,  Could  such
an  holocaust  have  been  averted  ?  If  it  could,  a  fearful  responsibility  rests
somewhere.  The  governments  who  through  their  consuls  had  knowledge  of  the
designs  of  the  king  should  have  interfered  to  save  the  lives  of  his  subjects,  and
he  should  have  been  given  to  understand  that  the  powers  of  the  world  would
hold  him  responsible  for  such  a  murderous  crime.

"  In  this  case  one  nation  may  say  to  another,  in  explanation  of  non-inter-
ference, '  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ? '  but  this  statement  will  not  lessen  the
responsibility.  A  fearful  massacre  of  human  life,  in  defiance  of  God's  law  as
well  as  civilized  sanction,  has  been  permitted  to  take  place,  and  the  governments
who  are  represented  by  consulates  in  Burmah  arc  in  a  measure  responsible  for
the  dark  tragedy.  Such  terrible  scenes  are  too  gross  an  outrage  to  disgrace  this
period  of  the  world's  history,  and  an  end  should  at  once  be  put  to  the  reign  of
such  an  infamous  pagan."

294:  PROGRESS.— PEIMARY  MEANS.

were  rolled,'  By  the  Mislimis,  all  the  tilings  '  necessary  for
a  person  whilst  living  are  placed  in  a  house  built  over  the
grave.'  And  Burton  says  that,  in  Old  Calabar,  a  house  is
built  on  the  beach  to  contain  the  deceased's  property,  '  to-
gether with  a  bed,  that  the  ghost  may  not  sleep  upon  the
floor.'  To  such  an  extent  is  this  provision  for  the  future
life  of  the  deceased  carried,  as,  in  many  cases,  to  entail  great
evil  on  the  survivors.  Concerning  some  Gold  Coast  tribes,
Beacham  says,  '  A  funeral  is  usually  absolute  ruin  to  a  poor
family.'  Low  states  that  the  Dyaks,  besides  the  deceased's
property,  '  bury  with  him  sometimes  large  sums  of  money
and  other  valuables ;  so  that  a  father,  who  has  been  unfortu-
nate in  the  death  of  many  of  his  family,  is  frequently  re-
duced to  poverty.'  And  among  some  extinct  societies  of
America,  nothing  but  the  deceased's  land,  which  they  are
unable  to  put  into  his  grave,  remained  for  his  widow  and
children."  *  "  On  the  death  of  a  Toda,  '  his  entire  herd '  of
oxen  was  sacrificed;  the  implication  being  that  his  widow
and  children  had  to  suffer  great  want.  When,  of  the  Chip-
pewayans,  we  are  told  that  '  no  article  is  spared  by  these  un-
happy men  when  a  near  relative  dies ' — when  we  learn  that
among  the  Bagos,  a  chief's  widows  bum  all  their  stores  of
food  at  his  funeral ;  we  can  not  but  infer  lack  of  food  as  a
result.  And  so  we  find  it.  Bancroft  tells  us  that '  the  In-
dians of  the  Eocky  Mountains  burn  with  the  deceased  all  his
effects,  and  even  those  of  his  nearest  relatives,  so  that  it  not
unfrequently  happens  that  a  family  is  reduced  to  absolute
starvation';  and,  of  the  Bagos  above  named,  Caillie  says,
'  The  family  of  the  'deceased,  who  are  ruined  by  this  act  of
superstition  [burning  his  property],  are  supported  through
the  next  harvest  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  village.' "  f  In
the  case  of  monarchs,  the  sacrifice  of  property  is  on  a
scale  proportionate  to  their  rank.  "  Here  are  the  details  of
an  account  published  in  1849,  of  the  funeral  of  the  late

*  "Principles  of  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  pp.  202,  203.
f  Loc.  cit.,  p.  286.

DESTRUCTION  OF  PROPERTY.  295

king  of  Cochin-China :  '  When  the  corpse  of  Thien  Tri  was
deposited  in  the  coffin,  there  were  also  deposited  in  it  many
things  for  the  use  of  the  deceased  in  the  other  world,
such  as  his  crown,  turbans,  clothes  of  all  descriptions,  gold,
silver,  and  other  precious  articles,  rice  and  other  provisions.'
Meals  were  set  out  near  the  coffin,  and  there  was  a  framed
piece  of  damask  with  woolen  characters,  the  abode  of  one  of
the  souls  of  the  defunct.  In  the  tomb,  an  inclosed  edifice  of
stone,  the  childless  wives  of  the  deceased  were  to  be  perpet-
ually shut  up  to  guard  the  sepulchre,  '  and  prepare  daily  the
food  and  other  things  of  which  they  think  the  deceased  has
need  in  the  other  life.'  At  the  time  of  the  deposit  of  the
coffin  in  a  cavern  behind  the  tomb  building,  there  were  burnt
three  great  piles  of  boats,  stages,  and  every  thing  used  in  the
funeral,  '  and,  moreover,  of  all  the  objects  which  had  been  in
use  by  the  king  during  his  life-time,  of  chessmen,  musical
instruments,  fans,  boxes,  parasols,  mats,  fillets,  carriages,  &c.,
&c.,  and  likewise  a  horse  and  an  elephant  of  wood  and  paste-
board. Some  months  after  the  funeral,  at  two  different
times,  there  were  constructed,  in  a  forest  near  a  pagoda,  two
magnificent  palaces  of  wood,  with  rich  furnishings,  in  all
things  similar  to  the  palace  which  the  defunct  monarch  had
inhabited.  Each  palace  was  composed  of  twenty  rooms,  and
the  most  scrupulous  attention  was  given  in  order  that  nothing
might  be  awanting  necessary  for  a  palace,  and  these  palaces
were  burned  with  great  pomp,  and  it  is  thus  that  immense
riches  have  been  given  to  the  flames  from  the  foolish  belief
that  it  would  serve  the  dead  in  the  other  world.'  "  *

To  these  modes  of  destroying  property  through  supersti-
tious beliefs,  should  be  added  the  immense  treasures  that  are
expended  in  the  erection  of  costly  tombs  and  sepulchres  for
dead  chiefs  and  kings.  "  That  which  early  Spanish  travel-
ers tell  us  about  the  Peruvians,  ancient  Greek  travelers  tell
us  about  the  Egyptians.  Cieza  expresses  his  astonishment
to  see  how  little  the  Collas  cared  for  having  large  and  hand-

*  "Primitive  Culture"  (London,  18Y1),  vol.  i,  pp.  441,  442,

296  PKOGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

some  houses  for  the  living  while  they  bestowed  so  much
care  on  the  tombs  where  the  dead  were  interred ;  and  simi-
larly Diodorus,  giving  a  reason  for  the  meanness  of  the  Egyp-
tians' dwellings,  as  contrasted  with  the  splendor  of  their
tombs,  says,  '  They  call  the  houses  of  the  living  inns,  because
they  stay  in  them  but  a  little  while ;  but  the  sepulchres  of
the  dead  they  call  everlasting  habitations.' "  ^  The  pyra-
mids of  Egypt  are  generally  supposed  to  have  been  erected
as  gigantic  tombs  for  deceased  kings ;  and  Herodotus  f  gives
an  account  of  the  enormous  cost  of  material,  labor,  and  time
that  their  construction  entailed  upon  the  people  of  Egypt.
The  temple,  as  Mr.  Spencer  shows,  has  grown  out  of  the  tomb,
and  therefore  all  the  costly  mosques,  cathedrals,  and  churches
of  later  ages,  whatever  opinions  may  be  held  as  to  their  value
to  the  race,  must  be  traced  to  this  early  superstition.

In  considering  solely  the  effect  which  superstitions  exert
upon  the  progress  of  the  human  race,  certain  of  the  less  obvi-
ous and  striking  practices  and  tendencies  come,  on  closer
examination,  to  outweigh  other  more  manifest  and  at  first
apparently  more  injurious  ones.  Just  as  the  destruction  of
property  has  been  shown  to  be  a  really  worse  evil  than  the
destruction  of  life,  so  the  more  gentle  but  persistent  opposi-
tion which  all  forms  of  religion  have  offered  to  the  progress
of  science,  even  in  its  infantile,  unsystematic,  or  empirical
state,  has  really  contributed  more  to  retard  the  progress  of
civilization  than  have  all  these  bloody  sacrifices  of  life  and
wanton  destructions  of  wealth.

Let  us  consider  this  influence  under  two  general  heads,
its  negative  and  its  positive  aspects.

The  only  manner  in  which  the  temporal  condition  of  the
human  race  has  undergone  any  amelioration  has  been  by  its
active  and  successful  efforts  to  modify  the  environment.  In
doing  this  the  physical  forces  and  substances,  the  material
objects  and  their  qualities,  whether  animate  or  inanimate,
have  alone  been  operated  upon.  Progress,  in  fact,  consists  in
*  "Principles  of  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  p.  276.  f  It,  pp.  124-128.

OPPOSITION  TO  SCIENCE.  29Y

the  directing  of  natural  forces,  otherwise  doing  no  good  or
doing  harm,  into  channels  of  human  advantage.  It  follows
that  no  efforts  to  control  supernatural  influences  can  by  any
possibility  contribute  to  this  result.  Even  granting  the  real-
ity of  the  alleged  supernatural  beings,  they  are  none  the  less
wholly  outside  the  domain  of  all  material  things  with  which
alone  social  amehoration  has  to  do.  Yet  while  from  the
nature  of  the  case  such  efforts  can  bring  no  good  to  man  in
this  life,  it  is  clear  that  they  may  result  in  his  injury  in  two
distinct  ways.  By  whatever  amount  the  energies  of  man
are  expended  in  efforts  to  influence  supernatural  beings,  by
so  much  will  they  be  withdrawn  from  the  legitimate  work
of  ameliorating  his  temporal  condition.  This  in  the  abstract
constitutes  what  we  shall  call  the  negative  opposition  which
the  belief  in  spiritual  beings  makes  to  human  progress.  The
positive  opposition  which  religion  offers  to  true,  or  scientific,
progress  is  well  known,  and  consists  in  open  hostility  to  the
advancement  of  knowledge  which  threatens  to  explain  away
the  necessity  for  supernatural  powers  and  thus  to  sap  the
foundations  of  religion  itself.  There  is,  however,  a  tendency
on  the  part  of  the  negative  form  of  opposition  to  pass  into
the  positive,  as  will  be  seen  from  a  few  illustrations  which
will  now  be  given  under  each  head.

Perhaps  the  purest  and  at  the  same  time  the  mildest
form  of  negative  opposition  may  be  seen  in  the  existence  of
the  priesthoods,  which  are  the  necessary  concomitants  of  all
religions  at  all  developed.  If  there  were  no  other  effect,  the
withdrawal  of  so  large  a  proportion  of  the  people  from  the
productive  arts,  and  the  necessity  for  their  support  by  the
rest  of  the  community,  constitutes,  in  the  least  extreme  cases,
a  heavy  tax  upon  the  mental  and  muscular  forces  of  society.
The  fact  upon  which  M.  Comte  lays  so  much  stress,  that
these  priesthoods,  from  the  very  leisure  which  their  position
affords,  have  in  many  cases  come  to  lead  the  intellectual
movement  of  their  age  and  country,  though  probably  fully
offset  by  the  abuse  of  power  w^iich  this  inequality  of  intelli-

298  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

gence  has  enabled  them  to  exercise,  is  not  really  applicable
here,  since  in  so  far  as  thej  are  cultivating  letters,  or  any  of
the  great  progressive  arts,  they  are  not  acting  in  their  sacer-
dotal but  in  a  scientific  capacity,  and  it  is  not  individuals
but  actions  which  we  must  seek  to  classify.  Still,  as  is  well
known,  the  tendency  has  ever  been  to  establish  a  caste  of
purely  "  spiritual "  advisers,  not  in  the  sense  in  which  Comte
used  that  word,  viz.,  intellectual,  but  whose  sole  duty  it
should  be  to  look  after  the  relations  of  mankind  to  assumed
spiritual  beings.  As  such,  so  far  as  this  life  is  concerned,
their  energies  are  wholly  wasted,  as  are  also  those  of  the
laity  expended  in  purely  devotional  or  propitiatory  exercises.

This  withdrawal  of  human  energy  and  attention  from  the
things  of  tliis  life  and  fixing  them  upon  supramundane  and
supernatural  conceptions  is  attended  with  secondary  conse-
quences which  are  far  more  important  than  the  actual  loss
thus  occasioned  to  temporal  interests.  It  brings  about  a  com-
plete divorce  of  man  from  nature.

As  it  is  only  by  operating  directly  upon  the  material  uni-
verse that  any  beneficial  changes  can  ever  be  wrought  in  man's
social  condition,  it  is  apparent  how  great  must  be  the  injury
which  such  a  divorce  must  occasion.  Erasmus,  "  the  brains  of
the  Reformation,"  truly  said  :  "  Though  our  mortal  eyes  have
failed  to  penetrate  the  depths  of  heaven,  we  have  succeeded
in  losing  sight  of  our  own  earth."  In  thus  losing  sight  of
earth  the  men  of  that  and  preceding  centuries  had  shut  out
all  hope  of  further  material  advancement,  and  had,  in  the
most  important  elements  of  social  existence,  actually  been
degenerating  for  more  than  a  thousand  years.  During  this
long  period  of  the  world's  recent  history,  religion  held  su-
preme sway  over  the  highest  types  of  humanity,  and,  with  a
great  past  behind  it,  buried  and  forgotten,  all  social  and  in-
tellectual progress  was  in  a  state  of  complete  suspension.*

*  As  showing  the  general  sta^ation  of  the  world,  with  respect  to  the  prog-
ress of  science,  from  the  third  to  the  fifteenth  centuries,  the  following  passage
from  the  annual  address  of  Professor  0.  C.  Marsh,  as  retiring  President  of  the

NEGATIVE  OPPOSITION.  299

It  is  safe  to  affirm  that,  could  such  a  state  of  things  continue,
rapid  degeneracy  would  eventually  set  in,  and  civilized  races
would  pass  back  into  barbarism.  "We  may,  therefore,  con-
template this  as  one  of  the  possible  ways  in  which  races  may
have  brought  about  their  own  extinction  at  an  early  period
in  their  career.

One  of  the  earliest  results  of  this  state  of  mind  after  it
has  become  chronic  in  society  is  a  complete  indifference  to
natural  phenomena  when  presented.  Engrossed  in  thoughts
of  another  world,  and  of  beings  beyond  the  range  of  bodily
experience,  men  soon  come  to  manifest  no  concern  for  any
of  the  things  of  this  mortal  existence.  Under  such  a  senti-
ment temporal  affairs  must  languish  and  material  progress
cease.  Moreover,  this  state  of  indifference  further  develoj)s
into  one  of  contempt  and  scorn  for  all  earthly  surroundings.
Asceticism  is  the  result.  Life  is  despised  and  death  courted.
The  Getse  weep  at  births  and  laugh  at  funerals.  Abdallah
of  the  Sea  and  the  dwellers  in  the  sea  feast  and  sing  when
one  of  their  number  dies ;  the  Buddhist  saint  eats  "  his  food
with  loathing  from  the  alms-bowl  that  he  carries  as  though
it  held  medicine,  wrapping  himself  in  grave-clothes  from  the
cemetery,  or  putting  on  his  disfigured  robe  as  though  it  were
a  bandage  to  cover  a  sore,  whose  looking  forward  is  to  death
for  deliverance  from  the  misery  of  life,  whose  dreamiest  hope
is  that  after  an  inconceivable  series  of  successive  existences
he  may  find  in  utter  dissolution  and  not-being  a  refuge  even

American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  at  Saratoga,  in  1879,
relative  to  paleontology,  which  probably  fairly  represents  all  the  sciences  that
had  then  been  at  all  pursued,  will  be  appropriate.  After  mentioning  the  specu-
lations of  Tertullian  (a.  d.  160)  about  the  remains  of  marine  animals  found  on
mountains  far  from  the  sea,  he  says :  "  During  the  next  thirteen  or  fourteen
centuries,  fossil  remains  of  animals  and  plants  seem  to  have  attracted  so  little
attention  that  few  references  are  made  to  them  by  writers  of  this  period.  Dur-
ing these  ages  of  darkness,  all  departments  of  knowledge  suffered  alike,  and
feeble  repetitions  of  ideas  derived  from  the  ancients  seem  to  have  been  about
the  only  contributions  of  that  period  to  natural  science."  ("  Proceedings,"  vol.
xxviii,  p.  4.)

300  PROGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

from  heaven."  *  "  The  monastic  rechise  closes  every  aper-
ture of  his  narrow  cell  on  his  return  from  midnight  prayers,
for  fear  that  the  nightingale's  song  might  intrude  upon  his
devotions,  or  the  morning  wind  visit  him  with  the  fragrance
and  the  greeting  of  the  hill  forests,  and  divert  his  mind  to
earthly  things  from  things  spiritual,"  f  The  monks  of  the
order  of  Feiiillans  "  knelt  on  the  floor  during  their  refections,
and  some  of  them  were  in  the  habit  of  drinking  out  of  skulls.
They  abstained  from  eggs,  fish,  butter,  and  even  salt,  and
confined  themselves  to  pottage  made  of  herbs  boiled  in  water,
and  bread  so  coarse  and  black  that  beasts  refused  to  eat  of  it."
As  a  result  of  this  austerity  fourteen  monks  died  in  a  single
week.;}:  Pascal  refused  to  look  at  a  landscape,  and  wasted
the  latter  part  of  his  brilliant  life  amid  the  asperities  of  Port
Royal,*  Racine,  the  great  French  poet  and  dramatist,  robbed
the  world  of  his  talents  at  an  early  age  by  burying  them  in
the  same  grave,  ||

From  asceticism  it  is  but  a  short  and  natural  step  to  self-
torture,  and  this  practice  has  prevailed  extensively  among
many  religious  sects,  especially  the  more  advanced.  Indian
fakirs  "  swing  for  hours  from  hooks  drawn  through  the
muscles  of  their  backs,  or  let  their  nails  grow  through  the
palms  of  their  clinched  hands,  or  roll  over  and  over  hun-
dreds of  miles  to  visit  a  shrine."  Bellarmine  patiently  let
the  fleas  bite  him,  saying,  "  We  shall  have  heaven  to  reward
us  for  our  sufferings,  but  these  poor  creatures  have  nothing
but  the  enjoyment  of  the  present  life."  ^     Speaking  of  the

*  "  Primitive  Culture  "  (London,  1871),  vol.  ii,  pp.  96,  97.

f  Quoted  from  Ulric  Hutten  by  Dr.  Felix  L.  Oswald,  "  Popular  Science
Monthly,"  vol.  xii,  p.  45.

X  "  Works  of  Francis  Bacon  "  (New  York,  1869),  vol.  i,  p.  532,  note.

*  He  is  said  to  have  given  himself  entirely  up  to  "  prayer  and  practices  of
mortification,  among  which  practices  may  be  mentioned  that  of  wearing  an  iron
girdle,  studded  with  sharp  points,  which  he  forced  into  his  flesh  whenever  he
felt  himself  assailed  by  sinful  thoughts."  ("Chambers's  Encyclopaedia,"  1865,
article  Pascal.)

I  Roche,  "  Histoire  des  princlpaux  ccrivains  Fran^ais,"  tome  ii,  p.  2Y.
^  "Primitive  Culture"  (London,  1871),  vol.  i,  p.  425,  foot-note.

POSITIVE  OPPOSITIOiT.  301

Flagellants,  Dr.  Carpenter  says :  "  These  Flagellants  went
about  in  bands  with  banners,  and  even  music,  carrying
scourges  ;  and  then  at  a  given  signal  every  one  would  strip
off  the  upper  garment  (men,  women,  and  children  joined
these  bands),  and  proceed  to  flog  themselves  very  severely
indeed,  or  to  flog  each  other ;  .  .  .  mothers  actually  scourged
their  new-born  infants  before  they  were  baptized,  believing
that  in  so  doing  they  were  making  an  offering  acceptable  to
God."  *  It  is  reported  upon  reliable  authority  that  the  prac-
tice of  scourging  still  prevailed  a  few  years  ago  at  Kome.f
In  a  few  countries  this  self -chastisement  is  carried  to  a  fatal
result,  as  in  India,  where  until  recently  the  practice  of  sac-
rificing themselves  under  the  car  of  Juggernaut  still  pre-
vailed, along  with  that  of  casting  infants  into  the  Ganges.
But  sufficient  has  already  been  said  to  illustrate  what  is
meant  by  the  negative  opposition  of  religion  to  science,  the
facts  of  which  are  familiar.

The  simplest  form  of  direct  opposition  which  the  relig-
ious sentiment  offers  to  the  extension  of  knowledge,  and  that
which  constitutes  the  transition  from  the  negative  to  the  posi-
tive form,  consists  in  the  tacit  disinclination  and  repugnance
which  it  logically  engenders  to  any  attempt  having  in  view
the  alteration  of  the  state  of  things  which  naturally  exists.
This  influence  is  described  with  characteristic  clearness  and
force  by  Comte  in  the  following  passage  of  the  "  Philoso-
phic Positive  " :}: :  "  Suivant  la  logique,  barbare  mais  rigou-
reuse,  des  peuples  arrieres,  toute  intervention  active  de
I'homme  pour  ameliorer  k  son  profit  I'economie  generale  de
la  nature,  doit  certainement  constituer  une  sorte  d'injuri-
eux  attentat  an  gouvernement  providentiel.  II  n'est  pas  dou-
teux,  en  effet,  qu'une  preponderance  trop  absolue  de  I'esprit
religieux  tend  necessairement,  en  elle  meme,  a  engourdir

*  Lecture  on  "  Epidemic  Delusions,"  delivered  at  Manchester,  18'72.
f  See  a  little  work  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  C.  M.  Butler,  entitled  "  Inner  Rome,"  p.
24T.

X  Vol.  iv,  p.  517.     Cf.  also,  vol  vi,  p.  142.

302  PROGEESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

I'essor  industriel  de  I'lmmanite,  par  le  sentiment  exagere
d'un  stupide  optimisme,  comme  on  pent  le  verifier  en  tant
d'occasions  decisives."  It  must  be  constantly  borne  in  mind
that  all  progress  consists  in  the  arbitrary  alteration,  by  hu-
man efforts  and  devices,  of  the  normal  course  of  nature,  so
that  civilization  is  wholly  an  artificial  product.  But  if  the
natural  course  of  things  is  the  result  of  the  voluntary  action
of  spiritual  beings,  nothing  could  be  more  rational,  on  this
assumption,  than  the  conclusion  that  every  artificial  product
is  the  result  of  successful  attempts  on  the  part  of  man  to
thwart  the  will  of  the  gods.  This  sentiment,  as  Comte  ad-
mits, even  while  striving  to  defend  the  priesthood,  really  has
made  itself  felt,  and  this  in  proportion  to  the  intensity  of
religious  belief,  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  the  logical  powers
of  the  mind,  on  the  other.  Reason  and  credulity,  usually
pitted  one  against  the  other,  are  here  found  in  close  alliance
on  the  side  of  error  against  civilization.  Whatever  progress
was,  in  fact,  made  in  the  earlier  stages  when  belief  was  most
intense,  was  due  to  the  feebleness  of  the  reason,  which  failed
to  deduce  this  most  obvious  conclusion  ;  while  the  progress
made  at  later  stages,  when  reason  had  been  strengthened,
was  due  to  a  decline  in  the  intensity  of  the  belief,  which
questioned  the  premises  upon  which  the  reasoning  proceeds.
The  stage  in  which  progress  is  most  completely  arrested  is
that  which  precedes  the  era  of  doubt,  but  succeeds  the  full
development  of  the  rational  faculty.  Such  a  stage  may  be
considered  as  having  actually  existed  after  the  decline  of  the
intellectual  epoch  of  Greek  and  Roman  philosophy  and  be-
fore-the  epoch  of  skepticism  inaugurated  by  the  Protestant
Reformation  and  completed  by  the  adoption  of  the  scientific
method.  It  was  during  this  period  that  the  legitimate  influ-
ence of  an  honest  and  immovable  belief  in  the  fundamental
concepts  of  theology  and  religion,  coupled  with  a  trained  and
inherited  mastery  of  the  theory  and  use  of  logic  and  reason,
succeeded  most  completely  in  barring  the  way  of  the  amelio-
rative arts.

POSITIVE  OPPOSITION.  303

Naturally  enough,  too,  we  find  that  this  open  opposition
made  itself  most  distinctly  manifest  near  the  beginning  and
near  the  close  of  this  period.  It  must  first  subdue  and  over-
whelm the  lights  of  antiquity,  which  was  not  accomplished
without  a  struggle ;  and,  when  skepticism  reared  its  head
twelve  centuries  later,  there  resulted  the  second  grand  strug-
gle. During  the  long  interval  which  separated  these  two
struggles  so  quiet  lay  the  smothered  form  of  progress  that
scarcely  a  murmur  from  it  is  heard  through  history.  Re-
ligion once  installed  in  full  power  throughout  Europe,  West-
ern Asia,  and  Northern  Africa,  its  systematic  warfare  upon
the  progress  of  the  past  began.  The  schools  of  philosophy,
art,  and  science  were  closed;  the  teachers  of  all  branches
were  forbidden  to  impart  their  knowledge.  The  works  of
art  were  broken  up  as  pagan  idols,  or  transformed  into
Christian  symbols,  Mohammedanism  came  to  supplement
the  work  of  Christianity.  The  Alexandrian  University  (for
such  it  really  was)  was  inhibited ;  its  teachers  were  scat-
tered or  put  to  death ;  its  astronomical  and  other  scientific
apparatus  was  destroyed ;  its  library,  containing  seven  hun-
dred thousand  volumes  of  accumulated  literature,  was  sacked
and  burned.  "  A  mob  of  fanatic  Christians,  led  on  by  the
Archbishop  Theophilus,  stormed  and  destroyed  the  temple
(of  Jupiter  Serapis,  called  the  Serapeion,  where  most  of  the
books  were  kept),  together,  it  is  most  likely,  with  the  greater
part  of  its  literary  treasures,  in  391  A.  d.  It  was  at  this
time  that  the  destruction  of  the  library  was  begun,  and  not
at  the  taking  of  Alexandria  by  the  Arabians  under  the  Ca-
liph Omar,  in  642  a.  d."  *  It  was  by  the  systematic  car-
rying out  of  such  measures  as  these  that  the  last  feeble
flicker  of  the  ancient  light  was  finally  extinguished,  and
the  complete  supremacy  of  the  religious  over  the  scientific
agencies  of  society  was  established.

But,  though  the  flame   was  quenched,  the  embers  still

*  "  Chambers's  Encyclopaedia,"  article  "  Alexandrian  Library."  See,  also,
article  "  Omar."

304:  PEOGRESS.— PRIMARY  MEANS.

smoldered,  and  wlien  at  last  they  could  be  smothered  no
longer,  and  burst  out  afresh  in  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth
century,  the  irrepressible  conflict  was  renewed,  this  time
with  far  greater  warmth  than  ever  before.  The  story  of  the
Protestant  Reformation,  of  the  Holy  Inquisition,  of  the  rise
and  fall  of  witchcraft,  of  the  persecution  of  Copernicus  and
Galileo,  of  the  martyrdom  of  Bruno  and  Servetus,  and  of  the
bitter  and  systematic  warfare  upon  science  and  material
civilization,  is  already  a  trite  theme,  and  its  true  character
doubtless  fails  to  receive  due  appreciation  from  the  fre-
quency with  which  it  is  presented  to  the  mind.  It  would,
therefore,  be  a  wholly  superfluous  task  to  attempt  here  to
pass  this  chapter  of  human  history  in  review.  Having  called
it  up  and  fixed  it  in  its  appropriate  niche  in  the  general
scheme,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  refer  the  reader  for  further
details  to  the  history  of  Europe  during  those  periods.

In  the  foregoing  pages  the  reader  will  doubtless  have  al-
ready seen  ample  justification  for  the  introduction  and  some-
what extended  treatment  of  the  religious  influence  in  so-
ciety. It  is  not  alone  because  the  popular  belief  respecting
its  relations  to  human  progress  is  wholly  erroneous  that  this
became  essential.  There  are  practical  reasons,  arising  out
of  the  general  system  of  thought  that  it  is  here  sought  to
develop,  which  made  this  course  a  logical  necessity.  The
natural  and  the  supernatural  agencies  have  one  and  the
same  origin,  seek  one  and  the  same  object,  and  follow  dis-
tinct but  co-ordinate  lines.  To  omit  one  of  these  would  be
to  present  a  one-sided  and  unbalanced  system,  easily  over-
thrown.

All  voluntary  human  efforts  are  necessarily  directed  to
the  modification  of  the  existing  condition  of  things  in  the
interest  of  man.  In  the  primordial  groping  of  the  human
reason,  two  widely  different  methods  of  attaining  this  end
were,  as  we  have  shown,  adopted  and  carried  out,  neither  of
which  has  yet  been  completely  renounced  by  any  whole  race

i

THE  "CONFLICT."  805

or  nation.  One  of  these  methods  aimed  to  control  for  man's
benelit  the  simpler  and  more  superlicial  phenomena  which,
from  their  simplicity  and  superficiality,  were  early  seen  to
be  governed  by  invariable  laws.  The  other  aimed  to  con-
trol, for  the  same  purpose,  the  deeper  and  more  occult  phe-
nomena which,  from  their  depth  and  obscurity,  were  believed
to  be  produced  by  the  voluntary  action  of  mysterious  spirit-
ual beings,  having  minds  and  wills  like  those  of  men.  The
superstructure  which  was  built  upon  the  first  of  these  foun-
dations was  that  of  science  and  inventive  art,  constituting
the  material  civilization  of  the  world.  The  superstructure
which  was  built  upon  the  second  of  these  foundations  was
the  religious  edifice.  The  first,  being  founded  upon  a  be-
lief in  harmony  with  the  real  state  of  things  in  the  universe,
resulted  in  the  intellectual  elevation  and  physical  improve-
ment of  mankind ;  the  second,  being  founded  on  a  belief  out
of  harmony  with  the  real  state  of  things  in  the  universe,
exerted  no  elevating  or  ameliorating  influence  upon  the
earthly  life  of  man,  but  tended  in  itself  to  leave  him  as  he
was  in  this  respect.  The  "conflict,"  however,  arose  from
the  simple  and  necessary  circumstance  that,  with  the  advance-
ment of  intelligence  brought  about  through  the  operation  of
the  first  method,  the  deeper  and  more  obscure  phenomena
already  claimed  by  religion  were  one  after  another  recog-
nized as  coming  within  the  dominion  of  fixed  laws  and
claimed  also  by  science.  Religion  had  nothing  to  gain  and
every  thing  to  lose ;  and  it  has,  in  fact,  been  constantly  los-
ing from  the  first,  and  must  continue  to  lose  to  the  last.  It
has  thus  been  a  true  "  warfare  of  science,"  *  science  having

*  A  certain  class  of  persons  have  sought  to  demonstrate  by  various  methods
that  there  exists  no  real  conflict  between  religion  and  science,  but  the  attempt  has
always  proceeded  from  the  heart  rather  than  from  the  head.  It  not  only  ignores
the  multiplied  facts  of  history  and  ethnography,  but  is  negatived,  as  we  have
seen,  by  the  fundamental  character  of  human  society  and  progress.  It  is  a  more
or  less  clear  perception  of  this  truth  which  has  emboldened  certain  modem
authors  to  come  forward  with  important  works  on  this  subject,  and  which
prompted  Professor  Charles  S.  Peirce  to  remark  that  "  those  scientific  men  who
45

306  PROGRESS. -PEIMARY  MEANS.

all  along  been  on  the  offensive.  Its  march,  though  ultimate-
ly irresistible,  was  nevertheless  perpetually  resisted  by  the
agencies  of  supernatural  belief,  resulting  in  a  continuous  and
protracted  "  conflict."

Conclusion.

The  real  progress  of  the  world  has  not,  as  we  have  seen,
been  along  one  direct  and  continuous  line.  While  treating
of  the  mode  of  development  in  biology,  in  Chapter  YI  (vol.
i,  p.  425),  we  saw  that  it  consisted  in  an  irregular  and  appar-
ently fortuitous  succession  of  alternating  advances  and  halts,
none  of  the  former  ever  proceeding  in  precisely  the  same  gen-
eral direction  as  the  one  preceding  it,  and  the  latter  persist-
ing until  there  had  been  developed  some  new  principle  which
should  serve  as  a  new  point  of  departure  for  the  succeeding
advance.  This  process  was  compared  to  the  slow,  labored,  and
irregular  approach  of  a  besieging  army  toward  a  garrisoned
fortress,  the  advances  being  usually  executed  rapidly  and
by  indirect  or  flank  movements.  If  we  look  back  over  the
history  of  human  progress,  we  shall  see  that  it  has  been  ac-
complished in  a  somewhat  similar  manner.  Considering,  first,
that  branch  which  has  consisted  in  the  development  of  the
power  of  intercommunication,  we  see  that  each  step  has  been
the  result  of  a  new  discovery  which  may  be  regarded  as  in
one  sense  fortuitous,  and  without  which  the  level  previously
reached  might  not  have  been  quitted  for  an  indefinite  period,
or  which  might,  for  aught  we  can  see,  have  been  made  ages
earlier  than  it  actually  was.  The  Greeks  might  as  well  have
had  the  printing-press  as  to  have  had  its  invention  post-
poned for  two  thousand  years  after  the  literature  of  Greece
had  reached  its  zenith;  or  we  may  easily  conceive  of  the
total  failure  to  realize  that  invention  for  another  thousand
years  from  the  date  of  the  actual  event.  Along  the  other
line  of  material  progress  this  is  even  more  obviously  true,  and

have  sought  to  make  out  that  science  was  not  hostile  to  theology  have  not  been
80  clear-sighted  as  their  opponents  "  ("  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xiii,  p.
216).

CONOLITSION.  307

stands  out  in  great  clearness  toward  the  last  end  of  the  line.
"What  was  said  of  the  printing-press  might  with  equal  pro-
priety be  said  of  each  of  the  great  epoch-making  discoveries
and  inventions  of  the  present  age,  or  of  preceding  ages,  and
it  is  to  these  that  material  progress  is  chiefly  due.  Society,
therefore,  like  organized  life  in  general,  has  reached  its  pres-
ent position  by  executing,  as  it  were,  a  series  of  successful
flank  movements,  each  accomplished  with  rapidity,  and  sepa-
rated by  long  intervals  of  stagnation.

"We  also  saw  that  the  real  progress  of  the  race  had  been
very  much  greater  than  appears  upon  a  comparison  of  two
distant  epochs,  in  consequence  of  the  fact  that  a  large  share
of  the  real  amelioration  has  always  been  neutralized  by  im-
mediate absorption  in  the  increased  number  of  individuals
whose  existence  it  has  rendered  possible.  This  fact  points^
to  the  importance  of  all  means  which  tend  to  prevent  this
result.  Every  thing  which  tends  to  convert  this  latent  prog-
ress into  active  progress  will  be  in  the  direction  of  the  true
social  development  and  amelioration  of  mankind.

If  society  shall  ever  awake  to  consciousness  and  recognize
the  true  object  of  conation  to  consist  in  the  attainment  of
happiness,  and  the  true  meaning  of  progress  as  that  which
conduces  to  that  end,  the  control  of  the  social  forces  by  the
aid  of  attractive  legislation  will  gradually  smooth  off  the
rhythms  in  its  advancing  current,  and  give  living  force  to  all
truly  progressive  measures.

CHAPTER  XI.

ACTION,

DIKECT    MEANS    TO    PE0GKE8S,    OR    SECOND    PROXIMATE    END    OP

CONATION.

General  relations  of  action  to  progress — Classification  of  actions — Involuntary
actions — ^Automatic  actions — Compulsory  actions — ^Voluntary  actions —
Nature  of  the  will  and  the  moral  sentiment — Impulsive  actions — Inconsist-
ency of  the  moral  code  in  condemning  and  commending  certain  emotions —
Love — Anger — Ambition — Avarice — Impulsive  actions  possessing  moral
quality — Impulsive  actions  devoid  of  moral  quality — Philosophy  of  habit —
Deliberative  actions — Deliberative  actions  possessing  moral  quality — Nat-
ure of  the  conscience — Virtue  and  vice — ^Responsibility — Crime — Normal
deliberative  actions — Supra-normal,  or  altruistic,  deliberative  actions — De-
liberative actions  devoid  of  moral  quality — Dynamic  actions — Man's  do-
minion over  nature — Examples  of  the  application  of  the  indirect  method
of  conation — Knowing,  knowing  how,  and  doing — Individual  and  social
dynamic  actions.

In  the  two  preceding  chapters  we  have  seen —

1.  That  true  utility  consists  in  the  increase  of  human
happiness,  which  is  the  ultimate  end  of  all  voluntary  effort ;
and —

2.  That  social  progress,  such  as  it  has  been  defined  and
described,  constitutes  the  immediate  and  direct  means  to  that
ultimate  end.

Since  the  increase  of  happiness  upon  a  large  scale  can  not
be  secured  directly,  it  becomes  necessary  to  inquire  how  it
can  be  secured  indirectly.  Progress  being  an  immediate
means  to  that  end,  and  the  only  immediate  means,  the  ques-
tion is  reduced  to  a  consideration  of  the  means  to  progress.

RELATION  OF  ACTION  TO  PROGRESS.  309

It  is  clear  that  ia  a  general  way  this  must  consist  in  some
form  of  action.  If  the  ultimate  end  could  be  directly  se-
cured, it  would  require  to  be  done  by  means  of  some  kind
of  action.  In  that  case,  the  civiKzing  influences  of  society
might  be  left  out  of  the  account,  and  this  class  of  action
necessary  to  work  an  increase  of  happiness  without  their  aid
would  then  constitute  the  immediate  means  instead  of  the
secondary  means.  It  is  commonly  supposed  that  human
happiness  can  be  increased  in  this  direct  way  by  certain
forms  of  action.  The  ethical  code  rests  on  this  assumption.
"Within  narrow  limits  the  assumption  is  true.  Men  can  not
only  be  taught  to  do  right  but  to  do  good,  and  both  justice
and  philanthropy  exist  in  the  world.  But  progress  of  this
kind  is  empirical,  unsystematic,  superficial,  and  unstable.  It
must  ever  proceed  from  the  same  base  of  operations.  It
may  make  deeper  inroads  in  some  directions  and  at  some
times  than  others,  but  can  only  go  as  far  as  it  can  reach.
True  progress  is  ever  advancing,  or,  if  compelled  at  times  to
recoil,  it  gathers  strength  and  again  moves  forward,  leaving
every  thing  behind  it.  As  we  have  seen  in  the  last  chapter,
the  amount  of  progress  actually  realized,  including  what  was
distinguished  as  latent  progress,  has  been  constantly  meas-
ured by  the  march  of  material  civilization  due  to  the  arts
and  sciences.  Moral  systems  have  contributed  nothing  to
this  result.

Since  man  has  been  upon  the  earth  he  has  accomplished
many  things.  He  has  ever  been  active  both  physically  and
mentally,  and  the  results  of  his  activities  are  every-where  visi-
ble. He  has  put  in  operation  each  of  the  great  agencies
enumerated  in  the  last  chapter,  all  of  which  have  been  the
result  of  one  form  or  another  of  human  action.  As  we  saw,
some  of  these  proved  progressive,  others  preservative  of
progress,  and  others  non-progressive  or  anti-progressive.  It
is  evident,  therefore,  that  a  large  part  of  the  activity  of  the
race  has  been  lost  in  non-productive  enterprises.

In  the  first  place,  only  those  actions  which  have  sprung

310  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

from  the  intellect  have  proved  progressive ;  and,  secondly,
only  that  class  of  intellectually  directed  actions  which  were
the  results  of  a  correct  interpretation  of  phenomena,  and
consisted  in  some  application  of  correctly  perceived  prin-
ciples of  nature  to  human  needs,  have  so  proved.  This
limits  the  range  of  progressive  activities  immensely,  and
suggests  the  paramount  importance  of  a  thorough  and  fun-
damental acquaintance  with  the  nature  of  all  classes  of
actions.

Progress  is  an  artificial  phenomenon,  i.  e.,  it  is  the  result
entirely  of  human  action,  a  truth  which  is  not  in  the  least
affected  by  the  fact  that  thus  far  there  has  been  little  or  no
conscious  design  on  the  part  of  man  to  improve  the  race  at
large.  That  result  has  been  to  a  considerable  extent  accom-
plished, and  it  has  been  accomplished  by  the  one  particular
class  of  actions  above  named.  It  is  therefore  of  the  utmost
importance  that  the  nature  of  this  particular  class  of  progres-
sive actions  should  be  perfectly  understood  and  clearly  dis-
tinguished from  all  other  classes.  An  investigation  of  this
question  from  this  point  of  view  wiU  therefore  be  seen  to  be
a  very  different  thing  from  a  treatise  on  morals  or  an  inquiry
into  the  nature  and  elements  of  the  various  ethical  codes,  as
the  title  of  this  chapter  might  lead  some  to  anticipate.  Still,
since  actions  having  an  ethical  character  constitute  an  im-
portant and  extensive  class,  a  somewhat  detailed  survey  of
them  will  be  necessary  in  its  proper  place.  The  first  requi-
site, however,  must  be  to  work  out  a  strictly  logical  classifica-
tion of  human  actions.

This  is  by  no  means  an  untried  field,  and  the  most  salient
distinctions  have  long  been  settled  beyond  the  power  of  any
future  writer  to  disturb  them.  The  chief  object  of  the  pres-
ent attempt  will  therefore  be  less  to  go  deeper  or  to  reach
further  than  others  have  done,  than  to  erect  a  system  with
the  especial  object  of  bringing  the  field  of  human  action
completely  within  the  purview  of  this  particular  work.  The
structure  may  contain  substantially  the  same  materials,  but

RELATION  OF  ACTION  TO  PROGEESS.  311

will  be  built  after  a  somewbat  different  style,  to  adapt  it  to  a
different  purpose.

Tbe  only  new  feature  connected  witb  it  will  perhaps  be
the  novel  point  of  view  from  which  it  proceeds.  In  all  at-
tempts heretofore  made  to  classify  human  actions,  the  dis-
tinctive aim  has  been  to  arrive  at  a  better  grasp  of  their  eth-
ical qualities.  However  far  downward  or  outward  they  may
have  reached  after  terms  for  better  illustration  and  compari-
son, the  chief  attribute  sought  has  always  been  the  moral.
In  the  present  attempt,  on  the  contrary,  the  influence  of  the
feelings,  which  is  the  characteristic  of  moral  actions,  is  mere-
ly recognized  as  an  observed  phenomenon,  valuable  only  as
an  aid  to  the  full  comprehension  of  the  influence  of  the
judgment.  Excursions  made  over  the  fields  of  physics,  phys-
iology, and  ethics,  will  have  in  view  solely  to  illuminate  the
paramount  problem  of  intellectual  action.  When  the  true
nature  of  the  Social  Forces,  as  defined  in  Chapter  YII,  is
adequately  grasped,  the  physical,  physiological,  and  ethical
problems  are  already  solved.  The  only  problem  remaining
is  the  intellectual  problem.  The  former  forces  being  wholly
analogous  to  all  the  other  natural  forces  which  intelligence
has  turned  to  human  advantage,  it  must  next  be  seriously
inquired  how  these,  too,  are  to  be  turned  to  human  advan-
tage. Since  the  forces  are  homogeneous,  the  failure  thus
far  to  treat  them  all  alike  must  be  due  to  some  defect  or  pe-
culiarity in  the  intellectual  faculty.

Physical  action,  physiological  action,  and  ethical  action
are  fixed  by  invariable  laws.  They  are  like  the  air,  the
water,  the  electric  and  magnetic  currents,  or  the  thermic,
luminous,  and  actinic  agencies.  Before  intelligence,  they  are
passive ;  they  do  the  bidding  of  the  intellect.  Placing  the
ethical  forces  upon  this  footing  gives  meaning  to  the  other-
wise meaningless  words,  "  Moral  Science."  And  as  we  in-
vestigate all  other  classes  of  forces  with  a  view  to  controlling
them,  so  must  this  class  be  investigated  with  that  view.  Is
this  now  done  ?    Manifestly  not.     There  is  something  lack-

312  ACTIOK— SECONDARY  MEANS.

ing  in  the  guiding  force.  What  the  defect  is,  is  not  clear
even  to  those  who  admit  all  the  rest.  It  is  this  guiding
force,  therefore,  that  most  requires  study.  The  nature  of
intelligence  with  reference  to  the  social  forces  needs  to  be
inquired  into.  The  class  of  actions  to  which  attention  should
be  specially  directed  is  the  intellectual  class.  It  will  there-
fore be  the  primary  aim  of  the  present  effort  at  classifying
actions  to  bring  this  class  prominently  into  the  foreground.

Classification  of  Actions.

The  two  primary  departments  into  which  actions  of  all
kinds  are  essentially  separated,  as  has  long  been  recognized,
are  those  of  voluntary  and  involuntary  actions.  Involun-
tary actions,  as  is  clear,  concern  us  here  very  little,  though
nothing  that  at  all  affects  living  beings  can  be  wholly  ig-
nored without  marring  the  symmetry  of  the  system.  It  will
not  be  necessary  to  go  further  with  this  class  than  to  note
the  primary  subdivision  of  them  into  compulsory  and  auto-
matic.

The  primary  subdivision  of  voluntary  actions  is  into
impulsive  and  deliberative.  The  former  correspond  to  what
the  physiologists  class  as  seTiaori-motor,  and  the  latter  to
what  they  class  as  ideo-motor  actions.

Impulsive,  or  sensori-motor,  actions  may  be  further  divided
into  ethically  indifferent  actions  and  moral  actions.  Indif-
ferent impulsive  actions  are  such  as  exert  no  influence  upon
the  feelings  of  sentient  beings,  either  of  the  agent  himself
or  others.  They  are  not  of  sufllcient  importance  to  demand
a  closer  analysis  here.

By  moral  impulsive  actions  are  meant  actions  having  a
moral  quality,  i.  (?.,  exerting  an  influence  upon  sentient  be-
ings, and  producing  pleasure  or  pain  either  in  the  agent  or
in  others.  In  either  case,  not  only  the  act  but  the  effiect  is
intended.  This  class  may  be  subdivided  on  a  number  of
independent  principles,  and  in  many  of  its  aspects  it  runs

CLASSIFICATION  OF  ACTIONS.  313

parallel  with  the  corresponding  group  of  deliberative  actions
next  to  be  considered.

Deliberative,  or  ideo-motor,  actions  also  fall  into  the  two
primary  classes  analogous  to  those  of  impulsive  actions,  viz.,
moral  and  non-moral.

Moral  deliberative  actions  we  will  divide  into  the  two
distinct  groups,  depending  upon  whether  the  normal  and
natural  relation  of  equality  is  recognized  or  whether  senti-
ments exist  which  transcend  the  recognition  of  this  relation.
Actions  belonging  to  the  former  group  are  classed  either  as
just  or  as  unjust ;  those  belonging  to  the  latter,  as  beneficent
or  as  maleficent.*

The  non-moral  deliberative  actions  have  no  direct  influ-
ence upon  the  feelings  of  sentient  beings,  and  do  not  neces-
sarily have  any  further  effect  in  any  direction  than  the  mere
maintenance  of  the  life  of  the  individual.  But  one  im-
portant group  of  them  has  for  its  normal  and  legitimate
result  the  improvement  of  the  temporal  estate  of  the  agent,
though  in  an  indirect  way,  which  distinguishes  it  sharply
from  the  moral  class  of  actions.  This  effect  is  produced  by
certain  dispositions  which  actions  of  this  class  make  with  the
natural  objects  upon  which  they  are  exerted,  whereby  the
qualities  of  these  objects,  the  forces  acting  upon  them,  and
the  relations  which  they  are  thus  made  to  sustain  to  one  an-
other and  to  the  agent,  conspire  in  securing  advantages  to
the  agent,  rendering  him  more  comfortable  and  better  able
to  produce  a  surplus  above  his  immediate  wants.  "We  may
therefore  divide  this  group  into  the  two  sub-groups  of  static,
or  non-progressive,  and  dynamic,  or  progressive,  actions.

In  the  above  concise  sketch  of  the  principal  divisions  and
subdivisions  of  human  actions,  each  of  which  will  be  con-
sidered more  in  detail  presently,  the  least  important  classes
have  been  first  disposed  of  and  the  most  important  class
placed  at  the  end,  where,  under  the  circumstances,  it  receives
greater  emphasis,  because  its  relations  to  the  other  classes,
*  Spencer,  "  Data  of  Ethics,"  p.  282.

814

AOTIOK— SECONDARY  MEANS.

and  therefore  its  true  cltaracter,  must  thus  be  better  under-
stood. In  other  words,  for  this  preliminary  survey  of  the
field,  it  was  deemed  best  to  proceed  analytically.

In  harmony  with  this  part  of  the  general  plan,  the  follow-
ing diagrammatic  representation  of  the  subject  is  added,  by
the  aid  of  which  the  various  co-ordinate  and  subordinate
groups  may  be  perceived  at  a  glance  :

'  Involun-
tary.

Actions
are:

!  Compulsory.
Automatic.

Impulsive,
or
Sensori-motor.

Volun-
w  tary.

Deliberative,

or
Ideo-motor.

f  Possessing  -

moral

quality.

Devoid

of
moral
1^  quality.

Normal,
or

Egoistic.

I  Just.
(  Unjust.

Supra-normal,  i  Beneficent,
or  •<

Altruistic.     ( Maleficent.

'Possessing  -

moral

quality.

'  Normal,

or
Egoistic.

iJust.
Unjust.

Supra-normal,  (  Beneficent,
or  •<

Altruistic,     f  Maleficent.

Devoid

of
moral
quality.

Static.

_  Dynamic.

( Indifferent.
( Conservative.

IndividuaL

Social.

INVOLUNTARY  ACTIONS.

To  say  that  an  act  is  voluntary  is  merely  to  say  that  it  is
done  in  conformity  with  the  desire  of  the  agent.  The  cona-
tive  faculty  represents  simply  the  force  of  the  desires  which
constitute  the  motive  power  popularly  termed  the  will.  This
reduces  the  field  of  really  involuntary  actions  to  very  narrow
limits,  and  remands  it  chiefly  to  the  department  of  biology.

INVOLUNTARY  ACTIONS.  315

It  is  true  that  Blackstone,^  while  he  takes  no  account
of  automatic  action,  enumerates,  in  addition  to  coercion,
two  other  cases  in  which,  as  he  states  it,  "  the  will  does  not
join  in  the  act."  These  are,  first,  where  there  is  a  defect
of  understanding ;  and,  second,  acts  done  by  chance  or  igno-
rance. This  last  ease  embraces  two  classes  of  actions  nearly
as  distinct  as  the  first,  while  in  reahty  all  these  three  may  be
reduced  to  one.  Por  while,  on  the  one  hand,  an  act  done
by  chance  is  really  due  to  ignorance  of  some  of  the  condi-
tions, so,  on  the  other,  ignorance,  in  so  far  as  the  act  in  ques-
tion is  concerned,  constitutes  a  defect  of  the  understanding.
But,  as  the  understanding  grows  feebler  relatively  to  the  ac-
tion, it  approaches  in  that  degree  the  automatic  condition.

By  a  continuation  of  this  gradation,  the  automatic  actions
of  living  organisms  approach  nearer  and  nearer  to  merely
physical  movements.  The  motions  of  the  particles  of  inor-
ganic matter  would  seem  to  be  almost  as  much  entitled  to  be
called  actions.  The  beating  of  an  animal's  heart  is  no  more
an  action  of  that  animal  than  the  pulsations  of  a  hydraulic
ram  are  actions  of  that  machine.  The  circulation  of  the
blood  and  other  fluids  of  the  body  is  no  more  an  act  of  the
body  than  the  circulation  of  the  sap  and  juices  of  a  plant  is
an  act  of  the  plant.  The  cause  which  produces  the  one  is  as
purely  physical  as  that  which  produces  the  other,  and  in
either  case  there  is  no  principle  that  exhibits  any  power  of  a
higher  order  than  that  which  causes  a  sponge  or  a  lump  of
sugar  to  take  up  water,  and  raise  it  against  the  force  of  grav-
itation. It  is  more  complicated  in  the  former  cases,  and  it
is  not  accomplished  on  precisely  the  same  principle,  but  it  is
no  higher  principle,  no  less  purely  physical.

The  mechanism  of  the  animal  body  involves  no  principle
not  already  known  to  natural  philosophy.  Most  of  its  laws
have  been  applied  to  some  of  the  artificial  machines  in  use
by  man.  Its  general  arrangement  differs  very  little  in  prin-
ciple from  that  of  the  steam-engine.     It  is  a  machine  kept

*  "Commentaries,"  book  iv,  p.  21.

316  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

in  operation  by  the  heat  generated  by  fuel  supplied  from
external  sources.  It  is  provided  with  furnace,  bellows,  feed-
pipes, force-pumps,  waste-  and  exhaust-pipes,  ropes,  journals,
lubricating  oil  in  well-arranged  oil-cups,  and  all  the  other  ap-
pliances for  the  performance  of  all  its  functions.  It  acts  as
the  steam-engine  acts  when  the  steam  is  up  and  the  cocks
are  turned,  and  it  ceases  as  does  that  machine  when  the  sup-
ply either  of  fuel  or  of  constituent  material  is  exhausted.
The  motions  of  the  one  are  as  much  and  no  more  entitled  to
be  called  actions  than  those  of  the  other.

But  there  are  certain  animal  movements  which  are  partly
voluntary  and  partly  involuntary.  The  winking  of  the  eyes
is  an  example.  It  can  be  prevented  for  a  time,  but  not  for
a  long  time.  The  will  seems  to  have  limited  jurisdiction
over  it.  The  same  is  true  of  the  actions  of  the  respiratory
organs.  With  regard  to  these  last,  however,  it  is  possible,
in  some  cases  at  least,  that  a  strong  effort  of  will  may  be
sufficient  to  make  them  cease  altogether.  In  all  these  cases
the  natural  functions  are  performed  unconsciously.  The
will  is  only  exercised  to  suspend  these  functions  temporarily.
There  are,  on  the  other  hand,  some  cases  in  which  the  will
must  be  strongly  exercised  to  produce  action.  Thus,  some
persons  have  acquired  the  power  by  persistent  exercise  of
the  will  to  move  the  muscles  of  the  ear,  though  most  persons
can  not  acquire  this  power.

In  the  lower  animals  a  much  larger  number  of  their
actions  are  automatic,  or  consensual,  than  in  man,  so  that  it
would  seem  that  between  the  simplest  reflex  action  and  the
highest  act  of  intelligence  there  exists  no  absolute  line  of
demarkation.  For  example,  my  canary  requires  just  three
conditions — two  external  and  one  internal — ^to  make  it  sing,
viz.,  a  certain  amount  of  light,  a  certain  amount  of  noise  in  the
room,  and  a  certain  degree  of  hunger.  The  certainty  of  its
singing  under  these  conditions  is  as  great  as  that  of  an  engine
moving  when  the  required  amount  of  steam  is  turned  on.
On  a  f  uU  stomach  nothing  can  make  it  utter  a  note.    But

AUTOMATIC  ACTIONS.  317

suppose  the  second  and  third  conditions  present,  and  the  cage
darkened  by  a  veil.  Unveil  it,  and  the  machine  starts.  Or,
suppose  all  but  the  second  condition  supplied,  and  let  the
room  be  perfectly  quiet.  Then  let  some  one  begin  to  speak,
or  touch  the  piano — away  it  goes  like  a  singing  hydrogen-
flame.  These  serai-voluntary  motions  further  tend  to  prove
that  the  power  which  the  will  has  over  the  various  motions
of  the  body  is  of  all  possible  degrees,  from  that  which  we
are  always  entirely  unconscious  of  exercising,  to  that  which
results  from  mature  deliberation.

But  if  this  be  the  case,  and  the  so-called  involuntary
actions  are  purely  physical,  does  it  not  argue  a  will-power  in
the  vegetable  and  the  chemical  ?  *  To  answer  this  question,
we  must  first  determine  definitely  what  we  are  to  understand
by  a  will-power.  What  is  the  will?  It  has  already  been
shown  (vol.  i,  pp.  394-401)  that  will  is  nothing  more  than
desire ;  that  to  desire  is  to  wish,  and  to  wish  is  to  will.

Is  there,  then,  no  line  which  divides  the  voluntary  from
the  automatic  actions  of  animals  ?  If  there  is  such  a  line,  it
must  be  where  consciousness  first  appears.  It  would  be,  of
course,  exceedingly  difficult  to  fix  that  line,  but,  once  fixed,
it  seems  to  satisfy  the  question  (vol.  i,  pp.  364,  386).  Since,
however,  this  difficulty  can  only  exist  in  those  cases  which
lie  close  to  that  line,  and  since  these  will  be  comparatively
few,  very  little  embarrassment  will  ever  arise  in  endeavoring
to  ascertain  on  which  side  of  this  line  a  particular  case  of
action  lies.  Hence,  we  may  adopt  it  as  a  convenient  rule
that  an  action  is  voluntary  if  the  actor  is  conscious  of  its
performance,  and  involuntary  if  he  is  unconscious  of  it.  But
this  rule  does  not,  of  course,  apply  to  acts  committed  by  rea-
son of  external  compulsion.     Of  these  we  will  now  speak.

A  man  may  be  compelled  to  perform  an  act  in  several
ways.

First,  he  may  be  forced  to  do  it  by  some  moving,  inani-
mate object.  In  this  case,  he  is  simply  to  be  regarded  as
*  Haeckel,  "  Die  heutige  Entwickelungslehre,"  u.  s.  w.,  S.  14,  23.

318  AOTIOK— SECONDARY  MEANS.

an  inanimate  body  himself.  He  does  not  do  the  act  any
more  than  if  he  had  been  such  an  object  instead  of  a  man.

Secondly,  he  may  be  seized  by  the  one  who  compels
him,  and  who  uses  his  limbs  instead  of  his  own  to  accom-
plish the  act.  In  this  case,  the  party  exercising  the  compnl-
sion  is  the  real  agent,  and  the  act  is  his  act  and  is  a  volun-
tary one.  The  party  compelled  is  no  more  an  agent  than  in
the  first  case.

Thirdly,  he  may  be  compelled  by  force  to  do  an  act  with
his  own  hands  or  members.  He  may  be  forced  to  walk
to  jail,  or  to  labor,  or  to  sign  his  name.  This  is  the  most
usual  case.  An  act  so  performed  is,  in  common  parlance,  de-
nominated involuntary.  It  includes  all  involuntary  servi-
tude, acts  done  under  duress,  etc.

It  is  unnecessary  to  make  a  fourth  class,  consisting  of
acts  moved  by  threats  of  violence  or  coercion,  since,  strictly
speaking,  all  such  acts  are  of  this  last  class.  The  force,
though  applied,  is  not  the  moving  power.  If  it  were,  it
would  fall  under  the  second  case.  It  is  only  the  fear  aris-
ing from  the  prospect  of  being  forced,  and  thereby  made  to
suffer  pain,  that  forms  the  real  motive  for  the  action.  A
man  who  is  being  escorted  to  jail  is  not  absolutely  com-
pelled to  walk;  it  is  the  express  or  implied  threat  that
if  he  does  not  walk  he  will  be  dragged,  that  induces  him
to  walk.  This  distinction  may,  therefore,  be  dropped,  and
all  this  class  of  actions  considered  together.  It  was  re-
marked that  in  ordinary  language  acts  of  this  class  are  called
involuntary.  But  in  strictness  they  are  not  so.  Every  act
that  a  person  performs  involves  a  choice;  that  is,  every
time  he  undertakes  to  act,  there  are  presented  to  his  judg-
ment more  than  simply  that  one  course ;  often  he  sees  many
courses  that  he  might  pursue,  frequently  several  which  have
almost  equal  claims.  If  he  is  eating,  there  may  be  many
kinds  of  food,  all  equally  good,  but  he  only  takes  one  kind  at
once.  Of  course,  in  most  cases,  the  preference  is  clear  and
distinct.    But  in  every  case  there  is  an  alternative.    If  it  is

COMPULSORY  ACTIONS.  319

no  other,  that  of  doing  or  not  doing  must  always  remain,  and
an  act  of  omission  is  as  much  an  act  as  one  of  commission.
Now,  to  make  the  application  of  this  to  the  case  of  compul-
sory action  last  mentioned,  we  see  at  once  that  every  such
act  is  nothing  more  than  an  alternative  between  doing  the
act  required  or  suffering  the  consequences  of  refusing  to  do
it.  A  man  need  not  sign  his  name,  although  he  may  be  cer-
tain that  unless  he  do  so  he  will  be  shot.  The  action  is  vol-
untary. Two  courses  lie  before  him.  He  chooses  the  one
or  the  other.  This  conforms  to  the  true  definition  of  a  vol-
untary action,  one  in  which  there  is  an  exercise  of  the  will.
The  first  two  of  the  cases  stated  above  are,  therefore,  invol-
untary ;  the  third  is  voluntary.

We  see,  therefore,  to  how  narrow  a  span  the  subject  of
involuntary  actions  may  be  reduced.  The  so-called  involun-
tary actions  of  the  animal  system  are  mere  physical  motions.
The  first  case  stated  of  forcible  human  actions  reduces  the
involuntary  agent  to  a  mere  lump  of  matter ;  in  the  second
case,  the  immediate  agent  is  no  less  virtually  inanimate,  and
the  person  compelling  is  the  real  agent  and  a  voluntary  one ;
while  the  principal  class  of  actions  popularly  known  as  invol-
untary are  in  reality  voluntary.

Before  passing  to  voluntary  actions,  it  may  be  well  to
refer  to  the  tendency,  pointed  out  by  other  authors,  and
already  discussed  from  its  psychological  side  in  a  previous
chapter  (vol.  i,  pp.  186, 188),  on  the  part  of  voluntary  to  pass
into  automatic  actions.  As  just  remarked,  the  special  char-
acteristic of  voluntary  actions  is  the  accompanying  state  of
complete  consciousness  on  the  part  of  the  agent.  This  is  only
to  say  that  the  motor  discharge  which  results  in  their  pro-
duction proceeds  from  the  supreme  nervous  center,  or  brain
(sensorium),  to  which  all  the  subordinate  nervous  shocks  con-
verging to  produce  it  have  been  referred.  The  transition
from  the  completely  voluntary  to  the  more  and  more  auto-
matic consists  simply  in  the  more  and  more  pronounced  fail-
ure of  these  contributing  shocks  to  reach  the  supreme  center,

320  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

accompanied  by  the  greater  and  greater  proportion  in  which
subordinate  ganglia  come  to  supply  the  place  of  the  prin-
cipal ganglion  in  constituting  motor  centers  for  the  dis-
charge. And  just  as  we  previously  saw  (vol.  i,  p.  374)  that
these  subordinate  centers  really  constitute  independent  reser-
voirs of  sensation  with  a  consciousness  of  their  own,  so  dis-
tinct from  the  supreme  consciousness  that  the  latter  can  not
sympathize  with  sufferings  experienced  by  the  former,  so
we  now  perceive  that  in  like  manner  the  subordinate  centers,
when  not  integrated  with  the  chief  center,  constitute  inde-
pendent sources  of  action  for  which  the  whole  organism  is
not  responsible.

VOLTINTABT  ACTIONS.

We  wiU  next  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  voluntary
actions.

It  will  be  necessary  to  begin  by  inquiring  somewhat  more
closely  into  the  origin  of  such  actions,  the  pre-existent  condi-
tions and  psychic  faculties,  and  the  means  by  which  these
operate  in  order  to  produce  them.  For  actions,  like  all  other
effects,  are  produced,  i.  e.,  they  are  caused.  They  are  not
spontaneous,  or  independent  of  ^external  influences,  as  many
seem  to  suppose.

It  is  a  mark  of  intelligence  to  seek  in  every  possible  way
to  disguise  the  fact  that  action  flows  from  antecedent  causes,
and  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle  boldly  says,  "  Tell  me,  in  any
given  circumstances,  what  those  circumstances  will  lead  me  to
do,  and  I  will  undertake  to  do  something  different "  ("  Mne-
teenth  Century,"  March,  1880),  apparently  forgetting  that
his  resolve  would  then  constitute  a  most  important  "  circum-
stance "  ;  not  an  insuperable  one,  however,  for  it  would  not
prevent  him  from  rescuing  a  friend  from  death  even  at  the
risk  of  verifying  some  one's  prediction  as  to  what  he  would
do  under  the  circumstances.

A  prevalent  mode  of  concealing  the  dependence  of  ac-
tions upon  conditions  is  seen  in  the  varied  forms  of  eccen-

VOLUNTARY  ACTIONS.  321

tricity  adopted,  which  consists  simply  in  doing  things  which
would  not  naturally  be  expected  under  the  circumstances
— ^the  motive  of  concealment,  a  predominant  causal  circum-
stance, not  being  supposed  to  be  known  to  the  observer.
There  are  all  degrees  of  eccentricity,  from  the  delicate  art  of
surprise  in  literature  known  as  "  originality  "  to  the  coarse
and  offensive  oddity  of  the  clown.  The  intermediate  forms,^
however,  are  the  most  common,  and  manifest  themselves  in
various  ways.  The  numerous  arts  and  affectations  of  life  are
made  up  of  these  strainings  after  individuality  which  is  sup-
posed to  distinguish  human  from  animal  action,  and  to  dem-
onstrate the  arbitrary  freedom  of  the  will,  but  in  all  cases
the  true  antecedents  are  internal  and  constitute  what  may  be
called  the  subjeciive  environment.

There  is  some  little  machinery  behind  voluntary  actions,
and  a  regular  train  of  inseparable  antecedents  connects  them
with  the  physical  organism  of  the  agent  in  a  uniform  and
necessary  way,  so  that  they  can  be  traced,  studied,  and  ex-
plained. A  necessary  part  of  the  definition  of  this  class  of
actions  is,  of  course,  that  they  must  involve  the  exercise  of
the  will.  As  already  remarked,  and  as  more  fully  shown  in
Chapter  V  (vol.  i,  p.  394),  the  will  is  simply  a  form  of  desire ;
but,  in  addition  to  what  has  been  said  respecting  it,  we  now
find  that,  before  we  can  proceed  with  the  present  discussion
in  an  intelligent  manner,  we  shall  need  to  devote  some
further  consideration  to  this  essential  basis  of  voluntary
actions.

The  phenomena  of  mind  all  rest  primarily  on  sensation,
that  property  inherent  only  in  nerve-matter,  by  which  it
acquires  a  conscious  susceptibility  to  external  impressions,
(vol.  i,  p.  364).  They  are  primarily  divisible  into  two  classes,
agreeable  and  disagreeable.  The  former  constitute  pleasure,
the  latter  pain.  Sensitive  matter  always  seeks  the  one  and
shuns  the  other.  This  state  of  being  which  thus  inclines  to
seek  pleasure  and  shun  pain  is  denominated  desire.  A  desire
is  therefore  a  mere  inclination  to  experience  agreeable  or

322  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

escape  disagreeable  sensations  {supra,  p.  49).  But,  while
nothing  but  this  bare  state  of  being  exists,  no  result  is  accom-
plished. This  state  of  mind  will  not  of  itself  secure  the  ob-
ject desired ;  it  neither  affords  pleasure  nor  relieves  pain.
Hence,  and  of  necessity,  there  is  always  attending,  and  in-
volved in,  the  state  of  mind  a  tendency  to  act.  The  two  are
inseparable.  A  desire  can  not  exist  without  an  inclination
so  to  act  as  to  secure  the  gratification  of  that  desire.  Yet  it
is  clear  that  the  act  and  the  desire  are  not  the  same,  since
most  desires  are  not  followed  by  actions.  But  they  are  so
intimately  dependent  that  no  act  can  be  performed  which
does  not  spring  from  a  desire.  This  is  the  definition  of  a
voluntary  action  :  an  action  that  springs  from  the  will,  i.  e.y
from  the  desires.  This  is  the  only  kind  of  action  that  prop-
erly belongs  to  sensitive  beings.  We  see.  what  a  close  relation
they  sustain  to  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  such  be-
ings— their  sensitive  organism.  Actions  of  any  other  kind
are  scarcely  more  than  mere  physical  motions.  Voluntary
actions,  therefore,  are  really  the  only  actions  with  which  we
have  any  thing  to  do.  They  not  only  embrace  the  entire
field  of  ethics  or  morals,  but  that  of  social  progress  also.

But,  while  we  are  inquiring  into  the  nature  of  the  basis  of
actions — the  desires — and  learning  that  they  are  those  states
of  mind  that  involve  a  tendency  on  the  part  of  the  individ-
ual experiencing  them  to  act  in  such  a  manner  as  will  satisfy
them  and  cause  them  to  cease  to  exist,  we  may  profitably
go  a  step  further  and  inquire  into  their  origin.  Primarily,
as  we  saw  (vol.  i,  p.  469),  they  arise  from  the  contact  of  ex-
ternal objects  with  the  sensitive  organism.  It  is  such  objects
that  produce  the  sensations,  upon  the  quality  of  which  the
desires  depend ;  hence,  external  objects  may  be  said  to  be
the  originating  cause  of  desires.  The  totality  of  such  objects
impinging  upon  the  organism  constitutes  its  adapting  envi-
ronment, to  the  consideration  of  which  subject  Chapter
Yin  was  chiefly  devoted,  and  any  attempt  to  go  further
back  for  the  causes  of  action  would  involve  us  in  the  ques-

THE   WILL  AND  MORAL  SENTIMENT.  323

tioii8  arising  out  of  causation,  whicli  were  discussed  in  tliat
chapter.

In  the  lower  forms  of  life,  and  to  a  preponderating  extent
in  man  also,  taken  in  his  entirety,  the  whole  process  consists
in  motor  discharges  generated  in  the  sensorium  from  the
various  sensations  produced  by  the  presence  of  the  objects  of
desire  to  the  organs  of  sense.  These  range  all  the  way  from
mere  reflex  actions  to  the  somewhat  systematic  efforts  of
individuals  to  satisfy  the  primary  wants  of  life,  to  defend
themselves  and  offspring  from  assault,  and  even  to  acquire
property.  The  satisfaction  of  all  the  sensual  appetites  and
natural  instincts  belongs  to  this  class,  and  even  the  acts  per-
formed in  obedience  to  the  higher  derivative  appetites  and
emotions,  such  as  avarice,  love,  etc.,  must  be  so  referred.
But,  psychologically,  such  actions  are  primary,  and  emanate
directly  from  the  peripheral  and  not  from  the  cerebral  seats
of  sensation.  Yet  all  desires,  or  volitions,  do  not  spring  im-
mediately from  such  external  contact.  There  is  a  large  (and,
in  fact,  as  far  as  the  present  subject  is  concerned,  the  most
important)  class  which  proceeds  indirectly,  or  mediately,  from
the  influence  of  surrounding  circumstances  upon  the  per-
ceptive faculties.  The  intermediate  stage  which  separates
the  primary  sensation  from  the  volition  is  an  intellectual
judgment.

In  a  previous  chapter  (vol.  i,  pp.  381,  386)  it  was  shown
that  accompanying  every  sensation,  and  forming  an  insep-
arable part  of  it,  there  is  a  correlative  perception,  convey-
ing to  the  mind  a  conception  of  the  qualities  of  the  objects
producing  the  sensation.  The  sensation  and  the  perception
are  isochronous.  The  one  may  result  in  an  immediate  desire
either  to  repeat  the  experience  or  to  avoid  a  repetition  of  it.
And  this  desire,  if  strong  enough  to  overcome  all  oppos-
ing desires,  will  culminate  in  a  corresponding  action.  The
other  conveys  to  the  mind  a  conception  of  the  object  which
has  produced  the  sensation.  This  conception  is  then  ready
to  be  compared  with  other  conceptions  already  in  the  mind,

324  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

and  this  comparison  may  result  in  a  judgment  of  the  intel-
lect, or  an  opinion.  Opinions  are  generally  legitimate  causes
of  desires.  They  are  not  produced  by  desires,  but  they  them-
selves produce  desires.  This  is  evident  from  the  nature  of
a  desire  as  defined,  viz.,  an  inclination  to  experience  pleasure
and  avoid  pain.  It  makes  no  difference  through  what  faculty
that  inclination  comes,  or  whether  it  comes  directly  or  indi-
rectly from  the  original  source  of  experience,  the  senses.  It
may  come  directly  from  the  intellect — from  the  cortical  lay-
ers. In  the  case  of  desires  resulting  from  opinions,  it  does  so
come.  By  comparing  one  conception  with  others,  the  mind
concludes  that  a  repetition  of  a  certain  experience  would
secure  greater  pleasure  than  pain,  or  avoid  more  pain  than
it  would  occasion.  This  is  a  judgment,  and  the  inclina-
tion spontaneously  arises  to  execute  it.  This  inclination  is
as  much  a  desire  as  if  it  arose  immediately  from  an  expe-
rience of  the  senses.  Like  all  other  desires,  it  is  accom-
panied with  an  action,  provided  it  be  stronger  than  opposing
desires.

Thus  we  see  that  there  are  two  sources  from  which  our
desires  spring,  and,  as  all  actions  are  the  result  of  desires,
there  are  two  distinct  classes  of  actions  depending  on  the
sources  from  which  they  emanate :  the  one  from  sensations,
the  other  from  opinions ;  the  one  from  the  subjective  branch,
or  department,  of  the  mind,  the  other  from  the  objective ;
the  one  from  the  sensibilities,  the  other  from  the  intellect.
This  is  the  philosophy  of  the  popular  classification  of  human
acts.  The  first  class  are  emotional,  or  impulsive ;  the  second,
rational,  or  deliberative.  And,  if  any  distinction  could  be
made  between  the  desires  and  the  will,  here  is  where  the  line
should  be  drawn.  Unfortunately,  however,  popular  lan-
guage does  not  support  this  classification,  the  term  "  will "
being  sometimes  applied  to  the  rational  resolutions  of  the
mind,  but  quite  as  fi*equently  to  its  irrational  impulses.

Now,  it  is  but  natural  that  the  desires  which  emanate
from   these  two  sources  respecting  the  same  thing  should

THE  WILL  AND  MOEAL  SENTIMENT.  325

sometimes  conflict.  In  fact,  they  do  very  frequently  con-
flict. And  here  is  the  origin  of  all  those  internal  mental
battles  of  which  the  records  of  man's  interior  history  are
as  full  as  are  those  of  his  exterior  history  of  the  battles  of
armies.

The  especial  importance  and  interest  of  this  subject  will
warrant,  and  perhaps  demands,  an  illustration.  Let  us  sup-
pose a  familiar  case.  A  man  has  acquired  a  fondness  for  spir-
ituous liquor.  To  his  palate  and  whole  nervous  system,  its  ef-
fect is  agreeable  in  the  extreme.  We  will  imagine  a  glass  of
his  favorite  beverage  to  be  placed  before  him.  The  liquor  is
a  niaterial  object  which,  if  he  drinks  it,  will  come  in  contact,
first,  with  his  gustatory  nerves  and  afterward  with  his  brain
and  general  system  through  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  and
will  produce  its  customary  normal  and  to  him  well-known
effects.  To  him  these  effects  constitute  a  highly  pleasurable
experience  which  repeated  previous  like  experiences  enable
him  vividly  to  anticipate.  A  powerful  inclination  hence
arises  to  renew  the  experience.  If  there  were  no  inclina-
tions antagonizing  this  one,  it  would  certainly  be  immedi-
ately followed  by  the  act  of  drinking  the  liquor.  The  incli-
nation to  perform  this  act  is  simply  a  desire.  As  such,  how-
ever, it  belongs  to  the  first  of  the  two  great  classes,  and  is
properly  called  an  impulsive  desire.  It  springs  immediately
from  the  senses.  No  intellectual  influence  intervenes.  The
order  is  direct :  first,  the  object ;  second,  the  sensation ;  third,
the  desire ;  fourth,  the  action.

But  suppose  another  element  to  be  introduced.  The
man  has  had  such  experiences  before.  He  has  previously  in-
dulged his  passion  and  enjoyed  the  pleasure  of  its  gratifica-
tion. But  he  has  observed  that  every  such  indulgence  has
been  followed  by  a  reaction ;  that  every  such  excess  of  pleas-
ure has  been  followed  by  an  equal  excess  of  pain ;  that  when
under  the  influence  of  the  draught  he  always  performs  acts
which  inflict  humiliation  and  mortification  upon  him  after
its  effect  has  passed  off ;  and  he  has  concluded  that,  on  the

326  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

whole,  the  pain  is  greater  than  the  pleasure,  and  he  is  invaria-
bly the  loser.

These  facts  amount  simply  to  an  amplification  of  the
knowledge  he  possessed  respecting  the  qualities  of  the  liquor.
It  is  necessary  to  take  them  all  into  the  account  in  order
to  complete  his  mental  conception  of  the  object.  It  has
the  property  of  affording  him  pleasure,  but  it  has  also  the
property  of  affording  him  pain ;  and  the  latter,  though  it
comes  last,  is  greater  than  the  former.  A  knowledge  of
both  these  qualities  constitutes  his  conception  of  the  object
which  tempts  another  experience,  and  has  aroused  a  power-
ful impulsive  desire  to  perform  the  act  which  will  secure  it.
This  conception  is  complex,  because  the  object  has  two  dis-
tinct sets  of  qualities,  but  it  is  the  conception  not  of  a  qual-
ity but  of  the  object  itself — of  all  its  qualities.  We  may  dis-
tinguish it  as  an  idea,  i.  <?.,  a  complex  conception.

Now,  by  a  comparison  of  conceptions,  or  ideas,  we  obtain
judgments,  or  opinions.  The  man  has  this  idea,  his  idea  of
the  liquor.  He  immediately  compares  it  with  other  ideas.  He
compares  it  with  his  health,  with  his  relations  to  his  family
and  to  society.  A  judgment  simply  declares  the  conceptions
to  agree  or  to  disagree.  In  this  case,  the  judgment  declares
that  the  objects  compared  disagree  ;  putting  his  best  interests
on  one  side  and  the  effect'  of  indulgence  on  the  other,  his
judgment  says  that  they  do  not  agree.  This  judgment  is  an
opinion.  An  opinion  begets  a  desire,  or  volition.  Since  every
desire  is  to  obtain  pleasure  or  to  avoid  pain,  and  he  is  of  opin-
ion that  to  drink  the  liquor  in  question  would  cause  more
pain  than  pleasure,  the  only  desire  that  could  spring  from
such  an  opinion  would  be  to  refrain  from  drinking.  The  act,
therefore,  that  would  result  from  such  a  desire  would  be  that
of  so  refraining.  If  this  were  stronger  than  the  desire  to
drink,  he  would  not  drink.  The  desire  in  this  case  springs
from  the  intellect — from  the  objective  branch,  or  department,
of  the  mind.  It  is  indirect.  The  regular  order  in  this  case
is  this :  first,  sensation ;  second,  perception ;  third,  concep-

THE  WILL  AND  MORAL  SENTIMENT.  327

tion ;  fourth,  judgment,  or  opinion ;  fifth,  desire ;  sixth,  ac-
tion. But  we  see  that  the  action  in  this  case,  if  it  take  place,
will  be  precisely  the  reverse  of  what  it  would  be  in  the  pre-
vious case.  The  impulsive  action  would  be  to  drink,  the
deliberate  action  would  be  to  refrain.

Here,  then,  is  a  conflict  of  desires.  The  man  desires  to
drink  and  he  desires  to  refrain.  But,  though  both  the  de-
sires may  exist,  the  acts  which  their  gratification  requires  are
incompatible.  To  gratify  both  is  a  physical  impossibility.
Either  the  one  or  the  other  must  yield ;  one  or  the  other
must  triumph.  Is  there  any  general  law  by  which  the  re-
sult can  be  predicted  ?  That  one  which  has  reason  on  its
side  is  by  no  means  always  victorious.  It  does  not  certainly
depend  upon  the  right  or  justice  of  the  case.  In  our  exam-
ple, we  have  supposed  the  man's  best  interests  to  lie  on  the
side  of  the  rational  desire.  Indeed,  this  is  usually  the  case,
though  by  no  means  always.  It  is  very  possible  for  impulses
and  intuitions  to  be  safer  than  the  most  deliberate  judgment.
Such  cases  may  be  exceptional,  but  such  exceptions  are  by
no  means  rare.  It  is  proverbial  that  the  female  mind,  un-
accustomed as  it  is,  in  the  present  state  of  society,  to  reason
closely,  passes  to  correct  conclusions  in  many  cases  where
the  logical  mind  of  man  misses  the  truth  after  the  most  care-
ful consideration.*  And  every  body  knows  how,  on  many
great  political  and  judicial  questions,  the  slow  detail  and
careful  technicality  of  legislators  and  judges  do  violence  to
truth  and  justice,  while  the  public  mind  has  seen  the  justice
of  the  case  from  the  first,  and  suffers  sore  disappointment  at
the  manner  in  which  truth  has  been  smothered  under  the
forms  of  logic  and  of  law.

Still,  as  in  the  case  supposed,  truth  is  usually  on  the  side
of  deliberation  when  in  conflict  with  impulse.  But  it  does
not  by  any  means  follow  that  that  side  will  triumph  on
which  truth  or  interest  resides.    If  this  had  been  the  case,

*  "  The  woman  that  deliberates  is  lost."  (Addison's  "  Cato,"  Act  iv,  Sc.  1.)

328  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

this  subject  would  not  have  attained  that  degree  of  impor-
tance which  now  attaches  to  it.

What,  then,  is  our  guide  as  to  the  result  of  such  conflicts  ?
It  depends  solely  upon  the  relative  strength  of  the  desires.
The  strongest  desire  must  prevail.  The  action  follows  the
strongest  inclination.  The  man  yields  to  the  most  power-
ful influence.  It  is  not  the  man  who  fights  the  battle  and  de-
cides the  issue.  It  is  the  forces  within  him.  It  is  not  the
introduction  of  a  third  force  of  his  own  by  which  he  settles
the  controversy.  He  is  merely  the  battle-ground.  The  re-
sult does  not  depend  upon  any  thing  he  may  do.  Whatever
he  does  is  the  result  of  the  conflict.  His  impulses  and  opin-
ions both  depend  upon  circumstances.  Hence  his  acts  must
also  depend  upon  circumstances.  If  his  animal  instincts  have
been  allowed  a  loose  rein,  if  he  has  had  no  education,  he  will
probably  yield  to  impulse;  but,  if  he  has  been  trained  in
schools  of  discipHne  and  intellectual  instruction,  if  his  reason
and  judgment  have  been  cultivated,  if  his  opinions  are  defi-
nite and  firm,  he  will  resist  impulse  and  defer  to  his  better
judgment.

The  strength  of  opinions  determines  the  strength  of  the
volitions  to  which  they  give  rise,  and  the  strength  of  those
volitions  determines  the  probabilities  of  the  acts  which  they
incite.  The  impulsive  desires  ar6  in  an  equal  degree  de-
pendent upon  all  those  circumstances  which  determine  delib-
erative ones.  Whichever  course  the  individual  adopts,  we
may  depend  there  will  be  a  reason  for  it.  That  reason  is  a
necessary  one,  an  immediate  moving  cause.  It  is  not  his
will ;  it  is  behind  his  wiU  and  controls  it,  and  through  it  the
action.  The  only  test  of  what  the  strongest  inclination  is,  is
the  act  itself.  To  say  that  any  one  ever  acts  in  a  manner
contrary  to  the  strongest  inclination,  is  equivalent  to  saying
that  a  body  may  sometimes  move  in  a  direction  contrary  to
the  resultant  of  all  the  forces  acting  upon  it.  Ethics  is  the
science  of  psychological  mechanics.

The  division  of  actions  into  such  as  spring  from  the  sub-

THE  WILL  AND  MORAL  SENTIMENT.  329

jective  branch  of  the  mind,  from  the  sensibilities,  and  such
as  spring  from  the  objective  branch,  or  the  intellect — into
impulsive,  or  emotional,  and  deliberative,  or  rational — is  one
that  is  sustained  as  well  by  fact  as  bj  theory.

Let  us  examine  each  of  these  classes  of  actions  for  a  mo-
ment, with  a  view  to  discovering,  as  far  as  possible,  wherein
they  differ.

The  first  is  the  natural,  or  normal,  type  of  action  ;  not
that  the  other  class  is  not  in  perfect  harmony  with  natural
law,  but  simply  that,  in  the  regular  order  of  mental  develop-
ment, the  first  named  would  be  also  chronologically  first,
and,  as  it  were,  original ;  the  second  being  derivative.

As  we  trace  man  back  from  the  civilized  to  the  savage
state,  we  find  his  impulses  controlling  more  and  more  ex-
clusively his  actions.  If  we  could  carry  our  minds  back  to
a  time  when  he  occupied  the  place  of  a  wild  animal,  we
might  imagine  him  wholly  divested  of  rational  desires.  Let
any  one  watch  the  acts  of  any  animal,  wild  or  domestic.
What  controls  them  ?  Observe,  for  example,  the  house-dog.
Now  he  lies  lazily  stretched  out  under  the  kitchen  stove.
The  fire  becomes  warmer,  and  he  gets  up,  yawns,  stretches,
then  leisurely  walks  a  few  steps  farther  off*,  and  again  lies
down.  Suddenly  another  dog  without  barks  briskly.  He
jumps  up,  pricks  up  his  ears,  and  runs  for  the  door.  If
open,  he  darts  out,  and  perhaps  pursues  the  other  animal,  or
perhaps  he  attacks  a  pig  or  a  cow  in  the  street.  In  a  mo-
ment he  quietly  returns  to  his  former  position.  All  this  is
exceedingly  simple  and  familiar  to  every  body.  Yet  there
is  involved  in  those  simple  and  natural  acts  a  profound
philosophy.  Every  one  of  them  was  produced  by  a  motive.
Each  separate  act  of  the  animal  was  the  result  of  a  desire,  an
inclination,  an  inner  prompting  to  perform  it.

Now,  we  can  not  separate  the  acts  of  a  dog  generically

from  those  which  men  perform.      We  can  see  no  distinct

principle  in  the  acts  of  a  child.     They  are  marked  by  the

same  spontaneous   movements  —  often,   indeed,  displaying

46

330  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

even  less  intelligence.  The  acts  wliich  an  animal  performs
are  performed  in  obedience  to  its  will  as  much  as  those  of  a
man.  The  will  controls  the  action  but  it  does  not  control
itself.  Yet  no  one  ever  talks  about  the  free-will  of  a  dosr.
The  advocates  of  the  free-will  doctrine  admit  that  animals
have  no  such  freedom.  Thej  seek  to  draw  some  line  be-
tween them  and  men  in  this  respect.  But  where  is  the  line
between  an  animal  and  a  child  ?  or  between  a  child  and  a
man  ?  All  the  actions  of  animated  beings  are  subject  to  the
same  law.  Thej  all  take  place  in  obedience  to  desire,  or
will,  the  physical  affection,  or  state,  which  inclines  them  to
act.  The  only  distinction  having  any  foundation  is  that
above  made,  and  in  both  these  classes  the  desire,  inclination,
or  will  is  the  controlling  influence.  It  controls  the  action  as
its  immediate  antecedent,  but  its  own  existence  depends  not
on  itseK,  but  on  definite  causes,  or  circumstances.  If  the
wiU  could  control  itself,  there  would  be  a  phenomenon  with-
out a  cause,  and  both  men  and  animals  would  be  gods.

Under  which  of  these  heads,  then,  do  the  acts  of  animals
stand  ?  Clearly,  under  the  first  class,  or  impulsive  actions.
This  is  the  greatest  distinction  that  exists  between  the  acts
of  animals  and  those  of  men.  The  acts  of  an  animal  are  all
impulsive,  while  those  of  a  man  are  only  part  of  them  so.
To  man  alone  belongs  this  second  class,  or  deliberative  acts.
When  an  animal  moves,  it  is  the  direct  result  of  a  present
physical  desire,  a  feeling.  It  feels  like  moving,  and  conse-
quently it  moves.  But  when  a  man  acts,  it  may  be  either
this  same  present  inclination,  or  it  may  be  in  obedience  to  a
desire  begotten  of  an  intellectual  judgment,  acting  inde-
pendently of,  or  in  opposition  to,  this  immediate  physical
sensation.

If  this  were  positively  without  exception,  it  might  form
a  pretty  clear  line  of  demarkation  between  man  and  the  brute.
Indeed,  it  is  the  line  which  ethical  writers  have  always  been
seeking  to  draw,  without  ever  being  able  distinctly  to  define
it.     They  say  that  mai^  is  a  free  moral  agent.     But  this  con-

THE   WILL  AND  MORAL  SENTIMENT.  331

veys  a  very  indistinct  idea.  They  say  that  he  is  capable  of
discerning  the  moral  quality  of  actions.  This  is  little  better.
They  say  that  he  has  a  free  will.  This  we  have  seen  to  be
false  in  the  sense  intended.  They  say  that  he  knows  the
difference  between  right -and  wrong.  This  depends  upon
his  knowledge  of  the  effect  of  his  actions,  and  is  not  true,  in
his  present  state,  any  oftener  than  it  is  false  {swpra,  p.  141).
And  this  is  the  loose  manner  in  which  they  have  always
been  straining  at  this  principle  without  reaching  it,  often
sacrificing  truth  in  their  efforts.  The  difficulty  with  them
has  been  twofold :  first,  a  failure  to  base  their  speculations
upon  a  firm  foundation  in  physical  science ;  and,  second,  a
preconceived  notion  that  there  actually  exists  a  fundamental
difference  between  men  and  animals  in  respect  to  their  acts.

I^ow  the  truth  is  that,  though  for  all  ordinary  purposes
the  distinction  above  drawn  is  a  correct  one,  still  it  must  be
taken  with  certain  qualifications.  Between  an  ordinary  man
and  an  ordinary  brute,  it  will  rarely  fail  to  hold  good.  But
there  are  three  cases  where  man,  in  a  general  sense,  ap-
proaches and,  I  think,  actually  meets  the  plane  of  the  brute
creation,  as  far  as  his  acts  are  concerned :  1,  in  childhood ;  2,
in  idiocy ;  and,  3,  in  extreme  savagery.

As  regards  childhood,  the  only  difficulty  is  in 'fixing  the
age  at  which  the  rational  faculty  begins  to  be  exercised.
This  differs  in  different  individuals,  and,  of  course,  no  arbi-
trary rule  can  be  established.  But  there  certainly  must  be  a
period,  some  time  in  the  life  of  every  child,  when  it  can  not
perform  a  deliberative  act.  If  it  is  at  no  other  time,  it  must
be  immediately  after  birth.  For,  from  the  nature  of  such
acts,  it  must  have  first  formed  a  judgment,  and  a  judgment
arises  from  the  comparison  of  two  conceptions.  But  at  this
period  the  child  can  have  no  conceptions,  having  had  no  ex-
perience from  which  to  receive  them.  Hence  it  can  have
no  judgment,  and  consequently  no  deliberative  action  is  pos-
sible. But  in  point  of  fact  it  does  not  make  use  of  any
judgment  till  a  somewhat  later  period.     The  acts  of  an  in-

332  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

fant  are  all  of  the  impulsive  kind.  They  spring  from  pres-
ent physical  wants  and  inclinations.  Infants  act  as  they  feel
prompted  to  act  at  each  moment.  They  .cry  and  laugh,  play
and  sleep,  just  as  their  bodily  demands  arise.  It  is  not  usu-
ally until  they  attain  the  age  of  two  or  three  years  that  they  to
any  extent  heed  the  dictates  of  reason  or  judgment.  With
respect  to  their  actions,  they  are  in  every  way  on  a  par  with
the  animal  creation,  their  movements  being  wholly  impul-
sive, or  at  least  as  much  so  as  are  those  of  some  animals.
This  is  so  of  necessity,  and  does  not  in  the  least  detract  from
the  dignity  of  human  action.

As  regards  idiots,  it  is  necessary  to  repeat  that  they  are
nothing  more  nor  less  than  beings  having  the  form  and
stature  of  men,  but  with  only  the  minds  of  animals  (vol.  i,
pp.  419,  420).  I  refer  to  cases  of  natural  idiocy,  and  not  to
those  where  dementation  has  been  caused  by  disease  or  acci-
dent, for  in  these  latter  it  is  more  correctly  speaking  de-
rangement, a  condition  to  which  both  animals  and  men  are
subject.  But  congenital  idiocy  is  often  simply  lack  of  intel-
lect, and  not  properly  pathological.  The  power  to  form
judgments  and  draw  conclusions  does  not  exist.  The  organ
of  the  mind  is  less  perfect  than  in  cases  of  sound  minds.  If
so,  wherein  do  they  differ  from  the  inferior  animals  ?  The
idiot  feels  as  well  as  the  brute.  He  possesses  all  the  senses.
He  has  the  same  desires,  appetites,  passions.  He  has  also  a
perfect  nervous  and  muscular  system.  In  him,  as  in  all
other  living  beings,  a  desire,  or  inclination,  is  succeeded  by
an  action.  He  acts  in  the  same  manner  as  any  man  or  an-
imal, only,  like  the  latter,  all  his  acts  are  the  result  of
present  physical  inclinations — impulsive,  never  deliberative.
Again,  there  is  no  fixed  line  of  demarkation  between  idiocy
and  sanity  any  more  than  there  is  between  childhood  and
maturity.  We  all  know  that  men  who  are  deemed  sane
have  varying  intellectual  powers.  To  say  that  aU  men
are  equal  in  intellect  would  be  to  deny  the  facts  every  day
presented  before  us.     We   know,  too,  that  there  are  de-

THE  WILL  AND  MOKAL  SENTIMENT.  333

grees  of  idiocy.  Every  one  has  seen  examples  of  this
kind.  There  are  those  who  seem  to  have  scarcely  any  mind
at  all,  who  for  want  simply  of  sufficient  knowledge  can  not
feed  and  dress  themselves.  There  are  others  who  have  a
very  little  more  sense,  who  can  do  these  things,  but  have  not
intellect  enough  to  apply  the  principles  of  language  to  ar-
ticulate speech,  though  they  have  perfect  organs.  The  next
grade,  and  the  one  which  is  most  commonly  met  with,  is
where  the  idiot  can  talk  and  comprehend,  and  in  many
ways  make  himself  useful.  A  still  higher  grade  of  idiots
exists,  capable  of  entering  into  industrial  pursuits,  earning
their  own  livelihood,  and  often  becoming  skilled  in  some
particular  trade.  And  then  there  is  our  half-witted  person,
who  may  have  learned  to  read  and  write,  perhaps  have  at-
tained some  proficiency  in  other  higher  intellectual  pursuits,
but  seems  to  have  no  talent,  genius,  or  tact  for  applying
them  or  getting  on  through  the  world — clearly  Tion  compos
Tnentis^  though  not  idiotic.  From  this  it  is  but  a  step  to  the
man  of  inferior  mind  whom  we  meet  every  day.  These  in-
tervals are  completely  filled  up  by  cases  where  the  person
may  exhibit  some  ability  in  a  certain  single  direction,  but  is
totally  deficient  in  many  or  perhaps  all  others ;  or  by  other
conditions  varying  in  one  way  or  another  from  the  precise
degree  described.  There  is  probably  no  shade  of  intellectual
capacity,  from  that  of  a  total  want  of  judgment  to  the  most
towering  human  intellect,  that  has  not  its  exact  representative
in  the  human  race.  It  is  only  a  gradation  in  the  quality  and
quantity  of  brain-power.  If,  then,  there  be  men  of  mature
age  and  possessing  all  the  knowledge  of  which  they  are  capa-
ble, and  yet  incapable  of  performing  deliberative,  or  rational,
acts,  and  confined  as  strictly  as  brutes  are  to  the  perform-
ance of  impulsive  acts,  we  perceive  that  our  rule,  though  in
the  main  true,  has  another  very  important  exception.

The  third  exception  has  a  much  broader  application.
For  not  only  are  there  thousands  of  human  beings  now  in-
habiting  this  globe  who  subsist  in  most  respects   like  the

334  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

brutes,  and  act  only  as  prompted  by  their  immediate  im-
pulses, but  who  shall  say  how  many  millions  more  have  thus
lived  in  the  vast,  undeterminable,  prehistoric  ages  which  have
seen  the  race  created  and  carried  upward  through  unknown
transformations  to  civilization  and  enlightenment  ?

It  has  been  already  remarked  that,  as  we  trace  man  back
from  civilization  to  barbarism,  we  find  the  deliberative  char-
acter of  his  acts  disappearing  in  proportion  as  we  recede.
We  arrive  at  length  at  a  point  where  it  is  no  longer  dis-
coverable. We  find  the  same  law  every- where  reproducing
itself  as  we  read  the  history  of  man.  Judgment  and  reason
have  ever  been  making  slow  but  steady  encroachments  upon
the  domain  of  passion  and  impulse.  But,  when  we  reach  the
lowest  stages  of  savagery,  we  find  them  wholly  wanting,  and
again  the  acts  of  men  are  on  the  same  common  footing  with
those  of  animals.  It  is  idle  to  talk  of  the  moral  quality  of
the  actions  of  some  savages — as  well  talk  of  the  moral  qual-
ity of  those  of  a  wolf  or  an  hyena !

Thus  much  for  the  exceptions  which  exist  among  human
beings  to  the  rule  that  their  acts  are  partly  impulsive  and
partly  rational.

There  is  also,  I  think,  an  important  deviation  from  the
other  branch  of  the  general  statement  made  above,  viz.,  that
the  acts  of  animals  are  altogether  impulsive.  The  statement
is  only  conveniently  accurate.  Animals  certainly  exercise
judgment  in  many  cases,  and  often  reason  also.  In  the  fear
that,  by  some  confusion  of  terms,  some  of  the  attributes  of
humanity  might  be  conferred  upon  the  brute,  men  have
agreed  to  use  a  different  word  to  express  the  same  quality  in
the  latter.  The  intelligence  of  a  human  being  is  only  the
sagacity  of  an  animal.  But,  if  we  were  willing  to  call  things
by  their  right  names,  we  should  discover  in  every  such  act
of  sagacity  a  real  exercise  of  intellect,  either  in  the  form  of
judgment,  or  reason,  or  both  (vol.  i,  p.  502).  It  is  unneces-
sary to  enumerate  instances  in  illustration  of  this  truth ;
such  instances  are  of  every-day  occurrence,  and  works  on

THE  WILL  AND  MORAL  SENTIMENT.  335

natural  history  abound  in  well-selected  and  well-autlienti-
cated  examples.

Taking  the  two  exceptions  together,  placing  the  lowest
type  of  man  by  the  side  of  the  highest  type  of  the  brute,  and
we  should  find  them  to  overlap  a  great  distance,  and  per-
haps whole  nations  of  human  beings  can  be  found  whose
acts  would  scarcely  bear  a  favorable  comparison  with  those
of  certain  species  of  animals  in  respect  to  the  quantity  of  the
rational  element  which  exists  to  prompt  them.  Therefore,
if  we  make  a  comprehensive  survey  of  the  whole  field  of  ac-
tion, we  shall  be  compelled  to  take  in  the  entire  animated
world,  and  we  shall  find  that  there  is  one  universal  and  har-
monious law  pervading  it.

It  is  the  regularity  of  the  laws  of  human  action  that  fur-
nishes the  hope  of  sociology.  One  of  the  principal  branches
of  social  science  will  be  that  now  popularly  designated  by
the  phrase  "  human  nature,"  i.  e.,  a  logical  classification  of
the  motives  of  human  actions,  with  a  view  to  referring  all
the  most  prominent  actions  which  men  perform  to  their
appropriate  heads.  This  science  is  already  in  its  empirical
stage,  and  considerable  accuracy  in  its  application  lias  been
acquired.  All  the  dealings  of  man  with  man  are  based
on  certain  intuitive  predictions  of  how  men  will  act  under
given  circumstances.  Still,  it  is  only  in  certain  of  the  more
simple  and  superficial  human  motives  that  any  success  in
this  direction  has  been  attained.  For  all  the  deeper  and
more  involved  motives,  so  great  is  the  failure  to  penetrate
them  that  systematic  deception  (vol.  i,  pp.  511,  578)  is  con-
stantly practiced  in  all  classes  of  society.  A  keen  observer
of  human  motives  finds  himself  constantly  surprised  to  see
how  obtuse  the  average  mind  is  in  allowing  itself  to  be  re-
peatedly duped  by  what  ought  to  be  transparent  frauds  and
disguises.  In  fact,  most  human  failures  are  really  due  to  ig-
norance of  the  laws  of  human  nature,  and  it  is  presumable
that  an  acceleration  of  social  progress  will  follow  the  reduc-
tion of  these  laws  to  a  tangible  science  similar  to  that  which

336  ACTION.— SECONDAKY  MEANS.   .

attended  the  reduction  of  physical  phenomena  to  laws  and
scientific  principles.  As  a  single  example,  it  may  be  laid
down  as  one  of  the  more  fundamental  laws  of  human  nature
that,  where  a  strong  natural  appetite  exists,  attempts  to  sup-
press it,  though  they  may  be  successful  in  a  few  individual
cases,  will  fail  when  applied  to  a  large  number  of  cases ;  or,
though  successful  for  short  periods,  they  will  fail  in  long
periods.  Thus,  while  there  are  no  doubt  many  perfectly
chaste  abbots,  monks,  and  other  celibates,  the  general  chastity
of  such  large  classes  for  long  periods  can  not  be  maintained.
In  general,  the  power  to  resist  a  natural  inclination  is  excep-
tional, amounting  to  idiosyncrasy,  and  will  always  be  found
to  have  absolute  limits  both  in  duration  of  time  and  number
of  attempts  to  effect  it.

IMPULSIVE,    OE   SENSOEI-MOTOE,    ACTIONS.

The  class  of  sensori-motor,  or  impulsive,  actions  was  said
in  one  sense  to  be  the  more  natural.  They  are  the  original
movements  of  all  animated  beings,  and  as  such  they  must  be
a  low  order  of  actions.  But  although  they  follow  immedi-
ately upon  the  physical  state  that  produces  them,  and  hence
obey  the  lower  promptings  of  appetite  and  passion,  yet  in
man  they  often  rise  to  an  elevated  plane,  and  appear  in  re-
sponse to  the  most  refined  emotions  and  the  most  delicate
sentiments.  So  true  is  tliis,  that  the  world  has  been  led  to
assign  even  a  higher  place  to  those  acts  which  are  said  to
spring  from  the  "  heart "  than  to  those  which  emanate  from
the  brain.

Yet  this  is  a  great  mistake.  Even  those  lofty  as  well  as
those  refined  motives,  the  promptings  of  sentiment,  of  love,
of  emotion,  are  representatives  of  that  great  family  which
are  co-extensive  with  the  existence  of  animated  beings.
They  are  of  the  primary  order.  The  lowest  animals  have
them  in  some  form  or  other,  and  act  in  obedience  to  them.

This  is  not,  however,  to  derogate  from  the  true  value  of
the  emotional  and  the  sentimental  in  human  nature.     On

IMPULSIVE  ACTIONS.  337

the  contrary,  when  controlled  by  the  higher  power  of  the  in-
tellectual, they  serve  to  throw  a  charm  over  society  and  over
life,  without  which  both  would  become  intolerable.  The
danger  never  has  been  that  of  suppressing  all  respect  for
the  sentimental,  but  rather  of  proscribing  some  forms  of  it
,  while  exalting  others.  The  superficial  and  unphilosophic
have  been  led  to  suppose  that  the  highest  morality  consisted
in  condemning  certain  manifestations  of  human  feeling
whch  it  has  pleased  them  to  denominate  base,  and  in  culti-
vating and  extolling  others  springing  from  the  same  sources,
and  therefore  no  more  entitled  to  this  mark  of  preference.

The  chief  sentiments  that  have  suffered  from  this  policy
have  been  love  as  between  the  sexes,  anger,  ambition,  or
love  of  fame,  and  avarice,  or  love  of  gain.  So  far  has  this
been  carried,  that  it  is  often  difficult  to  find  words  convey-
ing these  ideas  which  do  not  imply  in  themselves  some  tinge
of  criminality.  Of  course,  the  reason  of  this  lies  in  the  fact
that  these  happen  to  be  the  impulses  which  are  most  liable  to
be  indulged  to  excess,  and  which,  when  so  indulged,  result
in  the  greatest  injury  to  those  unfavorably  affected.  Necessa-
rily made  strong  and  reckless  by  the  paramount  requirements
of  physical  existence,  and  through  the  normal  operation  of
the  law  of  natural  selection,  these  sentiments  have  rendered
themselves  so  obnoxious  to  the  milder  forms  of  conduct,
growing  out  of  higher  states  of  culture,  that,  in  its  warfare
upon  their  turbulent  tendencies,  society  has  seemed  to  lose
sight  of  their  real  and  normal  purpose  and  mission,  and  has
imbibed  the  notion,  tacit  if  not  avowed,  that  they  are  to  be
put  down.  But  this  notion,  while  fully  as  absurd,  though
perhaps  not  quite  so  ridiculous,  as  Sir  Peter  Laurie's  proposal
to  "  put  down  suicide,"  has,  in  consequence  of  its  unsound
basis,  resulted  in  the  production  of  a  train  of  dangerous  so-
cial evils  which  a  rational  view  might  have  prevented.

All  philosophic  minds  recognize  in  the  sexual  appetite
and  in  the  important  derivative  sentiments  of  which  it  forms
the  immediate  basis,  aside  from  those  essential  results  in  se-

338  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

curing  the  continuance  of  the  race  and  constituting  the  bond
of  the  family  relation,  a  softening  and  refining  influence,
which,  if  not  strictly  progressive,  is  obviously  elevating  to
human  character.

The  novel  and  at  first  somewhat  startling  view,  set  forth
by  Professor  Joseph  Le  Conte,*  that  in  the  last  analysis,  while
egoistic  sentiments  are  connected  with  the  nutritive  func-
tions and  the  appetite  for  food,  altruistic  sentiments  are
connected  with  the  reproductive  functions  and  the  sexual
appetite,  finds  many  confirmations  in  biology  beyond  those
presented  by  him.  The  very  essence  and  primary  act  of  the
reproductive  process  in  all  organisms,  whether  animal,  vege-
tal, or  protist,  consists  in  a  sacrifice.  Whether  in  the  union
of  the  spermatozoid  with  the  oosphere  in  cryptogams,  of  the
pollen-tube  with  the  embryonal  vesicle  in  phsenogams,  or  of
the  spermatozoon  with  the  ovum  in  animals  of  whatever
grade,  there  always  results  a  complete  sacrifice  of  both  of
the  component  organisms  which  lose  all  individual  identity,
and  are  blended  and  merged  in  a  third  and  distinct  new
being,  the  offspring.f  Higher  up  the  scale,  we  meet  with
such  phenomena  as  are  presented  by  the  "nurse"  of  the
Cercaria,  which,  .gradually  absorbed  as  nutriment  for  the
mass  of  young  Cercarice  within  her — as  it  were,  devoured  by
them — becomes  at  length  reduced  to  a  mere  membranous
sac,  which  the  offspring  at  the  proper  time  burst  through  and
abandon  as  ephemerae  escape  from  their  exuviae.  Higher
forms  of  the  same  principle  are  exhibited  in  the  aphides,  the
several  alternating  generations  of  which  may  each  be  said  to
live  solely  for  the  succeeding  one,  as  well  as  by  bees  and  ants,
in  which  the  great  majority  are  made  neutral  as  to  sex  in  or-
der, as  it  were,  to  nurse  the  new  generation.  In  still  higher
forms  of  animal  life  we  see  the  remnant  of  this  profoundly
altruistic  principle  surviving  in  the  form  of  a  powerful  mater-
nal, and  sometimes  paternal,  instinct  which  continues  strong

*  "Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xvi  (December,  1879),  p.  177.
t  Haeckel,  "  Anthropogenie,"  S.  141.

PROSCRIBED  EMOTIONS.  339

in  man.  In  addition  to  this  parental  altruism  there  exists
also  a  strong  sexual  altruism,  which  manifests  itself  in  the
disposition  on  the  pai*t  of  males  to  protect  the  females  in  the
performance  of  their  maternal  functions  and  at  all  other
times.  This  sentiment,  well  marked  in  many  animals,  as,  for
example,  in  dogs,  becomes  a  strong  and  valuable  influence  in
the  human  race,  and  is  known  under  the  name  of  chivalry.

A  fallacy  may,  however,  I  think,  be  detected  in  tlie
generalization  of  Professor  Le  Conte.  This  lies  in  the  fail-
ure which  this  view  makes  to  recognize  the  primary  distinc-
tion, every-where  insisted  upon  in  this  work,  between  the
objects  of  nature  and  the  objects  of  the  organism.  All  these
fundamental  forms  of  altruistic  action  are  unconscious  and
nescient,  and  have  been  the  result  of  the  laws  of  selection,
thus  working  out  the  ends  of  nature — ^the  maintenance,  con-
tinuance, and  improvement  of  life.  Ethics,  on  the  contrary,
whether  normal  (confined  to  the  notion  of  equality  or  jus-
tice) or  supra-normal  (extended  to  supererogatory  acts,  be-
neficent or  maleficent),  rests  wholly  upon  the  feelings,  upon
the  conscious  recognition  of  the  capacity  of  the  subject  as
well  as  the  object  for  experiencing  pleasure  and  pain,  and
therefore  grows  out  of  that  branch  of  biology  and  of  sociol-
ogy which  takes  account  of  the  objects  of  the  organism  and
of  human  beings  (vol.  i,  p.  216).

That  the  prevailing  sentiment  of  society  on  the  question
of  the  purity  of  the  actions  which  spring  from  love  is  essen-
tially false  and  injurious,  is  evident  from  many  other  indica-
tions than  those  already  noticed.  The  steady  refusal  of  the
popular  pulse  to  beat  in  unison  with  moral  precept  respecting
it  may  be  counted  among  the  most  significant  of  these  indi-
ces. In  fact,  it  is  very  curious,  and  suggests  the  demoralizing
tendency  of  too  rigid  moral  standards,  to  observe  to  how
great  an  extent  the  moral  code  is  upheld  in  word  and  vio-
lated in  action.  Many  persons,  when  the  questions  of  this
class  arise  for  discussion,  will  defend  the  side  of  dogmatism,
who  at  the  same  time  are  at  heart  in  sympathy  with  the

34:0  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

party  of  skepticism  {supra,  p.  134).  The  real  popularity  of
this  side,  when  it  finds  an  opportunity  to  express  itself
through  channels  that  are  deemed  respectable,  and  when
its  true  nature  is  likely  to  remain  concealed,  is  well  shown
by  the  manner  in  which  works  of  fiction  are  demanded,  and
the  stage  is  supported.  These  agencies  are  the  natural
defenders  of  the  skeptical  side  of  this  question,  which  con-
stitutes almost  their  only  mission  and  raison  d'etre.  They
usually  aim  to  demonstrate  the  essential  purity  of  such  acts,
dictated  by  the  sexual  emotions,  as  the  ethical  canons  declare
impure.  A  romance  or  a  drama  which  should  fail  to  ad-
minister some  such  rebuke  to  the  accepted  tenets  of  ortho-
dox morality  would  be  adjudged  tame,  and  would  prove
a  financial  failure.  Every  one  knows  with  what  avidity  this
class  of  critical  literature  is  devoured  by  the  public,  and  its
dramatic  representation  is  applauded.  In  fact,  as  remarked
in  a  previous  chapter  (stcpra,  p.  24),  there  exists  throughout
society,  and  perhaps  always  has  existed,  not  only  with  re-
spect to  the  class  of  acts  here  specially  contemplated,  but
with  respect  to  many  other  classes,  a  deep-seated  rebellion
against  much  that  claims  to  call  itself  par  excellence,  moral
or  right — as  it  were,  a  vague  consciousness,  which  the  average
intellect  can  not  formulate,  of  the  arbitrary,  factitious  char-
acter of  the  moral  and  social  codes,  through  the  shadowy
form  of  which  may  be  dimly  seen  the  half-unconscious  recog-
nition that  human  action  is  the  product  of  fixed  laws  for
which  there  is  no  personal  responsibility,  that  there  is  no
absolute  good  or  bad,  but  that  these  qualities  are  relative  to
the  benefit  or  injury  done  to  beings  susceptible  to  pleasure
and  pain,  and  that  the  arbitrary  rules  of  society,  based  on
the  negation  of  these  truths,  fall  far  short  of  their  extrava-
gant claims  in  regulating  the  conduct  of  men.

Considering,  next,  the  sentiment  of  anger,  it  is  clear  that
this  is  not  by  any  means  a  useless  or  wholly  injurious  one,
as  seems  to  be  popularly  supposed.  It  has  been  man's  great
protection  from  lawless  imposition.    It  operates  as  a  check

PEOSOEIBED  EMOTIONS.  341

upon  his  other  passions.  In  a  savage  state  it  is  all  that  saves
him  from  destruction,  and,  as  he  becomes  more  civilized,  it
becomes  tempered  with  reason,  and  assumes  the  more  digni-
fied form  of  indignation  for  wrongs  suffered,  often  averting
and  redressing  them.  There  is  no  more  salutary  emotion
than  that  of  rational  anger  or  "  righteous  indignation  "  for  a
just  and  sufficient  cause.

Ambition,  when  not  inordinate,  is  also  a  salutary  senti-
ment. What  can  be  better  calculated  to  elevate  the  charac-
ter than  a  strong  desire  to  be  highly  esteemed  ?  And  there
are  few  cases  indeed,  if  any,  where  the  desire  is  to  be
thought  otherwise  than  well  of.  Even  Herostratus  probably
fancied  that  posterity  would  see  something  daring,  or  in  some
way  favorable  or  good,  in  his  rash  act  of  burning  the  tem-
ple. A  desire  to  be  thought  well  of  inspires  an  effort  to  win
that  good  opinion,  and  often  results  in  great  good.  Men  err,
it  is  true,  both  in  what  is  good  and  noble,  and  in  judging  of
what  others  will  deem  so,  yet  it  is  rare  that  self-esteem  and
ambition  fail  to  produce  some  beneficial  results.

We  little  dream  at  first  view  of  the  vast  benefits  that
accrue  to  society  from  that  "  love  of  money  "  which  a  high
authority  has  called  "the  root  of  all  evil."  Without  that
sentiment,  civilization  would  have  been  a  poor  thing  indeed.
It  is  the  spur  of  all  industry  and  commerce.  Without  the
accumulation  of  wealth,  there  could  have  been  no  leisure  for
intellectual  pursuits,  no  zeal  for  carrying  on  large  business
projects,  and  very  little  inducement  to  invention  or  discov-
ery. A  desire  can  only  be  gratified  by  the  possession  of  the
object  desired.  Civilization  is  so  exclusively  artificial  that
nearly  all  objects  of  human  desire  can  be  obtained  for
money.  Hence  money  constitutes  the  great  spur  to  the  sat-
isfaction of  desire  (vol.  i,  p.  494).

It  is  the  argumentuni  ex  ahusu  which  condemns  these
natural  impulses.  Those  who  employ  it  always  fail  to  see
any  thing  good  in  that  in  which  there  is  found  any  evil,  and
are  unconditionally  hostile  to  any  thing  which  can  be  carried

342  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

to  excess.  Instead  of  seeking  to  restrain  passion,  and  to  di-
rect ambition  into  useful  channels,  to  make  avarice  a  means
of  stimulating  industry,  and  to  limit  anger  and  indignation
to  their  proper  functions  of  protection  and  self-preserva-
tion, they  undertake  the  impossible  task  of  altering  human
nature  by  eliminating  these  attributes.  The  failure  which
has  attended  this  policy  has  not,  however,  prevented  the  ap-
pearance of  a  train  of  serious  social  evils  which  have  arisen
as  a  direct  result  of  a  false  moral  sentiment.

Impulsive,  or  sensori-motor,  actions  which  possess  a  moral
quality,  i.  e.,  which  in  any  direct  way  produce  pleasure  or
pain,  either  to  others  or  to  self,  may  be  classed,  as  shown  in
the  table,  in  two  groups,  the  normal  and  the  supra-normal.
This,  important  distinction,  for  the  first  time  drawn  by  Mr.
Spencer  in  his  "  Data  of  Ethics,"  *  is  explained  by  him  in  the
following  language  :  "  Those  of  the  one  group  achieve  ends
in  ways  that  do  or  do  not  unduly  interfere  with  the  pursuits
of  ends  by  others — actions  which,  because  of  this  difference,
we  call  respectively  unjust  or  just.  Those  forming  the  other
group  are  of  a  kind  which  influence  the  states  of  others  with-
out directly  interfering  with  the  relations  between  their  la-
bors and  the  results,  in  one  way  or  the  other — actions  which
we  speak  of  as  beneficent  or  maleficent."  The  first  part  of
this  explanation  is  quite  clear,  since  justice,  which  merely
involves  the  notion  of  equity  or  equality,  must  consist  in
such  acts  as  do  not  interfere  with  the  manner  in  which  others
pursue  their  ends,  and  injustice,  its  opposite,  must  consist  in
such  prejudicial  interference ;  and  this  is  why  he  logically
places  unjust  actions  first  as  representing  the  positive  proc-
ess. The  second  group  seems  to  me  not  so  happily  defined.
It  is  true  that  acts  falling  under  this  group  have  nothing
to  do  with  the  "  pursuits  "  of  those  affected  by  them.  They
are  not  reducible  to  the  condition  of  interferences  and  non-
interferences with  the  acts  of  others.     Both  the  subdivisions

*  Page  282.

CLASSES  OF  IMPULSIVE  ACTIONS.  343

of  this  group  are  positive,  so  far  as  the  agent  is  concerned,
both  are  designed  to  affect  others  either  to  their  advantage
or  disadvantage.  The  terra  altruism,  first  used  by  Comte,
has  never  been  given  the  full  meaning  and  scope  of  which
it  is  logically  capable.  It  should  properly  be  extended  to
the  division  of  maleficent  as  well  as  of  beneficent  actions,  to
the  latter  of  which  it  has  hitherto  been  exclusively  restricted.
It  implies  a  voluntary  effort  on  the  part  of  the  agent  to  af-
fect the  condition  of  others  without  the  accompanying  no-
tion that  the  condition  of  self  is  thereby  to  be  affected.  In
point  of  fact,  and  of  necessity,  some  effect  upon  self  must
be  produced,  otherwise  there  could  be  no  motive  to  action,
and  consequently  no  action ;  but  this  effect  is  a  purely  moral,
subjective,  or  sympathetic  one,  and  is  not  involved  in,  or
rather  is  purposely  kept  out  of,  the  notion  conveyed  by  the
term  "  altruism."  And  all  this  would  be  as  true  of  the  malefi-
cent as  of  the  beneficent  character  of  the  conception,  were
such  an  application  of  the  word  allowable.

If,  now,  we  go  back  to  the  other  group  designated  as
"  normal,"  and  examine  it  from  the  same  point  of  view,  it
will  be  perceived  that  the  acts  falling  under  it  stand  very
clearly  over  against  those  of  the  second  group  in  these  im-
portant particulars.  For  if,  in  the  latter  group,  the  interest
of  the  agent  is  expressly  excluded,  so,  in  the  former,  this
interest  becomes  the  chief  consideration.  It  is  never  as-
sumed that  a  person  will  do  an  unjust  act  unless  he  is  to  be
thereby  personally  benefited.  Interference  with  the  "  pur-
suits of  ends  "  by  others  is  never  gratuitous,  but  is  attempted
in  all  cases  because  such  pursuits  are  conceived  to  be  in  some
way  opposed  to  like  pursuits  by  the  person  interfering.  The
object  in  pointing  out  this  peculiarity  is  to  show  that,  just  as
the  actions  of  the  second  group  may  be  generically  classed
as  altruistic,  in  the  enlarged  sense  of  affecting  others  with-
out affecting  self,  so  those  of  the  first  group  may  with  the
same  or  greater  propriety  be  generically  classed  as  egoistic,
i.  e.,  affecting  others  only  for  the  sake  of  affecting  self.

344  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

Impulsive,  or  sensori-motor,  actions  devoid  of  moral  qual-
ity constitute  a  class,  large  in  itself  and  important,  but  about
whicli  little  need  be  said  more  than  to  indicate  its  true
character.  In  the  entire  animal  kingdom  it  is  this  class  of
action  which  performs  the  normal  functions  of  life,  in"  so  far
as  these  ends  are  not  secured  by  automatic  action.  In  fact,
the  automatic  class  shades  off  by  imperceptible  degrees  into
the  conscious.  This  class  of  actions  is,  therefore,  of  more  im-
portance to  biology  than  to  sociology.  In  man,  such  actions,
in  addition  to  the  simple  acts  which  he  performs  as  an  animal
organism  requiring  to  be  constantly  supplied  with  the  neces-
saries of  physical  life,  embrace  a  large  proportion  of  the
regular  and  customary  operations  which  he  goes  through
with  as  a  social  being.  His  daily  pursuits  and  labor,  al-
though a  derivative  class  of  actions  very  unlike  those  prompt-
ed by  brute  instincts,  and  although  expended  on  artificial  ob-
jects, often  in  the  production  of  such  objects,  are  neverthe-
less chiefly  governed  by  a  class  of  impulses,  and  not  by
original  ideational  states.  This  class  of  impulses,  derived
from  the  constant  repetition  of  acts  originally  prompted  by
ideas,  and  therefore  at  first  deliberative,  though  still  con-
sisting in  conscious  discharges  from  the  sensorial  center,  and
therefore  not  automatic,  are  no  longer  generated  in  the  cere-
bral surfaces,  and  therefore  have  ceased  to  be  ideo-motor.
They  must  therefore  be  sensori-motor,  though  not  prompted
by  any  of  the  strong  emotions.  The  actions  themselves  are
popularly  denominated  habits,  or  habitual  actions ;  and  it  is
important  to  point  out  the  economic  effect  of  this  transition
from  the  ideational  to  the  habitual  in  human  actions.  The
cost  in  nerve-force  of  referring  a  perception  to  the  sensorium
is  comparatively  small,  but  the  process  of  ideation  is  physi-
ologically very  expensive.  This  every  one  who  works  with
his  brain,  or  has  observed  the  effect  of  brain-work  in  others,
well  knows ;  besides,  it  is  a  question  which  has  repeatedly
been  made  the  subject  of  careful  experiment,  and  always
with  the  same  result.

HABIT.— DELIBERATIVE  ACTIONS.  345

At  the  risk  of  some  digression,  it  may  be  here  added  that
the  heaviest  demands  upon  the  brain-force  are  those  in  which
the  particular  class  of  ideas  sought  to  be  generated  are  re-
pugnant to  the  intellectual  constitution  of  the  individual  who
seeks  to  produce  them.  This  fact  has  been  frequently  ob-
served and  remarked.  The  explanation  which  I  would  offer
of  it  is,  that  in  such  cases  there  is  in  reality  a  conflict  in  the
process  of  ideation,  all  the  attempts  of  the  will,  i.  e.,  the  pre-
vailing desire,  generally  prompted  by  practical  considerations
of  necessity,  duty,  etc.,  being  to  a  large  extent  antagonized
by  opposing  tendencies  of  the  brain  to  produce  different
ideas.  The  actual  effect  is  therefore  only  a  resultant  of  these
opposing  tendencies.  To  accomplish  any  marked  results
under  such  circumstances,  it  is  therefore  necessary  that  the
brain  really  perform  a  much  larger  amount  of  work,  all  of
which  costs  equally  to  the  brain-tissue  and  nerve-force.  A
similar  explanation  applies  to  "  brain-worry,"  which  is  known
to  wear  out  the  mind  with  great  rapidity.  It  consists  in  an
attempt  to  force  ideation  against  normal  antagonizing  tend-
encies, or  else  to  compel  the  cerebral  processes  to  operate
faster  than  they  naturally  tend  to  do.

In  habitual  action,  the  economy  consists  in  sparing  the
convolutions  all  part  whatever  in  the  process,  which  is  an
immense  saving  to  the  whole  system.  This  economic  degra-
dation of  action  may  be  still  further  continued  until  habitual
actions  are  converted  into  automatic,  of  which  in  turn  there
are  as  many  degrees  as  there  exist  ganglionic  centers,  ending
with  simple  reflex  action,  and  with  each  step  of  which  pro-
cess there  goes  a  diminution  of  the  amount  of  nervous  drain
upon  the  system.

DELIBEKATIVE,    OE   IDEO-MOTOR,    ACTIONS.

As  we  have  already  seen,  deliberative,  or  ideo-motor,  ac-
tions are  distinguished  from  impulsive,  or  sensori-motor,  ones
by  the  fact  that  in  them  the  cerebral  hemispheres,  or  brain
proper,  must   take  part.     In  the  process  of  cephalization

346  ACTION. -SECONDARY  MEANS.

these  hemispheres,  or  cerebral  lobes,  have  been  gradually  de-
veloped in  the  animal  kingdom  below  man,  but  in  these  the
principal  increase  of  brain-mass  seems  to  have  been  devoted
to  the  object  of  furnishing  a  seat  for  the  nerves  of  special
sense.  Nevertheless,  animals  certainly  do  possess  true  cere-
bral lobes,  and  these  must  have  been  developed  through  use
and  selection,  from  which  it  would  be  clear,  were  it  not
otherwise  proved,  that  they  do  cerebrate  and,  in  a  strict
sense,  think.  When,  however,  we  remember  that  the  high-
est anthropoids  with  the  stature  of  man  possess  only  half  as
much  brain  as  the  minimum  amount  of  the  rational  human
being  (vol.  i,  p.  438),  it  becomes  apparent  that  the  extent  of
the  true  ideation  possible  in  animals  is,  as  compared  with
men,  extremely  small — so  small  that  man  may  be  practically
regarded  as  the  only  living  thing  that  can  really  reason.

The  process  of  ideation,  as  carried  on  in  the  cortical
layers  in  communication  with  each  other  by  means  of  longi-
tudinal and  transverse  fibers,  the  fornix  and  corpus  callosum,
and  with  the  sensorium  at  the  thalami  optici  and  th*e  cm^oi'a
striata^  has  been  described  in  a  previous  chapter  (vol.  i,  pp.
378,  380),  and  need  not  be  here  enlarged  upon.  We  are
more  especially  concerned  at  present  with  the  results  of  the
process  as  manifested  in  the  final  motor  discharge  and  ac-
companying muscular  activities,  which  are  the  legitimate
ends  of  ideas  when  formed.

As  in  impulsive,  or  sensori-motor,  actions,  so  in  delibera-
tive, or  ideo-motor,  actions,  some  are  calculated  to  affect  beings
endowed  with  feeling,  and  particularly  human  beings,  in
ways  that  occasion  pleasure  or  pain,  while  others  do  not  pos-
sess this  quality.  This  distinction  is  fundamental,  inasmuch
as  it  is  upon  the  first  of  these  classes  that  the  ethical  code
of  society  rests,  while  the  second  class  has  nothing  what-
ever to  do  with  ethics.  It  is  therefore  properly  excluded
from  all  works  on  ethics,  with  which,  of  course,  no  one  can
find  any  fault.  To  criticise  moral-science  writers  because
they  fail  to  make  their  treatises  embrace  that  class  of  actions

MOKAL  DELIBERATIVE  ACTIONS.  347

which  are  devoid  of  moral  quality,  would  only  be  to  com-
plain because  they  do  not  write  of  something  else  besides  mor-
als. While  this  would  of  course  be  absurd,  there  neverthe-
less exists  good  cause  to  complain,  not  to  say  wonder,  that
not  only  moi*al-science  writers,  but  writers  and  thinkers  in
general,  have  failed  to  recognize  the  great  class  of  non-moral
actions  and  its  true  relations  to  civilization — have  failed  to
recognize  that  moral  actions  are  essentially  non-progressive,
while  progressive  actions  are  necessarily  non-moral.

Without,  however,  anticipating  that  part  of  the  discus-
sion, let  us  now  attend  for  a  time  to  the  opposite  class  of
deliberative  actions,  viz.,  those  which  are  said  to  possess  a
moral  quality.

Deliberative,  or  Ideo-Motor,  Actions  possessing  Moral
Quality. — It  has  already  been  shown  that  most  of  the  con-
flicts of  the  mind,  in  which  the  will  is  supposed  to  act
and  conscience  to  be  consulted,  consist  of  cases  where  two
desires,  one  arising  from  the  emotions  and  the  other  from
the  reason,  yet  incompatible  with  each  other,  are  struggling
for  the  mastery  ;  and,  although  (so  deceptive  are  these  compli-
cated psychological  laws)  it  always  seems  as  if  the  mind  had
some  power  to  decide  such  contests,  nevertheless,  the  result
does  nothing  more  than  determine  which  was  actually  the
stronger  motive  force.

It  is  only  when  an  action  assumes  this  moral  quality,  i.  e.,
a  quality  as  to  the  agent,  affecting  his  alleged  prerogative  of
choice,  that  the  idea  of  responsibility  arises,  and  then  the  act
is  said  to  be  moral  or  immoral  according  as  it  is  right  or
wrong  {supra,  p.  141),  rendering  the  agent  guilty  or  in-
nocent, punishable  or  rewardable,  as  the  case  may  be.  For
this  purpose  it  is  generally  supposed  that  there  exists  a  fac-
ulty in  man  by  which  he  is  rendered  capable  of  discerning
what  is  right  and  distinguishing  it  from  what  is  wrong.  So
broad  a  statement  of  the  case  has,  however,  been  found  to
conflict  with  the  approved  distinction  between  right  and
wrong,  on  the  one  hand,  and  guilt  and  innocence,  on  the  other.

348  ACTIOK— SECONDARY  IkfEAKS.

For,  if  tliat  faculty  absolutely  enables  a  person  to  distinguish
right  from  wrong,  he  must  be  guilty  if  an  act  committed  by
him  is  wrong,  since  he  must  be  aware  that  it  is  so.  This
narrow  view  has  long  prevailed,  and  still  prevails.  In  all
cases  of  crimination  and  recrimination,  it  is  the  chief  fallacy
that  keeps  them  alive.  The  philosophy  of  it  is  something
like  this :  One  person  has  committed  an  act  which  another
regards  as  wrong.  The  act  was  done,  as  all  acts  are,  in  obe-
dience to  an  inclination,  founded  upon  the  view  which  the
agent  took  of  the  case,  i.  e.,  upon  his  opinions.  But  in  the
opinion  of  the  other  party  it  was  wrong,  and  therefore  he
censures  the  agent,  for  he  can  not  conceive  how  there  should
be  any  difference  of  opinion  about  what  is  wrong.  Because
he  thinks  an  act  wrong,  he  supposes  that  every  body  else  must
80  regard  it ;  that  is,  he  regards  the  human  conscience  as  an
infallible  monitor  on  all  matters  of  right  and  wrong.

From  this  view  of  the  subject,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  the
idea  of  guilt  might  have  originated.  If  every  one  who  does
what  any  one  else  thinks  wrong  is  in  each  case  himself  a
wrong-doer,  then  even  the  most  extreme  notions  of  deprav-
ity are  more  than  realized.  For  every  one  thinks  he  con-
stantly sees  wrong  perpetrated.  If  all  are  right  in  this,  i.  e.,
if  conscience  is  an  unerring  guide,  then  is  every  one  com-
mitting willful  wrongs,  and  guUty,  at  every  step  of  his  life.
He  who  believes  this  to  be  so,  naturally  considers  all  man-
kind totally  depraved  and  deserving  of  punishment.

But,  in  the  fii*st  place,  we  find  that  each  one  exempts
himself  from  the  rule  that  he  applies  to  others.  Any  one
may,  for  the  sake  of  argument  when  hard  pressed,  admit
that  he  is  liable  to  do  wrong,  but  never  will  he  admit  that
he  is  in  the  wrong  with  reference  to  the  particular  case  in
question,  and,  as  all  cases  are  special  at  the  time  they  are
under  consideration,  this  is  the  same  thing  as  to  claim  gen-
eral moral  infallibility.  We  see,  therefore,  that  the  same
rule  which,  when  objectively  applied,  criminates  all,  when
subjectively  applied,  exculpates  all.

NATURE  OF  THE  CONSCIENCE.  349

Again,  if  conscience  were  an  infallible  guide,  and  all  men
always  obeyed  it,  not  only  would  all  be  innocent,  but  all  acts
would  be  right.  The  first  of  these  conclusions,  however  true
it  may  be,  would  not  be  accepted,  while  the  second  is  mani-
festly untrue.  The  truth  that  comes  out  of  all  these  con-
fused theories,  and  accords  with  all  the  facts,  is,  that  the  con-
science is  only  a  judgment  of  the  intellect  upon  the  rightness
and  wrongness  of  actions,  and  such  judgments  are  as  much
more  liable  than  other  judgments  to  be  erroneous  as  the
subject  judged  is  more  difficult  to  understand.  But  a  judg-
ment made  becomes  simply  an  opinion,  so  that,  when  one
thinks  an  act  wrong  that  another  thinks  right,  it  is  only  a
question  of  opinion.  It  is  over  such  questions  that  most  of
the  crimination  and  recrimination  is  indulged  in.  There  is  a
remarkable  analogy  here  between  the  history  of  morals  and
that  of  religion.  Questions  of  conscience,  like  questions  of
faith,  are  merely  questions  of  opinion,  and  in  both  the  method
has  always  been  to  blame.  As,  however,  both  are  intellect-
ual operations,  and,  like  all  other  matters  of  opinion,  depend
upon  the  data  furnished'  to  the  mind,  the  only  possible  rem-
edy is  in  unifying  the  data.

But  it  is  said  that,  in  point  of  fact,  the  conscience  does
form  an  immediate  and  apparently  spontaneous  decision  as
to  the  quality  of  an  action  the  moment  it  is  presented  to  the
faculty.  If  a  person  steals  from  another,  or  tells  a  falsehood,
conscience  does  not  hesitate  to  pronounce  the  act  wrong.  If
he  befriends  another,  or  performs  an  unselfish  act,  conscience
instantly  declares  this  right,  and  never  errs  in  such  decisions.
This  is  very  true,  yet  it  admits  of  a  very  simple  explanation.
The  only  true  source  of  the  moral  idea  is  experience.  In
other  words,  this  kind  of  idea  forms  no  exception  to  the  uni-
versal principle  that  ideas  are  the  result  of  experience.  In
every  class  of  phenomena  there  are  grades  of  comprehensi-
bility.  There  are  those  which  readily  appear  to  the  mind,
and  there  are  those  which  it  only  grasps  with  an  effort.
Some  experiences  are  so  frequent  and  common  that  every

850  ACTION.— SECOITDARY  MEANS.

body  is  acquainted  with  their  proper  interpretation  as  soon  as
old  enough  to  form  ideas.  Others  are  so  rare  that  great  and
prolonged  labor  is  required  to  understand  their  significance.

The  phenomena  of  gravitation  form  an  example  of  the
first  class.  Every  person  knows  that  an  apple  will  fall  to  the
ground  as  soon  as  he  knows  how  to  communicate  an  idea ;
and  yet  this  is  no  intuition.  He  has  seen  so  many  examples
of  it  that  he  judges  instantly.  If  half  the  objects  by  which
we  are  surrounded  required  to  be  restrained  to  prevent  their
rising  from  the  ground,  as  they  would  if  the  relative  density
of  the  air  to  other  objects  were  as  great  as  that  of  water,
then,  before  judging  as  to  whether  an  object  would  rise  or
fall,  one  would  need  to  know  something  about  the  object.
If  I  hold  up  any  object  and  ask  a  child  whether  it  will  fall
if  I  let  it  go,  he  will  probably  say  yes,  and  in  almost  all  cases
will  judge  correctly.  Yet  even  in  this  he  may  err.  For
suppose  the  object  to  be  a  gas  balloon,  which  he  has  never
seen.  As  I  hold  it  in  my  hand,  he  will  decide  that  it  will  fall
just  as  surely  as  if  it  were  an  apple.  Yet  it  will  rise.  But,  if
I  place  an  object  in  a  trough  of  w^ter  midway  between  the
top  of  the  water  and  the  bottom,  and  ask  if  it  will  sink  or
rise,  it  will  require  some  knowledge  of  the  object  to  answer.
Even  a  grown  person,  unacquainted  with  it,  would  often  err.
It  would  require  experience.  An  apple  would  swim,  while
a  marble  would  sink.  If  men  or  rational  beings  inhabited  the
seas,  gravitation  would  not  be  that  simple  and  well-known
law  that  it  is  to  us  who  happen  to  occupy  a  rarer  medium.

As  an  example  of  that  class  of  physical  truths  which  are
difficult  to  comprehend,  we  may  instance  those  of  fluxions,
or  those  laws  which  govern  the  rates  of  variation  of  two
variable  quantities,  one  of  which  is  a  function  of  the  other.
Ko  one  can  answer  the  question  in  what  ratio  the  increment
to  the  solid  contents  of  a  cube  will  vary  with  a  given  rate  of
variation  of  a  side,  without  not  only  reflection  but  much  cal-
culation. Other  truths  are  difficult,  from  the  great  interval
between  the  occurrence  of  the  phenomena.     Such  is  the

NATURE  OF  THE  CONSCIENCE.  351

character  of  many  astronomical  truths.  We  are  in  possession
of  truths  to-day  which  we  could  not  know  had  not  the  an-
cients observed  and  recorded  the  phenomena  two  thousand
years  ago.  No  one  could  judge,  intuitively,  of  the  rate  of
the  precession  of  the  equinoxes.  This  has  required  a  long
series  of  observations.

Between  these  extremes  the  interval  is  entirely  filled.
There  are  all  degrees  of  comprehensibility  in  physical  truths,
yet  they  must  all  be  first  learned  by  experience.  !N"o  truth
is  intuitively  known  {infra,  p.  513).  Moral  truth  is  iden-
tical with  physical  truth  in  this  respect.  The  error  of  moral-
ists and  of  the  world  at  large  has  been,  that  they  have  taken
the  common  and  obvious  cases  that  every  one  learns  as  he
does  the  law  of  gravitation  as  soon  as  old  enough  to  think
at  all,  and  because  all  men  agree  about  these  and  recognize
the  truth  instantly  and  apparently  without  mental  effort,
they  have  concluded  that  there  must  exist  an  unerring  fac-
ulty of  the  mind  for  discerning  right  and  wrong.  It  would
be  as  logical,  because  all  men  judge  instantly  and  without
reflection  that  a  body  will  fall  to  the  ground,  to  deduce  the
conclusion  that  man  possesses  a  faculty  which  is  infallible
for  the  discernment  of  all  physical  truths.  To  lie,  to  steal,
to  kill,  to  befriend  one  another,  to  feed  the  hungry,  clothe
the  naked,  and  house  the  destitute — these  are  but  the  ABC
of  moral  science.  Every  body  knows  which  of  these  are
rio-ht  and  which  are  wrong.  But  this  is  not  the  whole  of
moral  science.  It  is  to  it  only  what  the  rudiments  of  arith-
metic are  to  mathematics ;  and  there  is  nothing  more  diffi-
cult in  the  whole  field  of  mathematics  than  is  to  be  met  with
in  the  field  of  morals  ;  no  problem  more  abstruse  or  knotty,
no  question  more  complicated  or  profound.*  Ethics  really
is  a  science,  the  science  of  one  important  class  of  human  ac-
tions, and  it  can  not  be  successfully  studied  until  it  is  treated
as  such.  In  the  great  domain  of  human  action,  there  are
multitudes  of  questions  which  the  conscience  can  not  de-
*  Spencer,  "  Data  of  Ethics,"  pp.  265,  287,  288.

352  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

cide.  Different  consciences  differ  respecting  tliem.  There
are  moral  questions  about  which  the  wisest  and  best  of  men
differ — questions  which  are  not  to  be  settled  bj  the  act  of
anj  faculty.  Such  questions  require  study,  and  often,  like
mathematical  questions,  close  calculation ;  or,  like  questions
in  physics,  repeated  experiment ;  or,  like  those  of  astronomy,
observations  at  long  intervals.  Every  person  has  met  with
such  moral  questions  in  his  own  experience.  The  humblest
peasant  in  his  struggles  with  life  and  the  world  is  liable
to  be  confronted,  in  his  honest  efforts  to  do  right,  with
some  moral  dilemma.  Suppose  a  day  laborer,  with  a  large
family  to  maintain,  to  be  out  of  employment  and  in  a  needy
condition.  Suppose  an  unworthy  politician  to  offer  him  re-
lief on  condition  that  he  vote  and  work  for  his  elevation  to
some  responsible  trust.  The  question  here  is,  "  To  which
do  I  owe  the  greater  duty — to  the  community,  or  to  myself
and  family?"  This  question  is  clearly  debatable.  The
moralist  would  tell  him  that  his  duty  to  the  state  was  para-
mount, or  that  to  aid  a  bad  man  to  power  was  wrotxg  in  the
abstract,  and  that  it  was  his  conscience  that  told  him  so.
l!S^ature,  on  the  other  hand,  as  loudly  proclaims  the  opposite
duty — self-preservation.  The  latter  prompting  is  not  in  this
case  a  mere  impulse,  and  is,  moreover,  largely  altruistic.  By
varying  the  case  so  as  to  make  the  man's  solicitude  wholly
for  the  safety  of  others,  both  motives  may  be  conceived  as
altruistic ;  and,  by  fm'ther  modifying  the  hypothesis,  cases
might  be  conceived  in  which  no  casuist  could  decide  on
which  side  conscience  would  be  found.

Let  us  take  another  case — one  of  the  commonest  that
modem  society  presents — a  woman  reduced  to  a  state  of
destitution.  Notwithstanding  the  theory  of  society  that
every  woman  has  a  male  supporter  and  protector,  this  one
has  neither.  AH  avenues  of  usefulness  are  closed  to  her.
She  asks  for  work,  it  is  refused ;  for  charity,  it  is  denied.
Starvation  and  death  stare  her  in  the  face,  while  abundance
and  luxury  surround  her  on  all  sides.     One  avenue  alone

NATURE  OF  THE  CONSCIENCE.        353

remains  open  to  her.  Two  alternative  courses  are  before
her — to  perish,  or  to  "  sin."  Against  the  latter  she  may  hold
out  long.  Kature,  demanding  the  preservation  of  existence,
wrestles  with  education,  demanding  obedience  to  the  moral
and  conventional  codes.  If  the  former  prevail,  and  the
woman  exchange  her  virtue  for  her  life,  society,  which  be-
fore had  turned  her  from  its  doors,  now  promptly  lifts  its
voice  and  pronounces  her  a  criminal.

Most  cases  of  this  class  are  decided  according  to  natural
law.  The  instinctive  love  of  life  prevails  over  the  codes,
and  Nature  asserts  her  superiority  to  education.  Yet  there
are  cases  of  the  opposite  class,  and  in  all  cases  there  is  a
struggle.  The  true  ethical  questions  involved  in  such  strug-
gles can  only  be  answered  by  an  appeal  to  the  facts.  Such
questions  are  not  to  be  answered  by  reference  to  any  arbi-
trary moral  rules  or  abstract  principles  of  ethics.  They  are
properly  scientific  questions,  whose  decision  depends  upon
all  the  circumstances  of  each  particular  case.  Those  circum-
stances must  be  known,  and  the  precise  effect  of  both  the
prompted  acts  deduced  from  them  before  any  one  is  qualified
to  say.  This  is  right,  or  that  is  wrong.  General  rules  will
suflBce  only  in  the  simplest  cases..

To  illustrate  from  other  fields.  It  is  a  general  rule  that
water  freezes  at  32°  Fahr.  But  the  case  must  be  simple ;
when  it  becomes  complex,  the  law  fails.  The  water  must  be
water  and  nothing  else — pure  oxygen  and  hydrogen.  The
air  must  be  of  a  certain  density  and  purity.  Otherwise,
calculations  based  upon  it  will  deviate  from  the  law.  It  is  a
general  law  that  celestial  bodies  move  in  ellipses.  But  this
is  true  only  in  theory.  In  fact,  no  planet  or  satellite  moves
in  a  perfect  ellipse.  The  motion  is  complex.  They  not
only  influence  one  another,  causing  wide  perturbations,  but
their  mean  path  is  but  relative  to  an  assumed  stationary
point  which  is  their  common  center  of  gravity.  But,  in  fact,
that  point  is  itself  moving.  Not  allowing  for  such  influ-
ences, the  moon's  orbit  with  reference  to  the  earth  is  an
47

354  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

ellipse,  but  with  reference  to  an  absolute  line  through  space
it  is  a  curve  of  incalculable  irregularity.  So  it  is  a  general
rule  that  theft,  falsehood,  adultery,  etc.,  are  immoral,  but  any
attempt  to  deduce  universal  laws  from  these  rules  would  lead
us  as  far  astray  as  would  the  assumption  that  all  the  heavenly
bodies  move  in  exact  ellipses.  The  exceptions  are  too  com-
mon. The  circumstances  are  too  involved.  Shall  Sister
Simplice  overstep  the  bounds  of  strict  veracity  just  this  once,
and  preserve  good  Pere  Madeleine  from  the  hounds  of  the
law  ?  Shall  he  in  turn  save  a  poor  worthless  but  innocent
wretch  from  the  galleys  by  making  known  his  identity,  and
destroying  his  usefulness?  These  are  true  casv^  conscien-
ticB.  They  require  something  more  than  mere  "  dialectics  "
for  their  proper  solution.

But  the  question  of  the  conscience  returns.  Admit  that
it  is  imperfect ;  admit  that  it  is  liable  to  err  like  other  hu-
man faculties.  This  does  not  prove  that  it  is  not  universal.
Do  not  all  men  form  some  judgment  upon  every  moral
action,  whether  that  judgment  be  correct  or  incorrect?  Is
there  not  a  principle  of  right  planted  in  every  mind,  though
it  may  often  err  in  its  application  ?

To  this,  also,  a  negative  answer  must  be  given.  In  point
of  fact,  no  one  ever  lived  who  never  hesitated  in  the  decision
of  a  moral  question.  Fully  one  half  of  our  acts  require  and
receive  deliberation  before  we  are  satisfied  that  they  are
right,  to  say  nothing  of  the  chances  for  that  decision,  after
all,  to  be  erroneous.  It  is  only  in  the  ordinary  classes  of  acts
that  the  decision  is  instantaneous,  and  then  it  is  only  because
it  is  not  the  first  occasion  of  the  class.  The  same  decision
has  been  made  a  thousand  times  before.  The  judgment  is
all  made  up,  written  out,  and  stereotyped  in  the  mind,  so  that
it  does  not  make  an  instantaneous  decision  at  all;  it  only
applies  a  decision  long  since  made.  When  learned,  it  makes
use  of  these  moral  truths  in  just  the  same  manner  as  it  does
of  mathematical  truths.  A  man  does  not  hesitate  to  decide
a  falsehood  wrong  or  a  kindness  right,  for  the  same  reason

RESP02TSIBILITY.  355

that  he  does  not  hesitate  to  call  two  and  two  four,  or  ten
times  ten  a  hundred.  In  both  cases  he  has  to  find  out  the
truth  first.  It  makes  no  difference  how  simple  a  truth  is,
nor  in  what  department  it  is  found,  it  must  be  learned  be-
fore it  can  be  known ;  and  all  those  apparently  spontaneous
intuitions  of  right  and  wrong  are  precisely  analogous  to  the
apparently  spontaneous  applications  which  men  make  of  the
multiplication-table.

Let  us  next  consider  the  meaning  of  the  words  virtue  and
vice,  guilt  and  innocence,  in  connection  with  reward,  punish-
ment, and  responsibility — all  of  which  belong  to  a  common
group.

Virtue  has  been  defined  to  be  "the  doing  of  right,  or
obedience  to  conscience."  I  take  this  definition  from  Dr.
Wayland's  "  Moral  Science,"  a  standard  text-book.  I  do  not
know  how  the  two  branches  of  that  definition  were  intended,
whether  as  synonymous  or  alternative,  though  the  former
seems  more  in  harmony  with  the  context.  But,  as  "the
doing  of  right,"  and  "obedience  to  conscience,"  are  two
distinct  things,  so  much  so  that  they  are  often  incompatible,
as  where  conscience  prompts  a  person  to  do  what  is  in  reality
wrong,  a  case  that  often  occurs,  the  definition  in  that  sense
stultifies  itself.  If  taken  in  the  alternative,  it  makes  the
word  virtue  an  ambiguous  term,  sometimes  meaning  one
thing  and  sometimes  another.  For,  if  a  person  intending  to
do  wrong  should  mistake  the  effect  of  his  act,  and  really  do
right,  the  act  would,  according  to  this  definition,  be  a  virtu-
ous one.  Or  if,  intending  to  do  right,  he  should,  through
defective  judgment,  really  do  wrong,  that  act  would,  by  the
same  definition,  also  be  a  virtuous  one.  Or,  so  far  as  the
definition  goes,  either  of  these  acts  might  constitute  vice.
But,  of  course,  this  author  would  not  accept  our  definition  of
right  {supra,  pp.  140, 141),  which  is  the  utilitarian  and  not
the  accepted  one,  the  latter  being,  as  was  shown,  unscientific
and  really  meaningless.     The  terms  virtue  and  vice  are  also

350  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEAN'S.

of  such  a  loose  nature  that,  as  popularly  employed,  they  do
not  admit  of  technical  definitions.  They  may,  however,  be
made  useful  words  by  confining  them  each  to  some  one
definite  signification.

It  is  true  that  the  performance  of  salutary  and  beneficial
acts,  without  reference  to  the  motive,  is  often  termed  virtu-
ous, and  the  performance  of  injurious  and  pernicious  acts,
for  whatever  reason,  is  called  vice.  It  is  true,  also,  that  the
person  who  does  what  he  believes  to  be  right  is  called  a  virtu-
ous person,  and  one  who  is  thought  to  do  what  he  believes
to  be  wrong  is  called  a  vicious  one  (though  this  latter  adjec-
tive is  rarely  applied  to  persons),  so  that  in  popular  language
the  terms  seem  to  have  different  meanings  according  as  they
are  used  of  actions  or  of  persons,  approaching  synonymy
with  right  and  wrong  in  the  first  case,  and  with  innocence
and  guilt  in  the  second.  The  latter  is  much  nearer  the  true
meaning,  but  the  less  we  have  to  do  with  such  indefinite
terms  the  better,  especially  when  definite  ones  can  be  found
to  express  every  phase  of  the  subject.

The  terms  guilt  and  innocence  are  sufficiently  definite,
but  unfortunately  they  are  not  exact  opposites,  the  latter
being  only  a  privative  of  the  former.  The  first  expresses  a
definite  quality,  but  the  second  only  the  absence  and  not  the
opposite  of  that  quality.  Both  are  subjective,  and  corre-
spond with  the  objective  qualities  blamableness  and  lauda-
bleness,  or  the  stronger  terms  punishableness  and  rewardable-
ness.  All  of  these  ideas  are  inseparable  from  that  of  respon-
sibility. To  show  how  this  subject  has  been  treated,  let  us
once  more  refer  to  the  author  whose  definition  of  virtue  was
quoted  above.

Evidently  in  search  of  the  truth,  he  asks  this  question :  "  Is
the  impulse  of  conscience,  in  a  morally  imperfect  being,  the
limit  of  moral  obligation  ? "  And  he  proceeds  to  answer  it
thus :  "  This  will,  I  suppose,  depend  upon  the  following
considerations:  1.  His  knowledge  of  the  relations  in  which
he  stands.    If  he  know  not  the  relations  in  which  he  stands

EESPONSIBILITY.  357

to  others,  and  have  not  the  Tneans  of  knowing  them,  he  is
guiltless.  If  he  know  them,  or  have  the  means  of  knowing
them,  and  have  not  improved  these  means,  he  is  guilty.  2.  His
guilt  will  depend  on  the  cause  of  this  imperfection  of  his
conscience.  Were  this  imperfection  of  conscience  not  the
result  of  his  own  act,  he  would  be  guiltless.  But,  in  just  so
far  as  it  is  the  result  of  his  own  conduct,  he  is  responsible.
And,  inasmuch  as  imperfection  of  conscience  or  diminution
of  moral  capacity  can  result  from  nothing  but  voluntary
transgression,  I  suppose  he  must  be  answerable  for  the
whole  amount  of  that  imperfection."

The  above  citation  may  probably  be  taken  as  a  fair  sam-
ple of  the  views  of  the  school  of  theologico-moral  writers.

According  to  this  doctrine,  the  guiltfulness  of  an  action  de-
pends, first,  upon  the  knowledge  which  the  agent  has  of  the
relations  in  which  he  stands  to  those  affected  by  the  action ;
in  other  words,  his  guilt  depends  upon  whether  he  knows
that  it  will  injure  others,  i.  e.,  whether  he  knows  it  to  be
wrong.  So  far  this  is  all  very  well,  with  this  oversight,  that
as  far  as  his  guilt  is  concerned  it  must  in  all  reason  be  the
same  if  he  believed  it  wrong,  though  it  were  not,  as  if  he
believed  it  wrong  and  it  were  wrong.  So  that,  to  have  been
consistent,  he  should  have  used  the  word  believe,  suppose,  or
think,  in  the  place  of  "  know."  He  then  goes  on  to  say  that
if  he  does  not  know,  and  has  had  no  means  of  knowing,  that
the  act  is  wrong,  he  is  innocent,  which  is  certainly  reason-
able. Neither  is  there  any  particular  objection  to  the  next
point,  that,  if  he  does  know,  he  is  guilty.  As  far  as  the  idea
of  guilt  at  all  is  admissible,  this  must  be  true,  even  if  he  only
and  erroneously  thought  the  act  to  be  wrong.  But  what
shall  we  say  of  the  proposition  that,  if  he  do  not  know  the  act
to  be  wrong,  yet  because  he  had  had  the  means  of  learning
this,  which  for  any  reason  he  had  not  improved,  he  is  to  be
held  guilty  ?  In  the  first  place,  it  is  in  direct  contradiction
of  the  first  principle  of  morals  held  by  the  same  writer,*
*  Loc.  cit.,  p.  33.

358  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

that  "  the  quality  lies  in  the  intention."  For,  if  he  did  not
know  the  act  to  be  wrong,  no  matter  why,  he  certainly  could
not  intend  to  do  wrong  in  committing  it.  Nothing  could  be
clearer  than  this.  In  the  second  place,  it  seems  like  prejudg-
ing a  case  against  a  person,  to  tell  him  that  he  is  not  only  re-
sponsible for  that  which  he  knew  better  than  to  do,  but  also
for  that  which  he  would  have  known  better  than  to  do  if  he
had  taken  the  pains  to  find  out.  Besides,  the  doctrine  is
complicated,  vague,  and  indefinite.  Important  questions  of
the  most  intricate  character  are  necessarily  involved  in  it.
What  constitutes  having  the  means  of  knowing  a  thing?
Can  any  one  be  said  to  have  such  means,  after  all  the  qualifi-
cations have  been  allowed,  if  he  in  fact  does  not  know  it  ?
For  among  those  qualifications  is  included  that  of  disinclina-
tion to  investigate.  And  if  only  certain  qualifications  are
allowable,  which  are  they  ?  What  deterring  influences  are  to
be  counted  and  what  ones  rejected  ?  Suppose  the  means  of
knowing  were  in  a  book,  but  the  person  has  not  learned  to
read  books.  He  may  have  had  an  opportunity  to  learn  to
read,  but  for  some  reason  has  chosen  to  devote  all  his  time
to  something  else.  Perhaps  he  was  poor,  and  has  been  com-
pelled to  labor  so  as  to  have  neglected  his  education.  He
may  have  been  so  situated  that  by  making  a  certain  sacrifice
he  might  have  learned  to  read,  but  chose  not  to  do  so.  Or,
suppose  he  could  read,  but  instead  of  reading  that  particular
book,  he  has  chosen  to  read  some  other,  and  thus,  having  the
means,  yet  has  not  acquainted  himself  with  the  facts  which
would  have  governed  his  conduct.  Or,  suppose  some  one
with  whom  he  was  daily  associated,  possessed  the  informa-
tion, but  he  had  never  thought  or  seen  fit  to  make  the  neces-
sary inquiries.  Or  even  suppose  he  had  been  told  this  trilth
or  had  read  it  in  some  book,  but  had,  from  any  cause,  con-
stitutional or  other,  failed  to  give  it  credence,  or  failed  to
understand  it,  or  had  misunderstood  it,  or,  understanding  and
believing  it,  had  afterward,  from  contradictory  reports  or
from  his  own  reflections,  withdrawn  his  belief.     In  which  of

RESPONSIBILITY.  359

all  ttese  cases,  or  of  an  infinite  number  of  otliers  having
every  degree  and  shade  of  connection  with  the  act,  yet  all
insufficient  to  restrain  its  commission,  is  he  to  be  held  inno-
cent, and  in  which  guilty  ?     Where  is  the  line  to  be  drawn  ?

But  we  will  pass  on  to  the  second  doctrine,  that  of  re-
sponsibility for  the  imperfection  of  conscience.  It  will  be
seen  that  Dr.  Wayland  makes  a  clean  sweep  of  his  own  pre-
vious qualification,  and  declares  finally  that  all  men  are  guilty
of  all  wrong  acts  committed  in  consequence  of  possessing  an
imperfect  conscience.  His  reason  for  this  is,  that  all  dimi-
nution of  moral  capacity  can  result  from  nothing  but  volun-
tary transgression.  This,  of  course,  flows  from  the  assump-
tion that  the  so-called  moral  sense  is  originally  perfect  in
every  human  being.

As  we  have  already  considered  this  moral  sense,  and  been
able  to  see  nothing  in  it  except  an  intellectual  judgment
respecting  right  and  wrong,  it  will  only  be  necessary  to
remark  here  that  there  is  clearly  no  reason  why  a  person
should  not  as  well  be  held  responsible  for  the  imperfection
of  his  reason  or  his  memory  as  for  that  of  his  conscience.

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add  that  the  utilitarian  phi-
losophy sweeps  away  all  this  worthless  casuistry.  Consist-
ently held,  it  rejects  the  notion  of  moral  responsibility,  and
advocates  the  adjustment  of  the  circumstances  by  which
men  are  surrounded  in  such  a  manner  as  to  cause  the  per-
formance of  right  actions  rather  than  the  punishment  of
wrong  ones  which  can  not  be  undone.  If  wrong  has  been
done,  there  must  have  been  a  cause  in  the  nature  of  things.
The  general  cause  of  wrong  acts  of  the  deliberative  class  is
ignorance,  or  its  aggravated  form,  error,  and  the  correspond-
ing general  remedy  for  this  will  be  considered  in  Chapters
XIII  and  XIY.

The  experiment  of  deterring  from  immoral  conduct  by
threats  of  future  punishment  has  failed,  as  proved  by  the
admission  of  those  who  adopt  that  method  that  the  general
morality  of  the  world  does  not  improve.     This,  it  is  true.

360  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

science  does  not  grant,  but  ascribes  the  real  improvement
that  has  taken  place  to  entirely  different  causes  {infra,  p.  507) ;
yet  it  does  maintain  that  the  theory  of  punishment,  and  of
rewards  also,  exerts  a  more  or  less  demoralizing  influence,
since  the  end  of  action  is  thereby  shifted  from  that  of  doing
right  and  avoiding  wrong  to  that  of  obtaining  reward  and
escaping  punishment,  which  are  by  no  means  identical  ends.
The  chief  wrongs  emanate  from  the  head  and  not  from  the
heart,  and  the  task  of  making  men  do  what  they  think  is
right  is  a  far  less  important  one  than  that  of  enabling  them
to  see  wherein  the  right  lies.  The  surest  moral  guide,  there-
fore, is  a  knowledge  of  the  relations  which  each  individual
sustains  to  his  fellows,  to  society,  and  to  the  world  in  gen-
eral {infra,  p.  495).

It  follows  from  what  has  been  said  that  what  are  called
moral  culture  and  moral  education  are  matters  of  minor
concern.  The  real  moral  education  is  intellectual  education,
the  education  of  information  {infra,  p.  568).

The  sword  of  education  is  two-edged ;  it  so  molds  the
mind  and  constitution,  on  the  one  hand,  as  to  render  the  ra-
tional desires  supreme  over  the  impulsive,  and,  on  the  other
hand,  it  teaches  what  right  consists  in.  It  is  education
that  forms  opinions  ;  these  beget  volitions,  and  these  in  turn
inspire  actions ;  so  that  if  the  education  be  sound  the  actions
will  be  moral.  All  men  do,  as  a  general  rule,  what  they
consider  for  the  best.  In  a  state  of  nature  they  are  gov-
erned mainly  by  impulse.  They  are  so  governed,  in  a  great
measure,  even  in  civilized  life.  But  such  acts  are  confined
to  the  gratification  of  the  immediate  demands  of  the  body.
They  are  an  insignificant  class.  Most  actions  which  greatly
affect  the  happiness  of  others  belong  to  the  rational  class.
In  these  all  men  consult  the  greatest  good.  They  often  fail
to  attain  that  end  because  short-sighted.  Ethical  questions
are  too  difficult  for  them.  But  they  are  entitled  to  the  credit
of  seeking  that  object.  Even  if  they  seek  their  own  interest
at  the  expense  of  that  of  others,  it  is  because,  in  their  minds

\

ETHICAL  ILLUSIONS.  361

and  with  their  narrow  understanding,  they  allow  the  interests
of  all  the  world  to  be  swallowed  up  in  their  own.  It  is  still
the  greatest  good  as  they  understand  it.  The  two  primary
questions,  therefore,  are :  1.  "What  will  be  the  effect  of  a
given  act  ?  and,  2.  How  shall  it  be  made  apparent  ?  These
problems  properly  belong  to  the  other  general  subdivision  of
deliberative  actions,  where  they  will  be  considered.

Returning  to  the  subject  of  responsibility,  we  find  that
but  little  remains  to  be  said.  The  principles  involved  may
be  summed  up  in  a  few  sentences.  There  is  no  such  thing
as  a  sense  of  guilt.  Every  deliberative  act  is  justified  at  the
time  committed.  All  supposed  guilt  can  be  accounted  for
on  one  or  other  of  the  three  following  principles :

1.  Men  think  others  guilty  because  they  do  what  they
{illi)  think  wrong.

2.  Men  think  themselves  guilty  of  acts  which  they  after-
ward see  to  have  been  wrong.

3.  Men  mistake  fear  of  punishment  for  remorse  of  con-
science.

The  first  of  these  classes  is  by  far  the  largest.  Nearly
all  that  is  pronounced  wrong  is  so  regarded  simply  because
the  party  judging  differs  in  opinion  from  the  party  perform-
ing the  act.  The  probability  of  the  act  being  right  is  in  the
long  run  equal  to  that  of  its  being  wrong,  and  the  agent  in
each  case  fully  justifies  his  conduct.  All  that  is  required  in
such  cases  is  simply  to  know  on  which  side  the  right  lies.

The  second  class  is  by  no  means  rare.  Remorse  is  noth-
ing more  than  a  disagreeable  state  of  mind  arising  out  of
the  subsequent  discovering  of  the  injurious  effect  of  an  act,
coupled  with  the  mistaken  impression  that  it  could  have
been  prevented.  If  the  act  was  a  deliberate  one,  the  party
simply  forgets  the  circumstances  surrounding  it,  and  the
state  of  mind  existing  at  the  time  of  its  commission.  He
Bees  now  so  plainly  that  it  was  wrong,  that  he  supposes  he
must  have  known  this  at  that  time,  when  in  reality  he  then
took  the  opposite  view.

362  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

I  do  not  say  that  no  one  ever  does  what  he  believes  to  be
wrong.  This  would  be  too  broad.  It  needs  to  be  qualified,
and  the  qualification  required  is  to  restrict  it  to  cases  of  ra-
tional actions.  If  a  person  ever  commits  an  act  which  he
himself  believes  at  the  time  to  be  wrong,  it  is  because  his
impulses  are  stronger  than  his  reason,  and  override  it.  The
act  is  of  the  impulsive  class,  while  the  opposite  act  of  re-
fraining is  of  the  rational  class.  But  the  impulse  is  stronger
than  the  reason,  and  it  must  triumph.  To  regret  such  an  act
is  to  "  cry  for  spilled  milk."  To  blame  one's  self  or  another
for  such  actions  is  the  height  of  folly.  It  is  far  better  to
set  about  the  work  of  strengthening  the  rational  powers  so
that  they  may  hold  the  passions  in  check  in  future.

But,  where  the  act  committed  is  a  deliberative  act  as  well
as  the  act  of  refraining  from  its  commission,  in  such  a  case,
the  rule  holds  good  that  a  person  never  performs  it  if  at  the
time  he  believes  it  to  be  wrong.  I  am  aware  that  this  will
be  generally  questioned.  But  it  is  because  of  the  diflBculty
in  agreeing  about  what  constitutes  a  sense  of  wrong-doing.
Few  will  admit  that,  where  one  person  deliberately  cheats
another  out  of  money,  he  believes  he  is  doing  right.  It  is
true  that  he  knows  he  is  not  doing  what  the  moral  code  pro-
nounces right.  But  it  will  always  be  found  that  he  has  some
special  reason  for  seK-justification.  The  very  fact  that  it  is
for  his  own  interest  is  sufficient  to  make  it  right  to  him.
For  with  him  the  greatest  good  to  himself  is  the  paramount
motive.  He  is  not  capable  of  weighing  properly  the  argu-
ments which  urge  him  to  desist.  Any  reason  which  favors
self  has  a  tenfold  power,  and  finds  a  justification  in  the  least
consideration.  He  therefore  just  as  much  believes  it  for  the
best  as  though  the  action  were  in  reality  a  praiseworthy  one.
Let  any  one  who  disputes  this  in  his  mind  seek  to  recall  acts
of  his  own,  and  he  will  probably  have  no  difficulty,  if  candid
in  his  purpose,  in  recollecting  many  that  he  has  himself  per-
formed which  he  knew  were  contrary  to  the  general  rules  of
society,  and  which  he  knew  society  would  condemn  if  they

ETHICAL  ILLUSIONS.  363

were  made  pubKc,  yet  he  thouglit  them  right  at  the  time,  and
perhaps  still  thinks  so — acts  that  he  had  his  own  private
reasons  for  believing  right,  and  for  which  he  fully  justified
himself  against  all  the  world.  Kow,  because  he  happens  to
change  his  mind  afterward,  this  does  not  in  the  least  alter  the
case.  Nor  does  it  alter  the  case  because  he  forgets  what  his
state  of  mind  was,  or  fails  to  realize  what  those  private  in-
terior considerations  were  that  decided  the  act.  It  is  the
fact  that,  in  such  cases,  men  generally  do  fail  to  reproduce
exactly  all  internal  and  external  circumstances  that  influ-
enced them  to  perform  an  action  which  they  afterward  think
they  see  to  have  been  wrong,  that  gives  rise  to  all  cases  of
regret  and  remorse,  except  those  where  the  act  was  the  result
of  a  momentary  impulse  of  impassioned  desire,  as  before  de-
scribed. And  this  is  all  there  is  of  remorse.  In  either  case
it  is  unpliilosophical,  and  a  proper  understanding  of  its  psy-
chological origin  and  nature  will  go  far  to  diminish  its  in-
fluence, and  may  eventually  eliminate  it  altogether.

The  third  case,  viz.,  where  men  mistake  fear  of  punish-
ment for  conscience,  arises  in  the  following  manner :  They
mistake  the  fear  which  they  entertain  of  the  penalties  of
positive  law  for  the  compunctions  of  conscience.  They  have
been  educated  to  respect  and  obey  this  law,  and  have  even
been  taught  that  the  object  of  law  is  to  "  command  what
is  right  and  prohibit  what  is  wrong."  *  This  reverence  for
law  has  been  thoroughly  kneaded  into  their  constitutions
by  a  series  of  generations  of  education  in  a  particular  direc-
tion, until  their  private  judgment  and  mental  independence
have  nearly  disappeared,  and  they  have  almost  come  to  be-
lieve that  what  the  "  powers  that  be  "  have  ordained  as  law
must  be  right  at  all  events.  They  therefore  so  reverence
human  law  that,  though  they  involuntarily  disobey  its  arbi-
trary requirements  where  they  conflict  with  their  judgment
and  intuitive  sense  of  duty,  yet  when  brought  to  trial  before
its  august  tribunals,  their  hereditary  respect  for  law  often
*  Blackstone,  "  Commentaries,"  p.  44.

304  ACTION.— SECONDAEY  MEANS.

returns,  and  they  are  ready  to  confess  themselves  guilty  for
what  they  had  deemed  obedience  to  the  dictates  of  their
consciences.

The  history  of  the  life,  character,  conduct,  and  execution
of  Lady  Jane  Grey  affords  a  fine  illustration  of  this  point.
History  acquits  her  of  all  guilt,  and  places  her  among  the
innocent  victims  of  political  and  religious  persecution ;  yet,
strange  to  say,  she  confesses  her  guilt  on  the  scaffold,  and
acknowledges  that  death  is  the  least  penalty  that  she  ought
to  expect  from  an  injured  state.  Yet  no  one  supposes  that
she  deemed  herself  guilty  at  the  time  of  committing  the  acts
for  which  her  life  was  demanded.

As  a  form  of  guilt,  crime  deserves  a  separate  considera-
tion. I  could  not  discuss  it  with  that  detail  which  its  impor-
tance demands  without  exceeding  the  limits  of  the  present
chapter,  but  will  venture  a  very  few  remarks  of  a  funda-
mental character,  for  the  purpose  of  showing  how  the  views
already  expressed  on  the  subject  of  human  actions  apply  to
this  particular  class.

An  action  becomes  criminal  whenever  it  rises  to  the  im-
portance of  a  public  injury.  The  history  of  criminal  law
shows  us  that  the  boundary-line  separating  the  social  from
the  civil  code  has  advanced  with  the  degree  of  civilization,
so  as  to  bring  many  acts  formerly  belonging  to  the  domain
of  the  former  under  that  of  the  latter.  The  time  has  been
within  the  historic  period  when  nations  only  punished  such
crimes  as  treason,  rebellion,  and  other  attempts  upon  the  life
of  the  state.  They  did  not  recognize  murder  and  robbery
as  crimes  against  the  state,  and  therefore  left  them  to  be  re-
dressed by  the  injured  parties.  The  present  theory  of  crimi-
nal law  is  that  all  acts  denominated  crimes  are  in  the  nature
of  attacks  upon  the  state — upon  the  social  order.  Crimes  be-
ing actions  are,  of  course,  divisible  into  the  two  great  classes,
impulsive  and  deliberative.  They  arise  out  of  desires  based
upon  either  a  physical  or  a  mental  state.  Hence  their  object
is  always  the  satisfaction  of  desire.     They  therefore  differ

CRIME.  365

from  other  immoral  acts  only  in  the  degree  of  their  evil  ef-
fects, and  in  their  tangibility,  or  capability  of  being  punished
or  prevented.  Like  all  other  acts,  crimes  are  the  necessary
consequences  of  the  particular  circumstances  that  produce
them.  The  theory  and  practice,  therefore,  of  punishment  for
crime  are  unsound.  But,  it  may  be  asked,  what  shall  be
done?  Shall  we  permit  crime  to  go  unpunished  and  to
flourish  ?  Does  not  the  greater  part  of  society  agree  as  to
what  constitutes  crime  in  most  cases,  and  shall  it  not  be
allowed  to  take  measures  to  prevent  it?  Certainly.  But
prevention  and  punishment  are  different  things.

All  sound  jurists  now  agree  that  the  prevention  of  crime
should  be  the  sole  object  of  criminal  proceedings.  The  most
effective  means  of  accomplishing  this  object  would  be  self-
protecting  laws  in  the  nature  of  equalizing  rights,  but  ulti-
mately this  might  be  supplemented  or  even  wholly  super-
seded by  attractive  measures  (vol.  i,  p.  39).  The  supreme
preventive  of  crime  is,  of  course,  general  intelligence,  which,
as  will  be  shown  in  Chapter  XIY,  can  only  be  secured  by
some  such  system  of  diffusing  knowledge  as  is  sketched  in
that  chapter.  But,  even  if  such  a  system  were  adopted,  there
would  be  a  long  transition  period  during  which  crime  would
require  to  be  checked.  This  could  be  accomplished  by  pro-
tective regulations,  humane  and  philosophical  in  character,
but  rigidly  enforced.

The  mode  of  protecting  society  need  not  differ  very
greatly  from  that  now  practiced.  The  spirit  should,  however,
be  very  different.  Confinement  is  probably  the  most  salu-
tary means  of  preventing  crime,  but  it  should  aim  only  to
prevent  future  crime,  and  not  to  inflict  punishment  for  past
crime.  The  former  of  these  objects  it  already  admirably  ac-
complishes by  restricting  the  offender  to  localities  where  he
can  not  do  what  his  imperfect  nature  prompts  him  to  do.  But,
as  now  employed  in  most  places,  it  fails  to  secure  the  mani-
festly paramount  object,  viz.,  the  reformation  of  the  criminal.

The  treatment  of  criminals  ought  to  be  made  as  much  a

366  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

Bcience  as  the  treatment  of  diseases.  Crimes  are  the  diseases
of  society.  They  are,  however,  mental  in  character,  and  a
place  of  confinement  for  criminals  should  be  arranged  with
special  reference  to  the  pathological  treatment  of  their  disor-
dered minds,  i.  e.,  adapted  to  effect  their  reform.  Neither
should  the  body  of  the  criminal  be  neglected,  much  less
abused,  since  the  mens  soma  can  only  properly  exist  in  cor-
pore  sano.  But,  as  crime  is  usually  due  to  either  ignorance
or  error — i.  e.,  either  to  the  want  of  such  general  acquaintance
with  the  relations  which  the  criminal  sustains  to  society  and  to
the  world  at  large  as  would,  if  understood,  have  rendered  its
commission  impossible,  or  else  to  false  ideas  respecting  those
relations — it  would  seem  that  no  higher  purpose  could  be  sub-
served by  imprisonment  than  to  make  it  a  means  of  supply-
ing the  criminal  with  information  respecting  such  relations,
and  of  disabusing  his  mind  of  the  false  impressions  enter-
tained with  regard  to  them.  In  other  words,  the  same  agen-
cies might  be  employed  in  the  moral  reformation  of  individ-
uals as  have  availed  to  secure  whatever  moral  reformation
has  taken  place  in  society  at  large  (infra,  p.  50Y).

The  subdivisions  of  the  class  of  deliberative  actions  pos-
sessing a  moral  quality  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  corre-
sponding class  of  impulsive  actions.  They  may  be  normal  or
egoistic  (just  or  unjust),  or  they  may  be  supra-normal  or  al-
truistic (beneficent  or  maleficent),  l^early  all  that  was  said
respecting  this  classification  of  actions  when  considering  the
simpler  class  will  apply  equally  to  the  more  complex  class,
and  need  not  be  repeated.  Yery  little  need  be  said  in  addi-
tion as  applicable  only  to  deliberative  actions,  since  the
greater  part  of  that  which  might  here  be  introduced  has  al-
ready been  more  conveniently  embraced  in  the  foregoing  dis-
cussion of  the  nature  of  deliberative  actions  in  general.

Relative  to  the  first  class,  the  necessity  above  referred  to
for  the  maintenance  of  an  equality  in  the  power  which  each
individual  can  exert  in  society  constitutes  the  most  important

EGOISTIC  ACTIONS.  367

consideration  in  the  entire  domain  of  justice  and  law.  A
recognition  of  the  fundamental  law  of  human  nature — the
egoistic  character  of  human  actions — furnishes  the  only  real
argument  in  favor  of  democracy.  It  shows  why  it  is  that  in
matters  of  legal  rights  or  political  influence,  Bentham's  dic-
tum, "  everybody  to  count  for  one,  nobody  for  more  than
one,"  should  apply.  There  is  no  doubt  that  some  persons  are
more  important  to  society  than  others,  but,  however  great
that  difference  may  be,  in  all  questions  affecting  human  rights
— questions  of  justice  and  injustice — the  power  of  one  should
not  be  in  the  least  greater  than  that  of  another.  The  govern-
ments of  the  world  are  all  based  upon  the  virtual  if  not
the  avowed  principle  that  certain  persons  should  have  more
rights  than  others  because  they  are  more  important  to  society.
Men  of  rank  undoubtedly  think,  though  they  may  have  the
modesty  never  to  say,  that  they  are  more  important  than  per-
sons of  low  birth,  and  they  infer  that  they  ought  to  have  more
power.  To  most  persons  this  claim  would  probably  be  re-
garded as  reasonable.  Men  of  wealth  reason  in  a  similar
manner,  and  many  think  their  position  sound.  Men  of  learn-
ing do  the  asme,  and,  if  the  inference  is  true  in  any  case,  it
certainly  should  be  in  theirs.  But,  while  rank  and  wealth
invariably  do  bring  increased  power,  learning  rarely  does  so.
Now,  rank,  wealth,  learning,  or  any  other  true  superiority
ought  to  exert,  and  must  exert,  an  influence  corresponding
to  its  degree,  but  from  the  ethical  point  of  view  it  should
exert  no  influence  whatever  in  the  domain  of  human  rights.
The  least  influence  exerted  in  this  field  beyond  numerical
strength  tends  to  increase  the  advantages  of  the  possessor
for  pursuing  happiness  at  the  expense  of  those  not  thus
privileged,  correspondingly  diminishing  the  advantages  of
the  latter  for  pursuing  happiness.  It  is  not  rank,  or  wealth,
or  learning  that  society  exists  for,  but  happiness,  to  which
all  other  things  are  only  the  means.  Considering  the  great
preponderance  of  those  not  possessing  these  gifts,  it  is  evi-
dent that  the  happiness  of  the  masses  is  the  great  end  to

368  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

be  sought,  and  not  that  of  a  few  who  possess  wealth,  power,
or  genius.*  If  it  would  contribute  to  that  end,  society  should
not  hesitate  to  sacrifice  these  few.  But,  as  it  manifestly
would  not,  it  can  certainly  deny  them  the  power  to  com-
mute the  welfare  of  the  mass  into  the  privileged  exercise
of  authority  by  a  mere  handful.  To  illustrate  in  how  great
disproportion  these  numerically  insignificant  classes  have
been  estimated,  it  will  only  be  necessary  to  consider  the  part
which  they  have  played  in  literature  and  history.  The  ad-
vance from  monarchism  to  democracy  has  already  caused
the  historic  worship  of  ruling  houses  to  be  appropriately
characterized.  But  in  literature  man-worship  still  prevails.
Genius,  or  talent,  is  alone  deemed  worthy  of  mention.  Me-
diocrity, which  must  always  embrace  the  great  mass,  is  sys-
tematically ignored.  While  eveiy  thing  is  done  to  make  brill-
iant stars  more  brilliant,  no  attempt  is  made  to  improve  the
immensely  greater  number  of  lesser  lights.  It  will  be  a  long
time  before  the  world  will  recognize  the  fundamental  truth
that  it  is  not  to  apotheosize  a  few  exceptional  intellects,  but
to  render  the  great  proletariat  comfortable,  that  true  civili-
zation should  aim.f

To  the  group  of  supra-normal,  or  altruistic,  actions  would
properly  belong  a  discussion  of  the  claims  of  disinterested
action.  This  object  has,  however,  been  partially  accom-
plished in  a  previous  part  of  this  chapter,  and  the  whole  sub-
ject has  been  so  ably  treated  by  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  in  his
"  Data  of  Ethics,"  J  that  nothing,  it  would  seem,  remains  to
be  said.

The  egoistic  basis  of  altruism  is  the  great  moral  paradox.
All  actions  emanate  from  feelings  of  some  kind,  and  these
must  all  agree  in  having  pleasure  for  their  end.  In  their
ultimate  analysis,  therefore,  all  actions  spring  from  the  same
motive.     The  real  distinction  between  egoism  and  altruism

*  Spencer,  "  Study  of  Sociology,"  p.  255.

f  "  Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  iv,  p.  389 ;  vol.  vi,  pp.  83,  161.

X  Chapters  xi  and  xii.

ALTRUISTIC  ACTIONS.  369

must  be  looked  for  at  a  later  stage  in  the  development  of
motives.  In  all  the  lower  and  commoner  motives,  the  feel-
ings constituting  them  are  what  may  be  called  simple,  or
direct.  The  pleasure  which  is  to  flow  from  action  begins
and  ends  with  self.  But  a  class  of  feelings  has  been  devel-
oped by  social  progress  which  are  more  complicated,  and  may
be  called  indirect.  They  are  collectively  denominated  "  sym-
pathy." These  feelings  only  arise  when  the  direct  feelings
of  others  are  affected.  Pain  in  others  produces  pain  in  self.
This  pain  is  a  real  feeling,  although  belonging  to  the  "  faint
series."  It  is  purely  subjective,  i.  e.,  due  to  nervous  changes
set  up  in  the  body  without  the  customary  moving  cause  of
sensations  produced  by  contact  with  objects  at  the  periphery.
The  moving  cause  in  sympathy  is  a  cognition,  or  idea.  The
cortical  layers  here,  as  in  many  other  analogies,  perform  the
oflice  of  external  nerves.  Discharges  propagated  to  certain
parts  of  the  body  produce  a  similar  effect  when  generated  in
the  brain  as  when  generated  at  the  extremities  or  on  the  sur-
face of  the  body.  Psychological  science,  based  on  the  study
of  the  brain  and  nervous  system  ("  estho-physiology  "),  will
doubtless  throw  much  more  light  upon  the  precise  nature  of
sympathy  as  a  psychological  and  physiological  phenomenon,
but  its  general  character  is  as  here  described.  It  is  certainly
a  fact  that  the  recognition  of  suffering  in  others  is  attended,
to  different  degrees  in  different  individuals,  and  in  very  close
proportion  to  the  grade  of  physical  and  mental  organization,
with  a  corresponding  painful  sensation.  It  is  upon  this
unquestionable  truth  that  the  egoistic  quality  of  so-called
altruistic  actions  rests.

It  seems  to  be  a  characteristic  of  the  human  mind  to
exalt  the  sentiments  belonging  to  the  faint  series  at  the  ex-
pense of  those  belonging  to  the  vivid  series.  This  is  doubt-
less because  it  is  perceived  that  such  sentiments  increase  in
power  with  the  advancement  of  the  race  and  the  develop-
ment of  the  mind.  They  belong  only  in  a  very  limited  de-
gree to  the  animal  races,  and  savages  are  for  the  most  part

370  ACTION.-SECONDARY  MEANS.

devoid  of  them,  while  they  are  strongest  in  the  highest  types
of  manhood.  Hence,  it  is  quite  naturally  inferred  that  they
must  be  something  higher,  more  spiritual,  and  purer  than  the
direct  sentiments  of  the  vivid  series.  In  the  last  chapter,
this  tendency  was  pointed  out  with  respect  to  such  senti-
ments as  hope  and  anticipation  {supra,  p.  283).  The  general
law  governing  that  case  is  applicable  to  sympathy.  It  seems
almost  to  be  forgotten,  notwithstanding  the  etymology  of
the  name,  that  sympathy  is  a  feeling  at  all,  and  many  will
reject,  with  a  sentiment  akin  to  indignation,  the  proposition
that  benevolent  and  philanthropic  actions  are  prompted,
like  others,  by  the  motive  of  diminishing  disagreeable  feel-
ings experienced  by  those  who  perform  them — of  diminishing
the  force  of  sympathy  which  is  becoming  unbearable.*  Yet
such  is  undoubtedly  the  scientific  explanation.  It  is,  in  fact,
the  only  one  possible,  since  the  popular  idea  that  such  acts
are  performed  without  any  personal  interest  on  the  part  of
the  agent  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  they  are  performed
without  any  motive — effects  without  a  cause.  This  view,
however,  should  by  no  means  detract  from  the  moral  superi-
ority of  such  actions,  for  egoistic  actions  may  differ,  in  this
respect,  in  all  conceivable  degrees.

What  was  said  of  the  sentiments  of  hope  and  anticipation
will  apply  equally  well  to  that  of  sympathy,  or  altruism — that
they  are  legitimate  and  safe  only  within  certain  Hmits,  be-
yond which  they  become,  in  a  certain  sense,  derangements,
or  at  least  a  morbid  condition  of  the  mind,  carefully  to  be

*  There  is  a  certain  luxury  of  altruism  in  which  some  persons  indulge  to  the
verge  of  dissipation.  Such  persons  seem  never  to  be  happy  except  in  the  midst
of  suffering,  striving  to  mitigate  it.  They  expect  their  reward  in  praise  for
their  disinterestedness  and  their  so-called  sacrifices,  when  they  are  really  pur-
suing the  only  course  that  yields  them  any  pleasure.  This  is  sometimes  carried
so  far  that  it  can  not  be  doubted  that  misfortunes  brought  upon  others  to
whom  they  are  permitted  to  minister  are  welcomed  with  a  certain  secret  joy,
to  which  they  of  course  would  not  confess.  The  real  evil  thus  occasioned  is
in  the  tendency  of  this  morbid  sentiment  to  withdraw  such  people  from  the
wholesome  egoistic  pursuits  which  nature  properly  demands  of  them.

ALTRUISTIO  ACTIONS.  371

avoided.  This  hyperestlietic  condition  is,  moreover,  easily
rendered  chronic,  and  a  state  produced,  by  voluntarily  dwell-
ing upon  scenes  of  suffering,  in  which  sympathy  becomes
stronger  than  real  pain,  and  renders  life  a  burden.  Neither
is  there  any  direct  relation  between  true  intellectual  superi-
ority and  the  capacity  for  sympathy.  On  the  contrary,  it  is
found  that  the  most  sympathetic  persons  are  those  of  rather
inferior  reasoning  powers ;  and  women,  who  are  confessedly
less  rationalistic,  are,  as  a  rule,  more  sympathetic  than  men.
Much  of  this  may  be  due  to  education  enforcing  the  over-
strained position  that  altruistic  are  so  far  superior  to  egoistic
sentiments  that  the  latter  ought  to  be  neglected.  True  intel-
lectual superiority  perceives  the  fallacy  in  this,  and  suppresses
the  tendency  to  the  undue  nurture  of  the  sympathies,  while
mediocrity  lives  up  to  the  false  standard.  The  apparent
antithesis  between  the  rational  and  the  sympathetic  is  in  this
way  brought  about  as  we  find  it  in  society.

We  have  in  the  word  sympathy  a  term  representing  the
altruistic  sentiments  as  subjective  feelings.  No  correspond-
ing term  exists  for  the  egoistic  sentiments.  The  word  auto-
pathy,  could  it  be  adopted  in  this  sense,  would  doubtless  be
found  useful.  Better  still  to  convey  the  altruistic  concep-
tion, and  in  more  natural  contrast  with  autopathy,  there
might  in  like  manner  be  substituted  for  sympathy  the  allied
expression  altropathy^  which,  to  a  certain  extent,  would  come
to  the  aid  of  the  stronger  term  philanthropy.

Before  passing  entirely  from  this  last  and  principal  class
of  strictly  moral  actions,  it  may  be  remarked  in  general  that
their  importance,  considered  as  the  subject  of  instruction
and  a  part  of  education,  has  been  vastly  overestimated.
Considered  in  itself,  there  can,  of  course,  be  no  greater  de-
sideratum than  that  of  upright  conduct  among  men,  but  no
truly  rational  theory  of  what  upright  conduct  consists  in  has
ever  been  proposed,  while  the  attempts  that  have  been  made
to  enforce  arbitrary  moral  rules  have  failed  entirely  to  secure

•372  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

any  improvement  in  natural  morals.  Whatever  improve-
ment has  taken  place  has  been  due  to  the  progress  of  knowl-
edge and  to  intellectual  development.  This  becomes  per-
fectly intelligible  when  it  is  recognized  that  what  has  been
worshiped  as  the  conscience  is  simply  an  intellectual  act —
an  act  of  the  judgment ;  and  it  becomes  clear  that  what  is
needed  in  order  to  improve  human  conduct  is  simply  to
strengthen  this  faculty.

The  necessity  for  any  code  of  ethical  rules  whatever  is
also  spen  to  exist  only  in  the  imagination,  since,  while  actions
must  conform  to  definite  laws  which  may  and  should  be  care-
fully studied  and  thoroughly  understood,  these  laws,  or  rules,
are  merely  the  embodiments  of  ethical  facts,  and  therefore
self -enforcing.  Any  human  rule  made  in  opposition  to  these
laws  is  as  incapable  of  enforcement  as  the  pope's  bull  against
the  comet,  while  human  rules  in  harmony  with  them  do  not
in  the  least  facilitate  or  a£fect  their  normal  operation.  Not
but  that  the  pure  science  of  conduct  has  its  corresponding
applied  stage,  but  as  a  science  this  must  consist  in  something
more  than  the  empirical  therapeutics  thus  far  practiced  in
the  field  of  moral  pathology.  The  basis  of  the  real  science
and  art  of  human  action  still  remains  to  be  considered.

It  should  also  be  remarked,  as  a  closing  thought  upon
this  general  branch  of  our  subject,  that  the  moral  code  which
we  have  constitutes  an  integi-al  part  of  our  social  develop-
ment, and  is  essential  to  it.  Much  sentimentality  is  indulged
in  with  respect  to  the  essential  nobility  of  moral  conduct,
and  the  general  tenor  of  this  is  to  give  the  credit  for  such
conduct  entirely  to  the  individual.  This  is  a  very  narrow
and  mistaken  view.  Ethical  principles  are  a  growth  of  the
social  system.  The  members  of  society  are  literally  bound
by  them,  not  by  an  ideal  bond,  but  by  positive  constraint.
The  prevailing  idea  is,  that  any  one  might  conduct  himself
immorally  if  he  preferred,  and  that  pure  pi^indple  is  all  that
prevents  the  majority  of  mankind  from  doing  so.  Such
ideas  legitimately  follow  from  the  free-will  doctrine  and

NATURE  OF  THE  MORAL  CODE.  373

other  kindred  errors  that  pervade  the  moral  teaching  which
we  all  receive.  The  truth  is,  that  men  are  compelled  to  con-
duct themselves  according  to  the  established  standards  of
propriety.  This  is  the  condition  upon  which  society  has
been  enabled  to  develop.  The  few  who  attempt  to  break
over  these  restrictions  quickly  come  to  grief.  They  drop
into  the  criminal  classes,  and  find  their  way  into  the  peni-
tentiaries; or  they  are  stamped  as  monomaniacs,  fanatics,
"  cranks,"  and  rigidly  guarded.  They  are  driven  from  the
centers  of  culture,  and  find  for  brief  periods  the  means  of
continuing  their  licentious  course  on  the  expanding  borders
of  civilization.  Here  they  are  known  as  "roughs"  and
"  desperadoes,"  and  flourish  until  compelled  to  succumb  to
the  summary  justice  of  "  vigilance  committees,"  which  are
merely  the  rude  guardians  of  moral  law  in  such  communi-
ties. For  there  is  really  no  hard-and-fast  line  which  can  be
drawn  between  criminality  and  the  less  heinous  forms  of
immorality.  But  even  the  least  deviation  from  the  path  of
rectitude  is,  in  developed  social  centers,  a  signal  for  ostra-
cism, the  withdrawal  of  esteem,  systematic  avoidance,  and
all  the  other  forms  of  punishment  which  render  life  intol-
erable, and  demonstrate  the  completely  compulsory  charac-
ter of  the  ethical  code.  It  is  a  code  which  enforces  itself,
and  therefore  requires  no  priesthood  and  no  manual.  And
strangely  enough,  here,  where  alone  laissez  faire  is  sound
doctrine,  we  find  the  laissez  feme  school  calling  loudly  for
"regulation."

It  is  only  by  the  aid  of  this  comprehensive  view  of  ethics,
or  the  science  of  conduct,  that  we  can  duly  appreciate  the
nature  and  value  of  dynamic  action,  or  social  dynamics — ^the
science  of  social  progress.

Beliherative,  or  Ideo-Motor^  Actions  devoid  of  Mm-al
Quality. ^-M.T.  Spencer  regards  "conduct"  as  embracing  the
same  territory  which  is  here  covered  by  voluntary  actions,  and
classifies  it  under  the  three  heads,  "  good,"  "  bad,"  and  "  in-
different."    Good  and  bad  conduct  are  of  course  commensu-

374  ACTION.— SECONDARY  lOlANS.

rate  with  what  are  here  classed  as  actions  possessing  a  moral
quality.  To  explain  what  he  means  by  indifferent  conduct,
he  says :  "  A  lai'ge  part  of  ordinary  conduct  is  indifferent.
Shall  I  walk  to  the  water-fall  to-day  ?  or  shall  I  ramble  along
the  sea-shore  ?  Here  the  ends  are  ethically  indifferent.  If
I  go  to  the  water-fall,  shall  I  go  over  the  moor,  or  take  the
path  through  the  wood  ?  Here  the  means  are  ethically  in-
different. And  from  hour  to  hour  most  of  the  things  we
do  are  not  to  be  judged  as  either  good  or  bad  in  respect  of
their  ends  or  means."  With  these  and  a  few  more  brief
comments  he  dismisses  the  subject  of  indifferent  conduct.

Considering  the  point  of  view  from  which  the  "Data
of  Ethics  "  proceeds,  which,  notwithstanding  the  revolution
which  his  friends  claim  that  this  work  is  to  produce  in  the
entire  system  of  morals,  is  the  point  of  view  from  which  all
previous  works  on  ethics  have  proceeded,  this  passing  notice
of  indifferent  actions  was  all  that  was  demanded  or  required.

From  the  point  of  view  from  which  this  chapter  pro-
ceeds, it  is  not  until  this  group  is  reached  that  the  proper
subject  of  the  chapter  can  be  said  to  have  been  entered
upon.  For,  although  in  the  systematic  treatment  of  each  of
the  other  classes  of  actions,  and  particularly  of  the  class  last
considered,  much  more  space  has  been  occupied  than  is  left
or  required  for  the  adequate  appreciation  of  the  present  one,
still  this  has  been  rather  in  the  nature  of  a  preparation  for
the  remarks  which  follow,  than  an  attempt  to  treat  the  sub-
ject of  ethics  in  a  systematic  way.  Before  it  was  possible
intelligibly  to  treat  the  class  of  actions  devoid  of  direct
moral  attributes,  it  was  necessary  to  differentiate  them  clearly
from  those  possessing  such  attributes,  which,  in  the  present
state  of  moral  science,  required  some  consideration  of  this
latter  class  from  this  unaccustomed  stand-point.

The  class  of  non-moral  actions,  as  shown  in  the  table,
falls  into  two  groups,  the  first  of  which  we  have  called  static,
and  the  second  dynamic.  Actions  belonging  to  the  statical
group  have  no  tendency  to  change  the  existing  status  of

ITON-MORAL  DELIBERATIVE  ACTIONS.  375

society.  They  may  be  further  subdivided  into  two  divis-
ions, one  of  which  embraces  such  acts  as  those  of  going  to
the  water-fall  or  the  sea-side — actions  not  only  ethically  but
in  all  other  respects  indifferent.  The  other  division  embraces
a  large  class  of  useful  acts  tending  to  preserve  the  existing
social  status.  What  was  said  of  that  class  of  impulsive  ac-
tions which  are  devoid  of  moral  quality  may,  without  quali-
fication, be  transferred  to  this  division  of  deliberative  actions.
The  great  preservative  agencies  of  society,  the  daily  pursuit
of  subsistence,  of  pleasure,  of  wealth,  etc.,  fall  within  this
definition.  Notwithstanding  their  importance,  such  actions
leave  the  world  where  they  find  it,  or  if,  by  virtue  of  accumu-
lations, they  add  to  the  social  structure,  it  is  not  to  them,  but
to  some  improved  method  or  ingenious  principle,  according
to  which  they  operate,  itself  the  result  of  a  different  kind
of  action,  that  this  increase  has  been  rendered  possible.  The
mere  journeyman  at  a  machine  performs  only  a  statical  serv-
ice, although,  by  virtue  of  the  machine,  he  may  be  able  to
accomplish  a  hundred-fold  more  of  the  same  grade  and  kind
of  work  than  if  required  to  do  it  by  hand.  It  is  not  to  his
action  that  this  increase  is  to  be  attributed,  but  to  that  of  him
who  discovered  the  laws  of  nature  by  which  the  machine
operates,  and  devised  the  apparatus  to  utilize  those  laws.

Tet  we  find  that,  even  in  this  comparatively  unimportant
group  of  ethically  indifferent  actions,  immense  labors  are
performed,  and  vast  results  accomplished,  which  increase  in
proportion  as  the  functions  of  social  life  become  extended
and  diversified.  Comte  maintained  that  the  human  intellect
was  so  constituted  that  it  must  always  be  true  that  the  great
bulk  of  mankind  would  be  confined  to  labors  of  this  purely
ministerial  kind.  He  distinguished  the  two  classes  of
workers  as  "  active "  and  "  speculative,"  and  remarks  that
"  presque  tons  les  hommes  sont,  par  leur  nature,  eminemment
impropres  au  travail  intellectuel,  et  voues  essentiellement  d
une  activite  materielle  ;  en  sorte  que  I'etat  speculatif,  de  plus
en  plus  indispensable,  ne  pent  etre  convenablement  produit

376  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

et  surtout  maintenu  chez  eux  que  d'apr^s  une  puissante  im-
pulsion li^terogene,  sans  cesse  entretenue  par  des  penchants
moins  elev^s  mais  plus  ^nergiques."  *  But  it  may  reasonably
be  asked  whether  long  and  continuous  habituation  may  not
extend  the  "  speculative  "  faculty  to  the  greater  part  of  man-
kind.

Dynamic  Action's.

The  distinction  between  conduct  and  action  is  not  ren-
dered complete  by  the  exclusion  from  the  former  of  mere
"  purposeless,"  or  involuntary,  actions.  In  fact,  as  already
shown,  these  should  properly  be  excluded  also  from  the  class
of  actions  proper,  so  long  as  they  are  conceived  as  performed
by  conscious  beings,  involuntary  actions  being  only  entitled
to  that  name  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  applied  to  inanimate
objects,  as  machines,  etc.  The  term  "  conduct "  is  itself  rarely
applied  to  ethically  indifferent  actions,  and,  when  it  is  so  ap-
plied, it  is  much  in  the  same  metaphorical  way  in  which  it  is
sometimes  applied,  along  with  its  close  synonym,  "  beliavior,"
to  inanimate  objects.  The  insignificant  division  of  ethically
indifferent  actions  from  which  Mr.  Spencer  draws  his  illus-
trations is  about  the  only  one  to  which  the  term  "  conduct "
can  be  applied.  For  the  much  larger  and  more  important
group  of  statically  conservative  actions,  such  a  use  of  the
word  is  not  admissible  ;  neither  will  it  apply  with  any  pro-
priety to  dynamic  actions.  Yet  the  greater  part  of  all  human
action  is  concentrated  upon  the  two  great  ends  of  maintaining
the  status  quo  and  of  producing  a  change  for  the  better — of
preserving  social  order,  or  of  effecting  social  progress.

The  great  object  of  action  is  to  do  something.  Conduct
only  aims  to  avoid  doing — either  to  avoid  interfering  with
the  "  pursuits  of  ends  "  by  others,  or  to  prevent  others  from
pursuing  such  ends,  or  to  do  some  benefit  for  another,  where-
by he  is  prevented  from  doing  the  necessary  acts  for  render-
ing an  equivalent,  or  to  do  him  an  injury  whereby  he  is  pre-

*  "  Philosqjhie  Positive,"  vol.  iv,  p.  889.

DYNAMIC  ACTIONS.  377

vented,  to  tliat  extent,  from  pursuing  his  natural  ends.  It
is  all  through  a  negative  proceeding,  interfering  at  every
point  with  the  normal  course  of  action.  Conduct  is  a  guid-
ance of  acts  so  as  to  prevent  or  to  occasion  conflicts  in  nor-
mal actions.  The  complicated  condition  of  society  has  ren-
dered it  necessary  that  an  entire  class  of  action*  should
exist  whose  sole  object  is  to  deal  with  such  conflicts.  The
aim  of  good,  or  moral,  conduct  is  so  to  bend  the  course
of  normal  action  as  to  avoid  all  conflict  with  the  normal
action  of  others.  The  aim  of  bad,  or  immoral,  conduct  is  so
to  steer  one's  course  as  to  produce  jars  and  collisions  in  the
normal  pursuits  of  ends  by  others.  The  pathological  state
of  society  to  which  all  moral  considerations  are  directed  is
the  consequence  of  this  complicated  net-work  of  human  pur-
suits, which,  in  the  nature  of  things,  must  frequently  clash.
The  "  pure  morals  "  of  Kant  and  the  "  absolute  ethics  "  of
Spencer  can  never  be  fully  realized,  and  can  only  be  ap-
proximately realized  through  a  complete  organisation  of  hu-
man action.  The  wholly  unorganized,  independent,  and
sporadic  character  of  human  pursuits — of  the  normal  actions
of  men — at  the  present  time,  is  the  cause  of  the  constant  con-
flict of  interests  in  society,  and  is  that  which  causes  a  moral
quality  to  exist.  Moral  conduct,  though  necessary  to  prevent
worse  evils,  is  in  itself  a  serious  evil.  Every  departure  from
the  direction  of  the  propelling  force  of  an  action  is  made  at
the  expense  of  the  results  accomplished  (vol.  i,  p.  39).  The
deviations  necessary  to  be  made  from  the  normal  line  of
action  in  order  to  avoid  conflict  with  the  interests  of  others
tell  heavily  against  success  in  achieving  the  cherished  aims
of  life.

Moral  conduct,  instead  of  being,  as  usually  represented,
conduct  in  a  right  line,  is  in  reality  conduct  in  a  very  irregu-
lar line.  The  path  of  rectitude  is  a  crooked  path,  and  the
distance  lost  in  following  it  counts  heavily  against  the  prog-
ress of  the  world,  yet  less  heavily  than  would  the  jars  and  col-
lisions which  a  failure  to  follow  it  would  inevitably  produce.

378  ACTION.— SECONDAEY  MEANS.

The  remarkable  fact  to  be  noted  is,  that  it  is  this  class  of
human  action,  aiming  simply  to  avoid  such  conflicts  of  inter-
est, insignificant  as  it  is  in  comparison  with  the  main  current
of  human  action,  that  has  been  the  subject  of  all  the  ethical
teaxjhing  and  ethical  writing  which  have  flooded  the  world
from  the  earliest  historic  periods.  Proceeding,  however,  as
this  great  ethical  movement  has,  upon  the  direct  method,  its
success  has  been  only  temporary  and  local,  and  no  true  monu-
ment of  its  results  exists,  from  the  summit  of  which,  as  from
a  new  vantage-ground,  a  fresh  movement  can  be  commenced,
enriched  with  the  accumulated  experiences  of  the  past.  At
this  late  day  we  still  find  ourselves  at  the  foot  of  the  ladder,
and  must  begin,  if  at  all,  where  Confucius  and  Menu  began.

Dynamical  actions  are  distinguished  from  statical  actions
in  proceeding  according  to  the  indirect,  or  intellectual,
method  of  conation  instead  of  the  direct,  or  physical,  method.
All  actions  consist  in  efforts  to  attain  desired  ends.  In  all,
the  end  is  present  to  the  mind  before  the  action  is  attempted.
In  statical  actions  the  movements  of  the  agent  are  made  in
straight  lines  toward  the  end.  In  dynamical  actions  they  are
not  so  made,  but  may  proceed  in  any  other  direction.  In
statical  actions  the  end  is  sought  immediately.  Nothing
intervenes  between  the  act  and  the  end,  between  the  agent
and  the  object.  In  djmamical  actions  ends  are  sought  medi-
ately. There  intervenes  between  the  action  and  the  end  a
third  something  which  is  called  a  mjeans.

All  actions,  whether  statical  or  dynamic,  consist  in  cer-
tain voluntary  muscular  movements  executed  by  the  agent  in
response  to  motor  discharges  from  the  supreme  nervous  cen-
ter. In  statical  actions  (which  may  be  either  ideo-motor  or
sensori-motor),  these  muscular  movements  proceed,  as  already
remarked,  in  the  direction  of  an  immediate  end  in  view.  In
dynamical  actions,  these  muscular  movements  are  directed
toward  other  objects  in  such  a  manner  as  to  make  these  lat-
ter serve  as  mechanical  aids  in  securing  remote  and  perhaps
invisible  ends.    These  intermediate  objects,  constituting  the

DYNAMIC  ACTIONS.  379

means  to  the  remote  end,  are  at  hand,  and  may  be  adjusted
in  any  desired  relations  to  one  another  and  to  the  agent  and
the  object  sought.  These  objects  possess  various  properties
peculiar  to  themselves.  They  are  also  related  in  special  ways
to  other  objects  by  which  they  are  surrounded,  and  to  the  va-
rious natural  forces  manifest  every-where,  whether  physical,
vital,  psychical,  or  social.  All  objects  on  the  surface  of  the
earth,  though  supposed  to  consist  of  multitudes  of  molecules
which  are  moving  among  themselves,  and  though  known  to  be
undergoing  secular  changes,  and  destined  to  manifest,  sooner
or  later,  wholly  different  forms  without  human  agency,  may
nevertheless,  so  far  as  man's  daily  dealings  with  them  are
concerned,  be  regarded  as  in  a  state  of  repose  or  inertia.
The  forces  of  gravitation  and  chemical  reaction  have  reduced
them  to  a  state  of  equilibrium.  Though  differing  immensely
in  properties,  in  form,  size,  consistency,  etc.,  they  are  most
of  them  in  so  far  tangible  that  they  allow  their  relations  to
be  changed  at  the  hands  of  man.  In  short,  they  neither  es-
cape him,  nor  resist  him,  nor  refuse  to  be  subdivided,  modi-
fied in  form,  or  transported  in  space.  Before  the  active
efforts  of  man  the  materials  of  nature  are  wholly  passive.  The
condition  which  they  have  naturally  assumed  is  the  statical
one.  The  free  forces  of  nature  have  already  played  upon
them  in  antecedent  dynamic  states  until  they  have  at  last
been  reduced  to  their  present  state.  This  is  the  one  in  which
they  are  capable  of  producing  the  least  effects  upon  surround-
ing objects.  While  their  matter  has  been  integrated  their
motion  has  been  dissipated,  until  the  matter  and  force  of  the
universe — at  least,  of  the  part  of  it  which  man  occupies —
have,  as  it  were,  become  separated  or  divorced,  and  exist  and
manifest  themselves  independently — such  is  the  apparent,  and,
so  far  as  human  action  is  concerned,  the  practical  condition.
Now,  it  would  be  reasonable  to  suppose  that,  since  natu-
ral objects  have  been  constantly  borne  down  until  they  have
been  brought  to  assume  the  greatest  degree  of  stability
of  which  they  are  capable  in  the  existing  condition  of  the

380  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.  *

universe,  any  attempt  to  disturb  that  condition  would  re-
move them  more  or  less  from  that  stable  state  and  render
them  less  inert  and  less  indifferent  to  the  influences  of  the
free  forces  still  playing  upon  them.  Such  is,  in  fact,  the
case,  and  it  is  an  indisputable  truth  that  the  great  results
achieved  by  man  in  operating  upon  the  material  objects  of
the  earth  have  consisted  in  removing  these  objects  from  the
still  folds  of  material  death  in  which  he  has  found  them,  and
so  placing  them  that  the  surrounding  influences  which  had
consigned  them  to  this  state  can  again  set  up  changes  in  them
and,  as  it  were,  reanimate  them.  In  scientific  phrase,  it  is
by  the  transfer  of  material  objects  from  the  statical  to  the
dynamical  state,  from  a  condition  of  molar  equilibrium  to
one  of  molar  activity,  that  human  civilization  has  been  en-
abled to  originate  and  to  advance.

But  this  is  a  work  which  mere  vital  or  social  forces  would
never  know  how  to  undertake.  It  is  only  under  the  guid-
ance of  the  intellectual  faculty  that  the  first  step  in  this
direction  can  be  taken.  The  means  necessary  to  be  employed
differ  so  widely  from  the  ends  that  intellectual  foresight  can
alone  insure  their  adoption  even  in  the  simplest  cases.  The
acts  really  required  are  so  wholly  unlike  those  which  would
be  required  if  the  end  were  directly  sought,  that  a  highly
developed  rational  faculty  is  demanded  in  all  beings  that  are
capable  of  performing  them.  When  a  being,  endowed  with
desires  to  be  satisfied,  is  made  acquainted  with  the  existence
of  a  desirable  object,  it  is  immediately  prompted  to  move,  or
to  put  forth  efforts,  in  the  direction  of  that  object.  To  such
a  being,  another,  desiring  the  same  object,  that  should  turn
away  from  it  and  commence  making  adjustments  in  other
objects  lying  about,  would,  to  use  the  language  of  fable,  ap-
pear extremely  stupid.  It  would  be  an  unnatural  action,
i.  e.,  it  would  be  an  artificial  one.  If  successful  in  securing
the  end,  unattainable  by  direct  effort,  it  would  be  an  exercise
of  true  art,  and  would  involve  an  acquaintance  with  the  prin-
ciples of  true  science.

DYNAMIC  ACTIONS.  381

The  vast  and  incalculable  advantages  which  the  indirect
method  possesses  over  the  direct  method,  as  well  as  the  fact
that  by  it  alone  has  all  human  progress  whatever  been
achieved,  have  been  insisted  upon,  and  the  reasons  therefor
urged,  in  numerous  places  and  ways  in  the  previous  chapters
of  this  work  (vol.  i,  pp.  476,  551 ;  vol.  ii,  pp.  99,  130,  160).
This  ground  need  not,  therefore,  be  again  gone  over.  The
present  aim  has  been  to  point  out  the  systematic  position  in
a  logical  classification  of  human  actions,  which  this  form  of
pursuing  ends  naturally  occupies.  It  constitutes  the  inven-
tive process  by  which  natural  forces  are  turned  to  human
advantage.

The  several  elements  which  were  shown  in  the  last  chap-
ter to  make  up  human  progress  have  all  been  begun  and
continued  by  dynamical  actions.  The  great  successive  arts
which  have  rendered  possible  the  system  of  intercommuni-
cation {supra,  p.  180)  which  now  exists,  as  well  as  the  varied
practical  inventive  arts  by  which  the  material  condition  of
society  has  been  perfected  {supra,  p.  189),  have  all  resulted
from  the  recognition  by  the  human  intellect  of  the  inter-
mediate steps  necessary  to  be  taken  in  order  indirectly  to
secure  these  great  ends  which  presented  themselves  as  remote
objects  beyond  the  reach  of  direct  eifort.  They  were  all
accomplished  by  the  aid  of  means  little  if  at  all  resembling
the  ends  sought.

It  is  this  characteristic  of  man's  reason  also  that  has  given
him  that  dominion  which  he  exercises  over  the  inferior  brute
creation.  It  is  not  the  form  or  "  image  "  of  man,  nor  any
instinct  implanted  in  animals,  which  causes  the  latter  to  rec-
ognize in  the  former  a  master.  If  animals  fear  man,  flee
from  him,  or  obey  him,  it  is  only  after  they  have  learned
what  he  is,  after  they  have  found  out  by  experience  that  he
possesses  that  faculty  by  which  he  can  destroy  them  at  a  dis-
tance, and  can  circumvent  them  in  all  their  attempts  to  evade
him.  The  hunter  well  knows  when  he  has  reached  a  region
where  man  has  not  been.     The  game  in  such  localities  is  no

383  AOTION.-SECONDARY  MEAJJS.

more  afraid  of  him  tlian  of  any  other  creature  of  the  same
size  which  it  has  never  seen  before.  It  only  seeks  to  keep
out  of  his  reach.  The  hare  or  the  grouse  sees  in  him
only  a  large  animal,  a  strange  creature,  and  takes  only  the
same  measures  to  escape  as  it  would  were  he  a  gorilla  or  an
orang-ontang,  although  from  these  it  would  in  reality  be
perfectly  safe  so  long  as  out  of  their  reach.  It  might  be
frightened  at  the  novelty  of  the  sight,  but  as  much  in  the
one  case  as  in  the  other.  It  little  dreams  that  he  has  power
to  destroy  it  at  the  distance  of  fifty  or  a  hundred  yards.
Hence,  as  the  hunter  terms  it,  the  game  is  tame.  But  let
man  invade  the  domain  of  these  animals  ;  let  him  settle  npon
it,  and  dapple  the  country  with  his  houses  and  fields ;  let
him,  as  he  invariably  does,  hnnt  the  game  for  a  few  years,
and  it  will  soon  learn  his  power.  It  will  then  fear  him  as
much  at  a  hundred  yards  as  it  formerly  did  when  within  his
reach.  Every  body  with  the  least  experience  in  new  coun-
tries has  seen  this  fact  abundantly  illustrated.  And  it  proves
that  the  animal  world  only  knows  the  dominion  of  man  after
it  has  learned  it ;  that  this  dominion  is  not  a  supernatural
charm,  but  a  real  power.

The  argument  drawn  from  the  obedience  of  domestic  ani-
mals is  still  less  apt  than  that  drawn  from  the  fear  of  wild
ones,  when  used  in  proof  of  the  doctrine  of  man's  supernat-
ural dominion.  For  they  are  only  domestic  because  of  man,
and  in  respect  to  him.  The  domestic  animal  has  always  been
under  the  immediate  power  of  man,  and  hence,  of  all  ani-
mals, it  knows  best  the  extent  of  that  power.  It  only  car-
ries its  recognition  of  his  dominion  further,  because  it  under-
stands it  better.  Instead  of  seeking  to  escape  from  his  grasp,
to  avoid  injury  at  his  hands,  it  has  learned,  in  a  meek  obe-
dience to  his  demands,  a  new  and  different  method  of
securing  the  same  object.  In  all  cases  his  dominion  is  due
to  hifi  power,  and  that  power  is  acquired  through  the  supe-
riority of  his  mind,  which  itself  is  only  recognized  by  the
brute  when  it  has  been  made  to  feel  and  realize  it.     So  true

MAN'S  DOMINION  OVER  NATURE.  383

is  this  that  among  Bome  savage  nations  the  men  are  almost
as  much  under  the  dominion  of  the  animals  as  the  animals
are  of  the  men.

But  not  only  do  man's  dynamic  actions  give  him  domin-
ion over  the  animal  kingdom ;  they  also  extend  that  domin-
ion over  all  the  rest  of  nature.  They  constitute  the  progres-
sive element  of  his  nature.  'No  progress  can  ever  result
from  statical  actions.  If  a  man  is  hungry,  he  feels  an  im-
pulse to  eat,  and,  if  any  food  is  within  his  reach,  he  eats  it,
and  thus  preserves  his  life.  But  this  is  only  preservative
and  not  progressive  action.  He  never  feels  an  impulse  to
sow,  that  he  may  eat  six  months  later.  That  is  a  delibera-
tive act.

Avarice  spurs  men  on  to  amass  wealth,  but  progress  lies
not  in  the  acquisition  but  in  the  judicious  appropriation  and
application  of  wealth.  Progress  is  nothing  more  than  taking
advantage  of  nature,  and  turning  it  into  useful  channels,  so
as  to  make  it  subserve  the  purpose  of  increasing  human  hap-
piness. To  do  this  requires,  first,  a  knowledge  of  nature,
*.  e,,  correct  views  respecting  it ;  and,  second,  such  action  as
will  render  those  results  necessary,  i.  e.,  the  application  in
practice  of  that  knowledge.  But,  of  course,  all  such  acts
must  be  of  the  dynamical  class.

Thus,  while  impulsive  and  all  statical  actions  are  the  more
universal  and  natural,  and  while  they  serve  the  ends  of
natural  utility,  viz.,  preservation  of  human  life,  rational
dynamic  actions  are  artificial,  and  serve  the  great  end  of  in-
dividual utility,  viz.,  increase  of  happiness  {supra,  p.  132).
As  above  remarked,  it  was  these  actions  which  gave  man  his
dominion  not  only  over  the  animal  world  but  over  all  nature.
That  dominion  when  exercised  over  the  animal  kingdom  not
only  protects  him  from  becoming  a  prey  to  wild  beasts,  but  it
makes  nearly  all  animals  subserve  his  interests  in  one  way  or
another.  Either  as  food,  or  in  yielding  milk,  or  in  furnish-
ing skins,  or  fur,  or  ivory,  or  as  beasts  of  draught  and  of  bur-
den, or  in  some  other  useful  manner,  he  compels  the  inferior

884  ACTIOK-SECONDARY  MEANS.

creation  to  minister  to  his  wants.  He  does  this  in  the  same
flawless  way  that  the  superior  animals  deal  with  the  inferior
ones,  and  often  with  less  excuse.

In  exercising  his  dominion  over  the  vegetable  kingdom,
he  multiplies  its  productiveness  by  cultivating  the  plants
with  which  nature  abounds,  and  from  which,  directly  or
indirectly,  all  animal  Kfe  must  derive  its  sustenance.  He
thus  not  only  prevents  the  destruction  of  his  species  by
hunger  and  want,  but  also  enables  the  race  to  expand,  and
occupy  regions  where  for  a  whole  season  no  vegetation  can
subsist  in  consequence  of  the  cold.  He  also  turns  the  forests
into  fuel  and  lumber  to  protect  him  from  the  inclemency  of
such  unnatural  and  otherwise  uninhabitable  climates.

Over  the  mineral  kingdom  man  exercises  a  still  wider
and  more  varied  jurisdiction.  To  attempt  an  enumeration
of  the  many  ways  in  which  he  reduces  it  to  usefulness,
would  be  unwarrantably  to  expand  the  subject.  When  we
consider  to  what  uses  he  has  put  the  single  metal  iron,  we
may  form  a  faint  conception  of  what  a  vast  field  this  is  for
the  dominion  of  reason.  He  has  also  turned  all  the  other
metals  into  his  service :  lead,  copper,  zinc,  silver,  gold,  plati-
num— all  are  in  daily  use  in  a  thousand  convenient  and  useful
ways.  So,  too,  all  the  rest  of  the  important  elementary  sub-
stances are,  in  some  greater  or  less  degree,  serviceable  to  him.
There  are,  besides,  many  combinations  which  he  has  succeeded
in  making  of  these  elements,  creating  so  many  distinct  sub-
stances, each  having  distinct  and  peculiar  properties.

In  this  enumeration,  too,  all  the  great  agencies,  natural
forces,  and  mechanical  principles  discovered  and  put  to  man's
service,  must  be  embraced.  The  power  of  steam  is  but  a
property  of  that  gas  which,  when  confined  by  human  device
and  conducted  into  the  cylinder  of  the  steam-engine,  is
made  to  propel  machinery.  The  utilization  of  electricity  ac-
cording to  the  same  general  principle  constitutes  one  of  the
grandest  of  human  achievements.  All  the  principles  of
mechanics  and  of  physics  must  be  included  in  this  class  of

EXAMPLES    OF  THE  INDIRECT  METHOD.  385

effects  as  produced  by  man's  knowledge  and  the  application
of  them  to  the  purposes  of  his  being.

We  see  in  this  brief  sketch  what  a  dominion  man  exer-
cises over  all  departments  of  nature,  and  we  may  safely  con-
clude that  he  has  not  yet  reached  the  maximum  limit  of  his
.power  in  this  direction.  But  that  power  is  wholly  dne  to  his
Intellectual  faculty,  which  has  guided  his  acts  in  devising  in-
direct means  of  accomplishing  ends  otherwise  unattainable.
Such  rational,  or  inventive,  actions  constitute  the  class  which
we  have  termed  dynamic.  Some  idea  of  the  importance  of
this  class  of  actions  may  thus  be  formed.

The  frequent  allusions  which  have  been  made  in  this
work  to  what  has  been  called  the  indirect  method  of  conation
{supra,  p.  99),  which  underlies  all  distinctively  progressive,
or  dynamic,  actions,  have  thus  far  been  general  and  for  the
most  part  unaccompanied  by  specific  examples  illustrating  its
operation.  The  principle  itself  is  too  simple  to  require  this
in  order  to  make  it  understood,  and  the  aim  has  been  rather
to  enforce  the  importance  of  its  recognition  as  the  corner-
stone of  Dynamic  Sociology.  Examples  showing  the  precise
manner  in  which  this  principle  operates  in  all  the  great  fields
over  which  the  human  intellect  has  borne  sway  are  easily
furnished,  and,  with  a  view  to  greater  completeness  in  the
treatment  of  this  subject,  it  is  here  proposed  to  enumerate  a
few  typical  cases  of  this  class  taken  from  the  history  of  the
progress  of  each  of  the  great  sciences  of  the  hierarchy.  The
special  aim  of  each  illustration  will  be  to  show,  first,  that  an
insight  into  the  laws  of  nature  by  the  human  intellect  has
been  a  necessary  antecedent  to  success ;  and,  second,  that  the
acts  performed  in  securing  the  desired  end  have  consisted
in  some  special  artificial  modification  wrought  in  certain  ob-
jects distinct  from  the  end,  and  constituting  the  means  of  its
attainment.

It  will  be  convenient  to  follow  the  Comtean  classifica-
tion, and  to  proceed  from  the  more  general  and  "  positive  "

386  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

to  the  more  special  and  complex.  It  will,  of  course,  be  ob-
served that  all  the  results  attained  bj  the  indirect  method
are  in  the  direction  of  applying  the  truths  comprehended  to
the  ends  desired  by  mankind,  either  to  the  more  convenient
and  rapid  acquisition  of  new  truths,  or,  more  generally,  to
the  supply  of  the  material  wants  of  society.

Beginning  with  mathematics,  we  find  that  questions  of
number  and  quantity  were  among  the  earliest  to  press  for
solution,  and  the  practical  need  of  some  means  of  stating  and
solving  them  early  became  a  paramount  consideration.  The
first  valuable  application  of  the  indirect  method  took  place  in
the  invention  of  systems  of  notation.  These  were  of  two
kinds,  arithmetical  and  geometrical.  The  system  of  arithmet-
ical notation  adopted  by  the  Greeks,  the  most  brilliantly  intel-
lectual race  of  antiquity,  happened  to  be  very  clumsy,  and,  al-
though a  better  one  is  now  known  to  have  been  invented  by
the  Pythagoreans,  it  was  never  brought  into  practical  use.
This  may,  however,  have  really  proved  a  gain  to  science,
since  it  was  doubtless  in  a  great  degree  the  inadequacy  of
their  system  of  numerals  that  drove  the  Greeks  to  such
lengths  in  the  elaboration  of  a  system  of  geometrical  nota-
tion as  a  substitute.

The  Romans,  the  next  most  highly  cultured  people  of
antiquity,  adopted  a  method  of  notation  only  one  degree
better  than  that  of  the  Greeks.  Its  inferiority  to  the  one
now  in  use,  and  known  as  the  Arabic,  is  well  understood  by
every  school-boy,  but  may  be  better  realized  by  attempting
to  perform  a  long  multiplication  by  the  use  of  the  Roman
numerals.  Yet  even  in  these  systems  there  had  been  some
invention,  and  the  skeleton  of  the  true  system  was  outlined.
The  decimal  method  of  counting  having  been  ineradicably
fastened  upon  all  nations  by  the  accident  of  the  ten  digits
{sujpra^  p.  ^^^  these  ruder  methods  of  writing  numbers  were
designed  to  simplify  matters  by  assigning  to  a  series  of  char-
acters values  increasing  in  a  tenfold  ratio.  In  the  Roman
system,  too,  an  arithmetical  "  value  of  position  "  was  recog-

EXAMPLES  IN  MATHEMATICS.  387

nized,  a  number  being  subtracted  if  placed  before,  and  added
if  placed  after  another.  This  may  very  probably  have  been
the  first  step  in  all  countries  toward  a  convenient  system  of
notation.  The  other  and  more  important  step  consisted  in
the  adoption  of  what  may  be  called  a  geometrical  "  value  of
position."  The  mere  series  of  descending  values,  M  C  X  I,
embraces  only  one  unit  of  each  term.  The  problem  was  to
express  any  number  of  such  units.  To  do  this,  other  numer-
als were  placed  over  or  under,  or  in  front  of  these,  to  denote
how  many  times  each  one  was  taken,  as  co-efficients  of  them,

il     iv  V     il  '

thus :  MCXI.     This  expression  would  then  read  2459.

Simple  as  the  step  appears  of  neglecting  the  original  units
and  letting  their  co-efficients  stand  in  their  places,  which
position  alone  would  sufficiently  indicate  tlieir  value  in  the
series,  it  proved  one  slow  to  be  taken.  Certain  it  is,  how-
ever, that  in  India,  Babylonia,  Arabia,  Persia,  China,  and
Japan,  systems  of  notation,  embodying  this  simple  but  im-
portant principle,  were  in  use  *  during  the  golden  eras  of
Greece  and  Rome,  where  it  was  unknown,  and  it  is  an  inter-
esting speculation  to  contemplate  to  what  lengths  an  ac-
quaintance with  it  might  have  carried  these  nations,  and  par-
ticularly the  Greeks,  had  they  possessed  it — so  vast  may  be
the  consequences  of  a  single  happy  idea.

The  adoption  of  a  convenient  system  of  notation  has  been
followed  by  a  train  of  equally  remarkable  inventions  in  the
elaboration  of  methods  of  arithmetical  solution.  The  so-
called  "  rules  of  arithmetic  "  have  all  been  the  results  of  suc-
cessive improvements,  each  involving  the  application  of  the
indirect  method,  insomuch  that  no  age  would  think  it  possi-
ble to  do  business  by  the  methods  employed  in  the  preceding
age.f  Algebra,  which  generalizes  arithmetic,  is  throughout
an  invention.  Geometry,  and  especially  trigonometry,  show-
ing to  what  uses  the  important  properties  of  sines,  co-sines,

*  Humboldt,  "Kosmos,"  Bd.  ii,  S.  97,  126,  165,  288.

f  See  an  article  by  Mr.  E.  0.  Vaile  on  "  Early  Methods  in  Arithmetic,"  in
"The  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xvi  (December,  18V9),  p.  204.

388  ACTION.  -SECONDARY  MEANS.

etc.,  can  be  put,  involves  the  inventive  method  in  a  high  de-
gree. The  invention  ot  logarithms  constitutes  one  of  the
purest  examples  of  the  happy  application  of  the  indirect
method  which  any  of  the  sciences  afford,  while  the  well-worn
history  of  the  invention  of  the  calculus  can  never  be  too
often  read  as  illusti-ating  the  astonishing  acumen  of  which
the  human  intellect  is  capable.*  To  all  this  may  be  added
tlie  perhaps  still  more  brilliant  achievement  of  Sir  W.  Rowan
Hamilton  in  the  discovery  of  the  law  of  quaternions,  by
which  motion  and  direction  have  been  brought  under  the
dominion  of  mathematics,  as  number  and  space  had  been
previously  brought  under  it.

The  greater  part  of  all  this  immense  work  of  mathemat-
ical invention  has  been  accomplished  by  a  few  individuals
who  have  chanced  to  possess  that  particular  quality  of  mind
which  can  follow  a  long  train  of  consequences  flowing  from
the  use  of  appropriate  means  through  to  the  ultimate  end,
which  is  never  lost  from  view.  In  mathematics,  as  in  all
other  sciences,  the  application  of  the  indirect  method  is  pri-
marily an  intellectual  exercise,  but  here  more  than  elsewhere
the  head  performs  the  chief  part  of  the  work.  The  only
muscular  activities  called  for  are  those  required  in  writing
down  the  results  of  the  mind's  discoveries.  The  objects  to
be  manipulated  are  simply  the  literal  and  numerical  charac-
ters involved,  and  are  used  more  for  the  sake  of  aiding  the
memory  and  securing  pubhcity  than  as  an  essential  part  of
the  labor.  Both  the  result  and  the  method  are  purely  ideal,
but  their  practical  utility  only  comes  with  their  application
to  concrete  facts.

Passing  over  astronomy,  whose  application  to  navigation
affords  numerous  illustrations  of  the  principle  under  consid-

*  Of  this  great  discovery  Comte  expresses  his  admiration  in  the  following
language :  "  Des  examples  de  nature  aussi  diverse  sont  plus  que  suflSsants  pour
faire  nettement  comprendre  en  general  I'immense  port6e  de  la  conception  fonda-
mentale  de  I'analyse  transcondante,  telle  que  Leibnitz  I'a  formde,  etqui  constitue
sans  aucun  doute  la  plus  haute  pcns6e  k  laquelle  I'esprit  humain  se  soit  jamais
616v6  jusqu'i  present"  (" Philosophie  Positive,"  vol.  i,  p.  1Y5).

EXAMPLES  IN  PHYSICS.  389

eration,  we  find  in  physics  the  phenomenal  science  in  which
it  comes  most  obtrusively  to  the  foreground.  It  is  within
this  field  that  are  comprehended  the  greater  number  of  all
the  mechanical  inventions.  "We  can,  of  course,  cite  only  a
few  typical  cases.

In  barology,  the  simplest  cases  are  such  machines  as  run
by  the  power  of  weights.  These  illustrate  in  the  least  com-
plex way  the  truth,  stated  a  few  pages  back,  that  invention
consists  in  disturbing  the  condition  of  equilibrium  in  which
all  matter  is  found.  The  effort  expended  in  winding  a  clock
converts  the  potential  energy  of  the  weights  into  actual
energy ;  and  the  force  of  gravitation,  in  equilibrating  that
energy,  performs  a  valuable  service  to  man.  All  applications
of  water  as  a  power  for  driving  machinery  involve  this  prin-
ciple. In  the  "  overshot "  wheel  the  power  consists  simply  in
the  weight  of  the  water  constantly  in  a  part  of  the  buckets.

Not  to  speak  of  the  machinery  and  gearing,  the  idea  that
human  advantage  might  be  gained  by  the  construction  of  a
dam  and  the  accumulation  of  a  head  of  water  in  a  flume  or
penstock,  was  a  shrewd  device  on  the  part  of  mankind.  Yet
this  is  among  the  simplest  of  the  contrivances  of  civilization,
and  is  well-nigh  paralleled  by  the  action  of  beavers.

If  we  seek  illustrations  in  the  department  of  optics,  the
invention  of  the  lens  is  perhaps  at  once  the  purest  example
of  ingenuity,  and  the  most  important  practical  discovery  to
be  found.  If  glass  had  not  yet  been  discovered,  crystals  of
quartz  might  have  been  found,  and  the  art  would  then  have
consisted  in  shaping  these  so  as  to  produce  the  desired  efifect.
But  how  could  it  be  known  that  the  convexo-convex  form
would  magnify  objects  seen  through  it  ?  Many  such  inven-
tions were  doubtless  reached  in  part  through  accident,  but
there  must  be  keen  intellectual  vision  to  perceive  the  mean-
ing even  of  such  accidents  and  to  follow  them  up  with
experiments.  Not  only  the  principle  of  the  microscope,  era-
bracing  that  of  the  eye-glass,  spectacles,  etc.,  but  that  of  the
telescope,  were  differentiated  from  that  of  the  lens  in  general.

390  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

It  was  in  the  direction  of  the  remote  and  the  minute  that  the
greatest  ignorance  and  error  prevailed  in  the  world,  and  it  is
the  lens  that  has  taught  us  what  we  know  of  both.  I  need
not  dwell  on  its  many  well-known  practical  uses,  but  may
hazard  the  remark  that  upon  it,  as  a  means  of  focalizing  the
sun's  heat,  the  race  may  yet  become  absolutely  dependent
for  its  means  of  inhabiting  the  globe.

Chemistry  is  full  of  illustrations  under  this  head.  I  will
mention  only  one  comparatively  unimportant  one,  selecting
it  because  it  shows  better  than  some  others  upon  what  simple
actions  the  most  remarkable  effects  may  depend.  The  case
is  that  of  the  Bunsen  burner.  A  simple  perforation  in  the
tube  conveying  the  gas  to  the  burner  converts  an  intensely
luminous  but  moderately  heating  flame  into  an  intensely  heat-
ing but  moderately  luminous  one,  eliminating  all  smoke.
This  invention  certainly  was  the  result  of  pure  scientific  de-
duction from  the  known  properties  of  the  gas  and  the  atmos-
phere. It  is  an  example  especially  adapted  to  show  what
immense  effects  it  may  be  possible  to  produce  with  very
moderate  labor  when  the  laws  of  nature  and  the  constitu-
tion of  matter  are  systematically  known  (vol.  i,  pp.  34,  38).

In  passing  from  physics  and  chemistry  to  biology,  a  radi-
cal difference  presents  itself  in  the  manner  in  which  human
ingenuity  accomplishes  beneficial  ends.  Some  might,  per-
haps, suppose  biology  to  be  wholly  outside  the  domain  of
invention.  But,  when  we  remember  in  what  invention  essen-
tially consists,  it  will  become  clear  that  such  is  not  the  case.
Invention,  as  so  often  already  remarked,  consists  in  the
employment  of  indirect  means  for  the  attainment  of  remote
ends.  It  must  follow,  therefore,  that  not  only  stock-breed-
ing and  the  improvement  of  cereals  and  fruits,  but  agricult-
ure in  its  enserrible,  are  illustrations  of  invention  in  the  do-
main of  biology.  Great  as  has  been  the  progress  thus  far  in
these  essential  arts,  they  have,  in  the  main,  been  pursued
empirically.  What  results  may  become  attainable  when  sys-
tematic science  shall  be  applied  to  them,  provided  all  the

EXAMPLES  IN   THE  COMPLEX  SCIENCES.  391

materials  on  the  globe  be  not  first  consumed  by  the  waste  of
the  old  system,  can  not  be  safely  predicted.  The  application
of  the  indirect  method  in  biology  does  not  fundamentally
differ  from  its  application  in  physics  or  mathematics.  The
immediate  muscular  efforts  put  forth  are  not  directed  to  the
end.  Whether  in  mating  the  finest  animals,  in  planting  the
seeds  of  the  choicest  food-plants,  or  in  carefully  preparing  the
soil  and  destroying  noxious  weeds,  the  process  results  from  a
rational  foresight,  and  consists  in  the  employment  of  indirect
means  wholly  different  in  themselves  from  the  end  sought.
If  it  can  not  be  called  invention,  it  can  be  called  art,  and  art
every-where  rests  on  science  {supra,  p.  193).

It  remains  to  consider  the  application  of  the  indirect
method  in  the  domain  of  sociology.  Thus  far  I  have  dwelt
only  upon  the  feeble  results  that  have  already  been  actually
achieved.  If  these  have  been  small  in  the  more  positive
sciences  and  wholly  empirical  in  biology,  one  would  be  justi-
fied in  concluding  that  in  the  unborn  science  of  sociology
they  must  be  nil.  Yet  this  conclusion  is  too  hasty.  There
is  a  certain  point  of  view  from  which  many  of  the  opera-
tions of  government  may  be  regarded  as,  in  a  sense,  em-
bodying the  progressive  principle.  Considering  that  its  end
is  the  preservation  of  the  social  order,  governments  have
certainly  devised  means  to  that  end.  They  have  always  pro-
fessed to  be  seeking  the  advancement  of  the  social  state,  and
have  adopted  many  measures  designed  to  secure  that  end,  but,
not  possessing  even  an  empirical  intuition  of  the  complex  laws
of  society,  such  measures  have  usually  proved  failures.  Yet
the  credit  must  be  conceded  to  government,  whenever  it  has
assumed  functions  affecting  all  the  members  of  society,  of
having  performed  them  in  a  more  satisfactory  manner  than
they  had  previously  been  performed  under  the  operation  of
the  so-called  natural  law  of  supply  and  demand;  and,  as
stated  in  the  Introduction  (vol.  i,  p.  63),  all  its  functions  admit
of  being  so  regarded.  There  is  not  one  of  them  that  may
not  be  conceived  of  as  delegated  to  private  enterprise.     The

392  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

punishment  of  crime,  which  we  are  in  the  habit  of  regarding
as  one  of  the  most  vitally  essential  to  governmental  control,
has  actually  been  so  delegated  within  the  historic  period.

A  few  examples  of  the  adoption  of  measures  by  govern-
ment involving  the  application  of  the  indirect  method  and
embodying  the  principle  of  Attractive  Legislation  were  in-
troduced in  an  early  part  of  the  work  (vol.  i,  p.  62),  and,
rather  with  a  view  to  symmetry  than  better  illustration,
another  typical  example  is  added  here :

To  prevent  importers  from  undervaluing  their  goods  on
which  ad  valorem  duties  were  imposed,  the  customs  officers
were  authorized  by  Article  lY  of  the  celebrated  "  Cobden
Treaty  "  (January  23,  1860),  if  not  satisfied  with  the  values
declared,  to  retain  the  goods  by  paying  the  declared  value
plus  five  per  cent.  The  effect  of  this  shrewd  provision  may
be  readily  seen.

But  upon  the  whole  it  must  be  confessed  that  progressive,
or  dynamic,  action  on  the  part  of  society  as  a  unit  -belongs  for
the  most  part  to  the  future  of  social  science.  If  it  ever
takes  place,  there  are  two  general  classes  of  indirect  means,
one  or  both  of  which  it  must  necessarily  adopt.  One  of
these  may  be  called  the  biological,  the  other  the  sociological,
means.

The  biological  means,  as  the  name  implies,  consists  in
the  simple  extension  of  the  present  application  of  the  in-
direct method  in  biology  to  human  beings,  considered  as
living  organisms,  capable,  like  all  other  living  organisms,  of
physical  improvement  by  artificial  selection.  That  man  is
thus  capable  of  improvement,  there  does  not  exist  the  least
trace  of  a  doubt ;  and,  if  any  method  could  be  suggested  ac-
ceptable to  the  majority,  its  adoption  would  have  a  greater
real  interest  for  the  future  of  the  human  race  than  that  of
all  the  issues  about  which  nations  go  to  war.  But  along
with  the  undeveloped  consciousness  of  the  social  organism
goes  a  corresponding  disregard  for  the  remote  future.  It  is
only  a  few  highly  endowed  minds  that  possess  any  really

KNOWING,  KNOWING  HOW,  AND  DOING.  393

great  concern  for  the  condition  of  the  world  at  a  time  when
they  know  they  can  not  be  in  it.  With  governments  the
sentiment  ^^ apres  nous  le  deluge^''  is  not  only  proverbial  but
universal.  It  is  vain,  therefore,  to  expect  that  the  biological
means  will  be  adopted  before  the  sociological.

The  sociological  means  is  co-extensive  with  the  principle
which  I  have  designated  by  the  name  "attractive  legisla-
tion." It  is  in  this  that  lies  the  only  rational  faith  in  the
approach  of  a  social  scientific  era.  The  present  is  the  era  of
material  science,  the  result  of  the  application  of  the  indirect
method  to  mathematics,  astronomy,  physics,  chemistry,  and
biology  (exclusive  of  man).  The  era  of  social  science,  if  it
ever  comes,  will  apply  this  method  to  the  phenomena  pre-
sented by  the  social  forces,  and  the  adoption  of  the  socio-
logical means  through  attractive  legislation  may  lead  to  the
adoption  of  the  biological  means  through  stirpiculture.

Those  who  contribute  to  human  progress  may  be  divided
into  two  classes  :  those  who  know,  and  those  who  hnow  how.
Dynamic,  or  progressive,  actions  may  likewise  be  classed  as,
1,  those  which  result  in  the  acquisition  of  knowledge ;  and,  2,
those  which  result  in  the  application  of  knowledge  acquired.
This  is  the  fundamental  distinction  between  science  and  art.

It  sometimes  happens  that  an  individual  who  knows,  also
knows  how.  In  reality,  those  who  know  how  must  also
know,  but  their  knowledge  is  often  to  a  great  extent  intui-
tive. They  can  not  give  an  account  of  it.  Their  art  is  em-
pirical. Where  they  possess  systematic  knowledge,  it  is  not
generally  original.  They  have  usually  acquired  it  second-
hand, and  not  obtained  it  by  the  study  of  nature.  Those
who  really  know  are  those  who  have  found  out  by  original
research.  Those  who  know  how  are  those  alone  who  do.
Progress,  on  the  one  hand,  is  only  brought  about  by  doing.
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  equally  dependent  upon  knowing.
But,  again,  in  order  to  do,  men  must  know  how.

There  has  never  been  lack  of  action ;  but,  except  as  con-

394  ACTION.— SECONDARY  MEANS.

trolled  by  the  other  two  conditions,  it  must  fall  under  some
of  the  statical  divisions  and  produce  no  progressive  effect.
The  true  progressive  action  must  proceed  not  only  from  a
knowledge  of  things  but  of  ways.  The  progressive  agent
must  understand  both  the  nature  of  the  objects  which  consti-
tute the  intermediate  means  to  the  remote  ends  sought,  and
how  they  must  be  adjusted  in  order,  through  them,  to  secure
those  ends.  Science  and  art,  which  it  is  the  tendency  to
divorce,  should  be  more  intimately  united.  So  far  as  pos-
sible they  should  co-exist  in  the  same  individual.  It  should
become  better  understood  that,  for  any  practical  purpose
such  as  tends  to  affect  the  mass  of  mankind,  science  unap-
plied is  worthless.  It  may  amuse  great  minds,  but  it  can
not  elevate  great  populations.

The  two  classes  of  progressive  actions,  those  which  result
in  the  acquisition  and  those  which  result  in  the  application
of  knowledge,  are  equally  important,  and,  although  they
must  always  stand  in  this  order  of  sequence,  it  should  be  the
aim  to  combine  them  as  far  as  possible.  Very  little  of  what
passes  for  education  tends  even  to  make  men  know.  It
should  tend  to  make  them  not  only  know,  but  know  how.
It  should  also  teach  them  to  do.  The  human  mind  should
be  instructed  in  the  art  of  arts,  invention.  The  inventive
faculty,  the  only  progressive  faculty  of  the  mind,  should  be
systematically  developed,  with  a  view  to  augmenting  the
proportion  of  progressive,  or  dynamic,  actions.

Dynamic  actions  may  be  subdivided  into  two  groups,  ac-
cording as  they  are  performed  by  individuals  or  small  corpo-
rations, or  by  society  at  large.  Thus  far,  nearly  all  dynamic
actions  have  belonged  to  the  first  of  these  groups.  The
inventive  faculty  requires  a  certain  degree  of  independence
in  its  exercise.  The  union  even  of  a  few  minds  upon  the
means  to  the  attainment  of  a  remote  end  frequently  results
in  a  degree  of  confusion  incompatible  with  the  adoption  of
any  rational  scheme.     The  mind  must  pursue  a  train  of  con-

INDIVIDTJAL  AND  SOCIAL  DYNAMIC  ACTIONS.     395

sequences  from  the  inception  to  the  conclusion  of  the  process,
and  this  requires  complete  isolation  and  freedom  from  inter-
mixture with  the  ideas  of  others.  Deliberative  bodies  rarely
enact  any  measures  which  involve  the  apphcation  of  the
indirect  method.  If  individual  members  who  have  worked
such  schemes  out  by  themselves  propose  them  in  such  bod-
ies, the  confusion  of  discordant  minds,  coupled  with  the
usual  preponderance  of  inferior  ones,  almost  always  defeats
their  adoption.  Such  bodies,  miscalled  deliberative,  afford
the  most  ineffective  means  possible  of  reaching  the  maxi-
mum wisdom  of  their  individual  members.  A  radical  change
should  be  inaugurated  in  the  entire  method  of  legislation.
By  the  present  system,  not  even  an  average  expression  of  the
intelligence  of  the  body  is  obtainable.  The  uniform  product
of  such  deliberations  falls  far  below  this  average,  if  it  can  be
said  to  rise  to  a  level  with  the  minimum  intellect  in  the
body.  True  deliberation  can  never  be  reached  until  all  par-
tisanship is  laid  aside,  and  each  member  is  enabled  to  work
out  every  problem  on  strictly  scientific  principles  and  by
scientific  methods,  and  until  the  sum  total  of  truth  actually
obtained  is  embodied  in  the  enactment.  The  real  work  can
not  be  done  in  open  session.  The  confusion  of  such  assem-
blies is  fatal  to  all  mental  application.  There  need  be  no
open  sessions.  The  labor  and  thought  should  be  performed
in  private  seclusion,  the  results  reached  by  others  should  in
this  way  be  calmly  compared  by  each  with  those  reached  by
himself,  and  a  general  and  voluntary  acquiescence  by  at  least  a
majority  in  that  which  really  conforms  with  the  truth  in  each
case  should  be  deliberately  embodied  as  law.  The  nature  of
political  bodies  should  be  made  to  conform  as  nearly  as  pos-
sible with  that  of  scientific  bodies ;  though  there  is  this  im-
portant difference,  that  scientific  bodies  meet  for  the  purpose
of  promulgating  the  truth  privately  worked  out,  while  the
aim  of  political  bodies  is  not  to  promulgate  truth,  but  to
adopt  measures.  This  latter  object  is  really  nothing  else
than  to  devise  means  or  invent  methods.     The  truth  upon

396  ACTION.— SECONDAKY  MEANS.

wliich  this  action  is  based  must  have  been  previously  reached
and  definitely  settled.  But  this  is  a  legitimate  part  of  legisla-
tion. It  is  not  enough  to  say  that  the  legislator's  education
furnishes  this  knowledge,  and  he  has  only  to  put  it  in  force.
This  can  not  be  true  even  in  theory.  Each  new  measure
must  involve  new  principles  which,  from  the  nature  of  things,
education  or  any  kind  of  previous  preparation  can  not  have
furnished.  In  this  art,  as  in  all  other  arts,  and  in  the  prac-
tical pursuits  of  life  in  general,  education  at  best  can  only
prepare  men  to  begin  the  special  investigation  required  for
the  practice  of  their  professions.  Every  step  through  their
career  must  be  assured  by  special  study  of  the  principles  to
be  applied  in  order  to  succeed.

The  legislature  must,  therefore,  as  before  maintained,  be
compared  to  the  workshop  of  the  inventor.  The  bulk  of  the
work  at  all  times  to  be  done  consists  in  investigation.  The
mere  enactment  of  laws  must  in  itself  demand  only  a  small
proportion  of  the  time  of  scientific  legislators;  although,
when  recognized  as  consisting  in  the  application  of  natural
principles  for  the  attainment  of  remote  ends  which  would  not
work  themselves  out,  it  requires  more  labor  and  pains  than
the  crude  hruta  fulmina  which  now  go  by  the  name  of  laws.
The  study  of  nature,  and  particularly  of  human  nature,  with
reference  to  ends  sought,  must  constitute  their  principal
duties.

The  fundamental  distinction  between  individual  and  so-
cial dynamic  actions  lies  in  the  classes  of  forces  with  which
they  each  usually  deal.  Individual  dynamic  actions  are  com-
monly directed  toward  the  control  of  those  forces  which  pre-
vail in  the  domain  of  the  lower  or  less  complex  sciences,
while  social  dynamic  actions  must  be  to  a  great  degree  con-
fined to  the  control  of  the  social  forces  alone.  Emanating
from  the  center  of  social  consciousness,  they  can  only  with
propriety  be  directed  to  the  adjustment  of  the  relations  be-
tween the  social  units,  with  a- view  to  the  prevention  of  social
evil  and  the  production  of  social  good.

SOCIAL  DYNAMIC  ACTION.  397

It  seems  needless  again  to  remark  that  very  few  of  the
acts  thus  far  performed  by  the  social  organism  in  its  supreme
corporate  capacity  have  belonged  to  the  dynamic  class.  In-
tellectually considered,  social  differentiation  has  always  been
far  in  advance  of  social  integration.  As  in  the  solar  system,
the  outlying  members — the  planets — have  vastly  exceeded
the  central  mass — the  sun — in  the  progress  which  they  have
made  toward  the  dissipation  of  their  inherent  motion  and  the
integration  of  their  constituent  matter,  so,  in  society,  while
individual  men  have,  at  different  times  and  in  varying  de-
grees, arrived  at  full  consciousness  both  of  themselves  and
of  the  universe,  the  social  mass,  the  supreme  psychic  center
of  the  social  organism,  still  consists  of  a  chaos  of  undifferen-
tiated elements  in  the  crude,  homogeneous  state.  So  great  is
this  lack  of  integration  in  the  social  consciousness  that  society
as  a  whole  is  still  broken  up  into  a  large  number  of  more  or
less  remote  and  independent  sub-societies,  joined  together
more  or  less  feebly  by  ties  which  differ  in  strength,  from
those  of  language  and  national  characteristics  in  politically
dependent  states,  to  those  of  commerce,  more  or  less  irregu-
lar, between  wide-separated  peoples  speaking  in  different
tongues.  When  we  speak  of  society,  therefore,  we  must,  for
all  practical  purposes,  confine  the  conception  to  some  single
autonomic  nation  or  state,  or,  at  the  widest,  to  those  few  lead-
ing nations  whose  commercial  relations  have  to  a  consider-
able extent  cemented  their  material  interests  and  unified
their  habits  of  thought  and  modes  of  life.  But,  even  in  this
latter  social  unity,  it  would  be  idle  to  talk  of  any  concentrated
social  action,  since  no  law  binds  the  several  autonomies  com-
posing it  except  an  international  code  drawn  up  by  irrespon-
sible jurists,  and  only  voluntarily  assented  to  by  each,  but
liable  to  violation  by  any.  Only  where  actual  legislation  is
conducted  can  there  be  said  to  exist  a  complete  social  organ-
ism. Wherever  any  such  complete  social  organism  exists,  it
is  possible  to  conceive  of  true  scientific  legislation.  To  a
limited  extent,  the  indirect  method  has  already  been  applied

398  ACTION.— SECONDAKY  MEANS.

by  nations.  In  some  cases,  it  has  been  applied  to  the  injury
of  social  interests,  for  want  of  a  snflficiently  comprehensive
grasp  of  social  principles,  as,  e.  g.,  where  heavy  duties  have
been  imposed  upon  necessities  of  common  Hfe,  with  a  view
to  increase  the  revenue  easily  without  incurring  the  odium  of
direct^*?  rata  taxation  upon  either  property  or  incomes,  the
only  just  modes  of  raising  revenue.  In  other  cases,  it  has
been  applied  to  the  real  advantage  of  the  state,  although
from  only  a  dim  and  partially  false  perception  of  the  social
principles  involved,  as  where  protective  duties  have  been
imposed  upon  commodities  obtainable  within  the  country,
the  real  motive  being,  however,  to  favor  some  influential  class
of  producers.  Yery  rarely  or  never  have  such  duties  been
imposed  for  the  true  economic  reason  that  it  is  a  waste  of
labor  to  transport  commodities  great  distances  which  can  be
obtained  without  such  transportation.  Some  idea  of  the  un-
organized and  chaotic  condition  of  the  world's  commerce,  so
easily  controllable  by  inventive  legislation,  can  be  formed
by  glancing  at  the  leading  articles  of  trade  of  any  large  na-
tion, as  France  or  England,  and  noting  to  how  great  an  ex-
tent the  same  commodities  are  both  imported  and  exported.
The  free-trade  system  tends  directly  to  foster  this  wasteful
process,  and  yet  most  persons  think  that  free  trade  is  the
scientific,  or  liberal,  as  opposed  to  protection,  as  the  empiri-
cal, or  narrow,  view  of  the  economic  questions  involved.
Some  even  go  so  far  as  to  hold  that  the  more  commerce
the  hetter,  as  though  it  increased  the  weight  or  value  of  a
commodity  to  transport  and  exchange  it.

But  this  is  only  one  of  the  questions  which  society  is  con-
stantly called  upon  to  consider,  and  there  is  scarcely  one
problem  in  the  entire  domain  of  politico-economics  to  which
the  principles  here  laid  down  might  not  be  applied.

Finally,  the  fundamental  problem  of  social  dynamics  is  to
show  how  legislatures  may  be  lifted  up  to  the  position  from
which  they  wiU  of  necessity,  and  as  a  matter  of  course,  legis-
late according  to  the  scientific  method.     The  discussion  of

\

SOCIAL  DYNAMIC  ACTION.  399

this  problem  belongs  to  a  future  chapter  {infray  p.  000),  and
need  not  be  anticipated  here  further  than  to  point  to  the  irre-
sistible tendency  of  governments  toward  the  popular  repre-
sentative character,  in  which  the  legislature  can  at  best  but
represent  the  intelligence  of  constituencies.  It  is,  therefore,
upon  these  latter,  upon  the  people  themselves,  that  the  influ-
ences must  be  brought  to  bear  which  are  to  transform  the
character  of  legislatures.

The  problem  is  a  difficult  and  complicated  one.  While
legislators  as  a  class  are  far  behind  the  few  progressive  indi-
viduals by  whose  dynamic  actions  social  progress  is  secured,
it  is  also  true  that,  as  a  general  rule,  they  are  somewhat  in
advance  pf  the  average  constituent,  sometimes  considerably
so.  This  is  seen  in  many  quasi-scientific  enterprises  that
they  quietly  continue,  which  their  constituents,  could  they
know  of  them,  would  promptly  condemn.  The  question,
therefore,  arises  whether  the  legislators  may  not  find  means,
as  a  work  of  supererogation,  to  place  their  constituents  upon
the  highway  to  a  condition  of  intelligence  which,  when  at-
tained, will  in  turn  work  out  the  problem  of  inaugurating  a
scientific  legislature  and  a  system  of  scientific  legislation.

CHAPTER  XII.

OPINION.

DIEECyr  MEANS   TO    PROGEESSIVE   ACTION,    OE    THIED   FEOXIMATE
END   OF   CONATION.

The  psychology  of  ideas — Correctness  of  opinions — The  notion  that  harmony  of
opinion  is  a  desirable  end  in  itself — The  opposite  idea  that  it  is  something
to  be  apprehended — Differences  of  opinion  usually  unnecessary — Subject-
ive barriers  to  the  acceptance  of  truth — Settlement  of  opinion  in  the  in-
dividual— Ambiguity  and  varying  definitions  of  the  term  "belief" — Beliefs
and  opinions  depend  on  the  evidence  presented,  regardless  of  its  legitimacy
— Tests  of  certainty — Nature  of  truth — Verification — Settlement  of  opin-
ion in  society — Subject-matter  of  opinions — Origin  of  opinions — ^Fruitless
attempts  to  coerce  opinions — ^Principal  sources  of  error — Subjective  in-
fluences— Ante-natal  influences — Post-natal  influences — Quantity  distin-
guished from  quality  of  opinions,  or  ideas — Objective  influences — Theory
of  experience — Opinions  and  ideas  the  result  of  experiences,  and  will  cor-
respond  to  them  in  importance — Artificial  determination  of  opinions —
Ethical  and  dynamic  opinions  —  Ethical  opinions  —  Confusion  of  morals
with  religion — The  Hebrew  decalogue,  in  how  far  moral  and  in  how  far
religious — The  idea  of  advantage  considered  as  underlying  the  ethical  sys-
tem— Scope  of  the  advantage — Reliability  of  the  judgment — Causes  of  the
variability  of  ethical  opinions — Varying  powers  of  moral  discernment —
Confounding  religion  with  morality — Confounding  custom  with  morality —
Dynamic  opinions — Cosmological  ideas — Biological  ideas — Anthropological
ideas — Sociological  ideas — Conclusion.

In  the  preceding  chapter  we  have  seen  that  social  prog-
ress, defined  in  terms  of  human  happiness,  is  chiefly  brought
about  through  ideo-motor  actions,  viz.,  actions  which  are
originated  by  cerebration  and  not  by  sensation.  The  exter-
nal impressions  from  which  the  mind  obtains  the  data  for
such  cerebration  have  been  previously  made,  and  the  quali-

PSYCHOLOGY  OF  IDEAS.  401

ties  of  the  objects  making  them  are  registered  in  the  brain-
substance.  Brain  action  elaborates  tlie  material  thns  ac-
quired, and  reaches  conceptions  of  wider  relations  (vol.  i,
pp.  401-405).  Different  minds  see  different  relations  among
like  objects,  and  questions  arise.  The  data  are  re-elabo-
rated, additional  data  are  sought  and  combined  with  pre-
vious data,  and  at  length  settled  convictions  are  reached.
These  may  differ  diametrically  upon  the  same  question,  but,
whether  true  or  false,  they  become  the  motives  to  action.
They  give  rise  to  desires  which  constitute  the  will,  and
motor  discharges  take  place  in  obedience  to  these  desires.
All  the  most  important  human  actions  proceed  from  this
source.  From  the  classification  made  in  the  last  chapter,  it
will  be  seen  that  there  are  two  important  groups  of  deliber-
ative, or  ideo-motor,  actions,  viz.,  ethical  actions  and  dynamic
actions.  Upon  the  first  rests  the  social  order,  upon  the  sec-
ond depends  social  progress,  but  without  the  first  the  second
would  be  impossible.  Both  these  important  fields  of  action
are  dominated  absolutely  by  the  opinions  that  prevail.  The
truism  that  ideas  rule  the  world  simply  means  that  opinions
determine  action.  In  a  general  sense,  what  men  do  depends
upon  the  views  they  entertain.*

The  value  of  human  action  will  chiefly  depend  upon  two
qualities  residing  in  human  opinions :

1,  On  their  correctness.

2.  On  the  importance  of  their  subject-matter.
Let  us  consider  each  of  these  qualities  separately.

COEEECTNESS    OF    OPINIONS.

While  it  is  perfectly  true  that  freedom  from  doubt  is  the
end  of  all  inquiry  by  the  individual,t  this  is  not  the  end
which  the  social  welfare  (or  even  the  individual  welfare)

*  "  C'cst  I'esprit  qui  gouveme  et  I'homme  qui  agit  selon  sa  pens6e  bien  plus
souvent  qu'il  ne  le  croit  lui-mSme"  (Guizot,  "Histoire  de  la  civilisation  en
France,"  vol.  iii,  p.  377).

f  Professor  Charles  S.  Pcirce  in  "  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xii  (No-
vember, 1877),  p.  6.
49

402  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

demands.  The  idea  entertained  by  Bome  tliat  the  chief  cause
of  the  evils  of  society  lies  in  the  conflicting  opinions  held
by  its  members,  and  that  the  unification  of  belief  is  the
great  end  to  be  striven  for,*  is  only  a  haK-truth,  and  might
result  in  far  worse  consequences  even  than  those  that  flow
from  an  unorganized  state  of  public  opinion.  Erroneous
opinions  can  by  no  possibility  be  attended  with  a  surplus  of
advantage  to  all  affected  by  the  resultant  action.  For  an
opinion  to  have  value  it  must  have  a  foundation  in  fact.
The  qualities  declared  to  agree  must  in  reality  agree.  The
relations  thought  to  subsist  must  in  fact  subsist ;  otherwise,
action  proceeding  from  such  supposed  agreements  and  rela-
tions will  constantly  betray  the  lack  of  correspondence,  and
snares  and  pitfalls  will  soon  await  the  deluded  agent.

The  great  desideratum  is  not  unity  of  opinion  but  cor-
rectness of  opinion.  It  is  true  that  the  latter  implies  the
former,  but  it  is  unfortunately  not  true  that  the  former  im-
plies the  latter.  In  making  correct  opinions  universal,  we
make  all  opinions  on  the  same  subject  identical ;  but  the  lat-
ter result  is  not  an  end,  it  is  merely  an  incident.  The  end
is  to  render  opinions  true,  and,  this  secured,  the  consequences
may  safely  be  left  to  take  care  of  themselves.  The  settle-
ment of  opinion,  whether  in  the  individual  or  in  the  com-
munity, may  be  the  end  of  inquiry,  and  the  only  result  that
can  satisfy  the  intellectual  demand ;  but  this,  of  itself,  unless
the  settlement  be  in  harmony  with  objective  reality,  can
never  satisfy  the  physical  demand.  It  is  of  small  conse-
quence that  the  demands  of  logic,  in  the  few  minds  that
think,  be  supplied,  so  long  as  the  demands  of  sense,  in  all
who  feel,  are  denied.  So  far  as  the  latter  are  concerned,  that
condition  of  mental  instability  and  mental  pruriency  called
doubt,  or  skepticism,  is  far  better  than  a  state  of  settled  belief
in  that  which  is  not  true.  But,  even  if  the  settlement  and
assimilation  of  all  opinions  were  the  end,  the  only  true  mode
of  attaining  it  would  be  through  their  verification.  For,  so
*  Comte,  "  Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  i,  p.  41 ;  vol.  vi,  p.  632.

CORRECTNESS  OF  OPINIONS.  403

long  as  the  settled  and  universal  conviction  remained  out  of
harmony  with  reality,  the  intellect  would  continue  to  catch
occasional  glimpses  of  this  fact,  and  a  condition  of  instabil-
ity would  inevitably  result.  Moreover,  so  inexorable  is  the
logic  of  causation,  that  in  such  a  state  this  lack  of  corre-
spondence between  thoughts  and  things,  between  organism
and  environment,  would  perpetually  entail  evils  upon  society,
and  force  mankind  to  suspect  that  there  was  some  funda-
mental flaw  in  the  social  system,  l^ot  only  would  the
deepest  thinkers  of  such  a  society  penetrate  the  illusion,  and
even  at  the  risk  of  martyrdom,  as  has  frequently  happened,
proclaim  the  truth,  but  the  great  "  common  sense "  of  the
mass,  without  being  able  to  perceive  the  truth,  would  feel  a
perpetual  consciousness  of  the  existence  of  error,  and  be  ever
ready  to  second,  in  the  way  most  fatal  to  social  order,  any
movement  in  the  direction  of  a  revolution  in  the  system  of
moral  and  social  government.

Equally  unfounded  is  the  opposite  view,  intended  as  an
answer  to  the  school  of  unifiers,  that  there  is  something  to
be  dreaded  in  the  idea  of  a  complete  harmony  of  opinion,
that  difference  of  opinion  exerts  a  wholesome  influence  upon
intellectual  and  social  progress,  and  that  unity  of  views  upon
the  chief  topics  of  any  age  would  result  in  mental  stagnation
and  social  degeneracy.

The  fallacy  here  lies  in  the  implied  assumption  that  the
opinions  held  by  both  parties  contain  germs  of  both  truth
and  error — an  assumption  contrary  to  the  hypothesis.  These
charges  are  indeed  true  where  the  settled  opinions  of  a  peo-
ple are  only  partially  true  or  mainly  false,  as  has  been  the
case  in  human  history,  but  they  are  wholly  inapplicable  to
a  supposed  case  in  which  these  settled  opinions  are  wholly
true.  The  idea  that  discussion  and  dispute  about  matters  in
general  constitute  a  means  of  progress  is  the  generic  form  of
the  idea,  previously  noted  (vol.  i,  p.  75),  that  intense  parti-
sanship in  matters  of  state  is  a  means  of  arriving  at  political
truth.     Both  the  general  and  the  special  cases  merely  consti-

404  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

tute  examples  of  the  still  more  eorapreliensive  generalization,
also  before  formulated  (vol.  i,  p.  72 ;  vol.  ii,  p.  86),  that  the
genetic,  or  consensual,  mode  of  development  is  necessarily
attended  with  enormous  friction  and  perpetual  rhythm,  caus-
ing the  loss  of  all  but  a  small  percentage  of  the  gross  amount
of  real  progress  gained.

But  it  may  be  said  that  the  settlement  of  opinion  in  com-
plete harmony  with  truth  must  be  dismissed  as  an  impossi-
bility ;  that  such  is  the  constitution  of  the  human  mind  that
all  can  not  be  made  to  see  truth  from  the  same  point  of  view,
and  differences  of  opinion  must  needs  exist.  Practically,
this  may  be  true,  but  not  theoretically.  It  may  be  that,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  there  will  always  be  certain  problems  unset-
tled, and  about  whose  solution  different  minds,  though  per-
haps of  equal  ability,  will  hold  opposite  views.  But  it  is,
nevertheless,  true  that  certain  other  problems  may  become
settled,  and  so  settled  that  they  can  never  again  be  unsettled.

Many  such  have  already,  to  all  present  appearances,
reached  this  state  of  complete  equilibration.  It  is  exceed-
ingly doubtful  whether  the  truths  of  the  multiplication-table
or  of  Euclid's  theorems  will  ever  be  disturbed  in  their  quiet
slumbers.  So  it  is  with  all  that  we  call  the  science  of  math-
ematics, yet  it  is  also  true  that  even  in  mathematics  there  have
been  much  discussion  and  difference  of  opinion  ;  and  this  is
still  the  case  with  the  higher  and  more  abstruse  problems
daily  discussed  in  mathematical  journals,  as,  e.  g.,  the  question
of  "  space  of  four  dimensions."  But  we  need  not  confine
ourselves  to  mathematics,  which  is  not  really  a  science,  but
only  the  test  of  all  the  sciences  (vol.  i,  p.  106).  We  may  find
abundant  examples  of  settled  opinions  among  purely  phe-
nomenal sciences,  and  respecting  problems  as  to  which  there
were  long  supposed  to  be  two  sides,  each  of  which  was  ably
and  bitterly  defended.  .  Astronomy,  perhaps,  furnishes  the
best-known  illustrations.  The  heliocentric  theory  was  long
the  battle-field  of  opinions  even  by  astronomers  themselves.
Opinion  respecting  it  has  now  become  so  far  settled  that

HARMONY  OF  OPINIOK  405

there  is  no  educated  person,  not  even  in  orders,  who  honestly
questions  it ;  and  a  modern  work,^  claiming  seriously  to
challenge  its  truth,  was  simply  an  object  of  general  ridicule.
There  is  little  more  chance  for  the  truth  which  Galileo  re-
canted before  a  grave  consistory  of  learned  prelates  ever  to
be  again  seriously  questioned  than  there  is  that  it  will  some
time  be  denied  that  a  right  line  joining  two  points  is  the
shortest  distance  between  them.

Geology,  too,  now  consists  of  a  body  of  established  facts..
The  most  important  of  them  are  not  yet  proved  by  actual
experience,  and  are,  from  their  nature,  incapable  of  such
proof.  Yet  they  are  no  longer  questioned.  Opinion,  which
once  ran  high  respecting  them,  is  now  completely  at  rest.
There  remains  no  one  to  gainsay  the  assertion  that  stratified
deposits  found  upon  high  mountains  were  once  at  the  bottom
of  the  sea,  where  they  were  formed.  JSTo  one  any  longer  dis-
putes that  the  fossils  found  in  such  positions  were  once  living
creatures  inhabiting  the  sea.  And,  while  no  one  can  say  with
any  degree  of  definiteness  how  long  ago  these  fossils  lived,
scarcely  a  cultivated  man  can  be  found  who  honestly  doubts
that  it  must  have  been,  in  most  cases,  very  much  more  than
the  long-claimed  six  thousand  years.  Upon  such  problems,  if
opinion  is  not  yet  universal,  it  is  so  completely  settled  among
all  who  at  all  comprehend  the  conditions  of  the  problems
that  its  complete  unification  must  result  from  a  general  dif-
fusion of  an  acquaintance  with  those  conditions.

We  might  go  in  like  manner  through  all  the  established
sciences :  physics,  with  its  law  of  gravitation ;  chemistry,
with  its  laws  of  proportions  and  elective  affinities ;  biology,
with  its  law  of  deterioration  through  interbreeding — all  now
settled,  though  once  disputed.

It  is  true  that  in  these  sciences  there  are  still  some  open
questions — questions  which  are  now  where  these  were  for-
merly— in  process  of  equilibration.     Such  are  the  nebular

*  "  Theoretical  Astronomy  examined  and  exposed."  By  "  Common  Sense  "
[John  Hampden  (?)],  London,  186S  (?).

406  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

hypothesis,  the  undulatory  theory  of  light,  the  transmutation
of  organic  species,  and  the  general  law  of  development,  or
evolution,  in  all  the  departments  of  the  universe.  These
propositions  are  not  yet  so  far  settled  but  that  many  able
minds  openly  reject  them  still.  Yet  each  one  of  the  hypoth-
eses named  seems  to  embody  a  truth,  and  to  be  rapidly  ap-
proaching the  completely  equilibrated  stage.  But  at  the
boundaries  of  every  science  there  are  disputed  questions  of
increasing  degrees  of  doubtfulness,  some  of  which  are  des-
tined to  crystallize  into  settled  truths,  and  others  to  be  yield-
ed up  as  errors.

Contemplating  those  settled  propositions  in  science  which
have  formerly  been  unsettled,  is  there  any  one  who  will  main-
tain that  their  settlement  has  tended  to  produce  intellectual
stagnation  or  social  degeneracy  ?  Do  not  all  rather  feel  that
such  settlement  of  opinion  was  an  essential  prerequisite  to
further  discovery  of  truth,  and  the  advancement  of  both  in-
tellectual and  social  progress  ?  Is  there,  then,  a  certain  kind
of  opinions  that  it  is  better  to  leave  open  than  to  have  settled
in  harmony  with  truth,  while  such  is  not  the  case  with  this
kind  of  opinions  ?  The  fallacy  is  too  obvious  to  pursue  fur-
ther. The  settlement  of  opinion  is  worse  than  doubt  or  dis-
pute, unless  it  can  be  settled  upon  the  basis  of  conformity
with  objective  reality.  If  it  can  be  so  settled,  no  matter  what
the  subject  of  opinion  be,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that
it  come  to  absolute  rest.

It  is  a  remarkable  but  an  obvious  fact  that  most  actual
differences  of  opinion  are  wholly  unnecessary.  The  data  for
the  complete  settlement  of  opinion  are  extant.  Incorrect
opinions  are  held  through  life,  influencing  action  against  the
interests  of  progress,  when  the  means  of  exchanging  them
for  correct  opinions  have  existed  for  years,  or  perhaps  for
centuries.  This  is  not  the  fault  of  the  individual.  It  is  the
defect  of  the  social  organization,  which  would  be  the  chief
gainer  in  preventing  it.  The  greater  part  of  the  questions
about  which  antagonistic  views  are  entertained  ought  not  to

DIFFERENCE  OF  OPINION.  407

be  capable  of  arising  anymore  than  disputes  could  arise  over
the  settled  truths  of  geometry.  The  loss  which  society  sus-
tains through  its  failure  to  diffuse  the  data  actually  elabo-
rated, often  at  great  expense  of  time  and  effort,  is  beyond
calculation.  Opinions  are  only  settled  at  great  expense  of  in-
tellectual energy.  Discussions,  debates,  dissensions,  and  dis-
putes cost  society  heavily  in  its  most  important  commodity.

Truth  has  a  twofold  object  in  social  economics — the  one
statical,  the  other  dynamical.  It  first  furnishes  the  means
to  the  immediate  increase  of  individual  gratification,  achiev-
ing to  that  extent  the  ultimate  end  of  being.  But  it  also
forms  a  basis  for  the  elaboration  of  new  truth,  and  thus  be-
comes a  progressive  means  to  the  attainment  of  the  end  in
higher  degrees.  But,  so  long  as  there  is  difference  of  opin-
ion, truth  can  not  be  said  to  be  reached.  Even  if  one  of  the
parties  to  the  discussion  have  actually  reached  it,  its  unset-
tled condition  precludes  fruition.  ]^ot  until  it  is  absolutely
fixed  beyond  the  remotest  apprehension  of  further  disturb-
ance can  it  fairly  begin  to  yield  its  natural  benefits.

It  therefore  becomes  the  highest  duty  of  mankind  and
society  to  see  to  it,  with  the  least  possible  delay,  that  all
questions  capable  of  complete  settlement  be  immediately  put
in  the  way  of  such  settlement.  Let  there  be  no  excuse  for
any  one  to  debate  a  question  which  has  at  any  time  or  place,
or  in  any  manner,  been  once  definitively  answered.

In  the  present  state  of  society,  a  small  class  of  advanced
minds  simply  look  on  and  smile  at  the  mad  surge*  of  bitter
polemic  that  engrosses  the  great  mass.  To  them  the  truth
has  been  long  patent,  and  may  have  become  trite.  Power-
less to  extend  it  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  they  are  tempted  to
regard  the  "  common  herd  "  as  they  would  regard  a  drove  of
cattle  on  their  way  to  the  slaughter-house.

Could  all  resolvable  questions  be  put  completely  at  rest
throughout  the  whole  world j  the  result  would  be  to  shift  the
energy,  now  wasted  in  discussing  them,  to  the  new  field  of
problems  never  yet  definitely  solved.     It  would  do  much

408  OPINIOK-TERTIARY  MEANS.

more.  As  we  just  saw,  the  chief  object  of  truth  is  to  afford
a  better  basis  for  arriving  at  other  truth.  Not  that  truth  is
an  end  in  itself,  but  through  improved  means  the  end  is  se-
cured in  a  vastly  accelerated  ratio.  It  is  therefore  necessary
to  work  for  truth  as  an  end,  since  the  real  end  must  come
through  the  means.  Every  opinion  now  disputed,  but  for
whose  complete  settlement  the  data  exist,  would,  when  thus
universally  decided,  become  a  new  truth,  to  be  employed  in
the  settlement  of  still  undecided  questions  and  the  establish-
ment of  additional  truth.  Could  this  process  be  thus  sys-
tematically continued,  and  every  question  of  opinion  be  dis-
posed of  on  the  side  of  real  fact  as  soon  as  the  data  for  its
solution  were  laid  before  the  world,  the  march  of  correct
ideas  must  become  extremely  rapid  as  compared  with  their
present  progress.  If  such  a  condition  of  perfect  social  organ-
ization be  deemed  impracticable,  this  does  not  in  the  least
lessen  the  necessity  of  making  the  strongest  possible  effort  in
the  direction  of  its  realization,  since  the  results  must  be  pro-
portional to  the  degree  of  success.

One  great  barrier  to  the  attainment  of  correct  opinions
lies  in  the  undue  preponderance  of  subjective  influences.
Truth  can  only  be  grasped  by  the  intellect.  It  can  not  be
determined  by  the  feelings.  Whatever  its  subject-matter,  it
must  ever  be  regarded  as  objective.  The  progress  of  cor-
rect opinion  is  in  great  part  measured  by  the  proportion
which  this  objective  mode  of  looking  at  all  problems  bears
to  the  subjective  mode.  This  truth  is  crystallized  in  the
proverb,  too  generally  true,  that  "  the  wish  is  father  to  the
thought " ;  or,  as  Bacon  puts  it, "  Quod  mavult  homo  verum
esse,  id  potius  credit^  *  In  reality,  the  wish  should  never
have  the  remotest  connection  with  the  thought.  Cold  calcu-
lation is  the  only  reliable  guide.  A  truly  healthy  state  of
public  opinion  can  never  be  reached  until  it  becomes  impos-
sible to  determine  the  personal  bias  of  a  speaker  when  ex-
pressing his  opinion  on  questions  of  fact.     So  sj)aringly  is

♦  '*  Novum  Organum,"  lib.  i,  aph.  xlix.

SUBJECTIVE  BARRIERS  TO  TRUTH.  409

this  the  case  now  that  any  one  who  should  thus  objectively
express  himself  would  not  receive  due  credit  for  it  as  an
opinion,  but  would  be  at  once  assumed  to  desire  the  result
predicted.  This  disposition  to  impute  the  wish  to  the
thought,  though  prevalent  in  minds  of  all  classes,  seems
peculiarly  inherent  in  the  female  mind.  A  man  of  known
'sentiments  is  liable  to  have  the  confidence  of  his  female
friends  rudely  shaken  if  he  ventures  to  declare  his  belief,
upon  however  strong  evidence,  that  any  thing  will  take  place
which  would  be  contrary  to  those  sentiments.  I  have  fre-
quently attempted,  in  such  cases,  to  explain  that  it  was  upon
the  evidence  and  contrary  to  my  desires  that  I  rendered  the
decision,  but,  while  this  course  has  generally  proved  satisfac-
tory to  the  male  mind,  I  have  never  felt  that  it  was  appre-
ciated by  the  female  mind,  a  lingering  doubt  appearing  to
remain  as  to  the  stability  of  my  sentiments  and  predilections.

The  great  prevalence  of  this  subjective  view  of  objective
facts  can  also  be  very  clearly  seen  in  the  dogmatic  certainty
with  which  partisans  predict  the  success  of  their  party  upon
both  sides  of  the  same  contest,  wholly  regardless  of  the  real
conditions  upon  which  the  result  must  depend.  This  tend-
ency may,  it  is  true,  and  doubtless  does,  appear  greater  than
it  is,  in  consequence  of  the  policy  of  not  admitting  doubts
even  where  they  exist,  through  fear  of  affecting  the  actual
result ;  yet  among  the  great  mass  their  convictions  are  honest,
and  rest  upon  little  else  than  their  simple  preferences.  The
same  tnith  holds  in  all  departments  of  social  life.  •  The  real
evidence  is  only  incidental,  while  the  desire  is  paramount  in
the  formation  of  opinion.

It  may  well  be  asked  of  what  use  such  opinions  are.
The  desired  is  no  more  likely  to  occur  than  the  undesired.
Opinions  based  on  desires  are  therefore  about  as  likely  to  be
false  as  true.  Human  judgment,  instead  of  being  an  addi-
tional evidence  of  truth,  adds  nothing  to  the  other  external
evidence.  Strange  as  this  proposition  may  seem,  it  is  only
one  view  of  the  more  general  proposition,  established  through-

410  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

out  human  history,  that  the  universality  of  a  belief  is  no  evi-
dence of  its  truth.*  Utterly  groundless  beliefs  have  clung  to
mankind  from  the  remotest  periods,  to  be  rejected  within
the  present  century,  and  a  strong  suspicion  exists  that  other
equally  false  ones  still  abide,  to  be  thrown  off  perhaps  cen-
turies hence.

The  remedy  for  this  deplorable  condition  of  things  must
come,  if  at  all,  from  the  gradual  extension  of  the  exact,  or
scientific,  method  to  every  department  of  human  thought
and  opinion.  Politics,  law,  business,  morals,  and  even  relig-
ion, must  fall  under  this  regime,  and  every  question,  from
the  success  of  an  enterprise  to  the  hope  of  salvation,  must  be
made  to  yield  to  the  logic  of  fact,  evidence,  and  statistics.
Opinions  resting  upon  any  other  basis  are  worse  than  worth-
less, and  to  cling  to  them  is  suicidal.

The  transition  from  the  unsettled  to  the  settled  state  of
opinion  is  not  abrupt,  but  represents  a  series  of  modifications.
It  may  be  looked  at  from  the  point  of  view  both  of  the  in-
dividual and  of  society.

SETTLEMENT   OF    OPINION   IN    THE   INDIVIDUAL.

In  the  case  of  the  individual,  several  of  the  stages  have
received  distinct  names,  but  different  languages  differ  in  se-
lecting these  salient  points  on  the  scale.  Kant  employs  as  the
generic  term  the  clumsy  but  expressive  word  FurwahrhaZten,
and  says  that  this  has  three  degrees,  represented  by  the  three
terms,  Meinen,  Glavhen^  and  TFm<ew.  The  first  may  be
translated  presumption  ;  the  second,  belief;  and  the  third,
Tcnowledge  (certainty).  The  first,  he  says,  is  both  subjectively
and  objectively  insufi[icient  to  satisfy  the  consciousness  ;  the
second  is  subjectively  sufficient,  but  not  objectively ;  the  last
is  both  subjectively  and  objectively  suflficient.f  What  Pro-
fessor Peirce  speaks  of  as  the  "settlement  of  opinion"  is
simply  the  second  of  these  stages.     It  is,  indeed,  sujectively

*  Tylor,  "Primitive  Culture,"  London,  1871,  vol.  i,  p.  12.
f  "  Kritik  der  reinen  Vemunft,"  pp.  541  et  seq.

SETTLEMENT  OF  OPINION.  411

sufficient,  but  objectively  it  is  insufficient.  Thus  far,  the
world  seems  to  have  been  satisfied  to  rest  with  this  subjective
sufficiency.

With  regard  to  the  earlier  stages  of  opinion,  Kant  as-
serts that  the  true  test  as  to  whether  it  is  a  mere  persuasion
or  a  settled  conviction  is  the  wager  /  for  one  may  be  suffi-
ciently persuaded  to  wager  a  ducat  when  he  would  find  his
faith  giving  way  if  asked  to  wager  ten.

In  the  use  of  the  word  "  belief  "  there  seems  to  be  a
wide  difierence  between  theory  and  practice.  Many,  per-
haps correctly,  insist  that  "  belief  implies  evidence,  and  is
founded  upon  it."  *  Spencer  says  that  "  the  word  helief,
having  two  radically  opposed  meanings,  admits  of  being
misinterpreted.  It  is  habitually  applied  to  dicta  of  con-
sciousness for  which  no  proof  can  be  assigned :  both  those
which  are  unprovable  because  they  underlie  all  proof  and
those  which  are  unprovable  because  of  the  absence  of  evi-
dence— both  those  which  are  most  certain  and  those  which
are  most  uncertain."  He  further  remarks  that  "  men  are  lia-
ble to  confound  the  things  they  truly  believe  with  the  things
they  believe  they  believe.  Yery  commonly  in  Philosophy,  as
in  Theology,  there  is  a  formal  acceptance  of  a  proposition
without  any  real  acceptance  of  it — without  any  proper  repre-
sentation of  that  which  it  asserts.  The  proposition  having
had  its  two  terms  identified  in  thought  as  known  terms,
and  having  had  the  relation  it  names  identified  as  a  known
relation,  it  is  often  supposed  that  the  specific  terms  have
been  brought  together  before  consciousness  in  the  specified
relation,  and  believed ;  when,  in  fact,  they  do  not  admit  of
being  brought  together  before  consciousness  in  this  relation
at  all,  and  can  not  therefore  be  believed  in  the  proper  sense
of  the  wordP  \  Dr.  Carpenter  also  says :  '  There  are  mul-
titudes who  do  not  feel  called  'upon  to  inquire  for  them-
selves, but  consider  themselves  justified  not  only  in  accept-

*  "  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xiii  (July,  1878),  p.  369,
f  "  Principles  of  Psychology,"  vol.  ii,  p.  403,  note.

412  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

ing  a  body  of  doctrine  which  they  regard  as  on  the  whole
beneficial,  but  in  recommending  it  to  the  acceptance  of
others.  Such  persons  can  not  be  truly  said  to  believe  a  set
of  propositions,  the  evidence  of  which  they  have  never
studied,  and  the  very  language  of  which  (framed  as  the  ex-
pression of  ideas  that  have  long  since  passed  away)  they  do
not  understand."*

This  view  is  still  more  sweeping,  and  narrows  down  the
field  of  legitimate  belief  until  it  is  nearly  identical  with  that
of  knowledge.  If  all  this  be  true,  then,  not  only  is  our
language  extremely  defective  in  the  absence  of  a  term  to
express  a  confessedly  very  prevalent  mental  state,  but  this
word  belief  is  indeed  grossly  misused.  In  fact,  so  universal
is  its  use  in  this  alleged  improper  sense  that,  if  it  is  ever  pos-
sible for  custom  to  sanction  any  thing  in  language,  it  must  be
held  to  have  sanctioned  this  meaning  of  the  word  "  belief."
At  all  events,  whether  there  exist  any  word  to  express  it  or
not,  the  greater  part  of  all  human  ideas  conceived  as  em-
bodying truth  have  belonged  to  this  same  objectionable  class.
This  is  especially  true,  as  was  shown  in  a  previous  chapter
(supra,  p.  266),  during  the  earlier  stages  of  development.
Only  the  most  superficial  and  obvious  truths  were  perceived
and  utilized,  while  the  great  body  of  thought  consisted  of
these  so-called  "  pseud-ideas  " — ideas  which  not  only  declared
relations  that  did  not  in  fact  exist,  but  relations  whose
terms  could  not  be  brought  together  in  consciousness.  If
these  were  not  beliefs,  they  were  certainly  important  mental
states  which  neither  psychology  nor  sociology  can  afford  to
ignore.  It  is  only  in  recent  times,  under  the  all-changing
influence  of  scientific  methods,  that  the  condition,  insisted
upon  as  belief  j9ar  excellence,  has  come  to  prevail  to  any
wide  extent.

The  transition  from  what  is  popularly  called  belief  to
what  is  technically  so  called  is  more  important  than  that
which  carries  the  mind  from  one  stage  to  any  other  of  the

*  " Mental  Physiology,"  p.  407.

k

BELIEF.  413

legitimate  series.  For  these  latter  we  have  already  terms
enough.  It  would  therefore  be  better  to  surrender  the  word
"  belief  "  entirely  to  the  designation  of  this  illegitimate  state.
The  word  "  faith,"  it  is  true,  is  made  to  embrace  this  general
field  of  mental  operation,  but  its  practical  application  clearly
unfits  it  for  taking  the  place  now  filled  by  "  belief."  If,
therefore,  we  were  allowed  to  distinguish  a  belief  from  an
opinion  by  exempting  the  latter  from  the  necessity  of  rest-
ing upon  any  evidence,  as  the  former  clearly  must,  however
inadequate  that  evidence  may  be,  we  should  have  at  least
one  trenchant  division  of  this  confessedly  obscure  and  con-
fused subject.  There  certainly  exist  in  fact  the  two  gen-
eral classes,  real  ideas  and  false  ideas.  By  whatever  name
they  may  be  called,  the  latter  as  surely  exist  as  the  former.
Neither  are  they  radically  dissimilar  in  any  other  respect
than  that  of  their  psychological  nature.  In  their  chief  char-
acteristic, from  the  sociological  point  of  view,  viz.,  their
tendency  to  produce  action,  they  are  identical  with  genuine
opinions.  This  fact  renders  it  important  that,  in  its  efforts
to  bring  about  the  general  settlement  of  opinion,  society
should  first  specially  aim  to  convert  all  pseud-ideas  into  true
ideas.  There  is  no  more  insidious  danger  than  that  of  mis-
taking settled  belief  of  the  illegitimate  class  for  the  attain-
ment of  truth  itself.  This  has  been  the  great  fallacy  of  all
ages.  Dogmatic  faith,  firmly  fixed  in  transcendental  propo-
sitions, has  always  been  to  a  greater  or  less  extent  confounded
with  positive  truth,  when  in  reality  they  stand  at  the  very
antipodes  of  consciousness.

This  barrier  once  leaped,  and  the  ideas  all  fairly  resting
upon  legitimate  evidence,  no  matter  how  inadequate,  the
mind  passes  naturally  from  the  feebler  to  the  firmer  states
of  opinion  with  no  other  aid  or  influence  than  those  of  in-
creasing evidence.  Nothing  can  prevent  complete  convic-
tion but  the  absence  of  such  evidence,  and  with  such  evi-
dence no  subjective  power  can  resist  its  normal  effect.  The
result  is  as  certain  as  that  a  body  will  move  when  affected  by

414  OPINION.— TEETIABY  MEANS.

a  force  stronger  than  its  inertia.  All  apparent  exceptions
simply  prove  that  in  snch  cases  the  evidence  has  not  in  fact
been  received.

This  truth  has  a  still  wider  application  than  the  one  here
noted.  It  is  unfortunately  the  case  that  the  evidence,  in
order  to  be  effective  in  setthng  opinion,  need  not  be  either
legitimate  or  complete.  Opinion  may  be  settled  at  variance
with  truth  by  the  simple  absence  of  opposing  evidence.  It
is  a  saying  no  less  true  than  trite  that  "  any  one  may  be
made  to  believe  any  thing."  *  The  mere  utterance  of  a
proposition,  were  there  absolutely  no  other  evidence,  would
produce  complete  subjective  conviction  upon  any  mind.  It
may  be  difficult  to  suppose  such  a  case,  but  the  same  truth  is
proved  in  innumerable  examples  where  educational  influ-
ences surrounding  the  young  are  all  on  one  side  of  proposi-
tions which  are  widely  dissented  from  every-where  beyond
the  sphere  of  this  influence.  We  often  wonder  how  learned
and  wise  men  in  past  ages  could  have  accepted  the  absurd
doctrines  which  we  know  they  did  accept.  It  was  because
they  received  no  evidence  against  them.  A  child  of  par-
entage no  matter  how  skeptical  or  talented,  which  should  be
brought  up  by  savages,  would  at  first  accept  their  religion
and  customs.  Its  superior  intellect  might  cause  doubts  to
arise  in  later  life  where  none  existed  among  any  of  the  tribe,
but  this  would  be  the  result  of  a  greater  susceptibility  to  the
opposing  evidence  actually  presented  by  the  circumstances  of
even  such  a  life.  The  avowed  policy  of  the  Roman  Catholic
Church  rests  upon  this  principle  shrewdly  perceived  by  its
leaders.  To  make  any  one,  no  matter  what  his  antecedents,
a  "  good  Catholic,"  only  requires  the  simple  exclusion  of  all
evidence  opposed  to  Catholicism,  and  beliefs  thus  firmly

*  Taylor,  "  Primitive  Culture  "  (Boston,  1874),  vol.  i,  p.  134  ;  Spencer,  "Psy-
chology," vol.  i,  p.  421 ;  Professor  Poirce,  loc.  dt.,  p.  10.  Humboldt  ("  Kosmos,"
Bd.  iv,  S.  142)  finds  several  authorities  for  the  groundless  belief  that  the  odor
of  onions  destroys  the  power  of  a  magnet.  This  is  a  type  of  a  multitude  of
such  popular  beliefs.  Some  one  has  said  so,  and  no  one  has  contradicted  it ;
erffo,  it  is  believed.

TESTS  OF  CERTAINTY.  415

fixed  in  the  early  education  are  known  to  be  difficult  to  dis-
turb afterward  in  the  majority  of  minds.  Such  opinions,  it
is  true,  are  only  subjectively  sufficient  and  for  the  most
part  pseudo-beliefs,  but,  so  far  as  the  individual  is  concerned,
they  may  be  as  unshakable  as  the  most  certain  truth.

Is  there,  then,  any  reliable  test  of  certitude  ?  Is  there
any  mark  by  which  the  correctness  of  a  proposition  can  be
known  ?  Mr.  Spencer  says  that  there  is,  viz.,  "  the  incon-
ceivabihty  of  its  negation."  *  For  such  truths  as  will  admit
of  the  application  of  this  test  it  is  undoubtedly  sufficient.
But  this  is  a  comparatively  small  class — the  truths  of  pure
logic.  From  a  practical  point  of  view  these  are  of  far  less
importance  than  those  phenomenal  truths  with  which  all
have  to  do.

The  distinction  between  truth  and  fcict^^  though  logic-
ally manifest,  is  too  close  for  our  present  purpose.  We
must  deal  with  ideas  of  all  kinds,  and  what  we  want  is
some  means  of  knowing  whether  we  are  entertaining  cor-
rect views  or  erroneous  views  respecting  any  subject  what-
ever. "  Truth,"  says  Dr.  Carpenter,  "  may  be  defined  to  be
an  aj)prehension  of  the  relations  of  things  as  they  actually
exist "  ;  %  and  Mr.  Spencer  himself  remarks  that  "  what  we
call  truth,  guiding  us  to  successful  action  and  the  consequent
maintenance  of  life,  is  simply  the  accurate  correspondence
of  subjective  to  objective  relations ;  while  error,  leading  to
failure  and  therefore  towards  death,  is  the  absence  of  such
accurate  correspondence."  *  This  is  precisely  what  we  here
mean  by  truth,  and  yet  how  powerless  his  logical  test,  in
almost  any  case  that  might  be  supposed,  to  furnish  an  assur-
ance of  such  truth !

Let  us,  then,  inquire  somewhat  more  closely  into  the  nat-
ure of  truth.  This  inquiry  is  old,  and  the  ground  has  been
repeatedly  traversed  by  logical  minds,  but  it  is  necessary  to
set  dowTi  the  result  here  before  passing  to  other  fields.

*  "Psychology,"  vol.  ii,  pp.  407  et  seq.  f  Whately,  "Logic,"  p.  189.

X  "  Mental  Physiology,"  p.  242.  «  "  First  Principles,"  p.  85.

416  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

Truth  consists  in  the  recognition  of  identity  v/nder  vary-
ing external  aspects.^

In  what  is  called  an  identical  proposition  the  subject  and
predicate  are  the  same  :  A  is  A.  But  in  most  true  proposi-
tions this  form  is  changed  while  the  substance  remains.  Un-
less ultimately  reducible  to  the  identical  form,  they  are  not
true.  If  we  say  A  is  A  -f-  2  -|-  1  —  3,  we  simply  complicate
the  predicate  a  little  without  altering  the  truth  of  the  propo-
sition. Every  algebraic  equation  is  an  identical  proposition,
and  assumes  the  identical  form  when  the  operations  indi-
cated are  performed.  In  most  propositions,  however,  the
terms  used  in  one  member  are  unlike  those  used  in  the  other.
They  are  of  different  extent,  but  the  truth  of  the  proposition
always  consists  in  the  identity  of  a  part  of  both,  or  of  the
whole  of  one  with  a  part  of  the  other.  Similarity  is  identity
of  parts  but  not  of  wholes.  The  most  important  propositions
are  those  in  which  the  identity  is  only  an  attribute,  or  relation.

The  discovery  of  truth,  as  distinguished  from  the  discov-
ery of  facts,  consists  solely  in  the  detection  of  a  known  attri-
bute, or  relation,  in  outwardly  dissimilar  forms  or  objects.
The  more  dissimilar  the  circumstances  concealing  it,  the
greater  the  penetration  required  to  detect  it.  The  highest
form  of  mental  operation  is  that  of  generalization.  Here  the
mind  perceives  the  same  quality  in  many  objects,  and  forms
of  them  a  group.  It  then  of  other  objects  forms  other
groups.  Finally,  it  perceives  a  quality  in  several  whole
groups,  and  selects  out  all  such  groups  to  form  a  higher  and
more  general  group.  The  wider  the  generalization  the
fainter  the  common  character,  and  the  keener  the  intellect-
ual powers  necessary  to  detect  it.  The  discovery  of  facts
furnishes  the  data  for  the  extension  of  knowledge.  The  dis-
covery of  truth,  i.  e.y  of  the  relations  among  facts,  constitutes
the  extension  of  knowledge  itself.f

*  Cf.  Condillac,  "  Langue  des  Calculs,"  liv.  1",  chap,  v,  pp.  60-63 ;  Alex-
ander  Bain,  "Logic,"  vol.  i,  p,  16;  G.  H.  Lewes,  "Principles  of  Certitude"
("  Problems  of  Life  and  Mind  "),  chap.  v.

f  Whately,  Loc.  cit.

TRUTH  DEFINED.— YEEIFICATIOK  417

Errors  are  cases  of  mistaken  identity.  The  mind  falsely
supposes  it  perceives  the  same  quality  under  different  as-
pects.    The  quality  taken  for  the  same  is  another.

But  the  question  still  remains :  How  shall  truth  be  dis-
tinguished from  error?  How  may  subjectively  sufficient
opinions  be  known  from  objectively  sufficient  ones?  The
test  is  easier  named  than  applied.     It  consists  in  verification.

1^0  belief  is  to  be  for  a  moment  trusted  which  can  not  be
objectively  verified.  All  opinions  must  remain  in  the  sub-
jectively sufficient  stage  of  settlement  until  proved.  The
verified  alone  is  the  known.

Yerification  is  of  two  kinds  :  1,  by  the  senses ;  2,  by  the
reason.  Where  possible,  nothing  less  authoritative  should  be
received  than  repeated  and  varied  sensual  tests.  It  is  upon
such  that  the  superior  certainty  of  most  scientific  truth  rests.
But  an  almost,  and  in  some  cases  quite,  equal  degree  of  cer-
tainty may  be  reached  through  rational  verification  ;  not  the
mere  deliverances  of  the  reasoning  faculty  from  subjective
data,  but  a  rational  comparison  of  the  tangibly  ascertained
and  verified  data,  and  a  legitimate  deduction  therefrom.
While  we  have  no  power  to  perceive  through  any  sense  the
ultra-microscopic  motes  that  fill  the  air,  the  experiments  of
Pasteur  and  Tyndall  afford  a  certainty  of  their  existence  and
organic  character  second  only  to  that  which  sense  could  pro-
duce. While  we  were  not  present  when  the  upheavals  took
place  which  raised  the  strata  of  the  Alps  to  their  present  po-
sition, rational  deductions  from  a  thousand  facts  converge  so
irresistibly  to  the  theory  of  their  submarine  origin  that  it
must  be  regarded  as  a  verified  truth.

This  latter  example  is  the  type  of  the  character  of  the
most  important  problems  of  science  and  of  life.  The  process
by  which  opinion  has  become  settled  respecting  it  is  none
other  than  the  inductive  process.  Inductive  reasoning  is
little  else  than  the  cumulative  verification  of  the  given  prop-
osition. Each  new  fact  in  its  support  is  additional  proof  of
its  truth.    One  fact  clearly  opposed  greatly  disturbs  the  tend-

418  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

ency  toward  objective  sufficiency  of  evidence.  But,  where
no  negative  evidence  appears,  a  certain  amount  of  positive
evidence  amounts  to  proof.  Sucli  proof  can  never  become
absolute  unless  all  the  facts  bearing  upon  the  theory  are
known,  a  case  which  never  occurs  with  respect  to  any  ques-
tion broad  enough  to  be  worth  discussing.  But  in  many
cases  the  approach  to  absolute  demonstration  becomes  asymp-
totic.

Scientific  knowledge  differs  from  the  so-called  knowledge
of  common  life  chiefly  in  being  verified  knowledge.  The
tendency  should,  therefore,  exist  to  extend  the  scientific
method  to  other  departments  of  thought  and  action.  This  is
the  only  method  of  bringing  about  the  settlement  of  opinion.

SETTLEMENT   OF   OPINION   IN    SOCIETY.

The  settlement  of  opinion  in  society,  to  the  same  extent
that  it  is  settled  in  the  individual,  only  requires  an  equal  dis-
tribution of  the  data  upon  which  opinion  rests.  The  state  of
objective  sufficiency  is  a  state  of  stable  equilibrium ;  that  of
subjective  sufficiency  is  a  state  of  unstable  equilibrium.
Therefore,  none  of  those  efforts  to  exclude  opposing  evidence
need  be  made  which  are  necessary  in  the  latter  case.  The
legitimate  evidence  may  always  be  trusted,  when  fully  pre-
sented, to  overrule  the  illegitimate  evidence.  Error  is  never
dangerous  when  truth  is  left  free  to  combat  it.  The  real
efforts  required  to  be  made  are  toward  the  diffusion  of  known
truth.  This  process  will  not  go  on  of  itself.  It  is  a  true
civilizing  process,  and  must  be  artificially  fostered  and  con-
ducted. But  the  result  is  certain  to  repay  a  thousand-fold
any  cost  entailed  upon  society.

It  is  important  to  point  out  that  individual  verification  of
all  propositions,  especially  of  such  as  admit  of  sensual  tests,
need  not  be  actually  made  by  all.  A  statement  of  fact  once
completely  verified  need  not  be  verified  a  second  time.  It
may  then  be  safely  inculcated  as  a  known  truth.  All  but  the
one  individual  who  actually  verified  Jv  will  accept  it  as  such,

SUBJECT-MATTER  OF  OPINIONS.  419

provided  always  that  tlie  means  of  re-verification  be  con-
stantly left  open.  The  moment  this  privilege  is  denied,
doubts  of  the  complete  objective  Buflficiency  of  the  proposi-
tion are  liable  to  arise.  Like  the  depositor  who,  hearing  that
his  banker  was  unsound,  demanded  his  deposit,  but,  when  it
was  promptly  tendered  him,  declined  it,  saying  that  if  the
bank  had  it  he  did  not  want  it,  the  human  mind  demands
proof  of  every  proposition,  the  means  of  verifying  which  are
cut  off  or  denied,  while  it  accepts  any  proposition  as  stable
trath  so  long  as  such  means  are  within  the  reach  of  all.
Strictly  speaking,  a  proposition  can  not  be  said  to  be  thor-
oughly verified  until  more  than  one  person  has  put  it  to  the
test.  The  experimentation,  in  addition  to  being  varied  to
the  utmost  possibility  in  method,  must  also  be  varied  as  to
the  experimenter,  lest  the  personal  equation  vitiate  the  re-
sult. But,  when  once  satisfactorily  settled,  to  the  degree  that
any  candid  mind  must  concede  its  absolute  truth  as  soon  as
fully  acquainted  with  the  process  of  proof,  its  original  re-in-
vestigation by  others  constitutes  a  clear  waste  and  expense  to
the  energies  of  society.  It  becomes,  therefore,  one  of  the
clear  duties  of  society  as  an  organized  body  to  take  thought-
ful measures  for  the  prevention  of  this  loss,  which  is  now
one  of  the  most  serious  that  it  suffers.  It  is  not  enough  to
settle  opinion.  The  resultant  truth  mast  be  so  proclaimed
as  to  prevent  unnecessary  re-verification,  and  to  put  an  end  to
all  discussion  of  the  already  known.

SmSJECT-MATTER   OF    OPINIONS.

We  will  next  consider  the  subject-matter  of  opinions.
Opinions  influence  actions  in  proportion  to  their  importance.
The  acts  of  a  great  man  are  due  to  the  greatness  of  his
thoughts.  The  antics  of  a  puppy,  the  play  of  children,  and
the  trifling  acts  that  make  up  the  life  of  people  of  feeble  in-
tellect or  benighted  condition,  represent  in  each  case  the
character  of  the  ideation  from  which  they  proceed.  The
fact  to  be  specially  marked  is  that,  from  the  same  degree  of

490  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

intellectual  energy,  entirely  different  motor  results  will  flow,
according  to  the  nature  of  the  ideas  entertained.  One  class
of  ideas  will  produce  immoral  conduct  and  valueless,  indif-
ferent, or  statical  actions,  when  another  class  of  ideas  will
generate  exemplary  moral  conduct  and  valuable  dynamic  or
progressive  actions.  From  the  one  set  of  ideas  there  will
result  a  life,  if  not  injurious,  at  least  useless  to  society,  while
from  the  other  there  will  result  a  life  of  perfect  moral  recti-
tude, and,  it  may  be,  of  vast  positive  advantage  to  the  pres-
ent and  future  of  mankind.

The  surest  way  to  arrive  at  a  clear  conception  of  the  sub-
ject-matter of  opinions,  considered  as  affecting  action,  is  first
to  inquire  into  their  essential  character,  and  this  inquiry  must,
in  turn,  be  introduced  by  a  consideration  of  their  origin  and
antecedents.

ORIGIN   OF   OPINIONS.

Opinions  are  the  result  of  circumstances,  and  are  to  be  re-
garded as  among  the  modes  of  existence  which  follow  fixed
and  definite  antecedents,  and  depend  wholly  upon  them.
The  idea  that  men  possess  any  power  by  which  they  can
change  or  determine  their  opinions  is  wholly  inconsistent
with  reason  and  with  fact.  Yet,  as  this  idea  has  long  and
widely  prevailed,  and  still  prevails,  it  may  be  well  to  notice
it  briefly.  The  idea  has  come  into  prominence  chiefly
through  religious  controversies,  and  from  the  peculiar  nature
of  religious  beliefs.

The  importance  of  reducing  opinions  of  this  nature  to  a
single  standard,  of  which  the  adherents  of  each  form  of  relig-
ion have  assumed  to  constitute  themselves  in  each  case  the
judges,  has  given  rise  to  many  heated  discussions  and  much
arbitrary  exercise  of  power.  But,  in  whatever  else  the  parties
to  these  strifes  have  differed  with  one  another,  they  have  all
been  agreed  upon  this:  that,  if  the  opponents  only  would,
they  might  conform  to  their  opinions.  It  is  clear  that  to
yield  this  point  would  be  to  end  the  contest.     At  least,  it

ORIGIN  OF  OPINIONS.  421

would  render  its  further  protraction  absurd  and  ridiculous.
For  still  to  contend  would  be  to  seek  tbe  accomplishment  of
what  had  been  already  admitted  an  impossibility.

It  is,  however,  more  charitable  and,  perhaps,  more  reason-
able to  suppose  that  throughout  these  contests  no  one  took
this  view.  So  thoroughly  was  the  doctrine  of  man's  free-
dom to  will  and  to  believe  imbedded  in  the  constitution  and
the  sentiments  of  the  age,  that  no  man  supposed  it  was  any
thing  else  than  pure  obstinacy  which  prevented  others  from
believing  precisely  that  which  he  believed.  It  was  on  this
supposition  that  men  proceeded,  and,  when  this  supposed
stubbornness  could  not  be  overcome  by  entreaty  or  by
threats,  they  acted  perfectly  consistent  with  their  own  doc-
trines when  they  sought  to  overcome  it  by  force.  They  pro-
ceeded against  opinions  precisely  as  they  would  against  ac-
tions. In  fact,  they  regarded  them  as  simply  acts  of  the
will.  They  never  stopped  to  reflect  that  their  argument  ap-
plied as  well  to  one  party  as  to  the  other.  Their  party  zeal
ran  too  high  for  this.  They  never  thought  of  trying  to  do
themselves  that  which  they  insisted  their  opponents  could
do.  Imagine  a  Koman  Catholic  zealot  philosophizing  with
himself  whether  he  could,  by  an  act  of  his  will,  accept  the
heresies  of  Martin  Luther !  And  yet  nothing  was  more
clearly  established  in  his  mind  than  that  those  heretics  could
return  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Universal  Church  the  moment
they  should  will  to  do  so.  So  clear  was  this  opinion  that
there  arose  a  strong  determination  to  act  upon  it  and  compel
them  to  do  so.

If  it  is  impossible  for  a  man  to  change  his  opinions,  it
must  also  be  impossible  for  one  person  to  compel  another  to
do  so.  For  in  this  case,  as  in  the  other,  the  party  subjected
to  the  compulsion  would  have  to  produce  the  change  upon
himself.  The  only  difference  there  could  be  would  be  in  the
motive  which  influenced  him.  In  the  first  case,  it  might  be
any  motive  at  all.  In  the  second,  it  must  be  fear  of  pain.
And,  if  he  can  not  do  it  by  an  act  of  his  will,  it  makes  no

422  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

difference  wliy  lie  wills  it.     It  is  the  will  just  as  much,
whether  the  motive  be  fear  or  interest.

Nor  is  it  only  by  a  priori  reasoning  that  we  arrive  at  this
conclusion.  It  is  abundantly  confirmed  by  all  hUraan  history.
It  is  perfectly  safe  to  say  that  there  never  was  a  successful
attempt  to  force  opinion.  Every  resort  to  this  course  has
proved  an  utter  failure.  There  have,  indeed,  been  cases
where  fear  of  pain  or  death  has  induced  parties  to  confess
such  a  forcible  conversion.  But  the  confession  never  ex-
tended beyond  the  lips.  There  have  also  been  cases  where
for  whole  generations  the  expression  of  certain  opinions  has
been  forcibly  suppressed,  while  contrary  opinions  were  to  be
heard  everywhere,  until  these  unproliibited  sentiments  be-
came the  only  education  of  this  new  generation,  and  they,  of
course,  believed  them  because  unopposed.  In  this  way  pub-
lic sentiment  may  become  revolutionized  by  force,  and  often
has  been,  though  generally  for  the  worse.  But  this  is  quite
another  thing  from  forcing  a  man  to  change  his  opinions.
It  is  an  ex  parte  system  of  education,  and,  instead  of  dis-
proving the  present  proposition,  furnishes,  on  the  contrary,
one  of  the  most  invincible  proofs  of  the  one  on  which  it
rests,  viz.,  that  opinions  are  the  result  of  circumstances.  It
must  not,  however,  be  inferred  that,  because  opinions  are
independent  of  volitions,  they  are  therefore  fixed  or  un-
changeable. On  the  contrary,  they  are  exceedingly  sensitive
and  subject  to  change.  But  the  influences  that  effect  these
changes  must  be  legitimate.  The  power  of  the  will  is  not
one  of  those  legitimate  influences.  The  will  has  no  jurisdic-
tion over  the  judgments  of  the  intellect.  There  is  no  better
illustration  of  causal  influences  than  this  fact  affords.  If  an
opinion  exists,  it  must  have  been  produced ;  it  must  have
a  certain  definite  cause.  The  cause  created  the  opinion.
The  opinion  which  sprang  from  the  cause  depends  upon  it
and  is  sustained  by  it.  Now,  it  is  perfectly  plain  that  in
order  to  affect  that  opinion  you  must  affect  the  cause  which
supports  it.     The  opinion  can  not  be  affected  in  any  other

ATTEMPTS  TO  COERCE  OPINIONS.  423

manner.  If  you  wisli  to  demolish  a  building,  you  must  oper
ate  upon  the  building  itself  and  destroy  its  foundations.  No
amount  of  labor  bestowed  upon  another  building  on  the  op-
posite side  of  the  street  will  have  the  slightest  effect.  Opin-
ions rest  upon  foundations.  They  stand  by  the  same  power
by  which  they  were  created.  But  it  so  happens  that  the  will
is  not  that  power.  No  one  ever  created  an  opinion  by  will-
power. The  will  is  no  more  the  true  cause  of  beliefs  than  it
is  of  climate.  It  was  once  supposed,  and  by  many  it  is  still
supposed,  that  the  wind  and  weather  may  be  controlled  by
the  will.  For  the  will  is  but  the  desire,  the  wish,  of  an  indi-
vidual, and  a  fervent  wish  is  all  that  constitutes  a  prayer.
People  have  always  supplicated  the  elements.  Many  a  pious
prayer  still  goes  up  for  rain  in  time  of  dearth.  But  every
man  of  science  knows  that  rain  does  not  depend  upon  human
prayers,  but  upon  the  state  of  the  atmosphere,  the  winds  and
moisture,  and  other  real  causes,  involving  the  effects  of  the
mingling  of  material  substances — ^gases  and  vapors.  These
can  be  investigated  and  explained.  By  the  aid  of  a  knowl-
edge of  such  facts  we  may  yet  acquire  some  control  over  the
elements  and  over  climate.  If  this  is  ever  done,  it  will  be  in
this  way.  But  no  exercise  of  will,  unless  guided  by  inventive
thought,  and  followed  by  appropriate  dynamic  action,  can
ever  influence  the  weather.

The  reason  is  the  same  as  that  in  the  case  of  opinions
when  it  is  sought  to  influence  them  by  the  will.  There  is
no  causal  relation  between  the  two.  They  are  independent,
co-ordinate  facts.  They  each  have  a  cause,  it  is  true.  TJiey
depend  upon  something,  and  that  dependence  is  necessary,
absolute,  and  real.  But  one  is  not  the  cause  of  the  other.
The  weather  is  no  more  the  result  of  the  wish  than  the  wish
is  of  the  weather.  The  opinion  is  no  more  the  cause  of  the
desire  than  the  desire  is  of  the  opinion.  Not  only  so,  but,
while  wishes  can  create  neither  weather  nor  opinions,  both
weather  and  opinions  may  constitute  legitimate  causes  for
certain  wishes.

424  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

The  fallacy  we  are  now  considering  is  the  non  causa  pro
causa,  and  is  the  chief  support  of  every  fonn  of  supersti-
tion.* A  failure  to  assign  the  real  cause  for  a  fact,  is  the
assigning  as  a  cause  of  that  which  is  not  a  cause.

We  may  now  return  and  inquire  as  to  the  true  cause  of
human  opinions.

There  is  a  necessary  chronological  order  in  which  all  the
phenomena  of  mind  take  place.  The  first  can  be  no  other
than  sensation.  This,  as  we  have  seen,  results  from  the  con-
tact of  external  objects  with  the  senses.  All  the  modes,
forms,  and  varieties  of  such  contacts  constitute  the  circum-
stances which  are  the  immediate  and  essential  cause  of  all
psychic  operations.

Now,  as  we  also  saw  in  our  inquiries  into  the  nature  of
mind,  sensation  has  two  aspects,  or  phases ;  a  subjective  and
an  objective.  The  first  is  sensation  proper — conscious  expe-
rience, or  feeling.  Following  up  that  branch  of  the  mind
which  proceeds  from  this  primary  quality  of  sensation,  we
find  that  there  result  immediately  from  it  desire,  emotion,
and  will.

The  other  aspect,  or  obverse  side  of  sensation,  is  percep-
tion. It  determines,  by  the  locality,  direction,  and  intensity
of  the  contact,  the  nature  of  the  object  producing  it,  and
thus  cognizes  the  object  itself,  its  qualities  and  character.
The  sensation  and  the  quality  producing  it  are  correlative.
A  particular  kind  of  resistance  produces  a  particular  efiect.
We  only  know  the  former  by  the  latter.  The  subjective
sensation  is  all  we  experience,  the  other  is  deduced,  or  in-
ferred. It  becomes  a  matter  of  judgment.  If  there  are
several  sensations  which  are  alike,  we  infer  that  it  is  the
same  quality  -which  produced  them  all.  This  is  perception,
or  apprehension.  Following  up  this  branch  of  psychic  phe-
nomena, it  leads  us  to  true  intellectual  operations.

Perceptions  form  the  basis  of  mental  judgments,  and
these  constitute  ideas  and  opinions.  Hence  the  primary
*  See  Bacon,  "  Novum  Organum,"  lib.  i,  aph.  xlvL

SOURCES  OF  ERPwOR.  425

cause  of  every  opinion  is  the  experience  of  the  senses.  That
experience  consists  of  the  circumstances  by  which  the  indi-
vidual is  surrounded,  and  which  are  incessantly  appealing  to
his  senses,  giving  him  new  perceptions,  revealing  to  him  the
varied  qualities  existing  in  objects,  and  thus  developing  his
intellectual  faculties.  Circumstances  are  therefore  as  much
the  cause  of  opinion  as  they  are  of  mountains,  rivers,  or
storms,  and  the  opinions  obey  laws  as  definite  and  necessary
as  those  which  such  physical  objects  obey.  Were  these  laws
as  well  understood,  their  results  could  be  calculated  with  as
much  accuracy  as  can  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies.
All  that  is  required  is  to  know  what  circumstances  will  pro-
duce a  certain  opinion,  and  you  have  only  to  create  those  cir-
cumstances to  be  sure  of  the  opinion.

We  little  dream  how  absolutely  we  are  the  creatures  of
circumstances,  and  to  what  extent  our  very  thoughts  are
created  by  them.  The  civilized  world  of  to-day,  surrounded
by  comforts  and  luxuries,  and  reaping  the  benefits  of  an  ad-
vanced state  of  art,  science,  and  literature,  feels  proud  of  its
condition  and  its  superiority  over  semi-civilized  and  barba-
rous peoples ;  yet  how  few  have  ever  reflected,  how  few  know
that  it  owes  this  pre-eminence  wholly  to  circumstances — to
the  influence  of  comprehensive  laws  of  nature  controlling
the  whole  domain  of  organized  matter,  the  phenomena  of
mind,  the  very  form  and  character  of  the  body,  and  the
quantity  and  quality  of  the  brain  !  Who  ever  stops  to  con-
sider, when  reading  the  history  of  his  race  in  the  primeval
ages  of  mankind,  when  wondering  over  the  strange  ideas,
absurd  customs,  and  false  opinions  which  were  then  enter-
tained, that,  if  he  had  lived  then  and  there,  he  would  have
himself  been  one  of  those  strange  beings,  would  have  shared
their  follies,  their  errors,  their  superstitions,  as  well  as  their
habits  and  customs  ?  Yet  we  can  not  doubt  that  such  is  the
fact.  The  mass  of  mankind  have  no  time,  disposition,  or
ability  to  examine  their  opinions.      They  are  like  children.

Their  leaders  are  parents  to  them  in  all  matters  of  opinion.
50

426  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

They  assume  to  tell  them  what  is  true,  and  they  can  only
believe.  If  the  teachers  are  themselves  ignorant,  so  much
the  worse  for  truth,  but  it  makes  no  difference  with  the  ac-
ceptance of  opinions.  They  are  formed  in  the  same  manner,
whether  false  or  true.

Most  ideas  are  derived  through  the  senses  of  seeing,
hearing,  and  feeling,  but  there  is  a  great  difference  in  the
quality,  or  relative  correctness,  of  the  opinions  formed  by  the
aid  of  these  three  senses.  Those  afforded  by  the  sense  of
touch  are  the  most  reliable.  "Where  a  thing  is  actually  felt,
except  in  cases  of  morbid  illusion,  it  is  sure  to  exist.  We
may  still  err  with  regard  to  its  nature,  but  less  often  than
in  other  cases.  Where  doubts  exist,  the  last  resort  is  always
to  this  sense.  We  know  then  that  the  object  in  question
exists.  The  sense  of  sight  comes  second  in  the  reliability  of
its  apprehensions.  That  which  we  see  we  can  pretty  gen-
erally depend  upon.  Still,  as  it  may  be  at  a  great  distance,
or  may  stand  in  a  peculiar  situation,  it  is  less  certain  than  if
it  were  actually  felt.  But  the  chief  case  of  unreliability
arising  from  this  sense  is  where  opinions  are  formed  from
written  language.  If  the  writer  states  an  error,  and  the
reader  believes  it,  he  has  acquired  a  false  opinion.  It  is
usually,  though  not  always,  the  opinion  also  of  the  writer,
but  it  has  thus  been  communicated  to  another.  But  even
in  this  respect  the  testimony  of  the  eye  is  more  reliable
than  that  of  the  ear.  For  that  which  any  one  takes  the
trouble  and  care  to  reduce  to  writing  is  generally  more  cor-
rect. The  writer  hesitates  instinctively,  before  he  frames  a
sentence,  to  see  whether  it  really  does  express  his  idea,  or
the  truth.

But  the  sense  which  is  responsible  for  the  greater  part
of  all  the  error  in  the  world  is  the  sense  of  hearing.  Even
with  regard  to  the  nature  of  sounds,  as  indicating  the  source
from  which  they  come,  this  sense  is  very  unreliable.  It  is  a
difficult  thing  to  tell  the  direction  of  a  sound,  and  still  more
difficult  to  judge  what  it  is  that  has  produced  the  sound.

SOURCES  OF  ERROR.  427

Still,  if  this  were  the  only  way  in  wliicli  hearing  engen-
dered opinions,  they  would  be  comparatively  correct.  The
chief  mode,  however,  in  which  it  does  this  is  through  the
medium  of  oral  language.  This  is  the  source  of  the  immense
majority  of  all  our  opinions,  whether  true  or  false.  It  is  on
the  wings  of  sound  and  through  the  medium  of  speech  that
come  the  first  ideas  of  every  one's  existence.  While  the  mind
is  tender  and  plastic,  there  pour  into  the  ears  a  thousand
thoughts  ani  ideas,  which  it  eagerly  drinks  in  and  makes  its
own.  And  in  later  years  the  great  confused  hum  of  public
sentiment  is  wafted  to  the  tympanum  and  beaten  into  the
brain.  Eumor  is  also  perpetually  making  itself  heard.  It  is
thus  that  traditions  come  down,  that  maxims,  true  or  false,
are  perpetuated,  that  all  kinds  of  thoughts  and  opinions  are
derived,  and  the  mind  crammed,  as  it  were,  with  confused
notions  of  every  thing.  The  ear  is  the  great  entrepot  of
ideas,  I  do  not  say  of  knowledge.  For,  as  I  have  said,  it  is
through  this  channel  that  most  errors  are  introduced.  We
hear  too  much  to  be  expected  to  analyze  it  all.  Most  men
do  not  stop  to  question  the  probability  or  reasonableness
of  any  thing  they  are  told.  In  a  majority  of  cases  it  is  be-
lieved or  disbelieved,  according  to  the  source  from  which
it  comes.  If  they  esteem  the  character  of  the  person  con-
veying it,  no  matter  for  what  reason,  they  will  generally
accept.it  as  true  without  questioning  its  merits.

Again,  as  already  remarked,  such  is  the  constitution  of  the
human  mind  that,  wherever  a  fact  is  stated,  and  nothing  is
set  off  against  it,  it  will  be  believed.  This  is  the  funda-
mental principle  of  legal  testimony.  Perhaps  it  is  well  that
it  is  so.  But  the  mind  seldom  makes  an  effort  of  its  own  to
see  whether  there  exists  any  such  offset,  either  intrinsic  or
extrinsic.

This  is  often  very  unfortunate  for  truth.  For  frequently,
by  a  little  reflection,  it  might  be  discovered  that  a  statement
is  unreasonable ;  or,  by  a  little  investigation,  it  might  be
found  to  be  false.     And  thus  error  accumulates.     Our  heads

428  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

are  full  of  errors,  poured  into  our  ears  and  received  on  the
faith  of  the  utterer,  or  because  not  contradicted,  or,  many
times,  on  a  faith  which  is  wholly  blind  and  unsupported.

Such  is  the  present  condition  of  human  opinions.  Min-
gled and  confused  together,  truth  and  error  are  stored  away
in  the  mind,  to  be  called  out,  whenever  occasion  arises,
for  the  formation  of  resolutions  and  the  government  of  ac-
tions.

Subjective  Influences. — We  have  seen  that  opinions  are
the  result  of  circumstances,  but  these  are  not  confined  to  the
immediate  contact  of  external  objects  upon  the  senses  thus
far  considered.  True,  without  such  contact  there  could  be
no  ideas.  Their  existence  primarily  depends  upon  this  con-
tact. But  the  nature  and  quality  of  these  ideas,  or  opinions,
are  in  great  part  determined  and  controlled  by  other  and
secondary  influences.  They  depend  much  upon  the  constitu-
tion of  the  mind  which  apprehends,  and  not  altogether  upon
the  objects  apprehended.  This  is  a  very  obvious  and  a  very
important  distinction.  We  have  again  here,  as  in  all  mental
operations,  the  subjective  in  connection  with  the  objective.
The  idea  will  depend  not  only  upon  the  external  object,  but
also  upon  peculiarities  of  mind.  It  is  well  known  that  differ-
ent minds  will  acquire  different  opinions  under  the  same  cir-
cumstances. True,  it  is  impossible  to  make  the  external  cir-
cumstances in  all  respects  the  same.  Still,  they  may  be  so
nearly  identical  that,  were  there  no  other  factors,  both  minds
would  dediice  therefrom  the  same  conclusion.  But  we  find
that  in  such  cases  we  have  often  been  mistaken ;  that,  in  cases
where  no  one  could  detect  the  least  difference  in  the  circum-
stances, not  only  different  but  opposite  opinions  have  been
formed  in  different  minds.  We  discover,  therefore,  that  here
is  an  element  which  we  must  not  ignore ;  that  opinions,  so
far  as  their  nature  and  quality  are  concerned,  are  as  much
subject  to  internal  as  to  external  influences,  to  subjective  as  to
objective  impressions.  This  depends  upon  a  variety  of  con-
siderations :  first,  upon  the  constitution  of  the  system,  upon

SUBJECTIVE  INFLUENCES— ANTE-NATAL.  429

the  pt.ato  of  physical  health,  upon  the  degree  of  sensitiveness
of  the  nerves  and  senses,  upon  the  degree  of  organization  of
the  mind  as  a  whole,  upon  the  sex,  the  nationality,  etc. ;  in
the  second  place,  it  is  due  to  those  subtile  influences  which
were  preparing  the  way  for  the  existing  peculiarities  of  con-
stitution, long  before  the  individual  had  an  existence.  In  a
word,  the  circumstances  which  give  rise  to  an  opinion  are  of
two  kinds — ante-natal  and  post-natal.  The  former,  though
of  much  less  importance  and  wholly  subjective,  are  never-
theless necessary  to  be  taken  into  the  account.  The  latter
are  most  influential,  and  may  be  subdivided,  as  has  been  said,
into  those  which  are  subjective,  and  depend  upon  the  mind
as  molded  by  previous  education,  and  those  which  are  ob-
jective, and  consist  in  the  contact  of  the  external  world  with
the  senses.

With  regard  to  the  true  influence  of  ante-natal  circum-
stances, there  may  be  differences  of  opinion.  It  is  a  diffi-
cult matter  to  decide  in  how  far  ideas  and  thoughts  are  due
to  hereditary  influences,  but  all  admit  that,  to  a  greater  or
less  extent,  they  are  dependent  upon  these  causes.  It  is
well  known  to  the  medical  profession  and  to  almost  every
body  that  the  characteristics  of  our  physical  systems,  their
form,  size,  and  proportions,  their  diseases,  deformities,  and
constitutional  peculiarities,  are  in  a  great  degree  hereditary,
and  are  derived  not  only  directly  from  parents,  but  from
remote  ancestors.  These  characteristics  may  disappear  en-
triely  for  several  generations,  and  again  reappear  (atavism),
or  they  may  be  traced  back  through  every  stage,  or  degree,
of  a  long  lineage.  All  are  familiar  with  this  fact,  and  nearly
every  person  carries  in  his  own  constitution  evidences  of  it
which  he  can  not  ignore.  If  the  mind  is  but  a  property  of
the  physical  system,  it  should  follow  that  it  too  must  derive
characteristics  and  peculiarities  from  ante-natal  circumstances.

But  fortunately  we  are  not  confined  to  a  priori  grounds.
The  phenomena  of  mind  tending  to  establish  this  view  are
scarcely  less  patent  than  those  observable  in  the  body.

430  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

We  will  next  consider  the  other  branch  of  subjective  in-
fluences which  tend  to  mold  and  modify  human  opinions,
viz.,  those  implanted  in  the  constitution  of  the  mind  after
birth.

When  a  person  finds  himself  in  the  possession  of  an  opin-
ion on  any  subject,  he  may  be  sure  that  it  is  not  altogether
owing  to  the  mere  appeal  which  the  objects  of  that  opinion
have  made  to  his  senses.  It  will  always  in  some  measure  be
due  to  the  condition  of  the  senses  themselves.  Aside  from
the  peculiar  bias  which  the  senses,  the  mind,  and  the  whole
constitution  may  have  received  from  ante-natal  influences,
there  are  also  many  distinguishing  qualities  which  have
been  acquired  since  birth.  These  qualities  are  of  two  kinds :
first,  those  affecting  the  power,  or  capacity,  of  the  mind ;  and,
second,  those  affecting  its  mode  of  apprehending.  The
first  class  simply  determine  whether  an  opinion  shall  exist,
whether  it  can  be  entertained,  whether  the  mind  is  capable
of  receiving  it.  We  of  this  day  hold  thousands  of  opinions
which  the  ancients  did  not  and  which  other  races  do  not
hold,  simply  because  we  possess  the  intellectual  capacity  to
comprehend  them.  For  the  same  reason  some  men  have
ideas  that  others  never  get  a  glimpse  of,  for  want  solely  of
the  power  of  apprehending  them.  Where  the  circumstances
are  the  same  the  objects  of  the  conceptions  are  constantly
appealing  to  the  senses  of  both,  but  the  first  class  receive
while  the  second  do  not,  owing  to  incapacity.  But,  by  the
incapacity  here  mentioned,  I  do  not  wish  to  imply  a  de-
ficiency of  intellect.  I  believe,  on  the  contrary,  that  almost
every  person  is  competent  to  comprehend  the  most  impor-
tant truths  of  nature  {infra,  p.  570).  The  incapacity  is  in  the
character  given  to  the  mind  by  education  or  want  of  educa-
tion. These  thoughts  can  not  enter,  not  because  there  is
no  room  for  them,  but  because  there  is  no  gate  by  which
they  can  be  admitted.  The  avenues  are  all  closed.  Other
less  important  matter,  often  the  merest  rubbish,  is  blocking
up  the  gangways.      The  senses,  like  gate-keepers,  will  not

SUBJECTIVE  INFLUENCES— POST-NATAL.  431

listen  to  them ;  they  are  occupied  by  other  things ;  they
will  not  be  persuaded  to  give  their  attention,  or  perhaps  the
din  of  other  applicants  drowns  the  voice  of  Nature,  and  they
never  hear  her  appeals.

The  great  struggle  which  the  human  race,  in  common
with  every  other  species,  has  had  to  make  for  its  existence,
has  kept  down  every  extraneous  influence.  The  strife  for
food,  clothing,  and  shelter  has  swallowed  up  all  other  con-
siderations. Man's  constant  warfare  against  the  enemies,
drawn  down  upon  him  by  his  own  error,  has  ever  stood  in
his  way  whenever  he  has  aspired  to  look  upward  for  an
inspiration.  So  long  as  man  regarded  the  sun  as  a  great
fire-god,  with  power  and  will  to  destroy  all  who  failed  to
do  him  homage,  there  was  no  hope  of  his  pausing  to  in-
vestigate the  nature  and  constitution  of  that  celestial  body.
The  proud  thoughts  which  now  fill  us  when  we  contem-
plate it  were  therefore  denied  him,  and  those  of  cring-
ing terror  took  their  place.  So  long  as  he  is  compelled  to
toil  from  morning  till  night  to  obtain  sufficient  to  eat  and
to  wear,  he  can  not  stop  to  ponder  over  deep  and  weighty
themes  of  science  or  philosophy,  much  less  can  he  find  time
to  read,  study,  and  investigate,  whereby  alone  his  mind  can
be.  awakened.  So  long  as  human  education  is  confined  to
pure  mathematics  and  the  "  dead  languages,"  it  can  not  be
expected  that  any  really  important  thoughts  or  any  settled
convictions  on  vital  subjects  will  be  stored  up  in  the  mind.
The  mind  is  as  absolutely  incapacitated  in  this  way  for  enter-
taining broad  or  useful  ideas  as  if  it  were  incompetent  to
comprehend  them,  although  it  may  have  proved  itself  capa-
ble of  solving  the  most  difficult  problems  or  of  mastering  the
most  abstruse  philosophical  intricacies.

This  first  class  of  influences,  therefore,  determines  the
quantity,  as  it  were,  of  the  ideas,  or  thoughts,  which  a  person
will  entertain.  Such  influences  will  answer  the  question
whether  he  knows  any  thing  about  the  subject  of  a  thought.
This  will  depend  upon  the  amount  and  character  of  the

432  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

instruction  or  experience  lie  lias  received.  If  he  has  been
allowed  to  grow  up  without  any  instruction,  and  compelled
to  labor  as  soon  as  old  enough  to  do  so,  no  matter  how  bright
may  be  his  genius,  or  how  great  his  talents,  he  will  entertain
none  but  ordinary  ideas.  If  he  receive  a  thorough  and  lib-
eral education,  though  his  talents  be  moderate,  he  will  be  in
possession  of  enlarged  views,  and  will  hold  intelligent  opin-
ions on  many  subjects  of  importance.

The  second  class  of  mental  qualities  implanted  by  educa-
tion and  experience,  and  which  determine  the  quality  of
opinions  by  affecting  the  mode  of  apprehension,  is  not  less
important  than  that  just  considered.  Here  we  suppose
to  exist  two  minds,  differently  constituted  in  this  respect,
surrounded  by  the  same  external  objects,  and  influenced  by
the  same  circumstances.  Two  of  these  objects  appeal  to  the
senses  of  both  these  persons  precisely  alike,  yet,  in  conse-
quence of  these  differences  of  constitution  in  the  two  minds,
in  the  senses  of  the  two  persons,  one  declares  them  to  agree,
the  other  declares  them  to  disagree.  They  are  qualities
which  both  are  equally  capable  of  apprehending,  but  one
views  them  from  one  stand-point,  and  the  other  from  another.
It  is  evident  that  either  one  or  both  must  be  wrong.  As  one
views  them,  two  terms  agree,  and  the  resulting  proposition,
expressing  his  judgment,  is  aflBrmative.  As  the  other  views
them,  the  same  terms  disagree,  and  his  judgment  is  negative.
Of  course,  there  must  be  some  mistake  in  the  process  on  the
part  of  one  or  both.  But  it  is  due  to  defects  in  the  mind  or
in  the  organs  of  sense.  The  qualities  in  question,  as  per-
ceived in  the  two  objects,  are  cognized  by  both  minds.  The
difference  of  opinion  arises  only  upon  the  question  of  their
identity.  Is  it  one  quality  inhering  in  both  objects,  or  are
there  two  distinct  qualities?  These  are  questions  for  the
intellect.  The  answer  depends,  not  upon  the  truth  of  the
matter  itself,  but  upon  the  manner  in  which  it  appears  to  the
mind.  If  both  minds  were  perfect,  of  course  there  could  be
but  one  opinion,  and  that  in  harmony  with  the  truth.     It

QUANTITY  VS.  QUALITY.  433

therefore  resolves  itself,  after  all,  into  a  question  of  capacity
of  tlie  mind.  But  the  mental  incapacity  which  causes  one
or  both  to  form  a  wrong  opinion  respecting  qualities  which
they  actually  have  apprehended  is  a  very  different  thing  from
that  incapacity  which  renders  them  incapable  of  detecting
the  quality  at  all,  and  therefore,  of  course,  having  no  opinion
about  it,  as  in  the  last  case  considered.  The  present  case
depends  upon  the  quality  of  the  mind  as  serving  to  form  a
judgment  upon  things  known,  and  not  upon  the  power  of
the  mind  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  things  upon  which
to  form  such  judgment.

Here,  too,  much  depends  upon  the  education  and  pre-
vious experience  as  tending  to  mold  and  fashion  the  mind
itself.  A  certain  course  of  education  in  childhood,  contin-
ued on  to  manhood,  presenting  one  side  only  of  a  general
idea  constantly  to  the  mind  and  completely  shutting  out  the
other,  will  cause  all  questions  relating  at  all  to  that  idea  to  be
answered  uniformly  in  one  way.  The  mind  has  a  bias  that
way.  It  is  so  fashioned  that  it  is  incapable  of  giving  any
weight  to  the  other  view  of  the  proposition.  It  is  not  be-
cause the  intellect  is  itself  weak  or  imbecile,  neither  is  it
because  the  subject  has  never  been  presented  to  the  mind.
It  is  solely  in  consequence  of  the  peculiar  quality  which  the
mind  has  received  from  education  which  incapacitates  it  to
take  more  than  one  view  of  the  matter  in  question.

The  extent  of  the  influence  of  education,  or  the  want  of
it,  in  affecting  human  opinions,  is  not  generally,  I  think,  fully
appreciated.  The  want  of  sound  education  is  always  made
up  by  a  mass  of  unimportant  and  often  injurious  beliefs.
The  mind  will  possess  about  the  same  number  of  ideas.
Education  determines  their  depth,  their  value,  and  their  cor-
rectness. Surrounded,  as  the  reader  probably  is,  by  all  the
influences  of  civilization,  accustomed  to  hearing  intelligent
conversation,  to  reading  a  variety  of  books  and  current  liter-
ature, and  having  early  implanted  in  his  mind  the  founda-
tion for  a  large  fund  of  knowledge,  it  will  be  difficult  for

434  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

him  to  imagine  the  abject  poverty  of  ideas  into  which  the
great  mass  of  the  human  race  are  sunk.

Let  him  suppose  for  a  moment  one  source  of  his  informa-
tion to  have  been  always  withheld — the  art  of  reading.  Sup-
pose he  could  not  read,  did  not  know  one  letter  from  an-
other. How  much  would  he  know  ?  What  would  now  be
the  character  of  his  thoughts  ?  How  much  of  his  present
knowledge  has  been  derived  either  directly  or  indirectly
from  reading?  For  it  is  not  simply  what  he  has  himself
read.  If  he  had  never  read  any  thing,  three  fourths  of  the
ideas  derived  from  other  sources  would  have  been  to  him
unintelligible,  and  he  would  never  have  comprehended  them.
Hence  with  respect  to  all  this  his  mind  would  have  been  a
total  blank.  And  there  are  thousands  among  us  in  this  con-
dition. But  there  are  thousands  more,  viz.,  savage  races,  in
a  far  lower  condition.

Again,  special  education  powerfully  affects  the  constitu-
tion of  the  mind,  rendering  it  incapable  of  entertaining  cer-
tain opinions.  As  already  remarked,  the  mass  of  our  race
never  stop  to  question  what  they  are  taught  to  be  true.
They  receive  it  upon  the  authority  of  the  teacher,  without
presuming  that  he  could  be  in  error.  And  it  makes  no
difference  how  improbable  or  unreasonable  a  doctrine  may
be.  In  this  respect  the  human  race  presents  a  truly  won-
derful spectacle.  We  find  men  believing  every  thing.  The
most  irrational,  contradictory,  and  absurd  propositions  are
believed,  in  the  greatest  sincerity,  by  whole  nations.  It  does
not  seem  possible,  if  one  were  to  try  the  experiment,  to  carry
the  matter  further  than  it  has  actually  gone.

There  are  certain  general  beliefs,  usages,  institutions,  and
principles  which  have  an  extensive  scope,  and  influence  vast
multitudes  of  people,  extending  over  great  areas  of  territory
and  long  periods  of  time,  fixing  the  mental  constitution,  and
giving  it  a  permanent  and  powerful  bias  in  a  particular  di-
rection, so  as  to  render  it  proof  against  all  contrary  influences.
These  vast  secular  opinions  are  no  more  likely  to  be  true

OBJECTIVE  INFLUENCES.  435

than  the  minor  notions  to  which  I  have  referred.  It  is  a
great  mistake  to  suppose  that  a  custom,  usage,  or  institution
is  a  useful  one  because  it  has  come  down  from  remote  ages,
or  that  a  maxim  or  proposition  is  true  because  whole  nations,
even  the  most  civilized,  have  from  time  immemorial  accepted
it.  '^O  TTciaL  BoKCL  TOVTO  elval  ^afiev  is  a  maxim  which  history
has  disproved.

It  is  not  true  that,  if  the  custom  were  deleterious,  or  the
maxim  unsound,  the  experience  of  so  many  people  for  so
many  ages  would  have  discovered  it.  This  reasoning  ought
to  be  good,  but  unfortunately  it  is  not.

There  are  anterior  considerations  based  on  the  constitu-
tion of  the  human  mind  which  in  most  cases  not  only  destroy
but  reverse  the  entire  reasoning.  In  point  of  fact,  the  worst
customs,  the  most  pernicious  institutions,  and  the  falsest
maxims  are  the  oldest  and  the  most  universal,  and  these  con-
tinue to  bias  the  judgment  and  derange  the  intellect  of  all
within  the  reach  of  their  influence.

Thus  much  for  those  subjective  post-natal  influences
which  predetermine  the  quality  of  an  opinion  under  given
external  circumstances,  and  this  completes  the  consideration
of  subjective,  or  constitutional,  conditions  as  affecting  human
opinions.

Objective  Influences. — It  remains  to  consider  the  object-
ive conditions,  or  circumstances,  that  is,  the  influence  of  the
actual  contact  of  the  senses  with  external  objects  or  their
qualities.  Rising  from  technical  and  exact  into  general  and
popular  language,  we  may  denominate  this  influence,  taken
in  all  its  bearings,  human  experience.  The  theory  of  the
artificial  formation  of  opinions  by  the  method  of  exclusion
has  already  been  stated  {supra,  p.  422),  and  we  have  on^y  to
glance  at  the  general  effect.

The  intellect,  ever  active  and  busy,  is  constantly  compar-
ing the  impressions  and  conceptions  which  it  receives  through
the  senses.  Assuming  that  the  senses  are  sufficiently  refined
to  perceive  the  contact  of  these  external  objects,  and  also  that

436  OPINION".— TERTIARY  MEANS.

the  mind  is  affected  with  certain  powers  and  dispositions  by
which,  upon  comparison,  it  forms  a  certain  judgment  re-
specting them,  we  have  all  the  essentials  to  make  up  this
experience.  In  thus  comparing  the  conceptions  momentarily
formed  in  the  mind,  a  mass  of  judgments,  affirmative  or  neg-
ative, are  caused  to  exist.  Each  such  judgment  constitutes
in  its  turn  a  new  element  of  mental  action  in  the  shghtly
different  form  of  ratiocination,  the  result  of  which  is  always
another  judgment  in  the  form  of  a  conclusion  from  the  pre-
ceding, and  this  may  again  be  similarly  employed,  and  so  on.
These  judgments,  from  whatever  source  derived,  are  our
opinions.  They  may  be  true  or  false,  according  to  either,
first,  the  reliability  of  the  senses  and  the  mind  in  the  re-
spective processes  of  judging  the  object  by  the  sensation,
and  the  agreement  or  disagreement  when  two  objects  are
compared  ;  or,  second,  the  clearness  and  forcibleness  of  the
contact.  For,  if  the  senses  be  too  blunt  for  the  experience,
the  latter  will  be  defective,  or,  if  the  mind  be  too  dull  to
make  a  just  comparison,  the  judgment  will  be  erroneous.
And,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  experience  be  confused  and
neutralized  by  a  mass  of  contemporarj'  contacts,  its  effect
will  be  so  far  lost  as  to  render  it  unreliable,  or,  if  it  be
too  feeble  sufficiently  to  impress  the  nerve  of  sense,  the
conception  will  be  correspondingly  weak,  fleeting,  and  un-
certain.

Since,  now,  it  is  the  chief  requisite  of  an  opinion  that  it
be  correct,  it  is  important,  in  seeking  to  create  one,  that  these
principles  should  be  understood.  Kext  after  the  estabh'sh-
ing  of  that  keen  and  refined  state  of  the  senses  and  tlie  mind
necessary  to  render  the  most  dehcate  contacts  and  influences
cognizable,  and  distinctly  available  to  the  mind  in  forming
judgments,  which  is  the  province  of  early  education  and
mental  discipline,  it  is  most  necessary  to  bring  the  proper
influence  in  a  distinct  and  unmixed  condition  and  with  suffi-
cient force  to  bear  upon  the  sense  to  be  affected.  An  opin-
ion based  upon  such  materials  can  not  fail  to  be  true  and

MANUFACTURE  OF  OPINION.  437

distinct.  Vague,  unsettled  notions  are  about  as  bad  when
true  as  actual  errors.*  They  can  not  result  in  resolute
effort.

Again,  a  judgment  may  be  important  or  unimportant,
according  as  the  experiences  upon  which  it  is  founded  are
made  by  valuable  or  by  worthless  causes.  Whatever  be  the
value  of  the  external  influence,  it  will  affect  the  sense  accord-
ing to  its  force,  and,  in  the  absence  of  useful  impressions,  the
intellect  will  seize  upon  worthless  ones,  and  will  go  on  work
ing  them  up  into  conceptions,  judgments,  and  conclusions —
will  manufacture  thoughts,  ideas,  opinions  out  of  them —
though  when  completed  they  are  not  of  the  least  value.
Furthermore,  not  only  will  the  mind  work  up  such  material
into  opinions,  but  those  opinions,  like  all  others,  will  beget
desires,  and  those  desires  will  prompt  actions,  so  that  a  whole
life  may  be  devoted  to  useless  frivolities  and  trifles.f  There
exists  in  society  an  illustration  of  this  truth,  which  is  so  clear
and  universally  observable  that  I  may  be  pardoned  for  ad-
ducing it.  It  is  often  remarked  that  women  are,  as  a  rule,
more  frivolous  and  trifling  than  men.  Being  the  truth,  it
may  as  well  be  spoken,  and  the  explanation  will  prove  a  suffi-
cient vindication  of  the  sex ;  for  it  will  be  found  that  their
ideas  are  exactly  as  much  less  important  than  those  of  men
as  their  experiences  are  less  useful.  Where  the  only  objects
with  which  woman  comes  in  contact  are  those  of  the  kitchen,
the  nursery,  the  drawing-room,  and  the  wardrobe,  how  shall
she  be  expected  to  have  broad  ideas  of  life,  the  world,  and

*  "  Citius  emergit  Veritas  ex  errore  quam  ex  confusione  "  ("  Novum  Orga-
num,"  lib.  ii,  aph.  xx,  "  Works,"  vol.  i,  p.  390).

\  See  Herbert  Spencer  in  "  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  pp.  90,  91.  "  Men  think  under
the  limitations  of  their  times  both  as  regards  the  extent  of  knowledge  and  the
intellectual  processes  to  which  they  are  habituated.  They  reason  as  they  can
on  such  materials  as  they  have.  .  .  .  The  human  mind  is  essentially  active,  and
will  malce  theories ;  and  the  less  its  knowledge  the  feebler  are  the  restraints
of  reason  and  the  bolder  the  spirit  of  speculation"  (Flammarion,  "History  of
the  Heavens,"  in  "Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  x  (March,  18'7'7),  p.  543  [Cf.
"Histoire  du  ciel,"  Paris,  1872,  p.  56]).

438  OPINION.— TERTIAEY  MEANS.

the  universe?  Her  ideas  are  perfectly  natural  and  legiti-
mate. She  has  seen  and  handled  culinary  utensils,  china,
and  silver-ware,  and  she  has  an  idea  of  them.  In  the  absence
of  other  ideas,  she  will  think  about  them,  talk  about  them,
have  her  whole  mind  absorbed  with  them.  The  mind  must
act,  and  this  is  all  the  material  it  has  to  act  upon.  It  is  the
same  of  dress ;  her  soul  is  engrossed  in  dress,  since  it  is  her
most  important  object  of  experience.  If  you  wish  to  make
her  forsake  it,  you  must  give  her  something  else  to  think  of.
Give  woman  an  interest  in  great  subjects,  and  she  will  soon
abandon  small  ones.  If  she  knew  as  much  about  the  great
men  of  history  or  of  her  own  age  as  she  does  about  her
neighbors,  she  would  cease  to  talk  about  the  latter  and  talk
about  the  former.  Teach  her  science,  philosophy,  law,  poli-
tics, and  you  will  do  much  to  put  an  end  to  gossip,  slander,
and  fashion-worship.

Illustrations  of  this  kind  might  be  multiplied.  Apply
the  same  principle  to  communities.  Their  breadth  and  depth
of  ideas  will  correspond  to  their  experiences.  Take  one
which  is  shut  out  from  all  communication  with  the  outside
world,  away  from  railroads  or  telegraph-lines,  deprived  of
schools,  manufactories,  and  other  live  enterprises — the  mem-
bers of  it  will  be  found  to  have  correspondingly  circum-
scribed ideas.  Their  town  will  appear  to  them  the  whole
world.  They  will  be  as  much  interested  in  the  construction
of  a  foot-bridge  as  most  of  us  are  in  that  of  a  transconti-
nental railroad.  They  will  be  as  profoundly  moved  by  the
affairs  of  a  borough  as  other  people  are  by  those  of  a  nation.*
They  can  think  only  about  those  things  of  which  they  know
something.  But  they  have  only  the  faintest  conception  that
a  nation  exists,  and  perhaps  may  have  never  heard  of  the
Old  World.  I  have  seen  communities  in  the  United  States
in  about  this  condition.     In  fact,  throughout  the  Southern

*  "  Yo  think  the  rustic  cackle  of  your  boui^
The  murmur  of  the  world."

(Temiyson,  "  Idyls  of  the  King— Enid.")

MANUFACTURE  OF  OPINION.  439

States,  before  the  war  of  1861,  the  poorer  classes  generally
approximated  very  closely  to  this  condition.  Their  State
was  the  highest  power  they  could  be  made  to  recognize,  and
many  of  them  would  doubtless  have  been  willing  to  fight  for
it  as  for  their  country  if  told  that  a  foreign  power  was  likely
to  invade  it.  It  was  my  experience,  on  one  occasion  during
that  struggle,  to  fall  into  such  a  community  not  a  hundred
miles  from  the  national  capital,  whose  condition  was  so  be-
nighted that  there  was  but  one  person  among  them,  and  that
a  young  woman,  who  could  tell  the  value  of  a  bank-note.
And  then  I  thought  how  preposterous  it  was  to  imagine  such
beings  capable  of  committing  treason  against  a  government
about  which  they  knew  less  than  some  children  at  five  years
of  age !  But  these  are  segregated  cases  in  the  midst  of  a  gen-
erally intelligent  people.  The  same  principle  may  be  applied
to  nations  and  races.  The  Shilooks  of  the  upper  Nile  differ
immeasurably  from  the  enlightened  nations  of  Europe  and
America,  but  not  more  than  their  circumstances  differ.  If
we  could  imagine  their  conditions  in  every  respect  reversed,
we  might  be  sure  that  their  ideas,  thoughts,  and  characters
would  be  also  reversed.  The  European  has  the  advantage
of  civilized  culture  and  education,  of  high  qualities  inherited
from  his  ancestors,  of  the  written  history  of  his  race  and
other  races  for  thousands  of  years,  of  communication  and
intercourse  with  all  the  world,  of  science,  art,  and  literature,
of  libraries,  newspapers,  magazines.  He  is  surrounded  by
and  forms  a  part  of  the  past  and  the  present.  The  loftiest
ideas  and  the  greatest  truths  are  unconsciously  pouring  into
his  mind.  In  fact,  he  is  the  product  of  the  combined  ele-
ments and  influences  of  a  broad  and  advanced  civilization.
The  Shilook,  on  the  contrary,  is  confined  to  the  savage  wilds
of  interior  Africa.  His  language  is  barely  capable  of  ex-
pressing the  coarsest  desires  ;  literature  is  unknown,  as  is  all
symbolic  communication.  His  history  is  confined  to  his
tribe,  and  is  a  mere  tradition,  enlarging  and  evaporating
into  a  myth  as  it  recedes  into  the  past.     He  has  no  art,  not

440  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

even  that  of  furnishing  clothing  for  his  body,  and  indeed  he
does  not  need  it.  Climate,  soil,  vegetation,  all  the  conditions
of  nature,  conspire  to  relieve  him  of  the  necessity  of  courting
experience.  All  his  ideas  beyond  his  immediate  physical
wants  are  mere  conjectures  or  superstitions.  In  a  word,  his
ideas  and  opinions  correspond  absolutely  with  his  experiences.

And  this  is  the  inflexible  rule.  In  fact,  it  can  not  be
otherwise,  since  it  is  these  latter  upon  which  all  ideas  are
based,  and  without  which  no  ideas  could  exist.  Hence,  the
only  possible  way  to  enlarge  the  sphere  of  man's  thoughts
is  to  force  a  higher,  more  useful,  and  more  valuable  class  of
experiences  upon  him.  In  other  words,  the  circumstances
which  are  to  produce  his  opinions  must  be  carefully  selected^
varied,  and  dictated  by  those  who  are  interested  in  having
him  entertain  correct  and  useful  opinions.  And  this  can  be
done.  It  is  a  false  idea  that  men's  opinions  come  by  chance
and  at  random.  They  come  when  they  are  caused,  and  they
are  just  what  they  are  made  to  be.  They  obey  a  law  like
all  other  natural  phenomena,  and  that  law  may  be  known.
The  laws  of  the  mind  may  just  as  well  be  reduced  to  a  sci-
ence and  put  into  practical  use  as  the  laws  of  pneumatics  or
of  hydrostatics.

Metaphysics  has  long  been  regarded  as  a  sort  of  idle
pastime,  a  branch  of  speculative  philosophy,  devised  for  the
benefit  of  the  lovers  of  the  abstruse  and  the  ideal  when  they
have  nothing  useful  to  employ  their  minds  about,  or  perhaps
as  a  means  of  mental  discipline  for  the  advanced  student.
And  indeed  it  has  well  merited  this  position  among  the
various  branches  of  education.  It  has,  in  fact,  been  what  it
has  been  called,  "  a  bundle  of  theories."  But  psychology,
which  is  the  modern  name  of  metaphysics,  studied  as  a  true
science,  and  for  the  same  purpose  that  other  sciences  are
studied,  viz.,  with  a  view  to  its  application  in  ways  that  will
advance  human  welfare,  may  be  regarded  as  the  basis  upon
which  sociology  must  immediately  rest,  since,  when  properly
understood,  it  reveals  to  man  the  course  he  must  pursue  in

ETHICAL  OPINIONS.  441

order  to  lay  the  foundation  in  just  and  enlarged  ideas  for
both  moral  conduct  and  progressive  action.  Useful  ideas
and  opinions,  like  all  other  useful  things,  must  be  to  a  great
.  extent  artificial ;  they  must  be  manufactured  before  they
will  lose  their  present  characteristics  of  unavailable  "raw
material."

Ethical  and  Dynamic  Opinions.
To  the  two  principal  classes  of  deliberative,  or  ideo-motor,
actions,  viz.,  ethical  actions  and  dynamic  actions,  correspond
two  general  classes  of  ideas  and  opinions.  These  mental
states  underlie,  and  are  the  immediate  causal  antecedents  of,
the  bodily  acts.  It  therefore  does  no  violence  to  language
to  apply  the  same  names  to  the  motives  as  to  the  actions
themselves.  Men  entertain  ethical  sentiments  or  moral  ideas.
They  also  hold  progressive  views.  Ethical  opinions  cause
ethical  actions,  and  dynamic  opinions  cause  dynamic  actions.
In  the  synthetic  treatment  here  made  of  the  subject,  it  was
necessary  to  consider  the  chronologically  later  process  first,
but  the  logical  dependence  and  definite  order  remain  undis-
turbed. We  have  now  to  look  more  closely  into  the  cona-
tive  effects  of  opinions,  and  are  left  no  choice  but  to  study
them  in  their  two  leading  aspects,  the  ethical  and  the  dy-
namic.

ETHICAL   opinions.

Ethical  opinions  consist  of  intellectual  judgments  re-
specting the  effects  of  actions  upon  the  happiness  of  self  or
others.  They  are  originally  in  the  nature  of  predictions.
The  effect  must  follow  the  act.  But  in  a  large  proportion  of
the  cases  the  phenomenon  has  occurred  so  often  and  its  effect
proved  so  uniform  that  laws  have  been  formulated  based
upon  this  uniform  sequence.  These  laws,  taken  together,
constitute  the  moral  code  of  society.  In  so  far,  the  process
is  a  strictly  scientific  one.  But  it  is  found  that  the  phenom-
ena thus  capable  of  certain  prediction  are  very  restricted.
They  do  not  extend  beyond  the  most  simple  cases.    Attempts

442  OPINIOX.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

to  generalize  moral  laws  have  usually  carried  them  far  beyond
the  condition  of  reliability  or  universality.  The  broadest
successful  generalization  yet  made  is  probably  that  of  Christ,
that  men  should  do  to  others  as  they  would  wish  to  have
others  do  to  them,  which  was  simply  an  improvement  upon
the  Confucian  rule,  taught  also  by  Hillel,  and  probably  by
Gamaliel,  of  whom  Christ  took  lessons  in  Hebrew  philoso-
phy, the  former  of  whom  enunciated  the  same  law  in  the
negative  form  (vol.  i,  p.  10).

Ethical  laws,  for  peculiar  reasons  residing  in  their  excep-
tional application,  have  generally  been  laid  down  in  the  im-
perative instead  of  the  indicative  form.  The  early  attempt,
referred  to  in  a  previous  chapter  {supra,  p.  283),  to  affiliate
morals  to  religion,  with  the  real  object  of  lending  weight
to  the  latter,  caused  ethical  investigators  to  present  the  results
of  their  researches  in  the  form  of  commands  of  superior  be-
ings, and  this  practice  has  continued  even  down  to  the  ethical
writings  of  modern  times.  This  dogmatic  form  of  publica-
tion, whatever  may  have  been  its  superiority  in  former  ages,
doubtless  tends  at  the  present  time  to  render  ethical  subjects
repugnant  to  liberal  minds ;  and  moral-science  writers  would
do  a  great  service  to  the  cause  of  morality  if  they  would  re-
vise the  entire  code,  and  present  it  in  the  form  of  simple
propositions,  supported  by  the  real  proofs  of  their  objective
truth.

In  the  confusion  referred  to  of  religion  with  ethics,  it  is
not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  line  between  moral  doctrine
and  religious  dogma  should  fail  to  be  drawn,  and  that,
as  religious  institutions  changed,  and  the  rules  enforcing
them  became  gradually  eliminated  from  the  moral  code,  cer-
tain of  the  least  objectionable  ones  should  cling  to  it,  and
be,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  confounded  with  truly  moral
rules.  A  remarkable  exemplification  of  this  tendency  is  to
be  found  in  the  so-called  "  Ten  Commandments,"  or  Hebrew
decalogue.  These  ten  injunctions  are  commonly  supposed
to  embody  all  the  fundamental  moral  precepts.     They  are

CONFUSION  OF  MORALS  WITH  RELIGION.         443

thought  of  froni  their  moral  rather  than  from  their  religious
aspect,  and  to  violate  any  of  them  is  regarded  as  committing
a  moral  sin.  But,  if  we  examine  them  closely,  we  shall  see
that  only  six  of  them  possess  any  etliical  character  at  all —
and  one  of  these,  the  tenth,  except  in  so  far  as  it  merely  re-
iterates the  substance  of  the  seventh  and  eighth,  is  a  hrutum
fulmen^  being  directed  against  a  mental  state  instead  of  a
form  of  action.  The  first  four  are  purely  religious,  and  lia-
ble to  be  different  in  different  religions.  Morality  certainly
has  nothing  to  do  with  monotheism  or  idolatry,  which  are
the  subjects  of  the  first  two.  The  third  forbids  the  vain  use
of  the  name  of  the  particular  deity  worshiped  by  the  He-
brews ;  while  the  fourth  enforces  the  observance  of  the  He-
brew Sabbath,  a  ceremony  of  that  nation  alone.  The  fifth
enjoins  filial  piety,  which  is  the  primary  principle  of  Confu-
cianism. Right  and  proper  within  certain  limits,  it  is  cer-
tainly carried  to  damaging  extremes  in  China,  and  probably
in  many  other  countries.

The  appearance  of  this  precept  in  so  many  authoritative
moral  codes  has  doubtless  done  much  to  render  the  popular
understanding  of  the  reciprocal  relations  of  parents  and  chil-
dren confused  and  illogical.  Children  are  usually  brought
into  thfe  world  through  an  act  performed  purely  for  the
gratification  of  a  sensual  desire  on  the  part  of  the  parents,
and  without  any  thought  whatever  of  the  consequences.
Under  such  circumstances  the  child  could  be  under  no
possible  obligation  to  the  parents  for  any  supposed  sacri-
fice. The  child  is  protected,  nourished,  and  cared  for  by
the  parents  through  the  operation  of  another  slightly  more
derivative  instinct,  but  not  so  derivative  but  that  it  is
found  in  nearly  all  vertebrates  and  many  invertebrates.
If  the  performance  of  such  acts  requires  a  sacrifice,  this
is  more  than  offset  by  the  pleasure  of  gratifying  this  in-
stinct. However  valuable  the  life  of  a  man  may  be,  he
can  in  no  way  be  under  any  special  obligation  to  those  who,
in  obedience  to  blind  natural  forces,  have  been  impelled  to

444  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

bring  him  into  the  world  and  preserve  him  to  the  age  of
self-dependence.  A  still  greater  inconsistency  is  often  found
in  cases  where  those  who  believe  most  strongly  in  the  debt
of  filial  gratitude  to  parents  hold  at  the  same  time  that  life
brings  greater  evil  than  good.  If  such  were  the  case,  well
might  we  weep  at  births  and  laugh  at  funerals.  It  undoubt-
edly is  the  case  to  a  great  extent,  for  every  suicide  demon-
strates, in  the  most  conclusive  manner,  that  the  life  of  the
suicide  was  a  grievous  burden ;  and  by  no  means  all  whose
lives  are  equally  unsatisfactory  would  reason  out  a  remedy
for  the  excess  of  evil,  and  balance  their  account  of  good
and  ill  with  sufficient  accuracy  to  perceive  that  they  were
living  at  a  loss.  The  mass  of  those  of  whom  this  is  true
live  on  from  instinct,  till  welcome  death  affords  them  the
needed  relief.

The  account  of  parents  with  their  children  is  therefore
quite  decidedly  against  the  former  in  the  average  case,  and
there  is  no  doubt  that,  had  the  injunction  of  filial  obedience
been  reversed  and  converted  into  an  injunction  of  parental
care  and  recognition  of  the  rights  of  children,  the  effect  upon
society  would  have  been  far  more  salutary.

The  remaining  four  commandments  are  aimed  at  some
of  the  worst  social  evils,  particularly  the  sixth,  eighth,  and
ninth.  The  seventh  forbids  an  offense  against  the  conven-
tional code,  and  tends  to  maintain  a  form  of  marriage  com-
mon to  most  races,  but  by  no  means  to  all.  In  many,  adul-
tery is  no  crime,  and  indeed  an  impossibility,  on  account  of
a  difference  of  custom  relating  to  the  sexual  relations — a  fact
which  shows  that  the  crime  is  not  intrinsic.

There  are,  therefore,  really  only  three*  of  the  "Ten
Commandments"  which  have  a  necessary  moral  character,
in  the  sense  of  being  universally  applicable  to  all  men,
whatever  their  religion  or  social  customs.      This  affords  a

*  In  reducing  them  to  two  (Matthew,  xxii,  36-40),  Christ  really  classified
them  on  the  basis  of  religious  and  moral,  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  he  did
not  regard  the  religious  commandment  as  in  the  highest  degree  moral  also.

ETHICS  BASED  ON  ADVANTAGE.  445

fair  illustration  of  the  ease  with  whicli  pure  ethics  may  be
confounded  with  things  that  have  no  relation  to  ethics.

Essentially  moral  sentiments  deal  only  with  the  notion  of
advantage.  In  the  stage  prior  to  the  fusion  of  morals  with
religion,  as  well  as  in  the  stage  to  come,  when  this  fusion
shall  have  disappeared,  right  and  good  must  be  regarded  as
interconvertible  terms.  The  formula  for  all  correct  moral
sentiments  is :  The  proposed  action  will  result  in  advantage.

In  discussing  this  formula,  there  are  two  variants  to  be
considered.  The  first  is  the  scope  or  range  of  the  advantage.
The  second  is  the  reliability  of  the  judgment.  We  will
glance  at  both.

Scope  of  the  Advantage. — Ideas,  or  opinions,  differ  from
actions  in  having  a  wider  field.  The  mind  may  entertain
propositions  which  it  is  impossible  for  the  individual  to  con-
vert into  action.  Every  thinking  mind  entertains  ideas  about
the  acts  of  others  which  can  not  be  made  the  acts  of  self.
Without  enacting  them,  we  all  have  our  views  as  to  what
will  be  the  effects  of  acts  conceived  as  performed  by  others,
whether  they  are  right  or  wrong.  While  every  one's  own
act  must  rest  ultimately  upon  an  egoistic  basis,  thoughts  may
be  and  are  relatively  far  more  altruistic.  The  advantage  con-
sidered by  the  performer  of  an  act  must  be  egoistic,  however
altruistic  it  may  also  be.  But  the  moral  philosopher  may
remove  the  egoistic,  or  subjective,  advantage  from  his  con-
templation entirely,  and  look  upon  actions  in  the  abstract,
with  reference  to  their  total  advantage  to  all  feeling  their
effects.  In  thinking  about  morals,  all  persons  do  this  to  a
more  or  less  marked  extent.

Now,  with  increased  mental  development,  the  actor  grad-
ually approaches  the  stand-point  of  the  thinker.  In  the
lower  types  of  mental  organization,  the  egoistic,  or  subjective,
advantage  of  an  act  is  about  the  only  view  that  has  any
weight  in  determining  it.  Advantage  to  self  outweighs  ad-
vantage to  others,  however  disproportional  they  may  really

446  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

be.  In  higher  types,  objective,  or  altruistic,  advantage  is
taken  into  the  account  along  with  subjective,  or  egoistic,  ad-
vantage. Great  objective  disadvantage  may  neutralize  cer-
tain degrees  of  subjective  advantage,  and  prevent  action.  In
the  highest  mental  types,  the  altruistic  view  dominates  the
egoistic,  and  action  depends  chiefly  upon  its  supposed  influ-
ence in  bringing  advantage  to  others.  Great  men  act  as  com-
mon men  think.

It  is  in  this  way  that  philosophers  have  arrived  at  the
idea  of  the  "  greatest  good."  It  is  the  objective  view  alone.
To  the  lowest  type,  the  greatest  good  is  pleasure  to  self,  re-
gardless of  others.  To  the  highest  type,  it  is  the  greatest
good  to  all,  including"  self.  Intermediate  types  act  more  like
the  lower,  but  think  more  like  the  higher  types.

To  the  lowest  savages,  the  idea,  of  right  is  simply  the  idea
of  personal  advantage.  Whatever  altruism  exists  belongs  to
the  instinctive  kind  developed  by  natural  selection  for  the
preservation  of  the  race.

Among  barbarians,  ethical  ideas  of  the  normal  class  exist
to  a  limited  extent.  The  notion  of  justice  is  perceptible,
disconnected  somewhat  from  that  of  personal  gain.  The
range  of  the  advantage  thought  of  as  following  action  ex-
tends beyond  mere  offspring,  and  takes  in  other  relatives,
and  perhaps  intimate  friends.  In  half-civilized  societies,  ob-
jective justice  is  a  well-developed  sentiment,  and  may  have
received  the  sanction  of  laws.  The  range  of  the  notion  of
advantage  flowing  from  actions  is  extended  to  embrace  all
the  members  of  the  tribe  or  nationality.

In  civilized  societies,  not  only  is  justice  reduced  to  a  sys-
tem and  sought  to  be  administered  by  the  state — i.  e.,  by
society  itself — and  the  idea  of  advantage  gained  through  ac-
tion extended  to  all  men,  but  the  supra-normal,  or  supererog-
atory, conception  of  disinterested  benevolence  has  been  de-
veloped through  the  growth  of  the  sympathies,  taking  the
place  to  some  extent  of  the  rosser  egoism  of  the  "  vivid
series."

SCOPE  OF  THE  ADVANTAGE.  447

The  progress  through  these  successive  stages  of  civilizca-
tion,  though  doubtless  due  to  the  consensual  development  of
all  the  psychic  faculties,  is  chiefly  brought  about  through
that  of  the  intellect  and  of  intelligence  attending  intellectual
growth.  Among  civilized  races,  the  greatest  differences  exist
between  individuals  and  communities,  as  also  between  races
themselves,  in  the  range  or  breadth  of  their  ethical  concep-
tions. The  supra-normal  conception  is  confined  to  the  most
intelligent  and  most  liberally  enlightened  classes.  Only
where  there  exists  an  active  literature  constantly  appealing
to  the  higher  sentiments  does  any  disinterested  sympathy
for  mankind  in  the  abstract  prevail.  Among  the  lower
types  of  civilized  communities,  it  ma'kes  no  difference  how
many  persons  degrade  themselves  and  throw  their  lives  away
by  indulging  in  alcoholic  stimulants,  no  public  movements
having  the  prevention  of  this  evil  in  view  will  be  set  on
foot.  An  apparently  complete  indifference  will  prevail  on
the  subject.  But  in  the  higher  types  of  civilized  communi-
ties this  fact  makes  a  profound  impression  upon  the  public
mind,  and  organizations  are  formed  upon  a  large  scale  to
reclaim  the  wayward  and  protect  the  young  from  temptation.
This  influence  frequently  makes  itself  so  strongly  felt  as  to
control  legislation  and  to  secure  the  enactment  of  laws  de-
signed to  accomplish  the  same  end.  Such  laws,  however,
like  most  others,  are  usually  based  upon  the  prohibitory  prin-
ciple, and  are  for  the  most  part  inoperative.

The  same  truth  is  manifest  with  regard  to  most  other
forms  of  charity.  Charitable  institutions  are  chiefly  confined
to  the  most  advanced  civilizations.  In  some  societies  they
are  carried  to  extremes,  and  mendicancy  and  pauperism  are
fostered  and  increased  by  them.  This  is  due  to  the  advance
of  the  sympathies  at  a  greater  rate  than  that  at  which  the
judgment  advances,  and  may  generally  be  traced  to  the  un-
due emphasis  given  to  the  doctrine  of  alms-giving  under  a
religious  sanction,  whereby  it  really  becomes  an  egoistic  sen-
timent.

448  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

Such  altruistic  sentiments  as  sometimes  spring  up  in  ad-
vanced moral  societies  and  clamor  for  the  abolition  of  some
brutal  practice,  or  of  some  institution  regarded  as  productive
of  evil  to  helpless  beings,  appear  to  be  among  the  purest  and
most  disinterested  impulses  of  human  nature.  Such  have
been  the  crusade  against  the  slave-trade  and  that  against
slavery  in  general.  It  is  only  within  a  few  centuries  that
such  sentiments  can  be  said  to  have  had  an  existence  in  the
world.  They  now  only  exist  in  the  breasts  of  a  compara-
tively few,  but  it  is  remarkable  how  much  power  these  few
have  been  able  to  wield.  This  fact  is  probably  due  to  the
sense  of  shame  in  those  who  are  at  heart  indifferent  to  the
proposed  reform  or  even  opposed  to  it,  which  causes  them
to  acquiesce  and  let  it  go  by  default.  The  human  mind  nat-
urally shrinks  from  the  open  advocacy  of  a  palpable  evil.
Only  strong  interests  in  its  continuance  are  sufficient  to  pro-
duce such  advocacy.

The  normal  condition  of  the  great  mass  of  mankind,  even
in  the  most  enlightened  states,  is  one  of  complete  indiffer-
ence to  the  sufferings  of  all  beyond  the  circle  of  their  own
immediate  experience.  In  moral  progress,  almost  as  much
as  in  material  progress,  it  is  a  relatively  insignificant  number
of  minds  that  must  be  credited  with  the  accomplishment  of
all  the  results  attained.

Thus  we  have  two  distinct  types  of  mind — the  egoistic,
which  may  be  called  the  statical,  and  the  altruistic,  which
may  be  called  the  dynamic.  The  egoistic,  or  statical,  type
of  mind  looks  at  things  as  they  are,  and  has  no  thought  of
improving  them.  It  is  satisfied  with  the  existing  condition
of  the  world  and  of  society.  It  feels  no  desire  to  elevate  the
low  to  the  level  of  the  high,  or  to  advance  the  latter  still
higher.  Strong  sympathies  may,  indeed,  co-exist  in  such
minds,  but  they  are  impulsive  only,  and  extend  no  further
than  the  concrete  case  which  may  happen  to  appeal  to  them
at  the  moment.  They  are,  moreover,  irrational  and  capri-
cious, and  called  out  more  by  relative,  or  imaginary,  than

SCOPE  OF  THE  ADVANTAGE.  449

by  absolute,  or  real,  suffering,  as  where  institutions  are  es-
tablished for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  the  respectability
of  those  who  have  once  been  wealthy.  Persons  who  would
give  large  sums  to  such  objects  would  give  nothing  to
educate  the  truly  indigent.  This  class  of  minds  can  not  be
aroused  on  any  moral  question,  and,  while  perhaps  freely
giving  alms,  would  resist  all  legislation  tending  to  render
alms-giving  unnecessary.  There  is  here  really  little  or  no
true  moral  sentiment,  and  appeals  to  personal  interest  are
the  only  ones  that  are  effective.

The  'dynamic  type  of  mind,  on  the  other  hand,  sees  in
every  thing  a  potential  superiority  to  its  present  condition.
It  demands  the  elevation  of  the  low,  not  by  alms-giving,  but
by  education  and  enfranchisement,  until  no  distinctions  shall
exist  except  those  of  actual  native  capacity  to  do  and  to  be,
and  in  many  ways  it  agitates  moral  reforms  for  the  future
and  the  many  where  no  direct  gain  to  self  is  to  follow.

Moral  ideas  increase  in  effectiveness  in  proportion  as  they
approach  the  intellectual  state.  From  mere  physical  instincts
to  high  emotional  sympathies,  and  from  these  to  cold  intel-
lectual judgments  upon  moral  questions,  the  advance  is  by  a
differential  series.  This  is  manifest  in  both  classes  of  ethical
sentiments.

With  the  expansion  of  ideas,  moral  actions  pass  from  a
special  to  a  general  character.  General  action  is  more  im-
portant than  special  action.  The  latter  is  always  attended
with  a  too  great  intensity  of  emotional  feeling,  and  only  aims
at  certain  obtrusive  salient  features  of  the  evil  in  question.
The  former  is  deliberate,  and  strikes  at  the  root  of  the  evil,
destroying  it  entirely.  Attempts  to  enforce  justice  by  coer-
cion and  appeal  are  only  partially  successful  and  not  perma-
nently successful.  The  administration  of  justice  will  never
be  thorough  and  complete  until  it  is  made  self-regulative.
This  can  not  be  accomplished  by  negative  fiats  and  penal
statutes.  It  may  perhaps  be  accomplished  by  Inventive  legis-
lation.

51

450  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

Considering,  next,  the  supra-normal,  or  altruistic,  class  of
moral  sentiments,  we  may  still  more  clearly  perceive  this  truth.
Promiscuous  and  unorganized  charity  is  the  least  effective
mode  of  relieving  human  suffering.  All  thinking  minds  see
that,  as  a  settled  public  sentiment,  the  belief  in  this  duty  is
one  of  the  great  barriers  to  the  object  it  aims  to  secure,  as
well  as  to  still  more  important  objects.  Small  charitable
schemes,  while  often  beneficial  to  the  recipients,  are  at  best
only  temporary  alleviations,  and  affect  only  the  surface  of
the  evils  which  render  them  necessary.  Philanthropy  which
aims  simply  to  mitigate  actual  suffering,  contributes  only
slightly  to  that  end.  Before  it  really  becomes  effective,  it
must  take  the  more  general  form  of  humanitarianism.
Charity  must  consist  in  something  broader  than  the  mere
satisfying  of  hungry  stomachs,  which  wiU  only  remain  satis-
fied a  few  hours.  Humanitarianism  aims  at  the  reorganiza-
tion of  society,  so  that  all  shall  possess  equal  advantages  for
gaining  a  livelihood  and  contributing  to  the  welfare  of  society.
The  truest  philanthropy  is  that  which  sees  and  declares  that  it
is  society  that  is  the  principal  loser  when  its  members  are  un-
employed, and,  laboring  for  the  good  of  society  as  a  whole,
it  secures  to  the  greatest  degree  the  good  of  its  needy  mem-
bers. "Whenever  this  sentiment  shall  generally  prevail,  most
of  the  worst  social  questions  will  quickly  solve  themselves.

Relidbility  of  the  Judgment— ^ <&  will  now  consider  the
second  variant  in  the  general  moral  formula,  viz.,  the  relia-
bility of  the  judgment.

Morality  rests  ultimately  upon  intellectual  capacity  and
general  intelligence.  For,  as  we  saw  {mjpra^  p.  349),  con-
science is  far  from  an  unerring  guide  to  right  conduct,  and
conduct  will  depend,  in  the  rightness  of  its  results,  upon  the
soundness  of  the  views  which  men  hold  upon  moral  questions
in  general.  If  every  act  were  right  which  any  one  believed
to  be  right,  the  problem  would  be  comparatively  simple.  If
all  men  agreed,  and  all  ages  had  agreed,  respecting  what  con-
stitutes the  right,  we  might  safely  infer  that  the  moral  judg-

RELIABILITY   OF  THE  JUDGMENT.  45 1

ment  of  mankind  was  worth  listening  to.  But  such  is  far
from  being  the  case,  l^ot  only  do  men  of  the  same  epoch
constantly  differ  about  the  most  important  moral  questions,
but  one  age  reverses  the  decision  of  another,  and  every  year
sees  the  overthrow  of  moral  ideas  which  had  been  cherished
from  immemorial  antiquity.  As  Dr.  Carpenter  pointedly
remarks,  "  Those  who  are  able  to  look  back  with  intelligent
retrospect  over  the  political  history  of  the  last  half-century,
and  who  witness  the  now  general  pervasion  of  the  public
mind  by  truths  which  it  accepts  as  self-evident,  and  by  moral
principles  which  it  regards  as  beyond  dispute,  can  scarcely
realize  to  themselves  the  fact  that  within  their  own  recollec-
tion the  fearless  assertors  of  these  truths  and  principles  were
scoffed  at  as  visionaries  or  reviled  as  destructives."  *

There  are  many  causes  for  these  variations  in  ethical
opinion,  but  the  greater  part  of  them  may  be  arranged  under
three  general  heads,  which  we  will  designate  as  follows :

1.  Varying  power  to  discern  moral  quality  in  action.

2.  Confusion  of  religion  with  morality.

3.  Confusion  of  custom  with  morality.

Moral  Discernment. — The  first  of  these  has  already  been
touched  upon  when  speaking  of  the  scope  of  advantage
conceived  as  flowing  from  action.  In  this  case,  the  change
occurs  for  the  most  part  in  one  direction,  and  constitutes
what  is  called  the  progress  of  moral  principle.

In  advanced  societies  at  the  present  day,  the  basis  of
moral  conduct  is  the  human  race  in  general.  Scarcely  any
one,  if  asked  whether  an  action,  which  was  considered  wrong
when  committed  against  one  man  or  class  of  men,  could  be
right,  ceteris  parilus,  if  committed  against  another  man  or
class  of  men,  would  now  give  any  but  a  negative  answer.
But  this  has  not  always  been  so,  and  is  so  now  only  in  civil-
ized races.  "We  need  not  go  back  to  barbarous  ages  to  see
this  fully  exemplified.  In  ancient  Greece,  the  most  cultured
nation  of  antiquity,  there  was  one  code  of  morals  for  the
*  "  Mental  Thysiology,"  p.  485.

452  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

Greek  and  another  for  all  other  nations.  "The  stranger,
the  alien,  the  enslaved  captive,  the  barbarian  of  the  non-
Hellenic  world,  were  not  human  fellows  to  the  Greek ;  at
most,  they  were  only  human  creatures  of  some  different
variety,  having  that  similitude,  and  approaching  somewhat
to  that  relation,  but  quite  excluded  from  his  cognition  of
fellowship  by  all  the  habits  of  his  feeling  and  his  thought
According  to  his  perception,  they  were  clearly  proper  sub-
jects of  predatory  warfare  and  piracy ;  he  could  kill  them,
plunder  them,  enslave  them,  with  no  more  compunction  of
conscience  than  the  modern  hunter  feels  in  capturing  or
killing  the  game-animals  of  the  forest.  And  yet  the  same
conscience  was  acting  in  the  Greek  that  acts  in  men  to-day ;
but  only  with  more  narrowness  of  range  in  the  perceptions
upon  which  it  acted."  *

The  Hebrew  nation  also  had  two  codes  of  morals  which
divide  off  with  trenchant  lines  at  many  points  in  their  re-
corded laws  and  history.  "  To  the  Jew  ^st  and  also  to  the
Greek  "  was  even  in  that  late  day  regarded  as  a  large  de-
parture from  accepted  principles,  and  Christ's  recognition
of  Gentiles  constitutes  one  of  his  leading  offenses.  The
system  of  slavery  which  prevailed  among  the  Israelites  dealt
very  differently  with  the  Hebrew  and  the  Gentile  slave.
For  the  latter,  there  was  no  "  year  of  jubilee,"  as  for  the  for-
mer. A  careful  study  of  the  early  histoiy  of  every  nation
shows  that  this  characteristic  of  a  dual  morality  has  been
common  to  them  all  at  one  period,  and  has  only  been  re-
moved by  the  progress  of  intelligence  and  mixture  with
other  races.

While  this  system  of  tribal  distinction  no  longer  exists
among  civilized  races,  a  relic  of  it  survives  in  the  marked
inequality  of  social  condition,  and  the  difference  of  treat-
ment corresponding  to  it.  Many  persons  of  fine  sensibilities
toward  those  of  their  own  rank  present  a  supercilious  and
heartless  bearing  toward  those  of  an  inferior  rank.     This

*  J.  N.  Lamed,  in  "  Popular  Science  Monthly  "  (ISVV),  vol.  xi,  p.  659.

MORAL  DISCERNMENT.  453

Bpirit  is  cultivated  in  Europe,  so  that  one  of  the  most  obvi-
ous marivs  of  a  foreigner  in  America  is  this  duality  in  his
character  and  conduct  according  to  the  rank  of  the  person
addressed ;  and  in  this  country,  where  social  inequalities  are
very  fluctuating  and  depend  on  wealth  or  accidental  position,
the  attempts  of  foreigners  properly  to  distribute  their  two
sets  of  actions  often  become  very  amusing.

In  general,  it  may  be  said  of  this  group  of  varying  prin-
ciples that  the  advance  effected  is  in  proportion  to  the  abil-
ity correctly  to  measure  the  advantage  to  flow  from  the
given  class  of  action,  and  therefore  morals  progress  in  unison
with  the  progress  of  intelligence.  Where  essentially  im-
moral practices  are  sanctioned  by  the  code  of  a  people,  such
as  murder,  lying,  theft,  robbery,  etc.,*  it  is  due  to  a  com-
plete failure  on  the  part  of  such  a  race  to  measure  the  good
and  evil  in  conduct,  a  false  and  perverse  or  a  dwarfed  and
stunted  moral  perception  and  mental  condition.  It  may  be
depended  upon  that,  when  a  people  fairly  realize  that  they
are  opposing  their  own  interests,  a  revolution,  not  only  of
thought  but  of  action,  will  take  place.  The  progress  of
moral  principles  in  society  consists  of  a  series  of  such  revo-
lutions brought  about  through  this  cause.

Confusion  of  Religion  with  Morality. — The  cases  in
which  religion  has  been  confounded  with  morality  constitute
by  far  the  most  numerous  class  of  variants  in  ethics.  The
great  number  of  different  religions,  having  different  forms,
rites,  and  ceremonies,  renders  this  necessary.  The  most
purely  moral  systems,  such  as  those  of  Confucius  and  Menu,
contain  much  that  is  rehgious  only.  The  mixed  moral  and
religious  codes  that  have  come  down  to  us  from  various

I  nations  have  produced  great  confusion  in  men's  notions  of
right.
"We  have  already  seen  that  the  Hebrew  decalogue  con-
tains four  purely  religious  injunctions  and  only  three  purely
moral  ones.  If  we  were  to  examine  the  entire  code  of  ac-
*  Spencer,  "Data  of  Ethics,"  p.  39.
1

I

454  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

cepted  morals  prevailing  in  civilized  communities,  we  should
probably  find  a  similar  proportion  of  the  non-essential  mixed
with  the  essential.  "Of  the  seventy-three  chapters  consti-
tuting the  rule  of  St.  Benedict,  nine  concern  the  moral  and
general  duties  of  the  brothers,  while  thirteen  concern  the
religious  ordinances.  And  how  the  idea  of  criminality  at-
tached to  disregard  of  ordinances  is  proved  by  the  following
passage  from  the  rule  of  St.  Columbanus :  '  A  year's  penance
for  him  who  loses  a  consecrated  wafer  ;  six  months  for  him
who  suffers  it  to  be  eaten  by  mites ;  twenty  days  for  him
who  lets  it  turn  red ;  forty  days  for  him  who  contemptu-
ously flings  it  into  water ;  twenty  days  for  him  who  brings
it  up  through  weakness  of  stomach  ;  but,  if  through  illness,
ten  days.  He  who  neglects  his  Amen  to  the  Benedicite,
who  speaks  when  eating,  who  forgets  to  make  the  sign  of
the  cross  on  his  spoon,  or  on  a  lantern  lighted  by  a  younger
brother,  is  to  receive  six  or  twelve  stripes.'  "  *  No  doubt
these  forbidden  acts  were  then  regarded  as  highly  immoral.
It  has  been  the  same  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  Among
the  Sandwich-Islanders,  "  if  any  one  made  a  noise  on  tabu-
day,  ...  he  must  die."  In  Peru,  "the  most  notable  sin
was  neglect  in  the  service  of  the  huacas."  With  the  Nica-
raguans,  it  was  to  break  a  festival.  The  Hindoos,  who  would
not  scruple  to  tell  lies,  would  die  sooner  than  eat  the  flesh  of
certain  animals  condemned  by  the  sacred  books.  The  story
of  the  homicide  who  confessed  to  killing  a  fellow-man  for  his
dinner,  consisting  of  bread  and  meat,  and  who  ate  the  bread
but  threw  the  meat  away  because  it  was  Friday,  whether
true  in  fact  or  not,  is  not  an  overdrawn  illustration  of  the
confusion  that  exists  in  society  respecting  right  and  wrong.
But  in  this  class,  as  in  the  one  previously  considered,  all  true
moral  progress  consists  in  the  elimination  of  non-essential
doctrines,  and  the  greater  and  greater  recognition  of  the
value  of  those  whose  practice  is  followed  by  positive  ad-
vantage.

*  Spencer,  "Ceremonial  Inatitutions,"  p.  11,  §344,

RELIGION  AND  CUSTOM.  455

Confusion  of  Custom  with  Morality. — Custom  has  been
almost  as  potent  in  distorting  conceptions  of  duty  as  has  re-
ligion. Oftentimes  the  two  are  inextricably  blended.  The
most  marked  cases  under  this  head  relate  to  the  condition  of
the  sexes.  Among  the  Hindoos,  the  marriage  of  adult  fe-
males is  regarded  as  highly  immoral,  and  it  is  said  that  mo-
nogamy, as  enforced  by  Christianity,  is  the  chief  obstacle  to
the  spread  of  that  faith  among  them,  as  they  regard  it  as  an
immoral  mode  of  treating  women.  Cato,  a  noble  Roman,
yielded  his  wife  to  a  friend.  Socrates  saw  nothing  wrong  in
the  prostitution  of  Aspasia.  In  the  Balearic  Isles,  a  bride
was  the  common  property  of  all  the  guests  before  she  could
be  the  wife  of  one.  Among  the  Naudowessies,  the  woman
who  could  take  to  her  bosom  forty  stalwart  warriors  of  a
night  was  regarded  almost  with  veneration,  and  had  her  pick
for  a  husband.*  Among  the  Tongans,  according  to  Pallas,
"  marriages  were  terminable  at  the  will  of  the  husband,  and,
excepting  in  married  women,  chastity  was  not  regarded  as
a  virtue."  f  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  loose  conduct  be-
tween the  sexes,  which  is  commonly  regarded  as  the  worst
form  of  immorality,  seems  to  have  no  influence  whatever
upon  the  essential  moral  condition  of  those  races  among
whom  it  prevails.  %  Thus,  of  the  race  last  mentioned,  it  is
said:  "Yet  we  are  told  that,  on  the  whole,  this  system,
although  opposed  to  our  feelings,  'had  not  the  least  ap-
pearance of  any  bad  effect.  The  women  were  tender,  kind
mothers,  and  the  children  were  well  cared  for.'  Both  sexes
appeared  to  be  contented  and  happy  in  their  relations  to
each  other,  and,  '  as  to  domestic  quarrels,  they  were  seldom
known.' "  *

There  are,  of  course,  many  other  illustrations  of  this  mis-
taking of  custom  for  duty  besides  those  connected  with  the

*  Carver,  "Travels  through  the  Interior  Parts  of  North  America"  (London,
1779),  pp.  245,  246.

f  Lubbock,  "  Origin  of  Civilization,"  p.  259.

X  Spencer,  "  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  pp.  638,  639.  *  Lubbock,  he.  cii.

456  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

sexual  relations,  but  these  are  not  only  the  most  abundant
but  also  the  most  interesting,  since  they  give  the  civilized
world  a  hint  that  the  greater  part  of  its  code  of  morals  is  not
intrinsic  but  factitious,  and  that  many  of  the  forbidden  acts
are  mala  jprohihita  only  and  not  mala  in  se  (vol.  i,  pp.  632
et  seq).

Without  going  on  to  enumerate  other  instances  under  this
head,  it  may  suffice  to  point  out  that,  in  general,  great  con-
fusion exists  between  the  moral  and  the  conventional  code.
The  disagreeable  sensation  which  comes  over  a  person  when
conscious  of  having  violated  a  rule  of  social  etiquette,  though
scarcely  less  cutting  to  the  sensibilities,  appears,  in  the  most
extreme  cases,  to  be  plainly  and  generically  distinct  from
that  which  he  experiences  when  conscious  of  having  vio-
lated a  rule  of  ethics.  Yet  between  them  there  exists  a  cer-
tain gradation  until  the  distinction  at  last  disappears.  The
only  test  in  such  cases  is  to  detennine  if  possible  whether  in-
jury has  really  been  done  to  any  one,  a  test  which  is  usually
very  difficult  of  application.

The  conventional  code,  like  the  moral  code,  exists  for  an
object,  and  this  can  be  no  other  than  the  good  of  society  in
both  cases.  It  is  manifestly  for  the  good  of  society  that
things  be  done  in  a  proper  manner,  and  this  can  only  be  ac-
complished by  fixing  the  order  in  which  they  are  to  be
done.  He  who  violates  this  order  really  injures  the  inter-
ests of  society.  This,  at  least,  is  the  theory  of  the  conven-
tional code,  and  serves  to  show  how  it  approaches,  in  its
fundamental  features,  the  moral  code.  But  in  point  of  fact
the  greater  part  of  the  customs  and  fashions  of  the  world
not  only  do  not  subserve  the  good  of  society,  but  tend  very
visibly  in  the  contrary  direction.  This,  however,  is  due  to
man's  defective  judgment  and  general  imperfection  of  mind
and  character.  To  sift  the  wheat  from  the  chafif  in  this  mass
of  crude  material  is  the  work  of  the  sociologist.  To  dis-
tinguish the  intrinsic  from  the  extrinsic,  that  which  really
brings  advantage  from  that  which  brings  no  advantage  or

DYNAMIC  OPINIONS.  457

brings  disadvantage,  is  one  of  the  living  problems  of  true
moral  science.

The  foregoing  analysis  of  ethical  opinions  may  appear
more  extended  than  its  importance  demands,  but  the  many
misconceptions  and  errors  in  which  the  subject  is  involved
^rendered  necessary  a  fuller  treatment  than  would  have  other-
wise been  sufficient.

DYNAMIC    OPINIONS.

Human  efforts  are  always  exerted  with  a  view  to  ac-
complish some  end  regarded  as  in  some  way  advantageous.
When  such  efforts  are  deliberative,  they  obey  states  of  mind
which  represent  the  advantage  to  the  individual  in  advance.
These  states  of  mind  are  of  various  degrees  of  complexity,
but  may  generally  be  resolved  into  simple  propositions,
either  flowing  from  other  propositions  (conclusions  from
premises)  or  standing  alone,  apparently  disconnected  from
simpler  states,  but  really  the  result  of  a  multitude  of  special
conceptions  of  which  it  is  impossible  to  take  account  sepa-
rately. Assuming  the  ends  of  conation  to  be  what  they  are
supposed  to  be,  viz.,  advantageous,  the  great  desideratum  of
life  is  to  be  permitted  to  act  in  the  manner  prompted  by  the
states  of  mind.  This  branch  of  the  subject  was  considered
in  the  preceding  chapter.  We  have  now  to  deal  with  the
states  of  mind  themselves.  It  is  notorious  that  in  a  great
number,  perhaps  in  a  majority  of  cases,  the  end  is  so  dimly
perceived,  or  so  grossly  misconceived,  that  action,  where  free,
brings  no  advantage,  or  even  brings  disadvantage  {supra,  pp.
91,  92).  Or,  if  the  end  be  correctly  perceived,  the  man-
ner of  trying  to  secure  it  proves  wholly  ineffectual,  and
no  result  is  reached.  If,  therefore,  liberty  to  act  is  of  so
vast  importance  when  so  many  acts  are  fruitless  or  injurious,
how  much  more  important  must  be  the  possession  of  such
states  of  mind  as  will  render  the  aim  of  action  certain,  and
action  certain  of  its  aim  !  The  failures  attendant  upon  hu-
man effort  are  due  to  the  lack  of  correspondence  between

458  OPmiON.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

thoughts  and  things.*  The  establishment  of  snch  corre-
spondence must  therefore  precede  the  establishment  of  com-
plete liberty  to  act,  if  the  highest  advantage  is  to  be  secured.
!Not  only  must  opinions  be  correct  in  this  sense,  but  men
must  entertain  the  right  kind  of  opinions  in  order  to  achieve
this  success.  Every  mind  is  constantly  thinking  about  some-
thing. The  millions  of  minds  in  millions  of  men  have  each
millions  of  thoughts  in  the  course  of  a  life-time.  But  this
vast  mass  of  ideas  is  for  the  most  part  worthless,  not  because
it  is  not  vigorous,  but  because  it  is  not  organized,  not  con-
centrated. Where  it  is  not  out  of  harmony  with  all  object-
ive reality,  it  is  out  of  the  line  of  utility,  shooting  away
after  some  glittering  tinsel,  or  ignis  fatuus,  following  some
freak  of  fancy,  riding  some  petted  hobby,  or  wrapped  up  in
some  vain  delusion. f  The  only  opinions  which  are  of  any
value  to  the  world  are  those  which  promote  its  progress
either  directly  or  by  preserving  order  as  the  guardian  of
progress.  The  latter  are  the  ethical  opinions  freed  from  the
dross  of  superstition  and  convention,  and  recognizing  only
positive  utility.  The  former  are  dynamic  opinions  prop-
erly so  called,  with  which  we  have  now  more  especially  to
deal.

Dynamic  ideas  are  necessarily  directed  toward,  and  con-
cerned with,  the  phenomena  and  laws  of  nature.  As  already
frequently  remarked,  civilization,  in  so  far  as  real,  is  essen-
tially artificial;  it  consists  in  the  control  and  direction  of
natural  forces  into  channels  of  human  advantage.  It  rests
upon  ideas,  both  true  and  practical,  of  the  relations  existing
among  natural  objects  and  the  character  of  natural  laws.
It  will,  therefore,  be  convenient  to  classify  these  ideas  in  the
same  manner  as  we  would  classify  the  sciences,  and  to  con-
sider them  in  connection  with  the  successive  great  divisions
of  the  scientific  hierarchy.  We  will. thus  pass  rapidly  in
review  the  following  classes  of  ideas :

*  Comte,  "  Philosophie  Positive,"  vol.  vi,  p.  663.

t  G.  S.  Peirce,  in  "Popular  Science  Monthly  "  (1878),  vol.  xii,  p.  289.

COSMOLOGICAL  IDEAS.  459

1.  Cosraological  ideas.

2.  Biological  ideas.

3.  Anthropological  ideas.

4.  Sociological  ideas.

COSMOLOGICAL   IDEAS.

Whatever  may  be  the  future  of  human  civilization,  it
must  be  confessed  that  thus  far  progress,  considered  as  con-
sisting in  either  actual  or  potential  increase  in  the  means  of
enjoying  life,  has  been  chiefly  material.  Man  is  "of  the
earth  earthy."  He  inhabits  a  material  planet,  is  bound  to  it
by  a  physical  law,  subsists  on  material  objects  existing  upon
it,  and  is  himself  an  integral  and  purely  material  part  of  it.
His  intimate  relations  with  matter  make  it  of  the  utmost
importance  that  he  know  all  about  matter.  At  every  turn
he  encounters  it  in  one  form  or  another,  and  experience  has
shown  that  such  contact  is  either  beneficial  or  injurious  ac-
cording to  the  views  he  entertains  of  his  relations  to  it,  and
of  those  which  the  various  forms  of  it  sustain  to  one  another.
It  is  reserved  for  the  next  chapter  to  consider  the  basis  of
his  opinions;  the  necessity  that  they  be  both  sound  and
practical  is  what  here  requires  special  emphasis.

First,  in  order  to  live  in  the  most  advantageous  way,
sound  views  of  the  material  universe  must  prevail.  So  long
as  man's  conceptions  of  the  universe  are  erroneous,  he  will
pursue  a  wayward  if  not  a  downward  course.  If  they  are  too
narrow,  and  he  believes  that  all  existing  things  are  within
the  range  of  his  vision,  his  conduct  will  be  correspondingly
narrowed.  If  he  believes  the  world  of  short  duration,  both
in  the  past  and  in  the  future,  this  too  will  dwarf  all  his  under-
takings, and  make  an  end  of  progress.  If  he  regards  nature
as  consisting  of  a  multitude  of  animated  powers  impending
over  him,  he  will  waste  all  his  energies  in  seeking  to  propiti-
ate these  powers.  If  he  deems  them  evil,  terror  will  demor-
alize him  and  make  life  a  burden.  If  he  conceives  the  uni-
verse to  be  watched  over  by  beneficent  powers,  he  will  be

460  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

apt  to  resign  all  initiative  effort  to  them,  and  relapse  into  a
condition  of  complete  stagnation.  It  is  difficult  to  saj  which
exerts  the  greater  demoralizing  and  anti-progressive  influ-
ence on  man,  pessimism  or  optimism.

In  the  second  place,  there  must  exist  just  and  adequate
views  respecting  the  particular  objects  of  the  universe.  The
stars,  the  sun,  the  earth  itself,  must  be  valued  at  something
like  a  true  estimate.  It  is  better  to  believe  the  "  moon  to  be
made  of  green  cheese  "  than  to  fail  to  regard  it  as  a  piece  of
matter  at  all.  Opinions  respecting  the  constitution  of  the
sun,  which  embody  the  latest  data  for  concluding  upon  that
question,  exert  a  powerful  dynamic  influence  when  substi-
tuted for  the  idea  that  it  is  a  god.  Proper  conceptions  of  the
relative  magnitude  of  the  sun  and  earth  help  immensely  to
tone  down  human  arrogance  and  to  make  men  behave  prop-
erly. Some  may  smile  at  such  a  statement,  but  they  need
only  to  remember  that,  down  to  the  time  when  this  and  other
kindred  truths  were  forced  by  science  upon  the  world,  the
most  moral  and  enlightened  men  in  the  most  advanced  por-
tion of  the  earth  were  decreeing  the  torture  and  execution  of
their  fellow-men  for  disbelief  in  certain  doctrinal  tenets  not
possessing  the  least  intrinsic  merit ;  and  scarcely  any  one  now
doubts  that  the  immense  liberalization  of  the  world  which
has  taken  place  during  the  last  three  centuries  has  been
chiefly  due  to  the  expansion  of  men's  views  rendered  pos-
sible by  the  discoveries  of  science.

In  the  third  place,  before  mankind  can  be  infused  with  a
progressive  spirit,  definite  opinions  must  prevail  respecting
the  origin  and  development  of  the  universe.  The  idea  of
fixity  in  the  object  produces  the  condition  of  fixity  in  the
subject.  The  idea  that  the  world  has  been  evolved  out  of
a  less  differentiated  state  of  its  materials,  that  it  is  itself  a
chip  from  the  enormously  greater  central  mass,  and  that  this
mass  once  extended  to  the  earth's  orbit  and  to  those  of  the
remoter  planets — these  ideas  are  grand  and  inspiring,  and
give  the  mind  an  irresistible  impulse  to  move  with  the  gen-

COSMOLOGICAL  IDEAS.  461

eral  tide  of  progress.  It  may  be  said  that  this  is  not  proved.
If  so,  it  probably  never  can  be,  tbougli  most  astronomers
think  that  it  is.  But,  even  if  it  be  not  demonstrated,  it  is  one
of  those  conceptions,  true  relatively  to  the  age,  that  satisfy
the  progressive  cravings  of  the  mind,  and  when  fairly  appro-
priated elevate  and  improve  character,  and  it  is  not  knowl-
ledge,  but  opinions,  that  we  are  now  considering.

Lastly,  the  relations  of  the  nearer  objects  with  which
men  come  into  immediate  contact,  their  physical  properties
and  susceptibilities,  must  be  rightly  viewed  before  progres-
sive action  can  follow.  It  is  through  just  conceptions  of
this  class  that  all  material  progress  comes.  The  indirect,  or
inventive,  method  of  procedure  is  only  adopted  in  cases
where  all  supernatural  views  are  discarded,  and  true  natural
relations  are  perceived.  The  influence  of  knowledge  is
through  the  ideas  it  generates.  Knowledge  is  chiefly  useful
as  furnishing  the  data  for  thought,  just  as  thought  is  chiefly
useful  as  furnishing  the  data  for  action.  It  is  the  laws
deduced,  the  generalizations  made,  the  conclusions  drawn,
the  opinions  formed,  that  count  in  social  progress.  It  is  not
essential  that  men's  views  be  completely  settled  in  society.
It  is  only  essential  that  they  be  objectively  true.  One  man,
though  alone  in  the  possession  of  a  truth,  wields  a  power.
It  is  unavoidable  that  many  of  the  advanced  views  held  by
advanced  minds  shall  be  disputed  ;  they  will  nevertheless  be
progressive  if  objectively  true.  The  belief  in  the  genesis  of
inorganic  substances,  instead  of  exerting  a  bad  influence,  is  an
aid  even  to  the  practical  work  of  mechanical  invention.  He
who  must  deal  with  matter  and  force  must  possess  a  grasp  of
their  nature  and  enlarged  views  of  their  possibilities.  The
fixed  conviction  that  the  chemical  elements  are  the  ultimate
divisions  of  matter  is  as  great  a  barrier  to  the  advancement
of  chemical  science  as  the  fixed  belief  in  the  Mosaic  firma-
ment was  to  that  of  astronomy.  The  successful  inventor
must  place  himself  completely  en  rapport  with  nature.  He
must  not  only  possess  the  settled  truths  of  verified  science,

462  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

but  must  be  capable  of  duly  weighing  all  unsettled  theories
of  the  universe.  With  no  other  profession  is  dogmatism,  of
whatever  form,  so  wholly  incompatible.

BIOLOGICAL   IDEAS.

All  men  entertain  biological  views,  though  they  may  not
recognize  them  by  that  name.  The  backward  farmer,  who
plants  his  potatoes  in  the  dark  of  the  moon,  has  a  conception
relating  to  the  laws  of  plant-growth,  albeit  there  exist  no
physical  relation  between  its  terms.  The  more  enlightened
one,  who  makes  a  pecuniary  sacrifice  in  order  to  plant  the
choicest  and  best,  has  grasped  in  a  rude  form  the  great
principle  of  heredity,  so  fertile  in  practical  advantages  to
man.  All  that  makes  cultivated  plants  and  domesticated
animals  superior  to  the  native  floras  and  faunas  of  the  world,
has  been  the  result  of  a  half -unconscious  recognition  of  this
law.  What  is  to  follow  from  a  few  centuries  of  its  full
recognition  and  practical  application  can  not  now  be  pre-
dicted. But,  though  the  law  of  artificial  selection  is  now  to
be  ranked  among  the  verified  truths  of  science,  the  unpardon-
able defectiveness  of  the  present  methods  of  distributing  in-
telligence confines  its  full  realization  to  a  small  number  of
persons,  who  are,  moreover,  generally  in  no  condition  to  put
it  to  any  practical  use.  The  great  mass  of  those  whose  busi-
ness it  is  to  deal  directly  with  the  organic  world,  and  supply
the  human  race  with  the  nourishment  which  is  there  elabo-
rated for  its  use,  are  left  destitute  of  nearly  all  the  ascertained
truth  which  could  be  made  available  for  the  advancement
both  of  their  interests  and  of  those  of  society.

Aside  from  such  paramount  practical  considerations,  there
are  theoretical  ones  in  the  domain  of  biology  which  possess
a  high  moral  if  not  a  true  material  value.  Such  generaliza-
tions as  were  presented  in  Chapter  lY,  by  which  the  unity
of  the  organic  and  inorganic  kingdoms  was  made  to  appear
through  a  systematic  co-ordination  of  the  verified  facts  and
truths  of  both  sciences,  help  the  mind  to  comprehend  the

BIOLOGICAL  IDEAS.  463

relations  of  dependence  whicli  exist  in  tlie  universe.  It  is  of
the  utmost  importance  that  such  relations  should  be  under-
stood, not  only  because  it  is  possible  in  many  ways  to  turn
them  to  practical  advantage,  but  as  a  part  of  the  general
scheme  of  orientation  by  which  man  fixes  his  own  place  in
the  universe,  and  rids  himself  of  the  incubus  of  supernatural
beliefs.

ANTHKOPOLOGICAL   IDEAS.

The  principal  progressive  anthropological  opinions  are
those  which  relate  to  man's  origin  and  nature,  to  his  relations
to  the  other  objects  of  the  universe,  and  to  his  physical
improvement.  For  the  first  of  these  it  must  suffice  to  refer
the  reader  to  Chapter  VI,  and  for  the  second  to  Chapter  YIII.
The  third,  which  was  briefly  touched  upon  in  the  last  chap-
ter {supra,  p,  392),  deserves  some  further  notice.

Artificial  selection,  now  a  settled  principle  in  biology,
must  be  applicable  in  its  length  and  breadth  to  the  human
race.  Its  extension  to  man  is  chiefly  rendered  difficult
because  it  requires  him,  as  it  were,  to  sit  in  judgment  on
his  own  case.  When  a  man  selects  the  finest  of  his  animals
for  breeding  purposes,  he  judges  objectively  what  qualities
are  most  useful.  But  with  human  beings  there  is  no  um-
pire to  settle  this  question.  Yet  no  one  doubts  that  there
are  immense  differences  in  the  usefulness  of  different  indi-
viduals. If  the  opinion  could  generally  prevail  among  all
classes  that  the  human  race  could  be  rapidly  improved,  both
physically  and  mentally,  by  the  intelligent  selection  of  those
who  are  to  keep  up  the  population,  much  of  the  difficulty
would  remove  itself.

There  are  two  ways  in  which  a  modified  stirpiculture
might  be  gradually  inaugurated.  One  consists  in  the  silent
influence  which  correct  views  on  the  subject  would  produce.
As  already  remarked  some  pages  back,  the  sexual  relations
constitute  the  subject  as  to  which  the  greatest  confusion
exists  between  the  conventional  and  the  moral  code,  and
the  greatest  variety  of  customs  respecting  their  observance.

464  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

The  present  customs  by  no  means  embody  the  greatest  pu-
rity of  life,  or  bring  out  the  highest  moral  sentiments,  and
the  apparent  tenacity  with  which  they  are  clung  to  only
indicates  their  weakness — dogmatism  being  always  most
intense  when  least  rational.  The  apparent  firmness  with
which  the  current  maxims  relative  to  marriage  are  defended,
therefore,  only  indicates  that  the  system  is  liable  to  a  revolu-
tion. But,  in  order  to  render  a  modified  form  of  stirpicult-
ure  possible,  this  revolution  need  be  but  slight,  and  need  not
sweep  away  any  thing  essential  to  the  ethics  of  the  sexes.
It  is  altogether  probable  that  in  a  highly  enlightened  com-
munity, fully  awake  to  the  value  of  restricting  propagation
to  those  physically  and  mentally  worthy  to  exercise  it,  cus-
tom alone  would  soon  prescribe  the  course  of  conduct  in
this  respect  which  would  secure  the  greater  part  of  the  ends
of  a  systematic  stirpiculture.  To  realize  the  possibility  of
this,  we  need  only  consider  the  views  now  held  respecting
incest.  "Why  do  men  look  with  such  feelings  of  disgust
upon  this  crime  ?  In  many  countries  it  is  no  crime.  Among
animals  no  instinct  exists,  so  far  as  known,  adapted  to  pre-
vent it.  The  fact  that  through  rare  coincidences  men  have
sometimes  been  known  to  fall  in  love  with  their  sisters,  with-
out knowing  the  relation,  proves  that  the  sentiment  is  not
instinctive.  Admitting  that  persons  of  delicate  sensibilities
would  naturally  look  upon  such  practices  as  too  familiar  and
would  discard  them,  it  is  still  probable  that  a  dim  conscious-
ness that  it  results  in  degeneracy  has  been  coupled  with  this
natural  abhorrence.  The  horror  of  incest  in  civilized  society
is  undoubtedly  a  survival  of  savage  customs  which  are  almost
universal,  and  are  the  necessary  result  of  the  conditions  under
which  social  institutions  have  developed.  Strict  as  advanced
races  are  in  prescribing  the  limits  of  consanguinity  within
which  marriage  may  take  place,  they  are  still  far  less  strict
than  are  the  less  advanced  races.  Here  marriage  is  forbid-
den within  a  large  group,  the  gens,  and  the  violation  of  this
custom  is  looked  upon  as  the  most  heinous  of  all  crimes.

\

ANTHROPOLOGICAL  IDEAS.  465

Major  Powell  says : *  "Of  crimes  resulting  from  the  regula-
tion of  the  relations  of  the  sexes,  marriage  within  the  pro-
scribed group  is  held  to  be  the  most  heinous  in  primitive
society.  It  is  never  condoned,  never  compounded."  But,
whatever  the  cause,  custom  so  completely  inhibits  too  close
consanguineal  unions,  that  not  only  have  they  been  made
the  object  of  legislative  prohibition  in  most  countries,  but
they  could  not  be  practiced  to  any  damaging  extent  were
there  no  laws  relating  to  them.  !N^ow,  if  we  suppose  an
equally  strong  repugnance  to  exist  to  the  marriage  of  con-
sumptives, or  persons  affected  with  any  hereditary  disease,
or  of  those  whose  pedigree  was  known  to  be  tainted  with
insanity,t  the  worst  features  of  the  present  system  would
be  removed  without  further  action.  But  custom  might,
and  doubtless  would,  soon  go  much  further.  Suppose  it
were  regarded  as  a  disgrace  for  a  married  pair  to  rear
more  than  two  or  three  children.  In  au  ignorant  com-
munity this  could  not  be  enforced,  but  in  a  sufficiently
enlightened  one  it  could  and  would  be.  The  opposite  article
of  the  present  code,  which  makes  it  an  honor  to  rear  a  large
family,  is  tacitly  violated  by  intelligent  people,  but  enforced
by  the  ignorant  and  the  poor,  a  state  of  things  which  power-
fully counteracts  all  efforts  to  enlighten  the  masses.  If  there
is  one  social  phenomenon  which  human  ingenuity  ought  to
fbring  completely  under  the  control  of  the  will,  it  is  the
phenomenon  of  procreation.  Just  as  every  one  is  his  own
judge  of  how  much  he  shall  eat  and  drink,  of  what  com-

*  "  Outlines  cf  Sociolofty."  Annual  address  of  the  President  of  the  Anthro-
pological Society  of  Washington,  delivered  February  1,  1882.  ("  Transactions,"
vol.  i,  p.  126.)

f  As  illustrating  the  utter  indifference  that  prevails  on  this  subject  at  pres-
ent, and  the  tendency  to  regard  the  human  race  as  entirely  outside  the  domain
of  biological  laws,  Dr.  Ilenry  Maudslcy  quotes  from  a  work  in  wliich  the  author
says :  "  I  actually  know  a  man  who  is  so  deeply  interested  in  the  doctrine  of
crossing,  that  every  hour  of  his  life  is  devoted  to  the  improvement  of  a  race  of
bantam  fowls  and  curious  pigeons,  and  who  yet  married  a  mad-woman,  whom
he  confines  in  a  garret,  and  by  whom  he  has  insane  progeny."  (Lecture  deliv-
ered at  University  College,  London,  October  2,  1876.)

4:66  OPINION.— TERTIARY  MEANS.

modities  he  wants  to  render  life  enjoyable,  so  eveiy  one
should  be  his  own  judge  of  how  large  a  family  he  desires,
and  should  have  power  in  the  same  degree  to  leave  off  when
the  requisite  number  is  reached.  What  society  needs  is
restriction  of  population,  especially  among  the  classes  and
at  the  points  where  it  now  increases  most  rapidly.

In  human  beings,  value  does  not  reside  in  numbers  but
in  quality,  and  quality  can  only  be  attained  in  two  ways :  1,
by  selection  of  parents;  and,  2,  by  education  of  children.
In  the  present  state  of  society,  neither  of  these  ends  is  at-
tained. Those  who  are  able  and  willing  to  educate  their
children  feel  that  population  is  increasing  too  rapidly,  and
decline  to  contribute  to  it ;  while  those  who  contribute  most
to  the  increase  are  neither  able  nor  willing,  through  poverty
and  ignorance,  to  educate  their  children.  Were  the  social
code  reversed  in  these  respects,  the  facts  would  be  reversed,
and  we  should  have  a  modified  form  of  stirpiculture  resting
on  custom  alone.

The  other  method  by  which  this  end  might  be  attained
is  through  legislation.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  there
can  be  no  effective  legislation  on  social  questions.  We  have
already  seen  that  in  nearly  all  nations  incest  is  prohibited
by  law.  In  nearly  all  monogamous  countries,  bigamy  (and
this  includes  polygamy)  is  forbidden.  In  many  of  the
United  States,  inter-racial  marriages  are  penal  offenses.  Such
laws  are  as  successful  as  most  laws  of  this  prohibitory  type.
If  the  acts  committed  can  not  be  prevented,  their  public
performance  can  be,  and  they  are  converted  into  crimes,  to
be  perpetrated  secretly.  This,  it  is  true,  is  often  worse  than
open  license,  but  it  is  the  efficacy  of  human  legislation  rather
than  its  wisdom  that  we  are  considering.  About  all  that
can  be  said  in  favor  of  prohibitory  legislation  is  that  it  some-
times seems  to  lead  public  sentiment  a  little  beyond  what  it
would  sanction  in  itself.  When  a  people  are  about  ready
for  a  change,  but  tardy  in  inaugurating  it,  a  legislative  sanc-
tion precipitates  it.     It  might  do  this  for  stirpiculture.     If

SOCIOLOGICAL  IDEAS.  467

the  social  code  hesitated  to  forbid  marriages  between  persons
physically  unsound,  the  legal  prohibition  of  such  marriages
would  greatly  aid  their  prevention.  But  prohibitory  legis-
lation assuredly  could  do  very  little  beyond  this,  and,  if  any
thing  else  can  be  done  by  legislation,  it  must  be  by  legisla-
tion of  the  opposite  class,  viz.,  attractive  legislation.  Here
the  theoretical  possibilities  are  immense.  What  men  can
not  be  made  to  do,  they  may  often  be  easily  induced
to  do.  Whatever  the  legislature  sees  to  be  desirable  for
them  to  do,  it  should  devise  the  inducements  which  shall
make  it  for  their  interests  to  do,  and  it  will  certainly  be
done.  The  common-law  principle  that  laws  in  restraint
of  marriage  are  void  belongs  to  this  class,  but  the  object
sought  is  one  of  those  arbitrary,  half-conventional  dogmas
whose  utility  is  doubtful.

SOCIOLOGICAL   IDEAS.

The  highest  type  of  dynamic  opinion  is  that  respect-
ing society.  After  dynamic  opinions  of  the  universe,  of
life,  and  of  man  have  been  formed,  it  is  easy  to  rise  to  the
position  from  which  society  can  be  contemplated  as  progres-
sive and  subject  to  a  central  control.  The  duties  of  society
toward  itself  are  manifest  enough  so  soon  as  its  true  charac-
ter can  be  understood.  Given  correct  ideas  of  what  it
exists  for,  of  the  nature  of  progress,  and  of  the  office  of
individual  and  social  action,  self-interest  alone  will  dictate
the  course  to  be  pursued.  But  this  assumes  full  conscious-
ness on  the  part  of  society  in  its  corporate  capacity.  The
great  problem  remains  how  to  bring  society  to  consciousness.
Assuming  it  to  have  been  brought  to  consciousness,  the
dynamic  truths  with  which  it  must  deal  are  comparatively
plain.  The  mouth-piece  of  a  conscious  society  is  the  legis-
lature. If  dynamic  opinions  prevail  there  with  sufficient
force  to  control  it,  the  systematic  improvement  of  the  social
estate  will  take  place  very  nearly  in  proportion  to  the  degree
of  wisdom  brought  to  bear  upon  it.     The  methods  to  be

468  OPINION.— TERTIARY  2kfEANS.

adopted  in  order  to  secure  this  result  have  been  explained
so  often  that  no  time  need  be  here  devoted  to  their  further
elucidation.

Conclusion.

There  exists  one  point  at  which  ethical  ideas  and  dynamic
ideas  closelj  approach  each  other,  if  they  do  not  actually
meet.  We  saw,  a  few  pages  back,  how  moral  ideas  increase
in  effectiveness  in  proportion  as  they  grow  more  intellectual.
From  mere  impulse  to  true  sentiment,  and  from  sentiment
to  reason,  are  the  psychic  steps  corresponding  to  the  series  of
benevolent  acts  which  lead  from  promiscuous  alms-giving,
through  the  expanding  systems  of  charity,  to  the  broadest
forms  of  philanthropy  and  deep-laid  schemes  of  humanitari-
anism.  But  from  humanitarianism  it  is  but  one  more  step
in  the  same  direction  to  meliorism*  which  may  be  defined
as  humanitarianism  minus  all  sentiment.  !N^ow,  meliorism,
instead  of  an  ethical,  is  a  dynamic  principle.  It  implies
the  improvement  of  the  social  condition  through  cold  calcu-
lation, through  the  adoption  of  indirect  means.  It  is  not
content  merely  to  alleviate  present  suffering,  it  aims  to  cre-
ate conditions  under  which  no  suffering  can  exist.  It  is
ready  even  to  sacrifice  temporary  enjoyment  for  greater  fut-
ure enjoyment — the  pleasure  of  a  few  for  that  of  the  mass.
Much  that  passes  for  philanthropy  and  charity  it  declares  to
be  injurious  to  society,  as  tending  to  preserve  and  perpetuate
those  who  are  naturally  unfit  to  survive.  It  would  break
over  the  barriers  of  sympathy  and  sentiment,  and  consider
only  the  end-result.  It  employs  the  indirect  method  of  at-
taining this  end,  works  through  inventive  strategy,  aims  to

*  The  language  seems  to  be  indebted  to  George  Eliot  for  this  much-needed
word,  and,  if  it  is  employed  here  with  a  slightly  different  shade  of  meaning  from
that  which  she  originally  assigned  to  it,  it  is  at  least  one  which  is  not  only  not
supplied  by  any  other  word,  but  one  which  is  in  harmony  with  its  etymology,
(See  "  Pessimism  :  a  History  and  a  Criticism,"  by  James  Sully,  London,  1877,
p.  399.)

CONCLUSION.— MELIOKISM.  469

control  natural  forces,  and  in  all  respects  simulates  the  spirit
of  true  science.

These  two  great  classes  of  ideas  thus  seem,  while  widely-
separated  in  their  lower,  to  converge  and  coalesce  in  their
higher,  stages.  They  at  first  seem  to  reverse  the  normal
course  of  evolution,  but,  upon  a  closer  inspection,  the  process
is  perceived  to  consist  in  a  sort  of  integration  of  the  parts  of
the  general  system  of  ideas  into  a  consistent  whole.

CHAPTER  XIII.
KNOWLEDGE.

IMMEDIATE  DATA   OF   IDEAS,   OK   FOUKTH    PEOXIMATE   END  OF
CONATION.

Tha  data  of  thought — Composite  character  of  intelligence — Two  influential
popular  errors — Dangers  of  pure  intellectual  activity — Relative  claims  of
intellect  and  knowledge  upon  culture — ^Explanation  of  the  fact  that  the
capacity  for  knowledge  has  always  exceeded  its  amount — Relative  ease  with
which  intellect  and  knowledge  may  be  increased — The  two  legitimate  modes
of  increasing  intellect — Chasm  between  the  knowledge  extant  and  that
possessed  by  the  average  mind — Resume  of  the  preceding  considerations —
Experience  as  the  vehicle  of  knowledge — Laws  of  the  mind  in  arriving  ac
certainty — Aid  rendered  to  intellect  by  knowledge — Qualitative  increase  of
knowledge — What  knowledge  is  most  important — Generality  as  a  test  of
importance — Practicality  as  a  test  of  importance — Scientific  and  unscien-
tific knowledge — Co-ordination  of  the  present  with  the  two  preceding
chapters — Ethical  knowledge — Dynamic  knowledge — Principles  of  certi-
tude— Limits  of  absolute  certainty — Doctrine  of  innate  ideas,  or  necessary
truths — Deductive  and  inductive  knowledge — The  senses  as  the  primary
source  of  all  knowledge — Testimony  as  a  mode  of  diminishing  the  degree
of  certainty — Nature  of  scientific  knowledge — Distribution  of  knowledge
— Legitimate  effect  of  the  existing  inequality  in  the  distribution  of  knowl-
edge.

In  the  four  preceding  chapters  we  have  seen  that  human
progress,  measured  by  the  degree  of  happiness  conferred,  has
been  accomplished  altogether  bj  appropriate  human  actions,
dictated  by  rational  thoughts.  We  have  now  to  inquire  into
the  nature  of  the  causal  antecedents  of  thoughts  themselves.
Men  can  not  think  rationally  by  merely  wishing  to  do  so.
Thought  is  the  product  of  the  psychological  machinery.     It

1

A

INTELLIGENCE.  471

will  correspond  to  the  general  character  of  the  mind,  and  can
be  neither  better  nor  worse  than  the  mind.  We  have,  there-
fore, really  to  consider  here  the  nature  of  the  thinking  mind,
not  exactly  from  the  physiological  or  psychological  stand-
point, but  from  a  higher  and  more  practical  stand-point.
We  must  consider  it  as  objectively  affected,  not  merely  in
itself,  its  normal  processes,  but  in  connection  with  its  environ-
ment, and  as  itself  modified,  conditioned,  and,  as  it  were,
charged  with  all  the  influences  of  the  surrounding  and  im-
pinging world.

Instead,  therefore,  of  saying  that  the  character  of  human
ideas  depends  upon  the  character  of  the  mind,  we  must  say
that  the  value  of  thought  depends  upon  the  degree  of  intel-
ligence. At  first  blush,  this  proposition  may  appear  to  be
nearly  identical  with  the  other,  but  we  shall  soon  see  that  the
difference  is  immense.

In  order  to  perceive  this,  it  will  be  necessary  to  analyze
the  word  '•intelligence."  A  glance  shows  it  to  be  com-
pound. It  is  clearly  not  equivalent  to  "  mind,"  which  em-
braces the  feelings  and  the  intellect ;  neither  is  it  equivalent
to  "  intellect,"  which  is  the  objective  branch  of  mind,  and
yet  its  connection  with  intellect  is  obviously  close.  Intellect
is  involved  in  intelligence,  but  something  else  is  also  involved
in  it.  What,  then,  is  this  additional  ingredient  ?  Evidently
it  is  the  product  of  intellection.  Intellect  coupled  with  the
product  of  its  operation  constitutes  intelligence.  The  ob-
jective character  of  the  intellect  suggests  that  it  is  engaged
with  external  objects.  Its  legitimate  work  is  the  cognition
of  such  objects.  Once  cognized,  an  object  becomes  an  in-
tellectual product.  This  product  may  be  technically  spoken
tof  as  a  cognition,  or  it  may  be  more  familiarly  called  knowl-
edge. Intelligence,  therefore,  implies  not  only  the  degree  of
intellectual  power  employed,  but  the  amount  of  labor  actu-
ally performed  by  this  power;  it  is  intellect  j?Zws  knowledge.
Intellect  has  been  very  appropriately  styled  the  co-efficient
of  intelligence.

I

47-2  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

There  are  several  other  terms  which  are  partially  synony-
mous with  either  intellect  or  intelligence,  which  may  be
briefly  noticed  in  passing.

The  notion  conveyed  by  the  word  "genius"  differs  from
that  conveyed  by  "intellect,"  in  denoting  a  special  applica-
tion of  the  latter,  or  specialized  power  in  certain  directions,
and  so-called  "geniuses"  always  manifest  a  greater  or  less
degree  of  inequality  among  the  faculties  of  the  intellect,
or  intellectual  one-sidedness.  Where  the  excess  is  in  the
direction  of  inventive  art,  this  one-sidedness  is  frequently
of  great  value  to  civilization.

The  notion  involved  in  the  word  "  talent "  is  much  nearer
to  "  intelligence  "  than  to  "  genius."  It  is  intermediate  be-
tween the  two,  but  conveys  more  strongly  the  notion  of
intellectual  power  than  quantity  of  knowledge.  "  Wisdom,"
on  the  other  hand,  while  involving  both  intellect  and  knowl-
edge, places  more  stress  upon  the  possession  and  proper
application  of  knowledge.

Before  proceeding  further,  it  may  be  well  to  name  the
two  fundamental  popular  errors  which  stand  most  in  the  way
of  the  realization  of  an  artificial  social  progress,  and,  more
than  any  other  of  the  opinions  of  mankind,  tend  to  retard
social  advancement.  These  are :  1,  overvaluation  of  intel-
lect, coupled  with  undervaluation  of  knowledge  ;  and,  2,
overvaluation  of  the  origination,  coupled  with  undervalua-
tion of  the  distribution,  of  knowledge.

The  second  of  these  errors  will  form  the  subject  of  the
latter  portion  of  this  chapter.  The  first  will  be  appropri-
ately considered  here.

It  may  seem  inconsistent  to  condemn  a  social  state  as  ar-
tificial while  alleging  that  it  has  been  brought  about  by  un-
directed nature,  and  at  the  same  time  to  appeal  to  artificial
human  agency  to  restore  the  natural  state.  Yet  this  the  dy-
namic sociologist  is  compelled  to  do,  and  on  closer  examina-
tion the  apparent  inconsistency  will  disappear,  and  it  will  be

TWO  POPULAR  ERRORS.  473

perceived  that,  though  a  paradox,  it  is  nevertheless  an  im-
portant truth  that  the  tendency  of  the  unaided  and  unguided
social  forces,  or  these  forces  guided  by  intellect  alone,  is  to
carry  man  away  from  nature,  and  make  him  a  prey  to  all
forms  of  erroneous  conceptions,  absurd  notions,  and  perni-
cious practices ;  while  at  the  same  time  the  only  power  to
which  he  can  appeal  for  the  removal  of  such  artificial  excres-
cences and  dangerous  social  diseases  to  which  intellectual  ac-
tion gives  rise  is  intellect  itself.  Mind  has  created  them,  and
mind  alone  can  abolish  them.  But  here  lies  a  second  para-
dox, or  rather  the  fundamental  truth  that  underlies  the  first.
The  natural  mind  produces  artificial  results ;  the  artificial
mind  produces  natural  results.  The  natural  mind  is  the
crude  intellect  unprovided  with  facts  and  truths — intellect
without  knowledge.  The  artificial  mind  is  the  intellect
stored  with  natural  truths  and  real  facts  —  intellect  with
knowledge.  Both  operate  logically  and  rationally,  but  ar-
rive at  diametrically  opposite  results.  The  former  appears
blind  and  unconscious,  the  latter  acts  with  foresight  and  a
full  consciousness  of  its  aims.  After  all,  there  really  is  no
natural  or  artificial.  Only  one  ultimate  criterion  exists,  viz.,
the  test  of  advantage.  From  the  moral  point  of  view,  i.  e.,
the  point  of  view  of  every  sentient  being,  that  only  is  natu-
ral which  brings  benefit,  and  every  principle  of  the  so-called
laws  of  nature  must  and  should  be  violated  to  insure  this  end.
Civilization  consists  in  the  wholesale  and  ruthless  trampling
down  of  natural  laws,  the  complete  subordination  of  the  cos-
mical  point  of  view  to  the  human  point  of  view.  Man  revo-
lutionizes the  universe,  and  makes  Feeling,  instead  of  Being,
the  criterion  of  the  Natural.  The  essential  function  of
Knowledge  is  to  aid  him  in  accomplishing  this  revolution.

The  conscious  efforts  of  society  to  improve  its  condition
may  be  directed  toward  either  of  the  two  following  ends :
1,  to  increase  the  amount  of  intellect ;  2,  to  increase  the
amount  of  knowledge.

As  before  remarked,  the  real  end  sought  is  the  increase
52

474  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEA.NS.

of  intelligence,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  consists  in  the  com-
bination of  these  two  subordinate  ends.  But  intelligence,
from  its  compound  nature,  can  not  be  acquired  as  such.  It
must  be  acquired  either  as  pure  intellect  or  as  pure  knowl-
edge. These  can  no  more  be  administered  in  their  combined
form  than  flesh  and  blood  can  be  administered  in  their  com-
plex state  directly  to  the  body.  But,  given  a  certain  amount
of  knowledge,  an  increase  in  the  degree  of  intellectual  power
produces  an  increase  in  the  degree  of  intelligence  ;  or,  given
a  certain  amount  of  intellectual  power,  an  increase  of  knowl-
edge also  produces  an  increase  of  intelligence.

The  question,  therefore,  becomes  simply  a  practical  one.
Which  is  it  more  profitable  to  expend  energy  in  trying  to
increase,  intellect  or  knowledge?  or,  if  both,  upon  which
should  the  greater  amount  of  energy  be  laid  out  ?  The
answer  to  this  question  depends  upon  two  conditions.

The  first  is  the  relative  necessity  or  importance  of  the
accomplishment  of  these  two  objects ;  the  second  is  the  rela-
tive ease  with  which  they  may  be  accomplished.

When  we  reflect  that  the  chief  character  by  which  man
is  distinguished  from  other  animals  is  his  superior  brain-
development,  and  that,  until  this  reaches  a  certain  point  (the
minimum  being  usually  placed,  though  roughly,  at  sixty-five
cubic  inches  of  encephalon),  no  amount  of  instruction  can
raise  him  above  the  animal  plane,  the  absolute  necessity  and
importance  of  intellectual  increase  below  and  at  this  point  is
of  course  obvious  to  all.  Moreover,  for  any  useful  degree
of  social  advancement,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  increase
to  a  considerable  distance  above  this  minimum  point  is  abso-
lutely essential.  What  to  say  of  the  several  savage  tribes
now  inhabiting  the  globe  can  not  be  determined  until  more
is  known  of  their  real  intellectual  condition ;  and,  although
this  doubtless  differs  immensely  in  different  tribes,  it  is  prob-
able that  they  must  still  advance  considerably  by  the  spon-
taneous methods  of  development  before  they  arrive  at  the
stage  at  which  a  systematic  social  fabric  can  be  erected.     In

CLAIMS  OF  INTELLECT  AND  KNOWLEDGE.         475

all  barbarian  and  half -civilized  nations  it  is  Highly  probable
that  the  basis  exists  for  a  much  higher  degree  of  intelligence,
and  that  all  that  is  wanting  to  take  them  out  of  those  ethno-
logical categories  and  place  them  alongside  of  so-called  civil-
ized nations  is  simply  to  augment  their  general  fund  of
information  to  a  point  much  nearer  the  limit  of  their  capac-
ity for  receiving  it.

When  we  come  to  the  consideration  of  civilized  nations
from  this  point  of  view,  it  becomes  obvious  that  here  also  the
capacity  for  knowledge  is  far  in  advance  of  the  knowledge
possessed.  This  is  proved  in  a  great  variety  of  ways.  The
number  of  great  men  that  succeed,  against  the  powerful
obstacles  which  society  presents,  in  rising  from  obscurity,
shows  that  in  the  lower  ranks  of  life  the  native  intellectual
power  is  nearly  as  great  as  in  the  higher.  Through  the
countless  reverses  of  fortune  which  society  is  perpetually
undergoing,  even  in  the  Old  "World,  it  is  impossible  to  pre-
vent much  sterling  blood  from  percolating  through  the  en-
tire mass ;  and  the  ruder  Jiabits  of  life  in  the  lower  classes
tend  to  prevent  the  degeneracy  of  genius  which  goes  on  so
rapidly  amid  the  luxuries  of  the  higher.  The  condition  of
the  European  race  is  such  now  that  in  point  of  average
capacity  there  is  probably,  except  in  isolated  localities,  no
distinction  in  the  different  ranks  or  social  stations  of  life.
An  equal  number,  selected  wholly  at  random  from  among
the  lower,  middle,  and  higher  classes,  would,  if  placed  under
like  conditions,  evince  equal  average  native  ability  for  ac-
quiring knowledge.  There  would  doubtless  be  marked
qualitative  differences  due  to  rank,  but  no  perceptible  quan-
titative differences.  If,  however,  we  compare  the  intelli-
gence of  different  classes  of  society,  we  observe  the  most
immense  differences.  This  certainly  no  one  can  question.
These  differences  can  therefore  only  be  accounted  for  on  the
supposition  that  to  equal  capacity  for  knowledge  enormously
disproportionate  amounts  of  knowledge  have  been  supplied.
Differences  of  social  position  bring  differences  of  opportu-

476  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

nity.  The  experiences  which  are  received  in  certain  modes
of  life  are  narrow,  special,  and  valueless;  those  of  other
modes  of  life  are  broad,  general,  and  valuable.  One  devel-
ops very  little  intelligence,  the  other  develops  much,  though
the  capacity  for  intelligence  be  precisely  equal.  Reverse
any  two  such  cases  and  the  results  would  be  reversed.  The
degree  of  intelligence  in  cities  is  well  known  to  be  greatly
superior  to  that  in  the  rural  districts.  This  is  by  no  means
due  to  the  superior  capacity  of  city  populations.  If  there  is
any  difference  in  this  respect,  it  is  probably  the  reverse  of
this.  The  country  boy  removed  to  the  city  soon  becomes  a
city  boy.  So  it  is  with  men  and  with  women.  It  is  the
more  frequent,  varied,  and  forcible  contact  of  mind  with
mind,  the  atmosphere  of  conversation,  news,  reading,  and
thinking  of  a  metropolis.  For  the  same  reason  the  more
thickly  settled  and  opulent  sections  of  a  country  exhibit  more
intelligence  than  the  newer  and  poorer  sections.  More  and
more  attention  is  devoted  to  helles-lettres^  to  art,  and  to
science.  From  the  plains  of  Nebraska,  where  the  aspiring
youth  can  only  with  the  greatest  diflficulty  obtain  the  rudi-
ments of  an  education,  to  the  great  centers  of  life  in  London,
Berlin,  or  Paris,  where  every  night  large  crowds  assemble  to
listen  to  technical  lectures  by  the  masters  of  science,  there
exist  all  degrees  of  difference  in  the  mere  opportunity  which
equal  intellects  enjoy  for  acquiring  knowledge  and  enhanc-
ing intelligence.

Panegyrists  of  the  ancients  maintain  that  the  native  ca-
pacity of  mankind  had  reached  a  stage  in  the  age  of  Aris-
totle which  it  has  never  since  surpassed ;  and  the  more  we
become  acquainted  with  the  thoughts  of  Grecian  sages  and
compare  them  with  those  worked  out  with  so  great  labor
and  increased  facilities  by  the  wisest  of  modern  times,  the
more  we  feel  obliged  to  acquiesce  in  this  judgment.  Yet
no  one  would  for  a  moment  maintain  that  the  intelligence
of  the  ancients  could  be  compared  with  that  of  later  ages.
Here,  again,  an  immense  difference  is  satisfactorily  account-

EXCESS  OF  CAPACITY  EXPLAINED.  477

ed  for  by  increased  acquisition  alone.  Had  the  Greeks  and
Komans  possessed  our  civilization  of  science,  they  would
have  been  fully  competent  to  use  and  enjoy  it.  These  facts,
and  many  more  that  might  be  brought  forward,  serve  to
show  how  far  intellect  in  all  civilized  races  has  outstripped
knowledge — to  how  great  an  extent  the  skeleton  of  intelli-
gence is  still  capable  of  being  clothed  with  flesh  and  blood.

So  remarkable  a  state  of  things  is  well  worthy  of  an
attempt  at  explanation  on  genetic  principles.  We  saw,  in  a
previous  chapter  (vol.  i,  p.  428),  that  the  superior  brain-
development  of  the  human,  race  was  probably  brought  about
through  natural  selection  as  a  substitute  for  the  loss  of  the
advantages  previously  possessed  of  an  arboreal  existence,  and
the  lack  of  most  of  those  successful  weapons  of  oifense  and
defense  possessed  by  other  animals.  This  was  aided  by  social
union,  by  competition  between  tribes,  by  language,  by  war,
by  migration,  and  by  conflict  with  natural  barriers,  cold  and
want.  The  development,  described  in  Chapter  YII,  of  the
love  of  acquisition,  and  the  various  modes  of  gratifying  this
derivative  but  powerful  passion,  gave  a  new  impetus  to  the
growth  of  intellect,  and  trade  and  commerce,  industry  and
fine  arts  were  the  result.  Various  systems  arose  designed
to  dispense  with  labor  and  secure  leisure.  Among  these
the  priesthood  was  eminently  successful.  Monarchy  and
various  forms  of  government  achieved  the  same  object ;
leisure  begat  literature,  and  speculation  and  pure  intellect
made  rapid  strides  among  special  favored  classes,  and,  while
the  low  condition  of  women  tended  constantly  to  check  this
advance,  male  selection,  which  looked  to  beauty  rather  than
to  social  position,  tended,  on  the  other  hand,  to  distribute
the  brain-development  already  attained  throughout  the
lower  and  less  favored  classes.

It  is  a  principle  of  general  biology  that  the  direction  of
development  is  always  along  the  line  of  greatest  advantage.
Every  organism  has  to  maintain  a  perpetual  struggle  for  the
preservation  of  life.    Every  true  advance  looks  directly  to  the

4:78  KNOWLEDGE.— FOUETH  MEANS.

increase  of  its  means  of  securing  this  object.  When  the  plan,
as  we  may  call  it,  of  adding  to  the  brain-mass  was  hit  upon
for  this  purpose,  sagacity  was  applied  solely  to  the  avoidance
of  danger  and  the  supply  of  wants.  Unless  increasing  in-
tellect could  establish  its  advantageousness  by  seizing  upon
principles  of  nature  which  would  enable  the  creature  to  make
a  better  defense  or  obtain  a  better  livelihood,  it  could  not
be  chosen  as  the  means  of  preventing  extinction.  But  it
proved  admirably  adapted  to  secure  both  these  ends,  which
sufficiently  explains  why  it  was  chosen.  What  we  should,
however,  carefully  note  and  duly  weigh,  is  the  important  fact
that  the  brain-development  necessary  to  produce  these  com-
paratively simple  results  is  sufficient  both  in  quantity  and
quality,  when  properly  directed,  to  produce  far  greater  and
more  complicated  results.  Divesting  the  mind  of  all  optimis-
tic impediments,  we  have  first  to  perceive  that  a  far  higher
degree  of  brain-development  was  actually  required  than  would
have  been  required  could  it  have  then  been  properly  directed.
Firmly  grasping  once  more  the  principles  set  forth  in  Chap-
ter X,  it  becomes  clear  that  the  incipient  progress  of  man-
kind, like  all  later  stages  of  progress,  was  accomplished  at
an  enormous  disadvantage,  due  simply  to  the  normal  con-
stitution of  the  world.  Could  all  the  phenomena  presented
to  the  nascent  intellect  have  been  correctly  intei-preted,
limited  though  its  range  was,  it  would  have  sped  forward
with  a  comparatively  lightning-like  rapidity.  As  a  matter
of  fact,  however,  instead  of  doing  this  under  the  power  of
the  development  that  actually  took  place,  progress  would
not  have  greatly  exceeded  the  rate  actually  reached,  but  in
its  stead  a  far  less  rapid  brain-development  would  have  gone
on.  But,  however  this  might  have  been  upon  this  assumption,
the  assumption  is  one  that  could  not  have  been  realized  in
the  nature  of  things.  It  was  absolutely  essential  that  the  tran-
sition to  manhood  should  be  accomplished  at  great  expense,
due  chiefly  to  the  obstacles  that  intellect  itself  placed  in  the
way.     The  mistakes,  errors,  delusions,  and  suicidal  acts  that

i

I

EXCESS  OF  CAPACITY  EXPLAINED.  479

tlie  crude,  uninstructed  intellect  committed  in  direct  antago-
nism with  the  great  end  of  intellectual  development,  are  not
mere  incidents  in  the  calculation,  but  are  legitimate  factors
in  the  problem  of  human  progress.  Brain-development,  con-
sidered as  one  of  nature's  selected  means  for  advancing  the
race,  must  be  powerful  enough  in  its  good  effects  to  override
these  necessary  bad  effects,  and  leave  some  margin  for  real
progress.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  this  tendency  could
ever  have  been  set  up  in  any  organism  whose  brain-power
had  already  reached  a  certain  point.  It  must  have  been  first
set  up  in  an  animal  incapable  of  any  of  the  compound  proc-
esses of  psychic  operation.  In  such  a  being,  the  whole  for-ce
of  the  increasing  intellect  is  applied  to  advantageous  uses,  as
we  see  it  in  the  fox,  seeking  its  prey,  or  the  crow,  evading
its  enemies.  Here  all  ideation  is  normal  and  direct.  The
reasoning,  though  feeble,  is  legitimate,  and  the  conclusions
reached  are  true.  But  when  the  stage  of  compound  idea-
tion is  reached — when  reflection,  ratiocination,  and  specula-
tion begin — then  begin  also  fallacy,  error,  and  hallucination.
These,  as  we  have  seen,  counteract  in  a  powerful  manner
the  advantageous  influence  of  intellectual  activity.  As  was
queried  in  another  place  {supra,  p.  271),  these  influences  may,
in  many  or  even  in  most  cases,  have  more  than  neutralized
the  progressive  effects  of  brain-development,  and  brought
about  the  rapid  extinction  of  many  species  at  this  critical
point ;  but  that  they  have  not  done  so  in  the  case  of  man,  or
at  least  of  some  of  the  branches  of  the  human  stock,  is
suflaciently  proved  by  the  actual  development  of  the  race  to
a  far  higher  position  in  the  organic  scale  than  has  been
reached  by  any  other  species  of  animal.  This  has  been  due
to  the  immense  advantage  of  even  the  simplest  application  of
the  indirect,  or  inventive,  method  of  securing  remote  ends.
The  few  surface  principles,  correctly  seized  and  sagaciously
applied,  proved  more  than  sufficient  to  counteract  the  evil
influence  of  all  man's  early  error  and  delusion  respecting  the
peeper  laws  of  his  environment  {supra,  pp.  274,  305).

480  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

The  brain,  while  possessing  certain  local  specializations,  is
ill  its  ensemble  a  unit — the  organ  of  the  intellect.  Its  devel-
opment through  natural  selection  had  to  reach  a  point  fur
beyond  that  which  would  have  been  necessary  could  the
phenomena  of  nature  have  been  correctly  interpreted.  In
other  words,  the  intellect,  almost  unaided  by  a  knowledge  of
truth,  was  obliged  to  serve  as  a  substitute  for  a  much  lower
degree  of  intellect  coupled  with  a  proper  amoant  of  such
knowledge.  The  consequence  has  been,  that  the  degree  of
native  capacity  has  always  been  far  in  excess  of  the  necessity,
and  still  remains  so,  if  by  necessity  we  consider  only  the
practical  end  of  nature — preservation  of  life.  While  this
has  gone  on  at  vast  expense  to  the  energies  of  the  race  in
the  past,  it  should  not  be  regarded  as  an  unmixed  evil.
There  is  still  time  partially  to  repair  tliis  loss.  Letting
by-gones  be  by-gones,  it  is  certainly  a  fortunate  circumstance,
now  that  society  is  about  to  waken  into  consciousness,  that  its
constitution  is  found  to  be  in  so  healthy  a  state.  Nature,  like
a  despotic  ruler,  while  she  has  heavily  taxed  the  resources  of
society,  and  lavishly,  often  wantonly,  squandered  its  revenues,
has  nevertheless  not  only  kept  it  out  of  debt,  but  will  be
ready,  when  society  takes  its  affairs  into  its  own  hands,  to
turn  over  to  it  a  well-filled  exchequer.

The  great  height  to  which  the  human  intellect  had  at-
tained before  the  historic  epoch  is  attested  by  innumerable
facts  revealed  in  archaeology.  The  brilliancy  of  its  achieve-
ments in  all  the  earliest  civilizations  has  been  the  favorite
theme  of  scholars  and  orators.  The  vast  and  truly  profound
intellectual  labors  of  the  leading  intellects  of  antiquity,  not
merely  in  Greece  and  Eome,  but  in  India,  Persia,  Phoenicia,
Assyria,  Egypt,  and  China,  are  also  well  understood  and
much  dwelt  upon.  But  the  comparative  fruitlessness  of  all
this  intellectual  labor  seems  not  to  have  been  sufficiently
realized  until  within  quite  recent  times,  when  men  began  to
see  that,  to  be  useful,  the  mind  must  occupy  itself  with  reali-
ties.   There  has  not  been  a  time  since  the  age  of  Pythagoras,

I

EXCESS  OF  CAPACITY  EXPLAINED.  481

when  the  knowledge  of  natural  truth,  now  enjoyed  by  West-
em  Europe,  could  not,  if  possessed  in  the  same  sense,  have
been  equally  utilized  by  any  people  in  Europe,  and  there
certainly  has  not  been  a  time  since  that  age  when  the  in-
tellect was  not  fully  capable  of  receiving  it.

'Nor  is  this  all.  The  intellect  of  Western  Europe  is  still
capable  of  easily  digesting  and  thoroughly  assimilating  a  vast
amount  of  natural  truth  in  addition  to  that  now  possessed  by
it ;  and  all  the  parts  of  it  and  of  America,  between  which
the  greatest  inequality  in  this  respect  now  exists,  are  capable
of  holding  it  all  alike,  and  the  proposed  increase  besides.
The  chief  differences  in  nations,  in  local  areas,  in  communi-
ties, and  in  individuals,  is  in  what  they  know,  and  not  in
what  they  are  capable  of  knowing.  It  is  intelligence  which
so  greatly  varies,  and  not  intellect ;  the  deficiencies  of  back-
ward regions  are  deficiencies  in  knowledge ;  the  chief  errors
of  the  world,  as  well  as  its  chief  evils,  have  a  common  origin
in  ignorance.

Let  us  now  restate  the  question :  Upon  the  increase  of
which  is  it  more  important  and  necessary  that  social  energy
be  expended,  intellect  or  knowledge  ?

Since  intelligence  is  the  real  end  in  view,  which  consists
only  in  a  proper  combination  of  the  two,  all  increase  in  the
one  in  excess  of  the  other  is  without  result.  But  we  have
shown  that  the  former  is  already  largely  in  excess.  Why,
then,  insist  upon  adding  to  tins,  to  the  neglect  of  the  other  ?
If,  in  seeking  to  obtain  a  larger  amount  of  a  compound
chemical,  composed  of  two  ingredients  which  combine  in
definite  proportions,  an  excess  of  either  one  be  constantly
added  without  adding  any  of  the  other,  the  amount  of  the
compound  desired  will  never  be  increased.  The  jar  may  be
filled  with  the  un combined  and  valueless  mixture,  but  it
represents  nothing.  Thus  it  is  with  the  psychic  progress  of
mankind.  The  only  increment  which  counts  is  the  incre-
ment of  intelligence,  represented  by  the  maximum  condition
of  the  lesser  of  its  two  components.

4:82  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

The  otlier  question  was  as  to  which  of  these  two  compo-
nents of  intelligence  it  is  easier  to  supply.  There  is  a  cer-
tain heroism  in  the  fearless  manner  in  which  the  human  race
attacks  the  most  difficult  problems.  A  typical  instance  of
this  kind  is  the  attempt  to  develop  the  human  intellect.  The
zeal  with  which  this  problem  has  been  attacked  by  "  educa-
tionalists," as  well  as  the  results,  reminds  us  strongly  of  Don
Quixote's  war  upon  the  windmills.  Wholly  ignorant  of  the
great  laws  of  heredity  which  suggest  a  real  method,  hostile
for  the  most  part  to  the  theory  of  natural  development,  by
whose  contemplation  alone  the  true  difficulties  of  the  task
can  be  duly  appreciated,  these  zealous  reformers  continue  to
beat  the  air  and  the  sea,  and  fancy  they  are  really  subduing
the  winds  and  the  waves.

The  trifling  or  even  questionable  progress  which  the  hu-
man intellect  has  made  within  the  entire  historic  period
should  suffice  to  teach  the  most  sanguine  that  brain-tissue
can  not  be  made  by  hand.  The  researches  of  Galton  show
us  with  what  pertinacity  nature  and  blood  hold  on  and  over-
rule education  and  circumstances;  physiognomy  and  phre-
nology (considered  as  the  real  science  of  cerebral  morphol-
ogy) negative  the  claim  that  any  appreciable  alteration  in  the
quantity  or  quality  of  the  psychic  substratum  can  be  effected
within  the  limits  of  an  individual's  life-time.

The  system  hitherto  chiefly  relied  upon  for  the  develop-
ment of  the  mind  may  be  appropriately  called  "  intellectual
gymnastic."  It  consists  in  exercising  the  intellect  on  sham
problems  in  the  same  manner  that  acrobats  cultivate  their
bodily  agility.  Logical  tournaments  and  mock  polemics  are
regularly  conducted,  and  various  forms  of  heated  "  wran-
gling "  are  made  regular  exercises  in  the  highest  institutions
of  learning.  Real  objects  are  avoided  as  unnecessary,  and  as
only  belonging  to  serious  life.  It  is  supposed  that  in  this
way  the  plastic  mind  of  youth  will  be  "  drawn  out "  and
made  something  very  different  from  what  it  would  other-
wise be.     Too  frequently  it  is  worn  out  instead,  and  thus

I

mCKEASE  OF  INTELLECT  AND  OF  KNOWLEDGE.  483

unfitted  entirely  for  tlae  active  duties  of  later  years.  That
some  effect  is  thus  produced,  not  indeed  appreciable  (unless
by  the  breaking  down  of  the  mind),  during  the  life  of  the  in-
dividual, but  upon  posterity  after  a  series  of  generations,  is
probably  true,  though  it  is  apt  to  show  itself  in  the  form  of
degeneracy  or  effeminacy — a  fondness  for  the  forms  and
shadows  of  things  accompanied  by  a  disregard  of  the  sub-
stance.

There  is  no  royal  road  to  mind-growth.  There  is  no
method  by  which  a  sufficiently  rapid  variation  in  the  quan-
tity or  quality  of  the  brain  can  be  produced  to  be  visible  in
the  individual,  and  all  change  in  the  intellect  proper  must
be  due  to  corresponding  change  in  the  brain.  Man's  power
over  the  bodily  qualities  of  animals  is  far  greater  than  it  is
over  his  own,  yet  the  most  extreme  enthusiast  in  such  mat-
ters never  hopes  to  alter  the  character  of  an  animal  after  it  is
born.  ^Nevertheless,  many  wildly  fancy  that  they  can  trans-
form human  beings  after  birth.  This  only  shows  that  the
science  of  dynamic  sociology  is  in  its  crude  stage,  when
the  coarsest  conceptions  are  entertained  and  impossibilities
credited,  while  the  delicate  nature  of  the  truths  concerning  it
find  no  responsive  chord  in  human  beliefs  and  ideas.  A
strict  parallel  is  furnished  by  biology  in  the  crude  beliefs
early  entertained  on  the  question  of  spontaneous  generation.

There  are  two  ways  in  which  intellect  may  be  really  de-
^  veloped,  though  the  results  can  only  appear  in  the  course  of
successive  generations.  One  of  these  is  by  the  practical  ob-
servance of  the  laws  of  heredity,  or,  in  other  words,  by  ra-
tional selection  of  the  parents  of  each  generation.  The  other
is  by  an  intelligent  modification  of  the  environment  of  in-
dividuals, such  as  to  cause  an  increment  of  variation  in  each
generation  in  the  direction  desired.

The  first  of  these  methods  is  far  more  rapid  than  the  sec-
ond, but  its  adoption  is  attended  with  very  great  practical  dif-
ficulties. All  that  is  necessary  to  say  upon  it  has  been  said
in  other  parts  of  this  work  {supra^  pp.  392,  463).

484  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

The  other  method,  though  less  rapid,  is  not  less  certain
than  the  first,  and  is  entirely  practicable.  The  variations
which  take  place  in  the  different  organs  of  animals  are  due
to  changes  in  their  environment,  which  make  it  advantageous
to  the  species  that  such  variations  occur.  But  the  end  may
be  changed,  and  artificial  be  substituted  for  natural  selection.
Thus  far  the  equiUbration  (of  organism  and  environment)  is
indirect.  That  an  artificial  mode  of  direct  equilibration  may
also  be  substituted  for  tlie  natural  mode,  though  little  recog-
nized, is  equally  obvious.  If  the  human  intellect  is  to  be
artificially  increased  it  will  probably  require  to  be  done
through  tliis  direct  form  of  selection,  viz.,  such  that  the
changed  circumstances,  appealing  directly  to  the  intellect,
will  effect  the  desired  differentiation.

By  changed  circumstances  must  of  course  be  understood
the  substitution  of  a  new  and  different  class  of  experiences.
In  order  to  produce  the  desired  result,  these  new  and  design-
edly arranged  experiences  must  be  such  as  will  tend  to  sup-
ply the  intellect  with  a  greater  amount  of  information  of  a
higher  class.  The  theory  of  direct  equilibration  is  that  an
organ  is  strengthened  by  use.  But  use  implies  legitimate
use.  It  does  not  strengthen  the  stomach  to  act,  ever  so
powerfully,  upon  vacancy.  Neither  does  it  strengthen  the
mind  to  revel  in  empty  speculation.  Truth  and  fact  are  the
natural  food  of  the  intellect,*  and  its  powers  will  be  increased
and  its  physiological  base  will  be  broadened  by  the  ample
supply  of  this  legitimate  pabulum.  To  state  the  problem  in
somewhat  plainer  terms,  we  may  say  that  the  only  present
practical  mode  of  contributing  any  thing  to  the  development
of  intellect,  is  that  of  supplying  it  with  knowledge.  "We
have  already  seen  that  knowledge  for  its  own  sake,  wholly
independent  of  capacity,  is  far  more  important  than  any  in-
tellectual increment.     We  now  see  that,  even  granting  the

*  "  Frustra  enim  f uerit  speculum  expolire,  si  desint  imagines  ;  et  plane  ma-
teria idonea  praeparanda  est  intellectui,  non  solum  praesidia  fida  comparanda."
(Bacon,  "  Distributio  operis,"  "  Works,"  vol.  i,  p.  222.)

MODES  OF  INCREASING  INTELLECT.  485

importance  of  such  intellectual  increment,  the  only  means  of
realizing  it  is  the  supply  of  knowledge.

We  have  considered  the  great  difficulties  in  the  way  of
all  efforts  to  produce  an  artificial  development  of  the  intel-
lect, and  the  necessarily  slow  and  secular  nature  of  such
changes,  whether  brought  about  by  natural  or  by  artificial
means.  It  remains  to  consider,  in  comparison  with  this,  the
difficulties  and  facilities  which  exist  or  may  exist  in  efforts
to  supply  knowledge.

If  it  were  solely  a  question  of  the  supply  of  oi'iginal
knowledge — knowledge  for  the  first  time  wrought  out  of
phenomena  and  natural  law — the  task  would,  of  course,  be  a
difficult  one ;  yet  the  difficulties  even  here  are  by  no  means
so  great  as  those  attending  the  actual  modification  of  the
physical  basis  of  psychic  phenomena.  Where  favorably
situated  and  industriously  disposed,  a  single  individual  dur-
ing a  life-time  may,  and  often  does,  add  large  increments  to
the  fund  of  known  truth.  A  very  few  minds  have  furnished
the  world  with  all  its  knowledge,  the  general  mass  contribut-
ing nothing  at  all.  But  fortunately  this  assumption  is  quite
unnecessary,  at  least  in  the  present  state  of  society.  Just
as  we  have  seen  that  the  degree  of  intellectual  capacity  has
far  outstripped  what  would  have  been  necessary  could  it
have  been  combined  with  knowledge  in  due  proportions,  so
we  shall  see  that  the  amount  of  knowledge  originated  far
exceeds  the  amount  possessed ;  even  the  originators  usually
possessing  very  little  beyond  their  own  individual  produc-
tions.

When,  therefore,  we  speak  of  increasing  knowledge  in
society,  we  include,  in  addition  to  the  origination  of  it,  its
distribution.  While  intelligence  is  the  only  branch  of  eco-
nomics in  which  a  division  of  labor  is  disadvantageous,  every
man  having  need  to  do  his  own  knowing,  it  is,  under  exist-
ing conditions,  the  one  in  which  the  division  of  labor  has
been  carried  to  the  greatest  extremes.  Only  a  few  know
most  of  what  is  important  to  be  known.     One  knows  one

486  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

thing,  another  another,  and  a  third  a  third.  No  attempt  is
made  to  equalize  knowledge.  It  seems  to  be  feared  that
some  degeneracy  or  effeminacy  would  result  from  the  general
distribution  even  of  such  knowledge  as  all  admit  to  be  im-
portant. It  is  thought  better  that  men  should  be  allowed
to  quarrel  over  matters  that  have  long  been  definitely  set-
tled in  a  few  minds,  and  might  easily  be  so  settled  in  all
minds.

The  distribution  of  knowledge,  though  a  somewhat  labo-
rious process,  is  at  the  same  time  a  comparatively  simple
and  easy  one.  It  rests  upon  the  law,  enunciated  in  the  last
chapter,  that  whatever  is  presented  to  the  mind,  if  there  be
no  rebutting  evidence  or  testimony,  will  be  accepted.  This
law  is  frequently  referred  to  as  anti-progressive,  in  conse-
quence of  the  ease  with  which  error  may  be  propagated  by
it.  But  it  is  forgotten  that  it  is  at  the  same  time  the  chief
vehicle  for  the  conveyance  of  truth  also,  and  of  all  knowl-
edge. The  greater  part  of  every  one's  knowledge  is  and
always  must  remain  second-hand.  The  man  who  should
only  know  what  he  had  found  out  for  himself,  without  de-
pending in  the  least  upon  what  others  had  found  out  and
communicated  to  him,  would  be  incapable  of  making  his
way  through  life.*  The  most  successful  originators  of
knowledge  take  care  first  to  possess  themselves,  without  re-
search, of  all  the  knowledge  bearing  upon  their  work  which
others  have  evolved  before  them,  and  they  generally  realize
that  their  own  contributions,  however  important,  form  only
a  small  addition  to  the  general  body  of  increasing  truth.

The  method  of  distributing  extant  knowledge  is  simply
to  communicate  it.  It  may  be  safely  assumed  that  it  will
be  accepted.  After  all,  the  mass  of  mankind  must  neces-
sarily fall  back  upon  authority.  This  will  present  no  diffi-
culty, so  long  as  the  means  of  verification  are  always  left  free
to  all  who  may  doubt.  This  method  is  certainly  easy  and
wholly  feasible.

*  Spencer,  "  Education,"  p.  82.

Ei:SUI«LE.  487

Briefly  to  sum  up  the  main  points  of  the  discussion  thus
far,  we  may  therefore  say :

1.  That  the  degree  of  intellectual  capacity,  as  already
spontaneously  developed,  is  amply  sufficient,  in  the  present
civilized  races,  to  establish  and  conduct  a  thoroughly  organ-
ized social  system.

2.  That  all  attempts  artificially  to  accelerate  this  develop-
ment must  be  attended  with  great  difficulties,  and,  in  so  far
as  successful,  must  occupy  prolonged  if  not  secular  periods.

3.  That  the  only  two  methods  by  which  this  can  be  ac-
complished are,  first,  artificial  selection,  or  the  scientific  prop-
agation of  human  beings — a  method  confronted  by  great
practical  obstacles ;  or,  second,  rational  change  of  environ-
ment, consisting  in  the  supply  of  the  intellect  with  more
and  better  legitimate  materials  to  work  upon,  i.  e.,  increase
of  knowledge.

4.  That  the  amount  of  useful  knowledge  possessed  by
the  average  mind  is  far  below  its  intellectual  capacity,  thus
keeping  the  degree  of  intelligence  correspondingly  below
what  it  might  be.

5.  That  the  actual  amount  of  such  knowledge  originated
by  man,  though  doubtless  still  below  his  ability  to  utilize  it,
is  sufficient,  if  equally  distributed,  to  elevate  him  to  a  rela-
tively high  position,  and  to  awaken  society  to  complete  con-
sciousness.

6.  That  the  origination  of  knowledge,  though  difficult
and  slow,  is  easier  and  more  rapid  than  any  possible  increase
of  intellect  can  be,  and  may  be  easily  made  to  keep  pace
with  the  latter  in  the  future.

7.  That  more  immediately  important  than  any  of  the
other  desiderata  named,  as  well  as  far  more  easy  of  accom-
plishment, is  the  thorough  distribution  of  the  great  body  of
valuable  knowledge  already  extant.

It  is  possible  for  confusion  to  exist  respecting  what  is
meant  by  the  expression  "increase  of  knowledge."    Since

488  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

knowledge  is  only  acquired  by  experience  of  some  kind,  and
since  life  consists  in  all  cases  in  a  succession  of  experiences,
increase  of  knowledge  must  consist  in  a  certain  change  of  ex-
perience. So  far  as  time  is  concerned,  every  life  receives
tTie  same  amount  of  experience  in  the  same  time,  since  for
each  its  time  is  fully  occupied  with  experiences.  Every
separate  experience  necessarily  adds  something  to  the  pre-
vious stock  of  knowledge,  and  that  increment  is  strictly
characteristic  of  the  experience.  So  long  as  we  consider
only  primary  knowledge,  or  mere  sense-perception,  this  is
true  throughout.  The  impression  experienced  is  real,  and
every  new  impression  furnishes  a  new  knowledge.  But  we
have  previously  seen  that  secondary  forms  of  knowledge
commence  close  down  to  sense-perception.  Even  the  sub-
jective impressions,  or  sensations,  are  more  or  less  compound,
owing  to  the  complex  character  of  the  percipient  nerve-
fibers,  and  the  first  attempt  to  cognize  the  qualities  of  objects
involves  true  inferences  from  varied  experiences.  Such  in-
ferences, even  here,  are  more  or  less  liable  to  be  false,  and
this  liability  to  error  increases  in  proportion  as  the  kind  of
knowledge  grows  more  inferential,  which  it  does  at  each  re-
move from  primary  sense-perception.  We  have  seen  that
the  knowledge  of  irrational  animals  is  more  correct  and  reli-
able, though  far  more  restricted,  than  that  of  primitive,  ra-
tional man.  "We  have  also  seen  that  the  only  correct  and
reliable  knowledge  of  primitive  man  was  that  derived  from
the  simplest  experiences.  Inferences  drawn  from  experi-
ences of  involved  or  deep-lying  phenomena  were  not  only
liable  to  be  false,  but  were  always  false  (vol.  i,  p.  45  ;  vol.  ii,
p.  273).

The  first  mode,  therefore,  of  increasing  knowledge,  is  that
of  rendering  experiences  reliable.

Error  is  not  knowledge.     The  primary  cognitions  upon]
which  it  is  based  are  real,  but  they  are  valueless.    As  a  rule,  i
knowledge  grows  more  valuable  as  it  grows  more  inferential.
Primary  knowledge  is  useful  only  as  a  means  of  gaining  see-

INCREASE  OF  KNOWLEDGE.  489

ondary  and  tertiary  knowledge.  It  is  as  true  of  every  thing
else  as  of  natural  history,  or  biology,  that  the  value  of  the
facts  consists  in  employing  them  for  the  establishment  of
principles.  While  the  knowledge  possessed  must  depend
upon  experiences,  the  latter  are  no  necessary  measure  of  the
former.  The  ratio  of  the  false  to  the  true  inferences  may
vary  in  all  degrees,  and  the  ratio  of  the  knowledge  to  the  ex-
perience will  vary  proportionally.  A  life  full  of  experience
may  leave  a  mind  empty  of  knowledge.  This  will  be  the
case  unless  the  inferences  drawn  from  the  experiences  are
correctly  drawn.

The  power  to  draw  correct  inferences  from  experiences
depends  but  slightly  upon  the  degree  of  intellect.  This  de-
pendence is  a  fixed  one,  and  may  be  formulated.  The  de-
gree of  involvedness,  or  complexity,  of  the  phenomena  expe-
rienced remaining  the  same,  the  increasing  intellect  will
draw  false  inferences  until  a  certain  point  is  reached,  when
it  will  grasp  the  true  one.  The  degree  of  intellectual  power
remaining  the  same,  and  the  phenomena  presenting  all  de-
grees of  complexity  and  occultness,  the  simpler  ones,  up  to  a
certain  point,  will  be  correctly  interpreted,  and  the  more  in-
volved, above  that  point,  will  be  incorrectly  interpreted.

To  these  propositions  certain  practical  qualifications  must
be  made.  The  first  is  that,  in  the  natural  state  of  the  human
mind,  the  degree  of  intellectual  development  necessary  to
give  true  interpretations  to  many  of  the  phenomena  whose
comprehension  is  of  the  utmost  value,  would  be  greater  than
that  yet  developed  upon  the  globe,  so  that  but  for  other  aids
the  world  would  have  still  remained  wholly  ignorant  of  most
of  the  really  valuable  truths  now  possessed.  So  vast  a  mind-
force  would  be  required  to  grasp  a  few  simple  principles,  that
progress  would  be  exceedingly  slow.

In  the  second  place,  if  we  consider  all  this  labor  as  being
accomplished  by  the  strength  of  intellect  alone,  the  isolated
character  of  each  result  would  render  it  of  less  value  when
obtained.     Even  in  the  early  stages  of  anthropological  de-

490  KNOWLEDGE.~FOURTH  MEANS.

velopraent,  the  secondary  force  began  to  count  in  man's  prog-
ress. Had  he  been  obliged  to  depend  at  each  recurrence  of
his  needs  upon  the  new  and  original  creation  of  the  life-pre-
serving conditions  wrought  through  the  exercise  of  his  sa-
gacity, he  would  have  doubtless  succumbed  before  attaining
full  manhood.  This  the  animal  must  do,  except  in  so  far  as
the  development  of  instincts  exempts  it  from  this  rule.  Man
must  not  only  have  a  substitute  for  instinct  which  he  early
lost,  but  also  an  offset  against  the  retrograde  action  of  his
manifold  errors,  to  which  no  other  creature  is  in  the  same
sense  subject.  Such  a  substitute  he  found  in  the  cumulative
effect  of  the  limited  class  of  experiences  which  were  cor-
rectly interpreted.  This  accumulation  of  correct  interpreta-
tions of  phenomena,  preserved  through  memory,  constituted
his  fund  of  knowledge ;  and  his  real  progress  was  due,  not
so  much  to  the  growth  of  his  power  correctly  to  interpret
phenomena,  as  to  that  of  his  stock  of  information.  Eut  his
power  to  comprehend  phenomena  was  in  turn  increased  much
more  rapidly  by  the  use  he  was  able  to  make  of  liis  knowl-
edge than  by  the  actual  development  of  the  organ  of  the
mind.

All  this  is  as  true  of  developed  as  of  undeveloped  man.
The  progress  of  the  world  has  been  due  chiefly  to  the  accu-
mulation of  correctly  interpreted  experiences  of  which  each
age  has  made  use  in  producing  its  advancement  from  the
preceding.  Art  has  done  this,  science  has  done  it.  Science
is  knowing,  art  is  knowing  how.  The  great  impetus  which
modem  science  has  given  to  civilization  was  the  result  of  the
superior  facilities  which  it  afforded  for  the  correct  interpreta-
tion of  valuable  experience,  and  not  at  all  of  any  sudden  rise
in  the  native  capacity  of  the  race  for  such  interpretation.  It
accomplished  its  object  simply  by  pouring  a  flood  of  useful
knowledge  upon  the  world,  and  not  to  the  least  perceptible
degree  by  augmenting  its  capacity  for  knowledge.  This  last
illustration  brings  us  directly  to  the  true  secret  of  the  first
mode  of  increasing  knowledge,  viz.,  that  which  increases  the

QUANTITATIVE  AND  QUALITATIVE  INCREASE.    491

ratio  of  correct  to  incorrect  inferences  from  experiences.
For  what  principally  distinguishes  the  modern  scientific
method  from  previous  methods  of  acquiring  knowledge?
Whatever  other  characteristics  it  may  possess,  that  of  the
systematic  xterification  of  all  the  experiences  made  under  its
control  is  assuredly  the  one  that  chiefly  and  radically  divides
the  scientific  from  the  unscientific.  This,  then,  is  the  prin-
ciple that  must  be  relied  upon  for  that  increase  of  knowledge
which  consists  in  the  elimination  of  error  from  the  mental
conceptions  of  mankind.  That  the  verified  alone  is  the
known,  which  we  postulated  in  the  last  chapter  for  the
higher  and  more  complicated  classes  of  conceptions,  judg-
ments, and  conclusions,  to  which  that  chapter  was  devoted,
may  now,  with  equal  propriety  and  safety,  be  extended  to
every  form  of  knowledge  above  the  primordial  sense-per-
ceptions.

The  mode  of  increasing  knowledge  thus  far  considered  is
calculated  to  increase  the  number  of  truths  apprehended.
Assuming  the  number  of  experiences  to  be  the  same,  the
mind  which  possesses  the  largest  proportion  of  verified  ones
has  acquired  the  most  knowledge,  or  the  greatest  number  of
knowledges.  This  may,  therefore,  be  called  the  quantitative
mode  of  increasing  knowledge.  Aside  from  the  obvious  ad-
vantage of  an  increased  quantity  and  variety  of  correct  con-
ceptions, this  verification  of  experiences  has  the  equally  great
merit  of  removing  the  same  number  of  errors  as  it  adds  of
truths.  The  disadvantageous  effects  of  error  are  often  greater
than  the  advantageous  effects  of  truth,  so  that,  for  every  in-
ference subtracted  from  the  side  of  error  and  added  to  the
side  of  truth,  a  twofold  benefit  is  secured.

But  there  is  another  mode  of  increasing  knowledge  which
may  be  distinguished  from  the  last  as  the  qualitative  mode,
and  which  we  must  now  consider.

That  all  forms  of  knowledge  are  not  of  equal  value  is  a
proposition  too  plain  to  require  proof ;  and  yet  there  is  no
more  perplexing  problem  than  that  of  determining  just  what

492  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  ItfEANS.

knowledge  is  really  most  important.  In  reasoning  upon  this
question,  the  usual  fallacy  of  beginning  with  the  most  com-
plex examples  is  commonly  committed,  and  therefore  the
question  becomes  at  once  inextricably  entangled  and  appears
quite  irresolvable.  It  may  be  freely  granted  that  the  ques-
tion. What  would  be  the  most  important  knowledge  in  the
case  of  any  particular  individual,  or  of  any  one  individual  in
general  ?  admits  of  no  trustworthy  answer,  but  it  does  not
follow  from  this  that  there  are  no  clear  general  principles
from  which  may  be  deduced  tolerably  accurate  rules  for
determining  what  general  classes  of  knowledge,  and  to  a
great  extent  what  specific  items  of  information,  lying  within
the  capacity  of  every  developed  intellect,  will  best  subserve
the  purposes  of  all  men.  There  are  objects,  phenomena,  and
laws,  which  it  is  to  the  highest  interest  of  mankind,  and  of
society,  that  every  individual  of  mature  years,  without  a
single  exception,  should  be  familiar  with ;  and  perhaps  it  is
not  too  much  to  say  that  the  greater  part  of  this  most  useful
knowledge  is  not  now  possessed  by  those  persons  who  are
called  cultivated,  and  that  much  of  it  is  only  obtainable
by  extraordinary  efforts,  coupled  with  peculiarly  favorable
opportunities.*

In  seeking  for  rules  by  which  to  determine  what  knowl-
edge is  most  important,  two  leading  tests,  or  criteria,  present
themselves,  by  the  application  of  one  or  the  other  or  both  of
which,  sufficiently  accurate  judgments  may  be  formed  in
most  cases.  These  are,  first,  the  test  of  relative  generality ;
and,  second,  that  of  relatiwe  praGticality.

As  to  the  first  of  these  tests,  it  is  true  within  limits  that
knowledge  is  more  important  in  proportion  as  it  is  more
general.  Isolated  facts  are  only  rarely  useful  in  any  great
degree.     They  are  well  worth  laboring  for,  though  it  is  not

*  Humboldt,  "  Kosmos,"  Bd.  I,  S.  12.  Hacckel  ("  Anthropogenie,"  S.  3,  4)
gives  a  typical  example.  The  complete  ignorance  of  so-called  cultivated  people
as  to  the  nature  of  cells  in  biology,  and  of  the  fact  that  they  have  themselves
each  been  evolved  from  a  simple  cell,  shuts  them  off  from  a  knowledge  of
the  most  important  truth  of  their  existence.

WHAT  KNOWLEDGE  MOST  IMPORTANT.  493

generally  for  any  good  that  they  are  capable  of  bringing  of
themselves,  but  in  order  to  compare  them  with  other  facts,
and  to  arrive  at  general  laws  or  principles.  It  is  not  objects
in  themselves,  so  much  as  the  relations  which  they  sustain
to  one  another  and  to  man,  that  are  of  immediate  interest
and  value.  Whatever  is  of  value  to  man  is  so  because  of
his  power  to  make  it  of  advantage  to  him.  The  advantage
which  he  takes  of  things  is  the  control  which  he  exercises
over  nature.  The  degree  of  such  control  is  proportionate  to
the  breadth  of  his  grasp  of  the  principles  which  underlie
phenomena.  But  this  breadth  of  grasp  is  due  altogether  to
the  generality  of  his  conceptions — assuming,  of  course,  that
they  are  true.  This  branch  of  qualitative  knowledge  is
more  or  less  connected  with  quantitative  knowledge,  since
the  power  of  generalization,  other  things  being  equal,  depends
upon  the  number  of  constituent  truths  comprehended.  But,
while  it  is  correct  to  say  that  the  larger  the  number  of  truths
comprehended  the  greater  is  the  amount  of  knowledge,  it  is
also  true,  and  in  a  much  stronger  sense,  that,  of  an  equal
number  of  truths,  the  more  comprehensive  they  are,  the
more  they  augment  the  sum  total  of  the  knowledge  pos-
sessed. By  such  generalization  the  mind  is  expanded,  and
a  vantage-ground  is  reached  from  which  other  knowledge,
both  special  and  general,  is  more  easily  acquired.

The  test  of  generality,  however,  is  obviously  insufficient
in  itself.  Truths  of  equal  generality  may  be  at  the  same
time  of  unequal  practicality.  To  find  general  principles  by
which  the  degree  of  practicality  of  different  classes  of  knowl-
edge may  be  determined  is  a  much  more  difficult  task.  In
order  to  approach  this  problem,  it  will  be  necessary  to  revert
once  more  to  the  primitive  condition  of  things.  Without
the  power  of  falling  back  frequently  upon  the  less  compli-
cated sciences,  all  progress  with  questions  of  sociology  must
be  from  time  to  time  brought  to  a  halt,  and  any  thing  like  a
consistent  science  of  society  must  be  impossible.

The  general  principle  upon  which  practicality  rests  is

494  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

tbat  of  correspondence,  which  runs  through  all  the  kingdoms
of  life.  Nature  is  extremely  practical,  though  not  what  men
call  economical.  Nature's  economics  differ  from  man's  in
being  genetic,  involving  great  waste  of  products  (vol.  i,  pp.
73,  521 ;  vol.  ii,  p.  87).  In  genetic  economy,  while  no  amount
of  cost  is  spared  to  produce  the  smallest  result,  nothing  is
ever  done  unless  it  produces  some  result,  however  slight.
In  human,  or  teleological,  economy,  on  the  other  hand,  great
parsimony  is  displayed  in  the  outlay,  and  frequently  much
labor  is  expended  without  result,  owing  to  erroneous  inter-
pretations of  phenomena.  Nature  never  errs,  but  she  wastes.
Man  economizes  but  often  loses  through  error.  Nature  may
be  called  practical,  but  not  economical ;  man  economical,  but
not  always  practical.

The  knowledge  which  animals  acquire  through  adapta-
tion to  their  environment,  though  limited,  and  usually  gained
only  at  an  immense  sacrifice  during  the  stages  of  imper-
fect and  partial  adaptation,  all  tends  steadily  in  one  fixed
direction  toward  the  most  practical  of  all  objects — the  pres-
ervation of  life.  This  was  as  true  of  Pithecanthropus  and
Anthropoides  as  of  other  species  of  animals.  And  when.
Anthropus,  or  Homo,  was  fully  evolved,  he  was  still  acquiring
knowledge  of  this  practical  sort  in  this  expensive  way.  The
continuation  of  his  development  to  any  given  stage  must
have  been  rendered  possible  by  the  gradual  acquisition  of
just  that  kind  of  knowledge  which  was  adapted  to  the  pres-
ervation of  the  race  under  the  changing  conditions  of  its  ex-
istence. No  other  test  of  practicality  will  apply  to  man  in
his  most  advanced  condition.  The  kind  of  knowledge  he
most  needs  now,  as  at  his  entrance  into  manhood,  is  that
which  will  preserve  him  and  strengthen  his  hold  upon  exist-
ence both  as  an  individual  and  as  a  race.

It  is  here  that  comes  in  an  important  principle,  insisted  _
upon  by  Mr,  Spencer  throughout  his  works,  but  especially  ii
his  "  Data  of  Ethics."  *  according  to  which  no  distinctioi

*  Pp.  14,  26,  ct  passim.

GENERALITY  AND  PRACTICALITY.  495

can  be  drawn  between  well-being  and  life.  That  which  con-
duces to  the  former  fortifies  the  latter ;  and,  conversely,  only
that  which  renders  life  more  secure  can  be  upon  the  whole
agreeable.  The  same  law  which  makes  the  practical  to  con-
sist in  whatever  tends  to  preserve  the  existence  of  the  indi-
vidual and  the  species,  renders  that  also  practical  which,
after  existence  has  become  secure,  tends  to  multiply  and  in-
tensify the  enjoyments  of  existence.  In  seeking,  therefore,
to  estimate  the  relative  value  of  different  kinds  of  knowledge,
our  conceptions  of  the  practical  must  be  so  enlarged  as  to
include,  in  addition  to  the  primary  ends  of  nature,  the  spe-
cial ends  of  human  life  also,  considered  as  a  simple  extension
and  amplification  of  the  former.  While  nature  aims  only
to  exist,  man  aims  also  to  enjoy ;  but  such  is  the  harmony  of
things  that,  whatever  legitimately  secures  the  latter  end,  must
tend  also  to  secure  the  former.  Vital  function  must  be  at-
tended with  a  real  satisfaction,  otherwise  it  is  tending  toward
cessation,  and  those  higher  forms  of  exercise  which  appear
as  happiness  represent  only  more  exalted  degrees  of  vital
function.  Whatever  tends  toM^ard  preservation,  while  such
influences  are  needed,  will  tend  toward  improvement  if  con-
tinued beyond  the  point  where  preservation  is  secured.  The
kind  of  knowledge,  and  the  only  kind,  which  tends  to  pre-
serve the  organism  while  exposed  to  all  the  hazards  of  life
in  the  midst  of  nature,  is  knowledge  of  its  environment ;  and
so,  too,  after  nature  has  been  subdued,  danger  removed,  and
life  securely  protected  by  artificial  means,  it  is  still  increased
knowledge  of  the  environment  that  can  alone  bring  other
and  greater  forms  of  amelioration.  Man  can  not  rest  sat-
isfied with  protection  only,  the  mere  negative  form  of  hap-
piness. He  will  seek  happiness  in  positive  forms,  and  he
should  seek  it.  Civilized  and  enlightened  man  is  perpetually
seeking  it,  and  he  finds  it  only  in  proportion  to  the  acquaint-
ance which  he  makes  with  his  environment.

But  what  constitutes  the  environment  of  the  civilized
man?    The  character  of  the  environment  of  animals  and  of

496  KNOWLEDGE.-FOUKTH  MEANS.

savage  man  is  easy  to  perceive.  It  is  the  earth,  the  air,  the
rocks  and  waters,  the  trees,  grass,  birds  and  animals,  the  last
to  include,  in  the  case  of  the  savage,  the  men  of  his  own
tribe  and  of  other  tribes,  and  also  civilized  races,  in  case  any
such  ever  come  in  contact  with  him.  It  is  by  learning  to
know  these  things  that  he  is  enabled  to  protect  and  defend
himself.

But,  looking  to  races  somewhat  more  advanced  than
the  crude  savage,  we  find,  as  frequently  shown  before,
that  their  advancement  has  been  due  to  action  on  their  part
in  taking  advantage  of  certain  deeper  laws  of  nature,  in
making  use  of  materials  that  savages  fail  to  make  use  of,  in
interpreting  phenomena  that  savages  do  not  correctly  inter-
pret, and,  through  these  means,  in  devising  plans  and  invent-
ing appliances  for  multiplying  the  products  of  nature  and
increasing  the  supply  of  physical,  social,  and  intellectual
wants.  And,  when  we  have  reached  the  highest  forms  of
social  existence,  we  find  that  the  only  effective  means  by
which  desire  is  gratified,  progress  achieved,  and  happiness
attained,  consist  in  still  deeper  knowledge  of  the  natural
surroundings,  in  a  still  wider  grasp  of  laws  and  principles,
in  the  correct  interpretation  of  still  more  obscure  phenom-
ena, and  in  the  discovery  and  invention  of  still  better  means
and  methods  of  securing  remote  ends.  To  know  one's  en-
vironment is  to  possess  the  most  real,  the  most  practical,  the
most  useful  of  all  kinds  of  knowledge,  and,  properly  viewed,
this  class  of  information  constitutes  the  only  true  knowl-
edge.

This  expression  —  knowledge  of  the  environment  —  has
been  employed  because  it  was  applicable  to  the  entire  series  of
stages  which  it  was  necessary  to  embrace  in  order  adequate-
ly to  elucidate  the  law  under  consideration.  For  the  animal,
the  savage,  and  the  barbarian,  no  definite  name  exists  for  this
class  of  knowledge  which  common  parlance  would  recognize.
But  for  civilized  man  in  the  present  epoch,  there  exists  a
word,  well  recognized  and  accepted,  but  in  many  cases  only

KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  ENVIRONMENT.  497

vaguely  understood,  which  comprehends  all  that  is  involved
in  our  expression,  and  nothing  not  involved  in  it,  and  which
is  co-extensiye  and  completely  synonymous  with  it.  That
word  is  Science.  Knowledge  of  man's  environment  is  noth-
ing more  nor  less  than  scientific  knowledge ;  and,  conversely,
all  scientific  knowledge  consists  in  knowledge  of  the  environ-
ment. It  may  even  be  advantageous,  and  aid  in  the  elucida-
tion of  other  questions,  to  identify  science  in  this  manner  with
those  primitive  mental  efforts  by  which  the  earliest  steps  in
human  progress  were  taken ;  and  we  also  thus  return,  by  a
new  and  unexpected  route,  to  the  truth,  popularly  ignored
or  denied,  that  something  which  differs  from  science  in  no
essential  respect  precedes  and  moves  the  rudest  forms  of  art
(vol.  i,  pp.  59,  552 ;  vol.  ii,  p.  193).

But  it  may  be  said  that  all  knowledge  is  in  this  sense  sci-
entific, that  there  is  no  fact  or  truth  which  has  no  bearing
upon  man's  surroundings  or  connection  with  his  environment,
that  in  a  certain  sense  all  things  are  natural,  and  that  there-
fore this  distinction  is  imaginary,  and  the  argument  unneces-
sary. The  reply  to  this  is,  that  experience  is  scientific  or  not
according  to  whether  it  is  made  so  or  not.  If  we  accept  as
knowledge  the  conceptions  (exclusive  of  false  ones)  which
the  mind  possesses,  it  may  be  in  great  part  wholly  unscientific.
Yere  scire  est  per  causas  scire.  The  only  useful  knowledge
is  that  which  furnishes  relations.  Isolated  facts,  until  em-
ployed for  this  purpose;  are  not  really  employed  at  all.  An
object  known  only  in  itself  can  scarcely  be  said  to  be  known.

Again,  there  are  truths  which  are  so  vaguely  related  to
man's  natural  environment  as  to  produce  no  impression  upon
it.  Knowledge  which  can  exert  no  influence  is  not  scien-
tific. Science  is  dynamic.  Whatever  it  touches  is  trans-
formed. The  only  object  in  knowing  is  by  means  of  it  to
do  something.  "  Science,  d'' mi  jprevoyance  /  prevoyance,  d'ou
action^  *

Finally,  knowledge  may  lose  its  scientific  character  through

*  Comte,  "Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  i,  p.  51.
53

498  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

mere  attenuation.  From  original  knowledge  there  comes  de-
rivative knowledge.  The  relations  which  subsist  between  pri-
marily derivative  truths  form  secondarily  derivative  knowl-
edge ;  relations  between  secondary  truths  become  tertiary
knowledge,  and  so  on.  A  point  is  at  length  reached  where
knowledge  is  so  widely  separated  from  its  basis  in  natural
phenomena  that  its  connection  with  the  environment  practi-
cally ceases.  No  amount  of  such  knowledge  enables  man
to  accomplish  any  useful  end  of  his  being.  It  is  by  the
more  or  less  exclusive  devotion  of  peoples  to  these  excessively
derivative  classes  of  knowledge  that  they  gradually  lose  their
hold  upon  their  environment,  fall  into  decadence,  and  become
effete  and  degenerate.  Every  race  or  nation  is  in  constant
danger  of  this  worst  of  all  calamities.  The  human  mind  is
so  constituted  as  to  be  fond  of  such  derivative  knowledge.
It  possesses  a  certain  charm  of  intricacy,  delicacy,  and  purity,
which  is  seductive.  The  last-named  quality,  by  which  it  seems
lifted  up  from  its  crude  foundations  of  materiality  into  an
ethereal  atmosphere,  is  especially  fascinating,  and  causes  it
to  be  preferred  to  any  form  of  original  truth.  The  mind
revels  in  its  airy  realms  ;  intellectual,  social,  and  moral  ideas
are  borne  up  and  linger  in  its  midst ;  and  society  seems  to
cut  loose  from  its  solid  base  and  to  dwell  in  a  state  of  mysti-
cism and  unreality.  More  than  once  in  the  historic  period
has  this  state  of  things  been  realized,  and  there  are  parts  of
Europe  to-day  in  which  it  is  more  than  half  realized.

It  was  the  special  merit  of  modern  science  that  it  tended
to  bring  the  world  back  to  nature,  from  which  it  had  so  far
wandered.  In  the  Middle  Ages  nature  was  almost  wholly
neglected  and  forgotten.  Nothing  was  thought  of  but  spirit
conceived  as  wholly  independent  of  body  and  of  earth.
Aside  entirely  from  the  truth  or  falsity  of  such  conceptions,
their  complete  impotence  to  modify  the  environment  is  ob-
vious at  a  glance.

But,  coming  nearer  home,  let  us  inquire  in  how  far  the
knowledge  of  our  time  is  original,  or  scientific,  and  in  how

ATTENUATION.  499

far  it  is  derivative  and  attenuated.  What  constitutes  the
bulk  of  that  which  passes  for  knowledge  in  society  ?  A
large  part  of  it  is  mere  social  conventionality.  A  knowledge
of  the  conventional  code  is  regarded  as  the  highest  accom-
plishment. This,  within  reasonable  limits,  is  commendable
and  useful.  It  deals  with  relations  between  men,  and  in
so  far  affects  the  environment.  But  such  are  the  nature
and  tendency  of  custom  and  fashion  that  they  universally
gravitate  away  from  their  basis  in  reason  and  advantage,
and  become  drawn  out  to  a  condition  of  extreme  tenuity.
Their  forms  continue  to  combine  with  one  another,  and  the
compounds  thus  formed  to  recombine  with  other  compounds
from  the  same  elements,  until  every  trace  of  their  origin  or
motive  has  disappeared.  Revamped  and.  re-enacted,  they
continue  to  engross  attention;  the  more  irrational  they
become  the  more  difficult  they  are  to  comprehend,  and  the
more  time  is  given  up  to  their  study  and  observance.  And
thus  mere  etiquette  comes  to  form  a  large  share  of  the  knowl-
edge of  the  world,  and  is  by  many  regarded  as  their  most
important  acquisition.

Another  engrossing  theme  is  social  position.  It  is  the
study  of  many  people's  lives  to  procure,  no  matter  by  what
means,  some  public  notice,  some  mark  of  distinction,  some
little  "  cheap "  eminence  by  which  their  existence  may  be
recognized.  To  succeed  in  this,  they  do  not  set  about  trying
to  accomplish  something  useful  and  worthy  of  praise  ;  they
seek  the  end  by  little  feats  of  strategy  or  sharp  practice,  by
affecting  a  character  which  they  do  not  possess,  or  by  em-
ploying the  labors  of  others  and  passing  them  off  as  their
own.  To  such  persons,  knowledge  which  enables  them  to
succeed  in  this  is  of  the  highest  value,  and  some  seem  to
possess  no  other.  They  often  actually  succeed  in  working
their  way,  through  intrigue  and  hardihood,  into  high  places.
This  is  their  life  aim  and  study,  and  they  inherit  a  tact  for
it  from  a  line  of  ancestors  similarly  engaged.  As  Edmond
About  says :  they  never  think  what  they  shall  do^  but  only

500  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

what  they  shall  he.    The  amount  of  true  knowledge  possessed
by  persons  of  this  class  may  often  be  set  down  as  nil.

If  we  examine  the  popular  conceptions  of  literature,  we
shall  find  that  the  most  derivative  is  the  most  sought  and
admired.  Literature  is  not  valued  as  a  vehicle  of  ideas,  but
as  a  pleasing  phantasy.  The  wildest  rhapsody,  if  pleasing
to  the  ear,  is  preferred  to  sober  truth,  however  well  couched.
"What  is  called  the  polite  and  classic  literature  of  the  world
consists  chiefly  in  adroit  modes  of  saying  nothing.  Putting
that  of  all  languages  together,  there  is  not  truth  enough  in
it  all  to  have  kept  civilization  from  perishing  if  it  had  de-
pended solely  upon  it  for  its  stock  of  knowledge.  Valuable
for  other  purposes,  it  is  comparatively  valueless  for  that  of
keeping  man  acquainted  with  his  environment.

If  we  look  to  philosophy,  where,  if  anywhere,  we  should
expect  to  find  the  most  general  and  useful  truths,  we  in  real-
ity find  that  human  speculations  have  been  for  the  most
part  mere  feats  of  intellectual  gymnastic,  and  to  a  great  ex-
tent they  are  so  still.  The  dialectics  of  the  school-men  are
re-enacted  now  in  the  form  of  brilliant  magazine  articles
and  studied  popular  lectures.

The  prevalent  ideas  of  society  and  life,  not  to  speak  of
such  as  are  false,  are  narrow,  and  for  the  most  part  value-
less. They  are  confined  to  the  most  superficial  phenomena,
and  dwell  only  on  disconnected  events.  IS'o  one  dreams
that  human  beings  are  subject  in  their  performances  to  any
laws  residing  in  their  own  nature,  or  that  of  nature  around-
them,  and  they  are  constantly  contemplated  as  ultimate
sources  of  conduct  and  action.  This  ignorance  vitiates  com-
pletely all  the  judgments  formed  respecting  both  individual
and  social  life.

In  politics  the  degree  of  unwisdom  displayed  is  perhaps!
at  its  highest  point.     Interest  alone  governs,  and  perhaps
in  the  present  state  of  society  it  is  best  that  it  should,  since
it  is  doubtful  whether  intelligence   could  do  without  it.
But  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  this  is  to  admit  that  society

DERIVATIVE  KNOWLEDGE.  501

is  not  yet  out  of  the  control  of  natural  law  under  which  the
practical  interest  of  the  organism  is  the  supreme  guide.  Yet
even  of  this  law,  by  which  his  very  political  career  is  con-
trolled, the  "  statesman  "  is  wholly  ignorant.  Financial  sys-
tems are  chaotic.  Laws  are  inoperative,  or  produce  unfore-
seen effects.  The  policy  of  states  is  perpetually  changing,
rendering  permanent  enterprises  insecure.  Wars  are  waged
for  trifling  grievances,  and  shrewd  capitalists  are  more  and
more  gaining  absolute  dominion  over  the  wealth  of  the
world.  The  situation  is  alarming,  but  no  present  remedy
exists.

The  so-called  "learned  professions"  afford  no  guaranty
that  the  knowledge  required  to  enter  them  shall  belong  to
the  useful  or  practical  class.  Jurisprudence,  unless  in  the
hands  of  an  awakened  intellect,  has  nothing  to  do  with
nature.  It  deals  with  relations  and  phenomena  of  the  high-
est degree  of  derivativeness.  Theology  looks  upon  nature
with  disdain  or  contempt,  and  is  the  representative,  in  this
respect,  of  the  spirit  of  the  Middle  Ages.  Even  Medicine,
which  can  not,  if  it  would,  ignore  the  human  body,  clings  as
closely  as  the  light  of  the  age  will  allow  to  the  ancient  exor-
cism out  of  which  it  has  grown,  and,  except  where  accident-
ally intrusted  to  enlightened  and  emancipated  minds,  stiU
rests  on  ontological  dogmas  in  lieu  of  causal  processes.

Education  itself  fails  to  furnish  true  knowledge.  In-
deed, it  expressly  disavows  this  claim,  and  demands  as  its
chief  end  the  development  of  the  intellect,  which  we  have
shown  to  be  little  more  than  a  hrutum  fulmen.  In  so  far  as
it  really  imparts  any  knowledge,  it  is  of  the  technologic  rather
than  of  the  scientific  kind.  It  teaches  the  how,  and  not  the
what.  In  view  of  the  modern  demands  for  greater  attention
to  technological  education,  this  statement  may  surprise  a  few
persons.  But  let  us  look  at  it.  The  "  rudiments  of  an  edu-
cation "  are  declared  by  "  educationalists  "  to  consist  in  learn-
ing to  "  read,  write,  and  cipher."  But  these  are  all  arts  sim-
ply.    The  selections  made  from  classic  authors  to  acquire  the

502  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

first  of  these  accoraplishraents  carefully  aim  to  avoid  afford-
ing any  information.  Learning  to  write  is  from  set  copies :
"  Many  men  of  many  minds ;  many  birds  of  many  kinds."
When  "  common  arithmetic  "  is  exceeded,  as  it  sometimes  is,
the  higher  "  mathematics  "  taught  are,  like  it,  modes  of  solv-
ing numerical  puzzles.  Mathematical  instruction  is  confined
to  the  different  forms  of  the  calculus,  without  even  the  poor
boon  of  a  preliminary  account  of  how  these  marvelous  prod-
ucts of  genius  chanced  to  have  been  discovered.  It  rarely
affords  the  student  a  glimpse  of  the  true  principles  of  mathe-
matics. The  higher  eurriculums  of  colleges  and  universities
would,  upon  analysis,  reveal  a  similar,  or  even  greater,  rela-
tive neglect  to  recognize  nature.  For,  while  the  technologi-
cal knowledge  there  imparted  is  of  less  relative  value  and  the
scientific  information  proportionally  less,  vast  labor  is  de-
voted to  a  class  of  derivative  knowledge  which  rarely  results
in  any  practical  advantage.  I  refer,  of  course,  to  the  unscien-
tific study  of  obsolete  languages.  I  say  unscientific,  for,  if
these  institutions  would  really  teach  comparative  philology,
which  is  one  of  the  most  useful  sciences  and  greatest  aids  in
teaching  man  what  he  is  and  whence  he  came,  no  scientific
man  would  dissent.  But  that  any  thing  approximating  this
is  usually  attained,  no  one,  who  has  any  idea  of  what  philol-
ogy consists  in,  will  maintain.

Without  reviewing  other  departments  of  knowledge,  let
us  take  one  general  glance  at  the  condition  of  society  as  a
whole  with  respect  to  the  subject  before  us.

Confining  ourselves  to  the  most  enlightened  communities,
we  may  remark  that  there  exist  two  widely  separated  classes
which  may  be  called  the  scientific  and  the  unscientific.  IsTu-
merically,  the  former  constitute  comparatively  but  a  very
few — a  handful,  as  it  were.  These  two  classes  are  both
found,  in  almost  the  same  relative  proportions,  in  nearly
every  department  of  life.  The  line  which  divides  them  cuts
through  all  professions  and  pursuits.  There  are  scientific  as
well  as  unscientific  persons  in  law,  theology,  medicine,  in

SCIENTIFIC  AND  UNSCIENTIFIC  KNOWLEDGE.      503

commerce,  manufactures,  trade,  and  industry,  in  institutions
of  learning,  schools  of  art,  and  halls  of  legislation,  as  also  in  the
field  of  the  agriculturist  and  the  workshop  of  the  mechanic.

These  two  classes,  especially  in  all  clearly  defined  cases
(for  there  are  of  course  intermediate  and  connecting  grades),
are  widely  separated  intellectually.  The  unscientific  man
looks  upon  the  scientific  man  as  a  sort  of  anomaly  or  curios-
ity. The  subjects  in  which  the  latter  is  interested  are  by  the
former  considered  strange,  unpractical,  or  visionary.  The
man  of  science  is  deemed  whimsical  and  eccentric.  The  ad-
vanced views  which  he  always  holds  are  apt  to  be  imputed
to  internal  depravity,  although  his  conduct  is  generally  con-
fessed to  be  exemplary.

In  a  whole  community  there  may  be  but  one  scientific
man.  He  is  chiefly  looked  upon  by  the  community  in  the
manner  above  described,  though  by  a  few  he  is  usually  the
victim  of  coarse  exaggeration,  and  held  to  be  a  sort  of  prod-
igy. He  takes  no  special  interest  in  the  current  social  events,
but  cares  more  for  the  natural  phenomena  going  on  around
him  which  the  rest  take  no  interest  in,  and  in  fact  do  not
generally  see.  He  observes  the  weather,  the  stars,  the  rocks,
the  vegetation,  the  birds  and  animals  of  the  locality ;  even
the  ants,  beetles,  spiders,  and  worms  are  not  neglected.  Or,
he  may  be  mechanically  inclined,  and  spend  much  time  in
experiments.  All  this  is  regarded  by  the  unscientific  as  evi-
dence of  partial  derangement.  He  reads  as  well  as  they,
but  the  works  he  reads  are  pronounced  abstruse  and  incom-
prehensible. They  are  neither  fiction,  nor  poetry,  nor  classic
literature.  He  reads  newspapers  very  little.  He  wants  to
see  only  the  bare  record  of  the  most  prominent  events,
stripped  of  all  unnecessary  or  ornamental  verbiage.  Phe-
nomena thus  recorded  he  regards  as  belonging  to  his  scientific
pursuits.  They  interest  him  only  as  affording  data  for  un-
derstanding the  laws  of  social  science.  He  has  no  professed
principles.  He  acts  according  to  his  inherent  convictions
in  each  particular  case.     His  religion  and  pohtics  are  hard

504:  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

to  find  out,  because  on  all  questions  at  all  doubtful  he  is
always  uncommitted  and  open  to  conviction.  If  asked  his
opinion  as  to  any  future  result,  if  given  at  all,  it  will  rest
solely  on  the  evidence  he  possesses,  and  afford  no  indication
whatever  as  to  what  he  desires  the  result  to  be.  He  works
hard,  much  of  his  time  being  devoted  to  wholly  unremuner-
ative  labor.  He  pubHshes  the  results  of  his  investigations
to  the  world  freely,  and  if,  as  is  frequently  the  case,  they  are
of  great  value  to  society,  some  shrewd  but  unscientific  per-
son succeeds  in  deriving  a  profit  from  them,  which  he  never
thinks  of  sharing  with  the  author.  Such  is  a  partial  por-
trait of  the  scientific  man.  Clinging  through  life  to  the
sound  material  base  of  things,  he  usually  contributes  some-
thing, however  little,  to  the  permanent  improvement  of  the
condition  of  the  race,  the  total  amount  of  social  progress
achieved  consisting  in  the  sum  of  the  increments  added  by
this  small  class  under  so  great  difficulties.

It  may  be  objected  that  such  men  are  specialists,  and  that
it  can  not  be  expected  that  the  majority  of  mankind  shall  be
specialists ;  that  they  have  other  more  practical  work  to  do,  to
take  care  of  their  families  and  dependents  in  society.  To
this  it  may  be  first  replied  that  the  true  scientific  man  and
the  scientific  speciahst  are  not  necessarily  identical ;  that  while
in  order  to  achieve  any  great  result  it  is  necessary  to  pursue
some  specialty  to  a  greater  or  less  degree,  still,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  those  most  frequently  referred  to  as  specialists,  and  pop-
ularly regarded  as  scientific  men  par  excellence,  really  belong
to  the  unscientific  class,  possess  the  narrow  views,  share  in
the  superficial  pursuits,  and  entertain  the  derivative  ideas  of
that  class.  They  pursue  their  specialties  from  a  mere  im-
pulse, or  passion,  and  make  no  use  of  the  data  they  collect.
In  the  second  place,  it  is  as  true  of  scientific  as  of  unscien-
tific persons  that  they  have  practical  duties  to  perform,  fam-
ilies to  provide  for,  and  dependents  to  support,  Earely  paid
for  their  scientific  labor,  they  simply  make  the  sacrifices  neo-
essary  to  carry  it  on.

SCIENTIFIC  AND  UNSCIENTIFIC  KNOWLEDGE.      505

111  contrast  with  this  small,  earnest  class,  we  behold  the
great  swarming  mass  of  thoughtless  humanity,  filled  with
highly  derivative  ideas  vaguely  and  confusedly  held  together ;
eagerly  devouring  the  light  gossip,  current  rumor,  and  daily
events  of  society  which  are  intensely  dwelt  upon,  each  in
itself,  and  wholly  disconnected  from  all  others  ;  entertaining
the  most  positive  opinions  on  the  most  doubtful  questions  ;
never  looking  down  upon  a  pebble,  a  flower,  or  a  butterfly,
or  up  at  a  star,  a  planet,  or  a  cloud ;  wholly  unacquainted
with  any  of  the  direct  manifestations  of  nature,  except  as  they
may  thwart  the  pursuit  of  their  superficial  pleasures  (in
which  case  they  are  usually  regarded  as  "  providential "  oc-
currences) ;  passing  through  a  half-unconscious  existence  with
which  they  keep  no  account,  and  leaving  the  world  in  all
respects  the  same  as  they  found  it.

While  this  picture  may  seem  somewhat  more  highly  col-
ored than  the  preceding,  still,  when  all  intermediate  stages
are  set  aside  and  the  real  character  of  the  majority  of  man-
kind of  both  sexes  is  considered,  as  well  the  fashionable  fri-
volity of  high  life  as  the  narrow  outlook  of  low  life,  and  the
excess  of  the  unthinking  classes  in  middle  life,  the  candid
critic  will  probably  be  ready  to  pronounce  it  not  overdrawn.

Popular  conceptions  are  every-where  more  or  less  trivial
and  unsubstantial.  Kot  that  the  general  public  possess  no
knowledge,  but  that  their  knowledge  is  both  taken  and  ad-
ministered in  homoeopathic  doses,  natural  truth  having  reached
its  hundredth  attenuation  before  it  is  deemed  suitable  for
their  pampered  mental  systems.

That  this  is  not  natural,  in  the  sense  of  being  the  sort  of
diet  which  the  intellect  spontaneously  seeks,  is  abundantly
proved  by  the  almost  universal  fondness  of  children  for  nat-
ural objects  and  phenomena.  Who  has  not  noticed  their
intense  interest  in  nature — their  passion  for  pretty  pebbles,
for  flowers,  insects,  birds,  and  animals,  for  torrents,  moun-
tains, rocks,  trees,  clouds,  rainbows,  and  sunsets  ?  They
are  also  very  much  impressed  by  the  manifestations  of  force

506  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

in  nature — by  tlie  winds,  the  lightning,  the  waves,  the  tides,
and  the  ceaseless  flow  of  great  rivers.  It  is  education,  coup-
led with  inheritance,  which  crushes  out  these  healthy  im-
pulses. It  is  the  ignorance  of  parents  and  other  adults  with
whom  they  associate,  and  to  whom  they  naturally  look  for
instruction,  in  failing  to  respond  to  their  anxious  inquiries
and  in  treating  them  as  trivial,  which  gradually  dulls  their
sense  of  natural  beauty  and  their  interest  in  natural  processes.
This  illustration,  it  is  true,  is  now  trite,  but  it  is  so  over-
whelmingly convincing  and  wholly  unanswerable  that  it  can
do  no  harm  to  reiterate  it  here.

Knowledge  must  be  regarded  as  furnishing  the  data  for
correct  opinions.  It  is  true  that  opinions  which  are  both  sub-
jectively and  objectively  settled  constitute  knowledge.  These
are  the  integrated  product  of  many  cognitions  of  lower  de-
grees of  complexity,  and  form  the  sure  foundations  of  all
useful  action.  But  opinions  which  are  only  subjectively  suf-
ficient, and  upon  which  much  action  is  also  necessarily  based,
are  safe  in  the  exact  proportion  that  their  elements  consist
of  verified  experiences.  The  advantage  which  results  from
action  will  be  the  same,  whether  it  be  dictated  by  opinion  or
by  knowledge ;  it  will  make  no  difference,  provided  the
proposition  from  which  it  proceeds  be  objectively  true,
whether  it  be  subjectively  settled  or  not.  The  greater  part
of  all  our  acts  must,  for  a  great  while  at  least,  if  not  forever,
be  guided  by  only  partially  verified  opinions.

The  complexity  of  the  phenomena  with  which  man  has
to  deal,  and  with  reference  to  which  he  must  act,  is  such  as
to  render  the  greater  part  of  his  opinions  more  or  less  prdb-
able.  Most  of  the  certainty  which  it  is  possible  to  attain  is
what  is  called  moral  certainty.  Such  certainty  approaches
absolute  certainty  in  proportion  as  the  complex  data  of  which
it  is  made  up  become  verified  truths,  i.  e.,  in  proportion  as
it  rests  upon  knowledge  as  its  basis.

Keeping  in  mind  the  production  oi     ivantageous  action

ETHICAL  KNOWLEDGE.  507

as  the  end  in  view,  and  the  real  use  of  knowledge,  we  may
now  note  the  connection  of  the  last  two  chapters  with  the
present  one.  The  two  great  advantageous  classes  of  action
were  seen  to  be  ethical  action  and  dynamic  action.  Corre-
sponding to  these  we  also  saw  in  the  last  chapter  that  there
are  the  two  classes  of  opinions,  ethical  and  dynamic.  We
need  dwell  but  lightly  in  this  chapter  on  the  nature  of  ethical
knowledge  and  dynamic  knowledge  which  must  form  the
basis  of  such  opinions  and  actions.

Ethical  Knowledge.

Respecting  ethical  knowledge,  however,  it  is  important
to  point  out  that  it  does  not  consist  in  an  acquaintance  with
the  strict,  accepted  canons  of  morality.  It  is  not  upon  this
class  of  knowledge  that  men  act.  The  study  of  ethical  sys-
tems is  important  only  as  an  historical  or  critical  study,  in
the  same  sense  that  scholars  study  religious  and  political  sys-
tems ;  viz.,  for  the  purpose  of  throwing  light  upon  their
causes,  development,  or  genesis,  and  of  comparing  those  of
one  age  or  people  with  those  of  another.  These  moral  sys-
tems, with  all  their  rules,  laws,  and  internal  machinery,  are
the  products  of  the  state  of  morals  existing  when  they  were
formed,  and  not  the  causes  of  it.  For  the  cause  of  a  given
state  of  public  morals  it  is  necessary  to  look  elsewhere.
The  solution  of  this  problem  has  been  indicated  in  previous
chapters,  especially  in  the  last  {supra,  pp.  441,  468).

Ethical  action  flows  from  ethical  opinions,  which  are
something  very  different  from  a  familiarity  with  moral
rules.  It  is  elevated  views  respecting  man's  relations  to  the
universe  and  to  man  that  liberalize  his  conduct.  Within
the  period  of  written  history  no  epoch  has  shown  such  real
and  rapid  progress  in  morals  as  the  modern  scientific  epoch.

Compare  the  moral  freedom  of  modern  nations  with  that
which  the  same  nations  enjoyed  during  the  fourteenth  or
fifteenth  century.  See  how  religious,  political,  personal,  and
proprietary  liberty  have  advanced.    This  is  true  moral  prog-

508  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

res8.  Yet  this  epoch  has  been  characterized  by  an  evident
neglect  and  somewhat  pungent  criticism  of  the  accepted
ethical  canons.  It  is  not,  however,  to  be  attributed  to  this,
but  to  the  sudden  and  enormous  expansion  of  the  views
of  mankind  respecting  the  world  and  its  inhabitants.  It  has
been  due  to  genuine  progress  of  ideas.  Anthropocentric
ideas  are  essentially  immoral.  They  pufi  their  holders  with
conceit  and  arrogance,  and  lead  to  base,  selfish  abuses  of
power.  From  the  notion  that  the  universe  was  made  for
man  to  the  one  that  it  was  made  for  some  one  man  is  an  easy
and  natural  step,  sure  to  be  taken  by  half-rational  beings
warped  by  interest  and  passion.  The  old  geocentric  theory
had  the  same  tendency.  All  narrow  views  about  nature
not  only  contract  the  mind,  but  dwarf  and  disfigure  the  moral
nature  of  man.  It  is  only  when  the  eyes  commence  to  open
to  the  true  vastness  of  the  universe  and  to  the  relative  insig-
nificance of  human  achievements,  that  it  begins  to  be  thought
not  worth  while  to  boast,  to  oppress,  or  to  persecute.

A  not  less  conspicuous  manner  in  which  this  change  was
wrought  was  by  the  unsettling  of  previously  fixed  beliefs.
The  thought  seemed  to  come  over  the  world  in  the  new  light
which  science  shed,  that  "  perhaps,  after  all,  we  have  been
wrong."  Mankind,  as  a  whole,  are  honest.  So  long  as  there
was  no  doubt,  they  pursued  the  only  logical  course ;  but,  as
soon  as  real  doubts  arose,  their  first  eftect  was  to  check  pro-
cedure, very  much  as  new  and  unsuspected  evidence  in  favor
of  the  innocence  of  a  prisoner  will  influence  a  jury.  "  The
benefit  of  the  doubt "  was  a  principle  that  entered  deeply
into  the  world's  morals  the  moment  science  furnished  any
evidence  upon  which  to  raise  a  doubt.

But  these  legitimate  ethical  views  were  not  manufactured
out  of  nothing.  They  were  not  smoothly  and  quietly  slipped
in  beneath  the  accepted  beliefs  of  the  age.  They  were  un-
welcome and  repugnant.  They  were  bitterly  opposed,  not
only  by  denunciation  and  verbal  prohibition,  but  by  phys-
ical coercion.     Their  power,  however,  lay  in  the  amount  of

DYNAMIC  KNOWLEDGE.  509

evidence  which  was  accumulated  in  their  support.  They
were  at  length  seen  to  rest  on  truth.  The  data  of  the  new
opinions  were  verified  experiences.  It  is  this  fact  which
especially  interests  us  here.  The  force  of  an  opinion  will
depend  upon  the  degree  of  verification  of  its  data.  The
value  of  ideas  depends  upon  the  extent  to  which  they  are
founded  in  knowledge.

Dynamic  Knowledge.

With  respect  to  dynamic  knowledge,  it  may  be  divided
into  two  classes,  potential  and  actual.  Potential  dynamic
knowledge  must  be  judged  of  by  general  analogy.  The
history  of  science  has  furnished  many  instances  of  the  great
value  of  knowledge  whose  practical  utility  would  have  been
questioned  even  by  its  discoverer.  Perhaps  no  better  illus-
tration of  this  can  be  cited  than  the  discovery  of  electro-gal-
vanism through  Galvani's  experiments  with  frogs'  legs,  and
which  may  be  regarded  as  the  fundamental  principle  under-
lying the  invention  of  the  electric  telegraph.  It  is  at  least
well  settled  that  the  utility  of  any  class  of  scientific  knowl-
edge can  not  always  be  foreseen.  Such  knowledge  must,  in
great  part,  be  pursued  for  its  own  sake.  Direct  experiments
with  nature  may  be  safely  undertaken  at  any  time.  Not  all,
of  course,  will  ever  result  in  any  practical  advantage  beyond
that  secured  by  the  scientific  discipline  acquired  in  making
them,  and  many  must  necessarily  be  made  which  it  would
have  been  better  not  to  have  undertaken.  But  it  is  easy  to
place  too  narrow  an  estimate  upon  apparently  useless  results
thus  brought  out.  Even  if  it  could  be  positively  proved  that
they  could  never  possess  any  dynamic  value,  it  must  not  be
forgotten  that  they  may  possess  great  ethical  value.

Let  us  take  the  case  of  the  recent  spectroscopic  discov-
eries respecting  the  constitution  of  the  celestial  bodies.
Granting,  as  no  scientific  man  will  unreservedly  do,  that
such  discoveries  can  never  in  the  remotest  degree  serve  to
improve  the  material  condition  of  man,  it  still  remains

510  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

clearly  obvious  that  they  do  very  considerably  tend  to  im-
prove his  moral  condition.  Just  as  whatever  contracts  the
mental  horizon  correspondingly  lowers  the  moral  condition,
so  whatever  expands  the  mental  horizon  equally  elevates  it ;
and  the  consciousness  of  having  even  partially  solved  so
transcendent  a  problem  as  the  constitution  of  the  sun,  the
fixed  stars,  and  the  nebulae,  affords  to  the  awakened  intellect
that  appreciates  this  truth  an  inspiration  which  raises  it  irre-
sistibly to  a  higher  plane  of  thought  and  action.

There  are  many  other  kinds  of  scientific  investigation  of
which  the  same  is  true.  Those  of  biology  in  most  of  its
departments  are  of  a  similar  character.  Aside  from  the  ele-
vating effects  of  an  intimate  communion  with  nature  in  its
highest  manifestations,  the  knowledge  thus  gained,  if  prop-
erly co-ordinated,  tends  directly  to  throw  light  upon  the
question  of  man's  own  nature  and  origin,  than  which  as-
suredly no  problem  can  be  more  important  to  man.  Every
new  conclusion  thus  reached  widens  his  views  of  humanity,
prolongs  it  into  the  past,  and  identifies  it  more  completely
with  all  other  life,  while  at  the  same  time  it  vastly  increases
the  prospects  for  higher  reaches  into  the  future.

But  knowledge  of  this  latter  class,  though  now  chiefly
potentially  dynamic,  already  approaches  so  nearly  the  actual
state  that  its  application  can  be  divined.

The  power  of  intelligence  to  modify  vital  phenomena,
and  create  such  products  as  it  may  elect,  has  been  abundantly
demonstrated  in  many  departments  of  life.  Its  application
to  human  life  is  no  longer  a  question  except  of  method.
With  a  greatly  enlarged  fund  of  biological  knowledge,  the
complete  subjection  of  the  vital  forces  to  human  control
may  be  confidently  expected.

While  potential  dynamic  knowledge  is  chiefly  confined
to  the  outer  boundaries  of  science,  either  to  excessively  re-
mote, minute,  or  complex  phenomena,  the  field  of  actual
dynamic  knowledge  is  well  known.  Kestricted  to  the  phe-
nomena of  the  more  simple  and  positive  sciences,  its  field  is

PRINCIPLES  OF  CERTITUDE.  511

60  clear  that  desired  ends  can  be  readily  foreseen  and  the
necessary  adjustments  made  to  secure  them.  The  normal
product  of  this  class  of  knowledge  is  some  form  of  inven-
tion, or  applied  discovery,  which  is  the  sole  form  of  human
action  that  results  in  social  improvement.  Upon  this  subject
enough  has  already  been  said  {supra,  p.  376).

PeINCIPLES    of    CEETrrUDE.

We  will  now  consider,  more  specifically  than  has  hitherto
been  done,  the  nature  and  sources  of  knowledge,  having
chiefly  in  view  to  determine  the  relative  certainty  of  its  dif-
ferent classes,  or  departments.

We  have  already  seen  that  a  broad  distinction  must  be
drawn  between  the  mere  capacity  for  receiving  truth  and
the  actual  possession  of  truth  by  the  knowing  faculty.  The
nature  of  knowledge  must,  therefore,  partake  of  the  nature
of  truth.

Material  objects  possess,  or  perhaps,  more  correctly  speak-
ing, consist  of,  certain  properties,  i.  e.,  they  have  certain
modes  of  appealing  to  the  senses,  whereby  the  latter  become
conscious  of  their  presence.  Every  such  conscious  impres-
sion is  a  thing  known,  and  whatever  it  be,  as  long  as  it  is
remembered,  it  constitutes  so  much  additional  knowledge,
viz.,  that  such  a  quality  belongs  to  such  an  object.  The  fact
that  the  quality  inheres  in  the  object  is  a  truth,  and  when
thus  apprehended  by  the  primary  faculty  of  the  intellect,
the  senses,  it  becomes  knowledge.  Kow,  the  judgment,  as
was  seen  {supra,  p.  416),  is  the  power  by  which  the  mind
detects  the  same  quality  in  different  objects.  This  is  done
by  comparing  the  sensations  produced  by  the  objects.  The
ideas  thus  acquired,  viz.,  that  a  certain  quality  is  common  to
two  or  more  objects,  are  of  a  secondary  character,  and  yet
they  depend  as  absolutely  upon  the  primary  sensation  as  do
the  primary  perceptions.  When  we  pass  to  the  third  faculty,
viz.,  the  reason,  the  same  is  equally  true.  For,  as  was  seen,
reason  is  only  that  faculty  of  the  intellect  by  which  special

512  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

truths  are  deduced  from  general  ones.  The  general  truths
which  form  the  premises  are  of  the  nature  of  judgments  or
propositions,  and  so  is  also  the  special  truth  sought,  or  con-
clusion. Throughout  the  process  of  ratiocination,  we  are
dealing  with  ideas,  or  relations,  and  not  with  sensations,  or
experiences — with  notions  of  the  identity  of  qualities  and  not
with  the  qualities  themselves ;  yet  had  those  qualities  never
existed,  or  had  they  never  been  cognized,  it  would  be  impos-
sible to  evolve  ideas  from  them.

There  is,  however,  another  basis  of  classification  of  knowl-
edge, namely,  with  respect  to  the  degree  of  certainty.  All
knowledge  may  be  arranged  under  two  general  heads,  as
either  absolute  or  probable,  in  either  of  which  it  may  be
either  positive  or  negative.

The  field  of  absolute  knowledge  is  for  man  exceedingly
limited.  Probably  the  only  instances  are  to  be  found  en-
tirely outside  the  domain  of  real  facts  and  actual  existing
things,  being  confined  to  the  acquisition  of  truths  by  the
aid  of  reason  where  the  premises  are  purely  hypothetical.
Hence  the  truth,  though  apprehended  infallibly,  is  neverthe-
less wholly  conditional.  In  other  words,  we  may  know  ab-
solutely what  would  he  if  certain  other  things  were  true.
But  this  we  can  not  absolutely  know.  Logic  and  mathe-
matics furnish  the  only  examples  of  this  kind  of  knowledge,
both  of  a  positive  nature,  as  in  all  direct  demonstration  a
jn'iori  from  assumed  premises,  and  also  of  a  negative  char-
acter, as  in  indirect  proof,  or  the  reductio  ad  dbsurdum.  It
will  be  observed  that  even  here  it  is  necessary  to  suppose
that  the  mechanical  labor  has  been  performed  without  error,
and  although  errors  of  this  nature  are  very  common,  stiU,
since  such  errors  can  at  all  times  be  corrected  till  absolute
exactness  is  reached,  this  fact  does  not  change  the  absolute
character  of  this  species  of  knowledge.  With  respect  to  the
last  classification,  all  such  knowledge  must,  therefore,  neces-
sarily belong  to  the  third  degree.

But  it  is  said  that  there  are  ^me  truths  which  are  "  in-

LIMITS  OF  ABSOLUTE  CEKTAINTY,  513

tuitive,"  and  whicli  the  mind  never  is  called  upon  to  acquire,
or  the  intellect  to  apprehend — first  truths,  necessary  knowl-
edge, without  which  the  mind  can  not  even  reason  upon  as-
sumed premises.*  Most  philosophers  claim  this,  and  some
have  even  maintained  that  we  should  know  these  truths
if  we  had  no  senses  at  all.  With  regard  to  this  latter  notion,
if  I  have  correctly  analyzed  the  human  understanding,  it
would  be  equivalent  to  saying  that  we  should  know  these
truths  if  we  had  no  mind  at  all,  since  the  mind  not  only
embraces  the  phenomena  of  the  senses,  but  the  senses  them-
selves actually  embody  all  the  elements  of  the  mind ;  i.  e.,
nervous  matter  alone  is  sentient ;  and  sensation,  which  im-
plies consciousness,  is  the  element  out  of  which  all  the  phe-
nomena of  mind  are  developed.  Let  us,  then,  consider  for  a
moment  these  so-called  intuitive  conceptions,  or  necessary
tniths.

It  is  claimed  by  these  "  nativists  "  that  all  truths  of  this
nature  must  be  known  to  the  intellect  without  any  process  of
reasoning,  reflection,  or  comparison.  For  example,  it  is  said
that  it  would  not  be  possible  to  be  ignorant  of  the  truth  that
the  whole  is  greater  than  any  of  its  parts,  that  only  one
straight  line  can  be  drawn  between  two  points,  that  two
straight  lines  can  not  inclose  space,  that  a  larger  object  occu-
pies more  space  than  a  smaller  one,  or  that  a  man  can  not
be  in  Washington  and  N^ew  York  at  the  same  time.  These,
it  is  claimed,  are  truths  that  all  must  know  without  effort,
being  alike  necessary  truths  and  necessary  knowledge.

We  will  first  inquire  whether  these  truths  form  a  sepa-
rate and  well-defined  group  in  which  they  naturally  place
themselves,  so  that  no  doubt  can  exist  in  the  mind  as  to
whether  any  of  them  actually  belong  to  this  group.  For,  if
there  be  any  such  doubt  with  regard  to  any,  it  argues  a  gra-
dation, and  destroys  the  distinctive  character  of  these  truths,

*  Cousin,  "  Du  vrai,  du  beau  et  du  bien,"  pp.  41,  98,  443 ;  Sir  William
Hamilton,  "  Metaphysics,"  Lecture  xxxviii ;  Carpenter,  "  Mental  Physiology,"  p.
408.

514  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

and  this  alone  is  sufficient  to  overthrow  the  doctrine.  Are
there,  then,  any  doubtful  cases  in  which  one  would  hesitate
before  assigning  them  a  place  among  the  intuitions  ?  It  is
clear  that  there  are  many.  That  the  whole  is  greater  than
a  part  may  seem  clearly  an  intuitive  conception.  That  the
sums  or  differences  of  equals  are  also  equal  scarcely  requires
an  effort  of  the  mind  to  comprehend  it.  But  with  regard  to
the  equality  of  the  products  and  quotients  of  equals,  though
not  difecult  to  see,  this  is  certainly  not  so  apparent.  It  re-
quires a  slight  effort  of  the  mind.

Between  two  points  only  one  straight  line  can  be  drawn.
This  is  clear  enough,  as  is  also  the  proposition  that  a  straight
line  is  the  shortest  distance  between  two  points.  Yet  some
of  the  text-books  give  these  as  axioms  of  geometry,  while
others  proceed  to  demonstrate  them.  The  same  is  true  of
the  proposition  that  the  angles  about  perpendiculars  are
right  angles,  or  the  converse.

Again,  two  straight  lines  can  not  inclose  space.  Ko  prop-
osition can  be  more  certain  or  apparent  than  this,  yet  it  may
be  demonstrated.  It  is  not  quite  so  clear  that  the  sum  of
adjacent  angles  is  equal  to  two  right  angles,  or  that  the  inte-
rior and  opposite  angles  formed  by  parallels  are  equal.  They
are  usually  proved  to  be  so.  It  is  but  a  step  further  to  declare
that  the  three  angles  of  a  triangle  are  equal  to  two  right
angles,  or  that  the  squares  of  the  base  and  perpendicular  of  a
right-angled  triangle  are  together  equal  to  the  square  of  the
hypotenuse.  We  have  now  reached  somewhat  deep  water,
and  might  carry  it  on  to  the  most  complicated  theorem  of
geometry.  There  is  no  difference  in  the  trueness  of  these
truths.  One  is  as  true  as  another.  Truth  is  absolute,  but
knowledge  is  relative.  "We  therefore  see  that  in  mathemat-
ics, at  least,  there  is  a  regular  gradation  in  the  ease  and  cer-
tainty with  which  the  mind  is  capable  of  grasping  truths.

It  is  the  same  in  physics.  Nothing  can  be  in  two  places
at  once  ;  that  is  very  clear.  But,  though  evident  that  a  man
can  not  be  in  San  Francisco  and  New  York  the  same  day,  yet,

I

INNATE  IDEAS.  515

in  the  present  state  of  conveyance,  he  may  be  in  both  places
the  same  week.  Neither  can  a  man  become  a  stag  in  the  twink-
ling of  an  eye,  yet  the  transformations  of  insects  and  amphibi-
ans would  be  scarcely  less  incredible  were  they  not  so  well
established  by  observation.     Credibility  rests  on  experience.

To  one  acquainted  with  the  solar  system  it  would  seem
impossible  for  the  earth  to  cease  any  of  its  motions,  at  least
suddenly,  but  here  we  are  verging  upon  the  doubtful,  and,
when  we  declare  the  solar  system  to  have  been  evolved  from
a  gaseous  mass,  we  have  reached  the  point  of  speculation.

We  see,  therefore,  that  there  is  a  gradation,  not  in  the
truth  of  these  statements,  for  every  one  of  them  is  either
true  or  false  without  the  least  reference  to  our  opinions,  but
in  our  knowledge  of  their  truth,  and,  if  this  be  so,  that
knowledge  can  never  be  absolute.  In  many  cases  it  is  am-
ply sufficient  and  satisfactory  to  us,  but  this  is  only  moral,  or
practical,  certainty,  and  not  absolute,  or  theoretical,  certainty.
So  that  the  doctrine  of  necessary  knowledge  can  not  be  main-
tained, if  by  it  is  meant  that  there  is  a  distinct  class  of  truths
which  the  mind  must  necessarily  know  without  effort.  On
the  contrary,  the  intellect  is  both  subjective  and  active,  while
all  truth  is  both  objective  and  passive.  Therefore  there
must  be  a  gradation  in  knowledge  arising  from  the  varieties
of  truth  with  respect  to  the  quantity  of  intellectual  force  re-
quired for  their  apprehension,  coupled  with  the  degrees  of
activity  and  power  which  different  intellects  possess.  "What
is  a  first  truth,  or  intuitive  conception,  for  one  intellect  is  the
result  of  study  or  reflection  for  another.

It  would  seem  to  follow,  from  these  premises,  that  even
in  the  domain  of  mathematical  demonstration  no  conclusion
can  be  absolutely  certain  which  involves  an  axiom  as  one
of  its  premises,  and  this  would  sweep  away  the  entire  de-
partment of  absolute  knowledge.  Still,  the  knowledge  thus
obtained  is  surely  sufficient  in  point  of  certainty  for  all
practical  purposes.  Indeed,  it  would  seem  that  there  are
many  axioms  which  any  intellect  capable  of  grasping  them

516  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

at  all  could  scarcely  fail  to  accept;  it  could  not,  at  least,
question  their  truth.

But  the  foregoing  considerations  do  not  by  any  means
furnish  the  only  evidence  which  can  be  brought  to  confute
the  doctrine  of  necessary  knowledge.  If  any  such  knowl-
edge exists,  then,  being  necessary,  it  must  be  universal.  It
can  admit  of  no  exceptions.  For  example,  if  the  mind  is
obliged  to  reject  the  belief  in  a  physical  impossibility  from
the  nature  of  the  case,  then  no  case  can  be  cited  in  which  any
one  has  ever  possessed  any  such  belief.  Otherwise  the
knowledge  is  no  longer  necessary,  and  the  doctrine  of  intui-
tive knowledge  falls  to  the  ground.  Yet  what  are  the  facts  ?
We  find,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  human  mind  has  found  no
difficulty  in  accepting  the  most  palpable  absurdities,  the
most  impossible  propositions,  and  the  most  obvious  violations
of  every  2)hysical  law.  The  Asiatics  in  particular  are  pro-
verbially imaginative,  as  it  is  called  ;  which  consists  not  only
in  a  great  facility  for  creating  unreal  and  fantastic  mental
images,  but  in  actually  receiving  the  same  as  true  and  possible.
An  Arab  finds  no  more  difficulty  in  believing  it  possible  for
a  man  instantly  to  become  a  horse  than  he  does  in  contem-
plating a  removal  of  his  tent.  To  him  the  enchanted  tales
of  the  '-'Niehts'  Entertainments"  are  not,  as  with  the  Euro-
pean,  an  indulgence  in  idle  fancies  known  to  be  impossible ;
but,  though  he  may  believe  the  particular  stories  to  be  ficti-
tious, he  yet  conceives  that  they  or  their  equals  might  be
true.  Nor  is  this  confined  to  Asia.  Perhaps  one  half  of  the
people  of  Europe  and  America  to-day  sincerely  believe  that
a  certain  woman  of  ancient  times  was  instantly  transformed
into  a  "  pillar  of  salt "  ;  that  on  certain  occasions  water  was
turned  to  wine;  that  in  one  instance  the  sun  and  moon  stopped
in  their  apparent  motions  for  the  space  of  twelve  hours;
that  a  man  lived  three  days  in  the  belly  of  a  whale  and
came  forth  alive.  And  many  still  reverently  believe  that  on
certain  occasions  a  piece  of  bread  made  by  human  hands  act-
ually becomes  a  part  of  the  body  of  a  man  who  lived  and

DEDUCTIVE  AND  INDUOTIVE  KNOWLEDGE.        517

died  nearly  nineteen  centuries  ago,  and  that  common  wine
becomes  in  real  truth  his  blood.  And  yet  philosophers  tell
us  that  the  human  mind  is  incapable  of  not  knowing  that
such  things  are  impossible.  The  doctrine  of  the  creation  of
matter  out  of  nothing  is  analogous  to  this.  It  can  not  be
reached  by  any  faculty  of  the  mind.  Reason  revolts  at  it
and  declares  it  impossible.  Facts  and  tests  belie  it  and  dem-
onstrate its  absurdity  ;  and  yet  the  whole  world,  with  a  hand-
ful of  exceptions,  go  on  believing  it  with  as  much  ease  as
though  it  had  been  proved  in  Euclid.

"We  see,  then,  that  the  doctrine  of  innate,  intuitive,  or
necessary  knowledge  is  wholly  untenable,  and  that  all  we
can  expect  to  know  must  have  some  degree  of  probability,
and  must  be  sought  and  acquired  by  personal  efforts.  But
though  there  are  no  such  things  as  innate  ideas,  the  belief  in
which  has  arisen  from  a  confusion  of  the  intellectual  opera-
tions of  the  mind  with  the  result  of  those  operations  when
applied  to  legitimate  objects — a  confounding  of  intellect
with  knowledge — still  there  are  obviously  two  quite  distinct
classes  of  knowledge  due  to  the  different  methods  by  which
it  is  acquired.  The  first  may  be  called  deductive,  or  a  priori,
knowledge,  the  second  inductive,  or  a  posteriori,  knowledge.
One  difference  between  them  is  this :  knowledge  of  the  first
class  must  be  learned  as  well  as  that  of  the  second,  but  once
learned,  it  is  not  possible  for  the  mind  to  doubt  or  for  dif-
ferent minds  to  differ  in  opinion  respecting  it.  With  regard
to  knowledge  of  the  second  class,  on  the  contrary,  we  may
conceive  the  non-existcDce  or  even  the  contradictory  of  an  a
posteriori  truth,*  and  different  minds  may  differ  in  opinion
concerning  it.

If  an  a  priori  truth  is  comprehended  at  all,  it  must  be
comprehended  as  true.  Once  fairly  acquired,  it  is  felt  to  be
either  logically  or  physically  necessary.     Deductive  truth  is

*  Spencer's  universal  postulate  of  the  "  inconceivability  of  the  negation "
docs  not  apply  to  this  class  at  all.  Yet  he  recognizes  it  as  the  most  important
kind  of  truth.     ("  First  Principles,"  p.  85.)

518  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

necessary  in  the  impossibility  of  its  being  otherwise,  while
inductive  truth  is  only  necessary  in  actually  being  what  it  is.
The  first  is  a  subjective,  the  second  an  objective,  necessity.

Now,  the  imperfection  of  human  knowledge  is  of  two
kinds,  according  as  it  is  caused  by  ignorance  or  by  error — by
the  absence  of  ideas  or  by  false  ideas.

With  reference  to  truth  of  the  first  class  mentioned
above,  viz.,  deductive,  or  a  priori,  truth,  the  mind  may  be  in
ignorance  of  it,  but  it  can  never  be  in  error  concerning  it.
With  reference  to  the  second  class,  however,  viz.,  inductive,
or  a  posteriori,  truth,  the  mind  may  be  both  in  ignorance
and  in  error  respecting  it.

But  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  data  for  all  knowl-
edge of  the  first  class  must  first  be  derived  through  sense-
perception,  and  its  higher  premises  must  first  be  established
as  knowledge  of  the  second  class,  which  is,  therefore,  chrono-
logically the  first.

We  must  here  take  leave  of  positively  certain  knowledge,
which  can  only  exist  as  a  conclusion  from  hypothetical
premises  purely,  so  that,  even  if  one  of  those  premises  is  an
axiom  or  a  physical  necessity,  its  truth  must  be  assumed  as  a
postulate,  while  the  process  of  ratiocination,  also  necessary
to  reach  that  conclusion,  must  be  presumed  to  have  been  per-
formed without  error.  This  knowledge,  when  the  contin-
gencies are  granted,  becomes  absolute,  yet  it  always  de-
pends upon  two  or  three  contingencies  which  are  in  them-
selves merely  uncertain  propositions.  It  is  evident,  there-
fore, that  it  is  to  the  class  of  uncertain,  or  probable,  knowl-
edge that  our  chief  attention  should  be  directed.  And,  first,
we  observe  that  there  are  various  grades  of  probability,  from
that  which  is  sufiiciently  certain  for  all  human  purposes  to
that  which  is  mere  speculation.  The  most  reliable  knowl-
edge which  it  is  possible  to  obtain  is  the  direct  testimony  of
the  senses.  The  senses,  in  fact,  as  has  been  shown  (vol.  i,  p.
381),  furnish  the  materials  of  all  knowledge,  and  but  for
them  no  truth  could  be  apprehended.     Therefore,  all  knowl-

PEIMARY  SOURCE  OF  KNOWLEDGE.  519

edge  must  depend  entirely  upon  these  sense-impressions ;  i.  e.,
the  truth  of  all  secondary  or  tertiary  ideas — all  judgments
and  conclusions — must  depend  upon  the  primary  perceptions,
of  which  they  are  the  elaborations.

"With  regard  to  the  certainty  of  these  primary  percep-
tions, it  may  be  laid  down  as  a  rule  that,  when  they  are  dis-
tinct, they  are  sufficiently  certain  to  be  safely  made  the  basis
of  any  human  action.  There  are,  however,  a  few  excep-
tions to  this  rule.  One  is,  when  the  organ  of  sense  is  in  a
diseased  condition.  In  this  case  it  is  liable  to  mistake  the
true  nature  of  the  object  cognized.  The  principle  which
renders  these  mistakes  possible  seems  to  be  that,  owing  to
the  diseased  state  of  the  apparatus  of  cognition,  it  is  con-
stantly experiencing  unnatural  changes  in  itself,  and  these
are  liable  to  be  taken  for,  or  confounded  with,  the  changes
produced  by  the  contact  of  the  external  object.  And,  of
course,  the  same  is  true  of  all  the  senses  when  the  whole
body  is  in  a  diseased  condition,  especially  if  the  disease  is  of
a  nervous  character.

A  second  case  of  unreliability  of  sense- impressions  is
where  there  is  an  effort  made  by  one  person  to  deceive  the
sonses  of  another.  This  is  illustrated  in  jugglery,  or  leger-
demain. Arrangements  may  be  made  well  calculated  to
deceive  the  senses,  and  great  success  in  this  direction  has
been  attained.  It  is  here  that  the  high  authority  of  the  so-
called  intuitions  is  rendered  most  apparent.  A  juggler  may
succeed  in  deceiving  the  subject  into  the  conviction  that  he
has  blown  a  large  potato  out  of  his  nose,  or  extracted  a  live
rabbit  from  a  boiling  pot,  but,  when  the  case  is  appealed  to
the  "  court  above,"  the  decision  is  always  reversed.  He  can
deceive  and  elude  the  senses,  but  he  can  not  convince  the
judgment.  This  judgment  is,  however,  founded  upon  ex-
perience, and  this  experience  is  nothing  more  than  the  con-
currence of  many  sensual  perceptions  opposed  to  the  one
now  experienced,  so  that,  after  all,  it  may  be  reduced  to  a
preponderance  of  homogeneous  experience.

520  KNOWLEDGE.— FOUETH  MEANS.

Again,  the  senses  often  deceive  ns  in  taking  casual  obser-
vations of  nature  under  extraordinary  circumstances.  The
mirage  is  a  good  illustration  of  this  fact.  But  such  illusions
are  of  every-day  occurrence.  Objects  look  colossal  through
a  mist.  They  appear  diminutive  when  viewed  at  a  nearly
vertical  angle,  either  up  or  down.  Two  trees  standing  a
short  distance  apart  on  a  distant  hiU  appear  much  farther
apart  than  they  really  are.  A  marble  seems  like  two  if  laid
between  the  fingers  when  they  are  crossed.  All  these  and
many  other  similar  phenomena  are  generally  regarded  as
proofs  of  the  unreliability  of  the  senses  under  unusual  cir-
cumstances. And  so  they  may  be  taken  to  be,  so  far  as  our
present  subject  is  concerned.  But,  when  such  phenomena
are  more  closely  examined,  they  are  found  to  be  errors  of
judgment,  owing  to  circumstances  surrounding  them,  to
which  the  mind  is  not  accustomed.  The  senses  communi-
cate the  impressions  just  as  they  receive  them,  but  the  gen-
eral phenomenon  is  of  a  secondary  character,  and  requires
an  act  of  the  mind  upon  those  impressions  as  the  basis  of
comparison.  This  judgment  is  the  same  as  is  usually  ren-
dered under  ordinary  circumstances,  but  the  circumstances
being  in  these  cases  extraordinary,  the  judgment  is  errone-
ous. This  is  the  true  explanation  of  these  illusions,  and,  by
a  parity  of  reasoning,  it  might  be  also  applied  to  the  solu-
tion of  all  tricks  of  legerdemain,  so  that,  unless  in  a  diseased
condition,  the  senses  themselves  may  be  regarded  as  wholly
reliable.

Every  separate  act  of  the  mind,  in  acquiring  an  idea,  in-
volves a  certain  degree  of  uncertainty.  There  are,  as  it
were,  loop-holes  between  each  successive  step  through  which
the  truth  is  liable  to  slip  out  and  escape.  There  are  three
degrees  of  knowledge,  each  requiring  one  additional  step,  or
separate  mental  act,  to  reach  it  from  the  one  below  it.  These
ideas  may  be  denominated  respectively  perceptions,  judg-
ments, and  conclusions,  and  the  knowledge  thus  acquired,
primary,  secondary,  and  tertiary.    We  have  already  consid-

DEGREES  OF  CERTAINTY.  521

ered  the  primary  perceptions,  and  find  them  of  a  very  high
degree  of  certainty,  the  highest  to  which  our  faculties  are
capable  of  attaining.

In  passing  now  to  judgments,  and  applying  the  rule,  we
see  that  the  degree  of  certainty  has  been  diminished  by  one
step,  or  chance.  A  judgment  is  expressed  by  a  proposition.
A  proposition  is  a  comparison  of  two  terms  (a  term  being
merely  the  expression  of  a  sense-impression),  whereby  they
are  declared  to  agree  or  disagree.  This  comparison  requires
an  act  of  the  mind  in  passing  from  one  impression  to  the
other,  and  it  is  in  this  second  act  that  the  second  liability  to
error  occurs.  Therefore,  the  certainty  of  a  judgment  is  one
degree  less  than  that  of  either  of  the  impressions  compared.
The  only  way  to  diminish  the  liability  to  error  is,  as  in
every  thing  else,  by  care  and  pains  in  the  act  of  the  mind,  in
the  same  way  that  the  original  conceptions  can  be  rendered
more  certain.  This  constitutes  verification,  and  is  accom-
plished by  the  repetition  and  variation  of  the  experience.

In  tertiary  ideas,  or  conclusions — being  due,  as  we  have
seen,  to  the  evolution,  by  an  act  called  ratiocination,  of  a  third
proposition  from  two  others  having  a  certain  relation  and
containing  both  the  terms  of  the  conclusion — we  find  that
the  certainty  has  again  suffered  a  diminution  by  this  third
mental  act.  The  liability  to  error  consists  in  this  case,  as  in
the  last,  in  the  possibility  of  employing  erroneous  premises.
If  the  premises  are  true  the  conclusion  must  be  true,  the
same  as  was  explained  with  regard  to  hypothetical  premises.
Since  conclusions  are  themselves  but  propositions,  as  well  as
the  premises  from  which  they  are  evolved,  the  question  may
arise  how  a  judgment  is  to  be  distinguished  from  a  conclu-
sion. This  depends  wholly  upon  the  point  of  view  of  the
person  employing  it.  Any  two  propositions  in  M'hich  there
is  a  common  term  may  be  made  to  unfold  a  third  proposi-
tion, or  conclusion.  ]^ow,  if  the  mind  of  a  particular  person
accepts  these  premises  without  further  proof,   they  are  to

Buch  a  mind  judgments,  from  which  he  draws  the  conclu-
54

522  KNOWLEDGE.— FOUKTH  MEANS.

sion  which  to  him  is  a  new  truth.  If,  now,  he  proceeds  to
make  use  of  this  new  proposition  as  a  premise  from  which
to  deduce  a  second  conclusion,  it  has  then  ceased  to  be  a  con-
chision,  and  taken  its  rank  as  an  ordinary  judgment.  Thus
a  proposition  may  be  made  to  serve  both  as  a  judgment  and
as  a  conclusion,  according  to  the  manner  in  which  it  is  em-
ployed, but  in  case  it  is  not  satisfactory  to  the  mind  it  must
itself  be  proved.  Almost  any  thing  can  be  demonstrated  by
logic,  provided  we  are  satisfied  with  the  premises  employed.
The  greatest  sophisms  may  thus  be  maintained.  It  was
owing  to  this  that  logic  at  the  time  of  Bacon  had  fallen  into
such  disrepute.*  Previous  to  that  time  it  had  been  the  cus-
tom to  take  generalities  as  premises,  and  no  one  seemed  to
think  of  the  possibility  that  they  might  need  proving  as  well
as  the  conclusions  derived  from  them.  They  were  usually
old,  established  maxims  of  ethics  or  metaphysics  which  no
one  dared  to  dispute.

It  was  then  assumed  that  these  were  included  in  the
number  of  first  truths  or  axiomatic  ideas,  and  served  as  a
basis  below  which  it  was  impossible  to  go.  Because,  they
said,  there  must  be  some  starting-point,  we  must  admit  some-
thinsr,  or  else  we  can  not  reason  at  all.  In  this  and  in  this
only  they  were  correct.  Because  we  must  believe  some-
thing, however,  it  does  not  follow  that  we  must  admit  these
particular  maxims.  What  that  something  is  that  we  must
admit  in  order  to  reason,  we  will  next  endeavor  to  ascertain.

The  questions  might  arise  now,  as  they  arose  then,  If
conclusions  are  convertible  into  premises,  and  vice  versa,  is
not  the  process  indefinite  ?  Must  not  every  proposition  be
proved  by  just  such  unproved  premises  ad  infinitum  ?  If
all  premises  must  be  proved,  where  shall  we  stop  ?  "Would
it  not  render  all  attempts  to  arrive  at  truth  hopeless?  The
answer  is,  that  the  necessity  of  a  basis  is  not  denied,  but  the
avoidance  of  an  erroneous  basis  is  demanded.    It  has  been

*  "  Instauratio  Magna,  Praefatio,"  "  Distributio  Opens."    ("  Works,"  vol.  i,
pp.  211,  214,  220.)

ANALYSIS  OF  A   PRIORI  DEDUCTIOI^S.  523

Bhown  that  the  degrees  of  certainty  in  the  modes  of  acquir-
ing knowledge  correspond  with  the  degrees  of  proximity
which  the  process  occupies  to  the  first  and  original  portals
througli  which  the  mind  receives  the  materials  of  all  knowl-
edge— the  senses.  Here  alone  is  the  real  key  to  the  truth
of  every  proposition.  Let  it  be  followed  back  to  the  door
through  which  all  its  elements  were  originally  admitted.
Seek  out  the  clew  that  leads  back  through  the  mazy  laby-
rinth of  complex  mental  operations  to  primary  experience,
and  there  at  the  entrance  examine  the  records  made  by  the
senses  and  see  whether  those  elements  are  there  registered.
Every  proposition  which  it  is  possible  for  man  to  know  can
be  thus  traced,  and  every  proposition  which  can  not  be  thus
traced  must  take  rank  with  the  unknowable.  This  is  not
only  the  rule  to  which  all  induction  must  conform,  but  it  is
the  great  comprehensive  gauge  for  harmonizing  opinions
with  truths  and  reconciling  ideas  with  realities.

That  every  knowable  proposition  can  be  so  traced  may
be  readily  shown.  Take,  for  example,  the  proposition  that
the  earth  is  globular.  It  appears  level ;  but  if  a  man  could
start  from  Quito  in  any  direction  whatever,  and  travel  in  a
right  line  a  distance  of  twenty-five  thousand  miles,  he  would
find  himself  at  exactly  the  same  spot  from  which  he  started.
He  would  thus  have  ocular  demonstration  of  the  truth  of  the
proposition.  If  I  look  across  a  sheet  of  water,  and  see  the
topmast  of  an  advancing  vessel,  and  afterward  the  sails  and
rigging,  and  lastly  her  hull,  I  have  demonstrated  in  the  most
certain  manner  possible,  not  that  the  earth  is  a  sphere,  but
that  that  sheet  of  water  has  a  curved  surface  ;  and,  if  I  repeat
the  experiment  in  many  seas  with  the  same  result,  the  cer-
tainty of  the  original  proposition  becomes  sufiicient.

As  a  second  illustration,  suppose  some  one  to  maintain
the  proposition  that  there  is  iron  in  the  sun.  He  may  have
arrived  at  that  conclusion  by  a  process  of  reasoning.  Sup-
pose him  to  have  deduced  it  in  the  following  manner :  God
always  supplies  useful   commodities  to   intelligent  beings.

524  KNOWLEDGE.— FOUETH  MEANS.

The  sun  is  inhabited  by  such  beings,  and  iron  is  such  a  com-
modity, therefore  there  must  be  iron  in  the  sun.  If  dis-
puted, he  might  prove  that  the  sun  is  inhabited  in  the  fol-
lowing way  :  The  sun  is  a  much  greater  and  more  beautiful
world  than  the  earth,  therefore  it  is  not  reasonable  that  God
would  place  intelligent  beings  upon  this  earth  and  not  place
them  also  upon  the  sun.

Suppose,  now,  we  endeavor  to  trace  this  argument  back  to
the  original  source  of  every  conception  involved  in  it.  Since
terras  are  only  the  expressions  of  these  conceptions,  we  must
take  each  term  and  analyze  it.  The  first  term,  "  God,"  is
found  to  consist  of  a  variety  of  conceptions  vaguely  confused
together,  and,  when  stripped  of  imaginary  elements  and
tested  by  the  light  of  science,  appears,  as  was  shown  in  my
remarks  on  religion  (mpra,  p.  2G9),  to  say  the  least,  to  lie
wholly  outside  the  domain  of  human  knowledge.  If  such  a
being  exists  at  all,  man  does  not,  and  in  his  present  state
can  not,  know  it.*  His  existence,  if  a  truth,  is  one  that  can
not  be  apprehended  by  the  intellect.  The  first  premise,
therefore,  which  predicates  a  fact  of  this  term,  must  fall  with
the  term  itself.  Not  that  it  is  disproved,  but  that  it  can  not
be  proved.  The  chief  proposition  of  the  second  premise —
that  the  sun  is  inhabited  by  intelligent  beings — must  submit
to  the  same  analysis.  The  sun  can  be  cognized  by  the  sense
of  sight,  but  we  thus  obtain  a  very  imperfect  notion  of  what
it  really  is.  The  first  time  an  intelligent  being  should  see  it,
he  might  think  it  was  a  mile  off  and  as  big  as  a  large  hat-brim.
The  early  impressions  which  any  one  gets  of  it  now  are  very
different  from  this,  because  every  child  is  taught  something
which  science  has  already  revealed  concerning  it.  Newton
has  analyzed  its  rays,  astronomers  have  calculated  its  dis-
tance, its  magnitude,  its  motions,  and  its  attractive  force,  and
now  more  recently  chemists  and  physicists  have  commenced

*  Kant  says:  "Zwar  wird  frcilich  sich  Niomand  ruhmcn  tonnen,  er  ii-issc,
dass  cin  Gott  .  .  .  sei ;  denn  wenn  er  das  weiss,  so  ist  er  {^erade  der  Slann,  den
ich  langsl  gcsucht  liabe."     ("  Kritik  der  reincn  Veraunft,"  S.  546.)

I

ANALYSIS  or  A  PRIORI  DEDUCTIONS.  525

to  make  discoveries  as  to  its  condition  and  its  constitution.
Among  other  relations  which  the  last-mentioned  class  of  ex-
perimenters have  made,  they  have  discovered  that  unques-
tionably there  is  iron  in  the  sun.  They  have  demonstrated
the  original  proposition,  and  have  established  it  by  the  high-
est form  of  proof — by  the  senses.  For,  though  they  can  not
see  the  iron  itself,  yet  they  can  see  one  of  its  invariable
modes  of  manifestation.  And,  indeed,  that  is  all  that  can  be
done ;  for,  when  we  see  and  handle  that  metal,  we  only  cog-
nize its  qualities,  i.  e.,  these  various  modes  of  manifestation.
"We  know  nothing  of  its  essence.  When  we  see  it,  we  only
note  its  mode  of  appeal  to  the  eye ;  when  we  handle  it,  to
the  nerves  of  feeling ;  when  we  strike  it,  to  the  ear.  When
we  lift  it,  we  only  learn  its  weight,  i.  e.,  the  force  by  which
the  earth  attracts  it,  which,  when  further  reduced,  shows  us
simply  its  density  relatively  to  other  substances.  All  these
are  its  properties  simply,  and  these  are  all  M^e  can  know.
But  it  is  found  to  have  other  properties  not  manifest  at  ordi-
nary temperatures.  These,  when  thoroughly  examined,  are
found  to  be  just  as  regular  and  characteristic  as  the  more
obvious  ones.  One  of  these  is  its  e"ffect  when  volatilized  of
producing  certain  bands  upon  the  spectrum,  in  a  fixed  posi-
tion, and  it  is  by  means  of  this  effect  that  its  presence  in  the
sun  has  been  rendered  so  certain ;  for  that  one  distinct  prop-
erty is  sufiicient,  though  of  course  not  so  absolutely  conclu-
sive as  a  greater  number  would  have  rendered  it.

But  let  us  not  renounce  our  plan  of  testing  this  proposi-
tion when  reached  by  other  means,  because,  while  seeking  to
prove  one  of  the  previous  premises,  viz.,  that  the  sun  must
be  inhabited  by  intelligent  beings,  we  have  found  it  true  in
another  and  entirely  independent  manner.  We  have  traced
back  the  first  term  of  this  premise,  "  the  sun,"  to  the  true
source,  viz.,  our  whole  knowledge  of  it  as  revealed  by  the
senses.  Let  us  now  examine  the  remaining  term,  "intelli-
gent beings."  What  do  we  know  of  them  ?  Of  course,  we
refer  to  man  exclusively,  a  being  cognizable  by  all  our  senses.

526  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

We  know  what  he  is,  what  he  is  capable  of  doing  and  endur-
ing. Putting  our  knowledge  of  man  with  our  knowledge  of
the  sun,  and  what  are  the  prospects  that  beings  like  him
dwell  there?  To  say  that  some  other  kind  of  intelligent
being,  differing  utterly  in  all  other  respects  except  that  of
intelligence,  dwells  there,  is  once  more  to  abandon  the  field
of  possible  knowledge  and  rely  again  upon  these  general  as-
sumptions which  have  already  proved  so  unreliable.  In  the
first  place,  then,  the  very  condition  necessary  to  our  discov-
ery of  the  presence  of  iron  is  that  the  temperature  of  the
sun  be  such  that  that  metal  is  in  a  gaseous  state — a  heat
greater  than  it  was  possible  for  man  to  create  until  the  mod-
ern electric  appliances  were  discovered  and  employed.  Of
course,  then,  this  second  premise  must  be  false,  if  by  in-
telligent beings  man,  or  any  other  sentient  creature  known
to  this  world,  is  meant.  Both  the  premises  upon  which
it  was  first  proposed  to  rest  this  question  are  thus  shown  to
be  fallacious.  The  fact  that  the  conclusion  drawn  from
them  happens  to  be  true,  is  not  the  least  excuse  for  employing
them.  So  far  as  they  are  concerned,  it  might  as  easily  have
been  false.  Nor  is  this  an  extreme  case.  It  is  exactly  the
manner  in  which  people  reasoned  down  to  the  age  of  Bacon.
They  piled  up  their  syllogisms  and  sorites  mountain-high,
till  they  threatened  to  deluge  the  world  with  so-called  logic.
The  true  basis  of  knowledge  is  the  primary  apprehension
of  truth  by  the  senses,  and  the  mode  of  reaching  it  is  the
thorough  analysis  of  every  term  of  a  proposition,  and  the
discovery  of  the  original  conceptions  upon  which  it  is
founded.  This  view  is  perfectly  rational ;  for  the  object
surely  should  be  to  arrive  at  the  greatest  possible  certainty,
and  since,  as  has  been  shown,  the  most  certain  mode  of  ap-
prehension is  by  means  of  the  senses — and  for  the  obvious
reason  that  it  is  the  original  mode,  so  that  of  course  no  sec-
ondary apprehension  could  possibly  be  any  more  certain,
because  a  conclusion  can  not  be  any  more  certain  than  the
premises  from  which  it  is  deduced,  but,  on  the  other  hand,

DIMINUTION  OF  CERTAINTY.  527

all  the  chances  are  in  the  direction  of  rendering  it  less  cer-
tain— it  follows  that  this  mode  is  the  very  most  certain  pos-
sible.

Speaking  generally,  then,  no  important  proposition  should
be  deemed  to  have  been  satisfactorily  established  until  it  has
been  subjected  to  the  test  of  a  thorough  scientific  analysis,
and  found  to  be  based  upon  either  some  tangible  material
thing^  or  object,  cognizable  by  the  senses,  or  upon  some  cer-
tain natural  law,  established  by  inductive  experiment,  or  else
upon  some  real  fact,  or  physical  change,  actually  known  by
sensual  demonstration  to  have  taken  place  in  such  matter  by
the  operation  of  such  law.  In  other  words,  it  must  be  proved
to  be  founded  upon  truth,  and  these  objects,  laws,  and  phe-
nomena constitute  the  three  departments  which  embrace  all
truths.

We  saw  a  few  pages  back  that  verified  primary  knowl-
edge of  nature  may  be,  and  constantly  is  being,  diminished
in  value  by  a  process  which  we  called  attenuation,  and  which
may  not  inaptly  be  compared  to  the  degeneration  of  living
creatures  by  successive  "  breeding  in-and-in."  We  are  now
to  consider  how  such  primary  legitimate  knowledge  may  be,
and  constantly  is  being,  diminished  in  certainty  by  a  some-
what analogous  process.

There  is  one  way  in  particular  in  which  the  certainty  of
knowledge  is  diminished,  which  has  received  much  atten-
tion. I  refer  to  the  effect  of  communication  between  dif-
ferent persons,  whereby  knowledge  once  apprehended  by
the  intellect  of  one  person  is  conveyed  and  imparted  to  a
second,  by  the  second  to  a  third,  and  so  on,  to  an  indefinite
number  of  individuals.  It  is  true  that  each  individual  ap-
prehends the  given  truth  by  some  of  his  senses,  but  the  first
one  alone  employed  the  particular  senses,  and  in  the  legiti-
mate manner  for  receiving  the  original  idea.  But  for  him
none  of  the  others  could  have  ever  received  it.  He  may
have  delved  into  the  hidden  recesses  of  nature  and  expended
a  life-time  in  bringing  it  to  light.     All  the  rest  acquire  it

528  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

in  a  moment  by  hearing  it  uttered,  or  by  reading  it  in  a
book.

The  effect  of  these  successive  communications  is  to
diminish  the  certainty  of  the  original  knowledge  at  each  re-
move from  the  first  discoverer.  This  effect  is  produced  in
many  ways.  Suppose  it  to  have  been  such  a  truth  as  that
above  described.  The  discoverer  in  his  long  and  protracted
researches,  when  he  had  at  last  secured  it  with  certainty,
would  naturally  seek  to  promulgate  it  with  the  greatest  care,
guarding  it  sacredly  with  technical  terms  long  pondered  and
precise  in  meaning.  Cast  forth,  at  last,  thus  guarded,  upon
the  faithless  ocean  of  loose  speech  and  careless  thought,  it
would,  with  a  few  buffets,  be  stripped,  of  its  precision,  di-
vested of  its  technicalities,  distorted  from  its  original  mean-
ing, and  exaggerated  into  a  myth  or  degraded  into  a  plati-
tude. It  must  run  these  risks,  and,  unless  means  are  afforded
for  its  repeated  elaboration  anew,  and  for  its  easy  demonstra-
tion by  true  tests,  it  soon  becomes  lost  like  a  vial  of  nectar
poured  into  the  sea.

Hence,  the  prominence  which  this  subject  has  assumed
in  all  discussions  upon  the  certainty  of  human  ideas.  That
much  time  and  energy  have  thus  been  wasted,  and  that  the
true  considerations  involved  have  been  largely  disregarded,  I
am  satisfied,  and  shall  now  endeavor  to  show.

Both  the  parties  to  controversies  of  this  class  have  seemed
content  to  rest  their  case  upon  the  nature  and  reliability  of
human  testimony  respecting  all  points  whatsoever,  as  if
there  could  be  no  essential  difference  in  the  subjects  of  testi-
mony. In  other  words,  they  have  given  the  same  weight  to
such  testimony  as  tended  to  establish  an  absurdity  or  a  phys-
ical impossibility  as  to  such  as  tended  to  prove  an  ordinary
probability,  and,  if  only  the  evidence  was  made  equal,  they
have  been  satisfied  to  regard  the  certainty  equal  also.  They
have  practically  ignored  the  internal  probability  of  the  alle-
gations made,  i.  e.,  the  quality  oi  propositions,  and  depended
wholly  upon  the  quality  and  quantity  of  evidence.

\

TESTIMONT.  529

In  point  of  fact,  the  certainty  of  a  proposition,  depending
altogether  upon  a  chain  of  human  testimony  for  its  credibil-
ity, is  to  be  judged  of  intelligently  only  by  finding  first  in
which  of  the  three  departments  of  truth  named  above  it  will
belong  if  true — whether  in  the  department  of  things,  of  laws,
^or  of  facts.  Two  cases  can  not  be  parallel,  one  of  which
lies  in  one  and  the  other  in  another  of  these  departments —
not,  at  least,  if  one  lies  in  the  last  named.  For,  amid  all
the  liabilities  to  error — first  in  the  original  apprehension,  in
which  these  liabilities  are  increased  the  further  we  go  back
into  the  ages  of  ignorance  and  imagination,  and  again  in
its  long  tradition  through  thousands  of  individuals  during
the  lapse  of  centuries — any  statement  whatever  becomes
utterly  unreliable.  It  may,  it  is  true,  have  been  preserved
unchanged  throughout  all  these  vicissitudes,  but,  where  this
is  true  of  one,  it  would  be  otherwise  with  thousands;  so
that  testimony  alone  is  worthless.  It  must  have  something
more  substantial  to  rest  upon.  !N^ow,  the  statement  of  a
mere  fact,  an  event  which  has  occurred  centuries  ago,  if
substantiated  by  testimony  alone,  can  not  be  credited.
Why  ?  Because  it  can  not  be  reproduced.  It  can  not  be
verified.  Kot  so  with  afiirming  the  existence  of  a  thing.
Things,  in  the  sense  here  meant,  are  eternal ;  for,  if  they
have  so  far  changed  their  form  as  to  have  ceased  to  be  rec-
ognizable under  the  same  name,  they  have  ceased  to  be
things,  and  passed  into  the  domain  of  facts.  Therefore,  if
the  existence  of  a  thing  at  a  remote  period  in  the  past  be
aflBrmed  and  supported  by  testimony,  the  testimony  is  equally
worthless  as  in  the  prior  case,  but  it  is  no  longer  absolutely
necessary.  The  thing  still  exists,  and  may  be  produced,  and
the  controversy  ended.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  historians
so  highly  value  every  little  monument  of  those  nations  long
passed  away  whose  history  they  are  endeavoring  to  trace.
Every  rude  pot,  every  coin,  every  graven  image,  every
carved  pillar,  is  a  material  substance,  and,  so  far  as  it  can
speak,  its  testimony  is  absolutely  reliable.     It  is  this  princi-

530  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

pie  also  that  gives  to  literature  its  immeDse  importance  with
respect  to  history ;  for  manuscripts,  books,  or  libraries,  are
things  which  exist  and  speak  with  many  tongues.

We  see,  therefore,  that,  as  far  as  testimony  itself  is  con-
cerned, it  is  of  little  or  no  value :  the  certainty  of  the  alleged
truth  depends  upon  its  susceptibility  to  reproduction  or
proof.  So  that,  when  we  are  told  that  we  rely  for  almost  all
our  knowledge  upon  what  others  tell  and  teach  us,  though
we  must  admit  this,  and  nowhere  more  than  in  matters  of
science,  yet  it  is  only  valuable  and  reliable  when  we  remem-
ber that  those  truths  still  exist,  and  that  we  can  easily  satisfy
ourselves,  if  we  are  disposed  to  doubt,  by  reproducing  them
in  the  same  manner  as  our  informants  and  our  teachers
originally  acquired  them.  It  is  only  by  testimony  that  I  am
able  to  affirm  that  such  a  city  as  London  exists.  Yet  I  am
sufficiently  certain  of  it,  for  my  informants  would  have  no
inducement  to  misrepresent  a  thing  so  easily  proved.

But  when  I  am  told  that  the  whole  world  was  overflowed
to  the  tops  of  the  mountains  four  thousand  years  ago  or
more,  that  is  an  event  to  which,  though  possible,  and  a  wide-
spread human  belief,  I  am  obliged  to  give  a  widely  quahfied
credence.  It  is  only  an  alleged  fact,  long  past,  leaving,  as
far  as  known,  nothing  which  still  exists  to  testify  to  its
truth.  The  accounts  of  it,  if  it  ever  happened,  were  evi-
dently written  after  many  ages  of  bare  tradition.  I  am  far
better  satisfied  that,  at  a  very  much  more  remote  period  of
the  earth's  history,  there  were  no  mountains  upon  its  surface,
and  it  was  nearly  or  quite  wholly  covered  with  water,  be-
cause there  exist  objects  of  a  tangible  nature  which  go  to
prove  that  such  must  have  once  been  the  case.

Thus  much  for  the  reliability  of  testimony  when  con-
sidered in  connection  with  the  different  species  of  truth  of
which  it  claims  to  acquaint  us.  Let  us  next  consider  it  in
connection  with  the  different  kinds  of  knowledge.

Knowledge  was  seen  to  be  either  absolute  or  probable.
Absolute  knowledge  is  confined  to  conclusions  drawn  from

i

TESTIMONY.  531

assumed  premises.  Probable  knowledge  was  shown  to  be
of  various  degrees  of  certainty,  according  to  the  faculty  of
the  intellect  by  which  it  is  apprehended,  the  highest  de-
gree being  found  to  be  the  original  conceptions  resulting
immediately  from  the  impressions  of  the  senses.  A  succes-
sion of  these  conceptions  constitutes  experience,  and  the  same
conception  many  times  repeated  enables  the  mind  to  estab-
lish principles  or  laws.

We  discover  these  laws,  therefore,  in  the  same  manner
that  we  discover  objects,  or  things — by  induction.  The  fact
that  we  do  not  specially  search  for  many  of  them  is  no  proof
that  they  are  less  reliable  when  discovered.  It  shows  rather
that  they  are  only  more  common,  and  do  not  require  great
research,  and  if  possible  they  must  be  more  certain,  the  in-
duction being  on  a  more  extended  scale,  and  the  experiments
being  repeated  a  greater  number  of  times.  These  laws,  then,
are  without  doubt  the  most  certain  knowledge  which  we  ever
acquire.  Harmony  with  these  laws  we  hence  denominate
physical  necessity,  and  violations  of  them  physical  impossi-
bilities.

Notwithstanding  this,  strange  to  say,  such  is  the  superfi-
cial character  of  men's  deductions  that  they  have  always
been  setting  up  testimony  which  in  itself,  as  we  have  seen,
is  almost  valueless,  when  it  extends  back  for  centuries  into
the  past,  to  invalidate  this  highest  of  all  possible  forms  of
knowledge.  New  and  profound  researches  into  nature  have,
it  is  true,  shown  us  that  in  some  cases  these  apparently  in-
tuitive principles  need  to  be  qualified  and  expanded  to  em-
brace wider  cycles  of  truth,  and  these  revelations  often  dis-
close apparent  paradoxes,  but  even  these  never  have  moved
the  common  axioms  from  their  foundations.  The  impression
that  human  testimony,  wafted  down  on  the  memory  through
the  ages,  could  ever  suffice  to  shake  those  foundations,  can
only  be  regarded  as  a  melancholy  proof  of  man's  irrationality.

The  chief  argument  of  one  of  the  parties  to  such  contro-
versies has  been  directed  to  sustain  facts  which  the  other

532  K^rOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

party  declare  to  be  physical  impossibilities,  and  which  are
alleged  to  have  occurred  many  centuries  ago,  but  in  proof  of
which  certain  written  records — not  the  original  records,  but
copies  and  translations  of  them — still  exist.

In  the  first  place,  being  mere  statements  of  events  that
have  occurred,  they  belong  to  the  class  of  propositions  having
the  least  antecedent  probability.  They  can  not  be  repro-
duced nor  verified.  In  the  second  place,  unlike  the  facts  of
geology  or  archaeology,  they  have  left  no  monuments,  actually
caused  by  them,  to  mark  either  the  date  or  the  fact  of  their
occurrence.  In  the  third  place,  the  written  testimony  to  their
occurrence  is  in  the  past  tense,  showing  that  some  time  at
least  must  have  elapsed  from  the  time  of  the  occurrence  to
the  time  of  the  record.  In  the  fourth  place,  the  records  are
not  in  any  case  the  original  ones.  Lastly,  the  evidence  all
goes  to  show  that  the  parties  who  originally  made  the  records
and  those  who  have  copied,  translated,  and  handed  them
down,  have  all  had  the  highest  kind  of  personal  interest  in
maintaining  their  truth.  And  when  we  take  into  considera-
tion the  further  fact  that,  in  the  ignorance  of  the  ancients,
such  marvelous  statements  were  of  general  credence ;  that
they  are  not  by  any  means  confined  to  those  which  have
been  so  strenuously  supported  in  modem  times,  but  embrace
others,  which  the  advocates  of  the  truth  of  the  latter  cast
aside  as  mere  superstitions,  but  which  are  believed  with
equal  reason  to  have  also  taken  place ;  and  that  since  that
time  others  equally  marvelous  have  been  vouched  for  by  just
as  good  authority,  and  about  which  the  religious  world  is  di-
vided in  opinion,  the  division  line  being  in  most  cases  noth-
ing better  than  that  which  divides  the  different  sects — when
we  take  all  these  circumstances  into  consideration,  we  must
indeed  be  blind  not  to  see  that  the  foundation  for  such  alle-
gations is  laid  in  the  sand.  As  against  the  established  laws
of  nature — established,  as  I  have  shown,  by  the  very  widest
and  most  thorough  induction — these  alleged  violations  of
those  laws  no  longer  possess  any  reasonable  credibility.

TESTIMON"Y.  533

Again,  a  fact  is  only  a  change  produced  in  matter  accord-
ing to  some  law  or  necessary  principle ;  therefore,  no  state-
ment of  a  fact  is  satisfactory  unless  we  can  either  actually
cause  the  occurrence  of  a  sufficient  number  of  similar  facts  to
deduce  the  law  from  them,  or  else  can  account  for  it  by  the
aid  of  laws  already  known  to  exist.  But  the  facts  alleged  to
have  occurred,  and  respecting  which  so  much  controversy
has  arisen,  come  under  neither  of  these  classes.  They  are  in
violation  of  all  the  laws  known  to  exist,  and  each  has  never
occurred  but  once,  so  that  no  other  higher  law  could  have
been  deduced.  For,  as  before  remarked,  all  the  laws  we
now  know  have  been  deduced  from  long  experience  and  ob-
servation of  the  repeated  occurrence  of  the  same  fact  under
the  same  circumstances.

Now,  the  mind  can  not  conceive  of  a  phenomenon  with-
out a  principle  to  explain  it  by.  For  the  phenomenon  is  but
one  observation,  while  the  law  which  it  violates  is  the  re-
sult of  thousands  of  observations ;  and,  though  the  one  may
be  apprehended  very  distinctly,  yet  it  can  not  outweigh  the
great  preponderance  in  the  number  of  experiments  against
it.  A  fortiori^  then,  it  can  not  be  for  a  moment  entertained
when  it  rests  entirely  upon  human  testimony  diluted  by  the
influence  of  ages  of  time.

The  success  of  society  as  a  system,  and  of  the  human
race  as  inhabiting  this  earth,  will  depend  upon  the  good
sense  displayed  in  keeping  the  intellect  safely  anchored  upon
the  firm  ground  of  original  knowledge ;  in  checking  the
tendency  to  prefer  its  highly  derivative  forms  which  ren-
der existence  a  mere  pantomime,  and  to  put  its  trust  in  alle-
gations which,  for  any  cause,  lie  beyond  the  reach  of  veri-
fication. The  only  sustaining  knowledge  is  that  which  lies
close  to  earth,  which  continually  knits  the  physical  being
to  his  environment,  and  does  not  ultimately  depend  either
upon  memory  or  upon  tradition.  It  is  knowledge  of  this
kind  which  is  called  scientific,  and  it  is  the  possession  of
these  original,  first-hand  qualities  which  distinguishes  scien-

534  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

tilic  knowledge  from  the  prevailing  forms  of  knowledge.
A  glance  is  sufficient  to  show  how  great  this  difference  is.
There  are  influences  at  work  which  tend,  even  now,  to  con-
vert popular  knowledge  into  scientific  knowledge.  Much
of  the  former  may  readily  be  thus  converted.  Its  present
worthlessness  is  not  due  to  its  inherent  nature,  but  to  the
form  in  which  it  is  acquired,  and  the  use  that  is  made  of  it,
or  perhaps,  more  correctly  speaking,  to  the  failure  to  make
any  use  of  it.  The  illustrations  of  this  are  every-where  ob-
trusive. They  may  be  found  in  the  knowledge  of  human
history,  of  literature,  of  language,  of  art,  and  of  the  descrip-
tive sciences.  It  might  be  easily  shown  that  all  of  these  and
many  other  branches  of  learning  furnish  valuable  data,
which,  scientifically  viewed,  acquire  a  dynamic  importance.
In  all  such  cases,  therefore,  the  great  need  is  that  the  knowl-
edge possessed  be  utilized,  that  its  manifold  relations  be  per-
ceived, that  it  be  apprehended  genetically,  that  the  things
known  be  traced  back  to  their  origin,  and  that  every  fact  be
carefully  put  away  into  its  proper  niche  in  a  system  of  con-
sistent thought.

DlSTKIBUTION    OF   EInOWLEDGE.

That  "  knowledge  is  power "  has  probably  been  faintly
perceived  by  the  wise  of  all  ages,  and  was  quite  distinctly
formulated  by  Lord  Bacon,*  who  also  had  a  clearer  concep-
tion of  what  true  knowledge  consists  in  than  either  his  pre-
decessors, his  contemporaries,  or  than  many  at  the  present
day.  It  would  probably  be  regarded  as  a  truism,  if  not
actual  tautology,  to  say  that  knowledge,  to  exert  its  power,
must  be  possessed  by  the  mind.  And  yet  no  belief  is  more
prevalent,  tacit  if  not  avowed,  than  that  knowledge  in  pos-
session of  a  few  individuals  sufficiently  avails  for  all.  But,
aside  from  the  fallaciousness  of  this  belief  from  a  logical
point  of  view,  it  is  exceedingly  injurious  in  its  practical  effect

*  "  Scientia  et  potentia  humana  in  idem  coincidunt."    ("  Novum  Organum,"
lib.  i,  aph.  iii.)

DISTRIBUTION  OF  KNOWLEDGE.  535

upon  society.  It  is  no  more  possible  for  one  person  to  do
another's  knowing  than  it  would  be  to  do  his  eating  or  drink-
ing. A  man's  knowledge  may  make  him  a  philanthropist,
but  it  can  not  prevent  another's  ignorance  from  making  him
a  criminal.  The  knowledge  which  makes  one  class  moral  and
upright  citizens  exerts  no  influence  in  reducing  the  immoral-
ity of  the  class  which  is  without  it.  The  knowledge  which
enables  a  very  few  to  introduce  all  the  progressive  agencies
into  civilization  tends  not  in  the  least  to  render  the  mass  of
mankind,  though  possessing  equal  average  capacity  for  such
service,  capable  of  contributing  any  thing  to  that  result.  On
the  contrary — and  this  is  a  fact  of  capital  significance — this
inequality  in  the  distribution  of  knowledge  actually  tends  in
no  small  degree  to  render  a  considerable  amount  of  the
knowledge  acquired  prejudicial  to  the  true  interests  of  so-
ciety. This  fact  is  dimly  seen  by  many  persons,  who,  unable
to  assign  the  true  causes,  make  it  serve  as  a  weapon  against
the  difiusion  of  intelligence ;  thus  adding  one  more  to  the
already  long  list  of  ways  in  which  progress  tends  to  defeat
itself  (vol.  i,  p.  75 ;  vol.  ii,  p.  71).

Better  to  appreciate  this  anomaly,  let  us  go  back  for  a
moment  to  the  principles  set  forth  in  Chapter  YII  under  the
head  of  "  Modes  of  Acquisition."  It  was  there  shown  that
the  normal  forces  of  society,  so  long  spurred  on  by  want,
had,  in  the  early  history  of  social  development,  impelled
mankind  to  pursue  the  means  of  subsistence  by  whatever
mode  they  could  be  most  successfully  obtained,  and  wholly
regardless  of  the  amount  of  evil  occasioned,  so  long  as  it  was
incapable  of  reacting  in  such  a  manner  as  to  defeat  the  end.
It  was  also  shown  that,  in  extension  of  this  principle,  after
the  notion  of  property  had  been  developed,  the  pursTiit  of
wealth,  i.  e.,  of  any  thing  whatever  that  possessed  a  perma-
nent or  interchangeable  value,  came  to  be  regarded  as  equiva-
lent to  the  pursuit  of  the  immediate  means  of  subsistence,  and
was  sought  in  ihe  same  manner  and  spirit.  Finally,  it  was
still  further  pointed  out  that  out  of  this  habit,  which  had  so

536  KNOWLEDGE.— FOtJETH  MEANS.

long  been  a  universal  necessity  to  existence,  there  naturally
grew  a  distinct  derivative  mental  attribute  recognized  under
the  name  of  avarice,  in  obedience  to  which  the  same  policy
was  pursued  with  unabated  energy  after  the  spur  of  want
was  withdrawn,  and  wholly  regardless  of  whether  the  object
pursued  was  necessary  or  in  any  way  capable  of  rendering
existence  more  comfortable  or  not.  So  firmly  have  these
characteristics  been  implanted  in  human  nature  that  their
evil  features  are  very  difiicult  to  eliminate  from  character  ;
and  it  has  become  proverbial  that  we  can  not  be  said  to  know
a  man  until  we  have  had  dealings  with  him,  and  that  one's
character  may  be  quite  exemplary  in  all  other  respects,  while
in  matters  of  pecuniary  gain  the  passion  for  acquisition  may
be  so  strong  that  it  becomes  a  habit  of  life  to  receive  value
at  every  opportunity  and  to  part  with  it  only  when  com-
pelled to  do  so,  without  regard  to  the  accepted  theories  of
proprietary  rights.  And,  quite  aside  from  individual  cases,
it  is  still  a  safe  principle  of  economics  that  all  men  will  in-
crease their  acquisitions  in  any  way  which  meets  no  opposi-
tion, the  milder  methods  of  doing  so  now  in  vogue  having  re-
placed the  ruder  ones  of  early  periods  in  consequence  of  the
inability  to  enforce  the  latter,  due  to  the  general  softening
influences  of  civilization.  In  human  nature  at  large,  there  is
no  supra-normal,  or  supererogatory,  element  {supra,  p.  366),
and  all  forms  of  business  rest  upon  strictly  egoistic  princi-
ples.*

Those  who  indulge  the  dream  of  a  golden  age  of  altru-
istic morality,  when  all  this  shall  be  changed,  and  men  shall
pursue  the  welfare  of  others  instead  of  their  own,  are  des-
tined to  disappointment,  and  deserve  to  be  disappointed.
Whatever  improvement  is  made  in  the  present  system  must
be  brought  about  by  the  development  of  the  means  of  equal
self -protection,  and  not  to  any  marked  degree  by  the  growth
of  altruism.     The  evils  now  complained  of  are  due  to  the

*  A  deed  without  a  consideration  is  void,  and  equity  will  invalidate  a  nomi-
nal consideration.

<

INEQUALITY  OF  DISTEIBUTIOK  537

enormous  inequality  of  opportunities  which  different  indi-
viduals enjoy.  But  the  fact  that  they  do  not  scruple  to  avail
themselves  of  these  opportunities  (and,  indeed,  those  who
possess  them  are  really  among  the  most  upright  members  of
society),  shows  very  clearly  that  society  is  as  yet  based  en-
tirely upon  egoistic  sentiments.

To  this  principle  must  now  be  joined  another,  also  elab-
orated in  the  above-named  chapter,  viz.,  that  success  in  ac-
quisition, without  regard  either  to  the  mode  or  to  the  conse-
quences to  others,  has  depended,  before  and  since  the  molli-
fying influences  of  social  development  arose,  upon  the  same
kind  of  power  which  enabled  man  to  rise  above  the  rest  of
creation  and  subject  all  other  forms  of  life  to  his  domin-
ion. Intellectual  superiority  has,  from  the  first,  borne  abso-
lute sway,  and  the  same  power  which  at  the  dawn  of  man-
hood gave  Anthropus  his  advantage  over  Anthropoides,  now
gives  the  capitalist  his  advantage  over  the  laborer.  There
is,  however,  this  qualitative  difference,  which  needs  to  be
insisted  upon.  Since  the  origin  of  society,  the  part  which
knowledge  has  played,  relatively  to  that  of  mere  sagacity,
has  immensely  increased,  as  shown  a  few  pages  back.  Kot
that  intellect  wholly  divorced  from  acquired  experience  was
ever  able  to  achieve  any  of  the  results  which  constitute  the
superiority  even  of  animals,  but  simply  that  intelligence  has
always  advanced  at  a  far  greater  rate  than  has  intellect,  and
that  the  ratio  between  their  rates  of  advancement  has  con-
stantly been  an  increasing  one,  until  now  it  is  in  the  former,
i.  «.,  in  the  relative  amount  of  knowledge  possessed,  that
nearly  all  superiority  consists.

We  are  now  prepared  to  understand  the  legitimate  efiect
of  an  inequality  in  knowledge.  Those  who  possess  most
knowledge  upon  an  average  possess  most  intelligence,  the
average  capacity  being  every -where  the  same.  But  superior
intelligence,  now  as  throughout  man's  career,  is  the  attribute
through  which  success  is  achieved  in  the  pursuit  of  wealth
and  the  gratification  of  desire,  by  whatever  mode.     It  follows

538  KNOWLEDGE.— FOURTH  MEANS.

that,  as  a  rule,  the  inequality  of  condition  among  the  mem-
bers of  society  is  due  to  the  inequality  of  intelligence,  or,
what  is  the  same  thing,  to  the  unequal  distribution  of  the
extant  knowledge  of  the  world.

This  also  explains  how  it  is  that  superior  intelligence
seems  to  be,  and  in  fact  is,  a  positive  injury  in  certain  cases.
It  puts  it  in  the  power  of  a  grasping  egoism  to  accomplish
its  purposes  at  the  expense  of  innocence  and  honesty.  Such,
for  that  matter,  is  its  universal  effect,  though  in  most  cases
this  is  to  a  great  degree  offset  by  the  corresponding  moral
elevation  which  it  brings,  and  also  by  its  salutary  dynamic
influence.

From  whatever  point  of  view  this  subject  may  be  re-
garded, there  appears  to  exist  no  adequate  excuse  for  the
present  inequality  in  the  distribution  of  knowledge.  The
fact  that  certain  individuals  possess  it  proves  it  to  be  extant.
The  great  bulk  of  the  labor  has  already  been  performed  in
its  discovery  and  elaboration.  Its  discoverers  rarely  claim  it
as  esoteric.  It  is  free,  yet  for  the  mass  of  social  units  as  in-
accessible as  if  its  only  source  were  at  the  center  of  the
earth.  The  subject  should  be  looked  at  from  the  point  of
view  of  social  economics,  and  not  from  that  of  morals  or
of  sentiment.  Where  such  an  immense  increase  in  the  dy-
namically useful  classes  of  society  can  be  so  easily  secured,  it
is  akin  to  suicidal  to  hesitate.  Where  such  a  vast  saving  as
would  result  from  the  elimination  of  the  criminal  class  is
so  obviously  feasible,  nothing  surely  short  of  a  lack  of  com-
plete organic  consciousness  on  the  part  of  society  could
delay  the  prosecution  of  the  required  measures.

All  civilization  is  artificial.  From  the  point  of  view  of
sentient  beings — and  this  is  the  proper  point  of  view  of
society  as  well — that  is  most  natural  which  results  in  the
greatest  advantage.  This  has  always  been  best  accomplished
by  processes  which  violate  and  resist  the  normal  course  of
nature.     Such  processes  are  obtained  through  human  action

EFFECT  OF  EQUAL  DISTRIBUTION.  539

directed  by  intelligence.  Every  force  in  nature  lias  been
more  or  less  controlled  by  this  agency.  The  last  of  these  to
be  subjected  is  that  of  the  intellect  itself.  Intelligence,
hitherto  a  growth,  is  destined  to  become  a  manufacture.
The  knowledge  of  experience  is,  so  to  speak,  a  genetic  prod-
uct ;  that  of  education  is  a  teleological  product.  The  origi-
nation and  distribution  of  knowledge  can  no  longer  be  left
to  chance  and  to  nature.  They  are  to  be  systematized  and
erected  into  true  arts.  Knowledge  artificially  acquired  is
still  real  knowledge,  and  the  stock  of  all  men  must  always
consist  chiefly  of  such  knowledge.  The  artificial  supply  of
knowledge  is  as  much  more  copious  than  the  natural  supply
as  is  the  artificial  supply  of  food  more  abundant  than  the
natural  supply.  Nor  does  the  parallel  cease  here,  for  the
quality  of  the  knowledge  which  may  be  furnished  by  system-
atic and  wise  teleological  direction  is  as  much  better  than
that  of  the  knowledge  of  spontaneous  experience  as  the
choice  viands  of  the  table  are  superior  to  the  crude  pabu-
lum of  the  spontaneous  earth.

And,  after  all,  let  those  who  so  love  the  natural  reflect
that  the  certain  result  of  an  equal  distribution  of  this  prod-
uct— knowledge — is  simply  to  complete  a  great  cycle  of
civilization  and  bring  man  back  once  more  to  nature.  For
the  inequality  now  existing  is  unnatural  in  every  legitimate
sense  of  the  term.  Differences  in  condition,  in  possession,
in  intelligence,  and  in  the  degree  of  happiness  enjoyed,  de-
pend upon  circumstances  in  the  highest  degree  artificial.
Equal  distribution  of  knowledge  will  bring  equal  opportuni-
ties, and  whatever  differences  of  condition  still  remain  will
only  be  such  as  are  due  to  differences  of  native  capacity.
But  these  are  the  same  and  the  only  differences  which. exist
among  animals.  They  are  great  there,  they  will  always  be
great  among  men ;  but  for  them  society  will  no  longer  be  re-
sponsible, and  all  true  philosophers  will  accept  such  a  social
state  as  the  truly  normal,  as  it  will  be  the  only  natural  one.

CHAPTER  XIV.
EDUCATION*

DIRECT  MEANS  TO  KNOWLEDGE;  FIFTH  AND  LAST  PKOXIMATE
END,  AND  INITIAL  MEANS  TO  THE  ULTIMATE  END  OF  CONA-
TION.

Education  the  highest  application  of  the  indirect  method  of  conation — Attain
ment  of  ends  through  means  ;  organization  only  possible  through  generali-
zation— Elimination  of  self-executing  processes — Inadequacy  of  the  word
"  education  " — Definitions  of  education — The  five  kinds  of  education,  tIz.,  of
experience,  of  discipline,  of  culture,  of  research,  and  of  information — ^Edu-
cation of  experience — Education  of  discipline — Education  of  culture — Edu-
cation of  research — Education  of  information — Education  a  social  function  "?
— Comparative  intelligence  of  the  different  branches  of  government — The
railroad  problem — Tendency  of  the  state  to  enlarge  its  Jurisdiction — Govern-
ment peculiarly  adapted  for  conducting  scientific  work — Still  better  for  con-  >
ducting  educational  work — Claims  of  state  educations-Absurdities  of  private
education — Universal  education— Need  of  educating  the  dangerous  and  de-
7  pendent  classes-i-Need  of  equalizing  the  amount  of  education — Compulsory
.  education-^Limits  to  be  set  to  universal  education — Education  of  women —
The  matter  of  education — Educational  curriculums — Determination  and
utilization  of  special  aptitudes — Means  of  education — Method  of  education
— Conclusion.

"We  have  now  arrived  at  the  highest  application  which
the  human  race  is  capable  of  making  of  the  indirect  method
of  conation — the  loftiest  flight  of  inventive  art.

*  This  chapter  is  simply  an  abridgment  of  a  much  more  extended  treatise  on
Education  which  was  written  in  1873,  and  then  designed  to  form  the  closing
portion  of  this  work.  Owing  to  the  amount  of  space  necessarily  required  in  the
elaboration  of  the  argument  itself,  the  impracticability  of  carrying  out  this  plan
has  been  apparent  from  the  time  that  the  outline  of  the  work  was  recast  in
ISVY.  While  it  would  be  gratifying  to  embody  these  more  amplified  views  on
BO  vital  a  question,  it  will  probably  be  conceded  by  the  reader  that  this  was  not

ATTAINMENT  OF  ENDS  THROUGH  MEAN'S.         541

As  the  ultimate  end  which  every  feeling  organism,  every
individual  man,  and  society  collectively,  both  morally  should
and  physically  must  directly  or  indirectly  pursue,  is  the  in-
crease of  happiness,  so  the  highest  achievement  of  the  devel-
oped intellect  and  social  consciousness  of  man  is  the  substi-
tution for  the  unsuccessful  or  partially  successful  and  costly
direct  efforts  to  attain  that  end,  of  a  systematic,  predeter-
mined, and  successful  scheme  for  the  organization  of  happi-
ness. Such  a  scheme  must  have  for  its  primary  object  the
equal  distribution  of  the  extant  knowledge  of  the  world.

The  chief  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the  intellectual,
inventive,  or  indirect  method  is  that  of  economizing  the  im-
mense waste  of  force  which  necessarily  attends  the  emotional,
muscular,  or  direct  method.  By  perceiving  a  train  of  phys-
ical sequences,  the  brain-force  is  able  to  direct  the  motor
energy  of  the  body  to  touch  the  springs,  as  it  were,  of  phe-
nomena, and  thus  cause  existing  external  forces  to  do  what
would  otherwise  be  the  laborious  work  of  the  feeble  organ-
ism. The  secret  of  success  in  this  effort  is  a  correct  ac-
quaintance with  the  true  means  to  be  employed.  The  more
remote  the  means  from  the  end,  provided  it  be  the  true
means,  the  greater  the  disproportion  between  the  cause  and
the  effect,  the  less  the  effort  and  the  greater  the  result.

At  the  same  time  it  is  true  that  the  more  remote  the
means  the  less  apparent  is  its  relation  to  the  end,  and  the
greater  the  acumen  required  to  identify  it  as  the  true  means.*

really  necessary,  and,  considering  the  amount  of  condensation  which  it  has  been
necessary  to  make  throughout  the  entire  work,  so  comprehensive  a  treatment  of
this  one  subject  might  have  been  regarded  as  a  slight  deviation  from  the  nor-
mal  proportions  which  it  has  been  carefully  sought  to  preserve  between  its  parts.
Adding  to  this  the  possibility  which  still  remains  of  presenting  this  unpublished
treatise  on  education  to  the  public  at  some  future  time,  perhaps  still  further
amplified  and  perfected,  the  inability  to  do  so  at  this  time  is  not  looked  upon
wholly  in  the  light  of  a  disappointment.

*  The  principal  reason  why  education  is  suspected,  and  its  efficacy  doubted,
is  because  it  is  a  means  so  remote  from  the  end  sought,  that  human  intelligence
can  only  with  the  greatest  difficulty  penetrate  the  causal  relations  which  unite
them.

542  EDUCATION.- INITIAL  MEANS.

Hence  the  progress  of  civilization  has  been  measured  by  the
increase  attained  in  the  power  of  identifying  remote  means.
The  most  remote  means  is  not,  however,  the  only  one  which
can  be  employed.  The  proximate  means  are  of  all  degrees
of  remoteness,  but  each  is  more  successful  in  proportion  as
it  is  more  removed  from  the  end.  The  problem  usually  is
to  eliminate  as  great  a  number  as  possible  of  these  interme-
diate terms.  All  effort  expended  on  the  first  term  is  wasted
if  the  second  can  be  employed,  and  all  expended  on  the
fourth  is  lost  if  a  practical  grasp  of  the  fifth  is  possible.

The  deeper  ground  for  this  superior  efficacy  of  the  re-
moter means  lies  in  tlie  fact  that  such  a  series  really  repre-
sents an  ever-widening  circle  of  generalization.  The  more
remote  means  stand  for  more  comprehensive  principles,  and
he  who  grasps  the  most  remote  means  to  a  given  end  com-
prehends the  widest  law  governing  the  given  phenomenon.

Generalization  is  the  condition  of  organization.  Organi-
zation can  only  proceed  in  proportion  as  the  phenomena  to
be  organized  are  generalized.  Hence  organization  is  the
certain  measure  of  the  advance  made  by  the  intellectual
method.  In  fact,  every  application  of  that  method  is  in  the
nature  of  organization.  To  seize  the  means,  is  true  generali-
zation ;  to  apply  them,  is  true  organization.

The  final  object  which  Dynamic  Sociology  seeks  is  the
organization  of  happiness.  This  it  aims  to  accomplish  in
the  legitimate  way,  by  seizing  and  applying  the  most  remote
means  to  that  end.  The  purpose  of  the  last  five  chapters
has  been  to  generalize  from  the  end  itself  up  to  the  most
remote  means  discoverable.  In  doing  this  it  has  been  neces-
sary to  consider  the  principal  proximate  means,  to  each  of
which  a  chapter  has  been  devoted.  This  ultimate  means  is
at  length  found  in  what,  for  want  of  a  better  term,  it  will
be  necessary  to  call  "  education."  This  must  be  regarded  as
the  initial  term,  and  also  as  the  true  point  d'appui  of  the
system.

GENERALIZATION  AND  ORGANIZATION.  543

In  all  organization  the  object  of  chief  concern  is  to  learn
which  of  the  elements  of  the  system  may  be  safely  left  to
take  care  of  themselves.  If  the  generalization  is  true,  all
the  lower  proximate  means  may  be  trusted  to  do  this ;  the
same  as  in  a  system  of  machinery,  if  only  the  driving-wheel
is  kept  in  motion  and  the  whole  gearing  is  properly  adjusted,
the  entire  system  will  certainly  move.  And  just  as  any  ar-
rangements for  diverting  a  part  of  the  power  from  the  driv-
ing-wheel and  applying  it  to  other  portions  of  the  machinery
must  result  in  nothing  but  the  simple  waste  of  the  amount
of  power  thus  diverted,  so  in  every  true  system  devised  in
strict  harmony  with  the  laws  of  inventive  art  and  with
science,  no  matter  how  complex  may  be  the  class  of  laws
with  which  it  has  to  deal,  even  if  they  be  the  social  forces,
all  power  diverted  from  the  motor,  or  initial  means  of  pro-
pulsion, and  applied  to  points  of  the  system  which  are  lower
in  the  scale  of  generalization  and  organization,  must  repre-
sent so  much  wasted  energy.  This,  of  course,  is  on  the  as-
sumption that  a  more  remote  means  has  been  made  use  of,
and  is  equally  true  whether  this  means  be  the  absolutely
most  remote  and  general  or  only  a  proximate  means ;  but,  as
already  remarked,  the  less  remote  the  means  employed,  the
greater  the  power  required  to  propel  the  system.

In  the  great  system  of  Dynamic  Sociology,  involving  the
generalization  of  the  most  complex  laws  of  being  and  the
organization  of  social  activities  and  individual  feelings,  there
is  found  no  occasion  for  modifying  in  the  least  particular
these  fundamental  principles  which  hold  so  obviously  in  the
field  of  physics  and  mechanics.  We  shall  find  that  not  only
may  the  ultimate  end,  happiness,  be  left  to  take  care  of  itself,
but  that  all  the  intermediate  proximate  means  to  that  end,
progress,  action,  opinion,  and  knowledge,  may  also  be  so  left.
And  we  shall  further  find  that  both  the  increase  of  intel-
lectual capacity  and  the  origination  of  knowledge  must  be
classed  among  the  proximate  ends  which  will,  in  the  present
state  of  society,  follow  of  necessity  from  the  application  of

544  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

the  initial  *  means,  which  consists  solely  in  the  distribution
of  the  already  known.

Let  us  examine  each  of  these  steps  from  this  point  of
view :

1.  The  direct  pursuit  of  happiness,  even  by  the  individ-
ual, is  proverbially  barren  of  results.  The  voluntary  deter-
mination to  be  happy  rarely  secures  its  aim.  The  more  in-
tently the  mind  fixes  itself  upon  this  end  the  more  complete-
ly the  end  itself  escapes.f  Happiness,  which  only  results  from
the  full  normal  exercise  of  function,  must  necessarily  be  in-
cidental to  such  exercise,  which,  physiologically  viewed,  is
the  end,  though  morally  this  incident  becomes  the  supreme
end.  In  seeking  to  attain  it  by  a  direct  effort  of  the  will,  the
moral  end  is  confounded  with  the  physiological  end,  and
happiness  pursued  as  a  physiological  end  can  not  be  attained,
since  it  is  not  such  an  end.  Therefore,  even  for  the  individ-
ual, happiness  can  only  be  secured  by  the  adoption  of  such
indirect  means  as  will  best  maintain  the  constant  exercise  of
the  normal  functions — means  which  bear  no  direct  resem-
blance to  the  end  sought  and  attained.

Considered  from  the  social  point  of  view,  the  powerless-
ness  of  direct  efforts  to  confer  happiness  upon  the  members
of  society  is  still  more  apparent.  Imagine  a  positive  statu-
tory enactment  simply  requiring  all  citizens  to  be  happy !
The  utmost  that  society  has  ever  sought  has  been  to  apply
the  second  indirect  means,  and  so  to  control  action  as  to  se-
cure happiness.     But  even  this  it  has  rarely  attempted  in  its

*  No  confusion  can  arise  from  the  employment  of  the  apparently  opposite
words  "  ultimate  "  and  "  initial  "  to  the  same  term  of  the  series,  when  it  is  remem-
bered that  this  term  must  sometimes  be  contemplated  as  the  most  remote  from
the  ultimate  end,  and  sometimes  as  the  starting-point  of  an  active  system.  In
the  former  case,  it  will  be  regarded  as  ultimate,  or  last ;  in  the  latter,  as  initial,
or  first.  So  with  the  intermediate,  or  proximate,  terms,  which  are  necessarily  con-
templated as  ends  when  the  mind  passes  from  the  ultimate  end  toward  the  ini-
tial means,  and  as  means  when  it  passes  from  the  initial  means  toward  the  ulti-
mate end.  They  are  proximate  means  when  regarded  as  means,  and  proximate
ends  when  regarded  as  ends.

f  Sidgwick's  "  Methods  of  Ethics,"  London,  18Y4,  p.  41.

SELF-EXECUTING  PROCESSES.  545

positive  form,  and,  when  it  has  attempted  it,  it  has  gener-
ally failed.  Its  efforts  have  almost  invariably  been  negative,
and  have  usually  possessed  a  double  negativity.  They  have
not  only  consisted  in  prohibitions  to  act,  but  the  prohibitions
have  been  designed  to  prevent  actions  vrhich  were  regarded
as  calculated  to  diminish  the  amount  of  happiness.  They
have  forbidden  unhappiness  rather  than  enjoined  happiness.
Government,  which  I  have  characterized  as  a  practically
non-progressive  and  simply  conservative  institution,  has  nev-
ertheless so  far  employed  the  indirect  method  as  to  have  made
two  generalizations.  Still,  its  purchase  for  propelling  the
system  has  been  so  slight  that,  after  attacking  the  problem  in
this  doubly  negative  way,  it  has  only  so  far  secured  the  end
as  to  neutralize  the  effect  of  antagonizing  and  disintegrating
forces  and  to  preserve  the  social  organization.

If,  however,  we  grant  that  social  progress  is  secured,  no
matter  by  what  means,  i.  e.,  that  the  materials  and  forces  of
nature  are  utilized  by  man,  the  end,  happiness,  comes  as  a
matter  of  course,  and  without  any  direct  effort  whatever.
This  will  take  care  of  itself,  provided  the  immediate  means  to
its  attainment  be  legitimately  secured  as  ends  in  themselves.

2.  But  progress  as  thus  defined,  considered  as  an  end,
can  no  more  be  directly  secured  than  can  the  ultimate  end
of  which  it  is  the  immediate  means.  Social  reform,  how-
ever clearly  perceived  by  the  legislator,  can  not  be  brought
about  by  direct  legislation,  either  positive  (affirmative)  or
negative.  The  evils  to  be  reformed  are  caused  by  the  natu-
ral flow  of  the  social  forces,  which  in  these  cases  chance  to
be  in  conflict  with  the  general  interests  of  society.  These  ,
forces  can  not  be  destroyed.  If  they  are  affected,  it  must  be
by  guiding  them  into  harmless  channels,  or  subdividing  them
until  each  branch  is  too  weak  to  be  longer  injurious,  or  in
otherwise  controlling  or  commuting  them  without  diminish-
ing their  sum  total.  This  can  be  done,  and  when  the  laws
of  their  operation  are  fully  comprehended  it  can  be  easily
done,  but  it  must  be  by  the  indirect,  inventive  method.
55

54G  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

Great  wisdom  in  legislation  might  check  many  retrogres-
sive tendencies,  if  not  create  some  progressive  ones,  without
rising  to  the  highest  degree  of  generalization.  It  might
accomplish  this  by  making  one  or  two  removes,  and  employ-
ing the  means  which  the  laws  of  action  and  of  thought  af-
ford. This  would  constitute  attractive  legislation,  to  which
no  society  has  as  yet,  except  accidentally,  attained.  But  by
no  possibility  can  social  progress  be  directly  achieved.

Yet,  if  men  be  induced,  by  whatever  means,  to  perform
the  appropriate  actions,  progress  will  necessarily  result  with-
out direct  effort.  If  ethical  and  especially  dynamic  actions
prevail,  the  materials  and  forces  of  nature  will  be  utilized,
the  reforms  needed  will  be  effected,  and  progress  will  be
already  secured.  This  first  proximate,  like  the  ultimate  end
may  then  be  safely  left  to  take  care  of  itself.

3.  Regarding  action  next  as  an  end,  we  shall  see  the
uniform  application  of  this  law.  Men  may  indeed  be  con-
strained to  act  and  to  desist  from  action,  and,  in  so  far  as  im-
pulsive actions  are  concerned,  such  compulsory  and  prohibi-
tive legislation  may  be  regarded  as  an  application  of  the
indirect  means  supplied  by  the  desires.  As  pointed  out  in
Chapter  XI  (vol.  ii,  p.  318),  such  action  is  really  voluntary
and  in  obedience  to  the  resultant  of  the  two  forces  antago-
nizing each  other  within,  the  desire  to  commit  the  act  and
the  desire  not  to  be  punished.  But  impulsive  actions  are
never  progressive,  so  that  whatever  success  may  attend  this
practice  it  has  no  effect  upon  the  issue.  Many  deliber-
ative actions  may  also  be  influenced  in  the  same  way,  par-
ticularly ethical  actions,  and  the  distinction  between  the
wrong  and  the  prohibited  has  been  well-nigh  obliterated.
But  neither  are  ethical  actions  progressive,  and  the  method
of  both  the  political  and  the  moral  codes  may  be  regarded
as  statical  in  its  results  and  practically  a  direct  one.

But  when  we  come  to  dynamic  actions  we  find  a  marked
distinction.  These  are  wholly  uninfluenced  by  any  legisla-
tive fiat.     They  proceed  from  ideo-raotor  phenomena  beyond

SELF-EXECUTING  PROCESSES.  647

the  reach  of  such  influences.  No  law,  no  physical  coercion,
from  whichever  code  or  from  whatever  source,  can  compel
the  mind  to  discover  principles  or  invent  machines.  Neither
can  these  prevent  this  except  by  withholding  the  means  and
opportunities  for  its  accomplishment,  which  is  only  the  me-
chanical and  not  the  intellectual  part.  To  influence  such
action  other  means  must  be  employed.  Ideas  must  be  sup-
plied or  withheld.

4.  All  the  higher  forms  of  deliberative  action  rest  upon
intellectual  operations  which  must  be  modified  in  order  to
affect  them.  The  general  conduct  of  mankind  is  determined
by  the  oj[>ini(ms  held,  and  without  changing  those  opinions
it  is  wholly  impossible  perceptibly  to  change  such  conduct.
Yet  let  the  sentiments,  opinions,  and  ideas  of  society  be
changed,  and  the  character  of  its  actions  will,  without  direct
effort  to  that  end,  be  correspondingly  changed.  Instill  pro-
gressive principles,  no  matter  how,  into  the  mind,  and  pro-
gressive actions  will  result.  With  the  former  as  a  means,
the  latter,  regarded  as  the  end  sought,  may  be  trusted  to  fol-
low as  a  natural  sequence.

The  attempt  to  change  opinions  by  direct  efforts  has  been
frequently  made.  No  one  will  now  deny  that  coercion  ap-
plied to  this  end  has  been  a  signal  failure.  Nothing  more
than  a  false  admission  of  such  change  based  on  physical  in-
terest has  ever  been  obtained.  There  is  one  way,  however,
in  which  force  may  and  does  secure,  not  a  change  of  existing
opinion,  but  the  acceptance  of  certain  approved  beliefs ;  but
this,  so  far  from  weakening  the  position  here  taken,  affords
a  capital  defense  of  it.  The  forcible  suppression  of  the  ut-
terance or  publication  in  any  form  of  unwelcome  opinions  is
equivalent  to  withholding  from  all  undetermined  minds  the
evidence  upon  which  such  views  rest ;  and,  since  opinions
are  rigidly  the  products  of  the  data  previously  furnished  the
mind,  such  opinions  can  not  exist,  because  no  data  for  them
have  ever  been  received  {supra,  p.  422).  In  such  cases  such
opinions  and  no  others  will  prevail  as  there  exist  data  for,

548  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

•which  are  opinions  whose  data  are  not  suppressed,  but  are
freely  promulgated.  This  law  explains  something  more  than
the  religious  beliefs  of  the  world.  It  explains  the  prevailing
"  public  sentiment "  of  every  nation  and  section  of  the  world,
and  shows  why  it  is  so  difficult  to  introduce  the  views  of  one
country  or  section  into  another,  however  superior  they  may
be  in  point  of  reasonableness.  The  application  of  this  prin-
ciple may  be  made  here,  though  slightly  anticipating  its  more
natural  place.  It  is  simply  that  true  views  may  as  easily  be
created  by  this  method  of  exclusion  as  false  ones,  which  latter
is  the  point  of  view  from  which  the  fact  is  usually  regarded.
The  more  or  less  arbitrary  exclusion  of  error,  i.  e.,  of  false
data,  is  to  a  great  degree  justifiable,  especially  where  the
true  data  supplied  consist  of  verified  experiences,  and  all  the
means  of  re-verifying  them  are  left  free.  But  the  same  end
is  practically  attained  by  the  intentional  supply,  on  a  large
scale  and  systematically  Carried  out,  of  such  true  data  with-
out effort  to  exclude  the  false.  This,  however,  is  the  essence
of  what  is  here  meant  by  education,  which  may  be  regarded
as  a  systematic  process  for  the  manufacture  of  correct  opin-
ions. As  such,  it  is  of  course  highly  inventive  in  its  charac-
ter, and  the  same  must  be  said  of  all  modes  of  producing
desired  beliefs  by  the  method  of  exclusion.

While  opinion,  considered  as  an  end,  can  not  be  directly
destroyed,  created,  changed,  or  affected,  still,  if  we  assume  the
appropriate  data  for  influencing  it  in  any  desired  way  to  be
supplied,  we  need  no  longer  have  a  care  for  the  result,  which  is
secured  without  further  effort  in  the  application  of  the  means.

5.  The  data  of  all  opinions,  or  states  of  mind  which  form
the  basis  for  ethical  or  dynamic  action,  consist  in  knowledge,
or  apprehended  truth.  This  acquisition  of  knowledge,  or
apprehension  of  truth,  can  only  be  sparingly  secured  by
direct  efforts.  The  senses  are  always  receiving  impressions,
and,  where  these  are  true  and  so  presented  that  the  series  of
inferences  following  each  and  leading  to  a  conception  will
be  all  correctly  drawn,  such  conceptions  will  correspond  with

SELF-EXECUTING  PROCESSES.  549

objectivity,  and  knowledge  will  be  the  result.  But  such  are
the  liabilities  to  error  in  running  this  gantlet  that  experi-
ence has  shown  the  necessity  of  devising  artificial  means  of
the  most  careful  kind,  and  of  employing  these  in  the  most
ingenious  and  systematic  way,  in  order  to  eliminate  these
sources  of  error.  Moreover,  progressive  views  depend  large-
ly upon  the  quality  of  the  data  supplied.  This  must  be  of
a  high  order  of  generality  and  practicality,  as  well  as  object-
ively true.  Unguided  experience  never  selects  on  the  quali-
tative principle.  The  worthless  and  the  valuable  are  pro-
miscuously and  unsystematically  supplied,  and  few  intellects
can  distinguish  the  chaff  from  the  wheat,  at  least  in  youth,
when  the  deepest  impressions  are  made.  An  artificial  system
for  assorting  impressions,  for  causing  their  systematic  pres-
entation, for  precluding  the  introduction  of  false  ones,  and
the  drawing  of  erroneous  inferences,  is  therefore  absolutely
necessary  to  the  successful  creation  of  progressive  states  of
the  human  mind.

Such  a  mechanism,  however,  adapted  to  its  purpose,  actu-
ally provides  the  data.  Assume  an  adequate  system  of  edu-
cation to  be  in  force,  and  the  question  of  the  quantity  and
quality  of  knowledge  in  society  is  no  longer  an  open  one.
The  application  of  the  means  is  equivalent  to  the  attainment
of  the  end.

But  it  may  be  justly  urged  that  progress  depends  upon
intelligence,  which,  as  shown  in  the  previous  chapter,  is
knowledge  joined  to  intellect.  The  question  may  therefore
be  asked.  What  of  this  latter  element,  omitted  from  the  fore-
going considerations  ?  While  the  present  state  of  intellectual
capacity  may  be  sufficient  for  a  time,  the  progress  here  con-
templated will  clearly  require  its  increase.  How  shall  this
be  accomplished?  The  answer  is,  that  knowledge  of  the
kind  named  constitutes  a  twofold  means,  or  a  means  to  the
two  ends :  progressive  ideas  and  increased  capacity.  More
exactly  stated,  the  act  of  acquiring  knowledge  under  the

550  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

biological  law  of  direct  equilibration  will  strengthen  the  in-
tellect, while  the  knowledge  after  it  has  been  obtained  will
expand  the  views.  If  it  is  complained  that  this  must  be  an
exceedingly  slow  process,  it  can  only  be  answered  that  it  is
the  only  practicable  method  at  the  present  time.  Better  than
any  artificial  gymnastics,  or  efforts  to  cultivate  the  intellect
by  brilliant  flights  into  the  empty  realms  of  pure  reason,  will
the  solid  contact  with  things  tend  to  carry  nutrition  to  those
cells  of  the  brain-tissue  which  lie  in  such  relations  as  to  en-
large and  develop  the  organ  of  thought.  Intellectual  exer-
cise upon  idealities  tends  to  destroy  the  reasoning  power  of
the  mind  by  denying  to  it  the  terms  of  the  relations  which  it
seeks  to  grasp,  and  habituating  it  to  conceive  such  relations
to  exist  when  some  of  their  terms  are  wanting.  The  intel-
lect becomes  irrational,  and  as  such  incapable  of  appreciating
the  real  knowledge  possessed.  But,  accustomed  to  demand
the  presence  of  all  the  terms  of  the  relations,  it  soon  becomes
incapable  of  deducing  irrational  conclusions,  and  refuses  to
reason  until  the  data  for  a  rational  deduction  are  all  supplied.
It  is  in  this  quality,  to  a  great  degree,  that  the  man  of  sci-
ence is  distinguished  from  the  rest  of  his  race.  As  a  brain-
builder,  nothing  is  so  eminently  effective  as  constant  and  in-
timate dealings  with  broad  and  practical  truth.

The  permanent  increase  of  brain-power  is  a  strictly  bio-
logical question.  It  means  permanent  alteration  of  tissue.
This  can  only  be  accomplished  in  two  ways  :  by  direct  equi-
libration, or  the  Lamarckian  law  of  increase  by  use  ;  and  by
indirect  equilibration,  or  the  Darwinian  law  of  hereditary
selection.  The  potency  of  the  latter,  even  in  a  state  of
nature,  is  now  thoroughly  recognized  by  all  biologists,  and  it
has  had  its  full  share  of  influence  in  making  man  what  he  is.
When  artificially  directed  by  human  intelligence,  this  law
ceases  to  be  secular,  and,  from  the  quickness  and  certainty  of
its  results,  takes  its  place  alongside  of  the  methods  by  which
man  modifies  the  physical  and  material  condition  of  the
world.    If,  therefore,  society  could  once  fairly  awaken  to

SELF-EXECUTING  PROCESSES.  551

the  overshadowing  importance  of  taking  this  view  of  human-
ity in  sufficient  earnest  to  undertake  the  application  of  this
method,  the  rapidity  with  which  the  intellectual  and  also
the  physical  capacity  of  human  beings  might  be  advanced  is
astonishing  to  contemplate.  But  it  has  already  been  fully
shown  that  this,  if  a  living  question  at  all,  is  one  for  the
distant  future,  after  the  other  influences  shall  have  greatly
increased  the  general  average  of  intelligence.  The  other
method,  therefore,  remains  the  only  practicable  one.

More  accurately  formulated,  this  method  consists  in  an
artificial  modification  of  the  environment.  The  truth  appre-
hended acts  objectively  upon  the  brain,  and  effects  transfor-
mations and  permanent  alterations  of  tissue,  gradually  but
slowly  building  up  a  better  structure.  Heredity  comes  in,
but  not  indirectly.  The  variations  are  transmitted,  but  not
selectively.  Much  will  be  lost  to  the  individual  by  dilution
from  union  with  inferior  minds  in  reproduction,  but  nothing
gained  will  be  lost  to  the  mass,  or  absolutely  lost.  And  thus
intellect  will,  upon  the  whole,  increase.

But  the  chief  fact  to  be  noted  is,  that  this  increase  of  in-
tellect need  not,  and  indeed  can  not,  be  sought  directly  as
an  end.  The  same  means  w^hich  are  sufficient  to  produce
sound  views  of  life  are  also  the  only  practical  means  to  the
expansion  of  the  rational  faculty.  The  latter  result,  like
the  former,  considered  as  a  desirable  end  to  be  achieved,  may
be  totally  neglected  in  the  scheme  of  social  organization,  in
so  far  as  the  outlay  of  labor  or  expense  in  its  direct  attain-
ment is  concerned.  To  employ  the  means  is  to  secure  the
end.

It  may  also  be  fairly  urged  that,  while  the  amount  of
truth  thus  far  made  known  may  be  sufficient  for  a  time  to
satisfy  the  proposed  state  of  social  advancement,  it  must  at
length  fall  short,  and  new  supplies  must  be  produced ;  and
the  question  may  arise,  What  provision  exists  in  the  proposed
system  for  the  origination  of  knowledge?  The  answer  to
this  question  may  be  made  to  resemble  as  closely  the  form  of

552  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

that  made  to  the  previous  one  as  the  two  questions  resemble
each  other.  Just  as  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  constitutes
the  only  present  practical  means  of  developing  the  intellect,
60  the  distribution  of  knowledge  constitutes  the  amply  suffi-
cient means  to  its  further  origination.

The  present  marked  tendency  of  the  human  mind  to
devote  itself  to  the  origination  of  knowledge  ought  to  be
a  sufficient  guarantee  that  it  would  do  so  under  any  circum-
stances. That  so  much  is  originated  now,  when  so  few  pos-
sess high  intelligence,  makes  it  certain  that  far  more  will  be
originated  when  all  shall  possess  high  intelligence.  In  fact,
there  is  now  a  vast  amount  of  truth  discovered  from  which
society  receives  no  benefit,  far  more  than  that  from  which  it
actually  receives  benefit.  This  consists  in  rediscovery.  The
unorganized  condition  of  knowledge  renders  it  possible  for
thousands  of  bright  minds  to  devote  life-long  energies  to  the
rediscovery  of  truth  which  may  have  been  already  not  only
discovered  but  applied  to  the  arts  before  their  researches
were  commenced.  Contrary  to  the  received  opinion,  the
tendency  of  the  mind  is  to  original  research  and  practical
application.  So  great  is  this  mental  bias,  that  such  research
and  application  are  being  constantly  undertaken  without  due
preparation.  The  superficiality  which  should  be  complained
of  is  that  which  narrows  down  to  practical  things  before  a
sufficient  foundation  has  been  laid  in  theoretical  preparation.
Yet  this  is  precisely  the  opposite  kind  of  superficiality  from
that  which  is  commonly  deplored.  While  a  thorough  ac-
quaintance with  as  large  a  number  as  possible  of  the  most
general  laws  and  principles  is  really  the  most  practical  knowl-
edge which  it  is  possible  to  confer,  this  course  is  universally
condemned,  and  one  approved  which  aims  to  confer  an  ex-
haustive acquaintance  with  a  very  few  special  facts  and
methods.  The  result  of  this  species  of  education  is  to
strengthen  the  tendency  to  pursue  narrow  and  unproduc-
tive specialties,  thus  increasing  the  real  superficiality  of  so-
ciety.   It  is  this  same  false  conception  of  the  practical  which

INADEQUACY  OF  THE  WORD  "EDUOATIOK"      553

causes  society  to  regard  the  mere  collectors  of  scientific  facts
as  the  true  scientific  men,  while  treating  the  organizers  of
those  facts  and  those  alone  who  put  them  to  any  use  as
theorists  to  be  looked  upon  with  suspicion.

One  of  the  chief  advantages,  therefore,  of  the  equal
distribution  of  knowledge  would  be  the  great  relative  in-
crease in  its  origination.  For  then,  not  only  would  thou-
sands be  induced  to  undertake  original  investigation  who
can  now  never  entertain  the  idea,  but  most  of  the  discover-
ies made  would  be  first-hand  discoveries  and  not  mere  redis-
coveries. The  impulse  to  prosecute  original  research  would
be  strengthened  and  widely  extended,  while,  at  the  same
time,  the  relative  productiveness  of  the  efforts  thus  expended
would  be  immensely  increased.  The  origination  of  knowl-
edge, therefore,  however  important,  need  not  and  does  not
form  any  part  of  the  scheme  of  social  organization,  since  it
is  clearly  one  of  those  things  which  can  be  safely  left  to  take
care  of  itself.  Like  the  ultimate  end,  happiness,  and  like
all  the  increasingly  remote  proximate  ends — progress,  action,
opinion,  knowledge,  and  intellectual  capacity — upon  each  of
which  vast  social  energies  have  been  vainly  expended,  the
creation  of  intellectual  data  is  a  spontaneous  process  neces-
sarily following  upon  the  diffusion  of  the  already  known.

For  the  two  most  important  and  cardinal  conceptions
which  this  work  seeks  to  convey,  there  exist  in  the  English
language  no  adequate  terms.  The  ultimate  end,  not  only  of
all  action  but  of  all  effort  to  act,  and  the  initial  means  to
be  employed  in  the  systematic  organization  of  society  to
realize  that  end  as  a  product  of  thought  and  action,  are  both
incapable  of  expression  by  any  existing  words.  The  embar-
rassments under  which  it  was  necessary  to  labor  in  the  former
of  these  cases  were  pointed  out  in  the  early  part  of  Chapter
IX  {sii/pra^  p.  147).  The  difllculties  of  the  latter  case  we
will  now  briefly  consider.

The  inadequacy  of  the  word  education — the  term  which.

554  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

after  a  careful  consideration  of  them  all,  has  been  chosen,  as
upon  the  whole  least  objectionable,  to  convey  the  notion
which  it  is  here  essential  to  convey — is  manifest  both  from
its  etymology  and  from  its  popular  meaning.  From  the  for-
mer point  of  view,  the  word  really  has  reference  to  some
species  of  "  drawing  out "  of  the  mind,  which  either  means
alteration  of  brain-tissue  or  it  means  nothing,  a  result  whose
perceptible  production  within  the  life-time  of  any  individual
is  clearly  impossible  (siipra,  p.  482).  From  the  popular  point
of  view,  the  number  of  attributes  which  it  possesses  is  very
great  and  varied,  constituting  it  one  of '  those  vague,  undif-
ferentiated terms  which  science  abhors,  and  which  have  for
their  chief  function  to  breed  confusion  of  ideas.

As  this  word  has,  however,  been  frequently  defined  by
high  authorities,  a  few  of  these  definitions  may  not  prove
amiss.

Let  us  first  quote  the  editor  of  "  The  Popular  Science
Monthly,"  who  is  a  well-known  advocate  of  higher  education :
"  Education  is  a  leading  out  of  the  faculties,  and  the  very
word  determines  the  method.  It  is  not  a  forcing  out,  a  driv-
ing out,  or  a  grinding  out  by  machinery,  but  a  process  that
expressly  excludes  the  compulsive  or  coercive  element — a
leading  out,  which  implies  that  the  individual  material  to  be
acted  upon  has  a  nature  that  must  be  respected  and  acted
upon  in  a  given  way."  *

It  is  but  just,  however,  to  the  editor  of  "  The  Popular
Science  Monthly  "  to  quote  another  of  his  utterances  made
five  years  later,  in  which  it  would  appear  that  his  mind  had
undergone  considerable  change,  not  to  say  made  consider-
able progress,  during  its  five  years'  earnest  advocacy  of  the
higher  education.  He  says :  "  The  crudeness  and  inefficiency
of  teaching  are  excused  upon  the  plea  that  mental  discipline
is  the  thing  aimed  at  in  study.  Our  whole  school  system  is
imbued  with  this  vicious  fallacy,  which  is  the  great  obstacle
to  rationalizing  school  methods.     The  knowledge  that  is  of

*  Vol.  vi  (April,  18Y6),  p.  749.

DEFINITIONS  OF  EDUCATION.  555

most  worth  is  either  not  taught,  or  is  taught  so  loosely  and
carelessly  that  it  is  of  but  little  practical  use ;  and  the  conse-
quence is,  that  our  boys  are  turned  out  into  the  world  so
ignorant  and  incompetent  that  they  are  defenseless  in  the
exposures  of  every-day  experience."  *

Dr.  T.  Clifford  Allbutt,  in  an  article  in  "  Brain,"  f  offers
the  following  definition  :  "  The  true  pm-pose  of  education
is,  first  of  all,  to  teach  discipline  —  the  discipline  of  the
body  and  the  higher  discipline  of  the  mind  and  heart ;  to
encourage  the  budding  faculties  to  break  freely  in  natural
variety;  to  quicken  the  eye  and  the  hand,  and  to  touch  the
lips  with  fire ;  to  promote  the  gathering  of  the  fountains  of
vigorous  life  by  fresh  air,  simple  nutritious  diet,  and  physical
exercise ;  and  finally  to  watch  for  the  growth,  silent  it  may
be  for  years,  of  the  higher  qualities  of  character,  or  even  of
genius,  not  forcing  them  into  heated  and  froward  activity,
but  rather  restraining  the  temptation  to  early  production,
and  waiting  for  the  mellowness  of  time :  remembering  that
the  human  mind  is  not  an  artificial  structure,  but  a  natural
growth,  irregular,  nay,  even  inconsistent,  as  such  growths
are,  wanting  most  often  the  symmetry  and  preciseness  of
artifice,  but  having  the  secret  of  permanence  and  adaptabil-
ity." In  all  this  it  is  clear  that  the  thought  of  conferring
knowledge  never  occurred  to  the  writer  as  forming  any  part
of  education,  while  great  possibilities  seem  to  be  entertained
of  producing  some  important  modification  of  the  organ  of
the  mind.

A  learned  leader  in  the  London  "  Times  "  of  July  8,
1878  (p.  9),  on  the  rejection  of  Sir  John  Lubbock's  motion
for  the  introduction  of  elementary  science  into  the  Eng-
lish schools,  thus  defines  education :  "•  Education,  which  might
once  have  been  defined  as  an  endeavor  to  expand  the  intel-
lect by  the  introduction  of  mechanically  compressed  facts,
should  now  be  defined  as  an  endeavor  favorably  to   influ-

*  Loc.  eit,  vol.  xvi  (February,  1880),  p.  560.
t  Vol.  i  (April,  1878),  p.  11.

556  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

ence  a  vital  process."  Here,  again,  is  embodied,  along  with
the  idea  that  knowledge  received  by  the  mind  can  have  no
effect  in  developing  the  intellect,  the  further  idea  that  such
an  effect  may  be  easily  produced  without  the  mind  receiving
any  knowledge.

Professor  Alexander  Bain,  in  "  Education  as  a  Science,"  *'
cites  a  number  of  definitions  of  education.  That  of  the
founders  of  the  Prussian  national  system  is  "  the  harmoni-
ous and  equable  evolution  of  the  human  powers,"  which
Stein  elaborates  as  follows :  '*  By  a  method  based  on  the
nature  of  the  mind,  every  power  of  the  soul  to  be  unfolded,
every  crude  principle  of  life  stirred  up  and  nourished,  all
one-sided  culture  avoided,  and  the  impulses  on  which  the
strength  and  worth  of  men  rest,  carefully  attended  to."
In  this,  once  more,  while  we  hear  about  "  culture,"  we  hear
nothing  about  information^  and  the  chief  defect  of  the  Ger-
man educational  system  is  believed  to  be  too  exclusive  at-
tention to  culture  on  the  one  hand  and  to  specialism  on  the
other.

Mr.  James  Mill's  definition  f  was  as  follows  :  "  To  render
the  individual  as  much  as  possible  an  instrument  of  happi-
ness, first  to  himself,  and  next  to  other  beings."  The  sound-
ness of  this  in  the  abstract  is  invincible,  but,  since  it  contains
no  hint  at  the  method,  it  can  not  really  be  regarded  as  a  defi-
nition of  education  at  all,  but  rather  as  a  mode  of  stating
the  utilitarian  doctrine.  The  question  is  no  longer  as  to  the
end  but  the  means.

Herbert  Spencer:]:  admits  that  "acquirement  of  every

*  P.  1.  Cf.  James  DonaldsoD,  "  Lectures  on  the  History  of  Education  in
Prussia  and  England,"  p.  38.

f  "Encyclopedia  Britannica,"  seventh  edition,  1842.  Article  "Education,"
p.  433.

%  "  Education,"  p.  37.  This  work  is  to  be  regarded  rather  as  a  treatise  on
home  training  and  the  bringing  up  of  children  than  as  one  on  education  in  any
special  sense,  and  as  such  it  must  be  confessed  that  it  handles  the  subject  with
more  skill  than  has  been  done  by  many  who  have  had  more  experience.  Its
chief  postulate,  however,  is  unsound,  which  is,  that  parent    are  generally  quali-

DEFINITIONS  OF  EDUCATION.  557

kind  has  two  values — value  as  knowledge  and  value  as  disci-
pliney^  and  in  numerous  passages  he  very  ably  enforces  the
importance  of  the  first  of  these  values.*

It  is  evident  that  none  of  the  above  definitions  are  at  all
adapted  to  the  present  purpose.  In  the  first  place,  all  of  them
are  far  too  comprehensive.  It  is  freely  admitted  that  the
word  education  properly  embraces  these  broad  fields  of  in-
fluence. In  the  widest  sense  of  the  word,  every  thing  that  pro-
.  duces  any  permanent  influence  on  the  mind  is  education,  and
,  the  sum  total  of  the  influences  by  which  an  individual  has
'been  surrounded  from  his  youth  up  is  popularly  and  con-
veniently called  his  education.  In  this  sense  education  is
often  opposed  to  instruction.  New  truth  presented  to  the
mind  is  debarred  from  acceptance  by  the  power  of  previous
education.  Yet  no  one  would  deny  that  such  presentation
of  new  truth  is  also  education,  so  that  the  word,  in  addition
to  many  dissimilar  meanings,  comes  to  have  contradictory
meanings.  The  employment  of  such  a  term,  therefore,
without  a  rigid  special  definition  in  other  terms,  would  be
impossible  in  a  work  making  any  pretensions  to  exact
treatment,  and  its  use  in  this  chapter  may  therefore  be  re-
garded rather  as  a  means  of  avoiding  the  repetition  of  that
definition  than  as  a  sanction  of  the  word.

Besides  not  being  scientific  in  its  meaning,  it  is  a  weak
word  in  itself,  and  is  too  intimately  bound  up  with  a  class
of  conceptions  which  imply  mere  ornament,  culture,  erudi-
tion, and  are  not  serious  enough  to  have  a  place  in  science
or  earnest  philosophy.  Education  has  been  intrusted  to
young  girls,  feeble-bodied  if  not  feeble-minded  men  who
were  considered  incapable  of  any  thing  else,  "book-worms"
and  litterateurs  who  are  unable  to  live  by  their  pens,  until

fied  to  instruct  their  children  in  what  is  most  important  for  them  to  know.
There  never  was  a  time  when  the  children  of  twelve  years  could  not  instruct
their  parents  in  the  most  important  branches,  and  this  fact  grows  more  notice-
able as  the  methods  of  education  improve.

*  For  other  definitions  of  edu'jation,  see  Barnard's  "  Studies  and  Conduct,"
pp.  11-22.

558  EDUCATION.-INITIAL  MEANS.

a  "  pedagogue  "  has  come  to  be  regarded  as  about  the  same
thing  as  a  pedant.  His  duty  is  simply  to  polish  off  young
people  the  same  as  a  dancing-master  is  expected  to  do.  The
fact  that  the  greater  part  of  the  time  now  devoted  to  edu-
cation is  spent  on  the  ornamental  part  is  a  very  obtrusive  one,
and  has  been  much  appealed  to  by  the  scientific  school  of
educators.  The  truths  instilled  are  of  the  derivative  and  at-
tenuated class  {supra,  pp.  498,  527),  and  even  these  form  only
a  small  percentage  of  what  is  taught.  The  bulk  of  the  in-
struction consists  in  the  polite  arts.  It  is  teaching  how  and
not  teaching  what;  even  those  arts  whose  acquisition  might
be  accompanied  with  information  being  almost  exclusively
confined  to  the  former  idea.  Keference  has  already  been
made  {supra,  p.  501)  to  this  fact  as  respects  the  rudimentary
branches,  and  it  may  be  here  added  that  the  same  holds  true
throughout  the  received  curriculum  for  higher  branches.
]!^ot  to  speak  of  art  itself — music,  drawing,  painting,  etc. —
the  form  in  which  literature  is  studied  makes  it  virtually  an
art.  The  learning  of  foreign  languages  clearly  illustrates
this,  and  the  idea  of  learning  language  as  a  body  of  princi-
ples rarely  occurs  to  the  teacher.  Even  poetry  and  helles-
lettres  in  general  are  presented  as  arts  to  be  imitated  in
small  things,  rather  than  as  the  best  forms  for  the  expres-
sion of  great  truths.

This  merely  ornamental  education,  this  culture  without
information,  Mr.  Spencer  very  pleasantly  likens  to  the  flower
which  the  florist  aims  to  secure  in  the  cultivation  of  the
plant,  and  which  to  him  is  the  end  sought  and  the  final
product  of  his  more  serious  labors.  The  fine  arts,  helles-
lettres,  and  refined  accomplishments  of  cultured  peoples  he
calls,  from  the  same  analogy,  the  "  efilorescence  of  civiliza-
tion." *  This  is  very  fine,  but  is  there  not  a  flaw  in  the
symbol  somewhere?  Is  the  flower  of  the  gardener  a  suit-
able example  ?  Is  it  a  normal  flower  ?  Certainly  not.  It  is
abnormal.     Its  stamens  and  pistils  have  been  converted  into

*  hoc.  cit.,  pp.  73,  74  -at    are

\

J

FIVE  KINDS  OF  EDUCATION.  559

petals,  a  case  of  reversion,  or  retrograde  development ;  it  pos-
sesses none  of  the  elements  or  powers  of  continuance ;  it  is  a
teratological  product  of  human  design,  a  showy  but  epheme-
ral gewgaw.  And  such,  it  must  be  confessed,  to  a  great
extent  is  this  "  efflorescence  of  civilization,"  which  consists
in  culture  without  knowledge.  Impotent  for  all  purposes
beyond  itself,  and  also  for  its  own  reproduction,  it  stands  as
a  sort  of  showy  monstrosity  of  artificial  construction,  a  social
excrescence  harmless  in  itself,  but  requiring  to  be  nourished
with  the  richest  juices  of  the  social  organism.

If  education  meant  knowledge,  we  should  have  in  lieu  of
this  a  culture  representing  the  natural  flower,  less  gaudy,  per-
haps, but  more  symmetrical,  and,  to  the  most  refined  tastes,
far  more  beautiful,  a  real  fertile  culture  with  organs  normal,
and  possessing  all  the  germs  and  potencies  of  a  future  and
higher  life.  Such  an  "  efflorescence  "  would  possess  an  ear-
nest reality  as  well  as  a  true  beauty ;  it  would  exist  for  a
purpose,  and  be  worth  the  cost  of  its  nurture  and  mainte-
nance.

The  Five  Kinds  of  Education.

The  prevailing  ideas  of  education  may  be  roughly  classi-
fied under  the  five  following  heads :

1.  Education  of  experience.

2.  Education  of  discipline.

3.  Education  of  culture.

4.  Education  of  research.

6.  Education  of  information.

EDUCATION    or    EXPERIENCE.

Under  the  first  of  these  heads  naturally  falls  that  educa-
tion which  every  one  necessarily  acquires  from  his  surround-
ings, whatever  they  may  be.  Some  seem  to  think  that  this
is  enough,  that  contact  with  the  world  and  observation  of  its
ways  are  better  guides  than  any  form  of  artificial  instruction.
This  view  has  already  been  adverted  to  {supra,  pp.  175,  206),

560  EDUCATION.-miTIAL  MEANS.

and  need  not  here  be  more  than  correlated  with  other  views
on  education.  There  is  one  practical  phase  of  it,  however,
which  has  not  heretofore  been  pointed  out.  This  is  the  eco-
nomic view.  Life  is  made  up  of  a  series  of  trials  to  accom-
plish desired  ends — to  gain  a  livelihood,  to  amass  wealth,  to
secure  social  position,  to  form  advantageous  associations,  to
select  suitable  life-consorts.  All  these  objects  must  be
sought  by  the  light  of  the  judgment,  and  upon  the  reliability
of  the  judgment  will  depend  the  success  of  each.  It  must
be  confessed  that  thus  far  the  "  lamp  of  experience  "  is  the
only  guide  that  mankind  has  had  in  all  these  matters,  but  has
it  proved  a  sufficient  guide  ?  Let  the  constantly  recurring
failures  in  every  department  of  human  activity  answer.*

In  the  first  place,  it  is  not  true  that  men  always  have  or
can  have  experience  to  guide  them.  Besides  the  obvious
fact  that  the  first  effort  must  always  be  without  experience,
there  is  the  fact  that  no  two  cases  can  ever  be  precisely  alike.
Experience  implies  failure,  not  failure  every  time,  but  fail-
ure one  or  more  times,  and  the  history  of  business  proves
that  this  implication  is  fully  justified  by  fact.  Success  is
rarely  attained  on  the  first  effort,  and  many  whole  lives  are
a  series  of  failures.  It  is  by  such  successive  failures,  either
from  defective  judgment  or  from  dissimilarity  of  circum-

■  *  According  to  statistics  annually  compiled  by  Messrs.  Dun,  Barlow  &  Co.,
of  New  York,  the  proportion  of  failures  to  the  number  actually  engaged  in
business  in  the  United  States  was :  in  1876,  one  in  every  69 ;  in  IS^Y,  one  in  every
73  ;  in  IS'ZS,  one  in  every  64 ;  and  in  1879,  one  in  every  105.  This,  however,  fails
to  reach  the  main  question,  which  is.  What  proportion  of  the  new  trials  prove
failures  ?  It  is  probably  impossible  to  determine  this,  though  doubtless  a  large
proportion  of  the  total  failures  are  of  new  enterprises,  those  which  have  sur-
vived several  years  being  far  more  likely  to  continue  to  survive.  A  further
glance  at  the  figures  of  Messrs.  Dun,  Barlow  &  Co.'s  circulars  may  throw  addi-
tional light  on  the  problem.  The  number  of  persons  in  business  in  1879  was
27,416  more  than  in  1878,  and  the  number  of  failures  during  1879  was  6,658  ;
therefore,  had  there  been  no  failures  the  increase  during  the  year  would  have
been  34,074.  The  total  number  of  failures  was  therefore  about  20  per  cent  of
the  new  enterprises.  This,  hoTvevcr,  wa.«,  as  seen  above,  an  exceptionally  good
year.

EDUCATION  OF  EXPERIENCE.  561

stances,  that  certain  unfortunate  ones  are  gradually  crowded
lower  and  lower  down  until  tliej  sink  into  pauperism  or
even  crime.  The  various  enterprises  which  are  conducted
are  each  the  result  of  a  series  of  efforts  successively  brought
to  naught  by  miscalculation,  resumed  under  better  auspices,
and,  by  the  light  of  previous  failures,  carried  to  a  certain
point  where  experience  ceases  longer  to  guide  them,  suc-
cumbing anew  to  adverse  conditions,  to  be  again  resumed
with  still  added  wisdom,  until  they  at  last  become  firmly
established,  but  only  after  ruining  several  individuals  and
wasting  a  number  of  fortunes.  This  is  the  usual  lesson
which  is  learned  at  the  school  of  experience,  and  it  is  a  legiti-
mate question  whether  there  may  not  be  found  some  sub-
stitute for  experience,  something  to  take  its  place  in  cases
where  experience  can  not  be  had — something  to  assist  ex-
perience, and  in  many  cases  render  it  unnecessary.  For  it
must  be  remembered  that  experience  costs.  It  is  not  a  desid-
eratum in  itself.  The  end  desired  is  success,  and  it  matters
not  how  this  is  attained.  If  there  is  any  difference  in  point
of  economy  between  two  modes  of  attaining  success,  no  one
will  or  ought  to  choose  the  more  costly  mode.

But  success  in  life  ultimately  depends  on  knowledge.
Failures  are  due  to  lack  of  knowledge,  success  to  its  posses-
sion. The  most  experience  can  do  is  to  furnish  knowledge,
but  it  furnishes  it  only  at  enormous  expense,  the  expense  of
many  failures.  Doubtless,  knowledge,  even  thus  gained,  is
worth  its  cost.  The  only  question  is,  whether  there  is  not  a
less  expensive  mode  of  acquiring  it.  It  may  also  be  true  that
there  are  kinds  of  knowledge  which  can  only  be  obtained
through  experience.  For  such  let  us  have  experience.  In
fact,  experience  can  not  be  escaped  if  men  would.  After  all
other  methods  have  been  used,  this  method  will  have  to  be
added.  It  is  customary  to  sneer  at  the  notion  that  education
can  do  any  thing  toward  fitting  men  for  the  stem  duties  of
real  life,  and  naturally  enough ;  for  what  has  the  pursuit  of
subsistence,  the  gaining  of  a  livelihood,  the  conduct  of  a

562  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

business,  or  the  amassing  of  a  fortune  to  do  with  "  Greek  and
algebra,"  with  Latin  versification,  with  "a  leading  out  of
the  faculties,"  with  "  the  higher  discipline  of  the  mind  and
heart,"  with  "  culture,"  "  erudition,"  or  the  "  efflorescence  of
civilization  "  ?  Obviously  nothing  whatever,  and,  so  long  as
these  remain  the  objects  of  education,  it  can  never  be  of  the
least  assistance  to  experience.  Yet  the  sole  object  of  ex-
perience is  knowledge.  The  question,  therefore,  becomes
whether  it  is  possible  for  a  portion  of  the  required  knowledge
to  be  conferred  by  education — by  the  education  of  informa-
tion.

It  may  as  well  be  pointed  out  that  the  fundamental  dis-
tinction between  experience  and  education  is  that  between
the  genetic  and  the  teleological  method.  Experience,  like  all
other  genetic  processes,  is  accompanied  by  waste,  by  the  ab-
solute loss  of  all  but  a  small  differential  of  the  progress
gained  {sujpra,  p.  86).  Education,  like  all  teleological  proc-
esses, is  economical,  seeks  remote  ends  through  tangible
means,  and  achieves  results  wholly  disproportionate  to  the
efforts  expended.  If  this  mode  of  acquiring  knowledge,
therefore,  can  be  shown  to  be  applicable  to  the  common  pur-
suits of  life,  every  consideration  of  human  interest  demands
its  adoption.  The  only  problem  remaining  is  the  practical
one  of  applying  it.

The  accomplishment  of  remote  ends  through  means  has
been  shown  to  consist  in  a  generalization  of  the  laws  affecting
the  given  result.  If  the  practical  affairs  of  life  are  not  sub-
ject to  laws  which  are  capable  of  such  generalization,  then
is  the  application  of  the  teleological  method  impracticable ;
but,  if  they  are  governed  by  laws  capable  of  generalization,
this  method  is  applicable.  The  education  of  knowledge  can
only  proceed  through  the  inculcation  of  more  or  less  general
principles  underlying  practical  interests  and  affairs.  This
it  is  calculated  to  accomplish.  That  such  principles  exist
and  are  widely  recognized,  few  will  deny.  The  expression
"business  principles"  does  not  come  from  the  theoretical

EDUCATION  OF  DISCIPLINE.  563

economists  but  from  the  business  world,  and  while  its  mean-
ing is  vaguely  understood  it  is  universally  recognized  as  hav-
ing a  meaning.  It  is,  in  fact,  experience  that  has  taught  the
world  business  principles  in  so  far  as  it  has  learned  them,
and  taught  them  in  its  own  ruinous  way.  But  the  question
is  certainly  legitimate,  whether  they  may  not  be  taught  in  a
far  better  and  cheaper  way.

All  the  activities  of  life  are  controlled  by  laws,  all  success-
ful enterprises  are  prosecuted  according  to  certain  distinct
and  unvarying  principles.  These  are  empirically,  though
as  a  rule  not  scientifically,  known.  To  co-ordinate  them,
though  perhaps  a  laborious,  is  by  no  means  a  dilEficult  task.
To  make  them  the  subject  of  systematic  instruction  is  not
only  possible  and  practicable,  but  in  the  highest  degree  de-
sirable. In  practice  it  would  be  found  that  such  truths  are
bound  up  with  all  other  truths,  and  that  the  most  general
knowledge  attainable  would  have  a  direct  and  important
bearing  upon  the  most  special  vocations  of  life,  so  that,  with-
out descending  to  technical  instruction,  the  greater  part  of  all
the  most  necessary  and  important  practical  knowledge  of
human  life  might  find  place  in  a  universal  curriculum.

EDUCATION    OF   DISCIPLINE.

As  regards  the  education  of  discijpline,  it  either  means
the  modification  of  brain-tissue,  or  it  means  the  supply  of
the  mind  with  the  data  for  thought.  So  far  as  the  former  is
concerned,  enough  has  already  been  said  {supra,  p.  482).
The  latter  will  be  denied  by  its  advocates,  who  imagine  that
there  exists  some  intermediate  process,  vaguely  apprehended,
but  potent  in  its  effects.  This  mistake  it  is  important  to
rectify.

There  is  no  doubt  a  common  plane  somewhere  on  which
psychology  and  physiology  meet.  Rigidly  defined,  psychol-
ogy and  physiology  are  one,  and  that  one  is  physiology.
But  practically  they  are  distinct.  So  doubtless  every  intel-
lectual process  is  a  physiological  one,  and  every  registered  im-

564  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

pression  results  from  an  alteration  more  or  less  permanent  of
the  matter  of  the  organ  of  thought.  To  attempt  to  draw
this  line  between  transient  and  permanent  impressions  would
either  ignore  the  phenomena  of  memory  or  place  every  im-
pression remembered  for  the  least  duration  of  time  in  the
permanent  list  as  physiological.  It  is  the  fact  that  all  mental
action  is  the  product  of  physiological  action  that  renders
real  brain-development  possible.  Every  impression  received,
every  comparison  made,  every  thought  evolved,  every  truth
grasped,  is  not  only  accompanied  but  caused  by  a  correspond-
ing modification  of  brain-tissue.  But  so  subtile  are  these
molecular  changes  that  in  the  whole  course  of  a  life-time
they  may  not  make  a  perceptible  difference  in  the  quantity
or  quality  of  the  brain.  Moreover,  there  may  be  change
without  increase,  modification  of  tissue  without  improve-
ment of  structure.  There  may  also  be  deterioration,  both
quantitative  and  qualitative.

"What,  then,  is  mental  discipline  ?  How  is  character
formed?  Obviously  by  organizing  mental  states  so  as  to
elicit  consistent  and  useful  action.  But  action  is  the  result
of  ideation,  and  this  depends  upon  previous  impressions
converted  into  conceptions.  And  what  is  all  this  but  the
acquisition  of  knowledge?  It  can  only  be  one  other
thing,  and  that  is  the  acquisition  of  that  which  is  not  knowl-
edge, i.  e.,  of  error.  Discipline  either  produces  knowledge
or  it  produces  error.  Character  is  either  true  or  false.  If
it  be  a  fact  that  there  is  a  discipline  which  results  in  neither
knowledge  nor  error,  then  it  must  be  an  empty  bubble,  and
this  claim  is  supported  by  the  inanity  of  many  "  disciplined  "
minds.

Granting,  then,  the  importance  and  desirability  of  disci-
pline, how  can  it  best  be  secured  ?  Clearly  by  the  organized
reception  of  the  most  important  knowledge.  Character,
therefore,  and  morals  fall  naturally  into  the  already  extended
catalogue  of  self-adjusting  ends.  The  education  of  knowl-
edge implies  discipline,  produces  character,  involves  moral-

EDUOATIOIJ  OF  CULTURE.  565

ity.    These  ends  may,  therefore,  be  safely  neglected.      They
can  not  fail  to  follow  from  the  adoption  of  the  means.

EDUCATION   OF   CULTUBE.

The  education  of  culture  aims  to  supply  the  mind  with
something,  with  some  knowledge  even,  but  it  is  a  kind  of
knowledge  which  has  no  practical  value.  This  knowledge  is
of  two  kinds :  knowledge  of  ways  and  knowledge  of  things,
but  the  former  belongs  to  the  artistic  and  the  latter  to  the
derivative  class.  Artistic  knowledge  is  called  accomplish-
ment; it  is  to  know  how  to  be  graceful,  to  do  pleasing
things.  It  is  very  desirable  but  not  necessary.  The  deriva-
tive knowledge  of  culture  is  also  merely  ornamental.  Much
of  it  is  so,  however,  simply  because  it  is  fashionable.  It
would  be  utterly  worthless  in  itself.  It  only  confers  pleas-
ure because  it  is  a  pleasure  to  conform  to  conventional  stand-
ards. Much  of  it,  on  the  other  hand,  is  capable  intrinsically
of  affording  pleasure.  It  is  therefore  not  to  be  condemned
but  approved,  after  knowledge  of  the  essential  kind  shall
have  been  obtained.  The  objection  lies  solely  against  mak-
ing such  knowledge  primary  instead  of  secondary,  or,  as  is
often  the  case,  making  it  the  only  knowledge.

EDUCATION   OF   EESEAECH.

The  education  of  resea/rch,  or  origination,  assumes  that  the
great  aim  should  be  to  discover  truth.  Reasoning  from  the
fact  that  all  human  progress  has  been  the  result  of  the  dis-
covery of  truth,  its  advocates  conclude  that  this  is  the  thing
to  be  sought  at  all  times  and  under  all  circumstances.  They
maintain  that  truth  discovered  will  naturally  diffuse  itself,
the  precise  reverse  of  this  being  the  case,  viz.,  that  knowl-
edge diffused  will  naturally  reveal  new  truth.  It  is  not  true,
either,  that  truth  tends,  to  any  great  extent,  to  diffuse  itself.
Yague  inklings  and  distorted  rumors  of  it  spread  far  and
wide,  but  these,  so  far  from  realizing  it  to  society,  do  much
to  neutralize  its  real  effect.     Great  discoveries  and  inventions

566  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

are,  it  is  true,  usually  put  to  practical  use ;  and  society,  in  a
manner,  but  in  an  imperfect  manner,  receives  the  benefit  of
many  of  them.  But  society  is  incapable  of  appreciating
them.  Its  universal  ingratitude  to  the  discoverers  proves
this,  and  the  way  in  which  it  allows  itself  to  be  imposed
upon  by  charlatans  still  further  proves  it.  The  public  at
large  rarely  realize  that  there  has  been  any  discoverer.  They
eagerly  avail  themselves  of  new  and  improved  appliances  for
attaining  desired  ends,  and  immediately  commence  to  com-
plain because  they  are  not  more  perfect.  In  some  vague
way  they  ascribe  them  either  to  Providence  or  to  govern-
ment. This  is  because  the  knowledge  which  renders  discov-
eries and  inventions  possible  is  not  distributed.

An  illustration  of  this  is  well  seen  in  the  manner  in
which  the  recent  meteorological  predictions  are  regarded  by
the  public.  The  technical  terms  in  which  it  is  necessary
that  they  be  couched  are  not  understood,  and  are  jumbled
in  the  mind,  which  causes  them  to  be  declared  unintelligible,
ambiguous,  and  conflicting.  We  constantly  hear  soine  one
say,  after  reading  them,  that  one  may  make  any  kind  of
weather  out  of  them,  when  in  fact  the  language  may  be  clear
and  the  prediction  definite.  Ignoring  the  majority  of  cases  in
which  they  prove  true,  a  single  partial  or  even  apparent  fail-
ure brings  down  execrations  on  the  Weather  Bureau.  Some
even  have  a  vague  idea  that  the  Weather  Bureau  should  con-
trol the  weather.  The  majority  fail  to  distinguish  its  pre-
dictions from  those  of  the  many  local  weather  prophets  and
of  the  almanacs,  and  do  not  understand  why  it  might  not  as
well  predict  for  a  whole  season  as  for  twenty-four  hours.
Only  an  occasional  one  fully  appreciates  the  truly  grand  re-
sult already  attained,  by  which  we  are  furnished  daily  with
a  map  on  which  is  recorded  the  actual  state  of  the  weather
at  a  given  moment  over  the  greater  part  of  this  continent.
Truly  this  is  "  casting  pearls  before  swine."  And  so  it  is
with  all  the  great  discoveries  and  achievements  of  science.
The  world  can  not  appreciate  them  because  the  manner  in

EDUCATION  OF  RESEARCH.  567

which  they  are  obtained  is  not  generally  known.  And,
while  it  manages  to  put  some  of  them  into  practice,  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  only  a  small  part  of  the  discovered
truth  is  really  utilized,  and  it  can  not  be  all  utilized  until
scientific  knowledge  is  made  more  general.  A  discoverer
never  sees  all  the  possible  applications  of  the  truth  he  brings
fortli.  An  unscientific  public  is  incompetent  to  utilize  truth
to  its  fullest  extent,  the  originators  of  truth  are  never  ade-
quately respected  or  rewarded,  and  speculators  often  suc-
ceed in  depriving  both  the  inventor  and  society  of  the  ben-
efit of  a  great  principle.

Again,  the  education  of  research  still  further  tends  to  in-
crease this  incongruity  by  encouraging  extreme  and  imprac-
ticable refinements  of  speciaHsm.  "While  there  is  great
rivalry  in  the  making  of  new  and  original  researches,  there
is  little  rivalry  in  arriving  at  practical  results.  The  chief
object  becomes  to  do  something  that  no  one  else  has  ever
done,*  and  the  question  of  utility  is  apt  to  be  ignored  en-
tirely. The  result  is  the  detailed  elaboration  of  every  con-
ceivable subject,  and  the  pursuit  of  minutiae  to  the  last  de-

*  The  power  of  this  sentiment,  as  well  as  its  prevalence,  may  be  seen  in
many  subordinate  ways.  One  of  these,  which  has  often  struck  me  as  very  re-
markable, is  the  frequency  with  which  we  find  persons  delighting  in  the  per-
formance of  acts  for  which  they  have  been  by  accident  or  otherwise  disabled.
Two  cases  have  come  under  my  notice  in  which  cripples  have  acquired  an  irre-
pressible passion  for  gunning.  One  had  lost  his  leg  by  amputation  of  the
femur.  He  wore  a  wooden  leg,  and  with  this  he  ranged  the  fields  and  woods
with  his  dog  and  gun.  The  other  had  lost  his  left  arm  at  the  shoulder,  and
was  fond  of  showing  how  skillfully  he  could  bring  his  piece  to  his  shoulder  with
one  arm,  and  to  increase  the  effect  always  carried  a  rather  heavy  one.

This  principle  may  also  in  great  part  account  for  blind  Huber's  passion  for
observing  bees.  It  doubtless  also  extends  to  those  cases  so  frequently  remarked
in  which  men  of  real  talents  in  some  special  direction  fail  to  appreciate  this,
and  manifest  special  fondness  for  other  pursuits  and  labors  for  which  they  are
wholly  incompetent.  These  persons  doubtless  despise  work  in  the  direction  of
their  natural  proclivities  because  it  is  to  them  easy,  and  they  fail  to  realize  that
what  is  easy  to  them  is  hard  to  others ;  and,  conversely,  they  probably  uncon-
sciously reason  that  those  pursuits  which  are  diflBcult  for  them  must  be  intrin-
sically difficult,  and  therefore  they  wish  to  show  their  skill  in  attacking  them.

568  EDUCATION.— liTlTIAL  MEANS.

gree  of  exhaustiveness.  This  is  very  clearly  illustrated  in
Germany,  where  the  Lehrfreiheit  and  Lemfreiheit  are  so
loudly  extolled.  There  is  scarcely  a  thinkable  question
which  some  German  student  has  not  investigated  in  this  ex-
haustive way.  This  knowledge  may  one  day,  if  preserved,
prove  useful,  but  to-day  the  great  bulk  of  it  is  incapable  of
being  assimilated  by  any  nation  on  the  globe.  And  yet  it  is
supposed  that  the  evils  of  society  are  to  be  cured  by  further
research,  by  the  origination  of  more  unassimilable  knowl-
edge.

EDUCATION   OF    INFORMATION.

The  education  of  information  differs  from  all  the  forms
of  education  considered.  It  differs  from  the  education  of
experience  in  proceeding  artificially  and  teleologically  to
confer  knowledge.  It  differs  from  the  education  of  disci-
pline in  paying  no  special  regard  to  the  formation  of  intel-
lectual faculties  or  of  character,  assuming  that  these  must
necessarily  follow  from  the  possession  of  knowledge.  It  dif-
fers from  the  education  of  culture  in  making  the  ornamental
secondary  and  the  useful  primary ;  in  conferring,  first  of  all,
a  knowledge  of  the  most  general  and  the  most  practical
truths  of  nature  and  of  life,  and  afterward  in  teaching  truths
and  principles  rather  than  methods,  the  wJiat  and  the  why
rather  than  the  how.  It  differs  from  the  education  of  re-
search in  leaving  the  latter  to  take  care  of  itself,  and  confin-
ing itself  exclusively  to  imparting  discovered  knowledge  to
those  who  do  not  possess  it.

Education,  as  understood  in  this  chapter,  may  therefore
be  defined  as  a  system  for  extending  to  all  the  members  of
society  such  of  the  extant  knowledge  of  the  world  as  may  be
deemed  most  important.

The  first  cardinal  principle  upon  which  this  system  rests,
and  by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  other  systems,  is  its
exclusive  devotion  to  the  contents  of  the  mind  and  its  entire
disregard  of  its  capacity.  Its  object  is  to  store  the  mind
with  a  carefully  organized  assortment  of  the  most  useful  and

EDUCATION  OF  INFORMATION".  569

important  known  truths,  and  to  trust  to  this  process  of  exer-
cising the  mind  upon  earnest  realities  for  whatever  incre-
ment of  brain-development  may  naturally  result.

Some  may  call  this  a  system  of  "  cramming,"  but  this
charge  can  not  be  made  nntil  it  is  known  that  more  knowl-
edge is  attempted  to  be  imparted  than  can  be  received  with-
out injury.  J^either  will  it  do  to  assume  that  the  method
of  imparting  such  instruction  must  necessarily  be  harsh  or
severe.  Both  these  elements  are  wholly  undetermined,  and
perhaps  can  only  be  determined  tentatively.  These  are  mat-
ters of  detail  into  which  space  forbids  us  here  to  enter  fur-
ther than  to  say  that  they  are  both  of  great  importance,
and  must  be  determined  with  an  enlightened  regard  for  all
the  conditions  of  the  problem.  But,  if  any  go  so  far  as  to
claim  that  the  inculcation  of  knowledge  must  necessarily
be  harsh  and  severe,  then,  for  such,  no  method  of  education
could  be  made  free  from  this  fault.

Relative  to  the  much-discussed  question  of  "  cramming,"
however,  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  kerael  of  the  matter
seems  generally  to  have  been  ignored.  It  should  be  emphat-
ically denied  that  any  great  proportion  of  the  evils  of  over-
brain-work  can  be  attributed  to  the  acquisition  of  knowledge.
The  small  amount  of  knowledge  acquired  or  sought  to  be
imparted  ought  sufficiently  to  attest  this,  but  it  is  further
proved  by  the  ease  and  eagerness  with  which  really  knowl-
edge-giving studies  are  pursued.  The  truth  is,  that  no  part
of  education  is  so  easy  and  is  gone  through  with  so  little  strain
to  the  system  as  that  which  affords  the  chief  elements  of  truth
acquired  during  the  course.  The  normal  mind  is  hungry  for
truth,  and,  when  fed  with  it,  it  devours  it  with  a  relish  and
digests  it  without  effort.  That  which  wears  out  the  youngV;
mind  is  the  perpetual  straining  after  an  ideal  intellectual  de- 1
velopment,  the  taxing  of  the  wits  in  the  solution  of  valueless
puzzles,  the  memorizing  of  long  lists  of  meaningless  names
to  "  lead  out "  the  faculties,  and  all  the  other  "  tricks  "  of  the

teacher's  trade  which  it  is  supposed  necessary  to  learn  in
56

570  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

order  to  "get  an  education."  Tlie  psychological  principle
upon  which  all  so-called  over-brain-work  rests  is  the  essen-
tial difficultness  of  all  unnatural  mental  action.  The  stud-
ies that  wear  out  the  brain  are  those  that  are  forced  upon  it
against  its  natural  promptings.

All  action  proceeds  from  desires  which  are  the  true  forces
that  impel  it.  Brain-action  is  no  exception.  Its  amount  is
measured  by  this  force.  But  here,  as  every-where  else,  there
are  conflicting  desires.  The  spontaneous  intellectual  impulses
may  either  coincide  with  or  run  counter  to  the  deliberative
desires  arising  out  of  interest  or  supposed  duty.  In  either
case  the  result  of  all  the  mental  activity  which  takes  place
will  be  represented  by  the  algebraic  sum  of  these  two  forces.
If  the  spontaneous  impulses  are  in  the  same  direction  as  the
dictates  of  interest  and  duty,  the  product  will  be  large  and
the  effort  small.  If  these  are  opposed,  the  product  will  only
represent  the  mathematical  resultant  of  these  two  forces;
and  it  will  require  a  large  expenditure  of  effort  to  bring  out
a  small  result.  It  is  rowing  up  the  stream,  or  sailing  against
the  current  {supra,  p.  345).

Kow,  in  all  but  the  most  exceptional  cases  the  apprehen-
sion of  general  and  practical  truth  satisfies  a  spontaneous
craving.  Where  this  seems  to  fail,  it  can  generally  be
traced  to  clumsy  methods  of  presentation.  No  other  class  of
knowledge  is  so  welcome,  no  other  so  readily  grasped  and
eagerly  appropriated.  Hence  the  normal  intellect  is  capable
of  receiving  a  far  greater  amount  of  this  most  useful  of  all
knowledge  than  of  any  other  kind  with  the  expenditure  of
the  same  effort.  The  assertion  that  scientific  truth  in  gen-
eral is  difficult  of  comprehension  is  only  made  by  those  who
are  unacquainted  with  it.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  its  very  sim-
plicity which  often  stands  in  the  way  of  its  acceptance.*

The  adult  mind,  with  its  inherited  load  of  dialecticisra,
prefers  something  obscure,  intricate,  and  mystical.  This,  sci-
ence is  not,  but  deals  constantly  with  the  real,  tangible,  and
*  Haeclvel,  "  Anthropologic,"  S.  108,  109.

I

EDUCATION  A  SOCIAL  FUNCTION.  5Y1

demonstrable.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  young  mind.  By
a  Darwinian  law,  this  love  of  the  ideal  only  appears  at  about
the  age  at  which  it  was  acquired  by  our  ancestors.  The
child  loves  truth,  craves  it,  comprehends  it  easily,  and  never
wpiflriPis  of  it-  It  is  by  refusing  it,  and  compelling  the  recep-
tion of  unnatural  ideas  by  more  unnatural  methods,  that  the
youthful  brain  is  overtasked.  In  acquiring  a  little  of  such
so-called  knowledge,  it  has  really  performed  an  Herculean
labor,  it  has  stemmed  the  whole  current  of  its  nature.

The  object  is  to  fill  the  mind  with  truth :  not  to  cram
it,  nor  to  force  it,  but  to  store  it  in  such  a  systematic  way
with  knowledge  that  it  may  make  use  of  its  stores  in  the
production  of  rational  thought.  The  idea  that  the  mind
breaks  down  because  crammed  beyond  its  capacity  with
knowledge  is  a  gross  misconception  of  the  primary  principles
of  psychology.  It  is  based  on  some  such  crude  assumption
as  that  the  brain  is  a  hollow  sphere  and  that  thoughts  are
material  gases  introduced  into  it.  The  fact  is  that  the  low-
est town  gossip  has  a  larger  number  of  items  of  information
stored  away  in  his  brain  than  Humboldt  ever  had.  It  re-
quires no  greater  effort  to  know  something  important  than
something  unimportant.  It  is  not  the  quantity  of  knowl-
edge but  the  quality,  not  the  number  of  truths  but  their
value,  which  should  be  chiefly  considered,  and  the  ability  of
the  mind  to  acquire  them  forms  no  part  of  the  problem.

Education  a  Social  Function.

The  second  cardinal  principle  of  the  educational  system
here  proposed  is,  that  it  shall  be  the  exclusive  work  of  society
itself.  Bj  this  is  meant  that,  through  whatever  form  of  or-
ganization society  prefers  to  act,  the  educational  system  shall
be  devised  and  carried  out  by  that  organization.  Of  course,
in  the  present  state  of  society,  this  organization  goes  by  the
name  of  government,  and  there  exist  in  the  civilized  parts
of  the  world  a  large  number  of  distinct  and  independent  au-
tonomies of  this  kind.     Prior,  therefore,  to  the  ultimate  amal-

572  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

garaation  of  all  these  governments,  sliould  this  ever  take
place,  whatever  is  predicated  of  society  in  general  may,  with-
out affecting  the  conditions  of  the  discussion,  be  applied  to
any  one  of  these  social  autonomics,  within  which  an  educa-
tional system  may  as  easily  be  established  as  in  a  union  of  all
these  societies.  In  common  parlance,  then,  education  must
be  exclusively  intrusted  to  the  state,  and  can  never  be
adopted  until  the  state  is  ready  to  adopt  it.

The  extension  of  the  province,  or  functions,  of  govern-
ment is  objectionable  to  many  persons.  This,  as  pointed  out
in  Chapter  X  {supra,  pp.  227j  242),  arises  from  the  character
of  the  prevailing  views  which  are  entertained  respecting  the
nature  and  sphere  of  government.  It  is  so  customary  to  look
upon  government  as  a  sort  of  extraneous  power,  to  be  kept
constantly  in  check,  as  though  existing  by  and  for  itself,  and
independent  of  the  people  (a  view  which  goes  far  to  make
itself  realized  in  fact),  that  the  mention  of  adding  any  thing
to  the  powers  already  vested  in  it  is  at  once  met  by  a  strong
resistance  from  a  considerable  class  of  citizens.  Whatever
may  be  the  real  grounds  of  this  opposition,  and  it  should  be
admitted  that  in  all  existing  governments  there  are  such,  they
must  be  inadequate  to  defeat  the  establishment  of  a  system
of  education,  and  no  system  of  education  not  exclusively  in-
trusted to  the  highest  social  authority  is  worthy  of  the  name.
The  initial  step  to  all  social  progress  can,  of  course,  only  be
taken  by  society  itself.

But  it  may  be  said  that  society,  as  represented  by  gov-
ernment, is  incapable  of  devising  and  conducting  a  system
of  education.  It  is  admitted  that  the  corporate  intelligence
is  far  below  the  highest  private  intelligence,  and  perhaps
below  the  average  individual  intelligence.  Legislative  bodies,
as  we  have  seen  {supra,  p.  395),  are  considerably  below  the
average  intelligence  of  the  members  of  such  bodies,  and
those  members  but  little  more  than  represent  the  average
intelligence  of  their  constituencies.  How,  then,  can  such
bodies  be  expected  to  be  capable  of  originating  a  true  system

THE  BEANCHES  OF  GOVEENMENT  COMPAEED.  573

of  education  ?  The  only  reply  is  that  there  is  no  alternative,
and  the  system  must  simply  wait  until  the  state  sees  fit  to
adopt  it.

But,  respecting  the  action  of  government,  there  are  some
important  qualifications  to  the  above  charges  which  are
usually  disregarded.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  not  just  to  judge
government  as  a  whole  by  its  legislative  branch  alone.  .Gov-
ernment always  administers  more  wisely  than  it  legislates.
rThe  judicial  branch,  too,  is  far  more  enlightened  than  the
'.legislative  branch,  rather  more  so  than  the  executive.  Besides
[the  enactment  of  laws  there  is  the  interpretation  of  them,
'and  this  is  usually  in  the  direction  of  reasonableness  and  jus-
tice. The  ministers  are  also  constantly  required  to  act  upon
matters  ultra  vires.  Laws  can  not  descend  to  all  the  minu-
tiae of  the  business  interests  of  a  great  state.  In  this  way,
and  by  the  exercise  of  discretionary  powers,  the  administra-
tion is  constantly  introducing  new  systems  and  methods  to
meet  pressing  demands  of  changing  conditions.  It  thus  be-
comes to  a  great  extent  the  originator  of  governmental  func-
tions, and  in  so  far  assumes  legislative  powers.  It  always
does  this  wisely  because  it  does  it  deliberately.  The  aggre-
gate wisdom  of  legislative  bodies  is  below  the  average  wisdom
of  their  members,  for  the  sole  reason  that  their  aggregate
actions  are  not  deliberative  actions,  the  name  "  deliberative
bodies"  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.  Executive  and
I  judicial  bodies  are  wiser  than  legislative  bodies,  because  they
j  are  more  deliberative.  The  higher  courts  of  a  state  are  the
I  most  truly  deliberative  bodies  of  the  state.  But  for  the
narrow,  special,  and  superficial  education  which  officers  of
the  law  receive,  these  courts  would  embody  the  highest  wis-
dom of  society.  As  it  is,  their  judgment  is  always  more
reliable  than  that  of  any  other  officers  of  the  government,
not  so  much  because  their  members  are  better  jurists,  but
because  they  are  so  constituted  as  to  render  their  action  on
all  questions  deliberative.  It  is  by  ample  deliberation,  free
from  distracting  influences,  that  they  at  length  arrive  at  de-

574  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

cisions  which  are  both  just  and  reasonable.  Deliberative
action  is  rational  action.  To  deliberate  is  to  reason.  "  Noth-
ing," said  Lord  Coke,  "  that  is  contrary  to  reason  is  consonant
to  law."  There  is  really  no  difference  between  deliberation
and  what  is  called  the  "  judicial "  method.  All  legislation
should  proceed  upon  this  method.  The  fact  that  it  does
not  is  one  of  the  chief  causes  which  render  courts  necessary.
But  the  powers  of  courts  are  greatly  restricted.  They  can
originate  nothing.  It  is  from  the  administrative,  or  execu-
tive, branch  that  has  thus  far  come  what  little  progressive
action  governments  have  ever  taken.  For  it  must  be  re-
membered that  the  differentiation  of  the  several  branches  of
government  is  a  comparatively  recent  event,  and  it  is  still
far  from  complete.  Formerly  the  three  "  co-ordinate  powers  "
were  more  or  less  completely  combined.  Whereas  now  the
legislative  branch  is  the  avowed  originator  and  supreme  rul-
ing power  of  the  state  in  most  civilized  countries,  it  was  for-
merly the  administrative  branch  that  assumed  this  character.

With  what  difficulty,  conservatism,  and  adroitness  this
change  has  been  effected  is  shown  by  the  surviving  forms
still  retained  in  the  preambles  to  statutory  enactments.  Of
all  the  great  nations  of  the  globe,  the  United  States  stands
alone  in  having  discarded  these  forms  and  placed  the  legis-
lative power  avowedly,  as  it  is  virtually,  at  the  head  of  the
law-making  process:  "Be  it  enacted  by  the  Senate  and
House  of  Eepresentatives  in  Congress  assembled,"  etc.  The
high  legislative  prerogative  of  the  President  to  prevent  all
legislation  not  sanctioned  by  two  thii'ds  of  both  Chambers  is
not  even  recognized  in  this  preamble,  except  perhaps  im-
pliedly in  making  him  a  part  of  Congress.

Very  different  from  this  is  the  formula  of  the  present
Republic  of  France :  "  Le  President  de  la  Republique  f  ran-
gaise,  sur  la  proposition  du  Conseil,  Ministre,  etc.  D6-
crete,"  etc.

In  this  we  see  the  obvious  survival  of  the  previous  for-
mula of  the  Empire :  "  Napoleon,  par  la  grace  de  Dieu  et  la

LEGISLATIVE  FORMULAS.  575

volonte  nationale,  Empereur  des  Frangais,  h  tous  presents  et
a  venir,  salut.  Sur  le  rapport  de  notre  ministre,  etc.  Avons
decrete  et  decretons  ce  qui  suit : "

In  Great  Britain,  which,  though  nominally  a  monarchy,
is  really  a  republic,  the  formula  is  as  follows :  "  Be  it  enacted
by  the  Queen's  most  Excellent  Majesty,  by  and  with  the  ad-
vice and  consent  of  the  Lords  Spiritual  and  Temporal,  and
Commons,  in  this  present  Parliament  assembled,  and  by  the
authority  of  the  same,  as  follows  : "

In  the  German  Empire  every  law  is  preceded  by  the
following  preamble :  "  Wir  Wilhelm,  von  Gottes  Gnaden
Deutscher  Kaiser,  Koenig  von  Preussen,  u.  s.  w.,  verord-
nen  im  Namen  des  Deutschen  Reichs,  nach  erfolgter  Zustim-
mung  des  Bundesraths  und  des  Reichstags,  was  folgt : "

The  Austrian  preamble  is  as  follows :  "  Mit  Zustimmung
beider  Hauser  meines  Reichsraths  finde  Ich  anzuordnen,
wie  folgt " — the  act  bearing  the  signature  of  the  emperor.

These  surviving  formulas  of  legislation  clearly  show  to
how  great  an  extent  the  executive  branch  of  all  European
governments,  nominally  at  least,  exercises  legislative  powers.
Although  much  of  this  is  mere  form,  designed  to  show  re-
spect to  the  executive  heads,  and  to  make  them  feel  less  keen-
ly the  extent  to  which  they  have  been  shorn  of  their  former
power,  while  the  laws  themselves  are  really  originated  in  the
legislature  and  only  presented  to  the  executive  for  approval
after  having  been  passed  by  that  body,  still,  not  only  in  these
nominal  monarchies,  but  in  the  not  less  nominal  republics  of
the  world,  the  executive  branch  actually  performs  a  large
share  of  the  legislative  work,  including  the  origination  of  the
most  important  measures  of  the  state.  It  alone  knows  what
the  real  demands  of  the  state  are.  It  is  constantly  subjected
to  pressure  from  various  quarters  arising  out  of  the  normal
operations  of  trade,  manufactures,  and  industry  in  general.
These  pulsations  it  can  not  help  instantly  feeling,  and  it  is
ever  stepping  to  the  verge  of  its  statutory  authority  to  meet
these  demands ;  and,  finding  itself  constantly  impeded  in  this

576  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

work  by  obstructive  or  deficient  legislation,  it  is  perpetually
availing  itself  of  its  prerogative  to  recommend  the  needed
measures  of  relief  to  the  legislature.  The  legislature,  in  re-
turn, conscious  of  its  inabihty  to  comprehend  these  needs,  is
usually  ready  to  respond  to  these  suggestions  by  passing  the
required  acts,  which  are  often  drafted  for  it  by  the  adminis-
trative branch.  It  is  in  one  or  the  other  of  these  two  ways
— either  by  the  arbitrary  adoption  of  measures  which  con-
travene no  law,  or  by  the  successful  suggestion  of  legal  re-
forms to  the  legislature — that  the  really  most  important  and
best-matured  work  which  states  have  ever  accomplished  has
been  done.  This  is  because  it  is  done  deliberately,  and  with
a  due  regard  for  the  evidence  of  its  necessity  and  advan-
tage. Measures  of  this  nature  certainly  embody  a  degree  of
wisdom,  even  in  the  present  state  of  society,  considerably
above  that  of  the  average  individual  even  of  the  better-in-
formed classes.

If  any  proofs  of  this  were  needed,  they  are  to  be  found
in  the  history  of  what  is  known  as  the  "railroad  problem."
That  unrestricted  private  enterprise  can  not  be  trusted  to
conduct  the  railroad  system  of  a  rapidly  growing  country,
may  now  be  safely  said  to  be  demonstrated.  The  princi-
ple of  unlimited  competition  upon  which  private  manage-
ment rests  tends  so  to  complicate  the  railroad  interests  as
to  ruin  many  of  those  who  embark  in  the  enterprise,  and,
w^hat  is  worse,  to  sink  and  destroy  immense  investments  of
capital  expended  in  their  construction  and  equipment.  Lines
are  built  where  they  are  not  needed,  rates  are  lowered  below
the  power  to  cover  expenses,  the  sense  of  losing  makes  the
officers  and  directors  indifferent  to  the  proj)er  sennce  of  the
public,  negligence  causes  disasters  to  passengers,  and  at  last
a  crisis  is  precipitated  and  all  the  lines  are  either  suspended
or  absorbed  by  some  one,  or  thrown  into  litigation.  Rail-
road wars  are  followed  by  railroad  monopolies,  and  it  is  dif-
ficult to  tell  through  which  the  p^vW^^  suffers  most.  The
highest  wisdom  has  never  gone  f uiSg^T-^r  than  to  adopt  a  sys-

i

THE  RAILROAD  PROBLEM.  677

tem  of  arbitrary  apportionment  of  profits  among  several  rival
lines,  vulgarly  called  "  pooling,"  which  is  a  scheme  unknown
to  the  law,  is  usually  entered  into  on  purely  verbal  agree-
ments which  are  broken  the  moment  any  one  of  the  parties
finds  it  to  his  interest  to  do  so,  and  which  operates  upon
the  public  in  a  manner  even  worse  than  does  a  legitimate
monopoly  through  legal  amalgamation  of  lines.

A  not  unfrequent  solution  of  such  difiiculties  is  found,  or
at  least  sought,  through  a  humble  appeal  to  the  state  for
succor.  To  such  an  extent  was  this  the  case  in  France  that
the  government  at  last  resolved  to  absorb  all  the  lines  in  the
country.  It  commenced  this  policy  in  1877,  when  ten  com-
peting lines  failed  and  sued  for  aid.  It  purchased  these  and
made  them  the  basis  for  a  general  acquisition  of  the  railroad
property  of  France.  It  entered  upon  the  administrative
management  of  its  own  lines  at  once,  and  so  successful  has  the
policy  proved  that  it  has  now  undertaken  the  construction
of  about  fifteen  thousand  kilometres  of  additional  state  rail-
roads. It  lays  them  out  where  and  only  where  they  are
needed.  It  also  prohibits  private  enterprise  from  the  con-
struction of  competitive  lines,  wisely  perceiving  that,  con-
trary to  current  laissezfaire  principles,  the  interests  of  indi-
viduals engaged  in  serving  the  public  do  not  always  coincide
with  the  interests  of  the  public.

Though  France  is  perhaps  the  best  illustration  of  this
general  truth,  it  is  by  no  means  the  only  one.  Belgium  has
already  well-nigh  passed  through  its  ordeal,  and  is  now  in
possession  of  the  greater  part  of  the  railroads  of  the  king-
dom, in  managing  which  it  so  competes  with  the  remaining
private  lines  that  these  are  now  joining  with  the  general
public  in  asking  it  to  add  them  to  its  posesssions.  Germany
is  rapidly  moving  in  the  same  general  direction  under  the  in-
fluence of  the  same  motives,  while  Italy  is  imitating  the
example  of  France  in  almost  every  particular.  In  England,
though  the  government  has  not  yet  assumed  the  proprietor-
ship of  any  railways,  it  has  been  compelled  to  place  them  all

578  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

under  the  closest  surveillance,  even  going  so  far  as  to  estab-
lish a  special  court  for  the  adjudication  of  railway  grievances.
It  prevents  competition  by  encouraging  "amalgamation,"
and  thus  is  able  to  postpone  the  crisis  which  also  has  long
threatened  to  come  in  that  country.  The  United  States  is
still  in  the  midst  of  utter  chaos  in  this  respect,  from  which
its  laissez  fairs  policy  renders  it  incapable  of  extricating
itself.  Therefore,  the  wasteful  policy  of  competition  is  al-
lowed to  go  on,  destroying  the  earnings  of  the  people.

While  the  railroad  problem  is  just  now  the  most  promi-
nent before  the  world,  and  best  exemplifies  both  the  inca-
pacity of  private  individuals  to  undertake  vast  enterprises
like  this,  and  the  superior  aggregate  wisdom  of  the  state  in
such  matters,  it  is  by  no  means  the  only  one  that  coidd  be
held  up  in  a  similar  manner  and  made  to  confirm  the  same
truth.

Competition  is  to  industry  what  "  free  trade  "  is  to  com-
merce. They  both  represent  the  wasteful  genetic  method,
destroying  a  large  proportion  of  what  is  produced,  and  pro-
gressing only  by  rhythmic  waves  w^hose  ebb  is  but  just  less
extensive  than  their  flow.

As  remarked  in  the  Introduction  (vol.  i,  p.  61),  the  ques-
tion whether  any  enterprise  should  be  undertaken  by  the
state  or  left  to  individuals  is  one  which  must  be  determined
on  the  intrinsic  merits  of  each  individual  case.  The  trans-
fer of  functions  from  the  latter  to  the  former  simply  marks
the  expansion  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  state,  a  process
which,  when  correctly  viewed,  has  been  going  on  steadily
from  the  earliest  ages  of  political  history.  Nearly  every
present  acknowledged  function  of  government  has  once  been
intrusted  to  private  enterprise.  It  simply  shows  that,  httle
by  little,  society  has  risen  to  the  consciousness  of  its  needs,
and  has,  one  by  one,  assumed  control  of  the  more  important
public  interests.  Whether  it  be  its  finances,  its  criminal
jurisprudence,  its  customs  regulation,  its  postal  affairs,  its
telegraphs,  or  its  railroads,  whatever  it  fairly  perceives  to

J

EXPANSION  OF  STATE  JURISDICTION.  579

need  state  administration,  it  proceeds  to  assume  and  add  to
the  functions  of  the  government.*

'Now,  of  all  the  enterprises  which  the  state  has  thus  appro-
priated to  itself,  there  is  not  one  which  it  has  not  managed
better  and  more  wisely  than  it  had  been  managed  before  by
private  parties.  Most  of  them  are  such  that  the  world  has
entirely  forgotten  that  they  were  ever  private  enterprises.
Others  have  become  cherished  public  institutions  which  no
future  revolutions  can  again  remand  to  private  direction.
And  there  are  others  which  are  still  debating-ground  or  on
trial  in  some  states.  The  transportation  question  is  one  of
these  latter.  Telegraphic  communication  is  another.  Edu-
cation is  a  third.  Other  social  operations  still,  not  now
looked  upon  except  by  a  few  as  belonging  to  this  class,  are
destined  to  pass  through  the  stages  of  agitation  and  govern-
mental assumption.  These  facts  should  not,  however,  lead
to  the  conclusion  that  government  should  immediately  as-
sume charge  of  all  private  enterprises  which  concern  the
general  public.  There  must  be  a  gradual  maturing  of  the
conditions,  both  on  the  side  of  the  state  and  of  the  individual,
before  this  can  successfully  be  done.  The  question  in  each
case  must  always  be.  Is  the  age  ripe  for  this  change?  As
society  is  constituted,  however,  premature  action  of  this  nat-
ure can  scarcely  occur.  So  strong  is  the  force  of  established
custom,  that  it  much  more  frequently  happens  that  the  event
is  too  long  postponed,  and  the  state  does  not  step  in  until
the  crying  evils  of  private  mismanagement  and  individual
incompetency  have  thoroughly  aroused  it  to  the  necessity.

The  superiority  of  governmental  administration  over  pri-
vate management,  in  large  enterprises  of  a  general  public
character,  has  been  clearly  seen  and  frequently  pointed  out,
but  the  progress  of  popular  opinion  on  such  questions  has

*  In  a  paper  on  "  Politico-Social  Functions,"  read  before  the  Anthropolopc-
ical  Society  of  Washington,  March  15,  1881,  and  published  in  the  "Pen:i
Monthly  "  for  May  of  that  year  (p.  321),  these  views  were  set  forth  and  sub-
stantiated more  fully  than  can  be  done  here.

580  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  ^lEANS.

been  powerfully  counteracted  by  the  special  nature  of  the
case.  Private  enterprise  is  ever  jealous  of  governmental  en-
croachment upon  its  domain,  and  the  more  lucrative  the  en-
terprise is — that  is,  the  greater  the  need  that  it  be  conducted
by  society  in  the  interest  of  its  members — the  stronger  will
be  the  influence  brought  to  bear  against  such  a  result.  This
influence  is  exerted  by  the  creation  of  a  public  sentiment
against  state  interference.  In  this,  private  entei*prise  always
has  matters  almost  entirely  its  own  way.  The  state  has  lit-
tle interest  in  the  subject.  The  people  at  large  rarely  attrib-
ute their  burdens  to  the  proper  source.  Things  must  reach
the  point  of  unendurableness  before  the  public  will  appeal
to  the  state  for  assistance.  Meanwhile  a  constant  stream
of  opposition  to  all  forms  of  state  interference,  more  or  less
ingeniously  supported  by  plausible  argument,  is  being  poured
out  by  interested  parties.  The  result  is,  according  to  the
principle  already  laid  down,  that  current  views  which  are
unopposed  will  be  generally  accepted  {supra,  pp.  422,  433),
that  the  state  must  overcome  an  immense  mass  of  preju-
dice before  it  can  act  in  any  case.

To  illustrate  this,  let  us  again  recur  to  the  railroad  ques-
tion. The  policy  of  the  railroad  organs  is  to  insist  at  every
opportunity  on  the  incompetency  of  government  to  operate
railroads.  Prior  to  all  attempts  of  this  nature,  this  was  main-
tained as  a  simple  matter  of  a  priori  deduction.  But  since
the  trials  in  Europe,  and  their  more  or  less  complete  success,
a  new  method  of  opposition  has  been  introduced.  Besides
the  sweeping  charges  of  official  corruption  among  so  large  a
number  of  government  employes  and  other  "  stock  argu-
ments," they  have  appealed  to  statistics,  and  found  that  al-
most without  exception  the  cost  of  operating  a  railroad  by
the  state  is  greater  than  that  of  operating  it  by  a  private  com-
pany. They  also  find  that  notwithstanding  this  the  net  earn-
ings of  state  roads  are  less  than  those  of  private  roads,  prov-
ing, as  they  claim,  that  they  are  not  running  on  as  sound  a
financial  basis.     These  facts  are  re-echoed  in  every  possible

FIDELITY  OF  STATE  MANAGEMENT.

581

form,  and  made  to  demonstrate  the  vast  superiority  of  private
over  public  management.  The  sophistry  of  this  mode  of  ar-
gument is  not  generally  penetrated  by  the  public  mind,  and
for  the  most  part  it  has  the  effect  intended.  A  further  scru-
tiny of  the  statistics,  however,  almost  invariably  reveals  the
fact  that,  wherever  comparison  under  similar  conditions  is
possible,  rates,  both  passenger  and  freight,  are  lower  on  gov-
ernment than  on  private  lines,*  which,  from  the  stand-point
of  the  public,  is  the  kernel  of  the  whole  matter.     The  peo-

*  Owing  to  the  characteristic  shrewdness  of  capital,  there  are  few  countries
in  which  statistics  of  rates  can  be  satisfactorily  obtained.  In  those  countries
where  all  roads  are  in  the  hands  of  companies,  and  competition  is  unchecked,
they  are  too  unsteady  to  render  them  of  any  value.  In  Prussia,  where  the
railroads  are  partly  owned  and  worked  by  the  state  and  partly  by  companies,
while  still  another  portion  are  owned  by  companies  but  worked  by  the  state,
careful  statistics  are  annually  made  up  which  shed  much  light  upon  this  vital
question.  The  following  table  is  compiled  from  the  official  statistics  of  the  rail-
roads of  Prussia  for  the  year  1874  :

OWNERSHIP  AND  MANAGEMENT.

Proportion
per  cent

of  expenses  to
receipts.

Test  of  lucra-
tiveness.

Average  cost  to

one  passenger

to  travel  one

kilometre.

Test  of  public

advantage.

Average  cost  of

transporting  one

centner  of  freight

one  kilometre.

Test  of  public

advantage.

Owned  and  worked  by  the  state.. .

Owned  by  companies,  but  worked
by  the  state

75-50

68-90
72-83
66-40

Ffennige.
4-04

4  08
4-06
4-42

Ffennige.
0-27

0-25

Total  worked  by  the  state

Owned  and  worked  by  companies.

0-26
0-31

It  will  be  sufficient  to  point  out  that,  while  the  roads  owned  and  worked  by
companies  yielded  13-7  per  cent  greater  profits  than  those  owned  and  worked  by
the  state,  the  latter  carried  passengers  9-4  and  freight  15  per  cent  cheaper  than
the  former.  It  should  be  added  that  in  no  case  were  any  of  the  government  lines
run  at  a  loss,  but  on  the  contrary  fair  profits  were  returned  to  the  state  in  each
case.  Since  compiling  this  table,  the  latest  then  attainable,  I  have  casually  ex-
amined later  statistics,  and  find  them  to  yield  substantially  the  same  results.
As  the  labor  of  compilation  is  considerable,  I  leave  the  figures  for  1874  as  a
fair  example.  {Cf,  "  Statistische  Nachrichten  von  den  preussischen  Eisenbah-
nen.")

582  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

pie  should  look  with  suspicion  upon  excessively  lucrative
industries,  since  their  very  sound  financial  condition  proves
that  thej  are  conducted  too  much  in  the  interests  of  the
directors  and  stockholders  and  too  little  in  that  of  the  public.
The  failure  of  the  state  to  make  them  lucrative  should  also
be  construed  as  an  evidence  of  the  integrity  and  proper
sense  of  duty  of  the  officers  of  the  state.

Without  further  attempt  to  show  the  difficulties  in  the
way  of  the  assumption  by  the  state  of  many  of  the  functions
properly  belonging  to  it,  it  must  suffice  to  point  out  the  faot
that  whatever  the  state  does  is  usually  better,  if  not  more
economically,  done  than  what  is  done  by  individuals.  Sta-
tistics show  that  in  the  management  of  the  finances  the
losses  sustained  in  government  transactions  bear  a  less  pro-
portion to  the  sums  handled  than  in  private  institutions.
This  is  due  to  numerous  causes,  one  of  the  chief  of  which  is
the  absence  of  personal  attachment  and  sympathy.  In  a  na-
tional exchequer  the  teller  or  cashier  expects  to  have  his  bal-
ances scrutinized,  and  feels  no  humiliation  in  submitting  to  it.
It  is  done  by  law,  or  by  general  regulation,  as  a  regular  part
of  the  duties  of  the  office.  This  is  usually  not  the  case
in  private  institutions.  Ties  of  friendship,  often  of  rela-
tionship, require  these  precautions  to  be  neglected  through
fear  of  seeming  to  suspect  dishonesty,  and  thus,  human  nat-
ure being  every-where  the  same,  fraud  and  embezzlement
are  of  daily  occurrence.

It  might  similarly  be  shown  that  all  the  functions  of  gov-
ernment are  usually  performed  with  far  greater  thorough-
ness and  fidelity  than  similar  functions  intrusted  to  private
individuals.  If  any  one  will  take  the  trouble  to  examine  the
various  reports  published  by  the  several  executive  depart-
ments of  any  government,  and  to  compare  them  with  efforts
of  a  like  general  nature  made  by  individuals,  he  will  doubt-
less be  willing  to  confess  that  the  latter  fall  below  the  for-
mer in  many  important  respects.  The  peculiar  weight  which
every  body  attaches  to  the  word  "  official "  has  something

SCIENTIFIC  WORK.  583

more  to  sustain  it  than  that  mere  blind  worship  of  great
names.  It  is  instinctively  felt  that,  whether  absolutely  reli-
able or  not,  an  official  statement  is  the  very  most  reliable  to
be  attained  ;  and  between  two  statements,  one  official  and
the  other  unofficial,  the  strongest  opponent  of  governmental
encroachment  on  private  territory  would  not  hesitate  to  pre-
fer the  former.  It  is  fashionable  to  declaim  against  the  so-
called  "  bureaucracy  "  of  modern  times,  but  this  is  only  a  part
of  the  attempt  of  sagacious  capitalists  to  manufacture  public
sentiment  to  counteract  the  steady  current  of  rational  con-
viction toward  the  conclusion  that  society  must  arouse  to  its
own  interests,  and  take  the  welfare  of  its  members  more  di-
rectly into  its  own  hands.

There  is  one  class  of  work  extensively  performed  by  the
state  which  has  proved  its  adaptability  to  this  method  more
completely  perhaps  than  almost  any  other.  This  is  work
of  a  scientific  character.  Whatever  scientific  undertakings
have  been  intrusted  to  the  government  have  almost  invari-
ably been  ably  and  thoroughly  prosecuted.  This  is  abun-
dantly illustrated  by  the  exceptional  efficiency  of  our  Coast
Survey  and  Light-House  Service,  by  the  labors  of  the  Kaval
Observatory,  of  the  Signal  Service,  of  the  Patent-Office,  of
the  Geological  Surveys,  and  of  every  other  bureau  to  which
work  of  this  class  has  been  intrusted.  The  same  is  true  of
all  other  countries.  The  scientific  mind  appears  to  be  pecul-
iarly adapted  to  faithful  service  in  situations  where  great  prac-
tical interests  are  involved.  Scientific  men  ai;p,  from  their
very  education,  earnest  men,  and  fully  aroused  to  the  impor-
tance of  putting  their  knowledge  to  the  best  practical  use.
Though  making  no  professions  of  philanthropic  principles,
they  really  have  the  welfare  of  society  more  at  heart  than
many  who  talk  loudly  of  social  reform.  They  only  ask  an
opportunity  to  apply  scientific  principles  to  great  things,  and
when  this  is  offered  they,  as  a  rule,  devote  themselves  com-
pletely and  unreservedly  to  their  work.

Then,  again,  science  is  ill-adapted  to  the  competitive  and

584  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

feverish  methods  and  sentiments  that  obtain  in  nearly  all
departments  of  private  life.  Success  in  science  depends  on
the  ability  to  await  results.  Science  can  not  be  hurried.
Forced  to  make  haste,  it  is  in  danger  of  degenerating  into
charlatanism.  It  must  also  be  independent.  No  one  can
influence  it  or  warp  its  conclusions.  There  is  no  substitute
for  exact  truth.  For  all  these  special  characteristics  of  all
scientific  work,  the  service  of  the  state  is  admirably  adapted.

All  that  has  been  said  of  scientific  work  and  much  more
will  apply  to  educational  work.  Education  is  essentially  a
scientific  labor,  and  this  in  the  highest  sense.  It  is  not  only
the  science  of  sciences,  but  the  art  of  arts.

Without  repeating  the  considerations  set  forth  in  the
preceding  paragraphs,  we  may  proceed  to  enumerate  a  few
of  the  special  reasons  why  all  educational  work  should  be
intrusted  to  the  state.

Education  can  not  be  successfully  conducted  on  the  com-
petitive system.  It  is  an  enterprise  so  wholly  dissimilar
from  those  of  ordinary  business  life  that  an  entirely  different
set  of  principles  must  be  applied  to  it  throughout.  In  the
first  place,  it  is  not  prosecuted  in  order  to  supply  any  of  the
demands  of  the  physical  being.  No  true  social  force  can  be
named  as  its  original  motive.  It  is  from  first  to  last  the  re-
sult of  cold  calculation  based  on  observation  and  experience.
There  exists  no  natural  desire  for  education.  Even  admit-
ting the  natural  craving  of  the  youthful  mind  for  knowl-
edge, this  wK)uld  never  be  sought  in  any  of  the  ways  in
which  education  requires  it  to  be  conferred.

Again,  the  recipients  of  education  are  not  the  same  indi-
viduals as  those  who  really  desire  that  education  be  given.
Where  this  desire  is  more  specialized  than  in  society  itself,  it
inheres  in  parents  or  guardians,  viz.,  the  desire  that  their  chil-
dren or  wards  receive  it.  This  is  obviously  a  wholly  anoma-
lous form  of  enterprise,  and  finds  no  analogue  within  the
whole  domain  of  social  undertakings.  This  radical  differ-
ence of  nature,  therefore,  clearly  requires  a  radically  differ-

K

EDrOATIONAL  WORK.  585

ent  form  of  treatment,  and  the  principles  and  formulas  that
apply  to  other  enterprises  are  wholly  inapplicable  to  this  one.
Adam  Smith  excepted  education  from  the  law  of  supply  and
demand,  and  similarly  it  must  be  excepted  from  every  other
established  law  of  politico-economics.

Every  thing  that  is  done  by  intelligent  beings  must  of
course  have  a  motive,  and,  since  all  motives  are  merely  de-
sires, every  act  must  proceed  from  some  desire.  Thus  far,
but  no  further,  education  conforms  to  all  other  human  under-
takings. The  fundamental  characteristic  which  distinguishes
it  from  all  others  is  that  here  the  individuals  who  receive
the  direct  benefit  are  not  the  same  as  those  who  desire  the
end.  To  those  who  desire  the  end  the  benefit  is  indirect.
Those  directly  benefited  usually  have  no  desire  but  rather  an
aversion  for  the  end.

There  are  three  possible  sources  from  which  the  motives
to  education  may  proceed,  viz. :

1.  The  actual  recipient.

2.  Parents  or  guardians.

3.  Society  in  its  collective  capacity.

Examples  of  the  first  class  are  rare,  and  are  exclusively
confined  to  recipients  who  have  already  reached  the  age  at
which  education  should  be  nearly  complete.  Such  cases  are
rendered  possible  only  by  defective  systems  which  neglect
some  until  they  come  to  the  age  of  reflection  and  perceive
the  great  need  of  education.  A  proper  system  would  render
all  such  cases  impossible,  and  thereby  eliminate  the  first
class  entirely.  For  in  no  proper  sense  can  children  be  said
to  desire  education.  Yery  few  crave  knowledge,  even  after
they  have  been  given  the  opportunity  of  tasting  its  sweets,
with  sufiicient  force  to  overcome  their  love  of  play  and  free-
dom. Until  first  taught  somewhat,  no  child  ever  desires  any
such  knowledge  as  education  confers.  The  desire  for  educa-
tion on  the  part  of  the  actual  recipients,  therefore,  can  not  be
regarded  as  in  the  smallest  degree  constituting  a  demand  for
it,  such  as  tends  to  induce  a  supply  in  the  commercial  sense.

686  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

To  them  education  is  exclusively  a  matter  of  blind  obedience
to  some  authority.  Every  system  of  education,  however
free  from  state  interference,  must  possess  this  character.  It
is  nothing  more  than  applies  to  all  the  acts  of  parents  in  the
rearing  of  children.  It  is  compulsory  in  the  sense  that  it  is
required  as  a  matter  of  obedience  to  authority,  and  it  is  im-
material in  this  respect  whether  such  obedience  be  yielded
through  fear  or  through  love.  So  far  then  as  the  recipients
of  education  are  concerned,  a  system  conducted  by  the  state
is  no  more  compulsory  than  one  conducted  at  the  homes  of
the  pupils.  State  and  private  education  are  in  this  respect
identical.

In  education  the  economic  laws  which  control  other
forms  of  enterprise  are  not  only  inapplicable,  but  in  many
cases  they  are  directly  reversed.  This  is  the  case  with  re-
spect to  the  motives  and  the  requirements.  In  general,  those
who  most  need  education  desire  it  least,  or  rather,  manifest
the  strongest  aversion  to  it.  Youth  is  the  period  when  the
mind  is  most  plastic  and  impressible.  It  is  therefore  the
proper  time  to  impart  such  knowledge  as  is  within  the  ca-
pacity of  the  mind.  Yet  the  love  of  knowledge  increases
in  children  with  their  age  and  with  the  amount  supplied.
Those  who  have  most  need  least,  and  those  who  have  least
need  most ;  but  those  who  have  most  want  most,  and  those
who  have  least  want  least.  If,  therefore,  education  has  any
value  at  all,  it  is  clearly  nonsense  to  talk  of  leaving  it  to
regulate  itself,  which  is  equivalent  to  leaving  it  wholly  un-
supplied.  V

The  second  class  in  whom  the  motives  to  education  may
reside,  viz.,  parents  and  guardians,  is  a  more  legitimate  one,
since  many  such  do  desire  it  for  their  children  and  wards.
Here  the  demand,  consisting  of  many  such  desires,  may  and
does  secure  a  normal  supply.  This  supply  will  correspond
to  the  demand,  i.  e.,  no  more  education  will  be  supplied  than
is  demanded,  those  who  do  not  desire  it  will  not  have  it,
those  who  desire  it  least  will  have  least,  and  each  one  wiU

ABSURDITIES  OF  PRIVATE  EDUCATION.  587

have  about  the  amount  lie  is  willing  to  pay  for.  Tins  is  the
character  of  all  private  education.  It  is  the  approximately
exact  supply  of  a  greatly  varying  demand.  The  variations
in  this  demand  are  not  only  quantitative,  but  qualitative.
Not  only  will  each  one  obtain  about  the  same  amount  of
education  for  his  children  that  he  desires  them  to  have,  but
he  will  also  secure  for  them  something  like  the  same  kind.
Individuals  differ  as  much  in  their  ideas  of  what  constitutes
an  education,  both  in  amount  and  in  kind,  as  they  do  in  all
other  characteristics.  Hence  all  degrees  and  all  kinds  of
education  will  necessarily  be  secured.

There  exists  one  practical  consideration  which  tends  some-
what to  lessen  the  degree  of  variation  and  heterogeneity  of
private  education.  This  is  the  fact  that  it  is  economical  to
combine  a  number  of  these  varying  desires  under  one  general
direction,  the  children  of  many  parents  under  one  teacher.
For  the  sake  of  economy  each  is  willing  to  yield  somewhat  of
his  own  peculiar  preferences  and  allow  at  least  an  apparent
uniformity.  This  ig  education  as  a  business.  The  teacher,
like  the  tailor,  is  obliged  to  suit  his  customers.  He  lives  by
his  trade,  and  he  must  retain  the  patronage  of  those  he  serves.
The  differences  existing  in  the  desires  of  parents,  and  which
are  nominally  ignored  by  co-operative  instruction,  are  really
recognized  and  respected  by  corresponding  variety  in  the
treatment  of  the  pupils.  A  few  parents  have  a  sincere  and
intelligent  desire  to  have  their  children  acquire  knowledge.
The  wishes  of  this  class  are  complied  with,  as  nearly  as  may
be.  Many  conceive  education  to  consist  in  attending  school
a  certain  length  of  time,  passing  through  certain  books,  and
receiving  certain  certificates.  These,  too,  are  gratified  to
the  best  of  the  teacher's  ability.  Others  have  ideas  of
their  own  about  what  their  children  ought  to  learn  and  are
to  become,  and  require  them  to  be  placed  on  special  diet.
Of  course,  the  actual  capacity  of  a  pupil  can  have  nothing  to
do  with  his  rate  of  progress.  In  private -education  there  is
tiTily  "  no  such  word  as  fail."     For  a  pupil  to  fail  at  an  ex-

588  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  IkfEANS.

amination  would  be  for  the  teacher  to  lose  a  patron  and  a
part  of  his  income.  The  great  laws  of  business  economics
will  regulate  such  matters  as  that.  This  is  the  self-regnlat-
ing  system.  If  a  parent  requires  his  son  to  complete  his
studies  within  a  prescribed  period,  the  teacher,  on  pain  of
having  him  removed  to  another  school,  will  readily  find
means  of  proving  his  superior  capacity  and  bringing  him
through  with  honors.  Children  of  wealthy  parents  must  of
course  receive  special  favors,  and  those  whose  parents  regard
them  as  precocious  must  be  so  marked  as  to  sustain  that  opin-
ion. The  variety  of  text-books  will  correspond  to  the  variety
of  notions  which  parents  hold  about  them,  those  which  each
used  "  when  he  went  to  school,"  however  antiquated,  being
usually  the  only  ones  allowed.  Such  is,  in  brief,  the  general
character  of  private  education,  proceeding  upon  the  economic
principles  of  supply  and  demand,  the  latter  consisting  in  the
desires  of  parents  and  guardians.

But  here,  as  in  the  preceding  case,  it  must  be  pointed
out  that  in  reality  this  law  is  reversed.  The  desire  of  the
parents,  so  far  from  indicating  the  true  need  of  education,  is
in  inverse  proportion  to  such  need.  Those  whose  children
stand  in  greatest  need  of  it  are  those  who  do  not  desire  them
to  have  it  at  all,  and  whose  children,  therefore,  never  receive
it.  From  these  the  gradations  to  such  as  intensely  desire
their  children  to  be  truly  educated  correspond  rigidly  to  the
gradations  in  the  necessity  for  education,  the  case  last  men-
tioned being  the  least  necessitous,  since,  were  there  no  school,
the  intelligence  of  the  parents  would  insure  a  fair  education
of  their  children.

The  system  of  private  education,  all  things  considered,
is  not  only  a  very  bad  one,  but,  properly  viewed,  it  is  abso-
lutely worse  than  none,  since  it  tends  still  further  to  increase
the  inequality  in  the  existing  intelligence,  which  is  a  worse
evil  than  a  generally  lower  state  of  intelligence  would  be.
The  redeeming  feature,  therefore,  is  that  under  its  opera-
tion very  little  real  knowledge  can  be  conferred.     The  less

ABSURDITIES  OF  PRIVATE  EDUCATION".  589

society  has  of  it  the  better,  and  therefore  its  very  ineffi-
ciency must  be  set  down  as  a  blessing.

The  third  and  last  source  capable  of  moving  a  system  of
education  is  the  will  of  society  itself.  As  in  all  other  cases,
this  will  can  only  be  expressed  through  the  organized  author-
ity of  society,  or  the  state.

The  peculiar  aptitude  of  the  state  for  carrying  on  educa-
tional work  has  already  been  mentioned.  Its  rationale  con-
sists in  the  fact  that  what  society  desires  is  what  is  really
needed.  The  object  of  education  is  social  improvement.
Education  is  really  needed  for  the  purpose  of  making  better
citizens.  This  is  practically  the  same  thing  as  the  higher
end,  social  progress,  which  we  saw  to  be  the  condition  to
increased  human  happiness.  If  education  can  not  accom-
plish this  end,  it  is  worth  nothing,  l^either  the  recipients
of  education  nor  their  parents  regard  it  in  any  such  light.
With  the  former  no  desire  exists.  With  the  latter  it  is  some
personal  caprice,  some  parental  pride  or  social  emulation —
an  empty  motive  leading  to  a  fruitless  result.

Again,  society  desires  most  the  education  of  those  most
needing  to  be  educated.  From  an  economical  point  of  view,
an  uneducated  class  is  an  expensive  class.  It  is  from  it  that
most  criminals,  drones,  and  paupers  come.  From  it — and  this
is  still  more  important — no  progressive  actions  ever  flow.
Therefore,  society  is  most  anxious  that  this  class,  which
would  never  educate  itself,  should  be  educated.  The  uni-
versality of  education,  which  is  the  logical  sequence  of  its
enforcement  by  the  state,  will  be  more  specially  considered
presently.

The  secret  of  the  superiority  of  state  over  private  educa-
tion lies  in  the  fact  that  in  the  former  the  teacher  is  respon-
sible solely  to  society.  As  in  private,  so  also  in  public  edu-
cation, the  calling  of  the  teacher  is  a  profession,  and  his
personal  success  must  depend  upon  his  success  in  accomplish-
ing the  result  which  his  employers  desire  accomplished.  But
the  result  desired  by  the  state  is  a  wholly  different  one  from

590  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

that  desired  by  parents,  guardians,  and  pupils.  Of  the  latter
he  is  happily  independent.  This  independence  renders  liim
practically  free.  His  own  ideas  of  method  naturally  harmo-
nize more  or  less  completely  with  those  of  the  state.  Sys-
tematic organization  is  what  he  constantly  feels  to  be  needed.
Uniformity  not  only  vastly  facilitates  the  labor  of  teaching,
but  it  enormously  increases  the  product  of  educational  effort.
The  teacher  also  naturally  prefers  to  see  his  pupils  improve
and  acquire  sound  knowledge.  The  tricks  of  diplomacy  at
the  expense  of  educational  progress,  to  which  he  must  resort
in  order  to  please  the  fancies  and  gratify  the  caprices  of  the
heterogeneously-minded  patrons  of  his  "select  school,"  are
irksome  in  the  extreme.  Freed  from  the  necessity  of  plan-
ning to  meet  such  cases,  he  finds  time  to  plan  true  educa-
tional work.

'■:  Once  more,  state  education  is  far  better  for  the  pupil.
It  is  distinguished  fundamentally  from  private  education  in
dealing  with  all  in  a  strictly  impartial  manner.  The  lowest
gamin  of  the  streets  here  meets  the  most  pampered  son  of
opulence  on  a  footing  of  strict  equality.  Nothing  counts
but  merit  itself.  Pupils  take  their  places  according  to  what
they  are,  not  what  they  are  called.  Public  education  oper-
ates as  a  gauge  of  the  capacities  of  the  mind.  Each  mind
is,  as  it  were,  measured  and  its  capacity  recorded.  A  thor-
ough trial  of  it  would  doubtless  be  of  the  highest  value,
merely  as  a  means  of  eradicating  popular  errors  respecting
the  fancied  superiority  of  birth,  rank,  and  station.  But  this
is  not  its  aim.  Its  aim  is  to  diffuse  intelligence.  The  fact
that,  under  its  undiscriminating  rule,  each  mind  must  find
its  natural  level,  wholly  regardless  of  conventional  circum-
stances, is  simply  an  incident  to  its  operation.  The  child
comes  to  look  upon  it  as  he  looks  upon  other  processes  of
nature,  as  something  over  which  he  has  no  control.  He
feels  that  in  coping  with  it,  as  in  coping  with  other  natural
forces,  his  success  will  be  determined  by  his  power.  It  is
not  something  which  can  be  accommodated  to  his  whims.

r

SUPERIORITY  OF  PUBLIC  EDUCATION,  591

His  tasks  can  not  be  sliii'ked,  or  imposed  upon  other  more
willing  ones.  Violations  of  its  requirements,  like  violations
of  the  laws  of- health,  bring  their  own  certain  penalties,  and
he  learns  to  regard  it,  as  he  regards  the  other  natural  forces
to  which  his  life  is  subject,  as  both  inexorable  and  irresponsi-
ble. This  kind  of  discipline  is  the  most  valuable  that  could
be  administered,  and  does  more  to  square  up  the  character
than  any  amount  of  moral  teaching.

f,  Lastly,  public  education  is  immeasurably  better  for  soci-
ety. It  is  so  because  it  really  accomplishes  the  object  of
education,  which  private  education  does  not.  "What  society
most  needs  is  the  distribution  of  the  knowledge  in  its  pos-
session. This  is  a  work  which  can  not  be  trusted  to  indi-
viduals. It  can  neither  be  left  to  the  discretion  of  chil-
dren, of  parents,  nor  of  teachers.  It  is  not  for  any  of  these
to  say  what  knowledge  is  most  useful  to  society.  I*^o  tri-
bunal short  of  that  which  society  in  its  own  sovereign  capa-
city shall  appoint  is  competent  to  decide  this  question.  To
the  teacher  duly  trained  for  his  work  may  be  left  certain
questions  of  method,  especially  of  detail ;  but  even  the
method  must  be  in  its  main  features  unified  with  a  view  to
the  greatest  economy  in  its  application.  This  must  neces-
sarily also  be  the  duty  of  the  supreme  authority.

If  society  ever  collectively  realizes  what  the  ultimate  end
of  its  being  is,  and  comprehends  the  true  relations  of  the
hierarchy  of  means  to  that  end,  it  will  necessarily  regard  the
distribution  of  knowledge  as  the  one  great  function,  outside
of  its  regulative  functions,  which  it  is  specially  constituted
to  perform.  It  will  concentrate  its  entire  dynamic  energy
upon  it,  to  the  neglect  of  all  those  ends  which,  as  we  have
seen,  must  follow  from  this  one  initial  motive  power.

The  state  education  implied  in  the  foregoing  remarks  is,
of  course,  ideal  state  education.  That  no  very  near  approach
to  it  has  ever  yet  been  made  is  apparent.  Society  has  not
yet  recognized  in  any  well-defined  form  the  first  principle
upon  which  its  title  to  perform  this  function  rests.     It  docf?

592  EDUCATIOIT.-I^nTIAL  MEAN'S.

not  realize  the  nature  of  the  disease  with  which  society  is
afflicted,  much  less  that  of  the  remedy  to  be  applied.

There  does,  however,  exist  a  vague  conception  of  the
superiority  of  state  education.  It  has  been  perceived  that,
where  education  is  left  to  private  efforts,  it  is  limited  to  a
comparatively  small  proportion  of  the  members  of  society.
It  has  also  been  realized  that  in  some  way  education  is  a  so-
cial benefit.  These  two  conceptions  have  already  become
so  definitely  formed  in  the  public  mind  that  in  most  civilized
countries  systems,  more  or  less  efficient,  of  public  instruction
have  been  adopted.  That  of  Germany  is  supposed  to  be  the
most  complete,  but  it  consists  of  the  education  of  culture
and  the  education  of  research,  paying  very  little  attention  to
the  diffusion  of  knowledge.  In  France  public  instruction  is
of  later  origin,  and,  though  of  late  it  has  been  greatly  im-
proved, a  large  proportion  of  the  educational  work  is  still
intrusted  to  private  enterprise  and  to  religious  societies.
In  England,  laissez  faire  principles  so  far  prevail  that  no
system  of  public  education  can  be  said  to  exist.  As  a  con-
sequence, while  there  are  many  intellects  of  the  very  high-
est capacity,  the  masses  are  in  a  state  of  abject  ignorance.

The  systems  of  state  education  in  the  United  States  have
been  devised  by  the  several  States  of  the  Union,  and  are  ex-
ceedingly heterogeneous  and  defective.  In  certain  States
scarcely  any  thing  worthy  of  the  name  of  education  exists,
while  in  others  the  systems  have  attained  a  high  degree  of
perfection.  Defective  as  these  are,  however,  they  have  cer-
tainly exerted  an  immense  influence  upon  tlie  people,  and
done  much  to  render  them  capable  of  self-government.

While  in  all  existing  systems  of  state  education,  disci-
pline, culture,  and  origination  occupy  much  more  prominent
places  than  information  or  distribution,  still  in  all  there  is
doubtless  much  real  knowledge  conferred  and  great  benefit
derived  by  society.  In  all,  however,  there  exists  one  funda-
mental defect,  which  goes  far  to  neutralize  their  advantages,
and  stamps  them  all  as  unworthy  to  be  regarded  as  the  work

UNIVERSAL  EDUCATION.  593

of  enlightened  society,  conscious  of  its  interest  and  its  needs.
This  defect  and  its  remedy  we  are  next  to  consider.

Univeesal  Education.

The  third  cardinal  principle  which  inheres  in  our  defini-
tion of  education  is  that  it  must  be  universal.  The  knowl-
edge which  society  requires  to  be  extended  to  one  it  must
require  to  be  extended  to  all.  Otherwise  the  true  end  in
view  is  not  attained.

We  have  seen  that  in  matters  of  education  the  ordinary
laws  of  economics  do  not  apply,  that  in  many  particulars
they  are  reversed.  In  addition  to  the  anomalies  pointed  out
a  few  pages  back,  we  have  now  to  recognize  the  important
fact  that  the  value  of  education  increases  in  an  accelerated
ratio  as  the  number  of  uneducated  diminishes.  Just  as  the
shepherd  rejoices  more  over  the  one  sheep  that  was  lost  and
is  found,  than  over  the  ninety-nine  that  went  not  astray,  so
society,  when  it  fairly  realizes  its  interests,  will  care  more
for  the  education  of  a  mere  handful  hitherto  neglected  than
for  the  mass  already  provided  for.

It  is  to  knowledge  that  civilization  is  due,  and  the  true
object  of  education  is  to  confer  knowledge.  Civilization,  as
much  as  religious  belief  or  moral  character,  is  a  personal
matter.  It  is  as  false  to  call  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  so-
called  civilized  world  civilized,  as  to  call  all  the  people  in
Christendom  Christians.  Both  these  errors  are  prevalent.  A
civilized  man  must  be  a  civil  man,  a  gentleman.  He  must
be  assimilated  to  the  conditions  of  civilization  around  him.
The  mark  of  a  barbarian  is  not  the  language  he  speaks  nor
the  deity  he  worships.  It  is  his  rude  intellectual  develop-
ment, his  narrow  range  of  views,  his  rough  treatment  of  oth-
ers. Every  thing  that  distinguishes  a  savage  from  a  civil-
ized man  can  be  directly  or  indirectly  traced  to  the  differ-
ences of  education.  From  the  native  Guinean  to  Toussaint
L'Ouverture,  from  the  prehistoric  cave-dweller  to  the  savant
who  studies  his  ancient  abode,  only  differences  of  civilization
57

594  EDUCxiTION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

are  perceptible.  Doubtless  there  are  differences  of  brain-
development,  but  education,  when  long  periods  are  consid-
ered, is  the  most  potent  agency  in  developing  brain.

But  civilization  must  reach  its  object  in  order  to  effect  it.
Left  to  chance,  there  are  a  thousand  ways  in  which  its  influ-
ence is  escaped.  In  sweeping  down  through  the  ages,  it  has
only  skimmed  the  surface  of  society.  The  great,  the  ex-
ceptionally talented,  the  influential,  the  fortunately  circum-
stanced, the  heirs  of  plenty  and  of  leisure,  such  alone  have
reaped  its  advantages.  The  mass  has  scarcely  felt  its  breath.
In  more  recent  times  great  reorganizing  and  redistributing
agencies  have  upturned  the  ancient  systems,  and  civilization
has  been  more  generally  diffused.  But,  in  this,  chance  has
still  ruled  supreme.  Modern  civilization  is  wholly  unsys-
tematic. Those  to  whose  lot  it  has  chanced  to  fall  have  re-
ceived it  in  proportion  to  their  opportunities.  A  thousand
angles  and  eddies  have  been  missed  entirely.  A  large  pro-
portion of  the  inhabitants  of  the  civilized  world  are  still  un-
civilized.* In  every  large  city  there  exist  throngs  of  true
barbarians — nay,  savages.  Throughout  the  regions  of  the
globe  where  civilization  prevails,  there  are  multitudes  who
are  not  in  the  least  assimilated  to  it.  They  are,  by  their  cult-
ure and  conduct,  far  better  adapted  to  Zulu-land  or  the  Fiji
Islands.  They  make  the  great  bulk  of  the  pauper,  beggar,
and  criminal  classes  of  every  country.  Tlie  total  cost  of  sup-
porting, punishing,  and  guarding  against  them  constitutes
half  the  charge  of  all  legitimate  government.

Yet  this  so-called  "  heathen  population "  have  normal
faculties  and  developed  brains.  Their  bodies  form  the  only
attainable  "  subjects  "  for  anatomical  study,  and  it  is  upon
their  study  that  our  ideas  of  the  human  system  almost  wholly
depend.  Of  course,  this  is  a  disgrace,  since  anatomy  should
be  studied  from  the  most  perfect  specimens  of  the  race,  both
physically  and  intellectually;  but  it  shows  that  education-

*  Lubbock,  "  Origin  of  Civilization,"  p.  323  ;  Hugh  Miller,  "  Testimony  of
the  Rocks,"  p.  272 ;  Carpenter,  "  Mental  Physiology,"  p.  108.

EDUCATION  OF  THE  DANGEROUS  CLASSES.        595

alists  do  not  believe  the  immense  gulf  which  separates  these
savages  from  civilized  men  to  be  due  to  any  perceptible  de-
ficiencies in  their  physical  constitutions.

Just  as  poverty  in  the  midst  of  wealth  aggravates  its
evils,  so  ignorance  in  the  midst  of  intelligence  is  intensified
by  the  contrast.*  A  generally  low  state  of  intelligence  is
comparatively  harmless,  since  there  is  a  normal  degree  of
correspondence  among  all  the  parts  of  the  social  fabric.f
But  a  stolid  and  vicious  class  in  the  midst  of  science,  learn-
ing, and  culture,  like  a  "bull  in  a  china-shop,"  presents
such  a  complete  state  of  inharmony  and  unfitness  that  the
effect  is  out  of  proportion  to  the  cause.  Civilization,  like  all
organized  progress,  has  only  been  achieved  at  vast  expense
to  the  social  energies.  Its  constitution  is  necessarily  deli-
cate in  proportion  as  it  is  refined.  Its  differentiation  has
gone  so  far,  and  its  integration  is  on  so  extensive  and  exact
a  scale,  that  it  will  not  stand  to  be  rent  in  pieces  by  internal
discords.  Every  assault  of  savagery  upon  so  complicated  and
expensive  an  organization  costs  society  an  immense  sacrifice,
and  is  felt  in  all  parts  of  the  social  system.  It  can  not  af-
ford thus  to  nurse  a  viper  daily  threatening  its  life.

There  is  even  a  worse  consequence.  So  long  as  society
has  this  burden  on  its  shoulders  it  can  not  progress  in  refine-
ment. It  must  cling  to  a  large  part  of  its  old  crudeness,  as
a  protection  against  its  unassimilated  membership.  It  must
be  perpetually  hampered  by  a  heavy  coat  of  mail  in  conse-
quence of  the  perpetual  dangers  that  beset  it.  This  tends
powerfully  to  neutralize  the  progressive  agencies  within  and
to  equilibrate  the  rhythm  of  its  motion.     In  a  word,  while  the

*  Says  Dr.  Daniel  Hack  Tuke :  "  It  is  constantly  forgotten  that,  while  there
is  nothing  better  than  true  civilization,  there  is  something  worse  than  the  con-
diiion  of  certain  savages,  and  that  almost  any  thing  is  better  than  that  stratum
of  civilized  society  which  is  squalid,  and  drunken,  and  sensual  ;  cursed  with
whatever  of  evil  the  ingenuity  of  civilized  man  has  invented,  but  not  blessed
with  the  counteracting  advantages  of  civilization."  ("  Macmillan's  Magazine  "
for  December,  IS11,  p.  132.)

f  Lubbock,  "  Origin  of  CiviUzation,"  p.  262.

596  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

state  of  civilization  around  them  has  no  tendency  to  raise
the  uncivilized  classes  up  toward  its  level,  but  rather  aggra-
vates the  contrast,  the  presence  of  these  classes  in  the  midst
of  civilization  tends  powerfully  to  lower  the  condition  of
the  latter  and  clog  its  advance.  The  need  of  ridding  itself
of  these  classes,  therefore,  becomes  twofold,  and,  since  they
can  not  be  annihilated,  and  will  not  civilize  themselves,  the
importance  of  undertaking  their  artificial  civilization  is  dou-
bly great.

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  any  system  of  education
which  falls  short,  even  in  the  least  particular,  of  absolute
universality,  can  not  proceed  from  any  true  conception  of
what  education  is  for,  or  of  what  it  is  capable  of  accomplish-
ing. Civilization  is  essentially  artificial  at  best,  and  is  in  no
way  changed  in  this  respect  by  being  artificially  and  teleo-
logically  extended  to  all  the  members  of  society.  The  only
effect  is  to  hasten  its  progress  and  lessen  its  cost.

While  the  equal  distribution  of  knowledge  will  thus
prove  an  imniense  gain  to  society  in  preventing  the  en-
croachments of  the  ignorant  upon  the  intelligent,  it  will
prove  of  equally  great  value  in  preventing  the  encroachments
of  the  intelligent  upon  the  ignorant.  Indeed,  it  is  diSicult
to  decide  which  of  these  weighty  arguments  for  universal
education  is  the  more  convincing.  Either  is  alone  sufficient ;
both  taken  together,  conflicting  at  no  point,  but  harmonizing
throughout,  are  overwhelming.

Looking  at  the  subject  from  the  point  of  view  of  social
welfare  alone,  it  is  obviously  less  important  that  a  great
amount  of  intelligence  shall  exist  than  that  the  data  of  in-
telligence shall  be  in  possession  of  all  alike.  The  end  of
life  is  enjoyment,  not  intelligence.  The  latter  is  only  a
means  to  the  end,  and  to  be  worth  any  thing  it  must  exist  in
such  a  form  as  really  to  constitute  such  a  means.  It  is  de-
monstrable that  intelligence  may,  and  often  does,  exist  in
forms  which  render  it  a  positive  evil  in  society.*  The
*  Tylor,  "  Primitive  Culture  "  (Boston,  1874),  vol,  i,  p.  28.

NEED   OF  EQUALIZING  EDUCATION.  597

knowledge  wliicli  enables  man  to  manufacture  intoxicating
beverages  is  unquestionably  an  immense  damage  to  society,
and  strikes  directly  at  human  happiness.  The  knowledge
which  enables  one  class  of  men  to  enslave  another  class
brings  misery  to  thousands  and  enjoyment  to  but  few.  The
greater  part  of  the  evils  of  society,  which  are  usually  and
correctly  ascribed  to  ignorance,  might  with  almost  equal
propriety  be  ascribed  to  intelligence.  The  ignorance  which
causes  them  is  only  relative  ignorance.  The  power  that
enacts  them  is  the  power  of  relatively  greater  intelligence.

Some  thoughtful  and  well-balanced  minds  will  doubtless
say  of  the  proposed  scheme  of  education  that  it  is  only  one  of
the  many  panaceas  that  are  constantly  being  recommended
by  those  who  see  all  things  from  one  single  point  of  view.
Others  will  wonder  why  so  little  is  said  in  this  work  of  the
great  social  economic  problems ;  why  the  distribution  of
wealth,  rather  than  of  education,  is  not  insisted  upon,  since
happiness  depends  greatly  upon  the  possession  of  the  objects
of  desire ;  why  the  contrast  between  civilization  and  barba-
rism, intelligence  and  ignorance,  has  been  so  strongly  drawn,
while  that  between  wealth  and  indigence,  "progress  and
poverty,"  has  been  neglected.  The  answer  to  all  such  criti-
cisms must  be  that  the  sole  object  of  this  treatise  is  to  arrive
at  the  initial  means,  and  that  even  did  space  permit,  as  it
clearly  does  not,  all  other  means  to  the  common  end  of  all
reformatory  writers,  would  be  purposely  neglected.  And
it  is  high  time  for  socialists  to  perceive  that,  as  a  rule,  they
are  working  at  the  roof  instead  of  at  the  foundation  of  the
structure  which  they  desire  to  erect.  Not  that  much  of  the
material  which  they  are  now  elaborating  will  not  "  come  in
play  "  when  society  is  ready  to  use  it,  but  that  their  time
would  be  better  spent  in  working  out  the  basal  principles
which  will  render  social  reform  possible.  Present  attempts
in  this  direction  consist  essentially  in  seeking  to  attain  prog-
ress or  even  happiness  directly,  as  ends,  without  employing
the  necessary  means.     Their  failure  is  therefore  as  certain  as

598  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

their  efforts  are  premature.  The  fact  is,  that  these  ends  will
take  care  of  themselves  whenever  the  proper  means  are
adopted.  Not  that  they  will  come  without  action,  but  the
adoption  of  the  proper  means  wUl  necessarily  dispose  to
action,  and  action  must  result,  and  of  the  kind  and  amount
necessary  to  secure  the  end.

The  distribution  of  knowledge  underlies  all  social  reform.
So  long  as  capital  and  labor  are  the  respective  symbols  of
intelligence  and  ignorance,  the  present  inequity  in  the  dis-
tribution of  wealth  must  continue.  It  may  be  urged  that,
since  there  exists  so  great  inequality  in  the  natural  capacity
of  the  human  mind,  there  must  still  ever  exist,  even  after
knowledge  shall  have  been  equally  distributed,  a  correspond-
ing inequality  of  intelligence,  and  that  therefore  the  pro-
posed change  will  only  substitute  one  species  of  inequality
for  another.     The  answer  is  twofold :

First,  the  differences  in  native  capacity,  though  admit-
tedly great,  are  small  compared  to  the  differences  of  informa-
tion. The  supposed  intellectual  inequality  is  greatly  exag-
gerated. The  large  fund  of  good  sense  which  is  always
found  among  the  lower,  uneducated  classes  is  an  obtrusive
fact  to  every  observing  mind.  The  ability  with  which  ig-
norant people  employ  their  small  fund  of  knowledge  has
surprised  many  learned  men.  While  there  may  doubtless
be  found  all  grades  of  intellect,  from  the  highest  philosophic
to  the  lowest  idiotic,  the  number  who  fall  below  a  certain
average  standard  is  insignificant,  and  so,  too,  is  the  number
who  rise  above  it.  The  great  bulk  of  humanity  are  fully
witted,  and  amply  capable  of  taking  care  of  themselves  if
afforded  an  opportunity.  In  fact,  it  is  out  of  this  class  that
the  majority  of  the  great  names  of  history  have  been  taken.
It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  sole  element  of  excellence
is  superior  intellectual  power.  It  is  usually  an  average  in-
tellect joined  to  an  indomitable  will,  a  tenacious  persever-
ance, or  an  unquenchable  ambition.  It  is  emotional  force,
not  intellectual,  that  brings  out  exceptional  results.     This  is

NEED  OF  EQUALIZING  EDUCATION.  599

unfortunately  often  too  apparent  in  tlie  labors  of  so-called
*'  self-made  men,"  whose  real  intellectual  mediocrity,  though
overlooked  when  accompanied  with  so  great  energy,  ren-
ders the  results  achieved  comparatively  worthless  and  short-
lived. On  the  contrary,  the  really  best  minds  are  not  the
ones  that  accomplish  most.  They  usually  lack  aspiration,
they  are  too  critical,  too  sensitive  to  the  least  defect.  Great
causal  penetration  and  all-sidedness  are  antagonistic  to  ener-
getic, independent  effort  under  difficulties.  Contrary  to  the
common  belief,  the  most  permanently  useful  and  solid  work
that  has  ever  been  done  has  come  from  such  minds  when  so
circumstanced  as  to  find  themselves  in  the  very  current  of
their  labors.  Had  they  not  been  so  placed,  they  would  prob-
ably never  have  made  the  effort  necessary  to  place  them-
selves there.  The  best  minds  require  to  have  opportunity
brought  to  them.  Those  who  seek  opportunities  and  create
circumstances  do  so  by  virtue  of  emotional  forces  which  usu-
ally accompany  only  average  talents.

It  is  a  prevalent  belief  that  so-called  self-made  men  attain
their  distinction  in  consequence  of  the  adverse  circumstances
against  which  they  are  compelled  to  contend.  The  phenom-
enon so  frequent  in  modern  times  of  men  working  up  from
obscurity  to  eminence  is  supposed  to  support  this  view.
Looked  at  more  closely,  however,  this  argument  is  found  to
involve  a  fatal  fallacy.  It  must  first  of  all  be  remembered
that  "  obscurity "  embraces  all  but  a  minute  fraction  of  the
human  race.  The  proportion  to  their  class  of  those  who
thus  rise  out  of  it  is  next  to  infinitesimal.  On  the  other
hand,  the  class  having  means  and  leisure  is  numerically  very
small.  One  case  of  distinction  from  this  class  would  be  rel-
atively equal  to  all  that  can  be  named  from  the  other.  Yet
no  one  can  deny  that  there  are  many  great  names  belong-
ing exclusively  to  the  latter  class.  It  is  sufficient  to  mention
Lord  Bacon,  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  Alexander  von  Humboldt,
Sir  Charles  Lyell,  or  Charles  Darwin,  in  order  to  show  that
leisure  is  not,  as  is  claimed,  a  detriment  to  aspiration.    It

600  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

shows,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  want  of  it  is  the  great  barrier
to  intellectual  excellence ;  that  poverty  and  monotonous  toil
crush  out  millions  of  potential  luminaries  in  society.  Yet
the  phenomenon  of  self-made  men  is  not  without  its  lessons.
It  teaches  the  average  native  capacity  of  all  men,  without  re-
gard to  rank  or  circumstances,  a  truth  which  is  also  generaUy
ignored  or  denied,  and  whose  denial  is  often  made  an  argu-
ment against  universal  education,  as  is  the  fallacy  just  pointed
out.  The  other  fact  of  the  relatively  frequent  rise  of  men
of  leisure  to  eminence,  and  the  great  achievements  of  such
men,  also  teaches  a  useful  truth,  viz.,  that  if  the  true  merits
of  mankind  are  to  be  all  brought  out,  it  must  be  done  by
equalizing  the  opportunities  of  all.  And  it  should  be  re-
membered that,  while  the  work  of  the  so-called  self-made
men  has  generally  possessed  only  a  temporary  and  fleeting
value,  that  of  men  of  leisure  has  usually  possessed  a  per-
manent and  lasting  value.  This  is  partly  because  all  truly
useful  work  requires  prejparatlon,  and  this  the  mushroom
growth  of  the  self-made  man  can  not  provide.

Thus  some  of  the  most  specious  arguments  against  edu-
cation in  general,  and  universal  education  in  particular,  are
seen  to  rest  upon  facts  which,  rightly  interpreted,  really
argue  powerfully  in  their  favor.

Mediocrity  is  the  normal  state  of  the  human  intellect;
brilliancy  of  genius  and  weight  of  talent  are  exceptional.
To  read  the  current  literature  of  the  age,  one  would  think
the  reverse  to  be  the  case.  All  calculations  are  based  on  the
possibilities  of  the  highest;  the  low  and  the  average  are
wholly  ignored.  Too  much  stress  is  laid  on  the  exceptions,
and  no  importance  is  attached  to  the  normal  cases  which
constitute  the  great  mass.  This  mass  can  not  be  expected
to  reach  the  excessive  standards  of  excellence  which  society
sets  up.  The  real  need  is  to  devise  the  means  necessary  to
render  mediocrity,  such  as  it  is,  more  comfortable.

The  fact  that  most  of  the  important  contributions  to
science  and  literature  emanate  from  men  holding  chairs  in

NEED  OF  EQUALIZING  EDUCATION.  601

universities  or  high  official  posts  with  abundant  opportuni-
ties, and  which  bring  them  into  direct  relation  with  their
subject,  makes  it  evident  that  almost  any  one  else  under  the
same  circumstances  would  have  done  equally  well ;  or  at  least
if  some  would  have  done  less  well  others  would  have  done
better,  the  chances  either  way  being  about  equal.  These
and  a  thousand  other  facts  tend  to  show  that  the  distinctions
now  so  apparent  between  men  are  for  the  most  part  differ-
ences of  position,  of  education,  of  opportunity — artificial  dif-
ferences— and  that  the  real,  or  intellectual,  differences  are
comparatively  slight.

Secondly,  admitting,  as  we  must,  that  such  differences
exist,  and  are,  when  regarded  absolutely,  very  considerable,
we  must  still  insist  that  the  inequality  of  intelligence  result-
ing from  them  alone  is,  as  regards  its  effects  upon  society,
comparatively  harmless.  Whatever  may  be  the  inequality
of  advantages  thus  produced,  they  must  be  due  to  inequality
of  merit,  and  not  of  accident  or  chance.  To  this  none  would
reasonably  object.  It  is  a  return  to  the  natural  and  normal
state  of  things  such  as  prevails  in  the  animal  world.  Each
individual  would  hold  his  natural  position  in  society.  In
this  case,  at  least,  the  natural  is  superior  to  the  artificial  con-
dition, but  the  natural  condition  can  only  be  secured  through
the  use  of  highly  artificial  means  {supra,  p.  473).

In  this  condition  must  also  be  found  the  true  solution  of
all  those  troublesome  questions  about  which  the  prophets  of
a  millennium  have  so  needlessly  and  prematurely  worried.
While  with  advancing  intelligence  higher  views  of  the  dig-
nity of  labor  will  prevail,  still  the  varied  kinds  of  labor  will,
as  now,  differ  in  the  degree  of  talent  required  to  perform
them.  But  the  natural  differences  of  intellectual  capacity
will  be  great  enough  to  furnish  each  vocation  with  laborers
who  are  capable  of  performing  its  duties,  but  not  capable  of
performing  those  of  higher  grades.  The  adaptation  must
necessarily  be  more  complete  than  now,  when  sages  do  menial
service  and  fools  rule  empires.     The  fitness  of  things  wiU

602  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

then  reach  its  highest  stage  of  completeness,  and  servants  as
well  as  poets  will  be  "  born,  not  made."

The  present  enormous  chasm  between  the  ignorant  and
the  intelligent,  caused  bj  the  unequal  distribution  of  knowl-
edge, is  the  worst  evil  under  which  society  labors.  This  is
because  it  places  it  in  the  power  of  a  small  number,  having
no  greater  natural  capacity,  and  no  natural  right  or  title,  to
seek  their  happiness  at  the  expense  of  a  large  number.  The
large  number,  deprived  of  the  means  of  intelligence,  though
born  with  the  capacity  for  it,  are  really  compelled  by  the
small  number,  through  the  exercise  of  a  superior  intelligence,
to  serve  them  without  compensation.  This  is  the  result  of
the  ultimate  analysis  of  the  problem  of  the  present  unequal
distribution  of  wealth.  For  it  is  not  the  idler,  but  the  toiler,
the  real  producer  of  wealth,  who  has  none ;  while  the  man
who  has  wealth  is  usually  a  man  of  leisure — at  least  he  has
rarely  or  never  acquired  it  through  labor  in  creating  it.  The
former  occupies  his  position  solely  in  consequence  of  his  rela-
tive ignorance,  the  latter  occupies  his  solely  in  consequence
of  his  relative  intelligence.  Knowledge  is  power,  and  power
has  ever  been  wielded  for  self-aggrandizement,  and  must  ever
be  so  wielded.  To  prevent  inequality  of  advantages  there
must  be  equality  of  power,  i.  e.^  equality  of  knowledge.

There  are  a  thousand  subtle  ways  in  which  the  superior
intelligence  of  the  capitalist  operates  to  reduce  the  inferior
intelligence  of  the  laborer  to  his  service.  One  of  these  is
by  adroitly  making  actions  appear  bad  or  criminal  when  done
by  the  latter  class  which  are  regarded  as  proper  when  done
by  the  former.  This  is  done  by  giving  the  same  general
class  of  actions  different  names  under  the  two  circumstances,
and  in  other  ways  so  obscuring  their  identity  as  to  make
them  appear  very  different  things.

As  an  illustration,  let  us  take  the  case  of  co-operation.
Owing  to  the  inherent  character  of  the  social  forces  as  exem-
plified throughout  the  workings  of  nature  and  of  human
nature,  one  of  the  means  of  increasing  power  to  secure  de-

NEED  OF  EQUALIZING  EDUCATION.  603

sired  ends  wliich  was  earliest  adopted  was  tlie  union  of  many
individuals  for  tlie  joint  accomplishment  of  a  common  object
which  intelligence  taught  them  could  not  be  accomplished
by  action  in  severalty.  Society  itself  and  government  rest
on  this  principle.  So  also  do  all  the  great  industrial  and
commercial  enterprises  of  the  world.  And  it  is  right  that
they  should,  since  in  no  other  way  could  any  great  results  be
achieved.  But  the  consequence  is  that,  while  the  intelligent
classes  have  co-oporated  and  by  means  of  co-operation  have
become  the  capitalists  and  employers,  the  ignorant  classes
have  worked  individually  and  independently,  and  have  been
compelled  to  turn  over  to  the  capitalists  without  any  equiv-
alent the  greater  part  of  the  value  they  have  created.  In
modern  times  the  latter  are  able  to  perpetuate  their  hold
upon  the  labor  of  the  former  by  establishing  influential
organs  and  molding  public  opinion.  The  laborers  have  few
if  any  such  avenues  of  communication,  and  indeed  could
make  little  use  of  them  if  they  had  them.  Those  who  are
able  to  read  at  all,  therefore,  read  the  organs  of  the  capital-
ists, and,  unable  to  penetrate  their  sophisms,  and  hearing
only  the  one  side,  they  acquiesce  in,  and  even  defend,  their
views.  This  genuine  co-operation  on  the  part  of  capitalists
does  not  go  by  that  name.  In  fact,  it  is  not  called  any  thing.
It  is  simply  recognized  as  the  only  proper  and  successful  way
to  do  business ;  and  such  it  really  is.  But  any  attempt  on
the  part  of  the  laboring  class  to  co-operate  on  the  same  prin-
ciple and  for  the  same  object  is  loudly  denounced  as  a  sort
of  crime  against  society !  The  laborer  is  actually  made  to  be-
lieve that  it  is  so,  and  the  state  frequently  steps  in  to  punish
it  as  such.  When  this  plan  fails,  as  it  sometimes  does,  other
specious  fallacies  are  spread  before  the  public  which  are  often
as  much  more  effective  as  they  are  more  mild  and  strategic,
marking  the  normal  method  of  the  intellect  in  circumvent-
ing the  feelings  and  the  muscles.  Only  to-day  a  leading  Brit-
ish economic  journal  *  is  found  shrewdly  accounting  for  the

*  "  Capital  and  Labour,"  May  31,  1880,  p.  199.

604  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

fact  that  wages  liave  not  risen  in  proportion  to  the  rise  of
prices  and  the  increase  of  business,  on  the  principle  that  em-
ployers have  got  into  the  habit  of  awaiting  the  action  of  the
trades-unions,  and  claiming  that  but  for  the  latter  they  would
probably  have  voluntarily  effected  a  general  increase  of
wages !  The  truth  probably  is,  that  wages  are  much  higher
now  on  account  of  the  power  of  trades-unions,  while  with  or
without  that  power  wages  would  never  be  raised  until  a
greater  loss  was  feared  from  not  raising  them  than  from
doing  so.  This  is  a  typical  illustration  of  the  astute  manner
in  which  intelligence  ever  seeks  the  protection  of  its  own  in-
terests, wholly  regardless  of  the  interests  of  others.  So  deli-
cate and  apparently  disinterested  an  argument  as  this  might
have  the  effect  to  weaken  materially  the  power  of  trades-
unions  by  making  their  perhaps  already  partially  disaffected
members  believe  that  they  would  have  been  better  off  with-
out them.

]^ot  to  multiply  instances,  for  which  this  is  clearly  not
the  place,  it  must  suffice  to  point  out  that  even  government
itself  employs  this  same  means  in  many  ways  for  its  own
support.  One  capital  example  will  illustrate  how  it  does
this.  The  masses  of  the  people,  even  in  republican  states,
little  dream  that  they  have  to  support  most  of  the  operations
of  the  government  out  of  the  daily  labor  of  their  hands.
An  idea  prevails  among  them  that  it  is  the  wealth  of  the
country  which  does  this.  If  told  that  he  has  to  pay  heavy
taxes,  the  landless  day-laborer  or  mechanic  would  at  once
deny  it,  and  declare  that  he  had  nothing  to  be  taxed.  Yet
he  does  pay  these  taxes  in  the  increased  price  which  he
must  give  for  a  large  number  of  the  most  useful  articles  of
food  and  clothing,  for  his  pick  and  shovel,  his  jackknife
and  cutlery,  his  hardware  and  crockery.  These  articles  are
all  taxed  on  entering  the  country,  or,  if  manufactured  here,
their  price  is  high  on  account  of  the  duty  on  similar  articles
of  foreign  manufacture.  Thus  a  very  large  proportion  of
the  revenue  of  the  United  States^^at  present  much  more  than

NEED  OF  EQUALIZING  EDUCATION.  605

half  of  it,*  is  raised  in  sucli  a  way  that  the  man  who  has
no  property  at  all  pays  about  the  same  as  the  millionaire.

But  it  may  be  said,  How  does  this  illustrate  the  issue  ?  In
this  way :  This  state  of  things  could  not  exist  if  every  body
understood  just  what  its  effect  is.  It  is  the  ignorance  of  con-
stituencies of  the  real  effect  of  a  "  revenue  tariff  "  that  makes
it  a  national  possibility.  Government  is  compelled  to  take  ad-
vantage of  this  ignorance  and  collect  its  revenues,  not  in  the
manner  that  will  least  burden  the  people,  but  in  the  manner
that  will  be  least  objectionable  to  the  people.  For  to  substi-
tute du'ect  taxation,  upon  either  property  or  incomes,  for  the
present  impost  revenue,  would  raise  a  storm  of  opposition
throughout  the  land,  and  the  worst  victims  of  the  existing
system  would  be  found  flocking  to  the  polls  to  hurl  the  au-
thors of  their  deliverance  from  power.  The  intelligence  of
the  men  of  property  and  large  incomes  would  certainly  per-
suade the  ignorant  mass  that  the  change  was  an  outrage  on
common  rights,  and  inveigle  them  into  aiding  in  its  defeat,
while  the  man  of  small  property  or  income  would  rather  pay
a  hundred  dollars  a  year  more  for  the  necessaries  of  life  than
ten  dollars  in  direct  taxation.  This,  however,  is  of  course
due  to  his  ignorance  of  the  real  effect,  since  no  one  would
knowingly  prefer  a  greater  to  a  smaller  loss.

It  is  surprising  that  this  argument  from  the  unequal  dis-
tribution of  knowledge  has  not  presented  itself  more  forcibly
to  writers  on  education  and  sociology.  Even  Herbert  Spen-
cer, whose  acute  perceptions  have  probed  so  many  obscure
truths,  seems  never  to  have  caught  the  faintest  glimpse  of  its
bearings.  This  is  evidenced  by  such  passages  as  the  follow-
ing :  "  Are  not  fraudulent  bankrupts  educated  people,  and
getters-up  of  bubble-companies,  and  makers  of  adulterated

*  The  revenue  derived  from  customs  during  the  year  ended  June  30,  1882,
was  $220,410,730,  the  amount  of  internal  revenue  for  the  same  period  was
$146,497,595,  the  amount  derived  from  all  other  sources  $36,616,925,  making
a  total  of  $403,525,250,  of  which  it  will  be  seen  that  the  customs  furnished
more  than  half.

606  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

goods,  and  users  of  false  trade-marks,  and  retailers  who  have
light  weights,  and  owners  of  unseaworthy  ships,  and  those
who  cheat  insurance  companies,  and  those  who  carry  on  turf
chicaneries,  and  the  great  majority  of  gamblers  ?  Or,  to  take
a  more  extreme  form  of  turpitude,  is  there  not  among  those
who  have  committed  murder  by  poison  within  our  memo-
ries, a  considerable  number  of  the  educated — a  number  bear-
ing as  large  a  ratio  to  the  educated  classes  as  does  the  total
number  of  murderers  to  the  total  population  ?  This  belief
in  the  moralizing  effects  of  intellectual  culture,  flatly  contra-
dicted by  facts,  is  absurd  a  jprioriP  *

Without  stopping  to  note  some  implied  inferences  in
the  above  which  do  not  appear  to  be  borne  out  by  the  facts,
or  the  doubts  which  the  passage  leaves  as  to  whether  by
"  intellectual  culture  "  and  "  educated  classes  "  is  meant  the
merely  ornamental  education  which  he  so  severely  character-
ized in  other  works,  or  the  education  which  fits  men  for  the
duties  of  life,  which  he  so  stoutly  defends,  it  will  be  suffi-
cient to  remark  that  no  better  examples  could  be  found  than
those  here  given  of  the  power  of  intelligence  to  aggrandize
itself  at  the  expense  of  ignorance,  and  therefore  no  better
are  needed  to  establish  the  necessity  of  the  equal  distribu-
tion of  useful  knowledge.

Comte,  it  is  true,  declares  for  universal  education,!  but
he  nowhere  clearly  indicates  the  evils  of  inequality  as  a  rea-
son for  it.  Others  %  Ji^ve  a  dvocated  the  necessity,  on  one
ground  or  another,  of  greatly  extending  the  facilities  for  edu-
cating the  masses,  and  even  for  making  them  embrace  all
mankind,  yet  little  more  than  general  principles  and  love  of
system  seem  to  have  been  urged  in  support  of  their  schemes.

*  "Study  of  Sociology,"  p.  121.

f  "  Philosophie  Positive,"  vol.  i,  p.  36  ;  vol.  vi,  pp.  459,  517.

X  Professor  Huxley's  "  Administrative  Nihilism  "  (an  address  to  the  mem-
bers of  the  Midland  Institute,  October  9,  1871)  contains  some  fine  thoughts  and
sound  views  on  this  question,  as  also  on  the  lais&ez  faire  theory  in  general  and
its  suicidal  tendencies.  ("  More  Criticisms  of  Darwin,  and  Administrative  Ni-
hilism."   New  York,  1872,  pp.  57-85.)

COMPULSORY  EDUCATION".  607

Only  in  the  writings  of  that  prodigy  and  prophet  of  science,
Jean  Lamarck,  do  we  find  the  very  kernel  of  the  problem
briefly  and  tersely  laid  bare.  That  the  following  passage
may  lose  nothing  of  its  native  cogency,  it  is  introduced  with-
out attempt  at  translation :

"  Je  pourrais  montrer  que,  tandis  que  I'homme  retire  de
ses  facultes  intellectuelles,  bien  developpees,  de  tres-grands
avantages,  I'espece  humaine,  consid^ree  en  general,  en  eprouve
en  meme  temps  des  inconvenients  considerables;  car  ces
facultes  donnant  autant  de  facilite  et  autant  de  moyens  pour
executer  le  mal  que  pour  faire  le  bien,  leur  resultat  general
est  toujours  au  desavantage  des  individus  qui  exercent  le
moins  leur  intelligence,  ce  qui  est  necessairement  le  cas  du
plus  grand  nombre.  Alors,  on  sentirait  que  le  mal,  a  cet
6ga.rd,  reside  principalement  dans  I'extreme  inegalite  d'intel-
ligence  des  individus,  inegalite  qu'il  est  impossible  de  de-
truire  entierement.  JS'eanmoins,  on  reconnaitrait  mieux
encore  que  ce  qu'il  importerait  le  plus  pour  le  perfectionne-
ment  et  le  bonheur  de  I'homme,  serait  de  diminuer  le  plus
possible  cette  enorme  inegalite,  parce  qu'elle  est  la  source  de
la  plupart  des  maux  auxquels  elle  I'expose."  *

Compulsory  Education.

The  objection  that  universal  education  implies  compul-
sory education  may  be  conveniently  anticipated  here.  Since
all  do  not  desire  education,  the  fact  must  be  broadly  admitted.
But,  when  once  squarely  met,  much  of  its  repulsiveness  dis-
appears upon  closer  acquaintance.  For  what  does  compul-
sory education  mean  ?  As  we  have  already  seen,  so  far  as
the  actual  recipients  of  education  are  concerned,  all  educa-
tion is  compulsory.  It  is  not  this  that  is  commonly  under-
stood by  compulsory  education.  It  is  the  supposed  hard-
ship of  requiring  parents  to  send  their  children  to  the  public
schools.  It  is  thought  that  this  is  an  unwarrantable  abridg-
ment of  the  liberty  of  adult  citizens.

*  "Philosophie  zoologique,"  vol.  ii,  pp.  315,  316.

608  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

It  has  already  been  pointed  out  that  government  usually
seeks  to  attain  its  ends  by  negative,  or  prohibitory,  rather
than  by  affirmative,  or  mandatory,  enactments.  It  was  also
seen  that  this  was  because  all  direct'  efforts  to  attain  ends  are
so  difficult.  A  negative  effort  is  the  first  step  toward  an  in-
direct proceeding  on  the  intellectual  plan,  and,  as  such,  is  in
so  far  more  successful  than  a  positive  direct  effort.  The
odium  of  all  mandatory  laws  is  a  good  illustration  of  this
truth.  Yet  such  laws  are  by  no  means  rare.  They  are  con-
stantly being  enacted,  and  are  more  or  less  successfully  en-
forced. The  objection  to  them  is  often  irrational,  and  is  the
cause  of  heavy  losses  to  society.  The  case  referred  to  above,
of  the  groundless  opposition  to  direct  taxation,  is  also  in
point  here.  In  fact,  the  collection  of  taxes  by  a  state  gener-
ally involves  affirmative  legislation,  and  its  universality  and
success  funiish  a  sufficient  reply  to  the  general  charge
against  such  legislation.  It  happens,  however,  to  be  an  un-
usually appropriate  example  in  the  present  connection,  since
the  same  ones  who  imagine  it  to  be  a  hardship  to  be  com-
pelled to  patronize  the  public  schools  usually  have  to  pay
taxes,  not  only  for  defraying  the  general  expenses  of  the
government,  but  also  for  defraying  the  expenses  of  these
same  schools.  These  they  pay,  with  only  the  customary
opposition.

It  is  the  word  compulsory  rather  than  the  meaning  it
really  conveys  which  is  so  objectionable.  All  action  in  so-
ciety is  constrained  action.  Every  thing  any  one  does  is  sim-
ply a  choice  among  many  things  he  might  do.  Not  alone
by  the  national  code,  but  also  by  the  moral  and  conventional
codes,  we  are  all  required  to  make  constant  sacrifices  and  sus-
tain man^j  important  losses.  If  this  were  always  upon  the
whole  to  our  advantage,  there  would  be  less  cause  to  com-
plain. But  all  these  powers  which  so  absolutely  control  our
conduct  are  perpetually  compelling  us  to  do  useless  things,
and  forbidding  us  to  do  harmless  ones  that  we  desire  to  do.
We  all  submit  almost  without  remonstrance.    Those  who  are

COMPULSORY  EDUOATIOK  609

unwilling  to  allow  the  state  to  educate  their  children  sub-
mit with  the  rest.  "Why,  then,  should  they  deem  it  a  hard-
ship to  be  required  to  perform  the  most  important  duty
which  a  citizen  can  render  to  his  country  ?  But  it  is  not  as
though  this  opposition  were  deep-seated  and  wide-spread.  It
is  only  a, few  even  now  who,  without  compulsion,  are  abso-
lutely unwilling  to  patronize  the  public  schools,  such  as  they
are.  Those  who  believe  in  education  at  all — and  most  men
have  some  idea  of  its  value,  though  they  may  at  first  object,
as  they  would  to  any  change — soon  come  to  see  the  personal
advantage  which  it  secures  to  themselves.  Aside  from  the
feeling  that  they  ought  to  derive  some  benefit  from  the  taxes
they  have  to  pay,  they  soon  perceive  that  they  are  exempted
from  the  payment  of  private  tuition.  Thus  the  dictates  of
pecuniary  interest,  the  most  powerful  of  all  influences,  tend
to  diminish  the  original  aversion  to  public  instruction.  The
few  who  object  on  the  ground  of  conscientious  religious
scruples,  considering  the  entirely  secular  character  of  state
education,  are  not  sufficiently  numerous  to  command  respect.
The  only  remaining  class  is  the  poor  and  ignorant,  who  know
nothing  of  education  or  its  value.  This  class  is  large,  it  is
true,  but  it  is  for  their  more  especial  benefit  that  state  edu-
cation should  be  established.  To  allow  these  to  have  a  voice
in  the  matter  would  be  suicidal  to  the  whole  scheme.  They
are  the  true  game  of  education.  From  this  point  of  view,
paradoxical  though  it  may  be,  every  such  citizen  is  of  vast-
ly greater  value  to  society  than  an  enlightened  citizen.  lie
has  a  negative  value.  "While  each  such  citizen  must  now
be  counted  as  a  negative  term  in  the  equation  of  civilization,
education  converts  him  into  a  positive  term.  His  value,
therefore,  when  reached,  is  twofold.  The  great  superiority
of  state  over  private  education,  from  this  point  of  view,  is,
that  it  can  compel  this  class  to  become  educated.  Unless  it
does  this,  it  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  established  its  right
to  exist.  To  argue  hardship  here  is  to  give  undue  dignity
to  an  unworthy  and  unprofitable  element.     Such   respect

610  EDUCATIOIT.— IITITIAL  MEAIfS.

would  not  be  appreciated  any  more  tlian  a  fine  point  of
honor  is  appreciated  by  a  savage.

But  there  is  another  point  of  view  from  which  this  ques-
tion may  be  regarded.  It  is  due  to  this  class  that  the  state
stretch  forth  its  arm  in  their  behalf  and  elevate  them  to  full
citizenship.  It  is  really  not  their  fault  that  they  are  what
and  where  they  are.  They  are  simply  the  victims  of  the
existing  social  system.  They  have  been  crowded  further
and  further  down  by  the  force  of  unorganized  circumstances.
The  state  has  stood  by  and  calmly  witnessed  the  process  by
which  this  has  been  effected.  It  has  seen  the  social  forces
work  out  this  result,  and  has  not  interfered.  It  has  winked
at  the  inequality  of  intelligence  due  to  the  inequality  in  the
means  of  acquiring  knowledge,  and  now  it  is  paying  for  its
neglect  by  being  compelled  to  support  paupers  and  prosecute
criminals.  Aside  from  its  duty  to  itself,  it  owes  a  duty  to
this  merely  unfortunate  class,  and  it  can  not  plead  the  lack
of  willingness  on  their  part  as  an  excuse  for  longer  neglect-
ing this  duty.  They  can  not  be  expected  to  be  competent
to  reason  out  what  constitutes  their  true  interests.  Society
does  know  and  should  take  immediate  steps  to  secure  them,
especially  since  in  so  doing  it  wiU  secure  its  own.

While  the  scope  of  what  can  really  be  called  compulsory
education  is  thus  narrowed  down  to  a  few  fanatics  and  the
irresponsible  dregs  of  society  over  which  the  state  should
exercise  absolute  control,  there  are  ways  in  which  it  might
doubtless  be  still  further  narrowed.  As  nearly  all  social  ac-
tion is  already  constrained  action,  and  much  of  it  consists  in  a
choice  between  two  evils,  human  ingenuity  is  capable  of
making  much  of  this  latter  a  choice  between  two  advantages.
In  other  words,  much  of  the  action  which  is  now  unpleasant
may  be  rendered  agreeable,  and  much  that  is  now  done
because  it  is  required  may  be  done  because  it  is  desired.
Instead  of  being  compelled  to  patronize  the  public  schools,
parents  and  guardians  should  be  induced  to  do  so.  Even
the  lowest  classes  are  capable  of  being  thus  attracted^  and

LIMITS  TO  UNIVERSAL  EDUCATION.  611

nothing  should   be  left  undone  to  secure  this  consumma-
tion.

The  many  practical  questions  which  rise  upon  the  con-
sideration of  an  absolutely  universal  education,  while  they  are
not  ignored,  can  not  be  here  treated  with  that  completeness
which  it  is  admitted  their  importance  demands.  They  are
questions  of  detail,  of  method,  of  administration,  and  would
require  a  separate  volume  for  their  thorough  consideration.
All  that  can  be  said  is  that  no  practical  objection  can  be  suf-
ficient to  detract  from  the  importance  and  necessity  of  the
end  itseK,  which  is  nothing  less  than  the  completion,  by  te-
leological  direction  and  intelligent  foresight,  of  the  work  of
civilization  which  nature  has  begun  but  is  unable  to  finish.

While  the  word  universal  ought  to  convey  to  the  minds
of  all  a  sufficiently  definite  idea  of  its  meaning  in  this  con-
nection, a  few  remarks  upon  its  scope  may  not  be  wholly
without  use.  Recognizing  the  fact  that  there  exist  all  grades'
of  native  capacity  for  receiving  education,  it  must  be  ad-
mitted that  there  exists  a  minimum  limit  to  the  desrree  of
intellectual  power  which  would  repay  the  attempt  to  impart
information.  Below  this  lies  the  class  which,  while  still  dif-
fering from  one  another,  must,  for  all  practical  purposes,  be
regarded  as  idiots.  But,  while  these  gradations  are  to  be  found
when  searched  for,  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  there  is  any
corresponding  numerical  gradation.  These  cases  of  undevel-
oped intellect  are  the  mere  exceptions,  and  must  be  regarded
as  in  a  certain  sense  abnormities,  or  monstrosities.  The  fact
that  this  class  does  not  admit  of  education  does  not  affect  tlie
other  fact  that  the  great  mass  of  mankind  does  admit  of  it.  It
can  not  be  concluded,  because  many  human  beings  are  so  sunk
in  ignorance  as  to  appear  almost  idiotic,  that  such  are  inca-
pable of  receiving  information.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  no
knowing  what  powers  may  be  made  to  spring  forth  from  such
repulsive  sources.     There  is  such  a  thing  as  latent  intellect.

Throughout  society  there  are  limits  between  which  the
sum  of  intellectual  vigor  in  all  its  manifestations  (faculties)

612  EDUOATIOX.— INITIAL  MEANS.

in  any  one  mind  simply  oscillates.  In  some  minds,  this  co-
efficient is  equally  distributed  among  all  the  faculties  (well-
balanced  minds).  In  some,  it  is  more  or  less  concentrated  in
some  one  set  of  faculties  at  the  expense  of  the  rest  (great  spe-
cialists and  geniuses).  In  a  few,  it  is  almost  totally  absorbed
in  one  single  faculty,  leaving  the  rest  of  the  mind  next  to
idiotic  (prodigies).  In  a  great  many,  the  particular  faculty
in  which  the  mind  might  have  displayed  its  power  never
finds  an  opportunity  to  manifest  itself,  the  proper  circum-
stances never  presenting  themselves  for  its  development.  It
is  in  such  cases  that  it  may  be  said  to  be  latent.  This  class
embraces  the  greater  part  of  those  who  are  reputed  dull,
stolid,  or  generally  uninteresting.  They  have  never  found
their  element,  and,  like  a  sloth  on  the  ground,  their  mental
activities' seem  awkward  and  sluggish.

When  we  reflect  how  few  opportunities  exist  for  the
development  of  certain  aptitudes,  and  yet  how  often  these
few  openings  are  filled  by  men  who  seem  to  have  been
born  expressly  for  them,  dismissing  the  supernatural  view
which  maybe  said  to  prevail,  that  such  cases  are  providential
coincidences,  the  thoughtful  observer  is  led  to  reflect  upon
the  probability  that  there  exist  throughout  society  minds
fully  capable  of  matching  the  most  brilliant  examples  which
the  race  has  produced,  but  which,  for  want  of  opportunity,
never  shed  a  single  ray  of  light  from  the  fire  that  smolders
within  them.  Putting  this  with  many  other  facts  and  de-
ductions which  society  as  it  exists  affords,  the  error  of  sup-
posing that  it  is  of  no  use  to  educate  any  class  because  it  is
now  low,  or  any  individual  because  he  is  dull,  becomes  ob-
vious, and  another  powerful  argument  for  universal  educa-
tion is  furnished.

The  adage  "No  excellence  without  labor"  would  be
equally  true,  though  a  truth  too  obscure  to  have  ever  become
an  adage,  had  it  been  "  No  excellence  without  opportuni-
ty." Where  opportunities  are  rare  and  talents  equally  rare,
since  these  must  join  to  produce  any  results,  such  results

LIMITS  TO  UNIVERSAL  EDUOATIOK  613

are  doubly  rare.  But  talent  can  not  be  created  artificially,
while  opportunities  to  a  great  extent  can  be  so  created.  Un-
less the  circumstances  are  favorable,  success  is  impossible.
The  circumstances  which  conspire  to  create  oj)portunities  are
of  many  kinds  and  degrees.  Many  of  them  are  too  special
to  admit  of  being  generally  produced  and  brought  within
the  reach  of  all.  But  there  are  many  that  admit  of  this
in  varying  degrees.  Universal  education  could  not  fail  to
extend  many  such  fundamental  advantages  to  all  mankind
equally.

There  is  one  such  fundamental  circumstance  which  may,
from  this  point  of  view,  be  regarded  as  the  mother  of  cir-
cumstances. This  consists  in  an  initial  acquaintance  with
the  given  field  of  labor — knowledge  that  such  a  field  ex-
ists. There  has  been  no  discoverer  so  great  in  this  world  as
to  owe  nothing  to  this  circumstance,  none  who  might  not
have  lived  and  died  in  the  profoundest  obscurity  had  not
some  external  force  first  lifted  him  to  that  height,  however
humble,  from  which  he  was  able,  more  or  less  clearly,  to
overlook  the  field  of  his  future  labors ;  none,  who,  had  he
chanced  to  live  in  another  land  or  a  prior  age,  could  have
achieved  the  results  which  he  was  enabled  to  achieve  under
the  actual  circumstances.  The  number  of  Newtons  who
may  really  be  said  never  to  have  had  an  opportunity  to  watch
an  apple  fall  to  the  ground,  may  be  great ;  for  to  the  sons  of
toil  and  want  and  circumscribed  existence,  reflection  even  is
forbidden.  It  is  just  this  initial  circumstance,  this  vision  of
the  promised  land,  that  education  is  specially  adapted  to  fur-
nish to  those  naturally  bright  minds  whom  fortune  has  re-
stricted to  dark  and  narrow  regions.

There  will  come  the  objection  from  the  value  of  time.
Many  parents  commence  to  derive  assistance  from  their  chil-
dren at  an  early  age,  and  others  apprentice  them  long  before
they  can  have  received  the  amount  of  education  which  so-
ciety should  require  of  all.  None  of  these  considerations,
however,  should  be  allowed  to  have  any  weight  except  in

614  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

dictating  a  policy  which  shall  bring  the  minimum  discomfort
from  these  causes  without  in  the  least  prejudicing  the  end  in
view.  Should  the  case  be  so  severe  as  to  threaten  parents
with  pauperism,  it  is  far  better  that  they  be  placed  on  the
dependent  list  and  supported  by  society  than  that  their
children  should  grow  up  in  ignorance  only  to  follow  in  their
footsteps.  The  making  of  a  few  paupers  is  a  less  evil  than
the  failure  to  prevent  many  from  becoming  such.  It  is
still  more  for.  the  good  of  the  children  thus  educated.  For
not  only  is  the  prevailing  child-labor  a  crying  evil  in  society,
but  labor  at  large  has  as  its  only  hope  the  intelligence,  i.  «.,
the  education,  of  the  laborer.

Much  the  same  general  argument  applies  to  those  home-
less and  houseless  urchins  of  the  streets  who  live  by  selling
newspapers,  or  perhaps  by  trivial  thefts  and  sharp  practices,
or  by  begging.  Independently  of  education,  this  class  are
proper  subjects  for  state  guardianship.  They  are  to  some
extent  a  dangerous  element,  and  their  mode  of  life  tends  to
render  them  more  so  when  they  become  men  and  women.
Add  to  this  that  they  are  usually  endowed  with  very  acute
intellectual  perceptions,  and  are  fully  capable  of  coping  with
the  rest  of  mankind.  They  are  therefore  in  a  peculiar  sense
the  fit  subjects  of  public  education.

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  universal  education
means  the  education  of  women  as  well  as  men ;  yet  so  much
is  it  the  custom  to  speak  of  the  male  sex  as  constituting  all
mankind  that  a  few  might  not  make  the  effort  to  throw  off
this  feeling  without  this  statement  being  expressly  made.
The  position  of  women  in  human  society  is  so  absurdly
anomalous  that  whatever  is  intended  to  include  them  must
have  this  particularly  expressed,  else  it  will  be  apt  to  be  in-
ferred that  they  are  excluded.  While  it  may  be  successfully
maintained  that,  so  far  as  universal  public  education  can  be
expected  to  extend,  the  equal  education  of  women  must  bene-
fit them  as  much  as  it  benefits  men,  still,  if  men  really  were
the  alpha  and  omega  of  society,  as  the  current  theories  imply,

EDUCATION  OF  WOMEN.  615

if  women  existed  only  as  the  means  of  continuing  tlie  race
of  men,  it  would  still  be  necessary  for  the  sociologist  who
knew  any  thing  of  the  laws  of  biology,  upon  which  all  soci-
ological truth  rests,  to  insist  upon  the  equal  development  of
both  sexes.  Most  modern  theories  of  human  progress,  if  they
do  not  wholly  ignore  the  laws  of  heredity,  at  least  neglect
one  prime  factor  in  the  workings  of  heredity.  This  is  the
universal  fact  that  the  offspring  inherits  its  qualities  from
hoth  parents  alike.  Any  theory  of  development,  therefore,
that  recognizes  the  fact  of  the  transmission  of  acquired  quali-
ties must  expect  that  where  only  one  parent  has  acquired
such  qualities  the  offspring  will  only  inherit  one  half  of  them.
If  the  full  value  of  the  energy  expended  in  conferring  useful
qualities  is  to  be  realized  in  the  offspring,  they  must  be  con-
ferred equally  upon  both  parents.  Estimating  women,  there-
fore, as  mere  breeding-stock,  as  is  virtually  done  to  so  great  an
extent,  and  granting  that  men  do  every  thing  that  is  of  any
real  value  to  society,  still  not  the  smallest  expense  of  money
or  energy  bestowed  upon  the  education  of  the  female  sex
could  be  lost  to  male  posterity.  Those  who  are  looking  to
some  form  of  artificial  selection,  or  human  stirpiculture,  as  a
means  of  accelerating  the  intellectual  advancement  of  the
race,  would  therefore  do  well  to  consider  that,  in  the  educa-
tion of  all  women  and  their  general  intellectual  elevation,
they  may  find  the  initial  step  toward  the  scheme  which  they
are  advocating.  Instead  of  trying  to  secure  a  superior
stock  from  a  few  thorough-breds,  a  conception  which  is  re-
pugnant to  all  the  sentiments  of  modern  society,  they  should
endeavor  to  render  all  men  and  all  women  as  thorough-bred
as  possible,  and  thus  really  secure  their  object  on  a  grand
scale.

But,  as  already  said,  the  universal  education  of  women
can  be  defended  on  its  own  merits.  The  current  theories  of
the  uselessness  of  women  except  for  breeding  purposes  are
false  and  monstrous,  relics  of  a  worse  than  barbarian  age.
Any   class   of    persons   will    be   what    society   rates  them.

016  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

Women,  in  so  far  as  they  are  ciphers  in  civilization,  are  so
because  they  have  been  so  rated  from  time  immemorial.  The
opponents  of  female  emancipation  are  fond  of  pointing  out
that  women  have  scarcely  ever  contributed  any  thing  to  the
great  currents  which  make  up  human  civilization.  The  at-
tempts of  the  friends  of  women  to  meet  this  argument  have
been  confined  to  the  enumeration  of  the  deeds  of  exceptional
women.  This  is  justly  declared  to  be  no  answer  to  the  above
argument.  It  has  always  seemed  strange  that  nothing  bet-
ter than  this  could  be  produced.  Admitting  all  the  facts,  the
argument  from  the  power  of  the  conventional  code  is  alone
amply  sufficient  to  account  not  only  for  the  paucity  and  inferi-
ority of  all  female  productions  outside  of  the  sphere  in  which
society  has  required  woman  to  move,  but  also  for  the  admit-
ted fact  that  the  brain  is  perceptibly  smaller  and  the  reason-
ing powers  appreciably  feebler  in  the  female  than  in  the
male.  All  that  women  have  accomplished,  let  it  be  distinctly
noted,  they  have  done  in  violation  of  the  conventional  code,
which  requires  them  to  keep  aloof  from  all  active  pursuits,
and  devote  themselves  solely  to  the  pleasing  of  the  male  sex
and  the  rearing  of  offspring.  Yet  who  does  not  know  the
power,  nay,  the  tyranny,  of  the  conventional  code  ?  The  real
wonder  is,  that  women  have  ever  done  the  little  that  they
have.  Certainly  men  would  not  have  done  more  under  the
same  circumstances.

This,  of  course,  accounts  for  the  diminished  brain  on  the
simple  principle  of  adaptation.  Brain  can  only  develop  by
use.  It  must  languish  from  disuse.  The  causal  faculty  of
woman  has  had  no  exercise,  therefore  it  has  not  developed.
The  quasi-scientific  sophistry  which  aims  to  prove  that  women
are  naturally  inferior,  and  which  would  make  ciphers  and
drudges  of  them  because  the  lioness  weighs  less  than  the  lion,
and  the  bull  is  stronger  than  the  cow,  was  exposed  in  a  pre-
vious chapter  (vol.  i,  pp.  657  et  seq.),  and  equally  strong  if
not  weightier  proofs  from  nature  that  the  female  is  the  really
favorite  and  inherently  superior  sex,  wftre  adduced.    Wide

EDUCATION  OF  WOMEN".  617

principles  in  biology  are  only  found  near  tlie  base  of  the
great  kingdoms  of  life,  and  too  often  have  naturalists  gone
wholly  astray  in  attempting  to  establish  universal  laws  from
the  necessarily  more  or  less  accidental  phenomena  presented
by  the  higher  derivative  forms.  It  was  this  error,  or  rather
this  ignorance  of  the  beginnings  of  life,  that  misled  the  great
Cuvier,  who,  as  all  know,  made  the  vertebrates  his  specialty,
while  Lamarck  devoted  his  life  to  the  invertebrates  and  to
plants.  The  generalizations  of  Cuvier  are  now  rejected,  and
those  of  Lamarck  are  accepted.

The  superiority  of  male  mammals  is  a  remarkable  fact,
but  is  due  to  causes  which  many  naturalists  fail  to  under-
stand, and  which  are  little  creditable  to  the  male  character
in  general.  !N^ot  one  particle  of  it  is  attributable  to  their
noble  efforts  in  protecting  and  supporting  the  females  or
their  own  offspring.  It  can  not  in  any  sense  be  said  to  have
been  "  intended  "  by  JN'ature.  Superiority  itself  has  never
constituted  a  jbial  cause.  There  is  no  evidence  that  it  has
ever  been  pursued  as  an  end  from  the  point  of  view  of  "  evo-
lutionary teleology."  This  male  superiority  in  the  most
derivative  forms  of  life  is  simply  a  secondary  sexual  charac-
ter. It  has  been  acquired  by  fierce  combats  among  the  males
for  the  possession  of  the  females.  It  is  this,  and  not  the
labor  of  brain  and  muscle  in  quest  of  food  and  shelter,  that
has  given  the  stag,  the  stallion,  the  bull,  and  the  lion  their
superior  size,  strength,  and  beauty.

Logically  to  carry  out  this  specious  reasoning,  therefore,
which  demands  that  men  shall  imitate  nature,  and  declares
that  whatever  nature  does  is  best,  it  will  be  necessary  for
men  to  adopt  these  animal  ways,  and  again  commence  fight-
ing among  themselves  for  the  possession  of  the  women,  which
is  what  has  given  them  their  present  superiority.  In  this
way  they  may  again  hope  to  develop  their  physical  powers
and  earn  their  title  to  supremacy.

The  sphere  prescribed  by  society  for  woman  has  neces-
sarily rendered  all  her  aims  and  pursuits  radically  different
58

618  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

from  those  of  men.  The  theory  of  life  for  women  is  that  ev-
ery woman  of  marriageable  age  is  actually  married  to  a  man
competent  to  protect  and  support  her ;  that  her  sole  duty  is
to  bear  children,  keep  her  husband's  house,  and  be  ornamental
according  to  his  tastes ;  that  all  labor,  whether  of  produc-
tion, exchange,  distribution,  politics,  or  war,  is  done  by  men,
and  women  found  engaged  in  any  of  these  pursuits  are
deemed  violators  of  the  social  code,  and  their  services  and
productions  are  discounted  proportionally.  Women  are  re-
garded as  wholly  incapable  of  taking  care  of  themselves,  and
are  dressed  in  a  manner  which  renders  any  active  occupation
impossible.  An  unprotected  woman  found  anywhere  out-
side of  her  normal  sphere  is  admitted  to  be  the  common
property  of  the  first  man  who  may  chance  upon  her.  The
sole  object  of  existence  for  unmarried  women  is  marriage ;
they  therefore  neglect  every  thing  else  and  devote  their  en-
tire attention  to  this  end.  They  seek  marriage  with  all  the
subtle  arts  with  which  men  seek  pecuniary  gain.  To  fail  is
to  lose  all  that  life  is  for.  A  woman  who  has  passed  a  cer-
tain age  without  attaining  to  this  goal  is  despised,  and  re-
proached with  an  offensive  epithet.

Barring  all  exceptions,  and  there  exist  many  honorable
ones,  the  above  is  a  scarcely  overdrawn  picture  of  the  pres-
ent state  of  public  opinion  throughout  the  so-called  civilized
world  with  respect  to  women.  Under  such  circumstances,
will  any  one  tell  how  they  ought,  by  any  fair  construction,  to
be  expected  to  do  any  thing  for  civilization  ?  The  fact  that
they  have  done  any  thing  at  all  is  sufficient  to  prove  that  they
would  do  their  full  share  if  the  barbarous  conventional  code
respecting  them  could  be  abolished.  The  object  of  educat-
ing women  is  to  render  them  capable  of  doing  something
besides  laying  snares  for  husbands  before  marriage  and  dress-
ing to  please  them  afterward.  Their  services  are  needed  in
greater  fields.  There  is  work  for  them  to  do.  Teachers  of
the  young  they  must  be,  whether  mothers  or  not,  and  this
universal  function  alone  would  be  sufficient  to  make  their

MATTER  OF  EDITOATION.  619

thorough  and  universal  education  an  imperative  duty  of  so-
ciety. While  the  female  mind  may,  and  doubtless  does,  dif-
fer from  the  male  in  many  important  and  fortunate  respects,
it  is  only  the  emotional  part  of  it.  Intellect  is  one  and  the
same  every-where,  and  the  proper  nourishment  of  intellect  is
truth.  Therefore  what  women  require  as  education  is  the
same  that  men  require,  viz.,  knowledge.

Matter  of  Education.

An  exhaustive  treatise  on  education  would  naturally  con-
sider its  three  aspects,  the  matter^  the  means,  and  the  Tneth-
ods  of  education.  It  is,  of  course,  not  the  aim  of  this  chap-
ter to  constitute  such  a  treatise,  but  merely  to  point  out  the
position  of  education  in  a  system  of  artificial  civilization.
Of  the  matter  of  education  much  has  already  been  said,  the
preceding  chapter  having  been  devoted  to  its  most  general
characteristics.  A  great  amount  of  important  detail  remains,
however,  and  can  not  be  brought  within  the  scope  of  this
work.  To  say  that  a  proper  system  of  education  should  con-
fer the  maximum  amount  of  the  most  important  extant  knowl-
edge upon  all  the  members  of  society,  leaves  the  question
still  open  as  to  what  constitutes  the  most  important  extant
knowledge,  as  well  as  the  question  how  much  the  maximum
amount  is.  Ko  attempt  at  a  detailed  answer  to  these  ques-
tions will  be  here  made,  for  two  reasons  :  first,  because  of  the
necessary  condensation  of  these  already  swollen  volumes ;  and,
secondly,  because  the  symmetry  of  the  work  does  not  require
it.  In  fact,  they  must  be,  after  all  has  been  said  that  can  be
said,  to  a  large  extent  experimental  questions,  to  be  solved
gradually  and  tentatively.  They  must  necessarily  be  ques-
tions for  experience  slowly  and  with  increasing  correctness
to  place  beyond  discussion.  All  that  can  at  most  be  ex-
pected of  us  are  such  general  suggestions  as  will  be  sufficient
to  form  a  working  basis  for  this  really  untried  experiment.

It  has  already  been  stated  {supra,  p.  492)  that  the  two
leading  principles  in  the  selection  of  the  most  important

620  EDUOATION.-INITLiL  MEANS.

knowledge  for  all  mankind  to  possess  are,  first,  that  of  gener-
ality and,  second,  that  of  practicahtj.  To  what  was  said  in
the  previous  chapter  respecting  the  first  of  these  principles,  a
single  word  may  perhaps  be  here  profitably  added.  This  is
in  the  nature  of  a  caution  against  the  mistake  of  confounding
the  general  with  the  abstract.  This  distinction  has  been  so
clearly  pointed  out  by  Herbert  Spencer  in  his  admirable  little
work  on  the  "  Classification  of  the  Sciences  "  *  that  it  will
be  suflicient  to  refer  the  reader  to  his  exposition.  He  will
observe,  however,  that  among  other  radical  distinctions  be-
tween general  and  abstract  truth  there  is  one  which  Mr.  Spen-
cer has  not  pointed  out  because  it  did  not  concern  him,  but
which  is  of  vital  moment  in  connection  with  education.  This
is  that,  while  abstract  truths  are  generally  difficult  to  grasp  by
the  mind,  general  truths  are  usually  easily  so  grasped.  The
reason,  of  course,  is  that  the  process  of  mental  abstraction  is  a
far  more  difficult  one  than  that  of  generalization.  General
truths  deal  with  phenomena,  and  are  in  that  sense  concrete
facts.  As  a  rule,  too,  the  details  of  the  most  important  gen-
eral truths,  the  several  terms  of  the  generalization,  are  famil-
iar to  all,  so  that  the  general  truth  needs  only  to  be  stated  to
be  learned.  The  only  question  the  teacher  need  ask,  there-
fore, is,  whether  these  terras  are  already  known.  If  not,  of
course  they  must  be  first  acquired.  But  from  first  to  last
it  is  dealing  with  the  concrete.  Kearly  all  the  truths  of  sci-
ence most  necessary  for  men  to  know  are  of  this  character,
and  require  no  higher  intellectual  powers  to  grasp  them
than  are  daily  employed  in  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life.

As  regards  practicality,  the  natural  mistake  to  be  avoided
is  that  of  confounding  practical  knowledge  with  technical
knowledge..  The  education  of  information  deals  wholly
with  knowledge  of  things  (objects,  phenomena,  laws),  not
with  knowledge  of  ways  of  doing  things,  which  is  the  sub-
ject of  technological  and  artistic  education.  The  practical
in  the  former  case  means  such  knowledge  as  tends  to  enable

*  Pase  6.

EDUCATIONAL  OURRIOULUMS.  621

its  possessor  to  perform  the  duties  of  life,  to  contribute  to
human  progress,  and  to  be  happy.  As  these  ends  are  the
supreme  concern  of  society,  we  must  look  to  the  wisdom  of
society,  gradually  and  tentatively,  as  above  remarked,  to  se-
cure them.

Prefacing,  then,  with  the  remark  that  all  that  may  be
said  must  be  understood  merely  in  the  nature  of  suggestion,
the  following  highly  latitudinarian  principles  may  now  be
provisionally  stated :

There  should  be  drawn  up  three  distinct  educational  cur-
riculums — the  first  to  be  strictly  universal  and  invariable
and  to  be  restricted  to  such  general  and  practical  knowledge,
within  the  certain  comprehension  of  all  intellects,  as  is  clearly
of  the  highest  value  to  all  without  any  distinction  whatever.
Of  the  body  of  truth  embraced  in  this  primary  curriculum,
let  no  human  being  within  the  authority  of  society  under
any  circumstances  remain  ignorant.  This  curriculum,  wisely
drawn  up,  while  it  must  necessarily  embrace  many  simple
but  important  truths  which  most  men  now  know,  would  at
the  same  time  embrace  a  large  amount  of  information  of  the
highest  value  for  all,  which  the  bulk  of  mankind,  under  the
existing  regime,  never  acquire.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that
such  a  curriculum  could  be  so  prepared  that,  were  all  educa-
tion to  stop  there,  mankind  would  really  be  wiser,  in  the
proper  sense  of  the  word,  than  at  present.

The  second  curriculum,  while  dealing  in  the  main  with
truths  of  greater  depth  and  difficultness,  should  also  adhere
to  the  principle  of  greatest  generality  and  practicality.
This  curriculum  should  also,  like  the  first,  be  universal  in  its
application,  but  should  differ  from  it  in  the  one  particular  of
embracing  many  interchangeable  branches.  Not  that  pupils
should  here  be  allowed  any  election  in  these  branches,  but
society  should  possess  the  means  of  judging  which  ones  are
best  adapted  to  the  intellectual  character  of  each.  The
method  for  securing  this  characteristic  of  the  second  cur-
riculum will  be  explained  presently.

G22  EDUCATIOIT.— INITIAL  MEANS.

The  third  curriculum  should  be  adapted  only  for  those
who  have  successfully  passed  the  first  and  second.  This
must  be,  to  a  large  extent,  elective  by  the  student,  who  is
supposed  to  have  attained  a  sufficient  age  and  judgment  to
decide,  with  the  aid  and  advice  of  the  teacher,  which  ad-
vanced studies  will  be  best  adapted  to  his  life- pursuits.  It
should  embrace  truths  of  greater  speciality  and  detail,  as
pointing  to  some  one  great  class  of  practical  labor  or  anoth-
er, to  be  undertaken  after  the  preparation  shall  have  been
completed  which  it  should  be  the  object  of  education  to
furnish.

These  curriculums  should  be  made  up,  not  arbitrarily,
but  systematically  and  in  pursuance  of  one  general  law,  or
ruling  principle  of  classification.  This  principle  should  be
something  like  the  following  :

Every  thing  that  has  been  made  known  by  man  should
be  made  known  to  all  men.  Not  that  every  object,  fact,
and  law  of  nature  can  be  separately  acquired,  but  that
general  laws  embracing  them  all  should  be  made  known,
through  the  knowledge  of  which  these  details  are  gener-
ally, though  not  specially,  known.  The  primary  curricu-
lum should  deal  with  the  widest  generalizations  progress-
ively diminishing  in  generality ;  the  secondary  simply  con-
tinues the  reduction  of  this  generality,  and  leaves  the  teacher
to  judge  at  what  point  certain  co-ordinate  branches  of  the
system  are  to  be  dropped  and  more  attention  paid  to  others,
and  which  ones  these  shall  be;  the  third  curriculum  still
further  continues  these  processes  of  specialization  and  elec-
tion for  special  ends.

In  all  this  it  must  not  be  inferred  that  abstractions  are  to
be  taught  first.  These  must  be  taught,  if  at  all,  toward  the
close,  after  the  most  complete  concrete  perceptions  to  be
abstracted  have  been  formed.  Nor  must  it  be  imagined  that
comprehensive  truths  are  to  be  taught  without  an  acquain-
tance with  the  terms  which  they  generalize.  In  all  cases  the
bulk  of  the  tutory  labor  will  be  in  furnishing  the  data  for

EDUOATIONAL  CtJRRICULtlMS.  623

these  wide  inductions.  It  is  only  meant  that  the  concrete
truths  instilled  should  be  such,  and  only  such,  as  constitute
such  data,  and  that  the  utmost  care  should  be  exercised  in
avoiding  the  introduction  of  such  as  only  constitute  data
for  special  laws  and  inductions  which  can  only  be  of  value
at  later  periods  in  the  course.

All  who  desire  to  pursue  branches  of  knowledge  not  em-
braced in  the  three  curriculum  s  should  be  furnished  the
means  of  doing  so,  and  society  should  regard  it  as  its  duty
and  its  interest  to  hold  out  to  worthy  persons  every  induce-
ment to  pursue  special  investigations,  including  those  hav-
ing the  origination  of  additional  knowledge  as  their  object.
But  these  should  only  extend  to  such  as  have  already  com-
pleted the  three  curriculums.  No  danger  from  inequality  of
intelligence  could  thus  result,  since  it  is  not  special  and  tech-
nical knowledge,  but  general  and  practical  knowledge,  that
chiefly  confers  intelligence  and  power  upon  men.  Tlie
higher  special  courses  might  thus  be  safely  made  optional,
to  he  pursued  by  those  having  special  inclination  and  suffi-
cient leisure.  For  as  there  are  degrees  of  interest  and  lei-
sure, so  there  must  be  degrees  of  learning.

The  extension  of  all  knowledge  to  all  men  can  take  place,
as  just  remarked,  only  through  the  classification  of  knowl-
edge. Those  having  no  leisure  to  continue  beyond  the  three
curriculums  will  have  already  received  a  course  of  instruc-
tion which  embraces  the  whole  field.  Those  who  go  on  can
only  receive  the  same  knowledge,  but  more  specialized  forms
of  it.  These  special  branches  simply  constitute  the  differ-
entia of  the  general  truths  already  attained.  This  might
be  carried  out  to  embrace  original  scientific  research  on  the
one  hand,  and  strictly  technical  instruction  on  the  other.

One  of  the  most  important  objects  of  education,  thus
systematically  conducted,  should  be  to  determine  the  natural
characteristics  of  individual  minds.  The  real  work  of  human
progress  could  be  doubled  with  the  same  outlay  of  energy  if
every  member  of  society  could  be  assigned  with  certainty  to

624:  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

the  duty  for  whose  performance  he  is  best  adapted.  Many
a  shoe-maker  was  made  for  a  legislator,  and  many  a  legislator
for  a  laborer.  Men  who  are  born  to  be  naturalists  are  made
clergymen,  and  vice  versa.  Most  men  are  out  of  place  be-
cause there  has  been  no  systematic"  direction  to  the  inherent
intellectual  energies,  and  the  force  of  circumstances  and
time-honored  custom  have  arbitrarily  chalked  out  the  field
of  labor  for  each.

The  system  of  education  here  described  affords  a  means
of  regulating  this  important  condition  on  strictly  natural
principles.  This  constitutes  the  special  object  of  the  three
curriculums,  gradually  descending  from  the  more  general  to
the  more  special.  A  school  should  be  conducted  on  scien-
tiiic  principles.  One  of  the  characteristics  of  all  scientific
work  is  a  record  of  observations.  The  phenomena  to  be  ob-
served and  recorded  in  education  are  intellectual  phenomena.
The  mental  aptitudes  of  individuals,  as  every  one  knows,
differ  in  all  ways  and  degrees.  It  is  only  by  observing  and
recording  these  that  the  true  character  of  any  particular
mind  can  be  determined  and  any  safe  conclusion  drawn  as
to  what  mode  of  life  will  be  most  successful,  from  the
point  of  view  of  the  interest  both  of  the  individual  and  of
society.

But  by  this  process,  systematically  and  regularly  con-
ducted, there  can  be  no  doubt  that  such  a  record  would  form
a  tolerably  safe  basis  for  such  a  conclusion.  This,  too,  ex-
plains the  necessity  of  leaving  it  entirely  to  the  teacher  to
determine  which  branches  of  the  second  curriculum  should
be  omitted  and  which  pursued,  the  teacher  being  in  turn
absolutely  confined  to  the  data  furnished  by  the  record.  It
would  be  both  easy  and  interesting  to  elaborate  this  impor-
tant suggestion.  We  can,  however,  only  add  that,  where
the  special  bent  of  the  mind  had  been  humored  throughout
the  second  and  third  curriculums,  the.  danger  of  any  one
departing  from  it  afterward  would  be  in  great  part  re-
moved.

MEANS  OF  EDUCATION.  625

Means  of  Education.

By  the  means  of  education,  as  distinguished  from  its
matter  on  the  one  hand  and  its  method  on  the  other,  must
be  understood  those  auxiliaries  through  which  knowledge  is
directly  imparted  to  the  mind.  Thus  far  we  have  limited
the  use  of  the  word  education  strictly  to  this  furnishing  the
mind  with  knowledge,  and,  so  far  as  this  discussion  is  directly
concerned,  this  is  its  entire  scope.  But  in  one  sense  edu-
cation, as  thus  defined,  is  itself  an  end,  and  is  to  be  attained
through  the  adoption  of  appropriate  means  as  well  as  carried
out  by  appropriate  methods.

This  distinction  has  been  wholly  overlooked  in  all  pre-
vious definitions,  and  those  things  which  are  here  regarded
as  the  means  of  education  have  not  only  been  included  in  its
matter,  but  have  been  made,  in  theory  as  well  as  in  practice,
to  constitute  its  chief  matter.

The  several  means  of  acquiring  education  constitute  so
many  true  arts,  and,  in  so  far  as  education  is  devoted  to  in-
culcating them,  it  is  simply  teaching  art  and  not  science.
In  the  history  of  progress  art  has  appeared  to  precede  science,
and,  if  by  science  systematic  knowledge  of  all  the  facts  and
principles  involved  in  the  given  art  is  understood,  it  certainly
has  preceded  it.  But  this  empirical  progress  is  the  true  in-
termediate step  between  completely  genetic  and  completely
teleological  progress,  between  the  method  of  nature  and  the
method  of  science,  which,  instead  of  being  identical,  as  cer-
tain scientists  suppose,  are  at  the  antipodes.  And  in  general
it  may  be  safely  affirmed  that  wherever  art  is  made  to  any
degree  to  precede  science,  that  is,  where  progress  is  tentative,
to  that  extent  will  it  resemble  genetic  progress  and  involve
waste  and  loss.  That  from  the  nature  of  things  this  must
often  occur  is  manifest,  and  it  can  only  serve  as  a  warning
against  the  error  of  imagining  that  there  is  any  superiority
in  this  method,  and  against  the  tendency  to  employ  it  when
it  might  have  been  avoided.     That  this  tendency  has  been

626  EDUCATION,— INITIAL  MEANS.

potent  in  education  is  as  manifest  as  that  the  a  priori  method
can  not  always  be  employed.

The  chief  means  of  education  are  the  arts  of  reading,
writing,  and  calculating.  In  learning  these  several  arts  the
mind  is  not  in  any  proper  sense  acquiring  knowledge,  al-
though to  most  persons  this  information  is  ranked  as  knowl-
edge. These,  however,  are  really  and  solely  the  means
through  which  knowledge  is  acquired,  and  it  is  a  dim  reali-
zation of  this  truth  which  leads  the  advocates  of  scientific
education  to  contend  so  strenuously  for  the  direct  study  of
objects.  There  is  much  justice  in  this  demand,  and  while
reading,  writing,  and  the  calculus  can  not  be  dispensed  with
as  potent  agencies  in  acquiring  knowledge,  the  constant  aim
should  be  to  reduce  the  amount  of  attention  given  to  them,
and  to  increase  the  amount  of  work  achieved  through  them ;
especially  should  all  devotion  to  them  as  ends  or  parts  of
culture  be  discouraged,  except  for  those  who  have  shown  by
their  completed  educational  record  that  nature  has  marked
them  out  either  for  elocutionists,  engrossing  clerks,  or  com-
puters of  astronomical  tables.

As  true  means  of  education,  however,  these  and  kindred
arts  must  be  duly  recognized,  and  with  them  the  necessity
of  devoting  as  much  time  to  their  acquirement  as  is  neces-
sary for  their  ready  use  in  the  work  for  which  they  are  de-
signed.

When  we  speak  of  education,  therefore,  and  name  its
matter,  it  must  be  understood  that  in  this  is  necessarily  em-
braced the  means  of  obtaining  it.

Method  of  Education.

The  method  of  education  is,  still  less  than  its  means,
within  the  scope  of  this  work.  Good  methods  of  instruction
as  well  as  competent  instructors  are  in  the  nature  of  the
supply  to  a  general  and  genuine  demand  for  education.  It
may  be  safely  asserted  tlmt  thus  far  this  supply  has  corre-
sponded, both  in  quantity  and  quality,  with  the  demand.

METHODS  OF  EDUCATION.  627

The  methods  and  the  teachers  have  always  been  as  good  as
the  popular  notions  of  education,  and  they  will  doubtless
continue  to  be  so.  Most  works  on  education  have  been  de-
voted chiefly  to  methods  of  conferring  it,  and  have  generally
failed  to  indicate  its  true  matter.  It  is  this  department,
therefore,  which  exclusively  claims  our  attention.  To  create
a  demand  for  real  education,  for  the  education  of  informa-
tion and  its  diffusion,  is  a  far  more  urgent  duty  than  to  lay
down  correct  rules  of  carrying  on  such  a  system  of  educa-
tion. Chronologically  it  precedes,  just  as  every- where,  not-
withstanding the  reverse  order  in  which  the  terms  are  usu-
ally placed,  demand  must  precede  supply,  ^.  e.,  desire  must
precede  satisfaction.  This  much  we  concede  to  the  otherwise
eri'oneous  belief  that  education  must  be  treated  on  mercantile
principles.  This  is  because  to  this  extent  it  is  really  a  busi-
ness affair,  and  properly  so.  Strangely  enough,  however,  it  is
just  this  part  of  education  that  a  disposition  has  been  shown
to  treat  as  outside  of  the  laws  of  economics.  The  manner  in
which  teachers  are  paid  and  the  general  attitude  of  society
toward  them  clearly  indicate  that  they  are  looked  upon,  to
a  certain  extent,  in  the  light  of  philanthropists  who  should
expect  to  fulfill  their  mission  without  much  substantial  aid
from  M'ithout,  and  as  a  mere  "  labor  of  love."  Strangely
enough,  too,  the  salaries  of  teachers  are  absolutely  lower
than  those  of  most  of  the  common  classes  of  artisans.

Before  entirely  dismissing  the  subject  of  method,  it  may
be  proper  to  remark  that  the  education  for  which  we  contend
is  an  artificial  education  ;  that  whatever  special  methods  may
be  adopted  it  must  at  least  be  prosecuted  on  one  general
method,  viz.,  the  teleological  method.  In  this  the  educa-
tion of  knowledge  and  its  distribution  differ  radically  from
the  education  of  experience.  Again,  it  becomes  necessary  to
combat  the  views  of  those  scientists  who,  having  probed
deep  enough  to  perceive  how  nature  works,  think  they  have
therein  found  the  key  to  the  way  man  should  work,  thus  ig-
noring the  great  distinguishing  characteristic  of  intellectual

628  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

labor.  Having  found  the  claims  of  those  who  believe  that
nature  is  a  product  of  design  and  outside  contrivance  to  be
unsound,  they  conclude  that  there  is  no  design  or  contrivance,
and,  having  seen  that  results  in  the  organic  world  are  pro-
duced through  rhythmic  differentiations,  they  infer  that  re-
sults in  the  super-organic  world  should  be  left  to  the  same
influences.  Nothing  could  be  more  false  or  more  pernicious.
Scientists  of  this  school,  from  the  weight  which  their  opin-
ions must  have,  are  really  doing  more  to  counteract  the  true
tendencies  of  social  progress  than  those  who  openly  oppose
them.  All  social  progress  is  artificial.  It  is  the  conse-
quence of  teleological  foresight,  design,  and  intellectual
labor,  which  are  processes  diametrically  opposed  in  principle
to  the  processes  of  nature.  If  in  learning  the  law  of  evolu-
tion we  must  apply  it  to  society,  it  would  have  been  better  to
have  remained  ignorant  of  that  law.  In  passing  from  the
policy  of  inaction  due  to  the  belief  that  Providence  is  alone
able  to  act,  to  the  policy  of  inaction  due  to  the  belief  that
Nature  is  alone  able  to  act,  we  have  gained  nothing.  As
well  worship  the  old  god  as  the  new  one.  But,  rightly  in-
terpreted, science  teaches  no  such  thing.  It  teaches  the  uni-
versal dependence  of  all  phenomena  upon  antecedents,  and
it  is  this  law  that  forms  the  basis  of  all  successful  action  in
transforming  rude  nature  into  useful  shapes  and  guiding
wild  forces  into  advantageous  channels.

That  this  correction  is  as  applicable  to  education  as  to
other  things  is  proved  by  the  hostility  shown  to  intrusting  it
to  the  care  of  society  itself  which  it  chiefly  benefits.  It  is
also  proved  by  many  of  the  so-called  natural  methods  which
are  recommended  by  this  class  of  nature-worshipers.  The
idea  that  children  in  this  enlightened  age  must  go  back  to
the  ages  of  barbarism  and  grope  along  as  their  ancestors
were  compelled  to  do  for  crumbs  of  knowledge ;  that  they
must  be  allowed  to  get  all  kinds  of  errors  into  their  minds
along  with  a  few  truths,  because  this  was  the  method  by
which  the  primitive  man  first  acquired  ideas ;  that  education

METHOD  OF  EDUCATION.  629

must  consist  in  a  rhythmic  ebb  and  flow  of  sense  and  non-
sense, in  order  that  the  evils  which  the  nonsense  naturally
entails  may  serve  as  warnings  and  make  sense  preferred ;  in
short,  the  notion  of  making  the  life  of  every  individual,  so
far  as  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  is  concerned,  an  epitome
of  the  experience  of  the  human  race — this  entire  scheme  for
converting  education  into  a  sort  of  social  ontogenesis  is  false
in  principle,  is  not  supported  by  any  proper  interpretation
of  the  teachings  of  science,  and  is  directly  opposed  to  those
furnished  by  every  progressive  step  in  the  civilization  of
the  race.

Nothing  is  calculated  more  forcibly  to  impress  upon  us
the  conviction  that  the  mass  of  mankind  must  get  their  knowl-
edge through  instruction  and  not  through  experience,  nor  yet
through  personal  observation  and  research,  than  to  note  how
such  great  minds  as  those  of  Copernicus,  Kepler,  Galileo,
Bacon,  and  Newton  groped  about  in  darkness  and  doubt  re-
specting the  questions  of  planetary  revolution,  tides,  gravita-
tion, light,  etc.,  with  which  every  school-boy  is  now  familiar.
"Who  shall  say  that  these  are  not  important  and  useful  truths
of  the  highest  generality  and  practicality,  yet  in  order  to
acquire  them  and  render  them  true  knowledge  it  does  not
require  a  long  sham  experience  of  stumbling  about  from
one  idea  to  another  before  the  truth  is  at  length  grudgingly
vouchsafed  ?  For  any  ordinary  intellect,  acquainted  with  the
phenomena  they  present,  it  is  sufficient  to  be  informed  ac-
cording to  what  laws  the  phenomena  occur.  This  is  but  the
work  of  a  moment,  or  of  a  few  lessons  at  most,  and  the  result
is  practically  the  same.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  a  sys-
tem of  education,  to  be  worthy  the  name,  must  be  framed
for  the  great  proletariat.  Most  systems  of  education  seem
designed  exclusively  for  the  sons  of  wealthy  gentry,  who  are
supposed  to  have  nothing  else  to  do  in  life  but  seek  the
highest  culture  in  the  most  approved  and  fashionable  ways.
But  the  great  mass,  too,  need  educating.  They  need  the
real,  solid  meat  of  education  in  the  most  concentrated  form

630  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

assimilable.  They  have  strong  mental  stomaclis,  and  little
time.  They  can  not  afford  to  take  slow,  winding  paths ;  they
must  move  directly  through.  Culture  they  can  get  along
without.  Failures  are  dead  losses.  For  them  every  step
should  count.

From  what  has  already  been  said  on  the  confusion  of  the
true  ends  of  education  with  the  means  of  attaining  them,  it
may  be  safely  inferred  that  we  regard  the  exclusive  study  of
books,  where  the  objects  of  which  they  treat  are  at  hand,  as
both  superfluous  and  wasteful  of  time.  Yet  let  any  one  con-
sider what  proportion  of  the  true  matter  of  education  is  thus
capable  of  being  directly  utilized  by  the  mass  of  juvenile
humanity.  But  in  their  absence  other  methods  must  be  em-
ployed. The  world  can  not  afford  to  go  ignorant,  simply  be-
cause specimens  for  illustration  are  unattainable.  How
many  naturalists  have  ever  seen  an  amphioxus  or  an  axo-
lotl?  Yet  how  do  those  who  have  not  know  any  thing
about  them  ?  They  have  simply  read  and  heard  about  them,
and  seen  graphic  representations  of  them.  They  would
doubtless  feel  better  satisfied  to  see  and  dissect  them,  yet
can  they  be  said  to  be  ignorant  of  them?  For  all  practi-
cal purposes  their  knowledge  is  sufficient  even  for  natural-
ists. Their  knowledge  would  indeed  be  limited  if  they
could  know  nothing  except  what  they  could  see,  possess,  dis-
sect, and  figure.  Yet  how  much  more  is  this  applicable  to
the  great  heterogeneous  swarms  of  non-specialists  that  make
up  the  total  of  humanity  !

The  modern  warfare  upon  books  is  simply  a  natural  re-
action against  the  prevailing  neglect  of  easily  attainable  ob-
jects for  the  illustration  of  truth.  Those  scientific  investi-
gators who  profess  to  hold  them  in  such  contempt  give  the
lie  to  their  professions  by  continually  making  more.  If  they
do  not  realize  how  much  they  themselves  owe  to  the  litera-
ture of  their  own  specialties,  they  at  least  confess  by  their
own  contributions  to  it  that,  they  expect  others  to  profit  by
it  in  consulting  their  works.     In  this  way  they  plainly  nega-

CONCLUSION.  631

tive  tlieir  pretensions  to  discard  books,  and  their  professed
disbelief  in  their  practical  value  to  science.

It  is  also  quite  remarkable  that  the  same  class  of  scientists
who  justly  ridicule  the  claim  of  the  advocates  of  the  ancient
classics  that  it  is  necessary  to  study  them  in  the  original  in
order  to  extract  their  full  meaning  and  beauty,  and  who  com-
pare this  method  to  that  of  taking  the  old  stage-coach  in
preference  to  the  steam-car,  denounce  the  easy,  second-hand
method  of  getting  information  through  books — those  transla-
tions of  Nature's  great  but  ditficult  classic — and  demand  that
each  individual  shall  struggle  laboriously  through  this  origi-
nal text  in  order,  as  they  uniformly  insist,  to  extract  its  full
meaning  and  to  appreciate  its  beauties.  There  is  a  gross  inj»
consistency  in  this  kind  of  practicality.  A  busy,  short-lived
race  demands  the  consistent  application  of  practical  econom-
ics  to  the  entire  educational  system.

COXCLUSION.

The  doctrine  that  education  is  an  active  factor  in  Dy-
jnamic  Sociology  is  simply  a  corollary  from  the  doctrine  of
[evolution  in  general,  which  rests  upon  the  power  of  the  en-
vironment to  mold  the  organism.  For  what  is  education
but  a  quality  of  the  environment  ?  To  deny  its  influence
on  society  is  to  deny  the  influence  of  the  environment  upon
the  organism.  In  enforcing  education  we  are  dealing  with
minors,  over  all  whose  acts  there  must  always  be  exercised
more  or  less  constraint.  They  are  simply  required  to  be  in
certain  places  at  certain  times,  and  to  perform  certain  acts
which  are  foreseen  to  be  destined  to  benefit  them  and  society
in  after  years.  Obedience  to  these  requirements,  no  matter
how  unwillingly,  can  not  fail  to  produce  the  result  foreseen.
The  intellect  and  the  faculties  of  the  mind  are  affected  by
the  external  influences  artificially  supplied  for  the  purpose,
and  the  individual  can  not  by  any  act  of  consciousness  pre-
vent them  from  being  so  affected.  Adults  are  themselves
subject  to  this  purely  mechanical  law  of  education,  and  chil-

632  EDUCATION.— INITIAL  MEANS.

dren  are  far  more  plastic  and  impressible  than  adults.  'No
one  can  say  that  he  wonld  have  been  the  same  as  he  is  had
his  education  been  different,  or  wanting  entirely.  Ko  one  can
help  becoming  acquainted  with  truths  that  are  thrust  upon
him  and  made  to  appeal  to  his  faculties.  Of  course,  open
and  conscious  resistance  to  impressions,  especially  in  adults,
would  tend  somewhat  to  diminish  their  force  and  clearness.
But  this  can  never  practically  occur  in  education.  Usually
there  is  no  resistance,  and  often  the  educational  influences
are  agreeable.  It  should  be  the  aim  to  render  them  still
more  so.

The  problem  of  education  is,  therefore,  reduced  to  this :
whether  the  members  of  society  shall  continue  to  pass
through  life  surrounded  only  by  the  natural  and  unorganized
influences  which  every-where  exist,  by  which  they  are  indeed
constantly  acquiring  knowledge,  such  as  it  is,  and  many  con-
ceptions which  are  not  knowledge  because  they  consist  of
erroneous  inferences ;  whether  they  shall  thus  be  left  to  form
all  kinds  of  undigested  and  unsystematized  ideas,  half  of
which  are  objectively  unreal,  and  most  of  the  remainder  too
narrow  to  be  of  any  value,  yet  to  which  their  conduct  will
rigidly  correspond,  producing  its  legitimate  effect  upon  them-
selves and  upon  society ;  or,  whether  they  shall  be  required  to
pass  a  portion  of  their  early  lives  under  a  system  of  artificial
circumstances,  so  regulated  that  the  bulk  of  the  influences
which  appeal  to  the  senses  and  produce  ideas  will  be  both
reliable  and  important,  and  from  which,  under  no  other  than
the  normal  operations  of  the  mind,  reliable  and  valuable
knowledge  must  necessarily  result,  solid  character  be  formed,
and  the  highest  ethical  and  dynamic  actions  be  induced,
exerting  rigidly  corresponding  effects  upon  themselves  and
upon  society.  It  is,  in  short,  the  question  whether  the  social
system  shaU  always  be  left  to  nature,  always  be  genetic  and
spontaneous,  and  be  allowed  to  drift  listlessly  on,  intrusted
to  the  by  no  means  always  progressive  influences  which  have
developed  it  and  brought  it  to  its  present  condition,  or

CONCLUSION.  633

\  "whether  it  shall  be  regarded  as  a  proper  subject  of  art,
treated  as  other  natural  products  have  been  treated  by  hu-
man intelligence,  and  made  as  much  superior  to  nature,  in
this  only  proper  sense  of  the  word,  as  other  artificial  produc-
tions are  superior  to  natural  ones.

LIST  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  AUTHORITIES
REFERRED   TO  IN  THE  WORK.

The  object  of  this  list  is  solely  to  aid  the  reader  in  finding  the  pas-
sages to  which  reference  is  made,  it  not  having  been  possible,  except  in
a  few  cases,  to  quote  them.  With  this  view  the  particular  edition  used
by  the  writer  is  given,  together  with  the  full  title  of  the  work  and
full  name  of  the  author.  For  the  same  reason  many  works  are  omitted
here,  the  titles  of  which  are  not  so  abbreviated  in  the  foot-notes  as  to
leave  any  doubt  of  their  identity.  To  this  class  belong  such  works  as
are  assumed  to  be  familiar  to  all,  together  with  scientific  serials  and
current  periodicals.

Adams,  Charlks  Feanois,  Jr.

Notes  on  Railroad  Accidents.     New  York,  1879.

Argyll,  Duke  of.

The  Reign  of  Law.     First  American  from  fifth  London  edition,
New  York,  1867.

Baoon,  Feancis,  Lord.

Complete  WorTcs.    New  York,  1869.

Bagehot,  Walter.

Physics  and  Politics.    New  York,  1873.     ("International  Scien-
tific Series.")

Bain,  Alexander.

Education  as  a  Science.    New  York,  1879.    ("  International  Scien-
tific Series.")
Logic.    London,  1870.

Barnard,  Henry.

True  Student  Life.     Letters^  Essays,  and  Thoughts  on  Stxidies  and
Conduct.    Second  edition.    Hartford,  1873.

PRINCIPAL  AUTHORITIES  REFERRED  TO.  635

Badekman,  n.

A  Treatise  on  the  Metallurgy  of  Iron.     New  York,  1868.

Bessels,  Emil.

Die  Amerikanische  Nor dpol- Expedition.     Leipzig,  1879.

BiAOKSTOiTE,  Sir  "William.

Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  England.    (References  are  to  the
original  paging.)

Blanqui,  JtRdME  Adolphe.

History  of  Political  Economy  in  Europe.     Translated  from  the
fourth  French  edition.     New  York,  1880.

Burnet,  Thomas.

The  Sacred  Theory  of  the  Earth.     Sixth  edition.     London,  1720.

Butlee,  Clemkut  Mooee.

Inner  Rome.     Philadelphia,  1866.

Butler,  Joseph.

The  Analogy  of  Eeligion,  Natural  and  Revealed,  to  the  Constitu-
tion and  Course  of  Nature.     Philadelphia,  1857.

Oabanis,  p.  J.  G.

Rapports  du  physique  et  du  moral  de  Vhomme.    Seconde  Edition.
Paris,  1805.

Carver,  Jonathan.

Travels  through  the  Interior  Parts  of  North  America,  in  the  Tears
1766,  1767,  and  1768.     Second  edition.     London,  1779.

Challis,  James.

Principles  of  Mathematics  and  Physics.     Cambridge  [Eng.],  1869.

"  Common  Sense  "  [John  Hampden  (?)].

Theoretical  Astronomy  examined  and  exposed.     London,  1869  (?).

Comte,  Attguste.

Gours  de  Philosophic  Positive.    Troisieme  Edition.    Paris,  1869.

Condillao,  E.  B.  de.

La  Langue  des  Calculs.     Basle  et  Paris,  1799.

Cooke,  Josiah  P.

The  New  Chemistry.    New  York,  1876.     ("  International  Scientific
Series.'")

Cousin,  Victor.

Du  vrai,  du  lean  et  du  Men.    Cinquidme  Edition.    Paris,  1856.

636  PRINCIPAL  AUTHORITIES  REFERRED  TO.

Dabwin,  Chaeles  Robebt.

Journal  of  Researches  into  the  Natural  History  and  Geology  of  the
Countries  visited  during  the  Voyage  of  II.  M.  S.  Beagle.  New
York,  1871.

On  the  Origin  of  Species  hy  Means  of  Natural  Selection,  or  the  Pres-
ervation of  Favored  Races  in  the  Struggle  for  Life.  New  York,
1871.

The  Descent  of  Man.,  and  Selection  in  Relation  to  Sex.  New  York,
1871.

Disraeli,  Benjamin,  Earl  of  Beaconsfield.
Lothair.    New  York,  1870.

Donaldson,  James.

Lectures  on  the  History  of  Education  in  Prussia  and  England,  and
Jcindred  topics.    London,  1874.

DoxiiEE,  Louis.

Memoire  sur  les  tardigrades.  Paris,  1842.  (In  "Annales  des
sciences  naturelles."  Seconde  s6rie.  "Zoologie,"  vols,  xiv,  xvii,
and  xviii.     Paris,  1840-'42.)

Dbapee,  John  W.

History  of  the  Conflict  between  Religion  and  Science.  New  York,
1875.     ("  International  Scientific  Series.")

EnRENBERG,  C.  G.

Hie  Infusionsthierehen  als  vollTcommene  Organismen.    Leipzig,  1838.
Ennius,  Quintus.

Quinti  Ennii  reliquim  quae  extant  omnes,  ex  editionibiis  variis  con-
quisitoB  a  J.  A.  Giles.     Oxonisa,  1834.

E^NELON,  FfiANgOIS   DE   SaLIGNAO   DE   LA    MoTHE.

Les  aventures  de  TeUmaque  fils  d'  Ulysse.    Paris,  1796.
Field  and  Forest.    Washington,  D.  C,  1875-1878.    (Published  inontUj.)
FiSKE,  John.

Outline  of  Cosmic  Philosophy.     Boston,  1875.

The  Unseen  World.     Boston,  1876.
Flammarion,  Camille.

Histoire  du  eiel.    Paris,  1872.
Ganot,  Adolphe,

Elementary  Treatise  on  Physics.     Ninth  edition.    Translated  hy  E.
Atkinson.    London,  1879.
GooDE,  G.  Brown,  and  "W.  O.  Atwateb.

A  History  of  the  Menhaden.    New  York,  1880.

PRINCIPAL  AUTHOKITIES  KEFERRED  TO.  637

Gray,  Asa.

Darwiniana.    New  York,  1877.

GuizoT,  F.  P.  G.

Histoire  de  la  civilisation  en  France.  Troisidme  Edition.  Paris,
1843.

Haeokel,  Eexst.

Naturliche  ScJidpfungsgeschicTite.     Ftlnfte  Auflage.     Berlin,  1874.

Anthropogenic  oder  EntwichelungsgescliicMe  des  Menschen.  Leip-
zig, 1874.

J)ie  heutige  BntwicJcelungslehre  im  VerJidltnisse  zur  Gesammtwia-
aenschaft.  Vortrag  in  der  ersten  offentlichen  Sitzung  derfunfzig-
sten  Versammlung  Deutscher  Naturf or  seller  und  Aerzte  zu  Miin-
chen  am  18.  September^  1877.     Stuttgart,  1877.

Das  ProtistenreicJi.  Eine  populdre  Uebersicht  uber  das  Formen-
gehiet  der  niedersten  Lebewesen.  Mit  einem  wissenschaftlichen
AnTiange :  Si/stem  der  Protisten.    Leipzig,  1878.

Hamilton-,  Sir  "William.

Lectures  on  Metaphysics.  Edited  by  H.  L.  Mansel  and  John  Veitch.
Edinburgh  and  London,  1859.

Hampdeit,  Jonisr.

See  "  Common  Sense."

HoBBES,  Thomas.

English  Worls.     London,  1839-1845.

IIuMBOLDT,  Alexander  von.
Kosmos.     Stuttgart,  1870.
Ansichten  der  Natur.     Stuttgart,  1871.

Hunt,  Thomas  Steret.

Chemical  and  Geological  Essays.    Second  edition.    Salem,  1878.
Huxley,  Thomas  Henry.

Evidence  as  to  Marc's  Place  in  Nature.     New  York,  1863.

More  Criticisms  on  Darwin,  and  Administrative  Nihilism.  New
York,  1872.

Jbvons,  W.  Stanley.

Theory  of  Political  Economy.     Second  edition.    London,  1880.
JussiEu,  Adrien  de.

Cours  elementaire  de  Botanique.    Paris,  1840.
Kames,  Henry  Home,  Lord.

Sketches  of  the  History  of  Man.     Edinburgh,  1788.

638  PRINCIPAL  AUTHORITIES  REFERRED  TO.

Kant,  Immanuel.

Allgemeine  Naturgeschichte  und  Theorie  des  Eimmels.     Konigs-

berg,  1Y55.
Kritik  der  Urtheilskraft.     Konigsberg,  1790.
Kritik  der  reinen  Vernun/t.     Leipzig,  1868.

Lamaeok,  Jean.

Philo8ophie  zoologique.    Nouvelle  Edition.    Paris,  1873.

Laplace,  P.  S.,  Marquis  de.

Exposition  du  sysUme  du  monde.    Sixi^me  Edition.    Paris,  1835.

Leeot,  Geoeges.

Lettres  sur  les  animaux.    Quatrieme  Edition.  Paris,  1862.

Lewes,  Geobge  Henbt.

Prohlems  of  Life  and  Mind.    First  Series.     "  The  Foundations  of
a  Creed,"  Vol.  IL    Boston,  1875.

LooMis,  Elias.

Elements  of  Natural  Philosophy.    Fifth  edition.    New  York,  1867.
A  Treatise  on  Algebra.     Thirtieth  edition.     New  York,  1858.

Lubbock,  Sir  John.

The  Origin  of  Civilization^  and  t?ie  Primitive  Condition  of  Man.
New  York,  1871.

Ltell,  Sir  Chaelks.

Travels  in  North  America.     New  York,  1856.

The  Geological  Evidences  of  the  Antiquity  of  Man.    Philadelphia,

1863.
Principles  of  Geology.    Eleventh  edition.    New  York,  1872.

Macatjlat,  Thomas  B.,  Lord.

Essay  on  the  Life  of  Lord  Bacon.     "  Essays,"  Vol.  II.     Philadel-
phia, 1841-1844.

M'Faelane,  Pateiok.

Primary  and  Present    State  of  the  Solar  System.     Edinburgh
[1853  (?)].

M'Lennan,  John  F.

Primitive  Marriage.     Edinburgh,  1865.
Malthus,  Thomas  R.

Essay  on  the  Principle  of  Population.  Fifth  edition.  London,  1817.
Meehan,  Thomas.

Native  Flowers  and  Ferns  of  the  United  States.    Boston,  1878-'79 ;
PhUadelphia,  1880.

PRINCIPAL  AUTHORITIES  REFERRED  TO.  639

Mill,  John  Stuaet.

Auguite  Comte  and  Positivism.    Pliiladelpliia,  1866.

Miller,  Hugh.

Testimony  of  the  Rocks.     Boston,  1857.

MiLLEB,  W.  A.

Elements  of  Chem,istry.    London,  1855-'57.

MiTAKT,  St.  Geoege.

Lessons  in  Elementary  Anatomy.    London,  1873.

MoEGAN,  Lewis  H.

Hotises  and  House-Life  of  the  North  American  Aborigines.  Wash-
ington, 1881.  "  Contributions  to  North  American  Ethnology,"
vol.  iv.

Newcomb,  Simon.

Popular  Astronomy.     New  York,  1878.

Roche,  Antonin.

Histoire  des  principaux  ecrivaina  Frangais.  Paris,  1867.
Sachs,  Julius.

Lehrhuch  der  Botanih.  Yierte  Auflage.  Leipzig,  1874.
Samson,  G.  "W.

Elements  of  Art  Criticism.    Abridged  edition.    Philadelphia,  1868.

SlDGWICK,  HeNEY.

Methods  of  Ethics.     London,  1874.
SiMCOx,  Edith,

Natural  Law.    An  Essay  in  Ethics.    London,  1877.
Spencee,  Heebeet.

Classification  of  the  Sciences^  to  which  are  added  Reasons  for  dis-
senting from  the  Philosophy  of  M.  Comte.  (Dated  March  12,
1864,  separate;  now  bound  with  the  "Essays,"  q.  ■».)

Essays,  Moral,  Political,  and  Esthetic.     New  York,  1882.

Education,  Intellectual,  Moral,  and  Physical.     New  Y'ork,  1866.

Social  Statics.     New  York,  1868.

First  Principles.     New  York,  1874.

Principles  of  Biology.     New  York,  1873.

Principles  of  Psychology.     New  York,  1873.

Principles  of  Sociology.     Vol.  I.     New  York,  1877.

Ceremonial  Institutions.    London,  1879.

Data  of  Ethics.     New  York,  1879.

Study  of  Sociology.  New  York,  1880.  ("  International  Scientific
Series.")

640  PRINCIPAL  AUTHORITIES  REFERRED  TO.

SuixT,  James.

Pessimism.    A  History  and  a  Criticism.    London,  1877.

Tylob,  Edwakd  B.

Primitive  Culture.  London,  1871,  and  Boston,  1874.  (The  foot-
notes state  which  edition  is  referred  to.)

Researches  into  the  Early  History  of  Mankind.  London,  1870,
and  New  York,  1878.

VOLTAIBE,  F.  M.  ArOUET  DE.

(Euvres  completes.    Paris,  1784.

Wallace,  Alfeed  Russel.

Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Natural  Selection.    A  Series  of
Essays.    London,  1870.
Waed,  Lesteb  F.

Guide  to  the  Flora  of  Washington  and  Vicinity.  Washington,
D.  C,  1881.    ("  Bulletin  of  the  U.  S.  National  Musenm,"  No.  22.)

Watland,  Fbancis.

Elements  of  Moral  Science.    Boston,  1867.

Whatelt,  Richabd.

Elements  of  Logic.  Reprinted  from  the  ninth  edition.  Louisville,
1854.

White,  Akdkew  D.

The  Warfare  of  Science.    New  York,  1876.

Winchell,  Alexander.

Reconciliation  of  Science  and  Religion.    New  York,  1877.

YOUMANS,  Edwaed  L.

A  Class-Booh  of  Chemistry.    New  York,  1867.

H^TDEX.

ABDALLAH  of  the  Sea,  ii,  299.
Absolute  ethics,  i,  217;  ii,  248,
377.

— ,  The,  i,  156 ;  ii,  258.

Abstract  right,  ii,  352.

Absurdities  of  private  education,  ii,
586.

Accessories  to  production,  i,  565.

Accommodation  as  a  function  of  gov-
ernment, ii,  216,  229,  231,  241,
245.

approaches  the  func-
tion of  amelioration,  ii,  245.

Accumulation  of  facts,  Disadvantages
of  the,  i,  5.

Acer  dasycarpum.  Winter  blooming  of,
ii,  60.

Acids  the  first  organic  group  to  be  de-
veloped, i,  306.

Acoustics,  Novel  place  assigned  to,  by
Comte,  i,  115.

— ,  Similarity  between  the  equations  of,
and  those  of  heat,  i,  115.

Acquisition  the  chief  object  of  volun-
tary action,  i,  497,  503,  507,  512.

—  distinguished  from  production,  i,
497,  507.

— ,  Modes  of,  i,  498,  503,  507  ;  ii,  477,
535.

,  Softening  of   the,   through

civilization,  i,  577,  582.

,  Non-industrial,  i,  581,  583.

— ,  Low  grade  of  intelligence  required
for,  i,  620.

Actinosphaerium,  ii,  151.

Action,  ii,  308.

— ,  Statement  of  the  naked  laws  of,
shocks  the  civilized  mind,  i,  76,  77.

— ,  Habitual,  how  causedj  i,  185,  188.

— ,  Automatic,  i,  186,  189 ;  ii,  312,  314,
316.

59

Action,  Fundamental  principles  of,  i,
469,  473 ;  ii,  77,  90,  127,  132,  133,
146.

— ,  Primary  motives  to,  i,  496.

— ,  Basis  of,  ii,  90.

—  distinguished  from  motion,  ii,  90.
— ,  Obstacles  to  successful,  ii,  92.
— ,  Dynamic,  defined,  ii,  108.

— ,  Direct  means  to  progressive,  ii,  400.

—  determined  by  opinion,  ii,  401.

— ,  Attempts  to  influence,  directly,  ii,
546.

— ,  All,  constrained,  ii,  608.

Actions  the  effects  of  antecedent  causes,
i,  29;  ii,  320,401.

— ,  Un-moral,  of  savages,  ii,  280.

— ,  Progressive,  a  limited  class,  ii,  310.

— ,  Moral,  or  ethical,  ii,  311,  312,  313,
314.

— ,  Intellectual,  ii,  311.

— ,  Classification  of,  ii,  312,  314.

— ,  Indifferent,  ii,  312,  314,  373,  374.

— ,  Non-moral,  ii,  313,  314.

— ,  Normal  (Just  and  unjust),  distin-
guished from  supra-normal  (benefi-
cent and  maleficent),  ii,  313,  314,
342.

— ,  Statical,  ii,  313,  314,  374.

— ,  Dynamic,  ii,  313,  314,  376.

— ,  Egoistic  and  altruistic,  ii,  314,  342,
343.

—  of  animals,  ii,  329,  331.
children,  ii,  329,  330,  831.

— ,  The  three  cases  in  which  human
and  animal,  agree,  ii,  331.

— ,  Regularity  of  human,  ii,  336,

Active  distinguished  from  passive  so-
cial dynamics,  i,  56,  137,  456.

Adams,  Charles  Francis,  Jr.,  on  railroad
accidents,  ii,  208.

Adaptation,  ii,  1,

G42

INDEX.

Adaptation,  All  progress  brought  about
by,  i,  72.

— ,  Active  and  passive,  i,  72.

— ,  Ambiguity  of  the  word,  i,  72 ;  ii,
25,  46.

— ,  Incomplete  or  defective,  in  nature,
i,  173,  648 ;  ii,  8, 16,  49,  59,  72,  271.

— ,  Difficulty  experienced  in  compre-
hending, ii,  7.

— ,  Fundamental  nature  of,  ii,  8,  37.

—  itself  a  paradox,  ii,  25.

—  to  environment,  greater  in  animals
than  in  men,  ii,  48.

—  of  feeling  to  function,  ii,  51.
Adulteration  of  food,  ii,  169.
Advantage,  Ethics  based  on,  ii,  445.
— ,  Scope  of  the,  as  a  variant  in  the

ethical  formula,  ii,  445.
— ,  Right  measured  by,  among  savages,
ii,  446.

—  the  true  test  of  the  natural,  ii,  473,
538.

.(Esthetic  forces,  i,  471,  472,  482,  666,
668.

—  sentiments,  Late  appearance  of,  i,
393,  672.

,  Origin  of,  ii,  127.

Affection  as  a  social  factor,  i,  395.

Agassiz,  Louis,  the  last  defender  of  the
cataclysm  theory,  i,  49.

,  on  the  multiple  origin  of  the  hu-
man races,  i,  423,  442.

Agencies,  Social,  ii,  167.

Aggregation,  Laws  of,  i,  222,  228,  232.

— ,  Compound,  i,  234.

— ,  Units  of,  i,  234.

— ,  Orders  of,  i,  234.

—  distinguished  from  evolution,  i,  248.

—  opposed  to  segregation,  i,  248.
— ,  Secondary,  i,  300,  469.

— ,  a  process  of  recompounding,  i,  310,

336,  350.
— ,  Nutrition  and  reproduction  forms

of,  i,  317.
— ,  Organic,  i,  336,  338.

—  in  plants  and  animals,  i,  337.

— ,  Parasitic  life  a  form  of,  i,  350,  355.
— ,  Comprehensiveness  of  the  process

of,  i,  355.
— ,  Psychological,  i,  403.
— ,  Tertiary,  i,  448.

compared  with  secondary,  i,  469.

Agricultural  stage  of  social  progress,  i,

490,  541,  660.
Akkas,  i,  418.
Alali,  i,  444.

Albuminoids,  Constitution  of  the,  i,
306.

Alcohol,  the  difficulty  of  its  manufact-
ure a  fortunate  fact,  ii,  67.

Alcohols,  Chemical  constitution  of  the,
i,  306.

Alexandrian  Library,  ii,  272,  303.

Algebra,  Comte's  treatment  of,  i,  107.

— ,  Invention  of,  ii,  387.

Allbut,  T.  Clifford,  his  definition  of  ed-
ucation, ii,  555.

Allman,  G.  J.,  Dualistic  views  of,  ii,  31.

Allotropism,  i,  289,  360.

Alms-giving,  Evil  effects  of,  ii,  447.

Alphabet,  Origin  of  the,  ii,  184.

Altropathy,  ii,  371.

Altruism  and  egoism,  i,  14,  891 ;  ii,
368.

— ,  The  word,  invented  by  Comte,  i,
123.

— ,  Origin  and  genesis  of,  ii,  14.

— ,  Alleged  connection  of,  with  the  re-
productive function,  ii,  338,

— ,  Male,  ii,  339.

— ,  Negative  and  positive,  ii,  843.

— ,  Egoistic  basis  of,  ii,  368.

— ,  Luxury  of,  ii,  370.

— ,  Importance  of,  overestimated,  ii,
371.

—  greater  in  thought  than  in  action,
ii,  445.

— ,  Instinctive,  ii,  446.
— ,  confined  to  the  most  enlightened
individuals,  ii,  447.

—  never  can  become  the  predominant
sentiment,  ii,  536.

— ,  incompatible  with  self-protection,

ii,  536.
Altruistic  actions,  ii,  369.
Amber-trade  of  the  ancients,  i,  667.
Ambition,  Psychological  position  of,  i,

679.
— ,  Uses  of,  ii,  341.

Amelioration  of  the  condition  of  soci-
ety in  the  past  not  appreciable,  i,  29.
America  not    recognized    in    Comte's

scheme  of  philosophic  progress,   i,

93.
— ,  Discovery  of,  by  the  Northmen,  i,

570.
Ammonia,  Important  function  of,  in

organic  economy,  i,  274.
Ammonium,  i,  289.
Amoebae,  i,  325.
Amoeboid  cells,  i,  368.
Amphioxus,  i,  338.

INDEX.

643

Analogy,  Reasoning  by,  i,  191,
Anarchic  stage  of  society,  i,  466.
Anarchy,  the  earliest  past  and  latest

future  state  of  society,  ii,  235.
Ancestor-worship,  i,  203  ;  ii,  259.
Ancients,   not  acquainted   with  many

articles  now  regarded  as  necessities,

ii,  199.
— ,  Intellectual  capacity  of  the,  ii,  476,

480.
Andaman-Islanders,  i,  418.
Andrarchy,  ii,  230.
Anemone  Hepatica,  ii,  60.
Anger,  Uses  of,  ii,  340.
— ,  Indignation  as  a  form  of,  i,  341.
Animal  and  vegetable,  Inadequacy  of

the  terms,  i,  34'7.

—  foods,  Sources  of,  i,  536.
,  Production  of,  i,  544.

,  Arts  practiced  in  obtaining,  i,

649.

—  population  of  the  globe,  i,  546  ;  ii,
132.

Animality,  Struggle  between  humanity

and,  i,  132.
Animals  distinguished  from  plants,  i,

334,  337,  340,  349,  350,  355,  856.

protists,  i,  349.

— ,  Mindin,  i,  415;  ii,  346.

— ,  a  true  aristocracy  in  the  organic

world,  i,  596.
— ,  Man's  warfare  with,  i,  685.
— ,  Irrational  fear  of,  among  civilized

people,  i,  685.
— ,  Liability  of,  to  error,  ii,  92.

—  always  free  from  affectation  and
superstition,  ii,  288.

— ,  Actions  of,  usually  impulsive,  ii,
329.

—  denied  free-will,  ii,  330.

— ,  Deliberative  actions  of,  ii,  334,

— ,  Reason  in,  ii,  346.

— ,  Philosophy  of  man's  dominion  over,

ii,  382.
Animal-worship,  i,  203  ;  ii,  255,  257,
Animism,  i,  208 ;  ii,  253,  257,  259.
Animotheism,  ii,  258.
Annulosa,  Composite  character  of  the,

i,  182,  235,  337,  373.

—  as  illustrating  secondary  aggrega-
tion, i,  337.

Anomaly  of  woman's  sexual  sentiments,
i,  606.

Ante-natal  influences  affecting  opin-
ions, ii,  429.

Antennaria  plantaginifolia.  Diminutive

size  of  the  staminate  plants  of,  i,
659,
Anthropocentric  ideas  essentially  im-
moral, ii,  508.

—  theories,  ii,  50,  133,
Anthropogeny,  i,  410.
Anthropoides,  i,  426, 427,  428 ;  ii,  494.
Anthropological  ideas,  ii,  459,  463.
Anthropomorphism,  i,  194,  225,  370,

411 ;  ii,  26,  264,  263.
Anthropo-teleology,  i,  29,  58,  67, 150,
Anthropotheism,  ii,  257,  258.
Anthropus,  ii,  494.
Anti-anthropocentric  facts,  ii,  62.
Anti-biocentric  facts,  ii,  69.
Anticipation  vs.  participation,  i,  676 ;

ii,  150,  284.
Anti-optimistic  facts,  ii,  59.
Antiquity  of  man,  i,  445.
Anti-social  tendencies,  i,  394,  452,  462,

463,474;  ii,  212,  221.
Anti-sociocentric  facts,  ii,  71,
Antithetical  types  of  mind,  i,  64 ;  ii,

24.
Apes,  Resemblance  of,  to  men  a  cause

of  their  being  despised,  i,  422.
Apoplexy,  Savage  interpretation  of,  i,

200,  201 ;  ii,  259,
Apotheosis,  i,  203,

Appliances  for  protection  against  cli-
mate, i,  563,
Applied  sociology,  i,  59,  60.

,  Caution  required  in,  i,  61.

Apportionment,  or  pooling,  in  railroad

management,  ii,  577.
A  priori   deductions.  Analysis  of,  ii,

523.
Aptitudes,  special.  Determination  and

utilization  of,  ii,  623.
Aqueous  gas  formerly  existing  in  the

atmosphere,  i,  303,
Arapahoes,  i,  436,
Archaeus,  i,  401.
Archimedes,  ii,  200.
Architecture,  Position  of,  among  the

fine  arts,  i,  669.

—  contrasted  with  landscape-garden-
ing, i,  670.

— ,  in  how  far  connected  with  the  re-
ligious sentiment,  ii,  192,

Argonauts,  i,  668.

Argument  for  dynamic  sociology,  State-
ment of  the,  ii,  106,

Argyll,  Duke  of,  i,  71,  72,  487,

Aristocracy,  Animals  constitute  a  true,
i,  596,

644

INDEX.

Aristotle,  i,  140 ;  ii,  200.

Arithmetic,  Progress  made  in,  ii,  381.

Art,  Fine,  or  imaginative,  distinguished
from  practical,  or  inventive,  i,  71,
662,  671 ;  ii,  191.

,  Late  development  of  the

highest  conceptions  of,  i,  393,  672.

,  Convergence  of  the  con-
ceptions of,  and  scientific  concep-
tions, i,  671.

,  Popularization  of,  i,  673,

674.

— ,  practical,  or  inventive.  Relations  of,
to  science,  i,  37,  149,  552 ;  ii,  193,
391,  393,  497,  625.

,  Objective,  or  positive,  vs.

subjective,  or  negative,  i,  58.

,  the  end,  or  last  stage,  of

every  science,  i,  149.

,  Origin  of,  i,  485,  648 ;  ii,

164,  276.

,  the  means  by  which  man

has  acquired  his  supremacy,  i,  486,
490;  ii,  190,  203.

,  Relations  of,  to  labor,  i,

489,  490.

,  the  means  to  production,

i,  547.

,  displayed  in   preparing

food,  i,  551.

,  required  in  providing  cloth-
ing and  shelter,  i,  551.

,  Relation  of,  to  invention,

ii,  100.

,  Fundamental  principle  un-
derlying, ii,  100,  380.

,  Role  of,  in  the  progress

of  civilization,  ii,  190,  203,  205,  260.

,  rests  on  the  preservative

forces,  ii,  191.

,  never  the  result  of  chance,

ii,  195.

,  Application  of,  to  organic

forces,  ii,  205.

— ,  Etymological  bearings  of  the  word,
ii,  165,

Artificial  selection  not  yet  applied  to
the  human  species,  i,  16.

,  Rapid  operation  of,  i,  21.

,  Possible  application  of,  to  man

and  society,  i,  21  ;  ii,  392,  462,  463,
483,  487,  550,  615.

rests  on  the  principle  of  imper-
fect adaptation,  i,  174.

,  General  laws  of,  ii,  206,  390.

—  progress,  i,  71.

Artificial  progress  vs.  natural,  i,  490.
— ,  The,  distinguished  from  the  natural,
i,  71,  490.

—  character  of  civilization,  i,  498  ;  ii,
203,  302,  538.

all  wealth  and  value,  i,  498,

562.

—  appliances.  Production  of,  i,  652.

—  phenomena  distinguished  from  nat-
ural, ii,  103,  105.

Arts  practiced  in  obtaining  animal  food,
i,  549.

vegetable  food,  i,  550.

Aryans,  i,  704.

Asceticism  a  form  of  insanity,  ii,  284.

— ,  Causes  and  effects  of,  ii,  299.

Ascidians,  i,  338.

Association  the  result  of  adaptive  in-
fluences, i,  451.

—  not  natural  to  man,  i,  451.

— ,  Conditions  favorable  to,  in  the  sim-
ian ancestors  of  man,  i,  453, 462,  463.

— ,  essential  to  the  development  of
speech,  i,  454.

Astragalus,  ii,  69.

Astronomy,  Positivity  of,  paradoxical,
i,  99,  102.

— ,  Phenomena  of,  excite  awe  only  in
those  ignorant  of  their  nature,  i,
100.

— ,  Comte's  treatment  of,  i,  1 10.

definition  of,  i.  111.

Atavism,  ii,  429.

Atheism,  sense  in  which  used  by  Lub-
bock, ii,  254.

Atmosphere,  Mystery  of  the,  to  primi-
tive man,  i,  48,  199  ;  ii,  11.

— ,  Former,  of  the  globe,  i,  263.

— ,  Depth  of  the,  i,  270.

— ,  Supposed  upper  eui-face  of  the,  i,
271.

— ,  T.  Sterry  Hunt  on  the  cosmical
character  of  the,  i,  271.

— ,  Relative  proportions  of  the  gases
of  the,  i,  272.

— ,  Eventual  reduction  of  the,  to  pure
nitrogen,  i,  276.

Atom,  The  ultimate,  i,  225,  226.

Atomic  theory,  i,  222.

,  Comte's  attacks  upon  the,  i,  118.

—  weight.  Meaning  of,  i,  296.
Atoms,  chemical.  Extreme  minuteness

of,  i,  226,  254.
,  distinguished  from  molecules,  i,

237.
,  Measurements  of,  i,  254.

INDEX.

646

Atom-Seelc,  i,  319.

Attenuation  of  truth,  ii,  498,  627,  558.

Attitude  of  science  toward  woman's

elevation,  i,  657.

nature  toward  man,  ii,  2,  3.

man  toward  nature.  The  proper,

ii,  2,  11.
Attraction  and  repulsion  as  universal

principles,  i,  39.
— ,  Principle  of,  applicable  to  educa-
tion, ii,  610.
Attractive  legislation,  i,  39,  40,  41,  44,

518,  580;  ii,  235,  249,  393,  467,  546.
,  Principle  of,  foreshadowed   by

the  Duke  of  Argyll,  i,  72.

,  Examples  of,  i,  44 ;  ii,  392.

—  measures,  i,  580 ;  ii,  365.

Atwater,  W.  0.,  ii,  68.

Australians,  i,  418.

Autarchic  stage  of  society,  i,  466.

Authority,  Most   knowledge   must  be

accepted  upon,  ii,  486,  530.
Autogens,  i,  348,  412.
Automatic  actions,  ii,  312,  314,  315.
,   Transition   from  voluntary  to,

ii,319,  344,  345.
Automatons,    Descartes's   theory   that

animals   are,  i,   364,  370,  415;   ii,

112.
Autopathy,  ii,  371.
Autumnal  blooming  of  vernal  plants,

ii,  60.
Avarice,  Origin  and  genesis  of,  i,  494,

495,496;  ii,  477,  536.
— ,  Beneficial  effects  of,  ii,  341.
Axioms,  The  mechanical,  ii,  95.
— ,  True  character  of,  ii,  531.
Axolotl,  ii,  66.

BACON,  FRANCIS,  Claims  of,  as
founder  of  the  inductive  method,
i,  96,  140,  141  ;  ii,  200,  201.

,  his  ignorance  of  mathematics,  i,

140.

Bacteria,  Power  of,  to  manufacture  or-
ganic matter,  i,  345.

Balance  of  trade,  ii,  157.

Bamboo  and  banana,  Seedless,  in  Amer-
ica, i,  334.

Barbary  ape,  i,  416.

Bark  of  trees  operating  as  a  hindrance
to  growth,  ii,  59,  60.

Barology,  i,  114.

Bathybius,  i,  316,  320.

— ,  History  of,  i,  320.

Beard,  George  M.,  ii,  78.

Beaver-dams  as  inventions,  ii,  389.

Beginnings  of  life,  i,  315.

Belief  depends  on  education  and  not  on

reason,  ii,  282,  414,  422,  427,  433,

486.
— ,  Ambiguity  of  the  word,  ii,  411.

—  distinguished  from  opinion,  ii,  413.
— ,  Settled,  mistaken  for  truth,  ii,  413.
— ,  Nothing  too  absurd  for,  ii,  414, 434.
— ,  General  law  governing,  ii,  422,  433,

440,  486,  548.

—  in  physical  impossibilities,  ii,  516.
Beliefs,  Nominal,  vs.  real,  ii,  24.
Bellarmine,  ii,  300.

Benevolence,  Motives  to,  egoistic,  ii,

370.
Bentham,  Jeremy,  Democratic  dictum

of,  ii,  367.
Bessels,   Emil,   on  Protobathybius,  i,

321,  322.
Bichat,  the  founder  of  biology,  i,  117.
Biogeny,  i,  300.
Biological  units,  i,  182,  234.

—  ideas,  ii,  459,  462.

Biology,  Tlie  science  of,  founded  by
Bichat,  i,  117.

— ,  The  term,  first  employed  by  De
Blainville,  i,  117.

— ,  Comte's  classification  of,  i,  121.

transcendental,  i,  121.

— ,  Spencer's  Principles  of,  i,  168, 181,
184.

,  Probable  ultimate  rank  of,

i,  184.

Bionomy,  Biotaxy,  Biotomy,  terms  pro-
posed by  Comte,  i,  120.

Birth-names,  i,  204.

Blanchard,  Emile,  on  speech  in  ani-
mals, i,  435,  487.

Blastospheres,  i,  338.

Body,  Specific  gravity  of  the  human,  a
disadvantage,  ii,  66.

Bond,  Thomas,  on  ignorance  as  a  cause
of  disease,  ii,  208.

Book-learning,  to  what  extent  neces-
sary, ii,  630.

— ,  Inconsistent  opposition  to,  ii,  630.

Borneo,  Degraded  race  in  the  interior
of,  i,  417.

Boscovich's  theory  of  matter,  i,  160.

Botany,  Origin  of  the  science  of,  i,  689.

Bourbon,  as  a  term  of  reproach  against
the  party  of  order,  i,  126.

Brain,  Genesis  of,  i,  373.

— ,  Analogy  of,  to  the  organs  of  special
sense,  i,  378 ;  ii,  188,  369.

646

INDEX.

Brain,  Increase  of,  the  initial  step  in
the  development  of  man,  i,  424,  455.

— ,  Capacity  of,  in  the  anthropoid  apes,
i,  438.

,  in  different  races,  i,  439.

— ,  how  related  to  intelligence,  i,  440.

— ,  Class  of  studies  that  overtax  the,
i,  569,  570.

— ,  Inferior  size  of  the  female,  ex-
plained, ii,  616.

—  as  the  seat  of  a  true  emotional  force,
i,  666,  699.

— ,  Counter-forces  in,  ii,  345,  5Y0.

Brain-development,  how  rendered  pos-
sible, i,  429 ;  ii,  564.

Brain-function,  Physiology  of,  i,  3Y7.

Brain-mass,  how  acquired,  i,  429.

Brain-work,  Economy  in,  ii,  344,  345,
570.

— ,  Acquiring  knowledge  the  easiest
kind  of,  ii,  569.

— ,  Secret  of  successful,  ii,  570.

Brain-worry,  ii,  345.

Brigandage  as  a  mode  of  acquisition,
i,  584.

Bronchocele,  ii,  63.

Broussais,  Favor  shown  by,  to  Comte's
views,  i,  84.

Bruno,  Giordano,  ii,  304.

Brute-force  distinguished  from  intel-
lectual force,  i,  40 ;  ii,  98.

—  the  normal  application  of  the  di-
rect method  of  conation,  ii,  98.

Buccal  cavities.  Influence  of  the,  on
speech,  i,  435,  437.

Buddhism,  i,  691.

Budding,  the  normal  mode  of  repro-
duction among  plants,  i,  333.

Bunsen  burner  as  a  typical  invention,
ii,  390,

Bureaucracy,  ii,  583.

Burmah  massacre,  ii,  292.

Bushmen,  i,  418.

Business  principles,  ii,  562.

Butler,  Bishop,  on  religion,  ii,  20,  260.

the  possible  insanity  of  whole

communities,  ii,  284.

CABANIS  on  irritability,  i,  364.
Calculus,  Comte's  enlarged  use  of
the  term,  i,  106.
— ,  The  two  divisions  of,  i,  107.
— ,  Acumen  displayed  in  the  invention

of  the,  i,  108;  ii,  386,  387.
— ,  Mathematical  education  usually  con-
fined to  the,  ii,  502.

Canary,  Automatic  actions  of  the,  ii,
316.

Capital,  Shrewdness  of,  in  creating  pub-
lic sentiment  in  its  interest,  i,  678  ;
ii,  602.

Capitalist,  Cause  of  the  power  of  the,
over  the  laborer,  ii,  537.

Capitalists,  arts  by  which  they  obtain
services  without  compensation,  ii,
602.

Carbon,  Cosmical  history  of,  i,  277.

— ,  never  absent  from  any  organic  com-
pound, i,  304.

—  constitutes  the  framing  timber  of
organisms,  i,  344,  345.

Carbonic  acid  (dioxide).  Former  pre-
ponderance of,  in  the  atmosphere,  i,
303.

the  base  of  the  organic  series,  i,

305.

Caribs,  Himian  sacrifices  among  the,  ii,
292.

Carpenter  theory  of  the  universe,  i,
65.

Carpenter,  William  B.,  on  belief,  ii,
411.

Carver,  Jonathan,  on  the  rice  feast  of
the  Naudowessies,  ii,  455.

Casus  conscientiae,  ii,  354,

Catalepsy,  Savage  interpretation  of,  i,
200,  201.

Categories,  Comte's  six  scientific,  i,  98.

—  of  Herbert  Spencer,  i,  155.

—  of  science,  i,  221,  365.

—  of  co-existence  and  sequence,  i,
222.

Cathartes,  in  how  far  gregarious,  i,
462.

Catholic  Church,  Policy  of  the,  in  secur-
ing belief,  ii,  414.

Catholicism,  Comte's  views  of,  i,  96.

"  Catholics,"  False  use  of  the  word,  in
Protestant  countries,  i,  694,

Cato,  the  Younger,  Suicide  of,  how  jus-
tified, ii,  268,

Caulerpa,  i,  235,  341,

Causal  type  of  mind,  i,  6.

—  dependence  among  phenomena,  i,  8.
Causality  a  rare  attribute,  i,  142.
Causation   distinguished  from   succes-
sion, i,  159.

Causational  school  of   philosophy,  ii,

19,  40.
Causes   rendered   disproportionate  to

effects  by  scientific  prevision,  i,  73 ;

ii,  97,  390.

INDEX.

647

Causes,  Pursuit  of,  characteristic  of

theology,  i,  86.
— ,  First,  final,  and  efficient,  i,  88.
— ,  Legitimate  and  illegitimate,  ii,  'J'l.
Cayaguas,  i,  418.
Cell,  The,  constitutes  the  morphological

unit,  i,  182,  326.
,  an  individual  of  the  first  order,

i,  326.

,  the  lowest  true  organism,  i,  326.

— ,  Origin  of  the,  i,  326.

—  theory  of  Schleiden  and  Schwann,  i,
361.

rejected  by  Comte,  i,  125.

Cellulose,  i,  348;  ii,  152.
Cephalization,  i,  428 ;  ii,  345.
Cercaria,  ii,  338.
Cercopithecus,  i,  426.
Cerebral  lobes.  Function  of  the,  i,  378.
,  adaptive  principle  on  which  de-
veloped, i,  384.
Cerebration,  Physiology  of,  i,  3*79.
Certainty,  Tests  of,  ii,  415.
— ,  Laws  of  the  mind  in  arriving  at,  ii,

489.
— ,  Moral,  ii,  506,  515.
— ,  absolute,  Limits  of,  ii,  612,  518.
— ,  Degrees  of,  ii,  520,  521.
— ,  Diminution  of,  ii,  527.
— ,  Testimony  as  tending  to  diminish,

ii,  527.
Challis  on  force,  i,  228.
Change  as  a  fundamental  relation,  i,

223.
Character,  how  formed,  ii,  564.
Characters   distinguishing    men   from

apes,  i,  424.
Charity,  a  result  of  a  high  state  of

civilization,  ii,  447.
— ,  Excess  of,  ii,  447,  468.
— ,  Special  and  general,  ii,  449,  450,

468.
Charlatanism,  ii,  247.
— ,  how  encouraged,  ii,  684.
Charruas,  Superstitions  of  the,  ii,  289.
Chase,  Love  of  the,  a  survival  of  the

hunting  stage  of  society,  i,  545.
Chemical  paradox,  i,  52.

—  affinities,    Comte's   disbelief  in,   i,
116.

—  relations,  i,  220.

Chemistry,  Relative  positivity  of,  i,  102.

—  called  molecular  physics,  i,  102, 112.
— ,  Comte's  definition  of,  i,  116.

— ,  Continuity  of  inorganic   and   or-
ganic, i,  116.

Chemistry,  Recompounding  in,  i,  236.

— ,  Transcendental,  i,  239.

Child-labor,  Evils  of,  ii,  614.

Children,  Actions  of,  impulsive,  ii,  329,
330.

— ,  Duties  of  parents  to,  ii,  443.

— ,  Fondness  of,  for  natural  objects,  ii,
505,  571.

Chimpanzee,  i,  426.

Chivalry,  i,  504  ;  ii,  339.

Chlorophyl  as  a  test  of  plants,  i,  340.

— ,  Alleged  occurrence  of,  in  animals,
i,  340.

— ,  Function  of,  i,  345,  346.

— ,  generated  by  the  electric  light,  i,
345.

— ,  Apparent  action  of,  may  be  due  to
protoplasm,  i,  346.

Chorion,  i,  332.

Christ,  Unwritten  teachings  of,  ii,  187.

Christianity,  Influence  of,  on  civiliza-
tion, i,  692,  694  ;  ii,  303.

— ,  Position  of,  as  a  religion,  ii,  279.

— ,  Opposition  of,  to  intellectual  prog-
ress, ii,  303.

Chroococci,  i,  840,

Church  buildings.  Genesis  of,  ii,  296.

Cicero  on  pleasure,  ii,  148.

immortality,  ii,  268.

Cienkowski's  investigation  of  moners,
i,  323.

Circumstances,  Inequality  of  wealth
due  to,  i,  522.

— ,  Lamarck's  use  of  the  term,  ii,  17.

— ,  Influence  of,  in  raising  men  to  emi-
nence, ii,  599,  601,  612.

— ,  The  mother  of,  ii,  613.

Circus  cyaneus,  var.  Hudsonius,  DifPer-
ence  in  the  size  of  the  sexes  of,  i,
660.

Civilization,  Definitions  of,  i,  35;  ii,
205,  296,  302,  305,  380,  458.

— ,  Comte's  historical  sketch  of,  i,  93.

— ,  Origin  and  genesis  of,  i,  495;  ii,
305,  380.

— ,  Artificial  character  of,  i,  498 ;  ii,
203,  302,  538.

— ,  Softening  effect  of,  on  natural  jus-
tice, i,  505.

— ,  Material,  increases  the  sum  of  hu-
man happiness,  ii,  175,  206.

— ,  Influence  of  art  in,  ii,  203,  207.

—  a  product  of  invention,  ii,  246,  305.

— ,  Fundamental  nature  of,  ii,  880.

— ,  Early  aids  to,  ii,  477.

— ,  deUcacy  of  ita  organization,  ii,  595.

648

INDEX.

Clarke,  F.  W.,  on  the  undue  accumula-
tion of  facts,  i,  23.

Classical  vs.  scientific  education,  ii,  602,
558.

Classification  of  the  sciences,  Impor-
tance of  the,  i,  2,

,  Comte's  system  of,  i,  97.

,    Essential     harmony     of

Comte's  and  Spencer's  systems  of,  i,
145-147.

,  Phenomenal  distinguished

from  logical  systems  of,  1,  148.

organisms,  i,  349.

phenomena,  ii,  76,  106.

,  Table  of,  ii,  106.

Claytonia  Virginica,  ii,  60.

Climate,  Appliances  for  protection
against,  i,  653.

Clothing,  Origin  of,  i,  474,  546,  663,
556,  638  ;  ii,  199.

— ,  original  purpose  to  which  applied,
i,  548,  557,  638.

— ,  Influence  of,  in  developing  the  sen-
timent of  modesty,  i,  638.

Coal  deposits.  Cause  of  the,  i,  272.

Coal-measures,  Optimistic  explanation
of  the,  ii,  52.

Code,  The  civil,  i,  514.

social,  or  conventional,  i,  515.

moral,  or  ethical,  i,  515  ;  ii,  372.

,  Unsoundness  of,  ii,  24,

339,  340.

Codes,  Natural  vs.  human,  5,  508.

— ,  Origin  and  nature  of  the  civil,  so-
cial, and  moral,  i,  514.

— ,  Crudeness  of  all,  ii,  144.

— ,  Confusion  between  the  moral  and
the  conventional,  ii,  456.

Codfish,  Number  of  young  produced  by
the,  ii,  87.

Co-efficient  of  intelligence,  i,  405 ;  ii,
471.

Coercion,  Loss  involved  in,  i,  41.

Cognition,  i,  383.

Coincidences,  Frequency  of,  ii,  58.

Cold  as  a  social  force,  i,  484.

Coleochajtje,  i,  331.

Colloid  matter,  i,  169.

a  dynamic  state,  i,  169.

Color,  Revolution  in  the  prevalent  ideas
of,  i,  286.

— ,  AH  other  properties  analogous  to,
i,  286.

Columbus,  motive  of  his  adventui>es,  i,
570.

Commerce,  Origin  of,  i,  566.

Commerce,  Indirect  effects  of,  i,  569.

— ,  the  notion  that  it  is  in  itself  a  bless-
ing, ii,  398.

"  Common  Sense,"  ii,  405.

Common  sense.  Philosophic,  i,  160.

Communication,  Progress  in  the  art  of,
ii,  179,  180.

Commutation  in  invention.  Law  of,  ii,
101.

Comparison  distinguished  from  obser-
vation and  experimentation,  i,  99.

Competition,  Law  of,  i,  573,  594.

—  lowers  the  standard  of  organic
forms,  ii,  88.

— ,  essentially  wasteful,  ii,  578.
Compound  aggregation,  i,  234.

—  radicals  as  illustrating  the  law  of
aggregation,  i,  236.

Compounds,  inorganic,  Formation  of
the,  i,  242,  283.

,  Properties  of,  more  active  than

those  of  elements,  i,  298.

increase  in  activity  with

increased  size  and  complexity  of  mol-
ecule, i,  298.

—  — ,  how  distinguished  from  ele-
ments, i,  301.

,  Comparatively  recent  develop-
ment of,  i,  302.

— ,  organic,  Molecules  of,  compared,  i,
298,  307.

,  Present  formation  of,  in  nature,

i,  303.

Compulsory  actions,  ii,  812,  814,  317.

—  education,  ii,  607.

Comte,  Auguste,  the  founder  of  the
science  of  sociology,  i,  1,  86.

,  anomalous  character  of  his  phi-
losophy, i,  82,  129.

,  nature  of  his  errors,  i,  83.

,  character  of  his  style,  i,  83.

,  What  science  owes  to,  i,  87.

,  his  classification  of  religions,  i,

94 ;  ii,  254.

the  sciences,  i,  97.

,  reasons  for  selecting  his  philos-
ophy and  that  of  Herbert  Spencer  as
the  subjects  of  special  notice  in  this
work,  i,  142.

Comtean  and  Spencerian  systems  of
philosophy  compared,  144-149.

contrasted,  149-156.

Conation,  Objects,  or  ends,  of,  i,  216  ;
ii,  93.

— ,  Etymology  and  prior  use  of  the
word,  ii,  93.

INDEX.

649

Conation,  Methods  of,  ii,  93.

— ,  Direct  and  indirect  methods  of,  ii,
93,  130,  160,  178,  181,  190.

method  of,  ii,  95.

— ,  Indirect  method  of,  ii,  99.

— ,  Ultimate  end  of,  ii.  111.

Conative  faculty,  i,  198,  400;  ii,  93,
314.

Conceptions,  intellectual,  Nature  of,  i,
•     403.

,  Steps  leading  up  to,  from  pri-
mary sense-perception,  i,  403.

Concrete,  All  proper  science  is  essen-
tially, i,  106.

— ,  Comte's  application  of  the  word,
to  mathematics,  i,  106,  109,  110.

Condorcet,  Share  due  to,  in  establish-
ing the  science  of  sociology,  i,  1.

Conduct,  Limits  to  the  term,  ii,  373,
376.

— ,  a  negative  term,  ii,  377.

— ,  Moral,  a  necessary  evil,  ii,  377.

— ,  Persons  having  two  codes  of,  ii,
452.

Conflict  between  religion  and  science,
i,  156;  ii,  345.

Confucius,  Moral  system  of,  i,  10, 13.

Confusion  of  morals  with  religion,  ii,
443,  451,  453.

custom,  ii,  451,  455.

Conjugation,  a  form  of  reproduction,
i,  331.

Conscience,  Fallibility  of  the,  i,  516 ;
ii,  349,  450.

— ,  True  nature  of,  ii,  349.

— ,  How  the  prevailing  ideas  of,  have
originated,  ii,  351.

—  not  always  instantaneous,  ii,  354.
— ,  Cases  of,  ii,  354.
Consciousness,  implied  in  feeling,  i,  185,

366,  386,  404.
— ,  Multiple,  i,  235,  373 ;  ii,  320.
— ,  double.  Explanation  of,  i,  376.

—  always  means  the  supreme  conscious-
ness, i,  376.

— ,  Evolution  of,  ii,  10.

— ,  First  appearance  of,  ii,  75,  317.

— ,  Undue  importance  given  to  the,  ii,

123.
— ,  Social,  not  yet  reached,  ii,  249,  397.
Constrained  aggregate  stage  of  society,

i,  466.

—  motion  illustrated  by  animal  action,
ii,  95.

Constructive  and  destructive  reform,  i,
10.

Consumption,    Excess    of    production

over,  i,  497.
Contentment  as  the  end  of  being,  ii,

206.

—  distinguished  from  happiness,  ii,
207.

Continuity  of  motion,  i,  159,  164,  231.

—  between  the  inorganic  and  the  or-
ganic, i,  299.

Contractility  and  extensibility,  i,  357.
Contraction,  muscular.  Mechanical  ex-
planation of,  353,  354,  362.
Contradiction,  Law  of,  i,  159.
Control  of  phenomena.  Scientific,  i,  63,

56,  104,  149.
Conversion,  Religious,  ii,  282.
Convolutions  of  the  brain,  i,  378.
Cooking,  Application  of  science  to,  i,

543.
Cooling  off  of  cosmical  bodies,  i,  252,

261.
Co-operation,  Industrial,  i,  573,  577,

591,  594.
,  by  capital  and  by  labor,  i,  592  ;

ii,  602,  603.
Co-ordination  of  facts,  i,  6,  24,  142.
Copernicus,  Persecution  of,  ii,  304.
Copper,  Early  commerce  in,  i,  567.
Corpora  striata,  i,  379.
Corpus  callosum,  i,  380.
Correlation  of  forces,  i,  160.
Correspondence  between  organism  and

environment  greater  in  animals  than

in  man,  ii,  48,

,  Imperfection  of,  ii,  69.

Cortical  layers.  Nature  of  the,  i,  378.
,  Analogy  of  the,  to  nerves  of

special  sense,  i,  378  ;  ii,  369.
Cosmical  dust,  i,  255,  260.

—  and  individual  utility,  ii,  132.
Cosmogeny,  i,  220.
Cosmogony,  i,  220.
Cosmological  paradox,  i,  62.

—  ideas,  ii,  459.

Cosmologies  of  savages,  how  elabo-
rated, i,  198  ;  ii.  275.

Cosmopolitan  stage  of  society,  i,  466,
467,  477,  678,  703.

Cotton,  Early  use  of,  by  man,  i,  558,

Counting,  Origin  of  the  decimal  sys-
tem of,  ii,  386.

Cramming,  in  education,  ii,  569,  571.

Cranes,  Laryngeal  development  in,  i,
435.

"  Cranks,"  ii,  373.

Creation  of  matter,  i,  231.

650

INDEX.

Creation,  Supernatural,  i,  411.

Creative  art,  ii,  191.

Cretins,  i,  417.

Crime,   Small  percentage  in  civilized

society  capable  of,  i,  239,  283.
— ,  Legalized  forms  of,  i,  510.
— ,  Definition  of,  ii,  364.
—  formerly  left  to  private  regulation,

ii,  364,  392.
— ,  Unjust  punishment  of,  ii,  365.
— ,  Remedy  for,  ii,  366.
Criminal  classes,  Proportion  of,  to  popu-
lation, ii,  240.
Criminality,  Progress  in  the  conception

of,  ii,  511.
Criminals  usually  religious,  ii,  282.
Croll,  James,  on  the  date  of  the  glacial

epochs,  i,  446.
Cryptogamic  vegetation  incapable  of

supporting  the  higher  forms  of  ani-
mal life,  ii,  53.
Crystallization,  organic  compounds  in

which  it  may  occur,  i,  304,  306.
Crystals,  Molecular  constitution  of,  i,

289.
Culture,  non-progressive,  i,  71.
— ,  Herbert  Spencer  on,  ii,  558,  562.
— ,  The  education  of,  ii,  565.
Cunning  as  a  factor  in  development,  i,

428.
Curriculums,  ii,  663,  621.
Cuscuta,  Anomalous  parasitism  of,  i,

349.
Custom,  Confusion  of,  with  morality,

ii,  455.
Cuvier,  Cataclysms  of,  i,  49.
Cycles  in  social  progress,  i,  621,  615,

652,  655  ;  ii,  234,  235,  539.
Cystophrys,  i,  338.
Cytod  stage,  i,  326,  333.

DAHOMEY,  Funeral  sacrifices  in,  ii,
291.

Daly,  Judge  Charles  P.,  i,  418.

Dangerous  classes  in  society,  Propor-
tion of,  to  population,  ii,  239-241.

,  Need  of  educating  the,  ii,

241,  595.

Darlingtonia,  ii,  92.

Darwin,  Erasmus,  i,  154.

— ,  Charles,  i,  177.

"  Data  of  Ethics  "  of  Herbert  Spencer,
i,  216.

Dead,  Modes  of  disposal  of  the,  i,  202.

Death,  Decline  of  life  a  gradual,  i,
126.

Death,  Savage  interpretation  of,  i,  200,
201 ;  ii,  267,  274.

—  believed  by  savages  to  be  always
due  to  witchcraft,  i,  688.

— ,  All  premature,  due  to  friction  of

the  environment,  ii,  69.
— ,  not  a  logical  result  of  pain,  ii,  113.

—  rates.  Reduction  of,  ii,  208.
DeBlainville,    Favor     shown    by,    to

Comte's  system,  i,  84.

— ,  the  inventor  of  the  term  "  biology,"
i,  117.

— ,  his  definition  of  instinct,  i,  123.

De  Brosse  on  fetichism,  ii,  254.

Decalogue,  The  Hebrew,  in  how  far
moral,  ii,  442,  453.

Deception,  the  fundamental  character-
istic of  all  intellectual  action,  i,  500;
ii,  145,  165.

— ,  how  justified,  i,  500.

—  in  the  animal  kingdom,  i,  502.

— ,  Universality  of,  among  intelligent
beings,  i,  511,  577;  ii,  836.

— ,  when  justifiable,  ii,  145.

Deductive  and  inductive  knowledge,  ii,
517.

Dcems's  definition  of  religion,  ii,  260.

Defalcations,  more  frequent  in  private
than  in  public  institutions,  ii,  682.

Definition  of  terms  in  Dynamic  Sociol-
ogy, ii,  107,  108.

Definitions  of  religion,  ii,  262-261,
263.

education,  ii,  554.

Degeneration,  Social,  i,  16,  704 ;  ii,  119,
498.

,    equivalent    to    extinction,    ii,

119.

Degradation,  Cases  of,  in  organic  life,
i,  348.

Degrees  of  certainty,  ii,  520.

Deity,  Origin  of  the  conception  of,  i,
205,  686.

— ,  an  unnecessary  hypothesis,  ii,  7.

— ,  In  how  far  belief  in,  is  common  to
all  religions,  ii,  253,  261.

— ,  reduced  to  an  expression  for  the
noumena,  ii,  269.

— ,  derived  objectively  from  the  idea
of  spiritual  existence,  ii,  262,  268.

— ,  Alleged  elevating  effects  of  contem-
plating, ii,  279,  285,  286.

— ,  Brutal  qualities  ascribed  to,  by  cer-
tain savages,  ii,  280.

Deliberative  actions,  ii,  812-314,  824,
846.

INDEX.

651

Deliberative  actions  possessing  moral

quality,  314,  34*7.
devoid  of  moral   quality,  314,

373.

—  bodies,  never  truly  deliberative,  ii,
395,  573.

rarely  employ  the  indirect  meth-
od, ii,  395.

,  Aggregate  wisdom  of,  below  the

average  wisdom  of  their  members,
ii,  395,  573.

,  Open  sessions  of,  unnecessary,

ii,  395.

Delirium,  Savage  interpretation  of,  i,
200.

Democracy,  The  one  valid  argument
for,  ii,  367.

Democritus,  i,  160  ;  ii,  9.

Depravity,  Doctrine  of,  ii,  45.

— ,  Origin  of  the  belief  in,  ii,  348.

Derangement,  Objective,  or  external,  i,
46.

Derivative  and  original  psychic  quali-
ties, i,  461.

—  social  forces,  i,  474.

—  knowledge,  ii,  501.

Descartes,  positive  character  of  his
philosophy,  i,  96,  140  ;  ii,  203.

— ,  Automaton  theory  of,  i,  864,  870,
415;  ii,  112.

"Descriptive  Sociology"  of  Herbert
Spencer,  i,  206,  700.

Desire,  the  initial  factor  in  all  sentient
phenomena,  i,  602,  663,  668 ;  ii,  90,
321,  323.

— ,  Local  seats  of,  i,  666 ;  ii,  323,  324.

— ,  the  basis  of  action,  ii,  90.

— ,  a  negative  form  of  pain,  ii,  149,  283.

— ,  Nature  of,  misunderstood  by  phi-
losophers, ii,  149.

— ,  never  fully  satisfied,  ii,  178.

— ,  Fundamental  nature  of,  ii,  321, 323.

— ,  Primary  cause  of,  ii,  322.

— ,  The  two  sources  of,  ii,  323,  324.

Desires  distinguished  from  emotions,  i,
392.

— ,  Conflicts  among,  i,  394.

— ,  Classification  of,  i,  474.

—  constitute  the  social  forces,  i,  479 ;
ii,  90,

Desmideae,  i,  331.

Desperadoes,  Philosophical  significance

of,  ii,  373.
Development  theory,  i,  8.

—  of  the  organic  from  the  inorganic,
i,  335.

Development,  Cosmical,  how  brought
about,  ii,  82.

—  defined,  ii,  162.

—  follows  from  existence,  ii,  162.
Dialectics  of  the  school-men,  how  over-
thrown, i,  96.

— ,  Fondness  for,  hereditary,  ii,  676.

Diatoms,  i,  348.

Diderot,  i,  95.

Difference,  Relation  of,  i,  223,

—  of  opinion  chiefly  unnecessary,  ii,
407.

Differentia,  Educational,  ii,  623.
Differentials,  Progress  by,  ii,  83.
Differentiation,  Nature  of,  i,  72,  175 ;
ii,  83.

—  distinguished  from  integration,  i,
175.

variation,  ii,  9.

Diffusion  of  the  sexual  instinct,  i,  609.

Dilettanteism,  ii,  247.  •

Dilution  as  a  mode  of  social  degener-
acy, i,  704.

Diminution  of  certainty,  ii,  527.

Dionaea,  ii,  92.

Dioscorides,  i,  689.

Dipneusta,  ii,  66.

Direct  and  indirect  equilibration,  i,
177.

social  phenomena,  i,  469,  604.

methods  of  conation,  ii,  94.

—  equilibration,  Herbert  Spencer's  law
of,  i,  177.

,  Artificial,  ii,  484.

—  method  of  conation,  ii,  95.
,  Application  of,  through

mind  and  through  muscle,  ii,  160,

161,
Direction,  Principle  of,  in  invention,

ii,  101.
Discipline,  Education  of,  ii,  555,  557,

559,  563,
Discontinuity,  biological,   Comte's   ac-
ceptance of,  i,  119.
Discovery,  Promising  fields  of  future,

i,  8.
— ,  Men  of  leisure  best  adapted  for  the

work  of,  i,  78.

—  of  truth,  Psychological  process  of,
ii,  416,

Discussion,  valueless  as  an  end,  ii,  403.
Disease,  Fear  of,  i,  687.
Dishonesty,  How  to  prevent,  i,  500.
— ,  in  how  far  necessary  to  success  in

business,  i,  511.
Disraeli,  ii,  175.

652

INDEX.

Dissection,   Subjects  for,  taken   from

the  least  developed  classes,  ii,  594.
Dissociation   point  of   chemical  com-
pounds, i,  303.
Dissolution,    Cosmical,    i,    155,    166,

167.
,  not  known  to  be  taking  place  in

the  visible  universe,  i,  163,  166.
Distaff,  the  early  emblem  of  industry,

i,  559.
Distribution  of  wealth,  Laws  of  the,  i,

565,  576.
as  a  mode  of  acquisition,  i,

576.
,  Sinister  tendencies  of  the,  i,

577.

knowledge,  ii,  634.

,  Inequality  of,  ii,  537.

)  Effect  of  equal,  ii,  539.

Divisibility  of  matter,  i,  225 ;  ii,  28.
Division  as  a  mode  of  reproduction,  i,

333.
Divorce  of  man  from  nature,  ii,  298,

499.
Dodder,  Anomalous   parasitism   of,  i,

348.
Dogmatism,  Kant's  use  of  the  term,  ii,

19,  340.
— ,  Douglas  Jcrrold's  definition  of,  ii,

19.
— ,  Reasons  for  accepting,  ii,  20.
Dokos,  i,  418.
Domestication,  Effects  of,  ii,  178.

—  of   animals,   not  practiced  by  the
North  American  aborigines,  ii,  197.

Dorsibranchiata,  i,  183.

Double,  Savage  belief  in  a,  i,  200.

—  stars,  i,  243.

—  consciousness  explained,  i,  376.
Doubt,  as  affecting  moral  progress,  ii,

508.
Drama,  Relation  of  the,  to  morals,  ii,

340.
Draper,  Henry,  i,  257.
— ,  J.  W.,  ii,  75.
Dreams,   Savage   interpretation   of,  i,

200,  259,  263,  266,  274.
Dress,  Inequality  of,  in  the  two  sexes,

i,  642,  650.
Dryopithecus,  i,  445.
Dualism  in  philosophy,  i,  65,  92,  100,

412;  ii,  18,  30,  31,  33.

chemistry,  i,  117.

religion,  i,  205,  692  ;  ii,  279.

Duality  of  subject  and  object,  i,  157.
Du  Bois-Reymond,  i,  12;  ii,  7.

Du  Chaillu,  i,  418.

Dujardin  on  sarcode,  i,  311.

Dumas  on  the  composite  character  of

the  chemical  elements,  i,  289.
Dynamic   sociology.  General   laws  of,

i,  25,  456;  ii,  154,  155.

,  Principles  of,  epitomized,  i,  25.

,  Active  and  passive,  i,  56,  700 ;

ii,  1.

,  Definitions  in,  ii,  107,  108,  161.

,  Terminology  of,  ii,  108.

,  Theorems  of,  ii,  108.

,  Notation  of,  ii,  109.

distinguished  from  moral  science,

ii,  159.

—  action  defined,  ii,  108.

—  opinion  defined,  ii,  108.

—  actions,  ii,  313,  314,  376.

vs.  statical,  ii,  378.

,  Classification  of,  ii,  394.

,  Individual  and  social,  ii,  394.

—  opinions,  ii,  457.

—  knowledge,  ii,  509,  510.
Dynamists  as  a  school  of  thought,  i,

*158,  221.
Dystelcologists,  ii,  33.
Dysteleology,  ii,  69.

EARTH,  Constitution  of  the,  i,  270.
— ,   Aqueous  envelope   of   the,  i,

270.
— ,  Gaseous  envelope  of  the,  i,  270,

272.
— ,  Crust  of  the,  how  formed,  i,  278.
— ,  Density  of  the,  i,  279.
— ,  advantage  of  its  spheroidal  form,

ii,  54.
Eccentricity,  Motive  to,  ii,  320.
Echoes,  Savage  interpretation  of,  i,  200 ;

ii,  259,  263,  266,  274.
Economics  of  nature,  1,  621,  606,  610 ;

ii,  68,  87,  494.
Ecstasy  among  savages,  ii,  261.
Education,  ii,  540.
— ,  Popular  scientific,  i,  22.
— ,  Definitions  of,  i,  22,  26 ;   ii,  108,

544,  551,  554,  568,  619.

—  as  an  article  of  faith,  i,  26.

—  should  aim  to  improve  the  condition
of  society,  i,  70.

—  of  culture,  i,  71 ;  ii,  558,  565.

— ,  Sound  views  of  Comte  on,  i,  133,

134.
— ,  Positive,  i,  133.
— ,  Universal,  i,  133, 150,  681 ;  ii,  589,

5aa,i506.

INDEX.

653

Education  should  observe  the  order  of

the  hierarchy  of  the  sciences,  i,  134.
— ,  state,  Arguments  for  and  against,

i,  151,  162;  ii,  571,  584,  589.
— ,  a  substitute  for  brain,  i,  407,  441.
— ,  Effect  of,  on  morals,  i,  500,  509 ;  ii,

360,  365,  366,  596,  605,  606.
— ,  Inequality  of,  i,  500,  509 ;  ii,  601,

602.

—  of  women,  i,  645 ;  ii,  614.

— ,  the  initial  means  to  the  ends  of  co-
nation, ii,  109,  542.

—  of  experience,  ii,  175,  206,  559,  629.
— ,  Influence  of,  on  crime,  ii,  365,  366.
— ,  Method  of   exclusion    in,  ii,  422,

425,  433,  440,  548.
— ,  Power  of,  to  mold  opinion,  ii,  422,

433,  548.
— ,  Ex  parte,  ii,  433,  548.

—  consists  in  an  artificial  modification
of  the  environment,  ii,  483,  487,  551,
631.

— ,  The  prevailing,  does  not  aim  to  con-
fer knowledge,  ii,  501.

teaches  art  rather  than  sci-
ence, ii,  501,  558.

— ,  Classical  vs.  scientific,  ii,  502,  568.

— ,  why  so  much  distrusted,  ii,  541.

— ,  Inadequacy  of  the  term,  ii,  553,
657.

—  of  disciphne,  ii,  555,  557,  559,  563.
— ,  Defects  of  the  German  system  of,

ii,  556,  568.
— ,  Fundamental   fallacy   of    Herbert

Spencer's  work  on,  ii,  556.
— ,  Ornamental,  ii,  558,  565.
— ,  The  five  kinds  of,  ii,  559.
— ,  an  improvement  upon  experience,

ii,  559,  629.

—  of  information,  ii,  662,  568.

— ,  The  teleological  contrasted  with  the
genetic  method  of,  ii,  562,  627.

—  of  research,  ii,  565.

—  a  social  function,  ii,  571.

—  forms  an  exception  to  the  laws  of
business  and  political  economy,  ii,
584,  586,  588,  693,  627.

— ,  Compulsory,  ii,  586,  607.

— ,  Absurdities  of  private,  ii,  587.

— ,  Superiority  of  public,  ii,  590.

— ,  when  an  evil,  ii,  596,  597.

— ,  Equalization  of,  a  return  to  nature,

ii,  601.
— ,  The  matter  of,  ii,  619.

means  of,  ii,  625,  626.

method  of,  ii,  626.

Education,  in  how  far  based  on  mer-
cantile principles,  ii,  627.

— ,  So  called  natural  methods  of,  ii,
627,  628.

— ,  essentially  artificial,  ii,  628.

— ,  made  a  social  ontogenesis,  ii,  629.

—  should  be  conducted  especially  in
the  interest  of  the  masses,  ii,  629.

Educational  work.  Adaptability  of,  to

state  management,  ii,  584.
Eel,  Number  of  eggs  contained  by  the,

ii,  87.
Efiicient  vs.  final  causes,  i,  88 ;  ii,  10,

82,  91.
EfiBorescence   of  civilization,  ii,  558,

562.
Effort,  Philosophy  of,  ii,  91,  93.
Ego  and  non-ego,  i,  157.
— ,  Multiple,  i,  374.
Egoism  and  altruism,  i,  14,  123;   ii,

368.
— ,  Universal  predominance  of,  i,  518 ;

ii,  368.

—  must  be  assumed  in  all  mercantile
transactions,  ii,  536.

Egoistic  actions,  ii,  367.

—  basis  of  altruism,  ii,  368.
Egos,  Subordinate,  i,  374.
Egotism,  i,  679.

Electric  light.  Power  of  the,  to  gen-
erate chlorophyl,  i,  345.

Electricity,  Comte's  hostility  to  the
fluid  theory  of,  i,  113.

—  as  illustrating  muscular  action,  ii,
97.

Electrology,  Position  of,  in  Comte's
hierarchy,  i,  115.

Elements,  the  chemical.  Number  of,  i,
162,  270.

,  Probable  composite  character

of,  i,  237j  239,  288,  290,  297.

,  history  of  their  discovery,  i,

240.

,  Cosmical  creation  of,  i,  255,

283,  295,  297.

,  Ideal  systems  of,  i,  293,  294.

,  Molecules  (atoms)  of,  com-
pared, i,  295.

,  Possible  evolution  of,  out  of

one  another,  i,  295,  297.

,   Properties   of,   less    active

than  those  of  compounds,  i,  297.

,  Molecules  of,  increase  as  the

body  cools,  i,  297.

,  distinguished  from  com-
pounds, i,  301.

654

INDEX.

Elite  of  humanity,  Comte'a  historical
sketch  confined  to  the,  i,  94.

Elohim,  i,  206.

Elysium,  ii,  26Y.

Embryogeny,  Steps  in  the  process  of,
i,  339.

—  recapitulates  race  development,  i,
340,

—  of  plants,  i,  340.

Embryology,  Facts  in  human,  pointing
to  the  animal  origin  of  man,  i,  420.

Emotions  distinguished  from  sensa-
tions, i,  185.

— ,  Source  of  the,  i,  389.

— ,  Physiology  of  the,  1,  389.

— ,  Cerebral,  i,  390,  400.

— ,  essentially  painful,  i,  392.

— ,  Classification  of  the,  i,  392,  393,
400,  675.

— ,  Bases  of  the,  i,  399.

— ,  Physical  seats  of  the,  i,  399,  674.

— ,  The  two  general  classes  of,  i,  400.

— ,  True  place  of  the,  ii,  336.

— ,  Proscribed,  ii,  337,  839.

Empiricism,  Kant's  use  of  the  term,  ii,
19,  23.

— ,  True  meaning  of,  ii,  193.

—  distinguished  from  science,  ii,  195,
196,  200,  303.

— ,  intermediate  between  the  genetic
and  the  teleological  method,  ii,  625.

Emu,  Young  of  the,  reared  by  the  male,
i,  660.

Ends  of  nature  and  of  sentient  beings,
i,  216,  461,  469,  522,  527,  564,  601,
605,  631,  664,  701 ;  ii,  116,  119, 120,
122,  128,  130,  132,  152,  339,  473,
495.

—  of  conation,  ii,  93,  129,  130,  136.

—  often  justify  the  means,  ii,  134.

—  that  may  safely  be  left  to  take  care
of  themselves,  ii,  543,  565,  598.

Energy  as  a  category  of  thought,  i,  221.
— ,  elimination  of  the  concept,  i,  221.
— ,  a  relation,  i,  222.
— ,  Basis  in  fact  of  the  idea  of,  ii,  81.
Ennui  as  a  factor  in  social  progress,  i,

232;  ii,  117,  126.
Entities,  Pursuit  of,  the  characteristic

of  metaphysics,  i,  86.
Entity,  Matter  the  only,  i,  222.
Environment,    equivalent    expression

used  by  Comte,  i,  118,  171 ;  ii,  17.

Lamarck,  i,  171 ;  ii,  17.

Geoffroy  Saint-Hilaire,

ii,  17.

Environment,  General  law  of  corre-
spondence between  organism  and,  i,
170,  177,360,  399;  ii,  483.

— ,  Influence  of  the,  in  producing  mor-
phological modifications,  i,  188;  ii,
37.

—  enlarges  with  increased  faculties,  i,
402.

— ,  Knowledge  of  the,  most  important

to  man,  ii,  12,  495,  496.
— ,  Friction  of  the,  ii,  13,  15,  69,  209.
— ,  Animals  better  adapted  to,  than

men,  ii,  48.
— ,  The  subjective,  ii,  321.
— ,  Education  an  artificial  modification

of  the,  ii,  484,  487.

—  of  civilized  man.  What  constitutes
the,  ii,  495,  497.

Ephemerae,  i,  660 ;  ii,  61.

Epicureanism,  ii,  23.

Epicurus,  i,  160;  ii,  134.

Epilepsy,  Savage  interpretation  of,  ii,

259,  263,  274.
Epileptic  origin  of  religions,  i,  12.
Equality  distinguished  from  similarity,

i,  191.
Equalizing  measures,  i,  681.

—  education.  Need  of,  ii,  596.
Equations,  All  truths  capable  of  ex-
pression by,  i,  105.

Equilibration,  Herbert  Spencer's  laws

of,  i,  164,  165,  177.
— ,  Direct  and  indirect,  in  biology,  i,

177,  178,  328;  ii,  86.
Equilibrium  in  the  organic  world,  ii,

178.
Equity,  Why  courts  of,  were  estab-
lished, ii,  144.
Erect  posture,  how  acquired  by  man,

i,  429,  432.
Error  distinguished  from  ignorance,  i,

61.
— ,  how  rendered  possible,  i,  385.
— ,  Tendencies  of  the  mind  to,  i,  406.
— ,  always  defended  by  high  authority,

ii,  72.
— ,  Susceptibility  of  primitive  man  to,

ii,  167.
— ,  a  possible  cause  of  the  extinction

of  races,  ii,  271,  479.
— ,  What    distinguishes    religious,   ii,

273.
— ,  Persistence  of,  ii,  409.
— ,  Principal  sources  of,  ii,  426,  426,

488.

—  mainly  due  to  ignorance,  ii,  481.

INDEX.

655

Errors,   All    great  minds  wedded  to

some,  i,  83  ;  ii,  72.
— ,  Nature  of  Comte's,  i,  83.

—  that  do  not  tend  to  correct  them-
selves, ii,  44.

—  of  judgment,  ii,  92.

— ,  cases  of  mistaken  identity,  ii,  417.
Erudition,  How  science  is  distinguished

from,  i,  71 ;  ii,  246.
Esquimaux,  i,  418.
Esquirol,  i,  84.

Essential  social  forces,  i,  482.
Estho-physiology,  ii,  369.
Ether,  The  interstellar,    regarded   by

Comte  as  an  ontological  conception,

i,  90,  113.

,  a  form  of  matter,  i,  229.

,  independent  of  gravitation,  i,

247,  292.
Ethical  knowledge,  ii,  507.
Ethics,  Absolute  and  relative,  i,  217;

ii,  377.
-,  Proper  place  of,  in  the  hierarchy,

i,  217.
— ,  Determinate  character  of,  ii,  372.
— ,  Fundamental  formula  of,  ii,  445.
"Ethology,  ii,  154.
Etiquette,  Time  wasted  on,  ii,  499.
Euclid,  ii,  200.
Evil,  Relativity  of,  i,  43.
— ,  Origin  of,  i,  623.
— ,  Problem  of  the   existence  of,  ii,

35,  47,  50.
— ,  The  human  mind  shrinks  from  the

open  advocacy  of,  ii,  448.
Evils  of  society,  i,  30.
Evolution,  the  most  general  law  thus

far  formulated,  i,  8,  207.

—  in  biology  underestimated  by  Comte,
i,  129.

— ,  Laws  of,  i,  154,  155,  160,  248.
— ,  Simple  and  compound,  i,  161.

—  prevails  throughout  the  known  uni-
verse, i,  163.

— ,  Stable  equilibrium  the  goal  of,i,  163.

— ,  constantly  antagonized  by  dissolu-
tion, i,  165,  166,^176,  284.

— ,  Relation  of,  to  organization,  i,  166,
176,  254 ;  ii,  84.

—  does  not  imply  increasing  perfec-
tion, i,  166.

— ,  comprehensiveness  of  the  process,
i,  207.

—  results  from  the  interaction  of  grav-
itation and  radiation,  i,  230,  231 ;
u,  84.

Evolution,  Cosmic  and  organic,  distin-
guished, i,  247,  284  ;  ii,  85.
— ,  Fundamental  law  of,  i,  248,  284.

—  distinguished  from  aggregation,  i,
248.

— ,  True  nature  of,  i,  249 ;  ii,  82.

— ,  inorganic,  Spencer's  neglect  to
treat,  i,  249.

;  physics  and  chemistry  of  an

evolving  system,  !,  249.

— ,  Final  stages  of,  in  a  system,  i,  259.

— ,  Inorganic  and  organic  periods  of,
i,  284.

— ,  Organic  and  super-organic,  ii,  85.

Evolutionary  teleology,  ii,  31.

Excess  of  intellectual  capacity  ex-
plained, ii,  477.

Exchange,  i,  566,  571.

— ,  Origin  of,  i,  492.

— ,  Sinister  tendencies  of,  i,  573.

— ,  Monopoly  in,  i,  592.

Exclusion,  Method  of,  in  education,  ii,
422,  433,  440,  486,  548.

Exercise  of  function  a  positive  pleas-
ure, ii,  126.

Exorcism  among  savages,  i,  688.

Experience,  General  theory  of,  i,  186
ii,  488.

— ,  The  education  of,  ii,  175,  206,  559
629.

— ,  All  knowledge  derived  from,  ii,
351,  354.

— ,  Intelligence  proportional  to,  ii
476,  488.

— ,  Not  all,  furnishes  knowledge,  ii
488.

—  an  insufficient  guide,  ii,  560.

— ,  Need  of  a  substitute  for,  ii,  561.
— ,  Cost  of,  ii,  561,  562.

—  a  genetic  process,  ii,  562.
Experimentation    distinguished    from

observation  and  comparison,  i,  99,
112.

Explanation  of  phenomena,  the  essen-
tial of  science,  i,  45,

— ,  Comte's  hostility  to  all  forms  of,
i,  89.

— ,  in  what  it  consists,  i,  365.

Extensor  coccygis,  rudimentary  in  man,
i,  419.

External  world,  how  proved,  i,  187.

bears   no   resemblance    to    the

mental  conceptions,  i,  192.

,  how  revealed,  i,  223.

,  Ideas  of  the,  compared  to  prop-
erties of  matter,  i,  294.

656

INDEX.

Extinction  of  societies,  i,  81 ;  ii,  271,

479.

wild  animals  by  man,  ii,  89.

Extremists  in  political  economy,  Two

schools  of,  ii,  246.
Eye,  Extreme  delicacy  of  the,  i,  293.

I7ACTS,  Excess  of,  an  impediment  to
science,  i,  3.
— ,  Pleasure  experienced  by  some  in

the  accumulation  of,  i,  5.
— ,  Accumulation  of,  compared  to  that

of  money,  i,  5.
Faculties  of  the  mind,  Localization  of

the,  i,  122.
,  Comte's  division  of  the,

i,  122.

,  Unity  of  the,  i,  404.

,  Perceptive  and  reflective,

i,  405.
,  Tendency  of   writers   to

multiply,  ii,  123.
Failures  of   animals    to    attain   their

ends,  ii,  91.
— ,  Cause  of  human,  ii,  457.
— ,  Business,  ii,  660.
Faint  series  of  psychic  phenomena,  i,

187;  ii,  150,  283,  369.
,  Sentiments   belonging

to  the,  ii,  283,  369.
,  Undue

praise  of,  ii,  369,  371.
Faith,  Education  as  an  article  of,  i,  26.
— ,  Religious,  ii,  278.

—  distinguished  from  belief,  ii,  412.
Falsehood,  when  justifiable,  ii,  145.
Family,  Sociological  importance  of  the,

i,  130,  604,  677.
Famine,  Cosmical  significance  of,  ii,  70.
Farming  of  revenues,  i,  63.
Fashion,  Despotism  of,  i,  638.
Fatalism,  ii,  18,  34,  35,  40.
Favorable  conditions.  Law  of,  ii,  172.
Fear,  Pain,  not  death  or  injury,  the

true  object  of,  i,  683.

—  of  violence,  i,  684.

man,  i,  684.

animals,  i,  684.

plants,  i,  685.

inanimate  nature,  i,  686.

spiritual  beings,  i,  687.

disease,  i,  687.

Fear-forces,  i,  675,  680.
— ,  Classification  of  the,  i,  682.
Feeling  the  motive  to  all  action,  i,  11 ;
u,  111,  118,  123.

Feeling  a  propelling  force,  i,  12.

—  the  end  to  which  intellect  is  the
means,  i,  67.

— ,  Organization  of,  i,  68.

— ,  Physiological  character  of,  i,  185 ;
ii,  112.

— ,  Limit  to,  in  the  descending  scale
of  organization,  i,  364.

— ,  adaptive  principle  on  which  devel-
oped, i,  388,  399;  ii,  112.

—  and  not  function  the  motive  to
action,  i,  468,  469,  479,  485,  601,
602,  604,  663,  681,  701;  ii,  113,
120,  321,  323.

— ,  Organs  of,  distinct  from  those  of
function,  i,  469 ;  ii,  121.

— ,  Sociologic  importance  of,  ii,  111.

— ,  Genesis  of,  ii,  112.

— ,  a  protective  armor  for  organized
beings,  ii,  117,  152.

— ,  Philosophy  of,  ii,  123.

— ,  Prevalent  disregard  for  the  phe-
nomena of,  ii,  123.

— ,  Increase  of,  with  organization,  ii,
152,  162,  174.

— ,  a  substitute  in  the  animal  for  the
cellulose  of  the  plant,  ii,  152.

Feelings,  Indifferent,  i,  386;  ii,  112.

Feldspar,  Composition  of,  i,  236.

Female  supremacy  among  the  lower
organisms,  i,  659.

Ferns,  i,  342.

Fertility,  inversely  proportional  to  de-
velopment, i,  184.

Fetichism,  i,  94,  202,  686 ;  ii,  254.

—  as  a  stage  of  theology,  i,  94.
— ,  Theory  of,  i,  202.

Feuillans  monks.  Asceticism   of  the,

ii,  300.
Fibro-vascular   bundles   in   plants,   i,

342.
Fiction,  Mission  of,  ii,  340.
Fijians,  Funeral  sacrifices  among,  11,

291.
Filial  piety.  Injurious  extremes  of,  ii,

443.
Filiation  of  the  sciences,  i,  97.
Final  causes,  i,  88 ;  ii,  10,  80,  91.
Finance,  Principles  of,  i,  567,  574.
— ,  Monopoly  in,  i,  592.
Finances  of  the  world.  Bad  condition

of  the,  ii,  501.
Fine  art  distinguished  from  practical,

i,  71,  662,  671 ;  ii,  191.
,  Two  classes  of  objects  of,  i,

670,  672.

INDEX.

657

Fine  art,  True  position  of,  ii,  191.

,  connected  with  the  reproductive

function,  ii,  I'Jl.
,  non-progressive,  ii,  192.

—  arts,  Classification  of  the,  ii,  669,

that  appeal  to  the  eye,  ii,  669.

ear,  ii,  672.

First  cause,  i,  88 ;  ii,  9.

Fishing  stage  of  social  development,
ii,  197.

Fiske,  John,  The  term  "  psychogeny  "
used  by,  i,  357.

"  sociogcny  "  used  by,  1,

448.

,  on  early  moral  conceptions,  i,

391.

the  law  of  progress,  i,  440.

religious  sentiment,  ii,  260.

Fits,  Savage  interpretation  of,  ii,  274.

Fixed  stars,  not  regarded  by  Comte  as
belonging  to  the  science  of  astrono-
my, i.  111.

constitute  centers  of  solar  sys-
tems, i,  243.

Fixity  of  species,  defended  by  Comte,
i,  119.

Flagellants,  ii,  301.

Flagellata,  i,  338.

Flax,  First  employment  of,  by  man,  i,
558.

Food,  The  three  primary  sources  of,  i,
530.

—  distinguished  from  medicine  and
poison,  i,  530.

— ,  the  final  object  of  production,  i,

547.
— ,  Arts  practiced  in  obtaining,  i,  549,

550.

displayed  in  preparing,  i,  651.

Foods,  Mineral,  i,  532.

— ,  Organic,  i,  533.

— ,  Nutritive,  i,  533.

— ,  Respiratory,  i,  534.

— ,  Vegetation  the  original  producer  of

organic,  i,  535.
— ,  Sources  of  vegetable,  i,  535.

animal,  i,  536.

— ,  Production  of,  i,  537.

mineral,  i,  538.

vegetable,  i,  539.

animal,  i,  544.

Force,  Law  of,  in  the  moral  world,  i,

32,  502,  503,  518.
,  softened  but  not

changed  by  civilization,  i,  503,  507,

608,  512,  618,  520.

Force,  Herbert  Spencer's  views  of,  i,

158.
— ,  Persistence  of,  i,  159.
— ,  the  effect  produced  by  molecular

impact,  i,  228,  230,  290,  291 ;  ii,  4.
— ,  Definition  of,  i,  230.
— ,  not  an  ultimate  principle,  but  one

requiring  explanation,  i,  365.
— ,  only  comprehensible  as  the  effect

of  matter  in  motion,  i,  458 ;  ii,  9,  81
— ,  Test  of  a  true  natural,  i,  476 ;  ii

95.
Forces,  The  social,  i,  35,  36,  132,  460,

468,  472,480;  ii,  190,  311.
,  Classification  of,  i,  468,  472,

480-482.
— ,  Transformation,  or  equivalence,  of,

i,  160.
— ,  Analysis  of,  the  initial  step  in  es

tablishing  a  new  science,  i,  438.
— ,  Evil,  in  society  and  their  counter

forces,  i,  580.
Foreordination,  ii,  34,  40.
Foresight,  Intellectual,  as  a  factor  in

human  progress,  i,  15,  72,  137.
Forests,  Destruction  of,  and  its  conse-
quences, i,  74,  274  ;  ii,  52,  88.
Formula  of  ethics,  The  fundamental,  ii,

445.
Formulas,  Legislative,  ii,  574.
Fornix,  Function  of  the,  i,  380.
Fourier,  Baron,  Favor   shown  by,  to

Comte's  scheme  of  philosophy,  i,  84.
,  Comte's  admiration  of  his  trea-
tise on  heat,  i,  114.
,  Evidence  furnished  by,  for  the

undulatory  theory  of  heat,  i,  115.
Fourth  means  to  the  ultimate  end  of

conation,  ii,  109,  470.
Fowle,   T.  W.,  Definition  of  religion

proposed  by,  ii,  253.
Fraunhofer's  early  observations  upon

the  constitution  of  the  fixed  stars,

i,  90,  111.
Free  moral  agency,  i,  457.
—  trade  a  typical  genetic  process,  i,

74  ;  ii,  398,  578.
Free-will,  Belief  in,  a  necessary  conse-
quence of  man's  surroundings,  i,  50.
— ,  Divine,  ii,  34,  38.
— ,  denied  to  animals,  ii,  330.
Fuogians,  i,  418.
Function  vs.  feeling,  i,  4C8,  469,  479,

485,  601,  602,  604,  663,  681,  701;

ii,  113,  120,  321,  323.
Functional  social  phenomena,  i,  701.

658

INDEX.

Functions,  Relations  of,  to  organs,  i,

119.
Funerals,  Human  sacrifices  offered  at,

by  various  savage  races,  ii,  289.
Fungi,  i,  341,  34Y.
Fiirwahrhalten,  ii,  410.
Future  existence,  belief  in.  Causes  of

the,  i,  201.
,  Extent  of  the,  i,  691 ;  ii,

261.
,  Power  of  the,  to  modify

society,  i,  691.
— ,  more  universal  than   in

immortality,  ii,  261.

GAIN,  Law  of  greatest,  i,  4,  20,  391,
510;  ii,  226.
— ,  Love  of,  and  its  consequences,  i,

516;  ii,  341.
,  as  a  motive  to  adventure  and

geographical  discovery,  i,  668.
Galiani,  ii,  1.
Galileo,  Share  of,  in  inaugurating  the

scientific   era,  i,  96,   141 ;   ii,   200,

203.
— ,  Persecution  of,  ii,  304.
Galton,  Francis,  ii,  482.
Galvani,  ii,  509.
Ganglia,  Nature  of,  i,  372.
Garciiasso,  ii,  290.
Gas,  Definition  of,  i,  249.
— ,  the  normal  form  of  matter,  i,  252.
Gases,  Solidification  of  the  permanent,

i,  252,  256.
— ,  Molecular  movements  in,  i,  253.
Gasterosteus,  i,  660.
Gastrocnemius  muscle,  i,  418.
Gastrula,  i,  339.
Creneral,  distinguished  from   abstract

truths,  ii,  620.
Generality,  as  a  test  of  importance  in

knowledge,  ii,  492.
Generalization,  Nature  of  the  process

of,  ii,  416.

—  consists  in  the  employment  of  re-
mote means,  ii,  642.

— ,  the  basis  of  organization,  ii,  642.
Genesis,  Uses  of  the  term,  i,  66,  172 ;
ii,  80.

—  of  matter,  i,  220.

organic  forms,  i,  300.

mind,  i,  357.

man,  i,  410.

society,  i,  448,  474.

avarice,  i,  495.

feeling,  ii,  112.

Genetic  progress,  i,  28,  31,  73;  ii,  9,

87.
— ,  Need  of  the  term,  i,  65 ;  ii,  80.

—  school  of  thought,  ii,  18.

—  ideas  not  inherited  but  acquired,  ii,
33.

—  phenomena,  ii,  80,  81.

occur  in  prolonged  series,  ii,  82.

,  Rhythmic  character  of,  ii,  86.

,  Waste  involved  in,  ii,  87.

,  Subdivisions  of,  ii,  105.

Genius,  Undue  attention  paid  to,  ii,
368,  600.

—  distinguished  from  intellect,  intel-
ligence, etc.,  ii,  472.

Geniuses,  Psychological  significance  of,
ii,  612.

Geoffroy  Saint-Hilaire,  ifitienne.  Ad-
vanced views  of,  in  biology,  i,  117,
119,  154;  ii,  17.

Geological  paradox,  i,  52.

Geology,  Best  established  truths  of,
incapable  of  proof  by  the  senses,  ii,
405,  417.

Geometry,  Comte's  treatment  of,  i,  109.

—  as  a  human  invention,  ii,  387.
George  Eliot,  ii,  468.
Germ-cell,  i,  331,  332,  342.
Germinative  layers,  i,  389.

Germs  of  disease,  difficulty  of  their

study,  ii,  70.
Gesture-language,  i,  436 ;  ii,  182.
Getae,  ii,  299.

"  Getting  religion,"  ii,  261.
Ghost  theory  of   Herbert   Spencer,  i,

202 ;  ii,  259.
Ghosts,  Fear  of,  i,  687.
Gibbon,  Characters  of  the,  that  most

resemble  man,  i,  426.
Gladstone  on  Spencer's  reconciliation

of  science  and  religion,  ii,  269.
Glass,   The   ancients    ignorant  of,   ii,

199.
Globe,  Cosmical  history  of  the,  i,  242,

262,  279.
Globigerinae,  i,  321.
Glycerine,  i,  306.
God  as  an  hypothesis,  ii,  7.
— ,  The  glory  of,  as  an  end  of  being,

ii,  138.
— ,  Kant  on  the  existence  of  a,  ii,  524.
Goitre,  how  brought  on,  ii,  63.
Golden  rule  of  ethics,  i,  10,  396;  ii,

146,  442.
Groode,  G.  Brown,  on  the  menhaden,  ii,

68.

INDEX.

659

CJorilla,  Characters  of  the,  that  most

resemble  man,  i,  426.
— ,  Terrestrial  habits  of  the,  i,  426,

427.
Gossen  on  social  mechanics,  i,  603.
Government,  Ameliorative  function  of,

i,  31 ;  ii,  216,  231,  245,  573.
— ,  Negative  character  of,  i,  33,

—  compared  to  a  polytechnic  institute,
i,  37  ;  ii,  252,

— ,  Encroachment  of,  upon  the  domain

of  private  enterprise,  i,  61,  62 ;  ii,

891,  522,  578.
— ,  Private  enterprises  assiuned  by,  i,

62 ;  ii,  579.
— ,  most  of  its  present  functions  once

left  to  private  enterprise,  i,  63 ;  ii,

578.
— ,  Origin  and  genesis  of,  i,  465,  513,

585  ;  ii,  14,  217,  259.
— ,  Cosmopolitan,  i,  466,  467,  477,  478,

703.
— ,  Protection  as  a  function  of,  i,  513 ;

ii,  214,  229,  231,  239,  243.
— ,   a   non-progressive    institution,    i,

626;  ii,  168,  212.

—  as  a  mode  of  acquisition,  i,  685,
— ,  Erroneous  views  of  the  progressive

tendencies  of,  ii,  168.
— ,  Objects  and  functions  of,  ii,  214,

216,  231,  245.
— ,  Necessity  for,  in  primitive  society,

ii,  221.
— ,  Erroneous  views  as  to  the  origin

of,  ii,  221.

—  as  an  invention  of  man,  ii,  224.

— ,  Ideal    contrasted    with  actual,  ii,

227,  242,  251.
— ,  Odiousness  of,  ii,  229,  231,  236.

—  should  rest  on  the  positive  will,
not  merely  on  the  consent,  of  the
governed,  ii,  230.

— ,  Future  prospects  of,  ii,  230.

— ,  Elimination  of  the  illegitimate  func-
tions of,  ii,  235.

— ,  Too  much,  ii,  237,  239.

— ,  compared  to  a  stock  company,  ii,
242.

— ,  evidence  that  it  antedated  religion,
ii,  259.

— ,  in  how  far  it  has  employed  the  in-
direct method,  ii,  391,  397,  545,  546.

— ,  Superiority  of  work  performed  by,
ii,  391,  578,  579,  581-584.

— ,  Objections  to  enlarging  the  sphere
of,  ii,  572.

Government,  The  legislative  branch  of,
less  intelligent  than  the  executive  or
judicial,  ii,  573.

— ,  All  progressive  measures  proceed
from  the  administrative  department
of,  ii,  574.

— ,  Encroachment  of  legislative  upon
the  executive  power  of,  ii,  574.

— ,  Tendency  of,  to  expand  its  jurisdic-
tion, ii,  577.

— ,  peculiarly  adapted  to  conducting
scientific  work,  ii,  583.

educational    work,    ii,

584,

Graminese,  Late  appearance  of  the,  ii,
63,

Gravitation,  Law  of,  practical  results  of
its  discovery,  i,  4,  231,

,  one  of  the  three  comprehen-
sive principles  known  to  man,  i,  8.

— ,  Possible  identity  of,  with  magnet-
ism, i,  113.

— ,  Material  theory  of,  i,  229,  238,

— ,  Le  Sage's  theory  of,  i,  229,

—  and  radiation.  Antagonistic  opera-
tion of,  i,  230,  231,  251 ;  ii,  84,

— ,  Utilization  of,  by  man,  i,  231.

— ,  Convertibility  of,  into  other  forms
of  force,  i,  291,

Greatest  good  (or  greatest  happiness),
Theory  of,  ii,  141,  142,  446.

Greek  Church,  i,  94,

Green  line  of  the  solar  spectrum,  i,  241,
280.

Gregariousness,  Conditions  required  to
produce,  i,  451,  462  ;  ii,  220,

Grey,  Lady  Jane,  ii,  364.

Groff,  George  G.,  i,  163.

Growth  distinguished  from  manufact-
ure, i,  72  ;  li,  204.

— ,  implied  in  life,  i,  125,

— ,  Antagonism  between,  and  repro-
duction, i,  172,  173,  184,

Guano,  Nature  of,  i,  274.

Guaranis,  Human  sacrifices  among  the,
ii,  290.

Guilt  and  innocence,  ii,  141,  356.

— ,  Origin  of  the  idea  of,  ii,  348,  865,
356,

— ,  The  three  principles  upon  which
the  belief  in,  rests,  ii,  361,

HABIT,  distinguished  from  instinct,
i,  189.
— ,  Analogy  of,  in  mental  operations,  i,
189.

660

IJTOEX.

Habit,  Philosophy  of,  ii,  844.

Habitat,  Conditions  restricting  species
to,  i,  466,  474,  486 ;  ii,  14,  209,  211,
234,  284.

Habitual  action,  i,  186,  186,  188,  180 ;
ii,  344.

Haeckel,  Ernst,  on  man's  simian  affini-
ties, i,  414.

Haidahs,  Funeral  orgies  of  the,  ii,  290.

Hamilton,  Sir  William,  on  philosophiz-
ing, i,  3.

,  The  term  "conation"  used

by,  ii,  93.

Rowan,  Invention  of  quater-
nions by,  ii,  388.

Hampden,  John,  ii,  405.

Hands,  how  developed,  i,  431.

— ,  Importance  of  the,  i,  431.

Happiness,  Universal  demand  for  an
increase  of,  i,  14.

— ,  the  ultimate  end  of  effort  (cona-
tion), i,  564;  ii,  94,  111,  129,  133,
136,  146,  153.

—  defined,  ii,  94,  108.

— ,  Means  to,  ii,  108,  109,  168,  308,
400,  470,  540.

— ,  Objectionableness  of  the  word,  ii,
147,  653,

— ,  Direct  and  indirect  pursuit  of,  ii,
153,  154,  544.

— ,  Individual  and  social,  ii,  154.

— ,  how  only  obtainable,  ii,  154.

— ,•  Organization  of,  ii,  156,  159,  541.

— ,  Primary  means  to,  ii,  158.

— ,  The  two  modes  of  increasing,  ii,
177.

— ,  Life  dependent  on,  ii,  496.

— ,  Negative  and  positive,  ii,  495.

— ,  not  attainable  by  direct  effort,  u,
644.

"  Hard  times,"  Sociological  significance
of,  i,  704 ;  ii,  210.

Harmony  of  opinion,  ii,  405.

Hate,  i,  675,  679.

Headship  among  uncivilized  tribes,  i,
210.

— ,  Races  devoid  of,  ii,  215.

Health,  Need  of  popularizing  the  laws
of,  i,  690.

Hearing,  Sense  of,  an  sDsthetic  social
force,  i,  666.

Heart,  Metaphorical  use  of  the  word,  i,
666,

Heat,  regarded  by  Comte  as  a  phenom-
enon  only,  whose  cause  it  was  idle
to  seek,  i,  90,  113.

Heat,  Baron  Fourier's  treatise  on,  i,  114.

— ,  Cosmic  effect  of,  opposed  to  evolu-
tion in  the  Spencerian  sense,  i,  1 75.

Heaven,  Origin  of  the  conception  of,  ii,
267.

Hecastotheism,  ii,  256.

Heliocentric  theory,  a  settled  question,
ii,  404.

Helix  Veatchii,  ii,  151.

Hell,  Origin  of  the  conception  of,  ii,
267.

Helvetius,  i,  96.

Hemp  plant,  as  an  example  of  female
supremacy,  i,  659.

Henry,  Joseph,  on  scientific  experimen-
tation, ii,  193.

Hercules,  Meaning  of  the  labors  of,  i,
568.

Heredity,  Law  of,  i,  178,  425.

— ,  Influence  of  the  female  in,  popular-
ly ignored,  ii,  616.

Heretics,  Meaning  of  the  persecution
of,  ii,  272.

Herostratus,  ii,  841,

Heterogeneous,  Progress  from  the  ho-
mogeneous to  the,  i,  165.

Heteromitae,  i,  331.

Hierarchy  of  the  sciences  as  drawn  up
by  Comte,  i,  2,  97.

,  Position  of  sociology  in

the,  i,  2,  9.

-^,  or  priestcraft,  as  a  mode  of  acqui-
sition, i,  687.

—  of  means  to  ends,  ii,  591.

— ,  or  priestcraft.  Tendency  to,  in  all
religions,  ii,  261.

Hillel,  Advanced  moral  doctrines  of,  i,
10,  396.

Ilipparchus,  ii,  200.

Hippocrates,  i,  689.

Histological  development,  i,  839.

Historical  method  in  teaching,  i,  106,
108.

History,  Superficial  character  of  the
current,  i,  537,  544,  667 ;  ii,  244,

— ,  Progressive  effect  of,  ii,  186.

Hobbes,  founder  of  the  negative  phi-
losophy, i,  95.

— ,  his  recognition  of  the  social  forces,
i,  132.

Homines,  i,  444.

Homo,  i,  413;  ii,  494.

Homogeneity  among  organized  beings,
i,  412.

Homogeneous,  Progress  from  the,  to
the  heterogeneous,  i,  165.

INDEX.

661

Homogeneous,  Instability  of  the,  i,  161.
Hope,  Psychological  position  of,  i,  675,

681 ;  ii,  283.
Hornaday,  William  T.,  on  the  habits  of

the  orang,  i,  426.
Horned  men,  Race  of,  i,  418.
Hottentots,  i,  418.
Houses,  Moral  influence  of,  i,  556.
Human    attributes     as    distinguished

from  animal,  i,  132,   490,  491;    ii,

330.

—  sacrifices  at  funerals,  ii,  290.

—  nature  as  a  branch  of  sociology,
ii,  335.

,  Fundamental  laws  of,  ii,  336.

Humanitarianism,    i,    678  ;     ii,    450,

468.
Humanity,  Comte's  religion  of,  i,  129.

—  and  animality,  Struggle  between,  i,
132.

— ,  a  recent  attribute  of  man,  i,  461.

Humboldt,  Alexander  von,  not  prop-
erly a  philosopher,  i,  3,  7,  141,  142.

,  Favor  shown  by,  to  Comte's

philosophic  scheme,  i,  84.

Humerus,  Perforation  of  the,  in  low
races,  i,  419.

Hunger  as  a  social  force,  i,  484.

Hunt,  T,  Sterry,  on  the  cosmic  origin
of  the  atmosphere,  i,  271.

Hunting  stage  of  society,  i,  490,  542,
545,  549  ;  ii,  197.

— ,  Cause  of  the  fondness  of  civilized
men  for,  i,  545.

Hutton  on  the  variability  of  the  earth's
crust,  i,  49.

Huxley,  Thomas  H.,  on  Bathybius,  1,
321.

man's  anatomical  relation-
ships, i,  414.

education    and    laissez

fairc,  ii,  606.

Hydra,  i,  323,  340,  349;  ii,  152.

Hydrides,  i,  306.

Hydrocarbons,  i,  304.

Hydrophobia,  Cause  of  the  impulse  to
bite  in,  ii,  62.

Hylokinesis,  ii,  9.

Hypnotism,  i,  376.

Hypotheses,  Value  of,  i,  7.

— ,  Comte's  hostility  to,  i,  88.

ICE,  to  be  regarded  as  rock,  i,  277.
Ideal  government,  ii,  227.
Idealism  weakens  the  intellect,  ii,  550.
Idealists,  i,  160.

Ideas  rule  the  world.  Meaning  of  the
saying  that,  ii,  401.

— ,  Worthlessness  of  most  human,  ii,
458.

— ,  Cosmological,  ii,  459.

— ,  Biological,  ii,  459,  462.

— ,  Anthropological,  ii,  459,  463.

— ,  Sociological,  ii,  459,  467.

Ideation,  Physiology  of,  i,  878-381;
ii,  346.

Identity  distinguished  from  similarity,
i,  191  ;  ii,  416.

— ,  Truth  consists  in  the  recognition
of,  ii,  415,  512.

Ideo-motor  actions,  ii,  312,  313,  314,
345.

Idiots,  Actions  of,  resemble  those  of
animals,  i,  417,  419 ;  ii,  331,  332.

— ,  No  line  between,  and  rational  per-
sons, ii,  332.

— ,  Whom  to  regard  as,  for  educational
purposes,  ii,  611.

Idolatry,  ii,  254.

Ignoramus  vs.  ignorabiraus,  i,  146,  164.

Ignorance  produces  apparent  insanity,
i,  46.

— ,  Most  error  and  evil  due  to,  ii,  481.

—  of  so-called  cultivated  people  re-
specting important  scientific  truths,
ii,  492.

Illegitimate  functions  of  government,
Elimination  of  the,  ii,  235.

Images,  reflected.  Savage  interpreta-
tion of,  i,  200,  259,  263,  266,  274.

— ,  Metaphysical,  i,  223.

Imagination,  Effect  of,  on  woman's
condition,  i,  606,  614.

— ,  Esthetic,  i,  671.

Imaginative  art,  ii,  191.

Immortality,  belief  in.  Extent  of  the,
i,  201 ;  ii,  261,  280.

,  Power  of  the,  i,  692,  694.

,  Moral  efl'ect  of  the,  i,  694,

696 ;  ii,  268,  279,  283,  284.

,   Anti-progressive   effects  of

the,  i,  696.

,  Effect  of  the,  on  civilization

exaggerated,  i,  696 ;  ii,  285.

,   evolved   from    the   simpler

conception  of  spiritual  existence,  ii,
261,  267.

,  favorable  to  suicide,  ii,  268.

,  Solace  derived  from  the,  ii,

279,  283.

,  wanting  in  primitive  relig-
ions, ii,  280.

662

INDEX.

Immortality,  not  claimed  to  be  proved,
ii,  268.

Impact  of  bodies,  Force  explained  on
the  principle  of  the,  i,  159,  228,  23U,
290,  291,  362  ;  ii,  4.

,  Molar  and  molecular,  i,  291.

Implements  as  a  secondary  form  of
production  and  the  means  to  pri-
mary production,  i,  547.

Improvement  of  society  as  a  function
of  government,  i,  31 ;  ii,  216,  231,
246,  573.

Impulsive  actions,  ii,  312,  314,  824,
336.

possessing  moral  quality,  ii,  314,

342.

devoid  of  moral  quality,  ii,  314,

344.

,  often  safer  than  deliberative,  ii,

327.

Inadaptation  in  nature,  i,  488,  677  ;  ii,
69.

Incandescence  of  nebulae  and  stars,  ,
251,  255.

Incentives  to  intellectual  labor.  Need
of,  i,  4.

,  The  two  principal,  i,  8.

Incest,  Abhorrence  of,  a  survival  of  se-
verer savage  customs,  ii,  464.

Increase  of  intellect  and  of  knowledge,
ii,  483,  488,  489.

India,  Mortality  in,  from  snake-bite,  i,
685 ;  ii,  271.

Indians,  North  American,  not  dimin-
ishing in  number,  i,  477.

Indifference,  Prevalence  of  moral,  ii,
447,  448.

Indignation,  a  form  of  anger,  ii,  341.

Indirect  equilibration,  i,  178.

—  method  of  conation  explained  and
distinguished  from  the  direct  method,
i,  476,  561 ;  ii,  94,  95,  99,  130,  160,
164,  178,  181,  190,  273,  378,  380,
881,  479,  541.

,  Deception  involved  in  the,

i,  500,  501.

,  Application  of  the,  to  so-
cial science,  ii,  101.

,  applied  thus  far  chiefly

to  physical  phenomena,  ii,  161.

,  Examples  of  the,  ii,  196,

276,  386-392.

,  Society  not  a  product  of

the,  ii,  211,  212.

,    Application   of   the,   to

government,  ii,  235.

Indirect  method  of  conation,  the  essen-
tial of  dynamic  action,  ii,  378.

,  Modus  operandi  of  the,  ii,

380.

,  rarely  employed  by  delib-
erative bodies,  ii,  396.

,  Highest  possible  applica-
tion of  the,  ii,  540.

— ,  or  functional,  social  phenomena,  i,
701.

Individual  utility,  ii,  132,  382.

Individuality,  Multiple,  in  the  nervous
system,  i,  185.

—  in  plants,  i,  235.
Individuals,  Orders  of,  i,  326,  837.
Induction  logically  de&ned,  i,  191 ;  ii,

201.

—  distinguished  from  deduction,  i,
191 ;  ii,  517.

— ,  to  what  extent  employed  by  the

ancients,  ii,  201.
Industry,  Origin  of,  i,  488.
— ,  Limitations  of  the  term,  i,  582,
— ,  Struggles  of,  ii,  88.
Inequalities,  Sexuo-social,  i,  642.
Inequality   of  knowledge,  intelligence,

and  education,  and  its  consequences,

i,  23,    509,    579,  645;  ii,  535,  638,

696,  602,  606,  607.
wealth  and  its  cause,  i,  516,  619,

522,  579 ;  ii,  638,  597,  602.

sex  in  dress,  i,  642,  660.

duties,  i,  643,  651,  661.

education,  i,  645,  652 ;  ii,

615.
rights,  i,  646,  653.

—  in  the  distribution  of  knowledge,  ii,
535,  537.

social  condition.    Cause    of,    ii,

538.

—  of  native  intellect  exaggerated,  ii,
598.

Infinitesimal,  Proper  sense  of  the  term,
i,  226.

Infinity,  Need  of  recognizing,  i,  227.

— ,  The  mind  shrinks  from  contemplat-
ing, ii,  6.

—  a  parte  ante  and  a  parte  post,  ii,
37.

Inflorescence  as  illustrating  orders  of

individuality,  i,  337.
Ingenuity,  Definition  of,  i,  552.
Initial  means,  ii,  109,  640.
Innocence,  ii,  141.
Innocent,  The  word,  not  etymologically

antithetical  to  guilty,  ii,  141.

INDEX.

663

Innuus,  i,  416.

Inorganic  evolution  omitted  in  Herbert
Spencer's  philosophy,  i,  145.

—  period  of  cosmical  development,  i,
284.

Inquisition,  ii,  304.

Insanity,  Apparent,  producible  by  ig-
norance i,  46.

— ,  Savage  interpretation  of,  i,  200.

Insects  as  illustrating  the  direct  method
of  conation,  ii,  95.

Instability  of  the  homogeneous,  i,  261 ;
ii,  83.

explains  the  heterogeneity

of  the  chemical  elements,  i,  162.

Instinct  defined  as  "  fixed  reason,"  ii,
123.

compound  reflex  action,  i,  188.

secondary    organization,     ii,

104.

— ,  Physiological  explanation  of,  i,  188.

—  distinguished  from  habit,  i,  188.

—  a  phylogenetic  process,  i,  189.

— ,  Transition  from,  to  reason,  i,  190.

— ,  Man's  substitute  for,  ii,  490.

Instincts,  how  developed,  ii,  96.

Institutions,  Progressive  and  non-pro-
gressive, ii,  166.

Integration,  Cosmical,  i,  155.

— ,  Organic,  i,  1'75.

— ,  Psychological,  ii,  469.

Intellect,  a  directive  force  only,  not  a
true  natural,  or  propelling,  force,  i,
12,  19,  486,  599,  667,  697  ;  ii,  100.

—  distinguished  from  feeling,  as  a
social  influence,  i,  61,  186,  381,  486.

—  as  a  seat  of  ifeeling,  or  emotion  i.,
67,698,  699;  ii,  128.

— ,  Influence  of,  compared  with  that  of
acquired  knowledge,  i,  69,  441 ;  ii,
472,  487.

—  a  dangerous  element  when  unsup-
plied  with  knowledge,  i,  69 ;  ii,  44,
174,  274,  287,  288,  302,  473,  478.

— ,  Truth  the  natural  food  of  the,  i,
69  ;  ii,  569,  619.

—  distinguished  from  intelligence,  i,
70,  405,  441,  507 ;  ii,  471,  475,  537.

— ,  Fundamental  nature  of  the,  i,  384,

402,  501.
— ,  Higher  faculties  of  the,  i,  403.

—  called  the  co-efficient  of  intelli-
gence, i,  405  ;  ii,  471.

— ,  Increase  of,  during  the  historical
period  questionable,  i,  407,  441 ;  ii,
476,  480.

Intellect,  most  successfully  developed
bv  the  acquisition  of  knowledge,  i,
441  ;  ii,  483,  484,  549,  550,  564,  569.

— ,  rapidity  of  its  operation,  i,  476  ;  ii,
173.

—  contrasted  with  the  true  social  forces,
i,  486,  666.

— ,  Deception  the  essential  process  of
the,  i,  501,  612.

—  antagonized  by  the  reproductive
function,  i,  649.

— ,  Superiority  of  the  male,  accounted

for,  i,  649 ;  ii,  616.
— ,  General  honesty  of  the,  ii,  32.
— ,  undue  importance  attached  to  its

development,  ii,  123,  368,  472,  600.
— ,  Pleasures  of  the,  ii,  128.

—  the  only  progressive  psychic  attri-
bute, ii,  160,  310.

— ,  cosmical  epoch  marked  by  its  ap-
pearance, ii,  164,  173.

— ,  All  grades  of,  represented  in  men,
ii,  333.

—  in  animals,  ii,  334.

— ,  Average  equality  of,  among  all
classes  of  men,  ii,  430,  475.

—  in  the  lower  hmnan  races,  ii,  474.
— ,  Minimum  standard  of,  requisite  to

civilization,  ii,  474.
education,    ii,    474,

611.
— ,  causes  of  its  increase  in  pre-social

man,  ii,  477.

—  always  in  advance  of  acciuired  knowl-
edge, ii,  477,  480,  487.

— ,  difficulties  in  the  way  of  its  artifi-
cial development,  ii,  482,  487.

— ,  legitimate  modes  of  its  develop-
ment, ii,  483,  484,  550,  564.

—  can  not  be  increased  by  direct  meth-
ods, ii,  543,  549,  551.

— ,  less  important  than  other  qualities
in  raising  men  to  eminence,  ii,  598.

— ,  Mediocrity  the  normal  state  of  the,
ii,  600.

— ,  Latent,  ii,  611.

— ,  Varying  qualities  of,  ii,  612.

Intellectual  states,  i,  403.

—  social  forces,  i,  472,  473,  482,
667.

—  action  distinguished  from  intellect-
ual force,  i,  476.

—  faculty,  Simplest  manifestation  of
the,  ii,  99.

—  culture.  Importance  of,  ii,  129.

—  gymnastic,  ii,  482.

6Q4:

INDEX.

Intelligence,  distinguished  from  intel-
lect, i,  70,  405,  406,  607;  ii,  471,
475,  637.

— ,  how  manifested  in  the  universe,  i,
368;  ii,  74.

— ,  Compound  character  of,  i,  405,  441 ;
ii,  471,  474.

— ,  Co-efficient  of,  i,  405 ;  ii,  471.

— ,  how  dependent  upon  brain-develop-
ment, i,  440.

— ,  distinctness  of  its  acquisitive  and
progressive  attributes,  i,  519.

—  a  product  of  organization,  ii,  10.
— ,  Influence  of  density  of  population

upon,  it,  476.

Intemperance,  Ineffectual  legislation
against,  i,  44.

— ,  General  indifference  to  the  evils  of,
ii,  447.

Intensification,  Principle  of,  in  inven-
tion, ii,  101.

Interior  observation  in  the  study  of
mind,  i,  123.

Interest,  Practical  and  speculative,  ii,
20.

Interpretation  of  natural  phenomena
always  erroneous  at  first,  i,  45.

Intromittent  organs,  First  appearance
of,  in  the  animal  kingdon,  ii,  116.

Intuition,  Herbert  Spencer's  use  of  the
term,  i,  190.

Intuitions  often  safer  guides  than  de-
liberate judgments,  ii,  327.

Invention,  Fundamental  nature  and
conditions  of,  i,  34,  35,  38,  39,  44,
486,  490,  493,  501, 551 ;  ii,  100,  165,
195,  204,  380,  385,  389.

— ,  Principle  of  deception  involved  in,
i,  501.

— ,  Incentives  to,.i,  548.

— ,  Classification  of  the  modes  of,  ii,  100.

— ,  Positive  and  negative,  ii,  101.

— ,  Intensification,  direction,  and  com-
mutation, as  principles  of,  ii,  101.

— ,  Examples  of,  in  physics  and  me-
chanics, ii,  389.

biology,  ii,  890.

sociology,  ii,  392.

— ,  Need  of  special  instmction  in,  ii,
394.

—  the  essential  element  in  dynamic
action,  ii,  511.

Inventions,  never  purely  accidental,  ji,
181.

—  not  appreciated  nor  fully  utilized
by  society,  ii,  566.

Inventors,  Unfortunate  lot  of  most,  i,
78.

Involuntary  actions,  ii,  312,  314.

,  Partially,  ii,  816.

,  Real  and  nominal,  ii,  318,  819.

Irritability  distinguished  from  sensi-
bility, i,  360,  364;  ii,  31.

— ,  Mechanical  explanation  of,  i,  362.

— ,  Lamarck's  definition  of,  i,  364.

—  a  motor  effect,  i,  369.

Isomerism,  i,  169,  286,  307,  308,  360.

— ,  Muscular  and  nervous  action  ex-
plained by,  i,  308.

Itching,  Psychological  explanation  of,
ii,  148.

JEALOUSY,  Communities  devoid  of,
i,  622.

— ,  evidence  of  its  existence  in  ani-
mals, i,  623.

— ,  the  correlative  of  sexual  love,  i,  680.

Jehovah,  Ancestral  origin  of,  i,  206.

Jerrold,  Douglas,  his  definition  of  dog-
matism, ii,  19.

Jesuitical  dictum,  ij,  134.

Joly,  N.,  on  the  origin  of  fire,  i,  554.

Ju4ngs,  i,  418,  455.

Judgment,  Faculty  of,  i,  404.

,  ReUability  of  the,  ii,  450.

— ,  Act  of,  consists  in  the  recognition
of  identity,  ii,  416,  511.

Judicial  method,  the  only  truly  delib-
erative method,  ii,  574.

Juggernaut,  ii,  301.

Jura  positiva,  ii,  144.

Justice,  Natural,  or  the  law  of  force,
i,  503.

,  Transition  from,  to  civil,  i,  504.

— ,  civil,  Genesis  of,  i,  508.

— ,  how  obtainable  in  society,  i,  618 ;
ii,  366,  449.

— ,  Self-regulative,  ii,  449.

KANT,  IMMANUEL,  philosophic  val-
ue of  his  "Theorie  des  Him-
mels,"  i,  7.

,  his  causal  in  excess  of  his  ob-
servational powers,  i,  142.

,  The  duality  of  psychic  phenom-
ena recognized  by,  i,  381.

,  his  pure  morals,  i,  391 ;  ii,  377.

,  Philosophy  of,  ii,  19.

,  his  antinomies,  ii,  19,  27.

on  religion,  ii,  252.

the  existence  of  a  Grod,  ii,

524.

INDEX.

665

Khonds,  Funeral  sacrifices  of  the,  ii,

291.
Kinetic  and  kinematic,  Modern  use  of

the  terms,  i,  458.
Kirchhoff's  early  observations  on  the

constitution  of  the  fixed  stars,  i,  90.
Klein  on  volcanic  activity  in  the  moon,

i,  163.
Knowable,  The,  i,  155,  157,  194.
Knowing,  knowing  how,  and  doing,  ii,

393,  568.
Knowledge,  ii,  470.
— ,  Equal  distribution  of  extant,  i,  21,

22;  ii,  418,  541,  544,  568,  602.
— ,  how  obtainable,  i,  22.
— ,  Excessive  accumulation  of,  i,  23.
— ,  Chaotic  condition  of,  i,  24  ;  ii,  462,

475,  535.
— ,  Influence  of,  compared  with   that

of  intellect,  i,  69,  441 ;  ii,  472,  477,

480,  487,  489,  537.

—  defined,  i,  69 ;  ii,  108.

— ,  All,  should  be  made  scientific,  i,
70.

— ,  Degrees  in  the  importance  of,  i,  70,
405;  u,  430,  489,  492,  495,  496,
620.

— ,  how  derived,  i,  186.

— ,  Root  of  the  idea  of,  i,  383.

— ,  Discovery  of,  always  in  advance  of
its  diffusion,  ii,  15,  72,  462,  472,
485.

— ,  Principal  use  of,  ii,  15,  16.

— ,  Effect  of  certain  beliefs  on  the  pur-
suit of,  ii,  38.

—  essential  to  progress,  ii,  129,

—  as  a  proximate  end  of  conation,  ii,
156,  470.

— ,  Power  proportional  to,  ii,  238,  382,
534,  602.

— ,  Undervaluation  of,  ii,  472.

— ,  Origination  vs.  distribution  of,  ii,
472,  485,  487,  541,  543,  544,  551,
565,  568,  602,  623.

— ,  Inequality  of,  ii,  475,  535,  607.

— ,  Capacity  for,  always  in  advance  of,
ii,  477,  480,  487.

— ,  Small  amount  of  the  extant,  pos-
sessed by  the  average  mind,  ii,  485,
602.

— ,  Necessity  for  accepting,  at  second
hand,  ii,  486.

— ,  the  more  inferential  the  more  val-
uable, ii,  488.

— ,  Increase  of,  ii,  488,  491.

—  an  aid  to  the  intellect,  ii,  489.

€0

Knowledge  a  substitute  for  instinct,  ii,

490.
— ,  Quantitative  and  qualitative  modes

of  increasing,  ii,  491.
— ,  Tests  of  the  importance  of,  ii,  492,

620.

—  of  the  environment,  ii,  495,  496.
— ,  Scientific  distinguished  from  imsci-

entific,  ii,  497,  533.

— ,  Derivative,  ii,  501.

— ,  Ethical,  ii,  507.

— ,  Dynamic,  ii,  509.

— ,  Absolute  and  probable,  ii,  512,  518.

— ,  Deductive  and  inductive,  ii,  517.

— ,  Primary  source  of,  ii,  519.

— ,  Distribution  of,  ii,  534.

— ,  Abundance  of  the  artificial  supply
of,  ii,  539.

— ,  Direct  means  to,  ii,  540.

— ,  in  how  far  obtainable  by  direct  ef-
forts, ii,  548.

— ,  not  always  furnished  by  experi-
ence, ii,  549.

— ,  The  most  general,  the  most  prac-
tical, ii,  563.

— ,  Useful,  as  easily  acquired  as  use-
less, ii,  571.

— ,  Lamarck  on  the  inequality  of,  ii,
607.

— ,  Relative  comprehensibility  of,  ii,
620.

— ,  Practical,  distinguished  from  tech-
nical, ii,  620.

Kohinoor,  i,  552.

Krapf  on  the  Dokos,  i,  418.

LABOR,  the  condition  of  human  ad-
vancement, i,  475,  489,  491.
— ,  Relations  of,  to  art,  i,  489.

—  defined,  i,  491.

— ,  not  natural  but  repugnant  to  man,

i,  541,  591.
— ,  Relations  of,  to  capital,  i,  578,  579,

594 ;  ii,  89.
— ,  Monopoly  of,  i,  593.
— ,  Imaginary  difficulties    that  would

be  presented  by,  under  universal  edu-
cation, ii,  601.
Labyrinthuleaj,  i,  338.
Lagrange,  Claims  of,  to  the  discovery

of  the  calculus,  i,  108.
Laissez  faire  doctrine,  i,  31,  36,  53,  64,

61,  62,  104,  137,  150 ;   ii,  169,  373,

572.
— ,  Comte's  attitude  toward  the,

i,  104,  137,  150,

666

INDEX.

Laissez  faire  philosophers,  Inconsist-
encies of,  ii,  373.

Lamarck,  bis  "  milieu  "  equivalent  to
Spencer's  "environment,"  i,  118;  li,
17.

— ,  Advanced  views  of,  i,  154.

— ,  Law  of  adaptation  formulated  by,
i,  177.

— ,  Natural  selection  not  distinctly
conceived  by,  i,  181.

—  on  irritability,  i,  361.

— ,  modem  principles  of  which  he  was
ignorant,  i,  361.

—  on  inequality  of  knowledge,  ii,  607.
Land,   Property  in,  i,   492,  498,  542,

562.
Landscape-gardening,  i,  669.

—  contrasted  with  architecture,  i,  670.
Language  distinguished  from   speech,

ii,  180.
— ,  Gesture,  ii,  180.

—  as  an  invention,  ii,  181,  182.
— ,  written.  Origin  of,  ii,  182.
Languages,  Rude  character  of  many,  i,

436.
Laplace,  Cosmogony  of,  i.  111.

—  on  the  hypothesis  of  a  deity,  ii,  7.
Lamed,  J.  N.,  ii,  452.

Larynx,  Development  of  the,  in  vari-
ous animals,  i,  434.

Lash-cells,  i,  343.

Latent  amelioration,  i,  80 ;  ii,  209,
307.

—  intellect,  ii,  611.
Latham,  Baldwin,  ii,  208.
Lavoisier,  i,  689.

Law  distinguished  from  regulation,  i,
42.

—  of  acquisition,  i,  497.

— ,  Deception  required  in  the  practice
of,  i,  513.

Laws,  Human,  chiefly  negative,  or  pro-
hibitory, i,  40 ;  ii,  545,  608.

,   distinguished  from  natural,   i,

42.

,  Preambles  to,  in  various  coun-
tries, ii,  574.

,  Mandatory,  ii,  608.

—  of  motion,  Newtonian,  ii,  95.
,  Obedience  to,  by  psychic

forces,  ii,  95,  96.

— ,  distinguished  from  facts  and  from
things,  ii,  627.

Learned  professions.  Superficial  char-
acter of  the,  ii,  501.

Least  resistance,  Law  of,  i,  160,

Leaves,  First  appearance  of,  i,  842.

Le  Conte,  Joseph,  on  the  effect  of  par-
tisanship, i,  75.

on  the  connection  of   altruistic

sentiments  with  reproductive  func-
tions, ii,  338.

Legislation  as  invention,  i,  36-38,  44  ;
ii,  249,  395.

— ,  Coercive,  i,  39,  41,  42.

— ,  Attractive,  i,  39-41,  44,  518,  580  ;
ii,  235,  249,  393,  467,  546.

— ,  Negative  character  of,  i,  40;  ii,
545,  608.

— ,  Equalizing,  i,  580.

— ,  Scientific,  ii,  249,  251.

— ,  Reform  in  the  methods  of,  ii,  896,
398,  399.

—  in  advance  of  constituencies,  ii,  399.

—  by  the  executive  branch,  ii,  573,  575.
Legislative  formulas,  ii,  574.
Legislators,  Comte's  idea  that  philoso-
phers are  unfit  for,  i,  136.

—  intellectually  above  the  mean  but
below  the  extreme,  ii,  399.

Lehrfreiheit,  ii,  568.

Leibnitz,  Claims  of,  as  the  discoverer
of  the  calculus,  i,  108.

— ,  Influence  of,  in  inaugurating  the
scientific  epoch,  ii,  203.

Leisure  as  a  social  factor,  i,  699 ;  ii,
477,  599.

Lens,  Achromatic,  principle  that  ren-
ders its  construction  possible,  ii,  64.

—  as  an  illustration  of  the  indirect
method,  ii,  389.

— ,  what  it  has  accomplished  and  may

accomplish,  ii,  390.
Lemfreiheit,  ii,  568.
Le  Sage's  theory  of  gravitation,  i,  229.
Letters,  Origin  of,  ii,  183.
— ,  Influence  of,  in  perfecting  language,

ii,  186.
Liberty,  False  ideas  respecting,  i,  32  ;

ii,  240.
— ,  largely  dependent  on  property,  i,

519.
— ,  Principles  underlying,  ii,  231,  232.

—  of  volition  distinguished  from  lib-
erty of  action,  ii,  232.

— ,  why  so  highly  valued,  ii,  233,  457.

Lichens,  i,  348.

Life  and  organization,  Relations  be-
tween, i,  117,  316,  819,  326.

,  the  respective  homologues  of

social  progress  and  social  order,  i,
125.

INDEX.

667

Life  implies  growth,  i,  125.

— ,  Decline    of,   a    gradual    death,   i,

126.
— ,  Spencer's  definitions  of,  i,  169, 1*72.
— ,  cosmical  conditions  upon  which  it

depends,  i,  176,  284.
— ,  Slender  tenure  of,  i,  176.
— ,  Ultimate  extinction  of  all,  i,  176,

284.
— ,  The  savage's  idea  of,  i,  198.
— ,  first  step  toward  its  development,  i,

302.
— ,  Preparations  for,  i,  303.
— ,  Beginnings  of,  i,  315.
— ,  Test  of,  i,  316.
— ,  the  result  of  the  aggregation  of

matter,  i,  318.
— ,  a  property  of  matter,  i,  320.
— ,  Probable  marine  origin  of,  i,  322,

344.
— ,  Unity  of  the  principle  of,  i,  356,
— ,  Central  fact  in,  i,  363.

—  distinguished  from  mind,  i,  363.

—  on  other  planets,  i,  410.

— ,  Unity  of  origin  of  all  forms  of,  i,
412.

— ,  enjoyment  tends  to  preserve  and
prolong  it,  i,  563,  564,  597  ;  ii,  495.

— ,  Superstition  aroused  by  the  phe-
nomena of,  i,  687.

— ,  Brevity  of  human,  a  disadvantage,
ii,  67.

Light,  Comte's  opposition  to  all  at-
tempts to  explain,  i,  90,  113.

— ,  Optimum  wave-lengths  of,  for  plant-
growth,  i,  347.

— ,  Advantage  of  the  great  velocity  of,
ii,  55.

Lignine,  i,  348.

Lime,  Art  of  burning,  not  known  to
American  aborigines,  i,  561.

Limits  of  state  regulation,  i,  61.

absolute  certainty,  ii,  513.

—  to  universal  education,  ii,  611.
Liquids,   Molecular  movements  in,   i,

253.
Literary  work,  paid  for  in  proportion

to  its  superficiality,  i,  78.
Literature,  Origin  of,  ii,  182.
— ,  Superficiality  of  the  current,  ii,  500.
— ,  studied  as  a  fine  art,  and  not  as  a

vehicle  of  information,  ii,  588.
Living   distinguished   from  non-living

bodies,  i,  327,  328.
Local  origin  of  man,  i,  445.
Localization  of  the  faculties,  i,  122.

Locke,  negative  character  of  his  phi-
losophy, i,  95.
Lockyer,  J.  Norman,  on  the  composite

nature  of  the  elements,  i,  289,  296.
Logarithms,  Acumen  displayed  in  the

invention  of,  ii,  388.
Logic  distinguished  from  reasoning,  1,

192.
Longevity  in  man,  ii,  67,  68.

toads,  ii,  67.

Loom,  Early  invention  of  the,  i,  559.
Loss  involved  in  coercive  measures,  i,  41.
Love,  sexual.  Definition  of,  i,  610.
based  on  the  sexual  instinct,  i,

610;  ii,  191.
,  Tendency  to  proscribe,  611  ;  ii,

339,  340.
,  Connection  of  the  fine  arts  with,

ii,  191.

—  of  offspring,  i,  676.

kindred,  i,  677.

country,  i,  677.

Love-forces,  i,  675,  676.
Love-sentiment,  Physical  modifications

wrought  by  the,  i,  611.

— ,  Social  modifications  wrought  by
the,  i,  613;  ii,  126.

Lubbock,  Sir  John,  on  the  origin  of  re-
ligion, ii,  253.

Lucretius,  ii,  9.

Luxuries  distinguished  from  necessities,
i,  563,  597.

Luxury  of  grief,  i,  393 ;  ii,  147,  148.

pity,  ii,  148.

altruism,  ii,  370.

LycopodiaccjB,  i,  342.

Lyell,  Sir  Charles,  on  the  variability  of
the  earth's  crust,  i,  49.

MACROCYSTIS  pyrifera,  i,  345.
Magnet,  Notion  that  the  odor  of

onions  destroys  the  power  of  the,  ii,

414.
Magnetism,  Possible  identity  of,  with

gravitation,  i,  113.  •
Magnitude,  Prevalent  narrow  ideas  of,

i,  225.
Male  sexual   selection   in  the  human

race,  i,  613,  633,  640,  648.
,  Tendency  of,  to  revert  to  fe-
male selection,  i,  615.
as  a  possible  explanation  of

woman's    painful    menstruation,    i,

640,  641.

—  superiority  (physical)  accounted
for,  i,  613,  658,  660 ;  ii,  617.

668

INDEX.

Male    superiority    (intellectual),    how

brought  about,  i,  649  ;  ii,  616.
—  sex  not  responsible  for  woman's

condition,  i,  655.
Mallcry,   Garrick,    on   certain   Indian

languages,  i,  436.
the  number  of  North  Ameri-
can Indians,  i,  411.
Malthusian  law  of  population,  i,  66,

704.
Man,  improvement  of  his  condition  the

end  of  science,  i,  8.
— ,  regarded  by  Comte  as  a  perpetual

individual,  i,  129.
— ,  Place  of,  in  the  animal  series,  i,

413.
— ,  anatomical   and  other  characters

denoting  his  simian  origin,  i,  416,

418,  419.
— ,  Low  races  of,  i,  41*7;  ii,  215.
— ,    popular     methods    of     reasoning

against   the   theory  of    his   animal

origin,  i,  422.
— ,  theory  of  his  multiple,  or  poly-
genetic,  origin,  i,  423,  442,  465.
single,  or  monogenetlc,  ori-
gin, i,  423,  442.

degeneration,  i,  423.

— ,   anatomical   and  other  characters

distinguishing   him  from   all   other

animals,  i,  424,  ^61  ;  ii,  125.
— ,  causes  of  his  supremacy,  i,  428.
— ,  Local  origin  of,  i,  443.
— ,  Speechless,  i,  444.
— ,  Antiquity  of,  i,  445.
— ,  not  naturally  a  social  being,  i,  451,

461  ;  ii,  221.
— ,  Different  rates  of  advancement  of

different  tribes  of,  i,  455.
— ,  Prehistoric,  fairly  represented  by

existing  low  tribes,  i,  455.
— ,  himself  his  worst  enemy,  i,  463,

411,  683  ;  ii,  215.
— ,  his  supremacy  prevents  the  rise  of

any  other  species,  i,  476.
— ,  primarily  a  vegetarian,  i,  489,  639,

544  ;  ii,  197.
— ,  Comparative  physical  helplessness

of,  i,  548.
— ,  his  warfare  with  the  lower  animals,

i,  684.
— ,  Attitude  of  nature  toward,  ii,  2.
— ,  Proper  attitude  of,  toward  nature,

ii,  2,  11.
— ,  Necessity  of  studying,  objectively,

ii,  3.

Man,  how  evolved,  i,  4.

— ,  Dominion  of,  over  nature,  ii,  881.

Mandans,  Mutilations  practiced  by  the,

ii,  289.
Mania,    Savage   interpretation    of,   ii,

263.
Mansel,  Contradictory  propositions  of,

reviewed  by  Spencer,  i,  156.
Manufacture,  Monopoly  of,  i,  594.

—  of  opinion,  ii,  437.
Manufactures      distinguished       from

growths,  i,  72  ;  ii,  204.
Marriage,  Forms  of,  i,  211,  615,  618.
— ,  Origin  and  genesis  of,  i,  616.

—  ceremonies,  i,  618.

— ,  Obstacles  to,  in  civilized  countries,

i,  624,  626.
— ,  Prevailing  social  theory  of,  i,  625  ;

ii,  618.

—  institutions.  General  remarks  on,  i,
631.

Marsh,  0.  C,  on  the  intellectual  con-
dition of  the  middle  ages,  ii,  298.

Marsh  harrier,  Superior  size  of  the  fe-
male, i,  660.

Masses,  Technical  definition  of,  i,  263.

Materia  medica.  Early  contributions  to
the,  i,  689.

Materialists,  i,  221 ;  ii,  22.

— ,  Different  kinds  of,  ii,  22.

Mathematics,  Comte's  treatment  of,  i,
104.

— ,  not  properly  a  science,  i,  105,  106.

— ,  Abstract  and  concrete,  i,  106,  109.

Matter,  Herbert  Spencer's  definition  of,
i,  158.

— ,  Indestructibility  of,  i,  159,  231.

— ,  Boscovich's  theory  of,  i,  160.

— ,  Redistribution  of,  i,  160.

— ,  Genesis  of,  i,  220,  232.

—  as  a  category  of  thought,  i,  221.
— ,  Attempts  to  eliminate,  from  the  list

of  primary  concepts,  i,  221.
— ,  Proofs  of  the  reality  of,  i,  222.

—  the  only  entity,  i,  222.
— ,  Constitution  of,  i,  223.

— ,  No  definition  of,  possible,  i,  224.

— ,  Identity  of  molar  and  molecular,  i,
224.

— ,  Divisibility  of,  i,  225 ;  ii,  28.

— ,  Solid,  liquid,  and  gaseous  states  of,
i,  252.

— ,  Alleged  impurity  of,  ii,  46.

— ,  Man's  relations  to,  ii,  379,  469.

Maudsley,  Henry,  on  the  epileptic  ori-
gin of  religions,  i,  12.

INDEX.

669

Maudsley,  Henry,  on  matter  and  mind,

ii,  22.
man's  indifference  to  the  laws

of  heredity,  ii,  465.
Maxwell,  Clerk,  on  molecular  action,  i,

291.
Means  to  be  distinguished  from  ends,

ii,  92,  108-110,  129,  133,  136,  156,

378,  541,  543,  597.

—  of  nature,  ii,  129.

—  represent  generalizations,  ii,  542.
Mechanical  theory  of  the  universe,  i,

65.

—  axioms,  ii,  95.

Mechanics,  the  science  of  time-relations,
i,  109.

— ,  Social,  i,  503.

Medicine  distinguished  from  food  and
poison,  i,  530.

— ,  Art  of,  its  superstitious  origin,  i,
688.

Mediocrity,  Claims  of,  ignored,  ii,  368.

— ,  the  normal  state  of  the  human
mind,  ii,  375,  600.

Medium.     See  Environment.

Meliorism,  i,  9  ;  ii,  468.

Memory,  Physiological  explanation  of,
i,  187,  379,  380,  403,  564.

Mendicancy,  fostered  by  society,  ii,
447.

Menhaden,  ii,  68.

Menial  service,  Future  problem  of,  ii,
601.

Meningitis,  Rachidian,  how  brought  on,
ii,  64.

Menstruation,  Probable  cause  of  wo-
man's exceptional,  i,  640.

Menu,  i,  13.

Mercantile  business,  i,  566.

Merit,  how  kept  out  of  view,  i,  79.

Mesocarpeae,  i,  831.

Metamorphosis,  Prevalence  of  the  be-
lief in,  among  savages,  i,  1 98.

Metaphysical,  as  distinguished  by
Comte  from  theological  and  positive,
i,  65,  86,  93,  132.

Metaphysics,  Impotence  of,  i,  69.

— ,  period  of  its  supremacy,  i,  94,

— ,  Origin  and  spread  of,  i,  95.

—  distinguished  from  psychology,  Ii,
440.

Metazoa,  i,  339.

Metempsychosis,  i,  203,  691.

Meteoric  stones.  Alleged  discovery  of

organic  remains  in,  i,  410.
Meteorological  paradox,  i,  51,  52.

Meteorology,  most  practical  and  least
positive  of  the  physical  sciences,  i,  64.

— ,  Modern  progress  in,  not  appreci-
ated, ii,  566.

Method  of  exclusion  in  education,  ii,
422,  433,  440,  486,  548.

education,  ii,  626.

,  The  teleological,  ii,  627.

Methods  of  conation,  ii,  93,  94.

Mexicans,  Human  sacrifices  among  the,
ii,  291.

Microcephalous  idiots,  i,  417,  419.

Middle  ages.  Intellectual  stagnation  of
the,  ii,  298,  302.

Migration,  Causes  of,  i,  464,  475.

—  as  a  cause  of  the  decadence  of  so-
cieties, i,  703.

stimulus  to  inventive  art,  ii,

198.
— ,  Influence  of,  in  locking  up  acquired

progress  in  latent  form,  ii,  209.
Milieu.    See  Environment.
Militant  societies,  i,  527.
Mill,  James,  Education  defined  by,  ii,

556.
— ,  John    Stuart,    on    systematization

i,  2.

pedantocracy,  i,  95.

phrenology,  i,  122.

Miller,  Hugh,  ii,  53.

Mind,  Fundamental   antithesis   of  the

human,  i,  64  ;  ii,  24.
— ,  Physiological  basis  of,  i,  185 ;   il,

563.
— ,  The  two  primary  divisions,  or  de-
partments, of,  i,  185,  381,  385 ;  ii,

329,  424.

—  distinguished  from  life,  i,  363.

— ,  Fundamental  nature  of,  i,  363,  368,
408.

— ,  how  manifested  in  nature,  i,  368 ;
ii,  74.

— ,  a  relation,  i,  885,  408.

— ,  Subjective  department  of,  i,  386.

— ,  Objective  department  of,  i,  401.

— ,  Successive  steps  in  the  operation  of
the,  i,  403  ;  ii,  323,  520.

— ,  powerless  to  communicate  its  oper-
ations, i,  408.

—  in  animals,  i,  415  ;  ii,  346.

— ,  comparative  rapidity  of  its  work-
ings, i,  476 ;  ii,  173.

—  constitutes  the  variable  in  social
progress,  i,  697.

— ,  Fundamental  processes  of,  i,  646 ;
ii,  323,  327.

670

INDEX.

Mind,  Peculiarities  of  the  female,  ii,

327.
Mind-force,   Relation  of    the,   to    the

sense-force,  i,  486.
Mineral  foods,  5,  532.

—  — ,  Production  of,  i,  538.
Minerals,  how  compounded,  i,  236.
Minnedienst,  i,  660.

Misandry,  i,  656.

"  Missing  link,"  where  and  how  to  seek
it,  i,  421

Mistletoe,  i,  349.

Modes  of  acquisition,  ii,  165.

increasing  intellect,  ii,  483.

Modesty,  Eelations  of  clothing  to,  i,
548,  557,  638.

— ,  Genesis  of,  i,  632.

— ,  The  two  kinds  of,  i,  632,

— ,  Schopenhauer's  theory  of,  i,  635.

— ,  Evil  tendencies  of,  i,  639.

Mohammedanism,  the  purest  form  of
monotheism,  i,  94,  206 ;  ii,  279.

— ,  Influence  of,  on  civilization,  i,  694.

— ,  in  how  far  responsible  for  the  de-
struction of  the  Alexandrian  library,
ii,  303.

Mohl  on  protoplasm,  i,  311.

Molar  and  molecular  phenomena,  i,
224.

—  aggregation,  i,  244,  247.

—  forces  vs.  molecular,  in  producing
aesthetic  objects,  i,  670,  672.

Mold,  Number  of  spores  contained  in

the  common,  ii,  87.
Molecular  phenomena  not  generically

distinct  from  molar,  i,  224.
,  Mysticism  caused  by,  ii,  81.

—  aggregates.  Constitution  of,  i,  236.

—  forces  vs.  molar  in  producing  aes-
thetic objects,  i,  670,  672.

Molecules,  Definition  of,  i,  253.
— ,  Size  of,  1,  254.

—  increase  in  mass  and  decrease  in
stability  during  the  evolution  of  a
system,  i,  301,  302.

— ,  similar  to  masses  except  in  size,  ii,

81.
Moners,  i,  820.
— ,  Different  kinds  of,  i,  322.
— ,  discovered  by  Haeckel,  i,  323.
— ,  perhaps  seen  by  Lamarck,  i,  323.
— ,  Reproduction  of,  i,  323,  328.
Money,  Origin  of,  i,  494,  496.
— ,  Widest  sense  of  the  term,  i,  675.
— ,  Importance  of,  as  a  social  factor,

u,  341.

Monism  and  the  monistic  theory,  i,  8,

65,  143;  ii,  31.
Monogamy,  i,  211,  618,  629.
Monopoly,  Nature  of,  i,  573,  577.

—  as   a  mode  of  acquisition,  i,  583,
590.

—  of  transportation,  i,  592.

exchange,  i,  592.

finance,  i,  592.

labor,  i,  593.

manufacture,  i,  594.

women,  i,  620,  630.

— ,  Remedies  for,  i,  594.

Monotheism  as  a  stage  in  the  progress

of  theology,  i,  94.
— ,  Origin  of,  i,  205.
— ,  rarely  pure,  i,  205.
— ,  Mohammedanism  the  purest  fonn

of,  i,  206 ;  ii,  279.
— ,  a  branch  of  psychotheism,  ii,  256.
— ,  in  how  far  common  to  all  religions,

ii,  261,  262.
Monotropa,  i,  349.
Montesquieu  as  a  forerunner  of  social

science,  i,  1.
Moon,  Geography  of  the,  ignored  by

Comte,  i.  111.
— ,  destitute  of  an  atmosphere  even  of

nitrogen,  i,  276.
— ,  irregularity  of  its  absolute  path,  ii,

353.
Moral  systems  not  progressive,  i,  10 ;

ii,  309.

,  The  principal,  i,  13.

must  be  in  accord  with  the  state

of  society,  i,  13.
,  the  product,  not  the  cause,  of

the  moral  condition  of  society,  ii,

507.

—  progress,  Nature  of  true,  i,  15 ;  ii,
468,  507,  508,  509.

—  paradox,  i,  52.

—  science,  compared   to  anatomy,  i,
391.

,  Prostitution  of  the  term,  i,  457 ;

ii,  247.

,  Class  of  writers  on,  ii,  247.

,  True,  ii,  811,  468.

,  The  fundamental  formula  of,  ii,

445.

—  sentiment.  Genesis  of  the,  i,  895,
400,  461,  503.

—  forces,  i,  471,  472,  667,  674.

—  code,  i,  515  ;  ii,  372.

—  sanction  of  religion,  ii,  279,  283.

—  principie,  False  ideas  about,  ii,  372,

INDEX.

671

Moral  conduct  not  voluntary  but  com-
pulsory, ii,  372.

—  discernment,  ii,  451,

—  certainty,  ii,  506.

Morality,  Rules  and  principles  of,  have

undergone  no  progress,  i,  10,  216  ;

ii,  155,  161,  372,  378.
— ,  founded  on  sympathy,  i,  123,  505.
— ,  held  by  Comte  to  be  natural  to

man,  i,  130.
— ,  Progress  of,  only  possible  through

that  of  intelligence,  i,  216  ;  ii,  453.
— ,  Abstract,  i,  391.
— ,  Excessive  standards  of,  i,  392 ;  ii,

24,  339.
— ,  How  progress  in,  takes  place,  i,

461,  678  ;  ii,  446,  451,  452,  453.
— ,  No  rule  of,  without  exceptions,  i,

500 ;  ii,  144.
— ,  Scientific  basis  of,  ii,    140,  329,

351.
— ,  Relation  of,  to  religion,  ii,  279,

280,  281,  283,  286,  442,  453.

—  of  savages,  ii,  280.

— ,  Psychological  basis  of,  ii,  324,  329.

—  the  product  of  accumulated  experi-
ences, ii,  351.

— ,  DiiBcult  problems  of,  ii,  351,  354.

— ,  Effect  of  education  on,  ii,  360,
605.

— ,  Undue  importance  attached  to,  ii,
371,  377.

— ,  self-regulating,  ii,  3*72,  564.

— ,  Varying  standards  and  rules  of,  ii,
451,  452.

— ,  Dual,  ii,  452,  453.

— ,  Rules  of,  exert  no  influence  on  con-
duct, ii,  607.

Morals,  An  authoritative  code  of,  not
necessary,  i,  216 ;  ii,  283,  372,  507.

— ,  Kant's  pure,  i,  21^,  891 ;  ii,  248,
371

—  of  nature  (force),  i,  503,  504,  505,
507,  522.

— ,  Secret  distrust  of  the  received  code
of,  ii,  24,  340.

— ,  a  pathological  science,  ii,  155,  160.

— ,  Origin  of  the  existing  code  of,  il,
161.

— ,  Loose  terms  employed  in,  ii,  330.

— ,  a  true  science,  ii,  351.

— ,  Negative  and  obstructive  influence
of,  ii,  376,  377.

— ,  Need  of  substituting  the  indicative
Jfor  the  imperative  form  of  expres-
sion in,  ii,  442.

Morals,  Advantage  the  central  idea  in,
ii,  445.

— ,  Confusion  of  custom  with,  ii,  455.

— ,  Non-progressive  character  of,  ii,
546.

More,  Henry,  ii,  262.

Mormon  (genus  of  apes),  i,  426.

Morphological  correspondence  of  or-
ganism with  environment,  i,  183.

—  units  distinguished  from  physiolog-
ical, i,  318.

chemical,  i,  325.

Mortality,  Percentage  of,  at  different

ages,  ii,  68.
Mortar,  Art   of  manufacturing,  from

lime   not   known  to   the  American

aborigines,  i,  561.
Motion  defined,  i,  158.
— ,  Continuity  of,  i,  159,  164,  231.
— ,  Rhythm  of,  i,  160.
— ,  Apparent  loss  of,  in  the  imiverse,  i,

164.

—  as  a  category  of  thought,  i,  221  458.
relation,  i,  222,  228.

— ,  Modes  of,  i,  228.

— ,  Indestructibility  of,  i,  231.

— ,  Two  classes  of,  i,  232,  248.

Mound-builders,  Use  of  textile  fabrics
by  the,  i,  559.

Miiller,  Wilhelra,  ii,  63.

Multiple  individuality,  i,  373.

Multiplication  of  effects,  i,  164.

Mummies,  i,  202,  559.

Muscineae,  i,  342.

Muscle,  Constitution  of,  i,  353.

— ,  Advantage  of,  over  mechanical
forces,  ii,  97.

Muscular  contraction.  Attempts  to  ex-
plain, i,  353,  357,  362 ;  ii,  97.

Music,  Late  development  of,  i,  669,
672;  ii,  192.

— ,  Great  differences  in  races  with  re-
spect to,  i,  673.

— ,  Influence  of,  on  society,  i,  673.

— ,  Connection  of,  with  the  reproduc-
tive function,  ii,  192.

Mutilation  as  practiced  by  certain  sav-
ages, ii,  289.

Mysticism  due  to  the  existence  of  mo-
lecular phenomena,  ii,  81.

Myxomycetffi,  i,  331 ;  ii,  31.

■VTATIONAL  stage  of  society,  i,  466.

li  Natural,  the.  Supposed  superior-
ity of,  to  the  artificial,  i,  71,  658,
664  ;  ii,  628,  629.

672

INDEX.

Natural,  the,  Supposed  analogy  be-
tween, and  the  artificial,  i,  72.

,  Advantage  the  true  test  of,  ii,

473,  638.

—  — ,  when  really  superior  to  the  arti-
ficial, ii,  601.

—  progress,  i,  20.

—  selection.  Law  of,  i,  177,  181 ;  ii,
173.

,  Action  of,  on  man,  i,  475.

—  —  does  not  always  select  the  really
best,  i,  520.

—  force,  Test  of  a  true,  ii,  95.

—  phenomena  vs.  artificial,  ii,  103.

—  utility,  ii,  382.

Nature,  Economics  of,  i,  621,  605,  610  ;
ii,  68,  87,  494.

—  should  be  contemplated  as  insensi-
ble, unconscious,  and  non-intelligent,
i,  605  ;  ii,  5,  9,  12,  13,  68,  74.

— ,  Purposes  of,  i,  659,  661.

—  always  inspires  fear,  never  hope,  in
man,  i,  684 ;  ii,  275.

— ,  Proper  attitude  of  man  toward,  ii,
2,11.

— ,  Attitude  of,  toward  man,  ii,  2,
379.

— ,  Processes  of,  genetic,  ii,  9.

— ,  In  how  far  proper  to  obey,  ii,  13.

— ,  ease  with  which  controlled,  ii,  14.

— ,  Uniformity  of,  amid  apparent  ir-
regularities, ii,  41.

—  favors  rapid  reproduction  with  pre-
mature destruction  of  the  excess,  ii,
68.

— ,  Prodigality  of,  ii,  87.

— ,  Divorce  of  man  from,  ii,  298,  499.

Nature-worship,  ii,  254,  264.

— ,  The  modern  survival  of,  ii,  628.

Navier,  Favor  shown  by,  to  Comte's
philosophic  scheme,  i,  84.

Neatness  in  animals,  i,  632.

Nebulae,  Nature  of,  i,  244,  249,  255.

— ,  Incandescent,  i,  250,  255.

— ,  Pre-luminous  state  of,  i,  251,  259.

— ,  Elements  discovered  in,  i,  256.

Nebular  hypothesis,  a  primary  cosmic-
al  principle,  i,  8.

,  Comte  on  the,  i.  111.

,  Proofs  of  the,  i,  224,  246,  255.

,  History  of  the,  i,  246.

Necessaries  distinguished  from  luxu-
ries, i,  563,  597.

Necessary  being,  Kant  on  the  existence
of  a,  ii,  29.

Necessitarianism,  ii,  4,  36,  40.

Necessitarianism,  Practical   and    pro-
gressive character  of,  ii,  37,  43.
— ,  Application  of,  to  moral  questions,

ii,  359.
Negroes,  Arms  of,  longer  than  those  of

Europeans,  i,  418.
Neisan  on  volcanic  phenomena  in  the

moon,  i,  163.
Neku  II,  of  Egypt,  i,  567.
Nematode,  Number  of  eggs  contained

in  a,  ii,  87.
Nerve-action,  Physiology  of,  i,  371.
Nerve-centers,  Individuality  of,  i,  185.
Nerves,  Constitution  of,  i,  185,  353.
— ,  Afferent  and  efferent,  i,  185,  372.
—  constitute    devices    for  organizing

protoplasm,  i,  370.
— ,  Genesis  of,  i,  371.
Nervous  system,  Functions  of  the,  i,

185.
^  Multiple  individuality  in  the,  i,

235,  373,  374,  376.
,  Point  of  origin  of  the,  in  the

organic  series,  i,  359.
Newton,  Sir  Isaac,  Claims  of,  to  the

discovery  of  the  infinitesimal  calcu-
lus, i,  108.
,  Influence    of,    in    bringing

about  the  scientific  epoch,  i,  141 ;  ii,

200,  203.
Nihilism,  i,  160.

Nisus,  The  universal,  ii,  93,  178.
Nitrogen,  Function   of,  in  the  organic

world,!,  168,  304.
— ,  Apparent  absence  of,  in  self-lumi-
nous bodies,  i,  257.
— ,  contrasted    with    oxygen,    i,   274,

305.
— ,  Final  destiny  of,  i,  275.
— ,  Reduction  of   the  atmosphere  to

pure,  i,  276.
— ,  how  absorbed  by  the  moon,  i,  276.
— ,  PecuUarities  of  organic  compounds

containing,  i,  304.
Non-contradiction,  Law  of,  i,  159.
Non-essential  social  forces,  i,  471,  472,

482,  664.

,  Local  seat  of  the,  i,  666.

,  Classification  of  the,  i,  666.

,  Undue  prominence  given  to

the,  i,  667.
,  Effects    of     the,    compared

with  those  of  the  essential,  i,  667.
Non-industrial  modes  of  acquisition,  i,

583.
Non-mor;j^  actions,  ii,  347.

INDEX.

673

Non-producers,  i,  526,  565.

— ,  Social  rank  of,  higher  than  that  of
producers,  i,  578.

Non-progressive  agencies,  ii,  211.

Non-relative,  Reality  of  the,  i,  156.

Non-resistance,  Policy  of,  i,  684.

Nordenskjold  expedition,  i,  571.

Northeast  passage,  i,  570.

Northmen,  i,  570.
'Northwest  passage,  i,  670.

Notation,  Defects  of  the  decimal  sys-
tem of,  ii,  65.

—  of  dynamic  sociology,  ii,  109.

' — ,  Invention  of  systems  of,  ii,  386.

— ,  Arithmetical  and  geometrical,  ii,
886,  387.

— ,  Value  of  position  in,  ii,  386,  387.

Notoriety  as  a  factor  in  moral  conduct,
ii,  143.

Noumena,  i,  46,  160 ;  ii,  259.

Nucleus  of  cells.  Formation  of  the,  i,
826.

,  Function  of  the,  i,  326.

,    Alleged    disappearance    of

the,  in  ova  after  impregnation,  i,
333.

Nurse  of  the  Cercaria,  i,  329 ;  ii,  338.

Nutrition  and  reproduction,  Antago-
nism between,  i,  318,  328.

— ,  Fundamental  nature  of,  i,  328.

— ,  Two  forms  of,  i,  352.

— ,  Full  scope  of  the  term,  i,  531.

— ,  More  special  definition  of,  i,  533.

Nutritive  foods,  i,  533.

OBJECTIVE  reality,  i,  46.
—  department  of  mind,  i,  401.

—  influences  affecting  opinions,  ii,  435.
Objects   of    nature,    as    distinguished

from  those  of  man  and  sentient  or-
ganisms in  general,  i,  216,  461,  469,
522,  527,  564,  601,  605,  631,  664,
701 ;  ii,  116,  119,  120,  122, 128, 130,
132,  152,  339,  473,  495.

Obongos,  i,  418.

Observation,  The  methods  of  scientific,
i,  98,  99.

—  vs.  co-ordination,  i,  142.
Ocean,  Average  depth  of  the,  i,  263.
— ,  Area  occupied  by  the,  i,  263.
Octopus,  Number  of  eggs  laid  by  the,

ii,  87.

— ,  Power  of  the,  to  replace  its  arms
when  lost,  ii,  1 52.

Offspring,  Sacrifices  made  for,  by  ani-
mals, ii,  338.

Oils,  Chemical  position  of,  i,  306.
Oken,  Discovery  of  protoplasm  by,  i,

311.
Onions,  Notion  that  the  odor  of,  de-
stroys the  power  of  a  magnet,  ii,

414.
Onomatopeia,  i,  436 ;  ii,  18.
Ontogenesis,  i,  189,  357  ;  ii,  629.
Ontogeny  and  phylogeny,  i,  341.
Oogonium,  i,  331,  343.
Ophiolatry,  ii,  271.
Ophir,  1,  568.
Opinion,  ii,  400.
— ,  Dynamic,  defined,  ii,  108.
— ,  Unity  of,  in  what  sense  desirable,

ii,  401,  403.
— ,  Settlement  of,  ii,  402.

in  the  individual,  ii,  410.

society,  ii,  418.

— ,  Harmony  of,  ii,  4C5.

— ,  Differences  of,  usually  unnecessary,

ii,  406,  407.
— ,  Grades  of,  ii,  410.
— ,  Law  governing  the  formation  of,  ii,

422,  433,  580.
— ,  Manufacture  of,  ii,  437.
— ,  Attempts  to  influence,  directly,  ii,

547.
Opinions    as  determining  actions,   ii,

401.
— ,  Correctness  of,  ii,  401.
— ,  Subject-matter  of,  ii,  401,  419.
— ,  Permanently  settled,  ii,  404.

—  usually  rest  more  on  desire  than  on
evidence,  ii,  408.

— ,  how  subjectively  Influenced,  ii,  408,
428.

— ,  Universality  of,  no  test  of  correct-
ness, ii,  409,  434.

— ,  Degrees  of  importance  of,  ii,  419,
437.

— ,  not  subject  to  the  will,  ii,  420.

— ,  Origin  and  nature  of,  ii,  420,  436.

— ,  Attempts  to  coerce,  ii,  421.

— ,  how  producible  by  design,  ii,  422,
433,  440,  547,  648.

— ,  in  how  far  hereditary,  ii,  429.

— ,  Conditions  to  the  entertainment  of,
ii,  430.

— ,  Quantitative  and  qualitative,  ii,  431,
432.

—  the  products  of  definite  antecedent
causes,  ii,  440.

— ,  Ethical  and  dynamic,  ii,  441,  457.
— ,  Probable,  or  subjectively  sufficient,
ii,  506.

674

INDEX.

Opinions  can  not  be  influenced  by  di-
rect efforts,  ii,  54*7.

Opossums,  ii,  61.

Opportunity,  a  condition  to  intelligence,
ii,  431,  612.

true  eminence,  ii,  599,  600,

612.

Optics,  Physical  vs.  physiological,  i,  115.

— ,  Position  of  in  Comte's  system,  i,
115.

Optimism,  Scientific,  i,  662.

— ,  Popular  belief  in,  considered,  ii,  45.

— ,  Absolute,  ii,  4*7.

— ,  Partial,  or  qualified,  ii,  48,  50.

,  Prevalence  of,  ii,  13.

— ,  General  influence  of,  ii,  89,  460.

— ,  not  manifest  in  nature,  ii,  2*71.

—  vs.  pessimism,  ii,  460.
Optimistic  facts,  ii,  50.

Orang,  Labored  arboreal  movements  of

the,  i,  426.
Orchidaceae,  Over-development  in  the,

i,  520.
Order  of  the  universe.  How  to  arrive

at  the,  i,  2.

—  vs.  progress,  i,  60,  125,  126.
— ,  Party  of,  i,  75,  126.

—  in  society  the  homologue  of  organ-
ization in  biology  and  of  statics  in
mathematics,  i,  125,  128.

— ,  Comte's  admiration  for  the  exist-
ing social,  i,  131.

Organ  vs.  function,  i,  119.

— ,  The  stomach  the  first,  formed,  i,
339.

Organic  chemistry,  i,  116,  11 7.

—  compounds,  Molecules  of  the,  com-
pared, i,  298,  305.

,  Elements  entering  into,  i,  303.

,  Direct  formation  of,  in  nature,

i,  303,  309.

,  Artificial  production  of,  i,  304.

,  Nature  of  the  molecules  of,  i,

304.

,  Continuity  of,  with  inorganic,  i,

305.

distinguished  from  tissue,  i,  309.

,  Properties  of,  increase  in  activ-
ity as  molecules  increase  in  mass  and
complexity,  i,  310.

—  bases,  i,  806.

—  remains.  Alleged  discovery  of,  in  me-
teoric stones,  i,  410.

—  foods,  i,  533.

,  Vegetation  the  original  pro-
ducer of,  i,  535.

Organic  evolution,  ii,  85.

Organisms,    Classification  of,   i,   348-

351.
Organization  of  feeling,  i,  68."
— ,  Relations  of,  to  Ufe,   i,  11 Y,  319,

326.

—  in  biology  the  homologue  of  order
in  society  and  of  statics  in  mathe-
matics, i,  125,  128.

—  vs.  evolution,  i,  166,  176,  254;  ii,
84.

— ,  Cosmical  process  of,  i,  166,  346.

— ,  Chemical  vs.  morphological,  i,  319,
326,  343.

— ,  a  means  of  intensifying  the  mechan-
ical power  of  protoplasm,  i,  324,
843.

— ,  Initial  step  in,  i,  325.

— ,  Recompounding  in,  i,  326.

— ,  Substances  used  as  framing-timber
in,  i,  344.

— ,  Origin  of,  i,  351.

— ,  Successive  steps  in,  i,  351.

— ,  Original  and  derivative  products  of,
i,  354.

— ,  Fundamental  nature  of,  i,  354,  355,
SYO.

— ,  Primary  form  of,  i,  367.

— ,  Degree  of,  attained  on  the  globe,  i,
411.

— ,  Widest  meaning  of  the  term,  i,  412.

— ,  Secondary,  (instinct)  ii,  104.

— ,  Increase  of  feeling  with,  ii,  151.

— ,  Tenacity  of  life  inversely  propor-
tional to,  ii,  151.

— ,  Artificial,  accomplished  through
generalization,  ii,  542.

Origin  of  man,  i,  441-447.

art,  i,  485.

industry,  i,  488.

opinions,  ii,  420.

Original  research.  Excess  of,  i,  22.

,  natural  to  the  himian  mind,  ii,

552.

,  Education  of,  ii,  565.

,  Proper  method  of,  ii,  623.

—  attributes,  i,  461.

Originality,  ii,  321.

Orobanche,  i,  849.

Ortyx  Virginiana,  i,  487.

Oscillatoriae,  i,  340.

Ostrich,  American,  Assistance  of  the
male,  in  rearing  the  young,  i,  660.

Over-development,  Cases  of,  i,  520.

Ovum,  i,  331,  342,  358.

Oxygen  in  the  sun,  i,  257.

INDEX.

675

Oxygen  in  the  atmosphere,  Reduction
of  the,  i,  273.

—  contrasted  with  nitrogen,  i,  274,
305.

Oyster,  Number  of  embryos  spawned

by  the,  ii,  87.
Ozone,  Theory  of  the  nature  of,  i,  241.

PAIN,  Nature  of,  i,  69,  682 ;  ii,  149,
282.
— ,  Genesis  of,  i,  388,  399;  ii,  114.
— ,  Teleological    attempts   to   account

for,  ii,  112.
— ,  Negative  and  positive,  ii,  149.
— ,  Desire  a  form  of,  ii,  149,  284.
Painting,  Art  of,  i,  669.
Paleontology,   the   science  that   must

furnish  the  data  for  fixing  the  local

origin  of  man,  i,  445.
Palmyra,  i,  568.
Panaceas,  Philosophic,  ii,  59V.
Pandorina,  i,  341.
Pangenesis,  i,  313.
Pantarchic  stage  of  society,  i,  466.
Pantheism,  ii,  256.

Paper,  unknown  to  the  ancients,  ii,  199.
Papuans,  i,  418.
Parable  of  Saint-Simon,  i,  586.
Paradox  of  the  failure  of  moral  and

religious  systems,  i,  14.

the  earth's  support,  i,  47,  51.

astronomy,  i,  47,  51,  99.

the  antiquity  of  man,  i,  48.

earth's  antiquity,  i,  48,  51.

shape,  i,  48,  51.

invisible  gases,  i,  48,  52.

wind,  i,  48,  52  ;  ii,  11.

unity  of   the  inorganic   and

organic  kingdoms,  i,  49.
variability    of    the     earth's

crust,  i,  49,  51.

species,  i,  49,  52.

cosmical  development,  i,  49,  62.

organic  development,  i,  49,  52.

the  animal  origin  and  nature  of

man,  i,  49,  52.

consciousness,  i,  50.

the  regularity  of  social  phenome-
na, i,  50,  52.
dependence  of  the  will,  i,  50,

62,  398 ;  ii,  347.
man's  tacit  acceptance  of  the  imi-

formity  of  natural  phenomena  while

openly  denying  it,  i,  66.

—  —  the  need  of  educating  those  who
least  desire  education,  i,  80 ;  ii,  686.

Paradox  of  the  need  of  studying  the

most  complex  subjects  last,  i,  549.
salety  of  public  conduct,  i,

508,  509.
obtrusiveness  of  the  animal

kingdom,  i,  550.

adaptation,  ii,  25.

the  priority  of  feeling  to  intellect,

ii,  129.

scientific  faith,  ii,  135.

pure  and  applied  science,  ii,  248.

the  fundamental  identity  of  re-
ligion and  science,  ii,  273.
independence  of  morality  and

religion,  ii,  283.
egoistic  basis  of  altruism,  ii,

368.
dangerons  character  of  pure

reason,  ii,  473.
tendency  of  the  natural  mind

to  produce  artificial  results  and  the

converse,  ii,  473.
Paradoxes  of  nature,  i,  45-53  ;  ii,  270.
Parasites,  Social,  i,  481,  526,  581.

,  The  six  classes  of,  i,  583.

Parasitic  classes.  General  observations

on  the,  i,  595.
Parasitism,  i,  348,  412,  581.
— ,  a  form  of  aggregation,  i,  350,  499.
— ,  Pastoral  life  a  form  of,  i,  491.
—  in  society,  i,  499.

biology  and  in  sociology,  i,  596.

Parental  affections,  i,  472,  677.

Parents,  Duties  of,  to  children,  ii,  443.

Parseeism,  i,  693.

Parthenogenesis,  i,  330.

Partisans,  Predictions  of,  worthless,  ii,

409.
Partisanship,  Supposed  advantages  of,

i,  75  ;  ii,  403.
— ,  Real  effect  of,  ii,  89.
Partridge,    Mode    of    entrapping    the

American,  i,  487.
Party  of  order  and  of  progress,  i,  75,

126.
Pascal,   Formula  of,   for  the  rule  of

force,  i,  32.
— ,  Ascetic  habits  of,  ii,  300.
Passive  and  active  social  dynamics,  i,

56,  456,  485.
Passivity  of  females,  i,  608.
Pastoral  stage  of  society,  i,  490,  542.
,  in  what  sense  parasitical,

i,  491.
Pathological    character  of    ethics,  ii,

155,  248.

676

INDEX.

Patriotism,  i,  677.
— ,  Correlative  of,  i,  680.
Pauperism,  how  increased,  ii,  447.
Peace   reform  movement,  Fallacy  in-
volved in  the,  i,  684.

—  of  nature,  illusory,  ii,  87.
Pedantocracy,  i,  95,  136.

Peirce,  Charles  S.,  on  the  effct  of  par-

tisanship,  i,  75.

unwelcome  truths,  i,  77.

the  antagonism  of  science

and  religion,  ii,  305.
settlement  of  opmion,

ii,  401,  410.
artificial  production  of

opinions,  ii,  414.
Penicillum    crustaceum,    Number     of

spores  contained  in,  ii,  87.
Pentateuch,  evidence  of  its  polytheistic

character,  i,  206.
People,  All  power  ultimately  resides  in

the,  ii,  238.
Perception,  Nature  of,  i,  186,  382, 401 ;

ii,  323.

—  distinguished  from  sensation,  i,  381,
386,  367.

—  does  not  imply  motor  action,  i,
883.

— ,  Vividness  of,  inversely  proportion-
al to  that  of  sensation,  i,  387.

Perfection,  Test  of,  ii,  176.

Perfcctionment  as  the  end  of  effort,  ii,
137.

Perpetual  motion,  Fallacy  of,  carried
into  social  science,  i,  36,  53.

Persistence  of  force,  i,  159.

—  the  true  proof  of  the  existence  of
an  external  world,  i,  187,  192.

condition  of  verification,  i,  192.

Personal  equation,  ii,  419.

Pessimism,  ii,  460.

Pestilence,  Cosmical  significance  and
true  mission  of,  ii,  70,  89.

Pettenkofer  on  the  composite  nature
of  the  chemical  elements,  i,  289.

Phenomena,  Classification  of,  ii,  76,
103,  105,  106.

— ,  Transitive,  ii,  78.

— ,  Teleological,  ii,  78,  80,  89,  106,
106.

— ,  Physical  and  psychical,  ii,  79.

— ,  Genetic,  ii,  80,  86,  105,  106.

— ,  molecular,  Effect  of,  on  the  mind,
ii,  81.

— ,  Stages  in,  with  reference  to  econo-
my of  results,  ii,  102.

Phenomena,  Natural  vs.  artificial,  ii,
10.3,  105,  106.

Phenomenal  classification  distinguished
from  logical,  i,  148.

Philanthropy,  i,  678.

— ,  Questionable  utility  of  the  preva-
lent, i,  518.

— ,  Correlative  of,  i,  679.

— ,  Egoistic  basis  of,  ii,  370.

—  distinguished  from  humanitarian,
ism,  ii,  450,  468.

Philoprogenitiveness,  i,  676.
Philosophers,   regarded   by  Comte  as

unfit  for  legislators,  i,  136.
Philosophy,  Relations  of,  to  science,  i,

7.
— ,  Practical  object  of,  i,  25 ;  ii,  123.
— ,  Spencer's  definition  of,  i,  157.

—  of  causal  circumstances,  or  necessi-
ty, ii,  40.

savages,  how  elaborated,  ii,  275.

I  — ,  Sterility  of  most,  ii,  500.
j  Phoradendron,  i,  349.
I  Photography,  i,  674.
■  Phrenology,  Comte  on,  i,  121.
— ,  Unexceptionable  etymology  of  the

word,  i,  122.
— ,  Comte's  substitute  for  the  word,  i,
122.

—  vs.  psychology,  i,  124.
Phylogenesis,  i,  189,  357.
Phylogeny  and  ontogeny,  i,  341.
Physical  paradox,  i,  52.

—  and  psychical  phenomena,  ii,  79.
Physicians,  Popular  faith  in,  i,  690.
Physics,  Relative  positivity  of,  i,  102.
— ,  Comte's  definition  of,  i,  112.

subdivision  of,  i,  114.

Physiological  division  of  labor,  i,  175.

—  units,  i,  312.

distinguished  from  morphological,

i,  318.

Physiology  of  brain-function,  i,  377.

Physitheism,  ii,  255,  256,  257.

Phytonomy,  phytotomy,  phytotaxy —
additions  proposed  to  Comte's  bio-
logical terminology,  i,  120.

Pictographs,  ii,  183.

Pithecanthropi,  i,  483.

Pithecanthropus,  i,  444 ;  ii,  494.

Planes  of  stability  in  protoplasmic
masses,  i,  362.

Planets,  Probable  existence  of,  in  other
systems,  i,  243.

— ,  Constitution  of  the  outer,  different
from  that  of  the  inner,  i,  264.

INDEX.

677

Planets,  Densities  of  the,  compared,  i,

269.
— ,  Habitability  of,  i,  269.
Plantain,  Seedless,  in  America,  i,  834.
Plants  distinguished  from  animals,  i,

334, 33Y,   340,   349,   350,   352,  355,

356.

—  proper,  i,  348.
— ,  Fear  of,  i,  685.
Plant-worship,  i,  204.

Plasson  bodies  distinguished  from  pro-
toplasm, i,  316.

,  Functions  performed  by,  i,  318,

335.

,  Moners  included  under,  i,  320.

,  Primary  differentiation  of,  i,  325.

Plastidul-Zeele,  ii,  31.

Platonism,  ii,  23.

Platycnemic  tibiae,  i,  419.

Play,  Theory  of,  ii,  116.

Pleasure,  Intellectual,  usually  the  only
reward  of  mental  effort,  i,  4.

—  and  pain,  Philosophy  of,  i,  388,  399,
680,  682;  ii,  112,  122,  124,  148,
233,  321.

,  and  not  life  or  function,  the

immediate  motives  to  action,  ii,
113.

,  how  correlated,  ii,  147,  150,

283.

,  Relativity  of,  ii,  148.

—  of  anticipation,  i,  676  ;  ii,  150.
— ,  Genesis  of,  ii,  115.

— ,  Capacity  for,  increases  with  struct-
ure, ii,  115,  124.

— ,  The  five  primary  sources  of,  ii,
128.

— ,  Cicero  on  prolonged  excessive,  ii,
148.

Plenum,  i,  228.

Pliny,  ii,  200.

Poetry,  ii,  192,

Poinsot,  Favor  shown  by,  to  Comte's
philosophic  scheme,  i,  84.

Poison  distinguished  from  food  and
medicine,  i,  630.

Politarchic  stage  of  society,  i,  466.

Political  economy.  First  law  of,  i,  4,  20,
391,  510;  ii,  226.

as  an  applied  science,  ii,  11.

,  Fundamental  fallacy  of  the  prev-
alent, ii,  87.

,  The  two  opposing  schools  of,  ii,

246.

—  events,  Superficiality  of,  i,  637,  667 ;
ii,  243.

Political  events  compared  to  meteoro-
logical phenomena,  ii,  244.
Politics  as  an  art,  i,  60.

a  trade,  i,  136 ;  ii,  500,

Pollen,  i,  343,

Pollen-tube,  i,  343,  358.

Polyandry,  i,  212,  618,  620.

— ,  Causes  producing,  i,  620,

— ,  The  illicit  form  of,  i,  622.

Polyborus,  i,  462.

Polygamy,  i,  211.

Polygyny,  i,  212,  619.  _    _         ^

—  adapted  to  militant  societies,  i,
213.

—  a  form  of  monopoly,  i,  213,  620,
630.

— ,  Origin  of,  i,  619.

— ,  Arguments  in  defense  of,  i,  620.

Polytheism  as  a  stage  of  theology,  i,  94,

— ,  Origin  of,  i,  205.

— ,  Hebrew,  i,  206.

— ,  Grecian,  Influence  of,  on  civiliza-
tion, i,  693.

,  Seriousness  of,  ii,  265.

Pooling,  or  apportionment,  in  railroad
management,  11,  577.

Popularity  as  an  argument  for  dogma-
tism, ii,  20.

Population,  Malthusian  law  of,  i,  66,
704.

— ,  Herbert  Spencer's  theory  of,  i,  184.

— ,  Disadvantageous  distribution  of,  ii,
89.

— ,  Need  of  restricting,  ii,  465.

Populousness,  the  primary  condition  to
the  formation  of  society,  i,  465,  466 ;
ii,  219.

Position,  Value  of,  in  notation,  ii,  386,
387.

— ,  social,  Empty  pursuit  of,  ii,  499.

Positive,  Comtean  sense  of  the  word,  i,
65,  85,  86.

—  institution  (expression  of  the  Duke
of  Argyll),  i,  72.

—  philosophy  of  Auguste  Comte,  Brief
survey  of  the,  i,  82,

,  period  of  its  supremacy,  i,  83,

96,

,  Adherents  of  the,  i,  84,

,  Influence  of  the,  in  France,  i,  84.

—  stage  of  social  development,  i,  132.

—  law.  Efficacy  of,  i,  149.

,  Undue  respect  for,  ii,  363.

Positivism  distinguished  from  theology

and  metaphysics,  i,  86,  92,  93.
the  scientific  method,  1,  87.

678

INDEX.

Positivism,  Suicidal  character  of  pure

Comtean,  i,  90,  91,  159.
— ,  Herbert  Spencer's  dissent  from,  i,

143.
Positivity,  Tests  of,  i,  99.

—  of  all  phenomena,  if  wholly  known,
i,  101.

Possession,  permanent.  First  recogni-
tion of,  i,  492.

Posterity,  Popular  disregard  for,  ii,
392.

Post-natal  influences  affecting  opinions,
ii,  429,  430.

Postulate,  Herbert  Spencer's  universal,
ii,  415,  517.

Poverty,  incompatible  with  liberty,  i,
519.

social  progress,  ii,  597.

the  proper  employment  of

native  talent,  ii,  600,  613.

Powell,  J.  W.,  on  the  classification  of
primitive  reUgions,  ii,  254.

,  his  terminology  critically  ex-
amined, ii,  258.

Practical,  True  nature  of  the,  i,  564 ;
ii,  157,  494,  552.

Practicality  as  a  test  of  the  value  of
knowledge,  ii,  492,  493.

—  distinguished  from  economy,  ii,
494.

— ,  True  and  false,  ii,  662.

Prayer,  Subjective  moral  efficacy  of,  ii,
279,  286.

— ,  Object  of,  among  savages,  ii,  281.

— ,  Objective  inefficacy  of,  ii,  423.

Preambles,  Statutory,  of  different  na-
tions, ii,  74.

Predestination,  ii,  18,  84,  88.

Pre-established  harmony  between  feel-
ing and  function,  i,  469,  602 ;  ii,
121.

Prehistoric  man  represented  by  exist-
ing savages,  i,  193,  455;  ii,  217.

Preparations  for  life,  i,  303.

Preservative  forces  of  society,  i,  469,
472,  474,  479,  480,  483,  697,  701.

Pre-social  development,  i,  427.

Pressure  the  only  rational  conception
of  force,  i,  228.

Prevision  as  a  test  of  science,  i,  101,
149  ;  ii,  246,  247.

Preyer  on  psychogenesis,  i,  357.

Priestcraft  as  a  mood  of  acquisition,  i,
687.

— .Proper  meaning  of  the  word,  i,
688.

Priesthood,  scientific.  Danger  of  a,  i,

19.

,  of  Comte,  i,  136.

Priesthoods,  how  power  is  exercised

by,  i,  19,  589  ;  ii,  285.
— f  Industrial  sterility  of,  i,  689.
— ,  Anti-progressive   character  of,  ii,

297.
Priestley,  i,  274,  689.
Primary  aggregation,  i,  220.
Primordial  problems  of  Comte,  i,  89,

111,  113.

—  utricle  of  Mohl,  i,  371.
Principle,  moral,  False  ideas  about,  ii,

872.

Principles  of  morality  of  Herbert
Spencer,  i,  147.

certitude,  ii,  511.

Pringsheim's  researches  into  the  ofiSce
of  chlorophyl,  i,  346.

Printing  as  a  progressive  agency,  ii,
185.

Privacy  afforded  by  houses.  Moral  ef-
fect of,  i,  556.

Private  enterprise,  Encroachment  of
government  upon,  i,  61 ;  ii,  578.

,  Means  employed  by,  to  protect

itself  from  state  interference,  ii,  580.

Prodigies,  Psychological  position  of,  ii,
612.

Producers,  i,  526.

Production  distinguished  from  acqui-
sition, i,  497.

— ,  Amount  of,  per  capita  per  diem,  i,
497.

— ,  Excess  of,  over  consumption,  i,
497.

—  of  foods,  i,  637.

— ,   Primary   and   secondary,   i,   546,

547.
— ,  Definition  of,  i,  647.
— ,  The  end  distinguished  from  the

means  of,  i,  547.

—  of  artificial  appliances,  i,  552.

clothing  and  shelter,  i,  656.

— ,  Accessories  to,  i,  565.

— ,  Evils  of  ill-adjusted,  i,  705.

Profundity,  Use  of,  as  a  cloak  for  me-
diocrity or  conscious  fallacy,  ii,  134.

Progress,  ii,  158.

— ,  Artificial  distinguished  from  natu-
ral,  i,  15,  27.

— ,  Spontaneous,  can  not  always  con-
tinue, i,  16.

— ,  Conditions  of,  i,  18,  42.

— ,  Natural,  i,  20,  27.

INDEX.

679

Progress,  Definitions  of,  i,  26,  67 ;  ii,

108,  161,  174,  383.
— ,  Latent,  i,  30 ;  ii,  209,  307.
— ,  Passive,  or  negative,  and  active,  or

positive,  i,  56.
— ,  Relations  of,  to  order,  i,  60,  125,

126.
— ,  Genetic,  i,  72  ;  ii,  82.
,  Waste  involved    in,  i,  73;  ii,

86-89.
— ,  Party  of,  i,  75,  126.
— ,  ways  in  which  it  defeats  itself,  i,

75-81,  218,  517,  524,  578;  ii,  6,  15,

59,  72,  209,  298,  478,  535,  580,  605.

—  the  homologue  in  sociology  of  life
in  biology  and  of  dynamics  in  mathe-
matics, i,  125,  128.

— ,  implied  in  life,  i,  126;  ii,  119,  162.
— ,  Rhythm  of,  i,  127 ;  ii,  306,  404.
— ,  Method  of,  i,  425 ;  ii,  178,  306.
— ,  Anthropological,  i,  441 ;  ii,  4.
— ,  Artificial  character  of  social,  i,  662 ;

ii,  310.
— ,  Influences  opposed  to,  ii,  5.
— ,  Only  a  few  contribute  any  thing  to,

ii,  12,  72,  175.

—  a  simple  continuation  of  the  origi-
nal formative  impulse,  ii,  120.

— ,  All  social,  the  result  of  intellectual
and  not  emotional  action,  ii,  160,
190.

— ,  Erroneous  views  of  the  true  agen-
cies of,  ii,  168.

— ,  Cosmic,  ii,  169.

— ,  Organic,  ii,  171.

— ,  Objective  and  subjective,  ii,  172.

— ,  Test  of,  ii,  176,  177.

— ,  the  two  lines  along  which  it  has
taken  place,  ii,  179.

— ,  Direct  means  to,  ii,  308.

— ,  Social,  chiefly  material,  ii,  459.

—  not  attainable  by  direct  effort,  ii,
545.

—  and  poverty,  ii,  597.
Progressive  systems,  Need  of,  i,  16.
,  Methods  of,  different  from  those

of  non-progressive,  i,  18.
,  why  more  difficult  to  establish

than  non-progressive,  i,  18.
,  The  intellectual  element  in,  i,  19.

—  classes  of  society,  The  three,  i,  78.

—  agencies,  ii,  178,

Proletariat,  Bad  condition  of  the,  i,  30.
— ,  Claims  of  the,  ii,  368.
Promiscuity,  i,  212,  618.
Pronuba  yuccasella,  i,  520.

Properties  of  compounds  more  active
than  of  elements,  i,  279.

can  not   be   predicted   from

those  of  their  components,  i,  311.

matter  due  to  the  mode  of  its

molecular  aggregation,  i,  285,  301,
308,  310,  359,  365.

,  Instability  of,  i,  286.

,  Ontological  views  of,  i,  359.

Property  as  a  social  factor,  i,  483,  493.

— ,  First  recognition  of,  i,  492.

— ,  Value  of,  in  the  United  States,  i,
497.

— ,  All,  artificial,  i,  498.

— ,  objects  in  which  it  can  not  be  ac-
quired, i,  498.

—  essential  to  liberty,  i,  619.

— ,  Destruction  of,  at  funerals,  ii,  292.
Propriety,  i,  636.   '
Proscribed  emotions,  ii,  389.
Prostitution  as  a  form  of  polyandry,  i,

212,  622,  629.
Protamoeba,  i,  333.
Protection  as  a  function  of  government,

i,  513;  ii,  214,  229,  231,  239,  243.

—  of  industries  by  imposing  duties,  ii,
398.

Proteine,  i,  169,  307,  361.
Protestant  Reformation,  ii,  302,  304.
Protestantism,  Comte  on,  i,  95.
Proteus,  ii,  66.
Protista,  i,  349,  350.
Protobathybius,  i,  322,  325.
Protogenes,  i,  316,  323.
Protophytes,  i,  340.
Protoplasm,  History   of  the  discovery

of,  i,  311.
— ,  Nature  and  constitution  of,  i,  312.
— ,  how  formed  in  nature,  i,  313.

—  a  chemical  substance,  i,  316.
— ,  Properties  of,  i,  31 6,  357.

— ,  Activities  of,  partly  molar,  i,  317.
— ,  wherein  its    stability    consists,    i,

317.
— ,  Functions  performed  by,  i,  318.
— ,  Activities  of,  constitute  all  that  is

distinctive   of   vital   phenomena,    i,

324,  355,  370.

—  performs  the  functions  ascribed  to
chlorophyl,  i,  346.

— ,  Presence  of,  the  only  test  of  life,  i,
351.

— ,  how  distinguished  from  other  sub-
stances, i,  359.

— ,  Psychic  phenomena  impossible
without,  ii,  80.

680

INDEX.

Protozoa,  i,  339,  371.

Providential  interposition,  Doctrine  of,

ii,  46,  74.
Proximate  ends  of  conation,   ii,   108,

109,  158,  308,  400,  470,  540.
Pruriency,  ii,  148.
Prussia,  Railroad  management  in,   ii,

581.
Pseud-ideas,  i,  160 ;  ii,  79.
Pseudopodia,  i,  318.
Psychical      phenomena     distinguished

from  physical,  ii,  79.

always  teleological,  ii,  80.

Psychogeny,  i,  357,  448.
Psychological  paradox,  i,  52.

—  phenomena,  i,  380.

—  units,  i,  403.

Psychology  treated  by  Comte  as  tran-
scendental biology,  i,  121,  145.

— ,  Objectionableness  of  the  terra,  i,
124.

— ,  Herbert  Spencer's  Principles  of,
reviewed,  i,  184.

—  of  ideas,  ii,  401.

—  and  physiology.  Convergence  "of,  ii,
563.

Psychotheism,  ii,  255-258.
Ptolemy,  ii,  200.

Public  education.  Superiority  of,  i,  590.
Punishment,    Fear    of,  mistaken    for

guilt,  ii,  861,  363.
— ,  Prevailing  theory  of,  false,  ii,  364.
Purpose  without  design,  ii,  118.
Purposes  of  nature,  i,  659,  661.
Pyramids  of  Egypt,  Object  of  the,  ii,

296.
Pythagoras,  ii,  200.

QUALITATIVE    brain-development,
i,  439.
Quality,  All  questions  of,  reducible  to

those  of  quantity,  i,  105.
Quantitative  and  qualitative  increase  of

knowledge,  i,  491,
Quaternions,  ii,  388.
Quatrefages,  A.  de,  i,  414.

RACHIDIAN  meningitis,  ii,  64.
Radiation,    Apparent  loss  of,   i,
163.

—  the  force  which  results  in  dissolu-
tion, i,  167,  175.

—  and  gravitation,  Cosmic  interaction
of,  i,  230,  231,  251,  261 ;  ii,  84.

— ,  in  what  sense  primarily  due  to
gravitation,  i,  231.

Railroad  problem,  History  of  the,  il,
576,  580,  581.

,  Statistics  bearing  upon  the,  ii,

580,  581.

Railroads,  Danger  of  travel  on,  exag-
gerated, ii,  2u8.

— ,  European  systems  of,  ii,  577.

Raraeses  the  Great,  i,  567.

Ratiocination,  i,  404.

Rationalism,  Historical  persistence  of,
ii,  24.

Rationality,  upon  what  dependent,  i,  46.

Reality,  Herbert  Spencer's  definition
of,  i,  157.

— ,  Proof  of,  i,  192.

Reason  called  "  movable  instinct "  by
De  Blainville,  i,  123.

—  distinguished  from  instinct,  i,  123,
188,  190,  491.

— ,  Transition  from  instinct  to,  i,  190.

—  a  legitimate  means  of  arriving  at
truth,  i,  335,  465;  ii,  417.

—  as  a  social  factor,  i,  395,  606,  614.
— ,  Definition  and  psychological  nature

of,  i,  404.

—  distinguished  from  reasoning,  i,  404.
— ,  when  a  dangerous  element,  ii,  287,

288,  290,  302.

Reasoning,  Qualitative  and  quantita-
tive, i,  190.

— ,  Psychological  process  of,  i,  190,
404  ;  ii,  512.

— ,  Analogical,  inductive,  and  deduc-
tive, distinguished,  i,  191.

—  distinguished  from  logic,  i,  191.
Reciprocal  relations  of  man  and  the

universe,  ii,  1.
Reconciliation  of  science  and  religion,

Herbert  Spencer's  proposed,  i,  166,

196 ;  ii,  269.
,   Remarkable

coincidence  in  illustrating,  ii,  269.
Rediscovery,  i,  552,  553.
Redistribution  of  matter,  i,  160.
Reflected  images,  Savage  interpretation

of,  i,  200 ;  ii,  269,  263,  266,  274.
Reflection,  Intellectual   process  of,  i,

380.
Reflex  action,  i,  186,  364,  873  ;  ii,  90,

316.
Reform,  social.  Ultimate  objects  of,  i,

14.

,  Ideal  system  of,  i,  18.

,  The  demand  for,  confined  to  en-
lightened communities,  ii,  447.
Reformation,  Protestant,  ii,  302,  304.

INDEX.

681

Reformatory  systems,  i,  13.

Regret,  analysis  of  the  sentiment,  i,

636.
Regulation  distinguished  from  law,  i,

42.
— ,  Moral,  ii,  373.
Relation,  The  fundamental,  i,  222.
— ,  Mind  a,  i,  408.
Relations  distinguished  from  entities,

i,  160.

—  between  feelings,  i,  185,  186.
— ,  General  nature  of,  i,  227,  285.
Relationships  among  plants  and  ani-
mals, i,  413.

Relatives,  Natural  attachment  for,  i,

677.
Relativity  of  all  knowledge,  i,  156.

magnitude,  i,  225,

Religion,  ii,  252.

—  consists  in  organized  emotion,  i,  11.
— ,  Founders  of,  why  successful,  i,  11.
— ,  Epileptic  origin  of,  i,  12.

— ,  Each,  rejects  every  other,  i,  15  ;  ii,

168,  266,  277,  288.
— ,  Lowest  forms  of,  most  intensely

religious,  i,  94.

—  of  humanity,  Comte's,  i,  1 29.

— ,  Conflict  of,  with  science,  i,  156  ;  ii,

273,  296,  301.
,  line  along  which  it

has  taken  place,  ii,  273.

—  restricted  by  Spencer  to  the  domain
of  the  unknowable,  i,  156,  194,  196.

—  originally  not   differentiated    from
science,  i,  194,  207;  ii,  305.

— ,  Natural  genesis  of,  i,  195 ;  ii,  274.

—  a  product  of    rational  thought,  i,
197.

— ,  Races  devoid  of,  i,  197  ;  ii,  253.
— ,  Fundamental  identity  of,  with  sci-
ence, i,  197;  ii,  272,  273.

—  subject  to  economic  laws,  i,  589.
— ,  Relations  of,  to  morality,  i,  695 ;  ii,

279,  280,  283.
— ,  erroneous  views  as  to  its  influence
on  civilization,  ii,  168.

—  always   means   "  my  religion,"   ii,
168.

—  a  non-progressive  agency,  ii,   168,
265.

— ,  Definitions  of,  ii,  252-261,  263.
— ,  Tylor's  "  minimum  definition "  of,

ii,  253,  263.
— ,  Getting,  ii,  261,  282.
— ,  in  how  far  objectively  true,  ii,  266,

277.

Religion  founded  on  the  supernatural,
ii,  273,  278.

— ,  secret  of  its  interest  for  man,  ii,  278.

— ,  qualities  for  which  chiefly  prized,
ii,  278,  279.

— ,  Original  and  derivative,  ii,  279.

— ,  Temporal  benefits  claimed  for,  ii,
279.

— ,  Moral  sanction  of,  ii,  279,  283.

— ,  All  animals  devoid  of,  ii,  287.

— ,  Anti-progressive  tendencies  of,  ii,
287.

— ,  Each,  declares  every  other  a  super-
stition, ii,  288.

—  divorces  man  from  nature,  ii,  298.
— ,  conditions  to  its  maximum  influ-
ence, ii,  302.

—  intensified  by  the  growth  of  pure
reason,  ii,  302.

Religionists   as  typical  utilitarians,  ii,

146.
Religious  systems,  i,  13.
,  Failure  of,  to  better  the  estate

of  man,  i,  14.
,  in  what  sense  successful  and  in

what  unsuccessful,  i,  14.
proceed  upon  a  want  of  harmony

between  intellect  and  feeling,  i,  19.

—  sentiment.  Love  of  truth  confounded
with  the,  i,  101.

,  Ultimate  form  of  the,  ii,  7.

Remorse,  analysis  of  the  sentiment,  i,
361,  363.

Representation  (in  psychology),  i,  385.

— ,  Political,  necessary  to  secure  jus-
tice, i,  517.

Reproduction,  antagonistic  to  growth,
i,  172,  173,  184.

intellectual  development  and

exercise,  i,  646,  649.

— ,  Biological  rank  of,  i,  173.

— ,  Different  modes  of,  i,  328,  333,

— ,  Fundamental  nature  of,  i,  328-333  ;
ii,  116,  119.

— ,  Transition  from  lower  to  higher
modes  of,  i,  329,  331.

— ,  Sacrifice  involved  in,  i,  329 ;  ii,  338.

— ,  sexual.  Genesis  of,  i,  330.

,  Physiological  process  of,  i,  333.

—  should  be  under  human  control,  ii,
465.

Reproductive  forces  of  societv,  i,  469,

472,  479,  481,  597.

,  Indirect  effects  of  the,  i,  701.

Research,  Original,  i,  22 ;  ii,  552,  665,

623.

682

IKDEX.

Research,  Education  of,  ii,  666.

Resistance  as  a  property  of  matter,  i,
158,  192.

— ,  Law  of  least,  i,  160.

Respectability  as  an  argument  for  dog-
matism, ii,  21.

Respiration,  common  to  plants  and  an-
imals, i,  352.

Respiratory  foods,  i,  534.

Responsibility,  ii,  847,  355,  357.

— ,  Dr.  Wayland  on,  i,  357.

Restraint  as  a  function  of  government,
ii,  213,  231,  236,  239,  243.

Retardataires,  i,  54.

Retina,  Cortical  layers  of  the  brain
compared  to  the,  i,  378.

Revelation,  Contests  about  the  inter-
pretation of,  ii,  140.

Revenue  of  the  United  States,  Sources
of  the,  ii,  605.

Revenues,  Farming  of,  i,  63.

— ,  Just  mode  of  raising,  ii,  398.

Reward  and  punishment.  Future,  i,  692.

Rhizopods,  i,  338,  345,  348.

Rhythm,  characteristic  of  genetic  prog-
ress, i,  75  ;  ii,  86.

—  of  motion,  i,  160.
Right  of  might,  i,  32,  502.

— ,  Abstract,  i,  32 ;  ii,  142,  145.

—  of  man  to  study  and  control  nat-
ure, ii,  12,  17.

— ,  Absolute,  as  the  end  of  effort,  ii,

138,  142,  145.
— ,  Doing,  as  an  end,  ii,  139.
— ,  Utilitarian  definition  of,  ii,  140,  141.

—  originally  equivalent  to  personal
advantage,  ii,  446.

Righteousness,  ii,  139.

Robbery  as  a  mode  of  acquisition,  i,
583.

Roman  Church,  improper  use  of  the
term  by  Protestants,  i,  694.

Romance,  Mission  of,  ii,  340.

Romanes,  G.  J.,  ii,  50.

Rosacete,  ii,  53.

Rotifera,  i,  660.

Roughs,  Sociological  significance  of,  ii,
373.

Rousseau,  Jean  Jacques,  Negative  phi-
losophy of,  i,  95.

on    the    superiority    of    the

natural  state  of  society,  ii,  175.

Rudimentary  organs,  ii,  62.

Rumford,  Count,  on  the  properties  of
water,  ii,  55.

Rumor  as  a  source  of  error,  ii,  427.

SABiEISM,  ii,  264.
Saccharomyces,  i,  841.

Sacrifices,  Human,  by  savages  at  fu-
nerals, ii,  290.

,  Voluntary,  ii,  290.

Sagacity  vs.  intelligence,  ii,  344.

Saint-Simon  on  the  natural  decline  of
nations  and  societies,  i,  167.

,  Parable  of,  i,  586.

Salt,  Production  of,  i,  538.

Saltpeter,  Origin  of,  i,  274.

Sanguinaria  Canadensis,  ii,  60.

Sarcode,  i,  311.

Sarracenia,  ii,  92.

Savages  represent  prehistoric  man,  i,
193;  ii,  217.

— ,  Vigorous  thinking  done  by,  i,  196.

— ,  Intellectual  differences  among,  i,
198 ;  ii,  295.

— ,  Lowest  known  tribes  of,  i,  417  ;  ii,
215,

— ,  Justifiable  deception  of,  ii,  145.

—  without  headship,  ii,  215.

—  in  the  midst  of  civilization,  ii,  241,
593,  594.

— ,  Absence  of  the  sentiment  of  won-
der among,  ii,  275.

— ,  Morality  of,  ii,  280.

— ,  Actions  of  the  lowest,  all  impulsive,
ii,  331,  334.

Schizomycetae,  i,  340.

Schleiden,  i,  361.

Schools  of  thought,  ii,  19.

Schopenhauer's  theory  of  modesty,  i,
635.

Schwann,  i,  361.

Schweinfurth,  i,  418.

Science,  Definitions  of,  i,  2,  45,  157,
407 ;  ii,  497.

—  precedes  art,  i,  37,  69,  552 ;  ii,
193,  200,  203,  497,  626.

— ,  Use,  or  value,  of,  consists  in  its
application,  i,  53,  56,  57,  104,  149,
662 ;  ii,  160,  203,  394.

— ,  Encroachments  of,  upon  the  do-
main of  religion,  i,  92 ;  ii,  305.

— ,  Prevision  a  test  of,  i,  101,  149 ;  ii,
246,  247.

— ,  Domain  of,  the  knowable,  i,  156.

—  originally  not  differentiated  from
religion,  i,  194,  207;  ii,  305.

— ,  Fundamental  identity  of,  with  re-
ligion, i,  197;  ii,  272,  273.
— ,  Simplicity  of,  i,  422 ;  ii,  570.
— ,  Fundamental  assumption  of,  i,  467i
— ,  Material  effects  of,  ii,  208,  509,

I

INDEX.

683

Science,  Abuse  of  the  word,  ii,  246.
— ,  Pure  and  applied,  ii,  247.
— ,  True  and  false,  ii,  247,  628.
— ,  Genesis  of,  ii,  273.

—  distinguished  from  art,  ii,  393.
— ,  Moral  effect  of,  ii,  460,  507.

— ,  Erroneous  inferences  from,  ii,  628.

Sciences,  Classification  of  the,  1,  2,  97,
145,  147,  148.

— ,  Co-ordination  of  the,  ii,  6.

Scientific  method,  EfEect  of  the  adop-
tion of  the,  ii,  198.

,  when  first  employed,  ii,  200,  201.

,  in  what  it  consists,  ii,  201.

,  why  not  adopted  sooner,  ii,  202.

—  legislation,  ii,  249,  251.

—  men.  Attitude  of,  toward  religion,  ii,
281.

distinguished  from  unscientific,

ii,  502.

—  knowledge,  ease  with  which  ac-
quired, ii,  570.

—  work,  State  superintendence  of,  ii,
583.

Sculpture,  i,  669;  ii,  192.

Sea,  Proljable  origin  of  life  in  the,  i,

322,  344.
Secondary  aggregation,  i,  300.

—  production,  i,  546.

—  organization  (instinct),  ii,  104.

—  means,  ii,  108,  308.

—  sexual  characters,  ii,  617.
Seedless  plants,  i,  334.
Segmentation,  i,  183.
Segregation,  i,  165,  233,  248,  254.
Selection,  Inorganic,  i,  233.

— ,  Organic,  ii,  85.

Self  distinguished  from  not-self,  i,  157.

Self-control,  i,  34.

Self-esteem,  i,  679.

Self-executing  processes,  ii,  545,  551,

553.
Self-justification,  ii,  362.
Self-love,  i,  676,  679.
Self-made  men,  ii,  599.
Self-torture,  ii,  300.
Semnopithecus,  i,  416,  426.
Sensation,  Local  seat  of,  i,  47,  387.
— ,  Definitions  of,  i,  364,  381,  386 ;  ii,

75,  321.

—  distinguished  from  feeling,  percep-
tion, and  consciousness,  i,  386.

Sensations  distinguished  from  emotions,

i,  185.
— ,  how  generated,  i,  185.
— ,  Classification  of,  i,  399.

Sense  and  intellect,  Primary  division
of  psychic  phenomena  into,  i,  381.

Sense-force  distinguished  from  mind-
force,  i,  486.

Senses,  The,  as  social  forces,  i,  471,
666.

,  as  sources  of  enjoyment,  i,  494.

,  Relative  reliability  of,  ii,  426.

,  constitute   the  primary   source

of  knowledge,  ii,  518.

,  when  reliable  and  when  not,  ii,

519.

Sensibility,  impUed  in  irritability,  i,
361,  364,  369.

—  a  sensor  effect,  i,  369,  370.
Sensitive  plants,  i,  369,  370.
Sensitiveness,  i,  381.
Sensori-motor  actions,  ii,  312,  314,  336.
Sensorium,  i,  377.

Sentient  and  insentient  phenomena,  ii,

111.
Sequence  and  co-existence.  Categories

of,  i,  2,  110,  128,  157,  158,  222;  ii,

7.
Servetus,  ii,  304.
Sex,  Importance  of  the  phenomena  of,

i,  601.

—  as  a  social  caste,  i,  648.

Sexes,  Numerical  equality   of  the,  i,

619.
Sexual  differentiation,  i,  330.
in  the  cryptogams,  i,  358.

—  appetite,  i,  605.

distinct  from  the  reproductive

function,  i,  469,  473,  602.

,  Genesis  of  the,  i,  602.

,  Difference  of,  in  the  two  sexes,

i,  608.
,  how  distinguished  from  all  other

desires,  i,  635.

—  sentiments.  Anomalous,  of  woman,
i,  606.

—  selection  in  man,  i,  613,  633,  640.

—  laxity  exerts  no  influence  on  moral
character  of  savages,  ii,  455.

Sexuo-social  inequalities,  i,  642,

—  dynamics,  i,  663.

Shadows,  Savage  interpretation  of,  i,

200 ;  ii,  259,  263,  266,  274.
Shamanism,  ii,  254.
Shame,  analysis  of  the  sentiment,  i,

636.
Shelter,   Results  of  man's  efforts  to

provide,  i,  474,  546,  564,  556,  560  ;

ii,  198.
Shoshones,  i,  436.

684:

INDEX.

Sight,  Sense  of,  as  a. social  force,  i,
666.

Silicon,  Cosmical  history  of,  i,  2V9.

Silk,  when  first  used,  i,  558.

Silurus,  i,  660.

Silver  maple,  Premature  blooming  of
the,  ii,  60.

Simian  characters  in  man,  i,  419.

Similarity  distinguished  from  equality,
i,  191,  416.

Simplice,  Sister,  ii,  44*7.

Skepticism,  Kant  on,  ii,  19,  340.

— ,  how  produced,  ii,  282.

— ,  Moral  value  of,  ii,  508.

Skunk-cabbage,  ii,  60.

Slavery,  originally  favorable  to  prog-
ress, i,  94.

—  as  a  discipline  to  labor,  i,  541.

—  constitutes  a  monopoly  of  labor,  i,
693.

— ,  Chattel,  in  the  United  States,  ii,
16Y.

— ,  Altruistic  crusade  against,  ii,  448.

— ,  Hebrew,  The  two  forms  of,  ii,  452.

Slave-trade,  Crusade  against  the,  ii,
448.

Snake-bite,  Mortality  from,  in  India,  i,
685  ;  ii,  271.

Sociability  regarded  by  Comte  as  a
natural  attribute  of  man,  i,  180,  460.

— ,  evidence  of  its  derivative  charac-
ter, i,  451,  461  ;  ii,  221.

— ,  Prerequisites  to,  i,  452.

Social  statics  and  dynamics,  i,  55,  59,
131-133,  456.

—  physics,  i,  125.

—  instinct.  Origin  of  the,  i,  390.

—  compact  theory,  i,  394,  516 ;  ii,
222.

—  relations,  i,  448.

—  science.  Import  of  the  term,  i,  456.
,  Superficiality  of  the  current,  i,

457,  700;  ii,  247.

—  forces,  i,  468;  ii,  190,  311.

,  Control  and  utilization  of,  i,  35,

42,  43  ;  ii,  249,  251.

—  —  the  only  unsubdued  natural
forces,  i,  36.

,  Impelling  and  attracting,  dis-
tinguished, i,  39.

recognized  by  Hobbes,  i,  132,

,  Classification  of  the,  i,  460,  468,

472,  479,  480  ;  ii,  128.

,  The  direct  and  indirect  objects

of  the,  distinguished,  i,  468,  469,
601,  602,  701.

Social  forces,  Genesis  of  society  through

the  action  of  the,  i,  474.

,  The  essential,  i,  482.

contrasted      with      intellectual

forces,  i,  486,  599.

,  Blind  action  of  the,  i,  487.

,  Preservative   and  reproductive,

compared,  i,  598,  599,  603.
are  true  natural  forces,  i,  599,

663 ;  ii,  95,  98.
,  The  non-essential,  i,  664.

—  mechanics,  i,  503.

—  evil,  The  so-called,  i,  629.

—  progress,  Only  a  few  contribute
anything  to,  ii,  12,  72,  175.

defined,  ii,  161,  174.

,  Real  and  apparent,  ii,  163,  174.

,  General  laws  of,  ii,  250.

—  agencies,  ii,  167.

Societies,  Classification  of,  i,  210.
Society,  Instability  of,  i,  16,  66,  704-

706;  ii,  14,  210,  272.
— ,  Popular  belief  in  the  possibility  of

artificially  improving,  i,  30.
— ,  Unorganized  state  of,  and  attendant

evils,  i,  30  ;  ii,  397.
— ,  in  how  far  capable  of  improving

itself,  i,  35  ;  ii,  392.
— ,  its  ignorance  of  its  own  interests,

i,  80.

—  compared  and  contrasted  with  an
organism,  i,  209.

— ,  Origin  and  genesis  of,  i,  390,  394,

395,  438.
— ,  Races  devoid  of,  1,  454.
— ,  Stages  in  the  development  of,  i,

464-^67,  490,   525,   537,   544;    ii,

196.
— ,  Dangerous   classes  of,  i,  509 ;  ii,

239-241,  595.

—  not  a  product  of  art,  ii,  211,  212.
— ,  Primary  condition  to,  ii,  219.

—  thus  far  unconscious,  ii,  249,  397.
— ,  The  two  legitimate  means  of  im-
proving, ii,  392.

— ,  Differentiation  of,  in  advance  of  in-
tegration, ii,  397.
Sociocracy,  i,  60,  137.
Sociogeny,  i,  448,  450,  525.
Sociological  paradox,  i,  52.

—  ideas,  ii,  459,  467.

Sociologists,  need  that  they  be  acquaint-
ed with  the  less  complex  sciences,  i,
37,  61,  62.

— ,  Class  of,  that  cling  to  the  pure
stage  of  the  science,  i,  59.

INDEX.

685

Sociology,  The  term,  first  used  by
Comte,  i,  1,  85,  125.

— ,  Position  of,  in  the  hierarchy  of  the
sciences,  i,  2,  9,  124.

— ,  Dynamic,  i,  25,  81,  456 ;  ii,  154,
155.

— ,  Infantile  state  of,  i,  40.

— ,  Practical  work  of,  i,  68,

— ,  Problems  of,  attacked  in  their  in-
verse order,  i,  76.

— ,  Special  obstacles  to,  i,  11.

— ,  Comte's  method  of  treating,  i,
124.

substitute  for  the  word,  i,  125.

— ,  Spencer's  Principles  of,  reviewed,
i,  193.

— ,  Ideas  as  data  for,  i,  194.

— ,  Aggregation  in,  i,  450.

— ,  Applied  stage  of,  i,  VOO.

— ,  Statical,  why  not  treated  in  this
work,  i,  700.

— ,  Dependence  of,  upon  the  more  sim-
ple sciences,  ii,  493.

Socrates,  meaning  of  his  execution,  i,
11 ;  ii,  265.

—  on  ignorance,  i,  46.

— ,  Unwritten  teachings  of,  ii,  18Y.
Solar  system  distinguished  by  Comte

from  the   universe  and   considered

the  only  proper  field  of  astronomy,

i,  112.
,  Common  origin  of  the  bodies  of

the,  i,  242.
,  Relative  densities  of  the  bodies

of  the,  i,  244.
,  General  comparisons  among  the

bodies  of  the,  i,  260.
not     best    adapted    to    human

needs,  ii,  64,
Soleus  muscle.  Small  development  of

the,  among  low  races,  i,  418.
Solidarity  of  the  sciences,  i,  97.
Solids  to  be  regarded  as  late-developed

forms  of  matter,  i,  252.
— ,  Molecular  movements  in,  i,  253,
Solitary  life  incompatible  with  the  ac-
quisition of  speech,  i,  454.

—  stage  of  society,  i,  466.
Somites,  Independent  individuality  of,

i,  182.
Somnambulism,  Psychological  meaning

of,  i,  376.
Sozobranchiata,  ii,  66.
Space  of  four  dimensions,  ii,  404.
Space-relations,  Science  of,  i,  109.
Special  creation,  i,  174.

Specialists  popularly  regarded  as  the
only  true  scientists,  i,  3.

—  the  statisticians  of  science,  i,  6.

— ,  Low  co-ordinating  power  of,  i,  140.

—  often  not  properly  scientific  men,
ii,  504.

Spectroscopy,  Practical  results  of,   ii,

509.
Speech,  Origin  and  development  of,  i,

434  ;  ii,  180.
— ,  Undifferentiated  sounds  in,  i,  437.

—  dependent  on  brain-development,  i,
438,  455  ;  ii,  180.

— ,  why  absent  in  animals,  i,  438.
— ,  Association  a  necessary  condition
to,  i,  454.

—  distinguished  from  language,  ii,  180.
Speechless  man,  i,  444.

Spencer,  Herbert,  Qualifications  of,  for
a  philosopher,  i,  142.

,  reasons  for  selecting  his  philoso-
phy and  that  of  Comte  as  the  sub-
jects of  special  consideration  in  this
work,  i,  142.

,  his  disclaimers  of  Comtism,  i,

143.

,  his  system  compared  with  that

of  Comte,  i,  143-149.

contrasted  with    that  of

Comte,  149-155,

,  opportuneness  of  his   work,  i,

154,

,  his  views  on  religion,  ii,  258.

Spermatozoa,  i,  331,  343,  358,

Spermatozoids,  i,  331.

— ,  Activity  of,  i,  358.

— ,  Homologue  of  the,  in  the  phaeno-
gams,  i,  358.

Sperm-cells  and  germ-cells,  i,  331,  332,
342,  358.

Sphaerularia  bombi,  i,  660.

Spices,  Early  commerce  in,  i,  568.

Spiders,  Superior  size  of  the  females  of
some,  i,  660.

Spirit,  Belief  in,  by  mankind,  i,  202 ;  ii,
261,  262,

— ,  the  sole  object  of  study  in  the  mid-
dle ages,  ii,  298.

Spirits  regarded  as  the  cause  of  all
phenomena,  i,  202.

—  generally  conceived  as  evil-dis-
posed, i,  202 ;  ii,  279,

Spiritual  power,  i,  136.

—  beings,  Fear  of,  i,  687.

,  Belief  in,  as  a  minimum  defini-
tion of  religion,  ii,  253,  261,  263,

686

INDEX.

Sponges,  i,  346.

Spontaneity,  ii,  18.

S|>ontaneou8  generation,  i,  313,  851.

Spurzheioi,  i,  185.

Stable  equilibrium,  i,  163.

Stage,  Mission  of  the,  ii,  340.

Standards,  Excessive,  of  morality,  ii,

339.
intellectual  achievement,   ii,

600.
Standing  armies,  ii,  236.
Star-worship,  i,  205.
State  education,  Objections  to,  ii,  6Y2.
,  Advantages  of,  ii,  590,  591.

—  jurisdiction,  ii,  5'79.
Statement  of  the  argument,  ii,  106.
States  of  mind,  Coherence  of,  in  con-
sciousness, i,  189.

Statics,  social,  Comte's  treatment  of,  i,

129.
Statistics,  i,  1,
Steamships,  Travel  in,  safer  than  in

sailing-vessels,  ii,  208.
Stephanosphaera,  i,  341.
Stewart,  Balfour,  i,  212.
Stinging  of  certain  insects  suicidal,  ii,

61.
Stirpiculturc,  i,  21 ;  ii,  392,  483,  487,

550.
— ,  A  practical  form  of,  ii,  463.
— ,  Obstacles  in  the  way  of,  ii,  463.
— ,  Indifference  on  the  subject  of,  ii,

465.
— ,  A  substitute  for,  ii,  615.
Stomach,  the  earliest  organ  developed,

i,  339.
Struthio  rhea,  i,  660.
Sturgeon,  Number  of  ova  spawned  by

the,  ii,  87.
Subject  and  object,  i,  157.
Subjection  of  women,  i,  648.
Subjective  department  of  mind,  i,  386.

—  environment,  ii,  321.

—  influences  affecting  opinions,  ii,
428.

Subsistence,  Pursuit  of,  by  man,  i,  479,
485  ;  ii,  179,  189.

Substances  technically  defined,  i,  254.

Succession  distinguished  from  causa-
tion, i,  96.

Suez  Canal  undertaken  by  Rameses  the
Great,  i,  557.

Suffering,  Diminution  of,  demanded,  i,
14.

— ,  Principal  cause  of,  ii,  11,  16.

—  in  the  animal  kingdom,  ii,  88.

Suggestio  falsi.  Prevalence  of  the,  i,
512.

Suicide,  Doctrine  of  immortality  favor-
able to,  ii,  268.

—  a  product  of  reason,  ii,  287.

— ,  Proposal  to  "  put  down,"  ii,  337.

— ,  what  it  proves,  ii,  444.

Sun,  Energy  of  the,  opposed  to  evolu-
tion, i,  175.

— ,  Work  done  by  the,  i,  230.

— ,  cause  of  its  heat,  i,  231.

— ,  Proportion  of  the  matter  of  the  so-
lar system  contained  by  the,  i,  260,
302.

— ,  Elements  found  in  the,  i,  261.

— ,  Heat  of  the,  probably  still  increas-
ing, i,  261.

— ,  Variations  of  shape  undergone  by
the,  i,  261.

Sun-worship,  i,  205.

Supara,  i,  568.

Superficiality,  Two  kinds  of,  ii,  652.

Superiority  of  the  female  sex,  Cases  of,
i,  659.

male  sex  not  an  end  of  nat-
ure, ii,  617.

Supernatural,  Belief  in  the,  a  test  of
dogmatism,  ii,  32.

,  the  basis  of  religion,  ii,

273.

,  constitutes  superstition,  ii,

288.

Super-organic  evolution,  ii,  85,  88.

Superstition,  Foundation  of,  i,  687.

—  absent  from  all  animals,  ii,  288.
— ,  Definition  of,  ii,  288.

—  wholly  non-progressive,  ii,  297.

— ,  fallacy  upon  which  it  rests,  ii,  424.
Suppressio  veri.  Prevalence  of  the,  i,       ■

612.  I

Supremacy,  Initial,  of  the  human  race,        i

1,428,
— ,  Only  one  animal  can  attain,  on  the

globe,  i,  476.
— ,  Ultimate,  of  some  one  of  the  hu-
man races,  i,  477.
Survival  of  the  fittest,  i,  178.
in  primary  aggregation,  i,

234.
not  to  be  confounded  with

survival  of  the  best,  i,  234.
Suspension  of  judgment,  i,  412.
Swoons,   Savage    interpretation  of,   i,

200 ;  ii,  259,  274.
Sympathy  the  basis  of  morals,  i,  39."),

461.

INDEX.

687

Sympathy,  Nature  and  influence  of,  i,

{j(>5,  580;  ii,  369.
— ,  Late  development  of,  ii,  369.
— ,  Undue  praise    popularly   accorded

to,  ii,  370,  371.

—  not  proportioned  to  intellectual  pow-
ers, ii,  371.

— ,  "  Autopathy  "  and  "  altropathy  "
proposed  as  correlative  and  synonym
to,  ii,  371.

Symplocarpus  foetidus,  ii,  60.

Synthesis  of  knowledge  the  essential  of
philosophy,  i,  25,  139.

Systcmatization,  John  Stuart  Mill  on,
5,2.

Systems,  moral  and  religious.  Power  of,
1,17.

— ,  philosophic.  Tendency  of,  to  be  chi-
merical, i,  218.

— ,  stellar,  Non-luminous,  i,  248.

. ,  General  theory  of  the  formation

of,  i,  243,  249.

TABLE  of  classification  of  the  social
forces,  i,  472.

phenomena,  ii,  106,

actions,  ii,  314.

—  showing  the  method  adopted  for
treating  the  social  forces,  i,  480.

—  of  railroad  statistics  in  Prussia,  ii,
581.

Taenia,  i,  337.

Tahitians,  Human  sacrifices  among  the,

ii,  291.
Talent  distinguished  from  genius,  ii,

472.
Tameness  of  animals.  Causes  of,  ii,  61,

381.
Tape-worm,   Imperfect  integration  of

the  segments  of  the,  i,  183,  234,  376.
— ,  Number  of  ova  contained  in  the,

ii,  87.
Tardigrades,  Tenacity  of  life  of  the,  ii,

152.
Tariff,  True  argument  for,  ii,  898.
: —  for  revenue,  Practical  effect  of,  ii,

604,  605.
Tartarus,  ii,  267.
Taste,  Absence  of,  conceivable,  i,  469.

—  distinct  from  the  function  of  nutri-
tion, i,  469.

Taxation,  Irrational  opposition  to  di-
rect, ii,  608.

Teachers  looked  upon  as  philanthro-
pists, ii,  627.

Telegraphy,  ii,  189.

Teleological  progress,  i,  28,  29,  57.

—  school  of  philosophy,  i,  64  ;  ii,  18,

—  adaptation  the  only  economical,  i,
75.

—  processes  distinguished  from  genet-
ic, ii,  9,  18,  30,  33.

—  phenomena,  ii,  78,  80,  89.

,  Apparent,  ii,  26.

,  Subdivisions  of,  ii,  105.

Teleology,  Anthropo-  and  theo-,  i,  28,

29,  57,  58,  67,  150.
— ,  Individual  and  social,  i,  34.

—  as  a  philosophy,  i,  64  ;  ii,  18.
— ,  Consistency  of  savage,  i,  208.

—  adapted  to  the  indolent  brain,  ii,  21,
— ,  Evolutionary,  ii,  31,  40.

— ,  Definition  of,  ii,  90.

Telephony,  ii,  189,

Temple,  The,  a  modification  of    the

tomb,  ii,  296.
Temptation,  i,  509,
Ten  commandments,  in  how  far  moral

and  in  how  far  religious,  ii,442,  453.

reduced  by  Christ  to  two,  ii,  444.

Tenacity  of  life  inversely  proportional

to  the  degree  of  organization,  ii,  151,
Terminology  of  dynamic  sociology,  ii,

108.
Terrestrial  paradoxes,  i,  51.
Terror,  Chronic,  of  animals,  ii,  88,
Tertiary  man,  i,  446.

—  aggregation,  i,  448.

—  means,  ii,  109,  400.

Testimony  a  means  of  diminishing
certainty,  ii,  527.

Textiles,  Origin  of,  i,  558.

Thalami  optici,  i,  379.

Thales,  ii,  200.

Thalictrum  dioicum,  i,  659.

Thallophytcs,  i,  331.

Theft  as  a  mode  of  acquisition,  i,  583,

— ,.  Justifiable,  ii,  143.

Theism,  ii,  254,  257.

Theological,  metaphysical,  and  posi-
tive stages  of  society,  i,  65,  86,  93,
132.

Theology,  Comte's  treatment  of,  i,  86,
93.

—  deals  with  the  first  cause  and  with
final  causes,  i,  88.

— ,  Encroachments  of  science  upon  the
domain  of,  i,  92  ;  ii,  305.

— ,  date  of  the  termination  of  its  su-
premacy, i,  94.

— ,  The  three  stages  of,  i,  94.

—  as  a  philosophic  school,  ii,  18.

688

INDEX.

Theology,  Anti-progressive  tendencies
of,  ii,  38,  301.

—  the  objective  branch  of  religion,  ii,

262,  275.

Theorems  of  dynamic  sociology,  ii,  108,

109.
Theo-teleology  grew  out  of  anthropo-

teleology,  i,  29,  58.
— ,  Narrowing  the  field  of,  i,  57.
Thermology,  i,  114,  115.
Things,  Need  that  thoughts  correspond

to,  i,  3,  70.

—  distinguished  from  facts  and  laws,
ii,  527.

Thoroughness,  False  ideas  of,  ii,  652.
Thought,  Definitions  of,  i,  157,  380.
— ,  Psychological  process  of,   i,  378,

385.
Thoughts  and  things,  necessity  of  their

correspondence,  i,  3,  70.
Thyroid  gland,  ii,  63.
Time  and  space,  i,  227  ;  ii,  6.
Time-limits  wanting  in  the  history  of

the  universe,  ii,  6.
Time-relations,  The  science  of,  i,  109.
Tin,  Early  commerce  in,  i,  567.
Tissue,  Simplest  form  of,  i,  338.
Tissues,   Embryonic    development    of

the,  i,  339.
Toads,  Longevity  of,  ii,  67.
Tomb,  The  temple  an  outgrowth  of  the,

ii,  296.
Ton-.bs,  Erection  of  costly,  ii,  296.
Tongans,  Human  sacrifices  among  the,

ii,  291.
Tonsils,  ii,  63.
Torula,  i,  341.
Totemism,  ii,  254.
Tours,  battle  of,  Critical  character  of

the,  ii,  244.
Tradition,  Unreliableness  of,  ii,  186.
Trance,   Savage  interpretation  of,   ii,

263,  266.
Transcendental  analysis,  i,  106.

—  biology,  i,  121,  145,  146.

—  chemistry,  i,  239.
Transfigured  realism,  i,  192.
Transition  forms,  i,  335.

—  from  natural   to    civil    justice,  i,
504.

Transitive  effects,  ii,  78.
Transportation,  i,  566,  667.
— ,  Monopoly  in,  i,  592.
— ,  Duplicated,  ii,  89.
Trigonometry,  ii,  887.
Trinity,  Doctrine  of  the,  ii,  279,

Truth  the  natural  food  of  the  mind,  i,

69;  ii,  669,  619.
— ,  Scientific  faith  in  the  innocence  of,

ii,  134.
— ,  Grades  of  comprchcnsibility  of,  ii,

349,  569.
— ,  Subjective  barriers  to,  ii,  408,  428.

—  distinguished  from  fact,  ii,  415.
— ,  Definitions  of,  ii,  415,  416.

— ,  General  distinguished  from  ab-
stract, ii,  620.

Tubicolae,  i,  183.

Turkey-buzzard,  i,  462.

Tylor,  Edward  B.,  on  religion,  ii,  268,
262.

animism,  ii,  259.

Types  of  mind,  i,  64,  91 ;  ii,  24.

structure.  Common  origin  of  the

animal,  i,  413.

ULTIMATE  atom,  i,  225.
—  end  of  conation,  ii,  108,  109,

111.
Unconditioned,  The,  i,  156  ;  ii,  258.
Unconscious  cerebration,  i,  375.
— ,  The  universe  to  be  regarded  as,  i,

577,  605,  662;  ii,  5,  9,  12,  13,  68,

74.
Understanding,  The,  ii,  154.
Units,  Biological,  i,  182,  234.

—  of  aggregation,  i,  234.

— ,  Physiological,  i,  312,  318.
— ,  Morphological,  i,  318.
Universal  education,  i,  133,  150,  581 ;
ii,  589,  593,  606,  613,  614.

—  postulate  of  Herbert  Spencer,  ii,
415,  517.

Universe  distinguished  by  Comte  from
the  solar  system,  i,  111.

—  to  be  contemplated  as  unconscious
and  unintelligent,  i,  577,  605,  662 ;
ii,  5,  12,  13,  68,  74.

Unknowable,  The,  i,  90,  111,  155,  156,
194,  196  ;  ii,  258.

"  Un-moral  "  actions  of  savages,  ii,  280.

Unremunerativeness  of  reformatory
work,  i,  78.

Urschleim,  i,  311.

Use  of  science,  i,  53.

Utilitarianism,  i,  391 ;  ii,  134,  468,

— ,  Spencer's  defense  of,  i,  217.

— ,  Objections  to,  ii,  135.

Utility,  Classification  of  the  objects  of,
i,  564,  565.

— ,  Individual,  distinguished  from  nat-
ural or  cosmical,  ii,  132,  383.

INDEX.

689

Utility,  Absolute,  ii,  133.
— ,  Dcanition  of,  ii,  140.

YAILE,  E.  0.,  on  early  methods  in
arithmetic,  ii,  387.
Value,  Artificial  character  of  nearly  all,

i,  562.
Variation,  Law  of,  in  biology,  i,  423.

—  distinguished  from  ditferentiation,
ii,  9.

Vegetable  foods.  Sources  of,  i,  535.

,  Production  of,  i,  539.

Vegetal  development,  i,  343.
Vegetarianism  the   probable    primary

state  of  the  human  race,  i,  489,  539,

544 ;  ii,  197.
Vegetation  the  original  producer  of  oi*-

ganic  foods,  i,  489,  535.

—  at  war,  ii,  87.

Vegetative  and  animal  life,  i,  121.

Verification  the  only  criterion  of  cer-
tainty, i,  192,  198  ;  ii,  402,417,  491,
521.

— ,  Rational  and  sensual,  ii,  417.

— ,  The  means  of,  must  ba  left  free,  ii,
418,  486.

—  the  chief  characteristic  of  the  sci-
entific method,  ii,  491.

Vermiform  appendage,  ii,  63.

Vertebrata,  Composite  nature  of  the,  i,
235.

Vestiges  distinguished  from  rudiments,
ii,  63.

Vibriones,  i,  340.

Vicious  circle  of  reasoning,  i,  49,  231.

Vigilance  committees,  Sociological  sig-
nificance of,  ii,  373.

Violence,  Fear  of,  i,  683.

— ,  All  deaths  attributed  to,  by  savages,
i,  688.

Virtue  mistaken  for  an  end,  ii,  135.

—  and  vice,  ii,  355.

Virtues,  The  cardinal,  wanting  in  primi-
tive man,  i,  461.

Viscum,  i,  349.

Vital  relations,  i,  300.

A'ituperation,  Method  of,  in  reform,  i,
499,  655  ;  ii,  238.

Vivid  series  of  psvchic  phenomena,  i,
187;  ii,  150,  283,  369.

Vogt,  Carl,  on  microcephalous  idiots,  i,
419.

"  Voir  pour  pr6voir,"  motto  of  Auguste
Comte,  i,  104,  149.

Volition,  ii,  90.

Voluntary  actions,  ii,  90,  312,  314,  320.

61

Voluntary  actions,  Partially,  ii,  316.
mistaken  for  involuntary,  ii,  318,

319,  546.
,  Transition  from,  to  automatic,  ii,

319,  344.

defined,  ii,  322.

Volvocineac,  i,  331,  338.

Volvox,  i,  338,  341.

Vorticella,  i,  323.

Vultures,  in  how  far  gregarious,  i,  462.

WAGER,  The,  a  test  of  the  strength
of  belief,  ii,  411.

Waldstein,  Charles,  ii,  147.

Wallace,  A.  R.,  on  the  multiple  origin
of  the  human  race,  i,  465.

Walras  on  social  mechanics,  i,  503.

Want  as  a  social  force,  i,  484,  683.

—  correlated  with  substance,  i,  485.

War  as  a  mode  of  acquisition,  i,  583,
584,

— ,  Fallacy  of  all  arguments  for  pre-
venting, i,  684.

— ,  Cosmical  significance  of,  ii,  70.

— ,  Justifications  of,  ii,  237.

Waste  involved  in  natural,  or  genetic,
processes,  i,  73,  74,  521 ;  ii,  86-89.

Water,  Maximum  density  temperature
of,  and  its  supposed  advantages,  ii,
55,  57.

Water-power,  Principles  involved  in,  ii,
389.

Wayland,  Francis,  on  moral  responsi-
bility, ii,  355-359.

Wealth,  Kind  of  superiority  required
to  obtain,  i,  519.

— ,  Private  accumulation  of,  indirectly
progressive,  i,  520.

— ,  Unequal  distribution  of,  ii,  89.

Weights,  Principle  of,  in  machinery,  ii,
389.

Werdcn,  ii,  80.

Wheat-eels,  Tenacity  of  life  of,  ii,  152.

White,  Andrew  D.,  i,  15;  ii,  208.

Will,  Nature  of  the,  i,  395-398  ;  ii,  123,
314,  317,  321,  324,  328-330.

— ,  Early  attempts  to  explain  the,  ii,  93.

Winchell,  Alexander,  on  the  constants
of  religion,  ii,  260.

Wind,  Mystery  of  the,  i,  48, 199  ;  ii,  11.

Winds,  Prevalence  of  northerly,  in
winter  and  southerly  in  summer,  ii,
70.

Wisdom  distinguished  from  intelli-
gence, ii,  472.

Witchcraft,  i,  688 ;  ii,  304.

690

INDEX.

Wollaston,  Early  spectroscopic  discov-
eries of,  i,  111.

—  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  atmos-
phere, i,  271.

Wolves,  why  gregarious,  i,  452.

Women,  Comte's  views  of,  i,  ISO.

— ,  Scientific  sophistry  employed  to  jus-
tify the  subjection  of,  i,  131,  658  ;  ii,
616.

— ,  Sexual  sentiments  of,  anomalous,  i,
606,  616,  633,  648.

— ,  Social  condition  of,  i,  640-65Y ;  ii,
613.

— ,  Sexuo-social  inequalities  of,  i,  642.

— ,  Education  of,  i,  645  ;  ii,  614.

— ,  Mental  peculiarities  of,  i,  646 ;  ii,
327.

— ,  Subjection  of,  i,  648.

—  usually  non-productive,  i,  05 1.

— ,  the  male   sex  not  responsible  for

their  condition,  i,  655.
— ,  Attitude  of  science  toward,  i,  657-

663 ;  ii,  616.
— ,  cause  of  the  trivial   character  of

their  ideas,  ii,  437.
intellectual  inferiority  of,  ii,

616.
— ,  Theoretical  sphere  of,  ii,  617.

Wonder,  No  occasion  for,  in  the  study

of  nature,  ii,  5,  7,  49.
— ,   Absence    of,   among   savages,   ii,

275.
Wool,  Introduction  of,  into  the  arts,  i,

558.
Written  language  as  a  social  agency,  ii,

182.
Wrong,  Definition  of,  ii,  140,  141.
Wyman,  Jeifries,  on  the  isolated  study

of  facts,  i,  23.

YORUBANS,  Human  sacrifices  among
the,  ii,  291.
Youmans,  E.  L.,  on  the  excessive  ac-
cumulation of  facts,  i,  23.
Yucca,  Fertilization  of,  i,  520.

7ELL-SEELE,  ii,  31.
Ai  Zodiacal  light,  i,  260.
Zoocentric  theory,  ii,  50.
Zoophjrtes,  i,  371.
Zootheism,  ii,  255,  257,  258.
Zootomy,  zootaxy,  terms  in  biology  in-
troduced by  De  Blainville,  i,  1 20.
Zoi'oaster,  i,  693.
Zunis,  i,  436.
Zygospores,  i.  331.

THE  KND  OF  VOLUME  H-

Scientific  Publications.

ANTS,  BEES,  AND  WASPS.  A  Kecord  of  Observations  on  the  Habits  of  th«
Social  Hymenoptora.  By  Sir  John  Lubbock,  Bart.,  M.  P.,  P.  K.  B.,  etc.,  author
of  "  Origin  of  Civilization,  and  the  Primitive  Condition  of  Man,"  etc.,  etc.  With
Colored  Plates.    12mo,  cloth,  $2.00.

"This  volume  contains  the  record  of  various  experiments  made  with  ants,  bees,  and
wasps  during-  the  last  ten  years,  with  a  view  to  test  their  mental  condition  and  powers
of  sense.  The  principal  point  in  which  J?ir  John's  mode  of  experiment  differs  from
those  of  Huber,  Porel,  McCook,  and  others,  is  that  he  has  carefully  watched  and
marked  particular  insects,  and  has  had  their  nests  under  observation  for  long  periods
— one  of  his  ants'  nests  having  been  under  constant  inspection  ever  since  1874.  His
observations  are  made  principally  upon  ants  because  they  show  more  power  and  flexi-
bility of  mind;  and  the  value  of  his  studies  is  that  they  belong  to  the  department  of
original  research."

"  We  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  the  author  has  presented  us  with  the  most
valuable  series  of  observations  on  a  special  subject  that  has  ever  been  produced,  charm-
ingly written,  full  of  logical  deductions,  and,  when  we  consider  his  multitudinous  en-
gagements, a  remarkable  illustration  of  economy  of  time.  As  a  contribution  to  insect
psychology,  it  will  be  long  before  this  book  finds  a  parallel." — London  Athenaeum.

DISEASES  OF  MEMORY :  An  Essay  in  the  Positive  Psychology.  By  Tn.
EiBOT,  author  of  "  Heredity,"  etc.  Translated  from  the  French  by  William
Huntington  Smith.    12mo,  cloth,  $1.50.

*'  M.  Ribot  reduces  diseases  of  memory  to  law,  and  his  treatise  is  of  extraor-
dinary interest." — Philadelphia  Press.

"Not  merely  to  scientiflc,  but  to  all  thinking  men,  this  volume  will  prove
Intensely  interesting."— iVew  York  Observer.

"M.  Ribot  has  bestowed  the  most  painstaking  attention  upon  his  theme,
and  numerous  examples  of  the  conditions  considered  greatly  increase  the  value
and  interest  of  the  volume." — Philadelphia  North  American.

"  To  the  general  reader  the  work  is  made  entertaining  by  many  illustrations
connected  with  such  names  as  Linnaeus,  Newton,  Sir  Walter  Scott,  Horace  Ver-
net,  Gustave  Dore,  and  many  others." — Harrisburg  Telegraph.

"The  whole  subject  is  presented  with  a  Frenchman's  vivacity  of  Btyle."—
Providence  Journal.

"It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  in  no  single  work  have  6o  many  cnrious
cases  been  brought  together  and  interpreted  in  a  scientific  manner.' — Boston
Evening  Traveller.

MYTH  AND  SCIENCE.    By  Trro  Vignoli.  ,12mo,  cloth,  price,  $1.50.

"  His  book  Is  ingenious ;  .  .  .  his  theorv  of  how  science  gradually  differen-
tiated from  and  conquered  myth  is  extremely  well  wrought  oat,  and  is  probably  in
essentials  correct."— Stoiwrday  Review.

"The  book  is  a  strong  one,  and  far  more  interesting  to  the  general  reader  than  its
title  would  indicate.  The  learning,  the  acuteness,  the  strong  reasoning  power,  and  the
scientific  spirit  of  the  author,  command  admiration." — New  York  Christian  Advocate.

"  An  attempt  made,  with  much  ability  and  no  small  measure  of  success,  to  trace  the
•rigin  and  development  of  the  myth.  The  author  has  pursued  his  inquiry  with  much
patience  and  ingenuity,  and  has  produced  a  very  readable  and  luminous  treatise." —
Philadelphia  North  American.

"  It  is  a  curious  if  not  startling  contribution  both  to  psychology  and  to  the  early
history  of  man's  development." — N'ew  York  World.

For  tale  by  aU  booksellers ;  or  sent  by  mail,  post-paid,  on  receipt  qf  price.
New  York :  D.  APPLETON  &  CO.,  1,  3,  &  5  Bond  Street.

Scientific  Publications,

THB  BRAIN  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS.  By  J.  Lutb,  Physician  to  the
Hospice  de  la  Salp6trlere.    With  lUustrations.    12mo.    Cloth,  $1.50.

"No  livinij  phy8iolo^e<t  is  better  entitled  to  Bpeak  with  authority  npon  thn
structure  and  fuuctioue  of  the  brain  than  Dr.  Luys.  His  studies  on  the  anatomy
ef  the  nervous  system  are  acknowledKcd  to  be  the  fullest  and  most  systematic
ever  undortaken.  Dr.  Luys  supports  his  conclusions  not  only  by  his  own  ana-
tomical re^iearches,  but  also  by  many  functional  observations  of  various  other
physiologists,  including  of  course  Professor  Ferrier's  now  classical  experi-
ments."—/S/.  James's  Gazette.

"  Dr.  Luys,  at  the  head  of  the  great  French  Insane  Asylum,  is  one  of  the  most
eminent  and  successful  investigators  of  cerebral  science  now  living;  and  he  has
given  unquestionably  the  clearest  and  most  interesting  brief  account  yet  made  of
the  structure  and  operations  of  the  brain.  We  have  been  fascinated  by  this  vol-
ume more  than  by  any  other  treatise  we  have  yet  seen  on  the  machinery  of  sen-
sibility and  thought ;  and  we  have  been  instructed  not  only  by  much  that  is  new,
but  by  many  sagacious  practical  hints  such  as  it  is  well  for  everybody  to  under-
stand."— TiU  Popular  Science  Monthly.

THE   CONCEPTS  AND  THEORIES  OF  MODERN  PHYSICS.    By

J.  B.  Stallo.    12mo.    Cloth,  $1.75.

"Judge  Stallo's  work  is  an  inquiry  into  the  validity  of  those  mechanical  con-
ceptions of  the  universe  which  are  now  held  as  fundamental  in  physical  science.
He  takes  up  the  leading  modern  doctrines  which  are  based  upon  this  mechanical
conception,  such  as  the  atomic  constitution  of  matter,  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,
the  conservation  of  energy,  the  nebular  hypothesis,  and  other  views,  to  find  how
much  stands  upon  solid  empirical  sround,  and  how  much  rests  upon  metaphys-
ical speculation.  Since  the  appearance  of  Dr.  Draper's  '  Religion  and  Science,'
no  book  has  been  published  in  the  country  calculated  to  make  so  deep  an  impres-
sion on  thoughtful  and  educated  readers  as  this  volume.  .  .  .  The  range  and
minuteness  of  the  author's  learning,  the  acuteness  of  his  reasoning,  and  the
singular  precision  and  clearness  of  his  style,  are  qualities  which  very  seldom
have  been  joindy  exhibited  in  a  scientific  treatise." — iVew  York  Sun,

THE  FORMATION  OF  VEGETABLE  MOULD,  THROUGH  THE
ACTION  OF  WORMS,  WITH  OBSERVATIONS  ON  THEIR
HABITS.  By  Charlbs  Darwin,  LL.  D.,  F.  R.  8.,  author  of  "  On  the
Origin  of  Species,"  etc.,  etc.  With  Illustrations.  12mo,  cloth.  Price,  $1.50.

"  Mr.  Darwin's  little  volume  on  the  habits  and  instincts  of  earth-worms  is  no
less  marked  than  the  earlier  or  more  elaborate  efforts  of  his  genius  by  freshness
of  observation,  unfailing  power  of  interpreting  and  correlating  facts,  and  logical
vigor  in  generalizing  npon  them.  The  main  purpose  of  the  work  is  to  point  out
the  share  which  worms  have  taken  in  the  formation  of  the  layer  of  vegetable
mould  which  covers  the  whole  surface  of  the  land  in  every  moderately  humid
country.  All  lovers  of  nature  will  unite  in  thanking  Mr.  Darwin  for  the  new  and
interesting  light  he  has  thrown  upon  a  subject  so  long  overlooked,  yet  so  full  of
interest  and  instruction,  as  the  structure  and  the  labors  of  the  earth-worm." —
Saturday  Review.

"  Respecting  worms  as  among  the  most  useful  portions  of  animate  nature,
Dr.  Darwin  relates,  in  this  remarkable  book,  their  structure  and  habits,  the  part
they  have  played  in  the  burial  of  ancient  buildings  and  the  denudation  of  the
land,  in  the  disintegration  of  rocks,  the  preparation  of  soil  for  the  growth  of
plants,  and  in  the  natural  history  of  the  world."— .Boston  Advertiser.

D.  APPLETON  &  CO.,  Publishers,

1,  3.  &  5  Bond  Street,  New  Tork.

Scientific  Publications.

BUiriDE  :  An  Essay  in  Comparative  Moral  Statistics.  By  Hknkt  Mobbelli,  Pto>
fessor  of  Psychological  MeJicine  in  Koyal  University,  Turin.  12mo,  Cloth,  $l.t5.
"  Suicide  "  Is  a  scientific  inquiry,  on  the  basis  of  the  statistical  method,  into  the  larvs
of  suicidal  phenomena.  Dealing  with  the  subject  as  a  branch  of  social  science,  it  con-
siders the  increase  of  suicide  in  different  countries,  and  the  comparison  of  nations,
races,  and  periods  in  its  manifestation.  The  influences  of  age,  sex.  constitution,  cli-
mate, season,  occupation,  religion,  prevailing  ideas,  the  elements  of  character,  and  the
.tendencies  of  civilization,  are  comprehensively  analyzed  in  their  bearing  upon  the  pro-
pensity to  self-destruction.  Professor  Morselll  is  an  eminent  European  authority  on
this  subject.  It  is  accompanied  by  colored  maps  illustrating  pictorially  the  results  of
statistical  inquiries.

VOX-CANOES  :  What  they  Are  and  what  they  Teach.  By  J.  W.  Jvvd,
Professor  of  Geology  in  the  Royal  School  of  Mines  (London).  With  Ninety-six
Illustrations.    12mo.    Cloth,  $2.00.

"  Tn  no  field  has  modern  research  been  more  fruitful  than  in  that  of  which  Professor
Judd  gives  a  popular  account  in  the  present  volume.  The  great  lines  of  dynamical,
geological,  and  meteorological  inquiry  converge  upon  the  grand  problem  of  the  interior
constitution  of  the  earth,  and  the  vast  influence  of  subterranean  agencies.  .  .  .  IwS
book  is  very  far  from  being  a  mere  dry  description  of  volcanoes  and  their  eruptions  ;  it
is  rather  a  presentation  of  the  terrestrial  facts  and  laws  with  which  volcanic  x>henoQ)etia
are  associated." — Popular  Science  Monthly.

"  The  volume  before  us  is  one  of  the  pleasantest  science  manuals  wo  have  read  for
some  time." — Atfienaeum.

"  Mr.  Judd's  summary  is  so  full  and  so  concise  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  give
a  fair  idea  in  a  short  review." — Pall  Mall  Gazelle.

THE  SUN.    By  C.  A.  Tottno.  Ph.  D.,  LL.  D.,  Professor  of  Astronomy  in  the  College

of  New  Jersey.     With  numerous  Illustrations.    12mo.     Cloth,  $2.00.

"  Professor  Young  Is  an  authority  on  '  The  Sun,'  and  writes  from  intimate  knowl-
edge. He  has  studied  that  great  luminary  all  his  life,  invented  and  improved  instru-
ments for  observing  it,  gone  to  all  quarters  of  the  world  in  search  of  the  best  places
and  opportunities  to  watch  it,  and  has  contributed  Important  discoveries  that  have
extended  our  knowledge  of  it.

"  It  would  take  a  cyclopaedia  to  represent  all  that  has  been  done  toward  clearing  up
the  solar  mysteries.  Professor  Young  has  summarized  the  information,  and  presented
it  in  a  form  completely  available  for  general  readers.  There  is  no  rhetoric  in  his  book ;
he  trusts  the  grandeur  of  his  theme  to  kindle  interest  and  Impress  the  feelings.  His
statements  are  plain,  direct,  clear,  and  condensed,  though  ample  enough  for  his  purpose,
and  the  substance  of  what  is  generally  wanted  will  be  found  accurately  given  In  his
pages."— jR9pM/ar  Science  Monthly.

iJLLiUSIONS  :  A  Psychological  Study.  By  James  Sully,  author  of  "  Sensa-
tion and  Intuition,"  etc.     12mo.    Cloth,  $1.50.

This  volume  takes  a  wide  survey  of  the  field  of  error,  embracing  In  its  view  not  only
the  illusions  commonly  regarded  as  of  the  nature  of  mental  aberrations  or  hallucina-
tions, but  also  other  illusions  arising  from  that  capacity  for  error  which  belongs  essen-
tially to  rational  human  nature.  The  author  has  endeavored  to  keep  to  a  strictly  scien-
tific treatment — that  is  to  say,  the  description  and  classification  of  acknowledged  errors,
and  the  exposition  of  them  by  a  reference  to  their  psychical  and  physical  conditions.

"  This  is  not  a  technical  work,  but  one  of  wide  popular  interest,  in  the  principles  and
results  of  which  every  one  is  concerned.  The  illusions  of  perception  of  the  senses  and
of  dreams  are  first  considered,  and  then  the  author  passes  to  the  illusions  of  introspec-
tion, errors  of  insight,  illusions  of  memory,  and  illusions  of  belief.  The  work  is  a  note-
worthy contribution  to  the  original  progress  of  thought,  and  may  bs  relied  upon  as
representing  the  present  state  of  knowledge  on  the  important  subject  to  which  it  is
devoted." — Popular  Science  Monthly.

D.  APPLETON  &  CO.,  Publishers,

1.  3,  and  6  Bond  Street.  New  York.

Scientific  Publications.

GSNBBAL  PHTSIOrOOY  OP  MUSCI.ES  AND  NERVES.    By  Dr.  L

RossNiHAi.,  Professor  of  Physiology  at  the  University  of  Erlangen.  With
seventy-fire  WoodcutB.  ("  iDtemationnl  Scieutiflc  Series.")  ISmo,  cloth,
$1.50.

"The  attempt  at  a  connected  acconnt  of  the  general  physiology  of  ronscles
and  nerves  is,  as  far  as  I  know,  the  first  of  its  kind.  The  general  data  for  thid
branch  of  science  have  been  gained  only  within  the  past  thirty  yesLre."— Extract
from  Prrface.

SIGHT :  An  Exposition  of  the  Principles  of  Monocular  and  Binocular  Vision
By  Joseph  Lb  Conte,  LL. D.,  author  of  "Elements  of  Geology";  "Re-
ligion and  Science  " ;  and  Professor  of  Geology  and  Natural  History  in  the
University  of  California.  With  numerous  Illustrations.  12mo,  cloth,  $1.50.

"It  is  pleasant  to  find  an  American  book  which  can  rank  with  the  very  best
of  forcigu  works  on  this  subject.  Professor  Le  Conte  has  long  been  known  as
an  oriiiinal  investigator  in  this  department;  all  that  he  gives  us  is  treated  with
a  master-hand."— yAe  Nation.

ANIMAIi  IjIFE,  as  affected  by  the  Natural  Conditions  of  Existence.  By
Kabl  Sempek,  Professor  of  the  University  of  Wtirzburg.  With  %  Maps
and  106  Woodcuts,  and  Index.    18mo,  cloth,  $2.00.

"  This  is  in  many  respects  one  of  the  most  interesting  contributions  to
zoological  literature  which  has  appeared  for  some  time." — Nature.

THE  ATOMIC  THEORY.  By  Ad.  Wttbtz.  Membre  de  I'lnstitut ;  Doyen
Ilonoraire  de  la  Faculte  de  M6decine  ;  Professeura  la  FacuM  des  Sciences
de  Paris.  Translated  by  E.  Clkminshaw,  M.  A.,  F.  C.  S.,  F.  I.  C,  Assist
ant  Master  at  Sherborne  School.    13mo,  cloth,  $l..'jO.

"  There  was  need  for  a  book  like  this,  which  discusses  the  atomic  theory  both
in  its  hiHtoric  evolution  and  in  its  present  form.  And  perhaps- no  man  ot  (his
age  could  have  been  selected  so  able  to  perform  the  task  in  a  masterly  wny  as
the  illustrious  French  chemist,  Adolph  Wurtz.  It  is  impossible  to  convey  t-o  the
reader,  in  a  notice  like  this,  any  adequate  idea  of  the  scope,  lucid  instructiveness,
and  scientific  interest  of  Professor  Wurtz's  book.  The  modern  problems  of
chemistry,  which  are  commonly  so  obscure  from  imperfect  exposition,  ate  here
made  wonderfully  clear  and  attractive." — The  FopiUar  Science  Monthly.

THE  CRAYFISH.  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  ZoOlogy.  By  Professor
T.  H.  Huxley,  F.  R.  S.    With  82  Illustrations.    12mo,  cloth,  $1.75.

"  Whoever  will  follow  these  pages,  crayfish  in  hand,  and  will  try  to  verify  for
himself  the  statements  which  they  contain,  will  find  himself  brought  face  to  face
with  all  the  great  zoological  questious  which  excite  so  lively  an  interest  at  the
present  day."

"The  reader  of  this  valuable  monograph  will  lay  it  down  with  a  feeling  of
wonder  at  the  amount  and  variety  of  matter  which  has  been  got  out  of  so  seem-
ingly Blight  and  unpretending  a  subject."— <Sa<Mrrfay  Beview.

D.  APPLETON   &  CO.,  Publishers,

1,  3,  &  5  Bond  Strest,  Nbw  Yobs..

Scientific  Publications,

THE  HUMAN  SPECIES.  By  A.  Db  QrATBEFAGES,  ProfesBor  of  Anthro-
pology ill  the  Museum  of  Natural  History,  Paris.    12mo,  cloth,  $9.00.

The  work  treats  of  the  unity,  origin,  antiquity,  and  original  localization  of
Hie  human  species,  peopling;  of  the  globe,  acclimatization,  primitive  man,  forma-
tian  of  the  human  races,  fossil  human  races,  present  human  races,  and  the  physi-
cal and  psychological  characters  of  mankind.

STUDENTS'  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COLOR ;  or,  MODERN  CHROMAT-
ICS. With  Applications  to  Art  and  Industry.  With  130  Original  Ilins-
tfations,  and  Prontieplece  in  Colors.  By  Ogden  N  Rood,  Professor  of
Physics  in  Columbia  College.    13mo,  cloth,  $2.00.

"In  this  interesting  bonk  Professor  Hood,  who,  as  a  dislinenished  Professor
of  Physics  in  Columbia  College,  United  States,  must  be  accepted  as  u  competent
autliority  on  the  branch  of  science  of  which  he  tnjats,  deals  briefly  and  succinctly
with  what  may  be  termed  the  scientific  rationale  of  his  subject.  But  the  chief
value  of  his  work  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  fact  that  he  is  himself  an  accom-
plished artist  as  well  as  an  authoritative  expounder  of  science." — £din(>urf/fi
Bedew,  October,  1879,  in  an  article  on  "  T/te  Philosophy  of  Color."

EDUCATION  AS  A  SCIENCE.  By  Alexander  Bain,  LL.  D.  12mo,  cloth.
$1.75.

"  This  work  must  bo  pronounced  the  most  remarkable  discussion  of  educa-
tional problems  which  has  been  published  in  our  day.  We  do  not  hesitate  to
bespeak  for  it  the  widest  circulation  and  the  most  earnest  attention.  It  should
i)e  in  the  hands  of  every  school-teacher  and  friend  of  education  throughout  the
land."— iVeM)  York  Sun.

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  STEAM-ENGINE.    By

Robert  H.  Thurston,  A.  M.,  C.  E.,  Professor  of  Mechanical  Engineering
in  the  Stevens  Institute  of  Technology,  Hoboken,  N.  J.,  etc.  With  163
Illustrations,  including  15  Portraits.    13mo,  cloth,  $2.50.

"  Professor  Thurston  almost  exhausts  his  subject ;  details  of  mechanism  are
/ollowedby  interesting  biographies  of  the  more  important  inventors.  If,  as  is
contended,  the  steam  engine  is  the  most  important  physical  agent  in  civilizing
the  world,  its  history  is  a  desideratum,  and  the  readers  of  ihe  present  work  will
agroe  that  it  could  have  a  no  more  amusing  and  intelligent  historian  than  our
author."— .Bftj/OM  Gazette.

STUDIES  IN  SPECTRUM  ANALYSIS.  By  J.  Nohman  Lockteh,  F.  R.  8,,
Correspondent  of  the  Institute  of  France,  etc.  With  60  Illustrations.  12mo,
cloth,  $2.50.

"The  study  of  spectrum  analysis  is  one  fraught  with  a  pecnliar  fascination,
and  some  of  the  autlior's  experiments  are  exceedingly  picturesque  in  their  re-
Bults.  They  are  so  lucidly  described,  too.  that  the  reader  keeps  on,  from  pag«
to  page,  never  flatrHin^  in  interest  in  the  natter  befon?  him,  nor  putting  down
Um  book  until  the  last  page  is  reached."— iVew;  York  Evening  Express.

D.   APPLETON   &   CO.,  Publishers,

1,  3,  &  6  Bond  Stbbkt,  Nbw  York.

Scientific  Publications,

THE  MODERN  APPIilCATIONS  OF  ELECTRICITY.  By  E.  HosPl-
TALiEB.  Translated  and  enlarged  by  Jours  Maieb,  Ph.  1).  With  170  Illastra-
tions.  8vo.  Cloth,  $-t.50.
"  M.  Ilospitalier  distinguishos  three  sources  of  electricity,  namely,  the  decomposition
of  metals  or  other  decomposable  bodies  in  acid  or  alkaline  solutions,  the  transformation
of  heat  into  electrical  energy,  and  lastly  the  conversion  of  work  into  current— giving
rise  to  the  three  specific  modes  of  force,  staled  respectively  galvanism,  therrao-elecfiicity,
and  dynamic  electricity.  He  gives  a  history  of  the  progress  of  each,  from  the  first
crude  constructions  of  the  j)ioncer  to  the  latest  and  most  perfect  form  of  battery,  thus
fiu-nishlng  the  student  of  science  with  a  sufficiently  copious  text-book  of  the  subject,
while  at  the  same  time  atfording  to  the  electrical  engineer  a  valuable  encyclopiedia  of
his  profession.  The  work  presents  a  most  useful  and  thorough  compendium  of  the
principles  and  practice  of  electrical  engineering,  written  as  only  an  expert  can  write,
to  whom  the  abstruse  by  long  study  has  become  simple.  The  translator  has  acted  the
part  of  an  editor  also,  and  has  added  considerable  material  of  value  to  the  original  text.
His  account  of  the  Edison,  Fox,  and  Brush  systems  of  lighting,  for  example,  is  more
complete  than  that  of  M.  Hospitaller  in  his  second  edition.  He  has  also  added  full
descriptions  of  the  ftre-damp  indicators  of  Liveling,  Sourzee,  and  Mounier;  of  Bright's
flre-alarm  and  district  telegraph,  and  of  Dolbcar's  telephone,  and  Kelway's  electric  log,
together  with  other  recent  inventions  not  mentioned  in  Mospitalier's  treatise,  exhaustive
and  excellent  as  it  is." — Ifew  York  Times.

THE  SUN.  By  C.  A.  Yottno,  Ph.  D.,  LL.  D.,  Professor  of  Astronomy  in  the  College
of  New  Jersey.  With  numerous  Illustrations.  Second  edition.  12mo.  Cloth,$2.00,

"  Professor  Young  is  an  authority  on  '  The  Sun,'  and  writes  from  intimate  knowl-
edge. He  has  studied  that  great  luminary  all  his  Hfe,  invented  and  improved  instru-
ments for  observing  it,  gone  to  all  quarters  of  the  world  in  search  of  the  best  places
and  opportunities  to  watch  it,  and  has  contributed  important  discoveries  that  have
extended  our  knowledge  of  it.

"  It  would  take  a  cyclopaedia  to  represent  all  that  has  been  done  toward  clearing  up
the  solar  mysteries.  Professor  Young  has  summarized  the  information  and  presented
it  in  a  form  completely  available  for  general  readers.  There  is  no  rhetoric  in  his  book ;
he  trusts  the  grandeur  of  his  theme  to  khidle  interest  and  impress  the  feeUngs.  His
statements  are  plain,  direct,  clear,  and  condensed,  though  ample  enough  for  his  purpose,
and  the  substance  of  what  is  generally  wanted  will  be  found  accurately  given  in  bis
pages." — P(ypular  Science  Monthly.

In  the  second  edition  of  this  work  great  pains  have  been  taken  by  the  aufhor  to
give  the  highest  accuracy  to  the  text,  and  he  has  appended,  in  the  form  of  notes,  all
the  new  and  important  information  that  has  accumulated  since  the  first  issue.  None
of  these  additions  discredit  what  may  be  regarded  as  established  facts  and  principles
relating  to  the  sun,  but  they  constitute  interesting  extensions  of  solar  knowledge,  to-
gether with  new  and  ingenious  speculations,  the  value  of  which  time  aloue  can  determine.

WINNERS  IN  LIFE'S  RACE  ;  ok,  THE  GREAT  BACKBONED  FAMILY.

By  Arabella  B.  Bucklet,  author  of  "  The  Fairy-Land  of  Science  "  and  "  Life
and  her  Children."    With  numerous  Illustratious.    12mo.    Cloth,  gilt  side  and
back,  $1.50.
"  An  account  of  vertebrate  animals,  written  with  such  natural  spirit  and  vivacity
that  it  might  convert  even  a  literary  person  to  ii.atural  science." — Saturday  Review.

"  Miss  Buckley  has  spared  no  pains  to  incorporate  in  her  book  the  latest  results  of
scientific  research.  The  illustrations  in  the  book  deserve  the'  highest  praise ;  they  are
numerous,  accurate,  and  striking." — London  Spectator.

"  It  is  evident  that  the  author  has  resorted  to  recent  and  eminent  authorities  for
the  facts  which  are  marshaled  with  praiseworthy  clearness  in  orderly  succession." —
The  Nation,  New  York.

For  sale  by  all  booksellers;  or,  sent  by  mail,  post-paid,  on  receipt  qf  price.
New  York :  D.  APPLETON  &  CO.,  1,  3,  &  6  Bond  Street.

Scientific  Publications,

A  TREATISE    ON  CHEMISTRY.     By  H.  E.  RoscoK,  F.  R.  8.,  and  C.

ScHORLEMMBK,  P.  R.  S.,  ProfugBorii  of  Chemistry  iu  the  Victoria  UuiverBity,
Owens  College,  Maucheeter.    Illustrated.

Vols.  T  and  II. — Inorganic  Chemistry.    Svo.

Vol.   I.— Non-Metallic  Elements.    Price,  $5.00.

Vol.  II.— Part   I.— Metals.    Price,  $3.00.

Vol.  II.— Part  II.— Metals.    Price,  $3.00.
Organic  Chemistry.    Svo.

Vol.  III.— Part   I.— The  Chemistry  of  the  Hydrocarbons  and  their
Derivatives.    Price,  $5.00.

Vol.  III.  —Part  U.— Completing  the  work.    (7w  preparation.)

"  It  is  difBcult  to  praise  too  highly  the  selection  of  materials  and  their  arrnnge-
ment,  or  the  wealth  of  illustrations  which  explain  and  adorn  the  text.  Whatever
tests  of  accuracy  as  to  figures  and  facts  we  have  been  able  to  apply  have  been
satisfactorily  met,  while  in  clearness  of  statement  this  third  volume  leaves  noth-
ing to  be  dtinired."— London  Academy.

THE   ELEMENTS  OF  ECONOMICS.     By  Henkt  DtmNiNG  Macleod,
M.  A.,  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  and  the  Inner  Temple,  barrister-at-
law  selected  by  the  Royal  Commissioners  for  the  Digest  of  the  Law  to  pre-
pare the  digest  of  the  law  of  bills  of  exchange,  bank  notes,  etc.    Lecturer
on  Political  Economy  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.     In  two  volumes.
Volume  I  now  ready.    12mo,  cloth.    Price,  $1.75.
"  Mr.  Macleod's  works  on  economic  science  have  one  great  merit,  they  belong
to  the  class  of  books  that  assist  inquiry  by  setting  their  readers  thinking.    The
views  they  set  forth  are  not  only  often  valuable  in  themselves,  but  they  are  the
generative  cause  of  ideas  which  may  also  be  valuable  in  their  readers.     His
books,  moreover,  are  written  in  the  proper  way.    The  subject  is  divided  care-
fully in  accordance  with  the  opinions  held  by  the  author ;  all  classifications  when
made  are  adhered  to,  and  the  descriptions  and  definitions  adopted  are  admir.nble
from  his  point  of  view,  and  in  some  cases  from  a  wider  stand-point."— 7%e  StatUt.

ADOIiPH    STRECKER'S    SHORT    TEXT-BOOK    OF    ORGANIC

CHEMISTRY.    ByDr.  JoiiANNBS  WisLicEKUs.   Translated  and  edited,

with  Extensive  Additions,  by  W.  II.  Hodgkinson,  Ph.  D.,  and  A.  J.  Gbeen-

AWAY,  F.  I.  C.    Svo.    Cloth,  $5.00.

"Let  no  one  suppose  that  in  this  'short  text-book'  we  have  to  deal  with  a

primer.    Everything  is  comparative,  and  the  term  'short'  here  has  relation  to

the  enormous  development  and  extent  of  recent  organic  chemistry.    This  solid

and  comprehensive  volume  is  intended  to  represent  the  present  condition  of  the

science  in  its  main  facts  and  leading  principles,  as  demanded  by  the  systematic

chemical  student.    We  have  here,  probably,  the  best  extant  text-book  of  organic

chemistry.    Not  only  is  it  full  and  comprehensive  and  remarkably  clear  and

methodical,  but  it  is  up  to  the  very  latest  moment,  and  it  has  been,  moreover,

prepared  in  a  way  to  secure  the  greatest  excellences  in  such  a  treatise."-— 7%«

Fopular  Science  Monthly.

THE  ORIGIN  OF  CIVILIZATION  AND  THE   PRIMITIVE   CON-
DITION  OF   MA'S,  Mental   and   Social   Condition   of  Savages.

By  Sir  John  LtJBBocK,  Bart.,  P.  R.  S.,  President  of  the  British  Association.
With  Illustrations.  Fourth  edition,  with  numerous  Additions.  Svo,  cloth.
Price,  $5.00.

For  tale  by  aU  booksellers  ;  or  sent  by  mail,  post-paid,  on  receipt  of  price.

D.  APPLETON  &  CO.,  Publishers,

1.  3,  &  5  Bond  Street.  New  York.

Scientific  Publications,

THE  FUNDAMENTAIi  CONCEPTS  OF  MODERN  PHII.OSOPHI0
THOUGHT,  CRITICALLY  AND  HISTORICALLY  CONSID^
ERED.  By  Rudolph  Kuckbn,  Ph.  D.,  Professor  in  Jena.  With  an
Introduction  by  Noah  Pobteh,  President  of  Yale  College.  One  voL,  12mo,
304  pages.    Cloth.    Price,  $1.75.

Precident  Porter  declares  of  this  work  that  "  there  are  few  books  within  his
knowledge  which  are  better  fitted  to  aid  the  etudent  who  wishes  to  acquaint  hiiii-
seir  with  the  course  of  modem  speculation  and  scientific  thinking,  and  to  form
an  intelligent  estimate  of  most  of  the  current  theories."

MIND  IN  THE  LOWER  ANIMALS  IN  HEALTH  AND  DISEASE.

By  W.  Lauder  Likdsat,  M.  D.,  F.  B.  8.  E.,  etc.    2  vols.,  8vo.    Cloth,  $4.00.

"  The  author  of  this  work,  which,  regarded  merely  as  an  accumulation  of
verified  and  classified  facts,  is  a  unique  and  precious  contribution  to  the  data  of
comparative  psychology,  claims  that  he  entered  on  his  inquiry  without  any  theory
to  deiend,  support,  or  illustrate.  We  are  bound  to  say  that,  while  his  general
conclusions  are  boldly  and  continually  avowed,  his  claim  of  fairness  and  caution
is  justified  by  his  method  of  examining  particular  phenomena  ;  that  he  seems
willing  at  all  times  to  renounce  any  inipression  or  belief  which  is  shown  to  be
scientifically  untenable."— A^ew  York  Sun.

"  In  this  work — two  volumes  of  over  500  pages— Dr.  Lindsay  marshals  a  pro-
portionately large  number  of  facts  against  those  philosophers  who  maintain  that
the  intelligence  of  man  diflTers  in  kind  and  not  simply  in  degree  from  that  of  the
lt)wer  animals.  It  is  one  purpose  of  his  book  to  show  that  the  main  diff'erenceB
between  man  and  the  lower  animals  exist  rather  in  their  physical  than  in  their
mental  structure.  In  this  way  of  thinking,  all  animals  possess  not  the  semblance
of,  but  the  true  substance  of  mind  and  will." — JVew  York  World.

"  So  far  as  we  are  aware  there  has  been  no  treatise  upon  the  subject  of  animal
l^telligence  so  broad  in  its  foundations,  so  well  considered,  or  so  scientific  in  its
methods  of  inquiry,  as  that  which  has  been  prepared  by  Dr.  W.  Lauder  Lindsay
in  two  large  volumes,  the  first  being  devoted  to  a  study  of  animal  mind  in  health,
and  the  second  to  animal  mind  in  disease.  We  may  safely  say  that  his  work  is.
In  some  respects,  the  most  important  essay  of  the  kind  that  has  yet  been  under-
taken. His  observations  have  been  supplemented  by  a  thorough  mastery  of  the
history  and  literature  of  the  subject,  and  hence  his  conclusions  rest  upon  the
broadest  possible  foundation  of  safe  induction.  There  is  a  cood  analytical  inde^
to  the  book,  as  there  ought  to  be  to  every  work  of  the  kind." — New  York  Evening
Post.

THE  ELEMENTARY  PRINCIPLES  OF  SCIENTIFIC  AGRICULT-
URE. By  N.  T.  Ltjpton,  LL.  D.,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  Vanderbilt
University,  Nashville,  Tenn.    18mo,    Cloth.    Price,  45  cents.

A  GLOSSARY  OF  BIOLOGICAL.  ANATOMICAL,  AND  PHYSIO-
LOGICAL TERMS.  By  Thomas  Dunman.  Small  8vo.  Cloth.  161
pages.    Price,  $1.00.

"  It  has  been  the  author's  task  to  famish  here  a  small  and  convenient  but  very
complete  glossary  of  those  terms  ;  and  he  has  done  this  so  well,  both  in  his  choice
of  terms  for  definition  and  in  his  clear  exposition  of  their  etymological  and  tech-
nical meaning,  as  to  leave  nothing  to  be  desired  in  this  direction." — New  York
Evening  Post.

For  tale  by  all  booksellers,  or  any  work  sent  by  mail,  postpaid,  on  receipt  qf  price.

D.  APPLETON  &  CO.,  Publishers,

1,  3,  and  5  Bond  Street,  New  Vork.

Scientific  Publications.

I

TEXT-BOOK  OP  SYSTEMATIC  MINERALOGY.    By  Henbt  Baubr

MAN,  P.  Q.  8.,  Associate  of  the  Royal  School  of  Mines.    (New  volume  in
the  "Text-Books  of  Science  Series.")    16mo,  cloth.  Price,  $2.50.

ANTHROPOIiOGY :  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Man  and  Civilization.
By  Edward  B.  Ttlob,  D.  C.  t,.,  F.  U.  S.,  author  of  "Primitive  Culture,"
"The  Early  History  of  Mau^ind,"  etc.  With  18  Illustrations.  12mo.
With  Index.    Cloth,  $2.00.

"Mr.  Tylor's  admirable  little  hook  certainly  deserves  the  success  with  which
it  will  doubtless  meet."— Pa//  MaM  Gazette.

SCIENTIFIC  CUL,TURE,  AND  OTHER  ES5SAYS.  By  Joseph  Pabsons
CooKB,  Professor  of  Chemistry  and  Mineralogy  in  Harvard  College.  One
vol.,  square  16mo,  cloth.    Price,  $1.00.

POPUI-AR  iECTURES  ON  SCIENTIFIC   SUBJECTS.    By  H.  Helm-

HOLTZ,  Professor  of  Physics  at  the  University  of  Berlin.    Second  Series.
12mo,  cloth,  $1.50.

The  favor  with  which  the  first  series  of  Professor  Helmholtz's  lectures  was
received  justifies,  if  a  justification  is  needed,  the  publication  of  the  present
volume.

THE  POWER  OF  MOVEMENT  IN  PLANTS.  By  Chables  Dabwin,
LL.  D.,  F.  II.  S.,  assisted  by  Fbancis  Daewin.  With  Illustrations.  12mo,
cloth,  $2.00.

"Mr.  Darwin's  latest  study  of  plant-life  shows  no  abatement  of  his  power  of
work  or  his  habits  of  fresh  and  original  observation.  We  have  learned  to  expect
from  him  at  intervals,  never  much  prolonged,  the  results  of  special  research  in
some  by-path  or  other  subordinated  to  the  main  course  of  the  biological  system
associated  with  his  name;  and  it  has  been  an  unfailing  source  of  interest  to  see
the  central  ideas  of  the  evolution  and  the  continuity  of  life  developed  in  detail
through  a  series  of  special  treatises,  each  wellnigh  exhaustive  of  the  materials
available  for  its  bubiecV— Saturday  Review.

A  PHYSICAL  TREATISE  ON  ELECTRICITY  AND  MAGNETISM.

By  J.  E.  H.  GoEDON,  B.  A.,  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  British  Association.
With  about  200  full-page  and  other  Illustrations.    2  vols.,  8vo,  cloth,  $7.00.

"  We  welcome  most  heartily  Mr.  Gordon's  valuable  contribution  to  the  experimen-
tal side  of  the  science.  It  at  once  takes  its  place  among  the  books  with  which  every
investigator  and  every  teacher  who  goes  beyond  the  merest  rudiments  must  needs
equip  fimself.  There  is  certainly  no  book  in  English — we  think  there  is  none  in  any
other  language — which  covers  quite  the  same  ground.  It  records  the  most  recent  ad-
vances in  the  experimental  treatment  of  electrical  problems,  it  describes  with  minute
carefulness  the  instruments  and  methods  in  use  In  physical  laboratories,  and  is  prodi-
gral  of  beautiftilly  executed  diagrams  and  drawings  made  to  scale." — London  Times.

APPLETON  &  CO.,  Publishers,

1,  8,  &  6  Bond  Stbket,  New  Yobr.

Scientific  Publications.

SCIENCE  AND  CUI.TURE,  AND  OTHER  ESSAYS.  By  ProfeBSor
T.  H.  HuxLKT.    12mo.    Cloth,  $1.50.

"  Of  the  essays  that  have  been  collected  by  Professor  Huxley  in  this  volnme,
the  first  four  deal  with  some  aspect  of  educatioa.  Most  of  the  remainder  are
exposiliouB  of  the  results  of  biological  research,  and,  at  the  same  time,  illustra-
tions of  the  history  of  scientific  ideas.  Some  of  these  arc  among  the  most  inter-
esting of  Professor  Huxley's  contributions  to  the  literature  of  science."— iondwi
Academy.

"  When  weary  of  the  iteration  of  old  thoughts  dressed  up  in  new  phrases,  it
Is  refreshing  to  be  brought  into  converse  with  one  of  the  roost  vigorous  and  acute
thinlters  of  our  time,  who  has  the  power  of  putting  hia  thoughts  uito  language  so
clear  and  forcible."— Xondow  Speclaior,

CAPITAI.    4ND   POPUIi ATION :  A  Study  of  the  Economic  Eflecta

of  their   Relations   to  Each  Other.     By  Fbsdsbick  B.  Hawlet.

12mo,  cloth.    Price,  $1.50.

"  It  would  be  false  modesty  in  me  to  seem  unaware  that  the  economic  law  I

have  attempted  to  establish  equals  in  its  influence  upon  economic  conclusions

any  hitherto  ascertained.     Granted  its  truth,  it  throws  new  and  decisive  light

on  nearly  all  the  unsolved  problems  of  the  science."— Extract  from  Preface.

PHYSICAL.   EDUCATION;    or,  The  Health  L.aw8  of  Nature.     By

Felix  L.  Oswald,  M.  D.    12mo.    Cloth,  $1.00.

Contents  :  Diet,  In-door  Life,  Out  door  Life,  Gymnastics,  Clothing,  Sleep,
Recreation,  Remedial  Education,  Hygienic  Precautious,  Popular  Fallacies.

"  The  author  strikes  right  and  left  at  the  lingering  traces  of  the  traditional
as'^eticism  which  has  had  so  much  influence  in  warpinir  our  systems  of  education
and  life.  He  insists,  at  the  outsetj  that  the  monkish  identification  of  the  human
body  with  Satan  and  sin  shall  be  discarded  utterly,  and  that  we  shall  regard  this
tabernacle  of  clay  as  the  most  perfect  structure  of  the  divine  architect,  and  as  the
sole  means  by  which  we  can  work  out  our  salvation.  Nature  is  the  author's
supreme  law,  and  his  cure  for  all  maladies  of  the  individual  and  the  community
is  right  living." — Home  Journal.

"  Dr.  Oswald  is  as  epigrammatic  as  Emerson,  as  spicy  as  Montaigne,  and  as
caustic  as  'Rcvae.^'— Philadelphia  Press.

THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  liAW:  An  Examination  of  the  liaw
of  Personal  Rights,  to  discover  the  Principles  of  the  Law,  as
ascertained  from  the  Practical  Rules  of  the  Law,  and  har>
monized  -with  the  Nature  of  Social  Relations.    By  A.  J.  Willabd.

8vo,  cloth.  Price,  $2.50.
"  A  calm,  dignified,  able,  and  exhaustive  treatise  of  a  subject  which  is  of  great
importance  to  every  one.  Mr.  Willard  first  discusses  the  nature  and  origin  of
rights,  obligations,  and  powers  of  fundamental  social  law  and  institutional  law.
He  then  expounds  the  science  of  law  and  defines  the  nature  of  all  species  of  obli-
gations and  contracts.  A  general  view  of  rights  and  powers  is  then  brought
forward,  and  a  consideration  of  their  special  functions,  as,  for  instance,  the  use
of  air  and  water  and  the  principles  of  individual  sustenance.  The  doctrine  of
individual  redress  and  protection  is  thoroughly  examined,  and  a  long  and  inter-
esting discussion  follows  of  nuisances,  wrongs,  and  injuries.  The  characteriza-
tion of  dueling  and  the  pithy  and  convincing  way  in  which  its  absurdity  is  shown
are  admirable.  The  treatment  of  the  subject  is  so  clear  and  logical,  so  simple
and  scholarly,  that  it  deserves  the  highest  praise.  It  is  a  work  such  as  Aristotle
might  have  written,  had  he  lived  in  this  latter  day."— Philadelphia  Press.

For  sals  by  aU  booksellers  ;  or  sent  by  mail,  post-paid,  on  receipt  of  price.

D.  APPLETON  &  CO.,  Publishers,

1,  3,  &  6  Bond  Street,  THew  Tork.

"^

^y^*^

'^1%-KS     .

'  •»«  ,

M    ♦r*<**''*  V      ^^t-^T*^*       ♦Cs**5**^       '^♦*A*»*1^*      •

»♦*  I*  vt     *^    «;,

'  ->•  .!:x^:  tti.:^:'>%r  i^:  ^^^  *-:-

•C»*    J^    ^.

^7^.^-'  *

\^^  ****.

*''   •«  ♦*    *»  t«f        ^t

'*^*»':^*^^:^«V  «i^>«<*»*  V '****•

t  ^^

HM

51

W37

V.2

Ward,  Lester  Frank
Dynamic  sociology

?;•«;-:

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
