Naturalism and Agnosticism, Vol. 2
James Ward (1899)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): James Ward's Naturalism and Agnosticism (1899), Vol. 2.

========================================================================

"I


1


NATURALISM AND AGNOSTICISM


e>


NATURALISM


AND


AGNOSTICISM

THE GIFFORD LECTURES DELIVERED BEFORE

THE UNIVERSIT^Y OF ABERDEEN

IN THE YEARS 1896-1898


BY

JAMES WARD, Sc.D.

HON. LL.D. BDINBUBOH

PROFESSOR OF MENTAL PHILOSOPHY AND LOGIC
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGB


VOLUME n


'• Wer die Oesetzmdssigkeit der Natur fur daa verant-
toortlich machtf was wirklich geschieht, hehauptet damit,
doss sie Gedanken recUisierCt und ist Teleolog ohne es zu
toissen/* — Siqwart.


LONDON
ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK

1899


7


CONTENTS

OF THE SECOND VOLUME

PART in. THEORY OF PSYCHOPHYSICAL

PARALLELISM

LECTURE XI

VABI0U8 FOKMS OF THE THBOBT

pAon

These theories attempt to answer the question : How are psychi-
cal changes related to the physical changes in the organism?
They all start from the Cartesian doctrine of the essential dis-
parateness and distinctness of Matter and Mind. So far they
have conunon thought on their side ; hence it is advisable to
inqoire first whether they are tenable even on this doalistic
aasomption 3-7

What is meant by the physical series readily ascertained. But the
meaning of the psychical series not so dear. It is not so much
my consciousness as a unity for me as my consciousness as
a series of events for the peychophysicist. Ambiguities of the
phase *^ parallelism 'Mn this connexion 7-13

(1) Clifford's exposition of Mind-stuff is only Matter-stuff over

again 13-17

(2) The so-called TuxhAapects theory assumes that two incom-
patible standpoints can be stereoscoped into one . 17-22

(3) The Conscious Automaton theory leaves the dualism un-
touched, and while asserting invariable concomitance tries to
deny any causal connexion : the two series keep pace, but yet
each * * goes along by itself. ' ' On the psychical side, sensation,
on the physical, life, are difficulties in the way of this theory.
How they are got over. Constant paralleliffln plus absolute
separation is logically so unstable a position that this theory
either lapses into some form of crude monism, or one series

is in the end subordinate to the other 22-29

V


VI


CONTENTS OF


Among scientific men the primacy \a usnally given to the material
side. Huxley taken as a type. He maintains that sensation
is an effect of molecular change, but will not allow that molecu-
lar changes are ever the effect of volition. To justify this posi-
tion volition has to be regarded as * * feeling * ' or sensation simply.


PA6X8


29-33


LECTURE Xn


THE CONSCIOUS A17TOMATON THEOBT


Doctrine of Conscious Automatism or Psychical Epiphenomenal-
ism examined. It is maintained (1) that there can be no
causal connexion between the psychical and the physical
series, and yet (2) that the psychical is a *' collateral product **
or epiplienomenon of the physical. The very statement is thus
self-contradictory 35-38

Mind thus becomes impotent to control matter. In accepting this
position Naturalism is really at variance with itself. For
(1) it elsewhere assumes that mind is an efficient factor in
biological evolution, and (2) the physicist proper declares that
the laws of matter alone will not explain life .... 38-40

However, taking the doctrine as it stands, there are these two
articles specially to consider: (a) the primacy and indepen-
dence of the automaton, and (b) the Illusory character of psy-
chical activity. The latter to be discussed first 4(M1

Huxley's endeavour to save himself from the chaige of fatalism
only results in substituting a blind necessity for a logical one.
Again, he urges that we are free, ** inasmuch as in many
respects we can do as we like." But how so, if '* volitions do
not enter into the chain of causation of the action at all " ?
Turning now to the mechanical world, of which the automa-
ton is a part, we find no activity within that .... 41-48

There is then activity nowhere ! How then do we come to be
talking of it even as illusory ? And if conscious automatism
is true, how is illusion or error possible ? The ground on
which Descartes called man a conscious automaton — because
of his intellectual and voluntary activity — is ignored by Hux-
ley and others. On their premisses Descartes would have
called man a mere automaton. Huxley turned against him-
self. The psychical series will not resolve into a series of
feelings, and ** volition counts for something as a condition of
the course of events*' 48-58


THE SECOND VOLUME yu

PAOIB

An antinomy thus reveals itself — that of the teleological and the
mechanical. The conscious automaton theory the result of the
naturalist's preference for materialistic terminology. At-
tempts to find a half-way through loopholes within the
mechanical theory turn out to be futile .... 58-64

LECTURE Xm

SUMMARY AKD REFLEXIONS

Abstract Dynamics does not furnish us with a Natural Philosophy,
but with a descriptiYe instrument of uncertain range. Facts
cannot be maimed to fit it, but it must be modified to suit
them 66-68

Even what can be mechanically described need not be, and expe-
rience may convince us that it is not, mechanically produced 68-71

It is impossible to divest living beings of ** internal determina-
tions and grounds of determination." Descartes' distinction
of causa formalis and causa eminens. Physics recognises
only the former, and resolves that into an equation. The
latter, being excluded from its premisses, is supposed to be
excluded from existence. On this fallacy the doctrine of con-
scious automatism is built up. Inertia not a fact but an ideal 71-74

Conservation of energy essentially a law of exchanges. That the
whole energy of the universe is constant in amount and * phe-
nomenal ' in character, not proven 74-78

The theoretical physicist having eliminated causation, must not
dogmatise about it. The crux of irreversibility suggests that
the world is not a mere mechanism. The physicist only de-
scribes the utterances of real things and the after-course of
these utterances, so far as left alone. He is obliged to admit
interference, but prefers a maximum breach of continuity far
ofE rather than orderly direction now 78-83

Such direction impossible if all the beings in the objective uni-
verse are inert No warrant for preferring dead things
rather than living as the tyi>e of such beings ; and if we want
to understand the world and not merely to calculate it, we
must start from some other type 83-86

The mathematical bias the source of naturalism. It can only be
corrected by observing how it has arisen. Mechanism by
itself is chaotic and meaningless. With mind first come law
and order. And mind we have seen implied as a vi8 directrix^
at least, in evolution, in natural selection, in psychophysics . 86-93


viii CONTENTS OF

PART IV. REFUTATION OF DUALISM

LECTURE XIV

GENERAL CONCEPTION OF EXPERIENCE


PAOl


The discufision of Psychophysical Parallelism has led up to the
formal side of our subject: we now ask, What is natural
knowledge and wJiat does U imply? 97-^

Naturalism assumes a dualism of phenomena and epiphenomena,
the former having the primacy. But the * real world ' from
which it starts is epiphenomenal. How then does it get to its
« real world ' of matter in motion, and, having got there, how
does it get back ? 90-107

The perplexities of dualism have brought into favour an agnostic
monism or * revised materialism.* If we are to transcend
dualism and this monism, it wiU be by making knowledge, or
rather experience itself, an object of reflexion. Neglect of
this question by natural science, psychology and the pre-
Kantian metaphysics 107-110

What we find is not a dualism of mind and matter, but a duality

of subject and object in the unity of experience . 110-112

Experience does not begin with a disconnected * manifold.* . 112-113

Sensations not ^ subjective modifications * nor devoid of all *• form * 113-117

Relation of subject and object: is it causal? Ambiguity of
terms. * Objective * use from two standpoints. Various at-
tempts to treat this relation as causal noticed . 117-123

LECTURE XV

EXPERIENCE AS LIFE

Recapitulation and further explication as to the general concep-
tion of experience. Its fundamental character the whole
difficulty : early reflexion misled by imperfect analysis and
by deceptive analogies 124-130

Coining to details, we note that every concrete experience is a
process of self-conservation, is a Life. Kant^s distinction of
« matter and form ' and his * Synthetic Unity of Apperception.^
Conation more fundamental than cognition. Subjective selec-
tion determined by the worth of objects rather than by their
* content.* A purely cognitive experience Impossible. Prac-
tical interests never absent Even spatial and temporal rela-
tions involve elements due to activity initiated by feeling . 130-136


THE SECOND VOLUME ix

PA«H

Spatial perceptions and conceptions comi)ared and discossed by
way of showing the shortcomings of dualism. Science, con-
cemed only with the conceptions, ignores the elements due
to the conatiye and practical interests of the subject . 136-146

A like comparison and discussion of temporal perceptions and

conceptions 146-149

The notion of empty space and empty time, as necessary ante-
cedents of the things and events that are said to fill them, is
an inyersion of reality 149-161

LECTURE XVI

BIBB OF DUALISM

Two forms of experience have emerged in the course of our pre-
vious discussion : the experience of a given individual and
Experience as the result of intersubjective intercourse. Dual-
ism maintained by misconception as to the relation of these
two, and by their separate treatment — the one exclusively
by psychology, the other by the natural sciences. To refute
dualism, then, we need to show that the second form of expe-
rience is an extension of the first and that there is organic
unity throughout both 152-166

In the case of individual experience, this organic unity illustrated
by reference to (1) Range in time, (2) Familiarity or Expert-
ness, and (3) Intellective Synthesis 166-166

Intersubjective intercourse leads to universal Experience, and
gives rise to the naive dualism of common thought. It does
this through (1) the notion of the transsubjective (naive
realism), and (2) the hypothesis of * introjection ' (animism).
A protest against the phrase ' internal and external experience.* 166-176

LECTURE XVII

UKITT OF INDIVIDUAL AND UNIVBBSAL BXPERIBNOB

In what sense is the transsubjective object independent of the
subject ? The discussion of this question has brought out a
new dualism, that of the empirical and the rational. In the
end, we may say, four terms emerge — the subject and object
of individual experience, and the subject and object of rational
knowledge. Scientific dualism, started by Descartes, after-
wards drops out the second subject 178-183


X CONTENTS OF

PAGBB

We have now to inquire whether an 'organic unity' can be

shown to exist between these. Beginning with the objectSt I

we find that * content * for transsabjecUve experience is sup-
plied by immediate experience. Intellectual * forms * consist
of relations between such ^fundametUa.^ But may not new

fundamenta emerge with the ampler parallax of universal |

experience? What of the categories of Unity, Substance i

Cause, e.g. ? This brings us to the subject of such experience 183-185

Kant's * originally synthetic unity of apperception ' the starting-
point The shortcomings of his treatment of the categories
discussed. Causality traced not to logical function but to
volitional activity. In a sense Kant recognises this. Sub-
stance, however, left to logic as a dead remainder. But sub-
stances or things is a category due to the interaction of active,
self-conscious subjects with their environment and to their
intercourse with each other 185-196

We conclude, then, that the subject of universal experience is
one and continuous with the subject of individual experience,
and that in universal experience also there is the same inti-
mate articulation of subjective and objective factors. Expe-
rience being then one organic unity, the charge of fallacy
against naive realism stands 196-198

Concluding remarks on dualism : the problem has been wrongly
stated. Dualism, like geocentric astronomy, suffices for ordi-
nary life ; but for philosophy, a satisfactory monism is still
to seek 198-202


PAET V. SPIEITUALISTIC MONISM

LECTURE XVin

CAPITULATION OF AONOSTIO MONISM

Neutral or agnostic monism tends to degenerate into materialism ;
but it might logically advance to idealism. If so, the teleo-
logical must be shown to underlie the mechanical. The diffi-
cultly of the mechanical view not remedied by preaching
agnosticism 206-210

But on closer scrutiny such agnosticism contains admissions
which lead on to spiritualism. Thus Huxley confesses (a) that
* our one certainty is the existence of the mental world,' and
(b) that * the notion of necessity has a logical not a physical
foundation' 211-219


THE SECOND VOLUME xi

PAGM

The cone^tion of natural law examined, — 1. It is teleological
in its origin as an organon or means of interpreting, and so
controlling, Nature 219^221

2. It is teleological in its character, in so far as it is a postulate
or hypothesis. We here come upon the epistemological prob-
lem of Hume and Kant, vto., to determine the character of
general propositions relating to matters of fact. The evidenoe
of such propositions neither immediate nor logical Hume
failed to explain them by association and remained a sceptic 221-225

But he made clear to Kant an alternative which he could not
himself see. For him the hiunan mind was but ** a bundle of
perceptions '^ ; though he was hopelessly at a loss to find the
**principle" that unites the ** bundle.** This principle Kant
declares to be the sfynthesiBing activity that yields self-con-
sciousness. In this activity we are to find the source of the
conception of nature as a system of unity and law . 225-230

LECTURE XTX

MATURE AS TBLBOLOGIOAL

The fact of self-activity, at once volitional and intellectual, bears
upon the conception of Nature in three ways ; as regards its
unity, its causality, its regularity 232-235

The Unity of Nature is the ideal counterpart of the actual unity
of each individual experience. Experience itself is unifying,
and beyond this immanence of experience we cannot go . 235-287

Causality, and the principle of causal uniformity or regularity
distinguished. In discussing the former we may note three
divisions of experience : (a) that of intersubjective intercourse
and cooperation ; (6) that of the individual and his immediate
environment; (c) that of science, in which objective changes
are regarded solely in relation to each other. In (a) activity
and passivity tLve primft facie certain. So in (6) as far as the
subject, but not the object, is concerned. In (c) causality is
only analogically assumed. Science disallows, or rather dis-
penses with, the analogy. In the scientific ideal individual
things and definite acts have no abiding place. This position
at once subordinates Nature to Mind 237-242

Some supposed difficulties besetting the conception of subjective

activity discussed : the fact of such activity remains . 242-248


xii CONTENTS OF

PAGB8

As regards HegtUarity — the conception of natural law rests on
the analogy of cItU law. Both are contingent on the realisa-
tion of certain necessary conditions. Universal and necessary
knowledge of Nature presupposes thought: here the condi-
tions are in us and are necessary : the result is contingent on
things conforming 248-262

If they do conform, we are entitled to say (1) that Nature itself
is in this respect teleological, and (2) teleological further in
being consequently amenable to human ends. As it is solely
by our activity that this assimilation of Nature is achieved,
the result may be described as that greeting of spirit by spirit
which idealism has always maintained 252-267


LECTURE XX

SPIRrrUALISTIC MONISM

Laws of Nature used in two senses : (a) as implying substantial
causes ; (&) as implying only constant relations. Does the
substitution of the latter for the former enable positive science
to clear itself of all anthropomorphic taint ? No, for (1) its
method and assumptions prove it to be a human instrument ;
(2) it shews that things are ordered by measure and number,
but not what they are themselves. Subjects with intrinsic
qualities, and causally efficient, are facts of experience prior
to and independent of it. It must come to terms with these
when challenged. We say then : Either it is itself intelligent
or there is intelligence beyond it. Either it is itself cauasblly
efficient or there is a causal agent behind it But for an
answer to these questions Naturalism refers us to Agnosticism.
And Agnosticism again betrays it 269-267

Mr. Herbert Spencer's answer examined. A First Cause is '^ a
necessary datum of consciousness, but cannot in any manner
or degree be known in the strict sense of knowing." Never-
theless, his Unknowable turns out to be '*the same Power
which in ourselves wells up under the form of consciousness ** 267-270

What Mr. Spencer means by '• knowing in the strict sense.* The
Kantian distinction of determinant, and reflective, judgment
brought to bear 270-274

The agnostic use of * Phenomenon ' criticised. Appearances do

not veil reality 274-276


THE SECOND VOLUME xiii

PAOI8

As a farther objection to a spiritualistio interpretation of Nature,
it is said that there can be no mind behind it, for it is never
interfered with. This objection due to a confusion easily
exposed 276-278

Moreover, when we divest ourselves of the scientific bias, and
contemplate the world in its historical ooncreteness, we can
see the true reality to be not a mechanism but a Realm of
Ends 278-288


PART III

THEORY OF PSYCHOPHYSICAL
PARALLELISM


THEORY OF PSYCHOPHYSICAL

PAEALLELISM


LECTURE XI

VABIOUS FOEMS OF THE THEORY

These theories attempt to answer the question: How are psychical
changes related to the physical changes in the organism f They all
start from the Cartesian doctrine of the essential disparateness and
distinctness of Matter and Mind. So far they Jiave common tJ^ught
on iheir side; hence it is advisable to enquire first whether they are
tenable even on this dualistic assumption.

What is meant by the physical series readily ascertained. But the
meaning of the psychicdl series not so clear. It is not so tnucA my
consciousness as a unity for me as my consciousness as a series of events
for the psychophysidst. Ambiguities of the phase ''^parallelism " in this
connexion.

(1) Clifford's exposition of Mind-staS is only Matter-stuff over again,

(2) The so-called Two Aspects tJieory assumes tJiat two incompatible
standpoints can be stereoscoped into one.

(8) The Conscious Automaton tJieory leaves the dualism untouched^
and while asserting invariable concomitance tries to deny any causal
connexion : the two series keep pace, but yet each *' goes along by itself. ^^
On the psychical side, sensation, on the physical, life, are difficulties in
the way of this theory. How they are got over. Constant parallelism
plus absolute separation is logically so unstable a position that this
theory either lapses into some form of crude monism, or one series is
in the end subordinate to the other.

Among scientific men the primacy is usually given to the material
side. Huxley taken as a type. He maintains tfiat sensation is an ^ect

3


4 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

of molecular change, but vHll not aUou) that molecular changes are ever
the efect of volition. To jttstify this position volition ?ias to be regarded
as ^^ feeling^'* or sensa;tion simply.

Since the dawn of modern philosophy in the Medi-
tations of Descartes, the question of the relation of
body and mind has been continuously under discussion.
The complete disparateness between thinking substance
and extended substance, upon which Descartes insisted,
at once brought this problem to the fore. Of philo-
sophical attempts to transcend this dualism there has
been, as we know, no lack. But the progress of sci-
ence, Which works forward to new distinctions rather
than backward to supreme identities, has, on the other
hand, only tended to widen the separation. The crude
psychology, for example, that regarded extension as
directly apprehended by the senses of touch and sight,
is practically obsolete ; so that even that vestige of
naive realism seems now to have disappeared. On the
other hand, Descartes' ideal of the external world as a
complete mechanism has become for many a scientific
certainty. Psychology and physics, in short, have each
elaborated working conceptions appropriate to their own
special facts, regardless of any questions concerning their
eventual coordination. Substance and cause, metaphysi-
cal notions which Descartes would have used in the
same sense, whether referring to matter or to mind,
are now discarded by physicist and psychologist alike.
Mass, indeed, still retains the one substantial attribute
of permanence, but matter as the support of innumer-
able qualities and powers is no more : souls, on the other
hand, as simple and indiscerptible entities are replaced


RISE OF THE THEORY 6

by consciousness, the so-called ^contents' of which are
in continuous flux. As to cause, it is absurd to credit
inert mass with efficiency, and so we have left on the
physical side only quantitative relations expressed in
equations of motion, and the like. In psychology the
meaning to be gpiven to causal efficiency, if any, is still
in dispute. But the influence of the more perfect sci-
ence here asserts itself. The notion of inherent ac-
tivity, being abandoned by the physicist, is regarded
with suspicion by many psychologists ; for they imagine
that what is held to transcend the limits of positive
science in one department of knowledge must needs
do so in another. In fact, the determination of this
most central of aU real categories, the category of effi-
ciency, they leave depending on the solution of this
very problem of psychophysics now before us. Psy-
chical facts being meanwhile regarded as only a flux
of presentations, this problem takes the form of ascer-
taining how the coexistences and sequences of that
changing content are related to those motions of mass
elements, which are held to constitute the physical
world.

The answer to which * modem science ' almost inevi-
tably leads is embodied in the doctrine now coming to
be known as the law of psychophysical parallelism, or
the doctrine of conscious automatism, as the most usual
form of it is called. This replaces in the creed of modem
Naturalism the coarsely materialistic doctrine of a genera-
tion ago, which, as we have found, the agnostics of our
day repudiate. Disclaiming any knowledge of substance
either mental or material, disclaiming too any knowledge


6 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

of efficient causes, they hold this doctrine of parallelism
to be simply a scientific inference from facts and not in
any sense a speculative hypothesis. I shall try to shew
that, on the contrary, it is really at variance with facts
and rests upon a speculative basis of the most unstable
kind, viz., the Cartesian dualism, the doctrine, i.e. of
the complete disparateness of matter and mind. The
theory of psychophysical parallelism is indeed, as it
seems to me, but the scientific counterpart of that occa-
sionalism to which the followers of Descartes were driven,
in their endeavour to account for the correspondence
between mental states and bodily movements. But,
whereas according to the Occasionalists the Deity inter-
vened as each occasion demanded, here the physical
series is held to be mechanically predetermined and to be
capable of calculation in Laplacean fashion. Thus we
seem driven to infer a like rigid determination of the
psychical concomitants, to admit, with Huxley, "the
banishment from all regions of human thought and activ-
ity of what we call spirit and spontaneity." It is
assuredly not a prepossessing doctrine ; this its upholders
often candidly allow. But, inasmuch as some of our
ablest scientific men are counted among them, we may
be sure that the arguments that have led to such a posi-
tion are not to be summarily disposed of. Merely to lay
bare the defects of the dualism which this parallelism
presupposes is not likely to be convincing,^ unless the
theory itself can be shewn to have defects which force us
to question its implicit assumptions. Such a procedure

^ TMb is the topic of the fourth section of these lectures. See below,
Lectures XTV ff .


THE PHYSICAL SERIES 7

is the less likely to be conyincing, as this same dualism
of matter and mind is engrained in common thought and
speech; to this extent the doctrine of parallelism has
common sense on its side. And the history of modern
philosophy shows the two questions, that concerning the
perception of an external world, and this concerning the
relation of body and mind, to be closely connected.
The whole subject is as difficult as it is important, and
we are bound to study it with the utmost attention and
care. When I say important, I mean important to the
student of Natural Theology, for the fine saying of Henry
More is assuredly true : Nvllvs in microco^mo spirituB^
nullum in maeroeosmo Devs,

To begin, we must make sure that we understand the
main points of the doctrine itself. These may be re-
sumed under three heads : for we have, first, a series of
physical changes or brain-processes; then, a simultane-
ous series of psychical changes or processes, accompany-
ing them ; and finally, the relation between the two,
declared to be purely one of concomitance, not one of in-
teraction. As regards the physical series, it is important
to remark that the only correspondences of which we
have any actual knowledge are such as have been found
between the physiological or pathologpical working of
nerve tissues on the one side and conscious states and acts
on the other. There is nothing in such facts taken alone
— instructive and impressive though they are, as shew-
ing the intimate connexion between body and mind — to
prove that that connexion is one of paxaUelism and not
of interaction. The specialists to whom we owe our
knowledge of these facts have indeed usually been of


8 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

opinion that the connexion is one of interaction. The
contrary opinion, then, it is to be noted, owes its rise,
not to the studies of mental physiologists or pathologists,
nor yet to the studies of comparative anatomists or com-
parative psychologists; it rests simply on the assumptions
of the upholders of the mechanical theory. According
to those assumptions, brain-processes, in conmion with all
vital processes, if they could be completely and perfectly
explained, would be described not as physiological, nor
even as physical, processes ; but simply as the mechanically
connected motions of inert mass-elements. So regarded,
the organic changes in brain and nerve become amenable,
in principle if not in fact, to that absolute determination
and fixity that characterise the ideal operations of exact
mechanics. They become distinguishable but insepara-
ble parts of an unbroken and unbreakable mechanism,
every element of which is rigorously linked with every
other ; the whole working in perfect unison, without the
possibility of deviation or individual initiative ; a world
that knows nothing of spontaneity, of quality, of worth,
or of purpose ; a world in which there is only uniformity
of space and time, indestructibility of mass, and persist-
ence of energy. There must be nothing in that world
which a mathematician with sufficient data and adequate
powers of calculation could not unlock ; its state at any
one instant, expressible in a single vast equation, must
be equally the key to all its past and to all its future.
Such a conception seems obviously to exclude all inter-
ference from 'without as well as from within.' In fact,
there is no without or within in the case. No ' within,'
for inertia excludes internal change; and no * without,'


THE PSYCHICAL SERIES 9

for, though force implies some mass external to the par-
ticular mass affected, yet, ex ht/pothesiy all the masses
there are are included in the system and the system
recognises nothing beyond. I do not propose to recall
at this stage the results to which we were led in our
earlier examination of the mechanical theory. The time
to apply these will be when we enter upon the task of
criticising the doctrine of parallelism. But we must
first complete the statement of it.

We come, then, now to the psychical series. What
are we to understand by this? Unhappily, there is no
answer forthcoming comparable as respects deflniteness
and precision with that given concerning the physical
series. For this difference there are many reasons.
For one thing, quality has only been eliminated from
the physical world by relegating it to the psychical;
and in consequence, relations of quantity and number,
which there admit of the utmost exactness, are here at
best but vague and approximate. Again, when we ask
after the laws determining the coexistences and succes-
sions of elements of the psychical series, we get in some
cases — that of sensations, for example — no answer at
all. In some cases, as in association and habit, the
past, in others, as in purposive action, the future, is
said to determine the present. In volition motives
spring from feeling but are controlled by deliberation ;
so in thought, judgment is superior to association, but
not to reason. How is this ultimate diversity of quali-
ties, how are these processes so different in rank and
character, to be described in terms that may rim par-
allel with the monotonous interplay of molecules in the


10 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

cavity of a skull? But there is a further difl&culty
still. If this psychical series is to be my experience as
it ij9 for me, or yours as it is for you, then all those
external perceptions, which are the physicists' prime
data, and all the conceptions whereby they are summa-
rised, belong to it and are the outcome of its processes.
So regarded they form a unity ; within this unity we
find indeed a duality, that of the correlatives, subject
and object, but we find no dualism of external and
internal, physical and psychical, matter and mind. To
come within the range of such a dualism and to justify
any notion of parallelism, we must leave the properly
psychologpical standpoint of my experience as it is for
me, or your experience as it is for you. We must
take up instead the standpoint of my experience as it
is for you, your experience as it is for me. Then, in-
deed, as I am for you primarily a portion of the physi-
cal world, and you in like manner for me, it becomes
natural to locate each one's experience inside his skin,
his environment being outside it ; to say that of the
chairs and tables, moon and stars, and the rest of this
external world, he has ideas ; to ask the puzzling ques-
tion how these ideas are produced or whereabouts inside
that skin the thinking thing is ; and finally, to take his
body to pieces in the hope of answering the question.
But this is still not the worst ; for, once accustomed to
speak of one's fellow-man's experience as made up of
ideas in that man's head, one is led by parity of rea-
soning to think the same of one's own experience. And
there is at least one further source of confusion still,
when from concrete experiences, in which the individual


THE PSYCHICAL SERIES 11

percipient is plainly recognised, has his name, place,
and date, and his manifold idiosyncrasies, we pass to
what is known as the scientific or objective standpoint,
where the subject experiencing is entirely ignored.
Psychology is only beginning to clear itself of these
confusions. I refer to them now that we may be on
our guard ; for when a physicist talks about matter, he
can generally provisionally define what he means. But
many able men wite about mind without being in the
least clear what they mean. As I have already remarked,
there are three related but distinct questions that are
constantly playing hide and seek, especially during the
occasional excursions into philosophical regions made
by scientific men. These questions are the psychophysi-
cal one now before us, the psychological one concerning
the intuition of an external world, and the epistemologi-
cal one concerning the phenomenal and the real. We
have agreed to postpone the latter questions as far as
may be. It will suffice for the present if we can see
that, when a psychical series is spoken of as parallel with
a physical series, such psychical series is not regarded
from the strictly psychological standpoint. Psychical
then means not my experience as it is for me, but my
experience as it is for the physiologist, who is studying
my brain and my organs of sense and movement. As
examples of the confusing influence of this point of
view upon psychology proper, we have the prevalent
metaphor of impressions imprinted on the mind as in
Locke and Hume, the frequent identification of action
with bodily movement, or the identification by certain
recent psychologists of emotion with its bodily expres-


12 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

sion. One further result of this confusion is the ten-
dency to treat consciousness atomistically, if I may so
say; in other words, to regard it as owing its unity to
combinations and associations of sensations, feelings, or
ideas, vaguely conceived as independent elements. A
glaring instance of this we have in Cliflford's wild specu-
lation concerning mind-stuff, to which I must refer pres-
ently. The essential characteristic of the psychophysical
standpoint is that it implies two subjects, or — as perhaps
it wiU be simpler to say — two percipients, whereas the
psychological implies only one.

Coming now to the question : What is meant by paral-
lelism? the answer is more uncertain still. We could
readily understand the relevance of such a term if the
two percipients, being psychologically similarly consti-
tuted, were both occupied with the same perceptual
environment ; as when, for instance, two fellow-travel-
lers are together engrossed by the sights and sounds of
a summer's day. We should also admit parallelism, if,
being psychophysicists, they were both simultaneously
occupied in scanning each other's brains — science having
previously devised means to obviate the thickness of their
skulls and the turbidity of the contents. In these cases,
along with the dual series that parallelism implies, we
should have also the point for point correspondence that
is quite as essential. But if, while one watches Hhe lark
soaring and singing in the blinding sky,' the other peers
into his head as he watches, where is the parallelism?
"Parallels are lines that never meet," it will be said,
"and so it is the complete disparateness of matter and
mind that is meant. Psychological analysis, pursued


THE PARALLELISM 13

never so far, will bring us no nearer to molecular motions,
and however much we lay bare the brain mechanism,
thought will remain as distinct as before." No doubt ;
but surely parallelism is an odd metaphor to employ
to express only absolute disparateness. Mental pro-
cesses and material processes may resemble parallels in
having no common element, but what have they answer-
ing to the point to point correspondence that parallels
imply ?

^*'Ordo et cannexio idearum idem e%t ac ordo et connexio
rerum^^^ is a famous proposition of Spinoza constantly
quoted in this discussion ; usually, I am bound to say,
in entire ignorance of Spinoza's context and meaning,
which to be sure is not very clear. But now, taking the
words as they stand, what is an idea and what is a
thing ? Let me here quote a writer who has undertaken
to expound such a parallelism — the late Professor Clif-
ford : " The parallelism here meant," he says, " is a
parallelism of complexity, an analogy of structure. A
spoken sentence and the same sentence written are two
utterly unlike things, but each of them consists of ele-
ments; the spoken sentence of the elementary sounds
of the language, the written sentence of its alphabet.
Now the relation between the spoken sentence and its
elements is very nearly the same as the relation between
the written sentence and its elements. There is a corre-
spondence of element to element ; although an elementary
sound is quite a different thing from a letter of the alpha-
bet, yet each elementary sound belongs to a certain letter
or letters. And the sounds being built up together to

1 Ethica, il, 7.


14 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

fonn a spoken sentence, the letters are built up together
in nearly the same way^ to form the written sentence.
The two complex products are as wholly unlike as the
elements are, but the manner of their complication is
the same. Or, as we should say in the mathematics, a
sentence spoken is the same function of the elementary
sounds as the same sentence written is of the correspond-
ing letters."^ Well, no one will question the apposite-
ness of the term parallelism here. ^^ Of such a nature,"
continues Clifford, ^^is the correspondence or pai*allelism
between body and mind." But if so, then to every
molecule in a man's brain there must be an answering
elementary idea. Also, since according to the prevalent
opinion of chemists, the seventy odd so-called elements
are to be regarded as combinations of one prime atom,
ideas in like manner must be regarded as combinations of
one prime idea. But if the speculations of Lord Kelvin
and others are to be accepted, and the prime atom itself
is a state of motion in a primitive homogeneous medium,
what is the mental equivalent of this primordial medium ?
Again, if the elements correspond, atoms to pieces of
mind-stuff, each to each, and if, further, the function is
the same, there cannot be more in the one order and
connexion than there is in the other. But the order
and connexion of mass-elements are ultimately resolved
into one kind of order and connexion, the kinetic;
what now is the corresponding ultimate order among
ideas? Is it associative contigfuity, logical congruency,
appetitive urgency, or what? The elements correspond
numerically, and are, of course, simple; time is supposed
^ On the Nature of Things in Themselves^ Mind^ vol. iii, p. 61.


CLIFFORD'S VIEWS 15

to be common to both series: there should remain then
only the question, What is the psychical analogue of
space? But whatever it be, since the functions corre-
spond, this psychical space, or quasi-space, should admit
of algebraic, though not of geometrical, expression.
Psychology then at length, like physics — Dr. Hicks
being our prophet — may hope to become a branch of
kinematics I In short, as in Clifford's illustratiye in-
stance, the sentence as sentence is the same whether
spoken or written — in logical language is one in form
though diverse in matter; so here, his mind-stuff is
simply the atom renamed. Allowing that it is not
mind, he makes no attempt to show how from such
dust a living mind could ever spring; but is content to
assert that ^^ reason, intelligence, and volition are prop-
erties of a complex made up of elements themselves
not rational, not intelligent, not conscious."^

On one point only in this maze of psychological bar-
barism I will venture a remark. The assertion that
new properties arise from any mere complication or
conjunction of elements is never justifiable, least of all
in such a case as this. Even the three lines that in a
certain position we may call a triangle are so only
when we introduce a fourth something we call surface,
that is distinct from and independent of them as three
several lines. Complexity, in truth, is a vague term
even when, in the unity so described the parts
precede the whole. Nobody bent on psychological pre-
cision would speak of ideas as either conscious or intel-
ligent, but still less would he speak of ideas existing

^ OntJie Nature of Things in Themselves^ Mind, vol. iii, p. 67.


16 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

in isolation apart from, and prior to, a consciousness
and intelligence. To such a position, however, Clifford
professes to have been driven by the principle of con-
tinuity and the doctrine of evolution. Of the absurdi-
ties to which this doctrine leads as expounded by Mr.
Spencer, whom Clifford seems to have followed, we
have had enough already. Had he followed Leibniz
instead, and applied the principle of continuity in like
fashion, he could have speculated as to simple minds to
his heart's content, but would never have imagined
that absurdity, "a piece of mind-stuff," to which his
fearless and logical interpretation of atomistic psychol-
ogy had led him ; he would never have imagined that
the esse intentionale of mind, if so scholastic a term be
allowed, could be described in terms that have a meaning
only when applied to the complexity of material structure.
We cannot, then, it seems to me, admit such a par-
allelism as that offered by this crude monism of Clif-
ford. And yet it seemed to call for notice since it is
a fair type of a good deal of naturalistic speculation
now in vogue. The independent advance of physics
and of psychology, as I have already remarked, has
revealed too clearly the entire disparity of their con-
ceptions to leave any room for the old materialism.
But the monism now in favour with many scientific
men is that old materialism, to all intents and purposes,
though with a new face. The problem as it presents
itself to a thinker setting out from the side of matter
and law, is to bring the facts of mind somehow within
range. The supposed diversity and disparity of the
two is the crux : hence the dualism. The assumed


MIND-STUFF AND MATTER-STUFF 17

impossibility of any interference with the physical
scheme, except by miracle, leads next to the assertion
of complete causal independence, and then the well-
ascertained facts of psychophysics seem to point to a
parallelism. Now, the mere existence of two indepen-
dent sets of facts, taken by itself, would constitute no
problem, for science at any rate. And the concomitant
variations of cerebral development and function on the
one hand, with mental development and function on the
other, in no way excludes, and, as I have said, was
never supposed to exclude, the interaction of body and
mind. But the conjunction of independence and par-
allelism at once confronts us as a formidable problem.
The ordinary canons of method allow of independence
and casual coincidence ; but independence and invari-
able coincidence seem contrary to all reason. Any hy-
pothesis that will resolve the coincidence into identity
is so far sound; but it must not tamper with the facts
as Clifford's egregious travesty of mind-stuff assuredly
does. Here the ideas (ejects as he calls them) becoitfe
the real things or things-in-themselves ; while material

•

things become what others call ideas or mental pictures,
in which mind-gtuff is the thing represented. But, as
the ejects stand divested of every mental characteristic,
it is a puzzle, at least as great as the puzzle solved, to
see how these new ideas are ever to begin. Even
things-in-themselves, that are ^not rational, not intelli-
gent, not conscious,' can neither have the motive nor the
power nor the skill to gproup themselves and take each
other's pictures.
Another rendering of Spinoza's doctrine of parallelism

VOL. II — C


18 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

more in keeping with his philosophy,, and altogether
less absurd, is that familiarly known as the two aspects
theory. Here, as with Spinoza, mind and matter are
attributes of one substance. But they are conceived
not as attributes of the one substance in itself, as in
Spinoza's definitions, not as real attributes, but as
phenomenal attributes, if I may so say. Modem
thought, chary of ontological dogmatism, declines to
affirm anything of such a conception as Spinoza's One
Substance. But while leaving this in uncertainty, many
recent writers of note have been content to account for
the disparity between the psychical and physical series
by diversity of standpoints. That which in one aspect
appears as states of consciousness, in the other appears
as matter in motion, just as a deaf man may perceive
the strokes of the bell-clapper while a blind man
hears the sounds from it. Once accept the deliverance
of the psychologist that he does not know what mind
as a substance is, and the like deliverance of the physi-
cist as to his own ignorance of the substance of matter,
and it becomes an obvious superfluity to have two un-
known substances. Especially so, when one — for those
who cannot do without any — and best of all, an un-
knowable one, will amply fill any gulf that is phenom-
enally impassable. So we find the very men who are
loudest in their denunciation of metaphysical specula-
tion complacently preaching this two aspects doctrine.
For, after all, what objection can an agnostic have to
an unknowable substance? But it is possible, I think,
without trespassing into metaphysics to shew that the
two aspects theory is untenable.


THE *TWO ASPECTS' THEORY 19

Like much psychophysical speculation, it rests upon a
faulty and exploded psychology and fails largely through
its free use of metaphor to get really to the bottom of
the situation. The notion, countenanced by Locke and
also by Kant, that the facts of mind are perceived by
an inner sense and the facts of matter by the outer
senses, breaks down before a more careful analysis.
Even if this distinction were sound, still what I am
supposed to experience through internal perception is
not another aspect of what I perceived externally; nor
again is my experience, taken as a whole, another side
of that abstract conceptual scheme by which the natu-
ralist would describe the physical processes of my brain.
When the normal man combines in himself the separate
perceptions of the blind and deaf, the movement seen
by the one, the tones heard by the other, he refers them
both to one thing, the bell, as its states or ^aspects.' But
now we never do this with our so-called internal and ex-
ternal perceptions. If we did, then so far the two-fold
aspect doctrine would be justified and the problem of
dualism avoided. Again, when two percipients observe
different sides of the same thing, like the hasty knights
in the fable, they can — as the knights did — change
places and each connect the two aspects in one experi-
ence of an object. In short the phrase ♦ two-sides' is a
phrase merely, unless it is possible in such manner to
pass continuously from the one to the other, from outer
to inner or from inner to outer. The whole psychophys-
ical problem turns on the fact that this cannot be done.
To give any meaning to this metaphor of sides or as-
pects, it should be possible to indicate the unity to which


20 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

they belong, and to shew that they have such congru-
ence as befits complementary sides or aspects of the
same thing. But the unity cannot be indicated; so an
unknown substance is assumed.

Within the range of our experience, or of the scien-
tific conceptions by which we formulate it, I have said
no such unity is forthcoming. Let us consider this a
little further. My experience is not so much beyond or
out of the present reach of the physiologist who may
con my brain : it is, as a concrete individual experience,
absolutely distinct from his ; and per contra his percep-
tion of my brain, for the very reason that it is his per-
ception, can never be mine. This is allowed ; but it is
frequently urged that even if I cannot directly perceive
my own brain I could conceivably observe it indirectly,
as I do my face in a glass for instance. Certainly the
mere fact that the reflection and the face reflected occupy
different positions in space does not seem important.
Similarly it may be urged that I could conceivably have
a facsimile model — if you like a working model — of
my brain, which would be as accessible to my observa-
tion as my actual brain is supposed to be to the obser-
vation of the physiologist. But now the physiologist
can see both the face and the reflection ; he can handle
both the brain and the model. Further, he must have
made the copy from his previous acquaintance with the
original; I should not even know my own portrait as
mine if I had not independent knowledge of other faces
and their portraits. When I touch one hand with the
other I have a double perception ; when I touch another's
hand I have only a single perception. So if I cotUd


THE 'TWO ASPECTS' THEORY 21

actually manipulate my own brain I should presumably
only add to that sense of embodiment, which is referred
to the psychical aspect. These experiences the model
would not give and the physiologist would not have.
And as to the possibility of a model, is it, I wiU not say
a conceivable, but is it a permissible hypothesis? I
refer not to the unattainable feats of workmanship such
a model implies, but to the fact that if it verily were a
model of a living brain it would have iU awn psychical
aspect. The nearest approach we know of to such a
model is that which nature makes in the production of
twins ; and the process there runs back through all the
ages of human development. To assume the possibility
of any process more direct is to assume the possibility of
setting aside the existing laws of nature, that of psy-
chophysical parallelism among the rest, if it be a law of
nature.

There is, then, it would seem, no way of combining
these distinct ^aspects' into one concrete experience.
If we are misled into imagining that there is, it is be-
cause we confound the general knowledge of brains
(which is all the physicist or physiologist really has,
and which we can share) with the concrete knowledge
implied in the notion of the physical aspect or basis
of our own particular experience, which we could not
possibly share. And this diversity, the concreteness
of the psychical side contrasted with the abstract and
conceptual character of the physical, is only one among
several points in which their characters manifest an
incongruity incompatible with the theory of their being
complementary aspects of one unity. Thus the one


22 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

is described as inextended, the other as extended ; to
the one all quality is relegated, the other remaining
wholly quantitative ; and so on. With these points,
however, we shall have to deal more fully later.

Another, and in some ways stricter, interpretation
still of the phrase psychophysical parallelism goes to
the opposite extreme. Instead of seeking to escape, in
some way or other, from the difficulties of interaction
between things so disparate, — as Descartes* immediate
successors did, — those who maintain this view boldly
make the impossibility of such interaction their starting-
point. Whatever produces a physical change must, they
contend, itself be physical ; whatever produces a psychical
change must itself be psychical. Though it is unques-
tionably the case that changes in the one region accom-
pany changes in the other, yet their place in time is
to be explained entirely by the antecedent events in
their own series, not at all by the simultaneous events
in the other. Their parallelism is a case of coexis-
tence simply, not of causation in any sense. If there
were interaction between matter and mind, then physics,
it is said, would be incomplete without a theory of
psychical action, precisely as it would be, — or perhaps I
should say, is, — incomplete without a theory of electro-
magnetism. On the other hand, states of mind, if amen-
able to diverse physical influences, would have to have
assignable spatial relations and configurations, and so
cease to be psychical. The plane of psychology, in short,
is held to be distinct toto ccelo from the plane of phys-
ics. It is usual to illustrate the supposed absurdity of
attempting to connect the two causally in some such


THE 'CONSCIOUS AUTOMATON' THEORY 23

fashion as in the following quotation, which I borrow
from Professor James. The writer quoted asks us to
imagine ^^an idea, say of food, producing a movement,
say of carrying food to the mouth." "What," he asks,
"is the method of its action? Does it assist the de-
composition of the molecules of the gray matter [of
the brain], or does it retard the process, or does it
alter the direction in which the shocks are distrib-
uted?" Supposing a case in which the gray matter
is about to "fall into simpler combinations on the im-
pact of an incident force," he then asks : " How is
the idea of food to prevent this decomposition? Mani-
festly," he continues, "it can do so only by increasing
the force which binds the molecules together. Good !
Try to imagine the idea of a beefsteak binding two
molecules together. It is impossible. Equally impos-
sible is it to imagine a similar idea loosening the at-
tractive force between two molecules."^ It must be
allowed that we cannot picture ideas in the act of alter-
ing the chemical properties of molecules ; and if illus-
trations of this kind are conclusive, we might at once
assert, as this writer does, that mind and matter are
absolutely separate. But unhappily such illustrations
do not help us much. If mind and matter are abso-
lutely separate, as separate, say, as music and minerals
are, what are we to make of the invariable concom-
itance of a mental change with a bodily change, on
which the same writer insists with equal strenuous-
ness ? " Why the two occur together, or what the

1 Of. Meioier, The Nervous Syetem and the Mind, p. 9 ; see W. James,
Principles €f Piyehology, yoL i, p. 185.


24 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

link is which connects them," he adds, ^^we do not
know, and most authorities believe that we never shall
and never can know." But, even granting this, surely
such ignorance is an odd reason for asserting an abso-
lute separateness of things thus invariably conjoined.
If science had proceeded in this fashion in other cases
of unexplained coexistence, it would not have made
much progress. I venture again to maintain that inva-
riable concomitance and absolute causal independence
are incompatible positions, and I will add further that
no "authorities" have ever been able consistently to
maintain both. What these people really mean when
they assert parallelism and absolute separation, on the
ground that like can only be produced by like, is some-
thing very different from what they seem to say, some-
thing very trivial and hardly worth saying. It amounts
briefly to this, that the connexion between matter and
mind cannot be a psychical connexion, and cannot
therefore be expressed in psychological language ; also
that it cannot be a physical connexion, and therefore
cannot be expressed in physical language. But since
the connexion exists, there are apparently only three
distinct possibilities open, possibilities, however, which
are not mutually exclusive. Either, first, there must
be, whether we know it or not, psychical facts not
psychologically explicable, psychical events without com-
plete psychical antecedents. Or secondly, there must
be, whether known or not, physical facts without com-
plete physical antecedents. Or thirdly, there must be
an unknown something as the medium connecting and
correlating the two. This last, which we may call the


SENSATIONS A DIFFICULTY 25

speculative altematiye, is that adopted in monistic inter-
pretations such as those we have just considered. The
other two may be classed together as scientific alterna-
tives, and it is these that chiefly concern us at present.
Now on the psychological side we can at once point to
a class of psychical events not psychologically explicable,
viz., sensations. And on the physiological side there is
certainly one fact which has so far bafiSed all attempts
at physical explanation — I mean the fact of life itself.
Here then, apart from any a priori considerations, we
have empirical grounds for demurring to the parallelistic
position "that the two things are on utterly different
platforms — the physical facts going along by them-
selves and the mental facts going along by themselves."^
Why sensations occur or recur, coexist together or suc-
ceed each other as they do, no psychology can explain,
no psychologist has ever attempted to explain. Sensa-
tions one and all are intrusions, interferences, affections,
or modifications in the mental series. So far they are
proof positive that that series does not altogether go
along by itself. Descartes is our best teacher here. The
fearful perplexities which beset him, the contradictions
into which he fell, in his endeavour to account for sen-
sation and yet maintain this utter dualism of body and
mind, are only escaped by the modem naturalist because
he does not face the problem as fairly as Descartes or
Malebranche did. The substitution of a psychophysical
for a strictly psychological standpoint has led the modern
psychologist first to regard your sensations as they are
for him, not as they are for you, and then to speak of

1 Clifford, Lectures and Essays, vol. ii, p. 56.


26 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

them as your subjective modifications, not as your objec-
tive presentations. He imagines your consciousness as
somehow located in a sort of fourth dimension, within
your head.^ Then, assuming that all the three-dimen-
sional changes there belong to what he calls 'par excellence
the objective world, the independence of this world both
of you and your sensations seems manifest ; and so he
concludes that mental facts go along by themselves.

The difficulties on the side of the physical series sug-
gested by the phenomena of life are escaped in a different
fashion. These, as we saw in the last lecture, consist
primarily in the facts of direction and selection which
distinguish the movements of living things from the
motions of inanimate matter. ^^ Tendency to equilibrium
of force and permanency of form," said Huxley, in a pas-
sage which he afterwards recanted, ^Hhese are the char-
acters of that portion of the imiverse that does not live,
the domain of the chemist and the physicist. Tendency
to disturb existing equilibrium, to take on forms which
succeed one another in definite cycles, is the character
of the living world." ^ In other words inertia is the
distinguishing mark of the one, effort of the other ; to
life primarily belongs that energy which is figuratively
attributed to matter. The principle of least action is
the crowning generalisation of physics, that of self-pres-
ervation and betterment the first law of life. So dia-
metrically opposed are the characters of the two that
our eminent physicists with scarcely an exception pro-

1 Descartes, it wiU be remembered, preferred a location of no dimen-
sions.

* Lay Sermon$, p. 76, and Prefatory Letter, p. vi.


LIFE A DIFFICULTY 27

claim the problem of life to be ultraphysical. ^' The only
contribution of dynamics to theoretical biology," says
Lord Kelvin, '^is absolute negation of automatic com-
mencement or automatic maintenance of life."^ Nev-
ertheless, this is precisely the doctrine which biologists
and physiologists for the most part maintain and be-
lieve. The diflficulties to which the pure physicist is
awake they seem to escape through a happy division
of labour. When a machine is already made, be it
clock, dynamo, or automaton, physical principles will
accoimt for its working. So to deal with organisms,
when there, is preeminently the business of the physi-
ologists. The main question for them is not how
the machine came to be, or what it is for, but how it
works. "You do not explain the working of a clock by
referring to a chronometric principle, but you point to
the coiled spring and to the disposition of its wheels
and levers ; so we," they say, " when we see a unicellular
organism positively heliotropic and turning to the Ught,
or negatively heUotropic and turning from it; we do
not appeal to an occult principle of life, we regard
such organism as an automaton, and seek in its con-
struction the explanation of its response. We keep
closer to the purely descriptive rSle of science, if we
simply credit such an organism with hydrotropism or
chimiotropism or thermotropism than we should do if
we said that it drinks when thirsty, eats when himgry,
and shrinks from the cold* And since the higher or-
ganisms are but complexes of cells, we conclude that
the same methods of interpretation are legitimately ap-

1 Prapertiea of Matter^ p. 416.


28 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

plicable to them. For Hhe most complex organism,' as
Claude Bernard, the greatest of French physiologists, has
said, ' is but a vast mechanism resulting from the assem-
blage of secondary mechanisms.' " Suppose we now turn
roimd on that inept analogy of the clock with its occult
chronometric principle ; and, reminding our physiologi-
cal friends that clocks not only do not exist for them-
selves, but neither make, mend, maintain, nor multiply
— still less improve — themselves ; suppose we ask how
these secondary mechanisms come to be, and to assem-
bla in.0 ooniced „eoh>»ta., o, vast complexity.
Well, we are then at once sent away with an intro-
duction to the biological specialist. He is the person
whose business it is to answer that question. But we
find he knows still less than the physiologist of the
narrow range of the ultimate conceptions of physics,
and looks at our question from quite another side. As
we have previously seen, he takes the theory of evo-
lution for the mainstay of his argument, regardless of
the fact that progress and development are conceptions
that do not admit of mechanical interpretation. He talks
naively of protoplasm, bioplasm, germ-plasm, and the
like, without ever suspecting that under cover of this
figure of plasticity he is availing himself of psycho-
logical conceptions that he, equally with the physiologist,
is boimd to disavow.

And so, — spite of the psychological impossibility of
accounting for sensation, spite of the emphatic declara-
tion of the pure physicist that he cannot conceive inert,
rudderless, molecules, that have no insides and undergo
no change, giving rise to wondrous automata that seem


PARALLELISM IMPLIES CONNEXION 29

afterwards to shape and direct them, — spite of all these
difficulties, the doctrine that man and the organisms be-
neath him are but conscious automata is made to look
presentable. This is the form that the doctrine of paral-
lelism assumes when monistic speculations as to a com-
mon substance, known or unknown, are left aside, and
the axiom that disparate things cannot interact is applied
to the one world of experience as sundered in twain by
the Cartesian dualism. It affords quite the most im-
pressive exhibition to be found of a fallacy to which
"scientific philosophy" is especially liable — that of mis-
taking two halves for a whole, the fallacy again which
the philosophy of science is especially bound to expose
and correct.^ If the so-called mental and material
worlds were reaUy independent and separate wholes,
each going along by itself, parallelism and interaction
would, I repeat, be alike inconceivable. On the other
hand, if they are really members of one whole, then
they cannot be severed and yet remain what they were
before. To deny their interaction when so severed, on
the ground that on neither side can the connecting
link be found, will be true, though trivial. But on
the ground of the abstract separation, to assert their
causal independence is an error which the alleged par-
allelism at once proclaims. Constant parallelism plu9
absolute separation is, I say once again, logically so un-
stable a combination that of necessity one or other
term must be dropped.

And now we shall find in fact that the exponents of
animal automatism are continually lapsing either into

1 Cf . Hegel, Encyc.j Logik, § 38, Zusatz.


30 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

vague monistic speculations, or subordinating the psy-
chical series to the physical, or both. Sometimes,
though more rarely, we find an author setting out by
formulating parallelism with causal independence, and
yet in the end subordinating the physical series to the
psychical. Such an author is Wimdt, who, while affirm-
ing that the action of mind on matter, if it existed,
would be of the nature of miracle,^ yet contrives to
accept the Aristotelian doctrine that the soul shapes
the body and to assign to voluntary impulses the rSle
of primum moven$ in organic development.' But such
opinions are mutually consistent only when parallelism
is resolved into the almost trivial statement I have al-
ready referred to, viz. that neither from the side of
psychology alone, nor from that of physics alone, is
the interaction of body and mind comprehensible— a
statement that is rather a methodological convention
than a law of nature. It amounts to saying: Let psy-
chologists and physicists severally attend to their own
business ; when they do so, their lines of work may
sometimes run parallel, but will never be found to in-
tersect. With Wundt's doctrine as a whole we have for
the present no concern and certainly no quarrel.

More serious and important is this doctrine of con-
scious automatism as propoimded by such purely scien-
tific writers as Huxley and Du Bois-Rejmond, and
here the lapse is always to the side of subordinating
the psychical to the physical. In Huxley's case indeed

^ Ueber paychische CausalUdt und da8 Princip der psychophysiachen
Paralleli$mu3, PhiloaophUche Studien^ Bd. x, p. 33.
* o.Cy p. 332.


SUBORDINATION OF THE PSYCHICAL 31

the leaning towards the primacy of the physical side is
often so pronounced that it can hardly be caUed parallel-
ism at all. Spite of his vehement repudiation of the title
of materialist as an affront to his untarnished agnosti-
cism, I know of few recent writers who on occasion
better deserve the title.^ Let me quote a passage or
two from his famous Belfast Address to the British
Association, On the Hi/pothesis that Animals are Automata
and its History? the appropriate pendant to the address
given by his friend Tyndall on the same occasion. "It
may be assumed then," he remarks after describing cer-
tain well-known experiments by Pfliiger and Goltz,
"that molecular changes in the brain are the causes of
all the states of consciousness of brutes. Is there any
evidence " he remarks, " that these states of conscious-
ness may, conversely, cause those molecular changes
which give rise to muscular motion ? " He answers :
"I see no such evidence." And presently he con-
tinues : " It is quite true that, to the best of my
judgment, the argumentation which applies to brutes
holds equally good of men; and, therefore, that all
states of consciousness in us, as in them, are immedi-
ately caused by the molecular changes of the brain
substance. It seems to me that in men, as in brutes,
there is no proof that any state of consciousness is the
cause of change in the motion of the matter of the organ-
ism." He tones this down somewhat by describing con-
sciousness as related to the mechanism of the body

1 Still, on Uie whole, it would be far tmer to charge Hozley with incon-
Bistency than with deliberate materialism.
* Collected Essays^ yol. i, cl pp. 289 fi.


82 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

* simply as a collateral product of its working,' but ex-
pressly declines to describe muscular motion as even
a collateral product of volition. At first sight this
one-sidedness seems very unreasonable, and in any
case is certainly not strict parallelism. We naturally
urge that it is not in itself more inconceivable how
matter can act on mind than it is how mind can
act on matter. The inconceivability Huxley fully
admits. "How the one phenomenon causes the other,"
he says, "we know, as much or as little, as in
any other case of causation ; but we have as much
right to believe that the sensation is an eflEect of the
molecular change as we have to believe that motion
is an effect of impact." But against the admission
that volition causes physical changes, there is, over and
above the general inconceivability of all transeunt action,
a further diflSculty — a diiB&culty that for naturalism
amounts to an absolute impossibility. For naturalism
sets out from, and is founded on, the mechanical theory,
and that, as we have abundantly seen, postulates a com-
plete and rigorous concatenation of all physical changes
into one vast, undeviating process. * Collateral prod-
ucts,' comparable to the shadow of a moving train or
the sound of its whistle, it is thought — very inconse-
quently, by the way — may perhaps be imagined ; for
these at least, though they may indicate, can never
influence, the working of the machinery. So regarded,
the psychological distinction between sensation and re-
sponse, vital though it is, sinks into nothing. The very
notion of action becomes an illusion. The material series
indeed goes along by itself, but the mental series only


MIND A < COLLATERAL PRODUCT' 83

goes along by itself as does a succession of shadows.
"If these positions are well based," says Huxley, "it
follows . • . that . . . the feeling we call volition is
not the cause of a voluntary act, but the symbol of
that state of the brain which is the immediate cause
of that act."^ How far those positions are well based
we must further consider in the next lecture.

^ Collected Essays^ vol. i, p. 244.

VOL. u — D


LECTURE XII

THE CONSCIOUS AUTOMATON THEOBY

Doctrine of Conscious Automatism or Psychical Epiphenomenalism

examined. It is maintained (1) that there can be no causal connexion

bettoeen the psychical and the physical series^ and yet (2) tluU the

psychical is a ^collateral product^ or epiphenomenon of the physical.

The very statement is thus self -contradictory.

Mind thtts becomes impotent to control matter. In acc^ting this
position Naturalism is really at variance with itself. For (1) it else-
where assumes that mind is an efficient factor in biological evolution^
and (2) the physicist proper declares tfuU the laws of matter alone vfill
not explain Hfe.

However^ taking the doctrine as it stands^ there are these two articles
specially to consider : (a) the primacy and independence of tJie autom-
aton, and (b) the illusory character of psychical activity. The latter to
be discussed first,

Huxley'' s endeavour to save himself from ^ charge of fatalism only
results in substituting a blind necessity for a logical one. Again^ he
urges that we are free j *' inasmuch as in many respects we can do as we
like.''^ But how sOf if^*^ volitions do not enter into the chain of causation
of the action atcUV^f Turning now to the mechanical world, of lohich
the automaton is a part, we find no activity within tfiat.

There is thus activity nowJiere ! How then do we come to be talking
of it even as illusory f And if conscious automatism is true, Tioto is
illusion or error possible f The ground on which Descartes called man
a conscious automaton — because of his intellectual and voluntary activity
— is ignored by Huxley and others. On their premisses Descartes would
have called man a mere automaton. Huxley turned against himself.
The psychical series will not resolve into a series of feelings, and **t?oZf-
tion counts for something as a condition of the course of events.^''

34


DUALISM OPPOSED TO INTERACTION 35

An antinomy thus reveals itself^ that of the teleological and the
mech^iniccU. The conscious automaton theory the result of the natural-
isVs preference for materialistic terminology. Attempts to find a half-v>ay
through loopholes vfithin the mechanical theory turn out to be futile.

In the preceding lecture we were occupied with a
general survey and some passing comments on the doc-
trine of psychophysical parallelism, and the yariotis
modifications of it now in vogue. Leaving aside onp
form of it, admissible but unimportant, which merely
announces the irrelevance and incongruity of psycho-
logical conceptions in physics and vice versay we found
the others result from reflexion on the intimate cor-
respondence between mind and body, which physiolog-
ical and comparative psychology now set before us.
The first and most obvious inference which suggests
itself to an observer confining his attention to these
facts, is that mind and body mutually influence each
other. Yet such an inference has failed to maintain
itself in the face of the dualistic conceptions with which
we one and all first approach these questions. The
more psychologists and physicists elaborate their respec-
tive data in isolation, the more inconceivable psycho-
physical interaction becomes. Under these circumstances
monistic hypotheses naturally present themselves, and
to a monism of some sort we must, no doubt, in the
end come. But the monism now in favour with scien-
tific men only escapes the lesser difficulty of parallel-
ism and absolute separation, by incurring others greater.
For if the order and connexion of physical things be
that of the mechanical theory, and if the order and con-
nexion of ideas conforms to that of physical things,


86 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

it matters little whether we have one substance or two.
Either way our ordinary common-sense conception of
mental activity and initiative becomes altogether illu-
sory. A monism that could dispense with this me-
chanical parallelism would be worth having. But if
mind has simply to shadow the working of an automatic
mechanism, it matters little whether we call it another
aspect of the same substance, or a collateral effect in a
distinct substance ; or whether, leaving the whole ques-
tion of substance aside, we call it an epiphenomenal
accompaniment of physical phenomena. Agnosticism, in
fact, insists that, if there are two substances, they are
both imknown ; but on grounds of economy acknowledges
a preference for one, provided it b unknowable. In
any case, the duaUsm of the psychical and physical series
remains as Descartes left it, save that it is, if anything,
still more pronounced. He, too, is in the main the
author of that doctrine of animal automatism by which
nowadays the relation of mind and body is said to be
^scientifically' described. This, then, is the doctrine
we have specially to examine.

We have already noticed one serious ambiguity about
it, on which it will be well to comment somewhat fur-
ther. On the one hand this doctrine maintains, first,
that there is no causal connexion between the two series
and that there cannot be any; yet on the other, in the
second place, it represents conscious states as collateral
products of the physical series. A new ground for the
first of these positions, over and above the complete dis-
parateness of mental and material facts, is found in the
doctrine of energy as mechanically understood. This is


MIND AS EPIPHENOMENAL 37

opposed both to the outgoing of energy from the phy-
sical side as well as to the incoming of energy from
the psychical side. As to the second position, that is
simply a desperate attempt to save appearances in the
eyes of logic. Constant coexistence and correspondence
imply causal relation of some sort. The physical side will
brook no interference and its processes are held to be
complete in themselves; but the vague and, so to say,
impalpable character of the psychical series, it is im-
agined, will allow us to regard it as a collateral effect,
an effect that yet takes nothing from the physical
energy of its cause. The figures used to describe this
relation, such as the shadow of the engine, the sound
of the clock-bell, the colours of a mosaic as distinct
from the stones that compose it, and particularly the
newly coined phrase epiphenomenan (or, as the Germans
say, Begleiter9cheinung)y plainly indicate an endeavour
to attenuate to the uttermost a connexion which after
all it is impossible absolutely to deny. It is scarcely
needful to dilate on the transparent inconsistency of
such a position. Even shadows and sounds involve work,
though possibly its amount is infinitesimal in compari-
son with that expended in driving the machine. And
this is a point which physicists are not slow to urge
when, with much more reason, it is said that mind guides
the material mechanism without the expenditure of
work. The physicist is not entitled to use cause in two
senses. If mental states are simply products of molec-
ular conditions, however collateral, then these products
must count in with the rest. To say that consciousness
is an aura or epiphenomenon of the organism, which


38 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

itself is but a mechanical automaton, is to shirk the
difficulty, not to face it. If mental states are not simply
products of material conditions, then matter must interact
with something else to produce them. The clock will
not sound in a vacuum nor cast shadows in the dark.

But the most serious point in this doctrine of con-
scious automatism is that which is also its cardinal
point, the impotence of mind to influence matter. The
practical consequences which logically follow are serious,
but I do not now refer to these : It is true, as Huxley
says with reference to them : " The only question which
any wise man can ask himself, and which any honest
man will ask himself, is whether a doctrine is true or
false. Consequences will take care of themselves ; at
most their importance can only justify us in testing with
extra care the reasoning process from which they result.'*
But it is exclusively the theoretical consequences to
which I propose to ask your attention with a view to
this very testing of the doctrme from which they follow.

To begin then, I would observe that in this doctrine of
animal automatism, naturalism is really at variance with
itself. For throughout its exposition of biological evolu-
tion it assumes — though often covertly — that mind i$
an efficient factor in organisation. We have seen Mr.
Spencer adroitly bringing consciousness on the scene
when the complexity of the organic reflexes, which are
supposed to be purely mechanical, necessitates such direc-
tion, much as a barrel organ requires some one to select
and start the appropriate tune. Again, in the theory of
natural selection it is everywhere taken for granted that
instincts, habits, and inclinations are factors equally as


INCONSISTENCIES INVOLVED 39

potent as anatomical strncture or physiological process.
Thus Darwin speaks of the sense of hunger and the pleas-
ure of eating as ^^no doubt, first acquired in order to
induce animals to eat." ^ He also thinks we may safely
infer that the parental, filial, and social, affections ^^ have
been to a large extent gained through natural selection."
The upholders of animal automatism, however, who make
a shift to account for- eating by a physical process of
chimiotropism, ought to replace social impulses by various
homeotropisms, and so forth. Moreover, it is not merely
constant concomitance that has to be accounted for, but
a constant concomitance that is teleological. As Pro-
fessor James pertinently urges: ^^If pleasures and pains
have no efficacy, one does not see (without some such
a priori rational harmony as would be scouted by the
scientific champions of the automaton theory) why the
most noxious acts, such as burning, might not give thrills
of delight, and the most necessary ones, such as breath-
ing, cause agony." ^

But not only is the automaton theory inconsistent with
the doctrine of evolution as ordinarily accepted, it is also,
as we have had occasion more than once to notice, incon-
sistent with the principles of mechanics as these are pre-
sented by their authorised exponents. Those principles
will account for the working of a machine, but they will
not account for the machine itself. They furnish the
inventor with his means ; they do not furnish him with
his ends. And let it be remembered further that accord-
ing to the strict naturalistic philosophy machine and

* 7%« Descent of Man, vol. i, pp. 80 f.

* Prindplea of Psychology y vol. I, p. 144.


40 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

machinist alike are possible in only one way, as lusus
naturcBy so to say ; as casual and more or less exceptional
results of integration of matter and concomitant dissipa-
tion of motion, to use again Mr. Spencer's formula.^ We
have from that no warrant to conclude that the cosmos is
more than a lucky comer in an illimitable chaos, compar-
able to a single truly rounded pebble which we may chance
to find on a whole beach of shapeless stones. What seems
at first sight the result of intelligent guidance turns out
to be but an incidental consequence of those secondary dis-
tributions of matter and motion that accompany the pri-
mary distribution. The existence of organisms regarded
as automata — though mechanically as inexplicable, if we
take any given organism by itself, as Paley's watch on
the heath is inexplicable if there be no watchmaker — is
accounted for then only after this haphazard method.
Nevertheless, the physicist proper, confining himself to
proximate causes, declares the origin of animate ma-
chines, even more than the construction of inanimate, to
be a result which the mere laws of matter and energy
will not explain. To set against this we have nothing
but Mr. Spencer's poetic evolution of cosmic evolution,
in which even the fixity of definition demanded by logic
is infected by the subject matter; and all the terms,
like the ^ instabilities and nascencies ' they describe, are in
a state of perpetual fierdficurt^ ek aWo yivo^.

However, for the moment accepting this result as part
and parcel of the naturalistic scheme, let us see how

1 This, by the way, is very ancient doctrine. It is carried out fear-
lessly to its remotest consequences by Lucretius. Cf. De Berum Naturae
bk. iv.


PSYCHICAL ACTIVITY AS ILLUSORY 41

things stand. The organism is an automaton that has
arisen without guidance. *^ What we call spirit and spon-
taneity," to recall Huxley's striking words, is already
banished from this side. And on the other side, when
we turn to the consciousness that shadows the working
of this automaton, there is no real independence, and
only the illusion of activity is left. Though but a col-
lateral product, it still is a product; the automaton is
physically independent of the consciousness that accom-
panies it, while the consciousness in the absence of an
adequate automaton is an impossibility. We have here
then two articles of the conscious automaton doctrine
which we must specially consider: (1) the primacy and
independence of the automaton; and, (2) the illusory
character of psychical activity. I propose to defer the
first of these for a while, and for the present to con-
tinue the examination of the latter.

When Huxley^ assures us that our voluntary acts are
as purely mechanical as our reflex actions, and that
* volitions' simply accompany but do not enter into the
chain of their causation at all, the only voluntary acts
he contemplates are bodily movements. But the theory
inevitably commits him to a far more extravagant position.
If the motor processes, with which our voluntary con-
sciousness is parallel, are part of the unbroken physical
series, the cerebral processes that are attended by intel-
lectual consciousness are equally parts of that physical
series. If volitional activity is illusory, intellectual activ-
ity is illusory also. If voluntary movements are at bottom
determined by motor reflexes, then, by parity of reasoning,

^ Cf. Collected Essays, voL i, p. 241.


42 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

thought is at bottom determined by nervous connexions.
Traumen ist leicht und Denken ist schwer^ say the Ger-
mans: dreaming is easy and thinking is hard. So it
seems; but nerve currents, like other physical changes,
take always the line of least resistance. Only, when the
resistance by the easiest line is comparatively great, the
process is slower; and what we call specially thinking
is but the collateral product of the friction induced. On
the physical side there is no effort, and on the psychical
the effort is only seeming; on the physical side there
are no ends, and on the psychical, the ends do not really
control the means. Logical processes become in truth but
the concomitants of physiological processes, and physio-
logical processes ultimately resolve into the integration
of matter and the dissipation of motion, the steady down-
ward trend of inert elements back again to that equi-
libration which sometime or other, nobody can say how
or why, must have been disturbed. Once the dice have
left the box every detail of their fall is entirely and
absolutely determined; and what is true of them is true
of every minutest movement of every minutest molecule
since that first catastrophe took place. The dance of
motes in a sunbeam and the dance of molecules in a
brain are, in this respect, altogether on a par; though
in the one case we believe there is a psychical aura^
while in the other we say there is none. Simply and
solely because these brain movements are what they are,
the attendant psychical shadows, their ^ collateral prod-
ucts,' are what they are, whether what we call strength
of will or what we call moral impotence, whether pure
reason or incoherent raving.


BLIND NECESSITY 43

And wherefore shall we not call this fatalism? ^^ Be-
cause,? replies Huxley, " I take the conception of neces-
sity to have a logical, and not a physical foundation."^
This is a strange and perplexing answer and suggests
many reflexions. In the first place, if our mental condi-
tions are simply 'the symbols in consciousness of the
changes that' take place automatically in the organism,'
then logical necessitation is like the rest. It, too, is but
the shadow or symbol that actually accompanies organic
changes that actually take place. Its existence is a fact,
its supposed significance is an illusion, precisely as the
existence of ' the states of consciousness called volitions '
is a fact and their supposed efficacy an illusion. Logical
necessitation is quite as important to the spiritualistic
yiew as voluntary freedom, but the doctrine of automatism
excludes both. Accordingly Huxley argues quite consist-
ently when he says elsewhere of this idea of necessity:
''It does not lie in the observed facts and has no warranty
that I can discover elsewhere. For my part I utterly re-
pudiate and anathematise the intruder. Fact I know, and
Law I know ; but what is this Necessity save an empty
shadow of my mind's own throwing ? " * How the shadows
come to throw shadows, even empty shadows, is a nice
question. Illusion seems as hard to explain from such
premisses as necessary truth. Descartes, it will be re-
membered, traced error to the independent activity of will.
But that being gone, even throwing empty shadows
should be impossible. However, leaving this aside for

1 Methods^ p. 245. Cf . below, Lecture XVIII.

2 op. ciUi p. 161. But Huxley gives a very different version of this
conception of necessity in other places. Cf., e.g,, vol. vi, p. 286.


44 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

the present,^ let us note in the next place, that — though
not necessary in the logical sense, still — this concomitance
of mental conditions, as collateral products of the changes
which take place in the organism, is regarded as actually
inevitable. It is natural law. Granted that we are only
entitled to say that dice actually do fall, when they are
thrown from the box, not that they must fall; granted
that we may only say that their after course is entirely
and absolutely the result of the initial conditions, not that
it must be; still this is enough. Though not a logical
necessity, yet the mechanical character of brain processes
and their rigorous mechanical connexion with the other
phenomena of the universe, also fundamentally mechani-
cal, is held to be a fact. Also it is held to be a fact
that, to quote our authority, ^^the soul stands re-
lated to the body, as the bell of a dock to its works,
and consciousness answers to the sound which the bell
gives out when it is struck." Again, I say, this is
enough. There is no logical necessity, certainly, about
a material configuration and its motions. Be it on a
great scale or on a small, we can readily imagine it as
other than it is, or as not existing at all. It may be
logically as contingent as you please ; it may never have
been decreed ; in this sense there may be neither ^ ought '
nor ^ shall' nor ^must' about it. Theistic notions of
fate, one need hardly say, are altogether alien to the
naturalistic standpoint. But a conscious automaton I am
actually — on the naturalistic assumption, at all events.
For that philosophy, matter and energy are indestructi-
ble and ingenerable, and the laws of their working rigor-

1 Cf. Lecture XVm.


FREEDOM AS < FEELING' 45

ous, exact, and unalterable. And this, beyond all cavil,
is what is meant by natural or blind necessity, apdytctfy
as the Greeks called it. This physical necessitation,
according to the doctrine of conscious automatism, ap-
plies without the possibility of abatement to all our
thinking and all our acting. "We are," as Huxley
says, "but parts of the great series of causes and effects
which in an unbroken continuity composes that which
is and has been and shall be — the sum of existence."^
Neyertheless we are told that we are free, "inasmuch
as in many respects we can do as we like." But such
words do not mean at all what they seem to mean. They
refer not to purposes carried out by an efficient agent
and arbiter ; they simply indicate a special class of pleas-
ures, the pleasures that sometimes accompany motor re-
flexes. This is all they mean in fact, and all they can
mean, if conscious automatism be true. The frequent
use of illustrations, like one used long ago by Spinoza,
shews clearly how little action such ^ doing as we like'
is supposed to involve. "Imagine, if you can," said
Spinoza, "that a stone, while its motion continues, is
conscious, and knows that, so far as it can, it endeav-
ours to persist in its motion. This stone, since it is
conscious only of its own endeavour and deeply inter-
ested therein, will believe that it is perfectly free, and
continues in motion for no other reason than that it so
wills. Now such is this freedom of man's will which
every one boasts of possessing, and which consists only
in this, that men are aware of their own desires and
ignorant of the causes by which those desires are deter-

1 Huxley, Collected Essays, vol. i, p. 244.


46 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

mined."! Spinoza, it may be observed in passing, is
concerned with free will, while we are concerned with
mental activity simply. Still the point of the illustra-
tion holds for both. The activity, we are to under-
stand, is as illusory as the freedom. If the stone's
motion were due to itself, we should call the stone
active; because it does not move itself, we call it inert
and inactive. So, if the mind can really determine the
movements of the body, as it is assumed to do in volun-
tary acts, then such acts deserve the name, and the mind
is truly regarded as active. But if voluntary acts are
purely mechanical, if ^^ volitions do not enter into the
chain of causation of the action at all" they do not de-
serve the name of acts and the activity of mind is an
illusion.

And now that we have seen clearly what a very one-
sided business this conscious automatism is, now that
we are satisfied of the complete dependence (according
to this doctrine) of the epiphenomenal series on the
physical or phenomenal series, of which it is in some
mysterious way but the collateral product, let us turn
for a moment to the primary series, and recall the de-
liverances of modem dynamics concerning the sort of
activity allowed there. The word * action' and other
words, ordinarily connoting activity, occur often enough.
Thus we have: ^Action and reaction are equal and op-
posite'; ^Unlike electricities attract, and like electricities
repel, each other ' ; and so forth. But eflBciency is every-
where strenuously disclaimed. The very notion of cause

1 Letters, No. 62, quoted by Sir F. Pollock, Spinoza^ his Life and
Philosophy, p. 208.


NO MECHANICAL ACTIVITY 47

is voted a fetish to be replaced by equations, neither
side of which can with any propriety be called either
cause or effect. And accordingly the distinction of past
and future, otherwise so fraught with meaning, becomes
insignificant; the future here lies just as open to the
scientific calculator as the past; both are alike fixed
and clear. The whole course of things is one effect,
one process. An efficient cause, a primum movensj there
must have been at the beginning; but, on the other
hand, such beginning may be indefinitely far off. So
we might say of a body moving uniformly in a straight
line, that it must at one time or other have been set in
motion from without, but no one can tell how long ago ;
at this present time, however, it is under the action of
no force. Though its position in space be regarded as
changing continuously, there is no new action, no fresh
interference. And so from the standpoint of the me-
chanical theory we are told to regard the world. Since
it was first set a-going, this too has been free from the
action of external forces and has received no accession
of energy. Inert as a whole, and inert in every part,
there is nowhere either choice or striving. The physi-
cist's use of the term energy, must not mislead us, and
will not, if we bear in mind the strictly mechanical in-
terpretation which he puts upon it. The actual energy
of a given mass depends solely on its speed, and this
the body has no power to alter. It can receive only
such energy as another body imparts to it, and can
only part with such energy as another body receives
from it. The nature of such dynamical transferences is
a mystery; the law of them is exact in all cases and


48 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

always devoid of ambiguity. Matter and law are su-
preme throughout; there is nowhere either spirit or spon-
taneity. Some of the older materialists, as Toland and
Priestley, insisted on the essential activity of matter, being
misled by Newton's metaphors of attraction and repulsion
and by such notions as Boscovich's of centres of force.
But the mechanical theorists pur sang^ as we have seen^
will have none of this. The world as a whole, looked
at as they conceive it, seems comparable to nothing so
much as an upturned hourglass. The glass could not
start itself ; this, at least, was an interference from with-
out, but it was an interference before the process, not
during it. Science, which is confined to describing the
movements of the sand, can give no account of this
catastrophe, and no meaning to it. But once the glass
is turned, the downward dance of the last grain to
move is just as inevitable as that of the first; and the
several movements being fixed, any collateral conse-
quences of them must be taken to be fixed too.

There is then activity nowhere. The automaton would
belie its name if its spontaneity were not as illusory as
that which Spinoza imagined the falling sand to dream
of. How then do we come to be talking of activity at
all? If there were such a thing on the physical side,
then possibly we could understand the assertion that
on the psychical side it was non-existent. Or if mind
be really active, we can readily understand that mat-
ter, in contrast to it, should be found to be inert. When
it was a question whether the sun or the earth was to be
regarded as fixed, it was plain that one or other moved ;
but would it ever have been maintained that the motion


ILLUSION INEXPLICABLE 49

of one of them was illusory, if both had been still?
Once grasp the notion that the material world is wholly
devoid of activity, and that there is no real activity in
that mental world which is but its shadowy accompa-
niment, and there can be no question of ^^hanUhing
spontaneity,'' no call to explain away the illusion of
being "up and doing." We cannot banish the non-
existent, or expose a counterfeit of what, as genuine,
is unknowable and inconceivable. Paradoxical though
it may seem, yet even the illusion of activity and spon-
taneity is certain evidence that activity and spontaneity
somehow really exist ; and since by common consent they
are not found in the physical world, they must be in
the psychical.

And here let me go back for a moment to insist fur-
ther upon an objection just now mentioned, the full
scope of which will be still more apparent later. If the
doctrine of conscious automatism were true, this illu-
sion and error equally with logical necessitation would
be inexplicable. The apposition of brain-state and con-
comitant mind-state is declared to be the closest possi-
ble: the one keeps pace and varies with the other, as
shadows follow after, and change with, the moving fig-
ures that cast them. The clock cannot sound six when
the bell only strikes once. If, as Huxley tells us, " our
mental conditions are simply the symbols in conscious-
ness of the changes that take place automatically in
the organism," how can they belie these? Concrete par-
ticular must then correspond immediately to concrete
particular. To the continuous series of neuro%eB^ molecular
changes in the automaton, will answer pari passu, a con-

VOL. II — E


60 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

tinuous series of psychoses^ fleeting mental changes. As
collateral products of the physical chain tliese miscalled
symbols have no direct connexion, either causal or logi-
cal, with each other. Sensations or feelings, mere items
that cannot sjrmbolise anything or be either true or
false, we might call them; but judgments they could
never be. Relations of coexistence and of succession
they will have ; but the recognition and affirmation even
of these will be a fact utterly beyond, and distinct from,
them, not an item among the rest. Still more distinct
— upon another plane — from their mere existence as
collateral products, must be any significance they may
carry of existence and relations beyond their own. The
consciousness in which they are symbols is not compara-
ble with the ground on which shadows fall. Objects
may project shadows, but shadows do not project objects,
or set aside the order in which they occur for an order
that explains their occurrence.

Great as is the disparity between sensations and molec-
ular motions, it is as nothing to the disparity between
molecular motions and thought. Thus Descartes, to
whom, as we have seen, the entire doctrine of conscious
automatism is due, habitually used the same term ^4dea,"
to denote the cerebral excitation, as well as the sensa-
tion proper. The same ambiguity is found lurking
again in Locke's "new way of ideas," as Stillingfleet
called it; and was the immediate occasion of Reid's
vigorous polemic, now too much forgotten. For the
sensory idea is still very much a tertium quid^ neither
purely mental nor purely material — as even Huxley's
phrase * collateral product,' incidentally shows. But for


DESCARTES AND HUXLEY 51

Descartes, at all events, these sensory ideas were not
necessary to mental life, which he regarded as essen-
tially active and independent of matter. Even for
Locke, the intellectual elaboration of ideas depended on
the mind's own initiative and effort, in which matter as
such had no part or share. In short, the dualism for
these thinkers was not between sensations, as ideas
proper, and cerebral impressions or material ideas ; but
between mind, as active in thought and volition, and
matter as merely extended and inert. In other words,
the dualism was between matter and spirit; man being
regarded as an inexplicable blending of both. I have
no concern now to dwell upon the inconsistency of the
philosophy of Descartes in this point, — where again, by
the way, he was followed in the main by Locke. Having
emphasised the substantial duality and essential disparity
of mind and matter, a philosopher who boasted that he
had admitted nothing as true but what was clear and
distinct, ought not to have been content to say that in
human nature both were merged, as it were, into one
substance constituting literally a conscious automaton.
What it interests us to note, however, is merely this:
Simply and solely because of his intellectual and volun-
tary activity was man, for Descartes, a consciov^ autom-
aton, and for lack of such activity the brute a mere
automaton. In such intellectual and spontaneous activity
lay the essential and necessary characteristics of spirit.
Sensations and other ^passive states' were for Descartes
as inexplicable from the side of mind as they were from
the side of matter. They were not the mind's handi-
work; and they existed solely for the benefit of the


52 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

composite whole of mind and body, to indicate what
things are beneficial or hurtful to that. They were not
to be regarded as elements of knowledge; for this bj
their irreparable confusion and obscurity they were alto-
gether unfitted. Thus widely then did the conception of
man as a conscious automaton, which the founder of the.
mechanical theory entertained, differ from that which
Huxley imagined him to hold, and held himself.

The question then arises : Can this spirit and sponta-
neity that for Descartes and Locke were the inalienable
property of mind, can these be banished from the psy-
chical world, as assuredly they must be if the modem
doctrine of automatism is to stand? What are the
facts? It is all very well for the upholders of automa-
tism to say there is no room for them, but what if they
are there ? Prima facie their reality is unquestionable,
and the world at large would doubt the sanity of one
who should go about with great pains and labour to
prove it. But what then are we to say of our modem
naturalists who claim to disprove it? Every man knows
the difference between feeling and doing, between idle
reverie and intense thought, between impotent and aim-
less drifting and unswerving tenacity of purpose, being
the slave of every passion or the master of himself.
And what he finds in his own experience — this funda-
mental contrast of passivity and activity — he believes to
be shared by all his fellow-men, nay, though in less de-
veloped forms, by every Uving thing. Experience in
every case consists in interaction between individual and
environment, an alternation of sensitive impression and
motor expression, the one relatively passive, the other


wmmB


THE REALITY OF ACTIVITY 53

relatively active. Absolute activity and absolute passiv-
ity are limiting conceptions to which we have no an-
swering experience, the one being commonly attributed
to God only, and the other only to primeval matter.
Devoid alike of creative efficiency and of the inert indif-
ference of senseless clay, each man finds himself, and
believes all other sentients to be, at once sensitive and
reactive, feeling as well as receiving, and prompted
by feeling to act. It must surely ever remain futile, nay,
even foolish, to attempt to explain either receptivity or
activity; for what is there in experience more funda-
mental ? ^ And being thus fundamental, the prime staple
of all experience, it is absurd to seek to prove them real,
since in the first and foremost sense of reality the real
and they are one. What then, I ask again, are we to
say of the attempt to disprove this reality?

It is useless for our opponents to reply that they have
no intention of denying the reality of consciousness, that
on the contrary they admit an answering psychosis to
every neurosis. But they insist that the psychoses shall
be always and wholly determined by the neuroses, and the
neuroses in no sense and never determined by the psy-
choses. They claim, supported by a shallow and perverted
psychology, to treat all psychoses as affective or sensa-
tional, calling volitions feelings, and regarding them
equally with sensation as but the shadows or symbols of
molecular processes in the brain. I do not propose to
remark further on the inadequacy of this account even
of the sensational and cognitive phase of conscipusness.
But if our acts are only feelings, only symbols of changes

1 Cf. below, Lecture XIV and Lecture XIX.


64 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

which they in no wise produce, changes predetermined
in the very structure of the physical world as a mechanism,
then they are unreal, they are not what they seem to be.
If consciousness is powerless to affect the neural process,
a fortiori it is without effect on the external changes that
are consequent upon these. And this is a statement from
which the upholders of the automaton theory do not
shrink. When we say that man has subjugated nature
and changed the face of the earth, this is only to mean
that the building of cities, that all the manifold triumphs
of art and civilization, are but part and parcel of the
one vast mechanical process, to which the upheaval of
volcanoes and the formation of crystals in their cooling
crust also belong. The consciousness of aims, acts, efforts,
that accompanied those miscalled artificial processes, was
not the source of their supposed teleological character-
istics. The physical series all through has been self-
sufficient, free from all extra-physical direction, alike
where a psychical series has been its collateral product,
and where it has not. Everjrthing teleological and di-
rective is either absent or recedes asymptotically into the
indefinite past. And yet we are not to conclude that
the consciousness of activity is illusory because the psy-
chical series of ^ feelings,' we are to understand, like the
physical series, goes along of itself. Not to insist further
on the fact that this strict parallelism is never upheld,
that the psychical series only goes along of itself in the
sense of not reacting upon the phjrsical series on which
it is functionally dependent, let us ask : What according
to this view is the psychical series?

In 1868 Professor Huxley wrote these words: "We


■a^F^»


HUXLEY AT VARIANCE WITH HIMSELF 66

live in a world which is full of misery and ignorance,
and the plain duty of each and all of us is to try to
make the little comer he can influence somewhat less
miserable and somewhat less ignorant than it was before
he entered it. To do this effectually it is necessary to
be fully possessed of only two beliefs: the first, that the
order of Nature is ascertainable by our faculties to an
extent which is practically unlimited; the second, that
our volition counts for something as a condition of the
course of events."^ With this, I take it, most of us
agree; but what are we to say of the following emen-
dation of this second belief substituted by Professor
Huxley as a foot-note in 1892? Our volition, "or to
speak more accurately," he then added, "the physical
state of which our volition is the expression ? " * Not, be
it remarked, the physical state which is the expression
of our volition, whereby it might * count for something '
in the course of events. Not this, but the physical state
of which our volition is itself the expression is the new
gloss I Is it possible to make these two statements mean
the same thing? For my part I say it is not possible.
Is it possible to prove the earlier statement illusory?
Again I say it is not possible. Illusory experience obvi-
ously implies, as I have already urged, a counterpart
experience by which its falsity is made manifest; abso-
lute illusion, like absolute motion or rest, cannot be ex-
perienced. The contrast between receptivity and activity
is essential to the experience of either of them, that is
to experience at all. A paralytic is the subject of illu-
sion when, having willed to make a movement, he is

1 Collected Essays, vol. i, p. 163. * Z.c, note.


66 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

unaware that no movement has resulted; but such
illusion is possible, only because he has previously found
his volition effective. The spectators of an epileptic under
seizure may be under the illusion that the man is acting
violently, but again only because they have previously seen
like violent action in persons who were responsible. The
conscious automaton theory combines and generalises
these two cases of illusion, so as to exclude the very
experiences which makes the illusoriness apparent. On
the psychical side, according to them, all our volitions are
like those of the paralytic; on the physical side all our
overt movements are like those of the epileptic. A con-
scious automaton is thus like a paralytic and an epileptic
rolled into one, the impotent volitions of the first keeping
step with the motor discharges of the second. To com-
plete the figure we must, as I have lately remarked, extend
it to intellectual activity too, and resolve thinking into an
orderly raving or reverie that accompanies physiological
' cerebration.'

But let us go back to the question : What exactly is
the psychical series? for the sake of which I was led
to quote Huxley's comment on himself. According to
his unamended creed, we find volitions conditioning the
course of external events; whereas according to his ad-
dress on Animal Automatism, a volition is a ^feeling'
merely: it is not the cause of a so-called * voluntary
act' but "a symbol of a state of the brain." But how
then, we ask, can it ^ count for something as a condi-
tion of the course of events'? If the psychical series
cannot intrude into the physical, then the course of
events, into which volition enters as a determinant, must


> ^ ■ p ■ I


HUXLEY AND HUXLEY 57

itself be part of the psychical series. Huxley, presum-
ably, decides for this alternative, for on proceeding with
his exposition of agnosticism he tells us that ^^in itself
it is of little moment whether we express the phenomena
of matter in terms of spirit, or the phenomena of spirit
in terms of matter."^ But what in the present case are
we to make of this result? It is plain that we shall
now have got two psychical series; one to which the
individual's volition directly belongs, and another con-
sisting of the general course of events, to which it does
not directly belong. When, then, we describe this gen-
eral course of events from the spiritual standpoint, the
individual's volition counts for something, as condition-
ing that course, and each man's environment, his ^little
comer,' is affected by what he thinks and says and does.
When, on the other hand, we describe this same course
of events from the material standpoint, there is no place
for such activity and efficiency. But surely these two
^highest truths,' as Huxley apparently means to call
them, are as hopelessly at variance as were the Aristo-
telian and Christian dogmas which the scholastics were
wont to maintain side by side. Had Huxley too, we
wonder, a doctrine in reserve like theirs of a Hwofold
truth'? Did he too mean to advocate a sort of ^book-
keeping by double entry,' one in spiritualistic terminology,
and one in materialistic? Anyhow the notion of a con-
scious automaton, which is said to result from combining
the two, proves to be a palpable contradiction. If we
cannot give the lie to our direct experience, whence all
our conceptions of activity and the realisation of ends

^ o,e.^ p. 164.


58 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

are derived, and if also we cannot deny the unbroken
concatenation of all things, whether organic or inorganic,
in accordance with strictly mechanical laws, we are face
to face with a most serious antinomy — the old antinomy
of the teleological and the mechanical, in a word.

Coming upon this antinomy in this wise, the first step
towards a solution that suggests itself is to determine
which is epistemologically the more fundamental stand-
point, that in which the spiritualistic terminology is
employed, or that in which we employ the materialistic.
We cannot be content to leave them on a par, confronting
each other but in irreconcUable antagonism. This would
only aggravate the antinomy. The conscious automaton
theory, as we have seen, does not leave them on a par,
but decides to stand ultimately by the latter. ^^The
materialistic terminology," Huxley has told us, ^^is in
every way to be preferred. For it connects thought with
the other phenomena of the universe, • . • whereas the
alternative, or spiritualistic terminology, is utterly barren,
and leads to nothing but obscurity and confusion of
ideas.*' No wonder then that naturalism, seeming to find
clearness and distinctness on the one side, and on the
other obscurity and confusion, ventures to discredit the
plain testimony of experience and to declare our power
over nature illusory, spite of the violent absurdities to
which such a declaration leads and the inconsistencies it
entails upon the naturalistic philosophy itself. We are
thus brought again to the second of the two positions
that we had reserved for special examination, the assumed
primacy of the physical series, on which the position that
we have just examined, the denial of psychical activity


MECHANISM AND TELEOLOGY 59

and initiatiye, is based. But I do not propose to enter
upon the discussion of that second position at once. It
leads so directly to the subject of agnosticism that I
will ask you to consider first another question which
wiU afford us a convenient opportunity of gathering up
some of the results of this long examination of naturalism.
So far it has been assumed that the mechanical theory
shuts us up to a rigorous determinism incompatible
with teleology. This is unquestionably the prevalent
view, but is there no escape from it? Is there no way
in which mind can influence matter without interfering
as it were ^miraculously* with mechanical laws and so far
subverting the supposed foundations of natural science?
Personally I believe there is no way. If the Laplacean
conception which we have taken as the text of this
whole discussion is to hold in its entirety, it is even
more certain that there is in the physical world no
room for man, than it is that, as Laplace boasted, there
is no need for God. We must say — and the naturalists
we have seen have had the courage to say it: The
physical world is a complete whole in itself, and goes
along altogether by itself. We must say: The very
same laws fundamentally, that determine the varying
motion of the solar system, bring together from the
four comers of the earth the molecules that from time
to time join in the dance we know as the brain of a
Dante creating immortal verse, or as the brain of a
Borgia teeming with unheard-of crimes. And finally
we must say: The presence of mental epiphenomena is
as irrelevant and immaterial to the one result as is
their absence to the other.


60 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

Nevertheless attempts have frequently been made —
and are continually being renewed — to find in the me-
chanical theory itself some loophole of escape from
these absurdities. The first of these was broached by
Descartes himself in the famous doctrine that the soul
from its punctual seat in the pineal gland directed the
movements of the animal spirits as it willed. The
quantity of motion, the product of mass x velocity,
Descartes maintained was constant, but its direction he
imagined was more or less indeterminate. This was
afterwards shewn to be a mistake. Descartes, in fact,
like Mr. Herbert Spencer after him, was ignorant of the
full meaning of the principle known as the Conservation
of Momentum. According to this principle, however,
the direction of a motion is as completely determined
by mechanical conditions as its speed is. The one, as
little as the other, can be altered without an external
force; and in mechanics, external force implies a second
mass moving with an equal and opposite acceleration to
that of the mass said to be moved. Had Descartes
but realized this, urged Leibniz, he must have seen
the mechanical impossibility of the soul directing the
flow of animal spirits in the way he supposed; he must
have come round to the doctrine of the preestablished
harmony as the only solution.^ The much simpler plan
of denying the unconditional supremacy of the laws of
motion was hidden from Leibniz, though seen by Kant.
But more of this hereafter.

Other attempts set out from cases in which the de-
termination of a movement, or of the course it shall

1 Cf. Leibniz, Thiodic^e, §§ 60, 61.


SEARCH FOR MECHANICAL LOOPHOLES 61

take, are said to be theoretically possible without the
expenditure of energy. Take a body at rest in a posi-
tion of completely unstable equilibrium: you may sup-
pose it as large as you like, yet the work to be done in
upsetting it may be less than any assignable amount,
have, that is to say, no limit but zero. Perhaps the
most impressive instance of this kind is that of the
blasting of Hell Gate on the Hudson River some twelve
years ago when, a little girl laying a jGuiger on an elec-
tric button, some million tons of earth and water were
shot upwards with a deafening roar. The brain change
that determined that finger movement was a case of
disturbed equilibrium perhaps more wonderful still, in-
finitesimal compared with the resulting eruption — and
that might have been indefinitely greater than it was.
Yet there is no ground for saying that even the inex-
pressibly delicate brain discharge was due to an initial
disturbance involving no transference of energy. To
suppose that matter in however unstable a condition
can be set in motion without receiving any energy from
without is not to find a loophole within the mechanical
theory, but to deny the absolute validity of its most
fundamental conception — that of inertia. If such an
assumption is legitimate, the first law of motion is not
true. Whether it is true or not is another matter; but
as the attempts in question take this law for granted,
they are obviously fallacious, confounding, in fact, an
indefinitely small quantity with no quantity at all.

The other case mentioned is somewhat different. I
can best describe it by a brief quotation from Max-
well : " The dynamical theory of a conservative material


62 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

system shews us that in general the present configura-
tion and motion determine the whole course of the
system, exceptions to this rule occurring only at the
instants when the system passes through certain iso-
lated and singular pLes, at which a sMctly inEnitesi-
mal force may determine the course of the system to any
one of a finite number of equally possible paths, as the
pointsman at a railway junction directs the train to one
set of rails or another."^ It is assumed that such me-
chanically indeterminate phases predominate throughout
the organic world, and that to life or mind belongs the
power of determining along which of two or more me-
chanically indifferent paths the elements of an organised
system shall go. Brain-cells in particular are supposed
to be systems of this kind. The question is not now,
whether such guidance exists, but whether there is
any reality, corresponding to dynamical equations with
singular solutions, to which on this aJ3Sumption such
guidance is confined. The question, in other words, is
whether the mechanical theory leaves any such loophole
for extra-physical intervention. The answer, it seems,
must be No. For that theory does not admit material
systems in isolation, but insists on treating the whole
material universe as one; it is only in thought that we
can abstract one part from the rest. Even granting that
data may then be wanting to furnish an unambiguous
forecast, all such indetermination, it is held, would dis-
appear as soon as other systems, or the rest of the uni-
verse, were taken into account.

^ Bevelationa of Paradoxical Philosophy, Nature, vol. xix, p. 141.
Collected Papers, vol. ii, p. 760.


LOOPHOLES NOT ADMITTED 63

Many other endeavours, more or less subtle and in-
genious, have been made to find a place for voluntary
and purposive action within the mechanical scheme,
taken thus in its entirety. Mathematicians are the
proper judges of the validity of such attempts, and
apparently they reject them all. If only matter in
motion can set matter in motion it is plain that mind,
which ex hypothesi is not matter in motion, cannot do
it. If, taking the universe into account, there are no un-
balanced forces, then whenever a given mass undergoes
a certain acceleration, i,e. is subject to an impressed
force, another mass simultaneously undergoes an equal
and opposite acceleration, i.e. is likewise subject to an
impressed force. Calling the one the action, and the
other the reaction, it then becomes absurd to suppose
the reaction to be a mass-acceleration, and yet to contend
that the action is a volition, unless such volition is but
an impotent ^aspect' of the opposite mass-acceleration,
which is the very supposition to be avoided. It would
seem, therefore, that there is no middle course left to us.
Either the universe is mechanical or it is teleological ; it
is not likely to be a mixture of the two. But to justify
naturalism, the mechanical theory must explain every-
thing: what it does not explain must be unreal and
illusory. Naturalism, we have seen, has for its base of
operations the primacy of the physical series ; and, setting
out from this position, it undertakes " the gradual banish-
ment from all regions of human thought of what we call
spirit and spontaneity." If it cannot succeed altogether,
it must fail altogether. In the next lecture I propose
to gather up the results of our inquiry on this point


64 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

and to offer some final reflections which they suggest.
We shall then be prepared in later lectures to contest
the assumption that for knowledge the primacy of the
psychical standpoint is, as Huxley has declared it, ^^ utterly
barren and leading to nothing but obscurity and confusion
of ideas." It will then be not so much with naturalism
as with agnosticism that we shall have to reckon.


LECTURE XIII

SUMMARY AND EEFLBXIONS

Abstract Dynamics does not furnish us with a Natural Philosophyy
but with a descriptive instrument of uncertain range. Facts cannot be
maimed to fit it, but it must be modified to suit tJiem.

Even what can be mechanically described need not be, and eocperience
may convince us that it is not, mechanically produced.

It is impossible to divest living beings of ^* internal determinations
and grounds of determination.^^ Descartes' distinction of causa formalis
and causa eminens. Physics recognises only the former, and resolves
that into an equation. The latter, being excluded from its premisses, is
supposed to be excluded from existence. On this fallacy the doctrine of
conscious automatism is built up. Inertia not a fact but an ideal.

Conservation of energy essentially a law of excTianges. That the
whole energy of the universe is constant in amount and 'phenomenal '
in character, not proven.

The theoretical physicist having eliminated causation, must not dogma-
tise about it. The crux of irreversibility suggests th<xt the world is not
a mere mecTianism. The physicist only describes the utterances of real
things and the after-course of these utterances, so far as 10 alone. He
is obliged to admit interference, but prefers a maximum breach of conti*
nuityfar off rather than orderly direction now.

Such direction impossible if all the beings in the objective universe
are inert. No warrant for preferring dead things rather than living as
the type of such beings; and if we want to understand the world and
not merely to calculate it, we must start from some other type.

The mathematical bias the source of naturalism. It can only be
corrected by observing ?u>w it has arisen. Mechanism by itself is chaotic
and meaningless. With mind first come law and order. And mind we
have seen implied as a Yia directrix, at least, in evolution, in natural
selection, in psychophysics.

VOL. II — F 66


66 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

We have accepted the decision of the upholders of
the mechanical theory of the world that in that theory
no place is left for consciousness to intervene as a de-
terminant of material changes. We have seen — as a
moment's reflexion suffices to show — that such suppo-
sitions are incompatible with the strict premisses on
which that theory rests. If the material world is in
itself a complete whole ^ if all its changes are but trans-
ferences of a common stock of energy constant in amount
from one to another of a common stock of vehicles or
receptacles, also constant; if such transferences are deter-
mined by nothing but relations of time and space and
number; and if time and space are continuous and uni-
form throughout, — there is no room for ambiguity, no
opportunity for meddling, and no possibility of control.
But we have not accepted those premisses, and are
therefore free to urge this result as an argument
against naturalism, which has accepted them.

The mechanical theory of the world we have traced to
a natural prejudice supposed to be the special infirmity
of metaphysicians — that of ascribing objective existence
to abstractions. Now, if ever there were abstractions, the
time and space and mass of abstract dynamics are such.
In the earlier lectures I endeavoured to follow the prog-
ress of the mechanical theory, as one after another of
the qualitative diversities we perceive, were brought
within the range of quantitative description, till what
at the outset was avowedly but an aspect of sensible
bodies became at last the entire reality of their ulti-
mate constituents. How much more is this earth than
a mass-point with a certain numerical value, moving in


f^f^t


DYNAMICS NOT PHILOSOPHY 67

accordance with dynamical equations among the other
mass-points of the solar system? Yet there are people
who imagine that when they have resolved the whole
earth and all that happens on it into motions of such
mass-points, traceable by pure mathematical analysis,
they have attained to a philosophy of nature. The much
decried thing per se thus turns up where we should least
have expected to find it: ^what actually goes on be-
hind what we see and feel ' is, we are to believe, simply
the motions of one ultimate fluid characterised through-
out by negative attributes. Others, whose faith is not
equal to this resolution of the phenomenal world into
"non-matter in motion," have seen what we take to
be the truth, — viz., that mechanism is not the one
reality behind the veil of phenomena. This, which
is the mechanical theory, they repudiate as we have
done. Abstract d3mamics is for them not a natural
philosophy, but a hypothetical descriptive scheme, origi-
nally devised and continually amended so as to sum-
marise, in the simplest and most comprehensive form,
the movements that occur in nature. If there are facts
that do not conform to it, or only conform approxi-
mately, so much the worse for it; it must go or be
modified; the facts will stand. If, again, there are facts
beyond its purview, that is not a reason for chopping
experience in two, but a plain proof that experience
transcends its range, and that the world is not funda-
mentally mechanical. To suppose that the rigorous
determinism deducible from the abstract scheme — for
the simple reason that it has been put into its funda-
mental premisses — must apply also to the real world it


68 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

has been devised to describe, is just as absurd as —
to take a very trivial illustration — it would be to say
that a man must fit his coat, and not that the coat
must fit the man. There may be nothing in the worid
answering to the conception of inert mass; it may be
as pure a limiting non-entity as the prima materia of
philosophical speculation. And as to the conservation
of the energy analytically distinguished from it, this
again is but a regulative principle, an idea, not a fact.
It is impossible to deprive a body of all its energy and
so measure its amount; impossible, again, to say what
latent forms of energy there may be, to which our
senses furnish no clue, direct or indirect. On both
these points, the assumed reality of mechanical deter-
minism and the true character of the principle of
energy-conservation, it will be well to enlarge a little.
To begin with the first: —

The physical investigator is never in the happy posi-
tion of the mathematical theorist, face to face with the
ultimate elements of mass in pure space and time, and,
like a demiurge completely master of all his data,
able to assign to each element its share of energy and
its position. The mathematical theorist emplojB direct
methods, as when, to take the simplest case, two forces
being given, he ascertains their resultant; the physicist
is largely shut up to inverse methods which leave room
for numerous solutions, as when, a force being given, its
possible components have to be ascertained. Hence in
his endeavours to describe physical phenomena in purely
mechanical terms, he is driven to imagine various me-
chanical devices to simulate them, and has to trust that


REALITY OF MECHANICAL DETERMINISM 69

crucial phenomena will gradually eliminate such of these
devices as are halt and lame. And when we reflect that
in mass, space, and time, the physical speculator has at
his disposal a sixfold continuum, we begin to realise
that there need be no end to hypothetical mechanisms.
Leibniz, for example, did not hesitate to affirm that in
a living body every smallest part is a machine, though
such body be divided ad infinitum.^ Our modern physi-
cists, however, require all this apparatus to describe
even bodies that are not living. But let us imagine, as
Leibniz did, that we could magnify an organic cell or
nucleus till we could examine it in detail, as we might
a factory full of machines ; and let us suppose somewhere
within it a being that really did move spontaneously,
changing its direction free from any impressed force.
What would the theoretical physicist say to this? With-
out a moment's hesitation he would quote his laws of
motion and postulate a second body (or massHsystem) with
an equal and opposite acceleration; though no evidence
— or, as he would say, no other evidence — of such a
body, were forthcoming. Just so the Pythagoreans with
their preconception of numerical fitness postulated an
avrlxOfov or Invisible Earth to complete the decade of
heavenly spheres, thereby, as Aristotle said, "forcing
phenomena into accordance with certain reasonings and
notions of their own." ^ This comparison, though it may
seem outrageous, is just in the one respect that the law
of inertia, when its scope is made coextensive with that

^ Monadologie, § 64.

3 Cf . note by W. H. Thompson in his edition of Archer Butler's Lectures
on AndefU Philosophy, vol. i, p. 841.


70 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

of the entire world, animate and inanimate, is assuredly
a preconceived postulate and not an ascertained fact.
What is ascertained fact is merely that mass-aggregates,
such as planets, billiard-balls, and other mechanical para-
digms, conform to this law as far as they can be
observed. That the bodies of Saint Paul, Christopher
Columbus or John Howard conformed to it is assuredly
not an ascertained fact. Let us, however, return to our
physical theorist in the magnified protoplasmic cell, and
let us assume that the movements of the spontaneous
being we have supposed him to find there manifest
all that diversity and discontinuity which commonly
characterise living things ; further, that these move-
ments concur with certain states of the machines among
which the being moves, while these in turn seem affected
by its presence. What now would the physicist say?
Certainly not, if he abides by his principles: ''Here is a
controlling and initiating mind"; nor even: "Here is
a conscious automaton." Rather he would say: "Self-
determined motion is for me a sheer impossibility. This
complexity of motion points to an equally complex
mechanism. Action at a distance, again, my principles
do not allow. Obviously, therefore, there is some ethe-
real medium here ; so much the relations of this being's
movements to those of the machines compel me to
believe. Let us imagine that erratic being magnified
in its turn as the cell was before, and we may hope to
invent some concealed machinery which might account
for its unpredictable behaviour."

With such powers of indefinite magnification and in-
definite multiplication of hypothetical mechanism, it is


/


MECHANICAL DESCRIPTION HYPOTHETICAL 71

possible, I say, that the most complex vital phenomena
the physiologist can ever discover could be mechanically
described. But it would not follow, even then, that they
and all beside them really were mechanical. To estab-
lish that, every infinitesimal mass concerned must be
ascertained and ear-marked, the path of each one must
be traced, and there must be no hidden machinery, no
resort to statistical averages, no ignoration of coordinates,
or the like. If the physicist, starting thus from the
very beginning, could directly shew that the result
accorded with his descriptive scheme, the verification
would be complete; the hypothesis would have become
fact and the abstractness be. at an end. Thereafter the
idea of psychical guidance would not conflict with a
theory, it would be refuted by facts. Meanwhile, how-
ever, nothing of this kind has been proved; and, fur-
ther, it is obvious nothing of this kind ever can be
proved. But, on the other hand, there is still no pros-
pect of direct physical evidence to shew where psychical
interference actually does occur, and where in conse-
quence the molecular movements in a living body
cease to be entirely determined by mechanical relations.
The question on this plane is an open one, albeit the
difficulties besetting the mechanical theory even of or-
ganic processes seem steadily increasing.

At this point Eant's declaration, '^ Hylozoism would be
the death of aU natural philosophy," recurs to us. ^ " On
the law of inertia and its conservation," we have found
him saying, "rests entirely all possibiUty of a proper
science of nature," — with which name he dignifies this

1 Cf . above, Lecture VI, p. 177.


72 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

abstract descriptive scheme, assumed by him to be a priori.
Again I say we must allow that this is so, and again I
would ask: And what then ? Are we to conclude that all
experience would lapse into unintelligible confusion un-
less living bodies were "absolutely devoid of internal
determinations and grounds of determination ? " ^ But our
own activity — which Naturalism cannot seriously gainsay
— is only possible, and the chief est part of our experience
is only intelligible, on the supposition that living bodies
are not thus devoid of self-determination. This, I would
insist, is not a fact to prove or to explain, but one to dis-
prove and explain away for those who can. What then
if we deny that a living man or even a living mouse, is
merely like the solar system for the astronomer, a material
^gg^g^^ devoid of internal determination? Two or
three things follow. For one, there is an end of the
mechanical theory as conceived by Laplace. " If we seek
the cause of any change of matter whatever in life, we
shall have,'' says Kant, "to seek it at once in another
substance, distinct from matter, although bound up with
it." Laplace's &med intelligence then will have, as I
have already said,' to add to his world-formula, at the
moment he obtains it, a complete foreknowledge of all
those changes of matter which mind will induce, assum-
ing, as we reasonably may, that the formula itself will
take account of all changes so produced up to that
moment. Still, when we remember that even the chemical
atom, which might have some claim to rank as one of

1 Cf . Kant, Metaphysische AnfangagrUnde der Naturwissenschqfty Hart-
enBtem*8 edition, Sftmmtliche Werke, voL iv, p. 439.
« Cf . Lecture VI, p. 176.


^r—^^TT'


FORMAL AND EMINENT CAUSES 73

Laplace's " real beings " has to be resolved into a complex
of prime atoms and these into mass-points before the me-
chanical theory can have full sway, nay, that even the ether
must submit to analysis, it is obvious that the feats of the
Laplacean intelligence cease altogether to be conceivable.
In short, we may take it as definitely conceded by the
physicists themselves that descriptive hypothesis takes
the place of real theory.

Another consequence of admitting that mind can con-
trol matter, will be that somewhere within the living
organism physical events will happen that have other than
physical conditions. Whether '^natural science proper"
will ever penetrate far enough into this arcanum area-
novum to find itself face to face with such a ^ miracle '
remains to be seen. But up to those uncertain limits it
will still have a vast range and unfettered scope. And
besides, if it renounces its old pretensions of being a nat-
ural philosophy, abjures the categories of substance and
cause, and only claims to describe events, it might still
be possible to express abstractly in mechanical terms effects
that in fact were not mechanical. Such a procedure I
endeavoured just now to picture. There is an old scho-
lastic distinction much used by Descartes that may serve
to put this in a clearer light. When a cause was related
to its effect as a seal, say, to its impress, it was a cauBa
formaltB ; when, as the engraver to the seal, it was a cau%a
eminens. Thus if one body is set in motion by another
the motion is produced formaliter in the Cartesian sense ;
but if a body were set in motion by mind such motion
would be produced eminenter. To suppose that every
motion is mechanically produced would then be much on


74 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

a par with supposing that all pictures are printed, and
none drawn; seals always moulded, and never engraved
by hand. The principle — a priori fallacy, as Mill with
some reason calls it — that like can only be produced by
like, so excluding eminent causes, lies, as we have seen,
at the base of the whole doctrine of psychophysical
parallelism. It is then but an easy step to the exclu-
sion of cause altogether ; especially so, when the processes
concerned consist simply in the transference of motion
from one mass to another. This step, as we have
seen, abstract dynamics has at length taken. A force is
no longer a cause — " whatever produces or tends to pro-
duce a change in a body's state of rest or motion''; it is
merely the effect or event, dynamically described, as mass-
acceleration. When, then, it is said that motion that is
not transferred motion is mechanically inconceivable, this is
but an analytical statement pure and simple. It amounts
to saying that it is inconceivable that what is inert should
yet be active, or, more generally, that you cannot get the
combination ah d out of the elements a, ft, and c. On the
strength of such truisms to deny that there is anything
active, to deny the existence of other elements than a, (,
and ^, to deny that matter is ever moved save by matter
in motion, is palpably a most unwarranted assumption,
the only statement logically permissible being that the
descriptive apparatus called abstract mechanics cannot
recognise such motion. Yet on such an assumption the
whole doctrine of psychophysical parallelism is mainly
built up; reject that, and there is no serious argument
le{t.
But, coming now to the second point — the precise


CONSERVATION OF ENERGY 76

import and range of the principle of the conservation of
energy. If mind can initiate or control the movements
of matter, in other words, if a living body is not inert
(whether because ^another substance, distinct from mat-
ter,' is bound up with it, or for any other reason), shall
we not have to set this principle of energy aside? This
seems a formidable problem. But in the first place, let
us recall a distinction we have already made. It is one
thing to ascertain the mechanical equivalents of various
forms of energy and to assert the absolute constancy of
these equivalents as part of the general postulate that
nature is uniform. It is another thing altogether to
assume that the quantity of energy in the universe is
finite; and that, being finite, it neither increases nor
decreases according to some law, or for some sufficient
reason. The attitude of physicists towards this question
is very much the attitude of an imaginary economist,
who, knowing nothing of the production or consumption
of wealth, should suppose that there were no economic
laws but those of exchange. But now, even in a science
so imperfectly mathematical as economics, it is still pos-
sible to work out demand and supply curves, spite of
the fact that the laws of production and consumption
more or less complicate them. In the grander economics
of nature the relations might be similar. What the
physicist calls its working capacity or energy may or may
not be constant; he cannot tell, for him it is an indefinite
amount. He only knows that its rates of exchange or
transformation are regular within the very narrow limits
of his observation ; and even within these limits, lie
is strictly confined to the average results of innumerable


76 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

individual transactions. If, spite of this ignorance, physi-
cists assume that the total energy of the universe is
constant, much as a Cheapside crossing-sweeper assumes
the population of London to be, their only justification
is its simplicity, and the sufficiency of the assumption
for their purpose. But it is no more a necessity of
thought than the assumption of the crossing-sweeper.
And how often in the history of science have false and
hasty assumptions been called axioms, only because they
were simple and could not be proved?

Of course if we take ^the high priori road' of Mr.
Spencer and Professor Tait, and affirm that the crea-
tion or destruction of energy is as inconceivable as
the creation or destruction of substance, we are so far
safe. On the inconsistency and futility of this recourse
to metaphysics and the noumenal I have already dwelt.
It is not with Mr. Spencer's Unknowable Force, that
persists but cannot be measured, that we have to do,
but with its knowable manifestations that do not per-
sist but are transformed continually. All we have then
is, first, the axiom that from nothing nothing comes, and
secondly, the experimental determination of the quanti-
tative equivalents of certain of those manifestations.
From such data it is plainly impossible to prove that
this phenomenal energy in the universe is fixed in
amount. And this the physicists themselves are begin-
ning to see more and more clearly, and frankly to
admit. Those who insist that the quantity of this
energy in the universe must be constant seem to me
in the same position as one who should maintain that
the quantity of water in a vast lake must be constant


ENERGY AS PHENOMENAL 77

merely because the surface was always level, though he
could never reach its shores nor fathom its depth. We
must remember too that this assumed constancy is only
kept on its legs at all by counting in, first, the so-called
potential energy, which is not actually energy at all nor
mechanically of the same dimensions, — capacity for work
and capacity for capacity for work not being on a par;
by counting in, secondly, dissipated energy, which is
capacity for work forever devoid of opportunity; and
by allowing, finally, that in every material system there
is an indeterminate amount of latent energy, of which
nothing is known.

But whether the whole energy in the world be con-
stant or not, still if mind is to initiate material move-
ments, must it not itself be a form of energy and have
its equivalent transformations into other forms like the
rest? An objection of this kind^ may be expected at
this point, and it will appear unanswerable to those who
accept the mechanical scheme as a complete and rounded
whole. But this is just the conception we are primarily
concerned to combat. Is there nothing beyond this ever-
lasting transference of motion from one moving mass to
another?

When I was a child my mind was much exercised,
because I could never find the beginning of a piece of
string; all the string I could get hold of had had the
beginning cut off. I was in a fair way to conclude that
string had no beginning, but that every piece was cut
off another piece, in turn cut off another, and so on
forever. But one day, passing a rope-walk, there to my

1 Cf. above, Lecture XI, p. 23.


78 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

delight I saw string emerging from a bundle of tow
that was not string at all. Now Naturalism seems to
have taken up a position analogous to that into which
I was lapsing, and unfortunately there is no such easy
way of escape. Naturalism reduces phenomena ultimately
to motions determined by other motions, and so without
end. It sees in the world but a variegated tapestry of
illimitable extent, the warp and woof of which are
motions. Keeping to the facts discernible from its
standpoint, it fails either by observation or experiment
to discover new threads entering the fabric; then, turn-
ing to ideas, it devises a descriptive scheme, according
to which such entry is inconceivable. Yet its *day of
Damascus,' to use a phrase of Du Bois-Reymond, might
any time have dawned upon it, as it did half dawn
upon him. The simple reflexion that the fact, before
it could never establish a negative ; and again that ideas
or theory must conform to facts, not facts to theory, —
such reflexions, I say, would have sufficed to shew that
the determination of motion otherwise than by antecedent
motion is in itself neither impossible nor absurd. Then,
with the scales of prejudice thus far cleared from its
eyes, the one plain fact of voluntary activity might have
been welcomed as a truth instead of being scouted as an
illusion.

At all events these two things seem certain — that
mind does somehow direct the movements of matter,
and that the constancy of the phenomenal energy of
the universe is neither a fact established by induction
nor a necessity of thought. The effects of psychical
determinations of the motions of inert matter, if matter


CAUSES AND EQUATIONS DISTINCT 79

be indeed inert, would, presumably, persist as truly as
the effects upon it of antecedent motions persist. Once
within the fabric which the physicist seeks to describe,
they would be indistinguishable from other effects. Nay,
as we have seen, they never could be distinguishable so
long as phjrsical description is confined to the use of an
abstract scheme, and cannot, even in the working of a
crowbar — to recall Thompson and Tait's instance —
come to close quarters with all the causes concerned;
but must acknowledge even that apparently simple
question to be in its completeness 'an infinitely trans-
cendent problem.' If the exponents of modern dynamics
were content to recognise causes and to describe force
as Newton did, then mental direction would be a force.
If, however, the conception of cause is to be eliminated,
that description by equations may be possible, we have
no right to object; nor indeed any ground to complain.
Only the physicist who, in order to be mathematical,
dispenses with causes must not dogmatise about them.
But of course no one supposes that causes are absent
from physical events: causes are only ignored. They
are ignored, first, because mass-motions being alone con-
sidered, quantitative relations suffice ; and again because,
such motions being both reciprocal and reversible, we
can not only say the cause equals the effect but it be-
comes indifferent which we call cause and which effect.
But when qualitative processes or processes of develop-
ment are in question this is no longer possible. The
internal nature, both of agent and patient, has to be
taken into account and the time-order is essential. But
inert mass has no qualities; and the conservation of


80 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

energy, regarded as a mechanical principle,^ is simply
the maxim, Causa ceqtuit effectum^ applied where only
mass-motions as quantities are concerned and where the
masses are assumed to be indestructible. This is sub-
stantially the result to which the expositions of Meyer
and Joule reduce it, as in the earlier lectures we have
already seen. In this form, however, it is but a logical
principle. It affords no basis for assertions about the
total capacity for work in the universe, nor for asser-
tions about its possible sources.

Such source or sources there must surely be; and if
we are to call them too ' energy ' the word must carry a
different signification from that which the physicist gives
to mv^/2. As there are no known processes by which
dissipated energy can be returned to its source as
available energy, may it not be that available energy
is derived from a latent source to which it cannot be
physically returned? The reversibility, in short, which
a purely mechanical scheme presupposes and which yet
the actual world does not permit, at once suggests to
the open-minded that there is more in heaven and earth
than is dreamt of by the naturalistic philosophy. But,
of course, in whatever way we suppose changes of
motion not determined by precedent motion, such sup-
position, it will be said, is tantamount to regarding the
world as not simply a mechanism. Certainly, I admit
this, and urge that the absence of reversibility equally
implies it. The solar system would work just as well,

^ The upholders of the new science of Energetics contend, of course,
for a wider interpretation. But they have still to make their way. Cf.
Lecture VT.


IRREVERSIBILITr 81

revolving from east to west, as it does revolving from
west to east. Reverse the spring, and a watch would
go just as well backwards. So generally in theory ; as
much indeed is implied in treating causes and effects as
mere sides of an equation, in which all the signs can be
changed. Time-order does not enter. So in theory, I
say, but never so in fact. How to get rid of this dis-
crepancy is still, I understand, an anxious problem for
the mathematical physicist. Meanwhile are we not
justified in suspecting that there is something more in
physical causation than can find its way into dynamical
equations? The absurdity of a reversal of organic pro-
cesses is evident, the tree shrinking back into the seed,
life beginning in a corpse and ending with a birth,
eve^og g.U„gic^^„.n„lng l»ct^M, natural s.
lection and survival of the fittest not excepted. And
what of the psychical series as a collateral product of
the physical in such a case? This question brings us
to the point. Facing the future we are efficient, facing
the past we are helpless. What is done cannot be
undone; over what is still to do we can give or with-
hold our fiat. Capacity for work — a mere Svva/iif: —
then passes into veritable iv^pyeia. But what is done
makes a new doing possible, so

That men may rise on stepping-stones
Of their dead selves to higher things.

Looking at the world in this wise, may it not be that the
physicist deals only with the utterances of what we may
call the insides of things ; and dealing with them only and
taking them for all, is thus led to deny inside existence

TOL. II — O


82 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

altogether? We have seen abundantlj how abstract his
whole procedure is, how reality slips through his fingers
as he resolves atoms into ethereal vortices, and ether
into an universal plenum as devoid of internal differ-
ence as empty space itself. And then, having got this
far and all question of an ^inside' being utterly banished,
he is forced at length — in open violation of his guid-
ing principle, continuity — to look to something extra-
physical or metaphysical to endow his medium with
motion. Is it less scientific to regard such interferences
as continuous and orderly? Mind must agitate and
direct the mass, it seems; why then, unless to simplify
mechanical description, has the physicist, to quote 'Pro-
fessor Tait, "driven the operation of that mystery
called life or will out of the objective universe?"^
And having done so, by what logic does he contrive to
call such life or will a * collateral product!' Surely, if
Naturalism did not despise all metaphysics but its own,
it might have learnt from philosophy a better way.
Eant's conception of man as at once phenomenon and
noumenon is better than this. Perhaps Lotze puts the
same idea more clearly, and in a way more germane to
these remarks, in a passage of his MicrocoimuSy which
has often impressed me, concluding with the words:
"The universal course of things may at every moment
have innumerable beginnings whose origin lies outside
of it, but can have none not necessarily continued within
it. Where such beginnings are to be found we cannot
beforehand say with certainty; but if experience con-
vinces us that every event of external Nature is at the

1 The Unseen Univeraey p. 183.


MENS AGITAT MOLEM 88

same time an effect having its cause in preceding facts,
it still remains possible that the cycle of inner mental
life does not consist throughout of a rigid mechanism
working necessarily, but that along with unlimited
freedom of will it also possesses a limited power of
imconditional commencement."^ It was in pursuance
of the same thought that I just now suggested that
possibly the phjrsicist's so-called actual energy might
spring from an efficiency of a higher order as well as
sink to the level where, as ^entropy,' it is available
energy no more.

But on the platform of our present argument — that
of the primacy of matter and its laws — these are mere
surmises. Suppose we assume then that mind only
directs energy, and is not a source of it. Its action
would thus be comparable to that of a force acting
always at right angles to the direction of the moving
body, thus altering its course without altering its speed.
Such guidance entails theoretically no expenditure of
energy and so does not conflict with the law of energy-
conservation ; but it conflicts with the conservation of
momentum, and is therefore contrary to the laws of
motion, as we have already seen. It is, in fact, the
Cartesian infltums physicvs which Leibniz exposed. Yet
it remains the conception most in favour with those
who see the absurdity of conscious automatism. But
again I say even this conception is incompatible with
the thoroughgoing mechanical theory of things. If the
facts of life and mind discernible in the external world
lead up to such a view, then those facts must lead us on

^ Microco$mus, translation, vol. i, p. 261.


84 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

also to deny the Cartesian dualism. The contradictions
of psychophysical parallelism amount so far to a proof
that mind and matter are not utterly disparate and
distinct. For guidance is impossible if all the beings
concerned in the objective universe are inert masses. To
this conception then we are brought back once more. Is
inert, dead matter everywhere; is it anywhere? Every-
where, Naturalism tries to believe. Nowhere, the idealist
maintains. But if it is not everywhere, then either there
must be two worlds, one world of inert masses, and an-
other of living things, or a single world in which these
somehow interact. In the former case we belong to the
second world, and can neither affect, nor be affected by
the first; can have neither knowledge of it nor interest
in it. In the latter case, where living things and dead
matter belong to the same world, then, if the physicist
could completely solve the problems he sets himself, he
would find some or all of his laws of motion sometimes
set aside. Psychophjrsics would then become a real
science, unless indeed the actions of living things — de-
scribed perhaps as^the movements of self -directing masses,
perhaps as the movements of self -directing ^monads'
that had no mass — manifested no kind of order or uni-
formity. Again, on the view to which Naturalism clings,
in a complete world of dead matter, there would be
nothing but a mechanism, but there would be no ma-
chines: to talk of collateral products of an epiphenom-
enal order would be stark* absurdity. But let us turn
again to the actual external world, and even from the
standpoint of natural science, what do we see? Surely
the very first distinction that meets us is this very one


LIVING THING OR DEAD, THE BETTER TYPE? 86

of Uving and dead tlmigs. Here I pick up a stone and
call it dead: I toss it from my hand and can describe
the path it will take. There I pick up a bird: I can
toss that from my hand too, but cannot foretell its
course through the air. From that stone, juit as it i«,
the physicist derives his idea of inertia. But from the
bird, just as it is, he declines to accept the idea of self-
direction. Rather calling upon us to accept Ms ideal of
mass-elements, he says, Magnify space and time indefi-
nitely and the bird will turn out to be but a vast system
of inert masses, devoid, like the stone, of self-direction
and obeying only the laws of motion. How does he
know this ? Suppose we suggest the opposite procedure
of diminishing space and time indefinitely tiU the stone
and its motions become infinitesimal, how does he know
that the whole sidereal system will not then turn out to
be more like the bird than the stone, an organised
whole manifesting life and self-direction ? The one sup-
position seems just as reasonable as the other.

It must be candidly confessed that, however much we
insist on the fact that mind can direct and control
inert mass, we are quite unable to analyse the process.
In our ignorance the simplest statement is the best,
and I can think of none simpler than saying that inertia,
always a hypothetical and abstract conception, per-
haps never applicable to anything in the world of con-
crete things, is certainly not applicable to everything.
We must remember that matter and inert mass are not
identical, and that the physicist, though he attempts to
describe all he knows of matter in terms of mass and
motion, is careful to say at the outset that ^^we do not


86 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

know and are probably incapable of discovering what
matter i«." ^ Unfortunately, before he reaches the end
of his story, this preliminary caveat is too often forgot-
ten: Professor Tait, for example, who makes this state-
ment, has hardly begun his exposition before he teUs
us that ^'matter is simply passive,"^ thus identifying
matter with mass. But ' a mass ' means merely a concrete
number, i.e. the term stands for a specific quantity not
for a concrete thing; mass is a mathematical conception
devised solely to facilitate calculation, and was never
meant to aid rational insight or understanding.

But calculation will never content us ; rational insight,
spiritual light, is what we want. Imagine a man re-
flecting upon the actual world as it lies as a whole
before him, bent on seizing its meaning, seeking to
frame a clear and distinct picture, a WeltHxnschauung^
a world-intuition, as the Germans expressively say, not
merely a world-formula. The starry firmament above
him, the moral law within his breast, fill him with awe,
the meanest flower that blows gives him thoughts that
often lie too deep for tears. Imagine such a man say-
ing : — " Here in the impact of two stones I discern the
secret of the whole! Just as far as I can resolve all
into this, just so far can I say that I see and under-
stand. Here is the promise and potency of every form
and variety of life! To this an ultimate analysis brings
us down, and on this a rational synthesis must build
up." Whereunto shall we liken such a man, and with
what can we compare him? Surely, having eyes he sees

1 Tait, Propertiea of Matter, p. 14. Cf. Leotare U aboye.
^ o.c,i p. 5.


THE MATHEMATICAL BIAS 87

not, having ears he hears not, neither can he understand.
But there is no such man, you say ; I know well that there
is not. But there is such a system of thought, of which
this is the logical outcome, and Naturalism is its name.
It is a novel Frankenstein that the man of science has
conjured up, and now pretending to have made hirn^
it pronounces him to be impotent, and the Nature it
presents, to be the only One and All that he can ever
know. How is this spectre to be dispelled? Most ef-
fectively, surely, by considering how it has arisen. To
this end, again, it seems obvious that we must go back
to the concrete world as a whole. And so doing, we
may first of all lay it down as a canon, that if we are
to understand the world as a whole we must take it as
a whole. But such a canon Naturalism has defied
again and again. To begin, there is this dualism of
mind and matter, and its consequence, the fruitless en-
deavour to reunite what has never been experienced
asunder. But that problem, closely as it is mixed up
with the one inmiediately before us, we have neverthe-
less agreed to defer. Meanwhile, taking Naturalism on
its own ground, and assuming the distinctness and the
primacy of the external world: here again our canon
is set aside, when qualities are all resolved into quan-
tity, and all relations but the mathematical discarded.
Descartes here, as before, is the first and chief offen-
der. His grand conception of science as Mathesis Uni-
ver%ali$ has never ceased to fascinate — and to mislead.
Some of the consequences of this error it has been our
business to trace ; and in that stupendous house of cards,
Mr. Spencer's Synthetic Philosophy, we have found an


88 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

impressive exhibition of them. As to the fascination of
such a conception, the reason for that is not far to
seek. It is simply the intuitive clearness of mathemati-
cal form and the boundless possibilities of geometrical
construction. Here, and here only, the human intellect
seems to be in possession of archetypal ideas, and to
approximate to the creative intuition attributed to the
Deity. The metaphysical obscurities of substance and
cause, of being and becoming, do not intrude into this
region. A spatial plenum or primordial ether seems to
afford us the unity and permanence of being without
its mystery; in motion we seem to have change with-
out its contradictions; and differential equations seem to
yield us necessary interdependence without any causal
nexus. But, alas, for the vanity of human dreams!
though everything that is has quantity, has spatial and
temporal relations, there is nothing that entirely con-
sists of these. When a given whole resolves into an
aggregate of parts, these again have quantity, have spa-
tial and temporal relations, but again they are more
than these. Proceed we never so far, the same remains
true; only in the limit to which thought will carry us,
but to which experience gives us no warrant to go, we
reach at length an empty world, not a world of thing%
having mathematical relations, not an actual world at all,
but a world of conceptual possibilities of mathematical
relations, where the principle of least resistance is the
supreme principle of change ; where masses can be moved
but need not be; where energy can be transferred but
need not be; where mass is invariably passive, and
energy invariably directionless. Such conceptions may


' I www


MERE MECHANISM MEANINGLESS 89

furnish an admirable descriptive scheme of ^^ the motions
that occur in nature," but they explain nothing. In place
of explaining they regress ad indefinitvm. As they can
give no account of any distribution of mass and energy,
save by reference to a previous distribution, they have no
title to deny interference, but only to admit that they are
inadequate to deal with it. So long as things are left
to themselves, mechanical principles can tell us what
will happen at the next instant, what will tend to hap-
pen indefinitely, provided always the mechanism is left
to itself. On this large assumption they can predict,
but on this only. In a world so framed sentient agents
would have means for their ends; for them such a world
would be one of law and order. In itself it would be a
chaos abated only by quantitative determination. How
absurd, then, to make all the life and action of such
sentients but the epiphenomenal shadows of vortex-
motions in such a chaos! Chaos I call it, for the world
described strictly in mechanical terms can have not a
vestige of meaning. There is exactness, there is preci-
sion, but there is no true unity and no sense.

But let ns go back once more to the actual world
as it confronts us while we live and struggle in it:
avoiding abstract formulation and seeking a concrete
acquaintance, what do we find? Certainly nothing that
suggests its ultimate resolution into homogeneous mass-
points mechanically interconnected. Keeping strictiy to
the concrete and historical, everywhere we find variety,
diversity, whether we carry our gaze into the depths
of space or back in time through the geologic eras of
the remote past, whether we compare the trees of a


90 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

forest or the leaves on a tree, the pebbles at our feet
or the mountain peaks that pierce the sky. We content
ourselves with merely counting our cattle or sheep, only
when we have no individual acquaintance with them;
but even on a cursory glance differences appear, and the
more intimate our knowledge the more individuaUty ob-
trudes itself. Even where the minuteness of objects
hides their individual differences from us, we frequently
have evidence that such differences are there. Thus the
spores of half a dozen ferns sprinkled on the hand look
all alike; but sow them, and both specific characters and
individual traits will presently shew themselves. In
short, so surely as we can find means to perceive the
p.«io«l.. tbi^ or p^aculT ...nt, so ^fi^^r^
characteristics, hcecceities as the schoolmen said, emerge
to view. I see no reason to doubt this would hold
true even of the five himdred billion light-waves said
to reach the eye in a second, if only we could magnify
time sufficiently to note and compare them one by one.
Just in proportion as things elude our perceptive power
or fail to interest us, do proper names give place to
common names, and common names to stuffs ; biography
becomes history, history chronology, and all the teem-
ing life of things but cosmic process. Experience,
then, justifies the doctrine of Leibniz: No two things
are entirely alike, and no two things are entirely dif-
ferent. An adequate and intuitive knowledge of the
world would embrace both these aspects, and so doing
would present the world in its true and concrete unity.
Scientific knowledge, however, is neither intuitive nor
adequate, but always more or less general and sym-


MB. SPENCER'S MISSION 91

bolic; its general concepts and symbols representing the
Ukenesses among individuals and the likenesses among
these likenesses, so tending indeed towards an abstract
and spurious unity, but farther and farther away from
the living whole. It begins by leaving half the truth
aside, viz., that no two things are entirely alike; and
natural science further leaves half the facts aside, or
rather an essential part of every fact, in ignoring mind
and its manifold implications. Setting out from such
a dualism and advancing in this abstract fashion, can
we wonder that we end in a blank mechanical scheme
diametrically opposed to .everything teleological ?

The surest way to exhibit the philosophical deficiency
of such a scheme is to proceed to reconstruct the con-
crete world by starting from it. For this Balaam's mis-
sion Ml-. Spencer has been destined, and admirably he
has done his work. So long as Naturalism continues
in vogue, so long, I cannot help thinking, Mr. Spencer's
great enterprise is its best refutation; while, on the
other hand, had that enterprise succeeded nothing could
have established Naturalism more convincingly. Hence
it seemed to me imperative to examine the Synthetic
Philosophy in some detail, and to shew clearly the loose-
ness of its ideas and its grave defects of method. I
confess the task was not difficult, and certainly was not
congenial; but it had to be done. We saw clearly, I
trust, that Mr. Spencer's entire performance was a sort
of philosophical sleight of hand. Sweep the board, he
says, leave me only the universe in a diffused, imper-
ceptible state, and setting out from the persistence of
energy, I will shew you how celestial bodies, organ-


92 PSYCHOPHYSICAL PARALLELISM

isms, and societies, must arise.^ We saw, clearly, I trust,
that with such data Mr. Spencer could not get beyond
what he terms the primary distribution of matter and
motion, the return of his diffused universe in the short-
est and easiest ways back to equilibrium; that, on the
other hand, the so-called secondary distributions which
are to be the source of celestial bodies, organisms, and
societies, one and all imply guidance, direction, and se-
lection — conceptions that inert mass and directionless
energy can never by any possibility yield.

Passing on to biological evolution over a gap of two
octavo volumes, still missing from Mr. Spencer's work,
we came to biological evolution as specially expounded
by Lamarck, Darwin, and their successors. Natural selec-
tion, taken alone, as Wallace urged and Darwin himself
allowed, is only a negative and destructive principle ;
in * struggle for existence and survival of the fittest,' on
the other hand, we found that striving not merely to
live, but to live well, which first gives natural selection its
^ point (TappuiJ Here we have a teleological factor, and
one suggesting not so much a nondescript force called
vital, as a psychical something endowed with feeling
and will. Feeling and will answer to the psychological
principle of self-conservation ; when to these we add know-
ledge, we reach a principle to which I have ventured
to give the name of subjective selection, the counterpart
and supplement of natural selection and the source of a
different order of species ; to wit, species of environments.

1 Cf . DescarteB* inyitation to the readers of his Le Monde, A sortir de
ce monde, poor en yenir voir xm autre tout nouyeau qu^il fera naitre en
sa presence dans des eepaces imaginaires.


MIND AS VIS DIRECTRIX 93

But in the way of all this stood the theory of psy-
chophysical parallelism which has just occupied us, and
the contradictions of which, if it be taken for any-
thing more than a methodological convention, I have
endeavoured to set forth. Those contradictions compel
us to suspect the thorough-going dualism, which ren-
ders the interaction of mind and matter inconceivable,
and we have seen that, from Descartes' day to our own,
it has never been consistently maintained. Invariable
concomitance means causal connexion somewhere and a
fundamental unity of substance at bottom. Naturalism
is driven to assign the causality to matter and to treat
mental ^ epiphenomena ' as its collateral products. We
have seen many reasons discrediting this position, but
it still remains to be examined ab initio. In the en-
deavour to defend the priority of mind, and to reduce
matter to the epiphenomenal, or phenomenal as we
may be content to say, we shall break with Naturalism
once and for all. So far our part has been merely
that of critics of its constructions. Hereafter its ally.
Agnosticism, will meet us as the critic of our own.


PART IV


REFUTATION OP DUALISM


3
>


♦


REFUTATION OF DUALISM


LECTURE XIV

GENERAL CONCEPTION OP EXPERIENCE

The discussion of Psychophysical Parallelism has led up to the formal
side of our subject : toe now askt What is natural knowledge and what
does it imply ?

Naturalism assumes a dualism of phenomena and epiphenomena^ the
former having the primacy. But the * real world ^ from which U starts is
epiphenomenal. How then does U get to \\& ^ real world * of matter in
motion^ andy having got tTiere, how does it get back f

The perplexities of dualism have brought into favour an agnostic monism
or ^revised materialism.^ If we are to transcend dualism and this
monism, it will be by making knowledge^ or raiher experience itself, an
object of reflexion. Neglect of this question by natural science^ psy-
chology and the pre-KarUian metaphysics.

What we find is not a dualism of mind and matter, but a duality of
subject and object in the unity of experience.

Experience does not begin with a disconnected * manifold.^

Sensations not * subjective modifications * nor devoid of all ^form,^

Belation of subject and object : is it causal f Ambiguity of terms,
* Objective ' used from two standpoints. Various attempts to treat this
relation as causal noticed.

The doctrine of conscious automatism, popularised in
this country by the late Professor Huxley, is the crown-
ing tenet of Naturalism, the logical outcome of that
theory, for which Descartes prepared the way, the

VOL. II — H 97


98 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

theory, that is to say, which regards the material world
as a self-contained whole, primary, fundamental, and
independent of mind. Minds, then, come to be looked
upon as secondary and episodic ; mere collateral pro-
ducts, that arise as often as matter falls into the appro-
priate organic condition ; p%ycho8eSy that are powerless
to react upon their concomitant neuro9e%. The confu-
sions and contradictions involved in this assertion of
the impotence of mind to control matter we have
already discussed at length. The assumed primacy
and independence of the automaton still remained to
be considered. But I propose now to merge this in
the broader question and to examine generally the as-
sumption of naturalism that physical phenomena are our
primary facts and facts independent of mind. To do this
will entail some change in our method of procedure.

At the outset of this course (in the second lecture), it
was remarked that our knowledge of nature, as unified
and systematised in the sciences, may be examined from
two sides : either formally as knowledge, in respect of
its postulates, categories, and the like ; or — taking these
for granted, as science itself does — this knowledge may
be examined in respect of the real principles to which
its supposed unity and completeness are ascribed. ^ We
began with this latter side and have dealt in turn with
the mechanical theory, the theory of evolution, and the
theory of psychophysical parallelism. And now at
length our discussion of the last of these real principles
brings us round to the formal side and leads us to ask :
What in itself is natural knowledge, and what does it

1 Lecture n, p. 40.


NATURAL KNOWLEDGE AND ITS IMPLICATIONS 99

imply ? For this is the problem really involved, whether
we challenge the particular doctrine that man is prima-
rily an automaton and his consciousness but an epiphe*
nomenal aura that accompanies its working, or challenge,
as I now propose, the more general doctrine, of which
this is but the logical consequence. According to that
doctrine, if we are to exhibit the sum of things from
the beginning and connect each to each completely, we
must start from matter and motion. To this, Mr. Spen-
cer in effect has told' us, '*an ultimate analysis brings
us down and on this a rational synthesis must build
up." Of the same tenor are some words of Huxley
which I have already quoted and will take leave to
quote in part again. "In itself," said Huxley, "it is
of little moment whether we express the phenomena of
matter in terms of spirit, or the phenomena of spirit
in terms of matter. . . . But with a view to the prog-
ress of science, the materialistic terminology is in every
way to be preferred. For it connects thought with the
other phenomena of the universe, . . . whereas the alter-
native, or spiritualistic terminology, is utterly barren,
and leads to nothing but obscurity and confusion of
ideas." ^

To be sure such deliverances are usually guarded by
agnostic disclaimers of any knowledge as to what matter
is, or what spirit is, and usually too by indignant repu-
diations of 'what is commonly understood by material-
ism.' Such materialism as that of Hobbes or of Holbach,
for example, is certainly no part of the naturalism of
to-day. So far from saying that mind is a mode of

^ Collected Essays, vol. i, p. 164.


100 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

motion^ it scouts such a notion as sheer absurdity. This
breach with the old materialism, to which Agnosticism
has led, is, we have allowed, a distinct advance. But
after all, if Naturalism is to stop at this, what have we
but the substitution of one materialism for another?
What avails it to know that mind is not actually itself
matter in motion, if we must believe that it is as much
bound up with such motion as the shadows and the
whirring of its wheels are bound up with the working
of a machine? If Spirit is to be derived from Nature
and not Nature from Spirit, if the materialistic termi-
nology is the one means of rational synthesis and the
spiritual leads only to confusion of ideas, what is the
good of saying that both are symboUc ? Something must
be real, and the plain implication so far is that the
materialistic terminology brings us nearest to that.
This is the position that we have now to examine, and
on account of which we must inquire into the character
of natural knowledge.

For the common-sense man, and for all men in their
ordinary life and intercourse, the world each one lives
in is a world of things that are seen, felt, and handled,
a world of sensible objects, some of which we seek and
use, while others we neglect or destroy. This is the
world of * naive realism,' as philosophers say. But from
the standpoint of naturalism a world described in such
terms is epiphenomenal. The 'real world' of science,
the world of phenomena, on the other hand, is a world
of mass-points transferring and transforming their mo-
tions, a world of quantitative diversity only. Now phi-
losophers, as we all know, have long vexed themselves


J


*THE UGLY BROAD DITCH' 101

with the endeavour to resolve the contradictions of unre-
flecting common sense, and to ascertain the veritable
reality of this external world that we perceive. These
ontological essays the agnostic derides as futile; for
of reality as distinct from appearance, we can, he tells
us, know nothing. He repudiates the materialistic phi-
loBophy ; but holds, nevertheless, that we have done the
most and the best that can be done when, accepting the
materialistic terminology^ we conceive the world in terms
of matter and energy and their evolutions. But we have
seen Naturalism, which undertakes this task, unable to
complete it, and breaking down hopelessly when the
complete facts of life and mind have to be taken into
account. The naturalist cannot get back to himself as
a Uving, thinking, acting being. In his desperation he
begins to blaspheme — I mean he begins to talk meta-
physics — much to the discomfort of his agnostic ally.
So he comes to speak of monism, of mind and matter
as comparable to the concave and convex aspects of
one curve, and the like. Then the agnostic persuades
him that what answers to the curve as distinct from /
the aspects -if indeed anything does -is unknown and
unknowable. Meanwhile, his own standpoint is the
outside of the curve, the material aspect. Its ter-
minology compels him to affirm that interference or spon-
taneity is impossible there ; and so the talk of conscious
automatism, collateral products, and epiphenomena arises.
It is the absurdities of this doctrine that lead us to
ask: How did the naturalist ever get across Hhe ugly
broad ditch,' over which he now finds no satisfactory
return? To this comparatively simple epistemological


102 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

question some physicists, as we saw when discussing
the mechanical theory, are now beginning to attend.
They openly proclaim that mass-points and frictionless
media are not phenomena, but merely descriptive hy-
potheses, that can never be verified as facts ; hypotheses
that would at once become obsolete, if simpler and
more workable conceptions should be found. Yet Natu-
ralism pays little heed to these admissions, and even
less to the consequences that they entail. Moreover,
even among physicists, to say nothing of other men of
science, there are many who believe — like one I have
had occasion to quote — that "what actually goes on
behind what we can see or feel " is these very motions
of mass-points so often described. But the objects of
sight and touch at any rate are phenomena; while it
is certain that no one has, or ever will, either see or
feel the motions of mass-points or of vortices in a fric-
tionless fluid. Naturalism, we remember, is too wise to
claim for these supposed actualities behind what is per-
ceptible any non-phenomenal, noumenal, or metaphysical
reality. But if neither perceived nor perceptible, how
then can they, with any propriety, be called phenomena ?
If they are not empirical data, how then has the physi-
cist got at them? There seems to be but one answer
to these questions, and happily in this all those physicists
are agreed who have in any way troubled themselves
with such epistemological inquiries- These supposed
actualities, behind what can possibly be seen or felt, are
not only not absolute realities, they are not even phe-
nomenal realities; they are simply conceptions which/
the physicist has reached by idealising what he can


PHENOMENA AND EPIPHENOMENA 108

see and feel. It is plain that if this be the truth, then
those prime and ultimate phenomena of Naturalism are,
after all, but epiphenomena, thoughts not things, ideas
existing solely for the minds of physicists, and serving
only to interpret and connect what we see and feel, that
is to say, other epiphenomena.

But what then is the force of the *epi,' and what
becomes of the primacy of the materialistic terminology ?
The tables seem to be completely turned. What we
see and feel, the facts of perception, become the real
phenomena. Instead of states of consciousness super-
vening upon certain motions of mass-points or some
peculiar complex of ethereal vortices, these motions,
etc., prove to be but ideal conceptions superimposed
upon phenomena by the mind that seeks to connect
them in respect of their quantitative relations. So far
from connecting ^^ thought with the other phenomena of
the universe," as Huxley maintained, these conceptions
are themselves simply thoughts connecting those ^ other
phenomena ' together. But the connexion of such ^ other
phenomena' with thought and consciousness is a whoUy
distinct question and one that is left entirely aside.

This complete scission is in fact the irpSnov 's^Bo^
of all dualistic speculation; and Naturalism does not
escape its consequences by hearkening to the voice of
Agnosticism, and substituting phenomena and epiphe-
nomena for the Cartesian substances, matter and mind.
The first step of all is easy to take ; indeed, it is taken
unconsciously ; for science sets out from the naive dual-
ism of common sense. But when it has gone ^farther
and farther, till at length only a system of mass-points.


/


•'


104 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

or a homogeneous plenum, in motion is left, then the
problem consciously to retrace the many steps that have
been taken proves hopeless. But it is said : ^^ Phenomena
empirically given were our starting-point ; observation,
experiment, deduction, and verification have accompanied
every step ; at what point then have the phenomena
ceased to be phenomenal? As we have advanced we
have but got nearer to the realities — phenomenal reali-
ties, of course, of which our sensory presentations are
merely the symbols." Such is the language of Natural-
ism on the wa;y out ; so it becomes committed to a doc-
trine of phenomena per se^ surely a more glaring absurdity
than that of things per ae can ever be. The true answer
to this challenge, as I hope we shall see, is to say that
the phenomena ceased to be phenomena at the very ini-
tial step when percept and percipient were sundered;
that the further steps consisted not of percepts but of
concepts, which as abstract may have — and indeed have
actually — a certain relative validity, but no reality. The
very ruthlessness with which its mathematical methods
hurry it onward to such ultimate abstractions as Bos-
covich's centres of force or Kelvin's homogeneous plenum,
yields perhaps the most convincing proof that after all
we can not set out to synthesise rationally by the aid of a
materialistic terminology. And when Naturalism, oblivi-
ous of all this and still regarding these mechanical ab-
stractions as real, attempted to get back to mind, we
might safely have said that it was foredoomed to the
failure that has in fact overtaken it. There can be no
" promise and potency of life " about mass-points chang-
ing in nothing but position and velocity, and that only


PHENOMENA PER SE 105

on external compulsion. There is no mystery about geo-
metrical points and their movements; yet no sooner is
there attached to them the notion of inertia and the name of
matter, than we are asked to regard them as the unknown
and hypothetical cause of states of our own consciousness.
Not — we are again assured — that consciousness inheres
in the inert mass or is identical with its movements, as
the crass and dogmatic materialist of ^ the bygone slime '
foolishly imagined. No, states of consciousness pertain
to a distinct but parallel aspect of these molecular motions,
albeit a secondary and, for them, a contingent aspect.
But where, we have asked, is the room for another aspect
of such moving points ? So long as matter was left with
an untold residuum of active properties, as by materialists
like Priestley, the annexation of thinking to matter was
not so obviously absurd, for such matter might prove
to be mind at bottom. But Agnosticism forbids such
speculations ; moreover, the increased exactness and pre-
cision of the materialistic terminology leave no room for
them.

The result then to which we seem to be led is briefly
this : The external world, as it is presented to us, and to
which each and all of the naturalist's observations and
experiments belong, is the true world of phenomena.
This world cannot be severed from the minds that per-
ceive it, and yet remain phenomenal; neither can it be
completely and adequately explained or described in
materialistic terminology. As the proximate phenomena
presuppose perceiving minds, so do the so-called ultimate
phenomena, involving pure space, uniform time, inert
mass, and energy, presuppose intelligent minds that have


106 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

elaborated these conceptions, though they have never
experienced such realities. The assumed primacy of the
physical as against the psychical is due, first, to the fact
that in his absorption and interest in the objective atti-
tude the naturalist has forgotten himself; and next, to
the fact that he has mistaken his abstract conceptions
for presented realities. The notion of an epiphenomenon
supervening on physical phenomena is in flagrant con-
tradiction with the mechanical conception of a closed
system of connected masses. From the standpoint of
physics itself such a notion could never arise; while from
the wider standpoint of psychology, to regard mind as
the collateral product of its own external perceptions is
simply to invert the facts. One might as well say that
reflections produce their own mirror, or that houses
evolve architects. We are led, in a word, to doubt that
mmd and matter can be dual reaUties, either phenomenal
or ontal, and to doubt further that, if they could be, matter
would be first. The dogmatic Naturalism of a former
age asserted this priority of matter as a substance; the
agnostic Naturalism of our own time asserts it of matter
as a phenomenon. Of the two positions that of the
thoroughgoing materialists is logically far the more
consistent. It is besides a position from which Natu-
raUsm has been unwillingly driven, and hence the tradi-
tional bias stUl remains. Evidence of this bias we have
seen in the frequent lapses from the unstable equilibrium
of psychophysical parallelism towards this primacy of
the materialistic standpoint. Further, as Naturalism has
had to abandon that old stronghold of dogmatic material-
ism, and can now only talk of matter as ^ the unknown


MONISM m DEMAND 107

and hypothetical cause of states of consciousness,' it is
loud to proclaim en revanche that spirit is also but ' an un-
known and hypothetical cause, or condition of states of
consciousness.' Even in these phrases of Huxley the
materialistic bias shews itself: matter is honoured as the
cause, spirit is referred to only as a cause or condition^
and then both are grouped together as * imaginary ' sub-
strata of groups of natural phenomena. But this Agnos-
ticism, which cannot be materialistic and will not be
idealistic, at any rate serves to exhibit the superfluity
of a dualism of substance; for why say there are two
substrata, if both are unknown? It explains too how
it is that monism has become the order of the day. A
glance at that enterprising and significant journal, The
Monistj will shew how eager scientific men are to help
in the new construction.

This demand for monism by scientific men who reject
the old materialism is in itself a hopeful sign. In dis-
cussing psychophysical parallelism we have had to notice
this movement. It then, however, became apparent that
we cannot hope much from a monism that sets out from
two totally distinct and disparate orders of phenomena,
least of all when the spontaneity that belongs to the
one is declared to be illusory or impotent, solely in
order to save the inertness which is held to be the
essence of the other. Nor again can we reasonably con-
tent ourselves with a monism which, however anxious
not to be called materialistic, yet disclaims the title of
idealistic or spiritualistic with even greater vehemence,
being unwilling at any price to part with its mechanical
scheme.


108 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

Two questions then here present themselves : (1) Can
we transcend this phenomenal dualism, or is it ultimate
and inevitable? (2) And if that is not ultimate, can
we then also get beyond agnostic monism, with its ma-
terialistic bias? In some form or other these are among
the oldest and most intractable problems of philosophy ;
what likelihood is there, therefore, that we shall succeed in
our day, when long centuries behind us are strewn with
failures? Of course I do not for a moment suppose
that the last word will be heard on these questions in
our time ; certain I am that the dicta of Naturalism and
Agnosticism will not end the quest. Nor can I admit
the ignorant commonplace that philosophy has made no
progress. And progress is all that we can look for :
finality from the nature of the case is impossible. As
I urged in the first lecture, relative knowledge implies
relative ignorance, and relative ignorance again implies
soluble problems. Now the function of philosophy, we
are often told, is to organise and unify knowledge. To
this end it is before all things necessary to make know-
ledge itself an object of reflexion and study. This
science does not do, and — what is worse — the dogmatic
metaphysics of Descartes, on which the whole fabric of
modern knowledge long rested, did not do it either. As
a consequence, the dualism of things mental and things
material, re% cogitantes and res extensce^ has been a prob-
lem for the critic of knowledge ever since. It ought
not to be thought presumptuous if philosophers claim
that during these two centuries of reflexion on that
problem they have made some progress.

Psychology and the natural sciences advancing inde-


A THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE CALLED FOR 109

pendently on the basis of this dualism have, as we have
seen, only widened the breach. For natural science the
question was how to get from matter to mind ; the at-
tempted solution by the hypothesis of psychophysical
parallelism we have found defective and unsatisfactory.
For psychology the question was how to get from mind
to matter, the problem, in other words, of external per-
ception. The result, again, I am bound to say, is defec-
tive and unsatisfactory. Shut in within a circle of ideas,
how could the mind know the things beyond, which
this very circle shut out ; how could it trust the copies
if the originals were forever beyond reach, nay, how
know that there were any originals at all? Such were
the questions raised in particular by British thinkers,
from Locke to Reid. These were the questions which
Locke slily remarked "seem not to want difficulty,"
and which Hume boldly declared hopelessly insoluble ;
while to resolve them Berkeley denied Descartes' outer
circle of things and Reid his inner circle of ideas. ^

Meanwhile the rationalistic thinkers of the Continent,
setting aside sense-impressions as too obscure and con-
fused to afford immediate knowledge, looked to clear,
distinct, and orderly thinking as the one method by
which knowledge was to be educed. This procedure
too proved futile and disclosed its essentially formal
character, when Wolff at length made the law of con-
tradiction the cardinal principle of his philosophy.
Then came Kant, and the question of external percep-
tion was taken up into the wider one of the nature of
experience. For so we may broadly characterise the

1 CL Fraser, Life and Letters of Berkeley^ p. 886.


110 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

inquiries of his three critiques; since all that we know
and feel and do, all our facts and theories, all our emo-
tions and ideals and ends, may be included in this one
term — experience.

It is then by raising this question as to the nature of
experience that, as I think, we shall see the imtenability
both of dualism and of the neutral monism that is
nominally to supersede it. I have mentioned Kant, not
because I propose to follow him in detail, but because
he first raised the right question, avoiding in the main
the one-sidedness both of his sensationalist and of his
rationalist precursors. There are active as well as
passive factors in experience, and the pre-critical philoso-
phers had tended each to emphasise only one. To carry
the mind beyond itself Locke's tahvla rasa was as help-
less one way as Leibniz's windowless monad was in the
other. But Kant, though he made both sensibility and
understanding essential to knowledge, yet failed to make
a satisfactory unity of the two. His * affections of the
sensibility' were only Locke's impressions oyer again.
Between the aggregate of these affections and the inde-
pendent functions of the understanding, he did not
succeed in establishing any true organic connexion.
His matter of knowledge and his forms of knowledge
stood too much apart ; the result was too much that of
sensationalism and rationalism placed side by side, rather
than the complete reconciliation of both. Still it was his
problem, taking experience as a fact, to render it intelligi-
ble, and he entered upon this, not by assuming a dualism
of matter and mind, but by insisting on the duality in unity
of subject and object. And with this we too must start.


EXPERIENCE A DUAUTY NOT A DUALISM 111

Let no one hastily conclude that between this duality
and that dualism there is only the faintest verbal differ-
ence, that subject and object are but mind and matter
over again. According to the Cartesian philosophy, of
course, mind and matter were not only distinct and
disparate, but absolutely separate and mutually inde-
pendent. Their union in fact was a miracle, and so,
for science, a stumbling-block ; and one, too, which the
various hypotheses of occasionalism, preestablished har-
mony, psychophysical parallelism, have severally failed
to surmount. But at any rate there cannot be this
great gulf fixed dividing one part of experience from
another. We may ask how such conceptions can have
arisen and discuss their validity, but we cannot set out
from them as a fact.

There is for each but one experience, his Awn ; and
an experience that is not owned is a contradiction. We
can assign no faced boundary to our experience except
by extending it in thought, and thought itself involves
experience. Hence the phrase, ^content of experience,'
or ^content of consciousness,' is apt to be misleading.
The experience of one is not limited by the experience
of another as one portion of time or space is limited by
another portion of time or space. The continuity of
experience is not then imposed from without. Experi-
ence is rather an organic unity that we always regard
as self -maintained. In a word it is life, filo^ — life as
it is for the living individual, not life, or Sa)j{, the inter-
action of organism and environment, with which the so-
called biologist is exclusively concerned, and where both
organism and environment are objects for a distinct


112 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

observer. It behoves us therefore to take all possible
pains to keep these two very different standpoints dis-
tinct. Psychology, as I have already remarked earlier
in these lectures, has been most seriously hampered by
confusing them.

We start then with this duality of subject and object
in the unity of experience. What a subject without
objects, or what objects without a subject, would be, is
indeed, as we are often told, unknowable ; for in truth
the knowledge of either apart is a contradiction. It is
their unity that specially interests us, for we look to
this to free us from the perplexities of dualism. Some,
current conceptions of this unity I feel bound to contro-
vert. First of all it is held and rightly that to a given
experience or life there can only be one subject, but that
— and to this I demur — there must be many objects.
The unity of experience pertains to the objective as well
as to the subjective. According to Kant, it will be
remembered, experience begins with a mere manifold or
disconnected multipUcity of sensations, which are then
synthesised into a temporoHspatial continuity. Discon-
nected in a logical sense this manifold may be, but
psychology, I trust, has outgrown this notion of isolated
particulars or ^mental atoms,' somehow strung together
on a Hhread of consciousness.' Whatever development
or differentiation an individual experience may imdergo, it
does not become^ but always z«, a unity. Sensations are
not like grains that the subject picks up, but changes in an
objective continuum that is always there as an unbroken
whole, however indefinite as respects boundaries. I am
loath to dwell on this point, partly because I have done


SENSATIONS NOT SUBJECTIVE 118

so already elsewhere,^ and still more because it is coming
to be generally conceded. I pass then to another more
open to debate.

Sensations are commonly described as subjective affec-
tions or modifications. Such language has, by the way,
the incidental advantage of disowning by implication
the atomic conception of sensations. But are these
primary presentations subjective? From one point of
view this language is perhaps justifiable; it is at least
convenient. In a sense all A's experience, qiui his and
not B'8, is subjective; and particularly in the sensations
of either there may be peculiarities or idiosyncrasies
that are undiscoverable and incommunicable. Never-
theless, I contend that the sensory and motor changes
or processes entering into each conscious experience
are objective for the subject of that experience; inas-
much as they can be attended to or apprehended, liked
or disliked. For cognition they are a ^this' and a
*what'; for volition they have a * worth.' To say that
sensations and movements are, from the point of view
of individual experience, modifications of the subject,
forces us further to say, either that they are originated
by the subject, or by what we commonly call objects, or
by an unknown thing per se. All three alternatives have
had their advocates. The first and third, the theories
respectively of Fichte and Kant, are attempts to render
experience intelligible by transcending experience ; the
one on the side of the subject, the other on that of the
object. These, as they stand, have satisfied nobody.
Even Fichte had to allow the duality of subject and

1 JSneyclopcedia Britannica, article Psychology.

VOL. II — I


114 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

object within experience, and Kant to treat hia thing
per se as a problematic and limiting conception. The
second alternative is that of ordinary thought. The
material thing we call an orange is commonly regarded
as an independent ^real,' that gives rise in each per-
cipient to his sensations of colour, taste, and so on.
But this, as it stands, is just the theory we have found
to break down, the theory that rests on the dualism of
phenomenon and epiphenomenon, and leads to all the
difficulties of psychophysical parallelism. It presup-
poses, too, that very primacy and independence as per-
taining to the physicist's external phenomenon, which
we have seen reason to disallow. If this phenomenon
is not to be itself a thing per ««, its own reality con-
sists of just such sensory ^prcesentabilia^^ as it is sup-
posed to cause. This theory, at any rate, Kant has
exploded ; albeit, unhappily, he never completely broke
away from the Cartesian opposition of mind and mat-
ter. He often seems to identify mind with the subject
of experience on the one hand, and matter with the
object of experience on the other. There could hardly
be a greater mistake than this identification; for the
duality in unity of subject and object at once lapses,
and the old gulf between thinking substance and ex-
tended substance, between external phenomena and in-
ternal epiphenomena reappears. It is safer to leave
the terms * matter' and *mind' entirely aside for a
time, and to keep strictly to the facts of experience.
But, if we must talk of mind, let us beware of
accepting the descriptions current among psychologists.
1 An awkward, but useful, word of Helmholtz*s.


EXPERIENCE IMPLIES OBJECTS 115

They may be admirable as rough approximations for
expository purposes, but even then are apt to confuse.
Thus no less eminent a writer than Dr. Bain suggests
that, '^Mind is definable in the first instance by the
method of contrast, or as a remainder arising from sub-
tracting the Object World from the totality of con-
scious experience.''^ But when he reaches our present
problem of external perception he is careful to add:
"There is no possible knowledge of a world except
in reference to our minds. Knowledge means a ^te
of mind : the notion of material things is a mental fact.
We are incapable even of discussing the existence of
an independent material world; the very act is a con-
tradiction. We can speak only of a world presented
to our own minds." ^ And, of coursOt this is the state-
ment we should prefer to accept; but then, it reduces
the preliminary definition to a contradiction, in so far
as conscious experience without objects is such. Again,
whereas the later statement recognises the fundamental
unity of experience in the duality of subject and object,
the earlier explicitly contemplates its separation into two
kinds — subject-consciousness and object-consciousness.
But there must be an objective side to the subject-con-
sciousness, and a subjective to the object-consciousness.
Are the subjects then identical, and how are the objects
related? The objects of the subject-consciousness, we
should be told, are those of an individual experience
only; those of the object-consciousness are the objects
in which all other sentient beings participate. I am
quite willing to accept this answer; it leaves us free
^ Senses and Intellect, fourth edition, p. 1. * o.c, p. 399.


116 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

to treat sensations as essentially objective, and only
brings out the fact just now mentioned, viz., that the
term objective is ambiguous till we know the stand-
point from which it is used. What is psychologically
objective is often treated as epistemologically subjec-
tive, as it is by Kant, for example, continually.

One further point by way of elucidating our claim to
treat sensations as objective. Such a claim is often dis-
allowed on the ground that sensations pertain really to
feeling and not to cognition ; or again on the ground
that they are the matter of experience simply, whereas
the objects of cognition must have form. This, as we
know, was substantially Kant's position, and made it
easier still for him to slide into defining sensations as
subjective affections. But the farther progress of psy-
chology since his time has, I think, fairly routed this
whole position. Sensations have form ; in other words,
they have inalienable characteristics, quality, intensity,
extensity ; as people say again nowadays, they have a
^ what ' as well as a Hhat.' Again, they are not isolated ;
but, as I have already urged, they are changes in what —
for want of a better word — I have been fain to call a
presentational continuimi. The so-called ^pure sensation '
of certain psychologists is a pure abstraction; as much
SO as the mass-point of the physicist, but without perhaps
the same warrant on the score of utility. The whole
doctrine of the gfradual elaboration of perception out of
purely subjective material is fast being relegated to the
region of psychological myth ; but it would carry us
too far from our main problem to discuss this in detail
here. When Locke treated sensations as ideas, or pre-


RELATION OF SUBJECT AND OBJECT 117

sentations, as we should now say, and defined these as
^^ the objects of the understanding when a man thinks,"
he was really nearer to the truth, than Kant was with
his artificial distinction of matter and form. It is phys-
iology rather than psychology that has kept the notion
of sensations as subjective affections in vogue. Primary
or perceptual presentation is all we mean, and such a
term has the advantage of making the objective character
expUcit, and of ignoring physiological impUcations with
which we have nothing to do.

And now we may pass to another question. If these
primary presentations are essentially objective, not sub-
jective, modifications, how is the relation of the subject
to such objects to be conceived? The subject has sev-
eral necessary relations to aU actual presentations, and
to these we must refer presently. But as regards the
bare fact of presentation there is nothing to be said ; it
is that relation of subject to object and of object to
subject, in virtue of which they are severally subject
and object. As the absolutely ultimate relation within
experience we can either say that it is inexplicable, or
that it needs no explanation, or we may entertain the
notion of an Absolute, in whom the unity of experience
outlasts the duality. But one thing, I think, we must
not do : we must not attempt to bring this relation of
subject and object under the category of cause and
effect. I do not mean to deny that there are causal
relations between subject and object, object and subject
— quite the contrary. I only demur to the assumption
that the subject-object relation itself is causal. With-
out meddling with any of the many vexed questions


118 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

concerning causation, it is at least clear that causes
must be real before they can be causes: an effect or
consequent cannot give rise to its own cause or antece-
dent. Causality logically presupposes reality, not reality
causality. But subject and object in the unity of experi-
ence is the real. If we disabuse ourselves of the psycho-
logical fiction of isolated sensations pattering like spots
of rain on a tabtUa rasa from an outer nowhere ; if we
think instead of the objective factor (or presentational
continuum) as an unbroken whole — as much a whole
as a mere continuum can be — then we see, I think,
that this — for experience — absolutely fundamental re-
lation cannot be causal. We ordinarily employ the
category of causality to relate one part of experience to
another, a change to an antecedent change. Thus in its
very form it presupposes distinction within experience,
and accordingly this relativity within experience ceases
at the very moment when the part coincides with the
whole. Similarly we may assign a position to one part
of the universe relatively to another, but not to the uni-
verse itself. Difficulties, analogous to those besetting
absolute time or absolute place, arise when we try to
make causation absolute by extending it to experience
en bloc. And in fact all attempts to treat the relation
of subject and object as causal have engendered such
difficulties. I referred to these a moment ago; it may
be well now to recur to them in more detail. But to
prevent misapprehension let me again repeat that the
question is not whether any interaction between subject
and object is conceivable, but simply whether the re-
lation of subject and object as that presents itself in


IS THE SUBJECT-OBJECT RELATION CAUSAL? 119

the time-worn problem of external perception can be
regarded as a causal relation.

First of all let me urge again that, at all events, we
have not the warrant of direct experience itself for so
doing. Those who imagine this are, as I think, misled
by the ambiguity of the leading terms. Thus mind is
sometimes used as coextensive with an individual expe-
rience in its entirety, as in empirical psychology, for
instance; at other times it is restricted to the subject
that has the experience. So, in like manner, subjective
refers at one time exclusively to this subject, at others
is made to cover both the subject and the totality of its
objects as such. But once we clear up this vagueness
in our terms, we find no warrant within experience for
regarding presentations as modifications of the subject
that has them. Comparative psychology, which — ac-
cording to the usual expositions of the differentiation of
subject and object — ought to furnish strong evidence
in support of this assumption, is, on the contrary, as
Professor Riehl-^ has pointed out, conclusive against it.

But we may still entertain the hypothesis that the
immediate objects of experience are ultimately, in some
underground way, offsets or emanations of the subject.
If we do this in Leibniz's fashion, — suppose, that is,
that each several subject evolves its own experience
from within, — we have a world which is really no world
at all, a world in which there is actually no conmiunity
or interaction, but only the semblance of them. And
even this semblance, as in the famous example of the

1 Der philosophisehe KriUcismua^ Bd. n, ii, p. 64. Of. James, Prin-
ciples of Psychology, yoL ii, ch. xvii.


120 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

two clocks, is only secured by the altogether extraneous
assumption of a preestablished harmony in the respec-
tive developments of the isolated, independent, window-
less monads. If we go to the opposite extreme, and,
following Fichte in his daring speculation, set out from
an Absolute Ego that posits its own Non-Ego, we have
then a converse difficulty, as Fichte soon discovered.
There is no way for us from such an act to the world of
finite subjects, face to face with a Non-Ego which they
have not posited. The relation of subject to object in
such experience is where it was. We cannot begin from
God and construct the universe. Even if we persist in
calling the objective factor in our experience a subjective
modification, at least we cannot pretend that the subject
is the cause of it. There is, perhaps, no point in the
whole of philosophy as to which there is such complete
agreement : idealist and realist, sceptic and dogmatist,
are here almost invariably at one.

Those who treat presentation as a causal relation ac-
cordingly look to the object itself as the cause. It is
in this aspect that the question *^ forms the most vital
crisis in the whole history of speculation," as Ferrier,
in one of his many brilliant essays on the topic, has
called it. And had Ferrier been familiar with the Kan-
tian controversies at the close of last century, or had he
lived to take part in the neo-Eantian controversies at
the close of this, he would have had still ampler grounds
for his emphasis than his studies of Berkeley, Reid,
Brown, and Hamilton afforded. Kant, as is well known,
refers to two orders of objects : objects extra no«, or
external phenomena, and objects prceter nos^ or things


KANT'S DIFFICULTIES 121

fer 86. The former he resolved into *raw stuff,' men-
tally elaborated according to the forms of intuition and
understanding. To this order the objects of our expe-
rience entirely and exclusively belong. Of the second
order, the things per «e, we have not and cannot have
any knowledge whatever ; neither knowledge that they
are nor yet knowledge what they are. Returning now
to the raw stuff of phenomenal objects, we ask : What
is this, and whence does it come? It consists, says
Kant, of sensible impressions or affections; it is pro-
duced by objects that excite our senses; in this way
only are objects given to us. These objects that are
^ given' to us are, of course, objects of the first order;
but of which order are the objects that affect us, the
objects that *^tve,' and so set experience going? To
this question neither Kant himself nor any of his suc-
cessors has been able to find a satisfactory and consistent
answer. A vast literature has already gathered round
the question, and is growing still. Are things per «e,
or are the phenomenal things in space the cause of
sensory impressions? This is the question. Which-
ever way it is answered special difficulties arise ; it is
therefore not surprising to find, sometimes, things per «e,
and sometimes external objects, assigned as the cause of
these *' affections of our sensibility.'

If, as Kant in the main does, we put forward things
per Be as this cause, then how can we also maintain
their purely problematic and negative character ? ^ They
become at once not *the boundary stones' but Hhe
foundation stones' of experience. We must know that

1 Cf . Drobisch, KanVs Dinge an sich und $ein Erfahrangibegriff:


I


122 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

they are ; and further from the variety of their effects
we must surely be able to infer something as to their
nature as causes. In a word, the categories, instead of
being confined to the raw stuff of experience, have now
some positive application to these things per se which
produce it ; and these, thus ceasing to be prceter nos,
become only extra no$ and phenomenal in their . turn.
Things per $e of a higher order now seem called for to
account for them, and so on indefinitely.^ On the other
hand, if Kant is to be held to his description of noumena
as purely problematic conceptions of what are objects
for beings whose intelligence is essentially different from
ours, it is idle to speak of them as causes concerned
in our experience.

Again, if, as neo-Kantians in the main do, we put
forward phenomenal objects as the cause of our sensa-
tions, we seem involved in a hopeless circle. "For,"
as Vaihinger in his monimiental commentary remarks,
"these empirical objects are according to Kant's thou-
sandfold repeated assurances ^nothing but our pre-
sentations.' How then can or should these presented
objects first affect us in order that we may obtain pre-
cisely the presentations in which alone they consist?"^
In short, remembering that our question is as to the
relation of subject and object generally, this answer is
tantamount to saying that the objective element in ex-
perience causes itself.

There is still another view that it would be weari-
some, and as I think needless, to discuss, which should

1 Cf. Caiid, The Critical PhiXoBophy of Kant, yol. i, p. 652.

^ Commentar zu KanVs Kritik der reinen Vemunfti Bd. II, p. 61.


PRESENTATIONISM 123

perhaps be mentioned. I refer to a doctrine, now in
favour with certain psychologists, that I have ventured
to call Presentationism. According to this, there are
at starting only presentations, and these by their inter-
action in due course give rise to a special presentation,
or rather complex of presentations, called the subject.
Such a doctrine I believe we are entitled summarily to
rule out of court till it is made plain to us how there
can be an experience with no unity, an experience that
nobody has.

So far then may we not say that we have good rea-
sons for demurring to treat the relation of subject and
object as primarily a causal relation? Some further
observations on this position and its consequences time
compels me to withhold till the next lecture.


LECTURE XV

BXPERIEKCB AS LIFE

jRecapitulation and further ea^lication as to the general conception of
experience. Its fundamental character t?ievfholedifflculty: early reflexion
misled by imperfect analysis and by deceptive analogies.

Coming to details, we note that every concrete experience is a process
of self-conservation, is a Life. Kant^s distinction of ^matter and form''
and his '• Synthetic Unity of Apperception.^ Conation more fundamental
t?han cognition. Subjective selection determined by the worth of objects
ratJier tJian by their * content.^ A purely cognitive experience impossible.
Practical interests nener absent. Even spatial and temporal relations
involve elements due to activity initiated by feeling.

Spatial perceptions and conceptions compared and discussed by vsay
of showing the shortcomings of dualism. Science, concerned ordy with
the conceptions, ignores t?ie elements due to the conative and practical
irUerests of the subject.

A like comparison and discussion of temporal perceptions and con-
ceptions.

The notion of empty space and empty time, as necessary antecedents
of the things and events that are said to fill them, is an inversion of
reality.

Let us first recall the general drift of our new
inquiry. It is to ascertain if there be not some way of
escape from that dualism of mental world and material
world, in consequence of which the departmental
sciences of physics and psychology have during two
centuries become more and more severed and estranged
from each other. Modem thought finds itself in a

124


RECAPITULATION 125

quandary familiar to most schoolboys working a sum,
when they bring out an answer which they know can-
not be right, while yet they fail to see any fault in
their mere arithmetic. Physics in its own department
seems to hold together, and psychology in like manner
in its department. Also we know that in experience
we find nothing of this gulf which yawns between
these sciences, and which hypotheses innumerable have
failed to bridge. To avoid this * scandal of philosophy
and of human reason,' as Kant called it, we have pro-
posed to leave the special sciences on one side, and to
reflect upon that experience as a whole, which they
begin by sundering. Like the schoolboy, we try our
sum again on a new method; that is to say, we take
up the problem of knowledge.

We started from the duality of subject and object as
the first essential of experience. In every concrete
experience there is one subject; and on the objective
side, too, such an experience is one, one life ; the
subject is continually in touch with one world, one
environment. The law of this life is change. Differ-
entiation, development, there may be too; but such life is
not a process of integrating particulars originally isolated
as well as distinct. Given a subject, or centre of
experience, and such an objective complement ; then
the most salient feature is their interaction : the feel-
ings that objective changes induce in the subject, and
the actions to which such feeling leads. To these we
must turn next. But first, one or two remarks on
what has been already said of this bare relation of
subject and object, which we have found to be the very


126 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

basis of experience. It cannot, we say, be itself a re-
lation of two disparate substances ; the unity of experi-
ence forbids that. Moreover, the dualism that has
brought our ^scientific philosophy' to a deadlock, went
wrong in this way. But can we even describe this
relation as a modification within one substance; can we
say that the object is a mode of the subject or the
subject a mode of the object? The attempt has been
made both ways, and both ways it has failed. The
sensationalism of Locke and the idealism of Berkeley
fall, more or less, under the one alternative: the old
forms of materialism and the 'presentationism' of certain
of our psychological contemporaries belong to the other.
The former fails to do justice to the objective unity of
experience, and the latter fails, still more egregiously,
to do justice to its subjective unity. The attempt again
to describe this relation as causal scarcely succeeds bet-
ter. The subject, no doubt, is active in thought and
volition, for example; but thinking and willing pre-
suppose objects: of a subject that either by thought
or will posits its own perceptions we at least know
nothing. Also it is true that one object, or rather
one change in the objective continuum, may prove the
cause of the presentation of another; so to relate
change with change is indeed the special function of
the category of cause. But this, like any other rela-
tion of particular object to particular object, leaves
the more fundamental relation of subject to object
just where it was.^

1 Cf. J. S. Mill, Examination of Sir. W. HamUton^s Philosophy,
third edition, p. 231.


UNCRITICAL VIEWS OF EXPERIENCE 127

The fundamental and ultimate character of this rela-
tion is, in fact, the whole difficulty. Experience is far
advanced ^bef ore even the rudest reflexion about it can
begin. Imperfect analysis and deceptive analogies are
the first result of such reflexion ; and as these become
embodied in common thought and language they coimt
for part of the facts, though really fictions that belie
them. Thus, the subject being identified with the or-
ganism which is but a special object among others, the
whole objective continuum is said to be an affection of
the subject, because the physical environment affects
the body. So we get the notion of sensations as sub-
jective affections, whose causes are still to seek. Then
come the metaphysical travesties of imier and outer,
which refer origina^y and literally to space divided
into two compartments by a man's skin. But pres-
ently, since it is said there is nothing in the intellect
but what first came through sense, 'inner' comes to
mean the whole of each one's experience as it is for
him, the psychical side of his particular brain ; inner
is then the equivalent of siibjective. Outer, on the other
hand, is the brain side of this particular subject pl^
all the rest of the external world ; in this all sentients
alike are supposed to participate. Imagine a dozen
genii, each one hermetically sealed in a bottle, but all
collectively roaming at large, and you have a fair par-
allel to this figure of inner and outer. Again, look for
a moment at another line, where reflexion shews itself
equally confused and incomplete. The sense of touch,
from its intimate connexion with muscular activity, is
held to present the actual ; while sight, spite of its pre-


^


128 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

eminence in cognition, being a fruitful source of illu-
sion, is found often to present things as they ^appear,'
not as they actually, i.e. tangibly, palpably, are. So
by an easy step <di our sensible intuitions come to be
regarded as phenomenal, the things per ««, which are
held to be their cause, and by which we might test
them, being now out of reach. But how then, we are
led to ask, can we speak of such things per ae at all?
And yet the answer is easy, once we are committed to
the notion that sensations are subjectively affections,
and objectively appearances or phenomena. For the
validity of these notions being taken for granted, Kant
argues with perfect cogency when he says *'that we
must have something to correspond to the receptivity
of the sensibility."^ And again that "it follows nat-
urally from the notion of a phenomenon of any sort
that something must correspond to it that is not itself
phenomenon"; also "that the very word 'phenomenon'
indicates a relation to something, the immediate pre-
sentation of which is indeed sensible, but which in itself
apart from this condition of sensibility, must still be
Something, namely, an object independent of sensibil-
ity."^ But the prime question is not what the notions
of receptivity and phenomenality implicate; but what
warrant these notions themselves possess in experience.
And here we can only follow suit and, like the great
body of Kant's critics, preach to Kant from himself.
Let what may be outside experience, if there can be
anything, and the supposition is not nonsense, at least

1 KrUik der reinen Vemunftt Eehrbach^s edition, p. 403.
«o.c., p. 233.


FUNDAMENTAL CHARACTER OF EXPERIENCE 129

there cannot be bare subjects lying in wait for objects,
nor objects that by definition never are positively ob-
jects. If the categories of substance and cause are only
valid within experience, they cannot be applied to ex-
perience as a whole. Whatever implications experience
may involve, it surely cannot involve that of transcend-
ing itself. Such miscalled transcendence, if it have any
validity, must really be immanence at bottom.

If this duality in unity of subject and object be in-
deed the fundamental fact of experience, present alike
in cognition, in feeling, and in volition, then, so far at
any rate, there can be nothing to explain. The demand
for explanation may be taken as evidence that we have
misconceived the facts. On this ground therefore we
must suspect and avoid aU statements of experience
that introduce conceptions of relations narrower and
more special than itself. Such, for example, is the ref-
erence to organs of sense excited by external stimuli.
Such again is the contrast of perceptual experience with
experience as modified by intersubjective intercourse, a
contrast which leads us first to picture each individual
as confined strictly to his own inside, and then with
Mr. Spencer and others to exclaim about "the myste-
riousness of the consciousness of something that is yet
out of consciousness, which, nevertheless," they say, " we
are obliged to think." * I am well aware that this is
the region of controversy and that dogmatism is here
peculiarly unbecoming. But there is another side to
the situation. The very failures that have overtaken
the old watchwords make it fitting to ask, whether it

1 Of. Spencer, Frindples of Psychology^ vol. ii, p. 462.

VOL. II — K


i


130 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

be not possible to take a little less for granted, and to
be charier of metaphors; whether it is not time to
treat as futile all attempts to explain experience, at any
rate all attempts to explain it by what falls short of it
on the one hand, or goes beyond it on the other. To
enounce that experience is a whole, or more precisely
a continuity, that it consists in the correlation of sub-
ject and object as its universal factors, is a statement
that seems to tamper with no facts and to involve no
hypotheses.

We must now look closer and see if this conception
of its unity still holds good when we come to details,
and advance from simpler to more complex forms of
experience. The first thing to note is that experience
in the concrete, that is any one's experience, is a process,
not a product. We speak of certain fixed arrange-
ments of objects as a product — a house, for example,
or a proposition of Euclid. But on the other hand all
products, whether of thought or art or nature, presup-
pose processes, of which we either have, or conceive
that we might have, an experience. We cannot, of
course, recall the beginning of our own experience, nor
can we, either by observation or inference, attain to any
conception of an experience which should be the sim-
plest possible. But all that we know, directly or indi-
rectly, warrants the statement that all experience is
process ; not merely change, not merely * felt change,'
but felt interchange. Brpadly speaking, every objective
change, every change of perception, entails a subjective
change ; and every subjective change an objective change.
I say, broadly speaking, because there are unirUer'


EXPERIENCE AS LIFE 131

eating presentations, to which there is no subjective
reaction, and which are pro tanto of no account even
for knowledge. In other respects, nevertheless, these
deserve our consideration ; they shew that the objec-
tive continuum has no definite limits, and they con-
stitute a field for future advance. Such a beyond we
are never without. To this topic belongs Leibniz's
classic distinction between perception and apperception,
the conscious and the subconscious, with all the tan-
gled questions thereto appertaining. To these we may
have to recur later. But we may for the present leave
it aside.

The selective interest, which we may fairly take as
characteristic in some measure of all experience, leads
to the remark that experience as a process may be further
defined as a process of self-conservation, and so far jus-
tifies us in describing it as life, or )8&9. It is scarcely
an exaggeration to say that the objects of experience
are not primarily objects of knowledge, but objects of
conation, i.e. of appetite and aversion. For though an
object must be cognised before it can be liked or disliked,
still it is to interesting objects that the subject mainly
attends, and it is with these, therefore, that the subject
acquires a closer and preciser acquaintance. A certain
afiBmty or consensiLS between this feeling and acting
subject and its objective continuum is then characteristic
of actual experience, so far as we can ascertain. Such
intimacy and adaptation is simply the counterpart of the
fact that to each subject there pertains a distinct organ-
ism and a special environment. It was but a one-sided
analysis, logical rather than psychological, that led Kant


132 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

to resolve experience into the dualism of matter and
form. Oddly enough Kant illustrates his position by
referring to the embryological controversies of his
time, but yet fails to see how close is the connexion
between experience and life. There were three hy-
potheses concerning life then in vogue: first, that of
its f spontaneous generation from matter; next, the hy-
pothesis that all life begins from a germ. But of this
there were two varieties, the pre-formation hypothesis,
according to which the germ was literally a complete
organism in miniature, which merely unfolded like a
bud; and the hypothesis of epigenesis, which denied
this mere expansion of the germ, and maintained that
each organism was built up de novo by a formative
impulse or nisiLS. With this last hypothesis, which
was the best established, Kant compares his own theory
of experience; to the first he likens the sensationalist
theory as commonly put down to Locke; while Leib-
niz's preestablished harmony is apparently meant to
correspond to the second. It is, no doubt, as hopeless
to try to conceive experience arising simply out of any
mere aggregate of sense-impressions as it is to conceive
life emerging from any aggregate of material particles.
But is the case really mended when over against such
an aggregate of sense-impressions we set the pure rea-
son of the Kantian philosophy with its forms of intuition
and of thought? From pure matter to which all form
is indifferent, and pure forms to which all matter is
indifferent, how is a definite result possible ? The nuns
vitalis in the hypothesis of epigenesis was, after all,
only formative within an already organised germ, and


PRACTICAL INTEREST ESSENTIAL 133

was powerless to act directly on unformed matter. If
Kant is to be in earnest with his simile of epigenesis,
then he must discard the formless matter of his sense-
manifold. As I have already urged, psychology has
certainly disposed of it, and we may safely say with
Professor Stumpf , to whom this question owes so much,
that "that cannot be true in epistemology which
is false in psychology."^ Whatever may be the value
in logical analysis of the metaphor of matter and form,
"the clumsy potter's phrase," as Herder styled it, it
is certainly inadequate to the synthesis of experience,
as indeed all material analogies are.

Kant represents this synthesis of experience as an
activity of the subject, an activity too which in thought
is spontaneous. But the point upon which I am con-
cerned to insist is that there is no activity and no spon-
taneity apart altogether from feeling and interest.
Experience can not without mutilation be resolved into
three departments, one cognitive or theoretical, one
emotional, and one practical. To be just to it, Kant's
three critiques must be combined into one. It is true
that what we take and what we find we must take and find
as it is given. But, on the other hand, it is also true
that we do not take — at least do not take up — what
is uninteresting ; nor do we find unless we seek, nor
seek unless we desire. The cognitive aspect of experi-
ence, in a word, is far more one of experiment, as its
very etymology suggests, than one of mere disinterested
observation. The philosopher may look on at the
buyers and sellers in the market-place, but the real

1 Psychologie und ErkenntnisstJieorie, 1891, p. 18.


134 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

experience is their trafficking, not the notes of this de-
tached bystander. Regarding experience in this wise
as life, self-conservation, self-realisation, and taking
conation not cognition as its central feature, we must
conclude that it is not that * content' of objects, which
the subject cannot alter, that gives them their place in
its experience, but their worth positive or negative,
their goodness or badness as ends or means to life.
We realise this truth if we try to imagine a purely
cognitive being — a subject apprehending or thinking
but devoid of any interest in thought or apprehension.
What psychologists call *the span of consciousness,' its
limited field and still more limited focus, has to be taken
into account. What is to determine which objects shall
enter this field, and on which attention shall be concen-
trated ? ^ Kant, no doubt, did well in declaring the syn-
thetic unity of apperception to be the paramount principle
of knowledge, but it is surely a mistake to suppose any
synthesis, or any unity, possible, apart from motives to
action and a practical interest in things. The cen-
trality and organisation — I intend the words to be
taken very literally — which all concrete experience
manifests, could never arise to a merely cognitive sub-
ject ; nor to us, if our intellective were independent
of our practical powers. In proof of this we have
only to turn again to what Naturalism mistakes for
experience — an indefinite multiplicity of inert un-
changeable items related only by unchangeable, un-
meaning, mechanical laws. Hence, the inability of

1 We can scarcely credit such a subject with an organism, for this
seems necessarily to imply sentient activity.


PRACTICAL ELEMENTS IN SPACE AND TIME 135

Naturalism to connect such a centreless, aimless, fatal-
istic scheme, ^^a cosmic process that has no sort of
relation to moral ends,"^ with experience as the self-
conservative process which it is for each of us. It is
this inability which we are seeking to remove.

Even spatial and temporal relations as we actually
experience them involve practical elements, which can
only be accounted for when experience is regarded as
life and not merely as theory. For lack of these ele-
ments the mathematical conceptions of space and time
are abstract and unreal. Kant, as we all know, treats
both space and time as pure forms of intuition ; and
space and time as conceptual ideals can be so treated.
But I think psychology teaches us that we should have
had no perception of either the one or the other but
for our practical interests. One essential of spatial
perception is voluntary movement. Though such move-
ments are objective changes as much as sensations are ;
yet they are changes which produce other objective
changes, and changes which the subject initiates. To
them we owe the notions of distance and of measure-
ment. To them we owe, too, the all-important notion
of a definite origin, a here to which we relate all
theres. Similar remarks apply in the case of time.
The present is the time in which we act ; the future
that for which we prepare. To the present we actively
adjust — we look, listen, handle, pursue, retreat. With
the past, as past, we have no dealings ; it is ^^ over
and done with " as we expressively say, save as it leads
us to expect and modify the future.

^ Hazley, Evolution and Ethics, p. 34 ; Collected Essays, vol. ix, p. 83.


186 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

It will repay us to reflect on these points a little
longer, as a comparison of our concrete time and space
perceptions, if I may so call them, with the abstract
ideals of time and space current in exact science helps
to lay bare the shortcomings of dualism. We shall
find a far more intimate connexion between the sub-
jective and objective factors of experience than would
be possible if dualism were true.

If the psychological position that a knowledge of
space presupposes active movement be sound, then no
merely cognitive activity in apprehending and compar-
ing changes of quality and intensity would make us
aware of space as an indefinite manifold of three or
more dimensions. We might still have our objective
continuum ; and the changes in this, like the changes
in a melody or in our organic sensations, might — we
will for the present suppose — be remembered and com-
pared. Time as the abstract form of succession would
thus be possible. But the only element of space that
we should have would be that of extensity : the vo-
luminousness or massiveness that we now connect with
embodiment, but which we should then connect with
nothing, for there would be nothing from which to
distinguish it. Whether, on shipboard, we look down
at the deck, or away to the horizon, or upwards at the
sky above us, the extensity of the colour sensation is
in each case the same ; the difference in the space seen
is due to acquired perceptions involving movement.^

1 A fact first dearly brought out by Berkeley in his Essay tatoards
a New Theory of Vision, thus opening a new chapter in the theory of
knowledge, and one the full significance of which has hardly yet been
realised.


MOVEMENT AND PERCEPTION OF SPACE 137

"We can never imagine," says Kant, "that there is
no space, although we can quite well think that no
objects are met toith^ in it." But, having thought away
all objects, how do we imagine this empty space itself ?
Kant's own words betray him: we suppose ourselves
to be traversing this space and meeting with nothing aa
we proceed. But how could such a progress be im-
agined by a subject incapable of active movement; and
if there were no such imaginary movement what would
be left of pure space as an infinite whole? And again,
though in the first part of his Oritiqt^ he describes
space as an infinite given magnitude, in the next he
has to allow that we cannot think of a line without
in thought drawing it, or of a circle without describing

it, nor ever imagine the three dimensions of space
without producing three lines intersecting each other at

right angles through the same point — all which is ob-
viously in contradiction with the notion of space as an
infinite given whole.

Perhaps we may most clearly realise that movement
is an essential element in our spatial experience if we
contrast with it that omnipresence or repletive ubiety
as the schoolmen called it, which they, followed by
Locke, Newton, and Clarke, attributed to the Deity.*
In a remarkable passage in his Optick$y Newton speaks
of absolute space as the sensorium of God ; and Clarke
in his famous controversy with Leibniz^ compares the

1 Italics mine.

* Of course it is empirical space not the abstract space of geometers
with which we are now concerned. Kant's great mistake was to con-
found the two.

* Leibnittii, Opera Philosophica Omnia, ed. J. E. Erdmann, p. 750.


138 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

presence of the soul to the sensations ^^in its little
sphere " with this living presence of the Deity through-
out immensity. The ubiquity of the soul in the body
as sentient — definitive ubiety, as the schoolmen termed
it — is thus the counterpart of the omnipresence of God
in space ; or, according to the phraseology I have been
using, a presentational continuum of infinite extensity
is present to the Divine Mind, but to the creature mind
a continuum limited to the impressions of a definite
organism. With the alleged defects of Newton's simile
— as, for instance, that it makes God the soul of the
world — we have at present no concern. It serves to
bring out one point: the only experience in which an
intuition of space as an infinite given whole is possi-
ble, is one in which every place is here and all places
present together. To such ubiquity movement would
be needless and even unmeaning; but such ubiquity
would not be our space. Within the little sphere of
its own sensorium, to use again Clarke's phrase, the
finite subject has ubiquity, but unlike the Deity, it can
actively intervene even here only by movements. Apart
from these this restricted ubiquity would not sufiSce for
a *form of externality.' But it is our conative interests
that lead to the movements by which we advance to the
full perception of space.

It belongs to psychology to explain this advance in
detail : the distinction of the body as an occupied space
in which impressions are * localised' from other bodies
and the environing space into which impressions are
'projected ' ; the invariable reference to the body as the
here or point of departure ; the steadily decreasing defi-


PERCEPTUAL AND CONCEPTUAL SPACE 139

niteness of these spatial perceptions as the radius of
the little sphere extends, and we pass from the more
adjacent places, in which we can discern both direction
and distance, to those in which only directions are per-
ceptible, from places so contiguous as to be controlled
by changes of posture to those amenable to control only
by locomotion. It is from this psychological, perspec-
tive space, with its absolute origin in the 'here' of the
percipient, each successive shell as we recede from this
centre, differing in characteristics and ordinates and
even dimensions, and differing largely by reason of the
different movements to which it is correlated — from
this concrete spatial scheme it is, I say, that the abstract
space of Euclid has been elaborated. And it bears
manifest traces of its origin, as the recent developments
of generalised geometries abundantly shew.^ I grant that

geometry involves intuitive construction and not merely
logical distinction; but this construction presupposes
such free movements as our bodies can make, move-
ments either of translation or of rotation. Had we
been "evolved" to maintain like compass-magnets one
constant orientation, or like screws to move only by
rotation and translation conjoined, it would be hard
to say what we should have made out of space of three
dimensions.

But, though our geometrical space contains elements
due to our motor experiences, it differs in important
particulars from our spatial perceptions. JEntre Thomme
et le monde il fatU VhumanitS^ said Comte; and it is
precisely this intervention of * humanity,' of Bettmsstsein
1 Even the phrase * tJUrd dimension * is in this way significant.


140 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

Uberhaupt, as Kant styled it, of understanding, reason,
thought — call it what you will — bettveen the per-
cipient and his immediate objective experience that has
made geometry possible; and it is this also that has
given rise to dualism. We shall have to deal with this
problem at length in the next two lectures ; but it may
be helpful to anticipate that general discussion so far
as space and time are concerned. An adequate treat-
ment even of this special question is quite beyond our
limits. I propose to refer to only three closely related
topics in this transition from spatial perception to spatial
conception, the transition, in other words, from actual
experience of spatial relation to the bare idea of pure
space. Into the actual experience there enter always
three factors; viz. various extensive continua, various
series of active movements or motor continua, and a
primary position or origin, which we call * here.' About
all these there is — from the standpoint of individual
experience — something absolute. Sensory impressions
as extensive, movements as protensive, have what psy-
chologists call 'threshold values.' Such minima sensibilia
furnish a standard of magnitude that is indeed relative
to the individual, but not relative for the individual.
A man cannot take thirty steps to the yard as a mouse
must do, nor can he *mark time' like the wings of a
gnat. I have always admired the sagacity of Locke's
remarks on this point: "Every part of duration," he
says, " is duration too ; and every part of extension is
extension, both of them capable of addition or division
in infinitum. But," he adds with emphasis, *' the least
portions of either of them^ whereof we have clear and


LOCK£ AND KANT ON SPACE 141

distinct ideaSj may perhaps be fittest to be considered by
us, as the simple ideas of that kind, out of which our
complex modes of space, extension, and duration are
made up, and into which they can again be distinctly
resolved." He then proposes to call this perceptual
element of space ^^ a sensible pointy meaning thereby the
least particle of matter or space we can discern." ^ What
is epistemologically important in this passage is that
it denies thoroughgoing relativity of our spatial (and
temporal) perception, while allowing such thorough-
going relativity to belong to our conceptions of space
(and time). Given only the pure space of Kant and
the geometers, it is impossible to deduce the actual space
of experience; but, given this, the deduction of that is
intelligible. The one, as perceptual, really affords a
foothold for the construction of the other as a concep-
tual ideal. Psychologically regarded, * large ' and * small '
are not purely relative terms; while, per contra^ zero
and infinity are simply negations. Certain inconsisten-
cies in Kant's doctrines will make this clearer. First,
Kant tells us space is a form of intuition; but a form
of intuition is not itself an intuition, any more than
a blank cheque is a sum of money. How then, we ask,
do we obtain intuitions of definite pure spaces ? To this
question Kant gives two diametrically opposite answers.
At one time he tells us that space ought not to be
called a Compositium^ but a Totum? because the parts are
only possible in the whole, and not the whole through
the parts. In conformity with this standpoint, he then

1 Essay concerning Human Understanding^ bk. ii, chap, xr, § 9.
^ Kritik der reinen Vemut^i Kehrbach's edition, p. 864.


•


142 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

describes definite spaces as arising solely through the
limitation of this infinite given whole.TvBut at another
time he asserts that space is not a totum^ but a compositum
ideaUy '^in which the idea of the part makes the idea
of the whole possible, and therefore necessarily precedes
it/'^ It is in keeping with this that he says:^ "I can-
not imagine any line, however smaU it be, without
in thought drawing it, i.e., from one point producing
all the parts, one after the other." But how, I ask, is
either procedure possible? How, setting out from space
as an infinite whole, am I to determine the point by
limitation, and how, from the point as zero, am I, by
a gradual synthesis of smallest possibles, to set up the
infinite whole ? But there is still a third view of space
to be found in Kant's writings, and this is, I think, the
true one. The infinite extent and the infinite divisi-
bility of space are ideals ; setting out from a finite line,
we can actually progress or regress indefinitely, but not
infinitely. Pure or absolute space is then not the pre-
supposition of spatial experience, but the consequence
of idealising this. In keeping with such a doctrine, we
can say space is both a totvm and a compositum — a totum
so far as our "little sphere" of extensity or ubiquity
goes, a compositum so far as we quantitatively differentiate
and extend it by movements. This is the foothold to
which I just now referred, from which we proceed to
measure the world. Active experience thus becomes
the basis of geometry, not geometry of experience.

I pass now to my second point. The place we call
'here,' however relative to the individual, is absolute

1 KrUik der reinen Vemur^, Analytik, § 26, note. ^ o.c, p. 160.


MEANING OF 'HERE' AND 'THERE' 143

for the individual ; * here ' is where we primarily dis-
tinguish right and left, up and down, before and behind ;
here is the point through which we set up our rec-
tangular coordinates and distinguish what Kant called
regions in space. But suppose we start with pure space,
where is this origin to be placed, and how are these axes
to be laid out ? Anywhere it will be said, and anyhow,
provided the axes are rectangular. Very good, but then
why not everywhere and everyhow and differently at
different times? The quandary of the famous ass of
Buridanus is as nothing to this and no Leibniz can
come to the rescue with the principle of indiscemibles.
There is no here and no there, no east, no west in pure
space. Its thoroughgoing relativity constitutes it an
absolute ; it is absolutely relative, — a system of relations
without a fundamentum relatianu^ and so a non-entity.
The form of a human hand, if we imagine it as the first
thing created, would certainly, as Kant says, be that of a
right hand or that of a left. Every actual figure must
be a definite figure. But I cannot see that such a hand
would furnish any evidence of the distinction of regions
in absolute space; or even that it would do so if its
counterpart were placed beside it. A right and left
hand alone in space do not suffice to constitute right
and left regions there. Referred both to the same
direction, as they perfectly well might be, they would
suggest not symmetry but dissimilarity; and, in fact,
while to the harp-player they present the one character,
to the pianist they present the other. The *here' of
actual experience is the first position in space ; to this
all other positions experienced are relative, as positions


144 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

in the environment. It is from orientation in such a
space, a space largely projective, the space, in short, of
visual perspective, that we slowly advance, aided by
our own memory of the past and by intercourse with
others, to the geometrical conception of space as an
extensive continuum of three dimensions, homogeneous
in all respects. But setting out from such an abstract
conception, simplified to the utmost by long experience,
we should find it hard to attain to the concrete space
in which we live and find our bearings.

And how do we find our bearings? This brings us
to the last point I will venture to notice, — the nature
of empty space in which we should certainly find none.
Common thought and science alike regard space as a
receptaculum, which as such can be either full or
empty, and is, in fact, partly the one and partly the
other; so at least Newton conceived it. I will say
nothing of the glaring logical circle involved in thus
describing space by a figure of speech which presupposes
it. What I wish to challenge is the notion that space
is in any sense prior to or independent of the empirical
objects that are said to occupy portions of it and to be
all contained in it. It is certain that our first ex-
perience is not of "extension which is extension of
nothing at all," ^ but of bodies that are extended. Nor
can it be maintained that since the perception of body
as extended requires movement, and movement implies
space to move in, therefore the knowledge of occupied
space implies the knowledge of empty space as well.
There is no warrant for the assumption that movement

1 Croom Robertson, Mind, vol. xlii, p. 422.


EMPTY SPACE 145

is impossible without a yacuum, as Locke supposed.
Such a yiew takes for granted that bodies consist ulti-
mately of adamantine particles, incapable of either dila-
tion or compression. This, as Kant, I think, has
conclusively shewn, is "a purely metaphysical hypoth-
esis."^ More in keeping with immediate experience, to
say the least, is the yiew that occupation of space is
not a mechanical but a dynamical occupation, and one
admitting therefore of varying deg^rees of intensity.
Whether nature abhors a vacuum or no, we at any rate
have no evidence of one. Movement is possible where
displacement is possible, as we see in a globe of fish,
and no other condition is necessary. But, though
empirical space is never empty space, the fact that
bodies retain their forms and yet freely change their
places enables us, first to separate the conception of a
given space from any particular body, and then to
advance to the conception of space as a whole devoid
of all real content and occupied only by itself. We
do not say there is nothing there, but that only space
is there. And had the empirical space, from which we
derive this conception, been one in which we had never
found any bodies possessing either fixity of form or
fixity of position, our conception of pure space, if we
ever attained to it, would have been one in which all the
parts were movable, though the motion could no longer
be distinguished. As it is we have derived our notions
of space from relatively rigid bodies and relatively
fixed positions, and accordingly we conceive the parts
of pure space as immovable, though these parts can no

1 Kritik der reinen Vemur^ft, Kehrbach's edition, p. 168.

VOL. n — L


146 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

longer be distinguished. It is odd to note here how
extremes meet. What would be true of a space filled
with adamant we predicate of a space filled only by
imagining it empty. But let us not forget two things :

(1) this pure, absolute, immovable space is an ideal ;

(2) such a conception is only possible to subjects that
have had full experience of extended bodies and their
relative places and displacements. In a word, the space
of the geometers is neither a priori^ pertaining wholly
to the subject in Kant's sense, nor real apart from
objects of experience in the sense of Newton and
Clarke. It is indeed the work of the mind, has ideality
and validity, but not reality ; but also it is based upon
concrete experiences, in which both subjective and
objective factors cooperate.

In the case of time the same general considerations
again present themselves, leading, as I think, to the same
conclusion. It will su£Gice to refer to these very briefly.
The scientific conception of time as the great indepen-
dent variable, is only attained by way of temporal per-
ceptions, involving active elements that in turn depend
on subjective interests. A mere series of *nows* would
give us no knowledge of time ; indeed it is proverbial
that so long as we are absorbed in the present we are
oblivious of time. "2)«m gliichliehen^^^ said the poet,
^^schldgt keine Stunde.''^ It is the impulses and inter-
ests that the present does not satisfy that bring the
fact of time before us; it is appetition that leads us to
await; and the tension of pursuit gradually nearing its
prize that marks the succession and measures the length

1 Schiller, quoted by Yolkmann.


PERCEPTUAL AND CONCEPTUAL TIME 147

of time. The more carefully psychologists reflect upon
the facts of life the more clearly, as it seems to me,
they see that cognitive processes of retentiveness and
association, however indispensable, are of themselves in-
sufficient to account for either memory or expectation.
Only through subjective selection with its consequent
restriction, differentiation, and emphasis of special pre-
sentations, can temporal order become distinct. For in
such restriction and emphasis we have what the psychol-
ogist calls a focus of consciousness; and it is by their
successive occupation of this focus that perceptions
obtain definite time-marks.

But there is more in temporal experience than suc-
cession; there is simultaneity and duration as well.
We have all these together in change ; and change, we
may safely say, is the fundamental objective fact in all
our time experience. We cannot perceive a change as
happening, unless two or more of its continuous phases
are perceptibly distinguishable within the limits of what
is for us an enduring now. If no difference of phase
is discernible within this * specious present' as it has
been called — whether because the succession is too
rapid or too slow, or the difference too slight, matters
not — in such a case, though there be a change, we shall
perceive none. With time as with space, infinite divisi-
bility is not a matter of concrete experience ; we have
a certain natural tempo^ which, however relative when
referred to pure time, is not relative for us. In tem-
poral perception too, as in spatial, we have a certain
limited ubiquity, a ntme stans or enduring now, within
which attention moves. Such a movement or * moment,'


148 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

*^the time of one idea in our minds" as Locke calls it,
is not positively resolvable into a succession; and con-
versely such moments could not themselves constitute
an actually experienced succession, if there were no en-
during present within which two or more of them
could fall. We are not called upon, I think, to inquire
further into the psychological characteristics of this
duration. What concerns us rather is the fact that
this perceptual experience has no counterpart in the
scientific conception of time. There every duratioii re-
solves into succession and there is no nunc stans; the
present is a point of time, not a portion of it. Even
this is saying too much; for as in empty space we
have no ground for distinguishing here from there, so
in empty time we have none for distinguishing now
from then ; and even the oneness of direction, from past
to present, from present to future, is merged in oneness
of dimension. It is easy to understand how the collec-
tive experience of the race has elaborated this abstract
ideal of empty time; but it is surely a mistake to re-
gard it, either as a form of intuition presupposed in all
temporal experience, or as having any kind of reality
apart from the events which are figuratively said to fill
it. It is only as we approach it from the side of these
that we can give any meaning to such a notion at all.
In this respect it is much on a par with indeterminate
forms, — such as x^, a;"*, etc., — which can only be inter-
preted when it is known how they have been reached.
An experience is quite conceivable, in which there would
have been no opportunity for the observation of natural,
or for the invention of artificial, time-measurers. In


'■■^


EMPTY SPACE AND TIME UNREAL 149

such a case, I imag^e, our quantitative conceptions of
time would have been as faulty, or as complex, as our
spatial conceptions in the absence of all experience of
rigid bodies. But whether flowing evenly or not, time
cannot be conceived as flowing at all unless we take
account both of duration and simultaneity. True, suc-
cession only can be brought under the mathematical
rubric of dimension, but the practice of representing
this one dimension by a line, at once reveals the other
elements lurking under it. For we do not literally
identify time with a line, but by the leng^ of the line
we measure duration, and by motion along it we con-
ceive succession. But we must have a finite portion of
the line presented as coexistent, and we must have two
positions of the moving point apprehended together and
yet distinguished as successively occupied, before we
can conceive time : all which we find in every concrete
experience of change.

And now, in conclusion, I must endeavour to indicate
the bearings of this discussion on our main problem, —
the refutation of dualism. Time and space, I have con-
tended, belong neither to the subject alone apart from
the object, nor to the object alone apart from the sub-
ject, but to experience as the duality of both. They
are neither subjective forms psychologically or logically
prior to experience, nor are they objective realities inde-
pendent of experience. Before it is possible for us to
elaborate those conceptions of pure, empty, absolute
space and time, of which geometry and its possible pen-
dant, chronometry, treat, we must first experience spa-
tial and temporal relations in the concrete. To these


150 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

the child, the savage, and the brute are confined. Our
advance is due to that partial transcendence of in-
dividual experience which intersubjective intercourse
secures. It is this transcendence of any given per-
ceptual experience which misleads us into regarding the
space and time of mathematics as independent of expe-
rience altogether — a fundamental delusion of the dual-
ist to which we shall have to refer again and again.
Into our concrete experience of spatial and temporal
determinations there enter elements due not merely to
the cognitive activity of the percipient, — if we aUow
for a moment that such activity is conceivable alone,
— but elements due to the conative and practical im-
pulses and interests of the subject as a living and self-
conserving unity. If this be true, then obviously the
procedure of Naturalism must be wrong ; experience
cannot be disarticulated into dual worlds, one of phe-
nomena and one of epiphenomena ; nor the latter be
regarded as secondary and dependent on the first as
the only world that is capable of going along of itself.
The notion of empty space and time as necessary ante-
cedent conditions, either in thought or fact, of the things
and events that are said to fill them, although a very
natural and persistent inversion of the truth, has — as
I think — been conclusively shewn to be an inversion,
both by psychologists and epistemologists, too, of widely
different schools. But my old teacher, Lotze, has per-
haps done most to give this conclusion sterling cur-
rency in the philosophic world. It seems fitting then
to bring this lecture to a close with some words of his
concerning time. ^^Only in the content itself of what-


LOTZE QUOTED 161

ever happens, not in a form at hand outside it, into
which it may .fall, can the ground lie both of the order
of its succession and of its being a succession at all.
. . . Becoming and activity come first, and bring
forth bota themselves either the actual course of time
or the appearance thereof in us. The persistent contra-
diction which imagination would allege against such an
inversion of our usual mode of thought, we can as
little get rid of as of our habit of saying that the sun
rises and sets; but we may hope to understand the
one illusion as well as we understand the other." ^
Unhappily, I may add, science holds as inveterately,
but with far more self-confidence, to the one illusion
as common language does to the other.

1 MeU^^aies, § 148.


LECTURE XVI

RISE OF DUALISM

Two forms of experience have emerged in the course of our previous
discussion : the experience of a given individual and Experience as the
result of intersuhjective intercourse. Dualism maintained by miscon-
ception as to the relation of these tw>, and by their separate treatmetit —
the one eocdusively by psychology, the other by tJie natural sciences. To
rtfute dualism, then, we need to show that the second form of experience
is an extension of the first and thaJL there is organic unity throughout
both.

In the case of individual experience, this organic unity illustrated
by reference to (1) Bange in time, (2) Familiarity or Expertness, and
(3) Intellective Synthesis.

Intersubijective intercourse leads to universcd Experience, and gives
rise to the naXve dualism of common thought. It does this through (1) the
notion of the transsubjective (^naXve realism), and (2) tJie hypothesis of
' introjection^ (animism). A protest against the phrase ^internal and
external experience.^

Thb discussions that have largely occupied us during
the last two lectures have, I trust, brought out three
points. First, we found experience used in a double
sense : there is the experience, the living experience, of
a given individual, filled with concrete events and shaped
from first to last by the paramount end of self -conser-
vation and self-realisation. There is also experience
generally — Experience with a capital E, the common
empirical knowledge of the race, the result entirely of

152


TWO FORMS OF EXPERIENCE 163

intersubjective intercourse, systematised and formulated
by means of abstract conceptions. Next, we found
grounds for suspecting that dualism has arisen from
misconception and ignorance as to the relation of these
two senses of experience. Experience in the first sense
being relegated to psychology, experience in the second
remained as the sole business of natural science; and
the one experience coming then to be regarded as exclu-
sively subjective and the other as altogether objective,
a clear line emerges between the two and the dualism
of Mind and Nature is the result. But now, in the third
place, we have found that our primary, concrete experi-
ence invariably implies both subjective and objective
factors, and seems to involve these, not as separable and
independent elements, but as organically cooperant mem-
bers of one whole. If they bear this character through-
out, then logical distinction of these factors is possible
but not their actual dismemberment; there is duality
but no dualism. To refute the dualism of ordinary
scientific thought then, it is necessary to shew that the
generalised or universal Experience with which it is
immediately concerned has g^own out of, depends upon,
and is really but an extension of, our primary, individual,
concrete experience ; and to shew also that within expe-
rience there is always organic unity. I have tried
already to prove both to be true in the particular case
of space and time ; arguing first, that spatial and tem-
poral perceptions involve both subjective and objective
factors, are not purely subjective in the sense of being
wholly a priori^ nor purely objective in the sense of pre-
senting independent realities ; and arguing further, that


154 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

the conceptions of space and time scientifically in vogue
are idealised derivatives of these perceptions. We might
proceed to argue in like manner concerning matter and
force. But our earlier discussions of the mechanical
theory have, I trust, sufficiently forestalled such detailed
inquiry in these cases. In fact, we found half our work
done for us when we attended only to the teaching of
those physicists who have any claim to philosophical com-
petence. They admit that the matter and force of which
they treat are not in themselves perceptual realities, are
not phenomena, but abstract ideal conceptions devised
for the description of such. Perceptual realities at aU
events belong entirely to individual experiences; and
descriptive conceptions plainly imply intersubjective in-
tercourse; in other words, universal, or, as it has been
called, transsubjective experience. Inasmuch, then, as
we suspect the dualism of mind and matter to be
grounded on the absence of clear knowledge concerning
the relations of these two forms or phases of experience,
it will help us most to continue our inquiry on broader
lines and to omit meanwhile further detailed discussion
of conceptions such as matter and force.

But first of all a caveat must again be entered against
such terms as percepts, perceptual reality, and the like,
which as the only terms in general use we have not been
able altogether to avoid. The assailant of dualism is at
a unique disadvantage ; the very weapons he uses have
been forged by the enemy, and seem designed to betray
him. Our psychological terminology is perhaps the most
treacherous of all. What each one immediately deals
with in experience is objective reality in the most fun-


UNITY OF INDIVIDUAL EXPERIENCE 165

damental sense. But first it was styled a picture or
impression; probably because on the retina of the per-
cipient an optical image of the things he looks at can
be seen by another. Then, when the progress of science
shewed that our so-called sensory impressions cannot be
literally representations, or copies, they lapsed into vica-
rious representations, or symbols, of the objects of uni-
versal experience. Finally came the vexed question :
How does the individual or how do any number of indi-
viduals, aU confined to vicarious symbols, attain to an
acquaintance with the real originals assumed to lie be-
yond? Thought, foiled in its attempts to advance, was
led to retrace its steps. At this juncture the protest of
Reid occurs and, despite his faulty reconstruction, the
protest in itself was sound and weighty. Of this, the
revival by so many thinkers in our own day of Reid's
problem is a striking proof. Two things seem certain :
Experience in which conceptions figure is preceded by
experience in which they do not; and in this earlier
experience the distinction of percept and object does not
arise. Perceptual reality is then for us only a convenient
term to distinguish the present objects of the one expe-
rience from the objects of the other. What each one
immediately deals with in his own experience is, I repeat,
objective reality in the most fundamental sense, and we
have to be incessantly on our guard lest the psychological
terms we naturally use mislead us unawares.

With this caution we may now resume our inquiry.
Before the stage at which experience is extended by
intersubjective intercourse, can it be dismembered into
two independent wholes? It may su£Gice to select for


166 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

consideration three distinct but related characteristics
of developing experience. We may call them (1) Range
in time ; (2) Familiarity or expertness : (8) Intellec-
tive Synthesis. The first of these has been already to
some extent anticipated in our previous discussion of
time. Inasmuch as experience is always experience of
process or change, an experience confined strictly to
each present instant would be as much a contradiction
as an experience ranging indefinitely through an empty
time in which nothing happened. In one or other of
these meeting extremes the matter of the physicist is
placed ; neither as actual subject nor as concrete object
is it conceivable. Not as subject, for as inert it initi-
ates nothing and is indifferent to everything; of its
varying external circumstances it retains no trace. Not
as object, because in itself i^ i^ unchangeable and its
external changes have severally succession but no dura-
tion. Some such considerations as these were present
to Leibniz when in his early essay on Abstract Motion
he said, omni$ enim corpus est mens momewtanea.^ The
conception of body suggests the extreme limits between
which experience proper lies. In order to^such experi-
ence at all there must be an enduring present ; and in
order to its fuller development there must be some re-
tentiveness or memory of the past.

It has always been a difficult problem for psychology
— this hold on the past secured by memory; and few
are the psychologists who have realised what a funda-
mental fact it is. Far too commonly it is imagined that
memory is mainly a matter of retentiveness ; accord-
> Cf. Zeller, GeschicJUe der deutsdien Phaosophie, p. 109.


RANGE m TIME 167

ingly when an array of physical instances of such reten-
tiveness can be marshalled, the mystery of memory is
thought to be fairly cleared up. But we could never
find a single such instance save with the help of mem-
ory, nor would they be reliable even as physical facts
except on the assumption that memory is trustworthy.
Nay, the bare term * retention' itself, and all cognate
terms, such as Hrace' or ^residuum,' are meaningless
unless some present circumstance can be related to the
past ; thus they presuppose memory. The analogy of
inscribed records is a favourite resort of those who
strive to elucidate the nature of memory by physical
imagery ; we find it again and again in Locke, for ex-
ample. Such an analogy is about on a par with that
between the eye and a telescope — the one is a natural,
the other an artificial, organ or instrument of vision ;
but neither will explain seeing as a psychological fact.
Brain traces and written records are in the same case.
Such phenomena as those of resonance, phosphorescence,
hysteresis, and the like, often cited in support of the
childish absurdity of ' ideagenous molecules,' ^ will carry
us about as far in the explanation of memory as written
materials will in the explanation of memoranda ; the
writer himself and what he is interested to retain are
still lacking — that is all! But these are the essentials,
the efficient cause and the final cause of the result.
Physical analogies are here, as usual, worthless to the
true psychologist, and throw no light on memory-know-
ledge. Recourse to them is a consequence of dualism
and their ineptness so far a refutation of it. Apart
1 Cf . Huxley, Collected Essays, vol. i, p. 239.


168 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

from the activity and interest of the subject there is
no evidence of retentiveness, whatever be the physical
intensity of the stimulus or however frequent its repe-
tition. Nor is the so-called * retention' in the least
comparable to the unchanged persistence of an effect,
or to the preservation of goods in a storehouse safe
from the teeth of time. On the contrary, we only re-
tain what we change, in other words, what we assimilate.
If the old merely persisted, we should have an accumu-
lation as fruitless as a miser's store. Or if the past
merely recurred again unchanged, it would be indistin-
guishable from what is simply present ; to be known as
past, it must bear the marks of the past about it,
marks which it obviously could not have had when first
present. These dates, or temporal signs as they may
be called, plainly bespeak that unity and solidarity
of individual experience which only subjective activity
and interest can bring about. What is thus dated or
remembered is our own past experience ; we can re-
member nothing else. In this way there arises at once
our subjective or biotic time along with its concrete
^ filling,' both inseparable from the individual subject to
which as its own objective experience they immediately
pertain. It is from this that we advance to the medi-
ate conceptions, first of transsubjective or common
time, and finally, of absolute time. Again it is from
the immediately presented content of this subjective
time — what each one calls *my time' — that we pro-
ceed to range events chronologically in the common
historical time, which we come to think of in dualistic
fashion as independent of all subjective factors.


THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY 159

Here, again, then we have to expose the covert dualism
that renders our psychological terminology unsuited to
epistemological discussions. As we are supposed to
know present objects through impressions of them, so
are we said to know the past through memory-images ;
the process is held to be alike mediate and vicarious in
both cases. On the contrary, I venture to maintain that
it is equally immediate in both. The distinction of
memory-image and past object only arises at the level
of universal experience, when dualism first becomes pos-
sible. On the question of fact Reid seems to me to have
been here also in the right and far more consistent than
his more learned exponent, Hamilton, who at this point
forsakes him.^ In particular cases memory may be fal-
lible, as in particular cases the senses may be illusory ;
but there is no appeal in such cases which does not rest
on their general validity. So far the mediate knowledge
of universal experience presupposes the immediate know-
ledge of individual experience. If we could never trust
memory implicitly, it would be impossible ever to test
it. But how could we ever trust memory implicitly if
all memory-knowledge is mediate, — how could we ever
know lapse of time at all if we never know it directly ?
It is only our extreme familiarity with the universal
standpoint which hides from us the necessary priority of
individual experience, a priority which nevertheless seems
obvious on reflexion. So far then we find the duaUty
of subject and object in the unity of experience will not
resolve into an independent dualism of internal world
and external world. I pass now to the second point.

1 Cf. Reid's Works, Hamilton's edition, p. 889, and Appendix B,


160 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

Experience and familiarity, experience and expertness,
are closely akin, so closely that we cannot, I think, call
that experience in which there is nothing of either. To
beg^ the exposition of experience from the standpoint
of Locke's tabula rasa^ or from that of Kant's chaotic
* manifold,' is in reality to attempt to shew how expe-
rience arises from what is not yet experience. We can
discuss digestion beginning from an empty stomach but
not from an empty plate, and we can continue with a
stomach filled from a larder but not with one filled from
a chemist's cupboards. In a word, as I urged in the
last lecture, an epigenesis of experience is possible but
not an abiogenesis or generatio cequivoca. In any actual
experience the sensory presentations are not wholly
strange nor the motor responses entirely inept. As in
this wise experience is from the first an organic unity,
so it continues in its development, when more and more
things are known, and more and more things can be
done.

But this advance, as regards knowledge at any rate,
depends primarily, it may be said, on the repetition of
like circumstances, that is, on *the uniformity of Na-
ture ' ; and this again, it may be urged, is a cardinal
fact independent of all percipients. Such a view is, no
doubt, part and parcel of the dualism we are seeking
to refute, and will occupy us further by and by. Mean-
while, as regards individual experience, it is obvious
that whatever objective uriiformity there might be> it
would remain unknown or meaningless save to a subject
itself characterised by continuity and uniformity. After
all, though we talk of uniformity of nature^ as of some-


FAMILIARITY AND EXPERTNESS 161

thing independent of us, yet it is uniformity of experience
that we mean. It is not only idle to maiie suppositions
about things per %e^ but indifferent what suppositions
we make. Even though there were no assignable limits
to the diversities existing in the absolute elements of
such things and in their ultimate relations, yet a sub-
ject that could combine and select might still find its
experience continuous and uniform. For, in the first
place, — as I just now urged, — we can never shew how
experience arises, cannot carry back our analysis till
we reach a dualism of subjects per »e and objects per %e;
and, in the second, all our assertions of identity among
reals are at bottom negative, amount simply to saying
that we discern no difference. Even in such a world
there could be events which, though diverse in them-
selves, were alike in being helpful ; and others, also
otherwise diverse, alike in being harmful, to a given
subject ; whilst others were entirely neutral. Such a
subject then, — possessing some measure of that selective
power which in earlier lectures we have found to belong
to all things living, — by seeking the helpful so that, in
the experience of that subject, it occurred frequently,
by avoiding the harmful so that it, in the same manner,
recurred seldom, and by simply ignoring the indifferent,
could secure for itself an orderly environment. For as
no experience deals with ultimate elements regarded as
things per «e, so no experience deals with the totality
of things. A whole crowd may watch the moonlight on
a summer sea and every wave reflect it, yet each spec-
tator sees only the one silvery path that stretches
outward straight from his own feet. In individual

▼OL. II — M


162 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

experience, in like manner, each has his own centre and
a restricted range. These two properties — centrality
and selection — are essential to the possibility of indi-
vidual experience, and so far to the possibility of any
universal experience which presupposes it. There seems
then to be no warrant for the assumption that the
uniformity of experience is a fact independent of all
percipients, as dualism maintains. The uniformity of
nature with which science deals, is, we must remember,
entirely conceptual. It resolves itself into a scheme
of general laws, connecting objects and events, them-
selves always more or less abstract and ideal. If we
try to picture the world as a whole, in its concreteness
and yet without relation to any specified percipients,
we are perplexed by diversity and complication rather
than impressed by uniformity. Where is there one
thing that is not also many, that is a whole and not
merely a part ; where one event that is not also a
succession of several? Relative to a specified subject,
some answer may be given. To us, for example, there
is meaning in saying that a dog is one thing ; but if
we imagine ourselves at the standpoint of his parasitic
guests, it would seem as extravagant so to regard him
as to many it seems extravagant to regard this planet,
in which we live and thrive, as a complete organism ;
spite of all that the genius of Fechner has done to com-
mend the notion to us. To us, again, the flash and crack
of a discharged rifle is one event ; but were our tempo
of apprehension quickened to the pace of a gnat's, the
momentary report, it has been imagined, would lengthen
out into a series of varied and intermittent noises. Nay,


CENTRALITY AND SELECTION 163

if that tempo were quickened sufficiently, even the still
briefer scintillation would occupy it for ages and present
we know not what variety. Bis repetita decent^ we say ;
but how, with our limited span of consciousness and the
infinite diversity of things, could we have any chance
of two like experiences apart from that subjective inter-
est and activity that enable us to react and to select ?
Surely then it is once again evident that we cannot get
from dualism to experience ; whether or in what sense
we can get from experience to dualism remains to be
seen.

It is by these repetitions then that we acquire cogni-
tive familiarity — experience of experience, so to say —
and practical facility or expertness. This implies that
each new recurrence is in general an advance. A second
experience of the same thing is not only not numeri-
cally, it is not qualitatively, the same experience as the
first; there is this difference of further intimacy and
efficiency. The thing is more clearly and distinctly
known, more easily and adroitly done ; and of course as
the old in this way becomes familiar and mechanical,
new advances are in general possible. How much of
such progress lies behind any stage of experience, of
which we have positive knowledge, no one can say.
But as regards the advance from such stage, we can say
that it is marked by a steadily increasing uniqueness.
The more developed two individual experiences, the
more truly is each one wi generis; ^none but itself
could be its parallel.' Its objects, its acts, its memories,
its aims and interests, in their concreteness are like those
of no other. This is a point on which I have already


164 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

enlarged in earlier lectures, and there is no need to be
detailed here ; we shall have to return to it in discuss-
ing the transition to universal experience. But just
now it concerns us chiefly to notice, that this increasing
definiteness reveals no trace of unrelated and unrelat-
able elements that can only be conceived apart, but
shews rather a duality in unity which we may fitly de-
scribe as an organic whole. The objects are for the
subject inasmuch as they are its ends, and just so far are
they properly objects. They have all the independence
but also all the relativity that the term ' object ' implies.
But a like relative independence pertains equally to the
subject. We have come upon nothing so far that can be
called reality into which both factors do not enter.

We come now to intellective synthesis, under which
somewhat vague phrase I propose to consider those
characteristics of developing individual experience which
first make intersubjective intercourse possible. Psychol-
ogy distinguishes between associative and intellective
sjmthesis; but, if what I have said of subjective selec-
tion be true, there is no synthesis without a prior differ-
entiation due to such subjective interest and apprehension
— no purely passive association of objective changes just
as they occur. By intellective synthesis, however, I
understand specially that which rests upon comparison,

events that are partly different. The comparison need
not be — indeed cannot be — at first deliberate and, so
to say, theoretical; it is rather suggested by practical
exigencies, and here the truth of Dr. Bain's 'flash of
similarity ' comes in. In such ways, conation and cogni-


■s:^-^'


^^««^^-^ ^kd W M


INTELLECTIVE SYNTHESIS 166

tion working always together, the individual subject
comes to distinguish its own body or self from other
bodies as not-selves, and to attribute to them also likes
and dislikes, and the power to know and to do. It is
obvious that the presence of other individuals of its own
species within its environment, together with its pecul-
iar interest in these, will facilitate this recognition of
both as selves, and so in turn make the recognition of
other sorts of selves easier. How far this identification
goes it would be hard to tell, for, as Goethe has some-
where said, ^^Man never realises how anthropomorphic
he is." At any rate, the researches of anthropologists
warrant us in assuming, that when human intercourse
begins there is no dualism. And now at length let us
turn to this intercourse to ascertain the general charac-
ters of universal experience, and how dualism comes
about.

'^ When ten men look at the sun or moon/' said Reid,
'^they all see the same individual object." But not so,
Hamilton replies : ^^ the truth is that each of these per-
sons sees a different object."^ With these diametri-
cally opposite statements of the two chieftains of the
Scottish philosophy, we may begin our inquiry. It is
obvious that they are here at different standpoints :
Reid at that of universal, Hamilton at that of individ-
ual, experience. In Hamilton's sense not one of the
ten sees the sun ; in Reid's ^^ the same individual object,"
which all mean, is not equivalent to the immediate ex-
perience of any one. Hamilton is right in so far as
each concrete experience has its own concrete object;

1 Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, voL ii, p. 168.


166 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

Reid in 80 far as common experience relates all these
concrete objects to one phenomenon. It would be a
vast convenience, by the way, if philosophical writers
would be at some pains to distinguish these very dif-
ferent meanings of ^object' that here again emerge.
It is mere slovenliness to call the concrete objects of
individual experience phenomena; for in that experience
there is nothing, as I have already urged, that answers
to the distinction of appearance and reality : aU here is
real. ^It shines, it moves,' not 4t appears to shine, it
appears to move,' would be the language of an individ-
ual percipient. The conception of the phenomenal, of
course, has brought with it the conception of a further,
so-called noumenal, reality beyond. How these two real-
ities, the actual before phenomena and the ontal beyond,
are related does not for the present concern us ; it is
enough to avoid confusing the two.

Our first question is to get clear ideas as to the rela-
tion of the ten different (actual) objects of Hamilton's
statement to the one identical (phenomenal) object of
Reid's. The question naturally presents itself in the
form : How does the one sun become an object to ten dif-
ferent men ? Tet the proper form rather is : How, and
in what sense, do the ten come to know that the actual
object of each is the same individual object for all?
For except on the basis of individual experience com-
munication is impossible. Tet obvious as this admission
is, it carries consequences that are usually forgotten,
so dominant has the universalistic standpoint become.
Now if the several subjects L, M, N . . . . could, so to
say, change places and the presentations of one become


INTERSUBJECTIVE INTERCOURSE 167

accessible in their actual entirety to the others, then
it might be possible to ascertain directly how far the
object of one was comparable or identical with that of
another. But it is superfluous to say that this is just
the most impossible thing in the world. Individuality
consists precisely in this impossibility. So, when we
speak of the totality of a given experience as Ego and
non-Ego, we regard such totality not merely as a logi-
cal, but as an actual concrete, universe. In this wise,
Leibniz, for example, conceived each of his monads as
mirroring the universe from a unique standpoint of its
own. Thus when in place of the Ego L we have M or
N, so too in place of the non-Ego non-L we have non-
M or non-N. The most, then, that L can indicate or
communicate to M of any part of his own experience,
is so much of it as is common to the experience of
both. We may be sure the earliest intercourse fell very
far short of this, and even now the maximum is prob-
ably never attained. The process apparently begins
with simple indications: we point to a particular thing
as this or that, and then — if it be ^^ something more than
phantasy" — each has ^Hhe sensible and true avouch
of his own eyes" that such particular is numerically
identical in their several experiences.^ And even the
description of this particular must, it would seem, rest
ultimately on indications. We point to other partic-
ulars that we find resembling it — other shining, mov-
ing, round objects ; and so, by suggesting its likeness
to these, take the chance that parallel relations or com-

1 In the case of ten hnngry men and a loaf, for example, this ob-
jeot-lesson would be impressiye.


168 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

parisons will be verified by our fellow-men. That great
differences may exist undetected between the particu-
lars of one man's experience and the corresponding par-
ticulars of another's is shewn by the facts of colour-
blindness. Of these the world was ignorant till Dalton,
the great chemist, appearing at his Quakers' meeting
in scarlet hose, was led to investigate the anomaly. In
no case, then, can the particulars of experience be com-
municated, whether they be objective or subjective, quali-
ties or intensities either of sensation or of feeling. This
is the kernel of truth which the sophist Gorgias tried
to turn to sceptical accoxmt in his paradoxical conten-
tion that even if there were any knowledge it could
not be communicated. So far as reality consists in par-
ticulars, so far it pertains to each experience for itself
alone ; and so far the solipsist in theory and the egoist,
or the solipsist in conduct, are logically unassailable;
even though the proper place to put them be, as
Schopenhauer said, the madhouse. AU communica-
tion begins and ends in establishing relations between
these primary realia of the communicants ; so far as
this is achieved they are said to understand each other.
Language, soon superseding mere gesture and exdama-
tion, becomes the medium of such understanding, and
the two mutually advance together.

Without this intersubjective intercourse mankind
would remain a herd; with it they become a society.
The common knowledge that results might be roughly
distinguished as practical, historical, and theoretical,
including under the last both science and philosophy.
It is with this theoretical knowledge that we are now


FORMS OF COMMON KNOWLEDGE 169

directly concerned, for it is here that the problem of
dualism becomes explicit and acute. Nevertheless the
other forms of knowledge are worthy of remark, since
each of them contributes an element to the problem.
A knowledge of another's experience sets us upon doing
and trjdng for ourselves, and thus the immediate ex-
perience of every member of a society is, in some degree,
extended through that of the rest. Such advance, by
ensuring greater practical efficiency and foresight, brings
with it a growing sense of power to shape a plastic
environment to human ends. But this sense of mastery
Naturalism, as the logical outcome of dualism, declares
to be illusory. It maintains that we are in reality con-
fronted by a system of matter and law which we are
impotent to control. This absolute domination of law
and uniformity, which seems to contradict and con-
found immediate experience on its active side, is almost
equally at variance with that historical knowledge which
we may call non-scientific. In so calling it we are only
following old usi^e. Thus Bacon excluded both his-
toria naturalis and historia civUis from his glohu9 inteU
hctualis or encyclopsedia ; and he did so because such
histories are confined to the concrete and particular.
Hobbes, who also excludes them, does so on the ground
that they are mere experientia and not ratiocinatio.^ It
is this opposition of experience as historical and practi-
cal to science as exclusively nomological which we shall
do well to note in passing, and to which we shall have
once again to return in later lectures. We have it

1 Similarly, Schopenhauer. Cf. Windelband^s Rectoratsrede, €^
Mchiehte und Naturvrisienachq/t, 1894, p. 21.


170 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

concisely and picturesquely summed up in Goethe's
familiar words: —

Gran, theurer Freond, ist alle Theorie,
Und griin des Lebens goldner Baom.

Life is wholly an affair of the real and individual ; we
cannot perform abstract acts or experience abstract
eyents ; everything here has not merely general proper-
ties but a unique setting, and counts only so far as it
has meaning and worth. It is not on the practical or
historical side that common knowledge conflicts with
individual experience, for there the reference to indi-
vidual subjects is still present and essential. But inter-
subjective intercourse on what we may call the theoretical
side leads almost inevitably to the omission of this ref-
erence ; and so for the living green we have the sombre
grey and Man at least ^^and Nature are at strife." Let
us now try to see how this comes about.

It seems to depend upon three elements or conditions
which are consequences of intersubjective intercourse :
the notion of the transsubjective, the hypothesis of
introjection, and the reification of abstractions. The
meaning of this somewhat novel terminology will, I
hope, become clear as we go along. We shall be
mainly concerned with the first two and with the
third chiefly as it is implicated in these. The term
* transsubjective ' ^ has been devised to obviate the con-
fusion of what is objective from the standpoint of uni-
versal Experience, the one individual object of Reid's
ten men, with what is objective for an individual ex-
perience, the different objects of Hamilton's ten. The

1 Cf. Volkelt, Erfahrung und Denken^ p. 42.


RISE OF DUALISM 171

sun as transsubjectiye object is not L's son or M's
sun or N's sun,— if I may so say, — but rather what is
common to them all, neglecting what is peculiar to
each — neglecting, in particular, that direct and immedi-
ate relation to L, M, and N severally, which constitutes
for each his own non-Ego. Apart from L or M their
respective non-Egos, — non-L, non-M, — are non-existent,
and their respective suns in like manner. Not so the
Sim as a transsubjectiye object. If we ask : Since this
object is not the peculiar object of any given conscious-
ness, for what consciousness is it an object, we have at
once Kant's answer : fUr Bevmsstsein iAerkaupt, for
consciousness in general. FoUowing out this answer,
we might presently see that this conceptual conscious-
ness, — absolute consciousness we may (in this context)
fairly call it — presupposes and is inseparable from the
individual consciousness of immediate experience ; in this
respect resembling the conceptual or absolute space and
time already discussed. But we want first to be clear
about the rise of dualism. To that end it will be
sufficient here to note that ordinary thought does not
raise Kant's question. It proceeds rather in this wise.
Regarding the sun as independent of L and M and N
severalltfy it concludes that it is and remains an object,
independently of them all collectively. Such reasoning is
about on a par with maintaining that the British House
of Commons is an estate of the realm independent of each
individual member and that therefore it might be addressed
from the throne, for instance, though there were no mem-
bers. This fallacy of nidve realism is one step towards
dualism ; the hypothesis of introjection supplies the other.


172 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

The term * introjection ' we owe to a brilliant thinker
but recently taken from us, the late Richard Avenarius
of Zurich. The hypothesis to which it refers is familiar
enough and as old apparently as human speech; it is
substantially what Professor Tylor has called animism.
But to Ayenarius belongs the merit of making the epis-
temological bearings of this primitive doctrine clearer
than they were before. The essence of introjection con-
sists in applying to the immediate experience of my
fellow-creatures conceptions which have no coxmterpart
in my own. I find myself in direct relation with my
environment and only what I find for myself can I logi-
cally assume for another. But of another, common
thought and language lead me to assume not merely
that his experience is distinct from mine, but that it is
in him in the form of sensations, perceptions, and other
^internal states.' Of the sun in my environment I say
there is a perception in him. Thus while my environ-
ment is an external world for me, his experience is for
me an internal world in him. This is introjection. And
since I am led to apply this conception to all my fellow-
creatures and it is applied by all my fellow-men to me,
I naturally apply it also to myself. Thus it comes about
that instead of construing others' experience exactly
and precisely on the lines of our own, — the duality of
subject and object, — we are induced to misconstrue our
own experience on the lines of a false but highly plausi-
ble assumption as to others' experience, which actually
contradicts our own. To this contradiction, latent in
common thought and language, we may fairly attribute
the impasse to which the problem of external perception


* INTRO JECTION' 178

has been reduced. With this contradiction and the fal-
lacy of naive realism just now referred to, dualism is
essentially complete.

But, so long as the problem of external perception does
not obtrude, the inconsistencies of these two positions, to
which social thinking has led, remain latent and unheeded.
Psychology and the natural sciences which work on the
level of this uncritical thinking take each their own half
of what — if they think about it at all — they suppose to
be a consistent and complete whole. The one reg^ding
^the transsubjective ' as a real world devoid of all sub-
jective implications, and the other accepting introjection
as a fact, they go their several ways, till in the end they
have not a single term in common — not even time, which
Kant imagined belonged alike to both. So complete is
the dualism that when philosophy essays to heal the
breach, it has no adequate language in which to express
itself; for its new wine there are only the old bottles.
To the plain man its teaching is a stumbling-block ;
to the man of science it is foolishness. Not merely
are familiar words used in what seems an unusual and
non-natural sense, but a position is challenged which the
several sciences have long held to be impregnable. For
what is true, men say, if it be not true that mind and
matter are disparate realities, if ^what takes place in the
mind' cannot be at once and always distinguished from
^what takes place without it.' Well, it is not unfre-
quently a sure sign of radical disease, when the patient
maintAinB that he is in perfect health and wants no phy-
sician. Science and common thought are, I make bold
to say, in this plight as regards dualism, when they


174 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

refuse the ministrations of philosophy. We can only
prescribe reflexion; and happily the reflexion is sore
sooner or later to come, and cannot in the end fail of its
result. But it is the practice of too many philosophers
in our day to defer this advice till the mischief has
reached ati advanced stage, and the difficulties of a thor-
oughgoing reflexion are proportionately increased. Let
me refer to some remarks of Professor Ladd in illustra-
tion. In writing about the definition of psychology I
had argued that we cannot at the outset accept the dis-
tinction of internal and external experience ; not only
because the reference to space which that distinction
involves is confused, but because the distinction itself is
one that psychology has to debate and explain. To this
Professor Ladd replies : " On the contrary, no distinction
seems, ^at the outset,' to be more clearly and promptly
made than this by the reflective mind of all mankind, tt
is only after the professional student has introduced cer-
tain metaphysical discussions, which ought to be left to
the later stages of psychology or to philosophy, that
this seemingly obvious distinction becomes debateable
and confused." 1 Had Professor Ladd but omitted the
one word * reflective,' we should have been completely
in accord ; for he would then merely have testified how
deeply ingrained is the notion of introjection. Never-
theless this * seemingly obvious ' but really unsound dis-
tinction ought, according to that eminent psychologist
and many beside him, to be left alone at the outset ;
because it is not the business of psychology to concern
itself with philosophical questions. Nor is it, others add,
1 Psychology^ Descriptive and Explanatory^ p. 3.


•INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL' EXPERIENCE 175

the business of philosophy to meddle in the affairs of the
sciences. Such protests are doubtless the consequences
of a just resentment on the part of science against the
presumptuous extravagancies of a Schelling or a Hegel,
and of a just repudiation of them on the part of a soberer
philosophy. Taken with a grain of sense, there is truth
in such contentions ; but to admit them unreservedly is
to err in the opposite extreme. This mistaken deference
has perhaps done more than anything to facilitate the
acceptance of the sort of agnostic monism we have al-
ready to some extent discussed. Pcenitentia sera raro
vera; error then should be denounced and renounced as
soon as it can be understood. If we leave this dualism
of internal experience and external experience unexposed,
till it has, so to say, consolidated and intrenched itself
in two disconnected sciences ; and only then invite philo-
sophic reflexion to attempt their unification, what more
natural than that it should declare them to be two aspects
of the unknown and unknowable, and should maintain
the science of the external side, as the more exact and
orderly, to be also the more fundamental ? No, if phi-
losophy is reaUy to unify knowledge, it must perforce pro-
test against these factitious unities, which allow of no
bond but the unknowable. Psychology, — the science
most intimately related to logic and epistemology, — so
far from accepting and building on this false foundation,
ought rather to shew how the seeming rift has grown.
As yet this particular branch of psychology, we might
call it the psychology of intersubjective intercourse, has
been rather neglected, and assuredly nothing will con-
tribute more to its neglect than to accept, as Professor


176 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

Ladd does, ihe ^ seemingly obvious ' bnt really ^ confused
and debateable' distinction of internal and external
experience.

But we have seen how this distinction has arisen.
It helps to account for dualism, but not to justify it.
It is quite possible for two errors to keep each other
in countenance, and jointly to acquire a semblance of
truth, which belongs to neither separately. And so it
is here. When it is said that psychology is concerned
only with internal experience, the external experience,
with which it supposed not to deal, is transsubjec-
tive or universal Experience. But, as I have tried to
shew, it is impossible to maintain that from the indi-
vidualistic standpoint experience is all internal or sub-
jective. We may, then, I venture to think, regard this
confusion as sufficiently cleared up for our purpose.
An important question, however, still remains' as to the
first of the twin errors to which we have traced dual-
ism. To that we must next address ourselves.


LECTURE XVII

UNITY OF INDIVIDUAL AND UNIVERSAL BXPEBIBNCE

In wh<U sefise is the transsubjective object independent of the subject f
The discussion of this question Jms brotig?U out a new dutUism^ that of
the empirical and the rational. In the end, toe may say, four terms emerge
— the subject and object of individual experience, and the subject and
object of rational knowledge. Scientific dualism, started by Descartes,
irfterwards drops out the second subject.

We have now to inquire whether an ' organic unity ' can be shown to
exist between these. Beginning with the objects, we find that ' content *
for transsubjective experience is supplied by immediate experience. Intel-
lectual ^ forms ^ consist of relations between 5t<cA *fimdamenta.* But
may not new fundamenta emerge toith the ampler parallax of universal
experience f What of the categories of Unity, Substance Cause, e.g. ?
This brings us to the subject of such experience.

KanVs * originally synthetic unity of apperception * the Starting-point,
The shortcomings of his treatment of the categories discussed. Causality
traced not to logical function but to volitional activity. In a sense Kant
recognises this. Substance, however, left to logic as a dead remainder.
But substances or things is a category due to the interaction of active,
self-conscious subjects toith their environment and to their intercourse
with each other.

We conclude, then, tJiat the subject of universal experience is one
and continuous vHth the subject of individual experience, and that in
universal experience also there is the same intimate articulation ofsubjec-
tive and objective factors. Experience being then one organic unity, the
charge of fallacy against naXve realism stands.

Concluding remarks on dualism : the problem has been wrongly stated.
Dualism, like geocentric astronomy, suffices for ordinary life ; but for
philosophy, a satisfactory monism is still to seek,

VOL. II — N 177


178 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

Naive realism, we have seen, regards the so-called
external world as independent not only of any partic-
ular subject and its experience, but of all subjects col-
lectively and of their experience. This assumption I
have called a fallacy. But, it will be said, it is only
fallacious to argue that what is true of each severally
is not therefore true of all collectively, when the col-
lective whole has some property which the isolated indi-
viduals have not. Mortality, for example, is as true of
every collection of men as it is of any individual man.
It needs, then, to be made clear that the objects of col-
lective experience are not as independent of humanity
as they are supposed to be of the individual experient.
It may be that the new elements that enter into collective
experience entail the same implication of subject and
object, and that the whole constitutes an organic unity,
just as we foimd was the case with individual experience.
Still, we ought to make sure. I have, indeed, tried to
shew that this is true in the special cases of space and
of time. But let us now consider in general the rela-
tions between individual experience and universal or
collective experience, when both exist. This, as I have
already said, is precisely the question that ordinary
thought ignores when it rushes straight into dualism
instead.

If we hold it true that all experience implies both
subject and object, then we must find a subject for uni-
versal experience; and of such subject we must say
that it is as essential to t^ objects — the sun, the earth,
and the rest of what we call together nature — as the
individual percipient to the immediate sensory and motor


DUALISM OF EMPIRICAL AND RATIONAL 179

events of its own objective continuum. What is this
universal subject, and what precisely are its objects?
Kant's answer, already referred to, is that it is the sub-
ject of consciousness in general, a sort of absolute con-
sciousness intuiting conceptual objects in absolute space
and time. We have, then, in all four terms — the sub-
ject and object of individual or perceptual experience,
and the subject and object of universal or conceptual
experience; and we have to ascertain the relation of
the second pair to the first. This, I say once again, is
the epistemological question which the sciences ignore.
Psychology and the natural sciences together take three
of the terms, both the subject and object of individual
experience, but only the object of universal experience.
Then regarding the two objects as disparate and the
second as independent of the only subject recognised,
these sciences becomes at once committed to dualism,
and acquire that tendency to treat the universal objects
as things per se which leads on to materialism. If we
ask how this matter becomes known to us, we get the
familiar answer : Through the senses ; our sensations
are partly copies, partly symbols, of it. If we ask,
again, how we know this, then the puzzling problem of
external perception begins. This problem British phi-
losophy essayed to solve, taking account only of the said
three terms. The rationalistic thinkers of the Conti-
nent prior to Kant had meanwhile introduced, under
the name of reason, or pure thought, what we have
called the second subject. The only result of that
was then a new dualism, — the dualism of experience
and reason in addition to the dualism of matter and


180 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

mind. For reason was regarded as independent of sen-
sory experience, and its objects as possessing a higher,
or nonmenal, reality, discovered by the use of innate
principles. It is this dualism that meets us with a some-
what altered face when we inquire concerning collec-
tive experience and its relation to individual experience.
Yet, notwithstanding the change of face, the old con-
trast of reason and experience has a bearing on our
question ; and that in two respects. First, we have the
fact that the foundations of .modem naturalism were
laid by Descartes, who was at once both dualist and
rationalist. The mechanical theory, the corner-stone
of naturalism, is due mainly to him — I say mainly, be-
cause if we examined its history more closely, we should
have to credit Galileo, Kepler, and even Hobbes, with
an important share in that great enterprise. But,
whereas the rationalism of Descartes infused a very
decided idealistic tincture into his philosophy, — wit-
ness his famous Oogito ergo 9um^ his criterion of truth,
his conception of God, — modern naturalism, though it
has retained and extended his mechanical theory of
nature, has left all these idealistic implications aside.
The rational structure remains, isolated and indepen-
dent, without the reason which gave it being, and on
which it ultimately depends. In the second place, the
old antagonism of rationalism and empiricism interests
us here, because their reconciliation was one prime mo-
tive of Kant's critical philosophy, and that philosophy
helps us a long way towards an answer to our question.
For in Kant's philosophy we have all our four terms, —
the subject and object of individual experience, and also


KANT AND DESCARTES 181

the subject and object of universal or rational experi-
ence. But they are no longer severed. According to
his well-known saying: "Perceptions without concep-
tions are blind, conceptions without perceptions are
empty." In other words : If we imagine the two ex-
periences completely sundered, the one is devoid of all
generality and necessity, the other of all real content ;
the one alone gives only the raw material of knowledge,
the other only empty form. The two subjects must be
at bottom the same individual, and the two objects must
be synthesised into one. Not so Descartes. Roundly
stated, his doctrine reduces the individual experient to
a mere automaton, while reason attains a priori to a
knowledge of the real per se; and the one is entirely
independent of the other. Hence, when Naturalism
drops out the idealistic factors from the Cartesian scheme,
we have the odd result just noted — a result which we
have already, in the earlier lectures, examined, per-
haps at inordinate length. We have, that is to say,
the consciousness of an automaton on the one side, on
the other a purely mechanical system ; and we have
no means of relating the two. True, this mechanical
system is said to be only phenomenal, but this, as I
have tried to shew, does not really mend matters so
long as we are asked to recognise epiphenomena as
well, and so long as the phenomena are declared wholly
independent of and disparate from these. We have
indeed, only the further contradiction of a phenomenon
per se. This logically barbarous notion, and the dual-
ism of experience and reason from which it sprang,
Kant helps us to clear away, and if we follow up what


182 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

he began, we may hope to find both disappear. This
will be the business of the present lecture. But let me
first recapitulate.

In the preceding lecture the naive dualism of ordinary
thought and language was traced to the union of naive
realism, based on the notion of the transsubjective, with
the hypothesis of introjection or animism. We have now
seen further that, as scientific knowledge and philosophic
reflexion advanced, this naive dualism led on to a further
dualism of the empirical aiid the rational, such as we find,
for example, in the Cartesian philosophy and its develop-
ments. We have thus, in a manner, four terms and their
relations to consider ; viz. the individual subject and its
sensitive experience, on the one hand, reason and its
innate or a priori ideas on the other. Naturalism with
the help of a spurious empirical psychology has got rid
of reason, resolving it in common with perception into
internal experience or the epiphenomenal, but retaining
the mechanical scheme of the Cartesian rationalism as a
universal and necessary system, a world of phenomena
per «e, prior to and independent of all this internal expe-
rience. It is this logical monstrosity, this hybrid of em-
piricism and dogmatism, trunk of brass and feet of miry
clay, that epistemology menaces and has begun to over-
throw. And Kant, der AUes Zermcdmende^ has been here
the chief iconoclast. We are, however, not now directly
concerned with his destructive criticism ; we have rather
to turn to account his reconstruction, as far as that is
sound, and to carry it forward.

Let us recall once more what our problem is. Our
discussions up to this point make a more precise state-


SUBJECTIVE AND TRANSSUBJECTIVE 183

ment of it possible. The dualism we are seeking to
refute is, we have seen, a consequence of intersubjective
intercourse. In individual experience, taken alone, there
is no such dualism, but only a duality of subject and
object in one articulate whole. So much a whole indeed
that, as we have seen, the tendency was to treat the
objects of this experience as merely subjective modifica-
tions. Only for the new experience that intersubjective
intercourse brings about was the distinction of subject
and object allowed to be well, founded. But if a new
order of objects thus emerges, transsubjective objects in
contrast to the so-called subjective objects of individual
experience, we naturaUy ask how are these new objects
related to the old, and for what subject are they objects ?
Is it not possible that such subject and those objects make
one experience, constitute also an organic unity ? Though
rationalism gave in one way an affirmative answer to this
question, it only did so by setting up a new dualism be-
tween reason and sense. We ask then further : Is it not
possible to unite both these into one experience, while
still preserving the leading characteristic of each ? Not
only possible, but the only possibility, is the answer of
the critical philosophy; taking the marks of a purely
individual experience to be concrete and particular ^posi-
tions,' and the marks of rational experience to be uni-
versal and necessary propositions.

Keeping for the present to this formulation of the
question, let us inquire if such a connexion between
the two subjects and the two objects can be made out.
Beginning with the latter: the transsubjective, as dis-
tinct from the sensory, object is, as we have seen, always


184 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

in some measure general or abstract; in other words,
conceptual. Between the lizard's immediate experience
— not strictly admitting of statement — of sunshine and
warm stone occurring together, and our common under-
standing that the sun makes the stone warm, lids, to
use an instance of Kant's, this difference of perceptual
and universal experience. But the second is only an
elaboration, though a most important elaboration, of the
first. The intellectual form must have the concrete
filling of my own real experience before I can mider-
stand what the proposition ^The sun warms the stone'
means. This proposition may be taken as a type of
what is called a law of nature; it expresses not merely
temporal coincidence but causal, and so far necessary,
connexion; and it expresses this not merely as valid in
my experience, but as universally valid. The content
which my immediate experience contributes, taken by
itself, is but an instance of that consScution des bStes^
which Leibniz used to distmguish from rational expe-
rience. Nevertheless without this content the universal
and necessary factors in the said proposition lapse into
empty form, become as incapable of yielding experience
as empty dies of minting coin. The further this intel-
lectual process extends, the more abstract the result;
as, for instance, if we were to say not, The sun warms
the stone, but Ethereal undulations produce molecular
vibrations. Still, however far such operations extend,
their results are only valid or objective provided they
rest ultimately on a basis of immediate experience. It
would seem, then, that as regards objects there is no
discontinuity between universal and individual experi-


HIGHER CATEGORIES 185

ence, since the intellectual form which characterises the
one consists exdusively in establishing relations within
the concrete real that constitutes the other. Relations
necessarily presuppose fundamenta ; and though we can-
not advance to universal experience without them, there
is nothing but ^^%^ fundamenta of individual experience
to advance from.

But granting all this, it may be said, it is still surely
possible, nay actually the case, that the advance brings
to light new fundamental realities that cannot dawn
upon isolated, perceptual experience. The relations
with which intersubjective intercourse begins are rela-
tions of comparison mainly, identifying the sun with
other round objects, other moving objects, and so forth.
But thought does more than classify; classification will
not account for the categories of unity, substance, cause.
The dualism of matter and mind, re% extensa and res
cogitans^ of phenomena and epiphenomena, which could
not arise for immediate experience, because of its very
immediacy, may still be a necessity of thought, which
the ampler parallax of mediate experience reveals.
Such a position will be found expressed or implied in
much of the naturalistic writing since the time of
Eant.^ This demurrer brings us to the next point in
our inquiry, and there we may hope to remove it.

What of the subject of this wider whole, Kant's
Betvusstsetn Uberhaupt and its categories or functions?
As I remarked in my lecture a week ago, Kant does
not satisfactorily connect these forms of thought with
the sensible content upon which they are imposed.

1 Cf. Lange, Oeschichte des Materialismus^ 3te Aus., Bd. II, p. 103.


186 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

Even after the shock to his earlier dogmatism whidi
the reading of Hume occasioned, he still retained a
strong leaven of the old rationalism; and failed in
consequence to eliminate from his system altogether
the dualism of empirical and rational knowledge. But
this excrescence will disappear if we only follow out
consistently Kant's method of reflecting upon experi-
ence itself. We cannot begin better than he did when
he made ^the originally synthetic unity of apperception
the highest point from which all use of the under-
standing and the whole of logic depend.'^ Not only
for thought, but even for perception, this synthetic
activity is fimdamental and essential; so much so that,
as I have already urged, we cannot resolve the hum-
blest experience into a disconnected manifold. Again,
this subjective activity is, as I have also urged, never
merely or primarily cognitive. Activity devoid of all
motive or impulse is no better than fate or chance; it
is not spontaneity or self-activity, which is what Kant
intends. But for the piecemeal fashion in which Kant
was led to discuss experience he would never have
severed thought from will, nor both from objects, as
respectively pure thought and pure will.

Nor, had the notion of development been in Kant's
day what it is now, nay, had Kant but paid more
heed to Leibniz's principle of continuity, could he
ever have been content to write that famous sentence
concluding the introduction of his first Critique :
^^ There are two stems of human knowledge, which
perhaps may spring from a common but to us un-
1 Kritik der reinen Vemunft, AnalyUk, § 16.


* SYNTHETIC UNITY OF APPERCEPTION* 187

known root, viz., sensibility and understanding, objects
being given to us by means of the former, but thought
by means of the latter." It is a short step from such
a dualism to that of epiphenomena and phenomena.
And the one is as hopeless as the other. In Kant's
case, the years he is supposed to have spent in finding
and ^deducing' his table of categories and in devising
schemata to connect them with perceptions,^ together
with the reams and reams of exposition and opposition
that this strange medley of formal logic and faculty-
psychology has called, and still calls forth, — all this is
fair presumptive evidence of hopeless failure. And
yet Kant's failure partly supplies its own remedy, in
the admissions that he is driven to make and in the
mediating terms he is forced to introduce. After all,
though in spite of himself, it comes out clearly that
sensibility or individual experience is not devoid of
synthetic activity, is not purely receptive and in no
respect formative. And plainly, if it were, the grad-
ual advance up to the stage at which intersubjective
intercourse can begin would be inexplicable. The
brute that has not, and the child that has not yet,
ipure understanding' ought to make no progress at
all. But even the preliminary, anoetic' or rather hypo-
noetic forms of synthesis, such as assimilation, associa-
tion, and the like, which Kant has to call to his aid,
are by themselves inadequate. The word ^ Siandltmg^'*
in his native speech, or as we might say ^handling,'
used to describe an action, and again the reference to

1 Cf. Adiokes, RarWs ffffstemcOik dls syitembUdender Factor, pp. 17 fit
* Cf . Stout, Analytic Pgychology, vol. i, p. 60.


188 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

the tongue in the word language, might both have
suggested to Kant, and indeed to the earlier psycholo-
gists generally, a factor in experience still far too much
overlooked. As Paulsen has well said: "This practi-
cal analysis and synthesis, which the hand performs on
things, is repeated in the analysis and synthesis which
the understanding applies to perceptions. To the tools
of the hand correspond the conceptions of the under-
standing. . . . That active, attitude of man towards
perceptions which the brute allows to glide passively
by, is due primarily to his possession of hands ever
ready experimentally to interfere in the course of
phenomena.''^ Language again, the indispensable in-
strument of most of our thinking, seems due first of
all to emotional reactions that testify to man's livelier
interest in his environment. And when, in consequence
of the cooperation and communication that are in these
ways possible, the spheres of individual experiences
begin both to overlap and to be more definitely cen-
tred, and such categories as Substance and Cause come
into play, we are not left merely to fini these cate-
gories, taking formal logic as our guiding thread,
holding ourselves happy to have found them all, but
unable to connect them organically.

But with Kant's round dozen of categories we have
little concern. His whole enterprise in this matter is
unique as an instance of perverted and worse than
fruitless ingenuity. What Schopenhauer said is here
much to the point, "It is remarkable,*' he observes,
"that Kant, whenever he wants an example for clearer

1 Einleitung in die Fhilosophie, p. 423.


CAUSALITY AND ACTIVITY 189

exposition, almost always selects the category of cau-
sality; for the simple reason that the law of causality
is the actual, but also the only, form of the under-
standing, and the remaining eleven categories mere
blind windows."^ Certainly, Substantiality and Cau-
sality are what mainly concern us, and there is much
truth in Schopenhauer's contention that Substantiality
is through and through Causality. More of this, how-
ever, later on. The long and short as regards causality
is, that the category of cause and effect cannot be
found in any functions of thought belonging to formal
logic, for this is independent of time; nor in modes of
time, for these are independent of logic ; nor, therefore,
in any imaginary schematism of the two. But it cer-
tainly is found, and found first of all, whatever be its
validity, in our own doing and suffering. It is not
enough, I repeat, to recognise in imagination and
kindred processes a sort of blind intellection mediating
between sensibility and pure thought. Thinking is
doing, and like all doing has a motive and has an end.
Kant's logical Ego functioning spontaneously out of
time is but a chimsera buzzing in a vacuum and feed-
ing on second intentions ; that it is the thinnest of
abstractions, he himself allows.

But this defect of his first Critique Kant in some
measure makes good in his second. Here we have a
self -determining will, and not merely a supreme logical
centre, the ne plus uUra of impersonality. Unfortunately,
however, Kant's practical subject is as much in need of
mediating forms of activity, if we are to connect indi-

1 Sammaiche Werke, Bd. ii, p. 629.


190 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

yidual with universal experience, as we have found his
logical subject to be. If the consciousness of active
initiation does not arise till the moral imperative I
ought discloses the practical I can^ there is a hopeless
gulf between the individual man as merely conational
and Man as rational. We cannot see how to get from
the one to the other ; and so failing, the rift of dualism
is sure to extend. With this second dualism of Kant's
— a dualism in the practical sphere — we must be content
to deal in a like summary fashion. The relation of
both to our main problem is too indirect to justify
more. We are only concerned to find the same con-
tinuity between the subject of consciousness in general
and the subject of a given concrete experience, as we
have found between the classificatory concepts of the
one and the percepts of the other. It may suffice then
to remark that without concrete springs of action self-
determination is meaningless; so far, a knowledge of
Butler might have saved Kant from some mistakes.
We may say generally of Kant's philosophy that it is
marked by one characteristic defect of eighteenth-cen-
tury thought — a want of historic sense. Such a defect
was the natural, perhaps the inevitable, consequence of
the state of knowledge at the time. The mathematical
sciences had a tremendous start ; the biological sciences
hardly existed; history was held to be essentially
unscientific ; and a building or a town furnished
the type of what a completed system of knowledge
would be. Sharp divisions, line and rule, symmetry of
compartments, and so forth, are the leading ideas of
Kant's * Arehitectonik.^ The conception of evolution has


KANT'S POSTHUMOUS TREATISE 191

placed the present century on a better platform; and
the next, we tnist, may quite outgrow the dualism of
reason and experience as well as the dualism of matter
and mind, both which we owe to the mathematical
rationalist, Descartes. From our standpoint we have no
difficulty in seeing that activity is the main feature of
experience. "Conduct," said Matthew Arnold, "is
three-fourths of life;" and without unduly extending
the meaning of the word, we find this true of all life
as far as we can clearly observe. Presentation, Feeling,
Conation, are ever one inseparable whole, and advance
continuously to higher and higher forms. But for the
fact that psychology was in the first instance studied,
not for its own sake, but in subservience to speculation,
this cardinal importance of activity would not have
been so long overlooked. We should not have heard
so much of passive sensations and so little of active
movements. It is especially interesting to find that
even Kant at length — in his latest work, the posthu-
mous treatise on the Connexion of Physics and Meta-
physics^ only recently discovered and published — came
to see the fundamental character of voluntary move-
ment. I will venture to quote one sentence: "We
should not recognise the moving forces of matter, not
even through experience, if we were not conscious of
our own activity in ourselves exerting acts of repul-
sion, approximation, etc."^ But to Maine de Biran,
often called the French Kant, to Schopenhauer, and,
finaUy, to our own British psychologists. Brown, Hamil-

'^ Das nachgelassene Werk Immanuel Kant^s: ti. s. to., edited by A.
Krause, 1888, p. 78.


192 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

ton, Bain, Spencer, is especially due the merit of seeing
the paramount importance of the active side of experi-
ence. To this then primarily, and not to any merely
intellectual function, we may safely refer the category
of causality.

But there still remains the category of substantiality,
which before all others is the stronghold of the Car-
tesian, nay, of all, dualism. There is certainly little
or no analogy between the subject of experience and
the conception of substance, as applied to matter both
by Descartes and by Kant; indeed Kant, as we know,
in his first Critique denies that substantiality is predi-
cable of the conscious subject in any sense. And plainly
such a view, if we must still allow material substance,
does not abate the rigour of the dualism we are striv-
ing to transcend. We are not, I imagine, concerned
to resuscitate the rational psychology of the Leibniz-
Wolffians which Kant demolished, in order to establish
the immortality of the soul on grounds which equally
prove the immortality of atoms. We are content to
hold — at any rate are only justified in holding — that
the imity and constancy of the subject of experience
are due to the nature of its activity, not to an un-
changeable substratum, of which thought and will are
but attributes or accidents. What, then, is the source
and the validity of this conception of an unchangeable
substratum as applied to things? All that we know
of anything resolves ultimately into changes that it
produces in other things or undergoes through them.
With different things these changes are different, and
so we attribute to each definite properties. And, but


SUBSTANCE AND THINGS 193

that such analysis seems inexhaustible, we might arrive
at length, as in thought we do arrive, at the bare posi-
tion of this or that without anything to distinguish
one thing &om another. Into such a captU mortuum
material substance always has, and, we may safely say,
always will tend to resolve itself. We cannot with
propriety call it real or actual, for real and actual, as
Lotze has pointed out, are predicates, and that is just
what substance can never be. The changes which con-
stitute the whole of our direct experience of things
can, then, in no way be explained by this bare poten-
tiality of everything and actuality of nothing. Sci-
ence generalises these changes into a system of laws ;
but an unchangeable, indeterminate substratum will not
account for determinate laws of change, nor they for
it. The only conception that is of any avail here is
that of determinate substances or things, and this at
once brings the category of causality to the fore, and
enables us, instead of saying. No causality without
substantiality, to say. No substantiality without causal-
ity.^ This change of front philosophy owes to Leib-
niz, and has seen no reason to abandon since. A world
of such determinate things, in orderly interaction, may
well lead our thought forward to a Supreme Principle
that maintains it all. But such an omnitudo realitatis^
or self-subsistent Being, is the very polar opposite to
matter, the equivocal substance of Descartes that only
gives content to the empty extent of space; and to
matter, the phenomenal substance of Kant that only
adds permanence to the empty extent of time. In the

1 Cf . Wundt'8 8y9Um der FhUoaophief p. 812.
VOL. n — o


194 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

form into which science has now brought this concep-
tion of matter, if it remains the substratum of any*
thing, it is the substratum of quantity. Descartes lays
stress on the spatial, and Kant on the temporal, aspect
of this quantity. "Corporeal substance," says Des-
cartes, "when distinguished from its quantity, is con-
fusedly conceived as incorporeal."^ "In all change
of phenomena," says Kant, "substance endures, and the
quantity of it in nature is neither increased nor dimin-
ished."^ Kant calls this conception dynamical; but
as we now understand the term dynamical, matter
has no title to the name. Dynamical relations require
substances or things, and so imply some degree of in-
dividuation, imply number. But there is a world of
difference between quantity and number. To this dif-
ference the conception of matter gives us no clue. It
ought not, therefore, to surprise us to find Kant, in
the course of expounding his principle of substance,
slide over from the singular to the plural, without the
faintest justification for the change. The same dead-
lock we find again in Descartes, and we have seen
it also in the modem mechanical theory. We can
regress from substances or things to substance; but
can find no way back from substance to substances.
We may conclude, therefore, that this category of sub-
stratum is not an element in experience, whether indi-
vidual or universal. It answers to nothing real, but
is simply a logical residuum, to aireipov. So long and
so far as we can determine we have form; and form
is essentially causal. The residuum at which for the

1 The Principles of Philosophy^ pt ii, § 9. ^ First Analogy,


SUBSTANCES AND CAUSALITY 195

time we halt is matter, the determinable, but as yet,
for us, undetermined.

But of a definite or real thing we may say — No sub-
stantiality without causality, and for this valid category
we can find a source in experience. But we cannot trace
it either to the subject alone, as merely cognitive, nor
to the object alone, as merely * given.' We owe it to
the interaction of active subjects with their environment,
and to their intercourse with each other. As experience
extends in objective range, it changes in its subjective
character. We advance &om bare consciousness to self-
consciousness, and from less reflective to more reflective
forms of this. As our acquaintance with other selves
extends the better we know our own self. The more
we realise the permanence, individuality, efliciency, and
purposiveness of self, the more the mere continua of per-
ception and association become an ordered world of dis-
tinct things. Thus universal experience, like individual,
is a growth and development, not a cut-and-dried sorting
according to ready-made, hard, and fast forms. Words
would be wasted in any further attempt to prove or illus-
trate this in detail. I will quote instead a few sen-
tences from Dr. Caird's admirable treatise on Kant,
directed against that dualism of universal and individual
experience, with which Kant's thought was more or less
infected. The point on which we have to insist is that
^^ the development of the consciousness of objects cannot
be separated from the development of self -consciousness."
"When we consider the matter more closely," says the
Master of Balliol, "we begin to see that as within and
without, subject and object, are strictly correlative, so


196 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

the presence or absence of a knowledge of the one cannot
be separated from a presence or absence of a knowledge
of the other. . . . All ignorance of the object is igno-
rance of self, all development of consciousness is also a
development of self-conscionsness. To say that we know
nothing purely a priori, but only gradually come to know
the world as it reveals itself to us, is another way of
describing the same fact, which is expressed when we
say that our conscious life is the realisation in us [the
gradual, progressive realisation — I take it] of a perfect
intelligence." ^

We may conclude then that the subject of univer-
sal experience is one and continuous with the subject
of individual experience; that in the conceptions of
universal experience there is the same mutual implica-
tion, the same intimate articulation, of subjective and
objective factors. And since we have seen that the
conceptions of this universal experience depend upon
the perceptions of individual experience, which they
elaborate by analysis and resynthesis, we conclude that
experience is throughout one organic unity. If this
be so, we can now substantiate our charge of fallacy
against naive realism ; for the demurrer that led us to
suspend it has been completely removed. The wider
world of intersubjective intercourse, the transubjec-
tive world, is indeed independent of the individual
percipient as such. Or, to be more exact, and to
obviate a possible misconstruction on the lines of the
old Sorites sophism, the difference of his presence or
absence is infinitesimal. But this transubjective world
1 The Critical Philosophy of Kant, vol. i, pp. 423 f.


IWH^^ — ll !■ _ W II^IW I I I" <_


EXPERIENCE THROUGHOUT A UNITY 197

is not independent of universal experience, but the
object of that experience. But once again, I say, the
subject of universal experience is not numerically dis-
tinct from the subject of individual experience; but is
this same subject advanced to the level of self-con-
sciousness, and so participating in all that is communi-
cable, that is, in all that is intelligible, in the experience
of other self-conscious subjects. Universal experience
is not distinct from all subjects, but common to all
inteUigents, peculiar to none. We can thus imagine
the world without L or M, but we cannot conceive it
apart from all subjects — without conceiving it. But
that is to bring it again into relation with subjects, or
rather to leave it still as universal object. If it be
true to say that apart from sight there is no colour,
apart from hearing no sound, and generally apart from
sense no sensible world, it is every whit as true to say
that apart from intelligence there is no intelligible
world. Intersubjective intercourse secures us against
the solipsism into which individual experience by it-
self might conceivably fall, but it does not carry us
beyond the wider solipsism — if I may so term it — of
Kant's consciousness in general, Betousstsein Uberhaupt
You cannot dismember percipient and percept, indi-
vidual subject and concrete object, into two distinct and
separate things: here there is only duality in unity.
As little can you dismember universal, conceptual ex-
perience into an abstract logical subject per se on the
one hand and negative conceptions of things per se on
the other. In both cases the attempt leaves us with
an indeterminate X on the one side, which we have no


198 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

right to call a subject, and on the other an indeter-
minate X, which has as little claim to be called an
object. There is no disarticulating experience. This
is the lesson we learn from Kant.

And when we think out this lesson thoroughly, we
begin to see that the problem of dualism has proved
intractable largely because it has been wrongly stated.
There is no hindrance to the solution of a question so
great as a faulty formulation at the outset. This is a
truth illustrated at every turn by the whole history of
human knowledge. And so with dualism. Before
serious reflexion upon knowledge has begun, we are
started upon a false issue by naive dualism, the sources
of which I have attempted to describe. Imagine two
physicists saying : " Here is a magnet ; it has contrary
properties at opposite ends. Let us divide and conquer."
" I will take away the south pole to my laboratory and
investigate that," says the one ; " and I will do my best
with the north pole in mine," rejoins the other. This
is what happens when psychologfists propose to study
internal experience, and naturalists external experi-
ence, exclusively. Our imaginary physicists when they
get to work find, the one that a north pole, the other
that a south pole, has turned up at the fracture of the
original magnet. The psychologist in Hke manner finds
objective elements in his internal experience; but he
calls them subjective modifications, and the physicist
in external experience finds subjective elements, but
he calls them laws of nature. When the imaginary
physicists meet again and join up the magnet, each is
puzzled to know what is gone with the new pole that


PROBLEM OF DUALISM MISSTATED 199

he had discovered. Similarly with the psychologist
and the naturalist: except that the joining up is here
the serious business. All your side is subjective modi-
fication, says the psychologist, perhaps. No, all your
side is laws of nature, the naturalist then replies. Or
the psychologist, having treated intelligence, in sensa-
tionalist fashion, as a mere outgrowth of isolated indi-
vidual experience, and the naturalist having treated
universal experience as mere nature divorced from
mind, they agree that the objects of the one are copies,
the objects of the other originals, and then comes the
riddle of their extraordinary correspondence. I know
of no one who has put this point so ably as Ferrier,
to my thinking far the most brilliant Scottish philoso-
pher since Himie. I feel it would be unseemly to
apologise for quoting some sentences from him. Nor
is such quotation superfluous, for Ferrier, nowadays,
seems but little read. '^ Our intercourse with the ex-
ternal universe," he says, "was the given whole with
which we had to deal. The older philosophies divided
this given whole into the external universe on the
one hand, and our perception of it on the other; but
they were unable to show how these two, the objective
and the subjective, could again be understood to coa-
lesce. Like magicians with but half the powers of
sorcery, they had spoken the dissolving spell which
severed man's mind from the universe ; but they were
unable to articulate the binding word which again
might bring them into union. It was reserved for the
speculation of a later day to utter this word. And
this it did by admitting in limine the distinction; but.


200 REFUTATION OP DUALISM

at the same time, by showing that eoLch of the divided
members again resolves itself into hoth the factors, into
which the original whole was separated; and that in
this way the distinction undoes itself. . . . [But]
unless we are able to think two things a% two and
separated from each other, it is vain and unreasonable
to ask how they can become one ... In the same
way, with respect to the question in hand. There is
not a subjective and objective before us, but there is
what we find to be an indivisible subjective-objective,
when we commence by regarding what we imagined to
be the pure subjective, and there is what we find to
be an indivisible subjective-objective also, when we
commence by regarding what we imagined to be the
pure objective. So that the question respecting the
nature of the connexion between the subjective and
the objective comes to be either this. What is the
nature of the connexion between two subjective-objec-
tives (but this is not the question to which an answer
was wished), or else this. What is the nature of the
connexion between one thing, one thing which no effort
of thought can construe as really two?"^

But, after all, it is not enough to ^ scotch ' a snake ;
it is necessary to kill it. Dualism has been refuted
many times, but it has wonderful powers of recovery.
Philosophy may constrain * common-sense,' for the nonce,
to recant , but, like Galileo before the Inquisition, it still
mutters its E pur se muove. An ominous instance that
for me, you will say. For me, perhaps, it is. But it
will only afford solid comfort to the dualist, provided

1 Philosophicdl Works, vol. iii, pp. 278-284.


A SATISFACTORY MONISM WANTED 201

bis persuasion of the truth of his position, like Galileo's,
always becomes the more cogent the more it is examined ;
but that is not what we find. Philosophy admits the
dualism of common language; but language has been
shaped, not for theoretical, but for practical, ends. As
for practical purposes, it is simplest to talk of the sun
rising and setting, so, for practical purposes, it is easiest
to talk of matter and mind, of internal and external
experience, as distinct and separable. The use of in-
struments of precision is a costly and time-consuming
business, and the philosophical standpoint is as cum-
brous and unsuitable to ordinary affairs, and eyen to
the departmental inquiries of the special sciences —
psychology in part excepted — :as the instruments of
the laboratory or the observatory would be to the me-
chanic or the navigator. As science itself is against
common ways of thinking as respects what used to be
called the Newtonian philosophy, — and it took a long
time before even the most reflective of mankind could
be convinced that the earth did not need supporting, —
so philosophy proper is against the common ways of
thinking as respects dualism. But between the naive
dualism of ordinary thought and language, and the
efforts of philosophy to transcend all dualism, we have
this dualism of science which we have been examining.
And that, as we have seen, has not only proved itself
vulnerable from without, as soon as systematic reflexion
upon knowledge and experience begins ; but it has also
proved internally more and more incoherent, as the
special problems concerning the connexion of body and
mind and concerning external perception have grown in


202 REFUTATION OF DUALISM

definiteness. Hence science itself, we have seen, has
been driven to a species of hybrid monism, which we
shall have by and by to examine somewhat further.
But from what we have seen already there is small
chance of that contenting us. And in saying this we
touch the real diflBculty. Destructive criticism is never
sufficient : we look for construction as well. But, even
when dualism is abandoned by reflective minds, there
ensues only a struggle of diverse monisms to take its
place. The agnostic monism of science, we feel, does
not content us, and the idealistic, or, as I would rather
say, the spiritualistic monism of certain philosophers is
unacceptable to scientific speculation. Still, here again
there is progress. How far we can transcend agnostic
monism, how far we can establish a spiritual monism —
these are the problems that remain to us. From a world
of spirits to a Supreme Spirit is a possible step. So far
as we succeed in solving these problems, then so far we
shall have secured a basis for a Natural Theology.


PART V


SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM


SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM


LECTURE XVm

CAPITTJLATION OF AGNOSTIC MONISM

Neutral or agnostic monism tends to degenerate into mctteridlism ;
but it might logically advance to idealism. If so, the teleological must
be shovm to underlie the mechanical. The difficulties of the mechanical
ffiew not remedied by preaching agnosticism. But on closer scrutiny
such agnosticism contains admissions which lead on to spiritualism.
Thus Huxley confesses (a) that ^our one certainty is the existence of
the mental world,^ and (b) t?iat Hhe notion of necessity has a logical
not a physical foundation.^

The conception of natural law examined. — 1. /( is teUologicdl in
its origin as an organon or means of interpreting, and so controlling,
Nature. 2. It is teleological in its character, in so far as it is a populate
or hypothesis. We here come upon the epistemologicdl problem of Hume
and Kant, viz., to determine the character of general propositions rehUing
to matters of fact. The evidence of such propositions neither immediate
nor logical. Hume failed to explain them by association and remained a
sceptic. But he made clear to Kant an alternative which Jie could not
himself see. For him the human mind was but ^^a bundle of percep-
tions^^ ; though he was hopelessly at a loss to find the ^^ principle '* that
unites the " bundle.^'* This principle Kant declares to be the synthesising
activity that yields self-consciousness. In this activity we are to find the
source of t?ie conception of nature as a system of unity and law.

In the lectures immediately preceding we examined the
dualism of ordinary thought, ascertained certain primitive
misconceptions in which it first originated, and exposed

205


SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM


LECTURE XVin

CAPrrULATION OF AGNOSTIC MONISM

Neutral or agnostic monism tends to degenerate into materialism;
hxtt it might logically advance to idealism. If so^ t\e teleologic<U must
be shown to underlie tfie mechanical. The difficulties of the mechanical
view not remedied by preaching agnosticism. But on closer scrutiny
such agnosticism contains admissions which lead on to spiritudlism.
Thus Huxley confesses (a) that ^our one certainty is tJie existence of
the mental worlds'* and (b) that *'the notion of necessity has a logical
not a physical foundation.^

The conception of natural law examined. — 1. It is teleological in
its origin as an organon or means of interpreting, and so controlling,
Nature. 2. It is teleological in its character, in so far as it is a postulate
or hypothesis. We here come upon the epistemologicai problem of Hume
and Kant, Tiz., to determine ^ character of general propositions relating
to matters of fact. The evidence of such propositions neither immediate
nor logical. Hume failed to explain them by association and remained a
sceptic. But he made clear to Kant an alternative which he could not
?Umse\f see. For him the human mind was but ^^a bundle of percep-
tions^^ ; though he was JiopeUssly at a loss to find t?ie ^^ principle ** that
unites the ** bundle.^ ^ This principle Kant declares to be the synthesising
activity that yields self-consciousness. In this activity we are to find the
source of t?te conception of nature as a system of unity and law.

In the lectures immediately preceding we examined the
dualism of ordinary thought, ascertained certain primitive
misconceptions in which it first originated, and exposed

205


206 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

certain false abstractioDs by which it has been since main-
tained. But it may be said, and said truly, that all phi-
losophies are faulty somewhere. Unless, then, we can
find monism beset with fewer difficulties, dualism, which
holds the field, sufficing for daily affairs and the routine
of science, will surely keep it ; mankind at large will be
content, as before, to get along without a final philosophy.
If, however, the desiderated monism is forthcoming, the
practical conyeniences of a dualistic phraseology will pre-
vail against it as little as our familiar use of the language
of the Ptolemaic astronomy against the new astronomy of
Copernicus and Newton.

There are three leading forms of monism, viz.. Material-
ism, Idealism, — or, as I should prefer to say. Spiritualism,
— and the Neutral or Agnostic Monism now in vogue
among scientific men. The first we may safely ignore:
science no longer directly defends that. The last, how-
ever, seems to call for consideration, as well because of its
wide acceptance, as because of its supposed merit in avoid-
ing the absurdities of materialism and the difficulties of
dualism. But this monism is scientifically popular mainly
because it is still essentially naturalistic, and disparages
the so-called psychical aspect as epistemologically sub-
ordinate to the physical. Thus whatever objections we
have found to lie against naturalism are valid against a
monism that is naturalistic. Again, this monism escapes
the absurdities of the old materialism more in seeming
than in fact. Whereas that was dogmatic, this is agnos-
tic, is materialism without matter, materialism with most
of its consequences, but divested of its metaphysics. For
in this monism the mechanical theory is still regarded as


NEUTRAL OR AGNOSTIC MONISM 207

furnishing a concrete and complete presentment of the
objective world, and as excluding all possibility of sub-
jective interference. Matter, indeed, is resolved into the
unknown and hypothetical; but spirit is not merely so
resolved : even its supposed manifestations of spontaneous
activity are declared illusory. Finally, this monism es-
capes the difficulties of dualism only by falling itself into
the opposite extreme. The essential characteristic of
experience we have found to be a duality in unity. As
dualism is incompatible with the unity of experience, so
naturalistic monism is incompatible with the duality.
Subject and object cease to be cooperant &ctors in one
process of life and experience, and lapse into concomitant
aspects of a single and unknowable process which is
neither life nor experience. The concave side of a curve
cannot interact with its convex side, or the reflexion of a
figure in a concave mirror with its reflexion in one that is
convex. Nor can we say that the curve is in itself more
convex than concave ; or the image in one mirror truer to
the original than the image in the other. So it is main-
tained that the Unknown and Unknowable is not more
matter than mind, not more subject than object, Ego than
Non-Ego. It is on this account that I have ventured to
describe this monism as both agnostic and neutral. But
the neutrality, as we have seen, is neither strict nor im-
partial. Indeed, from the nature of the case, how could
it be? Allow that the ultimate essence of matter and
spirit is unknown and unknowable, even then the practi-
cal question is, which of the two is better known? In
raising such a question we are at once confronted by
another, that is, how we are to estimate the comparative


208 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

importance of different forms or qualities of knowledg^e.
But however we settle this preliminary but weighty ques-
tion, the result is bound to affect our theories. And so
the monism we are considering, preferring calculability
to intelligibility, simplification to meaning, materialistic
to spiritualistic terminology, leans to the materialistic
side. Yet even then it is unstable, oscillating between the
two positions — pronounced materialism and unmediated
dualism — which it is supposed to transcend. We find
it, in fact, inclining now to the one, now to the other,
as the stress of each new problem determines; while the
obscurity of the unknown and unknowable serves to
cover its vacillations. Disregard this unknowable, or
take it for what it is worth, and the net result is but a
hybrid of hazy dualism and halting materialism. If
dualism is unsound, there seems to be no agnostic rest-
ing-place between materialism and spiritualism.

Our whole interest in such a temporary position
lies in the possibility that this labile monism may
after all lapse in the opposite direction. Signs of
such a change in scientific thought are by no means
wanting, and it is only as we are hopeful of them
that we can call agnostic monism an advance. But
what does such a transition in the idealistic direction
imply? Let us enter upon this inquiry just as it
presents itself, from the standpoint of the new monism,
that is to say. First, if it be true that the two
aspects, the psychical and the physical, of a supposed
Unknowable exactly correspond, though they cannot in-
teract, then whatever be the order and connexion on the
one side, there will be an identical order and connexion


TELEOLOGY v. MECHANISM 209

on the other.^ If the characteristics of one be teleologi-
cal, so in like manner will be those of the other ; if the
characteristics of one be mechanical, those of the other
will be mechanical too. But now, we must take it as
certain at the outset — not a matter of theory but a
matter of fact — that the characteristics of the side of
life and mind are prima facie essentially teleological.
At the same time it is maintained — but on theoretical
grounds — that the characteristics of the physical side
are ultimately and absolutely mechanical. By the
fundamental position of this monism, however, both
cannot be right. Either there is illusion on the one
side, or the view taken of the other is logically
erroneous. It is here that the need for a theory of
knowledge becomes paramount. But Naturalism, re-
gardless of this need, has straightway, and, as it
begins to appear, has too hastily, decided for the first
alternative. The strict mechanical necessity of the
physical side is upheld, and, as a consequence, the
spontaneity and purposiveness of the psychical side is
declared to be illusory, a thing to be explained away.
Again, as events on the physical side axe of one order,
mass-motions, so those on the psychical side must, it is
said, be of one order — a flux of presentations or feel-
ings; what we call thought and will can only be com-
plexes of such feelings or presentations : the changes and
complexes of the Unknown as matter-stuff on the one side
are changes and complexes of the Unknown as mind-
stuff on the other. But while the physical world is
held to be complete in itself, there are no psychical

^ Cf. Clifford, as quoted aboye, Lecture XI, pp. 18 ff.

VOL. u — p


210 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

laws that suffice either to connect individual minds
together or to connect the successiye ^feelings' of the
same mind one with another. The mechanical series
is therefore regarded as if it conditioned the seemingly
teleological series, and — spite of glaring inconsisten-
cies — mind and morals are even spoken of as col-
lateral products of mechanism. I do not, of course,
propose to weary you even by enumerating the many
detailed objections we have found to these positions
as real principles, but rather to discuss the general
question now raised from the more formal standpoint of
epistemology.

The question is: Can the teleological supplant the
mechanical, or rather, be shewn to underlie it, or can
it not? It is here that the naturalist, as such, is
most confident, and the moralist, as such, most de-
pressed. The one, as Huxley has told us, foresees the
tide of matter and law advancing till it is coextensive
with all experience; the other conceives this advance
as inevitably destroying all spirit and spontaneity. At
the outset one thing at least seems clear: it is utterly
fatuous to imagine that mere agnosticism can relieve us
from the burden of this problem; and yet it will be re-
membered agnosticism is what Huxley preached to all
those that are oppressed by it. But, if the supremacy
of the mechanical is verily knowledge, it is childish
to turn to ignorance, actual or necessary, of other
things, as a refuge from it. What matters what we
don't know beside, if we do indeed know this, if this
supremacy at any rate is certain ? Or, if what we do
not know does matter, is not that but another way of


TREACHERY OF AGNOSTICISM 211

saying that this mechanical supremacy is perhaps not
ultimate, perhaps not absolutely certain?

The truth is that this new philosophy owes its mon-
ism to the a priori speculations of Spinoza, while its
agnosticism is borrowed from Hume and Hume's suc-
cessors. Such ^ien elements, the dogmatic and the
sceptical, the empirical and the speculative, like oil and
water, refuse permanently to blend. Only one result of
such an attempted combination is foreseen and accepted:
the rationalism of Descartes and Spinoza, which takes
geometry as the type of knowledge, will serve to secure
the supremacy of the mechanical, while the sensationa-
lism and scepticism of Hume will suffice to discredit
the teleological and spiritual. But other and unforeseen
results emerge. One of these we have already noticed
— the instability, I mean, which leaves this new mon-
ism oscillating between dualism and materialism. From
such instability Descartes with his clearly defined sub-
stances, and Spinoza, still more, with his one supreme
substance, were practically free. A second result now
becomes apparent. Agnosticism proves a treacherous
ally even for Naturalism, and ends by undermining its
dogmatic foundations. At the same time mind, though
perhaps neither completely known nor completely know-
able, turns out less of a fiction than matter. The in-
cursions into philosophy, spread over many years, of two
distinguished men of science, recently removed from us,
Huxley and Du Bois-Reymond — afford instructive illus-
trations of this ^double decomposition,' to use a chemi-
cal phrase, of its rational and its empirical components,
to which agnostic monism may lead. The agnosticism,


212 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

attached primarily to the spiritual and teleological, ends
by fastening on the mechanical, while the teleological and
spiritual appear as the truly rational and fundamental.
If we examine what Huxley says when he preaches
agnosticism as delivering us from the perplexities of
naturalism, we shall find, I think, some evidence of this
transformation.

But for clearness' sake let us first recall some state-
ments of his that set forth the original position. ^^I
take it to be demonstrable," he says, ^^that it is utterly
impossible to prove that anything whatever may not
be the effect of a material and necessary cause [this
conjunction of ^material and necessary' is noteworthy],
and that human logic is equally incompetent to prove
that any act is really spontaneous."^ And again: ^^If
these positions are well based, it follows that our mental
conditions are simply the symbols in consciousness of
the changes that take place automatically in the organ-
ism. . . . We are conscious automata, . . . but none
the less parts of the great series of causes and effects,
which, in unbroken continuity, compose that which is,
and has been, and shall be — the sum of existence."^
Now the meaning of this and many like statements
that I have previously quoted is plain and unmistake-
able. It is this: Nature, to which we entirely belong,
is an unbroken continuity of necessary causes, and of
these our mental conditions are simply the inefficient

1 Collected Essays, voL I, p. 158.

^ o.c», p. 244. The clauses here omitted, referring to what is termed
* the feeling we call volition/ have been discussed above. Lecture XII,
p. 46.


HUXLEY'S CONFESSIONS 213

symbols. We have no knowledge how these symbols
are connected with those causes, but we are confident
that volitions do not enter into this chain of causation
at all. ^^The consciousness of this great truth," Hux-
ley has told us, ^^ weighs like a nightmare upon many
of the best minds of these days." And small wonder if
it be indeed a great truth. But now let us recall the
relief from this load which agnosticism is supposed to
afford us. The ^ great truth' is not fatalism, because,
says Huxley, ^^I take the conception of necessity to
have a logical, and not a physical, foundation ; " it is not
materialism, ^for I am utterly incapable of conceiving
the existence of matter, if there is no mind in which to
picture that existence."^ The existence of matter is
inconceivable without mind, the conception of necessity
has a logical, but has no physical, foundation — this does
not sound like a mere declaration of ignorance, and has,
moreover, a decidedly idealistic ring. Perhaps after all
there is substantial solace here for those alarmed by the
advancing tide of matter and law. Let us then exam-
ine somewhat closer these two articles of the agnostic
gospel.

It is the second of them that chiefly concerns our
present inquiry; but the first is important as it clears
and defines the ground of the later discussion. For if
necessity is logical, not physical, has its source in mind,
not its home in matter, it is desirable to begin by ascei^
taining the epistemology, or perhaps we ought to say
the agnoiology, of these conceptions, matter and mind.
This Huxley gives us in the following brief sentences of

^ Collected Eseaye^ vol. i, p. 245.


214 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

reassurance: "For, after all, what do we know of tMs
terrible ' matter,' except as a name for the unknown and
hypothetical cause of states of our own consciousness?
And what do we know of that * spirit ' over whose threat-
ened extinction by matter a great lamentation is aris-
ing . . . except that it also is a name for an unknown
and hypothetical cause, or condition, of states of con-
sciousness. In other words, matter and spirit are but
names for the imaginary substrata of groups of natural
phenomena/'^ We may safely take phenomena here as
equivalent to states of consciousness; the context itself
justifies this, and Huxley's statements elsewhere are quite
explicit. Indeed, we may fairly go farther and replace
^ states of consciousness ' by the simpler and less ambig-
uous phrase, experiences. We have, then, on the one
hand, experiences as our facts, and, on the other, matter
and mind as unknown and hypothetical causes and as
imaginary substrata of these facts. The mention here of
two hypothetical causes, two imaginary substrata, does
not mean that the two are alternatives ; so that, if one be
true and real, the other is false and unreal: it means
that duality pertains essentially to our experience as a
fact. So far, therefore, it is obvious there can be no
fear of one factor in this duality extinguishing the other,
whatever may befall the causes we assume or the sub-
strata we imagine for them. Nevertheless, it is a gross
exaggeration to say that matter and mind are simply
names for the unknown and unknowable; Huxley's
agnostic deliverances themselves testify to the contrary.
Mind is, at any rate, the name for the subjective factor,

1 Collected Essays, p. 160.


HUXLEY'S CONFESSIONS 215

and matter the name for an objective faotor in experi-
ence. In speaking of both as causes, their cooperation or
interaction in experience is recognised; and calling them
names for the unknown means simply that we have no
experience of the subjective apart from the objective, nor
of the objective apart from the subjective. To say that
these mean nothing in experience is to treat experience
itself as nothing. Again, speaking of both as substances
or substrata is but to recognise the permanence in expe-
rience of both factors, and calling them imaginary is again
nothing but the truism that we only know them as per-
manent in experience. To say that their permanence here
is imaginary is to deny the fundamental character of ex-
perience as continuous process. Plainly, facts must pre-
cede hjrpotheses and fictions. Thus, in arguing really
against dualism, what Huxley spite of himself so far
establishes is not agnostic monism, but merely the dual-
ity in unity of experience.

And so we come to what I just now called the first
article of the agnostic gospel. It is not materialism,
because the existence of matter is inconceivable with-
out mind to picture that existence. If the words had
run: It is not idealism (or spiritualism) because the
existence of mind is inconceivable without a physical
basis, of which it is the function and collateral product,
we should have been less surprised ; and, on the whole,
I am bound to say, such a statement would have seemed
more consistent. Nevertheless, Huxley, when this ques-
tion is definitely raised, quite rightly refuses to convert
invariable concomitance into necessary conjunction.^ So,

^ Cf. Collected Essays^ toI. ix, p. 141.


216 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

then, matter is inconceivable apart from mind, but mind
is not inconceivable apart from matter. More definitely,
matter is not essential to experience, but only a subject,
and its objects or ideas. Accordingly, we find Huxley
declaring ^' the arguments used by Descartes and Berke-
ley, to shew that our certain knowledge does not extend
beyond states of consciousness, to be irrefragable," that
^^ our one certainty is the existence of the mental world,
and that the existence of Kraft and Stoff falls into the
rank of a highly probable hypothesis." ^ And more than
once he has said, ^^If I were obliged to choose between
absolute materialism and absolute idealism I should feel
compelled to accept the latter alternative."^ The sig-
nificance of this admission for our present argument lies
solely in its recognition of that subjective centrality of
experience, the originally synthetic unity of appercep-
tion, as Kant styled it, which we have discussed ,in
earlier lectures. Its significance, therefore, is not im-
paired by any defects in the idealisms, dogmatic or
problematic, of Berkeley and Descartes; for they were
both essentially at one with Kant's transcendent ideal-
ism on this point Both would have subscribed to
Kant's words: ^^All the manifold determinations of per-
ception have a necessary relation to the ^I think' in
the subject that is conscious of them. The ^I think,'
however, is an act of spontaneity that cannot possibly
be due to sense." Nor, again, is the significance of this
admission diminished by Huxley's contention that he is
relieved from the obligation to choose by our ignorance

1 Of. Collected Essays^ vol. ix, p. 130.

2 o.c, vol. vi, p. 279 ; voL ix, p. 133 ; also vol. i, p. 172.


HUXLEY'S CONFESSIONS 217

what matter or mind, those hjrpothetical and imaginary
unknowns, may be in themselves. He is relieved from
the obligation to choose only by the fact that he has
chosen. The admission he has actually made is all we
care for : we are not concerned, either with the hypothe-
sis of dualism, that experience implies two substances,
matter per se and mind per ae ; nor with that of neutral
monism, that these two unknowns may be replaced by
a single unknowable. On the basis, then, of this recog-
nition of the active, subjective synthesis that makes
every experience an owned experience, and gives it not
only unity and continuity but centrality, we may now
pass to the second article of Huxley's agnostic gospel.

The * great truth' as to the advancing tide of matter
and law is not fatalism, because ^Hhe notion of neces-
sity has a logical, not a physical, foundation"; ^'is
something illegitimately thrust into the perfectly legiti-
mate conception of law." "For my part," says Huxley,
"I utterly repudiate and anathematise the intruder."
Very good; then presumably he would wish us to with-
draw the term ^necessary' from the passage just now
quoted, in which ^material and necessary causes' were
spoken of as conceivably the only causes there are.
"Fact I know, and Law I know; but what," he now
asks, "is this Necessity, save an empty shadow of my
own mind's throwing?" This is an odd inversion of
the ordinary naturalistic positions. It reminds us at
first of Kant's claim to be the Copernicus of philoso-
phy when he maintained that objects conform to the
a priori principles of our intelligence, not our intelli-
gence to the independent nature of things. Necessity,


218 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

Huxley seems to say, is not physically imposed by
nature on us, but psycliically imposed by us on nature.
But then comes the paradoxical contention that this
imposition is illegitimate, since necessity is no part of
the conception of law. If this contention could be sus-
tained, the outlook would be a poor one. We should
escape the Scylla of fatalism only to be lost in the
Charybdis of scepticism. Either no freedom or no
knowledge would be the only alternative; yet what
avails freedom without knowledge or knowledge with-
out freedom? However, further reflexion will satisfy
us — as I hope presently to show — that the notion of
necessity is not illegitimately, i.e. to say illogically,
thrust into the conception of law, but is an essential
part of it. Meanwhile this further concession, viz.,
that necessary law is wholly an ideal conception, not a
physical fact, along with the idealistic basis of experi-
ence already admitted, which reduces matter to the
rank of a secondary hypothesis — again therefore a con-
ception, not a fact — these together will, I think, enable
us in the end to see that the teleological, after all,
underlies the mechanical; that spirit cannot be the
effect of a material and necessary cause, but that nec-
essary causes are a postulate, and matter an hjrpothesis,
which mind has elaborated in order to render experi-
ence conceptually manageable. To this inquiry, then,
we now return to pursue it on its own merits. As to
the issue, it is encouraging and helpful to have found
that the agnostic's proposal, to escape all further trouble
about such a question by emphasising our inevitable
ignorance of the self-contradictory, is based on a half-


CONCEPTION OF *LAW* AN ORGANON 219

conscious percepUon of the errors of dualism, and cul-
minates in an admission incompatible with neutral
monism. We may say, indeed, that agnostic monism
here disposes of itself. Our one certainty is that which
we have already reached in our examination of dual-
ism, the unity in duality of experience. This I take to
be the meaning of Huxley's words; "Our one certainty
is the existence of the mental world." On this basis,
then, let us now proceed to examine the conception of
natural law.

In the first place, this conception is teleological in its
origin. It is a human invention or discovery turned to
account for the furtherance of human ends — as much
so as the discovery of fire or the invention of the plough.
Whether in enlarging his material, or in augmenting
his mental, possessions, man is alike active ; and his pro-
cedure in both cases is essentially the same. For both
he must devise instruments and find helps. In the words
of Bacon's famous aphorism : Nee manus nuda^ nee intel-
lectvs sibi permissus,, mvltum valet ; instrumentis et atixiKis
res perficitur ; quibtis opuB eat^ non minvs ad intellectum^
qaam ad manum.^ After many attempts, through many
failures, by gradual advances, has man at length secured
economy and efiBciency in the arts, exactness and sim-
plicity in the sciences. Of the principles and postulates
essential to the one, he is at the outset as little in actual
possession, as he is of the implements and structures indis-
pensable for the other. Nor are these necessary prereq-
uisites discovered or revealed as existing ready-made
without. Whatever the forces of nature may be, the

1 Novum OrganoTit Lib. i, 2.


220 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

laws of nature are not facts, as the constant confusion
of the two conceptions might lead us to suppose. Every
such law was at its inception merely a hypothesis await-
ing verification. Notably this was the case with one of
the most impressive and wide-reaching of all natural
laws — the law of universal gravitation. A mistake as
to the length of a degree of latitude brought out a result
incompatible with his theory, and so Newton was led to
keep his speculations in abeyance for many years. And
what is true of laws of nature severally is true of the con-
ception of natural law in general: it is a hypothesis, a
postulate; an epistemological condition of the possibility
of scientific experience, but not itself a &ct of experi-
ence. I urge this not with intent to disparage science.
Sceptical arguments of that sort are really illegitimate,
and rest upon a misconception of the genesis of know-
ledge which is poles asunder from the view I am endeav-
ouring to maintain. If we were merely passive recipients
of knowledge; if knowledge were simple * generated' in
a quasi-mechanical fashion by association, as Hume and
the psychologists who follow him affirm, — then indeed
there could be no talk of nature or of natural laws. On
the other hand, if our earlier analysis of experience is
sound, then there is no pure passivity in experience;
and even the association of ideas is determined, not
mechanically, but by subjective selection and interest.
Thinking, at any rate, is an arduous labour, the very
antithesis of amusement and relaxation; and, without
thought, such universal and necessary knowledge as the
conception of law implies would be unattainable. It
was this view of the genesis of knowledge that Socrates


CONCEPTION OF 'LAW A POSTULATE 221

sought to express by playful allusions to the maieutic
art, and Plato by his fanciful doctrine of avafivrfci^.
For a process entailing such strenuous and persistent
exertion there must be an adequate motive; and that
there is in the feeling that ignorance entails helpless-
ness and danger, whereas knowledge brings security
and power. And this truth, which Bacon first realised
with full consciousness of its meaning and set forth
systematically, has been the prime motive of man's think-
ing activity throughout. In a word, self-conservation,
the first law of life, is here the ultimate spring of action,
and shews plainly that knowledge is teleological in its
origin. But the teleological character of natural know-
ledge is further evinced by its originally hypothetical
form. Let us now inquire farther what such form im-
plies.

It is here that Hume is important, and especially
Hume as criticised and interpreted by Kant. True,
knowledge is power, it is said, and as a means to this
end is primarily sought. But to be reliable it must be
certain, and the only entire certainty that we possess
is either particular, confined to present impressions, or
formal, restricted to the relations of ideas. Neither of
these will give us prescience or control in dealing with
reality. Sense-particulars have reality indeed, but they
have no universality; while the logical relations of
ideas have universality but no reality, in other words,
are in the first instance only thought, not knowledge.
The extent to which such relations will hold of matters
of fact remains an open question, a question in no way
affected by their truth and validity as thought This


222 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

distinction between thought and knowledge marks the
modem era of philosophy. Like all great truths, it
gained ground gradually. Bacon, Locke, and Leibniz
contributed in their several ways towards its recogni-
tion: Bacon by his distinction between antieipationes
and interpretationeSy natures; Locke by his distinction of
archetypal and ectypal ideas; Leibniz by his distinction
of truths of reason and truths of fact. But Hume placed
the distinction beyond dispute, once and for all, by his
analysis of the conception of cause. Whatever be the
defects of that great argument in other respects, in this
one point it is generally acknowledged to be invulner-
able. ^^All the objects of human reason or inquiry,"
says Hume, ^^may be naturally divided into two kinds,
to wit, Belations of Ideas and Matters of Fact. Of the
first kind are the sciences of Geometry, Algebra, and
Arithmetic; and in short every affirmation which is
either intuitively or demonstratively certain. . . . Prop-
ositions of this kind are discoverable by the mere opera-
tion of thought, without dependence on what is any-
where existent in the universe. • . . Matters of fact
are not ascertained in the same manner; nor is our evi-
dence of their truth, however great, of a like nature
with the foregoing. The contrary of every matter of
fact is still possible; because it can never imply a con-
tradiction, and is conceived by the mind with the same
facility and distinctness, as if ever so conformable to
reality. That the sun will not rise to-morrow is no less
intelligible a proposition, and implies no more contradic-
tion, than the affirmation, that it will rise. We should
in vain, therefore, attempt to demonstrate its false-


HUME AND KANT 223

hood!"^ So far Hume and Kant agree. Hume, is even
at one with Kant in recognising the de facto validity of
general propositions relating to matters of fact, laws of
nature as we now call them. But, when we ask for the
ground of this validity, Hume acknowledges himself at a
loss and remains a sceptic. He can only fall back upon
association, which for him is but a passive and mechani-
cal process, devoid of reason. Kant, on the other hand,
appeals directly to the unity and spontaneity of intelli-
gence, and so gives us an explanation that is essentially
teleological. Strangely enough, Hume too has recourse
to teleology, as in the following remarkable passage:
"It is more conformable to the ordinary wisdom of
nature to secure so necessary an act of the mind [viz.,
that "by which we infer like effects from like causes,
and vice v^r^a"] by some instinct or mechanical ten-
dency, which may be infallible in its operations, may
discover itself at the first appearance of life and thought,
and may be independent of all the laboured deductions
of the understanding. As nature has taught us the use
of our limbs, without giving us the knowledge of the
muscles and nerves by which they are actuated; so
has she implanted in us an instinct, which carries for-
ward the thought in a correspondent course to that which
she has established among external objects."^ One or
two remarks on this instructive passage will help us
forward.

In the first place, the objection just now urged against
Hume's view of association must be repeated. Associa-

^ Enquiry concerning Human Understanding, § iv; Philosophical
Works, Green and Grose's edition, vol. iv, pp. 20 fl. « o.c, p. 47.


224 SPI&ITUALISTIC MONISM

tion is not a passive and mechanical process; even here
the subject is active and selective. Not any and every
impression that chances is retained and reproduced, but
only such as prove impressive by being interesting.
Even ^at the first appearance of life and thought' we
are warranted in assuming a sort of conservation that is
other than mechanical. What is wholly inert and indif-
ferent cannot learn even from nature; but ^instinctive
tendency' implies more than inertia, and excludes indif-
ference, and so cannot be purely mechanical. With
this correction we may grant the instinctive beginning
of experience to which Hume here refers. — But then,
in the next place, it is only a beginning; it suffices,
perhaps, for what Leibniz happily called les consScutianM
de% bStes.^ And it may be true, as Leibniz goes on to
say, that three-quarters of the actions of mankind are
on this level, are like the practice of medical quacks or
empirics, who have no theory. But the problem is to
account for theory, for the remaining quarter, in a word,
for the methodical inductions of science, or rather for the
principle underlying them. Mere imagination, associar
tion, or custom may suffice to explain that faulty induc-
tion by simple enumeration that Bacon denounced and
exposed ; but what we want to understand is the source
of what he called inductio vera. In one of his most
feUcitous aphorisms Bacon, by the way, gives us a hint
of the true answer, which Hume's sensationalist and
atomistic psychology hid from him, but which Kant's
sounder psychology — and I must add, Kant's greater
singleness of mind — enabled him clearly and distinctly

^ Monadologie^ § 28, Eidmann^s edition, p. 707.


HUME'S FAILURE 225

to realize. ^^Qui traetaverunt sdentias^'^ the passage runs,
" aut empirieii aut dogmatici fuenmt. Empirici^ formica^
more^ cangerunt tantum^ et utuntur; rationales^ aranearum
more^ telas ex se confieiunt: apis vero ratio media estj qum
materiam exfiorihus horti et agri elicit; sed tamen earn pro-
pria facultate vertit et digerit.^^^ — In the thiid place,
even to work out his own avowedly insufficient theory,
Hume has to assume the validity — both for nature and
for mind — of the very conception he fails to account
for. Causal inference is an act of the mind neces-
sary for our preservation, because Nature has estab-
lished a causal order among external objects. And this
necessary act of the mind, again, is itself the result of
natural, quasi-mechanical laws, viz., the laws of associa-
tion, which obviously, therefore, cannot themselves be
due to association. Causation is explained away by a
psychological theory which all the while doubly pre-
supposes it.

This brings us at length to the point, to Kant's point:
we have to presuppose causality — or, more exactly, we
have to presuppose law and order — before any experience
can be explained, and before ^Universal Experience'
can begin. We do not obtain the conceptions of natural
law and natural uniformity by an antlike accumulation
of particulars, nor are they mere cobwebs of the brain.
Impressions do not generate these conceptions for us,
but we apply the conceptions to them, thereby convert-
ing and transforming these crude experiences into the
one ^Objective Experience' we call science. To find
the ground of this rectified, systematised, universalised,

^ Normm Organon, Lib. i, 96.

VOL. II — Q


226 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

Experience is, we must remember, the sole problem. It
is not maintained that the unassimilated experiences of
the individual percipient abeady involve a conscious-
ness of law, order, uniformity on his part; but simply
that no mere repetition of such experience will suffice,
as by a sort of generatio cequivoca^ to bring those con-
ceptions forth. The more frequent the repetition of
impressions — interesting impressions, that is — the firmer
the association, the livelier the expectation. But ^' why,''
asks Mill, ^^is a single instance, in some cases, sufficient
for a complete induction, while in others mjrriads of
concurring instances, without a single exception known
or presumed, go such a very little way towards estab-
lishing a universal proposition? Whoever can answer
this question," he truly says, ^^ knows more of the phi-
losophy of logic than the wisest of the ancients, and has
solved the problem of induction."^ To this weighty
question Hume paid small heed ; he refers to it, however,
in one meagre paragraph. And there he first admits
^'that in some cases reflexion produces the belief with-
out the custom " ; but at once proceeds to explain away
the reflexion as merely * custom,' i.e. association, work-
ing " in an ollique and artificial manner."* But his argu-
ment, if it were as sound as it is plausible, would
assuredly bring scientific induction within the range of
rats and swine. For he assumes as true for the nonce the
very proposition that Mill denies, viz., that myriads of
concurring instances will suffice to establish a universal

» LogiCy lU, iii, Jin.

^ A TrecUise of Human NcUure, pt Hi, § 8, Green and Grose^s edition,
p. 405.


KANT'S SOLUTION 227

proposition ; and then from such direct associations con-
trives to glide — in an oblique and artificial manner —
to the principle of the uniformity of nature as also ^ the
effect of custom.' In fairness to Hiune, however, we
must not forget his scepticism. As Hamilton puts it:
^'Mr. Hume patronised the opinion that the notion of
causality is the offspring of experience engendered upon
custom. But those have a sorry insight into the phi-
losophy of that great thinker who suppose that this was
a dogmatic theory of his own. On the contrary, in his
hands, it was a mere reduction of dogmatism [rather of
empiricism] to absurdity by showing the inconsistency
of its results."^ Oddly enough, Mill, who raised the
crucial question, was satisfied with the empirical answer
and became ^the constructive Humist' that Hume him-
self was too profound a thinker to be. The net out-
come, in a word, was for Hume purely negative — hence
his persistent scepticism. But the negations of scepti-
cism are often the prelude to positive advance; and in
this instance Hume deserved the high commendations
Kant repeatedly accorded to him as his own and only
forerunner.

Kant*s question, generally stated, was as to the episte-
mological character of the conception of nature as a
system of laws. Up to Hume's time but two alterna-
tives were entertained, and he clearly negatives both.
The necessity implied in natural law is not discoverable
by the mere operation of thought. Comparison of ideas
can only reveal agreement or difference; formal logic is
essentially analjrtical. This necessity then is not logical.

^ Lectures on MetaphyHce^ vol. ii, p. 394.


228 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

Nor again is it empirical; for it is not given itself as
matter of fact, neither is it given in the temporal or
spatial continuity of matters of fact. And yet this con-
ception of causal necessity, and, more generally, the
conception of Nature as a single orderly system, un-
questionably exists. This it must be remembered Hume
never denies; and so, as he is clear that the origin of
this conception is not ^objective,' as we say nowadays,
he concludes that it must be subjective. But the only
subjective source he can find is association, and this will
not suffice. With all this Kant agrees. But he takes
a wider and deeper view of human nature than Hume
could do ; and so a subjective possibility is open to him,
which Hume's psychology had foreclosed. According
to that ^* the human mind is [but] a system of different
perceptions or different existences, which are linked to-
gether by the relation of cause and effect^ and mutually
produce, destroy, influence, and modify each other." ^
Such was his account of it in the TrecUite. No wonder
then that in an appendix to later editions he confesses :
^^But all my hopes vanish, when I come to explain the
principles that unite our successive perceptions in our
thought or consciousness. I cannot discover any theory
which gives me satisfaction on this head."^ This prin-
ciple that Hume cannot find is, of course, Kant's
* originally synthetic unity of apperception.' We have
already had to discuss the meaning and import of this
principle in examining dualism. But we come upon it

* A Treatise of ffuma/n Nature, vol. i, p. 641 Jin.

' OC the like admission of Mill, Examinaiion qf Sir W. ManUUon's
Philosophy, ch. zii, fin.


CAPITULATION OF AGNOSTICISM 229

in a new light here, where it presents itself as the
source of the conception of Nature as a system of unity
and law. Reserving this point for the next lecture, let
us note, in conclusion, the result we have attained so
far.

We are inquiring into the possibility of advancing
from neutral or agnostic monism to a monism of an
idealistic or spiritualistic type. We have seen Huxley,
the scientific champion of agnosticism, run his ship high
and dry on the idealistic side and there capitulate : ^^ Our
one certainty," he acknowledges, *^ is the existence of the
mental world." We have, too, his admission that the
conception of universal and necessary laws is ideal, an
invention of the mind's own devising, not a physical
fact Lastly, we have found his forerunner and master
in philosophy, David Hume, proving that this notion of
universal and necessary law holding among matters
of fact is neither empirically given nor logically deduci-
ble; and further, that it is psychologically inexplicable
to those who deny that ^ there is a spirit in man,' an
active, unifying principle, the ground of self-conscious-
ness and self-determination. In brief, taking agnostic
naturalism just as it presents itself, we have found it to
be really inside out. Instead of the physical world be-
ing primary and fundamental, the mental world second-
ary and episodic, as it supposes, the precise opposite is
implicit in its own very structure. The things known,
material permanence, mechanical necessity, natural law,
will not account for the knower: can we find anjrthing
in the knower that will account for them, is now the
question. If we do, it must be something teleological.


280 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

Already we know that man's knowledge of nature has
been acquired by the sweat of his brow, as truly as any
other product of civilization; how far the organon and
methods of this process and the result itself are teleo-
logical we shall do well to consider further.


LECTURE XIX

NATUBB AS TBLBOLOGICAL

The fact of self -activity, at once volitional and intellectucU, hears upon
the conception of Nature in three ways ; as regards its unity, its causality,
its regularity.

The Unity of Nature is the ideal counterpart of the actual unity of
each individual eocperience. Experience itself is unifying, and beyond
this immanence of experience toe cannot go.

Causality, and the principle of causal uniformity or regularity distin-
guished. In discussing the former toe may note three divisions of experi-
ence : (a) that of intersubjective intercourse and co'dperation ; (6) that
of the individucU and his immediate environment; (c) t?t<U of science, in
which objective changes are regarded solely in relation to each other.
In (a) activity and passivity are piimft facie certain. So in (b) as far
as t?ie sul^ct, but not t?ie object, is concerned. In (c) causality is only
analogically assumed. Science disallows, or rather dispenses with, the
analogy. In the scientific ideal individual things and definite acts have
no abiding place. This position at once subordinates Nature to Mind.

Some supposed difficulties besetting t?ie conception of sul^ctive activity
discussed: the fact of such activity remains.

As regards Regularity — the conception of natural law rests on the
analogy of civU law. Both are coiUingent on the redlisation of certain
necessary conditions. Universal and necessary knowledge of Nature pre-
supposes thought : here the conditions are in \is and are necessary : the
result is contingent on things conforming.

If they do conform, we are entitled to say (1) that Nature itself is
in this respect teleological, and (2) teleologicdl further in being conse-
quently amenable to human ends. As it is solely by our activity that
this assimilation of Nature is achieved, the result may be described as that
greeting of spirit by spirit which idealism fias always maintained.

231


282 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

Natubb, as science regards it, may be described as a
system, whose parts, be they simple, be they complex,
are wholly determined by universal laws. Knowledge
of these laws is an indispensable means to that subjaga-
tion and control of Nature, upon which human welfare
and advance in large measure depend. So far the pur-
suit and acquisition of such knowledge is teleological, as
truly so as other practical pursuits and achievements of
human activity. But what of the conception itself of
this systematic unity and invariable conformity to law?
That too, I say, is teleological, is a means to the end.
Knowledge itself. It is of the nature of a hypothesis
or postulate, and differs from other hypotheses or postu-
lates relating to objective reality only in the &ct that
it underlies them all. But it is not an axiom, which it
would be absurd to deny ; it is not in itself self-evident,
nor is it a deduction from anything self-evident. Nor
again is it so much brute fact thrust upon us willy-nilly.
Experiences of a sort are possible without it; and purely
formal knowledge, such as logic and arithmetic, is inde-
pendent of it. In neither of these senses then is it ob-
jective. So far is this from being the case, that we can,
as Kant has remarked, perfectly well imagine the variety
and diversity among things to be so bewildering, as to
set our powers of classification and simplification at de-
fiance, and render any systematisation of experience
impossible.^ And as it is, the amount of empirical mate-
rial actually assimilated and reduced to law is small
compared with the vast amount that still remains more
or less crude and intractable. Moreover, the range of

1 Cf . Kritik der Urtheilskrqft, Einleitung, § v.


NATURE AS A SYSTEM OF LAWS 288

our experience in space and time is infinitesimal com-
pared with the extent and duration of the universe;
and Stuart Mill accordingly, as is well known, declared
it to be folly to affirm confidently that the law of causa-
tion is a law of the universe and prevails even in dis-
tant stellar regions. But on such a view we have no
longer law but only probability, and objectively, ue. so
far as the universe goes, only indefinitely slight proba-
bility, as Mill himself expressly allows. Tet, quite
strictly speaking, we ought not to talk even of proba-
bility, inasmuch as any working theory of probability
presupposes law and uniformity. The conception of
Nature then, as a system of laws, is, we must say, hypo-
thetical ; since it is not self-evident, but admits of ques-
tion and awaits verification. But it is an indispensable
hypothesis, or postulate; for without it scientific expe-
rience is impossible. The ideal of science is complete
prescience, thoroughgoing explication; but comparison,
observation, experiment, reasoning, in a word intellectual
activity on our part, is an essential to its realisation;
and the conception of the universe as a realm of law is
the only assumption that can save us from wasting our
labour.

But how do we know this? Why must we assume
that Nature is a connected system of uniform laws, and
whence do we derive such a conception? The answer
to these questions is to be found in what we are our-
selves — self-conscious, self-determining individuals. And
this answer is at once simple and profound. It brings us
back, as we saw in the last lecture, to Kant's ^ originally
synthetic unity of apperception' as ^^the highest point


284 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

from which all use of the understanding depends" —
the principle which Hume sought for, but could not find.
It behoved him to seek it, for he admitted that our succes-
sive perceptions are united in one consciousness ; but he
could not find it, because perceptions were for him but
^ distinct existences ' and ^^ no connexions," he maintained,
«( among distinct existences are ever discoverable by hu-
man understanding." ^ But this means approaching expe-
rience from the wrong side ; and it means also ignoring
everything in experience except the several ^ impressions '
of sense — both oversights which we commonly find
in naturalistic psychology. The convergence of radii
towards a centre might seem puzzling if we set out by
regarding them as merely so many distinct lines, though
plain enough to one who saw them proceed from this
centre itself. Such precisely are the respective positions
towards the whole problem of experience and know-
ledge of Hume and Naturalism on the one hand, of Kant
and Spiritualism on the other. True, says Kant, almost
repeating Hume's words, ''no connexion can ever come
to us through the medium of sense. . . . Connexion
(conjunctio) is a spontaneous act of consciousness, ue.
of intellect, ... as distinguished from sense. . . . This
act we may call by the general name of Bynthem in
order to signalise (1) the fact that we can be aware of
nothing as conjoined in the object unless we have pre-
viously ourselves conjoined it, and (2) the fact that,
among all our presentations, ^conneodon^ is the only one
that cannot be given by the object, but must be wrought
solely by the subject itself, since it is an act of its own

1 Treatiae^ vol. i, App., p. 560.


SELF-ACTIVITY AND THE UNITY OF NATURE 285

self-activity."^ But this self-activity of the subject is
not merely intellective or apperceptive; it is also — and
I think we must add, it is primarily — a practical or
conative activity. However much for purposes of ex-
position we may abstract, we cannot separate, intellec-
tion from volition. This is a truth of fundamental
importance, but I have insisted upon it at length in
earlier lectures and it is sufficient here to recall it. With
this supplement, then, the fact of self-activity, at once
volitional and intellectual, bears upon the conception of
Nature in three ways — as regards its unity, as regards
its causality, and as regards its regularity. Let us con-
sider each of these in turn.

The Unity of Nature is the ideal counterpart of the
actual unity of each individual experience — an ideal
towards which we first advance when intersubjective
intercourse and reasoning begin; and an ideal which
becomes clearer and more distinct as mythology gives
place to science, and, I will venture to add, as science
in turn is taken up into philosophy. But it is unneces-
sary at this stage of our argument to enlarge upon the
monistic character of experience; this we have done
already with sufficient detail in discussing dualism. The
one point that now concerns us is the possibility of inter-
preting this monism idealistically, that is to say as a
spiritualism; and in this connexion the fact that all
that is formative in experience is primarily due to sub-
jective activity is of fundamental importance. However
elementaiy or however advanced this formative process
may be, the one activity complexly expressed as ^I

1 Analytik, § 16.


286 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

think, I feel, I do' is implied throughout, connecting
all that is presented or presentable with the one subjec-
tive centre. Things per w, if we could properly talk of
them, might be called distinct and separate existences;
for as it is certain that they are nothing far me^ they
may quite well be nothing for each other. But in so
far as Nature and possible experience are one and the
same, what holds of possible experience will hold of
Nature, because it holds of experience.^ But the sub-
ject of experience is, in one sense, always egoistic, never
disinterested; for it is only because certain perceptions
are my perceptions that they are perceptions at all ; and
in being my perceptions they have necessarily that unity
which I certainly cannot get from them, and certainly
do give to them. Moreover, that intellective or selec-
tive sjmthesis by which I make them mine — though I
do not make them absolutely — is determined primarily
by an affinity of interest, not by an affinity of ^ content,'
is a function of life first, not of logic. It is in this sense
that we must understand Kant's bold paradox: ^^the
intellect makes Nature, though it does not create it."
It organises, but it does not originate; just as it org^-
ises, but does not originate, the sense-particulars of ex-
perience. The very first result of this process is unity;
nay, experience itself is this unifying, and beyond that
we cannot go. The immanence of experience is thus
absolute, and it is on this ground that we say all phe-
nomena exist in one Nature, in complete community, in
one continuous space and one continuous time. We can
treat such phenomena as distinct and separable relatively

1 Cf. Kant's Prolegomena, § 36.


CAUSALITY AND SUBJECTIVE ACTIVITY 237

to each other, but only provided they are apperceived
and thereby made constituent parts of one organic unity.
Hence Kant was careful to distinguish this original,
qualitative unity, as he called it, of apperception from
quantitative unity as a category, which, like all cate-
gories, is derived from it.

Of these categories that of Causality is the chief ; and
here, as I said just now, we have to emphasise the prac-
tical side of subjective activity, which Kant in his first
Critique leaves out of account. For this reason it is
desirable to consider the source of the notion of Cause
and its bearing on that of Nature prior to any discus-
sion of Law or Regularity. Causal laws^ no doubt, are
what man is mainly concerned to know, for unless
Nature were regular in her action there could be neither
method nor purpose in ours. On the other hand, if we
were simply passive, impotent to act and counteract,
science would be for us no better than a gypsy fortune-
teller, and knowledge would certainly not be power.
Further, unless we have some concrete experience of
what causation is, it seems obvious that universal laws
of causation will be universal laws simply; to call them
causal laws will be meaningless. But they are not sim-
ply universal laws, since their universality depends
neither on laws of thought nor on pure intuition, is
neither logical nor mathematical. They relate to mat-
ters of fact. We ask then for instances, and the famil-
iar cases of sun shining and wax softening, or clay
hardening, are cited. Such perceptions become causal
judgments, we are told, when it is afiSrmed that the sun
melts the wax and bakes the clay. But we may demur


I

I

\

»

238 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

to such instftncesl So far as the relations of the one
object to the other go, they afford us no direct experi-
eixde of either cause or effect: in these relations there is
nothing, as Hume truly urged, but spatial and temporal
proxiixuty of sunshine and melting wax, simshine and
hardening clay. And assuredly there is nothing in the
bare form of the hypothetical judgment to warrant the
addition to those perceptions of the notions of activity
and passivity. Tet just as surely those notions are in-
volved in the affirmations — the sunshine melts the wax,
the wax is melted by the sunshine. But how have they
got there? Is it verily a case of solar myth? Precisely
so, we have heard the naturalist reply: the notion of
Cause like that of Substance is a fetish, and both these
items of anthropomorphic superstition we eliminate. Yes,
from science perhaps, but certainly not from experience.
Activity and passivity, doing and underg^oing, are at
least prima facie facts of experience, connecting subjec-
tive change with objective change, and objective change
with subjective change. It is prima facie certain that,
within limits, I determine the course of external things,
and that this within limits determines me. Such imme-
diate experience of activity and passivity may be the
source of myth, but at least it is not itself mythicaL In
analogy we infer a second similarity only from a first
that is given independetitiy : we cannot advance by rule
of three to a second ratio save as we are sure of a first. It
is not then in the relation of one objective change to
another that we first find causation ; that is rather where
we put it, in order intellectually to assimilate or syn-
thesise. Kant, it will be remembered, applies the notion


EXPERIENCE OF ACTIVITY AND PASSIVITY 289

of analogy both to the categoiy of substance and to that
of cause; but with him in the latter case the prime
relation is that of reason and consequent in logic, the
analogical relation that of cause and effect in time. But
in all this, I repeat, Kant is thinking only of the uni-
versality of causal laws, not at all of the specific char-
acter of the causal relation itself, as manifested in each
single instance in which it occurs. As regards this
character in concrete instances, our procedure is truly
analogical. The activity and passivity that are, at least
prima facie^ facts of individual experience, constituting
what we call the interaction of subject and environment,
we transfer by parity of reasoning to what we regard
as the interaction of object and object in universal ex-
perience. Such inference, of course, hangs together with
that other analogy by which we regard such objects as
things or individuals. Both analogies are &cilitated by
intersubjective intercourse; for, unless we are content
to be solipsists, we are forced to regard our fellow-
creatures as individual agents interacting with us, and
interacting, like ourselves, with their environment.

From the point of view of our present discussion, then,
we may make a threefold division of experience. We
have first this experience of intersubjective intercourse.
This yields a complete knowledge of what is, prima facie^
causal efficacy. I know that my fellow-man is determined
or influenced by my action, as I, in turn, am determined
or influenced by his. Society, civilisation, and science
itself are the result of such interaction. No doubt such
communion and reciprocity is not direct; it takes place,
we say, through the medium or instrumentality of matter.


240 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

But a medium or instrument is not necessarily either an
agent or a patient. It may be perfect just in proportion
as it is itself inerty neither increasing nor diminishing nor
in any way modifying what is. transmitted or effected
through it. So regarded, the material world occupies an
entirely secondary and subservient position; and in de-
scribing it as a mechanism we, in fact, only emphasise
this, for what is a machine but an artificial means or con-
trivance to minister to doing? — We have next the ex-
perience of the individual subject in dealing, not with
other subjects, but with the physical environment simply.
There is here no evidence of it^^eraction, such as we have
where there is cooperation or conflict of man with his
fellows. I only know that a certain change in the en-
vironment answers to my voluntary doing or activity, and
a certain other change again to my involuntary doing or
passivity. But I cannot perceive that, in the cases in
which I act, my environment suffers, nor vice versa / if I
infer these, I do so by assimilating the physical environ-
ment to mjTself or to the social environment, as primitive
man does when he personifies sun and moon, winds and
streams, fire and pestilence. — Lastly, we have the uni-
versal experience of science, in which objective changes
are regarded solely in relation to each other. Here there
is no direct evidence of action at all : there is just the fact
of change, nothing else is directly discernible. The re-
peated coexistences and successions we observe among
these objects confirm the anthropomorphic interpretation
of them as individual things interacting after the anal-
ogy of subjects. But in reality we discover nothing
but recurring conjunctions of qualities and recurring


mXERSUBJECTIVE ANALOGIES 241

sequences of events. Moreover, the analogy which
would lead us to treat such objects as individuals would
require us further to assume a medium for their inter-
action. The environing medium of such hypothetical
subjects, too, can, of course, be again resolved into hypo-
thetical subjects of a lower order interacting in an out-
standing medium, and so on indefinitely. In point of
fact, common thought and language never relinquish this
intersubjective analogy so long as they refer to changes
as definite at all. Scientific thought, on the other hand,
strenuously disavows it; though implications of it still
linger in the language of science till that takes the form
of equations. Meanwhile, science devises methods and
elaborates conceptions, by which to resolve those variegated
uniformities of coexistence and succession, from which it
sets out, into one continuous and unchangeable content in
space and one continuous and unalterable process in time.
But neither space nor matter, neither time nor motion,
affords any place for causal activity in the only form of
it of which we have any immediate knowledge. Hence
it behoves us to realise, what most expositions of causation
ignore or deny — I mean, that causation and causal uni-
formity are entirely distinct. An efficient cause is not
necessarily uniform in its action, and uniformity of se-
quence does not directly imply such causal intervention.
Within the scientific scheme, then, individual things
and definite acts find no abiding-place. The whole is
one thing and the procession of its changes one continu-
ous event. Such is Nature, and the course of Nature as
Naturalism conceives it. But, from the way in which we
have come- upon this conception, we see clearly that effi-

VOL. n — B


242 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

cient causes are not in strictness eliminated from it : the
strict truth is rather that they never enter into it. There
is nothing in it, therefore, that can possibly discredit that
prima fade interaction of individual minds, of which the
whole social fabric is a proof. Nor, again, is there any-
thing that can possibly discredit that rapport^ alternately
predominantly passive and predominantly active, of each
individual subject with its own environment, on which in
turn intersubjective intercourse and combination depend.
Such a conception of Nature, I say, cannot possibly dis-
credit these divisions of experience ; for, in the first place,
it leaves them entirely aside. The conception of efficient
cause lies beyond its bounds: it recognises law, orderly
sequence of events ; but it neither asserts nor denies what
we know as activity and passivity. And in the next place,
the conception of Nature, so limited, cannot discredit our
experience of activity and passivity, for the very exist-
ence of this conception presupposes both ; first, inasmuch
as it is but a formula or descriptive scheme, summarising
a common objective factor of universal experience; and
further inasmuch as, in being a formula or scheme at all,
it IB primarily — whatever validity it may have — but an
ideal intellectually elaborated. And plainly, as we have
seen, objects without subjects are nonsense, intellectual
constructions without intellect impossible, and intellect
without synthetic activity a nonentity.

Nevertheless I have spoken of all subjective activity
only as prima fade such. I did so, because this at
least is allowed generally and is sufficient to discrimi-
nate experience in the concrete from the abstract scheme
of science; and because, further, it was desirable to


>


ANALOGIES BEYOND THE PALE OF SCIENCE 243

avoid any semblance of dogmatism. Still we must
admit that, if the reality of such activity can be effect
ually challenged, there is an end of spiritualistic mon-
ism. But our discussion shews, I think, that at any
rate this reality cannot be impugned from the side of
the natural sciences. They can only say we do not find
it, and could make nothing of it if we did: it does not
belong to us. Beside this negative answer we have
placed the indirect argument, that the existence of the
sciences themselves becomes inexplicable, if the search
for truth, the refutation of error, the labours of obser-
vation, experiment, and computation, were themselves
part and parcel of the one course of Nature within
which, it is said, no spontaneity is found. The hope-
less inconsistencies of such a position were exposed in
our earlier examination of the conscious automaton
theory; and its actual inversion of the true place of
science in experience we have now seen. The only
ground, then, for misgiving lies in the alleged incon-
ceivability of subjective activity. Unquestionably there
is a bewildering diversity of opmion among psycholo-
gists on this point, which, I fear, we cannot even attempt
to unravel. But, happily, it is not a question of con-
ceivability, but of fact. The conception of a very simple
fact may be a very complex conception: indeed one
might very^ plausibly maintain that such an inverse
relation is rather the rule than the exception; that
generally most intellectual work is involved in the satis-
factory determination and definition of the most elemen-
taiy facts, and accordingly that it is only as we advance
farther synthetically that we can regress farther analyti-


244 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

cally. Thus the psychologists know better what they
mean by perception than what they mean by sensation ;
and the physicist is clearer about metals than he is about
matter.

But I would urge that we need not merely to dis-
tinguish between activity and the conception of activity,
but to distinguish also between activity and the percep-
tion of it. When we talk of perceiving that we are
active we really imply introspection, even perhaps retro-
spection: in a word, we are at the level of self-con-
sciousness or reflective consciousness; and I presume no
one will maintain that consciousness begins, or always
remains, at this level. Many of those who complain
that activity is inconceivable, shew by their arguments
that what they look for are details of how it is done.
Like the distracted centipede in the fable, puzzling
how it ran, they ask. What exactly do I do when I
do? How can I set about doing, unless I know how?
How can I be active, if the content and conditions of
activity are not clear to me? Thus Mr. Bradley asks,
"What is the content of activity as it appears to the
soul at first ? " ^ He promises also to be duly grateful to
any one who will direct him 'to an experimental in-
quiry ' into its particular conditions ! — We are of course
continually endeavouring to make apparently simple pro-
cesses of so-called transitive action distinct, by resolving
them into complex processes that involve conspiring cir-
cumstances and intermediate links. To imagine any
such method applicable to subjective activity is to assim-
ilate mental action to so-called physical action, the

^ Appearance and Beauty^ second edition, pp. 604, 606.


ACTIVITY AS CONCEPTION AND AS FACT 245

known to the unknown, the primitiye to the derivatiye,
the fact to the fiction. And as the continuity of space
and time, because it allows, nay compels, an indefinite
regress, prevents the physicist's inquiry from ever ter-
minating, so the like end for like reasons is sure to
befall the experimental inquiries of psychologists who
set out by regarding activity as an ^appearance,' the
conditions of which are to be found among other ^ appear-
ances.' It is not surprising, therefore, that those who
have adopted such methods soon confidently assert that
conscious activity is an illusion, due to certain combina-
tions and successions of sensations.^ And so is reached
that thoroughgoing naturalistic phenomenalism or agnos-
tic nihilism, which in completing itself refutes itself.

The relation of subject and object is not only for expe-
rience an indissoluble relation, but it is an incommu-
table one. We cannot treat the subjective as we do
the objective and form an abstract scheme, a statics and
dynamics, of spirit in Herbartian fashion. Activity is
of the essence of the relation though it does not make
it, and — giving the wide meaning to apperception that
is nowadays sometimes given to it — we may say with
Kant that among all our presentations this is ^' the only
one that cannot be given by the object, but must be
wrought solely by the subject itself, since it is an act of \
its own self-activity." If we ask for the conditions of
this activity, we must transcend experience to get them.
There would be little point in saying that the subject
is a condition, for it only t«, as it is active; nor that

iCf. my paper, ^ Modern^ Fsychology, Mind, 1893, N.S., vol. ii,
pp. 75 ff.


246 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

objects are a condition, for they again only are verily
objects, as they are apperceived. As Lotze very perti-
nently observes: "We cannot go on indefinitely requir-
ing intermediary machinery ... at some point or other
the chain of intermediaries must consist of simple mem-
bers connected together immediately and not requiring
something else to hold them together. . . . All attempts
to explain still further these most simple elements of
action and recurrence, to elucidate them by shewing the
way in which they come to pass, must invariably fail;
but they fail not on account of the imperfection of our
knowledge, but because the very existence of what they
erroneously seek is impossible."^ This immediacy, it
seems to me, we have in experience, in the activity of
cognition and volition. Strangely enough, those who
have such compunction about admitting mental activity
regard mental passivity as transparent fact; and yet a
very Uttle reflexion might convince them that passivity
involves activity. The scientific scheme accordingly,
which eliminates activity, equally eliminates passivity,
or more exactly — as we have just seen — the one con-
ception enters into it as little as the other. Inertia
means not merely inactivity, but also impassivity. A
body, as the physicist regards it, can do nothing and can
suffer nothing. The changes, which at first we say it
undergoes, resolve into motions of the aggregate of
which we say it consists; and such resolution has no
assignable limit short of points in space and instants in
time. Changes within a body, defined by its qualities,
eventually become changes between punctual something-

1 MiCTOCOsmuSy Eng. trans., vol. ii, p. 620.


NATURALISM AND EPISTEMOLOGY 247

nesses defined only by quantity. These physical points
themselves, again, are strictly indifferent, devoid alike of
f&culty and of capacity, neither endeavouring to change
nor resisting change, but incapable of it. And now 'per
contrttj it must be urged that we who experience change
aie parties to it, indifferent only to the uninteresting,
surprised by the unexpected, but attentive to all that
can hinder or help, feeling constraint only because con-
scious of freedom and bent on progress.

As regards Causality then, as we understand it in
our own immediate experience and in all human affairs,
we find it indeed excluded from the scientific realm of
Nature, but not thereby attainted or even impeached in
its native domain. That Naturalism nevertheless should
regard the whole notion of efficiency as extirpated, root
and branch, is but a consequence of the unwarrantable
assumption that the realm of Nature is primary, inde-
pendent, and complete in itself. But the truth, I trust,
is becoming ever clearer to us that such a phenomenal
world per «e is a hopeless contradiction, that Nature, aa
we conceive it, is neither primary, nor independent and
complete in itself; that it is, on the contrary, merely
an abstract scheme; and that, as such, it necessarily
presupposes intellectual constructiveness, and motives to
sustain the labour that such construction entails. Epis-
temological inquiries, in a word, completely reverse the
situation, which Naturalism, without condescending to
such inquiries, simply takes for granted. Mind is not
the impotent shadow of Nature as thus shaped forth,
but this shaping is itself the work of mind. At this '
point many questions present themselves which might


248 spmrruALiSTic monism

tempt us at once to press our advantage over Nata-
ralism. But it will be really wiser to defer them till
we have examined this shaping process itself. This
constitutes the last of my three points — the regularity
of Nature as postulated by mind.

A glance at the history of science, more particularly at
the development of those sciences which have advanced
the farthest towards the scientific ideal, would disebse
a curious inversion in the positions occupied by the no-
tions of cause and of law. The more substantial caises
fall out of sight, the more universal laws take on their
rdle; and, presently, they become hypostatized as ^self-
existent laws'; they operate unchecked, they reign
supreme, ^binding nature fast in fate.' Nevertheless by
this substitution science supposes that human experi-
ence emerges from the anthropomorphic or mythical
dawn with its metaphysical shadows, and enters the
clear noonday of positive Knowledge. "Fact I know,
and Law I know," says Huxley. I have now to urge
that this jubilation is premature, that we do not know
Law, in the sense in which we know fact. If we do
not find causes among our facts, so neither do we find
laws among them; if the conception of active causes is
anthropomorphic, so equally is that of universal laws.
At the level of individual experience we may perceive
facts, but we do not as yet conceive of laws that deter-
mine them. This conception is the outcome of inter-
subjective intercourse, of social cooperation; for society
is impossible without some government, and is more
perfect, the more law and order are assured and stable.
Now we know that pre-scientific man assumed the


LAW, JURAL AND NATURAL, COMPARED 249

preyalence of a divine law and order in Nature analo-
gous to that existing among men. We know, too,
that this assumption was at least the origin of the con-
ception of scientific law. Such an assumption may be
called natural superstition, religious credulity, or spir-
itual instinct; but at least it is neither incontestable
fact nor logical necessity. How far is the final concep-
tion of scientific law of a different character?

Though the human mind, human society, and human
knowledge have developed continuously and pari pa%9u^
yet we can deal with this question most effectively from
the reflective standpoint taken by Kant ; that is by assum-
ing the human mind to be what it now is, and real know-
ledge still to be acquired. We then ask how is such
real knowledge — universal, scientific experience — pos-
sible? So, assuming the individual mind to be what
it now is and society still waiting to be founded, we
may ask how is society possible ? The answers to these
questions are strikingly alike, though that to the last be
the more obvious of the two. We read that after the
flood ^^the whole earth was of one language and of one
speech . . . and they said one to another. Go to, let us
make brick and ... let us build us a city and a tower.
. . . And the Lord said. Behold they are one people
and they have one language ; and this is what they begin
to do: and now nothing will be withholden from them,
which they purpose to do. Go to, let us go down and
there confound their language, that they may not under-
stand one another's speech. ... So they left off to
build the city." Here the conditions of the possibility
of society are clearly implied; when a common under-


250 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

standing and a common purpose exist, society is possi-
ble, when they cease, any existing society is at an end.
It is not enough that each man has understanding and
purpose, but there must be common understanding and
common purpose before there can be one people. A like
accord between thinking and being is the condition with-
out which knowledge is impossible. Knowledge no doubt
is thought before everything ; but it is also more ; thought
is not directly knowledge, but only indirectly, f.e., — as
Kant says in one bold passage, — " by referring to some-
thing purely contingent, namely possible eocperieneey ^
By possible experience here we are to understand the
scientific ideal of orderly and systematic knowledge,
in which every item has its place in virtue of universal
and necessary laws. Such an ideal in itself is ^some-
thing purely contingent ' : it may prove to be valid and
it may cease to be so. But the conditions of this possi-
bility are epistemologically not contingent but necessary.
In this sense our ideal is hypothetical, it is a consequent
of the conditions and those conditions are in us^ who
know, not in the things to be known. Will the things
conform, will they be intelligible? As with the social
compact, we can only trust and try ; it must be this way,
if at all: the conditions are necessary, actual realisation
is contingent ; in this wise the whole notion of universal
and necessary laws of Nature is, then, essentially a postu-
late. To quote Kant again: "It is not a dogma . . .
because it has this peculiarity that it first renders its
own proof, viz., experience, possible; and has always to
be presupposed for the sake of experience."

1 Kritik der reinen Femunft, Ite Aus., p. 737,


KANT ON 'POSSIBLE EXPERIENCE' 251

Man may be very helpless, but at least he makes this
demand, and looks to its fulfilment to give him prescience
and power. And it has been fulfilled, and he has power
and prescience accordingly. Neyertheless, passing strange
though it be, those who haye done most to achieve
this result would fain persuade us that it is no achieve-
ment, and that man is as powerless over against the
Nature whose laws he conceives, as wax under the
stamp by which it is impressed. It is against this view
that I urge the analogy between civil law and natural
law, and the certain fact that the conception of the
latter is derived from the former. If man had never
made laws he could never know law, and if he were not
a free a&rent he could neither make laws nor obey them.
How aliurd it would be to argne, that in constituting
a commonwealth in order to obtain greater freedom and
security, men thereby become slaves, because as citizens
they can no longer each one do whatever is right in his
own eyes. Equally absurd is it to argue that, in postu-
lating regularity in Nature as the one ground of rational
experience, we are deprived of all power and initiative,
because in a system of universal and necessary law
nothing can be arbitrary and there can be no gaps. If
the conception of mechanism enables us to summarise
details that would otherwise bewilder us, this cannot
possibly nullify our independence, reduce im to parts of
the machine, and elevate tJuit into an absolute fate. The
very fact that it is our conception, that we devised it
and use it, see its imperfections and amend them, shews
that we are outside it and above it : its a priori condi-
tion and not its helpless consequence. In a word, con-


252 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

cisely to express the scope of that regularity which
science postulates, we must say as Kant has done,^ not
only In mundo non datur castiSy but also In mundo non
datur fatum. Nothing happens by blind chance, and
also nothing happens by blind necessity. The necessity
of natural law is always * a conditional, and consequently
intelligible, necessity.' Moreover, this intelligible, or
hypothetical, necessity, as Kant also calls it, applies —
as he is careful to point out — not to the existence of
things but only to their relations, which obviously pre-
suppose them. In jural a&irs, the source, we must ever
remember, of this analogy of natural regularity, we
might say whatever happens is determined by law so
far as there is either conformity to statute or submission
to penalty. But here, where law has its strict meaning,
we are aware that it would be nonsense to talk of it as
self-existent or self-executive. ^^Just as impossible is it
to assume," borrowing the words of Lotze, "that first
there could be as absolute Prius^ a kingdom of forms
necessary in themselves, a sort of immemorial Fate ; and
then that there should afterwards be, however created, a
world subjected to the constraint of these laws in order
to give reality to just whatever their limitations might
permit. Rather it is the real alone that is and through
its being produces the semblance of a necessity preceding
it, much as the living body shapes within itself the skele-
ton, round about which it seems to have grown."*

Let me now try to gather up in a sentence or two
the results up to this point of our discussion of Natural

1 Cf . the concluding remarks on the third Postulate of Experience.
» Metaphysik, 1879, § 88 fin-


RESULTS ATTAINED 253

Law, so far, at least, as is necessary to make clear the
next step in our argument. That argument is that
the material and mechanical is not fundamental, but
that the teleological and spiritual underlie it and are
presupposed by it. So far we have mainly considered
the process, and analysed the conception, of natural
knowledge. We have seen that the process is tele-
ological in its origin, since it is prompted and sus-
tained by practical motives. Also that the conception
of natural law is teleological in its character, first
inasmuch as it is hypothetical, and every hypothesis a
means to an end, a theoretical organon that may or
may not work; secondly and more especially, inasmuch
as the hypothesis is that Nature will conform to the
conditions of our intelligence. It has been needful to
exhibit at leng^, and to emphasise, the fact that these
conditions do emanate from us; needful to explain and
maintain the daring position of Eant that ^^the in-
tellect makes Nature, though it does not create it."
We have traced to this source the unity and the
regularity of the system of Nature, and have seen that
the causal efficiency, with which positive science can
dispense, so long as it merely describes and computes,
remains, and remains necessarily, the unassailable pos-
session of Mind. Of course, let me parenthetically
observe, the standpoint of our discussion has been that
of the duality of subject and object and implies only
such independence as that duality involves: the dis-
parateness of dualism with its mind per se and matter
per 86 we claim to have transcended. We have then
this result: It being in general granted that our con-


254 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

ception of the unity and regularity of Nature is entitled
to the name of knowledge — being ever confirmed, never
falsified, by experience — we are now equally entitled to
say that this unity and regularity of Nature proves that
Nature itself is teleological, and that in two respects:
(1) it is conformable to human intelligence and (2), in
consequence, it is amenable to human ends. Such is
the new step in our argument, and it contains all that
is essential to complete it.

A word or two may, I trust, suffice to make its bear-
ing clear. In the first point mentioned we find implied
that essential oneness of thought and being, that recog-
nition of the intelligible by intelligence, that g^eting of
spirit by spirit, for which idealists have always contended.
I do not propose to dilate upon this ; it is more germane
to the discussion I must soon bring to a close to insist
still upon what is essential to every true idealism or
spiritualism, — the spontaneous activity of the greeting
intelligence. This granted, the rest soon follows; while
by ignoring this first and denying it finally, Naturalism
has brought upon us Hhat nightmare of advancing
tide of matter and tightening grasp of law,' which
Agnosticism is helpless to dispel. Of the bare rela-
tion of subject and object as common to all forms and
phases of experience nothing can be said; by no means
can we get back of this; indeed, strictly speaking, we
cannot get so far back. We cannot know experience
as absolutely beginning but only as in process, and
here subjective spontaneity as selecting and connecting at
once asserts itself. If we try to conceive an objective
process apart from this, we picture a kaleidoscopic


INTELLIGENCE AND THE INTELLIGIBLE 256

succession of numberless elements in numberless com-
binations but devoid of any fixity, any connexion, or
any progress. The more clearly we succeed in mentally
depicting such *mind-stuflf' or * matter-stuff ' in its
nakedness, — it is indifferent which we call it, — the
more hopeless and absurd will appear the emergence
therefrom of a living, feeling Ego and a known non-
Ego; albeit such a generatio cequivoca of experience is
all that Naturalism can logically offer us. If, as Kant
does, we regard experience as starting with such an
indefinite manifold as its objective complement, we
must hasten to add, that the start is only made when
this matter of experience is shaped and informed by
the subject conscious of it and interested in it. Now
the point on which I have to insist is this: not only
is subjective synthesis indispensable before experience
can really begin ; but it is only by means of this
synthesis, and the conative activity by which it is
prompted and sustained, that experience can advance
and unfold. No doubt in all such advance there is
a constant reciprocity, if I may so say, between sub-
ject and object. But my contention is that to the sub-
ject belongs the lead and initiative throughout, and
that, as experience developes, this subject shews an
ever increasing activity and supremacy. Association is
freer tl^an sensation and entails more voluntary effort;
thought is freer than both, entailing more voluntary
effort still. Things need not conform to our thinking as
the existence of error shews: when they do conform —
however this is brought about — we call them intelli-
gible, describe them as, in content or essence, ideal.


256 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

No doubt truth is reached by a series of approxima-
tions, but to find it we must seek it, and the main clue
is our own nature. A rude anthropomorphism gives us
our first bearings, and every advance in knowledge of
the Not-self is a further self-revealing. With this
clearer self-consciousness we judge the world more
adequately, employ truer and more perfect categories.
But all through it is a process of assimilating the
non-Ego to the Ego, not the Ego to the non-Ego;
and therefore self-relisation is the sole way to advance.
The most potent of all means of self-realisation is
human society; ^'as iron sharpeneth iron so the coun-
tenance of man his fellow." Here first we transcend
the narrow limits of individual experience, confined to
perception, reminiscence, and expectation. Discourse
makes us logical; we ask questions, need convincing,
and so we reason; for universal experience consists
from the first wholly of thoughts, as it necessarily
must, since only thoughts admit of communication.
But all constructive thinking, if we consider its con-
tent and not merely its form, consists in assimilating.
"The resolution of mystery," as Dr. Bain has some-
where said, "is found in assimilation, identity, frater-
nity." The ultimate paradigm, if I may so say, for
this process we have in our own self-consciousness,
or rather in what we find common to all our self-
consciousnesses and call reason. This is the truth em-
bodied in Kant's transcendental unity of apperception.
It is shadowed forth, however perverted by its author,
in the Homo mensura doctrine of Protagoras, and in the
saying of Aristotle rb ojjloiov r(p 6tioC(p yiyvd)aK€a-0ai;


MEN AND NATURE ARE RATIONAL 257

indeed in one form or other it is a truth everywhere
apparent in the course of philosophy. In a sense, then,
we are always anthropomorphic. According to Natural-
ism the myths and cosmogonies of early thought are
purely subjective, while the laws of Nature that refute
them are wholly objective. But there is no such
chasm between them. In Baconian language both are
an anticipatio mentis and both are an interpretatio
NaturcB. It is solely through obstinate questionings
of reason, strengthened and clarified by the effort, that
the truer interpretation has been reached; and its
success, so far from justifying any dualism of sub-
jective and objective, should only assure an unbiassed
and reflective mind that Nature and Man are one in
being rational.

VOL. II — 8


LECTURE XX

SPIBITUALI8TIG MONISM

Lavjs of Nature used in two senses : (a) as implying subatanUal
causes; (6) as implying orUy constant relations. Does the substitution
of the latter for the former enable positive science to dear itself of all
anthropomorphic taint f No, for (I) its method and assumptions prove it
to be a human instrument; (2) it shows that things are ordered by
measure and number, but not what they are tJiemselves. Su^jjects todA
intrinsic qualities, and causaUy efficient, are facts of experience prior to
and independent of it. It must come to terms unth these when challenged.
We say then : Either it is itself intelligent or there is intelligence beyond
it. Either it is itself causally efficient or there is a caused agent behind it
But for an answer to these questions Naturalism refers us to Agnosticism.
And Agnosticism again betrays it,

Mr. Herbert Spencer'' s answer examined. A First Cause is^^a neces-
sary datum of consciousness, but cannot in any manner or degree be
known in the strict sense of knowing."*^ Nevertheless, his UntnotoaNe
turns out to be ^^t?ie same Power which in ourselves wells up under
the form of consciousness.^^

What Mr. Spencer means by 'knoudng in the strict sense."* The
Kantian distinction cf determinant, and reflective, judgment brought
to bear.

The agnostic use of ^ Phenomenon'* criticised. Appearances do not
veU reality.

As a further objection to a spiritualistic interpretation of Nature, it is
said that there can be no mind behind it, for it is never interfered vsUh.
This objection due to a confusion easUy exposed.

Moreover, when we divest ourselves of the scientific bias, and com-
template the world in its historic<U concreteness, we can see the true
reality to be not a mechanism but a Bealm of Ends,

258


TWO SENSES OF NATURAL LAW 259

Natubalism takes for granted, as we have seen,
that, when it has substituted for the conception of
causal agents that of universal laws, it has cleared
itself of the anthropomorphic taint, in other words of
all spiritual implications, and become pure positive, ob-
jective, science. That the conception of law is pri-
marily and properly a jural conception, implying a
sovereign power, cannot be denied, nor yet that in
its first application to Nature a Divine Lawgiver was
everywhere and always assumed. But all this, of
course, is anthropomorphic. In the last lecture the
question was raised whether the scientific form of this
conception is essentially of a different character; in the
course of a general discussion of the nature of know-
ledge, it was answered in the negative. I propose now
to return to this question and to deal with it in a
more special way.

We find laws of Nature used in two very different
senses by scientific writers. Sometimes such laws are
spoken of as self-existent and as independent of the
phenomena which they are said to govern and which
of necessity conform to them. But this language is
only defensible on one of two suppositions: either the
so-called self-existent laws are themselves causal agents
and phenomena the result of their interaction; or by a
metonymy, such as we commonly employ in speaking
of civil law, the laws are said to be and do, what the
sovereign executive really is and does. And we find
scientific language that favours now one, now the other,
of these alternatives: the former in speaking of forces
along with laws — gravitation, cohesion, electricity, for


260 SPIRTTUALISTIC MONISM

instance; the latter in referring all these laws col-
lectively to Nature as her laws. Nevertheless, the
thoroughgoing naturalist, as we well know, will not
defend this usage of law; but, casting it off as the
last rags of a creed outworn, thinks he has freed Imn-
self from all the ontcdogical tranunels that such terms
as force or cause or nature involve. He claims to use
law in quite another sense. Laws of Nature are for
him only uniformities of coexistence and succession.
Orderly relation of the parts of a whole is here the
outcome. But if we pitch upon any concrete thing* or
fact as possibly one of these parts, it is straightway
itself resolved into coexistences and successions: indeed
so long as we can single out a definite ^this' or ^that'
the analytic process continues. If we ask of what sort
are the relations, then attractions, repulsions, affinities,
influences, are discarded phrases: activity and passivity
are anthropomorphic, metaphjrsical. The relations are
ultimately related motions, that is the most that can
be safely said. We have, then, an infinity of meeting-
points or starting-points of related motions, motions so
related that the whole is one. As the analysis never
rests till everything intrinsic is resolved into relations
of elements external to each other, we may fairly say
each element is constituted solely by its external rela-
tions to all the others. True, the element in such a
case becomes for any clear thinking a pure nothing;
for it is as impossible to get the shadowiest of 4t8' out
of mere relations as to get quantity by any multipli-
cation of mere coefficients when your concrete term has
vanished. But waiving this, the laws of Nature only


NATURAL LAWS AS RELATIONS 261

state the relatioDs, they do not make them. How, then,
are the relations established or maintained; how do these
elements, which are on, or over, the verge of nonentity,
keep up this wondrous rapport? Certain physicists are
fond of talking of the mazy dance of molecules;
the ancient astronomers, too, imagined that the planets
had souls which steered their courses. Such concerted
action through mutual understanding is indeed the only
form of rapport that is clear to us; but even con-
certed action on such a scale is inconceivable. More-
over, the concerted actions that we know presuppose a
medium of communication; if that were excluded we
should have to fall back on ^ telepathy ' or, as the physi-
cist calls it, action at a distance. And even then there
would come the difficulty that these elements we are
supposing to act in concert, are not allowed to act at
all! Nevertheless, with extreme inconsequence, but to
obviate these difficulties, the physicist postulates, not a
medium of communication, but a medium, of which all
his elements are motions and by which strict continuity
of motion is secured. This commits him to infinity in
three directions. First, his ether must be infinite in
extent; for gravitation, cohesion, and the like, which it
mediates for its contents, are unavailing to give it bounds
or form, unless there be another ether to mediate in like
manner for it. On the other hand, it is infinite in divisi-
bility since it is absolutely continuous ; in every smallest
part of it, therefore, there is an infinity of elements, in
other words, no elements at all. Finally, though every
part of it can be moved, no part can move itself; the
motion therefore, apart from catastrophes, can never have


262 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

begun and can never end. Perhaps I ought to apolo-
gise for this brief restatement of what was discussed so
fully in the first half-dozen lectures. But there we
were content to take it for what it purported to be —
an objective presentment of real principles; we are now
concerned with it in its relation to the human mind.

Is it anthropomorphic in itself and as a whole? — that
is the first point. I answer Yes, as truly as the cos-
mogony of Hesiod, but it is a vastly narrower scheme.
There are three things human beings can do, and by
these the character of this scheme is fundamentally
determined: they can move things by contact, they can
measure, and they can work sums. To measure and com-
pute motions, connected in the only manner conceivable
by us, is all that this scheme will do. It is a wonderful
and exact instrument, but its exactness is due mainly
to its narrow range and formal character. Time is the
emptiest thing we can measure, and the thing we can
measure with far the greatest precision; but that gives
it no supremacy over other conceptions, makes it no
fuller, nor them less indispensable. The fact that me-
chanical laws are applicable to things shews indeed that
^things are ordered by measure and number,' but not
that they are themselves only measures and numbers.^

Is a system of such laws, then, really clear of anthro-
pomorphic implications? This is the second point: I
answer. By no means. That subjects with varied intrinsic
qualities, that causal agents, are beyond its ken does not
disprove or affect the existence of such things or such
agents. These we know first and independently, and

1 Cf . Lotze, Metaphysics, Concluaion.


SCIENCE AND ANTHROPOMORPHISM 263

we can pass from them to it but never from it to
them. We are able to use it, just as we use mortality
tables, because it is an analytical instrument of our
devising. Its utility, too, is evidence that the world is
verily a cosmos, but not that it is verily a mechanism.
Setting out from what — as I have said — we know
first and independently, causal agents and things with
intrinsic qualities, the unscientific mind looks to them
to account for changes, and strives to represent the
world in terms of their interaction. Hence the earlier
sense of laws of Nature and natural agencies, which
positive science only endures on sufferance and in prin-
ciple repudiates. But though this triumph of human
devising contrives to leave them out, it has still left
them there. Men do not cease to be every one more
or less 9ui generis^ seeking out many inventions with
untiring energy and undaunted by difficulty, because
Newton's particular genius led him to discover the
laws of motion and Laplace's led him to propound the
nebular theory; or because, last of all, Mr. Spencer has
evolved a theory of the universe in terms of these, into
which Newton and Laplace would have to fit. When
positive science scofiEs at anthropomorphism, it is play-
ing a dangerous game. Is it anthropomorphic, only the
license of the poet, to say to a man: ^^Thou art thou,
with power on thine own act and on the world"?

But if man's intellectual and practical activity is fact
and not analogy, any formulation, however rigidly me-
chanical, of what we call natural phenomena, must still
leave room for it and come to terms with it when chal-
lenged. A large part of human activity consists in


264 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

communication and cooperation between man and man.
This again is fact, not analogy, albeit fact readied only
by understanding, not fact as the lightning flash and
thunder clap might be called facts for any sentient
with eyes and ears. Hence I shall not charge you
with anthropomorphism if you accept these laryngeal
articulations of mine as — not noise, that might serre
to scare rooks or admit of acoustic analysis, given tie
necessary resonators, but as — a more or less rational dis-
course addressed to you. So generally, being ourselves
active and intelligent, we understand certain changes,
which science can only formulate as matter in motion,
to be verily the acts and expressions of rationals: only
so can we meet and greet our fellow-men. No ad-
vance in the essentially interminable description of that
mechanism can ever conceivably alter these facts, upon
which — as I have repeatedly urged — this whole business
of physical description depends, nay of which it is itself
a part. So far, at any rate, the teleological and ideal-
istic or spiritual character of experience seems clear;
and anthropomorphic * confusion of ideas' so far has
had no chance to obscure it. Now put mankind and
other sentients capable of mutual understanding on the
one side and their common environment as a whole on
the other. The relations of each individual subject to
this environment are not confined to those in which it
serves as the medium of intersubjective intercourse,
and, in fact, cannot begin with them. But, before and
apart from these relations, its environment is for each
subject an orderly objective continuum, affecting it im-
mediately, and always in some measure amenable to its


QUESTIONS TO BE ANSWERED 266

acts; the enyironment is its counterpart or non-Ego; its
microcosm we might perhaps call it These, then, are
the facts for which, I repeat, every system of Nature,
mechanical or not, must find room, or at least leave
room.

This non-Ego, we say, is orderly, and so, intelligi-
ble. Either, then, it is itself intelligent, or there is
intelligence beyond it. Again, I interact with it or
through it; either, then, it is itself causally efficient, or
there is a causal agent behind it. Early thinking, so
far as it faced these questions at all, answered each by
.fcMng the tot l^roaUv.. But the Man, oo,^^
aspects of the environment were then so obtrusive as
to shut out the whole — there was no seeing the wood
for the trees, as the proverb goes. Polytheism in
religion and independent forces in science were thus far
on a par. But the progress of thought has made it
easier to comprehend the world, at least formally, as a
unity, and in proportion as the questions just raised
have been fully faced, the second alternative has been
accepted in lieu of the first. As Hhe gods many and
lords many,' so amenable to concrete representation in
poetry and art, have paled before a clearer insight,
they have given place to one Supreme Being, beyond
the world and only intellectually conceivable. So, too,
the light, heat, and other natural agencies, so palpable
and real for common sense, have become but various
transformations of an underlying energy which is be-
yond perception. Religion and philosophy had worked
their way to the sublime idea of a Supreme Being, the
intelligent First Cause and Substance of all things,


266 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

long before science had accomplished its laborious task
of abstractlj formulating these things in terms of
matter and motion. And when this vaunted formula-
tion of all Nature is complete, and we are enabled to
conceive a meehantim^ intelligible therefore but not
intelligent; in working, but too inert ever to start or
alter or stop itself, how then can the questions we
have asked be evaded? And if they cannot, what
answer is there but that which philosophy and religion
would give?

The unity of this vast mechanism, its regularity aad
completeness, they would say, all point to the one
Supreme Intelligence as their only sufficient reason ;
while the inertness of all its parts equally point to
Him as its Prime Mover and Efficient Cause. So
spoke Descartes and Locke, Newton and Clarke, and
many beside, who were prominent as workers on this
fabric of modern science. Can we have the intelligible
without intelligence; can we have things that wholly
vanish in relations; can we have continuous process and
nowhere an efficient cause? Again let me remind you
that that older sense of Nature and natural laws, which
I first described, though it lingers unavoidably in the
less exact of the natural sciences, is treated as in prin-
ciple obsolete. Matter itself and energy are, it is
averred, only hypothetical conceptions — nay the whole
scheme is but a descriptive apparatus. Still if there
is verily something admitting of such description, it, too,
must imply what the description essentially presup-
poses. Naturalism then, it would seem, does not escape
spiritual implications, because science succeeds in strain-


AGNOSTICISM TREACHEROUS 267

ing its doctnnes clear of them. Not, let us remember,
that science is to be blamed for this : all that we have
a right to demand is that what is thus left out shall
not be ignored, and the bare anatomy of its body
offered us as the living universe itself. The complete-
ness of the abstract separation only makes our ques-
tions more pressing and the answer more impressive.
It is not till we have seen a dead body that we know
how much life means. Marvellous, even though but a
skeleton, is this system of positive law, beyond a doubt;
but how, we ask, if this be all, can these dry bones live ?
Science, as such, has nothing to do with the question;
but Naturalism, which has, evades it, and sends us to
Agnosticism for the answer. And once again, as it
seems to me. Agnosticism plays the rSle of traitor.

Taking Mr. Spencer as here its exponent : a very brief
examination of his doctrine concerning the Unknowable
will suffice to make this clear. We are obliged, he allows,
to refer the phenomenal world and all its law and order to
a First Cause, and though this, he tells us, ^^ cannot in any

•

manner or degree be known, in the strict sense of know-
ings y^t its positive existence is a necessary datum of
consciousness." Waiving for the moment any question
as to what may be meant by * knowing in the strict sense ' ;
or how Mr. Spencer contrives to find a middle term be-
tween strictly knowing and not knowing at all, which
shall not be opinion or belief, but positive and necessary
affirmation — let us note some of his assertions concern-
ing his Unknowable. First, he tells us, it is Incompre-
hensible Power.^ But * incomprehensible ' is a somewhat

1 First Principletf p. 99.


268 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

ambiguous word : we say the contradictory and nonsensi-
cal are incomprehensible, and we say man is incompre-
hensible to the brutes. It is in the latter sense that Mr.
Spencer uses the word ; for when the question of attribut-
ing personality to this First Cause is raised, he remadcs,
**the choice is between personality and something higher,'^
and elsewhere suggests that to it may belong ^^ a mode of
being as much transcending intelligence and will, as these
transcend mechanical motion." ^^ This consciousness of an
Incomprehensible Power," Mr. Spencer goes on to say, " is
just that consciousness on which religion dwells," and he
makes much of finding here a ground of reconciliation
between religion and science. Then, d propos of Man-
sel's famous Bamptan Lectures^ the chief source of his
own doctrine, he tells us that ^^ our duty is to submit our-
selves with all humility to the established limits of our
intelligence " — which, by the way, he elsewhere describes
as the ^ imbecilities of the understanding ! ' — ^' Indeed, it
seems somewhat strange," he continues, ^^ that men should
suppose the highest worship to lie in assimilating the
object of their worship to themselves. Not in asserting
a transcendent difference, but in asserting a certain like-
ness, consists the element of their creed which they think
essential." ^ For my part, I feel that there is only too
much in religious and theological literature to justify thra
censure. But still is it not possible to admit * the tran-
scendent difference ' while yet asserting a * certain essen-
tial likeness' between God and man? And, after all,
have not thoughtful men in every age allowed as obvious
that we cannot ^^find out the Almighty to perfection"?

1 First Frinciplea, p. 109.


MR. SPENCER'S THEOLOGY 269

But it is certain that we shall never find at all unless we
seek ; and yet how is search possible, if absolute difference
and no likeness is the affirmation forced upon us by ^ the
established limits of our intelligence ' ? As I have already
said, — and no fact of knowledge is more beyond cavil, —
all positive knowing is assimilating. Either, then, Mr.
Spencer must go backward, or he must go forward. If
the positive and necessary datum of consciousness, having,
he tells us, a higher warrant than any others whatever,
be the affirmation of the absolutely different, then as-
suredly irrationality and nonentity are at the root of us.
But if we may attribute to that Unknowable even Causal-
ity or Power, then so far we assimilate it to ourselves, as
being causal agents; and, as I have argued at length,
were it not that such is our nature we could not find that
such too, in transcendent measure, is the nature of God.
And again, if we may go this far, we must go farther
still. If we were face to &ce with chaos, as in the open-
ing scene of Mr. Spencer's evolutionary epic, we might
perhaps identify his Incomprehensible Power with mere
brute energy ; but the First Cause of a Cosmos, to be an
adequate cause and deserve the name, must be a Supreme
Intelligence. But, in truth, experience does not warrant
us in divorcing efficiency from intelligence. In a work,
written many years after his First Principles were
stereotyped, Mr. Spencer, discussing the development of
religious ideas, himself raises the question: *^How can
a final consciousness of the Unknowable, thus tacitly
alleged to be true, be reached by successive modifica-
tions of a conception which was utterly untrue ? Surely
if the primitive belief was absolutely false, all derived


'


270 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

beliefs must be absolutely false.'* And he replies:
^* Unexpected as it will be by most readers, the answer
here to be made is that at the outset a germ of truth
was contained in the primitive conception — the truth,
namely, that the power which manifests itself in con-
sciousness is but a differentiy conditioned form of Uie
power which manifests itself beyond consciousness. . . .
Consequentiy, the final outcome of the speculation com-
menced by the primitive man, is that the Power mani-
fested throughout the universe, distinguished as material,
is the same Power which in ourselves wells up under the
form of consciousness. . . . The conception to which he
(the explorer of Nature) tends is much less that of a uni-
verse of dead matter than that of a universe everywhere
alive." ^ We may conclude, therefore, that so far it is
only these inconsistent implications and admissions of an
altogether idealistic character that save Mr. Spencer's
flimsy agnosticism from being utter nonsense.

But there is still a point in abeyance. This Life of
a Universe ever3rwhere alive of which he has allowed
himself to talk, is, Mr. Spencer teUs us, totally and
forever beyond our knowledge *^in the strict sense
of knowing." What, we must now briefly ask, is the
precise import of this agnostic dictum? Briefly, then,
Mr. Spencer's ^strict knowledge' is neither more nor
less than the positive knowledge of Naturalism. For
it is confined entirely to what he terms *the veil of
appearances,' the veil never lifted by the ^Inscrutable
Reality ' — to use another of his phrases — which it abso-
lutely conceals; and these appearances again are either

1 Principles of Sociology, §§ 659 f.


MR. SPENCER'S POSITIVISM 271

sense-particulars or conceptual relations of such. We
are thus once more at Hume's standpoint, and may
straightway concede the whole position to Mr. Spencer,
if he is willing to take all consequences. Thus from
the strict premisses of positivism we can never prove
the existence of other minds or find a place for such
conceptions as cause and substance; for into those
premisses the existence of our own mind and its self-
activity have not entered. And accordingly we have
seen Naturalism led on in perfect consistency to resolve
man into an automaton that goes of itself as part of a
still vaster automaton, Nature as mechanically con-
ceived, which goes of itself. True, this mechanism only
goes of itself because it is going, and being altogether
inert cannot stop or change. How it ever started is
a question which indeed science cannot answer, but
which, on the other hand, it has no occasion to ask:
time, its one independent variable, extends indefinitely
without hint of either beginning or end. Such a sys-
tem of knowledge, anee toe are inside tt, so to say, is
entirely self-contained and complete. Mind is the alien,
irrelevant, superfluous. Nature, according to this con-
ception, contains no hint of either God or man; outside
this is the place for Mr. Spencer's Unknowable, as
what is transcendently different from it all, and Mind
occupies that place. Not from within this system, but
only from without and independently, can the concep-
tion of mind be brought to bear upon it. And the
result is as when the sacred name is uttered in some
Oriental palace of magic — the whole fabric collapses;
its independent reality was an empty show. But obvi-


272 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

ously this result cannot come from within; the magi-
cian does not exorcise himself. Naturalism, I admit,
talks of phenomena, but with fatal inconsistency. It
only does so to rid itself of spiritual implications, and
its phenomena end by being phenomena per se — a fla-
grant contradiction, of course. But work your way to
that standpoint, ignoring yourself more than you can,
and what do you find that is phenomenal in time, or
space, or mass, or number, or in equations connecting
terms involving only these? They in themselves give
no hint of aught behind or beyond that supplements
them, or of any gap in the system they form that
needs to be filled. The ^established imbecilities of the
understanding, to which we are bound dutifully to sub-
mit,' have no place here. It is precisely its independence
of these that constitutes the fascination of this scheme
for the naturalist who is taken out of himself and
caught up in it.

An important distinction made by Kant, but only
when he had reached his third Critique^ meets us at this
point — I mean the distinction between the determinant,
or as we might say, mechanical, judgment, and the
reflective or teleological judgment. Mr. Spencer's strict
or positive knowledge is wholly the work of the former ;
knowledge of other minds we reach only by means of
the latter. In the former we constitute the whole from
the parts; in the latter we interpret the parts from the
whole. In the latter, meaning and purpose, deeds and
ends, are everything; in the former, none of these
occur. From the reflective judgment as prius to the
mechanical judgment the way is easy; from the me-


'REFLECTIVE JUDGMENT' 273

chanical as prii^ to the reflective there is strictly no
way at all. No doubt in the various theories of psy-
chophysical parallelism an attempt is made to find a
way, so far at least as to connect mind and mechanism.
But only because the existence of finite minds cannot
be wholly ignored. And if those theories fail hopelessly
in the case of finite minds, is it likely that the same
method can lead us to any adequate idea of the First
Cause of all this mechanism? By parity of reasoning
on these lines God should be, if He is at all, the col-
lateral product of the universal mechanism, another
aspect of matter in motion. Monistic literature since
the days of Spinoza abounds in notions of this class,
but they only save themselves by negating themselves,
to use a Hegelian phrase. The moment mind and mat-
ter are mentioned together, matter appears at once as
secondary and dependent, so surely as mind is active
and matter inert, so surely as mind has meaning and
purpose, and matter only subserves them. This h^
been the burden of our argument since we entered upon
epistemological questions, and I do not need to enforce
it afresh, but only to apply it to Mr. Spencer's dictum.
We attain to the knowledge of all minds, the minds of
other creatures, the Creative Mind and even our own,
only by reflexion, interpretation, understanding. We are
adepts at this kind of knowledge before we have even
begun to acquire the positive, constructive, mechanical
knowledge by which we conceptually summarise the
world. But this we can do without understanding it
at all, just as a compositor can set up the type, letter
by letter, of a piece of literature in entire ignorance of

VOL. H — T


274 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

its sense. Between these two forms of knowledge, be-
tween the determinant and the teleological judgment,
the difference is not one of degree, it is a difference of
kind. No insight into printing processes will make a
litterateur or even a critic. But only a man who had
never been outside a printing works could imagine tiiat
literature was but a collateral product, a mere aspect of
letterpress, or an inscrutable something that lurked fo^
ever behind it. This analogy, however, is not in all
points exact, but to note where it breaks down will
help us forward. Unquestionably letterpress is only a
means to an end, not an end in itself. But in Nature
we can never say that anything is means only; it is
more reasonable to regard all as meaning, even though
we cannot say what. And, accordingly, if we allow
the conception of a Supreme Mind and First Cause to
be valid at all, we shall not have God and intermin-
able mechanism as His medium and instrument: really,
fundamentally, ultimately we shall have God only and no
mechanism. It is verily a case of all or none ; which we
find, God or mechanism, depends upon our standpoint, bat
we cannot from either standpoint find both. From the
one standpoint, for rational reflexion, for philosophy, the
conception of the course of Nature as a pure mechanism
is an obvious fiction, as much a mere organon as a table
of logarithms, a transparently human device, and so far
thoroughly anthropomorphic. Nevertheless, the fact that
the course of Nature can be summarised by mechanical
formulae is evidence of a congruity between thought and
things, which justifies the idealist's interpretation. But
from the other standpoint, for the formulas themselves,


THE VEIL OF APPEARANCES 276

the conception of God is not, as Laplace remarked, a hy-
pothesis that they do not need, but a conception wholly
without and beyond their horizon. But the same is
equally true in principle of all other minds, as the
ineptness of psychophysical parallelism and the contra-
dictions of dualism sufficiently shew. It is precisely
the independence thus pertaining to the mechanical
scheme which in the end, when reflexion begins, makes
its dependence the more certain and impressive.

But there is still one point in Mr. Spencer's charac-
terisation of theistic knowledge which we must not pass
without a word — I mean his use of the distinction of
appearance and reality — a distinction which has ever
been the stronghold of Agnosticism. Strict knowledge,
he gives us to understand, is confined to appearances,
behind which God remains wholly and forever concealed
as Inscrutable Reality. The term * phenomenon,' like
many other philosophical terms that have obtained com-
mon currency, has hereby acquired so many and such
diverse meanings as to make careful scrutiny imperative,
whenever it reappears in philosophical discussion. We
have allowed that strict knowing, if it is to mean the
resolution of the course of Nature into coexistence and
succession, and these again into a world-formula in terms
of matter and motion, does not reveal God at all, or
mind of any sort. But I would now urge that such a
formula is not ^a veil of appearances,' is not in pro-
priety of language phenomenal at all. ^^The idea of
phenomenon or appearance," says Lotze, *4n order to be
intelligible must presuppose not only a being or thing
which appears, but also, and quite as indispensably, a


2T6 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

second being by whom this appearance is perceived/'^
But who has ever perceived mass-points in motion, vortex-
atoms, or ethereal undulations? The whole purport of
these is that they are ideal conceptions, not perceptions;
not properly appearances at all, but only symbols of
perceptions which are the real appearances. And when
science forgets this and, inverting the true relation,
declares perceptions to be themselves the symbols and
its own abstracts the true phenomena, it perpetrates tiie
absurdity we have so often stigmatised of phenomena
per 86. But if we decline to call anything an appear-
ance, unless it is either perceived or perceptible, whj
then should we attach to it the bad sense of concealing^
rather than the good sense of revealing? Why should
appearances not be reality? Nay what else can tbey
be? How can reality appear, shine forth, and yet
remain totally and forever beyond the knowledge of
those to whom it appears? Let us turn, as we hate
done before, to the case we know best — the communica-
tion of one human mind with another. Assuming good
faith, we never regard a man's acts and utterances as mask-
ing, but rather as manifesting the man. If they mask when
it is his intention to deceive, surely they cannot also mask
when his intentions are the precise opposite. These acts
and utterances may be beyond the comprehension of men
on a lower intellectual level, and with narrower horizons,
but they are not the less real or true on that accomit
And why should we argue differently, when reflexion
leads us to see in a Universe declared to be * everywhere
alive,' the manifestations of a Supreme Mind?

1 MicrocosmtiSf Eng. trans., ii, p. 160.


DEISTIC VIEWS 277

This brings us to another agnostic objection — but one
raised this time, not by Mr. Spencer, but by the late
Professor Clifford, though it has been in substance a
commonplace objection with anti-theistio thinkers since
the days of Epicurus. Finite minds, it is said, mani-
fest themselves by interfering in the course of Nature.
Primitive man imagined that he discerned like interfer-
ences of a superhuman kind; and from such premisses
concluded correctly enough that ^*God walked with
men.'' But now it is maintained, as I once heard Du
Bois-Reymond say, that Science has banished the gods
from the universe. This objection again, though it has
unquestionably had weight for ages, seems to lose all its
force, once we take account of the difference between
the Mind that lives in the whole of things, and the
minds that are confined to parts. To overlook this dif-
ference is to be guilty of the fallacy of * the poor Indian
philosopher,' whom Locke has immortalised. No doubt
this sceptical objection has been indirectiy confirmed by
the ^^ fanaticism which would like to see the Supreme
Good active in some other way than that which it has
itself chosen, or which believes that Good to be attain-
able by some shorter path than the roundabout way of
formal orderliness which it has itself entered upon."^
Once again let us turn to what we know first and best :
let us consider how this objection would look if applied
to the thoughts and acts of a human mind regarded as
a whole in themselves. When a man sets to work to
expound a theory or to carry out some practical project,
he does not retract earlier statements, or change his

1 Lotse, MieroeosmuSi ii, p. 727.


278 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

first plans, save to amend his own error or to remedy
unforeseen defects: the more he is master of his pm^
pose the less of such interference there will be. And
when we look at the collectiye results of human thought
and practice, we see that, the more they approximate to
perfection, the more they have of fixity, or at least of
orderly progfress. Finally in the intercourse of man widi
man, the more steadfast purpose is directed by clear
insight, the more intimate the unity and community
that is possible; the more expectations are realised, the
more sure and secure is each among all. But the prime
foundation of all such life and intelligence is that per-
fect orderliness of Nature which science mistakes for
brute, mechanical necessity.

But is it needful to say again that the laws of Nature
are not self-existent at all, and that therefore their neces-
sity can not be the necessity of a Fate ? Science cannot
at once renounce metaphysics and play the metaphysician.
It was allowable for Lucretius, Gassendi, and the English
Deists, who still held to the notion of substantial cans^
to regard the world as started by Divine Power and then
left to itself. From such a position modem Naturalism is
cut off by the meaning it has g^yen to law. So soon as
laws are defined as constant relations, so soon reason com-
pels us to look beyond them. Such a definition brings
the ground and source of the relations nearer instead of
removing them farther off. Relations may hold, but they
cannot operate ; they may subsist, but they cannot exist
in the absence of the things to which they pertain.
Matrimony is a constant relation, and actual so long as
there are husbands and wives; service is a constant re-


REALITY AND RELATIONS 279

latioQ, and actual provided there are masters and servants.
The only things of which we have positive knowledge are
subjects with intrinsic qualities, things that are something
in themselves and something for themselves. All else
may be resolved into relations between these. Hence
science, which replaces qualities by relations, ends with
the conception of empty and formless matter, that is
nothing for itself, or in itself, that can receive no deter-
mination and can impart none. Again, the only causen of
which we have positive knowledge are minds : these have
a nature of their own and hence can interact, determine,
and be determined. And here again natural science that
knows not mind knows not cause: causes are replaced,
therefore, by transferences of motion between one portion
of the aireipov and another, transferences only mathe-
matically determinate and otherwise inconceivable. Is
it not plain, therefore, as I have argued at length before,
that reality consists in the concrete things and events
that science sets out from, and not in the network of
relations which is its goal? If then, as rational beings
who have other ends in life than calculating and classify-
ing, we want to interpret and understand the full mean-
ing of the world, must we not return to it in its fulness
and variety? When we so regard it, and consider first
what we know best, the interaction of mind with mind —
and this mtut be the basis of our interpretation if we are
to understand at all — we do not say, that between man
and man there intervenes some entity called a body of
relations. The intercourse, the cooperation or conflict,
actual or possible, of the individuals themselves is their
relation. As Lotze forcibly puts it: ^^The passion and


280 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

action of things must take the place of relation. Jnst
when, and in so far as things act on one another, &te
they related to one another; there are no objective rela-
tions other than this living action and passion."^

Why, then, if law and order are only intelligible as
the outcome of intelligence, may we not regard each
individual subject, everything that is anything for itself
and in itself, as a living law, or if you will as an
active essence or character, interacting in its own pecul-
iar manner with other subjects equally determinate?
With experience in the concrete, we can deal satisfac-
torily in no other way, and no competent thinker
dreams of interpreting the history of the world by
means of a scheme of universal laws. In history —
natural as well as civil — we find no mere repetitions,
no absolute fixity, small scope for measurement or for
mathematics, the indispensables of all scientific eaneep-
tion; yet, though affording thus littie foothold for positive
and exact science, the historical is what we understands
best and what concerns us most. How far below us,
how far above, the historical extends, we cannot tell.
But above it there can be only GrOD as the living unity
of all, and below it no longer things, but only the con-
necting, conserving acts of the one Supreme. Such a
view you will say is incompatible with the scientific
conception of law, for that postulates necessity, whereas
this lets contingency into the very heart of things. It

^ MicT0C09mu8^ ii, p. 635.

' On the antithesis between conceiving (Begreifen) and understand-
ing (Verstehen), see an interesting paragraph in Paulsen* s Einleitung
in die Philo8ophi€y 2 Aufl., p. 384.


EXPERIENCE AND NECESSITY 281

is true : I not only admit it, but contend that any other
world would be meaningless. For the contingency is
not that of chance, but that of freedom; so far as
everything that is is a law in itself, has an end for itself,
and seeks the good. In such a world there is still
room for rational necessity, and more than this scientific
generalisations do not justify and cannot demand. For
where rational necessity is supreme, freedom is possible,
and things must be intelligible. No sane man resents
as a constraint normal laws of thought, normal laws of
conduct, normal laws of taste, or demands that truth,
goodness, or beauty should be other than they are. Real
freedom consists in conformity to what ought to be.
For God, whom we conceive as essentially perfect, this
conformity is complete; for us it remains an ideal.
But were we the creatures of a blind mechanical neces-
sity, there could be no talk of ideal standards, either of
thought or of conduct; no meaning in reason at all.

Now at least one thing is certain : experience does not
start confronted and determined by mechanical necessity ;
and the conclusion to which we are led is that — provided
we keep the whole of it clearly in mind — it does not end
so confronted and determined. Science is ever appealing
to experience, and to experience we have gone, only
insisting that there shall be rendered to it all that is
its due. For science has left the historical so long
aside that it is beginning to forget that experience in
itself is historical at all. We have, therefore, on the
other hand, to insist that it is historical altogether ; and
the fact is happily one there is no gainsaying. Yes, the
actual is wholly historical; and so far, too, it is ^ the


282 SPIRITUALISTIC MONISM

unknowable in the strict sense of knowing"; in its con-
crete fulness, that is to say, it has defied and will ever
defy all our attempts at adequate formulation. And
precisely on this account must science ignore it, so long
as the ideal of science is calculation and measurement
Steadfastness to such an ideal cannot but entail the
exclusion from strict science of all but ^ necessaiy
truths'; whereas for us experience as a whole consists
from end to end of ^contingent truths.' The difference
between these Leibniz happily compared to that between
commensurable and incommensurable numbers. ^^ For as
with commensurable numbers," he says, ^^ resolution into a
common measure is possible, so with necessary truths a
demonstration or reduction to identical truths can be
found. But just as surd ratios . . . lead to an inte^
minable series, so contingent truths involve an analysis
that is infinite, and possible to God alone.'* ^ This in-
commensurability of the necessary and the contingent
the scientific and the historical, answers to the difference
between validity and reality, and shows, at the same time,
that ^^ reality is richer than thought." Thought gives us
only ^science,' not existence; we cannot, by piling up
propositions, secure the simplest ^position.' Thought
again, gives us only the ^universal,' the relational; from
the 'particular,' which is the *surd' for it — or the real
meeting point or subject of relations — it must start, but
to this particular it can never return save by traversing
an interminable series.

But this reality, richer than thought, is experience.
Science cannot originate experience ; for experience is the

^ De Scientia Univeraalit Operas Erdmann^s edition, p. 83.


THE CONCLUSION 283

source of science, yet always more than its product, so
surely as the workman is more than his tools. Science is
but the skeleton, while experience is the life ; ^ science but
a means, and experience the end itself. And when we
examine that necessity which is the boast of science, the
ground of its utility and the criterion of its perfection,
how singular is the result we find I For the sake of this
ideal, the historical is ignored, the metaphysical elimi-
nated, substance and cause become fetishes, God a super-
fluous hypothesis, and mind an enigma, a troublesome
by-product, a veritable ghost that cannot be laid. Never-
theless this necessity itself remains inexplicable, and in
turn is scouted as but a shadow of the ghost or anathe-
matised as an intruder. Naturalism can do nothing with-
out it, and Agnosticism can do nothing with it. For the
one can only attain reality by treating necessary truths as
truths of fact, and the other can find no necessity in facts
at all. But these necessary truths, we have seen, are as
Leibniz rightly called them, truths of reason. They
originate in the subject of experience, not in the object,
If the objects conform to them, then all experience is
rational; our reason is confronted and determined by
universal reason. Such is the world of spiritualistic
monism, and to this world, as I have tried to show.
Naturalism and Agnosticism eventually lead us in spite
of themselves. Thus their demurrer to theistic inquiries
is not sustained.

1 Cf. Lotze quoted above, p. 262.


INDEX


1


Absoluts, the, L 24 /; u a tenn,
122; Mr. Spencer's, 219/.; U.
267/.

Abstraction and analysis distinct, L
266/.,

Action, contact, L 122 ; ii. 70 ; at a
distance, L 124, 126 ; iL 261 ; con-
certed A., iL 261

Activity, physical eliminated, L 46/1 ;
psychical, as illusory, ii. 41 ; yet
even so needs explaining^ 48 ; as
real, 62/1, 246, 279 ; as essential
to experience, 181, 184, 186/., 191
/., 220; recognised by British
psychologists, 191 ; subjective A.,
and the unity of nature, 286 /. ;
and causality, 287 /. ; difficulties
of this conception, 242/

Agnosticism, L 18 /. ; iL 86, 210 ; its
relation to Naturalism, L 20 ; iL
211-219, 229, 267/

Analogies, danger of^ L 119, 149 ;
mechanical, 166 ; Kant's A. of
Experience, iL 289/.

Anthropomorphism, ii. 166, 267, 269 ;
and positive science, 262/.

Aristotle, his entelechy, L 282, 298 ;
on the Pythagoreans, IL 69 ; on
knowledge as assimilation, 266

Aspects, doctrine of Two, iL 17-22

Association of ideas, not passive or
mechanical, iL 228/

Atomic theory of Democritus, L 122,
148, 169/

Atoms, rigidity and elasticity of, L 128/

Automatism, L 179, 291 ; iL 271 ;
conscious A., theory of, iL 22-26,
29, 101, 212; at variance with

VOL. II— u


biology, 88; and with physics,
89 ; the two articles of; 41, 98 ;
regards psychical activity as illu-
sory, 41 / ; in this intellectual
activity must be included, 41 /.,
49.

Bacon, Loid, L 166 ; iL 221, 222, 224,

226
Bain, Dr. A., i. 146 ; on definition of

Mind, iL 116 ; on assimilation, 266
Bernard, Claude, IL 28
Body Alpha, Neumann's, L 72
Body, the, its relation to the mind, L

14,177/; iL4/,86; interaction

of the two, IL 88/
Boltzman, Prot L., on Theoretical

Physics, L 81, 82, 119, 160, 166 ;

on equilibrium of the Universe, 209
Boscovich, P^ his theory of matter,

L 126/., 148, 144 ; U. 104
Bradley, Mr. A. F., on phenomenalism,

L 64 ; on activity, iL 244
Brain, processes as physical, L 9 ; iL 7/

working model of, 20/.; instability

of B. substance no argument against

mechanical determinism, iL 61/
Bunge, Prot O., on Vitalism, L 178

Cairo, Dr. K, on development of
consciousness, iL 196/

Calculation and understanding distinct
iL 86, 278. Cf. 280

Causality, principle of^ a postulate of
science, i. 176 ; source of, in con-
scious activity, iL 192, 287 /.,
247 ; scientific C. excludes effi-
ciency, 241, 247


286


WARD'S GIFFOED LECTURES


Cause, elimination of the conception,
L 62, 64, 67, 139; iL 4, 288,
246 /., 278 ; in psychology, 5 ;
"fonnal" and ^'eminent "C, the
distinction applicable in psycho-
physical problem, 78 /. ; C. and
Law, 287, 248

Chalmers, T., on collocations, i 47/
49

Clifford, J. K., on molecules, L 100

/. ; on perfect fluid, 181 /. ; on

kinetic energy, 168; onmind-stu£^

177 ; ii. 17 ; on psychophysical

parallelism, 18-16, 25

Collocations, i. 47/., 207, 225

Consciousness, its ''contents*' nowadays
replace the soul, iL 4 ; as "col-
lateral product" of brain work,
31/., 86, 101, 106 ; content of C,
a misleading term, 111 ; "C in
general," 171, 185, 197

Continuity and cTolution, i 259, 288

Cotes, Roger, his three classes of natural
philosophers, L 87 ; on gravity, 125

Crookes, Sir W., on atoms, 1 108, 106,
224 ; on distribution of elements,
240

CuTier, i 7, 279

Dai^^n, his colour-blindness, iL 168
Darwin, on the descent of Man, L 7 ;
Origin qf Species^ 278 ; on natural
selection, 274, 281 ; on Lamarck,
279/ ; on instincts, ii 89
Death, L 289

Descartes, i. 165 ; iL 4, 25, 28, 92 ;
accepted mechanical theory, i. 166 ;
on animals as automata, 291 / ;
iL 36 ; on error, 43 ; on man as
intellectual and active, 51 / ;
his Mathesis universalia, 87 ; his
rationalism, 180 ; on corporeal
substance, 198/
Dissolution, L 191, 198
Drude, Prof. P., on ether, L 117
Dualism, of matter and mind, i. 18,
178, 269 ; iL 6, 85 /, 67, 83, 87,
108, 106, 179, 181, 214; pheno-
menal D., ii. 108 ; question of its
refutation, 158 ; its origin traced
to "naive realism," 171 ; and to
"introjection," 172 / ; problem
of, wrongly stated, 198 /. ; D. of
reason and sense, iL 179, 188


du BoiB-Reymond, E., on Laplsee'i
imaginary int^ligence, L 41, 170 ;
on science as aUieistic, iL 277
du Bois-Reymond, P^ on atoms, L 123
Duhem, Profl, quoted, L 164
Dynamics, abstract, its method, L 51
/., 138 ; its laws, 58/, 67. 77;
its application to phenomena, 67/,
70 /., 79 /, 188 /. ; its hypo-
thetical character, 81, 83, 138,
158 ; iL 71

EoONOMiCB, suggested parallels of, with
physios, i. 110 ; iL 75

Effects, Multiplication of; L 238-287

E|go and non-Ego as concrete univene,
iL 167/, 264/

Energetics, science of, i. 157, 169

Energy, Conservation o^ L 11, 91, 15^
170-175, 216 f,; iL 75/; «
postulate, 172, 214 ; iL 80 ; what
is energy, 157 /*.; is mind a fiaiin
of ? iL 77 ; relation to matter, i
159/*. ; kinetic, 163 ; mechanical
equivalents of; 168, 167 ; iL 75 ;
possible unknown transfonnatioia
of; 167 /, 290 ; Dissipation o^
191 /, 199/ ; will not suffice to
explain Evolution, 216 ; Conserva-
tion of K and Mind, iL 86/, 83 :
Source of K, iL 80

Environment and organism, L 14;
antagonism o^ 289 ; species a^
297

Epiphenomenon, L 178 ; ii. 37, 100/,
106

Ether, the, one or more, L 113 /l, 116 ;
meohanicsof, 114,117 ; primordial,
118, 128/

Evolution, chemical, L 107, 112, l^
238/ ; Theory of E., 186 /.
treats the Universe as a single
object, 188 /. ; K with goH-
ance, and without, 205 /;
primary and secondary, 207 / >'
Mr. Spencer's formula for, 212;
biological and mechanical, 27^

275/
Experience, general conception oi, u-
110/., 125 /. ; as life, HI, 131-
184; duality of, 112, 125, 129;
unity of, 112, 180, 160 ; inditi-
dual and universal, distinguishes),
152 /; unity of U.E., 196-198;


INDEX


287


characteristics of developing B.,
156-165 ; and ezpertneas, 160 /. ;
Universal E. and intersabjeotive
intercourse, 165 ff,\ the subject
of, 178/., 185/., 196/.; the
objects oi; 179, 184 ; higher
categories of, 185-196 ; in rela-
tion to Causality, 289-241, 265.

** External and internal," ambiguity of^
ii. 115, 127, 129, 174/

External World, problem oi; ii. 109,
154/, 179

Eye, the, Sturmins on, L 6 ; Helmholts
on, 7

Faradat, L 128

Ferrier, J. F., on dualism, iL 120, 199 /

Fluid, primordial of Lord Kelvin, i.

181-188 ; ii 261 ; its sUbiUty,

how secured, L 184
Force, its present meaning, i 60-62 :

not a cause, 61 ; centres of^ 126 ;

Mr. Spencer's uses oi^ 218 /.,

285, 241
Freedom, Laplace on, L 41, 177 ;

Huxley on, ii 45 /. ; Spinoza on,

45 ; F. and reason, 281

God, Laplace's dictumy i 4, 28 ; ii 274
and mechanism, i 48 /; ii 266,
274 ; as Unknowable, 267/1
Goigias the sophist, ii. 168
Ouidance, without work, ii 62, 88

Hamilton, Sir W., on memory, ii 159 ;

on Reid's use of ** object," 165
Hegel and Mr. Spencer contrasted, i

247 ; on abstraction, 258
Helmholtz, H. von, i 7, 88, 200, 208 ;

on vortex-motion, 128 ; on Con-
servation of Energy, 160 /., 178,

215/
Heredity, i 277, 800/.
Herschel, Sir J., on molecules as

"manufactured," i 100, 111 ;

quoted, 247
Hertz, H., i 115, 128, 166
Heterogeneity, insUbility of; i 281/.
Hioks, Prof: W. Bf., his Brit. Assn.

Address, i 129 /., 145, 146, 158,

165
Historical, the, contrasted with the

scientific, i 180 ; ii 89, 168,

169/, 280/


Homogeneity, Instability of, i 222-
288 ; difSculties, 222/ ; summary
on, 227 ; Mr. Spencer's instances
oi;228/.

Home, on divinity and metaphysics,
i 17 ; on causality, 175 ; ii 221-
225 ; on unity of consciousness,
228, 284

Huxley, T. H., on progress of science,
i 17 /. ; on chemical evolution,
112 ; on mental states as sjrmbols,
179 ; on characters of life, ii. 26 ;
on animal automatism, 81, 52 ;
on volition, 41 ; on necessity, 48,
218 ; on fireedom, 45 ; inconsist-
encies here, 54 /. ; his agnostic
gospel, i 18/; ii 210/ ; its im-
pUdt idealism, 215/

Hylozoism, i 177, ii 71

Idiaubm or Spiritualism, elements of,
in Mr. Spencer, i 269 ; ii 270 ;
in Descartes, ii 180 ; in Huxley,
215/ : He aUo Monism

Inertia, i 58, 60, 188 ; ii 246 ; per-
haps noUiing altogether inert, ii.
68, 88 ; of Lord Kelvin's medium,
i 188/ ; experience of, 162 ; range
of the law of problematic, ii 69,
85 ; Kant's view o^ 71 ; conse-
quence of limiting, 72

Inertial system, i 72/

Intersubjeotive intercourse, ii 166 /.;
knowledge resulting from it, 168
/.; leads to dualism, 170 /; a
possible psychology o^ 175 ; and
reason, ii 256, 264

Introjection, ii 172

Jams, Prof. W., quoted, ii 89
Joule, J.P., on Conservation of Eneigy,
i 178, 174

Kant, on the decline of Philosophy, i
21; on the mechanical Uieory,
166 ; on causality, 175 ; on hylo-
loism, 177 ; ii 71 ; on man as
phenomenon and noumenon, ii 82 ;
on experience, 109 / ; 171, 185,
197; on relation A subject and
object, 118 / ; 120 / ; on the
notionof a phenomenon, 121, 128 ;
his synthetic unity of appercep-
tion, 184, 186, 228, 284; on


288


WARD'S OIFFORD LECTURES


■pace 137, 140 /.; his reeonciliA-
tion of rationalism and empiricism,
181/.; defecU of his first OriHque,
186 /.; partly met in the second,
189 /.; and in his posthumous
work, 191 ; on substance, 194, 289;
on cause, 228/., 289 ; on ''possible
experience," 250/. ; on determinant
and reflective judgment, 272/.

Kelvin, Lord, his theory of vortex-atoms,
i 87/.; sure about the luminifer-
ous ether, 118 ; his primordial
ether, 118; ii 104; on kinetic
theory of matter, L 187 ; on dissi-
pation of energy, 199 /. ; on life,
200;iL27

Kinematics, relation to dynamics, L 57,
66 ; replacing dynamics in the
vortex-atom theory, 146/.

Kirchhoff, on force, L 61 ; on physics
as descriptive, 62, 88

Knowledge, Relativity of^ and the kin-
etic theory of matter, L 146 ;
natural, what it implies, ii 99
/.; 270/.

Ladd, Prof. G. T., iL 174, 176

Lagrange, L 174, 176

Lamarck, his laws, L 278, 277 /.; dis-
credit of, 279

Laplace, no need of God in his system,
14 23, 64, 275 ; his im^^ginary
intelligence, i 41, 176, 178 ; E. du
Bois-Rejrmond on it, 41 /.; not
omniscient 42 ; Jevons*s refnence
to, 45 ; on dimensions of the
universe, 94

Larmor, Dr. J. J., on the kinetic theory
of matter, L 129, 149

Leibniz, on a '* plenum" L 151 ; his phU-
osophy, 181 ; on the Cartesian in-
Jluxut physicut, iL 60, 88 ; his
organisms machines ad inf., 69;
on continuity of things, 90 ; on in-
dividual experience, 1 19 ; its limit,
156 ; each of his monads unique,
167 ; his contkution dea biUs, 184,
224 ; on substanoe, 193 ; on know-
ledge, 222

Life, oiigfai of; L 8 /., 261/; relation
oi; to the mechanical Uieory, 177,
200 ; L. anabolic, 289 ; ii 26 ;
and mechanism, i. 291 /.; ii 27
/.,82


Locke, recognised the activity of nmid,
ii. 51 ; on problem of external
world, 109 ; on space and time,
140/, 148 ; on knowledge, 222

Lodge, Ptt>f. 0., on primordial ether, i
182

Lotie, on treating the universe qnanti-
tativdy, i 218 ; on psychical initia-
tive, ii 82; on time, 150/.; on
action, 246, 279 ; on form and
reality, 252, 262 ; on phenomenon,
275 ; on the Supreme Good, 277


MaoGbioob, Prof. J. G., i 72, 78

Maoh, Prof. E., on cause, L 62 ; oa
absolute rotation, 75/.; on reality
and symbols, 179

Hansel, his Bampton Ledbwrt* and Mr.
Spencer, ii 268

Mass, the conception of; i 54/., 59, 168
a quantity not a substance, 57, 62
= quantity of inertia, 58 ; ii 86
Conservation ot i 85 ; the simplest
assumption, 91

Bfaterialism rejected by the agnostic,
i 18; ii 99, 105, 106» 206;
its terminology retained, i 19 /.

Matter, distinct ^m mass, i 54, 57 ;
ii 85 ; what it if, unknown, i 57 ;
ii 85 /. ; hydrokinetic theory of,
i 87, 118, 127, 128-137 ; assumed
primacy of; ii 41, 58, 98/., 278 ;
implies mind, 215 /.

Bfatter and Mind, dualism of; mt
Dualism ; as unknowns, i 18

Maxwell, J. Clerk, i 54, 55, 57, 59,
115, 125, 149, 164 ; ii 61 ; <m
molecules, 99/. ; on ethers, 118 ;
on Lord Kelvin's <* plenum," 184,
187 ; his "sorting demon," 201/

Mayer, J. R., on Conservation of Energy,
i 178, 174

Mechanical bias, i 164-167. 169
/. ; a. 88, 262, 272

Mechanical models, i 118/

Mechanical theory, i 40 /. ; Laplace's
statement of; 41, 50 ; its suprem-
acy, 96, 169; taken as reality,
130 ; ii 67 ; summary of resulta,
i 188-148 ; its formal charactor,
151 /. ; ii 66, 260, 262 /., 272 ;
no end to, L 158 ; ii 261 ; influ-
ence of imagination in, i 165, 169 ;
ii 66; Descartes and Kant on.


INDEX


289


166 ; detenninkm involved in,
IL 59, 66, 69 ; attempts to find
loopholes in, 59-64

Mechanics ; 9et also Dynamics ; ap-
plication to molecular physics, L
95/., 118, 187, 164 ; indirectness
of this application, 98 ; IL 71 ;
and Dynamics, distinction ot, 124 ;
Molar and Moleonlar M., their
rektion, 140-148

Memory, problem of, it 156-159

Mercier, Dr. 0., quoted, ii. 28

Metageometry, L 21

Mill, J. Stnart, soeptioal about ether,
i 118 ; on the function of labour,
200 ; on induction, ii. 226 /. ; on
the range of natural law, 288

Mind and brain, i. 9 /., 292 ; conco-
mitance of M. with life, 281/. ;
control of matter by M., denied, VL
88 ; consequences of admitting, iL
72 /., 78 ; use of the term, 119

Molecules, i 98 /. ; mechanical treat-
ment of^ 95/. ; as *' manafaotured
articles," 99-108, 108, 112 ; their
immutability, 104 ; how far hypo-
thetical, 109

Moleschott, L 278

Momentum, L 67 ; conservation of,
forgotten by Mr. Spencer, 228 ;
misunderstood by Descartes, ii.
60 ; Leibniz on, 60, 88

Monism, naturalistic or agnostic, ii 16,
85/., 101, 107, 202 ; objections to,
206 /. ; unstable, 208 ; capitula-
tion of; 229 /. ; spiritualistic, as
problem, 202, 229; as result,
lect zz. 259/.

Motion, absolute, L 69, 150 ; relative,
72 ; first law of; its application,
1% 77 ; resolution of phenomena
into, 140, 150 ; U. 260, 278 ; con-
tinuity of postulated, in vortex-
atom theory, L 146/.

Naturaldm, I 20, 186 ; ii 87 ;
uncritical, 22; iL 104, 247;
three real principles of; i 40 ;
rejects spirHualistio terminology,
i 19 ; ii 58, 100/., 247 ; assumes
the primacy of physical pheno-
mena, 98 /., 106 ; but does not
escape from spiritualistic implica-
tions, 262/ ; 266


Natural selection, i 274, 275, 281,
297, 802 ; ii 92 ; and variations,
i800

Nature, laws of, as "secondary causes," i
46, 48 ; as causal at all, ii 287/1 ;
compared with jural laws, ii 249
/., 259 ; two senses of, 259 ; as
relations, 260, 278/ ; Uniformity
of N., and experience, ii 160 /. ;
the conception of this uniformity,
teleological in origin, 219 /. ; and
as postulate, 221 /., 282 /. ;
distinct from conception of active
cause, 241 / ; unity of N., and
intelligence, 285 /., 266 / ; as
itself teleological, 254 /, 274 ;
God's non-interference with, 277

Necessity, the conception of; ii 48 /.,
218, 217 /., 227 / ; natural N.,
45, 278 ; rational, 281

Neo-Darwinians, i 278/., 800/

Neo-vitalism, i 178, 285

Newton, Sir Isaac, his recognition of
God, i 8, 6, 48 ; on time, space,
and motion, 68-74 ; on absolute
rotation, 78 ; on the range of
mechanical principles, 82, 84, 155 ;
on contact action, 122, 124

Nihilism, physical, i 140 /., 150 ; ii
260, 271

Objective, ambiguous term, ii. 116
Objects of individual and of universal

experience, ii 166/.
Organisms and machines, i 282, 291/ ;

ii 27/

Palbt, his Natural Theology, i 6
Parallelism, psychophysical, i 9 /.,
178 ; ii 5 /., 109, 278 ; meaning
of; to, 18/. ; logically incompatible
with dualism, 24, 29, 37 ; leads
to^monism, 81/, 98, 208/
Paulsen, Prof. F., on active attitude,
ii 188 ; on conceiving and under-
standing, 280
Pearson, Prof. Karl, i 57, 88, 117
Phenomenon, what the term implies, i
24; ii 104/., 214, 275/ ; rehition
to Absolute, i 26, 89 ; Kant's use
of, ii. 128 ; P. per «f, a contradic-
tion of Naturalism, 104, 181, 272,
276
PhysicS} as merely descriptive, i 62»


290


WAKD*S GIPFOBD LECTUEES


66 ; mechanical description if

adequate to, 116, 138, 158, 164
Plants, biological character of^ L 282,

287
Poincar^, Prot H., i 115
Presentotionism, iL 128, 126, 209
Protagoras, his Homo Menswu^ ii. 256
Protista, the, i. 288, 287/.
Psychical, processes, iL 9/. ; meaning

of, 11
Psychological and psychophTBical oon-

fosion ot; iL 10/., 21/., 117, 127
Psychology, and physics, L 15 ; iL 4 /.,

16, 22/., 108/., 124/, 158, 178,

179, 198
Pythagoreans, and the mechanical

theory, L 151 ; iL 69

QUALITT replaced by quantity in the
mechanical theory, L 96/., 112 ;
iL 279 ; relations of, non-plus the
Laplacean calculator, 176/

Rationaubm, dogmatic, iL 109 ; its
dualism of reason and experience,
179/

Realism, naive and the R. of sdenoe,
iL 100 ; nai've R. and the trans-
subjective, 171, 178 ; fallacy of;
178/., 196

Reality, and symbols, L 179/ ; per-
ceptual, iL 154/, 168 ; as con-
crete, ii. 87, 89, 279; R. and
appearance, 166

Reflex movements, L 286 ; IL 88

Reid, iL 109, 155 ; on memory, 169 ;
use of "object," 165

Reversibility, mechanical, L 208/ ;
absence of; in the universe a
difficulty for the mechanical theory,
iL 81 / ; such absence may point
to a ** source" of energy, 80

Riehl, Prof. A., on Mr. Spencer, L 225 ;
on sensations, iL 119

Romanes, i. 280

Rototion, absolute, L 78-80

SonvoB, its non-theistic character, L
6, 20 ; iL 277 ; its limiUtionB
and gaps, L 8/., 27, 80/; Huxley
on Uie progress of; 17 ; iL 99 ;
and nescience, L 26 /. ; Orlna
seianOa/rwn, 27, 88, 40; con-


trasted with the concrete worid,
iL87/

Segregation, L 237-242

Selection : see Natural ; Sexual. L 278 ;
Human, L 278 ; SubjectivB, 294-
297 ; iL 92, 131, 161

Self-conservation, L 290-294 ; iL 92,
131, 134; and progreea i cm, L
298/

Sensations, not psychologically explic-
able, iL 25 ; not subjectiTe modi-
fications, 113-117, 127 /. ; have
"form," 117

Senses distinction of internal and
external, iL 19

Skin-colouration, L 278

Solipaism, iL 168, 197

Space, absolute, L 68 ; iL 142 /
146 ; relative, L 71 / ; iL 143 ;
S. and Lord ELelvin's medium,
182; perception of; impljes
activity, ii. 135 / ; leads on to
conception of; 139 /., 149 /. ;
vievrs of Locke and Kant on, 140
/; "here" as "origin," 142;
empty S., 144/

Spencer, Mr. Hei-b^ on the Abeolnte,
L 26 ; iL 267/.; onsdenoe, L 26
on Conservation of Mass, 86 /.
on Ckmservation of Ebeiigy, 171/1;
on Evolution, 187 A 212 /.; on
Persistence of Force, 215 - 220 ;
sources of his philosophy, 243,
253 ; his procedure described, ^
illustrated and criticised, 246-259.
270; Brtt Quarterlif on, 255;
confloses abstraction with mnaly-
sis, 256 ; on the origin of lifis,
262 /.; on the transition to
mind, 265/, 286 ; on Equilibra-
tion, 276 ; his mission, iL 87, 91 ;
on consciousness, 129

Spinoza on self -conservation, L 290 ;
and parallelism, ii. 13, 18 ; on
flreedom, 45 ; his monism, 211, 278

Stallo, J. B., on a body and its rela-
tions, L 80

Statistics, in physics, L 110/

Stout, G. F. Dr., his Analytic Pjy.
chology referred to, iL 187

Strasbuiger, Prof. E., on organisnis as
machines, L 298

Struggle for existence, L 274, iL 92

Stompf; Prof: O, quoted, iL 188


J


INDEX


291


Sabjeot, and object, their relation in
presentation, iL 117-128 ; view of
Kant, 118 /, 120/.; of Pichte,
118, 120 ; of Leibniz, 119 ; of Neo-
Kantians, 122

Subjective, an ambiguous term, IL 119 ;
S. activity, see Activity

Substance, elhnination of the concep-
tion, i. 57, 64, 67, 122, 189, ii. 4 ;
retained by Prof. Tait, 146; for
Descartes and Kant primarily quan-
tiUtive, 198/.

Substantiality, source of the category of;
iL 192-196; implies causality,
198/.

Survival of the fittest, L 14, 275 ; U. 92

Symbols, Huxley and the Kirchoff
school on, L 179 ; and reality, 179
/ ; iL 276 ; Mr. Spencer on L 269 ;
Mental states as, iL 49

Synthesis, intellective, ii. 164 ; ''anoe-
tic," 187, Kant's use o( 284, 286

Tait, Prof. P. G., L 57, 62; his inertial
system, 78 ; on mass and energy,
158/.; on matter, iL 86

Teleological factors in evolution, i. 277
/., 288 /, 290-800 ; iL 92 ; T.
and mechanical, antinomy o4 iL
58, 63 ; which is fandiunental ?
210, 218, 229/., 258/., 264


Theism, demurrer of modem thought
against, L 87, 89 ; iL 288 ; and
polytheism, 265 ; Mr. Spencer on,
267/.

Theology, Natural, L 6, 28 ; Bridge-
water Treatises on, 6 ; Rational,
28; Emotional, 31/

Thomson and Tait, Natund Philosophy,
L 57, 162

Time, absolute, 68 ; mean, 70 /.; per-
ception of, analysed, iL 146-148 ;
conception of, 148/

"Transsubjective," meaning of, iL 170

Univbbsb, is it evolved ? L 188/.; is it

limited? 195/
Unknowable, the, L 24; iL 18, 101,

207 A 267/

VlTALIBM, L 178

Vortex - atoms, theory of; L 87/n 118,
128, 187, 144 ; mass and quasi-
mass 0^ 185 /.

Wallace, A. R., L 273, 275 ; on

Human Selection, 278
Weismann, Prof! A., L 273, 800/.
Wundt, Prof. W., on psychophysical

parallelism, ii. 80


o


In two vols., demy 8vo., cloth, price 24s.


Ifet. C|)oma0 of Canterbury:

HIS DEATH AND MIRACLES.


BV

EDWIN A, ABBOTT, M.A., D.D„

FORMBRLY FELLOW OF ST. JOHN's COLLBGB, CAMBRIDGE, /\

AND HULSEAN LECTURER;
AUTHOR OF 'PHILOCHRISTUS/ ' ONBStMUS.'


IN TIVO VOLUMES
Illustrated with a Photogravure Frontispiece.


* It is clear that I cannot say much of these six hundied and sixty large pages
in the same number of lines. But I would commend them to students of the
New Testament, to critics and theologians, as furnishing, with admirable candour,
no small addition to their means of following out certam long-debated problems,
until they arrive at a solution which shall be true to the evidence.' — Bookman.

* A couple of volumes singularly interesting, not only for their naive human
matter and for their important critical implication^*, but also for the admirably
scholarly and sympathetic treatment which he has given them.' — Academy,

* Dr. Abbott's lK)ok on St Thomas of Canterbury is one of the most striking
contributions, in my belief, to the history of testimony that has ever been made.
— Inquirer,

' A thoughtful and eminently scholarly work ... a work which the student
of theology, history, and sociology will regard as one of interest and importance.'
— Scotsman,

'The critical discernment of Dr. Abbott, the candour and fairness of his
criticism, his moderation in tone, and his freedom from partisan prejudice,
deserve our warmest praise.' — Daily News,

* It is extremely thorough and remarkably accurate ; a little hypercritical, no
doubt, but very acute and suggestive.' — Guardian,

* As to the interest of the story, the scholarly and scientific treatment of his
materials, and the great value of the book, no doubt can be entertained.' —
Standard,

' It should find a place in the library of every clergyman, for it must stimulate
inquiry and open out fresh lines of thought, and to any serious student of eccle-
siastical history the book will be of special value.' — Morning Post.


A. & C. BLACK, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.


THE APOCALYPSE OF BARUCH.

Translated from the Syriac
By Rev. R. H. CHARLES, M.A.

TRINITY COLLEGE, DUBLIN, AND BXBTBS COLLBCB, DUBLIN.

Crown 8w?^ clothe price 75. 6if. net

' Mr. Charles's work will have Br hearty wdcome from students of S3rnac whose
interest is linguistic, and from theological students who have learned the value of Jewish
and Christian pseudepigraphy ; and the educated general reader will find much of faigta
interest in it, regard being had to its date and its theological standpoint.' — Recm^

* The learned footnotes which accompany the translation throughout will be found
must helpful to the reader. Indeed, nothing seems to have been left undone whicfe
could nuuce this ancient writing intelligible to the student.* — Scotsman.


THE ASSUMPTION OF MOSES.

Translated from the Latin Sixth Century MS., the unemended Text of
which is published herewith, together with the Text in its restored
and critically emended form.

EDITED, WITH INTRODyCTION, NOTES, AND INDICES.

By Rev. R. H. CHARLES, M.A.

CroTtm ^vo., clothe price 75. 6</.

* In this admirable little book the Rev. R. H. Charles has added another to the
excellent series of editions by which he has earned the gratitude of all students of early
Christian literature.' — Times.

* Nothing has been left undone by the author which could contribute to the settling
of the text, the elucidation of the general purpose of the book, and the interpietatkxi
of particular passages. In short, it is worthy to rank with his edition of the "Apocalypse
of Baruch." and higher praise than that could hardly be given.' — Primitive Afeikodisi
Quarterly Review.


STUDIES IN HEBREW PROPER NAMES.

By G. BUCHANAN GRAY, M.A.,

LECTURKR IN HEBRBW AND OLD TB-^TAMBNT THBOLOGY IN MANSFIELD COLLKGS;
LATE SENIOR KENNICOTT SCHOLAR IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.

Crown Svo.j cloth, price is, 6d, net,

* The study of Hebrew proper names, then, with their meaning, their origin, and
ineir classification, cannot be looked upon simply as a dry-as-dust branch of inquiry,
but is one full of interest to the Biblical scholar who looks below the surface.' — CJkMrc^
Qyarterly Review.

'These "Studies" may be warmly commended as a step in the right direcrioo.
They bring out into clear relief progress of religious ideas in Israel, and nuike an
important contribution to the criticisms of Old Testament documents.'— C H. Toy,
Harvard University.

' There is not a student of the Old Testament in Hebrew but will find it indis-
pensable.'- -Expository Times.


A. & C. BLACK, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.


Demy 8w7., clothy price 245.


INTRODUCTION

TO THE

BOOK OF ISAIAH.

WITH AN APPENDIX CONTAINING THE UNDOUBTED PORTIONS
OF THE TWO CHIEF PROPHETIC WRITERS IN A

TRANSLATION.

BY THE

Rev. T. K. CHEYNE, M.A., D.D.,

ORIEL PROFESSOR OF THE INTERPRETATION OF HOLY SCRIPTURE AT OXFORD,
AND FORMERLY FELLOW OF BALLIOL COLLEGE ; CANON OF ROCHFS I ER.


' This elaborate and scholarly work. . . . We mnst leave to professed scholars the detailed
appreciation of Professor Cheyne's work. His own learoing and reputation suffice to attest its
importance.' — The Times.

* This truly great and mcmumental work.' — Critical Review.

'This monument of patient scholarship, wide reading^ and indefatigable research.' — The
speaker.


In croum Svo.t cloth, gill top, price dy. ; or in white vellum cloth, extra gilt,

gilt toPf price 75. 6d,


PASSAGES OF THE BIBLE,

CHOSEN FOR THEIR LITERARY BEAUTY AND

INTEREST.


BY

J. G. FRAZER, M.A.,

FBIXOW OP TRINITY COLLEGK, CAMBRIDGB.


' He has given us a fascinating book, the perusal of which cannot fail to invest the Bible,
even for many of those who know it best, with a fresh interest and significance.'— ff^rf/m/Vu/rr
Gaseife.

* Hardly a verse or a song that rings in anyone's memory but will be found htre.' —BooAmoM.

' Mr. Fraxer's selections are, as was to be expected, made with care and taste, and he has
prefixed to each of them an appropriate htsuding.'— A tJketueum.

' The notes are simply admirable.'— JVo/iVwo/ Observer.


A. & C. BLACK, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.


tn two vols.y demy Hvo.^ ciolh.

NATURALISM AND AGNOSTICISM

THE GIFFORD LECTURES DELIVERED BEFORE THE
UNIVERSITY OF ABERDEEN IN THE YEARS

1896- 1898.

BY

JAMES WARD, ScD., Hon. LL.D. (Edin.),

PROFKSSOK OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY AND LOGIC IN THB tNlVKRSITV OP CAMBBIOGB.


This work (consisting of five parts) seeks to show that the union of Naturalism and . ^
which constitutes ' modem scientific thought,' though it has led to a widespread prejudice against
Idealism and so againitt Theism, has yet really promoted the interest of both. i. It has brooghc
out the abstract descriptive character of the Mechanical Tfuory^ which had been reg:arded as
presenting 'what actually goes on behind what we see and feel.' 2. The futility of axtemptSs
such as that of Mr. Spencer, to deduce the Evolution of life, mind, and societv from a aaek
mechanical principle u then evident. 3. Further, the Jie/ati<>n of B0dy and Mind has ro dc
treated as a 'correspondence' that is neither causal physically nor casual logically. 4. The
perplexities of this Dumiism lead to a neutral (or agnostic) monism, which— beins essentially
unstable— must either lapse back into Materialism or advance to Idealism. Reneccioo xrpao
experience as a whole shows how this Dualism has arisen, and also that it is false. 5. It b cc o «De»
clear that only in terms 0/ Mind can we understand the unity, activity, and regularity that
Nature presents.

In one voL, demy 8t>^., clothe price js, 6d,

THE QUEST OF FAITH.

BEING NOTES ON THE CURRENT PHILOSOPHY OF

RELIGION.

By T. BAILEV SAUNDERS.

In this work the author deals with those theories on the justification c^ religious belief whidi
have recently found very pt eminent expression in this country. Nothing is more renuuicable
in our time than the extent to which the leaders of Englbh opinion, particul^riy in potiticss have
discussed the questions which lie at the root of the philosophy of religion Mr. Bailey Saonden
here states and criticises the views of those who make contemporary opinion on this scbyeot.
Keviewine the contributions of men like Profes«-or Huxley, Mr. Artnur Balfour, the Duke of
Argyll, Mr. Gladstone*, and the Roman Catholic writers, he expressly aims at providing the
general reader interested ill current controversy with an indication of the character and value of
their arguments, and an estimate of the general conclusion to which they tend.

In one vol., crown Svo., cloth, price is. 6d. net.

THOUGHTS ON THE PRESENT POSITION

OF

PROTESTANTISM

By Prof. ADOLF HARNACK
Translated by THOMAS BAILEY SAUNDERS.

This is a version of a recent utterance on the question at issue between the Catholic and the
Protestant by the most distinguished German theologian now living. Professor Hamack treats
of this question in a brief compass, but with a breadth of view and a vigovr of expression which
must make what he says interesting to readers of every shade of opinion.


A. & C. BLACK, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.


CroTtm Svo,y cloth, price is. 6rf. net each,

CHRISTIANITY AND HISTORY.

By ADOLF HARNACK.

Translated, with the Author's sanction, by THOMAS BAILEY
SAUNDERS, with an Introductory Note.

' It is highly interesting and full of thought. The short introductory note with which


GUugow Hentid.

• . . . We hope the lecture will be widely veaud.'—Prtfmtfve MtthodUt Qumrterfy RevUw,
' A renmrkable paper read to the German Evangelical Union.' — Scotsman.

* The lecture itself is weighty in its every word, and should be read and reread by those desiring
to have in a nutshell the central positions of modem Christianity. '-^Am/iVus World.

' We are thankful to Hamack for his splendid vindication of history, and grateful to him for
many other things in this lecture.'—^ ArrrfSrrw Free Preu,


THE VITALITY OF CHRISTIAN DOGMAS, AND
THEIR POWER OF EVOLUTION.

A STUDY IN RELIGIOUS PHILOSOPHY.

By A. SAB ATI ER, D.D.,

DKAN OF THE FACULTY OF PROTESTANT THEOLOGY, PARIS.

Translated by MRS. EMMANUEL CHRISTEN.

With a Preface by the Very Rev. the Hon. W. H. FREMANTLE,

D.D., Dean of Ripon.

* Dr. Sabatier has rendered a ^ood and timely service, alike to theology and religion, by dis-
cussing, as he does here, the relation in which dogma stands to the reality of religious feeling and
experience.'— (7/ki|ftm.- Herald,

* This interesting and able volume. We cannot speak too highly of the manner in which
Mrs. Christen has translated it. She has rendered into dear and visorous English not the mere
words, but the thoughu and arguments of the original.'— /'a// Mall UoMeite.

' It is reallv a sem of theological and instructive criticism. The work is worthy the careful
attention of all reUsious teachers.'— CAru/M« World.

' It is a poweHul and thoughtful study of dogma in the light of modem scientific doctrine.' —
Sccttmmm.

* Professor Sabatier has done an excellent service to liberal Christians of all denominations.'—
New Age.

MONISM; OR, THE CONFESSION OF FAITH OF

A MAN OF SCIENCE.

By PROFESSOR ERNST HAECKEL.
Translated from the German by J. D. F. GILCHRIST.

'The Monism, which is the i^ubstance of his faith, is thus defined by him : **Our conviction
that there lives one spirit in all thin^, and that the whole cognizable world is constituted, and
has been developed, in accordance with one common fundamental law." As the confession of a
distinguished man of science, this little work deserves to be r^^A.*— North British Daily Mail.

*We may readily admit that Professor Haeckel has stated his case with the clearness and
cottra^ which we should expect of him, and that his lecture may be regarded as a fair aiKl
authoritative statement of the views now held by a large number of scientifically educated people.'
— Times,

A. & C. BLACK, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.


^
H


Works by the late W. Robertson Smitb, M.A., LLD.,

PROFESSOR OF ARABIC IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.


Demy 8vo. Price 15s. net.

LECTURES ON
THE RELIGION OF THE SEMITES,

THE FUNDAMENTAL INSTITUTIONS.
New Edition, Revised throughout by the Author.


Demy 8vo. Price los. 6d.

THE OLD TESTAMENT IN THE

JEWISH CHURCH.

A COURSE OF LECTURES ON BIBLICAL CRITICISM.
Second Edition, Revised and much Enlarged,


Post 8vo. Price los. 6d.

THE PROPHETS OF ISRAEL

AND THEIR PLACE IN HISTORY

To the Close of the Eighth Century B.C.

Second Edition,

WITH INTRODUCTION AND ADDITIONAL NOTES.

BY

The Rev. T. K. CHEYNE, M.A., D.D.,

ORIEL PROFESSOR OF THE INTERPRETATION OP HOLY SCRIPTURE AT OXFORD,

CANON OP ROCHESTER.


A. & C. BLACK, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.


In one volume^ large croTvn 8w?., clothe gilt top^ price 75. 6if.

THE HISTORY OF THE

REFORMATION OF RELIGION

WITHIN THE REALM OF SCOTLAND.

WRITTEN BY

JOHN KNOX.

EDITED FOR POPULAR USE BY

C J. GUTHRIE, Q.C.

W!TH NOTES, SUMMARV, GLOSSARY, INDEX, AND FIFTY-SIX

ILLUSTRATIONS,

* The task is one which Carlyle desired to see accomplished nearly thirty years ago,
when be wrote in one of the least known of his works : " It is really a loss to English,
and even to universal, literature, that Knox's hasty and strangely interesting, impressive,
and peculiar book . . . has not been rendered far more extensively l^ble to serious
mankind at large than is hitherto the case." It will be interesting to see if Mr. Guthrie's
labour can restore John Knox's " History" to the place of honour it once held, but
seems long to have lost, among Scottish classics.' — Glasgow Herald,

* Nothing more graphic in incidents and portraiture, or trustworthy in narrative,
than this history remains to us of the literature of the period. The book represents
an immense amount of labour, and needs only to be casually examined to convince one
of the editor's intelligent care in its preparation, and of its present-day value. The
foot-notes are invariably fresh and informative.'— /'ray and Trust Maj^atine.


Crown Svo,, clothe price 65. net.

A SHORT HISTORY

OF

SYRIAC LITERATURE.

BY THE LATE

WILLIAM WRIGHT, LL.D.,

PROFESSOR OF ARABIC IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.

' A masterly account of the literature written in that language. It may safety be said
that there is no one in England— or even in Europe — at the present time capable of
speaking with anything like his authority in matters appertaining to Syriac literature. '
— Record.

'A very complete and valuable handbook to this important subject.' — Pall Mall
Gaseile,

* A valuable contribution to an important subject by one well qualified to give the
best Instruction.' — Religious Review 0/ Reviews.

' It is one of those collections of " clotted learning " which are the delight of the
scholar, and provoke the respectful admiration of the ordinary reader. Syriac students
will be glad to have this handbook in convenient form.' — British Weekly.


A. & C. BLACK, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.


VOL. I. READY IN OCTOBER.

- , ...... . Half-yearly 208.net

To be Publiihed in Four qw^i^t^iy yrtunee, Prioe lAe. eaoh, bouid in Clotb.

8ise, Saper-Boyal 8to., 10 by 7 inehoi.

For the conveninue of Subscribers who wish to bind the work inOnf Vo/ume when

complete f an edition of ecu h of the Quarterly Parts will also be issued on

thin paper, in paper boards with leather bcuks.


ENCYCLOPAEDIA BIBLICA:
a Dictionarp of tbe 3BiWe.

EDITED BY

The Rev. T. K. CHEYNE, M.A., D.D.,

Oriel Professor of the Interpretalion of Holy Scripture cU Oxford^ cmd formerly
Fellow of Balliol College^ Canon of Rochester ;

J. SUTHERLAND BLACK, M.A., LL.D.,

Assistant Editor of the * Encyclopcedia Britannica*


THE following are special points that have been kept steadily in view
in the preparation of this work :

1. The primary aim has been to supply a much felt want by apj^ying
to every detail within the scope of a Bible Dictionary the most exact
scientific methods now in use, so as to provide, in dictionary form, the
results of a thoroughgoing critical study of the Bible, with a completene»
and conciseness that has never yet been attained in any language.

2. The policy adopted is to give a carefully considered accoimt of the
subjects dealt with, based on and starting from the latest that has been
written on the subject by the leading scholars, rather than to attempt to
calculate the average opinion in the world of Biblical studies.

3. Generally speaking, the subject-matter of the * Encyclopaedia Biblica '
is that of Bible dictionaries in general. Some large important headings
will, however, be found here for the first time, and archaeological facts
have been treated with greater fulness than has been usual in works of
this class. By a careful system of cross-references to general articles, and
by the admission of only such parts of a subject as directly affect Biblical
questions, it has been found possible to treat many headings with greater
brevity than in previous works in the same field. For facility of reference
all the larger articles have been divided into numbered sections, with sub-
headings printed in clear type.

4. Great pains have been taken and much thought has been expended
with the view of avoiding repetitions, and attaining the greatest possible
condensation, especially m minor matters, so as to secure adequate treat-
ment of all questions of primary importance.

5. The work has, on the whole, proceeded simultaneously thruighout
the alphabet, so that all the articles, from the largest to the very sm^lest,
might be collated with each other in as far as they are mutually dependent
or illustrative ; the results of this collation being given in very full refer-
ences to the numerical section of the cognate article.

6. By delaying the stereotyping to the very last, it has been possible to
work the results of new discoveries or fresh discussions, as they appear
from month to month, into the whole mass of articles.

A. & C. BLACK, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.
