Naturalism and Agnosticism, Vol. 1
James Ward (1899)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): James Ward's Naturalism and Agnosticism (1899), Vol. 1 — the Gifford Lectures: the Cambridge pluralist's critique of naturalism.

========================================================================

r- /


\


General Library


OF


University of Michigan


*

ij? Presented by

1 3^...!AK.iAaly^.

*
*


%


-1/4J,


189


<\


m
m
m
m
m
m

i

m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m

$
t


BE
5H

.W25<?


!!


NATURALISM AND AGNOSTICISM


I


R

»


-*


fl^X|p


«s9 ^^ o


NATURALISM


AND


f^33j/


AGNOSTICISM

THE GIFFORD LECTURES DELIVERED BEFORE

THE UNIVERSITY OF ABERDEEN

IN THE YEARS 1896-1898


BY
JAMES \£ARD, Sc.D.

HON. LL.D. EDINBURGH

PROFESSOR OF MENTAL PHILOSOPHY AND LOGIC
IN THIS UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE


VOLUME I


" Wer die Gesetzmdssigkeit der Natur filr das verant-
toortlich macht, was wirklich geschieht, behauptet darnit,
doss He Gedanken realisiere, und ist Teleolog ohne es zu
totisen." — Siqwart.


TStfa fgork I

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

LONDON : MACMILLAN & CO., Lid. !

1899

All right* reserved


COPYBIGHT, 1899,

Bt THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.


Nortoooto $rrtw

J. 8. Cuihing St Co. — Berwick ft Smith
Norwood Mam. U.8.A.


PREFACE


)- These lectures do not form a systematic treatise.


r


4


They only attempt to discuss in a popular way -certain
r assumptions of 'modern science' which have led to a

widespread, but more or less tacit, rejection of idealistic
\ views of the world. These assumptions are, of course, no

part of the general body of the natural sciences, but
rather prepossessions that, after gradually taking shape
*\ in the minds of many absorbed in scientific studies, have

^ entered into the current thought of our time. Though,

as I believe, these prepossessions will prove to be ill-
grounded and mistaken, yet they are nevertheless the
-almost inevitable outcome of the standpoint and the
premisses from which the natural sciences start. If with
the history of science and the results of science before
us we pass straight on to the construction of a philoso-
phy, idealism has no chance. But, in truth, 'modern
science' hardly needs to construct its philosophy; for,
without any conscious labour on its part, the naturalistic
view of the world seems to stand out clearly of itself.
Figuratively speaking we have, as it were, the nebular
hypothesis exemplified in the evolution of knowledge.
(And for Mr. Spencer, by the way, the exemplification
is more than figurative.) From an inchoate confusion
of Crlaube and Aberglaube, of probable opinions and fan-


vi PREFACE

ciful surmises, there gradually emerges the clear circle
of the sciences, waxing brighter as it advances in cohe-
rence and continuity, while the void of nescience beyond
grows too dark for shadows, too empty for dreams; till
at length all there is to know finds a place in an un-
broken concatenation of laws, binding nature fast in fate.
Taking science as the touchstone of knowledge, "know-
ing in the strict sense," as Mr. Spencer calls it, we must
admit that we do not know God or even see room for
God at all. Such is the naturalistic contrast of science
and nescience, on the strength of which Natu ral™?! takes
A gnosticism fo r an ally. But the agnostic opposition
of knowable and unknowable is by no means identical '
with this contrast; and the alliance is proving ill-starred >
in consequence. For the distinction of known and un-
known, as science intends it, is, we may say, a mere ,
objective distinction of fact ; the distinction of knowable
and unknowable as used by the agnostic, on the other \
hand, brings the knower himself to the fore, and entails
an examination both of the standpoint and of the prem-
isses from which science, without any preliminary criti-
cism, set forth. In other words, Naturalism is essentially
dogmatic, whereas Agnosticism is essentially sceptical.

But this strange liaison, though disastrous to Natural-
ism, has served to promote Idealism in sundry ways.
The old materialism has been repudiated and an agnostic -
or neutral monism — nihilism some would call it — has
come into vogue in its stead. * Modern Science' seems
at this point in a dilemma; either this nondescript
monism must lapse back into materialism or move on to
spiritualism. But the relapse is difficult and the present


PREFACE vii

position unstable. With these more strictly epistemo-
logical topics I have tried to deal in the second and
shorter half of this work (beginning, that is, with Lee-
ture XIV). Many who chance to glance at its contents,
especially if they should be students of philosophy, may
think that here was the place to begin, and that the
earlier and longer division of the book could be sup-
pressed without much detriment to the justification of
idealism that follows. That the one half might have
been expanded and the other contracted with advantage,
I fully admit; and had it been any way practicable to
recast lectures, delivered on five separate occasions, into
one whole, such a readjustment might have been effected.
But, in any case, it would have seemed essential to the
writer's argument and purpose to discuss what have been
called the real principles of Naturalism at some length.

I take it for granted that till an idealistic (i.e. spirit-
ualistic) view of the world can be sustained, any exposi-
tion of theism is but wasted labour. Such, at any rate,
is the opinion of those who are dominated by naturalistic
preconceptions, and that — so far as these discussions are
concerned — is sufficient. But now, as already said, it is
precisely 'the solid ground of nature' science seems to
present that makes idealism appear to the naturalist so
fatuous or so futile, 'containing nothing but sophistry
and illusion, leading to nothing but obscurity and con-
fusion of ideas.' But is it verily positive, fully orbed
reality that modern science sets before us ? This is the
question that leads us to examine the mechanical theory,
the theory of evolution and the theory of psychical
epiphenomena, the principles on which this supposed


viii PREFACE

unity and completeness seem mainly to depend. Natu-
ralism, we find, though rejecting materialism, abandons
neither the materialistic standpoint nor the materialistic
endeavour to colligate the facts of life, mind, and history
with a mechanical scheme. But the compact of Natural-^
ism with Agnosticism, like the legendary compacts with'
the devil, to which Lange happily compares it, costs
Naturalism, as it turns out, its entire philosophical ex-
istence. In order to be free of ' metaphysical quagmires '
such as the ideas of substance and cause, it is led to
reject the reality not only of mind, but even of matter ;
and in this state of ideophobia must collapse, for lack
of the very ideas it dreads.

The following is a brief outline of the argument : —
A. i. Mechanics, as a branch of mathematics dealing sim-
ply with the quantitative aspects of physical phenomena,
can dispense entirely with 'real categories'; not so the
mechanical theory of Nature, which aspires to resolve the
actual world into an actual mechanism. Homoeopathic
remedies are the best for that disorder ; and, in fact, at
the present time mathematicians are, of all men of science,
the least tainted with it. An inquiry into the character
and mutual relations of Abstract Dynamics, Molar Me-
chanics, and Molecular Mechanics, seems to shew that the
modern dream of a mechanical apxv is as wild as the
Pythagorean of an arithmetical one. (Lectures II-VI.)
ii. A powerful, though unintentional refutation of this
theory is furnished by Mr. Herbert Spencer's attempt
to base a philosophy of evolution on the doctrine of the
conservation of energy. When at length Naturalism is
forced to take account of the facts of life and mind, we


PREFACE ix

find the strain on the mechanical theory is more than it
will bear. Mr. Spencer has blandly to confess that * two
volumes ' of his 6 Synthetic Philosophy ' are missing, the
volumes that should connect inorganic with biological,
evolution. (Lectures FTJ-IX.) Turning to the great
work of Darwin, we find, on the one hand, no pretence at
even conjecturing a mechanical derivation of life ; * and,
on the other, we find teleological factors, implicating
mind and incompatible with mere ' mechanism, regarded
as indispensable. (Lecture X.) iii. And finally, when
confronted with the relation of mind and body, Natural-
ism is driven, in the endeavour to maintain its mechani-
cal basis inviolable, to broach psychophysical theories in
flagrant contradiction not only with sound mechanical
principles and sound logic, but with the plain facts of
daily experience. To 'the body as a phenomenal machine
corresponds the mind as an epiphenomenal machine, albeit
the correspondence cannot be called causal in any physical
sense, nor casual in any logical sense. (Lectures XI-

xni.)

B. An examination of the ' real principles ' of Natural-
ism thus secures us a specially advantageous position for
discussing the epistemological questions on which the jus-
tification of idealism depends, iv. The dualism of matter
and mind, which has made the connexion of body and
soul an enigma for the naturalist, has rendered the con-
verse problem, as to the perception of an external world,
equally vexatious to the psychologist. It is obvious that

1 " It is mere rubbish thinking at present of the origin of life ; one
might as well think of the origin of matter. " — Letter to Hooker, Darioin's
Life, vol. iii, p. 18.


X PREFACE

there is no such dualism in experience itself, with which
we must begin ; and reflecting upon experience as a
whole, we learn how such dualism has arisen: also we
see that it is false. (Lectures XIV-XVU.*) Further,
such reflexion shews that the unity of experience cannot
be replaced by an unknowable that is no better than a
gulf between two disparate series of phenomena and epi-
phenomena. Once materialism is abandoned and dualism
found untenable, a spiritualistic monism remains the one
stable position. It is only in terms of mind that we can
understand the unity, activity, and regularity that nature
presents. In so understanding we see that Nature is
Spirit. (Lectures XVIII-XX.)

It is to be feared that inconsistencies and misunder-
standings may be detected in the course of an argument
elaborated piecemeal over a period of three years, and
continually interrupted by other work. Some of these
I might myself have discovered had it been possible to
do more than publish the lectures substantially as they
were delivered.

There only remains the pleasant duty of acknowledg-
ing the valuable help received from many kind friends.
Among these I must mention Professor Poynting, F.R.S.,
of Mason's College, Birmingham; Dr. E. W. Hobson,
F.R.S., of Christ's College, Cambridge ; the Hon. B. A. W.
Russell, Fellow of Trinity College ; and particularly Pro-
fessor J. S. Mackenzie, of University College, Cardiff, who
has aided me with many judicious criticisms in the course

of reading the proof sheets.

JAMES WARD.
Trinity College, Cambridge,
March, 1899.


CONTENTS

OP THE FIRST VOLUME

LECTURE I
intboductiov

PifiM

The attitudes toward Theism of Newton and Laplace : that of
the latter has become the common attitude of * Science.'
This illustrated 8-6

The polity of Modern Science claims to be in idea a complete and
compacted whole. ' Gaps ' in what sense admitted, and how
dealt with 6-13

The dualism of Matter and Mind : ' Science ' decides to treat

matter as fundamental, mind as episodic . . . . 18-16

Professor Huxley on the situation : his admissions and advice —
a blend of Naturalism and Agnosticism. These doctrines
complementary : they react upon each other. According to
the one, Natural Theology is unnecessary ; according to the
other, Rational Theology is impossible 17-24

Examination of the position that Science forms a self-contained
whole. No sharp boundary between ' science and nescience.'
Mr. Spencer betrays science 24-30

TyndalPs suggestion of an Emotional Theology . 31-33

PART L THE MECHANICAL THEORY

LECTURE n

ABSTRACT DYNAMICS

The demurrer of modern scientific thought, though illegitimately,
yet practically, forecloses theistic inquiries. A discussion of
its fundamental positions therefore called for in the interest

of such inquiries 37-39

xi


xu


CONTENTS OF


FAcm
Natural knowledge to be examined (i) formally as knowledge,
(ii) as a body of real principles. Beginning with the latter,
we have (a) the mechanical theory of Nature, (6) the theory
of Evolution, and (c) the psychophysical theory of Body and
Mind 40

A. The Mechanical Theory : — The Laplacean calculator; dif-
ferent views of him ; he excludes the teleological • . . 41-60

Abstract dynamics, a strictly mechanical science at the basis of

this theory 60-54

It thus divests itself of the real categories of Substance and Cause
and substitutes the quantitative terms 'Mass' and * Force*
(or Mass-acceleration) 64-63

But if this be so, Laplace's calculator never attains to real know-
ledge 63-64


LECTURE m


BELATION OF ABSTRACT DYNAMICS TO ACTUAL PHENOMENA


The characteristics of Abstract Dynamics recapitulated

The question raised : How far and in what sense this science can
be applied to actual phenomena. This problem illustrated
from Newton's treatment of Space, Time, Motion, as (1) ab-
solute ; (2) relative

Bearing of this distinction on the attempt to determine an actual
case of the first law of motion. Various proposals considered.
The question of absolute rotation especially instructive.
Mach's criticisms reveal the indefinite complexity of 'real


66-67


cases


The mechanical theory is thus divided against itself : it cannot
be at once rigorously exact and adequately real. The Kirch-
hoff School abandon the attempt ( to penetrate to the mechan-
ism of nature,' and see in mechanics only an instrument for
'approximate description.' Unconditional mechanical state-
ments concerning the real world appear so far unwarrantable

One of these, the Conservation of Mass, specially discussed:
Mr. Herbert Spencer's ' short and easy method ' found wide
of the mark. This doctrine, like other mechanical doctrines,
justified mainly by its simplicity ••»•••


67-70


7O-S0


80-84


84-91


THE FIRST VOLUME xiii

LECTURE IV

MOLECULAR MECHANICS: ITS INDIRECTNESS

PAOXB

Distinction of mass and molecule. The molecule not a ( minute

body' 92-96

The advance from abstract mechanics to molecular physics : me-
chanics historically a usurper 95-97

Molecular mechanics is (a) indirect and (b) ideal . . . 97-98

(a i.) The evidence for molecules examined. Clerk Maxwell's
theory of * manufactured articles.' Clifford's criticisms. Fur-
ther criticisms. Maxwell's theistic bias. The status of the
molecule hypothetical. Statistical physics commented upon • 98-111

(a ii.) Evolution applied to the molecule. The mechanical theory
bound, if possible, to resolve it into something simpler : the
prime-atom 112-113

(a iii.) The ether — one or more. Lord Kelvin sure of it, but
chiefly because the mechanical theory cannot get on other-
wise. New ethers invented to meet new mechanical problems.
Signs of a reaction. Professors Drude and K. Pearson quoted.
Hypothetical mechanisms and illustrative mechanisms dis-
tinct, but apt to get confused. Masterful analogies dangerous :
is nothing intelligible but what is mechanical ? . . 113-120

LECTURE V

MOLECULAR MECHANICS: IDEALS OF MATTER

(&) The ideal of matter. The old atomism strictly mechanical
but inadequate. Its conversion into one strictly dynamical
by Boscovich and the French. The resolution of this in
turn into the * kinetic theory • 122-128

The nature of the primordial fluid examined : it is made up of

negations, and is thus indeterminate : prima materia . . 129-135

Relation of its mass to the ( quasi-mass * of the vortices : the latter
becomes a complicated problem. The kinetic ideal in danger
from * metaphysical quagmires. 1 To avoid this impasse it is
proposed to make energy fundamental • . . . • 136-138

Besults of inquiry into mechanical theory thus far: Relation of
the three sciences, Analytical Mechanics, Molar Mechanics,
Molecular Mechanics. The first stands completely aloof from
concrete facts. The attempt to apply it to these without re-
serve leaves us with a scheme of motions and nothing to move 138-140


MHaMHMMmMMMII


xiv CONTENTS OP


PAGM


To molar mechanics belongs the role of stripping off the physical
characteristics of sensible bodies; to molecular mechanics,
the role of transforming these characteristics into mechanisms,
and the mechanisms into 'non-matter in motion.' The me-
chanical theory as a professed explanation of the world thus
over-reaches itself 140-143

As mechanical science has advanced, its true character has be-
come increasingly apparent — its objects are fictions of the
understanding, and not conceivably presentable facts . . 143-145

The kinetic ideal shows this best of all, for some of its upholders
dream of * replacing ' dynamical laws by kinematical. The
refutation is the more striking because they imagine that
they are all the while getting nearer to * what actually goes
on' 146-148

It is upon an uncritical prepossession of this kind that the me-
chanical theory has rested all along. Descriptive analogies
have been regarded as actual facts ; yet are nothing but the
inevitable outcome of the endeavour to summarise phenomena
in terms of motion. A moral drawn from the Pythagoreans . 148-152

But mechanical science has so far failed even to describe facts in

its own terms • 153-154


LECTURE VI

THE THEORY OF ENERGY

The proposal to replace Mechanical Physics by Energetics.
Whatever it may be worth, this proposal at least puts Me-
chanical Physics anew upon its trial 156-157

L What ft energy? Professor Tait's definition of Matter as the
4 vehicle or receptacle of Energy' examined. Relation of
Energy to Matter. Helmholtz's exposition of this relation.
Relation of Energy to Mass. Is not Mass as much an ana-
lytical abstraction as Force ? 167-163

All change either a transference or a transformation of Energy,
and Kinetic Energy only one form of actual energy — this is
the new doctrine. Difficulties of the old theory, which is bent
on resolving all actual energy into kinetic energy. Professor
Duhem's protest, and some reflections that it suggests . . 163-167

Returning to the new theory we note (i) that quantitative equiv-
alence not qualitative identity is all that is asserted of the


THE FIRST VOLUME


PAOB8


several forms of energy; and (ii) that some of these forms
may still remain undiscovered. Some final reflections on the
mechanical bias 167-170

II. What is the Conservation of Energy f What it is not ; it
does not warrant statements about the past or future of the
universe. It does not mean that Energy is verily and abso-
lutely the substance of the universe. Its relativity. Its
character as a postulate. Implications of this and new ques-
tions opened up « . 170-181


PART II. THEORY OF EVOLUTION

LECTURE VII

MECHANICAL EVOLUTION

1. Mechanical evolution, the process by which the mass and
energy of the universe have passed from some assumed prime-
val state to that distribution which they now present. Mr.
Herbert Spencer the best accredited exponent of this doc-
trine •. 185-187

He regards the universe as a single object, which is alternately
evolved and dissolved. But the universe cannot be so re-
garded 187-192

If it could, Mr. Spencer's mechanical principles forbid such alter-
nation. He ignores 'dissipation of energy/ and confuses
energy with work. The thermodynamic zero. A finite uni-
verse must have time limits 192-106

But is the universe finite ? The Kantian antinomies and their
solution. The notion of evolution not applicable to * the to-
tality of things ' 106-190

2. The doctrine of the dissipation of energy and questions of
reversibility. Limitations introduced by Lord Kelvin, Helm-

holtz and Maxwell 199-202

Two alternatives thus appear equally compatible with Mr.
Spencer's * fundamental truth.' — (a) evolution without guid-
ance, and (6) evolution with guidance 203-206

To account for the visible universe according to (a) requires a
definite * primitive collocation.' This Mr. Spencer rejects;
for him then the cosmos can be but a chance hit among many


xvi CONTENTS OF


PAGES


misses, a mere speck of order in a general chaos. In expect-
ing more from his mechanical principles he is guilty of the
fallacy of confounding (a) with (b) 206-211


LECTURE VIII

MB. spencer's interpretation of evolution

Mr. Spencer proposes to deduce the phenomena of evolution
(celestial, organic, social, etc.) from the conservation of
energy. The obvious insufficiency of this principle taken
alone. Mr. Spencer's conception of it contrasted with that
of Helmholtz 212-210

How Mr. Spencer connects this 'persistence of force, 7 as he
prefers to call it, with his doctrine of the Absolute. The
vagueness of his terms 216-221

The three principles in Mr. Spencer's interpretation : 1. Insta-
bility of the homogeneous. But is the homogeneous necessa-
rily unstable ? Quite the contrary. Moreover, Mr. Spencer
cannot by analysis get at such a beginning as he supposes.
How much can evolution possibly account for, and how little
need it presuppose ? No clear advance to be made from Mr.
Spencer's standpoint 221-227

Some illustrative instances of Mr. Spencer's procedure : (a) self-
rotating nebulae : in a single homogeneous object no ground
of change ; (6) instability of circular orbits : looseness of Mr.
Spencer's terminology ; (c) chemical differentiation, insta-
bility of the heterogeneous : two-edged arguments . . 227-238

2. Multiplication of effects. An instance of what Mr. Spencer
understands by one cause and many effects. Illusory deduc-
tion of this principle from the fundamental one of persistence

of force 233-237

3. Segregation. This ( the key to the advance from vague chaotic
heterogeneity to orderly heterogeneity.' The process de-
scribed: it turns out to require only * forces acting indis-
criminately.' Relation of this principle to the other two.
Difficulties for Mr. Spencer in connexion with the distribu-
tion of the chemical elements. Also in the characteristics of
organisms and the products of human industry. But Mr.
Spencer's terminology is happily ' plastic ' . 237-242


THE FIRST VOLUME xvii


LECTURE IX

REFLEXIONS ON MB. SPENCER'S THEORY : HI8 TREATMENT OF

LIFE AND MIND

PAGK8

The conclusions to which we were led in examining the mechan-
ical theory apply here. It is impossible to get more out of a
theory than there is in it. Out of space, time and mass, how-
ever manipulated, progress, development, history, meaning,
can never be deduced 243-246

How has Mr. Spencer come to think this possible? His pro-
cedure illustrated 246-251

He succeeds by means of formularies that seem to have always a
strictly mechanical sense, though they are frequently only
figuratively mechanical. Indeed he outvies the mechanical
theorists by his more fundamental analysis as well as by his
completer synthesis . . 252-256

But he confounds abstraction with analysis ; and abstracts till he

has no content left 255-259

The eliminated elements are then gradually resumed under cover
of the principle of continuity. The existing gaps in scientific
knowledge help to cloak such recoveries 259-262

An instance in Mr. Spencer's transition from Inorganic Evolu-
tion to Organic Evolution. Two volumes of the 4 Synthetic
Philosophy 9 missing 262-265

Mr. Spencer's somersault in passing from Life to Mind. After
all, the interpretation of Spirit in terms of Matter is allowed
to be ' wholly impossible ' f , 265-271


LECTURE X

BIOLOGICAL EVOLUTION

The Lamarckian, Darwinian, and ultra-Darwinian theories gen-
erally compared. Natural selection by itself non-teleological.
Attempts to assimilate the biological with the physical. Two
difficulties in the way. These lead to the question : Is there
not a teleological factor operative throughout biological evo-
lution? 272-277


xviii CONTENTS


PAQBS


Teleological and non-teleological factors distinguished. Darwin
recognised both. Only so far as both are present has ( struggle
for existence ' any meaning. The question raised equivalent
to inquiring how far mind is concomitant with life. Natural-
ism confident that life is the wider conception, and appeals to
the facts of plant-life ........ 277-283

* Continuity ' seems to help it, but really works both ways. The
case argued. The levelling-up method the simpler. Objec-
tions to this considered : (1) Reflexes ; (2) The character of
plants again. Recent views on this point .... 283-288

Restatement of the position reached. Antagonism of organism
and environment: the latter, then, not the source of life.
'Vital force' unworkable 288-290

Turning to the facts of mind we have : (1) Self-conservation ;
(2) Subjective selection. The meaning and significance of
these. Their distinctness from, and relation to, natural
selection 291-302


INTRODUCTION


r


NATURALISM AND AGNOSTICISM


LECTURE I

INTRODUCTION

The attitudes towards Theism of Newton and Laplace : the latter has
become the common attitude of ' Science.'' This illustrated.

The polity of Modern Science claims to be in idea a complete and com-
pacted whole. * Gaps,' in what sense admitted, and how dealt with.

The dualism of Matter and Mind : * Science ' decides to treat the
former as fundamental, the latter as episodic.

Professor Huxley on the situation: his admissions and advice — a
blend of Naturalism and Agnosticism. These doctrines complementary :
they react upon each other. According to the one, Natural Theology is
unnecessary; according to the other, Bational Theology is impossible.

Examination of the position that Science forms a self-contained whole.
No sharp boundary between ' science and nescience.' 1 Mr. Spencer be-
trays science.

TyndalV s suggestion of an Emotional Theology.

Sir Isaac Newton concludes his famous Principia
with a general scholium, in which he maintains that " the
whole diversity of natural things can have arisen from
nothing but the ideas and the will of one necessarily
existing being, who is always and everywhere, God
Supreme, infinite, omnipotent, omniscient, absolutely per-
fect." A little more than a hundred years later Laplace
began to publish his MScanique CSleste, which may be
described as an extension of Newton's Principia on

3


«»


4 INTRODUCTION

Newton's lines, translated into the language of the dif-
ferential calculus. When Laplace went to make a formal
presentation of his work to Napoleon, the latter re-
marked: " M. Laplace, they tell me you have written this "!
large book on the system of the universe and have never
even mentioned its Creator." Whereupon Laplace drew
himself up and answered bluntly: "Sire, I had no need
of any such hypothesis.- Since that interview another
century has almost passed. Sciences that were then in
their infancy — such as chemistry, geology, biology, and
even psychology — have in the meantime attained im-
posing proportions. Any one who might now have the
curiosity to compare the treatises of their best attested
exponents with the great work of Laplace would find
that work no longer singular in the omission which Napo-
leon found so remarkable, an omission which Newton, by I
the way, in his famous letters to Bentley, had already
pronounced to be absurd.

Of course, it is not to be forgotten, the increasing
specialisation brought about by the growth of knowledge
justifies and even necessitates far greater restriction in
the scope of any given branch of it than was customary
a couple of centuries ago. People talked then, not of
this or that natural science, but of ' natural philosophy ' j
and psychology, as we know, even in our own day, is
often lumped together with metaphysics as 4 mental phi-
losophy.' It was incumbent on men styling themselves
philosophers to define their attitude towards the notions
of a necessarily existent Being, a First and Absolute
Cause, and not to confine themselves merely to contin- J


i


W. W. Bouse Ball, Short History of Mathematics, 1888, p. 388.


NEWTON AND LAPLACE 5

gent existences and to causes that are in turn con-
ditioned. The sharp division which Christian Wolff
brought into vogue between empirical and rational know-
ledge was then ignored, if not unknown. But nowadays,
at all events, the absence from a work on natural science
of all reference to the supernatural would be no proof that
the author disavowed the supernatural altogether.

Still, this is not the point. What we have to note is
the existence in our time of a vast circle of empirical
knowledge in the whole range of which the idea of a
Necessary Being or a First Cause has no place. Towards
this result religious and devout men like Cuvier or Fara-
day have contributed as much as atheists such as Holbach
or Laplace. Like many another result of collective human
effort, it was neither intended nor foreseen. But there it
is nevertheless; and it is all the more impressive because
it has grown with humanity, and is not the work of a
one-sided sect or school. If modern science had a voice
and were questioned as to this omission of all reference to
a Creator, it would only reply: I am not aware of needing
any such hypothesis.

God made the country, they say, and man made the


i.


*•*


town. Now we may, as Descartes did, compare science f \S.

to the town. It is town-like in its compactness and
formality, in the preeminence of number and measure-
ment, systematic connexion, and constructive plan. And
where science ends, they say too, philosophy and faith
may begin. But where is science to end ? All was coun-
try once, but meanwhile the town extends and extends,
and the country seems to be ever receding before it. Let
us recall a few familiar instances by way of illustration.


N* ^


?;\


•*■


6 INTRODUCTION

To Bentley's inquiry, how the movements and structure
of the solar system were to be accounted for, Newton
replied: "To your query I answer that the motions
which the planets now have could not spring from any
natural cause alone, but were impressed by an intelligent v
Agent. ... To make this system with all its motions
required a cause which understood and compared together
the quantities of matter in the several bodies of the sun
and planets and the gravitating powers resulting from
thence, . . . and to compare and adjust all these things
together in so great a variety of bodies, argues that cause
to be not blind and fortuitous, but very well skilled in
mechanism and geometry." 1 But now, in place of this S
direct intervention of an intelligent Agent, modern as-
tronomy substitutes the nebular hypothesis of Kant and
Laplace. Think again of the remarkable instances of
special contrivance and design collected by Paley in his
Natural Theology, published at the beginning of this cen-
tury, or of those of the Bridgewater Treatises a generation
later — works from which some of us perhaps got our first
knowledge of science. Nobody reads these books now,
and nobody writes others like them. Such arguments
have ceased to be edifying, or even safe, since they cut
both ways, as the formidable array of facts capable of
an equally cogent dysteleological application sufficiently
shews. But, in truth, special adaptations have ceased
to lie on the confines of science, where natural causes
end. "Sturmius," says Paley, "held that the exami-
nation of the eye was a cure for atheism." 2 Yet Helm-

* Bentley's Works, Dyce's edition, vol. iii, pp. 204-206.

2 Natural Theology, ch. iii, Tegge's edition of the Works, p. 263.


CUVIER AND DARWIN 7

holtz, who knew incomparably more about the eye than
half a dozen Sturms, describes it as an instrument that
a scientific optician would be ashamed to make : and
Helmholtz was no atheist. 1 Again the immutability and
separate creation of species, which Cuvier and other dis-
tinguished naturalists long stoutly maintained, are doc-
trines now no longer defensible. And without them the
unique position assigned to man in the scale of organic
life — for the sake of which, it is not too much to say,
Cuvier and his allies held out so desperately — can be
claimed for man no more. "The grounds upon which
this conclusion rests," says Darwin, the conclusion, i.e.,
that man is descended from some less highly organised
form, " will never be shaken, for the close similarity
between man and the lower animals in embryonic de-
velopment as well as in innumerable points of structure
and constitution, both of high and of the most trifling
importance, — the rudiments which he retains, and the
abnormal reversions to which he is occasionally liable, —
are facts which cannot be disputed." 2 And certainly
the unanimity with which this conclusion is now accepted
by biologists of every school seems to justify Darwin's
confidence a quarter of a century ago. And not merely
man's erect gait and noble bearing, but his speech, his
reason, and his conscience too, are now held to have
been originated in the course of a vast process of evo-
lution, instead of being ascribed, as formerly, to the
inspiration and illumination of the Divine Spirit directly
intervening.

1 Popular Lectures, 1893, vol. i, p. 194.

2 The Descent of Man, 1871, vol. ii, p. 385.


8 INTRODUCTION


\


But vast as the circuit of modern science is, it is still
^Y of course limited. On no side does it begin at the be-

ginning, or reach to the end. In every direction it is
possible to leave its outposts behind, and to reach the
open country where poets, philosophers, and prophets
may expatiate freely. However, we are not for the
present concerned with this extra-scientific region — the
metempirical as it has been called : what we have to
notice is rather the existence of serious gaps within the
bounds of science itself. But over these vacant plots,
these instances of rus in urbe^ science still advances claims,
endeavouring to occupy them by more or less temporary
erections, otherwise called working hypotheses. Concern-
ing such gaps more must be said presently. Meanwhile,
it may suffice to refer to one or two in passing, as our
immediate concern is only to understand the claim of
science to include them within its domain, though it can
v u only occupy them provisionally.

J\ There is first the great gap between the inorganic

Y^ and the organic world. Even if astronomical physics

will carry us smoothly from chaotic nebulosity to the
order and stability of a solar system, and if again "it
does not seem incredible that from . . . low and inter-
mediate forms, both animals and plants may have been
developed " ; * still what of the transition from the
lifeless to the living? There is no physical theory of
the origin of life. Nothing can better shew the straits
to which science is put for one than the reception ac-
corded to Lord Kelvin's forlorn suggestion that possibly
life was brought to this planet by a stray meteorite !

1 Origin of Species, sixth edition, p. 426.


THE 'GAPS' IN SCIENCE 9

But, on the other hand, taking living things as there,
science finds nothing in their composition or in their
processes physically inexplicable. The old theory of
a special vital force, according to which physiological
processes were at the most only analogous to — not iden-
tical with — physical processes, has for the most part
been abandoned as superfluous. Step by step within
the last fifty years the identity of the two processes
has been so far established, that an eminent physiologist
does not hesitate to say "that for the future, the word
'vital' as distinctive of physiological processes might
be abandoned altogether." 1 It is allowed that life has /
never been found to arise save through the mediation
of already existing life — in spite of many a long and
arduous search. Yet, on the ground that vital phe-
nomena furnish no exceptions to purely physical laws,
it is assumed that life at its origin — if it ever did
originate — formed no break in the continuity of evolu-
tion. This instance may perhaps be taken as a type of
the scientific treatment of existing lacunae in our em-
pirical knowledge. Wherever there are reasons for
maintaining that a natural explanation is possible, though
none is, in fact, forthcoming, there actual discontinuity .
and the supernatural are held to be excluded.

But this principle is put to a far severer trial when
we pass from the physical aspect of life to the psychi-
cal. The coarse and shallow materialism that disposed
of this difficulty with an epigram, "The brain secretes
thought as the liver secretes bile," only served to set the

1 Professor Burdon Sanderson, Opening Address to the Biological Sec-
tion, British Association, 1889. Nature, vol. xl, p. 522.


}


10 INTRODUCTION

problem in a clearer light. For it is just the hopelessness
of the attempt to resolve thought into a physiological
function that is the difficulty. And accordingly, within
twenty years after Karl Vogt's flippant utterance, we
find the physiologist, Du Bois-Reymond, answering this
'riddle,' not merely with an Ignoramus, but with an
Ignorabimus. Indeed, nowadays there is nothing that
science resents more indignantly than the imputation of »
materialism. For, after all, materialism is a philosophi-
cal dogma, as much as idealism. It professes to start
from the beginning, which science can never do ; and,
when it is true to itself, never attempts to do. Modern
science is content to ascertain coexistences and succes-
sions between facts of mind and facts of body. The
relations so determined constitute the newest of the
sciences, psychophysiology or psychophysics. From
this science we learn that there exist manifold corre-
spondences of the most intimate and exact kind between
states and changes of consciousness on the one hand, and
states and changes of brain on the other. As respects
complexity, intensity, and time-order the concomitance
is apparently complete. Mind and brain advance and
decline pari passu; the stimulants and narcotics that
enliven or depress the action of the one tell in like
manner upon the other. Local lesions that suspend or
destroy, more or less completely, the functions of the
centres of sight and speech, for instance, involve an
equivalent loss, temporary or permanent, of words and
ideas. Yet, notwithstanding this close and undeviating
parallelism between conscious states and neural states,
it is admitted, as I have already said, that the two


)


MIND AND BRAIN 11

cannot be identified. It is possible, no doubt, to regard
a brain change as a case of matter and motion, but the
attempt to conceive a change of mind in this wise is j
allowed to be ridiculous.

But though these two sets of facts cannot be identi-
fied, as the physical and the physiological may be, yet,
since they vary concomitantly, may not causal connexion
at all events be safely affirmed of them ? Yes, it is said,
if that means merely that the connexion is not casual.
When, however, the attempt is made to determine an
event in either as the cause or the effect of the concomi-
tant event in the other, the difficulties seem insupera-
ble. There is not merely the difficulty that the two
are strictly coincident in time, so that all question of
sequence is excluded — although this difficulty is one on
which stress has been laid. But, in addition, the series
of neural events — being physical — is already, so to say,
closed and complete within itself, each neural state is t ,
held to be wholly the effect of the neural state immedi-i
ately preceding it, and the entire cause of that directly
following. In other words, the master generalisation
of the physical world, that of the conservation of energy,
would be violated by the assumption that energy could
appear or disappear in one form without at once disap-
pearing or reappearing to a precisely equivalent amount
in another. Brain changes could not then be trans-
formed into sensations, or volitions be transformed into
brain changes, without a breach of physical continuity ;
and of such a breach there is supposed to be no evidence.

The position, then, of science in the present day as
regards what I have called the gap between the psy-


12 INTRODUCTION

chical and the physical is briefly this : If the mechani-
cal theory of the material world including the modern
principle 'of energy is not to be impugned, then there
is no natural explanation of the parallelism that exists
between processes in brain and processes in conscious-
ness; the gap is one across which no causal links can
be traced. This amount of dualism science seems con-
tent to admit rather than forego the strict continuity
and necessary concatenation of the physical world. But
it is not regarded as the sort of discontinuity that sets
empirical generalisation at defiance or points directly to
supernatural interference. True, the gulf is such that
the utmost advance on the physical side would not, of
itself, help on psychology in the least, nay would not even
suggest to the physicist, pure and simple, the existence
of the psychical side at all. True, again, the gap is
such that psychology, keeping strictly to its own domain, '
gives no hint of the existence of that physical mechanism
of brain, nerve, and muscle, by which it is so intimately
shadowed, or — as many very arbitrarily prefer to say —
which it so intimately shadows. But this very con-
comitance is itself a uniformity of nature, a uniformity
of coexistence, and no limit can be assigned to the
extent to which psychophysics may succeed in determin-
ing its details. Inasmuch as supernatural intervention
is not invoked by physiology or psychology severally,
psychophysics can obviously dispense with it in merely
correlating the two. As a result of our brief survey,
then, we find that "the ideas and the will of the one
necessarily existing Being," to which Newton referred,
do not figure even as a working hypothesis anywhere


DUALISM OF MATTER AND MIND 13

within the range of that systematic exposition of "the
whole diversity of natural things," that calls itself
modern science.

This summary of existing knowledge about whatever
comes to be is confessedly meagre in the extreme. To
many it will suggest objections and to some it may
seem obscure. I shall myself have objections in plenty
to make and to meet, as best I may, later on; as to
the obscurity, this I fear could only be remedied by an
elaboration of detail which would call for more time
than we can spare. Moreover, this defect is made good
already in sundry well-known essays and addresses
by men like Huxley, Tyndall, Clifford, Helmholtz, Du
Bois-Reymond, and others. Besides, it is precisely the
broadest and most general characteristics, not the details,
of the current science of nature, that I wish to empha-
sise. Let me then, before attempting to advance further,
ask your patience while I try to restate them in an-
other way.
y We note first of all the old dualism of Matter and
. ^ Mind, or rather — since a duality of substances is nowa-

'Xv </ v ^ a y s ne fth er asserted nor denied — the dualism of so-
-^ called material and mental phenomena. As to material
phenomena — that is to say wherever there is matter in
motion, whether planets revolving round a sun or mole-
cules vibrating in a living frame, over all these — certain
mechanical laws are held to be supreme ; that a single
atom should deviate from its predetermined course were
as much a miracle as if Jupiter should break away from
its orbit and set the whole solar system in commotion.
Matter and energy are the two fundamental conceptions


y


14 INTRODUCTION

here. The amount of both is constant, and even inde-
pendent, in so far as matter cannot be raised to the
dignity of energy nor energy degraded to the inertness
of matter. But the energy of any given body or mate-
rial system may vary indefinitely, provided only every
increase or decrease shall entail always an equivalent
decrease or increase by transfer to or from other bodies
or systems. Thus the continuity and solidarity of the
material world is complete ; but there is no limit to
the diversities which it may assume, provided its physi-
cal unity and concatenation are strictly conserved.

When we turn to what are called mental phenomena
we find nothing answering to this quantitative constancy,
inviolable continuity, and strict reciprocity. Minds are
not a single conservative system as matter and energy
are. What one mind gains in ideas, feeling, strength of
will, another does not necessarily lose. We have here a
number of separate individuals, not a single continuum.
But on the other hand we know nothing of minds with-
out a living body and without external environment.
Between each living body and this environment there is
a continuous exchange of material — the metabolism of
physiologists — accompanied by a constant give and take
of energy. While the organism gains in this exchange,
it thrives and developes, goes up in the world ; as it loses,
it begins to decline and perish, to go down in the world.
But, as all organisms collectively, together with their
environments, constitute the constant and continuous
physical system, indefinite increase and advance all round
are impossible. Sooner or later what we describe as
struggle must ensue, leading to 'the survival of the


PHYSICAL WORLD A SINGLE SYSTEM 15

fittest,' as its result. But conscious life is found to rise
and fall with organic efficiency and position, so that
(completely isolated and distinct as the consciousness
of A is from that of B), all minds are indirectly con-
nected ; each is yoked to its own body and through
this body to the one material world. Of other connex-
ions and relations that minds may have wholly inde-
pendent of this physical connexion, we have so far no
experience ; all intercourse, all tradition, is mediated *
through the one physical world.

So then the concomitance of mind with body is invari-
able ; concomitance of body with mind on the other hand
is not certainly more than occasional, even exceptional.
Moreover, keeping strictly to the psychological stand-
point, we can never get beyond qualitative description
and rough classification, natural history in a word, not
natural science. And this would be true even though,
in individual cases, quantitative determinations were
possible, which however they are not. For there are
certainly no common psychological units of intensity or
duration ; no mind-stuff fixed in amount ; no psychical
energy that must be conserved. Thus, on the physical
side we have a single system, unvarying law, quanti-
tative exactness, complete concatenation of events — in a
word, one vastly complex, but rigidly adjusted, mechan-
ism. But on the psychical side we have as many worlds
as there are minds, connected indeed, yet independent
to an indefinite extent ; a series of partial and more
or less disparate aperpis or outlooks ; each for itself a
centre of experience, but all without any exact orienta-
tion in common. Psychology, pure and simple, has


/


16 INTRODUCTION

always been individualistic and accepted, tacitly at least,
the Homo Mensura doctrine. Again, on the physical
side the elements with which we deal are held to be
indestructible and unalterable, the same always and
everywhere. Whereas minds, so far as we know them,
are the subjects of continual flux while they last ; and
seem to arise and melt away like streaks of morning
cloud on the stable firmament of blue. But though all
these unique and transient centres of thought and feel-
ing are psychologically as isolated and individual as
mountain summits, oases in a desert, or stars in space, yet
they are indirectly related through physical organisms,
which are integral "parts of the one great mechanism.
To set out, then, from this one permanent material
scheme and to trace its working through the fleeting
multitude of vital sparks, as one follows the stem of a
tree up into its branches with their changing leaves and
fruit — that is a sure, synthetic, and direct method. But
to attempt, setting out from these sporadic and shifting
complexities, to reach an abiding and fundamental unity,
is as precarious as analytic and inverse methods always
are ; and possibly it is altogether hopeless. In brief,
then, we are to conclude that, in proportion as psycho-
logical facts are physiologically interpretable, and in
proportion again as their physiological concomitants are
physically explicable, in that same proportion will every
fact of mind have a definite and assignable place as an
epiphenomenon or concomitant of a definite and assign-
able physical fact, and our empirical knowledge approxi-
\ v mate towards a rounded and complete whole.

M No doubt such consummation of natural science is


V


'THE TIGHTENING GRASP OF LAW 17

indefinitely far off. But it is an ideal. Let me cite a
single and very eminent witness. " Any one who is'
acquainted with the history of science," says Professor N
Huxley, "will admit, that its progress has, in all ages,
meant, and now more than ever means, the extension J
of the province of what we call matter and causation, j
and the concomitant gradual banishment from all re- *
gions of human thought of what we call spirit and spon-
taneity. . . . And as surely as every future grows out
of past and present, so will the physiology of the future
gradually extend the realm of matter and law until it
is coextensive with knowledge, with feeling, and with
action. The consciousness of this great truth," Mr. Hux-
ley believes, "weighs like a nightmare upon many of
the best minds of these days. They watch what they j
conceive to be the progress of materialism in such fear I
and powerless anger as a savage feels, when, during an
eclipse, the great shadow creeps over the face of the'
sun. The advancing tide of matter threatens to drown
their souls; the tightening grasp of law impedes their
freedom." 1 ''

The alarm and perplexity are, in Professor's Huxley's
opinion, alike needless; the "strong and subtle intel-
lect" of David Hume, if only we would ponder his
words and accept his "most wise advice" would, he
thinks, soon allay our fears and give us heart again.
The advice is well-known, but as it will fitly introduce
a new trait in the modern scientific attitude, the main
features of which it is our present business to character-
ise, I will ask leave to re- quote it. It was in the

1 Collected Essays, Eversley edition, vol. i, pp. 150 ff.
vol. i— o


18 INTRODUCTION

Inquiry concerning the Human Understanding that Hume
wrote: "If we take in hand any volume of divinity,
or school metaphysics, for instance, let us ask, Does it

m

contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity or
number? No. Does it contain any experimental rea-
soning concerning matter of fact and existence? No.
Commit it then to the flames; for it can contain noth-
ing but sophistry and illusion." How this advice is to
dispel perplexity at " the advancing tide of matter and
the tightening grasp of law," and how it is to reas-
sure those who are alarmed lest man's moral nature
should be debased by the increase of his knowledge, are
perhaps not straightway obvious ! Well, the comfort
consists simply in saying : After all the knowledge is very
superficial and must always remain so. As Professor
Huxley puts it : " What, after all, do we know of this
terrible 'matter' except as a name for the unknown
/ and hypothetical cause of states of our own conscious-
| ness? And what do we know of that 'spirit' over
I whose threatened extinction by matter a great lamenta-
tion is arising, . . . except that it is also a name for an
unknown and hypothetical cause, or condition, of states
of consciousness? And what is the dire necessity and
' iron ' law under which men groan ? Truly, most gra-
l tuitously invented bugbears. . . . Fact I know, and Law
\ I know ; but what is this necessity save an empty
j shadow of my own mind's throwing — something illegiti-
mately thrust into the perfectly legitimate conception ^
of law ? " " The fundamental doctrines of materialism,"
continues Professor Huxley, "like those of spiritualism L

and most other ' isms ' lie outside the limits of philo-


/


NATURALISM


19


sophical inquiry ; and David Hume's great service to I
humanity is his irrefragable demonstration of what these
limits are." J


In this deliverance of Professor Huxley we have a
fragment of that particular 4 ism ' for which he is proud
to be sponsor and which he has christened Agnosticism.
It is in fact that doctrine that has led modern science,
as I have already remarked, to separate itself from the
pronounced materialism and atheism so common in scien-
tific circles half a century or so ago. But it is only in
its bearing on the ideal of knowledge just described that
agnosticism concerns us at present. Professor Huxley —
in this point following the lead of Mr. Herbert Spencer
— concludes the consolatory reflections he derives from
Hume and returns to his first position in this wise :
"It is in itself of little moment whether we express
the phenomena of matter in terms of spirit, or the phe-
nomena of spirit in terms of matter — each statement
has a certain relative truth. But with a view to the
progress of science, the materialistic terminology is in
every way to be preferred. For it connects thought
with the other phenomena of the universe, . . . whereas,
the alternative, or spiritualistic, terminology is utterly
barren, and leads to nothing but obscurity and confusion
of ideas. Thus there can be little doubt, that the further
science advances, the more extensively and consistently
will all the phenomena of Nature be represented by
materialistic formulae and symbols."

This 4 nightmare ' theory of knowledge, as regards its
exclusion of everything supernatural or spiritual, thus
closely resembles the doctrines which in the seventeenth


i


\


20 INTRODUCTION

century they called Naturalism. And the name has re-
cently been revived. But it is important to bear in mind
the difference already noted. Naturalism in the old time
tended dogmatically to deny the existence of things divine
or spiritual, and dogmatically to assert that matter was
the one absolute reality. But Naturalism and Agnos-
ticism now go together; they are the complementary
halves of the dominant philosophy of our scientific
teachers. So far as knowledge extends all is law, and
law ultimately and most clearly to be formulated in terms
of matter and motion. Knowledge, it is now said, can
never transcend the phenomenal; concerning 'unknown
and hypothetical ' existences beyond and beneath the
phenomenal, whether called Matter or Mind or God,
science will not dogmatise either by affirming or deny-
ing. This problematic admission of undiscovered coun-
try beyond the polity of science has tended powerfully
to promote the consolidation of that polity itself. Re-
lease from the obligation to include ultimate questions
has made it easier, alike on the score of sentiment and of
method, to deal in a thoroughly regimental fashion with
such definite coexistences, successions, resemblances, and
differences as fall within the range of actual experience.
The eternities safely left aside* the .relativities become at

once amenable to system. All this is apparent in the

- « .I, — •- - --  «.» «•*■ - * *•

passages just quoted from Professor Huxley.

But I pass now to a new point. Agnosticism, we have
just seen, has reacted upon naturalism, inducing in it a
more uncompromising application of scientific method to
all the phenomena of experience. And it will be found
that naturalism in its turn has reacted upon agnosticism,


AGNOSTICISM 21

inducing in that a more pronounced scepticism, or even
the renunciation of higher knowledge as a duty, in place
of the bare confession of ignorance as a fact. The con-
trast between the certainty of science, with its powers of
prediction and measurement, and the uncertainty of philo-
sophic speculation, forever changing, but never seeming
to advance, has been one source of this agnostic despon-
dency. The long record of attempts that can only appear
as failures, the many highly gifted minds, as it seems,
uselessly sacrificed in the forlorn enterprise of seeking
beneath the veil of things for the very heart of truth —
this, when contrasted with the steady growth of scientific
knowledge, might well, as Kant puts it, " bring philoso-
phy, onGe the queen of all the sciences, into contempt,
and leave her, like Hecuba forsaken and rejected, bewail-
ing: modo maxima rerum, tot generis natisque potens —
nunc trahor, exul, inops." 1 But since Kant's day the
position of philosophy has become still more desperate.
That agnosticism — for such we might call it — by which
he himself supplanted the bold but baseless metaphysics
of his rationalistic predecessors, is now in turn scouted
as transcendental and surreptitious; is charged, that is,
with borrowing from experience the very forms on whose
strictly a priori character it would rest the possibility of
experience. By the advance of what has been called
metageometry, still more by the advance of experi-
mental and comparative psychology, and by the wide
reach of the conception of evolution, science has en-
croached upon what Kant regarded as the province of
the a priori. He allowed that all our knowledge begins

1 Critique of Pure Beason, first edition, Pref., p. 3.


x


/


22 INTRODUCTION

with experience and is confined to experience. He
allowed that if the several particulars of that experience
had been different, as they conceivably might have been,
our a posteriori generalisations would have varied in like
manner. But a spontaneous generation of knowledge
from sense particulars without the aid of a priori forma-
tive processes, was to him as inconceivable as the spon-
taneous generation of a living object from lifeless matter
without the aid of a vital principle. But now that the
physical origin of life is regarded as not merely credible
but certain, a priori forms of knowledge are out of
fashion. Kant's position, in a word, is held to be out-
flanked. There can be no science without self -conscious-
ness ; but then this very self -consciousness, it is said, has
been evolved by natural processes. Nature herself has
polished, and apparently is still polishing, the mirror in
which she sees herself reflected. Kant's dialectic against
dogmatic metaphysics is thankfully accepted; but his
theory of knowledge is held to be superseded by a better
psychology and a better anthropology. All this, of
course, really amounts to saying that there can be no
theory of knowledge at all as distinct from an account
of the natural processes by which, as a fact in time, know-
ledge has come to be. The solvitur ambulando procedure
is at once the most effective and the most summary
method of dealing with this position, and we shall have
to try our best at it later on.

Meantime one or two remarks on this unreflective,
uncritical, character of modern science may serve to
complete this preliminary sketch of its attitude towards
the problem of theism. We have seen that, on the one


THE NEGATIONS OF SCIENCE 23

hand, it allows no place for Natural Theology or such
knowledge of God as the constitution of nature may-
furnish ; and that, on the other, it denies the title of
Knowledge to Rational Theology, or such knowledge of
God as philosophy may claim to disclose. We have
seen further that these negations have two main
grounds: first, the Laplacean dictum, which Naturalism
adopts, that science has no need of the theistic hypoth-
esis ; and secondly, the Humean, or ultra-agnostic,
dictum, that what is neither abstract reasoning con-
cerning quantity or number, nor yet experimental rea-
soning concerning matter of fact or existence, can only
be sophistry or illusion. Disregarding Hume's some-
what rhetorical phraseology, these two statements
amount to saying, first, that there is no knowledge
save scientific knowledge, or knowledge of phenomena
and of their relations, and secondly, that this knowledge
is non-theistic. It is worth our while to note that in a
sense both these propositions are true, and that is the
sense in which science in its every-day work is concerned
with them. But again there is a sense in which,
taken together, these propositions are not true, but this
is a sense that will only present itself to the critic of
knowledge reflecting upon knowledge as a whole.
Thus it is true that science has no need, and indeed,
can make no use, in any particular instance, of the
theistic hypothesis. That hypothesis is specially appli-
cable to nothing just because it claims to be equally
applicable to everything. Recourse to it as an explana-
tion of any specific problem would involve just that
discontinuity which it is the cardinal rule of scientific


24 INTRODUCTION

method to avoid. But, because reference to the Deity
will not serve for a physical explanation in physics or
a chemical explanation in chemistry, it does not there-
fore follow that the sum total of scientific knowledge
is equally intelligible whether we accept the theistic
hypothesis or not. Again, it is true that every item of
scientific knowledge is concerned with some definite
relation of definite phenomena and with nothing else.
But, for all that, the systematic organisation of such
items may quite well yield further knowledge which
transcends the special relations of definite phenomena.
In fact, so surely as science collectively is more than a
mere aggregate of items or 'knowledges,' as Bacon
would have said, so surely will the whole be more, and
yield more, than the mere sum of its parts.

And the strictly philosophical term 'phenomenon,' to
which science has taken so kindly, is in itself an
explicit avowal of relation to something beyond that
is not phenomenal. Mr. Herbert Spencer who, more
perhaps than any other writer, is hailed by our men of
science as the best exponent of their first principles, is
careful to insist upon the existence of this relation of
the phenomenal to the extra-phenomenal, noumenal, or
ontal. His synthetic philosophy opens with an exposi-
tion of this "real Non-relative or Absolute," as he
calls it, without which the relative itself becomes con-
tradictory. And when Mr. Spencer speaks of this
Absolute as the Unknowable, it is plain that he is
using the term 'unknowable' in a very restricted sense.
I say this, not merely because he devotes several chap-
ters to its elucidation, for these might have been


MR. SPENCER'S < UNKNOWABLE


25


purely negative ; but also because it is an essential
part of Mr. Spencer's doctrine to maintain that " our
consciousness of the Absolute, indefinite though it is, is
positive and not negative " ; * that " the Noumenon
everywhere named as the antithesis of the Phenomenon,
is throughout necessarily thought of as an actuality " ; a
that, "though the Absolute cannot in any manner or
degree be known, in the strict sense of knowing, yet we
find that its positive existence is a necessary datum of
consciousness ; that so long as consciousness continues,
we cannot, for an instant, rid it of this datum ; and
that thus the belief which this datum constitutes, has
a higher warrant than any other whatever." 8 In short
the Absolute or Noumenal according to Mr. Spencer,
though not known in the strict sense, that is as the
phenomenal or relative is known, is so far from being
a pure blank or nonentity for knowledge that this
phenomenal, which is said to be known in the strict
sense, is inconceivable without it. It is worth noting, by
the way, that 'this actuality behind appearances,' with-
out which appearances are unthinkable, is by Mr. Spencer
identified with that 'ultimate verity' on which religion
ever insists. His general survey of knowledge then has
led this pioneer of modern thought, as he is accounted
to be, to reject both the Humean dictum that there is
no knowledge save knowledge of phenomena and of
their relations, as well as the Laplacean dictum that
this knowledge is non-theistic.

But it might be maintained that the several relations

1 First Principles, stereotyped edition, p. 92.
3 o.c, p. 88, 8 o.c., p. 98. - -


26 INTRODUCTION

among phenomena may suffice in their totality to con-
stitute an Absolute. Possibly it may be so ; this much
remains for the present an open question. But even
so, it would still be true that any knowledge of this
Absolute would not be phenomenal knowledge. Science,
• which is chary of all terms with a definitely theistic
implication, talks freely of the Universe and of Nature ;
but I am at a loss to think of any single scientific state-
ment that has been, or can be, made concerning either
the one or the other. By scientific statement I mean
one that having a real import is either self-evident or
directly proved from experience. 1
. * '* +Q There is still another possibility, some seem to think,
^ /v which, however, has not yet been realised, and which
^^ 5*" indeed, it seems to me, never can be realised. It might
\^' conceivably have happened, they say, that our finite

knowledge of phenomena proved to be a complete and
rounded whole as far as it went, a sort of microcosm
within the macrocosm ; a model of the whole universe
on a scale appropriate to our human faculties, rather
than a fragment with hopelessly 4 ragged edges.' And
spite of the many obstinate questionings that show the
contrary, it is far from unusual to find scientific men
talking as if this preferable ideal, as some perhaps think
it, was the sober fact. Thus Mr. Spencer, though con-
troverting all such views, nevertheless describes " science
as a gradually increasing sphere," such that '"every
addition to its surface does but bring it into wider
contact with surrounding nescience." True, this with

1 Kant's discussion of the cosmologies! antinomies is instructive here
in its method even more than in its results.


SCIENCE AND SURROUNDING NESCIENCE 27

Mr. Spencer is only a metaphor, whereas for Comte it
was a doctrine ; but as metaphor or as doctrine it is
widely current and most misleading. Our knowledge
is not only bounded by an ocean of ignorance, but
intersected and cut up as it were by straits and seas of
ignorance ; the orbis scientiarwn, in fact, if we could
only map out ignorance as we map out knowledge,
would be little better than an archipelago, and would
show much more sea than land.

Of course the rejoinder will be made, We admit the
intervening streaks and shallows ; but here our igno-
rance, like our knowledge, is only relative, whereas, of
the illimitable ocean beyond, our ignorance is absolute
and profound. By the help of postulates and generalisa-
tions which our perceptive experience confirms, and by
the help of hypotheses congruent with our present ex-
periences and verifiable by experiences yet to come, we
have completed the circle of the sciences and built up
a Systema Ndturce. I have endeavoured to describe this
system of natural knowledge, as it is commonly con-
ceived by those whose genius and enterprise we have
to thank for it. The said fundamental postulates
and unrestricted generalisations, the various assumptions
consciously or unconsciously made, the hypothetical ab-
stractions by which this unity is secured — to all these
we must give our best attention later. For the moment
I am concerned only with this one conceit : that the
several sciences by their mutual attraction, if I might
so say, together form a single whole, totus teres atque
rotundus, floating in "an interminable air" of pure
nescience. But unless we are prepared to repudiate logic


I


28 INTRODUCTION

altogether, this sharp severance of known and unknown,
knowable and unknowable, must be abandoned, so radical
are the contradictions that beset it. Where nescience
is absolute, nothing can be said ; neither that there is
more to know nor that there is not. But if science
were verily in itself complete, this could only mean
that there was no more to know ; and then there could
be and would be no talk of an environing nescience.

Again, if nescience is real, — is such, I mean, that we
are conscious of it, — we must at least know that there
is more to know. But how can we know this? To
say that we know it because of the incompleteness of
the phenomenal relations actually ascertained, may be
true enough ; but of course such an admission gives
up at once the solid unity of science as it is ajyi the
utter vacuity of the opposed nescience. We must sup-
pose then that phenomenal knowledge is regarded as
ideally complete — the fragments sufficing at least to
suggest an outline of the whole, helped out by ulti-
mate generalisations such as the conservations of matter
and energy, the principle of evolution, and the like. And
if it is still held that there is an endless and impalpable
envelope of nescience beyond this ideally perfect sphere
of positive knowledge, this can only be because the
phenomenal implicates the noumenal; the known and
knowable, as Mr. Spencer and others teach, being neces-
sarily related to the * unknowable,' which means, we
must remember, the not strictly knowable. But this
doctrine too is fatal to any thoroughgoing dualism of
science and nescience ; on the contrary, it amounts to a
dualism of knowledge. As Mr. Spencer himself says :


MR. SPENCER'S DUALISM OF KNOWLEDGE 29

"The progress of intelligence has throughout been
dual. Though it has not seemed so to those who
made it, every step in advance has been a step towards
both the natural and the supernatural. The better in-
terpretation of each phenomenon has been, on the one
hand, the rejection of a cause that was relatively con-
ceivable in its nature but unknown in the order of its
actions, and, on the other hand, the adoption of a
cause that was known in the order of its actions but
relatively inconceivable in its nature. . . . And so
there arise two antithetical states of mind, answering
to the opposite sides of that existence about which we
think. While our consciousness of Nature under the
one aspect constitutes Science, our consciousness of it
undei^the other aspect constitutes Religion." 1

Finally, if on the other hand, it be held that phe-
nomenal knowledge, when ideally complete, will be clear
of these noumenal and supernatural implications, then
this position again is incompatible with a dualism be-
tween science and nescience. For if the sphere of science
were so complete as to be clear of all extra-scientific im-
plications, then, as I have already said, there would be
no nescience. If, however, there must be nescience so
long as science is finite and relative, then so long the
metaphysical ideas of the Absolute and the Infinite will
transcend the limits of actual science, and yet will have
a place within the sphere of science ideally complete.
In other words, ideally complete science will become
philosophy. This conceit or doctrine of an absolute
boundary between science and nescience and the en-

1 First Principles, p. 106 fin.


30 INTRODUCTION {

deavour to identify with it a like sharp separation
between empirical knowledge and philosophic speculation j

may then, we conclude, be both dismissed as "sophis-
tical and illusory." Nevertheless, as I have said, these
notions are widely current in one shape or other, save
among the few in these days, who have even a pass-
man's acquaintance with the rudiments of epistemol-
ogy. One of the most plausible and not least prevalent
forms of this doctrine is embodied in the shallow Com-
tian 'Law of Development,' according to which there
are three stages in human thought, the theological, the
metaphysical, and the positive ; the metaphysical super-
seding the theological and being in turn superseded by
the positive or scientific. A glance at the past history
of knowledge would shew at once the facts that make
these views so specious and yet prove them to be false.
And now to resume what has been said, and to con-
clude: I have tried to present an outline sketch of that
polity of many mansions, which we may call the King-
dom of the Sciences, and the mental atmosphere in which
its citizens live. As the constant inhabitants of large
towns, though familiar with shops supplying bread and
beef, know nothing of the herds in the meadows or the
waving fields of wheat, so the mere savant is familiar
with ' phenomena and their laws ' and with the methods
by which they are severally measured and ascertained,
but rarely or never thinks of all that phenomena'
and 'law' and 'method' imply. As a knowledge of
what is thus beyond his purview cannot be attained
by experiment or calculation, it should surprise us as
little to find him associate it with nescience as it sur-


EMOTIONAL THEOLOGY 31

prises us to find the urchins in a slum confusing with
the tales of fairy-land what we may try to tell them
of the actual facts of country life.

Indeed the resemblance in the two cases is closer than
at first it seems. For it is very common for those who
decline to recognise Natural or Rational Theology to
speak with fervour of what I think we might fairly call
JEsthetic Theology. Tyndall, for example, in his once
famous Belfast Address to the British Association, spoke
thus to the assembled representatives of science : " You
who have escaped from these religions into the high-
and-dry light of the intellect may deride them ; but in
so doing you deride accidents of form merely, and fail
to touch the immovable basis of the religious sentiment
in the nature of man. To yield this sentiment reason-
able satisfaction is the problem of problems at the pres-
ent hour." * It seems clear that in TyndalTs opinion this
reasonable satisfaction could not need, at any rate, must
not have, an intellectual basis either 4 high-and-dry,' or
otherwise. For he proceeds to describe this religious
sentiment as " a force, mischievous, if permitted to in-
trude on the region of knowledge, over which it holds no
command, but capable of being guided to noble issues
in the region of emotion, which is its proper and elevated
sphere." Yet a page or two further on Tyndall brings
his address to a close with these words : " The inexo-
rable advance of man's understanding in the path of
knowledge, and those unquenchable claims of his moral
and emotional nature which the understanding can
never satisfy, are here equally set forth. The world

1 Reprint of Address, 1874, p. 60.


32 INTRODUCTION

embraces not only a Newton, but a Shakespeare — not
only a Boyle, but a Raphael — not only a Kant, but a
Beethoven — not only a Darwin, but a Carlyle. Not in
each of these, but in all, is human nature whole. They
are not opposed, but supplementary ; not mutually
exclusive, but reconcilable. And if, unsatisfied with
them all, the human mind, with the yearning of a pil-
grim for his distant home, will still turn to the Mystery
from which it has emerged, seeking so to fashion it as
to give unity to thought and faith ; so long as this is
done, not only without intolerance or bigotry of any
kind, but with the enlightened recognition that ultimate
fixity of conception is here unattainable, and that each
succeeding age must be held free to fashion the Mys-
tery in accordance with its own needs — then, casting
aside all the restrictions of Materialism, I would affirm
this to be a field for the noblest exercise of what, in
contrast with the knowing faculties, may be called the
creative faculties of man."

I am really at a loss to know whether this is to be
taken for climax or anti-climax, pathos or bathos. But
of one thing I am sure : tried by the u high-and-dry light
of the intellect" this specimen of Professor TyndalFs
"eloquence and scientific fire," as the Saturday Review
called it, is almost too flimsy for derision.

Surely the late professor must have thought lightly
of his own teaching, to be ready under the influence
of an emotional yearning to cast aside the doctrine to
which an "intellectual necessity" (p. 55) had led him,
the doctrine by which he discerned in matter " the
promise and potency of all terrestrial life " ; nay, f ur-


EMOTIONAL THEOLOGY 33

ther, to be ready to refashion the Mystery from which
the human mind has emerged so as to give unity to
thought and faith. If religious sentiments must not
be permitted to intrude on the region of knowledge,
how is the refashioning in the interests of this unity
to begin? And if nothing short of creative faculties
can satisfy this sentiment, what about * the danger ' and
'the mischief to the work of the knowing faculties
when such sentiment does intrude?

Professor Tyndall does not tell us where he went for
his psychology. But Mr. Spencer, to whom he fre-
quently refers, would have taught him that no senti-
ments are entirely without a cognitive basis, the religious
perhaps least of all. This cognitive element in reli-
gious sentiment is of necessity amenable to intellectual
challenge, just because it is itself of necessity intel-
lectual. No doubt, "ultimate fixity of conception is
here unattainable " ; but when Professor Tyndall tells
us this, has he forgotten that on the very same page
he has also declared " it certain that [scientific] views
will undergo modification " ? In fact, just as religious
sentiment implies knowledge, so too do the high-and-dry
constructions of the intellect involve "creative facul-
ties " ; finality will be impossible and reconstruction
a necessity in both regions so long as we only "know
in part." But why do I talk of the regions of know-
ledge? The semblance of two regions, one pure fact,
the other pure fancy, one all science, the other all
nescience, is just the error that I have been trying to
expose and to which this utterly unscientific notion of
an emotional theology is due.

VOL. I — J>


PART I


THE MECHANICAL THEORY


THE MECHANICAL THEORY


LECTURE II

ABSTRACT DYNAMICS

The demurrer of modern scientific thought, though illegitimately ', yet
practically, forecloses theistic inquiries. A discussion of its fundamental
positions therefore called for in the interest of such inquiries.

Natural knowledge to be examined (i) formally as knowledge, (ii) as
a body of real principles. Beginning with the latter, we have (a) the
mechanical theory of Nature, (6) the theory of Evolution, and (c) the
psychophysical theory of Body and Mind.

A. The Mechanical Theory: — The Laplacean calculator; different
views of him ; he excludes the teleological. Abstract dynamics, a strictly
mechanical science, the basis of this theory, which thus divests itself of the
real categories of Substance and Cause, and substitutes for them the quan-
titative terms * Mass 1 and 'Force* (or Mass-acceleration). But if this
be so, Laplace J s calculator never attains to real knowledge.

Any attempt in these days to discuss the problem of
theism is, we have seen, liable to demurrers more or less
emphatic from what we may fairly call the spirit of the
age. Naturalism, speaking in the name of science, de-l
clares the problem superfluous, and agnosticism, profess-
ing to represent reason, declares it to be insoluble. This
attitude we have traced to that positivist conception of
knowledge which the rapid advances of science and the
repeated failures of philosophy have jointly encouraged.
Referring to this conception G. H. Lewes remarks:

37


 *


38 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

U A new era has dawned. For the first time in history
an explanation of the world, society, and man is pre-
sented which is thoroughly homogeneous and at the same
time thoroughly in accordance with accurate knowledge ;
having the reach of an all-embracing system, it condenses
human knowledge into a Doctrine, and coordinates all
the methods by which that knowledge has been reached,
and will in future be extended. ... Its basis is science
— the positive knowledge we have attained, and may at-
tain, of all phenomena whatever. Its superstructure is
the hierarchy of the sciences, i.e., that distribution and
coordination of general truths which transforms the scat-
tered and independent sciences into an organic whole,
wherein each part depends on all that precede and deter-
mines all that succeed." 1 In the last lecture we made a
cursory examination of this soi-disant organic whole of
phenomenal knowledge. Even that brief survey would
justify us in saying : First, that it is not in itself a homo-
geneous and organic whole; for the dualism of matter
and mind, at any rate, runs through it, and is only evaded
by desperate means. Materialism itself is repudiated, but
the materialistic terminology is retained as primary and
fundamental. Secondly, that it is not a whole of accu-
rate, positive, knowledge ; for it confessedly involves pos-
tulates and methods, which it is the business of no one of
'the scattered and independent sciences' to scrutinise,
and which they all alike, therefore, accept in a naive and
uncritical fashion. Finally, that it is not an all-embra-
cing system. Hamilton has supplied it with a Virgilian
motto : Rerumque ignarus, imagine gaudet. The 4 accu-
1 History of Philosophy, 3d edition, vol. ii, p. 590.


THE DEMURRER OF 'SCIENCE' 39

rate and strict ' knowledge of appearances implicates an
indefinite but still positive consciousness of an ultimate^
Reality ; for, says Mr. Spencer, " it is rigorously impossi-
ble to conceive that our knowledge is a knowledge *£
Appearances only without at the same time conceiving a
Reality of which they are appearances, for appearance
without reality is unthinkable." 1

But since the theistic problem deals primarily with
spirit, not with matter, since further it involves those
fundamental principles of knowledge which science is not
concerned to discuss, and since finally it belongs to
that extra-scientific or supernatural region of * nescience '
which science allows to be, but to lie forever beyond its
pale, we might, if so disposed, reasonably contend that
the demurrer both of Naturalism and of Agnosticism is
altogether ultra vires ; we might politely request science
to mind its own business and proceed at once to our
own. In so doing, too, we could safely count on the
approval and good-will of many eminent representatives
of science in every department. For, after all, agnosti-
cism and naturalism are not science, but, so to say, a
philosophy of knowing and being which is specially
plausible to, and hence is widely prevalent among, sci-
entific men. But just for this reason it would ill become
us to treat them with cavalier disdain. If Gifford Lec-
tures were less numerous, I might not perhaps be justified
in devoting a whole course to these initial objections;
but as every university in Scotland has always its
Gifford Lecturer, I venture to think such restriction is
not only allowable but desirable.

1 First Principles, p. 88.


/


40 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

Our knowledge of nature, as unified and systematised
according to the naturalistic scheme, may be considered
from two sides. We may examine it formally, as know-
ledge, in respect, that is to say, of its postulates, cate-
gories, and methods. Or, taking these for granted, as
science itself does, we may examine those of its real
principles to which its supposed unity and completeness
are ascribed. Some odd instances of confusion could be
cited due to a mingling of these two points of view —
a favourite practice with those who, like Huxley and
Tyndall, are at once fervent naturalists and pronounced
agnostics. We may know where we are when matter
is spoken of throughout as an objective fact, or through-
out as a mental symbol, but it is bewildering to find it
posing in both characters at once. To begin with, let
us then, postpone any attempt to get behind the plain de-
liverances of science by epistemological reflexions ; let
us give our attention first to its real principles.

There are three fundamental theories which — as we
have already noted — are held to be primarily concerned
in the unity of nature : the mechanical theory, this comes
first and 'determines all that succeed'; the theory of evo-
lution, which essays in terms homogeneous with this to
'formulate' the development of the world, society, and
man ; last, the theory of psychological parallelism, dealing
with the relation of body and mind. To the first of these
we may now pass.

There is a well-known passage at the beginning of Lar
place's essay on Probability, which may serve as a basis
for the remarks I have to offer on the Mechanical
Theory of Nature. Having enounced as an axiom —


LAPLACE'S IMAGINARY INTELLIGENCE 41

known, he says, as the principle of sufficient reason^ that
"a thing cannot begin to be without a cause to produce
it," and having summarily disposed of the notion of free-
will as an easily explained illusion, Laplace proceeds:
"We ought then to regard the present state of the uni-
verse as the effect of its antecedent state and as the cause
of the state that is to follow. An intelligence, who for
a given instant should be acquainted with all the forces
by which nature is animated and with the several posi-
tions of the beings composing it, if further his intellect
were vast enough to submit these data to analysis,,
would include in one and the same formula the move-
ments of the largest bodies in the universe and those
of the lightest atom. Nothing would be uncertain for
him ; the future as well as the past would be present
to his eyes." "The human mind," he continues, "in
the perfection it has been able to give to astronomy,
affords a feeble outline of such an intelligence. Its dis-
coveries in mechanics and in geometry, joined to that
of universal gravitation, have brought it within reach
of comprehending in the same analytical expressions the
past and future states of the system of the world. . . .
All its efforts in the search for truth tend to approxi-
mate it without limit to the intelligence we have just
imagined." So wrote Laplace in 1812, and his words
have been classic among men of science ever since. As
one instance among many shewing in what sense they
have been understood, I may mention the Leipzig Ad-
dress to the Deutscher Naturforscher Versammlung by
Emile du Bois-Reymond, an address that has made more
stir in its way than Tyndall's Belfast Address of a year


42 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

or two later, which it seems to have inspired. " As the
astronomer," said the Berlin professor, "has only to
assign to the time in the lunar equation a certain neg-
ative value to determine whether as Pericles embarked
for Epidaurus there was a solar eclipse visible at the
PiraBUS, so the spirit imagined by Laplace could tell us
by due discussion of his world-formula who the man
with the iron mask was or how the President came
to be wrecked. As the astronomer foretells the day on
which — years after — a comet shall reemerge in the
vault of heaven from the depths of cosmic space, so
that spirit would read in his equations the day when
the Greek cross shall glance again from the mosque of
St. Sophia or England have burnt her last bit of coal.
Let him put £= — <x> and there would be unveiled be-
fore him the mysterious beginning of all things. Or if
he took t positive and increasing without limit, he would
learn after what interval Carnot's Law will menace the
universe with icy stillness. To such a spirit even the
hairs of our heads would all be numbered and with-
out his knowledge not a sparrow would fall to the
ground." 1

Spite of these scriptural allusions, it would be a mis-
take to imagine any connexion between the knowledge
of this Laplacean intelligence and Divine omniscience.
How God knows, or even what knowledge means when
attributed to the Supreme Being, few of us will pretend
to understand. But this imaginary intelligence of La-
place knows, as we know, by calculation and inference
based on observation. To God the secret thoughts of

1 Ueber die Qrenzen des Naturerkennene, 4te Aufl., p. 6.


LAPLACE AND NATURAL THEOLOGY 43

man's heart are supposed to lie open; from this Lapla-
cean spirit they would be forever hidden, were it not
that he can calculate the workings of the brain. Human
free will and divine foreknowledge have been held to
be not incompatible: but free will and mechanical pre-
diction are avowedly contradictory. Laplace therefore
is careful to exclude free will. Before the future can
be in this way deduced from the past, all motives must
admit of mechanical statement and the motions of matter
and its configurations be the sole and sufficient reasons
of all change.

It would be a mistake again to confound this mechani-
cal theory of the universe with doctrines such as those
of Newton, Clarke, Butler, Chalmers, and other Chris-
tian apologists. They too refer to events in the ma-
terial world as "brought about, not by insulated
interpositions of divine power exerted in each particular
case, but through the establishment of general laws." 1
But they none the less regard the laws and properties of
matter as but "the instruments with which God works." 2
Such language may be open to serious criticism, but that
just now is not the point. It is enough if we realise
that whoever holds the notion of the Living God as
paramount can never maintain that exact acquaintance
with his instruments is enough to make plain all that
God will do or suffer to be done. Thus Newton, at the
close of his Opticks, declares that the various portions of
the world, organic or inorganic, "can be the effect of
nothing else than the wisdom and skill of a powerful

* Whewell, Bridgewater Treatise, 1847 edition, p. 366.
8 o.c, p. 367.


y


44 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

ever-living Agent who, being in all places, is more able
by his will to move the bodies within his boundless
uniform tentorium, and thereby to form and re-form the
parts of the universe than we are by our will to move
the parts of our own bodies." To men like Laplace and
the French Encyclopaedists, of course, this bold anthropo-
morphism would mean nothing; such strictly voluntary
movement being for them a delusion. But coming from
Newton, who did not regard man as a machine or con-
scious automaton, these words shew plainly that he
would not have subscribed to the mechanical theory,
although he laid what are taken to be its foundations.
I must confess to some surprise on finding Jevons,
who must certainly be counted on the theistic side as a
strenuous opponent of naturalism, nevertheless seeming
to approve of Laplace's "mechanical mythology," as it
has been called. " We may safely accept," says Jevons,
"as a satisfactory scientific hypothesis the doctrine so
grandly put forth by Laplace, who asserted that a per-
fect knowledge of the universe, as it existed at any given
moment, would give a perfect knowledge of what was
to happen henceforth and forever after. Scientific in-
ference is impossible, unless we may regard the present
as the outcome of what is past, and the cause of what is
to come. To the view of perfect intelligence nothing
is uncertain." 1 I must again repeat, that neither the
intelligence conceived by Laplace, nor the knowledge
attributed to it, is in any sense entitled to be called
perfect. Laplace himself, though accounted hardly sec-
ond to Newton as a mathematician, was hopelessly incom-

1 Principles of Science, 2nd edition, p. 738.


«M


JEVONS'S VIEW OF LAPLACE'S DOCTRINE 45

petent in the region of moral evidence. After a few weeks
in office as Minister of the Interior, his master Napoleon
sent him about his business, 1 declaring him fit for nothing
but solving problems in the infinitely little. His imaginary
intelligence was only an indefinite magnification of him-
self, commanding an appalling amount of differential
detail and possessed of the means of integrating it ; but
there is nothing to shew that the incapacity of this
Colossus may not in other respects have been as sublime
as his capacity for calculation. Jevons's inconsequence
in accepting this Laplacean conceit is possibly due to a
misunderstanding. A reference to Newton's first law
of motion will make my meaning clear. When it is
there said that a body left to itself perseveres in its state
of rest or of uniform motion in a straight line, what is
affirmed is a tendency, not a fact. Similarly it might
be said of the material universe, that, if from any given
moment it were left to itself its state thenceforth and
ever after would be the outcome of its state at such
initial moment. So understood, Laplace's ' doctrine '
would ^formulate a tendency, but would not assert a
fact. That it is in the former sense that Jevons in-
terprets it is plain, for he says expressly : " The same
Power, which created material nature, might, so far as
I can see, create additions to it, or annihilate portions
which do exist. . . . The indestructibility of matter,
and the conservation of energy, are very probable scien-
tific hypotheses, which accord satisfactorily with experi-
ments of scientific men during a few years past ; but it
would be a gross misconception of scientific inference to

1 Whewell, o.c, p. 338.


46 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

suppose that they are certain in the sense that a propo-
sition in Geometry is certain." 2 But this was assuredly
not Laplace's meaning; and from the illustrations used
it was clearly not what Du Bois-Reymond understood
him to mean. And lastly,-it is certainly not in any such
tentative and provisional sense that the mechanical theory
now holds sway among scientific men and 'weighs,' as
Huxley put it, 'like a night-mare' on the minds of
many.

We are bound, I think, carefully to distinguish these
two views : the one regarding" the universe, so far at
least as we can know it, as a vast automatic mechanism,
and the other regarding the ' laws of nature ' as but the
instrument of Nature's God. But it is important to
observe, too, that they have a certain common ground
in the recognition of laws as 'secondary causes.' In
this the naturalism of modern science and the super-
naturalism of popular theology are so far at one;
although the naturalist stops at the laws, and the
theologian advances to a Supreme Cause beyond them
and distinct from them. Now, it is, I think, inevitable,
so far as the question of theism is argued out from
such premisses, that theism will get the worst of
it. Unquestionably it has had the worst of it on these
lines so far ; of this we noted many instances in the
last lecture. Not a few temples to the Deity founded
on some impressive fact supposed to be safely beyond
the reach of scientific explanation have been overtaken
and secularised by the unexpected extension of natural
knowledge. Chalmers's now classic distinction between

1 WheweD, o.c, p. 766.


CHALMERS ON COLLOCATIONS 47

the laws and the collocation of matter, familiar at least
to every reader of Mill's Logic, may serve to illustrate
this point. " The tendency of atheistical writers," says
Chalmers, "is to reason exclusively on the laws of
matter, and to overlook its dispositions. Could all the
beauties and benefits of the astronomical system be
referred to the single law of gravitation, it would greatly
reduce the strength of the argument for a designing
cause." 1 "When Professor Robison felt alarmed by
the attempted demonstration of Laplace, that the law
of gravitation was an essential property of matter,
lest the cause of natural theology should be endangered
by it, he might have recollected that the main evi-
dence for a Divinity lies, not in the laws of matter, but
in the collocations." 2 "Though we conceded to the
atheist the eternity of matter and the essentially in-
herent character of all its laws, we would still point
out to him, in the manifold adjustments of matter, its
adjustments of place and figure, and magnitude, the
most impressive signatures of a Deity." 8 But what
would become of this 'main evidence for a Divinity'
if the laws of matter themselves explained its colloca-
tions? They can never explain them completely, of
course. Till a definite configuration is given him the
physicist has no problem ; but with such data he pro-
fesses to deduce the motions and redistributions that
according to the laws of matter must ensue. So, if
science by the help of these laws should trace the
course of the universe backwards, it must halt at some

1 Bridgewater Treatise, vol. i, p. 17.
* o.c, p. 20, note. * o.c, p. 21.


48 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

configuration or other ; and of the configuration at
which it halts it can give no account. " The laws of
nature," says Chalmers, "may keep up the working of
the machinery — but they did not and could not set up
the machine." 1 This final configuration reached by the
scientific regress, then — let it be noted — is "the
machine." That — provisionally at all events — science
cannot explain ; so much is true. But meanwhile two
things are noteworthy. First, in innumerable cases, as
I have said, what was formerly taken to be part of the
machine turns out to be due to the workings of its
machinery. Secondly, as a consequence of this, those
constructive interventions, which are held "to demon-
strate so powerfully the fiat and finger of a God,"
become rapidly fewer in number, and recede farther
and farther into the deep darkness of the infinite past.
It was surely a short-sighted procedure to rest the
theistic argument on a view of nature that toust
inevitably reduce the strength and diminish the im-
pressiveness of that argument at every advance of
natural science. When, too, those who adopt such a
line of reasoning themselves allow this fatal weakness,
as we have seen that Chalmers did, the proceeding
becomes almost fatuous. Indeed, it would hardly be
an exaggeration to say that the naturalism of to-day is
the logical outcome of the natural theology of a century
ago. I do not forget a rejoinder on the old lines that
one frequently hears now that the theories of Lyall and
Darwin and Spencer are supposed to have become
established truths — a sort of dernier resBort where

1 Bridgewater Treatise^ vol. i, p. 27.


GOD AND MECHANISM 49

direct attacks have failed. After all, it is said, the
more a machine can direct itself and repair itself the
more wonderful its first construction must have been.
To have so created and disposed the primal elements
of the world as to insure by the steadfast working of
unvarying laws the emergence in due time of all the
life and glory of the round ocean and the teeming
earth, is not this after all "the most impressive signa-
ture of a Deity " ? This seems to me very like asking
whether, after all, infinity times nothing is not greater
than n times m ? In other words such an argument
points logically either to the machine being nothing
and God all, or to God being nothing and the machine
everything. But which? That depends where we
start : if from God, the machine is throughout depend-
ent ; but if from the machinery, we may never reach
God at all. For the avowed pantheist, who knows
neither secondary laws nor machinery, it is, of course,
God that is all.

" That God, which ever lives and loves —
One God, one law, one element,
And one far-off divine event."

For those, on the other hand, anxious, perhaps, like
Chalmers, to keep clear of what he calls 'the metaphys-
ical obscurity' concerning the origination of matter
and its essential properties, and content to " discern in
the mere arrangements of matter the most obvious and
decisive signatures of the artist hand which has been
employed in it," 1 for such, it is God that vanishes.

1 Bridgewater Treatise, vol. i, p. 25.

VOL. I — B


50 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

Logically and actually on their premisses we find in
the words of Huxley already quoted "that matter and
law have banished spirit and spontaneity." 1

This then is the Laplacean conception that we have
first to examine, and if it lead us in the end into ' meta-
physical obscurity,' let us be warned not to shrink from
the task. In the beginning, however, it will rather be
certain physical commonplaces that must claim our
attention. As to these it behoves me to say at once and
emphatically that I make no pretence to special know-
ledge. But I shall take care to refer to nothing —
unless it be generally known — without expressly men-
tioning my authority.

First of all, it will be remembered that Laplace regarded
the universe as composed of a number of beings having
assignable positions and movements, and ranging in size
from the largest celestial bodies down to the lightest
atoms. He assumed that all these, whether masses or
molecules, whether of finite or of infinitesimal dimen-
sions, are amenable to the same mechanical laws; and
this assumption is still regarded as " the axiom on which
all modern physics is founded." 2 None the less there
are some striking differences in the methods followed
in the two cases, i.e. according as the masses to be dealt
with are of sensible or of insensible dimensions. With
sensible masses the physicist's procedure is in the main
abstract, and any exactness he may attain is attained in
this manner. But he at least knows the bodies he is
investigating, say the sun or the moon, the bob of a

1 Cf. above, Lecture I, cp. 17.

* J. J. Thomson, Applications of Dynamics, p. 1.


METHOD OF ABSTRACT DYNAMICS 51

pendulum or the screw of a steamship. In dealing with
molecules or atoms, on the other hand, such identification
and individualisation is impossible. His procedure here,
if I may so say, is predominantly idealistic. Actual per-
ception is replaced by ideal conception. Moreover, the
ideal atoms or molecules are often wholly hypothetical,
and when not this -as in chemistry, perhaps -are still
rather statistical means or averages than actual exist-
ences. Further, the exactness which it is known can-
not be affirmed of mechanisms of sensible mass, except
after manifold abstractions, is assumed, not unfrequently,
to apply literati}/ to the hypothetical mechanisms of
which atoms and molecules and other ideal conceptions
form the working parts. We shall thus have to con-
sider the abstract theory first in itself, next in its appli-
cation to sensible masses, and lastly in its application to
insensible masses.

First, as to the abstract method. A few sentences
from a standard text-book will make clear what is
meant by this. In Thomson and Tait's Natural Phi-
losophy the division entitled Abstract Dynamics begins as
follows : —

"Until we know thoroughly the nature of matter and
the forces which produce its motion, it will be utterly
impossible to submit to mathematical reasoning the exact
conditions of any physical questions. . . . Take, for
instance, the very simple case of a crowbar employed
to move a heavy mass. The accurate mathematical
investigation of the action would involve the simulta-
neous treatment of the motions of every part of bar, ful-
crum, and mass raised ; but our ignorance of the nature


52 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

of matter and molecular forces, precludes any such com-
plete treatment of the problem. . . . Hence, the idea of
solving, instead of the complete but infinitely transcen-
dent problem, another in reality quite different, but
which, while amply simple, obviously leads to practi-
cally the same results as the former, so far as concerns
. . . the bodies as a whole. . . . Imagine the masses
involved to be perfectly rigid, that is, incapable of chang-
ing form or dimensions. Then the infinite multiplicity
of the forces really acting may be left out of considera-
tion." After some further elucidation the writers con-
clude : " Enough, however, has been said to show, first,
our utter ignorance as to the true and complete solution
of any physical question by the only perfect method,
that of the consideration of the circumstances which
affect the motion of every portion, separately, of each
body concerned; and, second, the practically sufficient
manner in which practical questions may be attacked by
limiting their generality, the limitations introduced being
themselves deduced from experience"

The method above referred to as 'the only perfect
method,' — in which the motions of every particle con- i

cerned are taken into account — is obviously the very
method that Laplace's imaginary spirit is supposed to
apply to the universe. We seem meant to assume that j

this method is not abstract — a very questionable as-
sumption to which we shall be brought back later.
Meanwhile, turning to the confessedly abstract method
with which the actual physicist has to content himself,
let us note in what respects the simple question he .

actually solves differs from the concrete and really \


AN INSTANCE OF THE ABSTRACT METHOD 53

quite different question that is propounded. This refers
to a particular crowbar, a particular fulcrum, and a
particular material body to be raised at a particular
place and date. Assuming that raising the load at a
given place means moving it against the gravitational
forces at that place, — though in fact these will not be
the only forces concerned, — we shall be told that the
answer to the question on this score alone will in
general vary for every different place, and even, in
general, at every different date. But abstract dynamics
knows nothing of places and dates ; these are the affair
of topography and chronology: it knows only of ab-
stract space, time, and motion, as dealt with by geome-
try and kinematics. Accurately to ascertain the actual
forces existing at any place or time would require
precise measurements of a complex kind, and precise
measurement in the simplest case is, strictly speaking,
an impossibility. Abstract dynamics is a mathematical
science and therefore does not measure ; there would
be an end of all exactness if it did. We should be
requested accordingly to state what the weight of the
load is, or at any rate what it may be taken to be.
For the same reason the lengths of the two arms of
the lever must be given, then the power to be applied
can be found. Let us next suppose that the lever is
made of lead or of lancewood, and that the load consists
of dynamite, sheet-glass, or putty. The exponent of
abstract mechanics will object again : You are propos-
ing here millions, nay billions, of problems, instead of
one. The properties of the lever as a simple machine
being in question, we are entitled to replace the


54 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

material crowbar by a line of equal length fixed at the
point answering to the fulcrum, and to regard it as
unalterable in form and dimensions. And as to the
load, dynamics can deal only with the mass of that;
it does not recognise the qualitative differences of
material bodies. "In abstract dynamics" — to quote
Maxwell — "matter is considered under no other aspect
than as that which can have its motion changed by
the application of force. Hence any two bodies are of
equal mass if equal forces applied to these bodies
produce, in equal times, equal changes of velocity.
This is the only definition of equal masses which can
be admitted in dynamics, and it is applicable to all
material bodies, whatever they may be made of." 1

The gulf between this final abstraction of ' mass '
and the material bodies which it replaces is so great
that even the physicists to whom it is due often fail
to realise how much they have stripped off. The
notion of mass leaves far behind it not merely all the
diversities of chemical classification, where iron and
carbon, oxygen and chlorine are placed wide apart ;
not merely the variety of secondary qualities, colour,
taste, smell, and the like, whereby sensible objects are
commonly described ; not merely the physical distinc-
tion of solid, liquid, and gaseous states, in one or other
of which all material bodies are found. A mass has
no chemical nature, no physical properties, not even a
weight. Even its relation to space differs from that
of sensible bodies. Matter has often been defined as
that which can, or that which must, occupy space.

1 Matter and Motion, p. 40.


THE NOTION OF MASS 55

Whatever these definitions may be worth, they cannot
at all events be applied directly to mass as just defined.
A mass must have position or it could not be moved,
but it may be of finite amount and yet have no size,
or it may be of any size whatever. It is true that all
bodies of sensible dimensions are found to resist com-
pression, or deformation, or both. But these character-
istics are due not to mass, but to forces. Moreover,
when such changes in the configuration of a body are
under investigation, the body is regarded as a system
of mass-elements or mass-points, and these either as
continuous or discontinuous, as circumstances may de-
termine. Inasmuch, however, as changes of configura-
tion are conceivable in every material body of finite
dimensions, the logical implication is that all such
bodies consist of mass-points. Thus the question
whether matter is discrete, consisting ultimately of
atoms, or is continuous and so indefinitely divisible, is
not a question that concerns mass. Indeed, not only
may a mass of finite volume be divisible as long as
that volume itself is divisible ; but even if we suppose
ourselves to have reached the geometrical point or limit
of spatial divisibility, which has neither parts nor mag-
nitude, this puts no limit to the divisibility of mass.
As already said, such a geometrical point may be re-
garded as the seat of a mass that still has both parts
and magnitude. "In certain astronomical investiga-
tions," as Maxwell points out, " the' planets, and even
the sun, may be regarded each as a material particle," *
or mass-point. Yet these masses require a very great

1 Matter and Motion, art. vi, p. 11.


56 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

number to express them when our customary units of
mass are used. On the other hand, "even an atom,
when we consider it as capable of rotation, must be
regarded as consisting of many material particles" or
mass-points — although its total mass in gravitation
measure be less than the billionth part of a gramme.
But all this will become plainer, and the extreme ab-
stractions involved in the notion of mass more apparent,
if we recur again to its definition, regarding it this time
synthetically rather than analytically. It is possible to
describe the motions of points or figures and the com-
position or resolution of such motions in a purely formal
manner, just as in geometry their situations and con-
structions are formally described. In this way kine-
matics, as the science of abstract motion, covers all the
ground implied in change of position or change of speed
in any body or system of bodies, so far as such motion
involves only pure or abstract space and time. By
abstract space and time, it need hardly be said, is
meant, as I have already incidentally remarked, the
space and time of mathematics, not the variously filled
space and time of our concrete perceptual experience.
Kinematics is then in the strictest sense a branch of
pure mathematics, and not an empirical science. But
we pass, it may be supposed, from the mathematical to
the real, when, in place of merely describing motion, we
ask what is moved and what are the causes of such
actual motion. The categories of substance and cause
here seem to come upon the scene, and they surely
transcend the range of the purely mathematical. But
is mass conceived by abstract mechanics as a thing or


MATTER AND MASS 57

substance ; or is force conceived as a cause ? The an-
swer, I think, must be negative to both questions. But
deferring the question as to force, it must be noted that
mass is by no means synonymous with matter, though
sometimes used as if it were. " We must be careful to
remember," Maxwell tells us, " that what we sometimes,
even in abstract dynamics, call matter, is not that un-
known substratum of real bodies against which Berkeley
directed his arguments, but something as perfectly
intelligible as a straight line or a sphere." "Why,
then," he asks, " should we have any change of method
when passing from kinematics to abstract dynamics ?
Why should we find it more difficult to endow moving
figures with mass than to endow stationary figures with
motion ? The bodies we deal with in abstract dynamics
are just as completely known to us as the figures in
Euclid. They have no properties whatever except those
which we explicitly assign to them." 1 In entire accord
with this we have the statement of Professor Tait, — all
the more impressive because of his well-known hankering
after the metaphysical, — that " we do not know and are
probably incapable of discovering what matter i*." 2
Matter as substance is, in short, as rigorously excluded
from modern physics as mind, as substance, is banished
from modern psychology ; indeed, matter is not merely
excluded but abused as a 'metaphysical quagmire,'
'fetish,' 8 and the like.

1 Review of Thomson and Tait's Natural Philosophy, in Nature,
vol. xx, p. 214 ; also Scientific Papers, vol. ii, p. 779.

2 Properties of Matter, p. 14.

8 Cf. Karl Pearson, Grammar of Science, passim.


58 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

In dealing with mass, then, we are only dealing with
a property ; and, since it is a property that varies con-
tinuously in quantity, it is one that admits of mathe-
matical treatment. Mass, in short, is but another name
for quantity of inertia. By inertia the physicist denotes
the fact, or to be strictly accurate I should say the well-
grounded inference, that a body, so long as it is left to
itself, preserves strictly in respect of motion its status
quo. We can perfectly well imagine any number of such
bodies of the most various sizes and shapes moving
severally in all possible directions, and all at different
speeds, that of zero speed or rest being one. Referred
to some defined origin and axes, their apparent changes
of size, shape, relative position after a given interval,
as well as their apparent changes of speed, could all be
dealt with by kinematics. Such motions, in accordance
with Newton's First Law, might be called, perhaps have
been called, free, or independent, or unconstrained
motions. But this is not all that kinematics could do.
We might arbitrarily assign to any or all the bodies
under contemplation any deviations from uniform recti-
linear motion or from rest; and the resulting positions
after a given interval might still be found as before.
Such deviation from uniform rectilinear motion or from
rest is, of course, in actual fact the rule ; and the kine-
matical problems of abstract dynamics — if I might so call
them — differ from such arbitrary problems only in not
being arbitrary. u The new idea appropriate to dynamics
(then) is" — I quote Maxwell — "that the motions of
bodies are not independent of each other, but that, under
certain conditions, dynamical transactions take place


NEWTON'S SECOND LAW 59

between two bodies whereby the motions of both bodies
are affected." 1

Now one of these conditions is that the said transac-
tions between two bodies — as Maxwell picturesquely
calls them — are in no ways affected by, and in no
ways affect, other dynamical transactions which either
or both the bodies may have with other bodies. In
a word, the results of all such transactions are addi-
tive. All the principles involved may therefore be
learnt by considering such a transaction in a single
case. Another condition is that such transaction be-
tween two bodies takes place along the line joining
them ; also, that the changes of motion or the accelera-
tions of each body along this line, in which the said
transaction or mutual stress consists, are in opposite
directions. But how far is each to shunt from its
original direction, how much is each to alter its original
speed, that is to say, what share in the whole transac-
tion is each to take ? The answer to this question gives
the meaning of mass. To each body a number is to be
assigned, such that the changes of their motion are
inversely proportional to these numbers. Such number
answers to the mass of the body to which it belongs.
Its determination, of course, in any real case involves
measurement, and is the business, not of abstract dy-
namics, but of experimental physics. The actual number
again depends on the standard employed, but, once so
determined, by dynamical transaction with the standard,
it is determined once for all for every other dynamical
transaction with other masses numbered according to the

1 Nature^ I.e.


60 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

same unit. The appropriateness of defining mass as
quantity of inertia, i.e. as the measure of that tendency
to persistence of the motor status quo which preceded the
particular dynamical transaction under investigation, is
thus evident. For the greater the mass, the less in any
given case the change of motion that ensues ; the less
the mass the greater the change of motion — kinematically
estimated, of course. Thus, if the mass of one of the
two bodies is infinite, its kinematic circumstances are
unaltered ; if the mass of one be zero, that of the other,
however small, undergoes no acceleration ; where both
are equal, the accelerations of both are equal ; and so for
every other case. So far then from falling under the
category of substance, a mass as it occurs in abstract
dynamics is but a coefficient affecting the value of the
acceleration to which it is affixed. True the phrase
" mass of a body " is constantly recurring ; but then the
body, apart from the mass, is but a moving point or
figure.

There still remains the correlative term Force. How,
it may be asked, can the bodies of abstract dynamics be
conceived as merely geometrical figures moving accord-
ing to rule, if they are collectively endowed with all the
forces of nature: gravitation, light, heat, electricity,
chemical attraction, etc.? What are these if they are
not the active properties of material bodies? The in-
vestigation of the nature of matter or of the properties
of real bodies, we shall be told, is entirely the busi-
ness of experimental physics ; abstract dynamics takes
account of no properties but those expressed by its
definitions. But by definition a body is endowed with


THE NOTION OF FORCE 61

no essential properties but mass and mobility. Force,
as understood by dynamics, cannot then be an inherent
and permanent property of any given body, dynami-
cally considered. On the contrary, no mass, though
infinite, has any force by itself. A force in the dy-
namical sense cannot appear till there are two masses
in dynamical relation, and then there will be two equal
and opposite forces, let the masses differ as much as
they may. A force is but the name for a mass-acceler-
ation, i.e. for either side of the dynamical transaction
between two bodies, which we have already considered;
and a moment's recurrence to that transaction will
make the purely mathematical character of such forces
plain. Instead of the moving geometrical point of
kinematics, we have in dynamics a mass-point in motion.
This mass-motion for a given direction is called mo-
mentum ; momentum being the product of the number
of units of mass into the number of units of speed. It
remains, so long as the body is left to itself, a con-
stant quantity. When two masses are said to interact,
the momentum of each changes, and the rate of this
change for one of the bodies is called the moving force
on that body ; this again is a quantity, the product, as
said, of mass into acceleration. In short, the old quali-
tative definition of force as "whatever changes or tends
to change the motion of a body" is discarded by mod-
ern dynamics, which professes to leave the question of
the causes of such change entirely aside. Force for it
means simply the direction in which, and the rate at
which, this change takes place. It answers, says Kirch-
hoff, in mathematical language to the second differen-


62 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

tial coefficient of the distance as a function of the time;
is, as Tait puts it, no more an objective entity than
say five per cent per annum is a sum of money. 1

How completely the theory of mechanics has divested
itself of the conceptions of substance and cause, in assum-
ing its present strictly mathematical form, is brought
home to us by one striking fact; the fact, I mean, that
mass and force, in which these categories are supposed
to be implied, are but dependent variables in certain
general equations. In 7+5=12 or tan 45° = 1, we can-
not say that one side of these equations is more than the
other effect or consequent, that other being the cause or
essence whence it proceeds. It would be equally arbitrary
to attempt any such distinction when we have the equa-
tion mv =ft, or ms = jft 2 /2 or fs = mv*/2. In these, the
fundamental equations of dynamics, we have four quanti-
ties so connected, that if any three are known the fourth
can be found. In this respect one term is no more
real than another, and the dependence is not temporal
or causal or teleological, but mathematical simply. The
sole use of such equations, it is contended, is "to de-
scribe in the exactest and simplest manner such motions
as occur in nature." So Kirchhoff defined the object
of mathematical physics in his universally lauded text-
book, and his definition has recently been made the
motto of a manifesto on the part of Professor Mach.
44 It is said," Mach remarks, " description leaves the
sense of causality unsatisfied. In fact, many imagine
they understand motions better when they picture to
themselves pulling forces, and yet the acceleration*, the

1 Cf. Tait on Force, Nature, vol. xvii, p. 459.


THE NOTION OF FORCE 63

facts, accomplish more, without superfluous additions.
I hope that the science of the future will discard the
idea of cause and effect, as being formally obscure ;
and in my feeling that these ideas contain a strong
tincture of fetishism, I am certainly not alone." l

I am quite aware that the elimination from natural
science, of this so-called fetishism, which the categories
of substance and cause are supposed to involve, has
been gradual. 2 But the history of mechanics shews
conclusively that there at any rate this process of
elimination has been steady, and now at length seems
to be complete. The full significance of this deanthro-
pomorphic tendency of science it will be best to defer,
along with other epistemological reflections, till we have
reached the end of this survey of the cardinal doctrines
of modern science, which we have but just commenced.
At this stage I will only venture the remark that those
who seek to oppose this tendency — as Wundt and still
more Sigwart, for example, seem to do — appear rather to
mistake the issue. It is not a question of divesting the
human mind of its most fundamental conceptions ; it is
simply a question of method and expediency, the pro-
priety, in a word, of dividing natural science from nat-
ural philosophy. No doubt many of those who insist on
this separation are privately of opinion, as we have seen,

1 Papular Scientific Lectures, Eng. trans., p. 253.

2 Even in the time of Newton forces were regarded as powers
inherent in substances. Their effects could be measured, but not the
forces themselves. Still earlier the remora or echineis, though but a
44 little fish," was credited with the power of stopping a ship by merely
adhering to it. Cf. Whewell, History of Inductive Sciences, 3rd edition,
vol. i, p. 189.


64 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

that natural science will make a whole of knowledge by
itself. But in so thinking they are only playing the ama-
teur philosopher. Such a declaration is no part of their
business as scientific experts. As Mr. Bradley roundly
puts it : " When Phenomenalism loses its head and, be-
coming blatant, steps forward as a theory of first princi-
ples, then it is really not respectable. The best that can
be said of its pretensions is that they are ridiculous." 1
The sharper the division of labour, the more fragmentary
becomes the contribution of each separate worker ; but
the more perfect also the finished production of their
joint organisation. The 'ragged edges' of scientific
knowledge ought to become more apparent the more
strictly scientific they are ; and the more defined these
ragged edges are, the more effectively can philosophy
enter upon the work it aspires to do, of articulating
or healing those sutures, of rounding off and unifying
the whole.

No wonder Laplace could dispense with the hypothe-
sis of a Deity, if his celestial mechanics turn out to
be so abstract as to exclude the categories of substance
and cause. A mathematical formula does not change
its essential character by increasing in length and com-
plexity. If the validity of an equation is by its very
definition confined to what is mathematical, if it is only
tentatively and approximately applicable to what is real,
Laplace's world formula must be like the rest. On this
question of the relation of abstract dynamics to actual
phenomena, I propose to enter in the next lecture.

1 Appearance and Reality, p. 126.


LECTURE III

RELATION OF ABSTRACT DYNAMICS TO ACTUAL

PHENOMENA

The characteristics of Abstract Dynamics recapitulated.

The question raised : How fax, and in what sense, this science can be
applied to actual phenomena. This problem illustrated from Newton's
treatment of Space, Time, Motion, as (1) absolute ; (2) relative.

Bearing of this distinction on the attempt to determine an actual case
of the first law of motion. Various proposals considered. The question
of absolute rotation especially instructive. Mack's criticisms reveal the
indefinite complexity of l real cases.'

The mechanical theory is thus divided against itself: it cannot be at
once rigorously exact and adequately real. The Kirchhoff School abandon
the attempt " to penetrate to the mechanism of nature," and see in me-
chanics only an instrument for 'approximate description.' Uncon-
ditional mechanical statements concerning the real world appear so far
unwarrantable.

One of these specially discussed : the Conservation of Mass. Mr. Her-
bert Spencer' 8 ' short and easy method ' found wide of the mark. This
doctrine, like other mechanical doctrines, justified mainly by its simplicity.

We resume to-day the attempt to estimate the valid-
ity and the scope of the mechanical theory of the
universe. To understand this we have had first of all
to inquire into the precise import of the science of
abstract mechanics or dynamics, on which that theory
is avowedly founded. We have accepted the declara-
tion of mathematical physicists in the present day that
it is not the province of mechanical theory to explain

VOL. I — F 66


66 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

phenomena by means of natural forces, but only to*
describe completely in the simplest possible manner,'
such motions as occur in nature. 1 We appreciate most
readily the distinctive character of pure mechanics, as
thus defined, if we approach it from the side of kine-
matics. Kinematics is held to suffice for the descrip-
tion of any actual or possible motion of bodies, regarded
as moving figures of constant or varying shape. If
there are some motions too complex for kinematic treat-
ment in the present state of that science, the defect is
one that mechanics can do nothing to remove. But
"the motions that occur in nature" are frequently,
and, it is supposed, are always, mutually dependent.
As to the character of this dependence, the most vari-
ous hypotheses might be — indeed have been — formed;
and when such hypotheses are sufficiently definite, as
regards their space and time elements, their kinematical
consequences can be deduced. The kinematical prob-
lems thereby entailed might be appalling in compari-
son with those required by the simple assumptions

1 It may be objected that such * simplest possible description * is
itself explanation, that in fact explanation is merely resolving the com-
plex into the simple, and assimilating the less known to the better
known. I admit this fully. But experience is not restricted to the range
of exact science, and so far it is true that a fact is not fully explained if
its cause is unknown. (Cf. below, Lecture XIX.) Precisely in this
lay the difficulty for such men as Huygens, Leibnitz, and Bernoulli of
Newton's theory of gravitation. Newton only professed to * describe,'
but, as Lange tersely puts it: "These men could not separate the
mathematics from the physics, and physically the doctrine of Newton
was for them inconceivable." And so it has remained till this day,
although people are now accustomed to regard Newton's descriptive
conception as if it were itself a physical cause.


NEWTON'S « RATIONAL MECHANICS' 67

, to which, after many trials, Galileo, Huygens, and New-
ton, the founders of modern dynamics, were led. By
means of the conception of mass the notion of quan-
tity of motion, or momentum, was made definite by
Newton, and the so-called laws or axioms concerning
momentum formulated. According to these the rate at
which their momentum changes, when two masses are in
the state of mutual stress, is always equal in amount,
their motions taking place in opposite directions along
the line joining them, the result being that the momen-
tum of their common centre of mass remains unchanged.

Nothing could be more sublimely simple, especially
when it is remembered that these axioms involve the
so-called parallelogram of forces; imply, that is, that
the mutual accelerations of any two masses are uninflu-
enced by the presence of a third mass. Such is abstract
dynamics ; and, regarded from within, its exactness is
as impressive as its simplicity. Not only is it clear of
such ' bottomless quagmires ' as substantiality and cau-
sality, conceptions which no science has ever yet adjusted
to facts ; but as ' rational mechanics ' * it is clear, too,
of all induction and all experiment, resting wholly, as
truly as any formal science does, on its own funda-
mental definitions and axioms. The only space or time
or motion that it knows is what Newton called absolute,
true, and mathematical, and sharply distinguished from
the relative spaces, times, and movements of our per-
ceptual experience.

How far, and in what seme, this pure mechanical science
can he applied in the phenomenal world is now for us the

1 Cf. Newton's Preface tp the Principia.


68 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

vital question. Unhappily the authorised teachers of
physics seem only recently to have waked up to the
possibility of such a question at all. The only 'applied
mechanics' they seem aware of is that of the mechani-
cian and the engineer. While admitting readily that
the astronomer applies geometry and trigonometry in
his investigations, they talk as if he were entirely in
the region of pure theory as soon as he proceeds to
discuss celestial movements. Newton at all events
knew better than this, even if he realised the difficulty
of the transition less than many now do. Let me
quote a few sentences from the Principia in illustra-
tion. 1 First, as to time: "Absolute, true, and mathe-
matical time, in itself, and from its own nature, flows
equally, without relation to anything external ; and
by another name is called Duration. . . . The natural
days are truly unequal, though they are commonly con-
sidered as equal and used for a measure of time.
Astronomers correct this inequality that they may
measure the celestial motions by a more accurate time.
It may be that there is no equable motion, whereby
time may be accurately measured. All motions may be
accelerated and retarded; but the flowing of absolute
time is liable to no change. Duration . . . remains
the same, whether motions are swift or slow or none
at all: therefore this duration is properly distinguished
from its sensible measures; and from them it is col-
lected by means of an astronomical equation."

Again, as to space: "Absolute space, in its own
nature, without relation to anything external, remains

1 Ct Pemberton's translation, pp. 10 ff.


ABSOLUTE TIME, SPACE, AND MOTION 69

always similar and immovable." "For the primary
places of things to be moved is absurd. These are
therefore absolute places ; and translations only out of
these are absolute motions. But, because the parts of
space cannot be seen, or distinguished from one another
by our senses, therefore in their stead we use sensible
measures . . . and that without any inconvenience in
common affairs : but in philosophical disquisitions, we
must abstract from the senses. For it may be that no
body is really at rest, to which the places and motions
of others may be referred. ... It is possible that in
the regions of the fixed stars or far beyond them, there
may be some body absolutely at rest; but yet [it is]
impossible to know from the position of bodies with
respect to one another in our regions, whether any of
them do keep the same position to that remote body
or no. It follows [therefore] that absolute rest cannot
be determined from the position of bodies with respect
to each other in our regions."

Lastly, as to motion: "Absolute motion is the trans-
lation of a body from absolute place to absolute place;
and relative motion is the translation from relative
place to relative place." "If a place is moved, whatever
is placed therein is moved along with it. . . . There-
fore all motions which are made from places in motion,
are only parts of entire and absolute motions : and
every entire motion is composed of the motion of the
body out of its first place, and of the motion of this
place out of its place, and so on, until we come to
some immovable place, as in the example of the sailor
before mentioned [who was supposed to move relatively


70 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

to his ship which moved relatively to the earth, which
in turn moved relatively to the sun, and so on and
on]. Wherefore entire and absolute motions can be no
otherwise determined than by immovable places. . . .
It is indeed a matter of great difficulty to discover and
effectually to distinguish the true motions of particular
bodies from the apparent: because the parts of that
immovable space, in which motions are truly performed,
do not come under the observation of our senses. Yet
the case is not altogether desperate; for arguments may
be brought, partly from the apparent motions, which
are the differences of the true motions ; partly from
the forces, which are the causes and effects of true
motions."

One can readily gather from statements like these
that Newton saw no difficulty in working out problems
in which the time should flow at a constant rate, and
in which motion from absolute place to absolute place
was at once and effectually determined. The position
of mechanical theory is in this respect precisely on
a par with that of geometry. The description of the
circle, say, is easy and exact, but accurately to describe
the figure of any real object is an impossibility. So it
is with the fundamental quantities concerned in physics.

It is impossible to find in nature or artificially to con-
struct an accurate timekeeper. The physicist simply
has to collect the true time from its ' sensible measures,'
to use Newton's phrase, as nearly as he can. Experi-
ence provides us with innumerable instances in which
processes seemingly identical in character and severally
independent, are again and again repeated in such wise


MEAN TIME AND RELATIVE PLACE 71

that the number of repetitions of one kind of process is
found to bear an approximately constant ratio to the
number of repetitions of another and contemporaneous
series. The solar day, the lunar month, the solar year,
so far as we may regard them as independent events, are
instances of such isochronous series of the natural sort ;
the periods of waves of light or of waves of sound are
other instances ; while the vibrations of a given spring
or a given pendulum are cases of artificial isochronous
events. The comparison of a number of such series —
aided by dynamical reasoning, whereby certain disturb-
ances can be ascertained and corrected, and aided again
by the theory of probability in eliminating errors of
observation — results in the attainment, not of a measure
flowing equably without regard to anything external, but
in the best mean value possible in our restricted circum-
stances. Between such mean time and absolute time there
is a difference, that is certain ; and that difference is, for
the mechanical theory, of the nature of error or defect.
It is immaterial to the question we have in hand whether
absolute time is also real or is ideal only. It is at least
ideal, and the fact that the physicist has to leave this
ideal behind him when he proceeds to apply abstract
dynamics to natural phenomena is the fact to be noted.
Turning to space, the same fact meets us again. In-
stead of the immovable space, the fixed axes, the primary
places of mathematical theory, we have that indefinite
regress from relative place to relative place, which
renders the attempt to ascertain the so-called true mo-
tions of particular bodies, as Newton allows, " well-nigh
desperate." Consider, for example, a case falling under


72 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

the first law of motion. According to this law the
motion of a body free from external forces is uniform
in magnitude and direction. The mathematician has no
trouble with this. He can always specify the axes to
which he refers, and plot out diagrams of velocity in his
paper space. But when we pass to empirically given
space, where is the place to which the direction of a body
moving under the action of no forces is referred? "A
number of writers," says Professor MacGregor in a recent
article, " have attacked this problem, and left it only half
solved." 1 Newton's forlorn suggestion that possibly in
the region of the fixed stars, or far beyond, there may be
a body absolutely at rest, to which the positions and
motions of others may be referred, has been revived. In
favour of assuming this fictitious Body Alpha, as it has
been called, it is urged that such a body provides an
escape, in thought at all events, from the hopeless con-
fusion of relative motions to which there is no end. 2 But
ideally this Body Alpha is not wanted, and practically it
is useless. Another and less chimerical method that has
found more favour begins, not by asking for a body abso-
lutely at rest as a fundamental point of orientation, but
by asking for an "inertial system." To constitute such
a system it suffices to have three particles projected at
the same instant from one position, and each left free to
move, uninfluenced by force. Then, provided they do
not all move in one straight line, it is geometrically pos-
sible to find axes, referred to which they will all three

1 Hypotheses of Dynamics, Phil. Mag., 1893, vol. 36, p. 237.
a Cf. Sigwart, Logic, § 88, 8 ; and Riehl, Der philosophische Kriti-
cismus, Bd. II. i. pp. 92 ft


RELATIVE MOTION 73

move in straight lines. Referred to such a system, the
path of any fourth body moving free from force will be a
straight line. 1 But this again is obviously theoretical,
and so far superfluous. Practically it is as impossible
to ascertain that a body is absolutely free from forces as
it is to ascertain its direction relatively to the Body
Alpha, the presumption being indeed that no such body,
unless it be the universe as a whole, exists. Yet a third
method has been proposed of answering the question :
Relatively to what, is a body free from constraint moving
uniformly in a straight line? The answer according to
this method, which has been adopted by Professor Tait,
is, "Relatively to any set of lines drawn in a rigid body
of finite dimensions, which is not acted on by force, and
which has no rotation." 2 Here again it may be objected
that it is impossible to find such a body, for if the uni-
verse is a single mechanical system, there is no such body
to find.

But none the less this method brings to our notice
a topic keenly canvassed nowadays among physicists,
which is of extreme interest ; so that I trust I may be
pardoned for meddling with it. Newton believed that
he had shewn, first by experiment, and then by theoreti-
cal reasoning, that "there is," as he puts it, "only one
real circular motion of any revolving body . . . whereas
relative motions in one and the same body are innumera-
ble." Thus, if two bodies in an immeasurable void were
found to approach, there would be no means of determin-
ing which was moving. But if the two bodies were con-

1 Cf. L. Lange, Die geschichtliche Entwicklung des Bewegungsbegriffes,
1886, p. 139. 2 Properties of Matter, p. 02.


74 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

nected by a cord, it would be possible, though their
distance remained unchanged, to determine whether they
were revolving or not. To settle this question it would
be sufficient to ascertain the presence or absence of ten-
sion in the cord. Accordingly it is argued, as by Pro-
fessor Tait, that a body not rotating will provide us with
fixed directions in space, constitute a sort of absolute
compass, so to say ; and by the help of Newton's physical
test it can be ascertained whether a body has rotation or
not. Here, then, we seem to have something absolute,
an exception to the supposed invariable relativity of
everything phenomenal. But so far we have been given
only a purely hypothetical case — a single system in an
immense void. Newton's actual experiment consisted
in rotating a bucket of water by strongly twisting a cord
suspending it, so as to make the bucket spin rapidly.
At first, when the bucket alone rotates, the surface of
the water remains flat, although relatively to the bucket
it is not at rest ; whereas, by the time the water revolves
along with the bucket its surface has become concave,
thereby evidencing " real circular motion," to use New-
ton's phrase, notwithstanding that the bucket and the
water by this time are at rest relatively to each other.
Finally, when the bucket has ceased to revolve, the sur-
face of the water continues concave some while longer,
because " its endeavour to recede " from the axis has not
yet ceased. " Therefore," says Newton, " this endeavour
does not depend upon the translation of the water in
respect of the ambient bodies, nor can true circular mo-
tion be described by such translation." In other words,
as Kant remarks, " a motion which is a change of exter-


ABSOLUTE ROTATION 75

nal relation in space can be given empirically, although
this space itself is not empirically given, and is no ob-
ject of experience — a paradox deserving to be solved."
Kant's own solution is of interest in its. way, but it does
not help us much, for it leaves the paradox in the main
as he found it. But I will ask your attention instead to
the much more trenchant criticism of Mach, as this will
serve to illustrate the epistemological difference between
abstract science and its empirical application, which is
our immediate theme.

First of all let us note the difference between New-
ton's theoretical instance and his experimental one. In
the purely hypothetical case we imagine a single mass
system in an immense void, and it is shewn under
what circumstances, provided the Newtonian laws of
motion are assumed, the rotation of such a system
could be demonstrated. In the real case, which is
meant to verify this deduction, we are confined entirely
to experimental methods. But now in this case, over
and above the rotating mass of water, we have not only
the mass of the bucket, but we have also the masses
of the earth, of the rest of the solar system, and of
the so-called fixed stars. Now, says Professor Mach,
" Newton's experiment . . . only shews us that the rota-
tion of the water relative to the sides of the bucket
occasions no perceptible centrifugal forces, but that
such forces are occasioned, when the water rotates rela-
tively to the masses of the earth and the other heavenly
bodies." 1 Experimental canons then at once suggest

1 Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwicklung, 2te Aufl., pp. 216 f. There is
now an English translation of this most interesting book.


76 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

two further inquiries: Might not the rotation relative
to the bucket have some effect if the sides of the bucket
were enormously increased in thickness ? Or again —
allowing for the moment that the proposition is not
absurd, at least not kinematically absurd — supposing
the bucket to be fixed and the whole choir of heaven
to circle round it, would there then be no sign of rota-
tion in the water ? Such experiments being impractica-
ble — for, as Mach well says, " the universe is not
presented to us twice, first with the earth at rest and
then with the earth rotating" — we are left to content
ourselves, as best we can, with this result : that a
body with so-called absolute rotation is a body rotating
relatively to the fixed stars; and that a body without
rotation means a body directionally at rest, not absolutely,
but relatively to the fixed stars.

Returning now for a moment to Newton's hypotheti-
cal case, it is obvious that a physicist actually confined
to such a system, before he could begin experimentally
to apply or to verify the Newtonian laws of motion,
would find himself face to face with the very difficul-
ties we have considered. Positions and directions must
be independently determined before dynamical investi-
gations are begun. To assume the laws of motion in
order to fix directions and then to use these directions
in order to establish the laws would be obviously falla-
cious. From such a logical circle abstract dynamics is
free, because the physicist has here the complete com-
mand of ideal space, as is shewn by his diagrams on
paper ; and because he has not to prove the laws of
motion, but merely to deduce their theoretical conse-


ABSOLUTE ROTATION IDEAL 77

quences. Newton's absolute rotation is then, like his
absolute time and absolute space, not real but ideal,
not sensibly or empirically given but intellectually con-
ceived or constructed, not ectypal but archetypal, as
Locke says of all purely mathematical ideas.

This becomes clearer, if we consider the difference
between the two cases from another side. The hypo-
thetical case is that of a finite system in an immense
void ; all the rest of the universe is supposed to be
eliminated. In the real world we may ignore, but we
cannot exclude. Thus, as already said, it is allowed
that — except by accident — there is probably no body
in the state described in the first law of motion, in fact,
if the master generalisation of physics, the law of uni-
versal gravitation, is to be accepted, how can any par-
ticle of matter " be left to itself " ? By a free particle,
or a particle left to itself can only be meant a particle
at an infinite distance from any other particle, and in
this sense accordingly writers on abstract dynamics
sometimes define the phrase. But if we could come
across such a particle in actual experience, it is obvious
that nothing could be said about it; spatial perception
of any kind would necessarily be absent in such cir-
cumstances. In dealing with the actual world, however,
the facts that meet us first are those to which Newton's
second and third laws apply, and the law of inertia be-
comes but a special case of these. Setting out from
these laws, then, instead of attempting to affirm any-
thing concerning the movement of a particle alone in
absolute space, it seems to me as a mere question of
scientific taste and logic better to proceed in Mach's


78 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

fashion. Instead of saying that a particle moves with-
out acceleration in space, Mach would say that the
mean acceleration of such particle relatively to the
other particles in the universe, or in a sufficient por-
tion of the universe, is zero. 1

As it is obviously impossible to complete the sum-
mation required to ascertain this mean exactly, such a
statement has the advantage of keeping prominent the
approximate character of references to the directions of
certain stars as fixed directions. The reference to fixed
terrestrial objects, which sufficed for such observations as
led Galileo at first to formulate the law of inertia, is now
replaced by this reference to fixed stars ; but even this
direction is known to change in the course of ages. An-
other advantage of Mach's more concrete statement, then,
is that it impresses us, as he remarks, with the very com-
plicated character of just those mechanical laws that
appear the simplest. Suggested by incomplete experi-
ences in the first instance, they lose the exactness of
mathematical theory when we proceed to apply them to
experience again. The manifold particulars left out of
account in our abstract simplification are still there on
our return to confront us anew. The insight that a pure
theory has given may enable us to deal with them more
effectually ; it cannot justify us in ignoring their exist-
ence. Now by good fortune, not from any necessity in
the constitution of things, it is found that within certain
limits of exactness many of these particulars of experi-
ence are so similar, that any one appears to suffice for
the rest. One result of this apparent multiplicity of
1 But see the article by Professor MacGregor quoted above.


REAL MOTIONS INTERDEPENDENT 79

identicals is that, seeming to be independent of any one,
we presently suppose ourselves independent of all ; when
to be absolutely exact we are independent of none. In
applying the law of inertia to terrestrial bodies, for
example, there are innumerable landmarks from which to
estimate direction ; if one or more become unsteady or
disappear, there are still plenty of others left. So with
celestial objects ; if one fixed star should some day " pale
its feeble light" or be found careering across the sky,
there are still multitudes remaining to keep their accus-
tomed stations. Now, it is our familiarity from time im-
memorial with this plenitude of possibilities that leads us
to convert these several singular contingencies into a col-
lective contingency. We then assume that, as we are
independent of any one empirically marked position in
space, we are independent of all. In other words, the ab-
solute space of abstract conception is supposed to underlie
the empirical space that we perceive. But now imagine,
as Mach suggests, that the earth were the scene of inces-
sant earthquakes or that the stars behaved like a swarm
of flies : how should we apply the law of inertia then ?
Well, but to those who mean seriously to handle the
universe as a mere problem in abstract dynamics we must
reply that the earth is the scene of incessant convulsions
and the fixed stars are like a swarm of bees. The cost-
liness of the devices to eliminate terrestrial oscillations
in certain attempts at experimental precision and the
elaborate calculations to unravel the ( proper motions'
of the less distant stars are plain evidence of the truth
of this seemingly extravagant statement.

It would seem then that all bodies may be really impli-


80 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

cated in every <sase of movement observing the law of
inertia ; not one only, as the abstract theory assumes.
What a single body would be or do if it were not for
other bodies, no one can say. Unless indeed they are
prepared with Stallo to say boldly, it would be nothing
and therefore could do nothing. "A body," he says,
"cannot survive the system of relations in which alone
it has its being ; its presence or position in space is no
more possible without reference to other bodies than its
change of position or presence is possible without such
reference. . . . All properties of a body which consti-
tute the elements of its distinguishable presence in space
are in their nature relations and imply terms beyond the
body itself." * In abstract theory, then, we may introduce
first one particle and then another, each moving in given
directions in absolute space ; and we may talk of their
speed as measured by absolute time flowing equably
without relation to anything else. But, in reality, noth-
ing of this kind is accessible to us.

It is easy to see that the mechanical theory is here
divided against itself, and in this state cannot stand.
Experience compels it to admit the thorough-going inter-
dependence of all bodies, while mathematics tempts it to
suppose that it is possible to deal with bodies indepen-
dently and apart. The bodies which mathematics would
regard as isolated wholes are but undetermined fragments
of what is really indivisible, abstract aspects that never
exist alone. On the one side is the ideal simplicity and
completeness of a mathematical creation; on the other
an illimitable complexity of relations without beginning,
1 Concqpts and Theories of Modern Physics^ p. 200.


DYNAMICS AS DESCRIPTIVE 61

without middle, and without end. Now I presume
nobody will blame the physicist for insisting on the rela-
tivity of all motion, the relativity of all time-measures,
which practically depend on motion, or the relativity of
all determinations of mass or inertia. But we have a
right to demand logical consistency: if he abjure abso-
lute terms he must abjure absolute statements. He
must not confound his descriptive apparatus with the
actual phenomena it is devised to describe. The appa-
ratus consists, in general, as we have seen, of absolute
time, that is, an independent variable flowing at a con-
stant rate ; of absolute motions, that is, motions referred
to axes completely defined and thought of as fixed; of
bodies that by definition are masses and only masses,
absolutely determinate and unchangeable, and consti-
tuting together a mechanical system that is independent
and complete. Of this general form of apparatus there
may be several varieties, but that will be accounted the
best which affords the simplest and completest descrip-
tion of actual movements. We cannot be sure that
there is any a priori necessity about the particular
mechanical principles of Galileo and Newton ; from other
fundamental definitions consequences equally exact might
be deduced. As this is an assertion that to many may
seem unwarranted, let me hasten to say that I do not
make it without good authority; I will quote one such
out of many. In an essay on the Methods of Theoreti-
cal Physics, Boltzmann, referring with approval to
the changes introduced by Kirchhoff, thus proceeds :
44 Whether, with Kepler, the form of the orbit, of a
planet and the velocity at each point is defined, or with

VOL. I — O


82 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

Newton, the force at each point, both are really only-
different methods of describing the facts ; and Newton's
merit is only the discovery that the description of the
motion of the celestial bodies is especially simple if the
second differential of their coordinates in respect of
time is given." 2 In either case, and in every case, then,
we have only mathematical description. "The whole
difficulty of philosophy," said Newton, in the Preface to
his Principia, "seems to consist in investigating the
powers of Nature from the phenomena of motion."
Many of his successors have abandoned the enterprise.
To quote Boltzmann again : " The view [has] gained
ground that it cannot be the object of theory [i.e. of
science] to penetrate the mechanism of Nature, but that,
merely starting from the simplest assumptions (that cer-
tain magnitudes are linear or other elementary functions),
to establish equations as elementary as possible which
enable the natural phenomena to be calculated with the
closest approximation." Equations, not explanations,
approximation, not finality, and the simplest method the
best: in such wise has the modern science of dynamics
narrowed its scope. And the criterion of simplicity, it
must be remembered, is in the main subjective, not
objective. Our limited capacities make economy a con-
sideration. But for such limitation, indeed, it is diffi-
cult to see why we should cumber ourselves with a
descriptive apparatus of any sort. It is surely then a
thoughtless prejudice to forget that the capacity to cal-
culate and compute — though, as Laplace boasts, it ren-
ders the human species superior to the animals, and is

1 Philosophical Magazine, 1893, vol. 36, p. 40.


'APPLIED' MECHANICS HYPOTHETICAL 83

the foundation of our glory — is also still, like apparatus
generally, essentially a mark of limited powers. Re-
garded in this light it becomes very much a question
whether the Newtonian scheme is even the simplest;
indeed, other schemes, professedly simpler — and what, if
true, is of greater moment, more comprehensive — are
already in the air. If human capacities are limited,
they are not stationary. As Kirchhoff remarks : " A
description of certain phenomena, though it be indubi-
tably the simplest we can now give, may in the further
progress of science be superseded by another simpler
still. Of such like changes the past history of me-
chanics furnishes instances in plenty." » Still this ques-
tion of comparative simplicity does not concern us save
as it may serve to impress two points. First, the dif-
ference between the means of description, "the concep-
tual shorthand," as Professor Karl Pearson happily styles
it, and the perceptual realities it is devised to symbolise
and summarise. Secondly, the absence of finality. A
possible form of description is not enough, it must be
shewn to be the only one possible, the only one that the
phenomena themselves allow, before it can be held to
have passed out of the region of hypothesis into that
of objective truth?
► The conclusion then to which we are led is plain.

The application of abstract mechanics to real bodies is\
throughout hypothetical^ and absolute or unconditional
mechanical statements concerning the real world are^
therefore unwarrantable. There are no processes in

1 Vorlesungen ilber mathematische Physik, p. 1.

2 Cf. Helmholtz, Erhaltung der Krafts p. 7.


84 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

the real world that are certainly entirely mechanical,
mechanical in the sense, I mean, of those movements
of sensible masses from which Galileo and Newton in-
ductively inferred their well-known laws. The thermal,
chemical, electrical, magnetic, and other processes that
as a rule not only accompany but modify such me-
chanical movements may admit of complete and simple
description in purely mechanical terms. But there is
no necessity that they should. Newton saw reason to
hope for it, however. In the Preface to his Principia^
he justifies its title as Mathematical Principles of
Natural Philosophy by referring to the motions of the
planets, the comets, the moon, and the sea as deduced
from gravitational forces by propositions that are mathe-
matical. He then adds, "I wish we could derive the
other phenomena of nature from mechanical principles
by the same kind of argument. . . . But I hope that
the principles here established will afford some light
either to this, or some more perfect method of philoso-
phy." It is to this subject that we must pass in the
next two lectures, and we shall then have an oppor-
tunity of inquiring which of Newton's alternative
hopes is the more nearly realised : the resolution of
natural phenomena that are not obviously mechanical
into mechanisms, or the advent of some more perfect
method embracing both. But either way our main
conclusion will, I believe, still remain good.

There is one absolute statement frequently advanced
by modern physicists that flagrantly transgresses the
limits of a purely descriptive science, the statement, I
mean, that the mass of the universe is a definite and


THE CONSERVATION OF MASS 85

unchangeable quantity. Such partial and approximate
evidence as experience affords in favour of such a doc-
trine seems to be derived ultimately from the facts of
gravitation. Astronomical observations of planetary
motions and chemical measurements with the balance
justify the working hypothesis that such sensible masses
as we know are constant within the limits of our expe-
rience and unalterable by any means in our power. Thus
has been suggested the addition to abstract dynamics
of a principle not explicitly formulated by Galileo or
Newton, that, namely, of the Conservation of Mass, as
it is technically called. If the mass-values of bodies
were assumed to vary in some regular manner with
the time, with the size or proximity of neighbouring
systems, or the like, the procedure of abstract me-
chanics would be more complicated than it proves to
be on the simpler hypothesis of the constancy of such
mass-values. But though actual facts conform to such
an assumption, there is no necessity about it. Still
less is there any justification for converting this prin-
ciple of mass-conservation into an assertion concerning
the mass of the universe either in respect of its quantity
or its constancy. The epistemological character of
mathematical mechanics as a purely descriptive apparatus
would exclude these, as well as other real affirmations,
from its scope. It would be as reasonable to expect
from arithmetic a census of the separate bodies in the
universe as to look to pure mechanics for an assurance
that the mass of the universe is, as Helmholtz would have
us regard it, an eternally unchangeable quantity. If
there are any grounds for such a position at all, those


86 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

grounds must lie either in a posteriori inferences from
experience, that can never be more than probable, or in
a priori reasoning of a non-mathematical kind.

But before a priori considerations can be brought to
bear on such a point, mass must be identified with
matter, and matter with substance. And this is
precisely what we find in the plausible and summary
argument of Mr. Spencer's First Principles. His crucial
experimental proof is just that constancy of mass, gravi-
tationally measured, which I have already mentioned.
For, after citing several trivial instances, he clenches
them with the remark: "Not, however, until the rise
of quantitative chemistry, could the conclusion suggested
by such experiences be reduced to a certainty." 1 Spite
of this very restricted evidence for the conservation of
mass as a simple and useful working hypothesis, we find
Mr. Spencer concluding that "the form of our thought
renders it impossible for us to have experience of Matter
passing into non-existence, . . . that hence the inde-
structibility of Matter is in strictness an a priori truth";
albeit the ' pseudo-thinking of undisciplined minds ' is
ever leading them mistakenly to suppose they can really
think 'the absolutely unthinkable.' Now the question
is not at all whether we can or cannot conceive the uni-
verse to arise out of, or pass into, nothing ; but simply
what justification there may be for a certain absolute
statement concerning that dynamical phenomenon we
describe by help of the conception of Mass. When
Mr. Spencer or some one else shall have shewn that what
exists must exist as matter or not exist at all, and that

1 First Principles, p. 173. V "


MR. SPENCER'S PROOFS 87

all matter is necessarily ponderable matter, then, but
not before, the old maxim, Ex nihilo nihil fit, and the
appeal to the balance will be relevant to the question.
Quantity of mass is not necessarily identical with
quantity of matter ; and indeed, it seems obvious that,
till matter is defined qualitatively, quantitive statements
concerning it must be altogether precarious. Mean-
while, the prospects of a scientific definition of matter
get more and more remote. The severely exact physicist
of the Kirchhoff school, as we have seen, avoids the whole
of this subject with disdain ; while others with powerful
scientific imagination like Faraday or Maxwell or Lord
Kelvin, who pursue it eagerly, find themselves eluded
in turn, and end, as Boltzmann says, by talking in para-
bles. 1 Yet such parables and analogies are of inestimable
value, if only as a protest against the confident dogma-
tism of which Mr. Spencer is such a master. Consider,
for example, Lord Kelvin's well-known vortex-atom
theory of ponderable matter. According to his ideal

1 Roger Cotes begins his Preface to the Principia by reducing natural
philosophers to three classes : first, the Aristotelians, who attribute specific
and occult qualities to things, and last, the experimentalists, who invent
no hypotheses, among whom, of course, he places his ' most celebrated
author. 1 The second reject the substantial forms of the peripatetics and
lay down the principle that all matter is homogeneous. " But when," he
continues, u they assume to themselves a liberty of supposing at pleasure
unknown figures and magnitudes, uncertain situations and motions of the
parts ; and moreover of supposing occult fluids, which freely pervade the
pores of bodies, endowed with an all-powerful subtility, and agitated
with occult motions ; they then descend to visions, and neglect the true
constitution of things. . . . Although they afterward proceed with the
greatest accuracy from those principles [they] may be said to compose a
fable, elegant, perhaps, and pleasing to the imagination, but still it is a
fable."


88 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

presentation of it we are to imagine a perfect, i.e.
absolutely frictionless fluid; then the rotational motion
of portions of this fluid are what we know as ponderable
matter ; while the movements of these through the fluid
are what we know as moving masses. In other words,
our phenomenal matter is reduced to 4 non-matter in
motion.' This brilliant hypothesis (which has been
accounted deserving of careful and minute attention by
many of our leading physicists), suffices, even as it
stands, to suggest what removes there may be between
our physical experiences and anything that must be con-
served because its non-conservation is a priori incon-
ceivable. But instead of taking this hypothesis as it
stands, let us suppose, as the writers of the Unseen Uni-
verse do, that its ideal rigour is somewhat abated.
Vortex rings in an absolutely perfect fluid would re-
main self -identical and undiminished forever; vortex
rings in an indefinitely perfect fluid would so remain,
not forever, but indefinitely long. But per contra, vor-
tex rings in an indefinitely frictionless fluid could be
originated through such processes as we find setting up
vortices in the imperfect fluids about us; on a perfect
fluid such processes would have no hold. Now, questions
of theoretical simplicity and definiteness apart, there is
no gainsaying the fact that there is no experimental
need for assuming this ether-matter to be a perfect fluid.
No balance is delicate beyond six decimal places, and
our longest astronomical records are but ephemeral in
comparison with cosmical ages. Approximate constancy
is thus all that our experience requires, and this we have
by regarding the hypothetical fluid of the vortex atoms


/


LORD KELVIN'S SPECULATIONS 89

as indefinitely perfect ; and have not, if we regard it as
absolutely so. 1 Moreover, on the former alternative, we
should be free to allow the possibility of ponderable mat-
ter coming to be here and ceasing to be there ; the
average amount in existence at once, either remaining
stationary or else slowly altering, as is the case with
the population of the globe, for example. Also we could
entertain such a supposition without either flying in the
face of any truth there is in what Mr. Spencer calls
"the experimentally-established induction" that Matter
is indestructible, or deserving his taunt of "not think-
ing at all, but merely pseudo-thinking."

This hydro-kinetic theory of matter as a mode of
motion and not a substance, is specially wholesome and
instructive, if we compare it with the modern theory
of heat as a mode of motion, that has replaced the
older theory of caloric as a substance. We cannot
conceive substance to be either produced or destroyed,
Mr. Spencer will tell us. True and trite, we must
allow. When therefore it was found that heat and
mechanical work were mutually transformable, there
was an end of the theory that heat was a substance.
It is now possible to produce vortex rings, to show
that their behaviour in many respects approximates strik-
ingly to the behaviour of material particles, and that
this approximation would be greater if the fluids at our
disposal were less unlike the continuous and frictionless
fluid supposed to fill all space. Thus, though man may
never be able to make or unmake a material particle,
Lord Kelvin's ingenious speculations may at least pre-
1 Cf. Unseen Universe, second edition, p. 118.


90 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

dispose us to believe in the thoroughly phenomenal
character of all measurable masses, and, believing this,
we are under no temptation to render absolute that
relative constancy of such masses which our experience
so far has disclosed.

How utterly unscientific it is to apply this principle
of the conservation of mass to the entire universe is
evident again when we reflect that it involves the
further assertion that the universe is a finite system.
Some recent writers on arithmetic talk of numbers that
are at once infinite and complete, transfinite numbers
as they are called. But it is obvious that there can
be no scientific warrant for affirming such definite
infinity of the universe, and there is certainly no
empirical justification for affirming definite limits. No
doubt what we see is limited; but to contend that we
see no more, simply because there is no more to see,
would be more illogical than it is to maintain that the
bulk that may be beyond us must resemble the sample
that we know. What we see is limited indeed in the
sense of being finite, but it is not limited in the sense
of being either constant or complete.

But now if the physicist were to ask the mathema-
tician to devise for him a descriptive apparatus adapted
to the movements of a material system in which the
mass-values varied, the mathematician's first question
would be : How do they vary? The physicist could
not say. Innumerable forms of regular increase or
decrease or of periodic alternation of the two are pos-
sible. Over against this bewildering variety the one
definite supposition of constancy, in itself the simplest,


APPEAL TO CONSERVATION OF ENERGY 91

is borne out by the very small fraction of the world
that we can imperfectly measure. This seems to me
how the case stands ; and if it is, then it becomes plain
that abstract dynamics affords as little ground for abso-
lute statements about the magnitude or constancy of
mass as for such statements concerning space or time.
There are writers, however, who do not hesitate to rest
this doctrine of the conservation of mass on that of
the conservation of energy. But as this only means
that in their opinion the latter doctrine cannot be true
if the mass of the universe is not constant, such a plea
is worthless unless there are independent reasons for
maintaining that the energy of the universe is constant ;
and would not necessarily be true even then. The dis-
cussion of this important subject it will be best to
defer till we have dealt with the application of abstract
dynamics to the phenomena of molecular physics. To
this I will ask your attention in the next lecture.


LECTURE IV

MOLECULAR MECHANICS: ITS INDIRECTNESS

Distinction of mass and molecule. The molecule not a ' minute
body. 1

The advance from abstract mechanics to molecular physics : Mechanics
historically a usurper.

Molecular mechanics is (a) indirect and (b) ideal.

(a i.) The evidence for molecules examined. Clerk Maxwell's theory
of • manufactured articles. 11 Clifford's criticisms. Further criticisms.
MaxwelVs theistic bias. The status of the molecule hypothetical. Statis-
tical physics commented upon.

(a ii.) Evolution applied to the molecule. The mechanical theory
bound, if possible, to resolve it into something simpler : the pHme-atom.

(a Hi.) The ether — one or more. Lord Kelvin sure of it, but chiefly
because the mechanical theory cannot get on otherwise. New ethers in-
vented to meet new mechanical problems. Signs of a reaction. Professors
Drude and K. Pearson quoted. Hypothetical mechanisms and illustrative
mechanisms distinct, but apt to get confused. Masterful analogies dan-
gerous: is nothing intelligible but what is mechanical f

There is no obvious similarity between the swinging
of a pendulum or the motion of colliding billiard balls,
and the light and warmth of a glowing coal or of the
sun. Still, as we have seen, Newton entertained the hope
that both kinds of process might be described by means
of the same mechanical principles. This hope we find
has become an axiom for modern science ; and the special
conceptions involved and the peculiar methods employed

02


SENSIBLE MASS AND MOLECULE 93

in thus applying mechanical principles to molecular
physics are what we must endeavour to examine to-day.
The distinction of mole and molecule, of large mass
and small mass, is clearly not in itself a distinction of
kind. It is due in the first instance to a psychological
fact entirely external and irrelevant to the pure science
of mechanics, to the fact, I mean, that we cannot perceive
bodies of less than a certain size, changes of position of
less than a certain extent, intervals of time of less than
a certain duration, and so on. Still, however irrelevant
to the mathematician, the fact of such minima sensibilia
necessarily entails important differences of method upon
the physicist, when he essays to apply mechanical princi-
ples to systems whose parts and motions are no longer
directly discernible. The use of artificial means of mag-
nification convinces us of what was already a priori
probable, viz. : that the limits imposed by our senses are
merely accidental limits without any objective signifi-
cance. Consider in this connexion two statements that
we often hear : the one that a given mole or molecule
is divisible without limit into ever smaller particles ;
the other that such given mass or molecule consists of
a finite number of absolutely indiscerptible particles
called ultimate atoms. It is the latter far more than
the former of these propositions that is logically open
to suspicion. For the latter is an absolute statement,
and since it is an absolute statement that cannot claim
to be a necessity of thought, it is one that seems clearly
incapable of proof. But to propositions of the former
type, propositions, that is to say, asserting or implying
the existence of bodies of indefinitely small dimensions


94 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

and perhaps of indefinitely great complexity, we can
have at any rate no a priori objection.

The molecules of modern physics and the so-called
chemical atoms, however, are not bodies in this sense, and
it is difficult to imagine that much would be gained by
the assumption of their existence, if they were. This
may sound paradoxical ; I will try to explain. There is
a passage in Laplace's Exposition du systeme du monde,
one that has excited some discussion recently, which will
serve admirably to illustrate what I mean, for it supposes
an extreme case. Referring to the law of actions vary-
ing inversely as the square of the distance, as the law
that holds for all forces and emanations that set out
from a centre, he remarks : "Thus this law, answering
exactly to all the phenomena, is to be regarded, both
on account of its simplicity and its generality, as a rigor-
ous law. One of its remarkable properties is that if
the dimensions of all the bodies of the universe, their
mutual distances and their velocities, were to increase
or diminish proportionally, they would describe curves
entirely similar to those they describe now ; so that the
universe thus continuously reduced down to the smallest
space imaginable would present always the same appear-
ances to observers." x If then we can have the universe
on any scale, we might — if it is finite, as Laplace in-
clined to think it — have it complete within the head
of a pin ; and ought therefore to feel no surprise at
physicists who, on the one hand, compare 'a compound
atom, 9 as Jevons does, to a stellar system, each star a
minor system in itself ; " or who, on the other, talk of
1 o.c, bk. v, chap. v,/!n., QSuvres completes, 1893, vol. vi, p. 471.


MOLECULES NOT SMALL 'BODIES' 95

Jupiter and his satellites as a planetary molecule." 1
But if a molecule were a constellation on a vastly smaller
scale, then the phenomena of light, heat, magnetism, and
the like, to explain which the molecular constitution of
bodies has been assumed, would reappear in the molecule,
and again in the molecule of the molecule, and so on
indefinitely. On such lines then no logical advance
could be made. There may be molecules or atoms of
many orders, but, effectively to replace physical prop-
erties by mechanical processes, the molecule of any
order must be divested of whatever property its motions
are to explain or describe. Thus the molecules whose
motions on the kinetic theory of heat answer to that
state of a body which we call its temperature are not
themselves credited with heat. Again, magnetism is not
explained by resolving the smallest steel particles in a
magnet severally into magnets, but by an imponderable
fluid circulating round the particle, and so on.

Let us now attempt to characterise in a general way the
application of abstract mechanics to molecular physics.
We start with bodies of sensible dimensions. The dy-
namical transactions between such bodies can be directly
observed and described, such description requiring no
conceptions beyond those of mass, force, space, and time,
except of course, number, which measurement involves.
In confining itself to these conceptions, molar physics em-
ploys methods that are invariably abstract. Those impor-
tant qualities possessed by every body in its own specific
fashion, the differences of which remain for our percep-
tion as unique and irresolvable as are the sensations of

1 Cf. Stallo, Concepts of Modern Physics, p. 122.


96 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

our several senses, — all these it simply ignores. They
receive their proximate scientific handling in the vari-
ous branches of experimental physics, e.g.^ chemistry.
Here numerous empirical laws are ascertained that do
not in general overstep the qualitative barriers just
mentioned. These comparatively restricted generalisa-
tions, obtained from experiments on light, heat, elec-
tricity, chemical composition and decomposition, and the
like, are the material to which the theoretical physi-
cist applies his mechanical scheme of molecules, mole-
cular motions, and molecular forces. No doubt by this
time the mathematical physicist himself undertakes or
initiates experiments for the purpose of verifying or
advancing his molecular constructions. But this in no
way affects the fact that molecular physics can never
come to close quarters with its molecules as molar
physics can with the sensible masses and motions, from
which the principles of the mechanical theory were first
of all deduced.

To put the case in another way. Molar physics or
mechanics was historically but one branch of general
physics coordinate with those other experimental branches
called Optics, Acoustics, Thermotics, etc. So matters
stood in Newton's time, when he completed the main
outlines of that mathematical edifice, now known as ab-
stract dynamics, or, as he called it, 'rational mechanics.'
Molecular physics is then, historically regarded, noth-
ing but the endeavour to include the less perfect
branches of physics within the domain of the most per-
fect — an endeavour that Newton himself, as we have
seen, fully approved. The discovery that the stresses


RISE OF MOLECULAR MECHANICS 97

between electrified or magnetised bodies also varied
inversely as the square of the distance between them,
as do the stresses between gravitating masses, led to a
wider use of the conception of centres of attraction or
repulsion. Thus the mechanism which Newton found
exemplified in the case of the heavenly bodies came to
be regarded as a sort of type or paradigm. It would
apply, as we have seen Laplace pointing out, on any
scale, however great or small. So we come by the
general hypothesis of molecular physics: that all physi-
cal phenomena— however complete, however ultimate,
however numerous, their qualitative diversities may be,
and remain, for our perception — can still be shewn to
correspond to, and to be summed up by, purely dynami-
cal equations, such equations describing the configura-
tions and motions of a system of masses called molecules
from their minuteness (according to the Homo Mensura
standard). In other words, the hypothesis of molecular
physics is that all the qualitative variety of the external
world can be resolved into quantitative relations of
time, space, and mass, that is of mass and motion.

This general characterisation of molecular physics
we may now resume under two heads, each of which
it will repay us to discuss somewhat further. First of
all, the descriptions of molar physics may be called
direct, whereas those of molecular physics are always in-
direct, the indirectness being often, if I may say so, of many
removes from directness. Secondly, the descriptions of
molar physics are abstract : one property of bodies, that
of massiveness, of which we can have sensible evidence,
is taken; the remaining properties are simply left out

VOL. I — H


98 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

of account. But the descriptions of molecular physics
taken together are not in this sense abstract. They
leave no properties out of account ; on the contrary,
they transform everything qualitative into quantitative
equivalents. It was to this point that I referred at
the outset of this discussion (in the second lecture) in
calling the methods of molecular physics ideal. 1 I
should be glad of some less ambiguous term, but can
only hope that at the end of our discussion its meaning
may be clearer.

To begin with the indirectnesses. Nobody has ever
seen or felt, and if the physicists are to be trusted, no
instruments of magnification are possible by which in
the future any one can be helped to see or feel, an in-
dividual molecule. This, of course, would be a matter
of no importance if the molecule were merely regarded
as a mass-element in some homogeneous mass of sen-
sible volume. But the atoms and molecules of modern
science, if they have any real existence at all, are dis-
tinct individuals ; at all events, they have more title to
be so described than either the earth or the sun, which
we commonly regard as individual objects. For the
earth or sun are after all but aggregate masses, con-
stantly receiving additions — as in the meteoric showers
that feed the sun ; and probably — in the case of the
earth and many smaller bodies, at least — constantly
scattering part of their mass into space, as the moon,
for example, is supposed to have diffused away its free
gases and vapours. Not so the atoms and molecules of
the chemist. The progress of stellar spectroscopy and

1 Cf. above, p. 61.


\

\

\


ATOMS AS < MANUFACTURED ARTICLES' 99

of chemical physics, we are told, shuts us up to the
view that the whole universe apart from the ether or
ethers — of which more presently — consists entirely of
varying arrangements of incalculable numbers of some
seventy different elements, the individuals of each kind
being absolutely identical in their properties, and all
alike entirely beyond the reach of change or decay.
Philosophic speculations of this sort are, of course, no
novelty ; but when we are asked to accept such state-
ments as scientific truth and verity on evidence that
can only be indirect, we may well be pardoned by ' those
who know ' if we look a little critically, even scepti-
cally, at that evidence. But you may wish first of all to
have the statement itself in some accredited form. Let
me then quote two or three sentences from the Collected
Papers of Clerk Maxwell (vol. ii, pp. 361 ff.): — « The
same kind of molecule, say that of hydrogen, has the
same set of periods of vibration, whether we procure the
hydrogen from water, from coal, or from meteoric iron.
. . . Whether in Sirius or in Arcturus [it] executes its
vibrations in precisely the same time." u Though in the
course of ages catastrophes have occurred, and may yet
occur, in the heavens, though ancient systems may be
dissolved and new systems evolved out of their ruins ;
the molecules out of which these systems are built —
the foundation stones of the material universe — remain
unbroken and unworn." Elsewhere Maxwell proceeds
to make inferences concerning the supernatural from
this position. "None of the processes of Nature," he
says, "since the time when Nature began, have pro-
duced the slightest difference in the properties of any


/


100 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

molecule. We are therefore unable to ascribe either the
existence of the molecules or the identity of their prop-
erties to the operation of any of the causes which we
call natural. On the other hand, the exact equality of
each molecule to all others of the same kind gives it,
as Sir John Herschel has well said, the essential char-
acter of a manufactured article, and precludes the idea
of its being eternal and self-existent." This argument
would be open to question even if it were certain that
the molecules of any given element are exactly alike.
To many it would seem more reasonable in such case
to side with Democritus and regard what within the
whole range of actual or possible experience is abso-
lutely permanent and without the shadow of a change
as realising all that we can understand by 'self-sub-
sistent and eternal.' Moreover, the disparity between
the conception of creation and the conception of manu-
factured goods is so complete as to make all attempts
at analogy futile.

But to return to our immediate question : Of what
nature is the evidence, on which molecules of hydro-
gen, oxygen, or any supposed element are pronounced to
be respectively, each to each, exactly alike, the same
through all vicissitudes and everlasting as time itself.
As to the exact likeness — let me once more remark
that it is impossible to deal directly with the individual
molecules; and, even if it were, no measurements and
no physical comparisons are exact. But the measure-
ments of molecules, besides being indirect, are all made
in bulk. What is really measured is the combined
effect of millions, or it may be billions, of molecules.


MOLECULES ONLY MEASURED IN BULK 101

So that, even supposing disturbing causes to be entirely
excluded, the resulting measurement is true only of the
average molecule and leaves the range of the individual
deviations at best but partially determined. The most
delicate test so far available, that of the spectroscope,
seems always to be beset by at least one disturbing
factor. On this method the qualitative identity of the
molecules of a given element "in the gaseous state is
inferred from their light-note. But every one who has
heard the sound-note of the whistle of a train in mo-
tion must have observed that this note sounds higher
so long as the train is approaching, and lower as soon as
it has passed and begun to recede. To get the light-
note true, the molecules should be observed free from
their translatory motions towards and away from the
observer. The variations thus produced can only be
set down entirely to the account of the translatory mo-
tions after independent proof has been adduced of the
absolute likeness of the molecules. Meanwhile it has to
be shared between the two. But since Maxwell wrote
the passages I have quoted, it has been shewn that the
spectra of several elements vary with the temperature
and the pressure to which the gas is exposed ; and
when a gas approaches the liquid condition these changes
appear to be greater still. What various degrees of
aggregation there may be in the liquid or solid state,
and how far the individuality of the molecule dis-
appears in such aggregation — these are problems for
which there appears at present no definite solution. 1
Graham's familiar method of dialysis, or atom-sifting,

1 Cf. Ostwald, Outlines, pp. 189, f.


102 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

is also appealed to by Maxwell to establish the perfect
identity of the molecules of the same kind of matter.
Graham found, it will be remembered, that light gases
pass through a porous septum more rapidly than heavier
ones. Maxwell is referring to this method when at the
close of his book on Heat he says: "If of the mole-
cules of some substance such as hydrogen, some were
of sensibly greater mass -than others ... in this way we
should be able to produce two kinds of hydrogen, one
of which would be somewhat denser than the other.
As this cannot be done, we must admit that the equal-
ity which we assert to exist between the molecules of
hydrogen applies to each individual molecule, and not
merely to the average of groups of millions of mole-
cules." 1 But there is a world of difference between say-
ing of a million molecules that the mass of no one of
them is 4 sensibly greater ' than that of the rest, and say-
ing that the masses of all are absolutely equal.

I cannot help thinking that Clifford reasons far more
soundly than Maxwell in dealing with this same method
of dialysis. "If we put any single gas into a vessel,"

he says, "and we filter it through a septum of black-

•

lead into another vessel, we find no difference between
the gas on one side of the wall and the gas on the
other side. That is to say, if there is any difference, it
is too small to be perceived by our present means of
observation. It is upon that sort of evidence that the
statement rests that the molecules of a given gas are
all very nearly of the same weight. Why do I say very
nearly? Because evidence of that sort can never prove

1 Heat, p. 339.


CLIFFORD'S CRITICISM OF MAXWELL 103

that they are exactly of the same weight. The means
of measurement we have may be exceedingly correct,
but a certain limit must always be allowed for devia-
tion ; and if the deviations of molecules of oxygen from
a certain standard of weight were very small, and re-
stricted within certain limits, it would be quite possible
for our experiments to give us the results which they
do now. Suppose, for example, the variation in the
size of the oxygen atoms were as great as that in the
weight of different men, then it would be very difficult
indeed to tell by such a process of sifting what that
difference was, or, in fact, to establish that it existed at
all. But, on the other hand, if we suppose the forces
which originally caused all those molecules to be so
nearly alike as they are to be constantly acting and set-
ting the thing right as soon as by any sort of experi-
ment we set it wrong, then the small oxygen atoms on
one side would be made up to their right size and it
would be impossible to test the difference by any experi-
ment which was not quicker than the process by which
they were made right again." 1 Had Clifford been writ-
ing now he might have illustrated this last point by a
reference to Mr. Galton's principle of reversion towards
the mean, in accordance with which the children of
giants, for example, tend to be of less stature, and
the children of dwarfs to be of greater stature, than
their parents. 2

1 Lectures and Essays, vol. i, p. 207.

3 It is well known that some chemists agree with Sir William Crookes
in thinking that u probably our atomic weights merely represent a mean
value around which the actual atomic weights of these atoms vary within
certain narrow limits," reminding us of Newton's ( old worn particles, 1


104 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

But Maxwell felt himself "debarred from imagining
any cause of equalisation on account of the immutability
of each individual molecule" — this being the second
article of his molecular creed, as that of exact likeness
was the first. There is, I fear, something circular in
Maxwell's arguments for these two positions. On the
one hand the ingenerability and immutability seem to
be used in proof of the qualitative and quantitative
identity ; although, on the other, this very identity had
served as an argument for that everlasting constancy
which in turn it now helps to prove. Nay, his argu-
ment seems even weaker than that, for he takes for
granted that the persistence which he asserts for his
normal molecules would belong also to abnormal ones,
if any such there were. And so, assuming the exact
equality of all the individual molecules of hydrogen,
etc., within the range of our experience, he asks where
can the eliminated molecules have gone to? He then
proceeds : " The time required to eliminate from the
whole of the visible universe every molecule whose mass
differs from that of some of our so-called elements, by
processes similar to Graham's method of dialysis, which
is the only method we can conceive of at present, would
exceed the utmost limits ever demanded by evolution-
ists as many times as these exceed the period of vibra-
tion of a molecule." But surely it is quite gratuitous

save that the result is not supposed to be due to wear and tear. Besides
referring to Sir William Crookes's researches into the fractionation of
yttrium — one more instance, and a splendid one, of the saying that
genius is patience — I may mention the experiments on the homogeneity
of helium just published by Messrs. Ramsay and Collie. See Nature^
1896, vol. liv, p. 408.


MOLECULAR FORM POSSIBLY EVOLVED 105

to assume that they could only disappear by being sifted
out on some chaotic dust-heap beyond the fixed stars,
a sort of limbo for manufactured articles spoilt in the
making.

And this remark suggests a more searching question :
What, precisely, is it of which this immutable individu-
ality is affirmed ? Is it of a form or is it of a substance ?
The biologist can tell us of species that have persisted
unchanged from times so long anterior to ours that
the hoariest mountain ranges appear by comparison to
have sprung up but yesterday. But here it is only the
form that endures, the particular individuals being quite
transitory. A lake dries up and its tiny inhabitants
perish ; after a longer or shorter interval the water
returns and the old living forms reappear. But the
biologist does not follow the analogy of the chemist,
and pronounce these to be necessarily the earlier indi-
viduals emerging from some quasi-chemical condition in
which their characteristic properties have been suspended
or masked. Now physical astronomers find that the
spectra of certain of the whiter, and presumably hotter,
stars yield indications of no element save hydrogen ; also
that as stars approximate to a red colour, and so have
presumably a lower temperature, they furnish more
varied and complex spectra, indicating the presence of
many other elements besides hydrogen. The simplest
supposition we can make — and it is one actually
made — is that in the earlier stages of stellar evolution,
of which we thus get peeps, the various chemical ele-
ments come successively into being, as do various forms
of vegetable and animal life in the later stages of the


106 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

same vast process. 1 But what becomes of the molecule
as an article manufactured before natural processes began?
The best that can be said is, not that the individual
article is a fabric of timeless origin, but only that its
form or pattern is thus (relatively) immutable and ingen-
erable. It is still possible, however, to reinstate some
persisting individual by falling back on primal atoms or
elements of a higher order. And phenomena daily ob-
served by the chemist at once suggest this step. As ordi-
nary chemical compounds can be decomposed at high
temperatures, it is probable that our so-called elements
may be ' split up ' into elements of a new order by tem-
peratures greatly in excess of any that we can com-
mand. Those who think fit may regard this higher
order of element as furnishing "the foundation stones
of the material universe" and remaining — though the
firmament be dissolved and renewed again — "in the pre-
cise condition in which they first began to exist." But
such an opinion can no longer be entertained of the mole-
cules 'built up' of these stones, — molecules that pro-
cesses now going on seem to make and unmake, as the
chemist makes further compounds out of them, which he
can afterwards decompose again. Maxwell was evidently
prepared for this alternative. In the closing paragraph
of his Theory of Heat, he asks, " But if we suppose the
molecules to be made at all, or if we suppose them to
consist of some thing previously made, why should we
expect any irregularity to exist among them?"

But surely it is far from indifferent which of these

1 Cf. Sir W. Crookes's brilliant Address to the Chemical Section of
the British Association, 1886, Nature, vol. xxxiv, pp. 423 ff.


EVIDENCE OF THE PERIODIC LAW 107

alternatives we adopt when inquiring what amount of
"irregularity" we may expect among the molecules of
any given chemical stuff. If the molecules of oxygen,
hydrogen, etc., are themselves primeval and immutable
individuals, they are like nothing else that we know,
and we can have no scientific grounds for expecting
anything about them one way or other. But if they are
compounds that are put together and again 'split up'
in the course of nature, then, in the absence of certain
knowledge to the contrary, we may expect among their
forms any of the regularities or irregularities that we find
elsewhere among dissoluble products. In particular we
might expect, for example, that certain of these forms,
like some of the chemical compounds that we know as
such, would prove very unstable, and so disappear almost
as soon as they arose ; others again, like certain refrac-
tory minerals long regarded as elements, might persist
indefinitely. The striking analogy between the grouping
of chemical elements, when ranged as in the periodic laws
of Meyer and MendelejefF, and the grouping of biological
forms, might tempt us to entertain the hypothesis,
mutatis mutandis, of some sort of chemical evolution.
But absolute qualitative identity, for which Herschel
and Maxwell contended, would be almost as incompatible
with such an hypothesis as absolute immutability. Both
these absolute ideas would be alien to the notion of con-
tinuous transmutability or of connecting forms.

Digressing for a moment, let me remark that both
these ideas, there can be little doubt, are far more due
to theological zeal than to the bare logic of the facts.
In the fine conclusion of his text-book on Heat, after


108 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

asking, "Why should we expect any irregularity to
exist among them," — the molecules, i.e. of the same
kind of matter, — Maxwell continues : " Why should we
not rather look for some indication of that spirit of
order, our scientific confidence in which is never shaken
. . . and of which our moral estimation is shown in all
our attempts to think and speak the truth, and to ascer-
tain the exact principles of distributive justice?" 1 But
why so confidently assume, we might reply, that a rigid
and monotonous uniformity is the only, or the highest,
indication of the spirit of order, the order of an ever-
living Spirit above all? How is it then that we depre-
ciate machine-made articles and prefer those in which
the artistic impulse or the fitness of the individual case
is free to shape and to control what is literally manu-
factured, hand-made? The work of an engine-fitter is
greatly facilitated by the use of Whitworth bolts, tubing
of regulation sizes, and the like, but surely it is trivial
to frame teleological arguments concerning the universe
from the standpoint of a millwright. So the existence
of a limited number of absolute constants in nature
might bring the universe within the compass of the
Laplacean calculator. But, dangerous as teleological
arguments in general may be, we may at least safely
say the world was not designed to make science easy.
Struggling men and women, like the soldier on the
march when his machine-made shoe pinches, might rea-
sonably complain if science should succeed in persuad-
ing them that Nature's doles and Nature's dealings from
first to last are ruthlessly and rigidly mechanical. To

1 Heat, p. 342.


THE MOLECULE HYPOTHETICAL 109

call the verses of a poet, the politics of a statesman, or
the awards of a judge mechanical, implies, as Lotze has
pointed out, marked disparagement : although it implies,
too, precisely those characteristics — exactness and inva-
riability — in which Maxwell would have us see a token
of the Divine.

But, returning to our facts and avoiding altogether
any question as to why we should expect this or why
we should expect that, for such questions lie beyond the
legitimate pale of science, let us gather up what we
find. Chemical molecules are not presented realities:
in other words, a molecule — say of oxygen — is not a
small body which is known to exist as an individual of
a definite species, distinct, say, from a molecule of nitro-
gen, an individual of another definite species of small
body. Individual chemical molecules are not known, as
rubies or palms are known, i.e. as instances of species
and distinct from diamonds or cedars, instances of other
species. The chemical molecule is a hypothetical con-/
ception. Such things may exist or the hypothesis would
not be legitimate. Whether they actually exist or not,
they, at any rate, serve, like certain legal and commer-
cial fictions, to facilitate the business of scientific descrip-
tion. If they exist, then facts show that the molecules of
a given species are very nearly alike ; the said facts admit-
ting of interpretation according to statistical methods.
As in other cases admitting of statistical treatment, so
here the physicist is free to regard all molecules of a
class as exactly like his mean or average molecule. But
he is not entitled to let this abstract simplification harden
into concrete fact. Perhaps it may be thought that such


110 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

rigorism is pedantic. So far as any particular physical
inquiry is concerned it may be, but I am very doubtful
even of this. At all events, if such unwarrantable con-
creting of abstracts is to lead logically to a mechanical
theory of the universe, we do well to take note of it.

To make the bearing of this remark clearer, let us
turn our attention for a moment to the very parallel
case of economic theory and the interpretation of indus-
trial and social statistics. The science of so-called pure
or deductive economics has much in common with phys-
ics, that is to say, it sets out from definitions and
axioms and seeks to describe economic facts by means
of mathematical equations. The 'economic man' as con-
ceived by Ricardo, a 'market' as defined by Cournot,
James Mill's 'doses of capital,' the 'margin of cultiva-
tion,' or Jevons's 'supply and demand curves,' are not
things we expect to meet with in real life. They are
abstractions that summarise experience, not concrete
realities directly experienced. Englishmen about to
marry are not observed to be exclusively interested in
women their juniors by 2.05 years, though according
to the tables this is the difference of age between the
Englishman and his wife. But, again, the Englishman
or the Frenchman, or the civilised man or the savage, is
a concept, not a reality. Yet a science of anthropology
is possible in which different races of men and different
stages of human development are compared by the
help of mean values obtained by dealing with nations
and societies en Hoc. And perhaps "in this way," as
Lotze has said, "we may easily imagine how all kinds
of formulae may be arrived at, expressive of the accel-


MISAPPLICATIONS OF STATISTICS 111

eration and breadth and depth and colouring of the
current of historical progress, formulae which, if applied
to particulars, would be found to be utterly inexact,
but which can yet claim to express the true law of
history as freed from disturbing individual influences."
It was precisely this misapplication to particulars that
led Buckle to say that in a given state of society a
certain number of persons must put an end to their
own lives. Now, if, when both the varying particulars
and the statistical constants are alike well known, it is
possible for a reasonable man to fall into the error of
converting the one into an iron necessity which rules
over the other, no wonder this should be the prevalent
attitude in departments of knowledge where particulars
are beyond our ken. I contend then that the most the
physicist is entitled to assert is, that, if there are mole-
cules, the mass of the mean oxygen 4 atom ' is sixteen,
that of the mean hydrogen 'atom' being taken as
unity ; and so on for the rest of his table of masses.
He is not entitled to say that if there are molecules
the mass of every oxygen atom is precisely sixteen times
the mass of any hydrogen atom. Try to picture to
yourselves the sort of science of man and of society
that would be formulated by an intelligence whose data
were confined to anthropometrical and other statistical
results and who treated his data in the customary phys-
ical fashion. You will conclude, I think, that his
human beings or homunculi would come out surprisingly
like Herschel's molecules as 4 manufactured articles,' and
that his theory of society would have more than a
superficial resemblance to the kinetic theory of gases.


112 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

Finally, as the facts do not justify the assertion of
exact likeness among molecules, neither do they afford
ground for the assertion that individual molecules are
immutable and incorruptible. Once this is clear, then
molecules, if there are such things, come within the
range of the great conception of evolution and facts
pointing in this direction are known already and are
steadily accumulating. As Huxley well says : " The
idea that atoms are absolutely ingenerable and immu-
table 'manufactured articles' stands on the same sort
of foundation as the idea that biological species are
4 manufactured articles ' stood thirty years ago ; and
the supposed constancy of the elementary atoms, dur-
ing the enormous lapse of time measured by the exist-
ence of our universe, is of no more weight against
the possibility of change in them . . . than the con-
stancy of species in Egypt since the days of Rameses
or of Cheops is evidence of their immutability dur-
ing all past epochs of the earth's history. It seems
safe to prophesy that the hypothesis of the evolution
of the elements from a primitive matter will, in future,
play no less a part in the history of science than
the atomic hypothesis, which, to begin with, had no
greater, if so great, an empirical foundation." 1 We
may, I think, go even farther. Somehow or other the
qualitative diversity of the chemical elements must
admit of description by means of quantitative relations
of mass-points, configurations, and movements — if the
mechanical theory is to make good its claims. Indeed,

1 Collected Essays, vol. i, pp. 79 f.


THE ETHER — ONE OR MORE 113

the unceasing efforts of chemists and physicists in this
direction can be regarded as an emphatic admission
that they have laid this charge upon themselves. More-
over, in what is called the New Chemistry or General
Chemistry — take Ostwald's well-known Outlines as an
example — we see how much they have already accom-
plished ; and also, I will add, how very much more
still remains to be done.

But let us turn now to another order of facts. If
the molecules concerned in chemical reactions and in the
kinetic theory of gases are beyond sensible reach, the
forms of matter immediately concerned in the phe-
nomena of radiation, electricity, and magnetism are
more remote still. It is in connexion with these that
the ether or ethers come upon the scene. I say ethers
because it is by no means certain that one will suffice.
"It is only when we remember," says Maxwell, u the
extensive and mischievous influence on science which
hypotheses about ethers used formerly to exercise, that
we can appreciate the horror of ethers which sober-
minded men had during the eighteenth century, and
which, probably as a sort of hereditary prejudice,
descended even to the late J. S. Mill." Time seems
to have brought its revenge, for nowadays the ether
is regarded as preeminently real. Thus, in a lecture
given about ten years ago and recently published, our
foremost physicist said to his hearers : " You can ^
imagine particles of something, the thing whose motion^
constitutes light. This thing we call the luminiferous
ether. That is the only substance we are confident of in
dynamics. One thing we are sure of, and that is the

VOL,. I — I


f


114 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

reality and substantiality of the luminiferous ether" l Yet
in spite of this confidence of Lord Kelvin's I cannot
help thinking that a jury of logicians would side with
Mill. But possibly some of you may be disposed to
ask, What has the question as to the real or hypotheti-
cal nature of the luminiferous ether to do with the
mechanical theory of the universe? Simply that unless
a material medium for its propagation is either found
or assumed, the phenomena of light cannot be mechani-
cally described. And the remark applies equally to
other forms of radiation as well as to electricity and
magnetism. If not themselves massive, these phenom-
ena must depend on the configuration or motions of
something that is massive, or it is obviously impossible
to describe them in the mechanical terms at present in
vogue. That need entail no detriment to the special
physical sciences concerned with their description and
measurement by means of a more concrete and qualita-
tive terminology ; and, indeed, some able physicists
prefer to leave the question of a medium entirely
aside. 2 But to do this so far puts a stop to the reso-
lution of all physical changes into mechanical processes.
We shall all perhaps allow a reasonable presumption in
favour of any theory that will unify the variety of
physical facts. Perhaps some of us feel that physicists
have too hastily assumed that, unless these facts have a
common mechanical foundation, they can have no intel-
ligible connexion at all. Even if the mechanical theory
turn out to be true in fact, there is no a priori neces-

1 Lord Kelvin, Popular Lectures and Addresses, vol. i, p. 310.

8 F. E. Neumann, for example. Cf. Volkmann, Theorie des Lickts, p. 4.


THE ETHER STILL HYPOTHETICAL 115

sity about it. Yet covertly or overtly some such
necessity is assumed; and it is mainly on the basis of
this postulate that the ether is raised from the subsid-
iary position of a descriptive hypothesis to the rank
of a thing having "reality and substantiality," Grant,
first, that the world must be intelligible; grant, sec-
ondly, that to be intelligible it must be mechanical;
and then grant that to be mechanical there must be an
ether or ethers whose motions constitute light, electro-
magnetism, etc., grant all this and then — spite of the
absence of direct evidence — we might say the exist-
ence of ether is indirectly proved. But the first two
steps in this argument, it will be observed, are philo-
sophical and the second very disputable philosophy.
Science, however, has no right to build on philosophical
premisses, and is forward, as we have seen, to disown,
with much needless blasphemy, all such a priori
methods. Leave aside then any presuppositions of this
kind, and the ether remains but a mechanical hypothe-
sis ; its perceptual reality, if proved at all, can only be
proved by some crucial experiment or by cumulative ex-
perimental evidence. No doubt its value as a descrip-
tive hypothesis has been greatly enhanced since Mill's
time — notably by the labours of Maxwell and Hertz.
But as to the worth of their results I suppose Poin-
care's remark upon it is not too cautious : " There still
remains much to be done; the identity of light and
electricity is from to-day something more than a sedu-
cing hypothesis ; it is a probable truth, but it is not yet
a proved truth." 1

1 Nature, 1894, vol. 1, p. 11.


116 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

But though the conception of an all-pervading ether
has gained in scientific importance since Mill's contro-
versy with Whewell, it has also been repeatedly modi-
fied, I might even say transformed. At one time or
other it has been regarded as a gas, as an elastic solid of
small density but high rigidity, as a * quasi-solid ' con-
stituted by turbulent motion in an incompressible invis-
cid fluid — with two or three sub- varieties of this hydro-
kinetic type. And when a new ether is invented the
problem is to ascertain how many of the special laws of
radiation or electricity can be mechanically deduced from
it. In no case has this demand been adequately met;
hence the attempts, continually renewed, to devise more
satisfactory ethers. Surely if the ether were a definite
thing, the reality of which was an established fact, it
would be impossible to take these liberties with it. On
the other hand, is it not certain that if, conceivably, some
non-mechanical hypothesis were to afford a simpler and
more complete unification of optical and electrical phe-
nomena, there would be an end of luminiferous and
electric ethers, just as there was an end of phlogiston
in the days of Priestley and Lavoisier, and as there has
been an end of caloric and electrical fluids in our own?
By a non-mechanical hypothesis, I mean here one in
which some or all of the Newtonian laws are denied or
modified. 1 I should hardly have ventured even to suggest
such a thing on my own responsibility. But I observe
that several physicists in the present unsettled state of
the science are prepared to entertain such heresies. I

1 Perhaps such a restriction is in itself unwarranted, but it serves my
purpose here.


THE VIEWS OF PROFS. DRUDE AND PEARSON 117

will quote two. Professor Drude, on succeeding to a new
chair at Leipzig, devoted his inaugural lecture to the
Theory of Physics. Referring to the characteristic dif-
ference between what we call matter and what we call
ether, viz. : that the former consists of smallest inhomo-
geneities, — a finely grained structure, as we say in Eng-
lish, — while the latter is thoroughly homogeneous, he
continues : " The physics of matter must then appear
the more complicated compared with the physics of the J{\
ether. Is not that an indication that no simplification
can result if we attempt to describe the physics of the
ether formally in the same manner as the physics of mat-
ter, that is to say, by means of mechanical equations?" 1
Again, Professor Karl Pearson, in his Grammar of
Science, referring to the Newtonian laws, asks : " Ought
we to assert that these laws hold in their entirety for all
the scale from particle to ether-element ? Or will it be
more advantageous to postulate that mechanism in whole
or part flows from the ascending complexity of our struc-
ture, that the ether-element is largely the source of
mechanism, but is not completely mechanical in the
sense of obeying the laws of motion as given in dynami-
cal text-books ? " And in another passage : " The object
of science is to describe in the fewest words the widest
range of phenomena, and it is quite possible that a con-
ception of the ether may one day be formed in which the
mechanism of gross * matter ' itself may, to a great ex-
tent, be resumed. Indeed, it is on these points of the
constitution of the ether, and the structure of the prime
atom, that physical theory is at present chiefly at fault.

1 Die Theorie in der Physik, 1896, p. 13.


118 THE MECHANICAL THEORY !


There is plenty of opportunity for careful experiments
to define more narrowly the perceptual facts we want to
describe scientifically ; but there is still more need for a
brilliant use of the scientific imagination. There are
greater conceptions yet to be formed than the law of
gravitation or the evolution of species by natural selec-
tion. It is not problems that are wanting, but the in-
spiration to solve them; and those who shall unravel
them will stand the compeers of Newton and Darwin." 1

The remarks and queries just quoted apply to the
electric and luminiferous medium or media, though the
medium the writers have also in view is doubtless what
has been called "the primordial medium"; such, e.g.>
as the perfect fluid of Lord Kelvin's vortex-atoms,
from which ultimate ether the proximate ether of light
and electricity is supposed to be formed. At this pri-
mordial and absolutely homogeneous fluid the physical
theorist is content at last to stop ; and for this at pres-
ent no confident claim is advanced to " reality and sub-
stantiality." Will the physicists of fifty years hence
remain as modest — should the hypothesis, as seems
likely, hold its ground so long?

So much then must serve to illustrate what I called
the indirectness of molecular physics. Under this head
we have noted a tendency to treat statistical means
and hypothetical mechanism as concrete realities. And
here it seems needful to make a distinction or we may be
charged with unfairness — a distinction, I mean, between
hypothetical mechanisms and illustrative mechanisms em-
ployed solely for expository purposes. To the latter

1 Grammar of Science, pp. 339-369.


THE DANGERS OF ANALOGY 119

class, for example, belong unquestionably the "idle
wheels" of Maxwell's electro-magnetic theory and
again Lord Kelvin's gyrostatic cells. On the other hand
his quasi-elastic ether, or his quasi-labile ether, seem
to be meant as real and not as merely illustrative analo-
gies. But it is to be feared that physicists of the
school of Maxwell and Lord Kelvin, who — to use
Boltzmann's description of them — "are particularly
fond of the variegated garment of mechanical repre-
sentation," are apt unconsciously to play fast and loose
with the difference between fiction and fact, when
elaborating their mechanical models. Analogy, as we
know, is a good servant, but a bad master ; for, when
master, it does more to blind than it may previously
have done to illuminate. Most of us, I suppose, have
chanced to observe a bee buzzing up and down within
the four sides of a window-pane, vainly endeavouring
to escape by the only obvious way — the way most
light comes ; whereas by merely traversing the dark
border of the window-frame it might at once reach the
open casement. The history of science is full of in-
stances of able men similarly thwarted by a too-pre-
possessing analogy. In his lectures at the Johns Hopkins
University Lord Kelvin is reported to have said, "I
never satisfy myself till I can make a mechanical model
of a thing. If I can make a mechanical model I can
understand it. As long as I cannot make a mechanical
model all the way through, I cannot understand, and that
is why I cannot get the electro-magnetic theory of
light." 1 Now I should like respectfully to ask whether

1 Nature, vol. xxxi, p. 603.


120 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

this is not possibly a case of unwarrantable submission
to analogies. As before, I ask again : Why must
mechanism "all the way through" be the one and only
means of intelligibility? When we recollect the com-
paratively small range of the experiences within which
mechanical laws are found to be verifiable abstractions,
are we bound to assume that they are the only con-
crete realities at the very foundations of physical things?
This question brings us to the second characteristic of
molecular mechanics just now referred to — its ideal of
matter. The consideration of this may perhaps give
us further light, but must be deferred till the next
lecture.


LECTURE V

MOLECULAR MECHANICS: IDEALS OP MATTER

(b) The ideal of matter. The old atomism strictly mechanical but
inadequate. Its conversion into one strictly dynamical by Boscovich and
the French. The resolution of this in turn into the ' kinetic theory. '

The nature of the primordial fluid examined: it is made up of nega-
tions, and is thus indeterminate : prima materia.

Relation of its mass to the ' quasi-mass * of the vortices : the latter be-
comes a complicated problem. The kinetic ideal in danger from c meta-
physical quagmires.' 1 To avoid this impasse it is proposed to make energy
fundamental.

Results of inquiry into mechanical theory thus far : Relation of the
three sciences, Analytical Mechanics, Molar Mechanics, Molecular Me-
chanics. The first stands completely aloof from concrete facts. The
attempt to apply it to these without reserve leaves us with a scheme of
motions and nothing to move.

To molar mechanics belongs the rdle of stripping off the physical
characteristics of sensible bodies; to molecular mechanics, the rdle of
transforming these characteristics into mechanisms, and the mechanisms
into * non-matter in motion.' The mechanical theory as a professed
explanation of the world thus over-reaches itself.

As mechanical science has advanced, its true character has become
increasingly apparent— its objects are fictions of the understanding, and
not conceivably presentable facts.

The kinetic ideal shows this best of all, for some of its upholders dream
of « replacing ' dynamical laws by kinematical. The refutation the more
striking because they imagine they are all the while getting nearer to
' what actually goes onS

It is upon an uncritical prepossession of this kind that the mechanical
theory has rested all along. Descriptive analogies have been regarded as

121


122 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

actual facts; yet are nothing but the inevitable outcome of the endeavour
to summarise phenomena in terms of motion. A moral drawn from the
Pythagoreans,

But mechanical science has so far failed even to describe facts in its
own terms.

We have found physicists protesting with great vehe-
mence against being saddled with any metaphysical con-
ceptions of matter as a substance underlying phenomena.
Yet there is only one of the three chief theories of matter
that might readily clear itself of this stigma, and that is
the old atomic theory of Democritus or Lucretius; but
this, oddly enough, has always claimed to be a theory of
substance. In point of fact it is the most phenomenal
of all ; for the hard atom, apart from its being absolutely
hard, differs from sensible bodies only in respect of size
and indivisibility. The collisions of such atoms again
are essentially phenomenal, though actually beyond the
limits of direct perception. Such collisions too are the
very type of that plain, straightforward mechanical ac-
tion, which alone Galileo, Newton, and Huygens — the
founders of modern mechanics — were willing to recog-
nise. You will remember the often-quoted letter of
Newton to Bentley, in which he declared it to be "in-
conceivable that inanimate brute matter should . . .
operate upon and affect other matter without mutual
contact." This then is logically the one genuine and
original mechanical theory. But absolute hardness is
ideal and transcends experience, whereas for the physicist
bodies are real and empirically given. I think we may
say that whoever ventures to' apply to any real thing
such adjectives as 'absolute' or 'infinite' or 'per-


DEFECTS OF THE OLD ATOMISM 123

feet' or 'simple' — the terms being strictly used — has,
however much he may dislike it, embrangled himself
with metaphysics. Such at least has been the fate of
the Lucretian atom, when defined as absolutely hard.
Whether Lord Kelvin's perfect fluid fares any better,
we can consider later. But let us first notice some of
the antinomies besetting the older ideal atom.

Rigid bodies of sensible dimensions are described as re-
spectively elastic or non-elastic, according as they do or do
not resume their original shape after being strained. Ab-
solute rigidity, however, absolutely excludes deformation,
hence the hard atom can neither be elastic nor non-elastic.
What then will happen when two such atoms collide?
The problem is strictly indeterminate, so that — as has
been said — as often as such an event occurs, the course
of the world is at least as uncertain as an act of the
purest free will could make it. 1 " Take a series of very
inelastic bodies such as butter, lead, etc.," says P. du
Bois-Reymond, " and then a series of very elastic bodies,
such as india-rubber, ivory, etc. Of which of these two
series is the absolutely hard the limit? Obviously of
which we like, or of some mean between both." 2 If we
decide to regard the atoms as non-elastic, then, when two
collide, kinetic energy disappears without an equivalent
amount of potential energy taking its place. If we
prefer to regard them as elastic, their motions are in-
stantaneously reversed, in other words, a finite momen-
tum is produced in no time. If we combine the two, we

1 Kroman, Unsere Naturerkenntniss, p. 315.

2 Ueber die Grundlagen der Erkenntniss in den exacten Wissenschaften,
p. 37.


124 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

combine these consequences ; both of which contradict
our fundamental axioms. The fact is that rigidity,
whether accompanied by much or little elasticity, is
not a property of mass as such, but a physical property
of matter. But if a physical property, then rigidity has
to be explained by dynamical transactions between
masses, or the mechanical theory fails to redeem its
pledge. In other words, it is not open to the physicist
to explain — or, as is now said, to describe — rigidity
and elasticity in terms of rigidity and elasticity. The
retention or restitution of a given shape or configura-
tion implies mechanical or dynamical relations between
masses and has to be accounted for. So by inexorable
logic the "many hard, impenetrable particles," which
Newton was content to regard as "primitive," were
resolved step by step into the mass-points or centres
of force of Boscovich and the French analysts. But as
contact action, i.e. action of the straightforward me-
chanical type, is impossible between mass points, it was
replaced by action at a distance, sometimes attractive,
sometimes repulsive, according as the distance or other
circumstances might vary. The strictly mechanical
theory became in fact strictly dynamical.

A word or two of historical explanation seems called
for as to this opposition between two terms — I mean
* mechanical ' and ' dynamical,' which are nowadays often
regarded as synonymous. The term * mechanical' how-
ever, seems appropriate only to motions produced by
immediate displacement, as in machines, to contact action
in other words. Newton, who — as we have seen — re-
garded action at a distance as " so great an absurdity,


RISE OF DYNAMIC ATOMISM 125

that I believe," he writes to Bentley, " no man who has
in philosophical matters a competent faculty of thinking
can ever fall into it," finding himself unable mechanically
to explain the working of gravitation, contented himself
meanwhile with describing the motions produced. But he
began early and persisted long in the attempt to discover
some medium and mode of operation such as would enable
him to explain gravitation by contact, instead of assuming
it to be a force " innate, inherent, and essential to mat-
ter." However his friend and contemporary, the youth-
ful Roger Cotes, though anything but a fool, rushed in
where the master feared to tread. In his preface to
the Principia, Cotes definitely asserted the doctrine of
direct action at a distance, and maintained that gravity
is no more an occult property of matter than extension,
mobility, or impenetrability ; since it was, he held, as
plainly indicated by experience as they were. "And
when" — I here quote Maxwell — "the Newtonian phi-
losophy gained ground in Europe, it was the opinion of
Cotes rather than that of Newton that became most
prevalent, till at last Boscovich propounded his theory
that matter is a congeries of mathematical points, each
endowed with the power of attracting or repelling the
others according to fixed laws. In his world, matter
is inextended, and contact is impossible. He did not
forget, however, to endow his mathematical points with
inertia." 1 Thus Newton's position was exactly inverted.
The solid primitive particles of various sizes and figures,
in which Newton inclined to believe, were rejected ; and
the inherent forces acting through a vacuum, which he

1 Scientific Papers, vol. ii, p. 316.


126 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

disclaimed as absurd, were accepted as the reality to which
all the physical properties of matter were due. This is
what I meant by saying that his strictly mechanical
theory was transformed into one strictly dynamical.

One step in this transformation seems, as I have said,
logically inevitable, the reduction of finite molecules
to infinitesimal mass-points. Not so the second — the
attribution to such mass-points of intrinsic forces. We
have seen already that in abstract mechanics this con-
ception of vires invitee or substantial forces is rigorously
scouted. Force is there a purely relative conception, a
name for the rate of change of momentum of one mass
referred to the position of other masses in the same
"field." Unless then Boscovich's metaphysical idea of
forces inherent in a mass-point can be replaced by the
mathematical idea of external forces acting at a point,
molecular physics cannot be regarded as merely dynami-
cal in the looser modern sense. Central forces when
not used geometrically, as by Newton, i.e. merely to
describe observed motions, but metaphysically, to ex-
plain action at a distance, are incompatible with modern
mechanics. They become part of what Professor Tait
calls a "very old but most pernicious heresy, of which
much more than traces still exist even among physi-
cists." 1 But it must certainly be allowed that the prog-
ress of physics has steadily discredited it. Faraday's
experimental researches into electricity and magnetism,
the resolution of heat into "a mode of motion," and
many other lines of investigation tend to confirm the
kinetic ideal of matter, which has been aptly described

1 Properties of Matter ■, p. 6.


THE KINETIC THEORY OF MATTER 127

as the theory that matter is non-matter in motion — the
non-matter, being of course, Lord Kelvin's ideal fluid.

It is this kinetic, or perhaps I should say hydro-
kinetic, ideal of Lord Kelvin and his school, that, so far
as I can gather, is the ideal of matter prevalent in the
present day among such physicists as venture to stir
beyond their equations. Any one with a weakness for
Hegelian dialectic might easily discover the famous tri-
adic development of thought in the advance from what
was in the main Newton's ideal of matter through the
ideal of Boscovich to that of Faraday and later British
physicists. There seems to have been complete opposi-
tion between Newton's conceptions as to what matter
really was and the descriptive apparatus of central forces
acting across empty space by which he simplified and
extended the more cumbrous apparatus of Kepler. Bos-
covich's doctrine was thus the precise antithesis of New-
ton's, for he took Newton's descriptive apparatus for the
reality, and discarded his solid, impenetrable particles as
false. Boscovich's atoms were strictly mass-points ; occu-
pation of space with him was due entirely to substantial
forces, not to the absolute hardness of primitive particles ;
and all strictly mechanical action of the push and press
kind was replaced by attractions or repulsions acting at a
distance. The kinetic theory can be regarded as a syn-
thesis of these contraries. There is no action at a dis-
tance ; but then there is no empty space : action and
reaction are to be explained, not by impact, but by the
physical continuity of the plenum. There are no hard
atoms; yet the atom occupies space and is elastic in
virtue of its rotatory motion.


128 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

Faraday, who has been called a disciple of Boscovich,
made the first step on in the course of his wonderful elec-
trical researches. He shewed that in the part of space
traversed by magnetic force there exists a peculiar ten-
sion ; as Maxwell puts it, " that wherever magnetic force
\S exists there is matter" — that is to say, an electro-
^ magnetic medium or ether. Again Faraday's discovery
of the magnetic rotation of the plane of polarised light,
together with Maxwell's identification of the rate at
which light and electro-magnetic disturbances are propa-
gated, confirmed as this has been by the crucial experi-
ments of Hertz, makes it reasonable to identify the
luminiferous and electro-magnetic media. The second
great step towards this new ideal begins with the mathe-
matical investigation of Helmholtz into the properties of
vortex motion. Though apparently not suggested by
Faraday's work, the two were soon brought into con-
nexion; for Lord Kelvin found that the medium when
under the action of magnetic force must be in a state of
rotation, that is to say, in Maxwell's words "small por-
tions of the medium, which we may call molecular vor-
tices, are rotating, each on its own axis, the direction of
this axis being that of the magnetic force." * Finally,
Helmholtz's demonstration of the conservation of vortex-
motion in a perfect fluid led Lord Kelvin to his famous
vortex-atom theory, of which I have already spoken, and
which in its main features is known to everybody.
According to the kinetic ideal of matter, then, both atoms
and ether are resolved into motions of one ultimate fluid,
- which is defined as having "no other properties than

H l Scientific Papers, vol. ii, p. 321.


PROFESSOR HICKS ON THE KINETIC THEORY 129

inertia, invariable density, and perfect mobility ; and the
method by which the motion of this fluid is to be traced
is pure mathematical analysis." J .

Let me quote two versions of what is expected of this
ideal from two of its most able and hopeful supporters.
Dr. Larmor, in a paper in the Royal Society's Proceedings
of 1893, writes : " It has been in particular the aim of
Lord Kelvin to deduce material phenomena from the
play of inertia involved in the motion of a structureless
primordial fluid; if this were achieved it would reduce
the duality, rather the many-sidedness, of physical phe-
nomena, to a simple unity of scheme ; it would be the
ultimate simplification." This brief statement is clear
and modest by comparison with the following deliverance
of Professor Hicks in his Address to Section A at the
last meeting (1895) of the British Association: "While
on the one hand," said Professor Hicks, " the end of sci-
entific investigation is the discovery of laws, on the other,
science will have reached its highest goal when it shall
have reduced ultimate laws to one or two, the necessity
of which lies outside the sphere of our cognition. These
ultimate laws — in the domain of physical science at least
— will be the dynamical laws of the relations of matter
to number, space, and time. The ultimate data will be
number, matter, space, and time themselves. When these
relations shall be known, all physical phenomena will be
a branch of pure mathematics. We shall have done
away with the necessity of the conception of potential
energy, even if it may still be convenient to retain it;
and — if it should be found that all phenomena are mani-

1 Maxwell, o.c, vol. ii, p. 471.

VOL. I — K.


130 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

festations of motion of one single continuous medium —
the idea of force will be banished also, and the study
of dynamics replaced by the study of the equation of
continuity."

Every sentence in these remarks would repay criticism,
if we could spare the time. As it is, I must content
myself with an occasional reference in the more general
criticism of this ultra-physical ideal to which we may
now pass. But first, I will ask your indulgence if I
quote part of yet another paragraph from this presiden-
tial address. "Before, however, this can be attained,"
Professor Hicks continues, "we must have the working
drawings of the details of the mechanism we have to deal
with. These details lie outside the scope of our bodily
senses ; we cannot see, or feel, or hear them, and this,
not because they are unseeable, but because our senses
are too coarse-grained to transmit impressions of them
to our mind. The ordinary methods of investigation
here fail us ; we must proceed by a special method, and
make a bridge of communication between the mechanism
and our senses by means of hypotheses. By our imagina-
tion, experience, intuition we form theories, we deduce
the consequences of these theories on phenomena which
come within the range of our senses, and reject or modify
and try again. It is a slow and laborious process. The
wreckage of rejected theories is appalling ; but a know-
ledge of what actually goes on behind what we can see or
feel is surely if slowly being attained." 1

Now I think the whole drift of these statements, and
particularly this last sentence, makes it abundantly plain

1 Nature, vol. lii, p. 472 ; italics mine.


PROPERTIES OP THE PRIMORDIAL FLUID 131

that Dr. Hicks — and I am sure he is not alone — regards
the hydro-kinetic theory of matter which he passes on to
discuss, not as so much descriptive parable or ' conceptual
shorthand,' but as veritable, conceivably perceptible,
reality ; in short, " what actually goes on behind what
we can see or feel." Very good. Let us now try to
understand what this means.

If this primordial fluid is real, it must have some
positive attributes, and it cannot be an abstraction. But
it is defined as inert, incompressible, inextensible, invis-
cid, and structureless, all negative terms. It is useless
to reply that it is quite indifferent whether we use words
that are positive, or words that are negative in form ;
that, in fact, this primitive fluid can be equally well
defined as massive, of constant density, perfectly mobile,
and absolutely homogeneous and continuous. Leaving
the question of mass or inertia aside for a time, — we
shall have to deal with it more at length, presently, —
the remaining properties are, I take it, all summed up in
the one phrase 'perfect fluid.' And as all the fluids we
know are imperfect, it might seem that the negation
belongs to the known, not to the unknown. But to say
nothing of the obvious impossibility of this, we find that
the characteristics of an imperfect fluid, one and all,
refer to experimental facts. All liquids are compressible,
viscid, and more or less discrete or structural. Let me
cite a witness who has some claim to speak on such a
point, I mean Clifford : — "A true explanation describes
the previous unknown in terms of the known ; thus
light is described as a vibration, and such properties of
light as are also properties of vibrations are thereby


>


132 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

explained. Now a perfect liquid is not a known thing, but
a pure fiction. The imperfect liquids which approximate
to it, and from which the conception is derived, consist
of a vast number of small particles perpetually interfering
with one another's motion. . . . Thus a liquid is not
an ultimate conception, but is explained — it is known to
be, made up of molecules ; and the explanation requires
that it should not be frictionless. The liquid of Sir
William Thomson's hypothesis is continuous, infinitely
divisible, not made of molecules at all, and it is abso-
lutely frictionless. This is as much a mere mathematical
fiction as the attracting and repelling points of Bosco-
vich." * Even Professor Lodge, though a sturdy upholder
of the hydro-kinetic ideal, seems willing to allow the
impropriety of the term 4 fluid.' "Ether," he says, "is
often called a fluid or a liquid, and again it has been
called a solid, . . . but none of these names are very
much good ; all these are molecular groupings, and there-
fore not like ether [the name Professor Lodge applies to
this primitive medium] ; let us think simply and solely
of a continuous frictionless medium possessing inertia,
and the vagueness of the notion will be nothing more
than is proper in the present state of our knowledge." 2

Very good; again leaving aside for a moment the
property of inertia, let us think simply and solely of
this " continuous frictionless medium," neither ordinary
fluid nor solid. Wherein does it differ from space?
Space too is incompressible, inextensible, frictionless, and
structureless, and it furnishes the very form and type

1 Lectures and Essays, vol. i, p. 238 f.

2 The Ether and its Functions, Nature, vol. xxvii, p. 305.


VACUUM AND PLENUM 133

of a continuous medium. But whereas space is a per-
fect vacuum, it will be replied, our medium is a perfect
plenum. But from empty space to masses in motion is
a distinct step and from a uniformly filled space the
step is just as distinct. So far as the realisation of any
form or motion, thing or process, is her one aim, Nature
ought to abhor such a plenum quite as cordially as she
is said to abhor a vacuum. But the primordial medium
has mass, we shall be reminded ; in other words, it is
inert, and inertia at least is a definite and fundamental
physical fact. Let us now, then, inquire whether this
remaining attribute of the universal medium renders it
any more determinate, or whether, as so applied, 'inert'
is anything better than another negation.

Inertia as a qualitative term and in its primary sense
of inability or incapability is obviously negative. So
Young defined inertia as the incapability of matter to
alter its existing state except under the influence of
some external cause. To allow that this universal
plenum has inertia then does not remove its indeter-
minateness. Before it can be determined or differ-
entiated in any way, some cause must intervene entirely
from without, and such intervention will not admit of
physical description. Such cause is of the nature of
creation or miracle ; it is neither a force in the sense
of the attractions or repulsions by which Boscovich and
Kant sought to explain matter, nor is it force in the
modern sense of mass-acceleration. In other words, in
the kinetic ideal of matter we shall find that the notion
of mass is used with two distinct and inconsistent con-
notations. Abstract mechanics, as we have seen, sets out


134 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

from definite masses or bodies having assignable posi-
tions, between every two of which there are dynamical
transactions. Two masses, that is to say, measure each
other by their mutual accelerations; in other words,
mass is a strictly quantitative notion, and as such im-
plies relation to a standard. Not only is mass in this
wise always a relative quantity, but it is relative again
in implicating the correlative notion of moving forces
or stress between masses, which, as just said, is the
only means of determining mass. If we attempt to
apply the notion of mass to a universal homogeneous
plenum, it lapses back into the merely qualitative notion
of incapability of change evenly diffused through all im-
mensity. And definite forces — necessarily present where
there are definite masses to interact — seem here excluded.
I trust I am not mistaken on this point. But it is diffi-
cult to imagine what definite forces there can be. Every-
thing chemical or thermal or electrical is excluded, for
the medium is throughout homogeneous and structure-
less. In like manner gravity, elasticity, and cohesion
seem incompatible with absolute inviscidity and uni-
form density. Accordingly, to secure stability, it has
to be postulated either that the medium is provided
with a fixed boundary or that it extends to infinity.
Mathematically these alternatives may come to the same
thing, though the latter, i.e. infinite extension, seems the
simpler and less arbitrary of the two, again shewing how
little there is to choose between a vacuum and this ple-
num. The properties of such a plenum, indeed, as Max-
well chanced to remark 1 a year before Lord Kelvin's great
1 Scientific Papers, vol. ii, p. 26 (on Dynamic Theoiy of Gases).


MASS AND QUASI-MASS 135

hypothesis was broached, " may be dogmatically asserted
but cannot be mathematically explained." The reason
for this seems simple : such a medium does not furnish
even to abstract mechanics any irov <rr&.

However, assuming that in some ultra-physical fashion
it has been whisked up into that state of turbulent
motion to which Lord Kelvin has given the name of
" vortex-sponge," — this being the first step in cosmic
confectionery, — let us see how this primitive mass is
related to the phenomenal masses that then appear.
The point I wish to urge is that neither the one nor
the other conforms to the conception of mass with
which abstract mechanics set out. The mass of every
portion of the primitive fluid is an inalienable prop-
erty of that portion. So far good, of course. Again,
since the fluid is, and ever remains, of uniform den-
sity, the primitive or 'actual mass 9 of every portion is
proportional to its volume. A vortex-ring is such a por-
tion. But now its mass as measured by its mechanical
effects is not simply proportional to its volume ; in de-
termining this • effective mass,' the ' strength ' of the
vortex, i.e. its rotational motion, is also a distinct and
independent factor. In short, this quasi-mass, or " non-
matter in motion," depends upon a number of conditions,
of which the real or primitive mass is only one. Such
quasi-mass is therefore not an inalienable prqperty in
the sense in which primitive mass is such. For instance,
though the volume of a vortex is constant, and there-
fore its primitive mass also, its configuration is liable
to vary — in which fact of course lies the chief merit
of the vortex-atom. But on these variations in its con-


136 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

figuration depends the extent to which other portions
of fluid are carried along with the vortex, as it moves
onwards. Thus, while its primitive mass is invariable,
its effective mass may vary with its motion and configu-
ration.

We are brought, in short, to this paradoxical result:
First, mechanical mass, the mass we know, is resolved
into a mode of motion of some ultra-physical mass not
directly capable of mechanical transactions, a mass that
we therefore do not, and cannot, know as such. Given
so much space, there is given also so much of this
ultra-physical mass ; but how much or how little
nobody can say. Our scientific teachers have trespassed
unawares beyond the limits of the phenomenal, and we
find ourselves bowing down to a 'fetish' after all,
none other indeed than that hoary idol of metaphysics,
to aweipoP) materia prima, 1 qualitatively indeterminate
and quantitatively indistinguishable from space. Sec-
ondly, a mechanical, effective, or apparent mass, instead
of being a constant and ultimate physical quantity,
as at first defined, proves, so Professor Hicks tells us,
"a much more complicated matter, and requires much
fuller consideration than has been given to it." It may
even, he thinks, "depend to some extent at least on
temperature, however repugnant this may be to current
ideas." Thus in this endeavour to carry through the
application of abstract mechanics to all physical phe-
nomena, the conception of mass proper has got pushed
over the brink of the sensible and empirically verifiable,
and seems in danger of being lost in those terrible
1 Cf. Descartes, Lea Principes de la Philosophic, bk. ii, art. 5.


THE PRIMITIVE FLUID « MET APHYSICAL ' 137

'metaphysical quagmires' at which, as we have seen,
the reputable physicist shudders. So now, instead of
having this conception to the good in explaining or
describing physical phenomena, the semblance of mass
has itself to be accounted for ; and this, as we have just
been told, is a very complicated business "requiring
much fuller consideration than has been given to it."
The impasse which thus threatens to end the kinetic
ideal of matter was clearly seen by Maxwell and is
admitted by Lord Kelvin. In the article 4 Atom'* in
the Encyclopaedia Britannica Maxwell thus criticises it :
"Though the primitive fluid is the only true matter,
according to the kinetic ideal that is to say, yet that
which we call matter is not the primitive fluid itself,
but a mode of motion of that primitive fluid. ... In
Thomson's theory therefore the mass of bodies requires
explanation. We have to explain the inertia of what
is only a mode of motion, and inertia is a property of
matter, not of modes of motion." Lord Kelvin him-
self, in concluding his lecture on ^Elasticity as a Mode
of Motion? acknowledges that "this kinetic theory of
matter is a dream and can be nothing else, until it can
explain," not only the " inertia of masses (that is, crowds)
of vortices," but also gravitation, chemical affinity, and
much besides. His only ground of confidence appears
to be the "belief that no other theory of matter is
possible." 1 But this was in 1881 ; and one cannot help
wondering whether Lord Kelvin's confidence in his
theory has increased or diminished in the meantime.
Some among the younger generation of physicists pre-

1 Popular Lectures, vol. i, p. 146.


138 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

for, as I mentioned in the last lecture, to abandon the
attempt to reduce all physical phenomena to a con-
nected mechanism based solely on the Newtonian laws.
Many of them look to find a better way by taking, not
mass, but energy, for the fundamental notion. Before
we pass on to this, however, it will be well to try to
gather up the main results of our inquiry into the
mechanical theory so far.

We have distinguished three branches of science
which, though distinct, are closely connected and often
confused : (1) Pure, or Analytical Mechanics ; (2) Me-
chanics applied to Molar Physics, which might be called
Molar Mechanics ; and (3) Mechanics applied to Molec-
ular Physics, or Molecular Mechanics. The first is in
the strictest sense an exact science based entirely on
certain fundamental assumptions and definitions. We
have here rigorous calculation, but no measurement :
ideas, but not facts. The other two rest in part on
observation and experiment, which yield approximate
measurements, probable values, i.e. averages and means
corrected by the help of that — for the student of
knowledge — most wonderful instrument, 'the logic of
chance.' In the exact sciences, within the limits of our
powers and subject only to the laws of thought — we
are complete masters of the situation. Our intellectual
constructions are archetypal and not ectypal. We can
here give a meaning to absolute time, absolute space,
absolute motion ; we can here talk reasonably of the
perfectly continuous, perfectly discrete, and perfectly
constant. But applied to the particulars of experience
such conceptions have no warrant. The Pythagorean


SUMMARY OF RESULTS SO FAR 139

proposition, for example, is exact and certain, apart
from all physical circumstances as a proposition in
plane geometry. Bat, as Riemann's famous disserta-
tion suggests, it is quite conceivable that this prop-
osition should be falsified one way in astronomical
measurements, if the distances measured were suffi-
ciently vast ; and be falsified another way — in min-
eralogical measurements, say — if these distances were
sufficiently minute. Of course we might prefer to con-
sider our lines as not really straight. But this might
quite well only be changing one contradiction for
another, or prove far less simple than it would be to
describe the facts in terms of some non-Euclidean
space. But worse than this and far less open to dis-
pute : the most elementary conditions of absolute exact-
ness everywhere fail us. We have no fixed points, no
fixed directions, no accurate timekeeper, not one demon-
strably constant property of a physical description. Even
number when applied to physical phenomena is no ex-
ception, in so far as neither identity nor simplicity nor
discreteness admit of more than a relative application.
Now, as a consequence of all this, if you like — as the
price of its formal exactness, abstract mechanics has
to renounce those higher categories, Substantiality and
Causality, which bring us into touch with concrete
things. The process of eliminating these categories has
been slow ; for the terms * mass ' and * force ' seem almost
inseparably associated with substance and power, from
which notions in fact they were primarily derived. But
regarding the result as at length complete, and accept-
ing the purely mathematical definitions of mass and force


140 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

now in vogue, the bearing of this result on molar and
molecular mechanics is important. The simplest and
most comprehensive description of the movements, actual
or supposed, that occur in nature becomes the sole aim
of these sciences, not the unveiling of the mystery of
matter or the knowledge of the causes of things. The
logical development of this procedure we have attempted
to follow in some detail, and the outcome, as we have
just seen, is that we find nothing definite except move-
ment left. Heat is a mode of motion, elasticity is a
mode of motion, light and magnetism are modes of mo-
tion. Nay, mass itself is, in the end, supposed to be
but a mode of motion of a something that is neither
solid nor liquid nor gas, that is neither itself a body
nor an aggregate of bodies, that is not phenomenal and
must not be noumenal, a veritable aireipov on which we
can impose our own terms. I am sure this process will
remind many of you of one of Alice's Adventures in
Wonderland. I trust I may be pardoned for the allu-
sion. The Cheshire Cat, you remember, on a certain
occasion, " vanished quite slowly, beginning with the
end of the tail and ending with the grin, which re-
mained some time after the rest of it had gone. 4 Well !
I've often seen a cat without a grin,' thought Alice,
4 but a grin without a cat ! It's the most curious thing
I ever saw in all my life.'"

In this advance towards what looks like physical
nihilism, molar and molecular mechanics constitute
each a distinct step. The salient feature we have
noted in molar mechanics is that 'species of abstrac-
tion * that Thomson and Tait describe as 'limitation


ADVANCE TOWARDS PHYSICAL NIHILISM 141

of the data.' Of such abstractions we have an instance
in the treatment of the constraints and connexions that
limit the free motion of a particle or of the separate
portions of a machine, as mere geometrical or kinematic
conditions. In actual fact constraint involves friction,
strings stretch, levers bend, and so on. But all these
imply intermolecular forces, the investigation of which
is passed on to experimental physics. Again a change
in the momentum of a body may be due to any one or
more of a variety of causes — gravitation, heat, chemi-
cal action, and so on. Molar mechanics considers none
of these: it is concerned only with the rate of the
change itself, giving, as we must remember, the name
of 4 moving force' to this effect. The various causes,
as we are allowed provisionally to call them, are, as
before, passed on to corresponding departments of ex-
perimental physics. Finally the bodies moving have
manifold properties. Of these all save mass and mo-
bility are ignored, and the rest again passed on to
experimental physics.

But now assume for a moment that molecular me-
chanics has fully accomplished the task assigned to it,
I mean this mechanical interpretation of the facts of
experimental physics. None of those conditions of
constraint, none of those natural forces or physical
properties, which molar mechanics passed on, will then
be left over; all of them will have been described in
terms of mass and motion. It is thus obvious that
that 4 species of abstraction' or limitation so character-
istic of the methods of molar mechanics does not per-
tain to molecular mechanics. On the contrary, that


142 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

science, if verily complete, would — we have been told
— embrace in one scheme all the vast variety of physi-
cal phenomena reduced to the simplest possible form.
True, its fundamental ideas would be the same as those
of pure mechanics, but then we should be assured that
there were no others, whereas in molar mechanics this
still remained an open question. In fact this last
science would itself be absorbed; inasmuch as a body
of sensible dimensions would be but an aggregate of
molecules, and all those of its properties, left aside as
non-mechanical in the aggregate, would be referred to
mechanical processes in the parts. It is allowed, of
course, that molecular mechanics is not complete; and
we have seen that its procedure, when seeking to express
the facts of chemistry, light, electricity, etc., in purely
mechanical terms is in the main hypothetical and indirect.
Molecules, Atoms, Ethers, Prima Materia — one and all
are hypothetical. "Nevertheless," say the naturalists,
"they are thoroughly sound hypotheses and their
scientific value is enhanced daily both by known facts
that they are continually assimilating, and new facts
that they are continually revealing. We realise that
there is still much to do, but at the same time we are
confident that 'no other theory of matter is possible.'
Our scheme is therefore regarded as established in prin-
ciple despite important gaps in detail."

Now it is this advance — from mechanical theory, as
a branch of pure mathematics, through molar mechanics,
as an abstract application of that theory, on to molecular
mechanics, in which all physical phenomena are sub-
sumed under it — that vitally concerns us. A science


THE MECHANICAL THEORY REFUTES ITSELF 143

which at the outset is simply formal and quantitative
seems in the end to yield the ideal of concrete physical
existence, what Kant might have called the omnitudo
realitatis of the physical world; and this becomes, for
those to whom the physical world is primary and funda-
mental, the supreme and only omnitudo realitatis that
science can ever know. Here, then, we have that ad-
vancing tide of matter which, as Huxley says, "weighs
like a nightmare on the best minds of these days."
But surely if our account of this transformation of pure
mathematics into concrete physics is correct, the baleful
spectre should be dispelled, and that without any re-
course to such an agnosticism as Huxley's. The mechani-
cal theory, in a word, as I have already hinted, refutes
itself by proving too much. Or, to put it otherwise, and
more fairly : the mechanical theory, as a professed ex-
planation of the world, receives its death-blow from the
progress of mechanical physics itself.

As long as the ideal of matter consisted of the " solid,
massy, hard, impenetrable, movable particles of various
sizes and figures " (such as Newton supposes in his
Opticks), maintained in various states of vibration, rota-
tion, and translation by their mutual encounters ; so
long this ideal of matter answers to Newton's conception
of a vera causa. But the simple atom or centre of force
of Boscovich, and the primitive fluid of Lord Kelvin, are
not verce causce : we must not call them fetishes, but they
are assuredly fictions. To Newton's particles we mighty
perhaps, apply Dr. Hicks's words : " They lie outside
the scope of our bodily senses ; . . . not because they are
imperceptible, but because our senses are too coarse-


144 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

grained to transmit impressions of them to our minds."
To bodies wholly devoid of extension, or to a plenum
wholly devoid of differences, such language cannot be
applied. The process of analysis up to the stage of
the chemical or physical molecule, though hypothetical
and indirect, may yet be regarded as real analysis ; and
had the hypothesis of extended molecules proved ade-
quate, the mechanical theory might, so far as science
goes, have held its ground. Extended, solid, inde-
structible atoms have always been the stronghold of
materialistic views of the universe. But, unhappily for
such views, the hard, extended atom was not equal to
the demands which increasing knowledge laid upon it.
Then, as we have seen, encouraged by Newton's essen-
tially descriptive conception of distance-action, the old
atom shrank up gradually, surrendering all its extension,
rigidity, and elasticity, till it became identical with the
entirely formal conception of analytical mechanics, that,
viz., of a mass-point as a centre of force. But this later
analysis, though still hypothetical, had no longer any
conceivable physical counterpart. The supposition that
it had was due solely to that failure to realise the purely
descriptive character of mechanics which its increasing
mathematical formulation and its liberation from the
categories of substance and cause have now made clear.
It fell to Pere Boscovich decently to inter the genuinely
mechanical theory as an explanation of physical phe-
nomena. There was no rest for the old atom till it took
this ghostly form of a mass-point, and thenceforward it
was a dynamical fiction, pure and simple.

Lord Kelvin's brilliant hypothesis of vortex-atoms, if


DR. HICKS'S REAL WORLD 145

regarded as an endeavour to resuscitate indestructible and
extended atoms as realities, and to provide a medium
for their interaction, must be pronounced a failure too.
Boscovich resolved the palpable atom into an idea ; Lord
Kelvin seems to attempt the converse and far harder
feat of calling back this atom from a " vasty deep " so
dangerously like pure being as to be, phenomenally, pure
nothing. The endeavour to attribute mass to this con-
tinuum is as if one should let one's plummet drop in the
hope of sounding a fathomless sea ; we lose a simple
conception, and have a complex one left on our hands
instead. But now comes Dr. Hicks to persuade us that
we gain more than we lose : " If it should be found that
all phenomena are manifestations of motion of one single
continuous medium, the idea of force will be banished
[the relative idea, that is, of which mass is the correla-
tive] . . . and the study of dynamics will be replaced by
the equation of continuity ; " for " where all the matter
is of the same density the motions are kinematically de-
ducible from the configuration at the instant, and are
independent of the density."

These remarks are most opportune. If we consider
them for a moment, they ought to satisfy us that we
are not penetrating beyond what we see and feel to
anything that actually goes on behind the too coarse-
grained veil of sense. They serve to shew, on the
contrary, that the kinetic ideal also is but a fiction of
the mathematician, a descriptive symbol, and not con-
ceivably a presentable fact. Now there is a certain
philosophical doctrine, both psychologically and episte-
mologically of fundamental importance, that ought to

VOL. I — L


146 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

be well known in Aberdeen 1 — I mean the doctrine of
the relativity of knowledge. The range of this doc-
trine may be very much a question, but at least no
one will deny that it applies here. See then to what
it leads. Everything perceptually real, everything phe-
nomenal, whatever can be an object of possible experi-
ence, implies difference and change. But we have left
all sensible qualities except density behind us; and this,
though retained, is to admit of neither difference nor
change. "Idem semper sentire et non sentire ad idem
recidunt" says the doctrine of relativity. For any
conceivable experience then this density is as nothing.
Moreover, according to the kinetic theory, the motions
are independent of it. Why then is it retained?
Apparently to stand between us and nonentity. It
secures for us that "idea of stuff or substance which,"
Professor Tait tells us, " the mind seems to require " —
well for comfort! 2 It is then das reine Sein of our
present universe of discourse. Or it is the 'Achilles
heel* of reality, left when all the rest of the physical
world has been dipped in the Styx. "But why,"
asked an intelligent child, " did not Thetis dip
Achilles twice?" Now Dr. Hicks appears to have had
that much foresight in agreeing to let go dynamics
and to abide by the equation of continuity. For
dynamics and mass must surely vanish together, and
we have properly only kinematics left. Nevertheless
there remains one stipulation that kinematics does not
warrant — there must be no discontinuity in the

1 Being so strenuously maintained by Dr. Bain.

2 Unseen Universe, p. 106.


A QUASI-KINEMATICAL SYSTEM 147

motions on two sides of a geometrical boundary. The
vortices, in other words, must not spin and leave the
medium unaffected ; and so the medium, being involved
in the movement of one vortex, must in turn affect
the movements of another. And thus with this pro-
viso the whole becomes, as we may say, one vast quasi-
dynamical or rather quasi-kinematical system. For it
is allowed, 1 I believe, that the existence of surfaces of
finite slip is not precluded by the bare conception of a
uniform frictionless medium. Imagine such an ideal
fluid if you can, and the question whether a vortex in
it will or will not affect the fluid outside the vortex
is altogether indeterminate. It may do either or
neither, sometimes the one and sometimes the other.
Why then is this condition of motional continuity
imposed from without? Simply to make the thing
work mathematically, that is to say, to insure connexion
and continuity between one kinematical configuration
and another. Without it we might have vortex-atoms
as before, but not "actions excited by these vortices
on one another through the inertia of the fluid which
is their basis." 2 Such mutual regard is not then a direct
consequence of the common plenum. In fine, then, this
additional property of motional continuity is asserted,
though it cannot be deduced, in order to make possible
a kinematical scheme that replaces, as Dr. Hicks says,
the dynamical laws that can then be left behind. 8

1 See letter on Vortex-atoms, by Professor G. H. Darwin, Nature, vol.
xxii, p. 96. 2 Dr. Larmor, Proc. B. S., 1893, p. 439.

8 " It will be seen that the work is almost entirely kinematical ; we
start with the fact that the vortex-ring always consists of the same parti-


148 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

It may be that this exposition by the President of the
Physics Section of the British Association sounded rash,
or at least premature, to the distinguished physicists who
heard it. But it must certainly be impressive to any
humble outsider with a philosophical bent. It exhibits
strikingly the complete logical outcome of the problem
of mathematical physics, as formulated by the Kirchhoff
school; and all the more strikingly because this conse-
quence is here worked out, as it were unconsciously, by
one who, unlike Kirchhoff, seems to suppose that he is
all the while getting nearer to " what actually goes on "
in the real world. The tendency to extend kinematics at
the expense of dynamics seems inherent in this new con-
ception of physics. But the sounder the conception, the
more this tendency may be expected to assert itself spite
of contrary prepossessions, and the more effectively will
such prepossessions be dispossessed.

Now it is entirely upon these uncritical prejudices,
as we may fairly call them, that the mechanical theory
of the world rests. The more they are discredited the
more it is discredited through them, and this, I believe,
the history of science will amply show. The transfer-
ence of motion by impact, for example, as when two
billiard balls collide, seems the type of plainness, and so

cles of fluid (the proof of which, however, requires dynamical considera-
tions), and we find that the rest of the work is kinematical. This is
further evidence that the vortex theory of matter is of a much more fun-
damental character than the ordinary solid particle theory, since the
material action of two vortex-rings can be found by kinematical princi-
ples, whilst the * clash of atoms ' in the ordinary theory introduces us to
forces which themselves demand a theory to explain them." Professor
J. J. Thomson, A Treatise on the Nature of Vortex-Rings, 1883, p. 2.


DESCRIPTIVE ANALOGIES NOT FACTS 149

long as this and other equally familiar experiences were
accessible to the imagination, it seemed still to retain its
grasp of the real spite of 4 the cloud of analytical sym-
bols.' The triumph of the undulatory, over the corpus-
cular, theory of light, was a blow to such realism ; for
an imponderable ether was not easy to conjure up by
imagination. Still, after all, waves are familiar and it
was only the * undulating agency' 1 that was obscure.
But a severer blow overtakes us in what we might call
the demolition of the chemical atom as an assured strong-
hold of the realistic imagination. And when both chem-
ical elements and luminiferous ether are resolved into
motions of a medium, 'the dynamics of which is not
the dynamics of ordinary matter,' 1 realism seems fairly
routed. But stranger still, imagination has become itself
a traitor to mechanical realism — I refer, of course, to
such ingenious mechanical analogies as those, for exam-
ple, by which Maxwell succeeded in elucidating electro-
magnetism. Analogy is an important aid to description,
though powerless to prove existence. Nevertheless, as
I had occasion to remark in the last lecture, even the
ablest men are apt to see more in analogy than this ; and
it speaks volumes for Maxwell's strength of intellect
that, acute as he was in the discernment of helpful analo-
gies, he seems never to have been led away by them.
But it is a case in which there is safety in numbers. A
thinker familiar with many analogies is less likely to
be betrayed by them than a thinker whose mind is en-
chanted by one. Now Boltzmann, in an instructive paper

1 Lord Salisbury, Presidential Address, British Association, 1804.

2 Larmor, Nature, vol. liii, p. 4.


150 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

on the Methods of Theoretical Physics from which I have
already quoted once or twice, gives many instances of
surprising and far-reaching analogies that have been dis-
covered within the last half-century between physical
phenomena apparently quite unlike; as if nature had
"built up the most diversified things after exactly the
same pattern." "As the analyst dryly observes, the
same differential equations hold for the most diversified
phenomena." And no great wonder if the analyst pre-
viously made up his mind to see the most diversified
phenomena merely as cases of motion, to be described in
the simplest and most comprehensive manner. The logi-
cal goal of such a project, I conclude then, is — if I may
so say — to minimise the inevitable * matter ' of phe-
nomena and to bring all the diversity possible under the
c form ' of motion. This goal is already set before us
in the kinetic ideal of matter, where dynamics is all but
sublimated into kinematics. So much so indeed, I may
remark by the way, that even the motion is absolute,
and not merely relative motion; for every motion is
strictly a motion of the medium, and this is infinite and
all there is. Now, as soon as we are asked to entertain
the notion of absolute motion, we may satisfy ourselves
that we have left everything phenomenal behind us and
are once again entirely in the region of the abstract con-
ceptions of exact mathematics. And the medium itself,
though infinite and all there is — nay, because ^ of this,
for it does not allow even the distinction of body and
space — is indistinguishable from nothing. The whole
ideal, it seems to me, if it be meant to set before us what
verily is and happens, was refuted long ago by Leibnitz


A MORAL FROM THE PYTHAGOREANS 151

in the following sentences of the Monadology (§ 8) :
44 If simple substances did not differ at all in their quali-
ties, there would be no way of perceiving any change in
things, since what is in the compound can only come
from the simple ingredients, and if the monads were
without qualities they could not be distinguished the
one from the other, since also they do not differ in quan-
tity. Consequently, a plenum being supposed, each place
in any movement could receive only the equivalent of
what it had before, and one state of things would not be
distinguishable from another."

We smile at the critical simplicity while admiring
the boldness of the Pythagoreans, according to whom,
as Aristotle tells us, 4t Number is the essence of all
things ; and the organization of the universe, in its
various determinations, is a harmonious system of num-
bers and their relations." Enough perhaps is known
of the Pythagoreans and their tenets to shew that they
had no pure science of number, but that such arithmetical
knowledge as they had was encumbered by concrete and
fanciful associations with numbered things. May we
not apply the moral to the mechanical theories of the
universe, and say that the more clearly the purely
mathematical character of mechanics is realized, the
more absurdly inadequate that theory becomes? A
science that can only offer us as its ultimate scheme
of the universe the inconceivable ideal of continuous
motion in an unvarying plenum, is surely as incompetent
as arithmetic or geometry to furnish a concrete present-
ment of a real and living world. Its essentially formal
character has become increasingly evident with every


152 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

improvement in its methods. Galileo and Newton made
many experiments, and their works abound in diagrams ;
but I am not aware that either Lagrange or Laplace
ever tried an experiment, while Lagrange is said to
have boasted that his MScanique analytique did not con-
tain a single figure. This science, then, which has
gradually rid itself of the categories of substance and
cause, which works entirely with abstract quantities,
expressing its conditions in equations and its results in
equations, does not, and cannot, yield any direct know-
ledge concerning real things. When employed to de-
scribe them, its application is restricted absolutely to
the one quantitative aspect with which it deals, — the
motions of mass-systems. It has no scientific status
except where such motions are either (1) given, or (2)
inferred, or (3) assumed. In the first case its results,
though necessary and exact in themselves, become at
once hypothetical and approximate in their application ;
the ideal simplicity and abstract isolation of theory
being never found in reality. In the second case the
results are more hypothetical and approximate still ; for
neither the particles nor the motions themselves can be
directly measured. This is the region of statistical
probabilities. In the third, the masses and motions are
entirely hypothetical ; it is no longer, strictly speaking,
a case of applying pure mechanics to describe real
motions. This is the region of mechanical analogies,
of prime atoms and ethers, vortices and primordial
fluids ; the region in which, as Dr. Hicks has told us,
"the wreckage of rejected theories is appalling."
The mechanical theory of the universe, then, begins


ITS SHORTCOMINGS EVEN AS DESCRIPTIVE 153

with abstractions, and in the end has only abstractions
left ; it begins with phenomenal movement and ends by
resolving all phenomena into motion. It begins with
real bodies in empty space, and ends with ideal motions
in an imperceptible plenum. It begins with the dynamics
of ordinary masses, and ends with a medium that needs
no dynamics or has dynamics of its own. But between
beginning and end, there are stages innumerable ; in
other words, the end is an unattainable ideal. First, we
have sensible mechanisms ; to these theoretical formulae
only apply approximately, their abstract simplifications
being inadequate to cope with the 'practically infinite'
complexity of the reality. A closer approximation is
secured, but at the cost of new residual discrepancies,
by resolving the parts of sensible mechanisms into smaller
mechanisms, and the parts of these into others yet smaller
in turn. Again, further approximations are made by
attributing other elements of the real complexity to
imaginary mechanisms of many orders. But the com-
plexity being, as said, 'practically infinite,' this procedure
has no prospect of ending. Dr. Hicks, for example,
even when he has got as far as the chemical atom, —
and that, we must remember, is a very long way, —
cheerfully tells us, "The atom is much larger than a
cell, and contains, practically, an infinite number of
them ; " a cell, I must tell you, being an imaginary box
that Dr. Hicks has devised, in which a vortex of the
primary medium is magically penned up to wriggle.
Yet, spite of these complex mechanical fictions, no advance
is yet reported towards a kinetic theory of gravitation,
and very little has been done with the terrible complica-


154 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

tions of chemical affinity. The story of the progress so
far is, then, briefly this : Divergence between theory and
fact one part of the way, the wreckage of abandoned
fictions for the rest, with an unattainable goal of phe-
nomenal nihilism and ultra-physical mechanism beyond.
Nevertheless, there are many who hold that the world
must be such a mechanism, because they imagine them-
selves unable to conceive it otherwise. Such, as I
understand it, is Lord Kelvin's position, for example.
Others see in the situation a parallel to that of the
Ptolemaic astronomy, which could not cope with increas-
ing knowledge even with the help of new eccentrics and
epicycles, freely assumed as the occasion arose. A new
and simpler science of energetics is with some of these
reactionaries the counterpart of the Copernican astron-
omy, and is to release physics from the complications in
which mechanics has involved it. These are points that
must occupy us in the next lecture.


LECTURE VI

THE THEORY OP ENERGY

The proposal to replace Mechanical Physics by Energetics. What-
ever it may be worth, this proposal at least puts Mechanical Physics anew
upon its trial.

I. What is energy? Professor TaWs definition of Matter as the
'vehicle or receptacle of Energy' examined. Relation of Energy to
Matter. Helmholtz's exposition of this relation. Relation of Energy to
Mass. Is not Mass as much an analytical abstraction as Force?

All change either a transference or a transformation of Energy, and
Kinetic Energy only one form of actual energy — this is the new doctrine.
Difficulties of the old theory which is bent on resolving all actual energy
into kinetic energy. Professor Duhem's protest, and some reflections that
it suggests.

Returning to the new theory we note (i.) that quantitative equivalence
not qualitative identity is all that is asserted of the several forms of
energy; and (ii.) that some of these forms may still remain undiscovered.
Some final reflections on the mechanical bias.

II. What is the Conservation of Energy ? What it is not ; it does not
warrant statements about the past or future of the universe. It does not
mean that Energy is verily and absolutely the substance of the universe.
Its relativity. Its character as a postulate. Implications of this, and new
questions opened up.

In the preface to the Prindpia, it will be remembered,
Newton gave expression to his hope that if the mechan-
ical principles he had laid down should prove inade-
quate to the explanation of "the other phenomena of
nature, they might at least afford some light to a more

155


156 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

perfect method of [natural] philosophy." 1 The inquiry
which has occupied us for the last two lectures seems
to shew that the first alternative is well-nigh, if not
quite, hopeless. In place of simplifications of actual phe-
nomena it offers us fictitious mechanisms ; or mechani-
cal analogies, in which quasi-rigidity, quasi-elasticity,
quasi-mass, and quasi-matter meet us at every turn.
One recent writer! the brilliant German physicist] Hertz,
did not shrink from assuming that the underlying mech-
anism, by which he proposed to explain the effects
we perceive, consists of hidden masses and motions
that exceed by an infinite number the masses and
motions to be described. 2 And even with all this more
than poetic license it has not been found possible to
resolve electrical and chemical phenomena into motions,
to say nothing of the phenomena of organic life. Yet
all these phenomena, it is said, are clearly amenable to
the principle of the conservation of energy. Spite of
the physicist's complete ignorance as to what the mech-
anism of electricity, for instance, may be, if indeed it
has any mechanism at all ; ' electric current ' can be
produced, measured, and retailed to consumers like other
commodities ; and is so far under control that it can be
transformed into its equivalents of heat, light, or motive
power. Nay, but for a knowledge of these transforma-
tions and their mechanical equivalents, the mechanical
treatment of physics could not have advanced as far as
it has. Here then is a principle universal in its range,
independent of atomic hypotheses and fictitious forces,
confirmed by innumerable experiments and contradicted
1 Cf. Lecture III above, p. 84. 2 Principien der Mechanik, § 664.


THE SCIENCE OF ENERGETICS 157

by none, a principle that verily brings all physical phe-
nomena, mechanical as well as the rest, under a single
real scheme, surely this, it is said, is the true integral
law of the world. And so just forty years ago Ran-
kine sketched "the outlines of the science of ener-
getics." The project has never been lost sight of, and
within the last few years it has been pursued with
ardour in many quarters, especially in Germany and in
France. The views of the extreme upholders of this
new science are still sub judice, so much so that it
would ill become me as a complete layman in such
questions to venture any opinion. But the doctrine of
energy is fully admitted even by those physicists who
are not prepared to yield it precedence over the old
Newtonian mechanics. At the same time the more
progressive doctrines are at least effective as criticisms
of the older view. They are a new outgrowth, which,
if it does not displace, must at least profoundly, modify
the older form. For these reasons it has seemed to me
best to reserve the discussion of this subject till now,
and to do so was easy, as the mechanical ideal contrives
% to dispense with all forms of actual energy save the
old vis viva. And let me remark, by the way, that
energy, as I understand, is to be regarded as a physical
fact and not as a mathematical conception ; in discuss-
ing it and the criticisms of the mechanical theory that
it suggests, we are not then concerned with abstract
mechanics as a branch of mathematics, but only with
mechanics. applied to physical phenomena.

This becomes evident when we ask : What is energy ?
It is in the answer to this question that we come upon


158 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

the new wine that is to try the old bottles of the me-
chanical theory; for energy is so defined as to threaten
the independent existence of that matter which was first
of all regarded as its necessary substratum. Thus Pro-
fessor Tait informs us that "in the physical universe
there are but two classes of things, Matter and Energy."
Further, that as "energy is never found except in asso-
ciation with matter ... we might define matter as the
Vehicle or Receptacle of Energy." 1 Vehicle, I presume,
we are to take as the appropriate simile where the
energy is actual and changes are in process ; receptacle,
when the energy is only 4 stored,' and changes are only
potential. But either way these figurative expressions
distinctly imply that we know by experience each of
these two things, just as we know and distinguish the
cycle and the rider, the basket and its contents. The
appropriateness of such language turns entirely on the
question whether or no we have such knowledge. It
will, not do to say : We must have it, since we know
that both matter and energy are conserved. We shall
come to that presently; but it is plain our knowledge
cannot begin there. To know such laws about the
things, we must first have some sensible acquaintance
with the things themselves. We get a little nearer to
what we want when Professor Tait goes on to say:
" Matter is simply passive (inert is the scientific word) ;
energy is perpetually undergoing transformation." But
surely to be perpetually undergoing transformation is
no better than the dreariest picture of unmitigated pas-
sivity. However, Professor Tait continues: "the one

1 Properties of Matter, pp. 2, 4.


RELATION OF MATTER TO ENERGY 159

[matter] is, as it were, the body of the physical uni-
verse; the other [energy] is its life and activity." 1

Our question, then, can now be more precisely put ;
it is not, What do we or what does Professor Tait know
about this simply passive thing, this inactive unchange-
able body, as it were ; 4 scientific words ' like inert,
conservation, and the like, being used. The question
is: What sensible acquaintance have we with the thing
itself ? Now it is remarkable that, although the book I
have been quoting is entitled Properties of Matter —
Professor Tait proceeds to say : " From the strictly sci-
entific point of view the greater part of the present
work would be said to deal with energy rather than
matter ; " and he only justifies the title he has used
on " the two grounds of custom and convenience." We
are not, however, concerned either with custom or with
the convenience of exposition : on the contrary, it is the
44 strictly scientific " answer we want to the question :
How far matter can be known apart from energy?
The answer is : It cannot be known at all. I do not
give this as the answer of philosophers, it is the answer
of the physicists themselves. Every physical quality
we distinguish, every physical change we observe, every
physical measurement or comparison we can make, re-
lates to energy, to the "life and activity" of the physi-
cal universe ; not one refers to the supposed vehicle or
receptacle, " the body, as it were," of that activity. In
that famous memoir on the subject, which fifty years
ago was rejected as nonsense, though it has now be-
come one of the corner-stones of the new edifice, Helm-

1 Properties of Matter, p. 5.


160 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

holtz concedes this point, without however realizing its
consequences. The point is one which you may per-
haps think I have laboured at sufficiently already when
endeavouring to make clear the extremely abstract na-
ture of the conception of mass. But we are approaching
it now from what we might call the opposite side, and
I am anxious that at every stage we should keep our
authorities well in sight. Let me then quote a few
sentences from the philosophical introduction, as he
calls it, with which Helmholtz prefaced his essay on
The Conservation of Energy. And please note that what
primarily concerns us is the answer that his words af-
ford to our question as to the possibility of knowing
matter as distinct from energy. His philosophy of the
relation of the two conceptions we can examine later.
" Science," he tells us, then, " deals with external objects
from two abstract points of view: first, as barely exist-
ent, apart from their effects on other objects or on our
organs of sense ; as such we call them matter, which
for us is a thing in itself without motion, without
action. Qualitative differences are not to be ascribed
to it, for so soon as we speak of different kinds of
matter we imply differences of operations, i.e. of ener-
gies. Natural objects however are not without action,
for we become acquainted with them at all solely
through their actions, by which they eventually affect our
senses ; while from these actions we infer a something
acting. In applying the conception of matter, therefore,
to * actual things, we must restore through a second
abstraction whJIrwe were previously for leaving aside,
the power to produce effects; in other words, we must


k


>


HELMHOLTZ ON MATTER AND ENERGY 161

assign it energy. It is manifest that, when applied to
nature, the conceptions of matter and energy are not to
be separated. Pure matter would for the rest of nature
be a thing of indifference, since it would never deter-
mine any change either in this or in our senses. Pure
energy would be something that ought to exist and
yet again ought not to exist, for the existent we call
matter. . . . Both conceptions are abstractions from
the actual formed in the same way ; we can in truth
perceive matter only through its energies, never in
itself." 1 Now here we have the most unequivocal
admission that of matter as the simply passive vehicle
or receptacle of energy we perceive nothing ; that all
we perceive of external objects is due wholly and solely
to energy and to energy alone. True, Helmholtz pro-
poses to treat both matter and energy as abstractions
that are on the same footing ; but in so doing, though —
like Professor Tait afterwards — he conforms to custom
and convenience, he flies straight in the face of the
strictly scientific view. No doubt we call matter the
existent, attributing energy as a power or property to
it, and attributes cannot be separated from their sub-
stances. But great as are the forces of custom and the
claims of established conventions, all that the facts lead
us to infer is a "something acting" not a something
passive, which would be a thing of indifference for
everything beside. To the one conception corresponds,
in short, all our perceptual experience ; to the other
the unutterably metaphysical notion of bare existence

1 Ueber die Erhaltung der Krqft, p. 4, Ostwald's Klassiker der exakten
Wissensehaft. ( Kraft ' translated ' energy ' throughout.
vol. i — M


162 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

per se. How then can they be both on the same footing,
especially for a scientific view that discards the notion
of substance as non-phenomenal and defines matter as
44 that which can be perceived by the senses ? " l En-
ergy and its transformations are given, and nothing else
is given ; those who wish may attach the idea of sub-
stantiality or actuality to this, but they may not multi-
ply entities needlessly. It would seem, then, that there
are not, after all, two classes of things in the physical
universe, but one only. Such at least appears to be
the logical outcome of the theory of energy.

But what of mass, it will be asked; surely mass is
a property of matter, is, in fact, that very passivity
which distinguishes matter from energy. To answer
this we have only to ask another question : Is mass
perceptible by an external sense or is it not? Now, if
we turn to our text-book, Professor Tait tells us first of
all that " the mass of a body is estimated by its inertia ; "
next that inertia "may be described as passivity or dogged
perseverance " in the motor status quo, " familiar instances
of which present themselves in all directions," as when
the "sudden stopping of a train appears to urge the
passengers forwards. " 2 In other words, we become
acquainted with inertia when we experience a change
of momentum, and in no other way. But such an ex-
perience, whether we regard it as a change or as a per-
severance against change, implies time and implies 4 the
action of natural objects.' How are we going to advance
from this to mass as pure passivity, which implies neither ?

1 Thomson and Tait, Natural Philosophy, p. 207.
a Properties of Matter y pp. 91 f.


RELATION OF MASS AND FORCE 163

To that we can find no answering experience. But we
have seen how theoretical mechanics by analysing the dy-
namical transactions in which momentum is changed has
reached the two abstract conceptions of mass and force.
That the latter of these terms is nothing but an ana-
lytical abstraction Professor Tait has taught us with
commendable emphasis and persistence. Is it not then
odd that he is so anxious to persuade us that the
former is a reality? Surely here at least the two
abstractions are on the same footing. Then must we
not decline to accept masses as things, in which energy
careers like Ariel " on the curl'd clouds " ; or between
which it is imprisoned, like Ariel "'twixt a cloven
pine " ?

All change is either a transference or a tranformation
of energy — this is the new doctrine. The familiar
experiences to which we owe the conception of inertia
are transferences of one particular form of energy,
viz., motional or kinetic energy. This energy of motion

, ,, ,.ii i i momentum x velocity
may be mathematically regarded as ~ *■

or, as Clifford once put it, half the rate at which momen-
tum is carried along. 1 It is now, of course, a familiar
fact that other forms of energy have their equivalents
in kinetic energy and vice versa; it is this fact, indeed,
that renders the doctrine of energy physically so impor-
tant. But it is not a fact that other forms of energy
are not only quantitatively commensurable, but qualita-
tively identical, with energy of motion. This qualitative
identity is at best but an assumption; and in the vain

1 Nature, vol. xxii, p. 123.


164 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

endeavour to justify it we have seen the mechanical
theory led, " to pass through the very den of the meta-
physician strewed with the remains of former explorers,
and abhorred by every man of science." 1

It is this instinct of self-preservation that prompts so
many physicists just now to abandon as ' foolhardy '
the adventure of mechanical physics, and to set about
the construction of what we might call energetical
physics instead. Let me quote one of them, Professor
Duhem of Lille. Referring to the mechanical method,
and after illustrating its futility in chemical physics, he
says : — "We have seen this method at work ; we have
ascertained to how small an extent experience accords
with the results of its deductions. In the face of such
rebuffs is it not prudent to renounce the doctrines fol-
lowed thus far? Why seek by mechanical constructions
to set aside bodies and their modifications, instead of tak-
ing them as our senses give them, or rather as our ab-
stracting faculty, working on the data of sense, leads
us to conceive them ? . . . Why seek to figure changes
of state as displacements, juxtapositions of molecules,
variations of path, instead of characterising such
changes of state by the disturbance introduced into the
sensible and measurable properties of the body, such,
e.g. as increase or decrease of density, absorption or
evolution of heat, etc.? Why wish that the axioms on
which every theory must rest should be propositions
furnished by statics or dynamics, instead of accepting
for principles laws founded on experience and formu-
lated by induction, whatever be the form of such

1 Maxwell, Collected Papers, ii, p. 216.


PROFESSOR DUHEM'S PROTEST 165

laws and whatever be the nature of the concepts to
which they appeal ? " 1

Such language as a protest against the intellects
rnathematicce permisms sounds like the counterpart to
Bacon's against the intellects sibi permissus, and leads one
to wonder whether, after all, one and the same infirmity-
will not account for both — I mean that hankering after
certainty and definiteness by which we are hurried into
hasty generalisations. It was this that Bacon exposed
as the anticipation of nature, while ironically praising
it as so much easier and more satisfying a method than
the patient interpretation of nature. It was to this
too that Descartes referred when he declared the will
and not the intellect to be the source of errors. A
mechanism may be very complex, but once get at the
working drawings, and then, as Professor Hicks suggests,
there are no surprises, no irregularities, no uncertainties ;
only master the mathematics, and you are intellectually
master of the whole. That is one reason why so many
" wish that the axioms on which every theory must rest
should be furnished by statics or dynamics." And there
is another reason still, and one to which even Descartes,
spite of all his rules, completely succumbed — I mean
the influence of the imagination. We figure changes
of state as being displacements or motions because we
can imagine nothing else with equal clearness and dis-
tinctness. We cannot be surprised then that the cer-
tainty of mathematics, and the freedom from contradiction
and obscurity of mechanical imagery, should have led
so many able minds to an anticipation of nature that is

1 Mechanique chimique, 1803, p. 88.


166 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

unwarranted by facts, and even induced them to affirm
as Descartes, yes, and Kant too, have done, that a true
science of nature extends just as far as mechanics will
carry it and no farther. Time's cure for such an error
is twofold : first, to leave it to work itself out and so
refute itself ; and secondly, to confront it with facts
to which it will not apply. It was just such a conjunc-
ture that made Bacon's denunciation of scholastic science
effective. Perhaps some of you may live to see a sec-
ond intellectual reformation in which the mechanical
ideal of modern science will be proved in its turn to
be defective and chimerical. At any rate, we have
noted much that is ominous. Rigorously carried out
as a theory of the real world, that ideal lands us in
nihilism : all changes are motions, for motions are the
only changes we can understand, and so what moves,
to be understood, must itself be motion. Again, re-
garded as a descriptive or symbolic scheme, it proves
to be only approximate and to become involved in in-
terminable complications in the attempt to be exact.
Just when scientific men, who are neither mathematicians
nor physicists, Du Bois-Reymond and Huxley, for in-
stance, are preaching " the advancing tide of matter and
the tightening grasp of law," we find professed physi-
cists renouncing their allegiance to this ancient idol.
It is remarkable, too, that a change of a precisely oppo-
site kind is going on in the more concrete sciences,
which were formerly distinguished, as natural history,
from physics, to which was reserved the title of natural
science. Boltzmann refers to this : thus, he says :
" What were formerly called the descriptive natural


QUANTITY AND QUALITY DISTINCT 167

sciences triumphed, when Darwin's hypothesis made it
possible, not only to describe the various living forms
and phenomena, but also to explain them. Strangely
enough, physics made almost exactly at the same time
a turn in the opposite direction," 1 i.e. as I understand,
abandoning the attempt to be explanatory and content-
ing itself with being descriptive.

But returning now to the new theory of Energy.
One important point for us to take account of — let
me observe once more — is that this doctrine only
entitles the physicist to assert the quantitative equiva-
lence of phenomena that are qualitatively diverse: so
much energy in the form of heat is equivalent to so
much energy in the form of mechanical work ; or again,
so much thermal or mechanical energy has its equiva-
lent in radiant energy or in energy of electric field. But
it is going altogether beyond the facts to assume that all
these forms are at bottom the same, i.e. mechanical or
kinetic. The endeavour to reduce them to one is of
course legitimate and in the interests of simplification.
It is, however, pure hypothesis ; there is no necessity
about it; and, moreover, it is a hypothesis, as we have
seen, round which, in spite of all that it has accom-
plished, difficulties seem steadily to thicken.

There is still another point that we must not over-
look, — not only are the several forms of energy
qualitatively distinct, but we have, I take it, no means
of knowing that all these forms have been ascertained.
We have no means of ear-marking a portion of energy;
and it is not necessary to know all the transformations

1 Methods of Theoretical Physics, Phil. Mag. 1893, voL xxxvi, p. 40.


168 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

and transferences that may intervene in the course of
a reversible cycle before it can be said that, whatever
changes energy undergoes, it is never destroyed.
Indeed it would, I believe, be substantially true to say
that it was by assuming the conservation of energy,
while still mistaken as to the nature of heat, that Car-
not laid the foundation of thermodynamics. A strict
quid pro quo is the one thing essential. The Bank of
England issues notes equivalent in value to the gold
in its cellars, and pays the gold out again to whoever
presents the notes, and is so far unconcerned as to all
the transactions that have intervened. Whether these
transactions were many or few, domestic or foreign, in-
dustrial or financial — is of no account. So here : our
ignorance of one or many possible transformations does
not affect the main doctrine, provided we never find a
transformation in which energy appears or disappears,
unaccounted for.

But it is obvious that this possibility of unknown
forms of energy coupled with the probability that the
known forms are not all mechanical, suggests many
new vistas, for which it behoves us to keep an open
mind. I shall hope to recur to this briefly in dealing
with psychophysics. For the present I think we are
entitled as spectators of the march of science to say at
least this much : Mechanics is no longer, at the end
of the nineteenth century, what she was at the begin-
ning, when the author of the MScanique cSleste pro-
posed that "jubilant toast" to her that has served as
our text. Absolute supremacy is hers no more; at best
she is but prima inter pares, and even this, not


THE MECHANICAL BIAS 169

because of the paramount value of the real knowledge
she can bestow, but solely for her abstract purity of
form. Should the science of energetics be destined to
grow in importance at her expense, such an event
would be by no means without a precedent. Think of
the simplicity of the old Ionian and other pre-Socratic
philosophies. Without a vestige of that knowledge
that looms so large and imposing in the present con-
crete sciences, they set up their several apx<u or first
principles, water, air, fire, and so on ; which now,
so far from standing out as the obvious Alpha and
Omega of all things, are simply lost in the multitude
of particulars, quite on a par with them. And so in
the history of science, do we see aziomata media, or
middle principles, continually dwarfing and overtopping
what had appeared as the veritable summits of know-
ledge in earlier days - such supposed summits con-
stituting, by the way, the philosophy rather than the
science of the time. And the remark is relevant,
for mechanics, as I have had occasion to say before,
has hardly yet ceased to count as natural philosophy,
and even carries back its claims to those early times
just referred to, when Democritus and Leucippus first
broached the atomic theory. Its long supremacy is
due largely no doubt to that vividness and mathemati-
cal accuracy with which the imagination can follow
geometrical constructions. We are familiar with the
influence of this fact, direct and indirect, on the minds
of Plato, Descartes, Spinoza, and Kant. Had the
inadequacy of the old atomism been realised earlier,
the sway of the strictly mechanical theory would have


170 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

been, briefer. But it was only as physics and chemis-
try grew that these defects of the theory of "hard,
massy particles" disclosed themselves in the course of
attempts to resolve physical and chemical phenomena
into mechanical processes between such particles. The
result, as we have seen, has been to justify Lagrange's
contention that mechanics is essentially a branch of
pure mathematics, and as such subservient to, not
dominant over, the concrete physical sciences. These
meanwhile have a new ground of unity in the doctrine
of energy. The only way to a supreme generalisation
concerning physical things seems to lie through this; but
it is altogether premature to suppose that that generali-
sation will be found to consist of such a world-formula
as Laplace in his enthusiasm ventured to predict.

I have said much of this projected science of energetics,
but nothing as yet of its main principle, the so-called Con-
servation of Energy. What does this mean ? Methodolo-
gically, in other words, as a formal and regulative principle,
it means much ; really it means very little. Those who
imagine that it furnishes any basis for statements con-
cerning the past, present, or future of the universe, as a
whole, are assuredly mistaken. And there are many
such. We had an instance, for example, in th£ passage
from Du Bois-Reymond's famous Leipzig address, which
I quoted in the second lecture. Referring to Laplace's
imaginary intelligence, Du Bois-Reymond represents him
as calculating at what moment the universe will lapse
into icy dullness, its energy, though conserved, being,
in accordance with the second law of thermodynamics,
entirely degraded to the unavailable form of heat at one


THE ENERGY OF THE UNIVERSE 171

temperature. To say nothing of the impropriety of
treating the doctrine of the dissipation of energy as
comparable in validity with the principle of the con-
servation of energy, the gratuitous assumption is here
made that the quantity of energy in the universe is
finite. If it should be infinite — and why should it not
be? — then even Laplace's superhuman intelligence would
be effectually nonplussed. But all statements concerning
concrete quantity, and energy is such, imply measure-
ment. There is but that one way of answering the
question : How much ? It cannot be answered a priori
or by mere mathematics. To those who are fond of the
'high priori road' I will suggest the following con-
sideration : If the energy of the world is a finite quan-
tity and the second law of thermodynamics valid, how
is it that the said degradation and consequent icy still-
ness are not the fact? On these assumptions the uni-
verse can only last a finite time, and the ratio of finite
time to infinite duration is strictly infinitesimal. The
chances then are infinity to one in favour of the universe
being at any given moment 4 played out.'

But now I will venture to say that not only does the
principle of the conservation of energy tell us nothing
about the quantity of energy in the universe as a whole,
but that it does not even allow us to say that such quan-
tity is an amount eternally fixed. I am quite aware
that Mr. Spencer may here interpose with his caveat
against "pseudo-thinking," and remind us of "the ex-
perimentally established induction " that energy is inde-
structible. As to the first — we shall come to the second
presently — I am content to make again the reply made


172 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

when we were discussing the conservation of mass.
Reality and substantiality are not identical; if energy
be verily and absolutely substantial, it must no doubt
be verily and absolutely permanent, neither generated
nor liable to decay. But it is obvious that we cannot
by observation or measurement show that this is actu-
ally the case, nor can we by a priori reasoning prove
that it necessarily must be. It would be safe to go
further, and to say that if energy were verily and abso-
lutely the substance of things, it could not be measured
at all. To what is absolutely substance the notion of
unity and totality will apply, but these are not metrical
notions. The scientific meaning of the statement, "the
energy of the universe is constant," then, is not what
at first blush it seems to be and is often mistaken to
be. Apparently an absolute statement, it is really a
relative one, and only valid as such. Apparently a
statement of fact, it is really only a postulate. As
with the conservation of mass, which — as we have
seen — it may turn out to include, so with the con-
servation of energy; there are the same two grounds
for making it, but neither will suffice to place it beyond
question. First, it is borne out by experience, so far
as we know; and secondly, it seems the simplest and
best working hypothesis. As to its relativity, this it
shares in common with every other empirical statement :
all such tell us nothing but the ratio between the quan-
tity measured and the quantity of the unit or standard
employed in measuring. If both these quantities were
to vary in the same proportion, their ratio, of course,
would remain unaffected; hence it can afford no evi-


ENERGY-CONSERVATION A POSTULATE 173

dence of such variation. We assume, however, that
our standard is fixed, or what comes to the same thing
for metrical purposes — that, if there is any variation, it
is a uniform variation throughout the universe. This
is all that constancy means. But a principle that will
allow of such an interpretation cannot be one relating
to substance.

Regarded as a postulate the conservation of energy
appears under a somewhat different aspect, and one of
especial interest to us. I greatly regret that there is
not time enough left to deal with it more fully. It is
allowed that as an experimental generalisation the con-
servation of energy can only claim to be probable ; on
what ground to i» it pu/forward » afantaenta.
principle? Helmholtz, also Thomson and Tait, found
on "the axiom that the Perpetual Motion is impossible."
Mayer, a genius to whom the world has yet to do jus-
tice, and even Joule, are more 'metaphysical.' Mayer
falls back on the formula, Causa cequat effectum; and
Joule declares it "manifestly absurd to suppose that
the powers with which God has endowed matter can
be destroyed." 1 It is clear, then, that not only are we
not here in the region of experimental proof, but that
no direct proof of any kind is offered us. The use of
terms such as 'impossible' and 'absurd' shew plainly
that any proof there is, is indirect — a sure sign that,
if we are dealing with a truth at all, it is one that is
self-evident. And yet it was not till the year 1775
that the French Academy of Sciences, with Lagrange
and Laplace at their elbow, were s^ far convinced that

1 Cf. Mach, Popular Scientific Lectures, p. 246.


174 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

the perpetual motion was impossible, as to decline for
the future to receive any pretended demonstration of
such a machine. Moreover, as Mach 1 has pointed out,
the principle of virtual velocities, on which Lagrange's
whole MSchanique analytique rests, really presupposes
this axiom ; yet Lagrange himself was not clearly
aware of it, though sensible of the insufficiency of his
proof as it stood — an insufficiency that led Poinsot to
remark, that Lagrange had only lifted the clouds from
the course of mechanics, because he had allowed them
to gather at the very origin of that science. But after
all the impossibility of perpetual motion only covers
half the ground ; friction and strain are absent from ideal
mechanisms, so that the question what goes with appar-
ently wasted energy does not arise. It was the study
of actual machines, with which Lagrange never troubled
himself, that brought this side to the fore ; and it is this,
the converse of the first axiom, that Joule is attempting
vaguely to formulate when he says it is absurd to sup-
pose that material powers can be destroyed. The re-
mark is noteworthy, for it is customary to extol Joule as
a sound experimentalist and to depreciate Mayer as a
metaphysical dreamer. But there is little doubt that both
men first conceived the general truth, and then set about
— the one by experiments, the other by computations from
ascertained physical constants — to verify what they had
thus conceived. Mayer in one of his letters, quoted by
Mach, says expressly : " Engaged during a sea voyage al-
most exclusively with the study of physiology, I discovered
the new theory for the sufficient reason that I vividly

1 Mach, Lectures, pp. 152 f.


MAYER AND JOULE


175 I


felt the need of if." 1 But Mayer's statements are the
more comprehensive inasmuch as he refers to both the
creation and the annihilation of energy as impossible
assumptions, summing up both in the one formula,
Causa cequat effeetum. To be sure this as it stands is
too vague and perhaps too general to be impressive.
More definite and workable formulations have been
devised since. But the point is that, in however im-
perfect a form, Mayer's statement of the principle
embodies all that is axiomatic in the conservation of
energy, and that at bottom is none other than the
principle of sufficient reason which you will remember
Laplace too postulated. More precisely — since in deal-
ing with energy, we are dealing with procession, with
changes — the axiom implied is the principle of causality.
These two principles of sufficient reason and causality
may occupy us at some length later on. But I will an-
ticipate to the extent of mentioning some points that will
help us to round off this portion of these lectures, and
bring it not merely to an end, but to some sort of con-
clusion.

Looked at broadly, if you will philosophically, these
principles of sufficient reason and causality are part of
the postulate that everything shall be intelligible and the
whole of things rational. This is the faith of science; on
this point all are agreed. Even Hume and Kant are here
at one ; both allow that such principles do not derive
their validity from experience, though they differ widely
as to what this validity is worth. The principle of cau-
sality is not a logical or a mathematical, but a real princi-

i Mach, p. 184.


176 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

pie; in the principle of the conservation of energy we
have it in a quantitative form applied to physical changes.
So we may see by the way how Lagrange as the repre-
sentative of abstract mechanics failed to reach it, while
Mayer, bent on rendering concrete physical facts intel-
ligible, " vividly felt the need of it."

But though a real principle, the conservation of
energy only renders the quantitative relations of physi-
cal processes intelligible. What about the qualitative
relations between which it only determines quantitative
equivalences? Have we not an equal right to postulate
intelligibility here too? It is here that the psychical as
distinct from the physical comes in. Action initiated
by feeling is now the fundamental fact. True, we still
have quantitative distinctions of a sort ; that is, we have
a scale of values or worth, degrees of pleasure and pain,
degrees of beauty and ugliness, degrees of merit and
demerit. But qualitative differences not amenable to
mathematical treatment underlie them all. Motives, then,
are of the nature of causes ; and conduct falls within the
range gf the principle of sufficient reason ; although in
the last resort conduct carries us back to a sentient being
with its pronouncement, Sic volo, sic jubeo, %tet pro ratione
voluntas. Let me recall your attention to two points in the
famous paean of Laplace : (1) his acceptance of the prin-
ciple of sufficient reason as fundamental; and (2) his
assumption that his imaginary intelligence " shall be ac-
quainted with all the forces [let us say, with all the
causes] by which nature is animated." If pleasures and
pains can be sufficient reasons, they too must be reckoned
among the causes that animate nature, or at least among


LIFE AND MIND 177

the causes that determine events. Laplace, no doubt,
was careful to rule out free will ; but that is not enough.
Quite apart from the difficulties of that venerable prob-
lem, motives remain as a class of causes not yet admit-
ting of mathematical treatment, still less of mechanical
interpretation. De gustibus non est disputandum here
passes from a mere maxim almost into a metaphysical
principle. In other words, wherever there is feeling and
preference there is something unique. Now, either this
uniqueness appears in the physical world or it does not.
The admission that it does will make it very difficult to
stop short of regarding all the beings that compose the
world — so far as 'being' implies any sort of unity or
individuality — as feeling-agents, monads, or * mind-
stuff.' Now, though such an admission might still leave
room for an omniscient Deity, it would, it seems to me,
make an end of the Laplacean physicist. Kant saw this
very clearly, unhappily Clifford and other physicists,
who have a predilection for * mind-stuff,' do not seem
to see it. /"Life," says Kant, "means the capacity to
act or change according to an internal principle./ But
we know of no internal activity whatever but thought,
with what depends upon it, feeling of pleasure or pain
and desire or will. But matter is lifeless, for on the law
of inertia (next to that of the permanence of substance)
the possibility of physics proper entirely depends. The
opposite of this, and therefore the death of all natural
philosophy, would be Hylozoism." 1 By the death of all
natural philosophy, however, Kant means only that the

1 Metaphyrisehe Anfangsgrilnde der Naturwissenschajt, Hartenstein'g
edition, vol. iy, p. 489.
▼ol, i — N


178 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

mechanical theory would lose its supremacy ; and that in
1786 was a thing not to be thought of. Just a century
later, in 1886, we have a distinguished organic chemist,
Bunge, declaring "So treibt uns der Mechanismus der
Q-egenwart dem Vitalismus der Zukunft mit Sicherheit
entgegen" ; x the mechanical theories of the present are
urging us surely onwards to the vitalistic theory of the
future. It is mainly the tyranny of imagination that is
in the way. Picture the position of Galileo, to whom
the mechanical theory is primarily due, aud it will be
easier to believe in the Galileo that is to be.

Meanwhile, the view holds its ground that the unique-
ness of feeling agents does not affect the physical world.
To prevent "the death of all natural philosophy," it is
maintained that the psychical never affects the physical
sphere, the two being pronounced utterly distinct, dis-
parate, and, so to say, incommensurable. But what if
there are not two spheres ; and if only one, what if the
psychical is that one? However, assuming the dualism
now prevalent among scientific men, according to which
life and mind are merely impotent concomitants of the
physical, epiphenomenal as the latest phrase is — it is
difficult to see that the Laplacean physicist will be any
better able than before to peer into past or future history.
Grant that he knows all the changes of any brain he may
select as accurately as he knows the phases of the moon.
Yet he only knows them in the same way, i.e. as ma-
terial events. As such, they afford, ex hypothetic no clue
to their mental concomitants; nay, it is of the very
essence of the hypothesis that they should afford no clue.
1 VUalwnus und Mechaniwnus, ein Vortrag., p. 20.


/


A DUALISM OP SYMBOLS 179

Such dualism, it has been said, means chopping the
world in two with a hatchet. It is indeed a murderous
stroke, and leaves us with two dead and impotent halves
in place of the living whole. Or worse, it gives us two
sets of abstractions in place of one reality. This comes
out in an odd way when we compare the deliverances of
many of our physiological teachers with those of fore-
most physicists of the Kirchhoff school. Huxley, for
example, thus winds up his article on Conscious Autom-
atism: "If these positions are well based, it follows
that our mental conditions are simply the symbols in
consciousness of the changes which take place auto-
matically in the organism ; and that, to take an ex-
treme illustration, the feeling we call volition is not
the cause of the voluntary act, but the symbol of the
state of the brain which is the immediate cause of that
act." There seems then no escape from the conclusion
that the whole world is symbols. Attractions, affinities,
undulations, molecules, atoms, ether, are to be regarded
primarily as " mere Jielps or expedients to facilitate our
viewing things," not as the veritable realities : so Kirch-
hoff or Mach. But on the other hand the * perceptual
realities,' which those physicists are content to recognise,
are simply shadows and symbols : so the physiologists.

Have we no means of deciding the question at issue :
Which is the real and which is the symbolic? If the
question is fairly faced, it seems to me the answer is
extremely easy. Roundly stated, the real is always »
concrete, the symbolic is always abstract. The real
implies individuality more or less ; the symbolic is
always a logical universal. Within the range of our


180 THE MECHANICAL THEORY

experience the real implies always a history, that is,
places and dates, converse with a concrete environment.
The symbol is the creature of logic. If temporal and
spatial relations enter into its definition or description,
they are time and space coordinates with no vestige of
chronology or topography about them. Now, tried by
this standard, it is a glaring absurdity to call Caesar's
resolve to cross the Rubicon or Luther's to enter Worms
the symbol of the dance of molecules in their brains.
Yet to this pass Huxley brings himself. As I have
tried to shew, and as I believe, the very advance of
physics is proving the most effectual cure for this igno-
rant faith in matter and motion as the inmost substance
rather than the most abstract symbols of the sum of
existence.

And what, it may be asked, do I mean to argue from
this? Simply that in our speculation about the uni-
verse we should never let go the concrete that we en-
visage. As long as we keep to that we find no two
things absolutely alike, no two events absolutely the
same. Intellectually to compass the wealth of particu-
lars we are driven to generalise and symbolise, to em-
ploy the instrumentality of identity and uniformity
among substances and causes, when the full fact is
development and progress. It is far truer to say the uni-
verse is a life, than to say it is a mechanism, even such
a mechanism as Goethe describes in verses that German
men of science are fond of quoting, where the Spirit
of the Earth "weaves at the rattling loom of the years
the garment of Life which the Godhead wears." We
can never get to God through a mere mechanism. I


THE LIVING UNIVERSE 181

should not like to pin my faith to Leibnitz, but of all
the dogmatic philosophies his seems to me— in one fea-
ture at any rate — by far the best. With him, then, I
would argue that absolute passivity or inertness is not a
reality, but a limit. I would not say that the atoms
of our present physicists are monads, for it is still an
open question if they are anything. But to whatever
is entitled to be called "one of the beings composing
the world," — Laplace's phrase, you will remember, —
I would ascribe enough initiative and individuality to
put his famed Intelligence to confusion.


PART II


THEORY OF EVOLUTION


THEORY OF EVOLUTION


LECTURE VII

MECHANICAL EVOLUTION

1 Mechanical evolution, the process by which the mass and energy
of the universe have passed from some assumed primeval state to that
distribution which they now present. Mr. Herbert Spencer the best ac-
credited exponent of this doctrine.

He regards the universe as a single object, which is alternately evolved
and dissolved. But the universe cannot be so regarded; and, if it could,
Mr. Spencer* s mechanical principles forbid such alternation. He ignores
* dissipation of energy,' and confuses energy with work. The thermo-
dynamic zero. A finite universe must have time limits.

But is the universe finite f The Kantian antinomies and their solution.
The notion of evolution not applicable to ' the totality of things?

2 The doctrine of the dissipation of energy and questions of reversi-
bility. Limitations introduced by Lord Kelvin, Helmholtz and Maxwell.
Two alternatives thus appear equally compatible with Mr. Spencer's
'fundamental truth? — (a) evolution without guidance, and (b) evolu-
tion with guidance. To account for the visible universe according to
(a) requires a definite 'primitive collocation? This Mr. Spencer
rejects; for him then the cosmos can be but a chance hit among many
misses, a mere speck of order in a general chaos. In expecting more
from his mechanical principles he is guilty of the fallacy of confounding
(a) with (b).

In resuming our discussion after so long an interval
it may be well briefly to restate what it is that we
have set out to discuss. Naturalism we have taken to

185


186 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

designate the doctrine that separates Nature from God,
subordinates Spirit to Matter, and sets up unchangeable
law as supreme. It means, to quote again the words of
Huxley, "the extension of the province of what we call
matter and causation and the concomitant . . . banish-
ment from all regions of human thought of what we
call spirit and spontaneity • . . [till] the realm of matter
and law is coextensive with knowledge, with feeling,
with action." 1 This naturalistic philosophy consists in
the union of three fundamental theories : (1) the theory
that nature is ultimately resolvable into a single vast
mechanism ; (2) the theory of evolution as the working
of this mechanism ; and (3) the theory of psychophysical
parallelism or conscious automatism, according to which
theory mental phenomena occasionally accompany but
never determine the movements and interactions of the
material world. With the first of these we have already
dealt, and we now come to the second, in which it is
applied.

Yet evolution, as commonly understood, is as far as
possible from suggesting mechanism. By evolution or
development was meant primarily the gradual unfolding
of a living germ from its embryonic beginning to its
final and mature form. This adult form, again, was not
regarded as merely the end actually reached through
the successive stages of growth, but as the end aimed
at and attained through the presence of some arche-
typal idea, entelechy, or soul, shaping the plastic ma-
terial and directing the process of growth. Evolution,
in short, implied ideal ends controlling physical means;

1 Cf. Lecture I, p. 17.


MR. HERBERT SPENCER QUOTED 187

in a word, was teleological. In this sense mechanical
evolution or development becomes a contradiction in
terms. Nevertheless we shall find that the category of
End, equally with the categories of Substance and Cause,
is nowadays outside the pale of natural science. The
term 'evolution,' though retained, is retained merely to
denote the process by which the mass- and energy of
the universe have passed from some assumed primeval
state to that distribution which they have at present.
Also it is implied that the process will last till some
ultimate distribution is reached, whereupon a counter-
process of dissolution will begin. Let us now turn to
Mr. Herbert Spencer, the best accredited exponent of
this doctrine, for details.

^An entire history of anything," Mr. Spencer tells
us, "must include its appearance out of the impercepti-
ble and its disappearance into the imperceptible. Be it
a single object or a whole universe, any account which
begins with it in a concrete form, or leaves off with it
in a concrete form, is incomplete." "The sayings and
doings of daily life," he continues, " imply more or less
such knowledge of states which have gone before and
of states which will come after. . . . This general in-
formation which all men gain concerning the past and
future careers of surrounding things, Science has ex-
tended, and continues increasingly to extend. To the
biography of the individual man, it adds an intra-uterine
biography beginning with him as a microscopic germ ;
and it follows out his ultimate changes until it finds his
body resolved into the gaseous products of decomposi-
tion." So as to the clothes he wears — "not stopping


188 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

short at the sheep's back and the caterpillar's cocoon,
it identifies in wool and silk the nitrogenous matters
absorbed by the sheep and the caterpillar from plants."
So also as to " the wood from which furniture is made,
[this] it again traces back to the vegetal assimilation
of gases from the air and of certain minerals from the
soil. And inquiring whence came the stratum of stone
that was quarried to build the house, it finds that this
was once a loose sediment deposited in an estuary or
on the sea-bottom." In these and such like instances
Mr. Spencer sees the formula of evolution and dissolu-
tion foreshadowed. To quote again his own words:
"In recognising the fact that Science, tracing back the
genealogies of various objects, finds their components
were once in diffused states, and pursuing their histories
forwards, finds diffused states will be again assumed by
them, we have recognised the fact that the formula
must be one comprehending the two opposite processes
of concentration and diffusion. . . . The change from
a diffused, imperceptible state, to a concentrated, percep-
tible state, is an integration of matter and concomitant
dissipation of motion ; and the change from a concen-
trated, perceptible state, to a diffused, imperceptible
state, is an absorption of motion and concomitant disin-
tegration of matter." 1

Now, there is one obvious yet serious objection to
this theory. It proposes to treat the universe, in fact
requires us to treat the universe, as we treat a single
object. Every single object is first evolved and then
dissolved; it emerges from the imperceptible and into

1 First Principles, pp. 2Wr281. .


MR. SPENCER'S UNIVERSE A NEBULA 189

the imperceptible it disappears again. And so of the
universe : " Any account which begins with it in a
concrete form or leaves off with it in a concrete form,"
Mr. Spencer tells us, "is incomplete." Surely we have
here a case of what logicians call the fallacy of com-
position; what is predicable of the parts severally is
predicated of the whole collectively. It reminds us
forcibly of Locke's "poor Indian philosopher, who im-
agined that the earth always wanted something to bear
it up." The stability of everything on the earth was
manifestly due to a support, therefore the stability of
the solid earth itself seemed explicable in no other man-
ner. So the poor Indian; and similarly Mr. Herbert
Spencer. As science deals with any visible, tangible
thing, so the " synthetic philosophy " will deal with
the totality of things. Let us take as a simple instance
of the first, the familiar case suggested by Mr. Spencer
himself, that of a cloud appearing when vapour drifts
over a cold mountain top, and again disappearing when
it moves away into the warmer air. The cloud emerges
from the imperceptible as heat is dissipated and the
vapour condensed, and the cloud is dissolved again as
heat is absorbed and the watery particles evaporate.
How shall we apply this conception or anything like
it to the universe? The stronghold of Mr. Spencer's
argument is the nebular hypothesis. A nebula, no doubt,
is an object among other objects, though a most sublime
and stupendous one. It presupposes colliding stars or
meteoric swarms, whose material constituents are dissi-
pated by the heat which their collision has produced ;
but then these colliding masses in their turn imply still


190 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

earlier nebulae, whose materials concentrated as their heat
diffused. So the cloud presupposed vapours that had
previously condensed; and the vapour, cloud or water
that had previously evaporated. And much as clouds
dissolve in one place and form in another, and are to
be found at any time in all possible stages of evolution
and dissolution ; so with sidereal systems and nebulae.
The telescope and spectroscope tell of stars and nebulae
in every phase of advance . or decline to be found in
every quarter of the heavens. To ask which was first,
solid masses or nebulous haze, is much like asking which
was first the hen or the egg, and like that famous
problem, may lead us to conclude, — neither the one
nor the other. Meanwhile, it does not surprise us to
learn that, though Mr. Spencer is quite sure that the
universe began as imperceptible mist, others, like the
late Dr. Croll, who have incQmparably more right to
an opinion on the question, prefer to think that there
was an earlier or prae-nebular stage of the uni-
verse; during which large, cold masses of protyle or
primal matter were moving through space in all direc-
tions with excessive velocities. 1 Such an hypothesis,
whether otherwise admissible or not, at least recognises
a problem with which Mr. Spencer scarcely attempts to
deal — I mean the evolution, of the chemical elements.
It thus suffices to convict Mr. Spencer's work of a certain
incompleteness. For surely to begin with some seventy
distinct forms of matter with very various and definite
properties is not to begin at the beginning, however much
we may imagine them to be diffused. We must return to

1 CI. Croll, Stellar Evolution, pp. 3, 109.


'THE TOTALITY OF THINGS' UNKNOWN 191

this question of qualitative diversity presently. But the
prior question I am anxious to put as pointedly as possi-
ble is this : On what grounds is it assumed that the
universe was ever evolved at all ? A given man, a given
nation, a given continent, a given sidereal system, as par-
ticular objects, have their several finite histories of birth
and death, upheaval and subsidence, fiery mist and cold,
lifeless, consolidation. But growth and decay, rise and
decline, elevation and degradation, evolution and dissolu-
tion, are everywhere contemporaneous. We have but to
extend our range to find a permanent totality made up
of transient individuals in every stage of change. But
so enlarging our horizon we are not warranted in saying,
as Mr. Spencer does, "there is an alternation of Evo-
lution and Dissolution in the totality of things." 1 Of
the totality of things we have no experience. But now
what we do find, so far as experience and observation
will carry us, is that, be it great or small — once an
object has disappeared into the imperceptible, once it
is dissolved in Mr. Spencer's sense, that object never
reappears. We do not find dead men alive again, effete
civilisations rejuvenated, denuded continents again re-
stored, or worn-out stars rekindled as of yore. If there
were any justification for the phrase " visible universe "
and if we could conceivably represent the totality of
things as a single concrete object^ — both which supposi-
tions I deny, — then by all analogy and experience
* alternate eras of Evolution and Dissolution' would be
physically impossible. So surely as 'the appearance out
of the imperceptible ' was the beginning, so surely would

1 First Principles, p. 861, ^ C **


192 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

' the disappearance into the imperceptible ' be the end.
As, according to Mr. Spencer's own description, the
entire history of anything, be it a single object or the
whole universe, lies completely within such limits, it is
a manifest contradiction to turn round and say : After
all the end is not the end and the beginning is not the
beginning, and what we have called an entire and com-
plete account of the totality of things is only one wave
in an endless rhythm. It is true, of course, that the
history of many concrete objects is marked by periodic
phases ; but never by dissolution and ree volution, i.e. by
the disappearance of the concrete individual followed by
the reappearance of that individual — in short, by what
is tantamount within the scope of such terms as visi-
ble, tangible, concrete, and perceptible — to as complete a
breach of individuality as we should have in annihilation
and re-creation. It is also true, as we have already noted,
that within a given totality, one individual may succeed
another, but so far that totality — the universe of dis-
course, so to say — remains permanent. " One generation
passeth away, and another generation cometh : but the
earth abideth for ever." 1

Moreover, on the physical assumption from which Mr.
Spencer sets out, viz. that the mass of the universe and
the energy of the universe are fixed in quantity — which
ought to mean are finite in quantity — there can be no
such alternations as he supposes. Certainly not if we
are to accept the second law of thermodynamics, the law,
that is, of the dissipation of energy, along with the first
law, that of the conservation of energy. But of this

i Eccl. i. 4.


- - * _


DISSIPATION OF ENERGY 193

second law, commonly accepted though it is by physicists
at the present day, Mr. Spencer seems to take no account.
Apparently, too, Mr. Spencer confuses, energy or the
capacity of doing work with work actually done, and imag-
ines that so long as the quantity of energy persists, it
must be manifest in perpetual changes of equivalent
amount. But this in any case is not a necessary conse-
quence of the conservation of energy, and if the dissipa-
tion of energy be true, it is an impossible consequence.
For it is not on the bare persistence of energy, but on the
transference and transformation of energy that physical
changes depend. But energy, whatever be its form, is
only transferable from places of higher intensity' to
places of lower intensity, to use a convenient term. So
we find heavy bodies tend to fall, hot bodies to cool, and
so forth. Thus the amount of energy available for work
of the total energy possessed by two bodies is a function
of this difference of level or intensity, and is nil when
this difference is nil, whatever the total energy may be.
Generally speaking, energy is not transferred without an
exact equivalent of work being done; but to this rule
thermal energy is an exception. And it is here that the
so-called waste or dissipation of available energy comes
in. Putting it quite popularly, in the partnership of
energies, heat is the one squanderer, and may scatter
without producing. Whenever energy passes into this
form, some of it is always, and all of it is sometimes, lost
for purposes of work. As Mach puts it, "heat is only
partially transformed into work, but frequently work is
wholly transformed into heat. Hence a tendency exists
towards a diminution of the mechanical energy and to-

VOL. I — O


194 THEORY OP EVOLUTION

wards an increase of the thermal energy of the world." 1
In other words, though the energy of the world remains
constant, the unavailable energy or entropy, as it is called,
tends towards a maximum. There is still a peculiarity
of heat to be mentioned that will make the significance
of the thermal degradation of energy clearer — I refer
to Lord Kelvin's definition of an absolute zero of tem-
perature. If — whatever were the temperature of a body
— we could always imagine another body with a tempera-
ture still lower, just as whatever be the position of a
body we can always imagine another at a distance from
it towards which it can gravitate, then, so far as in this
way differences of temperature would always be possible,
the transformation of heat into work might always be
possible. But if there be, as is supposed, a thermo-
dynamic zero, there is an end to such a possibility ;
beyond that zero temperature cannot fall. And so while
all transformations of energy lead directly or indirectly
to transformation into heat, from that transformation
there is no complete return, and therefore finally no
return at all. This then is the conclusion to which Mr.
Spencer's premisses lead. Two eminent physicists who
accept those premisses may be cited at this point: "It
is absolutely certain," they say, "that life, so far as it
is physical, depends essentially upon transformations of
energy ; it is also absolutely certain that age after age
the possibility of such transformations is becoming less
and less ; and, so far as we yet know, the final state
of the present universe must be an aggregation (into
one mass) of all the matter it contains, i.e. the potential
1 Popular Scientific Lectures, Eng. trans., p. 176.


COSMOLOGICAL ANTINOMIES 195

energy gone, and a practically useless state of kinetic
energy, i.e. uniform temperature throughout that mass.
. . . The present visible universe began in time and
will in time come to an end." 1

To this conclusion we are surely led from such
premisses. But again I ask what warrant is there for
the premisses? Our experience certainly does not em-
brace the totality of things, is, in fact, ridiculously far
from it. We have no evidence of definite space or
time limits ; quite the contrary. Every advance of
knowledge only opens up new vistas into a remoter
past and discloses further depths of immensity teeming
with worlds. The physical principles of the conserva-
tion of mass and energy are, as I have already urged,
essentially formal and regulative ; they do but formu-
late the common postulate of all science — the uni-
formity and continuity of nature as presupposed in all
physical measurements. They do not justify us in
assuming, what we certainly cannot prove, that the
universe as a whole is measurable and therefore finite.
And when we pass to more purely a priori considera-
tions, the case against a universe with fixed and finite
limits is equally strong. It is needless to attempt even
the most cursory discussion of the antinomies as to the
finitude or infinitude of the universe in respect of time,
space, divisibility, or mass, that have constituted the
chief cosmological problems of philosophy, notably since
the time of Kant. They have only justified in the
main Kant's own solution. We cannot say that the
phenomenal universe is infinite in any of these aspects,

1 The Unseen Universe, § 116.


196 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

but just as little can we say it is finite. Since Kant's
day, more cogent arguments both for the theses and
for the antitheses of the cosmological problem have
been advanced. None of these invalidate the claims
of reason to regard the universe as a systematic whole,
but they set in a stronger light than ever the impos-
sibility of treating it as an arithmetical sum. "Say
that the universe is limited," says Kant, " and it is too
small for your concept ; you have a perfect right to
ask what determines that limit : but say that it is un-
limited, and it is too large for every possible empirical
concept." The reason of this is plain. In the empiri-
cal regress, to which the understanding, that is science,
is entirely confined, "no experience of an absolute limit,
that is, of any condition as such, which empirically is
absolutely unconditional, can exist." On the other
hand, this regress from any given phenomenon as con-
ditioned to another as its condition, though not truly
infinite, is never suspended yet never completed; in
other words, such regress must proceed in indefinitum.

But what Mr. Spencer calls a single object, must
surely have an assignable beginning and end in time
and assignable bounds in space ; it is precisely through
such time and space marks that the notion of single-
ness or identity becomes applicable. Those marks, how-
ever, are not given by empty time or space, but by
other objects relatively defined in the same fashion.
The universe, then, we may safely say, not only is not,
but never can be, a single object in this wise; and
Mr. Spencer's attempt to treat it after the fashion of
an evolving nebula, evinces an unexpected paucity of


THE UNIVERSE NOT A SINGLE OBJECT 197

imagination and is philosophically unsound. Experience
provides us with instances of evolution and dissolution
on the most varied scales, from the grass of the field
or the cedars of Lebanon to the solar system or the
Milky Way. But of a single supreme evolution em-
bracing them all we have no title to speak: not even
to assume that it is, much less to say what it is ; least
of all to affirm confidently that it can be embraced in
such a meaningless formula as the integration of matter
and the dissipation of motion — doubly meaningless un-
less a partial system, such as a nebula, is concerned, and
even then assuming the greater portion of molecular
physics without explanation. We have no evidence to
shew that what we miscall the ' visible universe ' is com-
ing to an end, for we have no evidence to shew that it
is finite. If we had such evidence, we should probably
then and there conclude that we were dealing with but
a part of the true universe and not with the totality of
things. Again there is no physical evidence to compel
the application to this absolute totality of such concep-
tions as increase and decrease, ebb and flow, development
and decay ; no warrant for attributing to the universe
a destined perfection, that if future must either be
attained and past ; or approached but never completely
attained at all. The former, if, as Mr. Spencer sup-
poses, the mass and energy of the universe are finite
and fundamental; the latter, if, being still the funda-
mental factors, the mass and energy are mathematically
infinite in amount. Whether the world be absolutely
perfect, or merely the best of all possible worlds, or
indeed the worst world possible, as actual, it is — so


198 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

far as we can judge from its physical constitution —
just what it always has been, the permanent theatre
of perpetual changes.

At any rate such a conception is less conjectural and
more adequate than Mr. Spencer's ridiculous compari-
son of the universe to a spinning top that begins by
* wabbling,' passes into a state of steady motion or
equilibrium mobile, and finally comes to rest. Referring
to this second phase as one of perfect moving equilib-
rium, he finds in it "a warrant for the belief that
evolution can end only in the establishment of the
greatest perfection and the most complete happiness."
Let us not pause now to ask what sort of perfection
and happiness that must be which depends on and neces-
sarily follows from such physical equilibration : let us
note only that, whatever it be, it is after all, according
to Mr. Spencer, neither final nor established. It is but
the u penultimate stage," as indeed he calls it, and
gives place, as he tells us, to " Dissolution, which inevi-
tably, at some time or other, undoes what Evolution has
done." 1 And again I say that the absurdity to which
Mr. Spencer betakes himself does not suffice to put a
better face on his doctrine — the absurdity, I mean, of
supposing that, though there cannot be two universes
in space, there may be any number in time. Beyond
the final quietus of cosmical equilibration the doctrine
of energy, in which Mr. Spencer puts his trust, affords
no hope of a new evolution. The dead bones, the
black ashes, may or jnay not live and glow again,* but
if they do it will not be from the mere 'persistence of

1 First Principles, p. 650.


SERIES OF UNIVERSES IN TIME 199

force ' that the quickening burst will come. Why, if
the thing is so obvious, not to say necessary, is it
never elucidated by 4 the familiar example ' of the spin-
ning top? No doubt two consolidated sidereal systems
may diffuse again after a collision, but how is one to
do this? And what can well be less suggestive of
recurring cycles than universal concentration of mass
and uniformity of temperature on the one hand and
indefinite diffusion of mass and diversity of tempera-
ture on the other? It must be allowed that in so far
as Mr. Spencer is personally concerned, the doctrine of
the dissipation of energy was scarcely in the air when
his First Principles were stereotyped. Meanwhile, for
us at any rate, that doctrine seems to put an end to
the alternate eras of evolution and dissolution which
Mr. Spencer has vainly striven to derive from the doc-
trine of conservation. On the whole then we may for
the present reasonably demur to Mr. Spencer's attempt
to bring the universe under a simple formula of evolu-
tion and dissolution, as if it were a single object emerg-
ing out of the imperceptible and dissolving into it
again. Before proceeding to discuss his formula in
more detail so as to ascertain its adequacy where evolution
in some sense is admissible, let me ask your attention
for a little longer to one or two reflections suggested
by our inquiry thus far or by points incidentally raised
in the course of it.

Among the last in particular is this doctrine of the
dissipation of energy, which excludes such reversibility
as Mr. Spencer supposes. Lord Kelvin, who was, I
believe, the first to formulate this doctrine, has been


200 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

frequently commended for the caution which led him
to restrict the impossibility to cases in which the
agency of inanimate matter is alone concerned. Thus
Helmholtz, referring to this reversion in a review of
Lord Kelvin's papers, says : " Such a reversion is a
postulate beyond the power of human means to fulfil.
We have no agency at our disposal by which to regu-
late the movement of atoms. Whether, however, in
the extraordinarily fine structure of organic tissues a
mechanism capable of doing it exists or not is a ques-
tion not yet to be answered, and I deem it very wise
on the part of Sir W. Thomson that he has limited
all his theses respecting the necessity of increasing
dissipation by restricting their validity to * inanimate
matter.'" 1 Dissipation of energy Lord Kelvin himself
tells us, "follows in nature from the fortuitous con-
course of atoms. The lost motivity is essentially not
restorable otherwise than by an agency dealing with
individual atoms ; and the mode of dealing with the
atoms to restore motivity is essentially a process of
assortment, sending this way all of one kind or class,
that way all of another kind or class." 2 Many here will
remember a fine passage in Mill's Political Economy on
the function of labour, in which he shews with impres-
sive detail that in what is called the action of man
upon nature it is "the properties of matter that do all
the work, when once objects are put into the right posi-
tion. This one operation of putting things into fit places
for being acted upon by their own internal forces, and

1 Wis8en8chaftliche Abhandlungen, Bd. iii, p. 694.
* Properties of Matter, p. 139.


'DISSIPATION' AND REVERSIBILITY 201

by those residing in other natural objects, is all that
man does, or can do, with matter. He only moves one
thing to or from another : " all his vast command over
natural forces immeasurably more powerful than himself
"is obtained by arranging objects in those mixtures
and combinations by which natural forces are generated,
as when by putting a lighted match to fuel, and water
into a boiler over it, he generates the expansive force
of steam, which has been made so largely available for
the attainment of human purposes." 1 Here then we
have the materials and powers of nature, as they for-
tuitously occur, incapable of, and unavailable for,
results, to which nevertheless they can be guided by
intelligent assortment and arrangement. And in a pre-
cisely analogous way we can imagine finite intelligences
disequalising temperature and undoing the natural dif-
fusion of heat, or assorting atoms and undoing the
natural conglomeration of matter, and so reversing the
downward trend, and even disturbing the final qui-
escence, to which the dissipation of energy or ' cosmic
equilibration,' to use Mr. Spencer's term, inevitably leads.
The conception of such an intelligence we have in " the
sorting demon of Maxwell," as Lord Kelvin has called it.
This brilliant idea was devised by Maxwell primarily
to illustrate " the limitation of the second law of thermo-
dynamics," to shew, that is, that this second law, the law
of the degradation of energy is not like the first — the law
of conservation — a fundamental, dynamical law; that,

1 Principles of Political Economy, Bk. i, chap, i, § 2. Mill attributes
this observation to his father, but even he was anticipated by Bacon
(Novum Organum, vol. i, p. 4), and again by Flayfair.


202 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

on the contrary, it is properly a statistical law and
confined to our experience of secondary bodies consist-
ing of an immense number of molecules, none of which
are individually perceptible. And so he remarks : " This
law is undoubtedly true as long as we can deal with
bodies only in mass, and have no power of perceiving or
handling the separate molecules of which they are made
up. But if we conceive a being," — and here we are
introduced to the 4 sorting demon' — "whose faculties
are so sharpened that he can follow every molecule in
its course, such a being, whose attributes are still as
essentially finite as our own, would be able to do what
is at present impossible to us." To most of you I am
sure the modus operandi of this possible but imaginary
being is perfectly well known ; still, to add to the clear-
ness of our discussion, I will venture to quote the rest
of Maxwell's paragraph. "For we have seen," he
continues, "that the molecules in a vessel full of air
at uniform temperature are moving with velocities by
no means uniform, though the mean velocity of any
great number of them, arbitrarily selected, is almost
exactly uniform. Now let us suppose that such a ves-
sel is divided into two portions, A and B, by a division
in which there is a small hole, and that a being, who
can see the individual molecules, opens and closes this
hole, so as to allow only the swifter molecules to pass
from A to B, and only the slower ones to pass from B
to A. He will thus, without expenditure of work, raise
the temperature of B and lower that of A, in contradic-
tion to the second law of thermodynamics." *

i Theory of Heat, 1894, pp. 338 £.


GUIDANCE WITHOUT WORK 203

Now, what I think we may fairly deduce from this
piece of physical exposition is that conservation of energy
at any rate, — and this is Mr. Spencer's one dynamical
principle, — is compatible with either of two alterna-
tives. 1 The first is that steady fall in the level of avail-
able energy, which finds expression in the second law
of thermodynamics, technically given in the statements
of Lord Kelvin and Clausius already quoted, 2 viz.* that,
though the energy of the universe remains constant, the
entropy of the universe tends towards a maximum. 3
The second alternative is the process of assortment and
guidance — without expenditure of work — by a select-
ing and directing intelligence, which process may, to
an indefinite extent, reverse and overrule the dissipa-
tion of energy, that tendency merely to run down.
For, granting the energy of a material system, however
large, to remain constant, and granting change of direc-
tion without work to be always theoretically possible,
we may infer that, until — after a lapse of time indefi-
nitely great — a state of absolute dissipation is reached, it
would be possible for intelligent beings, without infringing
any dynamical principles, to inaugurate changes, and for
an adequate intelligence to start that system anew on
a fresh round of evolution. This is forcibly put in
the paper of Helmholtz's, from which I have already
quoted : " The ascertained laws of dynamics," he says,

1 But our difficulties, no doubt, increase when we take into account
other dynamical principles which Mr. Spencer neglects. Of. below, Lec-
ture XII.

3 Cf. above, p. 194.

8 Strictly speaking, we are not warranted in applying metrical motions
to the universe. Cf. pp. 87, 171.


204 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

"yield the deduction that, if we were able suddenly
to reverse the total movements of the total atoms of
an isolated mechanical system, the whole system would
of necessity retraverse all the states which up to that
point of time it had passed through. Therewith, also,
would all the heat, generated by friction, collision, con-
duction of electrical currents, etc., return into other
forms of energy, and the energy, which had been dissi-
pated, would be all recovered." 1 And I presume that
an intelligence that could precisely reverse the direc-
tions could alter them as easily in other ways. But the
point is that, apart from intelligent guidance and arrange-
ment, no such recovery or alteration would be possible.

It will be quite worth while to compare these alterna-
tives somewhat further. Though both are equally com-
patible with the persistence of energy, yet Mr. Spencer,
as we have seen, admits only one, and ignores the fact
that that one entirely precludes such alternations of
evolution and dissolution as he assumes. According to
that, which we may fairly call the mechanical view,
evolution, or rather, as Mr. Spencer ought to say, a
given era of evolution, begins at an initial extreme,
characterized by him as an imperceptible state of ab-
sorption of motion and concomitant disintegration of
matter; and ends with a final extreme, equally imper-
ceptible, of integration of matter and concomitant dis-
sipation of motion. In conciser and more intelligible
language, the whole process ranges from an extreme
with very large potential energy to an extreme in
which all available energy is dissipated. The other
1 Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen, Bd. iii, p. 594,


EVOLUTION, GUIDED AND UNGUIDED 205

alternative, which we may perhaps call the teleologieal
view, neither requires an initial stage, such as Mr.
Spencer's, in order that evolution may begin, nor is
debarred by the dissipation of energy from all possibil-
ity of further change. Without postulating the crea-
tion of energy it recognises the direction of energy by
intelligence. Under what circumstances and by what
means such intelligent guidance is effected we need
not now inquire ; it is allowed to be possible, and
for the present that is enough.

And now let us attend to the important difference
between these two views, — evolution without guidance,
and evolution with guidance. According to the former,
the entire course of things is once and for all deter-
mined singly and solely by the initial distribution. It
is here that the Laplacean calculator comes in, prepared
from the mechanical data of any one moment to find
the state of the whole world at any other. For there
is one, and only one, course that a system of inert
matter will pursue without guidance, — the line of least
resistance : it will run down, and it will run down by
the easiest and shortest way. But the directions that
such a system may be led to take under guidance, but
still conformably to the law of conservation, may be
innumerable. To forecast the actual progress on this
view it is useless to know merely what would happen
in accordance with mechanical laws, if the system were
left to itself : for any forecast in this case a knowledge
of the end or meaning of such progress would be indis-
pensable. Let us take one or two familiar instances by
way of illustrating the difference. Imagine a derelict


206 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

ship and a sea-worthy vessel fully manned : if you
know enough of the winds, tides, and currents, you can
say where the derelict is likely to be after a week's
interval, but this information will be but of secondary
importance if you should attempt to predict the posi-
tion a week later of the ship under sailing orders.
Take two trains running opposite ways on a single line
of rails, — of which there are hundreds in this country
every day : if you know their distance apart, their
rates, and that they are left to themselves, you can
calculate when and where they will collide. Yet the
extreme rarity of collisions is secured simply by what
is practically "guidance without work," by * points-
men' directing energy which in itself is directionless.

But however impressive the difference between these
two forms of process, the blindly mechanical and the
intelligently guided, and however surely common sense
in our ordinary affairs enables us to distinguish be-
tween the two, yet in so far as both are compatible
with mechanical principles it is obvious that strictly
mechanical considerations will not enable us to distin-
guish between them. A bullet aimed to hit the mark
conforms to the law of projectiles as completely as one
fired at random. But now, of a thousand bullets so
fired haphazard, probably one or more will hit equally
truly. This simple instance may serve to characterise
two ways in which the teleological aspect of things can
be viewed mechanically. The first is by way of primi-
tive collocations. As the marksman's aim determined
the initial movement of the bullet with a view to its
final impact on the bull's-eye, so the Creator chose that


'PRIMITIVE COLLOCATION' 207

particular configuration of nebulous matter from which
the existing cosmos would mechanically ensue. } So
W he well, Chalmers, Jevons, and others represent the
beginning of evolution. "Out of infinitely infinite
choices which were open to the Creator, that one
choice must have been made which has yielded the
Universe as it now exists," says Jevons. We may ven-
ture, I think, to call this a ^shortsighted and fatuous
jview ; /but I am quite aware that those who first pro-
pounded it had many qualifications in reserve, qualifi-
cations, however, which must logically resolve the
external Artificer into an immanent Spirit. But at all
events this half-way house, whatever it be worth, is
closed against Mr. Spencer, if even he were disposed
to occupy it. For him there can be no 4 ultimate prop-
erties of kinds,' and no specific collocation of diverse
natural agents. Thoroughgoing homogeneity, diffusion,
and imperceptibility, are, as we shall see presently,
incompatible with such variety in the positions and
mechanical endowment of the primitive particles as
Jevons, for example, supposes. To Mr. Spencer there
is open only the second way of one chance hit out of
many misses. We have all of us to admit that facts
are by no means wanting that may seem to justify
such a view of Nature at least in details, as when find-
ing, for example, "that of fifty seeds, she often brings
but one to bear." For the mechanical theory of evo-
lution, however, this second way is absolute and uni-
versal. But it will be best here to cite Mr. Spencer's
own words: "We have to contemplate the matter of
an evolving aggregate as undergoing not progressive


208 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

integration simply, but as simultaneously undergoing
various secondary redistributions; we have also to con-
template the motion of an evolving aggregate, not only
as being gradually dissipated, but as passing through
many secondary redistributions on the way towards
dissipation." 1 Such is Mr. Spencer's general summary;
but it would be useless, I fear, to attempt to quote
also any of the numerous instances even of physical
phenomena, to say nothing of phenomena of a higher
order, which he has gathered together in such impres-
sive and bewildering variety in order to substantiate it.
I can put the case best, as I understand it, by taking
an illustrative instance of my own. Imagine a single
drop of water falling alone over Niagara: it will go
with accelerated velocity straight from top to bottom.
Such a process may typify simple evolution. Now try
to realise what happens when the full volume of the
St. Lawrence pitches over the Falls. The end is in
the main the same as before, but in the course of sim-
ple evolution on this larger scale there occur many,
and some very striking, instances of compound evolu-
tion, in other- words, of redistributions, arrests, and
reversals of the main process. Individual drops and
groups of drops may dash each other into mist, fall,
rise, and fall again, eventually joining the stream below
only after a long time and by the most devious routes.
Imagine the height of the Falls and so the time of
falling to be vastly increased, and the secondary results
will be more varied still. To this head of compound
evolution, then, we are asked to refer all the complex-

1 First Principles, p. 306.


SIMPLE AND COMPOUND EVOLUTION 209

ity of structure and movement, all the varieties of
form and rhythm, of which the actual world consists.
"Hence," says Mr. Spencer, "other things being equal,
in proportion to the quantity of motion which an ag-
gregate contains will be the quantity of secondary
change in the arrangement of its parts that accompa-
nies the primary change in their arrangement. Hence,
also, other things equal, in proportion to the time dur-
ing which the internal motion is retained, will be the
quantity of this secondary redistribution that accom-
panies the primary distribution." 1 A little reflection
will shew, I think, that on this doctrine what others
secure by primitive collocations is secured by taking
things on a sufficiently large scale, and trusting to the
combinations which haphazard will give. Shuffle an
adequate number of fonts of type long enough and a
given play of Shakespeare will be among the throws;
for it is a possible combination, and in time all pos-
sible combinations may be expected. In fact, Mr.
Spencer's law of evolution seems to consist essen-
tially in treating the universe as a vast problem in
thermodynamics, so to speak.

Apropos of this I cannot do better than quote a strik-
ing passage from a letter of Boltzmann's that appeared
in Nature about a year ago : " We assume that the
whole universe is, and rests forever, in thermal equilib-
rium. The probability that one (only one) part of the
universe is in a certain state, is the smaller the farther
this state is from thermal equilibrium ; but [on the
other hand] this probability is greater, the greater is

iJTWd., p. 289.

VOL. I — P


210 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

the universe itself. If we assume the universe great
enough, we can make the probability of one relatively
small part being in any given state (however far from
the state of thermal equilibrium) as great as we please.
We can also make the probability great that, though
the whole universe is in thermal equilibrium, our world
is in its present state. It may be said that the world
is so far from thermal equilibrium that we cannot
imagine the improbability of such a state. But can we
imagine, on the other side, how small a part of the
whole universe this world is? Assuming the universe
great enough, the probability that such a small part of
it as our world should be in its present state, is no
longer small. If this assumption were correct, our
world would return more and more to thermal equi-
librium ; but, because the whole universe is so great, it
might be probable that at some future time some other
world might deviate as far from thermal equilibrium as
our world does at present." 1

By 'world' I take Boltzmann to mean what is com-
monly called the 4 visible universe ' or * our galaxy.' The
return to thermal equilibrium again corresponds to Mr.
Spencer's simple evolution, assuming a like fortuitous
initial distribution or absence of specific collocations,
and a universe indefinitely great. Of course there is
no lack of space and time ; even energy too is cheap,
when you have only to imagine it. But such a chance
oasis of life and order in an illimitable desert of mo-
notonous irregularity is, I need hardly say, not what
Mr. Spencer means by evolution. So much the worse,

1 Nature, 1894-1895, vol. li, p. 416.


A FALLACY OF MR. SPENCER'S 211

however, for his synthetic philosophy. For while that
is the most that his law entitles him to, he assumes not
merely that the present throw — to recur to my illus-
tration — is comparable to a play of Shakespeare, but
he assumes also that, after the processes of dissolution
shall have broken up the type, another play will be
thrown next time. In other words, he is guilty of the
amazing fallacy of supposing that, because the laws of
energy are everywhere present, they are everywhere
sufficient to explain what we see; which is much the
same as assuming that, because a painter's palette, like
his finished canvas, shews us a mixture of colours laid
on with a brush, therefore what sufficed to produce the
one would equally suffice to produce the other.

But the further exposure of this prime fallacy of Mr.
Spencer's synthetic philosophy must be reserved till
next lecture.


LECTURE VIII
ME. spencer's interpretation op evolution

Mr. Spencer proposes to deduce the phenomena of evolution (celestial,
organic, social, etc.) from the conservation of energy. The obvious
insufficiency of this principle taken alone. Mr. Spencer's conception of
it contrasted with that of HelmhoUz.

How Mr. Spencer connects Ms * persistence of force,' as he prefers
to call it, with his doctrine of the Absolute. The vagueness of his terms.

The three principles in Mr. Spencer's interpretation : 1. Instability
of the homogeneous. But is the homogeneous necessarily unstable f
Quite the contrary. Moreover, Mr. Spencer cannot by analysis get at
such a beginning as he supposes. How much can evolution possibly
account for, and how little need it presuppose f No clear advance to
be made from Mr. Spencer's standpoint. Some illustrative instances
of Mr. Spencer's procedure: (a) self-rotating nebulas: in a single
homogeneous object no ground of change; (b) instability of circular
orbits: looseness of Mr. Spencer's terminology; (c) chemical differ-
entiation, instability of the heterogeneous : two-edged arguments.

2. Multiplication of effects. An instance of what Mr. Spencer under-
stands by one cause and many effects. Illusory deduction of this principle
from the fundamental one of persistence of force.

3. Segregation. This * the key to the advance from vague chaotic
heterogeneity to orderly heterogeneity.' The process described : it turns
out to require only 'forces acting indiscriminately.' Relation of this
principle to the other two. Difficulties for Mr. Spencer in connection
with the distribution of the chemical elements. Also in the character-
istics of organisms and the products of human industry. But Mr.
Spencer' 8 terminology is happily 'plastic'

As we shall have to refer frequently to Mr. Spencer's
formula of evolution in its final form, I will begin by

212


MR. SPENCER'S FORMULA 213

quoting it at length : " Evolution is an integration of
matter and concomitant dissipation of motion [so much
answers to 'simple evolution' and has been quoted
already; what follows includes * compound evolution']
during which the matter passes from an indefinite, in-
coherent homogeneity to a definite, coherent heterogeneity ;
and during which the retained motion undergoes a parallel
transformation" 1

"The task before us," says Mr. Spencer, the law of
evolution being ascertained, "is that of exhibiting the
phenomena of Evolution in synthetic order. Setting
out from an established ultimate principle, it has to be
shown that the course of transformation among all
kinds of existences cannot but be that which we have
seen it to be. It has to be shown that the redistribu-
tion of matter and motion must everywhere take place
in those ways and produce those traits, which celestial
bodies, organisms, societies, alike display. And it has
to be shown [here is the point] that this universality
of process results from the same necessity which de-
termines each simplest movement around us, down to
the accelerated fall of a stone or the recurrent beat of
a harp-string. In other words, the phenomena of Evo-
lution have to be deduced from the Persistence of
Force. As before said, 'to this an ultimate analysis
brings us down; and on this a rational synthesis must
build up.'" 2

By Force Mr. Spencer means, among other things,
Energy. Now 'I think it is quite clear that, so far
from accounting for all the phenomena of evolution,

1 First Principles, p. 396. 2 o.c, p. 398. 4 ' '


214 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

the doctrine of the persistence of energy alone will not
account for a single one. The celestial, organic, social,
and other phenomena which make up what Mr. Spencer
calls cosmic evolution are so many series of qualitative
changes. But the conservation of energy is not a law
of change, still less a law of qualities. It does not
initiate events, and furnishes absolutely no clew to
qualitative diversity. It is entirely a quantitative law.
When energy is transformed, there is precise equiva-
lence between the new form and the old; but of the
circumstances determining transformation and of the
possible kinds of transformation the principle tells us
nothing. If energy is- transferred, then the system
doing work loses precisely what some other part of the
universe gains ; but again the principle tells us nothing
of the conditions of such transferences.

As I tried to shew briefly in the sixth of these lec-
tures, this principle may be regarded as primarily and
fundamentally logical. Somewhere or other we postu-
late persistence or conservation, and finding so far as
experience goes that mass and energy are conserved,
we apply to them this a priori postulate. It might
turn out that we were wrong in this application, but
the postulate in its abstract generality we should still
not question. In some sense it must be true to say
Causa cequat effectum, and meanwhile there is a vast
body of evidence to shew that it is true of the trans-
ferences and transformations of energy. But now the
fact that the principle of energy involves in this wise
both an a priori and an empirical factor is continually
ignored by Mr. Spencer. He lays all the stress on the


HELMHOLTZ AND MR. SPENCER 215

a priori factor, i.e. on his own extraordinary version of
it; and does not see that this by itself is ludicrously
insufficient. Hence such language as this, with which
his chapter on the Persistence of Force concludes :
"Deeper than demonstration — deeper even than defi-
nite cognition — deep as the very nature of mind, is
the postulate at which we have arrived. Its authority
transcends all other whatever; for not only is it given
in the constitution of our own consciousness, but it is
impossible to imagine a consciousness so constituted as
not to give it." 1 And now let me quote for com-
parison with this a sentence or two from the conclu-
sion of Helmholtz's famous essay on the same subject :
"I believe that what has been here advanced has
shewn this law to be contradicted by no facts at pres-
ent known to science, but to be strikingly confirmed
by a very large number. I have striven to exhibit as
completely as possible such consequences as follow
from it in combination with the laws of natural phe-
nomena so far ascertained, consequences which must
still await experimental verification. It has been my
aim to lay before physicists with all possible complete-
ness the theoretical, practical, and heuristic importance
of this law, the complete establishment of which may
well be regarded as one of the chief undertakings of
the immediate future." 2 Such language as this would
be not only sheer nonsense, but a sheer impossibility if
Mr. Spencer's philosophy were right. Clearly Helm-
holtz does not regard the persistence of force as a

1 First Principles, p. 192.

a Erhaltung der Kraft, Ostwald's edition, p. 63.


216 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

datum of consciousness. But now Mr. Spencer, in a
very solemn passage, declares that "if it can be shewn
that the persistence of force is not a datum of con-
sciousness," why, " then, indeed," he adds, " it will be
shewn that the theory of Evolution has not the high
warrant here claimed for it." 1 The burden of proof,
however, plainly lies with him. Here is a principle, of
which physicists fifty years ago were unaware, a prin-
ciple which has had to fight its way to recognition, a
principle the range of which is still a question — the
notion of dynamically non-conservative systems being
therefore not absurd ; if this principle lies so wondrous
deep, "deeper than demonstration, deeper even than
definite cognition," then let Mr. Spencer explain New-
ton's ignorance of it and the general scepticism that
greeted its enunciation by Mayer, Joule, and Helmholtz.
Perhaps the terrible depth from which they must have
brought it is the explanation !

Taking this principle, then, as physicists understand
it, and not as it is misunderstood by Mr. Spencer, I
repeat that it will not carry us one step towards his
evolutionary formula. You could not deduce from it
even those "simplest movements," "the accelerated fall
of a stone or the recurrent beat of a harp-string,"
which he assumes to be necessarily determined by it.
Yet still more hopeless, if possible, would it be to find
for "the theory of evolution the high warrant claimed
for it" if we took Mr. Spencer's own version of the
persistence of force instead of the accepted doctrine.

To examine this version must appear, I fear, some-

* First Principles, p. 553. 5 - 7


MR. SPENCER'S FORCE AND HIS ABSOLUTE 217

what of a digression. But let me remind you how
often this recognised champion of naturalistic evolution
reiterates his confidence that nothing short of a refuta-
tion of this ultimate position can shake his general con-
clusions : " to this," he has said, " an ultimate analysis
brings us down and on this a rational synthesis must
build up." "But now what is the force of which we
predicate persistence ? " asks Mr. Spencer ; and he an-
swers : " It is not the force we are immediately con-
scious of in our own muscular efforts ... the force
of which we assert persistence is that Absolute Force,
of which we are indefinitely conscious. ... By the
persistence of Force [capital F], we really mean the
persistence of some Power [capital P] which transcends
our knowledge and conception. The manifestations, as
recurring either in ourselves or outside of us, do not
persist ; but that which persists is the Unknown Cause
[capitals again] of these manifestations." * In this state-
ment it is important to note two things. First, that
between the manifestations or phenomenal forces, accord-
ing to the usual phrase, and this Absolute Force or
Power, there stretches all that gulf, which Mr. Spencer
has elsewhere magnified, separating the known and com-
prehensible from the unknown and incomprehensible.
Secondly, that by persistence as applied to phenomenal
forces he means the quantitative constancy of these in
their totality ; while by persistence as applied to Abso-
lute Force he means, as he says, to assert "an Uncon-
ditioned Reality, without beginning or end." Now, if
Mr. Spencer's cosmic philosophy does not fall between

1 JMtL, p. rca. ^o


218 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

these two supports or lose itself in that 'ugly, broad
ditch' Schelling spoke of, between Nature and the
Absolute, it will be luckier than most eclectic attempts.
If it had started from the Absolute and Unconditioned
Reality, of which we are said to be indefinitely conscious,
it would obviously have been gratuitous — nay, self -con-
tradictory and nonsensical — to assume that the manifes-
tations of this Unknowable to finite intelligences must
remain always quantitatively the same. If " rational
synthesis" of things is what we seek, it is surely more
reasonable to say with Lotze : " What lies beneath all
is not a quantity which is bound eternally to the same
limits and compelled through many diverse arrange-
ments, continuously varied, to manifest always the very
same total. On the contrary, should the self-realisation
of the Idea require it, there is nothing to hinder the
working elements of the world being at one period more
numerous and yet more intense ; at another period less
intense as well as fewer. Then would the course of
Nature be like a melody, not flowing in monotonous
uniformity, but with crescendo* and diminuendos as each
in turn is required to express the meaning of the
whole." 1

If now, on the other hand, Mr. Spencer had started
from the phenomenal, then, allowing as he does, that of
the conservation of energy neither inductive proof nor
demonstration is possible, he ought to have regarded
that law as, like the still wider law of causation, a
postulate or regulative principle connecting together
the various branches of physics. But a basis so tenta-

* Metaphyaik, 1879, § 209.


MR. SPENCER'S METAPHYSICS OF FORCE 219

tive and restricted would not suffice for a theory which
essays to exhibit all the changes of celestial bodies,
organisms, and societies as necessary results of the same
universal principle. "The recognition of a persistent
Force, ever changing its manifestations but unchanged
in quantity throughout all past time and all future
time, is," he declares, " that which alone makes possible
each concrete interpretation and at last unifies all con-
crete interpretations." 1 So he is led to perpetrate two
or three astounding feats of philosophical jugglery.
The apparatus of the first of these we have now before
us. Persistence in the sense of permanence is secured
first of all by reference to the Unconditioned Reality ;
the non-existence of which is unthinkable, although
any knowledge of it is impossible — since to know is
to condition. Next persistence, but in the sense of
quantitative constancy, is transferred from this Uncondi-
tioned Reality to its phenomenal manifestations, but
only by first affirming of it precisely that statement
which we are not empirically warranted to affirm abso-
lutely of them. Let me present this apparatus anew
in Mr, Spencer's own words. Item No. 1. "Getting
rid of all complications and contemplating pure Force,
we are irresistibly compelled by the relativity of our
thought, to vaguely conceive some unknown force as
the correlative of the known force." 2 Item No. 2.
" Every antecedent mode of the Unknowable must have
an invariable connexion, quantitative and qualitative,
with that mode of the Unknowable which we call its
consequent. For to say otherwise is to deny the per-
1 First Principles, p. 662. a o.c, p. 170.


220 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

sistence of force." 1 Item No. 3. "For persistence is
nothing more than continued existence, and existence
cannot be thought of as other than continued." 2 In the
first we get the absolute existence of Force, with a capi-
tal F, at the price of absolute ignorance concerning it;
in the second, we get the absolute constancy of force,
with a little f, at the price of making precise and defi-
nite statements concerning that Unknowable. The in-
tellectual somersault thus rapidly performed is covered
by taking continued existence to involve invariable quan-
tity. How quantity of Unconditioned and Unknowable
Reality is to be measured we are not told, nor yet
what the unit of measure is to be. Does not this step
deserve the name of intellectual jugglery : on two items
of ignorance to establish an ultimate principle deter-
mining what the course of transformation among all
kinds of existences must be? We do not know what
the Absolute is and we cannot prove that the quantity
of force remains always the same. But since no con-
sciousness can think being as not being, the persistence
of the persistent is the fundamental cognition from
which all others are derived; hence the Unknowable
in persisting must make the knowable that does not
persist a constant quantity.

By such fetches of ingenuity to resolve the Absolute
into a fixed quantity would, after all, not be worth the
pains, unless, as I have said, force is to have a much
wider meaning and the conservation of energy a much
wider range than science at present allows to them.
Otherwise it would be impossible to bring organisms

1 First Principles, p. 193. a o.c, p. 195.


CONFUSION OF BEING AND QUANTITY 221

and societies and all thereto pertaining — life, mind,
character, language, literature, and institutions of every
kind — under the cover of a single formula. We are
therefore not surprised to find Mr. Spencer treating of
the transformation of physical forces into mental forces
and insisting on a quantitative equivalence between the
two, just as he treats of the transformation of mechani-
cal work into heat and the value in foot-pounds of a
calorie. The poetry of Milton and the British Constitu-
tion, nay, the human mind and the Christian religion,
are all according to him, equally with the tidal bore on
the Severn or gales at the equinoxes, so many secondary
results of the nebular hypothesis, cases of integration
of matter and dissipation of motion in obedience to the
persistence of force. It is to encompass all these within
one formula that he is tempted to stretch a great phys-
ical generalisation beyond all meaning, and to justify
his venture by questionable metaphysics concerning
Absolute Being. But it will be time enough to deal
with the hopeless vagueness of Mr. Spencer's concep-
tions of "knowable force" as they arise. Meanwhile,
having seen how little he succeeds in obtaining for his
theory of evolution the high warrant he claims for it,
let us turn to some of the details of the theory itself.

At once we make a great descent. We leave behind
the Ultimate Cause, Inscrutable Power, Unconditioned
Reality, supposed to be indispensable to Mr. Spencer's
u rational synthesis." We now find ourselves con-
fronted, as the complete theory requires, by the whole
universe in "a diffused imperceptible state." "On set-
ting out," says our guide, " the proposition which comes


222 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

first in logical order, is that some rearrangement must
result : and this proposition may best be dealt with
under the more specific shape that the condition of
homogeneity is a condition of unstable equilibrium."
Or more precisely : " The absolutely homogeneous must
lose its equilibrium, and the relatively homogeneous
must lapse into the relatively less homogeneous." 1 But
this is going too fast. H v!y a que le premier pas qui
eoUte : so we must be wary here. That homogeneity im-
plies instability is anything but self-evident. For one
thing, if such were the case, it would be difficult to see
how, on Mr. Spencer's theory, such homogeneity could
ever arise. Any given era of evolution we are free to
regard, according to his principles, as preceded by an
era of dissolution, the persistence of force being supreme
throughout. We seem required to picture the whole
universe, as soon as evolution is complete, beginning to
decompose and continuing so to do in such a manner
that the state of homogeneity shall be simultaneously
reached by every part of it. Otherwise, owing to the
instability of the homogeneous, the counter-process of
redintegration would begin in one part before the others
were ready. There seems, however, but one way in
which such a simultaneous dissolution is possible, viz. :
by the precise and instantaneous reversal of every move-
ment throughout the whole, as stated, e.g., in the pas-
sage from Helmholtz quoted in the last lecture. The
universe would then be like a reversible musical box
which could play its tunes backwards ; and, assuming it
to have started from a homogeneous state, it would in

1 First Principles, pp. 400,429.


INSTABILITY OF THE HOMOGENEOUS 223

this way return to it. But this is not what Mr.
Spencer understands by dissolution. In truth, however,
homogeneity is not necessarily instability. Quite other-
wise. If the homogeneity be absolute, — that of Lord
Kelvin's primordial medium, say, — then the stability
will be absolute too. In other words, if "the indefi-
nite, incoherent homogeneity," in which, according to
Mr. Spencer, some rearrangement must result, be a state
devoid of all qualitative diversity and without assign-
able bounds, then, as we saw in discussing mechanical
ideals, any " rearrangement " can result only from exter-
nal interference; it cannot begin from within. All
physicists are agreed, as Messrs. Tait and Stewart put
it, that "in the production of the atom from a perfect
fluid, we are driven at once to the unconditioned — to
the Great First Cause; it is, in fine, an act of creation
and not of development." 1 Thus, the very first step in
Mr. Spencer's evolution seems to necessitate a breach
of continuity. This fatal defect is not apparent in his
exposition; but only because, as remarked in the last
lecture, the whole vast problem of molecular develop-
ment is lost in the haziness of the nebular theory ; and,
further, as we now see, is slurred over by the vagueness
of such terms as "indefinite, incoherent homogeneity."
Mr. Spencer's attempt to evolve the chemical elements
from prime atoms by means of the nebular hypothesis
has, I believe, impressed nobody — unless it be with his
failure to realise the endless complications with which
such a problem is beset. But suppose this stage of
evolution satisfactorily explained, still what of the prime
1 The Unseen Universe, second edition, p. 117.


224 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

atom? Are we to call that indefinite, incoherent, homo-
geneous ? How can an atom be indefinite or incoherent ?
How, then, if we are to begin with the indefinite and
incoherent, can we begin with an atom of any sort?
And if we go beyond atoms to some cosmic protyle such
as that of Sir William Crookes, must we not assume,
too, as he suggests, that this " elementary protyle contains
within itself the potentiality of every possible combin-
ing proportion or atomic weight," 2 and then how can it
be homogeneous? There is, however, no end to such
questions. At any rate our reflections on the kinetic
ideal of matter brought us, it may be remembered, to
this conclusion.

That conclusion suggests two or three further remarks
on Mr. Spencer's " interpretation of evolution." In the
first place, the synthetic philosophy cannot begin at the
beginning of evolution because physical analysis can
never place it there. Such conceptions as prime atoms,
primordial media, prima materia, and the like, are obvi-
ously ideal limits and not possibly presentable realities.
In the next place, such limiting conceptions, taken
alone and treated as realities, lead straightway to
absurdities. We cannot begin operating with zeros and
infinities, though we recognise quantities that approxi-
mate to them asymptotically. So, in like manner, quali-
tative diversity may be replaced by quantitative formulae
and the range of mathematical description extended
without assignable limit. But such procedure is plainly
one of abstraction, and — if carried to the uttermost —
leaves us, as we saw, with absolutely no real content to

1 Address at Brit. Assn., 1886, Nature, vol. xxxiv, p. 428.


ABSOLUTE HOMOGENEITY = NOTHING 225

which our numbers and diagrams apply. A real world
is sublimated into "non-matter in motion." To such
epistemological reflections our synthetic philosopher
seems altogether a stranger, or he could never have
perpetrated the transparent absurdity, doubly an absurd-
ity in his case, of representing any heterogeneity as
arising simply — provided only there is quantitative
equivalence — out of absolute homogeneity. Such homo-
geneity is essentially stable ; and thus the first step in
his scheme of evolution becomes impossible, because, in
his zeal to be thorough, our author has eliminated all
ground of difference. Or if he has not, he has failed
to make good his undertaking, and begins not at the
beginning, but with atoms having indefinitely many
potentialities and distributed according to some specific
configuration ; in other words, begins with the manu-
factured articles of Herschel and Maxwell, and the
collocations of Chalmers and Mill. In point of fact he
begins, as said, with the * nebular hypothesis,' all that
goes before it being adroitly covered by the utterly
unscientific and unphilosophical phrase 'indefinite in-
coherent homogeneity.'

One further remark before we proceed ; the proposal
to start with complete homogeneity leads us to ask :
How much can evolution possibly account for, and how
little need it presuppose ? According to Mr. Spencer's
drift, it would seem that evolution, expounded in thor-
ough, philosophical fashion, will account for all form,
provided only a fixed quantity of matter and energy is
given. As Professor Riehl humorously puts it : " Lis-
ten to Herbert Spencer and you must believe that liter-

VOL. I — Q


226 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

ally everything there is has evolved, including forsooth
even evolution itself." 1 But so long as we look at
things from a purely mechanical standpoint, as Mr.
Spencer does, it is difficult to see what ground there
is for asserting any increase of complexity at all.
Given a certain aggregate of mass-points regarded as a
conservative system, and there will be a certain number
of possible configurations through which it can pass;
but on what grounds, I would ask, is one to be called
more homogeneous or more heterogeneous than an-
other? "The portions of which the whole is made
up may be severally regarded as minor wholes," 2 says
Mr. Spencer. No doubt they may be, but all such indi-
vidualisation is, from a strictly mechanical standpoint,
purely arbitrary. There may be teleological reasons
in plenty, or what we may call methodological reasons,
or reasons of practical interest ; but all such grounds
as these transcend the level of Mr. Spencer's primor-
dial truth and its corollaries. Keeping strictly to that,
there is only one true homogeneity, the homogeneity
of an undifferentiated plenum such as Descartes or
Lord Kelvin supposes. Between such a plenum and
an aggregate of elements in motion there is no con-
tinuity ; to secure the differentiation that an aggregate
implies, a catastrophe is indispensable. But once such a
system is secured, it is meaningless to call it indefinite
or incoherent. A configuration cannot be indefinite;
and as the forces between every pair of elements de-
pend solely on their masses and positions, such a system

1 Der philo8ophi8che KrUicismus^ Bd. ii, 2te Th. p. 76.
a First Principles, p. 428.


MECHANICAL SYSTEMS NEVER INDEFINITE 227

is never incoherent, that is to say, is never disconnected.
To the Laplacean calculator, i.e. according to what
Thomson and Tait call 'accurate mathematical investi-
gation' by 4 the only perfect method,' a chunk of gran-
ite or even a whirl of dust may be just as definite,
just as connected, just as heterogeneous as a chronom-
eter or a balance, just as much a pure mechanism con-
forming to the laws of energy. Summing up on this
head, then, we may say : (1) That this opposition of
homogeneity and heterogeneity is essentially out of
place in a rigorously mechanical theory. (2) That on
such a theory it is impossible to interpret Mr. Spencer
strictly when he says, "The absolutely homogeneous
must lose its equilibrium and the relatively homogene-
ous must lapse into the relatively less homogeneous " ; 1
for instability is incompatible with absolute, and inde-
pendent of relative, homogeneity. (3) That mere
indefiniteness and incoherence entitle him to assert
nothing either concerning homogeneity, or stability, or
anything else.

Any one at the trouble to read at all critically the
long chapter devoted to this so-called Instability of the
Homogeneous, cannot fail to discover instances in plenty
of what I say. Mr. Spencer's main example I may
perhaps be allowed to mention, though it has been
already exposed ; 2 for in this he flatly contradicts the
very mechanical principles he has declared to be so

1 Spite of this Mr. Spencer, in an earlier foot-note, cuts away the
ground from under his own feet by bargaining that "the terms here used
must be understood in a relative sense." Cf. p. 830 ; as also p. 407 fin.

2 Cf. British Quarterly Review, 1873, vol. 68.


228 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

unfathomably fundamental. Having by a series of
gratuitous and sometimes erroneous suppositions got
from pristine homogeneity as far as "irregular masses
of slightly aggregated nebular matter" all in motion,
he continues thus: " Established mechanical principles
. . . justify the conclusions that the motions of these
irregular masses . . . towards their common centre of
gravity must be severally rendered curvilinear, by the
resistance of the medium from which they were pre-
cipitated ; and that in consequence of the irregularities
of distribution already set up, such conflicting curvi-
linear motions must, by composition of forces, end in a
rotation of the incipient sidereal system." Now this
is a gigantic and palpable blunder, one that even the
least mathematically-minded might have avoided by re-
flecting that matter being essentially inert can hardly
be conceived to set itself spinning merely because there
is plenty of it. This felicitous plan for securing the
rotation that Laplace was content to assume, is directly
counter to what is technically called the Conservation
of Angular Momentum; and this, it is well known, is
directly deducible from Newton's third law. Now the
odd thing is that Mr. Spencer — very inaccurately, to
be sure — identifies the said law, viz., that action and
reaction are equal and opposite, with the law of the
conservation of energy. Thus an important scene in
his evolutionary drama runs directly counter to its main
motive.

Of course Mr. Spencer has had no difficulty in finding
instances in plenty of comparatively homogeneous states
lapsing into more heterogeneous ones; and had he so


MR. SPENCER'S NEBULA ROTATES ITSELF 229

minded he could have found just as many instances of
4 heterogeneous ' states lapsing into more 4 homogeneous '
ones — as he does indeed when he wishes to illustrate
dissolution. And all such instances alike are conform-
able to the principle of the conservation of energy ;
thereby shewing, as we have already seen, that that
principle is a sufficient basis for none. Whether an
egg is transformed into a chicken, into an omelette, or
into rottenness, one change is as much, or as little, as
the other deducible from that persistence of force which
Mr. Spencer always mentions with such mystic awe.
Moreover, all such instances require that besides the
homogeneous and unstable object or the heterogeneous
and unstable object, as the case may be, there should
be external forces affecting it. An egg alone in the
void would neither hatch nor cook nor smell : it is on
the object + external causes that the result — be it more,
be it less complexity — essentially depends. Now the
universe, regarded as a single object and homogeneous,
has no environment, is not amenable to extraneous forces
— a peculiarity that makes Mr. Spencer's instances
rather refute than corroborate his main thesis, but con-
firms on the other hand the antithesis we have opposed
to it.

Perhaps the most striking thing about Mr. Spencer's
multitudinous illustrations of the transitoriness of all
things homogeneous and their inevitable lapses into
heterogeneity, is the looseness with which these terms are
used. Thus he chooses to regard a circular orbit as
homogeneous and elliptic orbits as heterogeneous, and
then remarks : " All orbits, whether of planets or satel-


230 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

lites, are more or less excentric . . . and were they per-
fect circles they would soon become ellipses. Mutual
perturbations would inevitably generate excentricities.
That is to say, the homogeneous relations would lapse
into heterogeneous ones." 1 Now in the first place let an
orbit be what it may, the relations determining it are
invariable, involve no more factors at one time than at
another. But even if an orbit could with propriety be
called a relation, it is especially absurd in Mr. Spencer
to contrast a circle which is a single figure with ellipses
of which there may be an indefinite multitude. Com-
pare an elliptic orbit of definite eccentricity with a cir-
cular orbit, which is itself an elliptic orbit of definite,
i.e. zero, eccentricity, and both appear equally homoge-
neous and equally stable. Apropos of this a mathemati-
cal critic of Mr. Spencer, after comparing him to a man
44 who thought that Nature had a spite against the figure
3, because he had noticed that it was much more usual
to find that a number did not end with 3 than that it
did," proceeds to remark : 44 Of course, if you put all
elliptical orbits in one class and leave the circle to form
another class by itself, it is likely that the orbit will
tend to belong to the first-named class; for it can
change through all possible ellipses without altering
the appellation of its orbit, while the slightest variation
from a circle is reflected in a change of name." 2 A
blunder of this kind, though it shews how flimsy Mr.
Spencer's constructions are, would scarcely be worth
mention if it were isolated. Unhappily the fallacy

1 First Principles, p. 410.

2 British Quarterly Review, article above referred to.


INSTABILITY OF CIRCULAR ORBITS 231

underlying it is general and vitiates an indefinite num-
ber of 'the great evolutionist's' arguments; for the
homogeneous is ever one and the heterogeneous always
many.

Yet another instance may be mentioned in view of
its subsequent importance. Mr. Spencer devotes one
section of his long chapter on the Instability of the
Homogeneous to what he calls "chemical differentia-
tions." In the course of it he illustrates the well-
known, but for his argument somewhat anomalous, fact
that in general "simple combinations can exist at a
higher temperature than complex ones," in other words
that chemical stability decreases as chemical complexity
increases, so that for example what we ordinarily regard
as chemical elements at one extreme cannot be decom-
posed by any heat that we can artificially produce,
whereas organic compounds at the other extreme, which
are extremely complex, are readily decomposed at quite
moderate temperatures. Now as all ponderable matter
is in some chemical state or other, and as the half of
our evolutionary formula relates to redistribution of
matter, this fact — that chemically the more homoge-
neous matter is the more stable — surely cuts a monstrous
cantle out of the best of Mr. Spencer's realm. 1 I say
the best, for here, at any rate, the terms homogeneous
and heterogeneous are strictly applicable. The strange
thing, however, is that when, in a subsequent volume of

1 Oar author elsewhere (§ 101) accounts for this greater stability of
what is chemically homogeneous by asserting the comparative absence
from it of " contained motion. 11 But even this surrenders the point that
the homogeneous, merely as homogeneous, is unstable. It suggests, in-
deed, the precisely opposite conclusion.


232 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

his philosophy, Mr. Spencer comes to treat of the evo-
lution of organic life, this instability of the heterogeneous
becomes the mainstay of his argument.

But why, you may wonder, does he bring it forward
in a general chapter that has to prove the instability
of the homogeneous, where it seems so irrelevant and
inopportune? It is the earth's crust which is here the
direct object of Mr. Spencer's exposition: his purpose,
he says, is "to show how, in place of that comparative
homogeneity of the earth's crust, chemically considered,
which must have existed when its temperature was high,
there has arisen during its cooling, an increasing chemi-
cal heterogeneity, each element or compound, being un-
able to maintain its homogeneity in presence of various
surrounding affinities, having fallen into heterogeneous
combinations." 1 Let us examine this argument for a
moment. If the comparatively homogeneous as such is
unstable, then a fortiori the altogether homogeneous
should be unstable, if the argument is to be worth any-
thing. Let us then, as we surely may, imagine the
incandescent globe to have been wholly of oxygen or of
silicon, ought we not then to expect that heterogeneous
combinations would appear sooner and more conspicu-
ously? Again if the instability is due to homogeneity
simply, why is it essential to reduce the temperature
and to insure "the presence of various surrounding
affinities " before the lapse into heterogeneity can begin ?
Further, if the homogeneity involves instability, how
comes it that once combination has begun "the stability
decreases as the complexity increases ?" Lastly, what

1 First Principles^ p. 411.


CHEMICAL DIFFERENTIATION 233

warrant has Mr. Spencer for saying that 'each element
or compound falls into combination, being unable to
maintain tto homogeneity'? Does he mean that, when
oxygen and hydrogen form water, or acid and base
form a salt, both components disappear ? How then can
the combination be called heterogeneous ; we should
surely have a new homogeneous, presumably as unstable
as before ! On the whole I think we may say that
while Mr. Spencer's main argument here is an instance
of the "indefinite incoherent" confounding of things in
themselves distinct, it incidentally lets in a whole flood-
gate of facts very damaging to the homogeneity of his
theory.

With other instances of the instability of the homo-
geneous supposed to be deducible from the persistence
of energy, such as the development of intelligence and
the desynonymisation of words, it is impossible to deal
here. Mr. Spencer is considerate enough to anticipate
his readers' misgivings so far as to assure them that
"any difficulty felt in understanding" these and like
instances " will disappear on contemplating acts of mind
as nervous functions." All such parts of Mr. Spencer's
doctrine, then, may for the present stand over. There
remain still two steps in what our cosmic philosopher
calls the rationale of evolution, its deduction, that is to
say, from the persistence of force. At each of these
we must glance briefly.

To secure his first step, Mr. Spencer, as we have
seen, was led to maintain that the homogeneous is essen-
tially unstable; his second step consists in maintaining
that "the effect is universally more complex than the


234 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

cause." 1 "This secondary cause of change from homo-
geneity to heterogeneity," he remarks, "obviously be-
comes more potent in proportion as the heterogeneity
increases," — in fact, "the multiplication of effects," as
he entitles his second step, must, he contends, " proceed
in geometrical progression. Each stage of evolution
must initiate a higher stage." All these conclusions, of
course, he proceeds as before to shew, "are not only to
be established inductively, but are to be deduced from
the deepest of all truths." 2 And again I can only con-
tend that strictly interpreted this second position is as
devoid of foundation as the first, and is only made to
look plausible by a very loose use of leading terms and
a superabundance of specious analogies.

Let us see, for instance, what Mr. Spencer means by
one cause and by many effects. Here is an example.
He gives a detailed description of the leading physical
features of the earth, — its mountain ranges, irregular
coast line, its continents, and its oceans ; and then con-
cludes by saying : " Thus endless is the accumulation
of geological and geographical results slowly brought
about by this one cause — the escape of the earth's
primitive heat." 3 The effects, no doubt, are multitudi-
nous enough, but on what ground is the cause accounted
one? Suppose the earth to be a single gas cooling
under constant pressure, or to consist entirely of one
pure metal — the escape of the primitive heat could
take place as before, but how many of the endless
effects of this one cause would there be left? If such
loose and popular language is to pass as scientific induc-

1 First Principles, p. 433. * o.c, p. 468. • o.c., p. 438. *j £*


THE MULTIPLICATION OF EFFECTS 235

tion, it would be every whit as easy to shew that a
single effect is due to a multiplicity of causes. The
historian, for example, may in all seriousness so regard
the Reformation or the French Revolution, and the more
patient and pertinacious he is the more multitudinous
the causes he will find for that one result.

But when causes and effects are to be deduced from
a quantitative law and expressed in terms of matter and
motion, we have a right to expect more precision. Mr.
Spencer begins by using the language of the exact
sciences, talks much of incident forces, of action and re-
action being equal and opposite, and so forth, but in the
end he is as careless as one quite ignorant of mechan-
ical principles. Thus, for instance, when he describes
the fracture of a stone by a hammer as a case in which
a single force is changed by conflict with matter partly
into forces differing in their directions and partly into
forces differing in their kinds. He then proceeds further
to describe the first of these as a change of a homo-
geneous momentum into a group of momenta, hetero-
geneous in both amounts and directions. Lastly he
mentions as instances of the second the sound produced,
the heat disengaged, and the sparks struck off, etc.
In the course of half a page force is used in three dif-
ferent senses — as mechanical energy, as momentum, as
a physical sense-impression — and all wrong. But, above
all, what is to be understood by "a conflict of force
with matter ? " To the physicist proper, Professor Tait
say, for whom matter is essentially passive and inert,
such language is nonsense ; it can hardly have more
meaning for a writer who, like Mr. Spencer, maintains


236 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

that matter is force and nothing else. How, we wonder,
by the way, did the homogeneous lapse into this kind of
heterogeneity ?

From the inductions, of which these are specimens, Mr.
Spencer next passes to the deduction of this second step
from "the deepest of all truths," and in so doing he
becomes suddenly very perfunctory. After the parallel
deduction in the case of his first step, a like argument,
he thinks, "seems here scarcely required," and he is
content "for symmetry's sake briefly to point out how
the multiplication of effects, like the instability of the
homogeneous, is a corollary from the persistence of force."
In less than two pages the thing is done, or rather not
done, not even attempted — a result which in view of the
flimsiness of the inductive argument is only to be re-
gretted. What Mr. Spencer has to prove can be stated
simply enough. It is that if "the quantity of Force
remains always the same," there must be, and unless the
quantity of Force remains always the same, there cannot
be, what he calls the multiplication of effects in geomet-
rical progression. What he actually does, however, is
merely to draw out with needless parade a proposition,
which, as he is frank enough to allow "is in essence a
truism," viz., that unlike causes, or, as he prefers to say,
4 unlike forces' will have unlike effects. To this he
merely appends the remark that each different modifica-
tion "must produce its equivalent reaction; and must
so affect the total reaction. To say otherwise is to say
this differential force will produce no effect, which is to
say that force is not persistent." 1 In a word, instead

1 First Principles, p. 467.


SEGREGATION 237

of shewing that, given the persistence of energy, there
must be this geometrical increase in the diversity of
effects, what Mr. Spencer does is to assert that given
this diversity, every effect is the equivalent transforma-
tion of its cause — which is not to deduce anything as a
consequence of the law of conservation ; it is only a need-
less reiteration of the law itself.

We come at length to the final step in the rationale
of evolution. Mr. Spencer devotes to it the last chapter
of his exposition of this subject, and his opening sentences
ought to surprise us : " The general interpretation of ^ V J /
Evolution," he begins, "is far from being completed in
the preceding chapters. . . . Thus far no reason has
been assigned why there should not ordinarily arise a
vague chaotic heterogeneity in place of that orderly
heterogeneity displayed in Evolution." "We have found
. . . that the homogeneous must lapse into the hetero-
geneous and that the heterogeneous must become more
heterogeneous." "But," says our oracle, "the laws al-
ready set forth furnish no key to this arrangement in so
far as it is an advance from the indefinite to the defi-
nite." As to the advance from the incoherent to the
coherent the key to this, we must suppose, is furnished
by that * simplest and most general aspect 9 of evolution
to which Mr. Spencer ascribes the mere integration or
aggregation of matter. But there is, it seems, a further
" local integration " or segregation of like from unlike in
the heterogeneous mixture. Now it is by this process that
orderly heterogeneity arises out of the vague and chaotic.
Surprised as we naturally are to find ourselves thus near
to the close of the great interpretation, and yet not out


238 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

of the range of chaos, we await with some anxiety the
rationale of this final step by which at the last moment
a cosmos is secured. " The rationale," says Mr. Spencer,
"will be conveniently introduced by a few instances in
which we may watch this segregative process taking
place." 1

Let us be content with one and that the briefest of
these instances : " In every river we see how the mixed
materials, carried down, are separately deposited — how
in rapids the bottom gives rest to nothing but boulders
and pebbles ; how when the current is not so strong, sand
is let fall ; and how, in still places, there is a sediment of
mud." 2 After this and other introductory instances and
an assurance that there are countless similar ones, we
have the following generalisation : u In each case we see
in action a force which may be regarded as simple or uni-
form—fluid motion in a certain direction at a certain
velocity. ... In each case we have an aggregate made
up of unlike units — unlike in their specific gravities,
shapes, or other attributes. . . . And in each case these
unlike units or groups of units, of which the aggregate
consists, are, under the influence of some resultant
force, acting indiscriminately on them all? separated
from each other — segregated into minor aggregates, each
consisting of units that are severally like each other and
unlike those of the other minor aggregates." 4 Thus we
see that even the transition from the indefinite to the
definite, from the vague and chaotic to the cosmical and
orderly, is assigned to "force acting indiscriminately."

1 First Principles, p. 459. 2 o.c, p. 460. 8 Italics mine.

* o.c, p. 4w. ij ^ *y


SEGREGATION AS MECHANICAL PROCESS 239

Mens agitat molem is a maxim for which the mechanical
theory of evolution has nowhere a place. It is at any
rate satisfactory to come to the end and be clear on
this point. But I must defer general reflections till
the next lecture. For the present let us be content
with briefly considering how this indiscriminate sifting
process will work in conjunction with the other two.

A good deal will depend on their respective intensi-
ties, how they are matched against each other ; for it is
obvious that in several respects the process of segrega-
tion will counterwork the two other causes of evolution.
Thus, in producing local integrations of like units, it
must act counter to the instability of the homogene-
ous, according to which the like lapses into the unlike.
In so doing, again, it will frustrate the multiplication of
effects within the limits of such local integration, for
this is efficient * in proportion as the parts are unlike.' l
Imagine segregation to have been in full play while
the existing chemical elements of the solar system,
though present in the nebula, were still uncombined,
and that in consequence these elements were separated
into minor aggregates severally like each other and
unlike the rest — those of high specific gravity or strong
physical likeness near together and the unlike far
apart. Thus the conceit of the alchemists that the
seven metals correspond to the seven planets might
have been realised; and as to the gases, oxygen,
hydrogen, nitrogen, indispensable constituents of living
things — they might have been sifted off into space
before planetary consolidation began. We know of

1 First Principles, p. 468.


240 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

course that this has not happened or we should not be
here. But if Mr. Spencer's principle of segregation is
really the potent factor in evolution that he takes it
to be, it is at least remarkable to find that with a
whole nebula as a field for its activity and untold
ages in which to work, it has nevertheless left no trace
of itself. Let me quote an excellent authority. "We
do not find them [i.e. the chemical elements]," said Sir
William Crookes in his British Association Address,
" evenly distributed throughout the globe. Nor are they
associated in accordance with their specific gravities, the
lighter elements placed on or near the surface and the
heavier ones following serially deeper. Neither can we
trace any distinct relation between local climate and
mineral distribution. And by no means can we say
that elements are always or chiefly associated in nature
in the order of their so-called chemical affinities : those
which have a strong tendency to form with each other
definite chemical combinations being found together,
while those which have little or no such tendency
exist apart." Then definitely raising the question, —
but without any reference to Mr. Spencer, let me say,
— "Is there any power which regularly and system-
atically sorts out the different kinds of matter from
promiscuous heaps, conveying like to like and separat-
* **. tJ unliij" *«. dUti^hed cList
answers : " I must confess that I fail to trace any such
distributive agency, nor indeed, do I feel able to form
any distinct conception of its nature." 1 Perhaps Mr.
Spencer might have had something to say to this, but

1 Nature, 1886, vol. xxxiv, p. 426.


SEGREGATION AND GUIDANCE 241

then, as I have already mentioned, he had stereotyped
his First Principles some twenty years previously.

One other point as to the relation of the two chaotic
or differentiating processes to this cosmic, selectively inte-
grating, principle. At first blush the situation reminds
us of that intellectual guidance referred to in the last
lecture, when we were distinguishing teleological from
mechanical evolution. When human ingenuity constructs
a machine or a house, or when Maxwell's sorting demon
separates molecules moving with more than average ve-
locity from those moving with less, the processes are what
Mr. Spencer might call processes of segregation and
local integration. But they differ from Mr. Spencer's
process in several respects. First, the result is secured,
not by a force acting indiscriminately, but by intelligence
counterworking the downhill trend of energy towards
dissipation. Also in the case of the products of human
skill the result is rather that unlike things are brought
together than that unlike things are separated. Nowhere
do we find so little segregation, in the sense of Mr.
Spencer's sifting and winnowing processes, as in living
organisms and the products of human industry. Lastly,
organisms and machines are not aggregates of aggre-
gates, but individuals consisting of members. Spite of
these essential differences, Mr. Spencer, no doubt, thinks
mechanical segregation will cover both, and it must be
confessed that by sufficient license in the use of the term
4 force' and the free substitution of unit for fragment,
individual for aggregate, and the like, the task is feasible,
— and the result quite worthless. When sparks rise and
dust falls we say each moves along the line of least re-

VOL. I — B


242 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

sistance, their densities and gravitation being the segre-
gating forces; and when the virtuous man 'rises' and
the vicious i falls ' we may, if we like, say again that each
follows the line of least resistance, and may call their
desires and public opinion the segregating forces. This is
what Mr. Spencer does like to do; it is what he calls
synthetic philosophy.


LECTURE IX

REFLECTIONS ON MR. SPENCER'S THEORY: HIS TREAT-
MENT OF LIFE AND MIND

The conclusions to which we were led in examining the mechanical
theory apply here. It is impossible to get more out of a theory than there
is in it. Out of space, time and mass, however manipulated, progress,
development, history, meaning, can never be deduced.

How has Mr. Spencer come to think this possible f His procedure
illustrated. He succeeds by means of formularies that seem to have
always a strictly mechanical sense, though they are frequently only
figuratively mechanical. Indeed, he outvies the mechanical theorists by
his more fundamental analysis as well as by his completer synthesis.
But he confounds abstraction with analysis; and abstracts till he has
no content left. The eliminated elements are then gradually resumed
under cover of the principle of continuity. The existing gaps in scientific
knowledge help to cloak such recoveries.

An instance in Mr. Spencer* s transition from Inorganic Evolution to
Organic Evolution. Two volumes of the Synthetic Philosophy missing.

Mr. Spencer's somersault in passing from Life to Mind. After all,
the interpretation of Spirit in terms of Matter is allowed to be ' wholly
imposs

I have called Mr. Spencer an eclectic. His synthetic
philosophy is made up of Hamilton's theory of the Uncon-
ditioned, of the physical theory of the conservation of
energy as expounded by Grove, of the nebular hypothesis
of Laplace, and of what used to be called the develop-
ment hypothesis, or the doctrine of the transmutation of
species. The Darwinian form of this doctrine came too

243


244 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

late to be satisfactorily incorporated in his system, still
Mr. Spencer was not slow to turn it to account as far as
he could. Of his work Darwin, writing to one of its
chief exponents, Professor Fiske, thus expresses himself :
" Such parts of H. Spencer as I have read with care im-
press my mind with the idea of his inexhaustible wealth
of suggestion, but never convince me ; and so I find it
with some others. I believe the cause to be the fre-
quency with which I have found first-formed theories
erroneous." 1 In passing presently to this narrower sub-
ject of biological evolution, I do not propose to refer so
fully to Mr. Spencer's views.

In the existing state of knowledge this topic of
biological evolution is widely different in subject-mat-
ter and methods from the cosmological speculations
into which Mr. Spencer attempts to frame it. Here we
deal with concrete objects and a vast collection of
empirical observations concerning them. The axioms
of physics and its ideal conceptions of atoms, ethers,
and the like have to be left aside, temporarily at all
events. We are forced back upon them again when the
dominant naturalistic explanation of the relations of life
and mind to their so-called " physical basis" confront
us. But having reached a dividing line of this magni-
tude, it seems appropriate, before proceeding, to attempt
a retrospective summary of Mr. Spencer's cosmological
presentment of evolution as a deduction from mechani-
cal principles.

It was open to us perhaps to urge at the very outset
that such an enterprise was foredoomed to failure. For
1 Life and Letters of Charles Darwin, vol. iii, p. 194.


MECHANICAL PRINCIPLES INADEQUATE 245

what Mr. Spencer essays to do is to set before us " the
entire history " of things, " considered individually or in
their totality " ; and to set all this before us as the direct
and necessary consequence of a principle of permanence
which gives no clue to processes, transformations, or
changes of any kind — to say nothing of furnishing the
rationale of all processes and changes of every kind
whatever. It is as if we had the philosophy of Hera-
clitus deduced from the premisses of Parmenides. Even
when we allow Mr. Spencer to substitute the entire
body of hypotheses constituting abstract dynamics for
his Eleatic principle of "the impossibility of establish-
ing in thought a relation between Being and Not-
being," * the case is not mended. True this transcendent
but rather empty principle is not equivalent to the
physical doctrine of the conservation of energy ; and
again the conservation of energy, so far from constitut-
ing the sole and sufficient foundation of physical science,
only furnishes one of several equations — to put it tech-
nically — by which a given transformation is deter-
mined. But even if we add to it the principle of least
action and all the hypotheses necessary to make a
mechanical 'interpretation' of things as complete as
such an interpretation can be, still it will be hopelessly
inadequate to the "entire history of things considered
individually and in their totality." In fact, the conclu-
sions to which we were led in examining the mechani-
cal theory must apply straightway to what is itself but
an application of that theory — the resolution of all his-
tory into "a total and all-pervading process of redistri-

1 First Principles, p. 191.


246 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

bution of matter and motion." It is impossible to get
more out of such a theory than there is in it. Between
one stage of the process and another there can only be
such differences as dynamical diagrams, time-charts,
hodographs, and the like will give. The entire history
of things would thus be nothing better than the monot-
onous uniformity of a long series of gigantic Nautical
Almanacs. Change there would be certainly, but only
change of motion, change of grouping of unchangeable
elements, unchangeable because utterly devoid of quali-
tative diversity or internal character. Progress, devel-
opment, history, meaning — of these there would be
nothing. It is obviously impossible to get such con-
ceptions out of space, time, and mass, as quantities ; or
out of any relations between them, for these in turn are
only quantities. We have only the night — to appropriate
a mot of Hegel's — when all cows are black. Everything
is dynamical diagram: to this common level "celestial
bodies, organisms, societies " will all alike have somehow
to be reduced.

But how then does Mr. Spencer deceive himself into
imagining that he finds increasing purpose, advancing
harmony, final perfection, what he is pleased to call a
" Philosophico-Religious doctrine," 1 in a purely quanti-
tative scheme ; a scheme to which all such notions as
adaptation, perfection, and happiness are absolutely dis-
parate? The answer is simple and the fallacy to which
it has led is clear. There are two points to notice.
First, like the rest of us, Mr. Spencer sets out from
the concrete world which is only intelligible to us so

1 First Principles, p. 657.


HEGEL AND MR. SPENCER 247

far as we can regard it as a world of individuals, a
world full of purpose and of adaptations, a world to
which such notions as worth, progress, and perfection
are applicable. 1 Looking at this world, then, historically,
we can range its facts in an ascending order of com-
plexity and value — physical, biological, psychological,
social, and so forth. But as we make this ascent we
have at every advance to take up new conceptions : the
facts of biology cannot be expressed in purely physical
terms ; psychology will not resolve into biology nor
sociology into psychology. It would be sheer waste of
time to enlarge upon a point so perfectly obvious,
though for any attempt at a theory of knowledge it is
a point of vital importance. For Hegel — who also was
an evolutionist, but one occupying a standpoint the dia-
metrical opposite of Mr. Spencer's — the exhibition of
this hierarchy of categories was the main problem ; for
Mr. Spencer it is no problem at all. His works tes-
tify on every page that such an ascending scale of
conceptions is there and unavoidable. But the fact
gives him not a moment's pause ; it is only one more
instance of the passage of matter from indefinite, inco-
herent homogeneity to definite coherent heterogeneity !
And so we come to the second point, and thia again
it is enough barely to mention. Whatever be its mean-
ing, its purpose, or its life, the cosmos in one aspect
is but matter in motion. However difficult to for-
mulate without appearing to prejudge the ancient and

1 " Constituted as the human mind is, if nature be not interpretable
through these conceptions, it is not interpretable at all." Sir J. Herschel
on The Origin of Force in the Fortnightly Review, vol. i, p. 442.


248 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

obstinate problems to which it has given rise, this fact
is none the less in itself both familiar and unquestion-
able. The world of ideas is in some way presented
through, and embodied in, the world of sense; and the
sensible can be summarised in terms of matter, motion,
and force. And now it is by his mode of dealing with
these two planes of thought that Mr. Spencer has de-
ceived himself into thinking that he has encompassed the
entire history of things within the scope of a material-
istic formula. He advances by way of the ascending
scale of ideas, the concrete progress from physics to
life, from life to mind, from mind to reason ; but he
professes to explain by falling back on the abstractions
of pure dynamics. Yet on this level, if we could im-
agine ourselves confined to it, there is, as I have fre-
quently urged, no real advance, no true evolution at all.
Space and time, of course, do not alter ; also mass-ele-
ments do not alter ; and so between one configuration,
one diagram, and another, of a given number of such
elements, there is no essential difference. But when
we command both the dead level of changing configura-
tions and also the ascending complexity of the concrete
sciences and their categories, then we may make a
shift to call one material system a pumpkin and another
a poet. Only however because we first know pumpkins
and poets as such. To suppose then, that the trans-
formation of one such configuration into another fur-
nishes any clue to the evolution of poets is a glaring
and ridiculous blunder. But it is for this blunder that
Mr. Spencer is vaunted by Tyndall as an "Apostle of
the Understanding whose ganglia are sometimes the


HOW MR. SPENCER GETS ALONG 249

seat of a nascent poetic thrill." l Let me try to make
this point clearer by means of an imaginary case involv-
ing the same sort of fallacy. Take a shelf of miscel-
laneous books in the English language, — books on
mathematics, chemistry, physiology, Lo^ art, litera-
ture, or what you will,— and imagine a private student
setting to work to improve his mind, as we say, by
means of them. It will not be indifferent in what
order he reads : to understand the physiology he will
often find himself thrown back on the chemistry, to
understand the chemistry he must often consult the
mathematics ; the art and the literature will be full of
allusions to the history. Above all, the whole will
presuppose that the student himself is a person with
sense, intelligence, feeling, conscience. Nevertheless, if
we are not to be too severe on the synthetic philoso-
phy, we had better leave the student, as much as may
be, out of account.

Now let us introduce a man of letters with a Spen-
cerian sense of thoroughness. The first step, he will
say, must be to analyse all this material ; and only an
ultimate analysis will suffice : we must not pause till
we have reached the imperceptible. Specialists, he will
continue, have already provided nomenclatures and ter-
minologies, glossaries, indexes of persons and things,
and the like. Passing beyond all this un-unified know-
ledge, the lexicographer provides us with partially uni-
fied knowledge, and covers the whole range of these
books by an adequate dictionary of the English tongue.
We get still nearer to that ultimate analysis that must
1 Belfast Address before the British Association, 1874, p. 49.


250 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

underlie completely unified knowledge when we can ex-
hibit the letters of the alphabet as the constituents of
English as it is, was, and will be. But even these let-
ters are made up of strokes of two kinds, viz., straight
strokes and curved strokes; and only when these are
disintegrated into the primordial dots of which they
must be compounded, and these dots duly dissipated,
have we reached that ultimate and imperceptible state
where rational synthesis must begin. Evolution then
arises as this dissipation gives place to concentration,
and with increased concentration comes increased differ-
entiation ; and so we advance from dots to strokes,
from strokes to letters of various forms, from these
to syllables "with a subsequent advance to dissylla-
bles and polysyllables and to involved combinations of
words" — the heterogeneity steadily increasing in geo-
metrical progression. As these aggregates of letters
grow in complexity and definiteness more wide-reach-
ing interdependences become manifest : in short, what
is called grammar and sense arise. But not only do
we find in these the same processes of integration, dif-
ferentiation, and segregation already exemplified; they
are also themselves objectively presented and more or
less permanently registered in literal form. Then, when
at length the change which evolution presents is com-
plete and equilibration is reached, we have, in what
we know as stereotype, that perfection, harmony, and
complete congruity which the stereotyped editions of
the synthetic philosophy so admirably illustrate. To be
sure, this interpretation of all literary phenomena in
terms of integrated black and diffused white is nothing


AN IMAGINARY PARALLEL 251

more than the reduction of complex phenomena to their
simplest forms, and as that philosophy shews "when
the equation has been brought to its lowest terms the
symbols remain symbols still." 1 No doubt, "most per-
sons/' as the author of that philosophy remarks, "have
acquired repugnance to such modes of interpretation."
But, as he further truly says, " whoever remembers that
the forms of existence [in his case Matter and Motion,
in ours print and paper] which the illiterate speak of
with so much scorn are shewn to be the more marvel-
lous in their attributes the more they are investigated
. • . will see that the course proposed does not imply
a degradation of the so-called higher, but an elevation
of the so-called lower." 2 From the infant's primer with
its strokes and pothooks up to the pages of Newton
and Spencer, we discern the same evolving aggregate,
not progressively integrating simply, but simultaneously
undergoing various secondary redistributions : the struct-
ural complexities thus emerging being ever accompanied
by the functional complexities known as grammatical,
logical, literary, scientific, and so forth. Given the
indestructibility of ink and the persistence of paper,
together with the various derivative laws that are their
corollaries and consequences, and it can be shewn —
adapting the words of our great evolutionist — not only
how the grammatical elements exhibit the traits they
do, but how books are evolved, thoughts generated, and
civilisations achieved. But deny our fundamental da-
tum, or, as Mr. Spencer says: "Let idealism be true,
and evolution is a dream ! "

1 First Principles, p. 658. 2 o.c, p. 656.


252 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

Very ridiculous, of course, but not more essentially
ridiculous than Mr. Spencer's procedure. The plausi-
bility of his cosmic philosophy is due entirely to the
ingenuity with which he has devised a set of formu-
laries that seem, till closely scrutinised, to carry always
the same meaning; though at one time they are used
in a strictly mechanical sense, while at another they
are only figuratively mechanical. The illusoriness is the
more complete and captivating because it is the in-
grained habit of human intelligence to betake itself to
metaphor and parable. The current scientific terminol-
ogy is full of such, and we only realise that we have
been talking in similes when the progress of knowledge
has enabled us to outgrow them. Thus we now repudiate
as fanciful the powers of Love and Hate working be-
tween the elements, as Empedocles represented; though
We still talk with little misgiving of attractive and re-
pulsive forces, of chemical affinities and bonds ; speak of
organisms acquiring and bequeathing, and of seeds or
eggs as inheriting; and so forth. All this plenitude of
metaphor is grist to the Spencerian mill. Moreover, to
the 'pseudo-thinking ' — I borrow his favourite phrase —
which science allows to pass as sterling coin, this latest
Paracelsus has added abundance of his own counterfeit.

The lesson which our reflections on the mechanical
theory seemed to teach has apparently never dawned
upon him, although perhaps that lesson is nowhere more
impressively taught than it is in his own First Princi-
ples. According to that, philosophy must start from
the unknowable, science from the imperceptible. Know-
ledge is to be unified by ruthlessly abstracting from the


ULTIMATE ABSTRACTIONS UNREAL 253

concrete real all qualitative specification. Celestial bodies,
organisms, societies, are to be reduced to their lowest
terms, viz., Matter, Motion, Force; and are to find their
rationale in the instability of the homogeneous, the segre-
gation of the heterogeneous, and the tendency of all things
towards equilibrium. Surely this is not very unlike
trying to find the meaning of a book by first distribut-
ing the type and then mincing them up into strokes and
dots. Like the physicists who think to attain u a know-
ledge of what actually goes on behind what we see and
feel," by treating the ideal abstractions of pure me-
chanics as the real things, so Mr. Spencer essays to
find the fullest meaning of evolution among its emptiest
symbols, to deduce the form and life of the universe
from an Indeterminate and Unchanging Non-relative,
which "the imbecilities of our understanding," as he
tells us, prevent us from either comprehending or re-
jecting. The farthest point to which Philosophy, or
knowledge of the highest degree of generality, can
attain in seeking to comprehend this inscrutable fetish,
supposed to be the Supreme Reality, is reached when
all separate truths are resolved into implications of one
a priori truth, the Persistence of Force. The experi-
ence of force is assumed to last out through the process
of abstract analysis and generalisation, and to remain
as long as any content remains; beyond this, we have
only indeterminate, non-relative Existence or Persist-
ence, being without content, as the supreme, ineffable
generalisation of all. Thus Mr. Spencer outvies your
speculative physicists in both directions; his ultimate
analysis goes beyond theirs, and in his subsequent syn-


254 THEORY OP EVOLUTION

thesis phenomena of all kinds are to be included.
And by so much as the range of his formulae exceeds
theirs, by so much are his results illusory and worth-
less. Lord Kelvin's speculations, for example, were re-
stricted to the deduction of material phenomena from
the motions of a structureless primordial fluid; and he
is careful to say "that the beginning and the mainte-
nance of life on the earth is absolutely and infinitely be-
yond the range of all sound speculation in dynamical
science." 1 Lord Kelvin, too, it will be remembered,
proposed to test all his hypotheses by the construction,
real or imaginary, of a mechanical model — thus shewing
unmistakably that Matter, Motion, and Force were to
be taken in a strictly literal sense. And this, of course,
is, if anything, still more true of physicists of the
Kirchhoff school, for whom these conceptions are pure
mathematical abstractions, not real existences. How,
then, does it come about that Mr. Spencer imagines
he can set forth the entire history and rationale of tbe
universe in such terms? Do mechanical models of or-
ganisms and societies arise and work before his philo-
sophic eye, or can his transcendent mathematical genius
apply the equations of motion to such phenomena and
sum them up in generalised coordinates as yet undreamed
of? Nothing of the sort. It is simply the superiority
of ignorance that enables him to soar even in a vacuum.
Severe as is the following characteristic of Mr. Spen-
cer's powers, it is, to my thinking, as just as it is dis-
criminating. I quote again from a review which, though
anonymous, is known to have been written by a dis-

1 Properties of Matter, p. 416.


REAL AND APPARENT ANALOGIES 255

tinguished lawyer and mathematician : " The flexi-
bility of meaning that characterises well-known formulae
when they come into his [Mr. Spencer's] hands, com-
bined with an incapacity for distinguishing between real
and apparent analogies, enables him ever to find, on the
one hand a principle, and on the other a multitude of
examples, to support each of his positions, and imparts
to his style 'the semblance of perpetually hitting the
right nail on the head without the reality.' If there
be any part of science that Mr. Spencer knows thor-
oughly, and where his positions are right ones, his writ-
ings will there be highly valuable and suggestive. But
what these parts are we must learn from others, for
Mr. Spencer cannot tell when he does not understand
a subject; and his mind is such that it allows him to
frame inductive and deductive proofs of his propositions,
with almost equal facility, whether they be true or false." *
To pass to particulars. The hopeless vagueness of
Mr. Spencer's conception of Force is notorious, and
has been already sufficiently referred to. But there is
a further point, which I should like to make clearer,
in which Mr. Spencer is more or less at one with those
whom we may call the realistic physicists as distin-
guished from physicists of the Kirchhoff school, — and
that is in confusing abstraction with analysis. It was
to such a confusion that we attributed the notion of
the realistic physicist that the way to a knowledge of
what actually goes on behind what we see and feel lies
through hypothetical constructions in the region of ab-
stract mechanics. Sharing in this view and unencum-
1 British Quarterly Review, vol. lviii, p. 604.


256 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

bered with precise knowledge, Mr. Spencer thinks he
can succeed in interpreting the detailed phenomena
of Life and Mind and Society in terms of Matter,
Motion, and Force. The avowed presupposition of
such a synthesis is the belief that by a prior analysis
those phenomena have been reduced to these lowest
terms. This belief, then, I contend, is due to a con-
fusion between abstraction and analysis.

No doubt these two processes are intimately con-
nected, inasmuch as in abstracting we also analyse and
in analysing we also abstract. And yet there is an
important difference, and it is this that Mr. Spencer
and others beside him have overlooked. As to the
procedure in abstraction as such, what Benthain styled
"the matchless beauty of the Ramean tree" has, since
the days of Porphyry, furnished its classic type. Here,
as every one knows, we ascend by successively ignoring
essential characters. Starting from some given con-
crete reality, we rise through a strictly indefinite series
of intermediate species or genera to the summum genua
or genua generaliaaimum, Being; to a conception, that
is to say, devoid of assignable content and only for-
mally distinguishable from its contradictory Non-being.
As to analysis — this unfortunately is an ambiguous
term. Perhaps the usage in chemistry is the most
appropriate, as it is the most literal. Here then we
resolve a whole into its constituent elements. And
here, in contrast to abstraction, the farther we pro-
ceed the more numerous the constituents become. I
assume, let me say, that among these constituents we
include all those relations of what we may call the


ANALYSIS AND ABSTRACTION CONFUSED 257

mere elements concerned, without which their sub-
sequent synthesis would be impossible, — relations on
which, quite as much as on the mere elements them-
selves, the nature of the real whole depends. Adopting
an illustration of Condillac's, — who compared analysis
to the act of taking a watch to pieces, and synthesis
to that of putting it together again, — I should say the
analysis was incomplete till it sufficed to insure this
reconstructive process. Now when the physicist re-
gards things from the mechanical level, we have both
abstraction and analysis and also synthesis. We have
abstraction in that everything — to requote Maxwell —
"is considered under no other aspect than as that
which can have its motion changed by the action of
force." We have analysis in as far as this conception
of mechanism is found to involve the three simple and
independent elements of mass and space and time; and
we have a basis for synthesis in the laws of motion
expressing the relations of these elements. But syn-
thesise as much as we may, the entire result remains
abstract; for we cannot by synthesis introduce new
elements, any more than by combining two chemical
elements we can produce a compound of three. It is
because they see this clearly that physicists of the
Kirchhoff school repudiate the notion of attaining by
merely mechanical investigations to any presentment of
" what actually goes on " ; and it is because he does not
see it at all that Mr. Spencer must rank either as
a materialist — and this he disclaims — or as a 'pseudo-
thinker.'

In his so-called ultimate analysis, from which his so-

VOL. I — 8


258 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

called rational synthesis is supposed to build up, we have
only abstraction, nothing left to analyse and no basis for
synthesis. Let us recall some of his descriptions. How
can we analyse 4 the uncognisable,' that which is ' deeper
than definite cognition,' 1 which "is not the abstract of
any one group of thoughts, ideas, or conceptions, but is
the abstract of all thoughts, ideas, or conceptions, that
which is common to them all and cannot be got rid of,
' what we predicate by the word existence,' c being
apart from its appearances?' 2 In short, Mr. Spencer's
own words shew unmistakably that his ultimate analysis
is that ne plus ultra of abstraction, the logically unattain-
able apex of the Porphyrean tree, a height of abstraction
from which there is no return. This abstract analytic
procedure Hegel has quaintly compared to the process of
peeling off the coats of an onion ; now, in what Mr. Spen-
cer calls ultimate analysis, all the coats are gone. If we
are now to brush all these aside, it does not greatly matter
whether we call what is left Non-being or " being apart
from all appearances." It is a question of taste ; some
prefer one, some the other. The way back to rational
synthesis is alike impossible from either. The feats by
which Mr. Spencer seems to accomplish it we have ad-
mired already. From the persistence of existence to the
conservation of energy and from the conservation of
energy to the entire body of mechanical principles, two
easy steps for Mr. Spencer, and he is in line with the
mechanical theory. Having thus conjured himself back
from a height of abstraction, avowedly devoid of all defi-
nite content, to a definite content admitting of analysis,
1 First Principles, p. 192. 9 o. c, p. 96.


THE PRINCIPLE OF CONTINUITY 259

we are not surprised to find Mr. Spencer skilful enough
to make a show of building up the whole fabric and
essential history of life and mind and society in terms
of that content, i.e. in terms of Matter, Motion, and
Force. Having advanced from the indefinite residuum
as far as these three coats of his onion and their laws,
it seems no longer an impossible feat to conjure all the
rest out of these. But I contend that it is only conjur-
ing. The new elements are adroitly taken up as the
synthesis advances, although they seem to have been
swept from the board before the performance commenced.
The process is not legitimate because they are not
avowed as parts of the ultimate analysis ; because, in
fact, this supposed analysis is incomplete, is not analysis
but abstraction, on the way to which these elements
were left entirely aside.

Mr. Spencer's remarkable qualifications for this kind
of work I have tried already to describe and to illustrate

— perhaps at undue length. But there is one character-
istic of evolution which lends great additional plausibility
to his enterprise and to other like enterprises ; I mean
the extremely gradual advance, the general absence of
all discontinuity, that pertains to nature's developments

— that trait which is embodied in the familiar axiom,
Natura non facit saltum. In a nebulous haze compared
with the endless variety of the solar system ; in the dance
of drops in a fountain of water compared with the physi-
ological processes in a living organism ; in the Amoeba
compared with Homo sapiens; in a group of savages
uttering incantations round a newly fallen meteorite com-
pared with the Fellows of the Royal Society discussing


260 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

argon, — we see the most divergent extremes of kind. Yet
there are innumerable intermediate forms connecting these
several extremes by insensible degrees. When we con-
sider the extremes by themselves, as our forefathers for
the most part did, the explanation of the more complex
extreme confronts us as a formidable problem, however
adequate our explanation of the simpler extreme may
appear. But nowadays, familiarised as we are with the
successional continuity of the intervening stages, we are
inclined to imagine either that there is no problem at all,
or that, if there is, the problem is solved. Psychologi-
cally this may be readily accounted for. Certain well-
known sentences of Hume here apply exactly : " The
passage is ... so smooth and easy, that it produces little
alteration on the mind, and seems like the continuation
of the same action. . . . The thought slides along the
succession with equal facility, as if it considered only one
object ; and therefore confounds the succession with the
identity." * And so we can understand why, as Sigwart
remarks, u the notion of development has sometimes been
handled like a logical charm by means of which phe-
nomena hitherto inexplicable are explained with ease."
" It is," he continues, " as if we should say, that though
force is required to lift a weight a given height perpen-
dicularly, yet if the weight is placed on an inclined plane
and this made very long, so that over small lengths the
weight would rise only imperceptibly, it might really rise
of itself ; for the force diminishing as the time increases,
if the time taken were very long, force could be dispensed

1 A Treatise of Human Nature^ Green and Grose's edition, vol. i,
p. 492.


THE GAPS IN SCIENCE 261

with altogether." 1 But in truth, the law of continuity
does not dispense with causal laws, however much it may
facilitate genetic description or aid the dissolving views
of imagination. Evolution, so far from being a self-
sufficient explanation of what are called its results, has
itself to be explained ; like other processes, it must have
its adequate cause. But not merely so. Allowing
science to content itself with description, as we have
seen that it tends to do, still it is impossible, as we have
also seen, to convert the dead letters of the mechanical
alphabet into the living sense of things. Other and
higher conceptions have to be employed, and no continu-
ity or smoothness of transition will account for these;
though it may enable them to slip in easily and unawares,
thereby committing science to sophisms of the Sorites
type, which philosophic reflection may find it hard com-
pletely to expose. In truth the topic is too difficult and
would divert us too widely from our immediate theme
if we attempted to discuss it fully here. My present
purpose is simply to call attention to this feature of
evolutionism.

In pursuance of this object I will only remark further
that those serious gaps between the sciences which we
have already noticed, 2 so far from being, as we might
expect, a hindrance to the effective working of that logi-
cal charm seemingly pertaining to the notion of devel-
opment, really enlarge its scope and enhance its potency.
Take, for example, the gap between the inorganic and
the organic. Of the origin of life, if it ever did originate,
we have absolutely no knowledge. But, on the one

1 Logic, § 100, 15. a Cf . Lecture I, pp. 8 ff.


262 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

hand, there is no definite limit to the possible complex-
ity of mechanical processes, nor any definite limit, on the
other, to the possible simplicity of life. Thus in science
we have every facility and many temptations to assume
that somewhere in the terra incognita between physics
and physiology mass-aggregates become so configured
as to take on the functions and individuality of organ-
isms. Meanwhile — and again contrary to expectation —
the progress of knowledge and especially of that sys-
tematic reflection concerning knowledge, which takes
knowledge itself as the object of science, the science we
call epistemology, instead of making this conjectural
transition easier, renders it increasingly hazardous and
difficult. In proof of this it may be enough here to
contrast the light and airy way in which Mr. Spencer
glides over this problem, with- the confidence of physi-
cists like Lord Kelvin or Helmholtz, or of physiologists
like Liebig and Pasteur, that mechanical theories as to
the origin and maintenance of life are hopeless.

To be sure Mr. Spencer tells us, when hard pressed
by critics, that of the synthetic philosophy " two volumes
are missing " — the two important volumes on Inorganic
Evolution. " The closing chapter of the second of these
volumes " — he continues — " were it written^ would deal
with the evolution of organic matter — the step preced-
ing the evolution of living forms. Habitually carrying
with me in thought the contents of this unwritten
chapter, I have, in some cases, expressed myself as
though the reader had it before him ; and have thus ren-
dered some of my statements liable to misconstruction." x

1 Principles of Biology, vol. i, p. 480. Italics mine.


TRANSITION FROM INORGANIC TO ORGANIC 263

Surely this is a situation not wanting in humour — or in
pathos I Who is the more to be pitied: the sympathetic
readers, who — through no fault of their own, as Mr.
Spencer allows — have misunderstood, lacking as they
have done for thirty years these two missing volumes of
the stereotyped philosophy ; or poor Mr. Spencer him-
self, with these unwritten volumes in his teeming brain,
compelled all that time to see his statements miscon-
strued? Still we must take facts as we find them.
During the thirty years in which Mr. Spencer has been
engrossed with this interpretation, a whole generation of
biologists has striven hard, but striven in vain, to bring
this truth to light. For all but Mr. Spencer, at any
rate, the origin of life has remained a mystery.

So far as I can gather from his summary references to
this unwritten section of his philosophy, Mr. Spencer's
procedure there differs in no respect from his procedure
generally. Unless I, too, misconstrue it, it exactly illus-
trates what I have said, and amply justifies the animad-
versions I have made. On the one hand we have
statements purporting to be strictly mechanical ; on
the other, conceptions not mechanically intelligible slip-
ping in unawares and gradually changing the venue.
More definitely, on the one hand we have a chemical
molecule increasing in complexity till we reach the
proteids. Then — I here quote Mr. Spencer — "the sup-
position (justified by analogies) " that atoms of sulphur
or phosphorus " may be a bond of union between half a
dozen different isomeric forms of protein." And so, — con-
tinues Mr. Spencer, and getting bolder, — "a moment's
thought will show that, setting out with the thousand


264 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

isomeric forms of protein, this makes possible a number
of their combinations almost passing the power of figures
to express. . . • Molecules so produced, perhaps ex-
ceeding in size and complexity those of protein as those
of protein exceed those of inorganic matter, may, I con-
ceive, be the special units belonging to special kinds of
organisms." 1 So far, except that Mr. Spencer premises
that the ordinary idea of mechanical action must be
greatly expanded, i.e. that we are to take the full bene-
fit of mechanical hypotheses concerning physical and
chemical phenomena — so far, with this proviso, we are
still within the range of our lowest terms, Matter and
Motion. We are only asked to imagine a very complex
cluster of very complex chemical molecules. But, on
the other hand,- we find ourselves presently approaching
this aggregate from the standpoint of biology ; and we
hear our oracle saying as follows : " Exposed to those
innumerable modifications of conditions which the Earth's
surface afforded, here in amount of light, there in amount
of heat, and elsewhere in the mineral quality of its aque-
ous medium, this extremely changeable substance must
have undergone now one, now another, of its countless
metamorphoses. And to the mutual influences of its
metamorphic forms under favouring conditions, we must
ascribe the production of the still more composite, still
more sensitive, still more variously-changeable portions
of organic matter, which, in masses more minute and
simpler than existing Protozoa, displayed actions verg-
ing little by little into those called vital. . . . Thus,
setting out with inductions from the experience of

1 Principles of Biology, vol. i, p. 486. ^


THE INTERVAL ' DEDUCTIVELY BRIDGED' 265

organic chemists at the one extreme, and with induc-
tions from the observations of biologists at the other
extreme, we are enabled deductively to bridge the inter-
val — are enabled to conceive how organic compounds
were evolved, and how, by a continuance of the process,
the nascent life displayed in these became gradually
more pronounced." 1 In other words, going farther in
the way of complexity than chemical inductions directly
warrant, and farther in the way of simplicity than bio-
logical observations directly justify, these two lines of
conjecture will meet somewhere in the unknown inter-
val, and there will be the source of life. After this tri-
umphant deduction, is it not captious and unkind to
object, when — without further explanation — portions of
an extremely changeable stuff are declared to have
assumed the unity and permanence of individuals? Or
when the particles of this stuff, spoken of as living,
are credited with "an innate tendency to arrange them-
selves into the shape of the organism to which they
belong," 2 'tendencies derived from the inherited effects
of environing actions?' Or again when, though scorn-
fully repudiating the hypothesis of a nisus formativus, or
vital principle, Mr. Spencer allows himself to talk of
44 the polarities of the molecules determining the direction
in which the power [of environing forces] is turned?" 3
Instead of pausing to comment, let us rather take one
more sample of Mr. Spencer's procedure, which lies on
the way to our next topic — the transition from life to
mind. 44 The broadest and most complete definition of

1 Principles of Biology, vol. i, pp. 483 f .

2 o.c, vol. i, pp. 180 f. 8 o.c, vol. i, p. 488.


266 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

Life," he tells us, "will be The continuous adjustment
of internal relations to external relations." 1 This we are
to understand as a dynamic statement, and possibly in
the instance first given to exemplify it we might con-
trive so to understand it — the instance being the
correspondence between food assimilated and the tem-
perature of the environment. But how are we to find
a dynamic statement in such an instance as this : " A
sound or a scent wafted to it on the breeze prompts
the stag to dart away from the deerstalker " ? A child
would understand that adjustment here does not mean
any " transformation or equivalence of forces," and that
when the stag halts panting in a corrie five miles off,
the internal change from fright to a sense of security
cannot, like the external change, be exhibited by geo-
metrical or dynamical diagrams. Yet Mr. Spencer's
"broadest and most complete definition" is meant to
cover both these cases ; spite of the important differ-
ence that in the one 4 internal relations ' refer to states
of the organism, and involve all the three physical terms,
space, time, and mass ; while in the other ' internal re-
lations ' refer to states of mind, and so far can involve
neither space nor mass. Now we shall all admit that
it is a somewhat hazardous enterprise to set out "to
interpret in terms of Matter, Motion, and Force " —
such, it will be remembered, is the classic phrase —
phenomena into which it is allowed that matter, motion,
and force do not enter. The difficulty is two-fold:
first, to get rid of extension ; and then, since with ex-
tension matter goes too, to get back the real in some

1 Principles of Biology, vol. i, p. 80.


THE TRANSITION FROM LIFE TO MIND 267

other form. But it is just in these 'disastrous chances'
that Mr. Spencer's characteristics come out. That you
may learn in his own words how he resolves the first
difficulty, how from internal relations of the organism
he passes over to internal relations of the mind, let me
quote from his Principles of Psychology. The fol-
lowing is part of a chapter devoted to elucidating the
nature of intelligence : — " The skin, then, being the
part immediately subject to the various kinds of ex-
ternal stimuli, necessarily becomes the part in which
psychical changes are originated. . . . Speaking gen-
erally, therefore, we may say that while the physical
changes are being everywhere initiated throughout a
solid, the psychical ones, or rather those out of which
psychical ones arise, admit of being initiated only on
a surface" x So one dimension of this too, too solid
flesh melts ; to understand how the other two disap-
pear let us hear Mr. Spencer further. "Those abilities
which an intelligent creature possesses, of recognising
diverse external objects and of adjusting its actions to
composite phenomena of various kinds, imply a power
of combining many separate impressions. These sepa-
rate impressions are received by the senses — by dif-
ferent parts of the body. If they go no further than
the places at which they are received, they are use-
less. . . . That an effectual adjustment may be made,
they must all be brought into relation with one an-
other. But this implies some centre common to them
all through which they can pass ; and as they cannot
pass through it simultaneously they must pass in suc-

1 Principles of Psychology, vol. i, p. 401.


"V


268 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

cession, so that as the external phenomena responded
to become greater in number and more complicated in
kind, the variety and rapidity of the changes to which
this common centre 1 of communication is subject must
increase — there must result an unbroken series of these
changes — there must arise a consciousness." 2 Just as
extension reduces to a point, consciousness appears!

It would look as if a punctual seat of the soul were
as much a necessity for Mr. Spencer as it was for Des-
cartes. But Mr. Spencer's dynamic principle recog-
nises no substance but matter, and that has gone with
space. This brings us to the second difficulty.

How are we to interpret the intelligent creature for
whom this hurrying single file of impressions is brought
into relation? Since it cannot be what it ought to be
(if it is to be rationally built up according to Mr. Spen-
cer's ultimate analysis), since it cannot be matter, and
must be something, what, we wonder, is it? Now for
the deus ex machind. Turning to his chapter on the
Substance of Mind, we read : " . . . The concept we
form to ourselves of Matter is but the symbol of some
form of Power absolutely and forever unknown to us ;
and a symbol which we cannot suppose to be like the
reality without involving ourselves in contradictions.
. . . Also the representation of all objective activ-
ities in terms of Motion, is but a representation of
them and not a knowledge of them. When with these
conclusions ... we join the conclusion lately reached
that Mind also is unknowable, and that the simplest
form under which we can think of its substance is but

1 Italics mine. 2 Principles of Psychology, vol. i, p. 403,


THE VOLTE-FACE IN THE PSYCHOLOGY 269

a symbol of something that can never be rendered into
thought ; we see that the whole question is at last
nothing more than the question whether these symbols
should be expressed in terms of those, or those in terms
of these — a question scarcely worth deciding." 1

What's in a name? The rose by any other name
would smell as sweet, and when it is no longer conven-
ient to call our 'real' matter, why not call it mind? Why
not indeed ? Most of us here, I dare say, have no objec-
tion. Still the somersault is a little startling even from
our poet-philosopher, who in concluding his First Prin-
ciples we remember had said: "The interpretation of
all phenomena in terms of Matter, Motion, and Force
is nothing more than the reduction of our complex sym-
bols of thought to the simplest symbols." Our sur-
prise is the greater because here in this chapter on the
Substance of Mind he calmly remarks : " It seems
easier to translate so-called Matter into so-called Spirit,
than to translate so-called Spirit into so-called Matter
(which latter t* 9 indeed, wholly impossible). . . . Our
only course, " he continues, " is constantly to recognise
our symbols as symbols only; and to rest content with
that duality of them which our constitution necessi-
tates." 2 But now what has become of the complete
unification of the knowable in view of this utter dual-
ism ; arid how now are the complex facts of intelli-
gence and morality, of man and society, to be rationally
4 built up ' on the doctrine of the conservation and trans-
formation of energy? No wonder Mr. Spencer has
ever and anon to enter a caveat such as this, which

1 Principles of Psychology ', vol. i, p. 159. 2 o.c, vol. i, p. 161.


270 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

occurs in his treatment of social phenomena : " Though
evolution of the various products of human activity can-
not be said directly to exemplify the integration of mat-
ter and the dissipation of motion, yet they exemplify
it indirectly." 1 From synthetic interpretation to indi-
rect exemplification is verily a descent, nay, is the most
palpable failure. How very indirect even the exempli-
fication is may be judged from Mr. Spencer's final state-
ment of the psychological side of his great primordial
truth, viz., that "all mental action whatever is defin-
able as the continuous differentiation and integration of
states of consciousness" 2 This does not seem to mean
the same thing as the continuous integration of matter
and dissipation of motion; still it sounds a little
like it.

Here, then, is a thinker really following where he
essays to lead, professing to give the sciences their
bearings, but in fact losing his own as he goes along.
He looks at things, first of all, chronologically, and be-
gins with the generalities of . abstract dynamics, which
he mistakes for natural laws. The gap between this
abstract science and our empirical knowledge concern-
ing physical phenomena, together with the whole group
of physical sciences, is passed over. And when Mr. Spen-
cer, omitting two whole volumes, resumes his task with
what he calls the interpretation of Organic Nature, he
seems quite unaware that he has passed not only from
the abstract to the actual, but from the mechanical to
the teleological. Regarding living things as a whole,

1 First Principles, pp. 318 f.

2 Principles of Psychology, vol. ii, p. 301.


MR. SPENCER'S FINAL TABLEAU 271

we find that what is clearest about the lowest forms
is organization, and what is clearest in the highest is
mind. Midway then — there is a transition point in
the evolutional drama where the poet glides easily over
from the physical standpoint to the psychical, still, how-
ever, dealing with the facts chronologically. Then sud-
denly he ceases from this forward or synthetic move-
ment, and at the close of his psychology sweeps back
analytically, and, like a mighty boomerang, demolishes
his first starting-point. In place of it there arises
finally what is poetically styled " Transfigured Realism," l
a final tableau wherein every philosophy, from Scepti-
cism up to Absolute Idealism, finds something to be
thankful for and is anon swallowed up.

1 See Principles of Psychology, pt. vii, General Analysis, last chapter.


LECTURE X

BIOLOGICAL EVOLUTION

The Lamarckian, Darwinian, and ultra-Darwinian theories generally
compared. Natural selection by itself non-teleological. Attempts to
assimilate the biological with the physical. Two difficulties in the way.
These lead to the question : Is there not a teleological factor operative
throughout biological evolution f

Teleological and non-teleological factors distinguished. Darwin
recognised both. Only so far as both are present has * struggle for
existence' any meaning. The question raised equivalent to inquiring
how far mind is concomitant with life. Naturalism confident that life
is the wider conception, and appeals to the facts of plantAife. * Con-
tinuity ? seems to help it, but really works both ways. The case argued.
The levelling-up method the simpler. Objections to this considered:
(1) Beflexes; (2) The character of plants again. Becent views on this
point.

Bestatement of the position reached. Antagonism of organism and
environment : the latter, then, not the source of life. ' Vital force '
unworkable. Turning to the facts of mind we have : (1) Self-conserva-
tion ; (2) Subjective selection. The meaning and significance of these.
Their distinctness from, and relation to, natural selection.

In passing, as we do in this lecture, to the narrower
subject of biological evolution, we find no serious at-
tempt made to account for the origin of life or to reduce
the facts of life to those of a mechanism. The problem
here is merely to explain the diversity of living forms,
and that not by the help of mechanical, but of biologi-
cal, conceptions. The origin of species by descent from
some primitive form is assumed as the starting-point.

272


r


LAMARCK AND DARWIN 273

— s

Then we have two widely different, bat not incompat-
ible, theories, — that of Lamarck and that of C. Darwin
— to shew how, as the latter puts it, "whilst this planet
has gone cycling on according to the fixed law of
gravity, from so simple a beginning endless forms most
beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being
evolved." 1 The doctrine of special creation is, by com-
mon consent, disallowed as unscientific. This of course
leaves the general question of creation untouched. Still,
as respects teleological conceptions, the two dominant
theories of biological evolution are by no means on
the same footing. The extreme Darwinian theory, as
held, for example, by Wallace or Weismann, but strongly
discountenanced by Darwin himself, seems — if pressed
to its logical consequences — to leave but scant space
for any notions of purpose or end. 2 Natural selection
works blindly upon promiscuous variations blindly pro-
duced. So mechanical is the whole milieu that repeated
attempts have been made to extend the range of natural
selection, so understood, to the evolution of stellar sys-
tems, chemical elements, and the like. Such an exten-
sion would be impossible with the Lamarckian theory,
as the mere citation of the second of the four laws
given in the Eistoire Naturelle will shew : " The pro-
duction of a new organ in an animal body results from a
new want arising and continuing to be felt, and from
the new movement which this want initiates and sus-
tains." 8 According to Lamarck, then, variations are

1 Origin of Species, sixth edition, last sentence.

2 Cf. Romanes, Darwin and After Darwin, vol. ii, ch. 1.
8 o.c, edition 1815, t. i, p, 181.

VOL. I — T


274 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

due to a psychical factor ; but for the theory of natural
selection it is immaterial how they are produced. Given
the indefinite production of varying individuals, and
given also restriction in the number that can simulta-
neously exist, and it is obvious that some individuals
must be excluded and disappear ; if for no other reason,
at any rate, for want of standing-room. Unless the
selection is a pure affair of chance, the variations them-
selves must determine it : in one case — the question
being one of standing-room say — the highest specific
gravity, in another the lowest, might constitute the requi-
site fitness. So in economic exchange, wherever supply
exceeds demand, such principles of selection come into
play, and with one commodity cheapness is the ground
of fitness, with another taste, with another novelty, with
another utility in the narrower sense, and so on. Such
instances bring out still further the difference between
the Lamarckian and the Darwinian, or more correctly
the ultra-Darwinian standpoint. For Lamarck, the fit-
ness must relate primarily and essentially to the com-
peting individual; for Wallace or Weismann it might
primarily and essentially relate to the selecting agency..
Thus in sorting shot those pellets are selected that roll
down an incline quickest; in sorting emery powder
those particles are selected that take longest to sink in
water. In short, for the ultra-Darwinian view, life need
imply no more than the indefinite production of vary-
ing individuals. Struggle for Existence here, becomes
simply a figure of speech, not the stern reality first
depicted by Malthus, to whom, I believe, the phrase is
due. In the Origin of Species Darwin himself calls


'STRUGGLE' AND * SELECTION ' 275

attention to this : " I should premise," he says, " that
I use this term in a large and metaphorical sense."

A similar remark applies to the phrase Natural Selec-
tion. As to this let me quote from a letter of Wallace
to Darwin (Zifo ii, p. 46). He writes: "The term
4 survival of the fittest' is the plain expression of the
fact ; ' natural selection ' is a metaphorical expression of
it, and to a certain degree indirect and incorrect, since
. . . Nature . . . does not so much select special varie-
ties as exterminate the most unfavourable ones." But
even * survival of the fittest ' is not a plain expression of
what logically follows from the ultra-Darwinian prem-
isses. The notion of fitness is used just as metaphori-
cally as that of struggle or selection, for fitness is in
strict propriety a teleological conception, and there is
nothing teleological in those premisses. There is only
what Mr. Spencer would call equilibration : neither
struggle for life, nor selection by nature, nor survival
of the best, but simply conservation of the stablest; as
in a mass of chemical elements capable of combining,
compositions, double decompositions, neutralisations, ex-
pulsions go on, stronger affinities and avidities over-
coming weaker, till the stablest and most permanent
combinations are reached.

The mechanical theory of evolution, indeed, is, as we
have seen, bent on assimilating the biological to the
chemical in some such fashion. But in the way there
are two difficulties. In the first place, if we look
broadly at the world of living things and compare it
with the inanimate world, we are at once confronted
by a striking difference. In the latter we note a gen-


276 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

eral downward trend, the resolution of potential energy
into kinetic, and then of available forms of this into
unavailable; in other words, we find a uniform ten-
dency to pass in the shortest and easiest way to physi-
cal quiescence, fixity, and equilibrium. But in the
organic world, on the contrary, we find a steadily
increasing differentiation of structure and composition,
entailing a large storage of potential energy. We see
this as we advance from plants to animals, from inver-
tebrate to vertebrate, from cold-blooded vertebrates to
warm-blooded, from brutes to man. And if we take
into account what may be regarded as the by-products
of living things, — their stores of food, the snares they
make, the habitations they build, — the same character-
istics are still present, notably so, of course, in the
products of human skill. The inorganic world has
nothing to match dynamite, Liebig's Extract, a steam-
engine, or a ship-torpedo. It is impossible in the pres-
ent state of our knowledge to bring such results under
the facilis descensus principle of least resistance, which
dispenses with all conception of guidance and direction,
and can give no meaning to adaptation, fitness, or
worth. And, as has been urged in earlier lectures, it
seems absurd to attempt ever to refer those results to such
a source, unless they can at the same time be regarded
as rare and exceptional manifestations of that principle
when working on a very vast scale.

The second of the difficulties mentioned runs parallel
to the first ; it is, in fact, this advancing complexity re-
garded psychologically. Here we are only sure of the
latest term of the series; how the earliest terms are


< TELEOLOGIC AL FACTORS' 277

constituted we can only vaguely guess. In the case of
man and the higher animals, there is no doubt that the
instinct of self-preservation and the struggle for exist-
ence are realities ; no doubt, that needs and wants lead
to movements; or that improvement comes only by
repetition and effort, that practice makes perfect. The
only doubt is whether what is thus acquired in one
generation becomes in any measure the inborn heritage
of the next; but with this burning question we are
not for the moment concerned. We have only to de-
mand recognition of the truth that in this advancing
psychical complexity, at any rate, the teleological char-
acter of the facts is unmistakable ; no other conception
is adequate. Thus there arises this question which is
for us the important one : Is not this teleological factor
operative throughout the whole range of biological evo-
lution at least; so far, that is, as we find the downhill
trend distinctive of the inanimate world to be counter-
worked?

As a preliminary to the discussion of this question,
it will be well to define a little more exactly what is
to be understood by the phrase i teleological factor,' and
to distinguish it from the other factors implied. If
Lamarck had happened to ask himself : How the
leopard came by its spots, as well as how the giraffe
acquired its long neck, it is very unlikely that he
would have ventured to give the same explanation of
both. Continued use in stretching might have enabled
the giraffe to add a cubit to his stature, a continued
use to which the need of food might lead; but use or
need could hardly help the leopard to change its skin,


278 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

even though the change should facilitate the capture of
its prey. A more probable explanation here is the
purely Darwinian one, that skin-colouration being
specially liable to vary, a variation simulating the play
of sunshine through foliage had favoured the ancestors
of the leopard when lying in wait to pounce upon their
spoil ; and that such variation had been perfected by
natural selection. At any rate, though not forgetting
much striking evidence of a functional and more or
less voluntary connexion between an animal's colour
and its immediate surroundings, we may fairly take the
leopard's spots, the tiger's stripes, or the lion's tawny
hue, as instances of fortuitous or non-teleological 1 adap-
tation. Another factor that may be classed as non-
teleological, though it is one of minor importance, is
that described by Darwin as "the direct action of
external conditions," such as climate and food. This
is the factor on which Buffon laid stress, and to which
Buckle and the materialists are fond of appealing, an
appeal culminating in the mot of Moleschott, Der
i Mensch ist was er isst. In contrast to these factors of
biological evolution, then, the meaning of what I have
proposed to call the teleological factors will become
clearer. Among these I think we might enumerate
three. First, the Lamarckian principle already referred
to, secondly, Darwin's Sexual Selection, and lastly,
Human Selection, on which Wallace has the merit of
laying especial stress. 2

1 Non-teleological, that is, within the range of strictly biological ideas.

2 1 refer, of course, to his contention that the moral and intellectual
nature of man cannot be explained by natural selection. See his Dar-
winism, ch. xv.


DARWIN AND LAMARCK 279

The name of Lamarck has been so long in disrepute
that it would be rash to cite any theory of his, if there
were not at length among biologists a manifest rever-
sion in his favour. Opposed to the neo-Darwinians who
profess to see in natural selection far more than ever
Darwin publicly 1 claimed for it, there is also a numer-
ous neo-Lamarckian school, who replace the fanciful
illustrations that served to discredit Lamarck's specula-
tion by an imposing array of facts in its support. Such
materials were not in existence in Lamarck's day; and
from the free use of what material there was, he
seems to have been cut off, partly by blindness and
partly by poverty. It was thus easy for Cuvier, that
master of details, to turn the laugh against poor
Lamarck, and as the favourite of Napoleon, to use his
political influence against "the transformists," as the
Lamarckians were called. 2 So it came about that when
Darwin was working out his Origin of Species, Lamarck's
doctrines were in general discredit, and yet had never
received an impartial hearing. Darwin's letters shew
his anxiety lest these doctrines should be identified
with his own. "Heaven forfend me," he wrote to
Hooker in 1844, "from Lamarckian nonsense of a ten-
dency to progression,' 3 'adaptations from the slow
willing of animals, etc' But the conclusions I am led
to are not widely different from his ; though the views
of change are wholly so." Nevertheless, as time went

1 Cf. Osborn, From the Greeks to Darwin : an Outline of the De-
velopment of the Evolution Idea, 1895, p. 236.

3 Cf. Osborn, o.c, p. 196.

8 Which, by the way, it would seem Lamarck did not hold. Cf. Os-
born, o.c, p. 237,


280 THEORY OP EVOLUTION

on, Darwin was led by his own further studies and
observations to include the Lamarckian factor among
his 'views of change.' As Romanes says: The longer
he (Darwin) lived . . . the less exclusive was the rSle
which he assigned to natural selection, and the more
importance did he attribute to the supplementary
factors." Thus, to quote one instance : in the con-
clusion to his last edition of the Origin, Darwin pro-
tests against those who have misrepresented him as
attributing the modification of species exclusively to
natural selection, and expressly refers to it as "aided
in an important manner by the inherited effects of the
use and disuse of parts," 1 i.e. by what is commonly
called the Lamarckian factor. There is then after all
no imprudence in citing this principle.

In calling this factor teleological there is, of course,
no intention of connecting it with the old view that
each species was immediately designed and directly
fashioned to occupy a fixed place in a supposed 'plan
of creation.' As already said, Lamarck, equally with
Darwin, assumed the evolution of all species from a
common source. I call this factor teleological, simply,
then, on the ground that it presupposes conscious, or
at least sentient, activity directed to the satisfaction
of needs, appetites, or desires; psychical activity, in a
word, as distinct from physical passivity and inertness.
It implies an impulse to self-maintenance and better-
ment, which so far become ends. Only so far as such
conceptions are applicable, is there any meaning in talk-
ing of struggles to survive, or in saying, as Darwin

1 Origin of Species, sixth edition, p. 421.


THE CONCOMITANCE OF LIFE AND MIND 281

does, that " Natural selection acts solely by and for the
good of each." 1 Sexual selection, and still more ob-
viously human selection, can be brought under the
same head, and call here for no further notice.

And now we may take up again the question : Is
this same teleological factor operative throughout the
whole range of biological evolution, or is it confined to
those higher forms of life which have some obvious
resemblance to our own? The question is one that
seems to have important bearings on our main inquiry,
as I shall hope to shew later on. Broadly put, the
question is, How far is mind concomitant with life?
With this question neither Lamarck nor Darwin has
dealt explicitly; in fact biologists as such, for the
most part, ignore it. But naturalism, of course, con-
fidently assumes that life is the wider conception, that
mind is but an occasional accompaniment of organisa-
tion and is certainly never a cause of it ; just as it
confidently assumes organisation to be but a special
arrangement of inert masses and the effect of mechani-
cal forces. Perhaps, however, on closer inspection,
life, so regarded, may prove as insoluble a riddle as
mind, so regarded, is likely to prove. Comparing the
lower forms of life with the higher, it is at once obvious
that the non-teleological factors seem more exclusively
the efficient ones the lower down the scale we go, while
the teleological factors come more clearly into play the
higher we ascend. It is true that even plants respire,
imbibe, and assimilate ; and that among all but the
lowest, as among all but the lowest animals, there are

i Ibid,, p. 162.


282 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

differences of sex. " Still," it will be replied, " only poets
talk of 'the loves of the plants 9 ; science has no ground
for ascribing to them activities determined by hunger
and thirst, or other organic needs. And yet how im-
pressively diverse and complex are the developments to
which, by the operation of the non-teleological factors,
the vegetable kingdom has attained. The apparatus by
which the bee orchis or the garden sage secures the aid
of insects in its fertilisation, or that by which the
crane's-bill or the thistle scatters its seed, exceed in
ingenuity the snares of the spider or the ant-lion, are
comparable indeed even with human devices like the
parachute or the sling. Such instances, too, it must be
remembered, are not the exception, but the rule, in the
economy of plants ; whole libraries might be devoted
to the description of them. Such marvels of organisa-
tion, "it is argued," has natural selection accomplished
by steadily eliminating unpropitious variations, entirely
unaided by any sort of spontaneous impulse, sentient
preference, or organic memory, — to say nothing of con-
ceptions so mystical as the entelechies 1 of Aristotle, the
ni8U8 formativu8 of later writers, and other notions equally
transcendental. If, then, nature alone can advance thus
far before psychical phenomena appear at all, why sup-
pose, when these are present, that they are more than
concomitant, why attribute to them any share in the
organising processes ? At every step in the genealogical
descent, alike of plant and animal, the germ is built
anew into the parental form by a like inevitable process :

1 The mysticism now commonly associated with this conception seems
mainly due to the neo-Platonists and the Scholastics,


LEVELLING-DOWN AND LEVELLING-UP 283

the acorn is here not more passive than the egg ; in each
alike the embryo recapitulates the stages by which it
has been evolved. Why then suppose psychical factors
to be necessary to the one result, when they are dis-
pensed with in the other? It is much like saying that
though the coiled spring works the meat-jack, we must
suppose a musical box to be worked by the tune it plays."
Such language, I think, fairly represents the levelling-
down method to which naturalism is led. For this
method it claims the advantages of clearness and sim-
plicity ; on the ground, as urged by Huxley, that by
thus extending the range of matter and law, it is en-
abled to substitute the verifiable for the unverifiable, to
replace, by a single objective standpoint, subjective stand-
points that may be innumerable. To the psychophysical
doctrines in which it culminates, I shall hope to invite
attention six months hence. In common with other at-
tempts to make lower categories take the place of higher
ones — striking instances of which we have discovered
in the exposition of Mr. Spencer — this procedure gains
greatly in verisimilitude by the use it can make of the
principle of continuity, that cardinal principle of all
theories of evolution. But it should not be forgotten
that on the levelling-up method the principle of conti-
nuity is equally available. The scale of life is just as
continuous from Man to the Protista as it is from the
Protista to Man. To understand human actions we have
to take account of mind ; on the one method, then, we
carry back this conception of mental determination, our
teleological factor in other words, as far as we can. In
so doing, we may claim to be describing the unknown


284 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

in terms of the known. Imagination, it is true, will not
enable us to depict what Huxley would call the psycho-
ses of creatures so far beneath us. But that alone does
not invalidate the conception; if it did, a good many
scientific ideas would become illegitimate. On the other
hand, the levelling-down method has always more or
less definite pictures to offer of the [structure and move-
ments, as also of the phylogeny and the ontogeny of
each new member in any series of living forms, as it
follows forward the continuous interaction of variants
and environment. But then comes the difficulty, which
led us first of all to inquire whether teleological factors
were not throughout indispensable.

Now, even if we were to grant the theory of
psychophysical parallelism, this alone would not justify
us in saying that life is a wider fact than mind.
Simple forms of life might have as concomitants
equally simple forms of mind. We have allowed
that the psychologist is here at a disadvantage just
as the biologist, or rather the physiologist, is corre-
spondingly at a disadvantage, at the opposite extreme.
We cannot certainly discern or imagine the mental states
of creatures whose entire organism consists of a single
cell. But even the biologist in such a case is found to
infer much greater complexity of structure than ever
the microscope will enable him to see. The psycholo-
gist is equally entitled to infer the presence of appro-
priate mental concomitants in these unicellular organisms,
if the facts of life as a whole are made clearer by so do-
ing. I have only time to deal here with such general
considerations, but, in truth, the more the protoplasmic


ADVANTAGES OF LEVELLINCMJP 285

movements, even of the lowest plants, are studied, the
more they are found to resemble actions determined by
stimuli and to deviate from the mechanical motions of
inert masses. To such studies we owe in large measure
what its opponents regard as a recrudescence of supersti-
tion, and its upholders call ' neo-vitalism.' However,
without discussing detailed observations, the serious
difficulty just now mentioned as besetting the levelling-
down method is — to say the least — greatly simplified
by the opposite method, which assumes that mind is
everywhere coincident with life. That tendency to dis-
turb existing equilibria, to reverse the dissipative pro-
cesses which prevail throughout the inanimate world, to
store and build up where they are ever scattering and
pulling down; the tendency to conserve individual ex-
istence against antagonistic forces, to grow and to
progress, not inertly taking the easiest way, but seem-
ingly striving for the best, retaining every vantage
secured and working for new ones, — this complex char-
acteristic of all forms of life belongs also to mind. Corre-
lated with mind these characteristics are intelligible ; but
to interpret them literally in terms of physical interac-
tion, and apart from mind, is surely impossible. How-
ever we resolve the problem as to the connection of mind
and matter, it is then, we may conclude, unquestionably
a simplification to infer that wherever a material system
is organised for self-maintenance, growth, and reproduc-
tion, as an individual in touch with an environment, that
system has a psychical as well as a material aspect.

There is one very plausible doctrine not uncommon
among psychologists and countenanced, as we should


286 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

expect, by Mr. Herbert Spencer, that stands in the
way of this view. Mr. Spencer, as we have seen,
imagines consciousness to arise when physiological pro-
cesses become too complex to work automatically. Up
to that point the reactions of the organism are simply
reflexes, beyond it they are volitions : and since we are
usually unconscious of reflex movements, and since,
moreover, they are usually beyond our control, it is con-
cluded that reflexes only indicate life but do not impli-
cate mind. But looked at more closely, this conclusion
is at variance with the principle of continuity, that
fundamental axiom of evolutional theory ; and it is
besides, as I have urged at length elsewhere, 1 not really
borne out by empirical psychology. Reflex movements
are called mechanical or automatic, because of the uni-
formity, promptness, and precision with which they occur.
None the less, even the simplest of them depend on the
exact adjustment of structures often very complicated.
Accordingly the biologist makes large drafts on time
and appeals freely to natural selection to account for
their ultimate perfection. But during all this time the
various more or less abortive attempts thus leading up
to an eventual automatic regularity ought, on Mr.
Spencer's theory, to be accompanied by consciousness.
Moreover, when we turn to our own experience, this is
precisely what we find in all those cases where long
practice makes perfect, and where feats of dexterity
and the like become, as psychologists say, secondarily-
automatic.

Another seeming hindrance to the view I am attempting
1 Encyclopaedia BrUanntca, article Psychology, pp. 42 f.


CHARACTER OF PLANT-LIFE 287

to propound and defend, is the one I was just now refer-
ring to, viz. the character of plants. But strangely enough
this difficulty has been in the main removed by the biolo-
gists themselves. For it would hardly be going too far
to say that Aristotle's conception of a plant-soul, though
it would be expressed in other language, is tenable even
to-day, at least as tenable as any such notion can be at
a time when souls are out of fashion. The popular
idea of the three natural kingdoms, mineral, vegetable,
animal — plants developing from minerals, and animals
from plants, as represented by the ingenious device on
the covers of Mr. Spencer's volumes — has been long
abandoned. If such tripartite division is retained at
all, the animal it would seem should rather precede
than follow the plant. For the earliest stages of plant de-
velopment resemble those of animal development, though
according to all the rules of evolutional propriety the con-
verse would hold, if plants were first in order. But modern
biology, as I understand, assigns the first place in the
organic world to a kingdom of Protista, living things, that
is, from which individuals with the definite characteristics
of plants and animals were afterwards differentiated.
The Protista display in a marked degree the motility and
sensibility specially associated with animal life. Certain
of these freely-moving creatures are supposed to have
assumed a sessile position on the earth, and so to have
become plants or earth-parasites, as such developing their
capacity to build up protoplasm direct from its mineral
constituents, but degenerating in respect of their distinc-
tively animal traits, in consequence of their fixity of
habitat. The distinctively animal kingdom, on the other


288 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

hand, it is conjectured, began with the first protist, who
anticipated by untold ages the feat of little Jack Horner,
and did what animals have been doing ever since — appro-
priated and devoured the ready-made protoplasm. " The
easy nutrition which ensued," says Professor Cope, " was
probably pleasurable, and once enjoyed was repeated and
soon became a habit. The excess of energy thus saved
from the laborious process of making protoplasm was
available as the vehicle of consciousness and motion." 1
But all such conjectures aside — it is at any rate certain
that plant protoplasm and animal protoplasm are essen-
tially one and the same; that the animal functions of
motility and sensibility pertain to all protoplasm as truly
as the vegetable function of assimilation and reproduc-
tion; that from unicellular organisms, the Protista, lead-
ing the free-swimming life of animalcules and yet endowed
with the plant's power of transforming inorganic mat-
ter, there arose both unicellular organisms, the Protozoa,
retaining and developing the former characteristics; and
also unicellular organisms, the Protophyta, with the anti-
thetic traits; and finally that from the Protozoa and
Protophyta respectively all the more complex animal and
vegetable organisms have been evolved.

Let me now try by way of recapitulation to explain in
what sense I understand mind in thus concluding that
it is always implicated in life, or that, in other words, a
teleological factor, analogous to that of Lamarck, is
operative and essential throughout all biological evolu-
tion. Let us begin with the opposition of the living
individual, or organism, and its environment. These
1 Primary Factors of Organic Evolution, 1896, p. 614.


I


ANTAGONISM OF LIFE AND ENVIRONMENT 289

terms are, in biology, strictly correlative, just as in psy-
chology the terms subject and object are. This corre-
lation is one that only appears with life; the physicist
never gets beyond the action and reaction of bodies that
are not properly individuals. On looking at this relation
of organism and environment more closely, we discover
that it is essentially an antagonism. Whether living or
dead, the organism is equally a material system, and its
death makes no change in what we may call the attitude
of the environment. What this attitude is, is therefore
shewn by the processes that then ensue. These processes,
one and all, belong to the downhill trend characteristic of
inorganic changes; adopting, but somewhat extending, a
convenient physiological term, they are katabolic. Imagine
an organism reduced at length by these processes to a form-
less aggregate of its elemental constituents. Now imag-
ine this formless aggregate of dead material led back step
by step till the living organism is set up once more, and
you realize the antagonism between organism and envi-
ronment. For the processes of organisation that preceded
death were the precise opposite of all that follow it ; they
reversed the dissipative tendency of inanimate matter; in
a word, they were uphill processes of guidance and direc-
tion — were anabolic.

The actual relation of a given organism to its environ-
ment is usually very complex, the environment in large
measure consisting of other organisms. But we shall not
go wrong, if, for simplicity's sake, we consider only the
physical environment, which is indeed the sole environ-
ment of organic life taken as a whole. So doing we see
the hopelessness of regarding this environment — which

VOL. i — u


290 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

itself is not alive, which antagonises life — as possibly
itself the source of life. Neither can we assume a specific
vital energy or force, as the old vitalists did ; for life has
not — so far as we can see — the properties of a definite
form of energy. Thus, when life disappears, there is no
equivalent amount of other energy appearing in its place,
which we might regard as the result of its transforma-
tion. We cannot call death a form of energy. Life, in
short, seems to consist in the guidance and control of the
known forms of energy, molar and molecular. Quite
possibly, beside them, there may be unknown forms of
energy, but hardly, as commonly understood, such as
would explain life itself. For energy — unless there be
what might be vaguely called higher forms of it — is
directionless, and all physical forces, so to say, katabolic.
The progress of knowledge, in fine, discourages all at-
tempts to treat life as a sort of tertium quid, mediating
between matter and mind. Turning then to the facts of
mind, a sound method will lead us first to the daylight
of our own conscious experience, not to the glimmering
twilight of primitive sentience and instinct. Looking
broadly at the facts of mind from this standpoint, we
come upon two principles that lead us straight to the
teleological factors of organic evolution. One of these
is the principle of self-conservation — the wide reach
and significance of which Spinoza was one of the first
to see; 1 the other is a principle which I ventured many
years ago to call the principle of subjective or hedonic
selection. 2 These principles furnish natural selection with

1 Cf. Spinoza, his Life and Philosophy, by Sir F. Pollock, pp. 221 ff.

2 Art. Psychology, Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol. xx, 1886.


ORGANISMS AND MACHINES 291

the irov ar& it seems to demand. Without these it is
difficult to see what purchase it can have, as I will try
to shew presently. But first, a word concerning the
principles themselves.

I do not need to weary you with any laboured psy-
chological analysis. It is enough to note that both
these principles imply feeling and activity ; they imply,
too, that the activity is prompted by the feeling. Thus,
self -conservation, i.e. the conservation of self by self,
presupposes the will to live and the pain of dying.
It shews itself especially, any unfavourable change in
the environment having occurred, in the reactions to
this change, which frequently so much exceed the
energy of the occasioning stimulus. Apropos of this,
organisms are often compared to delicate machinery
provided with * self -regulating ' valves, with hair-trig-
gers, and with other devices, for nicely controlling
large stores of potential energy or setting it free on
slight provocation. No doubt there are many points of
analogy between organisms and such ingenious contriv-
ances. But it is forgotten that the said contrivances
are themselves invariably the work of mind. Call an
organism a machine by all means, if you like ; but
where is the mind that made it, and I may add, that
works it? Descartes, it will be remembered, was con-
tent to regard all the lower animals as simply
automatic machines, comparable, though superior, to
marionette dancers and flute-players such as those made
afterwards by Vaucanson, which led Lamettrie to call
even man a machine. But Descartes himself stopped
short of this, on the ground that the complexity of human


292 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

manifestations points to what Huxley has since called
a conscious, as distinct from a mechanical, automatism.
But the inconsequence of Descartes' reasoning has been
generally allowed. It was open to him either to refer
the greater variety of human life to the great com-
plexity of the human brain, or knowing by direct ex-
perience that the human machine was a conscious
automaton to infer that the simpler machineries of the
lower organisms were conscious automata of a simpler
type. The explanation of Descartes' inconsistent and
illogical doctrine is to be found in the perplexities of
the psychophysical problem, with which we shall have
next to deal. Led by his fundamental analysis to in-
sist on the complete disparateness of matter and mind,
and led, therefore, to reject such hybrid notions as vital
force, he saw no way of explaining the interaction of
body and mind save by miracle, 1 and naturally was
averse to admitting such intervention any further than
facts compelled him. His own consciousness, he thought,
convinced him that man was a 'rnSlanges confus' of

1 1 do not mean that Descartes regarded the union of body and mind
in man as continuously maintained by special Divine intervention. His
followers were, but he was not, an occasionalist, spite of all Hamilton's
contentions to the contrary (edition of Reid, p. 961). This union was
for Descartes only ' hyperphysical ' in the sense of being a unique fact,
a * negative instance, 9 as Kuno Fischer aptly calls it. The following
extract from a letter of Descartes to Arnauld seems decisive: Que
l'esprit qui est incorporel puisse faire mouvoir le corps, il n'y a ni raisonne-
ment, ni comparaison tiree des autre choses qui nous le puisse apprendre,
mais neanmoins nous n'en pouvoir douter, puisque des experiences trop
certaines et trop eMdentes nous le font connaitre tous les jours manifeste-
ment. Et il f aut bien prendre garde que cela est Pone des choses qui sont
connues par elle-m8mes, et que nous obscurcissons toutes les fois que nous
voulons les expliquer par d'autres. QSuvres, Cousin's edition, x, p. 161.


ORGANISMS AS LIVING MACHINES 293

body and soul ; he did not feel forced to say the same
of animals or of plants. But if we admit the inconse-
quence of Descartes' restriction of this concomitance of
psychical and physical to man alone among animals ;
and if we admit, too, the invalidity of treating life as
a specific form of energy, — then surely we are bound to
assume this concomitance wherever we recognise life. To
make my meaning clearer, let me first quote a sentence
or two from an essay by a very distinguished botanist,
and add one or two comments. The essay is by Pro-
fessor Strasburger, of Jena, and his subject is Proto-
plasm and Sensibility. Referring to the analogy between
organisation and machinery, he remarks : " For the
structure of a machine, too, might be called its organ-
isation ; and the fact that, when provided with a store
of energy, it can be started, by the opening of a valve,
to perform work conformable to its structure — this
property might be called its sensibility. But the living
substance is entirely distinguished from the dead ma-
chine by the ability to provide itself with the energy
needful for its work ; to set itself in motion and keep
itself going, to repair itself, within certain limits, the
defects that may arise ; and, above all, by the fact that
it constructs itself. In short, an organism — in contrast
to the dead machine — is a living machinel one that does
not depend on external impulses for its movements,
one that regulates its own course and continues going,
as long as the environment will allow. Only through
the hostility of this or through irreparable misfortune is it
brought to a halt." * Now, I have said, that wherever we

1 Das Protoplasma und die Reizbarkeit, 1891, pp. 24 f.


294 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

see a machine, we ask, Where is the mind that made
it, and that works it? In the dead machine this mind
is outside and independent ; in the living machine,
or organism, it is inside, and so far identical. Living
machine and conscious automaton are, then, strictly
synonymous : whether we say life or whether we say
consciousness, we equally imply the development and
conservation of self by self through processes working
counter to the downhill trend of the physical environ-
ment. Looking again at the dead machine, we may
ask, What is it made for ; what is the work that it is
constructed to perform? To crush quartz, roll lead,
grind flour, and so on, we are told, as the case may be.
But what is the living machine made for? We must
answer, be it plant, be it animal, be it man : For
itself and for its kind, to live and to multiply. Once
more, looking at the dead machine, we find the struc-
ture precedes and wholly determines the function; but
in the organism, and especially when we take an ascend-
ing series of organisms into account, we find it truer
to say the function, i.e. life, determines the structure.

And so we come to our second principle, that of
subjective or hedonic selection. 1 By way simply of illus-
trating this principle, and deferring meantime all ques-
tion of its evolutional significance, let me try briefly

1 There is, I suspect, some considerable resemblance between this
principle and that which Professor Baldwin describes as Organic Selection.
But as I have not seen all Professor Baldwin's papers and as he does not
refer to what I had written ten years before, I cannot speak definitely. If
our meaning should turn out to be the same, I should contend for the term
Subjective Selection as the more appropriate. Cf. A New Factor in
Evolution, by J. Mark Baldwin, The American Naturalist, July, 1896.


SUBJECTIVE SELECTION 295

to call up two or three examples. Take the passengers
on a coach going through some glen here in Scotland : in
one sense the glen is the same for them all, their common
environment for the time being. But one, an artist,
will single out subjects to sketch; another, an angler,
will see likely pools for fish ; the third, a geologist, will
detect raised beaches, glacial striation, or perched blocks.
Turn a miscellaneous lot of birds into a garden ; a fly-
catcher will at once be intent on the gnats, a bullfinch
on the pease, a thrush on the worms and snails. Scat-
ter a mixture of seeds evenly over a diversified piece
of country ; heath and cistus will spring up in the dry,
flags and rushes in the marshy, ground ; violets and ferns
in the shady hollows, gorse and broom on the hilltops.
I am aware, of course, that thrushes and flycatchers, flags
and heather, are products in large measure of natural
selection, that is of what we have agreed to call a non-
teleological factor. But I do not think this will be
found to militate against these examples for my pur-
pose. The complete unravelling of the two sets of
factors, teleological and non-teleological, so as clearly to
exhibit their respective shares in any given form is prob-
ably an impossible task. My concern is only to show
that the two sets of factors are there, and that the tele-
ological are indispensable. It will suffice then to ob-
serve that by the principle of subjective selection special
environments are singled out by different individuals
from the general environment common to all, and that
so far there is not necessarily any competition. Two
artists or two anglers may be in each other's way, but
an artist and an angler will hardly incommode each


296 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

other. A garden would still interest a flycatcher if
there were neither pease nor cherries in it, provided the
insects remained; whereas the bullfinch would at once
forsake it. Natural selection as distinct from subjec-
tive selection comes into play only when two anglers
contend for the same fish, two artists compete for the
same prizes, when the early bird gets the worm that
the later one must go without.

Let us next put this principle into shape and then we
may consider its evolutional significance. Psychologi-
cally regarded, movements are determined by feeling:
indifferent sensations, therefore, that occasion no feeling,
lead to no movement in response ; while the same pres-
entation, if it occasion opposite feelings in two differ-
ent individuals, will be followed by contrary movements.
As I have put it elsewhere : " The twilight that sends
the hen to roost sets the fox to prowl, and the lion's
roar which gathers the jackals scatters the sheep. Such
diversity in the movements, although the sensory pres-
entations are similar, is due," then, to the fact " that, out
of all the manifold changes of sensory presentation
which a given individual experiences, only a few are
the occasion of such decided feeling as to become ob-
jects of possible appetite or aversion." 1 So we may
formulate our principle ; which granted, certain impor-
tant consequences follow deductively when we connect
it with well-known psychological laws. Specialisation
means also concentration; the more restricted the lines
of reaction, the more perfect these reactions become.
The "Jack of all trades is master of none." Thus sub-
1 Encyclopedia Britannica, article Psychology, p. 42.


NATURAL AND SUBJECTIVE SELECTION 297

jective selection will determine definite variations as dis-
tinct from fortuitous ones, definite in the sense of bring-
ing the individual into closer rapport with that portion
of the general environment which it is selecting.

And now let us reflect how much these principles
mean. Natural selection, it is allowed, is metaphorical.
The common environment is not an agent, and selects as
little as it conseryes. Its tendency, if we consider it
alone, is not to produce variations any more than to pro-
duce life ; on the contrary, its tendency is towards uni-
formity and quiescence, as we may see in the dust and
ashes to which in the end it reduces all. But in subjec-
tive selection there is nothing metaphorical ; the agent
here — so at least we must say as psychologists — is real,
the source and type of all our conceptions of activity.
I do not forget the psychophysical inquiry still pending ;
but that in any case has to accept psychological facts,
being merely a theory about them. The agent then is
real, not an abstraction ; the selection likewise is real, not
metaphorical. The individual positively selects what is
pleasant, that is what conserves, for appetition ; and
negatively selects what is painful, and so detrimental,
for aversion. To the remainder it is indifferent. By
such selection is constituted its proper and specific envi-
ronment. The origin of this kind of species, species of
environments, at any rate seems due to a psychical, not
to a physical, selection. Moreover, there is so far no
struggle for existence, where " all subsists by elemental
strife " : rather here, as the poet has said, " All nature's
difference keeps all nature's peace." 1

1 Pope, Essay on Man, i, 169 ; iv, 66,


298 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

So far we may get by connecting our principles with
the well-known psychological law, that concentration and
practice perfect functions, and the corresponding physio-
logical law, that function perfects structure. But there
is another psychological generalisation with which I think
we may connect them, and which imparts to them still
further teleological significance. We have found Darwin
exclaiming against " Lamarckian nonsense of a tendency
to progression." But if nonsense, it is nonsense of which
many great thinkers have been guilty. We find it, of
course, in " the wisest of wise Greeks, the Stagirite," and
in our day — spite of Darwin's disclaimer — it is still
avowed by such leading biologists as Nageli, Kolliker,
and Virchow. No doubt Aristotle's conception of an
internal perfecting principle was vague and lent itself to
mystical interpretations. But I believe the progress of
psychology will enable us some day to give it greater defi-
niteness and a more assured foundation. Meanwhile time
forbids any attempt to work further at this point now.
But I will venture to quote a few sentences of my own
published ten years ago, that may suffice to indicate what
I mean : " How in the evolution of the animal kingdom
do we suppose this advance from lower to higher forms
of life to have been made? The tendency at any one
moment is simply towards more life, simply growth ; but
• this process of self-preservation imperceptibly but steadily
modifies the self that is preserved. The creature is bent
only on filling its skin ; but in doing this as pleasantly as
may be, it gets a better skin to fill, and accordingly seeks
to fill it differently. Though cabbage and honey are
what they were before, they have changed relatively to


'TENDENCY TO PROGRESSION' 299

the caterpillar now it has become a butterfly. So, while
we are all along preferring a more pleasurable state of
consciousness before a less, the content of our conscious-
ness is continually changing ; the greater pleasure still
outweighs the less, but the pleasures to be weighed are
either wholly different or at least are the same for us no
more. What we require, then, is . . . that to advance
to the level of life on which pleasure is derived from
higher objects shall on the whole be more pleasurable or
less painful than to remain behind." 1 Now this condi-
tion seems provided, without any need for a clear previ-
sion of ends or any feeling after improvement or perfection
as such, simply by the waning of familiar pleasures and
by the zest of novelty. In the midst of plenty it is usual
to become more dainty and to make efforts to secure
better fare, even though the old can be had without them.
Exceptionally no doubt such circumstances lead to an
opposite result, as we see in the degradation of most
parasitic forms. But the principle of self-conservation
seems sufficient to render this result exceptional.

Thus — even if there were no natural selection of varia-
tions fortuitously occurring, and even if there were no
struggle for subsistence, still — the will to live, the
spontaneous restriction of each individual to so much
of the common environment as evokes reaction by its
hedonic effects (with the increasing adaptation and ad-
justment that will thus ensue), and, finally, the pursuit of
betterment to which satiety urges and novelty prompts,
— these conditions, really implying no more than the
most rudimentary facts of mind, will account for defi-
1 Encyclopaedia Britannica, article Psychology^ p. 72.


300 THEORY OF EVOLUTION

nite variations to 311 apparently unlimited extent. What
is more, the variations so produced, even if there were
no others, would furnish natural selection with an ample
basis as soon as struggle for existence began. They
would also remove or minimise one of the most formi-
dable difficulties in the way of natural selection work-
ing alone — a difficulty which Mr. Herbert Spencer has
had the credit of pointing out. It is easy to imagine a
single variation which is at once useful, occurring for-
tuitously ; and it is plain that natural selection will
secure its survival. But when, as Darwin allows to be
generally the case, 1 utility depends on the coordination
of a number of variations separately useless, then the
chances against the simultaneous occurrence of these
in due correlation increase at an alarming rate as the
number of independent variants increases. Proportion-
ally large drafts on time thus become requisite before
such complex utilities can arise by lucky accident. Wc
might say, I think, that not only are geologists accused
of asking more time than according to the astronomer's
facts the physical history of the earth will afford them,
but that the demands of ultra-Darwinians like Weis-
mann may expose them to a like charge on the part of
geologists. Weismann long ago expressed the hope that
at no distant date he would be able to consider this objec-
tion — I mean the difficulty of coordinations ; but, so far
as I am aware, he has not yet made good his promise.

The mention of Weismann's name reminds me that
many of you will be thinking of his famous doctrines of
heredity and germ-plasm. If. those doctrines are true, iu
1 Cf . Origin of Species, sixth edition, pp. 178 fin*
