On the Origin of 'Eolithic' Flints by Natural Causes, Especially by the Foundering of Drifts (S. Hazzledine Warren, 1905)
=========================================================================================================================
Warren's 1905 natural-causes paper — the experimental demolition of the eoliths that ended the Tertiary-man debate in Britain. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (in.gov.ignca.16807) — Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, vol. 35.


ON THE ORIGIN OF " EOLITH IC " FLINTS BY NATURAL CAUSES,
ESPECIALLY BY THE FOUNDERING OF DRIFTS.


By S. Hazzledise "Warren, K.G.S.

[With Plate XXV T.]

I THINK that we, who do not accept the eoliths as humau implements, ha e
spoken what fa in onr mind, freely enough. This fa ne,.her tar tommeljcsto, on.
opponents, nor to the theory itaelf. ft fa bat « poor comphment to the theoo o
p£ it over with n vague exprotaou of incredulity. It » notable eno^lt to
deserve to have the worst tad of it thet nun be tad. and to ..and or full by the

‘“V. cannot .U nndertnke n thorough examination of the held evidence, and »
we ml natural reticence in .peaking. Thi, fa a right Ming. hnt tt may be

“'“tan^'one tnay no. be able to sp»k with ioraon.1 authority upon Urn
field evidence in the district that meat be enstdered “* W* ‘ ^ ^

country, one may yet be able. lwr ^" 0 r‘ In hot. Held evidence
the .abject, or to race auggeettve potnta (h , position of the

1 ‘ a * no bearin « u P° n th0 f l l,es “° n ftt ' ™ . ’her they are or are not, of human
eolithE that is primarily m dispute. hut ;. . ft knowIedge of the

fabrication. Local field evidence cannot help us he ,

fracture of flint under different conditions that we requu*

I have ltoon conducting experiments upon the fracture of flint, as bearing directs

upon tho eoUtliic question, for more than fivo J*JV undertake destruction.

feyond thfa it fa not very ™ “ ry »t eolithic mum I

So I confess that it is with regret that ^ Uthic implements

firmly believe that man existed long P« J ^ ^ any ev5dence that has been

yet recognised in this country. But I ^.pLdithic times is worthy

brought forward in positive proof of his existence i l

to command our belief. _ ith greater joy than I. if

None would hail the advent of the eo it ^ fiU a ^ p thftt w auts filling
it appeared to my judgment to be deform . ^ ^ triumph of lienee to prove

up in the history of the human race. l J* ^ a 8trong appeal

so much from such unpromising materia!. . 0 f our proofs

to an.', imagination. bnt. for thfa very mason, wa ought » b. ,ure o P

that we may not lie led astray.


S. H. Warkex.— Oh the Origin of Eolith U Flint, by Nabnvl


33ft


Are these chipped flint*, upon which so much reliance lias l>een place* I by
inauv of our geologists and archaeologists, of such a nature that they cannot
reasonably be supposed to have been made by natural causes?—and not made
rarely, hut frequently and in considerable minders.

Much lias lieen made of the fact that they conform to a certain definite series
of types.' It is argued from this that they must be due to intelligent design on
the part of man. To this I ventnre to givo a flat non acquit nr. The argument,
though attractive on the surface, is unscientific to the core.

Surely the same material, octet! upon by the same forces, of whatever nature
these may be, is likely to give riw to similar results ? Human activity does not
stand alone in this respect

The fracture of flint, under the operation of natural forces, takes certain
definite lines. One can collect large numbers of naturally broken flints
that conform to the saute type. 1 This must be familiar to everyone who luis ever
visited n gravel pit—or walked a ploughed field—in search of implements. The
eoliths are flints of natural shape which conform to a certain definite series of
types, and, in addition, show evidences of certain, equally definite, kinds of chipping.
In fact, of a groat proportion or them, one can only say that they show evidence of
a similar kind of wear, l or large numbers of them do not profess to be actually
worked, but, at the best, u implements " by virtue of use rather than of fabrication.
In any case, similar original shapes, exposed to similar causes of chipping, must
necessarily prove similar in the end.

The obtaining of long series of flints of certain types is purely n matter of
industry ami careful selection; therefore, it seems to me, we can place no reliance
upon the argument that similarity of form provos the operation of intelligent
design. The point is rather, can we, apart from this, prove that this chipping must
have been done by man, and could not have been done by nature ? If it could
liave been done by nature, we plainly are not justified in referring it to human
agency without the strongest collateral evidence. And of such evidence there is
none.


It may be said: if you believe tliat man existed in pre-p&loolithic times, where
then are his implements, if these he rejected ?

To this I should reply that there is no reason to conclude that pre-palrcolithic
man lived in this region of the world. Or, if he did live here, he may have
possessed no handicrafts whatever—as is believed to lie the case with the Kattea, 5
the most primitive race of South Africa—the paleolithic culture tnay have been
introduced ready-made from more southern areas: or may, indeed, have developed
more rapidly than we think. Or again, if he did live here, and has left recognisable
..races of bis presence, these may not have been discovered.

• See. for instance. F. J. Bennett, Oeot. Hag., 1903, jx 127.

lhe . nft ‘' ira ' ,on » attuned by flint, arranged by Professor T. McKenny
I « ^™i„ S ° rVfl - V Ma ~ am ’ Street, London. There U

r A Tt thc cur * tor » Mr - Mot,ta ^ f.g.8.

1 rr *‘” Bor A. II. Keane. * The Boer State*,' p. 73.


Can**, fxjn rS/t/1 if htf the Foundering of Drift*.


339


Itefore going into the more elaUrate details, I would like to refer to one or

two further objections and difficulties or a general character.

One of these is the difficulty of drawing a line between the work of nature
and the toppored work of man. It it tree that the* h> « t»rderh,.J m the cate
of the wcll-recogni«d prd,latino perio.lt. One find, a certam number of fiint, of

which all one can nay 1. that they may have 1«.n .lightly

-nit soino temporary purpoee. Bat when one ha, gamed some little pmot cj

experience from doing a little dint working onetell. the number of three dooHM

form, it mtrprimngly tmall. Ko one could tav that the dilhclty wa, of the

order a, it i, in theca* of the eolith. And. what it of

among at would ever found an important eonclotion upon He* doubtful f

Another difficulty i. in tin, geological •»«*% b> ««' <*> ■ J* ^
• induslrict - of M. liutot go tack. They can undoubtedly bo traced tael to tta

Upper Miocene, and perhaps even to tile Lower Miocene. " ' “ •'

ic'd. M. liutot held that the* early eoUth, helonge.1 to a mom ailvancml type of

industty (Reutdo-Meevinien and Motvinicn) ttan the Bculetan of tta Early

Pleistocene.* Tliis Is hardly what one might expect , imlinihnt

Patting from generulitic. we will now preceed to comnder the more important

classes of oolithic type3 in greater detail.

I thonlil data the colitht into the following three pnmary du»,« wu
certain tuMivition, no matter whether they 1* dne to human or iioa-hunian

agency:— , „ ,

Class 1 . Flint* with liatterfil Surface*.


Formed by prolonged concussions.


Class 2. Flint* with Flaked Surfaces.

Formed by the percussion of sharp blows.

Class 3. Flints tenth Chipped Edges.

Divided into—

Series L Formed by Uttering on the edge.

.Series 2. Formed by pressure on the edge.

There it a weil-m.rk.nl interannliate teriet between tta SM.
dataes; ttat it to say, flints which are tath llakcil anil tattered. The Knond a

third classes also pass into each other. or

.hit paper 1 stall endeavour * " £X2L ££

surfaces, and also those with battered €sl 0 h ,

• -Le Prvhi»torique d.u» I'Europe cf.itn>le.' C. B. Conga* ^ M a.

Since this pajKT wn» written, Mr. O. M. Dn toil uu ‘Infcricure," in La FcuitU tie*
Urill*. on - Le. Pdoudo-fiotitlie. du gnomon et Je l***™

June SouralLU*, IV' » -nno. Jmnsy 1.1“JJ rot. xix, 1900, p. 18 of

1 “8«r Lliomme Pr6qnat*rn»ir*, Du .So • -« F(Hm ;„ a lu, n Dull. Soe. tlftg*

reprint. “Note «ir U position »trnti««pl»'l nP
BnixeUc, voL xiv, 1000, p. 7 of reprint.


340


S. H. WARREN. —On the Griffin of - F.riithic" flint* by XoturaJ


those with pressure-chipped edges, to which series the hulk of the " Plateau
implements" of Sir Joseph Proetwich* lielong. nud among which points of
a peculiar type are so notable, are, in my opinion, due to what I shall propose
to name “ ioil-obnixion" That is to say, I shall endeavour to show that these
were formed by the grinding together of stones under pressure, due to differential
movements in the drifts in which they were embedded.

It may here Ixs pointed out tlmt it tuay be taken as a general rule that
pressure upon the edges makes for the production of notclies and points; while
rolling brings nbout the destruction of points, the production of battering, and
also (this is important) the effect of what is known ns “free Making’’ by percussion.
Jloth the battering und the Making are seen on the more exposed parts of the
Mints. The meaning ami the proof of these statements will unfold themselves in
the sequel.

1. Fusts with Battered Surfaces.

These are essentially different from tho typical Plateau Mints of Kent. They
are classed under tho name of “ perentenre ” by M. Kutot, ! and are especially
characteristic of his Bcutelien epoch, the earliest stage of his system of classifica¬
tion. They undoubtedly owe their form to a different process from that with
which 1 sliall chiefly deal here. They have suffered, not from pressure against
their edges, but from concussion upon their surfaces. Why this contusion should
be referred to human agency (of the existence of which there is no extraneous
evidence) ratiicr than to the inevitable concussions in tho course of a torrential
stream (of the existence of which we hnvo ahuudunl evidence) I must simply
confess that I do not understand. It is far otherwise with the eoliths of tho
second and third classes, but here, it seems to me, it is only necessary to picture
to oneself the conditions in a swift stream, and then, if there were any doubt
upon the subject, one will soon lx« convinced tliat these “ percuteurs ” may quite
easily l>e produced by natural causes. They are Hint nodules iu process of being
converted into pebbles. If proof of this Ixs needed, one can find it in the wash-mill
Hints of M. Boule. In any cose, these cannot stand alone without the more
convincing forms, so I need not dwell further on the point.

2. Flints WITH Flaked Surfaces.

A certain proportion of the eolithB ow T e their form, not to pressure-chipping ou
their edge*, but to M free flaking ” by percussion. Tliat is to say, they have been

1 Quart. Jovrn. Grot, Sor., voL xlvii, lSOI, pp. 126-160. Jonrn. Authrop. Intt^ roL xxi,
1802, pp. 246-2T0. The Utter paper reprinted with revisions in the author’s Contrvrcrted
Qurttunu of Oralogy, 189.1.

* A. Hu tot, “ Stir U distribution ties industries palcolithiques dans les couches qua terns ires
tie U Brtpque,” C. R. Congr* I*Ur*. JAmlknp. itArcktol. pr/kisL, XII* Session, 10OQ. “ £tudo
geologiqne et snthropologique du giarment de Orgy, 1 ’ kfr'm. Roc. dAntkrop. Brwxctte*, vol xx.


Can*'*, etptcinlly by Ike FbvnJmng of Drift*.


341


struck near their edge, i,J . «r 1- —*« dlta «* - **'» •£

i, r the hnud of m or in tint ttcneml »*. to th. hod of .

cL pmento n con.ider.bh. variety of form., both in mxo end ehnpc. Thqrww.

... t j^.Jnfimt Knt thev are all more or less flaked

lo defy anything like a general d.x nj ti , 7

over TSTkZk ju^taTdS?» b - v r® dof,n ; 1 ;:

grasped in the hand, and also of fojnnng^thing.to^c^ ^

nmy^bc, these forms give little support to any

argument from design. wh ich a few flakes

Th* lw>st of them are no more than natural sronw

* 1 , f i ri .r,i<it.nnce Anvone who Juts done any

have been removed along t e mesj that there are certain lines along

flint-working himself will foUow ' 1 • whac ftlo other8 5t lllfty 1*

which a flint will flake with the gre . ^ , mt along

haltered to n surprising extent until . . j t u, Hake at

which it is extremely difficult, or sometimes «l“ - 1 ,| iat i ithic mnu

,11. M conclusion » - to ^ ZZ, to* ..isuincc,

luul united tit© skill necessary to r,.fntct..r>. direction, 1-1 inn

hut was unable to exercise any control over the m

“ frai u”m met the oqnnUr noli to »r Umt *. - ^ n "«"J:

a for.ui.ou, multitude of U» to - “£ £ SLVST—i».
to the ldows which happen to be delivered riMfc. «« '

whUe it will withstand thoec acting in t ® ®°” f to natural causes as

If wo can equally well imagine the flint to owe iu

to human agency, surely it is —English’ eoliths; if they be
But .hose are not the dommaut fonm ^^ my opinio „,

anything they tend to appre^ fundamental difference, not of degree,

however, there is a gulf between fortuituous

hut iu kind. The onu ,»c*u„»g noth ing »teh m, ght ,^ „ [ ^

accidents of nature, the other presenting roforml to

The origin of the flret
again when the effects of water-abrasion

. Com |atc the effect of wave scliou, J!?** “eolith.* (^ called) nay

! l d« not «7 lha ‘ * onu ’ of ; th Jo not 0 ^, Uie human period further

not be human implement*. But, ^ ’ . . . „ t j lor n ot in accordance with that

hack than we know it in England. T»,e ofth.nA ut.^^ ^ ^ ^ ^ <1irlUvn m

generally recognised: he mil. the Mourtimn Palreolithic stage before hi*

our ordinary Acheulcen form* so that there m ^

ChdWen. Bui this eerie* has nothing in common w,th the tree sol.


.342


S. H. Waurk*.— Oh thr Origin of* Kolithie" Flints h„ Nohnut


3. Fusts with Chipped Edges.


Tliese I take to 1*1 the typical and dominant eoliths; that is, as we chiefly
know them in England. There are certain important points about these flints.
They liave not been flaked by direct percussion of freely delivered blows, bat
either by pressure, or by a kind of indiscriminate lettering, delivered on the edge:
the pressure having acted perpendicularly to the face of the flint. Where they
are made from flints that are flat on one surface and rounded on the other, they
are chipped from the flat surface, and therefore the flaking is seen on the rounded
surface. \\ here they are made of flints that are tabular, or approximately flat on
both surfaces, they are very frequently chipped at different parts of their edge
from opposite sides.

The chief forms produced are an indiscriminately chipped edge, and tho
notch, cither single or in various combinations. The double notched type, that is,
two notches a short distance apart, chipped either from the same or from opposite
sides of the flint, and leaving a point la-tween, is one of the most noteworthy and
characteristic forma

I divide this class of eoliths into two series, the lettered and the pressure-
chipped. These two series, if natural, owe their form to different causes; and if
human implements, to different methods of work.

The distinction between them is consequently of much importance, lint need
not lie dealt with fully until it has to lie taken into account in reference to the
effects of water-abrasion. This much only need be said now.- I will take it as
proved that water-abrasion, pure and simple, will not distinctly press two stones
together with considerable force. For this to happen in Nature, they would have
to lie held together in some sufficiently unyielding material. I think no one will
quarrel with that as an axiom.

I shall now deal chiefly with eoliths of the third class. It does not appear to
me necessary to deal so fully with those of the first and second classes, ns this has
already been done by M. Bouled But I think that his work does not fully meet
the case in regard to eoliths of the third class, without some further light being

thrown upon the effects of pressure clearly separated from those due to rolling and
concussion.

The possible means that suggest themselves by which eoliths may have lieen
formed are:—

1. Human agency.

2. Water-abrasion by wave action.

3. Wnter-abrasion by streams, rivers, and floods.

4. Soil-abrasion by the pressure and movements of soil-creep and foundering

5. The drag of ice.


G. Wear and tear on the surface of the ground.*

M. Houle, L'A n(kropnlot/it, vol xri, 1806, pp. 257-2<J7.

!* WMidrr lhD effecU ° l frntt *“»* thi * fc *»

n imuj laappHcaUt to the portion Ur form* awuiued by the eolith*.


Co turn, apccially by the Founderin'/ of Drift*.


343


I. Homan Agency.

Mttuv of these Hints, especially the double uotd.es with intervening point, are
very suggestive of human agency. If the presentation of a serviceable cutting-
edge can seldom be claimed for them, yet there ore, on the other hand, many very
serviceable points, and scraping edges of a variety of shapes are of genera
occurrence. If they l>e of human origin it appeare to me that the ideal m the

mind of the workers was the production of a serviceable scraping edge, for the

iK>ints are often of secondary importance.

Is this what one might exi«ect the early efforts or man in stone implement
making to lie' Personally. I should expect the first efforts of man in this
direction to be this: That he would break a stone to pieces, and then select such
fragments as suited his purpose. But the results of tins would hardly be

recognisable. . , ... , •

By the time he conceived the idee ef holding a that re bus heed, and

deliberately .hipping it with another atone, which U claimed for . eerntn, prepor-
lion of tin: eoliths, one docs not ace, ao lar aa .kill ia concerned, why he ahmdd not
do better work. On the ether hand it must not he foigoltcn that pnnutitc
liandiemfts are more under tlie coutn.1 ef custom and belief than obtauia with

a more advanced civilisation. ,

The Seri ef the liulf of California' use little or nothreg hut unmodified

or almost unmodified natural objects, aneh as the teeU, and talons of autre,.k I
is t»nrt of tlieir creed lo do so. Of atone they use only tolled teach iwhhles and
when one ia accidentally broken they threw it away, and the place where .t lies
may Ire -mhooed" to the whole trite. To fabricate a atone cxoep to a teo
alight extent, would offend its spirit, and violate .he relation ... winch they nnogrec
that they stand with the unseen world areund them.

Here. I take it. it is net » mud. wan. of drill as a pro nhtuon
that is in guestion. So hr as skUl is concerned, .he paheehtluc U.nt worke,
wonl.1 Imre teen perfectly cabbie .1 executing « great number at Ire. ef rim
neolithic forms. The difference was primarily eastern wind;greetedi h» meUrmb
of work along different channels. The change from pal.eehri.rn W « "» 1 h “- “
more subtle than a mere development ef skill; it » of the trend rnthor than of rite

Iuiud; it is a jjrowth of new ideas. ,. . .

Viewed in tins light there is nothing unfavourable in the eohlh.c lhnte boreg

„ , , . if some slraime way, became fixed in tins

confined to these types. If custom, iti some o

groove, so it might remain for long periods. , .

And the length of the penod w ould recount lor any reasonable abnmhmc. el

these forres, though when M. Burnt spreks ef 25 per cent.- retd even

■ IV. J. MeCte. D.H. lre .^»l>My ,pre„,„|„, de I.

■ - Ser U dteUibnUo,. dm h.d.»lr.» Wfoteta I ' 1 p, ti ^ ,, ,3 J

Bclgi,,uts" C. It. Cunyrie Intern. dAnlhrep. <f Arched. yrtMet-,

tile irjtriut.


;144 S. H. WaKKES .—On t/u Origin of" Eolithic ” Flint* by Natural

50 per cent. 1 of the mass of river-gravels being couijiosetl of worked liintn, one
must confess that it seems rather extraordinary.

A fact which tells against the human origin of these Hints is that eolithic
chipping occurs on the edges of i*ul;culithic implements. In some cases it might
very well he muiutaiued that this chipping was due to human agency. In fact, I
have in my own collection several examples of re-eutraut curves on paleolithic
implements, which appear to be definitely worked. One of these, in particular, is
u rude discoidal implement from Warren Hill, Mildcuhull. But the hollow curve
here has every appearance of Wing formed by designed ilakiug, which is entirely
in accordance with the flaking of the rest of the implement. Therefore, I consider
that, os it occurs upon uu undoubted implement, the bulauce of the evidence is
altogether in favour of its lteing genuine work.

In other cases, however, and in those, too, which have much more in
common with the eolithic chipping, the hulauee of the evideuce is entirely on the
other side.

Mr. W. L'unuiiigtou* has described examples of this character, where the
eolithic chippiug can neither l>e claimed ns secondary work, nor as the result of
urtificiul wear in the original use of the implement, I have exuiuiucd one of
those described by Mr. C'unniugton with great care, and it is perfectly clear that
the eolithic chipping occurs on a frost-flaked surface that was au accidental injury
to the implement, nut uuly subsequent to its fabrication, but subsequent to its
abrasion and patiuulioii.

The simple and natural explanation of this is that the eolithic chipping is due
to natural causes. To assume it to bo an instance of re-working of an old
implement at n later date, is to assume that man made a more advanced and more
useful implement into a more primitive aud less useful uue, whereas the
contrary is the general rule for re-worked implements. It further assumes that
mau, long after the Karlv Puheolithic Age, to which the implement belongs, still
continued to moke the eolithic types; mid this example is hy no tueaii3 isolated.
1 have, besides others, a very notable instance in a Moustcricn trimmed flake from
Swimscombc, with later eolithic chipping on its edge.* Among the others that I
have may he mentioned an ovate implement from Poitou, also with subsequent
eolithic chipping on its edge.* So it is clear that if this eolithic re-chipping was
douc by man be did it not infrequently, aud to a comparatively late date.

However unlikely Lliis may be, it is of course conceivable that these might
be iustauces of re-workiug, and what we want is not probability but demonstra¬
tion ; or rather, these might he instances of re-working, if they were, in reality,
instances of working at all. Aud here it is, os I take it, Unit we liud the proof

* “ Defeme dea EolitU«V Hull, .Voe. (fAiitirop. DrtuxtUs, vol. xx, 1002, jx 61 of the
reprint.

* Quart Jutirn. (Jcat. &*., vol. liv, 1886, p. 281.

• See- rUte XXVI, Fig*. a and 8n.

• Se* Plate XXVI, Fig. t


Com#*, rxptciullif by the foundering 0/ Drifts.


345


that we require. These examples of subsequent eolithic re-chipping bear none of
the characteristics of designed flaking. whUe they present every feature of
fortuitous pressure-chipping.

We not only find this pressure-chipping upon paleolithic implements, but we
find it also, though generally on a smaller scale, upon the edges of neolithic
implements, where it is also, very frequently, subsequent to the patmation of

the flint. . ,

No confusion cun arise— except iu name—betweeu tins fortuitous perpen¬
dicular pressure-chipping, and the deliberate flaking by pressure, which .s the
highest development of tlie art of flaking. Neither the method of operation nor
the effect produced have anything in common with each other.

This point naturally leads up to the question as to how fur contemporary
pressure-chipping upon the edges of undoubted implements may be taken
to have been caused by artificial wear, and how far it must lie rejected as
natural wear. But the discussion of this would lead me too far from my present

purpose, and I must regretfully i*ass it by. ..... , , , ,

t„ the December mini her of Jim.' I !»»« tow I found to

auilelious of eoUfhio hint. ..n new rsmls. eel lltst they ha.l been oh,pH by
premare against ether stones to the gnmad on the psMUS" °> car vrbcel. ever

them. The oy.Utl.ie double tteteh with point f »' "O »■»•««“ “"“T*!
•tootm those, ltv a series ef cxperimcuU I feeeJ Hot »b.U>ver ate, capable o
foteibiy ether by a suddeu shock. er by a dower and mem prolonged

lercium edge of a suitably abaH « the -face of another atom.,

wus dee capable ef producing the kind ef cbipH edge cletmetentU. ef Urn eel,tit
rrm KxtmittuESTs.— At this stage ef the ptocecdutgs mmt. oeper.meeu, were
eee.leeU.Kl ie elder te show practically the effect, ef pen*t»l,ouIer
lire edge, ef ffieuo Some ef tie*, wore placed agutnat pebble. set block of

oem^Tod thee stamH »I»» •<* the heel « »‘™* *“ U “ ° f ”''t
others were mere slow* pnLl .gainst . pMh to .

for the purpose. A» time ws limited, only «• »'* »' “**** “ mls * e "

experimented upon. Seveml of these, as fr»|ucntly happens ... to

broke ie the process, end the effect was ceemepeentty spo.lt ; but

least, were fairly seceessfel. end showed a oomndcisbl. amount of 1

high-uegle - parallel Hiking " (neele el,oust iuslantanconsly) rnelt a, t. sccu

cdtjm of the host examples ef «» “ <" J^Lt Mutton, ef eolith, can he
The point to be decided is tlus. w u,c .. .

produced by the artificial pressure of one stone agumst an,thor .m> Mdid
argument that they may be *> produced iu nature t Aud further, b) what
uaturel means eoeld sue,;, be thus pntssed togstber to such a manner as to make
to chipped eoliths f IWtully. I do net doubt for a me mcntth atto
onperinZT an, valid. But if one can answer Urn *coud ffuesuon m the

i Van. 1905. 103 : 1006, 3.


:U6 8. H. WakkkN.— On the Origin of “ Eolithic " Flint* by Not oral

nftit inative, namely tliut there arc forces in nature which cun press stones
forcibly together, then the validity of the experiments is sufficiently obvious, and
need not trouble us further. Then if it be still maintained that these eoliths an*
human implements, it must be for the advocates of that theory to explain why
eolithic man always chose atones of these particular shapes, and also why hV
always chipped them in the imiuner that fortuitous pressure is capable of doing. '

2. Watkk-Auuasiok by Wave Acnox.

Although the final result of wave action, whether of the sea or of inland
waters, is the pebble, there is no doubt that it is capable of producing, os
accidental and temporary forms, certain types of the eoliths.

M. Itutot asserts that eoliths may be found in considerable numbers on sea-
1 teaches. But he boldly claims for them an “ eolithic * age, 1 just as palieolithic
implements ore sometimes found in these situations. Although a positive
judgment could not be given without going into the local evideuce in each
alleged instance, one very mud. doubts whether this explanation would always
meet the case. Indeed, Mr. George Coffey’ lias found such objects which had
lieeu ouly recently chipped by the sea.

It is possible that the colitlis of the Kentish Plateau might have been
derived from marine formations of laic Tertiary Age, which we know formerly
existed in the area. But personally 1 do not believe that these particular eoliths
owe then form to wave action at all. They appear to me to be distinctly
pressure-chipped, uud not battered by any form of waler-ubroaiou.*

And, further, as the results of wave action arc plaiulv inapplicable to the
river gravels. I think tliis cause need not detain us further.

It is jiossiblc, however, that some of the eoliths which liuve l*xm recorded
from glacial gravels may be due to this cause. But this .picstiou con hardly Ihj
considered as of vital importance, aud these discoveries will be referred to
later on.


3. Watek-Abkasiox by Streams, Hivers akd Fuwiw.

As already stated. I think we may consider this cause os inapplicable to the
pressure-chipped eoliths of the third class. Esjiecially is this the case with the
double notches with point, and those with reverse chipping. It seems impossible

that free rolling m a river-bed, which makes for the destruction of points, could
produce these forms.

Al U» SUU. time, ouo umrt not forgrt tliat aotoctfung won: ll™ |n« ndliwr
m« toko ,,W-„ m tho co„„* „f nv« onaion. If tl.co .ere . Hint .tuck or
»«lgoJ w «,w. ».y to Uw bod of . rivo, wd „it|, Ul edge potoltog npwnlo, „„d

to. '4^ " ** *ol... tori, t , a of

! Br t A ‘* x - Saimkx, 1001, p. 7#,j.

8 “ u,r Kr “^ ^ .W„ Vol . 11X , 1U0 5, m S8.


CnWttt, f-yhxinlly l>y th' Found*rim/ of Drifts,


347


a stream of alone* and pebbles were driven against it by the current, it is manifest
i bat its edge would become chipped in the oolithic style, even if it only remained
in that position for a few moments before licit,g swept away. Or, as a river was
cutting its way into previously formed bods of gravel, a flint might be, as it wore,
attacked in a similar manner to the above, Indore being finally dislodged from it*
bed. One sometimes finds flints with several parallel flakes removed from one
side; this has probably beeu accomplished in this manner.

Again, there might be violent eddies swirling in a confined sjiace where a
fallen tree partially impeded the flow of the stream. These would cause much
chipping on the edges of flints.

These causes would doubtless produce occasional approaches towards the
pressure-chipjied flints, but even then, the difference in the method would almost
certainly reveal itself in the result. In practical experience of river gravels, ono
finds that this is so. and that the distinctly pressure-chipped forms are generally,
though not entirely, alwent. while the battered forms are characteristic. The
paleolithic trimmed flake from Swanscomlie, previously referred to, is one of these
exceptions; for the later eolithic chipping on its edge is distinctly the work of
pressure. But the gravel bore lies upon chalk, and this example is evidently c ue
to “ soil-abrasion - by foundering, presently to he described, and not to water-
abrasion at all. Such occasional pressure-chipi*ed forms might also I*? p uc
by the foundering of the river banka where they are undermined by the stream;
hut this again, though an integral fart of river work, is not water-abrasion.

It is notable that in most of the examples of pressure-chipping that I have
from river gravels—other, tluit is, than renutniJ or derived si»ecrmeno one ms
that the surfaces of the flints showing it are also striated. Although this stnation
is never seen in the river gravels to the extent that it is f'»und in the hill dri ta, it
is yet sufficient to indicate that grinding together under pressure, w » tn.i >)
or by soil-movement, has actually taken place.

We must now consider the difference between the chipped edges due to
battering and those due Ui pressure. The most important difference, perhaps »
the absence of the more advanced forms from the battered class. This is w ia
one would expect if the theory of their origin advanced here be correct.

In some cases it might lie difficult to distinguish between them, oepecially
where one had only isolated examples to deal with. But where one has a senes
of cad, class, then the difference between them, and also between both of them
and the effects of designed flaking, i* i«rfectly apparent to the trained eye.

When one examines the eoliths of the river gravels, and the pressure-
chipped forms made artificially; and then, when one compares these with the
eoliths of the hill drifts, it gradually dawns upon one that whereas the latter

certainly are pressure-chipped, the former are not.

t think L .11 U» moat cotwlnrivo proof* tlmt tho b.ttere.1 .ones » d»
to water-abrasion, i» the feet that they p-a by fc-nthtUo,,. (.hteh,

in,!,,-I. ia tnic of every elara of eolith, hut notably »o l„t,) into rrma true,

Vol. XXXV.


348 S. H. VVabKKX. — On the Origin of '• Eolithic" Flints bg Naturat

no one would—or should—accept as anything but natural In searching river
gravels I sometimes had to look some time before I could find auy suitable raw
material for the experimental production of eoliths, which liad not already boon
converted into more or less of an eolith. That is a matter of great import from
more than one jroiut of view. I will only say here that I !isk those who accept as
human implements the flints that liuppen to !« “ more," while they reject as
natural those that happen to be “ less," to show some essential difference in kind
1 »ctween them. If the difference la* one of degree only, their human origin, it
seems to me, is indefeusible.

Further confirmation tliat these forms are natural is found in the wash-mill
flints of M. Boule. 1 I liave not followed up the effects of wash-mill work to
the extent that has been doue by this iiutuor. Indeed, the ordinary wash-mills
of our brickfields are very different from those descrilied by him.

l$ut from time to time, for a good many years past, I have picked up such
objects when I have chanced to notice them. Some of these are very fair flakes*
with cone of percussion, facets on the outer face, and even some little secondary
chipping on their edges. One is a hollow-scraper eolith of the battered class.
Another is a flint nodule from which several flakes liuve been removed, and it
much resembles n rude hand implement. This shows how careful one ought to bo
in accepting indiscriminately chipped Hints as human work.

The flakes, however, have certain characteristics, especially in the trend
of the surface ripplingB of the fractured surfaces, which generally serve to
distinguish them from the artificial product. They are exactly parallel with the
forms which one finds to 1)0 characteristic of various Plateau Grovels, such as those
of Hertfordshire and Essex, or of the Cromer Forest Bed.* They also occur in
paleolithic river gravels in company with undoubted implements. Some of these
flakes from the Cromer Forest Bed were found l>eJore Mr. Lewi? Abbott’s 4 paper
was published, in which he claimed for them a human origin. But with this
conclusion I most emphatically disagree.

To sum up the efleets of water-abrasion. It is universally admitted that
water-abrasion is capable of producing a contusion of surfaces, a chipping of
edges by battering, and a considerable amount of “ free flaking " by percussion.
1 his 1 take to be the origin of the first and second classes of the eolitlis, of the
intermediate forms Iwtwcen the two, and of the first scries of the third class.
1 hose who would accept these forms os human implements place limits upon the
nlmvc-iuontioned processes of water-abrasion which appear to me altogether
arbitrary and impossible.

My sul»e<iueul remarks will refer to the pressuru-cliipped flints only, unless
expressly stated to the contrary.

M. Boule, L’JnlMroftotogie, voL xvi, IUO&, |ip. 257-267.

• 8e« Pbue XXVI, Pig,, t a „,i ^

4 See Plate XXVI, Fig*. 5 and Aa.

• SvtHrut Scimcr, voL a, 1M17, p. H'J.


Cause*, especially by the Foundering of Drifts.


349


4. Soil-Abrasion.

In contradistinction to water-abrasion, I propose to name the process abont to
be described aa “ soil-abrasion." I venture to think it is of far greater importance
than has hitherto been recognised.

All geologists will be familiar with the action of soil-creep, and the operation
of pressure beneath the surface. We find evidence of tliis work in many phases:
on a superficial scale in the disturUi.ee of drifts, the foundering of escarpments,
and other matters, while at a greater depth there are a great variety of effects in
the deformation of rocks. But into these latter we need not enter, as they do
not concern us as prehistorians.

We are all familiar with what one may call the extreme form of soil-creep m
the phenomena of the landslip. I need not go far into this question either, at
least, not in so far as the more extensive landslips are concerned. I may mention,
however, that I have an example of the last lower molar of EUphas privxigcntm,
from the Warren, near Folkestone, which has been involved in one of the
landslips that, owing to the peculiar geological structure, are of not infrequent
occurrence in that locality.' Both surfaces of this tooth are deeply scored and
striated by the slipping and eliding to which it has been subjected. The origin
of such scratches and Striation* is an important link in the chain of my evidence.
Instances where bones have been scored where they have loin in contact with each

other in peat beds have also been recorded.

As already hinted, superficial movements are not confined to such extensive

accidents ns this. Neither are they confined to steep slopes, 08 un0 nu « ht
imagine tluit they would lie: a gently-inclined plane is 'l u ' u sufficient. __

The determining cause of nil these phenomena, whether great or small, is
water. Water percolates into the soil, especially down cracks and crevices,
reduces the adhesion, and forms a lubricant It is thus that the surface accumu¬
lations are continually moving down from higher to lower levels, always travelling
grain by grain, and at more or less frequent intervals according to circumstances.

sliding in masses of greater or less magnitude. 3

Mr. W. Shone has dealt with the principles of subterranean erosion, chiefly
in so far as thev affect beds of unconsolidated sand and clay He states that
wherever water percolates tlirough unconsolidated material along an reclined
plane, it is constantly carrying the lighter materials out at the nearest point
of escape, that is. at the point of outlet of a spring. The consequence of this ,s

• W. Tuple}-, Proc. GsoL Assoc., voL M,

* Since tlii. paper wo. written, on article bv Mr. W.

of .Vufurv, voL Ixrifi 1906 „ 425. on "The UmWideita tbc ,j own .^ „ nd

how a tract of glacial drift ha. been moving over it* n , a j xjnl

showing no ouperfirial evidence of it* motion, for many 3 re *- nk ' . original

fifty vrarM ^o'enwe. thh. area, and since it- construction it ha* Iwen deflected from ^ongitu.

umrw to the extent of from C to 10 feet A .tone bridge haa al«» l«een i* o

damaged. „

is A M


350


S. H. WaBREK. —On th ' Origin of" Eolith ir " Flinti hy X/ituml


that, wherever a spring issues in the side of a valley under such conditions, it
carries away the underlying material and causes the overlying material to
founder down to fill its place. Even where this has been proceeding on a very
insignificant scale in the valleys of little streamlets iu the Cheshire plain, the
author proves that foundering tins taken pluce to the extent of 30 feet since the
glacial period. This does not sound very extensive, hut it is as much as could
well take place under the circumstances, as it has reached tho floor of the valley.
This paper was read before the Geological Society in 1892, and I must refer to it
for further details. 1

But this principle does not only apply to such unconsolidated material. It
must not be forgotten that all the mineral contained in spring water, whether in
mechanical suspension or chemical solution, is derived from the subterranean
erosion of the rocks through which it has passed. The effect of this must bo very
considerable indeed.

It must further be remembered that, upon a slope of even very moderate
inclination, the amount of sliding may be out of all proportion to the actual
amount of the subterranean erosion. While during the Pleistocene Period, when
the rainfall was so much greater than now, all these processes must have been
proportionally more active.

At tho one end of the scries, the landslip which precipitates a whole mountain
side into the valley below, though abundantly powerful to chip the edges of flints
by grinding them against other atones, Is yet too local and infrequent in its
occurrence to he the general ca»tse or the eoliths. At the othor end of the series,
the perpetual grain by grain soil-creep described by Darwin* where he found
that on n grass slope of 9£°, 24 cubic inches of earth crossed a line 1 yard
long every year, is too feeble to have any such effect. Nor, again, would the
individual creep of stones down a hillside be much more to the purpose. But
between these extremes we have a series of gradations which are both sufficiently
frequent and sufficiently powerful to supply at least a great part of the force we
require, especially when the rainfull was greater.

In this connection one may call to mind the slip which produces no surface
feature whatever, and only comes into our cognizance from the effect it has upon
the foundations of our houses.

Another important point, noted in the recent text-hook of Geology hy
Messrs. T. 0. Chamterlain and R. D. Salisbury* is the following. Tho inclination
of trees from tho perpendicular, whore they are growing upon sloping ground,
is caused hy the differential movement of the more superficial soil over the
sulr-soil in which the roots of the trees are anchored. The movement indicated
here is slow, and continuous, but powerful. Other movements are intermittent.

■ w. Shone, Jomm. Ottl. See., voL xlviii, IMfcJ, pp. 90-103.

2^ ( C D " rw '"* Tkr formation of Vegetable Mould throng/, M« Action of Worms, 1881,

■ Urology. Smntu, [v„L ij, London, 1906, p. - 18 .


Causes, apetially by tht Foundering of Drifts.


351


And tliia Lb not all. There is also the closely related aeries of phenomena
in the foundering down of snptsrfidal accumulations, owing to the chennca
solution of calcareouH rocks 1-eneath. The most familiar effect of tlus F«»» w
seen in the “piping" of the chalk.* Rainwater, percolating through the
superficial deposits along certain channels of least resistance, unequally dissolves
away the subjacent surface of the chalk, and this causes the overlying beds to

founder down into the spaces thus left. .

Some ot time pipes ore surprisingly narrow onJ .leep.aud Urey ere lille.1

with a heterogeneous oocumulotinn of materiel—grovele, saiuls. an c y»
short a mixture of whatever Imls tliere may formerly have been overlying I '»

clialk. It often hnppena that local aabtermaoan erosion gam on for a long
period without making any surface feature, a. the superficial drift » left » a
hridgn over tho cavity. Several instances have tea. recorded where he acta,
tall of these bridges lot, lieen otaerred to take pUec. Darwin- mention. fito
such subsidences a. having 00 ,no within his own knowledge, one of whie
happened in his own fields. The* nrc dereritad ns hnvmg been several feet m
diameter and some halt in depth. Bat others on a larger scale are *
liaviug occurred in the magiieeian Innostone near " .

feU in 1801 or 1802 is 30 foot in depth. Another which c a hoi, 18 3
SO feet in width and 00 feet in depth. Another which foil about 1810 t,
described as being now •• planted « an orchard.” » pro.au,at y it.. even huger,
mother engulptad a .lack which emu. men tad jaat been making bu
fortunately had left. It w*. donhtless. the weight of tho stack which precipitaled

the eetestrophe. ^ ^ ^ ^ wilh „ hich one legs to deal. Though

these pipe, aro fluently ven- mli*eat io cm* other, and must cron ua^y am*
vet apnUfrom rhis. and in the care of rotaueou, rook, like th o o taXlg Ante
is also a general relation of the whole surface going on. ^

there may ha on its surface to founder down, now rn on. «*“
another: on tho overage, perhaps, producing a air t U '
ii.aiiifa.t that this action mmt cm dUfereuMl movement, m the mesa,

" P TT S"id. ha, pci..,., oat. the riay.with-fiinm wMri, enpe the
eladk. thoagl. composed of the residue from the relation of the ehnlk. Inn, J

I J. Prrstwicb, "On the Origin of Sred red O— «P- »«”*■ **""

*“*. a'£*. "n. ft™ iota./ rvtM. *M * •*<*» * ■»"•*"*'• * "*■

• Bov. J. Sv Tults OW. Hag., 1«». P- »™: ^ .g ^ also W. Whitaker,

" rl ■'sil my. i« •!- - •a^JSTJSSE

.Ifunuiry 10, 10U6.


352 S. H. Warren'. —On the Origin of" Eolithu" Flint* by Natural

been almost everywhere disturbed since Pliocene times, as it contains abundant
remains of Tertiary strata up to and including the Pliocene.

Tho condition of things indicated by these facts is easily pictured in the
mind. Tertiary strata were formerly spread over the surface of the chalk. The
surface of the area was denuded of the cuppiug of Tertiary strata by suhaerial
erosion, leaviug only scattered remnants of their presence, and at lbe same
time the chalk was being dissolved away from its upper surface downwards by
subterranean erosion. As the clny-with-flints, which was left aa the residue from
the solntiou of the chalk, foundered down into the spaces thus left by that
solution, the remnants of the Tertiary strata became gradually carried down and
involved in the muss of the day-with-tliuts, where we find them to-day.
Doubtless this was largely accelerated during the climatic conditions of the
Glacial Period.

The 1 tearing of these various processes on the eolithic ipicstion is obvious, and
insistence has already been laid on it It must uot be expected that eoliths would
be produced in all cases. There must be suitable raw material, the stones must
l>o sufficiently near together to be pressed against each other, and one cau also
say in the ubs tract that the material in which they art; emlwdded must not
l>e too yielding. How this last matter would work out under subterranean
conditions—whether the clay of the "clay-with-lliuts" would sutiafy this
condition, and, if so, at what depth it would satisfy it—I am not yet prepared to
say. This much one may say, however, that where eoliths have been found in any
abundance, they have generally been associated with some sort of gravel.

The next question which must be asked is this: Is the pressure which would
be attained by the movements of superficial accumulations sufficient for the
purpose of chipping the edges of flints in the eolithic style ? A cubic yard of
material, such as we have to deal with, may be taken to weigh about a lou and
a-half. It might very well happen then that at a depth of only 0 feet, two
stones might be pressed together with a force of upwards of a ton. Added to
this there might be, sometimes, the momentum acquired by a fall of a foot or
more; while smaller forces than this would occur with greater frequence and at
a less depth.

The actual force required to chip the edge of a flint varies according to
the toughness of the Hint and tho thickness of its edge. The following may,
however, be taken as a general guide:—A keen-edged flake may have a notch
of some little depth chipped out of its edge by being merely grasped in the hands
anti pressed for a few moments against another stone. A little grinding action,
such as would take place with soil-movements, greatly assists, but is not always
necessary. A sudden stamp with oue’a heel, or a more prolonged pressure
brought about by throwing one’s weight down heavily, is sufficient to have the
same result on a considerably blunter edge. This is capable of reproducing a
%,r ) large proportion of the eolitlrs. On one occasion I succeeded after several
successive stamps with my heel in chipping a notch out of tho edge of a flint


Crtujv*. especially by thf Foundering of Drift*. 3o3

ihui was as blunt as could be seen on any eolith, and far more blunt than many
of these forms. But this must be considered somewhat exceptional, and it was
an example of the single notch only. The forms with an outward curve seem
to require a greater pressure. The weight from the wheel of a cart passing over
is abundantly sufficient to reproduce even the most exceptional examples of
oolithic chipping, and this can seldom exceed two tons, whereas a fur greater
pressure might he reached in nature.

We can thus definitely answer the question whether nature is capable of
chipping these fliuta What can we say on the other side for eolithic man T
How could he obtain the necessary pressure—esjieeially in the case of those which
are the finest examples of his supposed work—either ns a result of use or by
deliberate intention f Ho could not obtain the necessary pressure without the
aid of some mechanical contrivance, and—even if it were conceivable that he
should have this—the final result seems hardly worth the effort, when letter
things might l>e obtained so much more easily. And, on the oilier hand, no use
of the flints as implements would be any more capable of producing the observed
effects on their edges without the aid of great leverage.

But, it umy bo asked, Ls it demonstrable that it is pressure—and not a
chipping of the edge caused by designed battering—which has produced those
forms ? Although it might not always be possible, as bos already been stated,
in an individual instance to differentiate the effects of pressure from those
produced by any other means, yet I believe that there can bo no doubt about the
matter where one has a series to deal with. The evidence is complete on the
point, and seems to admit of no other interpretation. I have dealt with this
point both in previous jarts of this paper and also in Mu m, 1 hut it is so
important that 1 venture to give a summary of the argument here. Firstly, the
angle of chipping of this series of eoliths is the same as that obtained by pressure.
Secondly, the character of the chipping ami the trend of the surface ripplmgs
of the fractures is, in all typical examples, alwolutely identical m the case of the
plateau eoliths and in that of the experimental pressure-effects. It ls true Hint
a small number of these eolitlm are on the borderland, which might l* due
either to pressure-chipping or to designed flaking. But none of them cross the
border. None of them present anything more than Ls seen m the best examples
perpendicular pressure, which very cloaely approach the effects of designed linking.
Thirdly, the general sliajo of these eoliths is the same as one may find on a new
road, where the pressure is delivered without the guidance of intelligent design.

Wliat one finite in tin's manner is really of uioro value than ones own
experimental productions. For in the latter case there is the guiding intelligence
to be discounted. This is a great hindrance, ns one is prevented from obtaining
any particular types, except such us one cannot help producing from the nature
of the case.


« J/an, 1906, 103 ; 1900. 3.


354


S. H. WaRRKN. —On the Oriyin of" Edith ic " Flints by Mttural


We must now consider the drifts in which eoliths have been found.

Tlio paleolithic drift of High Down, 1 in the Isle of Wight, is situated on the
top of a narrow ridgo of clmlk. Although not at the highest [»art of the ridge,
it is yet situated where such a deposit could not by any |>ossibility he accumulated
under the present physiographical conditions. The flints contained in it are in
a great variety of conditions, some !>eing greatly corroded and abraded, others
being sharply angular. It is evidently a sweeping from, or redistribution of, the
surface accumulations of a considerable geological period from some more elevated
area which lias now disappeared.

It yields paleolithic implements in some abundance, and in addition there
are numliers of eolithic dints with pressure-chipped edges, many of them
unabraded and contemporary. One of these, as dcscrilwd in Man, I found
closely adhering to the rounded stone that hnd made it. But leaving this aside,
one tan say tliat, wliatever they may lie, these eoliths are certainly of paleolithic
age; they do not even 1>elong to an early stage of tliat period. Their occurrence
in such intimate association with paleolithic implements is certainly favourable
to their human origin, but as eoliths occur equally where there arc no human
implements, this argument breaks down. In any event—as is the case with the
jiaheoliths with later eolithic chipping on their edges—they break down the
argument for their great antiquity derived from their supposed nbscnce, as
con tern porn ry examples, from paheolitliic drifts. Certainly this supposed ul«seucc
does not accord with my own experience. I have even found them of neolithic
age. Professor Boyd Dawkins also states this as his experience. 2

In addition to these eoliths, there are also numerous flints which are scratched
and scored on their surfaces.* Now, it is manifest that if the soil-movements have
been sufficiently powerful to score the surfaces of flints, which are difficult to
scratch, they have also been powerful enough to chip their edges, which can l<e
accomplished with comparative ease.

I take it thut the 1 Iateau Drift of Kent is a similar sweeping together
of previously existent surface material from areas of the chalk which are now
much reduced. Like the High Down drift, it contains scratched flints and eoliths.
Mr. W. Cnnnington* suggested that both the scratches and the eolithic chippings
were due to movements in frozen or thawed gravel. I personally think thut it is
the thawed, rather than the frozen condition, that we want, as the latter—without
the aid of ice passing over it—would tend to check movement

In answering Mr. Wm. Cnnnington, my friend Mr. A. Sauter Keuuard*
maintained that there was no evidence of ice-action on the Kentish plateau. Now,
in Mr. Benjamin Harrisou's collection there ore a few striated flints which are in


S. IIazzIcIiiip Wortfn, Orol. Slag., 1000, p. 400 ; 1902, p. 07.

* Journ. Anthrop. /a*., toL xxiii, 1894, p. 250.

* See Plate XXVI, F1g». 19 and 20.

i **** vo |' > s »7. P- 327 ; Q*,rt. Joum. See.,

Aalwral Sctntor, roL xii, 1806, p. 27.


vol. liv, 1898, p. 291.


Causes especially by the. Foundering of Drifts* *****

the highest degree suggestive of ice-action. They possess deep and parallel
striations. But these are exceptional, and I do not wish to force the evidence
from such rare exceptions. Tire characteristic slight scratches, crossing the flints
—and not infrequently the palieolithic implements—in all directions, do not seem
to me to claim the hypothesis of ice. In fact, I rather incline to the view that
even the deep parallel atxiations might be formed by soil-abrasion alone. At least,
the point is a doubtful one, and I am wUUng to give the eolithic theory the benefit

of the doubt.

Mr. Kennard also objects to Mr. Cunnington’s idea that the scratches on the
flints were produced by other Hints, and suggests Hint they must have been
produced by something much harder, namely, quartz grains. I think that
Mr. Kennnrd may be right in this.

But both the ice-question and the method of the scratching are non-
essential side-issues. The essential matter is the reference of the scratched
surfaces and the chipped edges to the same cause, namely, movements in the
gravel in which they were, or, ut some former stage of their existence, have t»een

embedded.

A point upon which some stress has lieen laid, both by Mr. Benjamm
Harrison and also by Mr. J. Bussell Larkl.y,' is the absence of paleolithic
implements as surface finds from the highest le\els. l»ut I presume that
palaeolithic man, like his neolithic successor, dropped his implements over the
surface at all levels. Their absence from the liighest levels is nothing more than
an indication of the surface drifting and soil-creep Unit has taken place since
paheolithio times, and which lias left those higher levels practically denuded <>

implements. . ..

To take another instance of soil-abrasion. On the chalk areas the rain a

during the Pleistocene Period was greater than could be alworbed h) tic
The surface was consequently broken up, and there resulted a gravel composed of a
mixture of rolled fragments of chalk and flint. In course of time the contain
chalk was dissolved away, and the insoluble residue foundered down into I n
spaces thus left, now iu one place, now in another. An a result of lis, ie
strata, which were formerly horizontal, became bent down into a senes

festoons. ...

The drift at Alderbury, where I)r. Itlackmore has found so many eoht is.
is described by Professor T. McKcnny Hughes* ns being of this character. It is
interesting to note that many of the eoliths found here show little or no si^n
water-abrasion.* I therefore suggest that here, as in the poWithic drift o
High Down, we may perhnjw have eoliths tn *iiu in the drift in which tho ll »\
been formed by soil-abrasion.


• The Antiquary, N.3., vol. i, 1005, p. OS.

• Proc. Cambridge Phil. Hoc., voL i*. 180(1, p. 123- _

• Rev. R. A. Biilli’ii, Tmtu. Victoria InttiMt, vol. xKxiii, 1001, p. -13.


356 S. H. Warren.— On thr Origin of" EoUOu" FlinU h, Xatural

Tlie only serious criticism of any of these processes, as a cause of the
production of eoliths, which has come under my notice, is that by M. Rutot.’
It must l»e confessed that the effect of his argument is very powerful. He tells us
that he was formerly of opinion that the foundering of the soil was the cause of
the production of eoliths, and how, when he visited the phosphate excavations in
the environs of Mons, he was constrained, against all his preconceived opinions, to
aliundon that position.

L^t us examine the reasons for this. The beds worked there were concentrated
phosphntic deposits filling pipes iu phosphatic chalk. A section of one of these
pipes is figured, showing lines of flint nodules which are bent into a downward
curve where they cross the pijie ; and, in mldition, are broken up along their planes
of incipient fracture. As a straight line of nodules has become u downward curve,
which is of course of greater length, their fragments have tended to lie sejiarnted
from each other, rather than to be forced together. What the nature of the flint
fracture may lie we arc not informed, but iu any case the conditions arc- plainly
unfavourable for the formation of eoliths.

To judge by the figure given, the quantity of the residue (? aided by
replacement) left from the solution of the chalk amounts to more than half its
original bulk. This is altogether exceptional, the normal residue being only a small
percentage. 1 In consequent* of the large amount of residue, the lines of flint
nodules, although bent, are still intact; the junction with the overlying Eocene is
sharply defined; and there luts lieen no kneading together of material such os
normally takes place. Neither is there any mixed gravel here, such as one usually
finds associated with eoliths.

Another important jioint ujxm which no information is given, and where, not
knowing the country, one is consequently at a disadvantage, is the situation of the
locality. If it 1* iu a valley, as appears to 1* the ease, the observation has
obviously no beariug upon the conditions of hill areas. Iu any case, 1 fail to see
tliut conclusions drawn from one particular locality have any bearing ujiou a wider
area w here tlie conditions are totally different. One cannot invalidate the positive
evidence iu one locality hv negative evidence in another.

Resides this, tlie eolitlu of the Belgian river gravels, described by M. Rutot,
are not pressure-chipped. This is, in fact, a final answer so far os the Belgian
eoliths are concerned, but as it might be thought that the orgumeut would apply
to other areas, I Imve dealt with it somewhat fully.

lo sum up the oflecls of soil-abrasion ns affectiug the origin of eoliths.

I freely grant that I cannot, iu the nature of things, show an eolith that I have
seen made by auy process of soil-abrasion. Rut we have exact imitations of

Iivfenne ilw £<>lithea. I** Action* Xaturellm jHxuitilea «nnt inaptc* it produire des
hdeu Semblablc. k U Ketoucbe Iiitentiouellr," Hull. Soc. Untiles, vol. xx, 190*.

p- SO of the reprint.

-• In South-Eastern England the whole of the Middle and Upjier Ctialk wan never le» tluu»
J5 per cent of pure calcium carbonate. W. IWr Iluiue, Prvc. U<oL .laaoc., vol. xiii, |8tW,


357


Chums, r.*pcrially by Ikr Foir.ndrring of Drift*.

eoliths wade by pressure. The inference is consequently forced upon one that the
eoliths themselves were also made by pressure, and this eolithic mau could not well
luive obtained. We further have a great variety of natural phenomena resulting
in differential movements in superficial drifts, and as every cubic yard • >» soil
weighs about a tou anti n-hulf, this must take place under considerable pressure,
and is therefore capable of producing the eoliths. It is further to be noted
that tlio pressure-chipped eoliths are characteristic f»r those tlnfts which have
suffered most from these movements, an.l which contain nn nhundai.ee of suitable

material.


5. Tun Dkag ok Ick.

The ice quclioB In reference m the Plateau Unit of Kent hue already !«vn
considered, and there is no need to repeat the conclusions arrived at.

Then, ten he little doubt hut tlmt the drag ol ice, acting upon led. ot gravel,
would luive much the name effect iu chipping the edges ol Hints a. the phenomena
we have lust ben considering-previjcd always that tl.cn- he stumble atfend to
work upon. Hut it also appear, prahnhfe that, where we are dealing with l-uihh-r
claya, these effects weald no. happen re Irmptantly. Tim clay, it seems to me
would tend to term » cushion between the stones snd boulders embedded ... tt; and
might aUo he too yielding, crept whet, froren. to pres, them together with much
forte. Hut Unit these effects should happen occaaionully. if my theory of the ungm
of there eoliths he oorrect, I freely grant. And that this is so-that those edeots
do occur—l think oompletes the chain of evidence that wc nvtoiro.

Eoliths have been recorded from the glacial bed. of Norfolk Iff tin Rev.
Ashington Btdlen.* Irem the North-West of England. North Wole, and the We ol
Man by Mr. .1. Uotas,■ and freto Ireland by Mr. W. J. Know » ' In t ore dtstnefe
they ooottr U. rente orient it. bouMerehtya. hnt. as one would expect, they me mere

abundant In the glacinl gravels associated with thorn.

When I was cx.mi.dog a section ol boulder cloy near Ismk, m Nmdonhbto, «
few year. age. I found a giant eolith. Most of the bonhtem there are mere er lore
rounded, and eenld rag possibly he converted into eel,due Hna one. howeter. was
an exception. It was a piece ot igneous reek UJ inches long 7) tnd« Wide, rad
3 Inches thick, hot on ora, shk, and rounded on the other, and led the character,
notch. 4 inches acres. chipped ent of one edge. As >0 often “ *

notches in dint, this had no. Iren chipped out in one ptere. but presented a number
,.f facets. Of course, both the .mm, ilrelf. and aha, the notch ore on a larger scole
than Urn ordinary eolith, in dint, hut this is not surprising when one consolers the
magnitude of the forces that I conceive to luive made it

- Iter. R Aldington Bullen, 7W l^'rroc. Liotrpod

• Import, U.A.AJi., 1«*. P- 882 ; .Iso reported ». ^*‘9' ,80t »’ !»■ 80. / roe. iMtrf

OfoL Soe., vol. viii, 1899, pp 334-316 ; Bullen, op. <H-, p 209.

■ Kejtort, D.A.A.S., 1902. p. T6«.


358


S. H. Warren.— On Ou Origin of - Eolithic " Flint, by Natural

G. W ear and Tear ox the Surface ok the Ground.

1 rofessor T. McKenny Hughes 1 lias suggested that the stampeding of a herd
of oxen, or other similar occurrence, might chip many Hints in the eolithic style.
This suggestion has received remarkable confirmation from my experiments. As 1
li.iu* before stated ou more tluin one occasion, surprising imitations of eoliths can
be mode by placing a suitably shaped flint with its edge against the rounded l«mk
of another stone embedded in the ground, and then stamping upon it with
one’s bed.

That this a possible cause of their production is, in fact, demonstrable.

Of course it will be argued that it would not often happen that a suitably
sltaped flint would lie lying with its edge against another stone, and would then
be stamped upon by some heavy animal. But that it might happen, and would
happen, occasionally, no one can venture to deny. It might further be urged tluit
it would not be on every occasion when this did happen that an eolith would be
tin' result. This also is true. But on the other side it must be remembered thnt,
if this were going to happeu constuutly to every flint, there would soon be nothing
but eoliths left; except, of course, the unsuitably slu^ied stones. Besides this, it ia
not the only means—nor in any way the moat important umaus—by which 1
belie\ e them to have been formed in nature. So the infrequency of its occurrence
accords well with what wo require ns a subsidiary cause.

Some of the eoliths of Mr. Harrison, which have been fouud upon the surface,
come under this category. Their mineral condition shows that they have nothing
to do with the Plateau drift, and are, in some instances, clearly as lute as the
neolithic age, if not later.


Conclusion.


Ill conclusion, let mo repeat that we may have eoliths of any age. Those of tho
first class are lettered by concussion; those of the second class are chipped by
percussion; while the first series of the third class are also chipjied in a
somewhat similar manner, but generally by a lighter battering. These I take to

lie the work of water-abrasion in a swift stream, and they are characteristic of river
gravels of various ages.


The second series of the third class, or the “Plateau implements'' of
Su J. Prestwich, have chipped edges produced by pressure. These I take to be
ll.e work of what I Iu*ve called “soil-abrasion." which takes place during tho
foundering of drifts from various causes ; and these are characteristic of kill-drifts.
1 hey not only occur in those hill-drifts whieh-if one may venture to trust negative
evidence so far-appear to lie pre-pulaxilitluc. but also (as contemporary examples)
in those which yield pakeulithic implement* Tho age of such hill-drift* cannot be

T * ° f UlCir 0leVati0U aIone : ** “V be formed far

above the baae-levol of the valley-system.


* i>rxK ' (■’•unbridyt Phil. .Noc., v«.l. ix, 1800 , p. m.


S5t>


CavMt, apeeiaUy ty Foundtriiuj of Drift*.

It u u very important point that tlio pressure-chipped eoliths occur abundantly
in hill-drifts of paleolithic age, while they are of great rarity in the contemporary
valley gravels.

Tlius it is not the age, but the geological conditions under which a drift was
formed, tint influences the presence, and, whore present, the character, of the
eoliths it contains.

As subsidiary causes of the formation of eoliths, or those wluoh have operated
in certain special cases, we have wave-action, the drag of ico, anti wear and teuton
the surface of the ground.

I have spent sonio considerable! trouble in endeavouring to disprove tho
theory of eolithic mat!. I can only say that I would far rather have spent twice
the troublo in proving it, hod it a[>)>cared to me possible to do so.

Discussion.

Mr. J. Russell Laukby said tliat he congratulated the author on the manner
in which he hail marshalled his evidence, hut was unable to accept his conclusions
that these forms were merely the results of natural action. He wished to lay *I»eeinl
emphasis on the isolation of these forms in high-level gravels where there was no
true association with implements of paleolithic tyj>e. 1 ho association of palaeolithic
and eolithic types had !>een mooted, ami Professor Boyd Dawkins had, from this
supposed association, arrivod at the conclusion that eolitlis were merely natural
forms. 1 The implements to which Professor Boyd Dawkins alluded are those in
the Natural History Museum (Prestwich Collection); this evidence, however, came
from Ash, Shorehum, Kent, which is at a comparatively low level and where we
may reasonably exjicct such an association. If we require plateau evidenco, then
clearly we must go to tho liigltest part of the plateau; and of this supposed
association or eolithic and paleolithic forms, excavations at Terry’s Isxlgc
(7C3 feet 0.1).)gave no confirmatory evidence. It was true that well-authenticated
cases of the association of the two types must prove fetal to the authenticity of
eoliths, but up to the present tune we have not l»een confronted by snob evidence.
In all tho high-level gravels examined by tho speaker, he bad not observed any
true association of these types. He lielieved that the claim that these forms were
geologically separated from the valley gravel type was unanswerable and conclusive

as to tho artificial origin of eolithic forms.

Mr. F. J. Bennett said that he considered Mr. Warren rather lagged the
question by labelling various specimens as evidence of the direct action of the
wash-mill, the stream or torrent, and sea or wave-action, for ho noticed that one of
the wash-mill flints showed, to his mind, say, nine-tenths human and only say,
onc-tenth possible wash-mill action as seen in tho shattered edge; and also a
similar state of things in some other cases referred to streams, torrent, and sea-
action. He considered tluit many of tho chipped flints alleged to have Iweii made
by the wash-mill, were, in reality, human implements which had passed through
tho mill and been rolled. To prove how near he could get to what seemed possible

1 M* iw, April, 1903, 31.


360


S. H. Wahkkx .—On Ikr Origin of “ Eolith ic M Flints hy Natural

mill-work, he had chipped one edge of a mill Hint to imitate the possible milled
edge, and had so treated this as to make it very difficult to detect his work from
the jKwsible mill-work.

The Rev. H. G. O. K BMPALL said:—As against Mr. Warren’s argument that
the stones are linked and trimmed by lluviatile action. In the Knowle Farm Pit,
Savernake, there are paleolithic implements in every stage of condition, from
those which are quito sharp to those which are rolled almost into pebbles. On
the rolled implements it is evident that nature’s process lias been that of gradual
attrition, not the removal of chips or Hakes. This would seem to show that a
river of such force as that which once flowed ut Knowle does uot trim the edges
of stones. On a considerable number of the implements from this pit there is
“ eolithic ” chipping along one or both edges. A large series might be obtained,
for instance, bearing on one edge the said chipping, in the eolithic " bow-shaped
scraper ” form. On many implements these chips are plainly of the same age as
the Askings of the faces of the tools and were done at the saute time, and the
whole of the work, flaking and chipping, is often sharp and unwom. Either,
therefore, nature both linked the implement into shape and trimmed the edge, or
man was responsible for all the work. For (he implements have plainly not bceu
rolled or moved perceptibly since the Unking was done. If, then, man wns so
fond of this particular form of scraper, ami practised this chipping on paleolithic
implements, there is strong presumptive evidence that he was responsible for the
precisely similar forms of scrn]ier nnd nature of chipping which exists (but
without the fluking of the faces) on the eolithic tools. Again, os against any of
Mr. Warrens arguments for the performance of the trimming of the edges in
vurious ways by nature, 1 have un eolithic '* hollow mid scraper" from Hnckpen
Hill ut 875 feet, and a similar tool from the Knowle Farm I*iL These, and others
like them, exhibit, in the curve, parallel clippings such us I did not sec on any of
the stones that Mr. Warren passed round. If these hollow scrapers are the work
of nature, and if Mr. Warren's methods of experiments resemble nature's
methods, he ought to be able to produce similar tools. Mr. Kendall also drew
attention to some mimdiths from the Knowle I’iu

Mr. M. A ( . Hinton said that Mr. Itenjainiu Harrison had kindly lent him a
large series of eoliths to study, und many of these were now on the table to speak
for themselves. He would on the present occasion deal with only one type of
eolith ami w'ouhl coniine himself to one specimen which well illustrated that typo.
Tliis specimen had lately been obtained from a new pit at Terry's Lodge on tlie
summit of the esearpmout at a height of 770 feet O.D. The specimen showed nn
exceedingly delicate point with a hollow curve on either side. The flaking wns
coulinod to lliat portion of the edge which formed the point and curves. Both
111,111 ll,u ^ nature required an edge like that formed by the Hat anil convex sides os
a huais for the fluking operation. Nature might, hy the pressure linking described
*'•' Mr. Warren, produce n form similar to this by taking a fluke off from one side
and one from the other so as to leave a point lietwecn them. In this sj>ecinien
one was dealing, however, not with one or two flakes only, but with a great
number, and the only agent which the speaker could regard 'as (capable of doing
this was the hand of limn.


CoiiarA, mptcinlly Ay the Fonndertnij of Drift*.


361


Mr. A. S. KkKKABD waft of opinion that there waft a tendency in some
quarters to accept as human handiwork what was more probably the result of
natural causes, such as stream action or beach action, but the eoliths of the North
Downs conhl not be explained away by either of these causes or by pressure.
There were many gravels which fulfilled all the requirements or Mr. Warren’s
theory, and yet these yielded no examples of “ pressure " work. For instance, the
gravel on Litnpsfield Common, though yielding pataolithu, yielded no contemporary
” eoliths,” though a few derived examples occurred which from their condition
undoubtedly came from the chalk summit. It was possible to grade a series of
Hints from the perfectly natural form to the highly finished pohedltth.and where
the line was to Is.' drawn would always be a personal matter.

Mr. Reginald smith remarked that, as the Puy-Courny (Cautal) Hints
belonging to the Upper Miocene had been accepted us human work by authorities
conversant with the products of cemaut-tube. worked Hints in the mid-Plioceno
drift of the Kent plateau were possiblo but unproved. Reference had been made
to continual soil-movements even ou slightly inclined planes; one of the chief
objections to eoliths was that they were too numerous where they did occur and
wanting in adjacent areas where they should occur, but centuries of denudation
would naturally concentrate eoliths in the ancient river-valleys. Experiments in
pressure-flaking were of vast importance, but did not prove that nature was
resmtiftible for the form of every flint in the Plateau drift.

Rev R. AsiilMGTON Blu.es said that, of the dozens of striated ochreous
plateau-flints which he had submitted to Sir Joseph Prestwich (1890-6) for
inspection, the latter, after the most careful microscopical examination, could
discern on them no trace of glacial action. In answer to Mr. Warrens query.
•• Why eolithic man. if he existed, always chipped Hints in the way that nature
does ?" Mr. Bullen raised the difficulty of the squared Hints with straight edges.
He failed to see how natural pressure-chipping could produce a rectangular
implement with blunt edges, analogous to the blunt wooden sleeken, used, up to
a few years ago, by tanners to remove fat from skins. He also instanced the
persistency of the boring type of implement, analogous to the engineer's steel hit
of the present day. in which the chipping* on each sale of a point formed two
roughly parallel planes, presenting, on rotation, a continuously cutting edge. He
nlso exhibited specimens of round-ended scrapers, similar to neolithic forms, and
was of opinion that if the latter showed human workmanship, there was no reason
to exclude the earlier form. To his mind the above considerations contradicted the
author's statement that - none of the eolithic Hints approach deseed fluking.

Mr. A. J. Hogg said that lie was unable to agree with Mr. W arren s conception
of what constituted an eolith, and considered that the tern, should cover all
implements of the well-known red-brewn tint and not merely three early forms
which might almost be described as shupeless. This would allow the inclusion of
many ancestral tvpes of weapons and tools which, though not hitherto recognised,
occur in the eolithic period and continue, with slight modifications, down to

neolithic times. ,

Mr. Gbokoe Clinch writes: I listened to Mr. S. Ilazzledine M arren s paper

with much interest and pleasure, and much regret tliat I was unable, owing to


S. TI. WarKE.V. — On the Origin of “ Eoiitkir " Flint* hy Eat urn!


3G2


I lie lateness of the hour, to take part in the equally interesting discussion which
followed. I think Mr. Warren deserves great praise for the fairness and precision
with which he stated the case against " eolithic ” dints licing line to human agency.
1 may say that 1 have known Mr. Bcujamin Harrison, of Ightham. for about
twenty years. 1 have repeatedly inspected his collection of “ eoliths ” and have
heard his arguments, but I have never yet been convinced that the crushed and
battered edges of the Hints to which he points are necessarily of human or
artificial origin. One of the features of the “ eoliths * from the Ighthaiu district
which, 1 think, points to the crushing of Hints together in the gravel beds, as the
origin of whnt Mr. Harrison and others regard os artificial work, is that the
various fractures on the same Hint present differences of colour and ore obviously
of different periods. This is what one would expect if the Hints have l>ecn
sliaped in the beds by the forces arising from repented expansion and contraction
caused by great variations of temperature. Another point which, I think, is of
some inqiortance is tlmt “ eoliths" would have made such very jioor tools or
weiqious for any conceivable purpose. Mr. Harrison seems to admit this, aud
suggests that they were ** l tody-scrapers," used mainly for removing the hard akin
from the feet of huiuaii lieiugs. 1 find it very difficult to lielieve tlmt any man
with sullicient intelligence to shape Hint by means of chipping or crushing should
have gone on so long producing tools of such a low type and, one would imagine,
so much inferior in every way to natural objects of bone, born, or wood, which
must haw been easily procurable. I think Mr. Wuitcii’h experiments give
a complete and satisfactory explanation of the kind of crushing forces hy which
the so-called “ eoliths ** were shaped.

The Author replied to the objections of each sjieakcr iu detail, hut, as several
of the speakers raised similar objections, the arguments muy be summarised as
follows. He said that if it lie true tlmt pukeoliths and eoliths ure not associated
together os contemporary relics in the Plateau drift of Kent, it is no less true
that they are so associated elsewhere. 1 Witli reference to the specimens to which
attention had been drawn by several of the speakers, ns showing parallel linking
or other features which, it was alleged, amid not have been produced hy fortuitous
pressure, the author luul not the slightest hesitation iu saying that, however
remarkable they might appear at first sight, it was yet demonstrable that they
could lie so produced. A study of tho imitation eoliths made experimentally
proved this. In uuswer to Mr. Bennett, nothing was placed on the table as the
work nl the wash-mill or of the sen which was not such. The condition of tho
Hint alone proved tliat the fractures were quite modern.* The general absence of

1 This fact wan freely admitted l>y several of the speakers. Tluit jml.eolith* nhimld Us
nlx-cnt from many high-level drift* is not surprising, but this in no way proves the contention
of Mr. Istrkby, that such chipped (lint* tut are present must owe their chipping to human
agency.

' I did not. undent land Mr. Ik-unctt’s mraning on the evening of the meeting with
reference to his having succeeded in imitating the effects of the wash-mill. Tliat this can lie
done, by drill*-rale intention anti witli the exercise of due care, only proves the skill of tho
worker in being able to mask the usual evidences of designed flaking. It does not prove that
'vlmt can shown to be the normal effect of fortuitous canoes to-day must have been the
product of intelligent design on the part of man iu past geological |«rk*U.—S. H. W.


Causa, especially by the Foundering of Drift*.


363


pressure-chip)>od oolilta Iron, river gntvds referred ro by ^

the author stated to ho strictly in accordance wtth hnt theory W .th jtorenoa

t» » remark by Mr. Kermard that it would always bo Kp|ifi< ,

where the line between “ nature am ftr . mfi*v** tn determine

that it was apart of the work of Silted Ural th» lino could

where tins line was to be drawn. It t 1 further admitted

not bo drawn » a. I» incln.lo all the «ml ho

that no definite lino could bo drawn ur the rnl< • » . ■ u,o

drawn «l»»o the eoliths alUrgothor. » reply to Mr. "0*6
conception of an eolith that ho hrul dealt wrth was not Mo, ho
other people's couooptions, as univeraally nndcBtood ,n thra cmrotry and

Continent of Europe.

Detention of Plate XX YI.

Err.cn, or Fe.TCmw. P»ac™»»» *•» >•>“»* “ ™ OOTB " " rL '”

„ wwt -, fmme . Outer cruet of the flint with -lightly chipped edge*.

“ rf “" j ,h -

implement. „ Sm*L Swanaoombe, ehowiug a pnwaiw-dtlpp*d

r , s . » *. - *•

Fig. 3a.—Side view of the same. ... •_ p-, r . o 3 ntu l U reprcee tiled in

tf j._T} ie later prcwnire-chippuig in Fig*- ** . , *

«ui. aalj. widnad “» ' 7 . wi^ Jlh-ruiU.

Fig. 4 . Inner face of charnctenKtic lhv 0 ( other Aakea.

Fig. 4a.—Outer ftuw of the mmu, allowing f . ^ t b e “ Foreet Bed “of Cromer.

Fig. 6 .-A eimiUr example, but of ^rtht.ugh’not always, imperfectly derdoped in

SK2 S’-m ‘a-Kw 0 - a

Fig. So.—Outer face of the same -bowing to** o W(U . b on either aide. There

Fig. a.-Eulitb from the Chalk 1 latesu t h/notch oo the teft-hand side. Thi*

». and 9 , and in aonw of the slighU r note « ^ pro „ un! again ,t

Fig. 7.—Experimental imitation of eolit i t. t it ^ m P ■ , j^mte on DecetnW-r 19,

another atone, at the meeting of ^ ^ famtanrea, the flaking b

1905, when the paper wna read. In thia, aa m aa

at too high an angle to be fully »cen m the figure.

at too mgn an a. e iW-wheel flaking on a new rood.

Fig. A—Another example of the aimple note .

Kg. l-Ea»|h with thrv* oatt- I ■>“ «•"-*»•? jj-*, „ tl« rd«w Ctet-

Fig. ia—Thia ahowa two notches mectiug at a jtoiu ,
wheel flaking. _

Fig. II.—Similar, hut larger example. Cart-wheel flaking.

Fig. I*.—Type with longer point. Cart-wheel flaking. ^ R

Von. XXXV.


.5 .S «


364 S. H. WarrEN.— On the Origin of" Eolithie * Flints by Natural Causes, etc.


Fig. 13. — A small example* of the double-notch with point; each notch in this specimen was
made by a single stamp with the heel, the flint being placed on the ground with
its edge upon another atone.*

Fig. 14.—Neolithic flake from Kent with pressure-chipped edges meeting at a point This
edge-chipping does not bear the impress of designed flaking ; neither could it bo
aflirmed to ho duo to artificial wear.

Fig. 15.—Outer face of a flake from the Paleolithic drift on High Down, in the Iale of Wight
The inner face is striated, while the outer face shows several pressure-clipped
notches at different parts of the edge. Some of the striations can be seen passing
off at the edge just where the notches are ; there can be no reasonable doubt but
that the force which made the striations on the surface also made the notches at
the edge.

Figs. 1C and 16a.—Drill-like form, with reverse chipping ; that is with two notches, made from
either ride, and meeting at a point Each notch was made by a single stamp with
the heel against another stone.

Fig. 17. — Imitation eolith with parallel edge-chipping, made, by pressure, at the meeting when
the paper was read.

Fig. 17a. — Side view of the same.

Fig. 18.—An example of a different type. Cart-wheel flaking on a new ronit.

Fig. 10 . — Ochreous palaeolithic flake from the High Down drift in the Isle of Wight, showing
the striations on its surface.

Fig. 20.—This shows the striations on the surface of one square inch of another palaeolithic flake
from the name hill-drift. Natural size.

All the figures, except Fig. 20, are one-half natural size.


XoU .—In my article in lf<m (1905, 103) I gave references to previous suggestions that had
been made, jarticularly liy Mr. Wm. Cnnnington and Professor T. McKenny Hughes, upon
the accidental chipping of flint I have now come across, in the Peru* d« Vfacet* tFAnlhrop, d*
Parit (tome xi; 1901 ; p. 151), a short reference to sonic experiments made by M. L. Capitau,
tint it is unfortunately too late to introduce any reference to them in the body of the paper.


1 By pressure against two pebbles, instead of against one, the same effect may l>e produced
equally well at a single operation.


Journal of (U Anthropological IntfUnlt,


VoL XXXV. 1605, Platt XXVI.


BY NATURAL CAUSES.


THE 0R101K OK “ K0LITII1C ” FLINTS
