Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Internet Archive <https://archive.org/details/warrenreportrepo00unit>. Public domain.

The  Official  Report  on  the

Assassination  or
President  John  E  Kennedy


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010


http://www.archive.org/details/warrenreportrepoOOunit


THE  WARREN  REPORT


***•*,


REPORT  OF
THE  PRESroENT'S  COMMISSION  ON  THE

ASSASSINATION  OF

President  John  F.  Kennedy


PUBLISHED BY

THE  ASSOCIATED  PRESS

PRINTED IN  THE U.S.A. BY

Western  Printing  and  Lithographing  Company


PRESroENT'S  COMMISSION  ON  THE
ASSASSINATION  OF  PRESIDENT  KENNEDY


Chief  Justice  Earl  Warren,  Chairman

Senator  Richard  B.  Russell  Representative  Gerald  R.  Ford

Senator  John  Sherman  Cooper  Mr.  Allen  W.  Dulles

Representative  Hale  Boggs  Mr.  John  J.  McCloy


J.  Lee  Rankin,  General  Counsel

Assistant  Counsel

Francis  W.  H.  Adams  Albert  E.  Jenner,  Jr.

Joseph  A.  Ball  Wesley  J.  Liebeler

David  W.  Belin  Norman  Redlich

William  T.  Coleman,  Jr.  W.  David  Slawson

Melvin  Aron  Eisenberg  Arlen  Specter

Burt  W.  Griffin  Samuel  A.  Stem

Leon  D.  Hubert,  Jr.  Howard  P.  Willens*


Staff  Members

Phillip  Barson
Edward  A.  Conroy
John  Hart  Ely
Alfred  Goldberg
Murray  J.  Laulicht
Arthur  Marmor
Richard  M.  Mosk
John  J.  O'Brien
Stuart  Pollak
Alfredda  Scobey
Charles  N.  Shaffer,  Jr.
Lloyd  L.  Weinreb


•  Mr.  Willens  also  acted  as  liaison  between  the  Commission  and  the  Department  of  Justice.

iii


AN  INTRODUCTORY  NOTE


The  shock  and  the  grief  and  the  sense  of  national  disarray  were  beyond  measure.  On
a  sunny  Friday  in  Dallas,  the  young,  attractive  President  of  the  United  States  was  shot
and  killed,  John  Fitzgerald  Kennedy,  who  seemed  only  then  to  be  reaching  the  crest  of
his  talents  as  leader  of  his  country  and  the  Western  world,  was  now  dead.  And  two  days
later,  even  as  Americans  were  beginning  to  regain  a  semblance  of  national  dignity  in  the
majesty  of  their  grief,  the  accused  assassin  was  himself  shot  and  killed.  Lee  Harvey
Oswald  was  now  dead,  his  secrets  silenced.  Throughout  the  country  and  diverse  parts  of
the  world,  friendly  or  hostile,  long  civilized  or  newly  emerged,  the  tears  and  the  incre-
dulity spread.

Four  days  we  watched,  from  that  searing  Friday  to  that  endless  Monday,  we  watched
on  television  and  were  numbed  by  what  we  saw.  Who  can  say  when  the  tears  ended?
Who  can  say  the  last  time  he  awoke  and,  somewhere  between  fuU  sleep  and  full  wake-
fulness, there  lingered  the  hope,  wished  so  hard  it  felt  real,  that  none  of  this  had  happened?

While  the  grief  was  slow  to  ebb,  the  incoming  tide  brought  other  feelings.  There  was
now,  in  the  minds  of  many,  the  suspicion  that  there  must  be  more  to  the  Dallas  story.
Perhaps  it  was  because  the  human  mind  demanded  a  symmetry  of  cause  and  effect.  Per-
haps it  was  because  the  mind  refused  to  believe  that  the  President  of  the  United  States,
an  elegant  symbol  of  the  most  powerful  and,  we  thought,  the  most  civilized  nation  on
earth,  could  so  simply  be  shot  in  the  Ught  of  day  and  his  head  exploded  on  one  of  our
streets.  Surely  the  motive,  if  not  the  Idller,  somehow  had  to  fit  the  size  of  the  victim,  and
there  must  have  been  a  conspiracy  relative  to  the  world  of  Armageddon  in  which  he
lived.  A  gnat  simply  does  not  kill  a  lion.

The  questions  tumbled  forward.  Was  John  Kennedy  actually  murdered  by  Lee  Harvey
Oswald  and,  if  so,  had  Oswald  acted  alone?  Had  Jack  Ruby  known  Oswald?  Were  they
somehow  knowing  or  unknowing  parts  of  the  same  conspiracy,  one  to  kill  the  President
and  the  other  to  kill  and  silence  the  Idller?  Were  we  to  believe  in  an  amazing  coincidence
of  derangement:  that  a  sullen  little  man,  for  his  own  twisted  reasons,  could  kill  a  Presi-
dent and  then,  while  in  police  custody,  himself  be  killed  by  another  little  man  with  his
twisted  reasons?  Did  one  unbalanced  mind  rob  us  of  a  President  and  another,  of  his
murderer?  And  if  we  say  that  and  if  we  see  that,  are  we  then  close  to  sensing  that  the
sick  of  the  world,  though  imknown  to  each  other,  may  form  as  dangerous  a  conspiracy  as
any  political  plot  from  the  left  or  from  the  right?

But  this  last  question  goes  beyond  the  Commission's  immediate  purpose.  It  was  the
other  questions  which  the  Warren  Commission  was  called  upon  to  answer.  The  Com-
mission was  appointed  by  President  Johnson.  It  was  headed  by  the  Chief  Justice  of  the
United  States,  composed  of  distinguished  citizens,  and  had  at  its  disposal  all  the  investiga-
tive resources  of  a  proud  government.  Here,  then,  are  its  answers.  Will  history  be  fully
content  with  the  answers?  History  is  rarely  content  in  these  matters.


Saul  Pett

Special  Correspondent

The  Associated  Press


FOREWORD


PRESiDE>rr  Lyndon  B.  Johnson,  by  Executive  Order  No.  11130  dated  November  29,
1963,  created  this  Commission  to  investigate  the  assassination  on  November  22,  1963,
of  John  Fitzgerald  Kennedy,  the  35th  President  of  the  United  States.  The  President
directed  the  Commission  to  evaluate  all  the  facts  and  circumstances  surrounding  the
assassination  and  the  subsequent  killing  of  the  alleged  assassin  and  to  report  its  findings
and  conclusions  to  him.

The  subject  of  the  Commission's  inquiry  was  a  chain  of  events  which  saddened  and
shocked  the  people  of  the  United  States  and  of  the  world.  The  assassination  of  President
Kennedy  and  the  simultaneous  wounding  of  John  B.  Connally,  Jr.,  Governor  of  Texas,
had  been  followed  within  an  hour  by  the  slaying  of  Patrobnan  J.  D.  Tippit  of  the  Dallas
PoUce  Department.  In  the  United  States  and  abroad,  these  events  evoked  universal  de-
mands for  an  explanation.

Immediately  after  the  assassination.  State  and  local  oflBcials  in  DaUas  devoted  their
resources  to  the  apprehension  of  the  assassin.  The  U.S.  Secret  Service,  which  is  responsi-
ble for  the  protection  of  the  President,  and  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  began  an
investigation  at  the  direction  of  President  Johnson.  Within  35  minutes  of  the  killing  of
Patrolman  Tippit,  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was  arrested  by  the  Dallas  police  as  a  suspect  in
that  crime.  Based  on  evidence  provided  by  Federal,  State,  and  local  agencies,  the  State  of
Texas  arraigned  Oswald  within  12  hours  of  his  arrest,  charging  him  with  the  assassination
of  President  Kennedy  and  the  murder  of  Patrohnan  Tippit.  On  November  24,  1963,  less
than  48  hours  after  his  arrest,  Oswald  was  fatally  shot  in  the  basement  of  the  Dallas  Police
Department  by  Jack  Ruby,  a  Dallas  nightclub  owner.  This  shooting  took  place  in  full
view  of  a  national  television  audience.

The  events  of  these  2  days  were  witnessed  with  shock  and  disbelief  by  a  Nation  griev-
ing the  loss  of  its  yoimg  leader.  Throughout  the  world,  reports  on  these  events  were
disseminated  in  massive  detail.  Theories  and  speculations  mounted  regarding  the  assassina-
tion. In  many  instances,  the  intense  public  demand  for  facts  was  met  by  partial  and
frequently  conflicting  reports  from  Dallas  and  elsewhere.  After  Oswald's  arrest  and  his
denial  of  all  guilt,  public  attention  focused  both  on  the  extent  of  the  evidence  against
him  and  the  possibility  of  a  conspiracy,  domestic  or  foreign.  His  subsequent  death
heightened  public  interest  and  stimiilated  additional  suspicions  and  rumors.


THE  COMMISSION  AND  ITS  POWERS

After  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was  shot  by  Jack  Ruby,  it  was  no  longer  possible  to  arrive
at  the  complete  story  of  the  assassiQation  through  normal  judicial  procedures  during  a
trial  of  the  alleged  assassin.  Alternative  means  for  instituting  a  complete  investigation
were  widely  discussed.  Federal  and  State  officials  conferred  on  the  possibility  of  initiating
a  court  of  inquiry  before  a  State  magistrate  m  Texas.  An  investigation  by  the  grand  jury
of  Dallas  Coimty  also  was  considered.  As  speculation  about  the  existence  of  a  foreign  or
domestic  conspiracy  became  widespread,  committees  in  both  Houses  of  Congress  weighed
the  desirability  of  congressional  hearings  to  discover  all  the  facts  relating  to  the
assassination.

By  his  order  of  November  29  establishing  the  Commission,  President  Johnson  sought
to  avoid  parallel  investigations  and  to  concentrate  factfinding  in  a  body  having  the
broadest  national  mandate.  As  Chairman  of  the  Commission,  President  Johnson  selected
Earl  Warren,  Chief  Justice  of  the  United  States,  former  Governor  and  attorney  general
of  the  State  of  California.  From  the  U.S.  Senate,  he  chose  Richard  B.  Russell,  Democratic
Senator  from  Georgia  and  chairman  of  the  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee,  former

vii


Governor  of,  and  county  attorney  in,  the  State  of  Georgia,  and  John  Sherman  Cooper,
Republican  Senator  from  Kentucky,  former  coimty  and  circuit  judge,  State  of  Ken-
tucky, and  U.S.  Ambassador  to  India.  Two  members  of  the  Commission  were  drawn  from
the  U.S.  House  of  Representatives:  Hale  Boggs,  Democratic  U.S.  Representative  from
Louisiana  and  majority  whip,  and  Gerald  R.  Ford,  Republican,  U.S.  Representative  from
Michigan  and  chairman  of  the  House  Republican  Conference.  From  private  life,  Presi-
dent Johnson  selected  two  lawyers  by  profession,  both  of  whom  have  served  in  the  admini-
strations of  Democratic  and  Republican  Presidents:  Allen  W.  Dulles,  former  Director  of
Central  Intelligence,  and  John  J.  McCloy,  former  President  of  the  International  Bank
for  Reconstruction  and  Development,  former  U.S.  High  Commissioner  for  Germany,
and  during  World  War  II,  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  War.

From  its  first  meeting  on  December  5,  1963,  the  Commission  viewed  the  Executive
order  as  an  unequivocal  Presidential  mandate  to  conduct  a  thorough  and  independent
investigation.  Because  of  the  numerous  rumors  and  theories,  the  Commission  concluded
that  the  pubUc  interest  in  insuring  that  the  truth  was  ascertained  could  not  be  met  by
merely  accepting  the  reports  or  the  analyses  of  Federal  or  State  agencies.  Not  only  were
the  premises  and  conclusions  of  those  reports  critically  reassessed,  but  all  assertions  or
rumors  relating  to  a  possible  conspiracy,  or  the  complicity  of  others  than  Oswald,  which
have  come  to  the  attention  of  the  Commission,  were  investigated.

On  December  13,  1963,  Congress  enacted  Senate  Joint  Resolution  137  (Public  Law
88-202)  empowering  the  Commission  to  issue  subpoenas  requiring  the  testimony  of
witnesses  and  the  production  of  evidence  relating  to  any  matter  under  its  investigation.
In  addition,  the  resolution  authorized  the  Commission  to  compel  testimony  from  wit-
nesses claiming  the  privilege  against  self-incrimination  under  the  fifth  amendment  to  the
U.S.  Constitution  by  providing  for  the  grant  of  immunity  to  persons  testifying  imder
such  compulsion.  Immunity  under  these  provisions  was  not  granted  to  any  witness  during
the  Commission's  investigation.

The  Commission  took  steps  immediately  to  obtain  the  necessary  staff  to  fulfill  its
assignment.  J.  Lee  Rankin,  former  Solicitor  General  of  the  United  States,  was  sworn  in
as  general  counsel  for  the  Commission  on  December  16,  1963.  Additional  members  of
the  legal  staflf  were  selected  during  the  next  few  weeks.  The  Commission  has  been  aided
by  14  assistant  counsel  with  high  professional  qualifications,  selected  by  it  from  widely
separated  parts  of  the  United  States.  This  staflf  undertook  the  work  of  the  Commission
with  a  wealth  of  legal  and  investigative  experience  and  a  total  dedication  to  the  determi-
nation of  the  truth.  The  Commission  has  been  assisted  also  by  highly  qualified  personnel
from  several  Federal  agencies,  assigned  to  the  Commission  at  its  request.  This  group
included  lawyers  from  the  Department  of  Justice,  agents  of  the  Internal  Revenue
Service,  a  senior  historian  from  the  Department  of  Defense,  an  editor  from  the  Depart-
ment of  State,  and  secretarial  and  administrative  staflf  supplied  by  the  General  Services
Administration  and  other  agencies.

In  addition  to  the  assistance  afforded  by  Federal  agencies,  the  Commission  throughout
its  inquiry  had  the  cooperation  of  representatives  of  the  city  of  Dallas  and  the  State  of
Texas.  The  attorney  general  of  Texas,  Waggoner  Carr,  aided  by  two  distinguished  lawyers
of  that  State,  Robert  G.  Storey  of  Dallas,  retired  dean  of  the  Southern  Methodist  Uni-
versity Law  School  and  former  president  of  the  American  Bar  Association,  and  Leon
Jaworski  of  Houston,  former  president  of  the  Texas  State  Bar  Association,  has  been  fully
informed  at  all  times  as  to  the  progress  of  the  investigation,  and  has  advanced  such
suggestions  as  he  and  his  special  assistants  considered  helpful  to  the  accomplishment  of
the  Commission's  assignment.  Attorney  General  Carr  has  promptly  supplied  the  Com-
mission with  pertinent  information  possessed  by  Texas  oflficials.  Dallas  oflBcials,  particularly
those  from  the  police  department,  have  fully  complied  with  all  requests  made  by  the
Commission.


THE  INVESTIGATION

During  December  and  early  January  the  Commission  received  an  increasing  volume  of
reports  from  Federal  and  State  investigative  agencies.  Of  principal  importance  was  the
five-volvime  report  of  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation,  submitted  on  December  9,
1963,  which  summarized  the  results  of  the  investigation  conducted  by  the  Bureau  im-
mediately after  the  assassination.  After  reviewing  this  report,  the  Commission  requested

viii


the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  to  furnish  the  underlying  investigative  materials
relied  upon  in  the  summary  report.  The  first  investigative  reports  submitted  in  response
to  this  request  were  delivered  to  the  Commission  on  December  20,  1963.  On  December
18,  the  Secret  Service  submitted  a  detailed  report  on  security  precautions  taken  before
President  Kennedy's  trip  to  Texas  and  a  summary  of  the  events  of  November  22,  as
witnessed  by  Secret  Service  agents.  A  few  days  later  the  Department  of  State  submitted
a  report  relating  to  Oswald's  defection  to  the  Soviet  Union  in  1959,  and  his  return  to  the
United  States  in  1962.  On  January  7  and  11,  1964,  the  attorney  general  of  Texas  sub-
mitted an  extensive  set  of  investigative  materials,  largely  Dallas  police  reports,  on  the
assassination  of  President  Kennedy  and  the  killing  of  Oswald.

As  these  investigative  reports  were  received,  the  staff  began  analyzing  and  summarizing
them.  The  members  of  the  legal  staff,  divided  into  teams,  proceeded  to  organize  the  facts
revealed  by  these  investigations,  determine  the  issues,  sort  out  the  unresolved  problems,
and  recommend  additional  investigation  by  the  Commission.  Simultaneously,  to  insure
that  no  relevant  information  would  be  overlooked,  the  Commission  directed  requests  to
the  10  major  departments  of  the  Federal  Government,  14  of  its  independent  agencies  or
commissions,  and  4  congressional  committees  for  all  information  relating  to  the  assassina-
tion or  the  background  and  activities  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  and  Jack  Ruby.

After  reviewing  the  accumulating  materials,  the  Commission  directed  numerous  addi-
tional requests  to  Federal  and  State  investigative  agencies.  The  Federal  Bureau  of  Investi-
gation and  the  Secret  Service  executed  the  detailed  requests  for  statements  of  witnesses
and  examinations  of  physical  evidence  with  dispatch  and  thoroughness.  All  these  reports
were  reviewed  and  analyzed  by  the  Commission.  Additional  investigative  requests,  where
appropriate,  were  handled  by  Internal  Revenue  Service,  Department  of  State,  and  the
military  intelligence  agencies  with  comparable  skill.  Investigative  analyses  of  particular
significance  and  sensitivity  in  the  foreign  areas  were  contributed  by  the  Central  Intelli-
gence Agency.  On  occasion  the  Commission  used  independent  experts  from  State  and
city  governments  to  supplement  or  verify  information.  During  the  investigation  the  Com-
mission on  several  occasions  visited  the  scene  of  the  assassination  and  other  places  in  the
Dallas  area  pertinent  to  the  inquiry.

The  scope  and  detail  of  the  investigative  effort  by  the  Federal  and  State  agencies  are
suggested  in  part  by  statistics  from  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  and  the  Secret
Service.  Immediately  after  the  assassination  more  than  80  additional  FBI  personnel  were
transferred  to  the  Dallas  office  on  a  temporary  basis  to  assist  in  the  investigation.  Begin-
ning November  22,  1963,  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  conducted  approximately
25,000  interviews  and  reinterviews  of  persons  having  information  of  possible  relevance
to  the  investigation  and  by  September  11,  1964,  submitted  over  2,300  reports  totaling
approximately  25,400  pages  to  the  Commission.  During  the  same  period  the  Secret
Service  conducted  approximately  1,550  interviews  and  submitted  800  reports  totaling
some  4,600  pages.

Because  of  the  diligence,  cooperation,  and  facilities  of  Federal  investigative  agencies,  it
was  unnecessary  for  the  Commission  to  employ  investigators  other  than  the  members
of  the  Commission's  legal  staff.  The  Commission  recognized,  however,  that  special  meas-
ures were  required  whenever  the  facts  or  rumors  called  for  an  appraisal  of  the  acts  of  the
agencies  themselves.  The  staff  reviewed  in  detail  the  actions  of  several  Federal  agencies,
particularly  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation,  the  Secret  Service,  the  Central  Intelligence
Agency,  and  the  Department  of  State.  Initially  the  Commission  requested  the  agencies  to
furnish  all  their  reports  relating  to  the  assassination  and  their  relationships  with  Oswald  or
Ruby.  On  the  basis  of  these  reports,  the  Commission  submitted  specific  questions  to  the
agency  involved.  Members  of  the  staff  followed  up  the  answers  by  reviewing  the  relevant
files  of  each  agency  for  additional  information.  In  some  instances,  members  of  the  Com-
mission also  reviewed  the  files  in  person.  Finally,  the  responsible  officials  of  these  agencies
were  called  to  testify  under  oath.  Dean  Rusk,  Secretary  of  State;  C.  Douglas  Dillon,  Secre-
tary of  the  Treasury;  John  A.  McCone,  Director  of  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency;
J.  Edgar  Hoover,  Director  of  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation;  and  James  J.  Rowley,
Chief  of  the  Secret  Service,  appeared  as  witnesses  and  testified  fully  regarding  their
agencies'  participation  in  the  matters  under  scrutiny  by  the  Commission.

COMMISSION  HEARINGS

In  addition  to  the  information  resulting  from  these  investigations,  the  Commission  has

ix


relied  primarily  on  the  facts  disclosed  by  the  sworn  testimony  of  the  principal  witnesses
to  the  assassination  and  related  events.  Beginning  on  February  3,  1964,  the  Commission
and  its  staff  has  taken  the  testimony  of  552  witnesses.  Of  this  number,  94  appeared
before  members  of  the  Commission;  395  were  questioned  by  members  of  the  Commission's
legal  staff;  61  suppUed  sworn  affidavits;  and  2  gave  statements.  Under  Commission
procedures,  all  witnesses  were  advised  that  they  had  the  right  to  the  presence  and  the
advice  of  their  lawyer  during  the  interrogation,  with  the  corollary  rights  to  raise  objections
to  any  questions  asked,  to  make  any  clarifying  statement  on  the  record  after  the  interroga-
tion, and  to  purchase  a  copy  of  their  testimony.

Commission  hearings  were  closed  to  the  public  unless  the  witness  appearing  before
the  Commission  requested  an  open  hearing.  Under  these  procedures,  testimony  of  one
witness  was  taken  in  a  public  hearing  on  two  occasions.  No  other  witness  requested  a
public  hearing.  The  Commission  concluded  that  the  premature  publication  by  it  of  testi-
mony regarding  the  assassination  or  the  subsequent  killing  of  Oswald  might  interfere  with
Ruby's  rights  to  a  fair  and  impartial  trial  on  the  charges  filed  against  him  by  the  State
of  Texas.  The  Commission  also  recognized  that  testimony  would  be  presented  before  it
which  would  be  inadmissible  in  judicial  proceedings  and  might  prejudice  innocent  parties
if  made  public  out  of  context.  In  addition  to  the  witnesses  who  appeared  before  the
Commission,  numerous  others  provided  sworn  depositions,  affidavits,  and  statements
upon  which  the  Commission  has  relied.  Since  this  testimony,  as  well  as  that  taken  before
the  Commission,  could  not  always  be  taken  in  logical  sequence,  the  Commission  con-
cluded that  partial  publication  of  testimony  as  the  investigation  progressed  was  impracti-
cal and  could  be  misleading.


THE  COMMISSION'S  FUNCTION

The  Commission's  most  difficult  assignments  have  been  to  uncover  all  the  facts  con-
cerning the  assassination  of  President  Kennedy  and  to  determine  if  it  was  in  any  way
directed  or  encouraged  by  unknown  persons  at  home  or  abroad.  In  this  process,  its  objec-
tive has  been  to  identify  the  person  or  persons  responsible  for  both  the  assassination  of
President  Kennedy  and  the  killing  of  Oswald  through  an  examination  of  the  evidence.
The  task  has  demanded  unceasing  appraisal  of  the  evidence  by  the  individual  members  of
the  Commission  in  their  effort  to  discover  the  whole  truth.

The  procedures  followed  by  the  Commission  in  developing  and  assessing  evidence
necessarily  differed  from  those  of  a  court  conducting  a  criminal  trial  of  a  defendant
present  before  it,  since  under  our  system  there  is  no  provision  for  a  posthumous  trial.  If
Oswald  had  lived  he  could  have  had  a  trial  by  American  standards  of  justice  where  he
would  have  been  able  to  exercise  his  fuU  rights  under  the  law.  A  judge  and  jury  would
have  presumed  him  innocent  until  proven  guilty  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt.  He  might
have  furnished  information  which  could  have  affected  the  course  of  his  trial.  He  could
have  participated  in  and  guided  his  defense.  There  could  have  been  an  examination  to
determine  whether  he  was  sane  under  prevailing  legal  standards.  All  witnesses,  including
possibly  the  defendant,  could  have  been  subjected  to  searching  examination  under  the
adversary  system  of  American  trials.

The  Commission  has  functioned  neither  as  a  court  presiding  over  an  adversary  pro-
ceeding nor  as  a  prosecutor  determined  to  prove  a  case,  but  as  a  factfinding  agency
committed  to  the  ascertainment  of  the  truth.  In  the  course  of  the  investigation  of  the
facts  and  rumors  surrounding  these  matters,  it  was  necessary  to  explore  hearsay  and
other  sources  of  information  not  admissible  in  a  court  proceeding  obtained  from  persons
who  saw  or  heard  and  others  in  a  position  to  observe  what  occurred.  In  fairness  to  the
alleged  assassin  and  his  family,  the  Commission  on  February  25,  1964,  requested  Walter
E.  Craig,  president  of  the  American  Bar  Association,  to  participate  in  the  investigation
and  to  advise  the  Commission  whether  in  his  opinion  the  proceedings  conformed  to  the
basic  principles  of  American  justice.  Mr.  Craig  accepted  this  assignment  and  participated
fully  and  without  limitation.  He  attended  Commission  hearings  in  person  or  through  his
appointed  assistants.  All  working  papers,  reports,  and  other  data  in  Commission  files
were  made  available,  and  Mr.  Craig  and  his  associates  were  given  the  opportunity  to
cross-examine  witnesses,  to  recall  any  witness  heard  prior  to  his  appointment,  and  to
suggest  witnesses  whose  testimony  they  would  like  to  have  the  Commission  hear.  This
procedure  was  agreeable  to  counsel  for  Oswald's  widow.


THE  COMMISSION'S  REPORT

In  this  report  the  Commission  submits  the  results  of  its  investigation.  Each  member
of  the  Commission  has  given  careful  consideration  to  the  entire  report  and  concurs  in
its  findings  and  conclusions.  The  report  consists  of  an  initial  chapter  summarizing  the
Commission's  basic  findings  and  conclusions,  followed  by  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  facts
and  the  issues  raised  by  the  events  of  November  22,  1963,  and  the  2  following  days.
Individual  chapters  consider  the  trip  to  Dallas,  the  shots  from  the  Texas  School  Book
Depository,  the  identity  of  the  assassin,  the  killing  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  the  possibility
of  a  conspiracy,  Oswald's  background  and  possible  motive,  and  arrangements  for  the
protection  of  the  President.  In  these  chapters,  rather  than  rely  on  cross  references,  the
Commission  on  occasion  has  repeated  certain  testimony  in  order  that  the  reader  might
have  the  necessary  information  before  him  while  examining  the  conclusions  of  the  Com-
mission on  each  important  issue.

With  this  report  the  Connmission  is  submitting  the  complete  testimony  of  all  the  wit-
nesses who  appeared  before  the  Commission  or  gave  sworn  depositions  or  affidavits,  the
accompanying  documentary  exhibits,  and  other  investigative  materials  which  are  relied
upon  in  this  report.  The  Commission  is  committing  all  of  its  reports  and  working  papers
to  the  National  Archives,  where  they  can  be  permanently  preserved  under  the  rules  and
regulations  of  the  National  Archives  and  applicable  Federal  law.


XI


CONTENTS


•  ••


Members  of  the  Commission  ^

An  Introductory  Note  "v

Foreword  "vu

CHAPTER  I.  Summary  and  Conclusions  1

CHAPTER  n.  The  Assassination  15

CHAPTER  m.  The  Shots  From  The  Texas  School  Book

Depository  28

CHAPTER  rv.  The  Assassm  47

CHAPTER  V.  Detention  and  Death  of  Oswald  81

CHAPTER  VI.  Investigation  of  Possible  Conspiracy  99

CHAPTER  Vn.  Lee  Harvey  Oswald:  Background  and

Possible  Motives  160

CHAPTER  Vm.  The  Protection  of  the  President 185

APPENDIX  I.  Executive  Order  No.  11130  208

APPENDIX  n.  White  House  Release  208

APPENDIX  m.  Senate  Joint  Resolution  137  208

APPENDIX  rv.  Biographical  Information  and  Acknowledgments  208

APPENDIX  V.  List  of  Witnesses  209

APPENDIX  VI.  Commission  Procedures  for  the  Taking  of  Testimony  217

APPENDIX  vn.  A  Brief  History  of  Presidential  Protection 217

APPENDIX  vm.  Medical  Reports  from  Doctors  at  Parkland

Memorial  Hospital,  Dallas,  Tex 217

APPENDIX  DC.  Autopsy  Report  and  Supplemental  Report 225

APPENDIX  X.  Expert  Testimony  230

APPENDIX  XI.  Reports  Relating  to  the  Interrogation  of  Lee  Harvey

Oswald  at  the  Dallas  Police  Department  253

APPENDIX  Xn.  Speculations  and  Rumors  270

APPENDIX  Xin.  Biography  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  287

APPENDIX  XIV.  Analysis  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald's  Finances  from

June  13,  1962,  through  November  22,  1963  326

APPENDIX  XV.  Transactions  between  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  and
Marina  Oswald,  and  the  U.S.  Department  of  State  and  the
Immigration  and  Naturalization  Service  of  the  U.S.  Depart-
ment of  Justice  329

APPENDIX  XVI.  A  Biography  of  Jack  Ruby  347

APPENDIX  XVn.  Polygraph  Examination  of  Jack  Ruby  361

APPENDIX  XVm.  Footnotes 366

A  Footnote  366


xm


Chapter  I

SUMMARY  AND  CONCLUSIONS


THE  ASSASSINATION  of  John  Fitzgerald
Kennedy  on  November  22,  1963,  was  a  cruel
and  shocking  act  of  violence  directed  against  a
man,  a  family,  a  nation,  and  against  all  man-
kind. A  young  and  vigorous  leader  whose  years
of  public  and  private  life  stretched  before  him
was  the  victim  of  the  fourth  Presidential  assassi-
nation in  the  history  of  a  country  dedicated  to
the  concepts  of  reasoned  argument  and  peaceful
political  change.  This  Commission  was  created
on  November  29,  1963,  in  recognition  of  the
right  of  people  everywhere  to  full  and  truthful
knowledge  concerning  these  events.  This  report
endeavors  to  fulfill  that  right  and  to  appraise  this
tragedy  by  the  light  of  reason  and  the  standard
of  fairness.  It  has  been  prepared  with  a  deep
awareness  of  the  Commission's  responsibility  to
present  to  the  American  people  an  objective  re-
port of  the  facts  relating  to  the  assassination.


NARRATIVE  OF  EVENTS

At  11:40  a.m.,  c.s.t.,  on  Friday,  November
22,  1963,  President  John  F.  Kennedy,  Mrs.  Ken-
nedy, and  their  party  arrived  at  Love  Field,
Dallas,  Tex.  Behind  them  was  the  first  day  of  a
Texas  trip  planned  5  months  before  by  the  Presi-
dent, Vice  President  Lyndon  B.  Johnson,  and
John  B.  Connally,  Jr.,  Governor  of  Texas.  After
leaving  the  White  House  on  Thursday  morning,
the  President  had  flown  initially  to  San  Antonio
where  Vice  President  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  joined
the  party  and  the  President  dedicated  new  re-
search facilities  at  the  U.S.  Air  Force  School  of
Aerospace  Medicine.  Following  a  testimonial
dinner  in  Houston  for  U.S.  Representative  Al-
bert Thomas,  the  President  flew  to  Fort  Worth
where  he  spent  the  night  and  spoke  at  a  large
breakfast  gathering  on  Friday.

Planned  for  later  that  day  were  a  motorcade
through  downtown  Dallas,  a  luncheon  speech
at  the  Trade  Mart,  and  a  flight  to  Austin  where
the  President  would  attend  a  reception  and  speak
at  a  Democratic  fundraising  dinner.  From  Aus-
tin he  would  proceed  to  the  Texas  ranch  of  the
Vice  President.  Evident  on  this  trip  were  the
varied  roles  which  an  American  President  per-
forms— Head  of  State,  Chief  Executive,  party
leader,  and,  in  this  instance,  prospective  candi-
date for  reelection.

The  Dallas  motorcade,  it  was  hoped,  would
evoke  a  demonstration  of  the  President's  per-
sonal popularity  in  a  city  which  he  had  lost  in


the  1960  election.  Once  it  had  been  decided  that
the  trip  to  Texas  would  span  2  days,  those  re-
sponsible for  planning,  primarily  Governor  Con-
nally and  Kenneth  O'Donnell,  a  special  assistant
to  the  President,  agreed  that  a  motorcade
through  Dallas  would  be  desirable.  The  Secret
Service  was  told  on  November  8  that  45  min-
utes had  been  allotted  to  a  motorcade  proces-
sion from  Love  Field  to  the  site  of  a  luncheon
planned  by  Dallas  business  and  civic  leaders  in
honor  of  the  President.  After  considering  the
facilities  and  security  problems  of  several  build-
ings, the  Trade  Mart  was  chosen  as  the  luncheon
site.  Given  this  selection,  and  in  accordance  with
the  customar>'  practice  of  affording  the  greatest
number  of  people  an  opportunity  to  see  the
President,  the  motorcade  route  selected  was  a
natural  one.  The  route  was  approved  by  the  local
host  committee  and  White  House  representatives
on  November  18  and  publicized  in  the  local
papers  starting  on  November  19.  This  advance
publicit}'  made  it  clear  that  the  motorcade  would
leave  Main  Street  and  pass  the  intersection  of
Elm  and  Houston  Streets  as  it  proceeded  to  the
Trade  Mart  by  way  of  the  Stemmons  Freeway.

By  midmoming  of  November  22,  clearing
skies  in  Dallas  dispelled  the  threat  of  rain  and
the  President  greeted  the  crowds  from  his  open
limousine  without  the  "bubbletop,"  which  was
at  that  time  a  plastic  shield  furnishing  protection
only  against  inclement  weather.  To  the  left  of  the
President  in  the  rear  seat  was  Mrs.  Kennedy.  In
the  jump  seats  were  Governor  Connally,  who
was  in  front  of  the  President,  and  Mrs.  Connally
at  the  Governor's  left.  Agent  William  R.  Greer
of  the  Secret  Service  was  driving,  and  Agent  Roy
H.  Kellerman  was  sitting  to  his  right.

Directly  behind  the  Presidential  limousine
was  an  open  "followup"  car  with  eight  Secret
Service  agents,  two  in  the  front  seat,  t^AO  in  the
rear,  and  two  on  each  running  board.  These
agents,  in  accordance  with  normal  Secret  Serv-
ice procedures,  were  instructed  to  scan  the
crowds,  the  roofs,  and  windows  of  buildings,
overpasses,  and  crossings  for  signs  of  trouble.
Behind  the  "followup"  car  was  the  Vice-
Presidential  car  carrying  the  Vice  President  and
Mrs.  Johnson  and  Senator  Ralph  W.  Yarbor-
ough.  Next  were  a  Vice-Presidential  "followup"
car  and  several  cars  and  buses  for  additional
dignitaries,  press  representatives,  and  others.

The  motorcade  left  Love  Field  shortly  after
11:50  a.m.,  and  proceeded  through  residential
neighborhoods,  stopping  twice  at  the  President's


request  to  greet  well-wishers  among  the  friendly
crowds.  Each  time  the  President's  car  halted,
Secret  Service  agents  from  the  "followup"  car
moved  forward  to  assume  a  protective  stance
near  the  President  and  Mrs.  Kennedy.  As  the
motorcade  reached  Main  Street,  a  principal  east-
west  artery  in  downtown  Dallas,  the  welcome
became  tumultuous.  At  the  extreme  west  end  of
Main  Street  the  motorcade  turned  right  on
Houston  Street  and  proceeded  north  for  one
block  in  order  to  make  a  left  turn  on  Elm  Street,
the  most  direct  and  convenient  approach  to  the
Stemmons  Freeway  and  the  Trade  Mart.  As  the
President's  car  approached  the  intersection  of
Houston  and  Elm  Streets,  there  loomed  directly
ahead  on  the  intersection's  northwest  comer  a
seven-story,  orange  brick  warehouse  and  oflBce
building,  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository.
Riding  in  the  Vice  President's  car,  Agent  Rufus
W.  Yoimgblood  of  the  Secret  Service  noticed
that  the  clock  atop  the  building  indicated  12:30
p.m.,  the  scheduled  arrival  time  at  the  Trade
Mart.

The  President's  car  which  had  been  going
north  made  a  sharp  turn  toward  the  southwest
onto  Elm  Street.  At  a  speed  of  about  1 1  miles
per  hour,  it  started  down  the  gradual  descent
toward  a  railroad  overpass  under  which  the
motorcade  would  proceed  before  reaching  the
Stemmons  Freeway.  The  front  of  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  was  now  on  the  Presi-
dent's right,  and  he  waved  to  the  crowd  as-
sembled there  as  he  passed  the  building.  Dealey
Plaza — an  open,  landscaped  area  marking  the
western  end  of  downtown  Dallas — stretched  out
to  the  President's  left.  A  Secret  Service  agent
riding  in  the  motorcade  radioed  the  Trade  Mart
that  the  President  would  arrive  in  5  minutes.

Seconds  later  shots  resounded  in  rapid  suc-
cession. The  President's  hands  moved  to  his
neck.  He  appeared  to  stiffen  momentarily  and
lurch  slightly  forward  in  his  seat.  A  bullet  had
entered  the  base  of  the  back  of  his  neck  slightly
to  the  right  of  the  spine.  It  traveled  downward
and  exited  from  the  front  of  the  neck,  causing  a
nick  in  the  left  lower  portion  of  the  knot  in  the
President's  necktie.  Before  the  shooting  started,
Governor  Connally  had  been  facing  toward  the
crowd  on  the  right.  He  started  to  turn  toward
the  left  and  suddenly  felt  a  blow  on  his  back.
The  Governor  had  been  hit  by  a  bullet  which
entered  at  the  extreme  right  side  of  his  back  at
a  point  below  his  right  armpit.  The  bullet  trav-
eled through  his  chest  in  a  downward  and  for-
ward direction,  exited  below  his  right  nipple,
passed  through  his  right  wrist  which  had  been
in  his  lap,  and  then  caused  a  wound  to  his  left
thigh.  The  force  of  the  bullet's  impact  appeared
to  spin  the  Governor  to  his  right,  and  Mrs.  Con-
nally pulled  him  down  into  her  lap.  Another  bul-
let then  struck  President  Kennedy  in  the  rear
portion  of  his  head,  causing  a  massive  and  fatal
wound.  The  President  fell  to  the  left  into  Mrs.
Kennedy's  lap.

Secret  Service  Agent  Clinton  J.  Hill,  riding


on  the  left  running  board  of  the  "followup"  car,
heard  a  noise  which  sounded  like  a  firecracker
and  saw  the  President  suddenly  lean  forward
and  to  the  left.  Hill  jumped  off  the  car  and  raced
toward  the  President's  limousine.  In  the  front
seat  of  the  Vice-Presidential  car.  Agent  Young-
blood  heard  an  explosion  and  noticed  unusual
movements  in  the  crowd.  He  vaulted  into  the
rear  seat  and  sat  on  the  Vice  President  in  order
to  protect  him.  At  the  same  time  Agent  Keller-
man  in  the  front  seat  of  the  Presidential  limou-
sine turned  to  observe  the  President.  Seemg  that
the  President  was  struck,  Kellerman  instructed
the  driver,  "Let's  get  out  of  here;  we  are  hit."  He
radioed  ahead  to  the-lead  car,  "Get  us  to  the  hos-
pital immediately."  Agent  Greer  immediately
accelerated  the  Presidential  car.  As  it  gained
speed,  Agent  Hill  managed  to  pull  himself  onto
the  back  of  the  car  where  Mrs.  Kennedy  had
climbed.  Hill  pushed  her  back  into  the  rear  seat
and  shielded  the  stricken  President  and  Mrs.
Kennedy  as  the  President's  car  proceeded  at
high  speed  to  Parkland  Memorial  Hospital,  4
miles  away.

At  Parkland,  the  President  was  immediately
treated  by  a  team  of  physicians  who  had  been
alerted  for  the  President's  arrival  by  the  Dallas
Police  Department  as  the  result  of  a  radio  mes-
sage from  the  motorcade  after  the  shooting.  The
doctors  noted  irregular  breathing  movements
and  a  possible  heartbeat,  although  they  could
not  detect  a  pulsebeat.  They  observed  the  ex-
tensive wound  in  the  President's  head  and  a
small  wound  approximately  one-fourth  inch  in
diameter  in  the  lower  third  of  his  neck.  In  an
effort  to  facilitate  breathing,  the  physicians  per-
formed a  tracheotomy  by  enlarging  the  throat
wound  and  inserting  a  tube.  Totally  absorbed  in
the  immediate  task  of  trying  to  preserve  the
President's  life,  the  attending  doctors  never
turned  the  President  over  for  an  examination  of
his  back.  At  1  p.m.,  after  all  heart  activity
ceased  and  the  Last  Rites  were  administered  by
a  priest,  President  Kennedy  was  pronounced
dead.  Governor  Connally  imderwent  surgery
and  ultimately  recovered  from  his  serious
wounds.

Upon  learning  of  the  President's  death.  Vice
President  Johnson  left  Parkland  Hospital  under
close  guard  and  proceeded  to  the  Presidential
plane  at  Love  Field.  Mrs.  Kennedy,  accom-
panying her  husband's  body,  boarded  the  plane
shortly  thereafter.  At  2:38  p.m.,  in  the  central
compartment  of  the  plane,  Lyndon  B.  Johnson
was  sworn  in  as  the  36th  President  of  the  United
States  by  Federal  District  Court  Judge  Sarah  T.
Hughes.  The  plane  left  immediately  for  Wash-
ington, D.C.,  arriving  at  Andrews  AFB,  Md.,
at  5:58  p.m.,  e.s.t.  The  President's  body  was
taken  to  the  National  Naval  Medical  Center,
Bethesda,  Md.,  where  it  was  given  a  complete
pathological  examination.  The  autopsy  disclosed
the  large  head  wound  observed  at  Parkland  and
the  woimd  in  the  front  of  the  neck  which  had
been  enlarged  by  the  Parkland  doctors  when


they  performed  the  tracheotomy.  Both  of  these
wounds  were  described  in  the  autopsy  report
as  being  "presumably  of  exit."  In  addition  the
autopsy  revealed  a  small  wound  of  entry  in  the
rear  of  the  President's  skull  and  another  wound
of  entry  near  the  base  of  the  back  of  the  neck.
The  autopsy  report  stated  the  cause  of  death  as
"Gunshot  wound,  head,"  and  the  bullets  which
struck  the  President  were  described  as  having
been  fired  "from  a  point  behind  and  somewhat
above  the  level  of  the  deceased."

At  the  scene  of  the  shooting,  there  was  evi-
dent confusion  at  the  outset  concerning  the  point
of  origin  of  the  shots.  Witnesses  differed  in
their  accounts  of  the  direction  from  which  the
sound  of  the  shots  emanated.  Within  a  few  min-
utes, however,  attention  centered  on  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  Building  as  the  source
of  the  shots.  The  building  was  occupied  by  a
private  corporation,  the  Texas  School  Book  De-
pository Co.,  which  distributed  school  textbooks
of  several  publishers  and  leased  space  to  repre-
sentatives of  the  publishers.  Most  of  the  em-
ployees in  the  building  worked  for  these  pub-
lishers. The  balance,  including  a  15-man
warehousing  crew,  were  employees  of  the  Texas
School  Book  Depositor}'  Co.  itself.

Several  eyewitnesses  in  front  of  the  building
reported  that  they  saw  a  rifle  being  fired  from
the  southeast  comer  v^indow  on  the  sixth  floor
of  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository.  One  eye-
witness, Howard  L.  Brennan,  had  been  watching
the  parade  from  a  point  on  Elm  Street  directly
opposite  and  facing  the  building.  He  promptly
told  a  policeman  that  he  had  seen  a  slender  man,
about  5  feet  10  inches,  in  his  early  thirties,  take
dehberate  aim  from  the  sixth-floor  comer  win-
dow and  fire  a  rifle  in  the  direction  of  the  Presi-
dent's car.  Brennan  thought  he  might  be  able  to
identify  the  man  since  he  had  noticed  him  in  the
window  a  few  minutes  before  the  motorcade
made  the  turn  onto  Elm  Street.  At  12:34  p.m.,
the  Dallas  police  radio  mentioned  the  Deposi-
tory Building  as  a  possible  source  of  the  shots,
and  at  12:45  p.m.,  the  police  radio  broadcast
a  description  of  the  suspected  assassin  based
primarily  on  Brennan's  observations.

When  the  shots  were  fired,  a  Dallas  motor-
cycle patrolman,  Marrion  L.  Baker,  was  riding
in  the  motorcade  at  a  point  several  cars  behind
the  President.  He  had  turned  right  from  Main
Street  onto  Houston  Street  and  was  about  200
feet  south  of  Elm  Street  when  he  heard  a  shot.
Baker,  having  recently  returned  from  a  week  of
deer  hunting,  was  certain  the  shot  came  from  a
high-powered  rifle.  He  looked  up  and  saw  pi-
geons scattering  in  the  air  from  their  perches  on
the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building.  He
raced  his  motorcycle  to  the  building,  dismounted,
scanned  the  area  to  the  west  and  pushed  his  way
through  the  spectators  toward  the  entrance.
There  he  encountered  Roy  Tmly,  the  buUding
superintendent,  who  offered  Baker  his  help.
They  entered  the  buUding,  and  ran  toward  the
two  elevators  in  the  rear.  Finding  that  both


elevators  were  on  an  upper  floor,  they  dashed
up  the  stairs.  Not  more  than  2  minutes  had
elapsed  since  the  shooting.

When  they  reached  the  second-floor  landing
on  their  way  up  to  the  top  of  the  building,  Pa-
trolman Baker  thought  he  caught  a  glimpse  of
someone  through  the  smaU  glass  window  in  the
door  separating  the  haU  area  near  the  stairs
from  the  small  vestibule  leading  into  the  lunch-
room. Gun  in  hand,  he  rushed  to  the  door  and
saw  a  man  about  20  feet  away  walking  toward
the  other  end  of  the  lunchroom.  The  man  was
emptyhanded.  At  Baker's  command,  the  man
turned  and  approached  him.  Truly,  who  had
started  up  the  stairs  to  the  third  floor  ahead  of
Baker,  returned  to  see  what  had  delayed  the
patrolman.  Baker  asked  Truly  whether  he
knew  the  man  in  the  lunchroom.  Truly  replied
that  the  man  worked  in  the  building,  where-
upon Baker  turned  from  the  man  and  proceeded,
with  Tmly  up  the  stairs.  The  man  they  en-
countered had  started  working  in  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  Building  on  October
16,  1963.  His  fellow  workers  described  him  as
very  quiet — a  "loner."  His  name  was  Lee
Harvey  Oswald

Within  about  1  minute  after  his  encounter
with  Baker  and  Truly,  Oswald  was  seen  passing
through  the  second-floor  offices.  In  his  hand
was  a  fuU  "Coke"  bottle  which  he  had  purchased
from  a  vending  machine  in  the  lunchroom.  He
was  walking  toward  the  front  of  the  building
where  a  passenger  elevator  and  a  short  flight  of
stairs  provided  access  to  the  main  entrance  of
the  building  on  the  first  floor.  Approximately  7
minutes  later,  at  about  12:40  p.m.,  Oswald
boarded  a  bus  at  a  point  on  Elm  Street  seven
short  blocks  east  of  the  Depositor}'  Building.
The  bus  was  traveling  west  toward  the  ver>'
building  from  which  Oswald  had  come.  Its  route
lay  through  the  Oak  Cliff  section  in  southwest
DaUas,  where  it  would  pass  seven  blocks  east  of
the  roominghouse  in  which  Oswald  was  Uving,
at  1026  North  Beckley  Avenue.  On  the  bus  was
Mrs.  Mary  Bledsoe,  one  of  Oswald's  former
landladies  who  immediately  recognized  him.  Os-
wald stayed  on  the  bus  approximately  3  or  4
minutes,  during  which  time  it  proceeded  only
tv,o  blocks  because  of  the  traffic  jam  created  by
the  motorcade  and  the  assassination.  Oswald
then  left  the  bus.

A  few  minutes  later  he  entered  a  vacant  taxi
four  blocks  away  and  asked  the  driver  to  take
him  to  a  point  on  North  Beckley  Avenue  several
blocks  beyond  his  roominghouse.  The  trip  re-
quired 5  or  6  minutes.  At  about  1  p.m.  Oswald
arrived  at  the  roominghouse.  The  housekeeper,
Mrs.  Earlene  Roberts,  was  surprised  to  see  Os-
wald at  midday  and  remarked  to  him  that  he
seemed  to  be  in  quite  a  hurry.  He  made  no  reply.
A  few  minutes  later  Oswald  emerged  from  his
room  zipping  up  his  jacket  and  rushed  out  of  the
house.

Approximately  14  minutes  later,  and  just  45
minutes  after  the  assassination,  another  violent


shooting  occurred  in  Dallas.  The  victim  was
Patrolman  J.  D.  Tippit  of  the  Dallas  police,  an
officer  with  a  good  record  during  his  more  than
1 1  years  with  the  police  force.  He  was  shot  near
the  intersection  of  10th  Street  and  Patton  Ave-
nue, about  nine-tenths  of  a  mile  from  Oswald's
roominghouse.  At  the  time  of  the  assassination,
Tippit  was  alone  in  his  patrol  car,  the  routine
practice  for  most  police  patrol  cars  at  this  time
of  day.  He  had  been  ordered  by  radio  at  12:45
p.m.  to  proceed  to  the  central  Oak  Cliff  area  as
part  of  a  concentration  of  patrol  car  activity
around  the  center  of  the  city  following  the  assas-
sination. At  12:54  Tippit  radioed  that  he  had
moved  as  directed  and  would  be  available  for
any  emergency.  By  this  time  the  police  radio
had  broadcast  several  messages  alerting  the  po-
lice to  the  suspect  described  by  Brennan  at  the
scene  of  the  assassination — a  slender  white  male,
about  30  years  old,  5  feet  10  inches  and  weigh-
ing about  165  pounds.

At  approximately  1 :  15  p.m.,  Tippit  was  driv-
ing slowly  in  an  easterly  direction  on  East  10th
Street  in  Oak  Cliff.  About  100  feet  past  the  in-
tersection of  10th  Street  and  Patton  Avenue,
Tippit  pulled  up  alongside  a  man  walking  in  the
same  direction.  The  man  met  the  general  de-
scription of  the  suspect  wanted  in  connection
with  the  assassination.  He  walked  over  to  Tip-
pit's  car,  rested  his  arms  on  the  door  on  the
righthand  side  of  the  car,  and  apparently  ex-
changed words  with  Tippit  through  the  window.
Tippit  opened  the  door  on  the  left  side  and
started  to  walk  around  the  front  of  his  car.  As
he  reached  the  front  wheel  on  the  driver's  side,
the  man  on  the  sidewalk  drew  a  revolver  and
fired  several  shots  in  rapid  succession,  hitting
Tippit  four  times  and  killing  him  instantly.  An
automobile  repairman,  Domingo  Benavides,
heard  the  shots  and  stopped  his  pickup  truck
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street  about  25  feet
in  front  of  Tippit's  car.  He  observed  the  gunman
start  back  toward  Patton  Avenue,  removing  the
empty  cartridge  cases  from  the  gun  as  he  went.
Benavides  rushed  to  Tippit's  side.  The  patrol-
man, apparently  dead,  was  lying  on  his  revolver,
which  was  out  of  its  holster.  Benavides  promptly
reported  the  shooting  to  police  headquarters
over  the  radio  in  Tippit's  car.  The  message  was
received  shortly  after  1:16  p.m.

As  the  gunman  left  the  scene,  he  walked  hur-
riedly back  toward  Patton  Avenue  and  turned
left,  heading  south.  Standing  on  the  northwest
comer  of  10th  Street  and  Patton  Avenue  was
Helen  Markham,  who  had  been  walking  south
on  Patton  Avenue  and  had  seen  both  the  killer
and  Tippit  cross  the  intersection  in  front  of  her
as  she  waited  on  the  curb  for  traffic  to  pass.  She
witnessed  the  shooting  and  then  saw  the  man
with  a  gun  in  his  hand  walk  back  toward  the
corner  and  cut  across  the  lawn  of  the  corner
house  as  he  started  south  on  Patton  Avenue.

In  the  comer  house  itself,  Mrs.  Barbara
Jeanette  Davis  and  her  sister-in-law,  Mrs.  Vir-
ginia Davis,  heard  the  shots  and  rushed  to  the


door  in  time  to  see  the  man  walk  rapidly  across
the  lawn  shaking  a  revolver  as  if  he  were  emp-
tying it  of  cartridge  cases.  Later  that  day  each
woman  found  a  cartridge  case  near  the  house.
As  the  gunman  turned  the  comer  he  passed
alongside  a  taxicab  which  was  parked  on  Patton
Avenue,  a  few  feet  from  10th  Street.  The  driver,
William  W.  Scoggins,  had  seen  the  slaying  and
was  now  crouched  behind  his  cab  on  the  street
side.  As  the  gunman  cut  through  the  shrubbery
on  the  lawn,  Scoggins  looked  up  and  saw  the
man  approximately  12  feet  away.  In  his  hand
was  a  pistol  and  he  muttered  words  which
sounded  to  Scoggins  like  "poor  dumb  cop"  or
"poor  damn  cop."

After  passing  Scoggins,  the  gunman  crossed
to  the  west  side  of  Patton  Avenue  and  ran  south
toward  Jefferson  Boulevard,  a  main  Oak  Cliff
thoroughfare.  On  the  east  side  of  Patton,  be-
tween 10th  Street  and  Jefferson  Boulevard,  Ted
Callaway,  a  used  car  salesman,  heard  the  shots
and  ran  to  the  sidewalk.  As  the  man  with  the
gun  rushed  past,  Callaway  shouted  "What's  go-
ing on?"  The  man  merely  shmgged,  ran  on  to
Jefferson  Boulevard  and  turned  right.  On  the
next  comer  was  a  gas  station  with  a  parking  lot
in  the  rear.  The  assailant  ran  into  the  lot,  dis-
carded his  jacket  and  then  continued  his  flight
west  on  Jefferson.

In  a  shoe  store  a  few  blocks  farther  west  on
Jefferson,  the  manager,  Johnny  Calvin  Brewer,
heard  the  siren  of  a  police  car  moments  after
the  radio  in  his  store  announced  the  shooting
of  the  police  officer  in  Oak  Cliff.  Brewer  saw  a
man  step  quickly  into  the  entranceway  of  the
store  and  stand  there  with  his  back  toward  the
street.  When  the  police  car  made  a  U-turn  and
headed  back  in  the  direction  of  the  Tippit  shoot-
ing, the  man  left  and  Brewer  followed  him.  He
saw  the  man  enter  the  Texas  Theatre,  a  motion
picture  house  about  60  feet  away,  without  buy-
ing a  ticket.  Brewer  pointed  this  out  to  the
cashier,  Mrs.  Julia  Postal,  who  called  the  police.
The  time  was  shortly  after  1:40  p.m.

At  1:29  p.m.,  the  police  radio  had  noted  the
similarity  in  the  descriptions  of  the  suspects  in
the  Tippit  shooting  and  the  assassination.  At
1:45  p.m.,  in  response  to  Mrs.  Postal's  call,  the
police  radio  sounded  the  alarm:  "Have  informa-
tion a  suspect  just  went  in  the  Texas  Theatre  on
West  Jefferson."  Within  minutes  the  theater  was
surrounded.  The  house  lights  were  then  turned
up.  Patrolman  M.  N.  McDonald  and  several
other  policemen  approached  the  man,  who  had
been  pointed  out  to  them  by  Brewer.

McDonald  ordered  the  man  to  his  feet  and
heard  him  say,  "Well,  it's  all  over  now."  The
man  drew  a  gun  from  his  waist  with  one  hand
and  struck  the  officer  with  the  other.  McDonald
struck  out  with  his  right  hand  and  grabbed  the
gun  with  his  left  hand.  After  a  brief  stmggle
McDonald  and  several  other  police  officers  dis-
armed and  handcuffed  the  suspect  and  drove
him  to  police  headquarters,  arriving  at  approxi-
mately 2  p.m.


Following  the  assassination,  police  cars  had
rushed  to  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  in
response  to  the  many  radio  messages  reporting
that  the  shots  had  been  fired  from  the  Depository
Building,  Inspector  J.  Herbert  Sawyer  of  the
Dallas  Police  Department  arrived  at  the  scene
shortly  after  hearing  the  first  of  these  police  ra-
dio messages  at  12:34  p.m.  Some  of  the  oflBcers
who  had  been  assigned  to  the  area  of  Elm  and
Houston  Streets  for  the  motorcade  were  talking
to  witnesses  and  watching  the  building  when
Sawyer  arrived.  Sawyer  entered  the  building  and
rode  a  passenger  elevator  to  the  fourth  floor,
which  was  the  top  floor  for  this  elevator.  He
conducted  a  quick  search,  returned  to  the  main
floor  and,  between  approximately  12:37  and
12:40  p.m.,  ordered  tiiat  no  one  be  permitted
to  leave  the  building.

Shortly  before  1  p.m.  Capt.  J.  Will  Fritz,  chief
of  the  homicide  and  robbery  bureau  of  the  Dal-
las Police  Department,  arrived  to  take  charge
of  the  investigation.  Searching  the  sixth  floor.
Deputy  Sheriff  Luke  Mooney  noticed  a  pile  of
cartons  in  the  southeast  comer.  He  squeezed
through  the  boxes  and  realized  immediately  that
he  had  discovered  the  point  from  which  the  shots
had  been  fired.  On  the  floor  were  three  empty
cartridge  cases.  A  carton  had  apparently  been
placed  on  the  floor  at  the  side  of  the  window  so
that  a  person  sitting  on  the  carton  could  look
down  Elm  Street  toward  the  overpass  and
scarcely  be  noticed  from  the  outside.  Between
this  carton  and  the  half-open  window  were  three
additional  cartons  arranged  at  such  an  angle
that  a  rifle  resting  on  the  top  carton  would  be
aimed  directly  at  the  motorcade  as  it  moved
away  from  the  building.  The  high  stack  of  boxes,
which  first  attracted  Mooney's  attention,  effec-
tively screened  a  person  at  the  window  from  the
view  of  anyone  else  on  the  floor.

Mooney's  discovery  intensified  the  search  for
additional  evidence  on  the  sixth  floor,  and  at
1:22  p.m.,  approximately  10  minutes  after  the
cartridge  cases  were  found,  Deputy  Sheriff  Eu-
gene Boone  turned  his  flashlight  in  the  direction
of  two  rows  of  boxes  in  the  northwest  comer
near  the  staircase.  Stuffed  between  the  two  rows
was  a  bolt-action  rifle  with  a  telescopic  sight.
The  rifle  was  not  touched  imtU  it  could  be  photo-
graphed. When  Lt.  J.  C.  Day  of  the  police  iden-
tification bureau  decided  that  the  wooden  stock
and  the  metal  knob  at  the  end  of  the  bolt  con-
tained no  prints,  he  held  the  rifle  by  the  stock
while  Captain  Fritz  ejected  a  live  shell  by  oper-
ating the  bolt.  Lieutenant  Day  promptly  noted
that  stamped  on  the  rifle  itself  was  the  serial
number  "C2766"  as  well  as  the  markings  "1940"
"MADE  ITALY"  and  "CAL.  6.5."  The  rifle
was  about  40  inches  long  and  when  disassembled
it  could  fit  into  a  handmade  paper  sack  which,
after  the  assassination,  was  found  in  the  south-
east comer  of  the  building  within  a  few  feet  of
the  cartridge  cases.

As  Fritz  and  Day  were  completing  their  ex-
amination of  this  rifle  on  the  sixth  floor,  Roy


Tmly,  the  building  superintendent,  approached
with  information  which  he  felt  should  be
brought  to  the  attention  of  the  police.  Earlier,
while  the  police  were  questioning  the  employees.
Truly  had  observed  that  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,
1  of  the  15  men  who  worked  in  the  warehouse,
was  missing.  After  Tmly  provided  Oswald's
name,  address,  and  general  description,  Fritz
left  for  police  headquarters.  He  arrived  at  head-
quarters shortly  after  2  p.m.  and  asked  two  de-
tectives to  pick  up  the  employee  who  was  miss-
ing from  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository.
Standing  nearby  were  the  police  ofl&cers  who  had
just  arrived  with  the  man  arrested  in  the  Texas
Theatre.  When  Fritz  mentioned  the  name  of
the  missing  employee,  he  learned  that  the  man
was  already  in  the  interrogation  room.  The
missing  School  Book  Depository  employee  and
the  suspect  who  had  been  apprehended  in  the
Texas  Theatre  were  one  and  the  same — ^Lee
Harvey  Oswald.

The  suspect  Fritz  was  about  to  question  in
connection  with  the  assassination  of  the  Presi-
dent and  the  murder  of  a  policeman  was  bom
in  New  Orleans  on  October  18,  1939,  2  months
after  the  death  of  his  father.  His  mother.  Mar-
guerite Claverie  Oswald,  had  two  older  children.
One,  John  Pic,  was  a  half-brother  to  Lee  from
an  earlier  marriage  which  had  ended  in  divorce.
The  other  was  Robert  Oswald,  a  full  brother  to
Lee  and  5  years  older.  When  Lee  Oswald  was
3,  Mrs.  Oswald  placed  him  in  an  orphanage
where  his  brother  and  half-brother  were  ahready
living,  primarily  because  she  had  to  work.

In  January  1944,  when  Lee  was  4,  he  was
taken  out  of  the  orphanage,  and  shortly  there-
after his  mother  moved  with  him  to  Dallas,
Tex.,  where  the  older  boys  joined  them  at  the
end  of  the  school  year.  In  May  of  1945  Mar-
guerite Oswald  married  her  third  husband,  Ed-
win A.  Ekdahl.  While  the  two  older  boys  at-
tended a  military  boarding  school,  Lee  lived  at
home  and  developed  a  warm  attachment  to
Ekdahl,  occasionaUy  accompanying  his  mother
and  stepfather  on  business  trips  aroimd  the
country.  Lee  started  school  in  Benbrook,  Tex.,
but  in  the  faU  of  1946,  after  a  separation  from
Ekdahl,  Marguerite  Oswald  reentered  Lee  in  the
first  grade  in  Covington,  La.  In  January  1947,
while  Lee  was  still  in  the  first  grade,  the  family
moved  to  Fort  Worth,  Tex.,  as  the  result  of  an
attempted  reconciliation  between  Ekdahl  and
Lee's  mother.  A  year  and  a  half  later,  before
Lee  was  9,  his  mother  was  divorced  from  her
third  husband  as  the  result  of  a  divorce  action
instituted  by  Ekdahl.  Lee's  school  record  during
the  next  5i  years  in  Fort  Worth  was  average,
although  generally  it  grew  poorer  each  year.
The  comments  of  teachers  and  others  who  knew
him  at  that  time  do  not  reveal  any  unusual  per-
sonality traits  or  characteristics.

Another  change  for  Lee  Oswald  occurred  in
August  1952,  a  few  months  after  he  completed
the  sixth  grade.  Marguerite  Oswald  and  her  12-
year-old  son  moved  to  New  York  City  where


Marguerite's  oldest  son,  John  Pic,  was  stationed
with  the  Coast  Guard.  The  ensuing  year  and
one-half  in  New  York  was  marked  by  Lee's  re-
fusals to  attend  school  and  by  emotional  and
psychological  problems  of  a  seemingly  serious
nature.  Because  he  had  become  a  chronic  school
truant,  Lee  underwent  psychiatric  study  at
Youth  House  an  institution  in  New  York  for
juveniles  who  have  had  truancy  problems  or
difficulties  with  the  law,  and  who  appear  to  re-
quire psychiatric  observation,  or  other  types  of
guidance.  The  social  worker  assigned  to  his  case
described  him  as  "seriously  detached"  and  "with-
drawn" and  noted  "a  rather  pleasant,  appealing
quality  about  this  emotionally  starved,  aifection-
less  youngster."  Lee  expressed  the  feeling  to  the
social  worker  that  his  mother  did  not  care  for
him  and  regarded  him  as  a  burden.  He  experi-
enced fantasies  about  being  all  powerful  and
hurting  people,  but  during  his  stay  at  Youth
House  he  was  apparently  not  a  behavior  prob-
lem. He  appeared  withdrawn  and  evasive,  a  boy
who  preferred  to  spend  his  time  alone,  reading
and  watching  television.  His  tests  indicated  that
he  was  above  average  in  intelligence  for  his  age
group.  The  chief  psychiatrist  of  Youth  House
diagnosed  Lee's  problem  as  a  "personality  pat-
tern disturbance  with  schizoid  features  and
passive-aggressive  tendencies."  He  concluded
that  the  boy  was  "an  emotionally,  quite  dis-
turbed youngster"  and  recommended  psychiatric
treatment.

In  May  1953,  after  having  been  at  Youth
House  for  3  weeks,  Lee  Oswald  returned  to
school  where  his  attendance  and  grades  tem-
porarily improved.  By  the  following  fall,  how-
ever, the  probation  officer  reported  that  virtually
every  teacher  complained  about  the  boy's  be-
havior. His  mother  insisted  that  he  did  not  need
psychiatric  assistance.  Although  there  was  ap-
parently some  improvement  in  Lee's  behavior
during  the  next  few  months,  the  court  recom-
mended further  treatment.  In  January  1954,
while  Lee's  case  was  still  pending.  Marguerite
and  Lee  left  for  New  Orleans,  the  city  of  Lee's
birth.

Upon  his  return  to  New  Orleans,  Lee  main-
tained mediocre  grades  but  had  no  obvious  be-
havior problems.  Neighbors  and  others  who
knew  him  outside  of  school  remembered  him  as
a  quiet,  solitary  and  introverted  boy  who  read  a
great  deal  and  whose  vocabulary  made  him
quite  articulate.  About  1  month  after  he  started
the  10th  grade  and  11  days  before  his  16th
birthday  in  October  1955,  he  brought  to  school
a  note  purportedly  written  by  his  mother,  stating
that  the  family  was  moving  to  California.  The
note  was  written  by  Lee.  A  few  days  later  he
dropped  out  of  school  and  almost  immediately
tried  to  joiti  the  Marine  Corps.  Because  he  was
only  16,  he  was  rejected.

After  leaving  school  Lee  worked  for  the  next
10  months  at  several  jobs  in  New  Orleans  as  an
office  messenger  or  clerk.  It  was  during  this
period  that  he  started  to  read  communist  litera-


ture. Occasionally,  in  conversations  with  others,
he  praised  communism  and  expressed  to  his  fel-
low employees  a  desire  to  join  the  Communist
Party.  At  about  this  time,  when  he  was  not  yet
17,  he  viTOte  to  the  Socialist  Party  of  America,
professing  his  belief  in  Marxism.

Another  move  followed  in  July  1956  when
Lee  and  his  mother  returned  to  Fort  Worth.  He
reentered  high  school  but  again  dropped  out
after  a  few  weeks  and  enlisted  in  the  Marine
Corps  on  October  24,  1956,  6  days  after  his  17th
birthday.  On  December  21,  1956,  during  boot
camp  in  San  Diego,  Oswald  fired  a  score  of  212
for  record  with  the  M-1  rifle — 2  points  over  the
minimum  for  a  rating  of  "sharpshooter"  on  a
marksman/ sharpshooter/ expert  scale.  After  his
basic  training,  Oswald  received  training  in  avia-
tion fundamentals  and  then  in  radar  scanning.

Most  people  who  knew  Oswald  in  the  Marines
described  him  as  a  "loner"  who  resented  the
exercise  of  authority  by  others.  He  spent  much
of  his  free  time  reading.  He  was  court-martialed
once  for  possessing  an  unregistered  privately
owned  weapon  and,  on  another  occasion,  for
using  provocative  language  to  a  noncommis-
sioned officer.  He  was,  however,  generally  able
to  comply  with  Marine  discipline,  even  though
his  experiences  in  the  Marine  Corps  did  not
live  up  to  his  expectations.

Oswald  served  15  months  overseas  until  No-
vember 1958,  most  of  it  in  Japan.  During  his
final  year  in  the  Marine  Corps  he  was  stationed
for  the  most  part  in  Santa  Ana,  Calif.,  where
he  showed  a  marked  interest  in  the  Soviet  Un-
ion and  sometimes  expressed  politically  radical
views  with  dogmatic  conviction,  Oswald  again
fired  the  M-1  rifle  for  record  on  May  6,  1959,
and  this  time  he  shot  a  score  of  191  on  a  shorter
course  than  before,  only  1  point  over  the  mini-
mum required  to  be  a  "marksman."  According
to  one  of  his  fellow  marines,  Oswald  was  not
particularly  interested  in  his  rifle  performance,
and  his  unit  was  not  expected  to  exhibit  the
usual  rifle  proficiency.  Ehiring  this  period  he
expressed  strong  admiration  for  Fidel  Castro
and  an  interest  in  joining  the  Cuban  army.  He
tried  to  impress  those  around  him  as  an  intel-
lectual, but  his  thinking  appeared  to  some  as
shallow  and  rigid.

Oswald's  Marine  service  terminated  on  Sep-
tember 1 1,  1959,  when  at  his  own  request  he  was
released  from  active  service  a  few  months  ahead
of  his  scheduled  release.  He  offered  as  the  rea-
son for  his  release  the  ill  health  and  economic
plight  of  his  mother.  He  returned  to  Fort  Worth,
remained  with  his  mother  only  3  days  and  left
for  New  Orleans,  telling  his  mother  he  planned
to  get  work  there  in  the  shipping  or  import-
export  business.  In  New  Orleans  he  booked  pas-
sage on  the  freighter  SS  Marion  Lykes,  which
sailed  from  New  Orleans  to  Le  Havre,  France,
on  September  20,  1959.

Lee  Harvey  Oswald  had  presumably  planned
this  step  in  his  life  for  quite  some  time.  In  March
of  1959  he  had  applied  to  the  Albert  Schweitzer


College  in  Switzerland  for  admission  to  the
spring  1960  term.  His  letter  of  application  con-
tained many  blatant  falsehoods  concerning  his
qualifications  and  background.  A  few  weeks  be-
fore his  discharge  he  had  applied  for  and  ob-
tained a  passport,  Usting  the  Soviet  Union  as
one  of  the  countries  which  he  planned  to  visit.
During  his  service  in  the  Marines  he  had  saved
a  comparatively  large  sum  of  money,  possibly
as  much  as  $  1 ,500,  which  would  appear  to  have
been  accomplished  by  considerable  frugality
and  apparently  for  a  specific  purpose.

The  purpose  of  the  accumulated  fund  soon
became  known.  On  October  16,  1959,  Oswald
arrived  in  Moscow  by  train  after  crossing  the
border  from  Finland,  where  he  had  secured  a
visa  for  a  6-day  stay  in  the  Soviet  Union.  He
immediately  applied  for  Soviet  citizenship.  On
the  afternoon  of  October  21,  1959,  Oswald  was
ordered  to  leave  the  Soviet  Union  by  8  p.m.  that
evening.  That  same  afternoon  in  his  hotel  room
Oswald,  in  an  apparent  suicide  attempt,  slashed
his  left  wrist.  He  was  hospitalized  immediately.
On  October  31,  3  days  after  his  release  from
the  hospital,  Oswald  appeared  at  the  American
Embassy,  announced  that  he  wished  to  renounce
his  U.S.  citizenship  and  become  a  Russian  citi-
zen, and  handed  the  Embassy  oflBcer  a  written
statement  he  had  prepared  for  the  occasion.
When  asked  his  reasons,  Oswald  replied,  "I  am
a  Marxist."  Oswald  never  formally  complied
with  the  legal  steps  necessary  to  renounce  his
American  citizenship.  The  Soviet  Government
did  not  grant  his  request  for  citizenship,  but  in
January  1960  he  was  given  permission  to  re-
main in  the  Soviet  Union  on  a  year-to-year  basis.
At  the  same  time  Oswald  was  sent  to  Minsk
where  he  worked  in  a  radio  factory  as  an  un-
skilled laborer.  In  January  1961  his  permission
to  remain  in  the  Soviet  Union  was  extended  for
another  year.  A  few  weeks  later,  in  February
1961,  he  wrote  to  the  American  Embassy  in
Moscow  expressing  a  desire  to  return  to  the
United  States.

The  following  month  Oswald  met  a  19-year-
old  Russian  girl,  Marina  Nikolaevna  Prusakova,
a  pharmacist,  who  had  been  brought  up  in  Len-
ingrad but  was  then  living  with  an  aunt  and
uncle  in  Minsk.  They  were  married  on  April
30,  1961.  Throughout  the  following  year  he
carried  on  a  correspondence  with  American
and  Soviet  authorities  seeking  approval  for  the
departure  of  himself  and  his  wife  to  the  United
States.  In  the  course  of  this  effort,  Oswald  and
his  wife  visited  the  U.S.  Embassy  in  Moscow  in
July  of  1961.  Primarily  on  the  basis  of  an  inter-
view and  questionnaire  completed  there,  the
Embassy  concluded  that  Oswald  had  not  lost
his  citizenship,  a  decision  subsequently  ratified
by  the  Department  of  State  in  Washington,  D.C.
Upon  their  return  to  Minsk,  Oswald  and  his  wife
filed  with  the  Soviet  authorities  for  permission
to  leave  together.  Their  formal  application  was
made  in  July  1961,  and  on  December  25,  1961,
Marina  Oswald  was  advised  it  would  be  granted.


A  daughter  was  bom  to  the  Oswalds  in  Febru-
ary 1962.  In  the  months  that  followed  they  pre-
pared for  their  return  to  the  United  States.  On
May  9,  1962,  the  U.S.  Immigration  and  Nat-
uralization Service,  at  the  request  of  the  Depart-
ment of  State,  agreed  to  waive  a  restriction
under  the  law  which  would  have  prevented  the
issuance  of  a  United  States  visa  to  Oswald's
Russian  wife  until  she  had  left  the  Soviet  Union.
They  finally  left  Moscow  on  June  1,  1962,  and
were  assisted  in  meeting  their  travel  expenses  by
a  loan  of  $435.71  from  the  U.S.  Department  of
State.  Two  weeks  later  they  arrived  in  Fort
Worth,  Tex.

For  a  few  weeks  Oswald,  his  wife  and  child
lived  with  Oswald's  brother  Robert.  After  a
similar  stay  with  Oswald's  mother,  they  moved
into  their  own  apartment  in  early  August.  Os-
wald obtained  a  job  on  July  16  as  a  sheet  metal
worker.  During  this  period  in  Fort  Worth,  Os-
wald was  interviewed  twice  by  agents  of  the
FBI.  The  report  of  the  first  interview,  which
occurred  on  June  26,  described  him  as  arrogant
and  unwilling  to  discuss  the  reasons  why  he  had
gone  to  the  Soviet  Union.  Oswald  denied  that
he  was  involved  in  Soviet  intelligence  activities
and  promised  to  advise  the  FBI  if  Soviet  repre-
sentatives ever  communicated  with  him.  He  was
interviewed  again  on  August  16,  when  he  dis-
played a  less  belligerent  attitude  and  once  again
agreed  to  inform  the  FBI  of  any  attempt  to  en-
list him  in  intelligence  activities.

In  early  October  1962  Oswald  quit  his  job
at  the  sheet  metal  plant  and  moved  to  Dallas.
While  living  in  Fort  Worth  the  Oswalds  had
been  introduced  to  a  group  of  Russian-speaking
people  in  the  Dallas-Fort  Worth  area.  Many  of
them  assisted  the  Oswalds  by  providing  small
amounts  of  food,  clothing,  and  household  items.
Oswald  himself  was  disliked  by  almost  all  of
this  group  whose  help  to  the  family  was
prompted  primarily  by  sympathy  for  Marina
Oswald  and  the  child.  Despite  the  fact  that  he
had  left  the  Soviet  Union,  disillusioned  with  its
Government,  Oswald  seemed  more  firmly  com-
mitted than  ever  to  his  concepts  of  Marxism.
He  showed  disdain  for  democracy,  capitalism,
and  American  society  in  general.  He  was  highly
critical  of  the  Russian-speaking  group  because
they  seemed  devoted  to  American  concepts  of
democracy  and  capitalism  and  were  ambitious
to  improve  themselves  economically.

In  February  1963  the  Oswalds  met  Ruth
Paine  at  a  social  gathering.  Ruth  Pame  was
temporarily  separated  from  her  husband  and
living  with  her  two  children  in  their  home  in
Irving,  Tex.,  a  suburb  of  Dallas.  Because  of  an
interest  in  the  Russian  language  and  sympathy
for  Marina  Oswald,  who  spoke  no  English  and
had  little  funds,  Ruth  Paine  befriended  Marina
and,  during  the  next  2  months,  visited  her  on
several  occasions.

On  April  6,  1963,  Oswald  lost  his  job  with  a
photography  firm.  A  few  days  later,  on  April
10,  he  attempted  to  kill  Maj.  Gen.  Edwin  A.


Walker  (Resigned,  U.S.  Army),  using  a  rifle
which  he  had  ordered  by  mail  1  month  previ-
ously under  an  assumed  name.  Marina  Oswald
learned  of  her  husband's  act  when  she  con-
fronted him  with  a  note  which  he  had  left,  giving
her  instructions  in  the  event  he  did  not  return.
That  incident  and  their  general  economic  diffi-
culties impelled  Marina  Oswald  to  suggest  that
her  husband  leave  Dallas  and  go  to  New  Orleans
to  look  for  work.

Oswald  left  for  New  Orleans  on  April  24,
1963.  Ruth  Paine,  who  knew  nothing  of  the
Walker  shooting,  invited  Marina  Oswald  and
the  baby  to  stay  with  her  in  the  Paines'  modest
home  while  Oswald  sought  work  in  New  Or-
leans. Early  in  May,  upon  receiving  word  from
Oswald  that  he  had  found  a  job,  Ruth  Paine
drove  Marina  Oswald  and  the  baby  to  New  Or-
leans to  rejoin  Oswald.

During  the  stay  in  New  Orleans,  Oswald
formed  a  fictitious  New  Orleans  Chapter  of  the
Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee.  He  posed  as
secretary  of  this  organization  and  represented
that  the  president  was  A.  J.  Hidell.  In  reality,
Hidell  was  a  completely  fictitious  person  created
by  Oswald,  the  organization's  only  member.  Os-
wald was  arrested  on  August  9  in  connection
with  a  scuffle  which  occurred  while  he  was  dis-
tributing pro-Castro  leaflets.  The  next  day,  while
at  the  police  station,  he  was  interviewed  by  an
FBI  agent  after  Oswald  requested  the  police  to
arrange  such  an  interview.  Oswald  gave  the
agent  false  information  about  his  own  back-
ground and  was  evasive  in  his  replies  concern-
ing Fair  Play  for  Cuba  activities.  During  the
next  2  weeks  Oswald  appeared  on  radio  pro-
grams twice,  claiming  to  be  the  spokesman  for
the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  in  New
Orleans.

On  July  19,  1963,  Oswald  lost  his  job  as  a
greaser  of  coffee  processing  machinery.  In  Sep-
tember, after  an  exchange  of  correspondence
with  Marina  Oswald,  Ruth  Paine  drove  to  New
Orleans  and  on  September  23,  transported
Marina,  the  child,  and  the  family  belongings  to
Irving,  Tex.  Ruth  Paine  suggested  that  Marina
Oswald,  who  was  expecting  her  second  child  in
October,  live  at  the  Paine  house  imtil  after  the
baby  was  bom.  Oswald  remained  behind,  os-
tensibly to  find  work  either  in  Houston  or  some
other  city.  Instead,  he  departed  by  bus  for
Mexico,  arriving  in  Mexico  City  on  September
27,  where  he  promptly  visited  the  Cuban  and
Russian  Embassies.  His  stated  objective  was  to
obtain  official  permission  to  visit  Cuba,  on  his
way  to  the  Soviet  Union.  The  Cuban  Govern-
ment would  not  grant  his  visa  imless  the  Soviet
Government  would  also  issue  a  visa  permitting
his  entry  into  Russia.  Oswald's  efforts  to  secure
these  visas  failed,  and  he  left  for  Dallas,  where
he  arrived  on  October  3,  1963.

When  he  saw  his  wife  the  next  day,  it  was  de-
cided that  Oswald  would  rent  a  room  in  Dallas
and  visit  his  family  on  weekends.  For  1  week  he
rented  a  room  from  Mrs.  Bledsoe,  the  woman


who  later  saw  him  on  the  bus  shortly  after  the
assassination.  On  October  14,  1963,  he  rented
the  Beckley  Avenue  room  and  listed  his  name
as  O.  H.  Lee.  On  the  same  day,  at  the  suggestion
of  a  neighbor,  Mrs.  Paine  phoned  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  and  was  told  that  there
was  a  job  opening.  She  informed  Oswald  who
was  interviewed  the  foUowing  day  at  the  De-
pository and  started  to  work  there  on  October
16, 1963.

On  October  20  the  Oswalds'  second  daughter
was  bom.  During  October  and  November  Os-
wald established  a  general  pattern  of  weekend
visits  to  Irving,  arriving  on  Friday  aftemoon  and
returning  to  Dallas  Monday  morning  with  a
feUow  employee,  Buell  Wesley  Frazier,  who
lived  near  the  Paines.  On  Friday,  November  15,
Oswald  remained  in  Dallas  at  the  suggestion  of
his  wife  who  told  him  that  the  house  would  be
crowded  because  of  a  birthday  party  for  Ruth
Paine's  daughter.  On  Monday,  November  18,
Oswald  and  his  wife  quarreled  bitterly  during
a  telephone  conversation,  because  she  learned
for  the  first  time  that  he  was  living  at  the  room-
inghouse  under  an  assumed  name.  On  Thursday,
November  21,  Oswald  told  Frazier  that  he
would  Uke  to  drive  to  Irving  to  pick  up  some
curtain  rods  for  an  apartment  in  DaUas.  His  wife
and  Mrs.  Paine  were  quite  surprised  to  see  him
since  it  was  a  Thursday  night.  They  thought  he
had  returned  to  make  up  after  Monday's  quarrel.
He  was  conciliatory,  but  Marina  Oswald  was
still  angry.

Later  that  evening,  when  Mrs.  Paine  had  fin-
ished cleaning  the  kitchen,  she  went  into  the
garage  and  noticed  that  the  light  was  burning.
She  was  certain  that  she  had  not  left  it  on,  al-
though the  incident  appeared  unimportant  at
the  time.  In  the  garage  were  most  of  the  Os-
walds' personal  possessions.  The  following
morning  Oswald  left  while  his  wife  was  still  in
bed  feeding  the  baby.  She  did  not  see  him  leave
the  house,  nor  did  Ruth  Paine.  On  the  dresser
in  their  room  he  left  his  wedding  ring  which
he  had  never  done  before.  His  wallet  containing
$170  was  left  intact  in  a  dresser-drawer.

Oswald  walked  to  Frazier's  house  about  half
a  block  away  and  placed  a  long  bulky  package,
made  out  of  wrapping  paper  and  tape,  into  the
rear  seat  of  the  car.  He  told  Frazier  that  the
package  contained  curtain  rods.  When  they
reached  the  Depository  parking  lot,  Oswald
walked  quickly  ahead.  Frazier  followed  and  saw
Oswald  enter  the  Depository  Building  carrying
the  long  bulky  package  with  him.

During  the  morning  of  November  22,  Marina
Oswald  followed  President  Kennedy's  activities
on  television.  She  and  Ruth  Paine  cried  when
they  heard  that  the  President  had  been  shot.
Ruth  Paine  translated  the  news  of  the  shooting
to  Marina  Oswald  as  it  came  over  television,  in-
cluding the  report  that  the  shots  were  probably
fired  from  the  building  where  Oswald  worked.
When  Marina  Oswald  heard  this,  she  recalled
the  Walker  episode  and  the  fact  that  her  husband


8


still  owned  the  rifle.  She  went  quietly  to  the
Paine's  garage  where  the  rifle  had  been  con-
cealed in  a  blanket  among  their  other  belongings.
It  appeared  to  her  that  the  rifle  was  still  there,
although  she  did  not  actually  open  the  blanket.

At  about  3  p.m.  the  police  arrived  at  the
Paine  house  and  asked  Marina  Oswald  whether
her  husband  owned  a  rifle.  She  said  that  he  did
and  then  led  them  into  the  garage  and  pointed
to  the  rolled  up  blanket.  As  a  police  officer  lifted
it,  the  blanket  hung  limply  over  either  side  of
his  arm.  The  rifle  was  not  there.

Meanwhile,  at  police  headquarters,  Captain
Fritz  had  begun  questioning  Oswald.  Soon  after
the  start  of  the  first  interrogation,  agents  of  the
FBI  and  the  U.S.  Secret  Service  arrived  and
participated  in  the  questioning.  Oswald  denied
having  anything  to  do  with  the  assassination  of
President  Kennedy  or  the  murder  of  Patrolman
Tippit.  He  claimed  that  he  was  eating  lunch  at
the  time  of  the  assassination,  and  that  he  then
spoke  with  his  foreman  for  5  to  10  minutes  be-
fore going  home.  He  denied  that  he  owned  a
rifle  and  when  confronted,  in  a  subsequent  in-
terview, with  a  picture  showing  him  holding  a
rifle  and  pistol,  he  claimed  that  his  face  had
been  superimposed  on  someone  else's  body.  He
refused  to  answer  any  questions  about  the  pres-
ence in  his  wallet  of  a  selective  service  card  with
his  picture  and  the  name  "Alek  J.  Hidell."

During  the  questioning  of  Oswald  on  the  third
floor  of  the  police  department,  more  than  100
representatives  of  the  press,  radio,  and  television
were  crowded  into  the  haUway  through  which
Oswald  had  to  pass  when  being  taken  from  his
cell  to  Captain  Fritz'  ofiBce  for  interrogation.  Re-
porters tried  to  interview  Oswald  during  these
trips.  Between  Friday  afternoon  and  Sunday
morning  he  appeared  in  the  hallway  at  least  16
times.  The  generally  confused  conditions  out-
side and  inside  Captain  Fritz'  office  increased
the  difficulty  of  police  questioning.  Advised  by
the  police  that  he  could  communicate  with  an
attorney,  Oswald  made  several  telephone  calls
on  Saturday  in  an  effort  to  procure  representa-
tion of  his  own  choice  and  discussed  the  matter
with  the  president  of  the  local  bar  association,
who  offered  to  obtain  counsel.  Oswald  declined
the  offer  saying  that  he  would  first  try  to  obtain
counsel  by  himself.  By  Simday  morning  he  had
not  yet  engaged  an  attorney.

At  7:10  p.m.  on  November  22,  1963,  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  was  formally  advised  that  he
had  been  charged  with  the  murder  of  Patrolman
J.  D.  Tippit.  Several  witnesses  to  the  Tippit
slaying  and  to  the  subsequent  flight  of  the  gun-
man had  positively  identified  Oswald  in  police
lineups.  While  positive  firearm  identification  evi-
dence was  not  available  at  the  time,  the  revolver
in  Oswald's  possession  at  the  time  of  his  arrest
was  of  a  type  which  could  have  fired  the  shots
that  killed  Tippit.

The  formal  charge  against  Oswald  for  the
assassination  of  President  Kennedy  was  lodged
shortly  after  1:30  a.m.,  on  Saturday,  November


23.  By  10  p.m.  of  the  day  of  the  assassination,
the  FBI  had  traced  the  rifle  found  on  the  sixth
floor  of  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  to
a  mailorder  house  in  Chicago  which  had  pur-
chased it  from  a  distributor  in  New  York.  Ap-
proximately 6  hours  later  the  Chicago  firm  ad-
vised that  this  rifle  had  been  ordered  in  March
1963  by  an  A.  Hidel  for  shipment  to  post  office
box  2915,  in  Dallas,  Tex.,  a  box  rented  by  Os-
wald. Payment  for  the  rifle  was  remitted  by  a
money  order  signed  by  A.  Hidell.  By  6:45  p.m.
on  November  23,  the  FBI  was  able  to  advise  the
Dallas  police  that,  as  a  result  of  handwriting
analysis  of  the  documents  used  to  purchase  the
rifle,  it  had  concluded  that  the  rifle  had  been
ordered  by  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.

Throughout  Friday  and  Saturday,  the  Dallas
police  released  to  the  public  many  of  the  details
concerning  the  alleged  evidence  against  Oswald.
Police  officials  discussed  important  aspects  of
the  case,  usually  in  the  course  of  impromptu
and  confused  press  conferences  in  the  third-floor
corridor.  Some  of  the  information  divulged  was
erroneous.  Efforts  by  the  news  media  representa-
tives to  reconstruct  the  crime  and  promptly  re-
port details  frequently  led  to  erroneous  and
often  conflicting  reports.  At  the  urgings  of  the
newsmen.  Chief  of  Police  Jesse  E.  Curry,
brought  Oswald  to  a  press  conference  in  the  po-
lice assembly  room  shortly  after  midnight  of  the
day  Oswald  was  arrested.  The  assembly  room
was  crowded  with  newsmen  who  had  come  to
Dallas  from  all  over  the  country.  They  shouted
questions  at  Oswald  and  flashed  cameras  at
him.  Among  this  group  was  a  52-year-old  Dallas
nightclub  operator — Jack  Ruby.

On  Sunday  morning,  November  24,  arrange-
ments were  made  for  Oswald's  transfer  from
the  city  jail  to  the  Dallas  County  jail,  about  1
mile  away.  The  news  media  had  been  informed
on  Saturday  night  that  the  transfer  of  Oswald
would  not  take  place  until  after  10  a.m.  on
Sunday.  Earlier  on  Sunday,  between  2:30  and
3  a.m.,  anonymous  telephone  calls  threatening
Oswald's  life  had  been  received  by  the  Dallas
office  of  the  FBI  and  by  the  office  of  the  county
sheriff.  Nevertheless,  on  Sunday  morning,  tele-
vision, radio,  and  newspaper  representatives
crowded  into  the  basement  to  record  the  trans-
fer. As  viewed  through  television  cameras,  Os-
wald would  emerge  from  a  door  in  front  of  the
cameras  and  proceed  to  the  transfer  vehicle.  To
the  right  of  the  cameras  was  a  "down"  ramp
from  Main  Street  on  the  north.  To  the  left  was
an  "up"  ramp  leading  to  Commerce  Street  on
the  south.

The  armored  truck  in  which  Oswald  was  to
be  transferred  arrived  shortly  after  1 1  a.m.  Po-
lice officials  then  decided,  however,  that  an  un-
marked police  car  would  be  preferable  for  the
trip  because  of  its  greater  speed  and  maneuvera-
bility. At  approximately  11:20  a.m.  Oswald
emerged  from  the  basement  jail  office  flanked
by  detectives  on  either  side  and  at  his  rear.  He
took  a  few  steps  toward  the  car  and  was  in  the


glaring  light  of  the  television  cameras  when  a
man  suddenly  darted  out  from  an  area  on  the
right  of  the  cameras  where  newsmen  had  been
assembled.  The  man  was  carrying  a  Colt  .38
revolver  in  his  right  hand  and,  while  millions
watched  on  television,  he  moved  quickly  to
within  a  few  feet  of  Oswald  and  fired  one  shot
into  Oswald's  abdomen.  Oswald  groaned  with
pain  as  he  fell  to  the  groimd  and  quickly  lost
consciousness.  Within  7  minutes  Oswald  was  at
Parkland  Hospital  where,  without  having  re-
gained consciousness,  he  was  pronounced  dead
at  1:07  p.m.

The  man  who  killed  Oswald  was  Jack  Ruby.
He  was  instantly  arrested  and,  minutes  later,
confined  in  a  cell  on  the  fifth  floor  of  the  Dallas
police  jail.  Under  interrogation,  he  denied  that
the  killing  of  Oswald  was  in  any  way  connected
with  a  conspiracy  involving  the  assassination  of
President  Kennedy.  He  maintained  that  he  had
killed  Oswald  in  a  temporary  fit  of  depression
and  rage  over  the  President's  death.  Ruby  was
transferred  the  following  day  to  the  coimty  jail
without  notice  to  the  press  or  to  police  officers
not  directly  involved  in  the  transfer.  Indicted
for  the  murder  of  Oswald  by  the  State  of  Texas
on  November  26,  1963,  Ruby  was  found  guilty
on  March  14,  1964,  and  sentenced  to  death.  As
of  September  1964,  his  case  was  pending  on
appeaL


CONCLUSIONS

This  Commission  was  created  to  ascertain  the
facts  relating  to  the  preceding  summary  of
events  and  to  consider  the  important  questions
which  they  raised.  The  Commission  has  ad-
dressed itself  to  this  task  and  has  reached  cer-
tain conclusions  based  on  all  the  available  evi-
dence. No  limitations  have  been  placed  on  the
Commission's  inquiry;  it  has  conducted  its  own
investigation,  and  all  Government  agencies  have
fully  discharged  their  responsibility  to  cooperate
with  the  Commission  in  its  investigation.  These
conclusions  represent  the  reasoned  judgment
of  all  members  of  the  Commission  and  are  pre-
sented after  an  investigation  which  has  satisfied
the  Commission  that  it  has  ascertained  the  truth
concerning  the  assassination  of  President  Ken-
nedy to  the  extent  that  a  prolonged  and  thorough
search  makes  this  possible.

1.  The  shots  which  killed  President  Kennedy
and  wounded  Governor  Connally  were  fired
from  the  sixth  floor  window  at  the  southeast
comer  of  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository.
This  determination  is  based  upon  the  following:

(a)  Witnesses  at  the  scene  of  the  assassina-
tion saw  a  rifle  being  fired  from  the  sixth  floor
window  of  the  Depository  Building,  and  some
witnesses  saw  a  rifle  in  the  window  immedi-
ately after  the  shots  were  fired.

(b)  The  nearly  whole  bullet  found  on
Governor  Connally's  stretcher  at  Parkland


Memorial  Hospital  and  the  two  bullet  frag-
ments found  in  the  front  seat  of  the  Presi-
dential limousine  were  fired  from  the  6.5-
millimeter  Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle  found
on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Depository  Building
to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  weapons.

(c)  The  three  used  cartridge  cases  found
near  the  window  on  the  sixth  floor  at  the
southeast  comer  of  the  buDding  were  fired
from  the  same  rifle  which  fired  the  above-
described  bullet  and  fragments,  to  the  exclu-
sion of  all  other  weapons.

(d)  The  windshield  in  the  Presidential
limousine  was  stmck  by  a  bullet  fragment  on
the  inside  surface  of  the  glass,  but  was  not
penetrated.

(e)  The  nature  of  the  bullet  wounds  suffered
by  President  Kennedy  and  Governor  Con-
nally and  the  location  of  the  car  at  the  time
of  the  shots  establish  that  the  bullets  were
fired  from  above  and  behind  the  Presidential
limousine,  striking  the  President  and  the  Gov-
ernor as  follows:

(1)  President  Kennedy  was  first  struck
by  a  bullet  which  entered  at  the  back  of
his  neck  and  exited  through  the  lower
front  portion  of  his  neck,  causing  a  woimd
which  would  not  necessarily  have  been
lethal.  The  President  was  stmck  a  second
time  by  a  bullet  which  entered  the  right-
rear  portion  of  his  head,  causing  a  massive
and  fatal  wound.

(2)  Governor  Connally  was  stmck  by  a
bullet  which  entered  on  the  right  side  of
his  back  and  traveled  downward  through
the  right  side  of  his  chest,  exiting  below  his
right  nipple.  This  bullet  then  passed
through  his  right  wrist  and  entered  his
left  thigh  where  it  caused  a  superficial
wound.

(f)  There  is  no  credible  evidence  that  the
shots  were  fired  from  the  Triple  Underpass,
ahead  of  the  motorcade,  or  from  any  other
location.

2.  The  weight  of  the  evidence  indicates  that
there  were  three  shots  fired.

3.  Although  it  is  not  necessary  to  any  essen-
tial findings  of  the  Commission  to  determine  just
which  shot  hit  Governor  ConnaUy,  there  is  very
persuasive  evidence  from  the  experts  to  indi-
cate that  the  same  bullet  which  pierced  the
President's  throat  also  caused  Govemor  Con-
nally's woxmds.  However,  Govemor  Connally's
testimony  and  certain  other  factors  have  given
rise  to  some  difference  of  opinion  as  to  this
probability  but  there  is  no  question  in  the  mind
of  any  member  of  the  Commission  that  aU  the
shots  which  caused  the  President's  and  Gov-
emor Connally's  wounds  were  fired  from  the
sixth  floor  window  of  the  Texas  School  Book
Depository.

4.  The  shots  which  kiUed  President  Kennedy
and  wounded  Govemor  Connally  were  fired  by


10


Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  This  conclusion  is  based
upon  the  following:

(a)  The  Mannlicher-Carcano  6.5-millimeter
ItaUan  rifle  from  which  the  shots  were  fired
was  owned  by  and  in  the  possession  of
Oswald.

(b)  Oswald  carried  this  rifle  into  the  Deposi-
tory Building  on  the  morning  of  November
22,  1963.

(c)  Oswald,  at  the  time  of  the  assassination,
was  present  at  the  window  from  which  the
shots  were  fired.

(d)  Shortly  after  the  assassination,  the
Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle  belonging  to  Os-
wald was  foimd  partially  hidden  between
some  cartons  on  the  sixth  floor  and  the  im-
provised paper  bag  in  which  Oswald  brought
the  rifle  to  the  Depository  was  found  close  by
the  window  from  which  the  shots  were  fired.

(e)  Based  on  testimony  of  the  experts  and
their  analysis  of  films  of  the  assassination,  the
Commission  has  concluded  that  a  rifleman
of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald's  capabilities  could
have  fired  the  shots  from  the  rifle  used  in  the
assassination  within  the  elapsed  time  of  the
shooting.  The  Commission  has  concluded
further  that  Oswald  possessed  the  capability
with  a  rifle  which  enabled  him  to  conamit
the  assassination.

(f)  Oswald  lied  to  the  police  after  his  arrest
concerning  important  substantive  matters.

(g)  Oswald  had  attempted  to  kill  Maj.  Geru
Edwin  A.  Walker  (Resigned,  U.S.  Army)  on
April  10,  1963,  thereby  demonstrating  his
disposition  to  take  human  life.

5.  Oswald  killed  Dallas  Police  Patrolman  J.  D.
Tippit  approximately  45  minutes  after  the  as-
sassination. This  conclusion  upholds  the  finding
that  Oswald  fired  the  shots  which  killed  Presi-
dent Kennedy  and  wounded  Governor  Connally
and  is  supported  by  the  following:

(a)  Two  eyewitnesses  saw  the  Tippit  shoot-
ing and  seven  eyewitnesses  heard  the  shots
and  saw  the  gunman  leave  the  scene  with  re-
volver in  hand.  These  nine  eyewitnesses  posi-
tively identified  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  as  the
man  they  saw.

(b)  The  cartridge  cases  found  at  the  scene
of  the  shooting  were  fired  from  the  revolver
in  the  possession  of  Oswald  at  the  time  of  his
arrest  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  weapons.

(c)  The  revolver  in  Oswald's  possession  at
the  time  of  his  arrest  was  purchased  by  and
belonged  to  Oswald.

(d)  Oswald's  jacket  was  found  along  the
path  of  flight  taken  by  the  gunman  as  he  fled
from  the  scene  of  the  killing.

6.  Within  80  minutes  of  the  assassination  and
35  minutes  of  the  Tippit  killing  Oswald  resisted
arrest  at  the  theatre  by  attempting  to  shoot  an-
other Dallas  police  officer.


7.  The  Commission  has  reached  the  following
conclusions  concerning  Oswald's  interrogation
and  detention  by  the  DaUas  police:

(a)  Except  for  the  force  required  to  effect
his  arrest,  Oswald  was  not  subjected  to  any
physical  coercion  by  any  law  enforcement
officials.  He  was  advised  that  he  could  not  be
compelled  to  give  any  information  and  that
any  statements  made  by  him  might  be  used
against  him  in  court  He  was  advised  of  his
right  to  counsel.  He  was  given  the  opportunity
to  obtain  counsel  of  his  own  choice  and  was
offered  legal  assistance  by  the  Dallas  Bar  As-
sociation, which  he  rejected  at  that  time.

(b)  Newspaper,  radio,  and  television  re-
porters were  aUowed  uninhibited  access  to
the  area  through  which  Oswald  had  to  pass
when  he  was  moved  from  his  cell  to  the  inter-
rogation room  and  other  sections  of  the  build-
ing, thereby  subjecting  Oswald  to  harassment
and  creating  chaotic  conditions  which  were
not  conducive  to  orderly  interrogation  or  the
protection  of  the  rights  of  the  prisoner.

(c)  The  numerous  statements,  sometimes
erroneous,  made  to  the  press  by  various  local
law  enforcement  officials,  during  this  period
of  confusion  and  disorder  in  the  police  sta-
tion, would  have  presented  serious  obstacles
to  the  obtaining  of  a  fair  trial  for  Oswald.  To
the  extent  that  the  information  was  erroneous
or  misleading,  it  helped  to  create  doubts,
speculations,  and  fears  in  the  mind  of  the
pubhc  which  might  otherwise  not  have  arisen.

8.  The  Commission  has  reached  the  following
conclusions  concerning  the  killing  of  Oswald
by  Jack  Ruby  on  November  24,  1963:

(a)  Ruby  entered  the  basement  of  the
Dallas  Police  Department  shortly  after
11:17  a.m.  and  killed  Lee  Harvey  Oswald
at  11:21  a.m.

(b)  Although  the  evidence  on  Ruby's
means  of  entry  is  not  conclusive,  the  weight
of  the  evidence  indicates  that  he  walked
down  the  ramp  leading  from  Main  Street
to  the  basement  of  the  police  department.

(c)  There  is  no  evidence  to  support  the
rumor  that  Ruby  may  have  been  assisted
by  any  members  of  the  Dallas  Police  De-
partment in  the  killing  of  Oswald.

(d)  The  Dallas  Police  Department's  de-
cision to  transfer  Oswald  to  the  county  jail
in  full  pubUc  view  was  misound.  The  arrange-
ments made  by  the  police  department  on
Sunday  morning,  only  a  few  hoiurs  before
the  attempted  transfer,  were  inadequate.  Of
critical  importance  was  the  fact  that  news
media  representatives  and  others  were  not
excluded  from  the  basement  even  after  the
police  were  notiQed  of  threats  to  Oswald's
Life.  These  deficiencies  contributed  to  the
death  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.


11


9.  The  Commission  has  found  no  evidence
that  either  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  or  Jack  Ruby
was  part  of  any  conspiracy,  domestic  or  for-
eign, to  assassinate  President  Kennedy.  The
reasons  for  this  conclusion  are:

(a)  The  Commission  has  found  no  evidence
that  anyone  assisted  Oswald  in  planning  or
carrying  out  the  assassination.  In  this  con-
nection it  has  thoroughly  investigated,  among
other  factors,  the  circumstances  surrounding
the  planning  of  the  motorcade  route  through
Dallas,  the  hiring  of  Oswald  by  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  Co.  on  October  15,
1963,  the  method  by  which  the  rifle  was
brought  into  the  building,  the  placing  of  car-
tons of  books  at  the  window,  Oswald's  escape
from  the  building,  and  the  testimony  of  eye-
witnesses to  the  shooting.

(b)  The  Commission  has  foimd  no  evidence
that  Oswald  was  involved  with  any  person
or  group  in  a  conspiracy  to  assassinate  the
President,  although  it  has  thoroughly  inves-
tigated, in  addition  to  other  possible  leads,  all
facets  of  Oswald's  associations,  finances,  and
personal  habits,  particularly  during  the  pe-
riod following  his  return  from  the  Soviet
Union  in  June  1962.

(c)  The  Commission  has  found  no  evidence
to  show  that  Oswald  was  employed,  per-
suaded, or  encouraged  by  any  foreign  gov-
ernment to  assassinate  President  Kennedy
or  that  he  was  an  agent  of  any  foreign  gov-
ernment, although  the  Commission  has  re-
viewed the  circumstances  surrounding  Os-
wald's defection  to  the  Soviet  Union,  his  life
there  from  October  of  1959  to  June  of  1962
so  far  as  it  can  be  reconstructed,  his  known
contacts  with  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Com-
mittee, and  his  visits  to  the  Cuban  and  Soviet
Embassies  in  Mexico  City  during  his  trip  to
Mexico  from  September  26  to  October  3,
1963,  and  his  known  contacts  with  the  Soviet
Embassy  in  the  United  States.

(d)  The  Commission  has  explored  all  at-
tempts of  Oswald  to  identify  himself  with
various  political  groups,  including  the  Com-
munist Party,  U.S.A.,  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba
Committee,  and  the  Socialist  Workers  Party,
and  has  been  unable  to  find  any  evidence  that
the  contacts  which  he  initiated  were  related
to  Oswald's  subsequent  assassination  of  the
President.

(e)  All  of  the  evidence  before  the  Com-
mission established  that  there  was  nothing
to  support  the  speculation  that  Oswald  was
an  agent,  employee,  or  informant  of  the
FBI,  the  CIA,  or  any  other  governmental
agency.  It  has  thoroughly  investigated  Os-
wald's relationships  prior  to  the  assassination
with  all  agencies  of  the  U.S.  Government.
All  contacts  with  Oswald  by  any  of  these
agencies  were  made  in  the  regular  exercise
of  their  different  responsibilities.

(/)  No  direct  or  indirect  relationship  be-


tween Lee  Harvey  Oswald  and  Jack  Ruby
has  been  discovered  by  the  Commission,  nor
has  it  been  able  to  find  any  credible  evidence
that  either  knew  the  other,  although  a  thor-
ough investigation  was  made  of  the  many
rumors  and  speculations  of  such  a  relation-
ship.

(g)  The  Commission  has  found  no  evidence
that  Jack  Ruby  acted  with  any  other  person
in  the  killing  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.

(h)  After  careful  investigation  the  Com-
mission has  found  no  credible  evidence  either
that  Ruby  and  Officer  Tippit,  who  was  killed
by  Oswald,  knew  each  other  or  that  Oswald
and  Tippit  knew  each  other.

Because  of  the  difficulty  of  proving  nega-
tives to  a  certainty  the  possibility  of  others
being  involved  with  either  Oswald  or  Ruby
cannot  be  established  categorically,  but  if
there  is  any  such  evidence  it  has  been  beyond
the  reach  of  all  the  investigative  agencies  and
resources  of  the  United  States  and  has  not
come  to  the  attention  of  this  Commission.

10.  In  its  entire  investigation  the  Commission
has  found  no  evidence  of  conspiracy,  subver-
sion, or  disloyalty  to  the  U.S.  Government  by
any  Federal,  State,  or  local  official.

11.  On  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  the
Commission  it  concludes  that  Oswald  acted
alone.  Therefore,  to  determine  the  motives  for
the  assassination  of  President  Kennedy,  one
must  look  to  the  assassin  himself.  Clues  to  Os-
wald's motives  can  be  found  in  his  family  his-
tory, his  education  or  lack  of  it,  his  acts,  his
writings,  and  the  recollections  of  those  who  had
close  contacts  with  him  throughout  his  life.  The
Commission  has  presented  with  this  report  all
of  the  background  information  bearing  on  mo-
tivation which  it  could  discover.  Thus,  others
may  study  Lee  Oswald's  life  and  arrive  at  their
own  conclusions  as  to  his  possible  motives.

The  Commission  could  not  make  any  defini-
tive determination  of  Oswald's  motives.  It  has
endeavored  to  isolate  factors  which  contributed
to  his  character  and  which  might  have  influ-
enced his  decision  to  assassinate  President  Ken-
nedy. These  factors  were:

(a)  His  deep-rooted  resentment  of  all  au-
thority which  was  expressed  in  a  hostility
toward  every  society  in  which  he  lived;

(b)  His  inability  to  enter  into  meaningful
relationships  with  people,  and  a  continuous
pattern  of  rejecting  his  environment  in  favor
of  new  surroundings;

(c)  His  urge  to  try  to  find  a  place  in  history
and  despair  at  times  over  failures  in  his  var-
ious undertakings;

(d)  His  capacity  for  violence  as  evidenced
by  his  attempt  to  kill  General  Walker;

(e)  His  avowed  commitment  to  Marxism
and  communism,  as  he  understood  the  terms
and  developed  his  own  interpretation  of  them;
this  was  expressed  by  his  antagonism  toward
the  United  States,  by  his  defection  to  the


12


Soviet  Union,  by  his  failure  to  be  reconciled
with  life  in  the  United  States  even  after  his
disenchantment  with  the  Soviet  Union,  and  by
his  efforts,  though  frustrated,  to  go  to  Cuba.

Each  of  these  contributed  to  his  capacity  to
risk  all  in  cruel  and  irresponsible  actions.

12.  The  Commission  recognizes  that  the
varied  responsibilities  of  the  President  require
that  he  make  frequent  trips  to  all  parts  of  the
United  States  and  abroad.  Consistent  with  their
high  responsibilities  Presidents  can  never  be
protected  from  every  potential  threat.  The  Se-
cret Service's  difficulty  in  meeting  its  protective
responsibility  varies  with  the  activities  and  the
nature  of  the  occupant  of  the  Office  of  President
and  his  willingness  to  conform  to  plans  for  his
safety.  In  appraising  the  performance  of  the
Secret  Service  it  should  be  imderstood  that  it
has  to  do  its  work  within  such  limitations.  Nev-
ertheless, the  Commission  believes  that  recom-
mendations for  improvements  in  Presidential
protection  are  compelled  by  the  facts  disclosed
in  this  investigation.

(a)  The  complexities  of  the  Presidency  have
increased  so  rapidly  in  recent  years  that  the
Secret  Service  has  not  been  able  to  develop
or  to  secure  adequate  resources  of  persoimel
and  facilities  to  fulfill  its  important  assign-
ment. This  situation  should  be  promptly
remedied.

(b)  The  Commission  has  concluded  that
the  criteria  and  procedures  of  the  Secret  Serv-
ice designed  to  identify  and  protect  against
persons  considered  threats  to  the  President,
were  not  adequate  prior  to  the  assassination.

(1)  The  Protective  Research  Section  of
the  Secret  Service,  which  is  responsible  for
its  preventive  work,  lacked  suflBcient
trained  personnel  and  the  mechanical  and
technical  assistance  needed  to  fulfill  its
responsibility.

(2)  Prior  to  the  assassination  the  Secret
Service's  criteria  dealt  with  direct  threats
against  the  President.  Although  the  Secret
Service  treated  the  direct  threats  against
the  President  adequately,  it  failed  to  recog-
nize the  necessity  of  identifying  other  po-
tential sources  of  danger  to  his  security.
The  Secret  Service  did  not  develop  ade-
quate and  specific  criteria  defining  those
persons  or  groups  who  might  present
a  danger  to  the  President.  In  effect,  the
Secret  Service  largely  relied  upon  other
Federal.-or  State  agencies  to  supply  the  in-
formation necessary  for  it  to  fulfill  its  pre-
ventive responsibilities,  although  it  did  ask
for  information  about  direct  threats  to  the
President.

(c)  The  Commission  has  concluded  that
there  was  insuflBcient  liaison  and  coordination
of  information  between  the  Secret  Service
and  other  Federal  agencies  necessarily  con-


cerned with  Presidential  protection.  Although
the  FBI,  in  the  normal  exercise  of  its  respon-
sibility, had  secured  considerable  information
about  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  it  had  no  official
responsibility,  under  the  Secret  Service  cri-
teria existing  at  the  time  of  the  President's  trip
to  Dallas,  to  refer  to  the  Secret  Service  the
information  it  had  about  Oswald.  The  Com-
mission has  concluded,  however,  that  the
FBI  took  an  unduly  restrictive  view  of  its
role  in  preventive  intelligence  work  prior  to
the  assassination.  A  more  carefully  coordi-
nated treatment  of  the  Oswald  case  by  the
FBI  might  well  have  resulted  in  bringing  Os-
wald's activities  to  the  attention  of  the  Se-
cret Service.

(d)  The  Commission  has  concluded  that
some  of  the  advance  preparations  in  Dallas
made  by  the  Secret  Service,  such  as  the  de-
tailed security  measures  taken  at  Love  Field
and  the  Trade  Mart,  were  thorough  and  well
executed.  In  other  respects,  however,  the
Commission  has  concluded  that  the  advance
preparations  for  the  President's  trip  were
deficient.

( 1 )  Although  the  Secret  Service  is  com-
pelled to  rely  to  a  great  extent  on  local
law  enforcement  officials,  its  procedures
at  the  time  of  the  Dallas  trip  did  not  call  for
well-defined  instructions  as  to  the  respec-
tive responsibilities  of  the  police  officials
and  others  assisting  in  the  protection  of
the  President.

(2)  The  procedures  relied  upon  by  the
Secret  Service  for  detecting  the  presence
of  an  assassin  located  in  a  building  along
a  motorcade  route  were  inadequate.  At  the
time  of  the  trip  to  Dallas,  the  Secret  Serv-
ice as  a  matter  of  practice  did  not  investi-
gate, or  cause  to  be  checked,  any  building
located  along  the  motorcade  route  to  be
taken  by  the  President  The  responsibility
for  observing  windows  in  these  buildings
during  the  motorcade  was  divided  between
local  police  personnel  stationed  on  the
streets  to  regulate  crowds  and  Secret  Serv-
ice agents  riding  in  the  motorcade.  Based
on  its  investigation  the  Commission  has
conclulded  that  these  arrangements  during
the  trip  to  Dallas  were  clearly  not  sxifficient.

(e)  The  configuration  of  the  Presidential
car  and  the  seating  arrangements  of  the
Secret  Service  agents  in  the  car  did  not
afford  the  Secret  Service  agents  the  oppor-
tunity they  should  have  had  to  be  of  immedi-
ate assistance  to  the  President  at  the  first  sign
of  danger.

if)  Within  these  limitations,  however,  the
Commission  finds  that  the  agents  most  im-
mediately responsible  for  the  President's
safety  reacted  promptly  at  the  time  the  shots
were  fired  from  the  Texas  School  Book  De-
pository Building.


13


RECOMMENDATIONS

Prompted  by  the  assassination  of  President
Kennedy,  the  Secret  Service  has  initiated  a
comprehensive  and  critical  review  of  its  total
operations.  As  a  result  of  studies  conducted  dur-
ing the  past  several  months,  and  in  cooperation
with  this  Commission,  the  Secret  Service  has
prepared  a  planning  document  dated  August  27,
1964,  which  recommends  various  programs
considered  necessary  by  the  Service  to  improve
its  techniques  and  enlarge  its  resources.  The
Commission  is  encouraged  by  the  efforts  taken
by  the  Secret  Service  since  the  assassination  and
suggests  the  following  recommendations.

1.  A  committee  of  Cabinet  members  includ-
ing the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  and  the  At-
torney General,  or  the  National  Security  Coun-
cil, should  be  assigned  the  responsibility  of
reviewing  and  overseeing  the  protective  activities
of  the  Secret  Service  and  the  other  Federal
agencies  that  assist  in  safeguarding  the  Presi-
dent. Once  given  this  responsibility,  such  a  com-
mittee would  insure  that  the  maximum  re-
sources of  the  Federal  Government  are  fully
engaged  in  the  task  of  protecting  the  President,
and  would  provide  guidance  in  defining  the  gen-
eral nature  of  domestic  and  foreign  dangers  to
Presidential  sectirity.

2.  Suggestions  have  been  advanced  to  the
Commission  for  the  transfer  of  all  or  parts  of
the  Presidential  protective  responsibilities  of  the
Secret  Service  to  some  other  department  or
agency.  The  Commission  beUeves  that  if  there
is  to  be  any  determination  of  whether  or  not  to
relocate  these  responsibilities  and  functions,  it
ought  to  be  made  by  the  Executive  and  the
Congress,  perhaps  upon  recommendations
based  on  studies  by  the  previously  suggested
committee.

3.  Meanwhile,  in  order  to  improve  daily  su-
pervision of  the  Secret  Service  within  the  De-
partment of  the  Treasury,  the  Commission  rec-
ommends that  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury
appoint  a  special  assistant  with  the  responsibility
of  supervising  the  Secret  Service.  This  special
assistant  should  have  sufficient  stature  and  ex-
perience in  law  enforcement,  intelligence,  and
allied  fields  to  provide  effective  continuing  su-
pervision, and  to  keep  the  Secretary  fully  in-
formed regarding  the  performance  of  the  Secret
Service.  One  of  the  initial  assignments  of  this
special  assistant  should  be  the  supervision  of
the  current  effort  by  the  Secret  Service  to  revise
and  modernize  its  basic  operating  procedures.

4.  The  Commission  recommends  that  the
Secret  Service  completely  overhaul  its  facilities
devoted  to  the  advance  detection  of  potential
threats  against  the  President.  The  Commission
suggests  the  following  measures.

(a)  The  Secret  Service  should  develop  as
quickly  as  possible  more  useful  and  precise
criteria  defining  those  potential  threats  to  the
President  which  should  be  brought  to  its  at-


tention by  other  agencies.  The  criteria  should,
among  other  additions,  provide  for  prompt
notice  to  the  Secret  Service  of  all  returned
defectors.

(b)  The  Secret  Service  should  expedite  its
current  plans  to  utilize  the  most  efficient
data-processing  techniques.

(c)  Once  the  Secret  Service  has  formulated
new  criteria  delineating  the  information  it
desires,  it  should  enter  into  agreements  with
each  Federal  agency  to  insure  its  receipt  of
such  information.

5.  The  Commission  recommends  that  the
Secret  Service  improve  the  protective  measures
followed  in  the  planning,  and  conducting  of
Presidential  motorcades.  In  particular,  the  Se-
cret Service  should  continue  its  current  efforts  to
increase  the  precautionary  attention  given  to
buildings  along  the  motorcade  route.

6.  The  Commission  recommends  that  the
Secret  Service  continue  its  recent  efforts  to  im-
prove and  formalize  its  relationships  with  local
police  departments  in  areas  to  be  visited  by  the
President.

7.  The  Commission  believes  that  when  the
new  criteria  and  procedures  are  established,  the
Secret  Service  will  not  have  sufficient  personnel
or  adequate  facilities.  The  Conmiission  recom-
mends that  the  Secret  Service  be  provided  with
the  personnel  and  resources  which  the  Service
and  the  Department  of  the  Treasury  may  be  able
to  demonstrate  are  needed  to  fulfill  its  important
mission.

8.  Even  with  an  increase  in  Secret  Service
personnel,  the  protection  of  the  President  will
continue  to  require  the  resources  and  coopera-
tion of  many  Federal  agencies.  The  Conmiission
reconunends  that  these  agencies,  specifically  the
FBI,  continue  the  practice  as  it  has  developed,
particularly  since  the  assassination,  of  assisting
the  Secret  Service  upon  request  by  providing
personnel  or  other  aid,  and  that  there  be  a  closer
association  and  liaison  between  the  Secret  Serv-
ice and  all  Federal  agencies.

9.  The  Commission  recommends  that  the
President's  physician  always  accompany  him
during  his  travels  and  occupy  a  position  near
the  President  where  he  can  be  immediately
available  in  case  of  any  emergency.

10.  The  Commission  recommends  to  Con-
gress that  it  adopt  legislation  which  would  make
the  assassination  of  the  President  and  Vice
President  a  Federal  crime.  A  state  of  affairs
where  U.S.  authorities  have  no  clearly  defined
jurisdiction  to  investigate  the  assassination  of  a
President  is  anomalous.

11.  The  Commission  has  examined  the  De-
partment of  State's  handling  of  the  Oswald
matters  and  finds  that  it  followed  the  law
throughout.  However,  the  Commission  believes
that  the  Department  in  accordance  with  its  own
regulations  should  in  all  cases  exercise  great
care  in  the  return  to  this  country  of  defectors
who  have  evidenced  disloyalty  or  hostility  to


14


this  country  or  who  have  expressed  a  desire  to
renounce  their  American  citizenship  and  that
when  such  persons  are  so  returned,  procedures
should  be  adopted  for  the  better  dissemination
of  information  concerning  them  to  the  intelli-
gence agencies  of  the  Government.

12.  The  Commission  recomjnends  that  the


representatives  of  the  bar,  law  enforcement  as-
sociations, and  the  news  media  work  together  to
establish  ethical  standards  concerning  the  col-
lection and  presentation  of  information  to  the
public  so  that  there  will  be  no  interference  with
pending  criminal  investigations,  court  proceed-
ings, or  the  right  of  individuals  to  a  fair  trial.


Chapter  11


THE  ASSASSINATION


THIS  CHAPTER  describes  President  Kennedy's
trip  to  Dallas,  from  its  origin  through  its  tragic
conclusion.  The  narrative  of  these  events  is
based  largely  on  the  recollections  of  the  partici-
pants, although  in  many  instances  documentary
or  other  evidence  has  also  been  used  by  the
Commission.  Begiiming  with  the  advance  plans
and  Secret  Service  preparations  for  the  trip,
this  chapter  reviews  the  motorcade  through  Dal-
las, the  fleeting  moments  of  the  assassination,
the  activities  at  Parkland  Memorial  Hospital,
and  the  return  of  the  Presidential  party  to  Wash-
ington. An  evaluation  of  the  procedures  em-
ployed to  safegaurd  the  President,  with  recom-
mendations for  improving  these  procedures,
appears  in  chapter  VIIl  of  the  report


PLANNING  THE  TEXAS  TRIP

President  Keimedy's  visit  to  Texas  in  Novem-
ber 1963  had  been  under  consideration  for  al-
most a  year  before  it  occurred.  He  had  made
only  a  few  brief  visits  to  the  State  since  the  1960
Presidential  campaign  and  in  1962  he  began  to
consider  a  formal  visit.  During  1963,  the  rea-
sons for  making  the  trip  became  more  persua-
sive. As  a  political  leader,  the  President  wished
to  resolve  the  factional  controversy  within  the
Democratic  Party  in  Texas  before  the  election
of  1964.  The  party  itself  saw  an  opportunity  to
raise  funds  by  having  the  President  speak  at  a
political  dinner  eventually  planned  for  Austin.
As  Chief  of  State,  the  President  always  wel-
comed the  opportunity  to  learn,  firsthand,  about
the  problems  which  concerned  the  American
people.  Moreover,  he  looked  forward  to  the
public  appearances  which  he  personally  enjoyed.

The  basic  decision  on  the  November  trip  to
Texas  was  made  at  a  meeting  of  President  Ken-
nedy, Vice  President  Johnson,  and  Governor
Connally  on  June  5,  1963,  at  the  Cortez  Hotel
in  Elpaso,  Tex.  The  President  had  spoken  earlier
that  day  at  the  Air  Force  Academy  in  Colorado
Springs,  Colo.,  and  had  stopped  in  El  Paso  to
discuss  the  proposed  visit  and  other  matters  with
the  Vice  President  and  the  Governor.  The  three
agreed  that  the  President  would  come  to  Texas


in  late  November  1963.  The  original  plan  called
for  the  President  to  spend  only  1  day  in  the  State,
making  whirlwind  visits  to  Dallas,  Fort  Worth,
San  Antonio,  and  Houston.  In  September,  the
White  House  decided  to  permit  further  visits  by
the  President  and  extended  the  trip  to  run  from
the  afternoon  of  November  21  through  the
evening  of  Friday,  November  22.  When  Gover-
nor Connally  called  at  the  White  House  on
October  4  to  discuss  the  details  of  the  visit,  it
was  agreed  that  the  planning  of  events  in  Texas
would  be  left  largely  to  the  Governor.  At  the
White  House,  Kenneth  O'Donnell,  special  assist-
ant to  the  President,  acted  as  coordinator  for
the  trip.

Everyone  agreed  that,  if  there  was  sufficient
time,  a  motorcade  through  downtown  Dallas
would  be  the  best  way  for  the  people  to  see  their
President.  When  the  trip  was  plaimed  for  only
1  day.  Governor  Connally  had  opposed  the
motorcade  because  there  was  not  enough  time.
The  Governor  stated,  however,  that  "once  we
got  San  Antonio  moved  from  Friday  to  Thurs-
day afternoon,  where  that  was  his  initial  stop  in
Texas,  then  we  had  the  time,  and  I  withdrew  my
objections  to  a  motorcade."  According  to  O'Don-
nell, "we  had  a  motorcade  wherever  we  went,"
particularly  in  large  cities  where  the  purpose  was
to  let  the  President  be  seen  by  as  many  people  as
possible.  In  his  experience,  "it  would  be  auto-
matic" for  the  Secret  Service  to  arrange  a  route
which  would,  within  the  time  allotted,  bring  the
President  "through  an  area  which  exposes  him
to  the  greatest  number  of  people,"


ADVANCE  PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE
DALLAS  TRIP

Advance  preparations  for  President  Ken-
nedy's visit  to  Dallas  were  primarily  the  respon-
sibility of  two  Secret  Service  agents:  Special
Agent  Winston  G.  Lawson,  a  member  of  the
White  House  detail  who  acted  as  the  advance
agent,  and  Forrest  V.  Sorrels,  special  agent  in
charge  of  the  Dallas  office.  Both  agents  were  ad-
vised of  the  trip  on  November  4.  Lawson  re-
ceived a  tentative  schedule  of  the  Texas  trip  on


15


November  8  from  Roy  H.  Kellerman,  assistant
special  agent  in  charge  of  the  White  House  de-
tail, who  was  the  Secret  Service  official  responsi-
ble for  the  entire  Texas  journey.  As  advance
agent  working  closely  with  Sorrels,  Lawson  had
responsibility  for  arranging  the  timetable  for  the
President's  visit  to  Dallas  and  coordinating  local
activities  with  the  White  House  staff,  the  organi-
zations directly  concerned  with  the  visit,  and
local  law  enforcement  officials.  Lawson's  most
important  responsibilities  were  to  take  preventive
action  against  anyone  in  Dallas  considered  a
threat  to  the  President,  to  select  the  luncheon
site  and  motorcade  route,  and  to  plan  security
measures  for  the  luncheon  and  the  motorcade.

Preventive  Intelligence  Activities

The  Protective  Research  Section  (PRS)  of  the
Secret  Service  maintains  records  of  people  who
have  threatened  the  President  or  so  conducted
themselves  as  to  be  deemed  a  potential  danger
to  him.  On  November  8,  1963,  after  undertaking
the  responsibility  for  advance  preparations  for
the  visit  to  Dallas,  Agent  Lawson  went  to  the
PRS  offices  in  Washington.  A  check  of  the  geo-
graphic indexes  there  revealed  no  listing  for  any
individual  deemed  to  be  a  potential  danger  to  the
President  in  the  territory  of  the  Secret  Service
regional  office  which  includes  Dallas  and  Fort
Worth.

To  supplement  the  PRS  files,  the  Secret  Serv-
ice depends  largely  on  local  police  departments
and  local  offices  of  other  Federal  agencies  which
advise  it  of  potential  threats  immediately  before
the  visit  of  the  President  to  their  community.
Upon  his  arrival  in  Dallas  on  November  12  Law-
son  conferred  with  the  local  police  and  the  local
office  of  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation
about  potential  dangers  to  the  President.  Al-
though there  was  no  mention  in  PRS  files  of
the  demonstration  in  Dallas  against  Ambassador
Adlai  Stevenson  on  October  24,  1963,  Lawson
inquired  about  the  incident  and  obtained  through
the  local  police  photographs  of  some  of  the  per-
sons involved.  On  November  22  a  Secret  Serv-
ice agent  stood  at  the  entrance  to  the  Trade
Mart,  where  the  President  was  scheduled  to
speak,  with  copies  of  these  photographs.  Dallas
detectives  in  the  lobby  of  the  Trade  Mart  and  in
the  luncheon  area  also  had  copies  of  these  photo-
graphs. A  number  of  people  who  resembled
some  of  those  in  the  photographs  were  placed
under  surveillance  at  the  Trade  Mart.

The  FBI  office  in  Dallas  gave  the  local  Secret
Service  representatives  the  name  of  a  possibly
dangerous  individual  in  the  Dallas  area  who
was  investigated.  It  also  advised  the  Secret  Serv-
ice of  the  circulation  on  November  21  of  a  hand-
bill sharply  critical  of  President  Kennedy,  dis-
cussed in  chapter  VI  of  this  report.  Shortly  be-
fore, the  Dallas  police  had  reported  to  the  Secret
Service  that  the  handbill  had  appeared  on  the
streets  of  Dallas.  Neither  the  Dallas  police  nor
the  FBI  had  yet  learned  the  source  of  the  hand-
bill. No  one  else  was  identified  to  the  Secret


Service  through  local  inquiry  as  potentially
dangerous,  nor  did  PRS  develop  any  additional
information  between  November  12,  when  Law-
son  left  Washington,  and  November  22.  The
adequacy  of  the  intelligence  system  maintained
by  the  Secret  Service  at  the  time  of  the  assassi-
nation, including  a  detailed  description  of  the
available  data  on  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  and  the
reasons  why  his  name  had  not  been  furnished  to
the  Secret  Service,  is  discussed  in  chapter  VUI.

The  Luncheon  Site

An  important  purpose  of  the  President's  visit
to  Dallas  was  to  speak  at  a  luncheon  given  by
business  and  civic  leaders.  The  White  House
staff  informed  the  Secret  Service  that  the  Presi-
dent would  arrive  and  depart  from  Dallas'  Love
Field;  that  a  motorcade  through  the  downtown
area  of  Dallas  to  the  luncheon  site  should  be
arranged;  and  that  following  the  luncheon  the
President  would  return  to  the  airport  by  the  most
direct  route.  Accordingly,  it  was  important  to
determine  the  luncheon  site  as  quickly  as  possi-
ble, so  that  security  could  be  established  at  the
site  and  the  motorcade  route  selected.

On  November  4,  Gerald  A.  Behn,  agent  in
charge  of  the  White  House  detail,  asked  Sorrels
to  examine  three  potential  sites  for  the  luncheon.
One  building.  Market  Hall,  was  unavailable  for
November  22.  The  second,  the  Women's  Build-
ing at  the  State  Fair  Grounds,  was  a  one-story
building  with  few  entrances  and  easy  to  make
secure,  but  it  lacked  necessary  food-handling
facilities  and  had  certain  unattractive  features,
including  a  low  ceiling  with  exposed  conduits
and  beams.  The  third  possibility,  the  Trade
Mart,  a  handsome  new  building  with  all  the
necessary  facilities,  presented  security  problems.
It  had  numerous  entrances,  several  tiers  of  bal-
conies surrounding  the  central  court  where  the
luncheon  would  be  held,  and  several  catwalks
crossing  the  court  at  each  level.  On  November  4,
Sorrels  told  Behn  he  believed  security  difficulties
at  the  Trade  Mart  could  be  overcome  by  special
precautions.  Lawson  also  evaluated  the  security
hazards  at  the  Trade  Mart  on  November  13.
Kenneth  O'Donnell  made  the  final  decision  to
hold  the  luncheon  at  the  Trade  Mart;  Behn  so
notified  Lawson  on  November  14.

Once  the  Trade  Mart  had  been  selected.  Sor-
rels and  Lawson  worked  out  detailed  arrange-
ments for  security  at  the  building.  In  addition  to
the  preventive  measures  already  mentioned,  they
provided  for  controlling  access  to  the  building,
closing  off  and  policing  areas  around  it,  securing
the  roof  and  insuring  the  presence  of  numerous
police  officers  inside  and  around  the  building.
Ultimately  more  than  200  law  enforcement  offi-
cers, mainly  Dallas  pohce  but  including  8  Se-
cret Service  agents,  were  deployed  in  and  around
the  Trade  Mart.

The  Motorcade  Route

On  November  8,  when  Lawson  was  briefed  on
the  itinerary  for  the  trip  to  Dallas,  he  was  told


16


that  45  minutes  had  been  allotted  for  a  motor-
cade procession  from  Love  Field  to  the  luncheon
site.  Lawson  was  not  specifically  instructed  to
select  the  parade  route,  but  he  understood  that
this  was  one  of  his  functions.  Even  before  the
Trade  Mart  had  been  definitely  selected,  Law-
son  and  Sorrels  began  to  consider  the  best  motor-
cade route  from  Love  Field  to  the  Trade  Mart.
On  November  14,  Lawson  and  Sorrels  attended
a  meeting  at  Love  Field  and  on  their  return  to
Dallas  drove  over  the  route  which  Sorrels  be-
lieved best  suited  for  the  proposed  motorcade.
This  route,  eventually  selected  for  the  motorcade
from  the  airport  to  the  Trade  Mart,  measured
10  miles  and  could  be  driven  easily  within  the
allotted  45  minutes.  From  Love  Field  the  route
passed  through  a  portion  of  suburban  Dallas,
through  the  downtown  area  along  Main  Street
and  then  to  the  Trade  Mart  via  Stemmons  Free-
way. For  the  President's  return  to  Love  Field
following  the  luncheon,  the  agents  selected  the
most  direct  route,  which  was  approximately  4
miles.

After  the  selection  of  the  Trade  Mart  as  the
luncheon  site,  Lawson  and  Sorrels  met  with
Dallas  Chief  of  Police  Jesse  E.  Curry,  Assistant
Chief  Charles  Batchelor,  Deputy  Chief  N.  T.
Fisher,  and  several  other  command  oflficers  to
discuss  details  of  the  motorcade  and  possible
routes.  The  route  was  further  reviewed  by  Law-
son  and  Sorrels  with  Assistant  Chief  Batchelor
and  members  of  the  local  host  committee  on
November  15.  The  police  oflBcials  agreed  that
the  route  recommended  by  Sorrels  was  the
proper  one  and  did  not  express  a  belief  that  any
other  route  might  be  better.  On  November  18,
Sorrels  and  Lawson  drove  over  the  selected
route  with  Batchelor  and  other  police  officers,
verifying  that  it  could  be  traversed  within  45
minutes.  Representatives  of  the  local  host  com-
mittee and  the  White  House  staff  were  advised
by  the  Secret  Service  of  the  actual  route  on  the
afternoon  of  November  18.

The  route  impressed  the  agents  as  a  natural
and  desirable  one.  Sorrels,  who  had  participated
in  Presidential  protection  assignments  in  Dallas
since  a  visit  by  President  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt
in  1936,  testified  that  the  traditional  parade
route  in  Dallas  was  along  Main  Street,  since  the
tall  buildings  along  the  street  gave  more  people
an  opportunity  to  participate.  The  route  chosen
from  the  airport  to  Main  Street  was  the  normal
one,  except  where  Harwood  Street  was  selected
as  the  means  of  access  to  Main  Street  in  prefer-
ence to  a  short  stretch  of  the  Central  Express-
way, which  presented  a  minor  safety  hazard
and  could  not  accommodate  spectators  as  con-
veniently as  Harwood  Street.  According  to  Law-
son,  the  chosen  route  seemed  to  be  the  best

It  afforded  us  wide  streets  most  of  the  way,
becaiise  of  the  buses  that  were  in  the  motor-
cade. It  afforded  us  a  chance  to  have  alter-
native routes  if  something  happened  on  the
motorcade  route.  It  was  the  type  of  subur-


ban area  a  good  part  of  the  way  where  the
crowds  would  be  able  to  be  controlled  for  a
great  distance,  and  we  figured  that  the  largest
crowds  would  be  downtown,  which  they
were,  and  that  the  wide  streets  that  we  would
use  downtown  would  be  of  sufficient  width  to
keep  the  public  out  of  our  way.

Elm  Street,  parallel  to  Main  Street  and  one
block  north,  was  not  used  for  the  main  portion
of  the  downtown  part  of  the  motorcade  because
Main  Street  offered  better  vantage  points  for
spectators.

To  reach  the  Trade  Mart  from  Main  Street
the  agents  decided  to  use  the  Stemmons  Freeway
(Route  No.  11),  the  most  direct  route.  The  only
practical  way  for  westbound  traffic  on  Main
Street  to  reach  the  northbound  lanes  of  the
Stemmons  Freeway  is  via  Elm  Street,  which
Route  No.  77  traffic  is  instructed  to  foUow  m  this
part  of  the  city.  Elm  Street  was  to  be  reached
from  Main  by  turning  right  at  Houston,  going
one  block  north  and  then  turning  left  onto  Elm.
On  this  last  portion  of  the  journey,  only  5  min-
utes from  the  Trade  Mart,  the  President's  motor-
cade would  pass  the  Texas  School  Book  Deposi-
tory Building  on  the  northwest  corner  of
Houston  and  Elm  Streets.  The  building  over-
looks Dealey  Plaza,  an  attractively  landscaped
triangle  of  3  acres.  From  Houston  Street,  which
forms  the  base  of  the  triangle,  three  streets —
Commerce,  Main,  and  Elm — trisect  the  plaza,
convergiag  at  the  apex  of  the  triangle  to  form  a
triple  underpass  beneath  a  multiple  railroad
bridge  almost  500  feet  from  Houston  Street
Elm  Street  the  northernmost  of  the  three,  after
intersecting  Houston  curves  in  a  southwesterly
arc  through  the  underpass  and  leads  into  an
access  road,  which  branches  off  to  the  right  and
is  used  by  traflBc  going  to  the  Stemmons  Free-
way and  the  Dallas-Fort  Worth  Turnpike.

The  Elm  Street  approach  to  the  Stemmons
Freeway  is  necessary  in  order  to  avoid  the  traf-
fic hazards  which  would  otherwise  exist  if  right
turns  were  permitted  from  both  Main  and  Elm
into  the  freeway.  To  create  this  traffic  pattern,  a
concrete  barrier  between  Main  and  Elm  Streets
presents  an  obstacle  to  a  right  turn  from  Main
across  Ehn  to  the  access  road  to  Stemmons  Free-
way and  the  DaUas-Fort  Worth  Turnpike.  This
concrete  barrier  extends  far  enough  beyond  the
access  road  to  make  it  impracticable  for  vehicles
to  turn  right  from  Main  directly  to  the  access
road.  A  sign  located  on  this  barrier  instructs
Main  Street  traffic  not  to  make  any  turns.  In
conformity  with  these  arrangements,  traffic  prcn
ceeding  west  on  Main  is  directed  to  turn  right
at  Houston  in  order  to  reach  the  DaUas-Fort
Worth  Turnpike,  which  has  the  same  access  road
from  Elm  Street  as  does  the  Stemmons  Freeway.

The  planning  for  the  motorcade  also  included
advance  preparations  for  security  arrangements
along  the  route.  Sorrels  and  Lawson  reviewed
the  route  in  cooperation  with  Assistant  Chief
Batchelor  and  other  Dallas  police  officials  who


17


took  notes  on  the  requirements  for  controlling
the  crowds  and  traffic,  watching  the  overpasses,
and  providing  motorcycle  escort.  To  control
traffic,  arrangements  were  made  for  the  deploy-
ment of  foot  patrolmen  and  motorcycle  police
at  various  positions  along  the  route.  Police  were
assigned  to  each  overpass  on  the  route  and  in-
structed to  keep  them  clear  of  unauthorized  per-
sons. No  arrangements  were  made  for  poHce  or
building  custodians  to  inspect  buildings  along
the  motorcade  route  since  the  Secret  Service
did  not  normally  request  or  make  such  a  check.
Under  standard  procedures,  the  responsibility
for  watching  the  windows  of  buildings  was
shared  by  local  police  stationed  along  the  route
and  Secret  Service  agents  riding  in  the  motor-
cade.

As  the  date  for  the  President's  visit  ap-
proached, the  two  Dallas  newspapers  carried
several  reports  of  his  motorcade  route.  The  selec-
tion of  the  Trade  Mart  as  the  possible  site  for
the  luncheon  first  appeared  in  the  Dallas  Times-
Herald  on  November  15,  1963.  The  following
day,  the  newspaper  reported  that  the  Presiden-
tial party  "apparently  will  loop  through  the
downtown  area,  probably  on  Main  Street,  en
route  from  Dallas  Love  Field"  on  its  way  to  the
Trade  Mart.  On  November  19,  the  Times-
Herald  afternoon  paper  detailed  the  precise
route  :

From  the  airport,  the  President's  party  will
proceed  to  Mockingbird  Lane  to  Lemmon  and
then  to  Turtle  Creek,  turning  south  to  Cedar
Springs.

The  motorcade  will  then  pass  through  down-
town on  Harwood  and  then  west  on  Main,
turning  back  to  Elm  at  Houston  and  then  out
Stemmons  Freeway  to  the  Trade  Mart.

Also  on  November  19,  the  Morning  News  re-
ported that  the  President's  motorcade  would
travel  from  Love  Field  along  specified  streets,
then  "Harwood  to  Main,  Main  to  Houston,
Houston  to  Elm,  Elm  under  the  Triple  Under-
pass to  Stemmons  Freeway,  and  on  to  the  Trade
Mart."  On  November  20  a  front  page  story  re-
ported that  the  streets  on  which  the  Presidential
motorcade  would  travel  included  "Main  and
Stemmons  Freeway."  On  the  morning  of  the
President's  arrival,  the  Morning  News  noted  that
the  motorcade  would  travel  through  downtown
Dallas  onto  the  Stemmons  Freeway,  and  re-
ported that  "the  motorcade  wiU  move  slowly  so
that  crowds  can  'get  a  good  view'  of  President
Kennedy  and  his  wife."


DALLAS  BEFORE  THE  VISIT

The  President's  intention  to  pay  a  visit  to
Texas  in  the  fall  of  1963  aroused  interest
throughout  the  State.  The  two  Dallas  newspapers
provided  their  readers  with  a  steady  stream  of  in-
formation and  speculation  about  the  trip,  be-


ginning on  September  13,  when  the  Times-
Herald  announced  in  a  front  page  article  that
President  Kennedy  was  planning  a  brief  1-day
tour  of  four  Texas  cities — Dallas,  Fort  Worth,
San  Antonio,  and  Houston.  Both  Dallas  papers
cited  White  House  sources  on  September  26  as
confirming  the  President's  intention  to  visit
Texas  on  November  21  and  22,  with  Dallas
scheduled  as  one  of  the  stops.

Articles,  editorials,  and  letters  to  the  editor  in
the  Dallas  Morning  News  and  the  Dallas  Times-
Herald  after  September  13  reflected  the  feehng
in  the  community  toward  the  forthcoming  Presi-
dential visit.  Although  there  were  critical  editori-
als and  letters  to  the  editors,  the  news  stories
reflected  the  desire  of  Dallas  officials  to  welcome
the  President  with  dignity  and  courtesy.  An  edi-
torial in  the  Times-Herald  of  September  17
called  on  the  people  of  Dallas  to  be  "congenial
hosts"  even  though  "Dallas  didn't  vote  for  Mr.
Kennedy  in  1960,  may  not  endorse  him  in  '64."
On  October  3  the  Dallas  Morning  News  quoted
U.S.  Representative  Joe  Pool's  hope  that  Presi-
dent Kennedy  would  receive  a  "good  welcome"
and  would  not  face  demonstrations  like  those
encountered  by  Vice  President  Johnson  during
the  1960  campaign.

Increased  concern  about  the  President's  visit
was  aroused  by  the  incident  involving  the  U.S.
Ambassador  to  the  United  Nations,  Adlai  E.
Stevenson.  On  the  evening  of  October  24,  1963,
after  addressing  a  meeting  in  Dallas,  Stevenson
was  jeered,  jostled,  and  spat  upon  by  hostile
demonstrators  outside  the  Dallas  Memorial
Auditorium  Theater.  The  local,  national,  and
international  reaction  to  this  incident  evoked
from  Dallas  officials  and  newspapers  strong  con-
demnations of  the  demonstrators.  Mayor  Earle
Cabell  called  on  the  city  to  redeem  itself  during
President  Kennedy's  visit.  He  asserted  that  Dal-
las had  shed  its  reputation  of  the  twenties  as  the
"Southwest  hate  capital  of  Dixie."  On  October
26  the  press  reported  Chief  of  Police  Curry's
plans  to  caU  in  100  extra  off-duty  officers  to  help
protect  President  Kennedy.  Any  thought  that
the  President  might  cancel  his  visit  to  Dallas  was
ended  when  Governor  Connally  confirmed  on
November  8  that  the  President  would  come  to
Texas  on  November  21-22,  and  that  he  would
visit  San  Antonio,  Houston,  Fort  Worth,  Dallas,
and  Austin.

During  November  the  Dallas  papers  reported
frequently  on  the  plans  for  protecting  the  Presi-
dent, stressing  the  thoroughness  of  the  prepara-
tions. They  conveyed  the  pleas  of  Dallas  leaders
that  citizens  not  demonstrate  or  create  disturb-
ances during  the  President's  visit.  On  November
18  the  Dallas  Council  adopted  a  new  city  ordi-
nance prohibiting  interference  with  attendance
at  lawful  assemblies.  Two  days  before  the  Presi-
dent's arrival  Chief  Curry  warned  that  the  Dal-
las poUce  would  not  permit  improper  conduct
during  the  President's  visit.

Meanwhile,  on  November  17  the  president  of
the  Dallas  Chamber  of  Commerce  referred  to


18


the  city's  reputation  for  being  the  friendliest
town  in  America  and  asserted  that  citizens  would
"greet  the  President  of  the  United  States  with  the
warmth  and  pride  that  keep  the  Dallas  spirit
famous  the  world  over."  Two  days  later,  a  local
Republican  leader  called  for  a  "civilized  non-
partisan" welcome  for  President  Kennedy,  stat-
ing that  "in  many  respects  Dallas  County  has
isolated  itself  from  the  main  stream  of  life  in
the  world  in  this  decade."

Another  reaction  to  the  impending  visit —
hostile  to  the  President — came  to  a  head  shortly
before  his  arrival.  On  November  21  there  ap-
peared on  the  streets  of  Dallas  the  anonymous
handbill  mentioned  above.  It  was  fashioned  after
the  "wanted"  circulars  issued  by  law  enforce-
ment agencies.  Beneath  two  photographs  of
President  Keimedy,  one  fuUf ace  and  one  profile,
appeared  the  caption,  "Wanted  for  Treason,"
followed  by  a  scurrilous  bill  of  particulars  that
constituted  a  vilification  of  the  President.  And  on
the  morning  of  the  President's  arrival  there  ap-
peared in  the  Morning  News  a  full  page,  black-
bordered  advertisement  headed  "Welcome  Mr.
Kennedy  to  Dallas,"  sponsored  by  the  American
Factfinding  Committee,  which  the  sponsor  later
testified  was  an  ad  hoc  committee  "formed
strictly  for  the  purpose  of  having  a  name  to  put
in  the  paper."  The  "welcome"  consisted  of  a
series  of  statements  and  questions  critical  of  the
President  and  his  administration.


VISITS  TO  OTHER  TEXAS  CITIES

The  trip  to  Texas  began  with  the  departure
of  President  and  Mrs.  Kennedy  from  the  White
House  by  helicopter  at  10:45  a.m.,  e.s.t.,  on
November  21,  1963,  for  Andrews  AFB.  They
took  off  in  the  Presidential  plane.  Air  Force  One,
at  11  a.m.,  arriving  at  San  Antonio  at  1 :  30  p.m.,
c.s.t.  They  were  greeted  by  Vice  President  John-
son and  Governor  Cormally,  who  joined  the
Presidential  party  in  a  motorcade  through  San
Antonio.  During  the  afternoon,  President  Ken-
nedy dedicated  the  U.S.  Air  Force  School  of
Aerospace  Medicine  at  Brooks  AFB.  Late  in  the
afternoon  he  flew  to  Houston  where  he  rode
through  the  city  in  a  motorcade,  spoke  at  the
Rice  University  Stadium,  and  attended  a  dinner
in  honor  of  U.S.  Representative  Albert  Thomas.

At  Rice  Stadium  a  very  large,  enthusiastic
crowd  greeted  the  President.  In  Houston,  as  else-
where during  the  trip,  the  crowds  showed  much
interest  in  Mrs.  Kennedy.  David  F.  Powers  of
the  President's  staff  later  stated  that  when  the
President  asked  for  his  assessment  of  the  day's
activities,  Powers  rephed  "that  the  crowd  was
about  the  same  as  the  one  which  came  to  see
him  before  but  there  were  100,000  extra  people
on  hand  who  came  to  see  Mrs.  Kennedy."  Late
in  the  evening,  the  Presidential  party  flew  to
Fort  Worth  where  they  spent  the  night  at  the
Texas  Hotel.

On  the  morning  of  November  22,  President


Kennedy  attended  a  breakfast  at  the  hotel  and
afterward  addressed  a  crowd  at  an  open  parking
lot.  The  President  liked  outdoor  appearances
because  more  people  could  see  and  hear  him.
Before  leaving  the  hotel,  the  President,  Mrs.
Kennedy,  and  Kenneth  O'Donnell  talked  about
the  risks  inherent  in  Presidential  pubUc  appear-
ances. According  to  O'Donnell,  the  President
commented  that  "if  anybody  really  wanted  to
shoot  the  President  of  the  United  States,  it  was
not  a  very  difficult  job — all  one  had  to  do  was
get  a  high  building  someday  with  a  telescopic
rifle,  and  there  was  nothing  anybody  could  do
to  defend  against  such  an  attempt."  Upon  con-
cluding the  conversation,  the  President  prepared
to  depart  for  Dallas.


ARRIVAL  AT  LOVE  FIELD

In  Dallas  the  rain  had  stopped,  and  by  mid-
morning  a  gloomy  overcast  sky  had  given  way
to  the  bright  sunshine  that  greeted  the  Presiden-
tial party  when  Air  Force  One  touched  down  at
Love  Field  at  11:40  a.m.,  c.s.t.  Governor  and
Mrs.  Connally  and  Senator  Ralph  W.  Yar-
borough  had  come  with  the  President  from  Fort
Worth.  Vice  President  Johnson's  airplane.  Air
Force  Two,  had  arrived  at  Love  Field  at  ap-
proximately 11:35  a.m.,  and  the  Vice  President
and  Mrs.  Johnson  were  in  the  receiving  line  to
greet  President  and  Mrs.  Kennedy.

After  a  welcome  from  the  Dallas  reception
committee.  President  and  Mrs.  Kennedy  walked
along  a  chain-link  fence  at  the  reception  area
greeting  a  large  crowd  of  spectators  that  had
gathered  behind  it.  Secret  Service  agents  formed
a  cordon  to  keep  the  press  and  photographers
from  impeding  their  passage  and  scanned  the
crowd  for  threatening  movements.  Dallas  poUce
stood  at  intervals  along  the  fence  and  Dallas
plainclothesmen  mixed  in  the  crowd.  Vice  Presi-
dent and  Mrs.  Johnson  followed  along  the  fence,
guarded  by  four  members  of  the  Vice-Presi-
dential detaU.  Approximately  10  minutes  after
the  arrival  at  Love  Field,  the  President  and  Mrs.
Kennedy  went  to  the  Presidential  automobile  to
begin  the  motorcade.


ORGANIZATION  OF  THE
MOTORCADE

Secret  Service  arrangements  for  Presidential
trips,  which  were  followed  in  the  Dallas  motor-
cade, are  designed  to  provide  protection  while
permitting  large  numbers  of  people  to  see  the
President.  Every  effort  is  made  to  prevent  un-
scheduled stops,  although  the  President  may,
and  in  Dallas  did,  order  stops  in  order  to  greet
the  public.  When  the  motorcade  slows  or  stops,
agents  take  positions  between  the  President  and
the  crowd.

The  order  of  vehicles  in  the  Dallas  motor-
cade was  as  follows:


19


Motorcycles. — Dallas  police  motorcycles  pre-
ceded the  pilot  car.

The  pilot  car. — Manned  by  officers  of  the
Dallas  Police  Department,  this  automobile  pre-
ceded the  main  party  by  approximately  a  quarter
of  a  mile.  Its  function  was  to  alert  police  along
the  route  that  the  motorcade  was  approaching
and  to  check  for  signs  of  trouble.

Motorcycles. — Next  came  four  to  six  motor-
cycle policemen  whose  main  purpose  was  to
keep  the  crowd  back.

The  lead  car. — Described  as  a  "rolling  com-
mand car,"  this  was  an  unmarked  Dallas  police
car,  driven  by  Chief  of  Police  Curry  and  oc-
cupied by  Secret  Service  Agents  Sorrels  and
Lawson  and  by  Dallas  County  Sheriff  J.  E.
Decker.  The  occupants  scanned  the  crowd  and
the  buildings  along  the  route.  Their  main  func-
tion was  to  spot  trouble  in  advance  and  to  direct
any  necessary  steps  to  meet  the  trouble.  Follow-
ing normal  practice,  the  lead  automobile  stayed
approximately  four  to  five  car  lengths  ahead  of
the  President's  limousine.

The  Presidential  limousine. — ^The  President's
automobile  was  a  specially  designed  1961  Lin-
coln convertible  with  two  collapsible  jump  seats
between  the  front  and  rear  seats.  It  was  outfitted
with  a  clear  plastic  bubbletop  which  was  neither
bulletproof  nor  bullet  resistant.  Because  the  skies
had  cleared  in  Dallas,  Lawson  directed  that  the
top  not  be  used  for  the  day's  activities.  He  acted
on  instructions  he  had  received  earlier  from
Assistant  Special  Agent  in  Charge  Roy  H.  Kel-
lerman,  who  was  in  Fort  Worth  with  the  Presi-
dent. Kellerman  had  discussed  the  matter  with
O'Donnell,  whose  instructions  were,  "If  the
weather  is  clear  and  it  is  not  raining,  have  that
bubbletop  off."  Elevated  approximately  15
inches  above  the  back  of  the  front  seat  was  a
metallic  frame  with  four  handholds  that  riders
in  the  car  could  grip  while  standing  in  the  rear
seat  during  parades.  At  the  rear  on  each  side  of
the  automobile  were  small  running  boards,  each
designed  to  hold  a  Secret  Service  agent,  with  a
metallic  handle  for  the  rider  to  grasp.  The  Presi-
dent had  frequently  stated  that  he  did  not  want
agents  to  ride  on  these  steps  during  a  motorcade
except  when  necessary.  He  had  repeated  this
wish  only  a  few  days  before,  during  his  visit  to
Tampa,  Fla.

President  Kennedy  rode  on  the  right-hand  side
of  the  rear  seat  with  Mrs.  Kennedy  on  his  left.
Governor  Connally  occupied  the  right  jump  seat,
Mrs.  Connally  the  left.  Driving  the  Presidential
limousine  was  Special  Agent  WiUiam  R,  Greer
of  the  Secret  Service;  on  his  right  sat  Kellerman.
Kellerman's  responsibilities  included  maintain-
ing radio  communications  with  the  lead  and  fol-
lowup  cars,  scanning  the  route,  and  getting  out
and  standing  near  the  President  when  the  cars
stopped.

Motorcycles. — Four  motorcycles,  two  on  each
side,  flanked  the  rear  of  the  Presidential  car.
They  provided  some  cover  for  the  President,
but  their  main  purpose  was  to  keep  back  the


crowd.  On  previous  occasions,  the  President  had
requested  that,  to  the  extent  possible,  these  flank-
ing motorcycles  keep  back  from  the  sides  of  his
car.

Presidential  followup  car. — ^This  vehicle,  a
1955  Cadillac  eight-passenger  convertible  es-
pecially outfitted  for  the  Secret  Service,  followed
closely  behind  the  President's  automobile.  It  car-
ried eight  Secret  Service  agents — two  in  the
front  seat,  two  in  the  rear,  and  two  on  each  of
the  right  and  left  running  boards.  Each  agent
carried  a  .38-caliber  pistol,  and  a  shotgun  and
automatic  rifle  were  also  available.  Presidential
Assistants  David  F.  Powers  and  Kenneth  O'Don-
nell sat  in  the  right  and  left  jump  seats,
respectively.

The  agents  in  this  car,  under  established  pro-
cedure, had  instructions  to  watch  the  route  for
signs  of  trouble,  scanning  not  only  the  crowds
but  the  windows  and  roofs  of  buildings,  over-
passes, and  crossings.  They  were  instructed  to
watch  particularly  for  thrown  objects,  sudden
actions  in  the  crowd,  and  any  movements  toward
the  Presidential  car.  The  agents  on  the  front  of
the  running  boards  had  directions  to  move  im-
mediately to  positions  just  to  the  rear  of  the
President  and  Mrs.  Kennedy  when  the  Presi-
dent's car  slowed  to  a  walking  pace  or  stopped,
or  when  the  press  of  the  crowd  made  it  impos-
sible for  the  escort  motorcycles  to  stay  in  posi-
tion on  the  car's  rear  flanks.  The  two  agents  on
the  rear  of  the  running  boards  were  to  advance
toward  the  front  of  the  President's  car  whenever
it  stopped  or  slowed  down  sufficiently  for  them
to  do  so.

Vice-Presidential  car. — ^The  Vice-Presidential
automobile,  a  four-door  Lincoln  convertible  ob-
tained locally  for  use  in  the  motorcade,  pro-
ceeded approximately  two  to  three  car  lengths
behind  the  President's  followup  car.  This  dis-
tance was  maintained  so  that  spectators  would
normally  turn  their  gaze  from  the  President's
automobile  by  the  time  the  Vice  President  came
into  view.  Vice  President  Johnson  sat  on  the
right-hand  side  of  the  rear  seat,  Mrs.  Johnson  in
the  center,  and  Senator  Yarborough  on  the  left.
Rufus  W.  Youngblood,  special  agent  in  charge
of  the  Vice  President's  detail,  occupied  the  right-
hand  side  of  the  front  seat,  and  Hurchel  Jacks  of
the  Texas  State  Highway  patrol  was  the  driver.

Vice-Presidential  followup  car. — Driven  by
an  officer  of  the  Dallas  Police  Department,  this
vehicle  was  occupied  by  three  Secret  Service
agents  and  Clifton  C.  Carter,  assistant  to  the
Vice  President.  These  agents  performed  for  the
Vice  President  the  same  functions  that  the  agents
in  the  Presidential  followup  car  performed  for
the  President.

Remainder  of  motorcade. — ^The  remainder  of
the  motorcade  consisted  of  five  cars  for  other
dignitaries,  including  the  mayor  of  Dallas  and
Texas  Congressmen,  telephone  and  Western
Union  vehicles,  a  White  House  commimications
car,  three  cars  for  press  photographers,  an  offi-
cial party  bus  for  White  House  staff  members


20


and  others,  and  two  press  buses.  Admiral  George
G.  Burkley,  physician  to  the  President,  was  in  a
car  following  those  "containing  the  local  and
national  representatives."

Police  car  and  motorcycles. — A  Dallas  police
car  and  several  motorcycles  at  the  rear  kept  the
motorcade  together  and  prevented  unauthorized
vehicles  from  joining  the  motorcade.

Communications  in  the  motorcade. —  A  base
station  at  a  fixed  location  in  Dallas  operated  a
radio  network  which  linked  together  the  lead
car.  Presidential  car.  Presidential  followup  car.
White  House  communications  car,  Trade  Mart,
Love  Field,  and  the  Presidential  and  Vice-Presi-
dential airplanes.  The  Vice-Presidential  car  and
Vice-Presidential  followup  car  used  portable  sets
with  a  separate  frequency  for  their  own  car-to-
car  communication.


Houston  Street,  but  the  crowd  thinned  abruptly
along  Elm  Street,  which  curves  in  a  south-
westerly direction  as  it  proceeds  downgrade  to-
ward the  Triple  Underpass  and  the  Stemmons
Freeway.

As  the  motorcade  approached  the  intersection
of  Houston  and  Ehn  Streets,  there  was  general
gratification  in  the  Presidential  party  about  the
enthusiastic  reception.  Evaluating  the  pohtical
overtones,  Kenneth  O'Donnell  was  especially
pleased  because  it  convinced  him  that  the  aver-
age Dallas  resident  was  like  other  American
citizens  in  respecting  and  admuing  the  President.
Mrs.  Connally,  elated  by  the  reception,  tvirned  to
President  Kennedy  and  said,  "Mr.  President,
you  can't  say  Dallas  doesn't  love  you."  The
President  replied,  "That  is  very  obvious."


THE  DRIVE  THROUGH  DALLAS

The  motorcade  left  Love  Field  shortly  after
11 :  50  a.m.  and  drove  at  speeds  up  to  25  to  30
miles  an  hour  through  thinly  populated  areas  on
the  outskirts  of  Dallas.  At  the  President's  direc-
tion, his  automobile  stopped  twice,  the  first  time
to  permit  him  to  respond  to  a  sign  asking  him  to
shake  hands.  During  this  brief  stop,  agents  in
the  front  positions  on  the  running  boards  of  the
Presidential  followup  car  came  forward  and
stood  beside  the  President's  car,  looking  out
toward  the  crowd,  and  Special  Agent  Kellerman
assumed  his  position  next  to  the  car.  On  the  other
occasion,  the  President  halted  the  motorcade  to
speak  to  a  Catholic  nun  and  a  group  of  small
children.

In  the  downtown  area,  large  crowds  of  specta-
tors gave  the  President  a  tremendous  reception.
The  crowds  were  so  dense  that  Special  Agent
Clinton  J.  Hill  had  to  leave  the  left  front  running
board  of  the  President's  followup  car  four  times
to  ride  on  the  rear  of  the  President's  limousine.
Several  times  Special  Agent  John  D.  Ready  came
forward  from  the  right  front  running  board  of
the  Presidential  followup  car  to  the  right  side  of
the  President's  car.  Special  Agent  Glen  A.  Ben-
nett once  left  his  place  inside  the  foUowup  car
to  help  keep  the  crowd  away  from  the  President's
car.  When  a  teenage  boy  ran  toward  the  rear  of
the  President's  car.  Ready  left  the  running  board
to  chase  the  boy  back  into  the  crowd.  On  several
occasions  when  the  Vice  President's  car  was
slowed  down  by  the  throng,  Special  Agent
Youngblood  stepped  out  to  hold  the  crowd  back-
According  to  plan,  the  President's  motorcade
proceeded  west  through  downtown  Dallas  on
Main  Street  to  the  intersection  of  Houston
Street,  which  marks  the  beginning  of  Dealey
Plaza.  From  Main  Street  the  motorcade  turned
right  and  went  north  on  Houston  Street,  passing
tall  buildings  on  the  right,  and  headed  toward
the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building.  The
spectators  were  still  thickly  congregated  in  front
of  the  buildings  which  lined  the  east  side  of


THE  ASSASSINATION

At  12:30  p.m.,  c.s.t.,  as  the  President's  open
limousine  proceeded  at  approximately  11  miles
per  hour  along  Elm  Street  toward  the  Triple
Underpass,  shots  fired  from  a  rifle  mortally
wounded  President  Kennedy  and  seriously  in-
jured Governor  ConnaUy.  One  bullet  passed
through  the  President's  neck;  a  subsequent  bul-
let, which  was  lethal,  shattered  the  right  side
of  his  skuU.  Governor  Connally  sustained  bullet
wounds  in  his  back,  the  right  side  of  his  chest,
right  wrist,  and  left  thigh.

The  Time

The  exact  time  of  the  assassination  was  fixed
by  the  testimony  of  four  witnesses.  Special  Agent
Rufus  W.  Youngblood  observed  that  the  large
electric  sign  clock  atop  the  Texas  School  Book
Depository  Building  showed  the  numerals
"12:30"  as  the  Vice-Presidential  automobile
proceeded  north  on  Houston  Street,  a  few  sec-
onds before  the  shots  were  fired.  Just  prior  to
the  shooting,  David  F.  Powers,  riding  in  the
Secret  Service  followup  car,  remarked  to  Ken-
neth O'Donnell  that  it  was  12:30  p.m.,  the  time
they  were  due  at  the  Trade  Mart.  Seconds  after
the  shooting,  Roy  Kellerman,  riding  in  the  front
seat  of  the  Presidential  Umousine,  looked  at  his
watch  and  said  "12:30"  to  the  driver.  Special
Agent  Greer.  The  Dallas  police  radio  log  reflects
that  Chief  of  Police  Curry  reported  the  shooting
of  the  President  and  issued  his  initial  orders  at
12:30  p.m.

Speed  of  the  Limousine

William  Greer,  operator  of  the  Presidential
limousine,  estimated  the  car's  speed  at  the  time
of  the  fitrst  shot  as  12  to  15  miles  per  hour.  Other
witnesses  in  the  motorcade  estimated  the  speed
of  the  President's  limousine  from  7  to  22  miles
per  hour.  A  more  precise  determination  has  been
made  from  motion  pictures  taken  on  the  scene
by  an  amateur  photographer,  Abraham  Zapru-
der.  Based  on  these  films,  the  speed  of  the  Presi-
dent's automobile  is  computed  at  an  average


21


speed  of  11.2  miles  per  hour.  The  car  main-
tained this  average  speed  over  a  distance  of  ap-
proximately 136  feet  immediately  preceding  the
shot  which  struck  the  President  in  the  head.
While  the  car  traveled  this  distance,  the  Zapni-
der  camera  ran  152  frames.  Since  the  camera
operates  at  a  speed  of  18.3  frames  per  second,  it
was  calculated  that  the  car  required  8.3  seconds
to  cover  the  136  feet  This  represents  a  speed  of
11.2  miles  per  hour.

In  the  Presidential  Limousine

Mrs.  John  F.  Kennedy,  on  the  left  of  the  rear
seat  of  the  limousine,  looked  toward  her  left  and
waved  to  the  crowds  along  the  route.  Soon  after
the  motOTcade  turned  onto  Elm  Street,  she  heard
a  soimd  similar  to  a  motorcycle  noise  and  a  cry
from  Governor  ConnaUy,  which  caused  her  to
look  to  her  right.  On  turning  she  saw  a  quizzical
look  on  her  husband's  face  as  he  raised  his  left
hand  to  his  throat.  Mrs.  Kennedy  then  heard  a
second  shot  and  saw  the  President's  skull  torn
open  imder  the  impact  of  the  bullet  As  she
cradled  her  mortally  woimded  husband,  Mrs.
Kennedy  cried,  "Oh,  my  God,  they  have  shot  my
husband.  I  love  you.  Jack."

Governor  Connally  testified  that  he  recog-
nized the  first  noise  as  a  rifle  shot  and  the  thought
immediately  crossed  his  mind  that  it  was  an
assassination  attempt.  From  his  position  in  the
right  jimip  seat  immediately  in  front  of  the  Presi-
dent, he  instinctively  turned  to  his  right  because
the  shot  appeared  to  come  from  over  his  right
shoulder.  Unable  to  see  the  President  as  he
turned  to  the  right,  the  Governor  started  to  look
back  over  his  left  shoulder,  but  he  never  com-
pleted the  turn  because  he  felt  something  strike
him  in  the  back.  In  his  testimony  before  the
Commission,  Governor  Connally  was  certain
that  he  was  hit  by  the  second  shot,  which  he
stated  he  did  not  hear.

Mrs.  Connally,  too,  heard  a  frightening  noise
from  her  right.  Looking  over  her  right  shoulder,
she  saw  that  the  President  had  both  hands  at  his
neck  but  she  observed  no  blood  and  heard  noth-
ing. She  watched  as  he  slumped  down  with  an
empty  expression  on  his  face.  Roy  Kellerman,  in
the  right  front  seat  of  the  Umousine,  heard  a  re-
port Like  a  firecracker  pop.  Turning  to  his  right
in  the  direction  of  the  noise,  Kellerman  heard  the
President  say  "My  God,  I  am  hit,"  and  saw  both
of  the  President's  hands  move  up  toward  his
neck.  As  he  told  the  driver,  "Let's  get  out  of
here;  we  are  hit,"  KeUerman  grabbed  his  micro-
phone and  radioed  ahead  to  the  lead  car,  "We
are  hit.  Get  us  to  the  hospital  immediately."

The  driver,  WiUiam  Greer,  heard  a  noise
which  he  took  to  be  a  backfire  from  one  of  the
motorcycles  flanking  the  Presidential  car.  When
he  heard  the  same  noise  again,  Greer  glanced
over  his  shoulder  and  saw  Governor  ConnaUy
fall.  At  the  sound  of  the  second  shot  he  realized
that  something  was  wrong,  and  he  pressed  down
on  the  accelerator  as  Kellerman  said,  "Get  out
of  here  fast."  As  he  issued  his  instructions  to


Greer  and  to  the  lead  car,  Kellerman  heard  a
"flurry  of  shots"  within  5  seconds  of  the  first
noise.  According  to  Kellerman,  Mrs.  Kennedy
then  cried  out:  "What  are  they  doing  to  you?"
Looking  back  from  the  front  seat,  KeUerman
saw  Governor  ConnaUy  in  his  wife's  lap  and
Special  Agent  Clinton  J.  HiU  lying  across  the
trunk  of  the  car.

Mrs.  Connally  heard  a  second  shot  fired  and
puUed  her  husband  down  into  her  lap.  Observing
his  blood-covered  chest  as  he  was  puUed  into  his
wife's  lap,  Governor  ConnaUy  beUeved  himself
mortaUy  woimded.  He  cried  out,  "Oh,  no,  no,
no.  My  God,  they  are  going  to  kiU  us  aU."  At
first  Mrs.  ConnaUy  thought  that  her  husband  had
been  kiUed,  but  then  she  noticed  an  almost  im-
perceptible movement  and  knew  that  he  was  stiU
aUve.  She  said,  "It's  aU  right.  Be  stiU."  The  Gov-
ernor was  lying  with  his  head  on  his  wife's  lap
when  he  heard  a  shot  hit  the  President.  At  that
point,  both  Governor  and  Mrs.  ConnaUy  ob-
served brain  tissue  splattered  over  the  interior
of  the  car.  According  to  Governor  and  Mrs.
ConnaUy,  it  was  after  this  shot  that  KeUerman
issued  his  emergency  instructions  and  the  car
accelerated.

Reaction  by  Secret  Service  Agents

From  the  left  front  running  board  of  the
President's  f  oUowup  car.  Special  Agent  HiU  was
scanning  the  few  people  standing  on  the  south
side  of  Elm  Street  after  the  motorcade  had
turned  off  Houston  Street.  He  estimated  that  the
motorcade  had  slowed  down  to  approximately
9  or  10  mUes  per  hour  on  the  turn  at  the  inter-
section of  Houston  and  Elm  Streets  and  then
proceeded  at  a  rate  of  12  to  15  miles  per  hour
with  the  foUowup  car  trailing  the  President's
automobUe  by  approximately  5  feet.  HiU  heard  a
noise,  which  seemed  to  be  a  firecracker,  coming
from  his  right  rear.  He  immediately  looked  to
his  right,  "and,  in  so  doing,  my  eyes  had  to  cross
the  Presidential  limousine  and  I  saw  President
Kennedy  grab  at  himself  and  lurch  forward  and
to  the  left."  HiU  jumped  from  the  foUowup  car
and  ran  to  the  President's  automobUe.  At  about
the  time  he  reached  the  President's  automobUe,
HiU  heard  a  second  shot,  approximately  5  sec-
onds after  the  first,  which  removed  a  portion  of
the  President's  head.

At  the  instant  that  HUl  stepped  onto  the  left
rear  step  of  the  President's  automobile  and
grasped  the  handhold,  the  car  lurched  forward,
causing  him  to  lose  his  footing.  He  ran  three  or
four  steps,  regained  his  position  and  mounted
the  car.  Between  the  time  he  originaUy  seized
the  handhold  and  the  time  he  moimted  the  car,
HiU  recaUed  that —

Mrs.  Kennedy  had  jtmiped  up  from  the  seat
and  was,  it  appeared  to  me,  reaching  for
something  coming  off  the  right  rear  bumper
of  the  car,  the  right  rear  taU,  when  she  noticed
that  I  was  trying  to  climb  on  the  car.  She
turned  toward  me  and  I  grabbed  her  and  put


22


her  back  in  the  back  seat,  crawled  up  on  top
of  the  back  seat  and  lay  there.

David  Powers,  who  witnessed  the  scene  from  the
President's  followup  car,  stated  that  Mrs.  Ken-
nedy would  probably  have  fallen  off  the  rear
end  of  the  car  and  been  killed  if  Hill  had  not
pushed  her  back  into  the  Presidential  automo-
bile. Mrs.  Kennedy  had  no  recollection  of  climb-
ing onto  the  back  of  the  car.

Special  Agent  Ready,  on  the  right  front  run-
ning board  of  the  Presidential  foUowup  car,
heard  noises  that  sounded  like  iSrecrackers  and
ran  toward  the  President's  limousine.  But  he  was
immediately  called  back  by  Special  Agent  Emory
P.  Roberts,  in  charge  of  the  foUowup  car,  who
did  not  believe  that  he  could  reach  the  Presi-
dent's car  at  the  speed  it  was  then  traveling.
Special  Agent  George  W.  Hickey,  Jr.,  in  the  rear
seat  of  the  Presidential  followup  car,  picked  up
and  cocked  an  automatic  rifle  as  he  heard  the
last  shot.  At  this  point  the  cars  were  speeding
through  the  underpass  and  had  left  the  scene  of
the  shooting,  but  Hickey  kept  the  automatic
weapon  ready  as  the  car  raced  to  the  hospital
Most  of  the  other  Secret  Service  agents  in  the
motorcade  had  drawn  their  sidearms.  Roberts
noticed  that  the  Vice  President's  car  was  ap-
proximately one-half  block  behind  the  Presi-
dential foUowup  car  at  the  time  of  the  shooting
and  signaled  for  it  to  move  in  closer.

Directing  the  security  detail  for  the  Vice
President  from  the  right  front  seat  of  the  Vice-
Presidential  car,  Special  Agent  Youngblood  re-
called:

As  we  were  beginning  to  go  down  this  incline,
aU  of  a  sudden  there  was  an  explosive  noise.
I  quickly  observed  unnatural  movement  of
crowds,  like  ducking  or  scattering,  and  quick
movements  in  the  Presidential  foUowup  car.
So  I  turned  around  and  hit  the  Vice  President
on  the  shoulder  and  hoUered,  get  down,  and
then  looked  around  again  and  saw  more  of
this  movement,  and  so  I  proceeded  to  go  to
the  back  seat  and  get  on  top  of  him.

Youngblood  was  not  positive  that  he  was  in  the
rear  seat  before  the  second  shot,  but  thought  it
probable  because  of  President  Johnson's  state-
ment to  that  effect  immediately  after  the  assas-
sination. President  Johnson  emphasized  Young-
blood's  instantaneous  reaction  after  the  first
shot:

I  was  startled  by  the  sharp  report  or  ex-
plosion, but  I  had  no  time  to  speculate  as  to
its  origin  because  Agent  Youngblood  turned
in  a  flash,  immediately  after  the  first  explosion,
hitting  me  on  the  shoulder,  and  shouted  to
aU  of  us  in  the  back  seat  to  get  down.  I  was
pushed  down  by  Agent  Youngblood.  Almost
in  the  same  moment  in  which  he  hit  or  pushed
me,  he  vaulted  over  the  back  seat  and  sat  on
me.  I  was  bent  over  under  the  weight  of


Agent  Youngblood's  body,  toward  Mrs.  John-
son and  Senator  Yarboroughu

Clifton  C.  Carter,  riding  in  the  Vice  President's
foUowup  car  a  short  distance  behind,  reported
that  Youngblood  was  in  the  rear  seat  using  his
body  to  shield  the  Vice  President  before  the
second  and  third  shots  were  fired.

Other  Secret  Service  agents  assigned  to  the
motorcade  remained  at  their  posts  during  the
race  to  the  hospital.  None  stayed  at  the  scene
of  the  shooting,  and  none  entered  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  Building  at  or  imme-
diately after  the  shooting.  Secret  Service  pro-
cedure requires  that  each  agent  stay  with  the
person  being  protected  and  not  be  diverted
unless  it  is  necessary  to  accomplish  the  protec-
tive assignment.  Forrest  V.  Sorrels,  special  agent
in  charge  of  the  Dallas  office,  was  the  first  Secret
Service  agent  to  return  to  the  scene  of  the  assas-
sination, approximately  20  or  25  minutes  after
the  shots  were  fired.

PARKLAND  MEMORIAL  HOSPITAL

The  Race  to  the  Hospital

In  the  final  instant  of  the  assassination,  the
Presidential  motorcade  began  a  race  to  Parkland
Memorial  Hospital,  approximately  4  mUes  from
the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  BuUding.
On  receipt  of  the  radio  message  from  KeUerman
to  the  lead  car  that  the  President  had  been  hit.
Chief  of  PoUce  Curry  and  police  motorcyclists
at  the  head  of  the  motorcade  led  the  way  to  the
hospital.  Meanwhile,  Chief  Ciorry  ordered  the
poUce  base  station  to  notify  Parkland  Hospital
that  the  wounded  President  was  en  route.  The
radio  log  of  the  Dallas  PoUce  Department  shows
that  at  12:30  p.m.  on  November  22  Chief  Ciirry
radioed,  "Go  to  the  hospital — Parkland  Hos-
pital. Have  them  stand  by."  A  moment  later
Curry  added,  "Looks  like  the  President  has
been  hit.  Have  Parkland  stand  by."  The  base  sta-
tion repUed,  'They  have  been  notified."  Travel-
ing at  speeds  estimated  at  times  to  be  up  to  70
or  80  mUes  per  hour  down  the  Stemmons  Free-
way and  Harry  Hines  Boulevard,  the  Presidential
limousine  arrived  at  the  emergency  entrance  of
the  Parkland  Hospital  at  about  12:35  p.m.
Arriving  almost  simultaneously  were  the  Presi-
dent's foUowup  car,  the  Vice  President's  auto-
mobUe,  and  the  Vice  President's  foUowup  car,
Adnural  Burkley,  the  President's  physician,  ar-
rived at  the  hospital  "between  3  and  5  minutes
foUowing  the  arrival  of  the  President,"  since  the
riders  in  his  car  "were  not  exactly  aware  what
had  happened"  and  the  car  went  on  to  the  Trade
Mart  first.

When  Parkland  Hospital  received  the  notifi-
cation, the  staff  in  the  emergency  area  was
alerted  and  trauma  rooms  1  and  2  were  pre-
pared. These  rooms  were  for  the  emergency
treatment of acutely ill or injured patients.


23


Although  the  first  message  mentioned  an  injury
only  to  President  Kennedy,  two  rooms  were  pre-
pared. As  the  President's  limousine  sped  toward
the  hospital,  12  doctors  rushed  to  the  emergency
area:  surgeons,  Drs.  Malcolm  O.  Perry,  Charles
R.  Baxter,  Robert  N.  McClelland,  Ronald  C.
Jones;  the  chief  neurologist,  Dr.  William  Kemp
Clark;  4  anesthesiologists,  Drs.  Marion  T.  Jen-
kins, Adolph  H.  Giesecke,  Jr.,  Jackie  H.  Hunt,
Gene  C.  Akin;  a  urological  surgeon.  Dr.  Paul  C.
Peters;  an  oral  surgeon.  Dr.  Don  T.  Curtis;  and
a  heart  specialist.  Dr.  Fouad  A.  Bashour.

Upon  arriving  at  Parkland  Hospital,  Lawson
jumped  from  the  lead  car  and  rushed  into  the
emergency  entrance,  where  he  was  met  by  hos-
pital staff  members  wheeling  stretchers  out  to
the  automobile.  Special  Agent  Hill  removed  his
suit  jacket  and  covered  the  President's  head  and
upper  chest  to  prevent  the  taking  of  photographs.
Governor  Connally,  who  had  lost  consciousness
on  the  ride  to  the  hospital,  regained  conscious-
ness when  the  limousine  stopped  abruptly  at  the
emergency  entrance.  Despite  his  serious  wounds,
Governor  Connally  tried  to  get  out  of  the  way  so
that  medical  help  could  reach  the  President.
Although  he  was  reclining  in  his  wife's  arms,  he
lurched  forward  in  an  effort  to  stand  upright  and
get  out  of  the  car,  but  he  collapsed  again.  Then
he  experienced  his  first  sensation  of  pain,  which
became  excruciating.  The  Governor  was  lifted
onto  a  stretcher  and  taken  into  trauma  room  2.
For  a  moment,  Mrs.  Kennedy  refused  to  release
the  President,  whom  she  held  in  her  lap,  but  then
Kellerman,  Greer,  and  Lawson  lifted  the  Presi-
dent onto  a  stretcher  and  pushed  it  into  trauma
room  1.

Treatment  of  President  Kennedy

The  fixst  physician  to  see  the  President  at
Parkland  Hospital  was  Dr.  Charles  J.  Carrico,
a  resident  in  general  surgery.  Dr.  Carrico  was
in  the  emergency  area,  examining  another  pa-
tient, when  he  was  notified  that  President  Ken-
nedy was  en  route  to  the  hospital.  Approxi-
mately 2  minutes  later,  Dr.  Carrico  saw  the
President  on  his  back,  being  wheeled  into  the
emergency  area.  He  noted  that  the  President  was
blue-white  or  ashen  in  color;  had  slow,  spas-
modic, agonal  respiration  without  any  coordi-
nation; made  no  voluntary  movements;  had  his
eyes  open  with  the  pupils  dilated  without  any
reaction  to  light;  evidenced  no  palpable  pulse;
and  had  a  few  chest  sounds  which  were  thought
to  be  heart  beats.  On  the  basis  of  these  findings.
Dr.  Carrico  concluded  that  President  Kennedy
was  still  alive.

Dr.  Carrico  noted  two  wounds :  a  small  bullet
wound  in  the  front  lower  neck,  and  an  extensive
wound  in  the  President's  head  where  a  sizable
portion  of  the  skull  was  missing.  He  observed
shredded  brain  tissue  and  "considerable  slow
oozing"  from  the  latter  wound,  followed  by
"more  profuse  bleeding"  after  some  circulation
was  established.  Dr.  Carrico  felt  the  President's
back  and  determined  that  there  was  no  large


wound  there  which  would  be  an  immediate
threat  to  life.  Observing  the  serious  problems
presented  by  the  head  wound  and  inadequate
respiration.  Dr.  Carrico  directed  his  attention
to  improving  the  President's  breathing.  He  noted
contusions,  hematoma  to  the  right  of  the  larynx,
which  was  deviated  slightly  to  the  left,  and  also
ragged  tissue  which  indicated  a  tracheal  injury.
Dr.  Carrico  inserted  a  cuffed  endotracheal  tube
past  the  injury,  inflated  the  cuff,  and  connected
it  to  a  Bennett  machine  to  assist  in  respiration.

At  that  point,  direction  of  the  President's
treatment  was  undertaken  by  Dr.  Malcohn  O.
Perry,  who  arrived  at  trauma  room  1  a  few
moments  after  the  President.  Dr.  Perry  noted
the  President's  back  brace  as  he  felt  for  a  femoral
pulse,  which  he  did  not  find.  Observing  that  an
effective  airway  had  to  be  established  if  treat-
ment was  to  be  effective,  Dr.  Perry  performed
a  tracheotomy,  which  required  3  to  5  minutes.
While  Dr.  Perry  was  performing  the  tracheot-
omy, Drs.  Carrico  and  Ronald  Jones  made  cut-
downs  on  the  President's  right  leg  and  left  arm,
respectively,  to  infuse  blood  and  fluids  into  the
circulatory  system.  Dr.  Carrico  treated  the  Pres-
ident's known  adrenal  insufficiency  by  admin-
istering hydrocortisone.  Dr.  Robert  N.  McClel-
land entered  at  that  point  and  assisted  Dr.  Perry
with  the  tracheotomy.

Dr.  Fouad  Bashour,  chief  of  cardiology,  Dr.
M.  T.  Jenkins,  chief  of  anesthesiology,  and  Dr.
A.  H.  Giesecke,  Jr.,  then  joined  in  the  effort  to
revive  the  President.  When  Dr.  Perry  noted  free
air  and  blood  in  the  President's  chest  cavity,  he
asked  that  chest  tubes  be  inserted  to  allow  for
drainage  of  blood  and  air.  Drs.  Paul  C.  Peters
and  Charles  R.  Baxter  initiated  these  procedures.
As  a  result  of  the  infusion  of  liquids  through  the
cutdowns,  the  cardiac  massage,  and  the  airway,
the  doctors  were  able  to  maintain  peripheral
circulation  as  monitored  at  the  neck  (carotid)
artery  and  at  the  wrist  (radial)  pulse.  A  femoral
pulse  was  also  detected  in  the  President's  leg.
While  these  medical  efforts  were  in  progress.  Dr.
Clark  noted  some  electrical  activity  on  the  car-
diotachyscope  attached  to  monitor  the  Presi-
dent's heart  responses.  Dr.  Clark,  who  most
closely  observed  the  head  wound,  described  a
large,  gaping  wound  in  the  right  rear  part  of  the
head,  with  substantial  damage  and  exposure  of
brain  tissue,  and  a  considerable  loss  of  blood.
Dr.  Clark  did  not  see  any  other  hole  or  wound
on  the  President's  head.  According  to  Dr.  Clark,
the  small  bullet  hole  on  the  right  rear  of  the
President's  head  discovered  during  the  subse-
quent autopsy  "could  have  easily  been  hidden  in
the  blood  and  hair."

In  the  absence  of  any  neurological,  muscular,
or  heart  response,  the  doctors  concluded  that
efforts  to  revive  the  President  were  hopeless.
This  was  verified  by  Admiral  Burkley,  the  Presi-
dent's physician,  who  arrived  at  the  hospital
after  emergency  treatment  was  underway  and
concluded  that  "my  direct  services  to  him  at  that
moment  would  have  interfered  with  the  action


24


of  the  team  which  was  in  progress."  At  approxi-
mately 1  p.m.,  after  last  rites  were  administered
to  the  President  by  Father  Oscar  L.  Huber,  Dr.
Clark  pronounced  the  President  dead.  He  made
the  oflScial  determination  because  the  ultimate
cause  of  death,  the  severe  head  injury,  was
within  his  sphere  of  specialization.  The  time  was
fixed  at  1  p.m.,  as  an  approximation,  since  it
was  impossible  to  determine  the  precise  moment
when  Ufe  left  the  President.  President  Kennedy
could  have  survived  the  neck  injury,  but  the
head  wound  was  fatal.  From  a  medical  view-
point, President  Kennedy  was  alive  when  he  ar-
rived at  Parkland  Hospital;  the  doctors  observed
that  he  had  a  heart  beat  and  was  making  some
respiratory  efforts.  But  his  condition  was  hope-
less, and  the  extraordinary  efforts  of  the  doctors
to  save  him  could  not  help  but  to  have  been
unavailing.

Since  the  Dallas  doctors  directed  all  their
efforts  to  controlling  the  massive  bleeding  caused
by  the  head  woimd,  and  to  reconstructing  an
airway  to  his  lungs,  the  President  remained  on
his  back  throughout  his  medical  treatment  at
Parkland.  When  asked  why  he  did  not  turn  the
President  over,  Dr.  Carrico  testified  as  follows:

A.  This  man  was  in  obvious  extreme  dis-
tress and  any  more  thorough  inspection  would
have  involved  several  minutes — well,  several
— considerable  time  which  at  this  juncture
was  not  available.  A  thorough  inspection
would  have  involved  washing  and  cleansing
the  back,  and  this  is  not  practical  in  treating
an  acutely  injured  patient.  You  have  to  deter-
mine which  things,  which  are  immediately
life  threatening  and  cope  with  them,  before
attempting  to  evaluate  the  full  extent  of  the
injuries.

Q.  Did  you  ever  have  occasion  to  look  at
the  President's  back?

A.  No,  sir.  Before— well,  in  trying  to  treat
an  acutely  injured  patient,  you  have  to  estab-
lish an  airway,  adequate  ventilation  and  you
have  to  establish  adequate  circulation.  Before
this  was  accomplished  the  President's  cardiac
activity  had  ceased  and  closed  cardiac  mas-
sage was  instituted,  which  made  it  impossible
to  inspect  his  back.

Q.  Was  any  effort  made  to  inspect  the  Presi-
dent's back  after  he  had  expired?

A.  No,  sir.

Q.  And  why  was  no  effort  made  at  that  time
to  inspect  his  back?

A.  I  suppose  nobody  really  had  the  heart
to  do  it

Moreover,  the  Parkland  doctors  took  no  further
action  after  the  President  had  expired  because
they  concluded  that  it  was  beyond  the  scope  of
their  permissible  duties.

Treatment  of  Governor  Connally

While  one  medical  team  tried  to  revive  Presi-
dent Kennedy,  a  second  performed  a  series  of
operations  on  the  bullet  wounds  sustained  by


Governor  Connally.  Governor  ConnaUy  was
originally  seen  by  Dr.  Carrico  and  Dr.  Richard
Dulany.  While  Dr.  Carrico  went  on  to  attend
the  President,  Dr.  Dulany  stayed  with  the  Gov-
ernor and  was  soon  joined  by  several  other
doctors.  At  approximately  12:45  p.m.,  Dr.
Robert  Shaw,  chief  of  thoracic  surgery,  arrived
at  trauma  room  2,  to  take  charge  of  the  care  of
Governor  Connally,  whose  major  wound  fell
within  Dr.  Shaw's  area  of  specialization.

Governor  Connally  had  a  large  sucking
wound  in  the  front  of  the  right  chest  which
caused  extreme  pain  and  dif5culty  in  breathing.
Rubber  tubes  were  inserted  between  the  second
and  third  ribs  to  reexpand  the  right  lung,  which
had  collapsed  because  of  the  opening  in  the
chest  wall.  At  1:35  p.m.,  after  Governor  Con-
nally had  been  moved  to  the  operating  room.
Dr.  Shaw  started  the  first  operation  by  cutting
away  the  edges  of  the  wound  on  the  front  of  the
Governor's  chest  and  suturing  the  damaged
lung  and  lacerated  muscles.  The  elliptical  wound
in  the  Governor's  back,  located  slightly  to  the
left  of  the  Governor's  right  armpit  approxi-
mately five-eighths  inch  (a  centimeter  and  a
half)  in  its  greatest  diameter,  was  treated  by  cut-
ting away  the  damaged  skin  and  suturing  the
back  muscle  and  skin.  This  operation  was  con-
cluded at  3:20  p.m.

Two  additional  operations  were  performed
on  Governor  Connally  for  wounds  which  he
had  not  realized  he  had  sustained  imtil  he  re-
gained consciousness  the  following  day.  From
approximately  4  p.m.  to  4:50  p.m.  on  November
22,  Dr.  Charles  F.  Gregory,  chief  of  orthopedic
surgery,  operated  on  the  wounds  of  Governor
Connally's  right  wrist,  assisted  by  Drs.  WiUiam
Osborne  and  John  Parker.  The  wound  on  the
back  of  the  vmst  was  left  partially  open  for
draining,  and  the  woimd  on  the  palm  side  was
enlarged,  cleansed,  and  closed.  The  fracture
was  set,  and  a  cast  was  applied  with  some  trac-
tion utilized.  While  the  second  operation  was  in
progress,  Dr.  George  T.  Shires,  assisted  by  Drs.
Robert  McClelland,  Charles  Baxter,  and  Ralph
Don  Patman,  treated  the  gunshot  wound  in  the
left  thigh.  This  punctuate  missile  woimd,  about
two-fifths  inch  in  diameter  (1  centimeter)  and
located  approximately  5  inches  above  the  left
knee,  was  cleansed  and  closed  with  sutures;  but
a  small  metallic  fragment  remained  in  the  Gov-
ernor's leg.

Vice  President  Johnson  at  Parkland

As  President  Kennedy  and  Governor  Con-
nally were  being  removed  from  the  limousine
onto  stretchers,  a  protective  circle  of  Secret
Service  agents  surrovmded  Vice  President  and
Mrs.  Johnson  and  escorted  them  into  Parkland
Hospital  through  the  emergency  entrance.  The
agents  moved  a  nurse  and  patient  out  of  a
nearby  room,  lowered  the  shades,  and  took
emergency  security  measures  to  protect  the  Vice
President.  Two  men  from  the  President's  fol-
lowup  car  were  detailed  to  help  protect  the  Vice


25


President.  An  agent  was  stationed  at  the  en-
trance to  stop  anyone  who  was  not  a  member
of  the  Presidential  party.  U.S.  Representatives
Henry  B.  Gonzalez,  Jack  Brooks,  Homer  Thorn-
berry,  and  Albert  Thomas  joined  Clifton  C.
Carter  and  the  group  of  special  agents  protect-
ing the  Vice  President.  On  one  occasion  Mrs.
Johnson,  accompanied  by  two  Secret  Service
agents,  left  the  room  to  see  Mrs.  Kennedy  and
Mrs.  Connally.

Concern  that  the  Vice  President  might  also
be  a  target  for  assassination  prompted  the  Se-
cret Service  agents  to  urge  him  to  leave  the  hos-
pital and  return  to  Washington  immediately.
The  Vice  President  decided  to  wait  until  he  re-
ceived definitive  word  of  the  President's  condi-
tion. At  approximately  1 :20  p.m.,  Vice  President
Johnson  was  notified  by  O'Donnell  that  Presi-
dent Kennedy  was  dead.  Special  Agent  Young-
blood  learned  from  Mrs.  Johnson  the  location  of
her  two  daughters  and  made  arrangements
through  Secret  Service  headquarters  in  Washing-
ton to  provide  them  with  protection  immediately.

When  consulted  by  the  Vice  President,  O'Don-
nell advised  him  to  go  to  the  airfield  immediately
and  return  to  Washington.  It  was  decided  that
the  Vice  President  should  return  on  the  Presi-
dential plane  rather  than  on  the  Vice-Presi-
dential plane  because  it  had  better  communica-
tion equipment.  The  Vice  President  conferred
with  White  House  Assistant  Press  Secretary
Malcohn  Kilduff  and  decided  that  there  would
be  no  release  of  the  news  of  the  President's
death  until  the  Vice  President  had  left  the  hos-
pital. When  told  that  Mrs.  Kennedy  refused  to
leave  without  the  President's  body,  the  Vice
President  said  that  he  would  not  leave  Dallas
without  her.  On  the  reconmiendation  of  the
Secret  Service  agents.  Vice  President  Johnson
decided  to  board  the  Presidential  airplane.  Air
Force  One,  and  wait  for  Mrs.  Kennedy  and  the
President's  body.

Secret  Service  Emergency  Security
Arrangements

Immediately  after  President  Kennedy's
stretcher  was  wheeled  into  trauma  room  1,  Se-
cret Service  agents  took  positions  at  the  door
of  the  small  emergency  room.  A  nurse  was
asked  to  identify  hospital  personnel  and  to  tell
everyone,  except  necessary  medical  staff  mem-
bers, to  leave  the  emergency  room.  Other  Se-
cret Service  agents  posted  themselves  in  the  cor-
ridors and  other  areas  near  the  emergency  room.
Special  Agent  Lawson  made  certain  that  the
Dallas  police  kept  the  public  and  press  away
from  the  immediate  area  of  the  hospital.  Agents
Kellerman  and  HiU  telephoned  the  head  of  the
White  House  detail,  Gerald  A.  Behn,  to  advise
him  of  the  assassination.  The  telephone  line  to
Washington  was  kept  open  throughout  the  re-
mainder of  the  stay  at  the  hospital.

Secret  Service  agents  stationed  at  later  stops
on  the  President's  itinerary  of  November  22
were  redeployed.  Men  at  the  Trade  Mart  were


driven  to  Parkland  Hospital  in  Dallas  police
cars.  The  Secret  Service  group  awaiting  the
President  in  Austin  were  instructed  to  return  to
Washington.  Meanwhile,  the  Secret  Service
agents  in  charge  of  security  at  Love  Field  started
to  make  arrangements  for  departure.  As  soon  as
one  of  the  agents  learned  of  the  shooting,  he
asked  the  officer  in  charge  of  the  police  detail
at  the  airport  to  institute  strict  security  meas-
ures for  the  Presidential  aircraft,  the  airport
terminal,  and  the  surrounding  area.  The  police
were  cautioned  to  prevent  picture  taking.  Secret
Service  agents  working  with  poUce  cleared  the
areas  adjacent  to  the  aircraft,  including  ware-
houses, other  terminal  buildings  and  the  neigh-
boring parking  lots,  of  all  people.  The  agents
decided  not  to  shift  the  Presidential  aircraft  to
the  far  side  of  the  airport  because  the  original
landing  area  was  secure  and  a  move  would
require  new  measures.

When  security  arrangements  at  the  airport
were  complete,  the  Secret  Service  made  the
necessary  arrangements  for  the  Vice  President
to  leave  the  hospital.  Unmarked  police  cars  took
the  Vice  President  and  Mrs.  Johnson  from  Park-
land Hospital  to  Love  Field.  Chief  Curry  drove
one  automobile  occupied  by  Vice  President
Johnson,  U.S.  Representatives  Thomas  and
Thornberry,  and  Special  Agent  Youngblood.  In
another  car  Mrs.  Johnson  was  driven  to  the  air-
port accompanied  by  Secret  Service  agents  and
Representative  Brooks.  Motorcycle  policemen
who  escorted  the  automobiles  were  requested
by  the  Vice  President  and  Agent  Youngblood
not  to  use  sirens.  During  the  drive  Vice  Presi-
dent Johnson,  at  Youngblood's  instruction,  kept
below  window  level.

Removal  of  the  President's  Body

While  the  team  of  doctors  at  Parkland  Hos-
pital tried  desperately  to  save  the  life  of  Presi-
dent Kennedy,  Mrs.  Kennedy  alternated  be-
tween watching  them  and  waiting  outside.  After
the  President  was  pronounced  dead,  O'Donnell
tried  to  persuade  Mrs.  Kennedy  to  leave  the
area,  but  she  refused.  She  said  that  she  intended
to  stay  with  her  husband.  A  casket  was  obtained
and  the  President's  body  was  prepared  for  re-
moval. Before  the  body  could  be  taken  from  the
hospital,  two  Dallas  officials  informed  members
of  the  President's  staff  that  the  body  could  not
be  removed  from  the  city  until  an  autopsy  was
performed.  Despite  the  protests  of  these  offi-
cials, the  casket  was  wheeled  out  of  the  hospital,
placed  in  an  ambulance,  and  transported  to  the
airport  shortly  after  2  p.m.  At  approximately
2:15  p.m.  the  casket  was  loaded,  with  some
difficulty  because  of  the  narrow  airplane  door,
onto  the  rear  of  the  Presidential  plane  where
seats  had  been  removed  to  make  room.  Con-
cerned that  the  local  officials  might  try  to  pre-
vent the  plane's  departure,  O'Donnell  asked
that  the  pilot  take  off  immediately.  He  was  in-
formed that  takeoff  would  be  delayed  until
Vice  President  Johnson  was  sworn  in.


26


THE  END  OF  THE  TRIP

Swearing  in  of  the  New  President

From  the  Presidential  airplane,  the  Vice  Pres-
ident telephoned  Attorney  General  Robert  F.
Kennedy,  who  advised  that  Mr.  Johnson  take
the  Presidential  oath  of  office  before  the  plane
left  Dallas.  Federal  Judge  Sarah  T.  Hughes
hastened  to  the  plane  to  administer  the  oath.
Members  of  the  Presidential  and  Vice-Presi-
dential parties  filled  the  central  compartment
of  the  plane  to  witness  the  swearing  in.  At  2:38
p.m.,  c.s.t.,  Lyndon  Baines  Johnson  took  the
oath  of  office  as  the  36th  President  of  the  United
States.  Mrs.  Kennedy  and  Mrs.  Johnson  stood
at  the  side  of  the  new  President  as  he  took  the
oath  of  office.  Nine  minutes  later,  the  Presi-
dential airplane  departed  for  Washington,  D.C.

Return  to  Washington,  D.C.

On  the  return  flight,  Mrs.  Kennedy  sat  with
David  Powers,  Kenneth  O'Donnell,  and  Law-
rence O'Brien.  At  5:58  p.m.,  e.s.t.,  Air  Force
One  landed  at  Andrews  AFB,  where  President
Kennedy  had  begun  his  last  trip  only  31  hours
before.  Detailed  security  arrangements  had  been
made  by  radio  from  the  President's  plane  on  the
return  flight  The  public  had  been  excluded
from  the  base,  and  only  Government  officials
and  the  press  were  permitted  near  the  landing
area.  Upon  arrival,  President  Johnson  made  a
brief  statement  over  television  and  radio.  Presi-
dent and  Mrs.  Johnson  were  flown  by  helicopter
to  the  White  House,  from  where  Mrs.  Johnson
was  driven  to  her  residence  under  Secret  Service
escort.  The  President  then  walked  to  the  Execu-
tive Office  Building,  where  he  worked  until
9  p.m.

The  Autopsy

Given  a  choice  between  the  National  Naval
Medical  Center  at  Bethesda,  Md.,  and  the
Army's  Walter  Reed  Hospital,  Mrs.  Kennedy
chose  the  hospital  in  Bethesda  for  the  autopsy
because  the  President  had  served  in  the  Navy.
Mrs.  Kennedy  and  the  Attorney  General,  with
three  Secret  Service  agents,  accompanied  Presi-
dent Kennedy's  body  on  the  45-minute  automo-
bile trip  from  Andrews  AFB  to  the  Hospital.  On
the  17th  floor  of  the  Hospital,  Mrs.  Kennedy
and  the  Attorney  General  joined  other  members
of  the  Kennedy  family  to  await  the  conclusion
of  the  autopsy.  Mrs.  Kennedy  was  guarded  by
Secret  Service  agents  in  quarters  assigned  to  her
in  the  naval  hospital  The  Secret  Service  estab-
lished a  communication  system  with  the  White
House  and  screened  all  telephone  calls  and
visitors.


The  hospital  received  the  President's  body
for  autopsy  at  approximately  7:35  p.m.  X-rays
and  photographs  were  taken  preliminarily  and
the  pathological  examination  began  at  about
8  p.m.  The  autopsy  report  noted  that  President
Kennedy  was  46  years  of  age,  72i  inches  tall,
weighed  170  pounds,  had  blue  eyes  and  reddish-
brown  hair.  The  body  was  muscular  and  well
developed  with  no  gross  skeletal  abnormalities
except  for  those  caused  by  the  gunshot  wounds.
Under  "Pathological  Diagnosis"  the  cause  of
death  was  set  forth  as  "Gunshot  wound,  head."
(See  app.  IX.)

The  autopsy  examination  revealed  two
wounds  in  the  President's  head.  One  wound,
approximately  one-fourth  of  an  mch  by  five-
eighths  of  an  inch  (6  by  15  millimeters),  was
located  about  an  inch  (2.5  centimeters)  to  the
right  and  slighdy  above  the  large  bony  pro-
trusion (external  occipital  protuberance)  which
juts  out  at  the  center  of  the  lower  part  of  the
back  of  the  skull.  The  second  head  wound  meas-
ured approximately  5  inches  (13  centimeters)
in  its  greatest  diameter,  but  it  was  difficult  to
measure  accurately  because  multiple  crisscross
fractures  radiated  from  the  large  defect.  During
the  autopsy  examination,  Federal  agents  brought
the  surgeons  three  pieces  of  bone  recovered
from  Elm  Street  and  the  Presidential  automo-
bile. When  put  together,  these  fragments  ac-
counted for  approximately  three-quarters  of  the
missing  portion  of  the  skuU.  The  surgeons  ob-
served, through  X-ray  analysis,  30  or  40  tiny
dustlike  fragments  of  metal  running  in  a  line
from  the  wound  in  the  rear  of  the  President's
head  toward  the  front  part  of  the  skuU,  with  a
sizable  metal  fragment  lying  just  above  the  right
eye.  From  this  head  wound  two  small  irregularly
shaped  fragments  of  metal  were  recovered  and
turned  over  to  the  FBI.

The  autopsy  also  disclosed  a  wound  near  the
base  of  the  back  of  President  Kennedy's  neck
slightly  to  the  right  of  his  spine.  The  doctors
traced  the  course  of  the  bullet  through  the  body
and,  as  information  was  received  from  Park-
land Hospital,  concluded  that  the  buUet  had
emerged  from  the  front  portion  of  the  Presi-
dent's neck  that  had  been  cut  away  by  the
tracheotomy  at  Parkland,  The  nature  and  char-
acteristics of  this  neck  wotind  and  the  two  head
wounds  are  discussed  fuUy  in  the  next  chapter.

After  the  autopsy  was  concluded  at  approxi-
mately 11  p.m.,  the  President's  body  was  pre-
pared for  buriaL  This  was  finished  at  approxi-
mately 4  a.iiL  Shortly  thereafter,  the  President's
wife,  f amUy  and  aides  left  Bethesda  Naval  Hos-
pital. The  President's  body  was  taken  to  the
East  Room  of  the  White  House  where  it  was
placed  under  ceremonial  mihtary  guard.


27


Chapter  III

THE  SHOTS  FROM  THE  TEXAS  SCHOOL

BOOK  DEPOSITORY


IN  THIS  chapter  the  Commission  analyzes  the
evidence  and  sets  forth  its  conclusions  concern-
ing the  source,  effect,  number  and  timing  of  the
shots  that  killed  President  Kennedy  and
wounded  Governor  ConnaUy.  In  that  connection
the  Commission  has  evaluated  (1)  the  testimony
of  eyewitnesses  present  at  the  scene  of  the  as-
sassination; (2)  the  damage  to  the  Presidential
limousine;  (3)  the  examination  by  qualified  ex-
perts of  the  rifle  and  cartridge  cases  found  on
the  sixth  floor  of  the  Texas  School  Book  De-
pository and  the  bullet  fragments  found  in  the
Presidential  limousine  and  at  Parkland  Hospi-
tal; (4)  the  wounds  suffered  by  President  Ken-
nedy and  Governor  Connally;  (5)  wound  ballis-
tics tests;  (6)  the  examination  by  qualified  ex-
perts of  the  clothing  worn  by  President  Ken-
nedy and  Governor  Connally;  and  (7)  motion-
picture  films  and  stiU  photographs  taken  at  the
time  of  the  assassination.


THE  WITNESSES

As  reflected  in  the  previous  chapter,  passen-
gers in  the  first  few  cars  of  the  motorcade  had
the  impression  that  the  shots  came  from  the  rear
and  from  the  right,  the  general  direction  of  the
Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building,  al-
though none  of  these  passengers  saw  anyone  fire
the  shots.  Some  spectators  at  Houston  and  Elm
Streets,  however,  did  see  a  rifle  being  fired  in  the
direction  of  the  President's  car  from  the  eastern-
most window  of  the  sixth  floor  on  the  south  side
of  the  building.  Other  witnesses  saw  a  rifle  in  this
window  immediately  after  the  assassination.
Three  employees  of  the  Depository,  observing
the  parade  from  the  fifth  floor,  heard  the  shots
fired  from  the  floor  immediately  above  them.  No
credible  evidence  suggests  that  the  shots  were
fired  from  the  railroad  bridge  over  the  Triple
Underpass,  the  nearby  railroad  yards  or  any
place  other  than  the  Texas  School  Book  Deposi-
tory Building.

Near  the  Depository

Eyewitness  testified  that  they  saw  a  man  fire
a  weapon  from  the  sixth-floor  window.  Howard
L.  Brennan,  a  45-year-old  steamfitter,  watched
the  motorcade  from  a  concrete  retaining  wall  at
the  southwest  corner  of  Elm  and  Houston,  where
he  had  a  clear  view  of  the  south  side  of  the  De-
pository Building.  He  was  approximately  107


feet  from  the  Depository  entrance  and  120  feet
from  the  southeast  comer  window  of  the  sixth
floor.  Brennan's  presence  and  vantage  point  are
corroborated  by  a  motion  picture  of  the  motor-
cade taken  by  amateur  photographer  Abraham
Zapruder,  which  shows  Brennan,  wearing  gray
khaki  work  clothes  and  a  gray  work  helmet,
seated  on  the  retaining  wall.  Brennan  later  iden-
tified himself  in  the  Zapruder  movie.  While  wait-
ing about  7  minutes  for  the  President  to  arrive,
he  observed  the  crowd  on  the  street  and  the
people  at  the  windows  of  the  Depository  Build-
ing. He  noticed  a  man  at  the  southeast  corner
window  of  the  sixth  floor,  and  observed  him
leave  the  window  "a  couple  of  times."

Brennan  watched  the  President's  car  as  it
turned  the  comer  at  Houston  and  Elm  and
moved  down  the  incline  toward  the  Triple  Un-
derpass. Soon  after  the  President's  car  passed,
he  heard  an  explosion  like  the  backfire  of  a  mo-
torcycle. Brennan  recalled:

Well,  then  something,  just  right  after  this
explosion,  made  me  think  that  it  was  a  fire-
cracker being  thrown  from  the  Texas  Book
Store.  And  I  glanced  up.  And  this  man  that  I
saw  previous  was  aiming  for  his  last  shot.


Well,  as  it  appeared  to  me  he  was  standing
up  and  resting  against  the  left  window  sill,
with  gun  shouldered  to  his  right  shoulder,
holding  the  gun  with  his  left  hand  and  taking
positive  aim  and  fired  his  last  shot.  As  I  cal-
culate a  couple  of  seconds.  He  drew  the  gun
back  from  the  window  as  though  he  was  draw-
ing it  back  to  his  side  and  maybe  paused  for
another  second  as  though  to  assure  hisself  that
he  hit  his  mark,  and  then  he  disappeared.

Brennan  stated  that  he  saw  70  to  85  percent  of
the  gun  when  it  was  fired  and  the  body  of  the
man  from  the  waist  up.  The  rifle  was  aimed
southwesterly  down  Elm  Street  toward  the  Un-
derpass. Brennan  saw  the  man  fire  one  shot  and
he  remembered  hearing  a  total  of  only  two  shots.
When  questioned  about  the  number  of  shots,
Brennan  testified:

I  don't  know  what  made  me  think  that  there
was  firecrackers  throwed  out  of  the  Book
Store  unless  I  did  hear  the  second  shot,  be-
cause I  positively  thought  the  first  shot  was  a


28


backfire,  and  subconsciously  I  must  have
heard  a  second  shot,  but  I  do  not  recall  it.  I
could  not  swear  to  it.

Brennan  quickly  reported  his  observations  to
police  officers.  Brennan's  description  of  the  man
he  saw  is  discussed  in  the  next  chapter.

Amos  Lee  Euins,  a  15-year-old  ninth  grade
student,  stated  that  he  was  facing  the  Depository
as  the  motorcade  turned  the  comer  at  Elm  and
Houston.  He  recalled:

Then  I  was  standing  here,  and  as  the  motor-
cade tvuned  the  comer,  I  was  facing,  looking
dead  at  the  building.  And  so  I  seen  this  pipe
thing  sticking  out  the  window.  I  wasn't  pay-
ing too  much  attention  to  it.  Then  when  the
first  shot  was  fired,  I  started  looking  around,
thinking  it  was  a  backfire.  Everybody  else
started  looking  around.  Then  I  looked  up  at
the  window,  and  he  shot  again.

After  witnessing  the  first  shots,  Euins  hid  be-
hind a  fountain  bench  and  saw  the  man  shoot
again  from  the  window  in  the  southeast  comer
of  the  Depository's  sixth  floor.  According  to
Euins,  the  man  had  one  hand  on  the  barrel  and
the  other  on  the  trigger.  Euins  believed  that  there
were  four  shots.  Immediately  after  the  assassina-
tion, he  reported  his  observations  to  Sgt.  D.  V.
Harkness  of  the  Dallas  Police  Department  and
also  to  James  Underwood  of  station  KRLD-TV
of  Dallas.  Sergeant  Harkness  testified  that  Euins
told  him  that  the  shots  came  from  the  last  win-
dow of  the  floor  "under  the  ledge"  on  the  side
of  the  building  they  were  facing.  Based  on  Euins'
statements,  Harkness  radioed  to  headquarters  at
12:36  p.m.  that  "I  have  a  witness  that  says  that  it
came  from  the  fifth  floor  of  the  Texas  Book  De-
pository Store."  Euins  accurately  described  the
sixth  floor  as  the  floor  "under  the  ledge."  Hark-
ness testified  that  the  error  in  the  radio  message
was  due  to  his  own  "hasty  count  of  the  floors."
Other  witnesses  saw  a  nQe  in  the  window  after
the  shots  were  fired.  Robert  H.  Jackson,  staff
photographer,  DaUas  Times  Herald,  was  in  a
press  car  in  the  Presidential  motorcade,  eight  or
nine  cars  from  the  front.  On  Houston  Street
about  halfway  between  Main  and  Elm,  Jackson
heard  the  first  shot.  As  someone  in  the  car  com-
mented that  it  sounded  like  a  firecracker,  Jack-
son heard  two  more  shots.  He  testified:

Then  we  realized  or  we  thought  that  it  was
gunfire,  and  then  we  could  not  at  that  point
see  the  President's  car.  We  were  still  moving
slowly,  and  after  the  third  shot  the  second  two
shots  seemed  much  closer  together  than  the
first  shot,  than  they  were  to  the  first  shot.  Then
after  the  last  shot,  I  guess  all  of  us  were  just
looking  all  around  and  I  just  looked  straight
up  ahead  of  me  which  would  have  been  look-
ing at  the  School  Book  Depository  and  I  no-
ticed two  Negro  men  in  a  window  straining  to
see  directly  above  them,  and  my  eyes  followed
right  on  up  to  the  window  above  them  and  I


saw  the  rifle  or  what  looked  like  a  rifle  ap-
proximately half  of  the  weapon,  I  guess  I  saw,
and  just  as  I  looked  at  it,  it  was  drawn  fairly
slowly  back  into  the  building,  and  I  saw  no
one  in  the  window  with  it.

I  didn't  even  see  a  form  in  the  window.

In  the  car  with  Jackson  were  James  Underwood,
television  station  KRLD-TV;  Thomas  Dillard,
chief  photographer,  Dallas  Morning  News;  Mal-
cobn  O.  Couch  and  James  Darnell,  television
newsreel  cameramen.  Dillard,  Underwood,  and
the  driver  were  in  the  front  seat,  Couch  and  Dar-
nell were  sitting  on  top  of  the  back  seat  of  the
convertible  with  Jackson.  Dillard,  Couch,  and
Underwood  confirmed  that  Jackson  spontane-
ously exclaimed  that  he  saw  a  rifle  in  the  win-
dow. According  to  Dillard,  at  the  time  the  shots
were  fired  he  and  his  fellow  passengers  "had  an
absolutely  perfect  view  of  the  School  Depository
from  our  position  in  the  open  car."  Dillard  im-
mediately took  two  pictures  of  the  building:  one
of  the  east  two-thirds  of  the  south  side  and  the
other  of  the  southeast  comer,  particularly  the
fifth-  and  sixth-floor  windows.  These  pictures
show  three  Negro  men  in  windows  on  the  fifth
floor  and  the  partially  open  window  on  the  sixth
floor  directly  above  them.  Couch  also  saw  the
rifle  in  the  window,  and  testified:

And  after  the  third  shot,  Bob  Jackson,  who
was,  as  I  recall,  on  my  right,  yelled  something
like,  "Look  up  in  the  window!  There's  the
rifle!"

And  I  remember  glancing  up  to  a  window
on  the  far  right,  which  at  the  time  impressed
me  as  the  sixth  or  seventh  floor,  and  seeing
about  a  foot  of  a  rifle  being — the  barrel
brought  into  the  window.

Couch  testified  he  saw  people  standing  in  other
windows  on  the  third  or  fourth  floor  in  the  mid-
dle of  the  south  side,  one  of  them  being  a  Negro
in  a  white  T-shirt  leaning  out  to  look  up  at  the
windows  above  him.

Mayor  and  Mrs.  Earle  Cabell  rode  in  the
motorcade  immediately  behind  the  Vice-Presi-
dential foUowup  car.  Mrs.  CabeU  was  seated  in
the  back  seat  behind  the  driver  and  was  facing
U.S.  Representative  Ray  Roberts  on  her  right  as
the  car  made  the  turn  at  Elm  and  Houston.  In
this  position  Mrs.  Cabell  "was  actually  facing"
the  seven-story  Depository  when  the  first  shot
rang  out.  She  "jerked"  her  head  up  immediately
and  saw  a  "projection"  in  the  first  group  of
windows  on  a  floor  which  she  described  both  as
the  sixth  floor  and  the  top  floor.  According  to
Mrs.  CabeU,  the  object  was  "rather  long  look-
ing," but  she  was  unable  to  determine  whether
it  was  a  mechanical  object  or  a  person's  arm.
She  turned  away  from  the  window  to  tell  her
husband  that  the  noise  was  a  shot,  and  "just  as  I
got  the  words  out  *  *  *  the  second  two  shots
rang  out."  Mrs.  Cabell  did  not  look  at  the  sixth-


29


floor  window  when  the  second  and  third  shots
were  fired.

James  N.  Crawford  and  Mary  Ann  Mitchell,
two  deputy  district  clerks  for  Dallas  County,
watched  the  motorcade  at  the  southeast  comer
of  Elm  and  Houston.  After  the  President's  car
turned  the  comer,  Crawford  heard  a  loud  re-
port which  he  thought  was  backfire  coming  from
the  direction  of  the  Triple  Underpass.  He  heard
a  second  shot  seconds  later,  followed  quickly  by
a  third.  At  the  third  shot,  he  looked  up  and  saw
a  "movement"  in  the  far  east  comer  of  the  sixth
floor  of  the  Depository,  the  only  open  window  on
that  floor.  He  told  Miss  Mitchell  "that  if  those
were  shots  they  came  from  that  window."  When
asked  to  describe  the  movement  more  exactly,
he  said,

*  *  *  I  would  say  that  it  was  a  profile,  some-
what from  the  waist  up,  but  it  was  a  very
quick  movement  and  rather  indistinct  and  it
was  very  light  colored.  *  *  *


When  I  saw  it,  I  automatically  in  my  mind
came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  a  person
having  moved  out  of  the  window.  *  *  *

He  could  not  state  whether  the  person  was  a
man  or  a  woman.  Miss  Mitchell  confirmed  that
after  the  third  shot  Crawford  told  her,  'Those
shots  came  from  that  building."  She  saw  Craw-
ford pointing  at  a  window  but  was  not  sure  at
which  window  he  was  pointing.

On  the  Fifth  Floor

Three  Depository  employees  shown  in  the  pic-
ture taken  by  Dillaxd  were  on  the  fifth  floor  of
the  building  when  the  shots  were  fired:  James
Jarman,  Jr.,  age  34,  a  wrapper  in  the  shipping
department;  Bonnie  Ray  Williams,  age  20,  a
warehouseman  temporarily  assigned  to  laying
a  plywood  floor  on  the  sixth  floor;  and  Harold
Norman,  age  26,  an  "order  filler."  Norman  and
Jarman  decided  to  watch  the  parade  during  the
lunch  hour  from  the  fifth-floor  windows.  From
the  ground  floor  they  took  the  west  elevator,
which  operates  with  push-button  controls,  to  the
fifth  floor.  Meanwhile,  Williams  had  gone  up  to
the  sixth  floor  where  he  had  been  working  and
ate  his  lunch  on  the  south  side  of  that  floor.
Since  he  saw  no  one  around  when  he  finished
his  lunch,  he  started  down  on  the  east  elevator,
looking  for  company.  He  left  behind  his  paper
lunch  sack,  chicken  bones  and  an  empty  pop
bottle.  Williams  went  down  to  the  fifth  floor,
where  he  joined  Norman  and  Jarman  at  ap-
proximately 12:20  p.m.

Harold  Norman  was  in  the  fifth-floor  window
in  the  southeast  comer,  directly  tmder  the  win-
dow where  witnesses  saw  the  rifle.  He  could  see
light  though  the  ceiling  cracks  between  the  fifth
and  sixth  floors.  As  the  motorcade  went  by,  Nor-
man thought  that  the  President  was  saluting  with
his  right  arm,


*  *  *  and  I  can't  remember  what  the
exact  time  was  but  I  know  I  heard  a  shot,  and
then  after  I  heard  the  shot,  well,  it  seems  as
though  the  President,  you  know,  slumped  or
something,  and  then  another  shot  and  I  be-
lieve Jarman  or  someone  told  me,  he  said,  "I
believe  someone  is  shooting  at  the  President,"
and  I  think  I  made  a  statement  "It  is  someone
shooting  at  the  President,  and  I  beUeve  it  came
from  up  above  us."

Well,  I  couldn't  see  at  all  dvuing  the  time
but  I  know  I  heard  a  third  shot  fixed,  and  I
could  also  hear  something  soimded  like  the
shell  hulls  hitting  the  floor  and  the  ejecting  of
the  rifle  *  *  *.

Williams  said  that  he  "really  did  not  pay  any
attention"  to  the  first  shot —

*  *  *  because  I  did  not  know  what  was
happening.  The  second  shot,  it  sounded  like
it  was  ri^t  in  the  building,  the  second  and
third  shot.  And  it  sounded — it  even  shook  the
building,  the  side  we  were  on.  Cement  fell  on
my  head.

Q.  You  say  cement  fell  on  your  head?

A.  Cement,  gravel,  dirt,  or  something,  from
the  old  building,  because  it  shook  the  win-
dows and  everything.  Harold  was  sitting  next
to  me,  and  he  said  it  came  right  from  over
our  head.

Williams  testified  Norman  said  "I  can  even  hear
the  shells  being  ejected  from  the  gun  hitting  the
floor."

When Jarman heard the first sound, he
thought  that  it  was  either  a  backfire —

*  *  *  or  an  oflBcer  giving  a  salute  to  the
President.  And  then  at  that  time  I  didn't,
you  know,  think  too  much  about  it.  *  *  *


Well,  after  the  third  shot  was  fired,  I  think
I  got  up  and  I  run  over  to  Harold  Norman
and  Bonnie  Ray  Williams,  and  told  them,  I
said,  I  told  them  that  it  wasn't  a  backfire  or
anything,  that  somebody  was  shooting  at  the
President.

Jarman  testified  that  Norman  said  "that  he
thought  the  shots  had  come  from  above  us,  and
I  noticed  that  Bonnie  Ray  had  a  few  debris  in
his  head.  It  was  sort  of  white  stuff,  or  some-
thing." Jarman  stated  that  Norman  said  "that
he  was  sure  that  the  shot  came  from  inside  the
building  because  he  had  been  used  to  guns  and
all  that,  and  he  said  it  didn't  sound  like  it  was
too  far  off  anyway."  The  three  men  ran  to  the
West  side  of  the  building,  where  they  could  look
toward  the  Triple  Underpass  to  see  what  had
happened  to  the  motorcade.

After  the  men  had  gone  to  the  window  on  the
west  side  of  the  building,  Jarman  "got  to  think-
ing about  all  the  debris  on  Bonnie  Ray's  head"


30


and  said,  "That  shot  probably  did  come  from
upstairs,  up  over  us."  He  testiiSed  that  Norman
said,  "I  know  it  did,  because  I  could  hear  the
action  of  the  bolt,  and  I  could  hear  the  car-
tridges drop  on  the  floor."  After  pausing  for  a
few  minutes,  the  three  men  ran  downstairs.
Norman  and  Jarman  ran  out  of  the  front  en-
trance of  the  building,  where  they  saw  Brennan,
the  construction  worker  who  had  seen  the  man
in  the  window  firing  the  gun,  talking  to  a  police
officer,  and  they  then  reported  their  own  ex-
perience.

On  March  20,  1964,  preceding  their  appear-
ance before  the  Commission,  these  witnesses
were  interviewed  in  Dallas.  At  that  time  mem-
bers of  the  Commission's  legal  staff  conducted
an  experiment.  Norman,  Williams,  and  Jarman
placed  themselves  at  the  windows  of  the  fifth
floor  as  they  had  been  on  November  22.  A
Secret  Service  agent  operated  the  bolt  of  a  rifle
directly  above  them  at  the  southeast  comer  of
the  sixth  floor.  At  the  same  time,  three  cartridge
sheUs  were  dropped  to  the  floor  at  intervals  of
about  3  seconds.  According  to  Norman,  the
noise  outside  was  less  on  the  day  of  the  assassi-
nation than  on  the  day  of  the  test.  He  testified,
"Well,  I  heard  the  same  sound,  the  sound  similar.
I  heard  three  something  that  he  dropped  on  the
floor  and  then  I  could  hear  the  rifle  or  whatever
he  had  up  there."  The  experiment  with  the  shells
and  rifle  was  repeated  for  members  of  the  Com-
mission on  May  9,  1964,  on  June  7,  1964,  and
again  on  September  6,  1964.  All  seven  of  the
Commissioners  clearly  heard  the  shells  drop  to
the  floor.

At  the  Triple  Underpass

In  contrast  to  the  testimony  of  the  witnesses
who  heard  and  observed  shots  fired  from  the
Depository,  the  Commission's  investigation  has
disclosed  no  credible  evidence  that  any  shots
were  fired  from  anywhere  else.  When  the  shots
were  fired,  many  people  near  the  Depository
believed  that  the  shots  came  from  the  railroad
bridge  over  the  Triple  Underpass  or  from  the
area  to  the  west  of  the  Depository.  In  the  hectic
moments  after  the  assassination,  many  spectators
ran  in  the  general  direction  of  the  Triple  Under-
pass or  the  raib"oad  yards  northwest  of  the  build-
ing. Some  were  running  toward  the  place  from
which  the  sound  of  the  rifle  fire  appeared  to
come,  others  were  fleeing  the  scene  of  the  shoot-
ing. None  of  these  people  saw  anyone  with  a
rifle,  and  the  Commission's  inquiry  has  yielded
no  evidence  that  shots  were  fired  from  the
bridge  over  the  Triple  Underpass  or  from  the
railroad  yards.

On  the  day  of  the  motorcade,  Patrohnan  J.
W.  Foster  stood  on  the  east  side  of  the  railroad
bridge  over  the  Triple  Underpass  and  Patrobnan
J.  C.  White  stood  on  the  west  side.  Patrolman
Joe  E.  Murphy  was  standing  over  Ehn  Street  on
the  Stemmons  Freeway  overpass,  west  of  the
railroad  bridge  farther  away  from  the  Deposi-
tory. Two  other  officers  were  stationed  on  Stem-


mons Freeway  to  control  traffic  as  the  motorcade
entered  the  Freeway.  Under  the  advance  prep-
arations worked  out  between  the  Secret  Service
and  the  Dallas  Police  Department,  the  policemen
were  under  instructions  to  keep  "unauthorized"
people  away  from  these  locations.  When  the
motorcade  reached  the  intersection  of  Elm  and
Houston  Streets,  there  were  no  spectators  on
Stemmons  Freeway  where  Patrohnan  Murphy
was  stationed.  Patrolman  Foster  estimated  that
there  were  10  or  1 1  people  on  the  railroad  bridge
where  he  was  assigned;  another  witness  testified
that  there  were  between  14  and  18  people  there
as  the  motorcade  came  into  view.  Investigation
has  disclosed  15  persons  who  were  on  the  rail-
road bridge  at  this  time,  iocluding  2  policemen,
2  employees  of  the  Texas-Louisiana  Freight
Bureau  and  1 1  employees  of  the  Union  Termi-
nal Co.  In  the  absence  of  any  explicit  definition
of  "unauthorized"  persons,  the  policemen  per-
mitted these  employees  to  remain  on  the  rail-
road bridge  to  watch  the  motorcade.  (See  chap-
ter Vin. )  At  the  request  of  the  policemen,  S.  M.
Holland,  signal  supervisor  for  Union  Terminal
Co.,  came  to  the  railroad  bridge  at  about  1 1 :45
a.m.  and  remained  to  identify  those  persons
who  were  railroad  employees.  In  addition.
Patrolman  Foster  checked  credentials  to  deter-
mine if  persons  seeking  access  to  the  bridge
were  railroad  employees.  Persons  who  were  not
railroad  employees  were  ordered  away,  includ-
ing one  news  photographer  who  wished  only  to
take  a  picture  of  the  motorcade.

Another  employee  of  the  Union  Terminal
Co.,  Lee  E.  Bowers,  Jr.,  was  at  work  in  a  rail-
road tower  about  14  feet  above  the  tracks  to  the
north  of  the  railroad  bridge  and  northwest  of
the  comer  of  Ehn  and  Houston,  approximately
50  yards  from  the  back  of  the  Depository.  From
the  tower  he  could  view  people  moving  in  the
railroad  yards  and  at  the  rear  of  the  Depository.
According  to  Bowers,  "Since  approximately  10
o'clock  iQ  the  morning  traffic  had  been  cut  off
into  the  area  so  that  anyone  moving  around
could  actually  be  observed."  During  the  20  min-
utes prior  to  the  arrival  of  the  motorcade.  Bow-
ers noticed  three  automobiles  which  entered  his
immediate  area;  two  left  without  discharging  any
passengers  and  the  third  was  apparently  on  its
way  out  when  last  observed  by  Bowers.  Bowers
observed  only  three  or  four  people  in  the  general
area,  as  well  as  a  few  bystanders  on  the  railroad
bridge  over  the  Triple  Underpass.

As  the  motorcade  proceeded  toward  the  Triple
Underpass,  the  spectators  were  clustered  to-
gether along  the  east  concrete  wall  of  the  rail-
road bridge  facing  the  oncoming  procession.  Pa-
trohnan Foster  stood  immediately  behind  them
and  could  observe  all  of  them.  Secret  Service
agents  in  the  lead  car  of  the  motorcade  observed
the  bystanders  and  the  police  officer  on  the
bridge.  Special  Agent  Winston  G.  Lawson  mo-
tioned through  the  windshield  in  an  unsuccessf  vil
attempt  to  instruct  Patrolman  Foster  to  move
the  people  away  from  their  position  directly  over


31


the  path  of  the  motorcade.  Some  distance  away,
on  the  Stemmons  Freeway  overpass  above  Elm
Street,  Patrohnan  Murphy  also  had  the  group
on  the  bridge  within  view.  When  he  heard  the
shots,  Foster  rushed  to  the  wall  of  the  railroad
bridge  over  the  Triple  Underpass  and  looked
toward  the  street.  After  the  third  shot,  Foster
ran  toward  the  Depository  and  shortly  thereafter
informed  Inspector  Herbert  J.  Sawyer  of  the
Dallas  Police  Department  that  he  thought  the
shots  came  from  the  vicinity  of  Elm  and  Hous-
ton.

Other  witnesses  on  the  railroad  bridge  had
varying  views  concerning  the  source  and  number
of  the  shots.  Austin  L.  Miller,  employed  by  the
Texas-Louisiana  Freight  Bureau,  heard  three
shots  and  thought  that  they  came  from  the  area
of  the  Presidential  limousine  itself.  One  of  his
co-workers,  Royce  G.  Skelton,  thought  he  heard
four  shots,  but  could  not  tell  their  exact  source.
Frank  E.  Reilly,  an  electrician  at  Union  Termi-
nal, heard  three  shots  which  seemed  to  come
from  the  trees  "On  the  north  side  of  Elm  Street
at  the  comer  up  there."  According  to  S.  M.  Hol-
land, there  were  four  shots  which  sounded  as
though  they  came  from  the  trees  on  the  north
side  of  Elm  Street  where  he  saw  a  puff  of  smoke.
Thomas  J.  Murphy,  a  mail  foreman  at  Union
Terminal  Co.,  heard  two  shots  and  said  that  they
came  from  a  spot  just  west  of  the  Depository.  In
the  railroad  tower.  Bowers  heard  three  shots,
which  sounded  as  though  they  came  either  from
the  Depository  Building  or  near  the  mouth  of
the  Triple  Underpass.  Prior  to  November  22,
1963,  Bowers  had  noted  the  similarity  of  the
sounds  coming  from  the  vicinity  of  the  Deposi-
tory and  those  from  the  Triple  Underpass,  which
he  attributed  to  "a  reverberation  which  takes
place  from  either  location."

Immediately  after  the  shots  were  fired,  neither
the  policemen  nor  the  spectators  on  the  railroad
bridge  over  the  Triple  Underpass  saw  anything
suspicious  on  the  bridge  in  their  vicinity.  No  one
saw  anyone  with  a  rifle.  As  he  ran  around
through  the  railroad  yards  to  the  Depository,  Pa-
trolman Foster  saw  no  suspicious  activity.  The
same  was  true  of  the  other  bystanders,  many  of
whom  made  an  effort  after  the  shooting  to  ob-
serve any  unusual  activity.  Holland,  for  example,
immediately  after  the  shots,  ran  off  the  overpass
to  see  if  there  was  anyone  behind  the  picket
fence  on  the  north  side  of  Elm  Street,  but  he
did  not  see  anyone  among  the  parked  cars.  Miller
did  not  see  anyone  running  across  the  railroad
tracks  or  on  the  plaza  west  of  the  Depository.
Bowers  and  others  saw  a  motorcycle  officer  dis-
mount hurriedly  and  come  running  up  the  in-
cline on  the  north  side  of  Elm  Street.  The  mo-
torcycle officer,  Clyde  A.  Haygood,  saw  no  one
running  from  the  railroad  yards.

The  Presidential  Automobile

After  the  Presidential  car  was  returned  to
Washington  on  November  22,  1963,  Secret  Serv-
ice agents  found  two  bullet  fragments  in  the


front  seat.  One  fragment,  fovmd  on  the
seat  beside  the  driver,  weighed  44.6  grains
and  consisted  of  the  nose  portion  of  a  bullet.  The
other  fragment,  found  along  the  right  side  of  the
front  seat,  weighed  21.0  grains  and  consisted  of
the  base  portion  of  a  buUet.  During  the  course  of
an  examination  on  November  23,  agents  of  the
Federal  Buseau  of  Investigation  fovmd  three
small  lead  particles,  weighing  between  seven-
tenths  and  nine-tenths  of  a  grain  each,  on  the
rug  underneath  the  left  jump  seat  which  had
been  occupied  by  Mrs.  Connally.  During  this
examination,  the  Bureau  agents  noted  a  small
residue  of  lead  on  the  inside  surface  of  the
laminated  windshield  and  a  very  small  pattern  of
cracks  on  the  outer  layer  of  the  windshield  im-
mediately behind  the  lead  residue.  There  was  a
minute  particle  of  glass  missing  from  the  outside
surface,  but  no  penetration.  The  inside  layer  of
glass  was  not  broken.  The  agents  also  observed
a  dent  in  the  strip  of  chrome  across  the  top  of
the  windshield,  located  to  the  left  of  the  rear
view  mirror  support.

The  lead  residue  on  the  inside  of  the  wind-
shield was  compared  under  spectrographic  anal-
ysis by  FBI  experts  with  the  bullet  fragments
found  on  and  alongside  the  front  seat  and  with
the  fragments  under  the  left  jump  seat.  It  was
also  compared  with  bullet  fragments  found  at
Parkland  Hospital.  All  these  bullet  fragments
were  found  to  be  similar  in  metallic  composition,
but  it  was  not  possible  to  determine  whether
two  or  more  of  the  fragments  came  from  the
same  buUet.  It  is  possible  for  the  fragments
from  the  front  seat  to  have  been  a  part  of  the
same  bullet  as  the  three  fragments  found  near
the  left  jump  seat,  since  a  whole  bullet  of  this
type  weighs  160-161  grains.  (See  app.  X)

The  physical  characteristics  of  the  windshield
after  the  assassination  demonstrate  that  the
windshield  was  struck  on  the  inside-  surface.  The
windshield  is  composed  of  two  layers  of  glass
with  a  very  thin  layer  of  plastic  in  the  middle
"which  bonds  them  together  in  the  form  of  safety
glass."  The  windshield  was  extracted  from  the
automobile  and  was  examined  during  a  Com-
mission hearing.  According  to  Robert  A.  Frazier,
FBI  firearms  expert,  the  fact  that  cracks  were
present  on  the  outer  layer  of  glass  showed  that
the  glass  had  been  struck  from  the  inside.  He
testified  that  the  windshield

could  not  have  been  struck  on  the  outside
surface  because  of  the  manner  in  which  the
glass  broke  and  further  because  of  the  lead
residue  on  the  inside  surface.  The  cracks  ap-
pear in  the  outer  layer  of  the  glass  because  the
glass  is  bent  outward  at  the  time  of  impact
which  stretches  the  outer  layer  of  the  glass  to
tht  point  where  these  small  radial  or  wagon
spoke,  wagon  wheel  spoke-type  cracks  appear
on  the  outer  surface.

Although  there  is  some  uncertainty  whether  the
dent  in  the  chrome  on  the  windshield  was  pres-


32


ent  prior  to  the  assassination.  Frazier  testified
that  the  dent  "had  been  caused  by  some  projec-
tile which  struck  the  chrome  on  the  inside  sur-
face." If  it  was  caused  by  a  shot  during  the  as-
sassination, Frazier  stated  that  it  would  not
have  been  caused  by  a  bullet  traveling  at  full
velocity,  but  rather  by  a  fragment  traveling  at
"fau-ly  high  velocity."  It  could  have  been
caused  by  either  fragment  found  in  the  front
seat  of  the  limousine.


EXPERT  EXAMINATION  OF  RIFLE,
CARTRIDGE  CASES,  AND  BULLET
FRAGMENTS

On  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Depository  Building,
the  Dallas  police  found  three  spent  cartridges
and  a  rifle.  A  nearly  whole  bullet  was  dis-
covered on  the  stretcher  used  to  carry  Governor
Connally  at  Parkland  Hospital.  As  described  in
the  preceding  section,  five  bullet  fragments  were
found  in  the  President's  limousine.  The  car-
tridge cases,  the  nearly  whole  bullet  and  the  bul-
let fragments  were  all  subjected  to  firearms
identification  analysis  by  qualified  experts.  It
was  the  unanimous  opinion  of  the  experts  that
the  nearly  whole  bullet,  the  two  largest  bullet
fragments  and  the  three  cartridge  cases  were
definitely  fired  in  the  rifle  found  on  the  sixth
floor  of  the  Depository  Building  to  the  exclusion
of  all  other  weapons.

Discovery  of  Cartridge  Cases  and  Rifle

Shortly  after  the  assassination,  police  officers
arrived  at  the  Depository  Building  and  began  a
search  for  the  assassin  and  evidence.  Around
1  p.m.  Deputy  Sheriff  Luke  Mooney  noticed  a
pile  of  cartons  in  front  of  the  window  in  the
southeast  comer  of  the  sixth  floor.  Searching
that  area  he  found  at  approximately  1:12  p.m.
three  empty  cartridge  cases  on  the  floor  near  the
window.  When  he  was  notified  of  Mooney's  dis-
covery, Capt.  J.  W.  Fritz,  chief  of  the  homicide
bureau  of  the  Dallas  Police  Department,  issued
instructions  that  nothing  be  moved  or  touched
until  technicians  from  the  police  crime  labora-
tory could  take  photographs  and  check  for  fin-
gerprints. Mooney  stood  guard  to  see  that  noth-
ing was  disturbed.  A  few  minutes  later,  Lt.  J.
C.  Day  of  the  Dallas  Police  Department  arrived
and  took  photographs  of  the  cartridge  cases  be-
fore anything  had  been  moved.

At  1:22  p.m.  Deputy  Sheriff  Eugene  Boone
and  Deputy  Constable  Seymour  Weitzman
found  a  bolt-action  rifle  with  a  telescopic  sight
between  two  rows  of  boxes  in  the  northwest
comer  near  the  staircase  on  the  sixth  floor.  No
one  touched  the  weapon  or  otherwise  disturbed
the  scene  imtil  Captain  Fritz  and  Lieutenant
Day  arrived  and  the  weapon  was  photographed
as  it  lay  on  the  floor.  After  Lieutenant  Day  de-
termined that  there  were  no  fingerprints  on  the
knob  of  the  bolt  and  that  the  wooden  sock  was
too  rough  to  take  fingerprints,  he  picked  the  rifle


up  by  the  stock  and  held  it  that  way  whUe
Captain  Fritz  opened  the  bolt  and  ejected  a  Uve
round.  Lieutenant  Day  retained  possession  of
the  weapon  and  took  it  back  to  the  police  de-
partment for  examination.  Neither  Boone  nor
Weitzman  handled  the  rifle.

Discovery  of  Bullet  at  Parkland  Hospital

A  nearly  whole  bullet  was  found  on  Gover-
nor ConnaUy's  stretcher  at  Parkland  Hospital
after  the  assassination.  After  his  arrival  at  the
hospital  the  Governor  was  brought  into  trauma
room  No.  2  on  a  stretcher,  removed  from  the
room  on  that  stretcher  a  short  time  later,  and
taken  on  an  elevator  to  the  second-floor  oper-
ating room.  On  the  second  floor  he  was  trans-
ferred from  the  stretcher  to  an  operating  table
which  was  then  moved  into  the  operating  room,
and  a  hospital  attendant  wheeled  the  empty
stretcher  into  an  elevator.  Shortly  afterward,
Darrell  C.  Tomlinson,  the  hospital's  senior  en-
gineer, removed  this  stretcher  from  the  elevator
and  placed  it  in  the  corridor  on  the  groimd  floor,
alongside  another  stretcher  whoUy  imconnected
with  the  care  of  Govemor  Connally.  A  few
minutes  later,  he  bumped  one  of  the  stretchers
against  the  wall  and  a  bullet  rolled  out.

Although  Tomlinson  was  not  certain  whether
the  bullet  came  from  the  Connally  stretcher  or
the  adjacent  one,  the  Commission  has  con-
cluded that  the  bullet  came  from  the  Govemor's
stretcher.  That  conclusion  is  buttressed  by  evi-
dence which  eliminated  President  Keimedy's
stretcher  as  a  source  of  the  bullet.  President
Kennedy  remained  on  the  stretcher  on  which  he
was  carried  into  the  hospital  while  the  doctors
tried  to  save  his  life.  He  was  never  removed  from
the  stretcher  from  the  time  he  was  taken  into  the
emergency  room  until  his  body  was  placed  in  a
casket  in  that  same  room.  After  the  President's
body  was  removed  from  that  stretcher,  the  linen
was  taken  off  and  placed  in  a  hamper  and  the
stretcher  was  pushed  into  trauma  room  No.  2,
a  completely  different  location  from  the  site
where  the  nearly  whole  bullet  was  f ovmd.

Description  of  Rifle

The  bolt-action,  clip-fed  rifle  found  on  the
sixth  floor  of  the  Depository,  described  more
fully  in  appendix  X,  is  inscribed  with  various
markings,  including  "MADE  ITALY,"  "CAL.
6.5,"  "1940"  and  the  number  C2766.  These
markings  have  been  explained  as  follows:
"MADE  ITALY"  refers  to  its  origin;  "CAL,
6.5"  refers  to  the  rifle's  caliber;  "1940"  refers
to  the  year  of  manufacture;  and  the  number
C2766  is  the  serial  number.  This  rifle  is  the  only
one  of  its  type  bearing  that  serial  number.  After
review  of  standard  reference  works  and  the
markings  on  the  rifle,  it  was  identified  by  the
FBI  as  a  6.5-millimeter  model  91/38  Mann-
licher-Carcano  rifle.  Experts  from  the  FBI  made
an  independant  determination  of  the  caliber  by
inserting  a  Mannlicher-Carcano  6.5-millimeter
cartridge  into  the  weapon  for  fit,  and  by  making


33


a  sulfur  cast  of  the  inside  of  the  weapon's  barrel
From  outward  appearance,  the  weapon  would
appear  to  be  a  7.35-niillimeter  rifle,  but  its
mechanism  had  been  rebarreled  with  a  6.5-
millimeter  barrel.  Constable  Deputy  Sheriff
Weitzman,  who  only  saw  the  rifle  at  a  glance
and  did  not  handle  it,  thought  the  weapon
looked  like  a  7.65  Mauser  bolt-action  rifle.  (See
Chapter  V)

The  rifle  is  40.2  inches  long  and  weighs  8
pounds.  The  minimum  length  broken  down  is
34.8  inches,  the  length  of  the  wooden  stock.
Attached  to  the  weapon  is  an  inexpensive  four-
power  telescopic  sight,  stamped  "Optics  Ord-
nance Inc./ Hollywood  California,"  and  "Made
in  Japan."  The  weapon  also  bears  a  sling  con-
sisting of  two  leather  straps.  The  sUng  is  not  a
standard  rifle  sling  but  appears  to  be  a  musical
instrument  strap  or  a  sling  from  a  carrying  case
or  camera  bag.

Expert  Testimony

Four  experts  in  the  field  of  firearms  identi-
fication analyzed  the  nearly  whole  bullet,  the  two
largest  fragments  and  the  three  cartridge  cases  to
determine  whether  they  had  been  fired  from  the
C2766  Mannhcher-Carcano  rifle  found  on  the
sixth  floor  of  the  Depository.  Two  of  these  ex-
perts testified  before  the  Commission.  One  was
Robert  A.  Frazier,  a  special  agent  of  the  FBI
assigned  to  the  FBI  Laboratory  in  Washington,
D.C.  Frazier  has  worked  generally  in  the  field  of
firearms  identification  for  23  years,  examining
firearms  of  various  types  for  the  purpose  of  iden-
tifying the  caliber  and  other  characteristics  of
the  weapons  and  making  comparisons  of  bullets
and  cartridge  cases  for  the  purpose  of  determin-
ing whether  or  not  they  were  fired  in  a  particular
weapon.  He  estimated  that  he  has  made  "in  the
neighborhood  of  50,000  to  60,000"  firearms
comparisons  and  has  testified  in  court  on  about
400  occasions.  The  second  witness  who  testified
on  this  subject  was  Joseph  D.  Nicol,  superin-
tendent of  the  bureau  of  criminal  identification
and  investigation  for  the  State  of  Illinois.  Nicol
also  has  had  long  and  substantial  experience
since  1941  in  firearms  identification,  and  esti-
mated that  he  has  made  thousands  of  bullet  and
cartridge  case  examinations.

In  examining  the  bullet  fragments  and  car-
tridge cases,  these  experts  applied  the  general
principles  accepted  in  the  field  of  firearms  iden-
tification, which  are  discussed  in  more  detail  in
appendix  X.  In  brief,  a  determination  that  a  par-
ticular bullet  or  cartridge  case  has  been  fired  in  a
particular  weapon  is  based  upon  a  comparison  of
the  buUet  or  case  under  examination  with  one  or
more  bullets  or  cases  known  to  have  been  fired
in  that  weapon.  When  a  bullet  is  fired  in  any
given  weapon,  it  is  engraved  with  the  character-
istics of  the  weapon.  In  addition  to  the  rifling
characteristics  of  the  barrel  which  are  common
to  aU  weapons  of  a  given  make  and  model,  every
weapon  bears  distinctive  microscopic  markings
on  its  barrel,  firing  pin  and  bolt  face.  These


markings  arise  initially  during  manufacture,
since  the  action  of  the  manufacturing  tools
differs  microscopically  from  weapon  to  weapon
and  since,  in  addition,  the  tools  change  micro-
scopically while  being  used.  As  a  weapon  is  used
further  distinctive  markings  are  introduced.
Under  microscopic  examination  a  qualified  ex-
pert may  be  able  to  determine  whether  the  mark-
ings on  a  bullet  known  to  have  been  fired  in  a
particular  weapon  and  the  markings  on  a  sus-
pect bullet  are  the  same  and,  therefore,  whether
both  bullets  were  fired  in  the  same  weapon  to  the
exclusion  of  all  other  weapons.  Similarly,  fire-
arms identification  experts  are  able  to  compare
the  markings  left  upon  the  base  of  cartridge
cases  and  thereby  determine  whether  both  cart-
ridges were  fired  by  the  same  weapon  to  the
exclusion  of  all  other  weapons.  According  to
Frazier,  such  an  identification  "is  made  on  the
presence  of  sufficient  individual  microscopic
characteristics  so  that  a  very  definite  pattern  is
formed  and  visualized  on  the  two  surfaces."
Under  some  circumstances,  as  where  the  bullet
or  cartridge  case  is  seriously  mutilated,  there  are
not  sufficient  individual  characteristics  to  enable
the  expert  to  make  a  firm  identification.

After  making  independent  examinations,  both
Frazier  and  Nicol  positively  identified  the  nearly
whole  bullet  from  the  stretcher  and  the  two
larger  bullet  fragments  found  in  the  Presidential
limousine  as  having  been  fired  in  the  C2766
Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle  foimd  in  the  Deposi-
tory to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  weapons.  Each
of  the  two  bullet  fragments  had  sufficient  un-
mutilated  area  to  provide  the  basis  for  an  iden-
tification. However,  it  was  not  possible  to  de-
termine whether  the  two  bullet  fragments  were
from  the  same  bullet  or  from  two  different  bul-
lets. With  regard  to  the  other  buUet  fragments
discovered  in  the  limousine  and  in  the  coiirse  of
treating  President  Kennedy  and  Governor  Con-
nally,  however,  expert  examination  could  dem-
onstrate only  that  the  fragments  were  "similar  in
metallic  composition"  to  each  other,  to  the  two
larger  fragments  and  to  the  nearly  whole  bullet.
After  examination  of  the  three  cartridge  cases
found  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Depository,
Frazier  and  Nicol  concluded  that  they  had  been
fired  in  the  C2766  Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle  to
the  exclusion  of  all  other  weapons.  Two  other  ex-
perts from  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation,
who  made  independent  examinations  of  the
nearly  whole  bullet,  bullet  fragments  and  cart-
ridge cases,  reached  the  identical  conclusions.


THE  BULLET  WOUNDS

In  considering  the  question  of  the  source  of
the  shots  fired  at  President  Kennedy  and  Gov-
ernor ConnaUy,  the  Commission  has  also  eval-
uated the  expert  medical  testimony  of  the  doctors
who  observed  the  woimds  during  the  emergency
treatment  at  Parkland  Hospital  and  during  the
autopsy  at  Bethesda  Naval  Hospital.  It  paid  par-


34


ticular  attention  to  any  wound  characteristics
which  would  be  of  assistance  in  identifying  a
wound  as  the  entrance  or  exit  point  of  a  missile.
Additional  information  regarding  the  source  and
nature  of  the  injuries  was  obtained  by  expert  ex-
amination of  the  clothes  worn  by  the  two  men,
particularly  those  worn  by  President  Kennedy,
and  from  the  results  of  special  wound  ballistics
tests  conducted  at  the  Commission's  request,  us-
ing the  C2766  Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle  with
ammunition  of  the  same  type  as  that  used  and
found  on  November  22,  1963.

The  President's  Head  Wounds

The  detailed  autopsy  of  President  Kennedy
performed  on  the  night  of  November  22  at  the
Bethesda  Naval  Hospital  led  the  three  examining
pathologists  to  conclude  that  the  smaller  hole  in
the  rear  of  the  President's  skull  was  the  point
of  entry  and  that  the  large  opening  on  the  right
side  of  his  head  was  the  wound  of  exit.  The
smaller  hole  on  the  back  of  the  President's  head
measured  one-fourth  of  an  inch  by  five-eighths
of  an  inch  (6  by  15  millimeters).  The  dimen-
sions of  that  wound  were  consistent  with  having
been  caused  by  a  6.5-mLllimeter  bullet  fired  from
behind  and  above  which  struck  at  a  tangent  or
an  angle  causing  a  1 5-millimeter  cut.  The  cut  re-
flected a  larger  dimension  of  entry  than  the  bul-
let's diameter  of  6.5  millimeters,  since  the  mis-
sile, in  effect,  sliced  along  the  skuU  for  a  frac-
tional distance  until  it  entered.  The  dimension
of  6  millimeters,  somewhat  smaller  than  the  di-
ameter of  a  6.5-millimeter  bullet,  was  caused
by  the  elastic  recoU  of  the  skuU  which  shrinlcs
the  size  of  an  opening  after  a  missile  passes
through  it.

Lt.  Col.  Pierre  A.  Finck,  Chief  of  the  Wound
Ballistics  Pathology  Branch  of  the  Armed
Forces  Institute  of  Pathology,  who  has  had  ex-
tensive experience  with  bullet  wounds,  illustrated
the  characteristics  which  led  to  his  conclusions
about  the  head  wound  by  a  chart  prepared  by
him.  This  chart,  based  on  Colonel  Finck's  studies
of  more  than  400  cases,  depicted  the  effect  of  a
perforating  missile  wound  on  the  human  skuU.
When  a  bullet  enters  the  skull  (cranial  vault)  at
one  point  and  exits  at  another,  it  causes  a  bevel-
ing or  cratering  effect  where  the  diameter  of  the
hole  is  smaller  on  the  impact  side  than  on  the  exit
side.  Based  on  his  observations  of  that  beveling
effect  on  the  President's  skull.  Colonel  Finck
testified:  "President  Kennedy  was,  in  my  opin-
ion, shot  from  the  rear.  The  bullet  entered  in  the
back  of  the  head  and  went  out  on  the  right  side
of  his  skuU  *  *  *  he  was  shot  from  above  and
behind."

Comdr.  James  J.  Humes,  senior  pathologist
and  director  of  laboratories  at  the  Bethesda  Na-
val Hospital,  who  acted  as  chief  autopsy  sur-
geon, concurred  in  Colonel  Finck's  analysis.  He
compared  the  beveling  or  coning  effect  to  that
caused  by  a  BB  shot  which  strikes  a  pane  of
glass,  causing  a  round  or  oval  defect  on  the
side  of  the  glass  where  the  missile  strikes  and  a


belled-out  or  coned-out  surface  on  the  opposite
side  of  the  glass.  Referring  to  the  bullet  hole  on
the  back  of  President  Kennedy's  head,  Com-
mander Humes  testified:  "The  wound  on  the  in-
ner table,  however,  was  larger  and  had  what  in
the  field  of  wound  ballistics  is  described  as  a
shelving  or  coning  effect.  After  studying  the
other  hole  in  the  President's  skull,  Commander
Humes  stated:  "*  *  *  we  concluded  that  the
large  defect  to  the  upper  right  side  of  the  skull,
in  fact,  would  represent  a  wound  of  exit."  Those
characteristics  led  Commander  Humes  and
Comdr.  J.  Thornton  Boswell,  chief  of  pathology
at  Bethesda  Naval  Hospital,  who  assisted  in  the
autopsy,  to  conclude  that  the  bullet  penetrated
the  rear  of  the  President's  head  and  exited
through  a  large  wound  on  the  right  side  of  his
head.

Ballistics  experiments  (discussed  more  fully
in  app.  X)  showed  that  the  rifle  and  bullets  iden-
tified above  were  capable  of  producing  the  Presi-
dent's head  wound.  The  Wound  Ballistics  Branch
of  the  U.S.  Army  laboratories  at  Edgewood  Ar-
senal, Md.,  conducted  an  extensive  series  of  ex-
periments to  test  the  effect  of  Western  Cartridge
Co.  6.5-millimeter  bullets,  the  type  found  on
Governor  Connally's  stretcher  and  in  the  Presi-
dential limousine,  fired  from  the  C2766  Mann-
licher-Carcano rifle  found  in  the  Depository.
The  Edgewood  Arsenal  tests  were  performed
under  the  immediate  supervision  of  Alfred  G.
Olivier,  a  doctor  who  had  spent  7  years  in
wounds  ballistics  research  for  the  U.S.  Army.

One  series  of  tests,  performed  on  reconstructed
inert  human  skulls,  demonstrated  that  the  Presi-
dent's head  wound  could  have  been  caused  by
the  rifle  and  bullets  fired  by  the  assassin  from  the
sixth-floor  window.  The  results  of  this  series
were  illustrated  by  the  findings  on  one  skull
which  was  struck  at  a  point  closely  approximat-
ing the  wound  of  entry  on  President  Kennedy's
head.  That  bullet  blew  out  the  right  side  of  the
reconstructed  skull  in  a  manner  very  similar  to
the  head  wound  of  the  President.  As  a  result  of
these  tests.  Dr.  Olivier  concluded  that  a  Western
Cartridge  Co.  6.5  bullet  fired  from  the  C2766
Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle  at  a  distance  of  90
yards  would  make  the  same  type  of  wound  as
that  found  on  the  President's  head.  Referring
to  the  series  of  tests,  Dr.  Olivier  testified:

It  disclosed  that  the  type  of  head  wounds
that  the  President  received  could  be  done  by
this  type  of  bullet.  This  surprised  me  very
much,  because  this  type  of  stable  bullet  I  didn't
think  would  cause  a  massive  head  wound,  I
thought  it  would  go  through  making  a  small
entrance  and  exit,  but  the  bones  of  the  skull
are  enough  to  deform  the  end  of  this  bullet
causing  it  to  expend  a  lot  of  energy  and  blow-
ing out  the  side  of  the  skull  or  blowing  out
fragments  of  the  skuU.

After  examining  the  fragments  of  the  bullet


35


which  struck  the  reconstructed  skull,  Dr.  Olivier
stated  that —

the  recovered  fragments  were  very  similar  to
the  ones  recovered  on  the  front  seat  and  on  the
floor  of  the  car.

This,  to  me,  indicates  that  those  fragments
did  come  from  the  bullet  that  wounded  the
President  in  the  head.

The  President's  Neck  Wounds

During  the  autopsy  at  Bethesda  Naval  Hospi-
tal another  bullet  wound  was  observed  near  the
base  of  the  back  of  President  Kennedy's  neck
slightly  to  the  right  of  his  spine  which  provides
further  enlightenment  as  to  the  source  of  the
shots.  The  hole  was  located  approximately  5i
inches  (14  centimeters)  from  the  tip  of  the  right
shoulder  joint  and  approximately  the  same  dis-
tance below  the  tip  of  the  right  mastoid  process,
the  bony  point  immediately  behind  the  ear.  The
wound  was  approximately  one-fourth  by  one-
seventh  of  an  inch  (7  by  4  millimeters),  had  clean
edges,  was  sharply  delineated,  and  had  margins
similar  in  aU  respects  to  those  of  the  entry  wound
in  the  skull.  Commanders  Humes  and  Boswell
agreed  with  Colonel  Finck's  testimony  that  this
hole —

*  *  *  is  a  wound  of  entrance.  *  *  *  The
basis  for  that  conclusion  is  that  this  wound
was  relatively  small  with  clean  edges.  It  was
not  a  jagged  wound,  and  that  is  what  we  see
in  woimd  of  entrance  at  a  long  range.

The  autopsy  examination  further  disclosed
that,  after  entering  the  President,  the  bullet
passed  between  two  large  muscles,  produced
a  contusion  on  the  upper  part  of  the  pleural
cavity  (without  penetrating  that  cavity),  bruised
the  top  portion  of  the  right  lung  and  ripped  the
windpipe  (trachea)  in  its  path  through  the  Presi-
dent's neck.  The  examining  surgeons  concluded
that  the  wounds  were  caused  by  the  bullet  rather
than  the  tracheotomy  performed  at  Parkland
Hospital.  The  nature  of  the  bruises  indicated
that  the  President's  heart  and  lungs  were  func-
tioning when  the  bruises  were  caused,  whereas
there  was  very  Uttle  circulation  in  the  President's
body  when  incisions  on  the  President's  chest
were  made  to  insert  tubes  during  the  tracheot-
omy. No  bone  was  struck  by  the  buUet  which
passed  through  the  President's  body.  By  pro-
jecting from  a  point  of  entry  on  the  rear  of  the
neck  and  proceeding  at  a  slight  downward  angle
through  the  bruised  interior  portions,  the  doc-
tors concluded  that  the  bullet  exited  from  the
front  portion  of  the  President's  neck  that  had
been  cut  away  by  the  tracheotomy.

Concluding  that  a  bullet  passed  through  the
President's  neck,  the  doctors  at  Bethesda  Naval
Hospital  rejected  a  theory  that  the  bullet  lodged
in  the  large  muscle  in  the  back  of  his  neck  and
feU  out  through  the  point  of  entry  when  external
heart  massage  was  applied  at  Parkland  Hospital.


In  the  earlier  stages  of  the  autopsy,  the  surgeons
were  unable  to  find  a  path  into  any  large  muscle
in  the  back  of  the  neck.  At  that  time  they  did  not
know  that  there  had  been  a  bullet  hole  in  the
front  of  the  President's  neck  when  he  arrived  at
Parkland  Hospital  because  the  tracheotomy  in-
cision had  completely  eUminated  that  evidence.
While  the  autopsy  was  being  performed,  sur-
geons learned  that  a  whole  buUet  had  been
found  at  Parkland  Hospital  on  a  stretcher  which,
at  that  time,  was  thought  to  be  the  stretcher  oc-
cupied by  the  President.  This  led  to  speculation
that  the  bullet  might  have  penetrated  a  short
distance  into  the  back  of  the  neck  and  then
dropped  out  onto  the  stretcher  as  a  result  of  the
external  heart  massage.

Further  exploration  during  the  autopsy  dis-
proved that  theory.  The  surgeons  determined
that  the  bullet  had  passed  between  two  large
strap  muscles  and  bruised  them  without  leaving
any  channel,  since  the  bullet  merely  passed  be-
tween them.  Commander  Humes,  who  beheved
that  a  tracheotomy  had  been  performed  from
his  observations  at  the  autopsy,  talked  by  tele-
phone with  Dr.  Perry  early  on  the  morning  of
November  23,  and  learned  that  his  assumption
was  correct  and  that  Dr.  Perry  had  used  the  mis-
sile wound  in  the  neck  as  the  point  to  make
the  incision.  This  confirmed  the  Bethesda  sur-
geons' conclusion  that  the  bullet  had  exited
from  the  front  part  of  the  neck.

The  findings  of  the  doctors  who  conducted  the
autopsy  were  consistent  with  the  observations
of  the  doctors  who  treated  the  President  at
Parkland  Hospital.  Dr.  Charles  S.  Carrico,  a
resident  surgeon  at  Parkland,  noted  a  small
wound  approximately  one-fourth  of  an  inch
in  diameter  (5  to  8  millimeters)  in  the  lower  third
of  the  neck  below  the  Adam's  apple.  Dr.  Mal-
colm O.  Perry,  who  performed  the  tracheotomy,
described  the  wound  as  approximately  one-fifth
of  an  inch  in  diameter  (5  millimeters)  and  exud-
ing blood  which  partially  hid  edges  that  were
"neither  cleancut,  that  is,  punched  out,  nor  were
they  very  ragged."  Dr.  Carrico  testified  as  fol-
lows:

Q.  Based  on  your  observations  on  the  neck
wound  alone  did  you  have  a  sufficient  basis
to  form  an  opinion  as  to  whether  it  was  an
entrance  or  an  exit  wound?

A.  No,  sir;  we  did  not.  Not  having  com-
pletely evaluated  all  the  wounds,  traced  out
the  course  of  the  bullets,  this  wound  would
have  been  compatible  with  either  entrance  or
exit  wound  depending  upon  the  size,  the  ve-
locity, the  tissue  structure  and  so  forth.

The  same  response  was  made  by  Dr.  Perry  to  a
similar  query:

Q.  Based  on  the  appearance  of  the  neck
wound  alone,  could  it  have  been  either  an
entrance  or  an  exit  wound?

A.  It  could  have  been  either.


36


Then  each  doctor  was  asked  to  take  into  account
the  other  known  facts,  such  as  the  autopsy  find-
ings, the  approximate  distance  the  bullet  trav-
eled and  tested  muzzle  velocity  of  the  assassina-
tion weapon.  With  these  additional  factors,  the
doctors  commented  on  the  wound  on  the  front
of  the  President's  neck  as  follows:

DR.  CARRICO.  With  those  facts  and  the
fact  as  I  understand  it  no  other  bullet  was
found  this  would  be,  this  was,  I  believe,  was  an
exit  wound.

DR.  PERRY.  A  fuU  jacketed  buUet  with-
out deformation  passing  through  skin  would
leave  a  similar  wound  for  an  exit  and  entrance
wound  and  with  the  facts  which  you  have
made  available  and  with  these  assumptions,  I
believe  that  it  was  an  exit  wound.

Other  doctors  at  Parkland  Hospital  who  ob-
served the  wound  prior  to  the  tracheotomy
agreed  with  the  observations  of  Drs.  Perry  and
Carrico.  The  bullet  wound  in  the  neck  could  be
seen  for  only  a  short  time,  since  Dr.  Perry  elimi-
nated evidence  of  it  when  he  performed  the
tracheotomy.  He  selected  that  spot  since  it  was
the  point  where  such  an  operation  was  customar-
ily performed,  and  it  was  one  of  the  safest  and
easiest  spots  from  which  to  reach  the  trachea.  In
addition,  there  was  possibly  an  imderlying
wound  to  the  muscles  in  the  neck,  the  carotid
artery  or  the  jugular  vein,  and  Dr.  Perry  con-
cluded that  the  incision,  therefore,  had  to  be  low
in  order  to  maintain  respiration.

Considerable  confusion  has  arisen  because  of
comments  attributed  to  Dr.  Perry  concerning
the  nature  of  the  neck  wound.  Immediately  after
the  assassination,  many  people  reached  errone-
ous conclusions  about  the  source  of  the  shots
because  of  Dr.  Perry's  observations  to  the  press.
On  the  afternoon  of  November  22,  a  press  con-
ference was  organized  at  Parkland  Hospital  by
members  of  the  White  House  press  staff  and  a
hospital  administrator.  Newsmen  with  micro-
phones and  cameras  were  crowded  into  a  room
to  hear  statements  by  Drs.  Perry  and  Wniiam
Kemp  Clark,  chief  neurosurgeon  at  Parkland,
who  had  attended  to  President  Kennedy's  head
injury.  Dr.  Perry  described  the  situation  as
"bedlam."  The  confusion  was  compounded  by
the  fact  that  some  questions  were  only  partially
answered  before  other  questions  were  asked.

At  the  news  conference,  Dr.  Perry  answered
a  series  of  hypothetical  questions  and  stated  to
the  press  that  a  variety  of  possibilities  could  ac-
count for  the  President's  wounds.  He  stated  that
a  single  bullet  could  have  caused  the  President's
wounds  by  entering  through  the  throat,  striking
the  spine,  and  being  deflected  upward  with  the
point  of  exit  being  through  the  head.  This  would
have  accounted  for  the  two  wounds  he  observed,
the  hole  in  the  front  of  the  neck  and  the  large
opening  in  the  skuU.  At  that  time.  Dr.  Perry  did
not  know  about  either  the  wound  on  the  back
of  the  President's  neck  or  the  small  bullet-hole


wound  in  the  back  of  the  head.  As  described  in
chapter  II,  the  President  was  lying  on  his  back
during  his  entire  time  at  Parkland.  The  small
hole  in  the  head  was  also  hidden  from  view  by
the  large  quantity  of  blood  which  covered  the
President's  head.  Dr.  Perry  said  his  answers  at
the  press  conference  were  intended  to  convey
his  theory  about  what  could  have  happened,
based  on  his  limited  knowledge  at  the  time,
rather  than  his  professional  opinion  about  what
did  happen.  Commenting  on  his  answers  at  the
press  conference.  Dr.  Perry  testified  before  the
Commission:

I  expressed  it  [his  answers]  as  a  matter  of
speculation  that  this  was  conceivable.  But,
again,  Dr.  Clark  [who  also  answered  questions
at  the  conference]  and  I  emphasized  that  we
had  no  way  of  knowing.

Dr.  Perry's  recollection  of  his  comments  is  cor-
roborated by  some  of  the  news  stories  after  the
press  conference.  The  New  York  Herald  Tri-
bune on  November  23,  1963,  reported  as  fol-
lows:

Dr.  Malcolm  Perry,  34,  attendant  surgeon
at  Parkland  Hospital  who  attended  the  Presi-
dent, said  he  saw  two  wounds — one  below
the  Adam's  apple,  the  other  at  the  back  of  the
head.  He  said  he  did  not  know  if  two  bullets
were  involved.  It  is  possible,  he  said,  that
the  neck  wound  was  the  entrance  and  the
other  the  exit  of  the  missile.

According  to  this  report.  Dr.  Perry  stated  merely
that  it  was  "possible"  that  the  neck  wound  was
a  wound  of  entrance.  This  conforms  with  his
testimony  before  the  Commission,  where  he
stated  that  by  themselves  the  characteristics  of
the  neck  wound  were  consistent  with  being
either  a  point  of  entry  or  exit.

Wound  ballistics  tests. — Experiments  per-
formed by  the  Army  Wound  Ballistics  experts
at  Edgewood  Arsenal,  Md.  (dicussed  in  app.
X,)  showed  that  under  simulated  conditions
entry  and  exit  wounds  are  very  similar  in  ap-
pearance. After  reviewing  the  path  of  the  buUet
through  the  President's  neck,  as  disclosed  in  the
autopsy  report,  the  experts  simulated  the  neck
by  using  comparable  material  with  a  thickness
of  approximately  5i  inches  (13i  to  14i  centi-
meters), which  was  the  distance  traversed  by  the
bullet.  Animal  skin  was  placed  on  each  side,  and
Western  Cartridge  Co.  6.5  bullets  were  fired
from  the  C2766  Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle  from
a  distance  of  180  feet.  The  animal  skin  on  the
entry  side  showed  holes  which  were  regular  and
round.  On  the  exit  side  two  holes  were  only
sUghtly  elongated,  indicating  that  the  bullet  had
become  only  a  little  unstable  at  the  point  of  exit.
A  third  exit  hole  was  round,  although  not  quite
as  regular  as  the  entry  holes.  The  exit  holes,
especially  the  one  most  nearly  round,  appeared
similar  to  the  descriptions  given  by  Drs.  Perry


37


and  Carrico  of  the  hole  in  the  front  of  the  Presi-
dent's neck.

The  autopsy  disclosed  that  the  bullet  which
entered  the  back  of  the  President's  neck  hit  no
bony  structure  and  proceeded  in  a  slightly  down-
ward angle.  The  markings  on  the  President's
clothing  indicate  that  the  bullet  moved  in  a
slight  right  to  left  lateral  direction  as  it  passed
through  the  President's  body.  After  the  examin-
ing doctors  expressed  the  thought  that  a  bullet
would  have  lost  very  little  velocity  in  passing
through  the  soft  tissue  of  the  neck,  wound  bal-
listics experts  conducted  tests  to  measure  the
exit  velocity  of  the  bullet.  The  tests  were  the
same  as  those  used  to  create  entry  and  exit  holes,
supplemented  by  the  use  of  break-type  screens
which  measured  the  velocity  of  bullets.  The  en-
trance velocity  of  the  bullet  fired  from  the  rifle
averaged  1,904  feet  per  second  after  it  traveled
180  feet.  The  exit  velocity  averaged  1,772  to
1,798  feet  per  second,  depending  upon  the  sub-
stance through  which  the  bullet  passed.  A  photo-
graph of  the  path  of  the  bullet  traveling  through
the  simulated  neck  showed  that  it  proceeded  in  a
straight  line  and  was  stable.

Examination  of  clothing. — The  clothing  worn
by  President  Kennedy  on  November  22  had
holes  and  tears  which  showed  that  a  missile  en-
tered the  back  of  his  clothing  in  the  vicinity  of
his  lower  neck  and  exited  through  the  front  of
his  shirt  immediately  behind  his  tie,  nicking  the
knot  of  his  tie  in  its  forward  flight.  Although
the  caliber  of  the  bullet  could  not  be  determined
and  some  of  the  clothing  items  precluded  a  posi-
tive determination  that  some  tears  were  made  by
a  bullet,  all  the  defects  could  have  been  caused
by  a  6.5-millimeter  bullet  entering  the  back  of
the  President's  lower  neck  and  exiting  in  the
area  of  the  knot  of  his  tie.

An  examination  of  the  suit  jacket  worn  by
the  President  by  FBI  Agent  Frazier  revealed  a
roughly  circular  hole  approximately  one-fourth
of  an  inch  in  diameter  on  the  rear  of  the  coat,
51  inches  below  the  top  of  the  collar  and  II
inches  to  the  right  of  the  center  back  seam  of
the  coat.  The  hole  was  visible  on  the  upper  rear
of  the  coat  slightly  to  the  right  of  center.  Traces
of  copper  were  found  in  the  margins  of  the  hole
and  the  cloth  fibers  around  the  margins  were
pushed  inward.  Those  characteristics  established
that  the  hole  was  caused  by  an  entering  bullet.
Although  the  precise  size  of  the  bullet  could  not
be  determined  from  the  hole,  it  was  consistent
with  having  been  made  by  a  6.5-niillimeter  bul-
let.

The  shirt  worn  by  the  President  contained  a
hole  on  the  back  side  51  inches  below  the  top
of  the  collar  and  li  inches  to  right  of  the
middle  of  the  back  of  the  shirt.  The  hole  on  the
rear  of  the  shirt  was  approximately  circular  in
shape  and  about  one-fourth  of  an  inch  in  diame-
ter, with  the  fibers  pressed  inward.  These  fac-
tors established  it  as  a  bullet  entrance  hole.  The
relative  position  of  the  hole  in  the  back  of  the
suit  jacket  to  the  hole  in  the  back  of  the  shirt


indicated  that  both  were  caused  by  the  same
penetrating  missile.

On  the  front  of  the  shirt,  examination  re-
vealed a  hole  seven-eighths  of  an  inch  below  the
collar  button  and  a  similar  opening  seven-eighths
of  an  inch  below  the  buttonhole.  These  two
holes  fell  into  alinement  on  overlapping  posi-
tions when  the  shirt  was  buttoned.  Each  hole
was  a  vertical,  ragged  slit  approximately  one-
half  of  an  inch  in  height,  with  the  cloth  fibers
protruding  outward.  Although  the  characteris-
tics of  the  sUt  established  that  the  missile  had
exited  to  the  front,  the  irregular  nature  of  the  slit
precluded  a  positive  determination  that  it  was  a
bullet  hole.  However,  the  hole  could  have  been
caused  by  a  round  bullet  although  the  charac-
teristics were  not  sufficiently  clear  to  enable  the
examining  expert  to  render  a  conclusive  opinion.

When  the  President's  clothing  was  removed
at  Parkland  Hospital,  his  tie  was  cut  off  by  sev-
ering the  loop  immediately  to  the  wearer's  left
of  the  knot,  leaving  the  knot  in  its  original  con-
dition. The  tie  had  a  nick  on  the  left  side  of  the
knot.  The  nick  was  elongated  horizontally,  indi-
cating that  the  tear  was  made  by  some  object
moving  horizontally,  but  the  fibers  were  not
affected  in  a  manner  which  would  shed  Ught  on
the  direction  or  the  nature  of  the  missile.

The  Governor's  Wounds

While  riding  in  the  right  jump  seat  of  the
Presidential  limousine  on  November  22,  Gov-
ernor Connally  sustained  wounds  of  the  back,
chest,  right  wrist  and  left  thigh.  Because  of  the
small  size  and  clean-cut  edges  of  the  wound  on
the  Governor's  back.  Dr.  Robert  Shaw  con-
cluded that  it  was  an  entry  wound.  The  bullet
traversed  the  Governor's  chest  in  a  downward
angle,  shattering  his  fifth  rib,  and  exited  below
the  right  nipple.  The  ragged  edges  of  the  2-inch
(5  centimeters)  opening  on  the  front  of  the  chest
led  Dr.  Shaw  to  conclude  that  it  was  the  exit
point  of  the  buUet.  When  Governor  Connally
testified  before  the  Commission  5  months  after
the  assassination,  on  April  21,  1964,  the  Com-
mission observed  the  Governor's  chest  wounds,
as  well  as  the  injuries  to  his  wrist  and  thigh  and
watched  Dr.  Shaw  measure  with  a  caUper  an
angle  of  declination  of  25°  from  the  point  of
entry  on  the  back  to  the  point  of  exit  on  the
front  of  the  Governor's  chest.

At  the  time  of  the  shooting.  Governor  Con-
nally was  unaware  that  he  had  sustained  any
injuries  other  than  his  chest  wounds.  On  the
back  of  his  arm,  about  2  inches  (5  centimeters)
above  the  wrist  joint  on  the  thumb  side.  Dr.
Charles  F.  Gregory  observed  a  linear  perfora-
ting wound  approximately  one-fifth  of  an  inch
(one-half  centimeter)  wide  and  1  inch  (2i  cen-
timeters) long.  During  his  operation  on  this
injury,  the  doctor  concluded  that  this  ragged
wound  was  the  point  of  entry  because  thread
and  cloth  had  been  carried  into  the  wound  to
the  region  of  the  bone.  Dr.  Gregory's  conclu-
sions were  also  based  upon  the  location  in  the


38


Governor's  wrist,  as  revealed  by  X-ray,  of  small
fragments  of  metal  shed  by  the  missile  upon
striking  the  firm  surface  of  the  bone.  Evidence
of  different  amounts  of  air  in  the  tissues  of  the
wrist  gave  further  indication  that  the  bullet
passed  from  the  back  to  the  front  of  the  wrist.
An  examination  of  the  palm  surface  of  the  wrist
showed  a  wound  approximately  one-fifth  of  an
inch  (one-half  centimeter)  long  and  approxi-
mately three-fourths  of  an  inch  (2  centimeters)
above  the  crease  of  the  right  wrist.  Dr.  Shaw
had  initially  believed  that  the  missile  entered
on  the  palm  side  of  the  Governor's  wrist  and
exited  on  the  back  side.  After  reviewing  the
factors  considered  by  Dr.  Gregory,  however.
Dr.  Shaw  withdrew  his  earlier  opinion.  He  de-
ferred to  the  judgment  of  Dr.  Gregory,  who
had  more  closely  examined  that  wound  during
the  wrist  operation.

In  addition.  Governor  Connally  suffered  a
puncture  wound  in  the  left  thigh  that  was  ap-
proximately two-fifths  of  an  inch  (1  centimeter)
in  diameter  and  located  approximately  5  or  6
inches  above  the  Governor's  left  knee.  On  the
Governor's  leg,  very  Uttle  soft-tissue  damage
was  noted,  which  indicated  a  tangential  wound
or  the  penetration  of  a  larger  missile  entering
at  low  velocity  and  stopping  after  entering  the
skin.  X-ray  examination  disclosed  a  tiny  metal-
lic fragment  embedded  in  the  Governor's  leg.
The  surgeons  who  attended  the  Governor  con-
cluded that  the  thigh  wound  was  not  caused  by
the  small  fragment  in  the  thigh  but  resulted
from  the  impact  of  a  larger  missile.

Examination  of  clothing. — ^The  clothing  worn
by  Governor  Connally  on  November  22,  1963,
contained  holes  which  matched  his  wounds.  On
the  back  of  the  Governor's  coat,  a  hole  was
found  li  inches  from  the  seam  where  the  right
sleeve  attached  to  the  coat  and  7i  inches  to  the
right  of  the  midline.  This  hole  was  elongated
in  a  horizontal  direction  approximately  five-
eighths  of  an  inch  in  length  and  one-fourth  of
an  inch  in  height.  The  front  side  of  the  Gover-
nor's coat  contained  a  circular  hole  three-eighths
of  an  inch  in  diameter,  located  5  inches  to  the
right  of  the  front  edge  of  the  coat  slightly  above
the  top  button.  A  rough  hole  approximately  five-
eighths  of  an  inch  in  length  and  three-eighths  of
an  inch  in  width  was  found  near  the  end  of  the
right  sleeve.  Each  of  these  holes  could  have
been  caused  by  a  buUet,  but  a  positive  deter-
mination of  this  fact  or  the  direction  of  the  mis-
sile was  not  possible  because  the  garment  had
been  cleaned  and  pressed  prior  to  any  oppor-
tunity for  a  scientific  examination.

An  examination  of  the  Governor's  shirt  dis-
closed a  very  ragged  tear  five-eighths  of  an  inch
long  horizontally  and  one-half  of  an  inch  ver-
tically on  the  back  of  the  shirt  near  the  right
sleeve  2  inches  from  the  line  where  the  right
attaches.  Immediately  to  the  right  was  another
small  tear,  approximately  three-sixteenths  of  an
inch  long.  The  two  holes  corresponded  in  posi-
tion to  the  hole  in  the  back  of  the  Governor's


coat.  A  very  irregular  tear  in  the  form  of  an
"H"  was  observed  on  the  front  side  of  the  Gov-
ernor's shirt,  approximately  \i  inches  high,
with  a  crossbar  tear  approximately  1  inch  wide,
located  5  inches  from  the  right  side  seam  and  9
inches  from  the  top  of  the  right  sleeve.  Because
the  shirt  had  been  laundered,  there  were  in-
sufficient characteristics  for  the  expert  examiner
to  form  a  conclusive  opinion  on  the  direction  or
nature  of  the  object  causing  the  holes.  The  rear
hole  could  have  been  caused  by  the  entrance  of
a  6.5-millimeter  bullet  and  the  front  hole  by  the
exit  of  such  a  bullet.

On  the  French  cuff  of  the  right  sleeve  of  the
Governor's  shirt  was  a  ragged,  irregularly  shaped
hole  located  H  inches  from  the  end  of  the  sleeve
and  5i  inches  from  the  outside  cuff-link  hole.
The  characteristics  after  laundering  did  not  per-
mit positive  conclusions  but  these  holes  could
have  been  caused  by  a  bullet  passing  through
the  Governor's  right  wrist  from  the  back  to  the
front  sides.  The  Governor's  trousers  contained
a  hole  approximately  one-fourth  of  an  inch  in
diameter  in  the  region  of  the  left  knee.  The
roughly  circular  shape  of  the  hole  and  the  slight
tearing  away  from  the  edges  gave  the  hole  the
general  appearance  of  a  bullet  hole  but  it  was
not  possible  to  determine  the  direction  of  the
missUe  which  caused  the  hole.

Course  of  bullet. — Ballistics  experiments  and
medical  findings  established  that  the  missile
which  passed  through  the  Governor's  wrist  and
penetrated  his  thigh  had  first  traversed  his  chest.
The  Army  Wound  Ballistics  experts  conducted
tests  which  proved  that  the  Governor's  wrist
wound  was  not  caused  by  a  pristine  bullet.  (See
app.  X.)  A  bullet  is  pristine  immediately  on  ex-
iting from  a  rifle  muzzle  when  it  moves  in  a
straight  line  with  a  spinning  motion  and  main-
tains its  uniform  trajectory  with  but  a  minimum
of  nose  surface  striking  the  air  through  which
it  passes.  When  the  straight  line  of  flight  of  a
bullet  is  deflected  by  stricking  some  object,  it
starts  to  wobble  or  become  irregular  in  ^ght,  a
condition  called  yaw.  A  bullet  with  yaw  has  a
greater  surface  exposed  to  the  striking  material
or  air,  since  the  target  or  air  is  struck  not  only
by  the  nose  of  the  bullet,  its  smallest  striking
surface,  but  also  by  the  bullet's  sides.

The  ballistics  experts  learned  the  exact  nature
of  the  Governor's  wrist  wound  by  examining
Parkland  Hospital  records  and  X-rays  and  con-
ferring with  Dr.  Gregory.  The  C2766  Mann-
licher-Carcano  rifle  found  in  the  Depository  was
fired  with  bullets  of  the  same  type  as  the  bullet
found  on  the  Governor's  stretcher  and  the  frag-
ments found  in  the  Presidential  limousine.  Shots
were  fired  from  a  distance  of  70  yards  at  com-
parable flesh  and  bone  protected  by  material
similar  to  the  clothing  worn  by  the  Governor.
One  of  the  test  shots  wounded  the  comparable
flesh  and  bone  structure  in  virtually  the  same
place  and  from  the  same  angle  as  the  wound  in-
flicted on  Governor  Connally's  wrist.  An  X-ray
and  photograph  of  the  simulated  wrist  confirmed

39


the  similarity.  The  bullet  which  inflicted  that  in-
jury during  the  tests  had  a  nose  which  was  sub-
stantially flattened  from  striking  the  material.
The  striking  velocity  at  70  yards  of  seven  shots
fired  during  the  tests  averaged  1,858  feet  per
second;  the  average  exit  velocity  of  five  shots
was  1,776  feet  per  second.

The  conclusion  that  the  Governor's  wrist  was
not  struck  by  a  pristine  bullet  was  based  upon
the  following:  (1)  greater  damage  was  inflicted
on  the  test  material  than  on  the  Governor's  wrist;

(2)  the  test  material  had  a  smaller  entry  wound
and  a  larger  exit  wound,  characteristic  of  a  pris-
tine bullet,  while  the  Governor's  wrist  had  a
larger  entry  woimd  as  compared  with  its  exit
wound,  indicating  a  bullet  which  was  timibling;

(3)  clo^  was  carried  into  the  wrist  wound,  which
is  characteristic  of  an  irregular  missile;  (4)  the
partial  cutting  of  a  radial  nerve  and  tendon
leading  to  the  Governor's  thumb  further  sug-
gested that  the  bullet  which  struck  him  was  not
pristine,  since  such  a  bullet  would  merely  push
aside  a  tendon  and  nerve  rather  than  catch  and
tear  them;  (5)  the  bullet  found  on  the  Governor's
stretcher  probably  did  not  pass  through  the  vmst
as  a  pristine  bullet  because  its  nose  was  not  con-
siderably flattened,  as  was  the  case  with  the
pristine  bullet  which  struck  the  simulated  wrist;
and  (6)  the  bullet  which  caused  the  Governor's
thigh  injury  and  then  fell  out  of  the  wound  had
a  "very  low  velocity,"  whereas  the  pristine  bul-
lets fired  during  the  tests  possessed  a  very  high
exit  velocity.

All  the  evidence  indicated  that  the  bullet
found  on  the  Governor's  stretcher  could  have
caused  all  his  wounds.  The  weight  of  the  whole
bullet  prior  to  firing  was  approximately  160-161
grains  and  that  of  the  recovered  bullet  was  158.6
grains.  An  X-ray  of  the  Governor's  wrist  showed
very  minute  metallic  fragments,  and  two  or  three
of  these  fragments  were  removed  from  his  wrist.
All  these  fragments  were  sufficiently  small  and
light  so  that  the  nearly  whole  bullet  found  on  the
stretcher  could  have  deposited  those  pieces  of
metal  as  it  tumbled  through  his  wrist.  In  their
testimony,  the  three  doctors  who  attended  Gov-
ernor ConnaUy  at  Parkland  Hospital  expressed
independently  their  opinion  that  a  single  buUet
had  passed  through  his  chest;  tumbled  through
his  wrist  with  very  little  exit  velocity,  leaving
small  metallic  fragments  from  the  rear  portion
of  the  buUet;  punctured  his  left  thigh  after  the
buUet  had  lost  virtually  aU  of  its  velocity;  and
had  fallen  out  of  the  thigh  wound.

Governor  Connally  himself  thought  it  likely
that  all  his  wounds  were  caused  by  a  single  bul-
let. In  his  testimony  before  the  Commission,  he
repositioned  himself  as  he  recalled  his  position
on  the  jump  seat,  with  his  right  plam  on  his  left
thigh,  and  said:

I  *  *  *  woimd  up  the  next  day  realizing
I  was  hit  in  three  places,  and  I  was  not  con-
scious of  having  been  hit  but  by  one  bullet,
so  I  tried  to  reconstruct  how  I  could  have


been  hit  in  three  places  by  the  same  bullet,
and  I  merely,  I  know  it  penetrated  from  the
back  through  the  chest  &"st.

I  assumed  that  I  had  turned  as  I  described
a  moment  ago,  placing  my  right  hand  on  my
left  leg,  that  it  hit  my  wrist,  went  out  the
center  of  the  wrist,  the  underside,  and  then
into  my  leg,  but  it  might  not  have  happened
that  way  at  all.

The  Governor's  posture  explained  how  a  single
missile  through  his  body  would  cause  all  his
wounds.  His  doctors  at  Parkland  Hospital  had
recreated  his  position,  also,  but  they  placed  his
right  arm  somewhat  higher  than  his  left  thigh
although  in  the  same  alinement.  The  woimd  bal-
Ustics  experts  concurred  in  the  opinion  that  a
single  bullet  caused  aU  the  Governor's  wounds.


THE  TRAJECTORY

The  cumulative  evidence  of  eyewitnesses,  fire-
arms and  ballistic  experts  and  medical  author-
ities demonstrated  that  the  shots  were  fired  from
above  and  behind  President  Kennedy  and  Gov-
ernor ConnaUy,  more  particularly,  from  the
sixth  floor  of  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository
Building.  In  order  to  determine  the  facts  with
as  much  precision  as  possible  and  to  insure  that
all  data  were  consistent  with  the  shots  having
been  fired  from  the  sixth  floor  window,  the  Com-
mission requested  additional  investigation,  in-
cluding the  analysis  of  motion  picture  films  of
the  assassination  and  onsite  tests.  The  facts  de-
veloped through  this  investigation  by  the  FBI
and  Secret  Service  confirmed  the  conclusions
reached  by  the  Commission  regarding  the  source
and  trajectory  of  the  shots  which  hit  the  Presi-
dent and  the  Governor.  Moreover,  these  facts
enabled  the  Commission  to  make  certain  ap-
proximations regarding  the  locations  of  the
Presidential  limousine  at  the  time  of  the  shots
and  the  relevant  time  intervals.

Films  and  Tests

When  the  shots  rang  out  the  Presidential  lim-
ousine was  moving  beyond  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  Building  in  a  southwesterly
direction  on  Elm  Street  between  Houston  Street
and  the  Triple  Underpass.  The  general  location
of  the  car  was  described  and  marked  on  maps
by  eyewitnesses  as  precisely  as  their  observa-
tions and  recollections  permitted.  More  exact
information  was  provided  by  motion  pictures
taken  by  Abraham  Zapruder,  OrviUe  O.  Nix  and
Mary  Muchmore,  who  were  spectators  at  the
scene.  Substantial  Ught  has  been  shed  on  the
assassination  sequence  by  viewing  these  motion
pictures,  particularly  the  Zapruder  film,  which
was  the  most  complete  and  from  which  in-
dividual 35-millimeter  slides  were  made  of  each
motion  picture  frame.

Examination  of  the  Zapruder  motion  picture
camera  by  the  FBI  established  that  18.3  pictures


40


or  frames  were  taken  each  second,  and  there-
fore, the  timing  of  certain  events  could  be  cal-
culated by  allowing  1/18.3  seconds  for  the  ac-
tion depicted  from  one  frame  to  the  next.  The
films  and  slides  made  from  individual  frames
were  viewed  by  Governor  and  Mrs.  Connally,
the  Governor's  doctors,  the  autopsy  surgeons,
and  the  Army  wound  ballistics  scientists  in  or-
der to  apply  the  knowledge  of  each  to  determine
the  precise  course  of  events.  Tests  of  the  assas-
sin's rifle  disclosed  that  at  least  2.3  seconds  were
required  between  shots.  In  evaluating  the  films
in  the  light  of  these  timing  guides,  it  was  kept  in
nund  that  a  victim  of  a  bullet  wound  may  not
react  immediately  and,  in  some  situations,  ac-
cording to  experts,  the  victim  may  not  even
know  where  he  has  been  hit,  or  when.

On  May  24,  1964,  agents  of  the  FBI  and
Secret  Service  conducted  a  series  of  tests  to  de-
termine as  precisely  as  possible  what  happened
on  November  22,  1963.  Since  the  Presidential
limousine  was  being  remodeled  and  was  there-
fore unavailable,  it  was  simulated  by  using  the
Secret  Service  followup  car,  which  is  similar
in  design.  Any  differences  were  taken  into  ac-
count. Two  Bureau  agents  with  approximately
the  same  physical  characteristics  sat  in  the  car
in  the  same  relative  positions  as  President  Ken-
nedy and  Governor  Cormally  had  occupied.  The
back  of  the  stand-in  for  the  President  was
marked  with  chalk  at  the  point  where  the  bullet
entered.  The  Governor's  model  had  on  the  same
coat  worn  by  Governor  Connally  when  he  was
shot,  with  the  hole  in  the  back  circled  in  chalk.

To  simulate  the  conditions  which  existed  at
the  assassination  scene  on  November  22,  the  low-
er part  of  the  sixth-floor  window  at  the  southeast
comer  of  the  Depository  Building  was  raised
halfway,  the  cardboard  boxes  were  repositioned,
the  C2766  Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle  found  on
the  sixth  floor  of  the  Depository  was  used,  and
mounted  on  that  rifle  was  a  camera  which  re-
corded the  view  as  was  seen  by  the  assassin.  In
addition,  the  Zapruder,  Nix,  and  Muchmore
cameras  were  on  hand  so  that  photographs  taken
by  these  cameras  from  the  same  locations  where
they  were  used  on  November  22,  1963,  could  be
compared  with  the  films  of  that  date.  The  agents
ascertained  that  the  foliage  of  an  oak  tree  that
came  between  the  gunman  and  his  target  along
the  motorcade  route  on  Elm  Street  was  approxi-
mately the  same  as  on  the  day  of  the  assassina-
tion.

The  First  Bullet  That  Hit

The  position  of  President  Kennedy's  car  when
he  was  struck  in  the  neck  was  determined  with
substantial  precision  from  the  films  and  onsite
tests.  The  pictures  or  frames  in  the  Zapruder
film  were  marked  by  the  agents,  with  the  num-
ber "1"  given  to  the  first  frame  where  the  motor-
cycles leading  the  motorcade  came  into  view
on  Houston  Street.  The  numbers  continue  in
sequence  as  Zapruder  filmed  the  Presidential
limousine  as  it  came  around  the  corner  and  pro-


ceeded down  Elm.  The  President  was  in  clear
view  of  the  assassin  as  he  rode  up  Houston
Street  and  for  100  feet  as  he  proceeded  down
Elm  Street,  until  he  came  to  a  point  denoted  as
frame  166  on  the  Zapruder  film.  These  facts
were  determined  in  the  test  by  placing  the  car
and  men  on  Elm  Street  in  the  exact  spot  where
they  were  when  each  frame  of  the  Zapruder
film  was  photographed.  To  pinpoint  their  loca-
tions, a  man  stood  at  Zapruder's  position  and
directed  the  automobUe  and  both  models  to  the
positions  shown  on  each  frame,  after  which  a
Bureau  photographer  crouched  at  the  sixth-floor
window  and  looked  through  a  camera  whose
lens  recorded  the  view  through  the  telescopic
sight  of  the  C2766  Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle.
Each  position  was  measured  to  determine  how
far  President  Kennedy  had  gone  down  Elm
from  a  point,  which  was  designated  as  station
C,  on  a  line  drawn  along  the  west  curbline  of
Houston  Street.

Based  on  these  calculations,  the  agents  con-
cluded that  at  frame  166  of  the  Zapruder  film
the  President  passed  beneath  the  foilage  of  the
large  oak  tree  and  the  point  of  impact  on  the
President's  back  disappeared  from  the  gun-
man's view  as  seen  through  the  telescopic  lens.
For  a  fleeting  instant,  the  President  came  back
into  view  in  the  telescopic  lens  at  frame  186  as
he  appeared  in  an  opening  among  the  leaves.
The  test  revealed  that  the  next  point  at  which
the  rifleman  had  a  clear  view  through  the  tele-
scopic sight  of  the  point  where  the  bullet  entered
from  behind  the  tree  at  frame  210.  According
to  FBI  Agent  Lyndal  L.  Shaneyfelt,  "There  is
no  obstruction  from  the  sixth  floor  window  from
the  time  they  leave  the  tree  untU  they  disappear
down  toward  the  triple  overpass."

As  the  President  rode  along  Elm  Street  for  a
distance  of  about  1 40  feet,  he  was  waving  to  the
crowd.  Shaneyfelt  testified  that  the  waving  is
seen  on  the  Zapruder  movie  until  around  frame
205,  when  a  road  sign  blocked  out  most  of  the
President's  body  from  Zapruder's  view  through
the  lens  of  his  camera.  However,  the  assassin
continued  to  have  a  clear  view  of  the  President
as  he  proceeded  down  Elm.  When  President
Kennedy  again  came  fully  into  view  in  the
Zapruder  film  at  frame  225,  he  seemed  to  be
reacting  to  his  neck  wound  by  raising  his  hands
to  his  throat.  According  to  Shaneyfelt  the  re-
action was  "clearly  apparent  in  226  and  barely
apparent  in  225."  It  is  probable  that  the  President
was  not  shot  before  frame  210,  since  it  is  un-
likely that  the  assassin  would  deliberately  have
shot  at  him  with  a  view  obstructed  by  the  oak
tree  when  he  was  about  to  have  a  clear  oppor-
tunity. It  is  also  doubtful  that  even  the  most
proficient  marksman  would  have  hit  him  through
the  oak  tree.  In  addition,  the  President's  reaction
is  "barely  apparent"  in  frame  225,  which  is  15
frames  or  approximately  eight-tenths  second
after  frame  210,  and  a  shot  much  before  210
would  assume  a  longer  reaction  time  than  was
recalled  by  eyewitnesses  at  the  scene.  Thus,  the


41


evidence  indicated  that  the  President  was  not
hit  until  at  least  frame  210  and  that  he  was
probably  hit  by  frame  225.  The  possibility  of
variations  in  reaction  time  in  addition  to  the
obstruction  of  Zapnider's  view  by  the  sign  pre-
cluded a  more  specific  determination  than  that
the  President  was  probably  shot  through  the  neck
between  frames  210  and  225,  which  marked  his
position  between  138.9  and  153.8  feet  west  of
station  C.

According  to  Special  Agent  Robert  A.  Frazier,
who  occupied  the  position  of  the  assassin  in  the
sixth-floor  window  during  the  re-enactment,  it  is
likely  that  the  bullet  which  passed  through  the
President's  neck,  as  described  previously,  then
struck  the  automobile  or  someone  else  in  the
automobile.  The  minute  examination  by  the
FBI  inspection  team,  conducted  in  Washington
between  14  and  16  hours  after  the  assassination,
revealed  no  damage  indicating  that  a  bullet
struck  any  part  of  the  interior  of  the  Presidential
limousine,  with  the  exception  of  the  cracking  of
the  windshield  and  the  dent  on  the  windshield
chrome.  Neither  of  these  points  of  damage  to  the
car  could  have  been  caused  by  the  bullet  which
exited  from  the  President's  neck  at  a  velocity  of
1,772  to  1,779  feet  per  second.  If  the  trajectory
had  permitted  the  bullet  to  strike  the  windshield,
the  bullet  would  have  penetrated  it  and  traveled
a  substantial  distance  down  the  road  imless  it
struck  some  other  object  en  route.  Had  that
bullet  struck  the  metal  framing,  which  was
dented,  it  would  have  torn  a  hole  in  the  chrome
and  penetrated  the  framing,  both  inside  and  out-
side the  car.  At  that  exit  velocity,  the  bullet
would  have  penetrated  any  other  metal  or  uphol-
stery surface  of  the  interior  of  the  automobile.

The  bullet  that  hit  President  Kennedy  in  the
back  and  exited  through  his  throat  most  likely
could  not  have  missed  both  the  automobile  and
its  occupants.  Since  it  did  not  hit  the  automobile,
Frazier  testified  that  it  probably  struck  Governor
Connally.  The  relative  positions  of  President
Kennedy  and  Governor  Connally  at  the  time
when  the  President  was  struck  in  the  neck  con-
firm that  the  same  buUet  probably  passed
through  both  men.  Pictures  taken  of  the  Presi-
dent's limousine  on  November  22,  1963,  showed
that  the  Governor  sat  immediately  in  front  of
the  President.  Even  though  the  precise  distance
cannot  be  ascertained,  it  is  apparent  that  Presi-
dent Kennedy  was  somewhat  to  the  Governor's
right.  The  President  sat  on  the  extreme  right,  as
noted  in  the  films  and  by  eyewitnesses,  while
the  right  edge  of  the  jump  seat  in  which  the
Governor  sat  is  6  inches  from  the  right  door.
The  President  wore  a  back  brace  which  tended
to  make  him  sit  up  straight,  and  the  Governor
also  sat  erect  since  the  jump  seat  gave  him  little
leg  room.

Based  on  his  observations  during  the  re-enact-
ment and  the  position  of  Governor  Connally
shown  in  the  Zapruder  film  after  the  car  emerged
from  behind  the  sign,  Frazier  testified  that  Gov-
ernor ConnaUy  was  in  a  position  during  the


span  from  frame  207  to  frame  225  to  receive  a
bullet  which  would  have  caused  the  wounds
he  actually  suffered.  Governor  Connally  viewed
the  film  and  testified  that  he  was  hit  between
frames  231  and  234.  According  to  Frazier,
between  frames  235  and  240  the  Governor
turned  sharply  to  his  right,  so  that  by  frame  240
he  was  too  far  to  the  right  to  have  received  his
injuries  at  that  time.  At  some  point  between
frames  235  and  240,  therefore,  is  the  last  occa-
sion when  Governor  Connally  could  have  re-
ceived his  injuries,  since  in  the  frames  following
240  he  remained  turned  too  far  to  his  right.  If
Governor  Connally  was  hit  by  a  separate  shot
between  frames  235  and  240  which  followed  the
shot  which  hit  the  President's  neck,  it  would
follow  that:  (1)  the  assassin's  first  shot,  assum-
ing a  minimum  firing  time  of  2.3  seconds  (or
42  frames),  was  fired  between  frames  193  and
198  when  his  view  was  obscured  by  the  oak  tree;
(2)  President  Kennedy  continued  waving  to  the
crowd  after  he  was  hit  and  did  not  begin  to  react
for  about  li  seconds;  and  (3)  the  first  shot,
although  hitting  no  bones  in  the  President's
body,  was  deflected  after  its  exit  from  the  Presi-
dent's neck  in  such  a  way  that  it  failed  to  hit
either  the  automobile  or  any  of  the  other
occupants.

Viewed  through  the  telescopic  sight  of  the
C2766  Maimlicher-Carcano  rifle  from  the  sixth-
floor  window  during  the  test,  the  marks  that
simulated  the  entry  wounds  on  the  stand-ins
for  the  President  and  the  Governor  were  gener-
ally in  a  straight  line.  That  alinement  became
obvious  to  the  viewer  through  the  scope  as  the
Governor's  model  turned  slightly  to  his  right
and  assumed  the  position  which  Governor  Con-
nally had  described  as  his  position  when  he  was
struck.  Viewing  the  stand-ins  for  the  President
and  the  Governor  in  the  sight  of  the  C2766
Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle  at  the  location  de-
picted in  frames  207  and  210,  Frazier  testified:
"They  both  are  in  direct  alinement  with  the
telescopic  sight  at  the  window.  The  Governor  is
immediately  behind  the  President  in  the  field  of
view."  A  surveyor  then  placed  his  sighting  equip-
ment at  the  precise  point  of  entry  on  the  back  of
the  President's  neck,  assuming  that  the  President
was  struck  at  frame  210,  and  measured  the
angle  to  the  end  of  the  muzzle  of  the  rifle  posi-
tioned where  it  was  believed  to  have  been  held
by  the  assassin.  That  angle  measured  21°  34'.
From  the  same  points  of  reference,  the  angle
at  frame  225  was  measured  at  20°  11',  giving  an
average  angle  of  20°52'30"  from  frame  210  to
frame  225.  Allowing  for  a  downward  street
grade  of  3°9',  the  probable  angle  through  the
President's  body  was  calculated  at  17°43'30",
assuming  that  he  was  sitting  in  a  vertical
position.

That  angle  was  consistent  with  the  trajectory
of  a  bullet  passing  through  the  President's  neck
and  then  striking  Governor  Connally's  back,
causing  the  wounds  which  were  discussed  above.
Shortly  after  that  angle  was  ascertained,  the


42


open  car  and  the  stand-ins  were  taken  by  the
agents  to  a  nearby  garage  where  a  photograph
was  taken  to  determine  through  closer  study
whether  the  angle  of  that  shot  could  have  ac-
counted for  the  wounds  in  the  President's  neck
and  the  Governor's  back.  A  rod  was  placed  at
an  angle  of  17°43'30"  next  to  the  stand-ins  for
the  President  and  the  Governor,  who  were  seated
in  the  same  relative  positions.  The  wounds  of
entry  and  exit  on  the  President  were  approxi-
mated based  on  information  gained  from  the
autopsy  reports  and  photographs.  The  hole  in
the  back  of  the  jacket  worn  by  the  Governor
and  the  medical  description  of  the  wound  on
his  back  marked  that  entry  point.  That  line  of
fire  from  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Depository  would
have  caused  the  bullet  to  exit  under  the  Gov-
ernor's right  nipple  just  as  the  bullet  did.  Gov-
ernor Connally's  doctors  measured  an  angle  of
declination  on  his  body  from  the  entry  wound
on  his  back  to  the  exit  on  the  front  of  his  chest
at  about  25°  when  he  sat  erect.  That  difference
was  explained  by  either  a  slight  deflection  of
the  bullet  caused  by  striking  the  fifth  rib  or  the
Governor's  leaning  slightly  backward  at  the
time  he  was  struck.  In  addition,  the  angle  could
not  be  fixed  with  absolute  precision,  since  the
large  wound  on  the  front  of  his  chest  precluded
an  exact  determination  of  the  point  of  exit.

The  alinement  of  the  points  of  entry  was  only
indicative  and  not  conclusive  that  one  bullet
hit  both  men.  The  exact  positions  of  the  men
could  not  be  re-created;  thus,  the  angle  could
only  be  approximated.  Had  President  Kennedy
been  leaning  forward  or  backward,  the  angle
of  declination  of  the  shot  to  a  perpendicular  tar-
get would  have  varied.  The  angle  of  17°43'30"
was  approximately  the  angle  of  declination  re-
produced in  an  artist's  drawing.  That  drawing,
made  from  data  provided  by  the  autopsy  sur-
geons, could  not  reproduce  the  exact  line  of  the
bullet,  since  the  exit  wound  was  obliterated  by
the  tracheotomy.  Similarly,  if  the  President  or
the  Governor  had  been  sitting  in  a  different
lateral  position,  the  conclusion  might  have  var-
ied. Or  if  the  Governor  had  not  turned  in  ex-
actly the  way  calculated,  the  alinement  would
have  been  destroyed.

Additional  experiments  by  the  Army  Woimd
Ballistics  Branch  further  suggested  that  the
same  bullet  probably  passed  through  both  Presi-
dent Kennedy  and  Governor  Connally.  (See
app.  X.)  Correlation  of  a  test  simulating  the
Governor's  chest  wound  with  the  neck  and  wrist
experiments  indicated  that  course.  After  review-
ing the  Parkland  Hospital  medical  records  and
X-rays  of  the  Governor  and  discussing  his  chest
injury  with  the  attending  surgeon,  the  Army
ballistics  experts  virtually  duplicated  the  wound
using  the  assassination  weapon  and  animal  flesh
covered  by  cloth.  The  bullet  that  struck  the  ani-
mal flesh  displayed  characteristics  similar  to  the
bullet  found  on  Governor  Connally's  stretcher.
Moreover,  the  imprint  on  the  velocity  screen
immediately  behind  the  animal  flesh  showed  that


the  bullet  was  tumbling  after  exiting  from  the
flesh,  having  lost  a  total  average  of  265  feet  per
second.  Taking  into  consideration  the  Gover-
nor's size,  the  reduction  in  velocity  of  a  bullet
passing  through  his  body  would  be  approxi-
mately 400  feet  per  second.

Based  upon  the  medical  evidence  on  the
wounds  of  the  Governor  and  the  President  and
the  wound  ballistics  tests  performed  at  Edge-
wood  Arsenal,  Drs.  Olivier  and  Arthur  J.  Dzie-
mian,  chief  of  the  Army  Wound  Ballistics
Branch,  who  had  spent  17  years  in  that  area  of
specialization,  concluded  that  it  was  probable
that  the  same  bullet  passed  through  the  Presi-
dent's neck  and  then  inflicted  all  the  wounds  on
the  Governor.  Referring  to  the  President's  neck
wound  and  all  the  Governor's  wounds,  Dr.
Dziemian  testified:  "I  think  the  probability  is
very  good  that  it  is,  that  all  the  wounds  were
caused  by  one  bullet."  Both  Drs.  Dziemian  and
Olivier  believed  that  the  wound  on  the  Gover-
nor's wrist  would  have  been  more  extensive  had
the  bullet  which  inflicted  that  injury  merely
passed  through  the  Governor's  chest,  exiting  at
a  velocity  of  approximately  1,500  feet  per  sec-
ond. Thus,  the  Governor's  wrist  wound  sug-
gested that  the  bullet  passed  through  the  Presi-
dent's neck,  began  to  yaw  in  the  air  between  the
President  and  the  Governor,  and  then  lost  more
velocity  than  400  feet  per  second  in  passing
through  the  Governor's  chest.  A  bullet  which
was  yawing  on  entering  into  the  Governor's
back  would  lose  substantially  more  velocity  in
passing  through  his  body  than  a  pristine  buUet.
In  addition,  the  bullet  that  struck  the  animal
flesh  was  flattened  to  a  greater  extent  than  the
bullet  which  presumably  struck  the  Governor's
rib,  which  suggests  that  the  bullet  which  entered
the  Governor's  chest  had  already  lost  velocity
by  passing  through  the  President's  neck.  More-
over, the  large  wound  on  the  Governor's  back
would  be  explained  by  a  bullet  which  was  yaw-
ing, although  that  type  of  wound  might  also  be
accoimted  for  by  a  tangential  striking.

Dr.  Frederick  W.  Li^t,  Jr.,  the  third  of  the
wound  ballistics  experts,  who  has  been  engaged
in  that  specialty  at  Edgewood  Arsenal  since
1951,  testified  that  the  anatomical  findings  were
insufficient  for  him  to  formulate  a  firm  opinion
as  to  whether  the  same  bullet  did  or  did  not
pass  through  the  President's  neck  first  before
inflicting  all  the  wounds  on  Governor  Coimally.
Based  on  the  other  circumstances,  such  as  the
relative  positions  of  the  President  and  the  Gov-
ernor in  the  automobile.  Dr.  Light  concluded
that  it  was  probable  that  the  same  bullet  trav-
ersed the  President's  neck  and  inflicted  all  the
wounds  on  Governor  Cormally.

The  Subsequent  Bullet  That  Hit

After  a  bullet  penetrated  President  Kennedy's
neck,  a  subsequent  shot  entered  the  back  of  his
head  and  exited  through  the  upper  right  por-
tion of  his  skioll.  The  Zapruder,  Nix  and  Much-
more  films  show  the  instant  in  the  sequence


43


when  that  bullet  struck.  That  impact  was  evident
from  the  explosion  of  the  President's  brain  tis-
sues from  the  right  side  of  his  head.  The  imme-
diately preceding  frame  from  the  Zapruder  film
shows  the  President  slumped  to  his  left,  clutch-
ing at  his  throat,  with  his  chin  close  to  his  chest
and  his  head  tilted  forward  at  an  angle.  Based
upon  information  provided  by  the  doctors  who
conducted  the  autopsy,  an  artist's  drawing  de-
picted the  path  of  the  bullet  through  the  Presi-
dent's head,  with  his  head  being  in  the  same
approximate  position.

By  using  the  Zapruder,  Nix  and  Muchmore
motion  pictures,  the  President's  location  at  the
time  the  bullet  penetrated  his  head  was  fixed
with  reasonable  precision.  A  careful  analysis  of
the  Nix  and  Muchmore  films  led  to  fixing  the
exact  location  of  these  cameramen.  The  point  of
impact  of  the  bullet  on  the  President's  head  was
apparent  in  all  of  the  movies.  At  that  point  in
the  Nix  film  a  straight  line  was  plotted  from  the
camera  position  to  a  fixed  point  in  the  back-
ground and  the  President's  location  along  this
line  was  marked  on  a  plat  map.  A  similar  proc-
ess was  followed  with  the  Muchmore  film.
The  President's  location  on  the  plat  map  was
identical  to  that  determined  from  the  Nix  film.
The  President's  location,  established  through  the
Nix  and  Muchmore  films,  was  confirmed  by
comparing  his  position  on  the  Zapruder  film.
This  location  had  hitherto  only  been  approxi-
mated, since  there  were  no  landmarks  in  the
background  of  the  Zapruder  frame  for  aline-
ment  purposes  other  than  a  portion  of  a  painted
line  on  the  curb.  Through  these  procedures,  it
was  determined  that  President  Kennedy  was
shot  in  the  head  when  he  was  230.8  feet  from  a
point  on  the  west  curbline  on  Houston  Street
where  it  intersected  with  Elm  Street.  The  Presi-
dent was  265.3  feet  from  the  rifle  in  the  sixth-
floor  window  and  at  that  position  the  approxi-
mate angle  of  declination  was  15°2l'.


NUMBER  OF  SHOTS

The  consensus  among  the  witnesses  at  the
scene  was  that  three  shots  were  fired.  However,
some  heard  only  two  shots,  while  others  testified
that  they  heard  four  and  perhaps  as  many  as
five  or  six  shots.  The  difficulty  of  accurate  per-
ception of  the  sound  of  gunshots  required  care-
ful scrutiny  of  all  of  this  testimony  regarding
the  number  of  shots.  The  firing  of  a  bullet
causes  a  number  of  noises:  the  muzzle  blast,
caused  by  the  smashing  of  the  hot  gases  which
propel  the  bullet  into  the  relatively  stable  air  at
the  gun's  muzzle;  the  noise  of  the  bullet,  caused
by  the  shock  wave  built  up  ahead  of  the  bullet's
nose  as  it  travels  through  the  air;  and  the  noise
caused  by  the  impact  of  the  bullet  on  its  target.
Each  noise  can  be  quite  sharp  and  may  be  per-
ceived as  a  separate  shot.  The  tall  buildings  in
the  area  might  have  further  distorted  the  sound.

The  physical  and  other  evidence  examined


by  the  Commission  compels  the  conclusion  that
at  least  two  shots  were  fired.  As  discussed  pre-
viously, the  nearly  whole  bullet  discovered  at
Parkland  Hospital  and  the  two  larger  fragments
found  in  the  Presidential  automobile,  which
were  identified  as  coming  from  the  assassination
rifle,  came  from  at  least  two  separate  bullets
and  possibly  from  three.  The  most  convincing
evidence  relating  to  the  number  of  shots  was
provided  by  the  presence  on  the  sixth  floor  of
three  spent  cartridges  which  were  demonstrated
to  have  been  fired  by  the  same  rifle  that  fired  the
buUets  which  caused  the  wounds.  It  is  possible
that  the  assassin  carried  an  empty  shell  in  the
rifle  and  fired  only  two  shots,  with  the  witnesses
hearing  multiple  noises  made  by  the  same  shot.
Soon  after  the  three  empty  cartridges  were
found,  officials  at  the  scene  decided  that  three
shots  were  fired,  and  that  conclusion  was  widely
circulated  by  the  press.  The  eyewitness  testi-
mony may  be  subconsciously  colored  by  the  ex-
tensive publicity  given  the  conclusion  that  three
shots  were  fired.  Nevertheless,  the  preponder-
ance of  the  evidence,  in  particular  the  three  spent
cartridges,  led  the  Commission  to  conclude  that
there  were  three  shots  fired.


THE  SHOT  THAT  MISSED

From  the  initial  findings  that  (a)  one  shot
passed  through  the  President's  neck  and  then
most  probably  passed  through  the  Governor's
body,  (b)  a  subsequent  shot  penetrated  the  Presi-
dent's head,  (c)  no  other  shot  struck  any  part  of
the  automobile,  and  (d)  three  shots  were  fired,
it  follows  that  one  shot  probably  missed  the  car
and  its  occupants.  The  evidence  is  inconclusive
as  to  whether  it  was  the  first,  second,  or  third
shot  which  missed.

The  First  Shot

If  the  first  shot  missed,  the  assassin  perhaps
missed  in  an  efi:ort  to  fire  a  hurried  shot  before
the  President  passed  under  the  oak  tree,  or  possi-
bly he  fired  as  the  President  passed  under  the
tree  and  the  tree  obstructed  his  view.  The  bullet
might  have  struck  a  portion  of  the  tree  and  been
completely  deflected.  On  the  other  hand,  the
greatest  cause  for  doubt  that  the  first  shot  missed
is  the  improbability  that  the  same  marksman
who  twice  hit  a  moving  target  would  be  so  in-
accurate on  the  first  and  closest  of  his  shots  as
to  miss  completely,  not  only  the  target,  but  the
large  automobile.

Some  support  for  the  contention  that  the  first
shot  missed  is  found  in  the  statement  of  Secret
Service  Agent  Glen  A.  Bennett,  stationed  in
the  right  rear  seat  of  the  President's  foUowup
car,  who  heard  a  sound  like  a  firecracker  as  the
motorcade  proceeded  down  Elm  Street.  At  that
moment.  Agent  Bennett  stated:

* * *  I  looked  at  the  back  of  the  Presi-
dent. I  heard  another  firecracker  noise  and


44


saw  that  shot  hit  the  President  about  four
inches  down  from  the  right  shoulder.  A  sec-
ond shot  followed  immediately  and  hit  the
right  rear  high  of  the  President's  head.

Substantial  weight  may  be  given  Bennett's  ob-
servations. Although  his  formal  statement  was
dated  November  23,  1963,  his  notes  indicate
that  he  recorded  what  he  saw  and  heard  at  5 :  30
p.m.,  November  22,  1963,  on  the  airplane  en
route  back  to  Washington,  prior  to  the  autopsy,
when  it  was  not  yet  known  that  the  President
had  been  hit  in  the  back.  It  is  possible,  of  course,
that  Bennett  did  not  observe  the  hole  in  the
President's  back,  which  might  have  been  there
immediately  after  the  first  noise.

Governor  Connally's  testimony  supports  the
view  that  the  first  shot  missed,  because  he  stated
that  he  heard  a  shot,  turned  slightly  to  his  right,
and,  as  he  started  to  turn  back  toward  his  left,
was  struck  by  the  second  bullet.  He  never  saw
the  President  during  the  shooting  sequence,  and
it  is  entirely  possible  that  he  heard  the  missed
shot  and  that  both  men  were  struck  by  the  sec-
ond bullet.  Mrs.  Connally  testified  that  after  the
first  shot  she  turned  and  saw  the  President's
hands  moving  toward  his  throat,  as  seen  in  the
films  at  frame  225.  However,  Mrs.  Coimally
further  stated  that  she  thought  her  husband  was
hit  immediately  thereafter  by  the  second  bullet.
If  the  same  bullet  struck  both  the  President  and
the  Governor,  it  is  entirely  possible  that  she  saw
the  President's  movements  at  the  same  time  as
she  heard  the  second  shot.  Her  testimony,  there-
fore, does  not  preclude  the  possibility  of  the
first  shot  having  missed.

Other  eyewitness  testimony,  however,  sup-
ports the  conclusion  that  the  first  of  the  shots
fired  hit  the  President.  As  discussed  in  chapter
II,  Special  Agent  Hill's  testimony  indicates  that
the  President  was  hit  by  the  first  shot  and  that
the  head  injury  was  caused  by  a  second  shot
which  followed  about  5  seconds  later.  James  W.
Altgens,  a  photographer  in  Dallas  for  the  Asso-
ciated Press,  had  stationed  himself  on  Elm  Street
opposite  the  Depository  to  take  pictures  of  the
passing  motorcade.  Altgens  took  a  widely  cir-
culated photograph  which  showed  President
Kennedy  reacting  to  the  first  of  the  two  shots
which  hit  him.  According  to  Altgens,  he
snapped  the  picture  "almost  simultaneously"
with  a  shot  which  he  is  confident  was  the  first
one  fired.  Comparison  of  his  photograph  with
the  Zapruder  film,  however,  revealed  that  Alt-
gens took  his  picture  at  approximately  the  same
moment  as  frame  255  of  the  movie,  30  to  45
frames  (approximately  2  seconds)  later  than
the  point  at  which  the  President  was  shot  in  the
neck.  Another  photographer,  Phillip  L.  Willis,
snapped  a  picture  at  a  time  which  he  also  asserts
was  simultaneous  with  the  first  shot.  Analysis  of
his  photograph  revealed  that  it  was  taken  at  ap-
proximately frame  210  of  the  Zapruder  film,
which  was  the  approximate  time  of  the  shot  that
probably  hit  the  President  and  the  Governor.  If


Willis  accurately  recalled  that  there  were  no
previous  shots,  this  would  be  strong  evidence
that  the  first  shot  did  not  miss.

If  the  first  shot  did  not  miss,  there  must  be  an
explanation  for  Governor  Connally's  recollec-
tion that  he  was  not  hit  by  it.  There  was,  con-
ceivably, a  delayed  reaction  between  the  time  the
bullet  struck  him  and  the  time  he  realized  that
he  was  hit,  despite  the  fact  that  the  bullet  struck
a  glancing  blow  to  a  rib  and  penetrated  his  wrist
bone.  The  Governor  did  not  even  know  that  he
had  been  struck  in  the  wrist  or  in  the  thigh  until
he  regained  consciousness  in  the  hospital  the
next  day.  Moreover,  he  testified  that  he  did  not
hear  what  he  thought  was  the  second  shot,  al-
though he  did  hear  a  subsequent  shot  which
coincided  with  the  shattering  of  the  President's
head.  One  possibility,  therefore,  would  be  a
sequence  in  which  the  Governor  heard  the  first
shot,  did  not  immediately  feel  the  penetration
of  the  bullet,  then  felt  the  delayed  reaction  of
the  impact  on  his  back,  later  heard  the  shot
which  shattered  the  President's  head,  and  then
lost  consciousness  without  hearing  a  third  shot
which  might  have  occurred  later.

The  Second  Shot

The  possibility  that  the  second  shot  missed  is
consistent  with  the  elapsed  time  between  the
two  shots  that  hit  their  mark.  From  the  timing
evidenced  by  the  Zapruder  films,  there  was  an
interval  of  from  4.8  to  5.6  seconds  between  the
shot  which  struck  President  Kennedy's  neck
(between  frames  210  to  225)  and  the  shot  which
struck  his  head  at  frame  313.  Since  a  minimum
of  2.3  seconds  must  elapse  between  shots,  a  bul-
let could  have  been  fired  from  the  rifle  and
missed  during  this  interval.  This  possibility  was
buttressed  by  the  testimony  of  witnesses  who
claimed  that  the  shots  were  evenly  spaced,  since
a  second  shot  occurring  within  an  interval  of
approximately  5  seconds  would  have  to  be
almost  exactly  midway  in  this  period.  If  Altgen's
recollection  is  correct  that  he  snapped  his  pic-
ture at  the  same  moment  as  he  heard  a  shot,
then  it  is  possible  that  he  heard  a  second  shot
which  missed,  since  a  shot  fired  2.3  seconds  be-
fore he  took  his  picture  at  frame  255  could  have
hit  the  President  at  about  frame  213.

On  the  other  hand,  a  substantial  majority  of  the
witnesses  stated  that  the  shots  were  not  evenly
spaced.  Most  witnesses  recalled  that  the  second
and  third  shots  were  bunched  together,  although
some  believed  that  it  was  the  first  and  second
which  were  bunched.  To  the  extent  that  reliance
can  be  placed  on  recollection  of  witnesses  as  to
the  spacing  of  the  shots,  the  testimony  that  the
shots  were  not  evenly  spaced  would  militate
against  a  second  shot  missing.  Another  factor
arguing  against  the  second  shot  missing  is  that
the  gunman  would  have  been  shooting  at  very
near  the  minimum  allowable  time  to  have  fired
the  three  shots  within  4.8  to  5.6  seconds,  al-
though it  was  entirely  possible  for  him  to  have
done  so.  (See  ch.  IV.)


45


The  Third  Shot

The  last  possibility,  of  course,  is  that  it  was
the  third  shot  which  missed.  This  conclusion
conforms  most  easily  with  the  probability  that
the  assassin  would  most  likely  have  missed  the
farthest  shot,  particularly  since  there  was  an
acceleration  of  the  automobile  after  the  shot
which  struck  the  President's  head.  The  limousine
also  changed  direction  by  following  the  curve
to  the  right,  whereas  previously  it  had  been  pro-
ceeding in  almost  a  straight  line  with  a  rifle  pro-
truding from  the  sixth-floor  window  of  the  De-
pository Building.

One  must  consider,  however,  the  testimony
of  the  witnesses  who  described  the  head  shot  as
the  concluding  event  in  the  assassination
sequence.  Illustrative  is  the  testimony  of  Asso-
ciated Press  photographer  Altgens,  who  had  an
excellent  vantage  point  near  the  President's  car.
He  recalled  that  the  shot  which  hit  the  Presi-
dent's head  "was  the  last  shot — that  much  I  will
say  with  a  great  degree  of  certainty."  On  the
other  hand,  Emmett  J.  Hudson,  the  groimds-
keeper  of  Dealey  Plaza,  testified  that  from  his
position  on  Elm  Street,  midway  between  Hous-
ton Street  and  the  Triple  Underpass,  he  heard
a  third  shot  after  the  shot  which  hit  the  Presi-
dent in  the  head.  In  addition,  Mrs.  Kennedy's
testimony  indicated  that  neither  the  first  nor  the
second  shot  missed.  Immediately  after  the  first
noise  she  turned,  because  of  the  Governor's  yell,
and  saw  her  husband  raise  his  hand  to  his  fore-
head. Then  the  second  shot  struck  the  Presi-
dent's head.

Some  evidence  suggested  that  a  third  shot  may
have  entirely  missed  and  hit  the  turf  or  street  by
the  Triple  Underpass.  Royce  G.  Skelton,  who
watched  the  motorcade  from  the  railroad  bridge,
testified  that  after  two  shots  "the  car  came  on
down  close  to  the  Triple  Underpass"  and  an  ad-
ditional shot  "hit  in  the  left  front  of  the  Presi-
dent's car  on  the  cement."  Skelton  thought  that
there  had  been  a  total  of  four  shots,  either  the
third  or  fourth  of  which  hit  in  the  vicinity  of  the
imderpass.  Dallas  Patrolman  J.  W.  Foster,  who
was  also  on  the  Triple  Underpass,  testified  that  a
shot  hit  the  turf  near  a  manhole  cover  in  the
vicinity  of  the  underpass.  Examination  of  this
area,  however,  disclosed  no  indication  that  a
buUet  struck  at  the  locations  indicated  by  Skel-
ton or  Foster.

At  a  different  location  in  Dealey  Plaza,  the
evidence  indicated  that  a  bullet  fragment  did  hit
the  street.  James  T.  Tague,  who  got  out  of  his
car  to  watch  the  motorcade  from  a  position
between  Commerce  and  Main  Streets  near  the
Triple  Underpass,  was  hit  on  the  cheek  by  an
object  during  the  shooting.  Within  a  few  minutes
Tague  reported  this  to  Deputy  Sheriff  Eddy  R.
Walthers,  who  was  examining  the  area  to  see  if
any  bullets  had  struck  the  turf.  Walthers  im-
mediately started  to  search  where  Tague  had
been  standing  and  located  a  place  on  the  south
curb  of  Main  Street  where  it  appeared  a  bullet


had  hit  the  cement.  According  to  Tague,  "There
was  a  mark  quite  obviously  that  was  a  bullet,
and  it  was  very  fresh."  In  Tague's  opinion,  it
was  the  second  shot  which  caused  the  mark,
since  he  thinks  he  heard  the  third  shot  after  he
was  hit  in  the  face.  This  incident  appears  to  have
been  recorded  in  the  contemporaneous  report  of
Dallas  Patrolman  L.  L.  HUl,  who  radioed  in
around  12:40  p.m.:  "I  have  one  guy  that  was
possibly  hit  by  a  richochet  from  the  bullet  off  the
concrete."  Scientific  examination  of  the  mark
on  the  south  curb  of  Main  Street  by  FBI  experts
disclosed  metal  smears  which,  "were  spectro-
graphically  determined  to  be  essentially  lead
with  a  trace  of  antimony."  The  mark  on  the  curb
could  have  originated  from  the  lead  core  of  a
bullet  but  the  absence  of  copper  precluded  "the
possibility  that  the  mark  on  the  curbing  section
was  made  by  an  unmutilated  military  full  metal-
jacketed  buUet  such  as  the  bullet  from  Governor
Connally's  stretcher."

It  is  true  that  the  noise  of  a  subsequent  shot
might  have  been  drowned  out  by  the  siren  on
the  Secret  Service  followup  car  immediately
after  the  head  shot,  or  the  dramatic  effect  of  the
head  shot  might  have  caused  so  much  confusion
that  the  memory  of  subsequent  events  was
blurred.  Nevertheless,  the  preponderance  of  the
eyewitness  testimony  that  the  head  shot  was  the
final  shot  must  be  weighed  in  any  determination
as  to  whether  it  was  the  third  shot  that  missed.
Even  if  it  were  caused  by  a  bullet  fragment,  the
mark  on  the  south  curb  of  Main  Street  cannot  be
identified  conclusively  with  any  of  the  three
shots  fired.  Under  the  circumstances  it  might
have  come  from  the  bullet  which  hit  the  Presi-
dent's head,  or  it  might  have  been  a  product  of
the  fragmentation  of  the  missed  shot  upon  hit-
ting some  other  object  in  the  area.  Since  he  did
not  observe  any  of  the  shots  striking  the  Presi-
dent, Tague's  testimony  that  the  second  shot,
rather  than  the  third,  caused  the  scratch  on  his
cheek,  does  not  assist  in  limiting  the  possibilities.

The  wide  range  of  possibilities  and  the  exist-
ence of  conflicting  testimony,  when  coupled
with  the  impossibility  of  scientific  verification,
precludes  a  conclusive  finding  by  the  Commis-
sion as  to  which  shot  missed.


TIME  SPAN  OF  SHOTS

Witnesses  at  the  assassination  scene  said  that
the  shots  were  fired  within  a  few  seconds,  with
the  general  estimate  being  5  to  6  seconds.  That
approximation  was  most  probably  based  on  the
earlier  publicized  reports  that  the  first  shot  struck
the  President  in  the  neck,  the  second  woxmded
the  Governor  and  the  third  shattered  the  Presi-
dent's head,  with  the  time  span  from  the  neck  to
the  head  shots  on  the  President  being  approxi-
mately 5  seconds.  As  previously  indicated,  the
time  span  between  the  shot  entering  the  back  of
the  President's  neck  and  the  bullet  which  shat-
tered his  skull  was  4.8  to  5.6  seconds.  If  the


46


An  AP  Photo  Story  of  the  Tragedy


John  F.  Kennedy
A  picture  taken  on  November  14,  1963


I
I


Vi


/.


.-."«*


mSMMii


President  Kennedy's  last
moment,  just  before  he  was
assassinated.  He  shares  the
passenger  seats  with  Mrs.
Kennedy  and  with  Gov-
ernor and  Mrs.  Connally.


This  diagrammatic  photo-
graph indicates  the  trajec-
tory of  the  assassination
bullets  from  the  sixth  floor
window  of  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository
Building  to  the  presidential
automobile.


■  llil


In  a  matter  of  seconds  the  scene  at  the  presidential  automobile  turns  to  tragedy.  Mrs.  Ken-
nedy stands  over  the  President,  a  secret  service  man  leaps  to  the  bumper.


The  lethal  rifle  is  held  by  an  officer.


Lee  Harvey  Oswald


In  less  than  two  hours  after  the  assassination,  Lyndon  Johnson  becomes  President  of  the
United  States.  Here  Judge  Sarah  T.  Hughes  administers  the  oath  of  oflfice  in  the  presi-
dential plane;  Mrs.  Jacqueline  Kennedy  and  Mrs.  Johnson  watch.


Men  and  women  weep  unabashed  during  the  funeral  of  the  fallen  President.


X


ii


Her  dress  still  spattered  with  blood,  Mrs.  Kennedy  enters  an  ambulance  with  her  husband's
coffin  at  Andrews  Air  Force  Base  near  Washington.


The  Kennedy  funeral  cortege  crosses  the  Memorial  Bridge  to  the  Arlington  Cemetery.


Jack  Ruby  shoots  Lee  Oswald,  who  grimaces  in  pain.  An  officer  starts  back.  (Copyright,
The  Dallas  Times  Herald)


Jack  Ruby  confers  with  his  attorneys,  Joe  Tonahill  at  the  left  and  Melvin  Belli  at  the
right,  prior  to  his  widely  publicized  trial  for  the  murder  of  Lee  Oswald.


■f  ■ ^


liiisE


:£££aL.


„-!_ — ^il


An  Eternal  Flame  flickers  and  a  lone  sentry  stands  guard  beside  the  snow-covered
grave  of  John  F.  Kennedy  in  Arlington.  In  the  distance  are  the  lights  of  the  capitol.


CD  °  o  =r

^ -J  OQ

s  ^^  ^■

j--  TO  D  ci.

S O 3 ^
TO O ? 5

>  TO ^ _
TO , .-T  ^

a  jog  3


TO
O


C3

a


r

TO
TO


<_  TO


r=o


3*
TO


w  Z

D TO
13


TO

to"


o


TO

o


TO
TO ►-(

(^ HH £L


OQ >

TO Cr

a  TO

TO 3

1-1

^^


TO CL
3  -


3*3-
W  J.


?0
TO


TO c:
? TO


second  shot  missed,  then  4.8  to  5.6  seconds  was
the  total  time  span  of  the  shots.  If  either  the  first
or  third  shots  missed,  then  a  mmimum  of  2.3
seconds  (necessary  to  operate  the  rifle)  must  be
added  to  the  time  span  of  the  shots  which  hit,
giving  a  minimum  time  of  7.1  to  7.9  seconds  for
the  three  shots.  If  more  than  2.3  seconds  elapsed
between  a  shot  that  missed  and  one  that  hit,  then
the  time  span  would  be  correspondingly  in-
creased.


CONCLUSION

Based  on  the  evidence  analyzed  in  this  chap-


ter, the  Commission  has  concluded  that  the  shots
which  killed  President  Kennedy  and  wounded
Governor  Cormally  were  fired  from  the  sixth-
floor  window  at  the  southeast  comer  of  the
Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building.  Two
bullets  probably  caused  all  the  wounds  suffered
by  President  Kennedy  and  Governor  Connally.
Since  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  indi-
cated that  three  shots  were  fired,  the  Conmiission
concluded  that  one  shot  probably  missed  the
Presidential  limousine  and  its  occupants,  and
that  the  three  shots  were  fired  in  a  time  period
ranging  from  approximately  4.8  to  in  excess  of
7  seconds.


Chapter  IV

THE  ASSASSIN


THE  PRECEDING  chapter  has  estabUshed
that  the  bullets  which  killed  President  Kermedy
and  wounded  Governor  Connally  were  fired
from  the  southeast  corner  window  of  the  sixth
floor  of  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository
Building  and  that  the  weapon  which  fired  these
bullets  was  a  Mannlicher-Carcano  6.5-milli-
meter Italian  rifle  bearing  the  serial  number
C2766.  In  this  chapter  the  Commission  evalu-
ates the  evidence  upon  which  it  has  based  its
conclusion  concerning  the  identity  of  the  as-
sassin. This  evidence  includes  ( 1 )  the  ownership
and  possession  of  the  weapon  used  to  commit
the  assassination,  (2)  the  means  by  which  the
weapon  was  brought  into  the  Depository  Build-
ing, (3)  the  identity  of  the  person  present  at
the  window  from  which  the  shots  were  fired,
(4)  the  killing  of  Dallas  Patrolman  J.  D.  Tippit
within  45  minutes  after  the  assassination,  (5)
the  resistance  to  arrest  and  the  attempted  shoot-
ing of  another  police  officer  by  the  man  (Lee
Harvey  Oswald)  subsequently  accused  of  as-
sassinating President  Kennedy  and  killing  Pa-
trolman Tippit,  (6)  the  lies  told  to  the  police
by  Oswald,  (7)  the  evidence  linking  Oswald  to
the  attempted  killing  of  Maj.  Gen.  Edwin  A.
Walker  (Resigned,  U.S.  Army)  on  April  10,
1963,  and  (8)  Oswald's  capability  with  a  rifle.


OWNERSHIP  AND  POSSESSION  OF
ASSASSINATION  WEAPON

Purchase  of  Rifle  by  Oswald

Shortly  after  the  Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle
was  found  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  Building,  agents  of  the  FBI
learned  from  retail  outlets  in  Dallas  that  Cres-
cent Firearms,  Inc.,  of  New  York  City,  was  a
distributor of surplus Italian 6.5-niiUuneter


military  rifles.  During  the  evening  of  November
22,  1963,  a  review  of  the  records  of  Crescent
Firearms  revealed  that  the  firm  had  shipped  an
Italian  carbine,  serial  number  C2766,  to  Klein's
Sporting  Goods  Co.,  of  Chicago,  lU.  After
searching  their  records  from  10  p.m.  to  4  a.m.
the  officers  of  Klein's  discovered  that  a  rifle
bearing  serial  number  C2766  had  been  shipped
to  one  A.  Hidell,  Post  Office  Box  2915,  DaUas,
Tex.,  on  March  20,  1963.

According  to  its  microfilm  records,  Klein's
received  an  order  for  a  rifle  on  March  13,  1963,
on  a  coupon  clipped  from  the  February  1963
issue  of  the  American  Rifleman  magazine.  The
order  coupon  was  signed,  in  handprinting,  "A.
HideU,  P.  O.  Box  2915,  Dallas,  Texas."  It  was
sent  in  an  envelope  bearing  the  same  name  and
return  address  in  handwriting.  Document  ex-
aminers for  the  Treasury  Department  and  the
FBI  testified  unequivocally  that  the  bold  print-
ing on  the  face  of  the  mail-order  coupon  was
in  the  handprinting  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  and
that  the  writing  on  the  envelope  was  also  his.
Oswald's  writing  on  these  and  other  documents
was  identified  by  comparing  the  writing  and
printing  on  the  documents  in  question  with  that
appearing  on  documents  known  to  have  been
written  by  Oswald,  such  as  his  letters,  passport
application,  and  endorsements  of  checks.  (See
app.  X.)

In  addition  to  the  order  coupon  the  envelope
contained  a  U.S.  postal  money  order  for  $21.45,
purchased  as  No.  2,202,130,462  in  Dallas,  Tex.,
on  March  12,  1963.  The  canceled  money  order
was  obtained  from  the  Post  Office  Department.
Opposite  the  printed  words  "Pay  To"  were  writ-
ten the  words  "Kleins  Sporting  Goods,"  and
opposite  the  printed  word  "From"  were  written
the  words  "A.  Hidell,  P.  O.  Box  2915  Dallas,


47


Texas."  These  words  were  also  in  the  hand-
writing of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.

From  Klein's  records  it  was  possible  to  trace
the  processing  of  the  order  after  its  receipt.  A
bank  deposit  made  on  March  13,  1963,  included
an  item  of  $21.45.  Klein's  shipping  order  form
shows  an  imprint  made  by  the  cash  register
which  recorded  the  receipt  of  $21.45  on  March
13,  1963.  This  price  included  $19.95  for  the
rifle  and  the  scope,  and  $1.50  for  postage  and
handling.  The  rifle  without  the  scope  cost  only
$12.78.

According  to  the  vice  president  of  Klein's,
WUliam  Waldman,  the  scope  was  mounted  on
the  rifle  by  a  gunsmith  employed  by  Klein's,
and  the  rifle  was  shipped  fully  assembled  in
accordance  with  customary  company  proce-
dures. The  specific  rifle  shipped  against  the
order  had  been  received  by  Klein's  from  Cres-
cent on  February  21,  1963.  It  bore  the  manu-
facturer's serial  number  C2766.  On  that  date,
Klein's  placed  an  internal  control  number
VC836  on  this  rifle.  According  to  Klein's  ship-
ping order  form,  one  Italian  carbine  6.5  X-4  X
scope,  control  number  VC836,  serial  number
C2766,  was  shipped  parcel  post  to  "A.  Hidell,
P.O.  Box  2915,  DaUas,  Texas,"  on  March  20,
1963.  Information  received  from  the  Italian
Armed  Forces  Intelligence  Service  has  estab-
Ushed  that  this  particular  rifle  was  the  only  rifle
of  its  type  bearing  serial  number  C2766.  (See
app.  X.)

The  post  oflBce  box  to  which  the  rifle  was
shipped  was  rented  to  "Lee  H.  Oswald"  from
October  9,  1962,  to  May  14,  1963.  Experts  on
handwriting  identification  from  the  Treasury
Department  and  the  FBI  testified  that  the  sig-
nature and  other  writing  on  the  application  for
that  box  were  in  the  handwriting  of  Lee  Harvey
Oswald,  as  was  a  change-of -address  card  dated
May  12,  1963,  by  which  Oswald  requested  that
mail  addressed  to  that  box  be  forwarded  to  him
in  New  Orleans,  where  he  had  moved  on  April
24,  Since  the  rifle  was  shipped  from  Chicago
on  March  20,  1963,  it  was  received  in  DaUas
during  the  period  when  Oswald  rented  and
used  the  box.

It  is  not  known  whether  the  application  for
post  oflBce  box  2915  listed  "A.  Hidell"  as  a  per-
son entitled  to  receive  mail  at  this  box.  In  ac-
cordance with  postal  regulations,  the  portion  of
the  application  which  lists  names  of  persons,
other  than  the  applicant,  entitled  to  receive  mail
was  thrown  away  after  the  box  was  closed  on
May  14,  1963.  Postal  Inspector  Harry  D.
Holmes  of  the  DaUas  Office  testified,  however,
that  when  a  package  is  received  for  a  certain
box,  a  notice  is  placed  in  that  box  regardless  of
whether  the  name  on  the  package  is  listed  on
the  application  as  a  person  entitled  to  receive
mail  through  that  box.  The  person  having  access
to  the  box  then  takes  the  notice  to  the  window
and  is  given  the  package.  Ordinarily,  Inspector
Holmes  testified,  identification  is  not  requested


because  it  is  assumed  that  the  person  with  the
notice  is  entitled  to  the  package.

Oswald's  use  of  the  name  "Hidell"  to  pur-
chase the  assassination  weapon  was  one  of  sev-
eral instances  in  which  he  used  this  name  as  an
alias.  When  arrested  on  the  day  of  the  assassi-
nation, he  had  in  his  possession  a  Smith  &
Wesson  .38  caliber  revolver  purchased  by  mail-
order coupon  from  Seaport-Traders,  Inc.,  a
maU-order  division  of  George  Rose  &  Co.,  Los
Angeles.  The  mail-order  coupon  listed  the  pur-
chaser as  "A.  J.  Hidell  Age  28"  with  the  address
of  post  office  box  2915  in  Dallas.  Handwriting
experts  from  the  FBI  and  the  Treasury  Depart-
ment testified  that  the  writing  on  the  mail-order
form  was  that  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.

Among  other  identification  cards  in  Oswald's
wallet  at  the  time  of  his  arrest  were  a  Selective
Service  notice  of  classification,  a  Selective  Serv-
ice registration  certificate,  and  a  certificate  of
service  in  the  U.S.  Marine  Corps,  all  three
cards  being  in  his  own  name.  Also  in  his  waUet
at  that  time  were  a  Selective  Service  notice  of
classification  and  a  Marine  certificate  of  service
in  the  name  of  Alek  James  Hidell.  On  the  HideU
Selective  Service  card  there  appeared  a  signa-
ture, "Alek  J.  HideU,"  and  the  photograph  of
Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  Experts  on  questioned
documents  from  the  Treasury  Department  and
the  FBI  testified  that  the  Hidell  cards  were
counterfeit  photographic  reproductions  made
by  photographing  the  Oswald  cards,  retouching
the  resulting  negatives,  and  producing  prints
from  the  retouched  negatives.  The  HideU  signa-
ture on  the  notice  of  classification  was  in  the
handwriting  of  Oswald.  (See  app.  X.)

In  Oswald's  personal  effects  found  in  his
room  at  1026  North  Beckley  Avenue  in  DaUas
was  a  purported  international  certificate  of  vac-
cination signed  by  "Dr.  A.  J.  Hideel,"  Post
Office  Box  30016,  New  Orleans.  It  certified  that
Lee  Harvey  Oswald  had  been  vaccmated  for
smaUpox  on  June  8,  1963.  This,  too,  was  a
forgery.  The  signature  of  "A.  J.  Hideel"  was  in
the  handwriting  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  There
is  no  "Dr.  Hideel"  Ucensed  to  practice  medicine
in  Louisiana.  There  is  no  post  office  box  30016
in  the  New  Orleans  Post  Office  but  Oswald  had
rented  post  office  box  30061  in  New  Orleans  on
June  3,  1963,  Usting  Marina  Oswald  and  A.  J.
HideU  as  additional  persons  entitled  to  receive
maU  in  the  box.  The  New  Orleans  postal  au-
thorities had  not  discarded  the  portion  of  the
appUcation  listing  the  names  of  those,  other
than  the  owner  of  the  box,  entitled  to  receive
maU  through  the  box.  Expert  testimony  con-
firmed that  the  writing  on  this  appUcation  was
that  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.

HideU's  name  on  the  post  office  box  appUca-
tion was  part  of  Oswald's  use  of  a  nonexistent
HideU  to  serve  as  president  of  the  so-caUed  New
Orleans  Chapter  of  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Com-
mittee. Marina  Oswald  testified  that  she  first
learned  of  Oswald's  use  of  the  fictitious  name
"HideU"  in  connection  with  his  pro-Castro  ac-


48


tivities  in  New  Orleans.  According  to  her  testi-
mony, he  compelled  her  to  write  the  name
"Hidell"  on  membership  cards  in  the  space
designated  for  the  signature  of  the  "Chapter
President."  The  name  "Hidell"  was  stamped  on
some  of  the  "Chapter's"  printed  literature  and
on  the  membership  application  blanks.  Marina
Oswald  testified,  "I  knew  there  was  no  such
organization.  And  I  know  Hidell  is  merely  an
altered  Fidel,  and  I  laughed  at  such  foolish-
ness." Hidell  was  a  fictitious  president  of  an
organization  of  which  Oswald  was  the  only
member.

When  seeking  employment  in  New  Orleans,
Oswald  listed  a  "Sgt.  Robt.  Hidell"  as  a  refer-
ence on  one  job  application  and  "George
Hidell"  as  a  reference  on  another.  Both  names
were  found  to  be  fictitious.  Moreover,  the  use
of  "Alek"  as  a  first  name  for  Hidell  is  a  further
link  to  Oswald  because  "Alek"  was  Oswald's
nickname  in  Russia.  Letters  received  by  Marina
Oswald  from  her  husband  signed  "Alek"  were
given  to  the  Commission.

Oswald's  Palmprint  on  Rifle  Barrel

Based  on  the  above  evidence,  the  Commission
concluded  that  Oswald  purchased  the  rifle  found
on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Depository  Building.
Additional  evidence  of  ownership  was  provided
in  the  form  of  palmprint  identification  which
indicated  that  Oswald  had  possession  of  the  rifle
he  had  purchased,

A  few  minutes  after  the  rifle  was  discovered
on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Depository  Building  it
was  examined  by  Lt.  J.  C.  Day  of  the  identifica-
tion bureau  of  the  Dallas  police.  He  lifted  the
rifle  by  the  wooden  stock  after  his  examination
convinced  him  that  the  wood  was  too  rough  to
take  fingerprints.  Capt.  J.  W.  Fritz  then  ejected
a  cartridge  by  operating  the  bolt,  but  only  after
Day  viewed  the  knob  on  the  bolt  through  a
magnifying  glass  and  found  no  prints.  Day  con-
tinued to  examine  the  rifle  with  the  magnifying
glass,  looking  for  possible  fingerprints.  He  ap-
plied fingerprint  powder  to  the  side  of  the  metal
housing  near  the  trigger,  and  noticed  traces  of
two  prints.  At  11:45  p.m.  on  November  22,  the
rifle  was  released  to  the  FBI  and  forwarded  to
Washington  where  it  was  examined  on  the
morning  of  November  23  by  Sebastian  F.
Latona,  supervisor  of  the  Latent  Fingerprint
Section  of  the  FBI's  Identification  Division.

In  his  testimony  before  the  Commission,
Latona  stated  that  when  he  received  the  rifle,
the  area  where  prints  were  visible  was  protected
by  cellophane.  He  examined  these  prints,  as  well
as  photographs  of  them  which  the  Dallas  police
had  made,  and  concluded  that:

*  *  *  the  formations,  the  ridge  formations
and  characteristics,  were  insufficient  for  pur-
poses of  either  effecting  identification  or  a
determination  that  the  print  was  not  identical
with  the  prints  of  people.  Accordingly,  my


opinion simply  was that the latent prints
which  were  there  were  of  no  value.

Latona  then  processed  the  complete  weapon  but
developed  no  identifiable  prints.  He  stated  that
the  poor  quality  of  the  wood  and  the  metal
would  cause  the  rifle  to  absorb  moisture  from
the  skin,  thereby  making  a  clear  print  unlikely.

On  November  22,  however,  before  surren-
dering possession  of  the  rifle  to  the  FBI  Labora-
tory, Lieutenant  Day  of  the  Dallas  Police  De-
partment had  "lifted"  a  palmprint  from  the
underside  of  the  gun  barrel  "near  the  firing  end
of  the  barrel  about  3  inches  under  the  wood-
stock  when  I  took  the  Woodstock  loose."  "Lift-
ing" a  print  involves  the  use  of  adhesive  mate-
rial to  remove  the  fingerprint  powder  which
adheres  to  the  original  print.  In  this  way  the
powdered  impression  is  actually  removed  from
the  object.  The  lifting  had  been  so  complete  in
this  case  that  there  was  no  trace  of  the  print  on
the  rifle  itself  when  it  was  examined  by  Latona.
Nor  was  there  any  indication  that  the  lift  had
been  performed.  Day,  on  the  other  hand,  be-
lieved that  sufficient  traces  of  the  print  had  been
left  on  the  rifle  barrel,  because  he  did  not  re-
lease the  lifted  print  until  November  26,  when
he  received  instructions  to  send  "everything
that  we  had"  to  the  FBI.  The  print  arrived  in
the  FBI  Laboratory  in  Washington  on  Novem-
ber 29,  mounted  on  a  card  on  which  Lieutenant
Day  had  written  the  words  "off  underside  gun
barrel  near  end  of  foregrip  C2766."  The  print's
positive  identity  as  having  been  lifted  from  the
rifle  was  confirmed  by  FBI  Laboratory  tests
which  estabUshed  that  the  adhesive  material
bearing  the  print  also  bore  impressions  of  the
same  irregularities  that  appeared  on  the  barrel
of  the  rifle.

Latona  testified  that  this  palmprint  was  the
right  pahnprint  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  At  the
request  of  the  Commission,  Arthur  Mandella,
fingerprint  expert  with  the  New  York  City
Police  Department,  conducted  an  independent
examination  and  also  determined  that  this  was
the  right  palmprint  of  Oswald.  Latona's  findings
were  also  confirmed  by  Ronald  G.  Wittmus,
another  FBI  fingerprint  expert.  In  the  opinion
of  these  experts,  it  was  not  possible  to  estimate
the  time  which  elapsed  between  the  placing  of
the  print  on  the  rifle  and  the  date  of  the  lift.

Experts  testifying  before  the  Commission
agreed  that  palmprints  are  as  unique  as  finger-
prints for  purposes  of  establishing  identifica-
tion. Oswald's  palmprint  on  the  underside  of
the  barrel  demonstrates  that  he  handled  the
rifle  when  it  was  disassembled.  A  palmprint
could  not  be  placed  on  this  portion  of  the  rifle,
when  assembled,  because  the  wooden  foregrip
covers  the  barrel  at  this  point.  The  print  is  addi-
tional proof  that  the  rifle  was  in  Oswald's
possession.

Fibers  on  Rifle

In  a  crevice  between  the  butt  plate  of  the  rifle


49


and  the  wooden  stock  was  a  tuft  of  several  cot-
ton fibers  of  dark  blue,  gray-black,  and  orange-
yellow  shades.  On  November  23,  1963,  these
fibers  were  examined  by  Paul  M.  Stombaugh,  a
special  agent  assigned  to  the  Hair  and  Fiber
Unit  of  the  FBI  Laboratory.  He  compared  them
with  the  fibers  found  in  the  shirt  which  Oswald
was  wearing  when  arrested  in  the  Texas  Thea-
tre. This  shirt  was  also  composed  of  dark  blue,
gray-black  and  orange-yellow  fibers.  Stombaugh
testified  that  the  colors,  shades,  and  twist  of  the
fibers  found  in  the  tuft  on  the  rifle  matched
those  in  Oswald's  shirt.  (See  app.  X.)

Stombaugh  explained  in  his  testimony  that  in
fiber  analysis,  as  distinct  from  fingerprint  or
firearms  identification,  it  is  not  possible  to  state
with  scientific  certainty  that  a  particular  small
group  of  fibers  come  from  a  certain  piece  of
clotlung  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others  because
there  are  not  enough  microscopic  characteristics
present  in  fibers.  Judgments  as  to  probability
will  depend  on  the  number  and  types  of  matches.
He  concluded,  "There  is  no  doubt  in  my  mind
that  these  fibers  could  have  come  from  this
shirt.  There  is  no  way,  however,  to  eliminate  the
possibility  of  the  fibers  having  come  from  an-
other identical  shirt."

Having  considered  the  probabilities  as  ex-
plained in  Stombaugh's  testimony,  the  Com-
mission has  concluded  that  the  fibers  in  the  tuft
on  the  rifle  most  probably  came  from  the  shirt
worn  by  Oswald  when  he  was  arrested,  and
that  this  was  the  same  shirt  which  Oswald  wore
on  the  morning  of  the  assassination.  Marina
Oswald  testified  that  she  thought  her  husband
wore  this  shirt  to  work  on  that  day.  The  testi-
mony of  those  who  saw  Him  after  the  assassi-
nation was  inconclusive  about  the  color  of
Oswald's  shirt,  but  Mary  Bledsoe,  a  former
landlady  of  Oswald,  saw  him  on  a  bus  approxi-
mately 10  minutes  after  the  assassination  and
identified  the  shirt  as  being  the  one  worn  by
Oswald  primarily  because  of  a  distinctive  hole
in  the  shirt's  right  elbow.  Moreover,  the  bus
transfer  which  he  obtained  as  he  left  the  bus
was  still  in  the  pocket  when  he  was  arrested.
Although  Oswald  returned  to  his  roominghouse
after  the  assassination  and  when  questioned  by
the  police,  claimed  to  have  changed  his  shirt,
the  evidence  indicates  that  he  continued  wear-
ing the  same  shirt  which  he  was  wearing  all
morning  and  which  he  was  still  wearing  when
arrested.

In  light  of  these  findings  the  Commission
evaluated  the  additional  testimony  of  Stom-
baugh that  the  fibers  were  caught  in  the  crevice
of  the  rifle's  butt  plate  "in  the  recent  past."
Although  Stombaugh  was  unable  to  estimate  the
period  of  time  the  fibers  were  on  the  rifle  he
said  that  the  fibers  "were  clean,  they  had  good
color  to  them,  there  was  no  grease  on  them  and
they  were  not  fragmented.  They  looked  as  if
they  had  just  been  picked  up."  The  relative
freshness  of  the  fibers  is  strong  evidence  that
they  were  caught  on  the  rifle  on  the  morning  of


the  assassination  or  during  the  preceding  eve-
ning. For  10  days  prior  to  the  eve  of  the  assas-
sination Oswald  had  not  been  present  at  Ruth
Paine's  house  in  Irving,  Tex.,  where  the  rifle
was  kept.  Moreover,  the  Commission  foimd  no
reUable  evidence  that  Oswald  used  the  rifle  at
any  time  between  September  23,  when  it  was
transported  from  New  Orleans,  and  November
22,  the  day  of  the  assassination.  The  fact  that
on  the  morning  of  the  assassination  Oswald  was
wearing  the  shirt  from  which  these  relatively
fresh  fibers  most  probably  originated,  provides
some  evidence  that  they  were  placed  on  the
rifle  that  day  since  there  was  Imiited,  if  any,
opportunity  for  Oswald  to  handle  the  weapon
during  the  2  months  prior  to  November  22.

On  the  other  hand  Stombaugh  pointed  out
that  fibers  might  retain  their  freshness  if  the
rifle  had  been  "put  aside"  after  catching  the
fibers.  The  rifle  used  in  the  assassination  proba-
bly had  been  wrapped  in  a  blanket  for  about  8
weeks  prior  to  November  22.  Because  the  rela-
tive freshness  of  these  fibers  might  be  explained
by  the  continuous  storage  of  the  rifle  in  the
blanket,  the  Commission  was  unable  to  reach
any  firm  conclusion  as  to  when  the  fibers  were
caught  in  the  rifle.  The  Commission  was  able  to
conclude,  however,  that  the  fibers  most  proba-
bly came  from  Oswald's  shirt.  This  adds  to  the
conviction  of  the  Commission  that  Oswald
owned  and  handled  the  weapon  used  in  the
assassination.

Photograph  of  Oswald  With  Rifle

During  the  period  from  March  2,  1963,  to
April  24,  1963,  the  Oswalds  lived  on  Neely
Street  in  Dallas  in  a  rented  house  which  had  a
small  back  yard.  One  Sunday,  while  his  wife
was  hanging  diapers,  Oswald  asked  her  to  take
a  picture  of  him  holding  a  rifle,  a  pistol  and
issues  of  two  newspapers  later  identified  as  the
Worker  and  the  Militant.  Two  pictures  were
taken.  The  Commission  has  concluded  that  the
rifle  shown  in  these  pictures  is  the  same  rifle
which  was  found  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  De-
pository Building  on  November  22,  1963.

One  of  these  pictures.  Exhibit  No.  133-A,
shows  most  of  the  rifle's  configuration.  Special
Agent  Lyndal  L.  Shaneyfelt,  a  photography  ex-
pert with  the  FBI,  photographed  the  rifle  used
in  the  assassination,  attempting  to  duplicate  the
position  of  the  rifle  and  the  fighting  in  Exhibit
No.  133-A.  After  comparing  the  rifle  in  the
simulated  photograph  with  the  rifle  in  Exhibit
No.  133-A,  Shaneyfelt  testified,  "I  found  it  to
be  the  same  general  configuration.  AU  appear-
ances were  the  same."  He  found  "one  notch  in
the  stock  at  this  point  that  appears  very  faintly
in  the  photograph."  He  stated,  however,  that
while  he  "found  no  differences"  between  the
rifles  in  the  two  photographs,  he  could  not  make
a  "positive  identification  to  the  exclusion  of  all
other  rifles  of  the  same  general  configuration."

The  authenticity  of  these  pictures  has  been
established  by  expert  testimony  which  links  the


50


second  picture,  Commission  Exhibit  No.  133-B,
to  Oswald's  Imperial  Reflex  camera,  with  which
Marina  Oswald  testified  she  took  the  pictures.
The  negative  of  that  picture,  Commission  Ex-
hibit No.  133-B,  was  found  among  Oswald's
possessions.  Using  a  recognized  technique  of
determining  whether  a  picture  was  taken  with
a  particular  camera,  Shaneyfelt  compared  this
negative  with  a  negative  which  he  made  by
taking  a  new  picture  with  Oswald's  camera.  He
concluded  that  the  negative  of  Exhibit  No.
133-B  was  exposed  in  Oswald's  Imperial  Reflex
camera  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  cameras.
He  could  not  test  Exhibit  No.  133-A  in  the
same  way  because  the  negative  was  never  re-
covered. Both  pictures,  however,  have  identical
backgrounds  and  lighting  and,  judging  from
the  shadows,  were  taken  at  the  same  angle.  They
are  photographs  of  the  same  scene.  Since  Ex-
hibit No.  133-B  was  taken  with  Oswald's  cam-
era, it  is  reasonably  certain  that  Exhibit  No.
133-A  was  taken  by  the  same  camera  at  the
same  time,  as  Marina  Oswald  testified.  More-
over, Shaneyfelt  testified  that  in  his  opinion  the
photographs  were  not  composites  of  two  dif-
ferent photographs  and  that  Oswald's  face  had
not  been  superimposed  on  another  body.

One  of  the  photographs  taken  by  Marina
Oswald  was  widely  published  in  newspapers
and  magazines,  and  in  many  instances  die  de-
tails of  these  pictures  differed  from  the  original,
and  even  from  each  other,  particularly  as  to
the  configuration  of  the  rifle.  The  Commission
sought  to  determine  whether  these  photographs
were  retouched  prior  to  publication.  Shaneyfelt
testified  that  the  published  photographs  ap-
peared to  be  based  on  a  copy  of  tiie  original
which  the  publications  had  each  retouched  dif-
ferently. Several  of  the  publications  furnished
the  Commission  with  the  prints  they  had  used,
or  described  by  correspondence  the  retouching
they  had  done.  This  information  enabled  the
Commission  to  conclude  that  the  published  pic-
tures were  the  same  as  the  original  except  for
retouching  done  by  these  publications,  appar-
ently for  the  purpose  of  clarifying  the  lines  of
the  rifle  and  other  details  in  the  picture.

The  dates  surrounding  the  taking  of  this  pic-
ture and  the  purchase  of  the  rifle  reinforce  the
belief  that  the  rifle  in  the  photograph  is  the  rifle
which  Oswald  bought  from  Klein's.  The  rifle
was  shipped  from  Klein's  in  Chicago  on  March
20,  1963,  at  a  time  when  the  Oswalds  were  liv-
ing on  Neely  Street.  From  an  examination  of
one  of  the  photographs,  the  Commission  deter-
mined the  dates  of  the  issues  of  the  MUitant  and
the  Worker  which  Oswald  was  holding  in  his
hand.  By  checking  the  actual  mailing  dates  of
these  issues  and  the  time  it  usually  takes  to  effect
delivery  to  Dallas,  it  was  established  that  the
photographs  must  have  been  taken  sometime
after  March  27.  Marina  Oswald  testified  that
the  photographs  were  taken  on  a  Sunday  about
2  weeks  before  the  attempted  shooting  of  Maj.
Gen.  Edwin  A.  Walker  on  April  10,  1963.  By


Sunday,  March  31,  1963,  10  days  prior  to  the
Walker  attempt,  Oswald  had  undoubtedly  re-
ceived the  rifle  shipped  from  Chicago  on  March
20,  the  revolver  shipped  from  Los  Angeles  on
the  same  date,  and  the  two  newspapers  which
he  was  holding  in  the  picture.

Rifle  Among  Oswald's  Possessions

Marina  Oswald  testified  that  the  rifle  found
on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Depository  Building  was
the  "fateful  rifle  of  Lee  Oswald."  Moreover,  it
was  the  only  rifle  owned  by  her  husband  follow-
ing his  return  from  the  Soviet  Union  in  June
1962.  It  had  been  purchased  in  March  1963,
and  taken  to  New  Orleans  where  Marina  Os-
wald saw  it  in  their  rented  apartment  during  the
summer  of  1963.  It  appears  from  his  wife's
testimony  that  Oswald  may  have  sat  on  the
screened-in  porch  at  night  practicing  with  the
rifle  by  looking  through  the  telescopic  sight  and
operating  the  bolt.  In  September  1963,  Oswald
loaded  their  possessions  into  a  station  wagon
owned  by  Ruth  Paine,  who  had  invited  Marina
Oswald  and  the  baby  to  live  at  her  home  in
Irving,  Tex.  Marina  Oswald  has  stated  that  the
rifle  was  among  these  possessions,  although  Ruth
Paine  testified  that  she  was  not  aware  of  it.

From  September  24,  1963,  when  Marina
Oswald  arrived  in  Irving  from  New  Orleans,
until  the  morning  of  the  assassination,  the  rifle
was,  according  to  the  evidence,  stored  in  a
green  and  brown  blanket  in  the  Paines'  garage
among  the  Oswalds'  other  possessions.  About
1  week  after  the  return  from  New  Orleans,
Marina  Oswald  was  looking  in  the  garage  for
parts  to  the  baby's  crib  and  thought  that  the
parts  might  be  in  the  blanket.  When  she  started
to  open  the  blanket,  she  saw  the  stock  of  the
rifle.  Ruth  and  Michael  Paine  both  noticed  the
rolled-up  blanket  in  the  garage  during  the  time
that  Marina  Oswald  was  living  in  their  home.
On  several  occasions,  Michael  Paine  moved  the
blanket  in  the  garage.  He  thought  it  contained
tent  poles,  or  possibly  other  camping  equip-
ment such  as  a  folding  shovel.  When  he  ap-
peared before  the  Commission,  Michael  Paine
lifted  the  blanket  with  the  rifle  wrapped  inside
and  testified  that  it  appeared  to  be  the  same
approximate  weight  and  shape  as  the  package
in  his  garage.

About  3  hours  after  the  assassination,  a  de-
tective and  deputy  sheriff  saw  the  blanket-roll,
tied  with  a  string,  lying  on  the  floor  of  the
Paines'  garage.  Each  man  testified  that  he
thought  he  could  detect  the  outline  of  a  rifle  in
the  blanket,  even  though  the  blanket  was  empty.
Paul  M.  Stombaugh,  of  the  FBI  Laboratory,
examined  the  blanket  and  discovered  a  bulge
approximately  10  inches  long  midway  in  the
blanket.  This  bulge  was  apparently  caused  by  a
hard  protruding  object  which  had  stretched  the
blanket's  fibers.  It  could  have  been  caused  by
the  telescopic  sight  of  the  rifle  which  was  ap-
proximately 1 1  inches  long.


51


Conclusion

Having  reviewed  the  evidence  that  (1)  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  purchased  the  rifle  used  in  the
assassination,  (2)  Oswald's  palmprint  was  on
the  rifle  in  a  position  which  shows  that  he  had
handled  it  while  it  was  disassembled,  (3)  fibers
found  on  the  rifle  most  probably  came  from
the  shirt  Oswald  was  wearing  on  the  day  of  the
assassination,  (4)  a  photograph  taken  in  the
yard  of  Oswald's  apartment  showed  him  hold-
ing this  rifle,  and  (5)  the  rifle  was  kept  among
Oswald's  possessions  from  the  time  of  its  pur-
chase until  the  day  of  the  assassination,  the
Commission  concluded  that  the  rifle  used  to
assassinate  President  Kennedy  and  wound
Governor  Connally  was  owned  and  possessed
by  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.


THE  RIFLE  IN  THE  BUILDING

The  Commission  has  evaluated  the  evidence
tending  to  show  how  Lee  Harvey  Oswald's
Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle,  serial  number  C2766,
was  brought  into  the  Depository  Building,  where
it  was  found  on  the  sixth  floor  shortly  after  the
assassination.  In  this  connection  the  Commis-
sion considered  (1)  the  circumstances  sur-
rounding Oswald's  return  to  Irving,  Tex.,  on
Thursday,  November  21,  1963,  (2)  the  disap-
pearance of  the  rifle  from  its  normal  place  of
storage,  (3)  Oswald's  arrival  at  the  Depository
Building  on  November  22,  carrying  a  long  and
bulky  brown  paper  package,  (4)  the  presence
of  a  long  handmade  brown  paper  bag  near  the
point  from  which  the  shots  were  fired,  and  (5)
the  palmprint,  fiber,  and  paper  analyses  linking
Oswald  and  the  assassination  weapon  to  this
bag.

The  Curtain  Rod  Story

During  October  and  November  of  1963,  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  lived  in  a  roominghouse  in
DaUas  while  his  wife  and  children  lived  in
Irving,  at  the  home  of  Ruth  Paine,  approxi-
mately 15  miles  from  Oswald's  place  of  work
at  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository.  Oswald
traveled  between  Dallas  and  Irving  on  week-
ends in  a  car  driven  by  a  neighbor  of  the
Paines,  Buell  Wesley  Frazier,  who  also  worked
at  the  Depository.  Oswald  generally  would  go
to  Irving  on  Friday  afternoon  and  return  to
Dallas  Monday  morning.  According  to  the  testi-
mony of  Frazier,  Marina  Oswald,  and  Ruth
Paine,  it  appears  that  Oswald  never  returned  to
Irving  in  midweek  prior  to  November  21,  1963,
except  on  Monday,  October  21,  when  he  visited
his  wife  in  the  hospital  after  the  birth  of  their
second  child.

During  the  morning  of  November  21,  Oswald
asked  Frazier  whether  he  could  ride  home  with
him  that  afternoon.  Frazier,  surprised,  asked
him  why  he  was  going  to  Irving  on  Thursday
night  rather  than  Friday.  Oswald  replied,  "I'm


going  home  to  get  some  curtain  rods  *  *  *
[to]  put  in  an  apartment."  The  two  men  left
work  at  4:40  p.m.  and  drove  to  Irving.  There
was  little  conversation  between  them  on  the
way  home.  Mrs.  Linnie  Mae  Randle,  Frazier's
sister,  commented  to  her  brother  about  Oswald's
unusual  midweek  return  to  Irving.  Frazier  told
her  that  Oswald  had  come  home  to  get  curtain
rods.

It  would  appear,  however,  that  obtaining  cur-
tain rods  was  not  the  purpose  of  Oswald's  trip
to  Irving  on  November  21.  Mrs.  A.  C.  Johnson,
his  landlady,  testified  that  Oswald's  room  at
1026  North  Beckley  Avenue,  had  curtains  and
curtain  rods,  and  that  Oswald  had  never  dis-
cussed the  subject  with  her.  In  the  Paines'  ga-
rage, along  with  many  other  objects  of  a  house-
hold character,  there  were  two  flat  Ughtweight
curtain  rods  belonging  to  Ruth  Paine  but  they
were  still  there  on  Friday  afternoon  after  Os-
wald's arrest.  Oswald  never  asked  Mrs.  Paine
about  the  use  of  curtain  rods,  and  Marina
Oswald  testified  that  Oswald  did  not  say  any-
thing about  curtain  rods  on  the  day  before  the
assassination.  No  curtain  rods  were  known  to
have  been  discovered  in  the  Depository  Build-
ing after  the  assassination.  In  deciding  whether
Oswald  carried  a  rifle  to  work  in  a  long  paper
bag  on  November  22,  the  Commission  gave
weight  to  the  fact  that  Oswald  gave  a  false
reason  for  returning  home  on  November  21,
and  one  which  provided  an  excuse  for  the  carry-
ing of  a  bulky  package  the  following  morning.

The  Missing  Rifle

Before  dinner  on  November  21,  Oswald
played  on  the  lavm  of  the  Paines'  home  with  his
daughter  June.  After  dinner  Ruth  Paine  and
Marina  Oswald  were  busy  cleaning  house  and
preparing  their  children  for  bed.  Between  the
hours  of  8  and  9  p.m.  they  were  occupied  with
the  children  in  the  bedrooms  located  at  the  ex-
treme east  end  of  the  house.  On  the  west  end
of  the  house  is  the  attached  garage,  which  can
be  reached  from  the  kitchen  or  from  the  out-
side. In  the  garage  were  the  personal  belong-
ings of  the  Oswald  family  including,  as  the  evi-
dence has  shown,  the  rifle  wrapped  in  the  old
brown  and  green  blanket.

At  approximately  9  p.m.,  after  the  children
had  been  put  to  bed,  Mrs.  Paine,  according  to
her  testimony  before  the  Commission,  'Vent
out  to  the  garage  to  paint  some  children's
blocks,  and  worked  in  tiie  garage  for  half  an
hour  or  so.  I  noticed  when  I  went  out  that  the
light  was  on."  Mrs.  Paine  was  certain  that  she
had  not  left  the  light  on  in  the  garage  after  din-
ner. According  to  Mrs.  Paine,  Oswald  had  gone
to  bed  by  9  p.m.;  Marina  Oswald  testified  that  it
was  between  9  and  10  p.m.  Neither  Marina
Oswald  nor  Ruth  Paine  saw  Oswald  in  the  ga-
rage. The  period  between  8  and  9  p.m.,  how-
ever, provided  ample  opportimity  for  Oswald
to  prepare  the  rifle  for  his  departure  the  next
morning.  Only  if  disassembled  could  the  rifle


52


fit  into  the  paper  bag  found  near  the  window
from  which  the  shots  were  fired.  A  firearms
expert  with  the  FBI  assembled  the  rifle  in  6
minutes  using  a  10-cent  coin  as  a  tool,  and  he
could  disassemble  it  more  rapidly.  While  the
rifle  may  have  already  been  disassembled  when
Oswald  arrived  home  on  Thursday,  he  had
ample  time  that  evening  to  disassemble  the  rifle
and  insert  it  into  the  paper  bag.

On  the  day  of  the  assassination,  Marina
Oswald  was  watching  television  when  she
learned  of  the  shooting.  A  short  time  later  Mrs.
Paine  told  her  that  someone  had  shot  the  presi-
dent "from  the  building  in  which  Lee  is  work-
ing." Marina  Oswald  testified  that  at  that  time
"My  heart  dropped.  I  then  went  to  the  garage
to  see  whether  the  rifle  was  there  and  I  saw  that
the  blanket  was  still  there  and  I  said  'Thank
God.'  "  She  did  not  unroll  the  blanket.  She  saw
that  it  was  in  its  usual  position  and  it  appeared
to  her  to  have  something  inside.

Soon  afterward,  at  about  3  p.m.,  police  oflfi-
cers  arrived  and  searched  the  house.  Mrs.  Paine
pointed  out  that  most  of  the  Oswalds'  posses-
sions were  in  the  garage.  With  Ruth  Paine  act-
ing as  an  interpreter,  Detective  Rose  asked
Marina  whether  her  husband  had  a  rifle.  Mrs.
Paine,  who  had  no  knowledge  of  the  rifle,  first
said  "No,"  but  when  the  question  was  trans-
lated, Marina  Oswald  replied  "Yes."  She
pointed  to  the  blanket  which  was  on  the  floor
very  close  to  where  Ruth  Paine  was  standing.
Mrs.  Paine  testified:

As  she  [Marina]  told  me  about  it  I  stepped
onto  the  blanket  roll.  *  *  *  And  she  indi-
cated to  me  that  she  had  peered  into  this
roll  and  saw  a  portion  of  what  she  took  to
be  a  gun  she  knew  her  husband  to  have,  a
rifle.  And  I  then  translated  this  to  the  officers
that  she  knew  that  her  husband  had  a  gun
that  he  had  stored  in  here.  *  *  *  i  then
stepped  off  of  it  and  the  officer  picked  it  up
in  the  middle  and  it  bent  so.  *  *  *

Mrs.  Paine  had  the  actual  blanket  before  her
as  she  testified  and  she  indicated  that  the
blanket  hung  limp  in  the  officer's  hand.  Marina
Oswald  testified  that  this  was  her  first  knowl-
edge that  the  rifle  was  not  in  its  accustomed
place.

The  Long  and  Bulky  Package

On  the  morning  of  November  22,  1963,  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  left  the  Paine  house  in  Irving  at
approximately  7:15  a.m.,  while  Marina  Oswald
was  still  in  bed.  Neither  she  nor  Mrs.  Paine  saw
him  leave  the  house.  About  half-a-block  away
from  the  Paine  house  was  the  residence  of  Mrs.
Linnie  Mae  Randle,  the  sister  of  the  man  with
whom  Oswald  drove  to  work — Buell  Wesley
Frazier.  Mrs.  Randle  stated  that  on  the  morn-
ing of  November  22,  while  her  brother  was  eat-
ing breakfast,  she  looked  out  the  breakfast-
room  window  and  saw  Oswald  cross  the  street


and  walk  toward  the  driveway  where  her
brother  parked  his  car  near  the  carport.  He
carried  a  "heavy  brown  bag."  Oswald  gripped
the  bag  in  his  right  hand  near  the  top.  "It  ta-
pered Uke  this  as  he  hugged  it  in  his  hand.  It
was  *  *  *  more  bulky  toward  the  bottom"
than  toward  the  top.  She  then  opened  the
kitchen  door  and  saw  Oswald  open  the  right
rear  door  of  her  brother's  car  and  place  the
package  in  the  back  of  the  car.  Mrs.  Randle
estimated  that  the  package  was  approximately
28  inches  long  and  about  8  inches  wide.  She
thought  that  its  color  was  similar  to  that  of  the
bag  found  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  School  Book
Depository  after  the  assassination.

Frazier  met  Oswald  at  the  kitchen  door  and
together  they  walked  to  the  car.  After  entering
the  car,  Frazier  glanced  over  his  shoulder  and
noticed  a  brown  paper  package  on  the  back
seat.  He  asked,  "What's  the  package,  Lee?"
Oswald  repUed,  "curtain  rods."  Frazier  told  the
Commission  "*  *  *  the  main  reason  he  was
going  over  there  that  Thursday  afternoon  when
he  was  to  bring  back  some  curtain  rods,  so  I
didn't  think  any  more  about  it  when  he  told  me
that."  Frazier  estimated  that  the  bag  was  2  feet
long  "give  and  take  a  few  inches,"  and  about
5  or  6  inches  wide.  As  they  sat  in  the  car,  Frazier
asked  Oswald  where  his  lunch  was,  and  Oswald
replied  that  he  was  going  to  buy  his  lunch  that
day.  Frazier  testified  that  Oswald  carried  no
lunch  bag  that  day.  "When  he  rode  with  me,  I
say  he  always  brought  lunch  except  that  one
day  on  November  22  he  didn't  bring  his  lunch
that  day."

Frazier  parked  the  car  in  the  company  park-
ing lot  about  2  blocks  north  of  the  Depository
Building.  Oswald  left  the  car  first,  picked  up
the  brown  paper  bag,  and  proceeded  toward
the  building  ahead  of  Frazier.  Frazier  walked
behind  and  as  they  crossed  the  railroad  tracks
he  watched  the  switching  of  the  cars.  Frazier
recalled  that  one  end  of  the  package  was  under
Oswald's  armpit  and  the  lower  part  was  held
with  his  right  hand  so  that  it  was  carried  straight
and  parallel  to  his  body.  When  Oswald  entered
the  rear  door  of  the  Depository  Building,  he
was  about  50  feet  ahead  of  Frazier.  It  was  the
first  time  that  Oswald  had  not  walked  with
Frazier  from  the  parking  lot  to  the  building
entrance.  When  Frazier  entered  the  building,
he  did  not  see  Oswald,  One  employee.  Jack
Dougherty,  believed  that  he  saw  Oswald  com-
ing to  work,  but  he  does  not  remember  that
Oswald  had  anything  in  his  hands  as  he  entered
the  door.  No  other  employee  has  been  found
who  saw  Oswald  enter  that  morning.

In  deciding  whether  Oswald  carried  the  assas-
sination weapon  in  the  bag  which  Frazier  and
Mrs.  Randle  saw,  the  Commission  has  careftilly
considered  the  testimony  of  these  two  witnesses
with  regard  to  the  length  of  the  bag.  Frazier
and  Mrs.  Randle  testified  that  the  bag  which
Oswald  was  carrying  was  approximately  27  or
28  inches  long,  whereas  the  wooden  stock  of


53


the  rifle,  which  is  its  largest  component,  meas-
ured 34.8  inches.  The  bag  found  on  the  sixth
floor  was  38  inches  long.  When  Frazier  ap-
peared before  the  Commission  and  was  asked
to  demonstrate  how  Oswald  carried  the  package,
he  said,  "Like  I  said,  I  remember  that  I  didn't
look  at  the  package  very  much  *  *  *  but
when  I  did  look  at  it  he  did  have  his  hands  on
the  package  like  that,"  and  at  this  point  Frazier
placed  the  upper  part  of  the  package  under  his
armpit  and  attempted  to  cup  his  right  hand  be-
neath the  bottom  of  the  bag.  The  disassembled
rifle  was  too  long  to  be  carried  in  this  manner.
Similarly,  when  the  butt  of  the  rifle  was  placed
in  Frazier's  hand,  it  extended  above  his  shoulder
to  ear  level.  Moreover,  in  an  interview  on  De-
cember 1,  1963,  with  agents  of  the  FBI,  Frazier
had  marked  the  point  on  the  back  seat  of  his
car  which  he  believed  was  where  the  bag
reached  when  it  was  laid  on  the  seat  with  one
edge  against  the  door.  The  distance  between  the
point  on  the  seat  and  the  door  was  27  inches.

Mrs.  Randle  said,  when  shown  the  paper  bag,
that  the  bag  she  saw  Oswald  carrying  "wasn't
that  long,  I  mean  it  was  folded  down  at  the  top
as  I  told  you.  It  definitely  wasn't  that  long."  And
she  folded  the  bag  to  a  length  of  about  28i
inches.  Frazier  doubted  whether  the  bag  that
Oswald  carried  was  as  wide  as  the  bag  foimd
on  the  sixth  floor,  although  Mrs.  Randle  testi-
fied that  the  width  was  approximately  the  same.

The  Commission  has  weighed  the  visual  recol-
lection of  Frazier  and  Mrs.  Randle  against  the
evidence  here  presented  that  the  bag  Oswald
carried  contained  the  assassination  weapon  and
has  concluded  that  Frazier  and  Randle  are  mis-
taken as  to  the  length  of  the  bag.  Mrs.  Randle
saw  the  bag  fleetingly  and  her  first  remembrance
is  that  it  was  held  in  Oswald's  right  hand  "and
it  almost  touched  the  ground  as  he  carried  it."
Frazier's  view  of  the  bag  was  from  the  rear.  He
continually  advised  that  he  was  not  paying  close
attention.  For  example,  he  said,

*  *  *  I  didn't  pay  too  much  attention  the
way  he  was  walking  because  I  was  walking
along  there  looking  at  the  railroad  cars  and
watching  the  men  on  the  diesel  switch  them
cars  and  I  didn't  pay  too  much  attention  on
how  he  carried  the  package  at  aU.

Frazier  could  easily  have  been  mistaken  when
he  stated  that  Oswald  held  the  bottom  of  the
bag  cupped  in  his  hand  with  the  upper  end
tucked  into  his  armpit.

Location  of  Bag

A  handmade  bag  of  wrapping  paper  and  tape
was  found  in  the  southeast  comer  of  the  sixth
floor  alongside  the  window  from  which  the
shots  were  fired.  It  was  not  a  standard  type  bag
which  could  be  obtained  in  a  store  and  it  was
presumably  made  for  a  particular  purpose.  It
was  the  appropriate  size  to  contain,  in  disassem-
bled form,  Oswald's  Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle.


serial  No.  C2766,  which  was  also  found  on  the
sixth  floor.  Three  cartons  had  been  placed  at
the  window  apparently  to  act  as  a  gun  rest  and
a  fourth  carton  was  placed  behind  those  at  the
window.  A  person  seated  on  the  fourth  carton
could  assemble  the  rifle  without  being  seen  from
the  rest  of  the  sixth  floor  because  the  cartons
stacked  around  the  southeast  comer  would
shield  him.  The  presence  of  the  bag  in  this  cor-
ner is  cogent  evidence  that  it  was  used  as  the
container  for  the  rifle.  At  the  time  the  bag  was
found,  Lieutenant  Day  of  the  Dallas  police
wrote  on  it,  "Found  next  to  the  sixth  floor
window  gun  fired  from.  May  have  been  used  to
carry  gun.  Lt.  J.  C.  Day."

Scientific  Evidence  Linking  Rifle  and
Oswald  to  Paper  Bag

Oswald's  fingerprint  and  palmprint  found  on
bag. — Using  a  standard  chemical  method  in-
volving silver  nitrates  the  FBI  Laboratory  de-
veloped a  latent  palmprint  and  latent  fingerprint
on  the  bag.  (See  app.  X)  Sebastian  F.  La-
tona,  supervisor  of  the  FBI's  Latent  Finger-
print Section,  identified  these  prints  as  the  left
index  fingerprint  and  right  palmprint  of  Lee
Harvey  Oswald.  The  portion  of  the  palm  which
was  identified  was  the  heel  of  the  right  palm,
i.e.,  the  area  near  the  wrist,  on  the  little  finger
side.  These  prints  were  examined  independently
by  Ronald  G.  Wittmus  of  the  FBI,  and  by
Arthur  Mandella,  a  fingerprint  expert  with  the
New  York  City  Police  Department.  Both  con-
cluded that  the  prints  were  the  right  palm  and
left  index  finger  of  Lee  Oswald.  No  other  identi-
fiable prints  were  foimd  on  the  bag.

Oswald's  palmprint  on  the  bottom  of  the
paper  bag  indicated,  of  course,  that  he  had
handled  the  bag.  Furthermore,  it  was  consistent
with  the  bag  having  contained  a  heavy  or  bulky
object  when  he  handled  it  since  a  Ught  object  is
usuaUy  held  by  the  fingers.  The  palmprint  was
found  on  the  closed  end  of  the  bag.  It  was  taken
from  Oswald's  right  hand,  in  which  he  carried
the  long  package  as  he  walked  from  Frazier's
car  to  the  building.

Materials  used  to  make  bag. — On  the  day  of
the  assassination,  the  Dallas  police  obtained  a
sample  of  wrapping  paper  and  tape  from  the
shipping  room  of  the  Depository  and  forwarded
it  to  the  FBI  Laboratory  in  Washington.  James
C.  Cadigan,  a  questioned-documents  expert  with
the  Bureau,  compared  the  samples  with  the
paper  and  tape  in  the  actual  bag.  He  testified,
"In  aU  of  the  observations  and  physical  tests
that  I  made  I  found  *  *  *  the  bag  *  *  *
and  the  paper  sample  *  *  *  were  the  same."

Among  other  tests,  the  paper  and  tape  were
submitted  to  fiber  analysis  and  spectrographic
examination.  In  addition  the  tape  was  compared
to  determine  whether  the  sample  tape  and  the
tape  on  the  bag  had  been  taken  from  the  tape
dispensing  machine  at  the  Depository.  When
asked  to  explain  the  similarity  of  characteristics,
Cadigan  stated:


54


Well,  briefly,  it  would  be  the  thickness  of
both  the  paper  and  the  tape,  the  color  under
various  lighting  conditions  of  both  the  paper
and  the  tape,  the  width  of  the  tape,  the
knurled  markings  on  the  surface  of  the
fiber,  the  texture  of  the  fiber,  the  felting
pattern  *  *  *


I  found  that  the  paper  sack  found  on  the
sixth  floor  *  *  *  and  the  sample  ♦  *  *
had  the  same  observable  characteristics  both
under  the  microscope  and  ail  the  visual  tests
that  I  could  conduct.


The  papers  I  also  found  were  similar  in
fiber  composition,  therefore,  in  addition  to
the  visual  characteristics,  microscopic  and
UV  [ultra  violet]  characteristics.

Mr.  Cadigan  concluded  that  the  paper  and  tape
from  the  bag  were  identical  in  all  respects  to
the  sample  paper  and  tape  taken  from  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  shipping  room  on
November  22,  1963.

On  December  1,  1963,  a  replica  bag  was
made  from  materials  found  on  that  date  in  the
shipping  room.  This  was  done  as  an  investiga-
tory aid  since  the  original  bag  had  been  dis-
colored during  various  laboratory  examinations
and  could  not  be  used  for  valid  identification  by
witnesses.  Cadigan  found  that  the  paper  used
to  make  this  replica  sack  had  different  charac-
teristics from  the  paper  in  the  original  bag.
The  science  of  paper  analysis  enabled  him
to  distinguish  between  different  rolls  of  paper
even  though  they  were  produced  by  the  same
manufacturer.

Since  the  Depository  normally  used  approxi-
mately one  roll  of  paper  every  3  working  days,
it  was  not  surprising  that  the  replica  sack  made
on  December  1,  1963,  had  different  charac-
teristics from  both  the  actual  bag  and  the  sample
taken  on  November  22.  On  the  other  hand,
since  two  rolls  could  be  made  from  the  same
batch  of  paper,  one  cannot  estimate  when,  prior
to  November  22,  Oswald  made  the  paper  bag.
However,  the  complete  identity  of  characteris-
tics between  the  paper  and  tape  in  the  bag
found  on  the  sixth  floor  and  the  paper  and
tape  found  in  the  shipping  room  of  the  Deposi-
tory on  November  22  enabled  the  Commission
to  conclude  that  the  bag  was  made  from  these
materials.  The  Depository  shipping  department
was  on  the  first  floor  to  which  Oswald  had
access  in  the  normal  performance  of  his  duties
filling  orders.

Fibers  in  paper  bag  watched  fibers  in  blanket.
— When  Paul  M.  Stombaugh  of  the  FBI  Labo-
ratory examined  the  paper  bag,  he  found,  on
the  inside,  a  single  brown  delustered  viscose
fiber  and  several  light  green  cotton  fibers.  The
blanket  in  which  the  rifle  was  stored  was  com-


posed of  brown  and  green  cotton,  viscose  and
woolen  fibers.

The  single  brown  viscose  fiber  found  in  the
bag  matched  some  of  the  brown  viscose  fibers
from  the  blanket  in  all  observable  characteris-
tics. The  green  cotton  fibers  found  in  the  paper
bag  matched  some  of  the  green  cotton  fibers
in  the  blanket  "in  all  observable  microscopic
characteristics."  Despite  these  matches,  how-
ever, Stombaugh  was  unable  to  render  an  opin-
ion that  the  fibers  which  he  found  in  the  bag
had  probably  come  from  the  blanket,  because
other  types  of  fibers  present  in  the  blanket  were
not  found  in  the  bag.  He  concluded:

All  I  would  say  here  is  that  it  is  possible  that
these  fibers  could  have  come  from  this  blan-
ket, because  this  blanket  is  composed  of
brown  and  green  woolen  fibers,  brown  and
green  delustered  viscose  fibers,  and  brown
and  green  cotton  fibers.  *  *  *  We  found
no  brown  cotton  fibers,  no  green  viscose
fibers,  and  no  woolen  fibers.

So  if  I  found  all  of  these  then  I  would  have
been  able  to  say  these  fibers  probably  had
come  from  this  blanket.  But  since  I  found
so  few,  then  I  would  say  the  possibility  exists,
these  fibers  could  have  come  from  this
blanket.

Stombaugh  confirmed  that  the  rifle  could  have
picked  up  fibers  from  the  blanket  and  trans-
ferred them  to  the  paper  bag.  In  light  of  the
other  evidence  linking  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  the
blanket,  and  the  rifle  to  the  paper  bag  found
on  the  sixth  floor,  the  Commission  considered
Stombaugh's  testimony  of  probative  value  in
deciding  whether  Oswald  carried  the  rifle  into
the  building  in  the  paper  bag.

Conclusion

The  preponderance  of  the  evidence  supports
the  conclusion  that  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  (1)
told  the  curtain  rod  story  to  Frazier  to  explain
both  the  return  to  Irving  on  a  Thursday  and  the
obvious  bulk  of  the  package  which  he  intended
to  bring  to  work  the  next  day;  (2)  took  paper
and  tape  from  the  wrapping  bench  of  the  De-
pository and  fashioned  a  bag  large  enough  to
carry  the  disassembled  rifle;  (3)  removed  the
rifle  from  the  blanket  in  the  Paines'  garage  on
Thursday  evening;  (4)  carried  the  rifle  into  the
Depository  Building,  concealed  in  the  bag;  and,
(5)  left  the  bag  alongside  the  window  from
which  the  shots  were  fired.


OSWALD  AT  WINDOW

Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was  hired  on  October  15,
1963,  by  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  as
on  "order  filler."  He  worked  principally  on  the
first  and  sixth  floors  of  the  building,  gathering
books  listed  on  orders  and  delivering  them  to
the  shipping  room  on  the  first  floor.  He  had


55


ready  access  to  the  sixth  floor,  from  the  south-
east comer  window  of  which  the  shots  were
fired.  The  Commission  evaluated  the  physical
evidence  found  near  the  window  after  the  assas-
sination and  the  testimony  of  eyewitnesses  in
deciding  whether  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was
present  at  this  window  at  the  time  of  the
assassination.

Palmprints  and  Fingerprints  on  Cartons
and  Paper  Bag

Below  the  southeast  comer  window  on  the
sixth  floor  was  a  large  carton  of  books  measiur-
ing  approximately  18  by  12  by  14  inches  which
had  been  moved  from  a  stack  along  the  south
wall.  Atop  this  carton  was  a  smaU  carton  marked
"Rolling  Readers,"  measuring  approximately  13
by  9  by  8  inches.  In  front  of  this  small  carton
and  resting  partially  on  the  windowsill  was
another  small  "Rolling  Readers"  carton.  These
two  small  cartons  had  been  moved  from  a  stack
about  three  aisles  away.  The  boxes  in  the  win-
dow appeared  to  have  been  arranged  as  a  con-
venient gun  rest.  Behind  these  boxes  was  another
carton  placed  on  the  floor  on  which  a  man  sit-
ting could  look  southwesterly  down  Elm  Street
over  the  top  of  the  "Rolling  Readers"  cartons.
Next  to  these  cartons  was  the  handmade  paper
bag,  previously  discussed,  on  which  appeared
the  print  of  the  left  index  finger  and  right  pahn
of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.

The  cartons  were  forwarded  to  the  FBI  in
Washington.  Sebastian  F.  Latona,  supervisor  of
the  Latent  Fingerprint  Section,  testified  that  20
identifiable  fingerprints  and  8  palmprints  were
developed  on  these  cartons.  The  carton  on  the
windowsill  and  the  large  carton  below  the  win-
dow contained  no  prints  which  could  be  identi-
fied as  being  those  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  The
other  "Rolling  Readers"  carton,  however,  con-
tained a  palmprint  and  a  fingerprint  which  were
identified  by  Latona  as  being  the  left  palmprint
and  right  index  fingerprint  of  Lee  Harvey  Os-
wald. (See  app.  X)

The  Commission  has  considered  the  possi-
bility that  the  cartons  might  have  been  moved  in
connection  with  the  work  that  was  being  per-
formed on  the  sixth  floor  on  November  22.
Depository  employees  were  laying  a  new  floor
at  the  west  end  and  transferring  books  from  the
west  to  the  east  end  of  the  building.  The  "Roll-
ing Readers"  cartons,  however,  had  not  been
moved  by  the  floor  layers  and  had  apparently
been  taken  to  the  window  from  their  regular
position  for  some  particular  purpose.  The  "Roll-
ing Readers"  boxes  contained,  instead  of  books,
light  blocks  used  as  reading  aids.  They  could  be
easily  adjusted  and  were  still  solid  enough  to
serve  as  a  gun  rest.

The  box  on  the  floor,  behind  the  three  near
the  window,  had  been  one  of  these  moved  by
the  floor  layers  from  the  west  wall  to  near  the
east  side  of  the  building  in  preparation  for  the
laying  of  the  floor.  During  the  afternoon  of
November  22,  Lieutenant  Day  of  the  Dallas


police  dusted  this  carton  with  powder  and  de-
veloped a  palmprint  on  the  top  edge  of  the
carton  on  the  side  nearest  the  window.  The
position  of  this  palmprint  on  the  carton  was
paraUel  with  the  long  axis  of  the  box,  and  at
right  angles  with  the  short  axis;  the  bottom  of
the  palm  rested  on  the  box.  Someone  sitting  on
the  box  facing  the  window  would  have  his
palm  in  this  position  if  he  placed  his  hand  along-
side his  right  hip.  This  print  which  had  been  cut
out  of  the  box  was  also  forwarded  to  the  FBI
and  Latona  identified  it  as  Oswald's  right  palm-
print. In  Latona's  opinion  "not  too  long"  a  time
had  elapsed  between  the  time  that  the  print  was
placed  on  the  carton  and  the  time  that  it  had
been  developed  by  the  Dallas  police.  Although
Bureau  experiments  had  shown  that  24  hours
was  a  likely  maximum  time,  Latona  stated  that
he  could  only  testify  with  certainty  that  the  print
was  less  than  3  days  old.

The  print,  therefore,  could  have  been  placed
on  the  carton  at  any  time  within  this  period.  The
freshness  of  this  print  could  be  estimated  only
because  the  Dallas  police  developed  it  through
the  use  of  powder.  Since  cartons  absorb  perspi-
ration, powder  can  successfully  develop  a  print
on  such  material  only  within  a  limited  time.
When  the  FBI  in  Washington  received  the  car-
tons, the  remaining  prints,  including  Oswald's
on  the  Rolling  Readers  carton,  were  developed
by  chemical  processes.  The  freshness  of  prints
developed  in  this  manner  cannot  be  estimated,
so  no  conclusions  can  be  drawn  as  to  whether
these  remaining  prints  preceded  or  followed  the
print  developed  in  Dallas  by  powder.  Most  of
the  prints  were  found  to  have  been  placed  on
the  cartons  by  an  FBI  clerk  and  a  Dallas  police
oflBcer  after  the  cartons  had  been  processed
with  powder  by  the  Dallas  Police.  (See  ch.  VI,
app.  X)

In  his  independent  investigation,  Arthur  Man-
della  of  the  New  York  City  Police  Department
reached  the  same  conclusion  as  Latona  that  the
prints  found  on  the  cartons  were  those  of  Lee
Harvey  Oswald.  In  addition,  Mandella  was  of  the
opinion  that  the  print  taken  from  the  carton  on
the  floor  was  probably  made  within  a  day  or  a
day  and  a  half  of  the  examination  on  November
22.  Moreover,  another  expert  with  the  FBI,
Ronald  G.  Wittmus,  conducted  a  separate  ex-
amination and  also  agreed  with  Latona  that  the
prints  were  Oswald's.

In  evaluating  the  significance  of  these  finger-
print and  palmprint  identifications,  the  Com-
mission considered  the  possibility  that  Oswald
handled  these  cartons  as  part  of  his  normal
duties.  Since  other  identifiable  prints  were  de-
veloped on  the  cartons,  the  Commission  re-
quested that  they  be  compared  with  the  prints
of  the  12  warehouse  employees  who,  like  Os-
wald, might  have  handled  the  cartons.  They  were
also  compared  with  the  prints  of  those  law
enforcement  officials  who  might  have  handled
the  cartons.  The  results  of  this  investigation  are
fully  discussed  in  chapter  VI.  Although  a  person


56


could  handle  a  carton  and  not  leave  identifiable
prints,  none  of  these  employees  except  Oswald
left  identifiable  prints  on  the  cartons.  This  find-
ing, in  addition  to  the  freshness  of  one  of  the
prints  and  the  presence  of  Oswald's  prints  on
two  of  the  four  cartons  and  the  paper  bag  led  the
Commission  to  attach  some  probative  value  to
the  fingerprint  and  palmprint  identifications  in
reaching  the  conclusion  that  Oswald  was  at  the
window  from  which  the  shots  were  fired,  al-
though the  prints  do  not  establish  the  exact
time  he  was  there.

Oswald's  Presence  on  Sixth  Floor

Approximately  35  Minutes  Before  the
Assassination

Additional  testimony  linking  Oswald  with  the
point  from  which  the  shots  were  fired  was  pro-
vided by  the  testimony  of  Charles  Givens,  who
was  the  last  known  employee  to  see  Oswald
inside  the  building  prior  to  the  assassination.
During  the  morning  of  November  22,  Givens
was  working  with  the  floor-laying  crew  in  the
southwest  section  of  the  sixth  floor.  At  about
11:45  a.m.  the  floor-laying  crew  used  both
elevators  to  came  down  from  the  sixth  floor.
The  employees  raced  the  elevators  to  the  first
floor.  Givens  saw  Oswald  standing  at  the  gate
on  the  fifth  floor  as  the  elevator  went  by.  Givens
testified  that  after  reaching  the  fij^t  floor,  "I
discovered  I  left  my  cigarettes  in  my  jacket  poc-
ket upstairs,  and  I  took  the  elevator  back  upstairs
to  get  my  jacket  with  my  cigarettes  in  it."  He
saw  Oswald,  a  clipboard  in  hand,  walking  from
the  southeast  comer  of  the  sixth  floor  toward  the
elevator.  Givens  said  to  Oswald,  "Boy  are  you
going  downstairs?  *  *  *  It's  near  lunch  time."
Oswald  said,  "No,  sir.  When  you  get  downstairs,
close  the  gate  to  the  elevator."  Oswald  was
referring  to  the  west  elevator  which  operates  by
pushbutton  and  only  with  the  gate  closed.  Giv-
ens said,  "Okay,"  and  rode  down  in  the  east
elevator.  When  he  reached  the  first  floor,  the
west  elevator — ^the  one  with  the  gate — was  not
there.  Givens  thought  this  was  about  11:55  a.m.
None  of  the  Depository  employees  is  known  to
have  seen  Oswald  again  until  after  the  shooting.

The  significance  of  Givens'  observation  that
Oswald  was  carrying  his  clipboard  became  ap-
parent on  December  2,  1963,  when  an  employee,
Frankie  Kaiser,  found  a  clipboard  hidden  by
book  cartons  in  the  northwest  comer  of  the  sixth
floor  at  the  west  waU  a  few  feet  from  where  the
rifle  had  been  found.  This  clipboard  had  been
made  by  Kaiser  and  had  his  name  on  it.  Kaiser
identified  it  as  the  clipboard  which  Oswald  had
appropriated  from  him  when  Oswald  came  to
work  at  the  Depository,  Three  invoices  on  this
clipboard,  each  dated  November  22,  were  for
Scott-Foresman  books,  located  on  the  first  and
sixth  floors.  Oswald  had  not  filled  any  of  the
three  orders.

Eyewitness  Identification  of  Assassin

Howard  L.  Brennan  was  an  eyewitness  to  the


shooting.  As  indicated  previously  the  Commis-
sion considered  his  testimony  as  probative  in
reaching  the  conclusion  that  the  shots  came  from
the  sixth  floor,  southeast  comer  window  of  the
Depository  Building.  (See  ch.  III.)  Brennan  also
testified  that  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  whom  he
viewed  in  a  police  lineup  on  the  night  of  the
assassination,  was  the  man  he  saw  fire  the  shots
from  the  sixth-floor  window  of  the  Depository
Buildmg.  When  the  shots  were  fired,  Brennan
was  in  an  excellent  position  to  observe  anyone
in  the  window.  He  was  sitting  on  a  concrete
wall  on  the  southwest  comer  of  Elm  and  Hous-
ton Streets,  looking  north  at  the  Depository
Building  which  was  directly  in  front  of  him.
The  window  was  approximately  120  feet  away.

In  the  6-  to  8-minute  period  before  the  motor-
cade arrived,  Brennan  saw  a  man  leave  and
return  to  the  window  "a  couple  of  times."  After
hearing  the  first  shot,  which  he  thought  was  a
motorcycle  backfire,  Brennan  glanced  up  at
the  window.  He  testified  that  "this  man  I  saw
previously  was  aiming  for  his  last  shot  *  *  *
as  it  appeared  to  me  he  was  standing  up  and
resting  against  the  left  window  sill  *  *  *."

Brennan  saw  the  man  fire  the  last  shot  and
disappear  from  the  window.  Within  minutes  of
the  assassination,  Brennan  described  the  man
to  the  police.  This  description  most  probably  led
to  the  radio  alert  sent  to  police  cars  at  approxi-
mately 12:45  p.m.,  which  described  the  suspect
as  white,  slender,  weighing  about  165  pounds,
about  5'10"  tall,  and  in  his  early  thirties.  In  his
swora  statement  to  the  police  later  that  day,
Brennan  described  the  man  in  similar  terms,
except  that  he  gave  the  weight  as  between  165
and  175  pounds  and  the  height  was  omitted.  In
his  testimony  before  the  Commission,  Brennan
described  the  person  he  saw  as  "*  *  *  a  man
in  his  early  thirties,  fair  complexion,  slender,
but  neat,  neat  slender,  possible  5  foot  10  *  *  *
160  to  170  pounds."  Oswald  was  5'9",  slender
and  24  years  old.  When  arrested,  he  gave  his
weight  as  140  pounds.  On  other  occasions  he
gave  weights  of  both  140  and  150  pounds.  The
New  Orleans  police  records  of  his  arrest  in
August  of  1963  show  a  weight  of  136  pounds.
The  autopsy  report  indicated  an  estimated  weight
of  150  pounds.

Brennan's  description  should  also  be  com-
pared with  the  eyewitness  description  broadcast
over  the  Dallas  poUce  radio  at  1 :  22  p.m.  of  the
man  who  shot  Patrolman  J.  D.  Tippit.  The  sus-
pect was  described  as  "a  white  male  about  30,
5'8",  black  hair,  slender.  *  *  *"  At  1:29  p.m.
the  police  radio  reported  that  the  description  of
the  suspect  in  the  Tippit  shooting  was  similar
to  the  description  which  had  been  given  by
Brennan  in  connection  with  the  assassination.
Approximately  7  or  8  minutes  later  the  police
radio  reported  that  "an  eyeball  witness"  de-
scribed the  suspect  in  the  Tippit  shooting  as  "a
white  male,  27,  5'ir',  165  pounds,  black  wavy
hair."  As  will  be  discussed  fuUy  below,  the


57


Commission  has  concluded  that  this  suspect  was
Lee  Harvey  Oswald.

Although  Brennan  testified  that  the  man  in
the  window  was  standing  when  he  fired  the
shots,  most  probably  he  was  either  sitting  or
kneeling.  The  half-open  window,  the  arrange-
ment of  the  boxes,  and  the  angle  of  the  shots
virtually  preclude  a  standing  position.  It  is
understandable,  however,  for  Brennan  to  have
believed  that  the  man  with  the  rifle  was  stand-
ing. A  photograph  of  the  building  taken  seconds
after  the  assassination  shows  three  employees
looking  out  of  the  fifth-floor  window  directly
below  the  window  from  which  the  shots  were
fired.  Brennan  testified  that  they  were  standing,
which  is  their  apparent  position  in  the  photo-
graph. But  the  testimony  of  these  employees,
together  with  photographs  subsequently  taken  of
them  at  the  scene  of  the  assassination,  establishes
that  they  were  either  squatting  or  kneeling.  Since
the  window  ledges  in  the  Depository  Building
are  lower  than  in  most  buildings,  a  person
squatting  or  kneeling  exposes  more  of  his  body
than  would  normally  be  the  case.  From  the
street,  this  creates  the  impression  that  the  per-
son is  standing.  Brennan  could  have  seen  enough
of  the  body  of  a  kneeling  or  squatting  person  to
estimate  his  height.

Shortly  after  the  assassination  Brennan  no-
ticed two  of  these  employees  leaving  the  build-
ing and  immediately  identified  them  as  having
been  in  the  fifth-floor  windows.  When  the  three
employees  appeared  before  the  Commission,
Brennan  identified  the  two  whom  he  saw  leave
the  building.  The  two  men,  Harold  Norman  and
James  Jarman,  Jr.,  each  confirmed  that  when
they  came  out  of  the  building,  they  saw  and
heard  Brennan  describing  what  he  had  seen.
Norman  stated,  "*  *  *  I  remember  him  talk-
ing and  I  believe  I  remember  seeing  him  saying
that  he  saw  us  when  we  fij"st  went  up  to  the  fifth-
floor  window,  he  saw  us  then."  Jarman  heard
Brennan  "talking  to  this  officer  about  that  he
had  heard  these  shots  and  he  had  seen  the  bar-
rel of  the  gun  sticking  out  the  window,  and
he  said  that  the  shots  came  from  inside  the
building."

During  the  evening  of  November  22,  Brennan
identified  Oswald  as  the  person  in  the  Hneup
who  bore  the  closest  resemblance  to  the  man  in
the  window  but  he  said  he  was  unable  to  make  a
positive  identification.  Prior  to  the  lineup,  Bren-
nan had  seen  Oswald's  picture  on  television  and
he  told  the  Commission  that  whether  this  af-
fected his  identification  "is  something  I  do  not
know."  In  an  interview  with  FBI  agents  on
December  17,  1963,  Brennan  stated  that  he
was  sure  that  the  person  firing  the  rifle  was
Oswald.  In  another  interview  with  FBI  agents
on  January  7,  1964,  Brennan  appeared  to  revert
to  his  earlier  inability  to  make  a  positive  identi-
fication, but,  in  his  testimony  before  the  Com-
mission, Brennan  stated  that  his  remarks  of
January  7  were  intended  by  him  merely  as  an
accurate  report  of  what  he  said  on  November  22.


Brennan  told  the  Commission  that  he  could
have  made  a  positive  identification  in  the  lineup
on  November  22  but  did  not  do  so  because  he
felt  that  the  assassination  was  "a  Communist
activity,  and  I  felt  like  there  hadn't  been  more
than  one  eyewitness,  and  if  it  got  to  be  a  known
fact  that  I  was  an  eyewitness,  my  family  or  I,
either  one,  might  not  be  safe."  When  specifically
asked  before  the  Commission  whether  or  not  he
could  positively  identify  the  man  he  saw  in  the
sixth-floor  window  as  the  same  man  he  saw  in
the  police  station,  Brennan  stated,  "I  could  at
that  time — I  could,  with  all  sincerity,  identify
him  as  being  the  same  man."

Although  the  record  indicates  that  Brennan
was  an  accurate  observer,  he  declined  to  make  a
positive  identification  of  Oswald  when  he  first
saw  him  in  the  police  lineup.  The  Commission,
therefore,  does  not  base  its  conclusion  concern-
ing the  identity  of  the  assassin  on  Brennan's
subsequent  certain  identification  of  Lee  Harvey
Oswald  as  the  man  he  saw  fire  the  rifle.  Im-
mediately after  the  assassination,  however,  Bren-
nan described  to  the  police  the  man  he  saw  in
the  window  and  then  identified  Oswald  as  the
person  who  most  nearly  resembled  the  man  he
saw.  The  Commission  is  satisfied  that,  at  the
least,  Brennan  saw  a  man  in  the  window  who
closely  resembled  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  and  that
Brennan  believes  the  man  he  saw  was  in  fact
Lee  Harvey  Oswald.

Two  other  witnesses  were  able  to  offer  partial
descriptions  of  a  man  they  saw  in  the  southeast
comer  window  of  the  sixth  floor  approximately
1  minute  before  the  assassination,  although
neither  witness  saw  the  shots  being  fired.  Ronald
Fischer  and  Robert  Edwards  were  standing  on
the  curb  at  the  southwest  corner  of  Elm  and
Houston  Streets,  the  same  comer  where  Brennan
was  sitting  on  a  concrete  wall.  Fischer  testified
that  about  10  or  15  seconds  before  the  motor-
cade turned  onto  Houston  Street  from  Main
Street,  Edwards  said,  "Look  at  that  guy  there  in
that  window."

Fischer  looked  up  and  watched  the  man  in
the  window  for  10  or  15  seconds  and  then
started  watching  the  motorcade,  which  came
into  view  on  Houston  Street.  He  said  that  the
man  held  his  attention  until  the  motorcade  came
because  the  man:

*  *  *  appeared  uncomfortable  for  one,  and
secondly,  he  wasn't  watching  *  *  *  he
didn't  look  like  he  was  watching  for  the
parade.  He  looked  like  he  was  looking  down
toward  the  Trinity  River  and  Triple  Under-
pass down  at  the  end — toward  the  end  of
Elm  Street.  And  *  *  *  all  the  time  I
watched  him,  he  never  moved  his  head,  he
never — he  never  moved  anything.  Just  was
there  transfixed.

Fischer  placed  the  man  in  the  easternmost
window  on  the  south  side  of  the  Depository
Building  on  either  the  fiifth  or  the  sixth  floor.


58


He  said  that  he  could  see  the  man  from  the
middle  of  his  chest  to  the  top  of  his  head,  and
that  as  he  was  facing  the  window  the  man  was  in
the  lower  right-hand  portion  of  the  window  and
"seemed  to  be  sitting  a  little  forward."  The  man
was  dressed  in  a  light-colored,  open-neck  shirt
which  could  have  been  either  a  sports  shirt  or  a
T-shirt,  and  he  had  brown  hair,  a  slender  face
and  neck  with  light  complexion,  and  looked  to
be  22  or  24  years  old.  The  person  in  the  window
was  a  white  man  and  "looked  to  me  like  he  was
looking  straight  at  the  Triple  Underpass"  down
Elm  Street.  Boxes  and  cases  were  stacked  be-
hind him.

Approximately  1  week  after  the  assassination,
according  to  Fischer,  policemen  showed  him  a
picture  of  Oswald.  In  his  testimony  he  said,  "I
told  them  that  that  could  have  been  the  man.
*  *  *  That  that  could  have  been  the  man  that  I
saw  in  the  window  in  the  School  Book  Deposi-
tory Building,  but  that  I  was  not  sure."  Fischer
described  the  man's  hair  as  some  shade  of
brown — "it  wasn't  dark  and  it  wasn't  light."
On  November  22,  Fischer  had  apparently  de-
scribed the  man  as  "light-headed."  Fischer  ex-
plained that  he  did  not  mean  by  the  earlier
statement  that  the  man  was  blond,  but  rather
that  his  hair  was  not  black.

Robert  Edwards  said  that,  while  looking  at
the  south  side  of  the  Depository  Building  shortly
before  the  motorcade,  he  saw  nothing  of  im-
portance "except  maybe  one  individual  who  was
up  there  in  the  comer  room  of  the  sixth  floor
which  was  crowded  in  among  boxes."  He  said
that  this  was  a  white  man  about  average  in  size,
"possibly  thin,"  and  that  he  thought  the  man  had
light-brown  hair.  Fischer  and  Edwards  did  not
see  the  man  clearly  enough  or  long  enough  to
identify  him.  Their  testimony  is  of  probative
value,  however,  because  their  limited  descrip-
tion is  consistent  with  that  of  the  man  who  has
been  foimd  by  the  Commission,  based  on  other
evidence,  to  have  fired  the  shots  from  the
window.

Another  person  who  saw  the  assassin  as  the
shots  were  fired  was  Amos  L.  Euins,  age  15,
who  was  one  of  the  first  witnesses  to  alert  the
police  to  the  Depository  as  the  source  of  the
shots,  as  has  been  discussed  in  chapter  III.
Euins,  who  was  on  the  southwest  comer  of  Elm
and  Houston  Streets,  testified  that  he  could  not
describe  the  man  he  saw  in  the  window.  Accord-
ing to  Euins,  however,  as  the  man  lowered  his
head  in  order  to  aim  the  rifle  down  Elm  Street,
he  appeared  to  have  a  white  bald  spot  on  his
head.  Shortly  after  the  assassination,  Euins
signed  an  affidavit  describing  the  man  as  "white,"
but  a  radio  reporter  testified  that  Euins  described
the  man  to  him  as  "colored."  In  his  Commission
testimony,  Euins  stated  that  he  could  not  ascer-
tain the  man's  race  and  that  the  statement  in
the  affidavit  was  intended  to  refer  only  to  the
white  spot  on  the  man's  head  and  not  to  his  race.
A  Secret  Service  agent  who  spoke  to  Euins
approximately  20  to  30  minutes  after  the  assas-


sination confirmed  that  Euins  could  neither  de-
scribe the  man  in  the  window  nor  indicate  his
race.  Accordingly,  Euins'  testimony  is  con-
sidered probative  as  to  the  source  of  the  shots
but  is  inconclusive  as  to  the  identity  of  the  man
in  the  window.

In  evaluating  the  evidence  that  Oswald  was  at
the  southeast  comer  window  of  the  sixth  floor
at  the  time  of  the  shooting,  the  Commission  has
considered  the  allegation  that  Oswald  was  pho-
tographed standing  in  front  of  the  building  when
the  shots  were  fired.  The  picture  which  gave
rise  to  these  allegations  was  taken  by  Associated
Press  Photographer  James  W.  Altgens,  who  was
standing  on  the  south  side  of  Elm  Street  between
the  Triple  Underpass  and  the  Depository  Build-
ing. As  the  motorcade  started  its  descent  down
Elm  Street,  Altgens  snapped  a  picture  of  the
Presidential  limousine  with  the  entrance  to  the
Depository  Building  in  the  background.  Just
before  snapping  the  picture  Altgens  heard  a
noise  which  sounded  like  the  popping  of  a  fire-
cracker. Investigation  has  established  that  Alt-
gens' picture  was  taken  approximately  2  seconds
after  the  firing  of  the  shot  which  entered  the
back  of  the  President's  neck.

In  the  backgrovmd  of  this  picture  were  several
employees  watching  the  parade  from  the  steps
of  the  Depository  Building.  One  of  these  em-
ployees was  alleged  to  resemble  Lee  Harvey
Oswald.  The  Commission  has  determined  that
the  employee  was  in  fact  BUly  Nolan  Lovelady,
who  identified  himself  in  the  picture.  Standing
alongside  him  were  Buell  Wesley  Frazier  and
William  Shelley,  who  also  identified  Lovelady.
The  Commission  is  satisfied  that  Oswald  does
not  appear  in  this  photograph.

Oswald's  Actions  in  Building  After
Assassination

In  considering  whether  Oswald  was  at  the
southeast  comer  window  at  the  time  the  shots
were  fired,  the  Commission  has  reviewed  the
testimony  of  witnesses  who  saw  Oswald  in  the
building  within  minutes  after  the  assassination.
The  Commission  has  found  that  Oswald's  move-
ments, as  described  by  these  witnesses,  are  con-
sistent with  his  having  been  at  the  window  at
12:30  p.m.

The  encounter  in  the  lunchroom. — ^The  first
person  to  see  Oswald  after  the  assassination  was
Patrolman  M.  L.  Baker  of  the  Dallas  Police
Department.  Baker  was  riding  a  two-wheeled
motorcycle  behind  the  last  press  car  of  the
motorcade.  As  he  tumed  the  corner  from  Main
onto  Houston  at  a  speed  of  about  5  to  10  miles
per  hour,  a  strong  wind  blowing  from  the  north
almost  unseated  him.  At  about  this  time  he  heard
the  first  shot.  Having  recently  heard  the  sounds
of  rifles  while  on  a  hunting  trip,  Baker  recog-
nized the  shots  as  that  of  a  high-powered  rifle;
"it  sounded  high  and  I  immediately  kind  of
looked  up,  and  I  had  a  feeling  that  it  came  from
the  building,  either  right  in  front  of  me  [the
Depository  Building]  or  of  the  one  across  to  the


59


right  of  it."  He  saw  pigeons  flutter  upward.  He
was  not  certain,  "but  I  am  pretty  sure  they  came
from  the  building  right  on  the  northwest  comer."
He  heard  two  more  shots  spaced  "pretty  well
even  to  me."  After  the  third  shot,  he  "revved
that  motorcycle  up,"  drove  to  the  northwest
comer  of  Elm  and  Houston,  and  parked  ap-
proximately 10  feet  from  the  traffic  signal.  As
he  was  parking  he  noted  that  people  were  "fall-
ing, and  they  were  rolling  around  down  there
*  *  *  grabbing  their  children"  and  mshing
about.  A  woman  screamed,  "Oh,  they  have  shot
that  man,  they  have  shot  that  man."  Baker  "had
it  in  mind  that  the  shots  came  from  the  top  of
this  building  here,"  so  he  ran  straight  to  the
entrance  of  the  Depository  Building.

Baker  testified  that  he  entered  the  lobby  of
the  building  and  "spoke  out  and  asked  where  the
stairs  or  elevator  was  *  *  *  and  this  man,  Mr.
Truly,  spoke  up  and  says,  it  seems  to  me  like
he  says,  'I  am  a  building  manager.  Follow  me,
officer,  and  I  will  show  you.'  "  Baker  and  build-
ing superintendent  Roy  Tmly  went  through  a
second  set  of  doors  and  stopped  at  a  swinging
door  where  Baker  bumped  into  Tmly's  back.
They  went  through  the  swinging  door  and  con-
tinued at  "a  good  trot"  to  the  northwest  comer
of  the  floor  where  Truly  hoped  to  find  one  of  the
two  freight  elevators.  Neither  elevator  was  there.
Truly  pushed  the  button  for  the  west  elevator
which  operates  automatically  if  the  gate  is
closed.  He  shouted  twice,  'Turn  loose  the  eleva-
tor." When  the  elevator  failed  to  come.  Baker
said,  "let's  take  the  stairs,"  and  he  followed
Tmly  up  the  stairway,  which  is  to  the  west  of  the
elevator.

The  stairway  is  located  in  the  northwest  comer
of  the  Depository  Building.  The  stairs  from  one
floor  to  the  next  are  "L-shaped,"  with  both  legs
of  the  "I"  approximately  the  same  length.  Be-
cause the  stairway  itself  is  enclosed,  neither
Baker  nor  Truly  could  see  anything  on  the
second-floor  hallway  until  they  reached  the  land-
ing at  the  top  of  the  stairs.  On  the  second-floor
landing  there  is  a  small  open  area  with  a  door  at
the  east  end.  This  door  leads  into  a  small  vesti-
bule, and  another  door  leads  from  the  vestibule
into  the  second-floor  lunchroom.  The  limch-
room  door  is  usually  open,  but  the  first  door
is  kept  shut  by  a  closing  mechanism  on  the  door.
This  vestibule  door  is  solid  except  for  a  small
glass  window  in  the  upper  part  of  the  door.  As
Baker  reached  the  second  floor,  he  was  about
20  feet  from  the  vestibule  door.  He  intended  to
continue  around  to  his  left  toward  the  stairway
going  up  but  through  the  window  in  the  door
he  caught  a  fleeting  glimpse  of  a  man  walking
in  the  vestibule  toward  the  lunchroom.

Since  the  vestibule  door  is  only  a  few  feet
from  the  lunchroom  door,  the  man  must  have
entered  the  vestibule  only  a  second  or  two
before  Baker  arrived  at  the  top  of  the  stairwell.
Yet  he  must  have  entered  the  vestibule  door
before  Truly  reached  the  top  of  the  stairwell,
since  Truly  did  not  see  him.  If  the  man  had


passed  from  the  vestibule  Into  the  lunchroom,
Baker  could  not  have  seen  him.  Baker  said:

He  [Truly]  had  already  started  around  the
bend  to  come  to  the  next  elevator  going  up,
I  was  coming  out  this  one  on  the  second
floor,  and  I  don't  know,  I  was  kind  of  sweep-
ing this  area  as  I  come  up,  I  was  looking  from
right  to  left  and  as  I  got  to  this  door  here  I
caught  a  glimpse  of  this  man,  just,  you  know,
a  sudden  glimpse  *  *  *  and  it  looked  to  me
like  he  was  going  away  from  me.  *  *  *

I  can't  say  whether  he  had  gone  on  through
that  door  [the  lunchroom  door]  or  not.  All  I
did  was  catch  a  glance  at  him,  and  evidently
he  was — this  door  might  have  been,  you
know,  closing  and  almost  shut  at  the  same
time.

With  his  revolver  drawn.  Baker  opened  the
vestibule  door  and  ran  into  the  vestibule.  He
saw  a  man  walking  away  from  him  in  the  lunch-
room. Baker  stopped  at  the  door  of  the  lunch-
room and  commanded,  "Come  here,"  The  man
turned  and  walked  back  toward  Baker.  He  had
been  proceeding  toward  the  rear  of  the  lunch-
room. Along  a  side  wall  of  the  lunchroom
was  a  soft  drink  vending  machine,  but  at  that
time  the  man  had  nothing  in  his  hands.

Meanwhile,  Truly  had  mn  up  several  steps
toward  the  third  floor.  Missing  Baker,  he  came
back  to  find  the  officer  in  the  doorway  to  the
lunchroom  "facing  Lee  Harvey  Oswald."  Baker
turned  to  Truly  and  said,  "Do  you  know  this
man,  does  he  work  here?"  Tmly  replied,  "Yes."
Baker  stated  later  that  the  man  did  not  seem  to
be  out  of  breath;  he  seemed  calm.  "He  never
did  say  a  word  or  nothing.  In  fact,  he  didn't
change  his  expression  one  bit."  Tmly  said  of
Oswald:  "He  didn't  seem  to  be  excited  or  overly
afraid  or  anything.  He  might  have  been  a  bit
startled,  like  I  might  have  been  if  somebody
confronted  me.  But  I  cannot  recall  any  change
in  expression  of  any  kind  on  his  face."  Truly
thought  that  the  officer's  gun  at  that  time  ap-
peared to  be  almost  touching  the  middle  portion
of  Oswald's  body.  Truly  also  noted  at  this  time
that  Oswald's  hands  were  empty.

In  an  effort  to  determine  whether  Oswald
could  have  descended  to  the  lunchroom  from
the  sixth  floor  by  the  time  Baker  and  Tmly
arrived.  Commission  counsel  asked  Baker  and
Truly  to  repeat  their  movements  from  the  time
of  the  shot  until  Baker  came  upon  Oswald  in  the
lunchroom.  Baker  placed  himself  on  a  motor-
cycle about  200  feet  from  the  comer  of  Elm  and
Houston  Streets  where  he  said  he  heard  the
shots.  Truly  stood  in  front  of  the  building.  At  a
given  signal,  they  reenacted  the  event.  Baker's
movements  were  timed  with  a  stopwatch.  On
the  first  test,  the  elapsed  time  between  the  simu-
lated first  shot  and  Baker's  arrival  on  the  second-
floor  stair  landing  was  1  minute  and  30  sec-
onds. The  second  test  run  required  1  minute  and
15  seconds.


60


I


A  test  was  also  conducted  to  determine  the
time  required  to  walk  from  the  southeast  corner
of  the  sixth  floor  to  the  second-floor  lunchroom
by  stairway.  Special  Agent  John  Howlett  of  the
Secret  Service  carried  a  rifle  from  the  southeast
comer  of  the  sixth  floor  along  the  east  aisle  to
the  northeast  corner.  He  placed  the  rifle  on  the
floor  near  the  site  where  Oswald's  rifle  was
actually  found  after  the  shooting.  Then  Howlett
walked  down  the  stairway  to  the  second-floor
landing  and  entered  the  lunchroom.  The  first
test,  run  at  normal  walking  pace,  required  1
minute,  18  seconds;  the  second  test,  at  a  "fast
walk"  took  1  minute,  14  seconds.  The  second
test  followed  immediately  after  the  first.  The
only  interval  was  the  time  necessary  to  ride  in
the  elevator  from  the  second  to  the  sixth  floor
and  walk  back  to  the  southeast  comer.  Howlett
was  not  short  winded  at  the  end  of  either  test
mn.

The  minimum  time  required  by  Baker  to  park
his  motorcycle  and  reach  the  second-floor  lunch-
room was  within  3  seconds  of  the  time  needed
to  walk  from  the  southeast  comer  of  the  sixth
floor  down  the  stairway  to  the  lunchroom.  The
time  actually  required  for  Baker  and  Truly  to
reach  the  second  floor  on  November  22  was
probably  longer  than  in  the  test  runs.  For  ex-
ample. Baker  required  15  seconds  after  the
simulated  shot  to  ride  his  motorcycle  180  to
200  feet,  park  it,  and  run  45  feet  to  the  build-
ing. No  allowance  was  made  for  the  special
conditions  which  existed  on  the  day  of  the  assas-
sination— possible  delayed  reaction  to  the  shot,
jostling  with  the  crowd  of  people  on  the  steps
and  scarming  the  area  along  Elm  Street  and  the
parkway.  Baker  said,  "We  simulated  the  shots
and  by  the  time  we  got  there,  we  did  everything
that  I  did  that  day,  and  this  would  be  the  mini-
mum, because  I  am  sure  that  I,  you  know,  it
took  me  a  little  longer."  On  the  basis  of  this  time
test,  therefore,  the  Commission  concluded  that
Oswald  could  have  fired  the  shots  and  still  have
been  present  in  the  second-floor  lunchroom  when
seen  by  Baker  and  Truly.

That  Oswald  descended  by  stairway  from  the
sixth  floor  to  the  second-floor  lunchroom  is  con-
sistent with  the  movements  of  the  two  elevators,
which  would  have  provided  the  other  possible
means  of  descent.  When  Truly,  accompanied  by
Baker,  ran  to  the  rear  of  the  first  floor,  he  was
certain  that  both  elevators,  which  occupy  the
same  shaft,  were  on  the  fifth  floor.  Baker,  not
realizing  that  there  were  two  elevators,  thought
that  only  one  elevator  was  in  the  shaft  and  that
it  was  two  or  three  floors  above  the  second  floor.
In  the  few  seconds  which  elapsed  while  Baker
and  Truly  ran  from  the  first  to  the  second  floor,
neither  of  these  slow  elevators  could  have  de-
scended from  the  fifth  to  the  second  floor.  Fur-
thermore, no  elevator  was  at  the  second  floor
when  they  arrived  there.  Truly  and  Baker  con-
tinued up  the  stairs  after  the  encounter  with
Oswald  in  the  lunchroom.  There  was  no  elevator
on  the  third  or  fourth  floor.  The  east  elevator  was


on  the  fifth  floor  when  they  arrived;  the  west  ele-
vator was  not.  They  took  the  east  elevator  to  the
seventh  floor  and  ran  up  a  stairway  to  the  roof
where  they  searched  for  several  minutes.

Jack  Dougherty,  an  employee  working  on  the
fifth  floor,  testified  that  he  took  the  west  elevator
to  the  first  floor  after  hearing  a  noise  which
sounded  like  a  backfire.  Eddie  Piper,  the  janitor,
told  Dougherty  that  the  President  had  been  shot,
but  in  his  testimony  Piper  did  not  mention
either  seeing  or  talking  with  Dougherty  during
these  moments  of  excitement.  Both  Dougherty
and  Piper  were  confused  witnesses.  They  had  no
exact  memory  of  the  events  of  that  afternoon.
Truly  was  probably  correct  in  stating  that  the
west  elevator  was  on  the  fifth  floor  when  he
looked  up  the  elevator  shaft  from  the  first  floor.
The  west  elevator  was  not  on  the  fifth  floor
when  Baker  and  Truly  reached  that  floor,  proba-
bly because  Jack  Dougherty  took  it  to  the  first
floor  while  Baker  and  Truly  were  running  up
the  stairs  or  in  the  lunchroom  with  Oswald.
Neither  elevator  could  have  been  used  by  Os-
wald as  a  means  of  descent.

Oswald's  use  of  the  stairway  is  consistent  with
the  testimony  of  other  employees  in  the  build-
ing. Three  employees — James  Jarman,  Jr.,
Harold  Norman,  and  Bonnie  Ray  WUliams —
were  watching  the  parade  from  the  fifth  floor,
directly  below  the  window  from  which  the  shots
were  fired.  They  rushed  to  the  west  windows
after  the  shots  were  fired  and  remained  there
until  after  they  saw  Patrolman  Baker's  white
helmet  on  the  fifth  floor  moving  toward  the
elevator.  While  they  were  at  the  west  windows
their  view  of  the  stairwell  was  completely
blocked  by  shelves  and  boxes.  This  is  the  period
during  which  Oswald  would  have  descended  the
stairs.  In  all  likelihood  Dougherty  took  the
elevator  down  from  the  fifth  floor  after  Jarman,
Norman,  and  WiUiams  ran  to  the  west  windows
and  were  deciding  what  to  do.  None  of  these
three  men  saw  Dougherty,  probably  because  of
the  anxiety  of  the  moment  and  because  of  the
books  which  may  have  blocked  the  view.  Neither
Jarman,  Norman,  WiUiams,  or  Dougherty  saw
Oswald.

Victoria  Adams,  who  worked  on  the  fourth
floor  of  the  Depository  Building,  claimed  that
within  about  1  minute  following  the  shots  she
ran  from  a  window  on  the  south  side  of  the
fourth  floor,  down  the  rear  stairs  to  the  first
floor,  where  she  encoimtered  two  Depository
employees — William  Shelley  and  BiUy  Lovelady.
If  her  estimate  of  time  is  correct,  she  reached
the  bottom  of  the  stairs  before  Truly  and  Baker
started  up,  and  she  must  have  run  down  the
stairs  ahead  of  Oswald  and  would  probably  have
seen  or  heard  him.  Actually  she  noticed  no  one
on  the  back  stairs.  If  she  descended  from  the
fourth  to  the  first  floor  as  fast  as  she  claimed  in
her  testimony,  she  would  have  seen  Baker  or
Truly  on  the  first  floor  or  on  the  stairs,  unless
they  were  already  in  the  second-floor  lunchroom
talking  to  Oswald.  When  she  reached  the  first


61


floor,  she  actually  saw  Shelley  and  Lovelady
slightly  east  of  the  east  elevator.

Shelley  and  Lovelady,  however,  have  testified
that  they  were  watching  the  parade  from  the  top
step  of  the  building  entrance  when  Gloria
Calveriy,  who  works  in  the  Depository  Build-
ing, ran  up  and  said  that  the  President  had  been
shot.  Lovelady  and  Shelley  moved  out  into  the
street.  About  this  time  Shelley  saw  Truly  and
Patrolman  Baker  go  into  the  building.  Shelley
and  Lovelady,  at  a  fast  walk  or  trot,  turned  west
into  the  railroad  yards  and  then  to  the  west  side
of  the  Depository  Building.  They  reentered  the
building  by  the  rear  door  several  minutes  after
Baker  and  Truly  rushed  through  the  front  en-
trance. On  entering,  Lovelady  saw  a  girl  on  the
first  floor  who  he  believes  was  Victoria  Adams.
If  Miss  Adams  accurately  recalled  meeting
Shelley  and  Lovelady  when  she  reached  the
bottom  of  the  stairs,  then  her  estimate  of  the
time  when  she  descended  from  the  fourth  floor
is  incorrect,  and  she  actually  came  down  the
stairs  several  minutes  after  Oswald  and  after
Truly  and  Baker  as  well.

Oswald's  departure  from  building,— Vi/itim.
a  minute  after  Baker  and  Truly  left  Oswald  in
the  lunchroom,  Mrs.  R.  A.  Reid,  clerical  super-
visor for  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository,
saw  him  walk  through  the  clerical  office  on  the
second  floor  toward  the  door  leading  to  the  front
stairway.  Mrs.  Reid  had  watched  the  parade
from  the  sidewalk  in  front  of  the  building  with
Truly  and  Mr.  O.  V.  Campbell,  vice  president
of  the  Depository,  She  testified  that  she  heard
three  shots  which  she  thought  came  from  the
building.  She  ran  inside  and  up  the  front  stairs
into  the  large  open  office  reserved  for  clerical
employees.  As  she  approached  her  desk,  she
saw  Oswald.  He  was  walking  into  the  office  from
the  back  hallway,  carrying  a  full  bottle  of  Coca-
Cola  in  his  hand,  presumably  purchased  after
the  encounter  with  Baker  and  Truly.  As  Oswald
passed  Mrs.  Reid  she  said,  "Oh,  the  President
has  been  shot,  but  maybe  they  didn't  hit  him."
Oswald  mumbled  something  and  walked  by.  She
paid  no  more  attention  to  him.  The  only  exit
from  the  office  in  the  direction  Oswald  was
moving  was  through  the  door  to  the  front  stair-
way. Mrs.  Reid  testified  that  when  she  saw
Oswald,  he  was  wearing  a  T-shirt  and  no  jacket.
When  he  left  home  that  morning,  Marina  Os-
wald, who  was  still  in  bed,  suggested  that  he
wear  a  jacket.  A  blue  jacket,  later  identified  by
Marina  Oswald  as  her  husband's,  was  subse-
quently found  in  the  building,  apparently  left
behind  by  Oswald.

Mrs.  Reid  believes  that  she  returned  to  her
desk  from  the  street  about  2  minutes  after  the
shooting.  Reconstructing  her  movements,  Mrs.
Reid  ran  the  distance  three  times  and  was  timed
in  2  minutes  by  stopwatch.  The  reconstruction
was  the  minimum  time.  Accordingly,  she  proba-
bly met  Oswald  at  about  12:32,  approximately
30-45  seconds  after  Oswald's  lunchroom  en-
counter with  Baker  and  Truly.  After  leaving


Mrs.  Reid  in  the  front  office,  Oswald  could  have
gone  down  the  stairs  and  out  the  front  door  by
12:33  p.m. — 3  minutes  after  the  shooting.  At
that  time  the  building  had  not  yet  been  sealed
off  by  the  police.

While  it  was  difficult  to  determine  exactly
when  the  police  sealed  off  the  building,  the  earli-
est estimates  would  still  have  permitted  Os-
wald to  leave  the  building  by  12:33.  One  of
the  poUce  officers  assigned  to  the  comer  of  Elm
and  Houston  Streets  for  the  Presidential  motor-
cade, W.  E.  Bamett,  testified  that  immediately
after  the  shots  he  went  to  the  rear  of  the  build-
ing to  check  the  fire  escape.  He  then  returned  to
the  comer  of  Elm  and  Houston  where  he  met  a
sergeant  who  instmcted  him  to  find  out  the  name
of  the  building,  Bamett  ran  to  the  building,
noted  its  name,  and  then  returned  to  the  comer.
There  he  was  met  by  a  constmction  worker — in
all  likelihood  Howard  Breiman,  who  was  wear-
ing his  work  helmet.  This  worker  told  Bamett
that  the  shots  had  been  fired  from  a  window  in
the  Depository  Building,  whereupon  Bamett
posted  himself  at  the  front  door  to  make  certain
that  no  one  left  the  building.  The  sergeant  did
the  same  thing  at  the  rear  of  the  building.  Bamett
estimated  that  approximately  3  minutes  elapsed
between  the  time  he  heard  the  last  of  the  shots
and  the  time  he  started  guarding  the  front  door.
According  to  Bamett,  "there  were  people  going
in  and  out"  during  this  period.

Sgt.  D.  V,  Harkness  of  the  Dallas  police  said
that  to  his  knowledge  the  building  was  not  sealed
off  at  12:36  p.m.  when  he  called  in  on  police
radio  that  a  witness  (Amos  Euins)  had  seen  shots
fired  from  a  window  of  the  building.  At  that
time.  Inspector  Herbert  V.  Sawyer's  car  was
parked  in  front  of  the  building.  Harkness  did  not
know  whether  or  not  two  officers  with  Sawyer
were  guarding  the  doors.  At  12:34  p.m.  Sawyer
heard  a  call  over  the  police  radio  that  the  shots
had  come  from  the  Depository  Building.  He  then
entered  the  building  and  took  the  front  pas-
senger elevator  as  far  as  it  would  go — the  fourth
floor.  After  inspecting  this  floor.  Sawyer  retumed
to  the  street  about  3  minutes  after  he  entered
the  building.  After  he  retumed  to  the  street  he
directed  Sergeant  Harkness  to  station  two  pa-
trolmen at  the  front  door  and  not  let  anyone  in
or  out;  he  also  directed  that  the  back  door  be
sealed  off.  This  was  no  earlier  than  12:37  p.m.
and  may  have  been  later.  Special  Agent  Forrest
V.  Sorrels  of  the  Secret  Service,  who  had  been
in  the  motorcade,  testified  that  after  driving  to
Parkland  Hospital,  he  retumed  to  the  Deposi-
tory Building  about  20  minutes  after  the  shoot-
ing, found  no  police  officers  at  the  rear  door  and
was  able  to  enter  through  this  door  without
identifying  himself.

Although  Oswald  probably  left  the  building
at  about  12:33  p.m.,  his  absence  was  not  noticed
untU  at  least  one-half  hour  later.  Truly,  who  had
retumed  with  Patrolman  Baker  from  the  roof,
saw  the  police  questioning  the  warehouse  em-
ployees. Approximately  15  men  worked  in  the


62


warehouse  and  Truly  noticed  that  Oswald  was
not  among  those  being  questioned.  Satisfying
himself  that  Oswald  was  missing,  Truly  obtained
Oswald's  address,  phone  number,  and  descrip-
tion from  his  employment  application  card.  The
address  listed  was  for  the  Paine  home  in  Irving.
Truly  gave  this  information  to  Captain  Fritz
who  was  on  the  sixth  floor  at  the  time.  Truly
estimated  that  he  gave  this  information  to  Fritz
about  15  or  20  minutes  after  the  shots,  but  it
was  probably  no  earlier  than  1 :22  p.m.,  ttie  time
when  the  rifle  was  found.  Fritz  believed  that  he
learned  of  Oswald's  absence  after  the  rifle  was
foimd.  The  fact  that  Truly  found  Fritz  in  the
northwest  comer  of  the  floor,  near  the  point
where  the  rifle  was  found,  supports  Fritz'
recollection.

Conclusion

Fingerprint  and  palmprint  evidence  estab-
lishes that  Oswald  handled  two  of  the  four  car-
tons next  to  the  window  and  also  handled  a  paper
bag  which  was  found  near  the  cartons.  Oswald
was  seen  in  the  vicinity  of  the  southeast  comer
of  the  sixth  floor  approximately  35  minutes
before  the  assassination  and  no  one  could  be
found  who  saw  Oswald  anywhere  else  in  the
building  until  after  the  shooting.  An  eyewitness
to  the  shooting  immediately  provided  a  de-
scription of  the  man  in  the  window  which  was
similar  to  Oswald's  actual  appearance.  This  wit-
ness identified  Oswald  in  a  lineup  as  the  man
most  nearly  resembling  the  man  he  saw  and
later  identified  Oswald  as  the  man  he  observed.
Oswald's  known  actions  in  the  building  im-
mediately after  the  assassination  are  consistent
with  his  having  been  at  the  southeast  comer
window  of  the  sixth  floor  at  12:30  p.m.  On  the
basis  of  these  findings  the  Commission  has  con-
cluded that  Oswald,  at  the  time  of  the  assassina-
tion, was  present  at  the  window  from  which  the
shots  were  fired.


THE  KILLING  OF  PATROLMAN
J.  D.  TIPPIT

After  leaving  the  Depository  Building  at  ap-
proximately 12:33  p.m.,  Lee  Harvey  Oswald
proceeded  to  his  roominghouse  by  bus  and  taxi.
He  arrived  at  approximately  1  p.m.  and  left  a
few  minutes  later.  At  about  1:16  p.m.,  a  Dallas
police  oflBcer,  J.  D.  Tippit,  was  shot  less  than  1
mile  from  Oswald's  roominghouse.  In  deciding
whether  Oswald  killed  Patrohnan  Tippit  the
Commission  considered  the  following:  ( 1 )  posi-
tive identification  of  the  Idller  by  two  eyewit-
nesses who  saw  the  shooting  and  seven  eyewit-
nesses who  heard  the  shots  and  saw  the  gunman
flee  the  scene  with  the  revolver  in  his  hand,  (2)
testimony  of  firearms  identification  experts  es-
tablishing the  identity  of  the  murder  weapon,
(3)  evidence  establishing  the  ownership  of  the
murder  weapon,  (4)  evidence  establishing  the
ownership  of  a  zipper  jacket  found  along  the


path  of  flight  taken  by  the  gunman  from  the
scene  of  the  shooting  to  the  place  of  arrest.

Oswald's  Movements  After  Leaving
Depository  Building

The  bus  ride. — ^According  to  the  reconstmc-
tion  of  time  and  events  which  the  Commission
found  most  credible,  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  left
the  building  approximately  3  minutes  after  the
assassination.  He  probably  walked  east  on  Elm
Street  for  seven  blocks  to  the  comer  of  Elm  and
Murphy  where  he  boarded  a  bus  which  was
heading  back  in  the  direction  of  the  Depository
Building,  on  its  way  to  the  Oak  Cliff  section  of
Dallas.

When  Oswald  was  apprehended,  a  bus  trans-
fer marked  for  the  Lakewood-Marsalis  route
was  found  in  his  shirt  pocket  The  transfer  was
dated  "Fri.  Nov.  22,  '63"  and  was  punched  in
two  places  by  the  busdriver.  On  the  basis  of  this
punchmark,  which  was  distinctive  to  each  Dallas
driver,  the  transfer  was  conclusively  identified
as  having  been  issued  by  Cecil  J.  McWatters,  a
busdriver  for  the  Dallas  Transit  Co.  On  the
basis  of  the  date  and  time  on  the  transfer,
McWatters  was  able  to  testify  that  the  transfer
had  been  issued  by  him  on  a  trip  which  passed
a  check  point  at  St.  Paul  and  Elm  Streets  at
12:36  p.m.,  November  22,  1963.

McWatters  was  sure  that  he  left  the  check-
point on  time  and  he  estimated  that  it  took  him
3  to  4  minutes  to  drive  three  blocks  west  from
the  checkpoint  to  Field  Street,  which  he  reached
at  about  12:40  p.m.  McWatters'  recollection  is
that  he  issued  this  transfer  to  a  man  who  entered
his  bus  just  beyond  Field  Street,  where  a  man
beat  on  the  front  door  of  the  bus,  boarded  it  and
paid  his  fare.  About  two  blocks  later,  a  woman
asked  to  get  off  to  make  a  1  o'clock  train  at
Union  Station  and  requested  a  transfer  which
she  might  use  if  she  got  through  the  traffic.

*  *  *  So  I  gave  her  a  transfer  and  opened  the
door  and  as  she  was  going  out  the  gentleman
I  had  picked  up  about  two  blocks  [back]  asked
for  a  transfer  and  got  off  at  the  same  place  in
the  middle  of  the  block  where  the  lady  did.

*  *  *  It  was  the  intersection  near  Lamar
Street,  it  was  near  Poydras  and  Lamar  Street.

The  man  was  on  the  bus  approximately  4
minutes.

At  about  6:30  p.m.  on  the  day  of  the  assas-
sination, McWatters  viewed  four  men  in  a  police
lineup.  He  picked  Oswald  from  the  lineup  as  the
man  who  had  boarded  the  bus  at  the  "lower  end
of  town  on  Elm  around  Houston,"  and  who,
during  the  ride  south  on  Marsalis,  had  an  argu-
ment with  a  woman  passenger.  In  his  Commis-
sion testimony,  McWatters  said  he  had  been  in
error  and  that  a  teenager  named  Milton  Jones
was  the  passenger  he  had  in  mind.  In  a  later
interview,  Jones  confirmed  that  he  had  ex-
changed words  with  a  woman  passenger  on  the
bus  during  the  ride  south  on  Marsalis. Mc-


63


Watters  also  remembered  that  a  man  received  a
transfer  at  Lamar  and  Elm  Streets  and  that  a
man  in  the  lineup  was  about  the  size  of  this  man.
However,  McWatters'  recollection  alone  was
too  vague  to  be  a  basis  for  placing  Oswald  on
the  bus.

Riding  on  the  bus  was  an  elderly  woman,
Mary  Bledsoe,  who  confirmed  the  mute  evidence
of  the  transfer,  Oswald  had  rented  a  room  from
Mrs.  Bledsoe  about  6  weeks  before,  on  October
7,  but  she  had  asked  him  to  leave  at  the  end  of
a  week.  Mrs.  Bledsoe  told  him  "I  am  not  going
to  rent  to  you  any  more."  She  testified,  "I  didn't
like  his  attitude.  *  *  *  There  was  just  some-
thing about  him  I  didn't  like  or  want  him.
*  *  *  Just  didn't  want  him  around  me."  On
November  22,  Mrs.  Bledsoe  came  downtown  to
watch  the  Presidential  motorcade.  She  boarded
the  Marsalis  bus  at  St.  Paul  and  Elm  Streets  to
return  home.  She  testified  further:

And,  after  we  got  past  Akard,  at  Murphy —
I  figured  it  out.  Let's  see.  I  don't  know  for
sure.  Oswald  got  on.  He  looks  like  a  maniac.
His  sleeve  was  out  here.  *  *  *  His  shirt
was  undone.


Was  a  hole  in  it,  hole,  and  he  was  dirty,
and  I  didn't  look  at  him.  I  didn't  want  to
know  I  even  seen  him  * * *


*  *  *  he  looked  so  bad  in  his  face,  and  his
face  was  so  distorted.


*  *  *  Hole  in  his  sleeve  right  here.

As  Mrs.  Bledsoe  said  these  words,  she  pointed
to  her  right  elbow.  When  Oswald  was  arrested  in
the  Texas  Theatre,  he  was  wearing  a  brown  sport
shirt  with  a  hole  in  the  right  sleeve  at  the  elbow.
Mrs.  Bledsoe  identified  the  shirt  as  the  one
Oswald  was  wearing  and  she  stated  she  was
certain  that  it  was  Oswald  who  boarded  the
bus.  Mrs.  Bledsoe  recalled  that  Oswald  sat  half-
way to  the  rear  of  the  bus  which  moved  slowly
and  intermittently  as  traffic  became  heavy.  She
heard  a  passing  motorist  tell  the  driver  that  the
President  had  been  shot.  People  on  the  bus
began  talking  about  it.  As  the  bus  neared  Lamar
Street,  Oswald  left  the  bus  and  disappeared  into
the  crowd.

The  Marsalis  bus  which  Oswald  boarded
traveled  a  route  west  on  Elm,  south  on  Houston,
and  southwest  across  the  Houston  viaduct  to
service  the  Oak  Cliflf  area  along  Marsalis.  A
Beckley  bus  which  also  served  the  Oak  Cliff
area,  followed  the  same  route  as  the  Marsalis
bus  through  downtown  Dallas,  except  that  it
continued  west  on  Elm,  across  Houston  in  front
of  the  Depository  Building,  past  the  Triple
Underpass  into  west  Dallas,  and  south  on  Beck-
ley.  Marsalis  Street  is  seven  blocks  from  Beckley.


Oswald  lived  at  1026  North  Beckley.  He  could
not  reach  his  roominghouse  on  the  Marsalis  bus,
but  the  Beckley  bus  stopped  across  the  street.
According  to  McWatters,  the  Beckley  bus  was
behind  the  Marsalis  bus,  but  he  did  not  actually
see  it.  Both  buses  stopped  within  one  block  of
the  Depository  Building.  Instead  of  waiting
there,  Oswald  apparently  went  as  far  away  as  he
could  and  boarded  the  first  Oak  Cliff  bus  which
came  along  rather  than  wait  for  one  which
stopped  across  the  street  from  his  roominghouse.

In  a  reconstruction  of  this  bus  trip,  agents  of
the  Secret  Service  and  the  FBI  walked  the  seven
blocks  from  the  front  entrance  of  the  Deposi-
tory Building  to  Murphy  and  Elm  three  times,
averaging  6i  minutes  for  the  three  trips.  A  bus
moving  through  heavy  trafiBc  on  Elm  from  Mur-
phy to  Lamar  was  timed  at  4  minutes.  If  Os-
wald left  the  Depository  Building  at  12:33  p.m.,
walked  seven  blocks  directly  to  Murphy  and
Elm,  and  boarded  a  bus  almost  immediately,  he
would  have  boarded  the  bus  at  approximately
12:40  p.m.  and  left  it  at  approximately  12:44
p.m.

Roger  D.  Craig,  a  deputy  sheriff  of  Dallas
County,  claimed  that  about  15  minutes  after
the  assassination  he  saw  a  man,  whom  he  later
identified  as  Oswald,  coming  from  the  direction
of  the  Depository  Building  and  running  down
the  hill  north  of  Elm  Street  toward  a  light-
colored  Rambler  station  wagon,  which  was  mov-
ing slowly  along  Elm  toward  the  underpass.  The
station  wagon  stopped  to  pick  up  the  man  and
then  drove  off.  Craig  testified  that  later  in  the
afternoon  he  saw  Oswald  in  the  police  interroga-
tion room  and  told  Captain  Fritz  that  Oswald
was  the  man  he  saw.  Craig  also  claimed  that
when  Fritz  pointed  out  to  Oswald  that  Craig
had  identified  him,  Oswald  rose  from  his  chair,
looked  directly  at  Fritz,  and  said,  "Everybody
will  know  who  I  am  now."

The  Commission  could  not  accept  important
elements  of  Craig's  testimony.  Captain  Fritz
stated  that  a  deputy  sheriff  whom  he  could  not
identify  did  ask  to  see  him  that  afternoon  and
told  him  a  similar  story  to  Craig's.  Fritz  did  not
bring  him  into  his  oflBce  to  identify  Oswald  but
turned  him  over  to  Lieutenant  Baker  for  ques-
tioning. If  Craig  saw  Oswald  that  afternoon,  he
saw  him  through  the  glass  windows  of  the  office.
And  neither  Captain  Fritz  nor  any  other  officer
can  remember  that  Oswald  dramatically  arose
from  his  chair  and  said,  "Everybody  will  know
who  I  am  now."  If  Oswald  had  made  such  a
statement,  Captain  Fritz  and  others  present
would  probably  have  remembered  it.  Craig  may
have  seen  a  person  enter  a  white  Rambler  station
wagon  15  or  20  minutes  after  the  shooting  and
travel  west  on  Elm  Street,  but  the  Commission
concluded  that  this  man  was  not  Lee  Harvey
Oswald,  because  of  the  overwhehning  evidence
that  Oswald  was  far  away  from  the  building  by
that  time.

The  taxicab  ride. — ^William  Whaley,  a  taxicab
driver,  told  his  employer  on  Saturday  morning,


64


November  23,  that  he  recognized  Oswald  from  a
newspaper  photograph  as  a  man  whom  he  had
driven  to  the  Oak  Cliff  area  the  day  before.
Notified  of  Whaley's  statement,  the  police
brought  him  to  the  poUce  station  that  afternoon.
He  was  taken  to  the  lineup  room  where,  accord-
ing to  Whaley,  five  young  teenagers,  all  hand-
cuffed together,  were  displayed  with  Oswald.
He  testified  that  Oswald  looked  older  than  the
other  boys.  The  poUce  asked  him  whether  he
could  pick  out  his  passenger  from  the  lineup.
Whaley  picked  Oswald.  He  said,

*  *  *  you  could  have  picked  him  out  with-
out identifying  him  by  just  listening  to  him
because  he  was  bawling  out  the  policeman,
telling  them  it  wasn't  right  to  put  him  in  line
with  these  teenagers  and  all  of  that  and  they
asked  me  which  one  and  I  told  them.  It
was  him  all  right,  the  same  man.


He  showed  no  respect  for  the  policemen,
he  told  them  what  he  thought  about  them.
They  knew  what  they  were  doing  and  they
were  trying  to  railroad  him  and  he  wanted
his  lawyer.

Whaley  believes  that  Oswald's  conduct  did  not
aid  him  in  his  identification  "because  I  knew  he
was  the  right  one  as  soon  as  I  saw  him."

Whaley's  memory  of  the  lineup  is  inaccurate.
There  were  four  men  altogether,  not  six  men,
in  the  lineup  with  Oswald.  Whaley  said  that
Oswald  was  the  man  under  No.  2.  Actually
Oswald  was  under  No.  3.  Only  two  of  the  men
in  the  lineup  with  Oswald  were  teenagers:  John
T.  Horn,  aged  18,  was  No.  1;  David  Knapp,
aged  18,  was  No.  2;  Lee  Oswald  was  No.  3;  and
Daniel  Lujan,  aged  26,  was  No.  4.

When  he  first  testified  before  the  Commission,
Whaley  displayed  a  trip  manifest  which  showed
a  12  o'clock  trip  from  Travis  Hotel  to  the  Con-
tinental bus  station,  unloaded  at  12:15  p.m.,
a  12:15  p.m.  pickup  at  Continental  to  Grey-
hound, unloaded  at  12:30  p.m.,  and  a  pickup
from  Greyhound  (bus  station)  at  12:30  p.m.,
unloaded  at  500  North  Beckley  at  12:45  p.m.
Whaley  testified  that  he  did  not  keep  an  accurate
time  record  of  his  trips  but  recorded  them  by  the
quarter  hour,  and  that  sometimes  he  made  his
entry  right  after  a  trip  while  at  other  times  he
waited  to  record  three  or  four  trips.  As  he
unloaded  his  Continental  bus  station  passenger
in  front  of  Greyhoimd,  he  started  to  get  out  to
buy  a  package  of  cigarettes.  He  saw  a  man  walk-
ing south  on  Lamar  from  Commerce.  The  man
was  dressed  in  faded  blue  color  khaki  work
clothes,  a  brown  shirt,  and  some  kind  of  work
jacket  that  almost  matched  his  pants.  The  man
asked,  "May  I  have  the  cab?",  and  got  into  the
front  seat.  Whaley  described  the  ensuing  events
as  follows:

And  about  that  time  an  old  lady,  I  think  she


was  an  old  lady,  I  don't  remember  nothing  but
her  sticking  her  head  down  past  him  in  the
door  and  said,  "Driver,  will  you  call  me  a
cab  down  here?"

She  had  seen  him  get  this  cab  and  she
wanted  one,  too,  and  he  opened  the  door  a
little  bit  like  he  was  going  to  get  out  and  he
said,  "I  will  let  you  have  this  one,"  and  she
says,  "No,  the  driver  can  call  me  one."


*  *  *  I  asked  him  where  he  wanted  to  go.
And  he  said,  "500  North  Beckley."

Well,  I  started  up,  I  started  to  that  address,
and  the  police  cars,  the  sirens  was  going,
running  crisscrossing  everywhere,  just  a  big
uproar  in  that  end  of  town  and  I  said,  "What
the  hell.  I  wonder  what  the  hell  is  the  uproar?"

And  he  never  said  anything.  So  I  figured
he  was  one  of  these  people  that  don't  like  to
talk  so  I  never  said  any  more  to  him.

But  when  I  got  pretty  close  to  500  block  at
Neches  and  North  Beckley  which  is  the  500
block,  he  said,  "This  will  do  fine,"  and  I
pulled  over  to  the  curb  right  there.  He  gave
me  a  dollar  bill,  the  trip  was  95  cents.  He
gave  me  a  dollar  bill  and  didn't  say  any-
thing, just  got  out  and  closed  the  door  and
walked  around  the  front  of  the  cab  over  to
the  other  side  of  the  street  [east  side  of  the
street].  Of  course,  the  traffic  was  moving
through  there  and  I  put  it  in  gear  and  moved
on,  that  is  the  last  I  saw  of  him.

Whaley  was  somewhat  imprecise  as  to  where  he
imloaded  his  passenger.  He  marked  what  he
thought  was  the  intersection  of  Neches  and
Beckley  on  a  map  of  Dallas  with  a  large  "X."
He  said,  "Yes,  sir;  that  is  right,  because  that  is
the  500  block  of  North  Beckley."  However,
Neches  and  Beckley  do  not  intersect.  Neches  is
within  one-half  block  of  the  roominghouse  at
1026  North  Beckley  where  Oswald  was  living.
The  500  block  of  North  Beckley  is  five  blocks
south  of  the  roominghouse.

After  a  review  of  these  inconsistencies  in  his
testimony  before  the  Commission,  Whaley  was
interviewed  again  in  Dallas.  The  route  of  the
taxicab  was  retraced  imder  the  direction  of
Whaley.  He  directed  the  driver  of  the  car  to  a
point  20  feet  north  of  the  northwest  comer  of  the
intersection  of  Beckley  and  Neely,  the  point  at
which  he  said  his  passenger  alighted.  This  was
the  700  block  of  North  Beckley.  The  elapsed
time  of  the  reconstructed  run  from  the  Grey-
hound Bus  Station  to  Neely  and  Beckley  was  5
minutes  and  30  seconds  by  stopwatch.  The  walk
from  Beckley  and  Neely  to  1026  North  Beckley
was  timed  by  Commission  counsel  at  5  minutes
and  45  seconds.

Whaley  testified  that  Oswald  was  wearing
either  the  gray  zippered  jacket  or  the  heavy  blue
jacket.  He  was  in  error,  however.  Oswald  could
not  possibly  have  been  wearing  the  blue  jacket
during  the  trip  with  Whaley,  since  it  was  found


65


in  the  "domino"  room  of  the  Depository  late
in  November.  Moreover,  Mrs.  Bledsoe  saw  Os-
wald in  the  bus  without  a  jacket  and  wearing  a
shirt  with  a  hole  at  the  elbow.  On  the  other  hand,
Whaley  identified  Commission  Exhibit  No.  150
(the  shirt  taken  from  Oswald  upon  arrest)  as  the
shirt  his  passenger  was  wearing.  He  also  stated
he  saw  a  sUver  identification  bracelet  on  his
passenger's  left  wrist.  Oswald  was  wearing  such
a  bracelet  when  he  was  arrested.

On  November  22,  Oswald  told  Captain  Fritz
that  he  rode  a  bus  to  a  stop  near  his  home  and
then  walked  to  his  roominghouse.  When  queried
the  following  morning  concerning  a  bus  trans-
fer found  in  his  possession  at  the  time  of  his
arrest,  he  admitted  receiving  it.  And  when  inter-
rogated about  a  cab  ride,  Oswald  also  admitted
that  he  left  the  slow-moving  bus  and  took  a  cab
to  his  roominghouse.

The  Greyhound  Bus  Station  at  Lamar  and
Jackson  Streets,  where  Oswald  entered  Whaley's
cab,  is  three  to  four  short  blocks  south  of  Lamar
and  Elm.  If  Oswald  left  the  bus  at  12:44  p.m.
and  walked  directly  to  the  terminal,  he  would
have  entered  the  cab  at  12:47  or  12:48  p.m.
If  the  cab  ride  was  approximately  6  minutes,
as  was  the  reconstructed  ride,  he  would  have
reached  his  destination  at  approximately  12:54
p.m.  If  he  was  discharged  at  Neely  and  Beckley
and  walked  directly  to  his  roominghouse,  he
would  have  arrived  there  about  12:59  to  1  p.m.
From  the  500  block  of  North  Beckley,  the  walk
would  be  a  few  minutes  longer,  but  in  either
event  he  would  have  been  in  the  roominghouse
at  about  1  p.m.  This  is  the  approximate  time  he
entered  the  roominghouse,  according  to  Earlene
Roberts,  the  housekeeper  there.

Arrival  and  departure  from  roominghouse. —
Earlene  Roberts,  housekeeper  for  Mrs.  A.  C.
Johnson  at  1026  North  Beckley,  knew  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  under  the  alias  of  O.  H.  Lee.
She  first  saw  him  the  day  he  rented  a  room  at
that  address  on  October  14,  1963.  He  signed  his
name  as  O.  H.  Lee  on  the  roominghouse  register.

Mrs.  Roberts  testified  that  on  Thursday,  No-
vember 21,  Oswald  did  not  come  home.  On
Friday,  November  22,  about  1  p.m.,  he  entered
the  house  in  unusual  haste.  She  recalled  that  it
was  subsequent  to  the  time  the  President  had
been  shot.  After  a  friend  had  called  and  told
her,  "President  Keimedy  has  been  shot,"  she
turned  on  the  television.  When  Oswald  came  in
she  said,  "Oh,  you  are  in  a  hurry,"  but  Oswald
did  not  respond.  He  hurried  to  his  room  and
stayed  no  longer  than  3  or  4  minutes.  Oswald
had  entered  the  house  in  his  shirt  sleeves,  but
when  he  left,  he  was  zipping  up  a  jacket.  Mrs.
Roberts  saw  him  a  few  seconds  later  standing
near  the  bus  stop  in  front  of  the  house  on  the
east  side  of  Beckley.

Oswald  was  next  seen  about  nine-tenths  of  a
mile  away  at  the  southeast  comer  of  10th  Street
and  Patton  Avenue,  moments  before  the  Tippit
shooting.  If  Oswald  left  his  roominghouse  shortly
after  1  p.m.  and  walked  at  a  brisk  pace,  he


would  have  reached  10th  and  Patton  shortly
after  1:15  p.m.  Tippit's  murder  was  recorded
on  the  police  radio  tape  at  about  1:16  p.m.

Description  of  Shooting

Patrohnan  J.  D.  Tippit  joined  the  Dallas
Police  Department  in  July  1952.  He  was  de-
scribed by  Chief  Curry  as  having  the  reputation
of  being  "a  very  fine,  dedicated  ofiicer."  Tippit
patroled  district  No.  78  in  the  Oak  Cliff  area  of
Dallas  during  dayUght  hours.  He  drove  a  police
car  painted  distinctive  colors  with  No.  10  promi-
nently displayed  on  each  side.  Tippit  rode  alone,
as  only  one  man  was  normally  assigned  to  a
patrol  car  in  residential  areas  during  daylight
shifts.

At  about  12:44  p.m.  on  November  22,  the
radio  dispatcher  on  channel  1  ordered  all  down-
town patrol  squads  to  report  to  Elm  and  Hous-
ton, code  3  (emergency).  At  12:45  p.m.  the
dispatcher  ordered  No.  78  (Tippit)  to  "move
into  central  Oak  Cliff  area."  At  12:54  p.m.,
Tippit  reported  that  he  was  in  the  central  Oak
Cliff  area  at  Lancaster  and  Eighth.  The  dis-
patcher ordered  Tippit  to  be:  "*  *  *  at  large
for  any  emergency  that  comes  in."  According  to
Chief  Curry,  Tippit  was  free  to  patrol  the  cen-
tral Oak  Cliff  area,  Tippit  must  have  heard  the
description  of  the  suspect  wanted  for  the  Presi-
dent's shooting;  it  was  broadcast  over  channel
1  at  12:45  p.m.,  again  at  12:48  p.m.,  and  again
at  12:55  p.m.  The  suspect  was  described  as  a
"white  male,  approximately  30,  slender  build,
height  5  foot  10  inches,  weight  165  pounds."  A
similar  description  was  given  on  channel  2  at
12:45  p.m.

At  approximately  1:15  p.m.,  Tippit,  who  was
cruising  east  on  10th  Street,  passed  the  inter-
section of  10th  and  Patton,  about  eight  blocks
from  where  he  had  reported  at  12:54  p.m.  About
100  feet  past  the  intersection  Tippit  stopped  a
man  walking  east  along  the  south  side  of  Patton.
The  man's  general  description  was  similar  to
the  one  broadcast  over  the  police  radio.  Tippit
stopped  the  man  and  called  him  to  his  car.  He
approached  the  car  and  apparently  exchanged
words  with  Tippit  through  the  right  front  or
vent  window.  Tippit  got  out  and  started  to  walk
around  the  front  of  the  car.  As  Tippit  reached
the  left  front  wheel  the  man  pulled  out  a  revolver
and  fired  several  shots.  Four  bullets  hit  Tippit
and  killed  him  instantly.  The  gunman  started
back  toward  Patton  Avenue,  ejecting  the  empty
cartridge  cases  before  reloading  with  fresh
bullets.

At  least  12  persons  saw  the  man  with  the
revolver  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Tippit  crime  scene
at  or  immediately  after  the  shooting.  By  the
evening  of  November  22,  five  of  them  had
identified  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  in  police  lineups
as  the  man  they  saw.  A  sixth  did  so  the  next
day.  Three  others  subsequently  identified  Os-
wald from  a  photograph.  Two  witnesses  testified
that  Oswald  resembled  the  man  they  had  seen.


66


One  witness  felt  he  was  too  distant  from  the
gunman  to  make  a  positive  identification.

A  taxi  driver,  William  Scoggins,  was  eating
lunch  in  his  cab  which  was  parked  on  Patton
facing  the  southeast  comer  of  10th  Street  and
Patton  Avenue  a  few  feet  to  the  north.  A  police
car  moving  east  on  10th  at  about  10  or  12  miles
an  hour  passed  in  front  of  his  cab.  About  100
feet  from  the  comer  the  police  car  pulled  up
alongside  a  man  on  the  sidewalk.  This  man,
dressed  in  a  light-colored  jacket,  approached
the  car.  Scoggins  lost  sight  of  him  behind  some
shrubbery  on  the  southeast  comer  lot,  but  he
saw  the  policeman  leave  the  car,  heard  three
or  four  shots,  and  then  saw  the  policeman  fall.
Scoggins  hurriedly  left  his  seat  and  hid  behind
the  cab  as  the  man  came  back  toward  the  comer
with  gun  in  hand.  The  man  cut  across  the  yard
through  some  bushes,  passed  within  12  feet  of
Scoggins,  and  ran  south  on  Patton.  Scoggins
saw  him  and  heard  him  mutter  either  "Poor
damn  cop"  or  "Poor  dumb  cop."  The  next  day
Scoggins  viewed  a  lineup  of  four  persons  and
identified  Oswald  as  the  man  whom  he  had  seen
the  day  before  at  10th  and  Patton.  In  his  testi-
mony before  the  Commission,  Scoggins  stated
that  he  thought  he  had  seen  a  picture  of  Oswald
in  the  newspapers  prior  to  the  lineup  identifica-
tion on  Saturday.  He  had  not  seen  Oswald  on
television  and  had  not  been  shown  any  photo-
graphs of  Oswald  by  the  police.

Another  witness,  Domingo  Benavides,  was
driving  a  pickup  truck  west  on  10th  Street.  As
he  crossed  the  mtersection  a  block  east  of  10th
and  Patton,  he  saw  a  policeman  standing  by  the
left  door  of  the  police  car  parked  along  the
south  side  of  10th.  Benavides  saw  a  man  stand-
ing at  the  right  side  of  the  parked  police  car.  He
then  heard  three  shots  and  saw  the  policeman
fall  to  the  ground.  By  this  time  the  pickup  truck
was  across  the  street  and  about  25  feet  from
the  police  car.  Benavides  stopped  and  waited  in
the  truck  until  the  gunman  ran  to  the  comer.
He  saw  him  empty  the  gim  and  throw  the  shells
into  some  bushes  on  the  southeast  corner  lot.  It
was  Benavides,  using  Tippit's  car  radio,  who
first  reported  the  killing  of  Patrolman  Tippit  at
about  1:16  p.m.:  "We've  had  a  shooting  out
here."  He  found  two  empty  shells  in  the  bushes
and  gave  them  to  Patrolman  J.  M.  Poe  who  ar-
rived on  the  scene  shortly  after  the  shooting.
Benavides  never  saw  Oswald  after  the  arrest.
When  questioned  by  police  officers  on  the  eve-
ning of  November  22,  Benavides  told  them  that
he  did  not  think  that  he  could  identify  the  man
who  fired  the  shots.  As  a  result,  they  did  not
take  him  to  the  police  station.  He  testified  that
the  picture  of  Oswald  which  he  saw  later  on
television  bore  a  resemblance  to  the  man  who
shot  Officer  Tippit.

Just  prior  to  the  shooting,  Mrs.  Helen  Mark-
ham,  a  waitress  in  downtown  Dallas,  was  about
to  cross  10th  Street  at  Patton.  As  she  waited  on
the  northwest  comer  of  the  intersection  for
traffic  to  pass,  she  noticed  a  young  man  as  he


was  "almost  ready  to  get  up.on  the  curb"  at  the
southeast  corner  of  the  intersection,  approxi-
mately 50  feet  away.  The  man  continued  along
10th  Street.  Mrs.  Markham  saw  a  police  car
slowly  approach  the  man  from  the  rear  and
stop  alongside  of  him.  She  saw  the  man  come
to  the  right  window  of  the  police  car.  As  he
talked,  he  leaned  on  the  ledge  of  the  right  win-
dow with  his  arms.  The  man  appeared  to  step
back  as  the  policeman  "calmly  opened  the  car
door"  and  very  slowly  got  out  and  walked
toward  the  front  of  the  car.  The  man  pulled  a
gun.  Mrs.  Markham  heard  three  shots  and  saw
the  policeman  fall  to  the  groimd  near  the  left
front  wheel.  She  raised  her  hands  to  her  eyes  as
the  man  started  to  walk  back  toward  Patton.  She
peered  through  her  fingers,  lowered  her  hands,
and  saw  the  man  doing  something  with  his  gun.
"He  was  just  fooling  with  it  I  didn't  know  what
he  was  doing.  I  was  afraid  he  was  fixing  to  kill
me."  The  man  "in  kind  of  a  little  trot"  headed
down  Patton  toward  Jefferson  Boulevard,  a
block  away.  Mrs.  Markham  then  ran  to  Officer
Tippit's  side  and  saw  bim  lying  in  a  pool  of
blood.

Helen  Markham  was  screaming  as  she  leaned
over  the  body.  A  few  minutes  later  she  de-
scribed the  gunman  to  a  policeman.  Her  descrip-
tion and  that  of  other  eyewitnesses  led  to  the
police  broadcast  at  1:22  p.m.  describing  the
slayer  as  "about  30,  5'8",  black  hair,  slender."
At  about  4:30  p.m.,  Mrs.  Markham,  who  had
been  greatly  upset  by  her  experience,  was  able
to  view  a  lineup  of  four  men  handcuffed  to-
gether at  the  police  station.  She  identified  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  as  the  man  who  shot  the  poUce-
man.  Detective  L.  C.  Graves,  who  had  been
with  Mrs.  Markham  before  the  lineup  testified
that  she  was  "quite  hysterical"  and  was  "crying
and  upset."  He  said  that  Mrs.  Markham  started
crying  when  Oswald  walked  into  the  lineup
room.  In  testimony  before  the  Commission,  Mrs.
Markham  confirmed  her  positive  identification
of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  as  the  man  she  saw  kill
Officer  Tippit.

In  evaluating  Mrs.  Markham's  identification
of  Oswald,  the  Commission  considered  certain
allegations  that  Mrs.  Markham  described  the
man  who  killed  Patrolman  Tippit  as  "short,  a
little  on  the  heavy  side,"  and  having  "somewhat
bushy"  hair.  The  Commission  reviewed  the
transcript  of  a  phone  conversation  in  which  Mrs.
Markham  is  alleged  to  have  provided  such  a
description.  A  review  of  the  complete  transcript
has  satisfied  the  Conmiission  that  Mrs.  Mark-
ham strongly  reaffirmed  her  positive  identifica-
tion of  Oswald  and  denied  having  described  the
killer  as  short,  stocky  and  having  bushy  hair.
She  stated  that  the  man  weighed  about  150
pounds.  Although  she  used  the  words  "a  little
bit  bushy"  to  describe  the  gunman's  hair,  the
transcript  establishes  that  she  was  referring  to
the  uncombed  state  of  his  hair,  a  description
fully  supported  by  a  photograph  of  Oswald
taken  at  the  time  of  his  arrest.  Although  in  the


67


phone  conversation  she  described  the  man  as
"short,"  on  November  22,  within  minutes  of  the
shooting  and  before  the  lineup,  Mrs.  Markham
described  the  man  to  the  poHce  as  5'8"  tali.

During  her  testimony  Mrs.  Markham  initially
denied  that  she  ever  had  the  above  phone  con-
versation. She  has  subsequently  admitted  the  ex-
istence of  the  conversation  and  offered  an
explanation  for  her  denial.  Addressing  itself
solely  to  the  probative  value  of  Mrs.  Markham's
contemporaneous  description  of  the  gunman  and
her  positive  identification  of  Oswald  at  a  police
lineup,  the  Commission  considers  her  testimony
reliable.  However,  even  in  the  absence  of  Mrs.
Markham's  testimony,  there  is  ample  evidence
to  identify  Oswald  as  the  killer  of  Tippit.

Two  young  women,  Barbara  Jeanette  Davis
and  Virginia  Davis,  were  in  an  apartment  of  a
multiple-unit  house  on  the  southeast  corner  of
10th  and  Patton  when  they  heard  the  sound  of
gunfire  and  the  screams  of  Helen  Markham.
They  ran  to  the  door  in  time  to  see  a  man  with  a
revolver  cut  across  their  lawn  and  disappear
around  a  comer  of  the  house  onto  Patton.  Bar-
bara Jeanette  Davis  assumed  that  he  was  empty-
ing his  gun  as  "he  had  it  open  and  was  shaking
it."  She  immediately  called  the  police.  Later  in
the  day  each  woman  found  an  empty  shell  on
the  ground  near  the  house.  These  two  shells
were  delivered  to  the  police.

On  the  evening  of  November  22,  Barbara
Jeanette  and  Virginia  Davis  viewed  a  group  of
four  men  in  a  lineup  and  each  one  picked  Os-
wald as  the  man  who  crossed  their  lawn  while
emptying  his  pistol.  Barbara  Jeanette  Davis  testi-
fied that  no  one  had  shown  her  a  picture  of  Os-
wald before  the  identification  and  that  she  had
not  seen  him  on  television.  She  was  not  sure
whether  she  had  seen  his  picture  in  a  newspaper
on  the  afternoon  or  evening  of  November  22
prior  to  the  lineup.  Her  reaction  when  she  saw
Oswald  in  the  lineup  was  that  "I  was  pretty  sure
it  was  the  same  man  I  saw.  When  they  made  him
turn  sideways,  I  was  positive  that  was  the  one  I
seen."  Similarly,  Virginia  Davis  had  not  been
shown  pictures  of  anyone  prior  to  the  lineup
and  had  not  seen  either  television  or  the  news-
papers during  the  afternoon.  She  identified  Os-
wald, who  was  the  No.  2  man  in  the  lineup,  as
the  man  she  saw  running  with  the  gun:  she
testified,  "I  would  say  that  was  him  for  sure."
Barbara  Jeanette  Davis  and  Virginia  Davis  were
sitting  alongside  each  other  when  they  made
their  positive  identifications  of  Oswald.  Each
woman  whispered  Oswald's  number  to  the  de-
tective. Each  testified  that  she  was  the  first  to
make  the  identification.

William  Arthur  Smith  was  about  a  block  east
of  10th  and  Patton  when  he  heard  shots.  He
looked  west  on  10th  and  saw  a  man  running  to
the  west  and  a  policeman  falling  to  the  ground.
Smith  failed  to  make  himself  known  to  the  police
on  November  22.  Several  days  later  he  reported
what  he  had  seen  and  was  questioned  by  FBI
agents.  Smith  subsequently  told  a  Commission


staff  member  that  he  saw  Oswald  on  television
the  night  of  the  murder  and  thought  that  Os-
wald was  the  man  he  had  seen  running  away
from  the  shooting.  On  television  Oswald's  hair
looked  blond,  whereas  Smith  remembered  that
the  man  who  ran  away  had  hair  that  was  brown
or  brownish  black.  Later,  the  FBI  showed  Smith
a  picture  of  Oswald.  In  the  picture  the  hair  was
brown.  According  to  his  testimony,  Smith  told
the  FBI,  "It  looked  more  like  him  than  it  did  on
television."  He  stated  further  that  from  "What  I
saw  of  him"  the  man  looked  like  the  man  in  the
picture.

Two  other  important  eyewitnesses  to  Os-
wald's flight  were  Ted  Callaway,  manager  of  a
used-car  lot  on  the  northeast  corner  of  Patton
Avenue  and  Jefferson  Boulevard,  and  Sam  Guin-
yard,  a  porter  at  the  lot.  They  heard  the  sound
of  shots  to  the  north  of  their  lot.  Callaway  heard
five  shots,  and  Guinyard  three.  Both  ran  to  the
sidewalk  on  the  east  side  of  Patton  at  a  point
about  a  half  a  block  south  of  10th.  They  saw  a
man  coming  south  on  Patton  with  a  revolver
held  high  in  his  right  hand.  According  to  Calla-
way, the  man  crossed  to  the  west  side  of  Patton.
From  across  the  street  Callaway  yelled,  "Hey,
man,  what  the  hell  is  going  on?"  He  slowed
down,  halted,  said  something,  and  then  kept  on
going  to  the  corner,  turned  right,  and  con-
tinued west  on  Jefferson.  Guinyard  claimed  that
the  man  ran  down  the  east  side  of  Patton  and
passed  within  10  feet  of  him  before  crossing  to
the  other  side.  Guinyard  and  Callaway  ran  to
10th  and  Patton  and  found  Tippit  lying  in  the
street  beside  his  car.  Apparently  he  had  reached
for  his  gun;  it  lay  beneath  him  outside  of  the
holster.  Callaway  picked  up  the  gun.  He  and
Scoggins  attempted  to  chase  down  the  gunman
in  Scoggin's  taxicab,  but  he  had  disappeared.
Early  in  the  evening  of  November  22,  Guinyard
and  Callaway  viewed  the  same  lineup  of  four
men  from  which  Mrs.  Markham  had  earlier
made  her  identification  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.
Both  men  picked  Oswald  as  the  man  who  had
run  south  on  Patton  with  a  gun  in  his  hand.
Callaway  told  the  Commission:  "So  they  brought
four  men  in.  I  stepped  to  the  back  of  the  room,
so  I  could  kind  of  see  him  from  the  same  dis-
tance which  I  had  seen  him  before.  And  when
he  came  out  I  knew  him."  Guinyard  said,  "I  told
them  that  was  him  right  there.  I  pointed  him
out  right  there."  Both  Callaway  and  Guinyard
testified  that  they  had  not  been  shown  any  pic-
tures by  the  police  before  the  lineup.

The  Dallas  Police  Department  furnished  the
Commission  with  pictures  of  the  men  who  ap-
peared in  the  lineups  with  Oswald,  and  the  Com-
mission has  inquired  into  general  lineup  proce-
dures used  by  the  Dallas  police  as  well  as  the
specific  procedures  in  the  lineups  involving  Os-
wald. The  Commission  is  satisfied  that  the  line-
ups were  conducted  fairly.

As  Oswald  ran  south  on  Patton  Avenue
toward  Jefferson  Boulevard  he  was  moving  in
the  direction  of  a  used-car  lot  located  on  the


68


I


southeast  comer  of  this  intersection.  Four  men
— Warren  Reynolds,  Harold  Russell,  Pat  Patter-
son, and  L.  J.  Lewis — were  on  the  lot  at  the  time,
and  they  saw  a  white  male  with  a  revolver  in  his
hands  running  south  on  Patton.  When  the  man
reached  Jefferson,  he  turned  right  and  headed
west.  Reynolds  and  Patterson  decided  to  follow
him.  When  he  reached  a  gasoline  service  station
one  block  away  he  turned  north  and  walked
toward  a  parking  area  in  the  rear  of  the  station.
Neither  Reynolds  nor  Patterson  saw  the  man
after  he  turned  off  Jefferson  at  the  service  sta-
tion. These  four  witnesses  were  interviewed  by
FBI  agents  2  months  after  the  shooting.  Russell
and  Patterson  were  shown  a  picture  of  Oswald
and  they  stated  that  Oswald  was  the  man  they
saw  on  November  22,  1963.  Russell  confirmed
this  statement  in  a  sworn  affidavit  for  the  Com-
mission. Patterson,  when  asked  later  to  confirm
his  identification  by  affidavit  said  he  did  not  re-
call having  been  shown  the  photograph.  He
was  then  shown  two  photographs  of  Oswald
and  he  advised  that  Oswald  was  "unquestion-
ably" the  man  he  saw.  Reynolds  did  not  make  a
positive  identification  when  interviewed  by  the
FBI,  but  he  subsequently  testified  before  a  Com-
mission staff  member  and,  when  shown  two
photographs  of  Oswald,  stated  that  they  were
photographs  of  the  man  he  saw.  L.  J.  Lewis
said  in  an  interview  that  because  of  the  distance
from  which  he  observed  the  gunman  he  would
hesitate  to  state  whether  the  man  was  identical
with  Oswald.

Murder  Weapon

When  Oswald  was  arrested,  he  had  in  his  pos-
session a  Smith  &  Wesson  .38  Special  caliber
revolver,  serial  number  V510210.  Two  of  the
arresting  officers  placed  their  initials  on  the
weapon  and  a  third  inscribed  his  name.  All  three
identified  Exhibit  No.  143  as  the  revolver  taken
from  Oswald  when  he  was  arrested.  Four  car-
tridge cases  were  found  in  the  shrubbery  on  the
comer  of  10th  and  Patton  by  three  of  the  eye-
witnesses— Domingo  Benavides,  Barbara  Jean-
ette  Davis,  and  Virginia  Davis.  It  was  the  unani-
mous and  imequivocal  testimony  of  expert
witnesses  before  the  Commission  that  these  used
cartridge  cases  were  fired  from  the  revolver  in
Oswald's  possession  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other
weapons.  (See  app.  X.)

Cortlandt  Cunningham,  of  the  Firearms
Identification  Unit  of  the  FBI  Laboratory,  testi-
fied that  he  compared  the  four  empty  cartridge
cases  foimd  near  the  scene  of  the  shooting  with
a  test  cartridge  fired  from  the  weapon  in  Os-
wald's possession  when  he  was  arrested.  Cun-
ningham declared  that  this  weapon  fired  the  four
cartridges  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  weapons.
Identification  was  effected  through  breech  face
marks  and  firing  pin  marks.  Robert  A.  Frazier
and  Charles  Killion,  other  FBI  firearms  experts,
independently  examined  the  four  cartridge  cases
and  arrived  at  the  same  conclusion  as  Cunning-


ham. At  the  request  of  the  Commission,  Joseph
D.  Nicol,  superintendent  of  the  Illinois  Bureau
of  Criminal  Identification  Investigation,  also  ex-
amined the  four  cartridge  cases  found  near  the
site  of  the  homicide  and  compared  them  with
the  test  cartridge  cases  fired  from  the  Smith  &
Wesson  revolver  taken  from  Oswald.  He  con-
cluded that  all  of  these  cartridges  were  fired
from  the  same  weapon.

Cunningham  compared  four  lead  bullets  re-
covered from  the  body  of  Patrolman  Tippit  with
test  bullets  fired  from  Oswald's  revolver.  He
explained  that  the  bullets  were  slightly  smaller
than  the  barrel  of  the  pistol  which  had  fired
them.  This  caused  the  bullets  to  have  an  erratic
passage  through  the  barrel  and  impressed  upon
the  lead  of  the  bullets  inconsistent  individual
characteristics  which  made  identification  im-
possible. Consecutive  bullets  fired  from  the  re-
volver by  the  FBI  experts  could  not  be  identified
as  having  been  fired  from  that  revolver.  (See
app.  X.)  Curmingham  testified  that  all  of  the
bullets  were  mutilated,  one  being  useless  for
comparison  purposes.  All  four  bullets  were  fired
from  a  weapon  with  five  lands  and  grooves  and
a  right  twist  which  were  the  rifling  characteris-
tics of  the  revolver  taken  from  Oswald.  He  con-
cluded, however,  that  he  could  not  say  whether
the  four  bullets  were  fired  from  the  revolver  in
Oswald's  possession.  "The  only  thing  I  can  testify
is  they  could  have  on  the  basis  of  the  rifling
characteristics — they  could  have  been."

Nicol  differed  with  the  FBI  experts  on  one
bullet  taken  from  Tippit's  body.  He  declared
that  this  bullet  was  fired  from  the  same  weapon
that  fired  the  test  buUets  to  the  exclusion  of  all
other  weapons.  But  he  agreed  that  because  the
other  three  bullets  were  mutilated,  he  could  not
determine  if  they  had  been  fired  from  the  same
weapon  as  the  test  bullets.

The  examination  and  testimony  of  the  ex-
perts enabled  the  Commission  to  conclude  that
five  shots  may  have  been  fired,  even  though  only
four  bullets  were  recovered.  Three  of  the  bullets
recovered  from  Tippit's  body  were  manufac-
tured by  Winchester- Western,  and  the  fourth
bullet  by  Remington-Peters,  but  only  two  of  the
four  discarded  cartridge  cases  fotmd  on  the
lawn  at  10th  Street  and  Patton  Avenue  were  of
Winchester-Western  manufacture.  Therefore,
one  cartridge  case  of  this  type  was  not  recovered.
And  though  only  one  bullet  of  Remington-Peters
manufacture  was  recovered,  two  empty  cartridge
cases  of  that  make  were  retrieved.  Therefore,
either  one  bullet  of  Remington-Peters  manufac-
ture is  missing  or  one  used  Remington-Peters
cartridge  case,  which  may  have  been  in  the  re-
volver before  the  shooting,  was  discarded  along
with  the  others  as  Oswald  left  the  scene.  If  a
bullet  is  missing,  five  were  fired.  This  corre-
sponds with  the  observation  and  memory  of  Ted
Callaway,  and  possibly  Warren  Reynolds,  but
not  with  the  other  eyewitnesses  who  claim  to
have  heard  from  two  to  four  shots.


69


Ownership  of  Revolver

By  checking  certain  importers  and  dealers
after  the  assassination  of  President  Kennedy  and
slaying  of  OflBcer  Tippit,  agents  of  the  FBI  de-
termined that  George  Rose  &  Co.  of  Los  Angeles
was  a  major  distributor  of  this  type  of  revolver.
Records  of  Seaport  Traders,  Inc.,  a  mail-order
division  of  George  Rose  &  Co.,  disclosed  that  on
January  3,  1963,  the  company  received  from
Empire  Wholesale  Sporting  Goods,  Ltd.,  Mon-
treal, a  shipment  of  99  guns  in  one  case.  Among
these  guns  was  a  .38  Special  caliber  Smith  &
Wesson  revolver,  serial  No.  V510210,  the  only
revolver  made  by  Smith  &  Wesson  with  this
serial  nimiber.  When  first  manufactured,  it  had
a  5-inch  barrel.  George  Rose  &  Co.  had  the
barrel  shortened  by  a  gunsmith  to  2J  inches.

Sometime  after  January  27,  1963,  Seaport
Traders,  Inc.,  received  through  the  mail  a  mail-
order coupon  for  one  ".38  St.  W.  2"  Bbl.,"  cost
$29.95.  Ten  dollars  in  cash  was  enclosed.  The
order  was  signed  in  ink  by  "A.  J.  Hidell,  aged
28."  The  date  of  the  order  was  January  27  (no
year  shown),  and  the  return  address  was  Post
Oflfice  Box  2915,  Dallas,  Tex.  Also  on  the  order
form  was  an  order,  written  in  ink,  for  one  box  of
ammunition  and  one  holster,  but  a  line  was
drawn  through  these  items.  The  mail-order
form  had  a  iLie  for  the  name  of  a  witness  to
attest  that  the  person  ordering  the  gun  was  a
U.S.  citizen  and  had  not  been  convicted  of  a
felony.  The  name  written  in  this  space  was  D.  F.
Drittal.

Heinz  W.  Michaelis,  office  manager  of  both
George  Rose  &  Co.,  Inc.,  and  Seaport  Traders,
Inc.,  identified  records  of  Seaport  Traders,  Inc.,
which  showed  that  a  ".38  S  and  W  Special  two-
inch  Commando,  serial  number  V510210"  was
shipped  on  March  20,  1963,  to  A.  J.  Hidell,
Post  Office  Box  2915,  Dallas,  Tex.  The  invoice
was  prepared  on  March  13,  1963;  the  revolver
was  actually  shipped  on  March  20  by  Railway
Express.  The  balance  due  on  the  purchase  was
$19.95.  MichaeUs  furnished  the  shipping  copy
of  the  invoice,  and  the  Railway  Express  Agency
shipping  documents,  showing  that  $19.95,  plus
$1.27  shipping  charge,  had  been  collected  from
the  consignee,  Hidell.

Handwriting  experts,  Alwyn  Cole  of  the
Treasury  Department  and  James  C.  Cadigan  of
the  FBI,  testified  before  the  Commission  that
the  writing  on  the  coupon  was  Oswald's.  The
signature  of  the  witness,  D.  F.  Drittal,  who  at-
tested that  the  fictitious  Hidell  was  an  American
citizen  and  had  not  been  convicted  of  a  felony,
was  also  in  Oswald's  handwriting.  Marina  Os-
wald gave  as  her  opinion  that  the  mail-order
coupon  was  in  Oswald's  handwriting.  When
shown  the  revolver,  she  stated  that  she  recog-
nized it  as  the  one  owned  by  her  husband.  She
also  testified  that  this  appeared  to  be  the  re-
volver seen  in  Oswald's  belt  in  the  picture  she
took  in  late  March  or  early  April  1963  when  the
family  was  living  on  Neely  Street  in  Dallas.


Police  found  an  empty  revolver  holster  when
they  searched  Oswald's  room  on  Beckley  Avenue
after  his  arrest.  Marina  Oswald  testified  that  this
was  the  holster  which  contained  the  revolver  in
the  photographs  taken  on  Neely  Street.

Approximately  15  minutes  before  the  shoot-
ing of  Tippit,  Oswald  was  seen  leaving  his  room-
inghouse.  He  was  wearing  a  zipper  jacket  which
he  had  not  been  wearing  moments  before  when
he  had  arrived  home.  When  Oswald  was  ar-
rested, he  did  not  have  a  jacket.  Shortly  after
Tippit  was  slain,  policemen  foimd  a  light-
colored  zipper  jacket  along  the  route  taken  by
the  killer  as  he  attempted  to  escape.

At  1 :  22  p.m.  the  Dallas  police  radio  described
the  man  wanted  for  the  murder  of  Tippit  as  "a
white  male  about  thirty,  five  foot  eight  inches,
black  hair,  slender,  wearing  a  white  jacket,  white
shirt  and  dark  slacks."  According  to  Patrolman
Poe  this  description  came  from  Mrs.  Markham
and  Mrs.  Barbara  Jeanette  Davis.  Mrs.  Mark-
ham  told  Poe  that  the  man  was  a  "white  male,
about  25,  about  five  feet  eight,  brown  hair,  me-
dium," and  wearing  a  "white  jacket."  Mrs.  Davis
gave  Poe  the  same  general  description:  a  "white
male  in  his  early  twenties,  around  five  foot  seven
inches  or  eight  inches,  about  145  poimds,"  and
wearing  a  white  jacket.

As  has  been  discussed  previously,  two  wit-
nesses, Warren  Reynolds  and  B.  M.  Patterson,
saw  the  gunman  run  toward  the  rear  of  a  gaso-
line service  station  on  Jefferson  Boulevard.  Mrs.
Mary  Brock,  the  wife  of  a  mechanic  who  worked
at  the  station,  was  there  at  the  time  and  she  saw
a  white  male,  "5  feet,  10  inches  *  *  *  wear-
ing light  clothing  *  *  *  a  light-colored  jacket"
walk  past  her  at  a  fast  pace  with  his  hands  in
his  pocket.  She  last  saw  him  in  the  parking  lot
directly  behind  the  service  station.  When  inter-
viewed by  FBI  agents  on  January  21,  1964,  she
identified  a  picture  of  Oswald  as  being  the  same
person  she  saw  on  November  22.  She  confirmed
this  interview  by  a  sworn  affidavit.

At  1 :  24  p.m.,  the  poUce  radio  reported,  "The
suspect  last  seen  running  west  on  Jefferson  from
400  East  Jefferson."  Police  Capt.  W.  R.  West-
brook  and  several  other  officers  concentrated
their  search  along  Jefferson  Boulevard.  West-
brook  walked  through  the  parking  lot  behind
the  service  station  and  found  a  light-colored
jacket  lying  under  the  rear  of  one  of  the  cars.
Westbrook  identified  Commission  Exhibit  No.
162  as  the  Ught-colored  jacket  which  he  dis-
covered underneath  the  automobile.

This  jacket  belonged  to  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.
Marina  Oswald  stated  that  her  husband  owned
only  two  jackets,  one  blue  and  the  other  gray.
The  blue  jacket  was  found  in  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  and  was  identified  by  Marina
Oswald  as  her  husband's.  Marina  Oswald  also
identified  Commission  Exhibit  No.  162,  the
jacket  found  by  Captain  Westbrook,  as  her  hus-
band's second  jacket.

The  eyewitnesses  vary  in  their  identification  of
the  jacket.  Mrs.  Earlene  Roberts,  the  house-


70


keeper  at  Oswald's  roominghouse  and  the  last
person  known  to  have  seen  him  before  he
reached  10th  Street  and  Patton  Avenue,  said
that  she  may  have  seen  the  gray  zipper  jacket
but  she  was  not  certain.  It  seemed  to  her  that
the  jacket  Oswald  wore  was  darker  than  Com-
mission Exhibit  No.  162.  Ted  Callaway,  who
saw  the  gimman  moments  after  the  shooting,
testified  that  Commission  Exhibit  No.  162
looked  like  the  jacket  he  was  wearing  but  "I
thought  it  had  a  little  more  tan  to  it."  Two  other
witnesses,  Sam  Guinyard  and  William  Arthur
Smith,  testified  that  Commission  Exhibit  No.
162  was  the  jacket  worn  by  the  man  they  saw
on  November  22.  Mrs.  Markham  and  Barbara
Davis  thought  that  the  jacket  worn  by  the  slayer
of  Tippit  was  darker  than  the  jacket  foimd  by
Westbrook.  Scoggins  thought  it  was  lighter.

There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  Oswald  was
seen  leaving  his  roominghouse  at  about  1  p.m.
wearing  a  zipper  jacket,  that  the  man  who  killed
Tippit  was  wearing  a  light-colored  jacket,  that
he  was  seen  running  along  Jefferson  Boulevard,
that  a  jacket  was  found  under  a  car  in  a  lot  ad-
joining Jefferson  Boulevard,  that  the  jacket  be-
longed to  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  and  that  when  he
was  arrested  at  approximately  1:50  p.m.,  he
was  in  his  shirt  sleeves.  These  facts  warrant  the
finding  that  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  disposed  of  his
jacket  as  he  fled  from  the  scene  of  the  Tippit
killing.

Conclusion

The  foregoing  evidence  establishes  that  (1)
two  eyewitnesses  who  heard  the  shots  and  saw
the  shooting  of  Dallas  Police  Patrolman  J.  D.
Tippit  and  seven  eyewitnesses  who  saw  the  flight
of  the  gunman  with  revolver  in  hand  positively
identified  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  as  the  man  they
saw  fire  the  shots  or  flee  from  the  scene,  (2)  the
cartridge  cases  found  near  the  scene  of  the
shooting  were  fired  from  the  revolver  in  the  pos-
session of  Oswald  at  the  time  of  his  arrest,
to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  weapons,  (3)  the
revolver  in  Oswald's  possession  at  the  time  of
his  arrest  was  purchased  by  and  belonged  to  Os-
wald, and  (4)  Oswald's  jacket  was  found  along
the  path  of  flight  taken  by  the  gunman  as  he
fled  from  the  scene  of  the  killing.  On  the  basis
of  this  evidence  the  Commission  concluded  that
Lee  Harvey  Oswald  kifled  DaUas  Police  Patrol-
man J.  D.  Tippit.


OSWALD'S  ARREST

The  Texas  Theatre  is  on  the  north  side  of
Jefferson  Boulevard,  approximately  eight  blocks
from  the  scene  of  the  Tippit  shooting  and  six
blocks  from  where  several  witnesses  last  saw
Oswald  running  west  on  Jefferson  Boulevard.
Shortly  after  the  Tippit  murder,  police  sirens
sounded  along  Jefferson  Boulevard.  One  of  the
persons  who  heard  the  sirens  was  Johnny  Cal-
vin Brewer,  manager  of  Hardy's  Shoestore,  a


few  doors  east  of  the  Texas  Theatre.  Brewer
knew  from  radio  broadcasts  that  the  President
had  been  shot  and  that  a  patrohnan  had  also
been  shot  in  Oak  Cliff.  When  he  heard  police
sirens,  he  "looked  up  and  saw  the  man  enter
the  lobby,"  a  recessed  area  extending  about  15
feet  between  the  sidewalk  and  the  front  door  of
his  store.  A  police  car  made  a  U-tum,  and  as
the  sirens  grew  fainter,  the  man  in  the  lobby
"looked  over  his  shoulder  and  turned  around  and
walked  up  West  Jefferson  towards  the  theatre."
The  man  wore  a  T-shirt  beneath  his  outer  shirt
and  he  had  no  jacket.  Brewer  said,  "He  just
looked  funny  to  me.  *  *  *  His  hair  was  sort
of  messed  up  and  looked  like  he  had  been  run-
ning, and  he  looked  scared,  and  he  looked
funny."

Mrs.  Julia  Postal,  selling  tickets  at  the  box
office  of  the  Texas  Theatre,  heard  police  sirens
and  then  saw  a  man  as  he  "ducked  into"  the
outer  lobby  space  of  the  theatre  near  the  ticket
office.  Attracted  by  the  sound  of  the  sirens,  Mrs.
Postal  stepped  out  of  the  box  office  and  walked
to  the  curb.  Shortly  thereafter,  Johnny  Brewer,
who  had  come  from  the  nearby  shoestore,  asked
Mrs.  Postal  whether  the  fellow  that  had  ducked
in  had  bought  a  ticket.  She  said,  "No;  by  golly,
he  didn't,"  and  turned  around,  but  the  man  was
nowhere  in  sight.  Brewer  told  Mrs.  Postal  that
he  had  seen  the  man  ducking  into  his  place  of
business  and  that  he  had  followed  him  to  the
theatre.  She  sent  Brewer  into  the  theatre  to  find
the  man  and  check  the  exits,  told  him  about  the
assassination,  and  said  "I  don't  know  if  this  is
the  man  they  want  *  *  *  but  he  is  running
from  them  for  some  reason."  She  then  called
the  police.

At  1:45  p.m.,  the  police  radio  stated,  "Have
information  a  suspect  just  went  in  the  Texas
Theatre  on  West  Jefferson."  Patrol  cars  bearing
at  least  15  officers  converged  on  the  Texas
Theatre.  Patrolman  M.  N.  McDonald,  with  Pa-
trolmen R.  Hawkins,  T.  A.  Hutson,  and  C.  T.
Walker,  entered  the  theatre  from  the  rear.  Other
policemen  entered  the  front  door  and  searched
the  balcony.  Detective  Paul  L.  Bentley  rushed
to  the  balcony  and  told  the  projectionist  to  turn
up  the  house  lights.  Brewer  met  McDonald  and
the  other  policemen  at  the  alley  exit  door,
stepped  out  onto  the  stage  with  them  and  pointed
out  the  man  who  had  come  into  the  theatre  with-
out paying.  The  man  was  Oswald.  He  was  sit-
ting alone  in  the  rear  of  the  main  floor  of  the
theatre  near  the  right  center  aisle.  About  six  or
seven  people  were  seated  on  the  theatre's  main
floor  and  an  equal  number  in  the  balcony.

McDonald  first  searched  two  men  in  the  cen-
ter of  the  main  floor,  about  10  rows  from  the
front.  He  walked  out  of  the  row  up  the  right
center  aisle.  When  he  reached  the  row  where
the  suspect  was  sitting,  McDonald  stopped
abruptly  and  told  the  man  to  get  on  his  feet.
Oswald  rose  from  his  seat,  bringing  up  both
hands.  As  McDonald  started  to  search  Oswald's
waist  for  a  gun,  he  heard  him  say,  "WeU,  it's  all


71


over  now."  Oswald  then  struck  McDonald  be-
tween the  eyes  with  his  left  fist;  with  his  right
hand  he  drew  a  gun  from  his  waist.  McDonald
struck  back  with  his  right  hand  and  grabbed  the
gun  with  his  left  hand.  They  both  fell  into  the
seats.  Three  other  oflficers,  moving  toward  the
scuffle,  grabbed  Oswald  from  the  front,  rear  and
side.  As  McDonald  fell  into  the  seat  with  his
left  hand  on  the  gun,  he  felt  something  graze
across  his  hand  and  heard  what  sounded  like
the  snap  of  the  hammer.  McDonald  felt  the
pistol  scratch  his  cheek  as  he  wrenched  it  away
from  Oswald.  Detective  Bob  K.  Carroll,  who
was  standing  beside  McDonald,  seized  the  gun
from  him.

The  other  officers  who  helped  subdue  Oswald
corroborated  McDonald  in  his  testimony  except
that  they  did  not  hear  Oswald  say,  "It's  all  over
now."  Deputy  Sheriff  Eddy  R.  Walthers  re-
called such  a  remark  but  he  did  not  reach  the
scene  of  the  struggle  until  Oswald  had  been
knocked  to  the  floor  by  McDonald  and  the
others.  Some  of  the  officers  saw  Oswald  strike
McDonald  with  his  fist.  Most  of  them  heard  a
click  which  they  assumed  to  be  a  click  of  the
hammer  of  the  revolver.  Testimony  of  a  firearms
expert  before  the  Commission  established  that
the  hammer  of  the  revolver  never  touched  the
shell  in  the  chamber.  Although  the  witnesses
did  not  hear  the  sound  of  a  misfire,  they  might
have  heard  a  snapping  noise  resultmg  from  the
police  officer  grabbing  the  cylinder  of  the  re-
volver and  pulling  it  away  from  Oswald  while
he  was  attempting  to  pull  the  trigger.  (See  app.
X).

Two  patrons  of  the  theatre  and  John  Brewer
testified  regarding  the  arrest  of  Oswald,  as  did
the  various  police  officers  who  participated  in
the  fight.  George  Jefferson  AppHn,  Jr.,  con-
firmed that  Oswald  fought  with  four  or  five
officers  before  he  was  handcuffed.  He  added
that  one  officer  grabbed  the  muzzle  of  a  shot-
gun, drew  back,  and  hit  Oswald  with  the  butt
end  of  the  gun  in  the  back.  No  other  theatre
patron  or  officer  has  testified  that  Oswald  was
hit  by  a  gun.  Nor  did  Oswald  ever  complain  that
he  was  hit  with  a  gun,  or  injured  in  the  back.
Deputy  Sheriff  Walthers  brought  a  shotgun  into
the  theatre  but  laid  it  on  some  seats  before  help-
ing subdue  Oswald.  Officer  Ray  Hawkins  said
that  there  was  no  one  near  Oswald  who  had  a
shotgun  and  he  saw  no  one  strike  Oswald  in  the
back  vfiih  a  rifle  butt  or  the  butt  of  a  gun.

John  Gibson,  another  patron  in  the  theatre,
saw  an  officer  grab  Oswald,  and  he  claims  that
he  heard  the  click  of  a  gun  misfiring.  He  saw  no
shotgun  in  the  possession  of  any  policeman
near  Oswald.  Johnny  Brewer  testified  he  saw
Oswald  puU  the  revolver  and  the  officers  strug-
gle with  him  to  take  it  away  but  that  once  he
was  subdued,  no  officer  struck  him.  He  further
stated  that  while  fists  were  flying  he  heard  one
of  the  officers  say  "Kill  the  President,  will  you."
It  is  unlikely  that  any  of  the  police  officers  re-
ferred to  Oswald  as  a  suspect  in  the  assassina-


tion. While  the  police  radio  had  noted  the  simi-
larity in  description  of  the  two  suspects,  the
arresting  officers  were  pursuing  Oswald  for  the
murder  of  Tippit.  As  Oswald,  handcuffed,  was
led  from  the  theatre,  he  was,  according  to  Mc-
Donald, "cursing  a  Uttle  bit  and  hoUering  police
brutality."  At  1:51  p.m.,  police  car  2  reported
by  radio  that  it  was  on  the  way  to  headquarters
with  the  suspect.

Captain  Fritz  returned  to  poUce  headquarters
from  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  at
2:15  after  a  brief  stop  at  the  sheriff's  office.
When  he  entered  the  homicide  and  robbery
bureau  office,  he  saw  two  detectives  standing
there  with  Sgt.  Gerald  L.  HiU,  who  had  driven
from  the  theatre  with  Oswald.  Hill  testified
that  Fritz  told  the  detective  to  get  a  search  war-
rant, go  to  an  address  on  Fifth  Street  in  Irving,
and  pick  up  a  man  named  Lee  Oswald.  When
Hill  asked  why  Oswald  was  wanted,  Fritz  re-
plied, "WeU,  he  was  employed  down  at  the  Book
Depository  and  he  had  not  been  present  for  a
roll  call  of  the  employees."  Hill  said,  "Captain,
we  will  save  you  a  trip  *  *  *  there  he  sits."


STATEMENTS  OF  OSWALD  DURING
DETENTION

Oswald  was  questioned  intermittently  for  ap-
proximately 12  hours  between  2:30  p.m.,  on
November  22,  and  11  a.m.,  on  November  24.
Throughout  this  interrogation  he  denied  that  he
had  anything  to  do  either  with  the  assassination
of  President  Kennedy  or  the  murder  of  Patrol-
man Tippit.  Captain  Fritz  of  the  homicide  and
robbery  bureau  did  most  of  the  questioning,  but
he  kept  no  notes  and  there  were  no  stenographic
or  tape  recordings.  Representatives  of  other
law  enforcement  agencies  were  also  present,
including  the  FBI  and  the  U.S.  Secret  Sendee.
They  occasionally  participated  in  the  question-
ing. The  reports  prepared  by  those  present  at
these  interviews  are  set  forth  in  appendix  XI.
A  full  discussion  of  Oswald's  detention  and  m-
terrogation  is  presented  in  chapter  V  of  this

report.  ,

During  the  evening  of  November  22,  me
Dallas  Police  Department  performed  paraffin
tests  on  Oswald's  hands  and  right  cheek  m  an
apparent  effort  to  determine,  by  means  of  a
scientific  test,  whether  Oswald  had  recently  fired
a  weapon.  The  results  were  positive  for  the
hands  and  negative  for  the  right  cheek.  Expert
testimony  before  the  Commission  was  to  the
effect  that  the  paraffin  test  was  unreUable  in
determining  whether  or  not  a  person  has  fired
a  rifle  or  revolver.  The  Commission  has,  there-
fore, placed  no  reliance  on  the  paraffin  tests  ad-
ministered by  the  DaUas  poUce.  (See  app.  X).
Oswald  provided  little  information  during  his
questioning.  Frequently,  however,  he  was  con-
fronted with  evidence  which  he  could  not  ex-
plain, and  he  resorted  to  statements  which  are
known  to  be  lies.  While  Oswald's  untrue  state-


72


ments  during  interrogation  were  not  considered
items  of  positive  proof  by  the  Commission,  they
had  probative  value  in  deciding  the  weight  to  be
given  to  his  denials  that  he  assassinated  Presi-
dent Kennedy  and  killed  Patrolman  Tippit.  Since
independent  evidence  revealed  that  Oswald  re-
peatedly and  blatantly  lied  to  the  police,  the
Commission  gave  litde  weight  to  his  denials  of
guilt.

Denial  of  Rifle  Ownership

From  the  outset,  Oswald  denied  owning  a  rifle.
On  November  23,  Fritz  confronted  Oswald  with
the  evidence  that  he  had  purchased  a  rifle  under
the  fictitious  name  of  "Hidell."  Oswald  said  that
this  was  not  true.  Oswald  denied  that  he  had
a  rifle  wrapped  up  in  a  blanket  in  the  Paine
garage.  Oswald  also  denied  owning  a  rifle  and
said  that  since  leaving  the  Marine  Corps  he  had
fired  only  a  small  bore  .22  rifle.  On  the  after-
noon of  November  23,  Officers  H.  M.  Moore,
R.  S.  Stovall,  and  G.  F.  Rose  obtained  a  search
warrant  and  examined  Oswald's  effects  in  the
Paine  garage.  They  discovered  two  photographs,
each  showing  Oswald  with  a  rifle  and  a  pistol.
These  photographs  were  shown  to  Oswild  on
the  evening  of  November  23  and  again  on  the
morning  of  the  24th.  According  to  Fritz,  Os-
wald sneered,  saying  that  they  were  fake  photo-
graphs, that  he  had  been  photographed  a  num-
ber of  times  the  day  before  by  the  poUce,  that
they  had  superimposed  upon  the  photographs  a
rifle  and  a  revolver.  He  told  Fritz  a  number  of
times  that  the  smaller  photograph  was  either
made  from  the  larger,  or  the  larger  photograph
was  made  from  the  smaller  and  that  at  the  proper
time  he  would  show  that  the  pictures  were  fakes.
Fritz  told  him  that  the  two  small  photographs
were  found  in  the  Paine  garage.  At  that  point,
Oswald  refused  to  answer  any  further  questions.
As  previously  indicated,  Marina  Oswald  testified
that  she  took  the  two  pictures  with  her  husband's
Imperial  Reflex  camera  when  they  lived  on
Neely  Street.  Her  testimony  was  fully  supported
by  a  photography  expert  who  testified  that  in
his  opinion  the  pictures  were  not  composites.

The  Revolver

At  the  first  interrogation,  Oswald  claimed
that  his  only  crime  was  carrying  a  gun  and  re-
sisting arrest.  When  Captain  Fritz  asked  him
why  he  carried  the  revolver,  he  answered,  "Well,
you  know  about  a  pistol.  I  just  carried  it."  He
falsely  alleged  that  he  bought  the  revolver  in
Fort  Worth,  when  in  fact  he  purchased  it  from  a
mail-order  house  in  Los  Angeles.

The  Aliases  "Hidell"  and  "O.  H.  Lee"

The  arresting  officers  f oimd  a  forged  selective
service  card  with  a  picture  of  Oswald  and  the
name  "Alek  J.  HideU"  in  Oswald's  billfold.  On
November  22  and  23,  Oswald  refused  to  tell
Fritz  why  this  card  was  in  his  possession,  or  to
answer  any  questions  concerning  the  card.  On
Sunday  morning,  November  24,  Oswald  denied


that  he  knew  A.  J.  Hidell.  Captain  Fritz  pro-
duced the  selective  service  card  bearing  the
name  "Alek  J.  Hidell."  Oswald  became  angry
and  said,  "Now,  I've  told  you  all  I'm  going  to
tell  you  about  that  card  in  my  billfold — you
have  the  card  yourself  and  you  know  as  much
about  it  as  I  do."  At  the  last  interrogation  on
November  24,  Oswald  admitted  to  Postal  In-
spector Holmes  that  he  had  rented  post  office
box  2915,  Dallas,  but  denied  that  he  had  re-
ceived a  package  in  this  box  addressed  to  Hidell.
He  also  denied  that  he  had  received  the  rifle
through  this  box.  Holmes  reminded  Oswald  that
A.  I.  Hidell  was  hsted  on  post  office  box  30061,
New  Orleans,  as  one  entitled  to  receive  mail.
Oswald  replied,  "I  don't  know  anything  about
that."

When  asked  why  he  lived  at  his  rooming-
house  under  the  name  of  O.  H.  Lee,  Oswald
responded  that  the  landlady  simply  made  a  mis-
take, because  he  told  her  that  his  name  was
Lee,  meaning  his  first  name.  An  examination
of  the  roominghouse  register  revealed  that  Os-
wald actually  signed  the  name  O.  H.  Lee.

The  Curtain  Rod  Story

In  concluding  that  Oswald  was  carrying  a  rifle
in  the  paper  bag  on  the  morning  of  November
22,  1963,  the  Commission  foimd  that  Oswald
lied  when  he  told  Frazier  that  he  was  returning
to  Irving  to  obtain  curtain  rods.  When  asked
about  the  curtain  rod  story,  Oswald  hed  again.
He  denied  that  he  had  ever  told  Frazier  that  he
wanted  a  ride  to  Irving  to  get  curtain  rods  for
an  apartment.  He  explained  that  a  party  for  the
Paine  children  had  been  planned  for  the  week-
end and  he  preferred  not  to  be  in  the  Paine  house
at  that  time;  therefore,  he  made  his  weekly  visit
on  Thursday  night.  Actually,  the  party  for  one
of  the  Paine  children  was  the  preceding  week-
end, when  Marina  Oswald  suggested  that  Oswald
remain  in  Dallas.  When  told  that  Frazier  and
Mrs.  Randle  had  seen  him  carrying  a  long  heavy
package,  Oswald  replied,  "Well,  they  was  mis-
taken. That  must  have  been  some  other  time
he  picked  me  up."  In  one  interview,  he  told
Fritz  that  the  only  sack  he  carried  to  work  that
day  was  a  lunch  sack  which  he  kept  on  his  lap
during  the  ride  from  Irving  to  Dallas.  Frazier
testified  before  the  Commission  that  Oswald
carried  no  lunch  sack  that  day.

Actions  During  and  After  Shooting

During  the  first  interrogation  on  November
22,  Fritz  asked  Oswald  to  account  for  himself
at  the  time  the  President  was  shot.  Oswald  told
him  that  he  ate  limch  in  the  first-floor  lunchroom
and  then  went  to  the  second  floor  for  a  Coke
which  he  brought  downstairs.  He  acknowledged
the  encoimter  with  the  poUce  officer  on  the
second  floor.  Oswald  told  Fritz  that  after  lunch
he  went  outside,  talked  with  Foreman  Bill  Shel-
ley for  5  or  10  minutes  and  then  left  for  home.
He  said  that  he  left  work  because  BiU  Shelley
said  that  there  would  be  no  more  work  done  that


73


k


day  in  the  building.  Shelley  denied  seeing  Os-
wald after  12  noon  or  at  any  time  after  the
shooting.  The  next  day,  Oswald  added  to  his
story.  He  stated  that  at  the  time  the  President
was  shot  he  was  having  lunch  with  "Junior"
but  he  did  not  give  Junior's  last  name.  The  only
employee  at  the  Depository  Building  named
"Junior"  was  James  Jarman,  Jr.  Jarman  testified
that  he  ate  his  lunch  on  the  first  floor  around  5
minutes  to  12,  and  that  he  neither  ate  lunch
with  nor  saw  Oswald.  Jarman  did  talk  to  Oswald
that  morning:

*  *  *  he  asked  me  what  were  the  people
gathering  around  on  the  comer  for  and  I
told  him  that  the  President  was  supposed  to
pass  that  morning,  and  he  asked  me  did  I
know  which  way  he  was  coming,  and  I  told
him,  yes,  he  probably  come  down  Main  and
turn  on  Houston  and  then  back  again  on  Elm.
Then  he  said,  "Oh,  I  see,"  and  that  was  all.

PRIOR  ATTEMPT  TO  KILL

The  Attempt  on  the  Life  of  Maj.  Gen.  Edwin
A.  Walker

At  approximately  9  p.m.,  on  April  10,  1963,
in  Dallas,  Tex.,  Maj.  Gen.  Edwin  A.  Walker,
an  active  and  controversial  figure  on  the  Ameri-
can political  scene  since  his  resignation  from
the  U.S.  Army  in  1961,  narrowly  escaped  death
when  a  rifle  bullet  fired  from  outside  his  home
passed  near  his  head  as  he  was  seated  at  his
desk.  There  were  no  eyewitnesses,  although  a
14-year-old  boy  in  a  neighboring  house  claimed
that  immediately  after  the  shooting  he  saw  two
men,  in  separate  cars,  drive  out  of  a  church
parking  lot  adjacent  to  Walker's  home.  A  friend
of  Walker's  testified  that  two  nights  before  the
shooting  he  saw  "two  men  around  the  house
peeking  in  windows."  General  Walker  gave  this
information  to  the  police  before  the  footing,
but  it  did  not  help  solve  the  crime.  Although
the  bullet  was  recovered  from  Walker's  hotfse
(see  app.  X) ,  in  the  absence  of  a  weapon  it  was
of  httle  investigatory  value.  General  Walker
hired  two  investigators  to  determine  whether  a
former  employee  might  have  been  involved  in
the  shooting.  Their  results  were  negative.  Until
December  3,  1963,  the  Walker  shooting  re-
mained unsolved.

The  Commission  evaluated  the  following  evi-
dence in  considering  whether  Lee  Harvey  Os-
wald fired  the  shot  which  almost  killed  General
Walker:  (1)  A  note  which  Oswald  left  for  his
wife  on  the  evening  of  the  shooting,  (2)  photo-
graphs found  among  Oswald's  possessions  after
the  assassination  of  President  Kennedy,  (3)  fire-
arm identification  of  the  bullet  found  in  Walk-
er's home,  and  (4)  admissions  and  other  state-
ments made  to  Marina  Oswald  by  Oswald
concerning  the  shooting.

Note  left  by  Oswald. — On  December  2,  1963,
Mrs.  Ruth  Paine  turned  over  to  the  police  some


of  the  Oswalds'  belongings,  including  a  Russian
volume  entitled  "Book  of  Useful  Advice."  In
this  book  was  an  undated  note  written  in  Rus-
sian. In  translation,  the  note  read  as  follows:

1.  This  is  the  key  to  the  mailbox  which  is
located  in  the  main  post  office  in  the  city  on
Ervay  Street.  This  is  the  same  street  where  the
drugstore,  in  which  you  always  waited  is  lo-
cated. You  will  find  the  mailbox  in  the  post
office  which  is  located  4  blocks  from  the  drug-
store on  that  street.  I  paid  for  the  box  last
month  so  don't  worry  about  it.

2.  Send  the  information  as  to  what  has  hap-
pened to  me  to  the  Embassy  and  include
newspaper  clippings  (should  there  be  any-
thing about  me  in  the  newspapers).  I  believe
that  the  Embassy  will  come  quickly  to  your
assistance  on  learning  everything.

3.  I  paid  the  house  rent  on  the  2d  so  don't
worry  about  it.

4.  Recently  I  also  paid  for  water  and  gas.

5.  The  money  from  work  will  possibly  be
coming.  The  money  will  be  sent  to  our  post
office  box.  Go  to  the  bank  and  cash  the  check.

6.  You  can  either  throw  out  or  give  my
clothing,  etc.  away.  Do  not  keep  these.  How-
ever, I  prefer  that  you  hold  on  to  my  personal
papers  (military,  civil,  etc.).

7.  Certain  of  my  documents  are  in  the  small
blue  valise.

8.  The  address  book  can  be  foimd  on  my
table  in  the  study  should  need  same.

9.  We  have  friends  here.  The  Red  Cross
also  will  help  you.  (Red  Cross  in  English),
[sic]

10.  I  left  you  as  much  money  as  I  could,
$60  on  the  second  of  the  month.  You  and
the  baby  [apparently]  can  live  for  another  2
months  using  $10  per  week.

11.  If  I  am  alive  and  taken  prisoner,  the
city  jail  is  located  at  the  end  of  the  bridge
through  which  we  always  passed  on  going  to
the  city  (right  in  the  beginning  of  the  city
after  crossing  the  bridge).

James  C.  Cadigan,  FBI  handwriting  expert,  tes-
tified that  this  note  was  written  by  Lee  Harvey
Oswald.

Prior  to  the  Walker  shooting  on  April  10,
Oswald  had  been  attending  typing  classes  on
Monday,  Tuesday,  and  Thursday  evenings.  He
had  quit  these  classes  at  least  a  week  before  the
shooting,  which  occurred  on  a  Wednesday  night.
According  to  Marina  Oswald's  testimony,  on
the  night  of  the  Walker  shooting,  her  husband
left  their  apartment  on  Neely  Street  shortly
after  dinner.  She  thought  he  was  attending  a
class  or  was  "on  his  own  business."  When  he
failed  to  return  by  10  or  10:30  p.m.,  Marina
Oswald  went  to  his  room  and  discovered  the
note.  She  testified:  "When  he  came  back  I  asked
him  what  had  happened.  He  was  very  pale.  I
don't  remember  the  exact  time,  but  it  was  very
late.  And  he  told  me  not  to  ask  him  any  ques-


74


tions.  He  only  told  me  he  had  shot  at  General
Walker."  Oswald  told  his  wife  that  he  did  not
know  whether  he  had  hit  Walker;  according  to
Marina  Oswald  when  he  learned  on  the  radio
and  in  the  newspapers  the  next  day  that  he  had
missed,  he  said  that  he  "was  very  sorry  that  he
had  not  hit  him."  Marina  Oswald's  testimony
was  fully  supported  by  the  note  itself  which
appeared  to  be  the  work  of  a  man  expecting  to
be  killed,  or  imprisoned,  or  to  disappear.  The
last  paragraph  directed  her  to  the  jail  and  the
other  paragraphs  instructed  her  on  the  disposal
of  Oswald's  personal  effects  and  the  management
of  her  affairs  if  he  should  not  return.

It  is  clear  that  the  note  was  written  while  the
Oswalds  were  living  in  Dallas  before  they  moved
to  New  Orleans  in  the  spring  of  1963.  The  refer-
ences to  house  rent  and  payments  for  water
and  gas  indicated  that  the  note  was  written  when
they  were  living  in  a  rented  apartment;  there-
fore it  could  not  have  been  written  while  Marina
Oswald  was  living  with  the  Paines.  Moreover,
the  reference  in  paragraph  3  to  paying  "the
house  rent  on  the  2d"  would  be  consistent  with
the  period  when  the  Oswalds  were  living  on
Neely  Street  since  the  apartment  was  rented  on
March  3,  1963.  Oswald  had  paid  the  first
month's  rent  in  advance  on  March  2,  1963,
and  the  second  month's  rent  was  paid  on  either
April  2  or  April  3.  The  main  post  office  "on
Ervay  Street"  refers  to  the  post  office  where
Oswald  rented  box  2915  from  October  9,  1962,
to  May  14,  1963.  Another  statement  which
limits  the  time  when  it  could  have  been  written
is  the  reference  "you  and  the  baby,"  which
would  mdicate  that  it  was  probably  written  be-
fore the  birth  of  Oswald's  second  child  on  Oc-
tober 20,  1963.

Oswald  had  apparently  mistaken  the  county
jaU  for  the  city  jaU.  From  Neely  Street  the  Os-
walds would  have  traveled  downtown  on  the
Beckley  bus,  across  the  Commerce  Street  via-
duct and  into  downtown  Dallas  through  the
Triple  Underpass.  Either  the  viaduct  or  the
underpass  might  have  been  the  "bridge"  men-
tioned in  the  last  paragraph  of  the  note.  The
county  jaU  is  at  the  corner  of  Houston  and  Main
Streets  "right  in  the  beginning  of  the  city"  after
one  travels  through  the  underpass.

Photograph. — In  her  testimony  before  the
Commission  in  February  1964,  Marina  Oswald
stated  that  when  Oswald  returned  home  on  the
night  of  the  Walker  shooting,  he  told  her  that
he  had  been  planning  the  attempt  for  2  months.
He  showed  her  a  notebook  3  days  later  contain-
ing photographs  of  General  Walker's  home  and
a  map  of  the  area  where  the  house  was  located.
Although  Oswald  destroyed  the  notebook,  three
photographs  found  among  Oswald's  possessions
after  the  assassination  were  identified  by  Marina
Oswald  as  photographs  of  General  Walker's
house.  Two  of  these  photographs  were  taken
from  the  rear  of  Walker's  house.  The  Commis-
sion confirmed,  by  comparison  with  other  photo-
graphs, that  these  were,  indeed,  photographs  of


the  rear  of  Walker's  house.  An  examination
of  the  window  at  the  rear  of  the  house,  the
wall  through  which  the  bullet  passed,  and  the
fence  behind  the  house  indicated  that  the  bullet
was  fired  from  a  position  near  the  point  where
one  of  the  photographs  was  taken.

The  third  photograph  identified  by  Marina
Oswald  depicts  the  entrance  to  General  Walker's
driveway  from  a  back  alley.  Also  seen  in  the
picture  is  the  fence  on  which  Walker's  assailant
apparently  rested  the  rifle.  An  examination  of
certain  construction  work  appearing  in  the  back-
ground of  this  photograph  revealed  that  the
picture  was  taken  between  March  8  and  12,
1963,  and  most  probably  on  either  March  9  or
March  10.  Oswkld  purchased  the  money  order
for  the  rifle  on  March  12,  the  rifle  was  shipped
on  March  20,  and  the  shooting  occurred  on
April  10.  A  photography  expert  with  the  FBI
was  able  to  determine  that  this  picture  was
taken  with  the  Imperial  Reflex  camera  owned
by  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  (See  app.  X)

A  fourth  photograph,  showing  a  stretch  of
railroad  tracks,  was  also  identified  by  Marina
Oswald  as  having  been  taken  by  her  husband,
presumably  in  connection  with  the  Walker  shoot-
ing. Investigation  determined  that  this  photo-
graph was  taken  approximately  seven-tenths  of  a
mile  from  Walker's  house.  Another  photograph
of  railroad  tracks  found  among  Oswald's  pos-
sessions was  not  identified  by  his  wife,  but  in-
vestigation revealed  that  it  was  taken  from  a
point  slightly  less  than  half  a  mile  from  General
Walker's  house.  Marina  Oswald  stated  that  when
she  asked  her  husband  what  he  had  done  with
the  rifle,  he  replied  that  he  had  buried  it  in  the
ground  or  hidden  it  in  some  bushes  and  that  he
also  mentioned  a  railroad  track  in  this  connec-
tion. She  testified  that  several  days  later  Oswald
recovered  his  rifle  and  brought  it  back  to  their
apartment.

Firearms  identification. — In  the  room  beyond
the  one  in  which  General  Walker  was  sitting  on
the  night  of  the  shooting  the  Dallas  police  re-
covered a  badly  mutilated  buUet  which  had  come
to  rest  on  a  stack  of  paper.  The  Dallas  City-
County  Investigation  Laboratory  tried  to  de-
termine the  type  of  weapon  which  fired  the
bullet.  The  oral  report  was  negative  because  of
the  battered  condition  of  the  bullet.  On  No-
vember 30,  1963,  the  FBI  requested  the  bullet
for  ballistics  examination;  the  Dallas  Police  De-
partment forwarded  it  on  December  2,  1963.

Robert  A.  Frazier,  an  FBI  ballistics  identifi-
cation expert,  testified  that  he  was  "unable  to
reach  a  conclusion"  as  to  whether  or  not  the
bullet  recovered  from  Walker's  house  had  been
fired  from  the  rifle  found  on  the  sixth  floor  of
the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building.
He  concluded  that  "the  general  rifling  char-
acteristics of  the  rifle  *  *  *  are  of  the  same
type  as  those  found  on  the  bullet  *  *  *  and,
further,  on  this  basis  *  *  *  the  bullet  could
have  been  fired  from  the  rifle  on  the  basis  of  its
land  and  groove  impressions."  Frazier  testified


75


further  that  the  FBI  avoids  the  category  of
"probable"  identification.  Unless  the  missile  or
cartridge  case  can  be  identified  as  coming  from
a  particular  weapon  to  the  exclusion  of  all  oth-
ers, the  FBI  refuses  to  draw  any  conclusion  as
to  probability.  Frazier  testified,  however,  that
he  found  no  microscopic  characteristics  or  other
evidence  which  would  indicate  that  the  bullet
was  not  fired  from  the  Mannlicher-Carcano
rifle  owned  by  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  It  was  a
6.5-niillimeter  bullet  and,  according  to  Frazier,
"relatively  few"  types  of  rifles  could  produce
the  characteristics  found  on  the  bullet.

Joseph  D.  Nicol,  superintendent  of  the  Illi-
nois Bureau  of  Criminal  Identification  and  In-
vestigation, conducted  an  independent  exami-
nation of  this  bullet  and  concluded  "that  there
is  a  fair  probability"  that  the  bullet  was  fired
from  the  rifle  used  in  the  assassination  of  Presi-
dent Kennedy.  In  explaining  the  difference  be-
tween his  policy  and  that  of  the  FBI  on  the
matter  of  probable  identification,  Nicol  said:

I  am  aware  of  their  position.  This  is  not,  I
am  sure,  arrived  at  without  careful  considera-
tion. However,  to  say  that  because  one  does
not  find  sufficient  marks  for  identification  that
it  is  a  negative,  I  think  is  going  overboard  in
the  other  direction.  And  for  purposes  of  pro-
bative value,  for  whatever  it  might  be  worth,
in  the  absence  of  very  definite  negative  evi-
dence, I  think  it  is  permissible  to  say  that  in
an  exhibit  such  as  573  there  is  enough  on  it
to  say  that  it  could  have  come,  and  even  per-
haps a  httle  stronger,  to  say  that  it  probably
came  from  this,  without  going  so  far  as  to  say
to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  guns.  This  I  could
not  do.

Although  the  Commission  recognizes  that
neither  expert  was  able  to  state  that  the  bullet
which  missed  General  Walker  was  fired  from
Oswald's  rifle  to  the  exclusion  of  aU  others,  this
testimony  was  considered  probative  when  com-
bined with  the  other  testimony  linking  Oswald
to  the  shooting.

Additional  corroborative  evidence. — ^The  ad-
missions made  to  Marina  Oswald  by  her  hus-
band are  an  important  element  in  the  evidence
that  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  fired  the  shot  at  Gen-
eral Walker.  As  shown  above,  the  note  and  the
photographs  of  Walker's  house  and  of  the  nearby
railroad  tracks  provide  important  corroboration
for  her  accoimt  of  the  incident  Other  details
described  by  Marina  Oswald  coincide  with  facts
developed  independently  of  her  statements.  She
testified  that  her  husband  had  postponed  his
attempt  to  kill  Walker  imttl  that  Wednesday
because  he  had  heard  that  there  was  to  be  a
gathering  at  the  church  next  door  to  Walker's
house  on  that  evening.  He  indicated  that  he
wanted  more  people  in  the  vicinity  at  the  time
of  the  attempt  so  that  his  arrival  and  departure
would  not  attract  great  attention.  An  official  of
this  church  told  FBI  agents  that  services  are  held


every  Wednesday  at  the  church  except  during
the  month  of  August.  Marina  Oswald  also  tes-
tified that  her  husband  had  used  a  bus  to  return
home.  A  study  of  the  bus  routes  indicates  that
Oswald  could  have  taken  any  one  of  several
d  liferent  buses  to  Walker's  house  or  to  a  point
near  the  railroad  tracks  where  he  may  have
concealed  the  rifle.  It  would  have  been  possible
for  him  to  take  different  routes  in  approaching
and  leaving  the  scene  of  the  shooting.

Conclusion. — Based  on  (1)  the  contents  of
the  note  which  Oswald  left  for  his  wife  on  April
10,  1963,  (2)  the  photographs  found  among
Oswald's  possessions,  (3)  the  testimony  of  fire-
arms identification  experts,  and  (4)  the  testi-
mony of  Marina  Oswald,  the  Commission  has
concluded  that  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  attempted  to
take  the  Ufe  of  Maj.  Gen.  Edwin  A.  Walker
(Resigned,  U.S.  Army)  on  April  10,  1963.  The
finding  that  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  attempted  to
murder  a  pubUc  figure  in  April  1963  was  con-
sidered of  probative  value  in  this  investigation,
although  the  Commission's  conclusion  concern-
ing the  identity  of  the  assassin  was  based  on
evidence  independent  of  the  finding  that  Oswald
attempted  to  kill  General  Walker.

Richard  M.  Nixon  Incident

Another  alleged  threat  by  Oswald  against  a
public  figure  involved  former  Vice  President
Richard  M.  Nixon.  In  January  1964,  Marina
Oswald  and  her  business  manager,  James  Mar-
tin, told  Robert  Oswald,  Lee  Harvey  Oswald's
brother,  that  Oswald  had  once  threatened  to
shoot  former  Vice  President  Richard  M.  Nixon.
When  Marina  Oswald  testified  before  the  Com-
mission on  February  3-6,  1964,  she  had  failed
to  mention  the  incident  when  she  was  asked
whether  Oswald  had  ever  expressed  any  hostility
toward  any  official  of  the  United  States.  The
Commission  first  learned  of  this  incident  when
Robert  Oswald  related  it  to  FBI  agents  on
February  19,  1964,  and  to  the  Commission  on
February  21.

Marina  Oswald  appeared  before  the  Commis-
sion again  on  June  11,  1964,  and  testified  that  a
few  days  before  her  husband's  departure  from
Dallas  to  New  Orleans  on  April  24,  1963,  he
finished  reading  a  moming  newspaper  "  *  *  *
and  put  on  a  good  suit.  I  saw  that  he  took  a  pis-
tol. I  asked  him  where  he  was  going,  and  why  he
was  getting  dressed.  He  answered  'Nixon  is  com-
ing. I  want  to  go  and  have  a  look.'  "  He  also  said
that  he  would  use  the  pistol  if  the  opportunity
arose.  She  reminded  him  that  after  the  Walker
shooting  he  had  promised  never  to  repeat  such
an  act.  Marina  Oswald  related  the  events  which
followed;

I  called  him  into  the  bathroom  and  I  closed
the  door  and  I  wanted  to  prevent  him  and
then  I  started  to  cry.  And  I  told  him  that
he  shouldn't  do  this,  and  that  he  had  prom-
ised me.


76


I  remember  that  I  held  him.  We  actuaUy
struggled  for  several  minutes  and  then  he
quieted  down.

She  stated  that  it  was  not  physical  force  which
kept  him  from  leaving  the  house.  "I  couldn't
keep  him  from  going  out  if  he  really  wanted  to."
After  further  questioning  she  stated  that  she
might  have  been  confused  about  shutting  him  in
the  bathroom,  but  that  "there  is  no  doubt  that  he
got  dressed  and  got  a  gun."

Oswald's  revolver  was  shipped  from  Los  An-
geles on  March  20,  1963,  and  he  left  for  New
Orleans  on  April  24,  1963.  No  edition  of  either
Dallas  newspaper  dioring  the  period  January  1,
1963,  to  May  15,  1963,  mentioned  any  pro-
posed visit  by  Mr.  Nixon  to  Dallas.  Mr.  Nixon
advised  the  Commission  that  the  only  time  he
was  in  Dallas  in  1963  was  on  November  20-21,
1963.  An  investigation  failed  to  reveal  any  in-
vitation extended  to  Mr.  Nixon  during  the  pe-
riod when  Oswald's  threat  reportedly  occurred.
The  Commission  has  concluded,  therefore,  that
regardless  of  what  Oswald  may  have  said  to  his
wife  he  was  not  actually  planning  to  shoot  Mr.
Nixon  at  that  time  in  Dallas.

On  April  23,  1963,  Vice  President  Lyndon
B.  Johnson  was  in  Dallas  for  a  visit  which  had
been  publicized  in  the  Dallas  newspapers
throughout  April.  The  Commission  asked
Marina  Oswald  whether  she  might  have  mis-
understood the  object  of  her  husband's  threat.
She  stated,  "there  is  no  question  that  in  this  in-
cident it  was  a  question  of  Mr.  Nixon."  When
asked  later  whether  it  might  have  been  Mr.
Johnson,  she  said,  "Yes,  no.  I  am  getting  a  little
confused  with  so  many  questions.  I  was  abso-
lutely convinced  it  was  Nixon  and  now  after
all  these  questions  I  wonder  if  I  am  right  in  my
mind."  She  stated  further  that  Oswald  had  only
mentioned  Nixon's  name  once  during  the  inci-
dent. Marina  Oswald  might  have  misunderstood
her  husband.  Mr.  Johnson  was  the  then  Vice
President  and  his  visit  took  place  on  April  23d.
This  was  1  day  before  Oswald  left  for  New  Or-
leans and  Marina  appeared  certain  that  the
Nixon  incident  "wasn't  the  day  before.  Perhaps
3  days  before."

Marina  Oswald  speculated  that  the  incident
may  have  been  unrelated  to  an  actual  threat.
She  said,

*  *  *  It  might  have  been  that  he  was  just
trying  to  test  me.  He  was  the  kind  of  person
who  could  try  and  wound  somebody  in  that
way.  Possibly  he  didn't  want  to  go  out  at  all
but  was  just  doing  this  all  as  a  sort  of  joke,
not  really  as  a  joke  but  rather  to  simply
wound  me,  to  make  me  feel  bad.

In  the  absence  of  other  evidence  that  Oswald
actually  intended  to  shoot  someone  at  this  time,
the  Commission  concluded  that  the  incident.


77


as  described  by  Marina  Oswald,  was  of  no  pro-
bative value  in  the  Commission's  decision  con-
cerning the  identity  of  the  assassin  of  President
Kennedy.


OSWALD'S  RIFLE  CAPABILITY

In  deciding  whether  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  fired
the  shots  which  killed  President  Kennedy  and
wounded  Governor  Connally,  the  Commission
considered  whether  Oswald,  using  his  own  rifle,
possessed  the  capability  to  hit  his  target  with  two
out  of  three  shots  under  the  conditions  described
in  chapter  in.  The  Commission  evaluated  (1)
the  nature  of  the  shots,  (2)  Oswald's  Marine
training  in  marksmanship,  (3)  his  experience
and  practice  after  leaving  the  Marine  Corps,
and  (4)  the  accuracy  of  the  weapon  and  th&
quality  of  the  ammunition.

The  Nature  of  the  Shots

For  a  rifleman  situated  on  the  sixth  floor  of
the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building  the
shots  were  at  a  slow-moving  target  proceeding
on  a  downgrade  in  virtually  a  straight  line  with
the  alinement  of  the  assassin's  rifle,  at  a  range
of  177  to  266  feet  An  aerial  photograph  of
Dealey  Plaza  shows  that  Elm  Street  runs  at  an
angle  so  that  the  President  would  have  been
moving  in  an  almost  straight  line  away  from  the
assassin's  rifle.  In  addition,  the  3°  downward
slope  of  Ekn  Street  was  of  assistance  in  elimi-
nating at  least  some  of  the  adjustment  which  is
ordinarily  required  when  a  marksman  must  raise
his  rifle  as  a  target  moves  farther  away.

Four  marksmanship  experts  testified  before
the  Commission.  Maj.  Eugene  D.  Anderson,
assistant  head  of  the  Marksmanship  Branch  of
the  U.S.  Marine  Corps,  testified  that  the  shots
which  struck  the  President  in  the  neck  and  in
the  head  were  "not  *  *  *  particularly  diffi-
cult" Robert  A.  Frazier,  FBI  expert  in  firearms
identification  and  training,  said:

From  my  own  experience  in  shooting  over  the
years,  when  you  shoot  at  175  feet  or  260  feet,
which  is  less  than  100  yards,  with  a  tele-
scopic sight,  you  should  not  have  any  difficulty
in  hitting  your  target


I  mean  it  requires  no  training  at  aU  to  shoot
a  weapon  with  a  telescopic  sight  once  you
know  that  you  must  put  the  crosshairs  on  the
target  and  that  is  all  that  is  necessary.

Ronald  Simmons,  chief  of  the  U.S.  Army  In-
fantry Weapons  Evaluation  Branch  of  the  Bal-
listics Research  Laboratory,  said:  "Well,  in  or-
der to  achieve  three  hits,  it  would  not  be  required
that  a  man  be  an  exceptional  shot  A  proficient
man  with  this  weapon,  yes."

The  effect  of  a  four-power  telescopic  sight  on
the  difficulty  of  these  shots  was  considered  in


detail  by  M.  Sgt.  James  A,  Zahm,  noncommis-
sioned oflBcer  in  charge  of  the  Marksmanship
Training  Unit  in  the  Weapons  Training  Battalion
of  the  Marine  Corps  School  at  Quantico,  Va.
Referring  to  a  rifle  with  a  four-power  telescope,
Sergeant  Zahm  said:

*  *  *  this  is  the  ideal  type  of  weapon  for
moving  targets  *  *  *


*  *  *  Using  the  scope,  rapidly  working  a
bolt  and  using  the  scope  to  relocate  your  tar-
get quickly  and  at  the  same  time  when  you
locate  that  target  you  identify  it  and  the  cross-
hairs are  in  close  relationship  to  the  point  you
want  to  shoot  at,  it  just  takes  a  minor  move  in
aiming  to  bring  the  crosshairs  to  bear,  and
then  it  is  a  quick  squeeze.


I  consider  it  a  real  advantage,  particularly
at  the  range  of  100  yards,  in  identifying  your
target.  It  allows  you  to  see  your  target  clearly,
and  it  is  stUl  of  a  minimum  amount  of  power
that  it  doesn't  exaggerate  your  own  body
movements.  It  just  is  an  aid  in  seeing  in  the
fact  that  you  only  have  the  one  element,  the
crosshair,  in  relation  to  the  target  as  opposed
to  iron  sights  with  aligning  the  sights  and  then
aligning  them  on  the  target.

Characterizing  the  four-power  scope  as  "a  real
aid,  an  extreme  aid"  in  rapid  fire  shooting,
Sergeant  Zahm  expressed  the  opinion  that  the
shot  which  struck  President  Kennedy  in  the  neck
at  176.9  to  190.8  feet  was  "very  easy"  and  the
shot  which  struck  the  President  in  the  head  at  a
distance  of  265.3  feet  was  "an  easy  shot."  After
viewing  photographs  depicting  the  alinement  of
Elm  Street  in  relation  to  the  Texas  School  Book
Depository  Building,  Zahm  stated  further:

This  is  a  definite  advantage  to  the  shooter,
the  vehicle  moving  directly  away  from  him
and  the  downgrade  of  the  street,  and  he  being
in  an  elevated  position  made  an  almost  sta-
tionary target  while  he  was  aiming  in,  very
little  movement  if  any.

Oswald's  Marine Training

In  accordance  with  standard  Marine  proce-
dures, Oswald  received  extensive  training  in
marksmanship.  During  the  first  week  of  an
intensive  3-week  training  period  he  received  in-
struction in  sighting,  aiming,  and  manipulation
of  the  trigger.  He  went  through  a  series  of
exercises  called  dry  firing  where  he  assumed  all
positions  which  would  later  be  used  in  the
qualification  course.  After  familiarization  with
live  ammunition  in  the  .22  rifle  and  .22  pistol,
Oswald,  like  all  Marine  recruits,  received  train-


ing on  the  rifle  range  at  distances  up  to  500
yards,  firing  50  rounds  each  day  for  five  days.

Following  that  training,  Oswald  was  tested  in
December  of  1956,  and  obtained  a  score  of  212,
which  was  2  points  above  the  minimum  for
qualifications  as  a  "sharpshooter"  in  a  scale  of
marksman — sharpshooter — expert.  In  May  of
1959,  on  another  range,  Oswald  scored  191,
which  was  1  point  over  the  minimum  for  rank-
ing as  a  "marksman."  The  Marine  Corps  rec-
ords maintained  on  Oswald  further  show  that
he  had  fired  and  was  familiar  with  the  Browning
Automatic  rifle,  .45  caliber  pistol,  and  12-gage
riot  gun.

Based  on  the  general  Marine  Corps  ratings,
Lt.  Col.  A.  G.  Folsom,  Jr.,  head  Records
Branch,  Personnel  Department,  Headquarters
U.S.  Marine  Corps,  evaluated  the  sharpshooter
qualification  as  a  "fairly  good  shot"  and  a  low
marksman  rating  as  a  "rather  poor  shot."

When  asked  to  explain  the  different  scores
achieved  by  Oswald  on  the  two  occasions  when
he  fired  for  record.  Major  Anderson  said:

*  *  *  when  he  fired  that  [212]  he  had  just
completed  a  very  intensive  preliminary  train-
ing period.  He  had  the  services  of  an  experi-
enced highly  trained  coach.  He  had  high
motivation.  He  had  presumably  a  good  to
excellent  rifle  and  good  ammunition.  We  have
nothing  here  to  show  under  what  conditions
the  B  course  was  fired,  might  well  have  been
a  bad  day  for  firing  the  rifle — windy,  rainy,
dark.  There  is  little  probability  that  he  had  a
good,  expert  coach,  and  he  probably  didn't
have  as  high  a  motivation  because  he  was  no
longer  in  recruit  training  and  under  the  care
of  the  drill  instructor.  There  is  some  possi-
bility that  the  rifle  he  was  firing  might  not
have  been  as  good  a  rifle  as  the  rifle  that  he  was
firing  in  his  A  course  firing,  because  [he]  may
well  have  carried  this  rifle  for  quite  some
time,  and  it  got  banged  around  in  normal
usage.

Major  Anderson  concluded:

I  would  say  that  as  compared  to  other
Marines  receiving  the  same  type  of  training,
that  Oswald  was  a  good  shot,  somewhat  better
than  or  equal  to — better  than  the  average  let
us  say.  As  compared  to  a  civUian  who  had  not
received  this  intensive  training,  he  would  be
considered  as  a  good  to  excellent  shot.

When  Sergeant  Zahm  was  asked  whether  Os-
wald's Marine  Corps  training  would  have  made
it  easier  to  operate  a  rifle  with  a  four-power
scope,  he  replied:

Based  on  that  training,  his  basic  knowl-
edge in  sight  manipulation  and  trigger  squeeze
and  what  not,  I  would  say  that  he  would  be
capable  of  sighting  that  rifle  in  well,  firing  it,
with  10  rounds.


78


After  reviewing  Oswald's  marksmanship  scores.
Sergeant  Zahm  concluded:

I  would  say  in  the  Marine  Corps  he  is  a
good  shot,  slightly  above  average,  and  as  com-
pared to  the  average  male  of  his  age  through-
out the  civihan,  throughout  the  United  States,
that  he  is  an  excellent  shot

Oswald's Rifle  Practice Outside the  Marines

During  one  of  his  leaves  from  the  Marines,
Oswald  hunted  with  his  brother  Robert,  using  a
.22  caliber  bolt-action  rifle  belonging  either  to
Robert  or  Robert's  in-laws.  After  he  left  the
Marines  and  before  departing  for  Russia,  Os-
wald, his  brother,  and  a  third  companion  went
hunting  for  squirrels  and  rabbits.  On  that  oc-
casion Oswald  again  used  a  bolt-action  .22  cali-
ber rifle;  and  according  to  Robert,  Lee  Oswald
exhibited  an  average  amount  of  proficiency  with
that  weapon.  While  in  Russia,  Oswald  obtained
a  hunting  license,  joined  a  himting  club  and  went
hunting  about  six  times,  as  discussed  more  fuUy
in  chapter  VI.  Soon  after  Oswald  returned  from
the  Soviet  Union  he  again  went  hunting  with  his
brother,  Robert,  and  used  a  borrowed  .22  cali-
ber bolt-action  rifle.  After  Oswald  purchased  the
Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle,  he  told  his  wife  that
he  practiced  with  it  Marina  Oswald  testified
th£.t  on  one  occasion  she  saw  him  take  the  rifle,
concealed  in  a  raincoat,  from  the  house  on  Neely
Street.  Oswald  told  her  he  was  going  to  practice
with  it  According  to  George  De  Mohrenschildt,
Oswald  said  that  he  went  target  shooting  with
that  rifle.

Marina  Oswald  testified  that  in  New  Orleans
in  May  of  1963,  she  observed  Oswald  sitting
with  the  rifle  on  their  screened  porch  at  night,
sighting  with  the  telescopic  lens  and  operating
the  bolt  Examination  of  the  cartridge  cases
foimd  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Depository
Building  established  that  they  had  been  pre-
viously loaded  and  ejected  from  the  assassina-
tion rifle,  which  would  indicate  that  Oswald
practice  operating  the  bolt

Accuracy  of  Weapon

It  will  be  recalled  from  the  discussion  in
chapter  III  that  the  assassin  in  all  probability
hit  two  out  of  the  three  shots  during  the  maxi-
mum time  span  of  4.8  to  5.6  seconds  if  the  sec-
ond shot  missed,  or,  if  either  the  first  or  third
shots  missed,  the  assassin  fired  the  three  shots
during  a  minimum  time  span  of  7.1  to  7.9  sec-
onds. A  series  of  tests  were  performed  to  deter-
mine whether  the  weapons  and  ammunition
used  in  the  assassination  were  capable  of  firing
the  shots  which  were  fired  by  the  assassin  on
November  22,  1963.  The  ammunition  used  by
the  assassin  was  manufactured  by  Western  Car-
tridge Co.  of  East  Alton,  111.  In  tests  with  the
Mannlicher-Carcano  C2766  rifle,  over  100
rounds  of  this  ammunition  were  fired  by  the
FBI and the Infantry Weapons Evaluation


Branch  of  the  U.S.  Army.  There  were  no  mis-
fires.

In  an  effort  to  test  the  rifle  under  conditions
which  simulated  those  which  prevailed  during
the  assassination,  the  Infantry  Weapons  Evalua-
tion Branch  of  the  Ballistics  Research  Labora-
tory had  expert  riflemen  fire  the  assassination
weapon  from  a  tower  at  three  silhouette  targets
at  distances  of  175,  240,  and  265  feet  The  tar-
get at  265  feet  was  placed  to  the  right  of  the
240-foot  target  which  was  in  turn  placed  to  the
right  of  the  closest  sflhouette.  Using  the  assas-
sination rifle  mounted  with  the  telescopic  sight,
three  marksmen,  rated  as  master  by  the  Na-
tional Rifle  Association,  each  fired  t^'o  series  of
three  shots.  In  the  first  series  the  firers  required
time  spans  of  4.6,  6.75,  and  8.25  seconds  re-
spectively. On  the  second  series  they  required
5.15,  6.45,  and  7  seconds.  None  of  the  marks-
men had  any  practice  ^ith  the  assassination
weapon  except  for  exercising  the  bolt  for  2  or
3  minutes  on  a  dry  run.  They  had  not  even
pulled  the  trigger  because  of  concern  about
breaking  the  firing  pin.

The  marksmen  took  as  much  time  as  they
wanted  for  the  first  target  and  all  hit  the  target
For  the  first  four  attempts,  the  firers  missed  the
second  shot  by  several  inches.  The  angle  from
the  first  to  the  second  shot  was  greater  than
from  the  second  to  the  third  shot  and  required
a  movement  in  the  basic  firing  position  of  the
marksmen.  This  angle  was  used  in  the  test  be-
cause the  majorit}'  of  the  eyewitoesses  to  the
assassination  stated  that  there  was  a  shorter
interval  bet^'een  shots  two  and  three  than  be-
tween shots  one  and  two.  As  has  been  shown  in
chapter  IH,  if  the  three  shots  were  fired  within
a  period  of  from  4.8  to  5.6  seconds,  the  shots
would  have  been  evenly  spaced  and  the  assassin
would  not  have  incurred  so  sharp  an  angular
movement

Five  of  the  six  shots  hit  the  third  target  where
the  angle  of  movement  of  the  weapon  was  small
On  the  basis  of  these  results,  Simmons  testified
that  in  his  opinion  the  probability'  of  hitting  the
targets  at  the  relatively  short  range  at  which  they
were  hit  was  ver>'  hidi.  Considering  the  various
probabilities  which  may  have  prevailed  during
the  actual  assassination,  the  highest  level  of  fir-
ing performance  which  would  have  been  re-
quired of  the  assassin  and  the  C2766  rifle  would
have  been  to  fire  three  times  and  hit  the  target
twice  within  a  span  of  4.8  to  5.6  seconds.  In
fact,  one  of  the  firers  in  the  rapid  fire  test  in
firing  his  two  series  of  three  shots,  hit  the  target
t^^ice  within  a  span  of  4.6  and  5.15  seconds.  The
others  would  have  been  able  to  reduce  their
times  if  they  had  been  given  the  opportunit\"  to
become  famihar  with  the  movement  of  the  bolt
and  the  trigger  pull.  Simmons  testified  that  fa-
miliarity' with  the  bolt  could  be  achieved  in  dry
practice  and,  as  has  been  indicated  above,  Os-
wald engaged  in  such  practice.  If  the  assassin
missed  either  the  first  or  third  shot  ue  had  a
total  of  between  4.8  and  5.6  seconds  betv,een  the


79


two  shots  which  hit  and  a  total  minimum  time
period  of  from  7.1  to  7.9  seconds  for  all  three
shots.  All  three  of  the  firers  in  these  tests  were
able  to  fire  the  rounds  within  the  time  period
which  would  have  been  available  to  the  assassin
under  those  conditions.

Three  FBI  firearms  experts  tested  the  rifle  in
order  to  determine  the  speed  with  which  it  could
be  fired.  The  purpose  of  this  experiment  was  not
to  test  the  rifle  under  conditions  which  prevailed
at  the  time  of  the  assassination  but  to  determine
the  maximum  speed  at  which  it  could  be  fired.
The  three  FBI  experts  each  fired  three  shots
from  the  weapon  at  15  yards  in  6,  7,  and  9  sec-
onds, and  one  of  these  agents,  Robert  A.  Frazier,
fired  two  series  of  three  shots  at  25  yards  in  4.6
and  4.8  seconds.  At  15  yards  each  man's  shots
landed  within  the  size  of  a  dime.  The  shots  fired
by  Frazier  at  the  range  of  25  yards  landed  within
an  area  of  2  inches  and  5  inches  respectively.
Frazier  later  fired  four  groups  of  three  shots  at
a  distance  of  100  yards  in  5.9,  6.2,  5.6,  and  6.5
seconds.  Each  series  of  three  shots  landed  within
areas  ranging  in  diameter  from  3  to  5  inches.
Although  all  of  the  shots  were  a  few  inches  high
and  to  the  right  of  the  target,  this  was  because
of  a  defect  in  the  scope  which  was  recognized
by  the  FBI  agents  and  which  they  could  have
compensated  for  if  they  were  aiming  to  hit  a
bull's-eye.  They  were  instead  fiWng  to  determine
how  rapidly  the  weapon  could  be  fired  and  the
area  within  which  three  shots  could  be  placed.
Frazier  testified  that  while  he  could  not  tell  when
the  defect  occurred,  but  that  a  person  familiar
with  the  weapon  could  compensate  for  it.  More-
over, the  defect  was  one  which  would  have  as-
sisted the  assassin  aiming  at  a  target  which  was
moving  away.  Frazier  said,  "The  fact  that  the
crosshairs  are  set  high  would  actually  compen-
sate for  any  lead  which  had  to  be  taken.  So  that
if  you  aimed  with  this  weapon  as  it  actually  was
received  at  the  laboratory,  it  would  not  be
necessary  to  take  any  lead  whatsoever  in  order
to  hit  the  intended  object.  The  scope  would  ac-
complish the  lead  for  you."  Frazier  added  that
the  scope  would  cause  a  slight  miss  to  the  right.
It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  President's
car  was  curving  slightly  to  the  right  when  the
third  shot  was  fired.

Based  on  these  tests  the  experts  agreed  that
the  assassination  rifle  was  an  accurate  weapon.
Simmons  described  it  as  "quite  accurate,"  in
fact,  as  accurate  as  current  military  rifles.
Frazier  testified  that  the  rifle  was  accurate,  that
it  had  less  recoil  than  the  average  noilitary  rifle
and  that  one  would  not  have  to  be  an  expert
marksmen  to  have  accomplished  the  assassina-
tion with  the  weapon  which  was  used.

Conclusion
The  various  tests  showed  that  the  Mannlicher-


Carcano  was  an  accurate  rifle  and  that  the  use  of
a  four-power  scope  was  a  substantial  aid  to
rapid,  accurate  firing.  Oswald's  Marine  training
in  marksmanship,  his  other  rifle  experience  and
his  established  familiarity  with  this  particular
weapon  show  that  he  possessed  ample  capability
to  commit  the  assassination.  Based  on  the  known
facts  of  the  assassination,  the  Marine  marks-
manship experts,  Major  Anderson  and  Sergeant
Zahm,  concurred  in  the  opinion  that  Oswald
had  the  capability  to  fire  three  shots,  with  two
hits,  within  4.8  and  5.6  seconds.  Concerning  the
shots  which  struck  the  President  in  the  back  of
the  neck.  Sergeant  Zahm  testified:  "With  the
equipment  he  [Oswald]  had  and  with  his  ability
I  consider  it  a  very  easy  shot."  Having  fired  this
shot  the  assassin  was  then  required  to  hit  the
target  one  more  time  within  a  space  of  from
4.8  to  5.6  seconds.  On  the  basis  of  Oswald's
training  and  the  accuracy  of  the  weapon  as
estabUshed  by  the  tests,  the  Commission  con-
cluded that  Oswald  was  capable  of  accomplish-
ing this  second  hit  even  if  there  was  an  inter-
vening shot  which  missed.  The  probability  of
hitting  the  President  a  second  time  would  have
been  markedly  Increased  if,  in  fact,  he  had
missed  either  the  first  or  third  shots  thereby
leaving  a  time  span  of  4.8  to  5.6  seconds  between
the  two  shots  which  struck  their  mark.  The
Commission  agrees  with  the  testimony  of  Marine
marksmanship  expert  Zahm  that  it  was  "an
easy  shot"  to  hit  some  part  of  the  President's
body,  and  that  the  range  where  the  rifleman
would  be  expected  to  hit  would  include  the
President's  head.


CONCLUSION

On  the  basis  of  the  evidence  reviewed  in  this
chapter,  the  Commission  has  found  that  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  (1)  owned  and  possessed  the
rifle  used  to  kill  President  Kennedy  and  wound
Governor  Connally,  (2)  brought  this  rifle  into
the  Depository  Building  on  the  morning  of  the
assassination,  (3)  was  present,  at  the  time  of
the  assassination,  at  the  window  from  which  the
shots  were  fired,  (4)  killed  Dallas  Police  Oflficer
J,  D.  Tippit  in  an  apparent  attempt  to  escape,
(5)  resisted  arrest  by  drawing  a  fully  loaded
pistol  and  attempting  to  shoot  another  police
officer,  (6)  lied  to  the  police  after  his  arrest  con-
cerning important  substantive  matters,  (7)  at-
tempted, in  April  1963,  to  kill  Maj.  Gen.  Edwin
A.  Walker,  and  (8)  possessed  the  capability  with
a  rifle  which  would  have  enabled  him  to  commit
the  assassination.  On  the  basis  of  these  findings
the  Commission  has  concluded  that  Lee  Harvey
Oswald  was  the  assassin  of  President  Kennedy.


80


Chapter  V

DETENTION  AND  DEATH  OF  OSWALD


LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD  spent  almost  all  of
the  last  48  hours  of  his  life  in  the  Police  and
Courts  Building,  a  gray  stone  structure  in  down-
town Dallas  that  housed  the  headquarters  of  the
Dallas  Police  Department  and  the  city  jail.  Fol-
lowing his  arrest  early  Friday  afternoon,  Os-
wald was  brought  immediately  to  this  building
and  remained  there  until  Sunday  morning,  No-
vember 24,  when  he  was  scheduled  to  be  trans-
ferred to  the  county  jail.  At  11:21  that  morning,
in  full  view  of  millions  of  people  watching  on
television,  Oswald  was  fatally  wounded  by  Jack
Ruby,  who  emerged  suddenly  from  the  crowd
of  newsmen  and  policemen  witnessing  the  trans-
fer and  fired  a  single  shot  at  Oswald.

Whether  the  killing  of  Oswald  was  part  of  a
conspiracy  involving  the  assassination  of  Presi-
dent Kennedy  is  considered  in  Chapter  VL
Aside  from  that  question,  the  occurrences  with-
in the  Police  and  Courts  Building  between  No-
vember 22  and  24  raise  other  important  issues
concciTiing  the  conduct  of  law  enforcement  offi-
cials, the  responsibilities  of  the  press,  the  rights
of  accused  persons,  and  the  administration  of
criminal  justice  in  the  United  States.  The  Com-
mission has  therefore  deemed  it  necessary  to
determine  the  facts  concerning  Oswald's  deten-
tion and  death  and  to  evaluate  the  actions  and
responsibilities  of  the  police  and  press  involved
in  these  events.


TREATMENT  OF  OSWALD  IN  CUSTODY

The  focal  center  of  the  Police  and  Courts
Building  during  Oswald's  detention  was  the  third
floor,  which  housed  the  main  offices  of  the  Dal-
las Police  Department.  The  pubUc  elevators  on
this  floor  opened  into  a  lobby  midpoint  of  a  cor-
ridor that  extended  along  the  length  of  the  floor
for  about  140  feet.  At  one  end  of  this  7-foot-
wide  corridor  were  the  offices  occupied  by  Chief
of  Pohce  Jesse  E.  Curry  and  his  immediate  sub-
ordinates; at  the  other  end  was  a  small  press-
room that  could  accommodate  only  a  handful  of
reporters.  Along  this  corridor  were  other  police
offices,  including  those  of  the  major  detective
bureaus.  Between  the  pressroom  and  the  lobby
was  the  complex  of  offices  belonging  to  the
homicide  and  robbery  bureau,  headed  by  Capt.
J.  Wm  Fritz.

Chronology

The  policemen  who  seized  Oswald  at  the
Texas  Theatre  arrived  with  him  at  the  police
department  building  at  about  2  p.m.  and  brought
him  inunediately  to  the  third  floor  offices  of  the
homicide  and  robbery  bureau  to  await  the  ar-
rival of  Captain  Fritz  from  the  Texas  School


Book  Depository.  After  about  15  or  20  minutes
Oswald  was  ushered  into  the  office  of  Captain
Fritz  for  the  first  of  several  interrogation  ses-
sions. At  4:05  p.m.  he  was  taken  to  the  base-
ment assembly  room  for  his  first  lineup.  While
waiting  outside  the  lineup  room,  Oswald  was
searched,  and  five  cartridges  and  other  items
were  removed  from  his  pockets.  After  the  line-
up, at  about  4:20,  Oswald  was  returned  to  Cap-
tain Fritz'  office  for  further  questioning.  Two
hours  later,  at  6:20  p.m.,  Oswa'd  was  taken
downstairs  for  a  second  lineup  and  returned  to
Captain  Fritz'  office  within  15  minutes  for  ad-
ditional interrogation.  Shortly  after  7  p.m..  Cap-
tain Fritz  signed  a  complaint  charging  Oswald
with  the  murder  of  Patrolman  Tippit.  Oswald
was  formally  arraigned,  i.e.,  advised  of  the
charges,  at  7:10  p.m.,  before  Justice  of  the
Peace  David  L.  Johnston,  who  came  to  Captain
Fritz'  office  for  the  occasion.

After  a  third  lineup  at  about  7:40  p.m.,  Os-
wald was  returned  to  Fritz'  office.  About  an
hour  later,  after  further  questioning,  Oswald's
fingerprints  and  palmprints  were  taken  and  a
paraflln  test  (see  app.  XI)  administered  in
Fritz'  office,  after  which  the  questioning  re-
sumed. At  11:26  p.m.  Fritz  signed  the  com-
plaint charging  Oswald  with  the  murder  of
President  Kennedy.  Shortly  after  midnight,  de-
tectives took  Oswald  to  the  basement  assembly
room  for  an  appearance  of  several  minutes  be-
fore members  of  the  press.  At  about  12:20  a.m.
Oswald  was  delivered  to  the  jailer  who  placed
him  in  a  maximum  security  cell  on  the  fifth
floor.  His  cell  was  the  center  one  in  a  block  of
three  cells  that  were  separated  from  the  re-
mainder of  the  jail  area.  The  cells  on  either  side
of  Oswald  were  empty  and  a  guard  was  nearby
whenever  Oswald  was  present.  Shortly  after
1:30  a.m.  Oswald  was  brought  to  the  identifica-
tion bureau  on  the  fourth  floor  and  arraigned
before  Justice  of  the  Peace  Johnston,  this  time
for  the  murder  of  President  Kennedy.

Questioning  resumed  in  Fritz'  offices  on  Sat-
urday morning  at  about  10:25  a.m.,  and  the  ses-
sion lasted  nearly  an  hour  and  10  minutes.  Os-
wald was  then  returned  to  his  cell  for  an  hour,
and  at  12:35  p.m.  he  was  brought  back  to  Fritz'
office  for  an  additional  half -hour  of  questioning.
From  1:10  to  1:30  p.m.,  Oswald's  wife  and
mother  visited  Him  in  the  fourth  floor  visiting
area;  at  1 :40  p.m.  he  attempted  to  call  an  attor-
ney in  New  York.  He  appeared  in  another  line-
up at  2:15  p.m.  At  2:45  p.m.,  with  Oswald's
consent,  a  member  of  the  identification  bureau
obtained  fingernail  scrapings  and  specimens  of
hair  from  him.  He  returned  to  the  fourth  floor
at  3:30  p.m.  for  a  10-minute  visit  with  his
brother,  Robert  Between  4  and  4:30  p.m.,  Os-


81


wald  made  two  telephone  calls  to  Mrs,  Ruth
Paine  at  her  home  in  Irving;  at  about  5:30  p.m.
he  was  visited  by  the  president  of  the  Dallas
Bar  Association  with  whom  he  spoke  for  about
5  minutes.  From  6  to  7: 15  p.m.  Oswald  was  in-
terrogated once  again  in  Captain  Fritz'  oflBce
and  then  returned  to  his  cell.  At  8  p.m.  he  called
the  Paine  residence  again  and  asked  to  speak  to
his  wife,  but  Mrs,  Paine  told  him  that  his  wife
was  no  longer  there.

Oswald  was  signed  out  of  jail  at  9:30  a.m.
on  Simday,  November  24,  and  taken  to  Captain
Fritz'  ofl&ce  for  a  final  round  of  questioning.  The
transfer  party  left  Fritz'  office  at  about  11:15
a.m.;  at  1 1 :21  a.m,  Oswald  was  shot.  He  was  de-
clared dead  at  Parkland  Hospital  at  1:07  p,m.

Interrogation  Sessions

During  the  period  between  2:30  p.m.  on  Fri-
day afternoon  and  11:15  a.m.  Sunday  morning,
Oswald  was  interrogated  for  a  total  of  approxi-
mately 12  hours.  Though  subject  to  intermittent
questioning  for  more  than  7  hours  on  Friday,
Oswald  was  given  8  to  9  hours  to  rest  that  night
On  Saturday  he  was  questioned  for  a  total  of
only  3  hours  during  three  interrogation  sessions,
and  on  Sunday  he  was  questioned  for  less  than
2  hours.  (These  interrogations  are  discussed  in
ch.  rv.)

Captain  Fritz'  office,  within  which  the  inter-
rogations took  place,  was  a  small  room,  14  feet
by  9i  feet  in  size.  In  addition  to  the  policemen
guarding  the  prisoner,  those  present  usually  in-
cluded Dallas  detectives,  investigators  from  the
FBI  and  the  Secret  Service,  and  occasionally
other  officials,  particularly  a  post  office  inspec-
tor and  the  U.S.  marshal.  (See  statements  in
app.  XI.)  As  many  as  seven  or  eight  people
crowded  into  the  small  office.  In  aU,  more  than
25  different  persons  participated  in  or  were  pres-
ent at  some  time  during  interrogations.  Captain
Fritz,  who  conducted  most  of  the  interrogations,
was  frequently  called  from  the  room.  He  said,  "I
don't  believe  there  was  any  time  when  I  went
through  a  very  long  period  without  having  to
step  to  the  door,  or  step  outside,  to  get  a  report
from  some  pair  of  officers,  or  to  give  them  addi-
tional assignments."  In  his  absence,  others  pres-
ent would  occasionally  question  Oswald.

The  interrogators  differ  on  whether  the  con-
fusion prevailing  in  the  main  third  floor  corri-
dor penetrated  Fritz'  office  and  affected  the  at-
mosphere within.  Oswald's  processions  through
the  third  floor  corridor,  described  more  fuUy  be-
low, tended,  in  Fritz'  opinion,  to  keep  Oswald
upset,  and  the  remarks  and  questions  of  news-
men sometimes  caused  bim  to  become  annoyed.
Despite  the  confusion  that  frequently  prevailed,
Oswald  remained  calm  most  of  the  time  during
the  interrogations.  According  to  Captain  Fritz:

You  know  I  didn't  have  trouble  with  him.
If  we  would  just  talk  to  him  quietly  like  we
are  talking  right  now,  we  talked  all  right  un-
til I  asked  him  a  question  that  meant  some-


thing, every  time  I  asked  him  a  question  that
meant  something,  that  would  produce  evi-
dence he  immediately  told  me  he  wouldn't
tell  me  about  it  and  he  seemed  to  anticipate
what  I  was  going  to  ask.

Special  Agent  James  W.  Bookhout,  who  repre-
sented the  FBI  at  most  of  the  interrogations,
stated,  "I  think  generally  you  might  say  any-
time that  you  asked  a  question  that  would  be
pertinent  to  the  investigation,  that  would  be  the
type  of  question  he  would  refuse  to  discuss."

The  number  of  people  in  the  interrogation
room  and  the  timiultuous  atmosphere  through-
out the  third  floor  made  it  difficult  for  the  in-
terrogators to  gain  Oswald's  confidence  and  to
encourage  him  to  be  truthful.  As  Chief  Curry
has  recognized  in  his  testimony,  "we  were  vio-
lating every  principle  of  interrogation  *  *  *
it  was  just  against  all  principles  of  good  inter-
rogation practice."

Oswald's  Legal  Rights

All  available  evidence  indicates  that  Oswald
was  not  subjected  to  any  physical  hardship  dur-
ing the  interrogation  sessions  or  at  any  other
time  while  he  was  in  custody.  He  was  fed  and
allowed  to  rest.  When  he  protested  on  Friday
against  being  handcuffed  from  behind,  the  cuffs
were  removed  and  he  was  handcuffed  in  front.
Although  he  made  remarks  to  newsmen  about
desiring  a  shower  and  demanding  his  "civil
rights,"  Oswald  did  not  complain  about  his
treatment  to  any  of  the  numerous  police  officers
and  other  persons  who  had  much  to  do  with  him
during  the  2  days  of  his  detention.  As  described
in  chapter  IV,  Oswald  received  a  slight  cut  over
his  right  eye  and  a  bruise  under  his  left  eye  dur-
ing the  scuffle  in  the  Texas  Theatre  with  the  ar-
resting officers,  three  of  whom  were  LQJured  and
required  medical  treatment.  These  marks  were
visible  to  all  who  saw  him  during  the  2  days  of
his  detention  and  to  millions  of  television  view-
ers.

Before  the  first  questioning  session  on  Friday
afternoon,  Fritz  warned  Oswald  that  he  was  not
compelled  to  make  any  statement  and  that  state-
ments he  did  make  could  be  used  against  him.
About  5  hours  later,  he  was  arraigned  for  the
Tippit  murder  and  within  an  additional  6i  hours
he  was  arraigned  for  the  murder  of  President
Kennedy.  On  each  occasion  the  justice  of  the
peace  advised  Oswald  of  his  right  to  obtain
counsel  and  the  right  to  remain  sUent.

Throughout  the  period  of  detention,  however,
Oswald  was  not  represented  by  counsel.  At  the
Friday  midnight  press  conference  in  the  base-
ment assembly  room,  he  made  the  following  re-
marks:

Oswald.  Well,  I  was  questioned  by  Judge
[Johnston].  However,  I  protested  at  that  time
that  I  was  not  allowed  legal  representation
during  that  very  short  and  sweet  hearing.  I
really  don't  know  what  the  situation  is  about


82


I


Nobody  has  told  me  anything  except  that  I
am  accused  of,  of,  murdering  a  policeman.  I
know  nothing  more  than  that  and  I  do  re-
quest someone  to  come  forward  to  give  me
legal  assistance.

Q.  Did  you  kill  the  President?

A.  No.  I  have  not  been  charged  with  that.
In  fact  nobody  has  said  that  to  me  yet.  The
first  thing  I  heard  about  it  was  when  the
newspaper  reporters  in  the  hall  asked  me
that  question.


Q.  Mr.  Oswald,  how  did  you  hurt  your  eye?
A.  A  policeman  hit  me.

At  this  time  Oswald  had  been  arraigned  only
for  the  murder  of  Patrolman  Tippit,  but  ques-
tioning by  Captain  Fritz  and  others  had  been
substantially  concerned  with  Oswald's  connec-
tion with  the  assassination.

On  Friday  evening,  representatives  of  the
American  Civil  Liberties  Union  visited  the  po-
lice department  to  determine  whether  Oswald
was  being  deprived  of  counsel.  They  were  as-
sured by  police  officials  and  Justice  of  the  Peace
Johnston  that  Oswald  had  been  informed  of  his
rights  and  was  being  allowed  to  seek  a  lawyer.
On  Saturday  Oswald  attempted  several  times  to
reach  John  Abt,  a  New  York  lawyer,  by  tele-
phone, but  with  no  success.  In  the  afternoon,
he  called  Ruth  Paine  and  asked  her  to  try  to
reach  Abt  for  him,  but  she  too  failed.  Later  in
the  afternoon,  H.  Louis  Nichols,  president  of
the  Dallas  Bar  Association,  visited  Oswald  in
his  cell  and  asked  him  whether  he  wanted  the
association  to  obtain  a  lawyer  for  him.  Oswald
declined  the  offer,  stating  a  first  preference  for
Abt  and  a  second  preference  for  a  lawyer  from
the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union.  As  late  as
Sunday  morning,  according  to  Postal  Inspec-
tor Hairy  D.  Holmes,  Oswald  said  that  he  pre-
ferred to  get  his  own  lawyer.


ACTIVITY  OF  NEWSMEN

Within  an  hour  of  Oswald's  arrival  at  the  po-
lice department  on  November  22,  it  became
known  to  newsmen  that  he  was  a  possible  sus-
pect in  the  slaying  of  President  Kennedy  as  well
as  in  the  murder  of  Patrolman  Tippit.  At  least
as  early  as  3:26  p.m.  a  television  report  carried
this  information.  Reporters  and  cameramen
flooded  into  the  building  and  congregated  in  the
corridor  of  the  third  floor,  joining  those  few  who
had  been  present  when  Oswald  first  arrived.

On  the  Third  Floor

Felix  McKnight,  editor  of  the  Dallas  Times-
Herald,  who  handled  press  arrangements  for
the  President's  visit,  estimated  that  within  24
hours  of  the  assassination  more  than  300  repre-
sentatives of  news  media  were  in  Dallas,  in-
cludiag  correspondents  from  foreign  newspa-


pers and  press  associations.  District  Attorney
Henry  M.  Wade  thought  that  the  crowd  in  the
third  floor  hallway  itself  may  have  numbered  as
many  as  300.  Most  estimates,  including  those
based  on  examination  of  video  tapes,  place  up-
wards of  100  newsmen  and  cameramen  in  the
third  floor  corridor  of  the  police  department  by
the  evening  of  November  22.

In  the  words  of  an  FBI  agent  who  was  pres-
ent, the  conditions  at  the  police  station  were
"not  too  much  unlike  Grand  Central  Station  at
rush  hour,  maybe  like  the  Yankee  Stadium  dur-
ing the  World  Series  games.  *  *  *"  In  the  lobby
of  the  third  floor,  television  cameramen  set  up
two  large  cameras  and  floodlights  in  strategic
positions  that  gave  them  a  sweep  of  the  corri-
dor in  either  direction.  Technicians  stretched
their  television  cables  into  and  out  of  offices,
running  some  of  them  out  of  the  windows  of  a
deputy  chiefs  office  and  down  the  side  of  the
building.  Men  with  newsreel  cameras,  still
cameras,  and  microphones,  more  mobile  than
the  television  cameramen,  moved  back  and
forth  seeking  information  and  opportimities  for
interviews.  Newsmen  wandered  into  the  offices
of  other  bureaus  located  on  the  third  floor,  sat
on  desks,  and  used  police  telephones;  iodeed,
one  reporter  admits  hiding  a  telephone  behind  a
desk  so  that  he  would  have  exclusive  access  to  it
if  something  developed.

By  the  time  Chief  Curry  returned  to  the
building  in  the  middle  of  the  afternoon  from
Love  Field  where  he  had  escorted  President
Johnson  from  Parkland  Hospital,  he  found  that
"there  was  just  pandemonium  on  the  third
floor."  The  news  representatives,  he  testified:

*  *  *  were  jammed  into  the  north  hall  of
the  third  floor,  which  are  the  offices  of  the
criminal  investigation  division.  The  television
trucks,  there  were  several  of  them  around  the
city  hall.  I  went  into  my  administrative  offi-
ces, I  saw  cables  coming  through  the  admin-
istrative assistant  office  and  through  the  dep-
uty chief  of  traffic  through  his  office,  and
running  through  the  hall  they  had  a  live  TV
set  up  on  the  third  floor,  and  it  was  a  bedlam
of  confusion.

According  to  Special  Agent  Winston  G.  Law-
son  of  the  Secret  Service:

At  least  by  6  or  7  o'clock  *  *  *  [the  report-
ers and  cameramen]  were  quite  in  evidence
up  and  down  the  corridors,  cameras  on  the
tripods,  the  sound  equipment,  people  with
still  cameras,  motion  picture-type  hand  cam-
eras, all  kinds  of  people  with  tape  recorders,
and  they  were  trying  to  interview  people,  any-
body that  belonged  in  police  headquarters
that might know anything about Oswald

ie * if

The  corridor  became  so  jammed  that  police-
men and  newsmen  had  to  push  and  shove  if  they


83


wanted  to  get  through,  stepping  over  cables,
wires,  and  tripods.  The  crowd  in  the  hallway
was  so  dense  that  District  Attorney  Wade  found
it  a  "strain  to  get  the  door  open"  to  get  into  the
homicide  office.  According  to  Lawson,  "You
had  to  literally  fight  your  way  through  the  peo-
ple to  get  up  and  down  the  corridor."  A  witness
who  was  escorted  into  the  homicide  offices  on
Saturday  afternoon  related  that  he

tried  to  get  by  the  reporters,  stepping  over
television  cables  and  you  couldn't  hardly  get
by,  they  would  grab  you  and  wanted  to  know
what  you  were  doing  down  here,  even  with
the  detectives  one  in  front  and  one  behind
you.

The  television  cameras  continued  to  record  the
scene  on  the  third  floor  as  some  of  the  newsmen
kept  vigil  through  the  night.

Such  police  efforts  as  there  were  to  control
the  newsmen  were  unavailing.  Capt.  Glen  D.
King,  administrative  assistant  to  Chief  Curry,
witnessed  efforts  to  clear  an  aisle  through  the
hallway,  but  related  that  "this  was  a  constant
battle  because  of  the  number  of  newsmen  who
were  there.  They  would  move  back  into  the
aisleway  that  had  been  cleared.  They  interfered
with  the  movement  of  people  who  had  to  be
there."  According  to  one  detective,  "they  would
be  asked  to  stand  back  and  stay  back  but  it
wouldn't  do  much  good,  and  they  would  push
forward  and  you  had  to  hold  them  off  physi-
cally." The  detective  recalled  that  on  one  occa-
sion when  he  was  escorting  a  witness  through
the  corridor  he  "stopped  *  *  *  and  looked
down  and  there  was  a  joker  had  a  camera  stuck
between  *  *  *  [his]  legs  taking  pictures.
*  *  *  "  Forrest  V.  Sorrels  of  the  Secret  Serv-
ice had  the  impression  that  the  "press  and  the
television  people  just  *  *  *  took  over."

Police  control  over  the  access  of  other  than
newsmen  to  the  third  floor  was  of  limited  but
increasing  effectiveness  after  Oswald's  arrival
at  the  police  department.  Initially  no  steps  were
taken  to  exclude  unauthorized  persons  from  the
third  floor  corridor,  but  late  Friday  afternoon
Assistant  Chief  Charles  Batchelor  stationed
guards  at  the  elevators  and  the  stairway  to  pre-
vent the  admission  of  such  persons.  He  also  di-
rected the  records  room  in  the  basement  to  issue
passes,  after  verification  by  the  bureaus  in-
volved, to  people  who  had  legitimate  business
on  the  third  floor.  Throughout  the  3  days  of
Oswald's  detention,  the  police  were  obliged  to
continue  normal  business  in  all  five  bureaus  lo-
cated along  the  third  floor  hallway.  Thus  many
persons — relatives  of  prisoners,  complainants,
witnesses — had  occasion  to  visit  police  offices
on  the  third  floor  on  business  unrelated  to  the
investigation  of  the  assassination.

Newsmen  seeking  admission  to  the  third  floor
were  required  to  identify  themselves  by  their
personal  press  cards;  however,  the  department
did  not  follow  its  usual  procedure  of  checking


the  authenticity  of  press  credentials.  Captain
King  felt  that  this  would  have  been  impossible
in  light  of  "the  atmosphere  that  existed  over
there,  the  tremendous  pressures  that  existed,  the
fact  that  telephones  were  ringing  constantly,
that  there  were  droves  of  people  in  there  *  *  *
the  fact  that  the  method  by  which  you  positively
identify  someone  * * *  it's  not  easy."

Police  officers  on  the  third  floor  testified  that
they  carefully  checked  all  persons  for  creden-
tials, and  most  newsmen  indicated  that  after
Batchelor  imposed  security  they  were  required
to  identify  themselves  by  their  press  cards.  Spe-
cial Agent  Sorrels  of  the  Secret  Service  stated
that  he  was  requested  to  present  credentials  on
some  of  his  visits  to  the  third  floor.  However,
other  newsmen  apparently  went  unchallenged
during  the  entire  period  before  Oswald  was
killed,  although  some  of  them  were  wearing
press  badges  on  their  lapels  and  some  may  have
been  known  to  the  police  officers.

According  to  some  reporters  and  policemen,
people  who  appeared  to  be  unauthorized  were
present  on  the  third  floor  after  security  proce-
dures were  instituted,  and  video  tapes  seem  to
confirm  their  observations.  Jack  Ruby  was  pres-
ent on  the  third  floor  on  Friday  night.  Assistant
Chief  of  Police  N.  T.  Fisher  testified  that  even
on  Saturday  "anybody  could  come  up  with  a
plausible  reason  for  going  to  one  of  the  third
floor  bureaus  and  was  able  to  get  in."

Oswald  and  the  Press

When  the  police  car  bringing  Oswald  from
the  Texas  Theatre  drove  into  the  basement  of
p)olice  headquarters  at  about  2  p.m.  on  Friday,
some  reporters  and  cameramen,  principally
from  local  papers  and  stations,  were  already  on
hand.  The  policemen  formed  a  wedge  around
Oswald  and  conducted  him  to  the  elevator,  but
several  newsmen  crowded  into.the  elevator  with
Oswald  and  the  police.  When  the  elevator
stopped  at  the  third  floor,  the  cameramen  ran
ahead  down  the  corridor,  and  then  turned
around  and  backed  up,  taking  pictures  of  Os-
wald as  he  was  escorted  toward  the  homicide
and  robbery  bureau  office.  According  to  one  es-
corting officer,  some  six  or  seven  reporters  fol-
lowed the  police  into  the  bureau  office.

From  Friday  afternoon,  when  Oswald  ar-
rived in  the  building,  until  Sunday,  newspaper
reporters  and  television  cameras  focused  their
attention  on  the  homicide  office.  In  full  view  and
within  arm's  lenth  of  the  assembled  newsmen,
Oswald  traversed  the  20  feet  of  corridor  be-
tween the  homicide  office  and  the  locked  door
leading  to  the  jail  elevator  at  least  15  times  after
his  initial  arrival.  The  jail  elevator,  sealed  off
from  public  use,  took  him  to  his  fifth  floor  cell
and  to  the  assembly  room  in  the  basement  for
lineups  and  the  Friday  night  news  conference.

On  most  occasions,  Oswald's  escort  of  three
to  six  detectives  and  policemen  had  to  push  their
way  through  the  newsmen  who  sought  to  sur-


84


round  them.  Although  the  Dallas  press  nor-
mally did  not  take  pictures  of  a  prisoner  with-
out first  obtaining  permission  of  the  police,  who
generally  asked  the  prisoner,  this  practice  was
not  followed  by  any  of  the  newsmen  with  Os-
wald. Generally  when  Oswald  appeared  the
newsmen  turned  their  cameras  on  him,  thrust
microphones  at  his  face,  and  shouted  questions
at  him.  Sometimes  he  answered.  Reporters  in
the  forefront  of  the  throng  would  repeat  his
answers  for  the  benefit  of  those  behind  them
who  could  not  hear.  On  Saturday,  however  in
response  to  police  admonitions,  the  reporters
exercised  more  restraint  and  shouted  fewer
questions  at  Oswald  when  he  passed  through
the  corridor.

Oswald's  most  prolonged  exposure  occurred
at  the  midnight  press  conference  on  Friday
night.  In  response  to  demands  of  newsmen,
District  Attorney  Wade,  after  consulting  with
Chief  Curry  and  Captain  Fritz,  had  announced
shortly  before  midnight  that  Oswald  would  ap-
pear at  a  press  conference  in  the  basement  as-
sembly room.  An  estimated  70  to  100  people,
including  Jack  Ruby,  and  other  unauthorized
persons,  crowded  into  the  small  downstairs
room.  No  identification  was  required.  The  room
was  so  packed  that  Deputy  Chief  M.  W.  Steven-
son and  Captain  Fritz  who  came  down  to  the
basement  after  the  crowd  had  assembled  could
not  get  in  and  were  forced  to  remain  in  the
doorway.

Oswald  was  brought  into  the  room  shortly
after  midnight.  Curry  had  instructed  policemen
not  to  permit  newsmen  to  touch  Oswald  or  get
close  to  him,  but  no  steps  were  taken  to  shield
Oswald  from  the  crowd.  Captain  Fritz  had
asked  that  Oswald  be  placed  on  the  platform
used  for  lineups  so  that  he  could  be  more  easily
removed  "if  anything  happened."  Chief  Curry,
however,  insisted  that  Oswald  stand  on  the  floor
in  front  of  the  stage,  where  he  was  also  in  front
of  the  one-way  nylon-cloth  screen  customarily
used  to  prevent  a  suspect  from  seeing  those  pre-
sent in  the  room.  This  was  done  because  camera-
men had  told  Curry  that  their  cameras  would
not  photograph  well  through  the  screen.

Curry  had  instructed  the  reporters  that  they
were  not  to  "ask  any  questions  and  try  to  inter-
view *  *  *  [Oswald]  in  any  way,"  but  when
he  was  brought  into  the  room,  "immediately
they  began  to  shoot  questions  at  him  and  shove
microphones  into  his  face."  It  was  difficult  to
hear  Oswald's  answers  above  the  uproar.  Cam-
eramen stood  on  the  tables  to  take  pictures  and
others  pushed  forward  to  get  closeups.  The
noise  and  confusion  moimted  as  reporters
shouted  at  each  other  to  get  out  of  the  way  and
cameramen  made  frantic  efforts  to  get  into  po-
sition for  pictures.  After  Oswald  had  been  in  the
room  only  a  few  minutes.  Chief  Curry  inter-
vened and  directed  that  Oswald  be  taken  back
to  jail  because,  he  testified,  the  newsmen  "tried
to  overrun  him."


THE  ABORTIVE  TRANSFER

In  Dallas,  after  a  person  is  charged  with  a
felony,  the  county  sheriff  ordinarily  takes  cus-
tody of  the  prisoner  and  assumes  responsibility
for  his  safekeeping.  Normally,  the  Dallas  Police
Department  notifies  the  sheriff  when  a  prisoner
has  been  charged  with  a  felony  and  the  sheriff
dispatches  his  deputies  to  transport  the  accused
to  the  county  jail.  This  is  usually  done  within  a
few  hours  after  the  complaint  has  been  filed.  In
cases  of  unusual  importance,  however,  the  Dal-
las city  police  sometimes  transport  the  prison-
ers to  the  county  jail.

The  decision  to  move  Oswald  to  the  county
jail  on  Sunday  morning  was  reached  by  Chief
Curry  the  preceding  evening.  Sometime  after
7:30  Saturday  evening,  according  to  Assistant
Chief  Batchelor,  two  reporters  told  him  that
they  wanted  to  go  out  to  dinner  but  that  "they
didn't  want  to  miss  anything  if  we  were  going
to  move  the  prisoner."  Curry  came  upon  them
at  that  point  and  told  the  two  newsmen  that  if
they  returned  by  10  o'clock  in  the  morning,
they  wouldn't  "miss  anything."  A  little  later,  af-
ter checking  with  Captain  Fritz,  Curry  made  a
similar  announcement  to  the  assembled  report-
ers. Curry  reported  the  making  of  his  decision
to  move  Oswald  as  follows:

Then,  I  talked  to  Fritz  about  when  he  thought
he  would  transfer  the  prisoner,  and  he  didn't
think  it  was  a  good  idea  to  transfer  him  at
night  because  of  the  fact  you  couldn't  see,
and  if  anybody  tried  to  cause  them  any  trou-
ble, they  needed  to  see  who  they  were  and
where  it  was  coming  from  and  so  forth,  and
he  suggested  that  we  wait  until  daylight,  so
this  was  normal  procedure,  I  mean,  for  Fritz
to  determine  when  he  is  going  to  transfer  his
prisoners,  so  I  told  him  "Okay."  I  asked  him,
I  said,  "What  time  do  you  think  you  will  be
ready  tomorrow?"  And  he  didn't  know  ex-
actly and  I  said,  "Do  you  think  about  10
o'clock,"  and  he  said,  "I  believe  so,  and  then
is  when  I  went  out  and  told  the  newspaper
people  *  *  *  "I  believe  if  you  are  back  here
by  10  o'clock  you  will  be  back  in  time  to  ob-
serve anything  you  care  to  observe."

During  the  night,  between  2:30  and  3  a.m.,
the  local  office  of  the  FBI  and  the  sheriff's  of-
fice received  telephone  calls  from  an  unidenti-
fied man  who  warned  that  a  committee  had  de-
cided "to  kill  the  man  that  killed  the  President."
Shortly  after,  an  FBI  agent  notified  the  Dallas
police  of  the  anonymous  threat.  The  police  de-
partment and  ultimately  Chief  Curry  were  in-
formed of  both  threats.

Immediately  after  his  arrival  at  the  building
on  Sunday  morning  between  8:30  and  8:45
a.m.,  Curry  spoke  by  telephone  with  Sheriff
J.  E.  Decker  about  the  transfer.  When  Decker
indicated  that  he  would  leave  to  Curry  the  de-
cision on  whether  the  sheriff's  office  or  the  po-


85


lice  would  move  Oswald,  Curry  decided  that  the
police  would  handle  it  because  "we  had  so  much
involved  here,  we  were  the  ones  that  were  in-
vestigating the  case  and  we  had  the  officers  set
up  downstairs  to  handle  it."

After  talking  with  Decker,  Curry  began  to
discuss  plans  for  the  transfer.  With  the  threats
against  Oswald  in  mind,  Curry  suggested  to
Batchelor  and  Deputy  Chief  Stevenson  that  Os-
wald be  transported  to  the  county  jail  in  an  ar-
mored truck,  to  which  they  agreed.  While
Batchelor  made  arrangements  to  have  an  ar-
mored truck  brought  to  the  building,  Curry  and
Stevenson  tentatively  agreed  on  the  route  the  ar-
mored truck  would  follow  from  the  building  to
the  county  jail.

Curry  decided  that  Oswald  would  leave  the
building  via  the  basement.  He  stated  later  that
he  reached  this  decision  shortly  after  his  arrival
at  the  police  building  Sunday  morning,  when
members  of  the  press  had  already  begun  to  gath-
er in  the  basement.  There  is  no  evidence  that
anyone  opposed  this  decision.  Two  members  of
the  Dallas  police  did  suggest  to  Captain  Fritz
that  Oswald  be  taken  from  the  building  by  an-
other exit,  leaving  the  press  "waiting  in  the  base-
ment and  on  Corrmierce  Street,  and  we  could
be  to  the  county  jail  before  anyone  knew  what
was  taking  place."  However,  Fritz  said  that  he
did  not  think  Curry  would  agree  to  such  a  plan
because  he  had  promised  that  Oswald  would  be
transferred  at  a  time  when  newsmen  could  take
pictures.  Forrest  Sorrels  also  suggested  to  Fritz
that  Oswald  be  moved  at  an  unannounced  time
when  no  one  was  around,  but  Fritz  again  re-
sponded that  Curry  "wanted  to  go  along  with
the  press  and  not  try  to  put  anything  over  on
them."

Preliminary  arrangements  to  obtain  addi-
tional personnel  to  assist  with  the  transfer  were
begun  Saturday  evening.  On  Saturday  night,  the
police  reserves  were  requested  to  provide  8  to
10  men  on  Sunday,  and  additional  reservists
were  sought  in  the  morning.  Capt.  C.  E.  Talbert,
who  was  in  charge  of  the  patrol  division  for  the
city  of  Dallas  on  the  morning  of  November  24,
retained  a  small  number  of  policemen  in  the
building  when  he  took  charge  that  morning  and
later  ordered  other  patrolmen  from  several  dis-
tricts to  report  to  the  basement.  At  about  9  a.m.
Deputy  Chief  Stevenson  instructed  all  detec-
tives within  the  building  to  remain  for  the  trans-
fer. Sheriff  Decker  testified  that  his  men  were
ready  to  receive  Oswald  at  the  county  jail  from
the  early  hours  of  Sunday  morning.

With  the  patrolmen  and  reserve  policemen
available  to  him,  Captain  Talbert,  on  his  own
initiative,  undertook  to  secure  the  basement  of
the  police  department  building.  He  placed  po-
licemen outside  the  building  at  the  top  of  the
Commerce  Street  ramp  to  keep  all  spectators  on
the  opposite  side  of  Commerce  Street.  Later,
Talbert  directed  that  patrolmen  be  assigned  to
all  street  intersections  the  transfer  vehicle  would
cross  along  the  route  to  the  county  jail.  His  most


significant  security  precautions,  however,  were
steps  designed  to  exclude  unauthorized  persons
from  the  basement  area.

The  spacious  basement  of  the  Police  and
Courts  Building  contains,  among  other  things,
the  jail  office  and  the  police  garage.  The  jaU
office,  into  which  the  jail  elevator  opens,  is  situ-
ated on  the  west  side  of  an  auto  ramp  cutting
across  the  length  of  the  basement  from  Main
Street,  on  the  north  side  of  the  building,  to  Com-
merce Street,  on  the  south  side.  From  the  foot
of  this  ramp,  on  the  east  side,  midway  through
the  basement,  a  decline  runs  down  a  short  dis-
tance to  the  L-shaped  police  garage.  In  addition
to  the  auto  ramp,  five  doors  to  the  garage  pro-
vide access  to  the  basement  from  the  Police  and
Courts  Building  on  the  west  side  of  the  garage
and  the  attached  Municipal  Building  on  the  east.
Three  of  these  five  doors  provide  access  to  three
elevators  opening  into  the  garage,  two  for  pas-
sengers near  the  central  part  of  the  garage  and
one  for  service  at  the  east  end  of  the  garage.  A
fomth  door  near  the  passenger  elevator  opens
into  the  municipal  building;  the  fifth  door,  at  the
Commerce  Street  side  of  the  garage,  opens  into
a  subbasement  that  is  connected  with  both
buildings.

Shortly  after  9  o'clock  Sunday  morning,  po-
licemen cleared  the  basement  of  all  but  police
personnel.  Guards  were  stationed  at  the  top  of
the  Main  and  Commerce  Streets  auto  ramps
leading  down  into  the  basement,  at  each  of  the
five  doorways  into  the  garage,  and  at  the  double
doors  leading  to  the  public  hallway  adjacent  to
the  jaD  ofl&ce.  Then,  Sgt.  Patrick  T.  Dean,  act-
LQg  under  instructions  from  Talbert,  directed
14  men  in  a  search  of  the  garage.  Maintenance
workers  were  directed  to  leave  the  area.  The
searchers  examined  the  rafters,  tops  of  air  con-
ditioning ducts,  and  every  closet  and  room
opening  off  the  garage.  They  searched  the  in-
terior and  trunk  compartment  of  automobiles
parked  in  the  garage.  The  two  passenger  ele-
vators in  the  central  part  of  the  garage  were  not
in  service  and  the  doors  were  shut  and  locked;
the  service  elevator  was  moved  to  the  first  floor,
and  the  operator  was  instructed  not  to  return  it
to  the  basement.

Despite  the  thoroughness  with  which  the
search  was  conducted,  there  stUl  existed  one
and  perhaps  two  weak  points  in  controlling  ac-
cess to  the  garage.  Testimony  did  not  resolve
positively  whether  or  not  the  stairway  door  near
the  pubUc  elevators  was  locked  both  from  the
inside  and  outside  as  was  necessary  to  secure
it  effectively.  And  although  guards  were  sta-
tioned near  the  double  doors,  the  hallway  near
the  jail  office  was  accessible  to  people  from  in-
side the  Police  and  Courts  Building  without  the
necessity  of  presenting  identification.  Until  sec-
onds before  Oswald  was  shot,  newsmen  hurry-
ing to  photograph  Oswald  were  able  to  run  with-
out challenge  through  those  doors  into  the  base-
ment.

After  the  search  had  been  completed,  the  po-


86


lice  allowed  news  representatives  to  reenter  the
basement  area  and  gather  along  the  entrance  to
the  garage  on  the  east  side  of  the  ramp.  Later,
the  police  permitted  the  newsmen  to  stand  in
front  of  the  railing  on  the  east  side  of  the  ramp
leading  to  Main  Street.  The  policemen  deployed
by  Talbert  and  Dean  had  instructions  to  allow
no  one  but  identified  news  media  representa-
tives into  the  basement.  As  before,  the  police
accepted  any  credentials  that  appeared  authen-
tic, though  some  officers  did  make  special  ef-
forts to  check  for  pictures  and  other  forms  of
corroborating  identification.  Many  newsmen  re-
ported that  they  were  checked  on  more  than  one
occasion  while  they  waited  in  the  basement.  A
small  number  did  not  recall  that  their  creden-
tials were  ever  checked.

Shortly  after  his  arrival  on  Sunday  moming,
Chief  Curry  issued  instructions  to  keep  report-
ers and  cameramen  out  of  the  jail  oSice  and  to
keep  television  equipment  behind  the  railing
separating  the  basement  auto  ramp  from  the
garage.  Curry  observed  that  in  other  respects
Captain  Talbert  appeared  to  have  security  meas-
ures in  hand  and  allowed  him  to  proceed  on  his
own  initiative.  Batchelor  and  Stevenson  checked
progress  ia  the  basement  during  the  course  of
the  moming,  and  the  oflBcials  were  generally
satisfied  with  the  steps  Talbert  had  taken.

At  about  11  a.m.,  Deputy  Chief  Stevenson
requested  that  Capt.  O.  A.  Jones  of*  the  forgery
bureau  bring  all  available  detectives  from  the
third  floor  offices  to  the  basement.  Jones  in-
structed the  detectives  who  accompanied  him  to
the  basement  to  line  the  walls  on  either  side  of
the  passageway  cleared  for  the  transfer  party.
According  to  Detective  T.  D.  McMillon,

*  *  *  Captain  Jones  explained  to  us  that,
when  they  brought  the  prisoner  out,  that  he
wanted  two  lines  formed  and  we  were  to  keep
these  two  lines  formed,  you  know,  a  barrier
on  either  side  of  them,  kind  of  an  aisle  *  *  *
for  them  to  walk  through,  and  when  they
came  down  this  aisle,  we  were  to  keep  this
line  intact  and  move  along  with  them  until
the  man  was  placed  in  the  car.

I  With  Assistant  Chief  Batchelor's  permission,
Jones  removed  photographers  who  had  gathered
once  again  in  the  basement  jail  office.  Jones  re-
called that  he  instructed  all  newsmen  along  the
Main  Street  ramp  to  remain  behind  an  imagin-
ary line  extending  from  the  southeast  comer  of
the  jail  office  to  the  railing  on  the  east  side  of
the  ramp;  other  officers  recalled  that  Jones  di-
rected the  newsmen  to  move  away  from  the  foot
of  the  Main  Street  ramp  and  to  line  up  against
the  east  railing.  In  any  event,  newsmen  were  al-
lowed to  congregate  along  the  foot  of  the  ramp
after  Batchelor  observed  that  there  was  insuffi-
cient room  along  the  east  of  the  ramp  to  permit
all  the  news  representatives  to  see  Oswald  as  he
was  brought  out.

By  the  time  Oswald  reached  the  basement,  40


87


to  50  newsmen  and  70  to  75  police  officers  were
assembled  there.  Three  television  cameras  stood
along  the  railing  and  most  of  the  newsmen  were
congregated  in  that  area  and  at  the  top  of  the
adjacent  decline  leading  into  the  garage.  A
group  of  newsmen  and  police  officers,  best  es-
timated at  about  20,  stood  strung  across  the
bottom  of  the  Main  Street  ramp.  Along  the
south  wall  of  the  passageway  outside  the  jail
office  door  were  about  eight  detectives,  and
three  detectives  lined  the  north  wall.  Two  offi-
cers stood  in  front  of  the  double  doors  leading
mto  the  passageway  from  the  corridor  next  to
the  jail  office.

Begiiming  Saturday  night,  the  public  had
been  kept  informed  of  the  approximate  time  of
the  transfer.  At  approximately  10:20  a.m.
Curry  told  a  press  conference  that  Oswald
would  be  moved  in  an  armored  truck  and  gave
a  general  description  of  other  security  precau-
tions. Apparently  no  newsmen  were  informed  of
the  transfer  route,  however,  and  the  route  was
not  disclosed  to  the  driver  of  the  armored  truck
until  the  tmck  arrived  at  the  Commerce  Street
exit  at  about  11:07  a.m.  When  they  leamed  of
its  arrival,  many  of  the  remaining  newsmen  who
had  waited  on  the  third  floor  descended  to  the
basement.  Shortly  after,  newsmen  may  have  had
another  indication  that  the  transfer  was  immi-
nent if  they  caught  a  glimpse  through  the  glass
windows  of  Oswald  putting  on  a  sweater  in  Cap-
tain Fritz'  office.

Because  the  driver  feared  that  the  truck  might
stall  if  it  had  to  start  from  the  bottom  of  the
ramp  and  because  the  overhead  clearance  ap-
peared to  be  inadeqtiate,  Assistant  Chief  Batch-
elor had  it  backed  only  into  the  entranceway
at  the  top  of  the  ramp.  Batchelor  and  others
then  inspected  the  inside  of  the  truck.

When  Chief  Curry  leamed  that  the  truck  had
arrived,  he  informed  Captain  Fritz  that  security
controls  were  in  effect  and  inquired  how  long
the  questioning  of  Oswald  would  continue.  At
this  point,  Fritz  leamed  for  the  first  time  of  the
plan  to  convey  Oswald  by  armored  truck  and
immediately  expressed  his  disapproval.  He
urged  the  use  of  an  unmarked  pohce  car  driven
by  a  poUce  officer,  pointing  out  that  this  would
be  better  from  the  standpoint  of  both  speed  and
maneuverability.  Curry  agreed  to  Fritz'  plan;
the  armored  truck  would  be  used  as  a  decoy.
They  decided  that  the  armored  truck  would
leave  the  ramp  first,  followed  by  a  car  which
would  contain  only  security  officers.  A  poUce
car  bearing  Oswald  would  follow.  After  pro-
ceeding one  block,  the  car  with  Oswald  would
turn  off  and  proceed  directly  to  the  county  jail;
the  armored  truck  would  follow  a  lead  car  to
the  jail  along  the  previously  agreed  upon  and
more  circuitous  route.

Captain  Fritz  instmcted  Detectives  C.  W.
Brown  and  C.  N.  Dhority  and  a  third  detective
to  proceed  to  the  garage  and  move  the  foUowup
car  and  the  transfer  car  into  place  on  the  auto
ramp.  He  told  Lt  Rio  S.  Pierce  to  obtain  an-


other  automobile  from  the  basement  and  take
up  a  lead  position  on  Commerce  Street.  Deputy
Chief  Stevenson  went  back  to  the  basement  to
inform  Batchelor  and  Jones  of  the  change  in
plans.  Oswald  was  given  his  sweater,  and  then
his  right  hand  was  handcuffed  to  the  left  hand
of  Detective  J.  R.  Leavelle.  Detective  T.  L.
Baker  called  the  jaU  office  to  check  on  security
precautions  in  the  basement  and  notify  ofl&ciails
that  the  prisoner  was  being  brought  down.

On  arriving  in  the  basement.  Pierce  asked
Sgts.  James  A.  Putnam  and  BiUy  Joe  Maxey  to
accompany  him  in  the  lead  car.  Since  the  ar-
mored truck  was  blocking  the  Commerce  Street
ramp,  it  would  be  necessary  to  drive  out  the
Main  Street  ramp  and  circle  the  block  to  Com-
merce Street.  Maxey  sat  on  the  back  seat  of
Pierce's  car,  and  Putnam  helped  clear  a  path
through  reporters  on  the  ramp  so  that  Pierce
could  drive  up  toward  Main  Street.  When  the
car  passed  by  the  reporters  at  about  11 :20  a.m.,
Putnam  entered  the  car  on  the  right  front  side.
Pierce  drove  to  the  top  of  the  Main  Street  ramp
and  slowed  momentarily  as  Patrolman  Roy  E.
Vaughn  stepped  from  his  position  at  the  top  of
the  ramp  toward  the  street  to  watch  for  traffic.
After  Pierce's  car  left  the  garage  area,  Brown
drove  another  police  car  out  of  the  garage,
moved  part  way  up  the  Commerce  Street  ramp,
and  began  to  back  down  into  position  to  receive
Oswald.  Dhority  also  proceeded  to  drive  the
followup  car  into  position  ahead  of  Brown.

As  Pierce's  car  started  up  the  ramp  at  about
11:20  a.m.,  Oswald,  accompanied  by  Captain
Fritz  and  four  detectives,  arrived  at  the  jail  of-
fice. Cameramen  in  the  hallway  of  the  basement
took  pictures  of  Oswald  through  the  interior
glass  windows  of  the  jail  office  as  he  was  led
through  the  office  to  the  exit.  Some  of  these
camerameQ  then  ran  through  the  double  doors
near  the  jaU  office  and  squeezed  into  the  line
which  had  formed  across  the  Main  Street  ramp.
Still  others  remained  just  inside  the  double
doors  or  proceeded  through  the  double  doors
after  Oswald  and  his  escort  emerged  from  the
jaU  office.

When  Fritz  came  to  the  jail  office  door,  he
asked  if  everything  was  ready,  and  a  detective
standing  in  the  passageway  answered  yes.  Some-
one shouted,  "Here  he  comes!";  additional  spot-
lights were  turned  on  in  the  basement,  and  the
din  increased.  A  detective  stepped  from  the  jail
office  and  proceeded  toward  the  transfer  car.
Seconds  later  Fritz  and  then  Oswald,  with  Detec-
tive Leavelle  at  his  right,  Detective  L.  C.  Graves
at  his  left,  and  Detective  L.  D.  Montgomery  at
his  rear,  came  through  the  door.  Fritz  walked
to  Brown's  car,  which  had  not  yet  backed  fully
into  position;  Oswald  followed  a  few  feet  be-
hind. Newsmen  near  the  double  door  moved
forward  after  him.  Though  movie  films  and
video  tapes  indicate  that  the  front  line  of  news-
men along  the  Main  Street  ramp  remained  fairly
stationary,  it  was  the  impression  of  many  who
were  close  to  the  scene  that  with  Oswald's  ap-


pearance the  crowd  surged  forward.  According
to  Detective  Montgomery,  who  was  walking  di-
rectly behind  Oswald,  "as  soon  as  we  came  out
this  door  *  *  *  this  bunch  here  just  moved
in  on  us."  To  Detective  B.  H.  Combest,  stand-
ing on  the  Commerce  Street  side  of  the  passage-
way from  the  jail  office  door,  it  appeared  that

Almost  the  whole  line  of  people  pushed  for-
ward when  Oswald  started  to  leave  the  jail
office,  the  door,  the  hall — all  the  newsmen
were  poking  their  sound  mikes  across  to  him
and  asking  questions,  and  they  were  everyone
sticking  their  flashbulbs  up  and  around  and
over  him  and  in  his  face.

After  Oswald  had  moved  about  10  feet  from  the
door  of  the  jail  office.  Jack  Ruby  passed  be-
tween a  newsman  and  a  detective  at  the  edge  of
the  straining  crowd  on  the  Main  Street  ramp.
With  his  right  hand  extended  and  holding  a
.38  caliber  revolver.  Ruby  stepped  quickly  for-
ward and  fired  a  single  fatal  bullet  into  Oswald's
abdomen.


POSSIBLE  ASSISTANCE  TO  JACK  RUBY
IN  ENTERING  THE  BASEMENT

The  killing  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  in  the  base-
ment of  police  headquarters  in  the  midst  of
more  than  70  police  officers  gave  rise  to  im-
mediate specvilation  that  one  or  more  members
of  the  police  department  provided  Jack  Ruby
assistance  which  had  enabled  him  to  enter  the
basement  and  approach  within  a  few  feet  of  the
accused  Presidential  assassin.  In  chapter  VI,  the
Commission  has  considered  whether  there  is
any  evidence  linking  Jack  Ruby  with  a  con-
spiracy to  kill  the  President.  At  this  point,  how-
ever, it  is  appropriate  to  consider  whether  there
is  evidence  that  Jack  Ruby  received  assistance
from  Dallas  policemen  or  others  in  gaining  ac-
cess to  the  basement  on  the  morning  of  Novem-
ber 24.  An  affirmative  answer  would  require
that  the  evidence  be  evaluated  for  pKJssible  con-
nection with  the  assassination  itself.  While  the
Commission  has  found  no  evidence  that  Ruby
received  assistance  from  any  person  in  entering
the  basement,  his  means  of  entry  is  significant
in  evaluating  the  adequacy  of  the  precautions
taken  to  protect  Oswald.

Although  more  than  a  hundred  policemen
and  newsmen  were  present  in  the  basement  of
police  headquarters  during  the  10  minutes  be-
fore the  shooting  of  Oswald,  none  has  been
found  who  definitely  observed  Jack  Ruby's  en-
try into  the  basement.  After  considering  all  the
evidence,  the  Commission  has  concluded  that
Ruby  entered  the  basement  unaided,  probably
via  the  Main  Street  ramp,  and  no  more  than  3
minutes  before  the  shooting  of  Oswald.

Ruby's  account  of  how  he  entered  the  base-
ment by  the  Main  Street  ramp  merits  considera-
tion in  determining  his  means  of  entry.  Three


88


Dallas  policemen  testified  that  approximately
30  minutes  after  his  arrest,  Ruby  told  them  that
he  had  walked  to  the  top  of  the  Main  Street
ramp  from  the  nearby  Western  Union  oflBce
and  that  he  walked  down  the  ramp  at  the  time
the  police  car  driven  by  Lieutenant  Pierce
emerged  into  Main  Street.  This  information  did
not  come  to  light  immediately  because  the  po-
licemen did  not  report  it  to  their  superiors  until
some  days  later.  Ruby  refused  to  discuss  his
means  of  entry  in  interrogations  with  other  in-
vestigators later  on  the  day  of  his  arrest.  There-
after, in  a  lengthy  interview  on  December  21
and  in  a  sworn  deposition  taken  after  his  trial,
Ruby  gave  the  same  explanation  he  had  given
to  the  three  policemen.

The  Commission  has  been  able  to  establish
with  precision  the  time  of  certain  events  leading
up  to  the  shooting.  Minutes  before  Oswald  ap-
peared in  the  basement.  Ruby  was  in  the  West-
em  Union  Office  located  on  the  same  block  of
Main  Street  some  350  feet  from  the  top  of  the
Mam  Street  ramp.  The  time  stamp  on  a  money
order  which  he  sent  and  on  the  receipt  found  in
his  pocket  establish  that  the  order  was  accepted
for  transmission  at  almost  exactly  11:17  a.m.
Ruby  was  then  observed  to  depart  the  office
walking  in  the  direction  of  the  police  building.
Video  tapes  taken  without  interruption  before
the  shooting  establish  that  Lieutenant  Pierce's
car  cleared  the  crowd  at  the  foot  of  the  ramp  55
seconds  before  the  shooting.  They  also  show
Ruby  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  ramp  on  the
Main  Street  side  before  the  shooting.  The  shoot-
ing occurred  very  close  to  11 :21  a.m.  This  time
has  been  established  by  observing  the  time  on
a  clock  appearing  in  motion  pictures  of  Oswald
in  the  basement  jail  office,  and  by  records  giving
the  time  of  Oswald's  departure  from  the  city  jail
and  the  time  at  which  an  ambulance  was  sum-
moned for  Oswald.

The  Main  Street  ramp  provided  the  most  di-
rect route  to  the  basement  from  the  Western  Un-
ion office.  At  normal  stride,  it  requires  approxi-
mately 1  minute  to  walk  from  that  office  to  the
top  of  the  Main  Street  ramp  and  about  20-25
seconds  to  descend  the  ramp.  It  is  certain,  there-
fore, that  Ruby  entered  the  basement  no  more
than  2-3  minutes  before  the  shooting.  This  time-
table indicates  that  a  little  more  than  2  of
the  4  minutes  between  Ruby's  departure  from
the  Western  Union  office  and  the  time  of  the
shooting  are  unaccounted  for.  Ruby  could  have
consumed  this  time  in  loitering  along  the  way,
at  the  top  of  the  ramp,  or  inside  the  basement.
However,  if  Ruby  is  correct  that  he  passed
Pierce's  car  at  the  top  of  the  ramp,  he  could
have  been  in  the  basement  no  more  than  30
seconds  before  the  shooting.

The  testimony  of  two  witnesses  partially  cor-
roborates Ruby's  claim  that  he  entered  by  the
Main  Street  ramp.  James  Turner,  an  employee
of  WBAP-TV  Fort  Worth,  testified  that  while
he  was  standing  near  the  railing  on  the  east  side
of  the  Main  Street  ramp,  perhaps  30  seconds


before  the  shooting,  he  observed  a  man  he  is
confident  was  Jack  Ruby  moving  slowly  down
the  Main  Street  ramp  about  10  feet  from  the
bottom.  Two  other  witnesses  testified  that  they
thought  they  had  seen  Ruby  on  the  Main  Street
side  of  the  ramp  before  the  shooting.

One  other  witness  has  testified  regarding  the
purported  movements  of  a  man  on  the  Main
Street  ramp,  but  his  testimony  merits  Uttle  cre-
dence. A  former  police  officer,  N.  J.  Daniels,
who  was  standing  at  the  top  of  the  ramp  with  the
single  patrolman  guarding  this  entrance,  R.  E.
Vaughn,  testified  that  "3  or  4  minutes,  I  guess"
before  the  shooting,  a  man  walked  down  the
Main  Street  ramp  in  full  view  of  Vaughn  but
was  not  stopped  or  questioned  by  the  officer.
Daniels  did  not  identify  the  man  as  Ruby.
Moreover,  he  gave  a  description  which  differed
in  important  respects  from  Ruby's  appearance
on  November  24,  and  he  has  testified  that  he
doesn't  think  the  man  was  Ruby.  On  November
24,  Vaughn  telephoned  Daniels  to  ask  him  if
he  had  seen  anybody  walk  past  him  on  the
morning  of  the  24th  and  was  told  that  he  had
not;  it  was  not  untU  November  29  that  Daniels
came  forward  with  the  statement  that  he  had
seen  a  man  enter.

Although  the  sum  of  this  evidence  tends  to
support  Ruby's  claim  that  he  entered  by  the
Main  Street  ramp,  there  is  other  evidence  not
fully  consistent  with  Ruby's  story.  Patrolman
Vaughn  stated  that  he  checked  the  credentials
of  all  unknown  persons  seeking  to  enter  the
basement,  and  his  testimony  was  supported  by
several  persons.  Vaughn  denied  that  the  emer-
gence of  Lieutenant  Pierce's  car  from  the  build-
ing distracted  him  long  enough  to  allow  Ruby  to
enter  the  ramp  unnoticed,  and  neither  he  nor
any  of  the  three  officers  in  Lieutenant  Pierce's
car  saw  Ruby  enter.

Despite  Vaughn's  denial  the  Commission  has
found  no  credible  evidence  to  support  any  other
entry  route.  Two  Dallas  detectives  believed
they  observed  three  men  pushing  a  WBAP-TV
camera  into  the  basement  minutes  before  the
shooting,  while  only  two  were  vnth  the  camera
after  Oswald  had  been  shot.  However,  films
taken  in  the  basement  show  the  WBAP-TV
camera  being  pushed  past  the  detectives  by  only
two  men.  The  suspicion  of  the  detectives  is
probably  explained  by  testimony  that  a  third
WBAP-TV  employee  ran  to  help  steady  the  in-
coming camera  as  it  entered  the  basement,  prob-
ably just  before  the  camera  became  visible  on
the  fihns.  Moreover,  since  the  camera  entered
the  basement  close  to  4  minutes  before  the
shooting,  it  is  virtually  impossible  that  Ruby
could  have  been  in  the  basement  at  that  time.

The  possibility  that  Ruby  entered  the  base-
ment by  some  other  route  has  been  investigated,
but  the  Commission  has  found  no  evidence  to
support  it.  Ruby  could  have  walked  from  the
Western  Union  office  to  the  Commerce  Street
ramp  on  the  other  side  of  the  building  in  about
2i  minutes.  However,  dvu±ig  the  minutes  pre-


89


ceding  the  shooting  video  tapes  show  the  ar-
mored truck  in  the  entranceway  to  this  ramp
with  only  narrow  clearance  on  either  side.  Sev-
eral policemen  were  standing  near  the  truck  and
a  large  crowd  of  spectators  was  gathered  across
the  street.  It  is  improbable  that  Ruby  could  have
squeezed  past  the  truck  without  having  been
observed.  U  Ruby  entered  by  any  other  means,
he  would  have  had  to  pass  first  through  the  Po-
lice and  Courts  Building  or  the  attached  Muni-
cipal Building,  and  then  secondly  through  one
of  the  five  doors  into  the  basement,  all  of  which,
according  to  the  testimony  of  police  ofiicers,
were  secured.  The  testimony  was  not  completely
positive  about  one  of  the  doors.

There  is  no  evidence  to  support  the  specula-
tions that  Ruby  used  a  press  badge  to  gain  en-
try to  the  basement  or  that  he  concealed  him-
self in  a  police  car.  Police  found  no  form  of
press  card  on  Ruby's  person  after  his  apprehen-
sion, nor  any  discarded  badges  within  the  base-
ment. There  is  no  evidence  that  any  police  offi-
cer admitted  Ruby  on  the  pretense  fiat  he  was  a
member  of  the  press  or  any  other  pretense.

Police  vehicles  in  the  basement  were  in-
spected during  the  course  of  the  search  super-
vised by  Sergeant  Dean.  According  to  Patrol-
man Vaughn,  the  only  vehicles  that  entered  the
basement  while  he  was  at  the  top  of  the  Main
Street  ramp  were  two  patrol  cars,  one  of  which
entered  twice,  and  a  patrol  wagon  which  was
searched  by  another  policeman  after  it  entered
the  basement.  AH  entered  on  official  police  busi-
ness and  considerably  more  than  4  minutes  be-
fore Oswald  was  shot.  None  of  the  witnesses  at
the  top  of  the  Main  Street  ramp  recalled  any
police  car  entering  the  basement  in  the  4-minute
period  after  Ruby  left  the  Western  Union  office
and  preceding  the  shooting.  The  possibility  that
Ruby  could  have  entered  the  basement  in  a  car
may  therefore  be  completely  discounted.

The  Dallas  Police  Department,  concerned  at
the  failure  of  its  security  measures,  conducted
an  extensive  investigation  that  revealed  no  in-
formation indicating  complicity  between  any
police  officer  and  Jack  Ruby.  Ruby  denied  to
the  Commission  that  he  received  any  form  of
assistance.  The  F^I  interviewed  every  member
of  the  police  department  who  was  on  duty  in
the  basement  on  November  24,  and  Commis-
sion staff  members  took  sworn  depositions  from
many.  With  few  exceptions,  newsmen  who  were
present  in  the  basement  at  the  time  also  gave
statements  and/ or  depositions.  As  the  record
before  the  Commission  indicated,  Ruby  had
had  rather  free  access  to  the  Dallas  police  quar-
ters during  the  period  subsequent  to  the  assas-
sination, but  there  was  no  evidence  that  impli-
cated the  police  or  newsmen  in  Ruby's  actions
on  that  day.

Ruby  was  known  to  have  a  wide  acquaint-
anceship with  Dallas  policemen  and  to  seek
their  favor.  Acording  to  testimony  from  many
sources,  he  gave  free  coffee  at  his  clubs  to  many
policemen  while  they  were  on  duty  and  free  ad-


mittance and  discounts  on  beverages  when  they
were  off  duty.  Although  Chief  Curry's  estimate
that  approximately  25  to  50  of  the  1,175  men
in  the  Dallas  Police  Department  knew  Ruby
may  be  too  conservative,  the  Commission  found
no  evidence  of  any  suspicious  relationships  be-
tween Ruby  and  any  police  officer.

The  Commission  found  no  substantial  evi-
dence that  any  member  of  the  Dallas  Police  De-
partment recognized  Jack  Ruby  as  an  unauthor-
ized person  in  the  basement  prior  to  the  time
Sgt.  P.  T.  Dean,  according  to  his  testimony,
saw  Ruby  dart  forward  toward  Oswald.  But
Dean  was  then  part  way  up  the  Conmierce
Street  ramp,  too  far  removed  to  act.  Patrol-
man W.  J.  Harrison,  Capt.  Glen  King,  and  re-
serve officers  Capt.  C.  O.  Amett  and  Patrol-
man W.  M.  Croy  were  among  those  in  front  of
Ruby  at  the  time  Dean  saw  him.  They  all  faced
away  from  Ruby,  toward  the  jail  office.  Video
tapes  show  that  Harrison  turned  in  the  direction
of  the  ramp  at  the  time  Lieutenant  Pierce's  car
passed,  and  once  again  25  seconds  later,  but
there  is  no  indication  that  he  observed  or  recog-
nized Ruby.  The  policemen  standing  on  the
south  side  of  the  passageway  from  the  jail  office,
who  might  have  been  looldng  in  Ruby's  direc-
tion, had  the  glare  of  television  and  photograph-
er's lights  in  their  eyes.

The  Commission  also  considered  the  possi-
bility that  a  member  of  the  police  department
called  Ruby  at  his  apartment  and  informed  him,
either  intentionally  or  unintentionally,  of  the
time  of  the  planned  transfer.  From  at  least
10:19  a.m.,  imtil  close  to  11  a.m.,  on  Sunday,
Ruby  was  at  his  apartment,  where  he  could
have  received  a  call  that  the  transfer  was  im-
minent. He  apparently  left  his  apartment  be-
tween 10:45  and  11  a.m.  However,  the  drive
from  Ruby's  apartment  to  the  Western  Union
office  takes  approximately  15  minutes.  Since  the
time  of  the  contemplated  transfer  could  not
have  been  known  to  anyone  until  a  few  minutes
before  11:15  a.m.,  a  precise  time  could  not  have
been  conveyed  to  Ruby  while  he  was  at  his
apartment.  Moreover,  the  television  and  radio
publicized  the  transfer  plans  throughout  the
morning,  obviating  the  need  for  Ruby  to  obtain
information  surreptitiously.


ADEQUACY  OF  SECURITY
PRECAUTIONS

The  shooting  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  obvi-
ously resulted  from  the  failure  of  the  security
precautions  which  the  Dallas  Police  Depart-
ment had  taken  to  protect  their  prisoner.  In  as-
sessing the  causes  of  the  security  failure,  the
Commission  has  not  overlooked  the  extraor-
dinary circumstances  which  prevailed  during
the  days  that  the  attention  of  the  world  was
turned  on  Dallas.  Confronted  with  a  unique
situation,  the  Dallas  police  took  special  security
measvures  to  insure  Oswald's  safety.  Unfortu-


90


nately  these  did  not  include  adequate  control
of  the  great  crowd  of  newsmen  that  inundated
the  police  department  building.

The  Dallas  police  had  in  custody  a  man
whose  alleged  act  had  brought  upon  him  im-
mediate and  universal  opprobrium.  There  were
many  possible  reasons  why  people  might  have
attempted  to  kill  him  if  given  the  opportunity.
Concerned  that  there  might  be  an  attempt  on
Oswald's  life,  FBI  Director  J.  Edgar  Hoover
sent  a  message  to  Chief  Curry  on  November  22
through  Special  Agent  Manning  C.  Clements
of  the  FBI's  Dallas  oflBce,  urging  that  Oswald
be  afforded  the  utmost  security.  Curry  does  not
recall  receiving  the  message.

Although  the  presence  of  a  great  mass  of
press  representatives  created  an  extraordinary
security  problem  in  the  building,  the  police  de-
partment pursued  its  normal  policy  of  admit-
ting the  press.  That  policy,  set  forth  in  General
Order  No.  81  of  the  Dallas  Police  Department,
provided —

*  *  *  that  members  of  this  Department  ren-
der every  assistance,  except  such  as  obviously
may  seriously  hinder  or  delay  the  proper
functioning  of  the  Department,  to  the  ac-
credited members  of  the  official  news-gather-
ing agencies  and  this  includes  newspaper,
television  cameramen  and  news-reel  photog-
raphers.

In  a  letter  to  all  members  of  the  police  depart-
ment, dated  February  7,  1963,  Chief  Curry  ex-
plained the  general  order,  in  part,  as  foUows:

The  General  Order  covering  this  subject  is
not  merely  permissive.  It  does  not  state  that
the  Officer  may,  if  he  so  chooses,  assist  the
press.  It  rather  places  on  him  a  responsibility
to  lend  active  assistance.


*  *  *  as  a  Department  we  deal  with  pub-
lic affairs.  It  is  the  right  of  the  public  to  loiow
about  these  affairs,  and  one  of  the  most  ac-
curate and  useful  avenues  we  have  of  sup-
plying this  information  is  through  the  news-
papers and  radio  and  television  stations.

Implied  in  the  General  Order  is  a  prohi-
bition for  the  Officer  to  improperly  attempt
to  interfere  with  the  news  media  representa-
tive, who  is  functioning  in  his  capacity  as
such.  Such  activity  on  the  part  of  any  Police
Officer  is  regarded  by  the  press  as  an  infringe-
ment of  rights,  and  the  Department  shares
this  view.

Under  this  policy,  news  representatives  or-
dinarily had  access  to  the  Police  and  Courts
Building.  The  first  newsmen  to  arrive  on  Friday
afternoon  were  admitted  in  accordance  with
the  policy;  others  who  came  later  simply  fol-
lowed behind  them.  Shortly  after  Oswald  ar-
rived. Captain  Kiag  granted  permission  to  bring


television  cameras  to  the  third  floor.  By  the  time
the  unwieldly  proportions  of  the  crowd  of  news-
men became  apparent,  it  had  already  become
well  entrenched  on  the  third  floor.  No  one  sug-
gested reversing  the  department's  pohcy  ex-
pressed in  General  Order  No.  81.  Chief  Curry
testified  that  at  no  time  did  he  consider  clearing
the  crowd  from  the  building;  he  "saw  no  par-
ticular harm  in  allowing  the  media  to  observe
the  prisoner."  Captain  King  later  stated  can-
didly that  he  simply  became  "accustomed  to  the
idea  of  them  being  out  there."

The  general  policy  of  the  Dallas  police  recog-
nized that  the  rule  of  fuU  cooperation  did  not
apply  when  it  might  jeopardize  an  investigation.
In  retrospect,  most  members  of  the  department
believed  that  the  general  rule  allowing  admit-
tance of  the  press  to  the  police  quarters  should
not  have  been  followed  ^ter  the  assassination-
Few,  if  any,  thought  this  at  the  time.  By  failing
to  exclude  the  press  from  the  building  on  Fri-
day and  Saturday,  the  Dallas  poUce  made  it  pos-
sible for  the  uncontrolled  crowd  to  nearly  sur-
round Oswald  on  the  frequent  occasions  that
he  moved  through  the  third  floor  corridor.  The
decision  to  aUow  newsmen  to  observe  the  trans-
fer on  Sunday  followed  naturally  the  policy  es-
tablished during  these  first  2  days  of  Oswald's
detention.

The  reporters  and  cameramen  descended
upon  the  third  floor  of  the  Police  and  Courts
Building  in  such  numbers  that  the  pressroom  on
the  third  floor  proved  whoUy  inadequate.  Rath-
er than  the  "two  or  three  or  maybe  a  half  dozen
reporters"  who  normally  appeared  to  cover  lo-
cal police  stories,  the  police  were  faced  with  up-
ward of  100.  Bringing  with  them  cameras,
microphones,  cables,  and  spotlights,  the  news-
men inevitably  spUled  over  into  areas  where
they  interfered  with  the  transaction  of  police
business  and  the  maintenance  of  security.

Aside  from  numbers,  the  gathering  of  report-
ers presented  a  problem  because  most  of  them
were  representatives  of  the  national  and  foreign
press,  rather  than  the  local  press.  These  news-
men carried  individual  press  cards  rather  than
identification  cards  issued  by  the  Dallas  poUce.
Therefore,  it  was  impossible  for  the  poUce  to
verify  quickly  the  identity  of  this  great  number
of  unfamiliar  people  who  appeared  almost  si-
multaneously. Because  of  the  close  physical
proximity  of  the  milling  mass  of  insistent  news-
men to  the  prisoner,  the  failure  to  authenticate
press  credentials  subjected  the  prisoner  to  a  seri-
ous security  risk.

Although  steps  were  taken  on  Friday  after-
noon to  insure  that  persons  seeking  entr>'  to  the
third  floor  were  there  for  a  legitimate  purpose,
reasons  could  be  fabricated.  Moreover,  because
of  the  large  crowd,  it  was  easier  for  unauthor-
ized persons  to  slip  by  those  guarding  the  en-
trances. Jack  Ruby,  for  one,  was  able  to  gain  en-
try to  the  third-floor  corridor  on  Friday  night.

The  third-floor  corridor  provided  the  only  pas-
sageway between  the  homicide  and  robbery  bu-


91


reau  and  the  jail  elevator.  No  thought  seems  to
have  been  given,  however,  to  the  possibility  of
questioning  Oswald  on  some  other  floor.  More-
over, Oswald's  most  extended  exposure  to  the
press,  at  the  Friday  evening  press  conference,
was  unrelated  to  any  phase  of  the  investigation
and  was  motivated  primarily  by  the  desire  to
satisfy  the  demands  of  the  news  media  to  see
the  prisoner.  The  riisks  attendant  upon  this  ap-
pearance were  emphasized  by  the  presence  of
unauthorized  persons,  including  Jack  Ruby,  at
the  press  conference  in  the  basement  assembly
room.

Although  Oswald  was  repeatedly  exposed  to
possible  assaults  on  Friday  and  Saturday,  he
met  his  death  on  Sunday,  when  police  took  the
most  extensive  security  precautions.  The  as-
sembly of  more  than  70  police  officers,  some  of
them  armed  with  tear  gas,  and  the  contemplated
use  of  an  armored  truck,  appear  to  have  b^n  de-
signed primarily  to  repel  an  attempt  of  a  mob
to  seize  the  prisoner.  Chief  Curry's  own  testi-
mony indicated  that  such  a  focus  resulted  not
from  any  appraisal  of  the  varied  risks  to  Os-
wald's life  but  came  about  in  response  to  the
telephone  threat  Sunday  morning  that  a  hun-
dred men  were  going  to  attack  Oswald.

A  more  balanced  appraisal  would  have  given
thought  to  protection  against  any  attack.  For
example,  the  acceptance  of  inadequate  press
credentials  posed  a  clear  avenue  for  a  one-man
assault.  The  likelihood  of  an  unauthorized  per-
son obtaining  entry  by  such  means  is  confirmed
not  alone  by  the  fact  that  Jack  Ruby  managed
to  get  by  a  guard  at  one  entrance.  Several  news-
men related  that  their  credentials  were  not
checked  as  they  entered  the  basement  Sunday
morning.  Seconds  before  Oswald  was  shot,  the
double  doors  from  the  hallway  next  to  the  jail
office  afforded  a  means  of  entry  to  the  basement
without  presentation  of  credentials  earlier  de-
manded of  newsmen.

The  swarm  of  newspeople  in  the  basement
also  substantially  limited  the  ability  of  the  po-
lice to  detect  an  unauthorized  person  once  he
had  entered  the  basement.  While  Jack  Ruby
might  have  been  easily  spotted  if  only  police  of-
ficers had  been  in  the  basement,  he  remained
apparently  unnoticed  in  the  crowd  of  newsmen
until  he  lunged  forward  toward  Oswald.  The
near-blinding  television  and  motion  picture
lights  which  were  allowed  to  shine  upon  the  es-
cort party  further  increased  the  difficulty  of  ob-
serving unusual  movements  in  the  basement.
Moreover,  by  making  public  the  plans  for  the
transfer,  the  police  attracted  to  the  city  jail  many
persons  who  otherwise  might  not  have  learned
of  the  move  until  it  had  been  completed.  This
group  included  the  onlookers  gathered  on  Com-
merce Street  and  a  few  people  on  Main  Street.
Also,  continuous  television  and  radio  coverage
of  the  activities  in  the  basement  might  have  re-
sulted in  compromise  of  the  transfer  operation.
These  risks  to  Oswald's  safety,  growing  in
part  out  of  adherence  to  the  general  policy  of


the  police  department,  were  also  accepted  for
other  reasons.  Many  members  of  the  police  de-
partment believed  that  the  extraordinary  public
attention  aroused  by  the  tragic  death  of  Presi-
dent Kennedy  obliged  them  to  make  special  ef-
forts to  accommodate  the  press.  Captain  King
carefully  articulated  one  reason  why  the  news-
men were  permitted

*  *  *  to  remain  in  the  hallways,  *  *  *  to
view  the  investigation  and  to  keep  in  constant
touch  with  progress  of  the  investigation.

* * *

We  realized  that  if  we  arrested  a  suspect,  that
if  we  brought  him  into  the  police  station  and
then  conducted  all  of  our  investigations  be-
hind closed  doors,  that  if  we  gave  no  reports
on  the  progress  of  our  investigation  and  did
not  permit  the  newsmen  to  see  the  suspect —
if  we  excluded  them  from  it — we  would  leave
ourselves  open  not  only  to  criticisms  that  we
were  fabricating  a  suspect  and  were  attempt-
ing to  pin  something  on  someone,  but  even
more  importantly,  we  would  cause  people  to
lose  faith  in  our  fairness  and,  through  losing
faith  in  our  fairness,  to  lose  faith  to  a  cer-
tain extent  in  the  processes  of  law.

We  felt  it  was  mandatory  that  as  many
people  knew  about  it  as  possible.  We  knew,
too,  that  if  we  did  exclude  the  newsmen,  we
would  be  leaving  ourselves  open  to  a  charge
that  we  were  using  improper  action,  duress,
physical  abuse,  all  of  these  things.

While  Oswald  was  in  custody,  the  Dallas  po-
lice kept  the  press  informed  about  the  treatment
Oswald  was  receiving.  The  public  could  have
been  assured  that  the  prisoner  was  not  mistreat-
ed and  that  his  rights  were  fully  respected  by
the  police,  without  each  one  of  hundreds  of
cameramen  and  reporters  being  permitted  to
satisfy  himself  that  the  police  had  not  abused
the  prisoner.  This  result  could  have  been  ac-
complished by  obtaining  reports  from  mem-
bers of  the  family  who  visited  him,  or  by  a  com-
mittee of  the  bar  or  other  substantial  citizens  of
the  community.  When  it  became  known  on
Saturday  that  Oswald  did  not  have  an  attorney,
the  president  of  the  Dallas  Bar  Association  vis-
ited him  to  inquire  whether  he  v/ished  assistance
in  obtaining  counsel.

Moreover,  the  right  of  the  public  to  know
does  not  give  the  press  license  to  interfere  with
the  efficient  operation  of  law-erxforcement  agen-
cies. Permitting  the  press  to  remain  on  the  third
floor  of  the  building  served  no  valid  purpose  that
could  not  have  been  met  if  the  press  had  been
excluded  from  the  third  floor,  as  it  was  from  the
fourth  and  fifth  floors,  and  informed  of  develop-
ments either  through  press  releases  or  at  press
conferences  elsewhere  in  the  building.

Having  failed  to  exclude  the  mass  of  the  press
from  the  basement  during  the  transfer  of  Os-
wald, the  police  department's  security  measures


92


could  not  be  completely  effective.  Despite  the
pressures  that  prevailed,  planning  and  coordina-
tion of  security  arrangements  could  have  been
more  thorough  and  precise.  No  single  member
of  the  Dallas  Police  Department  ever  assumed
full  responsibility  for  the  details  of  Oswald's
transfer.  Chief  Curry  participated  in  some  of
the  planning,  but  he  felt  that  primary  authority
for  the  transfer  should  be  Fritz's,  since  Fritz
had  charge  of  the  investigation.  According  to
Chief  Curry —

Fritz  and  I,  I  think,  discussed  this  briefly,  the
possibility  of  getting  that  prisoner  out  of  the
city  hall  during  the  night  hours  and  by  an-
other route  and  slipping  him  to  the  jail,  but
actually  Fritz  was  not  too  much  in  favor  of
this  and  I  more  or  less  left  this  up  to  Fritz
as  to  when  and  how  this  transfer  would  be
made,  because  he  has  in  the  past  transferred
many  of  his  prisoners  to  the  county  jail  and
I  felt  that  since  it  was  his  responsibility,  the
prisoner  was,  to  let  him  decide  when  and
how  he  wanted  to  transfer  this  prisoner.

Fritz,  on  the  other  hand,  felt  that  Curry  was
directing  the  transfer  arrangements:  "I  was
transferring  him  like  the  chief  told  me  to  trans-
fer him,"  When  Capt.  W.  B.  Frazier  notified
Fritz  by  telephone  early  Simday  morning  about
the  threats  to  Oswald's  Ufe,  Fritz  replied  that
Curry  should  be  notified,  since  he  was  handling
the  transfer.  When  urged  to  modify  the  transfer
plans  to  avoid  the  press  as  he  later  testified  he
would  have  preferred  to  do,  Fritz  declined  on
the  ground  that  Curry  had  already  decided  to
the  contrary.  Hence,  if  the  recollection  of  both
oflBcials  is  accurate,  the  basic  decision  to  move
Oswald  at  an  announced  time  and  in  the  pres-
ence of  the  news  media  was  never  carefully
thought  through  by  either  man.  Curry  and
Fritz  had  agreed  Saturday  evening  that  Oswald
should  not  be  moved  at  night,  but  their  discus-
sion apparently  went  little  further.

Perhaps  the  members  of  the  Dallas  Police  De-
partment were,  as  many  testified,  accustomed
to  working  together  so  tiiat  formal  instructions
were  sometimes  unnecessary.  On  the  other  hand,
it  is  clear,  at  least  in  retrospect,  that  this  par-
ticular occasion  demanded  more  than  the  usual
informal  unspoken  understandings.  The  evidence
indicates  that  no  member  of  the  department  at
any  time  considered  fully  the  implications  of
moving  Oswald  through  the  basement.  Nor  did
any  single  official  or  group  of  officials  coordinate
and  direct  where  the  transfer  vehicle  would  be
stationed  to  accept  Oswald,  where  the  press
would  stand,  and  the  number  and  positioning  of
police  officers  in  the  basement.  Captain  Jones
indicated  that  there  were  to  be  two  soUd  lines
of  policemen  from  the  jail  office  door  to  the
transfer  vehicle,  but  lines  were  formed  only
along  the  walls  of  the  areaway  between  the  ]ah
office  door  and  the  ramp.  The  newsmen  were
not  kept  east  of  the  auto  ramp  where  a  railing


would  have  separated  them  from  Oswald.  No
strong  ranks  of  policemen  were  ever  placed  in
front  of  the  newsmen  once  they  were  allowed  to
gather  in  the  area  of  the  Main  Street  ramp.
Many  poUcemen  in  the  basement  did  not  know
the  function  they  were  supposed  to  perform.  No
instructions  were  given  that  certain  policemen
should  watch  the  crowd  rather  than  Oswald.
Apparently  no  one  gave  any  thought  to  the
blinding  effect  of  television  and  other  camera
lights  upon  the  escort  party.

Largely  on  his  own  initiative.  Captain  Talbert
undertook  to  secure  the  basement,  with  only
minimal  coordination  with  those  responsible  for
and  familiar  with  the  route  Oswald  would  take
through  the  basement.  Several  officials  recalled
that  Lt.  Woodrow  Wiggins  was  directed  to  clear
the  basement  jail  office,  but  Wiggins  testified
that  he  received  no  such  assignment.  In  any
event,  less  than  20  minutes  before  the  transfer,
Captain  Jones  observed  newsmen  in  the  jail
office  and  had  them  removed.  But  no  official  re-
moved news  personnel  from  the  corridor  beside
the  jail  office;  indeed,  cameramen  took  pictures
through  the  glass  windows  of  the  jail  office  as
Oswald  walked  through  it  toward  the  basement,
and  then  approached  to  within  20  feet  of  Os-
wald from  the  rear  at  the  same  time  that  Jack
Ruby  moved  toward  Oswald  from  the  front.

A  clear  example  of  the  inadequacy  of  co-
ordination was  the  last  minute  change  in  plans
to  transfer  Oswald  in  an  immarked  police  car
rather  than  by  armored  truck.  The  plan  to  use
an  armored  vehicle  was  adopted  without  in-
forming Fritz.  When  Fritz  was  told  of  the  ar-
rangement shortly  after  1 1  o'clock,  he  objected,
and  hurried  steps  were  taken  to  modify  the  ar-
rangements. Fritz  was  then  prematurely  in-
formed that  the  basement  arrangements  were
complete.  When  Oswald  and  the  escorting  detec-
tives entered  the  basement,  the  transfer  car  had
not  yet  been  backed  into  position,  nor  had  the
policemen  been  arranged  to  block  the  news-
men's access  to  Oswald's  path.  If  the  transfer
car  had  been  carefully  positioned  between  the
press  and  Oswald,  Ruby  might  have  been  kept
several  yards  from  his  victim  and  possibly  with-
out a  clear  view  of  him.  Detective  Leavelle,  who
accompanied  Oswald  into  the  basement,  testi-
fied:

*  *  *  I  was  surprised  when  I  walked  to  the
door  and  the  car  was  not  in  the  spot  it  should
have  been,  but  I  could  see  it  was  in  back,  and
backing  into  position,  but  had  it  been  in  posi-
tion where  we  were  told  it  would  be,  that
would  have  eliminated  a  lot  of  the  area  in
which  anyone  would  have  access  to  him,  be-
cause it  would  have  been  blocked  by  the  car.
In  fact,  if  the  car  had  been  sitting  where  we
were  told  it  was  going  to  be,  see — it  would
have  been  sitting  directly  upon  the  spot  where
Ruby  was  standing  when  he  fired  the  shot

Captain  Jones  described  the  confusion  with


93


which  Oswald's  entry  into  the  basement  was  in
fact  received:

Then  the  change — going  to  put  two  cars  up
there.  There  is  no  reason  why  that  back  car
can't  get  all  the  way  back  to  the  jail  office.  The
original  plan  would  be  that  the  line  of  officers
would  be  from  the  jail  door  to  the  vehicle.
Then  they  say,  "Here  he  comes."  *  *  *  It  is
too  late  to  get  the  people  out  of  the  way  of  the
car  and  form  the  line.  I  am  aware  that  Os-
wald is  already  coming  because  of  the  furor,
so,  I  was  trying  to  keep  everybody  out  of  the
way  and  keep  the  way  clear  and  I  heard  a
shot.

Therefore,  regardless  of  whether  the  press
should  have  been  allowed  to  witness  the  trans-
fer, security  measures  in  the  basement  for  Os-
wald's protection  could  and  should  have  been
better  organized  and  more  thorough.  These  ad-
ditional deficiencies  were  directly  related  to  the
decision  to  admit  newsmen  to  the  basement.  The
Commission  concludes  that  the  failure  of  the
police  to  remove  Oswald  secretly  or  to  control
the  crowd  in  the  basement  at  tie  time  of  the
transfer  were  the  major  causes  of  the  security
breakdown  which  led  to  Oswald's  death.


NEWS  COVERAGE  AND  POLICE  POLICY

Consistent  with  its  policy  of  allowing  news
representatives  to  remain  within  the  working
quarters  of  the  Police  and  Courts  Building,  the
police  department  made  every  effort  to  keep  the
press  fully  informed  about  the  progress  of  the
investigation.  As  a  result,  from  Friday  after-
noon until  after  the  killing  of  Oswald  on  Sun-
day, the  press  was  able  to  publicize  virtually  all
of  the  information  about  the  case  which  had
been  gathered  until  that  time.  In  the  process,
a  great  deal  of  misinformation  was  disseminated
to  a  worldwide  audience.  (For  some  examples
see  app.  Xn.)

As  administrative  assistant  to  Chief  Curry,
Captain  King  also  handled  departmental  press
relations  and  issued  press  releases.  According  to
King,  it  was  "the  responsibiUty  of  each  mem-
ber of  the  department  to  furnish  to  the  press  in-
formation on  incidents  in  which  they,  them-
selves, were  involved,  except  on  matters  which
involved  *  *  *  personnel  poUcies  of  the  de-
partment, or  *  *  *  unless  it  would  obviously
interfere  with  an  investigation  underway."  In
Oswald's  case.  Chief  Curry  released  most  of
the  information  to  the  press.  He  and  Assistant
Chief  Batchelor  agreed  on  Friday  that  Curry
would  make  all  annoimcements  to  the  press.
However,  there  is  no  evidence  that  this  decision
was  ever  communicated  to  the  rest  of  the  police
force.  The  chief  consequence  appears  to  have
been  that  Batchelor  refrained  from  making
statements  to  the  news  media  during  this  period.

Most  of  the  information  was  disclosed  through


informal  oral  statements  or  answers  to  questions
at  impromptu  and  clamorous  press  coriferences
in  the  third  floor  corridor.  Written  press  releases
were  not  employed.  The  ambulatory  press  con-
ference became  a  familiar  sight  during  these
days.  Whenever  Curry  or  other  officials  appeared
in  the  hallway,  newsmen  surrounded  them,  ask-
ing questions  and  requesting  statements.  Usually
the  officials  complied.

Curry  appeared  in  interviews  on  the  television
and  radio  at  least  a  dozen  times  during  Novem-
ber 22-24.  He  did  not  attend  any  of  the  interro-
gations of  Oswald  in  Captain  Fritz's  office  except
at  the  beginning  and  toward  the  end  of  Sunday
morning's  session;  he  received  his  information
through  Captain  Fritz  and  other  sources.  Nev-
ertheless, in  sessions  with  the  newsmen  on  Fri-
day and  Saturday  he  gave  detailed  information
on  the  progress  of  the  case  against  Oswald.
Recorded  statements  of  television  and  radio  in-
terviews with  Curry  and  other  officials  in  Dallas
during  November  22-24  have  been  transcribed
and  included  in  the  record  compiled  by  the  Com-
mission. An  example  of  these  interviews  is  the
following  transcript  of  remarks  made  by  Curry
to  newsmen  on  Saturday:

Q.  Chief  Curry,  I  understand  you  have  some
new  information  in  this  case.  Could  you  relate
what  that  is?

A.  Yes,  we've  just  been  informed  by  the
Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation,  that  they,
the  FBI,  have  the  order  letter  from  a  mail
order  house,  and  the  order  was  sent  to  their
laboratory  in  Washington  and  the  writing  on
this  order  was  compared  with  known  sam-
ples of  our  suspect,  Oswald's  handwritiAg  and
found  to  be  the  same.

Q.  This  order  was  for  the  rifle?

A.  This  order  was  for  the  rifle  to  a  mail
order  house  in  Chicago.  It  was  [inaudible].
The  return  address  was  to  Dallas,  Texas,  to
the  post  office  box  imder  the  name  of  A.  Hi-
dell,  H-I-D-E-double-L.  This  is  the  post  of-
fice box  of  our  suspect.  This  gun  was  mailed
parcel  post  March  20,  1963.  I  understand  he
left  Dallas  shortly  after  this  and  didn't  come
back  until  I  think  about  two  months  ago.

Q.  Do  you  know  again  on  what  date  this
rifle  was  ordered  and  are  you  able  to  link  it
definitely  as  the  rifle  which  you  confiscated  at
the  School  Book  Depository?

A.  That  we  have  not  done  so  far.  If  the  FBI
has  been  able  to  do  it  I  have  not  been  in-
formed of  it  yet.  We  do  know  that  this  man
ordered  a  rifle  of  the  type  that  was  used  in
the  assassination  of  the  President  from  this
mail  order  house  in  Chicago  and  the  FBI  has
definitely  identified  the  writing  as  that  of  our
suspect.

Q.  On  another  subject — I  understand  you
have  photographs  of  the  suspect,  Oswald,
with  a  rifle  like  that  used.  Could  you  describe
that  picture?

A.  This  is  the  picture  of  Oswald  standing


94


facing  a  camera  with  a  rifle  Id  his  hand  which
is  very  similar  to  the  rifle  that  we  have  in  our
possession.  He  also  had  a  pistol  strapped  on
his  hip.  He  was  holding  two  papers  in  his
hand,  with  one  of  them  seemed  to  be  The
Worker  and  the  other  says  Be  MDitant — I
don't  know  whether  that  was  headlines  or  the
name  of  the  paper.

Q.  How  much  did  the  gun  cost  from  the
mail  order  house?

A.  I  understand  the  gun  was  advertised  for
$12.78,  I  believe.

Q.  Have  you  received  any  results  on  the
ballistics  test  conducted  on  the  gun  and  on
Oswald?

A.  They're  going  to  be  favorable.  I  don't
have  a  formal  report  yet.

Q.  But  you  are  sure  at  this  time  they  will
be  favorable?

A.  Yes.

Q.  Do  you  feel  now  that  you  have  the  case
completely  wrapped  up,  or  are  you  continu-
ing?

A.  We  will  continue  as  long  as  there  is  a
shred  of  evidence  to  be  gathered.  We  have  a
strong  case  at  this  time.

Q.  I  believe  you  said  earlier  this  afternoon
that  you  have  a  new  development  which  does
wrap  up  the  case — the  first  time  you  said  the
case  definitely  is  secure.  Is  that  correct?

A.  That  was  this  morning.  This  additional
evidence  just  makes  a  stronger  case.

Q.  But  this  is  not  the  same  evidence  you
were  referring  to  then?

A.  No,  that's  true.

Q.  Would  you  be  willing  to  say  what  that
evidence  was?

A.  No,  sir.  I  don't  wish  to  reveal  it.  It  might
jeopardize  our  case.

Commentator:  Thank  you  very  much  Chief
Jesse  Curry  of  the  Dallas  PoUce  Department

Although  Captain  Fritz  permitted  himself  to
to  be  interviewed  by  the  news  media  less  fre-
quently than  did  Chief  Curry,  he  nevertheless
answered  questions  and  ventured  opinions
about  the  progress  of  the  investigation.  On  Sat-
urday he  told  reporters  that  he  was  convinced
beyond  a  doubt  that  Oswald  had  killed  the  Presi-
dent. He  discussed  some  of  the  evidence  in  the
case,  especially  the  rifle,  but  his  contribution
to  the  knowledge  of  the  reporters  was  small
compared  with  that  of  Chief  Curry.

Many  other  members  of  the  police  depart-
ment, including  high  officials,  detectives,  and
patrolmen,  were  also  interviewed  by  news  rep-
resentatives during  these  days.  Some  of  these
men  had  participated  in  specific  aspects  of  the
case,  such  as  the  capture  of  Oswald  at  the  Texas
Theatre  and  the  search  for  the  evidence  at  the
Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building.  Few,
if  any,  seemed  reluctant  to  submit  to  questions
and  to  being  televised.  It  seemed  to  District  At-
torney Wade  that  the  newsmen  "just  followed
everybody  everywhere  they  went  * • *  they


interviewed  some  of  your  patrolmen  •  •  •  on
the  corner  ♦  *  ♦  they  were  interviewing  any-
body."

Wade  himself  also  made  several  statements  to
the  press.  He  visited  police  headquarters  twice
on  Friday,  twice  on  Saturday,  and  twice  on  Sun-
day. On  most  of  these  occasions  he  was  inter-
viewed by  the  press  and  appeared  on  television.
After  Oswald  had  appeared  before  the  press  on
Friday  night,  Wade  held  an  impromptu  confer-
ence with  reporters  in  the  overflowing  assembly
room.  Wade  told  the  press  on  Saturday  that  he
would  not  reveal  any  evidence  because  it  might
prejudice  the  selection  of  a  jury.  On  other  oc-
casions, however,  he  mentioned  some  items  of
evidence  and  expressed  his  opinions  regarding
Oswald's  guilt.  He  told  the  press  on  Friday  night
that  Oswald's  wife  had  told  the  police  that  her
husband  had  a  rifle  in  the  garage  at  the  house  in
Irving  and  that  it  was  missing  the  mommg  of
the  assassination.  On  one  occasion  he  repeated
the  error  that  the  murder  rifle  had  been  a
Mauser.  Another  time,  he  stated  his  belief  that
Oswald  had  prepared  for  the  assassination
months  in  advance,  including  what  he  would
tell  the  police.  He  also  said  that  Oswald  had
practiced  v^ith  the  rifle  to  improve  his  marks-
manship.

The  running  commentary  on  the  investigation
by  the  police  inevitably  carried  with  it  the  dis-
closure of  many  details  that  proved  to  be  erro-
neous. In  their  efforts  to  keep  the  public  abreast
of  the  investigation,  the  police  reported  hearsay
items  and  unverified  leads;  further  investigation
proved  many  of  these  to  be  incorrect  or  inaccu-
rate. For  example,  the  rifle  found  on  the  sixth
floor  of  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository
Building  was  initially  identified  as  a  Mauser
7.65  rather  than  a  Mannlicher-Carcano  6.5  be-
cause a  deput>'  constable  who  was  one  of  the
first  to  see  it  thought  it  looked  Uke  a  Mauser.  He
neither  handled  the  weapon  nor  saw  it  at  close
range.

Police  sources  were  also  responsible  for  the
mistaken  notion  that  the  chicken  bones  found
on  the  sixth  floor  were  the  remains  of  Oswald's
lunch.  They  had  in  fact  been  left  by  another
employee  who  ate  his  lunch  there  at  least  15
minutes  before  the  assassination.  Curr>'  repeated
the  erroneous  report  that  a  Negro  had  picked  up
Oswald  near  the  scene  of  the  assassination  and
driven  him  across  town.  It  was  also  reported
that  the  map  found  in  Oswald's  room  contained
a  marked  route  of  the  Presidential  motorcade
when  it  actually  contained  markings  of  places
where  Oswald  may  have  applied  for  jobs,  includ-
ing, of  course,  the  Texas  School  Book  Deposi-
tory.

Concern  about  the  effects  of  the  unlimited
disclosures  was  being  voiced  by  Saturday  morn-
ing. According  to  District  Attorney  Wade,  he
received  calls  from  lawyers  in  DaUas  and  else-
where expressing  concern  about  providing  an
attorney  for  Oswald  and  about  the  amount  of
information  being  given  to  the  press  by  the


95


police  and  the  district  attorney.  Curry  continued
to  answer  questions  on  television  and  radio  dur-
ing the  remainder  of  the  day  and  Sunday  morn-
ing.

FBI  Director  J.  Edgar  Hoover  became  con-
cerned because  "almost  as  soon  as  *  *  *  [FBI
Laboratory  reports]  would  reach  the  Dallas
Police  Department,  the  chief  of  police  or  one  of
the  representatives  of  the  department  would  go
on  TV  or  radio  and  relate  fiiidings  of  the  FBI,
giving  information  such  as  the  identification  of
the  gun  and  other  items  of  physical  evidence."
On  Sunday,  after  Oswald  was  shot,  Hoover  dis-
patched a  personal  message  to  Ouiry  requesting
him  "not  to  go  on  the  air  any  more  until  this
case  *  *  *  [is]  resolved."  Hoover  testified  later
that  Curry  agreed  not  to  make  any  more  state-
ments.

The  shooting  of  Oswald  shocked  the  Dallas
police,  and  after  the  interviews  that  immediately
followed  the  shooting  they  were  disposed  to  re-
main silent.  Chief  Curry  made  only  one  more
television  appearance  after  the  shooting.  At
1 :  30  p.m.,  he  descended  to  the  assembly  room
where,  tersely  and  grimly,  he  announosd  Os-
wald's death.  He  refused  to  answer  any  of  the
questions  shouted  at  him  by  the  persistent  re-
porters, concluding  the  conference  in  less  than
a  minute.

District  Attorney  Wade  also  held  one  more
press  conference.  Before  doing  so  on  Sunday
evening,  he  returned  once  more  to  the  police
station  and  held  a  meeting  with  "all  the  brass"
except  Curry.  Wade  told  them  that  "people  are


saymg


*  *  *


you  had  the  wrong  man  and  you


all  were  the  one  who  killed  him  or  let  him  out
here  to  have  him  killed  intentionally."  Wade
told  the  police  that  "somebody  ought  to  go  out
in  television  and  lay  out  the  evidence  that  you
had  on  Oswald,  and  tell  them  everything."  He
sat  down  and  listed  from  memory  items  of  evi-
dence in  the  case  against  Oswald.  According  to
Wade,  Chief  Curry  refused  to  make  any  state-
ments because  he  had  told  an  FBI  inspector  that
he  would  say  no  more.  The  police  refused  to
furnish  Wade  with  additional  details  of  the  case.
Wade  nonetheless  proceeded  to  hold  a  lengthy
formal  press  conference  that  evening,  in  which
he  attempted  to  list  all  of  the  evidence  that  had
been  accumulated  at  that  point  tending  to  estab-
lish Oswald  as  the  assassin  of  President  Ken-
nedy. Unfortunately,  at  that  time,  as  he  sub-
sequently testified,  he  lacked  a  thorough  grasp
of  the  evidence  and  made  a  number  of  errors.
He  stated  that  Oswald  had  told  a  woman  on  a
bus  that  the  President  had  been  killed,  an  error
apparently  caused  by  the  busdriver  having  con-
fused Oswald  with  another  passenger  who  was
on  the  bus  after  Oswald  had  left.  Wade  also
repeated  the  error  about  Oswald's  having  a  map
marked  with  the  route  of  the  motorcade.  He
told  reporters  that  Oswald's  description  and
name  "went  out  by  the  police  to  look  for  him."
The  police  never  mentioned  Oswald's  name  in
their  broadcast  descriptions  before  his  arrest.


Wade  was  innocent  of  one  error  imputed  to
script  of  part  of  the  press  conference  furnished
him  since  November  24.  The  published  tran-
to  newspapers  by  the  Associated  Press  represent-
ed Wade  as  having  identified  the  cabdriver  who
took  Oswald  to  North  Beckley  Avenue  after  the
shooting,  as  one  named  "Darryl  Click."  The
transcript  as  it  appeared  in  the  New  York  Times
and  the  Washington  Post  of  November  26,
reads:

A.  [Wade]  a  lady.  He  then — the  bus,  he
asked  the  bus  driver  to  stop,  got  off  at  a  stop,
caught  a  taxicab  driver,  Darryl  Click.  I  don't
have  his  exact  place — and  went  to  his  home  in
Oak  Cliff,  changed  his  clothes  hurriedly,  and
left.

The  correct  transcript  of  the  press  conference,
taken  from  an  audio  tape  supplied  by  station
WBAP,  Fort  Worth,  is  as  follows:

A.  [Wade]  A  lady.  He  then — ^the  bus,  he
asked  the  bus  driver  to  stop,  got  off  at  a  stop,
caught  a  taxicab  driver.

Q.  Where?

A.  In  Oak  Cliff.  I  don't  have  the  exact
place — and  went  to  his  home  in  Oak  Cliff,
changed  his  clothes  hurriedly  and  left.

In  this  maimer,  a  section  of  Dallas,  "Oak
Cliff,"  became  a  non-existent  taxicab  driver,
"Darryl  Click."  Wade  did  not  mention  the  cab-
driver  by  name  at  any  time.  In  transcribing  the
conference  from  the  sound  tape,  a  stenographer
apparently  made  an  error  that  might  have  be-
come permanently  imbedded  in  the  literature  of
the  event  but  for  the  preservation  and  use  of  an
original  sovmd  tape.

Though  many  of  the  inaccuracies  were  sub-
sequently corrected  by  the  police  and  are  ne-
gated by  findings  of  the  Commission  included
elsewhere  in  this  report,  the  publicizing  of  un-
checked information  provided  much  of  the  basis
for  the  myths  and  rumors  that  came  into  being
soon  after  the  President's  death.  The  erroneous
disclosures  became  the  basis  for  distorted  re-
constructions and  interpretations  of  the  assassi-
nation. The  necessity  for  the  Dallas  authorities
to  correct  themselves  or  to  be  corrected  by  other
soiu"ces  gave  rise  not  only  to  criticism  of  the
police  department's  competence  but  also  to
doubts  regarding  the  veracity  of  the  poUce.
Skeptics  sought  to  cast  doubt  on  much  of  the
correct  evidence  later  developed  and  to  find
support  for  their  own  theories  in  these  early
police  statements.

The  immediate  disclosure  of  information  by
the  police  created  a  further  risk  of  injuring  in-
nocent citizens  by  unfavorable  publicity.  This
was  the  unfortunate  experience  of  Joe  R.  Mo-
lina, a  Dallas-born  Navy  veteran  who  had  been
employed  by  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository
since  1947  and  on  November  22,  1963,  held  the
position  of  credit  manager.  Apparently  because


96


of  Molina's  employment  at  the  Depository  and
his  membership  in  a  veterans'  organization,  the
American  G.I.  Forum,  that  the  Dallas  police
considered  possibly  subversive,  Dallas  police-
men searched  Molina's  home  with  his  permis-
sion, at  about  1:30  a.m.,  Saturday,  November
23.  During  the  day  Molina  was  intermittently
interrogated  at  police  headquarters  for  6  or  7
hours,  chiefly  about  his  membership  in  the
American  G.I.  Forum,  and  also  about  Oswald.
He  was  never  arrested,  charged,  or  held  in
custody.

While  Molina  was  being  questioned,  officials
of  the  police  department  made  statements  or
answered  questions  that  provided  the  basis  for
television  reports  about  Molina  during  the  day.
These  reports  spoke  of  a  "second  suspect  being
picked  up,"  insinuated  that  the  Dallas  police  had
reason  to  suspect  another  person  who  worked
in  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository,  stated
that  the  suspect  had  been  arrested  and  his  home
searched,  and  mentioned  that  Molina  may  have
been  identified  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Jus-
tice as  a  possible  subversive.

No  evidence  was  ever  presented  to  link  Mo-
lina with  Oswald  except  as  a  fellow  employee
of  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository.  Accord-
ing to  Molina,  he  had  never  spoken  to  Oswald.
The  FBI  notified  the  Commission  that  Molina
had  never  been  the  subject  of  an  investigation
by  it  and  that  it  had  never  given  any  information
about  Molina  to  the  Dallas  police  concerning
any  alleged  subversive  activities  by  him.  The
Dallas  police  explained  in  a  statement  to  the  FBI
that  they  had  never  had  a  file  on  Molina,  but
that  they  did  have  one  on  the  American  G.I.
Forum.

Molina  lost  his  job  in  December.  He  felt  that
he  was  being  discharged  because  of  the  unfavor-
able publicity  he  had  received,  but  ofl&cials  of
the  Depository  claimed  that  automation  was
the  reason.  Molina  testified  that  he  had  diflBculty
in  finding  another  position,  undl  finally,  with  the
help  of  a  fellow  church  member,  he  secured  a
position  at  a  lower  salary  than  his  previous  one.

If  Oswald  had  been  tried  for  his  murders  of
November  22,  the  effects  of  the  news  policy  pur-
\  sued  by  the  Dallas  authorities  would  have  prov-
en harmful  both  to  the  prosecution  and  the  de-
fense. The  misinformation  reported  after  the
shootings  might  have  been  used  by  the  defense
to  cast  doubt  on  the  reliability  of  the  State's
entire  case.  Though  each  inaccuracy  can  be  ex-
plained without  great  difficulty,  the  number  and
variety  of  misstatements  issued  by  the  police
shortly  after  the  assassination  would  have  greatly
assisted  a  skillful  defense  attorney  attempting  to
influence  the  attitudes  of  jurors.

A  fundamental  objection  to  the  news  policy
pursued  by  the  Dallas  police,  however,  is  the
extent  to  which  it  endangered  Oswald's  constitu-
tional right  to  a  trial  by  an  impartial  jury.  Be-
cause of  the  nature  of  the  crime,  the  widespread
attention  which  it  necessarily  received,  and  the
intense public feeling which it aroused, it


would  have  been  a  most  difficult  task  to  select
an  unprejudiced  jury,  either  in  Dallas  or  else-
where. But  the  difficulty  was  markedly  increased
by  the  divulgence  of  the  specific  items  of  evi-
dence with  which  the  police  linked  Oswald  to
the  two  killings.  The  disclosure  of  evidence  en-
couraged the  public,  from  which  a  jury  would
ultimately  be  impaneled,  to  prejudge  the  very
questions  that  would  be  raised  at  trial.

Moreover,  rules  of  law  might  have  prevented
the  prosecution  from  presenting  portions  of  this
evidence  to  the  jury.  For  example,  though  ex-
pressly recognizing  that  Oswald's  wife  could  not
be  compelled  to  testify  against  him.  District  At-
torney Wade  revealed  to  the  Nation  that  Marina
Oswald  had  affirmed  her  husband's  ownership
of  a  rifle  like  that  found  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the
Texas  School  Book  Depository.  Curry  stated
that  Oswald  had  refused  to  take  a  lie  detector
test,  although  such  a  statement  would  have  been
inadmissible  in  a  trial.  The  exclusion  of  such
evidence,  however,  would  have  been  meaning-
less if  jurors  were  already  familiar  with  the  same
facts  from  previous  television  or  newspaper  re-
ports. Wade  might  have  influenced  prospective
jurors  by  his  mistaken  statement  that  the  paraf-
fin test  showed  that  Oswald  had  fired  a  gun.  The
tests  merely  showed  that  he  had  nitrate  traces  on
his  hands,  which  did  not  necessarily  mean  that
he  had  fired  either  a  rifle  or  a  pistol.

The  disclosure  of  evidence  was  seriously  ag-
gravated by  the  statements  of  numerous  respon-
sible officials  that  they  were  certain  of  Os-
wald's guilt.  Captain  Fritz  said  that  the  case
against  Oswald  was  "cinched."  Curry  reported
on  Saturday  that  "we  are  sure  of  our  case."
Curry  announced  that  he  considered  Oswald
sane,  and  Wade  told  the  public  that  he  would
ask  jfor  the  death  penalty.

The  American  Bar  Aissociation  declared  in
December  1963  that  "widespread  publicizing  of
Oswald's  alleged  guilt,  involving  statements  by
officials  and  public  disclosures  of  the  details  of
•evidence,'  would  have  made  it  extremely  diffi-
cult to  impanel  an  imprejudiced  jury  and  afford
the  accused  a  fair  trial."  Local  bar  associations
expressed  similar  feelings.  The  Commission
agrees  that  Lee  Harvey  Oswald's  opportunity
for  a  trial  by  12  jurors  free  of  preconception  as
to  his  guilt  or  ionocence  would  have  been  seri-
ously jeopardized  by  the  premature  disclosure
and  weighing  of  the  evidence  against  him.

The  problem  of  disclosure  of  information
and  its  effect  on  trials  is,  of  course,  further  com-
plicated by  the  independent  activities  of  the
press  in  developing  information  on  its  own  from
sources  other  than  law  enforcement  agencies.
Had  the  police  not  released  the  specific  items  of
evidence  against  Oswald,  it  is  still  possible  that
the  other  information  presented  on  television
and  in  the  newspapers,  chiefly  of  a  biographical
nature,  would  itself  have  had  a  prejudicial  ef-
fect on  the  public.

In  explanation  of  the  news  policy  adopted
by  the  Dallas  authorities.  Chief  Curry  observed


97


that  "it  seemed  like  there  was  a  great  demand
by  the  general  public  to  know  what  was  going
on."  In  a  prepared  statement.  Captain  King
wrote:

At  that  time  we  felt  a  necessity  for  permit-
ting the  newsmen  as  much  latitude  as  possible.
We  realized  the  magnitude  of  the  incident  the
newsmen  were  there  to  cover.  We  realized
that  not  only  the  nation  but  the  world  would
be  greatly  interested  in  what  occurred  in  Dal-
las. We  believed  that  we  had  an  obligation  to
make  as  widely  known  as  possible  everything
we  could  regarding  the  investigation  of  the
assassination  and  the  manner  in  which  we
undertook  that  investigation.

The  Commission  recognizes  that  the  people
of  the  United  States,  and  indeed  the  world,  had
a  deep-felt  interest  in  learning  of  the  events
surrounding  the  death  of  President  Kennedy,  in-
cluding the  development  of  the  investigation  in
Dallas.  An  informed  public  provided  the  ulti-
mate guarantee  that  adequate  steps  would  be
taken  to  apprehend  those  responsible  for  the  as-
sassination and  that  all  necessary  precautions
would  be  taken  to  protect  the  national  security.
It  was  therefore  proper  and  desirable  that  the
public  know  which  agencies  were  participating
in  the  investigation  and  the  rate  at  which  their
work  was  progressing.  The  public  was  also  en-
titled to  know  that  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  had  been
apprehended  and  that  the  State  had  gathered
sufficient  evidence  to  arraign  him  for  the  mur-
ders of  the  President  and  Patrolman  Tippit,  that
he  was  being  held  pending  action  of  the  grand
jury,  that  the  investigation  was  continuing,  and
that  the  law  enforcement  agencies  had  discov-
ered no  evidence  which  tended  to  show  that  any
other  person  was  involved  in  either  slaying.

However,  neither  the  press  nor  the  public  had
a  right  to  be  contemporaneously  informed  by
the  police  or  prosecuting  authorities  of  the  de-
tails of  the  evidence  being  accumulated  against
Oswald.  Undoubtedly  the  public  was  interested
in  these  disclosures,  but  its  curiosity  should  not
have  been  satisfied  at  the  expense  of  the  ac-
cused's right  to  a  trial  by  an  impartial  jury.  The
courtroom,  not  the  newspaper  or  television
screen,  is  the  appropriate  forum  in  our  system
for  the  trial  of  a  man  accused  of  a  crime.

If  the  evidence  in  the  possession  of  the  au-
thorities had  not  been  disclosed,  it  is  true  that
the  public  would  not  have  been  in  a  position  to
assess  the  adequacy  of  the  investigation  or  to
apply  pressures  for  further  official  imdertakings.
But  a  major  consequence  of  the  hasty  and  at
times  inaccurate  divulgence  of  evidence  after
the  assassination  was  simply  to  give  rise  to
groundless  rumors  and  public  confusion.  More-
over, without  learning  the  details  of  the  case,  the
public  could  have  been  informed  by  the  respon-
sible authority  of  the  general  scope  of  the  investi-
gation and  the  extent  to  which  State  and  Federal
agencies  were  assisting  in  the  police  work.


RESPONSIBILITY  OF  NEWS  MEDIA

While  appreciating  the  heavy  and  unique
pressures  with  which  the  Dallas  Police  Depart-
ment was  confronted  by  reason  of  the  assassi-
nation of  President  Kennedy,  primary  responsi-
bility for  having  failed  to  control  the  press  and
to  check  the  flow  of  undigested  evidence  to  the
public  must  be  borne  by  the  police  department.
It  was  the  only  agency  that  could  have  estab-
lished orderly  and  sound  operating  procedures
to  control  the  multitude  of  newsmen  gathered  in
the  police  building  after  the  assassination.

The  Commission  believes,  however,  that  a
part  of  the  responsibility  for  the  unfortunate
circumstances  following  the  President's  death
must  be  borne  by  the  news  media.  The  crowd  of
newsmen  generally  failed  to  respond  properly  to
the  demands  of  the  police.  Frequently  without
permission,  news  representatives  used  police
offices  on  the  third  floor,  tying  up  facilities  and
and  interfering  with  normal  police  operations.
Police  efforts  to  preserve  order  and  to  clear
passageways  in  the  corridor  were  usually  un-
successful. On  Friday  night  the  reporters  com-
pletely ignored  Curry's  injunction  against  ask-
ing Oswald  questions  in  the  assembly  room  and
crowding  in  on  him.  On  Sunday  morning,  the
newmen  were  instructed  to  direct  no  questions
at  Oswald;  nevertheless,  several  reporters
shouted  questions  at  him  when  he  appeared  in
the  basement.

Moreover,  by  constantly  pursuing  public
officials,  the  news  representatives  placed  an  in-
sistent pressure  upon  them  to  disclose  informa-
tion. And  this  pressure  was  not  without  effect,
since  the  police  attitude  toward  the  press  was
affected  by  the  desire  to  maintain  satisfactory
relations  with  the  news  representatives  and  to
create  a  favorable  image  of  themselves.  Chief
Curry  frankly  told  the  Commission  that

I  didn't  order  them  out  of  the  building,  which
if  I  had  it  to  do  over  I  would.  In  the  past  like
I  say,  we  had  always  maintained  very  good
relations  with  our  press,  and  they  had  always
respected  us.  *  *  *

Curry  refused  Fritz'  request  to  put  Oswald
behind  the  screen  in  the  assembly  room  at  the
Friday  night  press  conference  because  this
might  have  hindered  the  taking  of  pictures.
Ciury's  subordinates  had  the  impression  that  an
imannounced  transfer  of  Oswald  to  the  coimty
jail  was  unacceptable  because  Curry  did  not
want  to  disappoint  the  newsmen;  he  had  prom-
ised that  they  could  witness  the  transfer.  It
seemed  clear  enough  that  any  attempt  to  ex-
clude the  press  from  the  building  or  to  place
limits  on  the  information  disclosed  to  them
would  have  been  resented  and  disputed  by  the
newsmen,  who  were  constantly  and  aggressively
demanding  all  possible  information  about  any-
thing related  to  the  assassination.

Although  the  Commission  has  found  no  cor-


98


roboration  in  the  video  and  audio  tapes,  police
officials  recall  that  one  or  two  representatives  of
the  press  reinforced  their  demands  to  see  Oswald
by  suggesting  that  the  police  had  been  guilty  of
brutalizing  him.  They  intimated  that  unless  they
were  given  the  opportunity  to  see  him,  these
suggestions  would  be  passed  on  to  the  public.
Captain  King  testified  that  he  had  been  told
that

A  short  time  after  Oswald's  arrest  one  news-
man held  up  a  photograph  and  said,  "This  is
what  the  man  charged  with  the  assassination
of  the  President  looks  like.  Or  at  least  this
is  what  he  did  look  like.  We  don't  know  what
he  looks  like  after  an  hour  in  the  custody  of
the  Dallas  Police  Department."

City  Manager  Elgin  Crull  stated  that  when  he
visited  Chief  Curry  in  his  office  on  the  morning
of  November  23,  Curry  told  him  that  he  "felt
it  was  necessary  to  cooperate  with  the  news
media  representatives,  in  order  to  avoid  being
accused  of  using  Gestapo  tactics  in  connection
with  the  handling  of  Oswald."  Crull  agreed  with
Curry.  The  Commission  deems  any  such  veiled
threats  to  be  absolutely  without  justification.

The  general  disorder  in  the  Police  and  Courts
Building  during  November  22-24  reveals  a  re-
grettable lack  of  self-discipline  by  the  news-
men. The  Commission  believes  that  the  news
media,  as  well  as  the  police  authorities,  who
failed  to  impose  conditions  more  in  keeping
with  the  orderly  process  of  justice,  must  share


responsibility  for  the  failure  of  law  enforcement
which  occurred  in  connection  with  the  death  of
Oswald.  On  previous  occasions,  public  bodies
have  voiced  the  need  for  the  exercise  of  self-
restraint  by  the  news  media  in  periods  when  the
demand  for  information  must  be  tempered  by
other  fundamental  requirements  of  our  society.

At  its  annual  meeting  in  Washington  in  April
1964,  the  American  Society  of  Newspaper  Edi-
tors discussed  the  role  of  the  press  in  Dallas
immediately  after  President  Kennedy's  assassi-
nation. The  discussion  revealed  the  strong  mis-
givings among  the  editors  themselves  about  the
role  that  the  press  had  played  and  their  desire
that  the  press  display  more  self-discipline  and
adhere  to  higher  standards  of  conduct  in  the
future.  To  prevent  a  recurrence  of  the  unfor-
tunate events  which  followed  the  assassination,
however,  more  than  general  concern  will  be
needed.  The  promulgation  of  a  code  of  profes-
sional conduct  governing  representatives  of  all
news  media  would  be  welcome  evidence  that
the  press  had  profited  by  the  lesson  of  Dallas.

The  burden  of  insuring  that  appropriate  ac-
tion is  taken  to  establish  ethical  standards  of
conduct  for  the  news  media  must  also  be  borne,
however,  by  State  and  local  governments,  by  the
bar,  and  ultimately  by  the  public.  The  experi-
ence in  Dallas  during  November  22-24  is  a
dramatic  affirmation  of  the  need  for  steps  to
bring  about  a  proper  balance  between  the  right
of  the  public  to  be  kept  informed  and  the  right
of  the  individual  to  a  fair  and  impartial  trial.


Chapter  VI

INVESTIGATION  OF  POSSIBLE  CONSPIRACY


TfflS  CHAPTER  sets  forth  the  findings  of  the
Commission  as  to  whether  Lee  Harvey  Oswald
had  any  accomplices  in  the  planning  or  execu-
tion of  the  assassination.  Particularly  after  the
slaying  of  Oswald  by  Jack  Ruby  under  the  cir-
cumstances described  in  the  preceding  chapter,
rumors  and  suspicions  developed  regarding  the
existence  of  a  conspiracy  to  assassinate  Presi-
dent Kennedy.  As  discussed  in  appendix  XII,
many  of  these  rumors  were  based  on  a  lack  of
information  as  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  evi-
dence that  Oswald  alone  fired  the  shots  which
killed  President  Kennedy  and  wounded  Gover-
nor Connally.  Others  of  the  more  widely  pub-
licized rumors  maintained  that  Oswald  must
have  received  aid  from  one  or  more  persons  or
political  groups,  ranging  from  the  far  left  to  the
far  right  of  the  political  spectrum,  or  from  a  for-
eign government,  usually  either  the  Castro  re-
gime in  Cuba  or  the  Soviet  Union.

The  Commission  faced  substantial  difficulties
in  determining  whether  anyone  conspired  with


or  assisted  the  person  who  committed  the  assas-
sination. Prior  to  his  own  death  Oswald  had
neither  admitted  his  own  involvement  nor  im-
plicated any  other  persons  in  the  assassination
of  the  President.  TTie  problem  of  determining
the  existence  or  nonexistence  of  a  conspiracy
was  compounded  because  of  the  possibility  of
subversive  activity  by  a  foreign  power.  Wit-
nesses and  evidence  located  in  other  countries
were  not  subject  to  subpena,  as  they  would
have  been  if  they  had  been  located  in  the  United
States.  When  evidence  was  obtained  from  a  for-
eign nation,  it  could  not  be  appraised  as  effec-
tively as  if  it  had  been  derived  from  a  domestic
source.  The  Commission  has  given  the  closest
scrutiny  to  all  available  evidence  which  related
or  might  have  related  to  a  foreign  country.  All
such  evidence  was  tested,  whenever  possible,
against  the  contingency  that  it  had  been  fabri-
cated or  slanted  to  mislead  or  confuse.

In  order  to  meet  its  obligations  fuUy,  the  Com-
mission has  investigated  each  rumor  and  allega-


99


tion  linking  Oswald  to  a  conspiracy  which  has
come  to  its  attention,  regardless  of  source.  In
addition,  the  Commission  has  explored  the  de-
tails of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald's  activities  and  life,
especially  in  the  months  immediately  preceding
the  assassination,  in  order  to  develop  any  in-
vestigative lead  relevant  to  the  issue  of  con-
spiracy. All  of  Oswald's  known  writings  or  other
possessions  which  might  have  been  used  for
code  or  other  espionage  purposes  have  been  ex-
amined by  either  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investi-
gation or  the  National  Security  Agency,  or  both
agencies,  to  determine  whether  they  were  so
used.

In  setting  forth  the  results  of  this  investiga-
tion, the  first  section  of  this  chapter  reviews  the
facts  related  to  the  assassination  itself,  previous-
ly considered  in  more  detail  in  chapter  IV.  If
any  conspiracy  did  exist,  it  might  have  mani-
fested itself  at  some  point  during  Oswald's  prep-
aration for  the  shooting,  his  execution  of  the
plan,  or  his  escape  from  the  scene  of  the  assassi-
nation. The  Commission  has  therefore  studied
the  precise  means  by  which  the  assassination  oc-
curred for  traces  of  evidence  that  Oswald  re-
ceived any  form  of  assistance  in  effecting  the
killing.

The  second  section  of  the  chapter  deals  more
broadly  with  Oswald's  life  since  1959.  During
the  period  following  his  discharge  from  the
Marines  in  1959,  Oswald  engaged  in  several
activities  which  demand  close  scrutiny  to  deter-
mine whether,  through  these  pursuits,  he  de-
veloped any  associations  which  were  connected
with  the  planning  or  execution  of  the  assassina-
tion. Oswald  professed  commitment  to  Marxist
ideology;  he  defected  to  the  Soviet  Union  in
1959;  he  attempted  to  expatriate  himself  and
acquire  Soviet  citizenship;  and  he  resided  in  the
Soviet  Union  until  June  of  1962.  After  his  re-
turn to  the  United  States  he  sought  to  maintaki
contacts  with  the  Communist  Party,  Socialist
Workers  Party,  and  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba
Committee;  he  associated  with  various  Russian-
speaking  citizens  in  the  Dallas-Fort  Worth  area
— some  of  whom  had  resided  in  Russia;  he  trav-
eled to  Mexico  City  where  he  visited  both  the
Cuban  and  Soviet  Embassies  7  weeks  before  the
assassination; and  he  corresponded  with  the
Soviet  Embassy  in  Washington,  D.C.  In  view
of  these  activities,  the  Commission  has  instituted
a  thorough  investigation  to  determine  whether
the  assassiQation  was  in  some  manner  directed
or  encouraged  through  contacts  made  abroad  or
through  Oswald's  politically  oriented  activities
in  this  country.  The  Commission  has  also  con-
sidered whether  any  connections existed  be-
tween Oswald  and  certain  right-wing  activity
in  Dallas  which,  shortly  before  the  assassination,
led  to  the  publication  of  hostile  criticism  of
President  Kennedy.

The  final  section  of  this  chapter  considers  the
possibility  that  Jack  Ruby  was  part  of  a  con-
spiracy to  assassinate  President  Kennedy.  The
Commission  explored  Ruby's  background  and


his  activities  in  the  months  prior  to  the  assassi-
nation, and  especially  his  activities  in  the  2  days
after  the  assassination,  in  an  effort  to  determine
whether  there  was  any  indication  that  Ruby  was
implicated  in  that  event.  The  Commission  also
sought  to  ascertain  the  truth  or  falsity  of  asser-
tions that  Oswald  and  Ruby  were  known  to  one
another  prior  to  the  assassination.

In  considering  the  question  of  foreign  involve-
ment, the  Commission  has  received  valuable  as-
sistance from  the  Department  of  State,  the  Cen-
tral Intelligence  Agency,  the  Federal  Bureau  of
Investigation,  and  other  Federal  agencies  with
special  competence  in  the  field  of  foreign  inves-
tigation. Some  of  the  information  furnished  by
these  agencies  is  of  a  highly  confidential  nature.
Nevertheless,  because  the  disclosure  of  aU  facts
relating  to  the  assassination  of  President  Ken-
nedy is  of  great  public  importance,  the  Com-
mission has  included  in  this  report  all  informa-
tion furnished  by  these  agencies  which  the
Commission  relied  upon  in  coming  to  its  con-
clusions, or  which  tended  to  contradict  those
conclusions.  Confidential  sources  of  informa-
tion, as  contrasted  with  the  information  itself,
have,  in  a  relatively  few  instances,  been  with-
held.


CIRCUMSTANCES  SURROUNDING
THE  ASSASSINATION

Earlier  chapters  have  set  forth  the  evidence
upon  which  the  Comunission  concluded  that
President  Kennedy  was  fired  upon  from  a  single
window  in  the  southeast  corner  of  the  sixth
floor  of  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository,  and
that  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was  the  person  who
fired  the  shots  from  this  point.  As  reflected  in
those  chapters,  a  certain  sequence  of  events
necessarily  took  place  in  order  for  the  assassina-
tion to  have  occurred  as  it  did.  The  motorcade
traveled  past  the  Texas  School  Book  Deposi-
tory; Oswald  had  access  to  the  sixth  floor  of  the
building;  Oswald  brought  the  rifle  into  the  build-
ing; the  cartons  were  arranged  at  the  sixth-floor
window;  and  Oswald  escaped  from  the  building
before  the  police  had  sealed  off  the  exits.  Ac-
cordingly, the  Commission  has  investigated
these  circumstances  to  determine  whether  Os-
wald received  help  from  any  other  person  in
plamiing  or  performing  the  shooting.

Selection  of  Motorcade  Route

The  factors  involved  in  the  choice  of  the
motorcade  route  by  the  Secret  Service  have  been
discussed  in  chapter  U  of  this  report.  It  was
there  indicated  that  after  passing  through  a  por-
tion of  suburban  Dallas,  the  motorcade  was  to
travel  west  on  Main  Street,  and  then  to  the
Trade  Mart  by  way  of  the  Stemmons  Freeway,
the  most  direct  route  from  that  point.  This  route
would  take  the  motorcade  along  the  traditional
parade  route  through  downtown  Dallas;  it  al-
lowed the  maximum  number  of  persons  to  ob-


100


serve  the  President;  and  it  enabled  the  motor-
cade to  cover  the  distance  from  Love  Field  to
the  Trade  Mart  in  the  45  minutes  allocated  by
members  of  the  White  House  staff  planning  the
President's  schedule  in  Dallas.  No  member  of
the  Secret  Service,  the  Dallas  Police  Depart-
ment, or  the  local  host  committee  who  was  con-
sulted felt  that  any  other  route  would  be  pref-
erable.

To  reach  Stemmons  Freeway  from  Main
Street,  it  was  determined  that  the  motorcade
would  turn  right  from  Main  Street  onto  Hous-
ton Street  for  one  block  and  then  left  onto  Elm
Street,  proceeding  through  the  Triple  Under-
pass to  the  Stemmons  Freeway  access  road.  This
route  took  the  motorcade  past  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  Building  on  the  northwest  cor-
ner of  Elin  and  Houston  Streets.  Because  of  the
sharp  turn  at  this  comer,  the  motorcade  also
reduced  its  speed.  The  motorcade  would  have
passed  approximately  90  yards  further  from
the  Depository  Building  and  made  no  turn  near
the  building  if  it  had  attempted  to  reach  the
Stemmons  Freeway  directly  from  Main  Street,
The  road  plan  in  Dealey  Plaza,  however,  is  de-
signed to  prevent  such  a  turn.  In  order  to  keep
motorists  from  reaching  the  freeway  from  Main
Street,  a  concrete  barrier  has  been  erected  be-
tween Main  and  Elm  Streets  extending  beyond
the  freeway  entrance.  Hence,  it  would  have  been
necessary  for  the  motorcade  either  to  have  driv-
en over  this  barrier  or  to  have  made  a  sharp  S-
tum  in  order  to  have  entered  the  freeway  from
Main  Street,  Selection  of  the  motorcade  route
was  thus  entirely  appropriate  and  based  on  such
legitimate  considerations  as  the  origin  and  desti-
nation of  the  motorcade,  the  desired  opportunity
for  the  President  to  greet  large  numbers  of  peo-
ple, and  normal  patterns  of  traffic.

Oswald's  Presence  in  the  Depository  Building

Oswald's  presence  as  an  employee  in  the
Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building  was  the
result  of  a  series  of  happenings  unrelated  to  the
President's  trip  to  Dallas.  He  obtained  the  De-
pository job  after  aknost  2  weeks  of  job  hunting
which  began  immediately  upon  his  arrival  in
Dallas  from  Mexico  on  October  3,  1963.  At  that
time  be  was  in  poor  financial  circumstances,
having  arrived  from  Mexico  City  with  approxi-
mately $133  or  less,  and  with  his  unemployment
compensation  benefits  due  to  expire  on  October
8.  Oswald  and  his  wife  were  expecting  the  birth
of  their  second  child,  who  was  in  fact  bom  on
October  20.  In  attempting  to  procure  work,
Oswald  utilized  normal  channels,  including  the
Texas  Employment  Commission,

On  October  4,  1963,  Oswald  applied  for  a
position  with  Padgett  Printing  Corp.,  which  was
located  at  1313  Industrial  Boulevard,  several
blocks  from  President  Kennedy's  parade  route.
Oswald  favorably  impressed  the  plant  superin-
tendent who  checked  his  prior  job  references,
one  of  which  was  Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall,  the
firm  where  Oswad  had  done  photography  work


from  October  1962  to  April  1963.  The  following
report  was  written  by  Padgett's  plant  superin-
tendent on  the  reverse  side  of  Oswald's  job  apn
plication:  "Bob  Stovall  does  not  recommend
this  man.  He  was  released  because  of  his  record
as  a  troublemaker. — Has  Communistic  tenden-
cies." Oswald  received  word  that  Padgett  Print-
ing had  hired  someone  else.

Oswald's  employment  with  the  Texas  Sk:hool
Book  Depository  came  about  through  a  chance
conversation  on  Monday,  October  14,  betwe«i
Ruth  Paine,  with  whom  his  family  was  staying
while  Oswald  was  living  in  a  roominghouse  in
Dallas,  and  two  of  Mrs.  Paine's  neighbors.  Dur-
ing a  morning  conversation  over  coffee,  at  which
Marina  Oswald  was  present,  Oswald's  search
for  employment  was  mentioned.  The  neighbors
suggested  several  places  where  Oswald  might
apply  for  work.  One  of  the  neighbors  present,
Linnie  Mae  Randle,  said  that  her  brother  had
recently  been  hired  as  a  schoolbook  order  fillCT
at  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  and  she
thought  the  Depository  might  need  additional
help.  She  testified,  "and  of  course  you  know
just  being  neighborly  and  everything,  we  felt
sorry  for  Marina  because  her  baby  was  due
right  away  as  we  understood  it,  and  he  didn't
have  any  work  * * *."

When  Marina  Oswald  and  Mrs.  Paine  re-
turned home,  Mrs.  Paine  promptly  telephoned
the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  and  spoke  to
Superintendent  Roy  Truly,  whom  she  did  not
know.  Truly  agreed  to  interview  Oswald,  who  at
the  time  was  in  Dallas  seeking  employment
When  Oswald  called  that  evening,  Mrs.  Paine
told  him  of  her  conversation  with  Truly.  The
next  morning  Oswald  went  to  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  where  he  was  interviewed  and
hired  for  the  position  of  order  filler.

On  the  same  date,  the  Texas  Employment
Commission  attempted  to  refer  Oswald  to  an
airline  company  which  was  looking  for  baggage
and  cargo  handlers  at  a  salary  which  was  SI 00
per  month  higher  than  that  offered  by  the  De-
pository Co.  The  Employment  Commission
tried  to  advise  Oswald  of  this  job  at  10:30  a.m.
on  October  16,  1963.  Since  the  records  of  the
Commission  indicate  that  Oswald  was  then
working,  it  seems  clear  that  Oswald  was  hired
by  the  Depository  Co.  before  the  higher  paying
job  was  available.  It  is  unlikely  that  he  ever
learned  of  this  second  opportunity.

Although  publicity  concerning  the  President's
trip  to  Dallas  appeared  in  Dallas  newspapers  as
early  as  September  13,  1963,  the  planning  of  the
motorcade  route  was  not  started  imtU  after  No-
vember 4,  when  the  Secret  Service  was  first
notified  of  the  trip.  A  final  decision  as  to  the
route  could  not  have  been  reached  until  Novem-
ber 14,  when  the  Trade  Mart  was  selected  as  the
luncheon  site.  Although  news  reports  on  No-
vember 15  and  November  16  might  have  led  a
person  to  believe  that  the  motorcade  would  pass
the  Depository  Building,  the  route  was  not  fi-
nally selected  until  November 18;  it  was  an-


101


nounced  in  the  press  on  November  19,  only  3
days  before  the  President's  arrival.  Based  on  the
circumstances  of  Oswald's  employment  and  the
I^anning  of  the  motorcade  route,  the  Commis-
sion has  concluded  that  Oswald's  employment  in
the  Depository  was  wholly  unrelated  to  the
President's  trip  to  Dallas.

Bringing  Rifle  Into  Building

On  the  basis  of  the  evidence  developed  in
chapter  IV  the  Commission  concluded  that  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  carried  the  rifle  used  in  the
assassination  into  the  Depository  Building  on
Friday,  November  22,  1963,  in  the  handmade
brown  paper  bag  found  near  the  window  from
which  the  shots  were  fired.  The  arrangement  by
which  Buell  Wesley  Frazier  drove  Oswald  be-
tween Irving  and  Dallas  was  an  innocent  one,
having  commenced  when  Oswald  first  started
working  at  the  Depository.  As  noted  above,  it
was  Frazier's  sister,  Linnie  May  Randle,  who
had  suggested  to  Ruth  Paine  that  Oswald  might
be  able  to  find  employment  at  the  Depository.
When  Oswald  started  working  there,  Frazier,
who  lived  only  a  half  block  away  from  the
Paines,  offered  to  drive  Oswald  to  and  from  Irv-
ing whenever  he  was  going  to  stay  at  the  Paines'
home.  Although  Oswald's  request  for  a  ride  to
Irving  on  Thursday,  November  21,  was  a  de-
parture from  the  normal  weekend  pattern,  Os-
wald gave  the  explanation  that  he  needed  to
obtain  curtain  rods  for  an  "apartment"  in  Dal-
las. This  served  also  to  explain  the  long  package
which  he  took  with  him  from  Irving  to  the
Depository  Building  the  next  morning.  Further,
there  is  no  evidence  that  Ruth  Paine  or  Ma-
rina Oswald  had  reason  to  believe  that  Oswald's
return  was  in  any  way  related  to  an  attempt  to
shoot  the  President  the  next  day.  Although  his
visit  was  a  surprise,  since  he  arrived  on  Thurs-
day instead  of  Friday  for  his  usual  weekend
visit,  both  women  testified  that  they  thought  he
had  come  to  patch  up  a  quarrel  which  he  had
with  his  wife  a  few  days  earlier  when  she
learned  that  he  was  living  in  Dallas  under  an
assumed  name.

It  has  also  been  shown  that  Oswald  had  the
opportunity  to  work  in  the  Paines'  garage  on
Thursday  evening  and  prepare  the  rifle  by  dis-
assembling it,  if  it  were  not  already  disassem-
bled, and  packing  it  in  the  brown  bag.  It  has
been  demonstrated  that  the  paper  and  tape  from
which  the  bag  was  made  came  from  the  shipping
room  of  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  and
that  Oswald  had  access  to  this  material.  Neither
Ruth  Paine  nor  Marina  Oswald  saw  the  paper
bag  or  the  paper  and  tape  out  of  which  the  bag
was  constructed.  If  Oswald  actually  prepared
the  bag  in  the  Depository  out  of  materials  avail-
able to  him  there,  he  could  have  concealed  it  in
the  jacket  or  shirt  which  he  was  wearing.  The
Commission  has  found  no  evidence  which  sug-
gests that  Oswald  required  or  in  fact  received
any  assistance  in  bringing  the  rifle  into  the  build-


ing other  than  the  innocent  assistance  provided
by  Frazier  in  the  form  of  the  ride  to  work.

Accomplices  at  the  Scene  of  the  Assassination

The  arrangement  of  boxes  at  the  window
from  which  the  shots  were  fired  was  studied  to
determine  whether  Oswald  required  any  assist-
ance in  moving  the  cartons  to  the  window.  Car-
tons had  been  stacked  on  the  floor,  a  few  feet
behind  the  window,  thus  shielding  Oswald  from
the  view  of  anyone  on  the  sixth  floor  who  did
not  attempt  to  go  behind  them.  Most  of  those
cartons  had  been  moved  there  by  other  em-
ployees to  clear  an  area  for  laying  a  new  flooring
on  the  west  end  of  the  sixth  floor.  Superinten-
dent Roy  Truly  testified  that  the  floor-laying
crew  moved  a  long  row  of  books  parallel  to  the
windows  on  the  south  side  and  had  "quite  a  lot
of  cartons"  in  the  southeast  comer  of  the  build-
ing. He  said  that  there  was  not  any  particular
pattern  that  the  men  used  in  putting  them  there.
"They  were  just  piled  up  there  more  or  less  at
that  time."  According  to  Truly,  "several  cartons"
which  had  been  in  the  extreme  southeast  comer
had  been  placed  on  top  of  the  ones  that  had  been
piled  in  front  of  the  southeast  comer  window.

The  arrangement  of  the  three  boxes  in  the
window  and  the  one  on  which  the  assassin  may
have  sat  has  been  described  previously.  Two  of
these  four  boxes,  weighing  approximately  55
pounds  each,  had  been  moved  by  the  floor-laying
crew  from  the  west  side  of  the  floor  to  the  area
near  the  southwest  comer.  The  carton  on  which
the  assassin  may  have  sat  might  not  even  have
been  moved  by  the  assassin  at  all.  A  photograph
of  the  scene  depicts  this  carton  on  the  floor
alongside  other  similar  cartons.  Oswald's  right
palmprint  on  this  carton  may  have  been  placed
there  as  he  was  sitting  on  the  carton  rather  than
while  carrying  it.  In  any  event  both  of  these  55-
pound  cartons  could  have  been  carried  by  one
man.  The  remaining  two  cartons  contained  light
block-like  reading  aids  called  "Rolling  Readers"
weighing  only  about  8  poimds  each.  Although
they  had  been  moved  approximately  40  feet
from  their  normal  locations  at  the  southeast
comer  window,  it  would  appear  that  one  man
could  have  done  this  in  a  matter  of  seconds.

In  considering  the  possibility  of  accomplices
at  the  window,  the  Commission  evaluated  the
significance  of  the  presence  of  fingerprints  other
than  Oswald's  on  the  four  cartons  found  in  and
near  the  window.  Three  of  Oswald's  prints  were
developed  on  two  of  the  cartons.  In  addition  a
total  of  25  identifiable  prints  were  foimd  on  the
4  cartons.  Moreover,  prints  were  developed
which  were  considered  as  not  identifiable,  i.e.,
the  quality  of  the  print  was  too  fragmentary  to
be  of  value  for  identification  purposes.

As  has  been  explained  in  chapter  IV,  the
Commission  determined  that  none  of  the  ware-
house employees  who  might  have  customarily
handled  these  cartons  left  prints  which  could
be  identified.  This  was  considered  of  some  pro-
bative value  in  determining  whether  Oswald


102


moved  the  cartons  to  the  window.  All  but  1  of
the  25  definitely  identifiable  prints  were  the
prints  of  2  persons — an  FBI  employee  and  a
member  of  the  Dallas  Police  Department  who
had  handled  the  cartons  during  the  course  of
the  investigation.  One  identifiable  palmprint  was
not  identified.

The  presence  on  these  cartons  of  unidentified
prints,  whether  or  not  identifiable,  does  not
appear  to  be  unusual  since  these  cartons  con-
tained commercial  products  which  had  been
handled  by  many  people  throughout  the  normal
course  of  manufacturing,  warehousing,  and
shipping.  Unlike  other  items  of  evidence  such
as,  for  example,  a  ransom  note  in  a  kidnaping,
these  cartons  could  contain  the  prints  of  many
people  having  nothing  to  do  with  the  assassi-
nation. Moreover,  the  FBI  does  not  maintain  a
filing  system  for  palmprints  because,  according
to  the  supervisor  of  the  Bureau's  latent  finger-
print section,  Sebastian  F.  Latona,  the  problems
of  classification  make  such  a  system  impractica-
ble. FinAlly,  in  considering  the  significance  of
the  imidentified  prints,  the  Commission  gave
weight  to  the  opinion  of  Latona  to  the  effect  that
people  could  handle  these  cartons  without  leav-
ing prints  which  were  capable  of  being  de-
veloped.

Though  the  fingerprints  other  than  Oswald's
on  the  boxes  thus  provide  no  indication  of  the
presence  of  an  accompUce  at  the  window,  two
Depository  employees  are  known  to  have  been
present  briefly  on  the  sixth  floor  during  the
period  between  11:45  a.m.,  when  the  floor-
laying  crew  stopped  for  lunch,  and  the  moment
of  the  assassination.  One  of  these  was  Charles
Givens,  a  member  of  the  floor-laying  crew,  who
went  down  on  the  elevator  with  the  others  and
then,  returned  to  the  sixth  floor  to  get  his  jacket
and  cigarettes.  He  saw  Oswald  walking  away
from  the  southeast  comer,  but  saw  no  one  else
on  the  sixth  floor  at  that  time.  He  then  took  one
of  the  elevators  back  to  the  first  floor  at  approxi-
mately 11:55  a.m.

Bonnie  Ray  WilUams,  who  was  also  working
with  the  floor-laying  crew,  returned  to  the  sixth
floor  at  about  noon  to  eat  his  limch  and  watch
the  motorcade.  He  looked  out  on  Ehn  Street
from  a  position  in  the  area  of  the  third  or  fourth
set  of  windows  from  the  east  walL  At  this  point
he  was  approximately  20-30  feet  away  from  the
southeast  comer  window.  He  remained  for
about  "5,  10,  maybe  12  minutes"  eating  his
lunch  which  consisted  of  chicken  and  a  bottle
of  soda  pop.  Williams  saw  no  one  on  the  sixth
floor  during  this  period,  although  the  stacks  of
books  prevented  his  seeing  the  east  side  of  the
building.  After  finishing  his  lunch  Wilhams  took
the  elevator  dovra  because  no  one  had  joined
him  on  the  sixth  floor  to  watch  the  motorcade.
He  stopped  at  the  fifth  floor  where  he  joined
Harold  Norman  and  James  Jarman,  Jr.,  who
watched  the  motorcade  with  him  from  a  position
on  the  fifth  floor  directly  below  the  point  from
which  the  shots  were  fired.  Williams  left  the  re-


mains of  his  lunch,  including  chicken  bones  and
a  bottle  of  soda,  near  the  window  where  he  was
eating.

Several  witnesses  outside  the  building  claim
to  have  seen  a  person  in  the  southeast  comer
window  of  the  sixth  floor.  As  has  already  been
indicated,  some  were  able  to  offer  better  descrip-
tions than  others  and  one,  Howard  L.  Brennan,
made  a  positive  identification  of  Oswald  as  be-
ing the  person  at  the  window.  Although  there
are  differences  among  these  witnesses  with  re-
gard to  their  ability  to  describe  the  person  they
saw,  none  of  these  witnesses  testified  to  seeing
more  than  one  person  in  the  window.

One  witness,  however,  offered  testimony
which,  if  accurate,  would  create  the  possibility
of  an  accomplice  at  the  window  at  the  time  of
the  assassination.  The  witness  was  18 -year-old
Arnold  Rowland,  who  testified  in  great  detail
concerning  his  activities  and  observations  on
November  22,  1963.  He  and  his  wife  were
awaiting  the  motorcade,  standing  on  the  east
side  of  Houston  Street  between  Maine  and  Elm,
when  he  looked  toward  the  Depository  Building
and  noticed  a  man  holding  a  rifle  standing  back
from  the  southwest  comer  window  on  the  sixth
floor.  The  man  was  rather  slender  in  proportion
to  his  size  and  of  Ught  complexion  with  dark
hair.  Rowland  said  that  his  wife  was  looking
elsewhere  at  the  time  and  when  they  looked
back  to  the  window  the  man  "was  gone  from
our  vision."  They  thought  the  man  was  most
Ukely  someone  protecting  the  President.  After
the  assassination  Rowland  signed  an  affidavit  in
which  he  told  of  seeing  this  man,  although  Row-
land was  unable  to  identify  him.

When  Rowland  testified  before  the  Commis-
sion on  March  10,  1964,  he  claimed  for  the  first
time  to  have  seen  another  person  on  the  sixth
floor.  Rowland  said  that  before  he  had  noticed
the  man  with  the  rifle  on  the  southwest  comer  of
the  sixth  floor  he  had  seen  an  elderly  Negro
man  "hanging  out  that  window"  on  the  south-
east comer  of  the  sixth  floor.  Rowland  described
the  Negro  man  as  "very  thin,  an  elderly  gentle-
man, bald  or  practically  bald,  very  thin  hair  if
he  wasn't  bald,"  between  50  and  60  years  of  age,
5  feet  8  inches  to  5  feet  10  inches  tall,  with
fairly  dark  complexion.  Rowland  claimed  that
he  looked  back  two  or  three  times  and  noticed
that  the  man  remained  imtil  5  or  6  minutes  prior
to  the  time  the  motorcade  came.  Rowland  did
not  see  him  thereafter.  He  made  no  mention  of
the  Negro  man  in  his  affidavit.  And,  while  he
said  he  told  FBI  agents  about  the  man  in  the
southeast  comer  window  when  interviewed  on
the  Saturday  and  Simday  following  the  assassi-
nation, no  such  statement  appears  in  any  FBI
report

Mrs.  Rowland  testified  that  her  husband  never
told  her  about  seeing  any  other  man  on  the  sixth
floor  except  the  man  with  the  rifle  in  the  south-
west comer  that  he  first  saw.  She  also  was  pres-
ent during  Rowland's  interview  with  representa-
tives of  the  FBI  and  said  she  did  not  hear  him


103


make  such  a  statement,  although  she  also  said
that  she  did  not  hear  everything  that  was  dis-
cussed. Mrs.  Rowland  testified  that  after  her
husband  first  talked  about  seeing  a  man  with  the
rifle,  she  looked  back  more  than  once  at  the  De-
pository Building  and  saw  no  person  looking  out
of  any  window  on  the  sixth  floor.  She  also  said
that  "At  times  my  husband  is  prone  to  exagger-
ate." Because  of  inconsistencies  in  Rowland's
testimony  and  the  importance  of  his  testimony
to  the  question  of  a  possible  accomplice,  the
Commission  requested  the  FBI  to  conduct  an
inquiry  into  the  truth  of  a  broad  range  of  state-
ments made  by  Rowland  to  the  Commission.
The  investigation  showed  that  numerous  state-
ments by  Rowland  concerning  matters  about
which  he  would  not  normally  be  expected  to  be
mistaken — such  as  subjects  he  studied  in  school,
grades  he  received,  whether  or  not  he  had  gradu-
ated from  high  school,  and  whether  or  not  he
had  been  admitted  to  college — ^were  false.

The  only  possible  corroboration  for  Row-
land's story  is  found  in  the  testimony  of  Roger
D.  Craig,  a  deputy  sheriff  of  Dallas  County,
whose  testimony  on  other  aspects  of  the  case
has  been  discussed  in  chapter  IV.  Craig  claimed
that  about  10  minutes  after  the  assassination  he
talked  to  a  young  couple,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Rowland,

*  *  *  and  the  boy  said  he  saw  two  men  on
the  sixth  floor  of  the  Book  Depository  Build-
ing over  there;  one  of  them  had  a  rifle  with  a
telescopic  sight  on  it — ^but  he  thought  they
were  Secret  Service  agents  or  guards  and
didn't  report  it.  This  was  about — oh,  he  said,
15  minutes  before  the  motorcade  ever  arrived.

According  to  Craig,  Rowland  said  that  he
looked  back  a  few  minutes  later  and  "the  other
man  was  gone,  and  there  was  just  one  man —
the  man  with  the  rifle."  Craig  further  testified
that  Rowland  told  him  that  when  he  first  saw
the  two  men,  they  were  walking  back  and  forth
in  front  of  the  window  for  several  minutes.  They
were  both  white  men  and  one  of  them  had  a  rifle
with  a  scope  on  it.  This  report  by  Craig  is  con-
tradicted by  the  testimony  of  both  the  Row-
lands, and  by  every  recorded  interview  with
them  conducted  by  law  enforcement  agencies
after  the  assassination.

As  part  of  its  investigation  of  Rowland's  alle-
gation and  of  the  general  question  of  accom-
plices at  the  scene  of  the  assassination,  the
Commission  undertook  an  investigation  of  every
person  employed  in  the  Texas  School  Book  De-
pository Building.  Two  employees  might  possi-
bly fit  the  general  description  of  an  elderly  Ne-
gro man,  bald  or  balding.  These  two  men  were
on  the  first  floor  of  the  building  during  the  per-
iod before  and  during  the  assassination.  More-
over, all  of  the  employees  were  asked  whether
they  saw  any  strangers  in  the  building  on  the
morning  of  November  22.  Only  one  employee
saw  a  stranger  whom  he  described  as  a  feeble
individual  who  had  to  be  helped  up  the  front


steps  of  the  building.  He  went  to  a  public  rest-
room  and  left  the  building  5  minutes  later,  about
40  minutes  before  the  assassination.

Rowland's  failure  to  report  his  story  despite
several  interviews  until  his  appearance  before
the  Commission,  the  lack  of  probative  corrobo-
ration, and  the  serious  doubts  about  his  credi-
bility, have  led  the  Commission  to  reject  the
testimony  that  Rowland  saw  an  elderly  balding
Negro  man  in  the  southeast  comer  window  of
the  sixth  floor  of  the  Depository  Building  sev-
eral minutes  before  the  assassination.

Oswald's  Escape

The  Commission  has  analyzed  Oswald's
movements  between  the  time  of  the  assassina-
tion and  the  shooting  of  Patrolman  Tippit  to
determine  whether  there  is  any  evidence  that  Os-
wald had  assistance  in  his  flight  from  the  build-
ing. Oswald's  activities  during  this  period  have
been  traced  through  the  testimony  of  seven  wit-
nesses and  discussed  in  detail  in  chapter  IV.
Patrolman  M.  L.  Baker  and  Depository  super-
LDtendent  Roy  Truly  saw  him  within  2  minutes
of  the  assassination  on  the  second  floor  of  the
building.  Mrs.  R.  A.  Reid  saw  him  less  than  1
minute  later  walking  through  the  second-floor
ofl&ces  toward  the  front  of  the  building.  A  bus-
driver,  Cecil  J.  McWatters,  and  Oswald's  former
landlady,  Mrs.  Mary  Bledsoe,  saw  him  board  a
bus  at  approximately  12:40  p.m.,  and  get  off
about  4  minutes  later.  A  cabdriver,  William  W.
Whaley,  drove  Oswald  from  a  cabstand  located
a  few  blocks  from  where  Oswald  left  the  bus
to  a  point  in  Oak  Cliff  about  four  blocks  from
his  roominghouse;  and  Earlene  Roberts,  the
housekeeper  at  Oswald's  roominghouse,  saw
him  enter  the  roominghouse  at  about  1  p.m.
and  leave  a  few  minutes  later.  When  seen  by
these  seven  witnesses  Oswald  was  always  alone.

Particular  attention  has  been  directed  to  Os-
wald's departure  from  the  Depository  Building
in  order  to  determine  whether  he  could  have
left  the  building  within  approximately  3  minutes
of  the  assassination  without  assistance.  As  dis-
cussed more  fully  in  chapter  IV,  the  building
was  probably  first  sealed  off  no  earlier  than
12:37  by  Inspector  Herbert  Sawyer.  The  short-
est estimate  of  the  time  taken  to  seal  off  the
building  comes  from  Police  Officer  W.  E.  Bar-
nett,  one  of  the  oflBcers  assigned  to  the  corner
of  Elm  and  Houston  Streets  for  the  Presiden-
tial motorcade,  who  estimated  that  approxi-
mately 3  minutes  elapsed  between  the  time  he
heard  the  last  of  the  shots  and  the  time  he
started  guarding  the  front  door.  According  to
Barnett,  "there  were  people  going  in  and  out"
during  this  period.  The  evidence  discussed  in
chapter  IV  shows  that  3  minutes  would  have
been  sufficient  time  for  Oswald  to  have  descend-
ed from  the  sixth  floor  and  left  the  building
without  assistance.

One  witness,  James  R.  Worrell,  Jr.,  claims  to
have  seen  a  man  running  from  the  rear  of  the
building  shortly  after  the  assassination,  but  in


104


testimony  before  the  Commission  he  stated  that
he  could  not  see  his  face.  Two  other  witnesses
who  watched  the  rear  of  the  building  during  the
first  5  minutes  after  the  shooting  saw  no  one
leave.  The  claim  of  Deputy  Sheriff  Roger  Craig
that  he  saw  Oswald  leave  the  Depository  Build-
ing approximately  15  minutes  after  the  assassi-
nation has  been  discussed  in  chapter  IV.  Al-
though Craig  may  have  seen  someone  enter  a
station  wagon  15  minutes  after  the  assassina-
tion, the  person  he  saw  was  not  Lee  Harvey  Os-
wald, who  was  far  removed  from  the  building
at  that  time.

The  possibility  that  accomplices  aided  Os-
wald in  connection  with  his  escape  was  sug-

'  gested  by  the  testimony  of  Earlene  Roberts,  the
housekeeper  at  the  1026  North  Beckley  room-
inghouse.  She  testified  that  at  about  1  p.m.  on
November  22,  after  Oswald  had  returned  to
the  roominghouse,  a  Dallas  police  car  drove
slowly  by  the  front  of  the  1026  North  Beckley
premises  and  stopped  momentarily;  she  said  she
heard  its  horn  several  times.  Mrs.  Roberts  stated
that  the  occupants  of  the  car  were  not  known  to
her  even  though  she  had  worked  for  some  po-
licemen who  would  occasionally  come  by.  She
said  the  policeman  she  knew  drove  car  No.  1 70
and  that  this  was  not  the  number  on  the  police
car  that  honked  on  November  22.  She  testified
that  she  first  thought  the  car  she  saw  was  No.
106  and  then  said  that  it  was  No.  107,  In  an
FBI  interview  she  had  stated  that  she  looked  out
the  front  window  and  saw  police  car  No.  207.
Investigation  has  not  produced  any  evidence
that  there  was  a  police  vehicle  in  the  area  of
1026  North  Beckley  at  about  1  p.m.  on  Novem-
ber 22.  Squad  car  207  was  at  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  Building,  as  was  car  106.
Squad  cars  170  and  107  were  sold  in  April  1963

I  and  their  numbers  were  not  reassigned  until
February  1964.

Whatever  may  be  the  accuracy  of  Mrs.  Rob-
erts' recollection  concerning  the  police  car,  it  is
apparent  from  Mrs.  Roberts'  further  testimony
that  she  did  not  see  Oswald  enter  a  car  when  he
hurriedly  left  the  house.  She  has  stated  that
when  she  last  saw  Oswald,  shortly  after  1  p.m.,
he  was  standing  at  a  bus  stop  in  front  of  the
house.  Oswald  was  next  seen  less  than  1  mUe
away,  at  the  point  where  he  shot  Patrolman  Tip-
pit.  Oswald  could  have  easily  reached  this  point
on  foot  by  about  1:16  p.m.,  when  Tippit  was
shot.  Finally,  investigation  has  produced  no  evi-
dence that  Oswald  had  prearranged  plans  for  a
means  to  leave  Dallas  after  the  assassination  or
that  any  other  person  was  to  have  provided  him
assistance  in  hiding  or  in  departing  the  city.


any  person  other  than  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was
involved  in  the  killing  of  the  President,  the
Commission  directed  an  intensive  investigation
into  his  life  for  the  purpose,  among  others,  of
detecting  any  possible  traces  that  at  some  point
he  became  Involved  in  a  conspiracy  culminating
in  the  deed  of  November  22,  1963.  As  a  product
of  this  investigation,  the  Commission  has  com-
piled a  detailed  chronological  biography  of  Os-
wald which  is  set  forth  as  appendix  XIU.  Study
of  the  period  from  Oswald's  birth  in  1939  to  his
military  service  from  1956  to  1959  has  revealed
no  evidence  that  he  was  associated  with  any
type  of  sinister  or  subversive  organization  dur-
ing that  period.  Though  his  personality  and  po-
litical views  took  shape  during  these  early  years,
the  events  of  that  period  are  significant  primar-
ily to  an  understanding  of  the  personality  of
Lee  Harvey  Oswald  and  are  discussed  in  that
connection  in  chapter  Vn.  Beginning  with  his
preparation  for  defection  to  the  Soviet  Union  in
1959,  however,  Oswald  engaged  in  several  ac-
tivities which  required  close  scrutiny  by  the
Commission.  In  an  appraisal  of  Oswald's  ac-
tions since  1959  for  the  purpose  of  determining
whether  he  was  part  of  a  conspiracy,  several
aspects  of  his  backgroimd  and  character  must  be
borne  in  mind.  He  was  yovmg,  inexperienced,
and  had  only  a  limited  education.  As  will  be
more  fully  discussed  in  chapter  VII,  he  was  un-
able to  establish  relationships  with  others  and
had  a  resentment  for  authority  and  any  disci-
pline flowing  from  it.  While  he  demonstrated
the  ability  to  act  secretively  and  alone,  without
regard  to  the  consequences  to  himself,  as  in  his
defection  to  the  Soviet  Union,  he  does  not  ap-
pear to  have  been  the  kind  of  person  whom  one
would  normally  expect  to  be  selected  as  a  con-
spirator.

Residence  in  the  Soviet  Union

Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was  openly  committed
to  Marxist  ideology,  he  defected  to  the  Soviet
Union  in  1959,  and  resided  there  until  Jione
of  1962,  eventually  returning  to  the  United
States  with  a  Russian  wife.  In  order  to  evalu-
ate rumors  and  speculations  that  Oswald  may
have  been  an  agent  of  the  Soviet  Union,  the
Commission  investigated  the  facts  surrounding
Oswald's  stay  in  Russia.  The  Commission  was
thus  fulfilling  its  obligation  to  probe  all  facts  of
possible  relevance  to  the  assassination,  and  does
not  suggest  by  this  investigation  that  the  rulers
of  the  Soviet  Union  believed  that  their  political
interests  would  be  advanced  by  the  assassination
of  President  Kennedy.  On  this  question,  the  Sec-
retary of  State  testified  before  the  Commission
on  June  10,  1964  as  follows:


BACKGROUND  OF  LEE  HARVEY
OSWALD

Finding  no  evidence  in  the  circumstances  im-
mediately  surrounding the assassination that


I  have  seen  no  evidence  that  would  indi-
cate to  me  that  the  Soviet  Union  considered
that  it  had  an  interest  in  the  removal  of  Presi-
dent Kennedy  or  that  it  was  in  any  way  in-
volved in  the  removal  of  President  Kennedy.


105


I  have  not  seen  or  heard  of  any  scrap  of
evidence  indicating  that  the  Soviet  Union  had
any  desire  to  eliminate  President  Kennedy
nor  in  any  way  participated  in  any  such  event.

Now,  standing  back  and  trying  to  look  at
that  question  objectively  despite  the  ideologi-
cal differences  between  our  two  great  systems,
I  can't  see  how  it  could  be  to  the  interest  of
the  Soviet  Union  to  make  any  such  effort.

*  * *

I  do  think  that  the  Soviet  Union,  again  ob-
jectively considered,  has  an  interest  in  the
correctness  of  state  relations.  This  would  be
particularly  true  among  the  great  powers,
with  which  the  major  interests  of  the  Soviet
Union  are  directly  engaged.

*  * *

I  think  that  although  there  are  grave  dif-
ferences between  the  Communist  world  and
the  free  world,  between  the  Soviet  Union  and
other  major  powers,  that  even  from  their
point  of  view  there  needs  to  be  some  shape
and  fcMm  to  international  relations,  that  it
is  not  in  their  interest  to  have  this  world  struc-
ture dissolve  into  complete  anarchy,  that
great  states  and  particularly  nuclear  powers
have  to  be  in  a  position  to  deal  with  each
other,  to  transact  business  with  each  other,
to  try  to  meet  problems  with  each  other,  and
that  requires  the  maintenance  of  correct  rela-
tions and  access  to  the  leadership  on  all  sides.

I  think  also  that  although  there  had  been
grave  differences  between  Chairman  Khrush-
chev and  President  Kennedy,  I  think  there
were  evidences  of  a  certain  mutual  respect
that  had  developed  over  some  of  the  experi-
ences, both  good  and  bad,  through  which
these  two  men  had  lived.

I  think  both  of  them  were  aware  of  the  fact
that  any  Chairman  of  the  Soviet  Union,  and
any  President  of  the  United  States,  neces-
sarily bear  somewhat  special  responsibility
for  the  general  peace  of  the  world.  Indeed
without  exaggeration,  one  could  almost  say
the  existence  of  the  northern  hemisphere  in
this  nuclear  age.


So  that  it  would  be  an  act  of  rashness  and
madness  for  Soviet  leaders  to  undertake  such
an  action  as  an  active  policy.  Because  every-
thing would  have  been  put  in  jeopardy  or  at
stake  in  connection  with  such  an  act.

It  has  not  been  our  impression  that  mad-
ness has  characterized  the  actions  of  the  So-
viet leadership  in  recent  years.

The  Conmiission  accepts  Secretary  Rusk's
estimate  as  reasonable  and  objective,  but  recog-
nizes that  a  precise  assessment  of  Soviet  inten-
tions or  interests  is  most  difficult.  The  Commis-


sion has  thus  examined  all  the  known  facts
regarding  Oswald's  defection,  residence  in  the
Soviet  Union,  and  return  to  the  United  States.
At  each  step  the  Commission  sought  to  deter-
mine whether  there  was  any  evidence  which
supported  a  conclusion  that  Soviet  authorities
may  have  directly  or  indirectly  influenced  Os-
wald's actions  in  assassinating  the  President.

Oswald's  entry  into  the  Soviet  Union. — Al-
though the  evidence  is  inconclusive  as  to  the
factors  which  motivated  Oswald  to  go  to  the
Soviet  Union,  there  is  no  indication  that  he  was
prompted  to  do  so  by  agents  of  that  country.  He
may  have  begun  to  study  the  Russian  language
when  he  was  stationed  in  Japan,  which  was  in-
termittently from  August  1957  to  November
1958.  After  he  arrived  in  Moscow  in  October
1959  he  told  several  persons  that  he  had  been
planning  his  defection  for  2  years,  which  sug-
gests that  the  decision  was  made  while  he  was
in  the  Far  East.  George  De  Mohrenschildt,  who
met  Oswald  after  his  return  from  the  Soviet  Un-
ion, testified  that  Oswald  once  told  him  much
the  same  thing:  "I  met  some  Communists  in
Japan  and  they  got  me  excited  and  interested,
and  that  was  one  of  my  inducements  in  going  to
Soviet  Russia,  to  see  what  goes  on  there."  This
evidence,  however,  is  somewhat  at  variance  with
Oswald's  statements  made  to  two  American
newspaper  reporters  in  Moscow  shortly  after
his  defection  in  1959,  and  to  other  people  in  the
United  States  after  his  return  in  1962.  Though
his  remarks  were  not  inconsistent  as  to  the  time
he  decided  to  defect,  to  these  people  he  insisted
that  before  going  to  the  Soviet  Union  he  had
"never  met  a  Communist"  and  that  the  intent  to
defect  derived  entirely  from  his  own  reading
and  thinking.  He  said  much  the  same  to  his
brother  in  a  letter  he  wrote  to  him  from  Russia
explaining  why  he  had  defected.  Which  of  Os-
w^d's  statements  was  the  more  accurate  re-
mains unknown.

There  is  no  evidence  that  Oswald  received
outside  assistance  in  financing  his  trip  to  the
Soviet  Union.  After  he  arrived  in  Moscow,  Os-
wald told  a  newspaper  correspondent,  Aline
Mosby,  that  he  had  saved  $1,500  out  of  his
Marine  Corps  salary  to  finance  his  defection,
although  the  news  story  based  upon  Oswald's
interview  with  Aline  Mosby  unaccountably
listed  the  sum  of  $1,600  instead  of  $1,500.  Af-
ter this  article  had  appeared.  Marguerite  Oswald
also  related  the  $1,600  figure  to  an  FBI  agent.
Either  amount  could  have  been  accumulated
out  of  Oswald's  earnings  in  the  Marine  Corps;
during  his  2  years  and  10  months  of  service  he
received  $3,452.20,  after  all  taxes,  allotments
and  other  deductions.  Moreover  Oswald  could
certainly  have  made  the  entire  trip  on  less  than
$1,000.  The  ticket  on  the  ship  he  took  from
New  Orleans  to  Le  Havre,  France,  cost
$220.75;  it  cost  him  $20  to  reach  London  from
Le  Havre;  his  plane  fare  from  London  to  Hel-
sinki, where  he  received  his  visa,  cost  him
$111.90;  he  probably  purchased  Russian  "tour-


106


ist  vouchers"  normally  good  for  room  and
board  for  10  days  for  $300;  his  train  fare  from
Helsinki  to  Moscow  was  about  $44;  in  Moscow
he  paid  only  $1.50  to  $3  a  night  for  his  room
and  very  little  for  his  meals  after  his  tourist
vouchers  ran  out;  and  apparently  he  did  not  pay
his  hotel  biU  at  all  after  November  30,  1959.
Oswald's  known  living  habits  indicate  that  he
could  be  extraordinarily  frugal  when  he  had  rea-
son to  be,  and  it  seems  clear  that  he  did  have  a
strong  desire  to  go  to  the  Soviet  Union.

While  in  Atsugi,  Japan,  Oswald  studied  the
Russian  language,  perhaps  with  some  help  from
an  oflBcer  in  his  unit  who  was  interested  in  Rus-
sian and  used  to  "talk  about  it"  with  Oswald
occasionally.  He  studied  by  himself  a  great  deal
in  late  1958  and  early  1959  after  he  was  trans-
ferred from  Japan  to  California.  He  took  an
Army  aptitude  test  in  Russian  in  February  1959
and  rated  "Poor."  When  he  reached  the  Soviet
Union  in  October  of  the  same  year  he  could
barely  speak  the  language.  During  the  period  in
Moscow  while  he  was  awaiting  decision  on  his
application  for  citizenship,  his  diary  records
that  he  practiced  Russian  8  hour  a  day.  After  he
was  sent  to  Minsk  in  early  January  1960  he  took
lessons  from  an  interpreter  assigned  to  him  for
that  purpose  by  the  Soviet  Government.  Marina
Oswald  said  that  by  the  time  she  met  him  in
March  1961  he  spoke  the  language  well  enough
so  that  at  first  she  thought  he  was  from  one  of
the  Baltic  areas  of  her  country,  because  of  his
accent.  She  stated  that  his  only  defects  were  that
his  grammar  was  sometimes  incorrect  and  that
his  writing  was  never  good.

Thus,  the  limited  evidence  provides  no  indi-
cation that  Oswald  was  recruited  by  Soviet
agents  in  the  Far  East  with  a  view  toward  defec-
tion and  eventual  return  to  the  United  States.
Moreover,  on  its  face  such  a  possibility  is  most
imlikely.  If  Soviet  agents  had  communicated
with  Oswald  while  he  was  in  the  Marine  Corps,
one  of  the  least  probable  instructions  they
would  have  given  him  would  have  been  to  de-
fect. If  Oswald  had  remained  a  Marine  radar
specialist,  he  might  at  some  point  have  reached
a  position  of  value  as  a  secret  agent.  However,
his  defection  and  the  disloyal  statements  he
made  publicly  in  connection  with  it  eliminated
the  possibility  that  he  would  ever  gain  access
to  confidential  information  or  programs  of  the
United  States.  The  very  fact  that  he  defected,
therefore,  is  itself  persuasive  evidence  that  he
was  not  recruited  as  an  agent  prior  to  his  de-
fection.

The  Commission  has  investigated  the  circum-
stances under  which  Oswald  obtained  a  visa  to
enter  the  Soviet  Union  for  possible  evidence  that
he  received  preferential  treatment  in  being  per-
mitted to  enter  the  country.  Oswald  left  New
Orleans,  La.,  for  Europe  on  September  20,
1959,  having  been  released  from  active  duty  in
the  Marine  Corps  on  September  11,  1959.  He
went  direcdy  to  Helsinki,  Finland,  by  way  of  Le
Havre,  France,  and  London,  England,  arriving


at  Helsinki  on  Saturday,  October  10,  1959.  Os-
wald probably  arrived  in  Helsinki  too  late  in  the
evening  to  have  applied  for  a  visa  at  the  Soviet
Union  consulate  that  night.  In  light  of  the  rapid-
ity with  which  he  made  connections  throughout
his  entire  trip,  he  probably  applied  for  a  visa
early  on  Monday,  October  12.  On  October  14,
he  was  issued  Soviet  Tourist  Visa  No.  403339,
good  for  one  6-day  visit  in  the  U.S.S.R.  He  left
Helsinki  on  a  train  destined  for  Moscow  on
October  15.

The  Department  of  State  has  advised  the
Commission  that  it  has  some  information  that  in
1959  it  usually  took  an  American  tourist  in  Hel-
sinki 1  to  2  weeks  to  obtain  a  visa,  and  that  it
has  other  information  that  the  normal  waiting
period  during  the  past  5  years  has  been  a  week
or  less.  According  to  the  Department's  informa-
tion, the  waiting  period  has  always  varied  fre-
quently and  widely,  with  one  confirmed  instance
in  1963  of  a  visa  routinely  issued  in  less  than  24
hours.  The  Central  Intelligence  Agency  has  in-
dicated that  visas  during  the  1964  tourist  sea-
son were  being  granted  in  about  5  to  7  days.

This  information  from  the  Department  of
State  and  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency  thus
suggests  that  Oswald's  wait  for  a  visa  may  have
been  shorter  than  usual  but  not  beyond  the
range  of  possible  variation.  The  prompt  issu-
ance of  Oswald's  visa  may  have  been  merely
the  result  of  normal  procedures,  due  in  part  to
the  fact  that  the  summer  rush  had  ended.  It
might  also  mean  that  Oswald  was  unusually  ur-
gent in  his  demands  that  his  visa  be  issued
promptly.  Oswald  himself  told  officials  at  the
American  Embassy  in  Moscow  on  October  31,
when  he  appeared  to  renounce  his  citizenship,
that  he  had  said  nothing  to  the  Soviets  about  de-
fecting until  he  arrived  in  Moscow.  In  any  event,
the  Commission  has  found  nothing  in  the  cir-
cumstances of  Oswald's  entry  into  the  Soviet
Union  which  indicates  that  he  was  at  the  time  an
agent  of  the  U.S.S.R.

Defection  and  admission  to  residence. — ^Two
months  and  22  days  elapsed  from  Oswald's  ar-
rival in  Moscow  until  he  left  that  city  to  take
up  residence  in  Minsk.  The  Commission  has
considered  the  possibility  that  Oswald  was  ac-
cepted for  residence  in  the  Soviet  Union  and
sent  to  Minsk  unusually  soon  after  he  arrived,
either  because  he  had  been  expected  or  because
during  his  first  weeks  in  Moscow  he  developed
an  undercover  relationship  with  the  Soviet  Gov-
ernment. In  doing  so,  the  Commission  has  at-
tempted to  reconstruct  the  events  of  those
months,  though  it  is,  of  course,  impossible  to
account  for  Oswald's  activities  on  every  day  of
that  period.

Oswald's  "Historic  Diary,"  which  commences
on  October  16,  1959,  the  date  Oswald  arrived  in
Moscow,  and  other  writings  he  later  prepared,
have  provided  the  Commission  with  one  source
of  information  about  Oswald's  activities
throughout  his  stay  in  the  Soviet  Union.  Even
assuming  the  diary  was  intended  to  be  a  truthful


107


record,  it  is  not  an  accurate  guide  to  the  details
of  Oswald's  activities.  Oswald  seems  not  to  have
been  concerned  about  the  accuracy  of  dates  and
names,  and  apparently  made  many  of  his  en-
tries subsequent  to  the  date  the  events  occurred.
Marina  Oswald  testified  that  she  beUeved  that
her  husband  did  not  begin  to  keep  the  diary  un-
til he  reached  Minsk,  3  months  after  his  arrival
in  Russia,  and  scraps  of  paper  found  in  Oswald's
possession,  containing  much  the  same  informa-
tion as  appears  in  his  diary,  suggest  that  he
transcribed  the  entries  into  the  diary  at  a  later
time.  The  substance  of  Oswald's  writings  has
been  carefully  examined  for  consistency  with
all  other  related  information  available  to  the
Commission.  In  addition,  the  writings  have  been
checked  for  handwriting,  and  for  consistency  of
style,  grammar,  and  spelUng  with  earlier  and
later  writings  which  are  known  to  be  his.  No  in-
dication has  been  found  that  entries  were  writ-
ten or  coached  by  other  persons.

However,  the  most  reliable  information  con-
cerning the  period  Oswald  spent  in  Moscow  in
the  latter  part  of  1962  comes  from  the  records
of  the  American  Embassy  in  Moscow,  the  testi-
mony of  Embassy  oflBcials,  and  the  notes  of  two
American  newspaper  reporters,  Aline  Mosby
and  PriscUla  Johnson,  who  interviewed  Oswald
during  this  period.  Oswald's  correspondence
with  his  brother  and  mother  has  also  been  relied
upon  for  some  relatively  minor  information.
TTie  findings  upon  which  the  Commission  based
its  conclusion  concerning  Soviet  involvements
in  the  assassination  were  supported  by  evidence
other  than  material  provided  by  the  Soviet  Un-
ion or  Oswald's  writings.  The  Central  Intelli-
gence Agency  has  also  contributed  data  on  the
normal  practices  and  procedures  of  the  Soviet
authorities  in  handling  American  defectors.

The  "Historic  Diary"  indicates  that  on  Octo-
ber 16,  1959,  the  day  Oswald  arrived  in  Mos-
cow, he  told  his  Intourist  guide,  Rima  Shiro-
kova,  that  he  wished  to  renounce  his  American
citizenship  and  become  a  Soviet  citizen.  The
same  day,  the  guide  reportedly  helped  Oswald
prepare  a  letter  to  the  Soviet  authorities  re-
questing citizenship.  The  diary  indicates,  how-
ever, that  on  October  21  he  was  informed  that
his  visa  had  expired  and  that  he  would  be  re-
quired to  leave  Moscow  within  2  hours.  During
the  preceding  days,  according  to  the  diary,  he
had  been  interviewed  once  and  perhaps  twice
by  Soviet  ofl&cials.  During  this  period  the  KGB,*

*  The  Committee  for  State  Seciarity,  best  known  by  its  Rus-
sian initials,  "KGB,"  is  a  lineal  descendant  of  the  revolutionary
ChEKA  and  has  passed  through  nimierous  changes  of  name
gince  1917  with  little  change  of  function.  Presently  the  KGB
handles  all  Soviet  counterintelligence  operations  and  is  the  in-
strument for  various  types  of  subversive  activities.  It  is  respon-
sible for  the  internal  security  of  the  Soviet  state  and  the  safety
of  its  leaders.  In  addition  it  shares  responsibility  for  foreign
espionage  activities  with  the  intelligence  component  of  the
Ministry  of  Defense,  the  "GRU."  The  KGB  would  have  the
primary  responsibility  for  keeping  track  of  a  defector  such  as
Oswald.

The  Ministry  of  Internal  Affairs  or  "MVID"  was  for  many
years  the  designation  of  the  organization  responsible  for  civil
law enforcement ajid administration of prisons and forced


the  agency  with  primary  responsibility  for  ex-
amining defectors  arriving  in  Russia,  undoubt-
edly investigated  Oswald  as  fully  as  possible.  In
1959,  virtually  all  Intourist  guides  were  KGB
informants,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  believe
that  this  was  not  true  of  Oswald's  guide.

According  to  Oswald's  diary  he  attempted
suicide  when  he  learned  his  application  for  citi-
zenship had  been  denied.  If  true,  this  would
seem  to  provide  strong  evidence  that,  at  least
prior  to  October  21,  there  was  no  undercover
relationship  between  Oswald  and  the  Soviet
Government.  Though  not  necessarily  conclu-
sive, there  is  considerable  direct  evidence  which
indicates  that  Oswald  did  slash  his  wrist.  Os-
wald's autopsy  showed  that  he  had  a  scar  on  his
left  wrist  and  that  it  was  of  the  kind  which  could
have  been  caused  by  a  suicide  attempt.  The  med-
ical records  from  the  Botkinskaya  Hospital  in
Moscow,  furnished  by  the  Soviet  Government,
reveal  that  from  October  21  to  October  28  he
was  treated  there  for  a  self-inflicted  wound  on
the  left  wrist.  The  information  contained  in
these  records  is  consistent  with  the  facts  dis-
closed by  the  autopsy  examination  relating  to
Oswald's  wrist  and  to  other  facts  known  about
Oswald.  Although  no  witness  recalled  Oswald
mentioning  a  suicide  attempt,  Marina  Oswald
testified  that  when  she  questioned  her  husband
about  the  scar  on  his  wrist,  he  became  "very  an-
gry," and  avoided  giving  her  a  reply.  Oswald's
character,  discussed  in  the  following  chapter,
does  not  seem  inconsistent  with  a  suicide  or
feigned  suicide  attempt,  nor  with  his  having
failed  to  disclose  the  suicide  attempt.  Many  wit-
nesses who  testified  before  the  Commission  ob-
served that  he  was  not  an  "open"  or  trusting
person,  had  a  tendency  toward  arrogance,  and
was  not  the  kind  of  man  who  would  readily  ad-
mit weaknesses.

Oswald  appeared  at  the  American  Embassy
in  Moscow  on  October  31,  1959,  3  days  after
his  release  from  the  Botkinskaya  Hospital.  He
did  not  give  the  oflBcials  at  the  Embassy  any  in-
dication that  he  had  recently  received  medical
treatment,  Oswald's  appearance  was  the  first
notification  to  the  American  Government  that
he  was  in  Russia,  since  he  had  failed  to  inform
the  Embassy  upon  his  arrival,  as  most  Ameri-

labor  camps  in  the  Soviet  Union.  During  a  part  of  its  history
it  also  directed  vast  economic  combines.  In  January  1960,  the
central  or  all-union  MVD  was  abolished  and  its  powers  trans-
ferred to  the  MVD's  of  the  several  Soviet  republics.  A  further
change  took  place  in  the  sunmier  of  1962,  when  the  republic
MVD's  were  renamed  Ministries  for  the  Preservation  of  Public
Order  and  Safety.  In  the  past  few  years  the  republic  MVD's
have  been  gradually  divesting  themselves  of  their  economic
functions.  When  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was  in  the  Soviet  Union
though,  the  MVD  still  carried  on  substantial  economic  activ-
ities. For  example,  inmates  of  the  MVD-administered  "cor-
rective labor  colonies"  engaged  in  brickmaking,  heavy  con-
struction work,  and  lumbering.

In  the  Conmiission's  report,  the  term  KGB  will  be  used,  as
above,  to  describe  the  principal  Soviet  counterintelligence  and
espionage  service.  Oswald  often  inaccurately  referred  to  the
"secret  police"  as  the  MVD;  and  in  any  quotations  from  him,
the  Commission  will  reproduce  his  actual  words.  Whenever  the
Commission  refers  to  the  MVD,  it  vvtII  be  referring  to  it  as
defined  in  this  footnote.


108


can  tourists  did  at  the  time.  In  appendix  XV,
Oswald's  dealings  with  the  Embassy  in  1959  un-
til his  return  to  the  United  States  in  1962  are
described  in  full,  and  all  action  taken  by  the
American  officials  on  his  case  is  evaluated.  His
conduct  at  the  Embassy  has  also  been  consid-
ered by  the  Commission  for  any  indication  it
may  provide  as  to  whether  or  not  Oswald  was
then  acting  under  directions  of  the  Soviet  Gov-
ernment.

At  the  Embassy,  Oswald  declared  that  he
wished  to  renounce  his  U.S.  citizenship,  but  the
consul  to  whom  he  spoke,  Richard  E.  Snyder,
refused  to  accept  his  renunciation  at  that  time,
telling  him  that  he  would  have  to  return  to  com-
plete the  necessary  papers.  However,  Oswald
did  give  the  consul  his  passport  and  a  hand-
written statement  requesting  that  his  American
citizenship  be  "revoked"  and  "aflBrm  [ing]  [his]
*  *  *  allegiance"  to  the  Soviet  Union.  The
FBI  has  confirmed  that  this  statement  is  in  Os-
wald's handwriting,  and  Snyder  has  testified  that
the  letter's  phrases  are  consistent  with  the  way
Oswald  talked  and  conducted  himself.  E>uring
the  approximately  40-minute  interview,  Oswald
also  informed  Snyder  that  he  had  been  a  radar
operator  in  the  Marine  Corps,  intimating  that  he
might  know  something  of  special  interest,  and
that  he  had  informed  a  Soviet  oflBcial  that  he
would  give  the  Soviets  any  information  con-
cerning the  Marine  Corps  and  radar  operation
which  he  possessed.  Although  Oswald  never
filed  a  formal  renimciation,  in  a  letter  to  the
Embassy  dated  November  3,  1959,  he  again  re-
quested that  his  American  citizenship  be  re-
voked and  protested  the  refusal  to  accept  his  re-
nunciation on  October  31.

While  at  the  Embassy,  and  in  a  subsequent  in-
terview with  an  American  journalist,  Oswald
displayed  familiarity  with  Communist  ideologi-
cal arguments,  which  led  those  with  whom  he
spoke  to  speculate  that  he  may  have  received
some  instruction  from  Soviet  authorities.  Os-
wald's familiarity  with  the  law  regarding  renun-
ciation of  citizenship,  observed  by  both  Em-
bassy officials,  could  also  be  construed  as  a  sign
of  coaching  by  Soviet  authorities.  However,  Os-
wald is  known  to  have  been  an  avid  reader  and
there  is  evidence  that  he  had  read  Communist
literature  without  guidance  while  in  the  Marine
Corps  and  before  that  time.  After  his  arrival
in  Moscow,  Oswald  most  probably  had  discus-
sions with  his  Intourist  guide  and  others,  but
none  of  the  Americans  with  whom  he  talked  in
Moscow  felt  that  his  conversations  necessarily
revealed  any  type  of  formal  training.  The  "His-
toric Diary"  indicates  that  Oswald  did  not  tell
his  guide  that  he  intended  to  visit  the  Embassy
because  he  feared  she  would  disapprove.
Though  Oswald  gave  Snyder  the  impression  "of
an  intelligent  person  who  spoke  in  a  manner  and
on  a  level,  which  seemed  to  befit  his  apparent
level  of  intelligence,"  correspondent  Priscilla
Johnson,  who  spent  about  5  hours  talking  with
him,  received  a  much  less  favorable  impression:


He  liked  to  create  the  pretense,  the  impres-
sion that  he  was  attracted  to  abstract  discus-
sion and  was  capable  of  engaging  in  it,  and
was  drawn  to  it.  But  it  was  like  pricking  a
balloon.  I  had  the  feeling  that  if  you  really
did  engage  him  on  this  ground,  you  very
quickly  would  discover  that  he  didn't  have
the  capacity  for  a  logical  sustained  argument
about  an  abstract  point  on  economics  or  on
noneconomic,  political  matters  or  any  mat-
ter, philosophical.

A  comparison  of  the  formal  note  Oswald
handed  Snyder  and  his  letter  of  November  3
with  the  provisions  of  section  349(a)  of  the
Immigration  and  Nationality  Act  suggests  that
Oswald  had  read  the  statute  but  understood  it
imperfectly;  he  apparently  was  trying  to  use
three  out  of  the  four  ways  set  out  in  the  statute
to  surrender  his  citizenship,  but  he  succeeded
in  none.

Moreover,  persuasive  evidence  that  Oswald's
conduct  was  not  carefully  coached  by  Soviet
agents  is  provided  by  some  of  his  actions  at  the
Embassy.  The  single  statement  which  probably
caused  Oswald  the  most  future  trouble  was  his
declaration  that  he  had  already  volunteered  to
a  Soviet  oflBcial  that  he  would,  if  asked,  tell  the
Soviet  Government  all  that  he  knew  about  his
job  in  radar  as  a  Marine.  Certainly  a  statement
of  this  type  would  prejudice  any  possibility  of
his  being  an  eflfective  pro-Communist  agent.

Further,  though  unquestionably  evidencing
anti-American  sentiments,  Oswald's  behavior  at
the  Embassy,  which  brought  him  exceedingly
close  to  expatriation,  was  unlikely  to  have  in-
creased his  value  in  any  capacity  to  the  Soviet
Union.  Richard  E.  Snyder,  the  oflBcial  who  in-
terviewed Oswald  on  October  31,  testified  that
he  "had  every  reason  to  believe"  that  Oswald
would  have  carried  through  a  formal — and
therefore  eflfective — renunciation  of  his  Ameri-
can citizenship  immediately  if  he  had  let  him.
However,  as  a  defector,  Oswald  could  have  had
considerable  propaganda  value  without  expa-
triating himself;  and  if  he  had  expatriated  him-
self his  eventual  return  to  the  United  States
would  have  been  much  more  diflBcult  and  per-
haps impossible.  If  Snyder's  assessment  of  Os-
wadd's  intentions  is  accurate,  it  thus  tends  to
refute  the  suggestion  that  Oswald  was  being
coached  by  the  Soviets.  In  addition,  reporters
noticed  Oswald's  apparent  ambivalence  in  re-
gard to  renouncing  his  citizenship — stormily  de-
manding that  he  be  permitted  to  renounce  while
failing  to  follow  through  by  completing  the  nec-
essary papers — behavior  which  might  have  de-
tracted from  his  propaganda  value.

According  to  Oswald's  "Historic  Diary"  and
the  documents  furnished  to  the  Commission  by
the  Soviet  Government,  Oswald  was  not  told
that  he  had  been  accepted  as  a  resident  of  the
Soviet  Union  until  about  January  4,  1960.  Al-
though on  November  13  and  16  Oswald  in-
formed Aline  Mosby  and  Priscilla  Johnson  that


109


he  had  been  granted  permission  to  remain  in  the
country  indefinitely,  the  diary  indicates  that  at
that  time  he  had  been  told  only  that  he  could
remain  "imtil  some  solution  is  found  with  what
to  do  with  me."  The  diary  is  more  consistent  with
the  letter  Oswald  wrote  to  his  brother  Robert  on
December  17,  saying  that  he  was  then,  more
than  a  month  after  he  saw  Johnson  and  Mosby,
about  to  leave  his  hotel,  and  with  some  later
correspondence  with  his  mother.  Oswald  mailed
a  short  note  to  his  mother  which  she  received  in
Texas  on  January  5;  that  same  day  she  mailed  a
money  order  to  him  in  Moscow,  but  it  apparent-
ly got  there  too  late,  because  she  received  it
back,  imopened,  on  February  25.  Oswald's  con-
flicting statement  to  the  correspondents  also
seems  reconcilable  with  his  very  apparent  de-
sire to  appear  important  to  others.  Moreover,  so
long  as  Oswald  continued  to  stay  in  a  hotel  in
Moscow,  the  inference  is  that  the  Soviet  au-
thorities had  not  yet  decided  to  accept  him.  This
inference  is  supported  by  information  supplied
by  the  CIA  on  the  handling  of  other  defectors
in  the  Soviet  Union.

Thus,  the  evidence  is  strong  that  Oswald
waited  at  least  until  November  16,  when  he  saw
Miss  Johnson,  and  it  is  probable  that  he  was  re-
quired to  wait  until  January  4,  a  little  over  2i
months  from  October  16,  before  his  application
to  remain  in  Russia  was  granted.  In  mid-No=
vember  Miss  Johnson  asked  Oswald  whether
the  Russians  were  encouraging  his  defection,  to
which  Oswald  responded:  "The  Russians  are
treating  it  like  a  legal  formality.  They  don't  en-
courage you  and  they  don't  discourage  you."
And,  when  the  Soviet  Government  finally  acted,
Oswald  did  not  receive  Soviet  citizenship,  as
he  had  requested,  but  merely  permission  to  re-
side in  Russia  on  a  year-to-year  basis.

Asked  to  comment  upon  the  length  of  time,  2
months  and  22  days,  that  probably  passed  be-
fore Oswald  was  granted  the  right  to  remain  in
the  Soviet  Union,  the  CIA  has  advised  that
"when  compared  to  five  other  defector  cases,
this  procedure  seems  vmexceptional."  Similarly,
the  Department  of  State  reports  that  its  infor-
mation "indicated  that  a  2-month  waiting  period
is  not  unusuaL"  The  fuU  response  of  the  CIA
is  as  follows:

Oswald  said  that  he  asked  for  Soviet  citi-
zenship on  16  October  1959.  According  to
his  diary,  he  received  word  a  month  later  that
he  could  stay  in  the  USSR  pending  disposi-
tion of  his  request,  but  it  was  another  month
and  a  half  before  he  was  given  his  stateless
passport.

When  compared  to  five  other  defector
cases,  this  procedure  seems  unexceptional.
Two  defectors  from  US  Army  intelligence
units  in  West  Germany  appear  to  have  been
given  citizenship  immediately,  but  both  had
prior  KGB  connections  and  fled  as  a  result
of  Army  security  checks.  Of  the  other  three
cases,  one  was  accepted  after  not  more  than


five  weeks  and  given  a  stateless  passport  ap-
parently at  about  the  same  time.  The  second
was  immediately  given  permission  to  stay  for
a  while,  and  his  subsequent  request  for  citi-
zenship was  granted  three  months  later.  The
third  was  allowed  to  stay  after  he  made  his
citizenship  request,  but  almost  two  months
passed  before  he  was  told  that  he  had  been  ac-
cepted. Although  the  Soviet  Ministry  of  For-
eign Affairs  soon  after  told  the  US  Embassy
that  he  was  a  Soviet  citizen,  he  did  not  receive
his  document  until  five  or  six  months  after
initial  application.  We  know  of  only  one  case
in  which  an  American  asked  for  Soviet  citizen-
ship but  did  not  take  up  residence  in  the
USSR.  In  that  instance,  the  American
changed  his  mind  and  voluntarily  returned  to
the  United  States  less  than  three  weeks  after
he  had  requested  Soviet  citizenship.

The  Department  of  State  has  commented  as  fol-
lows:

The  files  of  the  Department  of  State  reflect
the  fact  that  Oswald  first  applied  for  permis-
sion to  remain  in  Russia  permanently,  or  at
least  for  a  long  period,  when  he  arrived  in
Moscow,  and  that  he  obtained  permission  to
remain  within  one  or  two  months.

A.  Is  the  fact  that  he  obtained  permission
to  stay  within  this  period  of  time  usual?

Answer — Our  information  indicates  that  a
two  months  waiting  period  is  not  imusual.  In
the  case  of  [name  withheld]  the  Supreme  So-
viet decided  within  two  months  to  give  Soviet
citizenship  and  he  was  thereafter,  of  course,
permitted  to  stay.

B.  Can  you  teU  us  what  the  normal  proce-
dures are  imder  similar  circumstances?

Answer — It  is  impossible  for  us  to  state  any
"normal"  procedures.  The  Soviet  Govern-
ment never  publicizes  the  proceedings  in
these  cases  or  the  reasons  for  its  action.  Fur-
thermore, it  is,  of  course,  extremely  unusual
for  an  American  citizen  to  defect.

The  information  relating  to  Oswald's  suicide
attempt  indicates  that  his  application  to  remain
in  the  Soviet  Union  was  probably  rejected  about
6  days  after  his  arrival  in  Moscow.  Since  the
KGB  is  the  Soviet  agency  responsible  for  the
initial  handling  of  all  defectors,  it  seems  likely
that  the  original  decision  not  to  accept  Oswald
was  made  by  the  KGB.  That  Oswald  was  per-
mitted to  remain  in  Moscow  after  his  release
from  the  hospital  suggests  that  another  ministry
of  the  Soviet  Government  may  have  intervened
on  his  behalf.  This  hypothesis  is  consistent  with
entries  in  the  "Historic  Diary"  commenting  that
the  officials  Oswald  met  after  his  hospital  treat-
ment were  different  from  those  with  whom  he
had  dealt  before.  The  most  plausible  reason  for
any  such  intervention  may  well  have  been  ap-
prehension over  the  publicity  that  would  fol-


110


low  the  rejection  of  a  devout  convert  to  the
Communist  cause.

Oswald's  Life  in  Minsk. — According  to  the
"Historic  Diary"  and  documents  received  from
the  Soviet  Government,  Oswald  resided  in  the
city  of  Minsk  from  January  1960  until  June
1962.  Oswald's  life  in  Minsk  is  the  portion  of  his
life  concerning  which  the  least  is  known.  The
primary  sources  of  information  are  Oswald's
own  writings  and  the  testimony  of  Marina  Os-
wald. Other  evidence,  however,  establishes  be-
yond doubt  that  Oswald  was  in  fact  located  in
Minsk  on  at  least  two  occasions.  The  Commis-
sion has  obtained  two  photographs  which  were
taken  by  American  tourists  in  Minsk  in  August
1961  in  which  Oswald  appears.  The  tourists  did
not  know  Oswald,  nor  did  they  speak  with  him;
they  remembered  only  that  several  men  gath-
ered near  their  car.  In  addition,  Oswald  was  no-
ticed in  Minsk  by  a  student  who  was  traveling
with  the  University  of  Michigan  band  on  a  tour
of  Russia  in  the  spring  of  1961.  Oswald  corres-
ponded with  the  American  Embassy  in  Moscow
from  Minsk,  and  wrote  letters  from  Minsk  to  his
family  in  the  United  States.  Oswald  and  his  wife
have  many  photographs  taken  of  themselves
which  show  Minsk  backgrounds  and  persons
who  are  identifiable  as  residents  of  Minsk.  After
he  returned  to  the  United  States,  Oswald  con-
versed about  the  city  with  Russian-bom  Ameri-
can citizens  who  were  familiar  with  it.  Marina
Oswald  is  also  familiar  with  the  city.  The  Com-
mission has  also  been  able  independently  to
verify  the  existence  in  Minsk  of  many  of  the  ac-
quaintances of  Oswald  and  his  wife  whom  they
said  they  knew  there.

Once  he  was  accepted  as  a  resident  alien  in
the  Soviet  Union,  Oswald  was  given  consider-
able benefits  which  ordinary  Soviet  citizens  in
his  position  in  society  did  not  have.  The  "His-
toric Diary"  recites  that  after  Oswald  was  in-
formed that  he  could  remain  in  the  Soviet  Un-
ion and  was  being  sent  to  Minsk  he  was  given
5,000  rubles*  ($500)  by  the  "Red  Cross,
*  *  *  for  expenses."  He  used  2,200  rubles  to
pay  his  hotel  biU,  and  another  150  rubles  to
purchase  a  train  ticket.  With  the  balance  of
slightly  over  2,500  rubles,  Oswald  felt,  accord-
ing to  the  diary,  like  a  rich  man.  Oswald  did  not
receive  free  living  quarters,  as  the  diary  indi-
cates the  "Mayor"  of  Minsk  promised  him,  but
about  6  weeks  after  his  arrival  he  did  receive  an
apartment,  very  pleasant  by  Soviet  standards,
for  which  he  was  required  to  pay  only  60  rubles
($6.00)  a  month.  Oswald  considered  the  apart-
ment "almost  rent  free."  Oswald  was  given  a
job  in  the  "Byelorussian  Radio  and  Television
Factory,"  where  his  pay  on  a  per  piece  basis
ranged  from  700  to  900  rubles  ($70-$90)  a
month.  According  to  his  wife,  this  rate  of  pay
was  average  for  people  in  his  occupation  but
good  by  Soviet  standards  generally.  She  ex-
plained  that  piecework rates throughout  the

*  About  a  year  after  Oswald  received  this  money,  the  ruble
was  revalued  to  about  10  dmes  its  earlier  value.


Soviet  Union  have  generally  grown  out  of  line
with  compensation  for  other  jobs.  The  CIA  has
confirmed  that  this  condition  exists  in  many
areas  and  occupations  in  the  Soviet  Union.  In
addition  to  his  salary,  Oswald  regularly  received
700  rubles  ($70)  per  month  from  the  Soviet
"Red  Cross."  The  well-paying  job,  the  monthly
subsidy,  and  the  "almost  rent-free"  apartment
combined  to  give  Oswald  more  money  than  he
needed.  The  only  complaint  recorded  in  the
"Historic  Diary"  is  that  there  was  "no  place  to
spend  the  money."

The  Commission  has  found  no  basis  for  as-
sociating Oswald's  preferred  income  with  Soviet
undercover  activity.  Marina  Oswald  testified
that  foreign  nationals  are  commonly  given  spe-
cial treatment  in  the  Soviet  Union,  and  the  Cen-
tral Intelligence  Agency  has  confirmed  that  it  is
standard  practice  in  the  Soviet  Union  for  Ameri-
cans and  other  foreign  defectors  from  countries
with  high  standards  of  living  to  be  "subsidized."
Apparently  it  is  Soviet  practice  to  attempt  to
make  life  suflSciently  pleasant  for  a  foreign  de-
fector so  that  he  will  not  become  disillusioned
and  return  to  his  native  country.  The  Commis-
sion has  also  assumed  that  it  is  customary  for
Soviet  intelligence  agencies  to  keep  defectors
under  surveillance  during  their  residence  in  the
Soviet  Union,  through  periodic  interviews  of
neighbors  and  associates  of  the  defector,  Oswald
once  mentioned  that  the  Soviet  police  questioned
his  neighbors  occasionally.

Moreover,  it  is  from  Oswald's  personal  writ-
ings alone  that  the  Commission  has  learned  that
he  received  supplementary  funds  from  the  Soviet
"Red  Cross."  In  the  notes  he  made  during  the
return  trip  to  the  United  States  Oswald  recog-
nized that  the  "Red  Cross"  subsidy  had  nothing
to  do  with  the  well-known  International  Red
Cross.  He  frankly  stated  that  the  money  was
paid  to  him  for  having  "denounced"  the  United
States  and  that  it  had  come  from  the  "MVD."
Oswald's  papers  reveal  that  the  "Red  Cross"  sub-
sidy was  terminated  as  soon  as  he  wrote  the
American  Embassy  in  Moscow  in  February
1961  asking  that  he  be  permitted  to  return.
Marina  Oswald's  testimony  confirmed  this;
she  said  that  when  she  knew  Oswald  he  no
longer  was  receiving  the  monthly  grant  but  stiU
retained  some  of  the  savings  accumulated  in  the
months  when  he  had  been  receiving  it.  Since  she
met  Oswald  in  March  and  married  him  in  April
of  1961,  her  testimony  was  consistent  with  his
records.

The  nature  of  Oswald's  employment  while  in
Minsk  has  been  examined  by  the  CommissiorL
The  factory  in  which  he  worked  was  a  large  plant
manufacturing  electronic  parts  and  radio  and
television  sets.  Marina  Oswald  has  testified  that
he  was  an  "apprentice  machinist"  and  "ground
small  metallic  parts  for  radio  receivers,  on  a
lathe."  So  far  as  can  be  determined,  Oswald
never  straight-forwardly  described  to  anyone
else  in  the  United  States  exactly  what  his  job
was  in  the  Soviet  Union.  Some  of  his  acquain-


111


tances  in  Dallas  and  Fort  Worth  had  the  impres-
sion that  he  was  disappointed  in  having  been  giv-
en a  menial  job  and  not  assigned  to  an  institution
of  higher  learning  in  the  Soviet  Union.
Marina  Oswald  confirmed  this  and  also  testified
that  her  husband  was  not  interested  in  his  work
and  not  regarded  at  the  factory  as  a  very  good
worker.  The  documents  furnished  to  the  Com-
mission by  the  Soviet  government  were  consist-
ent with  her  testimony  on  this  point,  since  they
included  a  report  from  Oswald's  superior  at  the
factory  which  is  critical  of  his  performance  on
the  job.  Oswald's  employment  and  his  job  per-
formance are  thus  consistent  with  his  known
occupational  habits  in  this  country  and  other-
wise afford  no  ground  for  suspicion.

Oswald's  membership  in  a  hunting  club  while
he  was  in  the  Soviet  Union  has  been  a  matter  of
special  interest  to  the  Commission.  One  Russian
emigre  testified  that  this  was  a  suspicious  cir-
cumstance because  no  one  in  the  Soviet  Union
is  permitted  to  own  a  gun  for  pleasure.  The
Commission's  investigation,  however,  has  estab-
lished that  this  is  not  so.  The  Central  Intelli-
gence Agency  has  advised  the  Commission  that
hunting  societies  such  as  the  one  to  which  Os-
wald belonged  are  very  popular  in  the  Soviet
Union.  They  are  frequently  sponsored  by  fac-
tories for  their  employees,  as  was  Oswald's.
Moreover,  Soviet  citizens  (or  foreigners  resid-
ing in  the  Soviet  Union)  are  permitted  to  own
shotguns,  but  not  rifles,  without  joining  a  so-
ciety; all  that  is  necessary  is  that  the  gun  be  reg-
istered at  the  local  militia  office  immediately
after  it  has  been  purchased.  Experts  from  the
Central  InteUigence  Agency  have  examined  Os-
wald's club  membership  certificate  and  gun  per-
mit and  expressed  the  opinion  that  its  terms  and
numbers  are  consistent  with  other  information
the  CIA  has  about  the  Soviet  Union.

Marina  Oswald  testified  that  her  husband
went  hunting  only  on  one  occasion  during  the
time  of  their  marriage.  However,  Oswald  appar-
ently joined  the  Byelorussian  Society  of  Hunt-
ers and  Fishermen  in  the  summer  of  1960  and
did  not  marry  until  April  30,  1961,  so  he  could
have  been  more  active  while  he  was  still  a  bach-
elor. Oswald  made  no  secret  of  his  membership
in  the  hunting  club.  He  mentioned  it  on  occa-
sion to  friends  after  he  returned  to  the  United
States;  discussed  it  at  some  length  in  a  speech  at
a  Jesuit  Seminary  in  Mobile,  Ala.,  in  the  sum-
mer of  1962;  included  it  in  his  correspondence
with  his  brother  Robert;  and  kept  his  member-
ship certificate  and  gun  permit  until  the  day  he
was  killed.  In  view  of  these  facts,  it  is  unlikely
that  Oswald's  membership  in  a  hunting  club  was
contrived  to  conceal  some  sort  of  secret  training.
Moreover,  the  CIA  has  informed  the  Commis-
sion that  it  is  in  possession  of  considerable  in-
formation on  the  location  of  secret  Soviet
training  institutions  and  that  it  knows  of  no  such
institution  in  or  near  Minsk  during  the  time
Oswald  was  there.

Oswald's  marriage  to  Marina  Prusakova  on

112


April  30,  1961,  is  itself  a  fact  meriting  con-
sideration. A  foreigner  living  in  Russia  cannot
marry  without  the  permission  of  the  Soviet  Gov-
ernment. It  seems  unlikely  that  the  Soviet  au-
thorities would  have  permitted  Oswald  to  marry
and  to  take  his  wife  with  him  to  the  United
States  if  they  were  contemplating  using  him
alone  as  an  agent.  The  fact  that  he  had  a  Rus-
sian wife  would  be  likely,  in  their  view,  to  in-
crease any  surveillance  under  which  he  would
be  kept  by  American  security  agencies,  would
make  him  even  more  conspicuous  to  his  neigh-
bors as  "an  ex-Russian,"  and  would  decrease  his
mobility.  A  wife's  presence  in  the  United  States
would  also  constitute  a  continuing  risk  of  dis-
closure. On  the  other  hand,  Marina  Oswald's
lack  of  English  training  and  her  complete  igno-
rance of  the  United  States  and  its  customs  would
scarcely  recommend  her  to  the  Soviet  authori-
ties as  one  member  of  an  "agent  team"  to  be  sent
to  the  United  States  on  a  difficult  and  danger-
ous foreign  enterprise.

Oswald's  departure  from  the  Soviet  Union. —
On  February  13,  1961,  the  American  Embassy
in  Moscow  received  a  letter  from  Oswald  post-
marked Minsk,  February  5,  asking  that  he  be
readmitted  to  the  United  States.  This  was  the
first  time  that  the  Embassy  had  heard  from  or
about  Oswald  since  November  16,  1959.  The
end  of  the  15-month  silence  came  only  a  few
days  after  the  Department  of  State  in  Washing-
ton had  forwarded  a  request  to  the  Moscow
Embassy  on  February  1,  1961,  informing  the
Embassy  that  Oswald's  mother  was  worried
about  him,  and  asking  that  he  get  in  touch  with
her  if  possible.  The  simultaneity  of  the  two
events  was  apparently  coincidental.  The  request
from  Marguerite  Oswald  went  from  Washing-
ton to  Moscow  by  sealed  diplomatic  pouch  and
there  was  no  evidence  that  the  seal  had  been
tampered  with.  The  officer  of  the  Department  of
State  who  carried  the  responsibility  for  such  mat-
ters has  testified  that  the  message  was  not  for-
warded to  the  Russians  after  it  arrived  in  Mos-
cow.

Oswald's  letter  does  not  seem  to  have  been  de-
signed to  ingratiate  him  with  the  Embassy  offi-
cials. It  starts  by  incorrectly  implying  that  he
had  written  an  earher  letter  that  was  not  an-
swered, states  that  he  will  return  to  the  United
States  only  if  he  can  first  "come  to  some  agree-
ment" on  there  being  no  legal  charges  brought
against  him,  and  ends  with  a  reminder  to  the
officials  at  the  Embassy  that  they  have  a  respon-
sibiUty  to  do  everything  they  can  to  help  him,
since  he  is  an  American  citizen.

The  Embassy's  response  to  this  letter  was  to
invite  Oswald  to  come  personally  to  Moscow  to
discuss  the  matter.  Oswald  at  first  protested  be-
cause of  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  Soviet  per-
mission. He  wrote  two  more  protesting  letters
during  the  following  4  months,  but  received  no
indication  that  the  Embassy  would  allow  him  to
handle  the  matter  by  mail.  While  the  Depart-
ment of  State  was  clarifying  its  position  on  this


matter,  Oswald  unexpectedly  appeared  in  Mos-
cow on  Saturday,  July  8,  1961.  On  Sunday,
Marina  Oswald  flew  to  Moscow,  and  was  inter-
viewed by  oflBcials  in  the  American  Embassy
on  Tuesday.

The  Commission  asked  the  Department  of
State  and  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency  to
comment  on  whether  the  Oswalds'  travel  to
Moscow  without  permission  signified  special
treatment  by  the  Soviet  Union.  From  their  re-
sponses, it  appears  that  since  Marina  Oswald
possessed  a  Soviet  citizen's  internal  passport,
she  did  not  require  prior  approval  to  make  the
trip.  Although  Soviet  law  did  require  her  hus-
band, as  the  holder  of  a  "stateless  passport,"  to
obtain  advance  permission  for  the  trip,  his
failure  to  do  so  would  not  normally  have  been
considered  a  serious  violation.  In  this  respect,
the  CIA  has  advised  the  Commission  as  fol-
lows:

OSWALD'S  travel  from  Minsk  to  Mos-
cow and  return  in  July  1961  would  normally
have  required  prior  authorization.  Bearers
of  a  Soviet  "passport  for  foreigners"  (vid  na
zhitelstov  V.  SSSR  dlya  innostrantsa)  are  re-
required  to  obtain  travel  authorization  from
the  Visa  and  Registration  Department
(OVTR)  (or  Passport  Registration  Depart-
ment (PRO)  in  smaller  towns)  if  they  desire
to  leave  the  city  (or  oblast)  where  they  are
domiciled.  This  same  requirement  is  believed
to  apply  to  persons,  such  as  OSV,'ALD,  hold-
ing Soviet  "stateless  passports"  (vid  na  zhi-
telstvo  V.  SSSR  dlya  lits  bez  grazhdanstva).

The  practicality  of  even  "unauthorized"
travel  was  demonstrated  by  events  related  by
a  United  States  citizen  who  defected  in  1960,
and  subsequently  was  sent  to  Kiev  to  study.
After  repatriating  this  defector  told  U.S.  au-
thorities he  had  made  a  total  of  seven  unau-
thorized trips  from  Kiev  during  his  stay  in
the  USSR.  He  was  apprehended  on  two  of  his
flights  and  was  returned  to  Kiev  each  time,
the  second  time  under  escort  On  both  occa-
sions he  was  merely  reprimanded  by  the
deput)'  chief  of  the  institute  at  which  he  was
studying.  Since  Marina  had  a  Soviet  citizen's
internal  passport  there  would  have  been  no
restrictions  against  her  making  the  trip  to
Moscow.

The  answers  of  the  Department  of  State,  to-
gether with  the  Commission's  specific  questions,
are  as  foUows:

B.  Could  resident  foreigners  normally
travel  in  this  maimer  without  first  obtaining
such  permission?

Answer — There  are  only  a  few  U.S.  na=
tionals  now  Living  in  the  Soviet  Union.  They
include  an  American  Roman  Catholic  priest,
an  American  Protestant  minister,  a  number
of  correspondents,  some  students  and  tech-
nical advisers  to  Soviet  businesses.  We  know


that  the  priest,  the  minister,  the  correspond-
ents and  the  students  must  obtain  permission
from  Soviet  authorities  before  taking  any
trips.  The  technical  advisers  notify  officials
of  their  project  before  they  travel  and  these
officials  personally  inform  the  militia.

C.  If  travel  of  this  r>pe  was  not  freely
permitted,  do  you  believe  that  Oswald  nor-
mally would  have  been  apprehended  during
the  attempt  or  punished  after  the  fact  for
traveling  without  permission?

Answer — Based  on  the  information  we
have,  we  beUeve  that  if  Oswald  went  to  Mos-
cow without  permission,  and  this  was  known
to  the  Soviet  authorities,  he  would  have  been
fined  or  reprimanded.  Oswald  was  not,  of
course,  an  average  foreign  resident.  He  was
a  defector  from  a  foreign  country  and  the
bearer  of  a  Soviet  internal  "stateless"  pass-
port *  *  *  during  the  time  when  he  was
contemplating  the  visit  to  Moscow  to  come  to
the  Embassy  * * *

The  Soviet  authorities  probably  knew
about  Oswald's  trip  even  if  he  did  not  obtain
advance  permission,  since  in  most  instances
the  Soviet  militia  guards  at  the  Embassy  ask
for  the  documents  of  unidentified  persons  en-
tering the  Embassy  groimds  • * *

An  American  citizen  who,  with  her  Ameri-
can citizen  husband,  went  to  the  So\iet  Union
to  live  permanently  and  is  now  trv'ing  to  ob-
tain permission  to  leave,  informed  the  Em-
bassy that  she  had  been  fined  for  not  getting
permission  to  go  from  Odessa  to  Moscow  on
a  recent  trip  to  visit  the  Embassy.

D.  Even  if  such  travel  did  not  have  to  be
authorized,  do  you  have  any  information  or
obser\'ations  regarding  the  practicality  of
such  travel  by  Soviet  citizens  or  persons  in
Oswald's  status?

Answer — It  is  impossible  to  generalize  in
this  area.  We  understand  from  interrogations
of  former  residents  in  the  Soviet  Union  who
were  considered  "stateless"  by  Soviet  authori-
ties that  they  were  not  permitted  to  leave  the
tov."n  where  they  resided  v-ithout  permission
of  the  poUce.  In  requestiDg  such  permission
they  were  required  to  fill  out  a  questionnaire
gi%-ing  the  reason  for  travel,  length  of  stay,
addresses  of  iDdi\iduals  to  be  visited,  etc.

Notwithstanding  these  requirements,  we
know  that  at  least  one  "stateless"  person  often
traveled  without  permission  of  the  authori-
ties and  stated  that  police  stationed  at  rail-
road stations  usually  spotchecked  the  identi-
fication papers  of  every  tenth  traveler,  but
that  it  was  an  easy  matter  to  avoid  such
checks.  Finally,  she  stated  that  persons  who
were  caught  evading  the  registration  require-
ments were  returned  to  their  home  towns  by
the  police  and  sentenced  to  short  jail  terms
and  fined.  These  sentences  were  more  severe
for  repeated  \iolations.

Vrlien  Oswald  arrived  at  the  Embassy  in  Mos-


113


cow,  he  met  Richard  E.  Snyder,  the  same  person
with  whom  he  had  dealt  in  October  of  1959.
Primarily  on  the  basis  of  Oswald's  interview
with  Snyder  on  Monday,  July  10,  1961,  the
American  Embassy  concluded  that  Oswald  had
not  expatriated  himself.  (See  app.  XV)  On  the
basis  of  this  tentative  decision,  Oswald  was
given  back  his  American  passport,  which  he
had  surrendered  in  1959.  The  document  was
due  to  expire  in  September  1961,  however,  and
Oswald  was  informed  that  its  renewal  would
depend  upon  the  ultimate  decision  by  the  De-
partment of  State  on  his  expatriation.  On  July
11,  Marina  Oswald  was  interviewed  at  the
Embassy  and  the  steps  necessary  for  her  to
obtain  an  American  visa  were  begun.  In  May
1962,  after  15  months  of  dealings  with  the
Embassy,  Oswald's  passport  was  ultimately  re-
newed and  permission  for  his  wife  to  enter  the
United  States  was  granted.

The  files  on  Oswald  and  his  wife  compiled
by  the  Department  of  State  and  the  Immigra-
tion and  Naturalization  Service  contain  no  in-
dication of  any  expert  guidance  by  Soviet
authorities  in  Oswald's  dealings  with  the  De-
partment or  the  Service.  For  example,  the  let-
ters from  Minsk  to  the  Embassy  in  Moscow,
which  are  in  his  handwriting,  display  the  arro-
gant attitude  which  was  characteristic  of  him
both  before  and  after  he  Uved  in  Russia,  and,
when  compared  with  other  letters  that  were  with-
out doubt  composed  and  written  by  him,  show
about  the  same  low  level  of  sophistication,  flu-
ency, and  spelling.  The  Department  officer  who
most  frequently  dealt  with  Oswald  when  he
began  negotiations  to  return  to  the  United  States,
Richard  E.  Snyder,  testified  that  he  can  recall
nothing  that  indicated  Oswald  was  being  guided
or  assisted  by  a  third  party  when  he  appeared  at
the  Embassy  in  July  1961.  On  the  contrary,  the
arrogant  and  presumptuous  attitude  which  Os-
wald displayed  in  his  correspondence  with  the
Embassy  from  early  1961  until  June  1962,
when  he  finally  departed  from  Russia,  undoubt-
edly hindered  his  attempts  to  return  to  the
United  States.  Snyder  has  testified  that  although
he  made  a  sincere  effort  to  treat  Oswald's  appU-
cation  objectively,  Oswald's  attitude  made  this
very  difficult.

In  order  to  leave  Russia,  it  was  also  neces-
sary for  the  Oswalds  to  obtain  permission  from
the  Soviet  Government.  The  timing  and  circum-
stances under  which  the  Oswalds  obtained  this
permission  have  also  been  considered  by  the
Commission.  Marina  Oswald,  although  her
memory  is  not  clear  on  the  point,  said  that  she
and  Oswald  first  made  their  intentions  to  go  to
the  United  States  known  to  Soviet  officials  in
Minsk  in  May,  even  before  coming  to  Moscow
in  July  for  the  conference  at  the  American  Em-
bassy. The  Oswalds'  correspondence  with  the
Embassy  and  the  documents  furnished  the  Com-
mission by  the  Soviet  Government  show  that
the  Oswalds  made  a  series  of  formal  applica-
tions to  the  Soviets  from  July  15  to  August  21.


Presumably  the  most  difficult  question  for  the
Soviet  authorities  was  whether  to  allow  Marina
Oswald  to  accompany  her  husband.  She  was
called  to  the  local  passport  office  in  Minsk  on
December  25,  1961,  and  told  that  authority  had
been  received  to  issue  exit  visas  to  her  and
Oswald.  Obtaining  the  permission  of  the  Soviet
Government  to  leave  may  have  been  aided  by  a
conference  which  Marina  Oswald  had,  at  her
own  request,  with  a  local  MVD  official.  Colonel
Aksenov,  sometime  in  late  1961.  She  testified
that  she  applied  for  the  conference  at  her  hus-
band's urging,  after  he  had  tried  unsuccessfully
to  arrange  such  a  conference  for  himself.  She
believed  that  it  may  have  been  granted  her  be-
cause her  uncle  with  whom  she  had  lived  in
Minsk  before  her  marriage  was  also  an  MVD
official.

The  correspondence  with  the  American  Em-
bassy at  this  time  reflected  that  the  Oswalds  did
not  pick  up  their  exit  visas  inmiediately.  On
January  11,  1962,  Marina  Oswald  was  issued
her  Soviet  exit  visa.  It  was  marked  valid  imtil
December  1,  1962.  The  Oswalds  did  not  leave
Russia  until  June  1962,  but  the  additional  delay
was  caused  by  problems  with  the  U.S.  Govern-
ment and  by  the  birth  of  a  child  in  February.
Permission  of  the  Soviet  authorities  to  leave,
once  given,  was  never  revoked.  Oswald  told
the  FBI  in  July  1962,  shortly  after  he  returned
to  the  United  States,  that  he  had  been  inter-
viewed by  the  MVD  twice,  once  when  he  first
came  to  the  Soviet  Union  and  once  just  before
he  departed.  His  wife  testified  that  the  second
interview  did  not  occur  in  Moscow  but  that  she
and  her  husband  dealt  with  the  MVD  visa  offi-
cials frequently  in  Minsk.

Investigation  of  the  circumstances,  including
the  timing,  under  which  the  Oswalds  obtained
permission  from  the  Soviet  Government  to  leave
Russia  for  the  United  States  show  that  they  dif-
fered in  no  discernible  manner  from  the  normal.
The  Central  InteUigence  Agency  has  informed
the  Commission  that  normally  a  Soviet  national
would  not  be  permitted  to  emigrate  if  he  might
endanger  Soviet  national  security  once  he  went
abroad.  Those  persons  in  possession  of  confi-
dential information,  for  example,  would  consti-
tute an  important  category  of  such  "security
risks."  Apparently  Oswald's  predeparture  inter-
view by  the  MVD  was  part  of  an  attempt  to
ascertain  whether  he  or  his  wife  had  access  to
any  confidential  information.  Marina  Oswald's
reported  interview  with  the  MVD  in  late  1961,
which  was  arranged  at  her  request,  may  have
served  the  same  purpose.  The  Commission's
awareness  of  both  interviews  derives  entirely
from  Oswald's  and  his  wife's  statements  and
letters  to  the  American  Embassy,  which  afford
additional  evidence  that  the  conferences  car-
ried no  subversive  significance.

It  took  the  Soviet  authorities  at  least  5i
months,  from  about  July  15,  1961,  until  late
December,  to  grant  permission  for  the  Oswalds
to  leave  the  country.  When  asked  to  comment


114


upon  the  alleged  rapidity  of  the  Oswalds'  de-
parture, the  Department  of  State  advised  the
Commission:

*  *  *  In  the  immediate  post-war  period
there  were  about  fifteen  marriages  in  which
the  wife  had  been  waiting  for  many  years  for
a  Soviet  exit  permit.  After  the  death  of  Stalin
the  Soviet  Government  showed  a  disposition
to  settle  these  cases.  In  the  simimer  of  1953
permission  was  given  for  all  of  this  group  of
Soviet  citizen  wives  to  accompany  their
American  citizen  husbands  to  the  United
States.

Since  this  group  was  given  permission  to
leave  the  Soviet  Union,  there  have  been  from
time  to  time  marriages  in  the  Soviet  Union
of  American  citizens  and  Soviet  citizens.
With  one  exception,  it  is  our  understanding
that  all  of  the  Soviet  citizens  involved  have
been  given  permission  to  emigrate  to  the
United  States  after  waiting  periods  which
were,  in  some  cases  from  three  to  six  months
and  in  others  much  longer.

Both  the  Department  of  State  and  the  Central
Intelligence  Agency  compiled  data  for  the
Commission  on  Soviet  wives  of  American  citi-
zens who  received  exit  visas  to  leave  the  Soviet
Union,  where  the  relevant  information  was
available.  In  both  cases  the  data  were  con-
sistent with  the  above  conclusion  of  the  State
Department.  The  Department  of  State  had  suf-
ficient information  to  measure  the  timespan  in
14  cases.  The  Department  points  out  that  it  has
information  on  the  dates  of  application  for  and
receipt  of  Soviet  exit  visas  only  on  those  cases
that  have  been  brought  to  its  attention.  A  com-
mon reason  for  bringing  a  case  to  the  attention
of  the  Department  is  that  the  granting  of  the
exit  visa  by  the  Soviet  Union  has  been  delayed,
so  that  the  American  spouse  seeks  the  assistance
of  his  own  government.  It  therefore  appears  that
the  sampling  data  carry  a  distinct  bias  toward
lengthy  waiting  periods.  Of  the  14  cases  tested,
6  involve  women  who  applied  for  visas  after
1953,  when  the  liberalized  post-Stalin  policy
was  in  effect.  The  approximate  waiting  periods
for  these  wives  were,  in  decreasing  order,  13
months,  6  months,  3  months,  1  month,  and  10
days.  Of  the  11  cases  examined  by  the  Central
Intelligence  Agency  in  which  the  time  period  is
known  or  can  be  inferred,  the  Soviet  wives  had
to  wait  from  5  months  to  a  year  to  obtain  exit
visas.

In  his  correspondence  with  the  American
Embassy  and  his  brother  while  he  was  in  Russia,
in  his  diary,  and  in  his  conversations  with
people  in  the  United  States  after  he  returned,
Oswald  claimed  that  his  wife  had  been  subjected
to  pressure  by  the  Soviet  Government  in  an
effort  to  induce  her  not  to  emigrate  to  the  United
States.  In  the  Embassy  correspondence,  Oswald
claimed  that  the  pressure  had  been  so  intense
that  she  had  to  be  hospitalized  for  5  days  for


"nervous  exhaustion."  Marina  Oswald  testified
that  her  husband  exaggerated  and  that  no  such
hospitalization  or  "nervous  exhaustion"  ever
occurred.  However,  she  did  testify  that  she  was
questioned  on  the  matter  occasionally  and  given
the  impression  that  her  government  was  not
pleased  with  her  decision.  Her  aunt  and  uncle
in  Minsk  did  not  speak  to  her  "for  a  long  time";
she  also  stated  that  she  was  dropped  from  mem-
bership in  the  Communist  Youtih  Organization
(Komsomol)  when  the  news  of  her  visit  to  the
American  Embassy  in  Moscow  reached  that
organization.  A  student  who  took  Russian  les-
sons from  her  in  Texas  testified  that  she  once
referred  to  the  days  when  the  pressure  was  ap-
plied as  "a  very  horrible  time."  Despite  all  this
Marina  Oswald  testified  that  she  was  surprised
that  their  visas  were  granted  as  soon  as  they
were — and  that  hers  was  granted  at  all.  This  evi-
dence thus  indicates  that  the  Soviet  authorities,
rather  than  facUitatlng  the  departure  of  the
Oswalds,  first  tried  to  dissuade  Marina  Oswald
from  going  to  the  United  States  and  then,  when
she  failed  to  respond  to  the  pressure,  permitted
her  to  leave  without  undue  delay.  There  are  in-
dications that  the  Soviet  treatment  of  another
recent  defector  who  left  the  Soviet  Union  to
return  to  the  United  States  resembled  that  ac-
corded to  the  Oswalds.

On  the  basis  of  all  the  foregoing  evidence,  the
Commission  concluded  that  there  was  no  reason
to  believe  that  the  Oswalds  received  unusually
favorable  treatment  in  being  permitted  to  leave
the  Soviet  Union.

Associations  in  the  Dallas-Fort  Worth
Community

The  Russian-speaking  community. — Shortly
after  his  return  from  Russia  in  June  1962,
Oswald  and  his  family  settled  in  Fort  Worth,
Tex.,  where  they  met  a  group  of  Russian-bom
or  Russian-speaking  persons  in  the  DaUas-Fort
Worth  area.  The  members  of  this  community
were  attracted  to  each  other  by  common  back-
ground, language,  and  culture.  Many  of  them
were  well-educated,  accomplished,  and  indus-
trious people,  several  being  connected  with  the
oil  exploration,  production,  and  processing  in-
dustry that  flourishes  in  the  Dallas-Fort  Worth
area.  As  described  more  fully  in  chapter  VII  and
in  appendix  XIII,  many  of  these  persons  assisted
the  Oswalds  in  various  ways.  Some  provided  the
Oswalds  with  gifts  of  such  things  as  food,  cloth-
ing, and  baby  furniture.  Some  arranged  appoint-
ments and  transportation  for  medical  and  dental
treatment,  and  assumed  the  cost  in  some  in-
stances. When  Oswald  imdertook  to  look  for
employment  in  Dallas  in  early  October  of  1962
and  again  when  marital  difficulties  arose  be-
tween the  Oswalds  in  November  of  the  same
year,  Marina  Oswald  and  their  child  were
housed  at  times  in  the  homes  of  various  mem-
bers of  the  group.  The  Commission  has  ex-
amined the  background  of  many  of  these  indi-


115


viduals and has thoroughly investigated Os-
wald's relationship  with  them.

There  is  no  basis  to  suppose  that  Oswald  came
to  Fort  Worth  upon  his  return  from  Russia  for
the  purpose  of  establishing  contacts  with  the
Russian-speaking  community  located  in  that
area.  Oswald  had  spent  several  of  his  grammar-
school  years  in  Fort  Worth.  In  1962,  his  brother
Robert  lived  in  Fort  Worth  and  his  mother  re-
sided in  nearby  Vernon,  Tex.  In  January  of  that
year,  Oswald  indicated  to  American  officials  in
Russia  that  he  intended  to  stay  with  his  mother
upon  his  return  to  the  United  States;  however,
sometime  after  mid-February,  he  received  an
invitation  to  stay  with  Robert  and  his  family
until  he  became  settled,  and  he  did  spend  the
first  several  weeks  after  his  return  at  Robert's
home.  In  July,  Oswald's  mother  moved  to  Fort
Worth  and  Oswald  and  his  wife  and  child  moved
into  an  apartment  with  her.  While  in  that  apart-
ment, Oswald  located  a  job  in  Fort  Worth  and
then  rented  and  moved  with  his  family  into  an
apartment  on  Mercedes  Street.

Upon  his  arrival  in  1962,  Oswald  did  not
know  any  members  of  the  relatively  small  and
loosely  knit  Russian-speaking  community.
Shortly  after  his  arrival  Oswald  obtained  the
name  of  two  Russian-speaking  persons  in  Fort
Worth  from  the  office  of  the  Texas  Employ-
ment Commission  in  that  city.  Attempts  to  ar-
range a  prompt  visit  with  one  of  them  failed.
The  second  person,  Peter  Paul  Gregory,  was  a
consulting  petroleum  engineer  and  part-time
Russian-language  instructor  at  the  Fort  Worth
Public  Library.  Oswald  contacted  him  in  order
to  obtain  a  letter  certifying  to  his  proficiency  in
Russian  and  Marina  Oswald  later  tutored  his  son
in  the  Russian  language.  Gregory  introduced  the
Oswalds  to  George  Bouhe  and  Anna  Meller,
both  of  whom  Uved  in  Dallas  and  became  inter-
ested in  the  welfare  of  Marina  Oswald  and  her
child.  Through  them,  other  members  of  the  Rus-
sian community  became  acquainted  with  the
Oswalds.

The  Oswalds  met  some  30  persons  in  the
Russian-speaking  community,  of  whom  25  testi-
fied before  the  Commission  or  its  staff;  others
were  interviewed  on  behalf  of  the  Commission.
This  range  of  testimony  has  disclosed  that  the
relationship  between  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  and
the  Russian-speaking  community  was  short
lived  and  generally  quite  strained.  During  Octo-
ber and  November  of  1962  Marina  Oswald
lived  at  the  homes  of  some  of  the  members  of
the  Russian-speaking  commimity.  She  stayed
first  with  Elena  Hall  while  Oswald  was  looking
for  work  in  Dallas.  In  early  November,  Marina
Oswald  and  the  baby  joined  Oswald  in  Dallas,
but  soon  thereafter,  she  spent  approximately  2
weeks  with  different  Russian-speaking  friends
during  another  separation.  Oswald  openly  re-
sented the  help  Marina's  "Russian  friends"  gave
to  him  and  his  wife  and  the  efforts  of  some  of
them  to  induce  Marina  to  leave  him.  George
Bouhe  attempted  to  dissuade  Marina  from  re-


turning to  her  husband  in  November  1962,  and
when  she  rejoined  him,  Bouhe  became  dis-
pleased with  her  as  well.  Relations  between  the
Oswalds  and  the  members  of  the  Russian  com-
munity had  practically  ceased  by  the  end  of
1962.  Katherine  Ford,  one  of  the  members
of  the  group,  summed  up  the  situation  as  it
existed  at  the  end  of  January  1963:  "So  it  was
rather,  sort  of,  Marina  and  her  husband  were
dropped  at  that  time,  nobody  actually  wanted
to  help.  * *  *  »

In  April  of  1963,  Oswald  left  Fort  Worth  for
New  Orleans,  where  he  was  later  joined  by  his
wife  and  daughter,  and  remained  until  his  trip
to  Mexico  City  in  late  September  and  his  sub-
sequent return  to  the  Dallas-Fort  Worth  area  in
early  October  of  1963.  With  only  minor  excep-
tions, there  is  no  evidence  that  any  member  of
the  Russian-speaking  community  had  further
contact  with  Oswald  or  his  family  after  April.  In
New  Orleans,  Oswald  made  no  attempt  to  make
new  Russian-speaking  acquaintances  for  his
wife  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  he  developed
any  friendships  in  that  city.  Similarly,  after  the
return  from  New  Orleans,  there  seems  to  have
been  no  communication  between  the  Oswalds
and  this  group  until  the  evening  of  November
22,  1963,  when  the  Dallas  Pohce  erdisted  Ilya
Mamantov  to  serve  as  an  interpreter  for  them
in  their  questioning  of  Marina  Oswald.

George  De  Mohrenschildt  and  his  wife,  both
of  whom  speak  Russian  as  well  as  several  other
languages,  however,  did  continue  to  see  the
Oswalds  on  occasion  up  to  about  the  time  Os-
wald went  to  New  Orleans  on  April  24,  1963.
De  Mohrenschildt  was  apparently  the  only
Russian-speaking  person  hving  in  Dallas  for
whom  Oswald  had  appreciable  respect,  and  this
seems  to  have  been  true  even  though  De
Mohrenschildt  helped  Marina  Oswald  leave  her
husband  for  a  period  in  November  of  1962.

In  connection  with  the  relations  between
Oswald  and  De  Mohrenschildt,  the  Commission
has  considered  testimony  concertiing  an  event
which  occurred  shortly  after  Oswald  shot  at
General  Walker.  The  De  Mohrenschildts  came
to  Oswald's  apartment  on  Neely  Street  for  the
first  time  on  the  evening  of  April  13,  1963,
apparently  to  bring  an  Easter  gift  for  the
Oswald  child.  Mrs.  De  Mohrenschildt  testified
that  while  Marina  Oswald  was  showing  her  the
apartment,  she  saw  a  rifle  with  a  scope  in  a
closet.  Mrs.  De  Mohrenschildt  then  told  her
husband,  in  the  presence  of  the  Oswalds,  that
there  was  a  rifle  in  the  closet.  Mrs.  De  Mohren-
schildt testified  that  "George,  of  course,  with
his  sense  of  humor — Walker  was  shot  at  a  few
days  ago,  within  that  time.  He  said,  'Did  you
take  a  pot  shot  at  Walker  by  any  chance?'  "  At
that  point,  Mr.  De  Mohrenschildt  testified,
Oswald  "sort  of  shriveled,  you  see,  when  I  asked
this  question.  *  *  *  made  a  peculiar  face
*  *  *  [and]  changed  the  expression  on  his
face"  and  remarked  that  he  did  target  shooting.
Marina  Oswald  testified  that  the  De  Mohren-


116


schildts  came  to  visit  a  few  days  after  the
Walker  incident  and  that  when  De  Mohren-
schildt  made  his  reference  to  Oswald's  possibly
shooting  at  Walker,  Oswald's  "face  changed,
*  *  *  he  ahnost  became  speechless."  Accord-
ing to  the  De  Mohrenschildts,  Mr.  De  Mohren-
schildt's  remark  was  intended  as  a  joke,  and  he
had  no  knowledge  of  Oswald's  involvement  in
the  attack  on  Walker.  Nonetheless,  the  remark
appears  to  have  created  an  uncomfortable  si-
lence, and  the  De  Mohrenschildts  left  "very
soon  afterwards."  They  never  saw  either  of  the
Oswalds  again.  They  left  in  a  few  days  on  a  trip
to  New  York  City  and  did  not  return  until  after
Oswald  had  gone  to  New  Orleans.  A  postcard
from  Oswald  to  De  Mohrenschildt  was  appar-
ently the  only  contact  they  had  thereafter.  The
De  Mohrenschildts  left  in  early  June  for  Haiti
on  a  business  venture,  and  they  were  still  re-
siding there  at  the  time  they  testified  on  April
23,  1964.

Extensive  investigation  has  been  conducted
into  the  background  of  both  De  Mohrenschildts.
The  investigation  has  revealed  that  George  De
Mohrenschildt  is  a  highly  individualistic  person
of  varied  interests.  He  was  bom  in  the  Russian
Ukraine  in  1911  and  fled  Russia  with  his  par-
ents in  1921  during  the  civil  disorder  following
the  revolution.  He  was  in  a  Polish  cavalry  mili-
tary academy  for  li  years.  Later  he  studied  in
Antwerp  and  attended  the  University  of  Liege
from  which  he  received  a  doctor's  degree  in  in-
ternational commerce  in  1928.  Soon  thereafter,
he  emigrated  to  the  United  States;  he  became
a  U.S.  citizen  in  1949.  De  Mohrenschildt  even-
tually became  interested  in  oil  exploration  and
production;  he  entered  the  University  of  Texas
in  1944  and  received  a  master's  degree  in  pe-
troleum geology  and  petroleum  engineering  in
1945.  He  has  since  become  active  as  a  petroleum
engineer  throughout  the  world.  In  1960,  after
the  death  of  his  son,  he  and  his  wife  made  an
8-month  hike  from  the  United  States-Mexican
border  to  Panama  over  primitive  jungle  trails.
By  happenstance  they  were  in  Guatemala  City
at  the  time  of  the  Bay  of  Pigs  invasion.  A  lengthy
film  and  complete  written  log  was  prepared  by
De  Mohrenschildt  and  a  report  of  the  trip  was
made  to  the  U.S.  Government.  Upon  arriving  in
Panama  they  journeyed  to  Haiti  where  De
Mohrenschildt  eventiially  became  involved  in
a Government-oriented business venture in
which  he  has  been  engaged  continuously  since
June  1963  until  the  time  of  this  report.

The  members  of  the  Dallas-Fort  Worth  Rus-
sian community  and  others  have  variously  de-
scribed De  Mohrenschildt  as  eccentric,  out-
spoken, and  a  strong  believer  in  individual
liberties  and  in  the  U.S.  form  of  government,
but  also  of  the  belief  that  some  form  of  imdemo-
cratic  government  might  be  best  for  other
peoples.  De  Mohrenschildt  frankly  admits  his
provocative  personality.

Jeanne  De  Mohrenschildt  was  bom  in  Har-
bin, China,  of  White  Russian  parents.  She  left


during  the  war  with  Japan,  coming  to  New
York  in  1938  where  she  became  a  successful
ladies  dress  and  sportswear  apparel  designer.
She  married  her  present  husband  in  1959.

The  Commission's  investigation  has  devel-
oped no  signs  of  subversive  or  disloyal  conduct
on  the  part  of  either  of  the  De  Mohrenschildts.
Neither  the  FBI,  CIA,  nor  any  witness  con-
tacted by  the  Commission  has  provided  any
information  linking  the  De  Mohrenschildts
to  subversive  or  extremist  organizations.  Nor
has  there  been  any  evidence  Unking  them  in
any  way  with  the  assassination  of  President
Kennedy.

The  Commission  has  also  considered  closely
the  relations  between  the  Oswalds  and  Michael
and  Ruth  Paine  of  Irving,  Tex.  The  Paines  were
not  part  of  the  Russian  community  which  has
been  discussed  above.  Ruth  Paine  speaks  Rus-
sian, however,  and  for  this  reason  was  invited
to  a  party  in  February  of  1963  at  which  she
became  acquainted  with  the  Oswalds.  TTie  host
had  met  the  Oswalds  through  the  De  Mohren-
schildts. Marina  Oswald  and  Ruth  Paine  subse-
quently became  quite  friendly,  and  Mrs.  Paine
provided  considerable  assistance  to  the  Oswalds.
Marina  Oswald  and  her  child  resided  with  Ruth
Paine  for  a  little  over  2  weeks  while  Oswald
sought  a  job  in  New  Orleans  in  late  April  and
early  May  1963.  In  May,  she  transported
Marina  Oswald  to  New  Orleans,  paying  aU  of
the  traveling  and  other  expenses.  While  the
Oswalds  were  in  New  Orleans,  the  two  women
corresponded.  Mrs.  Paine  came  to  New  Orleans
in  late  September  and  took  Marina  Oswald  and
her  child  to  her  home  in  Irving.

Since  Oswald  left  for  Mexico  City  promptly
after  Mrs.  Paine  and  his  family  departed  New
Orleans,  the  Commission  has  considered
whether  Ruth  Paine's  trip  to  New  Orleans  was
undertaken  to  assist  Oswald  in  this  venture,  but
the  evidence  is  clear  that  it  was  not.  In  her
letters  to  Ruth  Paine  during  the  summer  of
1963,  Marina  Oswald  confided  that  she  was
having  continuing  difficulties  with  her  husband,
and  Mrs.  Paine  urged  Marina  Oswald  to  live
with  her  in  Irving;  the  letters  of  the  two  women
prior  to  Mrs.  Paine's  arrival  in  New  Orleans  on
September  20,  1963,  however,  contain  no  men-
tion that  Oswald  was  planning  a  trip  to  Mexico
City  or  elsewhere.  In  New  Orleans,  Mrs.  Paine
was  told  by  Oswald  that  he  planned  to  seek
employment  in  Houston,  or  perhaps  Philadel-
phia. Though  Marina  Oswald  knew  this  to  be
false,  she  testified  that  she  joined  in  this  decep-
tion. At  no  time  during  the  entire  weekend  was
Mexico  City  mentioned.  Corroboration  for  this
testimony  is  foimd  in  a  letter  Mrs.  Paine  wrote
her  mother  shortly  after  she  and  Marina  Oswald
had  returned  to  Irving  on  September  24,  in
which  she  stated  that  Marina  Oswald  was  again
Living  with  her  temporarily  and  that  Oswald  was
job-himting.  When  Oswald  arrived  at  the  Paine
home  on  October  4,  he  continued  his  deception
by  telling  Mrs.  Paine,  in  his  wife's  presence,  that


117


he  had  been  unsuccessful  in  findmg  employ-
ment. At  Oswald's  request,  Marina  Oswald
remained  silent.

Marina  Oswald  lived  with  Ruth  Paine  through
the  birth  of  her  second  daughter  on  October  20,
1963,  and  imtU  the  assassination  of  President
Kennedy.  During  this  period,  Oswald  obtained
a  room  in  Dallas  and  found  employment  in
Dallas,  but  spent  weekends  with  his  family  at
the  Paine  home.  On  November  1  and  5,  Ruth
Paine  was  interviewed  by  agents  of  the  FBI  who
were  investigating  Oswald's  activities  since  his
return  from  the  Soviet  Union,  as  set  forth  in
greater  detail  in  chapter  VIIL  She  did  not  then
know  Oswald's  address  in  Dallas.  She  was  not
asked  for,  nor  did  she  volunteer,  Oswald's  tele-
phone number  in  Dallas,  which  she  did  know.
She  advised  the  Bureau  agent  to  whom  she
spoke  of  Oswald's  periodical  weekend  visits,  and
she  informed  him  that  Oswald  was  employed  at
the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  BuUding.

On  November  10,  Ruth  Paine  discovered  a
draft  of  Oswald's  letter  written  the  day  before
to  the  Soviet  Embassy  in  Washington,  in  which
he  indicated  that  he  had  journeyed  to  Mexico
City  and  conferred  with  a  "comrade  Kostine  in
the  Embassy  of  the  Soviet  Union,  Mexico  City,
Mexico."  (This  letter  is  discussed  later  in  this
chapter.)  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Paine  testified  that
although  they  initially  assumed  the  letter  was  a
figment  of  Oswald's  imagination,  the  letter  gave
Mrs.  Paine  considerable  misgivings.  She  deter-
mined that  if  the  FBI  agents  returned  she  would
deliver  to  them  the  copy  of  a  draft  of  the  letter
which,  unknown  to  Oswald,  she  had  made.
However,  the  agents  did  not  return  before  the
assassination.  On  November  19,  Mrs.  Paine
learned  that  Oswald  was  living  in  his  Dallas
rooming  house  under  an  assumed  name.  She  did
not  report  this  to  the  FBI  because,  as  she  testi-
fied, she  "had  no  occasion  to  see  them,  and
*  *  *  did  not  think  it  important  enough  to  call
them  after  that  untU  the  23d  of  November."

The  Commission  has  thoroughly  investigated
the  background  of  both  Paines,  Mrs.  Paine  was
bom  Ruth  Hyde  in  New  York  City  on  Septem-
ber 3,  1932.  Her  parents  moved  to  Columbus,
Ohio,  in  the  late  1930's.  They  were  divorced  in
1961.  Ruth  Paine  graduated  from  Antioch  Col-
lege in  1955.  While  in  high  school  she  first  be-
came interested  in  Quaker  activities;  she  and
her  brother  became  Quakers  in  1951.  In  1952,
following  completion  of  her  sophomore  year  at
Antioch  College,  she  was  a  delegate  to  two
Friends  conferences  in  England.

At  the  time  the  Paines  met  in  1955,  Mrs.
Paine  was  active  in  the  work  of  the  Young
Friends  Committee  of  North  America,  which,
with  the  cooperation  of  the  Department  of  State,
was  making  an  effort  to  lessen  the  tensions  be-
tween Soviet  Russia  and  the  United  States  by
means  of  the  stimulation  of  contacts  and  ex-
change of  cultures  between  citizens  of  the  two
nations  through  "pen-pal"  correspondence  and
exchanges  of  young  Russians  and  Americans.


It  was  during  this  period  that  Mrs,  Paine  became
interested  in  the  Russian  languages.  Mrs.  Paine
participated  in  a  Russian-American  student  ex-
change program  sponsored  by  the  Young
Friends  Conmiittee  of  North  America,  and  has
participated  in  the  "pen-pal"  phase  of  the  activi-
ties of  the  Young  Friends  Committee.  She  has
corresponded  until  recently  with  a  schoolteacher
in  Russia.  Although  her  active  interest  in  the
Friends'  program  for  the  lessening  of  East- West
tensions  ceased  upon  her  marriage  in  Decem-
ber 1957,  she  has  continued  to  hold  to  the
tenets  of  the  Quaker  faith.

Michael  Paine  is  the  son  of  George  Lyman
Paine  and  Ruth  Forbes  Paine,  now  Ruth  Forbes
Young,  wife  of  Arthur  Young  of  Philadelphia,
Pa.  His  parents  were  divorced  when  he  was  4
years  of  age.  His  father,  George  Lyman  Paine,
is  an  architect  and  resides  in  California.  Michael
Paine  testified  that  during  his  late  grammar  and
early  high  school  days  his  father  participated
actively  in  the  Trotskyite  faction  of  the  Com-
munist movement  in  the  United  States  and  that
he  attended  some  of  those  meetings.  He  stated
that  his  father,  with  whom  he  has  had  little  con-
tact throughout  most  of  his  life,  has  not  in-
fluenced his  political  thinking.  He  said  that  he
has  visited  his  father  four  or  five  times  in  Cali-
fornia since  1959,  but  their  discussions  did  not
include  the  subject  of  communism.  Since  mov-
ing to  Irving,  Tex.,  in  1959,  he  has  been  a  re-
search engineer  for  Bell  Helicopter  Co.  in  Fort
Worth.  Mr.  Paine  has  security  clearance  for  his
work.  He  has  been  a  long-time  member  of  the
American  Civil  Liberties  Union.  Though  not  in
sympathy  with  rightist  political  aims,  he  has
attended  a  few  meetings  of  far-right  organiza-
tions in  Dallas  for  the  purpose,  he  testified,  of
learning  something  about  those  organizations
and  because  he  "was  interested  in  seeing  more
communication  between  the  right  and  the  left."

The  Conmiission  has  conducted  a  thorough
investigation  of  the  Paines'  finances  and  is  satis-
fied that  their  income  has  been  from  legitimate
and  traceable  sources,  and  that  their  expendi-
tures were  consistent  with  their  income  and  for
normal  purposes.  Although  in  the  course  of
their  relationship  with  the  Oswalds,  the  Paines
assumed  expenses  for  such  matters  as  food  and
transportation,  with  a  value  of  approximately
$500,  they  made  no  direct  payments  to,  and
received  no  moneys  or  valuables  from,  the
Oswalds.

Although  prior  to  November  22,  Mrs.  Paine
had  information  relating  to  Oswald's  use  of  an
alias  in  Dallas,  his  telephone  number,  and  his
correspondence  with  the  Soviet  Embassy,  which
she  did  not  pass  on  to  the  FBI,  her  failure  to
have  come  forward  with  this  information  must
be  viewed  within  the  context  of  the  informa-
tion available  to  her  at  that  time.  There  is  no
evidence  to  contradict  her  testimony  that  she
did  not  then  know  about  Oswald's  attack  on
General  Walker,  the  presence  of  the  rifle  on  the
floor  of  her  garage,  Oswald's  ownership  of  a


118


pistol,  or  the  photographs  of  Oswald  displaying
the  firearms.  She  thus  assumed  that  Oswald,
though  a  difficult  and  disturbing  personality,
was  not  potentially  violent,  and  that  the  FBI
was  cognizant  of  his  past  history  and  current
activities.

Moreover,  it  is  from  Mrs.  Paine  herself  that
the  Commission  has  learned  that  she  possessed
the  information  which  she  did  have.  Mrs.  Paine
was  forthright  with  the  agent  of  the  FBI  with
whom  she  spoke  in  early  November  1963,  pro-
viding him  with  sufficient  information  to  have
located  Oswald  at  his  job  if  he  had  deemed  it
necessary  to  do  so,  and  her  failure  to  have  taken
immediate  steps  to  notify  the  Bureau  of  the
additional  information  does  not  imder  the  cir-
cumstances appear  unusual.  Throughout  the
Commission's  investigation,  Ruth  Paine  has
been  completely  cooperative,  voluntarily  pro-
ducing all  correspondence,  memoranda,  and
other  written  communications  in  her  possession
that  had  passed  between  her  and  Marina  Oswald
both  before  and  after  November  22,  1963.  The
Commission  has  had  the  benefit  of  Mrs.  Paine's
1963  date  book  and  calendar  and  her  address
book  and  telephone  notation  book,  in  both  of
which  appear  many  entries  relating  to  her  ac-
tivities with  the  Oswalds.  Other  material  of  a
purely  personal  nature  was  also  voluntarily
made  available.  The  Commission  has  found
nothing  in  the  Paines'  background,  activities,  or
finances  which  suggests  disloyalty  to  the  United
States,  and  it  has  concluded  that  Ruth  and
Michael  Paine  were  not  involved  in  any  way
with  the  assassination  of  President  Kennedy.

A  fuller  narrative  of  the  social  contacts  be-
tween the  Oswalds  and  the  various  persons  of
the  Dallas-Fort  Worth  community  is  incorpo-
rated in  chapter  VII  and  appendix  XIII,  and  the
testimony  of  all  members  of  the  group  who
testified  before  the  Commission  is  included  in
the  printed  record  which  accompanies  the  re-
port. The  evidence  establishes  that  the  Oswalds'
contacts  with  these  people  were  originated  and
maintained  under  normal  and  understandable
circumstances.  The  files  maintained  by  the  FBI
contain  no  information  indicating  that  any  of
the  persons  in  the  Dallas-Fort  Worth  community
with  whom  Oswald  associated  were  affiliated
with  any  Communist,  Fascist,  or  other  subver-
sive organization.  During  the  course  of  this  in-
vestigation, the  Commission  has  found  nothing
which  suggests  the  involvement  of  any  member
of  the  Russian-speaking  community  in  Oswald's
preparations  to  assassinate  President  Kennedy.

Political  Activities  Upon  Return
to  the  United  States

Upon  his  return  from  the  Soviet  Union,
Oswald  had  dealings  with  the  Communist  Party,
U.S.A.,  the  Socialist  Workers  Part>',  and  the
Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee,  and  he  also  had
minor  contacts  with  at  least  two  other  organi-
zations with  political  interests.  For  the  purpose
of  determining  whether  Oswald  received  any


advice,  encouragement,  or  assistance  from  these
organizations  in  planning  or  executing  the  as-
sassination of  President  Kennedy,  the  Commis-
sion has  conducted  a  fuU  investigation  of  the
nature  and  extent  of  Oswald's  relations  with
them.  The  Commission  has  also  conducted  an
investigation  to  determine  whether  certain  per-
sons and  organizations  expressing  hostility  to
President  Kennedy  prior  to  the  assassination
had  any  connection  with  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  or
with  the  shooting  of  the  President,

Communist  Party,  US. A.;  Socialist  Workers
Party. — In  August  of  1962,  Oswald  subscribed
to  the  Worker,  a  publication  of  the  Communist
Party,  U.S.A.  He  also  wrote  the  Communist
Party  to  obtain  pamphlets  and  other  Uterature
which,  the  evidence  indicates,  were  sent  to  him
as  a  matter  of  course.

Oswald  also  attempted  to  initiate  other  deal-
ings with  the  Communist  Party,  U.S.A.,  but  the
organization  was  not  especially  responsive.
From  New  Orleans,  he  informed  the  part>'  of  his
activities  in  connection  with  the  Fair  Play  for
Cuba  Committee,  discussed  below,  submitting
membership  cards  in  his  fictitioijs  chapter  to
several  party  officials.  In  a  letter  from  Arnold
S.  Johnson,  director  of  the  information  and  lec-
ture bureau  of  the  party,  Oswald  was  informed
that  although  the  Communist  Party  had  no
"organizational  ties"  with  the  committee,  the
party  issued  much  literature  which  was  "impor-
tant for  anybody  who  is  concerned  about  de-
velopments in  Cuba."  In  September  1963  Os-
wald inquired  how  he  might  contact  the  party
when  he  relocated  in  the  Baltimore-Washington
area,  as  he  said  he  planned  to  do  in  October,  and
Johnson  suggested  in  a  letter  of  September  19
that  he  "get  in  touch  with  us  here  [New  York]
and  we  will  find  some  way  of  getting  in  touch
with  you  in  that  city  [Baltimore]."  However,
Oswald  had  also  written  asking  whether,  "hand-
icapped as  it  were,  by  *  *  *  [his]  past  record,"
he  could  "still  *  *  *  compete  with  antipro-
gressive  forces,  above  ground  or  whether  in
your  opinion  *  *  *  [he]  should  always  remain
in  the  background,  i.e.,  underground,"  and  in
the  September  19  letter  received  the  reply  that
"often  it  is  advisable  for  some  people  to  remain
in  the  background,  not  underground."

In  id  letter  postmarked  November  1,  Oswald
inforfned  the  party  that  he  had  moved  to  Dallas,
and  reported  his  attendance  at  a  meeting  at
which  General  Walker  had  spoken,  and  at  a
meeting  of  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union;
he  asked  Johnson  for  the  part}"'s  "general  view"
of  the  latter  organization  and  "to  what  degree,
if  any,  [he]  should  attempt  to  highten  its  pro-
gressive tendencies."  According  to  Johnson,  this
letter  was  not  received  by  the  Communist  Party
untU  after  the  assassination.  At  different  times,
Oswald  also  wrote  the  Worker  and  the  HaU-
Davis  Defense  Committee,  enclosing  samples  of
his  photographic  work  and  offering  to  assist  in
preparing  posters;  he  was  told  that  "his  kind
offer  [was]  most  welcomed  and  from  time  to


119


time  we  shall  call  on  you,"  but  he  was  never
asked  for  assistance.  The  correspondence  be-
tween Oswald  and  the  Communist  Party,  and
with  all  other  organizations,  is  printed  in  the
record  accompanying  this  report.

When  Oswald  applied  for  a  visa  to  enter  Cuba
during  his  trip  to  Mexico  City,  discussed  below,
Senora  Silvia  Duran,  the  Cuban  consular  em-
ployee who  dealt  with  Oswald,  wrote  on  the
application  that  Oswald  said  he  was  a  member
of  the  Communist  Party  and  that  he  had  "dis-
played documents  in  proof  of  his  membership."
When  Oswald  went  to  Mexico,  he  is  believed
to  have  carried  his  letters  from  the  Soviet  Em-
bassy in  Washington  and  from  the  Communist
Party  in  the  United  States,  his  1959  passport,
which  contained  stamps  showing  that  he  had
Uved  in  Russia  for  2i  years,  his  Russian  work
permit,  his  Russian  marriage  certificate,  mem-
bership cards  and  newspaper  clippings  purport-
ing to  show  his  role  in  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba
Committee,  and  a  prepared  statement  of  his
qualifications  as  a  "Marxist."  Because  of  the
mass  of  papers  Oswald  did  present  showing  his
afiinity  for  communism,  some  in  the  Russian
language,  which  was  foreign  to  Senora  Duran,
and  because  further  investigation,  discussed
below,  indicated  that  Oswald  was  not  a  mem-
ber of  the  party,  Senora  Duran's  notation  was
probably  inaccurate.

Upon  his  arrest  after  the  assassination,  Os-
wald attempted  to  contact  John  J.  Abt,  a  New
York  attorney,  to  request  Abt  to  represent  him.
Abt  was  not  in  New  York  at  the  time,  and  he
was  never  reached  in  connection  with  represent-
ing Oswald.  Abt  has  testified  that  he  at  no  time
had  any  dealings  with  Oswald  and  that  prior  to
the  assassination  he  had  never  heard  of  Lee
Harvey  Oswald.

After  his  return  from  the  Soviet  Union,  Os-
wald also  carried  on  a  limited  correspondence
with  the  Socialist  Workers  Party.  In  October  of
1962  he  attempted  to  join  the  party,  but  his  ap-
plication was  not  accepted  since  there  was  then
no  chapter  in  the  Dallas  area.  Oswald  also  wrote
the  Socialist  Workers  Party  offering  his  assist-
ance in  preparing  posters.  From  this  organiza-
tion too  he  received  the  response  that  he  might
be  called  upon  if  needed.  He  was  asked  for
further  information  about  his  photographic
skills,  which  he  does  not  appear  to  have  ever
provided.  Oswald  did  obtain  literature  from
the  Socialist  Workers  Party,  however,  and  in
December  1962  he  entered  a  subscription  to
the  aflfiliated  publication,  the  Militant.  Appar-
ently in  March  of  1963  Oswald  wrote  the  party
of  his  activities  and  submitted  a  clipping  with
his  letter.  In  response,  he  was  told  that  his  name
was  being  sent  to  the  Yoimg  SociaUst  Alliance
for  further  correspondence,  but  the  files  of  the
alliance  apparently  contain  no  reference  to
Oswald.  Neither  the  letter  nor  the  clipping
which  Oswald  sent  has  been  located.

Investigation  by  the  Commission  has  pro-
duced no  platisible  evidence  that  Lee  Harvey

120


Oswald  had  any  other  significant  contacts  with
the  Communist  Party,  U.S.A.,  the  Socialist
Workers  Party,  or  with  any  other  extreme  left-
ist political  organization.  The  FBI  and  other
Federal  security  agencies  have  made  a  study  of
their  records  and  files  and  contacted  numerous
confidential  informants  of  the  agencies  and
have  produced  no  such  evidence.  The  Com-
mission has  questioned  persons  who,  as  a  group,
knew  Oswald  during  virtually  every  phase  of
his  adult  life,  and  from  none  of  these  came  any
indication  that  Oswald  maintained  a  surrepti-
tious relationship  with  any  organization.  Arnold
S.  Johnson,  of  the  American  Communist  Party;
James  T.  Tormey,  executive  secretary  of  the
Hall-Davis  Defense  Committee;  and  Farrell
Dobbs,  secretary  of  the  Socialist  Workers  Party,
voluntarily  appeared  before  the  Commission
and  testified  under  oath  that  Oswald  was  not  a
member  of  these  organizations  and  that  a
thorough  search  of  their  files  had  disclosed  no
records  relating  to  Oswald  other  than  those
which  they  produced  for  the  Commission.  The
material  that  has  been  disclosed  is  in  all  cases
consistent  with  other  data  in  the  possession  of
the  Commission.

Socialist  Labor  Party. — Oswald  also  wrote
to  the  Socialist  Labor  Party  in  New  York  in
November  1962  requesting  literature.  Horace
Twiford,  a  national  conmiitteeman  at  large  for
the  party  in  the  State  of  Texas,  was  informed
by  the  New  York  headquarters  in  July  1963  of
Oswald's  request,  and  on  September  11,  1963,
he  did  mail  Uterature  to  Oswald  at  his  old  post
office  box  in  Dallas.  On  his  way  to  Mexico  City
in  September  1963,  Oswald  attempted  to  con-
tact Twiford  at  his  home  in  Houston;  Oswald
spoke  briefly  with  Twiford's  wife,  identifying
himself  as  a  member  of  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba
Committee,  but  since  Twiford  was  out  of  town
at  the  time,  Oswald  was  unable  to  speak  with
him.  Arnold  Peterson,  national  secretary  and
treasurer  of  the  Socialist  Labor  Party,  has  stated
that  a  search  of  the  records  of  the  national
headquarters  reveals  no  record  pertaining  to
Oswald;  he  explained  that  letters  requesting  lit-
erature are  routinely  destroyed.  The  Socialist
Party-Social  Democratic  Federation  has  also
advised  that  a  review  of  its  records  fails  to  reflect
any  information  or  correspondence  pertaining
to  Oswald.

Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee. — During  the
period  Oswald  was  in  New  Orleans,  from  the
end  of  April  to  late  September  1963,  he  was
engaged  in  activity  purportedly  on  behalf  of  the
now  defunct  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee
(FPCC)  an  organization  centered  in  New  York
which  was  highly  critical  of  U.S.  policy  toward
the  Cuban  Government  under  Fidel  Castro.  In
May  1963,  after  having  obtained  literature  from
the  FPCC,  Oswald  appUed  for  and  was  granted
membership  in  the  organization.  When  applying
for  membership,  Oswald  wrote  national  head-
quarters that  he  had


♦  *  *  been  thinking  about  renting  a  small
office  at  my  own  expense  for  the  purpose  of
forming  a  F.P.C.C.  branch  here  in  New
Orleans.

Could  you  give  me  a  charter?

With  his  membership  card,  Oswald  apparently
received  a  copy  of  the  constitution  and  bylaws
for  FPCC  chapters,  and  a  letter,  dated  May  29,
which  read  in  part  as  follows  (with  spelling  as
in  original):

It  would  be  hard  to  concieve  of  a  chapter
with  as  few  members  as  seem  to  exist  in  the
New  Orleans  area.  I  have  just  gone  through
our  files  and  find  that  Louisiana  seams  some-
what restricted  for  Fair  Play  activities.  How-
ever, with  what  is  there  perhaps  you  could
build  a  larger  group  if  a  few  people  would
undertake  the  disciplined  responsibility  of
concrete  organizational  work.

We  certainly  are  not  at  all  adverse  to  a
very  small  Chapter  but  certainly  would  ex-
pect that  there  would  be  at  least  twice  the
amount  needed  to  conduct  a  legal  executive
board  for  the  Chapter.  Should  this  be  rea-
sonable we  could  readily  issue  a  charter  for
a  New  Orleans  Chapter  of  FPCC.  In  fact,
we  would  be  very,  very  pleased  to  see  this
take  place  and  would  like  to  do  everything
possible  to  assist  in  bringing  it  about.


You  must  realize  that  you  will  come  under
tremendous  pressures  with  any  attempt  to  do
FPCC  work  in  that  area  and  that  you  will
not  be  able  to  operate  in  the  maimer  which
is  conventional  here  in  the  north-east.  Even
most  of  our  big  city  Chapters  have  been
forced  to  Abandon  the  idea  of  operating  an
office  in  public.  *  *  *  Most  Chapters  have
discovered  that  it  is  easier  to  operate  semi-
privately  out  of  a  home  and  maintain  a  P.O.
Box  for  all  mailings  and  public  notices.  (A
P.O.  Box  is  a  must  for  any  Chapter  in  the  or-
ganization to  guarnatee  the  continued  contact
with  the  national  even  if  an  individual  should
move  or  drop  out.)  We  do  have  a  serious  and
often  violent  opposition  and  this  proceedure
helps  prevent  many  unnecessary  incidents
which  frighten  away  prospective  supporters.
I  definitely  would  not  recommend  an  office,
at  least  not  one  that  wiU  be  easily  identifyable
to  the  lunatic  fringe  in  your  commimity.  Cer-
tainly, I  would  not  recommend  that  you  en-
gage in  one  at  the  very  beginning  but  wait  and
see  how  you  can  operate  in  the  community
through  several  public  experiences.

Thereafter  Oswald  informed  national  headquar-
ters that  he  had  opened  post  office  box  No.
30061,  and  that  against  its  advice  he  had  decided
"to  take  an  office  from  the  very  beginning";  he
also  submitted  copies  of  a  membership  applica-
tion form  and  a  circular  headed  "Hands  Off


Cuba!"  which  he  had  had  printed,  and  informed
the  headquarters  that  he  intended  to  have  mem-
bership cards  for  his  chapter  printed,  which  he
subsequently  did.  He  wrote  three  further  letters
to  the  New  York  office  to  inform  it  of  his  con-
tinued activities.  In  one  he  reported  that  he  had
been  evicted  from  the  office  he  claimed  to  have
opened,  so  that  he  "worked  out  of  a  post  office
box  and  by  using  street  demonstrations  and
some  circular  work  *  *  *  sustained  a  great
deal  of  interest  but  no  new  members."

Oswald  did  distribute  the  handbills  he  had
printed  on  at  least  three  occasions.  Once,  while
doing  so,  he  was  arrested  and  fined  for  being
involved  in  a  disturbance  with  anti-Castro  Cuban
refugees,  one  of  whom  he  had  previously  met  by
presenting  himself  as  hostile  to  Premier  Castro
in  an  apparent  effort  to  gain  information  about
anti-Castro  organizations  operating  in  New  Or-
leans. When  arrested,  he  informed  the  police
that  his  chapter  had  35  members.  His  activities
received  some  attention  in  the  New  Orleans
press,  and  he  twice  appeared  on  a  local  radio
program  representing  himself  as  a  spokesman
for  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee.  After
his  return  to  Dallas,  he  listed  the  FPCC  as  an
organization  authorized  to  receive  mail  at  his
post  office  box.

Despite  these  activities,  the  FPCC  chapter
which  Oswald  purportedly  formed  in  New  Or-
leans was  entirely  fictitious.  Vincent  T.  Lee,
formerly  national  director  of  the  Fair  Play  for
Cuba  Conmiittee,  has  testified  that  the  New
York  office  did  not  authorize  the  creation  of  a
New  Orleans  chapter,  nor  did  it  provide  Oswald
with  funds  to  support  his  activities  there.  The
national  office  did  not  write  Oswald  again  after
its  letter  of  May  29.  As  discussed  more  fully  in
chapter  Vn,  Oswald's  later  letters  to  the  national
office  purporting  to  inform  it  of  his  progress  in
New  Orleans  contained  numerous  exaggerations
about  the  scope  of  his  activities  and  the  public
reaction  to  them.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Os-
wald ever  opened  an  office  as  he  claimed  to
have  done.  Although  a  pamphlet  taken  from  him
at  the  time  of  his  arrest  in  New  Orleans  contains
the  rubber  stamp  imprint  "FPCC,  544  CAMP
ST.,  NEW  ORLEANS,  LA.,"  investigation  has
indicated  that  neither  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba
Committee  nor  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  ever  main-
tained an  office  at  that  address.  The  handbills
and  other  materials  bearing  the  name  of  the  Fair
Play  for  Cuba  Committee  were  printed  com-
mercially by  Oswald  without  the  approval  of  the
national  headquarters.  Oswald's  membership
card  in  the  "New  Orleans  chapter"  of  the  com-
mittee carried  the  signature  of  "A.  J.  Hidell,"
purportedly  the  president  of  the  chapter,  but
there  is  no  evidence  that  an  "A.  J.  Hidell"
existed  and,  as  pointed  out  in  chapter  IV,  there  is
conclusive  evidence  that  the  name  was  an  alias
which  Oswald  used  on  various  occasions.  Marina
Oswald  herself  wrote  the  name  "Hidell"  on  the
membership  card  at  her  husband's  insistence.

No  other  member  of  the  so-called  New  Or-


121


leans  chapter  of  the  committee  has  ever  been
found.  The  only  occasion  on  which  anyone  other
than  Oswald  was  observed  taking  part  in  these
activities  was  on  August  9,  1963,  when  Oswald
and  two  young  men  passed  out  leaflets  urging
"Hands  Off  Cuba!"  on  the  streets  of  New  Or-
leans. One  of  the  two  men,  who  was  16  years
old  at  the  time,  has  testified  that  Oswald  ap-
proached him  at  the  Louisiana  State  Employ-
ment Commission  and  offered  him  $2  for  about
an  hour's  work.  He  accepted  the  offer  but  later,
when  he  noticed  that  television  cameras  were
being  focused  on  him,  he  obtained  his  money
and  left.  He  testified  that  he  had  never  seen  Os-
wald before  and  never  saw  him  again.  The  sec-
ond individual  has  never  been  located;  but  ac-
cording to  the  testimony  of  the  youth  who  was
found,  he  too  seemed  to  be  someone  not  previ-
ously connected  with  Oswald.  Finally,  the  FBI
has  advised  the  Commission  that  its  information
on  undercover  Cuban  activities  in  the  New  Or-
leans area  reveals  no  knowledge  of  Oswald  be-
fore the  assassination.

Right-wing  groups  hostile  to  President  Ken-
nedy.— ^The  Commission  also  considered  the
possibility  that  there  may  have  been  a  h'nk  be-
tween Oswald  and  certain  groups  which  had
bitterly  denoimced  President  Kennedy  and  his
poUcies  prior  to  the  time  of  the  President's  trip
to  Dallas.  As  discussed  in  chapter  II,  two  pro-
vocative incidents  took  place  concurrently  with
President  Kennedy's  visit  and  a  third  but  a
month  prior  thereto.  The  incidents  were  (1)
the  demonstration  against  the  Honorable  Adlai
E.  Stevenson,  U.S.  Ambassador  to  the  United
Nations,  in  late  October  1963,  when  he  came  to
Dallas  on  United  Nations  Day;  (2)  the  publi-
cation in  the  Dallas  Morning  News  on  Novem-
ber 22  of  the  full  page,  black-bordered  paid
advertisement  entitled,  "Welcome  Mr.  Ken-
nedy"; and  (3)  the  distribution  of  a  throwaway
handbill  entitled  "Wanted  for  Treason"  through-
out Dallas  on  November  20  and  21.  Oswald  was
aware  of  the  Stevenson  incident;  there  is  no  evi-
dence that  he  became  aware  of  either  the  "Wel-
come Mr.  Kennedy"  advertisement  or  the
"Wanted  for  Treason"  handbill,  though  neither
possibility  can  be  precluded.

The  only  evidence  of  interest  on  Oswald's
part  in  rightist  groups  in  Dallas  was  his  alleged
attendance  at  a  rally  at  the  Dallas  Auditorium
the  evening  preceding  Ambassador  Stevenson's
address  on  United  Nations  Day,  October  24,
1963.  On  the  evening  of  October  25,  1963,  at
the  invitation  of  Michael  Paine,  Oswald  attended
a  monthly  meeting  of  the  Dallas  chapter  of  the
American  Civil  Liberties  Union  in  which  he  was
later  to  seek  membership.  During  the  course  of
the  discussion  at  this  meeting,  a  speaker  men-
tioned Maj.  Gen.  Edwin  A.  Walker  (Resigned,
U.S.  Army).  Oswald  arose  in  the  midst  of  the
meeting  to  remark  that  a  "night  or  two  nights
before"  he  had  attended  a  meeting  at  which
General  Walker  had  spoken  in  terms  that  led
Oswald  to  assert  that  General  Walker  was  both


anti-Catholic  and  anti-Semitic.  General  Walker
testified  that  he  had  been  the  speaker  at  a  rally
the  night  before  Ambassador  Stevenson's  ap-
pearance, but  that  he  did  not  know  and  had
never  heard  of  Oswald  prior  to  the  announce-
ment of  his  name  on  radio  and  television  on  the
afternoon  of  November  22.  Oswald  confirmed
his  attendance  at  the  U.S.  Day  rally  in  an  un-
dated letter  he  wrote  to  Arnold  Johnson,  director
of  the  information  and  lecture  bureau  of  the
Communist  Party,  mailed  November  1,  1963,  in
which  he  reported:

On  October  23rd,  I  had  attended  a  ultra-
right  meeting  headed  by  General  Edwin  a.
Walker,  who  lives  in  Dallas.

This  meeting  preceded  by  one  day  the  at-
tack on  a.  e.  Stevenson  at  the  United  Nations
Day  meeting  at  which  he  spoke.

As  you  can  see,  political  friction  between
'left'  and  'right'  is  very  great  here.

In  the  light  of  Oswald's  attack  upon  General
Walker  on  the  evening  of  April  10,  1963,  dis-
cussed in  chapter  IV,  as  well  as  Oswald's  known
poHtical  views,  his  asserted  attendance  at  the
political  rally  at  which  General  Walker  spoke
may  have  been  induced  by  many  possible  mo-
tives. However,  there  is  no  evidence  that  Os-
wald attended  any  other  rightist  meetings  or  was
associated  with  any  poUtically  conservative
organizations.

While  the  black-bordered  "Welcome  Mr.
Kennedy"  advertisement  in  the  November  22
Dallas  Morning  News,  which  addressed  a  series
of  critical  questions  to  the  President,  probably
did  not  come  to  Oswald's  attention,  it  was  of
interest  to  the  Commission  because  of  its  ap-
pearance on  the  day  of  the  assassination  and
because  of  an  allegation  made  before  the  Com-
mission concerning  the  person  whose  name  ap-
peared as  the  chairman  of  the  committee  spon-
soring the  advertisement.  The  black-bordered
advertisement  was  purported  to  be  sponsored  by
"The  American  Fact-Finding  Committee,"
which  was  described  as  "An  unaffiliated  and
nonpartisan  group  of  citizens  who  wish  truth."
Bernard  Weissman  was  Usted  as  "Chairman"
and  a  post  office  box  in  Dallas  was  the  only
address.

The  Commission  has  conducted  a  full  inves-
tigation into  the  genesis  of  this  advertisement
and  the  background  of  those  responsible  for  it.
Three  of  the  four  men  chiefly  responsible,  Ber-
nard W.  Weissman,  William  B.  Burley  III,  and
Larrie  H.  Schmidt,  had  served  together  in  the
U.S.  Army  in  Munich,  Germany,  in  1962.  Dur-
ing that  time  they  had  with  others  devised  plans
to  develop  two  conservative  organizations,  one
poUtical  and  the  other  business.  The  political
entity  was  to  be  named  Conservatism — USA,  or
CUSA,  and  the  business  entity  was  to  be  named
American  Business,  or  AMBUS.  While  in  Mu-
nich, according  to  Weissman,  they  attempted  to
develop  in  their  "own  minds  *  *  *  ways  to
build  up  various  businesses  that  would  support


122


US  and  at  the  same  time  support  our  political
activities."  According  to  a  subsequent  letter  from
Schmidt  to  Weissman,  "Cusa  was  founded  for
patriotic  reasons  rather  than  for  personal  gain —
even  though,  as  a  side  effect,  Ambus  was  to  have
brought  great  return,  as  any  business  endeavor
should."  To  establish  their  organizations,  Weiss-
man  testified  that  they:

*  *  *  had  planned  while  in  Munich  that  in
order  to  accomplish  our  goals,  to  try  to  do  it
from  scratch  would  be  almost  impossible,  be-
cause it  would  be  years  before  we  could  even
get  the  funds  to  develop  a  powerful  organi-
zation. So  we  had  planned  to  infiltrate  various
rightwing  organizations  and  by  our  own  ef-
forts become  involved  in  the  hierarchy  of
these  various  organizations  and  eventually  get
ourselves  elected  or  appointed  to  various
higher  oflBces  in  these  organizations,  and  by
doing  this  bring  in  some  of  our  own  people,
and  eventually  take  over  the  leadership  of
these  organizations,  and  at  that  time  having
our  people  in  these  various  organizations,  we
would  then,  you  might  say,  call  a  conference
and  have  them  unite,  and  while  no  one  knew
of  the  existence  of  CUSA  aside  from  us,  we
would  then  bring  them  aU  together,  unite
them,  and  arrange  to  have  it  called  CUSA.

Schmidt  was  the  first  to  leave  the  service;  set-
tling in  Dallas  in  October  1962,  he  became  a  life
insurance  salesman  and  quickly  engaged  in  num-
erous poUtical  activities  in  pursuit  of  the  objec-
tives devised  in  Munich.  He  became  aflSliated
with  several  organizations  and  prepared  various
political  writings.

Upon  theu"  release  from  the  military,  Weiss-
man  and  Burley  did  not  immediately  move  to
Dallas,  though  repeatedly  urged  to  do  so  by
Schmidt.  On  October  1,  1963,  Schmidt  wrote
Weissman:  "Adlai  Stevenson  is  scheduled  here
on  the  24th  on  UN  Day.  Kennedy  is  scheduled
in  Dallas  on  Nov.  24th.  There  are  to  be  protests.
All  the  big  things  are  happening  now — if  we
don't  get  in  right  now  we  may  as  well  forget  it."
The  day  of  the  Stevenson  demonstration,
Schmidt  telephoned  Weissman,  again  urging  him
to  move  to  Dallas.  Recalling  that  conversation
with  Schmidt,  Weissman  testified:

And  he  said,  "If  we  are  going  to  take  advan-
tage of  the  situation  *  *  *  you  better  hurry
down  here  and  take  advantage  of  the  pub-
licity, and  at  least  become  known  among  these
various  right-wingers,  because  this  is  the
chance  we  have  been  looking  for  to  infiltrate
some  of  these  organizations  and  become
known,"  in  other  words,  go  along  with  the
philosophy  we  had  developed  in  Munich.

Five  days  later  he  wrote  to  Weissman  and  Bur-
ley  to  report  that  as  the  "only  organizer  of  the
demonstration  to  have  publicly  identified  him-
self," he  had  "become,  overnight,  a  'fearless


spokesman'  and  'leader'  of  the  rightwing  in  Dal-
las. What  I  worked  so  hard  for  in  one  year —
and  nearly  failed — finally  came  through  one  in-
cident in  one  night!"  He  ended,  "PoUtically,
CUSA  is  set.  It  is  now  up  to  you  to  get  Ambus
going."

Weissman  and  Burley  accepted  Schmidt's
prompting  and  traveled  to  Dallas,  arriving  on
November  4,  1963.  Both  obtained  employment
as  carpet  salesmen.  At  Schmidt's  solicitation  they
took  steps  to  join  the  John  Birch  Society,  and
through  Schmidt  they  met  the  fourth  person  in-
volved in  placing  the  November  22  advertise-
ment, Joseph  P.  Grinnan,  Dallas  independent
oil  operator  and  a  John  Birch  Society  coordi-
nator in  the  Dallas  area.

Within  a  week  to  10  days  after  Weissman  and
Burley  had  arrived  in  Dallas,  the  four  men  began
to  consider  plans  regarding  President  Kennedy's
planned  visit  to  Dallas.  Weissman  explained  the
reason  for  which  it  was  decided  that  the  ad
should  be  placed:

*  *  *  after  the  Stevenson  incident,  it  was
felt  that  a  demonstration  would  be  entirely
out  of  order,  because  we  didn't  want  anything
to  happen  in  the  way  of  physical  violence  to
President  Kennedy  when  he  came  to  Dallas.
But  we  thought  that  the  conservatives  in  Dal-
las— I  was  told — were  a  pretty  downtrodden
lot  after  that,  because  they  were  being  op-
pressed by  the  local  liberals,  because  of  the
Stevenson  incident.  We  felt  we  had  to  do
something  to  build  up  the  morale  of  the  con-
servative element,  in  Dallas.  So  we  hit  upon
the  idea  of  the  ad.

Weissman,  Schmidt,  and  Grinnan  worked  on
the  text  for  tihe  advertisement.  A  pamphlet  con-
taining 50  questions  critical  of  American  policy
was  employed  for  this  purpose,  and  was  the
source  of  the  militant  questions  contained  in  the
ad  attacking  President  Kennedy's  administra-
tion. Grinnan  imdertook  to  raise  the  $1,465
needed  to  pay  for  the  ad.  He  employed  a  typed
draft  of  the  advertisement  to  support  his  funds
solicitation.  Grinnan  raised  the  needed  money
from  three  wealthy  Dallas  businessmen:  Edgar
R.  Crissey,  Nelson  Bimker  Hunt,  and  H.  R.
Bright,  some  of  whom  in  turn  collected  contri-
butions from  others.  At  least  one  of  the  contrib-
utors would  not  make  a  contribution  unless  a
question  he  suggested  was  inserted.  Weissman,
believing  that  Schmidt,  Grinnan,  and  the  con-
tributors were  active  members  of  the  John  Birch
Society,  and  that  Grinnan  eventually  took  charge
of  the  project,  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  ad-
vertisement was  the  creation  of  the  John  Birch
Society,  though  Schmidt  and  Grinnan  have
maintained  that  they  were  acting  "solely  as
individuals."

A  fictitious  sponsormg  organization  was  in-
vented out  of  whole  cloth.  The  name  chosen  for
the  supposed  organization  was  The  American
Fact-Finding  Committee.  This  was  "Solely  a


123


name,"  Weissman  testified;  "*  *  *  As  a  matter
of  fact,  when  I  went  to  place  the  ad,  I  could  not
remember  the  name  *  *  *  I  had  to  refer  to  a
piece  of  paper  for  the  name."  Weissman's  own
name  was  used  on  the  ad  in  part  to  counter
charges  of  anti-Semitism  which  had  been  leveled
against  conservative  groups  in  Dallas.  Weissman
conceived  the  idea  of  using  a  black  border,  and
testified  he  intended  it  to  serve  the  function  of
stimulating  reader  attention.  Before  accepting
the  advertisement,  the  Dallas  Morning  News  ap-
parently submitted  it  to  its  attorneys  for  their
opinion  as  to  whether  its  publication  might  sub-
ject them  to  liability.

Weissman  testified  that  the  advertisement
drew  50  or  60  mailed  responses.  He  took  them
from  the  post  ofiice  box  early  on  Sunday  morn-
ing, November  24.  He  said  that  those  post-
marked before  the  attack  on  President  Kennedy
were  "favorable"  in  tone;  those  of  later  post-
mark were  violently  unfavorable,  nasty,  and
threatening;  and,  according  to  a  report  from
Schmidt,  those  postmarked  some  weeks  later
were  again  of  favorable  tone.

The  four  promoters  of  the  ad  deny  that  they
had  any  knowledge  of  or  famiUarity  with  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  prior  to  November  22,  or  Jack
Ruby  prior  to  November  24.  Each  has  provided
a  statement  of  his  role  in  connection  with  the
placement  of  the  November  22  advertisement
and  other  matters,  and  investigation  has  revealed
no  deception.  The  Commission  has  foimd  no
evidence  that  any  of  these  persons  was  connected
with  Oswald  or  Ruby,  or  was  linked  to  a  con-
spiracy to  assassinate  President  Kennedy.

The  advertisement,  however,  did  give  rise  to
one  allegation  concerning  Bernard  Weissman
which  required  additional  investigation.  On
March  4,  1964,  Mark  Lane,  a  New  York  attor-
ney, testified  before  the  Commission  that  an
undisclosed  informant  had  told  him  that  Weiss-
man had  met  with  Jack  Ruby  and  Patrolman  J.
D.  Tippit  at  Ruby's  Carousel  Club  on  November
14,  1963.  Lane  declined  to  state  the  name  of  his
informant  but  said  that  he  would  attempt  to  ob-
tain his  informant's  permission  to  reveal  his
name.  On  July  2,  1964,  after  repeated  requests
by  the  Commission  that  he  disclose  the  name  of
his  informant.  Lane  testified  a  second  time  con-
cerning this  matter,  but  declined  to  reveal  the
information,  stating  as  his  reason  that  he
had  promised  the  individual  that  his  name
would  not  be  revealed  without  his  permission.
Lane  also  made  this  allegation  during  a  radio
appearance,  whereupon  Weissman  twice  de-
manded that  Lane  reveal  the  name  of  the  infor-
mant. As  of  the  date  of  this  report  Lane  has
failed  to  reveal  the  name  of  his  informant  and
has  offered  no  evidence  to  support  his  allegation.
The  Commission  has  investigated  the  allegation
of  a  Weissman-Ruby-Tippit  meeting  and  has
found  no  evidence  that  such  a  meeting  took  place
anywhere  at  any  time.  The  investigation  into
this  matter  is  discussed  in  a  later  section  of  this


chapter  dealing  with  possible  conspiracies  in-
volving Jack  Ruby.

A  comparable  incident  was  the  appearance
of  the  "Wanted  for  Treason"  handbill  on  the
streets  of  Dallas  1  to  2  days  before  President
Kennedy's  arrival.  These  handbills  bore  a  re-
production of  a  front  and  profile  photograph  of
the  President  and  set  forth  a  series  of  inflamma-
tory charges  against  him.  Efforts  to  locate  the
author  and  the  lithography  printer  of  the  hand-
bill at  first  met  with  evasive  responses  and  re-
fusals to  furnish  information.  Robert  A.  Surrey
was  eventually  identified  as  the  author  of  the
handbUl.  Surrey,  a  38-year-old  printing  salesman
employed  by  Johnson  Printing  Co.  of  Dallas,
Tex.,  has  been  closely  associated  with  General
Walker  for  several  years  in  his  political  and  busi-
ness activities.  He  is  president  of  American  Eagle
PubUshing  Co.  of  Dallas,  in  which  he  is  a  partner
with  General  Walker.  Its  office  and  address  is  the
post  office  box  of  Johnson  Printing  Co.  Its  assets
consist  of  cash  and  various  printed  materials
composed  chiefly  of  General  Walker's  pohtical
and  promotional  literature,  all  of  which  is  stored
at  General  Walker's  headquarters.

Surrey  prepared  the  text  for  the  handbill  and
apparently  used  Johnson  Printing  Co.  facilities
to  set  the  type  and  print  a  proof.  Surrey  induced
Klause,  a  salesman  employed  by  Lettercraft
Printing  Co.  of  Dallas,  whom  Surrey  had  met
when  both  were  employed  at  Johnson  Printing
Co.,  to  print  the  handbill  "on  the  side."  Ac-
cording to  Klause,  Surrey  contacted  him  initially
approximately  2  or  2i  weeks  prior  to  November
22.  About  a  week  prior  to  November  22,  Surrey
dehvered  to  Klause  two  slick  paper  magazine
prints  of  photographs  of  a  front  view  and  profile
of  President  Kennedy,  together  with  the  textual
page  proof.  Klause  was  unable  to  make  the
photographic  negative  of  the  prints  needed  to
prepare  tihe  photographic  printing  plate,  so  that
he  had  this  feature  of  the  job  done  at  a  local
shop.  Klause  then  arranged  the  halftone  front
and  profile  representations  of  President  Kennedy
at  the  top  of  the  textual  material  he  had  received
from  Surrey  so  as  to  simulate  a  "man  wanted"
police  placard.  He  then  made  a  photographic
printing  plate  of  the  picture.  During  the  night,  he
and  his  wife  surreptitiously  printed  approxi-
mately 5,000  copies  on  Lettercraft  Printing  Co.
offset  printing  equipment  without  the  knowledge
of  his  employers.  The  next  day  he  arranged  with
Surrey  a  meeting  place,  and  delivered  the  hand-
bills. Klause's  charge  for  the  printing  of  the
handbUls  was,  includmg  expenses,  $60.

At  the  outset  of  the  investigation  Klause
stated  to  Federal  agents  that  he  did  not  know  the
name  of  his  customer,  whom  he  incorrectly  de^
scribed;  he  did  say,  however,  that  the  customer
did  not  resemble  either  Oswald  or  Ruby.  Shortly
before  he  appeared  before  the  Commission,
Klause  disclosed  Surrey's  identity.  He  explained
that  no  record  of  the  transaction  had  been  made
because  "he  saw  a  chance  to  make  a  few  dollars
on  the  side."


124


Klause's  testimony  receives  some  corrobora-
tion from  Bernard  Weissman's  testimony  that
he  saw  a  copy  of  one  of  the  "Wanted  for  Trea-
son" handbills  on  the  floor  of  General  Walker's
station  wagon  shortly  after  November  22.  Other
details  of  the  manner  in  which  the  handbills
were  printed  have  also  been  verified.  Moreover,
Weissman  testified  that  neither  he  nor  any  of  his
associates  had  anything  to  do  with  the  handbill
or  were  acquainted  with  Surrey,  Klause,  Letter-
craft  Printing  Co.,  or  Johnson  Printing  Co.
Klause  and  Surrey,  as  well  as  General  Walker,
testified  that  they  were  unacquainted  with  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  and  had  not  heard  of  him  prior
to  the  afternoon  of  November  22.  The  Com-
mission has  found  no  evidence  of  any  connec-
tion between  those  responsible  for  the  handbill
and  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  or  the  assassination.

Contacts  With  the  Cuban  and  Soviet  Embassies
in  Mexico  City  and  the  Soviet  Embassy  in
Washington,  D.C.

Eight  weeks  before  the  assassination,  Oswald
traveled  to  Mexico  City  where  he  visited  both
the  Cuban  and  Soviet  Embassies.*  Oswald's
wife  knew  of  this  trip  before  he  went,  but  she
denied  such  knowledge  until  she  testified  before
the  Commission.  The  Commission  undertook  an
intensive  investigation  to  determine  Oswald's
purpose  and  activities  on  this  journey,  with
specific  reference  to  reports  that  Oswald  was  an
agent  of  the  Cuban  or  Soviet  Governments.  As
a  result  of  its  investigation,  the  Commission  be-
lieves that  it  has  been  able  to  reconstruct  and
explain  most  of  Oswald's  actions  during  this
time.  A  detailed  chronological  account  of  this
trip  appears  in  appendix  XIII.

Trip  to  Mexico. — Oswald  was  in  Mexico
from  September  26,  1963,  until  October  3,  1963.
Marina  Oswald  testified  that  Oswald  had  told
her  that  the  purpose  of  the  trip  was  to  evade  the
American  prohibition  on  travel  to  Cuba  and  to
reach  that  country.  He  cautioned  her  that  the
trip  and  its  purpose  were  to  be  kept  strictly  se-
cret. She  testified  that  he  had  earlier  laid  plans  to
reach  Cuba  by  hijacking  an  airliner  flying  out  of
New  Orleans,  but  she  refused  to  cooperate  and
urged  him  to  give  it  up,  which  he  finally  did.
Witnesses  who  spoke  with  Oswald  while  he  was
on  a  bus  going  to  Mexico  City  also  testified  that
Oswald  told  them  he  intended  to  reach  Cuba  by
way  of  Mexico,  and  that  he  hoped  to  meet
Fidel  Castro  after  he  arrived.  When  Oswald
spoke  to  the  Cuban  and  Soviet  consular  oflSciaJs
in  Mexico  City,  he  represented  that  he  intended
to  travel  to  the  Soviet  Union  and  requested  an
"in-transit"  Cuban  visa  to  permit  him  to  enter
Cuba  on  September  30  on  the  way  to  the  Soviet
Union.  Marina  Oswald  has  testified  that  these
statements  were  deceptions  designed  to  get  him

*  The  Soviet  Embassy  in  Mexico  City  includes  consular  as
well  as  diplomatic  personnel  in  a  single  building.  The  Cuban
Embassy  and  Cuban  Consulate  in  Mexico  City,  though  in
separate  buildings,  are  in  the  same  compound.  Both  the  Soviet
and  the  Cuban  establishments  will  be  referred  to  throughout
the  report  simply  as  Embassies.


to  Cuba.  Thus,  although  it  is  possible  that  Os-
wald intended  to  continue  on  to  Russia  from
Cuba,  the  evidence  makes  it  more  likely  that  he
intended  to  remain  in  Cuba.

Oswald  departed  from  New  Orleans  probably
about  noon  on  September  25  and  arrived  in
Mexico  City  at  about  10  a.m.  on  September  27.
In  Mexico  City  he  embarked  on  a  series  of  visits
to  the  Soviet  and  Cuban  Embassies,  which  oc-
cupied most  of  his  time  during  the  first  2  days  of
his  visit.  At  the  Cuban  Embassy,  he  requested
an  "in-transit"  visa  to  permit  him  to  visit  Cuba
on  his  way  to  the  Soviet  Union.  Oswald  was  in-
formed that  he  could  not  obtain  a  visa  for  entry
into  Cuba  unless  he  first  obtained  a  visa  to  enter
the  U.S.S.R.,  and  the  Soviet  Embassy  told  him
that  he  could  not  expect  an  answer  on  his  appli-
cation for  a  visa  for  the  Soviet  Union  for  about
4  months.  Oswald  carried  with  him  newspaper
clippings,  letters  and  various  documents,  some
of  them  forged  or  containing  false  information,
purporting  to  show  that  he  was  a  "friend"  of
Cuba.  With  these  papers  and  his  record  of  previ-
ous residence  in  the  Soviet  Union  and  marriage
to  a  Soviet  national,  he  tried  to  curry  favor  with
both  Embassies.  Indeed,  his  wife  testified  that  in
her  opinion  Oswald's  primary  purpose  in  having
engaged  in  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  activi-
ties was  to  create  a  pubUc  record  that  he  was  a
"friend"  of  Cuba.  He  made  himself  especially
unpopular  at  the  Cuban  Embassy  by  persisting
in  his  demands  that  as  a  sympathizer  in  Cuban
objectives  he  ought  to  be  given  a  visa.  This  re-
sulted in  a  sharp  argument  with  the  consul,
Eusebio  Azque.

By  Saturday,  September  28,  1963,  Oswald
had  failed  to  obtain  visas  at  both  Embassies.
From  Sunday,  September  29,  through  Wednes-
day morning,  October  2,  when  he  left  Mexico
City  on  a  bus  bound  for  the  United  States,  Os-
wald spent  considerable  time  making  his  travel
arrangements,  sightseeing  and  checking  again
with  the  Soviet  Embassy  to  leam  whether  any-
thing had  happened  on  his  visa  application.
Marina  Oswald  testified  that  when  she  first  saw
him  after  his  return  to  the  United  States  he  was
disappointed  and  discouraged  at  his  failure  to
reach  Cuba.

The  general  outlines  of  Oswald's  activities  in
Mexico,  particularly  the  nature  and  extent  of
his  contacts  at  the  Cuban  Embassy,  were  learned
very  early  in  the  investigation.  An  important
source  of  information  relating  to  his  business  at
the  Cuban  Embassy  was  Senora  Silvia  Tirado  de
Duran,  a  Mexican  national  employed  in  the  visa
section  of  the  Cuban  Embassy,  who  was  ques-
tioned intensively  by  Mexican  authorities  soon
after  the  assassination.  An  excerpt  from  the  re-
port of  the  Mexican  Government  summarized
the  crucial  portion  of  Senora  Duran's  recollec-
tion of  Oswald.  In  translation  it  reads  as  follows:

*  *  *  she  remembered  *  *  *  [that  Lee
Harvey  Oswald]  was  the  name  of  an  American
who  had  come  to  the  Cuban  Consulate  to  ob-


125


tain  a  visa  to  travel  to  Cuba  in  transit  to  Rus-
sia, the  latter  part  of  September  or  the  early
part  of  October  of  this  year,  and  in  support
of  his  application  had  shown  his  passport,  in
which  it  was  noted  that  he  had  lived  in  that
country  for  a  period  of  three  years;  his  labor
card  from  the  same  country  written  in  the
Russian  language;  and  letters  in  that  same
language.  He  had  presented  evidence  that  he
was  married  to  a  Russian  woman,  and  also
that  he  was  apparently  the  leader  of  an  organi-
zation in  the  city  of  New  Orleans  called  "Fair

*  *  *  [Play]  for  Cuba,"  claiming  that  he
should  be  accepted  as  a  "friend"  of  the  Cuban
Revolution.  Accordingly,  the  declarant,  com-
plying with  her  duties,  took  down  all  of  the
information  and  completed  the  appropriate
application  form;  and  the  declarant,  admit-
tedly exceeding  her  responsibilities,  informally
telephoned  the  Russian  consulate,  with  the  in-
tention of  doing  what  she  could  to  facilitate
issuance  of  the  Russian  visa  to  Lee  Harvey
Oswald.  However,  they  told  her  that  there
would  be  a  delay  of  about  four  months  in  pro-
cessing the  case,  which  annoyed  the  applicant
since,  according  to  his  statement,  he  was  in  a
great  hurry  to  obtain  visas  that  would  enable
him  to  travel  to  Russia,  insisting  on  his  right
to  do  so  in  view  of  his  background  and  his
loyalty  and  his  activities  in  behalf  of  the
Cuban  movement.  The  declarant  was  unable
to  recall  accurately  whether  or  not  the  appli-
cant told  her  he  was  a  member  of  the  Com-
munist Party,  but  he  did  say  that  his  wife

*  *  *  was  then  in  New  York  City,  and
would  follow  him,  *  *  *  [Senora  Duran
stated]  that  when  Oswald  understood  that  it
was  not  possible  to  give  him  a  Cuban  visa
without  his  first  having  obtained  the  Russian
visa,  *  *  *  he  became  very  excited  or  angry,
and  accordingly,  the  affiant  called  Consul  As-
cue  [sic],  *  *  *  [who]  came  out  and  began  a
heated  discussion  in  English  with  Oswald,
that  concluded  by  Ascue  telling  him  that  "if
it  were  up  to  him,  he  would  not  give  him  the
visa,"  and  "a  person  of  his  type  was  harming
the  Cuban  Revolution  rather  than  helping
it,"  it  being  understood  that  in  their  conver-
sation they  were  talking  about  the  Russian
Socialist  Revolution  and  not  the  Cuban.  Os-
wald maintained  that  he  had  two  reasons
for  requesting  that  his  visa  be  issued  promptly,
and  they  were:  one,  that  his  tourist  permit  in
Mexico  was  about  to  expire;  and  the  other,
that  he  had  to  get  to  Russia  as  quickly  as
possible.  Despite  her  annoyance,  the  declarant
gave  Oswald  a  paper  *  *  *  in  which  she
put  down  her  name,  "Silvia  Duran,"  and
the  number  of  the  telephone  at  the  consulate,
which  is  "11-28-47"  and  the  visa  application
was  processed  anyway.  It  was  sent  to  the
Ministry  of  [Foreign]  Relations  of  Cuba  from
which  a  routine  reply  was  received  some
fifteen  to  thirty  days  later,  approving  the
visa,  but  on  the  condition  that  the  Russian


visa  be  obtained  first,  although  she  does  not
recall  whether  or  not  Oswald  later  telephoned
her  at  the  Consulate  number  that  she  gave
him.

With  the  dates  of  Oswald's  entry  into  and
departure  from  Mexico,  which  had  been  ob-
tained from  the  records  of  the  Mexican  Im-
migration Service  very  shortly  after  the  assassi-
nation, the  Government  of  Mexico  initiated  a
thorough  investigation  to  uncover  as  much  in-
formation as  possible  on  Oswald's  trip.  Repre-
sentatives of  U.S.  agencies  worked  in  close  Uai-
son  with  the  Mexican  law  enforcement  authori-
ties. The  result  of  this  investigative  effort  was  to
corroborate  the  statements  of  Senora  Duran
and  to  verify  the  essentials  of  Oswald's  activities
in  Mexico  as  outlined  above.

Senora  Duran  is  a  well-educated  native  of
Mexico,  who  was  26  years  old  at  the  time  of  her
interrogation.  She  is  married  to  Senor  Horacio
Duran  Navarro,  a  40-year-old  industrial  de-
signer, and  has  a  young  child.  Although  Senora
Duran  denies  being  a  member  of  the  Commu-
nist Party  or  otherwise  connected  with  it,  both
Durans  have  been  active  in  far  left  political  af-
fairs in  Mexico,  believe  in  Marxist  ideology,  and
sympathize  with  the  government  of  Fidel  Castro,
and  Senor  Duran  has  written  articles  for  El
Dia,  a  pro-Communist  newspaper  Ln  Mexico
City.  The  Commission  has  reliable  evidence
from  a  confidential  source  that  Senora  Duran
as  well  as  other  personnel  at  the  Cuban  Embassy
were  genuinely  upset  upon  receiving  news  of
President  Kennedy's  death.  Senora  Duran's
statements  were  made  to  Mexican  officials  soon
after  the  assassination,  and  no  sigmficant  in-
accuracies in  them  have  been  detected.  Docu-
ments fitting  the  description  given  by  Senora
Duran  of  the  documents  Oswald  had  shown  her,
plus  a  notation  which  she  said  she  had  given
him,  were  found  among  his  possessions  after
his  arrest.

The  Cuban  Government  was  asked  to  docu-
ment and  confirm  the  essentials  of  Senora
Duran's  testimony.  Its  response,  which  has  been
included  in  its  entirety  in  this  Report,  included
a  summary  statement  of  Oswald's  activities  at
the  Cuban  Embassy,  a  photograph  of  the  ap-
plication for  a  visa  he  completed  there,  and  a
photograph  of  the  communication  from  Havana
rejecting  the  application  unless  he  could  first
present  a  Soviet  visa.  The  information  on  these
documents  concerning  Oswald's  date  of  birth,
American  passport  number  and  activities  and
statements  at  the  Embassy  is  consistent  with
other  information  available  to  the  Commission,
CIA  experts  have  given  their  opinion  that  the
handwriting  on  the  visa  application  which  pur-
ports to  be  Oswald's  is  in  fact  his  and  that,  al-
though the  handwritten  notations  on  the  bottom
of  the  document  are  too  brief  and  faint  to  per-
mit a  conclusive  determination,  they  are  proba-
bly Senora  Duran's.  The  clothes  which  Oswald
was  wearing  in  the  photograph  which  appears  on


126


the  application  appear  to  be  the  same  as  some  of
those  found  among  his  effects  after  the  assassina-
tion, and  the  photograph  itself  appears  to  be
from  the  same  negative  as  a  photograph  found
among  his  effects.  Nothing  on  any  of  the  docu-
ments raises  a  suspicion  that  they  might  not  be
authentic.

By  far  the  most  important  confirmation  of
Senora  Duran's  testimony,  however,  has  been
supphed  by  confidential  sources  of  extremely
high  reliability  available  to  the  United  States  in
Mexico.  The  information  from  these  sources
estabUshes  that  her  testimony  was  truthful  and
accurate  in  all  material  resf)ects.  The  identities
of  these  sources  cannot  be  disclosed  without  de-
stroying their  future  usefulness  to  the  United
States.

The  investigation  of  the  Commission  has  pro-
duced considerable  testimonial  and  documentary
evidence  establishing  the  precise  time  of  Os-
wald's journey,  his  means  of  transportation,  the
hotel  at  which  he  stayed  in  Mexico  City,  and  a
restaurant  at  which  he  often  ate.  All  known
persons  whom  Oswald  may  have  met  while  in
Mexico,  including  passengers  on  the  buses  he
rode,  and  the  employees  and  guests  of  the  hotel
where  he  stayed,  were  interviewed.  No  credible
witness  has  been  located  who  saw  Oswald  with
any  unidentified  person  while  in  Mexico  City;
to  the  contrary,  he  was  observed  traveling  alone
to  and  from  Mexico  City,  at  his  hotel,  and  at
the  nearby  restaurant  where  he  frequently  ate.
A  hotel  guest  stated  that  on  one  occasion  he  sat
down  at  a  table  with  Oswald  at  the  restaurant
because  no  empty  table  was  available,  but  that
neither  spoke  to  the  other  because  of  the  lan-
guage barrier.  Two  Australian  girls  who  saw
Oswald  on  the  bus  to  Mexico  City  relate  that  he
occupied  a  seat  next  to  a  man  who  has  been  iden-
tified as  Albert  Osborne,  an  elderly  itinerant
preacher.  Osborne  denies  that  Oswald  was  beside
him  on  the  bus.  To  the  other  passengers  on  the
bus  it  appeared  that  Osborne  and  Oswald  had  not
previously  met,  and  extensive  investigation  of
Osborne  has  revealed  no  further  contact  between
him  and  Oswald.  Osborne's  responses  to  Federal
investigators  on  matters  unrelated  to  Oswald
have  proved  inconsistent  and  unreliable,  and,
therefore,  based  on  the  contrary  evidence  and
Osborne's  lack  of  reliability,  the  Commission
has  attached  no  credence  to  his  denial  that  Os-
wald was  beside  him  on  the  bus.  Investigation
of  his  background  and  activities,  however,  dis-
close no  basis  for  suspecting  him  of  any  involve-
ment in  the  assassination.

Investigation  of  the  hotel  at  which  Oswald
stayed  has  failed  to  uncover  any  evidence  that
the  hotel  is  unusual  in  any  way  that  could  relate
to  Oswald's  visit.  It  is  not  especially  popular
among  Cubans,  and  there  is  no  indication  that
it  is  used  as  a  meeting  place  for  extremist  or
revolutionary  organizations.  Investigation  of
other  guests  of  the  hotel  who  were  there  when
Oswald  was  has  failed  to  uncover  anything
creating  suspicion.  Oswald's  notebook  which


he  carried  with  him  to  Mexico  City  contained
the  telephone  number  of  the  Cuban  AirUnes
Office  in  Mexico  City;  however,  a  Cuban  visa  is
required  by  Mexican  authorities  before  an  in-
dividual may  enplane  for  Cuba,  and  a  confiden-
tial check  of  the  Cuban  Airlines  Office  uncovered
no  evidence  that  Oswald  visited  their  offices
while  in  the  city.

Allegations  of  conspiracy. — Literally  dozens
of  allegations  of  a  conspiratorial  contact  be-
tween Oswald  and  agents  of  the  Cuban  Govern-
ment have  been  investigated  by  the  Commission.
Among  the  claims  made  were  allegations  that
Oswald  had  made  a  previous  trip  to  Mexico  City
in  early  September  to  receive  money  and  orders
for  the  assassination,  that  he  had  been  flown  to  a
secret  airfield  somewhere  in  or  near  the  Yucatan
Peninsula,  that  he  might  have  made  contacts  in
Mexico  City  with  a  Commimist  from  the  United
States  shortly  before  the  assassination,  and  that
Oswald  assassinated  the  President  at  the  direc-
tion of  a  particular  Cuban  agent  who  met  with
him  in  the  United  States  and  paid  him  $7,000.
A  letter  was  received  from  someone  in  Cuba
alleging  the  writer  had  attended  a  meeting  where
the  assassination  had  been  discussed  as  part  of  a
plan  which  would  soon  include  the  death  of  other
non-Communist  leaders  in  the  Americas.  The
charge  was  made  in  a  Cuban  expatriate  publi-
cation that  in  a  speech  he  deUvered  5  days  after
the  assassination,  while  he  was  under  the  influ-
ence of  Uquor,  Fidel  Castro  made  a  slip  of  the
tongue  and  said,  "The  first  time  Oswald  was  in
Cuba,"  thereby  giving  away  the  fact  that  Oswald
had  made  one  or  more  surreptitious  trips  to  that
country.

Some  stories  linked  the  assassination  to  anti-
Castro  groups  who  allegedly  were  engaged  in
obtaining  iUicit  firearms  in  the  United  States,
one  such  claim  being  that  these  groups  killed
the  President  as  part  of  a  bargain  with  some
illicit  organizations  who  would  then  supply
them  with  firearms  as  payment  Other  rumors
placed  Oswald  in  Miami,  Fla.,  at  various  times,
allegedly  in  pro-Cuban  activities  there.  The
assassination  was  claimed  to  have  been  carried
out  by  Chinese  Conamunists  operating  jointly
with  the  Cubans.  Oswald  was  also  alleged  to  have
met  with  the  Cuban  Ambassador  in  a  Mexico
City  restaurant  and  to  have  driven  off  in  the
Ambassador's  car  for  a  private  talk.  Castro  him-
self, it  was  alleged,  2  days  after  the  assassination
called  for  the  files  relating  to  Oswald's  dealings
with  two  members  of  the  Cuban  diplomatic
mission  in  the  Soviet  Union;  the  inference
drawn  was  that  the  "dealings"  had  occurred  and
had  established  a  secret  subversive  relationship
which  continued  through  Oswald's  life.  Without
exception,  the  rumors  and  allegations  of  a  con-
spiratorial contact  were  shown  to  be  without  any
factnal  basis,  in  some  cases  the  product  of  mis-
taken identification.

Illustrative  of  the  attention  given  to  the  most
serious  allegations  is  the  case  of  "D,"  a  young
Latin  American  secret  agent  who  approached


127


U.S.  authorities  in  Mexico  shortly  after  the
assassination  and  declared  that  he  saw  Lee  Har-
vey Oswald  receiving  $6,500  to  kill  the  Presi-
dent. Among  other  details,  "D"  said  that  at
about  noon  on  September  18,  waiting  to  con-
duct some  business  at  the  Cuban  consulate,  he
saw  a  group  of  three  persons  conversing  in  a
patio  a  few  feet  away.  One  was  a  tall,  thin
Negro  with  reddish  hair,  obviously  dyed,  who
spoke  rapidly  in  both  Spanish  and  English,  and
another  was  a  man  he  said  was  Lee  Harvey
Oswald.  A  tall  Cuban  joined  the  group  momen-
tarily and  passed  some  currency  to  the  Negro.
The  Negro  then  allegedly  said  to  Oswald  in
English,  "I  want  to  kill  the  man."  Oswald  re-
pUed,  "You're  not  man  enough,  I  can  do  it."
The  Negro  then  said  in  Spanish,  "I  can't  go
with  you,  I  have  a  lot  to  do."  Oswald  replied,
"The  people  are  waiting  for  me  back  there."
The  Negro  then  gave  Oswald  $6,500  in  large-
denomination  American  bills,  saying,  "This
isn't  much."  After  hearing  this  conversation,
"D"  said  that  he  telephoned  the  American  Em-
bassy in  Mexico  City  several  times  prior  to  the
assassination  in  an  attempt  to  report  his  belief
that  someone  important  in  the  United  States  was
to  be  killed,  but  was  finally  told  by  someone  at
the  Embassy  to  stop  wasting  his  time.

"D"  and  his  allegations  were  immediately
subjected  to  intensive  investigation.  His  former
employment  as  an  agent  for  a  Latin  American
country  was  confirmed,  although  his  superiors
had  no  knowledge  of  his  presence  in  Mexico  or
the  assignment  described  by  "D."  Four  days
after  "D"  first  appeared  the  U.S.  Government
was  informed  by  the  Mexican  authorities  that
"D"  had  admitted  in  writing  that  his  whole  nar-
rative about  Oswald  was  false.  He  said  that  he
had  never  seen  Oswald  anyplace,  and  that  he
had  not  seen  anybody  paid  money  in  the  Cuban
Embassy.  He  also  adroitted  that  he  never  tried
to  telephone  the  American  Embassy  in  Sep-
tember and  that  his  first  call  to  the  Embassy  was
after  the  assassination.  "D"  said  that  his  motive
in  fabricating  the  story  was  to  help  get  himself
admitted  into  the  United  States  so  that  he  could
there  participate  in  action  against  Fidel  Castro.
He  said  that  he  hated  Castro  and  hoped  that  the
story  he  made  up  would  be  beheved  and  would
cause  the  United  States  to  "take  action"  against
him.

Still  later,  when  questioned  by  American
authorities,  "D"  claimed  that  he  had  been  pres-
sured into  retracting  his  statement  by  the  Mex-
ican police  and  that  the  retraction,  rather  than
his  first  statement,  was  false.  A  portion  of  the
American  questioning  was  carried  on  with  the
use  of  a  polygraph  machine,  with  the  consent
of  "D."  When  told  that  the  machine  indicated
that  he  was  probably  lying,  "D"  said  words  to
the  effect  that  he  "must  be  mistaken."  Investi-
gation in  the  meantime  had  disclosed  that  the
Embassy  extension  number  "D"  said  he  had
called  would  not  have  given  him  the  person  he
said  he  spoke  to,  and  that  no  one  at  the  Embassy


— clerks,  secretaries,  or  officers — had  any  rec-
ollection of  his  calls.  In  addition,  Oswald  spoke
Httle,  if  any,  Spanish.  That  he  could  have  car-
ried on  the  alleged  conversation  with  the  red-
headed Negro  in  the  Cuban  Embassy,  part  of
which  was  supposed  to  have  been  in  Spanish,
was  therefore  doubtful.  "D"  now  said  that  he
was  uncertain  as  to  the  date  when  he  saw  "some-
one who  looked  Uke  Oswald"  at  the  Cuban  Em-
bassy, and  upon  reconsideration,  he  now  thought
it  was  on  a  Tuesday,  September  17,  rather  than
September  18.  On  September  17,  however,  Os-
wald visited  the  Louisiana  State  Unemployment
Commission  in  New  Orleans  and  also  cashed  a
check  from  the  Texas  Employment  Commission
at  the  Winn-Dixie  Store  No.  1425  in  New  Or-
leans. On  the  basis  of  the  retractions  made  by
"D"  when  he  heard  the  results  of  the  polygraph
examination,  and  on  the  basis  of  discrepancies
which  appeared  in  his  story,  it  was  concluded
that  "D"  was  lymg.

The  investigation  of  the  Commission  has  thus
produced  no  evidence  that  Oswald's  trip  to  Mex-
ico was  in  any  way  coimected  with  the  assas-
sination of  President  Kennedy,  nor  has  it  un-
covered evidence  that  the  Cuban  Government
had  any  involvement  in  the  assassination.  To
the  contrary,  the  Commission  has  been  advised
by  the  CIA  and  FBI  that  secret  and  reUable
sources  corroborate  the  statements  of  Senora
Duran  in  all  material  respects,  and  that  the
Cuban  Government  had  no  relationship  with
Lee  Harvey  Oswald  other  than  that  described
by  Senora  Duran.  Secretary  of  State  Rusk  also
testified  that  after  the  assassination  "there  was
very  considerable  concern  in  Cuba  as  to  whether
they  would  be  held  responsible  and  what  the
effect  of  that  might  be  on  their  own  position  and
their  own  safety."

Contacts  with  the  Soviet  Embassy  in  the
United  States. — Soon  after  the  Oswalds  reached
the  United  States  in  June  1962  they  wrote  to
the  Soviet  Embassy  in  Washington,  D.C.  Oswald
requested  information  about  subscriptions  to
Russian  newspapers  and  magazines  and  ulti-
mately did  subscribe  to  several  Russian  journals.
Soviet  law  required  Marina  Oswald,  as  a  Soviet
citizen  Uving  abroad,  to  remain  in  contact  with
her  nation's  Embassy  and  to  file  various  papers
occasionally.  In  1963,  after  Oswald  had  ex-
perienced repeated  employment  difficulties,
there  were  further  letters  when  the  Oswalds
sought  permission  to  return  to  the  Soviet  Union.
The  first  such  request  was  a  letter  written  by
Marina  Oswald  on  February  17,  1963.  She  wrote
that  she  wished  to  return  to  Russia  but  that  her
husband  would  stay  in  the  United  States  because
"he  is  an  American  by  nationality."  She  was
informed  on  March  8,  1963,  that  it  would  take
from  5  to  6  months  to  process  the  appUcation.
The  Soviet  Union  made  available  to  the  Com-
mission what  purports  to  be  the  entire  corre-
spondence between  the  Oswalds  and  the  Russian
Embassy  in  the  United  States.  This  material  has
been  checked  for  codes  and  none  has  been  de-


128


tected  With  the  possible  exception  of  a  letter
which  Oswald  wrote  to  the  Soviet  Embassy  after
his  return  from  Mexico  City,  discussed  below,
there  is  no  material  which  gives  any  reason  for
suspicion.  The  implications  of  all  of  this  corres-
pondence for  an  understanding  of  Lee  Harvey
Oswald's  personalit>'  and  motivation  is  discussed
in  the  foUowing  chapter.

Oswald's  last  letter  to  the  Soviet  Embassy  in
Washington,  D.C.,  dated  November  9,  1963,
began  by  stating  that  it  was  written  "to  inform
you  of  recent  events  since  my  meetings  with
Comrade  Kostin  in  the  Embassy  of  the  Soviet
Union,  Mexico  City,  Mexico."  The  envelope
bears  a  postmark  which  appears  to  be  November
12,  1963.  Ruth  Paine  has  testified  that  Oswald
spent  the  weekend  at  her  home  working  on  the
letter  and  that  she  observed  one  preliminary
draft.  A  piece  of  paper  which  was  identified  as
one  of  these  drafts  was  found  among  Oswald's
effects  after  the  assassination.  According  to
Marina  Oswald,  her  husband  retyped  the  enve-
lope 10  times.

Information  produced  for  the  Commission
by  the  CIA  is  to  the  effect  that  the  person  re-
ferred to  in  the  letter  as  "comrade  Kostin"  was
probably  Valeriy  Vladimirovich  Kostikov,  a
member  of  the  consular  staff  of  the  Soviet  Union
in  Mexico  City.  He  is  also  one  of  the  KGB  oflB-
cers  stationed  at  the  Embassy.  It  is  standard
Soviet  procedure  for  KGB  officers  stationed  in
embassies  and  in  consulates  to  carry  on  the  nor-
mal duties  of  such  a  position  in  addition  to  the
undercover  activities.  The  Commission  has
identified  the  Cuban  consul  referred  to  in  Os-
wald's letter  as  Senor  Eusebio  Azque  (also  "As-
cue"),  the  man  with  whom  Oswald  argued  at
the  Cuban  Embassy,  who  was  in  fact  replaced.
The  CIA  advised  the  Commission:

We  surmise  that  the  references  in  Oswald's
9  November  letter  to  a  man  who  had  since
been  replaced  must  refer  to  Cuban  Consul
Eusebio  Azque,  who  left  Mexico  for  Cuba  on
permanent  transfer  on  18  November  1963,
four  days  before  the  assassination.  Azque  had
been  in  Mexico  for  1 8  years  and  it  was  known
as  early  as  September  1963  that  Azque  was  to
be  replaced.  His  replacement  did  arrive  in
September.  Azque  was  scheduled  to  leave  in
October  but  did  not  leave  until  18  November.

We  do  not  know  who  might  have  told  Os-
wald that  Azque  or  any  other  Cuban  had  been
or  was  to  be  replaced,  but  we  speculate  that
Silvia  Duran  or  some  Soviet  official  might
have  mentioned  it  if  Oswald  complaiaed  about
Azque's  altercation  with  him.

When  asked  to  explain  the  letter,  Marina  Os-
wald was  unable  to  add  an>lhing  to  an  under-
standing of  its  contents.  Some  hgbt  on  its  pos-
sible meaning  can  be  shed  by  comparing  it  with
the  early  draft.  When  the  differences  between
the  draft  and  the  final  document  are  studied,  and
especially  when  crossed-out  words  are  taken
into  account,  it  becomes  apparent  that  Oswald


was  intentionally  beclouding  the  true  state  of  af-
fairs in  order  to  make  his  trip  to  Mexico  sound
as  mysterious  and  important  as  possible.

For  example,  the  first  sentence  in  the  second
paragraph  of  the  letter  reads.  "I  was  unable  to
remain  in  Mexico  indefinily  because  of  my  mexi-
can  visa  restrictions  which  was  for  15  days  only."
The  same  sentence  in  the  draft  begins,  before
the  words  are  crossed  out,  "I  was  unable  to  re-
main in  Mexico  City  because  I  considered
useless  *  *  *"  As  already  mentioned,  the  Com-
mission has  good  evidence  that  Oswald's  trip  to
Mexico  was  indeed  "useless"  and  that  he  re-
turned to  Texas  with  that  conviction.  The  first
draft,  therefore,  spoke  the  truth;  but  Oswald  re-
wrote the  sentence  to  imply  that  he  had  to  leave
because  his  visa  was  about  to  expire.  This  is
false;  Oswald's  tourist  card  stiU  had  a  fuU  week
to  run  when  he  departed  from  Mexico  cm
October  3.

The  next  sentence  in  the  letter  reads,  "I  could
not  take  a  chance  on  requesting  a  new  visa  un-
less I  used  my  real  name,  so  I  returned  to  the
United  States."  The  fact  is  that  he  did  use  his
real  name  for  his  tourist  card,  and  in  all  dealings
with  the  Cuban  Embassy,  the  Russian  Embassy
and  elsewhere.  Oswald  did  use  the  name  of  "Lee"
on  the  trip,  but  as  indicated  below,  he  did  so
only  sporadically  and  probably  as  the  result  of  a
clerical  error.  In  the  opinion  of  the  Commission,
based  upon  its  knowledge  of  Oswald  the  letter
constitutes  no  more  than  a  clumsy  effect  to  in-
gratiate himself  with  the  Soviet  Embassy.

Investigation  of  Other  Activities

Osvjald's  use  of  post  office  boxes  and  false
names. — After  his  return  from  the  Soviet  Union,
Lee  Han'ey  Oswald  is  known  to  have  received
his  mail  at  post  office  boxes  and  to  have  used
different  aliases  on  numerous  occasions.  Since
either  practice  is  susceptible  of  use  for  clandes-
tine purposes,  the  Commission  has  directed  at-
tention to  both  for  signs  that  Oswald  at  some
point  made  undercover  contact  with  other  per-
sons who  might  have  been  connected  with  the
assassination.

Oswald  is  known  to  have  opened  three  post
office  boxes  during  1962  and  1963.  On  October
9,  1962,  the  same  day  that  he  arrived  in  Dallas
from  Fort  Worth,  and  before  establishing  a  resi-
dence there,  he  opened  box  No.  2915  at  the
Dallas  General  Post  Office.  This  box  was  closed
on  May  14,  1963,  shortly  after  Oswald  had
moved  to  New  Orleans.  That  portion  of  the  post
office  box  appUcation  Listing  the  names  of  those
persons  other  than  the  applicant  entitled  to  re-
ceive mail  at  the  box  was  discarded  in  accord-
ance with  postal  regulations  after  the  box  was
closed;  hence,  it  is  not  known  what  names  other
than  Oswald's  were  listed  on  that  form.  How-
ever, as  discussed  in  chapter  IV,  Oswald  is
known  to  have  received  the  assassination  rifle
under  the  name  of  A.  Hidell  and  his  Smith  &
Wesson  revolver  under  the  name  of  A.  J.  HideU
at  that  box.  On  June  3,  1963,  Oswald  opened  box


129


No.  30061  at  the  Lafayette  Square  Substation
in  New  Orleans.  Marina  Oswald  and  A.  J.
Hidell  were  listed  as  additional  persons  entitled
to  receive  mail  at  this  box.  Immediately  before
leaving  for  Mexico  City  in  late  September,  Os-
wald submitted  a  request  to  forward  his  mail  to
to  the  Paines'  address  in  Irving,  and  the  box  was
closed  on  September  26.  On  November  1,  1963,
he  opened  box  No.  6225  at  the  Dallas  Post  OflBce
Terminal  Amiex.  The  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Com-
mittee and  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union
were  listed  as  also  being  entitled  to  receive  mail
at  this  box.

Oswald's  use  of  post  oflBce  boxes  is  consistent
with  other  information  known  about  him.  His
frequent  changes  of  address  and  receipt  of  Com-
munist and  other  political  literatxire  would  ap-
pear to  have  provided  Oswald  reason  to  have
rented  postal  boxes.  These  were  the  explanations
for  his  use  of  the  boxes  which  he  provided  Postal
Inspector  H.  D.  Holmes  on  November  24.
Moreover,  on  October  14,  1963,  he  had  moved
into  a  room  on  Beckley  Avenue  under  the  name
of  O.  H.  Lee  and  it  would  have  been  extremely
difficult  for  Oswald  to  have  received  his  mail  at
that  address  without  having  disclosed  his  true
name.  The  boxes  cost  Oswald  only  $1.50  or  less
per  month.

Although  the  possibilities  of  investigation  in
this  area  are  limited,  there  is  no  evidence  that
any  of  the  three  boxes  was  ever  used  for  the
surreptitious  receipt  of  messages  or  was  used  by
persons  other  than  Oswald  or  his  family.  No  un-
explainable  notes  were  foimd  among  Oswald's
possessions  after  his  arrest.  Oswald's  box  on  the
day  of  the  assassination.  No.  6225,  was  kept
under  constant  personal  surveillance  by  postal
inspectors  from  about  5  p.m.  November  22  until
midnight  November  24.  A  modified  surveillance
was  maintained  thereafter.  No  one  called  for
mail  out  of  this  box;  indeed  the  only  mail  in  the
box  was  a  Russian  magazine  addressed  to  Os-
wald. The  single  outstanding  key  was  recovered
from  Oswald  immediately  after  he  was  taken  in
custody.

In  appraising  the  import  of  Oswald's  rental  of
post  office  boxes,  it  is  significant  that  he  was  not
secretive  about  their  use.  All  three  boxes  were
rented  by  Oswald  using  his  true  name.  His  ap-
pUcation  for  box  No.  2915  showed  his  home
address  as  that  of  Alexandria  De  Mohrenschildt
(Taylor),  whose  husband  had  agreed  to  allow
Oswald  to  use  his  address.  His  application  for
the  New  Orleans  box  listed  his  address  as  657
French  Street;  his  aunt,  Lillian  Murret,  lived
at  757  French  Street.  On  the  application  for  box
No.  6225,  Oswald  gave  an  incorrect  street  num-
ber, though  he  did  show  Beckley  Avenue,  where
he  was  then  living.  He  furnished  the  box  num-
bers to  his  brother,  to  an  employer,  to  Texas  and
New  Orleans  unemployment  commissions,  and
to  others.  Based  on  all  the  facts  disclosed  by  its
investigation,  the  Commission  has  attached  no
conspiratorial  significance  to  Oswald's  rental  of
post  office  boxes.


Oswald's  use  of  aliases  is  also  well  established.
In  chapter  IV,  the  evidence  relating  to  his  re-
peated use  of  the  name  "A.  J.  Hidell,"  and
close  variants  thereof,  is  set  forth.  Because  Os-
wald's use  of  this  pseudonym  became  known
quickly  after  the  assassination,  investigations
were  conducted  with  regard  to  persons  using  the
name  Hidell  or  names  similar  to  it.  Subversive
files,  public  carrier  records,  telegraph  company
records,  banking  and  other  commercial  records,
and  other  matters  investigated  and  persons  in-
terviewed have  been  examined  with  regard  to
Oswald's  true  name  and  his  known  alias.  No
evidence  has  been  produced  that  Oswald  ever
used  the  name  Hidell  as  a  means  of  making
undercover  contact  with  any  person.  Indeed,
though  Oswald  did  prepare  a  counterfeit  selec-
tive service  card  and  other  identification  using
this  name,  he  commonly  used  "Hidell"  to  repre-
sent persons  other  than  himself,  such  as  the
president  of  his  nonexistent  Fair  Play  for  Cuba
Committee  chapter,  the  doctor  whose  name  ap-
peared on  his  counterfeit  international  certifi-
cate of  vaccination,  and  as  references  on  his
job  applications.

Alwyn  Cole,  questioned  docimient  expert  for
the  Treasury  Department,  testified  that  the  false
identification  found  on  Oswald  upon  his  arrest
could  have  been  produced  by  employing  ele-
mentary techniques  used  in  a  photographic
printing  plant.  (See  app.  X)  Though  to  per-
form the  necessary  procedures  would  have  been
difficult  without  the  use  of  expensive  photo-
graphic equipment,  such  equipment  and  the
needed  film  and  photographic  paper  were  availa-
ble to  Oswald  when  he  was  employed  from
October  1962  through  early  April  1963  at
Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall,  a  commercial  advertising
photography  firm  in  Dallas.  While  so  employed,
Oswald  is  known  to  have  become  familiar  with
the  mechanics  of  photographic  enlargements,
contraction,  and  image  distortion  that  would
have  been  necessary  to  produce  his  false  identifi-
cation, and  to  have  used  the  facilities  of  his  em-
ployer for  some  personal  work.  Cole  testified
that  the  cards  in  Oswald's  wallet  did  not  exhibit
a  great  deal  of  skill,  pointing  out  various  errors
that  had  been  committed.  Oswald's  supervisor
at  Jaggars-Chiles-StovaU  has  stated  that  Oswald
seemed  unable  to  perform  photographic  work
with  precision,  which  was  one  of  the  main  rea-
sons for  which  he  was  ultimately  discharged.
The  retouched  negatives  used  to  make  Oswald's
counterfeit  certificate  of  service  identification
were  found  among  Oswald's  personal  effects
after  his  arrest,  as  was  a  rubber  stamping  kit
apparently  employed  to  produce  his  spurious
international  certificate  of  vaccination.  There
is  strong  evidence,  therefore,  that  Oswald  him-
self made  the  various  pieces  of  counterfeit  identi-
fication which  he  carried,  and  there  is  no  reason
to  believe  that  he  received  assistance  from  any
person  in  establishing  his  alias.

Oswald  also  used  incorrect  names  other  than
Hidell,  but  these  too  appear  unconnected  with


130


any  form  of  conspiracy.  Oswald's  last  name  ap-
pears as  "Lee"  in  three  places  in  connection
with  his  trip  to  Mexico  City,  discussed  above.
His  tourist  card  was  typed  by  the  Mexican  con-
sulate in  New  Orleans,  "Lee,  Harvey  Oswald."
However,  the  comma  seems  to  have  been  a  cleri-
cal error,  since  Oswald  signed  both  the  applica-
tion and  the  card  itself,  "Lee  H.  Oswald."  More-
over, Oswald seems originally to have also
printed  his  name,  evenly  spaced,  as  "Lee  H  Os-
wald," but  noting  that  the  form  instructed  him
to  "Print  full  name.  No  initials,"  printed  the  re-
mainder of  his  middle  name  after  the  "H."  The
clerk  who  typed  the  card  thus  saw  a  space  after
"Lee,"  followed  by  "Harvey  Oswald"  crowded
together,  and  probably  assumed  that  "Lee"  was
the  applicant's  last  name.  The  clerk  who  pre-
pared Oswald's  bus  reservation  for  his  return  trip
wrote  "H.  O.  Lee."  He  stated  that  he  did  not  re-
member the  occasion,  although  he  was  sure  from
the  handwriting  and  from  other  facts  that  he
had  dealt  with  Oswald.  He  surmised  that  he
probably made out the reservation directly
from  the  tourist  card,  since  Oswald  spoke  no
Spanish, and, seeing the comma, wrote the
name  "H.  O.  Lee."  Oswald  himself  signed  the
register  at  the  hotel  in  Mexico  City  as  "Lee,
Harvey  Oswald,"  but  since  the  error  is  identical
to  that  on  the  tourist  card  and  since  he  revealed
the  remainder  of  his  name,  "Harvey  Oswald,"
it  is  possible  that  Oswald  inserted  the  comma  to
conform  to  the  tourist  card,  or  that  the  earlier
mistake  suggested  a  new  pseudonym  to  Oswald
which  he  decided  to  continue.

In  any  event,  Oswald  used  his  correct  name
in  making  reservations  for  the  trip  to  Mexico
City,  in  introducing  himself  to  passengers  on
the  bus,  and  in  his  dealings  with  the  Cuban  and
Soviet  Embassies.  When  registering  at  the  Beck-
ley  Avenue  house  in  mid-October,  Oswald  per-
petuated the  pseudonym  by  giving  his  name  as
"O.  H.  Lee,"  though  he  had  given  his  correct
name  to  the  owner  of  the  previous  rooming-
house  where  he  had  rented  a  room  after  his  re-
turn from  Mexico  City.  Investigations  of  the
Commission  have  been  conducted  with  regard  to
persons  using  the  name  "Lee,"  and  no  evidence
has  been  found  that  Oswald  used  this  alias  for
the  purpose  of  making  any  type  of  secret
contacts.

Oswald  is  also  known  to  have  used  the  sur-
name "Osborne"  in  ordering  Fair  Play  for  Cuba
Committee  handbills  in  May  1963.  He  also  used
the  false  name  D.  F.  Drittal  as  a  certifying  wit-
ness on  the  mail-order  coupon  with  which  he
purchased  his  Smith  &  Wesson  revolver.  He  used
the  name  Lt.  J.  Evans  as  a  reference  on  an  em-
ployment application  in  New  Orleans.

Oswald's  repeated  use  of  false  names  is  proba-
bly not  to  be  disassociated  from  his  antisocial
and  criminal  inclinations.  No  doubt  he  pur-
chased his  weapons  under  the  name  of  Hidell  in
attempt  to  prevent  their  ownership  from  being
traced.  Oswald's  creation  of  false  names  and
fictitious  personalities  is  treated  in  the  discus-


sion of  possible  motives  set  forth  in  chapter  VII.
Whatever  its  significance  in  that  respect  may  be,
the  Commission  has  found  no  indication  that
Oswald's  use  of  aliases  was  linked  with  any
conspiracy  with  others.

Ownership  of  a  second  rifle. — The  Commis-
sion has  investigated  a  report  that,  during  the
first  2  weeks  of  November  1963,  Oswald  had
a  telescopic  sight  mounted  and  sighted  on  a  rifle
at  a  sporting  goods  store  in  Irving,  Tex.  The
main  evidence  that  Oswald  had  such  work  per-
formed for  him  is  an  undated  repair  tag  bearing
the  name  "Oswald"  from  the  Irving  Sports  Shop
in  Irving,  Tex.  On  November  25,  1963,  Dial  D.
Ryder,  an  employee  of  the  Irving  Sports  Shop,
presented  this  tag  to  agents  of  the  FBI,  claiming
that  the  tag  was  in  his  handwriting.  The  undated
tag  indicated  that  three  holes  had  been  drilled
in  an  unspecified  t>'pe  of  rifle  and  a  telescopic
sight  had  been  mounted  on  the  rifle  and
boresighted.

As  discussed  in  chapter  FV,  the  telescopic
sight  on  the  C2766  Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle
was  already  mounted  when  shipped  to  Oswald,
and  both  Ryder  and  his  employer,  Charles  W.
Greener,  feel  certain  that  they  never  did  any
work  on  this  rifle.  If  the  repair  tag  actually  rep-
resented a  transaction  involving  Lee  Harvey
Oswald,  therefore,  it  would  mean  that  Oswald
owned  another  rifle.  Although  this  would  not
alter  the  evidence  which  estabhshes  Oswald's
ownership  of  the  rifle  used  to  assassinate  Presi-
dent Kennedy,  the  possession  of  a  second  rifle
warranted  investigation  because  it  would  indi-
cate that  a  possibly  important  part  of  Oswald's
life  had  not  been  uncovered.

Since  aU  of  Oswald's  known  transactions  in
connection  with  firearms  after  his  return  to  the
United  States  were  undertaken  under  an  as-
sumed name,  it  seems  unlikely  that  if  he  did
have  repairs  made  at  the  sports  shop  he  would
have  used  his  real  name.  Investigation  has  re-
vealed that  the  authenticity  of  the  repair  tag
bearing  Oswald's  name  is  indeed  subject  to  grave
doubts.  Ryder  testified  that  he  found  the  repair
tag  while  cleaning  his  workbench  on  November
23,  1963.  However,  Ryder  spoke  with  Greener
repeatedly  during  the  period  between  November
22-28  and,  sometime  prior  to  November  25,
he  discussed  with  him  the  possibility  that  Oswald
had  been  in  the  store.  Neither  he  nor  Greener
could  remember  that  he  had  been.  But  despite
these  conversations  with  Greener,  it  is  significant
that  Ryder  never  called  the  repair  tag  to  his
employer's attention. Greener did not learn
about  the  tag  until  November  28,  when  he  was
called  by  TV  reporters  after  the  story  had  ap-
peared in  the  Dallas  Times-Herald The  pe-
culiarity of  Ryder's  silence  is  compounded  by
the  fact  that,  when  speaking  to  the  FBI  on
November  25,  Ryder  fixed  the  period  during
whioh  the  tag  had  been  issued  as  November
1-14,  1963,  yet,  from  his  later  testimony,  it  ap-
pears that  he  did  so  on  the  basis  that  it  must
have  occurred  when  Greener  was  on  vacation


131


since  Greener  did  not  remember  the  transaction.
Moreover,  the  FBI  had  been  directed  to  the
Irving  Sports  Shop  by  anonymous  telephone
calls  received  by  its  Dallas  office  and  by  a  local
television  station.  The  anonymous  male  who
telephoned  the  Bureau  attributed  his  informa-
tion to  an  unidentified  sack  boy  at  a  specified
supermarket  in  Irving,  but  investigation  has
faUed  to  verify  this  source.

Neither  Ryder  nor  Greener  claimed  that  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  had  ever  been  a  customer  in  the
Irving  Sports  Shop.  Neither  has  any  recollection
of  either  Oswald  or  his  Mannlicher-Carcano
rifle,  nor  does  either  recall  the  transaction  al-
legedly represented  by  the  repair  tag  or  the
person  for  whom  the  repair  was  supposedly
made.  Although  Ryder  stated  to  the  FBI  that
he  was  "quite  sure"  that  he  had  seen  Oswald  and
that  Oswald  may  have  been  in  the  store  at  one
time,  when  shown  a  photograph  of  Oswald  dur-
ing his  deposition,  Ryder  testified  he  knew  the
picture  to  be  of  Oswald,  "as  the  pictures  in  the
paper,  but  as  far  as  seeing  the  guy  personally,  I
don't  think  I  ever  have."

Subsequent  events  also  reflect  on  Ryder's
credibility.  In  his  deposition,  Ryder  emphatically
denied  that  he  talked  to  any  reporters  about  this
matter  prior  to  the  time  a  story  about  it  ap-
peared in  the  November  28,  1963,  edition  of
the  Dallas  Times-Herald.  Earlier,  however,  he
told  an  agent  of  the  U.S.  Secret  Service  that  the
newspaper  had  misquoted  him.  Moreover,  a  re-
porter for  the  Dallas  Times-Herald  has  testified
that  on  November  28,  1963,  he  called  Ryder  at
his  home  and  obtained  from  him  all  of  the  de-
tails of  the  alleged  transaction,  and  his  story  is
supported  by  the  testimony  of  a  second  reporter
who  overheard  one  end  of  the  telephone  conver-
sation. No  other  person  by  the  name  of  Oswald
in  the  Dallas-Fort  Worth  area  has  been  found
who  had  a  rifle  repaired  at  the  Irving  Sports
Shop.

Possible  corroboration  for  Ryder's  story  is
provided  by  two  women,  Mrs.  Edith  Whitworth,
who  operates  the  Furniture  Mart,  a  furniture
store  located  about  H  blocks  from  the  Irving
Sports  Shop,  and  Mrs.  Gertrude  Hunter,  a  friend
of  Mrs.  Whitworth.  They  testified  that  in  early
November  of  1963,  a  man  who  they  later  came
to  believe  was  Oswald  drove  up  to  the  Furniture
Mart  in  a  two-tone  blue  and  white  1957  Ford
automobile,  entered  the  store  and  asked  about
a  part  for  a  gun,  presumably  because  of  a  sign
that  appeared  in  the  building  advertising  a  gun-
smith shop  that  had  formerly  occupied  part  of
the  premises.  When  he  found  that  he  could  not
obtain  the  part,  the  man  allegedly  returned  to
his  car  and  then  came  back  into  the  store  with  a
woman  and  two  young  children  to  look  at  furni-
ture, remaining  in  the  store  for  about  30  to  40
minutes.

Upon  confronting  Marina  Oswald,  both
women  identified  her  as  the  woman  whom  they
had  seen  in  the  store  on  the  occasion  in  question,
although  Mrs.  Hunter  could  not  identify  a  pic-


ture of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  and  Mrs.  Whitworth
identified  some  pictures  of  Oswald  but  not
others.  Mrs.  Hunter  purported  to  identify  Ma-
rina Oswald  by  her  eyes,  and  did  not  observe  the
fact  that  Marina  Oswald  had  a  front  tooth  miss-
ing at  the  time  she  supposedly  saw  her.  After  a
thorough  inspection  of  the  Furniture  Mart,  Ma-
rina Oswald  testified  that  she  had  never  been  on
the  premises  before.

The  circumstances  surrounding  the  testimony
of  the  two  women  are  helpful  in  evaluating  the
weight  to  be  given  to  their  testimony,  and  the
extent  to  which  they  lend  support  to  Ryder's  evi-
dence. The  women  previously  told  newspaper
reporters  that  the  part  for  which  the  man  was
looking  was  a  "plunger,"  which  the  Commission
has  been  advised  is  a  colloquial  term  used  to
describe  a  firing  pin.  This  work  was  completely
different  from  the  work  covered  by  Ryder's  re-
pair tag,  and  the  firing  pin  of  the  assassination
weapon  does  not  appear  to  have  been  recently
replaced.  At  the  time  of  their  depositions,  nei-
ther woman  was  able  to  recall  the  type  of  work
which  the  man  wanted  done.

Mrs.  Whitworth  related  to  the  FBI  that  the
man  told  her  that  the  younger  child  with  him
was  bom  on  October  20,  1963,  which  was  in
fact  Rachel  Oswald's  birthday.  In  her  testimony
before  the  Commission,  however,  Mrs.  Whit-
worth could  not  state  that  the  man  had  told  her
the  child's  birthdate  was  October  20,  1963,  and
in  fact  expressed  uncertainty  about  the  birthday
of  her  own  grandchild,  which  she  had  previously
used  as  a  guide  to  remembering  the  birth  date  of
the  younger  child  in  the  shop.  Mrs.  Hunter
thought  that  the  man  she  and  Mrs.  Whitworth
believed  was  Oswald  drove  the  car  to  and  from
the  store;  however,  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  appar-
ently was  not  able  to  drive  an  automobile  by  him-
self and  does  not  appear  to  have  had  access  to  a
car.

The  two  women  claimed  that  Oswald  was  in
the  Furniture  Mart  on  a  weekday,  and  in  mid-
afternoon.  However,  Oswald  had  reported  to
work  at  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  on
the  dates  referred  to  by  the  women  and  there  is
no  evidence  that  he  left  his  job  during  business
hours.  In  addition,  Ruth  Paine  has  stated  that
she  always  accompanied  Marina  Oswald  when-
ever Marina  left  the  house  with  her  children  and
that  they  never  went  to  the  Furniture  Mart,
either  with  or  without  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  at
any  time  during  October  or  November  of  1963.
There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  in  November
the  Oswalds  were  interested  in  buying  furniture.

Finally,  investigation  has  produced  reason  to
question  the  credibility  of  Mrs.  Hunter  as  a  wit-
ness. Mrs.  Hunter  stated  that  one  of  the  reasons
she  remembers  the  description  of  the  car  in
which  Oswald  supposedly  drove  to  the  furniture
store  was  that  she  was  awaiting  the  arrival  of  a
friend  from  Houston,  who  drove  a  similar  auto-
mobile. However,  the  friend  in  Houston  has
advised  that  in  November  1963,  she  never  vis-
ited or  planned  to  visit  Dallas,  and  that  she


132


told  no  one  that  she  intended  to  make  such  a
trip.  Moreover  the  friend  added,  according  to
the  FBI  interview  report,  that  Mrs.  Hunter  has
"a  strange  obsession  for  attempting  to  inject  her-
self into  any  big  event  which  comes  to  her  atten-
tion" and  that  she  "is  likely  to  claim  some  per-
sonal knowledge  of  any  major  crime  which  re-
ceives much  publicity."  She  concluded  that  "the
entire  family  is  aware  of  these  'tall  tales'  Mrs.
Hunter  tells  and  they  normally  pay  no  attention
to  her."

Another  allegation  relating  to  the  possible
ownership  of  a  second  rifle  by  Oswald  comes
from  Robert  Adrian  Taylor,  a  mechanic  at  a
service  station  in  Irving.  Some  3  weeks  after  the
assassination,  Taylor  reported  to  the  FBI  that
he  thought  that,  in  March  or  April  of  1963,  a
man  he  believed  to  be  Oswald  had  been  a  pas-
senger in  an  automobile  that  stopped  at  his  sta-
tion for  repairs;  since  neither  the  driver  nor  the
passenger  had  sufficient  funds  for  the  repair
work,  the  person  believed  to  be  Oswald  sold  a
U.S.  Army  rifle  to  Mr.  Taylor,  using  the  pro-
ceeds to  pay  for  the  repairs.  However,  a  second
employee  at  the  service  station,  who  recalled  the
incident,  believed  that,  despite  a  sUght  resem-
blance, the  passenger  was  not  Oswald.  Upon
reflection,  Taylor  himself  stated  that  he  is  very
doubtful  that  the  man  was  Oswald.

Rifle  practice. — Several  witnesses  believed
that  in  the  weeks  preceding  the  assassination,
they  observed  a  man  resembling  Oswald  prac-
ticing with  a  rifle  in  the  fields  and  wooded  areas
siirrounding  Dallas,  and  at  rifle  ranges  in  that
area.  Some  witnesses  claimed  Oswald  was  alone,
while  others  said  he  was  accompanied  by  one
or  more  other  persons.  In  most  instances,  in-
vestigation has  disclosed  that  there  is  no  sub-
stantial basis  for  believing  that  the  person  re-
ported by  the  various  witnesses  was  Oswadd.

One  group  of  witnesses,  however,  believed
that  they  observed  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  at  the
Sports  Drome  Rifle  Range  in  Dallas  at  various
times  from  September  through  November  of
1963.  In  light  of  the  number  of  witnesses,  the
similarity  of  the  descriptions  of  the  man  they
saw,  and  the  type  of  weapon  they  thought  the
individual  was  shooting,  there  is  reason  to  be-
lieve that  these  witnesses  did  see  the  same  per-
son at  the  firing  range,  although  the  testimony
of  none  of  these  witnesses  is  fuUy  consistent
with  the  reported  observations  of  the  other
witnesses.

The  witnesses  who  claimed  to  have  seen  Os-
wald at  the  firing  range  had  more  than  a  pass-
ing notice  of  the  person  they  observed.  Mal-
colm H.  Price,  Jr.,  adjusted  the  scope  on  the
individual's  rifle  on  one  occasion;  Garland  G.
Slack  had  an  altercation  with  the  individual  on
another  occasion  because  he  was  shooting  at
Slack's  target;  and  Sterling  C.  Wood,  who  on  a
third  date  was  present  at  the  range  with  his
father,  Dr.  Homer  Wood,  spoke  with  his  father
and  very  briefly  with  the  man  himself  about  the
individual's  rifle.  All  three  of  these  persons,  as


well  as  Dr.  Wood,  expressed  confidence  that
the  man  they  saw  was  Oswald.  Two  other  per-
sons believed  they  saw  a  person  resembling  Os-
wald firing  a  similar  rifle  at  another  range  near
Irving  2  days  before  the  assassination.

Although  the  testimony  of  these  witnesses
was  partially  corroborated  by  other  witnesses,
there  was  other  evidence  which  prevented  the
Commission  from  reaching  the  conclusion  that
Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was  the  person  these  wit-
nesses saw.  Others  who  were  at  the  firing  range
remembered  the  same  individual  but,  though
noting  a  similarity  to  Oswald,  did  not  believe
that  the  man  was  Oswald;  others  either  were
unable  to  state  whether  the  man  was  Oswald  or
did  not  recall  seeing  anybody  who  they  feel  may
have  been  Oswald.  Moreover,  when  interviewed
on  December  2,  1963,  Slack  recalled  that  the
individual  whom  he  saw  had  blond  hair,  and  on
December  3,  1963,  Price  stated  that  on  several
occasions  when  he  saw  the  individual,  he  was
wearing  a  "Bulldogger  Texas  st>-le"  hat  and  had
bubble  gum  or  chewing  tobacco  in  his  cheek.
None  of  these  characteristics  match  those  known
about  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.

Moreover,  the  date  on  which  Price  adjusted
the  scope  for  the  unknown  person  was  Septem-
ber 28,  1963,  but  Oswald  is  known  to  have  been
in  Mexico  City  at  that  time;  since  a  comparison
of  the  events  testified  to  by  Price  and  Slack
strongly  suggests  that  they  were  describing  the
same  man,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  Slack
was  also  describing  a  man  other  than  Oswald
In  addition.  Slack  believed  he  saw  the  same  per-
son at  the  rifle  range  on  November  10  and  there
is  persuasive  evidence  that  on  November  10,
Oswald  was  at  the  Paines'  home  in  Irving  and
did  not  leave  to  go  to  the  rifle  range.  Finally,
the  man  whom  Price  assisted  on  September  28
drove  an  old  car,  possibly  a  1940  or  1941  Ford.
However,  there  is  evidence  that  Oswald  could
not  drive  at  that  time,  and  there  is  no  indication
that  Oswald  ever  had  access  to  such  a  car.
Neither  Oswald's  name  nor  any  of  his  knovrTi
aliases  was  found  in  the  sign-in  register  main-
tained at  the  Sports  Drome  Rifle  Range,  though
many  customers  did  sign  this  register,  The  alle-
gations pertaining  to  the  companions  who  re-
portedly accompanied  the  man  believed  to  be
Oswald  are  also  inconsistent  among  themselves
and  conform  to  no  other  credible  information
ascertained  by  the  Commission.  Several  Vritnes-
ses  noticed  a  bearded  man  at  the  club  when  the
person  believed  to  be  Oswald  was  there,  although
only  one  witness  thought  the  tv-'o  men  were  to-
gether; the  bearded  gentleman  was  located,  and
he  was  not  found  to  have  any  connection  with
Oswald.

It  seems  likely  that  the  identification  of  Price,
Slack,  and  the  Woods  was  reinforced  in  their
own  minds  by  the  belief  that  the  man  whom  they
saw  was  firing  a  rifle  perhaps  identical  to  Os-
wald's Manrdicher-Carcano.  The  witnesses
agreed  that  the  man  they  observed  was  firing  a
Mauser-t>"pe  bolt-action  rifle  with  the  ammuni-


133


tion  clip  immediately  in  front  of  the  trigger  ac-
tion, and  that  a  scope  was  mounted  on  the  rifle.
These  features  are  consistent  with  the  rifle  Os-
wald used  for  the  assassination.  The  witnesses
agreed  that  the  man  had  accurate  aim  with  the
rifle.

However,  the  evidence  demonstrated  that  the
weapon  fired  by  the  man  they  observed  was
different  from  the  assassination  rifle.  The  wit-
nesses agreed  that  the  barrel  of  the  gun  which
the  individual  was  firing  had  been  shortened  in
the  process  of  "sporterizing"  the  weapon.  In  ad-
dition, Price  and  Slack  recalled  that  certain
pieces  were  missing  from  the  top  of  the  weapon,
and  Dr.  Wood  and  his  son,  and  others,  remem-
bered that  the  weapon  spouted  flames  when
fired.  None  of  these  characteristics  correspond
with  Oswald's  Mannlicher-Carcano.  Price  and
Slack  believed  that  the  gun  did  not  have  a  sling,
but  the  assassination  weapon  did  have  one.  Ster-
Ung  Wood,  on  the  other  hand,  recalled  that  the
rifle  which  he  saw  had  a  sling.  Price  also  recalled
that  he  examined  the  rifle  briefly  for  some  indi-
cation as  to  where  it  had  been  manufactured,  but
saw  nothing,  whereas  the  words  "MADE
ITALY"  are  marked  on  the  top  of  Oswald's
Mannlicher-Carcano.

The  scope  on  the  rifle  observed  at  the  firing
range  does  not  appear  to  be  the  same  as  the  one
on  the  assassination  weapon.  Price  remembered
that  the  individual  told  him  that  his  scope  was
Japanese,  that  he  had  paid  $18  for  it,  and  that
he  had  it  mounted  in  a  gimshop  in  Cedar  HiUs,
though  apparently  no  such  shop  exists  in  that
area.  The  scope  on  the  Mannlicher-Carcano  was
of  Japanese  origin  but  it  was  worth  a  little  more
than  $7  and  was  already  mounted  when  he  re-
ceived the  rifle  from  a  mail-order  firm  in  Chi-
cago. Sterling  Wood  and  Slack  agreed  that  the
scope  had  a  somewhat  different  appearance  from
the  scope  on  the  assassination  rifle.

Though  the  person  believed  to  be  Oswald  re-
tained his  sheU  casings,  presumably  for  reuse,
all  casings  recovered  from  areas  where  it  is  be-
lieved that  Oswald  may  have  practiced  have
been  examined  by  the  FBI  Laboratory,  and  none
has  been  found  which  was  fired  from  Oswald's
rifle.  FinaUy,  evidence  discussed  in  chapter  IV
tends  to  prove  that  Oswald  brought  his  rifle  to
Dallas  from  the  home  of  the  Paines  in  Irving  on
November  22,  and  there  is  no  other  evidence
which  iudicates  that  he  took  the  rifle  or  a  pack-
age which  might  have  contained  the  rifle  out  of
the  Paine's  garage,  where  it  was  stored,  prior
to  that  date.

Automobile  demonstration. — The  testimony
of  Albert  Guy  Bogard  has  been  carefuUy  evalu-
ated because  it  suggests  the  possibility  that  Os-
wald might  have  been  a  proficient  automobile
driver  and,  during  November  1963,  might  have
been  expecting  funds  with  which  to  purchase  a
car.  Bogard,  formerly  an  automobile  salesman
with  a  Lincoln-Mercury  firm  in  Dallas,  testified
that  in  the  early  afternoon  of  November  9,  1963,
he  attended  a  prospective  customer  who  he  be-


lieves was  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  According  to
Bogard,  the  customer,  after  test  driving  an  auto-
mobile over  the  Stemmons  Freeway  at  60  to  70
miles  per  hour,  told  Bogard  that  in  several  weeks
he  would  have  the  money  to  make  a  purchase.
Bogard  asserted  that  the  customer  gave  his  name
as  "Lee  Oswald,"  which  Bogard  wrote  on  a  busi-
ness card.  After  Oswald's  name  was  mentioned
on  the  radio  on  November  22,  Bogard  assertedly
threw  the  card  in  a  trash  can,  making  the  com-
ment to  coemployees  that  he  supposed  Oswald
would  no  longer  wish  to  buy  a  car.

Bogard's  testimony  has  received  corrobora-
tion. The  assistant  sales  manager  at  the  time,
Frank  Pizzo,  and  a  second  salesman,  Eugene
M.  Wilson,  stated  that  they  recall  an  instance
when  the  customer  described  by  Bogard  was  in
the  showroom.  Another  salesman,  Oran  Brown,
recalled  that  Bogard  asked  him  to  assist  the  cus-
tomer if  he  appeared  during  certain  evenings
when  Bogard  was  away  from  the  showroom.
Brown  stated  that  he  too  wrote  down  the  custo-
mer's name  and  both  he  and  his  wife  remember
the  name  "Oswald"  as  being  on  a  paper  in  his
possession  before  the  assassination.

However,  doubts  exist  about  the  accuracy  of
Bogard's  testimony.  He,  Pizzo,  and  Wilson  dif-
fered on  important  details  of  what  is  supposed
to  have  occiured  when  the  customer  was  in  the
showroom.  Whereas  Bogard  stated  that  the  cus-
tomer said  he  did  not  wish  credit  and  wanted  to
purchase  a  car  for  cash,  Pizzo  and  Wilson  both
indicated  that  the  man  did  attempt  to  purchase
on  credit.  According  to  Wilson,  when  the  custo-
mer was  told  that  he  would  be  unable  to  pur-
chase a  car  without  a  credit  rating,  substantial
cash  or  a  lengthy  employment  record,  he  stated
sarcastically,  "Maybe  I'm  going  to  have  to  go
back  to  Russia  to  buy  a  car."  While  it  is  possible
that  Oswald  would  have  made  such  a  remark,
the  statement  is  not  consistent  with  Bogard's
story.  Indeed,  Bogard  has  made  no  mention
that  the  customer  ever  spoke  with  Wilson  while
he  was  in  the  showroom.  More  important,  on
November  23,  a  search  through  the  showroom's
refuse  was  made,  but  no  paper  bearing  Oswald's
name  was  fovmd.  The  paper  on  which  Brown
reportedly  wrote  Oswald's  name  also  has  never
been  located.

The  assistant  sales  manager,  Mr.  Pizzo,  who
saw  Bogard's  prospect  on  November  9  and
shortly  after  the  assassioation  felt  that  Oswald
may  have  been  this  man,  later  examined  pictures
of  Oswald  and  expressed  serious  doubts  that  the
person  with  Bogard  was  in  fact  Oswald.  While
noting  a  resemblance,  he  did  not  believe  that
Oswald's  hairline  matched  that  of  the  person
who  had  been  in  the  showroom  on  November  9.
Wilson  has  stated  that  Bogard's  customer  was
only  about  5  feet  taU.  Several  persons  who  knew
Oswald  have  testified  that  he  was  unable  to
drive,  although  Mrs.  Paine,  who  was  giving  Os-
wald driving  lessons,  stated  that  Oswald  was
showing  some  improvement  by  November.
Moreover,  Oswald's  whereabouts  on  November


134


9,  as  testified  to  by  Marina  Oswald  and  Ruth
Paine,  would  have  made  it  impossible  for  him
to  have  visited  the  automobile  showroom  as  Mr.
Bogard  claims.

Alleged  association  with  various  Mexican  or
Cuban  individuals. — The  Commission  has  ex-
amined Oswald's  known  or  alleged  contacts  and
activities  in  an  effort  to  ascertain  whether  or  not
he  was  involved  in  any  conspiracy  may  be  seen
in  the  investigation  it  conducted  as  a  result  of
the  testimony  given  by  Mrs.  Sylvia  Odio.  The
Commission  investigated  her  statements  in  con-
nection with  its  consideration  of  the  testimony  of
several  witnesses  suggesting  that  Oswald  may
have  been  seen  in  the  company  of  unidentified
persons  of  Cuban  or  Mexican  background.  Mrs.
Odio  was  born  in  Havana  in  1937  and  remained
in  Cuba  until  1960;  it  appears  that  both  of  her
parents  are  political  prisoners  of  the  Castro  re-
gime. Mrs.  Odio  is  a  member  of  the  Cuban
Revolutionary  Junta  (JURE),  and  anti-Castro
organization.  She  testified  that  late  in  September
1963,  three  men  came  to  her  apartment  in  Dallas
and  asked  her  to  help  them  prepare  a  letter  so-
liciting funds  for  JURE  activities.  She  claimed
that  the  men,  who  exhibited  personal  familiarity
with  her  imprisoned  father,  asked  her  if  she  were
"working  in  the  underground,"  and  she  replied
that  she  was  not.  She  testified  that  two  of  the
men  appeared  to  be  Cubans,  although  they  also
had  some  characteristics  that  she  associated  with
Mexicans.  Those  two  men  did  not  state  their  full
names,  but  identified  themselves  only  by  their
fictitious  underground  "war  names."  Mrs.  Odio
remembered  the  name  of  one  of  the  Cubans  as
"Leopoldo."  The  third  man,  an  American,  al-
legedly was  introduced  to  Mrs.  Odio  as  "Leon
Oswald,"  and  she  was  told  that  he  was  very  much
interested  in  the  Cuban  cause.  Mrs.  Odio  said
that  the  men  told  her  that  they  had  just  come
from  New  Orleans  and  that  they  were  then  about
to  leave  on  a  trip.  Mrs.  Odio  testified  that  the
next  day  Leopoldo  called  her  on  the  telephone
and  told  her  that  it  was  his  idea  to  introduce  the
American  into  the  underground  "because  he  is
great,  he  is  kind  of  nuts."  Leopoldo  also  said
that  the  American  had  been  in  the  Marine  Corps
and  was  an  excellent  shot,  and  that  the  Ameri-
can said  the  Cubans  "don't  have  any  guts  *  *  *
because  President  Keimedy  should  have  been
assassinated  after  the  Bay  of  Pigs,  and  some
Cubans  should  have  done  that,  because  he  was
the  one  that  was  holding  the  freedom  of  Cuba
actually."

Although  Mrs.  Odio  suggested  doubts  that
the  men  were  in  fact  members  of  JURE,  she
was  certain  that  the  American  who  was  intro-
duced to  her  as  Leon  Oswald  was  Lee  Harvey
Oswald.  Her  sister,  who  was  in  the  apartment
at  the  time  of  the  visit  by  the  three  men,  and
who  stated  that  she  saw  them  briefly  in  the  hall-
way when  answering  the  door,  also  believed  that
the  American  was  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  By  re-
ferring to  the  date  on  which  she  moved  from  her
former  apartment,  October  1,  1963,  Mrs.  Odio


fixed  the  date  of  the  alleged  visit  on  the  Thurs-
day or  Friday  immediately  preceding  that  date,
i.e.,  September  26  or  27.  She  was  positive  that
the  visit  occurred  prior  to  October  1.

During  the  course  of  its  investigation,  how-
ever, the  Commission  concluded  that  Oswald
could  not  have  been  in  Dallas  on  the  evening
of  either  September  26  or  27,  1963.  It  also  de-
veloped considerable  evidence  that  he  was  not
in  Dallas  at  any  time  between  the  beginning  of
September  and  October  3,  1963.  On  April  24,
Oswald  left  Dallas  for  New  Orleans,  where  he
lived  until  his  trip  to  Mexico  City  in  late  Sep-
tember and  his  subsequent  return  to  Dallas.  Os-
wald is  known  to  have  been  in  New  Orleans  as
late  as  September  23,  1963,  the  date  on  which
Mrs.  Paine  and  Marina  Oswald  left  New  Or-
leans for  Dallas.  Sometime  between  4  p.m.  on
September  24  and  1  p.m.  on  September  25,  Os-
wald cashed  an  unemployment  compensation
check  at  a  store  in  New  Orleans;  imder  normal
procedures  this  check  would  not  have  reached
Oswald's  postal  box  in  New  Orleans  imtil  at
least  5  a.m.  on  September  25.  The  store  at  which
he  cashed  the  check  did  not  open  until  8  a.m.
Therefore,  it  appeared  that  Oswald's  presence  in
New  Orleans  until  sometime  between  8  a.m.  and

1  p.m.  on  September  25  was  quite  firmly
established.

Although  there  is  no  firm  evidence  of  the
means  by  which  Oswald  traveled  from  New  Or-
leans to  Houston,  on  the  first  leg  of  his  Mexico
City  trip,  the  Commission  noted  that  a  Conti-
nental Trailways  bus  leaving  New  Orleans  at
12:30  p.m.  on  September  25  would  have
brought  Oswald  to  Houston  at  10:50  p.m.  that
evening.  His  presence  on  this  bus  would  be  con-
sistent with  other  ©vidence  before  the  Commis-
sion. There  is  strong  evidence  that  on  September
26,  1963,  Oswald  traveled  on  Continental  Trail-
ways  bus  No.  5133  which  left  Houston  at  2:35
a.m.  for  Laredo,  Tex.  Bus  company  records  dis-
close that  one  ticket  from  Houston  to  Laredo
was  sold  during  the  night  shift  on  September
25-26,  and  that  such  ticket  was  the  only  one  of
its  kind  sold  in  the  period  of  September  25
through  September  26.  The  agent  who  sold  this
ticket  has  stated  that  Oswald  could  have  been
the  purchaser.  Two  English  passengers.  Dr.  and
Mrs.  John  B.  McFarland,  testified  that  they  saw
Oswald  riding  alone  on  this  bus  shortly  after  they
awoke  at  6  a.m.  The  bus  was  scheduled  to  ar-
rive in  Laredo  at  1:20  p.m.  on  September  26,
and  Mexican  immigration  records  show  that  Os-
wald in  fact  crossed  the  border  at  Laredo  to
Nuevo  Laredo,  Mexico,  between  6  a.m. and

2  p.m.  on  that  day.  Evidence  set  out  in  appendix
Xin  establishes  that  Oswald  did  not  leave
Mexico  imtil  October  3,  and  that  he  arrived  in
Dallas  the  same  day.

The  Commission  noted  that  the  only  time  not
strictly  accounted  for  during  the  period  that
Mrs.  Odio  thought  Oswald  might  have  visited
her  is  the  span  between  the  morning  of  Septem-
ber 25  and  2:35  a.ni.  on  September  26.  The


135


only  public  means  of  transportation  by  which
Oswald  could  have  traveled  from  New  Orleans
to  Dallas  in  time  to  catch  his  bus  from  Houston
to  Laredo,  would  have  been  the  airlines.  Inves-
tigation disclosed  no  indication  that  he  flew  be-
tween these  points.  Moreover,  it  did  not  seem
probably  that  Oswald  would  speed  from  New
Orleans,  spend  a  short  time  talking  to  Sylvia
Odio,  and  then  travel  from  Dallas  to  Mexico
City  and  back  on  the  bus.  Automobile  travel  in
the time  available, though  perhaps possible,
would have been difficult. The Commission
noted,  however,  that  if  Oswald  had  reached
Dallas  on  the  evening  of  September  25,  he  could
have  traveled  by  bus  to  Alice,  Tex.,  and  there
caught  the  bus  which  had  left  Houston  for
Laredo  at  2:30  a.m.  on  September  26,  1963.
Further  investigation  in  that  regard  indicated,
however,  that  no  tickets  were  sold,  during  the
period  September  23-26,  1963  for  travel  from
Dallas  to  Laredo  or  points  beyond  by  the  Dallas
office  of  Contioental  Trailways,  the  only  bus
line  on  which  Oswald  could  have  made  connec-
tions vsdth  the  bus  on  which  he  was  later  seen.
Furthermore, if Oswald had traveled from
Dallas  to  Alice,  he  would  not  have  reached  the
Houston  to  Laredo  bus  until  after  he  was  first
reportedly  observed  on  it  by  the  McFarlands.  Os-
wald had  also  told  passengers  on  the  bus  to
Laredo  that  he  had  traveled  from  New  Orleans
by  bus,  and  made  no  mention  of  an  intervening
trip  to  Dallas. In  addition, the  Commission
noted  evidence  that  on  the  evening  of  September
25,  1963,  Oswald  made  a  telephone  call  to  a
party  in  Houston  proposing  to  visit  a  resident  of
Houston  that  evening  and  the  fact  that  such  a
call  would  appear  to  be  inconsistent  with  Os-
wald's having  been  in  Dallas  at  the  time.  It  thus
appeared  that  the  evidence  was  persuasive  that
Oswald  was  not  in  Dallas  on  September  25,  and,
therefore,  that  he  was  not  in  that  city  at  the  time
Mrs.  Odio  said  she  saw  him.

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  appeared  almost
certain  that  Oswald  could  not  have  been  in  Dal-
las at  the  time  Mrs.  Odio  thought  he  was,  the
Commission  requested  the  FBI  to  conduct  fur-
ther investigation  to  determine  the  validity  of
Mrs.  Odio's  testimony.  The  Commission  con-
sidered the  problems  raised  by  that  testimony
as  important  in  view  of  the  possibility  it  raised
that  Oswald  may  have  had  companions  on  his
trip  to  Mexico.  The  Conmiission  specifically  re-
quested the  FBI  to  attempt  to  locate  and  identify
the  two  men  who  Mrs.  Odio  stated  were  with
the  man  she  thought  was  Oswald.  In  an  effort  to
do  that  the  FBI  located  and  interviewed  Manuel
Ray,  a  leader  of  JURE  who  confirmed  that  Mrs.
Odio's  parents  were  political  prisoners  in  Cuba,
but  stated  that  he  did  not  know  anything  about
the  alleged  Oswald  visit.  The  same  was  true  of
Rogelio  Cisneros,  a  former  anti-Castro  leader
from  Miami  who  had  visited  Mrs.  Odio  in  June
of  1962  in  connection  with  certain  anti-Castro
activities.  Additional  investigation  was  con-
ducted in  Dallas  and  in  other  cities  in  search  of


the  visitors  to  Mrs.  Odio's  apartment.  Mrs.  Odio
herself  was  reinterviewed.

On  September  16,  1964,  the  FBI  located
Loran  Eugene  Hall  in  Johnsandale,  Calif.  Hall
has  been  identified  as  a  participant  in  numerous
anti-Castro  activities.  He  told  the  FBI  that  in
September  of  1963  he  was  in  Dallas,  soliciting
aid  in  connection  with  anti-Castro  activities.  He
said  he  had  visited  Mrs.  Odio.  He  was  accom-
panied by  Lawrence  Howard,  a  Mexican-
American  from  East  Los  Angeles  and  one  Wil-
ham  Seymour  from  Arizona.  He  stated  that
Seymour  is  similar  in  appearance  to  Lee  Harvey
Oswald;  he  speaks  only  a  few  words  of  Spanish,
as  Mrs.  Odio  had  testified  one  of  the  men  who
visited  her  did.  While  the  FBI  had  not  yet  com-
pleted its  investigation  into  this  matter  at  the
time  the  report  went  to  press,  the  Commission
has  concluded  that  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was  not
at  Mrs.  Odio's  apartment  in  September  of  1963.

The  Commission  has  also  noted  the  testi-
mony of  Evaristo  Rodriguez,  a  bartender  in  the
Habana  Bar  in  New  Orleans,  to  the  effect  that
he  saw  Oswald  in  that  bar  in  August  of  1963  in
the  company  of  a  Latin-appearing  man.  Rod-
riguez' description  of  the  man  accompanying
the  person  he  thought  to  be  Oswald  was  similar
in  respects  to  the  description  given  by  Sylvia
Odio  since  both  testified  that  the  man  may  have
been  of  either  Cuban  or  Mexican  extraction,  and
had  a  slight  bald  spot  on  the  forepart  of  his  hair-
line. Rodriguez'  identification  of  Oswald  was  un-
corroborated except  for  the  testimony  of  the
owner  of  the  bar,  Orest  Pena;  according  to
Rodriguez,  Pena  was  not  in  a  position  to  observe
the  man  he  thought  later  to  have  been  Oswald.
Although  Pena  has  testified  that  he  did  observe
the  same  person  as  did  Rodriguez,  and  that  this
person  was  Oswald,  an  FBI  interview  report  in-
dicated that  a  month  earlier  Pena  had  stated  that
he  "could  not  at  this  time  or  at  any  time  say
whether  or  not  the  person  was  identical  with
Lee  Harvey  Oswald."  Though  when  testifying,
Pena  identified  photographs  of  Oswald,  the  FBI
report  also  recorded  that  Pena  "stated  the  only
reason  he  was  able  to  recognize  Oswald  was  be-
cause he  had  seen  Oswald's  picture  in  the  news
media  so  often  after  the  assassination  of  Presi-
dent John  F.  Kennedy."  When  present  at  Pena's
bar.  Oswald  was  supposed  to  have  been  intoxi-
cated to  the  extent  that  he  became  ill,  which  is
inconsistent  with  other  evidence  that  Oswald  did
not  drink  alcoholic  beverages  to  excess.

The  Commission  has  also  noted  the  testimony
of  Dean  Andrews,  an  attorney  in  New  Orleans.
Andrews  stated  that  Oswald  came  to  his  office
several  times  in  the  summer  of  1963  to  seek  ad-
vice on  a  less  than  honorable  discharge  from  the
Armed  Forces,  the  citizenship  status  of  his  wife
and  his  own  citizenship  status.  Andrews,  who
believed  that  he  was  contacted  on  November  23
to  represent  Oswald,  testified  that  Oswald  was
always  accompanied  by  a  Mexican  and  was  at
times  accompanied  by  apparent  homosexuals.
Andrews  was  able  to  locate  no  records  of  any  of


136


Oswald's  alleged  visits,  and  investigation  has
failed  to  locate  the  person  who  supposedly
called  Andrews  on  November  23,  at  a  time  when
Andrews  was  under  heavy  sedation.  While  one
of  Andrews'  employees  felt  that  Oswald  might
have  been  at  his  office,  his  secretary  has  no  recol-
lection of  Oswald  being  there.

Oswald  Was  Not  an  Agent  for  the  U.S.
Government

From  the  time  of  his  release  from  the  Marine
Corps  imtil  the  assassination,  Lee  Harvey  Os-
wald dealt  in  various  transactions  with  several
agencies  of  the  U.S.  Government.  Before  de-
parting the  United  States  for  the  Soviet  Union
m  1959,  he  obtained  an  American  passport,
which  he  returned  to  the  Embassy  in  Moscow
in  October  1959  when  he  attempted  to  renoimce
his  U.S.  citizenship.  Thereafter,  while  in  the  So-
viet Union,  Oswald  had  numerous  contacts  with
the  American  Embassy,  both  in  person  and
through  correspondence.  Two  years  later,  he
applied  for  the  return  and  renewal  of  his  pass-
port, which  was  granted  him.  His  application
concerning  the  admittance  of  his  wife  to  this
country  was  passed  upon  by  the  Immigration
and  Naturalization  Service  of  the  Department  of
Justice  in  addition  to  the  State  Department.  And
before  returning  to  this  country,  he  secured  a
loan  from  the  State  Department  to  help  cover
his  transportation  costs  from  Moscow  to  New
York.  These  dealings  with  the  Department  of
State  and  the  Immigration  and  Naturalization
Service  have  been  reviewed  earlier  in  this  chap-
ter and  are  considered  in  detail  in  appendix  XV.
After  his  return,  Oswald  was  interviewed  on
three  occasions  by  agents  of  the  FBI,  and  Mrs.
Paine  was  also  questioned  by  the  FBI  about  Os-
wald's activities.  Oswald  obtained  a  second  pass-
port in  June  of  1963.  And  both  the  FBI  and  the
CIA  took  note  of  his  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Com-
mittee activities  in  New  Orleans  and  his  appear-
ance at  the  Soviet  consulate  in  Mexico  City.  For
reasons  which  will  be  discussed  fully  in  chapter
VIII,  Oswald's  name  was  never  given  to  the  U.S.
Secret  Service.

These  dealings  have  given  rise  to  numerous
rumors  and  allegations  that  Oswald  may  have
been  a  paid  informant  or  some  type  of  under-
cover agent  for  a  Federal  agency,  usually  the
FBI  or  the  CIA.  The  Commission  has  fully  ex-
plored whether  Oswald  had  any  official  or  un-
official relationship  with  any  Federal  agency  be-
yond that  already  described.

Oswald's  mother,  Mrs.  Marguerite  Oswald,
testified  before  the  Commission  that  she  believes
her  son  went  to  Russia  and  returned  as  an  under-
cover agent  for  the  U.S.  Government.  Mrs.  Os-
wald mentioned  the  belief  that  her  son  was  an
agent  to  a  State  Department  representative
whom  she  visited  in  January  1961,  when  she  was
trying  to  locate  her  son.  She  had  been  inter-
viewed earlier  by  FBI  Agent  John  W.  Fain,
within  some  6  months  of  Oswald's  depaijure  for
Russia,  and  did  not  at  that  time  suggest-Such  an


explanation  for  Oswald's  departure.  Though
provided  the  opportunity  to  present  any  ma-
terial she  considered  pertinent,  Mrs.  Oswald
was  not  able  to  give  the  Commission  any  rea-
sonable basis  for  her  speculation.  As  discussed
later  in  this  chapter,  the  Commission  has  in-
vestigated Marguerite  Oswald's  claim  that  an
FBI  agent  showed  her  a  picture  of  Jack  Ruby
after  the  assassination  but  before  Lee  Harvey
Oswald  had  been  killed;  this  allegation  was  in-
accurate, since  the  picture  was  not  of  Ruby.

After  the  assassination  it  was  reported  that
in  1962  Oswald  had  told  Pauline  Bates,  a  pub-
lic stenographer  in  Fort  Worth,  Tex.,  that  he  had
become  a  "secret  agent"  of  the  U.S.  Govern-
ment and  that  he  was  soon  going  back  to  Russia
"for  Washington."  Mrs.  Bates  in  her  sworn  testi-
mony denied  that  Oswald  ever  told  her  anything
to  that  effect.  She  testified  that  she  had  stated
"that  when  he  first  said  that  he  went  to  Russia
and  had  gotten  a  visa  that  I  thought — it  was  just
a  thought — that  maybe  he  was  going  over  under
the  auspices  of  the  State  Department — as  a  stu-
dent or  something."

In  order  to  evaluate  the  natiire  of  Oswald's
dealings  with  the  Department  of  State  and  the
Immigration  and  Naturalization  Service,  the
Coromission  has  obtained  the  complete  files  of
both  the  Department  and  the  Service  pertaining
to  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  Officials  who  were  di-
rectly involved  in  dealiog  with  the  Oswald  case
on  these  matters  have  testified  before  the  Com-
mission. A  critical  evaluation  of  the  manner  in
which  they  were  handled  by  these  organizations
is  set  forth  in  appendix  XV.  The  record  estab-
lishes that  Oswald  received  no  preferential
treatment  and  that  his  case  involved  no  impro-
priety on  the  part  of  any  Government  official.

Director  John  A.  McCone  and  Deputy  Di-
rector Richard  Helms  of  the  Central  Intelligence
Agency  testified  before  the  Commission  that  no
one  connected  with  the  CIA  had  ever  inter-
viewed Oswald  or  communicated  with  him  in
any  way.  In  his  supplementing  affidavit.  Direc-
tor McCone  stated  unequivocally  that  Oswald
was  not  an  agent,  employee,  or  informant  of  the
CIA,  that  the  Agency  never  communicated  with
him  in  any  manner  or  furnished  him  any  com-
pensation, and  that  Oswald  was  never  directly
or  indirectly  associated  with  the  CIA.  The  Com-
mission has  had  access  to  the  full  CIA  file  on
Oswald  which  is  entirely  consistent  with  Direc-
tor McCone's  statements.

The  Director  of  the  FBI,  J.  Edgar  Hoover,
Assistant  to  the  Director  Alan  H.  Belmont,  FBI
Agents  John  W.  Fain  and  John  L.  Quigley,  who
interviewed  Oswald,  and  FBI  Agent  James  P.
Hosty,  Jr.,  who  was  in  charge  of  his  case  at  the
time  of  the  assassination,  have  also  testified  be-
fore the  Commission.  All  declared,  in  substance,
that  Oswald  was  not  an  informant  or  agent  of
the  FBI,  that  he  did  not  act  in  any  other  capacity
for  the  FBI,  and  that  no  attempt  was  made  to
recruit  him  in  any  capacity.  Director  Hoover
and  each  Bureau  agent,  who  according  to  the


137


FBI  would  have  been  responsible  for  or  aware
of  any  attempt  to  recruit  Oswald  as  an  inform-
ant, have  also  provided  the  Commission  with
sworn  affidavits  to  this  effect.  Director  Hoover
has  sworn  that  he  caused  a  search  to  be  made  of
the  records  of  the  Bureau,  and  that  the  search
discloses  that  Oswald  "was  never  an  informant
of  the  FBI,  and  never  assigned  a  symbol  number
in  that  capacity,  and  was  never  paid  any  amount
of  money  by  the  FBI  in  any  regard."  This  testi-
mony is  corroborated  by  the  Commission's  inde-
pendent review  of  the  Bureau  files  dealing  with
the  Oswald  investigation.

The  Commission  also  investigated  the  circum-
stances which  led  to  the  presence  in  Oswald's
address  book  of  the  name  of  Agent  Hosty  to-
gether with  bis  office  address,  telephone  number,
and  license  number.  Hosty  and  Mrs.  Paine  tes-
tified that  on  November  1,  1963,  Hosty  left  his
name  and  phone  number  with  Mrs.  Paine  so
that  she  could  advise  Hosty  when  she  learned
where  Oswald  was  living  in  Dallas.  Mrs.  Paine
and  Marina  Oswald  have  testified  that  Mrs.
Paine  handed  Oswald  the  slip  of  paper  on  which
Hosty  had  written  this  information.  In  accord-
ance with  prior  instructions  from  Oswald,  Ma-
rina Oswald  noted  Hosty's  license  number  which
she  gave  to  her  husband.  The  address  of  the  Dal-
las office  of  the  FBI  could  have  been  obtained
from  any  public  sources.

Thus,  close  scrutiny  of  the  records  of  the
Federal  agencies  involved  and  the  testimony  of
the  responsible  oflacials  of  the  U.S.  Government
establish  that  there  was  absolutely  no  type  of
informant  or  undercover  relationship  between
an  agency  of  the  U.S.  Government  and  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  at  any  time.

Oswald's  Finances

In  search  of  activities  or  payments  demon-
strating the  receipt  of  unexplained  funds,  the
Commission  undertook  a  detailed  study  of  Os-
wald's receipts  and  expenditures  starting  with
the  date  of  his  return  from  the  Soviet  Union  on
June  13,  1962,  and  continuing  to  the  date  of  his
arrest  on  November  22,  1963.  In  appendix  XJV
there  appears  a  table  listing  Oswald's  estimated
receipts  and  expenditures  on  a  monthly  basis
during  this  period.

The  Commission  was  assisted  in  this  phase  of
the  investigation  by  able  investigators  of  the  In-
ternal Revenue  Service  of  the  Department  of  the
Treasury  and  by  agents  of  the  FBI.  The  investi-
gation extended  far  beyond  interrogation  of  wit-
nesses who  appeared  before  the  Commission.  At
banks  in  New  Orleans,  La.;  Fort  Worth,  Dallas,
Houston,  and  Laredo,  Tex.,  inquiries  were  made
for  any  record  of  a  checking,  savings,  or  loan
accounts  or  a  safe  deposit  box  rented  in  the
names  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  his  known  aliases,
or  members  of  his  inunediate  family.  In  many
cases  a  photograph  of  Oswald  was  exhibited  to
bank  officials  who  were  in  a  position  to  see  a
person  in  the  safe  deposit  box  area  of  their
banks.  No  bank  account  or  safe  deposit  boxes


were  located  which  could  be  identified  with  Os-
wald during  this  period  of  his  life,  although
evidence  was  developed  of  a  bank  account  which
he  had  used  prior  to  his  trip  to  the  Soviet  Union
in  1959.  Telegraph  companies  were  checked  for
the  possibility  of  money  orders  that  may  have
been  sent  to  Oswald.  All  known  locations  where
Oswald  cashed  checks  which  he  received  were
queried  as  to  the  possibility  of  his  having  cashed
other  checks  there.  Further  inquiries  were  made
at  Oswald's  places  of  employment,  his  residences
and  with  local  credit  associations,  hospitals,
utility  companies.  State  and  local  government
offices,  post  offices,  periodicals,  newspapers,  and
employment  agencies.

Marina  Oswald  testified  that  she  knew  of  no
sources  of  income  Oswald  other  than  his  wages
and  his  unemployment  compensation.  No  evi-
dence of  other  cash  income  has  been  discovered.
The  Conmiission  has  found  that  the  funds
known  to  have  been  available  to  Oswald  during
the  period  June  13,  1962,  through  November  22,
1963,  were  sufficient  to  cover  aU  of  his  known
expenditures  during  this  period.  Including  cash
on  hand  of  $63  when  he  arrived  from  the  Soviet
Union,  the  Oswalds  received  a  total  of  $3,665.89
in  cash  from  wages,  unemployment  compensa-
tion benefits,  loans,  and  gifts  from  acquaint-
ances. His  cash  disbursements  during  this  period
were  estimated  at  $3,501.79,  leaving  a  balance
of  $164.10.  (See  app.  XIV.)  This  estimated
balance  is  within  $19  of  the  $183.87  in  cash
which  was  actually  in  Oswald's  possession  at
the  time  of  his  arrest,  consisting  of  $13.87  on
his  person  and  $170  in  his  wallet  left  at  the
Paine  house.

In  computing  Oswald's  expenditures,  esti-
mates were  made  for  food,  clothing,  and  inci-
dental expenses.  The  incidental  expenses  in-
cluded telephone  calls,  the  cost  of  local
newspapers,  money  order  and  check-cashing
fees,  postage,  local  transportation  costs,  per-
sonal care  goods  and  services,  and  other  such
small  items.  All  of  these  expenses,  including
food  and  clothing,  were  estimated  at  a  slightly
higher  figure  than  would  be  normal  for  a  family
with  the  income  of  the  Oswalds,  and  probably
higher  than  the  Oswalds  actually  spent  on  such
items.  This  was  done  in  order  to  be  certain  that
even  if  some  of  Oswald's  minor  expenditures  are
not  known,  he  had  adequate  func^  to  cover  his
known  expenditures.

During  the  17-month  period  preceding  his
death,  Oswald's  pattern  of  living  was  consistent
with  his  limited  income.  He  Uved  with  his  family
in  furnished  apartments  whose  cost,  including
utilities,  ranged  from  about  $60  to  $75  per
month.  Witnesses  testified  to  his  wife's  disap-
pointment and  complaints  and  to  their  own
shock  and  misgivings  about  several  of  the  apart-
ments in  which  the  Oswalds  lived  during  the
period.  Moreover,  the  Oswalds,  particularly
Marina,  frequently  Uved  with  relatives  and  ac-
quaintances at  no  cost.  Oswald  and  his  family
lived  with  his  brother  Robert  and  then  with


138


Marguerite  Oswald  from  June  untU  sometime  in
August  1962.  As  discussed  previously,  Marina
Oswald  lived  with  Elena  Hadl  and  spent  a  few
nights  at  the  Taylors'  house  during  October  of
1962;  in  November  of  that  same  year,  Marina
Oswald  lived  with  two  families.  When  living
away  from  his  family  Oswald  rented  rooms  for
$7  and  $8  per  week  or  stayed  at  the  YMCA  in
Dallas  where  he  paid  $2.25  per  day.  During  late
April  and  early  May  1963,  Oswald  lived  with
relatives  in  New  Orleans,  while  his  wife  lived
with  Ruth  Paine  in  Irving,  Tex.  From  Septem-
ber 24,  1963,  until  November  22,  Marina  Os-
wald stayed  with  Ruth  Paine,  while  Oswald  lived
in  roominghouses  in  Dallas.  During  the  period
Marina  Oswald  resided  with  others,  neither  she
nor  her  husband  made  any  contribution  to  her
support.

The  Oswalds  owned  no  major  household  ap-
pliances, had  no  automobile,  and  resorted  to
dental  and  hospital  clinics  for  medical  care.
Acquaintances  purchased  baby  furniture  for
them,  and  paid  dental  bills  in  one  instance.
After  his  return  to  the  United  States,  Oswald  did
not  smoke  or  drink,  and  he  discouraged  his  wife
from  doing  so.  Oswald  spent  much  of  his  time
reading  books  which  he  obtained  from  the  public
library,  and  periodicals  to  which  he  subscribed.
He  resided  near  his  place  of  employment  and
used  buses  to  travel  to  and  from  work.  When  he
visited  his  wife  and  the  children  on  weekends  in
October  and  November  1963,  he  rode  in  a  neigh-
bor's car,  making  no  contribution  for  gasoline  or
other  expenses.  Oswald's  personal  wardrobe  was
also  very  modest.  He  customarily  wore  T-shirts,
cheap  slacks,  well-worn  sweaters,  and  well-used
zipper  jackets.  Oswald  owned  one  suit,  of  Rus-
sian make  and  purchase,  poor  fitting  and  of
heavy  fabric  which,  despite  its  unsuitabUity  to
the  climates  of  Texas  and  Louisiana  and  his  ob-
vious discomfort,  he  wore  on  the  few  occasions
that  required  dress.

Food  for  his  family  was  extremely  meager.
Paul  Gregory  testified  that  during  the  6  weeks
that  Marina  Oswald  tutored  him  he  took  the  Os-
walds shopping  for  food  and  groceries  on  a
number  of  occasions  and  that  he  was  "amazed
at  how  little  they  bought."  Their  friends  in  the
Dallas-Fort  Worth  area  frequently  brought  them
food  and  groceries.  Marina  testified  that  her  hus-
band ate  "very  Uttle."  He  "never  had  breakfast.
He  just  drank  coffee  and  that  is  all.  Not  because
he  was  trying  to  economize.  Simply  he  never
liked  to  eat."  She  estimated  that  when  he  was
living  by  himself  in  a  roominghouse,  he  would
spend  "about  a  dollar,  $1.30"  for  dinner  and
have  a  sandwich  and  soft  drink  for  lunch.

The  thrift  which  Oswald  exercised  in  meeting
his  living  expenses  allowed  him  to  accumulate
sufficient  funds  to  meet  other  expenses  which
he  incurred  after  his  return  from  the  Soviet  Un-
ion. From  his  return  until  January  of  1963,
Oswald  repaid  the  $435.71  he  had  borrowed
from  the  State  Department  for  travel  expenses
from  Moscow,  and  the  $200  loan  he  had  ob-


tained from  his  brother  Robert  to  fly  from  New
York  to  Dallas  upon  his  return  to  this  country.
He  completed  the  retirement  of  the  debt  to  his
brother  in  October  1962.  His  cash  receipts  from
all  soiu"ces  from  the  day  of  his  arrival  in  Fort
Worth  through  October  1962  aggregated
$719.94;  it  is  estimated  that  he  could  have  made
the  repayments  to  Robert  and  met  his  other
known  expenses  and  still  have  been  left  with
savings  of  $122.06  at  the  end  of  the  month.
After  making  initial  $10  monthly  payments  to
the  State  Department,  Oswald  paid  the  Gov-
ernment $190  in  December  and  $206  in  Janu-
ary, thus  liquidating  that  debt.  From  his  net
earning  of  $805.96  from  November  through
January  plus  his  prior  savings,  Oswald  could
have  made  these  payments  to  the  State  Depart-
ment, met  his  other  known  expenses,  and  still
have  had  a  balance  of  $8.59  at  the  end  of  Janu-
ary 1963.  In  discussing  the  repayment  of  these
debts,  Marina  Oswald  testified:  "Of  course  we
did  not  live  in  luxury.  We  did  not  buy  anything
that  was  not  absolutely  needed,  because  Lee  had
to  pay  his  debt  to  Robert  and  to  the  Govern-
ment. But  it  was  not  particularly  difficult."

Included  in  the  total  figure  for  Oswald's  dis-
bursements were  $21.45  for  the  rifle  used  in  the
assassination  and  $31.22  for  the  revolver  with
which  Oswald  shot  Officer  Tippit.  The  major
portion  of  the  purchase  price  for  these  weapons
was  paid  in  March  1963,  when  Oswald  had  fin-
ished paying  his  debts,  and  the  purchases  were
compatible  with  the  total  funds  then  available
to  him.  During  May,  June,  and  July  of  1963,
Oswald  spent  approximately  $23  for  circulars,
application  blanks,  and  membership  cards  for
his  one-man  New  Orleans  chapter  of  the  Fair
Play  for  Cuba  Committee.  In  August  he  paid
$2  to  one  and  possibly  two  young  men  to  assist
in  passing  out  circulars  and  then  paid  a  $10
court  fine  after  pleading  guilty  to  a  charge  of
disturbing  the  peace.  Although  some  of  these
expenses  were  incurred  after  Oswald  lost  his
job  on  July  19,  1963,  his  wages  during  June  and
July,  and  his  unemployment  compensation
thereafter,  provided  sufficient  funds  to  enable
him  to  finance  these  activities  out  of  his  own
resources.

Although  Oswald  paid  his  own  busfare  to
New  Orleans  on  April  24,  1963,  his  wife  and
the  baby  were  taken  there,  at  no  cost  to  Oswald,
by  Ruth  Paine.  Similarly,  Ruth  Paine  drove  to
New  Orleans  in  September  and  brought  Marina
Oswald  and  the  baby  back  to  Irving,  Tex.  Os-
wald's uncle,  Charles  Murret,  also  paid  for  the
short  trip  taken  by  Oswald  and  his  family  from
New  Orleans  to  Mobile,  Ala.,  on  July  27,  1963.
It  is  estimated  that  when  Oswald  left  for  Mexico
City  in  September  1963,  he  had  accumulated
slightly  over  $200.  Marina  Oswald  testified  that
when  he  left  for  Mexico  City  he  had  "a  little
over  $100,"  though  she  may  not  have  taken  into
account  the  $33  unemployment  compensation
check  which  Oswald  collected  after  her  depar-
ture from  New  Orleans.  In  any  event,  expenses


139


in  Mexico  have  been  estimated  at  approximately
$85,  based  on  transportation  costs  of  $50  and
a  hotel  expense  of  about  $1.28  per  day,  Oswald
ate  inexpensively  and,  allowing  $15  for  enter-
tainment and  miscellaneous  items,  it  would  ap-
pear that  he  had  the  funds  available  to  finance
the  trip.

The  Commission  has  considered  the  testimony
of  Leonard  E.  Hutchison,  proprietor  of  Hutch's
Market  in  Irving,  in  connection  with  Oswald's
finances.  Hutchison  has  testified  that  on  a
Friday  during  the  first  week  in  November,  a  man
he  believes  to  have  been  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  at-
tempted to  cash  a  "two-party,"  or  personal
check  for  $189,  but  that  he  refused  to  cash  the
check  since  his  policy  is  to  cash  personal  checks
for  no  more  than  $25.  Oswald  is  not  known  to
have  received  a  check  for  this  amount  from  any
source.

On  Friday,  November  1,  Oswald  did  cash  a
Texas  Unemployment  Commission  check  for
$33  at  another  supermarket  in  Irving,  so  that  a
possible  explanation  of  Hutchison's  testimony
is  that  he  refused  to  cash  this  $33  check  for
Oswald  and  is  simply  in  error  as  to  the  amount
of  the  instrument.  However,  since  the  check
cashed  at  the  supermarket  was  issued  by  the
State  comptroller  of  Texas,  it  is  not  likely  that
Hutchison  could  have  confused  it  with  a  per-
sonal check.

Examination  of  Hutchison's  testimony  indi-
cates that  a  more  likely  explanation  is  that  Os-
wald was  not  in  his  store  at  all.  Hutchison  testi-
fied that  the  man  who  attempted  to  cash  the
check  was  a  customer  in  his  store  on  previous
occasions;  in  particular,  Hutchison  recalled  that
the  man,  accompanied  by  a  woman  he  believes
was  Marina  Oswald  and  an  elderly  woman,  were
shopping  in  his  store  in  October  or  November  of
1963  on  a  night  he  feels  certain  was  a  Wednes-
day evening.  Oswald,  however,  is  not  known  to
have  been  in  Irving  on  any  Wednesday  evening
during  this  period.  Neither  of  the  two  checkers
at  the  market  recall  such  a  visit  by  a  person
matching  the  description  provided  by  Hutchison,
and  both  Marina  Oswald  and  Marguerite  Os-
wald deny  that  they  were  ever  in  Hutchison's
store.  Hutchison  further  stated  that  the  man
made  uxegular  caUs  at  his  grocery  between  7:20
a.m.  and  7:45  a.m.  on  weekday  mornings,  and
always  purchased  cinnamon  rolls  and  a  full  gal-
lon of  milk.  However,  the  evidence  indicates
that  except  for  rare  occasions  Oswald  was  in
Irving  only  on  weekends;  moreover,  Buell  Wes-
ley Frazier,  who  drove  Oswald  to  and  from  Irv-
ing on  these  occasions,  testified  that  on  Monday
mornings  he  picked  Oswald  up  at  a  point  which
is  many  blocks  from Hutchison's  store and
ordinarily  by  7:20  a.m.  Hutchison  also  testified
that  Ruth  Paine  was  an  occasional  customer  in
his  store;  however,  Mrs.  Paine  indicated  that
she  was  not  in  the  store  as  often  as  Hutchison
testified;  and  her  appearance  is  dissimilar  to  the
description  of  the  woman  Hutchison  stated  was
Mrs.  Paine.  In  light  of  the  strong  reasons  for

140


doubting  the  correctness  of  Hutchison's  testi-
mony and  the  absence  of  any  other  sign  that
Oswald  ever  possessed  a  personal  check  for
$189,  the  Commission  was  unable  to  conclude
that  he  ever  received  such  a  check.

The  Commission  has  also  examined  a  report
that,  not  long  before  the  assassination,  Oswald
may  have  received  unaccounted  funds  through
money  orders  sent  to  him  in  Dallas.  Five  days
after  the  assassmation,  C.  A.  Hamblen,  early
night  manager  for  the  Western  Union  Telegraph
Co.  in  Dallas,  told  his  superior  that  about  2
weeks  earlier  he  remembered  Oswald  sending
a  telegram  from  the  office  to  Washington,  D.C.,
possibly  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  and  that
the  application  was  completed  in  an  unusual
form  of  hand  printing.  The  next  day  Hamblen
told  a  magazine  correspondent  who  was  in  the
Western  Union  office  on  other  business  that  he
remembered  seeing  Oswald  in  the  oflfice  on  prior
occasions  collecting  money  orders  for  small
amounts  of  money.  Soon  thereafter  Hamblen
signed  a  statement  relating  to  both  the  telegram
and  the  money  orders,  and  specifying  two  in-
stances in  which  he  had  seen  the  person  he  be-
lieved to  be  Oswald  in  the  office;  in  each  instance
the  man  had  behaved  disagreeably  and  one  other
Western  Union  employee  had  become  involved
in  assisting  him.

During  his  testimony,  Hamblen  did  not  recall
with  clarity  the  statements  he  had  previously
made,  and  was  unable  to  state  whether  the  per-
son he  reportedly  had  seen  in  the  Western  Union
office  was  or  was  not  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  In-
vestigation has  disclosed  that  a  second  employee
does  recall  one  of  the  occurrences  described  by
Hamblen,  and  believes  that  the  money  order  in
question  was  delivered  "to  someone  at  the
YMCA";  however,  he  is  unable  to  state  whether
or  not  the  man  involved  was  Oswald.  The  em-
ployee referred  to  by  Hamblen  in  connection
with  the  second  incident  feels  certain  that  the
unusual  episode  described  by  Hamblen  did  not
occur,  and  that  she  at  no  time  observed  Oswald
in  the  Western  Union  office.

At  the  request  of  Federal  investigators,  offi-
cers of  Western  Union  conducted  a  complete
search  of  their  records  in  Dallas  and  in  other
cities,  for  the  period  from  June  through  No-
vember 1963,  for  money  orders  payable  to  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  or  his  known  aliases  and  for  tele-
grams sent  by  Oswald  or  his  known  aliases.  In
addition,  all  money  orders  addressed  to  persons
at  the  YMCA  in  Dallas  during  October  and
November  1963  were  inspected,  and  all  tele-
grams handled  from  November  1  through  No-
vember 22  by  the  employee  who  Hamblen  as-
sertedly  saw  service  Oswald  were  examined,  as
were  all  telegrams  sent  from  Dallas  to  Washing-
ton during  November.  No  indication  of  any  such
money  order  or  telegram  was  found  in  any  of
these  records.  Hamblen  himself  participated  in
this  search,  and  was  "imable  *  *  *  to  pin
down  any  of  these  telegrams  or  money  orders
that  would  indicate  it  was  Oswald."  Hamblen's


superiors  have  concluded  "that  this  whole  thing
was  a  figment  of  Mr.  Hamblen's  imagination,"
and  the  Commission  accepts  this  assessment.


POSSIBLE  CONSPIRACY  INVOLVING
JACK  RUBY

Jack  Ruby  shot  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  at  11:21
a.m.,  on  Sunday,  November  24,  1963,  shortly
after  Ruby  entered  the  basement  of  the  Dallas
Police  Department.  Almost  immediately,  specu-
lation arose  that  Ruby  had  acted  on  behalf  of
members  of  a  conspiracy  who  had  plaimed  the
killing  of  President  Kennedy  and  wanted  to  si-
lence Oswald.  This  section  of  chapter  VI  sets
forth  the  Commission's  investigation  into  the
possibility  that  Ruby,  together  with  Oswald  or
with  others,  conspired  to  kill  the  President,  or
that  Ruby,  though  not  part  of  any  such  con-
spiracy, had  accomplices  in  the  slaying  of  Os-
wald. Presented  first  are  the  results  of  the  Com-
mission's detailed  inquiry  into  Ruby's  actions
from  November  2 1  to  November  24.  In  addition,
this  section  analyzes  the  numerous  rumors  and
suspicions  that  Ruby  and  Oswald  were  acquaint-
ed and  examines  Ruby's  background  and  asso-
ciation for  evidence  of  any  conspiratorial  rela-
tionship or  motive.  A  detailed  life  of  Ruby  is
given  in  appendix  XVI  which  provides  supple-
mental information  about  Ruby  and  his
associations.

Ruby's  Activities  From  November  21 to
November  24,  1963

The  Commission  has  attempted  to  reconstruct
as  precisely  as  possible  the  movements  of  Jack
Ruby  during  the  period  November  21 -Novem-
ber 24,  1963.  It  has  done  so  on  the  premise  that,
if  Jack  Ruby  were  involved  in  a  conspiracy,  his
activities  and  associations  during  this  period
would,  in  some  way,  have  reflected  the  conspir-
atorial relationship.  The  Commission  has  not
attempted  to  determine  the  time  at  which  Ruby
first  decided  to  make  his  attack  on  Lee  Harvey
Oswald,  nor  does  it  purport  to  evaluate  the  psy-
chiatric and  related  legal  questions  which  have
arisen  from  the  assault  upon  Oswald.  Ruby's
activities  during  this  3-day  period  have  been
scrutinized,  however,  for  the  insight  they  pro-
vide into  whether  the  shooting  of  Oswald  was
grounded  in  any  form  of  conspiracy.

The  eve  of  the  President's  visit. — On  Thurs-
day, November  21,  Jack  Ruby  was  attending  to
his  usual  duties  as  the  proprietor  of  two  Dallas
night  spots — the  Carousel  Club,  a  downtown
nightclub  featuring  striptease  dancers,  and  the
Vegas  Club,  a  rock-and-roll  establishment  in  the
Oaklawn  section  of  Dallas.  Both  clubs  opened
for  business  each  day  in  the  early  evening  and
continued  7  days  a  week  until  after  midnight
Ruby  arrived  at  the  Carousel  Club  at  about  3
p.m.  Thursday  afternoon,  as  was  his  custom,  and
remained  long  enough  to  chat  with  a  friend  and
receive  messages  from  Larry  Craf ard,  a  handy-


man and  helper  who  lived  at  the  Carousel.  Ear-
lier in  the  day  Ruby  had  visited  with  a  young
lady  who  was  job  hunting  in  Dallas,  paid  his
rent  for  the  Carousel  premises,  conferred  about
a  peace  bond  he  had  been  obliged  to  post  as  a
result  of  a  fight  with  one  of  his  striptease  dan-
cers, consulted  with  an  attorney  about  problems
he  was  having  with  Federal  tax  authorities,  dis-
tributed membership  cards  for  the  Carousel
Club,  talked  with  Dallas  County  Assistant  Dis-
trict Attorney  William  F.  Alexander  about  in-
sufficient fund  checks  which  a  friend  had  passed,
and  submitted  advertising  copy  for  his  night-
clubs to  the  Dallas  Morning  News.

Ruby's  evening  activities  on  Thursday,  No-
vember 21,  were  a  combination  of  business  and
pleasure.  At  approximately  7:30  p.m.,  he  drove
Larry  Crafard  to  the  Vegas  Club  which  Crafard
was  overseeing  because  Ruby's  sister,  Eva  Grant,
who  normally  managed  the  club,  was  convalesc-
ing from  a  recent  illness.  Thereafter,  Ruby  re-
turned to  the  Carousel  Club  and  conversed  for
about  an  hour  with  Lawrence  Meyers,  a  Chicago
businessman.  Between  9:45  and  10:45  p.m..
Ruby  had  dinner  with  Ralph  Paul,  his  close
friend  and  financial  backer.  While  dining  Ruby
spoke  briefly  with  a  Dallas  Morning  News  em-
ployee, Don  Campbell,  who  suggested  that  they
go  to  the  Castaway  Club,  but  Ruby  declined.
Thereafter,  Ruby  returned  to  the  Carousel  Club
where  he  acted  as  master  of  ceremonies  for  his
show  and  peacefully  ejected  an  imruly  patron.
At  about  midnight  Ruby  rejoined  Meyers  at  the
Bon  Vivant  Room  of  the  Dallas  Cabana  where
they  met  Meyers'  brother  and  sister-in-law.  Nei-
ther Ralph  Paul  nor  Lawrence  Meyers  recalled
that  Ruby  mentioned  the  President's  trip  to  Dal-
las. Leaving  Meyers  at  the  Cabana  after  a  brief
visit.  Ruby  returned  to  close  the  Carousel  Club
and  obtain  the  night's  receipts.  He  then  went  to
the  Vegas  Club  which  he  helped  Larry  Crafard
close  for  the  night;  and,  as  late  as  2:30  a.m..
Ruby  was  seen  eating  at  a  restaurant  near  the
Vegas  Club.

Friday  morning  at  the  Dallas  Morning  News.
• — Jack  Ruby  learned  of  the  shooting  of  Presi-
dent Kennedy  while  in  the  second-floor  adver-
tising offices  of  the  Dallas  Morning  News,  five
blocks  from  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository,
where  he  had  come  Friday  morning  to  place
regular  weekend  advertisements  for  his  two
nightclubs.  On  arriving  at  the  newspaper  build-
ing at  about  11  or  11:30  a.m.,  he  talked  briefly
with  two  newspaper  employees  concerning  some
diet  pills  he  had  recommended  to  them.  Ruby
then  went  to  the  office  of  Morning  News  col-
umnist, Tony  Zoppi,  where  he  states  he  obtained
a  brochure  on  his  new  master  of  ceremonies
that  he  wanted  to  use  in  preparing  copy  for  his
advertisements.  Proceeding  to  the  advertising
department,  he  spoke  with  advertising  employee
Don  Campbell  from  about  noon  until  12:25
p.m.  when  Campbell  left  the  office.  In  addition
to  the  business  at  hand,  much  of  the  conversa-
tion concerned  Ruby's  unhappiness  over  the


141


financial  condition  of  his  clubs  and  his  professed
ability  to  handle  the  physical  fights  which  arose
in  connection  with  the  clubs.  According  to
Campbell,  Ruby  did  not  mention  the  Presidential
motorcade  nor  did  he  display  any  unusual
behavior.

About  10  minutes  after  the  President  had  been
shot  but  before  word  had  spread  to  the  second
floor,  John  Newnam,  an  advertising  department
employee,  observed  Ruby  sitting  at  the  same  spot
where  Campbell  had  left  him.  At  that  time  Ruby
had  completed  the  advertisement,  which  he  had
apparently  begun  to  compose  when  Campbell
departed,  and  was  reading  a  newspaper.  To
Newnam,  Ruby  voiced  criticism  of  the  black-
bordered  advertisement  entitled  "Welcome,  Mr.
Kennedy"  appearing  in  the  morning  paper  and
bearing  the  name  of  Bernard  Weissman  as  the
chairman  of  the  committee  sponsoring  the  ad-
vertisement. According  to  Eva  Grant,  Ruby's
sister,  he  had  telephoned  her  earlier  in  the  morn-
ing to  call  her  attention  to  the  ad.  At  about  12:45
p.m.,  an  employee  entered  the  office  and  an-
nounced that  shots  had  been  fired  at  the  Presi-
dent. NevvTiam  remembered  that  Ruby  re-
sponded with  a  look  of  "stuimed  disbelief."

Shortly  afterward,  according  to  Newnam,
"confusion  reigned"  in  the  office  as  advertisers
telephoned  to  cancel  advertising  they  had  placed
for  the  weekend.  Ruby  appears  to  have  believed
that  some  of  those  cancellations  were  motivated
by  the  Weissman  advertisement.  After  Newnam
accepted  a  few  telephone  calls,  he  and  Ruby
walked  toward  a  room  where  other  persons  were
watching  television.  One  of  the  newspaper  em-
ployees recalled  that  Ruby  then  appeared  "ob-
viously shaken,  and  an  ashen  color — ^just  very
pale  *  *  *"  showed  little  disposition  to  con-
verse, and  sat  for  a  while  with  a  dazed  expres-
sion in  his  eyes.

After  a  few  minutes,  Ruby  placed  telephone
calls  to  Andrew  Armstrong,  his  assistant  at  the
Carousel  Club,  and  to  his  sister,  Mrs.  Grant.  He
told  Armstrong,  "If  anything  happens  we  are
going  to  close  the  club"  and  said  he  would  see
him  in  about  30  minutes.  During  the  call  to  his
sister,  Ruby  again  referred  to  the  Weissman
advertisement;  at  one  point  he  put  the  telephone
to  Newnam's  ear,  and  Newnam  heard  Mrs.
Grant  exclaim,  "My  God,  what  do  they  want?"
It  was  Newnam's  recollection  that  Ruby  tried
to  calm  her.

Ruby  testified  that  after  calling  his  sister  he
said,  "John,  I  will  have  to  leave  Dallas."  Ruby
explained  to  the  Commission:

I  don't  know  why  I  said  that,  but  it  is  a
fimny  reaction  that  you  feel;  the  city  is  terri-
bly let  down  by  the  tragedy  that  happened.
And  I  said,  "John,  I  am  not  opening  up
tonight."

And  I  don't  know  what  else  transpired.  I
know  people  were  just  heartbroken  *  *  *.

I  left  the  building  and  I  went  down  and  I
got  in  my  car  and  I  couldn't  stop  crying.  *  *  *


Newnam  estimated  that  Ruby  departed  from  the
Morning  News  at  about  1:30  p.m.,  but  other
testimony  indicated  that  Ruby  may  have  left
earlier.

Ruby's  alleged  visit  to  Parkland  Hospital. —
The  Commission  has  investigated  claims  that
Jack  Ruby  was  at  Parkland  Hospital  at  about
1:30  p.m.,  when  a  Presidential  press  secretary,
Malcolm  Kilduff ,  announced  that  President  Ken-
nedy was  dead.  Seth  Kantor,  a  newspaperman
who  had  previously  met  Ruby  in  Dallas,  re-
ported and  later  testified  that  Jack  Ruby  stopped
him  momentarily  inside  the  main  entrance  to
Parkland  Hospital  some  time  between  1 :  30  and
2  p.m.,  Friday,  November  22,  1963.  The  only
other  person  besides  Kantor  who  recalled  seeing
Ruby  at  the  hospital  did  not  make  known  her
observation  until  April  1964,  had  never  seen
Ruby  before,  allegedly  saw  him  only  briefly
then,  had  an  obstructed  view,  and  was  uncertain
of  the  time.  Ruby  has  firmly  denied  going  to
Parkland  and  has  stated  that  he  went  to  the
Carousel  Club  upon  leaving  the  Morning  News.
Video  tapes  of  the  scene  at  Parkland  do  not  show
Ruby  there,  although  Kantor  can  be  seen.

Investigation  has  limited  the  period  during
which  Kantor  could  have  met  Ruby  at  Parkland
Hospital  on  Friday  to  a  few  minutes  before  and
after  1:30  p.m.  Telephone  company  records
and  the  testimony  of  Andrew  Armstrong  estab-
lished that  Ruby  arrived  at  the  Carousel  Club
no  later  than  1 :45  p.m.  and  probably  a  few  min-
utes earlier.  Kantor  was  engaged  in  a  long-
distance telephone  call  to  his  Washington  office
from  1:02  p.m.  until  1:27  p.m.  Kantor  testified
that,  after  completing  that  call,  he  immediately
left  the  building  from  which  he  had  been  tele-
phoning, traveled  perhaps  100  yards,  and  en-
tered the  main  entrance  of  the  hospital.  It  was
there,  as  he  walked  through  a  small  doorway,
that  he  believed  he  saw  Jack  Ruby,  who,  Kantor
said,  tugged  at  his  coattails  and  asked,  "Should
I  close  my  place  for  the  next  three  nights,  do  you
think?"  Kantor  recalled  that  he  turned  briefly  to
Ruby  and  proceeded  to  the  press  conference  at
which  the  President's  death  was  announced.
Kantor  was  certain  he  encountered  Ruby  at
Parkland  but  had  doubts  about  the  exact  time
and  place.

Kantor  probably  did  not  see  Ruby  at  Park-
land Hospital  in  the  few  minutes  before  or
after  1:30  p.m.,  the  only  time  it  would  have
been  possible  for  Kantor  to  have  done  so.  If
Ruby  immediately  returned  to  the  Carousel  Club
after  Kantor  saw  him,  it  would  have  been  neces-
sary for  him  to  have  covered  the  distance  from
Parkland  in  approximately  10  or  15  minutes  in
order  to  have  arrived  at  the  club  before  1:45
p.m.,  when  a  telephone  call  was  placed  at  Ruby's
request  to  his  entertainer,  Karen  Bennet  Carlin.
At  a  normal  driving  speed  under  normal  condi-
tions the  trip  can  be  made  in  9  or  10  minutes.
However,  it  is  likely  that  congested  traffic  con-
ditions on  November  22  would  have  extended
the  driving  time.  Even  if  Ruby  had  been  able  to


142


drive  from  Parkland  to  the  Carousel  in  15  min-
utes, his  presence  at  the  Dallas  Morning  News
until  1  p.m.,  and  at  the  Carousel  prior  to  1:45
p.m.,  would  have  made  his  visit  at  Parkland  ex-
ceedingly brief.  Since  Ruby  was  observed  at  the
Dallas  Police  Department  during  a  2  hour  period
after  1 1  p.m.  on  Friday,  when  Kantor  was  also
present,  and  since  Kantor  did  not  remember
seeing  Ruby  there,  Kantor  may  have  been  mis-
taken about  both  the  time  and  the  place  that  he
saw  Ruby.  When  seeing  Ruby,  Kantor  was  pre-
occupied with  the  important  event  that  a  press
conference  represented.  Both  Ruby  and  Kantor
were  present  at  another  important  event,  a  press
conference  held  about  midnight,  November  22,
in  the  assembly  room  of  the  Dallas  Police  De-
partment. It  is  conceivable  that  Kantor's  en-
counter with  Ruby  occurred  at  that  time,  per-
haps near  the  small  doorway  there.

Ruby's  decision  to  close  his  clubs. — Upon  ar-
riving at  the  Carousel  Club  shortly  before  1:45
p.m.,  Ruby  instructed  Andrew  Armstrong,  the
Carousel's  bartender,  to  notify  employees  that
the  club  would  be  closed  that  night.  During
much  of  the  next  hour  Ruby  talked  by  telephone
to  several  persons  who  were  or  had  been  es-
pecially close  to  him,  and  the  remainder  of  the
time  he  watched  television  and  spoke  with  Arm-
strong and  Larry  Crafard  about  the  assassina-
tion. At  1:51  p.m..  Ruby  telephoned  Ralph  Paul
in  Arlington,  Tex.,  to  say  that  he  was  going  to
close  his  clubs.  He  urged  Paul  to  do  likewise
with  his  drive-in  restaurant.  Unable  to  reach
Alice  Nichols,  a  former  girl  friend,  who  was  at
lunch,  Ruby  telephoned  his  sister,  Eileen  Kamin-
sky,  in  Chicago.  Mrs.  Kaminsky  described  her
brother  as  completely  unnerved  and  crying
about  President  Kennedy's  death.  To  Mrs.
Nichols,  whose  return  call  caused  Ruby  to  cut
short  his  conversation  with  Mrs.  Kaminsky,
Ruby  expressed  shock  over  the  assassination.
Although  Mrs.  Nichols  had  dated  Ruby  for
nearly  1 1  years,  she  was  surprised  to  hear  from
him  on  November  22  since  they  had  not  seen
one  another  socially  for  some  time.  Thereafter,
Ruby  telephoned  at  2:37  p.m.  to  Alex  Gniber,
a  boyhood  friend  from  Chicago  who  was  living
in  Los  Angeles.  Gruber  recalled  that  in  their  3-
minutes  conversation  Ruby  talked  about  a  dog
he  had  promised  to  send  Gruber,  a  carwash  busi-
ness Gruber  had  considered  starting,  and  the
assassination.  Ruby  apparently  lost  his  self-
control  during  the  conversation  and  terminated
it.  However,  2  minutes  after  that  call  ended,
Ruby  telephoned  again  to  Ralph  Paul.

Upon  leaving  the  Carousel  Club  at  about  3:15
p.m.,  Ruby  drove  to  Eva  Grant's  home  but  left
soon  after  he  arrived,  to  obtain  some  weekend
food  for  his  sister  and  himself.  He  first  returned
to  the  Carousel  Club  and  directed  Larry  Crafard
to  prepare  a  sign  indicating  that  the  club  would
be  closed;  however,  Ruby  instructed  Crafard
not  to  post  the  sign  imtil  later  in  the  evening  to
avoid  informing  his  competitors  that  he  would
be  closed.  Before  leaving  the  club,  Ruby  tele-


phoned Mrs.  Grant  who  reminded  him  to  pur-
chase food.  As  a  result  he  went  to  the  Ritz
Delicatessen,  about  two  blocks  from  the  Car-
ousel Club,  and  bought  a  great  quantity  of  cold
cuts.

Ruby  probably  arrived  a  second  time  at  his
sister's  home  close  to  5:30  p.m.  and  remained
for  about  2  hours.  He  continued  his  rapid  rate
of  telephone  calls,  ate  sparingly,  became  ill,  and
attempted  to  get  some  rest.  While  at  the  apart-
ment. Ruby  decided  to  close  his  clubs  for  3  days.
He  testified  that  after  talking  to  Don  Saffran,  a
columnist  for  the  Dallas  Times-Herald:

I  put  the  receiver  down  and  talked  to  my
sister,  and  I  said,  "Eva,  what  shall  we  do?"

And  she  said,  "Jack,  let's  close  for  the  3
days."  She  said,  "We  don't  have  anything
anyway,  but  we  owe  it  to — "  (chokes  up.)

So  I  called  Don  Saflfran  back  immediately
and  I  said,  "Don,  we  decided  to  close  for
Friday,  Saturday,  and  Sunday."

And  he  said,  "Okay."

Ruby  then  telephoned  the  Dallas  Morning  News
to  cancel  his  advertisement  and,  when  unable  to
do  so,  he  changed  his  ad  to  read  that  his  clubs
would  be  closed  for  the  weekend.  Ruby  also
telephoned  Cecil  Hamlin,  a  friend  of  many
years.  Sounding  very  "broken  up,"  he  told
Hamlin  that  he  had  closed  the  clubs  since  he
thought  most  people  would  not  be  in  the  mood
to  visit  them  and  that  he  felt  concern  for  Presi-
dent Kennedy's  "kids."  Thereafter  he  made  two
calls  to  ascertain  when  services  at  Temple
Shearith  Israel  would  be  held.  He  placed  a  sec-
ond call  to  Alice  Nichols  to  tell  her  of  his
intention  to  attend  those  services  and  phoned
Larry  Crafard  at  the  Carousel  to  ask  whether
he  had  received  any  messages.  Eva  Grant  testi-
fied:

When  he  was  leaving,  he  looked  pretty
bad.  This  I  remember.  I  can't  explain  it  to
you.  He  looked  too  broken,  a  broken  man
already.  He  did  make  the  remark,  he  said,  "I
never  felt  so  bad  in  my  life,  even  when  Ma  or
Pa  died."

So  I  said,  "Well,  Pa  was  an  old  man.  He
was  almost  89  years.  *  *  *"

Friday  evening. — Ruby  is  uncertain  whether
he  went  directly  from  his  sister's  home  to  his
apartment  or  possibly  first  to  his  club.  At  least
5  witnesses  recall  seeing  a  man  they  believe  was
Ruby  on  the  third  floor  of  police  headquarters  at
times  they  have  estimated  between  6  and  9  p.m.;
however,  it  is  not  clear  that  Ruby  was  present
at  the  Police  and  Courts  Building  before  1 1  p.m.
With  respect  to  three  of  the  witnesses,  it  is
doubtful  that  the  man  observed  was  Ruby.  Two
of  those  persons  had  not  known  Ruby  previously
and  described  wearing  apparel  which  differed
both  from  Ruby's  known  dress  that  night  and


143


from  his  known  wardrobe.  The  third,  who
viewed  from  the  rear  the  person  he  beUeved  was
Ruby,  said  the  man  unsuccessfully  attempted
to  enter  the  homicide  oflBce.  Of  the  poUce  ofiB-
cers  on  duty  near  homicide  at  the  time  of  the
alleged  event,  only  one  remembered  the  episode,
and  he  said  the  man  in  question  definitely  was
not  Ruby.  The  remaining  witnesses  knew  or
talked  with  Ruby,  and  their  testimony  leaves
Uttle  doubt  that  they  did  see  him  on  the  third
floor  at  some  point  on  Friday  night;  however  the
possibility  remains  that  they  observed  Ruby
later  in  the  evening,  when  his  presence  is  con-
clusively established.  Ruby  has  denied  being  at
the  police  department  Friday  night  before  ap-
proximately 11:15  p.m.

In  any  event.  Ruby  eventually  returned  to  his
own  apartment  before  9  p.m.  There  he  tele-
phoned Ralph  Paul  but  was  unable  to  persuade
Paul  to  join  him  at  synagogue  services.  Shortly
after  9  p.m..  Ruby  called  the  Chicago  home  of
his  oldest  brother,  Hyman  Rubenstein,  and  two
of  his  sisters,  Marion  Carroll  and  Ann  Volpert.
Hyman  Rubenstein  testified  that,  during  the
call,  his  brother  was  so  disturbed  about  the
situation  that  he  mentioned  seUing  his  business
and  returning  to  Chicago.  From  his  apartment,
Ruby  drove  to  Temple  Shearith  Israel,  arriving
near  the  end  of  a  2-hour  service  which  had  be-
gun at  8  p.m.  Rabbi  Hillel  Silverman,  who
greeted  him  among  the  crowd  leaving  the  serv-
ices was  surprised  that  Ruby,  who  appeared
depressed,  mentioned  only  his  sister's  recent  ill-
ness and  said  nothing  about  the  assassination.

Ruby  related  that,  after  joining  in  the  post-
service  refreshments,  he  drove  by  some  night
clubs,  noticing  whether  or  not  they  had  been
closed  as  his  were.  He  testified  that,  as  he  drove
toward  town,  a  radio  anouncement  that  the  Dal-
las police  were  working  overtime  prompted  the
thought  that  he  might  bring  those  at  poUce
headquarters  something  to  eat.  At  about  10:30
p.m.,  he  stopped  at  a  deUcatessen  near  the  Vegas
Club  and  purchased  8  kosher  sandwiches  and
10  soft  drinks.  From  the  delicatessen,  he  called
the  police  department  but  was  told  that  the  offi-
cers had  already  eaten.  He  said  he  then  tried  to
offer  the  food  to  employees  at  radio  station
KLIF  but  failed  in  several  attempts  to  obtain  the
private  night  line  number  to  the  station.  On
three  occasions  between  phone  calls,  Ruby
spoke  with  a  group  of  students  whom  he  did  not
loiow,  lamenting  the  President's  death,  teasing
one  of  the  young  men  about  being  too  young  for
his  clubs,  borrowing  their  copy  of  the  Dallas
Times-Herald  to  see  how  his  advertisements  had
been  run,  and  stating  that  his  clubs  were  the
only  ones  that  had  closed  because  of  the  assas-
sination. He  also  expressed  the  opinion,  as  he
had  earlier  in  the  day,  that  the  assassination
would  be  harmful  to  the  convention  business  in
Dallas.  Upon  leaving  the  delicatessen  with  his
purchases.  Ruby  gave  the  counterman  as  a  tip
a  card  granting  free  admission  to  his  clubs.  He
drove  downtown  to  the  poUce  station  where  he


has  said  he  hoped  to  find  an  employee  from
KLIF  who  could  give  him  the  "hot  line"  phone
number  for  the  radio  station.

The  third  floor  of  police  headquarters. —
Ruby  is  known  to  have  made  his  way,  by  about
11:30  p.m.,  to  the  third  floor  of  the  Dallas
PoUce  Department  where  reporters  were  con-
gregated near  the  homicide  bureau.  Newsman
John  Rutledge,  one  of  those  who  may  well  have
been  mistaken  as  to  time,  gave  the  following
description  of  his  first  encounter  with  Ruby  at
the  police  station:

I  saw  Jack  and  two  out-of-state  reporters,
whom  I  did  not  know,  leave  the  elevator
door  and  proceed  toward  those  television
cameras,  to  go  around  the  comer  where  Cap-
tain Fritz's  office  was.  Jack  walked  between
them.  These  two  out-of-state  reporters  had
big  press  cards  pinned  to  their  coats,  great  big
red  ones,  I  think  they  said  "President  Ken-
nedy's Visit  to  Dallas — Press,"  or  something
like  that.  And  Jack  didn't  have  one,  but  the
man  on  either  side  of  him  did.  And  they
walked  pretty  rapidly  from  the  elevator  area
past  the  policeman,  and  Jack  was  bent  over
like  this — writing  on  a  piece  of  paper,  and
talking  to  one  of  the  reporters,  and  pointing
to  something  on  the  piece  of  paper,  he  was
kind  of  hunched  over.

Detective  Augustus  M.  Eberhardt,  who  also  re-
called that  he  first  saw  Ruby  earlier  in  the  eve-
ning, said  Ruby  carried  a  note  pad  and  pro-
fessed to  be  a  translator  for  the  Israeli  press.
He  remembered  Ruby's  remarking  how  iinfor-
tunate  the  assassination  was  for  the  city  of  Dal-
las and  that  it  was  "hard  to  realize  that  a  com-
plete nothing,  a  zero  like  that,  could  kill  a  man
like  President  Kennedy  *  *  *."

Video  tapes  confirm  Ruby's  statement  that  he
was  present  on  the  third  floor  when  Chief  Jesse
E.  Curry  and  District  Attorney  Henry  M.  Wade
announced  that  Oswald  would  be  shown  to  the
newsmen  at  a  press  conference  in  the  basement.
Though  he  has  said  his  original  purpose  was
only  to  locate  a  KLIF  employee,  Ruby  has
stated  that  while  at  the  police  station  he  was
"carried  away  with  the  excitement  of  history."
He  accompanied  the  newsmen  to  the  basement
to  observe  Oswald.  His  presence  at  the  midnight
news  conference  is  established  by  television
tapes  and  by  at  least  12  witnesses.  When  Oswald
arrived.  Ruby,  together  with  a  number  of  news-
men, was  standing  atop  a  table  on  one  side  of
the  room.  Oswald  was  taken  from  the  room
after  a  brief  appearance,  and  Ruby  remained  to
hear  reporters  question  District  Attorney  Wade.
During  the  press  conference,  Wade  stated  that
Oswald  would  probably  be  moved  to  the  county
jail  at  the  beginning  of  next  week.  In  answer  to
one  question.  Wade  said  that  Oswald  belonged
to  the  "Free  Cuba  Committee."  A  few  reporters
spoke  up  correcting  Wade  and  among  the  voices
was  that  of  Jack  Ruby.


144


Ruby  later  followed  the  district  attorney  out
of  the  press  conference,  walked  up  to  him  and,
according  to  Wade,  said  "Hi  Henry  *  *  *
Don't  you  know  me?  *  *  *  I  am  Jack  Ruby,
I  run  the  Vegas  Club.  *  *  *"  Ruby  also  intro-
duced himself  to  Justice  of  the  Peace  David  L.
Johnston,  shook  his  hand,  gave  Johnston  a
business  card  to  the  Carousel  Club,  and,  upon
learning  Johnston's  official  position,  shook
Johnston's  hand  again.  After  talking  with
Johnston,  he  gave  another  card  to  Icarus  M.
Pappas,  a  reporter  for  New  York  radio  station
WNEW.  From  a  representative  of  radio  station
KBOX  in  Dallas,  Ruby  obtained  the  "hot  line"
telephone  number  to  KLIF.  He  then  called  the
station  and  told  one  of  the  employees  that  he
would  like  to  come  up  to  distribute  the  sand-
wiches and  cold  drinks  he  had  purchased.  Ob-
serving Pappas  holding  a  telephone  line  open
and  attempting  to  get  the  attention  of  District
Attorney  Wade,  Ruby  directed  Wade  to  Pappas,
who  proceeded  to  interview  the  district  attorney.
Ruby  then  called  KLIF  a  second  time  and
offered  to  secure  an  interview  with  Wade;  he
next  summoned  Wade  to  his  phone,  whereupon
KLIF  recorded  a  telephone  interview  with  the
district  attorney.  A  few  minutes  later.  Ruby
encountered  Russ  Knight,  a  reporter  from
KLIF  who  had  left  the  station  for  the  police
department  at  the  beginning  of  Ruby's  second
telephone  call.  Ruby  directed  Knight  to  Wade
and  waited  a  short  distance  away  while  the
reporter  conducted  another  interview  with  the
district  attorney.

At  radio  station  KLIF. — When  Ruby  left
police  headquarters,  he  drove  to  radio  station
KLIF,  arriving  at  approximately  1:45  a.m.  and
remaining  for  about  45  minutes.  After  first  dis-
tributing his  sandwiches  and  soft  drinks.  Ruby
settled  in  the  newsroom  for  the  2  a.m.  newscast
in  which  he  was  credited  with  suggesting  that
Russ  Knight  ask  District  Attorney  Wade
whether  or  not  Oswald  was  sane.  After  the
newscast,  Ruby  gave  a  Carousel  card  to  one
KLIF  employee,  although  another  did  not  re-
call that  Ruby  was  promoting  his  club  as  he
normally  did.  When  speaking  with  KLIF's
Danny  Patrick  McCurdy,  Ruby  mentioned  that
he  was  going  to  close  his  clubs  for  the  weekend
and  that  he  would  rather  lose  $1,200  or  $1,500
than  remain  open  at  that  time  in  the  Nation's
history.  McCurdy  remembered  that  Ruby
"looked  rather  pale  to  me  as  he  was  talking  to
me  and  he  kept  looking  at  the  floor."  To  an-
nouncer Glen  Duncan,  Ruby  expressed  satis-
faction that  the  evidence  was  mounting  against
Oswald.  Duncan  said  that  Ruby  did  not  appear
to  be  grieving  but,  instead,  seemed  pleased  about
the  personal  contact  he  had  had  with  the  in-
vestigation earlier  in  the  evening.

Ruby  left  the  radio  station  accompanied  by
Russ  Knight.  Engaging  Knight  in  a  short  con-
versation, Ruby  handed  him  a  radio  script  en-
titled "Heroism"  from  a  conservative  radio
program  called  "Life  Line."  It  was  apparently


one  of  the  scripts  that  had  come  into  Ruby's
hands  a  few  weeks  before  at  the  Texas  Products
Show  when  H  L  H  Products  were  including  such
scripts  with  samples  of  their  products.  The
script  extolled  the  virtues  of  those  who  embark
upon  risky  business  ventures  and  stand  firmly
for  causes  they  believe  to  be  correct.  Ruby
asked  Knight's  views  on  the  script  and  sug-
gested that  there  was  a  group  of  "radicals"  in
Dallas  which  hated  President  Kennedy  and  that
the  owner  of  the  radio  station  should  editorialize
against  this  group.  Knight  could  not  clearly
determine  whether  Ruby  had  reference  to  per-
sons who  sponsored  programs  like  "Life  Line"
or  to  those  who  held  leftwing  views.  Knight
gained  the  impression  that  Ruby  believed  such
persons,  whoever  they  might  be,  were  partially
responsible  for  the  assassination.

Early  morning  of  November  23. — At  about
2:30  a.m.,  Ruby  entered  his  automobile  and
departed  for  the  Dallas  Times-Herald  Building.
En  route,  he  stopped  for  about  an  hour  to  speak
with  Kay  Helen  Coleman,  one  of  his  dancers,
and  Harry  Olsen,  a  member  of  the  Dallas  Police
Department,  who  had  hailed  him  from  a  park-
ing garage  at  the  comer  of  Jackson  and  Field
Streets.  The  couple  were  crying  and  extremely
upset  over  the  assassination.  At  one  point,  ac-
cording to  Ruby,  the  police  officer  remarked
that  "they  should  cut  this  guy  [Oswald]  inch  by
inch  into  ribbons,"  and  the  dancer  said  that  "in
England  they  would  drag  him  through  the
streets  and  would  have  hung  him."  Although
Ruby  failed  to  mention  this  episode  during  his
first  two  FBI  interviews,  he  later  explained  that
his  reason  for  failing  to  do  so  was  that  he  did
not  "want  to  involve  them  in  anything,  because
it  was  supposed  to  be  a  secret  that  he  [the  police
officer]  was  going  with  this  young  lady."  About
6  weeks  after  the  assassination,  Olsen  left  the
Dallas  Police  Department  and  married  Miss
Coleman.  Both  Olsen  and  his  wife  testified  that
they  were  greatly  upset  during  their  lengthy
conversation  with  Ruby  early  Saturday  morn-
ing; but  Mrs.  Olsen  denied  and  Olsen  did  not
recall  the  remarks  ascribed  to  them.  The  Olsens
claimed  instead  that  Ruby  had  cursed  Oswald.
Mrs.  Olsen  also  mentioned  that  Ruby  expressed
sympathy  for  Mrs.  Kennedy  and  her  children.

From  Jackson  and  Field  Streets,  Ruby  drove
to  the  Dallas  Times-Herald,  where  he  talked  for
about  15  minutes  with  composing  room  em-
ployee Roy  Pryor,  who  had  just  fir^hed  a  shift
at  4  a.m.  Ruby  mentioned  that  he  had  seen
Oswald  earUer  in  the  night,  that  he  had  cor-
rected Henry  Wade  in  connection  with  the  Fair
Play  for  Cuba  Committee,  and  that  he  had  set
up  a  telephone  interview  with  Wade.  Pryor  tes-
tified that  Ruby  explicitly  stated  to  him  that  he
believed  he  was  in  good  favor  with  the  district
attorney.  Recalling  that  Ruby  described  Oswald
as  a  "little  weasel  of  a  guy"  and  was  emotionally
concerned  about  the  President's  wife  and  chil-
dren, Pryor  also  was  impressed  by  Ruby's  sor-
rowful mood  and  remembered  that,  as  he  talked.


145


Ruby  shcx)k  a  newspaper  to  emphasize  his  con-
cern over  the  assassination.

When  Pryor  left  the  composing  room,  Ruby
remained  and  continued  speaking  with  other
employees,  including  Arthur  Watherwax  and
the  foreman,  Clyde  Gadash.  Ruby,  who  often
visited  the  Times-Herald  at  that  early  morning
hour  in  connection  with  his  ads,  sought  Wather-
wax's  views  on  his  decision  to  close  his  clubs
and  indicated  he  was  going  to  attempt  to  per-
suade other  club  owners  to  do  likewise.  Wather-
wax described  Ruby  as  "pretty  shaken  up"
about  the  assassination  and  at  the  same  time
"excited"  that  he  had  attended  Oswald's  Friday
night  press  conference.

While  at  the  Times-Herald,  Ruby  displayed
to  the  composing  room  employees  a  "twist-
board"  he  had  previously  promised  to  Gadash.
The  twistboard  was  an  exercising  device  con-
sisting of  two  pieces  of  hardened  materials
joined  together  by  a  lazy  susan  bearing  so  that
one  piece  could  remain  stationary  on  the  floor
while  a  person  stood  atop  it  and  swiveled  to
and  fro.  Ruby  had  been  trying  to  promote  sales
of  the  board  in  the  weeks  before  President  Ken-
nedy was  killed.  Considerable  merriment  de-
veloped when  one  of  the  women  employees  at
the  Times-Herald  demonstrated  the  board,  and
Ruby  himself,  put  on  a  demonstration  for  those
assembled.  He  later  testified:  "*  *  *  not  that
I  wanted  to  get  in  with  the  hilarity  of  frolick-
ing, but  he  [Gadash]  asked  me  to  show  him,
and  the  other  men  gathered  around."  Gadash
agreed  that  Ruby's  general  mood  was  one  of
sorrow.

At  about  4:30  a.m.,  Ruby  drove  from  the
Dallas  Times-Herald  to  his  apartment  where  he
awakened  his  roommate  George  Senator.  Dur-
ing his  visit  in  the  composing  room  Ruby  had
expressed  the  view  that  the  Weissman  adver-
tisement was  an  effort  to  discredit  the  Jews.
Senator  testified  that  when  Ruby  returned  to
the  apartment,  he  began  to  discuss  the  Weiss-
man  advertisement  and  also  a  signboard  he  had
seen  in  Dallas  urging  that  Chief  Justice  Earl
Warren  be  impeached.  Shortly  thereafter,  Ruby
telephoned  Larry  Crafard  at  the  Carousel  Club.
He  told  Crafard  to  meet  him  and  Senator  at  the
Nichols  Garage  adjacent  to  the  Carousel  Club
and  to  bring  a  Polaroid  camera  kept  in  the  club.
After  Crafard  joined  Ruby  and  Senator,  the
three  men  drove  to  the  "Impeach  Earl  Warren"
sign  near  Hall  Avenue  and  Central  Expressway
in  Dallas.  There  Ruby  instructed  Crafard  to
take  three  photographs  of  the  billboard.  Be-
lieving that  the  sign  and  the  Weissman  news-
paper ad  might  somehow  be  connected,  Ruby
noted  on  the  back  of  an  envelope  a  name  and
post  office  box  number  that  appeared  on  the
sign.  According  to  George  Senator:

*  *  *  when  he  was  looking  at  the  sign
and  taking  pictures  of  it,  and  the  newspaper
ad,  *  *  *  this  is  where  he  really  wanted  to
know  the  whys  or  why  these  things  had  to  be


out.  He  is  trying  to  combine  these  two  to-
gether, which  I  did  hear  him  say,  "This  is  the
work  of  the  John  Birch  Society  or  the  Com-
munist Party  or  maybe  a  combination  of
both."

Pursuing  a  possible  connection  between  the
billboard  and  the  newspaper  advertisement.
Ruby  drove  to  the  post  office  and  asked  a  postal
employee  for  the  name  of  the  man  who  had
rented  the  box  indicated  on  the  billboard,  but
the  employee  said  that  he  could  not  provide
such  information.  Ruby  inspected  the  box,  how-
ever, and  was  upset  to  find  it  stuffed  with  mail.
The  three  men  then  drove  to  a  coffeeshop  where
Ruby  continued  to  discuss  the  two  advertise-
ments. After  about  30  minutes,  they  left  the
coffeeshop.  Crafard  was  taken  to  the  Carousel
Club;  Ruby  and  Senator  returned  to  their  apart-
ment, and  Ruby  retired  at  about  6  a.m.

The  morning  and  afternoon  of  November  23.
— At  8  or  8:30  a.m.  Crafard,  who  had  been
asked  to  feed  Ruby's  dogs,  telephoned  Ruby  at
his  apartment  to  inquire  about  food  for  the  ani-
mals. Ruby  forgot  that  he  had  told  Crafard  he
did  not  plan  to  go  to  bed  and  reprimanded
Crafard  for  waking  him.  A  few  hours  thereafter
Crafard  assembled  his  few  belongings,  took
from  the  Carousel  cash  register  $5  of  money
due  him  from  Ruby,  left  a  receipt  and  thank-
you  note,  and  began  hitchhiking  to  Michigan.
Later  that  day,  Andrew  Armstrong  found  the
note  and  telephoned  Ruby.

Ruby  apparently  did  not  return  to  bed  fol-
lowing Crafard's  call.  During  the  morning
hours,  he  watched  a  rabbi  deliver  on  television
a  moving  eulogy  of  President  Kennedy.  Accord-
ing to  Ruby,  the  rabbi:

went  ahead  and  eulogized  that  here  is  a  man
that  fought  in  every  battle,  went  to  every
country,  and  had  to  come  back  to  his  own
country  to  be  shot  in  the  back  [starts  crying]
*  *  *  That  created  a  tremendous  emotional
feeling  for  me,  the  way  he  said  that.  Prior  to
all  the  other  times,  I  was  carried  away.

An  employee  from  the  Carousel  Club  who  tele-
phoned Ruby  during  the  morning  remembered
that  his  "voice  was  shaking"  when  he  spoke  of
the  assassination.

Ruby  has  stated  that,  upon  leaving  his  apart-
ment some  time  between  noon  and  1:30  p.m.,
he  drove  to  Dealey  Plaza  where  a  police  officer,
who  noted  Ruby's  solemnity,  pointed  out  to  him
the  window  from  which  the  rifleshots  had  been
fired  the  day  before.  Ruby  related  that  he  in-
spected the  wreaths  that  had  been  placed  in
memory  of  the  President  and  became  filled  with
emotion  while  speaking  with  the  police  officer.
Ruby  introduced  himself  to  a  reporter  for  radio
station  KRLD  who  was  working  inside  a  mobile
news  unit  at  the  plaza;  the  newsman  mentioned
to  Ruby  that  he  had  heard  of  Ruby's  help  to
KLIF  in  obtaining  an  interview  with  Henry


146


Wade,  and  Ruby  pointed  out  to  the  reporter  that
Capt.  J.  Will  Fritz  and  Chief  Curry  were  then
in  the  vicinity.  Thereafter,  the  newsman  inter-
viewed and  photographed  the  officers.  Ruby
said  that  he  next  drove  home  and  retximed
downtown  to  Sol's  Turf  Bar  on  Commerce
Street.

The  evidence  indicated,  however,  that  some-
time after  leaving  Dealey  Plaza,  Ruby  went  to
the  Nichols  Parking  Garage  adjacent  to  the
Carousel  Club,  where  he  was  seen  by  Gamett
C.  Hallmark,  general  manager  of  the  garage,
and  Tom  Brown,  an  attendant.  Brown  believed
that  at  about  1:30  p.m.  he  heard  Ruby  mention
Chief  Curry's  name  in  a  telephone  conversation
from  the  garage.  Brown  also  recalled  that,  be-
fore finally  departing,  Ruby  asked  him  to  in-
form acquaintances  whom  he  expected  to  stop
by  the  garage  that  the  Carousel  would  be  closed.
Hallmark  testified  that  Ruby  drove  into  the
garage  at  about  3  p.m.,  walked  to  the  telephone,
inquired  whether  or  not  a  competing  burlesque
club  would  be  closed  that  night,  and  told  Hall-
mark that  he  (Ruby)  was  "acting  like  a  re-
porter." Hallmark  then  heard  Ruby  address
someone  at  the  other  end  of  the  telephone  as
"Ken"  and  caught  portions  of  a  conversation
concerning  the  transfer  of  Oswald.  Hallmark
said  Ruby  never  called  Oswald  by  name  but
used  the  pronoun  "he"  and  remarked  to  the
recipient  of  the  call,  "\'ou  know  Til  be  there."

Ken  Dowe,  a  KLIF  announcer,  to  whom
Ruby  made  at  least  two  telephone  calls  within  a
short  span  of  time  Saturday  afternoon,  con-
firmed that  he  was  probably  the  person  to  whom
HaUmark  and  Brown  overheard  Ruby  speaking.
In  one  call  to  Dowe,  Ruby  asked  whether  the
station  knew  when  Oswald  would  be  moved;
and,  in  another,  he  stated  he  was  going  to
attempt  to  locate  Henry  Wade.  After  Ruby
finished  his  calls,  he  walked  onto  Commerce
Street,  passed  the  Carousel  Club,  and  returned
a  few  minutes  later  to  get  his  car.

Ruby's  comment  that  he  was  "acting  Uke  a
reporter"  and  that  he  would  be  at  the  Oswald
transfer  suggests  that  Ruby  may  have  spent  part
of  Saturday  afternoon  shuttling  back  and  forth
from  the  Police  and  Courts  Building  to  Dealey
Plaza.  Such  activity  would  explain  the  fact  that
Tom  Brown  at  the  Nichols  Garage  believed  he
saw  Ruby  at  1 :30  p.m.  while  Gamett  HaUmark
placed  Ruby  at  the  garage  at  3  p.m.  It  would
also  explain  Ken  Dowe's  receiving  two  phone
calls  from  Ruby.  The  testimony  of  five  news  re-
porters supports  the  possibility  that  Ruby  was
at  the  Police  and  Courts  Building  Saturday  aft-
ernoon. One  stated  that  Ruby  provided  sand-
wiches for  newsmen  on  duty  there  Saturday
afternoon,  although  no  news  representative  has
mentioned  personally  receiving  such  sand-
wiches. Another  testified  that  he  received  a
card  to  the  Carousel  Club  from  Ruby  about  4
p.m.  that  day  at  the  police  station.  A  third  be-
lieved he  saw  Ruby  enter  an  office  in  which
Henry  Wade  was  working,  but  no  one  else  re-


ported a  similar  event.  The  remaining  two  wit-
nesses mentioned  no  specific  activities.  None  of
the  persons  who  believed  they  saw  Ruby  at  the
police  department  on  Saturday  had  known  him
previously,  and  no  police  officer  has  repKjrted
Ruby's  presence  on  that  day.  Ruby  has  not  men-
tioned such  a  visit.  The  Commission,  therefore,
reached  no  firm  conclusion  as  to  whether  or  not
Ruby  visited  the  Dallas  Police  Department  on
Saturday.

Shortly  after  3  p.m.  Ruby  went  to  Sol's  Turf
Bar  on  Commerce  Street  where  he  remained  for
about  45  minutes.  Ruby,  a  nondrinker,  stated
that  he  visited  Sol's  for  the  purpose  of  talking
with  his  accountant,  who  customarily  prepared
the  bar's  payroll  on  Saturday  aftemon.  The
accountant  testified,  however,  that  he  saw  Ruby
only  briefly  and  mentioned  no  business  conver-
sation with  Ruby.  Ruby  was  first  noticed  at  the
Turf  Bar  by  jeweler  Frank  BeUochio,  who,  after
seeing  Ruby,  began  to  berate  the  people  of  Dal-
las for  the  assassination.  Ruby  disagreed  and,
when  BeUochio  said  he  might  close  his  jewelry
business  and  leave  DaUas,  Ruby  attempted  to
calm  him,  saying  that  there  were  many  good
citizens  in  Dallas.  In  response,  BeUochio  pointed
to  a  copy  of  the  Bernard  Weissman  advertise-
ment. To  BeUochio's  bewilderment,  Ruby  then
said  he  beUeved  that  the  advertisement  was  the
work  of  a  group  attempting  to  create  anti-
Semitic  feelings  in  DaUas  and  that  he  had
learned  from  the  DaUas  Morning  News  that  the
ad  had  been  paid  for  partly  in  cash.  Ruby
thereupon  produced  one  of  the  photographs  he
had  taken  Saturday  morning  of  the  "Impeach
Earl  Warren"  sign  and  excitedly  began  to  raU
against  the  sign  as  if  he  agreed  with  BeUochio's
original  criticism  of  DaUas.  He  "seemed  to  be
taking  two  sides — he  wasn't  coherent,"  BeUo-
chio testified.  WTien  BeUochio  saw  Ruby's  pho-
tographs, which  BeUochio  thought  supported
his  argument  against  DaUas,  he  walked  to  the
front  of  the  bar  and  showed  them  to  Tom
Apple,  with  whom  he  had  been  previously  ar-
guing. In  Apple's  presence,  BeUochio  asked
Ruby  for  one  of  the  pictures  but  Ruby  refused,
mentioning  that  he  regarded  the  pictures  as  a
scoop.  BeUochio  testified:  "I  spoke  to  Tom  and
said  a  few  more  words  to  Tom,  and  Ruby  was
gone — never  said  'Goodbve'  or  T'U  be  seeing
you."'

Ruby  may  have  left  in  order  to  telephone
Stanley  Kaufman,  a  friend  and  attorney  who
had  represented  him  in  civU  matters.  Kaufman
testified  that,  at  approximately  4  p.m.,  Ruby
caUed  him  about  the  Bernard  Weissman  adver-
tisement. According  to  Kaufman,  "Jack  was
particularly  impressed  with  the  [black]  border
as  being  a  tipoff  of  some  sort — that  this  man
knew  the  President  was  going  to  be  assassi-
nated *  *  *"  Ruby  told  Kaufman  that  he  had
tried  to  locate  Weissman  by  going  to  the  post
office  and  said  that  he  was  attempting  to  be
helpful  to  law  enforcement  authorities.

Considerable  confusion  exists  as  to  the  place


147


from  which  Ruby  placed  the  call  to  Kaufman
and  as  to  his  activities  after  leaving  Sol's  Turf
Bar.  Eva  Grant  stated  that  the  call  was  made
from  her  apartment  about  4  p.m.  Ruby,  how-
ever, believed  it  was  made  from  the  Turf  Bar.
He  stated  that  from  the  Turf  Bar  he  went  to  the
Carousel  and  then  home  and  has  not  provided
additional  details  on  his  activities  during  the
hours  from  about  4  to  9:30  p.m.  Robert  Larkin
saw  him  downtown  at  about  6  p.m.  and  Andrew
Armstrong  testified  that  Ruby  visited  the  Carou-
sel Club  between  6  and  7  p.m.  and  remained
about  an  hour.

At  Eva  Grant's  apartment  Saturday  evening,
— Eva  Grant  believed  that,  for  most  of  the  pe-
riod from  4  until  8  p.m..  Ruby  was  at  her  apart-
ment. Mrs.  Grant  testified  that  her  brother  was
still  disturbed  about  the  Weissman  advertise-
ment when  he  arrived,  showed  her  the  photo-
graph of  the  Warren  sign,  and  recounted  his
argument  with  Bellochio  about  the  city  of
Dallas.  Still  curious  as  to  whether  or  not  Weiss-
man  was  Jewish,  Mrs.  Grant  asked  her  brother
whether  he  had  been  able  to  find  the  name
Bernard  Weissman  in  the  Dallas  city  directory,
and  Ruby  said  he  had  not.  Their  doubts  about
Weissman's  existence  having  been  confirmed,
both  began  to  speculate  that  the  Weissman  ad
and  the  Warren  sign  were  the  work  of  either
"Commies  or  the  Birchers,"  and  were  designed
to  discredit  the  Jews.  Apparently  in  the  midst
of  that  conversation  Ruby  telephoned  Russ
Knight  at  KLLF  and,  according  to  Knight,
asked  who  Earl  Warren  was.

Mrs.  Grant  has  testified  that  Ruby  eventually
retired  to  her  bedroom  where  he  made  tele-
phone calls  and  slept.  About  8:30  p.m.,  Ruby
telephoned  to  Thomas  J.  O'Grady,  a  friend  and
former  Dallas  police  officer  who  had  once
worked  for  Ruby  as  a  bouncer.  To  O'Grady,
Ruby  mentioned  closing  the  Carousel  Club,
criticized  his  competitors  for  remaining  open,
and  complained  about  the  "Impeach  Earl  War-
ren" sign.

Saturday  evening  at  Ruby's  apartment. — By
9:30  p.m..  Ruby  had  apparently  returned  to  his
apartment  where  he  received  a  telephone  call
from  one  of  his  striptease  dancers,  Karen  Ben-
nett Carlin,  who,  together  with  her  husband,
had  been  driven  from  Fort  Worth  to  Dallas  that
evening  by  another  dancer,  Nancy  Powell.  All
three  had  stopped  at  the  Colony  Club,  a  bur-
lesque nightclub  which  competed  with  the
Carousel.  Mrs.  Carlin  testified  that,  in  need  of
money,  she  telephoned  Ruby,  asked  whether
the  Carousel  would  be  open  that  night,  and
requested  part  of  her  salary.  According  to  Mrs.
Carlin,  Ruby  became  angry  at  the  suggestion
that  the  Carousel  Club  might  be  open  for  busi-
ness but  told  her  he  would  come  to  the  Carousel
in  about  an  hour.

Thereafter,  in  a  depressed  mood,  Ruby  tele-
phoned his  sister  Eva  Grant,  who  suggested  he
visit  a  friend.  Possibly  in  response  to  that  sug-
gestion, Ruby  called  Lawrence  Meyers,  a  friend


from  Chicago  with  whom  he  had  visited  two
nights  previously.  Meyers  testified  that,  during
their  telephone  conversation.  Ruby  asked  him
what  he  thought  of  this  "terrible  thing."  Ruby
then  began  to  criticize  his  competitors,  Abe  and
Barney  Weinstein,  for  failing  to  close  their  clubs
on  Saturday  night.  In  the  course  of  his  conver-
sation about  the  Weinsteins  and  the  assassina-
tion. Ruby  said  "I've  got  to  do  something  about
this."  Meyers  initially  understood  that  remark
to  refer  to  the  Weinsteins.  Upon  reflection  after
Oswald  was  shot,  Meyers  was  uncertain  whether
Ruby  was  referring  to  his  competitors,  or  to  the
assassination  of  President  Kennedy;  for  Ruby
had  also  spoken  at  length  about  Mrs.  Kennedy
and  had  repeated  "those  poor  people,  those  poor
people."  At  the  conclusion  of  their  conversa-
tion, Meyers  declined  Ruby's  invitation  to  join
bim  for  a  cup  of  coffee  but  invited  Ruby  to  join
him  at  the  motel.  When  Ruby  also  declkied,  the
two  agreed  to  meet  for  dinner  the  following
evening.

Meanwhile,  Karen  Carlin  and  her  husband
grew  anxious  over  Ruby's  failure  to  appear  with
the  money  they  had  requested.  After  a  substan-
tial wait,  they  returned  together  to  the  Nichols
Garage  where  Mr.  Carlin  telephoned  to  Ruby.
Carlin  testified  that  he  told  Ruby  they  needed
money  in  order  to  return  to  Fort  Worth  although
Nancy  Powell  testified  that  she  drove  the  Car-
lins  home  that  evening.  Agreeing  to  advance  a
small  sum.  Ruby  asked  to  speak  to  Mrs.  Carlin,
who  claimed  that  Ruby  told  her  that  if  she
needed  more  money  she  should  call  him  on
Sunday.  Thereafter,  at  Ruby's  request,  garage
attendant  Huey  Reeves  gave  Mrs.  Carlin  $5,
and  she  signed  with  her  stage  name  "Little
Lynn"  a  receipt  which  Reeves  time-stamped
10:33  p.m.,  November  23.

Inconsistent  testimony  was  developed  re-
garding Ruby's  activities  during  the  next  45
minutes.  Eva  Grant  testified  that  she  did  not
see  her  brother  on  Saturday  night  after  8  p.m.
and  has  denied  calling  Ralph  Paul  herself  that
night.  Nonetheless,  telephone  company  records
revealed  that  at  10:44  p.m.  a  call  was  made  to
Ralph  Paul's  Bull  Pen  Drive-In  in  Arlington,
Tex.,  from  Mrs.  Grant's  apartment  It  was  the
only  call  to  Paul  from  her  apartment  on  Friday
or  Saturday;  she  recalled  her  brother  making
such  a  call  that  weekend;  and  Ralph  Paul  has
testified  that  Ruby  telephoned  him  Saturday
night  from  Eva  Grant's  apartment  and  said  he
and  his  sister  were  there  crying.

Nineteen-year-old  Wanda  Helmick,  a  former
waitress  at  the  Bull  Pen  Drive-In,  first  reported
in  Jxme,  1964  that  some  time  during  the  eve-
ning she  saw  the  cashier  answer  the  Bull  Pen's
pay  telephone  and  heard  her  call  out  to  Paul,
"It  is  for  you.  It  is  Jack."  Mrs.  Helmick  claimed
she  overheard  Paul,  speaking  on  the  telephone,
mention  something  about  a  gun  which,  she
understood  from  Paul's  conversation,  the  caller
had  in  his  possession.  She  said  she  also  heard
Paul  exclaim  "Are  you  crazy  1"  She  provided


148


no  other  details  of  the  conversation.  Mrs.
Helmick  claimed  that  on  Sunday,  November  24,
after  Oswald  had  been  shot,  she  heard  Paul  re-
peat the  substance  of  the  call  to  other  employees
as  she  had  related  it  and  that  Paul  said  Ruby
was  the  caller.  Ralph  Paul  denied  the  allega-
tions of  Mrs.  Helmick.  Both  Paul  and  Mrs.
Helmick  agreed  that  Paul  went  home  soon  after
the  call,  apparently  about  1 1  p.m.

Shortly  after  11  p.m..  Ruby  arrived  at  the
Nichols  Garage  where  he  repaid  Huey  Reeves
and  obtained  the  receipt  Mrs.  Carlin  had  signed.
Outside  the  Carousel,  Ruby  exchanged  greet-
ings with  Police  Officer  Harry  Olsen  and  Kay
Coleman,  whom  he  had  seen  late  the  previous
night.  Going  upstairs  to  the  club,  Ruby  made  a
series  of  five  brief  long-distance  phone  calls,  the
first  being  to  the  Bull  Pen  Drive-In  at  1 1 :  18  p.m.
and  lasting  only  1  minute.  Apparently  imable  to
reach  Paul  there.  Ruby  telephoned  Paul's  home
in  Arlington,  Tex.,  for  3  minutes.  A  third  call
was  placed  at  11:36  p.m.  for  2  minutes,  again
to  Paul's  home.  At  1 1 :44  p.m.  Ruby  telephoned
Breck  Wall,  a  friend  and  entertainer  who  had
gone  to  Galveston,  Tex.,  when  his  show  in
Dallas  suspended  its  performance  out  of  respect
to  President  Kennedy.  The  call  lasted  2  minutes.
Thereafter,  Ruby  immediately  placed  a  1 -minute
phone  call  to  Paul's  home.

Although  Ruby  has  mentioned  those  calls,  he
has  not  provided  details  to  the  Commission;
however,  he  has  denied  ever  indicating  to  Paul
or  Wall  that  he  was  going  to  shoot  Oswald  and
has  said  he  did  not  consider  such  action  until
Sunday  morning.  Ralph  Paul  did  not  mention
the  late  evening  calls  in  his  interview  with  FBI
agents  on  November  24,  1963.  Later  Paul  testi-
fied that  Ruby  called  him  from  downtown  to
say  that  nobody  was  doing  any  business.  Breck
Wall  testified  that  Ruby  called  him  to  determine
whether  or  not  the  American  Guild  of  Variety
Artists  (AGVA),  which  represented  striptease
dancers  in  DaUas,  had  met  concerning  a  dispute
Ruby  was  having  with  the  union.  Ruby's  major
difference  with  AGVA  during  the  preceding  2
weeks  had  involved  what  Ruby  considered  to
be  AGVA's  failure  to  enforce  against  his  2
competitors,  Abe  and  Barney  Weinstein,
AGVA's  ban  on  "striptease  contests"  and  per-
formances by  "amateurs."  As  recently  as
Wednesday,  November  20,  Ruby  had  tele-
phoned an  AGVA  representative  in  Chicago
about  that  complaint  and  earUer  in  November
he  had  unsuccessfully  sought  to  obtain  assist-
ance from  a  San  Francisco  gambler  and  a  Chi-
cagoan  reputed  for  his  heavyhanded  union  ac-
tivities. Wall  testified  that  Ruby  "was  very
upset  the  President  was  assassinated  and  he
called  Abe  Weinstein  or  Bemie  Weinstein  *  *  *
some  names  for  staying  open  *  *  *  ."  Wall
added,  "he  was  very  upset  *  *  *  that  they  did
not  have  the  decency  to  close  on  such  a  day  and
he  thought  out  of  respect  they  should  close."

Ruby's  activities  after  midnight. — After  com-
pleting the  series  of  calls  to  Paul  and  Wall  at


1 1 :48  p.m..  Ruby  went  to  the  Pago  Club,  about
a  10-minute  drive  from  the  Carousel  Club.  He
took  a  table  near  the  middle  of  the  club  and,
after  ordering  a  Coke,  asked  the  waitress  in  a
disapproving  tone,  "Why  are  you  open?"  When
Robert  Norton,  the  club's  manager,  joined  Ruby
a  few  minutes  later  he  expressed  to  Ruby  his
concern  as  to  whether  or  not  it  was  proper  to
operate  the  Pago  Club  that  evening.  Ruby  indi-
cated that  the  Carousel  was  closed  but  did  not
criticize  Norton  for  remaining  open.  Norton
raised  the  topic  of  President  Kennedy's  death
and  said,  "[W]e  couldn't  do  enough  to  the  per-
son that  [did]  this  sort  of  thing."  Norton  added,
however,  that  "Nobody  has  the  right  to  take  the
life  of  another  one."  Ruby  expressed  no  strong
opinion,  and  closed  the  conversation  by  saying
he  was  going  home  because  he  was  tired.  Later,
Ruby  told  the  Commission:  "he  knew  some-
thing was  wrong  with  me  in  the  certain  mood  I
was  in."

Ruby  testified  that  he  went  home  after  speak-
ing with  Norton  and  went  to  bed  about  1:30
a.m.  By  that  time,  George  Senator  claimed,  he
had  retired  for  the  night  and  did  not  remember
Ruby's  return.  Eva  Grant  testified  that  her
brother  telephoned  her  at  about  12:45  a.m.  to
learn  how  she  was  feeling.

Sunday  morning. — Ruby's  activities  on  Sun-
day morning  are  the  subject  of  conflicting  testi-
mony. George  Senator  believed  that  Ruby  did
not  rise  until  9  or  9:30  a.m.;  both  Ruby  and
Senator  maintained  that  Ruby  did  not  leave
their  apartment  until  shortly  before  1 1 :  00  a.m.,
and  two  other  witnesses  have  provided  testi-
mony which  supports  that  accoimt  of  Ruby*s
whereabouts.  On  the  other  hand,  three  WBAP-
TV  television  technicians — Warren  Richey,
John  Smith,  and  Ira  Walker — ^believed  they  saw
Ruby  near  the  Police  and  Courts  Building  at
various  times  between  8  a.m.  and  11  a.m.  But
there  are  substantial  reasons  to  doubt  the  accu-
racy of  their  identifications.  None  had  ever  seen
Ruby  on  a  prior  occasion.  None  looked  for  an
extended  period  at  the  man  believed  to  be  Ruby,
and  all  were  occupied  with  their  duties  and  had
no  reason  to  remember  the  man's  appearance
until  they  saw  Ruby's  picture  on  television.

Smith,  for  one,  was  not  entirely  positive  about
his  identification  of  Ruby  as  the  man  he  saw;
and  Richey  was  looking  down  from  atop  a  TV
mobile  unit  when  he  observed  on  the  sidewalk
the  man  he  believed  was  Ruby.  In  addition,
Richey  and  Smith  provided  descriptions  of
Ruby  which  differ  substantially  from  informa-
tion about  Ruby  gathered  from  other  sources.
Smith  described  the  man  he  saw  as  being  an
"imkempt  person  that  possibly  could  have  slept
with  his  clothes  on  *  *  *."  Ruby  was  charac-
teristically clean  and  well  groomed.  In  fact.
Senator  testified  that  Ruby  shaved  and  dressed
before  leaving  their  apartment  that  morning,
and  at  the  time  Ruby  shot  Oswald  he  was  dressed
in  a  hat  and  business  suit.  Richey  described
Ruby  as  wearing  a  grayish  overcoat,  while  in-


149


vestigation  indicated  that  Ruby  did  not  own  an
overcoat  and  was  not  wearing  one  at  the  time  of
the  shooting.  Although  Walker's  identification
of  Ruby  is  the  most  positive,  his  certainty  must
be  contrasted  with  the  indefinite  identification
made  by  Smith,  who  had  seen  the  man  on  one
additional  occasion.  Both  Smith  and  Walker
saw  a  man  resembling  Ruby  when  the  man,  on
two  occasions,  looked  through  the  window  of
their  mobUe  news  unit  and  once  asked  whether
Oswald  had  been  transferred.  Both  saw  only  the
man's  head,  and  Smith  was  closer  to  the  win-
dow; yet  Smith  would  not  state  positively  that
the  man  was  Ruby.  Finally,  video  tapes  of
scenes  on  Sunday  morning  near  the  NBC  van
show  a  man  close  to  the  Commerce  Street
entrance  who  might  have  been  mistaken  for
Ruby.

George  Senator  said  that  when  he  arose,  be-
fore 9  a.m.,  he  began  to  do  his  laundry  in  the
basement  of  the  apartment  building  while  Ruby
slept.  During  Senator's  absence.  Ruby  received
a  telephone  call  from  his  cleaning  lady,  Mrs.
Elnora  Pitts,  who  testified  that  she  called  some-
time between  8:30  and  9  a.m.  to  leam  whether
Ruby  wanted  her  to  clean  his  apartment  that
day.  Mrs.  Pitts  remembered  that  Ruby  "sounded
terrible  strange  to  me."  She  said  that  "there  was
something  wrong  with  him  the  way  he  was
talking  to  me."  Mrs.  Pitts  explained  that,  al-
though she  had  regularly  been  cleaning  Ruby's
apartment  on  Sundays,  Ruby  seemed  not  to
comprehend  who  she  was  or  the  reason  for  her
call  and  required  her  to  repeat  herself  several
times.  As  Senator  returned  to  the  apartment
after  the  call,  he  was  apparently  mistaken  for
Ruby  by  a  neighbor,  Sidney  Evans,  Jr.  Evans
had  never  seen  Ruby  before  but  recalled  observ-
ing a  man  resembling  Ruby,  clad  in  trousers  and
T-shirt,  walk  upstairs  from  the  "washateria"  in
the  basement  of  their  building  and  enter  Ruby's
suite  with  a  load  of  laundry.  Later  in  the  morn-
ing, Malcolm  Slaughter  who  shared  an  apart-
ment with  Evans,  saw  an  individual,  similarly
clad,  on  the  same  floor  as  Ruby's  apartment.
Senator  stated  that  it  was  not  Ruby's  custom  to
do  his  own  washing  and  that  Ruby  did  not  do  so
that  morning.

While  Senator  was  in  the  apartment.  Ruby
watched  television,  made  himself  coffee  and
scrambled  eggs,  and  received,  at  10:19  a.m.,  a
telephone  call  from  his  entertainer,  Karen  Car-
lin.  Mrs.  Carlin  testified  that  in  her  telephone
conversation  she  asked  Ruby  for  $25  inasmuch
as  her  rent  was  delinquent  and  she  needed  gro-
ceries. She  said  that  Ruby,  who  seemed  upset,
mentioned  that  he  was  going  downtown  anyway
and  that  he  would  send  the  money  from  the
Western  Union  office.  According  to  George
Senator,  Ruby  then  probably  took  a  half  hour
or  more  to  bathe  and  dress.

Supporting  the  accounts  given  by  Mrs.  Carlin
and  Mrs.  Pitts  of  Ruby's  emotional  state,  Sena-
tor testified  that  during  the  morning  Ruby:


*  *  *  was  even  mumbling,  which  I  didn't
understand.  And  right  after  breakfast  he  got
dressed.  Then  after  he  got  dressed  he  was
pacing  the  floor  from  the  Uving  room  to  the
bedroom,  from  the  bedroom  to  the  Uving
room,  and  his  lips  were  going.  What  he  was
jabbering  I  don't  know.  But  he  was  really
pacing.

Ruby  has  described  to  the  Commission  his  own
emotions  of  Sunday  morning  as  follows:

*  *  *  Sunday  morning  ***[!]  saw  a
letter  to  Caroline,  two  columns  about  a  16-
inch  area.  Someone  had  written  a  letter  to
Caroline.  The  most  heartbreaking  letter.  I
don't  remember  the  contents.  *  *  *  along-
side that  letter  on  the  same  sheet  of  paper
was  a  small  conmient  in  the  newspaper  that,  I
don't  know  how  it  was  stated,  that  Mrs.  Ken-
nedy may  have  to  come  back  for  the  trial  of
Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  *  *  *

I  don't  know  what  bug  got  ahold  of  me.
I  don't  know  what  it  is,  but  I  am  going  to  tell
the  truth  word  for  word.

I  am  taking  a  pill  called  Preludin.  It  is  a
harmless  pill,  and  it  is  very  easy  to  get  in  the
drugstore.  It  isn't  a  highly  prescribed  pill.  I
use  it  for  dieting.

I  don't  partake  of  that  much  food.  I  think
that  was  a  stimulus  to  give  me  an  emotional
feeling  that  suddenly  I  felt,  which  was  so  stu-
pid, that  I  wanted  to  show  my  love  for  our
faith,  being  of  the  Jewish  faith,  and  I  never
used  the  term  and  I  don't  want  to  go  into  that
— suddenly  the  feeling,  the  emotional  feeling
came  within  me  that  someone  owed  this  debt
to  our  beloved  President  to  save  her  the  or-
deal of  coming  back.  I  don't  know  why  that
came  through  my  mind.

Sunday  morning  trip  to  police  department. —
Leaving  his  apartment  a  few  minntes  before  1 1
a.m..  Ruby  went  to  his  automobile  taking  with
him  his  dachshund,  Sheba,  and  a  portable  radio.
He  placed  in  his  pocket  a  revolver  which  he
routinely  carried  in  a  bank  moneybag  in  the
trunk  of  his  car.  Listening  to  the  radio,  he  drove
downtown,  according  to  his  own  testimony,  by
a  route  that  took  bim  past  Dealey  Plaza  where
he  observed  the  scattered  wreaths.  Ruby  re-
lated that  he  noted  the  crowd  that  had  gathered
outside  the  county  jail  and  assumed  that  Oswald
had  aheady  been  transferred.  However,  when
he  passed  the  Mam  Street  side  of  the  Police  and
Courts  Building,  which  is  situated  on  the  same
block  as  the  Western  Union  office,  he  also  noted
the  crowd  that  was  gathered  outside  that  build-
ing. Normal  driving  time  for  the  trip  from  his
apartment  would  have  been  about  15  minutes,
but  Ruby's  possible  haste  and  the  slow  movement
of  traffic  through  Dealey  Plaza  make  a  reliable
estimate  difficult.

Ruby  parked  his  car  in  a  lot  directly  across
the  street  from  the  Western  Union  office.  He  ap-


150


parently  placed  his  keys  and  billfold  in  the
trunk  of  the  car,  then  locked  the  trunk,  which
contained  approximately  $1,000  in  cash,  and
placed  the  trunk  key  in  the  glove  compartment
of  the  car.  He  did  not  lock  the  car  doors.

With  his  revolver,  more  than  $2,000  in  cash,
and  no  personal  identification,  Ruby  walked
from  the  parking  lot  across  the  street  to  the
Western  Union  office  where  he  filled  out  forms
for  sendmg  $25  by  telegraph  to  Karen  Carlin.
After  waiting  in  line  while  one  other  Western
Union  customer  completed  her  business,  Ruby
paid  for  the  telegram  and  retained  as  a  receipt
one  of  three  time-stamped  documents  which
show  that  the  transaction  was  completed  at  al-
most exactly  11:17  a.m.,  c.s.t.  The  Western  Un-
ion clerk  who  accepted  Ruby's  order  recalls  that
Ruby  promptly  turned,  walked  out  of  the  door
onto  Main  Street,  and  proceeded  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  police  department  one  block  away.
The  evidence  set  forth  in  chapter  V  indicates
that  Ruby  entered  the  police  basement  through
the  auto  ramp  from  Main  Street  and  stood  be-
hind the  front  rank  of  newsmen  and  police  of-
ficers who  were  crowded  together  at  the  base
of  the  ramp  awaiting  the  transfer  of  Oswald
to  the  county  jail.  As  Oswald  emerged  from  a
basement  office  at  approximately  11:21  a.m.,
Ruby  moved  quickly  forward  and,  without
speaJdng,  fired  one  fatal  shot  into  Oswald's  ab-
domen before  being  subdued  by  a  rush  of  po-
lice officers.

Evaluation  of  activities. —  Examination  of
Ruby's  activities  immediately  preceding  and
following  the  death  of  President  Kennedy  re-
vealed no  sign  of  any  conduct  which  suggests
that  he  was  involved  in  the  assassination.  Prior
to  the  tragedy,  Ruby's  activities  were  routine.
Though  persons  who  saw  him  between  Novem-
ber 22  and  24  disagree  as  to  whether  or  not  he
appeared  more  upset  than  others  around  him,
his  response  to  the  assassination  appears  to  have
been  one  of  genuine  shock  and  grief.  His  indica-
tions of  concern  over  the  possible  effects  of  the
assassination  upon  his  businesses  seem  consis-
tent with  other  evidence  of  his  character.  During
the  course  of  the  weekend.  Ruby  seems  to  have
become  obsessed  with  the  possibility  that  the
Impeach  Earl  Warren  sign  and  the  Bernard
Weissman  ad  were  somehow  cormected  and  re-
lated to  the  assassination.  However,  Ruby's  in-
terest in  these  public  notices  was  openly  ex-
pressed and,  as  discussed  below,  the  evidence
reveals  no  connection  between  him  and  any  po-
litical organization.

Examination  of  Larry  Crafard's  sudden  de-
parture from  DaUas  shortly  before  noon  on  No-
vember 23  does  not  suggest  that  Ruby  was  in-
volved in  a  conspiracy.  To  be  sure,  Crafard
started  hitchhiking  to  Michigan,  where  members
of  his  family  Uved,  with  only  $7  in  his  pocket
He  made  no  attempt  to  commimicate  with  law
enforcement  officials  after  Oswald's  death;  and
a  relative  in  Michigan  recalled  that  Crafard
spoke  very  little  of  his  association  with  Ruby.


When  finally  located  by  the  FBI  6  days  later,  he
stated  that  he  left  Ruby's  employ  because  he  did
not  wish  to  be  subjected  to  further  verbal  abuse
by  Ruby  and  that  he  went  north  to  see  his  sister,
from  whom  he  had  not  heard  in  some  time.

An  investigation  of  Crafard's  unusual  behavi-
or confirms  that  his  departure  from  Dallas  was
innocent.  After  Oswald  was  shot,  FBI  agents  ob-
tained from  the  Carousel  Club  an  unmailed  let-
ter drafted  by  Crafard  to  a  relative  in  Michigan
at  least  a  week  before  the  assassination.  The  let-
ter revealed  that  he  was  considering  leaving  Dal-
las at  that  time.  On  November  17,  Crafard,  who
had  been  receiving  only  room,  board,  and  inci-
dental expenses,  told  Ruby  he  wanted  to  stop
working  for  him;  however,  Crafard  agreed  to
remain  when  Ruby  promised  a  salary.  Then  on
the  morning  of  November  23,  Ruby  and  Cra-
fard had  a  minor  altercation  over  the  telephone.
Although  Crafard  did  not  voluntarily  make
known  to  the  authorities  his  associations  with
Ruby,  he  spoke  freely  and  with  verifiable  ac-
curacy when  questioned.  The  automobile  driver
who  provided  Crafard  his  first  ride  from  Dallas
has  been  located;  his  statement  generally  con-
forms with  Crafard's  story;  and  he  did  not  re-
call any  unusual  or  troubled  behavior  by  Cra-
fard during  that  ride.

Although  Crafard's  peremptory  decision  to
leave  Dallas  might  be  unusual  for  most  persons,
such  behavior  does  not  appear  to  have  been  un-
common for  him.  His  family  residence  had
shifted  frequently  among  California,  Michigan,
and  Oregon.  During  his  22  years,  he  had  earned
his  livelihood  picking  crops,  working  in  carni-
vals, and  taking  other  odd  jobs  throughout  the
country.  According  to  his  testimony,  he  had
previously  hitchhiked  across  the  country  with
his  then  wife  and  two  infant  children.  Against
such  a  background,  it  is  most  probable  that  the
factors  motivating  Crafard's  departure  from
Dallas  on  November  23  were  dissatisfaction
with  his  existence  in  Ruby's  employ,  which  he
had  never  considered  more  than  temporary,  Ru-
by's decision  to  close  his  clubs  for  3  days,  the
argument  on  Saturday  morning,  and  his  own  de-
sire to  see  his  relatives  in  Michigan.  There  is  no
evidence  to  suggest  any  connection  between
Crafard's  departure  and  the  assassination  of  the
President  or  the  shooting  of  Oswald.

The  allegations  of  Wanda  HeLmick  raised
speculation  that  Ruby's  Saturday  night  phone
caUs  to  Ralph  Paul  and  Breck  Wall  might  have
concerning  the  shooting  of  Oswald,  but  investi-
gation has  found  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  calls
had  conspiratorial  impUcations.  Paul  was  a
close  friend,  business  associate,  and  adviser  to
Jack  Ruby.  Ruby  normally  kept  in  close  tele-
phone contact  with  Paul,  who  had  a  substantial
simi  of  money  committed  to  the  Carousel  Club.
Paul  explain^  that  Ruby  called  him  Saturday
evening  once  to  point  out  his  ads,  another  time
to  say  that  nobody  seemed  to  be  doing  any  busi-
ness in  downtown  Dallas,  and  a  third  time  to  re-
late that  both  he  and  his  sister  were  crying  over


151


the  assassination.  Between  two  of  those  phone
calls  to  Paul,  Ruby  telephoned  to  Galveston,
Tex.,  to  speak  with  Wall,  a  friend  and  former
business  associate  who  was  an  official  of  the
American  Guild  of  Variety  Artists.  Wall  re-
lated that  during  that  call  Ruby  criticized  the
Weinsteins  for  failing  to  close  their  clubs.

Having  eariier  made  the  same  complaint  to
Lawrence  Meyers  to  whom  he  mentioned  a  need
"to  do  something  about  this"  it  would  have  been
characteristic  for  Ruby  to  want  to  direct  Breck
Wall's  attention,  as  an  AGVA  official,  to  what
he  regarded  as  the  Weinsteins'  improper  con-
duct. The  view  that  the  calls  to  Wall  and  Paul
could  have  had  conspiratorial  implications  also
is  belied  in  large  measure  by  the  conduct  of  both
men  before  and  after  the  events  of  November
22-24.  A  check  of  long-distance  telephone
records  reveals  no  suspicious  activity  by  either
man.  Paul,  in  fact,  is  not  known  to  have  visited
Dallas  during  the  weekend  of  the  assassination
except  to  appear  openly  in  an  effort  to  arrange
counsel  for  Ruby  within  a  few  hours  of  the  at-
tack on  Oswald.  Neither  the  FBI  nor  the  CIA
has  been  able  to  provide  any  information  that
Ralph  Paul  or  Breck  Wall  ever  engaged  in  any
form  of  subversive  activity.

Moreover,  Mrs.  Helmick's  reliability  is  un-
dermined by  her  failure  to  report  her  informa-
tion to  any  investigative  official  until  June  9,
1964.  Although  a  sister-in-law  confirms  that
Mrs.  Heknick  wrote  her  "something  about  a
gun"  shortly  after  the  shooting,  the  only  men-
tion of  any  statement  by  Paul  which  was  in-
cluded in  a  letter  written  by  Mrs.  Helmick  after
the  Ruby  trial  was  that  Paul  believed  Ruby  was
"not  in  his  right  mind."  No  corroborating  wit-
ness named  by  Mrs.  Helmick  has  been  found
who  remembers  the  conversations  she  men-
tioned. Both  Ruby  and  Paul  have  denied  that
anything  was  said,  as  Mrs.  Helmick  suggests,
about  a  gun  or  an  intent  to  shoot  Oswald,  and
WaU  has  stated  that  Ruby  did  not  discuss  such
matters  with  him.  Even  if  Mrs.  Helmick  is  ac-
curate the  statements  ascribed  to  Paul  indicate
only  that  he  may  have  heard  of  a  possible
reference  by  Ruby  to  shooting  Oswald.  Accord-
ing to  her,  Paul's  response  was  to  exclaim  "Are
you  crazy?"  But  under  no  circumstances  does
the  report  of  Mrs.  Helmick  or  any  other  fact
support  a  belief  that  Paul  or  Wall  was  involved
in  the  shooting  of  Oswald.

The  Commission  has  conducted  an  investiga-
tion of  the  telephone  call  Ruby  received  from
Karen  Carlin  at  10:19  Sunday  morning  to  de-
termine whether  that  call  was  prearranged  for
the  purpose  of  conveying  information  about
the  transfer  of  Oswald  or  to  provide  Ruby  an
excuse  for  being  near  the  police  department.
The  Commission  has  examined  the  records  of
long-distance  telephone  calls  on  Sunday  morn-
ing for  Jack  Ruby,  the  Carlins,  the  Dallas  police,
and  several  other  persons  and  has  found  no
sign  of  any  indirect  communication  to  Ruby
through  Mr.  or  Mrs.  Carlin.  No  other  evidence


showing  any  link  between  the  Carlins  and  the
shooting  of  Oswald  has  been  developed.

Ruby  and  Oswald  Were  Not  Acquainted

The  possibility  of  a  prior  acquaintanceship
between  Ruby  and  Oswald  has  been  suggested
by  some  persons  who  viewed  the  shooting  on
television  and  believed  that  a  look  of  recognition
appeared  on  Oswald's  face  as  Ruby  moved
toward  him  in  the  jail  basement.  The  Commis-
sion has  examined  the  television  tapes  and  movie
films  which  were  made  as  Oswald  moved
through  the  basement  and  has  observed  no  facial
expressions  which  can  be  interpreted  as  signify-
ing recognition  of  Ruby  by  Oswald.  It  is  doubt-
ful even  that  Oswald  could  have  seen  Ruby
sufficiently  clearly  to  discern  his  identity  since
Oswald  was  walking  from  a  dark  corridor  into
"the  flash  from  the  many  cameras"  and  the
lights  of  TV  cameramen  which  were  "blinding."
In  addition  to  such  generalized  suspicion,  there
have  been  numerous  specific  allegations  that
Oswald  was  seen  in  the  company  of  Ruby  prior
to  November  22,  often  at  Ruby's  Carousel  Club.
All  such  allegations  have  been  investigated,  but
the  Commission  has  found  none  which  merits
credence.  In  all  but  a  few  instances  where  the
Commission  was  able  to  trace  the  claim  to  its
source,  the  person  responsible  for  the  report
either  denied  making  it  or  admitted  that  he  had
no  basis  for  the  original  allegations.  Frequently
those  responsible  for  the  allegations  have  proved
to  be  persons  of  enatic  memory  or  dubious
mental  stability.  In  a  few  instances,  the  source
of  the  story  has  remained  unidentified,  and  no
person  has  come  forward  to  substantiate  the
rumor.

The  testimony  of  a  few  witnesses  who  claim
to  have  seen  Ruby  with  a  person  who  they  feel
may  have  been  Oswald  warrants  further  com-
ment. One  such  vdtness,  Robert  K.  Patter-
son, a  Dallas  electronics  salesman,  has  stated
that  on  a  date  established  from  sales  records  as
November  1,  1963,  Ruby,  accompanied  by  a
man  who  resembled  Oswald,  purchased  some
equipment  at  his  business  establishment.  How-
ever, Patterson  did  not  claim  positively  that  the
man  he  saw  was  Oswald,  and  two  of  his  associ-
ates who  were  also  present  at  the  time  could
not  state  that  the  man  was  Oswald.  Other  evi-
dence indicates  that  Ruby's  companion  was
Larry  Crafard.  Craf ard,  who  Uved  at  the  Carou-
sel Club  while  working  for  Ruby  from  mid-
October  until  November  23,  1963,  stated  that
sometime  in  late  October  or  early  November  he
accompanied  Ruby  to  an  electronics  store  in
connection  with  the  purchase  of  electronics
equipment.  Ruth  Paine  testified  that  Crafard's
photograph  bears  a  strong  resemblance  to  Os-
wald; and  employment  records  of  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  show  that  Oswald
worked  a  full  day  on  November  1,  1963.

William  D.  Crowe,  Jr.,  a  young  nightclub
master  of  ceremonies  who  had  worked  for  Ruby
on  three  occasions  and  had  begun  a  4-  or  5-


152


week  engagement  at  the  Carousel  Club  on  No-
vember 11,  1963,  was  the  first  person  who  re-
ported a  possible  association  between  Ruby  and
Oswald.  While  attempting  to  enter  the  Carousel
Club  on  November  24,  shortly  after  Oswald
was  shot,  Crowe  encountered  two  news  media
representatives  who  were  gathering  information
on  Jack  Ruby.  At  that  time,  Crowe,  who  in-
cluded a  memory  act  in  his  repertoire,  men-
tioned the  "possibility"  that  he  had  seen  Oswald
at  the  Carousel  Club.  As  a  result  he  was  asked
to  appear  on  television.  In  Crowe's  own  words,
the  story  "started  snowballing."  He  testified:

They  built  up  the  memory  thing  and  they
built  up  the  bit  of  having  seen  Oswald  there,
and  I  never  stated  definitely,  positively,  and
they  said  that  I  did,  and  all  in  all,  what  they
had  in  the  paper  was  hardly  even  close  to
what  I  told  them.

Crowe  added  that  his  memory  act  involved  a
limited  system  which  did  not,  in  fact,  improve
his  memory  and  that  his  memory  might  not
even  be  as  good  as  that  of  the  average  person.
When  asked  how  certain  he  was  that  the  man
he  saw  was  Oswald,  Crowe  testified:  "*  *  *  the
face  seemed  familiar  as  some  faces  do,  and  I
had  associated  him  vdth  a  patron  that  I  had  seen
in  the  club  a  week  before.  That  was  about  it."

A  possible  explanation  for  Crowe's  belief  that
Oswald's  face  seemed  familiar  was  supplied  by  a
freelance  photographer,  Eddie  Rocco,  who  had
taken  pictures  at  the  Carousel  Club  for  Ruby  at
about  the  time  Crowe  was  employed  there.  Roc-
co produced  one  of  those  photographs  which  de-
picted a  man  who  might  have  been  mistaken  for
Oswald  by  persons  having  no  reason  to  remem-
ber the  man  at  the  time  they  saw  him.  When
shown  the  Rocco  photograph,  Crowe  said  that
there  was  as  strong  a  possibility  that  the  man  he
recalled  seeing  was  the  man  in  the  photograph  as
there  was  that  he  was  Oswald.  (>owe's  uncer-
tainty was  further  imderscored  by  his  failure
initially  to  provide  his  information  about  Oswald
to  David  Hoy,  a  news-media  friend  whom  Crowe
telephoned  in  EvansviUe,  Ind.,  less  than  20  min-
utes after  Oswald  was  shot.  By  then  the  possible
recognition  had  occurred  to  Crowe,  and  Hoy
said  he  was  quite  surprised  that  Crowe  had
given  the  information  first  to  other  news  repre-
sentatives instead  of  telling  him  in  that  early  con-
versation.

After  Crowe's  identification  had  been  publi-
cized, four  other  persons  also  reported  seeing
Oswald  at  the  Carousel  Club.  One  man  said  he
saw  Ruby  and  Oswald  seated  at  a  table  together
and  recalled  that  the  man  resembling  Oswald
was  addressed  by  a  blond-haired  waitress  as
"Bettit"  or  "Pettit."  The  witness  was  unable  to
give  any  description  of  "Pettit"  except  that  he
was  the  man  who  had  been  shot  by  Ruby.  He
could  not  describe  the  inside  of  the  Carousel  and
was  unable  to  give  a  precise  location  for  the
club.  Another  witness,  a  resident  of  Tennessee,


related  seeing  a  man  resembling  Oswald  at  the
Carousel  Club  on  November  10.  Ruth  Paine
has  testified,  however,  that  Oswald  spent  the
entire  holiday  weekend  of  November  9,  1 0,  and
11  at  her  home  in  Irving,  Tex.  Two  of  Ruby's
former  employees,  Karen  Carlin  and  Billy  Joe
Willis,  also  believed  they  had  seen  a  person  who
resembled  Oswald.  Willis  believed  he  saw  the
man  at  the  Carousel  Club  but  did  not  think  the
man  was  Oswald.  Mrs.  Carlin  likewise  was  not
certain  that  the  man  was  Oswald  nor  was  she
sure  where  she  had  seen  him.  Neither  reported
any  connection  between  the  man  and  Ruby.  No
other  employees  recalled  seeing  Oswald  or  a
person  resembling  him  at  the  Carousel  Club.

Wilbryn  Waldon  (Robert)  Litchfield  II  also
claimed  to  have  seen  at  the  Carousel  Club  a
man  resembling  Oswald.  Litchfield  stated  that
during  a  visit  to  the  Carousel  Club  in  late  Octo-
ber or  early  November  1963,  he  saw  such  a  man
enter  Ruby's  office,  apparently  to  confer  with
Ruby.  Although  there  is  substantial  evidence  that
Litchfield  did  see  Ruby  at  the  Carousel  Club
about  that  time,  there  is  strong  reason  to  believe
that  Litchfield  did  not  see  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.
Litchfield  described  the  man  he  saw  as  having
pockmarks  on  the  right  side  of  his  chin;  Oswald
did  not  have  such  identifying  marks.  Moreover,
the  Commission  has  substantial  doubts  concern-
ing Litchfield's  credibility.  Although  present  at
an  FBI  interview  of  anodier  witness  on  Novem-
ber 29,  Litchfield  made  no  mention  of  his  ob-
servation to  public  officials  until  December  2,
1963.  Litchfield,  who  had  twice  been  convicted
for  offenses  involving  forged  checks,  testified
that  he  first  recalled  that  Oswald  resembled  the
visitor  he  saw  at  the  Carousel  Club  while  watch-
ing a  television  showing  on  Sunday  morning,
November  24,  of  the  shooting  by  Ruby.  At  that
time  Litchfield  was  playing  poker  with  three
friends,  and  he  testified  that  he  promptly  in-
formed them  of  the  resemblance  he  observed.
However,  none  of  the  three  poker  companions
remembered  Litchfield's  makhig  such  a  remark;
and  two  added  that  Litchfield's  statements  were
often  vmtrustworthy.

With  regard  to  all  of  the  persons  who  claimed
to  have  seen  Ruby  and  Oswald  together,  it  is
significant  that  none  had  particular  reason  to
pay  close  attention  to  either  man,  that  substan-
tial periods  of  time  elapsed  before  the  events
they  assertedly  witnessed  became  meaningful
and  that,  unlike  the  eyewitnesses  who  claimed  to
have  seen  Oswald  on  November  22,  none  re-
ported their  observations  soon  after  Oswald
was  arrested.  In  the  course  of  its  investigation,
the  Commission  has  encountered  numerous
clear  mistakes  of  identification.  For  example,  at
least  four  persons,  other  than  Crafard,  are
known  to  have  been  mistaken  for  Oswald.  Other
persons  have  been  misidentified  as  Jack  Ruby.
Under  all  the  available  evidence  there  is  no  sub-
stantial likelihood  that  the  person  the  various
witnesses  claimed  to  have  seen  with  Ruby  was
in  fact  Oswald.


153


In  addition  to  probing  the  reported  evidence
that  Ruby  and  Oswald  had  been  seen  together,
the  Commission  has  examined  other  circum-
stances for  signs  that  the  two  men  were  ac-
quainted. From  the  time  Oswald  returned  from
Mexico,  both  he  and  Jack  Ruby  lived  in  the
Oak  Cliff  section  of  Dallas,  slightly  more  than
a  mile  apart.  Nimierous  neighbors  of  both  Os-
wald and  Ruby  were  interviewed, and  none
knew  of  any  association  between  the  two.  Os-
wald's work  began  at  8  each  weekday  morning
and  terminated  at  4:45  each  afternoon.  Jack
Ruby  usually  remained  in  his  apartment  until
past  9  a.m.  each  day.  Although  both  men  worked
in  downtown  Dallas,  they  normally  traveled  to
their  places  of  employment  by  different  routes.
Ruby  owned  an  automobile,  and  the  shortest
route  downtown  from  his  home  was  via  a  free-
way adjacent  to  his  apartment.  Oswald  did  not
own  a  car  and  had,  at  best,  a  rudimentary  ability
to  drive.  From  his  roominghouses  on  North
Beckley  Avenue  and  on  Marsalis  Street,  he  nor-
mally took  public  transportation  which  did  not
bring  him  within  six  blocks  of  either  Ruby's
apartment  or  his  downtown  nightclub,  nor  did
Oswald's  route  from  the  bus  stop  to  home  or
work  bring  him  near  Ruby's  home  or  business.
Persons  at  Oswald's  roominghouse  testified  that
he  regularly  came  home  promptly  after  work
and  remained  in  his  room.  While  in  Dallas,  he
is  not  known  to  have  visited  any  nightclub.  Ruby
was  generally  at  the Carousel  Club  from  9
o'clock  each  evening  until  after  1  a.m.  In  a  few
instances, Ruby and Oswald patronized the
same  stores,  but  no  indication  has  been  found
that  they  ever  met  at  such  stores.  Ruby  at  one
time  frequented  a  restaurant  where  Oswald  oc-
casionally ate  breakfast,  but  the  times  of  their
patronage  were  widely  separated  and  restaurant
employees  knew  of  no  acquaintance  between
Ruby  and  Oswald.  Likewise,  Ruby  has  held
various  memberships  in  the  Dallas  YMCA  and
Oswald  lived  there  for  brief  periods;  however,
there  is  no  indication  that  they  were  there  at  the
same  time.

Both  Ruby  and  Oswald  maintained  post  office
boxes  at  the  terminal  annex  of  the  U.S.  post  of-
fice in  DaUas,  but  there  is  no  indication  that
those  facts  were  more  than  coincidental.  On
November  1,  1963,  Oswald  rented  box  No.
6225,  his  third  since  October  1962.  Oswald's
possible  purpose  has  been  discussed  previously  in
this  chapter.  On  November  7,  1963,  Jack  Ruby
rented  post  office  box  No.  5475  because  he
hoped  to  receive  mail  responses  to  advertise-
ments for  the  twistboard  exercise  device  which
he  was  then  promoting.  Although  it  is  conceiv-
able that  Oswald  and  Ruby  coincidentally  en-
countered one  another  while  checking  their
boxes,  the  different  daily  schedules  of  the  two
men  render  even  this  possibility  unUkely.  More-
over, Oswald's  withdrawn  personality  makes  it
improbable  that  the  two  would  have  spoken  if
their  paths  had  crossed.

The Commission has also examined the


known  friends  and  acquaintances  of  Ruby  and
Oswald  for  evidence  that  the  two  were  ac-
quainted, but  it  has  found  very  few  possible
links.  One  conceivable  association  was  through
John  Carter,  a  boarder  at  1026  North  Beckley
Avenue  while  Oswald  lived  there.  Carter  was
friendly  with  Wanda  Joyce  Killam,  who  had
known  Jack  Ruby  since  shortly  after  he  moved
to  Dallas  in  1947  and  worked  for  him  from  July
1963  to  early  November  1963.  Mrs.  Killam,  who
volunteered  the  information  about  Carter's  resi-
dence during  an  interview  with  an  agent  of  the
FBI,  has  stated  that  she  did  not  believe  Carter
ever  visited  the  Carousel  Club  and  that  she  did
not  think  Carter  knew  Ruby.  Carter  stated  that
he  had  not  heard  of  Ruby  until  Oswald  was  shot,
had  talked  briefly  with  Oswald  only  once  or
twice,  and  had  never  heard  Oswald  mention
Ruby  or  the  Carousel  Club.  The  Commission
has  no  reason  to  disbelieve  either  Mrs.  Killam  or
Mr.  Carter

A  second  possible  link  between  Oswald  and
Ruby  was  through  Earlene  Roberts,  the  house-
keeper at  1026  North  Beckley  Avenue.  Bertha
Cheek,  the  sister  of  Mrs.  Roberts,  is  known  to
have  visited  Jack  Ruby  at  the  Carousel  Club  dur-
ing the  afternoon  of  November  18,  1963.  Mrs.
Cheek  testified  that  she  had  met  with  Ruby  and
a  person  whom  Ruby  represented  to  be  an  in-
terior decorator  for  the  purpose  of  discussing  the
possibility  of  financially  backing  Ruby  in  a  new
nightclub  which  he  planned  to  open.  Mrs.  Cheek
said  she  had  met  Ruby  only  once,  a  few  years
before,  and  that  she  had  not  heard  of  Oswald
untU  he  shot  President  Kennedy.  Mr.  Frank
Boerder,  the  decorator  who  was  present  at  the
November  18  meeting,  confirmed  the  substance
of  the  discussion  reported  by  Mrs.  Cheek,  and
other  witnesses  established  that  Ruby  was,  in
fact,  seeking  an  associate  for  a  new  nightclub
venture.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Jack  Ruby
ever  associated  with  Earlene  Roberts,  nor  is
there  any  indication  that  Mrs.  Cheek  knew  of
Lee  Harvey  Oswald  prior  to  November  22.

Oswald's  trips  to  the  home  of  Mrs.  Ruth  Paine
at  2115  West  Fifth  Street  in  Irving,  Tex.,  pre-
sented another  possible  link  to  Ruby.  While  Os-
wald's family  resided  with  Mrs.  Paine,  William
F.  Simmons,  piano  player  in  the  musical  combo
which  worked  at  the  Carousel  Club  from  Sep-
tember 17,  1963,  until  November  21,  1963,
lived  at  2539  West  Fifth  Street,  in  Irving.  Sim-
mons has  stated  that  his  only  relationship  to
Ruby  was  as  an  employee,  that  Ruby  never
visited  him,  that  he  did  not  know  Oswald,  and
that  he  had  never  seen  Oswald  at  the  Carousel
Club.  Other  persons  in  the  neighborhood  knew
of  no  connection  between  Ruby  and  Oswald.

The  Commission  has  investigate!  rumors  that
Jack  Ruby  and  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  were  both
homosexuals  and,  thus,  might  have  known  each
other  in  that  respect.  However,  no  evidence  has
been  uncovered  to  support  the  rumors,  the  clos-
est acquaintances  of  both  men  emphatically  deny

154


them,  and  Ruby's  nightclubs  were  not  known  to
have  been  frequented  by  homosexuals.

A  final  suggestion  of  a  connection  between
Jack  Ruby  and  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  arises  from
the  testimony  of  Oswald's  mother,  Marguerite
Oswald.  When  appearing  before  the  Commis-
sion, Mrs.  Oswald  related  that  on  November  23,
1963,  before  Ruby  shot  Oswald,  FBI  Agent
BardweU  D.  Odum  showed  her  a  picture  of  a
man  she  believed  was  Jack  Ruby,  and  asked
whether  the  man  shown  was  familiar  to  her.
Odum  had  first  attempted  to  see  Marina  Oswald,
but  Marguerite  refused  to  allow  Marina  to  be
disturbed  at  that  time.  In  the  course  of  Mar-
guerite's testimony,  the  Commission  asked  the
FBI  for  a  copy  of  the  photograph  displayed  by
Odum  to  her.  When  Marguerite  viewed  the
photograph  provided  the  Commission,  she  stated
that  the  picture  was  different  from  the  one  she
saw  in  November,  in  part  because  the  "top  two
comers"  were  cut  differently  and  because  the
man  depicted  was  not  Jack  Ruby.

The  Commission  has  investigated  this  matter
and  determined  that  Special  Agent  Odum  did
show  a  picture  to  Marguerite  Oswald  for  pos-
sible identification  but  that  the  picture  was  not
of  Jack  Ruby.  On  November  22  the  CIA  had
provided  the  FBI  with  a  photograph  of  a  man
who,  it  was  thought  at  the  time,  might  have  been
associated  with  Oswald.  To  prevent  the  viewer
from  determining  precisely  where  the  picture
had  been  taken,  FBI  Agent  Odum  had  trimmed
the  backgroimd  from  the  photograph  by  making
a  series  of  straight  cuts  which  reduced  the  pic-
ture to  an  irregular  hexagonal  shape.  The  pic-
ture which  was  displayed  by  the  Commission  to
Marguerite  Oswald  was  a  copy  of  the  same
picture  shown  her  by  Agent  Odimi;  however,
in  supplying  a  duplicate  photograph  for  Com-
mission use  the  FBI  had  cropped  the  background
by  cutting  along  the  contours  of  the  body  of  the
man  shown,  restilting  in  a  photograph  without
any  background,  unlike  the  first  photograph
Marguerite  viewed  on  November  23.  Affidavits
obtained  from  the  CIA  and  from  two  FBI  agents
who  trimmed  the  photographs  established  that
the  one  shown  to  Mrs.  Oswald  before  the  Com-
mission, though  trimmed  differently  from  the
one  shown  her  on  November  23,  was  a  copy  of
the  same  picture.  Neither  picture  was  of  Jack
Ruby.  The  original  photograph  had  been  taken
by  the  CIA  outside  of  the  United  States  some-
time between  July  1,  1963,  and  November  22,
1963,  during  all  of  which  time  Ruby  was  within
the  country.

Ruby's  Background  and  Associations

In  addition  to  examining  in  detail  Jack  Ruby's
activities  from  November  21  to  November  24
and  his  possible  acquaintanceship  with  Lee  Har-
vey Oswald,  the  Commission  has  considered
whether  or  not  Ruby  had  ties  with  individuals
or  groups  that  might  have  obviated  the  need  for
any  direct  contact  near  the  time  of  the  assassina-
tion. Study  of  Jack  Ruby's  background,  which


is  set  out  more  fully  in  appendix  XVI,  leads  to
the  firm  conclusion  that  he  had  no  such  ties.

Business  activities. — Ruby's  entire  life  is
characteristic  of  a  rigorously  independent  per-
son. He  moved  from  his  family  home  soon  after
leaving  high  school  at  age  16,  although  a  "fam-
ily" residence  has  been  maintained  in  Chicago
throughout  the  years.  Later,  in  1947,  he  moved
from  Chicago  to  Dallas  and  maintained  only
sporadic  contact  wnith  most  of  his  family.  For
most  of  his  working  years  and  continuously  since
1947,  Jack  Ruby  was  self-employed.  Although
he  had  partners  from  time  to  time,  the  partner-
ships were  not  lasting,  and  Ruby  seems  to  have
preferred  to  operate  independently.

Ruby's  main  sources  of  income  were  his  two
nightclubs — the  Carousel  Club  and  the  Vegas
Club — although  he  also  frequently  pursued  a
number  of  independent  short-lived  business  pro-
motions. (Ruby's  business  dealings  are  described
iD  greater  detail  in  app.  XVI.)  At  the  time  of  the
assassination,  the  United  States  claimed  ap-
proximately $44,000  in  delinquent  taxes,  and  he
was  in  substantial  debt  to  his  brother  Earl  and
to  his  friend  Ralph  Paul.  However,  there  are  no
indications  that  Earl  Ruby  or  Ralph  Paul  was
exerting  pressure  for  payment  or  that  Ruby's
tax  liabilities  were  not  susceptible  to  an  accepta-
ble settlement.  Ruby  operated  his  clubs  on  a
cash  basis,  usually  carrying  large  amounts  of
cash  on  his  person;  thus  there  is  no  particular
significance  to  the  fact  that  approximately
$3,000  in  cash  was  found  on  his  person  and  in
his  automobile  when  arrested.  Nor  do  his  meager
financial  records  reflect  any  suspicious  activities.
He  used  his  bank  accounts  only  infrequently,
with  no  unexplained  large  transactions;  and  no
entries  were  made  to  Ruby's  safe-deposit  boxes
in  over  a  year  prior  to  the  shooting  of  Oswald,
There  is  no  evidence  that  Ruby  received  any
sums  after  his  arrest  except  royalties  from  a
syndicated  newspaper  article  on  his  life  and
small  contributions  for  his  defense  from  friends,
sympathizers,  and  family  members.

Ruby's  political  activities. — Jack  Ruby  con-
sidered himself  a  Democrat,  perhaps  in  part  be-
cause his  brother  Hyman  had  been  active  in
Democratic  ward  politics  iti  Chicago.  When
Ruby  was  arrested,  police  officers  found  in  his
apartment,  10  political  cards  urging  the  election
of  the  "Conservative  Democratic  slate,"  but  the
Commission  has  found  no  evidence  that  Ruby
had  distributed  that  literature  and  he  is  not
known  ever  to  have  campaigned  for  any  political
candidates.  None  of  his  friends  or  associates  ex-
pressed any  knowledge  that  he  belonged  to  any
groups  interested  in  political  issues,  nor  did  they
remember  that  he  had  discussed  political  prob-
lems except  on  rare  occasions.

As  a  young  man,  Ruby  participated  in  attacks
upon  meetings  of  the  German-American  Bund  in
Chicago,  but  the  assaults  were  the  efforts  of
poolhaJl  associates  from  his  predominantly  Jew-
ish neighborhood  rather  than  the  work  of  any
political  group.  His  only  other  known  activities


155


which  had  any  political  flavor  possessed  stronger
overtones  of  financial  self-interest.  In  early  1 942
he  registered  a  copyright  for  a  placard  which
displayed  an  American  flag  and  bore  the  inscrip-
tion "Remember  Pearl  Harbor."  The  placard
was  never  successfully  promoted.  At  other  times,
he  is  reported  to  have  attempted  to  sell  busts  of
President  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt,  The  rabbi  of
Ruby's  synagogue  expressed  the  belief  that  Ruby
was  too  unsophisticated  to  grasp  or  have  a  sig-
nificant interest  in  any  political  creed.  Although
various  views  have  been  given  concerning
Ruby's  attitude  toward  President  Kennedy  prior
to  the  assassination,  the  overwhelming  number
of  witnesses  reported  that  Ruby  had  considera-
ble respect  for  the  President,  and  there  has  been
no  report  of  any  hostility  toward  him.

There  is  also  no  reliable  indication  that  Ruby
was  ever  associated  with  any  Communist  or  radi-
cal causes.  Jack  Ruby's  parents  were  born  in  Po-
land in  the  1870's  and  his  father  served  in  the
Czarist  Russian  army  from  1893-98.  Though
neither  parent  became  a  citizen  after  emigrating
to  the  United  States  m  the  early  1900's,  the  evi-
dence indicates  that  neither  Ruby  nor  his  family
maintained  any  ties  with  relatives  in  Europe.
Jack  Ruby  has  denied  ever  being  connected  with
any  Communist  activities.  The  FBI  has  reported
that,  prior  to  the  shooting  of  Oswald,  its  nation-
wide files  contained  no  information  of  any  sub-
versive activities  by  Ruby.  In  addition,  a  Com-
mission staff  member  has  personally  examined
all  subversive  activities  reports  from  the  Dallas-
Fort  Worth  office  of  the  FBI  for  the  year  1963
and  has  found  no  reports  pertaining  to  Jack
Ruby  or  any  of  his  known  acquaintances.

The  Commission  has  directed  considerable  at-
tention to  an  allegation  that  Jack  Ruby  was  con-
nected with  Communist  Party  activities  in  Mun-
cie,  Ind.  On  the  day  after  Oswald's  death,  a
former  resident  of  Muncie  claimed  that  between
1943  and  1947  a  Chicagoan  resembling  Ruby
and  knovm  to  him  as  Jack  Rubenstein  was  in
Muncie  on  three  occasions  and  associated  with
persons  who  the  witness  suspected  were  Com-
munists. The  witness  stated  that  the  man  re-
sembling Ruby  visited  Muncie  during  these  years
as  a  guest  of  the  son-in-law  of  a  now-deceased
jeweler  for  whom  the  witness  worked.  A  second
son-in-law  of  the  jewelry  store  owner  suggested
that  he  may  have  known  Ruby  while  the  two  re-
sided in  Chicago,  but  the  son-in-law  whom  Ruby
allegedly  visited  disclaimed  any  acquaintance-
ship with  Ruby.  Both  sons-in-law  denied  any
Communist  activities  and  the  Commission  has
found  no  contrary  evidence  other  than  the  testi-
mony of  the  witness.

On  the  first  two  occasions  on  which  Ruby  is
alleged  to  have  been  in  Muncie,  military  records
show  him  to  have  been  on  active  miltary  duty  in
the  South.  The  witness  also  said  that  the  man  he
knew  as  Rubenstein  ovraed  or  managed  a  night-
club when  he  met  him,  but  the  Commission  has
no  reliable  evidence  that  Jack  Ruby  ever  owned
or  worked  in  any  nightclubs  when  he  lived  in


156


Chicago.  The  witness  further  stated  that  on  one
occasion  he  found  the  name  of  Jack  Rubenstein,
or  perhaps  a  similar  name,  together  with  the
names  of  others  he  believed  were  Communists,
on  a  list  which  had  been  left  in  a  room  above  the
jewelry  store  after  a  meeting  held  there.  The
witness  said  he  gave  the  list  to  his  wife's  cousin,
now  deceased,  who  was  then  the  chief  of  detec-
tives in  Muncie.  However,  neither  the  list  nor  a
person  identifiable  as  Jack  Ruby  has  been  lo-
cated after  a  thorough  search  by  the  FBI  of  its
own  files  and  those  of  the  Muncie  Police  Depart-
ment, the  Indiana  State  Police,  and  other  agen-
cies. The  witness  did  not  recall  seeing  Ruben-
stein in  Muncie  during  the  period  of  that  meet-
ing, and  he  had  never  heard  Rubenstein  say  any-
thing which  would  indicate  he  was  a  Communist.

The  FBI  has  interviewed  all  living  persons
who  the  witness  stated  were  involved  with  Ruby
in  Communist  activities  in  Muncie.  One  per-
son named  by  the  witness  was  known  pre-
viously to  have  been  involved  in  Communist
Party  activities,  but  subversive  activities  files
have  revealed  no  such  activities  for  any  of  the
others.  The  admitted  former  Communist  denied
knowing  Ruby  and  stated  that  the  jeweb-y  store
owner  was  not  known  to  him  as  a  Communist
and  that  Communist  meetings  were  never  held
above  the  store.  All  other  Muncie  residents
named  by  the  witness  as  possible  associates  of
Ruby  denied  knowing  Ruby.  Similarly,  fellow
employees  of  the  witness  whom  he  did  not  claim
were  Communists  knew  of  no  Communist  ac-
tivities connected  with  the  jewelry  store  owner
or  any  visits  of  Jack  Ruby,  and  FBI  informants
familiar  with  Communist  activities  in  Indiana
and  Chicago  did  not  know  of  any  participation
by  Ruby.  Finally,  the  witness  testified  that  even
though  he  believed  as  early  as  1947  that  all  of
the  persons  named  by  him  were  Communists  he
had  never  brought  his  information  to  the  at-
tention of  any  authority  investigating  such  ac-
tivities, except  for  providing  the  alleged  list  to
his  cousin.  The  Commission  finds  no  basis  for
accepting  the  witness's  testimony.

The  Commission  has  also  investigated  the  pos-
sibility that  Ruby  was  associated  vdth  ultracon-
servative  political  endeavors  in  Dallas.  Among
Ruby's  possessions  police  found  two  radio
scripts  of  a  right-wing  program,  promoted  by
H.  L.  Hunt,  owner  of  the  Hunt  Oil  Corpora-
tion. Ruby  had  acquired  the  scripts  a  few
weeks  earlier  at  the  Texas  Products  Show,
where  they  were  enclosed  in  bags  of  H  L  H
Products  (a  division  of  Hunt  Oil)  food  items.
Ruby  is  reported  to  have  become  enraged  when
he  discovered  the  scripts,  and  threatened  to
send  one  to  "Kennedy."  He  is  not  known  to
have  done  anything  with  them  prior  to  giving
one  to  a  radio  announcer  on  November  23;
and  on  that  day  he  seemed  to  confuse  organ-
izations of  the  extreme  right  with  those  of  the
far  left.  On  November  21,  Ruby  drove  Connie
Tranmiel,  a  young  college  graduate  whom  he
had  met  some  months  previously,  to  the  office
of  Lamar  Hunt,  the  son  of  H.  L.  Hunt,  for  a  job


interview.  Although  Ruby  stated  that  he  would
like  to  meet  Hunt,  seemingly  to  establish  a  busi-
ness connection,  he  did  not  enter  Hunt's  office
with  her.

An  allegation  that  Ruby  was  a  visitor  at  the
home  of  Maj.  Gen.  Edwin  A.  WaUcer  (Resigned,
U.S  Army)  appears  totally  unfounded.  The  alle-
gation was  made  in  late  May  1964  to  an  agent
of  the  U.S.  Secret  Service  by  William  McEwan
Duff.  Duff,  who  was  discharged  from  military
service  in  June  1964  because  of  a  fraudulent  en-
listment, disclaimed  any  knowledge  of  Ruby  or
Oswald  when  questioned  by  FBI  agents  in  Janu-
ary 1964.

Another  allegation  connecting  Jack  Ruby
with  right-wing  activities  was  Mark  Lane's  as-
sertion, mentioned  previously,  that  an  unnamed
informant  told  him  of  a  meeting  lasting  more
than  2  hours  in  the  Carousel  Club  on  November
14,  1963,  between  Jack  Ruby,  Patrolman  J.  D.
Tippit,  and  Bernard  Weissman.  Although  the
name  of  Lane's  informant  has  never  been  re-
vealed to  the  Commission,  an  investigation  has
been  conducted  in  an  effort  to  find  corroboration
for  the  claimed  Tippit,  Weissman,  and  Ruby
meeting.  No  employee  of  the  Carousel  Club  has
any  knowledge  of  the  meeting  described  by
Lane.  Ruby  and  Weissman  both  deny  that  such
a  meeting  occurred,  and  Officer  Tippit's  widow
has  no  knowledge  that  her  late  husband  ever
went  to  the  Carousel  Club.

Some  confusion  has  arisen,  however,  because
early  Friday  afternoon,  November  22,  Ruby
remarked  that  he  knew  the  Tippit  who  had  been
shot  by  Oswald.  Later  Ruby  stated  that  he  did
not  know  J.  D.  Tippit  but  that  his  reference  was
to  G.  M.  Tippit,  a  member  of  the  special  services
bureau  of  the  Dallas  Police  Department  who
had  visited  Ruby  establishments  occasionally  in
the  course  of  his  offical  duties.  Larry  Crafard
was  unable  to  recognize  photographs  of  J.  D.
Tippit  and  had  no  recollection  of  a  Tippit,  Weiss-
man, and  Ruby  meeting  at  any  time.  However,
uncertainty  was  introduced  when  Crafard  iden-
tified a  photograph  of  Bernard  Weissman  as  re-
sembling a  man  who  had  visited  the  Carousel
Club  and  had  been  referred  to  by  Ruby  as
"Weissman."  In  a  subsequent  interview  Crafard
stated  that  he  believed  Weissman  was  a  detective
on  the  Dallas  Police  Department,  that  his  first
name  may  have  been  Johnny,  and  that  he  was  in
his  late  thirties  or  early  forties.  As  set  forth  pre-
viously, Bernard  Weissman  was  a  26-year-old
New  York  carpet  salesman.  Crafard  added  "I
could  have  my  recollection  of  a  Mr.  Weissman
mixed  up  with  someone  else."

Ruby's  conduct  on  November  22  and  23,
1963,  corroborates  his  denial  that  he  knew  Ber-
nard Weissman.  Ruby  expressed  hostility  to  the
November  22  full-page  advertisement  to  many
persons.  To  none  did  he  give  any  indication  that
he  was  famUiar  with  the  person  listed  as  respon-
sible for  the  advertisement.  His  attempt  on  No-
vember 23  to  trace  the  holder  of  the  post  office
box  shown  on  the  "Impeach  Earl  Warren"  sign


and  to  locate  Weissman's  name  in  a  Dallas  city
directory  also  tends  to  indicate  that  in  fact  he
was  not  familiar  with  Weissman.  Had  he  been
involved  in  some  type  of  unlawful  activity  with
Weissman,  it  is  highly  unlikely  that  Ruby  would
have  called  attention  to  Weissman  as  he  did.

Investigation  has  disclosed  no  evidence  that
Officer  J.  D.  Tippit  was  acquainted  with  either
Ruby  or  Oswald.  Neither  Tippit's  wife  nor  his
close  friends  knew  of  such  an  acquaintanceship.
Tippit  was  not  known  to  frequent  nightclubs
and  he  had  no  reason  during  the  course  of  his
pohce  duties  to  enter  Ruby's  clubs.  Although  at
the  time  of  the  assassination  Tippit  was  working
weekends  in  a  Dallas  restaurant  owned  by  a
member  of  the  John  Birch  Society,  the  restau-
rant owner  stated  that  he  never  discussed  poli-
tics with  Tippit.  Persons  close  to  Tippit  related
that  Tippit  rarely  discussed  political  matters
with  any  person  and  that  he  was  a  member  of
no  political  organization.  Telephone  records  for
the  period  following  September  26,  1963,  re-
vealed no  suspicious  long-distance  calls  from
the  Tippit  household.

Tippit's  encounter  with  Oswald  following  the
shooting  of  the  President  is  indicative  of  no  prior
association  between  the  two  men.  Police  radio
logs  show  that,  as  part  of  general  directions  is-
sued to  all  officers  immediately  after  the  assas-
sination, Tippit  was  specifically  directed  to  patrol
the  Oak  CUS  area  where  he  came  upon  Oswald,
His  movement  from  the  area  which  he  had  been
patrolling  into  the  central  Oak  Cliff  area  was
also  in  conformity  with  the  normal  procedure
of  the  Dallas  Police  Department  for  patrol  cars
to  cover  nearby  districts  when  the  patrol  cars  in
that  district  became  otherwise  engaged,  as  oc-
curred after  the  assassination.  Oswald  fit  the
general  description,  which,  15  minutes  after  the
assassination,  was  broadcast  to  all  police  cars  of
a  suspect  described  by  a  bystander  who  had
seen  Oswald  in  the  sixth-floor  window  of  the
Texas  School  Book  Depository.  There  is  thus
no  basis  for  any  inference  that,  in  approaching
Oswald,  Tippit  was  acting  other  than  in  the  line
of  police  duty.

Allegations  of  Cuban  activity. — No  substan-
tiation has  been  found  for  rumors  linking  Ruby
with  pro-  or  anti-Castro  Cuban  activities,  except
for  one  incident  in  January  1959  when  Ruby
made  preliminary  inquiries,  as  a  middleman,
concerning  the  possible  sale  to  Cuba  of  some  sur-
plus jeeps  located  in  Shreveport,  La.,  and  asked
about  the  possible  release  of  prisoners  from  a
Cuban  prison.  No  evidence  has  been  developed
that  the  project  ever  became  more  than  a  "pos-
sibility." Ruby  explained  that  in  early  1959
United  States  sentiment  toward  Cuba  was  stiU
favorable  and  that  he  was  merely  pursuing  a
money-making  opportunity.

During  the  period  of  the  "jeep  sale,"  R.  D.
Matthews,  a  gambler  and  a  "passing  acquaint-
ance" of  Ruby,  returned  to  Dallas  from  Havana
where  he  had  been  living.  In  mid-1959,  he  re-
turned to  Cuba  until  mid-1960.  On  October  3,


157


1963,  a  telephone  call  was  made  from  the  Carou-
sel Club  to  Matthews'  former  wife  in  Shreve-
port.  No  evidence  has  been  uncovered  that
Matthews  was  associated  with  the  sale  of  jeeps  or
the  release  of  prisoners  or  that  he  knew  of  Os-
wald prior  to  the  assassination.  Matthews'  ex-
wife  did  not  recall  the  phone  call  in  October  of
1963,  and  she  asserted  that  she  did  not  know
Jack  Ruby  or  anybody  working  for  him.

In  September  1959,  Ruby  traveled  to  Havana
as  a  guest  of  a  close  friend  and  known  gam-
bler, Lewis  J.  McWillie.  Both  Ruby  and  McWil-
lie  state  the  trip  was  purely  social.  In  January
1961,  McWillie  left  Cuba  with  strong  feelings
of  hostility  to  the  Castro  regime.  In  early  1963,
Ruby  purchased  a  pistol  which  he  shipped  to
McWillie  in  Nevada,  but  McWillie  did  not  ac-
cept the  package.  The  Commission  has  fotmd  no
evidence  that  McWillie  has  engaged  in  any  ac-
tivities since  leaving  Cuba  that  are  related  to
pro-  or  anti-Castro  political  movements  or  that
he  was  involved  in  Ruby's  abortive  jeep  trans-
action.

The  Commission  has  also  received  evidence
that  in  April  1962,  a  telegram  sent  to  Havana,
Cuba,  was  charged  to  the  business  telephone  of
Earl  Ruby,  brother  of  Jack  Ruby.  Earl  Ruby
stated  that  he  was  unable  to  recall  that  telegram
but  testified  that  he  had  never  traveled  to  Cuba
nor  had  any  dealings  vvdth  persons  in  Cuba.  Jack
Ruby  is  not  known  to  have  visited  his  brother  at
that  time,  and  during  that  period  Earl  and  Jack
did  not  maintain  a  close  relationship.  Earl  Ruby
is  not  known  to  have  been  involved  in  any  sub-
versive activities.

Finally,  examination  of  FBI  infomation  rel-
ative to  Cuban  groups  in  the  Dallas-Fort  Worth
area  for  the  year  1963  fails  to  disclose  any  per-
sons who  might  provide  a  link  between  Ruby
and  such  groups.  The  Central  Intelligence
Agency  has  no  information  suggesting  that  Jack
Ruby  or  any  of  his  closest  associates  have  been
involved  in  any  type  of  revolutionary  or  sub-
versive Cuban  activity.

Possible  underworld  connections. —  The  Com-
mission has  investigated  Ruby's  possible  criminal
activities,  looking  with  particular  concern  for
evidence  that  he  engaged  in  illegal  activities  with
members  of  the  organized  imderworld  or  that,
on  his  own,  he  was  a  promoter  of  illegal  en-
deavors. The  results  of  that  investigation  are
more  fully  detailed  in  appendix  XVI.  Ruby  was
reared  in  a  Chicago  neighborhood  where  he  be-
came acquainted  with  local  criminals  and  with
persons  who  later  became  criminals.  Through-
out his  life,  Ruby's  friendships  with  persons  of
that  character  were  limited  largely  to  profes-
sional gamblers,  although  his  night  club  busi-
nesses brought  him  in  contact  with  persons  who
had  been  convicted  of  other  offenses.  There  is  no
credible  evidence  that  Ruby,  himself,  gambled
on  other  than  a  social  basis  or  that  he  had  any
unpaid  gambling  debts.  He  had  never  been
charged  with  a  felony  prior  to  his  attack  on  Os-
wald; his  only  encounters  in  Chicago  stemmed


from  ticket  scalping  and  the  unauthorized  sale
of  copyrighted  music;  and,  in  Dallas,  his  law
violations,  excluding  traffic  charges,  resulted
from  the  operation  of  his  clubs  or  outbursts  of
temper.  Ruby  has  disclaimed  that  he  was  asso-
ciated with  organized  criminal  activities,  and
law  enforcement  agencies  have  confirmed  that
denial.

Investigation  of  Georpe  Senator. — In  addi-
tion to  examining  Ruby's  own  activities  and
background,  the  Commission  has  paid  careful
attention  to  the  activities  and  background  of
George  Senator,  Ruby's  roommate  and  one  of
his  closest  friends  in  Dallas.  Senator  was  inter-
rogated by  staff  members  over  a  2-day  period;
he  provided  a  detailed  account  of  his  own  Ufe
and  cooperated  fully  in  all  aspects  of  the  Com-
mission's inquiry  into  the  activities  of  Jack
Ruby.

Senator  was  50  years  old  at  the  time  Ruby  shot
Oswald.  He  had  been  bom  September  4,  1913,
in  Gloversville,  N.Y.,  and  had  received  an  eighth
grade  education.  Upon  leaving  school,  he
worked  in  Gloversville  and  New  York  City  until
about  age  25.  For  the  next  few  years  he  worked
in  various  restaurants  and  cafeterias  in  New
York  and  Florida  untU  enlisting  in  the  Army  in
August  1941.  After  his  honorable  discharge  in
September  1945,  Senator  was  employed  for  most
of  the  next  13  years  selling  inexpensive  dresses
throughout  the  South  and  Southwest.  In  the
course  of  that  employment  he  moved  to  Dallas
where  he  met  Jack  Ruby  while  visiting  Ruby's
Vegas  Club  in  about  1955  or  1956.  Ruby  was
one  of  many  who  helped  Senator  when  he  en-
countered financial  difficulties  during  the  years
1958  to  1962.  For  a  while  in  1962,  Ruby  pro-
vided room  and  board  In  exchange  for  Senator's
help  in  his  clubs  and  apartment.  In  August  1963,
Senator  was  vmable  to  maintain  his  own  apart-
ment alone  following  his  roonmiate's  marriage.
Ruby  again  offered  to  help  and  on  November  1,
1963,  Senator  moved  into  Ruby's  apartment
The  Commission  has  foimd  no  evidence  that
Senator  ever  engaged  in  any  poUtical  activities.

Against  this  backgrovmd  the  Commission  has
evaluated  Senator's  account  of  his  own  activities
on  November  22,  23,  and  24.  When  questioned
by  Dallas  and  Federal  authorities  hours  after  the
shooting  of  Oswald,  Senator  omitted  mention  of
having  accompanied  Ruby  to  photograph  the
"Impeach  Earl  Warren"  sign  on  Saturday  morn-
ing. Senator  stated  to  Commission  staff  members
that  in  the  interviews  of  November  24  he
omitted  the  incident  because  of  oversight.  How-
ever, he  spoke  freely  about  it  in  his  sworn  testi-
mony and  no  inaccuracies  have  been  noted  in
that  portion  of  his  testimony.  Senator  also  failed
to  mention  to  the  Commission  and  to  previous
interrogators  that,  shortly  after  Ruby  left  their
apartment  Sunday  morning,  he  called  friends,
Mr.  and  Mrs.  William  Downey,  and  offered  to
visit  their  apartment  and  make  breakfast  for
them.  Downey  stated,  in  June  1964,  that  Sena-
tor said  he  was  alone  and  that,  after  Downey


158


declined  the  offer,  Senator  remarked  that  he
would  then  go  downtown  for  breakfast.  When
told  of  Downey's  account.  Senator  denied  it
and  explained  that  the  two  were  not  friendly
by  the  time  Senator  left  Dallas  about  six  weeks
after  the  assassination.

The  Commission  also  experienced  diflSculty  in
ascertaining  the  activities  of  Senator  on  Novem-
ber 22  and  23.  He  was  unable  to  account  speci-
fically for  large  segments  of  time  when  he  was
not  with  Ruby.  And,  as  to  places  and  people
Senator  says  he  visited  on  those  days  prior  to  the
time  Oswald  was  shot,  the  Commission  has  been
unsuccessful  in  obtaining  verification.  Senator
admitted  that  he  had  spent  much  of  that  time
drinking  but  denied  that  he  was  intoxicated.

It  is  difficult  to  know  with  complete  certainty
whether  Senator  had  any  foreknowledge  of  the
shooting  of  Oswald.  Ruby  testified  that  at  about
10:15  a.m.  on  Simday  morning,  November  24,
he  said,  in  Senator's  presence,  "If  something
happened  to  this  person,  that  then  Mrs.  Kennedy
won't  have  to  come  back  for  the  trial."  Accord-
ing to  Ruby,  this  is  the  most  explicit  statement
he  made  concerning  Oswald  that  morning.  Sen-
ator denies  any  knowledge  of  Ruby's  intentions.
Senator's  general  response  to  the  shooting  was
not  like  that  of  a  person  seeking  to  conceal  his
guilt.  Shortly  before  it  was  known  that  Ruby  was
Sie  slayer  of  Oswald,  Senator  visited  the  Eatwell
Restaurant  in  downtown  Dallas.  Upon  being  in-
formed that  Ruby  was  the  attacker.  Senator
exclaimed,  "My  God,"  in  what  appeared  to  be  a
genuinely  surprised  tone.  He  then  ran  to  a  tele-
phone, returned  to  gulp  down  his  coffee,  and
quickly  departed.  He  drove  promptly  to  the
home  of  James  Martin,  an  attorney  and  friend.
Mari;in  recalled  that  Senator's  concern  was  for
his  friend  Ruby  and  not  for  himself.  Martin  and
Senator  drove  to  the  Dallas  Police  Department
where  Senator  voluntarily  submitted  himself  to
police  questioning,  and  gave  interviews  to  news-
paper and  television  repori;ers.  The  Commission
has  concluded,  on  the  basis  of  its  investigation
into  Senator's  background,  activities,  and  reac-
tion to  the  shooting,  that  Senator  did  not  aid  or
conspire  with  Jack  Ruby  in  the  killing  of  Os-
wald.

Ruby's  activities  preceding  Presidenfs  trip. —
In  addition  to  the  broad  investigation  into  Ruby's
background  and  associations,  the  Commission
delved  particularly  into  Ruby's  pattern  of  activi-
ties during  the  2  months  preceding  President
Kennedy's  visit  to  Dallas  in  order  to  determine
whether  there  was  unusual  conduct  which  might
be  linked  to  the  President's  forthcoming  trip.

The  Commission  has  been  able  to  account
specifically  for  Jack  Ruby's  presence  in  Dallas
on  every  day  after  September  26,  1963,  except
five — September  29,  30  and  October  11,  14,  and
24 — and  there  is  no  evidence  that  he  was  out  of
the  Dallas-Fort  Worth  area  on  those  days.  The
report  of  one  person  who  saw  Ruby  on  Septem-
ber 28  indicates  that  Ruby  probably  remained  in
Dallas  on  September  29  and  30,  when  Oswald


was  in  Mexico  City.  The  Commission  has  looked
for  but  has  found  no  evidence  that  Ruby  traveled
to  Mexico  at  that  time.  Both  Ruby  and  Ralph
Paul  have  stated  that  Ruby  did  not  leave  the
Dallas-Fort  Worth  area  during  September,  Oc-
tober, or  November  1963.

During  October  and  November  of  1963,  Jack
Ruby  maintained  his  usual  vigorous  pace  of
business  In  particular,  he  directed  considerable
attention  to  his  two  nightclubs  and  to  other  busi-
ness promotions.  During  the  final  month  before
the  Kennedy  trip,  his  time  was  increasingly  oc-
cupied with  personnel  problems  at  both  his  clubs.
There  is  no  indication  that  he  devoted  less  than
full  attention  to  these  matters  or  that  he  appeared
preoccupied  with  other  affairs.  His  acquaint-
ances did  feel  that  Ruby  seemed  depressed  and
concerned  that  his  friends  were  deserting  him.
However,  there  were  no  signs  of  secretive  con-
duct.

Scrutiny  of  Ruby's  activities  during  the  sev-
eral days  preceding  the  President's  arrival  in  Dal-
las has  revealed  no  indication  of  any  unusual
activity.  Ruby  is  remembered  to  have  discussed
the  President's  impending  trip  with  only  two
persons  and  only  briefly.  Two  newspapers  con-
taining a  description  of  the  expected  motorcade
routes  through  Dallas  and  Fort  Worth  were
found  in  Ruby's  car  at  the  time  of  his  arrest.
However,  such  papers  circulated  widely  in  Dal-
las, and  Ruby's  car,  like  his  apartment,  was  so
cluttered  with  other  newspapers,  notebooks,
brochures,  cards,  clothing  and  personal  items
that  there  is  no  reason  to  attach  any  significance
to  the  papers.

Aside  from  the  results  of  the  Corrunission's
investigation  reported  above,  there  are  other
reasons  to  doubt  that  Jack  Ruby  would  have
shot  Oswald  as  he  did  if  he  had  been  involved  in
a  conspiracy  to  carry  out  the  assassination,  or
that  he  would  have  been  delegated  to  perform
the  shooting  of  Oswald  on  behalf  of  others  who
were  involved  in  the  slaying  of  the  President.  By
striking  in  the  city  jail,  Ruby  was  certain  to  be
apprehended.  An  attempt  to  silence  Oswald  by
having  Ruby  kUl  him  would  have  presented
exceptionally  grave  dangers  to  any  other  per-
sons involved  in  the  scheme.  If  the  attempt  had
failed,  Oswald  might  have  been  moved  to  dis-
close his  confederates  to  the  authorities.  If  it
succeeded,  as  it  did,  the  additional  killing  might
itself  have  produced  a  trail  to  them.  Moreover,
Ruby  was  regarded  by  most  persons  who  knew
him  as  moody  and  unstable — hardly  one  to  have
encouraged  the  confidence  of  persons  involved  in
a  sensitive  conspiracy.

Since  his  apprehension,  Jack  Ruby  has  pro-
vided the  Federal  authorities  with  several  de-
tailed accounts  of  his  activities  both  preceding
and  following  the  assassination  of  President
Kennedy.  Ruby  has  shown  no  reluctance  to  an-
swer any  questions  addressed  to  him.  The  ac-
counts provided  by  Ruby  are  consistent  with  evi-
dence available  to  the  Commission  from  other


sources.


159


These  additional  considerations  are  thus  fully
consistent  with  the  results  of  the  Commission's
investigation.  Rumors  of  a  connection  between
Ruby  and  Oswald  have  proved  groundless,  while
examination  of  Ruby's  background  and  associa-
tions, his  behavior  prior  to  the  assassination,  and
his  activities  during  the  November  22-24  week-
end has  yielded  no  evidence  that  Ruby  conspired
with  anyone  in  planning  or  executing  the  killing
of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  Whatever  the  legal  culpa-
bility of  Jack  Ruby  for  his  act  of  November
24,  the  evidence  is  persuasive  that  he  acted  in-
dependently in  shooting  Oswald.  ,


CONCLUSION

Based  upon  the  investigation  reviewed  in  this
chapter  the  Commission  concluded  that  there
is  no  credible  evidence  that  Lee  Harvey  Oswald
was  part  of  a  conspiracy  to  assassinate  President
Kennedy.  Examination  of  the  facts  of  the  as-
sassination itself  revealed  no  indication  that  Os-


wald was  aided  in  the  planning  or  execution  of
his  scheme.  Review  of  Oswald's  life  and  activi-
ties since  1959,  although  productive  in  illuminat-
ing the  character  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  (which
is  discussed  in  the  next  chapter),  did  not  produce
any  meaningful  evidence  of  a  conspiracy.  The
Commission  discovered  no  evidence  that  the  So-
viet Union  or  Cuba  were  involved  in  the  assas-
sination of  President  Kennedy.  Nor  did  the  Com-
mission's investigation  of  Jack  Ruby  produce
any  grounds  for  believing  that  Ruby's  killing  of
Oswald  was  part  of  a  conspiracy.  The  conclu-
sion that  there  is  no  evidence  of  a  conspiracy
was  also  reached  independently  by  Dean  Rusk,
the  Secretary  of  State;  Robert  S.  McNamara,  the
Secretary  of  Defense;  C.  Douglas  Dillon,  the
Secretary  of  the  Treasury;  Robert  F.  Kennedy,
the  Attorney  General;  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  the
Director  of  the  FBI;  John  A.  McCone,  the  Di-
rector of  the  CIA;  and  James  J.  Rowley,  the
Chief  of  the  Secret  Service,  on  the  basis  of  the
information  available  to  each  of  them.


Chapter  VII

LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD:
BACKGROUND  AND  POSSIBLE  MOTIVES


THE  EVIDENCE  reviewed  above  identifies  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  as  the  assassin  of  President  Ken-
nedy and  indicates  that  he  acted  alone  in  that
event.  There  is  no  evidence  that  he  had  accom-
plices or  that  he  was  involved  in  any  conspiracy
directed  to  the  assassination  of  the  President.
There  remains  the  question  of  what  impelled
Oswald  to  conceive  and  to  carry  out  the  assas-
sination of  the  President  of  the  United  States.
The  Commission  has  considered  many  possible
motives  for  the  assassination,  including  those
which  might  flow  from  Oswald's  commitment  to
Marxism  or  communism,  the  existence  of  some
personal  grievance,  a  desire  to  effect  changes  in
the  structure  of  society  or  simply  to  go  down  in
history  as  a  well  publicized  assassin.  None  of
these  possibilities  satisfactorily  explains  Oswald's
act  if  it  is  judged  by  the  standards  of  reasonable
men.  The  motives  of  any  man,  however,  must  be
analyzed  in  terms  of  the  character  and  state  of
mind  of  the  particular  individual  involved.  For
a  motive  that  appears  incomprehensible  to  other
men  may  be  the  moving  force  of  a  man  whose
view  of  the  world  has  been  twisted,  possibly  by
factors  of  which  those  around  him  were  only
dimly  aware.  Oswald's  complete  state  of  mind
and  character  are  now  outside  of  the  power  of
man  to  know.  He  cannot,  of  course,  be  ques-
tioned or  observed  by  those  charged  with  the  re-
sponsibility for  this  report  or  by  experts  on  their


behalf.  There  is,  however,  a  large  amount  of
material  available  in  his  writings  and  in  the  his-
tory of  his  life  which  does  give  some  insight  in-
to his  character  and,  possibly,  into  the  motives
for  his  act.

Since  Oswald  is  dead,  the  Commission  is  not
able  to  reach  any  definite  conclusions  as  to
whether  or  not  he  was  "sane"  imder  prevailing
legal  standards.  Under  our  system  of  justice
no  forum  could  properly  make  that  determina-
tion unless  Oswald  were  before  it.  It  certainly
could  not  be  made  by  this  Commission  which,
as  has  been  pointed  out  above,  ascertained  the
facts  surrounding  the  assassination  but  did  not
draw  conclusions  concerning  Oswald's  legal
guilt.

Indications  of  Oswald's  motivation  may  be
obtained  from  a  study  of  the  events,  relation-
ships and  influences  which  appear  to  have  been
significant  in  shaping  his  character  and  in  guid-
ing him.  Perhaps  the  most  outstanding  conclusion
of  such  a  study  is  that  Oswald  was  profoundly
alienated  from  the  world  in  which  he  lived.  His
life  was  characterized  by  isolation,  frustration,
and  failure.  He  had  very  few,  if  any,  close  re-
lationships with  other  people  and  he  appeared  to
have  great  difficulty  in  finding  a  meaningful
place  in  the  world.  He  was  never  satisfied  with
anything.  When  he  was  in  the  United  States  he
resented  the  capitalist  system  which  he  thought


160


was  exploiting  him  and  others  like  him.  He
seemed  to  prefer  the  Soviet  Union  and  he  spoke
highly  of  Cuba.  When  he  was  in  the  Soviet  Un-
ion, he  apparently  resented  the  Communist  Party
members,  who  were  accorded  special  privileges
and  who  he  thought  were  betraying  commu-
nism, and  he  spoke  well  of  the  United  States.  He
accused  his  wife  of  preferring  others  to  himself
and  told  her  to  return  to  the  Soviet  Union  with-
out him  but  without  a  divorce.  At  the  same  time
he  professed  his  love  for  her  and  said  that  he
could  not  get  along  without  her.  Marina  Oswald
thought  that  he  would  not  be  happy  anywhere,
"Only  on  the  moon,  perhaps."

While  Oswald  appeared  to  most  of  those  who
knew  him  as  a  meek  and  harmless  person,  he
sometimes  imagined  himself  as  "the  Comman-
der" and,  apparently  seriously,  as  a  political
prophet — a  man  who  said  that  after  20  years  he
would  be  prime  minister.  His  wife  testified  that
he  compared  himself  with  great  leaders  of  his-
tory. Such  ideas  of  grandeur  were  apparently  ac-
companied by  notions  of  oppression.  He  had  a
great  hostility  toward  his  environment,  what-
ever it  happened  to  be,  which  he  expressed  in
striking  and  sometimes  violent  acts  long  before
the  assassination.  There  was  some  quality  about
him  that  led  him  to  act  with  an  apparent  dis-
regard for  possible  consequences.  He  defected
to  the  Soviet  Union,  shot  at  General  Walker,
tried  to  go  to  Cuba  and  even  contemplated  hi-
jacking an  airplane  to  get  there.  He  assassinated
the  President,  shot  Officer  Tippit,  resisted  arrest
and  tried  to  kill  another  policeman  in  the  pro-
cess.

Oswald  apparently  started  reading  about  com-
munism  when  he  was  about  15.  In  the  Marines,
he  evidenced  a  strong  conviction  as  to  the  cor-
rectness of  Marxist  doctrine,  which  one  associate
described  as  "irrevocable,"  but  also  as  "theo-
retical"; that  associate  did  not  think  that  Oswald
was  a  Communist.  Oswald  did  not  always  dis-
tinguish between  Marxism  and  communism.  He
stated  several  times  that  he  was  a  Communist  but
apparently  never  joined  any  Commimist  Party.

His  attachment  to  Marxist  and  Communist
doctrine  was  probably,  in  some  measure,  an  ex-
pression of  his  hostility  to  his  environment.
While  there  is  doubt  about  how  fully  Oswald  un-
derstood the  doctrine  which  he  so  often  es-
poused, it  seems  clear  that  his  commitment  to
Marxism  was  an  important  factor  influencing  his
conduct  during  his  adult  years.  It  was  an  obvious
element  in  his  decision  to  go  to  Russia  and  later
to  Cuba  and  it  probably  influenced  his  decision
to  shoot  at  General  Walker.  It  was  a  factor  which
contributed  to  his  character  and  thereby  might
have  influenced  his  decision  to  assassinate  Presi-
dent Kennedy.

The  discussion  below  will  describe  the  events
known  to  the  Commission  which  most  clearly
reveals  the  formation  and  nature  of  Oswald's
character.  It  will  attempt  to  summarize  the
events  of  his  early  life,  his  experience  in  New
York  City  and  in  the  Marine  Corps,  and  his  in-


terest in  Marxism.  It  will  examine  his  defecton
to  the  Soviet  Union  in  1959,  his  subsequent  re-
turn to  the  United  States  and  his  life  here  after
June  of  1962.  The  review  of  the  latter  period
will  evaluate  his  personal  and  employment  re-
lations, his  attempt  to  kill  General  Walker,  his
political  activities,  and  his  unsuccessful  attempt
to  go  to  Cuba  in  late  September  of  1963.  Various
possible  motives  will  be  treated  in  the  appropri-
ate context  of  the  discussion  outlined  above.

The  Early  Years

Significant  in  shaping  the  character  of  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  was  the  death  of  his  father,  a
collector  of  insurance  premiums.  This  occurred
2  months  before  Lee  was  bom  in  New  Orleans
on  October  18,  1939.  That  death  strained  the
financial  fortunes  of  the  remainder  of  the  Os-
wald family.  It  had  its  effect  on  Lee's  mother,
Marguerite,  his  brother  Robert,  who  had  been
bom  in  1934,  and  his  half-brother  John  Pic,
who  had  been  bom  in  1932  during  Marguerite's
previous  marriage.  It  forced  Marguerite  Oswald
to  go  to  work  to  provide  for  her  family.  Re-
minding her  sons  that  they  were  orphans  and  that
the  family's  financial  condition  was  poor,  she
placed  John  Pic  and  Robert  Oswald  in  an  or-
phans' home.  From  the  time  Marguerite  Oswald
returned  to  work  untU  December  26, 1942,  when
Lee  too  was  sent  to  the  orphans'  home  he  was
cared  for  principally  by  his  mother's  sister,  by
babysitters  and  by  his  mother,  when  she  had  time
for  him.

Marguerite  Oswald  withdrew  Lee  from  the  or-
phans' home  and  took  him  with  her  to  Dallas
when  he  was  a  little  over  4  years  old.  About  6
months  later  she  also  withdrew  John  Pic  and
Robert  Oswald.  Apparently  that  action  was
taken  in  anticipation  of  her  marriage  to  Edwin
A.  Ekdahl,  which  took  place  in  May  of  1945.
In  the  fall  of  that  year  John  Pic  and  Robert  Os-
wald went  to  a  military  academy  where  they
stayed,  except  for  vacations,  until  the  spring  of
1948.  Lee  Oswald  remained  with  his  mother  and
Ekdahl,  to  whom  he  became  quite  attached.  John
Pic  testified  that  he  thought  Lee  found  in  Ekdahl
the  father  that  he  never  had.  That  situation,  how-
ever, was  short-lived,  for  the  relations  between
Marguerite  Oswald  and  Ekdahl  were  stormy
and  they  were  finally  divorced,  after  several  sep-
arations and  reunions,  in  the  summer  of  1948.

After  the  divorce  Mrs.  Oswald  complained
considerably  about  how  unfairly  she  was  treated,
dwelling  on  the  fact  that  she  was  a  widow  with
three  children.  John  Pic,  however,  did  not  think
her  position  was  worse  than  that  of  many  other
people.  In  the  fall  of  1948  she  told  John  Pic  and
Robert  Oswald  that  she  could  not  afford  to  send
them  back  to  the  military  school  and  she  asked
Pic  to  quit  school  entirely  to  help  support  the
family,  which  he  did  for  4  months  in  the  fall
of  1948.  In  order  to  supplement  their  income
further  she  falsely  swore  that  Pic  was  17  years
old  so  that  he  could  join  the  Marine  Corps  Re-
serves. Pic  did  turn  over  part  of  his  income  to


161


his  mother,  but  he  returned  to  high  school  in
January  of  1949,  where  he  stayed  until  3  days
before  he  was  scheduled  to  graduate,  when  he
left  school  in  order  to  get  into  the  Coast  Guard.
Since  his  mother  did  not  approve  of  his  decision
to  continue  school  he  accepted  the  responsibility
for  that  decision  himself  and  signed  his  mother's
name  to  all  his  own  excuses  and  report  cards.

Pic  thought  that  his  mother  overstated  her
financial  problems  and  was  unduly  concerned
about  money.  Referring  to  the  period  after  the
divorce  from  Ekdahl,  which  was  apparently
caused  in  part  by  Marguerite's  desu-e  to  get  more
money  from  him.  Pic  said:  "Lee  was  brought
up  in  this  atmosphere  of  constant  money  prob-
lems, and  I  am  sure  it  had  quite  an  effect  on  him,
and  also  Robert."  Marguerite  Oswald  worked
in  miscellaneous  jobs  after  her  divorce  from
Ekdahl.  When  she  worked  for  a  time  as  an  in-
surance saleslady,  she  would  sometimes  take
Lee  with  her,  apparently  leaving  him  alone  in
the  car  while  she  transacted  her  business.  When
she  worked  during  the  school  year,  Lee  had  to
leave  an  empty  house  in  the  morning,  return  to
it  for  lunch  and  then  again  at  night,  his  mother
having  trained  him  to  do  that  rather  than  to  play
with  other  children.

An  indication  of  the  nature  of  Lee's  character
at  this  time  was  provided  in  the  spring  of  1950,
when  he  was  sent  to  New  Orleans  to  visit  the
family  of  his  mother's  sister,  Mrs.  Lillian  Mur-
ret,  for  2  or  3  weeks.  Despite  their  urgings,  he
refused  to  play  with  the  other  children  his  own
age.  It  also  appears  that  Lee  tried  to  tag  along
with  his  older  brothers  but  apparently  was  not
able  to  spend  as  much  time  with  them  as  he
would  have  liked,  because  of  the  age  gaps  of  5
and  7  years,  which  became  more  significant  as
the  children  grew  older.

New  York  City

Whatever  problems  may  have  been  created
by  Lee's  home  life  in  Louisiana  and  Texas,  he
apparently  adjusted  well  enough  there  to  have
had  an  average,  although  gradually  deteriorat-
ing, school  record  with  no  behavior  or  truancy
problems.  That  was  not  the  case,  however,  after
he  and  his  mother  moved  to  New  York  in  Aug-
ust of  1952,  shortly  before  Lee's  13th  birthday.
They  moved  shortly  after  Robert  joined  the
Marines;  they  lived  for  a  time  with  John  Pic  who
was  stationed  there  with  the  Coast  Guard.  Re-
lations soon  became  strained,  however,  so  in  late
September  Lee  and  his  mother  moved  to  their
own  apartment  in  the  Bronx.  Pic  and  his  wife
would  have  been  happy  to  have  kept  Lee,  how-
ever, who  was  becoming  quite  a  disciplinary
problem  for  his  mother,  having  struck  her  on
at  least  one  occasion.

The  short-lived  stay  with  the  Pics  was  ter-
minated after  an  incident  in  which  Lee  allegedly
pulled  out  a  pocket  knife  during  an  argument
and  threatened  to  use  it  on  Mrs.  Pic.  When  Pic
returned  home,  Mrs.  Oswald  tried  to  play  down
the  event  but  Mrs.  Pic  took  a  different  view  and


asked  the  Oswalds  to  leave.  Lee  refused  to  dis-
cuss the  matter  with  Pic,  whom  he  had  previ-
ously idolized,  and  their  relations  were  strained
thereafter.

On  September  30,  1952,  Lee  enrolled  in  P.S.
117a  junior  high  school  in  the  Bronx,  where  the
other  children  apparently  teased  him  because
of  his  "western"  clothes  and  Texas  accent.  He
began  to  stay  away  from  school,  preferring  to
read  magazines  and  watch  televison  at  home  by
himself.  This  continued  despite  the  efforts  of  the
school  authorities  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  of  his
mother  to  have  him  return  to  school.  Truancy
charges  were  brought  against  him  alleging  that
he  was  "beyond  the  control  of  his  mother  inso-
far as  school  attendance  is  concerned."  Lee
Oswald  was  remanded  for  psychiatric  observa-
tion to  Youth  House,  an  institution  in  which
children  are  kept  for  psychiatric  observation  or
for  detention  pending  court  appearance  or  com-
mitment to  a  child-caring  or  custodial  institution
such  as  a  training  school.  He  was  in  Youth  House
from  April  1 6  to  May  7, 1 953,  during  which  time
he  was  examined  by  its  Chief  Psychiatrist,  Dr.
Renatus  Hartogs,  and  interviewed  and  observed
by  other  members  of  the  Youth  House  staff.

Marguerite  Oswald  visited  her  son  at  Youth
House,  where  she  recalled  that  she  waited  in
line  "with  Puerto  Ricans  and  Negroes  and  every-
thing." She  said  that  her  pocketbook  was
searched  "because  the  children  in  this  home
were  such  criminals,  dope  fiends,  and  had  been
in  criminal  offenses,  that  anybody  entering  this
home  had  to  be  searched  in  case  the  parents
were  bringing  cigarettes  or  narcotics  or  any-
thing." She  recalled  that  Lee  cried  and  said,
"Mother,  I  want  to  get  out  of  here.  There  are
children  in  here  who  have  killed  people,  and
smoke.  I  want  to  get  out."  Marguerite  Oswald
said  that  she  had  not  realized  until  then  in  what
kind  of  place  her  son  had  been  confined.

On  the  other  hand,  Lee  told  his  probation
ofl&cer,  John  Carro,  that  "whUe  he  liked  Youth
House  he  miss[ed]  the  freedom  of  doing  what
he  wanted.  He  indicated  that  he  did  not  miss  his
mother."  Mrs.  Evelyn  Strickman  Siegel,  a  social
worker  who  interviewed  both  Lee  and  his  mother
while  Lee  was  confined  in  Youth  House,  re-
ported that  Lee  "confided  that  the  worse  thing
about  Youth  House  was  the  fact  that  he  had  to
be  with  other  boys  all  the  time,  was  disturbed
about  disrobing  in  front  of  them,  taking  showers
with  them  etc."

Contrary  to  reports  that  appeared  after  the  as-
sassination, the  psychiatric  examination  did  not
indicate  that  Lee  Oswald  was  a  potential  assas-
sin, potentially  dangerous,  that  "his  outlook  on
life  had  strongly  paranoid  overtones"  or  that  he
should  be  institutionalized.  Dr.  Hartogs  did  find
Oswald  to  be  a  tense,  withdrawn,  and  evassive
boy  who  intensely  disliked  talking  about  him-
self and  his  feelings.  He  noted  that  Lee  liked  to
give  the  impression  that  he  did  not  care  for  other
people  but  preferred  to  keep  to  himself,  so  that
he  was  not  bothered  and  did  not  have  to  make


162


the  effort  of  communicating.  Oswald's  with-
drawn tendencies  and  solitary  habits  were
thought  to  be  the  result  of  "intense  anxiety,  shy-
ness, feelings  of  awkwardness  and  insecurity."
He  was  reported  to  have  said  "I  don't  want  a
friend  and  I  don't  like  to  talk  to  people"  and  "I
dislike  everybody."  He  was  also  described  as
having  a  "vivid  fantasy  life,  turning  around  the
topics  of  omnipotence  and  power,  through  which
he  tries  to  compensate  for  his  present  shortcom-
ings and  frustrations."  Dr.  Hartogs  summarized
his  report  by  stating:

This  1 3  year  old  well  built  boy  has  superior
mental  resources  and  functions  only  slightly
below  his  capacity  level  in  spite  of  chronic
truancy  from  school  which  brought  him  into
Youth  House.  No  finding  of  neurological  im-
pairment or  psychotic  mental  changes  could
be  made.  Lee  has  to  be  diagnosed  as  "per-
sonality pattern  disturbance  with  schizoid
features  and  passive — aggressive  tendencies.'*
Lee  has  to  be  seen  as  an  emotionally,  quite
distiirbed  youngster  who  suffers  under  the  im-
pact of  really  existing  emotional  isolation  and
deprivation,  lack  of  Section,  absence  of  fam-
ily life  and  rejection  by  a  self  involved  and
conflicted  mother.

Dr.  Hartogs  recommended  that  Oswald  he
placed  on  probation  on  condition  that  he  seek
help  and  guidance  through  a  child  guidance
clinic.  There,  he  suggested,  Lee  should  be  treated
by  a  male  psychiatrist  who  could  substitute  for
the  lack  of  a  father  figure.  He  also  recommended
that  Mrs.  Oswald  seek  "psychotherapeutic  guid-
ance through  contact  with  a  family  agency."
The  possibility  of  commitment  was  to  be  con-
sidered only  if  the  probation  plan  was  not  suc-
cessful.

Lee's  withdrawal  was  also  noted  by  Mrs.  Sie-
gel,  who  described  him  as  a  "seriously  detached,
withdrawn  youngster."  She  also  noted  that  there
was  "a  rather  pleasant,  appealing  quality  about
this  emotionally  starved,  affectionless  youngster
which  grows  as  one  speaks  to  him."  She  thought
that  he  had  detached  himself  from  the  world
around  him  because  "no  one  in  it  ever  met  any
of  his  needs  for  love."  She  observed  that  since
Lee's  mother  worked  all  day,  he  made  his  own
meals  and  spent  all  his  time  alone  because  he
didn't  make  friends  with  the  boys  in  the  neigh-
borhood. She  thought  that  he  "withdrew  into  a
completely  solitary  and  detached  existence  where
he  did  as  he  wanted  and  he  didn't  have  to  live
by  any  rules  or  come  into  contact  with  people."
Mrs.  Siegel  concluded  that  Lee  "just  felt  that
his  mother  never  gave  a  damn  for  him.  He  al-
ways felt  like  a  burden  that  she  simply  just  had
to  tolerate."  Lee  confirmed  some  of  those  ob-
servations by  saying  that  he  felt  almost  as  if
there  were  a  veU  between  him  and  other  people
through  which  they  could  not  reach  him,  but
he  preferred  the  veil  to  remain  intact.  He  ad-
mitted to  fantasies  about  being  powerful  and


sometimes  hurting  and  killing  people,  but  re-
fused to  elaborate  on  them.  He  took  the  position
that  such  matters  were  his  own  business.

A  psychological  human  figure-drawing  test
corroborated  the  interviewer's  finding  that  Lee
was  insec\ire  and  had  limited  social  contacts.
Irving  Sokolow,  a  Youth  House  psychologist  re-
ported that:

The  Human  Figure  Drawings  are  empty,
poor  characterizations  of  persons  approxi-
mately the  same  age  as  the  subject.  They  re-
flect a  considerable  amount  of  impoverish-
ment in  the  social  and  emotional  areas.  He
appears  to  be  a  somewhat  insecure  youngster
exhibiting  much  inclination  for  warm  and
satisf^'ing  relationships  to  others.  There  is
some  indication  that  he  may  relate  to  men
more  easily  than  to  women  in  view  of  the
more  mature  conceptualisation.  He  appears
sUghtly  withdrawn  and  in  view  of  the  lack  of
detail  within  the  drawings  this  may  assume
a  more  significant  characteristic.  He  exhibits
some  difficult^'  in  relationship  to  the  maternal
figure  suggesting  more  anxiety  in  this  area
than  in  any  other.

Lee  scored  an  IQ  of  118  on  the  Wechsler  In-
telligence Scale  for  Children.  According  to  So-
kolow, this  indicated  a  "present  intellectual
functioning  in  the  upper  range  of  bright  normal
intelligence."  Sokolow  said  that  although  Lee
was  "presumably  disinterested  in  school  subjects
he  operates  on  a  much  higher  than  average  lev-
el." On  the  Monroe  Silent  Reading  Test,  Lee's
score  indicated  no  retardation  in  reading  speed
and  comprehension;  he  had  better  than  average
ability  in  arithmetical  reasoning  for  his  age
group.

Lee  told  Carro,  his  probation  officer,  that  he
liked  to  be  by  himself  because  he  had  too  much
difficulty  in  making  friends.  The  reports  of
Carro  and  Mrs.  Siegel  also  indicate  an  ambiva-
lent attitude  toward  authority  on  Oswald's  part
Carro  reported  that  Lee  was  disruptive  in  class
after  he  returned  to  school  on  a  regular  basis  in
the  fall  of  1953.  He  had  refiised  to  salute  the  flag
and  was  doing  very  little,  if  any,  work.  It  appears
that  he  did  not  want  to  do  any  of  the  things
which  the  authorities  suggested  in  their  efforts
to  bring  him  out  of  the  shell  into  which  he  ap-
peared to  be  retreating.  He  told  Mrs.  Siegel  that
he  would  run  away  if  sent  to  a  boarding  school.
On  the  other  hand  he  also  told  her  that  he  wished
his  mother  had  been  more  firm  with  him  in  her
attempts  to  get  him  to  return  to  school.

The  reports  of  the  New  York  authorities  indi-
cate that  Lee's  mother  gave  him  ver>'  httle  affec-
tion and  did  not  serve  as  any  sort  of  substimte
for  a  father.  Furthermore  she  did  not  appear  to
understand  her  own  relationship  to  Lee's  psy-
chological problems.  After  her  interview  with
Mrs.  Oswald,  Mrs.  Siegel  described  her  as  a
"smartly  dressed,  gray  haired  woman,  ver>'  self-
possessed  and  alert  and  superficially  affable,"


163


but  essentially  a  "defensive,  rigid,  self-involved
person  who  had  real  difficulty  in  accepting  and
relating  to  people"  and  who  had  "little  under-
standing" of  Lee's  behavior  and  of  the  "protec-
tive shell  he  has  drawn  around  himself."  Dr.
Hartogs  reported  that  Mrs.  Oswald  did  not  un-
derstand that  Lee's  withdrawal  was  a  form  of
"violent  but  silent  protest  against  his  neglect  by
her  and  represents  his  reaction  to  a  complete  ab-
sence of  any  real  family  life."  Carro  reported
that  when  questioned  about  his  mother  Lee  said,
"well  I've  got  to  live  with  her.  I  guess  I  love  her."
It  may  also  be  significant  that,  as  reported  by
John  Pic,  "Lee  slept  with  my  mother  until  I
joined  the  service  in  1950.  This  would  make
him  approximately  10,  well,  almost  11  years
old."

The  factors  in  Lee  Oswald's  personality  which
were  noted  by  those  who  had  contact  with  him
in  New  York  indicate  that  he  had  great  difficulty
in  adapting  himself  to  conditions  in  that  city.
His  usual  reaction  to  the  problems  which  he  en-
countered there  was  simply  withdrawal.  Those
factors  indicated  a  severe  inability  to  enter  into
relationships  with  other  people.  In  view  of  his
experiences  when  he  visited  his  relatives  in  New
Orleans  in  the  spring  of  1950,  and  his  other
solitary  habits,  Lee  had  apparently  been  experi-
encing similar  problems  before  going  to  New
York,  and  as  will  be  shown  below,  this  failure  to
adapt  to  his  environment  was  a  dominant  trait
in  his  later  life.

It  would  be  incorrect,  however,  to  believe  that
those  aspects  of  Lee's  personality  which  were  ob-
served in  New  York  could  have  led  anyone  to
predict  the  outburst  of  violence  which  finally
occurred.  Carro  was  the  only  one  of  Oswald's
three  principal  observers  who  recommended  that
he  be  placed  in  a  boy's  home  or  similar  institu-
tion. But  Carro  was  quite  specific  that  his  recom-
mendation was  based  primarily  on  the  adverse
factors  in  Lee's  environment — his  lack  of
friends,  the  apparent  unavailability  of  any
agency  assistance  and  the  ineffectualness  of  his
mother — and  not  on  any  particular  mental  dis-
turbance Id  the  boy  himself.  Carro  testified  that:

There  was  nothing  that  would  lead  me  to  be-
lieve when  I  saw  him  at  the  age  of  12  that
there  would  be  seeds  of  destruction  for  some-
body. I  couldn't  in  all  honesty  siQcerely  say
such  a  thing.

Mrs.  Siegel  concluded  her  report  with  the  state-
ment that:

Despite  his  withdrawal,  he  gives  the  impres-
sion that  he  is  not  so  difficult  to  reach  as  he
appears  and  patient,  prolonged  effort  in  a
sustained  relationship  with  one  therapist
might  bring  results.  There  are  indications  that
he  has  suffered  serious  personality  damage  but
if  he  can  receive  help  quickly  this  might  be
repaired  to  some  extent


Lee  Oswald  never  received  that  help.  Few  so-
cial agencies  even  in  New  York  were  equipped
to  provide  the  kind  of  intensive  treatment  that
he  needed,  and  when  one  of  the  city's  clinics  did
find  room  to  handle  him,  for  some  reason  the
record  does  not  show,  advantage  was  never  taken
of  the  chance  afforded  to  Oswald.  When  Lee  be-
came a  disciplinary  problem  upon  his  return  to
school  in  the  fall  of  1953,  and  when  his  mother
failed  to  cooperate  in  any  way  with  school  au-
thorities, authorities  were  finally  forced  to  con-
sider placement  in  a  home  for  boys.  Such  a
placement  was  postponed,  however,  perhaps  in
part  at  least  because  Lee's  behavior  suddenly
improved.  Before  the  court  took  any  action,  the
Oswalds  left  New  York  in  January  of  1954,
and  returned  to  New  Orleans  where  Lee  finished
the  ninth  grade  before  he  left  school  to  work  for
a  year.  Then  in  October  of  1956,  he  joined  the
Marines.

Return  to  New  Orleans  and  Joining  the
Marine  Corps

After  his  return  to  New  Orleans  Oswald  was
teased  at  school  because  of  the  northern  accent
which  he  had  acquired.  He  concluded  that
school  had  nothing  to  offer  him.  His  mother
exercised  little  control  over  him  and  thought  he
could  decide  for  himself  whether  to  go  on  in
school.  Neighbors  and  others  who  knew  him  at
that  time  recall  an  introverted  boy  who  read  a
great  deal.  He  took  walks  and  visited  museums,
and  sometimes  rode  a  rented  bicycle  in  the  park
on  Saturday  mornings.  Mrs.  Murret  believes  that
he  talked  at  length  with  a  girl  on  the  telephone,
but  no  one  remembers  that  he  had  any  dates.  A
friend,  Edward  Voebel,  testified  that  "he  was
more  bashful  about  girls  than  anything  else."

Several  witnesses  testified  that  Lee  Oswald
was  not  aggressive.  He  was,  however,  involved
in  some  fights.  Once  a  group  of  white  boys  beat
him  up  for  sitting  in  the  Negro  section  of  a  bus,
which  he  apparently  did  simply  out  of  ignorance.
Another  time,  he  fought  with  two  brothers  who
claimed  that  he  had  picked  on  the  younger  of
them,  3  years  Oswald's  junior.  Two  days  later,
"some  big  guy,  probably  from  a  high  school —
he  looked  like  a  tremendous  football  player"
accosted  Oswald  on  the  way  home  from  school
and  punched  him  in  the  mouth,  making  his  lip
bleed  and  loosening  a  tooth.  Voebel  took  Oswald
back  to  the  school  to  attend  to  his  wounds,  and
their  "mild  friendship"  stemmed  from  that  inci-
dent. Voebel  also  recalled  that  Oswald  once  out-
lined a  plan  to  cut  the  glass  in  the  window  of  a
store  on  Rampart  Street  and  steal  a  pistol,  but
he  was  not  sure  then  that  Oswald  meant  to  carry
out  the  plan,  and  in  fact  they  never  did.  Voebel
said  that  Oswald  "wouldn't  start  any  fights,  but
if  you  wanted  to  start  one  with  him,  he  was  going
to  make  sure  that  he  ended  it,  or  you  were  going
to  really  have  one,  because  he  wasn't  going  to
take  anything  from  anybody."  In  a  space  for  the
names  of  "close  friends"  on  the  ninth  grade  per-
sonal history  record,  Oswald  first  wrote  "Ed-


164


ward  Vogel,"  an  obvious  misspelling  of  Voebel's
name,  and  "Arthor  Abear,"  most  likely  Arthur
Hebert,  a  classmate  who  has  said  that  he  did  not
know  Oswald  well.  Oswald  erased  those  names,
however,  and  indicated  that  he  had  no  close
friends.

It  has  been  suggested  that  this  misspelling  of
names,  apparently  on  a  phonetic  basis,  was
caused  by  a  reading-spelling  disability  from
which  Oswald  appeared  to  suffer.  Other  evi-
dence of  the  existence  of  such  a  disability  is  pro-
vided by  the  many  other  misspellings  that  appear
in  Oswald's  writings,  portions  of  which  are
quoted  below.

Sometime  during  this  period,  and  under  cir-
cumstances to  be  discussed  more  fully  below,
Oswald  started  to  read  Communist  literature,
which  he  obtained  from  the  public  library.  One
of  his  fellow  employees.  Palmer  McBride,  stated
that  Oswald  said  he  would  like  to  kill  President
Eisenhower  because  he  was  exploiting  the  work-
ing class.  Oswald  praised  Khrushchev  and  sug-
gested that  he  and  McBride  join  the  Commimist
Party  "to  take  advantage  of  their  social  func-
tions." Oswald  also  became  interested  in  the
New  Orleans  Amateur  Astronomy  Association,
an  organization  of  high  school  students.  The
association's  then  president,  William  E.  Wulf,
testified  that  he  remembered  an  occasion  when
Oswald

*  *  *  started  expoimding  the  Communist
doctrine  and  saying  that  he  was  highly  in-
terested in  communism,  that  communism  was
the  only  way  of  life  for  the  worker,  et  cetera,
and  then  came  out  with  a  statement  that  he
was  looking  for  a  Communist  cell  in  town  to
join  but  he  couldn't  find  any.  He  was  a  little
dismayed  at  this,  and  he  said  that  he  couldn't
find  any  that  would  show  any  interest  in  him
as  a  Communist,  and  subsequently,  after  this
conversation,  my  father  came  in  and  we  were
kind  of  arguing  back  and  forth  about  the
situation,  and  my  father  came  in  the  room,
heard  what  we  were  arguing  on  communism,
and  that  this  boy  was  loud-mouthed,  boister-
ous, and  my  father  asked  him  to  leave  the
house  and  politely  put  him  out  of  the  house,
and  that  is  the  last  I  have  seen  or  spoken  with
Oswald.

Despite  this  apparent  interest  in  communism,
Oswald  tried  to  join  the  Marines  when  he  was
16  years  old.  This  was  1  year  before  his  actual
enlistment  and  just  a  little  over  2i  years  after
he  left  New  York.  He  wrote  a  note  in  his
mother's  name  to  school  authorities  in  New  Or-
leans saying  that  he  was  leaving  school  because
he  and  his  mother  were  moving  to  San  Diego.
In  fact,  he  had  quit  school  in  an  attempt  to  ob-
tain his  mother's  assistance  to  join  the  Marines.
While  he  apparently  was  able  to  induce  his
mother  to  make  a  false  statement  about  his  age
he  was  nevertheless  unable  to  convince  the
proper  authorities  that  he  was  really  17  years


old.  There  is  evidence  that  Oswald  was  greatly
influenced  in  his  decision  to  join  the  Marines  by
the  fact  that  his  brother  Robert  had  done  so  ap-
proximately 3  years  before.  Robert  Oswald  had
given  his  Marine  Corps  manual  to  his  brother
Lee,  who  studied  it  during  the  year  following  his
unsuccessful  attempt  to  enlist  until  "He  knew  it
by  heart."  According  to  Marguerite  Oswald,
"Lee  lived  for  the  time  that  he  would  become  17
years  old  to  join  the  Marines — that  whole  year."
In  John  Pic's  view,  Oswald  was  motivated  to
join  the  Marines  in  large  part  by  a  desire  "to  get
from  out  and  under  *  ♦  *  the  yoke  of  oppres-
sion from  my  mother."

Oswald's  inability  or  lack  of  desire  to  enter
into  meaningful  relationships  with  other  people
continued  during  this  period  in  New  Orleans
(1954-56).  It  probably  contributed  greatly  to
the  general  dissatisfaction  which  he  exhibited
with  his  environment,  a  dissatisfaction  which
seemed  to  find  expression  at  this  particular  point
in  his  intense  desire  to  join  the  Marines  and  get
away  from  his  surroundings  and  his  mother.  His
study  of  Communist  literature,  which  might  ap-
pear to  be  inconsistent  with  his  desire  to  join  the
Marines,  could  have  been  another  manifestation
of  Oswald's  rejection  of  his  environment.

His  difficulty  in  relating  to  other  people  and
his  general  dissatisfaction  with  the  world  around
him  continued  while  he  was  in  the  Marine  Corps.
Kerry  Thomley,  a  marine  associate,  who,  shortly
after  Oswald's  defection,  wrote  an  as  yet  unpub-
lished novel  based  in  considerable  part  on  Os-
wald's life,  testified  that  "definitely  the  Marine
Corps  was  not  what  he  had  expected  it  to  be
when  he  joined."  He  said  that  Oswald  "seemed
to  guard  against  developing  real  close  friend-
ships." Daniel  Powers,  another  marine  who  was
stationed  with  Oswald  for  part  of  his  marine
career,  testified  that  Oswald  seemed  "always  [to
be]  striving  for  a  relationship,  but  whenever  he
did  *  *  *  his  general  personality  would  alien-
ate the  group  against  him."  Other  marines  also
testified  that  Oswald  had  few  friends  and  kept
very  much  to  himself.

While  there  is  nothing  in  Oswald's  military
records  to  indicate  that  he  was  mentally  unstable
or  otherwise  psychologically  unfit  for  duty  in
the  Marine  Corps,  he  did  not  adjust  well  to  con-
ditions which  he  found  in  that  service.  He  did
not  rise  above  the  rank  of  private  first  class,
even  though  he  had  passed  a  qualifying  exami-
nation for  the  rank  of  corporal.  His  Marine
career  was  not  helped  by  his  attitude  that  he  was
a  man  of  great  ability  and  intelligence  and  that
many  of  his  superiors  in  the  Marine  Corps  were
not  sufficiently  competent  to  give  him  orders.
While  Oswald  did  not  seem  to  object  to  authority
in  the  abstract,  he  did  think  that  he  should  be
one  to  exercise  it.  John  E.  Donovan,  one  of  his
former  officers,  testified  that  Oswald  thought
"that  authority,  particularly  the  Marine  Corps,
ought  to  be  able  to  recognize  talent  such  as  his
own,  without  a  given  magic  college  degree,  and
put  them  in  positions  of  prominence."


165


Oswald  manifested  this  feeling  about  au-
thority by  baiting  his  officers.  He  led  them  into
discussions  of  foreign  affairs  about  which  they
often  knew  less  than  he  did,  since  he  had  ap-
parently devoted  considerable  time  to  a  study  of
such  matters.  When  the  officers  were  unable  to
discuss  foreign  affairs  satisfactorily  with  him,
Oswald  regarded  them  as  unfit  to  exercise  com-
mand over  him.  Nelson  Delgado,  one  of  Os-
wald's fellow  Marines,  testified  that  Oswald  tried
to  "cut  up  anybody  that  was  high  ranking"  in
those  arguments  "and  make  himself  come  out
top  dog."  Oswald  probably  engaged  his  supe-
riors in  arguments  on  a  subject  that  he  had
studied  in  an  attempt  to  attract  attention  to  him-
self and  to  support  his  exaggerated  idea  of  his
own  abilities.

Thomley  also  testified  that  he  thought  that
Oswald's  extreme  personal  sloppiness  in  the
Marine  Corps  "fitted  into  a  general  personality
pattern  of  his:  to  do  whatever  was  not  wanted
of  him,  a  recalcitrant  trend  in  his  personality."
Oswald  "seemed  to  be  a  person  who  would  go
out  of  his  way  to  get  into  trouble"  and  then  used
the  "special  treatment"  he  received  as  an  ex-
ample of  the  way  in  which  he  was  being  picked
on  and  "as  a  means  of  getting  or  attempting  to
get  sympathy."  In  Thomley's  view,  Oswald
labored  under  a  persecution  complex  which  he
strove  to  maintain  and  "felt  the  Marine  Corps
kept  a  pretty  close  watch  on  him  because  of  his
'subversive'  activities."  Thomley  added:  "I  think
it  was  kind  of  necessary  to  him  to  beUeve  that
he  was  being  picked  on.  It  wasn't  anything
extreme.  I  wouldn't  go  as  far  as  to  call  it,  call
him  a  paranoid,  but  a  definite  tendency  there
was  in  that  direction,  I  think."

Powers  considered  Oswald  to  be  meek  and
easily  led,  an  "individual  that  you  would  brain-
wash, and  quite  easy  *  *  *  [but]  I  think  once
he  believed  in  something  *  *  *  he  stood  in
his  beliefs."  Powers  also  testified  that  Oswald
was  reserved  and  seemed  to  be  "somewhat  the
frail,  little  puppy  in  the  litter."  He  had  the  nick-
name "Ozzie  Rabbit."

Oswald  read  a  good  deal,  said  Powers,  but
"he  would  never  be  reading  any  of  the  shoot-
em-up  westerns  or  anything  like  that.  Normally,
it  would  be  a  good  type  of  literature;  and  the
one  that  I  recall  was  'Leaves  of  Grass,'  by  Walt
Whitman."  According  to  Powers,  Oswald  said:
"  'AU  the  Marine  Corps  did  was  to  teach  you  to
kill'  and  after  you  got  out  of  the  Marines  you
might  be  good  gangsters."  Powers  believed  that
when  Oswald  arrived  in  Japan  he  acquired  a
girlfriend,  "finally  attaining  a  male  status  or
image  in  his  own  eyes."  That  apparently  caused
Oswald  to  become  more  self-confident,  aggres-
sive and  even  somewhat  pugnacious,  although
Powers  "wouldn't  say  that  this  guy  is  a  trouble-
maker." Powers  said  "now  he  was  Oswald  the
man  rather  than  Oswald  the  rabbit."  Oswald
once  told  Powers  that  he  didn't  care  if  he
returned  to  the  United  States  at  all.

While  in  Japan,  Oswald's  new  found  apparent


self  confidence  and  pugnaciousness  led  to  an
incident  in  which  he  spilled  a  drink  on  one
of  his  sergeants  and  abusively  challenged  him  to
fight.  At  the  court-martial  hearing  which  fol-
lowed, Oswald  admitted  that  he  had  been  rather
drunk  when  the  incident  occurred.  He  testified
that  he  had  felt  the  sergeant  had  a  grudge  against
him  and  that  he  had  unsuccessfully  sought  a
transfer  from  the  sergeant's  unit.  He  said  that  he
had  simply  wanted  to  discuss  the  question  with
the  sergeant  and  the  drink  had  been  spilled
accidentally.  The  hearing  officer  agreed  with
the  latter  claim  but  found  Oswald  guilty  of
wTongfuUy  using  provoking  words  and  sentenced
him  to  28  days,  canceling  the  suspension  of  a
20-day  sentence  that  Oswald  had  received  in
an  earlier  court-martial  for  possessing  an  un-
authorized pistol  with  which  he  had  accidentally
shot  himself.

At  his  own  request,  Oswald  was  transferred
from  active  duty  to  the  Marine  Corps  Reserve
under  honorable  conditions  in  September  of
1959,  3  months  prior  to  his  regularly  scheduled
separation  date,  ostensibly  to  care  for  his  mother
who  had  been  injured  in  an  accident  at  her
work.  He  was  undesirably  discharged  from  the
Marine  Corps  Reserve,  to  which  he  had  been
assigned  on  inactive  status  following  his  transfer
from  active  duty,  after  it  was  learned  that  he
had  defected  to  the  Soviet  Union.  In  an  attempt
to  have  this  discharge  reversed,  Oswald  wrote  to
then  Secretary  of  the  Navy  ConnaUy  on  January
30,  1962,  stating  that  he  would  "employ  all
means  to  right  this  gross  mistake  or  injustice."

Governor  Connally  had  just  resigned  to  run
for  Governor  of  Texas,  so  he  advised  Oswald
that  he  had  forwarded  the  letter  to  his  successor.
It  is  thus  clear  that  Oswald  knew  that  Governor
Connally  was  never  directly  concerned  with  his
discharge  and  he  must  have  known  that  Presi-
dent Keimedy  had  had  nothing  to  do  with  it.  In
that  connection,  it  does  not  appear  that  Oswald
ever  expressed  any  dissatisfaction  of  any  kind
with  either  the  President  or  Governor  Connally.
Marina  Oswald  testified  that  she  "had  never
heard  anything  bad  about  Kennedy  from  Lee.
And  he  never  had  anything  against  him."  Mrs.
Oswald  said  that  her  husband  did  not  say  any-
thing about  Governor  Connally  after  his  return
to  the  United  States.  She  testified:  "But  while  we
were  in  Russia  he  spoke  well  of  him.  *  *  *
Lee  said  that  when  he  would  return  to  the  United
States  he  would  vote  for  him  [for  Governor]."
Oswald  must  have  already  learned  that  the
Governor  could  not  help  him  with  his  discharge
because  he  was  no  longer  Secretary  of  the  Navy,
at  the  time  he  made  that  remark.

Even  though  Oswald  apparently  did  not  ex-
press any  hostility  against  the  President  or  Gov-
ernor Connally,  he  continued  to  be  concerned
about  his  undesirable  discharge.  It  is  clear  that
he  thought  he  had  been  imjustly  treated.  Proba-
bly his  complaint  was  due  to  the  fact  that  his
discharge  was  not  related  to  anything  he  had
done  while  on  active  duty  and  also  because  he


166


had  not  received  any  notice  of  the  original  dis-
charge proceedings,  since  his  whereabouts  were
not  known.  He  continued  his  efforts  to  reverse
the  discharge  by  petitioning  the  Navy  Discharge
Review  Board,  which  finally  declined  to  modify
the  discharge  and  so  advised  him  in  a  letter
dated  July  25,  1963.

Governor  ConnaUy's  connection  with  the  dis-
charge, although  indirect,  caused  the  Commis-
sion to  consider  whether  he  might  have  been
Oswald's  real  target.  In  that  connection,  it  should
be  noted  that  Marina  Oswald  testified  on  Sep-
tember 6,  1964,  that  she  thought  her  husband
"was  shooting  at  Connally  rather  than  President
Kennedy."  In  support  of  her  conclusion  Mrs.
Oswald  noted  her  husband's  undesirable  dis-
charge and  that  she  could  not  think  of  any
reason  why  Oswald  would  want  to  kill  President
Kennedy.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  at
the  time  Oswald  fired  the  shots  at  the  Presiden-
tial limousine  the  Governor  occupied  the  seat  in
front  of  the  President,  and  it  would  have  been
almost  impossible  for  Oswald  to  have  hit  the
Governor  without  hitting  the  President  first.
Oswald  could  have  shot  the  Governor  as  the  car
approached  the  Depository  or  as  it  was  making
the  turn  onto  Elm  Street.  Once  it  had  started
down  Elm  Street  toward  the  Triple  Underpass,
however,  the  President  almost  completely
blocked  Oswald's  view  of  the  Governor  prior  to
the  time  the  first  shot  struck  the  President.
Furthermore,  Oswald  would  have  had  other
and  more  favorable  opportunities  to  strike  at
the  Governor  than  on  this  occasion  when,  as  a
member  of  the  President's  party,  he  had  more
protection  than  usual.  It  would  appear,  there-
fore, that  to  the  extent  Oswald's  undesirable
discharge  affected  his  motivation,  it  was  more  in
terms  of  a  general  hostility  against  the  govern-
ment and  its  representatives  rather  than  a  grudge
against  any  particular  person.

Interest  in  Marxism

As  indicated  above,  Oswald  started  to  read
Communist  literature  after  he  and  his  mother
left  New  York  and  moved  to  New  Orleans,  He
told  Aline  Mosby,  a  reporter  who  interviewed
him  after  he  arrived  in  Moscow:

I'm  a  Marxist,  *  *  *  i  became  interested
about  the  age  of  15.  From  an  ideological
viewpoint.  An  old  lady  handed  me  a  pam-
phlet about  saving  the  Rosenbergs.  *  *  *  i
looked  at  that  paper  and  I  still  remember  it
for  some  reason,  I  don't  know  why.

Oswald  studied  Marxism  after  he  joined  the
Marines  and  his  sympathies  in  that  direction  and
for  the  Soviet  Union  appear  to  have  been  widely
known,  at  least  in  the  unit  to  which  he  was
assigned  after  his  return  from  the  Far  East.  His
interest  in  Russia  led  some  of  his  associates  to
call  him  "comrade"  or  "Oswaldskovitch."  He
always  wanted  to  play  the  red  pieces  in  chess
because,  as  he  said  in  an  apparently  humorous


context,  he  preferred  the  "Red  Army."  He
studied  the  Russian  language,  read  a  Russian
language  newspaper  and  seemed  interested  in
what  was  going  on  in  the  Soviet  Union.  Thorn-
ley,  who  thought  Oswald  had  an  "irrevocable
conviction"  that  his  Marxist  beliefs  were  correct,
testified:

I  think  you  could  sit  down  and  argue  with
him  for  a  number  of  years  *  *  *  and  I  don't
think  you  could  have  changed  his  mind  on
that  unless  you  knew  why  he  believed  it  in
the  first  place.  I  certainly  don't.  I  don't  think
with  any  kind  of  formal  argument  you  could
have  shaken  that  conviction.  And  that  is  why
I  say  irrevocable.  It  was  just — never  getting
back  to  looking  at  things  from  any  other  way
once  he  had  become  a  Marxist,  whenever
that  was.

Thomley  also  testified  about  an  incident
which  grew  out  of  a  combination  of  Oswald's
known  Marxist  sympathies  and  George  Orwell's
book  "1984,"  one  of  Oswald's  favorite  books
which  Thomley  read  at  Oswald's  suggestion.
Shortly  after  Thomley  finished  reading  that  book
the  Marine  unit  to  whdch  both  men  were  assigned
was  required  to  take  part  in  a  Saturday  morning
parade  in  honor  of  some  retiring  noncommis-
sioned officers,  an  event  which  they  both  ap-
proached with  little  enthusiasm.  While  waiting
for  the  parade  to  start  they  talked  briefly  about
"1984"  even  though  Oswald  seemed  to  be  lost
in  his  own  thoughts.  After  a  brief  period  of
silence  Oswald  remarked  on  the  stupidity  of  the
parade  and  on  how  angry  it  made  him,  to  which
Thomley  replied:  "Well,  comes  the  revolution
you  will  change  all  that."  Thomley  testified:

At  which  time  he  looked  at  me  like  a
betrayed  Caesar  and  screamed  definitely,
"Not  you,  too,  Thomley."  And  I  remember
his  voice  cracked  as  he  said  this.  He  was
definitely  disturbed  at  what  I  had  said  and  I
didn't  really  think  I  had  said  that  much-
*  *  *  I  never  said  anything  to  him  again  and
he  never  said  anything  to  me  again.

Thomley  said  that  he  had  made  his  remark  only
in  the  context  of  "1984"  and  had  not  intended
any  criticism  of  Oswald's  political  views  which
is  the  way  in  which,  Thornley  thought,  Oswald
took  his  remarks.

Lieutenant  Donovan  testified  that  Oswald
thought  that  "there  were  many  grave  injustices
concerning  the  affairs  in  the  intemational  situa-
tion." He  recalled  that  Oswald  had  a  specific
interest  in  Latin  America,  particularly  Cuba,
and  expressed  opposition  to  the  Batista  regime
and  sympathy  for  Castro,  an  attitude  which,
Donovan  said,  was  "not  *  *  *  unpopular"  at
that  time.  Donovan  testified  that  he  never  heard
Oswald  express  a  desire  personally  to  take  part
in  the  elimination  of  injustices  anywhere  in  the
world  and  that  he  "never  heard  him  in  any  way,


167


shape  or  form  confess  that  he  was  a  Communist,
or  that  he  ever  thought  about  being  a  Com-
munist." Delgado  testified  that  Oswald  was  "a
complete  beUever  that  our  way  of  government
was  not  quite  right"  and  beUeved  that  our
Government  did  not  have  "too  much  to  offer,"
but  was  not  in  favor  of  "the  Communist  way  of
life."  Delgado  and  Oswald  talked  more  about
Cuba  than  Russia,  and  sometimes  imagined
themselves  as  leaders  in  the  Cuban  Army  or
Government,  who  might  "lead  an  expedition  to
some  of  these  other  islands  and  free  them  too."
Thomley  also  believed  that  Oswald's  Marxist
beliefs  led  to  an  extraordinary  view  of  history
under  which:

He  looked  upon  the  eyes  of  future  people  as
some  kind  of  tribunal,  and  he  wanted  to  be
on  the  wiiming  side  so  that  10,000  years  from
now  people  would  look  in  the  history  books
and  say,  "Well,  this  man  was  ahead  of  his
time."  *  *  *  The  eyes  of  the  future  became
*  *  *  the  eyes  of  God.  *  *  *  He  was  con-
cerned with  his  image  in  history  and  I  do
think  that  is  why  he  chose  *  *  *  the  par-
ticular method  [of  defecting]  he  chose  and
did  it  in  the  way  he  did.  It  got  him  in  the
newspapers.  It  did  broadcast  his  name  out

Thomley  thought  that  Oswald  not  only  wanted
a  place  in  history  but  also  wanted  to  live  com-
fortably in  the  present.  He  testified  that  if  Os-
wald could  not  have  that  "degree  of  physical
comfort  that  he  expected  or  sought,  I  think  he
would  then  throw  himself  entirely  on  the  other
thing  he  also  wanted,  which  was  the  image  in
history.  *  *  *  i  think  he  wanted  both  if  he
could  have  them.  If  he  didn't,  he  wanted  to  die
with  the  knowledge  that,  or  with  the  idea  that  he
was  somebody."

Oswald's  interest  in  Marxism  led  some  people
to  avoid  him,  even  though  as  his  wife  suggested,
that  interest  may  have  been  motivated  by  a
desire  to  gain  attention.  He  used  his  Marxist  and
associated  activities  as  excuses  for  his  difficulties
in  getting  along  in  the  world,  which  were  usually
caused  by  entirely  different  factors.  His  use  of
those  excuses  to  present  himself  to  the  world
as  a  person  who  was  being  unfairly  treated  is
shown  most  clearly  by  his  employment  relations
after  his  return  from  the  Soviet  Union.  Of
course,  he  made  his  real  problems  worse  to  the
extent  that  his  use  of  those  excuses  prevented
him  from  discovering  the  real  reasons  for  and
attempting  to  overcome  his  difficulties.  Of
greater  importance,  Oswald's  commitment  to
Marxism  contributed  to  the  decisions  which  led
him  to  defect  to  the  Soviet  Union  in  1959,  and
later  to  engage  in  activities  on  behalf  of  the  Fair
Play  for  Cuba  Committee  in  the  summer  of
1963,  and  to  attempt  to  go  to  Cuba  late  in
September  of  that  year.

Defection  to  the  Soviet  Union

After  Oswald  left  the  Marine  Corps  in  Sep-


tember of  1959,  ostensibly  to  care  for  his
mother,  he  almost  immediately  left  for  the  Soviet
Union  where  he  attempted  to  renounce  his
citizenship.  At  the  age  of  19,  Oswald  thus  com-
mitted an  act  which  was  the  most  striking  indi-
cation he  had  yet  given  of  his  willingness  to  act
on  his  beliefs  in  quite  extraordinary  ways.

While  his  defection  resulted  in  part  from
Oswald's  commitment  to  Marxism,  it  appears
that  personal  and  psychological  factors  were  also
involved.  On  August  17,  1963,  Oswald  told  Mr.
William  Stuckey,  who  had  arranged  a  radio
debate  on  Oswald's  activities  on  behalf  of  the
Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee,  that  while  he  had
begun  to  read  Marx  and  Engels  at  the  age  of  15.

the  conclusive  thing  that  made  him  decide
that  Marxism  was  the  answer  was  his  service
in  Japan.  He  said  living  conditions  over  there
convinced  him  something  was  wrong  with
the  system,  and  that  possibly  Marxism  was
the  answer.  He  said  it  was  in  Japan  that  he
made  up  his  mind  to  go  to  Russia  and  see  for
himself  how  a  revolutionary  society  operates,
a  Marxist  society.

On  the  other  hand,  at  least  one  person  who  knew
Oswald  after  his  return  thought  that  his  defec-
tion had  a  more  personal  and  psychological
basis.  The  validity  of  the  latter  observation  is
borne  out  by  some  of  the  things  Oswald  wrote
in  connection  with  his  defection  indicating  that
his  motivation  was  at  least  in  part  a  personal
one.  On  November  26,  1959,  shortly  after  he
arrived  in  the  Soviet  Union,  and  probably  before
Soviet  authorities  had  given  him  permission  to
stay  indefinitely,  he  wrote  to  his  brother  Robert
that  the  Soviet  Union  was  a  country  which  "I
have  always  considered  *  *  *  to  be  my  own"
and  that  he  went  there  "only  to  find  freedonL
*  *  *  I  could  never  have  been  personally  happy
in  the  U.S."  He  wrote  in  another  letter  that  he
would  "never  return  to  the  United  States  which
is  a  country  I  hate."  His  idea  that  he  was  to  fijid
"freedom"  in  the  Soviet  Union  was  to  be  rudely
shattered.

Whatever  Oswald's  reasons  for  going  to  the
Soviet  Union  might  have  been,  however,  there
can  be  little  doubt  that  his  desire  to  go  was
quite  strong.  In  addition  to  studying  the  Russian
language  while  he  was  in  the  Marines,  Oswald
had  managed  to  save  enough  money  to  cover  the
expenses  of  his  forthcoming  trip.  While  there  is
no  proof  that  he  saved  $1,500,  as  he  claimed,  it
would  have  taken  considerable  discipline  to  save
whatever  amount  was  required  to  finance  his
defection  out  of  the  salary  of  a  low  ranking
enlisted  man.

The  extent  of  Oswald's  desire  to  go  to  the
Soviet  Union  and  of  his  initial  commitment  to
that  country  can  best  be  understood,  however,
in  the  context  of  his  concomitant  hatred  of  the
United  States,  which  was  most  clearly  expressed
in  his  November  26,  1959,  letter  to  his  brother
Robert.  Addressing  himself  to  the  question  of


168


why  "I  and  my  fellow  workers  and  communist's
would  like  to  see  the  present  capitalist  govern-
ment of  the  U.S.  overthrown"  Oswald  stated  that
that  government  supported  an  economic  system
"which  exploits  all  its  workers"  and  under  which
"art,  culture  and  the  spirt  of  man  are  subjected
to  commercial  enterpraising,  [and]  religion  and
education  are  used  as  a  tool  to  surpress  what
would  otherwise  be  a  population  questioning
their  government's  unfair  economic  system  and
plans  for  war."

He  complained  in  his  letter  about  segregation,
unemployment,  automation,  and  the  use  of  mili-
tary forces  to  suppress  other  populations.  Ask-
ing his  brother  why  he  supported  the  American
Government  and  what  ideals  he  put  forward,
Oswald  wrote:

Ask  me  and  I  will  tell  you  I  fight  for  com-
munism. *  *  *  I  will  not  say  your  grand-
children will  live  under  communism,  look  for
yourself  at  history,  look  at  a  world  map!
America  is  a  dicing  country,  I  do  not  wish  to
be  a  part  of  it,  nor  do  I  ever  again  wish  to  be
used  as  a  tool  in  its  military  aggressions.

This  should  answer  your  question,  and  also
give  you  a  glimpse  of  my  way  of  thinking.

So  you  speak  of  advantages.  Do  you  think
that  is  why  I  am  here?  For  personal,  material
advantages?  Happiness  is  not  based  on  one-
self, it  does  not  consist  of  a  small  home,  of
taking  and  getting,  Happiness  is  taking  part  in
the  struggle,  where  there  is  no  borderline  be-
tween one's  own  personal  world,  and  the
world  in  general.  I  never  believed  I  would
find  more  material  advantages  at  this  stage  of
development  in  the  Soviet  Union  than  I  might
of  had  in  the  U.S.


I  have  been  a  pro-communist  for  years  and
yet  I  have  never  met  a  communist,  instead  I
kept  silent  and  observed,  and  what  I  observed
plus  my  Marx'ist  learning  brought  me  here  to
the  Soviet  Union.  I  have  always  considered
thus  country  to  be  my  own.

Responding  to  Robert's  statement  that  he  had
not  "renounced"  him,  Oswald  told  his  brother
"on  what  terms  I  want  this  arrangement,"  He
advised  Robert  that:

1.  In  the  event  of  war  I  would  kill  any
american  government — any  american.

2.  That  in  my  own  mind  I  have  no  attach-
ment's of  any  kind  in  the  U.S.

3.  That  I  want  to,  and  I  shall,  live  a  normal
happy  and  peaceful  life  here  in  the  Soviet
Union  for  the  rest  of  my  life.

4.  that  my  mother  and  you  are  (in  spite  of
what  the  newspaper  said)  not  objects  of  af-
fection, but  only  examples  of  workers  in  the
U.S.

Despite  this  commitment  to  the  Soviet  Union


Oswald  met  disappointments  there  just  as  he  had
in  the  past.  At  the  outset  the  Soviets  told  him
that  he  could  not  remain.  It  seems  that  Oswald
immediately  attempted  suicide — a  striking  in-
dication of  how  much  he  desired  to  remain  in
the  Soviet  Union.  It  shows  how  willing  he  was
to  act  dramatically  and  decisively  when  he  faced
an  emotional  crisis  with  few  readily  available
alternatives  at  hand.  He  was  shocked  to  find  that
the  Soviet  Union  did  not  accept  him  with  open
arms.  The  entry  in  his  self-styled  "Historic
Diary"  for  October  21,  1959,  reports:

I  am  shocked  !  !  My  dreams!  *  *  *  I  have
waited  for  2  year  to  be  accepted.  My  fondes
dreams  are  shattered  because  of  a  petty  oflB-
al,  *  *  *  I  decide  to  end  it.  Soak  rist  in  cold
water  to  numb  the  pain.  Than  slash  my  left-
wrist.  Than  plaug  wrist  into  bathtum  of  hot
water.  *  *  *  Somewhere,  a  violin  plays,  as
I  wacth  my  life  whirl  away.  I  think  to  myself
"How  easy  to  Die"  and  "A  Sweet  Death,
(to  violins)


* *  *


Oswald  was  discovered  in  time  to  thwart  his
attempt  at  suicide.  He  was  taken  to  a  hospital
in  Moscow  where  he  was  kept  imtil  October  28,
1959.

Still  intent,  however,  on  staying  in  the  Soviet
Union,  Oswald  went  on  October  31,  to  the
American  Embassy  to  renounce  his  U.S.  citizen-
ship. Mr.  Richard  E.  Snyder,  then  Second  Sec-
retary and  senior  consular  official  at  the  Em-
bassy, testified  that  Oswald  was  extremely  sure
of  himself  and  seemed  "to  know  what  his  mis-
sion was.  He  took  charge,  in  a  sense,  of  the
conversation  right  from  the  beginning."  He  pre-
sented the  following  signed  note:

I  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  do  hereby  request
that  my  present  citizenship  in  the  United
States  of  America,  be  revoked.

I  have  entered  the  Soviet  Union  for  the
express  purpose  of  applying  for  citizenship
in  the  Soviet  Union,  through  the  means  of
naturalization.

My  request  for  citizenship  is  now  pending
before  the  Surprem  Soviet  of  the  U.S.S.R.

I  take  these  steps  for  political  reasons.  My
request  for  the  revoking  of  my  American
citizenship  is  made  only  after  the  longest  and
most  serious  considerations.

I  affirm  that  my  allegiance  is  to  the  Union
of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics.

As  his  "principal  reason"  for  renouncing  his
citizenship  Oswald  stated:  "I  am  a  Marxist."  He
also  alluded  to  hardships  endured  by  his  mother
as  a  worker,  referring  to  them  as  experiences
that  he  did  not  intend  to  have  himself,  even
though  he  stated  that  he  had  never  held  a  civilian
job.  He  said  that  his  Marine  service  in  Okinawa
and  elsewhere  had  given  him  "a  chance  to  ob-
serve 'American  imperialism.'  "  but  he  also  dis-
played some  sensitivity  at  not  having  reached  a


169


higher  rank  in  the  Marine  Corps.  He  stated  that
he  had  volunteered  to  give  Soviet  officials  any
information  that  he  had  concerning  Marine
Corps  operations,  and  intimated  that  he  might
know  something  of  special  interest.  Oswald's
"Historic  Diary"  describes  the  event  in  part  as
follows:

I  leave  Embassy,  elated  at  this  showdown,
returning  to  my  hotel  I  feel  now  my  enorgies
are  not  spent  in  vain.  I'm  sure  Russians  will
except  me  after  this  sign  of  my  faith  in  them.

The  Soviet  authorities  finally  permitted  Os-
wald to  remain  in  their  country.  No  evidence
has  been  found  that  they  used  him  for  any  par-
ticular propaganda  or  other  political  or  informa-
tional purposes.  They  sent  hun  to  Minsk  to  work
in  a  radio  and  television  factory  as  a  metal
worker.  The  Soviet  authorities  denied  Oswald
permission  to  attend  a  university  in  Moscow,
but  they  gave  him  a  monthly  allowance  of  700
rubles  a  month  (old  exchange  rate)  in  addition
to  his  factory  salary  of  approximately  equal
amount  and  considerably  better  living  quarters
than  those  accorded  to  Soviet  citizens  of  equal
age  and  station.  The  subsidy,  apparently  similar
to  those  sometimes  given  to  foreigners  allowed
to  remain  in  the  Soviet  Union,  together  with  his
salary,  gave  Oswald  an  income  which  he  said
approximated  that  of  the  director  of  the  factory
in  which  he  worked.

Even  though  he  received  more  money  and
better  living  quarters  than  other  Russians  doing
similar  work,  he  envied  his  wife's  uncle,  a
colonel  in  the  MVD,  because  of  the  larger  apart-
ment in  which  he  lived.  Reminiscent  of  his
attitude  toward  his  superiors  in  the  Marine
Corps,  Oswald  apparently  resented  the  exercise
of  authority  over  him  and  the  better  treatment
afforded  to  Commimist  Party  officials.  After  he
returned  to  the  United  States  he  took  the  position
that  the  Communist  Party  officials  in  the  Soviet
Union  were  opportunists  who  were  betraying
their  positions  for  personal  gain.  He  is  reported
to  have  expressed  the  conclusion  that  they  had
"fat  stinking  politicians  over  there  just  like  we
have  over  here."

Oswald  apparently  continued  to  have  per-
sonal difficulties  while  he  was  in  Minsk.  Al-
though Marina  Oswald  told  the  Commission
that  her  husband  had  good  personal  relation-
ships in  the  Soviet  Union,  Katherine  Ford,  one
of  the  members  of  the  Russian  commimity  in
Dallas  with  which  the  Oswalds  became  ac-
quainted upon  their  arrival  in  the  United  States,
stated  that  Mrs.  Oswald  told  her  everybody  in
Russia  "hated  him."  Jeanne  De  Mohrenschildt,
another  member  of  that  group,  said  that  Oswald
told  her  that  he  had  returned  because  "I  didn't
find  what  I  was  looking  for."  George  De
Mohrenschildt  thought  that  Oswald  must  have
become  disgusted  with  life  in  the  Soviet  Union
as  the  novelty  of  the  presence  of  an  American


wore  off  and  he  began  to  be  less  the  center  of
attention.

The  best  description  of  Oswald's  state  of
mind,  however,  is  set  forth  in  his  own  "Historic
Diary."  Under  the  entry  for  May  1,  1960,  he
noted  that  one  of  his  acquaintances  "relats  many
things  I  do  not  know  about  the  U.S.S.R.  I  begin
to  feel  uneasy  inside,  its  true!"  Under  the  entry
for  August-September  of  that  year  he  wrote:

As  my  Russian  improves  I  become  in-
creasingly concious  of  just  what  sort  of  a
sociaty  I  live  in.  Mass  gymnastics,  complu-
sory  afterwork  meeting,  usually  political  in-
formation meeting.  Complusory  attendance
at  lectures  and  the  sending  of  the  entire  shop
collective  (except  me)  to  pick  potatoes  on  a
Sunday,  at  a  state  collective  farm:  A  "pa-
troict  duty"  to  bring  in  the  harvest.  The  opions
of  the  workers  (unvoiced)  are  that  its  a  great
pain  in  the  neck:  they  don't  seem  to  be  es-
spicialy  enthusiastic  about  any  of  the  "col-
lective" duties  a  natural  feeling.  I  am  increas-
ingly aware  of  the  presence,  in  all  thing,  of
Lebizen,  shop  party  secretary,  fat,  fortyish,
and  jovial  on  the  outside.  He  is  a  no-nonsense
party  regular.

Finally,  the  entry  of  January  4-31  of  1961:

I  am  stating  to  reconsider  my  disire  about
staying  the  work  is  drab  the  money  I  get  has
nowhere  to  be  spent.  No  night  clubs  or  bowl-
ing allys  no  places  of  recreation  acept  the
trade  union  dances  I  have  had  enough.

Shortly  thereafter,  less  than  18  months  after  his
defection,  about  6  weeks  before  he  met  Marina
Prusakova,  Oswald  opened  negotiations  with  the
U.S.  Embassy  in  Moscow  looking  toward  his
return  to  the  United  States.

Return  to  the  United  States

In  view  of  the  intensity  of  his  earlier  com-
mitment to  the  Soviet  Union,  a  great  change
must  have  occurred  in  Oswald's  thinking  to  in-
duce him  to  return  to  the  United  States.  The
psychological  effects  of  that  change  must  have
been  highly  unsettling.  It  should  be  remembered
that  he  was  not  yet  20  years  old  when  he  went
to  the  Soviet  Union  with  such  high  hopes  and
not  quite  23  when  he  returned  bitterly  disap-
pointed. His  attempt  to  renounce  his  citizenship
had  been  an  open  expression  of  hostility  against
the  United  States  and  a  profound  rejection  of
his  early  life.  The  dramatic  break  with  society
in  America  now  had  to  be  undone.  His  return
to  the  United  States  publicly  testified  to  the  utter
failure  of  what  had  been  the  most  important
act  of  his  life.

Marina  Oswald  confirmed  the  fact  that  her
husband  was  experiencing  psychological  diffi-
culties at  the  time  of  his  return.  She  said  that
"immediately  after  coming  to  the  United  States
Lee  changed.  I  did  not  know  him  as  such  a  man


170


in  Russia."  She  added  that  while  he  helped  her
as  he  had  done  before,  he  became  more  of  a
recluse,  that  "[he]  was  very  irritable,  sometimes
for  a  trifle"  and  that  "Lee  was  very  unrestrained
and  verv  explosive"  during  the  period  from
November  19,  1962  to  March  of  1963.

After  the  assassination  she  wrote  that:

In  general,  our  family  life  began  to  de-
teriorate after  we  arrived  in  America.  Lee
was  always  hot-tempered,  and  now  this  trait
of  character  more  and  more  prevented  us  from
living  together  in  harmony.  Lee  became  very
irritable,  and  sometimes  some  completely
trivial  thing  would  drive  him  into  a  rage.  I
myself  do  not  have  a  particular  quiet  dispo-
sition, but  I  had  to  change  my  character  a
great  deal  in  order  to  maintain  a  more  or
less  peaceful  family  Hfe.

Marina  Oswald's  judgment  of  her  husband's
state  of  mind  may  be  substantiated  by  compar-
ing material  which  he  wrote  in  the  Soviet  Union
with  what  he  wrote  while  on  the  way  back  to
the  United  States  and  after  his  return.  While  in
the  Soviet  Union  he  wrote  his  longest  and  clear-
est piece  of  work,  "The  Collective."  This  was  a
fairly  coherent  description  of  life  in  that  country,
basically  centered  around  the  radio  and  tele-
vision factory  in  which  he  worked.  While  it  was
apparently  intended  for  publication  in  the  United
States,  and  is  in  many  respects  critical  of  cer-
tain aspects  of  life  in  the  Soviet  Union,  it  ap-
pears to  be  the  work  of  a  fairly  well  organized
person.  Oswald  prefaced  his  manuscript  with  a
short  autobiographical  sketch  which  reads  in
part  as  follows:

Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was  bom  in  Oct  1939
in  New  Orleans  La.  the  son  of  a  Insuraen
Salesmen  whose  early  death  left  a  far  mean
streak  of  indepence  brought  on  by  negleck.
entering  the  US  Marine  corp  at  17  this  streak
of  independence  was  strengthed  by  exotic
journeys  to  Japan  the  Philipines  and  the  scores
of  odd  Islands  in  the  Pacific  immianly  after
serving  out  his  3  years  in  the  USMC  he
abonded  his  american  life  to  seek  a  new  life
in  the  USSR,  full  of  optimism  and  hope  he
stood  in  red  square  in  the  fall  of  1959  vow-
ing to  see  his  chosen  course  through,  after,
however,  two  years  and  alot  of  growing  up  I
decided  to  return  to  the  USA.  *  *  *

"The  Collective"  contrasts  sharply  with  ma-
terial which  Oswald  seems  to  have  written  after
he  left  the  Soviet  Union,  which  appears  to  be
more  an  expression  of  his  own  psychological
condition  than  of  a  reasoned  analysis.  The  lat-
ter material  expresses  great  hostility  to  both
communism  and  capitalism.  He  wrote,  that  to
a  person  knowing  both  of  those  systems,  "their
can  be  no  mediation  between  those  systems  as
they  exist  to-day  and  that  person.  He  must  be


opposed  to  their  basic  foundations  and  repre-
sentatives"

and  yet  it  is  imature  to  take  the  sort  of  at-
titude which  says  "a  curse  on  both  your
houses!"

their  are  two  great  represenative  of  power
in  the  world,  simply  expressed,  the  left  and
right,  and  their  rfr^pfing  factions  and  concers.
any  practical  attempt  at  one  alternative  must
have  as  its  nuclus  the  triditionaU  ideological
best  of  both  systems,  and  yet  be  utterly  op-
posed to  both  systems.

Such  an  alternative  was  to  be  opposed  both  to
capitalism  and  communism  because:

No  man,  having  known,  having  lived,  under
the  Russian  Communist  and  American  capi-
talist system,  could  possibly  make  a  choice
between  them,  there  is  no  choice,  one  offers
oppresstion  the  other  poverty.  Both  are  im-
perilistic  injustice,  tinted  with  two  brands  of
slavery.

Oswald  actually  did  attempt  to  formulate  such
an  alternative  which  he  planned  to  "put  for-
ward" himself.  He  thought  the  new  alternative
would  have  its  best  chance  to  be  accepted  after
"conflict  between  the  two  world  systems  leaves
the- ^isarisi country  without  defense  or  foundation
of  government,"  after  which  the  survivors  would
"seek  a  altumative  »»ya3s4  to  those  systems
which  have  brough  them  misery."  Oswald  real-
ized that  "their  thinking  and  education  will  be
steeped  in  the  traiditions  of  those  systems  [and]
they  would  never  except  a  'new  order*  com-
plete beyond  their  understanding."  As  a  result
he  thought  it  would  be  "necessary  to  oppose
the  old  systems  but  at  the  same  time  support
their  cherised  trations."

Expanding  on  his  ideas  on  how  his  alterna-
tive to  communism  and  capitalism  might  be
introduced,  he  wrote  of  a  "readily  foreseeable
*  *  *  economic,  political  or  military  crisis,  in-
ternal or  external,  [which]  will  bring  about  the
final  destrution  of  the  capitalist  system,"  and
indicated  that  "preparation  in  a  special  party
could  safeguard  an  independant  course  of  action
after  the  debacle,"  which  would  achieve  the  goal,
which  was:

The  emplacement  of  a  separate,  democratic,
pure  commimist  sociaty  *  *  *  but  one  with
union-communes,  democratic  socializing  of
production  and  without  regard  to  the  twisting
apart  of  MarsisKi  Marxist  Communism  by
other  powers.

While  "[r]esoufualniss  and  patient  working  to-
wards the  aforesaid  goal's  are  prefered  rather
than  loud  and  useless  manifestation's  of  protest,"
Oswald  went  on  to  note:

But  these  prefered  tactics  now,  may  prove


171


to  be  too  limited  in  the  near  future,  they
should  not  be  confused  with  slowness,  inde-
sision  or  fear,  only  the  intellectually  fearless
could  even  be  remody  attracted  too  our  doc-
trine, and  yet  this  doctrine  requirers  the  upt-
mest  utmost  restraint,  a  state  of  being  in  itself
majustic  in  power.

Oswald's  decided  rejection  of  both  capitalism
and  communism  seemed  to  place  him  in  a  situa-
tion in  which  he  could  not  live  with  satisfaction
either  in  the  United  States  or  in  the  Soviet  Union.
The  discussion  above  has  already  set  forth  ex-
amples of  his  expression  of  hatred  for  the  United
States.  He  also  expressed  hatred  of  the  Soviet
Union  and  of  the  Communist  Party,  U.S.A.,
even  though  he  later  referred  to  the  latter  as
"trusted  long  time  fighters  for  progress."  He
wrote:

The  Communist  Party  of  the  United  States
has  betrayed  itself!

It  has  turned  itself  into  the  traditional  lever
of  a  foreign  power  to  overthrow  the  govern-
ment of  the  United  States;  not  in  the  name
of  freedow  or  high  ideals,  but  in  servile  con-
formity to  the  wishes  of  the  Soviet  Union  and
in  anticipation  of  Soviet  Russia's  complete
domination  of  the  American  continent.


There  can  be  no  sympathy  for  those  who
have  turned  the  idea  of  communism  into  a  vill
curse  to  western  man.

The  Soviets  have  committed  crimes  unsur-
passed even  by  their  early  day  capitalist  coun-
terparts, the  imprisonment  of  their  own  peo-
ples, with  the  mass  extermination  so  typical
of  Stalin,  and  the  individual  surpresstion  and
regimentation  under  Krushchev.

The  deportations,  the  purposefull  curtail-
ment of  diet  in  the  consumer  slighted  popula-
tion of  Russia,  the  murder  of  history,  the
prositution  of  art  and  culture,

A  suggestion  that  Oswald  hated  more  than  just
capitalism  and  commimism  is  provided  by  the
following,  which  was  apparently  written  either
on  the  ship  coming  back,  or  after  his  return
from  the  Soviet  Union:

I  have  oflfen  wondered  why  it  is  that  the
communist,  sf^"  ?C".c3t  capitalist  and  even  the
fasist  and  anarchist  elements  'm  american,
allways  profess  patrotistism  toward  the  land
and  the  people,  if  not  the  goverment;  al-
though their  idtah  movements  must  surly  lead
to  the  bitter  destruction  of  all  and  everything.

I  am  quite  sure  these  people  must  hate
not  only  the  goverment  but  oer  the  pe«¥>
culture,  tra»J-itions,  heritage  and  very  people
itself,  and  yet  they  stand  up  and  pioiosly  pro-
nounce themselfs  patriots,  displaying  their
war  medles,  that  they  gained  in  conflicts  Icc:^-
fsst  between  themselfs.


I  wonder  what  would  happen  it  somebody
was  to  stand  up  and  say  he  was  utterly  op-
posed not  only  to  the  goverments,  but  to  the
people,  too  the  entire  land  and  complete
foundations  of  his  socially.

Oswald  demonstrated  his  thinking  in  connec-
tion with  his  return  to  the  United  States  by  pre-
paring two  sets  of  identical  questions  of  the
type  which  he  might  have  thought  he  would  be
asked  at  a  press  conference  when  he  returned.
With  either  great  ambivalence  or  cold  calcula-
tion he  prepared  completely  different  answers
to  the  same  questions.  Judged  by  his  other  state-
ments and  writings,  however,  he  appears  to  have
indicated  his  true  feelings  in  the  set  of  answers
first  presented  and  to  have  stated  in  the  second
what  he  thought  would  be  least  harmful  to  him
as  he  resumed  life  in  the  United  States.  For  ex-
ample, in  response  to  his  questions  about  his
decision  to  go  to  the  Soviet  Union,  his  first  draft
answered  "as  a  mark  of  dicuss  and  protest
against  american  poUtical  policies  in  foriengn
countrys,  my  personal  sign  of  discontent  and
horror  at  the  misguided  line  of  resoning  of  the
U.S.  Goverment."  His  second  answer  was  that
he  "went  as  a  citizen  of  the  U.S.  (as  a  tourist)
residing  in  a  forieng  conutry  which  I  have  a
perfect  right  to  do.  I  went  there  to  see  the  land,
the  people  and  how  their  system  works."

To  the  question  of  "Are  you  a  communist?"  he
first  answered  "Yes,  basically,  allthough  I  hate
the  USSR  and  socialist  system  I  still  think
marxism  can  work  under  different  circum-
stances." His  second  answer  to  this  question  was,
"No  of  course  not,  I  have  never  even  know  a
communist,  outside  of  the  ones  in  the  USSR  but
you  can't  help  that."  His  first  set  of  questions
and  answers  indicated  his  beUef  that  there  were
no  outstanding  differences  between  the  Soviet
Union  and  the  United  States,  "except  in  the  US.
the  living  standard  is  a  httle  higher,  freedoms
are  about  the  same,  medical  aid  and  the  educa-
tional system  in  the  USSR  is  better  than  in  the
USA."  In  the  second  simulated  transcript  which
ended  with  the  statement  "Newspapers,  thank
you  sir;  you  are  a  real  patriot  !  !  "  he  apparently
concluded  that  the  United  States  offered  "free-
dom to  beUeve  in  god,"  while  the  Soviet  Union
did  not.

Despite  the  hatred  that  Oswald  expressed
toward  the  Soviet  Union  after  his  residence
there,  he  continued  to  be  interested  in  that  coun-
try after  he  returned  to  the  United  States.  Soon
after  his  arrival  he  wrote  to  the  Soviet  Embassy
in  Washington  requesting  information  on  how
to  subscribe  to  Russian  newspapers  and  maga-
zines and  asked  for  "any  periodicals  or  bulletins
which  you  may  put  out  for  the  beneifit  of  your
citizens  living,  for  a  time,  in  the  U.S.A.."  Os-
wald subsequently  did  subscribe  to  several  So-
viet journals.  While  Marina  Oswald  tried  to
obtain  permission  to  return  to  the  Soviet  Union


172


she  testified  that  she  did  so  at  her  husband's
insistence.

In  July  of  1963,  Oswald  also  requested  the
Soviet  Union  to  provide  a  visa  for  his  return
to  that  country.  In  August  of  1963,  he  gave  the
New  Orleans  police  as  a  reason  for  refusing  to
permit  his  family  to  learn  English,  that  "he  hated
America  and  he  did  not  want  them  to  become
'Americanized'  and  that  his  plans  were  to  go
back  to  Russia."  Even  though  his  priman'  pur-
pose probably  was  to  get  to  Cuba,  he  sought  an
immediate  grant  of  visa  on  his  trip  to  Mexico
City  in  late  September  of  1963.  He  also  inquired
about  visas  for  himself  and  his  wife  in  a  letter
which  he  wrote  to  the  Soviet  Embassy  in  Wash-
ington on  November  9,  1963.

Personal  Relations

Apart  from  his  relatives,  Oswald  had  no
friends  or  close  associates  in  Texas  when  he  re-
turned there  in  June  of  1962,  and  he  did  not
establish  any  close  friendships  or  associations,
although  it  appears  that  he  came  to  respect
George  De  Mohrenschildt.  Somewhat  of  a  non-
conformist, De  Mohrenschildt  was  a  peripheral
member  of  the  so-called  Russian  community,
with  which  Oswald  made  contact  through  Mr.
Peter  Gregory,  a  Russian-speaking  petroleum
engineer  whom  Oswald  met  as  a  result  of  his
contact  with  the  Texas  Employment  Commis-
sion oflBce  in  Fort  Worth.  Some  of  the  members
of  that  group  saw  a  good  deal  of  the  Oswalds
through  the  fall  of  1963,  and  attempted  to  help
Mrs,  Oswald  particularly,  in  various  ways.  In
general,  Oswald  did  not  like  the  members  of  the
Russian  community.  In  fact,  his  relations  with
some  of  them,  particularly  George  Bouhe,  be-
came quite  hostile.  Part  of  the  problem  resulted
from  the  fact  that,  as  Jeanne  I>e  Mohrenschildt
testified,  Oswald  was  "very,  very  disagreeable
and  disappointed."  He  also  expressed  considera-
ble resentment  at  the  help  given  to  his  wife  by
her  Russian-American  friends.  Jeanne  De  Moh-
renschildt said:

Marina  had  a  hundred  dresses  given  to  her
•  *  *  [and]  he  objected  to  that  lavish  help,
because  Marina  was  throwing  it  into  his  face.


He  was  offensive  with  the  people.  And  I  can
understand  why,  *  *  *  because  that  hurt
him.  He  could  never  give  her  what  the  people
were  showering  on  her.  *  *  *  no  matter  how
hard  he  worked — and  he  worked  very  hard.

The  relations  between  Oswald  and  his  wife
became  such  that  Bouhe  wanted  to  "liberate"
her  from  Oswald.  While  the  exact  sequence  of
events  is  not  clear  because  of  conflicting  testi-
mony, it  appears  that  De  Mohrenschildt  and
his  wife  actually  went  to  Oswald's  apartment
early  in  November  of  1962  and  helped  to  move
the  personal  effects  of  Marina  Oswald  and  the
baby.  Even  though  it  appears  that  they  may


have  left  Oswald  a  few  days  before,  it  seems  that
he  resisted  the  move  as  best  he  could.  He  even
threatened  to  tear  up  his  wife's  dresses  and  break
all  the  baby  things.  According  to  De  Mohren-
schildt, Oswald  submitted  to  the  inevitable,  pre-
sumably because  he  was  "small,  you  know,  and
he  was  rather  a  puny  individual."  De  Mohren-
schildt said  that  the  whole  affair  made  him  nerv-
ous since  he  was  "interfering  in  other  people's
affairs,  after  all."

Oswald  attempted  to  get  his  wife  to  come  back
and,  over  Bouhe's  protest,  De  Mohrenschildt
finally  told  him  where  she  was.  De  Mohren-
schildt admitted  that;

if  somebody  did  that  to  me,  a  lousy  trick  like
that,  to  take  my  wife  away,  and  all  the  furni-
ture, I  would  be  mad  as  hell,  too.  I  am  sur-
prised that  he  didn't  do  something  worse.

After  about  a  2-week  separation,  Marina  Os-
wald returned  to  her  husband.  Bouhe  thoroughly
disapproved  of  this  and  as  a  result  almost  all
communication  between  the  Oswalds  and  mem-
bers of  the  Russian  community  ceased.  Contacts
with  De  Mohrenschildt  and  his  wife  did  con-
tinue and  they  saw  the  Oswalds  occasionally
untn  the  spring  of  1963.

Shortly  after  his  return  from  the  Soviet  Union,
Oswald  severed  all  relations  with  his  mother;  he
did  not  see  his  brother  Robert  from  Thanks-
giving of  1962  until  November  23,  1963.  At  the
time  of  his  defection,  Oswald  had  said  that
neither  his  brother,  Robert,  nor  his  mother  were
objects  of  his  affection,  "but  only  examples  of
workers  in  the  U.S."  He  also  indicated  to  oflBcials
at  the  American  Embassy  in  Moscow  that  his
defection  was  motivated  at  least  in  part  by  so-
called  exploitation  of  his  mother  by  the  capi-
talist system.  Consistent  with  this  attitude  he  first
told  his  wife  that  he  did  not  have  a  mother,  but
later  admitted  that  he  did  but  that  "he  didn't
love  her  very  much."

WTien  they  arrived  from  the  Soviet  Union,  Os-
wald and  his  family  Hved  at  first  with  his  brother
Robert.  The  latter  testified  that  they  "were  just
together  again,"  as  if  his  brother  "had  not  been
to  Russia."  He  also  said  that  he  and  his  family
got  along  well  with  Marina  Oswald  and  enjoyed
showing  her  American  things.  After  about  a
month  with  his  brother,  Oswald  and  his  family
lived  for  a  brief  period  with  his  mother  at  her
urging,  but  Oswald  soon  decided  to  move  out

Marguerite  Oswald  visited  her  son  and  his
family  at  the  first  apartment  which  he  rented
after  his  return,  and  tried  to  help  them  get  set-
tled there.  After  she  had  bought  some  clothes
for  Marina  Oswald  and  a  highchatr  for  the
baby,  Oswald  emphatically  told  her  to  stop.  As
Marguerite  Oswald  testified,  "he  strongly  put
me  in  my  place  about  bu>ing  things  for  his  wife
that  he  himseLf  could  not  buy."  Oswald  objected
to  his  mother  visiting  the  apartment  and  became
quite  incensed  with  his  wife  when  she  would
open  the  door  for  her  in  spite  of  his  instructions


173


to  the  contrary.  Oswald  moved  to  Dallas  on
about  October  8,  1962,  without  telling  his
mother  where  he  was  going.  He  never  saw  or
communicated  with  her  in  any  way  again  until
she  came  to  see  him  after  the  assassination.

Even  though  Oswald  cut  off  relations  with  his
mother,  he  attempted  for  the  first  time  to  learn
something  about  his  family  background  when
he  went  to  New  Orleans  in  April  of  1963.  He
visited  some  of  his  father's  elderly  relatives  and
the  cemetery  where  his  father  was  buried  in  an
eflfort  to  develop  the  facts  of  his  genealogy.
While  it  does  not  appear  that  he  established  any
new  relationships  as  a  result  of  his  investigation,
he  did  obtain  a  large  picture  of  his  father  from
one  of  the  elderly  relatives  with  whom  he
spoke.  Oswald's  interest  in  such  things  presents
a  sharp  contrast  with  his  attitude  at  the  time  of
his  defection,  when  he  evidenced  no  interest  in
his  father  and  hardly  mentioned  him,  even
when  questioned.

Employment

Oswald's  defection,  his  interest  in  the  Soviet
Union,  and  his  activities  on  behalf  of  the  Fair
Play  for  Cuba  Committee  not  only  caused  binn
diflSculties  in  his  employment  relations,  but  they
also  provided  him  with  excuses  for  employment
failures  which  were  largely  of  his  own  making.
Oswald  experienced  some  difficulty  finding  em-
ployment. Perhaps  this  was  partially  because  of
his  lack  of  any  specific  skill  or  training.  Some
of  his  acquaintances,  feeling  that  Oswald  tried
to  impress  people  with  the  fact  that  he  had  lived
and  worked  in  Russia,  were  led  to  the  belief
that  his  employment  difficulties  were  caused  by
his  telling  prospective  employers  that  he  had  last
been  employed  in  Minsk.  While  he  might  have
expected  difficulty  from  such  an  approach,  in
fact  the  evidence  indicates  that  Oswald  usually
told  his  prospective  employers  and  employment
counselors  that  he  had  recently  been  discharged
from  the  Marine  Corps.

Oswald  obtained  a  job  in  July  of  1962  as  a
sheet  metal  worker  with  a  company  in  Fort
Worth.  His  performance  for  that  company  was
satisfactory.  Even  though  he  told  his  wife  that
he  had  been  fired,  he  voluntarily  left  on  October
8,  1962,  and  moved  to  Dallas.

On  October  9,  1962  he  went  to  the  Dallas
office  of  the  Texas  Employment  Commission
where  he  expressed  a  reluctance  to  work  in  the
industrial  field.  He  indicated  an  interest  in  writ-
ing. An  employment  counselor  testified,  on  the
basis  of  a  general  aptitude  test  Oswald  had
taken,  that  he  had  some  aptitude  in  that  area,
"because  the  verbal  score  is  high  and  the  clerical
score  is  high."  While  that  counselor  found  that
he  was  qualified  to  handle  many  different  types
of  jobs,  because  of  his  need  for  immediate  em-
ployment she  attempted  to  obtain  for  him  any
job  that  was  available  at  the  time.  Oswald  made
qualifying  marks  in  19  of  23  categories  included
on  the  general  aptitude  examination  and  scored
127  on  the  verbal  test,  as  compared  with  50


percent  of  the  people  taking  it  who  score  less
than  100.  The  counselor  testified  that  there  was
some  indication  that  Oswald  was  capable  of
doing  college  work  and  noted  that  Oswald's
verbal  and  clerical  potential  was  "outstanding."
Employment  Commission  records  concerning
Oswald  stated:  "Well-groomed  &  spoken,  busi-
ness suit,  alert  replies — Expresses  self  extremely
well."  Oswald  said  that  he  hoped  eventually  to
develop  qualifications  for  employment  as  a
junior  executive  through  a  work-study  program
at  a  local  college.  He  indicated,  however,  that
he  would  have  to  delay  that  program  because  of
his  immediate  financial  needs  and  responsibili-
ties.

On  October  11,  1962,  the  Employment  Com-
mission referred  Oswald  to  a  commercial  ad-
vertising photography  firm  in  Dallas,  where  he
was  employed  as  a  trainee  starting  October  12,

1962.  Even  though  Oswald  indicated  that  he
liked  photographic  work,  his  employer  found
that  he  was  not  an  efficient  worker.  He  was  not
able  to  produce  photographic  work  which  ad-
hered with  sufficient  precision  to  the  job  specifi-
cations and  as  a  result  too  much  of  his  work  had
to  be  redone.  He  also  had  difficulty  in  working
with  the  other  employees.  This  was  at  least  in
part  because  of  the  close  physical  confines  in
which  some  of  the  work  had  to  be  done.  He  did
not  seem  to  be  able  to  make  the  acconmaoda-
tions  necessary  when  people  work  imder  such
conditions  and  as  a  result  became  involved  in
conflicts,  some  of  which  were  fairly  heated,  with
his  fellow  employees.

In  February  or  March  of  1963,  it  began  to
appear  that  Oswald  was  havmg  considerable
difficulty  doing  accurate  work  and  in  getting
along  with  the  other  employees.  It  appears  that
his  discharge  was  hastened  by  the  fact  that  he
brought  a  Russian  language  newspaper  to  work.
It  is  not  possible  to  teU  whether  Oswald  did  this
to  provide  an  excuse  for  his  eventual  discharge,
or  whether  he  brought  the  Russian  language
newspaper  with  him  one  day  after  his  other
difficulties  became  clear.  It  is  possible  that  his
immediate  supervisor  noticed  the  newspaper  at
that  time  because  his  attention  had  otherwise
been  drawn  more  directly  to  Oswald.  In  any
event, Oswald was discharged on April 6,

1963,  obstensibly  because  of  his  inefficiency  and
difficult  personality.  His  supervisor  admitted,
however,  that  while  he  did  not  fire  Oswald  be-
cause of  the  newspaper  incident  or  even  weigh
it  heavily  in  his  decision,  "it  didn't  do  his  case
any  good."

Upon  moving  to  New  Orleans  on  April  24,
1963,  Oswald's  employment  problems  became
more  difficult.  He  left  his  wife  and  child  at  the
home  of  a  friend,  Mrs.  Ruth  Paine,  of  Irving,
Tex.  In  New  Orleans  he  obtained  work  as  a
greaser  and  oiler  of  coffee  processing  machines
for  the  William  B.  Reily  Co.,  beginning  May
10,  1963.  After  securing  this  job  and  an  apart-
ment, Oswald  asked  his  wife  to  join  him.  Mrs.
Paine  brought  Oswald's  family  to  New  Orleans.


174


Refusing  to  admit  that  he  could  only  get  work
as  a  greaser,  Oswald  told  his  wife  and  Mrs.
Paine  that  he  was  working  as  a  commercial
photographer.  He  lost  his  job  on  July  19,  1963,
because  his  work  was  not  satisfactory  and  be-
cause he  spent  too  much  time  loitering  in  the
garage  next  door,  where  he  read  rifle  and  hunt-
ing magazines.  Oswald  apparently  concluded
that  his  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  activities
were  not  related  to  his  discharge.  The  correct-
ness of  that  conclusion  is  supported  by  the  fact
that  he  does  not  seem  to  have  been  publicly
identified  with  that  organization  until  August  9,
1963,  almost  a  month  after  he  lost  his  job.

His  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  activities,
however,  made  it  more  difficult  for  him  to  ob-
tain other  employment.  A  placement  interviewer
of  the  Louisiana  Department  of  Labor  who  had
previously  interviewed  Oswald,  saw  him  on  tele-
vision and  heard  a  radio  debate  in  which  he  en-
gaged on  August  21,  1963.  He  consulted  with
his  supervisor  and  "it  was  determined  that  we
should  not  undertake  to  furnish  employment
references  for  him."  Ironically,  he  failed  to  get
a  job  in  another  photographic  firm  after  his  re-
turn to  Dallas  in  October  of  1963,  because  the
president  of  the  photographic  firm  for  which  he
had  previously  worked  told  the  prospective  em-
ployer that  Oswald  was  "kinda  peculiar  some-
times and  that  he  had  some  knowledge  of  the
Russian  language,"  and  that  he  "may  be  a  damn
Communist,  I  can't  tell  you.  If  I  was  you,  I
wouldn't  hire  him."  The  plant  superintendent  of
the  new  firm  testified  that  one  of  the  employees
of  the  old  firm  "implied  that  Oswald's  fellow
employees  did  not  like  him  because  he  was
propagandizing  and  had  been  seen  reading  a
foreign  — newspaper."  As  a  result  Oswald  was
not  hired.  He  subsequently  found  a  job  with  the
Texas  School  Book  Depository  for  which  he
performed  his  duties  satisfactorily.

Attack  on  General  Walker

The  Commission  has  concluded  that  on  April
10,  1963,  Oswald  shot  at  Maj.  Gen.  Edwin  A.
Walker  (Resigned,  U.S.  Army),  demonstrating
once  again  his  propensity  to  act  dramatically
and,  in  this  instance  violently,  in  furtherance  of
his  beliefs.  The  shooting  occurred  2  weeks  be-
fore Oswald  moved  to  New  Orleans  and  a  few
days  after  he  had  been  discharged  by  the  photo-
graphic firm.  As  indicated  in  chapter  IV,  Os-
wald had  been  planning  his  attack  on  General
Walker  for  at  least  1  and  perhaps  as  much  as  2
months.  He  outlined  his  plans  in  a  notebook
and  studied  them  at  considerable  length  before
his  attack.  He  also  studied  Dallas  bus  schedules
to  prepare  for  his  later  use  of  buses  to  travel  to
and  from  General  Walker's  house.  Sometime
after  March  27,  but  according  to  Marina  Os-
wald, prior  to  April  10,  1963,  Oswald  posed  for
two  pictures  with  his  recently  acquired  rifle  and
pistol,  a  copy  of  the  March  24,  1963,  issue  of
the  Worker,  and  the  March  11,  1963,  issue  of
the  Militant  He  told  his  wife  that  he  wanted  to


send  the  pictures  to  the  Militant  and  he  also
asked  her  to  keep  one  of  the  pictures  for  his
daughter,  June.

Following  his  unsuccessful  attack  on  Walker,
Oswald  returned  home.  He  had  left  a  note  for
his  wife  telling  her  what  to  do  in  case  he  were
apprehended,  as  well  as  his  notebook  and  the
pictures  of  himself  holding  the  rifle.  She  testified
that  she  was  agitated  because  she  had  found  the
note  in  Oswald's  room,  where  she  had  gone,
contrary  to  his  instructions,  after  she  became
worried  about  his  absence.  She  indicated  that
she  had  no  advance  knowledge  of  Oswald's
plans,  that  she  became  quite  angry  when  Oswald
told  her  what  he  had  done,  and  that  she  made
him  promise  never  to  repeat  such  a  perform-
ance. She  said  that  she  kept  the  note  to  use
against  him  "if  something  like  that  should  be
repeated  again."  When  asked  if  Oswald  re-
quested the  note  back  she  testified  that:

He  forgot  about  it.  But  apparently  after  he
thought  that  what  he  had  written  in  his  book
might  be  proof  against  him,  and  he  destroyed
it.  [the  book]

She  later  gave  the  following  testimony  [♦indi-
cates the  witness  answered  without  using  the
interpreter]:

Q. After  he  brought  the  rifle  home,  then,
he  showed  you  the  book?
*A.  Yes.

Q.  And  you  said  it  was  not  a  good  idea  to
keep  this  book?
*A.  Yes.

Q.  And  then  he  burned  the  book?
*A.  Yes.

Q.  Did  you  ask  him  why  he  had  not  de-
stroyed the  book  before  he  actually  went  to
shoot  General  Walker?

A.  It  never  came  to  me,  myself,  to  ask  him
that  question.

Marina  Oswald's  testimony  indicates  that  her
husband  was  not  particularly  concerned  about
his  continued  possession  of  the  most  incriminat-
ing sort  of  evidence.  If  he  had  been  successful
and  had  been  apprehended  even  for  routine
questioning,  his  apartment  would  undoubtedly
have  been  searched,  and  his  role  would  have
been  made  clear  by  the  evidence  which  he  had
left  behind.  Leaving  the  note  and  picture  as  he
did  would  seem  to  indicate  that  he  had  con-
sidered the  possibility  of  capture.  Possibly  he
might  have  wanted  to  be  caught,  and  wanted
his  involvement  made  clear  if  he  was  in  fact
apprehended.  Even  after  his  wife  told  him  to
destroy  the  notebook  he  removed  at  least  some
of  the  pictures  which  had  been  pasted  in  it  and
saved  them  among  his  effects,  where  they  were
found  after  the  assassination.  His  behavior  was
entirely  consistent  with  his  wife's  testimony
that:


175


I  asked  him  what  for  he  was  making  all
these  entries  in  the  book  and  he  answered
that  he  wanted  to  leave  a  complete  record  so
that  all  the  details  would  be  in  it.


I  am  guessing  that  perhaps  he  did  it  to  ap-
pear to  be  a  brave  man  in  case  he  were  ar-
rested, but  that  is  my  supposition.


* * *


The  attempt  on  General  Walker's  life  deserves
close  attention  in  any  consideration  of  Oswald's
possible  motive  for  the  assassination  and  the
trail  of  evidence  he  left  behind  him  on  that  oc-
casion. While  there  are  differences  between  the
two  events  as  far  as  Oswald's  actions  and  plan-
ning are  concerned,  there  are  also  similarities
that  should  be  considered.  The  items  which  Os-
wald left  at  home  when  he  made  his  attack  on
Walker  suggest  a  strong  concern  for  his  place  in
history.  If  the  attack  had  succeeded  and  Oswald
had  been  caught,  the  pictures  showing  him  with
his  rifle  and  his  Communist  and  Socialist  Work-
er's Party  newspapers  would  probably  have  ap-
peared on  the  front  pages  of  newspapers  or
magazines  all  over  the  country,  as,  in  fact,  one
of  them  did  appear  after  the  assassination.  The
circumstances  of  the  attack  on  Walker  coupled
with  other  indications  that  Oswald  was  con-
cerned about  his  place  in  history  and  with  the
circumstances  surrounding  the  assassination,
have  led  the  Conmiission  to  believe  that  such
concern  is  an  important  factor  to  consider  in
assessing  possible  motivation  for  the  assassina-
tion.

In  any  event,  the  Walker  incident  indicates
that  in  spite  of  the  belief  among  those  who  knew
him  that  he  was  apparently  not  dangerous,  Os-
wald did  not  lack  the  determination  and  other
traits  required  to  carry  out  a  carefully  planned
killing  of  another  human  being  and  was  willing
to  consummate  such  a  purpose  if  he  thought
there  was  sufficient  reason  to  do  so.  Some  idea
of  what  he  thought  was  sufficient  reason  for
such  an  act  may  be  found  in  the  nature  of  the
motive  that  he  stated  for  his  attack  on  General
Walker.  Marina  Oswald  indicated  that  her  hus-
band had  compared  General  Walker  to  Adolph
Hitler.  She  testified  that  Oswald  said  that  Gen-
eral Walker  "was  a  very  bad  man,  that  he  was  a
fascist,  that  he  was  the  leader  of  a  fascist  or-
ganization, and  when  I  said  that  even  though
all  of  that  might  be  true,  just  the  same  he  had
no  right  to  take  his  life,  he  said  if  someone  had
killed  Hitler  in  time  it  would  have  saved  many
Uves."

Political  Activities

Oswald's  poUtical  activities  after  his  return
to  the  United  States  center  around  his  interest
in  Cuba  and  in  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Commit-
tee. Although,  as  indicated  above,  the  Commis-
sion has  been  unable  to  find  any  credible
evidence  that  he  was  involved  in  any  conspiracy,
his  political  activities  do  provide  insight  into


certain  aspects  of  Oswald's  character  and  into
his possible  motivation for  the  assassination.
While  it  appears  that  he  may  have  distributed
Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  materials  on  one
uneventful  occasion  in  Dallas  sometime  during
the  period  April  6-24,  1963,  Oswald's  first  pub-
lic identification  with  that  cause  was  in  New
Orleans.  There,  in  late  May  and  early  June  of
1963,  under  the  name  Lee  Osborne,  he  had
printed  a  handbiU  headed  in  large  letters  "Hands
Off  Cuba,"  an  application  form  for,  and  a  mem-
bership card  in,  the  New  Orleans  branch  of  the
Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee.  He  first  dis-
tributed his  handbills  and  other  material  un-
eventfully in  the  vicmity  of  the  U.S.S.  Wasp,
which  was  berthed  at  the  Dumaine  Street  wharf
in  New  Orleans,  on  June  16,  1963.  He  dis-
tributed literature  in  downtown  New  Orleans
on  August  9,  1963,  and  was  arrested  because  of
a  dispute  with  three  anti-Castro  Cuban  exiles,
and  again  on  August  16,  1963.  Following  his
arrest,  he  was  interviewed  by  the  police,  and  at
his  own  request,  by  an  agent  of  the  FBI.  On
August  17,  1963,  he  appeared  briefly  on  a  radio
program  and  on  August  21,  1963,  he  debated
over  radio  station  WDSU,  New  Orleans,  with
Carlos  Bringuier,  one  of  the  Cuban  exiles  who
had  been  arrested  with  him  on  August  9.  Brin-
guier claimed  that  on  August  5,  1963,  Oswald
had  attempted  to  infiltrate  an  anti-Castro  or-
ganization with  which  he  was  associated.

While  Oswald  publicly  engaged  in  the  activi-
ties described  above,  his  "organization"  was  a
product  of  his  imagination.  The  imaginary
president  of  the  nonexistent  chapter  was  named
A.  J.  Hidell,  the  name  that  Oswald  used  when
he  purchased  the  assassination  weapon.  Marina
Oswald  said  she  signed  that  name,  apparently
chosen  because  it  rhymed  with  "Fidel,"  to  her
husband's  membership  card  in  the  New  Orleans
chapter.  She  testified  that  he  threatened  to  beat
her  if  she  did  not  do  so.  The  chapter  had  never
been  chartered  by  the  national  FPCC  organiza-
tion. It  appears  to  have  been  a  solitary  operation
on  Oswald's  part  in  spite  of  his  misstatements
to  the  New  Orleans  police  that  it  had  35  mem-
bers, 5  of  which  were  usually  present  at  meetings
which  were  held  once  a  month.

Oswald's  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  activities  may  be
viewed  as  a  very  shrewd  political  operation  in
which  one  man  single  handedly  created  publicity
for  his  cause  or  for  himself.  It  is  also  evidence
of  Oswald's  reluctance  to  describe  events  accu-
rately and  of  his  need  to  present  himself  to
others  as  well  as  to  himself  in  a  light  more  fa-
vorable than  was  justified  by  reality.  This  is  sug-
gested by  his  misleading  and  sometime  untruth-
ful statements  in  his  letters  to  Mr.  V.  T.  Lee,
then  national  director  of  FPCC.  In  one  of  those
letters,  dated  August  1,  1963,  Oswald  wrote  that
an  office  which  he  had  previously  claimed  to
have  rented  for  FPCC  activities  had  been
"promply  closed  3  days  later  for  some  obsure
reasons  by  the  renters,  they  said  something
about  remodeling  ect, I'm  sure  you under-

176


stand."  He  wrote  that  "thousands  of  circulars
were  disturbed"  and  that  he  continued  to  re-
ceive inquiries  through  his  post  oflBce  box  which
he  endeavored  "to  keep  ansewering  to  the  best
of  my  ability."  In  his  letter  to  V.  T.  Lee,  he
stated  that  he  was  then  alone  in  his  efforts  on
behalf  of  FPCC,  but  he  attributed  his  lack  of
support  to  an  attack  by  Cuban  exiles  in  a  street
demonstration  and  being  "ofiBcialy  cautioned"
by  the  police,  events  which  "robbed  me  of  what
support  I  had  leaving  me  alone."

In  spite  of  those  claims,  the  Commission  has
not  been  able  to  uncover  any  evidence  that  any-
one ever  attacked  any  street  demonstration  in
which  Oswald  was  involved,  except  for  the  Brin-
guier  incident  mentioned  above,  which  occurred
8  days  after  Oswald  wrote  the  above  letter  to
V.  T.  Lee.  Bringuier,  who  seemed  to  be  familiar
with  many  anti -Castro  activities  in  New  Orleans,
was  not  aware  of  any  such  incident  Police  re-
ports also  fail  to  reflect  any  activity  on  Oswald's
part  prior  to  August  9,  1963,  except  for  the  un-
eventful distribution  of  literature  at  the  Du-
maine  Street  wharf  in  June.  Furthermore,  the
general  tenor  of  Oswald's  next  letter  to  V.  T.
Lee,  in  which  he  supported  his  report  on  the
Bringuier  incident  with  a  copy  of  the  charges
made  against  him  and  a  newspaper  clipping  re-
porting the  event,  suggests  that  his  previous
story  of  an  attack  by  Cuban  exHes  was  at  least
greatly  exaggerated.  While  the  legend  "FPCC
544  Camp  St. NEW ORLEANS, LA." was
stamped  on  some  literature  that  Oswald  had  in
his  possession  at  the  time  of  his  arrest  in  New
Orleans,  extensive  investigation  was  not  able  to
connect  Oswald  with  that  address,  although  it
did  develop  the  fact  that  an  anti-Castro  organi-
zation had  maintained  offices  there  for  a  period
ending  early  in  1962.  The  Commission  has  not
been  able  to  find  any  other  indication  that  Os-
wald had  rented  an  oflBce  in  New  Orleans.  In
view  of  the  limited  amount  of  public  activity  on
Oswald's  part  before  August  9,  1963,  there  also
seems  to  be  no  basis  for  his  claim  that  he  had
distributed  "thousands"  of  circulars,  especially
since  he  had  claimed  to  have  printed  only  2,000
and  actiially  had  only  1,000  printed.  In  addi-
tion, there  is  no  evidence  that  he  received  any
substantial  amount  of  materials  from  the  na-
tional headquarters.

In  another  letter  to  V.  T.  Lee,  dated  August
17,  1963,  Oswald  wrote  that  he  had  appeared
on  Mr.  William  Stuckey's  15-minute  television
program  over  WDSU-TV  called  "Latin  Ameri-
can Focus"  as  a  result  of  which  he  was  "flooded
with  callers  and  invitations  to  debate's  ect.  as
well  as  people  interested  in  joining  the  F.P.C.C.
New  Orleans  branch."  WDSU  has  no  program
of  any  kind  called  "Latin  American  Focus."
Stuckey  had  a  radio  program  called  "Latin  Lis-
tening Post,"  on  which  Oswald  was  heard  for
less  than  5  minutes  on  August  17,  1963.  It  ap-
pears that  Oswald  had  only  one  caller  in  re-
sponse to  all  of  his  FPCC  activities,  an  agent
of  Bringuier's  attempting  to  learn  more  about


the  true  natiire  of  the  alleged  FPCC  "organiza-
tion" in  New  Orleans.

Oswald's  statements  suggest  that  he  hoped  to
be  flooded  with  callers  and  invitations  to  debate.
This  would  have  made  him  a  real  center  of
attention  as  he  must  have  been  when  he  first
arrived  in  the  Soviet  Union  and  as  he  was  to
some  extent  when  he  returned  to  the  United
States.  The  limited  notoriety  that  Oswald  re-
ceived as  a  result  of  the  street  fracas  and  in  the
subsequent  radio  debate  was  apparently  not
enough  to  satisfy  him.  He  exaggerated  in  his
letters  to  V.  T.  Lee  in  an  apparent  attempt  to
make  himself  and  his  activities  appear  far  more
important  than  they  really  were.

His  attempt  to  express  himself  through  his
Fair  Play  for  Cuba  activities,  however,  was
greatly  impeded  by  the  fact  that  the  radio  de-
bate over  WDSU  on  August  21,  1963,  brought
out  the  history  of  his  defection  to  the  Soviet
Union.  The  basic  facts  of  the  event  were  un-
covered independently  by  WUham  Stuckey,  who
arranged  the  debate,  and  Edward  Butler,  execu-
tive director  of  the  Information  Council  of  the
Americas,  who  also  appeared  on  the  program-
Oswald  was  confronted  with  those  facts  at  the
beginning  of  the  debate  and  was  so  throv,T3  on
the  defensive  by  this  that  he  was  forced  to  state
that  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  was  "not  at  all  Com-
munist controlled  regardless  of  the  fact  that  I
had  the  experience  of  living  in  Russia."

Stuckey  testified  that  uncovering  Oswald's
defection  was  very  important:

I  think  that  we  finished  him  on  that  pro-


gram.


* *


*  because  we  had  publicly  linked
the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  with  a
fellow  who  had  Uved  in  Russia  for  3  years
and  who  was  an  admitted  Marxist

The  interesting  thing,  or  rather  the  danger
involved,  was  the  fact  that  Oswald  seemed  like
such  a  nice,  bright  boy  and  was  extremely
beUevable  before  this.  We  thought  the  fellow
could  probably  get  quite  a  few  members  if
he  was  really  indeed  serious  about  getting
members.  We  figured  after  this  broadcast  of
August  21,  why,  that  was  no  longer  possible.

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  Oswald  had  been  sur-
prised and  was  on  the  defensive  throughout  the
debate,  according  to  Stuckey:  "Mr.  Oswald
handled  himself  very  well,  as  usual."  Stuckey
thought  Oswald  "appeared  to  be  a  ver}'  logical,
intelligent  fellow,"  and  "was  arrested  by  his
cleancutness."  He  did  not  think  Oswald  looked
like  the  "t>'pe"  that  he  would  have  expected  to
find  associating  with  a  group  such  as  the  Fair
Play  for  Cuba  Committee.  Stuckey  thought  that
Oswald  acted  very  much  as  would  a  young
attorney.

Following  the  disclosure  of  his  defection,  Os-
wald sought  advice  from  the  Communist  Party,
U.SA.,  concerning  his  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  ac-
tivity. He  had  previously  sent  apparently  tm-
solicited,  to  the  Party  newspaper,  the  Worker,


177


samples  of  his  photographic  work,  offering  to
contribute  that  sort  of  service  without  charge.
The  Worker  replied:  "Your  kind  offer  is  most
welcomed  and  from  time  to  time  we  shall  call
on  you."  He  later  wrote  to  another  official  of
the  Worker,  seeking  employment,  and  mention-
ing the  praise  he  had  received  for  submitting  his
photographic  work.  He  presented  Arnold  John-
son, Gus  Hall,  and  Benjamin  J.  Davis  honorary
membership  cards  in  his  nonexistent  New  Or-
leans chapter  of  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Com-
mittee, and  advised  them  of  some  of  his  activities
on  behalf  of  the  organization.  Arnold  Johnson,
director  of  the  information  and  lecture  bureau
of  the  Communist  Party,  U.S.A.,  replied  stating:

It  is  good  to  know  that  movements  in  sup-
port of  fair  play  for  Cuba  has  developed  in
New  Orleans  as  weU  as  in  other  cities.  We
do  not  have  any  organizational  ties  with  the
Committee,  and  yet  there  is  much  material
that  we  issue  from  time  to  time  that  is  im-
portant for  anybody  who  is  concerned  about
developments  in  Cuba.

Marina  Oswald  said  that  such  correspondence
from  people  he  considered  important  meant
much  to  Oswald.  After  he  had  begun  his  Cuban
activity  in  New  Orleans  "he  received  a  letter
from  somebody  in  New  York,  some  Communist
— probably  from  New  York — I  am  not  sure
from  where — from  some  Communist  leader  and
he  was  very  happy,  he  felt  that  this  was  a  great
man  that  he  had  received  the  letter  from."  Since
he  seemed  to  feel  that  no  one  else  understood
his  political  views,  the  letter  was  of  great  value
to  him  for  it  "was  proof  *  *  *  that  there  were
people  who  understood  his  activity."

He  anticipated  that  the  fuU  disclosure  of  his
defection  would  hinder  him  in  "the  struggle  for
progress  and  freedom  in  the  United  States"  into
which  Oswald,  in  his  own  words,  had  "thrown"
himseif.  He  sought  advice  from  the  central  com-
mittee of  the  Communist  Party,  U.S.A.,  in  a
letter  dated  August  28,  1963,  about  whether  he
could  "continue  to  fight,  handicapped  as  it  were,
by  my  past  record  *  *  *  [and]  compete  with
anti-progressive  forces,  aboveground  or  weather
in  your  opion  I  should  always  remain  in  the
background,  i.e.  underground."  Stating  that  he
had  used  his  "position"  with  what  he  claimed
to  be  the  local  branch  of  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba
Committee  to  "foster  communist  ideals,"  Os-
wald wrote  that  he  felt  that  he  might  have  com-
promised the  FPCC  and  expressed  concern  lest
"Our  opponents  could  use  my  background  of
residence  in  the  U.S.S.R.  against  any  cause
which  I  join,  by  association,  they  could  say  the
organization  of  which  I  am  a  member,  is  Rus-
sian controled,  ect."  In  reply  Arnold  Johnson
advised  Oswald  that,  while  as  an  American  citi-
zen he  had  a  right  to  participate  in  such  organi-
zations as  he  wished,  "there  are  a  number  of
organizations,  including  possibly  Fair  Play,
which  are  of  a  very  broad  character,  and  often
it  is  advisable  for  some  people  to  remain  in  the


background,  not  underground."

By  August  of  1963,  after  a  short  3  months  in
New  Orleans,  the  city  in  which  he  had  been
bom  and  had  lived  most  of  his  early  life,  Oswald
had  fallen  on  difficult  times.  He  had  not  liked  his
job  as  a  greaser  of  coffee  processing  machinery
and  he  held  it  for  only  a  little  over  2  months.  He
had  not  found  another  job.  His  wife  was  expect-
ing their  second  child  in  October  and  there  was
concern  about  the  cost  which  would  be  involved.
His  brief  foray  on  behalf  of  the  Fair  Play  for
Cuba  Committee  had  failed  to  win  any  support.
While  he  had  drawn  some  attention  to  himself
and  had  actually  appeared  on  two  radio  pro-
grams, he  had  been  attacked  by  Cuban  exiles
and  arrested,  an  event  which  his  wife  thought
upset  him  and  as  a  result  of  which  "he  became
less  active,  he  cooled  off  a  little."  More  ser-
iously, the  facts  of  his  defection  had  become
known,  leaving  him  open  to  almost  unanswer-
able attack  by  those  who  opposed  his  views.  It
would  not  have  been  possible  to  have  followed
Arnold  Johnson's  advice  to  remain  in  the  back-
ground, since  there  was  no  background  to  the
New  Orleans  FPCC  "organization,"  which  con-
sisted solely  of  Oswald.  Furthermore,  he  had
apparently  not  received  any  letters  from  the
national  headquarters  of  FPCC  since  May  29,
1963,  even  though  he  had  written  four  detailed
letters  since  that  time  to  Mr.  V.  T.  Lee  and  had
also  kept  the  national  headquarters  informed  of
each  of  his  changes  of  mailing  address.  Those
events  no  doubt  had  their  effects  on  Oswald.

Interest  in  Cuba

By  August  of  1963,  Oswald  had  for  some  time
been  considering  the  possibility  of  leaving  the
United  States  agaui.  On  June  24,  1963,  he  ap-
plied for  a  new  passport  and  in  late  June  or
early  July  he  told  his  wife  that  he  wanted  to
return  to  the  Soviet  Union  with  her.  She  said
that  he  was  extremely  upset,  very  unhappy,  and
that  he  actually  wept  when  he  told  her  that.  He
said  that  nothing  kept  him  in  the  United  States,
that  he  would  not  lose  anything  if  he  returned  to
the  Soviet  Union,  that  he  wanted  to  be  with  her
and  that  it  would  be  better  to  have  less  and  not
have  to  be  concerned  about  tomorrow.

As  a  result  of  that  conversation,  Marina  Os-
wald wrote  the  Soviet  Embassy  in  Washington
concerning  a  request  she  had  first  made  on  Feb-
ruary 17,  1963,  for  permission  for  herself  and
June  to  return  to  the  Soviet  Union.  While  that
first  request,  made  according  to  Marina  Oswald
at  her  husband's  insistence,  specifically  stated
that  Oswald  was  to  remain  in  the  United  States,
she  wrote  in  her  letter  of  July  1963,  that  "things
are  improving  due  to  the  fact  that  my  husband
expresses  a  sincere  wish  to  return  together  with
me  to  the  USSR."  Unknown  to  his  wife,  how-
ever, Oswald  apparently  enclosed  a  note  with
her  letter  of  July  in  which  he  requested  the
Embassy  to  rush  his  wife's  entrance  visa  because
of  the  impending  birth  of  the  second  child  but
stated  that: "As  for  my  retiun  entrance  visa


178


please  consider  it  separtably."

Thus,  while  Oswald's  real  intentions,  assum-
ing that  they  were  known  to  himself,  are  not
clear,  he  may  not  have  intended  to  go  to  the
Soviet  Union  directly,  if  at  all.  It  appears  that
he  really  wanted  to  go  to  Cuba.  In  his  wife's
words:

I  only  know  that  his  basic  desire  was  to  get  to
Cuba  by  any  means,  and  that  all  the  rest  of  it
was  window  dressing  for  that  purpose.

Marina  Oswald  testified  that  her  husband  en-
gaged in  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  activi-
ties "primarily  for  purposes  of  self-advertising.
He  wanted  to  be  arrested.  I  think  he  wanted  to
get  into  the  newspapers,  so  that  he  would  be
known."  According  to  Marina  Oswald,  he
thought  that  would  help  him  when  he  got  to
Cuba.  He  asked  his  wife  to  help  him  to  hijack
an  airplane  to  get  there,  but  gave  up  that  scheme
when  she  refused.

During  this  period  Oswald  may  have  practiced
opening  and  closing  the  bolt  on  his  rifle  in  a
screened  porch  in  his  apartment.  In  September
he  began  to  review  Spanish.  He  approved  ar-
rangements for  his  family  to  return  to  Irving,
Tex.,  to  live  with  Mrs.  Ruth  Paine.  On  Septem-
ber 20,  1963,  Mrs.  Paine  and  her  two  children
arrived  in  New  Orleans  from  a  trip  to  the  East
Coast  and  left  for  Irving  with  Marina  Oswald
and  June  and  most  of  the  Oswalds'  effects  3  days
later.  While  Marina  Oswald  knew  of  her  hus-
band's plan  to  go  to  Mexico  and  thence  to  Cuba
if  possible,  Mrs.  Paine  was  told  that  Oswald  was
going  to  Houston  and  possibly  Philadelphia  to
look  for  work.

Oswald  left  for  Mexico  City  on  September  25,
1963,  and  arrived  on  September  27,  1963.  He
went  almost  directly  to  the  Cuban  Embassy  and
applied  for  a  visa  to  Cuba  in.  transit  to  Russia.
Representing  himself  as  the  head  of  the  New
Orleans  branch  of  the  "organization  called  'Fair
Play  for  Cuba,'  he  stated  his  desire  that  he  should
be  accepted  as  a  'friend'  of  the  Cuban  Revolu-
tion." He  apparently  based  his  claun  for  a  visa
in  transit  to  Russia  on  his  previous  residence,
his  work  permit  for  that  country,  and  several
undentified  letters  in  the  Russian  language.  The
Cubans  would  not,  however,  give  him  a  visa
until  he  had  received  one  from  the  Soviets,
which  involved  a  delay  of  several  months.  When
faced  with  that  situation  Oswald  became  greatly
agitated,  and  although  he  later  unsuccessfully
attempted  to  obtain  a  Soviet  visa  at  the  Soviet
Embassy  in  Mexico  City,  he  insisted  that  he  was
entitled  to  the  Cuban  visa  because  of  his  back-
ground, partisanship,  and  personal  activities  on
behalf  of  the  Cuban  movement.  He  engaged  in
an  angry  argument  with  the  consul  who  finally
told  him  that  "as  far  as  he  was  concerned  he
would  not  give  him  a  visa"  and  that  "a  person
like  him  [Oswald]  in  place  of  aiding  the  Cuban
Revolution,  was  doing  it  harm."

Oswald  must  have  been  thoroughly  disillu-
sioned when  he  left  Mexico  City  on  October  2,


1963.  In  spite  of  his  former  residence  in  the
Soviet  Union  and  his  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Com-
mittee activities  he  had  been  rebuffed  by  the  of-
ficials of  both  Cuba  and  the  Soviet  Union  in
Mexico  City.  Now  there  appeared  to  be  no
chance  to  get  to  Cuba,  where  he  had  thought
he  might  find  his  communist  ideal.  The  U.S.
Government  would  not  permit  travel  there  and
as  far  as  the  performance  of  the  Cubans  them-
selves was  concerned,  he  was  "disappointed  at
not  being  able  to  get  to  Cuba,  and  he  didn't
have  any  great  desire  to  do  so  any  more  because
he  had  run  into,  as  he  himself  said — into  bu-
reaucracy and  red  tape."

Oswald's  attempt  to  go  to  Cuba  was  another
act  which  expressed  his  hostility  toward  the
United  States  and  its  iostitutions  as  well  as  a
concomitant  attachment  to  a  country  in  which
he  must  have  thought  were  embodied  the  po-
litical principles  to  which  he  had  been  committed
for  so  long.  It  should  be  noted  that  his  interest
in  Cuba  seems  to  have  increased  along  with  the
sense  of  frustration  which  must  have  developed
as — he  experienced  successive  failures  in  his
jobs,  in  his  political  activity,  and  in  his  personal
relationships.  In  retrospect  his  attempt  to  go  to
Cuba  or  return  to  the  Soviet  Union  may  well
have  been  Oswald's  last  escape  hatch,  his  last
gambit  to  extricate  himself  from  the  mediocrity
and  defeat  which  plagued  him  throughout  most
of  his  life.

Oswald's  activities  with  regard  to  Cuba  raise
serious  questions  as  to  how  much  he  might  have
been  motivated  in  the  assassination  by  a  desire
to  aid  the  Castro  regime,  which  President  Ken-
nedy so  outspokenly  criticized.  For  example,  the
Dallas  Times  Herald  of  November  19,  1963,
prominently  reported  President  Kennedy  as  hav-
ing "all  but  invited  the  Cuban  people  today  to
overthrow  Fidel  Castro's  Communist  regime  and
promised  prompt  U.S.  aid  if  they  do."  The  Cas-
tro regime  severely  attacked  President  Kennedy
in  connection  with  the  Bay  of  Pigs  affair,  the
Cuban  missUe  crisis,  the  ban  on  travel  to  Cuba,
the  economic  embargo  against  that  country,  and
the  general  policy  of  the  United  States  with  re-
gard to  Cuba.  An  examination  of  the  Militant,  to
which  Oswald  subscribed,  for  the  3 -month  per-
iod prior  to  the  assassination  reflects  an  extreme-
ly critical  attitude  toward  President  Kennedy
and  his  administration  concerning  Cuban  policy
in  general  as  well  as  on  the  issues  of  automation
and  civil  rights,  issues  which  appeared  to  con-
cern Oswald  a  great  deal.  The  Militant  also  re-
flected a  critical  attitude  toward  President  Ken-
nedy's attempts  to  reduce  tensions  between  the
United  States  and  the  Soviet  Union.  It  also  dealt
with  the  fear  of  the  Castro  regime  that  such  a
policy  might  result  in  its  abandonment  by  the
Soviet  Union.

The  October  7,  1963,  issue  of  the  Militant
reported  Castro  as  saying  Cuba  could  not  ac-
cept a  situation  where  at  the  same  time  the
United  States  was  trying  to  ease  world  tensions
it  also  "was  increasing  its  efforts  to  'tighten  the


179


noose'  around  Cuba."  Castro's  opposition  to
President  Kennedy's  attempt  to  reduce  world
tensions  was  also  reported  in  the  October  1,
1963,  issue  of  the  Worker,  to  which  Oswald
also  subscribed.  In  this  connection  it  should  be
noted  that  in  speaking  of  the  Worker,  Oswald
told  Michael  Paine,  apparently  in  all  seriousness,
that  "you  could  tell  what  they  wanted  you  to
do  *  *  *  by  reading  between  the  lines,  read-
ing the  thing  and  doing  a  little  reading  between
the  lines."

The  general  conflict  of  views  between  the
United  States  and  Cuba  was,  of  course,  reflected
in  other  media  to  such  an  extent  that  there  can
be  no  doubt  that  Oswald  was  aware  generally  of
the  critical  attitude  that  Castro  expressed  about
President  Kennedy.  Oswald  was  asked  during
the  New  Orleans  radio  debate  in  which  he  en-
gaged on  August  21,  1963,  whether  or  not  he
agreed  with  Castro  that  President  Kennedy  was
a  "ruffian  and  a  thief."  He  replied  that  he  "would
not  agree  with  that  particular  wording,"  It
should  also  be  noted,  however,  that  one  witness
testified  that  shortly  before  the  assassination  Os-
wald had  expressed  approval  of  President  Ken-
nedy's active  role  in  the  area  of  civil  rights.

Although  Oswald  could  possibly  have  been
motivated  in  part  by  his  sympathy  for  the  Castro
government,  it  should  be  remembered  that  his
wife  testified  that  he  was  disappointed  with  his
failure  to  get  to  Cuba  and  had  lost  his  desire  to
do  so  because  of  the  bureaucracy  and  red  tape
which  he  had  encountered.  His  unhappy  experi-
ence with  the  Cuban  consul  seems  thus  to  have
reduced  this  enthusiasm  for  the  Castro  regime
and  his  desire  to  go  to  Cuba.

While  some  of  Castro's  more  severe  criticisms
of  President  Kennedy  might  have  led  Oswald  to
believe  that  he  would  be  well  received  in  Cuba
after  he  had  assassinated  the  American  Presi-
dent, it  does  not  appear  that  he  had  any  plans
to  go  there.  Oswald  was  carrying  only  $13.87
at  the  time  of  his  arrest,  although  he  had  left,
apparently  by  design,  $170  in  a  wallet  in  his
wife's  room  in  Irving.  If  there  was  no  conspir-
acy which  would  help  him  escape,  the  possibilty
of  which  has  been  considered  in  chapter  VI,
it  is  unlikely  that  a  reasoning  person  would  plan
to  attempt  to  travel  from  Dallas,  Tex.,  to  Cuba
with  $13.87  when  considerably  greater  resources
were  available  to  him.  The  fact  that  Oswald  left
behind  the  funds  which  might  have  enabled  him
to  reach  Cuba  suggests  the  absence  of  any  plan
to  try  to  flee  there  and  raises  serious  questions
as  to  whether  or  not  he  ever  expected  to  escape.

Possible  Influence  of  Anti-Kennedy  Sentiment
in  Dallas

It  has  been  suggested  that  one  of  the  motivat-
ing influences  operating  on  Lee  Oswald  was  the
atmosphere  in  the  city  of  Dallas,  especially  an
atmosphere  of  extreme  opposition  to  President
Kennedy  that  was  present  in  some  parts  of  the
Dallas  commimity  and  which  received  publicity
there  prior  to  the  assassination.  Some  of  that


feeling  was  expressed  in  the  incident  involving
then  vice-presidential  candidate  Johnson  during
the  1960  campaign,  in  the  treatment  of  Ambas-
sador Adlai  Stevenson  late  in  October  of  1963
and  in  the  extreme  anti-Kennedy  newspaper
advertisement  and  handbills  that  appeared  in
Dallas  at  the  time  of  the  President's  visit  there.
The  Commission  has  found  no  evidence  that
the  extreme  views  expressed  toward  President
Kennedy  by  some  rightwtng  groups  centered  in
Dallas  or  any  other  general  atmosphere  of  hate
or  rightwing  extremism  which  may  have  existed
in  the  city  of  Dallas  had  any  connection  with
Oswald's  actions  on  November  22,  1963.  There
is,  of  course,  no  way  to  judge  what  the  eff'ect
of  the  general  political  ferment  present  in  that
city  might  have  been,  even  though  Oswald  was
aware  of  it.  His  awareness  is  shown  by  a  letter
that  he  wrote  to  Arnold  Johnson  of  the  Com-
munist Party  U.S.A.,  which  Johnson  said  he  did
not  receive  until  after  the  assassination.  The
letter  said  in  part:

On  October  23rd,  I  had  attended  a  ultra-
right  meeting  headed  by  General  Edwin  A.
Walker,  who  lives  in  Dallas.

This  meeting  preceded  by  one  day  the  at-
tack on  A.  E.  Stevenson  at  the  United  Nations
Day  meeting  at  which  he  spoke

As  you  can  see,  political  friction  between
"left"  and  "right"  is  very  great  here.

Could  you  advise  me  as  to  the  general  view
we  have  on  the  American  Civil  Liberties
Union?

In  any  event,  the  Commission  has  been  unable
to  find  any  credible  evidence  that  Oswald  had
direct  contact  or  association  with  any  of  the
personalities  or  groups  epitomizing  or  represent-
ing the  so-called  rightwing,  even  though  he  did,
as  he  told  Johnson,  attend  a  meeting  at  which
General  Walker  spoke  to  approximately  1,300
persons.  Oswald's  writings  and  his  reading  habits
indicate  that  he  had  an  extreme  dislike  of  the
rightwing,  an  attitude  most  clearly  reflected
by  his  attempt  to  shoot  General  Walker.

Relationship  With  Wife

The  relations  between  Lee  and  Marina  Oswald
are  of  great  importance  in  any  attempt  to  under-
stand Oswald's  possible  motivation.  During  the
period  from  Oswald's  return  from  Mexico  to  the
assassination,  he  and  his  wife  spent  every  week-
end but  one  together  at  the  Irving,  Tex.,  home
of  Mrs.  Ruth  Paine,  who  was  then  separated
from  her  husband.  The  sole  exception  was  the
weekend  of  November  16-17,  1963,  the  week-
end before  the  assassination,  when  his  wife  asked
Oswald  not  to  come  to  Irving.  During  the  week,
Oswald  lived  in  a  roominghouse  in  Dallas,  but  he
usually  called  his  wife  on  the  telephone  twice  a
day.  She  testified  that  after  his  return  from  Mexi-
co Oswald  "changed  for  the  better.  He  began  to
treat  me  better.  *  *  *  He  helped  me  more —
although  he  always  did  help.  But  he  was  more


180


attentive."  Marina  Oswald  attributed  that  to
their  living  apart  and  to  the  imminent  birth  of
their  second  child.  She  testified  that  Oswald
"was  very  happy"  about  the  birth  of  the  child.

While  those  considerations  no  doubt  had  an
effect  on  Oswald's  attitude  toward  his  family
it  would  seem  that  the  need  for  support  and
sympathy  after  his  recent  rebuffs  in  Mexico
City  nnight  also  have  been  important  to  him.
It  would  not  have  been  the  first  time  that  Os-
wald sought  closer  ties  wih  his  family  in  time
of  adversity.

His  past  relationships  with  his  wife  had  been
stormy,  however,  and  it  did  not  seem  that  she
respected  him  very  much.  They  had  been  mar-
ried after  a  courtship  of  only  about  6  weeks,  a
part  of  which  Oswald  spent  in  the  hospital.  Os-
wald's diary  reports  that  he  married  his  wife
shortly  after  his  proposal  of  marriage  to  another
girl  had  been  rejected.  He  stated  that  the  other
girl  rejected  him  partly  because  he  was  an
American,  a  fact  that  he  said  she  had  exploited.
He  stated  that  "Inspite  of  fact  I  married  Marina
to  hurt  Ella  [the  girl  that  had  rejected  him]  I
found  myself  in  love  with  Marina."  Many  of  the
people  with  whom  the  Oswalds  became  ac-
quainted after  their  arrival  in  the  United  States
thought  that  Marina  Oswald  had  married  her
husband  primarily  in  the  hope  that  she  would  be
able  to  leave  the  Soviet  Union.  Marina  Oswald
has  denied  this.

Marina  Oswald  expressed  one  aspect  of  her
husband's  attitude  toward  her  when  she  testi-
fied that:

*  *  *  Lee  wanted  me  to  go  to  Russia,  and
I  told  him  that  if  he  wanted  me  to  go  then  that
meant  that  he  didn't  love  me,  and  that  in  that
case  what  was  the  idea  of  coming  to  the
United  States  in  the  first  place.  Lee  would  say
that  it  would  be  better  for  me  if  I  went  to
Russia.  I  did  not  know  why.  I  did  not  know
what  he  had  in  mind.  He  said  he  loved  me
but  that  it  would  be  better  for  me  if  I  went
to  Russia,  and  what  he  had  in  mind  I  don't
know.

On  the  other  hand,  Oswald  objected  to  the  in-
vitation that  his  wife  had  received  to  live  with
Mrs.  Ruth  Paine,  which  Mrs.  Paine  had  made
in  part  to  give  her  an  alternative  to  returning  to
the  Soviet  Union.  Marina  Oswald  wrote  to  Mrs.
Paine  that:  "Many  times  he  [Oswald]  has  re-
called this  matter  to  me  and  said  that  I  am  just
waiting  for  an  opportunity  to  hurt  him.  It  has
been  the  cause  of  many  of  our  arguments."  Os-
wald claimed  that  his  wife  preferred  others  to
him.  He  said  this  about  members  of  the  Russian-
speaking  group  in  the  Dallas-Ft.  Worth  area,
whom  she  said  he  tried  to  forbid  her  from  seeing,
and  also  about  Mrs.  Paine.  He  specifically  made
that  claim  when  his  wife  refused  to  come  to  live
with  him  in  Dallas  as  he  asked  her  to  do  on  the
evening  of  November  21,  1963.

The  instability  of  their  relations  was  probably


a  function  of  the  personalities  of  both  people.
Oswald  was  overbearing  in  relations  with  his
wife.  He  apparentiy  attempted  to  be  "the  Com-
mander" by  dictating  many  of  the  details  of  their
married  life.  While  Marina  Oswald  said  that  her
husband  wanted  her  to  learn  English,  he  made
no  attempt  to  help  her  and  there  are  other  indi-
cations that  he  did  not  want  her  to  learn  that
language.  Oswald  apparently  wished  to  continue
practicing  his  own  Russian  with  her.  Lieutenant
Martello  of  the  New  Orleans  police  testified
that  Oswald  stated  that  he  did  not  speak  English
in  his  family  because  he  did  not  want  them  to
become  Americanized.  Marina  Oswald's  inabil-
ity to  speak  English  also  made  it  more  difficult
for  her  to  have  an  independent  existence  in  this
country.  Oswald  struck  his  wife  on  occasion,  did
not  want  her  to  drink,  smoke  or  wear  cosmetics
and  generally  treated  her  with  lack  of  respect
in  the  presence  of  others.

The  diflBculties  which  Oswald's  problems
would  have  caused  him  in  any  relationship  were
probably  not  reduced  by  his  wife's  conduct.
Katherine  Ford,  with  whom  Marina  Oswald
stayed  during  her  separation  from  her  husband
in  November  of  1962,  thought  that  Marina  Os-
wald was  immature  in  her  thinking  and  partly
responsible  for  the  diflBculties  that  the  Oswalds
were  having  at  that  time.  Mrs.  Ford  said  that
Marina  Oswald  admitted  that  she  provoked  Os-
wald on  occasion.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that
some  provocation  existed.  Oswald  once  struck
his  wife  because  of  a  letter  which  she  wrote  to
a  former  boy  friend  in  Russia.  In  the  letter
Marina  Oswald  stated  that  her  husband  had
changed  a  great  deal  and  that  she  was  very  lonely
in  the  United  States.  She  was  "sorry  that  I  had
not  married  him  [the  Russian  boy  friend]  instead,
that  it  would  have  been  much  easier  for  me."
The  letter  fell  into  Oswald's  hands  when  it  was
returned  to  his  post  office  box  because  of  insuffi-
cient postage,  which  apparently  resulted  from
an  increase  in  postal  rates  of  which  his  wife
had  been  unaware.  Oswald  read  the  letter,  but
refused  to  believe  that  it  was  sincere,  even
though  his  wife  insisted  to  him  that  it  was.  As  a
result  Oswald  struck  her,  as  to  which  she  testi-
fied: "Generally  I  think  that  was  right,  for  such
things  that  is  the  right  thing  to  do.  There  was
some  grounds  for  it."

Although  she  denied  it  in  some  of  her  testi-
mony before  the  Commission,  it  appears  that
Marina  Oswald  also  complained  that  her  hus-
band was  not  able  to  provide  more  material
things  for  her.  On  that  issue  George  De  Mohren-
schildt,  who  was  probably  as  close  to  the  Os-
walds as  anyone  else  during  their  first  stay  in
Dallas,  said  that:

She  was  annoying  him  all  the  time — "Why
don't  you  make  some  money?"  *  *  *  Poor
guy  was  going  out  of  his  mind.  *  *  *

We  told  her  she  should  not  annoy  him —
poor  guy,  he  is  doing  his  best,  "Don't  annoy
him  so  much."  *  *  *


181


The  De  MohrenschUdts  also  testified  that
"right  in  front"  of  Oswald  Marina  Oswald  com-
plained about  Oswald's  inadequacy  as  a  hus-
band. Mrs.  Oswald  told  another  of  her  friends
that  Oswald  was  very  cold  to  her,  that  they  very
seldom  had  sexual  relations  and  that  Oswald
"was  not  a  man."  She  also  told  Mrs.  Paine
that  she  was  not  satisfied  with  her  sexual  rela-
tions with  Oswald.

Marina  Oswald  also  ridiculed  her  husband's
political  views,  thereby  tearing  down  his  view
of  his  own  importance.  He  was  very  much  in-
terested in  autobiographical  works  of  outstand-
ing statesmen  of  the  United  States,  to  whom  his
wife  thought  he  compared  himself.  She  said  he
was  different  from  other  people  in  "At  least  his
imagination,  his  fantasy,  which  was  quite  un-
f oimded,  as  to  the  fact  that  he  was  an  outstanding
man."  She  said  that  she  "always  tried  to  point
out  to  him  that  he  was  a  man  like  any  others  who
were  around  us.  But  he  simply  could  not  imder-
stand  that."  Jeanne  De  Mohrenschildt,  however,
thought  that  Marina  Oswald  "said  things  that
will  hurt  men's  pride."  She  said  that  if  she  ever
spoke  to  her  husband  the  way  Marina  Oswald
spoke  to  her  husband,  "we  would  not  last  long."
Mrs.  De  Mohrenschildt  thought  that  Oswald,
whom  she  compared  to  "a  puppy  dog  that  every-
body kicked,"  had  a  lot  of  good  qualities,  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  "Nobody  said  anythmg
good  about  him."  She  had  "the  impression  that
he  was  just  pushed,  pushed,  pushed,  and  she
[Marina  Oswald]  was  probably  nagging,  nagging,
nagging."  She  thought  that  he  might  not  have  be-
come involved  in  the  assassination  if  people
had  been  kinder  to  him.
In  spite  of  these  difficulties,  however,  and  in
the  face  of  the  economic  problems  that  were
always  with  them,  things  apparently  went  quite
smoothly  from  the  time  Oswald  returned  from
Mexico  tintil  the  weekend  of  November  16-17,
1963.  Mrs.  Paine  was  planning  a  birthday  party
for  one  of  her  children  on  that  weekend  and
her  husband,  Michael,  was  to  be  at  the  house.
Marina  Oswald  said  that  she  knew  her  husband
did  not  like  Michael  Paine  and  so  she  asked  him
not  to  come  out  that  weekend,  even  though  he
wanted  to  do  so.  She  testified  that  she  told  him
"that  he  shouldn't  come  every  week,  that  per-
haps it  is  not  convenient  for  Ruth  that  the  whole
family  be  there,  live  there."  She  testified  that  he
responded:  "As  you  wish.  If  you  don't  want  me
to  come,  I  won't."  Ruth  Paine  testified  that  she
heard  Marina  Oswald  tell  Oswald  about  the
birthday  party.

On  Sunday,  November  17,  1963,  Ruth  Paine
and  Marina  Oswald  decided  to  call  Oswald  at
the  place  where  he  was  hving,  unbeknownst  to
them,  under  the  name  of  O.  H.  Lee.  They  asked
for  Lee  Oswald  who  was  not  called  to  tiie  tele-
phone because  he  was  known  by  the  other  name.
When  Oswald  called  the  next  day  his  wife  be-
came very  angry  about  his  use  of  the  alias.  He
said  that  he  used  it  because  "he  did  not  want  his
landlady  to  know  his  real  name  because  she


might  read  in  the  paper  of  the  fact  that  he  had
been  in  Russia  and  that  he  had  been  ques-
tioned." Oswald  also  said  that  he  did  not  want
the  FBI  to  know  where  he  lived  "Because  their
visits  were  not  very  pleasant  for  him  and  he
thought  that  he  loses  jobs  because  the  FBI  visits
the  place  of  his  employment."  While  the  facts  of
his  defection  had  become  known  in  New  Or-
leans as  a  result  of  his  radio  debate  with  Brin-
guier,  it  would  appear  to  be  unlikely  that  his
landlady  in  Dallas  would  see  anything  in  the
newspaper  about  his  defection,  unless  he  en-
gaged in  activities  similar  to  those  which  had  led
to  the  disclosure  of  his  defection  in  New  Or-
leans. Furthermore,  even  though  it  appears  that
at  times  Oswald  was  really  upset  by  visits  of  the
FBI,  it  does  not  appear  that  he  ever  lost  his  job
because  of  its  activities,  although  he  may  well
not  have  been  aware  of  that  fact.

While  Oswald's  concern  about  the  FBI  had
some  basis  in  fact,  in  that  FBI  agents  had  inter-
viewed him  in  the  past  and  had  renewed  their
interest  to  some  extent  after  his  Fair  Play  for
Cuba  Committee  activities  had  become  known,
he  exaggerated  their  concern  for  him.  Marina
Oswald  thought  he  did  so  in  order  to  emphasize
his  importance.  For  example,  in  his  letter  of
November  9,  1963,  to  the  Soviet  Embassy  in
Washington,  he  asked  about  the  entrance  visas
for  which  he  and  his  wife  had  previously  ap-
plied. He  absolved  the  Soviet  Embassy  in  Mexi-
co City  of  any  blame  for  his  difficulties  there.
He  advised  the  Washington  Embassy  that  the
FBI  was  "not  now"  interested  in  his  Fair  Play
for  Cuba  Committee  activities,  but  noted  that
the  FBI  "has  visited  us  here  in  Dallas,  Texas,  on
November  1.  Agent  James  P.  Hosty  warned  me
that  if  I  engaged  in  F.P.C.C.  activities  in  Texas
the  F.B.I,  will  again  take  an  'interest'  in  me."
Neither  Hosty  nor  any  other  agent  of  the  FBI
spoke  to  Oswald  on  any  subject  from  August
10,  1963,  to  the  time  of  the  assassination.  The
claimed  warning  was  one  more  of  Oswald's
fabrications.  Hosty  had  come  to  the  Paioe  resi-
dence on  November  1  and  5,  1963,  but  did  not
issue  any  such  warning  or  suggest  that  Marina
Oswald  defect  from  the  Soviet  Union  and  re-
main in  the  United  States  imder  FBI  protection,
as  Oswald  went  on  to  say.  In  Oswald's  imagina-
tion "I  and  my  wife  strongly  protested  these
tactics  by  the  notorious  F.B.I."  In  fact,  his  vdfe
testified  that  she  only  said  that  she  would  prefer
not  to  receive  any  more  visits  from  the  Bureau
because  of  the  'Very  exciting  and  disturbing
effect"  they  had  upon  her  husband,  who  was
not  even  present  at  that  time.

The  arguments  he  used  to  justify  his  use  of
the  alias  suggest  that  Oswald  may  have  come
to  think  that  the  whole  world  was  becoming  in-
volved in  an  increasingly  complex  conspiracy
against  him.  He  may  have  felt  he  could  never
tell  when  the  FBI  was  going  to  appear  on  the
scene  or  who  else  was  going  to  find  out  about  his
defection  and  use  it  against  him  as  had  been
done  in  New  Orleans.  On  the  other  hand,  the


182


concern  he  expressed  about  the  FBI  may  have
been  just  another  story  to  support  the  objective
he  sought  in  his  letter.

Those  arguments,  however,  were  not  persua-
sive to  Marina  Oswald,  to  whom  "it  was  nothing
terrible  if  people  were  to  find  out  that  he  had
been  in  Russia."  She  asked  Oswald:  "After  all,
when  will  all  your  foolishness  come  to  an  end?
All  of  these  comedies.  First  one  thing  and  then
another.  And  now  this  fictitious  name."  She
said:  "On  Monday  [November  18,  1963]  he
called  several  times,  but  after  I  hung  up  on
him  and  didn't  want  to  talk  to  him  he  did  not
call  again.  He  then  arrived  on  Thursday  [Novem-
ber 21,  1963]."

The  events  of  that  evening  can  best  be  ap-
preciated through  Marina  Oswald's  testimony:

Q.  Did  your  husband  give  any  reason  for
coming  home  on  Thursday?

A.  He  said  that  he  was  lonely  because  he
hadn't  come  the  preceding  weekend,  and  he
wanted  to  make  his  peace  with  me.

Q.  Did  you  say  anything  to  him  then?

A.  He  tried  to  talk  to  me  but  I  would  not
answer  him,  and  he  was  very  upset.

Q.  Were  you  upset  with  him?

A.  I  was  angry,  of  course.  He  was  not  angry
■he  was  upset  I  was  angry.  He  tried  very
hard  to  please  me.  He  spent  quite  a  bit  of  time
putting  away  diapers  and  played  with  the
children  on  (he  street.

Q.  How  did  you  indicate  to  him  that  you
were  angry  with  him?

A.  By  not  talking  to  him.

Q.  And  how  did  he  show  that  he  was  upset?

A.  He  was  upset  over  the  fact  that  I  would
not  answer  him.  He  tried  to  start  a  conversa-
tion with  me  several  times,  but  I  would  not
answer.  And  he  said  that  he  didn't  want  me
to  be  angry  at  him  because  this  upsets  him.

On  that  day,  he  suggested  that  we  rent  an
apartment  in  Dallas.  He  said  that  he  was  tired
of  living  alone  and  perhaps  the  reason  for
my  being  so  angry  was  the  fact  that  we  were
not  living  together.  That  if  I  want  to  he  would
rent  an  apartment  in  Dallas  tomorrow — that
he  didn't  want  me  to  remain  with  Ruth  any
longer,  but  wanted  me  to  live  with  him  in
Dallas.

He  repeated  this  not  once  but  several  times,
but  I  refused.  And  he  said  that  once  again  I
was  preferring  my  friends  to  him,  and  that
I  didn't  need  him.

Q.  What  did  you  say  to  that?

A.  I  said  it  would  be  better  if  I  remained
with  Ruth  until  the  holidays,  he  would  come,
and  we  would  all  meet  together.  That  this
was  better  because  while  he  was  hving  alone
and  I  stayed  with  Ruth,  we  were  spending  less
money.  And  I  told  him  to  buy  me  a  washing
machine,  because  two  children  it  became  too
diflBcult  to  wash  by  hand.

Q.  What  did  he  say  to that?


A.  He  said  he  would  buy  me  a  washing
machine.

Q.  What  did  you  say  to  that?

A.  Thank  you.  That  it  would  be  better  if  he
bought  something  for  himself — that  I  would
manage.

That  night  Oswald  went  to  bed  before  his
wife  retired.  She  did  not  speak  to  him  when  she
joined  him  there,  although  she  thought  that  he
was  still  awake.  The  next  morning  he  left  for
work  before  anyone  else  arose.  For  the  first  time
he  left  his  wedding  ring  in  a  cup  on  the  dresser
in  his  room.  He  also  left  $17  in  a  wallet  in  one  of
the  dresser  drawers.  He  took  with  him  $13.87
and  the  long  brown  package  that  Frazier  and
Mrs.  Randle  saw  him  carry  and  which  he  was
to  take  to  the  School  Book  Depository.

The  Unanswered  Question

No  one  will  ever  know  what  passed  through
Oswald's  mind  during  the  week  before  Novem-
ber 22,  1963.  Instead  of  returning  to  Irving  on
November  15  for  his  customary  weekend  visit,
he  remained  in  Dallas  at  his  wife's  suggestion
because  of  the  birthday  party.  He  had  argued
with  her  over  the  use  of  an  alias  and  had  not
called  her  after  that  argument,  although  he  usu-
ally telephoned  once  or  twice  a  day.  Then  on
Thursday  morning,  November  21,  he  asked
Frazier  for  a  ride  to  Irving  that  night,  stating
falsely  that  he  wanted  to  pick  up  some  curtain
rods  to  put  ki  an  apartment.

He  must  have  planned  his  attack  at  the  very
latest  prior  to  Thursday  morning  when  he  spoke
to  Frazier.  There  is,  of  course,  no  way  to  deter-
mine the  degree  to  which  he  was  committed  to
his  plan  at  that  time.  While  there  is  no  way  to
tell  when  he  first  began  to  think  specifically  of
assassinating  the  President  it  should  be  noted
that  mention  of  the  Trade  Mart  as  the  expected
site  of  the  Presidential  luncheon  appeared  in
The  Dallas  Times  Herald  on  November  15,
1963.  The  next  day  that  paper  announced  the
final  approval  of  the  Trade  Mart  as  the  luncheon
site  and  stated  that  the  motorcade  "apparently
will  loop  through  the  downtown  area,  probably
on  Main  Street,  en  route  from  DaUas  Lx>ve
Field"  on  its  way  to  the  Trade  Mart  on  Stem-
mons  Freeway.  Anyone  who  was  familiaj  with
that  area  of  Dallas  would  have  known  that  the
motorcade  would  probably  pass  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  to  get  from  Main  Street
onto  the  Stemmons  Freeway.  That  fact  was
made  precisely  clear  in  subsequent  news  stories
on  November  19,  20,  and  22.

On  November  15,  1963,  the  same  day  that
his  wife  told  him  not  to  come  to  Irving,  Oswald
could  have  assumed  that  the  Presidential  motor-
cade would  pass  in  front  of  his  place  of  work.
Whether  he  thought  about  assassinating  the  Pres-
ident over  the  weekend  can  never  be  known,  but
it  is  reasonably  certain  that  over  the  weekend
he  did  think  about  his  wife's  request  that  he  not
come  to  Irving,  which  was  prompted  by  the


183


birthday  party  being  held  at  the  Paine  home.  Os-
wald had  a  highly  exaggerated  sense  of  his  own
importance,  but  he  had  failed  at  almost  every-
thing he  had  ever  tried  to  do.  He  had  great  diffi-
culty in  establishing  meaningful  relations  with
other  people.  Except  for  his  famUy  he  was  com-
pletely alone.  Even  though  he  had  searched — in
the  Marine  Corps,  in  his  ideal  of  communism,  in
the  Soviet  Union  and  in  his  attempt  to  get  to
Cuba — he  had  never  found  anything  to  which
he  felt  he  could  really  belong.

After  he  retunied  from  his  trip  to  Mexico
where  his  application  to  go  to  Cuba  had  been
sharply  rejected,  it  must  have  appeared  to  him
that  he  was  unable  to  command  even  the  atten-
tion of  his  family.  He  could  not  keep  them  with
him  in  Dallas,  where  at  least  he  could  see  his
children  whom,  several  witnesses  testified,  he
seemed  to  love.  His  family  lived  with  Mrs.
Paine,  ostensibly  because  Oswald  could  not  af-
ford to  keep  an  apartment  in  Dallas,  but  it  was
also,  at  least  in  part,  because  his  wife  did  not
want  to  live  there  with  him.  Now  it  appeared
that  he  was  not  welcome  at  the  Paine  home,
where  he  had  spent  every  previous  weekend
since  his  return  from  Mexico  and  his  wife  was
once  again  calling  into  question  his  judgment,
this  time  concerning  his  use  of  an  alias.

The  conversation  on  Monday,  November  18,
1963,  ended  when  Marina  Oswald  hung  up  and
refused  to  talk  to  him.  Although  he  may  long
before  have  decided  on  the  course  he  was  to
follow  and  may  have  told  his  wife  the  things  he
did  on  the  evening  of  November  21,  1963,
merely  to  disarm  her  and  to  provide  a  justifica-
tion of  sorts,  both  she  and  Mrs.  Paine  thought
he  had  come  home  to  make  up  after  the  fight  on
Monday.  Thoughts  of  his  personal  difficulties
must  have  been  at  least  partly  on  his  mind  when
he  went  to  Irving  on  Thursday  night  and  told
his  wife  that  he  was  lonely,  that  he  wanted  to
make  peace  with  her  and  bring  his  family  to
Dallas  where  they  could  live  with  him  again.

The  Commission  does  not  believe  that  the
relations  between  Oswald  and  his  wife  caused
him  to  assassinate  the  President.  It  is  unlikely
that  the  motivation  was  that  simple.  The  feelings
of  hostility  and  aggression  which  seem  to  have
played  such  an  important  part  in  Oswald's  life
were  part  of  his  character  long  before  he  met
his  wife  and  such  a  favorable  opportunity  to
strike  at  a  figure  as  great  as  the  President  would
probably  never  have  come  to  him  again.

Oswald's  behavior  after  the  assassination
throws  little  light  on  his  motives.  The  fact  that
he  took  so  little  money  with  him  when  he  left
Irving  in  the  morning  indicates  that  he  did  not
expect  to  get  very  far  from  Dallas  on  his  ovm
and  suggests  the  possibility,  as  did  his  note  to  his
wife  just  prior  to  the  attempt  on  General  Walker,


that  he  did  not  expect  to  escape  at  all.  On  the
other  hand,  he  could  have  traveled  some  distance
with  the  money  he  did  have  and  he  did  return
to  his  room  where  he  obtained  his  revolver.  He
then  killed  Patrolman  Tippit  when  that  police
officer  apparently  tried  to  question  him  after  he
had  left  his  roominghouse  and  he  vigorously
resisted  arrest  when  he  was  finally  apprehended
in  the  Texas  Theatre.  Although  it  is  not  fully
cortoborated  by  others  who  were  present,  two
officers  have  testified  that  at  the  time  of  his  ar-
rest Oswald  said  something  to  the  eflfect  that
"it's  all  over  now."

Oswald  was  overbearing  and  arrogant
throughout  much  of  the  time  between  his  arrest
and  his  own  death.  He  consistently  refused  to
admit  involvement  in  the  assassination  or  in  the
killing  of  Patrolman  Tippit.  While  he  did  be-
come enraged  at  at  least  one  point  in  his  interro-
gation, the  testimony  of  the  officers  present  in-
dicates that  he  handled  himself  with  consider-
able composure  during  his  questioning.  He  ad-
mitted nothing  that  would  damage  him  but  dis-
cussed other  matters  quite  freely.  His  denials
under  questioning,  which  have  no  probative
value  in  view  of  the  many  readily  demonstrable
lies  he  told  at  that  time  and  in  the  face  of  the
overwhelming  evidence  against  him  which  has
been  set  forth  above,  only  served  to  prolong  the
period  during  which  he  was  the  center  of  the
attention  of  the  entire  world.

Conclusion

Many  factors  were  imdoubtedly  involved  in
Oswald's  motivation  for  the  assassination,  and
the  Commission  does  not  believe  that  it  can  as-
cribe to  him  any  one  motive  or  group  of  mo-
tives. It  is  apparent,  however,  that  Oswald  was
moved  by  an  overriding  hostility  to  his  environ-
ment. He  does  not  appear  to  have  been  able  to
establish  meaningful  relationships  with  other
people.  He  was  perpetually  discontented  with
the  world  around  him.  Lx)ng  before  the  assassi-
nation he  expressed  his  hatred  for  American  so-
ciety and  acted  in  protest  against  it  Oswald's
search  for  what  he  conceived  to  be  the  perfect
society  was  doomed  from  the  start.  He  sought
for  himself  a  place  in  history — a  role  as  the
"great  man"  who  would  be  recognized  as  having
been  in  advance  of  his  times.  His  commitment
to  Marxism  and  communism  appears  to  have
been  another  important  factor  in  his  motivation.
He  also  had  demonstrated  a  capacity  to  act  de-
cisively and  without  regard  to  the  consequences
when  such  action  would  further  his  aims  of  the
moment.  Out  of  these  and  the  many  other  fac-
tors which  may  have  molded  the  character  of
Lee  Harvey  Oswald  there  emerged  a  man  cap-
able of  assassinating  President  Kennedy.


184


Chapter  VHI


THE  PROTECTION  OF  THE  PRESffiENT


IN  THE  100  years  since  1865  four  Presidents
of  the  United  States  have  been  assassinated —
Abraham  Lincoln,  James  A.  Garfield,  William
McKinley,  and  John  F.  Kennedy.  During  this
same  period  there  were  three  other  attacks  on
the  life  of  a  President,  a  President-elect,  and  a
candidate  for  the  Presidency,  which  narrowly
failed:  on  Theodore  Roosevelt  whUe  campaign-
ing in  October  of  1912;  on  President-elect  Frank-
lin Delano  Roosevelt,  when  visiting  Miami  on
February  15,  1933;  and  on  President  Harry  S.
Truman  on  November  1,  1950,  when  his  tem-
porary residence,  Blair  House,  was  attacked  by
Puerto  Rican  Nationalists.  One  out  of  every
five  Presidents  since  1865  has  been  assassinated;
there  have  been  attempts  on  the  lives  of  one  out
of  every  three.

Prompted  by  these  dismaying  statistics,  the
Commission  has  inquired  into  the  problems  and
methods  of  Presidential  protection  in  effect  at
the  time  of  President  Kennedy's  assassination.
This  study  has  led  the  Commission  to  conclude
that  the  public  interest  might  be  served  by  any
contribution  it  can  make  to  the  improvement  of
protective  arrangements.  The  Commission  has
not  undertaken  a  comprehensive  examination  of
aU  facets  of  this  subject;  rather,  it  has  devoted
its  time  and  resources  to  those  broader  aspects
of  Presidential  protection  to  which  the  events
of  last  November  called  attention.

In  this  part  of  its  inquiry  the  Commission  has
had  fuU  access  to  a  major  study  of  all  phases
of  protective  activities  prepared  by  the  Secret
Service  for  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  follow-
ing the  assassination.  As  a  result  of  this  study,
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  has  prepared  a
planning  document  dated  August  27,  1964,
which  recommends  additional  personnel  and
facilities  to  enable  the  Secret  Service  to  expand
its  protection  capabilities.  The  Secretary  of  the
Treasury  submitted  this  planning  document  on
August  31,  1964,  to  the  Bureau  of  the  Budget
for  review  and  approval.  This  planning  docu-
ment has  been  made  a  part  of  the  Commission's
published  record;  the  underlying  staff  and  con-
sultants' reports  reviewed  by  the  Commission
have  not,  since  a  disclosure  of  such  detailed
information  relating  to  protective  measures
might  undermine  present  methods  of  protecting
the  President.  However,  all  information  con-
sidered by  the  Commission  which  pertains  to
the  protective  function  as  it  was  carried  out  in
Dallas  has  been  published  as  part  of  this  report

The  protection  of  the  President  of  the  United
States  is  an  immensely  difficult  and  complex  task.
It  is  unlikely  that  measures  can  be  devised  to


eliminate  entirely  the  multitude  of  diverse  dan-
gers that  may  arise,  particularly  when  the  Presi-
dent is  traveling  in  this  country  or  abroad.  The
protective  task  is  further  compUcated  by  the  re-
luctance of  Presidents  to  take  security  precau-
tions which  might  interfere  with  the  performance
of  their  duties,  or  their  desire  to  have  frequent
and  easy  access  to  the  people.  The  adequacy  of
existing  procediores  can  fairly  be  assessed  only
after  fuU  consideration  of  the  difficulty  of  the
protective  assignment,  with  particular  attention
to  the  diverse  roles  which  the  President  is  ex-
pected to  fill.  After  reviewing  this  aspect  of  the
matter  this  chapter  will  set  forth  the  Commis-
sion's conclusions  regarding  certain  protective
measures  in  force  at  the  time  of  the  Dallas
trip  and  propose  recommendations  for  improve-
ments.


THE  NATURE  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE
ASSIGNMENT

The  President  is  Head  of  State,  Chief  Execu-
tive, Commander  in  Chief,  and  leader  of  a  po-
litical party.  As  the  ceremonial  head  of  the
Government  the  President  must  discharge  a  ^ide
range  of  public  duties,  not  only  in  Washington
but  throughout  the  land.  In  this  role  he  appears
to  the  American  people,  in  the  words  of  William
Howard  Taft,  as  "the  personal  embodiment  and
representative  of  their  dignity  and  majest>'."
As  Chief  Executive,  the  President  controls  the
exercise  of  the  vast,  almost  incalculable  powers
of  the  executive  branch  of  the  Federal  Govern-
ment As  Commander  in  Chief  of  the  Armed
Forces,  he  must  maintain  ultimate  authority
over  the  development  and  disposition  of  our
military  power.  Finally,  in  accordance  with
George  Washington's  maxim  that  Americans
have  a  government  "of  accommodation  as  well
as  a  government  of  laws,"  it  is  the  President's
right  and  duty  to  be  the  active  leader  of  his
party,  as  when  he  seeks  to  be  reelected  or  to
maintain  his  party  in  power.

In  all  of  these  roles  the  President  must  go  to
the  people.  Exposure  of  the  President  to  public
view  through  travel  among  the  people  of  this
country  is  a  great  and  historic  tradition  of
American  life.  Desired  by  both  the  President
and  the  public,  it  is  an  indispensable  means  of
communication  between  the  two.  More  often
than  not,  Presidential  journeys  have  served
more  than  one  purpose  at  the  same  time:  cere-
monial, administrative,  pohtical.

From  George  Washington  to  John  F.  Ken-


185


nedy,  such  journeys  have  been  a  normal  part
of  the  President's  activities.  To  promote  nation-
wide acceptance  of  his  administration  Washing-
ton made  grand  tours  that  served  also  to  excite
interest  in  the  Presidency.  In  recent  years,  Presi-
dential journeys  have  been  frequent  and  exten-
sive, partly  because  of  the  greater  speed  and
comfort  of  travel  and  partly  because  of  the
greater  demands  made  on  the  President.  It  is
now  possible  for  Presidents  to  travel  the  length
and  breadth  of  a  land  far  larger  than  the  United
States  in  1789  in  less  time  than  it  took  George
Washington  to  travel  from  New  York  to  Mount
Vernon  or  Thomas  Jefferson  from  Washington
to  Monticello.  During  his  Presidency,  Franklin
D.  Roosevelt  made  almost  400  journeys  and
traveled  more  than  350,000  miles.  Since  1945,
Roosevelt's  successors  have  ranged  the  world,
and  their  foreign  journeys  have  come  to  be  ac-
cepted as  normal  rather  than  extraordinary.
John  F.  Kennedy's  journey  to  Texas  in  No-
vember 1963  was  in  this  tradition.  His  friend  and
Special  Assistant  Kenneth  O'Donnell,  who  ac-
companied him  on  his  last  visit  to  Dallas,  stated
the  President's  views  of  his  responsibilities  with
simplicity  and  clarity:

The  President's  views  of  his  responsibilities
as  President  of  the  United  States  were  that  he
meet  the  people,  that  he  go  out  to  their  homes
and  see  them,  and  allow  them  to  see  him,  and
discuss,  if  possible,  the  views  of  the  world  as
he  sees  it,  the  problems  of  the  country  as  he
sees  them.  And  he  felt  that  leaving  Washing-
ton for  the  President  of  the  United  States
was  a  most  necessary — not  only  for  the  peo-
ple, but  for  the  President  himself,  that  he  ex-
pose himself  to  the  actual  basic  problems  that
were  disturbing  the  American  people.  It
helped  him  in  his  job  here,  he  was  able  to  come
back  here  vidth  a  fresh  view  of  many  things.
I  think  he  felt  very  strongly  that  the  President
ought  to  get  out  of  Washington,  and  go  meet
the  people  on  a  regular  basis.

Whatever  their  purpose,  Presidential  journeys
have  greatly  enlarged  and  complicated  the  task
of  protecting  the  President.  The  Secret  Service
and  the  Federal,  State,  and  local  law  enforce-
ment agencies  which  cooperate  with  it,  have
been  confronted  in  recent  years  with  increas-
ingly difficult  problems,  created  by  the  greater
exposure  of  the  President  during  his  travels
and  the  greater  diversity  of  the  audiences  he  must
face  in  a  world  torn  by  conflicting  ideologies.

If  the  sole  goal  were  to  protect  the  life  of  the
President,  it  could  be  accomplished  with  rea-
sonable assurance  despite  the  multiple  roles  he
must  play.  But  his  very  position  as  representa-
tive of  the  people  prevents  him  from  effectively
shielding  himself  from  the  people.  He  cannot
and  will  not  take  the  precautions  of  a  dictator
or  a  sovereign.  Under  our  system,  measures
must  be  sought  to  afford  security  without  im-
peding the  President's  performance  of  his  many
functions.  The  protection  of  the  President  must


be  thorough  but  inconspicuous  to  avoid  even  the
suggestion  of  a  garrison  state.  The  rights  of
private  individuals  must  not  be  infringed.  If  the
protective  job  is  well  done,  its  performance  will
be  evident  only  in  the  unexceptional  fact  of  its
success.  The  men  in  charge  of  protecting  the
President,  confronted  by  complex  problems  and
limited  as  they  are  in  the  measures  they  may
employ,  must  depend  upon  the  utmost  coopera-
tion and  understanding  from  the  public  and  the
President.

The  problem  and  the  reasonable  approach
to  its  solution  were  ably  stated  in  a  memorandum
prepared  by  FBI  Director  J.  Edgar  Hoover  for
the  President  soon  after  the  assassination:

The  degree  of  security  that  can  be  afforded
the  President  of  the  United  States  is  depend-
ent to  a  considerable  extent  upon  the  degree
of  contact  with  the  general  public  desired  by
the  President.  Absolute  security  is  neither
practical  nor  possible.  An  approach  to  com-
plete security  would  require  the  President  to
operate  in  a  sort  of  vacuum,  isolated  from  the
general  public  and  behind  impregnable  bar-
riers. His  travel  would  be  in  secret;  his  pub-
lic appearances  would  be  behind  bulletproof
glass,

A  more  practical  approach  necessitates
compromise.  Any  travel,  any  contact  with
the  general  public,  involves  a  calculated  risk
on  the  part  of  the  President  and  the  men  re-
sponsible for  his  protection.  Such  risks  can
be  lessened  when  the  President  recognizes  the
security  problem,  has  confidence  in  the  dedi-
cated Secret  Service  men  who  are  ready  to
lay  down  their  lives  for  him  and  accepts  the
necessary  security  precautions  which  they
recommend.  Many  Presidents  have  been  un-
derstandably impatient  with  the  security  pre-
cautions which  many  years  of  experience
dictate  because  these  precautions  reduce  the
President's  privacy  and  the  access  to  him  of
the  people  of  the  country.  Nevertheless  the
procedures  and  advice  should  be  accepted  if
the  President  wishes  to  have  any  security.


EVALUATION  OF  PRESEDENTIAL
PROTECTION  AT  THE  TIME  OF  THE
ASSASSINATION  OF  PRESIDENT
KENNEDY

The  history  of  Presidential  protection  shows
growing  recognition  over  the  years  that  the  job
must  be  done  by  able,  dedicated,  thoroughly  pro-
fessional personnel,  using  the  best  technical
equipment  that  can  be  devised.  The  assassination
of  President  Kennedy  demands  an  examination
of  the  protective  measures  employed  to  safe-
guard him  and  an  inquiry  whether  improve-
ments can  be  made  which  will  reduce  the  risk
of  another  such  tragedy.  This  section  considers
first  the  means  used  to  locate  potential  sources
of  danger  to  the  President  in  time  to  take  ap-


186


propriate  precautions.  In  this  connection  the
information  available  to  Federal  agencies  about
Lee  Harvey  Oswald  is  set  out  and  the  reasons
why  this  information  was  not  furnished  to  the
Secret  Service  appraised.  Second,  the  adequacy
of  other  advance  preparations  for  the  security
of  the  President  during  his  visit  to  Dallas,  largely
measures  taken  by  the  Secret  Service,  is  con-
sidered. Finally,  the  performance  of  those
charged  with  the  immediate  responsibility  of
protecting  the  President  on  November  22  is  re-
viewed.

Intelligence  Functions  Relating  to  Presidential
Protection  at  the  Time  of  the  Dallas  Trip

A  basic  element  of  Presidential  protection  is
the  identification  and  elimination  of  possible
sources  of  danger  to  the  President  before  the
danger  becomes  actual  The  SeCTet  Service  has
attempted  to  perform  this  function  through  the
activities  of  its  Protective  Research  Section  and
requests  to  other  agencies.  Federal  and  local,  for
useful  information.  The  Commission  has  con-
cluded that  at  the  time  of  the  assassination  the
arrangements  relied  upon  by  the  Secret  Service
to  perform  this  function  were  seriously  deficient.

Adequacy  of  preventive  intelligence  opera-
tion of  the  Secret  Service. — The  main  job  of  the
Protective  Research  Section  (PRS;  is  to  collect,
process,  and  evaluate  information  about  persons
or  groups  who  may  be  a  danger  to  the  President
In  addition  to  this  fimction,  PRS  is  responsible
for  such  tasks  as  obtaining  clearance  of  some
categories  of  White  House  employees  and  all
tradesmen  who  service  the  White  House,  the
security  processing  of  gifts  sent  to  the  President,
and  technical  inspections  against  covert  listening
devices.  At  the  time  of  the  assassination  PRS
was  a  very  small  group,  comprised  of  12  spe-
cialists and  3  clerks.

Many  persons  call  themselves  to  the  atten-
tion of  PRS  by  attempting  to  visit  the  President
for  bizarre  reasons  or  by  writing  or  in  some
other  way  attempting  to  communicate  with  bim
in  a  threatening  or  abusive  manner  or  with
undue  persistence.  Robert  I.  Bouck,  special  agent
in  charge  of  PRS,  estimated  that  most  of  the
material  received  by  his  office  originated  in  this
fashion  or  from  the  occasional  investigations
initiated  by  the  Secret  Service,  while  the  balance
was  furnished  to  PRS  by  other  Federal  agencies,
with  primary  source  being  the  FBL  The  total
volume  of  information  received  by  PRS  has
risen  steadily.  In  1943  PRS  received  approxi-
mately 9,000  items  of  information;  in  1953  this
had  increased  to  more  than  17,000  items;  in
1963  the  total  exceeded  32,000  items.  Since
many  items  may  pertain  to  a  single  case,  these
figures  do  not  show  the  caseload.  In  the  period
from  November  1961  to  November  1963,  PRS
received  items  in  8,709  cases.

Before  the  assassination  of  President  Ken-
nedy, PRS  expressed  its  interest  in  receiving
information  on  suspects  in  ver>'  general  terms.
For  example,  PRS  instructed  the  White  House


mailroom,  a  source  of  much  PRS  data,  to  refer
all  communications  on  identified  existing  cases
and,  in  addition,  any  communication  "that  in
any  way  indicates  anyone  may  have  possible
intention  of  harming  the  President"  SLighUy
more  specific  criteria  were  established  for  PRS
personnel  processing  White  House  mail  referred
by  the  White  House  mailroom,  but  again  the
standards  were  ver>'  general.  These  instructions
to  PRS  personnel  appear  to  be  the  only  instance
where  an  effort  was  made  to  reduce  the  criteria
to  writing.  When  requested  to  provide  a  specific
statement  of  the  standards  employed  by  PRS
in  deciding  what  information  to  seek  and  retain,
the  Secret  Service  responded:

The  criteria  in  effect  prior  to  November  22,
1963,  for  determining  whether  to  accept  ma-
terial for  the  PRS  general  files  were  broad  and
flexible.  AH  material  is  and  was  desired,  ac-
cepted, and  filed  if  it  indicated  or  tended  to
indicate  that  the  safet>'  of  the  President  is  or
might  be  in  danger,  either  at  the  present  or  in
the  future.  *  *  *  There  are  many  actions,
situations,  and  incidents  that  may  indicate
such  potential  danger.  Some  are  specific,  such
as  threats;  danger  may  be  implied  from  others,
such  as  membership  or  activir>'  in  an  organiza-
tion which  beheves  in  assassination  as  a  politi-
cal weapon.  All  material  received  by  PRS
was  separately  screened  and  a  determination
made  as  to  whether  the  information  might
indicate  possible  harm  to  the  President  If  the
material  was  evaluated  as  indicating  some  po-
tential danger  to  the  President — no  matter
how  small — it  was  indexed  in  the  general  PRS
files  under  the  name  of  the  individual  or  group
of  individuals  to  whom  that  material  related.

The  general  files  of  PRS  consist  of  folders  on
individuals,  card  indexed  by  name.  The  files  are
manually  maintained,  v»ithout  use  of  any  auto-
matic data-processing  techniques.  At  the  time
of  the  assassination,  the  active  PRS  general  files
contained  approximately  50,000  cases  accumu-
lated over  a  20-year  period,  some  of  which  in-
cluded more  than  one  individual.  A  case  file  was
established  if  the  information  available  sug-
gested that  the  subject  might  be  a  danger  to  the
President.  Many  of  these  cases  were  not  investi-
gated by  PRS.  The  case  file  served  merely  as  a
repository  for  information  imtU  enough  had
accumulated  to  warrant  an  investigation.  Ehir-
ing  the  period  November  1961  to  November
1963,  PRS  iQvestigated  34  newly  established  or
reactivated  cases  concerning  residents  of  Texas.
Most  of  these  cases  involved  persons  who  used
threatening  language  in  communications  to  or
about  the  President.  An  additional  15  cases  con-
cerning Texas  residents  were  established  but  not
investigated.

WTien  PRS  learns  of  an  individual  whose  con-
duct warrants  scrutiny,  it  requests  an  investiga-
tion by  the  closest  Secret  Senice  field  office,  of
which  there  are  65  throughout  the  country.  If


187


the  field  office  determines  that  the  case  should
be  subject  to  continuing  review,  PRS  establishes
a  file  which  requires  a  checkup  at  least  every  6
months.  This  might  involve  a  personal  interview
or  interviews  with  members  of  the  person's
household.  Wherever  possible,  the  Secret  Service
arranges  for  the  family  and  friends  of  the  indi-
vidual, and  local  law  enforcement  officials,  to
advise  the  field  office  if  the  subject  displays  signs
of  increased  danger  or  plans  to  leave  his  home
area.  At  the  time  of  the  assassination  there  were
approximately  400  persons  throughout  the  coun-
try who  were  subject  to  periodic  review.

If  PRS  concludes  after  investigation  that  an
individual  presents  a  significant  danger  to  the
life  of  the  President,  his  name  is  placed  in  a  "trip
index  file"  which  is  maintained  on  a  geographi-
cal field  office  basis.  At  the  time  of  the  assassina-
tion the  names  of  about  100  persons  were  in  this
index,  all  of  whom  were  included  in  the  group
of  400  being  reviewed  regularly.  PRS  also  main-
tains an  album  of  photographs  and  descriptions
of  about  12  to  15  individuals  who  are  regarded
as  clear  risks  to  the  President  and  who  do  not
have  a  fixed  place  of  residence.  Members  of  the
White  House  detail  of  the  Secret  Service  have
copies  of  this  album.

Individuals  who  are  regarded  as  dangerous
to  the  President  and  who  are  in  penal  or  hospital
custody  are  Usted  only  in  the  general  files  of
PRS,  but  there  is  a  system  for  the  immediate
notification  of  the  Secret  Service  by  the  confin-
ing institution  when  a  subject  is  released  or
escapes.  PRS  attempts  to  eliminate  serious  risks
by  hospitalization  or,  where  necessary,  the
prosecution  of  persons  who  have  committed  an
offense  such  as  threatening  the  President.  In
June  1964  PRS  had  arrangements  to  be  notified
about  the  release  or  escape  of  approximately
1,000  persons.

In  summary,  at  the  time  of  the  assassination
PRS  had  received,  over  a  20-year  period,  basic
information  on  some  50,000  cases;  it  had  ar-
rangements to  be  notified  about  release  from
confinement  in  roughly  1,000  cases;  it  had  es-
tablished periodic  regular  review  of  the  status
of  400  individuals;  it  regarded  approximately
100  of  these  400  cases  as  serious  risks  and  12
to  15  of  these  cases  as  highly  dangerous  risks.
Members  of  the  White  House  detail  were  ex-
pected to  famiUarize  themselves  with  the  de-
scriptions and  photographs  of  the  highest  risk
cases.  The  cases  subject  to  periodic  review  and
the  100  or  so  cases  in  the  higher  risk  category
were  filed  on  a  geographic  basis,  and  could  con-
veniently be  reviewed  by  a  Secret  Service  agent
preparing  for  a  Presidential  trip  to  a  particular
part  of  the  country.  These  were  the  files  reviewed
by  PRS  on  November  8,  1963,  at  the  request  of
Special  Agent  Lawson,  advance  agent  for  Presi-
dent Kennedy's  trip  to  Dallas.  The  general  files
of  PRS  were  not  indexed  by  geographic  location
and  were  of  Uttle  use  in  preparing  for  a  Presi-
dential visit  to  a  specific  locality.

Secret  Service  requests  to  other  agencies  for


intelligence  information  were  no  more  specific
than  the  broad  and  general  instructions  to  its
own  agents  and  the  White  House  mailroom.
The  head  of  PRS  testified  that  the  Secret  Service
requested  other  agencies  to  provide  "any  and  all
information  that  they  may  come  in  contact  with
that  would  indicate  danger  to  the  President."
These  requests  were  not  communicated  in  writ-
ing by  the  Secret  Service;  rather,  the  Service
depended  on  the  personal  liaison  maintained  by
PRS  with  the  headquarters  of  the  Federal  intelli-
gence agencies,  particularly  the  FBI,  and  at  the
working  level  with  personnel  of  the  field  offices
of  the  various  agencies.  The  Service  frequently
participated  in  the  training  programs  of  other
law  enforcement  agencies,  and  agents  from  other
agencies  attended  the  regular  Secret  Service
training  schools.  Presidential  protection  was  an
important  topic  in  these  training  programs.

In  the  absence  of  more  specific  instructions,
other  Federal  agencies  interpreted  the  Secret
Service's  informal  requests  to  relate  principally
to  overt  threats  to  harm  the  President  or  other
specific  manifestations  of  hostihty.  For  example,
at  the  time  of  the  assassination,  the  FBI  Hand-
book, which  is  in  the  possession  of  every  Bureau
special  agent,  provided:

Threats  against  the  President  of  the  U.S.,
members  of  his  immediate  family,  the  Presi-
dent-elect, and  the  Vice-President

Investigation  of  threats  against  the  Presi-
dent of  the  United  States,  members  of  his
immediate  family,  the  President-Elect,  and
the  Vice-President  is  within  the  exclusive  jur-
isdiction of  the  U.S.  Secret  Service.  Any  in-
formation indicating  the  possibility  of  an
attempt  against  the  person  or  safety  of  the
President,  members  of  the  immediate  family
of  the  President,  the  President-Elect  or  the
Vice-President  must  be  referred  immediately
by  the  most  expeditious  means  of  communica-
tion to  the  nearest  office  of  the  U.S.  Secret
Service.  Advise  the  Bureau  at  the  same  time
by  teletype  of  the  information  so  furnished
to  the  Secret  Service  and  the  fact  that  it  has
been  so  disseminated.  The  above  action  should
be  taken  without  delay  in  order  to  attempt  to
verify  the  information  and  no  evaluation  of
the  ijoformation  should  be  attempted.  When
the  threat  is  in  the  form  of  a  written  com-
munication, give  a  copy  to  local  Secret  Serv-
ice and  forward  the  original  to  the  Bureau
where  it  will  be  made  available  to  Secret
Service  headquarters  in  Washington.  The  re-
ferral of  the  copy  to  local  Secret  Service
should  not  delay  the  immediate  referral  of
the  information  by  the  fastest  available  means
of  communication  to  Secret  Service  locally.

The  State  Department  advised  the  Secret  Serv-
ice of  all  crank  and  threat  letter  mail  or  crank
visitors  and  furnished  reports  concerning  any
assassination  or  attempted  assassination  of  a


188


ruler  or  other  major  official  anywhere  in  the
world.  The  several  military  intelligence  agencies
reported  crank  mail  and  similar  threats  involv-
ing the  President.  According  to  Special  Agent  in
Charge  Bouck,  the  Secret  Service  had  no  stand-
ard procedure  for  the  systematic  review  of  its
requests  for  and  receipt  of  information  from
other  Federal  agencies.

The  Commission  believes  that  the  facilities
and  procedures  of  the  Protective  Research  Sec-
tion of  the  Secret  Service  prior  to  November  22,
1963,  were  inadequate.  Its  efforts  appear  to  have
been  too  largely  directed  at  the  "crank"  threat.
Although  the  Service  recognized  that  its  advance
preventive  measures  must  encompass  more  than
these  most  obvious  dangers,  it  made  little  effort
to  identify  factors  in  the  activities  of  an  indi-
vidual or  an  organized  group,  other  than  specific
threats,  which  suggested  a  source  of  danger
against  which  timely  precautions  could  be  taken.
Except  for  its  special  "trip  index"  file  of  400
names,  none  of  the  cases  in  the  PRS  general
files  was  available  for  systematic  review  on  a
geographic  basis  when  the  President  planned  a
particiUar  trip.

As  reported  in  chapter  II,  when  the  special
file  was  reviewed  on  November  8,  it  contained
the  names  of  no  persons  from  the  entire  DaUas-
Fort  Worth  area,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that
Ambassador  Stevenson  had  been  abused  by
pickets  in  Dallas  less  than  a  month  before.
Bouck  explained  the  failure  to  try  to  identify
the  individuals  involved  in  the  Stevenson  inci-
dent after  it  occurred  on  the  ground  that  PRS
required  a  more  direct  indication  of  a  threat  to
the  President,  and  that  there  was  no  such  indica-
tion until  the  President's  scheduled  visit  to  that
area  became  known.  Such  an  approach  seriously
undermines  the  precautionary  nature  of  PRS
work;  if  the  presence  in  DaUas  of  the  Stevenson
pickets  might  have  created  a  danger  for  the
President  on  a  visit  to  that  city,  PRS  should  have
investigated  and  been  prepared  to  guard  against
it.

Other  agencies  occasionally  provided  infor-
mation to  the  Secret  Service  concerning  poten-
tially dangerous  political  groups.  This  was  done
in  the  case  of  the  Nationalist  Party  of  Puerto
Rico,  for  example,  but  only  after  members  of
the  group  had  resorted  to  political  violence.
However,  the  vague  requests  for  information
which  the  Secret  Service  made  to  Federal  intelli-
gence and  law  enforcement  agencies  were  not
well  designed  to  eUcit  information  from  them
about  persons  other  than  those  who  were  obvi-
ous threats  to  the  President.  The  requests  shifted
the  responsibihty  for  evaluating  diflBcult  cases
from  the  Service,  the  agency  most  responsible
for  performing  that  task,  to  the  other  agencies.
No  specific  guidance  was  provided.  Although  the
CIA  had  on  file  requests  from  the  Treasury
Department  for  information  on  the  counterfeit-
ing of  U.S.  currency  and  certain  smuggling
matters,  it  had  no  written  specification  of  intelli-
gence information  collected by CIA abroad


which  was  desired  by  the  Secret  Service  in
advance  of  Presidential  trips  outside  the  United
States.

Information  known  about  Lee  Harvey  Os-
\K-ald  prior  to  the  assassination. — No  informa-
tion concerning  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  appeared  in
PRS  files  before  the  President's  trip  to  Dallas.
Oswald  was  known  to  other  Federal  agencies
with  which  the  Secret  Senice  maintained  intelli-
gence liaison.  The  FBI  had  been  interested  in
bim,  to  some  degree  at  least,  since  the  time  of  his
defection  in  October  1959.  It  had  interviewed
him  twice  shortly  after  his  return  to  the  United
States,  again  a  year  later  at  his  request  and  was
investigating  him  at  the  time  of  the  assassina-
tion. The  Commission  has  taken  the  testimony
of  Bureau  agents  who  interviewed  Oswald  after
his  return  from  the  Soviet  Union  and  prior  to
November  22,  1963,  the  agent  who  was  assigned
his  case  at  the  time  of  the  assassination,  the
Director  of  the  FBI,  and  the  Assistant  to  the
Director  in  charge  of  aU  investigative  activities
under  the  Director  and  Associate  Director.  In
addition,  the  Director  and  Deput>'  Director  for
Plans  of  the  CIA  testified  concerning  that
Agency's  limited  knowledge  of  Oswald  before
the  assassination.  Finally,  the  Commission  has
reviewed  the  complete  files  on  Oswald,  as  they
existed  at  the  time  of  the  assassination,  of  the
Department  of  State,  the  Office  of  Naval  Intelli-
gence, the  FBI,  and  the  CIA.  The  information
knowTi  to  the  FBI  is  summarized  below.

From  defection  to  return  to  Fort  Worth. —
The  FBI  opened  a  file  on  Oswald  in  October

1959,  when  news  reports  appeared  of  his  defec-
tion to  the  Soviet  Union.  The  file  was  opened
"for  the  purpose  of  correlating  information  inas-
much as  he  was  considered  a  possible  security
risk  in  the  event  he  returned  to  this  country."
Oswald's  defection  was  also  the  occasion  for  the
opening  of  files  by  the  Department  of  State,
CIA,  and  the  Office  of  Naval  Intelligence.  Until
April  1960,  FBI  activit>'  consisted  of  placing  in
Oswald's  file  information  regarding  his  relations
with  the  U.S.  Embassy  in  Moscow  and  back-
ground data  relating  largely  to  his  prior  military
service,  provided  by  other  agencies.  In  April

1960,  Mrs.  Marguerite  Oswald  and  Robert  Os-
wald were  interviewed  in  the  course  of  a  routine
FBI  investigation  of  transfers  of  small  sums  of
money  from  Mrs.  Oswald  to  her  son  in  Russia.

During  the  next  2  years  the  FBI  continued
to  accumulate  information,  and  kept  itself  in-
formed on  Oswald's  status  by  periodic  review,-s
of  State  Department  and  Office  of  Naval  Intelli-
gence files.  In  this  way,  it  learned  that  when  Os-
wald had  arrived  in  the  Soviet  Union  he  had
attempted  to  renounce  his  U.S.  citizenship  and
applied  for  Soviet  citizenship,  had  described
himself  as  a  Marxist,  had  said  he  would  give  the
Soviet  Union  any  useful  information  he  had
acquired  as  a  marine  radar  technician  and  had
displayed  an  arrogant  and  aggressive  attitude  at
the  U.S.  Embassy;  it  learned  also  that  Oswald
had  been  discharged  from  the  Marine  Corps

189


Reserve  as  undesirable  in  August  1960.  In  June
1962,  the  Bureau  was  advised  by  the  Depart-
ment of  State  of  Oswald's  plan  to  return  to  the
United  States.  The  Bureau  made  arrangements
to  be  advised  by  immigration  authorities  of  his
return,  and  instructed  the  Dallas  oflBce  to  inter-
view him  when  he  got  back  to  determine  whether
he  had  been  recruited  by  a  Soviet  intelligence
service.  Oswald's  file  at  the  Department  of  State
Passport  Ofifice  was  reviewed  in  June  1962.  It
revealed  his  letter  of  January  30,  1962,  to  Secre-
tary of  the  Navy  Connally,  in  which  he  protested
his  discharge  and  declared  that  he  would  use
"all  means"  to  correct  it.  The  file  reflected  the
Department's  determination  that  Oswald  had  not
expatriated  himself.

From  return  to  Fort  Worth  to  move  to  New
Orleans. — Oswald  was  first  interviewed  by  FBI
Agents  John  W.  Fam  and  B.  Tom  Carter  on
June  26,  1962,  in  Fort  Worth.  Agent  Fam  re-
ported to  headquarters  that  Oswald  was  im-
patient and  arrogant,  and  unwilling  to  answer
questions  regarding  his  motive  for  going  to  the
Soviet  Union.  Oswald  "denied  that  he  had  ever
denounced  his  U.S.  citizenship,  and  *  *  *  that
he  had  ever  applied  for  Soviet  citizenship  spe-
cifically." Oswald  was,  however,  willing  to  dis-
cuss hiis  contacts  with  Soviet  authorities.  He
denied  having  any  involvement  with  Soviet  in-
telligence agencies  and  promised  to  advise  the
FBI  if  he  heard  from  them.

Agent  Fain  was  not  satisfied  by  this  interview
and  arranged  to  see  Oswald  again  on  August  16,
1962.  According  to  Fain's  contemporaneous
memorandum  and  his  present  recollection,  while
Oswald  remained  somewhat  evasive  at  this  inter-
view, he  was  not  antagonistic  and  seemed  gener-
ally to  be  settling  down.  (Marina  Oswald,  how-
ever, recalled  that  her  husband  was  upset  by
this  interview.)  Oswald  again  agreed  to  advise
the  FBI  if  he  were  approached  under  suspicious
circumstances;  however,  he  deprecated  the  pos-
sibility of  this  happening,  particularly  since  his
employment  did  not  involve  any  sensitive  infor-
mation. Having  concluded  that  Oswald  was  not
a  security  risk  or  potentially  dangerous  or  vio-
lent. Fain  determined  that  nothing  further  re-
mained to  be  done  at  that  time  and  recom-
mended that  the  case  be  placed  in  a  closed
status.  This  is  an  administrative  classification
indicating  that  no  further  work  has  been
scheduled.  It  does  not  preclude  the  agent  in
charge  of  the  case  from  reopening  it  if  he  feels
that  further  work  should  be  done.

From  August  1962  until  March  1963,  the
FBI  continued  to  accumulate  information  re-
garding Oswald  but  engaged  in  no  active  inves-
tigation. Agent  Fain  retired  from  the  FBI  in
October  1962,  and  the  closed  Oswald  case  was
not  reassigned.  However,  pursuant  to  a  regular
Bureau  practice  of  interviewing  certain  immi-
grants from  Iron  Curtain  countries.  Fain  had
been  assigned  to  see  Marina  Oswald  at  an  ap-
propriate time.  This  assignment  was  given  to
Agent  James  P.  Hosty,  Jr.  of  the  Dallas  ofllce


upon  Fain's  retirement.  In  March  1963,  while
attempting  to  locate  Marina  Oswald,  Agent
Hosty  was  told  by  Mrs.  M.  F.  Tobias,  a  former
landlady  of  the  Oswalds  at  602  Elsbeth  Street  in
Dallas,  that  other  tenants  had  complained  be-
cause Oswald  was  drinking  to  excess  and  beat-
ing his  wife.  This  information  led  Hosty  to
review  Oswald's  file,  from  which  he  learned  that
Oswald  had  become  a  subscriber  to  the  Worker,
a  Communist  Party  publication.  Hosty  decided
that  the  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  case  should  be
reopened  because  of  the  alleged  personal  diffi-
culties and  the  contact  with  the  Worker,  and
his  recommendation  was  accepted.  He  decided,
however,  not  to  interview  Marina  Oswald  at  that
time,  and  merely  determined  that  the  Oswalds
were  living  at  214  Neely  Street  in  Dallas.

On  April  21,  1963,  the  FBI  field  office  in  New
York  was  advised  that  Oswald  was  in  contact
with  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  in  New
York,  and  that  he  had  written  to  the  committee
stating  that  he  had  distributed  its  pamphlets  on
the  streets  of  Dallas.  This  information  did  not
reach  Agent  Hosty  in  Dallas  imtil  June.  Hosty
considered  the  information  to  be  "stale"  by  that
time,  and  did  not  attempt  to  verify  Oswald's
reported  statement.  Under  a  general  Bureau
request  to  be  on  the  alert  for  activities  of  the
Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee,  Hosty  had
inquired  earlier  and  found  no  evidence  that  it
was  fimctioning  in  the  Dallas  area.

In  New  Orleans. — In  the  middle  of  May  of
1963,  Agent  Hosty  checked  Oswald's  last  known
residence  and  found  that  he  had  moved.  Oswald
was  tentatively  located  in  New  Orleans  in  June,
and  Hosty  asked  the  New  Orleans  FBI  office
to  determine  Oswald's  address  and  what  he  was
doing.  The  New  Orleans  office  investigated  and
located  Oswald,  learning  his  address  and  former
place  of  employment  on  August  5,  1963.  A
confidential  informant  advised  the  FBI  that  Os-
wald was  not  known  to  be  engaged  in  Com-
munist Party  activities  in  New  Orleans.

On  June  24,  Oswald  applied  in  New  Orleans
for  a  passport,  stating  that  he  planned  to  depart
by  ship  for  an  extended  tour  of  Western  Euro-
pean countries,  the  Soviet  Union,  Finland,  and
Poland.  The  Passport  Office  of  the  Department
of  State  in  Washington  had  no  listing  for  Os-
wald requiring  special  treatment,  and  his  appli-
cation was  approved  on  the  following  day.  The
FBI  had  not  asked  to  be  informed  of  any  effort
by  Oswald  to  obtain  a  passport,  as  it  might
have  imder  existing  procedures,  and  did  not
know  of  his  application.  According  to  the
Bureau,

We  did  not  request  the  State  Department
to  include  Oswald  on  a  list  which  would  have
resulted  in  advising  us  of  any  application  for
a  passport  inasmuch  as  the  facts  relating  to
Oswald's  activities  at  that  time  did  not  war-
rant such  action.  Our  investigation  of  Oswald
had  disclosed  no  evidence  that  Oswald  was
acting  imder  the  instructions  or  on  behalf  of


190


any  foreign  government  or  mstnimentality
thereof.

On  August  9,  1963,  Oswald  was  arrested  and
jailed  by  the  New  Orleans  PoUce  Department
for  disturbing  the  peace,  in  connection  with  a
street  fight  which  broke  out  when  he  was
accosted  by  anti-Castro  Cubans  while  distribu-
ting leaflets  on  behalf  of  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba
Committee.  On  the  next  day,  he  ask&d  the  New
Orleans  poUce  to  arrange  for  him  to  be  inter-
viewed by  the  FBI.  The  police  called  the  local
FBI  ofl&ce  and  an  agent,  John  L.  Quigley,  was
sent  to  the  police  station.  Agent  Quigley  did  not
know  of  Oswald's  prior  FBI  record  when  he
interviewed  him,  inasmuch  as  the  police  had  not
given  Oswald's  name  to  the  Bureau  when  they
called  the  office.

Quigley  recalled  that  Oswald  was  receptive
when  questioned  about  his  general  background
but  less  than  completely  truthful  or  cooperative
when  interrogated  about  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba
Committee.  Quigley  testified:

When  I  began  asking  him  specific  details
with  respect  to  his  activities  in  the  Fair  Play
for  Cuba  Committee  in  New  Orleans  as  to
where  meetings  were  held,  who  was  involved,
what  occurred,  he  was  reticent  to  furnish  in-
formation, reluctant  and  actually  as  far  as  I
was  concerned,  was  completely  evasive  on
them.

In  Quigley's  judgment,  Oswald  "was  probably
making  a  self-serving  statement  in  attempting
to  explain  to  me  why  he  was  distributing  this
literature,  and  for  no  other  reason,  and  when  I
got  to  questioning  him  further  then  he  felt  that
his  purpose  had  been  served  and  he  wouldn't
say  anything  further,"

During  the  interview  Quigley  obtained  back-
ground information  from  Oswald  which  was  in-
consistent with  information  already  in  the  Bu-
reau's possession.  When  Quigley  returned  to  his
office,  he  learned  that  another  Bureau  agent,
Milton  R.  Kaack,  had  been  conducting  a  back-
ground investigation  of  Oswald  at  the  request
of  Agent  Hosty  in  Dallas.  Quigley  advised
Kaack  of  his  interview  and  gave  him  a  detailed
memorandum.  Kaack  was  aware  of  the  facts
known  to  the  FBI  and  recognized  Oswald's  false
statements.  For  example,  Oswald  claimed  that
his  wife's  maiden  name  was  Prossa  and  that  they
had  been  married  in  Fort  Worth  and  lived  there
until  coming  to  New  Orleans.  He  had  told  the
New  Orleans  arresting  officers  that  he  had  been
bom  in  Cuba.

Several  days  later,  the  Bureau  received  ad-
ditional evidence  that  Oswald  had  Ued  to  Agent
Quigley.  On  August  22,  it  learned  that  Oswald
had  appeared  on  a  radio  discussion  program  on
August  21.  WUliam  Stuckey,  who  had  appeared
on  the  radio  program  with  Oswald,  told  the
Bureau  on  August  30  that  Oswald  had  told  him
that  he  had  worked  and  been  married  in  the


Soviet  Union.  Neither  these  discrepancies  nor
the  fact  that  Oswald  had  initiated  the  FBI  inter-
view was  considered  sufficiently  unusual  to
necessitate  another  interview.  Alan  H.  Belmont,
Assistant  to  the  Director  of  the  FBI,  stated  the
Bureau's  reasoning  in  this  way:

Our  interest  in  this  man  at  this  point  was
to  determine  whether  his  activities  constituted
a  threat  to  the  internal  security  of  the  coun-
try. It  was  apparent  that  he  had  made  a  self-
serving  statement  to  Agent  Quigley.  It  be-
came a  matter  of  record  in  our  files  as  a  part
of  the  case,  and  if  we  determined  that  the
course  of  the  investigation  required  us  to
clarify  or  face  him  down  with  this  informa-
tion, we  would  do  it  at  the  appropriate  time.

In  other  words,  he  committed  no  violation
of  the  law  by  telling  us  something  that  wasn't
true,  and  unless  this  required  further  investi-
gation at  that  time,  we  would  handle  it  in  due
course,  in  accord  with  the  whole  context  of
the  investigation.

On  August  21,  1963,  Bureau  headquarters  in-
structed the  New  Orleans  and  Dallas  field  offices
to  conduct  an  additional  investigation  of  Oswald
in  view  of  the  activities  which  had  led  to  his
arrest.  FBI  informants  in  the  New  Orleans  area,
familiar  with  pro-Castro  or  Communist  Party
activity  there,  advised  the  Bureau  that  Oswald
was  unknown  in  such  circles.

In  Dallas. — In  early  September  1963  the  FBI
transferred  the  principal  responsibility  for  the
Oswald  case  from  the  Dallas  office  to  the  New
Orleans  office.  Soon  after,  on  October  1,  1963,
the  FBI  was  advised  by  the  rental  agent  for  the
Oswalds'  apartment  in  New  Orleans  that  they
had  moved  again.  According  to  the  information
received  by  the  Bureau  they  had  vacated  their
apartment,  and  Marina  Oswald  had  departed
with  their  child  in  a  station  wagon  with  Texas
registration.  On  October  3,  Hosty  reopened  the
case  in  Dallas  to  assist  the  New  Orleans  office.
He  checked  in  Oswald's  old  neighborhood  and
throughout  the  Dallas-Fort  Worth  area  but  was
unable  to  locate  Oswald.

The  next  word  about  Oswald's  location  was
a  communication  from  the  CIA  to  the  FBI  on
October  10,  advising  that  an  individual  tenta-
tively identified  as  Oswald  had  been  in  touch
with  the  Soviet  Embassy  in  Mexico  City  in  early
October  of  1963.  The  Bureau  had  had  no  earUer
information  suggesting  that  Oswald  had  left  the
United  States.  The  possible  contact  with  the
Soviet  Embassy  in  Mexico  intensified  the  FBI's
interest  in  learning  Oswald's  whereabouts.  The
FBI  representative  in  Mexico  City  arranged  to
follow  up  this  information  with  the  CIA  and  to
verify  Oswald's  entry  into  Mexico.  The  CIA
message  was  sent  also  to  the  Department  of
State  where  it  was  reviewed  by  personnel  of
the  Passport  Office,  who  knew  from  Oswald's
file  that  he  had  sought  and  obtained  a  passport
on  June  25,  1963.  The  Department  of  State  did


191


not  advise  either  the  CIA  or  the  FBI  of  these
facts.

On  October  25,  the  New  Orleans  ojQfice  of  the
FBI  learned  that  in  September  Oswald  had  given
a  forwarding  address  of  25 1 5  West  Fifth  Street,
Irving,  Tex.  After  receiving  this  information  on
October  29,  Agent  Hosty  attempted  to  locate
Oswald.  On  the  same  day  Hosty  interviewed
neighbors  on  Fifth  Street  and  learned  that  the
address  was  that  of  Mrs.  Ruth  Paine.  He  con-
ducted a  limited  background  investigation  of  the
Paines,  intending  to  interview  Mrs.  Paine  and
ask  her  particularly  about  Oswald's  where-
abouts.

Having  determined  that  Mrs.  Paine  was  a
responsible  and  reUable  citizen,  Hosty  inter-
viewed her  on  November  1 .  The  interview  lasted
about  20-25  minutes.  In  response  to  Hosty's
inquiries,  Mrs.  Paine

*  *  *  readily  admitted  that  Mrs.  Marina
Oswald  and  Lee  Oswald's  two  children  were
staying  with  her.  She  said  that  Lee  Oswald
was  living  somewhere  in  Dallas,  She  didn't
know  where.  She  said  it  was  in  the  Oak  Cliff
area  but  she  didn't  have  his  address.

I  asked  her  if  she  knew  where  he  worked.
After  a  moment's  hesitation,  she  told  me  that
he  worked  at  the  Texas  School  Book  Deposi-
tory near  the  downtown  area  of  Dallas.  She
didn't  have  the  exact  address,  and  it  is  my
recollection  that  we  went  to  the  phone  book
and  looked  it  up,  found  it  to  be  411  Elm
Street.

Mrs.  Paine  told  Hosty  also  that  Oswald  was  liv-
ing alone  in  Dallas  because  she  did  not  want  him
staying  at  her  house,  although  she  was  willing  to
let  Oswald  visit  his  wife  and  children.  According
to  Hosty,  Mrs.  Paine  indicated  that  she  thought
she  could  find  out  where  Oswald  was  living  and
would  let  him  know.  At  this  point  in  the  inter-
view, Hosty  gave  Mrs.  Paine  Ws  name  and  office
telephone  number  on  a  piece  of  paper.  At  the
end  of  the  interview,  Marina  Oswald  came  into
the  room.  When  he  observed  that  she  seemed
"quite  alarmed"  about  the  visit,  Hosty  assured
her,  through  Mrs.  Pame  as  interpreter,  that  the
FBI  would  not  harm  or  harass  her.

On  November  4,  Hosty  telephoned  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  and  learned  that  Os-
wald was  working  there  and  that  he  had  given  as
his  address  Mrs.  Paine's  residence  in  Irving.
Hosty  took  the  necessary  steps  to  have  the  Dal-
las office  of  the  FBI,  rather  than  the  New  Or-
leans office,  reestablished  as  the  office  with  prin-
cipal responsibility.  On  November  5,  Hosty  was
traveling  near  Mre.  Paine's  home  and  took  the
occasion  to  stop  by  to  ask  whether  she  had  any
further  information.  Mrs.  Paine  had  nothing  to
add  to  what  she  had  already  told  him,  except
that  during  a  visit  that  past  weekend,  Oswald
had  said  that  he  was  a  "Trotskyite  Communist,"
and  that  she  found  this  and  siinilar  statements  il-
logical and  somewhat  amusing.  On  this  occasion


Hosty  was  at  the  Paine  residence  for  only  a  few
minutes.

During  neither  interview  did  Hosty  learn
Oswald's  address  or  telephone  number  in  Dallas.
Mrs.  Paine  testified  that  she  learned  Oswald's
telephone  number  at  the  Beckley  Street  room-
inghouse  in  the  middle  of  October  shortly  after
Oswald  rented  the  room  on  October  14.  As  dis-
cussed in  chapter  VI,  she  failed  to  report  this  to
Agent  Hosty  because  she  thought  the  FBI  was
in  possesion  of  a  great  deal  of  information  and
certainly  would  find  it  very  easy  to  learn  where
Oswald  was  UvLag,

Hosty  did  nothing  further  in  connection  with
the  Oswald  case  imtil  after  the  assassination.  On
November  1,  1963,  he  had  received  a  copy  of
the  report  of  the  New  Orleans  office  which  con-
tained Agent  Quigley's  memorandum  of  the  in-
terview in  the  New  Orleans  jail  on  August  10,
and  realized  unmediately  that  Oswald  had  given
false  biographic  information.  Hosty  knew  that
he  would  eventually  have  to  investigate  this,
and  "was  quite  interested  in  determining  the
nature  of  his  contact  with  the  Soviet  Embassy  in
Mexico  City."  When  asked  what  his  next  step
would  have  been,  Hosty  replied:

Well,  as  I  had  previously  stated,  I  have  be-
tween 25  and  40  cases  assigned  to  me  at  any
one  time.  I  had  other  matters  to  take  care  of.
I  had  now  estabUshed  that  Lee  Oswald  was
not  employed  in  a  sensitive  industry.  I  can
now  afford  to  wait  until  New  Orleans  for-
warded the  necessary  papers  to  me  to  show
me  I  now  had  all  the  information.  It  was  then
my  plan  to  interview  Marina  Oswald  in  detail
concerning  both  herself  and  her  husband's
background.

Q.  Had  you  planned  any  steps  beyond  that
point?

A.  No.  I  would  have  to  wait  until  I  had
talked  to  Marina  to  see  what  I  could  deter-
mine, and  from  there  I  could  make  my  plans.

Q.  Did  you  take  any  action  on  this  case  be-
tween November  5  and  November  22?

A.  No,  sir.

The  official  Bureau  files  confirm  Hosty's  state-
ment that  from  November  5  imtil  the  assassina-
tion, no  active  investigation  was  conducted.  On
November  18  the  FBI  learned  that  Oswald  re-
cently had  been  in  communication  with  the
Soviet  Embassy  in  Washington  and  so  advised
the  Dallas  office  in  the  ordinary  course  of
business.  Hosty  received  this  information  on
the  afternoon  of  November  22,  1963.

Nonreferral  of  Oswald  to  the  Secret  Service. —
The  Commission  has  considered  carefully  the
question  whether  the  FBI,  in  view  of  all  the
information  concerning  Oswald  in  its  files,
should  have  alerted  the  Secret  Service  to  Os-
wald's presence  in  Dallas  prior  to  President
Kennedy's  visit.  The  Secret  Service  and  the  FBI
differ  as  to  whether  Oswald  fell  within  the  cate-


192


gory  of  "threats  against  the  President"  which
should  be  referred  to  the  Service.

Robert  I.  Bouck,  special  agent  in  charge  of
the  Protective  Research  Section,  testified  that
the  information  available  to  the  Federal  Gov-
ernment about  Oswald  before  the  assassination
would,  if  known  to  PRS,  have  made  Oswald  a
subject  of  concern  to  the  Secret  Service.  Bouck
pointed  to  a  number  of  characteristics  besides
Oswald's  defection  the  cumulative  effect  of
which  would  have  been  to  alert  the  Secret  Serv-
ice to  potential  danger:

I  would  think  his  continued  association
with  the  Russian  Embassy  after  his  rettim,  his
association  with  the  Castro  groups  would  have
been  of  concern  to  us,  a  knowledge  that  he
had,  I  believe,  been  courtmartialed  for  illegal
possession  of  a  gun,  of  a  hand  gun  in  the
Marines,  that  he  had  owned  a  weapon  and  did
a  good  deal  of  hunting  or  use  of  it,  perhaps  in
Russia,  plus  a  number  of  items  about  his  dis-
position and  unreliability  of  character,  I
think  aU  of  those,  if  we  had  had  them  alto-
gether, would  have  added  up  to  poiating  out
a  pretty  bad  individual,  and  I  think  that,  to-
gether, had  we  known  that  he  had  a  vantage
point  would  have  seemed  somewhat  serious  to
us,  even  though  I  must  admit  that  none  of
these  in  themselves  would  be — would  meet
our  specific  criteria,  none  of  them  alone.

But  it  is  when  you  begin  adding  them  up
to  some  degree  that  you  begin  to  get  criteria
that  are  meaningful.

Mr.  Bouck  pointed  out,  however,  that  he  had  no
reason  to  beUeve  that  any  one  Federal  agency
had  access  to  all  this  information,  including  the
significant  fact  that  Oswald  was  employed  in
a  building  which  overlooked  the  motorcade
route.

Agent  Hosty  testified  that  he  was  fuUy  aware
of  the  pending  Presidential  visit  to  Dallas.  He
recalled  that  the  special  agent  in  charge  of  the
Dallas  ofl&ce  of  the  FBI,  J.  Gordon  Sbanklin,
had  discussed  the  President's  visit  on  several  oc-
casions, including  the  regular  biweekly  con-
ference on  the  morning  of  November  22:

Mr.  Shanklin  advised  us,  among  other
things,  that  in  view  of  the  Presidential  visit
to  Dallas,  that  if  anyone  had  any  indication
of  any  possibility  of  any  acts  of  violence  or
any  demonstrations  against  the  President,  or
Vice  President,  to  immediately  notify  the
Secret  Service  and  confirm  it  in  wxiting.  He
had  made  the  same  statement  about  a  week
prior  at  another  special  conference  which  we
had  held.  I  don't  recall  the  exact  date.  It  was
about  a  week  prior.

In  fact,  Hosty  participated  in  transmitting  to
the  Secret  Service  two  pieces  of  information
pertaining  to  the  visit.  Hosty  testified  that  he  did
not  know  until  the  evening  of  Thursday,  No-


vember 21,  that  there  was  to  be  a  motorcade,
however,  and  never  realized  that  the  motorcade
would  pass  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository
Building.  He  testified  that  he  did  not  read  the
newspaper  story  describing  the  motorcade  route
in  detail,  since  he  was  interested  only  in  the  fact
that  the  motorcade  was  coming  up  Main  Street,
"where  maybe  I  could  watch  it  if  I  had  a
chance."

Even  if  he  had  recalled  that  Oswald's  place  of
employment  was  on  the  President's  route,  Hosty
testified  that  he  would  not  have  cited  him  to  the
Secret  Service  as  a  potential  threat  to  the  Presi-
dent. Hosty  interpreted  his  instructions  as  re-
quiring "some  indication  that  the  person
planned  to  take  some  action  against  the  safety
of  the  President  of  the  United  States  or  the  Vice
President"  In  his  opinion,  none  of  the  informa-
tion in  the  FBI  files — Oswald's  defection,  his
Fair  Play  for  Cuba  activities  in  New  Orleans,
his  Ues  to  Agent  Quigley,  his  recent  visit  to
Mexico  City — indicated  that  Oswald  was  cap-
able of  violence.  Hosty's  initial  reaction  on  hear-
ing that  Oswald  was  a  suspect  in  the  assassina-
tion, was  "shock,  complete  surprise,"  because
he  had  no  reason  to  beheve  that  Oswald  "was
capable  or  potentially  an  assassin  of  the  Presi-
dent of  the  United  States."

Shortly  after  Oswald  was  apprehended  and
identified,  Hosty's  superior  sent  him  to  observe
the  interrogation  of  Oswald.  Hosty  parked  his
car  in  the  basement  of  police  headquarters  and
there  met  an  acquaintance,  Lt.  Jack  RevUl  of
the  DaUas  police  force.  The  two  men  disagree
about  the  conversation  which  took  place  be-
tween them.  They  agree  that  Hosty  told  Revill
that  the  FBI  had  known  about  Oswald  and,  in
particular,  of  his  presence  in  Dallas  and  his
employment  at  the  Texas  School  Book  Deposi-
tory Building.  Revill  testified  that  Hosty  said
also  that  the  FBI  had  information  that  Oswald
was  "capable  of  committing  this  assassinatioiL"
According  to  Revill,  Hosty  indicated  that  he
was  going  to  teU  this  to  Lieutenant  Wells  of  the
homicide  and  robbery  bureau.  Revill  promptly
made  a  memorandum  of  this  conversation  in
which  the  quoted  statement  appears.  His  secre-
tary testified  that  she  prepared  such  a  report  for
him  that  afternoon  and  Chief  of  Police  Jesse  E.
Curry  and  District  Attorney  Henry  M.  Wade
both  testified  that  they  saw  it  later  that  day.

Host}'  has  imequivocally  denied,  first  by  affi-
davit and  then  in  his  testimony  before  the  Com-
mission, that  he  ever  said  that  Oswald  was  capa-
ble of  violence,  or  that  he  had  any  information
suggesting  this.  The  only  witness  to  the  conver-
sation was  Dallas  Police  Detective  V.  J.  Brian,
who  was  accompanying  Revill.  Brian  did  not
hear  Hosty  make  any  statement  concerning  Os-
wald's capacity  to  be  an  assassin  but  he  did  not
hear  the  entire  conversation  because  of  the  com-
motion at  police  headquarters  and  because  he
was  not  within  hearing  distance  at  all  times.

Host}''s  interpretation  of  the  prevailing  FBI
instructions  on  referrals  to  the  Secret  Service


193


was  defended  before  the  Commission  by  his
superiors.  After  summarizing  the  Bureau's  inves-
tigative interest  in  Oswald  prior  to  the  assassina-
tion, J.  Edgar  Hoover  concluded  that  "There
was  nothing  up  to  the  time  of  the  assassination
that  gave  any  indication  that  this  man  was  a
dangerous  character  who  might  do  harm  to  the
President  or  to  the  Vice  President."  Director
Hoover  emphasized  that  the  first  indication  of
Oswald's  capacity  for  violence  was  his  attempt
on  General  Walker's  life,  which  did  not  become
known  to  the  FBI  until  after  the  assassination.
Both  Director  Hoover  and  his  assistant,  Alan  H.
Belmont,  stressed  also  the  decision  by  the  De-
partment of  State  that  Oswald  should  be  per-
mitted to  return  to  the  United  States.  Neither
believed  that  the  Bureau  investigation  of  him
up  to  November  2  revealed  any  information
which  would  have  justified  referral  to  the  Se-
cret Service.  According  to  Belmont,  when  Os-
wald returned  from  the  Soviet  Union,

*  *  *  he  indicated  that  he  had  learned
his  lesson,  was  disenchanted  with  Russia,
and  had  a  renewed  concept — I  am  paraphras-
ing, a  renewed  concept — of  the  American
free  society.

We  talked  to  him  twice.  He  likewise  in-
dicated he  was  disenchanted  with  Russia.  We
satisfied  ourselves  that  we  had  met  our  re-
quirement, namely  to  find  out  whether  he
had  been  recruited  by  Soviet  intelligence.  The
case  was  closed.

We  again  exhibited  interest  on  the  basis  of
these  contacts  with  The  Worker,  Fair  Play  for
Cuba  Committee,  which  are  relatively  in-
consequential.

His  activities  for  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba
Committee  in  New  Orleans,  we  knew,  were
not  of  real  consequence  as  he  was  not  con-
nected with  any  organized  activity  there.

The  interview  with  him  in  jail  is  not  sig-
nificant from  the  standpoint  of  whether  he
had  a  propensity  for  violence.

Q.  This  is  the  Quigley  interview  you  are
talking  about?

A.  Yes;  it  was  a  self-serving  interview.

The  visits  with  the  Soviet  Embassy  were
evidently  for  the  purpose  of  securing  a  visa,
and  he  had  told  us  during  one  of  the  inter-
views that  he  would  probably  take  his  wife
back  to  Soviet  Russia  some  time  in  the  future.
He  had  come  back  to  Dallas.  Hosty  had  es-
tablished that  he  had  a  job,  he  was  working,
and  had  told  Mrs.  Paine  that  when  he  got  the
money  he  was  going  to  take  an  apartment
when  the  baby  was  old  enough,  he  was  going
to  take  an  apartment,  and  the  famUy  would
live  together.

He  gave  evidence  of  settling  down.  No-
where during  the  course  of  this  investigation
or  the  information  that  came  to  us  from  other
agencies  was  there  any  indication  of  a  poten-
tial for  violence  on  his  part.


Consequently,  there  was  no  basis  for  Hosty
to  go  to  Secret  Service  and  advise  them  of
Oswald's  presence.  * *  *

As  reflected  in  this  testimony,  the  officials  of
the  FBI  believed  that  there  was  no  data  in  its
files  which  gave  warning  that  Oswald  was  a
source  of  danger  to  President  Kennedy.  While
he  had  expressed  hostility  at  times  toward  the
State  Department,  the  Marine  Corps,  and  the
FBI  as  agents  of  the  Government,  so  far  as  the
FBI  knew  he  had  not  shown  any  potential  for
violence.  Prior  to  November  22,  1963,  no  law
enforcement  agency  had  any  information  to
connect  Oswald  with  the  attempted  shooting  of
General  Walker.  It  was  against  this  background
and  consistent  with  the  criteria  followed  by  the
FBI  prior  to  November  22  that  agents  of  the
FBI  in  Dallas  did  not  consider  Oswald's  presence
in  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building
overlooking  the  motorcade  route  as  a  source  of
danger  to  the  President  and  did  not  inform  the
Secret  Service  of  his  employment  in  the  Deposi-
tory Building.

The  Commission  believes,  however,  that  the
FBI  took  an  unduly  restrictive  view  of  its  re-
sponsibihties  in  preventive  intelligence  work,
prior  to  the  assassination.  The  Commission  ap-
preciates the  large  volume  of  cases  handled  by
the  FBI  (636,371  investigative  matters  during
fiscal  year  1963).  There  were  no  Secret  Service
criteria  which  specifically  required  the  referral
of  Oswald's  case  to  the  Secret  Service;  nor  was
there  any  requirement  to  report  the  names  of
defectors.  However,  there  was  much  material  in
the  hands  of  the  FBI  about  Oswald:  the  knowl-
edge of  his  defection,  his  arrogance  and  hostility
to  the  United  States,  his  pro-Castro  tendencies,
his  lies  when  interrogated  by  the  FBI,  his  trip  to
Mexico  where  he  was  in  contact  with  Soviet
authorities,  his  presence  in  the  School  Book  De-
pository job  and  its  location  along  the  route  of
the  motorcade.  All  this  does  seem  to  amount  to
enough  to  have  induced  an  alert  agency,  such  as
the  FBI,  possessed  of  this  information  to  Ust
Oswald  as  a  potential  threat  to  the  safety  of  the
President.  This  conclusion  may  be  tinged  with
hindsight,  but  is  stated  primarily  to  direct  the
thought  of  those  responsible  for  the  future  safety
of  our  President  to  the  need  for  a  more  imagi-
native and  less  narrow  intepretation  of  their
responsibilities.

It  is  the  conclusion  of  the  Commission  that,
even  in  the  absence  of  Secret  Service  criteria
which  specifically  required  the  referral  of  such
a  case  as  Oswald's  to  the  Secret  Service,  a  more
alert  and  carefully  considered  treatment  of  the
Oswald  case  by  the  Bureau  might  have  brought
about  such  a  referral.  Had  such  a  review  been
undertaken  by  the  FBI,  there  might  conceivably
have  been  additional  investigation  of  the  Oswald
case  between  November  5  and  November  22.
Agent  Hosty  testified  that  several  matters
brought  to  his  attention  in  late  October  and
early  November,  including  the  visit  to  the  Soviet

194


Embassy  in  Mexico  City,  required  further  at-
tention. Under  proper  procedures  knowledge  of
the  pending  Presidential  visit  might  have
prompted  Hosty  to  have  made  more  vigorous
efforts  to  locate  Oswald's  roominghouse  address
in  Dallas  and  to  interview  him  regarding  these
unresolved  matters.

The  formal  FBI  instructions  to  its  agents  out-
lining the  information  to  be  referred  to  the  Se-
cret Service  were  too  narrow  at  the  time  of  the
assassination.  While  the  Secret  Service  bear  the
principal  responsibility  for  this  faUure,  the  FBI
instructions  did  not  reflect  fully  the  Secret  Serv-
ice's need  for  information  regarding  potential
threats.  The  handbook  referred  thus  to  "the  pos-
sibility of  an  attempt  against  the  person  or
safety  of  the  President."  It  is  clear  from  Hosty's
testimony  that  this  was  construed,  at  least  by
him,  as  requiring  evidence  of  a  plan  or  con-
spiracy to  injure  the  President.  Efforts  made  by
the  Bureau  since  the  assassination,  on  the  other
hand,  reflect  keen  awareness  of  the  necessity  of
conununicating  a  much  wider  range  of  intelli-
gence information  to  the  Service.

Most  important,  notwithstanding  that  both
agencies  have  professed  to  the  Commission  that
the  liaison  between  them  was  close  and  fully
sufficient,  the  Commission  does  not  believe
that  the  liaison  between  the  FBI  and  the  Secret
Service  prior  to  the  assassination  was  as  effec-
tive as  it  should  have  been.  The  FBI  Manual  of
Instructions  provided:

Liaison  With  Other  Government  Agencies

To  insure  adequate  and  effective  liaison  ar-
rangements, each  SAC  should  specifically  des-
ignate an  Agent  (or  Agents)  to  be  responsible
for  developing  and  maintaining  liaison  with
other  Federal  Agencies.  This  liaison  should
take  into  consideration  FBI-agency  commun-
ity of  interests,  location  of  agency  headquar-
ters, and  the  responsiveness  of  agency  repre-
sentatives. In  each  instance,  haison  contacts
should  be  developed  to  include  a  close  friendly
relationship,  mutual  understanding  of  FBI
and  agency  jurisdictions,  and  an  indicated
willingness  by  the  agency  representative  to
coordinate  activities  and  to  discuss  problems
of  mutual  interest.  Each  field  office  should
determine  those  Federal  agencies  which  are
represented  locally  and  with  which  liaison
should  be  conducted.

The  testimony  reveals  that  liaison  responsibili-
ties in  connection  with  the  President's  visit  were
discussed  twice  officially  by  the  special  agent  in
charge  of  the  FBI  office  in  Dallas.  As  discussed
in  chapter  11,  some  limited  information  was
made  available  to  the  Secret  Service.  But  there
was  no  fuily  adequate  haison  between  the  two
agencies.  Indeed,  the  Commission  believes  that
the  Liaison  between  all  Federal  agencies  respon-
sible for  Presidential  protection  should  be
improved.


Other  Protective  Measures  and  Aspects  of
Secret  Service  Performance

The  President's  trip  to  Dallas  called  into  play
many  standard  operating  procedures  of  the  Se-
cret Service  in  addition  to  its  preventive  intelli-
gence operations.  Examination  of  these  proce-
dures shows  that  in  most  respects  they  were  well
conceived  and  ably  executed  by  the  personnel  of
the  Service.  Against  the  background  of  the
critical  events  of  November  22,  however,  cer-
tain shortcomings  and  lapses  from  the  high
standards  which  the  Commission  believes  should
prevail  in  the  field  of  Presidential  protection  are
evident.

Advance  preparations. — The  advance  prepa-
rations in  Dallas  by  Agent  Winston  G.  Lawson
of  the  White  House  detaU  have  been  described
in  chapter  U.  With  the  assistance  of  Agent  in
Charge  Sorrels  of  the  Dallas  field  office  of  the
Secret  Service,  Lawson  was  responsible  fOT
working  out  a  great  many  arrangements  for  the
President's  trip.  The  Service  prefers  to  have  two
agents  perform  advance  preparations.  In  the
case  of  Dallas,  because  President  Kennedy  had
scheduled  visits  to  five  Texas  cities  and  had  also
scheduled  visits  to  other  parts  of  the  country  im-
mediately before  the  Texas  trip,  there  were  not
enough  men  available  to  permit  two  agents  to
be  assigned  to  all  the  advance  work.  Conse-
quently, Agent  Lawson  did  the  advance  work
alone  from  November  13  to  November  18
when  he  was  joined  by  Agent  David  B.  Grant,
who  had  just  completed  advance  work  on  the
President's  trip  to  Tampa.

The  Commission  concludes  that  the  most  sig-
nificant advance  arrangements  for  the  President's
trip  were  soundly  planned.  In  particular,  the
Commission  believes  that  the  motorcade  route
selected  by  Agent  Lawson,  upon  the  advice  of
Agent  in  Charge  Sorrels  and  with  the  concur-
rence of  the  Dallas  police,  was  entirely  appro-
priate in  view  of  the  known  desires  of  the  Presi-
dent. There  were  far  safer  routes  via  freeways
directly  to  the  Trade  Mart,  but  these  routes
would  not  have  been  in  accordance  with  the
WTiite  House  staff  instructions  given  the  Secret
Service  for  a  desirable  motorcade  route.  Much
of  Lawson's  time  was  taken  with  establishing
adequate  security  over  the  motorcade  route  and
at  the  two  places  where  the  President  would
stop,  Love  Field  and  the  Trade  Mart.  The  Com-
mission concludes  that  the  arrangements
worked  out  at  the  Trade  Mart  by  these  Secret
Service  agents  with  the  cooperation  of  the  Dallas
police  and  other  local  law  enforcement  agents,
were  carefully  executed.  Since  the  President  was
to  be  at  the  Trade  Mart  longer  than  at  any  other
location  in  Dallas  and  in  view  of  the  security
hazards  presented  by  the  building,  the  Secret
Service  correctly  gave  particular  attention  in  the
advance  preparations  to  those  arrangements.
The  Commission  also  regards  the  securitv"  ar-
rangements worked  out  by  Lawson  and  Sorrels
at  Love  Field  as  entirely  adequate.


195


The  Commission  believes,  however,  that  the
Secret  Service  has  inadequately  defined  the  re-
sponsibilities of  its  advance  agents,  who  have
been  given  broad  discretion  to  determine  what
matters  require  attention  in  making  advance
preparations  and  to  decide  what  action  to  take.
Agent  Lawson  was  not  given  written  instruc-
tions concerning  the  Dallas  trip  or  advice  about
any  peculiar  problems  which  it  might  involve;
all  instructions  from  higher  authority  were
communicated  to  him  orally.  He  did  not  have  a
checklist  of  the  tasks  he  was  expected  to  accom-
plish, either  by  his  own  efforts  or  with  the  co-
operation of  local  authorities.  The  only  syste-
matic supervision  of  the  activities  of  the  advance
agent  has  been  that  provided  by  a  requirement
that  he  file  interim  and  final  reports  on  each  ad-
vance assignment.  The  interim  report  must  be  in
the  hands  of  the  agent  supervising  the  protective
group  traveling  with  the  President  long  enough
before  his  departure  to  apprise  him  of  any  par-
ticular problems  encountered  and  the  respon-
sive action  taken.  Agent  Lawson's  interim  re-
port was  received  by  Agent  Kellerman  on  No-
vember 20,  the  day  before  departure  on  the
Texas  trip.

The  Secret  Service  has  advised  the  Commis-
sion that  no  unusual  precautions  were  taken  for
the  Dallas  trip,  and  that  "the  precautions  taken
for  the  President's  trip  were  the  usual  safe-
guards employed  on  trips  of  this  kind  in  the
United  States  during  the  previous  year."  Spe-
cial Agent  in  Charge  Sorrels  testified  that  the
advance  preparations  followed  on  this  occasion
were  "pretty  much  the  same"  as  those  followed
in  1936  during  a  trip  to  Dallas  by  President
Roosevelt,  which  was  Sorrels'  first  important
assignment  in  connection  with  Presidential
work.

In  view  of  the  constant  change  in  the  nature
of  threats  to  the  President  and  the  diversity  of
the  dangers  which  may  arise  in  the  various  cities
within  the  United  States,  the  Commission  be-
lieves that  standard  procedures  in  use  for  many
years  and  applied  in  all  parts  of  the  country  may
not  be  sufficient.  There  is,  for  example,  no  Se-
cret Service  arrangement  for  evaluating  before
a  trip  particular  difficulties  that  might  be  an-
ticipated, which  would  bring  to  bear  the  judg-
ment and  experience  of  members  of  the  White
House  detail  other  than  the  advance  agent.  Con-
stant reevaluation  of  procedures,  with  atten-
tion to  special  problems  and  the  development  of
instructions  specific  to  particular  trips,  would
be  a  desirable  iimovation.

Liaison  with  local  law  enforcement  authori-
ties.— In  the  description  of  the  important  as-
pects of  the  advance  preparations,  there  have
been  references  to  the  numerous  discussions  be-
tween Secret  Service  representatives  and  the
Dallas  Police  Department.  The  wholehearted
support  of  these  local  authorities  was  indispen-
sable to  the  Service  in  carrying  out  its  duties.
The  Service  had  28  agents  participating  in  the
Dallas  visit.  Agent  Lawson's  advance  planning


called  for  the  deployment  of  almost  600  mem-
bers of  the  Dallas  Police  Department,  Fire  De-
partment, County  SheriiFs  Department,  and  the
Texas  Department  of  Public  Safety.  Despite  this
dependence  on  local  authorities,  which  would
be  substantially  the  same  on  a  visit  by  the  Presi-
dent to  any  large  city,  the  Secret  Service  did  not
at  the  time  of  the  assassination  have  any  estab-
lished procedure  governing  its  relationships  with
them.  It  had  no  prepared  checklist  of  matters  to
be  covered  with  local  police  on  such  visits  to
metropolitan  areas  and  no  written  description
of  the  role  the  local  police  were  expected  to  per-
form. Discussions  with  the  Dallas  authorities
and  requests  made  of  them  were  entirely  infor-
mal.

The  Commission  believes  that  a  more  formal
statement  of  assigned  responsibilities,  supple-
mented in  each  case  to  reflect  the  peculiar  condi-
tions of  each  Presidential  trip,  is  essential.  This
would  help  to  eliminate  varying  interpretations
of  Secret  Service  instructions  by  different  local
law  enforcement  representatives.  For  example,
while  the  Secret  Service  representatives  in  Dallas
asked  the  police  to  station  guards  at  each  over-
pass to  keep  "unauthorized  personnel"  off,  this
term  was  not  defined.  At  some  overpasses  aU
persons  were  excluded,  while  on  the  overpass
overlooking  the  assassination  scene  railroad  and
yard  terminal  workmen  were  permitted  to  re-
main under  police  supervision,  as  discussed  in
chapter  III.  Assistant  Chief  Batchelor  of  the
Dallas  police  noted  the  absence  of  any  formal
statement  by  the  Secret  Service  of  specific  work
assigned  to  the  police  and  suggested  the  desira-
bility of  such  a  statement.  Agent  Lawson  agreed
that  such  a  procedure  would  assist  him  and  other
agents  in  fulfilling  their  responsibilities  as  ad-
vance agents.

Check  of  buildings  along  route  of  motorcade.
— Agent  Lawson  did  not  arrange  for  a  prior  in-
spection of  buildings  along  the  motorcade  route,
either  by  police  or  by  custodians  of  the  buildings,
since  it  was  not  the  usual  practice  of  the  Secret
Service  to  do  so.  The  Chief  of  the  Service  has
provided  the  Commission  a  detailed  explanation
of  this  policy:

Except  for  inauguration  of  other  parades
involving  foreign  dignitaries  accompanied  by
the  President  in  Washington,  it  has  not  been
the  practice  of  the  Secret  Service  to  make  sur-
veys or  checks  of  buildings  along  the  route  of
a  Presidential  motorcade.  For  the  inaugura-
tion and  certain  other  parades  in  Washington
where  the  traditional  route  is  known  to  the
public  long  in  advance  of  the  event,  buildings
along  the  route  can  be  checked  by  teams  of
law  enforcement  officers,  and  armed  guards
are  posted  along  the  route  as  appropriate.  But
on  out-of-town  trips  where  the  route  is  de-
cided on  and  made  public  only  a  few  days  in
advance,  buildings  are  not  checked  either  by
Secret  Service  agents  or  by  any  other  law  en-
forcement officers  at  the  request  of  the  Secret


196


Service.  With  the  number  of  men  available  to
the  Secret  Service  and  the  time  available,  sur-
veys of  hundreds  of  buildings  and  thousands
of  windows  is  not  practical.

In  Dallas  the  route  selected  necessarily  in-
volved passing  through  the  principal  down-
town section  between  tall  buildings.  While
certain  streets  thought  to  be  too  narrow  could
be  avoided  and  other  choices  made,  it  was  not
practical  to  select  a  route  where  the  President
could  not  be  seen  from  roofs  or  windows  of
buildings.  At  the  two  places  in  Dallas  where
the  President  would  remain  for  a  period  of
time,  Love  Field  and  the  Trade  Mart,  arrange-
ments were  made  for  building  and  roof
security  by  posting  police  oflScers  where  ap-
propriate. Similar  arrangements  for  a  motor-
cade of  ten  miles,  including  many  blocks  of
tall  commercial  buildings  is  not  practical.  Nor
is  it  practical  to  prevent  people  from  enteriog
such  buildings,  or  to  limit  access  in  every
building  to  those  employed  or  having  business
there.  Even  if  it  were  possible  with  a  vastly
larger  force  of  security  officers  to  do  so,
many  observers  have  felt  that  such  a  pro-
cedure would  not  be  consistent  with  the  nature
and  purpose  of  the  motorcade  to  let  the  people
see  their  President  and  to  welcome  him  to
their  city.

In  accordance  with  its  regular  procedures,
no  survey  or  other  check  was  made  by  the
Secret  Service,  or  by  any  other  law  enforce-
ment agency  at  its  request,  of  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  Building  or  those  em-
ployed there  prior  to  the  time  the  President
was  shot

This  justification  of  the  Secret  Service's  stand-
ing policy  is  not  persuasive.  The  danger  from  a
concealed  sniper  on  the  Dallas  trip  was  of  con-
cern to  those  who  had  considered  the  problem.
President  Kennedy  himself  had  mentioned  it  that
morning,  as  had  Agent  Sorrels  when  he  and
Agent  Lawson  were  fixing  the  motorcade  route.
Admittedly,  protective  measures  cannot  ordi-
narily be  taken  with  regard  to  all  buildings  along
a  motorcade  route.  Levels  of  risk  can  be  deter-
mine, however,  as  has  been  confirmed  by  build-
ing surveys  made  since  the  assassination  for  the
Department  of  the  Treasury.  An  attempt  to
cover  only  the  most  obvious  points  of  possible
ambush  along  the  route  in  Dallas  might  well  have
included  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository
Building.

Instead  of  such  advance  precautions,  the  Se-
cret Service  depended  in  part  on  the  efforts  of
local  law  enforcement  personnel  stationed  along
the  route.  In  addition.  Secret  Service  agents  rid-
ing in  the  motorcade  were  trained  to  scan  build-
ings as  part  of  their  general  observation  of  the
crowd  of  spectators.  These  substitute  measures
were  of  limited  value.  Agent  Lawson  was  im-
able  to  state  whether  he  had  actually  instructed
the  Dallas  police  to  scan  windows  of  buildings
lining  the  motorcade  route,  although  it  was  his


usual  practice  to  do  so.  If  such  instructions  were
in  fact  given,  they  were  not  effectively  carried
out.  Television  films  taken  of  parts  of  the  motor-
cade by  a  Dallas  television  station  show  the  foot
patrolmen  facing  the  passing  motorcade,  and
not  the  adjacent  crowds  and  buildings,  as  the
procession  passed.

Three  officers  from  the  Dallas  Police  Depart-
ment were  assigned  to  the  intersection  of  Elm
and  Houston  during  the  morning  of  November
22  prior  to  the  motorcade.  All  received  their  in-
structions early  in  the  morning  from  Capt.  P.  W.
Lawrence  of  the  traffic  division.  According  to
Captain  Lawrence:

I  then  told  the  officers  that  their  primary
duty  was  traffic  and  crowd  control  and  that
they  should  be  alert  for  any  persons  who
might  attempt  to  throw  anything  and  although
it  was  not  a  violation  of  the  law  to  carry  a
placard,  that  they  were  not  to  tolerate  any
actions  such  as  the  Stevenson  incident  and
arrest  any  person  who  might  attempt  to  throw
anything  or  try  to  get  at  the  President  and  his
party;  paying  particular  attention  to  the  crowd
for  any  unusual  activity.  I  stressed  the  fact
that  this  was  our  President  and  he  should  be
shown  every  respect  due  his  position  and  that
it  was  our  duty  to  see  that  this  was  done.

Captain  Lawrence  was  not  instructed  to  have
his  men  watch  buildings  along  the  motorcade
route  and  did  not  mention  the  observation  of
buildings  to  them.  The  three  officers  confirm
that  their  primary  concern  was  crowd  and  traffic
control,  and  that  they  had  no  opportunity  to
scan  the  windows  of  the  Depository  or  any
other  building  in  the  vicinity  of  Elm  and  Hous-
ton when  the  motorcade  was  passing.  They  had,
however,  occasionally  observed  the  windows  of
buildings  in  the  area  before  the  motorcade  ar-
rived, in  accordance  with  their  own  understand-
ing of  their  fimction.

As  the  motorcade  approached  Elm  Street
there  were  several  Secret  Service  agents  in  it
who  shared  the  responsibility  of  scanning  the
windows  of  nearby  buildings.  Agent  Sorrels,  rid-
ing in  the  lead  car,  did  observe  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  Building  as  he  passed  by,  at
least  for  a  sufficient  number  of  seconds  to  gain
a  "general  impression"  of  the  lack  of  any  unusual
activity.  He  was  handicapped,  however,  by  the
fact  that  he  was  riding  in  a  closed  car  whose
roof  at  times  obscured  his  view.  Lawson,  also
in  the  lead  car,  did  not  scan  any  buildings  since
an  important  part  of  his  job  was  to  look  back-
ward at  the  President's  car.  Lawson  stated  that
he  "was  looking  back  a  good  deal  of  the  time,
watching  his  car,  watching  the  sides,  watching
the  crowds,  giving  advice  or  asking  advice  from
the  Chief  and  also  looking  ahead  to  the  known
hazards  like  overpasses,  underpasses,  railroads,
et  cetera."  Agent  Roy  H.  Kellerman,  riding  in
the  front  seat  of  the  Presidential  car,  stated  that
he  scanned  the  Depository  Building,  but  not


197


sufficiently  to  be  alerted  by  anything  in  the  win-
dows or  on  the  roof.  The  agents  in  the  foUowup
car  also  were  expected  to  scan  adjacent  build-
ings. However,  the  Commission  does  not  believe
that  agents  stationed  in  a  car  behind  the  Presi-
dential car,  who  must  concentrate  primarily  on
the  possibility  of  threats  from  crowds  along  the
route,  provide  a  significant  safeguard  against
dangers  in  nearby  buildings.

Conduct  of  Secret  Service  agents  in  Fort
Worth  on  November  22. — In  the  early  morning
hours  on  November  22,  1963,  in  Fort  Worth,
there  occurred  a  breach  of  discipline  by  some
members  of  the  Secret  Service  who  were  offi-
cially traveling  with  the  President.  After  the
President  had  retired  at  his  hotel,  nine  agents
who  were  off  duty  went  to  the  nearby  Fort
Worth  Press  Club  at  midnight  or  slightly  there-
after, expecting  to  obtain  food;  they  had  had
little  opportunity  to  eat  during  the  day.  No  food
was  available  at  the  Press  Club.  All  of  the  agents
stayed  for  a  drink  of  beer,  or  in  several  cases,  a
mixed  drink.  According  to  their  affidavits,  the
drinking  in  no  case  amounted  to  more  than
three  glasses  of  beer  or  H  mixed  drinks,  and
others  who  were  present  say  that  no  agent  was
inebriated  or  acted  improperly.  The  statements
of  the  agents  involved  are  supported  by  state-
ments of  members  of  the  Fort  Worth  press  who
accompanied  or  observed  them  and  by  a  Secret
Service  investigation.

According  to  their  statements,  the  agents  re-
mained at  the  Press  Club  for  periods  varying
from  30  minutes  to  an  hour  and  a  half,  and  the
last  agent  left  the  Press  Club  by  2  a.m.  Two  of
the  nine  agents  returned  to  their  rooms.  The
seven  others  proceeded  to  an  establishment
called  the  Cellar  Coffee  House,  described  by
some  as  a  beatnik  place  and  by  its  manager  as
"a  unique  show  place  with  continuous  light  en-
tertainment all  night  [serving]  only  coffee,  fruit
juices  and  no  hard  liquors  or  beer.  There  is  no
indication  that  any  of  the  agents  who  visited
the  Cellar  Coffee  House  had  any  intoxicating
drink  at  that  establishment.  Most  of  the  agents
were  there  from  about  1:30  or  1:45  a.m.  to
about  2:45  or  3  a.m.;  one  agent  was  there  from
2  until  5  a.m.

The  lobby  of  the  hotel  and  the  areas  adjacent
to  the  quarters  of  the  President  were  guarded
during  the  night  by  members  of  the  midnight
to  8  a.m.  shift  of  the  White  House  detail.  These
agents  were  each  relieved  for  a  half  hour  break
during  the  night.  Three  members  of  this  shift
separately  took  this  opportunity  to  visit  the  Cel-
lar Coffee  House.  Only  one  stayed  as  long  as  a
half  hour,  and  none  had  any  beverage  there.
Chief  Rowley  testiQed  that  agents  on  duty  in
such  a  situation  usually  stay  within  the  building
during  their  reUef,  but  that  their  visits  to  the
Cellar  were  "neither  consistent  nor  inconsistent"
with  their  duty.

Each  of  the  agents  who  visited  the  Press  Club
or  the  Cellar  Coffee  House  (apart  from  the
three  members  of  the  midnight  shift)  had  duty


assignments  begiiming  no  later  than  8  a.m.  that
morning.  President  Kennedy  was  scheduled  to
speak  across  the  street  from  his  hotel  in  Fort
Worth  at  8:30  a.m.,  and  then  at  a  breakfast,
after  which  the  entourage  would  proceed  to
Dallas.  In  Dallas,  one  of  the  nine  agents  was
assigned  to  assist  in  security  measures  at  Love
Field,  and  four  had  protective  assignments  at
the  Trade  Mart.  The  remaining  four  had  key
responsibilities  as  members  of  the  complement
of  the  follow-up  car  in  the  motorcade.  Three  of
these  agents  occupied  positions  on  the  running
boards  of  the  car,  and  the  fourth  was  seated  in
the  car.

The  supervisor  of  each  of  the  off-duty  agents
who  visited  the  Press  Club  or  the  Cellar  Coffee
House  advised,  in  the  course  of  the  Secret  Serv-
ice investigation  of  these  events,  that  each  agent
reported  for  duty  on  time,  with  full  possession
of  his  mental  and  physical  capabilities  and  en-
tirely ready  for  the  performance  of  his  assigned
duties.  Chief  Rowley  testified  that,  as  a  result
of  the  investigation  he  ordered,  he  was  satisfied
that  each  of  the  agents  performed  his  duties  in
an  entirely  satisfactory  manner,  and  that  their
conduct  the  night  before  did  not  impede  their
actions  on  duty  or  in  the  slightest  way  prevent
them  from  taking  any  action  that  might  have
averted  the  tragedy.  However,  Chief  Rowley  did
not  condone  the  action  of  the  off-duty  agents,
particularly  since  it  violated  a  regulation  of  the
Secret  Service,  which  provides:

Liquor,  use  of. — a.  Employees  are  strictly
enjoined  to  refraiin  from  the  use  of  intoxicat-
ing liquor  during  the  hours  they  are  officially
employed  at  their  post  of  duty,  or  when  they
may  reasonably  expect  that  they  may  be  called
upon  to  perform  an  official  duty.  During  en-
tire periods  of  travel  status,  the  special  agent
is  officially  employed  and  should  not  use
liquor,  imtil  the  completion  of  all  of  his  offi-
cial duties  for  the  day,  after  which  time  a  very
moderate  use  of  Uquor  will  not  be  considered
a  violation.  However,  aU  members  of  the
White  House  Detail  and  special  agents  co-
operating with  them  on  Presidential  and  simi-
lar protective  assignments  are  considered  to  be
subject  to  call  for  official  duty  at  any  time
while  in  travel  status.  Therefore,  the  use  of
intoxicating  hquor  of  any  kind,  including  beer
and  wine,  by  members  of  the  White  House  De-
tail and  special  agents  cooperating  with  them,
or  by  special  agents  on  similar  assignments,
while  they  are  in  a  travel  status,  is  prohibited.

The  regulations  provide  further  that  "violation
or  slight  disregard"  of  these  provisions  "will  be
cause  for  removal  from  the  Service."

Chief  Rowley  testified  that  under  ordinary
circumstances  he  would  have  taken  discipUnary
action  against  those  agents  who  had  been  drink-
ing in  clear  violation  of  the  regulation.  However,
he  felt  that  any  disciplinary  action  might  have
given  rise  to  an  inference  that  the  violation  of


198


the  regulation  had  contributed  to  the  tragic
events  of  November  22.  Since  he  was  convinced
that  this  was  not  the  case,  he  beUeved  that  it
would  be  unfair  to  the  agents  and  their  families
to  take  explicit  disciplinary  measures.  He  felt
that  each  agent  recognized  the  seriousness  of
the  infraction  and  that  there  was  no  danger  of  a
repetition.

The  Commission  recognizes  that  the  respon-
sibilities of  members  of  the  White  House  detail
of  the  Secret  Service  are  arduous.  They  work
long,  hard  hours,  under  very  great  strain,  and
must  travel  frequently.  It  might  seem  harsh  to
circumscribe  their  opportunities  for  relaxation.
Yet  their  role  of  protecting  the  President  is  so
important  to  the  well-being  of  the  country  that
it  is  reasonable  to  expect  them  to  meet  very
high  standards  of  personal  conduct,  so  that  noth-
ing can  interfere  with  their  bringing  to  their  task
the  finest  qualities  and  maximum  resources  of
mind  and  body.  This  is  the  salutary  goal  to  which
the  Secret  Service  regvilation  is  directed,  when
it  absolutely  forbids  drinking  by  any  agent  ac-
companying the  President  on  a  trip.  Nor  is  this
goal  served  when  agents  remain  out  until  early
morning  hours,  and  lose  the  opportunity  to  get
a  reasonable  amount  of  sleep.  It  is  conceivable
that  those  men  who  had  little  sleep,  and  who  had
consumed  alcoholic  beverages,  even  in  limited
quantities,  might  have  been  more  alert  in  the
Dallas  motorcade  if  they  had  retired  promptly
in  Fort  Worth.  However,  there  is  no  evidence
that  these  men  failed  to  take  any  action  in  Dallas
within  their  power  that  would  have  averted  the
tragedy.  As  will  be  seen,  the  instantaneous  and
heroic  response  to  the  assassination  of  some  of
the  agents  concerned  was  in  the  finest  tradition
of  Government  service.

The  motorcade  in  Dallas. — Rigorous  security
precautions  had  been  arranged  at  Love  Field
with  the  local  law  enforcement  authorities  by
Agents  Sorrels  and  Lawson.  These  precautions
included  reserving  a  ceremonial  area  for  the
Presidential  party,  stationing  police  on  the  roof-
tops of  all  buildings  overlooking  the  reception
area,  and  detailing  police  in  civOian  clothes  to  be
scattered  throughout  the  sizable  crowd.  When
President  and  Mrs.  Kennedy  shook  hands
with  members  of  the  public  along  the  fences
surrounding  the  reception  area,  they  were  closely
guarded  by  Secret  Service  agents  who  responded
to  the  implanned  event  witit  dispatch.

As  described  in.  chapter  II,  the  President  di-
rected that  his  car  stop  on  two  occasions  dur-
ing the  motorcade  so  that  he  could  greet
members  of  the  public.  At  these  stops,  agents
from  the  Presidential  follow-up  car  stood  be-
tween the  President  and  the  public,  and  on  one
occasion  Agent  KeUerman  left  the  front  seat  of
the  President's  car  to  take  a  similar  position.
The  Commission  regards  such  impromptu  stops
as  presenting  an  unnecessary  danger,  but  finds
that  the  Secret  Service  agents  did  all  that  could
have  been  done  to  take  protective  measures.
The  Presidential  limousine. — ^The  limousine


used  by  President  Kennedy  in  Dallas  was  a  con-
vertible with  a  detachable,  rigid  plastic  "bubble"
top  which  was  neither  bulletproof  nor  bullet
resistant.  The  last  Presidential  vehicle  with  any
protection  against  small-arms  fire  left  the  White
House  in  1953.  It  was  not  then  replaced  because
the  state  of  the  art  did  not  permit  the  develop-
ment of  a  bulletproof  top  of  sufficiently  light
weight  to  permit  its  removal  on  those  occasions
when  the  President  wished  to  ride  in  an  open
car.  The  Secret  Service  believed  that  it  was  very
doubtful  that  any  President  would  ride  regu-
larly in  a  vehicle  with  a  fixed  top,  even  though
transparent.  Since  the  assassination,  the  Secret
Service,  with  the  assistance  of  other  Federal
agencies  and  of  private  industry,  has  developed
a  vehicle  for  the  better  protection  of  the  Presi-
dent.

Access  to  passenger  compartment  of  Presi-
dential car.— On  occasion  the  Secret  Service
has  been  permitted  to  have  an  agent  riding  in
the  passenger  compartment  with  the  President.
Presidents  have  made  it  clear,  however,  that
they  did  not  favor  this  or  any  other  arrangement
which  interferes  with  the  privacy  of  the  President
and  his  guests.  The  Secret  Service  has  therefore
suggested  this  practice  only  on  extraordinary
occasions.  Without  attempting  to  prescribe  or
recommend  specific  measures  which  should  be
employed  for  the  future  protection  of  Presidents,
the  Commission  does  believe  that  there  are
aspects  of  the  protective  measures  employed  in
the  motorcade  at  Dallas  which  deserve  special
comment.

The  Presidential  vehicle  in  use  in  Dallas,  de-
scribed in  chapter  II,  had  no  special  design  or
equipment  which  would  have  permitted  the  Se-
cret Service  agent  riding  in  the  driver's  com-
partment to  move  into  the  passenger  section
without  hindrance  or  delay.  Had  the  vehicle
been  so  designed  it  is  possible  that  an  agent  rid-
ing in  the  front  seat  could  have  reached  the
President  in  time  to  protect  him  from  the  second
and  fatal  shot  to  hit  the  President.  However,
such  access  to  the  President  was  interfered  with
both  by  the  metal  bar  some  15  inches  above  the
back  of  the  front  seat  and  by  the  passengers  in
the  jump  seats.  In  contrast,  the  Vice  Presidential
vehicle,  although  not  specially  designed  for  that
purpose,  had  no  passenger  in  a  jump  seat  be-
tween Agent  Youngblood  and  Vice  President
Johnson  to  interfere  with  Agent  Youngblood's
ability  to  take  a  protective  position  in  the  pas-
senger compartment  before  the  third  shot  was
fired.

The  assassination  suggests  that  it  would  have
been  of  prime  importance  in  the  protection  of
the  President  if  the  Presidential  car  permitted
immediate  access  to  the  President  by  a  Secret
Service  agent  at  the  first  sign  of  danger.  At  that
time  the  agents  on  the  running  boards  of  the
followup  car  were  expected  to  perform  such  a
function.  However,  these  agents  could  not  reach
the  President's  car  when  it  was  traveling  at  an
appreciable  rate  of  speed.  Even  if  the  car  is

199


traveling  more  slowly,  the  delay  involved  in
reaching  the  President  may  be  crucial.  It  is  clear
that  at  the  time  of  the  shots  in  Dallas,  Agent
Chnton  J.  Hill  leaped  to  the  President's  rescue
as  quickly  as  humanly  possible.  Even  so,  analysis
of  the  motion  picture  films  taken  by  amateur
photographer  Zapruder  reveals  that  Hill  first
placed  his  hand  on  the  Presidential  car  at  frame
343,  30  frames  and  therefore  approximately
1.6  seconds  after  the  President  was  shot  in  the
head.  About  3.7  seconds  after  the  President  re-
ceived this  wound,  Hill  had  both  feet  on  the  car
and  was  climbing  aboard  to  assist  President  and
Mrs.  Kennedy.

Planning  for  motorcade  contingencies. — In
response  to  inquiry  by  the  Commission  regard-
ing the  instructions  to  agents  in  a  motorcade
of  emergency  procedures  to  be  taken  in  a  con-
tingency such  as  that  which  actually  occurred,
the  Secret  Service  responded:

The  Secret  Service  has  consistently  followed
two  general  principles  in  emergencies  involv-
ing the  President.  All  agents  are  so  instructed.
The  first  duty  of  the  agents  in  the  motorcade
is  to  attempt  to  cover  the  President  as  closely
as  possible  and  practicable  and  to  shield  him
by  attempting  to  place  themselves  between
the  President  and  any  source  of  danger.  Sec-
ondly, agents  are  instructed  to  remove  the
President  as  quickly  as  possible  from  known
or  impending  danger.  Agents  are  instructed
that  it  is  not  their  responsibility  to  investigate
or  evaluate  a  present  danger,  but  to  consider
any  untoward  circumstances  as  serious  and  to
afford  the  President  maximum  protection  at
all  times.  No  responsibility  rests  upon  those
agents  near  the  President  for  the  identification
or  arrest  of  any  assassin  or  an  attacker.  Their
primary  responsibility  is  to  stay  with  and
protect  the  President.

Beyond  these  two  principles  the  Secret  Serv-
ice believes  a  detailed  contingency  or  emer-
gency plan  is  not  feasible  because  the  varia-
tions possible  preclude  effective  planning.  A
number  of  steps  are  taken,  however,  to  permit
appropriate  steps  to  be  taken  in  an  emergency.
For  instance,  tiie  lead  car  always  is  manned
by  Secret  Service  agents  familiar  with  the
area  and  with  local  law  enforcement  offi-
cials; the  radio  net  in  use  in  motorcades  is
elaborate  and  permits  a  number  of  different
means  of  communication  with  various  local
points.  A  doctor  is  in  the  motorcade.

This  basic  approach  to  the  problem  of  planning
for  emergencies  is  sound.  Any  effort  to  prepare
detailed  contingency  plans  might  well  have  the
undesirable  effect  of  inhibiting  quick  and  imagi-
native responses.  If  the  advance  preparation  is
thorough,  and  the  protective  devices  and  tech-
niques employed  are  sound,  those  in  command
should  be  able  to  direct  the  response  appropriate
to  the  emergency.

The  Commission  finds  that  the  Secret  Service


agents  in  the  motorcade  who  were  immediately
responsible  for  the  President's  safety  reacted
promptly  at  the  time  the  shots  were  fired.  Their
actions  demonstrate  that  the  President  and  the
Nation  can  expect  courage  and  devotion  to  duty
from  the  agents  of  the  Secret  Service.


RECOMMENDATIONS

The  Commission's  review  of  the  provisions
for  Presidential  protection  at  the  time  of  Presi-
dent Kennedy's  trip  to  Dallas  demonstrates  the
need  for  substantial  improvements.  Since  the
assassination,  the  Secret  Service  and  the  Depart-
ment of  the  Treasury  have  properly  taken  the
initiative  in  reexamining  major  aspects  of  Presi-
dential protection.  Many  changes  have  already
been  made  and  others  are  contemplated,  some
of  them  in  response  to  the  Commission's  ques-
tions and  informal  suggestions.

Assassination  a  Federal  Crime

There  was  no  Federal  criminal  jurisdiction
over  the  assassination  of  President  Kennedy.
Had  there  been  reason  to  beUeve  that  the  assas-
sination was  the  result  of  a  conspiracy.  Federal
jurisdiction  could  have  been  asserted;  it  has  long
been  a  Federal  crime  to  conspire  to  injure  any
Federal  officer,  on  account  of,  or  while  he  is
engaged  in,  the  lawful  discharge  of  the  duties  of
his  office.  Murder  of  the  President  has  never
been  covered  by  Federal  law,  however,  so  that
once  it  became  reasonably  clear  that  the  killing
was  the  act  of  a  single  person,  the  State  of  Texas
had  exclusive  jurisdiction.

It  is  anomalous  that  Congress  has  legislated
in  other  ways  touching  upon  the  safety  of  the
Chief  Executive  or  other  Federal  officers,  with-
out making  an  attack  on  the  President  a  crime.
Threatening  harm  to  the  President  is  a  Federal
offense,  as  is  advocacy  of  the  overthrow  of  the
Government  by  the  assassination  of  any  of  its
officers.  The  murder  of  Federal  judges,  U.S.
attorneys  and  marshals,  and  a  number  of  other
specifically  designated  Federal  law  enforcement
officers  is  a  Federal  crime.  Equally  anomalous
are  statutory  provisions  which  specifically  au-
thorize the  Secret  Service  to  protect  the  Presi-
dent, without  authorizing  it  to  arrest  anyone
who  harms  him.  The  same  provisions  authorize
the  Service  to  arrest  without  warrant  persons
committing  certain  offenses,  including  counter-
feiting and  certain  frauds  involving  Federal
checks  or  securities.  The  Commission  agrees
with  the  Secret  Service  that  it  should  be  au-
thorized to  make  arrests  without  warrant  for  all
offenses  within  its  jurisdiction,  as  are  FBI  agents
and  Federal  marshals.

There  have  been  a  number  of  efforts  to  make
assassination  a  Federal  crime,  particularly  after
the  assassination  of  President  McKinley  and
the  attempt  on  the  life  of  President-elect  Frank-
Un  D.  Roosevelt.  In  1902  bills  passed  both
Houses  of  Congress  but  failed  of  enactment

200


when  the  Senate  refused  to  accept  the  confer-
ence report.  A  number  of  bills  were  introduced
immediately  following  the  assassination  of  Presi-
dent Kennedy.

The  Commdssion  recommends  to  the  Congress
that  it  adopt  legislation  which  would:

Punish  the  murder  or  manslaughter  of,
attempt  or  conspiracy  to  murder,  kidnaping
of  and  assault  upon

the  President,  Vice  President,  or  other  offi-
cer next  in  the  order  of  succession  to  the  Office
of  President,  the  President-elect  and  the  Vice-
President-elect,

whether  or  not  the  act  is  committed  while
the  victim  is  in  the  performance  of  his  official
duties  or  on  account  of  such  performance.

Such  a  statute  would  cover  the  President
and  Vice  President  or,  in  the  absence  of  a  Vice
President,  the  person  next  in  order  of  succession.
During  the  period  between  election  and  inaugu-
ration, the  President-elect  and  Vice-President-
elect would  also  be  covered.  Restricting  the
coverage  in  this  way  would  avoid  unnecessary
controversy  over  the  inclusion  or  exclusion  of
other  officials  who  are  in  the  order  of  succession
or  who  hold  important  governmental  posts.  In
addition,  the  restriction  would  probably  elimi-
nate a  need  for  the  requirement  which  has  been
urged  as  necessary  for  the  exercise  of  Federal
power,  that  the  hostile  act  occur  while  the  vic-
tim is  engaged  in  or  because  of  the  perform-
ance of  official  duties.  The  governmental  conse-
quences of  assassination  of  one  of  the  specified
officials  give  the  United  States  ample  power  to
act  for  its  own  protection.  The  activities  of  the
victim  at  the  time  an  assassination  occurs  and
the  motive  for  the  assassination  bear  no  relation-
ship to  the  injury  to  the  United  States  which
follows  from  the  act.  This  point  was  ably  made
in  the  1902  debate  by  Senator  George  F.  Hoar,
the  sponsor  of  the  Senate  bill:

♦  *  *  what  this  bill  means  to  punish  is  the
crime  of  interruption  of  the  Government  of
the  United  States  and  the  destruction  of  its
security  by  striking  down  the  life  of  the  per-
son who  is  actually  in  the  exercise  of  the  ex-
ecutive power,  or  of  such  persons  as  have
been  constitutionally  and  lawfully  provided
to  succeed  thereto  in  case  of  a  vacancy.  It
is  important  to  this  covmtry  that  the  interrup-
tion shall  not  take  place  for  an  hour  *  *  *

Enactment  of  this  statute  would  mean  that  the
investigation  of  any  of  the  acts  covered  and  of
the  possibility  of  a  further  attempt  would  be
conducted  by  Federal  law  enforcement  officials,
in  particular,  the  FBI  with  the  assistance  of  the
Secret  Service.  At  present,  Federal  agencies  par-
ticipate only  upon  the  sufferance  of  the  local
authorities.  While  the  poUce  work  of  the  Dallas
authorities  in  the  early  identification  and  appre-
hension of  Oswald  was  both  efficient  and  prompt,


FBI  director  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  who  strongly
supports  such  legislation,  testified  that  the  ab-
sence of  clear  Federal  jurisdiction  over  the  assas-
sination of  President  Kennedy  led  to  embarrass-
ment and  confusion  in  the  subsequent  investiga-
tion by  Federal  and  local  authorities.  In  addition,
the  proposed  legislation  will  insure  that  any
suspects  who  are  arrested  will  be  Federal  prison-
ers, subject  to  Federal  protection  from  vigilante
justice  and  other  threats.

Committee  of  Cabinet  Officers

As  our  Government  has  become  more  com-
plex, agencies  other  than  the  Secret  Service  have
become  involved  in  phases  of  the  overall  prob-
lem of  protecting  our  national  leaders.  The  FBI
is  the  major  domestic  investigating  agency  of  the
United  States,  while  the  CIA  has  the  primary
responsibility  for  collecting  intelligence  overseas
to  supplement  information  acquired  by  the  De-
partment of  State.  The  Secret  Service  must  rely
in  large  part  upon  the  investigating  capacity  and
experience  of  these  and  other  agencies  for  much
of  its  information  regarding  possible  dangers
to  the  President.  The  Commission  believes  that
it  is  necessary  to  improve  the  cooperation  among
these  agencies  and  to  emphasize  that  the  task  of
Presidential  protection  is  one  of  broad  national
concern.

The  Commission  suggests  that  consideration
might  be  given  to  assigning  to  a  Cabinet-level
committee  or  the  National  Security  Council
(which  is  responsible  for  advising  the  President
respecting  the  coordination  of  departmental
policies  relating  to  the  national  security)  the
responsibility  to  review  and  oversee  the  protec-
tive activities  of  the  Secret  Service  and  the  other
Federal  agencies  that  assist  in  safeguarding  the
President.  The  Committee  should  include  the
Secretary  of  the  Treasury  and  the  Attorney
General,  and,  if  the  Council  is  used,  arrange-
ments should  be  made  for  the  attendance  of  the
Secretary  of  the  Treasury  and  the  Attorney
General  at  any  meetings  which  are  concerned
with  Presidential  protection.  The  Coimcil  al-
ready includes,  in  addition  to  the  President  and
Vice  President,  the  Secretaries  of  State  and  De-
fense and  has  a  competent  staff.

The  foremost  assignment  of  the  Committee
would  be  to  insure  that  the  maximum  resources
of  the  Federal  Government  are  fuUy  engaged
in  the  job  of  protecting  the  President,  by  defining
responsibilities  clearly  and  overseeing  their  exe-
cution. Major  needs  of  personnel  or  other
resources  might  be  met  more  easily  on  its  recom-
mendation than  they  have  been  in  the  past.

The  Committee  would  be  able  to  provide
guidance  in  defining  the  general  nature  of  do-
mestic and  foreign  dangers  to  Presidential  secu-
rity. As  improvements  are  recommended  for  the
advance  detection  of  potential  threats  to  the
President,  it  could  act  as  a  final  review  board.
The  expert  assistance  and  resources  which  it
could  draw  upon  would  be  particularly  desirable
in  this  complex  and  sensitive  area.


201


This  arrangement  would  provide  a  continuing
high-level  contact  for  agencies  that  may  wish
to  consult  respecting  particular  protective  meas-
ures. For  various  reasons  the  Secret  Service  has
functioned  largely  as  an  informal  part  of  the
White  House  st^,  with  the  result  that  it  has
been  imable,  as  a  practical  matter,  to  exercise
sufficient  influence  over  the  security  precau-
tions which  surround  Presidential  activities.  A
Cabinet-level  committee  which  is  actively  con-
cerned with  these  problems  would  be  able  to  dis-
cuss these  matters  more  effectively  with  the
President

Responsibilities  for  Presidential  Protection

The  assignment  of  the  responsibility  of  pro-
tecting the  President  to  an  agency  of  the  Depart-
ment of  the  Treasury  was  largely  an  historical
accident.  The  Secret  Service  was  organized  as  a
division  of  the  Department  of  the  Treasury  in
1865,  to  deal  with  counterfeiting.  In  1894,  while
investigating  a  plot  to  assassinate  President
Cleveland,  the  Service  assigned  a  small  protec-
tive detail  of  agents  to  the  White  House.  Secret
Service  men  accompanied  the  President  and  his
family  to  their  vacation  home  in  Massachusetts
and  special  details  protected  him  in  Washington,
on  trips,  and  at  special  fimctions.  These  informal
and  part-time  arrrangements  led  to  more  sys-
tematic protection  in  1902,  after  the  assassina-
tion of  President  McKinley;  the  Secret  Service,
then  the  only  Federal  investigative  agency,  as-
sumed full-time  responsibility  for  the  safety  of
the  President.  Since  that  time,  the  Secret  Service
has  had  and  exercised  responsibility  for  the
physical  protection  of  the  President  and  also  for
the  preventive  investigation  of  potential  threats
against  the  President.

Although  the  Secret  Service  has  had  the  pri-
mary responsibility  for  the  protection  of  the
President,  the  FBI,  which  was  established  within
the  Department  of  Justice  in  1908,  has  had  in
recent  years  an  increasingly  important  role  to
play.  In  the  appropriations  of  the  FBI  there  has
recurred  annually  a  item  for  the  "protection  of
the  person  of  the  President  of  the  United  States,'
which  first  appeared  in  the  appropriation  of  the
Department  of  Justice  in  1910  under  the  head-
ing "Miscellaneous  Objects."  Although  the  FBI
is  not  charged  with  the  physical  protection  of  the
President,  it  does  have  an  assignment,  as  do
other  Government  agencies,  in  the  field  of  pre-
ventive investigation  in  regard  to  the  President's
security.  As  discussed  above,  the  Bureau  has  at-
tempted to  meet  its  responsibilities  in  this  field
by  spelling  out  in  its  Handbook  the  procedures
which  its  agents  are  to  follow  in  connection  with
information  received  "indicating  the  possibility
of  an  attempt  against  the  person  or  safety  of  the
President"  or  other  protected  persons.

With  two  Federal  agencies  operating  in  the
same  general  field  of  preventive  investigation,
questions  inevitably  arise  as  to  the  scope  of  each
agency's  authority  and  responsibility.  As  the
testimony  of  J.  Edgar  Hoover  and  other  Bureau


officials  revealed,  the  FBI  did  not  believe  that
its  directive  required  the  Bureau  to  notify  the
Secret  Service  of  the  substantial  information
about  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  which  the  FBI  had
accumulated  before  the  President  reached  Dal-
las. On  the  other  hand,  the  Secret  Service  had
no  knowledge  whatever  of  Oswald,  his  back-
ground, or  his  employment  at  the  Book  Deposi-
tory, and  Robert  I.  Bouck,  who  was  in  charge  of
the  Protective  Research  Section  of  the  Secret
Service,  believed  that  the  accumulation  of  the
facts  known  to  the  FBI  should  have  constituted
a  sufficient  basis  to  warn  the  Secret  Service  of
the  Oswald  risk.

The  Commission  believes  that  both  the  FBI
and  the  Secret  Service  have  too  narrowly  con-
strued their  respective  responsibilities.  The  Com-
mission has  the  impression  that  too  much  em-
phasis is  placed  by  both  on  the  investigation  of
specific  threats  by  individuals  and  not  enough
on  dangers  from  other  sources.  In  addition,  the
Commission  has  concluded  that  the  Secret  Serv-
ice particularly  tends  to  be  the  passive  recipient
of  information  regarding  such  threats  and  that
its  Protective  Research  Section  is  not  adequately
staffed  or  equipped  to  conduct  the  wider  investi-
gative work  that  is  required  today  for  the  security
of  the  President.

During  the  period  the  Commission  was  giving
thought  to  this  situation,  the  Commission  re-
ceived a  number  of  proposals  designed  to  im-
prove current  arrangements  for  protecting  the
President.  These  proposals  included  suggestions
to  locate  exclusive  responsibility  for  all  phases
of  the  work  in  one  or  another  Government
agency,  to  clarify  the  division  of  authority  be-
tween the  agencies  involved,  and  to  retain  the
existing  system  but  expand  both  the  scope  and
the  operations  of  the  existing  agencies,  par-
ticularly those  of  the  Secret  Service  and  the  FBI.

It  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  FBI,  as  our
chief  investigative  agency,  is  properly  manned
and  equipped  to  carry  on  extensive  irifonnation
gathering  functions  within  the  United  States.
It  was  also  suggested  that  it  would  take  a  sub-
stantial period  of  time  for  the  Secret  Service  to
build  up  the  experience  and  skills  necessary  to
meet  the  problem.  Consequently  the  sugges-
tion has  been  made,  on  the  one  hand,  that  all
preventive  investigative  functions  relating  to  the
security  of  the  President  should  be  transferred
to  the  FBI,  leaving  with  the  Secret  Service  only
the  responsibility  for  the  physical  protection  of
the  President,  that  is,  the  guarding  function
alone.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  urged  that  all  features
of  the  protection  of  the  President  and  his  family
should  be  committed  to  an  elite  and  independent
corps.  It  is  also  contended  that  the  agents  should
be  intimately  associated  with  the  life  of  the  Presi-
dential family  in  all  its  ramifications  and  alert  to
every  danger  that  might  befall  it,  and  ready  at
any  instant  to  hazard  great  danger  to  themselves
in  the  performance  of  their  tremendous  respon-
sibility. It  is  suggested  that  an  organization  shorn

202


of  its  power  to  investigate  all  the  possibilities  of
danger  to  the  President  and  becoming  merely
the  recipient  of  information  gathered  by  others
would  become  limited  solely  to  acts  of  physical
alertness  and  personal  courage  incident  to  its
responsibilities.  So  circumscribed,  it  could  not
maintain  the  esprit  de  corps  or  the  necessary
alertness  for  this  imique  and  challenging  re-
sponsibility.

While  in  accordance  with  its  mandate  this
Commission  has  necessarily  examined  into  the
functioning  of  the  various  Federal  agencies  con-
cerned with  the  tragic  trip  of  President  Kennedy
to  Dallas  and  while  it  has  arrived  at  certain  con-
clusions in  respect  thereto,  it  seems  clear  that
it  was  not  within  the  Commission's  responsibility
to  make  specific  recommendations  as  to  the  long-
range  organization  of  the  President's  protection,
except  as  conclusions  flowing  directly  from  its
examination  of  the  President's  assassination  can
be  drawn.  The  Commission  was  not  asked  to
apply  itself  as  did  the  Hoover  Commission  in
1949,  for  example,  to  a  determination  of  the
optimum  organization  of  the  President's  protec-
tion. It  would  have  been  necessary  for  the  Com-
mission to  take  considerable  testimony,  much  of
it  extraneous  to  the  facts  of  the  assassination  of
President  Kennedy,  to  put  it  in  a  position  to
reach  final  conclusions  in  this  respect.  There
are  always  dangers  of  divided  responsibility,
duplication,  and  confusion  of  authority  where
more  than  one  agency  is  operating  in  the  same
field;  but  on  the  other  hand  the  protection  of
the  President  is  in  a  real  sense  a  Government-
wide  responsibility  which  must  necessarily  be
assumed  by  the  Department  of  State,  the  FBI,
the  CIA,  and  the  military  intelligence  agencies
as  well  as  the  Secret  Service.  Moreover,  a  num-
ber of  imponderable  questions  have  to  be
weighed  if  any  change  in  the  intimate  associa-
tion now  established  between  the  Secret  Service
and  the  President  and  his  family  is  contemplated.

These  considerations  have  induced  the  Com-
mission to  believe  that  the  determination  of
whether  or  not  there  should  be  a  relocation  of
responsibilities  and  fimctions  should  be  left  to
the  Executive  and  the  Congress,  perhaps  upon
recommendations  based  on  further  studies  by
the  Cabinet-level  committee  recommended
above  or  the  National  Security  Council.

Pending  any  such  determination,  however,
this  Commission  is  convinced  of  the  necessity
of  better  coordination  and  direction  of  the  ac-
tivities of  all  existing  agencies  of  Government
which  are  in  a  position  to,  and  do,  furnish  in-
formation and  services  related  to  the  security
of  the  President.  The  Commission  feels  the  Se-
cret Service  and  the  FBI,  as  well  as  the  State
Department  and  the  CIA  when  the  President
travels  abroad,  could  improve  their  existing
capacities  and  procedures  so  as  to  lessen  the
chances  of  assassination.  Without,  therefore,
coming  to  final  conclusions  respecting  the  long-
range  organization  of  the  President's  security,
the  Commission  believes  that  the  facts  of  the


assassination  of  President  Kennedy  point  to
certain  measures  which,  while  assuming  no  radi-
cal relocation  of  responsibilities,  can  and  should
be  reconmiended  by  this  Commission  in  the
interest  of  the  more  eflicient  protection  of  the
President.  These  recommendations  are  reviewed
below.

General  Supervision  of  the  Secret  Service

The  intimacy  of  the  Secret  Service's  relation-
ship to  the  White  House  and  the  dissimilarity
of  its  protective  functions  to  most  activities  of
the  Department  of  the  Treasury  have  made  it
difficult  for  the  Treasury  to  maintain  close  and
continuing  supervision.  The  Commission  be-
lieves that  the  recommended  Cabinet-level  com-
mittee will  help  to  correct  many  of  the  major
deficiencies  of  supervision  disclosed  by  the  Com-
mission's investigation.  Other  measures  should
be  taken  as  well  to  improve  the  overall  operation
of  the  Secret  Service.

Daily  supervision  of  the  operations  of  the
Secret  Service  within  the  Department  of  the
Treasury  should  be  improved.  The  Chief  of  the
Service  now  reports  to  the  Secretary  of  the
Treasury  through  an  Assistant  Secretary  whose
duties  also  include  the  direct  supervision  of  the
Bureau  of  the  Mint  and  the  Department's  Em-
ployment Policy  Program,  and  who  also  repre-
sents the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  on  various
committees  and  groups.  The  incimibent  has  no
technical  qualifications  in  the  area  of  Presidential
protection.  The  Commission  recommends  that
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  appoint  a  special
assistant  with  the  responsibility  of  supervising
the  Service.  This  special  assistant  should  be  re-
quired to  have  sufficient  stature  and  experience
in  law  enforcement,  intelligence,  or  allied  fields
to  be  able  to  provide  effective  continuing  super-
vision, and  to  keep  the  Secretary  fully  informed
regarding  all  significant  developments  relating
to  Presidential  protection.

This  report  has  already  pointed  out  several
respects  in  which  the  Commission  believes  that
the  Secret  Service  has  operated  with  insufficient
planning  or  control.  Actions  by  the  Service  since
the  assassination  indicate  its  awareness  of  the
necessity  for  substantial  improvement  in  its  ad-
ministration. A  formal  and  thorough  description
of  the  responsibilities  of  the  advance  agent  is
now  in  preparation  by  the  Service.  Work  is  going
forward  toward  the  preparation  of  formal  imder-
standings  of  the  respective  roles  of  the  Secret
Service  and  other  agencies  with  which  it  col-
laborates or  from  which  it  derives  assistance  and
support.  The  Commission  urges  that  the  Service
continue  this  effort  to  overhaul  and  define  its
procedures.  While  manuals  and  memoranda  are
no  guarantee  of  effective  operations,  no  sizable
organization  can  achieve  efficiency  without  the
careful  analysis  and  demarcation  of  responsi-
bility that  is  reflected  in  definite  and  compre-
hensive operating  procedures.

The  Commission  also  recommends  that  the
Secret  Service  consciously  set  about  the  task  of


203


inculcating  and  maintaining  the  highest  standard
of  excellence  and  esprit  for  all  of  its  personnel.
This  involves  tight  and  unswerving  discipline  as
well  as  the  promotion  of  an  outstanding  degree
of  dedication  and  loyalty  to  duty.  The  Commis-
sion emphasizes  that  it  finds  no  causal  connec-
tion between  the  assassination  and  the  breach
of  regulations  which  occurred  on  the  night  of
November  21  at  Fort  Worth.  Nevertheless,  such
a  breach,  in  which  so  many  agents  participated,
is  not  consistent  with  the  standarck  which  the
responsibilities  of  the  Secret  Service  require  it  to
meet.

Preventive  Intelligence

In  attempting  to  identify  those  individuals
who  might  prove  a  danger  to  the  President,  the
Secret  Service  has  largely  been  the  passive  re-
cipient of  threatening  communications  to  the
President  and  reports  from  other  agencies  which
independently  evaluate  their  information  for  po-
tential sources  of  danger.  This  was  the  conse-
quence of  the  Service's  lack  of  an  adequate  in-
vestigative staff,  its  inability  to  process  large
amounts  of  data,  and  its  failure  to  provide  speci-
fic descriptions  of  the  kind  of  information  it
sought.

The  Secret  Service  has  embarked  upon  a  com-
plete overhaul  of  its  research  activities.  The
staff  of  the  Protective  Research  Section  (PRS)
has  been  augmented,  and  a  Secret  Service  in-
spector has  been  put  in  charge  of  this  operation.
With  the  assistance  of  the  President's  Office  of
Science  and  Technology,  and  of  the  Advanced
Research  Projects  Agency  of  the  Department  of
Defense,  it  has  obtained  the  services  of  outside
consultants  such  as  the  Rand  Corp.,  Interna-
tional Business  Machines  Corp.,  and  a  panel  of
psychiatric  and  psychological  experts.  It  has  re-
ceived assistance  also  from  data  processing  ex-
perts at  the  CIA  and  from  a  specialist  in  psy-
chiatric prognostication  at  Walter  Reed  Hospital.
As  a  result  of  these  studies,  the  planning  docu-
ment submitted  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury
to  the  Bureau  of  the  Budget  on  August  31,  1964,
makes  several  significant  recommendations  in
this  field.  Based  on  the  Commission's  investiga-
tion, the  following  minimum  goals  for  improve-
ments are  indicated:

Broader  and  more  selective  criteria. — Since
the  assassination,  both  the  Secret  Service  and  the
FBI  have  recognized  that  the  PRS  files  can  no
longer  be  limited  largely  to  persons  communicat-
ing actual  threats  to  the  President.  On  December
26,  1963,  the  FBI  circulated  additional  instruc-
tions to  all  its  agents,  specifying  criteria  for  in-
formation to  be  furnished  to  the  Secret  Service
in  addition  to  that  covered  by  the  former  stand-
ard, which  was  the  possibility  of  an  attempt
against  the  person  or  safety  of  the  President.  The
new  instructions  require  FBI  agents  to  report
immediately  information  concerning:

Subversives,  ultrarightists,  racists  and  fas-
cists (a)  possessing  emotional  instability  or


irrational  behavior,  (b)  who  have  made
threats  of  bodily  harm  against  officials  or
employees  of  Federal,  state  or  local  govern-
ment or  officials  of  a  foreign  government,
(c)  who  express  or  have  expressed  strong  or
violent  anti-U.S.  sentiments  and  who  have
been  involved  in  bombing  or  bomb-making
or  whose  past  conduct  indicates  tendencies
toward  violence,  and  (d)  whose  prior  acts
or  statements  depict  propensity  for  violence
and  hatred  against  organized  government.

Alan  H.  Belmont,  Assistant  to  the  Director  of
the  FBI,  testified  that  this  revision  was  initiated
by  the  FBI  itself.  The  volimie  of  references  to
the  Secret  Service  has  increased  substantially
since  the  new  instructions  went  into  effect;  more
than  5,000  names  were  referred  to  the  Secret
Service  in  the  first  4  months  of  1964.  According
to  Chief  Rowley,  by  mid- June  1964,  the  Secret
Service  had  received  from  the  FBI  some  9,000
reports  on  members  of  the  Communist  Party.
The  FBI  now  transmits  information  on  aU  de-
fectors, a  category  which  would,  of  course,  have
included  Oswald.

Both  Director  Hoover  and  Behnont  expressed
to  the  Commission  the  great  concern  of  the  FBI,
which  is  shared  by  the  Secret  Service,  that  re-
ferrals to  the  Secret  Service  imder  the  new  cri-
teria might,  if  not  properly  handled,  result  in
some  degree  of  interference  with  the  personal
liberty  of  those  involved.  They  emphasized  the
necessity  that  the  information  now  being  fur-
nished be  handled  with  judgment  and  care.  The
Commission  shares  this  concern.  The  problem
is  aggravated  by  the  necessity  that  the  Service
obtain  the  assistance  of  local  law  enforcement
officials  in  evaluating  the  information  which  it
receives  and  in  taking  preventive  steps.

In  June  1964,  the  Secret  Service  sent  to  a
number  of  Federal  law  enforcement  and  intel-
ligence agencies  guidelines  for  an  experimental
program  to  develop  more  detailed  criteria.  The
suggestions  of  Federal  agencies  for  revision  of
these  guidelines  were  solicited.  The  new  tentative
criteria  are  useful  in  making  clear  that  the  inter-
est of  the  Secret  Service  goes  beyond  information
on  individuals  or  groups  threatening  to  cause
harm  or  embarrassment  to  the  President.  Infor-
mation is  requested  also  concerning  individuals
or  groups  who  have  demonstrated  an  interest
in  the  President  or  "other  high  government  offi-
cials in  the  nature  of  a  complaint  coupled  with
an  expressed  or  impUed  determination  to  use  a
means,  other  than  legal  or  peaceful,  to  satisfy
any  grievance,  real  or  imagined."  Under  these
criteria,  whether  the  case  should  be  referred  to
the  Secret  Service  depends  on  the  existence  of
a  previous  history  of  mental  instability,  propen-
sity toward  violent  action,  or  some  similar  char-
acteristic, coupled  with  some  evaluation  of  the
capabiUty  of  the  individual  or  group  to  further
the  intention  to  satisfy  a  grievance  by  unlawful
means.

While  these  tentative  criteria  are  a  step  in  the


204


right  direction,  they  seem  unduly  restrictive  in
continuing  to  require  some  manifestation  of
animus  against  a  Government  official.  It  is  ques-
tionable whether  such  criteria  would  have  re-
sulted in  the  referral  of  Oswald  to  the  Secret
Service.  Chief  Rowley  believed  that  they  would,
because  of  Oswald's  demonstrated  hostihty  to-
ward the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  in  his  letter  of
January  30,  1962.

I  shall  employ  all  means  to  right  this  gross
mistake  or  injustice  to  a  boni-fied  U.S.  citizen
and  ex-serviceman.  The  U.S.  government  has
no  charges  or  complaints  against  me.  I  ask
you  to  look  into  this  case  and  take  the  neces-
sary steps  to  repair  the  damage  done  to  me
and  my  family.

Even  with  the  advantage  of  hindsight,  this  letter
does  not  appear  to  express  or  imply  Oswald's
"determination  to  use  a  means,  other  than  legal
or  peaceful,  to  satisfy  [his]  grievance"  within  the
meaning  of  the  new  criteria.

It  is  apparent  that  a  good  deal  of  further  con-
sideration and  experimentation  will  be  required
before  adequate  criteria  can  be  framed.  The
Coimnission  recognizes  that  no  set  of  meaningful
criteria  will  yield  the  names  of  all  potential
assassins.  Charles  J.  Guiteau,  Leon  F.  Czolgosz,
John  Schrank,  and  Guiseppe  Zangara — four
assassins  or  would-be  assassins — were  all  men
who  acted  alone  in  their  criminal  acts  against
our  leaders.  None  had  a  serious  record  of  prior
violence.  Each  of  them  was  a  failure  in  his  work
and  in  his  relations  with  others,  a  victim  of  de-
lusions and  fancies  which  led  to  the  conviction
that  society  and  its  leaders  had  combined  to
thwart  him.  It  will  require  every  available  re-
source of  our  Government  to  devise  a  practical
system  which  has  any  reasonable  possibility  of
revealing  such  malcontents.

Liaison  with  other  agencies  regarding  intelli-
gence.— ^The  Secret  Service's  liaison  with  the
agencies  that  supply  information  to  it  has  been
too  casual.  Since  the  assassination,  the  Service
has  recognized  that  these  relationships  must  be
far  more  formal,  and  each  agency  given  clear
imderstanding  of  the  assistance  which  the  Se-
cret Service  expects.

Once  the  Secret  Service  has  formulated  its
new  standards  for  collection  of  information,  it
should  enter  into  written  agreements  with  each
Federal  agency  and  the  leading  State  and  local
agencies  that  might  be  a  source  of  such  informa-
tion. Such  agreements  should  describe  in  detail
the  information  which  is  sought,  the  manner  in
which  it  win  be  provided  to  the  Secret  Service,
and  the  respective  responsibilities  for  any  fur-
ther investigation  that  may  be  required.

This  is  especially  necessary  with  regard  to  the
FBI  and  CIA,  which  carry  the  major  responsi-
bility for  supplying  information  about  potential
threats,  particularly  those  arising  from  organized
groups,  within  their  special  jurisdiction.  Since
these  agencies  are  already  obliged  constantly  to


evaluate  the  activities  of  such  groups,  they
should  be  responsible  for  advising  the  Secret
Service  if  information  develops  indicating  the
existence  of  an  assassination  plot  and  for  re-
porting such  events  as  a  change  in  leadership  or
dogma  which  indicate  that  the  group  may  pre-
sent a  danger  to  the  President.  Detailed  formal
agreements  embodying  these  arrangements
should  be  worked  out  between  the  Secret  Serv-
ice and  both  of  these  agencies.

It  should  be  made  clear  that  the  Secret  Service
will  in  no  way  seek  to  duplicate  the  intelligence
and  investigative  capabilities  of  the  agencies
now  operating  in  this  field  but  will  continue  to
use  the  data  developed  by  these  agencies  to
carry  out  its  special  duties.  Once  experience  has
been  gained  in  implementing  such  agreements
with  the  Federal  and  leading  State  and  local
agencies,  the  Secret  Service,  through  its  field
offices,  should  negotiate  similar  arrangements
with  such  other  State  and  local  law  enforcement
agencies  as  may  provide  meaningful  assistance.
Much  useful  information  will  come  to  the  at-
tention of  local  law  enforcement  agencies  in  the
regular  course  of  their  activities,  and  this  source
should  not  be  neglected  by  undue  concentration
on  relationships  with  other  Federal  agencies.
Finally,  these  agreements  with  Federal  and  local
authorities  will  be  of  little  value  unless  a  system
is  established  for  the  frequent  formal  review  of
activities  thereunder.

In  this  regard  the  Commission  notes  with  ap-
proval several  recent  measures  taken  and  pro-
posed by  the  Secret  Service  to  improve  its  liaison
arrangements.  In  his  testimony  Secretary  of  the
Treasury  C.  Douglas  Dillon  informed  the  Com-
mission that  an  interagency  committee  has  been
established  to  develop  more  effective  criteria.
According  to  Secretary  Dillon,  the  Committee
will  include  representatives  of  the  President's
Office  of  Science  and  Technology,  Department
of  Defense,  CIA,  FBI,  and  the  Secret  Service.
In  addition,  the  Department  of  the  Treasury  has
requested  five  additional  agents  for  its  Protective
Research  Section  to  serve  as  liaison  officers  with
law  enforcement  and  intelligence  agencies.  On
the  basis  of  the  Department's  review  during  the
past  several  months.  Secretary  Dillon  testified
that  the  use  of  such  liaison  officers  is  the  only
effective  way  to  insure  that  adequate  liaison  is
maintained.  As  a  beginning  step  to  improve
liaison  with  local  law  enforcement  officials,  the
Secret  Service  on  August  26,  1964,  directed  its
field  representatives  to  send  a  form  request  for
intelligence  information  to  all  local,  county,  and
State  law  enforcement  agencies  in  their  districts.
Each  of  these  efforts  appears  sound,  and  the
Commission  recommends  that  these  and  the
other  measures  suggested  by  the  Commission
be  pursued  vigorously  by  the  Secret  Service.

Automatic  data  processing. — Unless  the  Se-
cret Service  is  able  to  deal  rapidly  and  accurately
with  a  growing  body  of  data,  the  increased  in-
formation supplied  by  other  agencies  will  be
wasted.  PRS  must  develop  the  capacity  to  clas-


205


sify  its  subjects  on  a  more  sophisticated  basis
than  the  present  geographic  breakdown.  Its  pres-
ent manual  filing  system  is  obsolete;  it  makes  no
use  of  the  recent  developments  in  automatic
data  processing  which  are  widely  used  in  the
business  world  and  in  other  Government  oflBces.

The  Secret  Service  and  the  Department  of  the
Treasury  now  recognize  this  critical  need.  In
the  planning  document  currently  under  review
by  the  Bureau  of  the  Budget,  the  Department
recommends  that  it  be  permitted  to  hire  five
qualified  persons  "to  plan  and  develop  a  work-
able and  efficient  automated  file  and  retrieval
system."  Also  the  Department  requests  the  sum
of  $100,000  to  conduct  a  detailed  feasibility
study;  this  money  would  be  used  to  compensate
consultants,  to  lease  standard  equipment  or  to
purchase  specially  designed  pilot  equipment  On
the  basis  of  such  a  feasibility  study,  the  Depart-
ment hopes  to  design  a  practical  system  which
will  fully  meet  the  needs  of  the  Protective  Re-
search Section  of  the  Secret  Service.

The  Commission  recommends  that  prompt
and  favorable  consideration  be  given  to  this  re-
quest. The  Commission  further  recommends
that  the  Secret  Service  coordinate  its  planning
as  closely  as  possible  with  all  of  the  Federal
agencies  from  which  it  receives  information.  The
Secret  Service  should  not  and  does  not  plan  to
develop  its  own  intelligence  gathering  facilities
to  duplicate  the  existing  facilities  of  other  Fed-
eral agencies.  In  planning  its  data  processing
techniques,  the  Secret  Service  should  attempt  to
develop  a  system  compatible  with  those  of  the
agencies  from  which  most  of  its  data  will  come.*
Protective  Research  participation  in  advance
arrangements. — Since  the  assassination.  Secret
Service  procedures  have  been  changed  to  re-
quire that  a  member  of  PRS  accompany  each
advance  survey  team  to  establish  liaison  with
local  intelligence  gathering  agencies  and  to  pro-
vide for  the  immediate  evaluation  of  informa-
tion received  from  them.  This  PRS  agent  will
also  be  responsible  for  establishing  an  informal
local  liaison  committee  to  make  certain  that  all
protective  intelligence  activities  are  coordinated.
Based  on  its  experience  during  this  period,  the
Secret  Service  now  recommends  that  additional
personnel  be  made  available  to  PRS  so  that  these
arrangements  can  be  made  permanent  without

*  In  evaluating  data  processing  techniques  of  the  Secret
Service,  the  Conunission  had  occasion  to  become  informed,  to
a  limited  extent,  about  the  data  processing  techniques  of  other
Federal  intelligence  and  law  enforcement  agencies.  The  Com-
mission was  struck  by  the  apparent  lack  of  effort,  on  an  inter-
agency basis,  to  develop  coordinated  and  mutually  compatible
systems,  even  where  such  coordination  would  not  seem  incon-
sistent with  the  particular  purposes  of  the  agency  involved.
The  Commission  recognizes  that  this  is  a  controversial  area
and  that  many  strongly  held  views  are  advanced  in  resistance
to  any  suggMtion  that  an  effort  be  made  to  impose  any  degree
of  coordination.  This  matter  is  obviously  beyond  the  jurisdic-
tion of  the  Commission,  but  it  seems  to  warrant  further  study
before  each  agency  becomes  irrevocably  committed  to  separate
action.  The  Commission,  therefore,  recommends  that  the  Presi-
dent consider  ordering  an  inquiry  into  the  possibility  that  co-
ordination might  be  achieved  to  a  greater  extent  than  seems
now  to  be  contemplated,  without  interference  with  the  primary
mission  of  each  agency  involved.


adversely  affecting  the  operations  of  the  Service's
field  offices.  The  Commission  regards  this  as  a
most  useful  innovation  and  urges  that  the  prac-
tice be  continued.

Liaison  With  Local  Law  Enforcement  Agencies

Advice  by  the  Secret  Service  to  local  police  in
metropolitan  areas  relating  to  the  assistance  ex-
pected in  connection  with  a  Presidential  visit  has
hitherto  been  handled  on  an  informal  basis.  The
Service  should  consider  preparing  formal  ex-
planations of  the  cooperation  anticipated  during
a  Presidential  visit  to  a  city,  in  formats  that  can
be  commimicated  to  each  level  of  local  authori-
ties. Thus,  the  local  chief  of  police  could  be
given  a  master  plan,  prepared  for  the  occasion,
of  all  protective  measures  to  be  taken  during  the
visit;  each  patrolman  might  be  given  a  prepared
booklet  of  instructions  explaining  what  is  ex-
pected of  him.

The  Secret  Service  has  expressed  concern  that
written  instructions  might  come  into  the  hands
of  local  newspapers,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  pre-
cautions described.  However,  the  instructions
must  be  communicated  to  the  local  police  in  any
event  and  can  be  leaked  to  the  press  whether  or
not  they  are  in  writing.  More  importantly,  the
lack  of  carefully  prepared  and  carefully  trans-
mitted instructions  for  typical  visits  to  cities  can
lead  to  lapses  in  protection,  such  as  the  confu-
sion in  Dallas  about  whether  members  of  the
public  were  permitted  on  overpasses.  Such  in-
structions will  not  fit  all  circumstances,  of
course,  and  should  not  be  reUed  upon  to  the
detriment  of  the  imaginative  application  of  judg-
ment in  special  cases.

Inspection  of  Buildings

Since  the  assassination  of  President  Kennedy,
the  Secret  Service  has  been  experimenting  with
new  techniques  in  the  inspection  of  buildings
along  a  motorcade  route.  According  to  Secre-
tary Dillon,  the  studies  indicate  that  there  is
some  utility  in  attempting  to  designate  certain
buildings  as  involving  a  higher  risk  than  others.
The  Commission  strongly  encourages  these
efforts  to  improve  protection  along  a  motorcade
route.  The  Secret  Service  should  utilize  the  per-
sonnel of  other  Federal  law  enforcement  offices
in  the  locality  to  assure  adequate  manpower  for
this  task,  as  it  is  now  doing.  Lack  of  adequate
resources  is  an  unacceptable  excuse  for  failing
to  improve  advance  precautions  in  this  crucial
area  of  Presidential  protection.

Secret  Service  Personnel  and  Facilities

Testimony  and  other  evidence  before  the
Commission  suggest  that  the  Secret  Service  is
trying  to  accomplish  its  job  with  too  few  people
and  without  adequate  modem  equipment.  Al-
though Chief  Rowley  does  not  complain  about
the  pay  scale  for  Secret  Service  agents,  salaries
are  below  those  of  the  FBI  and  leading  munici-
pal poUce  forces.  The  assistant  to  the  Director
of  the  FBI  testified  that  the  caseload  of  each


206


FBI  agent  averaged  20-25,  and  he  felt  that  this
was  high.  Chief  Rowley  testified  that  the  present
workload  of  each  Secret  Service  agent  averages
110.1  cases.  While  these  statistics  relate  to  the
activities  of  Secret  Service  agents  stationed  in
field  offices  and  not  the  White  House  detail,  field
agents  supplement  those  on  the  detail,  particu-
larly when  the  President  is  traveling.  Although
the  Commission  does  not  know  whether  the
cases  involved  are  entirely  comparable,  these
figures  suggest  that  the  agents  of  the  Secret
Service  are  substantially  overworked.

In  its  budget  request  for  the  fiscal  year  begin-
ning July  1,  1964,  the  Secret  Service  sought
funds  for  25  new  positions,  primarily  in  field
offices.  This  increase  has  been  approved  by  the
Congress.  Chief  Rowley  explained  that  this
would  not  provide  enough  additional  manpower
to  take  all  the  measures  which  he  considers  re-
quired. However,  the  1964-65  budget  request
was  submitted  in  November  1963  and  requests
for  additional  personnel  were  not  made  because
of  the  studies  then  being  conducted

The  Secret  Service  has  now  presented  its
recommendations  to  the  Bureau  of  the  Budget
The  plan  proposed  by  the  Service  would  take
approximately  20  months  to  implement  and  re-
quire expenditures  of  approximately  $3  million
during  that  period.  The  plan  provides  for  an
additional  205  agents  for  the  Secret  Service.
Seventeen  of  this  number  are  proposed  for  the
Protective  Research  Section;  145  are  proposed
for  the  field  offices  to  handle  the  increased
volume  of  security  investigations  and  be  availa-
ble to  protect  the  President  or  Vice  President
when  they  travel;  18  agents  are  proposed  for  a
rotating  pool  which  will  go  through  an  intensive
training  cycle  and  also  be  available  to  supple-
ment the  White  House  detail  in  case  of  unex-
pected need;  and  25  additional  agents  are  recom-
mended to  provide  the  Vice  President  full
protection.

The  Commission  urges  that  the  Bureau  of
the  Budget  review  these  recommendations  with
the  Secret  Service  and  authorize  a  request  for
the  necessary  supplemental  appropriation,  as
soon  as  it  can  be  justified.  The  Congress  has
often  stressed  that  it  will  support  any  reasonable
request  for  funds  for  the  protection  of  the
President

Manpower  and  Technical  Assistance  From
Other  Agencies

Before  the  assassination  the  Secret  Service  in-
frequently requested  other  Federal  law  enforce-
ment agencies  to  provide  persoimel  to  assist  in
its  protection  functions.  Since  the  assassination,
the  Service  has  experimented  with  the  use  of
agents  borrowed  for  short  periods  from  such
agencies.  It  has  used  other  Treasury  law  en-
forcement agents  on  special  experiments  in
building  and  route  surveys  in  places  to  which
the  President  frequently  travels.  It  has  also  used
other  Federal  law  enforcement  agents  during
Presidential  visits  to  cities  in  which  such  agents


are  stationed.  Thus,  in  the  4  months  following
the  assassination,  the  FBI,  on  16  separate  occa-
sions, supplied  a  total  of  139  agents  to  assist  in
protection  work  during  a  Presidential  visit,
which  represents  a  departure  from  its  prior
practice.  From  February  11  through  June  30,
1964,  the  Service  had  the  advantage  of  9,500
hours  of  work  by  other  enforcement  agencies.

The  FBI  has  indicated  that  it  is  willing  to
continue  to  make  such  assistance  available,  even
though  it  agrees  with  the  Secret  Service  that  it  is
preferable  for  the  Service  to  have  enough  agents
to  handle  all  protective  demands.  The  Commis-
sion endorses  these  efforts  to  supplement  the
Service's  own  persormel  by  obtaining,  for  short
periods  of  time,  the  assistance  of  trained  Federal
law  enforcement  officers.  In  view  of  the  ever-
increasing  mobility  of  American  Presidents,  it
seems  unlikely  that  the  Service  could  or  should
increase  its  own  staff  to  a  size  which  would  per-
mit it  to  provide  adequate  protective  manpower
for  all  situations.  The  Commission  recommends
that  the  agencies  involved  determine  how  much
periodic  assistance  they  can  provide,  and  that
each  such  agency  and  the  Secret  Ser\ice  enter
into  a  formal  agreement  defining  such  arrange-
ments. It  may  eventually  be  desirable  to  codify
the  practice  in  an  Executive  order.  The  Secret
Service  will  be  better  able  to  plan  its  own  long-
range  persormel  requirements  if  it  knows  with
reasonable  certaint}'  the  amount  of  assistance
that  it  can  expect  from  other  agencies.

The  occasional  use  of  personnel  from  other
Federal  agencies  to  assist  in  protecting  the  Presi-
dent has  a  further  advantage.  It  symbolizes  the
reality  that  the  job  of  protecting  the  President
has  not  been  and  cannot  be  exclusively  the  re-
sponsibility of  the  Secret  Service.  The  Secret
Service  in  the  past  has  sometimes  guarded  its
right  to  be  acknowledged  as  the  sole  protector
of  the  Chief  Executive.  This  no  longer  appears
to  be  the  case.  Protecting  the  President  is  a  diffi-
cult and  complex  task  which  requires  full  use  of
the  best  resources  of  many  parts  of  our  Govern-
ment. Recognition  that  the  responsibility'  must
be  shared  increases  the  likeUhood  that  it  will  be
met.

Much  of  the  Secret  Ser\'ice  work  requires  the
development  and  use  of  highly  sopliisticated
equipment  some  of  which  must  be  specially  de-
signed to  fit  unique  requirements.  Even  before
the  assassination,  and  to  a  far  greater  extent
thereafter,  the  Secret  Ser\'ice  has  been  receiving
full  cooperation  in  scientific  research  and  tech-
nological development  from  many  Government
agencies  including  the  Department  of  Defense
and  the  President's  Office  of  Science  and
Technology.

Even  if  the  manpower  and  technological  re-
sources of  the  Secret  Service  are  adequately
augmented,  it  will  continue  to  rely  in  many  re-
spects upon  the  greater  resources  of  the  Office
of  Science  and  Technology'  and  other  agencies.
The  Commission  reconmiends  that  the  present
arrangements  with  the  Office  of  Science  and


207


Technology  and  the  other  Federal  agencies  that
have  been  so  helpful  to  the  Secret  Service  be
placed  on  a  permanent  and  formal  basis.  The
exchange  of  letters  dated  August  31,  1964,  be-
tween Secretary  Dillon  and  Donald  F.  Hornig,
Special  Assistant  to  the  President  for  Science
and  Technology,  is  a  useful  effort  in  the  right
direction.  The  service  should  negotiate  a  memo-
randum of  understanding  with  each  agency  that
has  been  assisting  it  and  from  which  it  can  ex-
pect to  need  help  in  the  future.  The  essential
terms  of  such  memoranda  might  well  be  em-
bodied in  an  Executive  order.


CONCLUSION

This  Commission  can  recommend  no  proce-
dures for  the  future  protection  of  our  Presidents
which  will  guarantee  security.  The  demands  on
the  President  in  the  execution  of  his  responsi-


bilities in  today's  world  are  so  varied  and  com-
plex and  the  traditions  of  the  office  in  a  democ-
racy such  as  ours  are  so  deepseated  as  to
preclude  absolute  security.

The  Commission  has,  however,  from  its  ex-
amination of  the  facts  of  President  Kennedy's
assassination  made  certain  recommendations
which  it  believes  would,  if  adopted,  materially
improve  upon  the  procedures  in  effect  at  the
time  of  President  Kennedy's  assassination  and
result  in  a  substantial  lessening  of  the  danger.

As  has  been  pointed  out,  the  Commission  has
not  resolved  all  the  proposals  which  could  be
made.  The  Commission  nevertheless  is  confi-
dent that,  with  the  active  cooperation  of  the  re-
sponsible agencies  and  with  the  understanding  of
the  people  of  the  United  States  in  their  demands
upon  their  President,  the  recommendations  we
have  here  suggested  would  greatly  advance  the
security  of  the  office  without  any  impairment  of
our  fundamental  liberties.


Appendix  I

(This  appendix,  a  copy  of  President  Johnson's  Executive
Order  No.  11 130  appointing  the  Commission  to  report  upon
the  assassination  of  President  Kennedy,  is  omitted.)


Appendix  11

(This  appendix,  a  copy  of  the  White  House  Press  Secretary's
news  release  announcing  the  names  of  the  Commission  mem-
bers, is  omitted.)


Appendix  HI

(This  appendix,  a  copy  of  Senate  Joint  Resolution  137  of
December  13, 1963  authorizing  the  presidential  Commission
to  compel  attendance  and  testimony  of  witnesses  and  the
production  of  evidence,  is  omitted.)


Appendix  IV

(This  appendix,  containing  biographical  information  on
members  of  the  presidential  Commission  and  acknowledge-
ments to  various  Department  of  Justice  attorneys  who  aided
in  taking  testimony,  is  omitted.)

208


Appendix  V


List  of  Witnesses

The  following  is  a  list  of  the  552  witnesses
whose  testimony  has  been  presented  to  the  Com-
mission. Witnesses  who  appeared  before  mem-
bers of  the  Commission  have  a  "C"  following
their  names;  those  questioned  during  depositions
by  members  of  the  Commission's  legal  staff
are  indicated  by  a  "D";  and  those  who  supplied
affidavits  and  statements  are  similarly  identified
with  "A"  and  "S".  The  brief  descriptions  of  the
witnesses  pertain  either  to  the  time  of  their  testi-
mony or  to  the  time  of  the  events  concerning
which  they  testified.

Witness  Description

Abies,  Don  R.  (D) — Jail  Clerk,  Dallas  Police

Department
Abt,  John  J.(D) — New  York  City  attorney
Adamcik,  John  P.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police

Department
Adams, R. L.(AD) — Placement interviewer,

Texas  Employment  Commission
Adams, Victoria Elizabeth  (D) — Employee,

Texas  School  Book  Depository  (TSBD)
Akin, Gene Coleman(D) — Doctor, Parkland

Hospital
Alba,  Adrian  Thomas  (D) — ^Acquaintance  oi
Oswald  in  New  Orleans
Allen,  Mrs.  J.  U.(A) — Secretary,  Chamberlin-

Hunt  Academy
Altgens,  James  W.(D) — ^Witness  at  assassina-
tion scene
Anderson, Eugene D.(D) — Marine Corps

markmanship  expert
Andrews,  Dean  Adams,  Jr.(D) — New  Orleans

attorney
Applin,  George  Jefferson,  Jr.(D) — ^Witness  of

Oswald  arrest
Arce,  Danny  G.(D) — Employee,  TSBD
Archer,  Don  Ray(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police

Department
Armstrong,  Andrew,  Jr.(D) — Acquaintance  of

Jack  Ruby
Amett, Charles Oliver(D) — Member, Dallas

Police  Department
Aycox,  James  Thomas (D) — ^Acquaintance  of

Jack  Ruby
Baker, Marrion L.(AC) — Member, Dallas

Police  Department
Baker,  Mrs.  (Rachley)  Donald(D) — Employee,

TSBD
Baker,  T.  L.(C) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment
Ballen,  Samuel  B.(D) — Acquaintance  of  the

Oswalds  in  Texas
Barbe, Emmett Charles, Jr.  (A) — Employee,

William  B.  Reily  Co.
Bargas, Tommy(D) — Superintendent, Leslie

Welding  Co.
Barnes,  W.E.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment


Barnett,  W.  E.(D)— do

Barnhorst,  Colin (D)— Desk  Clerk,  YMCA,  in
Dallas

Bashour,  Fouad  A.(D) — Doctor,  Parkland  Hos-
pital

Batchelor,  Charles (D) — Assistant  Chief,  Dallas
Police  Department

Bates,  Pauline  Virginia(D) — Public  stenogra-
pher. Fort  Worth

Baxter,  Charles  Rufus(D) — Doctor,  Parkland
Hospital

Beaty,  Buford  Lee(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Beavers,  William  Robert (D) — Psychiatrist,  Dal-
las

Beers,  Ira  J.  "Jack",  Jr.(D) — Newspaper  pho-
tographer, Dallas

Bellocchio,  Frank (D) — Acquaintance  of  Jack
Ruby

Belmont,  Alan  H.(C) — Assistant  to  the  Direc-
tor, Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  (FBI)

Benavides,  Domingo(D) — Witness  in  the  vi-
cinity of  the  Tippit  crime  scene

Benton,  Nelson (D) — Television  reporter,  CBS

Bieberdorf,  Fred  A.(D) — First  aid  attendant,
Dallas  Health  Department

Biggio,  William  S.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Blalock,  Vance (D) — Observed  Oswald  in  New
Orleans

Bledsoe,  Mary  E.(D) — Oswald's  former  land-
lady in  Dallas

Bogard,  Albert  Guy(D) — ^Automobile  salesman,
Dallas

Bookhout,  James  W.(D) — ^Agent,  FBI

Boone, Eugene(C) — Deputy Sheriff,  Dallas
County

Boswell, J. Thomton(C) — Doctor, Bethesda
Naval  Hospital

Botelho,  James  Anthony  (A) — ^Acquaintance  of
Oswald  in  Marine  Corps

Bouck,  Robert  Inman(C) — ^Agent,  U.S.  Secret
Service

Boudreaux, Anne(D) — ^Acquaintance of Os-
wald during  his  youth

Bouhe,  George  A.(D) — ^Acquaintance  of  the
Oswalds  in  Texas

Bowers, Lee E., Jr.(D) — Employee, Union
Terminal  Co.

Bowron, Diana Hamilton (D) — Nurse, Park-
land Hospital

Boyd,  Ehner  L.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Branch,  John  Henry(D) — Acquaintance  of  Jack
Ruby

Brennan,  Howard  LesUe(AC) — Witness  at  as-
sassination scene

Brewer,  E.  D.(D) — Member,  Dallas  PoHce  De-
partment,


209


Brewer,  Johnny  Calvin (D) — Witness  of  Oswald
arrest

Brian,  V.  J.(C) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Bringuier,  Carlos (D) — Cuban  attorney,  now  a
resident  of  New  Orleans

Brock,  Alvin  R.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Brock,  Mary  (A) — Witness  in  the  vicinity  of  the
Tippit  crime  scene

Brock,  Robert  (A) — do

Brooks,  Donald  E.(D) — Employment  coun-
selor, Texas  Employment  Commission

Brown,  C.  W.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Brown,  Earle  V.(D) — do

Brown,  Peter  Megargee(A) — Coimsel  for  Com-
munity Service  Society,  New  York

Burcham,  John  W.(A)— Chief  of  Unemploy-
ment Insurance,  Texas  Employment  Commis-
sion

Bums,  Doris (D) — ^Employee,  TSBD

Burroughs,  Warren  H.(D) — Employee,  Texas
Theatre

Cabell,  Earle(D) — Mayor  of  Dallas

CabeU,  Mrs.  Earle(D)— Wife  of  Mayor  Cabell

Cadigan,  James  C.(CD) — Questioned  document
expert,  FBI.

Call,  Richard  Dennis  (A) — Acquaintance  of  Os-
wald in  the  Marine  Corps

Callaway,  Ted(C) — Witness  in  the  vicinity  of
the  Tippit  crime  scene

Camarata,  Donald  Peter  (A) — ^Acquaintance  of
Oswald  in  the  Marine  Corps

Carlin,  Bruce  Ray(D) — ^Acquaintance  of  Jack
Ruby

Carlin,  Karen  Bennett (D) — do

Carr,  Waggoner (C) — ^Attorney  general  of  State
of  Texas

Carrico,  Charles  James  (CD) — Doctor,  Park-
land Hospital

Carro,  John(D) — Probation  oflficer,  New  York
City,  1952-54

Carroll,  Bob  K.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Carswell,  Robert(C) — Special  assistant  to  Secre-
tary of  Treasury

Carter,  Clifton  C.(A) — ^Assistant  to  President
Johnson

Cason,  Frances (D) — ^Telephone  clerk,  Dallas
Police  Department

Cason,  Jack  Charles  (A) — President,  TSBD

Caster,  Warren(D) — Assistant  manager,  South-
western Publishing  Co.,  TSBD

Chayes,  Abram(C) — Legal  Adviser,  Depart-
ment of  State

Cheek,  Bertha(D) — Acquaintance  of  Jack  Ruby

Church,  George  B.,  Jr.  (A) — Passenger  with
Oswald  on  SS  Marion  Lykes

Church,  Mrs.  George  B.,  Jr.  (A) — do

Clardy,  Barnard  S.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Clark,  Max  E.(D) — ^Acquaintance  of  the  Os-
walds in  Texas


Clark,  Richard  L.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Clark,  William  Kemp(D) — Doctor,  Parkland
Hospital

Clements,  Manning  C.(D) — ^Agent,  FBI

Cole,  Alwyn(CD) — Questioned  document  ex-
aminer. Treasury  Department

Combest,  B.  H.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

ConnaUy,  John  Bowden,  Jr.(C) — Governor  of
Texas

Connally,  Mrs.  John  Bowden,  Jr.(C) — ^Wife  of
the  Governor  of  Texas

Connor,  Peter  Francis  (A) — ^Acquaintance  of
Oswald  in  the  Marine  Corps

Conway,  Hiram  P.(D) — Fort  Worth  neighbor
of  the  Oswalds  in  Oswald's  youth

Corporon,  John(A) — Ofl&cial  of  New  Orleans
radio  station

Couch,  Malcohn  0.(D) — ^TV  news  camera-
man, Dallas

Coulter,  Harris (C) — State  Department  inter-
preter

Cox,  Roland  A.(D) — Reserve  force,  Dallas  po-
lice Department

Crafard,  Curtis  LaVerne(D) — ^Acquaintance  of
Jack  Ruby

Craig,  Roger  D.(D) — Witness  at  assassination
scene

Crawford,  James  N.(D) — do

Creel,  Robert  J.  (A) — Employee,  Louisiana  De-
partment of  Labor,  New  Orleans

Crowe,  William  D.,  Jr.(a.k.a.  Bill  DeMar).(D)
Acquaintance  of  Jack  Ruby

Crowley,  James  D.(A) — Specialist  in  intelli-
gence matters.  Department  of  State

Croy,  Kenneth  Hudson(D) — Reserve  force,
Dallas  Police  Department

Crull,  Elgin  E.(D) — City  Manager  of  Dallas

Cunningham,  Cortlandt(AC) — Firearms  identi-
fication expert,  FBI

Cunningham,  Helen  P.  (AD) — Employment
Counselor,  Texas  Employment  Commission

Curry,  Jesse  Edward(ACD) — Chief,  Dallas  Po-
lice Department

Curtis,  Don  Teel(D) — Doctor,  Parkland  Hos-
pital

Cutchshaw,  Wilbur  Jay(D) — Member,  Dallas
Police  Department

Daniels,  John  L.(D) — Employee,  Dallas  Park-
ing lot

Daniels,  Napoleon  J.(D) — Former  member,
Dallas  Police  Department

Davis,  Barbara  Jeanette(C) — ^Witness  in  the  vi-
cinity of  the  Tippit  crime  scene

Davis,  Floyd  Guy(D) — Operator,  Sports  Drome
Rifle  Range

Davis,  Virginia  (Mrs.  Charles). (D) — ^Witness
in  the  vicinity  of  the  Tippit  crime  scene

Davis,  Virginia  Louise (D) — Wife  of  Floyd  Guy
Davis

Day,  J.  C.(AC) — Lieutenant,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Dean,  Patrick  Trevore(CD) — Member,  Dallas
Police  Department


210


Decker,  J.  E.  (Bill)  (D)— Sheriff,  DaUas  County

Delgado,  Nelson(D) — Acquaintance  of  Oswald
in  Marine  Corps

DeMar,  William  (see  Crowe,  William  D.,  Jr.)

De  Mohrenschildt,  George  S.(D) — ^Acquain-
tance of  the  Oswalds  in  Texas

De  Mohrenschildt,  Jeanne (D) — do

Dhority,  C.  N.(AD) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Dietrich,  Edward  C.(D) — Guard,  Armored
Motor  Service

Dillard,  Tom  C.(D) — Photographer-Journalist,
Dallas

Dillon,  C.  Douglas(C) — Secretary  of  the  Treas-
ury

Dobbs,  Farrell(AD) — International  Secretary,
Socialist  Workers  Party

Donabedian,  George (D) — Captain,  U.S.  Navy

Donovan,  John  E.(D) — ^Acquaintance  of  Os-
wald in  the  Marine  Corps

Dougherty,  Jack  Edwin(D) — Employee,  TSBD

Dowe,  Kenneth  Lawry(D) — Acquaintance  of
Jack  Ruby

Dulany,  Richard  B.(D) — Doctor,  Parkland
Hospital

Duncan,  William  Glenn,  Jr.(D) — Employee,
radio  station,  Dallas

Dymitruk,  Lydia(D) — Acquaintance  of  the  Os-
walds in  Texas

Dziemian,  Arthur  J.(C) — Wovmd  ballistics  ex-
pert, U.S.  Army

Eberhardt,  A.  M.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Edwards,  Robert  Edwin(D) — Employee,  Dal-
las City  Courthouse

Euins,  Amos  Lee(C) — Witness  at  assassination
scene

Evans,  Julian(D) — ^Husband  of  Myrtle  Evans

Evans,  Myrtle(D) — ^Acquaintance  of  Marguer-
ite Oswald  in  Oswald's  youth

Evans,  Sidney,  Jr.(D) — Resident  of  Ruby's
apartment  house

Fain,  John  W.(C)— Agent,  FBI

Fehrenbach,  George  William.  (D) — Resident  of
Ashland,  Oreg.

Feldsott,  Louis  (A) — President,  Crescent  Fire-
arms, Inc.

Fenley, Robert  Gene(D) — Reporter, Dallas

Finck,  Pierre  A.(C) — Doctor,  Bethesda  Naval
Hospital

Fischer,  Ronald  B.(D) — Auditor,  City  of  Dal-
las

Fleming,  Harold  J.(D) — Employee,  Armored
Motor  Service,  Inc.

Folsom,  Allison  G.,  Jr.(D)— Lt.  Col.,  U.S.  Ma-
rine Corps

Ford,  Declan  P.(C) — Husband  of  Katherine  N.
Ford  and  acquaintance  of  the  Oswalds  in
Texas

Ford,  Katherine  N.(C) — ^Acquaintance  of  the
Oswalds  in  Texas

Foster,  J.  W.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Frazier,  BueU  Wesley  (CD)— Employee,  TSBD
and  neighbor  of  the  Paines  in  Irving,  Tex.


Frazier,  Robert  A. (AC) — Firearms  Identifica-
tion Expert,  FBI

Frazier,  W.  B.(D) — Captain,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Fritz,  John  Wm(ACD)— do

Fuqua,  Harold  R.(D) — Parking  attendant  in
basement  of  city  hall

Gallagher,  John  F.(D)— Agent,  FBI

Gangl,  Theodore  Frank(A) — Employee,  Pad-
gett Printing  Corp.

Gamer,  Jesse  J.  (A) — Neighbor  of  the  Oswalds
in  New  Orleans

Gamer,  Mrs.  Jesse (D) — Landlady  of  Oswald
in  New  Orleans

Gauthier,  Leo  J.(C) — Inspector,  FBI

George,  M.  Waldo(  A) — Landlord  of  Oswalds  in
Dallas

Geraci,  Philip,  III(D) — Resident  of  New  Or-
leans who  met  Oswald

Gibson,  Mrs.  Donald (D) — ^Acquaintance  of  the
Oswalds  in  Texas

Gibson,  John(D) — ^Witness  to  Oswald  arrest

Giesecke,  Adolph  H.,  Jr. (D)— Doctor,  Park-
land Hospital

Givens,  Charles  Douglas (D) — Employee,  TS-
BD

Glover,  Everett  D.(D) — Acquaintance  of  the
Oswalds  in  Texas

Goin,  Donald  Edward (D) — ^Armored  car  oper-
ator

Goldstein,  David  (A) — Owner,  Dave's  House  of
Guns

Goodson,  Clyde  Franklin(D) — Member,  Dallas
Police  Department

Graef,  John  G.(D) — Oswald's  supervisor,  Jag-
gars-Chiles-Stovall,  DaUas

Graf,  Allen  D.(A) — ^Acquaintance  of  Oswald
in  Marine  Corps.

Grant,  Eva(D) — Sister  of  Jack  Ruby

Graves,  Gene(A) — Secretary,  Leslie  Welding
Co.

Graves,  L.  C.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Gravitis,  Dorothy (D) — ^Acquaintance  of  Mrs.
Paine  in  Dallas

Gray,  Virgima(A) — Employee,  Duke  Univer-
sity Library

Greener,  Charles  W.(D) — Proprietor,  Irving
Sports  Shop

Greer,  William  Robert(C) — ^Agent,  U.S.  Secret
Service

Gregory,  Charles  F.(CD) — Doctor,  Parkland
Hospital

Gregory,  Paul  Roderick(D) — Son  of  Peter  Paul
Gregory  and  acquaintance  of  the  Oswalds  in
Texas

Gregory,  Peter  Paul(C) — ^Acquaintance  of  the
Oswalds  in  Texas

Guinyard,  Sam(D) — Witness  in  the  vicinity  of
Tippit  crime  scene

Hall,  C.  Ray (D)— Agent,  FBI

Hall,  Elena  A.(D) — ^Acquaintance  of  the  Os-
walds in  Texas

Hall,  John  Raymond (D) — Husband  of  Elena
A.  Hall  and  acquaintance  of  the  Oswalds


211


Hall,  Marvin  E.  "Bert" (D)— Employee,  Ar-
mored Motor  Service,  Dallas

Hallmark,  Garnett  Claud(D) — Acquaintance  of
Jack  Ruby

Hamblen,  C.  A.(D) — Employee,  Western
Union  Telegraph  Co.

Hankal,  Robert  L.(D) — Director,  television
station,  Dallas

Hansen,  Timothy  M.,  Jr.(D) — Member,  Dallas
Police  Department

Hardin,  Michael (D) — City  ambulance  driver

Hargis,  Bobby  W.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Harkness,  D.  V.(D)— do

Harrison,  William  J.(D) — do

Hartogs,  Renatus(D) — Psychiatrist,  New  York
City

Hawldns,  Ray(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Haygood,  Clyde  A.(D) — do

Heindel,  John  Rene  (A) — Acquaintance  of  Os-
wald in  Marine  Corps

Helmick,  Wanda  Yvonne  or  Wanda  Sweat.  (D)
— Employee  of  Ralph  Paul,  an  acquaintance
of  Jack  Ruby

Helms,  Richard  M.(CA) — Deputy  Director  for
Plans,  Central  InteUigence  Agency

Henchliffe,  Margaret  M.(D) — Nurse,  Parkland
Hospital

Henslee,  Gerald  D.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Po-
lice Department

Hemdon,  Bell  P.(D) — Polygraph  operator,  FBI

Hicks,  J.  B.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Hill,  Clinton  J. (C)— Agent,  U.S.  Secret  Service

Hill,  Gerald  Lynn(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Hill,  Jean  Lollis(D) — ^Witness  at  assassination
scene

Hine,  Geneva  L.(D) — Employee,  TSBD

Hodge,  Alfred  Douglas(D) — Owner,  Buckhorn
Trading  Post

Holland,  S.  M.(D) — ^Witness  at  assassination
scene

Holly,  Harold  B.,  Jr.(D) — Reserve  force,  Dal-
las Police  Department

Hohnes,  Harry  D.(D) — U.S.  Post  Office  inspec-
tor

Hoover,  J.  Edgar(C) — Director,  FBI

Hosty,  James,  P.,  Jr. (C)— Agent,  FBI

Howlett,  John  Joe  (AD) — ^Agent,  U.S.  Secret
Service

Hudson,  Emmett  J.(D) — ^Witness  at  assassi-
nation scene

Huffaker,  Robert  S.,  Jr.(D) — Newsman,  Dallas

Hulen,  Richard  Leroy(D) — Employee  of  Dallas
YMCA

Hulse,  C.  E.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Humes,  James  J.(C) — Doctor,  Bethesda  Naval
Hospital

Hunley,  Bobb(A) — Employee,  Louisiana  De-
partment of  Labor,  New  Orleans

Hunt,  Jackie  H.(D) — Doctor,  Parkland  Hos-
pital


Hunter,  Gertrude (D) — ^Witness  concerning  al-
leged encounter  with  Oswald

Hutchison,  Leonard  Edwin(D) — Owner  of  gro-
cery store  in  Irving

Hutson,  Thomas  Alexander (D) — Member,  Dal-
las Police  Department

Isaacs,  Martin (D) — Employee,  Special  Services
Welfare  Center,  New  York

Jackson,  Robert  Hill(C) — News  photographer,
DaUas

Jackson,  Theodore (D) — Attendant  at  Dallas
parking  lot

James,  Virginia  H.(D) — International  Rela-
tions Officer,  Office  of  Soviet  Affairs,  State  De-
partment

Jarman,  James,  Jr.(C) — Employee,  TSBD

Jenkins,  Marion T.(D) — Doctor,  Parkland  Hos-
pital

Jenkins,  Ronald  Lee(D) — News  editor,  radio
station,  Dallas

Jimison,  R.  J.(D) — Orderly,  Parkland  Hospital

Johnson,  Arnold  Samuel(D) — Director  of  In-
formation and  Lecture  Bureau,  Communist
Party,  U.S.A.

Johnson,  Arthur  Carl(D) — Owner  of  rooming-
house  in  Dallas  where  Oswald  resided

Johnson,  Mrs,  Arthur  Carl(D) — Wife  of  A.  C.
Johnson

Johnson,  Joseph  Weldon,  Jr.(D) — ^Acquaint-
ance of  Jack  Ruby

Johnson,  Lyndon  B.(S) — President  of  the
United States

Johnson,  Mrs.  Lyndon  B.(S) — Wife  of  the
President  of  the  United  States

Johnson,  Marvin(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Johnson,  PriscUla  Mary  Post(D) — Newspaper
reporter  who  interviewed  Oswald  in  Russia

Johnson,  Speedy (D) — Acquaintance  of  Jack
Ruby

Johnston,  David  L.(D) — Justice  of  the  peace,
Dallas

Jones,  O.  A.(D) — Captain,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Jones,  Ronald  C.(D) — Doctor,  Parkland  Hos-
pital

Kaiser,  Frankie(D)— Employee,  TSBD

Kaminsky,  Eileen(D) — Jack  Ruby's  sister

Kantor,  Seth(D) — Reporter,

Kaufman,  Stanley  M.(D) — ^Acquaintance  of
Jack  Ruby

KeUerman,  Roy  H.(C)— Agent,  U.S.  Secret
Service

Kelley,  Thomas  J.  (AC) — Inspector,  U.S.  Secret
Service

Kelly,  Edward(D) — Porter,  Dallas  City  Hall

Kennedy,  Mrs.  John  F.(C) — Widow  of  Presi-
dent John  Fitzgerald  Kennedy

Killion,  Charles  L.(A) — Firearms  identification
expert,  FBI

King,  Glen  D,(D) — Captain,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Klause,  Robert  G.(C) — Printer  of  handbill  at-
tacking President  Kennedy


212


Kleinlerer,  AlexanderCA) — Acquaintance  of  the
Oswalds  in  Texas

Kleinman,  Abraham  (D) — Acquaintance  of
Jack  Ruby

Kline,  William  (A)— Agent,  U.S.  Customs

Knight,  Frances  G.(C) — Director,  Passport
Office,  Department  of  State

Knight,  Russell  (see  Moore)

Kramer,  Monica(A) — Tourist  in  Minsk  in  1961

Kravitz,  Herbert  B.(D) — Acquaintance  of  Jack
Ruby

Kriss,  Harry  M.(D) — Reserve  force,  Dallas  Po-
lice Department

Krystinik,  Raymond  Franklin(D) — Fellow  em-
ployee of  Michael  R.  Paine  in  Texas

Lane,  Doyle  E.(D) — Clerk,  Western  Union
Telegraph  Co.

Lane,  Mark  R.(C) — Attorney,  New  York  City

Latona,  Sebastian  F.(C) — Fingerprint  expert,
FBI

Lawrence,  Perdue  W.(D) — Captain,  Dallas  Po-
lice Department

Lawson,  Winston  G.  (accompanied  by  Fred  B.
Smith).(C)— Agent,  U.S.  Secret  Service

Leavelle,  James  R.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

LeBlanc,  Charles  Joseph  (D) — Maintenance
man,  William  B.  Reily  Co.

Lee,  Ivan  D.(A) — Agent,  FBI

Lee,  Vincent  T.(DA) — Official,  Fair  Play  for
Cuba  Committee

Lehrer,  James (D) — Reporter,  Dallas

Leslie,  Helen(D) — Member  of  Russian-speak-
ing Committee  in  Dallas

Lewis,  Aubrey  Lee(D) — Employee,  Western
Union  Telegraph  Co.

Lewis,  Erwin  Donald  (A) — Acquaintance  of  Os-
wald in  Marine  Corps

Lewis,  L.  J.  (A) — Witness  in  the  vicinity  of  the
Tippit  crime  scene

Light,  Frederick  W.,  Jr.(C) — ^Wound  ballistics
expert,  U.S.  Army

Litchfield,  Wilbym  Waldon  (Robert),  n.(D)—
Acquaintance  of  Ruby

Lord,  Billy  Joe(A) — Passenger  with  Oswald
on  SS  Marion  Lykes

Lovelady,  Billy  Nolan (D)— Employee,  TSBD

Lowery,  Roy  Lee(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Lujan,  Daniel  Gutierrez(D) — Appeared  in
lineup  with  Oswald

Lux,  J.  Philip  (A) — Employee,  H.  L.  Green  Co.

McClelland,  Robert  N.(D)— Doctor,  Parkland
Hospital

McCone,  John  Alex(C) — Director,  Central  In-
telligence Agency

McCullough,  John  G.(D) — Reporter,  Philadel-
phia

McCurdy,  Danny  Patrick(D) — Acquaintance  of
Jack  Ruby

McDonald,  M.  N.(C) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

McFarland,  John  Bryan(A) — Passenger  on  bus
with  Oswald  to  Mexico  City  in  1963

McFarland,  Meryl  (A) — do


McKinzie,  Louis (D)— Porter,  Dallas  City  Hall

McMillon,  Thomas  Donald(D) — Member,  Dal-
las Police  Department

McVickar,  John  A.(C) — Foreign  Service  officer
stationed  at  American  Embassy  in  Soviet
Union  in  1959-61

McWatters,  Cecil  J.(C) — Busdriver,  Dallas

Malley,  James  R.(A) — Inspector,  FBI

Mallory,  Katherine(A) — Tourist  in  Minsk  in
1961

Mamantov,  Dya  A.(D) — Member  of  Russian-
speaking  community  in  Dallas

Mandella,  Arthur (C) — (accompanied  by  Jo-
seph A.  Mooney). — Fingerprint  expert,  New
York  City  Police  Department

Markham,  Helen  Louise  (CD) — Witness  in  the
vicinity  of  the  Tippit  crime  scene

Martello,  Francis  L.(AD) — Lieutenant,  New
Orleans  Police  Department

Martin,  B.  J.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Martin,  Frank  M.(D) — Captain,  Dallas  Police
Department

Martin,  James  Herbert (C) — Former  business
manager  for  Mrs.  Lee  Harvey  Oswald

Maxey,  Billy  Joe(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Mayo,  Logan  W.(D) — Reserve  force,  Dallas
Police  Department

Meller,  Anna  N.(D) — Acquaintance  of  the  Os-
walds in  Texas

Meyers,  Lawrence  V.(D) — Acquaintance  of
Jack  Ruby

Michaelis,  Heinz  W.(D) — Manager,  Seaport
Traders,  Inc.

Miller,  Austin  L.(D) — Witness  at  assassination
scene

Miller,  Dave  L.(D) — Acquaintance  of  Jack
Ruby

Miller,  Louis  D.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Mitchell,  Mary  Ann(D) — Witness  at  assassi-
ii3.tioii  scene

MoUna,  Joe  R.(D)— Employee,  TSBD

Montgomery,  L.  D.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Po-
lice Department

Mooney,  Luke(C) — Deputy  Sheriff,  Dallas
County

Moore,  Henry  M.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Moore,  Russell  Lee  (Knight)  (D) — Acquaint-
ance of  Jack  Ruby

Mumford,  Pamela(D) — Passenger  on  bus  with
Oswald  to  Mexico  City  in  1963

Murphy,  Joe  E.(D) — Member,  Dallas  PoUce
Department

Murphy,  Paul  Edward  (A) — Acqtiaintance  of
Oswald  in  Marine  Corps

Murray,  David  Christie,  Jr.  (A) — do

Murret,  Charles  (Dutz)(D) — Uncle  of  Lee
Harvey  Oswald,  New  Orleans

Murret,  John  Martial  (Boogie). (D) — Cousin
of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  New  Orleans

Murret,  Lillian(AD) — Sister  of  Marguerite  Os-


213


wald  and  aunt  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  New

Orleans
Murret,  Marilyn  Dorothea (D) — Cousin  of  Lee

Harvey  Oswald,  New  Orleans
Naman,  Rita(A) — Tourist  in  Minsk  in  1961
Nelson,  Doris  Mae(D) — Nurse,  Parkland  Hos-
pital
Newman,  William  J.(D) — Reserve  force,  Dallas

Police  Department
Newnam, John(D) — Advertising department

employee,  Dallas  newspaper
Nichols, Alice Reaves(D)— Acquaintance of

Jack  Ruby
Nichols,  H.  Louis (D) — Former  president,  Dal-
las bar  association
Nicol,  Joseph  D.(C) — Firearms  identification

expert,  Bureau  of  Criminal  Identification  and

Investigation,  Illinois  Department  of  Public

Safety
Norman,  Harold (C) — Employee,  TSBD
Norton,  Robert  L.(D) — Acquaintance  of  Jack

Ruby
O'Brien,  Lawrence  F.(D) — ^Assistant  to  Presi-
dent Kennedy
Odio,  Sylvia (D) — Former  citizen  of  Cuba  now

residing  in  Dallas
O'Donnell,  Kenneth(D) — ^Assistant  to  President

Kennedy
Odum,  Bardwell  D.(A) — Agent,  FBI
Ofstein, Dennis Hyman(D) — Employee, Jag-

gers-Chiles-Stovall,  Dallas
Olds,  Gregory  Lee(D) — President,  Dallas  Chap-
ter, American  CivU  Liberties  Union
Oliver,  ReviJo  P.  (D) — Member  of  the  council  of

the  John  Birch  Society
Olivier, Alfred G.(C) — Wound  ballistics  ex-
pert, U.S.  Army
Olsen,  Harry  N.(D) — Former  member,  Dallas

Police  Department
Olsen,  Kay  Helen(D) — Acquaintance  of  Jack

Ruby
Osborne,  Mack  (A) — Acquaintance  of  Oswald

in  Marine  Corps
O'Sullivan,  Frederick  S.(D) — Acquaintance  of

Oswald  at  Beauregard  Junior  High  School,

New  Orleans
Oswald,  Marguerite(C) — Mother  of  Lee  Harvey

Oswald
Oswald,  Marina  (CD) — Widow  of  Lee  Harvey

Oswald
Oswald,  Robert  Edward  Lee(C) — Brother  of

Lee  Harvey  Oswald
Owens,  Calvin  Bud(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police

Department
Paine,  Michael  R.(CD) — Acquaintance  of  the

Oswalds  in  Texas
Paine,  Ruth  Hyde (ACD)— Wife  of  Michael  R.

Paine  and  acquaintance  of  the  Oswalds  in

Texas
Palmer,  Thomas  Stewart (D) — Acquaintance  of

Jack  Ruby
Pappas,  Icarus  M.(D) — Reporter,  radio  station.

New  York  City
Patterson,  B.  M.(A) — Witness  in  the  vicinity  of

the  Tippit  crime  scene


Patterson,  Bobby  G.  (D) — Member,  Dallas  Po-
lice Department

Patterson,  Robert  Carl(D) — ^Acquaintance  of
Jack  Ruby

Paul,  Ralph(D) — do

Pena,  Orest(D) — Owner,  Habana  Bar,  New
Orleans

I'ena,  Kuperto(D) — Brother  of  Orest  Pena

Perry,  Malcohn  O.(CD) — Doctor,  Parkland
Hospital

Perry,  W.  E.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Peterman,  ViolafD) — Neighbor  of  Oswald
family  in  New  Orleans

Peters,  Paul  C.(D) — Doctor,  Parkland  Hospi-
tal

Peterson,  Joseph  Alexander (D) — ^Acquaintance
of  Jack  Ruby

Phenix,  George  R.(D) — ^Television  cameraman
and  reporter,  Dallas

Pic,  Edward  John,  Jr. (AD) — First  husband  of
Marguerite  Oswald

Pic,  John  Edward (D) — Half  brother  of  Lee
Harvey  Oswald

Pierce,  Edward  E.(D) — Employee,  Dallas  City
Hall

Pierce,  Rio  S.(D) — Lieutenant,  Dallas  Police
Department

Pinkston,  Nat  A.(D) — Employee,  TSBD

Piper,  Eddie (D)— do

Pitts,  Elnora(D) — Acquaintance  of  Jack  Ruby

Pizzo,  Frank(D) — Assistant  manager  of  auto
agency,  Dallas

Poe,  J.  M.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Postal,  JuUa(D) — Cashier,  Texas  Theatre

Potts,  Walter  E.(D) — Member,  Lallas  Police
Department

Powell,  Nancy  M.  (a.k.a.  TammieTrue).(D) —
Acquaintance  of  Jack  Ruby

Powers,  Daniel  Patrick(D) — Acquaintance  of
Oswald  in  Marine  Corps

Powers,  David  F.(A) — Assistant  to  President
Kennedy

Price,  Charles  Jack(D) — Administrator,  Park-
land Hospital

Price,  Malcohn  H.,  Jr.(D) — Patron,  Sports
Drome  Rifle  Range

Priddy,  Hal  Jr.(D)— ReUef  dispatcher,  O'Neil
Funeral  Home  in  Dallas

Pryor,  Roy  A.(D) — Acquaintance  of  Jack  Ruby

Pugh,  Oran(A) — Agent,  U.S.  Customs

Pullman,  Edward  J.(D) — Acquaintance  of  Jack
Ruby

Putnam,  James  A.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Quigley,  John  L.(C)— Agent,  FBI

Rachal,  John  R.(A)— Employee,  Louisiana  De-
partment of  Labor,  New  Orleans

Rackley,  George  W.,  Sr.(D) — Employee,  Co-
ordinated RR.  Co.

Raigorodsky,  Paul  M.(D) — Member  of  Rus-
sian-speaking community  in  Dallas

Randle,  Linnie  Mae(C)— Buell  Wesley  Frazier's
sister  and  neighbor  of  Ruth  Paine


214


Ray, Natalie (Mrs. Thomas M.).(D) — Ac-
quaintance of  the  Oswalds  in  Texas

Ray,  Thomas  M.(D) — Husband  of  Natalie  Ray
and  acquaintance  of  the  Oswalds  in  Texas

Ray,  Valentine  A.  (Mrs.  Frank  H.).(D) — Ac-
quaintance of  the  Oswalds  in  Texas

Rea, Billy A.(D) — Advertising staff, Dallas
newspaper

Reeves,  Huey(D) — Acquaintance  of  Jack  Ruby

Reid,  Mrs.  Robert  A.(C) — Employee,  TSBD

Reilly,  Frank  E.(D) — Witness  at  assassination
scene

Revill, Jack  (CD) — Lieutenant, Dallas Police
Department

Reynolds,  Warren  Allen(D) — Witness  in  the
vicinity  of  the  Tippit  crime  scene

Rheinstein,  Frederic(D) — Producer-director,
NBC

Rich,  Nancy  Perrin(D) — ^Acquaintance  of  Jack
Ruby

Richey,  Marjorie  R.(D) — do

Richey, Warren E.(D) — ^TV engineer, Fort
Worth

Riggs,  Alfreadia(D) — Porter,  City  Hall

Riggs,  Chester  Allen,  Jr.  (A) — Landlord  of  the
Oswalds  in  Fort  Worth

Ritchie,  James  L.(D) — Passport  Officer,  De-
partment of  State

Roberts, Earlene(AD) — Housekeeper at Os-
wald's roominghouse  in  Dallas

Robertson, Mary  Jane(D) — Employee,  Dallas
Police  Department

Robertson,  Victor  F.,  Jr.(D) — Reporter,  Dallas

Rodriguez,  Evaristo(D) — Bartender  at  Habana
Bar,  New  Orleans

Rogers,  Eric(D) — Neighbor  of  the  Oswalds  in
New  Orleans

Romack,  James  E.(D) — ^Witness  at  assassination
scene

Rose,  Guy  F.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Ross,  Henrietta  M.(D) — ^Technician,  Parkland
Hospital

Rossi,  Joseph(D) — Acquaintance  of  Jack  Ruby

Roussel,  Henry  J.,  Jr.(A) — Acquaintance  of  Os-
wald in  Marine  Corps.

Rowland,  Arnold  Louis(C) — Witness  at  assas-
sination scene

Rowland,  Barbara  (Mrs.  Arnold  L.).(D) — do

Rowley,  James  J.(C) — Chief,  U.S.  Secret  Service

Rubenstein,  Hyman  (D) — Brother  of  Jack  Ruby

Ruby,  Earl(D) — do

Ruby,  Jack(CD) — Convicted  slayer  of  Oswald

Ruby,  Sam(D) — Brother  of  Jack  Ruby

Rusk,  Dean(C) — Secretary  of  State

Russell,  Harold(A) — Witness  in  the  vicinity  of
the  Tippit  crime  scene

Ryder,  Dial  D.(D) — Employee,  Irving  Sports
Shop

Salyer,  Kermeth  E.(D) — Doctor,  Parkland  Hos-
pital

Saunders, Richard L.(D) — Advertising staff,
Dallas  newspaper

Sawyer,  J.  Herbert(D) — Inspector,  Dallas  Po-
lice Department


Sawyer,  Mildred(D) — Neighbor  and  acquaint-
ance of  Oswald  as  a  youth  in  New  Orleans

Schmidt,  Hunter,  Jr.(D)— City  editor,  Dallas

Scibor,  Mitchell  J.(D) — Employee,  Klein's
Sports  Goods

Scoggins,  William  W.(C) — Witness  in  the  vi-
cinity of  the  Tippit  crime  scene

Seeley,  Carroll  Hamilton,  Jr.(D) — Assistant
Chief,  Legal  Division,  Passport  Office,  De-
partment of  State

Semingsen,  W.  W.(D) — Employee,  Western
Union  Telegraph  Co.

Senator,  GeorgefD) — Roommate  of  Jack  Ruby

Servance,  John  Olridge(D) — Head  porter.  City
Hall  and  Municipal  Building

Shaneyfelt,  Lyndal  L.(CD) — Photography  ex-
pert, FBI

Shasteen,  Clifton,  M.(D) — Owner  of  barbershop
in  Irving,  Tex.

Shaw,  Robert  Roeder(CD) — Doctor,  Parkland
Hospital

Shelley,  William  H.(D)— Employee,  TSBD

Shields,  Edward(D) — Employee,  TSBD

Shires,  George  T.(D) — Doctor,  Parkland  Hos-
pital

Siegel,  Evelyn  Grace  Strickman(D) — Social
worker.  New  York  City

Simmons,  Ronald(C) — Weapons  evaluation  ex-
pert, U.S.  Army  Weapons  System  Division.

Sims,  Richard  M.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Skelton,  Royce  G.(D) — Witness  at  assassination
scene

Slack,  Garland  Glenwill(D) — Patron,  Sports
Drome  Rifle  Range.

Slack,  Willie  B.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Slaughter,  Malcolm  R.(D) — Resident  in  Jack
Ruby's  apartment  buUding

Smart,  Vernon  S.(D) — Lieutenant,  Dallas  Police
Department

Smith,  Bennierita(D) — Acquaintance  of  Oswald
at  Beauregard  Jimior  High  School  in  New
Orleans

Smith,  Edgar  Leon,  Jr.(D) — Member,  Dallas
Police  Department

Smith,  Glenn  Emmett(D) — Service  station  at-
tendant in  Dallas

Smith,  Hilda  L.(A) — Employee,  Louisiana  De-
partment of  Labor,  New  Orleans

Smith,  Joe  Marshall(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Smith,  John  Allison(D) — ^TV  technician.  Fort
Worth

Smith,  William  ArthurCD) — ^Witness  in  the
vicinity  of  the  Tippit  crime  scene

Snyder,  Richard  Edward(C) — Foreign  Service
officer,  stationed  in  the  Embassy  in  the  Soviet
Union,  1950-61

Solomon,  James  Maurice(D) — Captain,  Dallas
Police  Department

Sorrels,  Forrest  V.(DA) — Agent,  U.S.  Secret
Service

Standifer,  Roy  E.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department


215


Standridge,  Ruth  Jeanette(D) — Head  nurse  of
operating  rooms,  Parkland  Hospital

Staples,  Albert  F.(A) — Dentist  at  Baylor  Uni-
versity College  of  Dentistry

Statman,  Irvtng(D) — Assistant  District  Director
of  Dallas  District,  Texas  Employment  Com-
mission

Steele,  Charles  Hall,  Jr.(D) — Resident  of  New
Orleans  who  assisted  Oswald  in  distribution
of  handbills

Steele,  Charles  Hall,  Sr.(D) — Father  of  Charles
Hall  Steele,  Jr.

Steele,  Don  Francis(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Stevenson,  M.  W.(D) — Deputy  Chief,  Dallas
Police  Department

Stombaugh,  Paul  Morgan(CA) — Hair  and  fiber
expert,  FBI

Stovall,  Richard  S.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Stovall,  Robert  L.(D) — President,  Jaggars-
Chiles-Stovall,  Dallas,  Tex.

Strong,  Jesse  M.(D) — Employee,  Western  Union
Telegraph  Co.

Stuckey,  William  Kirk(D) — Radio  program  di-
rector, New  Orleans

Studebaker,  Robert  Lee(D) — Member,  Dallas
Police  Department

Surrey,  Robert  Alan(C) — Publisher  of  handbill
attacking  President  Kennedy

Tague,  James  Thomas(D) — Witness  at  assassina-
tion scene

Talbert,  Cecil  E.(D) — Captain,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Tasker,  Harry  T.(D) — ^Taxicab  driver  in  Dallas

Taylor,  Gary  E.(DA) — Acquaintance  of  the  Os-
walds in  Texas

Thompson,  Llewellyn  E.(C) — Former  U.S.  Am-
bassador to  Russia

Thomley,  Kerry  Wendell(D) — Acquaintance  of
Oswald  in  Marines

Tice,  Wilma  May(D) — Resident  of  Dallas

Tobias,  Mahlon  F.,  Sr.(D) — Manager  of  apart-
ment house  where  the  Oswalds  resided,  Dallas

Tobias,  Mrs.  Mahlon  F.(D)— Wife  of  M.  F.
Tobias,  Sr.

Tomlinson,  Darrell  C.(D) — Senior  engineer.
Parkland  Hospital

Tormey,  James  J.(D) — Executive  secretary,
Hall-Davis  Defense  Commission

Truly,  Roy  Sansom(ACD) — Superintendent,
TSBD

Turner,  F.  M.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

Turner,  Jimmy(D) — ^TV  director,  Fort  Worth

Twiford,  Horace  Elroy(A)— rMember,  Socialist
Labor  Party,  Houston,  Tex.

Twiford,  Estelle(A) — Wife  of  Horace  Elroy
Twiford

Underwood,  James  R.(D) — Assistant  news  di-
rector, TV  and  radio,  Dallas

Vaughn,  Roy  Eugene(D) — Member,  Dallas  Po-
lice Department

Vinson,  Philip  Eugene(D) — Reporter,  Fort
Worth


Voebel,  Edward(D) — Acquaintance  of  Oswald
in  Beauregard  Junior  High  School,  New
Orleans

Voshinin,  Igor  Vladimir(D) — Member  of  Rus-
sian-speaking community  in  Dallas

Voshinin,  Mrs.  Igor  Vladimir.(D) — Acquaint-
ance of  the  Oswalds  in  Texas

Wade,  Henry(C) — District  attorney,  Dallas
County

Waldman,  William  J.(D) — Vice  President,
Klein's  Sporting  Goods,  Inc.

Waldo,  Thayer(D) — Reporter,  Fort  Worth

Walker,  C.  T.(D)— Member,  Dallas  PoUce  De-
partment

Walker,  Maj.  Gen.  Edwin  A.(D) — Resident  of
Dallas  and  object  of  shooting  in  April  1963

Walker,  Ira  N.,  Jr.(D) — Broadcast  technician.
Fort  Worth

Wall,  Breck  (a.k.a.  Billy  Ray  Wilson).(D)—
Acquaintance  of  Ruby

Walthers,  Eddy  Raymond(D) — Deputy  sheriff,
Dallas  County

Warner,  Roger  C.(A) — Agent,  U.S.  Secret  Serv-
ice

Waterman,  Bemice(C) — Adjudicator,  Passport
Office,  Department  of  State

Watherwax,  Arthur  William.  (D) — Printer,  Dal-
las newspaper

Watson,  James  C.(D) — Member,  Dallas  Police
Department

Weinstock,  Louis(A) — General  manager,  the
Worker

Weissman,  Bemard(CD) — Codraftsman  and
signer  of  November  22,  1963,  full-page  ad-
vertisement

Weitzman,  Seymour(D) — Deputy  constable,
Dallas  County

West,  Troy  Eugene(D) — Employee,  TSBD

Westbrook,  W.  R.(D) — Captain,  Dallas  Police
Department

Wester,  Jane  Carolyn(D) — Nurse,  Parkland
Hospital

Whaley,  William  Wayne(CD) — Taxicab  driver
in  Dallas

White,  J.  C.(D)— Member,  Dallas  Police  De-
partment

White,  Martin  G.(D) — Doctor,  Parkland  Hos-
pital.

Whitworth,  Edith(D) — Manager,  used  fvu-niture
store,  Irving,  Tex.

Wiggins,  Woodrow(D) — Lieutenant,  Dallas  Po-
lice Department

Wilcox,  Laurance  R.(D) — District  manager.
Western  Union  Telegraph  Co.

Williams,  Bonnie  Ray(C>— Employee,  TSBD

Willis,  Linda  Kay(D) — Daughter  of  Phillip  L.
WUlis

Willis,  Phillip  L.(D) — Witness  at  assassination
scene

Wilson,  Billy  Ray  (see  Wall,  Breck)

Wittmus,  Ronald  G.(A) — Fingerprint  expert,
FBI

Wood,  Homer(D) — Patron,  Sports  Drome  Rifle
Range


216


Wood,  Sterling  CharlesfD) — Son  of  Dr.  Homer  Yarborough,  Ralph  W.fA) — U.S.  Senator  from

Wood  Texas

Wood,  Theresa(D) — Wife  of  Dr.  Homer  Wood  Yeargan,  Albert  C,  Jr.(A) — Employee,  H.  C.
Worley,  Gano  E.(D) — Reserve  Force, Dallas  Green,  Dallas

Police  Department  Youngblood, Rufus Wayne(C) — Agent, U.S.
Worrell,  James  Richard,  Jr.(C) — Witness  at  as-  Secret  Service

sassination  scene  Zahm,  James  A. CD) — Marine  Corps  expert  on
Wright, Norman Earl(D) — Acquaintance of  marksmanship

Jack  Ruby  Zapruder,  Abraham(D) — Witness  at  assassina-
Wulf,  William  E.(D) — Acquaintance  of  Oswald  tion  scene

in  his  youth


Appendix  VI

(This  appendix,  the  text  of  the  Commission's  resolution  gov-
erning questioning  of  witnesses  and  other  procedures  for
taking  testimony,  is  omitted.)


Appendix  VIE

(This  appendix,  a  brief  history  of  assassinations  and  attempts
upon  the  lives  of  former  American  presidents,  is  omitted.)


Appendix  Vlll

MEDICAL  REPORTS  FROM  DOCTORS  AT
PARKLAND  MEMORLVL  HOSPITAL,  DALLAS,  TEX.

STATEMENT

The  President  arrived  in  the  Emergency  Room  at  exactly  12:43  p.m.  in  his  limousine.
He  was  in  the  back  seat,  Gov.  Connally  was  in  the  front  seat  of  the  same  car,  Gov.  Connally
was  brought  out  first  and  was  put  in  room  two.  President  was  brought  out  next  and  put  in
room  one.  Dr.  Clark  pronounced  the  President  dead  at  1  p.m.  exactly.  All  of  the  Presi-
dent's belongings  except  his  watch  were  given  to  the  Secret  Service.  His  watch  was  given
to  Mr.  O.  P.  Wright.  He  left  the  Emergency  Room,  the  President,  at  about  2  p.m.  in  an
O'Neal  ambulance.  He  was  put  in  a  bronze  colored  plastic  casket  after  being  wrapped  in
a  blanket  and  was  taken  out  of  the  hospital.  He  was  removed  from  the  hospital.  The  Gov.
was  taken  from  the  Emergency  Room  to  the  Operating  Room.

The  President's  wife  refused  to  take  off  her  bloody  gloves,  clothes.  She  did  take  a  towel
and  wipe  her  face.  She  took  her  wedding  ring  off  and  placed  it  on  one  of  the  President's
fingers.

SUMMARY

The  President  arrived  at  the  Emergency  Room  at  12:43  P.M.,  the  22nd  of  November,
1963.  He  was  in  the  back  seat  of  his  limousine.  Governor  Connally  of  Texas  was  also  in
the  car.  The  first  physician  to  see  the  President  was  Dr.  James  Carrico,  a  Resident  in
General  Surgery.

Dr.  Carrico  noted  the  President  to  have  slow,  agenal  respiratory  efforts.  He  could  hear
a  heartbeat  but  found  no  pulse  or  blood  pressure  to  be  present.  Two  external  wounds,
one  in  the  lower  third  of  the  anterior  neck,  the  other  in  the  occipital  region  of  the  skuU,
were  noted.  Through  the  head  wound,  blood  and  brain  were  extruding.  Dr.  Carrico  in-
serted a  cuffed  endotracheal  tube.  While  doing  so,  he  noted  a  ragged  wound  of  the  trachea
immediately  below  the  larynx.

217


At  this  time,  Dr.  Malcolm  Perry,  Attending  Sxirgeon,  Dr.  Charles  Baxter,  Attending
Surgeon,  and  Dr.  Ronald  Jones,  another  Resident  in  General  Surgery,  arrived.  Immedi-
ately thereafter,  Dr.  M.  T.  Jenkins,  Director  of  the  Department  of  Anesthesia,  and
Doctors  Giesecke  and  Hunt,  two  other  Staff  Anesthesiologists,  arrived.  The  endotracheal
tube  had  been  connected  to  a  Bennett  respirator  to  assist  the  President's  breathing.  An
Anesthesia  machine  was  substituted  for  this  by  Dr.  Jenkins.  Only  100%  oxygen  was
administered.

A  cutdown  was  performed  in  the  right  ankle,  and  a  polyethylene  catheter  inserted  in
the  vein.  An  infusion  of  lactated  Ringer's  solution  was  begun.  Blood  was  drawn  for  type
and  crossmatch,  but  unmatched  type  "O"  RH  negative  blood  was  immediately  obtained
and  begun.  Hydrocortisone  300  mgms  was  added  to  the  intravenous  fluids.

Dr.  Robert  McClelland,  Attending  Surgeon,  arrived  to  help  in  the  President's  care.
Doctors  Perry,  Baxter,  and  McClelland  began  a  tracheostomy,  as  considerable  quantities
of  blood  were  present  from  the  President's  oral  pharynx.  At  this  time.  Dr.  Paul  Peters,
Attending  Urological  Surgeon,  and  Dr.  Kemp  Clark,  Director  of  Neurological  Surgery,
arrived.  Because  of  the  lacerated  trachea,  anterior  chest  tubes  were  placed  in  both  pleural
spaces.  These  were  connected  to  sealed  underwater  drainage.

Neurological  examination  revealed  the  President's  pupils  to  be  widely  dilated  and  fixed
to  light.  His  eyes  were  divergent,  being  deviated  outward;  a  skew  deviation  from  the
horizontal  was  present.  No  deep  tendon  reflexes  or  spontaneous  movements  were  found.

There  was  a  large  wound  in  the  right  occipitoparietal  region,  from  which  profuse
bleeding  was  occurring.  1500  cc.  of  blood  were  estimated  on  the  drapes  and  floor  of  the
Emergency  Operating  Room.  There  was  considerable  loss  of  scalp  and  bone  tissue.  Both
cerebral  and  cerebellar  tissue  were  extruding  from  the  wound.

Further  examination  was  not  possible  as  cardiac  arrest  occurred  at  this  point.  Closed
chest  cardiac  massage  was  begun  by  Dr.  Clark.  A  pulse  palpable  in  both  the  carotid  and
femoral  arteries  was  obtained.  Dr.  Perry  relieved  on  the  Cardiac  massage  whUe  a  cardio-
tachioscope  was  connected.  Dr.  Fouad  Bashour,  Attending  Physician,  arrived  as  this  was
being  connected.  There  was  electrical  silence  of  the  President's  heart.

President  Kennedy  was  pronounced  dead  at  1300  hours  by  Dr.  Clark.

(Signed)

Kemp  Clark,  M.D.
Director

Service  of  Neurological  Surgery
KC:  aa

cc  to  Dean's  Office,  Southwestern  Medical  School
to  Medical  Records,  Parkland  Memorial  Hospital


218


DATS  AND  HOURi


ga  /Th  /9<i3


DOCTOt. ^^fi/fy


SI.


iUL.


^^ f/ J/)^(J iy^r^..u^^:it4^. ."//j


U


n;


hin^


rini.  C(m


La g/r^  i


foA^'Loto


\llan<i


fci/^/'tf!^-


/  lLJ-^ J/^^^  4^i H.J- ^LL^ly^J^


U-dXttU jl^ (U^i /J^/dztfAM/. A^A^^uJ^b^ /.*A^


UJa^


u>«  t^j^ti  a£^^


^-^t/^jW  • 7m  "I^/Ja^^H^  'M^


J*S>a.


nl/sA-  t»A^r


jtc yyyiA^^C( iajt^l^


A.ffUC.tAr^f' ol  ,/iJLlilI  -(Jlr^^L*^^af


ADMISSION  NOTE


jUitrnJCU


.&d  i^^ A,\j,h7/aJ^.


— "  -• — ' — -~- — ^y  ^^


jyijJLAAjsh^ri. — ^Jyfhy^^~  (M€^ ft  Aa^,/.A,.^  Jt


JsSi


-f


M


rj.rt/Y\/i


Jifu^^]/ /t^^^


y-


jAfO'


"^alJ^  a,^.y>r<i


/63oL ^^/ir^/16'3


(Handwritten  statements  by  doctors  Charles  James  Carrico,  Charles  Rufus  Baxter,
William  Kemp  Clark,  Robert  N.  McClelland  and  Fouad  A.  Bashour  have  been  omitted
from  this  appendix  because  of  their  poor  legibility  and  reproductive  quality.)

219


The  University  of  Texas

SOUTHWESTERN  MEDICAL  SCHOOL

Dallas

M.  T.  JENKINS,  M.D.

PROFESSOR AND CHAIRMAN

Department  of  Anesthesiology

November  22, 1963
1630

To:  Mr.  C.  J.  Price,  Administrator

Parkland  Memorial  Hospital

From:  M.  T.  Jenkins,  M.D.,  Professor  and  Chairman

Department  of  Anesthesiology

Subject:  Statement  concerning  resuscitative  efforts  for

President  John  F.  Kennedy

Upon  receiving  a  stat  alarm  that  this  distinguished  patient  was  being  brought  to  the
emergency  room  at  Parkland  Memorial  Hospital,  I  dispatched  Doctors  A.  H.  Giesecke
and  Jackie  H.  Hunt  with  an  anesthesia  machine  and  resuscitative  equipment  to  the
major  surgical  emergency  room  area,  and  I  ran  down  the  stairs.  On  my  arrival  in  the
emergency  operating  room  at  approximately  1230  I  found  that  Doctors  Carrico  and/ or
Delaney  had  begun  resuscitative  efforts  by  introducing  an  orotracheal  tube,  connecting
it  for  controlled  ventilation  to  a  Bennett  intermittent  positive  pressure  breathing  appa-
ratus. Doctors  Charles  Baxter,  Malcolm  Perry,  and  Robert  McClelland  arrived  at  the
same  time  and  began  a  tracheostomy  and  started  the  insertion  of  a  right  chest  tube,
since  there  was  also  obvious  tracheal  and  chest  damage.  Doctors  Paul  Peters  and  Kemp
Clark  arrived  simultaneously  and  immediately  thereafter  assisted  respectively  with  the
insertion  of  the  right  chest  tube  and  with  manual  closed  chest  cardiac  compression  to
assure  circulation.

For  better  control  of  artificial  ventilation,  I  exchanged  the  intermittent  positive  pressure
breathing  apparatus  for  an  anesthesia  machine  and  continued  artificial  ventUatiorL
Doctors  Gene  Akin  and  A.  H.  Giesecke  assisted  with  the  respiratory  problems  incident
to  changing  from  the  orotracheal  tube  to  a  tracheostomy  tube,  and  Doctors  Hunt  and
Giesecke  connected  a  cardioscope  to  determine  cardiac  activity.

During  the  progress  of  these  activities,  the  emergency  room  cart  was  elevated  at  the
feet  in  order  to  provide  a  Trendelenburg  position,  a  venous  cutdown  was  performed  on
the  right  saphenous  vein,  and  additional  fluids  were  begun  in  a  vein  in  the  left  forearm
while  blood  was  ordered  from  the  blood  bank.  All  of  these  activities  were  completed
by  approximately  1245,  at  which  time  external  cardiac  massage  was  still  being  carried
out  effectively  by  Doctor  Clark  as  judged  by  a  palpable  peripheral  pulse.  IDespite  these
measures  there  was  no  electrocardiographic  evidence  of  cardiac  activity.

These  described  resuscitative  activities  were  indicated  as  of  first  importance,  and  after
they  were  carried  out  attention  was  turned  to  all  other  evidences  of  injury.  There  was
a  great  laceration  on  the  right  side  of  the  head  (temporal  and  occipital),  causing  a
great  defect  in  the  skull  plate  so  that  there  was  herniation  and  laceration  of  great  areas
of  the  brain,  even  to  the  extent  that  the  cerebellum  had  protruded  from  the  wound.
There  were  also  fragmented  sections  of  brain  on  the  drapes  of  the  emergency  room
cart.  With  the  institution  of  adequate  cardiac  compression,  there  was  a  great  flow  of
blood  from  the  cranial  cavity,  indicating  that  there  was  much  vascular  damage  as  well
as  brain  tissue  damage.

It  is  my  personal  feeling  that  all  methods  of  resuscitation  were  instituted  expeditiously
and  efficiently.  However,  this  cranial  and  intracranial  damage  was  of  such  magnitude
as  to  cause  the  irreversible  damage.  President  Kermedy  was  pronounced  dead  at  1300.

Sincerely,

(Signed)

M.  T.  Jenkins,  M.D.

220


PARKLAND  MEMORIAL  HOSPITAL
OPERATIVE  RECORD

Name:  John  ConnaUy.  Room:  220.  Status:  Pvt  Unit  #  26  36  99.  Age:  (blank).
Race:  W/M.  Date: 11-22-63.  Thoracic  Surg.

Pre-operative  diagnosis:  Gunshot  wound  of  the  chest  with  comminuted  fracture  of
the  5th  rib.

Post-op>erative  diagnosis: Same  with  laceration  right  middle  lobe,  hematoma  lower

lobe  of  lung.

Operation:  Thoracotomy,  removal  rib  fragment,  debridement  of  wound.

Anesthetic:  General.  Began: 1300.  Anesthesiologist:  Giesecke.

Surgeon:  Robert  Shaw,  M.D.  Assistants:  Drs.  Boland  and  Duke.  Scrub  Nurse:  King/
Burkett.  Circ.  Nurse:  Johnson.

Sponge  counts:  1st — correct;  2nd — correct  LV.  Fluids  and  blood:  111-500  cc  whole
blood;  11-1000  cc  D-5-RL.

Complications:  None.

Condition  of  patient:  Satisfactory.

Clinical  evaluation; operative  findings; description  of  operation: The  patient  was
brought  to  the  OR  from  the  EOR.  In  the  EOR  a  sucking  wound  of  the  right  chest  was
partially  controlled  by  an  occlusive  dressing  supported  by  manual  pressure.  A  tube  had
been  placed  through  the  second  interspace  in  the  mid-clavicular  line  connected  to  a
waterseal  bottle  to  evacuate  the  right  pneumothorax  and  hemathorax.  An  IV  iofusion
of  RL  solution  had  already  been  started.  As  soon  as  the  patient  was  positioned  on  the
OR  table  the  anesthesia  was  induced  by  E>r.  Giesecke  and  an  endotracheal  tube  was  in
place.  As  soon  as  it  was  possible  to  control  respiration  with  positive  pressure  the
occlusive  dressing  was  taken  from  the  right  chest  and  the  extent  of  the  wound  more
carefully  determined.  It  was  found  that  the  wound  of  entrance  was  just  lateral  to  the
right  scapula  close  to  the  axilla  yet  had  passed  through  the  latysmus  dorsi  miascle
shattered  approximately  ten  cm  of  the  lateral  and  anterior  portion  of  the  right  fifth  rib
and  emerged  below  the  right  nipple.  The  wound  of  entrance  was  approximately  three
cm  in  its  longest  diameter  and  the  woimd  of  exit  was  a  ragged  wound  approximately
five  cm  in  its  greatest  diameter.  The  skin  and  subcutaneous  tissue  over  the  path  of  the
missUe  moved  in  a  paradoxical  manner  with  respiration  indicating  softening  of  the
chest.  The  skin  of  the  whole  area  was  carefully  cleansed  with  Phisohex  and  Iodine.
The  entire  area  including  the  wound  of  entrance  and  wound  of  exit  was  draped  partially
excluding  the  wound  of  entrance  for  the  first  part  of  the  operation.  An  elliptical  incision
was  made  around  the  wound  of  exit  removing  the  torn  edges  of  the  skin  and  the  dam-
aged subcutaneous  tissue.  The  incision  was  then  carried  in  a  downward  curve  up  toward
the  right  axilla  so  as  to  not  have  the  skin  incision  over  the  actual  path  of  the  missile
through  the  chest  wall.  This  incision  was  carried  down  through  the  subcutaneous  tissue
to  expose  the  Serratus  anterior  muscle  and  the  anterior  border  of  the  latissimus  dorsi
muscle.  The  fragmented  and  damaged  portions  of  the  Serratus  anterior  muscle  were
excised.  Small  rib  fragments  that  were  adhering  to  periosteal  tags  were  carefully  removed
preserving  as  much  periosteum  as  possible.  The  fourth  intercostal  muscle  bundle  and
fifth  intercostal  muscle  bundle  were  not  appreciably  damaged.  The  ragged  ends  of  the
damaged  fifth  rib  were  cleaned  out  with  the  rongeur.  The  plura  had  been  torn  open  by
the  secondary  missiles  created  by  the  fragmented  fifth  rib.  The  wound  was  open  widely
and  exposure  was  obtained  with  a  self  retaining  retractor.  The  right  pleural  cavity  was
then  carefully  inspected.  Approximately  200  cc  of  clot  and  liquid  blood  was  removed
from  the  pleural  cavity.  The  middle  lobe  had  a  linear  rent  starting  at  its  peripheral  edge
going  down  towards  its  hilum  separating  the  lobe  into  two  segments.  There  was  an
open  bronchus  in  the  depth  of  this  wound.  Since  the  vascularity  and  the  bronchial
connections  to  the  lobe  were  intact  it  was  decided  to  repair  the  lobe  rather  than  to
remove  it.  The  repair  was  accomplished  with  a  running  suture  of  i;:000  chromic  gut
on  atraiimatic  needle  closing  both  plural  surfaces  as  well  as  two  running  sutures  approxi-
mating the  tissue  of  the  central  portion  of  the  lobe.  This  almost  completely  sealed  off
the  air  leaks  which  were  evident  in  the  torn  portion  of  the  lobe.  The  lower  lobe  was  next

221


examined  and  found  to  be  engorged  with  blood  and  at  one  point  a  laceration  allowed  the
oozing  of  blood.  This  laceration  had  undoubtedly  been  caused  by  a  rib  fragment.  This
laceration  was  closed  with  a  single  suture  of  #3-0  chromic  gut  on  atraumatic  needle.
The  right  pleural  cavity  was  now  carefuUy  examined  and  small  rib  fragments  were  re-
moved, the  diaphram  was  fovmd  to  be  uninjured.  There  was  no  evidence  of  injury  of
the  mediastinum  and  its  contents.  Hemostasis  had  been  accomplished  within  the  pleural
cavity  with  the  repair  of  the  middle  lobe  and  the  suturing  of  the  laceration  in  the  lower
lobe.  The  upper  lobe  was  found  to  be  vminjured.  The  drains  which  had  previously  been
placed  in  the  second  interspace  in  the  midclavicular  line  was  found  to  be  longer  than
necessary  so  approximately  ten  cm  of  it  was  cut  away  and  the  remaining  portion  was
tenonstrated  with  two  additional  openings.  An  additional  drain  was  placed  through  a
stab  wound  in  the  eighth  interspace  in  the  posterior  axillary  line.  Both  these  drains  were
then  connected  to  a  waterseal  bottle.  The  fourth  and  fifth  intercostal  muscles  were  then
approximated  with  interrupted  sutures  of  i^SjfcO  chromic  gut.  The  remaining  portion  of
the  Serratus  anterior  muscle  was  then  approximated  across  the  closvure  of  the  intercostal
muscle.  The  laceration  of  the  latissimus  dorsi  muscle  on  its  intermost  surface  was  then
closed  with  several  interrupted  sutures  of  #0  chromic  gut.  Before  closing  the  sub-
cutaneous tissue  one  million  units  of  Penicillin  and  one  gram  of  Streptomycin  in  100  cc
normal  saline  was  instilled  into  the  wound.  The  stab  wound  was  then  made  in  the  most
dependent  portion  of  the  wound  coming  out  near  the  angle  of  the  scapula.  A  large
Penrose  drain  was  drawn  out  through  this  stab  wound  to  allow  drainage  of  the  wound
of  the  chest  wall.  The  subcutaneous  tissue  was  then  closed  with  interrupted  ^^0  chromic
gut  inverting  the  knots.  Skin  closed  with  interrupted  vertical  mattress  sutures  of  black
silk.  Attention  was  next  turned  to  the  wound  of  entrance.  It  was  excised  with  an  elliptical
incision.  It  was  foimd  that  the  latissimus  dorsi  muscle  although  lacerated  was  not
badly  damaged  so  that  the  opening  was  closed  with  sutures  of  #0  chromic  gut  in  the
fascia  of  the  muscle.  Before  closing  this  incision  palpation  with  the  index  finger  the
Penrose  drain  could  be  felt  immediately  below  in  the  space  beneath  the  latissimus  dorsi
muscle.  The  skin  closed  with  interrupted  vertical  mattress  sutures  of  black  silk.  Drainage
tubes  were  secured  with  safety  pins  and  adhesive  tape  and  dressings  appUed.  As  soon
as  the  operation  on  the  chest  had  been  concluded  Dr.  Gregory  and  Dr.  Shires  started
the  surgery  that  was  necessary  for  the  wounds  of  the  right  wrist  and  left  thigh.

There  was  also  a  comminuted  fracture  of  the  right  radius  secondary  to  the  same  missUe
and  in  addition  a  small  flesh  wound  of  the  left  thigh.  The  operative  notes  concerning
the  management  of  the  right  arm  and  left  thigh  will  be  dictated  by  Dr.  Charles  Gregory
and  Dr.  Tom  Shires.

(Signed)

Dr.  Robert  Shaw

RS:bl


Statement  by  Dr.  Gregory:  While  still  under  general  anesthesia  and  following  a  tho-
racotomy and  repair  of  the  chest  injury  by  Dr.  Robert  Shaw,  the  right  upper  extremity
was  thoroughly  prepped  in  the  routine  fashion  after  shaving.  He  was  draped  in  the
routine  fashion  using  stockinette,  the  only  addition  was  the  use  of  a  debridement  pan.
The  wound  of  entry  on  the  dorsal  aspect  of  the  right  wrist  over  the  junction  of  the  distal
fourth  of  the  radius  and  shaft  was  approximately  two  cm  in  length  and  rather  oblique
with  the  loss  of  tissue  with  some  considerable  contusion  at  the  margins  of  it.  There  was
a  wound  of  exit  along  the  volar  surface  of  the  wrist  about  two  cm  above  the  flexion
crease  of  the  wrist  and  in  the  midline.  The  wound  of  entrance  was  carefuUy  excised  and
developed  through  the  muscles  and  tendons  from  the  radial  side  of  that  bone  to  the
bone  itself  where  the  fracture  was  encountered.  It  was  noted  that  the  tendon  of  the
abductor  palmaris  longus*  was  transected,  only  two  small  fragments  of  bone  were  re-
moved, one  approximately  one  cm  in  length  and  consisted  of  lateral  cortex  which  lay
free  in  the  wound  and  had  no  soft  tissue  connections,  another  much  smaller  fragment
perhaps  3  mm  in  length  was  subsequently  removed.  Small  bits  of  metal  were  encoun-

222


tered  at  various  levels  throughout  the  wound  and  these  were  wherever  they  were  identi-
fied and  could  be  picked  up  were  picked  up  and  have  been  submitted  to  the  Pathology
department  for  identification  and  examination.  Throughout  the  wound  and  especially
in  the  superficial  layers  and  to  some  extent  in  the  tendon  and  tendon  sheaths  on  the
radial  side  of  the  arm  small  fine  bits  of  cloth  consistant  with  fine  bits  of  Mohair.  It  is
our  understanding  that  the  patient  was  wearing  a  Mohair  suit  at  the  time  of  the  mjury
and  this  accounts  for  the  deposition  of  such  organic  material  within  the  wound.  After  as
careful  and  complete  a  debridement  as  could  be  carried  out  and  with  an  apparent  in-
tegrity of  the  flexor  tendons  and  the  median  nerve  in  the  volar  side,  and  after  thorough
irrigation  the  wound  of  exit  on  the  volar  surface  of  the  wrist  was  closed  primarily  with
wire  sutures  while  the  wound  of  entrance  on  the  radial  side  of  the  forearm  was  only
partially  closed,  being  left  open  for  the  purpose  of  drainage  should  any  make  spontaneous
appearance.  This  is  because  of  the  presence  of  Mohair  and  organic  material  deep  into
the  wound  which  is  prone  to  produce  tissue  reactions  and  to  encourage  infection  and
this  precaution  of  not  closing  the  wound  was  taken  in  correspondence  with  our  experience
in  that  regard.

In  view  of  the  urgency  of  the  Governor's  original  chest  injury  it  was  impossible  to
definitely  ascertain  the  status  of  the  circulation  and  the  nerve  supply  to  the  hand  and
wrist  on  the  right  side.  Accordingly,  it  was  determined  as  best  we  could  at  the  time  of
operation  and  the  radial  artery  was  found  to  be  intact  and  pulsating  normally.  The
integrity  of  the  median  nerve  and  the  ulnar  nerve  is  not  clearly  established  but  it  is
presumed  to  be  present.  Following  closure  of  the  volar  wound  and  partial  closure  of  the
radial  wound,  dry  sterile  dressings  were  applied  and  a  long  arm  cast  was  then  appUed
with  skin  tape  traction,  rubber  band  variety,  attached  to  the  thumb  and  index  finger
of  the  right  hand.  An  attitude  of  flexon  was  created  at  the  right  elbow,  and  post  opera-
tively  the  limbus  suspended  from  an  overhead  frame  using  tape  traction.  The  post
operative  diagnosis  for  the  right  forearm  remains  the  same  and  again  I  suggest  that
you  incorporate  this  particular  dictation  together  with  other  dictations  which  will  be
given  to  you  by  the  surgeons  concerned  with  this  patient.

(Signed)

Charles  Gregory,  M.D.


*Dr.  Gregory  added  this  handwritten  marginal  note:  "Also  a  partial  transection  of  the
superficial  radial  nerve.  Or  Ext  Pal.  Brevis."


Statement  by  Dr.  Shires:  There  was  a  1  cm.  punctate  missile  wound  over  the  juncture  of
the  middle  and  lower  third,  medial  aspect,  of  the  left  thigh.  X-rays  of  the  thigh  and  leg
revealed  a  bullet  fragment  which  was  imbedded  in  the  body  of  the  femur  in  the  distal
third.  The  leg  was  prepared  with  Phisohex  and  1.0  Prep  and  was  draped  in  the  usual
fashion.  Following  this  the  missile  woimd  was  excised  and  the  bullet  tract  was  explored.
The  missUe  wound  was  seen  to  course  through  the  subcutaneous  fat  and  into  the  vastus
medialis.  The  necrotic  fat  and  muscle  were  debrided  down  to  the  region  of  the  femur.
The  direction  of  the  missile  wound  was  judged  not  to  be  in  the  course  of  the  femoral
vessel,  since  the  wound  was  distal  and  anterior  to  Hunter's  canal.  Following  complete
debridement  of  the  wound  and  irrigation  with  saline,  the  wound  was  felt  to  be  adequately
debrided  enough  so  that  three  simple  through-and- through,  stainless  steel  Aloe  qt^28
wire  sutures  were  used  encompassing  skin,  subcutaneous  tissue,  and  muscle  fascia  on
both  sides.  Following  this  a  sterile  dressing  was  applied.  The  dorsalis  pedis  and  posterior
tibial  pulses  in  both  legs  were  quite  good.  The  thoracic  procedure  had  been  completed
at  this  time,  the  debridement  of  the  compound  fracture  in  the  arm  was  still  in  progress
at  the  time  this  soft  tissue  injury  repair  was  completed.

(Signed)

Tom  Shires,  M.D.
223


PARKLAND  MEMORIAL  HOSPITAL
OPERATIVE  RECORD

Name:  Oswald,  Lee  Harvey.  Room:  (blank).  Statm:  S.  EOR:  25260.  Age:  24  Yr.
Race:  W/M.  Date:  11/24/63.  Surg.

Pre-operative  diagnosis:  GSW  of  upper  abdomen  and  chest  with  massive  bleeding.

Post-operative  diagnosis:  Major  vascular  injury  in  abdomen  and  chest.

Operation:  Exploratory  laparotomy,  thoracotomy,  efforts  to  repair  aorta.  Began:  1142.
Ended: 1307.

Anesthetic:  General.  Began:  1142.  Anesthesiologist:  Dr.  M.  T.  Jenkins,  Dr.  Gene
Akin,  Dr.  Curtis  Spier.

Surgeon:  Dr.  Tom  Shires.  Assistants:  Dr.  Perry,  Dr.  McClelland,  Dr.  Ron  Jones.
Scrub  Nurse:  Schrader-Lunsford.  Circ.  Nurse:  Schrader-Bell-Burkett-Simpson.

Sponge  counts:  2  counted  sponges  missing  when  body  closed;  square  pack  count
correct.  Drugs:  Ca  chloride — 3  vials;  Cedilanid — 12;  One  molar  lactate — 6;  Isuprel — 24;
AdrenaUn  1 :  1000 — 3. 1.V.  Fluids  and  blood:  3-1000  cc.  lactated  Ringer's  solution;  16-500
cc.  whole  blood;  6-1000  cc.  5%  dextrose  in  lactated  Ringer's  solution.  Measured  blood
loss — 8,376  cc.

Condition  of  patient:  Expired  at  1307.

Clinical  evaluation;  operative  findings;  description  of  operation:  Previous  inspection
had  revealed  an  entrance  wound  over  the  left  lower  lateral  chest  cage,  and  an  exit  was
identified  by  subcutaneous  palpation  of  the  bullet  over  the  right  lower  lateral  chest  cage.
At  the  time  he  was  seen  preoperatively  he  was  without  blood  pressure,  heart  beat  was  heard
infrequently  at  130  beats  per  minute,  and  preoperatively  had  endotracheal  tube  placed  and
was  receiving  oxygen  by  anesthesia  at  the  time  he  was  moved  to  the  operating  room.  Under
endotracheal  oxygen  anesthesia,  a  long  mid-line  abdominal  incision  was  made.  Bleeders
were  not  apparent  and  none  were  clamped  or  tied.  Upon  opening  the  peritoneal  cavity,
approximately  2  to  3  Hters  of  blood,  both  liquid  and  in  clots,  were  encountered.  These
were  removed.  The  bullet  pathway  was  then  identified  as  having  shattered  the  upper
medial  surface  of  the  spleen,  then  entered  the  retroperitoneal  area  where  there  was  a  large
retroperitoneal  hematoma  in  the  area  of  the  pancreas.  Following  this,  bleeding  was  seen  to
be  coming  from  the  right  side,  and  upon  inspection  there  was  seen  to  be  an  exit  to  the
right  through  the  inferior  vena  cava,  thence  through  the  superior  pole  of  the  right  kidney,
the  lower  portion  of  the  right  lobe  of  the  Uver,  and  into  the  right  lateral  body  wall.  First
the  right  kidney,  which  was  bleeding,  was  identified,  dissected  free,  retracted  immediately,
and  the  inferior  vena  cava  hole  was  clamped  with  a  partial  occlusion  clamp  of  the
Satinsky  type.  Following  this  immobilization,  packing  controlled  the  bleeding  from  the
right  kidney.  Attention  was  then  turned  to  the  left,  as  bleeding  was  massive  from  the  left
side.  The  inspection  of  the  retroperitoneal  area  revealed  a  huge  hematoma  in  the  mid-
line. The  spleen  was  then  mobilized,  as  was  the  left  colon,  and  the  retroperitoneal
approach  was  made  to  the  mid-line  structures.  The  pancreas  was  seen  to  be  shattered  in
its  mid  portion,  bleeding  was  seen  to  be  coming  from  the  aorta.  This  was  dissected  free.
Bleeding  was  controlled  with  finger  pressure  by  Dr.  Malcolm  O.  Perry.  Upon  identifi-
cation of  this  injury,  the  superior  mesenteric  artery  had  been  sheared  off  of  the  aorta,
there  was  back  bleeding  from  the  superior  mesenteric  artery.  This  was  cross-clamped
with  a  small,  curved  DeBakey  clamp.  The  aorta  was  then  occluded  with  a  straight
DeBakey  clamp  above  and  a  Potts  clamp  below.  At  this  point  all  major  bleeding  was
controlled,  blood  pressure  was  reported  to  be  in  the  neighborhood  of  100  systoUc.
Shortly  thereafter,  however,  the  pulse  rate,  which  had  been  in  the  80  to  90  range,  was
found  to  be  40  and  a  few  seconds  later  found  to  be  zero.  No  pulse  was  felt  in  the  aorta
at  this  time.  Consequently  the  left  chest  was  opened  through  an  intercostal  incision  in
approximately  the  fourth  intercostal  space.  A  Finochietto  retractor  was  inserted,  the
heart  was  seen  to  be  flabby  and  not  beating  at  all.  There  was  no  hemopericardium.
There  was  a  hole  in  the  diaphragm  but  no  hemothorax.  A  left  closed  chest  tube  had
been  introduced  in  the  Emergency  Room  prior  to  surgery,  so  that  there  was  no  significant
pneumothorax  on  the  left  side.  The  pericardium  was  opened,  cardiac  massage  was  started,
and  a  pulse  was  obtainable  with  massage.  The  heart  was  flabby,  consequently  calcium
chloride  followed  by  epinephrine-Xylocaine®  were  injected  into  the  left  ventricle  with-
out success.  However,  the  standstill  was  converted  to  fibrillation.  Following  this,  de-
fibrillation was  done,  using  240,  360,  500,  and  750  volts  and  finally  successful  defibrilla-

224


tion  was  accomplished.  However,  no  effective  heart  beat  could  be  instituted.  A
pacemaker  was  then  inserted  into  the  wall  of  the  right  ventricle  and  grounded  on  skin,
and  pacemaking  was  started.  A  very  feeble,  small,  localized  muscular  response  was
obtained  with  the  pacemaker  but  still  no  effective  beat.  At  this  time  we  were  informed
by  Dr.  Jenkins  that  there  were  no  signs  of  life  in  that  the  pupils  were  fixed  and  dilated,
there  was  no  retinal  blood  flow,  no  respiratory  effort,  and  no  effective  pulse  could  be
maintained  even  with  cardiac  massage.  The  patient  was  pronounced  dead  at  1:07  P.M.
Anesthesia  consisted  entirely  of  oxygen.  No  anesthetic  agents  as  such  were  administered.
The  patient  was  never  conscious  from  the  time  of  his  arrival  in  the  Emergency  Room
until  his  death  at  1:07  P.M.  The  subcutaneous  bullet  was  extracted  from  the  right  side
during  the  attempts  at  defibrillation,  which  were  rotated  among  the  surgeons.  The  cardiac
massage  and  defibrillation  attempts  were  carried  out  by  Dr.  Robert  N.  McClelland,  Dr.
Malcolm  O.  Perry,  Dr.  Ronald  Jones.  Assistance  was  obtained  from  the  cardiologist.
Dr.  Fouad  Bashour.

(Signed)

Tom  Shires,  M.D.


Appendix  IX
AUTOPSY  REPORT  AXD  SUPPLEMENTAL  REPORT

Date  and  Hour  Died:  22  November  1963  1300  (CST).

Date  and  Hour  Autopsy  Performed:  22  November  1963  2000  (EST).

Prosector:  (497831)  Cdr.  J.  J.  Humes,  MC,  USN;  Assistant:  (489878)  Cdr.  "J"  Thorn-
ton Boswell,  MC,  USN;  LCol.  Pierre  A.  Finck,  MC,  USA  (04  043  322).

Clinical  Diagnoses  (Including  operations):  Ht — 72i  inches;  Wt, — 170  pounds;  Eyes —
blue;  Hair — Reddish  brown.

Pathological  Diagnoses:  CAUSE  OF  DEATH:  Gunshot  wound,  head.

Approved — Signature:  J.  J.  Humes,  Cdr.  MC,  USN.

Military  Organization:  President,  United  States.

Age:  46;  Sex:  Male;  Race:  Cauc;  Autopsy  No.:  A63-272.

Patient's  Identification:  Kennedy,  John  F.;  Naval  Medical  SchooL

CLINICAL  SUMMARY:  According  to  available  information  the  deceased.  President
John  F.  Kennedy,  was  riding  in  an  open  car  in  a  motorcade  during  an  official  visit  to  DaUas,
Texas  on  22  November  1963.  The  President  was  sitting  ia  the  right  rear  seat  with  Mrs.
Kennedy  seated  on  the  same  seat  to  his  left.  Sitting  directly  in  front  of  the  President  was
Governor  John  B.  ConnaUy  of  Texas  and  directly  in  front  of  Mrs.  Keimedy  sat  Mrs.  Con-
nally.  The  vehicle  was  moving  at  a  slow  rate  of  speed  down  an  incline  into  an  underpass
that  leads  to  a  freeway  route  to  the  Dallas  Trade  Mart  where  the  President  was  to  deliver
an  address.

Three  shots  were  heard  and  the  President  feU  forward  bleeding  from  the  head.  (Gover-
nor Connally  was  seriously  wounded  by  the  same  gunfire.)  According  to  newspaper  reports
("Washington  Post"  November  23,  1963)  Bob  Jackson,  a  Dallas  "Times  Herald"  Photog-
rapher, said  he  looked  around  as  he  heard  the  shots  and  saw  a  rifle  barrel  disappearing  into
a  window  on  an  upper  floor  of  the  nearby  Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building.

Shortly  following  the  wounding  of  the  two  men  the  car  was  driven  to  Parkland  Hospital
in  Dallas.  In  the  emergency  room  of  that  hospital  the  President  was  attended  by  Dr.  Mal-
colm Perry.  Telephone  communication  with  Dr.  Perry  on  November  23,  1963  develops
the  following  information  relative  to  the  observaions  made  by  Dr.  Perry  and  procedures
performed  there  prior  to  death.

Dr.  Perry  noted  the  massive  wound  of  the  head  and  a  second  much  smaller  wound  of
the  low  anterior  neck  in  approximately  the  midline.  A  tracheostomy  was  performed  by  ex-
tending the  latter  woimd.  At  this  point  bloody  air  was  noted  bubbling  from  the  wound  and
injury  to  the  right  lateral  wall  of  the  trachea  was  observed.  Incisions  were  made  in  the
upper  anterior  chest  wall  bilaterally  to  combat  possible  subcutaneous  emphysema.  Intra-
venous infusions  of  blood  and  saline  were  begun  and  ox}'gen  was  administered.  Despite
these  measures  cardiac  arrest  occurred  and  closed  chest  cardiac  massage  failed  to  re-
establish cardiac  action.  The  President  was  pronounced  dead  approximately  thirty  to  forty
minutes  after  receiving  his  woimds.

225


The  remains  were  transported  via  the  Presidential  plane  to  Washington,  D.C.  and  sub-
sequently to  the  Naval  Medical  School,  National  Naval  Medical  Center,  Bethesda,  Mary-
land for  postmortem  examination.

GENERAL  DESCRIPTION  OF  BODY:  The  body  is  that  of  a  muscular,  well-
developed  and  well  nourished  adult  Caucasian  male  measuring  72i  inches  and  weighing
approximately  170  pounds.  There  is  beginnmg  rigor  mortis,  minimal  dependent  livor  mor-
tis of  the  dorsum,  and  early  algor  mortis.  The  hair  is  reddish  brown  and  abundant,  the
eyes  are  blue,  the  right  pupiJ  measuring  8  mm.  in  diameter,  the  left  4  mm.  There  is  edema
and  ecchymosis  of  the  inner  canthus  region  of  the  left  eyelid  measuring  approximately
1.5  cm.  in  greatest  diameter.  There  is  edema  and  ecchymosis  diffusely  over  the  right  supra-
orbital ridge  with  abnormal  mobility  of  the  vmderlying  bone.  (The  remainder  of  the  scalp
will  be  described  with  the  skull.)  There  is  clotted  blood  on  the  external  ears  but  otherwise
the  ears,  nares,  and  mouth  are  essentially  unremarkable.  The  teeth  are  in  excellent  repair
and  there  is  some  pallor  of  the  oral  mucous  membrane.

Situated  on  the  upper  right  posterior  thorax  just  above  the  upper  border  of  the  scapula
there  is  a  7  x  4  millimeter  oval  wound.  This  wound  is  measured  to  be  14  cm.  from  the  tip
of  the  right  acromion  process  and  14  cm.  below  the  tip  of  the  right  mastoid  process.

Situated  in  the  low  anterior  neck  at  approximately  the  level  of  the  third  and  fourth
Tracheal  rings  is  a  6.5  cm.  long  transverse  wovmd  with  widely  gaping  irregular  edges.  (The
depth  and  character  of  these  wounds  will  be  further  described  below.)

Situated  on  the  anterior  chest  wall  in  the  nipple  line  are  bilateral  2  cm.  long  recent
transverse  surgical  incisions  into  the  subcutaneous  tissue.  The  one  on  the  left  is  situated  1 1
cm.  cephalad  to  the  nipple  and  the  one  on  the  right  8  cm.  cephalad  to  the  nipple.  There  is
no  hemorrhage  or  ecchymosis  associated  with  these  wovmds.  A  similar  clear  woimd  meas-
uring 2  cm.  in  length  is  situated  on  the  antero-lateral  aspect  of  the  left  mid  arm.  Situated  on
the  antero-lateral  aspect  of  each  ankle  is  a  recent  2  cm.  transverse  incision  into  the  sub-
cutaneous tissue.

There  is  an  old  well  healed  8  cm.  McBumey  abdominal  incision.  Over  the  lumbar  spine
in  the  midline  is  an  old,  well  healed  15  cm.  scar.  Situated  on  the  upper  antero-lateral  aspect
of  the  right  thigh  is  an  old,  well  healed  8  cm.  scar.

MISSILE  WOUNDS:  1.  There  is  a  large  irregular  defect  of  the  scalp  and  skull  on  the
right  involving  chiefly  the  parietal  bone  but  extending  somewhat  into  the  temporal  and
occipital  regions.  In  this  region  there  is  an  actual  absence  of  scalp  and  bone  producing  a
defect  which  measures  approximately  13  cm.  in  greatest  diameter.

From  the  irregular  margins  of  the  above  scalp  defect  tears  extend  in  stellate  fashion  into
the  more  or  less  intact  scalp  as  follows:

a.  From  the  right  inferior  tempro-parietal  margin  anterior  to  the  right  ear  to  a  point
slightly  above  the  tragus.

b.  From  the  anterior  parietal  margin  anteriorly  on  the  forehead  to  approximately  4  cm,
above  the  right  orbital  ridge.

c.  From  the  left  margin  of  the  main  defect  across  the  midlane  antero-laterally  for  a
distance  of  approximately  8  cm.

d.  From  the  same  starting  point  as  c.  10  cm.  postero-laterally.

Situated  in  the  posterior  scalp  approximately  2.5  cm.  laterally  to  the  right  and  slightly
above  the  external  occipital  protuberance  is  a  lacerated  wound  measuring  15x6  mm.  In
the  underlying  bone  is  a  corresponding  wound  through  the  skull  which  exhibits  beveling
of  the  margins  of  the  bone  when  viewed  from  the  inner  aspect  of  the  skull.

Clearly  visible  in  the  above  described  large  skull  defect  and  exuding  from  it  is  lacerated
brain  tissue  which  on  close  inspection  proves  to  represent  the  major  portion  of  the  right
cerebral  hemisphere.  At  this  point  it  is  noted  that  the  falx  cerebri  is  extensively  lacerated
with  disruption  of  the  superior  saggital  sinus.

Upon  reflecting  the  scalp  multiple  complete  fracture  lines  are  seen  to  radiate  from  both
the  large  defect  at  the  vertex  and  the  smaUer  wound  at  the  occiput.  These  vary  greatly  in
length  and  direction,  the  longest  measuring  approximately  19  cm.  These  result  in  the  pro-
duction of  numerous  fragments  which  vary  in  size  from  a  few  miUimeters  to  10  cm.  in
greatest  diameter.

The  complexity  of  these  fractures  and  the  fragments  thus  produced  tax  satisfactory  ver-
bal description  and  are  better  appreciated  in  photographs  and  roentgenograms  which  are
prepared.

The  brain  is  removed  and  preserved  for  further  study  foUowing  formalin  fixation.

226


Received  as  separate  specimens  from  Dallas,  Texas  are  three  fragments  of  skull  bone
which  in  aggregate  roughly  approximate  the  dimensions  of  the  large  defect  described
above.  At  one  angle  of  the  largest  of  these  fragments  is  a  portion  of  the  perimeter  of  a
roughly  circular  wound  presumably  of  exit  which  exhibits  beveling  of  the  outer  aspect
of  the  bone  and  is  estimated  to  measure  approximately  2.5  to  3.0  cm.  in  diameter.  Roent-
genograms of  this  fragment  reveal  minute  particles  of  metal  in  the  bone  at  this  margin.
Roentgenograms  of  the  skull  reveal  multiple  minute  metallic  fragments  along  a  line  cor-
responding with  a  line  joining  the  above  described  small  occipital  wound  and  the  right
supraorbital  ridge.  From  the  surface  of  the  disrupted  right  cerebral  cortex  two  small  ir-
regularly shaped  fragments  of  metal  are  recovered.  These  measure  7x2  mm.  and  3  x  1  mm.
These  are  placed  in  the  custody  of  Agents  Francis  X.  O'Neill,  Jr.  and  James  W.  Sibert,
of  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation,  who  executed  a  receipt  therefor  (attached).

2.  The  second  wound  presumably  of  entry  is  that  described  above  in  the  upper  right
posterior  thorax.  Beneath  the  skin  there  is  ecchymosis  of  subcutaneous  tissue  and  mus-
culature. The  missUe  path  through  the  fascia  and  musculature  cannot  be  easily  probed.  The
wound  presumably  of  exit  was  that  described  by  Dr.  Malcolm  Perry  of  Dallas  in  the  low
anterior  cervical  region.  When  observed  by  Dr.  Perry  the  wound  measured  "a  few  mil-
limeters in  diameter,"  however  it  was  extended  as  a  tracheostomy  incision  and  thios  its
character  is  distorted  at  the  time  of  autopsy.  However,  there  is  considerable  ecchymosis
of  the  strap  muscles  of  the  right  side  of  the  neck  and  of  the  fascia  about  the  trachea
adjacent  to  the  line  of  the  tracheostomy  wound.  The  third  point  of  reference  in  connecting
these  two  wounds  is  in  the  apex  (supra-clavicular  portion)  of  the  right  pleural  cavity.  In
this  region  there  is  contusion  of  the  parietal  pleura  and  of  the  extreme  apical  portion  of  the
right  upper  lobe  of  the  limg.  In  both  instances  the  diameter  of  contusion  and  ecchymosis
at  the  point  of  maximal  involvement  measures  5  cm.  Both  the  visceral  and  parietal  pleura
are  intact  overlying  these  areas  of  trauma.

INCISIONS:  The  scalp  wounds  are  extended  in  the  coronal  plane  to  examine  the
cranial  content  and  the  customary  (Y)  shaped  incision  is  used  to  examine  the  body
cavities.

THORACIC  CAVITY:  The  bony  cage  is  unremarkable.  The  thoracic  organs  are  in
their  normal  positions  and  relationships  and  there  is  no  increase  in  free  pleural  fluid.  The
above  described  area  of  contusion  in  the  apical  portion  of  the  right  pleural  cavity  is  noted.

LUNGS:  The  lungs  are  of  essentially  similar  appearance  the  right  weighing  320  Gm.,
the  left  290  Gm.  The  lungs  are  well  aerated  with  smooth  gUstening  pleural  surfaces  and
gray-pink  color.  A  5  cm.  diameter  area  of  purplish  red  discoloration  and  increased  firmness
to  paJpation  is  situated  in  the  apical  portion  of  the  right  upper  lobe.  This  corresponds
to  the  similar  area  described  in  the  overlying  parietal  pleura.  Incision  in  this  region  reveals
recent  hemorrhage  into  pulmonary  parenchyma.

HEART:  The  pericardial  cavity  is  smooth  walled  and  contains  approximately  10  cc
of  straw-colored  fluid.  The  heart  is  of  essentially  normal  external  contour  and  weighs  350
Gm.  The  pulmonary  artery  is  opened  in  situ  and  no  abnormalities  are  noted.  The  cardiac
chambers  contain  moderate  amounts  of  postmortem  clotted  blood.  There  are  no  gross
abnormalities  of  the  leaflets  of  any  of  the  cardiac  valves.  The  following  are  the  circum-
ferences of  the  cardiac  valves:  aortic  7.5  cm.,  pulmonic  7  cm.,  tricuspid  12  cm.,  mitral
11  cm.  The  myocardium  is  firm  and  reddish  brown.  The  left  ventricular  myocardiimi
averages  1.2  cm.  in  thickness,  the  right  ventricular  myocardium  0.4  cm.  The  comary
arteries  are  dissected  and  are  of  normal  distribution  and  smooth  walled  and  elastic
throughout.

ABDOMINAL  CAVITY:  The  abdominal  organs  are  in  their  normal  positions  and
relationships  and  there  is  no  increase  in  free  peritoneal  fluid.  The  vermiform  appendix  is
surgically  absent  and  there  are  a  few  adhesions  joining  the  region  of  the  cectmi  to  the
ventral  abdominal  wall  at  the  above  described  old  abdominal  incisional  scar.

SKELETAL  SYSTEM:  Aside  from  the  above  described  skull  woimds  there  are  no
significant  gross  skeletal  abnormalities,

PHOTOGRAPHY:  Black  and  white  and  color  photographs  depicting  significant  find-

227


ings  are  exposed  but  not  developed.  These  photographs  were  placed  in  the  custody  of
Agent  Roy  H.  Kellerman  of  the  U.S.  Secret  Service,  who  executed  a  receipt  therefore
(attached).

ROENTGENOGRAMS:  Roentgenograms  are  made  of  the  entire  body  and  of  the  sep-
arately submitted  three  fragments  of  skull  bone.  These  are  developed  and  were  placed  in
the  custody  of  Agent  Roy  H.  Kellerman  of  the  U.S.  Secret  Service,  who  executed  a  receipt
therefor  (attached).

SUMMARY:  Based  on  the  above  observations  it  is  our  opinion  that  the  deceased  died
as  a  result  of  two  perforating  gunshot  wounds  inflicted  by  high  velocity  projectiles  fired
by  a  person  or  persons  imknown.  The  projectiles  were  fired  from  a  point  behind  and  some-
what above  the  level  of  the  deceased.  The  observations  and  available  information  do  not
permit  a  satisfactory  estimate  as  to  the  sequence  of  the  two  wounds.

The  fatal  missile  entered  the  skull  above  and  to  the  right  of  the  external  occipital  protu-
berance. A  portion  of  the  projectile  traversed  the  cranial  cavity  in  a  posterior-anterior
direction  (see  lateral  skull  roentgenograms)  depositing  minute  particles  along  its  path.  A
portion  of  the  projectile  made  its  exit  through  the  parietal  bone  on  the  right  carrying  with
it  portions  of  cerebrum,  skull  and  scalp.  The  two  wounds  of  the  skull  combined  with  the
force  of  the  missile  produced  extensive  fragmentation  of  the  skuU,  lacerations  of  the  super-
ior saggital  sinus,  and  of  the  right  cerebral  hemisphere.

The  other  missile  entered  the  right  superior  posterior  thorax  above  the  scapula  and
traversed  the  soft  tissues  of  the  supra-scapular  and  the  supra-clavicular  portions  of  the
base  of  the  right  side  of  the  neck.  This  missile  produced  contusions  of  the  right  apical
parietal  pleurs  and  of  the  apical  portion  of  the  right  upper  lobe  of  the  lung.  The
missile  contused  the  strap  muscles  of  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  damaged  the  trachea
and  made  its  exit  through  the  anterior  surface  of  the  neck.  As  far  as  can  be  ascertained
this  missile  struck  no  bony  structures  in  its  path  through  the  body.

In  addition,  it  is  our  opinion  that  the  wound  of  the  skull  produced  such  extensive
damage  to  the  brain  as  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  the  deceased  surviving  this  injury.

A  supplementary  report  will  be  submitted  following  more  detailed  examination  of  the
brain  and  of  microscopic  sections.  However,  it  is  not  anticipated  that  these  examinations
will  materially  alter  the  findings.

(Signed)

J.  J.  HUMES  'T'  THORNTON  BOSWELL PIERRE  A.  FINCK

CDR,  MC,  USN  (497831) CDR,  MC,  USN  (489878)  LT  COL,  MC,  USA

(04-043-322)

SUPPLEMENTARY  REPORT  OF  AUTOPSY  NUMBER  A63-272
PRESIDENT  JOHN  F.  KENNEDY

GROSS  DESCRIPTION  OF  BRAIN:  Followmg  formalin  fixation  the  brain  weighs
1500  gm.  The  right  cerebral  hemisphere  is  found  to  be  markedly  disrupted.  There  is  a
longitudmal  laceration  of  the  right  hemisphere  which  is  para-sagittal  in  position  approxi-
mately 2.5  cm.  to  the  right  of  the  midline  which  extends  from  the  tip  of  the  occipital  lobe
posteriorly  to  the  tip  of  the  frontal  lobe  anteriorly.  The  base  of  the  laceration  is  situated
approximately  4.5  cm.  below  the  vertex  in  the  white  matter.  There  is  considerable  loss  of
cortical  substance  above  the  base  of  the  laceration,  particularly  in  the  parietal  lobe.  The
margins  of  this  laceration  are  at  all  points  jagged  and  irregular,  with  additional  lacerations
extending  in  varying  directions  and  for  varying  distances  from  the  main  laceration.  In
addition,  there  is  a  laceration  of  the  corpus  callosum  extending  from  the  genu  to  the  tail.
Exposed  in  this  latter  laceration  are  the  interiors  of  the  right  lateral  and  thh-d  ventricles.

When  viewed  from  the  vertex  the  left  cerebral  hemisphere  is  intact.  There  is  marked
engorgement  of  meningeal  blood  vessels  of  the  left  temporal  and  frontal  regions  with
considerable  associated  sub-arachnoid  hemorrhage.  The  gyri  and  sulci  over  the  left  hemi-
sphere are  of  essentially  normal  size  and  distribution.  Those  on  the  right  are  too  frag-
mented and  distorted  for  satisfactory  description.

When  viewed  from  the  basilar  aspect  the  disruption  of  the  right  cortex  is  again  obvious.
There  is  a  longitudinal  laceration  of  the  mid-brain  through  the  floor  of  the  third  ventricle
just  behind  the  optic  chiasm  and  the  mammillary  bodies.  This  laceration  partially  com-
municates with  an  oblique  1.5  cm.  tear  through  the  left  cerebral  peduncle.  There  are

228


irregular  superficial  lacerations  over  the  basilar  aspects  of  the  left  temporal  and  frontal
lobes.

In  the  interest  of  preserving  the  specimen  coronal  sections  are  not  made.  The  following
sections  are  taken  for  microscopic  examination:

a.  From  the  margin  of  the  laceration  in  the  right  parietal  lobe.

b.  From  the  margin  of  the  laceration  in  the  corpus  callosum.

c.  From  the  anterior  portion  of  the  laceration  in  the  right  frontal  lobe.

d.  From  the  contused  left  fronto-parietal  cortex.

e.  From  the  line  of  transection  of  the  spinal  cord.

f.  From  the  right  cerebellar  cortex.

g.  From  the  superficial  laceration  of  the  basilar  aspect  of  the  left  temporal  lobe.

During  the  course  of  this  examination  seven  (7)  black  and  white  and  six  (6)  color  4x5
inch  negatives  are  exposed  but  not  developed  (the  cassettes  containing  these  negatives
have  been  delivered  by  hand  to  Rear  Admiral  George  W.  Burkley,  MC,  USN,  White  House
Physician) .

MICROSCOPIC  EXAMINATION:

BRAIN:  Multiple  sections  from  representative  areas  as  noted  above  are  examined.  All
sections  are  essentially  similar  and  show  extensive  disruption  of  brain  tissue  with  associ-
ated hemorrhage.  In  none  of  the  sections  examined  are  there  significant  abnormalities
other  than  those  directly  related  to  the  recent  trauma.

HEART:  Sections  show  a  moderate  amount  of  subepicardial  fat.  The  coronary  arteries,
myocardial  fibers,  and  endocardium  are  unremarkable.

LUNGS:  Sections  through  the  grossly  described  area  of  contusion  in  the  right  upper  lobe
exhibit  disruption  of  alveolar  walls  and  recent  hemorrhage  into  alveoli.  Sections  are  other-
wise essentially  unremarkable.

LIVER:  Sections  show  the  normal  hepatic  architecture  to  be  well  preserved.  The  paren-
chymal ceUs  exhibit  markedly  granular  cytoplasm  indicating  high  glycogen  content
which  is  characteristic  of  the  "liver  biopsy  pattern"  of  sudden  death.

SPLEEN:  Sections  show  no  significant  abnormalities.

KIDNEYS:  Sections  show  no  significant  abnormalities  aside  from  dilatation  and  en-
gorgement of  blood  vessels  of  all  calibers.

SKIN  WOUNDS:  Sections  through  the  wounds  in  the  occipital  and  upper  right  posterior
thoracic  regions  are  essentially  similar.  In  each  there  is  loss  of  continuity  of  the  epider-
mis with  coagulation  necrosis  of  the  tissues  at  the  woimd  margins.  The  scalp  woimd  ex-
hibits several  small  fragments  of  bone  at  its  margins  in  the  subcutaneous  tissue.

FINAL  SUMMARY:  This  supplementary  report  covers  in  more  detail  the  extensive
degree  of  cerebral  trauma  in  this  case.  However  neither  this  portion  of  the  examination  nor
the  microscopic  examinations  alter  the  previously  submitted  report  or  add  significant
details  to  the  cause  of  death.

J.  J.  HUMES

CDR,  MC,  USN,  497831

6  December  1963
From:  Commanding  OflBcer,  U.  S.  Naval  Medical  School
To:  The  White  House  Physician

Via:  Commanding  OflBcer,  National  Naval  Medical  Center

Subj:  Supplementary  report  of  Naval  Medical  School  autopsy  No.  A63-272,  John  F,
Keimedy;  forwarding  of

1.  All  copies  of  the  above  subject  final  supplementary  report  are  forwarded  herewith.

J.  H.  STOVER,  JR.
• • • • •

6  December  1963
FIRST  ENDORSEMENT

From:  Commanding  OflBcer,  National  Naval  Medical  Center
To:  The  White  House  Physician

C.  B.  GALLOWAY

229


Appendix  X
EXPERT  TESTIMONY


FIREARMS  AND  FIREARMS
IDENTIFICATION


Three  experts  gave  testimony  concerning  fire-
arms and  firearms  identification:  Robert  A.
Frazier  and  Cortlandt  Cunningham  of  the  FBI,
and  Joseph  D.  Nicol,  superintendent  of  the  Bu-
reau of  Criminal  IdentMcation  and  Investiga-
tion of  the  State  of  Dlinois.  Frazier  has  been  in
the  field  of  firearms  identification  for  23  years,
following  a  1-year  course  of  specialized  train-
ing in  the  FBI  Laboratory.  Cunningham  has
been  in  the  field  for  5  years,  having  also  com-
pleted the  FBI  course.  Nicol  has  been  in  the
firearms  identification  field  since  1941,  having
begun  his  training  in  the  Chicago  police  crime
laboratory.  Each  has  made  many  thousands  of
firearms  identification  examinations.  Frazier
testified  on  the  rifle,  the  rifle  cartridge  cases,  and
the  rifle  bullets;  Cimningham  on  the  revolver,
the  revolver  cartridge  cases,  the  revolver  bullets,
and  the  paraflBn  test;  and  Nicol  on  all  the  bul-
lets and  cartridge  cases  and  the  paraflBn  test.  Ni-
col's  conclusions  were  identical  to  those  of
Frazier  and  Cunningham,  except  as  noted.

General  Principles

A  cartridge,  or  round  of  ammunition,  is  com-
posed of  a  primer,  a  cartridge  case,  powder,  and
a  buUet.  The  primer,  a  metal  cup  containing
a  detonable  mixture,  fits  into  the  base  of  the  car-
tridge case,  which  is  loaded  with  the  powder.
The  buUet,  which  usually  consists  of  lead  or  of
a  lead  core  encased  in  a  higher  strength  metal
jacket,  fits  into  the  neck  of  the  cartridge  case.
To  fire  the  bullet,  the  cartridge  is  placed  in  the
chamber  of  a  firearm,  immediately  behind  the
firearm's  barrel.  The  base  of  the  cartridge  rests
against  a  solid  support  called  the  breech  face  or,
in  the  case  of  a  bolt-operated  weapon,  the  bolt
face.  When  the  trigger  is  puUed,  a  firing  pin
strikes  a  swift,  hard  blow  into  the  primer,  det-
onating the  priming  mixture.  The  flames  from
the  resulting  explosion  ignite  the  powder,  caus-
ing a  rapid  combustion  whose  force  propels  the
bullet  forward  through  the  barrel.

The  barrels  of  modem  firearms  are  "rifled,"
that  is,  several  spiral  grooves  are  cut  into  the
barrel  from  end  to  end.  The  purpose  of  the  ri-
fling is  to  set  the  bullet  spinning  around  its  axis,
giving  it  a  stability  in  flight  that  it  would  other-
wise lack.  The  weapons  of  a  given  make  and
model  are  aUke  in  their  rifling  characteristics;
that  is,  number  of  grooves,  number  of  lands
(the  raised  portion  of  the  barrel  between  the
grooves)  and  twist  of  the  rifling.  When  a  bullet
is  fired  through  a  barrel,  it  is  engraved  with  these
rifling  characteristics.  For  example,  all  S.  &  W.
.38/200  British  Service  Revolvers  have  five
grooves  and  five  lands,  which  twist  to  the  right,
and  bullets  fired  through  such  a  revolver  will


have  five  groove  and  land  impressions,  right
twist.

In  addition  to  rifling  characteristics,  every
weapon  bears  distinctive  microscopic  character-
istics on  its  components,  including  its  barrel,  fir-
ing pin,  and  breech  face.  While  a  weapon's
rifling  characteristics  are  common  to  aU  other
weapons  of  its  make  and  model  (and  sometimes
even  to  weapons  of  a  different  make  or  model),
a  weapon's  microscopic  characteristics  are  dis-
tinctive, and  differ  from  those  of  every  other
weapon,  regardless  of  make  and  model.  Such
markings  are  initially  caused  during  manufac-
ture, since  the  action  of  manufacturing  tools
differs  microscopically  from  weapon  to  weapon,
and  since  the  tools  change  microscopically  while
being  operated.  As  a  weapon  is  used,  further
distinctive  microscopic  markings  are  introduced
by  the  effects  of  wear,  fouling,  and  cleaning.  As
Frazier  testified:

Q.  Can  you  explain  how  you  are  able  to
come  to  a  conclusion  that  a  cartridge  case
was  fired  in  a  particular  weapon  to  the  ex-
clusion of  all  other  weapons?

Mr.  Frazier.  Yes,  sir;  during  the  manufac-
ture of  a  weapon,  there  are  certain  things
done  to  the  mechanism  of  it,  which  are  by
machine  or  by  filing,  by  grinding,  which  form
the  parts  of  the  weapon  into  their  final  shape.
These  machining  and  grinding  and  filing  oper-
actions  will  mark  the  metal  with  very  fine
scratches  or  turning  marks  and  grinding
marks  in  such  a  way  that  there  will  be  de-
veloped on  the  surface  of  the  metal  a  char-
acteristic pattern.  This  pattern,  because  it  is
made  by  these  accidental  machine-type  op-
erations, will  be  characteristic  of  that  par-
ticular weapon,  and  will  not  be  reproduced  on
separate  weapons.  It  may  be  a  combination  of
marks  that — the  face  of  the  bolt  may  be
milled,  then  it  may  be  in  part  filed  to  smooth
off  the  comers,  and  then,  as  a  final  opera-
tion, it  may  be  polished,  or  otherwise  ad-
justed during  the  hand  fitting  operation,  so
that  it  does  have  its  particular  pattern  of  mi-
croscopic marks.

The  bolt  face  of  the  139  rifle  I  have  photo-
graphed  and enlarged in this photograph
[Commission  Exhibit  No.  558]  to  show  the
types  of  marks  I  was  referring  to.
* * *

The  marks  produced  during  manufacture
are  the  marks  seen  on  the  bolt  face;  filing
marks,  machining  marks  of  the  various  types,
even  forging  marks  or  casting  marks  if  the
bolt  happens  to  be  forged  or  cast.  And  then
variations  which  occur  in  these  marks  during
the  life  of  the  weapon  are  very  important  in
identification,  because  many  of  the  machining
marks  can  be  flattened  out,  can  be  changed,


230


by  merely  a  grain  of  sand  between  the  face  of
the  cartridge  case  and  the  bolt  at  the  time  a
shot  is  fired,  which  will  itself  scratch  and  dent
the  bolt  face.  So  the  bolt  face  will  pick  up  a
characteristic  pattern  of  marks  which  are  pe-
culiar to  it.


♦  *  *  [T]he  marks  which  are  placed  on
any  bolt  face  are  accidental  in  nature.  That  is,
they  are  not  placed  there  intentionally  in  the
first  place.  They  are  residual  to  some  machin-
ing operation,  such  as  a  milling  machine,  in
which  each  cutter  of  the  milling  tool  cuts
away  a  portion  of  the  metal;  then  the  next
tooth  comes  along  and  cuts  away  a  little
more,  and  so  on,  until  the  final  surface  bears
the  combination  of  the  various  teeth  of  the
milling  cutter.  In  following  that  operation,
then,  the  surface  is  additionally  scratched —
until  you  have  numerous — we  call  them  mi-
croscopic characteristics,  a  characteristic  be-
ing a  mark  which  is  peculiar  to  a  certain
place  on  the  bolt  face,  and  of  a  certain  shape,
it  is  of  a  certain  size,  it  has  a  certain  contour,
it  may  be  just  a  little  dimple  in  the  metal,  or  a
spot  of  rust  at  one  time  on  the  face  of  the
bolt,  or  have  occurred  from  some  accidental
means  such  as  dropping  the  bolt,  or  repeated
use  having  flattened  or  smoothed  off  the  sur-
face of  the  metal.


*  *  *  [A]s  the  blade  of  a  milling  machine
travels  around  a  surface,  it  takes  off  actually
a  dust — it  is  not  actually  a  piece  of  metal — it
scrapes  a  little  steel  off  in  the  form  of  a  dust —
or  a  very  fine  powder  or  chip — ^that  tooth
leaves  a  certain  pattern  of  marks — that  edge.
That  milling  cutter  may  have  a  dozen  of  these
edges  on  its  surface,  and  each  one  takes  a
little  more.  Gradually  you  wear  the  metal
down,  you  tear  it  out  actually  until  you  are  at
the  proper  depth.  Those  little  pieces  of  metal,
as  they  are  traveling  around,  can  also  scratch
the  face  of  the  bolt — ^unless  they  are  washed
away.  So  that  you  may  have  accidental  marks
from  that  source,  just  in  the  machining  opera-
tion.

Now,  there  are  two  types  of  marks  pro-
duced in  a  cutting  operation.  One,  from  the
nicks  along  the  cutting  edge  of  the  tool,  which
are  produced  by  a  circular  operating  tool —
which  produce  very  fine  scratches  in  a  circu-
lar pattern.  Each  time  the  tool  goes  around,
it  erases  those  marks  that  were  there  before.
And  when  the  tool  is  finally  lifted  out,  you
have  a  series  of  marks  which  go  around  the
surface  which  has  been  machined,  and  you
will  find  that  that  pattern  of  marks,  as  this
tool  goes  aroimd,  will  change.  In  one  area,  it
will  be  one  set  of  marks — and  as  you  visually
examine  the  surface  of  the  metal,  these  very
fine  marks  will  extend  for  a  short  distance,
then  disappear,  and  a  new  mark  of  a  new  type


will  begin  and  extend  for  a  short  distance.
The  entire  surface,  then,  will  have  a — be
composed  of  a  series  of  circles,  but  the  indi-
vidual marks  seen  in  the  microscope  will  not
be  circular,  will  not  form  complete  circles
around  the  face  of  the  bolt.

Q.  Have  you  had  occasion  to  examine  two
consecutive  bolt  faces  from  a  factory?

A.  Oh,  yes.

Q.  And  what  did  you  find  on  that  examina-
tion?

A.  There  would  be  no  similarity  in  the  in-
dividual microscopic  characteristics  between
the  two  bolt  faces.

Q.  There  actually  was  none?

A.  No,  there  was  none.
* * *

Q.  How  are  you  able  to  conclude  that  a
given  bullet  was  fired  in  a  given  weapon  to
the  exclusion  of  all  other  weapons,  Mr.  Fra-
zier?

A.  That  is  based  again  upon  the  micro-
scopic marks  left  on  the  fired  bullets  and
those  marks  in  turn  are  based  upon  the  barrel
from  which  the  bullets  are  fired.

The  marks  in  the  barrel  originate  during
manufacture.  They  originate  through  use  of
the  gun,  through  accidental  marks  resulting
from  cleaning,  excessive  cleaning,  of  the  weap-
on, or  faulty  cleaning.

They  result  from  corrosion  in  the  barrel
due  to  the  hot  gases  and  possibly  corrosive
primer  mixtures  in  the  cartridges  used,  and
primarily  again  they  result  from  wear,  that  is,
an  eroding  of  the  barrel  through  friction  due
to  the  firing  of  cartridges,  bullets  through  it.

In  this  particular  barrel  the  manufacturer's
marks  are  caused  by  the  drill  which  drills  out
the  barrel,  leaving  certain  marks  from  the
drilling  tool.  Then  portions  of  these  marks
are  erased  by  a  rifling  tool  which  cuts  the
four  spiral  grooves  in  the  barrel  and,  in  turn,
leaves  marks  themselves,  and  in  connection
with  those  marks  of  course,  the  drilling
marks,  being  circular  in  shape,  there  is  a
tearing  away  of  the  surface  of  the  metal,  so
that  a  microscopically  rough  surface  is  left

Then  removing  part  of  those  marks  with
a  separate  tool  causes  that  barrel  to  assume
an  individual  characteristic,  a  character  all  of
its  own.

In  other  words,  at  that  time  you  could  iden-
tify a  bullet  fired  from  that  barrel  as  having
been  fired  from  the  barrel  to  the  exclusion  of
all  other  barrels,  because  there  is  no  system
whatever  to  the  drilling  of  the  barrel.  The
only  system  is  in  the  rifling  or  in  the  cutting
of  the  grooves,  and  in  this  case  of  rifle  bar-
rels, even  the  cutters  wear  down  as  the  bar-
rels are  made,  eventually  of  course  having
to  be  discarded  or  resharpened.

Q.  Have  you  examined  consecutively
manufactured  barrels  to  determine  whether
their  microscopic  characteristics  are  identi-
cal?


231


A.  Yes,  sir;  I  have  three  different  sets  of,
you  might  say,  paired  barrels,  which  have
been  manufactured  on  the  same  machine,  one
after  the  other,  under  controlled  conditions  to
make  them  as  nearly  alike  as  possible,  and
in  each  case  fired  bullets  from  those  barrels
could  not  be  identified  with  each  other;  in
fact,  they  looked  nothing  at  all  alike  as  far
as  individual  microscopic  characteristics  are
concerned.  Their  rifling  impressions  of  course
would  be  identical,  but  the  individual  marks
there  would  be  entirely  different.

When  a  cartridge  is  fired,  the  microscopic
characteristics  of  the  weapon's  barrel  are  en-
graved into  the  bullet  (along  with  its  rifling
characteristics),  and  the  microscopic  charac-
teristics of  the  firing  pin  and  breech  face  are
engraved  into  the  base  of  the  cartridge  case.  By
virtue  of  these  microscopic  markmgs,  an  expert
can  frequently  match  a  bullet  or  cartridge  case
to  the  weapon  in  which  it  was  fired.  To  make
such  an  identification,  the  expert  compares  the
suspect  bullet  or  cartridge  case  under  a  com-
parison microscope,  side  by  side  with  a  test  bul-
let or  cartridge  case  which  has  been  fired  in  the
weapon,  to  determine  whether  the  pattern  of
the  markings  in  the  test  and  suspect  items  are
sufficiently  similar  to  show  that  they  were  fired
in  the  same  weapon.  This  is  exemplified  by
Frazier's  examination  of  Commission  Exhibit
No.  543,  one  of  the  cartridge  cases  found  in
the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building  af-
ter the  assassination:

Q.  Mr.  Frazier,  we  were  just  beginning
to  discuss,  before  the  recess,  Conmiission  Ex-
hibit 559,  which  is  a  picture,  as  you  described
it,  of  Exhibit  No.  543  and  a  test  cartridge
under  a  microscope  *  *  *  ?

Mr.  Frazier.  Yes,  sir.

Q.  Could  you  discuss,  by  using  that  picture,
some  of  the  markings  which  you  have  seen
under  the  microscope  and  on  the  basis  of
which  you  made  your  identification?

A.  Yes,  sir.  In  the  photograph  I  have  drawn
some  small  circles  and  numbered  them,  those
circles,  correspondingly  on  each  side  of  the
photograph.  The  purpose  of  the  circles  is  not
to  point  out  all  the  similarities,  but  to  call
attention  to  some  of  them  and  to  help  orient
in  locating  a  mark  on  one  with  a  mark  on  the
opposite  side  of  the  photograph.  In  general
the  area  shown  is  immediately  outside  of  the
firing  pin  in  the  bolt  of  the  139  rifle,  on  the
left  side  of  the  photograph,  and  Commission
Exhibit  543  on  the  right  side.

The  circles  have  been  drawn  around  the
dents  or  irregularly  shaped  ridges,  small
bumps,  and  depressions  on  the  surface  of  the
metal  in  six  places  on  each  side  of  the  photo-
graph. It  is  an  examination  of  these  marks,
and  aU  of  the  marks  on  the  face  of  the  breech,
microscopically  which  permits  a  conclusion
to  be  reached.  The  photograph  itself  actually


is  a  substitute  to  show  only  the  type  of  marks
found  rather  than  their  nature,  that  is,  their
height,  their  width,  or  their  relationship  to
each  other,  which  is  actually  a  mental,  visual,
comparison  on  the  two  specimens  themselves.

Q.  Referring  for  a  second  to  this  mental,
visual,  comparison,  Mr.  Frazier,  would  a  per-
son without  firearms  training — firearms-iden-
tification training — be  able  to  look  under  a
microscope  and  make  a  determination  for
himself  concerning  whether  a  given  cartridge
case  had  been  fired  in  a  given  weapon?

A.  In  that  connection  that  person  could
look  through  the  microscope.  He  may  or  may
not  see  these  individual  characteristics  which
are  present,  because  he  does  not  know  what
to  look  for  in  the  first  place,  and,  secondly,
they  are  of  such  a  nature  that  you  have  to
mentally  sort  them  out  in  your  mind  going
back  and  forth  between  one  area  and  the
other  until  you  form  a  mental  picture  of
them  in  a  comparison  such  as  this.

If  it  was  a  different  type  of  comparison,  of
parallel  marks  or  something  of  that  natiu-e,
then  he  could  see  the  marks,  but  in  either  in-
stance, without  having  compared  hundreds
and  hundreds  of  specimens,  he  would  not  be
able  to  make  any  statement  as  to  whether  or
not  they  were  fired  from  the  same  rifle.

Q.  Would  you  say  that  this  is,  then,  a  mat-
ter of  expert  interpretation  rather  than  a
point-for-point  comparison  which  a  layman
could  make?

A.  I  would  say  so;  yes.  I  don't  think  a  lay-
man would  recognize  some  of  the  things  on
these  cartridge  cases  and  some  shown  in  the
photographs  as  actually  being  significant  or
not  significant,  because  there  wUl  be  things
present  which  have  nothing  whatsoever  to  do
with  the  firing  of  the  cartridge  case  in  the  gutL

There  may  be  a  depression  in  the  primer  to
begin  with,  and  there  are  no  marks  registered
at  that  point  as  a  result  of  the  fixing.  Unless
these  things  are  known  to  occur,  someone
may  actually  arrive  at  a  different  conclusion,
because  of  the  absence  of  similar  marks.

Q.  Now  having  reference  to  the  specific  ex-
hibit before  you,  which  is  559

A.  Yes.

Q.  Are  all  the  marks  shown  in  both  photo-
graphs identical?

A.  No.

Q.  And  could  you  go  into  detail  on  a  mark
which  is  not  identical  to  explain  why  you
would  get  such  a  result?

A.  Well,  for  instance,  between  what  I  have
drawn  here  as  a  circle  4  and  circle  5,  there  is
a  slanting  line  from  the  upper  left  to  the  lower
right  on  C-6.  This  line  shows  as  a  white  line
in  the  photograph.

On  the  other  side  there  is  a  rough,  very
rough  ridge  which  runs  through  there,  having
an  entirely  different  appearance  from  the  rel-
atively sharp  line  on  C-6.  The  significant
part  of  that  mark  is  the  groove  in  between.


232


rather  than  the  sharp  edge  of  the  mark,  be-
cause the  sharp  comer  could  be  affected  by  the
hardness  of  the  metal  or  the  irregular  surface
of  the  primer  and  the  amount  of  pressure  ex-
erted against  it,  pressing  it  back  against  the
face  of  the  bolt,  at  the  time  the  cartridges
were  fired.  So  that  you  would  never  expect
all  the  marks  on  one  cartridge  case  to  be  iden-
tical with  all  the  marks  on  the  other  cartridge
case.

In  fact,  you  would  expect  many  differ-
ences. But  the  comparison  is  made  on  the
overall  pattern,  contour,  and  nature  of  the
marks  that  are  present


Q.  Again  there  are  dissimilar  marks  on
these  two  pictiu-es  [of  the  firing-pin  depres-
sions on  the  cartridge  case  Commission  Ex-
hibit No.  543,  and  a  test  cartridge  case],  Mr.
Frazier?

A.  Yes;  there  are,  for  the  same  reason,  that
metal  does  not  flow  the  same  in  every  in-
stance, and  it  will  not  be  impressed  to  the
same  depth  and  to  the  same  amount,  depend-
ing on  the  type  of  metal,  the  blow  that  is
struck,  and  the  pressures  involved.

Q.  Is  your  identification  made  therefore  on
the  basis  of  the  presence  of  similarities,  as
opposed  to  the  absence  of  dissimilarities?

A.  No,  that  is  not  exactly  right.  The  iden-
tification is  made  on  the  presence  of  suflBcient
individual  microscopic  characteristics  so  that
a  very  definite  pattern  is  formed  and  visual-
ized on  the  two  stirfaces.

Dissimilarities  may  or  may  not  be  present,
depending  on  whether  there  have  been
changes  to  the  firing  pin  through  use  or  wear
whether  the  metal  flows  are  the  same,  and
whether  the  pressures  are  the  same  or  not.

So  I  don't  think  we  can  say  that  it  is  an  ab-
sence of  dissimilarities,  but  rather  the  pres-
ence of  similarities.

A  bullet  or  cartridge  case  cannot  always  be
identified  with  the  weapon  in  which  it  was  fired.
In  some  cases,  the  bullet  or  cartridge  case  is  too
mutilated.  In  other  cases,  the  weapon's  micro-
scopic characteristics  have  changed  between  the
time  the  suspect  item  was  fired  and  the  time  the
test  item  was  fired — ^microscopic  characteristics
change  drastically  in  a  short  period  of  time,  due
to  wear,  or  over  a  longer  period  of  time,  due
to  wear,  corrosion,  and  cleaning.  Still  again,  the
weapon  may  mark  bullets  inconsistently — for
example,  because  the  buUets  are  smaller  than
the  barrel,  and  travel  through  it  erratically.

The  Rifle

The  rifle  found  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  shortly  after  the  assassi-
nation was  a  bolt-action,  clip-fed,  military  rifle,
40.2  inches  long  and  8  pounds  In  weight  In-
scribed on  the  rifle  were  various  markings,  in-
cluding the  words  "CAL.  6.5,"  "MADE  ITA-


LY," "TERNI,"  and  "ROCCA";  the  numerals
"1940"  and  "40";  the  serial  number  C2766;  the
letters  "R-E,"  "PG,"  and  'TNI";  the  figure  of
a  crown;  and  several  other  barely  decipherable
letters  and  numbers.  The  rifle  bore  a  very  in-
expensive Japanese  four-power  sight,  stamped
"4  X  18  COATED,"  "ORDNANCE  OPTICS
INC.,"  "HOLLYWOOD  CALIFORNL\,"  and
"MADE  IN  JAPAN"  and  a  sling  consisting  of
two  leather  straps,  one  of  which  had  a  broad
patch,  which  apparently  had  been  inserted  on
the  rifle  and  cut  to  length.  The  sling  was  not  a
standard  rifle  sling,  but  appeared  to  be  a  musical
instrument  strap  or  a  sling  from  a  carrying'case
or  camera  bag.  A  basic  purpose  of  a  rifle  sling
is  to  enable  the  rifleman  to  steady  his  grip,  by
wrapping  the  arm  into  the  sling  in  a  prescribed
manner.  The  sling  on  the  rifle  was  too  short  to
use  in  the  normal  way,  but  might  have  served  to
provide  some  additional  steadiness.

The  rifle  was  identified  as  a  6.5-millimeter
Mannlicher-Carcano  Italian  military  rifle.  Mod-
el 91/38.  This  identification  was  initially  made
by  comparing  the  rifle  with  standard  reference
works  and  by  the  markings  inscribed  on  the  ri-
fle. The  caliber  was  independently  determined  by
chambering  a  Mannlicher-Carcano  6.5  millime-
ter cartridge  in  the  rifle  for  fit,  and  by  making  a
sulfur  cast  of  the  inside  of  the  rifle's  barrel
which  was  measured  with  a  micrometer.  (The
caliber  of  a  weapon  is  the  diameter  of  the  in-
terior of  the  barrel,  measured  between  opposite
lands.  The  caliber  of  American  weapons  is  ex-
pressed in  inches;  thus  a  .30-caliber  weapon  has
a  barrel  which  is  thirty-one-hundredths  or  three-
tenths  of  an  inch  in  diameter.  The  caliber  of
continental  European  weapons  is  measured  in
millimeters.  A  6.5-mi11imeter  caliber  weapon
corresponds  to  an  American  .257-cahber  weap-
on, that  is,  its  barrel  diameter  is  about  one-fourth
inch. )  The  identification  was  later  confirmed  by
a  communication  from  SIFAR,  the  Italian
Armed  Forces  Intelligence  Service.  This  com-
munication also  explained  the  markings  on  the
rifle,  as  follows:  "CAL.  6.5"  refers  to  the  rifle's
caliber;  "MADE  ITALY"  refers  to  its  origin,
and  was  inscribed  at  the  request  of  the  Ameri-
can importer  prior  to  shipment;  'TERNI"
means  that  the  rifle  was  manufactured  and
tested  by  the  Temi  Army  Plant  of  Temi,  Italy;
the  number  "C2766"  is  the  serial  number  of  the
rifle,  and  the  rifle  in  question  is  the  only  one  of
its  t>'pe  bearing  that  serial  number;  the  numer-
als "1940"  and  "40"  refer  to  the  year  of  manu-
facture; and  the  other  figures,  numbers,  and
letters  are  principally  inspector's,  designer's  or
manufacturer's  marks.

The  Model  91/38  rifle  was  one  of  the  1891
series  of  Italian  military  rifles,  incorporating  fea-
tures designed  by  Ritter  von  Mannlicher  and
M.  Carcano.  The  series  originally  consisted  of
6.5-millimeter  caliber  rifles,  but  Model  38  of  the
series,  designed  shortly  before  World  War  n,
was  a  7. 3 5 -millimeter  caliber.  Early  in  World
War n, however, the Itahan Government,


233


which  encountered  an  ammunition  supply  prob-
lem, began  producing  many  of  these  rifles  as
6.5-millimeter  caliber  rifles,  known  as  the  6.5-
millimeter  Model  91/38.  The  91/38  has  been
imported  into  this  country  as  surplus  military
equipment,  has  been  advertised  quite  widely,
and  is  now  fairly  common  in  this  country.

Like  most  bolt-action  military  rifles,  the  91/
38  is  operated  by  turning  up  the  bolt  handle,
drawing  the  bolt  to  the  rear,  pushing  the  bolt
forward,  turning  down  the  bolt  handle,  and
pulling  the  trigger.  Bringing  the  bolt  forward
and  turning  down  the  bolt  handle  compresses
the  spring  which  drives  the  firing  pin,  and
locks  the  bolt  into  place.  When  the  trigger
is  pulled,  the  cocked  spring  drives  the  firing  pin
forward  and  the  cartridge  is  fired.  The  face  of
the  bolt  bears  a  lip,  called  the  extractor,  around
a  portion  of  its  circumference.  As  the  bolt  is
pushed  forward,  this  lip  grasps  the  rim  of  the
cartridge.  As  the  bolt  is  pulled  back,  the  ex-
tractor brings  the  empty  cartridge  case  with  it,
and  as  the  cartridge  case  is  being  brought  back,
it  strikes  a  projection  in  the  ejection  port  called
the  ejector,  which  throws  it  out  of  the  rifle.
Meanwhile,  a  leaf  spring  beneath  the  clip  has
raised  the  next  cartridge  into  loading  position.
When  the  bolt  is  brought  forward,  it  pushes  the
fresh  cartridge  into  the  chamber.  The  trigger  is
pulled,  the  cartridge  is  fired,  the  bolt  handle  is
brought  up,  the  bolt  is  brought  back,  and  the
entire  cycle  starts  again.  As  long  as  there  is  am-
munition in  the  clip,  one  need  only  work  the
bolt  and  pull  the  trigger  to  fire  the  rtfle.

The  cUp  itself  is  inserted  into  the  rifle  by
drawing  back  the  bolt,  and  pushing  the  clip  in
from  the  top.  The  clip  holds  one  to  six  car-
tridges. If  six  cartridges  are  inserted  into  the
clip  and  an  additional  cartridge  is  inserted  into
the  chamber,  up  to  seven  buUets  can  be  fired
before  reloading.  When  the  rifle  was  found  in
the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building  it
contained  a  clip  which  bore  the  letters  "SMT'
(the  manufacturer's  markings)  and  the  number
"952"  (possibly  a  part  number  or  the  manufac-
turer's code  number).  The  rifle  probably  was
sold  without  a  clip;  however,  the  clip  is  com-
monly available.

Rifle  Cartridge  and  Cartridge  Cases

When  the  rifle  was  found,  one  cartridge  was
in  the  chamber.  The  cartridge  was  a  6.5-milli-
meter Mannlicher-Carcano  cartridge,  manufac-
tured by  the  Western  Cartridge  Co.,  at  East
Alton,  LI.  This  type  of  cartridge  is  loaded  with
a  full  metal-jacketed,  military  type  of  buUet,
weighing  160-161  grains.  The  bullet  has  parallel
sides  and  a  round  nose.  It  is  just  under  1 .2  inches
long,  and  just  over  one-fourth  inch  in  diameter.
Its  velocity  is  approximately  2,165  feet  per  sec-
ond. The  cartridge  is  very  dependable;  in  tests
run  by  the  FBI  and  the  Iniantry  Weapons  Eval-
uation Branch  of  the  U.S.  Army,  the  C2766
rifle  was  fired  with  this  Western  Cartridge  Co.
ammunition  ovct  100  times,  with  no  misfires.


(In  contrast,  some  of  the  other  ammunition
available  on  the  market  for  this  rifle  is  undesixa-
able  or  of  very  poor  quality.)  The  cartridge  is
readily  available  for  purchase  from  mail-order
houses,  as  well  as  a  few  gunshops;  some  2  mil-
lion rounds  have  been  placed  on  sale  in  the
United  States.

The  presence  of  the  cartridge  in  the  chamber
did  not  necessarily  mean  that  the  assassin  con-
sidered firing  another  bullet,  since  he  may  have
reloaded  merely  by  reflex.

Apart  from  the  cartridge  in  the  rifle,  three
expended  cartridge  cases  were  found  in  the
southeast  portion  of  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  Building,  lying  between
the  south  waU  and  a  high  stack  of  boxes  which
ran  parallel  to  the  wall.  The  cartridge  cases  were
a  short  distance  to  the  west  of  the  southeast
comer  window  in  that  wall.  Based  on  a  com-
parison with  test  cartridge  cases  fired  from  the
C2766  rifle,  the  three  cartridge  cases  were  iden-
tified as  having  been  fired  from  the  C2766  rifle.
(See  Conmiission  Exhibit  No.  558,  p.  556.)  A
test  was  run  to  determine  if  the  cartridge-case-
ejection  pattern  of  the  rifle  was  consistent  with
the  assimiption  that  the  assassin  had  fired  from
the  southeast  window.  In  this  test,  1 1  cartridges
were  fired  from  the  rifle  while  it  was  depressed
45°  downward,  and  8  cartridges  were  fired  from
the  rifle  while  it  was  held  horizontally.  The  ele-
vation of  the  ejected  cartridge  cases  above  the
level  of  the  ejection  port,  and  the  points  on  the
floor  at  which  the  ejection  cartridge  cases  ini-
tiaUy  landed,  were  then  plotted.  The  results  of
these  tests  are  illustrated  by  the  diagrams,  Com-
mission Exhibits  Nos.  546  and  547.  Briefly,
Commission  Exhibit  No.  547  shows  that  with
the  weapon  depressed  at  a  45*  angle,  the  car-
tridge cases  did  not  rise  more  than  2  inches
above  the  ejection  port;  with  the  weapon  held
horizontally,  they  did  not  rise  more  than  12
inches  above  the  ejection  port.  Commission  Ex-
hibit No.  546  shows  that  if  a  circle  was  drawn
around  the  initial  landing  points  of  the  cartridge
cases  which  were  ejected  in  the  test  while  the
rifle  was  held  depressed  at  45°,  the  center  of  the
circle  would  be  located  86  inches  and  80°  to  the
right  of  the  rifle's  line  of  sight;  if  a  circle  was
drawn  around  the  initial  landing  points  of  the
cartridge  cases  ejected  while  the  rifle  was  held
horizontally,  the  center  of  the  circle  would  be
80  inches  and  90°  to  the  right  of  the  line  of
sight.  In  other  words,  the  cartridge  cases  were
ejected  to  the  right  of  and  at  roughly  a  right
angle  to  the  rifle.  The  cartridge  cases  showed
considerable  ricochet  after  their  initial  landing,
bouncing  from  8  inches  to  15  feet.  The  location
of  the  cartridge  cases  was  therefore  consistent
with  the  southeast  window  having  been  used  by
the  assassin,  since  if  the  assassin  fired  from  that
window  the  ejected  cartridge  cases  would  have
hit  the  pile  of  boxes  at  his  back  and  ricocheted
between  the  boxes  and  the  wall  until  they  came
to  rest  to  the  west  of  the  window.


234


The  Rifle  Bullets

In  addition  to  the  three  cartridge  cases  found
in  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building,
a  nearly  whole  bullet  was  found  on  Governor
Connally's  stretcher  and  two  bullet  fragments
were  found  in  the  front  of  the  President's  car.
The  stretcher  bullet  weighed  158.6  grains,  or
several  grains  less  than  the  average  West-
em  Cartridge  Co.  6.5-millimeter  Mannlicher-
Carcano  bullet.  It  was  slightly  flattened,  but  oth-
erwise umnutilated.  The  two  bullet  fragments
weighed  44.6  and  21.0  grains,  respectively.  The
heavier  fragment  was  a  portion  of  a  bullet's  nose
area,  as  shown  by  its  rounded  contour  and  the
character  of  the  markings  it  bore.  The  lighter
fragment  consisted  of  bullet's  base  portion,  as
shown  by  its  shape  and  by  the  presence  of  a
cannelure.  The  two  fragments  were  both  muti-
lated, and  it  was  not  possible  to  determine  from
the  fragments  themselves  whether  they  com-
prised the  base  and  nose  of  one  bullet  or  of  two
separate  bullets.  However,  each  had  suflicient
unmutilated  area  to  provide  the  basis  of  an
identification.  Based  on  a  comparison  with  test
bullets  fired  from  the  C2766  rifle,  the  stretcher
bullet  and  both  bullet  fragments  were  identified
as  having  been  fired  from  the  C2766  rifle.

The  Revolver

The  revolver  taken  from  Oswald  at  the  time
of  his  arrest  was  a  .38  Special  S.  &  W.  Victory
Model  revolver.  It  bore  the  serial  No.  V510210,
and  is  the  only  such  revolver  with  that  serial
number,  since  S,  &  W.  does  not  repeat  serial
numbers.  The  revolver  was  originally  made  in
the  United  States,  but  was  shipped  to  England,
as  shown  by  the  English  inspection  or  proof
marks  on  the  chambers.  The  revolver  showed
definite  signs  of  use  but  was  in  good  operating
condition.  The  revolver  was  originally  designed
to  fire  a  .38  S,  &  W.  cartridge,  whose  bullet  is
approximately  12  or  13  grains  lighter  than  the
.38  Special,  and  approximately  .12  inches
shorter,  but  has  a  somewhat  larger  diameter.  In
the  United  States,  the  .38  Special  is  considered
to  be  a  better  bullet  than  the  .38  S.  &  W„  and
the  revolver  was  rechambered  for  a  ,38  Special
prior  to  being  sold  in  the  United  States.  The
weapon  was  not  rebarreled,  although  the  barrel
was  shortened  by  cutting  off  approximately  2J
of  its  original  5  inches.  The  shortening  of  the
barrel  had  no  functional  value,  except  to  facili-
tate concealment.

The  weapon  is  a  conventional  revolver,  with  a
rotating  cylinder  holding  one  to  six  cartridges.
It  is  loaded  by  swinging  out  the  cylinder  and  in-
serting cartridges  into  the  cylinder's  chambers.
If  all  six  chambers  are  loaded,  the  weapon  can
be  fired  six  consecutive  times  without  reloading.
To  extract  empty  cartridge  cases,  the  cylinder
is  swung  out  and  an  ejector  rod  attached  to  the
cylinder  is  pushed,  simultaneously  ejecting  all
the  cartridge  cases  (and  cartridges)  in  the  cyl-
inder. If  both  live  cartridges  and  expended  car-


tridge cases  are  in  the  cylinder,  before  pushing
the  ejection  rod  one  can  tip  the  cylinder  and
dump  the  live  cartridges  into  his  hand.  The  car-
tridge cases  win  not  fall  out,  because  they  are
lighter  than  the  cartridges,  and  when  fired  they
will  have  expanded  so  as  to  tightly  fit  the  cham-
ber walls.

In  a  crouched  stance  a  person  can  fire  five
shots  with  the  revolver  in  3-4  seconds  with  no
trouble,  and  would  need  no  training  to  hit  a
human  body  four  times  in  four  or  five  shots  at  a
range  of  8  feet.  A  person  who  had  any  training
with  the  weapon  would  not  find  its  recoil
noticeable.

Revolver  Cartridges  and  Cartridge  Cases

When  Oswald  was  arrested  six  live  cartridges
were  found  in  the  revolver.  Three  were  Western
.38  Specials,  loaded  with  copper-coated  lead
bullets,  and  three  were  Remington-Peters  ,38
Specials,  loaded  with  lead  bullets.  Five  addi-
tional live  cartridges  were  found  in  Oswald's
pocket,  all  of  which  were  Western  ,38  Specials,
loaded  with  copper-coated  bullets.  The  Western
and  Remington-Peters  ,38  Special  cartridges  are
virtually  identical — the  copper  coating  on  the
Western  bullets  is  not  a  fiill  jacket,  but  only
a  gilding  metal,  put  on  principally  for  sales
appeal.

Four  expended  cartridge  cases  were  found
near  the  site  of  the  Tippit  killing.  Two  of  these
cartridge  cases  were  Remington-Peters  .38  Spe-
cials and  two  were  Western  .38  Specials,  Based
on  a  comparison  with  test  cartridge  cases  fired
in  the  V510210  revolver,  the  four  cartridge
cases  were  identified  as  having  been  fired  in  the
V510210  revolver.

Revolver  Bullets

Fotir  bullets  were  recovered  from  the  body  of
Officer  Tippit.  In  Nicol's  opinion  one  of  the
four  bullets  could  be  positively  identified  with
test  bullets  fired  from  V510210  revolver,  and
the  other  three  could  have  been  fired  from  that
revolver.  In  Cimningham's  opinion  all  four  bul-
lets could  have  been  fired  from  the  V510210
revolver,  but  none  could  be  positively  identified
to  the  revolver — that  is,  in  his  opinion  the
bullets  bore  the  revolver's  rifling  characteristics,
but  no  conclusion  could  be  drawn  on  the  basis
of  microscopic  characteristics,  Cunningham  did
not  conclude  that  the  bullets  had  not  been  fired
from  the  revolver,  since  he  found  that  consecu-
tive bullets  fired  in  the  revolver  by  the  FBI  could
not  even  be  identified  with  each  other  under  the
microscope.  The  apparent  reasons  for  this  was
that  while  the  revolver  had  been  rechambered
for  a  .38  Special  cartridge,  it  had  not  been
rebarreled  for  a  ,38  Special  bullet.  The  barrel
was  therefore  slightly  oversized  for  a  .38  Spe-
cial bullet,  which  has  a  smaller  diameter  than  a
.38  S.  &  W.  bullet.  This  would  cause  the  passage
of  a  ,38  Special  bullet  through  the  barrel  to  be
erratic,  resulting  in  inconsistent  microscopic
markings.


235


Based  on  the  number  of  grooves,  groove
widths,  groove  spacing,  and  knurling  on  the  four
recovered  bullets,  three  were  copper-coated  lead
bullets  of  Western-Winchester  manufacture
(Western  and  Winchester  are  divisions  of  the
same  company) ,  and  the  fourth  was  a  lead  bullet
of  Remington-Peters  manufacture.  This  con-
trasts with  the  four  recovered  cartridge  cases,
which  consisted  of  two  Remington-Peters  and
two  Westerns.  There  are  several  possible  ex-
planations for  this  variance:  (1)  the  killer  fired
five  cartridges,  three  of  which  were  Western-
Winchester  and  two  of  which  were  Remington-
Peters;  one  Remington-Peters  bullet  missed
Tippit;  and  a  Western- Winchester  cartridge  case
and  the  Remington-Peters  bullet  that  missed
were  simply  not  fovmd.  (2)  The  killer  fired  only
four  cartridges,  three  oif  which  were  Western-
Winchester  and  one  of  which  was  Remington-
Peters;  prior  to  the  shooting  the  killer  had  an
expended  Remington-Peters  cartridge  case  in
his  revolver,  which  was  ejected  with  the  three
Western- Winchester  and  one  Remington-Peters
cases;  and  one  of  the  Western-Winchester  cases
was  not  found.  (3)  The  killer  was  using  hand-
loaded  ammunition,  that  is,  ammunition  which
is  made  with  used  cartridge  cases  to  save  money;
thus  he  might  have  loaded  one  make  of  bullet
into  another  make  of  cartridge  case.  This  third
possibility  is  extremely  unlikely,  because  when
a  cartridge  is  fired  the  cartridge  case  expands,
and  before  it  can  be  reused  it  must  be  resized.
There  was,  however,  no  evidence  that  any  of  the
four  recovered  cartridge  cases  had  been  resized.

The  Struggle  for  the  Revolver

Officer  McDonald  of  the  Dallas  police,  who
arrested  Oswald,  stated  that  he  had  struggled
with  Oswald  for  possession  of  the  revolver  and
that  in  the  course  of  the  struggle,  "I  heard  the
snap  of  the  hammer,  and  the  pistol  crossed  my
left  cheek  *  *  *  the  primer  of  one  round  was
dented  on  misfire  at  the  time  of  the  struggle.
*  *  *"  However,  none  of  the  cartridges  found
in  the  revolver  bore  the  impression  of  the  re-
volver's firing  pin.  In  addition,  the  revolver  is
so  constructed  that  the  firing  pin  cannot  strike  a
cartridge  unless  the  hammer  (which  bears  the
firing  pin)  has  first  been  drawn  aU  the  way  back
by  a  complete  trigger  pull.  Had  the  hammer
gone  all  the  way  back  and  then  hit  the  cartridge,
it  is  unlikely  that  the  cartridge  would  have  mis-
fired. It  would  be  possible  for  a  person  to  inter-
ject his  finger  between  the  hammer  and  the
cartridge,  but  the  spring  driving  the  hammer  is
a  very  strong  one  and  the  impact  of  the  firing
pin  into  a  finger  would  be  clearly  felt.  However,
the  cylinder  and  the  trigger  are  interconnected
and  the  trigger  cannot  be  fully  pulled  back  if  the
cylinder  is  grasped.  Therefore,  if  Oswald  had
pulled  on  the  trigger  while  McDonald  was  firmly
grasping  the  cylinder,  the  revolver  would  not
have  fired,  and  if  the  gun  was  grabbed  away  at
the  same  time  the  trigger  would  have  snapped
back  with  an  audible  sound.


The  Paraffin  Test

During  the  course  of  the  interrogation  of  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  following  the  assassination  a
paraffin  test  was  performed  by  the  Dallas  police
on  both  of  his  hands  and  his  right  cheek.  The
paraffiun  cast  of  Oswald's  hands  reacted  positive-
ly to  the  test.  The  cast  of  the  right  cheek  showed
no  reaction.

To  perform  the  paraffin  test,  layers  of  warm
liquid  paraSin,  interleaved  with  layers  of  gauze
for  reinforcement,  are  brushed  or  poured  on  the
suspect's  skin.  The  warm  sticky  paraffin  opens
the  skin's  pores  and  picks  up  any  dirt  and  for-
eign material  present  at  the  surface.  When  the
paraffin  cools  and  hardens  it  forms  a  cast,  which
is  taken  off  and  processed  with  diphenylamine
or  diphenylbenzidine,  chemicals  which  turn
blue  in  the  presence  of  nitrates.  Since  gun-
powder residues  contain  nitrates,  the  theory  be-
hind the  test  is  that  if  a  cast  reacts  positively,
i.e.,  if  blue  dots  appear,  it  provides  evidence
that  the  suspect  recently  fired  a  weapon.  In
fact,  however,  the  test  is  completely  unreUable
in  determining  either  whether  a  person  has  re-
cently fired  a  weapon  or  whether  he  has  not.  On
the  one  hand,  diphenylamine  and  diphenylben-
zidine will  react  positively  not  only  with  nitrates
from  gimpowder  residues,  but  nitrates  from  oth-
er sources  and  most  oxidizing  agents,  including
dichromates,  permanganates,  hypochlorates,
periodates,  and  some  oxides.  Thus,  contact  with
tobacco,  Clorox,  urine,  cosmetics,  kitchen
matches,  pharmaceuticals,  fertilizers,  or  soils,
among  other  things,  may  result  in  a  positive  re-
action to  the  paraffin  test.  Also,  the  mere  han-
dling of  a  weapon  may  leave  nitrates  on  the
skin.  A  positive  reaction  is,  therefore,  valueless
in  determining  whether  a  suspect  has  recently
fired  a  weapon.  Conversely,  a  person  who  has
recently  fired  a  weapon  may  not  show  a  positive
reaction  to  the  paraffin  test,  particularly  if  the
weapon  was  a  rifle.  A  revolver  is  so  constructed
that  there  is  a  space  between  the  cylinder,  which
bears  the  chambers,  and  the  barrel.  When  a  re-
volver is  fired,  nitrate-bearing  gases  escape
through  this  space  and  may  leave  residues  on
the  hand.  In  a  rifle,  however,  there  is  no  gap
between  the  chamber  and  the  barrel,  and  one
would  therefore  not  expect  nitrates  to  be  de-
posited upon  a  person's  hands  or  cheeks  as  a
result  of  his  firing  a  rifle.  As  ^
testified:


MR.  CUNNINGHAM.  *  ♦  ♦  I  person-
ally wouldn't  expect  to  find  any  residues  on  a
person's  right  cheek  after  firing  a  rifle  due  to
the  fact  that  by  the  very  principles  and  the
manufacture  and  the  action,  the  cartridge
itself  is  sealed  into  the  chamber  by  the  bolt
being  closed  behind  it,  and  upon  firing  the
case,  the  cartridge  case  expands  into  the  cham-
ber filling  it  up  and  sealing  it  off  from  the
gases,  so  none  will  come  back  m  your  face.


236


and  so  by  its  very  nature,  I  would  not  expect
to  find  residue  on  the  righit  cheek  of  a  shooter.

The  unreliability  of  the  paraffin  test  has  been
demonstrated  by  experiments  run  by  the  FBI.
In  one  experiment,  conducted  prior  to  the  assas-
sination, paraffin  tests  were  performed  on  17
men  who  had  just  fired  5  shots  with  a  .38-caliber
revolver.  Eight  men  tested  negative  in  both
hands,  three  men  tested  positive  on  the  idle  hand
and  negative  on  the  firing  hand,  two  men  tested
positive  on  the  firing  hand  and  negative  on  the
idle  hand,  and  four  men  tested  positive  on  both
their  firing  and  idle  hands.  In  a  second  experi-
ment, paraffin  tests  were  performed  on  29  per-
sons, 9  of  whom  had  just  fired  a  revolver  or  an
automatic,  and  20  of  whom  had  not  fired  a
weapon.  AU  29  persons  tested  positive  on  either
or  both  hands.  In  a  third  experiment,  performed
after  the  assassination,  an  agent  of  the  FBI,
using  the  C2766  rifle,  fired  three  rounds  of
Western  6.5-millimeter  Mannlicher-Carcano
ammunition  in  rapid  succession.  A  paraffin  test
was  then  performed  on  both  of  his  hands  and
his  right  cheek.  Both  of  his  hands  and  his  cheek
tested  negative.

The  paraffin  casts  of  Oswald's  hands  and  right
cheek  were  also  examined  by  neutron-activation
analyses  at  the  Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory.
Barium  and  antimony  were  found  to  be  present
on  both  surfaces  of  all  the  casts  and  also  in
residues  from  the  rifle  cartridge  cases  and  the
revolver  cartridge  cases.  Since  barium  and  anti-
mony were  present  in  both  the  rifle  and  the
revolver  cartridge  cases,  their  presence  on  the
casts  were  not  evidence  that  Oswald  had  fired
the  rifle.  Moreover,  the  presence  on  the  inside
surface  of  the  cheek  cast  of  a  lesser  amount  of
barium,  and  only  a  sUghtly  greater  amount  of
antimony,  than  was  f oimd  on  the  outside  surface
of  the  cast  rendered  it  impossible  to  attach
significance  to  the  presence  of  these  elements  on
the  inside  surface.  Since  the  outside  surface  had
not  been  in  contact  with  Oswald's  cheek,  the
barium  and  antimony  found  there  had  come
from  a  source  other  than  Oswald.  Furthermore,
while  there  was  more  barium  and  antimony  pre-
sent on  the  casts  than  would  normally  be  foxrnd
on  the  hands  of  a  person  who  had  not  fired  a
weapon  or  handled  a  fired  weapon,  it  is  also  true
that  barium  and  antimony  may  be  present  in
many  common  items;  for  example,  barium  may
be  present  in  grease,  ceramics,  glass,  paint,
printing  ink,  paper,  rubber,  plastics,  leather,
cloth,  pyrotechnics,  oilcloth  and  linoleum,  stor-
age batteries,  matches  and  cosmetics;  antimony
is  present  in  matches,  type  metal,  lead  alloys,
paints  and  lacquers,  pigments  for  oil  and  water
colors,  flameproof  textiles,  storage  batteries,
pyrotechnics,  rubber,  pharmaceutical  prepara-
tions and  calico;  and  both  barium  and  antimony
are  present  in  printed  paper  and  cloth,  paint,
storage  batteries,  rubber,  matches,  pyrotechnics,
and  possibly  other  items.  However,  the  barium
and  antimony  present  in  these  items  are  usually


not  present  in  a  form  which  would  lead  to  their
adhering  to  the  skin  of  a  person  who  had  handled
such  items.

The  Walker  Bullet

On  April  10,  1963,  a  bullet  was  recovered
from  General  Walker's  home,  following  an  at-
tempt on  his  Ufe.  The  bullet,  which  was  severely
mutilated,  weighed  148.25  grains.  This  bullet
had  the  rifling  characteristics  of  the  C2766  rifle
and  all  its  remaining  physical  characteristics
were  the  same  as  the  Western  6.5  millimeter
MannUcher-Carcano  bullet.  However,  while  the
bullet  could  have  been  fired  from  the  C2766
rifle,  it  was  severely  mutilated  and  in  Frazier's
opinion  could  not  be  identified  as  having  been
fired  or  not  fired  from  that  rifle.  Nicol  agreed
that  a  positive  identification  could  not  be  made,
but  concluded  there  was  "a  fair  probability"
that  the  bullet  had  been  fired  from  the  same  rifle
as  the  test  buUets.

FINGERPRINTS  AND  PALMPRINTS

Two  experts  gave  testimony  concerning  finger-
prints and  palmprints:  Sebestian  Latona  and
Arthur  Mandella.  Latona  is  the  supervisor  of  the
Latent  Fingerprint  Section  of  the  Identification
Division  of  the  FBI.  He  has  been  with  that
Division  over  32  years,  having  begun  as  a  stu-
dent fingerprint  classifier  and  worked  up  to  his
present  position.  Mandella  is  a  detective  and
fingerprint  instructor  with  the  police  department
of  the  city  of  New  York.  He  has  been  in  the
fingerprint  field  for  19  years.  Both  have  made
a  vast  number  of  fingerprint  examinations  and
have  testified  in  Federal,  State,  and  military
courts.  Their  conclusions  were  identical,  except
as  noted.

General  Principles

Fingerprints  and  palmprints  are  made  by  the
ridges  wMch  cover  the  surface  of  the  fingers  and
pahns.  These  ridges  first  appear  2  or  3  months
before  birth,  and  remain  unchanged  until  death.
Conmiission  Exhibit  No.  634-A  illustrates  sev-
eral common  characteristics  or  "points"  formed
by  the  ridges;  a  clear  fingerprint  impression
vkW  contain  anywhere  from  85  to  125  such
points.  While  many  of  the  common  points  appear
in  almost  every  print,  no  two  prints  have  the
same  points  in  the  same  relationship  to  each
other.

A  print  taken  by  a  law  enforcement  agency
is  known  as  an  "inked  print,"  and  is  carefully
taken  so  that  all  the  characteristics  of  the  print
are  reproduced  on  the  fingerprint  card;  a  print
which  is  left  accidentally,  such  as  a  print  left  at
the  scene  of  a  crime,  is  known  as  a  latent  print.
To  make  an  identification  of  a  latent  print,  the
expert  compares  the  points  in  the  latent  print
with  the  points  in  an  inked  print.  If  a  point
appearing  in  a  latent  print  does  not  appear  in
the  inked  print,  or  vice  versa,  the  expert  con-
cludes that  the  two  points  were  not  made  by  the


237


same  finger  or  palm.  An  identification  is  made
only  if  there  are  no  inconsistencies  between  the
inked  and  latent  prints,  and  the  points  of  simi-
larity and  their  relative  positions  are  sufficiently
distinctive,  and  sufficient  in  number,  to  satisfy
the  expert  that  an  identity  exists.

There  is  some  disagreement  concerning
whether  a  minimum  number  of  points  is  neces-
sary for  an  identification.  Some  foreign  law-
enforcement  agencies  require  a  minimum  num-
ber of  1 6  points.  However,  in  the  United  States,
in  which  there  has  been  a  great  deal  of  experi-
ence with  fingerprints,  expert  opinion  holds  there
is  no  minimum  number  of  points,  and  that  each
print  must  be  evaluated  on  its  own  merits,

Palmprints  are  as  distinctive  as  fingerprints,
but  are  not  as  popularly  known.  Possibly  this  is
because  law  enforcement  agencies  usually  re-
cord only  fingerprints  for  their  identification
files,  since  fingerprints  can  be  much  more  readily
classified  and  filed  than  palmprints.  Also,  latent
fingerprint  impressions  are  probably  more  com-
mon than  latent  palmprint  impressions,  because
persons  generally  touch  objects  with  their  fingers
rather  than  their  palms.  However,  palmprints
will  frequently  be  found  on  heavy  objects,  since
the  pahns  as  weU  as  the  fingers  are  employed  in
handling  such  objects.

A  latent  print  is  the  result  of  perspiration
exuded  by  the  sweat  pores  in  the  ridges.  This
perspiration  is  composed  of  water,  protein  or
fatty  materials,  and  sodium  chloride  (salt).  A
latent  print  can  be  developed — made  visible —
in  several  ways.  Sometimes  a  latent  print  can  be
developed  merely  by  the  use  of  correct  fighting.
A  second  method  is  to  brush  the  print  very
lighdy  with  a  powder,  which  adheres  to  its  out-
line. Once  a  print  is  powered  it  can  be  photo-
graphed, lifted,  or  both.  (In  lifting,  an  adhesive
substance,  such  as  scotch  tape,  is  placed  over  a
powdered  print.  When  the  adhesive  is  lifted  the
powder  clings  to  its  surface.  The  adhesive  is  then
mounted.)  However,  powder  is  usually  effective
only  on  objects  which  have  a  hard,  smooth,
nonabsorbent  surface,  such  as  glass,  tUe,  and
various  types  of  highly  polished  metals  and  is
usually  not  effective  on  absorbent  materials,
such  as  paper  or  unfinished  wood  or  metal,
which  absorb  perspiration  so  that  there  is  noth-
ing on  the  material's  surface  to  which  the  pow-
der can  adhere.  Prints  on  absorbent  materials
can  sometimes  be  developed  by  iodine  fumes,
which  may  react  with  fatty  or  protein  materials
which  have  been  absorbed  into  the  object,  or
by  a  silver  nitrate  solution,  which  may  react
with  sodium  chloride  which  has  been  absorbed
into  the  object.

Not  every  contact  of  a  finger  or  palm  leaves
a  latent  print.  For  example,  if  the  surface  is  not
susceptible  to  a  latent  print,  if  the  finger  or  palm
had  no  perspiration,  or  if  the  perspiration  was
mostly  water  and  had  evaporated,  no  print  wiQ
be  found.


Objects  in  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  Building

A  number  of  objects  found  in  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  Building  following  the
assassination  were  processed  for  latent  finger-
prints by  the  FBI — in  some  cases,  after  they
had  been  processed  by  the  Dallas  poUce.  These
objects  included  the  homemade  wrapping  paper
bag  foimd  near  the  southeast  comer  window;
the  C2766  rifle;  three  small  cartons  which  were
stacked  near  that  window  (which  were  marked
"Box  A,"  "Box  B,"  and  "Box  C"),  and  a  fourth
carton  resting  on  the  floor  nearby  (marked
"Box  D");  the  three  6.5-millimeter  cartridge
cases  found  near  the  window;  and  the  cartridge
found  in  the  rifle.  The  results  were  as  follows:

The  paper  bag. — ^The  FBI  developed  a  palm-
print  and  a  fingerprint  on  the  paper  bag  by
silver  nitrate.  These  were  compared  with  the
fingerprints  and  palmprints  of  Lee  Harvey
Oswald  taken  by  the  Dallas  police,  and  were
found  to  have  been  made  by  the  right  palm  and
the  left  index  finger  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.

The  C2766  rifle. — The  wood  and  metal  of
the  rifle  was  absorbent,  and  not  conducive  to
recording  a  good  print.  However,  the  Dallas
poUce  developed  by  powder  some  faint  ridge
formations  on  the  metal  magazine  housing  in
front  of  the  trigger  and  also  developed  by
powder  and  lifted  a  latent  palmprint  from  the
imderside  of  the  barrel.  The  faint  ridge  forma-
tions were  insufficient  for  purposes  of  effecting
an  identification,  but  the  latent  palmprint  was
identified  as  the  right  pahn  of  Lee  Harvey
Oswald.

The  cartons. — Using  the  silver  nitrate
method,  the  FBI  developed  nine  identifiable
latent  fingerprints  and  four  identifiable  latent
palmprints  on  Box  A,  seven  identifiable  finger-
prints and  two  identifiable  palmprints  on  Box
B,  and  two  identifiable  fingerprints  and  one
identifiable  palmprint  on  Box  C.  One  of  the
fingerprints  on  Box  A  was  identified  as  the  right
index  fingerprint  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  and
one  of  the  palmprints  on  Box  A  was  identified
as  the  left  palmprint  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  All
the  remaining  prints  on  Box  A  were  the  palm-
prints of  R.  L.  Studebaker,  a  Dallas  police  offi-
cer, and  Forest  L.  Lucy,  an  FBI  clerk,  who
shipped  the  cartons  from  Dallas  to  the  FBI
Laboratory  in  Washington,  D.C.,  and  finger-
prints of  Detective  Studebaker.  AU  but  one  of
the  fingerprints  on  Box  B  belonged  to  Stude-
baker and  Lucy  and  one  palmprint  was  that  of
Studebaker.  The  fingerprints  on  Box  C  were
those  of  Studebaker  and  Lucy  and  the  palmprint
was  Studebaker's.  One  palmprint  on  Box  B  was
unidentified.

The  FBI  developed  two  fingerprints  on  Box  D
by  sUver  nitrate,  and  the  Dallas  poUce  devel-
oped a  palmprint  on  Box  D  by  powder.  The
fingerprints  belonged  to  Lucy.  The  palmprint
was  identified  as  the  right  palmprint  of  Lee
Harvey  Oswald.  While  the  age  of  a  print  can-


238


not  be  generally  determined,  this  palmprint
must  have  been  relatively  fresh,  because  the
carton  was  constructed  of  cardboard,  an  ab-
sorbent material,  and  if  a  long  period  had
elapsed  between  the  time  the  print  was  made
and  the  time  it  was  powdered,  the  perspiration
would  have  been  absorbed  into  the  cardboard,
and  the  print  could  not  have  been  developed  by
powder.  Tests  run  by  the  FBI  show  that  usually
a  latent  impression  on  such  cardboard  cannot
be  developed  by  powder  more  than  24  hours
after  it  is  made.  Latona  felt  that  the  maximum
age  of  the  palmprint  on  Box  D  at  the  time  of
development  (which  was  shortly  after  the  as-
sassination), would  have  been  3  days;  Mandella
felt  that  the  maximum  time  would  have  been  a
day  and  a  half.

The  three  cartridge  cases  and  the  cartridge
case  found  in  the  rifle. — No  prints  were  de-
veloped on  the  cartridge  found  in  the  rifle  or  on
the  three  expended  cartridge  cases.


QUESTIONED  DOCUMENTS

Two  experts  gave  testimony  concerning  ques-
tioned documents:  Alwyn  Cole  and  James  C.
Cadigan.  Cole  apprenticed  as  a  questioned
document  examiner  for  6  years,  from  1929  to
1935,  and  has  been  examiner  of  questioned
documents  for  the  U.S.  Treasury  Department
since  then.  Cadigan  has  been  a  questioned  docu-
ment examiner  with  the  FBI  for  23i  years,  fol-
lowing a  specialized  course  of  training  and  in-
struction. Both  have  testified  many  times  in
Federal  and  States  courts.  Their  conclusions
were  identical,  except  as  noted.

Both  experts  examined  and  testified  on  the
following  questioned  docimients:  (1)  The  mail
order  to  Klein's  Sporting  Goods  of  Chicago,  in
response  to  which  Klein's  sent  the  C2766  rifle;
the  accompanying  money  order;  and  the  enve-
lope in  which  the  maU  order  and  the  money
order  were  sent — all  of  which  bore  the  name  of
"A.  HideU"  and  the  address  "P.O.  Box  2915,
Dallas,  Texas";  (2)  the  mail  order  to  Seaport
Traders,  Inc.,  of  Los  Angeles,  bearing  the  same
name  and  address,  in  response  to  which  the  Sea-
port Traders  sent  the  V510210  revolver;  (3)
part  of  an  application  for  Post  Office  Box  2915,
Dallas,  Tex.,  opened  October  9,  1962  and  closed
May  14,  1963,  and  two  change-of -address  or-
ders relating  to  that  box,  dated  October  10,
1962  and  May  12,  1963— aU  signed  "Lee  H.
Oswald,"  and  part  of  an  application  for  Post
Office  Box  30061,  New  Orleans,  La.,  naming
"A.  J.  HideU"  as  a  party  entitled  to  receive  mail
through  the  box,  signed  "L.  H.  Oswald";  (4)  a
spurious  selective  service  system  notice  of  clas-
sification and  a  spurious  certificate  of  service  in
the  U.S.  Marine  Corps,  found  in  Oswald's
wallet  after  his  arrest,  both  in  the  name  "Alek
James  HideU";  (5)  a  spurious  smaUpox  vacci-
nation certificate,  found  among  Oswald's  be-
longings at  his  room  at  1026  North  Beckley,


purportedly  issued  to  Lee  Oswald  by  "Dr.  A.
J.  Hideel,  P.O.  Box  30016,  New  Orieans,  La.";
and  (6)  a  card,  found  in  Oswald's  waUet  after
his  arrest,  reading  "Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Com-
mittee New  Orleans  Chapter,"  dated  "June  15,
1963,"  bearing  the  name  "L.  H.  Oswald"  and
the  signature  "Lee  H.  Oswald,"  and  signed  "A.
J.  HideU"  as  chapter  president.  Cadigan  also
examined  (7)  the  unsigned  note,  Commission
Exhibit  No.  1,  written  almost  entirely  in  Rus-
sian, which  Marina  testified  Oswald  had  left  for
her  prior  to  his  attempt  on  the  life  of  General
Walker;  and  (8)  the  homemade  paper  bag
found  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  foUowing  the  assassination.

General  principles. — ^The  area  of  questioned
document  examination  encompasses  many
types  of  inquiries,  the  most  famiUar  of  which
is  the  identification  of  handwriting.  Handvmt-
ing  identification  is  based  upon  the  principle
that  every  person's  handwriting  is  distinctive.
As  Cole  testified:

Q.  Mr.  Cole,  could  you  explain  the  basis
on  which  you  were  able  to  make  an  identifi-
cation of  a  questioned  writing  as  being  au-
thored by  the  person  who  wrote  a  standard
writing?

MR.  COLE.  This  is  based  upon  the  prin-
ciple that  every  handwriting  is  distinctive,
that  since  the  mental  and  physical  equipment
for  producing  handwriting  is  different  in
every  individual,  each  person  produces  his
own  distinctive  writing  habits.  Of  course,
everyone  learns  to  write  in  the  beginning  by
an  endeavor  to  repeat  ideal  letter  forms  but,
practicaUy  no  one  is  able  to  reproduce  these
forms  exactly.  Even  though  a  person  might
have  some  initial  success  during  the  active
period  of  instruction,  he  soon  departs  from
these  and  develops  his  own  habits.  It  may  be
said  that  habit  in  handwriting  is  that  which
makes  handwriting  possible.  Habit  is  that
which  makes  handwriting  efficient.  If  it  were
not  for  the  development  of  habit,  one  would
be  obUged  to  draw  or  sketch.

Some  habit  would  be  included  even  in  those
efforts.  But  the  production  of  handwriting
rapidly  and  fluently  always  involves  a  record-
ing of  personal  writing  habit.  This  has  been
confirmed  by  observation  of  a  very  large
number  of  specimens  over  a  long  period  of
time,  and  it  has  further  been  demonstrated
by,  on  my  part,  having  a  formal  responsibUity
for  rendering  decisions  about  the  identifica-
tion of  handwriting  based  upon  an  agreement
of  handwriting  habit  in  situations  where  there
would  be  a  rigorous  testing  of  the  correctness
of  these  decisions  by  field  investigators,  for
example,  of  the  law-enforcement  agencies,
and  a  demonstration  that  these  results  were
confirmed  by  other  evidence.

This  is  the  basis  for  identification  of
handwriting.


239


The  same  principles  are  generally  applicable  to
hand  printing,  and  in  the  balance  of  this  section
the  term  "handwriting"  will  be  used  to  refer  to
both  cursive  or  script  writing  and  hand  printing.

Not  every  letter  in  a  questioned  handwriting
can  be  used  as  the  basis  of  an  identification.
Most  people  leam  to  write  letters  in  a  standard
or  "copybook"  form:  a  handwriting  is  distinc-
tive only  insofar  as  it  departs  significantly  from
such  forms.  Correspondingly,  not  every  varia-
tion indicates  nonidentification;  no  two  acts  are
precisely  alike  and  variations  may  be  found
within  a  single  document.  Like  similarities,
variations  are  significant  only  if  they  are  distinc-
tive. Moreover,  since  any  single  distinctive  char-
acteristic may  not  be  unique  to  one  person,  in
order  to  make  an  identification  the  expert  must
find  a  sufficient  number  of  corresponding  dis-
tinctive characteristics  and  a  general  absence
of  distinctive  differences.

The  possibility  that  one  person  could  imitate
the  handwriting  of  another  and  successfully  de-
ceive an  expert  document  examiner  is  very  re-
mote. A  forger  leaves  two  types  of  clue.  First,
he  can  seldom  perfectly  simulate  the  letter  forms
of  the  victim;  concentrating  on  the  reproduc-
tion of  one  detail,  he  is  likely  not  to  see  others.
Thus,  the  forger  may  successfully  imitate  the
general  form  of  a  letter,  but  get  proportions  or
letter  connections  wrong.  In  addition,  the  forger
draws  rather  than  writes.  Forged  writing  is
therefore  distinguished  by  defects  in  the  quality
of  its  line,  such  as  tremor,  waver,  patching,  re-
touching, noncontinuous  lines,  and  pen  lifts  in
awkward  and  unusual  places.

To  make  a  handwriting  identification,  the
handwriting  in  the  document  under  examina-
tion (the  questioned  document)  is  compared
against  the  handwriting  in  documents  known  to
have  been  prepared  by  a  suspect  (the  known  or
standard  documents).  This  is  exemplified  by
Cole's  examination  of  Conmiission  Exhibit  No.
773,  the  photograph  of  the  mail  order  for  the
rifle  and  the  envelope  in  which  it  was  sent:

Q.  Now,  Mr.  Cole,  returning  to  773,  the
questioned  document,  can  you  tell  the  Com-
mission how  you  formed  the  conclusion  that
it  was  prepared  by  the  author  of  the  stand-
ards, that  is,  what  steps  you  followed  in  your
examination  and  comparison,  what  things
you  considered,  what  instruments  or  equip-
ment you  used,  and  so  forth?

MR.  COLE.  I  made  first  a  cacreful  study
of  the  writing  on  Commission  Exhibit  773
without  reference  to  the  standard  writing,  in
an  effort  to  determine  whether  or  not  this
writing  contained  what  I  would  regard  as  a
basis  for  identification,  contained  a  record  of
writing  habit,  and  as  that — as  a  result  of  that
part  of  my  examination,  I  concluded  that  this
is  a  natural  handwriting.  By  that  I  mean  that
it  was  made  at  a  fair  speed,  that  it  doesn't
show  any  evidence  of  an  unnatural  move-
ment, poor  line  quality,  tremor,  waver,  re-


touching, or  the  like.  I  regard  it  as  being  made
in  a  fluent  and  fairly  rapid  manner  which
would  record  the  normal  writing  habits  of  the
person  who  made  it.

I  then  made  a  separate  examination  of  the
standards,  of  aU  of  the  standard  writings,  to
determine  whether  that  record  gave  a  record
of  writing  habit  which  could  be  used  for
identification  purposes,  and  I  concluded  that
it,  too,  was  a  natural  handwriting  and  gave  a
good  record  of  writing  habit.

I  then  brought  the  standard  writings  to-
gether with  the  questioned  writing  for  a  de-
tailed and  orderly  comparison,  considering
details  of  letter  forms,  proportion,  pen  pres-
siu-e,  letter  connections,  and  other  details  of
handwriting  habit  * *  *.

The  standards  used  by  Cole  and  Cadigan  con-
sisted of  a  wide  variety  of  documents  known  to
be  in  the  handwriting  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,
including  indorsements  on  his  payroll  checks,
applications  for  employment,  for  a  passport,  for
membership  in  the  American  CivU  Liberties
Union,  and  for  a  library  card,  and  letters  to  the
Immigration  and  Naturalization  Service,  the
Marine  Corps,  the  State  Department,  and  the
American  Embassy  in  Russia.

The  Mail  Order  for  the  C2766  Rifle,  the
Related  Envelope,  and  the  Money  Order

The  mail  order  and  envelope  for  the  C2766
rifle  were  photographed  by  Klein's  on  micro-
film, and  then  destroyed.  To  identify  the  hand-
writing an  enlarged  photograph  was  made
which  showed  the  handwriting  characteristics
with  suflBcient  clarity  to  form  the  basis  of  an
identification.  Based  on  a  comparison  with  the
standards,  the  handwriting  on  the  purchase  or-
der and  the  envelope  were  identified  as  Lee
Harvey  Oswald's.  The  money  order,  which  was
retained  by  the  post  office  after  having  been
cashed  by  Klein's,  was  also  identified  as  being
in  Oswald's  handwriting.  These  identifications
were  made  on  the  basis  of  nimierous  charac-
teristics in  which  the  vmting  in  both  the  ques-
tioned and  standard  documents  departed  from
conventional  letter  forms.  For  example,  in  the
return  address  on  the  envelope,  the  left  side  of
the  "A"  in  "A.  Hidell"  was  made  by  a  down-
stroke  foUowed  by  an  upstroke  which  almost
exactly  traced  the  downstroke,  the  "i"  showed
an  elongation  of  the  approach  stroke  and  an
exaggerated  slant  to  the  right,  and  the  second
"1"  was  somewhat  larger  than  the  first;  the  "B"
in  "Box"  had  an  upper  lobe  smaller  than  the
lower  lobe;  the  "D"  in  "Dallas"  exhibited  a  dis-
tinctive construction  of  the  looped  form  at  the
top  of  a  letter,  and  the  "s"  was  flattened  and
forced  over  on  its  side;  and  the  "x"  in  "Texas"
was  made  in  the  form  of  a  "u"  with  a  cross  bar.
These  characteristics  were  also  present  in  the
standards.  In  addition,  these  items,  as  well  as
other  questioned  documents,  resembled  the
standards  in  their  use  of  certain  erroneous  com-


240


binations  of  capital  and  lowercase  letters.  For
example,  in  the  mail  order,  'Texas"  was  printed
with  a  capital  'T,"  "X,"  "A,"  and  "S,"  but  a
lowercase  "e";  a  similar  mixture  of  capital  and
lowercase  letters  in  'Texas"  was  found  in  the
standards.

The  writing  on  the  purchase  order  and  enve-
lope showed  no  significant  evidence  of  disguise
(subject  to  the  qualification  that  the  use  of  hand
printing  on  the  maU  order,  rather  than  hand-
writing, may  have  been  used  for  that  purpose).
However,  it  is  not  unusual  for  a  person  using
an  alias  not  to  disguise  his  writing.  For  example,
Cole,  who  is  document  examiner  for  the  Treas-
ury Department,  has  frequently  examined  for-
geries evidencing  no  attempt  at  disguise.

Mail  Order  for  the  V510210  Revolver

Based  on  a  comparison  with  the  standards,
the  handwriting  on  the  mail  order  for  the
V510210  revolver  was  also  identified  as  Lee
Harvey  Oswald's.

Post  Office  Box  Applications  and
Change-of-Address  Card

A  post  oflBce  box  application  consists  of  three
parts:  The  first  contains  directions  for  use.  The
second  provides  applicant's  name,  address,  sig-
nature space,  box  number,  date  of  opening  and
closing.  The  third  part  provides  instruction
space  concerning  delivery  of  maU  and  names
of  persons  entitled  to  use  the  box.  Under  post
oflBce  regulations  the  second  part  was  retained
by  the  Dallas  Post  Office  for  box  2915;  it  de-
stroyed the  third  part  after  the  box  was  closed.
Based  on  the  standards,  the  signature  "Lee  H.
Oswald,"  and  other  handwriting  on  the  applica-
tion, was  identified  as  that  of  Lee  Harvey
Oswald.  The  postal  clerk  appeared  to  have  filled
in  the  balance.

The  Fort  Worth  and  Dallas  post  offices  re-
tained two  change-of-address  orders  signed
"Lee  H.  Oswald":  One  to  "Postmaster,  Fort
Worth,  Tex.,"  dated  October  10,  1962,  to  send
mail  to  "Oswald,  Lee  H"  at  2703  Mercedes
Av.,  Fort  Worth,  Texas"  and  forward  to  "Box
2915,  Dallas,  Texas";  the  other  to  "Postmaster,
DaUas,  Texas"  dated  May  12,  1963,  requested
mail  for  post  office  box  2915  be  forwarded  to
"Lee  Oswald"  at  "4907  Magazine  St.,  New
Orleans,  La."  Based  on  a  comparison  with  the
standards,  the  handwriting  on  these  orders  was
identified  as  that  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.

The  New  Orleans  post  office  retained  the
third  part  of  the  application  for  post  office  box
30061,  New  Orleans,  La.,  dated  June  11,  1963,
and  signed  "L.  H.  Oswald."  Inserted  in  the  space
for  names  of  persons  entitled  to  receive  maU
through  the  box  were  written  the  names  "A.  J.
Hidell"  and  "Marina  Oswald."  On  the  basis  of  a
comparison  with  the  standards,  the  writing  and
the  signature  on  the  card  was  identified  as  the
handwriting  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.


The  Spurious  Selective  Service  System
Notice  of  Classification  and  U.S.
Marine  Corps  Certificate  of  Service

When  Oswald  was  arrested  he  had  in  his  pos-
session a  Selective  Service  System  notice  of  clas-
sification and  a  certificate  of  service  in  the  U.S.
Marine  Corps  in  the  name  of  "Alek  James
Hidell,"  and  a  Selective  Service  System  notice  of
classification,  a  Selective  Service  System  regis-
tration certificate,  and  a  certificate  of  service  in
the  U.S.  Marine  Corps  in  his  own  name.  The
Hidell  cards  were  photographic  counterfeits.
After  Oswald's  arrest  a  group  of  retouched
negatives  were  found  in  Mr.  Paine's  garage  at
2515  West  Fifth  Street,  Irving,  Tex.,  among
which  were  retouched  negatives  of  the  Oswald
cards.  A  comparison  of  these  retouched  nega-
tives with  the  Hidell  and  Oswald  cards  showed
that  the  Hidell  cards  had  been  counterfeited  by
photographing  the  Oswald  cards,  retouching  the
resulting  negatives,  and  producing  photographic
prints  from  the  retouched  negatives.

The  Hidell  Notice  of  Classification

Face  side. — The  face  of  the  Hidell  notice  of
classification  was  produced  from  the  face  of  the
Oswald  notice  of  classification  by  a  two-step
process.  First,  the  counterfeiter  photographed
the  Oswald  notice,  making  a  basic  intermediate
negative.  He  then  opaqued  out  of  this  interme-
diate negative  aU  of  the  information  typed  or
handwritten  onto  the  Oswald  notice,  including
the  name  "Lee  Harvey  Oswald,"  the  selective
service  No.,  "41-114^39-532,"  the  signature  of
the  official  of  the  local  board,  and  the  mailing
date.  In  addition,  he  made  another  intermediate
negative  of  the  lowermost  third  of  the  Oswald
notice,  which  contained  a  printed  legend  setting
forth  various  instructions  relating  to  draft  board
procedures.  This  negative  reproduced  the
printed  material  exactly,  but  reduced  it  in  size.
The  two  intermediate  negatives  were  combined
to  produce  a  third  negative,  substantially  identi-
cal to  the  basic  intermediate  negative  except
that,  by  virtue  of  the  reduction  in  the  size  of  the
printed  legend,  a  square  space  had  been  created
in  the  lower  left-hand  comer.  The  counterfeiter
then  made  a  photographic  print  of  this  third
negative,  which  contained  blanks  wherever
typed  or  handwritten  material  had  appeared  on
the  original  Oswald  notice  and  a  new  space  in
the  lower  left-hand  comer.  Finally,  new  mate-
rial was  inserted  into  the  blanks  on  the  Hidell
notice  where  typed  or  handwritten  material  had
appeared  on  the  Oswald  notice.  Thus  the  name
"ALEK  JAMES  HIDELL,"  the  selective  serv-
ice No.  "42-224-39-532,"  and  the  mailing  date
"Feb.  5,  1962,"  were  typed  into  the  appropriate
blanks  on  the  HideU  notice.  Two  typewriters
were  used  in  this  typing,  as  shown  by  di5erences
in  the  design  of  the  typed  figure  "4,"  and  by
differences  in  the  strength  of  the  typed  impres-
sion. Probably  the  counterfeiter  switched  type-
writers when  he  discovered  that  the  ribbon  of


241


his  first  typewriter  was  not  inked  heavily  enough
to  leave  a  clear  impression  (a  problem  which
would  have  been  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  the
glossy  photographic  paper  used  to  make  the
Hidell  notice  did  not  provide  a  good  surface  for
typewriting).  The  face  of  the  notice  also  bore
many  uninked  indentations,  which  could  only
be  made  out  under  strong  side  lighting.  These
indentations  were  apparently  made  with  the
typewriter  set  at  stencil — that  is,  set  so  that  the
typewriter  key  struck  the  notice  directly,  rather
than  striking  it  through  the  inked  typewriter
ribbon.  This  may  have  been  done  as  a  dry-run
practice,  to  enable  the  counterfeiter  to  deter-
mine how  to  properly  center  and  aline  the  in-
serted material.  A  sidelight  photograph  showed
that  the  names  "ALEK,"  "JAMES,"  and
"HIDELL"  had  each  been  typed  in  stencil  at
least  twice  before  being  typed  in  with  the  rib-
bon. A  capital  letter  "O"  had  been  stenciled
prior  to  one  of  the  stenciled  "ALEK's."  A  serial
number  and  a  date  of  mailing  had  also  been
typed  in  stencil.

In  addition  to  the  typed  material,  a  signature,
"Alek  J.  Hidell,"  was  written  in  ink  m  the  blank
provided  for  the  registrant's  signature,  and  an-
other, somewhat  illegible  signature,  apparently
reading  "Good  Hoflfer,"  was  written  in  ink  in
the  blank  provided  for  the  signature  of  an  oflB-
cial  of  the  local  board.  This  name  differed  from
the  name  written  in  ink  on  the  Oswald  notice,
which  appeared  to  consist  of  a  first  name  begin-
ning with  an  "E"  or  a  "G"  and  the  surname
"Schiffen."  However,  the  legibUity  of  the  name
on  the  Oswald  notice  was  also  quite  poor,  and
the  counterfeiter  might  have  been  attempting
to  duplicate  it.  A  possible  reason  for  deleting
the  original  name  and  substituting  another  is
that  if  the  name  had  not  been  deleted  it  would
have  been  reproduced  on  the  Hidell  notice  as  a
photographic  reproduction,  which  would  look
less  authentic  than  a  pen-and-ink  signature.

Based  on  a  comparison  with  the  handwriting
in  the  standards,  the  signature  "Alek  J.  Hidell"
on  the  Hidell  notice  was  identified  as  being  in
the  handwriting  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  The
signature  "Good  Hoffer"  could  not  be  positively
identified,  being  ahnost  illegible;  however,  it
was  not  inconsistent  with  Oswald's  handwriting.

To  complete  the  face  of  the  Hidell  notice  a
picture  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was  inserted  into
the  space  in  the  lower  left-hand  comer  which
had  been  created  by  reducing  the  size  of  the
printed  legend  at  the  bottom.

In  creating  the  face  of  the  Hidell  notice,  the
counterfeiter  left  traces  which  enabled  the  ex-
perts to  link  together  the  Hidell  notice,  the  re-
touched negatives,  and  the  Oswald  notice.  To
retouch  the  negatives  the  counterfeiter  simply
painted  a  red  opaque  substance  on  one  side  of
the  negative  over  the  material  he  wished  to
delete.  When  the  negative  was  printed,  the
opaquing  prevented  light  from  passing  through,
so  that  the  print  showed  blanks  wherever  the
negative  had  been  opaqued.  However,  the  origi-


nal material  was  still  clearly  visible  on  the
negative  itself.  In  addition,  at  several  points  the
typed  or  handwritten  material  in  the  Oswald
notice  had  overlapped  the  printed  material.  For
example,  the  signature  of  the  official  of  the  local
board  overlapped  the  letters  "re"  in  the  printed
word  "President,"  "1"  and  "a"  in  the  printed
word  "local,"  and  "viola"  in  the  printed  word
"violation."  When  this  signature  was  opaqued
out,  the  portions  of  the  printed  material  which
had  been  overlapped  by  the  signature  were
either  removed  or  mutilated.  The  consequent
distortions  were  apparent  on  both  the  retouched
negative  and  the  Hidell  notice  itself.  Similarly,
the  selective  service  number  typed  on  the
Oswald  notice  overlapped  the  margins  of  the
boxes  into  which  it  was  typed.  Although  the
counterfeiter  opaqued  out  the  numerals  them-
selves, the  margins  of  the  boxes  remained  thick-
ened at  the  points  where  they  had  been  over-
lapped by  the  numerals.  These  thickened  mar-
gins were  apparent  on  both  the  retouched  nega-
tive and  the  Hidell  notice.

Reverse  side. — ^The  reverse  side  of  the  Hidell
notice,  which  was  pasted  back-to-back  to  the
face,  was  actually  a  form  of  the  reverse  side  of
a  Selective  Service  System  registration  certifi-
cate. Essentially,  it  was  counterfeited  the  same
way  as  the  face  of  the  notice:  a  photograph
was  made  of  the  reverse  side  of  the  Oswald
registration  certificate,  the  material  which  had
been  typed  or  stamped  on  the  Oswald  registra-
tion certificate  was  opaqued  out  of  the  result-
ing negative,  and  a  photographic  print  was
made  from  the  retouched  negative.  This  is
shovm  by  the  negative,  in  which  the  opaqued-
out  information  is  still  visible,  and  by  defects
in  the  printed  material  on  the  Hidell  notice  at
point  where  typed-in  material  had  overlapped
printed  material  on  the  Oswald  registration
certificate.

As  the  final  step,  new  information  was  typed
on  the  print  in  the  blanks  which  resulted  from
the  retouching  operation.  Thus  "GR"  was  sub-
stituted for  "Blue"  under  color  of  eyes;
"BROWN"  was  substituted  for  "Bm"  under
color  of  hair;  "FAIR"  was  substituted  for
"Med."  under  complexion;  "5"  [ft.]  "9"  fm.]
was  substituted  for  "5"  [ft.]  "11"  [in.]  under
height;  and  "155"  was  substituted  for  "150"
under  weight.  The  name  and  address  of  the  local
board  on  the  Oswald  registration  certificate
were  opaqued  out,  but  substantially  the  same
name  and  address  were  typed  back  onto  the
Hidell  notice.  As  in  the  signature  of  the  local
board  official  on  the  face  of  the  notice,  a  pos-
sible reason  for  deleting  the  original  draft  board
name  and  the  address  and  substituting  sub-
stantially similar  material  in  its  place  is  that  if
the  original  material  had  not  been  deleted  it
would  have  reproduced  as  a  photographic  re-
production, which  would  look  much  less  au-
thentic than  typed-in  material.

A  limited  number  of  typed  uninked  indenta-
tions are  also  present.  Thus  the  indented  letters


242


"CT"  appear  before  the  letters  "GR"  (under
color  of  eyes)  and  the  indented  letters  "EY"
follow  "GR."  An  indented  "9"  appears  above
the  visible  "9"  for  the  inch  figure  of  height,  and
an  indented  "i"  appears  before  the  weight,
"155."  Much  of  the  typed  material  on  the  re-
verse side  of  the  Hidell  notice  was  not  very  legi-
ble under  ordinary  lighting,  since  it  was  typed
with  a  typewriter  which  left  a  very  weakly  inked
impression.  In  fact,  it  is  difficult  to  tell  whether
some  of  the  material,  particularly  the  word
"Brown"  under  color  of  hair,  was  put  in  by
stencil  or  by  ribbon.

The  Hidell  Certificate  of  Service

The  face  and  reverse  side  of  the  Hidell  cer-
tificate of  service  were  produced  from  the  face
and  reverse  side  of  the  Oswald  certificate  of
service  by  photographing  the  Oswald  certificate,
retouching  the  resulting  negatives  to  eliminate
typed  and  handwritten  material,  and  making  a
photographic  print  from  the  retouched  negative.
As  in  the  case  of  the  notice  of  classification,  this
is  shown  by  the  negative  itself,  in  which  the
opaqued-out  information  is  still  visible,  and  by
defects  in  the  printed  material  on  the  Hidell  cer-
tificate at  points  where  handwritten  material  had
crossed  over  printed  material  on  the  Oswald
certificate.  Thus,  in  the  Oswald  certificate  the
upper  portion  of  the  name  "Lee"  in  Oswald's
signature  crosses  the  letter  "u"  in  the  printed
word  "signature."  The  consequent  mutilation
of  the  printed  letter  "u"  can  be  seen  on  the
Hidell  certificate.  Similarly,  the  ending  stroke  in
the  letter  "y"  hi  the  name  "Harvey"  in  Oswald's
signature  crosses  the  letter  "n"  in  the  printed
word  "certifying."  This  stroke  was  not  removed
at  all,  and  can  be  seen  as  a  stroke  across  the
"n"  in  the  Hidell  certificate.  As  the  final  step  in
producing  the  Hidell  certificate,  new  material
was  typed  into  the  blanks  on  the  photographic
print.  On  the  face,  the  words  "ALEK  JAMES
HIDELL"  were  typed  into  the  blank  where
"LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD  1653230"  had  ap-
peared. A  sidelight  photograph  shows  that  these
words  had  been  typed  in  stencil  at  least  twice
before  being  typed  in  with  the  ribbon  appar-
ently to  determine  proper  centering  and  aline-
ment.  In  producing  the  reverse  side  of  the  Hidell
certificate,  the  signamre  "Lee  Harvey  Oswald,"
and  the  date  "24  October  1956"  and  "11  Sep-
tember 1959,"  showing  the  beginning  and  end
of  the  period  of  active  service,  had  been
opaqued  out.  No  signature  was  inserted  into
resulting  blank  signature  space.  However,  just
below  the  word  "of"  in  the  printed  line  "signa-
ture of  individual,"  there  are  two  vertical  inden-
tations which  fill  about  three-fourths  of  the
height  of  the  signature  blank,  and  a  diagonal
indentation  which  slants  from  approximately
the  base  of  the  left  vertical  to  approximately  the
midpoint  of  the  right  vertical — the  total  effect
being  of  a  printed  capital  letter  "H."  Also,  just
below  the  second  and  third  "i's"  Ln  the  printed
word  "individual"  are  two  more  vertical  inden-


tations, which  could  be  the  vertical  strokes  of
"d's"  or  "I's" — although  the  circular  portion  of
the  letter  "d"  is  not  present.  These  indentations
could  have  been  made  by  any  sharp  instrument,
such  as  a  ballpoint  pen  which  was  not  deliver-
ing ink,  a  stylus  of  the  type  used  in  preparing
mimeograph  forms,  or  even  a  toothpick.  The  in-
dentations are  brought  out  rather  clearly  in  a
sideUght  photograph,  but  can  also  be  seen  on
the  card  itself  if  the  card  is  held  so  that  light
strikes  it  at  an  angle.

Into  the  space  for  the  beginning  of  active
service  was  typed  the  date  "OCT.  13,  1958."
The  space  for  the  end  of  active  service  contains
several  light-impression  and  stencil  typewriting
operations.  It  was  apparently  intended  to  read
"OCT.  12  1961,"  but  because  of  the  lightness
of  the  impression  and  the  many  stenciled  char-
acters, the  date  is  barely  legible.  Interestingly,
one  of  the  stenciled  impressions  in  the  blank
for  end  of  active  service  reads  "24  October
1959,"  as  determined  under  a  microscope,  while
a  stenciled  impression  in  the  blank  for  beginning
of  active  service  reads  "24  October  1957."

The  counterfeiting  of  the  HideU  cards  did  not
require  great  skill,  but  probably  required  an  ele-
mentary knowledge  of  photography,  particu-
larly of  the  photographic  techniques  used  in  a
printing  plant,  A  moderate  amount  of  practice
with  the  technique  would  be  required — perhaps
half  a  dozen  attempts.  Practicing  retouching  on
the  balance  of  the  negatives  found  at  the  Paine
garage  would  have  been  sufficient.  The  retouch-
ing of  the  negatives  could  have  been  accom-
plished without  any  special  equipment.  How-
ever, the  preparation  of  the  negative,  apart  from
retouching,  would  probably  have  required  a
very  accurate  camera,  such  as  would  be  found
in  a  photographic  laboratory  or  printing  plant.

The  Vaccination  Certificate

A  government-printed  form  entitled  "Inter-
national Certificates  of  Vaccination  or  Revac-
cination  against  Smallpox"  was  found  among
Oswald's  belongings  at  his  room  at  1026  Beck-
ley  Avenue,  Dallas.  The  form  purported  to
certify  that  "LEE  OSWALD"  had  been  vacci-
nated against  smallpox  on  "JUNE  8,  1963"  by
"DR.  A.  J.  HIDEEL,  P.O.  BOX  30016,  NEW
ORLEANS,  LA."  The  card  was  signed  "Lee  H.
Oswald"  and  "A.  J.  Hideel,"  and  the  name  and
address  "Lee  H.  Oswald,  New  Orleans,  La,"
were  hand  printed  on  the  front  of  the  card.  AU
of  this  material,  except  the  signatures  and  the
hand  printing,  had  been  stamped  onto  the  card.
The  Hideel  name  and  address  consisted  of  a
three-line  stamp — "DR.  A.  J.  HIDEEL/ P.O.
BOX  3 00 16/ NEW  ORLEANS,  LA."  A  cucu-
lar,  stamped,  illegible  impression  resembling  a
seal  appeared  under  a  column  entitled  "Ap-
proved stamp."

On  the  basis  of  a  comparison  with  the  stand-
ards. Cole  identified  all  of  the  hand^xiting  on
the  vaccination  certificate,  including  the  signa-
ture "A.  J.  Hideel,"  as  the  writing  of  Lee  Harvey


243


Oswald.  Cadigan  identified  all  of  the  writing  as
Oswald's  except  for  the  "A.  J.  Hideel"  signa-
ture, which  in  his  opinion  was  too  distorted  to
either  identify  or  nonidentify  as  Oswald's  hand-
writing. The  stamped  material  on  the  certificate
was  compared  with  a  rubber  stamping  kit  which
belonged  to  Oswald.  In  this  kit  was  a  rubber
stamp  with  three  lines  of  print  assembled:  "L.
H.  OSWALD/ 4907  MAGAZINE  ST/ NEW
ORLEANS,  LA.  Cole  found  a  perfect  agree-
ment in  measurement  and  design  between  the
letters  stamped  on  the  certificate  and  the  letters
he  examined  from  Oswald's  rubber  stamping
kit.  However,  he  was  unable  to  determine
whether  the  characteristics  of  Oswald's  rubber
stamping  kit  were  distinctive,  and  therefore,
while  he  concluded  that  Oswald's  rubber  stamp-
ing kit  could  have  made  the  rubber  stamp  im-
pressions on  the  certificate,  he  was  unable  to
say  that  it  was  the  only  kit  which  could  have
made  the  impressions.  On  the  basis  of  the  com-
parison between  the  words  "NEW  ORLEANS,
LA."  set  up  in  the  rubber  stamp  in  Oswald's  kit,
and  the  words  "NEW  ORLEANS,  LA."  on  the
certificate,  Cadigan  concluded  that  these  words
had  been  stamped  on  the  certificate  with  Os-
wald's rubber  stamp.  However,  he  could  draw
no  conclusion  as  to  the  remaining  stamped  ma-
terial, which  was  not  directly  comparable  to  the
remaining  line^  set  up  on  Oswald's  rubber  stamp.
On  close  examination,  the  circular  impression
resembling  a  seal  consisted  of  the  words
"BRUSH  IN  CAN,"  printed  in  reverse.  Appar-
ently, the  impression  was  made  with  the  top  of
a  container  of  solvent  or  cleaning  fluid  which
bore  these  words  in  raised  lettering.  In  the  cen-
ter of  the  impression  was  a  mottled  pattern
which  was  similar  to  the  blank  areas  on  a  date
stamp  found  in  Oswald's  rubber  stamping  kit.

The  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  Card

The  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  card  had
two  signatures:  "L.  H.  Oswald"  and  "A.  J.
Hidell."  Based  on  the  standards,  both  Cole  and
Cadigan  identified  "L.  H.  Oswald"  as  the  signa-
ture of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  but  both  were  un-
able to  identify  the  "A.  J.  HideU"  signature.
Cadigan  noted  differences  between  the  Hidell
signature  and  Oswald's  handwriting,  indicating
the  possibility  that  someone  other  than  Oswald
had  authored  the  signature.  Cole  believed  that
the  signattire  was  somewhat  beyond  Oswald's
abilities  as  a  penman.  On  the  basis  of  a  short
English  interlinear  translation  written  by  Marina
Oswald,  Cole  felt  that  she  might  have  been  the
author  of  the  signature,  but  the  translation  did
not  present  enough  of  her  handwriting  to  make
possible  a  positive  identification.  In  subsequent
testimony  before  the  Commission,  Marina  stated
that  she  was  indeed  the  author  of  the  Hidell
signature  on  the  card.  Cadigan  confirmed  this
testimony  by  obtaining  further  samples  of
Marina  Oswald's  handwriting  and  comparing
these  samples  with  the  signature  on  the  card.


The  Unsigned  Russian-Language  Note

Cadigan's  examination  confirmed  Marina's
testimony  that  the  handwriting  in  the  unsigned
note  was  that  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  Since  the
note  was  written  almost  entirely  in  the  Russian
language,  which  uses  the  Cyrillic  alphabet  (as
opposed  to  the  Latin  alphabet  used  in  the  Eng-
lish language),  in  making  his  examination  Cadi-
gan employed  not  only  Oswald's  English  lan-
guage standards,  but  also  letters  written  by
Oswald  in  the  Russian  language.

The  Homemade  Wrapping  Paper  Bag

In  the  absence  of  watermarks  or  other  distinc-
tive characteristics,  it  is  impossible  to  determine
whether  two  samples  of  paper  came  from  the
same  manufacturer.  The  homemade  paper  bag
found  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  following  the  assassination
was  made  out  of  heavy  brown  paper  and  glue-
bearing  brown  paper  tape,  neither  of  which  con-
tained watermarks  or  other  distinctive  charac-
teristics. However,  Cadigan  compared  the  ques-
tioned paper  and  tape  in  the  paper  bag  with
known  paper  and  tape  samples  obtained  from
the  shipping  department  of  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  on  November  22,  1963,  to  see
if  the  questioned  items  could  have  come  from
the  shipping  room.  The  questioned  and  known
items  were  examined  visually  by  normal,  inci-
dental, and  transmitted  natural  and  electric  Ught,
and  under  ultraviolet  light;  examined  micro-
scopically for  surface,  paper  structure,  color,
and  imperfections;  examined  for  their  felting
pattern,  which  is  the  pattern  of  light  and  dark
areas  caused  by  the  maimer  in  which  the  fibers
become  felted  at  the  beginning  stages  of  paper
manufacture;  measured  for  thickness  with  a
micrometer  sensitive  to  one  one-thousandth  of
an  inch,  subjected  to  a  fiber  analysis  to  deter-
mine the  type  of  fibers  of  which  they  were  com-
posed, and  whether  the  fibers  were  bleached  or
unbleached;  and  examined  spectrographicaUy  to
determine  what  metallic  ions  were  present.  The
questioned  and  known  items  were  identical  in
aU  the  properties  measured  by  these  tests.  (The
width  of  the  tape  on  the  paper  sack  was  3
inches,  while  the  width  of  the  sample  tape  was
2.975,  or  twenty-five  thousandths  of  an  inch
smaller;  however,  this  was  not  a  significant  dif-
ference). In  contrast,  a  paper  sample  obtained
from  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  ship-
ping room  on  December  1,  1963,  was  readily
distinguishable  from  the  questioned  paper.

Examination  of  the  tape  revealed  other  sig-
nificant factors  indicating  that  it  could  have
come  from  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository
shipping  room.  There  were  several  strips  of  tape
on  the  bag.  AU  but  two  of  the  ends  of  these  strips
were  irregularly  torn;  the  remaining  two  ends
had  machine-cut  edges.  This  indicated  that  the
person  who  made  the  bag  had  drawn  a  long  strip
of  tape  from  a  dispensing  machine  and  had  torn
it  by  hand  into  several  smaller  strips.  Confirma-


244


tion  that  the  tape  had  been  drawn  from  a  dis-
pensing machine  was  supplied  by  the  fact  that
a  series  of  small  markings  in  the  form  of  half-
inch  lines  ran  down  the  center  of  the  tape  like
ties  on  a  raUroad  track.  Such  lines  are  made  by  a
ridged  wheel  in  a  tape  dispenser  which  is  con-
structed so  that  when  a  hand  lever  is  pulled,  the
wheel,  which  is  connected  to  the  lever,  pulls  the
tape  from  its  roll  and  dispenses  it.  Such  dis-
pensers are  usually  found  only  in  commercial
establishments.  A  dispenser  of  this  type  was  lo-
cated in  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  ship-
ping room.  The  length  of  the  lines  and  the  num-
ber of  lines  per  inch  on  the  tape  from  the  paper
bag  was  identical  to  the  length  of  the  lines  and
the  number  of  lines  per  inch  on  the  tape  ob-
tained from  the  dispenser  in  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  shipping  room.


WOUND  BALLISTICS  EXPERIMENTS

Purpose  of  the  Tests

During  the  course  of  the  Commission's  in-
quiry, questions  arose  as  to  whether  the  wounds
inflicted  on  President  Kennedy  and  Governor
Connally  could  have  been  caused  by  the  Mann-
licher-Carcano  rifle  found  on  the  sixth  floor  of
the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building  and
Western  Cartridge  Co.  bullets  and  fragments  of
the  type  found  on  the  Governor's  stretcher  and
in  the  Presidential  limousine.  In  analyzing  the
trajectory  of  the  bullets  after  they  struck  their
victims,  further  questions  were  posed  on  the
bullet's  velocity  and  penetration  power  after
exiting  from  the  person  who  was  initially  struck.
To  answer  these  and  related  questions,  the  Com-
mission requested  that  a  series  of  tests  be  con-
ducted on  substances  resembling  the  wounded
portions  of  the  bodies  of  President  Kennedy
and  Governor  Connally  under  conditions  which
simulated  the  events  of  the  assassination.

The  Testers  and  Their  Qualifications

In  response  to  the  Commission's  request,  an
extensive  series  of  tests  were  conducted  by  the
Wound  Ballistics  Branch  of  the  U.S.  Army
Chemical  Research  and  Development  Labora-
tories at  Edgewood  Arsenal,  Md.  Scientists
working  at  that  branch  are  engaged  in  full-time
efforts  to  investigate  the  wound  ballistics  of
missiles  in  order  to  test  their  effects  on  sub-
stances which  simulate  live  human  bodies.  The
tests  for  the  Commission  were  performed  by
Dr.  Alfred  G.  Olivier  under  the  general  super-
vision of  Dr.  Arthur  J.  Dziemian  with  consul-
tation from  Dr.  Frederick  W.  Light,  Jr.  Dr.
Olivier  received  his  doctorate  in  veterinary
medicine  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1953.  Since  1957  he  has  been  engaged  in  re-
search on  wound  ballistics  at  Edgewood  Arsenal
and  is  now  chief  of  the  Wound  Ballistics  Branch.
His  supervisor,  Dr.  Dziemian,  who  is  chief  of
the  Biophysics  Division  at  Edgewood  Arsenal,


holds  a  Ph.D.  degree  from  Princeton  in  1939,
was  a  national  research  fellow  in  physiology  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  and  was  a  fellow
in  anatomy  at  Johns  Hopkins  University  Medi-
cal School.  Since  1947,  Dr.  Dziemian  has  been
continuously  engaged  in  wound  ballistics  work
at  Edgewood  Arsenal.  In  1930,  Dr.  Light  was
awarded  an  M.D.  degree  from  Johns  Hopkins
Medical  School  and  in  1948  received  his  Ph.D.
from  the  same  institution.  After  serving  a  resi-
dency in  pathology,  he  worked  as  a  pathologist
until  1940  when  he  returned  to  Johns  Hopkins
University  to  study  mathematics.  Since  1951,
Dr.  Light  has  been  engaged  in  the  study  of  the
pathology  of  wounding  at  Edgewood  Arsenal.
All  three  of  these  distinguished  scientists  testi-
fied before  the  Commission.

General  Testing  Conditions

The  Commission  made  available  to  the  Edge-
wood  Arsenal  scientists  all  the  relevant  facts
relating  to  the  woimds  which  were  inflicted  on
President  Kennedy  and  Governor  Connally  in-
cluding the  autopsy  report  on  the  President,  and
the  reports  and  X-rays  from  Parkland  Hospital.
In  addition,  Drs.  Olivier  and  Light  had  an  op-
portunity to  discuss  in  detail  the  Governor's
wounds  with  the  Governor's  surgeons,  Drs.
Robert  R.  Shaw  and  Charles  F.  Gregory.  The
Zapruder  films  of  the  assassination  were  viewed
with  Governor  and  Mrs.  Connally  to  give  the
Edgewood  scientists  their  version.  The  Com-
mission also  provided  the  Edgewood  scientists
with  all  known  data  on  the  source  of  the  shots,
the  rifle  and  bullets  used,  and  the  distances  in-
volved. For  purposes  of  the  experiments,  the
Commission  turned  over  to  the  Edgewood
testers  the  Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle  found  on
the  sixth  floor  of  the  Depository  Building.  From
information  provided  by  the  Commission,  the
Edgewood  scientists  obtained  Western  bullets
of  the  type  used  by  the  assassin.

Tests  on  Penetration  Power
and  Bullet  Stability

Comparisons  were  made  of  the  penetrating
power  of  Western  bullets  fired  from  the  as-
sassination rifle  with  other  bullets.  From  the
Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle,  the  Western  bullet
was  fired  through  two  gelatin  blocks  totaling
72i  centimeters  in  length.  As  evidenced  by
Commission  Exhibit  No.  844,  which  is  a  photo-
graph from  a  high-speed  motion  picture,  the
Western  bullets  passed  through  H  blocks  in  a
straight  line  before  their  trajectory  curved.
After  coming  out  of  the  second  gelatin  block,  a
number  of  the  bullets  buried  themselves  in  a
mound  of  earth.

Under  similar  circumstances,  a  bullet  de-
scribed as  the  NATO  round  M-80  was  fired
from  a  M-14  rifle.  The  penetrating  power  of
the  latter  is  depicted  in  Commission  Exhibit
No.  845  which  shows  that  buUet  possesses  much
less  penetrating  power  with  a  quicker  tumbling
action.  Those  characteristics cause  an  early


245


release  of  energy  which  brings  the  bullet  to  a
stop  at  shorter  distances.  A  further  test  was
made  with  a  257  Winchester  Roberts  soft-nosed
hunting  bullet  as  depicted  in  Commission  Ex-
hibit No.  846.  That  bullet  became  deformed
almost  immediately  upon  entering  the  block  of
gelatin  and  released  its  energy  very  rapidly.
From  these  tests,  it  was  concluded  that  the
Western  bullet  fired  from  the  Mannlicher-
Carcano  had  "terrific  penetrating  ability"  and
would  retain  substantial  velocity  after  passing
through  objects  such  as  the  portions  of  the
human  body.

Tests  Simulating  President
Kennedy's  Neck  Wound

After  reviewing  the  autopsy  report  on  Presi-
dent Kennedy,  the  Edgewood  scientists  simu-
lated the  portion  of  the  President's  neck  through
which  the  bullet  passed.  It  was  determined  that
the  bullet  traveled  through  13i  to  14i  centi-
meters of  tissue  in  the  President's  neck.  That
substance  was  simulated  by  constructing  three
blocks:  one  with  a  20-percent  gelatin  composi-
tion, a  second  from  one  animal  meat  and  a  third
from  another  animal  meat  Those  substances
duplicated  as  closely  as  possible  the  portion  of
the  President's  neck  through  which  the  bullet
passed.  At  the  time  the  tests  were  conducted,  it
was  estimated  that  the  President  was  struck
at  a  range  of  approximately  180  feet,  and  the
onsite  tests  which  were  conducted  later  at  Dallas
estabUshed  that  the  President  was  shot  through
the  neck  at  a  range  of  174.9  feet  to  190.8  feet
At  a  range  of  180  feet,  the  Western  bullets  were
fired  from  the  assassination  weapon,  which  has
a  muzzle  velocity  of  approximately  2,160  feet
per  second,  through  those  substances  which
were  placed  beside  a  break-type  screen  for
measuring  velocity.  The  average  entrance  ve-
locity at  180  feet  was  1,904  feet  per  second.

To  reconstruct  the  assassination  situation  as
closely  as  possible  both  sides  of  the  substances
were  covered  with  material  and  cUpped  animal
skin  to  duplicate  human  skin.  The  average  exit
velocity  was  1,779  feet  from  the  gelatin,  1,798
feet  from  the  first  animal  meat  and  1,772  feet
from  the  second  animal  meat.  Commission  Ex-
hibit No.  847  depicts  one  of  the  animal  meats
compressed  to  13i  to  14i  centimeters  to  ap-
proximate the  President's  neck  and  Commission
Exhibit  No.  848  shows  the  analogous  arrange-
ment for  the  gelatin.  The  photograph  marked
Commission  Exhibit  No.  849  shows  the  bullet
passing  through  the  gelatin  in  a  straight  line
evidencing  very  stable  characteristics.

Commission  Exhibit  No.  850  depicts  the
pieces  of  clipped  animal  skin  placed  on  the
points  of  entry  and  exit  showing  that  the  holes
of  entrance  are  round  while  the  holes  of  exit  are
"a  little  more  elongated."  From  these  tests,  it
was  concluded  that  the  bullet  lost  Uttle  of  its
velocity  in  penetrating  the  President's  neck  so
that  there  would  have  been  substantial  impact
on  the  interior  of  the  Presidential  limousine  or


anyone  else  struck  by  the  exiting  bullet.  In  addi-
tion, these  tests  indicated  that  the  bullet  had
retained  most  of  its  stability  in  penetrating  the
President's  neck  so  that  the  exit  hole  would  be
only  slightly  different  from  the  appearance  of
the  entry  hole.

Tests  Simulating  Governor
Connolly's  Chest  Wounds

To  most  closely  approximate  the  Governor's
chest  injuries,  the  Edgewood  scientists  shot  an
animal  with  the  assassination  weapon  using  the
Western  bullets  at  a  distance  of  210  feet.  The
onsite  tests  later  determined  that  the  Governor
was  wounded  at  a  distance  of  176.9  feet  to  190.8
feet  from  the  sixth-floor  window  at  the  south-
east comer  of  the  Depository  Building.  The
average  striking  velocity  of  11  shots  at  210  feet
was  1,929  feet  per  second  and  the  average  exit
velocity  was  1,664  feet  per  second.

One  of  the  shots  produced  an  injury  on  the
animal's  rib  very  similar  to  that  inflicted  on
Governor  Connally.  For  purposes  of  compari-
son with  the  Governor's  wound,  the  Edgewood
scientists  studied  the  Parkland  Hospital  report
and  X-rays,  and  they  also  discussed  these
wounds  with  Dr.  Shaw,  the  Governor's  chest
surgeon.  The  similar  animal  injury  passed  along
the  animal's  eighth  left  rib  causing  a  fracture
which  removed  a  portion  of  the  rib  in  a  manner
very  similar  to  the  wound  sustained  by  the
Governor.  The  X-ray  of  that  wound  on  the
animal  is  reproduced  as  Commission  Exhibit
No.  852.  A  comparison  with  the  Governor's
chest  wound,  shown  in  X-ray  marked  as  Com-
mission Exhibit  No.  681,  shows  the  remarkable
similarity  between  those  two  wounds.

The  bullet  which  produced  the  wound  de-
picted in  Commission  Exhibits  Nos.  851  and

852  was  marked  as  Commission  Exhibit  No.

853  and  possessed  characteristics  very  similar  to
the  bullet  marked  as  Commission  Exhibit  No.
399  found  on  Governor  Connally's  stretcher
and  believed  to  have  been  the  bullet  which
caused  his  chest  wound.  Those  bullets,  identi-
fied as  Commission  Exhibits  Nos.  399  and  853,
were  flattened  in  similar  fashion.  In  addition,
the  lead  core  was  extruded  from  the  rear  in  the
same  fashion  on  both  bullets.  One  noticeable
difference  was  that  the  bullet  identified  as  Com-
mission Exhibit  No.  853,  which  penetrated  the
animal,  was  somewhat  more  flat  than  Commis-
sion Exhibit  No.  399  which  indicated  that  Com-
mission Exhibit  No.  853  was  probably  traveling
at  somewhat  greater  speed  than  the  bullet  which
penetrated  the  Governor's  chest.  After  the
buUet  passed  through  the  animal,  it  left  an  im-
print on  the  velocity  screen  immediately  behind
the  animal  which  was  almost  the  length  of  the
bullet  indicating  that  the  bullet  was  traveling
sideways  or  end  over  end.  Taking  into  con-
sideration the  extra  girth  on  the  Governor,  the
reduction  in  the  velocity  of  the  bullet  passing
through  his  body  was  estimated  at  400  feet.  The
conclusions  from  the  animal  shots  are  signifi-


246


cant  when  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  experi-
ments performed  simulating  the  injuries  to  the
Governor's  wrist.

Tests  Simulating  Governor
Connolly's  Wrist  Wounds

Following  procedures  identical  to  those
employed  in  simulating  the  chest  wound,  the
wound  ballistics  experts  from  Edgewood  Ar-
senal reproduced,  as  closely  as  possible,  the
Governor's  wrist  wound.  Again  the  scientists
examined  the  reports  and  X-rays  from  Parkland
Hospital  and  discussed  the  Governor's  wrist
wound  with  the  attending  orthopedic  surgeon.
Dr.  Charles  F.  Gregory.  Bone  structures  were
then  shot  with  Western  bullets  fired  from  the
assassination  weapon  at  a  distance  of  210  feet.
The  most  similar  bone-structure  shot  was  ana-
lyzed in  testimony  before  the  CommissioiL  An
X-ray  designated  as  Commission  Exhibit  No.
854  and  a  photograph  of  that  X-ray  which  ap-
pears as  Commission  Exhibit  No.  855  show  a
fracture  at  a  location  which  is  very  similar  to
the  Governor's  wrist  wound  depicted  in  X-rays
marked  as  Commission  Exhibits  Nos.  690  and
691.

The  average  striking  velocity  of  the  shots  was
1,858  feet  per  second.  The  average  exit  velocity
was  1,786  feet  per  second  for  the  7  out  of  10
shots  from  bone  structures  which  could  be
measured.  These  tests  demonstrated  that  Gover-
nor Connally's  wrist  was  not  struck  by  a  pristine
bullet,  which  is  a  missile  that  strikes  an  object
before  hitting  anything  else.  This  conclusion
was  based  on  the  following  factors:  (1)  Greater
damage  was  inflicted  on  the  bone  structure  than
that  which  was  suffered  by  the  Governor's
wrist;  and  (2)  the  bone  structure  had  a  smaller
entry  wound  and  a  larger  exit  wound  which  is
characteristic  of  a  pristine  buUet  as  distinguished
from  the  Governor's  wrist  which  had  a  larger
wound  of  entry  indicating  a  bullet  which  was
tumbling  with  substantial  reduction  in  velocity.
In  addition,  if  the  bullet  found  on  the  Governor's
stretcher  (Commission  Exhibit  No.  399)  in-
flicted the  wound  on  the  Governor's  wrist,  then
it  could  not  have  passed  through  the  Governor's
wrist  had  it  been  a  pristine  bullet,  for  the  nose
would  have  been  considerably  flattened,  as  was
the  buUet  which  struck  the  bone  structure,  iden-
tified as  Commission  Exhibit  No.  856.

Conclusions  From  Simulating  the  Neck,
Chest,  and  Wrist  Wounds

Both  Drs.  Olivier  and  Dziemian  expressed
the  opinion  that  one  buUet  caused  all  the
wounds  on  Governor  Connally.  The  wound  to
the  Governor's  wrist  was  explained  by  circum-
stances where  the  bullet  passed  through  the
Governor's  chest,  lost  substantial  velocity  in
doing  so,  tumbled  through  the  wrist,  and  then
slightly  penetrated  the  Governor's  left  thigh.
Thus,  the  results  of  the  wound  balhstics  tests
support  the  conclusions  of  Governor  Connally's


doctors  that  all  his  wounds  were  caused  by  one
bullet.

In  addition,  the  wound  ballistics  tests  indi-
cated that  it  was  most  probable  that  the  same
bullet  passed  through  the  President's  neck  and
then  proceeded  to  inflict  all  the  wounds  on  the
Governor.  That  conclusion  was  reached  by  Drs.
Olivier  and  Dziemian  based  on  the  medical  evi-
dence on  the  wounds  of  the  President  and  the
Governor  and  the  tests  they  performed.  It  was
their  opinion  that  the  wound  on  the  Governor's
wrist  would  have  been  more  extensive  had  the
bullet  which  inflicted  that  injury  merely  passed
through  the  Governor's  chest  exiting  at  a  velos-
ity  of  approximately  1,500  feet  per  second.
Thus,  the  Governor's  wrist  woimd  indicated
that  the  bullet  passed  through  the  President's
neck,  began  to  yaw  in  the  air  between  the  Presi-
dent and  the  Governor,  and  then  lost  substan-
tially more  velocity  than  400  feet  per  second  in
passing  through  the  Governor's  chest  A  bullet
which  was  yawing  on  entering  into  the  Gover-
nor's back  would  lose  substantially  more  veloc-
ity in  passing  through  his  body  than  a  pristine
bullet.  In  addition,  the  greater  flattening  of  the
bullet  that  struck  the  animal's  rib  (Commission
Exhibit  No.  853)  than  the  bullet  which  presum-
ably struck  the  Governor's  rib  (Commission  Ex-
hibit No.  399)  indicates  that  the  animal  bullet
was  traveling  at  a  greater  velocity.  That  suggests
that  the  bullet  which  entered  the  Governor's
chest  had  already  lost  velocity'  by  passing  through
the  President's  neck.  Moreover,  the  large  wound
on  the  Governor's  back  would  be  explained  by
a  bullet  which  was  yawing  although  that  t>'pe  of
wound  might  also  be  accounted  for  by  a  tan-
gential striking.

Dr.  Frederick  W.  Light,  Jr.,  the  third  of  the
wound  ballistics  experts,  testified  that  the  ana-
tomical findings  alone  were  insufficient  for  him
to  formulate  a  firm  opinion  on  whether  the  same
bullet  did  or  did  not  pass  through  the  President's
neck  first  before  inflicting  all  the  woiands  on
Governor  Coimally.  Based  on  the  other  circum-
stances, such  as  the  relative  positions  in  the
automobile  of  the  President  and  the  Governor,
Dr.  Light  concluded  that  it  was  probable  that  the
same  bullet  traversed  the  President's  neck  and
inflicted  aU  the  wounds  on  Governor  Connally.

Tests  Simulating  President  Kennedy's  Head
Wounds

Additional  tests  were  performed  on  inert
skulls  filled  with  a  20  percent  gelatin  substance
and  then  coated  with  additional  gelatin  to  ap-
proximate the  soft  tissues  overlying  the  skuU.
The  skull  was  then  draped  with  simulated  hair
as  depicted  in  Commission  Exhibit  No.  860.
Using  the  Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle  and  the
Western  buUets,  10  shots  were  fired  at  the  re-
constructed skulls  from  a  distance  of  270  feet
which  was  the  estimated  distance  at  the  time
those  tests  were  conducted.  It  was  later  deter-
mined through  the  onsite  tests  that  President
Kennedy  was  struck  in  the  back  of  the  head  at  a


247


distance  of  265.3  feet  from  the  assassination
weapon.

The  general  results  of  these  tests  were  illus-
trated by  the  findings  on  one  skull  which  was
struck  at  a  point  most  nearly  approximating  the
wound  of  entry  on  President  Kennedy's  head.
The  whole  skull,  depicted  in  Commission  Ex-
hibit No.  860,  was  struck  2.9  centimeters  to  the
right  and  almost  horizontal  to  the  occipital  pro-
tuberance or  slightly  above  it,  which  was  vir-
tually the  precise  point  of  entry  on  the  Presi-
dent's head  as  described  by  the  autopsy  sur-
geons. That  bullet  blew  out  the  right  side  of  the
reconstructed  skull  in  a  manner  very  similar  to
the  head  woxmds  of  the  President.  The  conse-
quences on  that  skull  are  depicted  in  Commis-
sion Exhibits  Nos.  861  and  862,  which  illustrate
the  testimony  of  Dr.  Alfred  G.  Olivier,  who
supervised  the  experiments.  Based  on  his  review
of  the  autopsy  report,  Dr.  Olivier  concluded
that  the  damage  to  the  reconstructed  skull  was
very  similar  to  the  wound  inflicted  on  the
President.

Two  fragments  from  the  bullet  which  struck
the  test  skuU  closely  resembled  the  two  frag-
ments found  in  the  front  seat  of  the  Presidential
limousine.  The  fragment  designated  as  Commis-
sion Exhibit  No.  567  is  a  mutilated  piece  of  lead
and  copper  very  similar  to  a  mutilated  piece  of
copper  recovered  from  the  bullet  which  struck
the  skull  depicted  in  Commission  Exhibit  No.
860.  The  other  fragment,  designated  as  Com-
mission Exhibit  No.  569  which  was  found  in
the  front  seat  of  the  Presidential  limousine,  is
the  copper  end  of  the  bullet.  Commission  Ex-
hibit No.  569  is  very  similar  to  a  copper  frag-
ment of  the  end  of  the  bullet  which  struck  the
test  skuU.  The  fragments  from  the  test  bullet  are
designated  as  Commission  Exhibit  No.  857  and
are  depicted  in  a  photograph  identified  as  Com-
missies  Exhibit  No.  858.  A  group  of  small  lead
particles,  recovered  from  the  test  bullet,  are  also
very  similar  to  the  particles  recovered  under  the
left  jump  seat  and  in  the  President's  head.  The
particles  from  the  test  bullet  are  a  part  of  Com-
mission Exhibit  No.  857  and  are  depicted  in
photograph  designated  as  Commission  Exhibit
No.  859.  That  skuU  was  depicted  as  Commission
Exhibit  No.  862.

As  a  result  of  these  tests.  Dr.  Olivier  con-
cluded that  the  Western  bullet  fired  from  the
Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle  at  a  distance  of  270
feet  would  make  the  same  type  of  wound  found
on  the  President's  head.  Prior  to  the  tests,  Dr.
Olivier  had  some  doubt  that  such  a  stable  bullet
would  cause  a  massive  head  wound  like  that  in-
flicted on  the  President.  He  had  thought  it  more
likely  that  such  a  striking  bullet  would  make
small  entrance  and  exit  holes.  The  tests,  how-
ever, showed  that  the  bones  of  the  skull  were
suflBcient  to  deform  the  end  of  the  bullet  causing
it  to  expend  a  great  deal  of  energy  and  thereby
blow  out  the  side  of  the  skull.  These  tests  further
confirmed  the  autopsy  surgeons'  opinions  that
the  President's  head  wound  was  not  caused  by  a


dumdum  bullet.  Because  of  the  test  results,  Dr.
Olivier  concluded  that  the  fragments  found  on
and  under  the  front  seat  of  the  President's  car
most  probably  came  from  the  bullet  which
struck  the  President's  head.  It  was  further  con-
cluded that  the  damage  done  to  Governor  Con-
naUy's  wrist  could  not  have  resulted  from  a
fragment  from  the  bullet  which  struck  President
Kennedy's  head.


HAIRS  AND  FIBERS

Testimony  on  hairs  and  fibers  was  given  by
Paul  M.  Stombaugh  of  the  FBI.  Stombaugh
has  been  a  specialist  in  hairs  and  fibers  since
1960,  when  he  began  a  1-year  period  of  spe-
cialized training  in  this  field.  He  has  made  thou-
sands of  hair  and  fiber  examinations,  and  has
testified  in  Federal  and  State  courts  in  approxi-
mately 28  States.  Stombaugh  examined  and  gave
testimony  on  the  following  objects:  (1)  The
green  and  brown  blanket  found  in  the  Paine's
garage.  Commission  Exhibit  No.  140;  (2)  the
homemade  paper  bag  found  on  the  sixth  floor
of  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  following
the  assassination,  Conmiission  Exhibit  No.  142;
(3)  the  shirt  worn  by  Oswald  on  November  22,
1963,  Commission  Exhibit  No.  150;  and  (4)
the  C2766  rifle.  Commission  Exhibit  No.  139.

General  Principles

Hairs. — ^As  shown  in  Commission  Exhibit
No.  666,  a  hair  consists  of  a  central  shaft
of  air  cells,  known  as  the  medulla;  a  cortex
containing  pigment  granules  (which  give  the
hair  its  color)  and  cortical  fusi  (air  spaces);
and  a  cuticle  and  an  outer  layer  of  scales.  Un-
like fingerprints,  hairs  are  not  imique.  However,
human  hairs  can  be  distinguished  from  animal
hairs  by  various  characteristics,  including  color,
texture,  length,  medullary  structure  and  shape,
shape  of  pigment,  root  size,  and  scale  size.  In
addition,  hairs  of  the  Caucasian,  Negroid,  and
Mongoloid  human  races  can  be  distinguished
from  each  other  by  color,  texture,  size  and  de-
gree of  fluctuation  of  diameter,  thickness  of
cuticle,  shape  and  distribution  of  pigment,  and
shape  of  cross-section.  Moreover,  even  though
individual  hairs  are  not  unique,  the  expert
usually  can  distinguish  the  hairs  of  different  in-
dividuals. Thus,  Stombaugh,  who  had  made  ap-
proximately 1,000  comparison  examinations  of
Caucasian  hairs  and  500  comparison  examina-
tions of  Negroid  hairs,  had  never  found  a  case
in  which  he  was  unable  to  differentiate  the  hairs
of  two  different  Caucasian  individuals,  and  had
found  only  several  cases  in  which  he  could  not
distinguish,  with  absolute  certainty,  between  the
hairs  of  two  different  Negroid  individuals.

Fibers. — Like  hairs,  the  various  types  of  nat-
ural and  artificial  fibers  can  be  distinguished
from  each  other  under  the  microscope.  Like
hairs  too,  individual  fibers  are  not  unique,  but
the  expert  usually  can  distinguish  fibers  from


248


different  fabrics.  A  major  identifying  character-
istic of  most  fibers  is  color,  and  under  the  mi-
croscope many  different  shades  of  each  color  can
be  differentiated — for  example,  50-100  shades
of  green  or  blue,  and  25-30  shades  of  black.
The  microscopic  appearance  of  three  types  of
fibers — cotton,  wool,  and  viscose — is  illustrated
in  Commission  Exhibit  No.  665.  Two  of
these,  cotton  and  viscose,  were  the  subject  of
testimony  by  Stombaugh.  Cotton  is  a  natural
fiber.  Under  the  microscope,  it  resembles  a
twisted  soda  straw,  and  the  degree  of  twist  is  an
additional  identifying  characteristic  of  cotton.
Cotton  may  be  mercerized  or  (more  common-
ly) unmercerized.  Viscose  is  an  artificial  fiber.
A  delustering  agent  is  usually  added  to  viscose  to
cut  down  its  luster,  and  under  the  microscope
this  agent  appears  as  millions  of  tiny  spots  on  the
outside  of  the  fiber.  The  major  identifying  char-
acteristics of  viscose,  apart  from  color,  are  di-
ameter— hundreds  of  variations  being  possible
— and  size  and  distribution  of  delustering  agent,
if  any.

The  blanket. — Stombaugh  received  the  blan-
ket. Commission  Exhibit  No.  140,  in  the  FBI
Laboratory  at  7:30  a.m.,  on  November  23,
1963.  Examination  showed  that  it  was  com-
posed of  brown  and  green  fibers,  of  which  ap-
proximately 1-2  percent  were  woolen,  20-35
percent  were  cotton,  and  the  remainder  were  de-
lustered  viscose.  The  viscose  fibers  in  the  blanket
were  of  10-15  different  diameters,  and  also
varied  slightiy  in  shade  and  in  the  size  and  dis-
tribution of  the  delustering  agent,  (The  apparent
cause  of  those  variations  was  that  the  viscose  in
the  blanket  consisted  of  scrap  viscose. )  The  cot-
ton also  varied  in  shade,  about  seven  to  eight
different  shades  of  green  cotton  being  present,
but  was  uniform  in  twist

When  received  by  Stombaugh,  the  blanket
was  folded  into  approximately  the  shape  of  a
narrow  right  triangle.  A  safety  pin  was  inserted
in  one  end  of  the  blanket,  and  also  at  this
end,  loosely  wrapped  aroimd  the  blanket,  was  a
string.  On  the  basis  of  creases  in  the  blanket  in
this  area  it  appeared  that  the  string  had  been
tied  aroimd  the  blanket  rather  tightiy  at  one  time
while  something  was  inside  the  blanket.  Other
creases  and  folds  were  also  present,  as  illustrated
in  Commission  Exhibit  No.  663.  Among  these
was  a  crease  or  himip  approximately  10  inches
long.  This  crease  must  have  been  caused  by  a
hard  protruding  object  approximately  10  inches
long  which  had  been  ti^tly  wrapped  in  the
blanket,  causing  the  yam  to  stretch  so  that  the
hump  was  present  even  when  the  object  had
been  extracted.  The  hump  was  approximately
the  same  length  and  shape  as  the  telescopic
sight  on  the  C2766  rifle,  and  its  position  with
respect  to  the  ends  of  the  blanket  was  such
(based  on  the  manner  in  which  the  blanket  was
folded  when  Stombaugh  received  it)  that  had
the  rifle  been  in  the  blanket  the  telescopic  sight
could  have  made  the  hump.

The  string  wrapped  aroimd  the  blanket  was


made  of  ordinary  white  cotton.  It  had  been  tied
into  a  granny  knot  (a  very  common  knot  tied
right  over  right,  right  over  right)  and  the  dan-
gling ends  had  been  further  tied  into  a  bow  knot
(the  knot  used  on  shoelaces).

After  receiving  the  blanket,  Stombaugh
scraped  it  to  remove  the  foreign  textile  fibers
and  hairs  that  were  present.  He  found  numerous
foreign  textile  fibers  of  various  types  and  colors,
and  a  number  of  Umb,  pubic,  and  head  hairs,
all  of  which  had  originated  from  persons  of  the
Caucasian  race,  and  had  faUen  out  naturally,
as  was  shown  by  the  shape  of  their  roots.  Several
of  the  limb  and  pubic  hairs  matched  samples  of
Oswald's  limb  and  pubic  hairs  obtained  by  the
Dallas  police  in  all  observable  characteristics,
including  certain  relatively  unusual  character-
istics. For  example,  in  both  Oswald's  pubic
hairs  and  some  of  the  blanket  pubic  hairs,  the
color  was  a  medium  brown,  which  remained
constant  to  the  tip,  where  it  changed  to  a  very
light  brown  and  then  became  transparent,  due
to  lack  of  color  pigments;  the  diameters  were
identical,  and  rather  narrow  for  pubic  hairs;  the
hairs  were  very  smooth,  lacking  the  knobbiness
characteristic  of  pubic  hairs,  and  the  upper  two-
thirds  were  extremely  smooth  for  pubic  hairs;
the  tips  of  the  hairs  were  sharp,  which  is  unusual
for  pubic  hairs;  the  cuticle  was  very  thin  for
pubic  hairs;  the  scales  displayed  only  a  very
small  protrusion;  the  pigmentation  was  very  fine,
equally  dispersed,  and  occasionally  chained  to-
gether, and  displayed  only  very  slight  gapping;
cortical  fusi  were  for  the  most  part  absent;  the
medulla  was  either  fairly  continuous  or  com-
pletely absent;  and  the  root  area  was  rather  clear
of  pigment,  and  contained  only  a  fair  amount  of
cortical  fusi,  which  was  imusual.  Similarly,  in
both  Oswald's  limb  hairs  and  some  of  the  hmb
hairs  from  the  blanket  the  color  was  light  brown
through  its  entire  length;  the  diameter  was  very
fine  and  did  not  noticeably  fluctuate;  the  tips
were  very  sharp,  which  is  unusual;  the  scales
were  of  medium  size,  with  very  slight  protru-
sion; there  was  a  very  slight  gapping  of  the  pig-
mentation near  the  cuticle;  there  was  an  unusnal
amount  of  cortical  fusi,  equally  distributed
through  the  hair  shaft;  and  the  meduUa  was  dis-
continuous, granular,  very  bulbous,  and  very
uneven.

Other  limb,  pubic,  and  head  hairs  on  the
blanket  did  not  come  from  Oswald

The  paper  bag. — Stombaugh  received  the
paper  bag.  Commission  Exhibit  No.  142,  at
7:30  a.m.  on  November  23,  1963.  No  foreign
material  was  found  on  the  outside  of  the  bag
except  traces  of  fingerprint  powder  and  several
white  cotton  fibers,  which  were  of  no  signifir
cance,  since  white  cotton  is  the  most  common
textile,  and  at  any  rate  the  fibers  may  have  come
from  Stombaugh's  white  cotton  gloves.  Inside
the  bag  were  a  tiny  wood  fragment  which  was
too  minute  for  comparison  purposes,  and  may
have  come  from  the  woodpulp  from  which  the
paper  was  made;  a  particle  of  a  waxy  substance.


249


like  candle  wax;  and  a  single  brown  delustered
viscose  fiber  and  several  light-green  cotton
fibers.

The  fibers  found  inside  the  bag  were  com-
pared with  brown  viscose  and  green  cotton  fi-
bers taken  from  the  blanket  The  brown  viscose
fiber  found  in  the  bag  matched  some  of  the
brown  viscose  fibers  from  the  blanket  in  aU  ob-
servable characteristics,  i.e.,  shade,  diameter,
and  size  and  distribution  of  delustering  agent
The  green  cotton  fibers  found  in  the  bag  were,
like  those  from  the  blanket  of  varying  shades,
but  of  a  uniform  twist.  Each  green  cotton  fiber
from  the  bag  matched  some  of  the  green  cotton
fibers  from  the  blanket  in  aU  observable  char-
acteristics, i.e.,  shade  and  degree  of  twist.  Like
the  blanket  cotton  fibers,  the  cotton  fibers  foimd
in  the  bag  were  tmmercerized.

The  shirt. — Sombaugh  received  the  shirt.
Commission  Exhibit  No.  150,  at  7:30  a.m.  on
November  23,  1963.  Examination  showed  that
it  was  composed  of  gray-black,  dark  blue,  and
orange-yellow  cotton  fibers.  The  orange-yeUow
and  gray-black  cotton  fibers  were  of  a  uniform
shade,  and  the  dark-blue  fibers  were  of  three
different  shades.  All  the  fibers  were  mercerized
and  of  substantially  uniform  degree  of  twist.

The  C2766  rifle. — ^The  rifle.  Commission  Ex-
hibit No.  139,  was  received  in  the  FBI  Labora-
tory on  the  morning  of  November  23,  1963,  and
examined  for  foreign  material  at  that  time.
Stombaugh  noticed  immediately  that  the  rifle
had  been  dusted  for  fingerprints,  "and  at  the
time  I  noted  to  myself  that  I  doubted  very  much
if  there  would  be  any  fibers  adhering  to  the  out-
side of  this  gun — I  possibly  might  find  some  in
a  crevice  some  place — ^because  when  the  latent
fingerprint  man  dusted  this  gun,  apparently  in
Dallas,  they  use  a  little  brush  to  dust  with  they
would  have  dusted  any  fibers  off  the  gun  at  the
same  time  *  *  *."  In  fact,  most  of  the  fibers
Stombaugh  found  were  either  adhering  to
greasy,  oily  deposits  or  were  jammed  down  into
crevices,  and  were  so  dirty,  old,  and  fragmented
that  he  could  not  determine  what  type  of  fibers
they  were.  However,  Stombaugh  found  that  a
tiny  tuft  of  fibers  had  caught  on  a  jagged  edge
on  the  rifle's  metal  butt  plate  where  it  met  the
end  of  the  wooden  stock,  and  had  adhered  to  this
edge,  so  that  when  the  rifle  had  been  dusted  for
fingerprints  the  brush  had  folded  the  tuft  into  a
crevice  between  the  butt  plate  and  the  stock,
where  it  remained.  Stombaugh  described  these
fibers  as  "fresh,"  by  which  he  meant  that  "they
were  clean,  they  had  good  color  to  them,  there
was  no  grease  on  them  and  they  were  not
fragmented."  However,  it  was  not  possible  to
determine  how  long  the  fibers  had  been  on  the
rifle,  in  the  absence  of  information  as  to  how
frequently  the  rifle  had  been  used.  Examination
showed  that  the  tuft  was  composed  of  six  or
seven  orange-yellow,  gray-black,  and  dark-blue
cotton  fibers.  These  fibers  were  compared  with
fibers  from  the  shirt.  Commission  Exhibit  No.
150,  which  was  also  composed  of  orange-yellow.


gray-black,  and  dark-blue  cotton  fibers.  The
orange-yellow  and  gray-black  tuft  fibers  matched
the  comparable  shirt  fibers  in  aU  observable
characteristics,  i.e.,  shade  and  twist.  The  three
dark-blue  fibers  matched  two  of  the  three  shades
of  the  dark-blue  shirt  fibers,  and  also  matched
the  dark-blue  shirt  fibers  in  degree  of  twist
Based  on  these  facts,  Stombaugh  concluded  that
the  tuft  of  fibers  found  on  the  rifle  "could  easily"
have  come  from  the  shirt,  and  that  "there  is  no
doubt  in  my  mind  that  these  fibers  could  have
come  from  this  shirt.  There  is  no  way,  how-
ever, to  eliminate  the  possibility  of  the  fibers
having  come  from  another  identical  shirt"


PHOTOGRAPHS

Two  photographs  of  Lee  Harvey  Oswald
holding  a  rifle  were  found  among  Oswald's  pos-
sessions in  Mrs.  Ruth  Paine's  garage  at  2515
West  Fifth  Street,  Irving,  Tex.  In  one.  Commis-
sion Exhibit  No.  133-A,  Oswald  is  holding  the
rifle  generaUy  in  front  of  his  body;  in  the  other.
Commission  Exhibit  No.  133-B,  he  is  holding
the  rifle  to  his  right.  Also  found  at  Mrs.  Paine's
garage  were  a  negative  of  133-B  and  several
photographs  of  the  rear  of  General  Walker's
house.  An  Imperial  reflex  camera,  which  Marina
Oswald  testified  she  used  to  take  133-A  and
133-B,  was  subsequently  produced  by  Robert
Oswald,  Lee  Harvey  Oswald's  brother.  Testi-
mony concerning  the  photographs,  the  negative,
and  the  camera  was  given  by  Lyndal  D.  Shaney-
felt  of  the  FBI  Shaneyfelt  has  been  connected
with  photographic  work  since  1937.  He  has
made  100-300  photographic  examinations,  and
has  testified  frequently  on  the  subject  in  court

Photographs  133-A  and  133-B. — ^The  back-
ground and  lighting  in  133-A  and  133-B  are
virtually  identical;  the  only  apparent  difference
between  the  two  photographs  is  the  pose.  How-
ever, in  133-A  the  rifle  is  held  in  a  position
showing  many  more  of  its  characteristics  than
are  shown  in  133-B.  In  order  to  bring  out  the
details  in  the  rifle  pictured  in  133-A,  Shaneyfelt
rephotographed  133-A  and  prepared  prints  of
varying  densities  from  the  new  negative.  He  also
took  two  new  photographs  of  the  C2766  rifle
itself:  one  shows  the  rifle  in  approximately  the
same  position  as  the  rifle  pictured  in  133-A.  The
other  shows  a  man  holding  the  rifle  simulating
the  pose  in  133-A.  Shaneyfelt  compared  the
actual  rifle,  the  photograph  133-A,  his  rephoto-
graphs  of  133-A,  and  the  two  new  photographs
to  determine  whether  the  rifle  pictured  in  133-A
was  the  C2766  rifle.  He  foimd  it  to  be  the  same
in  aU  appearances,  noted  no  differences,  and
found  a  notch  in  the  stock  of  the  C2766  which
also  appeared  very  faintly  in  133-A.  However,
he  did  not  find  enough  peculiarities  to  positively
identify  the  rifle  in  133-A  as  the  C2766  rifle,
as  distinguished  from  other  rifles  of  the  same
configuration.

The  rifle's  position  in  133-B  is  such  that  less


250


of  its  characteristics  were  visible  than  in  133-A;
essentially,  133-B  shows  only  the  bottom  of  the
rifle.  However,  the  characteristics  of  the  rifle
visible  in  133-B  are  also  similar  to  the  observa-
ble characteristics  of  the  C2766  rifle,  except  that
while  the  C2766  rifle  was  equipped  with  a  home-
made leather  sling  when  it  was  found  after  the
assassination,  the  rifle  in  133-B  seems  to  be
equipped  with  a  homemade  rope  sling.  The  por-
tion of  the  sling  visible  in  133-A  is  too  small  to
establish  whether  it  is  rope  or  leather,  but  it  has
the  appearance  of  rope,  and  its  configuration  is
consistent  with  the  rope  sling  pictured  in  133-B.

The  negative. — Shaneyfelt's  examination  of
the  negative,  Conmiission  Exhibit  No.  749,
showed  that  the  photograph,  133-B,  had  been
printed  directly  or  indirectly  from  the  negative.
It  was  Shaneyfelt's  opinion  that  133-B  had  been
directly  from  the  negative,  but  he  could  not  ab-
solutely eliminate  the  possibility  of  an  iatemega-
tive,  that  is,  the  possibility  that  a  print  had  been
produced  from  the  negative  749,  a  photograph
had  been  taken  of  that  print,  and  133-B  had
been  produced  from  the  new  negative,  rather
than  from  the  original  negative.  "I  think  this  is
highly  unlikely,  because  if  this  were  the  result
of  a  copied  negative,  there  would  normally  be
evidence  that  I  could  detect,  such  as  a  loss  of
detail  and  imperfections  that  show  up  due  to  the
added  process."  In  any  event,  any  "intermedi-
ate" print  would  have  been  virtually  indistin-
guishable from  133-B,  so  that  Shaneyfelt's  testi-
mony conclusively  established  that  either  133-B
or  a  virtually  indistinguishable  print  had  been
produced  from  the  negative  749.

The  camera. — The  Imperial  camera.  Com-
mission Exhibit  No.  750,  was  a  relatively  in-
expensive, fixed-focus,  one-shutter-speed,  box-
type  camera,  made  in  the  United  States.  Shaney-
felt  compared  this  camera  with  the  negative.
Commission  Exhibit  No.  749,  to  determine
whether  this  negative  had  been  taken  with  the
camera.  To  make  this  determination,  Shaney-
f elt  compared  the  margins  of  the  image  on  Com-
mission Exhibit  No.  749  with  the  margins  of  the
image  on  a  negative  he  himself  had  taken  with
the  camera.  Microscopic  examination  shows
that  the  margins  of  a  negative's  image,  although
apparently  straight,  are  actually  irregular.  The
irregularities  usually  do  not  show  on  a  finished
print,  because  they  are  blocked  out  to  give  the
print  a  neat  border.  The  cause  of  these  irregu-
larities can  be  best  imderstood  by  examination  of
Commission  Exhibit  No.  751,  a  photograph
of  the  Imperial  camera  with  the  back  removed
to  show  the  camera's  film-plane  aperture.  When
the  camera's  shutter  is  opened,  fight  exposes  that
portion  of  the  film  which  is  not  blocked  off  by
this  aperture.  The  edges  of  the  aperture,  there-
fore, the  define  edges  of  the  image  which  will
appear  on  the  developed  negative.  In  effect,  the
edge  of  the  image  is  a  shadowgraph  of  the  edge
of  the  aperture.  As  Shaneyfelt  testified:


*  *  *  the  basis  of  the  examination  was  a
close  microscopic  study  of  the  negative  made
in  the  camera  to  study  the  shadowgraph  that
is  made  of  the  edge  of  the  aperture.

As  the  film  is  placed  across  the  aperture  of
the  camera,  and  the  shutter  is  opened,  fight
comes  through  and  exposes  the  film  only  in
the  opening  within  the  edges.  Where  the  film
is  out  over  the  edges  of  the  aperture  it  is  not
exposed,  and  your  result  is  an  exposed  nega-
tive with  a  clear  edge,  and  on  the  negative
then,  the  edges  of  that  exposure  of  the  photo-
graph, are  actuaUy  shadowgraphs  of  the
edges  of  the  aperture.

The  basis  of  the  identification  is  that  the  mi-
croscopic characteristics  of  every  film-plane
aperture,  fike  those  of  a  rifle  barrel,  are  distinc-
tive, for  much  the  same  reason;  that  is,  when
the  camera  is  manufactured,  certain  handwork
is  done  which  differs  microscopically  from  cam-
era to  camera,  and  further  differences  accrue
as  the  casaera  is  used.  As  Shane>^elt  testified:

Q,  Mr.  Shaneyfelt,  what  is  the  basis  of  your
statement,  the  theoretical  basis  of  your  state-
ment, that  every  camera  with  this  t>'pe  of  back
aperture  arrangement  is  unique  in  the  char-
acteristics of  the  shadowgraph  it  makes  on
the  negative?

Mr.  SHANEYFELT.  It  is  because  of  the
minute  variations  that  even  two  cameras  from
the  same  mold  wfil  have.  Additional  hand-
work on  cameras,  or  filing  the  edges  where  a
little  bit  of  plastic  or  a  fittle  bit  of  metal  stays
on,  make  individual  characteristics  apart  from
those  that  would  be  general  characteristics  on
all  of  them  from  the  same  mold.

In  addition,  as  the  film  moves  across  the
camera  and  it  is  used  for  a  considerable  length
of  time,  dirt  and  debris  tend  to  accumulate
a  fittle— or  if  the  aperture  is  painted,  fittle
lumps  in  the  paint  will  make  fittle  bumps
along  that  edge  that  would  make  that  then
individuaUy  different  from  every  other  cam-
era,

Q.  Is  this  similar  then  to  tooknark  identifi-
cation?

Mr.  SHANEYFELT.  Very  simfiar;  yes.

Based  on  his  examination  of  the  shadowgraph
on  the  negative,  Commission  Exhibit  No.  749,
Shane>'felt  determined  that  it  had  been  taken
with  the  Imperial  camera.

Three  edges  of  the  shadowgraph  of  the  film-
plane  aperture  were  also  visible  on  one  of  the
photographs  of  General  Walker's  house,  not
having  been  blocked  out  in  the  making  of  the
print.  On  the  basis  of  these  three  margins,
Shaneyfelt  determined  that  this  photograph  had
also  been  taken  with  Oswald's  Imperial  Reflex
camera.  Shaneyfelt  could  not  determine  whether
133-A  had  been  photographed  with  the  Im-
perial camera,  because  the  negative  of  133-A


251


had  not  been  found,  and  the  print  itself  did  not
show  a  shadowgraph  area.

During  his  interrogations  Oswald  had  been
shown  133-A,  and  had  claimed  it  was  a  com-
posite— that  the  face  in  the  picture  was  his,  but
the  body  was  not.  Shaneyfelt  examined  133-A
and  133-B  to  determine  if  they  were  composite
pictures.  He  concluded  that  they  were  not:

*  *  *  it  is  my  opinion  that  they  are  not
composites.  Again  with  very,  very  minor  res-
ervation, because  I  cannot  entirely  eliminate
an  extremely  expert  composite.  I  have  ex-
amined many  composite  photographs,  and
there  is  always  an  inconsistency,  either  in
lighting  of  the  portion  that  is  added,  or  the
configuration  indicating  a  different  lens  used
for  the  part  that  was  added  to  the  original
phoograph,  things  many  times  that  you  can't
point  to  and  say  this  is  a  characteristic,  or  that
is  a  characteristic,  but  they  have  definite  vari-
ations that  are  not  consistent  throughout  the
picture.

I  found  no  such  characteristic  in  this  pic-
ture.

In  addition,  with  a  composite  it  is  always
necessary  to  make  a  print  that  you  then  make
a  pasteup  of.  In  this  instance  paste  the  face
in,  and  rephotograph  it,  and  then  retouch  out
the  area  where  the  head  was  cut  out,  which
would  leave  a  characteristic  that  would  be
retouched  out  on  the  negative  and  then  that
would  be  printed.

Normally,  this  retouching  can  be  seen
under  magnification  in  the  resulting  compos-
ite— points  can  be  seen  where  the  edge  of  the
head  had  been  added  and  it  hadn't  been  en-
tirely retouched  out.

This  can  nearly  always  be  detected  under
magnification.  I  found  no  such  characteristics
in  these  pictures.

Q.  Did  you  use  the  technique  of  magnifica-
tion in  your  analysis?

A.  Yes.

Furthermore,  the  negative.  Commission  Ex-
hibit No.  749,  showed  absolutely  no  doctoring
or  composition.  Since  the  negative  was  made  ui
Oswald's  Imperial  camera,  Commission  Exhibit
No.  750,  a  composite  of  133-B  could  have  been
made  only  by  putting  two  pictures  together  and
rephotographing  them  in  the  Imperial  camera
— aU  without  leaving  a  discwnible  trace.  This,
to  Shaneyfelt,  was  "in  the  realm  of  the  impos-
sible":

In  addition,  in  this  instance  regarding
133-B  which  I  have  just  stated,  I  have  identi-
fied as  being  photographed  or  exposed  in  the


camera  which  is  Exhibit  750,  for  this  to  be  a
composite,  they  would  have  had  to  make  a
picture  of  the  background  with  an  individual
standing  there,  and  then  substitute  the  face,
and  retouch  it  and  then  possibly  rephoto-
graph it  and  retouch  that  negative,  and  make
a  print,  and  then  photograph  it  with  this  cam-
era, which  is  Commission  Exhibit  750,  in  or-
der to  have  this  negative  which  we  have  iden-
tified with  the  camera,  and  is  Conomission
Exhibit  749.

This  to  me  is  beyond  reasonable  doubt,  it
just  doesn't  seem  that  it  would  be  at  aU  possi-
ble, in  this  particular  photograph.


Q.  You  have  the  negative  of  this?  [Refer-
ring to  Exhibit  133B.]

A.  We  have  the  negative  of  133B.

Q.  You  have  the  negative  of  133B.  That
negative  in  itself  shows  no  doctoring  or  com-
position at  all?

A.  It  shows  absolutely  no  doctoring  or
composition.

Q.  So  that  the  only  composition  that  could
have  been  made  would  have  been  in  this  proc-
ess which  you  have  described  of  picture  on
picture  and  negative  and  then  photographing?

A.  And  then  finally  rephotographing  with
this  camera.

Q.  Rephotograplung  with  this  camera,  this
very  camera?

A.  That  is  correct,  and  this  then,  to  me,
becomes  in  the  realm  of  the  impossible.

Following  the  assassination,  photographs
similar  to  133-A  appeared  in  a  number  of  news-
papers and  magazines.  At  least  some  of  these
photographs,  as  reproduced,  differed  both  from
133-A  and  from  each  other  in  minor  details.
Shaneyfelt  examined  several  of  these  reproduc-
tions and  concluded  that  in  each  case  the  in-
dividual publisher  had  taken  a  reproduction  of
133-A  and  retouched  it  in  various  ways,  ap-
parently for  clarifying  purposes,  thus  accounting
for  the  differences  between  the  reproductions
and  133-A,  and  the  differences  between  the  re-
productions themselves.  Subsequently  one  of  the
publishers  involved  submitted  the  original  photo-
graphs which  it  had  retouched.  Shaneyfelt's  ex-
amination of  this  photograph  confirmed  his
original  conclusion.  The  remaining  publishers
either  confirmed  that  they  had  retouched  the
photographs  they  had  used,  or  failed  to  contra-
dict Shaneyfelt's  testimony  after  having  been
given  an  opportunity  to  do  so.


252


Appendix  XI

REPORTS  RELATING  TO  THE  INTERROGATION  OF  LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD

AT  THE  DALLAS  POLICE  DEPARTMENT

As  discussed  in  chapters  IV  and  V,  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was  interrogated  for  a  total  of
approximately  12  hours  between  2:30  p.m.  on  Friday,  November  22,  1963,  and  11:15  a.m.
on  Sunday,  November  24,  1963.  There  were  no  stenographic  or  tape  recordings  of  these
interviews.  Several  of  the  investigators  present  at  one  or  more  of  the  interrogation  sessions,
prior  to  testifying  before  the  Commission,  had  prepared  memoranda  setting  forth  their
recollections  of  the  questioning  of  Oswald  and  his  responses.  The  following  are  the  most
important  of  these  reports.

Report  of  Capt  J.  W.  Fritz,
Dallas  Police  Department

INTERROGATION  OF  LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD


We  conducted  the  investigation  at  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building  on
November  22,  1963,  immediately  after  the  President  was  shot  and  after  we  had  found  the
location  where  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  had  done  the  shooting  from  and  left  three  empty
cartridge  cases  on  the  floor  and  the  rifle  had  been  found  partially  hidden  under  some  boxes
near  the  back  stairway.  These  pieces  of  evidence  were  protected  until  the  Crime  Lab  could
get  pictures  and  make  a  search  for  fingerprints.  After  Lt.  Day,  of  the  Crime  Lab,  had
finished  his  work  with  the  rifle,  I  picked  it  up  and  found  that  it  had  a  cartridge  in  the
chamber,  which  I  ejected.  About  this  time  some  ofl&cer  came  to  me  and  told  me  that
Mr.  Roy  S.  Truly  wanted  to  see  me,  as  one  of  his  men  had  left  the  building.  I  had  talked
to  Mr.  Truly  previously,  and  at  that  time  he  thought  everyone  was  accounted  for  who
worked  in  the  building.  Mr.  Truly  then  came  with  another  officer  and  told  me  that  a  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  had  left  the  building.  I  asked  if  he  had  an  address  where  this  man  lived,
and  he  told  me  that  he  did,  that  it  was  in  Irving  at  25 1 5  W.  5th  Street.

I  then  left  the  rest  of  the  search  of  the  building  with  Chief  Lumpkin  and  other  oflBcers
who  were  there  and  told  Dets.  R.  M.  Sims  and  E.  L.  Boyd  to  accompany  me  to  the  City  Hall
where  we  could  make  a  quick  check  for  police  record  and  any  other  information  of  value,
and  we  would  then  go  to  Irving,  Texas,  in  an  effort  to  apprehend  this  man.  While  I  was  in
the  building,  I  was  told  that  Officer  J.  D.  Tippit  had  been  shot  in  Oak  Cliff.  Immediately
after  I  reached  my  office,  I  asked  the  officers  who  had  brought  in  a  prisoner  from  the  Tippit
shooting  who  the  man  was  who  shot  the  officer.  They  told  me  his  name  was  Lee  Harvey
Oswald,  and  I  replied  that  that  was  our  suspect  in  the  President's  killing.  I  instructed  the
officers  to  bring  this  man  into  the  office  after  talking  to  the  officers  for  a  few  minutes  in
the  presence  of  Officers  R.  M.  Sims  and  E.  L.  Boyd  of  the  Homicide  Bureau  and  possibly
some  Secret  Service  man.  Just  as  I  had  started  questioning  this  man,  I  received  a  call  from
Gordon  Shanklin,  Agent  in  Charge  of  the  FBI  office  here  in  Dallas,  who  asked  me  to  let
him  talk  to  Jim  Bookhout,  one  of  his  agents.  He  told  Mr.  Bookhout  that  he  would  Uke  for
James  P.  Hosty  to  sit  in  on  this  interview  as  he  knew  about  these  people  and  had  been
investigating  them  before.  I  invited  Mr.  Bookhout  and  Mr.  Hosty  in  to  help  with  the
interview.

After  some  questions  about  this  man's  fuU  name  I  asked  him  if  he  worked  for  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository,  and  he  told  me  he  did.  I  asked  him  which  floor  he  worked  on,
and  he  said  usually  on  the  second  floor  but  sometimes  his  work  took  him  to  all  the  different
floors.  I  asked  him  what  part  of  the  building  he  was  in  at  the  time  the  President  was  shot,
and  he  said  that  he  was  having  his  limch  about  that  time  on  the  first  floor.  Mr.  Truly  had
told  me  that  one  of  the  police  officers  had  stopped  this  man  immediately  after  the  shooting
somewhere  near  the  back  stairway,  so  I  asked  Oswald  where  he  was  when  the  police  officer
stopped  him.  He  said  he  was  on  the  second  floor  drinking  a  coca  cola  when  the  officer  came
in.  I  asked  him  why  he  left  the  building,  and  he  said  there  was  so  much  excitement  he  didn't
think  there  would  be  any  more  work  done  that  day,  and  that  as  this  company  wasn't
particular  about  their  hours,  that  they  did  not  punch  a  clock,  and  that  he  thought  it  would
be  just  as  well  that  he  left  for  the  rest  of  the  afternoon.  I  asked  him  if  he  owned  a  rifle,  and
he  said  that  he  did  not.  He  said  that  he  had  seen  one  at  the  building  a  few  days  ago,  and

253


that  Mr.  Truly  and  some  of  the  employees  were  looking  at  it.  I  asked  him  where  he  went
to  when  he  left  work,  and  he  told  me  that  he  had  a  room  on  1026  North  Beckley,  that  he
went  over  there  and  changed  his  trousers  and  got  his  pistol  and  went  to  the  picture  show.
I  asked  him  why  he  carried  his  pistol,  and  he  remarked,  "You  know  how  boys  do  when
they  have  a  gun,  they  just  carry  it."

Mr.  Hosty  asked  Oswald  if  he  had  been  in  Russia.  He  told  him,  "Yes,  he  had  been  in
Russia  three  years."  He  asked  him  if  he  had  written  to  the  Russian  Embassy,  and  he  said
he  had.  This  man  became  very  upset  and  arrogant  with  Agent  Hosty  when  he  questioned
him  and  accused  him  of  accosting  his  wife  two  different  times.  When  Agent  Hosty
attempted  to  talk  to  this  man,  he  would  hit  his  fist  on  the  desk.  I  asked  Oswald  what  he
meant  by  accosting  his  wife  when  he  was  talking  to  Mr.  Hosty.  He  said  Hosty  mistreated
his  wife  two  different  times  when  he  talked  with  her,  practically  accosted  her.  Mr.  Hosty
also  asked  Oswald  if  he  had  been  to  Mexico  City,  which  he  denied.  During  this  interview
he  told  me  that  he  had  gone  to  school  in  New  York  and  in  Fort  Worth,  Texas,  that  after
going  into  the  Marines,  finished  his  high  school  education.  I  asked  him  if  he  won  any
medals  for  rifle  shooting  in  the  Marines,  He  said  he  won  the  usual  medals.

I  asked  him  what  his  political  beliefs  were,  and  he  said  he  had  none  but  that  he  belonged
to  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  and  told  me  that  they  had  headquarters  in  New  York
and  that  he  had  been  Secretary  for  this  organization  in  New  Orleans  when  he  lived  there.
He  also  said  that  he  supports  the  Castro  Revolution.  One  of  the  oflBcers  had  told  me  that
he  had  rented  the  room  on  Beckley  under  the  name  of  O.  H.  Lee.  I  asked  him  why  he  did
this.  He  said  the  landlady  did  it.  She  didn't  understand  his  name  correctly.

Oswald  asked  if  he  was  allowed  an  attorney  and  I  told  him  he  could  have  any  attorney
he  liked,  and  that  the  telephone  would  be  available  to  him  up  in  the  jail  and  he  could  caU
anyone  he  wished.  I  believe  it  was  during  this  interview  that  he  first  expressed  a  desire  to
talk  to  Mr.  Abt,  an  attorney  in  New  York.  Interviews  on  this  day  were  interrupted  by
showups  where  witnesses  identified  Oswald  positively  as  the  man  who  killed  Officer  Tippit,
and  the  time  that  I  would  have  to  talk  to  another  witness  or  to  some  of  the  officers.  One
of  these  showups  was  held  at  4:35  pm  and  the  next  one  at  6:30  pm,  and  at  7:55  pm.  At
7:05  pm  I  signed  a  complaint  before  BUI  Alexander  of  the  District  Attorney's  office,  charg-
ing Oswald  with  the  Tippit  murder.  At  7: 10  pm  Tippit  [sic]  was  arraigned  before  Judge
Johnston.  During  the  second  day  interviews  I  asked  Oswald  about  a  card  that  he  had  in  his
purse  «howing  that  he  belonged  to  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee,  which  he  admitted
was  his.  I  asked  him  about  another  identification  card  in  his  pocket  bearing  the  name  of
Alex  Hidell.  He  said  he  picked  up  that  name  in  New  Orleans  while  working  in  the  Fair
Play  for  Cuba  organization.  He  said  he  spoke  Russian,  that  he  corresponded  with  people
in  Russia,  and  that  he  received  newspapers  from  Ruesia.

I  showed  the  rifle  to  Marina  Oswald,  and  she  could  not  positively  identify  it,  but  said
that  it  looked  like  the  rifle  that  her  husband  had  and  that  he  had  been  keeping  it  in  the
garage  at  Mrs.  Paine's  home  in  Irving  and  that  he  had  a  few  personal  effects  at  his  room
rifle,  but  he  denied  owning  a  rifle  at  all,  and  said  that  he  did  have  a  small  rifle  some  years
past.  I  asked  him  if  he  owned  a  rifle  in  Russia,  and  he  said,  "You  know  you  can't  buy  a  rifle
in  Russia,  you  can  only  buy  shotguns."  "I  had  a  shotgun  in  Russia  and  himted  some  while
there."  Marina  Oswald  had  told  me  that  she  thought  her  husband  might  have  brought  the
rifle  from  New  Orleans,  which  he  denied.  He  told  me  that  he  had  some  things  stored  in  a
garage  at  Mrs.  Paine's  home  in  Irving  and  that  he  had  a  few  personal  effects  at  his  room
on  Beckley.  I  instructed  the  officers  to  make  a  thorough  search  of  both  of  these  places.

After  reviewing  aU  of  the  evidence  pertaining  to  the  kiUing  of  President  Kennedy  before
District  Attorney  Henry  Wade  and  his  assistant,  Bill  Alexander,  and  Jim  AUen,  former
First  Assistant  District  Attorney  of  Dallas  County,  I  signed  a  complaint  before  the  District
Attorney  charging  Oswald  with  the  murder  of  President  Kennedy.  This  was  at  1 1 :26  pm.
He  was  arraigned  before  Judge  David  Johnston  at  1 :35  am,  November  23,  1963.

Oswald  was  placed  in  jail  about  12:00  midnight  and  brought  from  the  jail  for  arraign-
ment before  Judge  David  Johnston  at  1:36  am.

On  November  23  at  10:25  AM  Oswald  was  brought  from  the  jail  for  an  interview.
Present  at  this  time  was  FBI  agent  Jim  Bookhout,  Forrest  Sorrells,  special  agent  and  in
charge  of  Secret  Service,  United  States  Marshal  Robert  Nash,  and  Homicide  officers.
During  this  interview  I  talked  to  Oswald  about  his  leaving  the  building,  and  he  told  me  he
left  by  bus  and  rode  to  a  stop  near  home  and  walked  on  to  his  house.  At  the  time  of  Oswald's
arrest  he  had  a  bus  transfer  in  his  pocket.  He  admitted  this  was  given  to  him  by  the  bus
driver  when  he  rode  the  bus  after  leaving  the  building.

254


One  of  the  officers  had  told  me  that  a  cab  driver,  William  Wayne  Whaley,  thought  he  had
recognized  Oswald's  picture  as  the  man  who  had  gotten  in  his  cab  near  the  bus  station  and
rode  to  Beckley  Avenue.  I  asked  Oswald  if  he  had  ridden  a  cab  on  that  day,  and  he  said,
"Yes,  I  did  ride  in  the  cab.  The  bus  I  got  on  near  where  I  work  got  into  heavy  traffic  and  was
traveling  too  slow,  and  I  got  off  and  caught  a  cab."  I  asked  him  about  his  conversation  with
the  cab  driver,  and  he  said  he  remembered  that  when  he  got  in  the  cab  a  lady  came  up  who
also  wanted  a  cab,  and  he  told  Oswald  to  tell  the  lady  to  "take  another  cab".

We  found  from  the  investigation  the  day  before  that  when  Oswald  left  home,  he  was
carrying  a  long  package.  He  usually  went  to  see  his  wife  of  week  ends,  but  this  time  he  had
gone  on  Thursday  night.  I  asked  him  if  he  had  told  Buell  Wesley  Frazier  why  he  had  gone
home  a  diiferent  night,  and  if  he  had  told  him  anything  about  bringing  back  some  curtain
rods.  He  denied  it.

During  this  conversation  he  told  me  he  reached  his  home  by  cab  and  changed  both  his
shirt  and  trousers  before  going  to  the  show.  He  said  his  cab  fare  home  was  85  cents.  When
asked  what  he  did  with  his  clothing  he  took  off  when  he  got  home,  he  said  he  put  them  in
the  dirty  clothes.  In  talking  with  him  further  about  his  location  at  the  time  the  President
was  killed,  he  said  he  ate  Ivmch  with  some  of  the  colored  boys  who  worked  with  him.  One
of  them  was  called  "Junior"  and  the  other  one  was  a  little  short  man  whose  name  he  did
not  know.  He  said  he  had  a  cheese  sandwich  and  some  fruit  and  that  was  the  only  package
he  had  brought  with  him  to  work  and  denied  that  he  had  brought  the  long  package  described
by  Mr.  Frazier  and  his  sister.

I  asked  him  why  he  lived  in  a  room,  while  his  wife  lived  in  Irving.  He  said  Mrs.  Paine,
the  lady  his  wife  lived  with,  was  learning  Russian,  that  his  wife  needed  help  with  the  young
baby,  and  that  it  made  a  nice  arrangement  for  both  of  them.  He  said  he  didn't  know  Mr.
Paine  very  well,  but  Mr.  Paine  and  his  wife,  he  thought,  were  separated  a  great  deal  of  the
time.  He  said  he  owned  no  car,  but  that  the  Paines  have  two  cars,  and  told  that  in  the
garage  at  the  Paine's  home  he  had  some  sea  bags  that  had  a  lot  of  his  personal  belongings,
that  he  had  left  them  there  after  coming  back  from  New  Orleans  in  September.

He  said  he  had  a  brother,  Robert,  who  lived  in  Fort  Worth.  We  later  found  that  this
brother  lived  in  Denton.  He  said  the  Paines  were  close  friends  of  his.

I  asked  him  if  he  belonged  to  the  Communist  Party,  but  he  said  that  he  had  never  had  a
card,  but  repeated  that  he  belonged  to  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  organization,  and  he  said  that
he  belonged  to  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union  and  paid  $5.00  dues.  I  asked  him  again
why  he  carried  the  pistol  to  the  show.  He  refused  to  answer  questions  about  the  pistol.  He
did  tell  me,  however,  that  he  had  bought  it  several  months  before  in  Fort  Worth,  Texas.

I  noted  that  in  questioning  him  that  he  did  answer  very  quickly,  and  I  asked  him  if  he
had  ever  been  questioned  before,  and  he  told  me  that  he  had.  He  was  questioned  one  time
for  a  long  time  by  the  FBI  after  he  had  returned  from  Russia.  He  said  they  used  different
methods,  they  tried  the  hard  and  soft,  and  the  buddy  method,  and  said  he  was  very  familiar
with  interrogation.  He  reminded  me  that  he  did  not  have  to  answer  any  questions  at  all
until  he  talked  to  his  attorney,  and  I  told  him  again  that  he  could  have  an  attorney  any
time  he  wished.  He  said  he  didn't  have  money  to  pay  for  a  phone  call  to  Mr.  Abt.  I  told  him
to  call  "collect",  if  he  Uked,  to  use  the  jail  phone  or  that  he  could  have  another  attorney  if
he  wished.  He  said  he  didn't  want  another  attorney,  he  wanted  to  talk  to  this  attorney  first.
I  believe  he  made  this  call  later  as  he  thanked  me  later  during  one  of  our  interviews  for
allowing  him  the  use  of  the  telephone.  I  explained  to  him  that  all  prisoners  were  allowed  to
use  the  telephone.  I  asked  him  why  he  wanted  Mr.  Abt,  instead  of  some  available  attorney.
He  told  me  he  didn't  know  Mr.  Abt  personally,  but  that  he  was  familiar  with  a  case  where
Mr.  Abt  defended  some  people  for  a  violation  of  the  Smith  Act,  and  that  if  he  didn't  get
Mr.  Abt,  that  he  felt  sure  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union  would  furnish  him  a  lawyer.
He  explained  to  me  that  this  organization  helped  people  who  needed  attorneys  and  weren't
able  to  get  them.

While  in  New  Orleans,  he  lived  at  4907  Magazine  Street  and  at  one  time  worked  for  the
William  RUey  Company  near  that  address.  When  asked  about  any  previous  arrests,  he  told
me  that  he  had  had  a  little  trouble  while  working  with  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee
and  had  a  fight  with  some  anti-Castro  people.  He  also  told  me  of  a  debate  on  some  radio
station  in  New  Orleans  where  he  debated  with  some  anti-Castro  people.

I  asked  him  what  he  thought  of  President  Kennedy  and  his  family,  and  he  said  he  didn't
have  any  views  on  the  President.  He  said,  "I  like  the  President's  family  very  well.  I  have  my
own  views  about  national  policies."  I  asked  him  about  a  polygraph  test.  He  told  me  he  had
refused  a  polygraph  test  with  the  FBI,  and  he  certainly  wouldn't  take  one  at  this  time.  Both

255


Mr.  Bookhout,  of  the  FBI,  and  Mr.  Kelley,  and  the  Marshall  [sic]  asked  Oswald  some
questions  during  thi6  interview.

Oswald  was  placed  back  in  jail  at  11:33  am.  At  12:35  pm  Oswald  was  brought  to  tho
office  for  another  interview  with  Inspector  Kelley  and  some  of  the  other  officers  and  myself.
I  talked  to  Oswald  about  the  diflferent  places  he  had  lived  in  Dallas  in  an  effort  to  find  where
he  was  Uving  when  the  picture  was  made  of  him  holding  a  rifle  which  looked  to  be  the  same
rifle  we  had  recovered.  This  picture  showed  to  be  taken  near  a  stairway  with  many  identify-
ing things  in  the  back  yard.  He  told  me  about  one  of  the  places  where  he  had  lived.

Mr.  Paine  had  told  me  about  where  Oswald  lived  on  Neely  Street.  Oswald  was  very
evasive  about  this  location.  We  found  later  that  this  was  the  place  where  the  picture  was
made.  I  again  asked  him  about  his  property  and  where  his  things  might  be  kept,  and  he
told  me  about  the  things  at  Mrs.  Paine's  residence  and  a  few  things  on  Beckley.  He  was
placed  back  in  jail  at  1:10  PM.

At  6:00  PM  I  instructed  the  officers  to  bring  Oswald  back  into  the  office,  and  in  the
presence  of  Jim  Bookhout,  Homicide  officers,  and  Inspector  KeUey,  of  the  Secret  Service,
I  showed  Oswald  an  enlarged  picture  of  him  holding  a  rifle  and  wearing  a  pistol.  This
picture  had  been  enlarged  by  our  Crime  Lab  from  a  picture  foimd  in  the  garage  at  Mrs.
Paine's  home.  He  said  the  picture  was  not  his,  that  the  face  was  his  face,  but  that  this
picture  had  been  made  by  someone  superimposing  his  face,  the  other  part  of  the  picture
was  not  him  at  all  and  that  he  had  never  seen  the  picture  before.  When  I  told  him  that  the
picture  was  recovered  from  Mrs.  Paine's  garage,  he  said  that  picture  had  never  been  in  his
possession,  and  I  explained  to  him  that  it  was  an  enlargement  of  the  small  picture  obtained
in  the  search.  At  that  time  I  showed  him  the  smaller  picture.  He  denied  ever  seeing  that
picture  and  said  that  he  knew  aU  about  photography,  that  he  had  done  a  lot  of  work  in
photography  himself,  that  the  small  picture  was  a  reduced  picture  of  the  large  picture,  and
had  been  made  by  some  person  unknown  to  him.  He  further  stated  that  since  he  had  been
photographed  here  at  the  City  Hall  and  that  people  had  been  taking  his  picture  while  being
transferred  from  my  office  to  the  jaU  door  that  someone  had  been  able  to  get  a  picture
of  his  face  and  that  with  that,  they  had  made  this  picture.  He  told  me  that  he  vmderstood
photography  real  well,  and  that  in  time,  he  would  be  able  to  show  that  it  was  not  his  picture,
and  that  it  had  been  made  by  someone  else.  At  this  time  he  said  that  he  did  not  want  to
answer  any  more  questions  and  he  was  returned  to  the  jaU  about  7:15  pm.

At  9:30  on  the  morning  of  November  24, 1  asked  that  Oswald  be  brought  to  the  office.
At  that  time  I  showed  him  a  map  of  the  City  of  Dallas  which  had  been  recovered  in  the
search  of  his  room  on  North  Beckley.  This  map  had  some  markings  on  it,  one  of  which  was
about  where  the  President  was  shot.  He  said  that  the  map  had  nothing  to  do  with  the
President's  shooting  and  again,  as  he  had  one  [sic]  in  the  previous  interviews,  denied
knowing  anything  of  the  shooting  of  the  President,  or  of  the  shooting  of  Officer  Tippit.
He  said  the  map  had  been  used  to  locate  buildings  where  he  had  gone  to  talk  to  people
about  employment

During  this  interview  Inspector  Kelley  asked  Oswald  about  his  religious  views,  and  he
replied  that  he  didn't  agree  with  all  the  philosophies  on  religion.  He  seemed  evasive  with
Inspector  KeUey  about  how  he  felt  about  reUgion,  and  I  asked  him  if  he  believed  in  a  Diety.
He  was  evasive  and  didn't  answer  this  question.

Someone  of  the  Federal  officers  asked  Oswald  if  he  thought  Cuba  would  be  better  off
since  the  President  was  assassinated.  To  this  he  replied  that  he  felt  that  since  the  President
was  kUled  that  someone  else  would  take  his  place,  perhaps  Vice-President  Johnson,  and  that
his  views  would  probably  be  largely  the  same  as  those  of  President  Kennedy.

I  again  asked  him  about  the  gun  and  about  the  picture  of  him  holding  a  similar  rifle,
and  at  that  time  he  again  positively  denied  having  any  knowledge  of  the  picture  or  the
rifle  and  denied  that  he  had  ever  Uved  on  Neely  Street,  and  when  I  told  him  that  friends
who  had  visited  him  there  said  that  he  had  lived  there,  he  said  that  they  were  mistaken
about  visiting  him  there,  because  he  had  never  Uved  there.

During  this  interview,  Oswald  said  he  was  a  Marxist.  He  repeated  two  or  three  times,
"I  am  a  Marxist,  but  not  a  Leninist-Marxist."  He  told  me  that  the  station  that  he  had
debated  on  in  New  Orleans  was  the  one  who  carried  Bill  Stakey's  program.  He  denied
again  knowing  Alex  Hidell  in  New  Orleans,  and  again  reiterated  his  beUef  in  Fair  Play
for  Cuba  and  what  the  committee  stood  for.

After  some  questioning,  Chief  Jesse  E.  Curry  came  to  the  office  and  asked  me  if  I  was
ready  for  the  man  to  be  transferred.  I  told  him  we  were  ready  as  soon  as  the  security  was
completed  in  the  basement,  where  we  were  to  place  Oswald  in  a  car  to  transfer  him  to  the

256


County  Jail.  I  had  objected  to  the  cameras  obstructing  the  jail  door,  and  the  Chief  explained
to  me  that  these  have  been  moved,  and  the  people  were  moved  back,  and  the  cameramen
were  well  back  in  the  garage.  I  told  the  Chief  then  that  we  were  ready  to  go.  He  told  us  to
go  ahead  with  the  prisoner,  and  that  he  and  Chief  Stevenson,  who  was  with  him,  would
meet  us  at  the  County  Jail.

Oswald's  shirt,  which  he  was  wearing  at  the  time  of  arrest,  had  been  removed  and  sent
to  the  crime  lab  in  Washington  with  all  the  other  evidence  for  a  comparison  test.  Oswald
said  he  would  like  to  have  a  shirt  from  his  clothing  that  had  been  brought  to  the  office  to
wear  over  the  T-shirt  that  he  was  wearing  at  the  time.  We  selected  the  best-looking  shirt
from  his  things,  but  he  said  he  would  prefer  wearing  a  black  Ivy  League  type  shirt,
indicating  that  it  might  be  a  little  warmer.  We  made  this  change  and  I  asked  him  if  he
wouldn't  like  to  wear  a  hat  to  more  or  less  camouflage  his  looks  in  the  car  whUe  being
transferred  as  all  of  the  people  who  had  been  viewing  him  had  seen  him  bareheaded.  He
didn't  want  to  do  this.  Then  Officer  J.  R.  Leavelle  handcuffed  his  left  hand  to  Oswald's
right  hand,  then  we  left  the  office  for  the  transfer.

Inasmuch  as  this  report  was  made  from  rough  notes  and  memory,  it  is  entirely  possible
that  one  of  these  questions  could  be  in  a  separate  interview  from  the  one  indicated  in  this
report.  He  was  interviewed  under  the  most  adverse  conditions  in  my  office  which  is  9  feet
6  inches  by  14  feet,  and  has  only  one  front  door,  which  forced  us  to  move  this  prisoner
through  himdreds  of  people  each  time  he  was  carried  from  my  office  to  the  jail  door,  some
20  feet,  during  each  of  these  transfers.  The  crowd  would  attempt  to  jam  around  him,
shouting  questions  and  many  containing  slurs.  This  office  is  also  surrounded  by  large  glass
windows,  and  there  were  many  officers  working  next  to  these  windows.  I  have  no  recorder
in  this  office  and  was  unable  to  record  the  interview.  I  was  interrupted  many  times  during
these  interviews  to  step  from  the  office  to  talk  to  another  witness  or  secure  additional
information  from  officers  needed  for  the  interrogation.


REPORTS  OF  AGENTS  OF  THE  FEDERAL  BUREAU  OF  E^fVESTIGATION

FEDERAL  BUREAU  OF  INVESTIGATION


Date:  11/23/63

LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD,  1026  North  Beckley,  Dallas,  Texas,  was  interviewed
by  Captain  WILL  FRITZ  of  the  Homicide  Bureau,  Dallas  Police  Department.
Special  Agents  JAMES  P.  HOSTY,  JR.  and  JAMES  W.  BOOKHOUT  were  present  during
this  interview.  When  the  Agents  entered  the  interview  room  at  3:15  p.m..  Captain  FRITZ
had  been  previously  interviewing  LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD  for  an  undetermined  period
of  time.  Both  Agents  identified  themselves  to  OSWALD  and  advised  him  they  were  law
enforcement  officers  and  anything  he  said  could  be  used  against  him.  OSWALD  at  this
time  adopted  a  violent  attitude  toward  the  FBI  and  both  Agents  and  made  many  uncom-
plimentary remarks  about  the  FBI.  OSWALD  requested  that  Captain  FRITZ  remove  the
cuffs  from  him,  it  being  noted  that  OSWALD  was  handcuffed  with  his  hands  behind  him.
Captain  FRITZ  had  one  of  his  detectives  remove  the  handcuffs  and  handcuff  OSWALD
with  his  hands  in  front  of  him.

Captain  FRITZ  asked  OSWALD  if  he  ever  owned  a  rifle  and  OSWALD  stated  that  he
had  observed  a  MR.  TRUELY  (phonetic),  a  supervisor  at  the  Texas  Schoolbook  Depository
on  November  20,  1963,  display  a  rifle  to  some  individuals  in  his  office  on  the  first  floor  of
the  Texas  Schoolbook  Depository,  but  denied  ever  owning  a  rifle  himself.  OSWALD  stated
that  he  had  never  been  in  Mexico  except  in  Tijuana  on  one  occasion.  However,  he  admitted
to  Captain  FRITZ  to  having  resided  in  the  Soviet  Union  for  three  years  where  he  has  many
friends  and  relatives  of  his  wife.

OSWALD  also  admitted  that  he  was  the  secretary  for  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee
in  New  Orleans,  Louisiana  a  few  months  ago.  OSWALD  stated  that  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba
Committee  has  its  headquarters  in  New  York  City.  OSWALD  admitted  to  having  received
an  award  for  marksmanship  while  a  member  of  the  U.S.  Marine  Corps.  He  further  admitted
that  he  was  living  at  1026  N.  Beckley  in  Dallas,  Texas,  under  the  name  of  O.  H.  LEE.
OSWALD  admitted  that  he  was  present  in  the  Texas  Schoolbook  Depository  on  November

257


22,  1963,  where  he  has  been  employed  since  October  15,  1963.  OSWALD  stated  that  as  a
laborer,  he  has  access  to  the  entire  building  which  has  offices  on  the  first  and  second  floors
and  storage  on  the  third  and  fourth,  as  well  as  the  fifth  and  sixth  floors.  OSWALD  stated
that  he  went  to  lunch  at  approximately  noon  and  he  claimed  he  ate  his  lunch  on  the  first
floor  in  the  lunchroom;  however  he  went  to  the  second  floor  where  the  Coca-Cola  machine
was  located  and  obtained  a  bottle  of  Coca-Cola  for  his  lunch.  OSWALD  claimed  to  be  on
the  first  floor  when  President  JOHN  F.  KENNEDY  passed  this  building.

After  hearing  what  had  happened,  he  said  that  because  of  all  the  confusion  there  would
be  no  work  performed  that  afternoon  so  he  decided  to  go  home.  OSWALD  stated  he  then
went  home  by  bus  and  changed  his  clothes  and  went  to  a  movie.  OSWALD  admitted  to
carrying  a  pistol  with  him  to  this  movie  stating  he  did  this  because  he  felt  like  it,  giving
no  other  reason.  OSWALD  further  admitted  attempting  to  fight  the  Dallas  police  officers
who  arrested  him  in  this  movie  theater  when  he  received  a  cut  and  a  bump.

OSWALD  frantically  denied  shooting  Dallas  police  officer  TIPPIT  or  shooting
President  JOHN  F. KENNEDY.  The  interview  was  concluded  at  4:05  p.m.  when

OSWALD  was  removed  for  a  lineup.

*****

On  11/22/63  at  DaUas,  Texas.  File  #  DL  89-43.

By  Special  Agents  JAMES  P.  HOSTY,  JR.  and  JAMES  W.  BOOKHOUT.

Date  dictated:  11/23/63.

This  document  contains  neither  recommendations  nor  conclusions  of  the  FBL  It  is  the
property  of  the  FBI  and  is  loaned  to  your  agency;  and  its  contents  are  not  to  be  distributed
outside  your  agency.


FEDERAL  BUREAU  OF  INVESTIGATION


Date:  11/23/63

LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD,  interviewed  in  offices  of  the  Dallas  Police  Department,  was
advised  that  he  did  not  have  to  make  any  statement,  any  statement  he  made  could  be  used
against  him  in  court  and  of  his  right  to  an  attorney.  He  was  requested  to  furnish  descriptive
and  biographical  data  concerning  himself.

The  following  was  obtained  from  his  responses  and  examination  of  contents  of  his
wallet:

OSWALD  decUned  to  explain  his  possession  of  a  photograph  of  a  Selective  Service  card
in  the  name  of  "ALEK  JAMES  HIDELL".

When  interview  had  been  substantially  completed  and  OSWALD  was  asked  as  to  his
present  employment,  he  stated  he  thought  perhaps  interview  to  obtain  descriptive  informa-
tion was  too  prolonged,  that  he  had  declined  to  be  interviewed  by  any  other  officers  pre-
viously, and  did  not  desire  to  be  interviewed  by  this  agent.  He  remarked  "I  know  your
tactics —  there  is  a  similar  agency  in  Russia.  You  are  using  the  soft  touch  and,  of  course,
the  procedure  in  Russia  would  be  quite  different."

OSWALD  was  advised  questions  were  intended  to  obtain  his  complete  physical  descrip-
tion and  background.  Upon  repetition  of  the  question  as  to  his  present  employment,  he
furnished  same  without  further  discussion.
Race — ^White.
Sex — Male.

Date  of  Birth — October  18,  1939.
Place  of  Birth — ^New  Orleans,  Louisiana.
Height— 5'  9".
Weight— 140.

Hair — Medium  brown,  worn  medium  length,  needs  haircut.
Eyes — Blue-gray.

Scars — No  tattoos  or  permanent  scars.

Relatives — Mother — MARGUERITE  OSWALD,  unknown  address,  Arlington,  Texas,
practical  nurse  (has  not  been  seen  for  about  one  year).  Father — ROBERT  LEE  OS-

258


WALD,  deceased,  August  31,  1939,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.  Wife — MARINA;  two
infant  chUdren.  Brothers — JOHN  OSWALD,  address  unknown,  last  known  at  Fort
Worth,  Texas,  five  or  six  years  ago,  age  about  30,  works  with  pharmaceuticals  but
not  graduate  pharmacist;  ROBERT  OSWALD,  7313  Davenport,  Fort  Worth,  Texas
(wife — VADA,  two  smaU  children),  works  for  brick  company  (believed  Acme).

Dress  at  Time  of  Interview — Black  trousers,  brown  "salt  and  pepper",  long  sleeved  shirty
bareheaded.

Contents  of  Wallet— Had  card  in  possession,  LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD,  Social  Security
No.  433-54-3937.  Photo  of  Selective  Service  S>'stem  card  with  photo  of  OSWALD,
"Notice  of  Classification"  and  name  "ALEK  JAMES  HIDELL,  SSN  42-224-39-

5321".  Card  shows  classification  IV (?).  Bears  date  February  5,  1962,  reverse  side

shows  card  from  Texas  Local  Board,  400  West  Vicken',  Fort  Worth,  Texas.  Card
shows  erasures  and  ret>-ping  of  the  information  indicated  and  bears  longhand  signa-
ture "ALEK  J.  HIDELL".  Signature  of  member  or  clerk  of  local  board  (indistinct,

may  be  GOOD .  Local  Board  114,  Fort  Worth,  LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD,

SSN  41-114-39-532,  address  3124  West  5th  Street,  Fort  Worth,  Texas,  registered
September  14,  1959.  Date  of  birth  October  18,  1939,  New  Orleans,  5'  11",  150  lbs.,
blue  eyes,  brown  hair.  MRS.  ZOLA  Z.  BURGER,  Clerk.  Snapshot  photo  of  woman,
apparently  wife.  Snapshot  photo  of  infant.  White  card  with  longhand,  "Embassy
USSR,  1609  Decatur,  NW,  Washington,  D.C.,  Consular  "REZHUYEHKO"  (in-
distinct). Department  of  Defense  Identification  No.  N4,271,617,  issued  to  LEE  R
OSWALD,  expiration  date  December  7,  1962,  Private  First  Class,  E-2,  MCR/INAC,
Service  No.  1653230.  Card  shows  date  of  birth  October  18,  1939,  5'  11",  145  lbs.,
brown  hair,  gray  eyes.  Dallas  Public  Library  card,  undated,  expiration  date  December
7,  1965,  issued  to  LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD,  602  Elsbeth,  Dallas,  school  or  business
— Jaggers-Chiles-StovaU,  followed  by  the  name  JACK  L.  BOWEN,  1916  Stevens
Forest  Drive,  WH  8-8997.  U.  S.  Forces,  Japan  Identification  card  issued  to  LEE  H.
OSWALD,  Private,  Service  No.  1653230,  organization  -  MACS-1  MAG-11  1st
MAW.  Identification  card  if00646,  issued.  May  8,  1958.  Date  of  birth  October  18,
1939,  American.  Card,  "Compliments  GA  -  JO  Enkanko  Hotel,  telephone  number
ED  5-0755  of  reverse  side.  Certificate  of  Service  in  Armed  Forces  of  United  States,
issued  to  LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD,  1653230,  reflected  honorably  served  on  active
duty,  U.  S.  Marine  Corps,  October  24,  1956  -  September  11,  1959.  Card  of  "Fair
Play  for  Cuba  Ck>mmittee,  799  Broadway,  New  York  3,  New  York,  telephone
ORegon  4-8295",  issued  to  LEE  H.  OSWALD,  May  28,  1963,  filed  by  V.  T.  LEE  as
Executive  Secretary.  Card  of  "Fair  Play  for  Cuba,  New  Orleans  Chapter",  issued
toL.  H.  OSWALD,  June  15,  1963,  filed  by  A.  T.(?)  HIDELL,  Chapter  President  (note
name  HIDELL  on  fictitious  Selective  Service  card) .  Selective  Service  notice  of  classi-
fication card  to  LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD,  Selective  Service  No.  41-114-39-532,
rV-A,  dated  February  2,  1960,  from  Local  Board  114,  Fort  Worth,  Texas.  $13.00
in  currency,  consisting  of  one  $5.00  bUl  and  eight  $1.00  bills.

Residence — 2515  West  5th  Street,  Irving,  Texas,  phone  BL  3-1628  (residence  of  wife  for
past  five  weeks).  Room  in  rooming  house,  1026  North  Beckley,  for  about  five  weeks.
Phone  number  unknown.

Previous  Residences — 4706  Magazine  Street,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana,  no  phone  (about
three  months).  602  Elsbeth,  no  phone  (about  seven  months),  Dallas,  Texas.  Unrecalled
street  in  Fort  Worth,  Texas,  (a  few  months),  with  brother  in  Fort  Worth,  Texas,  for  a
few  months.  Previously  in  Soviet  Union,  until  July,  1962.

Occupations — Photography  -  Jaggers  -  Chiles  -  Stovall,  522  Browder,  Dallas,  Texas.
Factory  worker,  William  B.  Riley  Company  (Coffee  and  Coffee  Canisters),  644  Maga-
zine Street,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.  Unemployed  for  several  months.  Employed
with  Texas  State  Book  Depository,  Dallas,  Texas,  September,  1963,  stock  work,  filing

orders,  etc.

*****

On:  11/22/63  at  Dallas,  Texas.  File  #89-43.
By  Special  Agent  MANNING  C.  CLEMENTS.
Date  dictated:  11/23/63.

This  docviment  contains  neither  recommendations  nor  conclusions  of  the  FBI.  It  is  the
property  of  the  FBI  and  is  loaned  to  your  agency;  it  and  its  contents  are  not  to  be  distributed
outside  your  agency.

259


FEDERAL  BUREAU  OF  INVESTIGATION

Date:  11/25/63

LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD  was  interviewed  at  the  Homicide  and  Robbery  Bureau,  Dallas
Police  Department,  by  Captain  J.  W.  FRITZ  in  the  presence  of  Special  Agent  JAMES  W.
BOOKHOUT,  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation.  OSWALD  was  advised  of  the  identity  and
oflBcial  capacity  of  said  agent  and  the  fact  that  he  did  not  have  to  make  any  statement,  that
any  statement  he  did  make  could  be  losed  in  a  court  of  law  against  him,  and  that
any  statement  made  must  be  free  and  voluntary  and  that  he  had  the  right  to  consult  with  an
attorney.

OSWALD  stated  that  he  did  not  own  any  rifle.  He  advised  that  he  saw  a  rifle  day  before
yesterday  at  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  which  MR.  TRULY  and  two  other  gentle-
men had  in  their  possession  and  were  looking  at

OSWALD  stated  that  on  November  22,  1963,  at  the  time  of  the  search  of  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  buUding  by  Dallas  poUce  oflBcers,  he  was  on  the  second  floor  of
said  buUding,  having  just  purchased  a  Coca-cola  from  the  soft-drink  machine,  at  which
time  a  police  oflBcer  came  into  the  room  with  pistol  drawn  and  asked  him  if  he  worked  there.
MR  TRULY  was  present  and  verified  that  he  was  an  employee  and  the  poice  ofl&cer  there-
after left  the  room  and  continued  through  the  building.  OSWALD  stated  that  he  took  this
Coke  down  to  the  first  floor  and  stood  around  and  had  lunch  in  the  employees  lunch  room.
He  thereafter  went  outside  and  stood  around  for  five  or  ten  minutes  with  foreman  BILL
SHELLY,  and  thereafter  went  home.  He  stated  that  he  left  work  because,  in  his  opinion,
based  upon  remarks  of  BILL  SHELLY,  he  did  not  believe  that  there  was  going  to  be  any
more  work  that  day  due  to  the  confusion  in  the  buUding.  He  stated  after  arriving  at  his
residence,  then  he  went  to  a  movie,  where  he  was  subsequently  apprehended  by  the  Dallas
PoHce  Department.

OSWALD  stated  that  his  hours  of  work  at  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  are  from

8  a.m.  to  4:45  p.m.,  but  that  he  is  not  required  to  punch  a  time  clock.  His  usual  place  of

work  in  the  buUding  is  on  the  first  floor;  however,  he  frequently  is  required  to  go  to  the

fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  floors  of  the  buUding  in  order  to  get  books  and  this  was  true

on  November  22,  1963,  and  he  had  been  on  all  of  the  floors  in  the  performance  of  his

duties  on  November  22,  1963.

*****

On  11/22/63  at  DaUas,  Texas. FUe  #DL  89-43.
By  Special  Agent  JAMES  W.  BOOKHOUT.
Date  dictated:  11/24/63.

This  document  contains  neither  recommendations  nor  conclusions  of  the  FBI.  It  is  the
property  of  the  FBI  and  is  loaned  to  your  agency;  it  and  its  contents  are  not  to  be  distributed
outside  your  agency.


FEDERAL  BUREAU  OF  INVESTIGATION

Date:  11/25/63

LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD  was  interviewed  by  Captain  J.  W.  FRITZ,  Homicide  and
Robbery  Bureau,  Dallas  Police  Department.  OSWALD  was  advised  of  the  identity  of
SA  JAMES  W.  BOOKHOUT,  and  his  capacity  as  a  Special  Agent  of  the  Federal  Bureau  of
Investigation.  He  was  informed  of  his  right  to  an  attorney,  that  any  statement  he  might
make  could  be  used  against  bim  in  a  court  of  law,  and  that  any  statement  which  he  might
make  must  be  free  and  voluntary.  He  furnished  the  following  information  in  the  presence
of  T.  J.  KELLEY,  U.S.  Secret  Service;  DAVID  B.  GRANT,  Secret  Service;  ROBERT  I.
NASH,  United  States  Marshall  [sic];  and  Detectives  BILLY  L.  SE>«CEL  and  FAY  M.
TURNER  of  the  Homicide  and  Robbery  Bureau,  Dallas  PoUce  Department

Following  his  departure  from  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository,  he  boarded  a  city  bus  to
his  residence  and  obtained  transfer  upon  departure  from  the  bus.  He  stated  that  ofiBcers  at
the  time  of  arresting  him  took  his  transfer  out  of  his  pocket.

OSWALD  advised  that  he  had  only  one  post  office  box  which  was  at  Dallas,  Texas.  He
denied  bringing  any  package  to  work  on  the  morning  of  November  22,  1963.  He  stated

260


that  he  was  not  in  the  process  of  fixing  up  his  apartment  and  he  denied  telling  WESLEY
FRAZIER  that  the  purpose  of  his  visit  to  Irving,  Texas,  on  the  night  of  November  21, 1963,
was  to  obtain  some  curtain  rods  from  MRS.  RUTH  PAINE.

OSWALD  stated  that  it  was  not  exactly  true  as  recently  stated  by  him  that  he  rode  a
bus  from  his  place  of  employment  to  his  residence  on  November  22,  1963.  He  stated  ac-
tually he  did  board  a  city  bus  at  his  place  of  employment  but  that  after  about  a  block  or  two,
due  to  traffic  congestion,  he  left  the  bus  and  rode  a  city  cab  to  his  apartment  on  North
Beckley.  He  recalled  that  at  the  time  of  getting  into  the  cab,  some  lady  looked  in  and  asked
the  driver  to  call  her  a  cab.  He  stated  that  he  might  have  made  some  remarks  to  the  cab
driver  merely  for  the  purpose  of  passing  the  time  of  day  at  that  time.  He  recalled  that  his
fare  was  approximately  85  cents.  He  stated  that  after  arriving  at  his  apartment,  he  changed
his  shirt  and  trousers  because  they  were  dirty.  He  described  his  dirty  clothes  as  being  a
reddish  colored,  long  sleeved,  shirt  with  a  button-down  collar  and  gray  colored  trousers.
He  indicated  that  he  had  placed  these  articles  of  clothing  in  the  lower  drawer  of  his  dresser.

OSWALD  stated  that  on  November  22,  1963,  he  had  eaten  lunch  in  the  lunch  room  at
the  Texas  School  Book  Depository,  alone,  but  recalled  possibly  two  Negro  employees  walk-
ing through  the  room  during  this  period.  He  stated  possibly  one  of  these  employees
was  called  "Junior"  and  the  other  was  a  short  individual  whose  name  he  could  not  recall
but  whom  he  would  be  able  to  recognize.  He  stated  that  his  lunch  had  consisted  of  a  cheese
sandwich  and  an  apple  which  he  had  obtained  at  MRS.  RUTH  PAlNE's  residence  in
Irving,  Texas,  upon  his  leaving  for  work  that  morning.

OSWALD  stated  that  MRS.  PAINE  receives  no  pay  for  keeping  his  wife  and  children
at  her  residence.  He  stated  that  their  presence  in  MRS.  PAINE's  residence  is  a  good
arrangement  for  her  because  of  her  language  interest,  mdicating  that  his  wife  speaks  Rus-
sian and  MRS.  PAINE  is  interested  in  the  Russian  language.

OSWALD  denied  having  kept  a  rifle  in  MRS.  PAINE's  garage  at  Irving,  Texas,  but
stated  that  he  did  have  certain  articles  stored  in  her  garage,  consisting  of  two  sea  bags,  a
couple  of  suitcases,  and  several  boxes  of  kitchen  articles  and  also  kept  his  clothes  at  MRS.
PAINE's  residence.  He  stated  that  all  of  the  articles  in  MRS.  PAINE's  garage  had  been
brought  there  about  September,  1963,  from  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.

OSWALD  stated  that  he  had  no  visitors  at  his  apartment  on  North  Beckley.

OSWALD  stated  that  he  has  no  receipts  for  purchase  of  any  guns  and  has  never  ordered
any  guns  and  does  not  own  a  rifle  nor  has  he  ever  possessed  a  rifle.

OSWALD  denied  that  he  is  a  member  of  the  Communist  Party.

OSWALD  stated  that  he  purchased  a  pistol,  which  was  taken  off  him  by  police  officers
November  22,  1963,  about  six  months  ago.  He  declined  to  state  where  he  had  purchased  it.

OSWALD  stated  that  he  arrived  about  July,  1962,  from  USSR  and  was  interviewed  by
the  FBI  at  Fort  Worth,  Texas.  He  stated  that  he  felt  they  overstepped  their  bounds  and  had
used  various  tactics  in  interviewing  him.

He  further  complained  that  on  interview  of  RUTH  PAINE  by  the  FBI  regarding  his
wife,  that  he  felt  that  his  wife  was  intimidated.

OSWALD  stated  that  he  desired  to  contact  Attorney  ABT,  New  York  City,  indicating
that  ABT  was  the  attorney  who  had  defended  the  Smith  Act  case  about  1949-1950.  He
stated  that  he  does  not  know  Attorney  ABT  personally.  Captain  FRITZ  advised  OSWALD
that  arrangements  would  be  made  whereby  he  could  call  Attorney  ABT.

OSWALD  stated  that  prior  to  coming  to  Dallas  from  New  Orleans  he  had  resided  at  a
furnished  apartment  at  4706  Magazine  Street,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.  While  in  New
Orleans,  he  had  been  employed  by  WILLIAM  B.  RILEY  Company,  640  Magazine  Street,
New  Orleans,

OSWALD  stated  that  he  has  nothing  against  President  JOHN  F.  KENNEDY  personally;
however  in  view  of  the  present  charges  against  him,  he  did  not  desire  to  discuss  this  phase
further.

OSWALD  stated  that  he  would  not  agree  to  take  a  polygraph  examination  without  the
advice  of  counsel.  He  added  that  in  the  past  he  has  refused  to  take  polygraph  examinations.

OSWALD  stated  that  he  is  a  member  of  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union  and  added
that  MRS.  RUTH  PAINE  was  also  a  member  of  same.

With  regard  to  Selective  Service  card  in  the  possession  of  OSWALD  bearing  photograph
of  OSWALD  and  the  name  of  ALEK  JAMES  HIDELL,  OSWALD  admitted  that  he
carried  this  Selective  Service  card  but  declined  to  state  that  he  wrote  the  signature  of  ALEK
J.  HIDELL  appearing  on  same.  He  further  declined  to  state  the  purpose  of  carrying  same
or  any  use  he  has  made  of  same.

261


OSWALD  stated  that  an  address  book  in  his  possession  contains  the  names  of  various
Russian  immigrants  residing  in  Dallas,  Texas,  whom  he  has  visited  with,

OSWALD  denied  shooting  President  JOHN  F.  KENNEDY  on  November  22, 1963,  and
added  that  he  did  not  know  that  Governor  JOHN  CONNALLY  had  been  shot  and  denied

any  knowledge  concerning  this  incident.

*****

On  11/23/63  at  DaUas,  Texas. FUe  #  DL  89-43.
By  Special  Agent  JAMES  W.  BOOKHOUT.
Date  dictated:  11/24/63.

This  document  contains  neither  recommendations  nor  conclusions  of  the  FBL  It  is  the
property  of  the  FBI  and  is  loaned  to  your  agency;  it  and  its  contents  are  not  to  be  distributed
outside  your  agency.


FEDERAL  BUREAU  OF  INVESTIGATION

Date:  11/25/63

LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD  was  interviewed  at  the  Homicide  and  Robbery  Bureau,  Dallas
Police  Department,  at  6:35  p.m.,  by  Captain  J.  W.  FRITZ  in  the  presence  of  Special
Agent  JAMES  W.  BOOKHOUT,  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation.  OSWALD  was  advised
of  the  identity  and  official  capacity  of  said  Agent  and  the  fact  that  he  did  not  have  to  make
any  statement,  that  any  statement  he  did  make  could  be  used  in  a  court  of  law  against  him,
and  that  any  statement  made  must  be  free  and  voluntary  and  that  he  had  the  right  to  consult
with  an  attorney.

Captain  J.  W.  FRITZ  exhibited  to  LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD  a  photograph  which  had
been  obtained  by  the  Dallas  Police  Department  in  a  search,  by  search  warrant,  of  the
garage  at  the  residence  of  MRS.  RUTH  PAINE,  located  at  Irving,  Texas,  which  photograph
reflects  OSWALD  holding  a  rifle  and  wearing  a  bolstered  pistol.  OSWALD  was  asked  if
this  was  a  photograph  of  himself.  OSWALD  stated  that  he  would  not  discuss  the  photograph
without  advice  of  an  attorney.  He  stated  that  the  head  of  the  individual  in  the  photograph
could  be  him  but  that  it  was  entirely  possible  that  the  Police  Department  had  superimposed
this  part  of  the  photograph  over  the  body  of  someone  else.  He  pointed  out  that  numerous
news  media  had  snapped  his  photograph  during  the  day  and  the  possibility  existed  that  the
police  had  doctored  up  this  photograph.

OSWALD  denied  that  he  had  purchased  any  rifle  from  Kleins  Store  in  Chicago,  Illinois.

OSWALD  complained  of  a  lineup  wherein  he  had  not  been  granted  a  request  to  put  on  a

jacket  similar  to  those  worn  by  some  of  the  other  individuals  in  the  lineup.

*****

On  1 1  /  23/  63  at  Dallas,  Texas. File  #  89-43.
By  Special  Agent  JAMES  W.  BOOKHOUT.
Date  dictated  11/24/63.

This  document  contains  neither  recommendations  nor  conclusions  of  the  FBI,  It  is  the
property  of  the  FBI  and  is  loaned  toyour  agency;  it  and  its  contents  are  not  to  be  distributed
outside  your  agency.


REPORTS  OF  INSPECTOR  THOMAS  J.  KELLEY,
U.S.  SECRET  SERVICE

FIRST  INTERVIEW  OF
LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD

At  about  10:30  A.M.,  November  23,  1963,  I  attended  my  first  interview  with  Oswald.
Present  during  the  interview  at  the  Homicide  Division,  Dallas  Police  Department,  were
Special  Agent  Jim  Bookhout,  FBI;  Captain  Will  Fritz,  Homicide  Division,  Dallas  Police

262


Department;  U.  S.  Marshal  Robert  Nash;  SA  David  Grant  and  SAIC  Sorrels;  and  Officers
Boyd  and  Hall  of  Captain  Fritz's  detail.  The  interview  was  not  recorded.  Mr.  Sorrels  and
my  presence  was  as  observers,  since  Oswald  was  being  held  for  murder  and  his  custody
and  interrogation  at  that  time  was  the  responsibility  of  the  Dallas  Police  Department.

In  response  to  questions  put  by  Captain  Fritz,  Oswald  said  that  immediately  after  having
left  the  building  where  he  worked,  he  went  by  bus  to  the  theater  where  he  was  arrested;
that  when  he  got  on  the  bus  he  secured  a  transfer  and  thereafter  transferred  to  other  buses
to  get  to  his  destination.  He  denied  that  he  brought  a  package  to  work  on  that  day  and  he
denied  that  he  had  ever  had  any  conversation  about  curtain  rods  with  the  boy  named  Wesley
who  drove  him  to  his  employment.  Fritz  asked  him  if  he  had  ridden  a  taxi  that  day  and
Oswald  then  changed  his  story  and  said  that  when  he  got  on  the  bus  he  found  it  was
going  too  slow  and  after  two  blocks  he  got  off  the  bus  and  took  a  cab  to  his  home;  that  he
passed  the  time  with  the  cab  driver  and  that  the  cab  driver  had  told  him  that  the  President
was  shot.  He  paid  a  cab  fare  of  85^.

In  response  to  questions,  he  stated  that  this  was  the  first  time  he  had  ever  ridden  in  a  cab
since  a  bus  was  always  available.  He  said  he  went  home,  changed  his  trousers  and  shirt,  put
his  shirt  in  a  drawer.  This  was  a  red  shirt,  and  he  put  it  with  his  dirty  clothes.  He  described
the  shirt  as  having  a  button  down  collar  and  of  reddish  color.  The  trousers  were  grey
colored.

He  said  he  ate  his  lunch  with  the  colored  boys  who  worked  with  him.  He  described  one
of  them  as  "Junior",  a  colored  boy,  and  the  other  was  a  little  short  negro  boy.  He  said  his
lunch  consisted  of  cheese,  bread,  fruit,  and  apples,  and  was  the  only  package  he  had  with
him  when  he  went  to  work.

He  stated  that  Mrs.  Paine  practices  Russian  by  having  his  wife  live  with  her.  He  denied
that  he  had  ever  owned  a  rifle.  He  said  he  does  not  know  Mr.  Paine  very  well  but  that  Paine
usually  comes  by  the  place  where  his  wife  was  living  with  Mrs.  Paine  on  Friday  or  Wednes-
day. He  stated  that  Mr.  Paine  has  a  car  and  Mrs.  Paine  has  had  two  cars.  He  said  in  response
to  questions  by  Captain  Fritz  that  his  effects  were  in  Mrs.  Paine's  garage  and  that  they
consisted  of  two  sea  bags  with  some  other  packages  containing  his  personal  belongings  and
that  he  had  brought  those  back  from  New  Orleans  with  him  sometime  in  September.  He
stated  that  his  brother,  Robert,  lived  at  7313  Davenport  Street,  Fort  Worth,  and  that  the
Paines  were  his  closest  friends  in  town.  He  denied  that  he  had  ever  joined  the  Commvmist
party;  that  he  never  had  a  Communist  card.  He  did  belong  to  the  American  Civil  Liberties
Union  and  had  paid  $5  a  year  dues.  He  stated  that  he  had  bought  the  pistol  that  was  found
in  his  possession  when  he  was  arrested  about  seven  months  ago.  He  refused  to  answer
any  questions  concerning  the  pistol  or  a  gun  until  he  talked  to  a  lawyer.

Oswald  stated  that  at  various  other  times  he  had  been  thoroughly  interrogated  by  the
FBI;  that  they  had  used  all  the  usual  interrogation  practices  and  all  their  standard  operating
procedure;  that  he  was  very  familiar  with  interrogation,  and  he  had  no  intention  of  answer-
ing any  questions  concerning  any  shooting;  that  he  knew  he  did  not  have  to  answer  them
and  that  he  would  not  answer  any  questions  until  he  had  been  given  coimsel.  He  stated  that
the  FBI  had  used  their  hard  and  soft  approach  to  him,  they  used  the  buddy  system;  that
he  was  familiar  with  aU  types  of  questioning  and  had  no  intention  of  making  any  statements.
He  said  that  in  the  past  three  weeks  when  the  FBI  had  talked  to  his  wife,  they  were  abusive
and  impolite;  that  they  frightened  his  wife  and  he  considered  their  activities  obnoxious.  He
stated  that  he  wanted  to  contact  a  Mr.  Abt,  a  New  York  lawyer  whom  he  did  not  know  but
who  had  defended  the  Smith  Act  "victims"  in  1949  or  1950  in  connection  with  a  conspiracy
against  the  Government;  that  Abt  would  imderstand  what  this  case  was  all  about  and  that
he  would  give  him  an  excellent  defense.  He  stated  in  returning  a  question  about  his  former
addresses  that  he  lived  at  4907  Magazine  Street  in  New  Orleans  at  one  time  and  worked
for  the  William  Riley  Company;  that  he  was  arrested  in  New  Orleans  for  disturbing  the
peace  and  paid  a  $10  fine  while  he  was  demonstrating  for  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Com-
mittee; that  he  had  a  fight  with  some  anti-Castro  refugees  and  that  they  were  released  while
he  was  fined.

Upon  questionmg  by  Captain  Fritz,  he  said,  "I  have  no  views  on  the  President."  "My
wife  and  I  like  the  President's  family.  They  are  interesting  people.  I  have  my  own  views  on
the  President's  national  policy.  I  have  a  right  to  express  my  views  but  because  of  the  charges
I  do  not  think  I  should  comment  further."  Oswald  said  "I  am  not  a  malcontent;  nothing
irritated  me  about  the  President."  He  said  that  during  1962  he  was  interviewed  by  the  FBI
and  that  he  at  the  time  refused  to  take  a  polygraph  and  that  he  did  not  intend  to  take  a  poly-
graph test  for  the  Dallas  police.  At  this  time  Captain  Fritz  showed  a  Selective  Service  Card

263


that  was  taken  out  of  his  wallet  which  bore  the  name  of  Alex  Hidell.  Oswald  refused  to
discuss  this  after  being  asked  for  an  explanation  of  it,  both  by  Fritz  and  by  James  Bookhout,
the  FBI  agent.  I  asked  him  if  he  viewed  the  parade  and  he  said  he  had  not.  I  then  asked
him  if  he  had  shot  the  President  and  he  said  he  had  not.  I  asked  him  if  he  had  shot  Gover-
nor Connally  and  he  said  he  had  not.  He  did  not  intend  to  answer  further  questions  with-
out counsel  and  that  if  he  could  not  get  Abt,  then  he  would  hope  the  Civil  Liberties  Union
would  give  him  an  attorney  to  represent  him.  At  that  point  Captain  Fritz  terminated  the
interview  at  about  11:30  A.M.,  11-23-63.

(SIGNED)
Thomas  J.  Kelley
Inspector


INTERVIEWS  WITH  LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD  ON  NOVEMBER  23,  1963

At  about  12:35  P.M.,  November  23,  1963,  Lee  Oswald  was  interviewed  in  the  oflBce  of
Captain  Will  Fritz  of  the  Homicide  Division,  Dallas  Police  Department.  Among  those
present  at  this  interview  were  Inspector  Kelley,  Captain  Fritz,  Detectives  Senkel  and
Tiemon  of  the  Homicide  Division  and  SA  James  Bookout,  FBI.  Captain  Fritz  conducted
the  interview  which  was  concerned  mostly  with  Oswald's  places  of  residence  in  Dallas  and
was  an  attempt  to  ascertain  where  the  bulk  of  Oswald's  belongings  were  located  in  Dallas.
As  a  result  of  the  interview,  Oswald  furnished  information  to  Captain  Fritz  that  most  of
his  personal  effects,  including  a  sea  bag,  were  in  the  garage  at  the  address  of  Mrs.  Paine,
2515  West  5th  Street,  Irving,  Texas.

The  interview  was  concluded  about  1:10  A.  M.  and  immediately  thereafter  members
of  the  Homicide  Division  secured  a  search  warrant  and  recovered  Oswald's  effects  from
the  home  of  Mrs.  Paine.  Found  among  the  effects  were  two  different  poses  in  snapshot
type  photographs  taken  of  Oswald  holding  a  rifle  in  one  hand  and  holding  up  a  copy  of  a
paper  called  the  Militant  and  "The  Worker"  in  the  other  hand.  Oswald  was  wearing  a
revolver  in  a  holster  on  his  right  side.  This  photograph  was  enlarged  by  the  Dallas  Police
Laboratories  and  was  used  as  a  basis  of  additional  questioning  of  Oswald  at  approxi-
mately 6:00  P.M.  that  same  evening.

On  November  23, 1963,  at  6:00  P.M.,  in  the  office  of  Captain  Fritz,  Homicide  Division,
Dallas  Police  Department,  I  was  present  at  an  interview  with  Oswald.  Also  present  were
Captain  Fritz,  FBI  Agent  Jim  Bookhoutt,  and  four  officers  from  the  Homicide  Division.
This  interview  was  conducted  with  Oswald  for  the  purpose  of  displaying  to  him  the  blow-
ups of  photographs  showing  him  holding  a  rifle  and  a  pistol  which  were  seized  as  a  result  of
the  search  warrant  for  the  garage  of  Mrs.  Paine  at  2515  West  5th  Street,  Irving,  Texas.
When  the  photographs  were  presented  to  Oswald,  he  sneered  at  them  saying  that  they  were
false  photographs;  that  he  had  been  photographed  a  number  of  times  the  day  before  by  the
police  and  apparently  after  they  photographed  him  they  superimposed  on  the  photographs
a  rifle  and  put  a  gun  in  his  pocket.  He  got  into  a  long  argument  with  Captain  Fritz  about
his  knowledge  of  photography  and  asked  Fritz  a  number  of  times  whether  the  smaller
photograph  was  made  from  the  larger  or  whether  the  larger  photograph  was  made  from
the  smaller.  He  said  at  the  proper  time  he  would  show  that  the  photc^aphs  were  fakes.
Fritz  told  him  that  the  smaller  photograph  was  taken  from  his  effects  at  the  garage.  Oswald
became  arrogant  and  refused  to  answer  any  further  questions  concerning  the  photographs
and  would  not  identify  the  photographs  as  being  a  photograph  of  himself.  Captain  Fritz
displayed  great  patience  and  tenacity  in  attempting  to  secure  from  Oswald  the  location  of
what  apparently  is  the  backyard  of  an  address  at  which  Oswald  formerly  lived,  but  it  was
apparent  that  Oswald,  though  slightly  shaken  by  the  evidence,  had  no  intention  of  furnish-
ing any  information.

The  interview  was  terminated  at  about  7:15  P.M.

(SIGNED)

Thomas  J.  Kelley
Inspector

264


U.  S.  Secret  Service

Chief  November  29,  1963

Inspector  Kelley

Preliminary  Special  Dallas  Report  if  3
Covers  third  interview  with  Oswald  and
circumstances  immediately  following  his  murder

This  interview  started  at  approximately  9 : 30  a.m.  on  Sim.,  Nov.  24,  1963.  The  interview
was  conducted  in  the  office  of  Captain  Will  Fritz  of  the  Homicide  Bureau,  Dallas  Police.
Present  at  the  interview  in  addition  to  Oswald  were  Captain  Fritz,  Postal  Inspector  Holmes,
SAIC  Sorrels,  Inspector  Kelley  and  four  members  of  the  Homicide  Squad.  The  interview
had  just  begun  when  I  arrived  and  Captain  Fritz  was  again  requesting  Oswald  to  identify
the  place  where  the  photograph  of  him  holding  the  gun  was  taken.  Captain  Fritz  indicated
that  it  would  save  the  Police  a  great  deal  of  time  if  he  would  teU  them  where  the  place  was
located.  Oswald  refused  to  discuss  the  matter.  Captain  Fritz  asked,  "Are  you  a  Com-
munist?" Oswald  answered,  "No,  I  am  a  Marxist  but  I  am  not  a  Marxist  Leninist".  Captain
Fritz  asked  him  what  the  difference  was  and  Oswald  said  it  would  take  too  long  to  explain
it  to  him.  Oswald  said  that  he  became  interested  in  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  while
he  was  in  New  Orleans;  that  he  wrote  to  the  Committee's  Headquarters  in  New  York  and
received  some  Committee  literature  and  a  letter  signed  by  Alex  HideU.  He  stated  that  he
began  to  distribute  that  literature  in  New  Orleans  and  it  was  at  that  time  that  he  got  into
an  altercation  with  a  group  and  he  was  arrested.  He  said  his  opinions  concerning  Fair  Play
for  Cuba  are  well  known;  that  he  appeared  on  BiU  Stukey's  television  program  in  New
Orleans  on  a  number  of  occasions  and  was  interviewed  by  the  local  press  often.  He  denies
knowing  or  ever  seeing  Hidell  in  New  Orleans,  said  he  believed  in  all  of  the  tenets  of  the
Fair  Play  for  Cuba  and  the  things  which  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  stood  for,
which  was  free  intercourse  with  Cuba  and  freedom  for  tourists  of  the  both  countries  to
travel  within  each  other's  borders.

Among  other  things,  Oswald  said  that  Cuba  should  have  full  diplomatic  relationship  with
the  United  States.  I  asked  him  if  he  thought  that  the  President's  assassination  would  have
any  effect  on  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee.  He  said  there  would  be  no  change  in  the
attitude  of  the  American  people  toward  Cuba  with  President  Johnson  becoming  President
because  they  both  belonged  to  the  same  political  party  and  the  one  would  foUow  pretty
generally  the  poUcies  of  the  other.  He  stated  that  he  is  an  avid  reader  of  Russian  literature
whether  it  is  communistic  or  not;  that  he  siibscribes  to  'The  Militant",  which,  he  says,  is
the  weekly  of  the  Socialist  party  in  the  United  States  (it  is  a  copy  of  'The  Militant"  that
Oswald  is  shown  holding  in  the  photograph  taken  from  his  effects  at  Irving  Street).  At  tiiat
time  he  asked  me  whether  I  was  an  FBI  Agent  and  I  said  that  I  was  not  that  I  was  a  member
of  the  Secret  Service.  He  said  when  he  was  standing  in  front  of  the  Textbook  Building  and
about  to  leave  it,  a  young  crew-cut  man  rushed  up  to  him  and  said  he  was  from  the  Secret
Service,  showed  a  book  of  identification,  and  asked  him  where  the  phone  was.  Oswald  said
he  pointed  toward  the  pay  phone  in  the  bmlding  and  that  he  saw  the  man  actually  go  to  the
phone  before  he  left,

I  asked  Oswald  whether  as  a  Marxist  he  believed  that  religion  was  an  opiate  of  the  people
and  he  said  very  definitely  so  that  all  organized  religions  tend  to  become  monopolistic  and
are  the  causes  of  a  great  deal  of  class  warfare.  I  asked  him  whether  he  considered  the
CathoUc  Church  to  be  an  enemy  of  the  Communist  philosophy  and  he  said  well,  there  was
no  Catholicism  in  Russia;  that  the  closest  to  it  is  the  Orthodox  Churches  but  he  said  he
would  not  further  discuss  his  opinions  of  religion  since  this  was  an  attempt  to  have  him
say  something  which  could  be  construed  as  being  anti-reUgious  or  anti  Catholic.

Capt.  Fritz  displayed  an  Enco  street  map  of  Dallas  which  had  been  found  among  Os-
wald's effects  at  the  rooming  house.  Oswald  was  asked  whether  the  map  was  his  and
whether  he  had  put  some  marks  on  it.  He  said  it  was  his  and  remarked  "My  God  don't
tell  me  there's  a  mark  near  where  this  thing  happened".  The  mark  w^as  pointed  out  to  him
and  he  said  "What  about  the  other  marks  on  the  map? — I  put  a  number  of  marks  on  it,  I
was  looking  for  work  and  marked  the  places  where  I  went  for  jobs  or  where  I  heard  there
were  jobs".

Since  it  was  obvious  to  Captain  Fritz  that  Oswald  was  not  going  to  be  cooperative,  he
terminated  the  interview  at  that  time.

265


I  approached  Oswald  then  and,  out  of  the  hearing  of  the  others  except  perhaps  one  of
Captain  Fritz's  men,  said  that  as  a  Secret  Service  agent,  we  are  anxious  to  talk  with  him  as
soon  as  he  had  secured  counsel;  that  we  were  responsible  for  the  safety  of  the  President;
that  the  Dallas  Police  had  charged  him  with  the  assassination  of  the  President  but  that  he
had  denied  it;  we  were  therefore  very  anxious  to  talk  with  him  to  make  certain  that  the
correct  story  was  developing  as  it  related  to  the  assassination.  He  said  that  he  would  be
glad  to  discuss  this  proposition  with  his  attorney  and  that  after  he  talked  to  one,  we  could
either  discuss  it  with  him  or  discuss  it  with  his  attorney,  if  the  attorney  thought  it  was  the
wise  thing  to  do,  but  that  at  the  present  time  he  had  nothing  more  to  say  to  me.  Oswald  was
then  handed  some  different  clothing  to  put  on.  The  clothing  included  a  sweater.  Captain
Fritz  made  a  number  of  telephone  calls  to  ascertain  whether  the  preparations  he  had  placed
into  effect  for  transferring  the  prisoner  to  the  County  Jail  were  ready  and  upon  being  so
advised.  Captain  Fritz  and  members  of  the  Detective  Bureau  escorted  Oswald  from  the
Homicide  Office  on  the  third  floor  to  the  basement  where  Oswald  was  shot  by  Jack  Ruby.

On  the  completion  of  the  interview,  SAIC  Sorrels  and  I  proceeded  to  the  office  of  the
Chief  of  Police  on  the  third  floor  and  were  discussing  the  interview  when  we  heard  that
Oswald  had  been  shot.  We  both  ran  down  the  steps  to  the  basement.  I  arrived  in  the  ante-
room where  they  had  dragged  Oswald.  SAIC  Sorrels  located  and  interviewed  Ruby.  Some-
one was  bending  over  Oswald  with  a  stethoscope  and  he  appeared  to  be  unconscious  in  very
serious  condition  at  that  time.  I  asked  Captain  Fritz  what  had  happened  and  he  said  Oswald
had  been  shot  by  one  Jack  "Rubio"  whom  the  police  knew  as  a  tavern  operator.  Shortly
thereafter  a  stretcher  arrived  and  I  accompanied  the  stretcher  to  the  ambulance  which  had
been  hastily  backed  into  the  garage.  I  observed  that  during  the  transfer  that  Oswald  was  un-
conscious; when  the  ambulance  drove  away  from  the  building,  I  attempted  to  board  a
cruiser  that  apparently  was  going  to  follow  the  ambulance  but  I  was  unable  to  get  into  the
car  before  it  pulled  away.  Special  Agents  Warner  and  Patterson  had  heard  of  the  shooting
on  their  radio,  proceeded  to  Parkland  Hospital  where  Oswald  was  being  taken  and  arrived
very  shortly  after  Oswald  had  arrived  at  the  emergency  entrance  and  was  being  taken  into
the  emergency  treatment  room.  One  or  the  other  of  these  agents  was  in  close  proximity  to
Oswald  while  he  was  being  treated.  When  I  arrived  at  the  hospital,  I  rode  up  on  the  elevator
with  Dr.  Shaw  who  had  looked  at  Oswald  as  he  had  come  in  and  was  being  recalled  to  the
operating  room  where  Oswald  had  been  taken.  While  Oswald  was  in  the  operating  room,
no  one  other  than  medical  personnel  was  present  but  a  Dallas  policeman  who  had  ac-
companied Oswald  in  the  ambulance  was  standing  in  the  doorway  of  the  operating  room
in  operating  room  scrub  clothes.  No  other  investigating  personnel  were  in  the  vicinity.  In  the
immediate  vicinity  of  the  detective  was  Special  Agent  Warner.  Oswald  made  no  statements
from  the  time  he  was  shot  until  the  time  of  his  death.  He  was  unconscious  during  the
ambulance  run  to  the  hospital  which  I  verified  through  Detective  Daugherty,  who  ac-
companied him.  He  did  not  regain  consciousness  at  any  time  during  the  treatment  until
he  died.  At  the  time  of  his  death,  myself.  Detective  Daugherty  and  Colonel  Garrison  of
the  Texas  State  Police  were  on  the  fifth  floor  of  the  hospital  arranging  a  security  room
in  which  to  take  Oswald,  in  the  event  he  survived  the  operating  room  treatment.  It  was
never  necessary  to  use  this  room  and  upon  learning  of  his  death,  I  proceeded  to  the  morgue
to  arrange  for  his  family  to  view  the  body.  When  the  family  heard  of  the  death  they  were
in  the  process  of  being  interviewed  by  Special  Agents  Kunkel  and  Howard,  and  requested
to  be  brought  to  the  hospital.  Oswald's  brother,  Robert,  who  had  also  come  to  the  hospital,
was  being  interviewed  by  Special  Agent  Howlett.  Before  the  post  mortem  was  performed,
Oswald's  family,  with  the  exception  of  Robert,  viewed  the  body.  Robert  arrived  too  late
to  view  the  body  before  the  autopsy  had  started  and  was  not  permitted  by  hospital  authori-
ties to  view  the  body.  The  family  was  accompanied  during  the  viewing  by  the  hospital
chaplain.

After  making  arrangements  through  the  chaplain  and  another  clergyman  for  the  burial
of  the  body,  the  family  was  returned  to  a  secluded  spot  under  the  protection  of  Special
Agents  Kunkel  and  Howard,  and  the  Irving  Texas  police.  Precaution  was  taken  to  insure
their  safety  in  view  of  the  excitement  caused  by  the  Idllmg  of  Oswald.  Special  Agents
Howard  and  Kunkel  did  an  excellent  job  in  handling  the  security  of  this  family  detail
and  insuring  their  safety.  Thereafter,  I  was  called  by  SAIC  Bouck  who  advised  me  that  the
President  and  the  Attorney  General  were  concerned  about  the  safety  of  this  family  and
mstructed  that  all  precautions  should  be  taken  to  insure  that  no  harm  befell  them.  SAIC
Bouck  was  advised  that  the  family  was  presently  under  our  protection;  we  would  continue
providing  protection  until  further  notice.

266


Later  that  same  day,  I  was  contacted  by  SA  Robertson  of  the  FBI  who  asked  whether
we  had  someone  with  the  family.  He  was  assured  that  we  had.  He  requested  to  be  advised
where  the  family  had  been  taken.  Since  their  ultimate  destination  was  unknown  to  me  at
the  time,  I  assured  him  that  when  I  learned  of  their  whereabouts  I  would  relay  it  to  him.
He  said  that  they  received  instructions  from  the  Attorney  General  and  President  Johnson
that  precaution  should  be  taken  to  insure  the  family  safety.

At  1 1  pm,  Sunday,  November  24th,  I  was  advised  of  the  location  of  the  family  and  im-
mediately notified  Robertson  and  inquired  whether  they  now  wished  to  take  over  their
protection.  He  said  no  they  had  no  such  instructions,  they  merely  wished  to  be  assured  that
someone  was  looking  out  for  their  safety.  I  assured  them  that  adequate  protection  was  being
provided  and  that  they  were  available  for  interviews  by  the  FBI.  He  stated  that  they  did  not
wish  to  interview  the  family  at  this  time;  that  they  merely  wanted  to  make  sure  they  were
in  safe  hands.  TJK:VS


REPORT  OF  U.S.  POSTAL  INSPECTOR  H.  D.  HOLMES

MEMORANDUM  OF  INTERVIEW
Dallas,  Texas  December  17,  1963

Informal  memorandum  furnished  by  Postal  Inspector  H.  D.  Holmes,  Dallas,  Texas,  of
an  interview  he  took  part  in  with  Lee  H.  Oswald  on  Sunday  morning,  November  24,  1963,
between  the  approximate  hours  of  9:25  a.m.  to  11:10  a.m.  Those  present,  in  addition  to
Inspector  Holmes,  were  Captain  Will  Fritz,  Dallas  Police,  Forrest  V.  Sorrels,  Local  Agent
in  Charge,  Secret  Service,  and  Thomas  J.  Kelly,  Inspector,  Secret  Service.  In  addition,
there  were  three  Detectives  who  were  apparently  assigned  to  guarding  Oswald  as  none  of
them  took  part  in  the  interrogation.

Oswald  at  no  time  appeared  confused  or  in  doubt  as  to  whether  or  not  he  should  answer
a  question.  On  the  contrary,  he  was  quite  alert  and  showed  no  hesitancy  in  answering  those
questions  which  he  wanted  to  answer,  and  was  quite  skillful  in  parrying  those  questions
which  he  did  not  want  to  answer.  I  got  the  impression  that  he  had  disciplined  his  mind  and
reflexes  to  a  state  where  I  personally  doubted  if  he  would  ever  have  confessed.  He  denied,
emphatically,  having  taken  part  in  or  having  had  any  knowledge  of  the  shooting  of  the
policeman  Tippitt  or  of  the  President,  stating  that  so  far  as  he  is  concerned  the  reason  he
was  in  custody  was  because  he  "popped  a  policeman  in  the  nose  in  a  theater  on  Jefferson
Avenue."

P.O.  BOXES — He  was  questioned  separately  about  the  three  boxes  he  had  rented,  and
in  each  instance  his  answers  were  quick,  direct  and  accurate  as  reflected  on  the  box  rental
applications.  He  stated  without  prompting  that  he  had  rented  Box  2915  at  the  Main  Post
Office  for  several  months  prior  to  his  going  to  New  Orleans,  that  this  box  was  rented  in
his  own  name,  Lee  H.  Oswald,  and  that  he  had  taken  out  two  keys  to  the  box,  and  that
when  he  had  closed  the  box,  he  directed  that  his  maU  be  forwarded  to  him  at  his  street
address  in  New  Orleans.

He  stated  that  no  one  received  mail  in  this  box  other  than  himself,  nor  did  he  receive
any  mail  vmder  any  other  name  than  his  own  true  name;  that  no  one  had  access  to  the
box  other  than  himself  nor  did  he  permit  anyone  else  to  use  this  box.  He  stated  it  was
possible  that  on  rare  occasions  he  may  have  handed  one  of  the  keys  to  his  wife  to  go  get
his  maU  but  certainly  nobody  else.  He  denied  emphatically  that  he  ever  ordered  a  rifle
under  his  name  or  any  other  name,  nor  permitted  anyone  else  to  order  a  rifle  to  be  received
in  this  box.  Further,  he  denied  that  he  had  ever  ordered  any  rifle  by  maU  order  or  bought
any  money  order  for  the  purpose  of  paying  for  such  a  rifle.  In  fact,  he  claimed  he  owned
no  rifle  and  had  not  practiced  or  shot  a  rifle  other  than  possibly  a  .22,  small  bore  rifle,
since  his  days  with  the  Marine  Corp.  He  stated  that  "How  could  I  afford  to  order  a  rifle
on  my  salary  of  $1.25  an  hour  when  I  can't  hardly  feed  myself  on  what  I  make."

When  asked  if  he  had  a  post  oflBce  box  in  New  Orleans  he  stated  that  he  did,  for  the
reason  that  he  subscribed  to  several  publications,  at  least  two  of  which  were  published  in
Russia,  one  being  the  hometown  paper  published  in  Minsk  where  he  met  and  married  his
wife,  and  that  he  moved  around  so  much  that  it  was  more  practical  to  simply  rent  post
office  boxes  and  have  his  mail  forwarded  from  one  box  to  the  next  rather  than  going
through  the  process  of  furnishing  changes  of  address  to  the  publishers.  When  asked  if  he

267


permitted  anyone  other  than  himself  to  get  maU  in  box  30061  at  New  Orleans,  he  stated
that  he  did  not.  It  will  be  recalled  that  on  this  box  rent  application  he  showed  that  both
Marina  Oswald  and  A.  J.  Hidell  were  Usted  under  the  caption  "Persons  entitled  to  receive
maU  through  box."  After  denying  that  anyone  else  was  pennitted  to  get  mail  in  the  box,
he  was  reminded  that  this  application  showed  the  name  Marina  Oswald  as  being  entitled
to  receive  mail  in  the  box  and  he  replied  "well  so  what,  she  was  my  wife  and  I  see  nothing
wrong  with  that,  and  it  could  very  well  be  that  I  did  place  her  name  on  the  application."
He  was  then  reminded  that  the  application  also  showed  the  name  A.  J.  Hidell  was  also
entitled  to  receive  mail  in  the  box,  at  which  he  simply  shrugged  his  shoulders  and  stated
"I  don't  recall  anything  about  that."

He  stated  that  when  he  came  back  to  Dallas  and  after  he  had  gone  to  work  for  the
Texas  School  Book  Depository,  he  had  rented  a  box  at  the  nearby  Terminal  Annex
postal  station,  this  being  Box  6225,  and  that  this  box  was  also  rented  in  his  name,  Lee
H.  Oswald.  He  stated  he  had  only  checked  out  one  key  for  this  box,  which  information
was  found  to  be  accurate,  and  this  key  was  found  on  his  person  at  the  time  of  his  arrest.
He  professed  not  to  recall  the  fact  that  he  showed  on  the  box  rental  application  under
name  of  corporation  "Fair  Play  For  Cuba  Committee"  and  "American  Civil  Liberties
Union."  When  asked  as  to  why  he  showed  these  organizations  on  the  application,  he  simply
shrugged  and  said  that  he  didn't  recall  showing  them.  When  asked  if  he  paid  the  box
rental  fee  or  did  the  organizations  pay  it,  he  stated  that  he  paid  it.  In  answer  to  another
question,  he  also  stated  that  no  one  had  any  knowledge  that  he  had  this  box  other  than
himself.

ORGANIZATIONS— MEMBERSHIP  IN— With  respect  to  American  CivU  Liberties
Union  he  was  a  little  evasive  stating  something  to  the  effect  that  he  had  made  some  effort
to  join  but  it  was  never  made  clear  whether  he  had  or  had  not  been  accepted.  He  stated
that  he  first  became  interested  in  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee,  after  he  went  to
New  Orleans,  that  it  started  out  as  being  a  group  of  individuals  who,  like  him,  who
thought  and  had  like  political  opinions.  They  did  decide  to  organize,  and  did  organize
after  a  fashion,  but  denied  that  they  had  any  president  or  any  elected  officers.  He  stated
that  he,  himself,  could  probably  be  considered  the  secretary  since  he  wrote  some  letters
on  their  behalf  and  attempted  to  collect  dues  which,  if  I  recall,  were  $1.00  per  month.
He  also  stated  that  there  was  a  "Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee"  in  New  York  which
was  better  organized.  He  denied  that  he  was  sent  to  Dallas  for  the  purpose  of  organizing
such  a  cell  in  DaUas.

When  asked  if  he  was  a  communist,  he  stated  emphatically  not,  that  he  was  a  Marxist.
Someone  asked  the  difference  and  he  stated  that  a  communist  is  a  Lenin-Marxist,  that
he  himself  was  a  pure  Marxist,  and  when  someone  asked  the  difference,  he  stated  that  it  was
a  long  story  and  if  they  didn't  know,  it  would  take  too  long  to  teU  them.  He  stated  further
that  he  had  read  about  everything  written  by  or  about  Karl  Marx.

When  asked  as  to  his  religion,  he  stated  that  Karl  Marx  was  his  religion,  and  in
response  to  further  questioning  he  stated  that  some  people  may  find  the  Bible  interesting
reading,  but  it  was  not  for  him,  stating  further  that  even  as  a  philosophy  there  was  not
much  to  the  Bible.

MARINE  CORP  SERVICE— Captain  Fritz  made  some  mention  of  his  dishonorable
discharge  from  the  Marine  Corp  at  which  point  he  bristled  noticeably,  stating  that  he
had  been  discharged  with  an  "honorable"  discharge  and  that  this  was  later  changed  due
to  his  having  attempted  to  denounce  his  American  Citizenship  while  he  was  living  in
Russia.  He  stated  further  that  since  his  change  of  citizenship  did  not  come  to  pass,  he  had
written  a  letter  to  Mr.  Connally,  then  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  and  after  considerable
delay,  received  a  very  respectful  reply  wherein  Connally  stated  he  had  resigned  to  run
for  Governor  of  Texas,  and  that  his  letter  was  being  referred  to  the  new  Secretary,  a  Mr.
Cork,  Kurth,  or  something  like  that.  He  showed  no  particular  animosity  toward  Mr.
Connally  while  discussing  this  feature.

MAP — Captain  Fritz  advised  him  that  among  his  effects  in  his  room,  there  was  found  a
map  of  the  City  of  Dallas  that  had  some  marks  on  it  and  asked  him  to  explain  this  map.
Oswald  said  he  presumed  he  had  reference  to  an  old  City  map  which  he  had  on  which
he  had  made  some  X's  denoting  location  of  firms  that  had  advertised  job  vacancies.  He
stated  that  he  had  no  transportation  and  either  walked  or  rode  a  bus  and  that  as  he  was
constantly  looking  for  work,  in  fact  had  registered  for  employment  at  the  Texas  Employ-
ment Bureau,  and  that  as  he  would  receive  leads  either  from  newspaper  ads  or  from  the
Bureau  or  from  neighbors,  he  would  chart  these  places  on  the  map  to  save  time  in  his

268


traveling.  He  said  to  the  best  of  his  recollection,  most  of  them  were  out  Industrial,  pre-
sumably meaning  Industrial  Blvd.  When  asked  as  to  why  the  X  at  the  location  of  the
Texas  School  Depository  at  Ebn  and  Houston,  he  stated  that  "Well,  I  interviewed  there
for  a  job,  in  fact,  got  the  job,  therefore  the  X."

When  asked  as  to  how  he  learned  about  this  vacancy,  he  stated  that  "Oh,  it  was  general
information  in  the  neighborhood,  I  don't  recall  just  who  told  me  about  it,  but  I  learned
it  from  people  in  Mrs.  Paynes'  neighborhood"  and  that  all  the  people  around  there  were
looking  out  for  possible  employment  for  him.

ACTIVITY  JUST  PRIOR  TO  AND  IMMEDIATELY  FOLLOWING  ASSASSINA-
TION ATTEMPT — To  an  inquiry  as  to  why  he  went  to  visit  his  wife  on  Thursday  night,
November  21,  whereas  he  normally  visited  her  over  the  weekend,  he  stated  that  on
this  particular  weekend  he  had  learned  that  his  wife  and  Mrs.  Payne  were  giving  a  party
for  the  children  and  that  they  were  having  in  a  "houseful"  of  neighborhood  children
and  that  he  just  didn't  want  to  be  around  at  such  a  tune.  Therefore,  he  made  his  weekly
visit  on  Thursday  night.

When  asked  if  he  didn't  bring  a  sack  with  him  the  next  morning  to  work,  he  stated
that  he  did,  and  when  asked  as  to  the  contents  of  the  sack,  he  stated  that  it  contained
his  lunch.  Then,  when  asked  as  to  the  size  or  shape  of  the  sack,  he  said  "Oh,  I  don't
recall,  it  may  have  a  small  sack  or  a  large  sack,  you  don't  always  find  one  that  just
fits  your  sandwiches."  When  asked  as  to  where  he  placed  the  sack  when  he  got  in  the
car,  he  said  in  his  lap,  or  possibly  the  front  seat  beside  him,  as  he  always  did  because
he  didn't  want  to  get  it  crushed.  He  denied  that  he  placed  any  package  in  the  back  seat
When  advised  that  the  driver  stated  that  he  had  brought  out  a  long  parcel  and  placed
it  in  the  back  seat,  he  stated  "Oh,  he  must  be  mistaken  or  else  thinking  about  some
other  time  when  he  picked  me  up."

When  asked  as  to  his  whereabouts  at  the  time  of  the  shooting,  he  stated  that  when
limch  time  came,  and  he  didn't  say  which  floor  he  was  on,  he  said  one  of  the  Negro
employees  invited  him  to  eat  lunch  with  him  and  he  stated  "You  go  on  down  and  send
the  elevator  back  up  and  I  will  join  you  in  a  few  minutes."  Before  he  could  finish
whatever  he  was  doing,  he  stated,  the  commotion  surrounding  the  assassination  took
place  and  when  he  went  down  stairs,  a  policeman  questioned  him  as  to  his  identification
and  his  boss  stated  that  "he  is  one  of  our  employees"  whereupon  the  policeman  had  him
step  aside  momentarily.  Following  this,  he  simply  walked  out  the  front  door  of  the
building.  I  don't  recall  that  anyone  asked  why  he  left  or  where  or  how  he  went.  I  just
presumed  that  this  had  been  covered  in  an  earlier  questioning.

A.  J.  HIDELL  IDENTIFICATION  CARD— Captain  Fritz  asked  him  if  he  knew

anyone  by  the  name  of  A.  J.  Hidell  and  he  denied  that  he  did.  When  asked  if  he  had

ever  used  this  name  as  an  alias,  he  also  made  a  denial.  In  fact,  he  stated  that  he  had

never  used  the  name,  didn't  know  anyone  by  this  name,  and  never  had  heard  of  the

name  before.  Captain  Fritz  then  asked  him  about  the  I.D.  card  he  had  in  his  pocket

bearing  such  a  name  and  he  flared  up  and  stated  "I've  told  you  all  I'm  going  to  about

that  card.  You  took  notes,  just  read  them  for  yourself,  if  you  want  to  refresh  your

memory."  He  told  Captain  Fritz  that  "You  have  the  card.  Now  you  know  as  much

about  it  as  I  do."

* * * * *

About  11:00  a.m.  or  a  few  minutes  thereafter,  someone  handed  through  the  door
several  hangers  on  which  there  were  some  trousers,  shirts,  and  a  couple  of  sweaters.
When  asked  if  he  wanted  to  change  any  of  his  clothes  before  being  transferred  to  the
County  jail,  he  said  "Just  give  me  one  of  those  sweaters."  He  didn't  like  the  one  they
handed  him  and  insisted  on  putting  on  a  black  slip-over  sweater  that  had  some  jagged
holes  in  it  near  the  front  of  the  right  shoulder.  One  cuff  was  released  whUe  he  slipped  this
over  the  head,  following  which  he  was  again  cuffed.  During  this  change  of  clothing.
Chief  of  Police  Curry  came  into  the  room  and  discussed  something  in  an  inaudible
imdertone  with  Captain  Fritz,  apparently  for  the  purpose  of  not  letting  Oswald  hear
what  was  being  said.  I  have  no  idea  what  this  conversation  was,  but  just  presume  they
were  discussing  the  transfer  of  the  prisoner.  I  did  not  go  downstairs  to  witness  the  further
transfer  of  the  prisoner.

(Signed)
H.  D.  Holmes
Postal  Inspector
Dallas  22,  Texas

269


Appendix  XII
SPECULATIONS  AND  RUMORS


Myths  have  traditionally  surrounded  the
dramatic  assassinations  of  history.  The  rumors
and  theories  about  the  assassination  of  Abra-
ham Lincoln  that  are  still  being  publicized
were  for  the  most  part  first  bruited  within
months  of  his  death.  Wherever  there  is  any
element  of  mystery  in  such  dramatic  events
misconceptions  often  result  from  sensational
speculations.

Lacking  the  testimony  of  Lee  Harvey  Os-
wald, it  has  been  necessary  to  reconstruct
painstakingly  all  of  the  facts  that  led  the  Coni-
mission  to  the  conclusion  that  Oswald  assassi-
nated President  Kennedy,  acting  alone  and
without  advice  or  assistance.  The  Commission
has  foimd  no  credible  evidence  that  he  was  a
member  of  a  foreign  or  domestic  conspiracy  of
any  kind.  Nor  was  there  any  evidence  that  he
was  involved  with  any  criminal  or  imderworld
elements  or  that  he  had  any  association  with
his  slayer,  Jack  Ruby,  except  as  his  victim.  The
evidence  on  these  issues  has  been  set  forth  in
great  detail  in  this  report.

In  addition  the  Commission  has  inquired
into  the  various  hypotheses,  rumors,  and  specu-
lations that  have  arisen  from  the  tragic  devel-
opments of  November  22-24,  1963.  It  is  rec-
ognized that  the  public  judgment  of  these
events  has  been  influenced,  at  least  to  some  ex-
tent, by  these  conjectures.

Many  questions  have  been  raised  about  the
facts  out  of  genuine  puzzlement  or  because  of
misinformation  which  attended  some  of  the
early  reporting  of  the  fast-crowding  events  of
these  3  days.  Most  of  the  speculation  and  at-
tempted reconstruction  of  these  events  by  the
public  centered  on  these  basic  questions:  Was
Lee  Harvey  Oswald  really  the  assassin  of  the
President;  why  did  he  do  it;  did  he  have  any
accomplices;  and  why  did  Ruby  shoot  Oswald?
Many  of  the  theories  and  hypotheses  advanced
have  rested  on  premises  which  the  Commission
feels  deserve  critical  examination.

Many  people  who  witnessed  the  assassination
and  the  killing  of  Oswald  or  were  present  in
the  area  were  a  major  source  of  diverse  and
often  contradictory  information.  As  is  easily
understood  vmder  such  circumstances,  all  of  the
witnesses  did  not  see  and  hear  the  same  thing
or  interpret  what  they  saw  and  heard  the  same
way  and  many  changed  their  stories  as  they
repeated  them.  Moreover,  they  were  inter-
viewed at  different  times  after  the  event  by
different  people  and  often  under  circumstances
which  made  accurate  reporting  extremely  diflS-
cult.

Even  the  occupants  of  the  cars  in  the  Presi-
dential motorcade  were  not  entirely  in  agree-
ment in  their  accounts  because  they,  too,  saw
and  heard  what  happened  from  different  posi-
tions. Moreover,  those  closest  to  the  assassina-


tion were  subjected  to  a  physical  and  emotional
strain  that  tended  to  affect  their  recollections
of  what  they  thought  they  saw  or  heard.  Conse-
quently, the  presentation  of  the  news  from
Dallas  included  much  misinformation.  This,  to
some  extent,  was  imavoidable,  but  the  wide-
spread and  repetitive  dissemination  of  every
scrap  of  information  about  the  President's  as-
sassination and  its  aftermath  has  helped  to
build  up  a  large  number  of  erroneous  conclu-
sions. The  manner  in  which  local  authorities
released  information  about  the  investigation,
sometimes  before  it  could  be  verified  in  all  de-
tail, has  further  contributed  to  the  fund  of  ill-
foimded  theories.  Typographical  mistakes  in
the  press  and  failiu-e  to  transcribe  sound  accu-
rately from  tapes  resulted  in  errors,  some  of
which  have  remained  uncorrected  in  print  at
the  time  of  the  publication  of  this  report.

Much  of  the  speculation  that  has  persisted  in
one  form  or  another  since  November  22-24
came  from  people  who  usually  spoke  in  good
faith.  Some  of  the  errors  have  resulted  simply
from  a  lack  of  complete  knowledge  at  the
time  of  the  event.  In  this  category  are  the
statements  attributed  to  doctors  at  Parkland
Memorial  Hospital  who  attended  the  dying
President  and  described  his  wounds  to  the
press  afterward.  It  remained  for  the  autopsy  in
Washington,  completed  early  the  next  morning,
to  ascertain  the  full  facts  concerning  the
wounds.  The  correction  of  earlier  assertions  of
fact  on  the  basis  of  later  and  fuller  analysis  or
investigation  is  a  normal  part  of  the  process  of
accumulation  of  evidence.  But  it  is  not  often
that  the  process  is  conducted  in  such  an  intense
glare  of  worldwide  publicity,  and  later  correc-
tions have  difficulty  overtaking  the  original
sensational  reports.

There  is  still  another  category'  of  speculation
and  rumor  that  complicated  and  broadened  the
work  of  the  Commission.  Numerous  people
claimed  to  have  seen  Oswald  or  Ruby  at  vari-
ous times  and  places  in  the  United  States  or
abroad.  Others  insisted  that  during  the  days
following  the  assassination,  they  had  detected
significant  actions  on  television  that  were  wit-
nessed by  no  one  else.  Still  others  assumed
from  a  widely  published  picture  that  Oswald
was  standing  on  the  steps  of  the  entrance  to
the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  at  the  time
the  President  was  shot.  Throughout  the  country
people  reported  overheard  remarks,  conversa-
tions, threats,  prophesies,  and  opinions  that
seemed  to  them  to  have  a  possible  bearing  on
the  assassination.  More  than  a  few  informants
initially  told  their  speculations  or  professed
firsthand  information  to  newspaper  and  tele-
vision reporters.  Later,  many  of  them  changed
or  retracted  their  stories  in  teUing  them  to
official  investigators.


270


The  U.S.  investigative  agencies  expended
much  valuable  time  and  effort  inquiring  into
these  leads.  Investigations  of  a  vast  number  of
rumors  and  speculations  reached  into  almost
every  part  of  the  United  States  and  to  most  of
the  other  continents  of  the  world.

The  Commission's  work  was  also  handi-
capped by  those  witnesses  and  other  persons
connected  with  the  investigation  who  sold  for
publication  evidence  pertinent  to  the  investiga-
tion. These  persons  sold  pictures  and  docu-
ments and  even  recollections,  sometimes  before
the  Commission  had  an  opportunity  to  receive
their  evidence.  Some  of  the  evidence  thus  pub-
lished was  changed  from  its  original  form  and
gave  misleading  impressions  to  the  public.  The
piecemeal  release  of  this  evidence,  sometimes
in  distorted  or  exaggerated  form,  and  often  out
of  context,  provided  the  basis  for  new  specula-
tions and  rumors  or  served  to  reinforce  already
current  ones.  The  practice  was  frequently
harmful  to  the  work  of  the  Commission  and  a
disservice  to  the  public.

This  appendix  is  intended  to  clarify  the  most
widespread  factual  misunderstandings.  False  or
inaccurate  speculations  concerning  the  assassi-
nation and  related  events  are  set  forth  below
together  with  brief  summary  statements  of
what  the  Commission  has  found  to  be  the  true
facts.  The  citation  following  each  Conmiission
finding  is  either  to  that  portion  of  the  report
in  which  the  subject  is  discussed  more  fully,  to
the  evidence  in  the  record  supporting  the  find-
ing, or  to  both.  For  complete  answers  to  these
speculations,  the  sources  cited  in  the  footnotes
should  be  consulted.  The  speculations  are  con-
sidered under  the  following  headings:

1.  The  source  of  the  shots.

2.  The  identity  of  the  assassin.

3.  Oswald's  movements  between  12:33  and

1:15  p.m.  on  November  22,  1963.

4.  The  murder  of  Patrolman  Tippit.

5.  Oswald  after  his  arrest.

6.  Oswald  in  the  Soviet  Union.

7.  Oswald's  trip  to  Mexico  City.

8.  Oswald  and  U.S.  Government  agencies.

9.  Conspiratorial  relationships.
10.  Miscellaneous  charges.


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  SHOTS

There  have  been  speculations  that  some  or
all  of  the  shots  aimed  at  President  Kennedy
and  Governor  Connally  came  from  the  railroad
overpass  as  the  Presidential  automobile  ap-
proached it,  or  from  somewhere  other  than  the
Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building.  Re-
lated speculations  maintain  that  the  shots  came
from  both  the  railroad  overpass  and  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  Building.  These  are
supported  by  a  number  of  assertions  that  have
been  carefully  examined  by  the  Commission  in
the  course  of  its  investigation  and  rejected  as


being  without  foundation.  They  are  set  forth
below,  together  with  the  results  of  the  Com-
mission's investigation.

Speculation. — The  shots  that  killed  the  Presi-
dent came  from  the  railroad  overpass  above
the  triple  underpass.

Commission  finding. — The  shots  that  entered
the  neck  and  head  of  the  President  and
wounded  Governor  Connally  came  from  be-
hind and  above.  There  is  no  evidence  that  any
shots  were  fired  at  the  President  from  any-
where other  than  the  Texas  School  Book  De-
pository Building.

Speculation. — The  railroad  overpass  was  left
unguarded  on  November  22.

Commission  finding. — On  November  22  the
railroad  overpass  was  guarded  by  two  Dallas
policemen.  Patrolmen  J.  W.  Foster  and  J.  C.
White,  who  have  testified  that  they  permitted
only  railroad  personnel  on  the  overpass.

Speculation. — There  are  witnesses  who  al-
leged that  the  shots  came  from  the  overpass.

Commission  finding. — The  Commission  does
not  have  knowledge  of  any  witnesses  who  saw
shots  fired  from  the  overpass.  Statements  or
depositions  from  the  2  policemen  and  13  rail-
road employees  who  were  on  the  overpass  all
affirm  that  no  shots  were  fired  from  the  over-
pass. Most  of  these  witnesses  who  discussed  the
source  of  the  shots  stated  that  they  came  from
the  direction  of  Elm  and  Houston  Streets,

Speculation. — A  rifle  cartridge  was  recovered
on  the  overpass.

Commission  finding. — No  cartridge  of  any
kind  was  found  on  the  overpass  nor  has  any
witness  come  forward  to  claim  having  found
one.

Speculation. — A  witness  to  the  assassination
said  that  she  saw  a  man  run  behind  the  con-
crete wall  of  the  overpass  and  disappear.

Commission  finding. — Mrs.  Jean  L.  HUl
stated  that  after  the  firing  stopped  she  saw  a
white  man  wearing  a  brown  overcoat  and  a  hat
running  west  away  from  the  Depository  Building
in  the  direction  of  the  railroad  tracks.  There
are  no  other  witnesses  who  claim  to  have  seen
a  man  running  toward  the  railroad  tracks.  Ex-
amination of  all  available  films  of  the  area  fol-
lowing the  shooting,  reexamination  of  inter-
views with  individuals  in  the  vicinity  of  the
shooting,  and  interviews  with  members  of  the
Dallas  Police  Department  and  the  Dallas
County  sheriff's  office  failed  to  corroborate
Mrs.  Hill's  recollection  or  to  reveal  the  identity
of  the  man  described  by  Mrs.  Hill.

Speculation. — Immediately  after  the  shooting
a  motorcycle  policeman  was  seen  racing  up  the
grassy  embankment  to  the  right  of  the  shooting
scene  pursuing  a  couple  seeking  to  flee  from
the  overpass.

Commission  finding. — There  are  no  wit-
nesses who  have  ever  stated  this  and  there  is  no
evidence  to  support  the  claim.  A  motorcycle
policeman,  Clyde  A.  Haygood,  dismounted  in
the  street  and  ran  up  the  incline.  He  stated  that


271


he  saw  no  one  running  from  the  railroad  yards
adjacent  to  the  overpass.  Subsequently,  at
12:37  p.m.,  Haygood  reported  that  the  shots
had  come  from  the  Texas  School  Book  Deposi-
tory Building.

Speculation. — More  than  three  shots,  per-
haps as  many  as  five  or  six,  were  fired  at  the
President  and  Governor  Connally.

Commission  finding. — The  weight  of  the  evi-
dence indicates  that  three  shots  were  fired,  of
which  two  struck  President  Kennedy.  There  is
persuasive  evidence  from  the  experts  that  one
of  these  two  bullets  also  struck  Governor  Con-
nally. Some  witnesses  claimed  that  they  heard
more  than  three  shots  but,  as  fully  described  in
chapter  III,  the  great  majority  heard  only  three
shots.

Speculation. — At  least  four  or  five  bullets
have  been  foimd.

Commission  finding. — ^After  the  assassina-
tion, metal  remains  of  bullets  were  recovered.
These  included  an  almost  whole  bullet  of  158.6
grains,  fragments  weighing  44.6  grains  and
21.0  grains,  and  other  fragments  too  small  to
be  identified.  These  metal  remains  indicate  that
at  least  two  shots  were  fired.  The  Commission
believes  that  three  shots  were  fired.

Speculation. — A  bullet  was  found  on  the
stretcher  used  for  President  Keimedy  at  Park-
land Hospital.

Commission  finding. — TSio  bullet  was  found
on  the  stretcher  used  by  President  Kennedy.
An  almost  whole  bullet  was  found  when  it
roUed  off  the  stretcher  used  by  Governor
Connally.

Speculation. — A  bullet  was  found  in  the
grass  near  the  scene  of  the  assassination  shortly
afterward  by  a  deputy  sheriff  of  Dallas  County,
E.  R.  Walthers.

Commission  finding. — Walthers  has  denied
that  he  found  a  bullet  at  any  time  or  that  he
told  anyone  that  he  had  found  one.  With
another  deputy  sheriff  he  made  a  diligent
search  for  such  a  bullet  2  or  3  days  after  the
assassination.

Speculation. — ^The  Presidential  car  stopped
momentarily  or  almost  came  to  a  complete  halt
after  the  first  shot.  This  is  evidence  that  the
driver  had  the  impression  that  the  first  shot
came  from  the  front  and  therefore  hesitated  to
drive  closer  to  the  overpass.

Commission  finding. — ^The  Presidential  car
did  not  stop  or  almost  come  to  a  complete  halt
after  the  firing  of  the  first  shot  or  any  other
shots.  The  driver.  Special  Agent  William  R.
Greer,  has  testified  that  he  accelerated  the  car
after  what  was  probably  the  second  shot.  Mo-
tion pictures  of  the  scene  show  that  the  car
slowed  down  momentarily  after  the  shot  that
struck  the  President  in  the  head  and  then
speeded  up  rapidly.

Speculation. — The  Presidential  car  had  a
small  round  bullet  hole  in  the  front  windshield.
This  is  evidence  that  a  shot  or  shots  were  fired
at  the  President  from  the  front  of  the  car.


Commission  finding. — ^The  windshield  was
not  penetrated  by  any  bullet.  A  small  residue
of  lead  was  found  on  the  inside  surface  of  the
windshield;  on  the  outside  of  the  windshield
was  a  very  small  pattern  of  cracks  immediately
in  front  of  the  lead  residue  on  the  inside.  The
bullet  from  which  this  lead  residue  came  was
probably  one  of  those  that  struck  the  President
and  therefore  came  from  overhead  and  to  the
rear.  Experts  established  that  the  abrasion  in
the  windshield  came  from  impact  on  the  inside
of  the  glass.

Speculation. — The  throat  woxmd  sustained
by  the  President  was  the  result  of  a  shot  fired
from  the  front  according  to  doctors  at  Park-
land Hospital.

Commission  finding. — Doctors  at  Parkland
Hospital  originally  believed  that  the  throat
wound  could  have  been  either  an  entry  or  exit
wound,  but  they  made  no  examination  to  de-
termine entry  and  exit  wounds.  Subsequently,
when  the  evidence  of  the  autopsy  became
available,  the  doctors  at  Parkland  agreed  that
it  was  an  exit  wound.

Speculation. — It  is  inconceivable  that  the
doctors  at  Parkland  Hospital  did  not  turn  the
President  over  on  his  face  and  notice  the  bullet
hole  in  the  back  of  his  neck.

Commission  finding. — Doctors  at  Parkland
Hospital  have  testified  that  the  President  re-
mained on  his  back  while  he  was  at  Parkland
Hospital  for  treatment  and  that  they  did  not
turn  him  over  at  any  time;  they  were  busy  try-
ing to  save  his  life.  Consequently,  they  were
never  aware  of  the  hole  in  the  back  of  his  neck
imtil  they  were  notified  of  it  later.

Speculation. — The  first  shot  struck  the  Presi-
dent in  the  throat  as  the  car  was  proceeding
along  Houston  Street  toward  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository.  The  car  then  made  a  left
turn  on  to  Elm  Street  and  proceeded  for  some
distance  before  additional  shots  were  fired  at
the  President.

Commission  finding. — Before  the  autopsy
findings  made  it  clear  that  the  shots  were  fired
from  the  rear,  there  was  speculation  that  the
first  shot  may  have  been  fired  before  the  Presi-
dential car  turned  on  to  Elm  Street.  As  this
report  demonstrates,  all  of  the  shots  that  struck
the  President  were  fired  from  the  rear  and  in  a
time  period  inconsistent  with  the  theory  that
the  first  shot  struck  him  while  his  car  was
coming  down  Houston  Street.  Motion  pictures
taken  at  the  time  show  that  the  first  shot  struck
the  President  after  the  car  had  turned  onto  Elm
Street  and  was  proceeding  away  from  the
Depository.


THE  ASSASSIN

Speculations  tending  to  support  the  theory
that  Oswald  could  not  have  assassinated  Presi-
dent Kennedy  are  based  on  a  wide  variety  of
assertions. Among  these  are  statements that


272


Oswald  could  not  have  been  acquainted  with
the  motorcade  route  before  he  came  to  work
on  November  22,  that  he  may  well  have  car-
ried curtain  rods  rather  than  a  rifle  in  a  brown
paper  package  he  brought  with  him,  that  there
may  have  been  other  people  in  the  building
who  could  have  fired  the  rifle,  that  Oswald
could  not  have  fired  the  shots  in  the  time  avail-
able to  him,  that  he  was  not  a  good  enough
marksman  to  have  scored  the  hits  with  the
rifle,  that  there  were  other  people  in  the  lunch-
room of  the  Depository  Building  when  he  was
confronted  by  Patrolman  M.  L.  Baker,  and
that  there  are  no  eyewitnesses  who  could  iden-
tify Oswald  as  having  been  in  the  window.
Each  of  these  speculations  is  dealt  with  below
in  the  light  of  the  testimony  and  evidence  con-
sidered by  the  Commission.

Speculation. — Oswald  could  not  have  known
the  motorcade  route  before  he  arrived  at  work
on  November  22.

Commission  finding. — The  motorcade  route
was  published  in  both  Dallas  papers  on  No-
vember 19  and  was  therefore  available  at  least
72  hours  before  Oswald  reported  for  work  on
November  22.

Speculation. — The  route  as  shown  in  the
newspaper  took  the  motorcade  through  the
Triple  Underpass  via  Main  Street,  a  block
away  from  the  Depository.  Therefore,  Oswald
could  not  have  known  that  the  motorcade
would  pass  directly  by  the  Texas  School  Book
Depository  Building.

Commission  finding. — ^The  motorcade  route
as  published  showed  the  motorcade  turning
right  off  Main  Street  onto  Houston  for  one
block  and  then  left  on  Elm  to  the  access  road
to  the  Stemmons  Freeway.  This  route  was
clearly  indicated  in  published  descriptions  and
maps  of  the  motorcade  route.  There  was  no
mention  of  continuing  on  Main  Street  through
the  Triple  Underpass.

Speculation. — ^The  motorcade  route  was
changed  on  November  22  after  the  map  had
been  printed.  The  motorcade  was  shifted  from
Main  Street  over  to  Elm  Street  to  bring  it  by
the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building.

Commission  finding. — ^The  motorcade  route
was  decided  upon  on  November  18  and  pub-
lished in  the  Dallas  newspapers  on  Novem-
ber 19.  It  was  not  changed  in  any  way  there-
after. The  route  called  for  the  motorcade  to
turn  off  Main  Street  at  Houston,  go  up  to  Elm,
and  then  turn  left  on  Elm  Street.

Speculation. — ^The  normal  and  logical  route
woiild  have  been  straight  down  Main  Street
through  the  Triple  Underpass  to  the  Stemmons
Freeway.  It  is  possible  to  drive  from  Main  onto
the  access  road  to  the  Stemmons  Freeway  from
a  point  beyond  the  underpass.

Commission  finding. — ^The  normal,  direct,
and  only  permissible  route  to  the  Stenmions
Freeway  from  Main  Street  is  via  Houston  and
Elm  Streets.  Any  attempt  to  turn  onto  the  ac-
cess road  to  the  Stemmons  Freeway  from  Main


Street  beyond  the  Triple  Underpass  would
have  been  extremely  difficult  because  of  a  con-
crete strip  dividing  Elm  and  Main  Streets.  Such
an  attempt  would  have  required  making  an
S-turn  beyond  the  strip  at  a  very  tight  angle,
thereby  slowing  the  Presidential  car  almost  to
a  stop.

Speculation. — Oswald  may  well  have  carried
curtain  rods  to  work  on  November  22  in  the
brown  paper  package  he  was  observed  to
bring  into  the  building  because  he  lived  in  a
room  where  he  needed  them.

Commission  finding. — According  to  Oswald's
landlady  at  1026  North  Beckley  Avenue,  Mrs.
A.  C.  Johnson,  the  room  had  Venetian  blinds,
curtain  rods,  and  curtains  while  Oswald  was
living  there.  The  curtain  rods  in  the  Paine
garage  that  belonged  to  Mrs.  Paine  were  still
there  after  Oswald  went  to  work  on  Novem-
ber 22.  Mrs.  Paine  and  Marina  Oswald  testified
that  Oswald  had  not  spoken  to  them  about
curtain  rods.  After  the  assassination  the  empty
package  was  foimd  near  the  window  from
which  the  shots  were  fired,  but  no  curtain  rods
were  foimd.

Speculation. — Oswald  spent  the  morning  of
November  22  in  the  company  of  other  workers
in  the  building  and  remained  with  them  imtil
they  went  downstairs  to  watch  the  President  go
by,  no  later  probably  than  12:15.

Commission  finding. — Oswald  did  not  spend
the  morning  in  the  company  of  other  workers
in  the  building,  and  before  the  assassination  he
was  last  seen  in  the  building  on  the  sixth  floor
at  about  1 1 :55  a.m.  by  Charles  Givens,  another
employee.

Speculation. — It  is  probable  that  the  chicken
lunch,  remains  of  which  were  found  on  the
sixth  floor,  was  eaten  by  an  accomplice  of
Oswald  who  had  hidden  on  the  sixth  floor
overnight.

Commission  finding. — ^The  chicken  lunch
had  been  eaten  shortly  after  noon  on  Novem-
ber 22  by  Bonnie  Ray  Williams,  an  employee
of  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository,  who
after  eating  his  lunch  went  to  the  fifth  floor
where  he  was  when  the  shots  were  fired.  Os-
wald did  not  eat  the  chicken  limch,  nor  did  he
drink  from  the  soft  drink  bottle  foimd  near  the
chicken  lunch.

Speculation. — Laboratory  tests  showed  re-
mains of  the  chicken  lunch  found  on  the  sixth
floor  were  2  days  old.

Commission  finding. — ^The  chicken  lunch  re-
mains had  been  left  there  shortly  after  noon
on  November  22  by  Bonnie  Ray  Williams.

Speculation. — An  amateur  8 -millimeter  pho-
tograph taken  at  12:20  p.m.,  10  minutes  before
the  assassination  of  President  Kennedy,  showed
two  silhouettes  at  the  sixth-floor  window  of  the
Depository.

Commission  finding. — A  film  taken  by  an
amateur  photographer,  Robert  J.  E.  Hughes,
just  before  the  assassination,  shows  a  shadow
in  the  southeast  comer  window  of  the  sixth


273


floor.  This  has  been  determined  after  examina-
tion by  the  FBI  and  the  U.S.  Navy  Photo-
graphic Interpretation  Center  to  be  the  shadow
from  the  cartons  near  the  window.

Speculation. — A  picture  published  widely  in
newspapers  and  magazines  after  the  assassina-
tion showed  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  standing  on
the  front  steps  of  the  Texas  School  Book  De-
pository Building  shortly  before  the  President's
motorcade  passed  by.

Commission  finding. — The  man  on  the  front
steps  of  the  building,  thought  or  alleged  by
some  to  be  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  is  actually
Billy  Lovelady,  an  employee  of  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository,  who  somewhat  re-
sembles Oswald.  Lovelady  has  identified  him-
self in  the  picture,  and  other  employees  of  the
Depository  standing  with  him,  as  shown  in  the
picture,  have  verified  that  he  was  the  man  in
the  picture  and  that  Oswald  was  not  there.

Speculation. — The  post  office  box  in  Dallas
to  which  Oswald  had  the  rifle  mailed  was  kept
under  both  his  name  and  that  of  A.  Hidell.

Commission  finding. — It  is  not  known
whether  Oswald's  application  listed  the  name
A.  Hidell  as  one  entitled  to  receive  mail  at  the
box.  In  accordance  with  U.S.  Post  Office  regu-
lations, the  portion  of  the  application  listing
the  names  of  persons  other  than  the  applicant
entitled  to  receive  mail  was  discarded  after  the
box  was  closed  on  May  14,  1963.  During  the
summer  of  1963,  Oswald  rented  a  post  office
box  m  New  Orleans,  listing  the  name  "Hidell"
in  addition  to  his  own  name  and  that  of  his
wife.  Hidell  was  a  favorite  alias  used  by  Os-
wald on  a  number  of  occasions.  Diligent  search
has  failed  to  reveal  any  person  in  Dallas  or
New  Orleans  by  that  name.  It  was  merely  a
creation  for  his  own  purposes.

Speculation. — The  President's  car  was  going
at  a  speed  estimated  at  from  12  to  20  miles  per
hour,  thus  presenting  a  target  comparable  to
the  most  difficult  that  a  soldier  would  encoun-
ter under  battlefield  conditions.

Commission  finding. — During  the  period  be-
tween the  time  that  the  first  and  second  shots
struck  the  President,  the  Presidential  car  was
traveling  at  an  average  speed  of  approximately
11.2  miles  per  hour.  Expert  witnesses  testified
that  the  target  is  regarded  as  a  favorable  one
because  the  car  was  going  away  from  the
marksman  in  a  straight  line.

Speculation. — Oswald  could  not  have  fired
three  shots  from  the  Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle
in  51/2  seconds.

Commission  finding. — According  to  expert
witnesses,  exacting  tests  conducted  for  the
Commission  demonstrated  that  it  was  possible
to  fire  three  shots  from  the  rifle  within  SVi
seconds.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  first  loaded
shell  was  already  in  the  chamber  ready  for
firing;  Oswald  had  only  to  pull  the  trigger  to
fire  the  first  shot  and  to  work  the  bolt  twice  in
order  to  fire  the  second  and  third  shots.  They
testified  that  if  the  second  shot  missed,  Oswald


had  between  4.8  and  5.6  seconds  to  fire  the
three  shots.  If  either  the  first  or  third  shot
missed,  Oswald  had  in  excess  of  7  seconds  to
fire  the  three  shots.

Speculation. — Oswald  did  not  have  the
marksmanship  ability  demonstrated  by  the  rifle-
man who  fired  the  shots.

Commission  finding. — Oswald  qualified  as  a
sharpshooter  and  a  marksman  with  the  M-1
rifle  in  the  Marine  Corps.  Marina  Oswald  testi-
fied that  in  New  Orleans  her  husband  practiced
operating  the  bolt  of  the  rifle.  Moreover,  ex-
perts stated  that  the  scope  was  a  substantial  aid
for  rapid,  accurate  firing.  The  Commission  con-
cluded that  Oswald  had  the  capability  with  a
rifle  to  commit  assassination.

Speculation. — The  name  of  the  rifle  used  in
the  assassination  appeared  on  the  rifle.  There-
fore, the  searchers  who  foimd  the  rifle  on  the
sixth  floor  of  the  Texas  School  Book  Deposi-
tory should  have  been  able  to  identify  it  cor-
rectly by  name.

Commission  finding. — An  examination  of  the
rifle  does  not  reveal  any  manufacturer's  name.
An  inscription  on  the  rifle  shows  that  it  was
made  in  Italy.  The  rifle  was  identified  by  Cap-
tain Fritz  and  Lieutenant  Day,  who  were  the
first  to  actually  handle  it.

Speculation. — The  rifle  found  on  the  sixth
floor  of  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  was
identified  as  a  7.65  Mauser  by  the  man  who
found  it,  Deputy  Constable  Seymour  Weitz-
man.

Commission  finding. — Weitzman,  the  origi-
nal source  of  the  speculation  that  the  rifle  was
a  Mauser,  and  Deputy  Sheriff  Eugene  Boone
found  the  weapon.  Weitzman  did  not  handle
the  rifle  and  did  not  examine  it  at  close  range.
He  had  little  more  than  a  glimpse  of  it  and
thought  it  was  a  Mauser,  a  German  bolt-type
rifle  similar  in  appearance  to  the  Mannlicher-
Carcano.  Police  laboratory  technicians  subse-
quently arrived  and  correctly  identified  the
weapon  as  a  6.5  Italian  rifle.

Speculation. — There  is  evidence  that  a  sec-
ond rifle  was  discovered  on  the  roof  of  the
Texas  School  Book  Depository  or  on  the  over-
pass.

Commission  finding. — No  second  rifle  was
found  in  either  of  these  places  or  in  any  other
place.  The  shots  that  struck  President  Kennedy
and  Governor  Connally  came  from  the  rifle
found  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository.

Speculation. — It  is  possible  that  there  was  a
second  Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle  involved  in
the  assassination.  The  Irving  Sports  Shop
mounted  a  scope  on  a  rifle  3  weeks  before  the
assassination.

Commission  finding. — Dial  D.  Ryder,  an
employee  of  the  Irving  Sports  Shop,  has  stated
that  he  found  on  his  workbench  on  Novem-
ber 23  an  undated  work  tag  with  the  name
"Oswald"  on  it,  indicating  that  sometime  dur-
ing the  first  2  weeks  of  November  three  holes


274


had  been  bored  in  a  rifle  and  a  telescopic  sight
mounted  on  it  and  bore-sighted.  However,
Ryder  and  his  employer,  Charles  W.  Greener,
had  no  recollection  of  Oswald,  of  his  Mann-
licher-Carcano  rifle,  of  the  transaction  allegedly
represented  by  the  repair  tag,  or  of  any  person
for  whom  such  a  repair  was  supposedly  made.
The  rifle  found  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository  had  two  holes  in  it
bored  for  the  installation  of  a  scope  prior  to
shipment  to  Oswald  in  March  1963.  The  Com-
mission concluded  that  it  is  doubtful  whether
the  tag  produced  by  Ryder  was  authentic.  All
of  the  evidence  developed  proves  that  Oswald
owned  only  the  one  rifle — the  Mannlicher-
Carcano — and  that  he  did  not  bring  it  or  a
second  rifle  to  the  Irving  Sports  Shop.

Speculation. — Ammunition  for  the  rifle
found  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  had  not  been  manufactured
since  the  end  of  World  War  II.  The  ammuni-
tion used  by  Oswald  must,  therefore,  have  been
at  least  20  years  old,  making  it  extremely  un-
reliable.

Commission  finding. — ^The  ammunition  used
in  the  rifle  was  American  ammunition  recently
made  by  the  Western  Cartridge  Co.,  which
manufactures  such  ammunition  currently.  In
tests  with  the  same  kind  of  ammunition,  experts
fired  Oswald's  Mannlicher-Carcano  rifle  more
than  100  times  without  any  misfires.

Speculation. — ^The  assertion  that  Oswald's
palmprint  appeared  on  the  rifle  is  false.  The
FBI  told  newsmen  in  an  oflf-the-record  briefing
session  that  there  was  no  palmprint  on  the  rifle.
Commission  finding. — ^The  FBI  confirmed
that  the  palmprint  lifted  by  the  Dallas  police
from  the  rifle  found  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the
Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building  was
Oswald's  palmprint.  The  FBI  informed  the
Commission  that  no  FBI  agent  made  state-
ments of  any  type  to  the  press  concerning  the
existence  or  nonexistence  of  this  print.

Speculation. — If  Oswald  had  been  gloveless,
he  would  have  left  fingerprints  on  the  rifle  be-
cause he  would  not  have  had  time  to  wipe  the
prints  off  the  rifle  after  he  had  fired  it.

Commission  finding. — An  FBI  fingerprint
expert  testified  that  the  poor  quality  of  the
metal  and  wooden  parts  would  cause  them  to
absorb  moisture  from  the  skin,  thereby  making
a  clear  print  unlikely.  There  is  no  evidence  that
Oswald  wore  gloves  or  that  he  wiped  prints  off
the  rifle.  Latent  fingerprints  were  found  on  the
rifle  but  they  were  too  incomplete  to  be  identi-
fied.

Speculation. — Gordon  Shanklin,  the  special
agent  in  charge  of  the  Dallas  office  of  the  FBI,
stated  that  the  paraffin  test  of  Oswald's  face
and  hands  was  positive  and  proved  that  he  had
fired  a  rifle.

Commission  finding. — ^The  paraffin  tests
were  conducted  by  members  of  the  Dallas
Police  Department  and  the  technical  examina-
tions by  members  of  the  Dallas  City-County


Criminal  Investigation  Laboratory.  The  FBI
has  notified  the  Commission  that  neither
Shanklin  nor  any  other  representative  of  the
FBI  ever  made  such  a  statement.  The  Commis-
sion has  found  no  evidence  that  Special  Agent
Shanklin  ever  made  this  statement  publicly.

Speculation. — Marina  Oswald  stated  that  she
did  not  know  that  her  husband  owned  a  rifle
nor  did  she  know  that  he  owned  a  pistol.

Commission  finding. — There  is  no  evidence
that  Marina  Oswald  ever  told  this  to  any  au-
thorities. On  the  afternoon  of  November  22,
she  told  the  police  that  her  husband  owned  a
rifle  and  that  he  kept  it  in  the  garage  of  the
Paine  house  La  Irving.  Later,  at  Dallas  police
headquarters,  she  said  that  she  could  not  iden-
tify as  her  husband's  the  rifle  shown  her  by
policemen.  When  Marina  Oswald  appeared  be-
fore the  Commission  she  was  shown  the
Mannlicher-Carcano  6.5  rifle  found  on  the
sixth  floor  of  the  Depository  and  identified  it
as  the  "fateful  rifle  of  Lee  Oswald."

Speculation. — The  picture  of  Oswald  taken
by  his  wife  in  March  or  April  1963  and  show-
ing him  with  a  rifle  and  a  pistol  was  "doctored"
when  it  appeared  in  magazines  and  newspapers
in  February  1964.  The  rifle  held  by  Oswald  in
these  pictures  is  not  the  same  rifle  that  was
found  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  Building.

Commission  finding. — Life  magazine,  News-
week, and  the  New  York  Times  notified  the
Commission  that  they  had  retouched  this  pic-
ture. In  doing  so,  they  inadvertently  altered
details  of  the  configuration  of  the  rifle.  The
original  prints  of  this  picture  have  been  exam-
ined by  the  Commission  and  by  photographic
experts  who  have  identified  the  rifle  as  a
Mannlicher-Carcano  6.5,  the  same  kind  as  the
one  found  on  the  sixth  floor  of  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository,  FBI  experts  testified
that  the  picture  was  taken  with  Oswald's
camera.

Speculation. — ^The  rifle  picture  of  Oswald
was  a  composite  one  with  Oswald's  face  pasted
on  somebody  else's  body.

Commission  finding. — Marina  Oswald  has
testified  that  she  took  this  picture  with  a  camera
ovraed  by  her  husband  and  subsequently  identi-
fied as  Oswald's  Imperial  Reflex  camera.  She
identified  the  man  in  the  picture  as  her  hus-
band. Experts  also  state  the  picture  was  not  a
composite.

Speculation. — After  firing  the  shots,  Oswald
could  not  have  disposed  of  the  rifle  and  de-
scended the  stairs  to  the  lunchroom  in  time  to
get  a  drink  from  a  soft  drink  machine  and  be
there  when  Patrolman  Baker  came  in.

Commission  finding. — ^A  series  of  time  tests
made  by  investigators  and  by  Roy  S.  Truly  and
Patrolman  M.  L.  Baker  at  the  request  of  the
Commission,  show  that  it  was  possible  for
Oswald  to  have  placed  the  rifle  behind  a  box
and  descended  to  the  lunchroom  on  the  second
floor  before  Patrolman  Baker  and  Truly  got  up
275


there.  Oswald  did  not  have  a  soft  drink  bottle
in  his  hand  at  the  time  he  was  confronted  by
Baker  and  he  was  not  standing  by  the  soft
drink  machine.  He  was  just  entering  the  lunch-
room; Baker  caught  a  glimpse  of  him  through
the  glass  panel  in  the  door  leading  to  the
lunchroom  vestibule.

Speculation. — There  were  other  people  pres-
ent in  the  lunchroom  at  the  time  that  Baker
and  Truly  saw  Oswald  there.

Commission  finding. — Baker  and  Truly  have
both  stated  that  there  was  no  one  in  the  lunch-
room other  than  Oswald  at  the  time  that  they
entered.  No  other  witness  to  this  incident  has
been  found.

Speculation. — Police  were  sealing  off  all  exits
from  the  building  by  the  time  Oswald  got  to
the  second  floor.

Commission  finding. — Police  may  have  be-
gun to  take  up  positions  at  the  exits  to  the
building  as  early  as  12:33,  but  it  is  unlikely
that  they  had  blocked  them  off  completely  until
12:37  p.m.  at  the  earliest.  Oswald  was  seen  in
an  office,  walking  toward  an  exit  leading  to  the
front  stairway,  at  about  12:33  p.m.  Oswald
probably  had  at  least  7  minutes  in  which  to  get
out  of  the  building  without  being  stopped.


OSWALD'S  MOVEMENTS  BETWEEN
12:33  AND  1:15  P.M.

One  of  the  major  theses  urged  in  support  of
the  theory  that  Oswald  did  not  murder  Patrol-
man Tippit  was  that  his  known  movements
after  he  left  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository
would  not  have  permitted  him  to  have  arrived
at  10th  Street  and  Patton  Avenue  in  time  to
encounter  Tippit  by  1 :16  p.m.  Careful  reenact-
ments  by  investigative  agencies  and  by  mem-
bers of  the  Commission  staff  of  Oswald's  move-
ments from  the  time  he  left  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository  until  he  encountered  Tippit
verified  that  Oswald  could  reach  his  rooming-
house  at  1026  North  Beckley  Avenue  at  ap-
proximately 1  p.m.  or  earlier.  The  housekeeper
at  the  roominghouse  testified  that  Oswald  spent
only  a  few  minutes  at  the  house,  leaving  as
hurriedly  as  he  had  arrived.  During  police
interrogation  after  his  arrest,  Oswald  admitted
to  riding  both  bus  and  taxi  in  returning  to  his
roominghouse  after  the  assassination  of  the
President.  From  1026  North  Beckley  Avenue,
Oswald  could  easily  have  walked  the  nine
tenths  of  a  mile  to  10th  Street  and  Patton
Avenue  where  he  encountered  Tippit.

Speculation. — A  detailed  and  remarkably
clear  description  of  Oswald  was  sent  over  the
police  radio  in  Dallas  at  12:36  p.m.,  Novem-
ber 22,  1963.

Commission  finding. — The  radio  logs  of  the
Dallas  Police  Department  and  the  Dallas
County  Sheriff's  Office  shov(^  that  no  description
of  a  suspect  in  the  assassination  of  the  Presi-
dent was  broadcast  before  12:45  p.m.  on  that


day.  No  reference  to  Oswald  by  name  was
broadcast  before  he  was  arrested.  The  descrip-
tion of  the  suspect  that  was  broadcast  was
similar  to  that  of  Oswald,  but  it  lacked  some
important  specific  details  such  as  color  of  hair
and  eyes.  The  information  for  the  initial  broad-
casts most  probably  came  from  Howard  Bren-
nan,  who  saw  Oswald  in  the  window  when  he
was  firing  the  rifle.

Speculation. — Oswald  did  not  have  time  for
all  of  the  movements  imputed  to  him  between
his  departure  from  the  Texas  School  Book
Depository  and  his  encounter  with  Tippit.

Commission  finding. — Time  tests  of  all  of
Oswald's  movements  establish  that  these  move-
ments could  have  been  accomplished  in  the
time  available  to  him.

Speculation. — Oswald  was  stopped  by  police
as  he  left  the  building  and  was  permitted  to
pass  after  he  told  them  he  worked  in  the
building.

Commission  finding. — ^The  Commission  has
found  no  witness  who  saw  Oswald  leave  the
building.  This  speculation  is  probably  a  mis-
interpretation of  the  fact  that  he  was  stopped
in  the  Ivmchroom  by  Patrolman  Baker  before
he  left  the  building  and  was  allowed  to  pro-
ceed after  Truly,  the  Depository  superintend-
ent, identified  him  as  an  employee  there.  Police
did  not  seal  off  the  building  until  at  least  sev-
eral minutes  after  Oswald  could  have  left.

Speculation. — The  log  of  the  cabdriver  who
took  Oswald  to  North  Beckley  Avenue,  Wil-
liam W.  Whaley,  shows  that  Oswald  entered
his  cab  at  12:30  p.m.  Since  this  occurred  at
some  distance  from  the  point  of  the  President's
assassination,  Oswald  could  not  have  shot  the
President.

Commission  finding. — ^Whaley's  log  does
show  12:30  p.m.,  but  he  has  testified  that  he
was  not  accurate  in  logging  the  tune  that  pas-
sengers entered  his  cab,  that  he  usually  logged
them  at  15-minute  intervals,  and  that  it  was
undoubtedly  some  time  later  than  12:30  when
Oswald  entered  his  cab.  Sometimes  he  did  not
make  entries  in  his  logbook  until  three  or  four
trips  later.  The  bus  transfer  in  Oswald's  pos-
session was  issued  after  12:36  p.m.  The  Com-
mission has  determined  that  Oswald  probably
entered  Whaley's  cab  at  about  12:47  or
12:48  p.m.

Speculation. — ^The  distance  from  the  Grey-
hound terminal  in  Dallas,  where  Oswald  en-
tered the  cab,  to  North  Beckley  Avenue,  where
he  probably  left  the  cab,  is  something  over
3  miles — normally  a  10-minute  cab  drive.
Given  the  traffic  jam  that  existed  at  the  time,
it  is  doubtful  that  Whaley  could  have  made  the
trip  in  less  than  15  minutes.  One  estimate  has
placed  the  time  at  24  minutes  from  the  Grey-
hound terminal  to  Oswald's  roominghouse.

Commission  finding. — The  distance  from  the
Greyhound  bus  terminal  at  Jackson  and  Lamar
Streets  to  the  500  block  of  North  Beckley  is
2.5  miles.  Oswald  actually  got  out  in  the  700


276


block  of  North  Beckley.  The  distance  was,
therefore,  less  than  2.5  miles.  Whaley  has  testi-
fied to  the  Commission  that  the  trip  took  6
minutes.  Test  nms  made  by  members  of  the
Commission  staff  under  traffic  conditions  some-
what similar  to  those  that  existed  on  Novem-
ber 22,  took  approximately  5  minutes  and  30
seconds.  To  walk  from  Beckley  and  Neely,
which  is  the  700  block  of  Beckley,  where
Oswald  probably  left  the  cab,  to  1026  North
Beckley,  took  Commission  staff  members  5
minutes  and  45  seconds.

Speculation. — Oswald  was  on  his  way  to
Jack  Ruby's  apartment  when  he  was  stopped
by  Patrolman  Tippit.

Commission  finding. — There  is  no  evidence
that  Oswald  and  Ruby  knew  each  other  or  had
any  relationship  through  a  third  party  or
parties.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Oswald  knew
where  Ruby  lived.  Accordingly,  there  is  neither
evidence  nor  reason  to  believe  that  Oswald
was  on  his  way  to  Ruby's  apartment  when  he
was  stopped  by  Tippit


MURDER  OF  TrPPIT

Speculations  on  the  murder  of  Tippit  cen-
tered about  assertions  that  he  was  elsewhere
than  he  was  supposed  to  be  when  he  was  shot,
that  he  knew  the  man  who  shot  him,  and  that
the  description  of  the  murderer  given  by  one
of  the  eyewitnesses  did  not  fit  Oswald's  descrip-
tion.

The  Commission  found  that  Tippit  was  un-
questionably patrolling  in  an  area  to  which  he
had  been  directed  by  police  headquarters.
There  was  no  evidence  to  support  the  specula-
tion that  Tippit  and  Oswald  knew  each  other
or  had  ever  seen  each  other  before.  The  de-
scription of  the  murderer  imputed  to  one  of
the  witnesses  was  denied  by  her  and  had  no
support  from  any  other  eyewitness.

Speculation. — Tippit  was  driving  alone  in  his
police  car  even  though  standing  orders  for
police  in  Dallas  were  that  radio  cars  of  the
type  Tippit  was  driving  must  have  two  police-
men in  them.

Commission  finding. — Dallas  police  officials
stated  that  department  policy  required  about
80  percent  of  the  patrolmen  on  the  day  shift,
7  a.m.  to  3  p.m.,  to  work  alone.  Tippit  was  one
of  the  patrolmen  assigned  to  work  alone  that
day.

Speculation. — Tippit  was  violating  an  order
he  had  received  the  day  before  not  to  leave  the
sector  to  which  he  had  been  assigned.  This
sector  was  supposed  to  be  in  downtown  Dallas
at  the  time  he  stopped  Oswald,

Commission  finding. — A  review  of  Tippit's
file  in  the  Dallas  Police  Department  and  the
department's  radio  log  revealed  that  following
the  shooting  of  the  President,  Tippit  was  di-
rected to  move  into  and  remain  in  the  central
Oak  Cliff  area  available  for  any  emergency.


Speculation. — The  police  had  been  with-
drawn from  the  area  in  which  Tippit  found
Oswald.

Commission  finding. — Other  police  cars  were
operating  in  the  Oak  Cliff  area  at  the  same  time
as  Tippit.  They  participated  in  the  subsequent
search  for  and  apprehension  of  Tippit's  slayer.

Speculation. — Tippit  violated  a  procedure
governing  radio  cars  when  he  failed  to  notify
headquarters  that  he  was  stopping  to  question
a  suspect.

Commission  finding. — The  Dallas  Police  De-
partment had  no  requirement  or  regulation  for
police  officers  to  notify  headquarters  when
stopping  to  question  a  suspect.  Therefore,  Tip-
pit  did  not  violate  any  police  radio  procedure
in  failing  to  notify  the  radio  dispatcher  that  he
was  stopping  Oswald.

Speculation. — Tippit  could  not  have  recog-
nized Oswald  from  the  description  sent  out
over  the  police  radio.

Commission  finding. — There  is  no  certaiQ
way  of  knowing  whether  Tippit  recognized
Oswald  from  the  description  put  out  by  the
police  radio.  The  Dallas  Police  Department
radio  log  shows  that  the  police  radio  dispatcher
at  1:29  p.m.  noted  a  similarity  between  the
broadcast  descriptions  of  the  President's  assas-
sin and  Tippit's  slayer.  It  is  conceivable,  even
probable,  that  Tippit  stopped  Oswald  because
of  the  description  broadcast  by  the  police  radio.

Speculation. — Tippit  and  his  killer  knew
each  other.

Commission  finding. — Investigation  has  re-
vealed no  evidence  that  Oswald  and  Tippit
were  acquainted,  had  ever  seen  each  other,  or
had  any  mutual  acquaintances.  Witnesses  to
the  shooting  observed  no  signs  of  recognition
between  the  two  men.

Speculation. — Mrs.  Helen  Markham,  a  wit-
ness to  the  slaying  of  Tippit,  put  the  time  at
just  after  1:06  p.m.  This  would  have  made  it
impossible  for  Oswald  to  have  committed  the
killing  since  he  would  not  have  had  time  to
arrive  at  the  shooting  scene  by  that  time.

Commission  finding. — The  shooting  of  Tippit
has  been  established  at  approximately  1:15  or
1:16  p.m.  on  the  basis  of  a  call  to  police  head-
quarters on  Tippit's  car  radio  by  another  wit-
ness to  the  assassination,  Domingo  Benavides.
In  her  various  statements  and  in  her  testimony,
Mrs.  Markham  was  uncertain  and  inconsistent
in  her  recollection  of  the  exact  time  of  the
slaying.

Speculation. — Mrs.  Helen  Markham  is  the
only  witness  to  the  killing  of  Tippit.

Commission  finding. — Other  witnesses  to  the
killing  of  Tippit  include  Domingo  Benavides,
who  used  Tippit's  car  radio  to  notify  the  police
dispatcher  of  the  killing  at  1:16  p.m.,  and  Wil-
liam Scoggins,  a  cabdriver  parked  at  the  comer
of  10th  Street  and  Patton  Avenue.  Barbara
Jeanette  Davis  and  Virginia  Davis  saw  a  man
with  a  pistol  in  his  hand  walk  across  their  lawn
immediately  after  they  heard  the  sound  of  the


277


shots  that  killed  Tippit.  The  man  emptied  the
shells  from  his  pistol  and  turned  the  corner
from  10th  Street  onto  Patton  Avenue.  All  of
these  witnesses,  except  Benavides,  subsequently
picked  Oswald  out  of  a  lineup  as  the  slayer.
Benavides  did  not  feel  that  he  could  make  a
positive  identification  and  never  attended  a
lineup  for  the  purpose.

Speculation. — Mrs.  Markham  said  that  the
man  she  saw  shooting  Tippit  was  about  30,
short,  with  bushy  hair,  and  wearing  a  white
coat.  Since  Oswald  does  not  fit  this  description
he  could  not  be  the  killer.

Commission  finding. — In  evaluating  Helen
Markham's  testimony  the  Commission  is  aware
of  allegations  that  she  described  the  killer  of
Patrolman  Tippit  as  short,  stocky,  and  with
bushy  hair,  which  would  not  be  a  correct  de-
scription of  Oswald.  It  has  also  been  alleged
that  Mrs.  Markham  identified  Oswald  in  the
lineup  because  of  his  clothing  rather  than  his
appearance.  When  Oswald  appeared  in  the
lineup  at  v/hich  Mrs.  Markham  was  present,
he  was  not  wearing  the  jacket  which  he  wore
at  the  time  of  the  shooting,  and  Mrs.  Markham
has  testified  that  her  identification  was  based
"mostly  from  his  face."  Moreover,  Mrs.  Mark-
ham has  denied  that  she  ever  described  the
man  who  killed  Tippit  as  short,  stocky,  and
with  bushy  hair.  The  Commission  reviewed  the
transcript  of  a  telephone  conversation  in  which
Mrs.  Markham  was  alleged  to  have  made  such
a  description.  In  the  transcription  Mrs.  Mark-
ham reaffirmed  her  positive  identification  of
Oswald  and  denied  having  described  the  killer
as  short,  stocky,  and  bushy  haired.

Speculation. — Another  witness  to  the  slaying
of  Patrolman  Tippit,  an  unidentified  woman,
was  interviewed  by  the  FBI  but  was  never
called  as  a  witness  by  the  President's  Commis-
sion on  the  Assassination  of  President  Ken-
nedy. This  witness  is  alleged  to  have  stated  that
she  saw  two  men  involved  in  the  shooting  and
that  they  ran  oflf  in  opposite  directions  after-
ward.

Commission  finding. — ^The  only  woman
among  the  witnesses  to  the  slaying  of  Tippit
known  to  the  Commission  is  Helen  Markham.
The  FBI  never  interviewed  any  other  woman
who  claimed  to  have  seen  the  shooting  and
never  received  any  information  concerning  the
existence  of  such  a  witness.  Two  women,
Barbara  Jeanette  Davis  and  Virginia  Davis,  saw
the  killer  immediately  after  the  shooting  as  he
crossed  the  lawn  at  the  comer  of  Patton  Ave-
nue and  10th  Street,  but  they  did  not  witness
the  shooting  itself.  They  were  both  interviewed
by  the  FBI  and  appeared  before  the  Commis-
sion. The  Commission  has  no  evidence  that
there  was  any  witness  to  the  slaying  other  than
those  identified  in  chapter  IV.

Speculation. — No  witness  saw  Oswald  be-
tween the  time  he  was  supposed  to  have  re-
loaded his  gun  near  the  scene  of  the  slaying


and  his  appearance  at  the  shoestore  on  Jeffer-
son Boulevard.

Commission  finding. — Six  witnesses  identi-
fied Oswald  as  the  man  they  saw  in  flight  after
the  murder  of  Tippit.  The  killer  was  seen,  gun
in  hand,  by  Ted  Callaway  and  Sam  Guinyard
in  the  block  of  Patton  Avenue  between  10th
Street  and  Jefferson  Boulevard  after  the  shoot-
ing of  Tippit.  They  saw  him  run  to  Jefferson
and  turn  right.  On  the  evening  of  Novem-
ber 22,  Callaway  and  Guinyard  picked  Oswald
out  of  a  police  lineup  as  the  man  they  saw  with
the  gun.  Two  other  men,  Warren  Reynolds  and
Pat  Patterson,  saw  a  man  with  a  pistol  in  his
hand  running  south  on  Patton  Avenue.  They
followed  him  for  a  block  on  Jefferson  Boule-
vard and  then  lost  sight  of  him.  Both  men  sub-
sequently identified  pictures  of  Oswald  as  the
man  they  saw  with  the  gun.  Harold  Russell
also  saw  a  man  with  a  gun  running  south  on
Patton  Avenue  and  later  identified  him  from
pictures  as  Oswald.  Mrs.  Mary  Brock  saw  a
man  she  later  identified  as  Oswald  walk  at  a
fast  pace  into  the  parking  lot  behind  the  service
station  at  the  comer  of  Jefferson  and  Crawford,
where  Oswald's  jacket  was  found  shortly  after.

Speculation. — ^When  Oswald  left  his  room-
inghouse  at  about  1  p.m.  on  November  22  he
had  on  a  zipper-type  tan  plaid  jacket.

Commission  finding. — The  jacket  that  Os-
wald was  wearing  at  the  time  of  the  slaying  of
Tippit  was  a  light-gray  jacket.  According  to
Marina  Oswald,  her  husband  owned  only  two
jackets — one  blue  and  the  other  light  gray.  The
housekeeper  at  1026  North  Beckley  Avenue,
Mrs.  Earlene  Roberts,  was  not  certain  about
the  color  of  the  jacket  that  Oswald  was  wearing
when  he  left  the  house.

Speculation. — Oswald  wore  an  olive-brown
plain  jacket  which  is  visible  in  all  the  pictures
of  him  after  his  arrest.

Commission  finding. — At  the  time  of  his
arrest,  Oswald  was  not  wearing  a  jacket.  The
jacket  that  was  subsequently  recovered  in  a
parking  lot  and  identified  as  Oswald's  was  a
light-gray  one.  There  are  no  witnesses  who
have  stated  that  Oswald  was  wearing  an  olive-
brown  jacket  immediately  before  or  after  his
arrest.  The  Commission  has  seen  no  pictures
of  Oswald  taken  subsequent  to  his  arrest  that
show  him  in  such  a  jacket.  Pictures  taken
shortly  after  his  arrest  show  him  in  the  shirt
that  Mrs.  Bledsoe  described  him  as  wearing
when  she  saw  him  on  the  bus  at  approximately
1:40  p.m.

Speculation. — Oswald's  landlady,  Mrs.  A.  C.
Johnson,  said  that  Oswald  never  had  a  gun  in
the  room.

Commission  finding. — In  her  testimony  be-
fore the  Commission,  Mrs.  Johnson  said  that
he  "never  brought  that  rifle  in  my  house.  *  *  *
He  could  have  had  this  pistol,  I  don't  know,
because  they  found  the  scabbard."  As  shown  in
chapter  IV,  Oswald  kept  his  rifle  in  the  Paine
garage  in  Irving  while  he  was  living  in  Dallas


278


during  October  and  November.  The  pistol  was
small  and  easily  concealed.

Speculation. — There  was  absolutely  no  place
to  hide  a  gun  in  Oswald's  room  at  1026  North
Beckley  Avenue.

Commission  finding. — In  the  search  of  Os-
wald's room  after  his  apprehension  police
found  a  pistol  holster.  Oswald's  landlady,  Mrs.
A.  C.  Johnson,  stated  that  she  had  not  seen  the
holster  before.  There  is  no  reason  to  believe
that  Oswald  could  not  have  had  both  a  pistol
and  the  holster  hidden  in  the  room.  Oswald's
pistol  was  a  small  one  with  the  barrel  cut  down
to  2V^  inches.  It  could  have  been  concealed  in
a  pocket  of  his  clothes.

Speculation. — Oswald  did  not  pick  up  the
revolver  from  his  room  at  1  p.m.

Commission  finding. — ^There  is  reason  to  be-
lieve that  Oswald  did  pick  up  the  revolver  from
his  room,  probably  concealing  it  beneath  his
jacket.  This  likelihood  is  reinforced  by  the  find-
ing of  the  pistol  holster  in  the  room  after  the
assassination,  since  this  indicates  that  Oswald
did  not  store  the  pistol  at  the  home  of  Mrs.
Paine  where  he  spent  the  night  before  the
assassination.

Speculation. — No  one  saw  Oswald  enter  the
Texas  Theatre.

Commission  finding. — A  nearby  shoe  store
manager,  Johnny  C.  Brewer,  and  the  theatre
cashier,  Julia  Postal,  saw  Oswald  enter  the
lobby  of  the  theatre  from  where  he  went  on
into  the  theatre  proper.

Speculation. — Not  a  single  one  of  the  people
in  the  Texas  Theatre  at  the  time  of  Oswald's
arrest  has  come  forward  or  been  brought  for-
ward to  give  an  eyewitness  accoxmt  of  the
arrest.

Commission  finding. — Johnny  C.  Brewer,  the
shoe  store  manager,  and  two  patrons  of  the
theatre — John  Gibson  and  George  Jefferson
Applin,  Jr. — were  present  in  the  theatre  and
testified  before  the  Commission  on  the  circum-
stances of  Oswald's  arrest  at  the  Texas  Theatre.
Only  6  or  7  people  were  seated  on  the  main
floor  of  the  theatre.

Speculation. — There  is  no  independent  wit-
ness aside  from  the  police  who  testified  that
Oswald  was  carrying  a  gim  when  arrested  by
the  police.

Commission  finding. — Johnny  Brewer  testi-
fied before  the  Commission  that  he  saw  Oswald
pull  a  gun  and  that  he  saw  it  taken  away  from
him  by  a  policeman.


OSWALD  AFTER  HIS  ARREST

The  Commission  found  that  assertions  that
the  Dallas  police  treated  Oswald  brutally  and
denied  him  his  constitutional  rights  to  legal
counsel  had  no  foundation  in  fact.  Insinuations
that  Dallas  police  officials  and  District  Attorney
Henry  M.  Wade  fabricated  or  altered  evidence
to  establish  the  guilt  of  Oswald  were  baseless.


It  is  true  that  police  officials  and  the  district
attorney  made  errors  in  giving  evidential  in-
formation to  the  press,  but  these  were  clearly
the  result  of  misapprehensions  or  ignorance
rather  than  intent,  and  at  the  worst  represent
bad  judgment.  At  least  one  imputed  fabrica-
tion of  fact,  further  embellished  by  repetition,
never  really  occurred.  Sinister  connotations
were  evoked  by  the  attribution  to  the  district
attorney  of  the  statement  that  a  taxicab  driver
named  Darryl  Click  drove  Oswald  from  down-
town Dallas  to  the  area  of  his  roominghouse
in  Oak  Cliff.  It  has  been  correctly  ascertained
that  no  such  taxicab  driver  existed  in  Dallas.
On  the  other  hand,  the  district  attorney,  who
was  quoted  in  a  newspaper  transcript  as  making
the  statement,  never  made  the  statement  nor
did  any  one  else.  Audio  tapes  of  the  district
attorney's  press  conference  make  clear  that  the
person  who  transcribed  the  conference  rend-
ered a  reference  to  the  "Oak  Cliff"  area  of
Dallas  as  a  person,  "Darryl  Click."  This  error
in  trascription  is  the  sole  source  for  the  exist-
ence of  a  "Darr>'l  Click"  as  a  taxicab  driver.

Speculation.— Oswald  was  the  victim  of
police  brutality.

Commission  finding. — Oswald  resisted  arrest
in  the  Texas  Theatre  and  drew  a  gun.  He  re-
ceived a  slight  cut  over  his  right  eye  and  a
bruise  imder  his  left  eye  in  the  course  of  his
struggles.  During  the  time  he  was  in  police
custody,  he  was  neither  ill-treated  nor  abused.

Speculation. — Oswald  was  never  formally
charged  with  the  assassination  of  the  President;
he  was  charged  only  with  the  shooting  of  Pa-
trolman J.  D.  Tippit.

Commission  finding. — Oswald  was  arraigned
for  the  murder  of  President  Kennedy  before
Justice  of  the  Peace  David  Johnston  on  the
fourth  floor  of  the  Police  Department  building
at  1:35  a.m.,  November  23.  Previously,  he  had
been  arraigned  before  Johnston  for  the  murder
of  Tippit  at  7:10  p.m.,  November  22.

Speculation. — The  police  questioned  Oswald
extensively  about  the  Tippit  murder  on  the
first  day  of  his  detention.  They  did  not  ques-
tion him  about  the  assassination  of  President
Kennedy.

Commission  finding. — Dallas  police  officials
stated  that  they  questioned  Oswald  repeatedly
on  November  22  about  the  assassination  of
President  Kennedy  and  his  relationship  on  it.
At  the  first  interrogation,  Captain  Fritz  asked
Oswald  to  account  for  himself  at  the  time  the
President  was  shot.  FBI  agents  who  were
present  also  stated  that  he  was  questioned
about  the  assassination  of  the  President

Speculation. — Oswald's  attempts  to  get  legal
counsel  were  deliberately  thwarted  by  the
police  and  he  was  cut  off  from  outside  calls
that  would  have  permitted  him  to  obtain  a
lawyer.

Commission  finding. — On  November  23,  Os-
wald was  visited  by  the  president  of  the  Dallas
Bar  Association,  H.  Louis  Nichols,  who  offered


279


him  help  in  getting  a  lawyer;  Oswald  refused
the  offer.  Oswald  was  told  by  the  police  that
he  could  use  the  telephone  when  he  wished,
and  he  did  make  telephone  calls.  He  attempted
to  call  attorney  John  Abt  in  New  York  but
was  unsuccessful  in  reaching  him.  Mrs.  Paine
testified  that  at  Oswald's  request  she  tried  with-
out success  to  reach  Abt.  Oswald  was  also
visited  by  his  wife,  mother,  and  brother,  to  any
of  whom  he  could  have  turned  for  help  in  get-
ting counsel.


OSWALD  IN  THE  SOVIET  UNION

Oswald's  residence  in  the  Soviet  Union  for
more  than  2V^  years  aroused  speculation  after
his  arrest  that  he  was  an  agent  of  the  Soviet
Union  or  in  some  way  affiliated  with  it.  This
speculation  was  supported  by  assertions  that  he
had  received  exceptionally  favored  treatment
from  the  Soviet  Government  in  securing  per-
mission to  enter  and  leave  the  country,  espe-
cially the  latter,  because  his  Russian  wife  and
child  were  permitted  to  leave  with  him.  The
careful  analysis  of  these  speculations  in  chap-
ter VI  of  this  report  led  to  the  Commission's
conclusion  that  there  is  no  credible  evidence
that  Oswald  was  an  agent  of  the  Soviet  Gov-
ernment and  that  he  did  not  receive  unusually
favorable  treatment  in  entering  or  leaving  the
Soviet  Union  or  in  returning  to  the  United
States.

Speculation. — A  yoimg  private  in  the  Marine
Corps  in  the  1950's  could  not  study  Marxism,
learn  Russian,  and  read  Soviet  newspapers
without  any  adverse  repercussions  in  his  unit.

Commission  finding. — Although  Oswald's  in-
terest in  the  Soviet  Union  was  well  known,  his
interest  in  Marxism  was  apparently  known  to
only  a  few  of  his  fellow  marines.  While  sta-
tioned in  California,  he  studied  Russian.  In
February  1959,  while  still  in  the  Marines,  he
took  an  oflBcial  test  on  his  proficiency  in  Rus-
sian and  was  rated  "Poor."  In  California  at
about  this  time  he  probably  read  a  Russian-
language  newspaper.  The  reactions  of  his  fel-
low Marines  who  were  aware  of  his  interests
in  Marxism  and  the  Soviet  Union  were  ap-
parently not  antagonistic  and  did  not  deter
him  from  pursuing  these  interests.

Speculation. — Oswald  learned  Russian  dur-
ing his  service  in  the  Marines  as  part  of  his
military  training.

Commission  finding. — Oswald  never  received
any  training  from  the  Marine  Corps  in  the
Russian  language.  His  studies  of  Russian  were
entirely  on  his  own  time  and  at  his  own  initia-
tive.

Speculation. — Oswald  could  not  have  saved
$1,600  from  his  Marine  pay  for  his  trip  to
Russia  in  1959.

Commission  finding. — In  November  1959,
Oswald  told  an  American  reporter  in  Moscow,
Aline  Mosby,  that  he  had  saved  $1,500  (not


$1,600)  while  in  the  Marines.  It  is  entirely
consistent  with  Oswald's  known  frugaUty  that
he  could  have  saved  the  money  from  the
$3,452.20  in  pay  he  received  while  he  was  in
the  Marines.  Moreover,  despite  his  statement  to
Aline  Mosby,  he  may  not  actually  have  saved
$1,500,  for  it  was  possible  for  him  to  have
made  the  trip  to  Russia  in  1959  for  consider-
ably less  than  that  amount.

Speculation. — It  is  probable  that  Oswald
had  prior  contacts  with  Soviet  agents  before
he  entered  Russia  in  1959  because  his  applica-
tion for  a  visa  was  processed  and  approved
immediately  on  receipt.

Commission  finding. — ^There  is  no  evidence
that  Oswald  was  in  touch  with  Soviet  agents
before  his  visit  to  Russia.  The  time  that  it  took
for  him  to  receive  his  visa  in  Helsinki  for  en-
trance to  the  Soviet  Union  was  shorter  than
the  average  but  not  beyond  the  normal  range
for  the  granting  of  such  visas.  Had  Oswald
been  recruited  as  a  Russian  agent  while  he
was  still  in  the  Marines,  it  is  most  improbable
that  he  would  have  been  encouraged  to  defect.
He  would  have  been  of  greater  value  to  Rus-
sian intelligence  as  a  Marine  radar  operator
than  as  a  defector.

Speculation. — Soviet  suspicion  of  Oswald  is
indicated  by  the  fact  that  he  was  sent  off  to
work  in  a  radio  plant  in  Minsk  as  an  unskilled
hand  at  the  lowest  rate  of  pay  although  he
qualified  as  a  trained  radar  and  electronics
technician.

Commission  finding. — ^The  Soviet  Govern-
ment probably  was  suspicious  of  Oswald,  as  it
would  be  of  any  American  who  appeared  in
Moscow  and  said  he  wanted  to  live  in  the
Soviet  Union.  Under  the  circumstances  it  is  to
be  expected  that  he  would  be  placed  in  a  posi-
tion tiiat  would  not  involve  national  security.
Moreover,  Oswald  had  been  a  radar  operator,
not  a  technician,  in  the  Marines.  His  total
income  in  Russia  was  higher  than  normal  be-
cause his  pay  was  supplemented  for  about  a
year  by  payments  from  the  Soviet  "Red  Cross,"
an  oflficial  agency  of  the  Soviet  Government.
Oswald  believed  that  these  payments  really
came  from  the  MVD.  It  is  a  policy  of  the
Soviet  Government  to  subsidize  defectors  from
Western  nations  who  settle  in  the  Soviet  Union,
in  order  that  their  standard  of  living  may  not
be  too  much  lower  than  their  previous  standard
in  their  own  country.

Speculation. — Oswald  was  trained  by  the
Russians  in  a  special  school  for  assassins  at
Minsk.

Commission  finding. — Commission  investi-
gations revealed  no  evidence  to  support  this
claim  or  the  existence  of  such  a  school  in
Minsk  during  the  time  Oswald  was  there.  Os-
wald belonged  to  a  himting  club  near  Minsk,
but  there  is  no  evidence  that  this  was  other
than  an  ordinary  hunting  club.

Speculation. — Marina  Oswald's  father  was


280


an  important  part  of  the  Soviet  intelligence
apparatus.

Commission  finding. — Marina  Oswald's  fa-
ther died  while  she  was  still  an  infant.  This
reference  is  presumably  to  her  uncle,  Ilya
Prusakov,  who  was  an  executive  in  the  lumber
industry,  which  position  carried  with  it  the
rank  of  lieutenant  colonel  or  colonel  in  the
Ministry  of  Internal  Affairs  (MVD).  Since
1953  the  MVD  has  not  been  concerned  with
internal  security  or  other  police  functions.

Speculation. — It  was  most  exceptional  that
Oswald  was  able  to  bring  his  wife  and  child
out  of  the  Soviet  Union  with  him.

Commission  finding. — There  is  no  reason  to
believe  that  the  Oswalds  received  imusually
favorable  treatment  in  being  permitted  or  as-
sisted to  leave  the  Soviet  Union  together.  Other
American  citizens  have  brought  their  Russian
wives  out  of  the  Soviet  Union,  both  before  and
after  Oswald.

Speculation. — Oswald  never  would  have  been
permitted  to  return  to  the  United  States  if
Soviet  intelligence  had  not  planned  to  use  him
in  some  way  against  the  United  States.

Commission  finding. — There  is  no  evidence
that  Oswald  had  any  working  relationship  with
the  Soviet  Government  or  Soviet  intelligence.
The  Russians  have  permitted  other  American
defectors  to  return  to  the  United  States.

Speculation. — Since  the  exit  visa  for  Marina
Oswald  was  granted  so  promptly  the  Soviet
authorities  must  have  wanted  Marina  to  ac-
company her  husband.

Commission  finding. — Marina  Oswald's  exit
visa  application  was  not  acted  upon  with  un-
usual rapidity.  It  took  at  least  5Vi  months  from
the  time  the  Oswalds  applied  until  they  were
notified  of  permission  in  December  1961.
There  have  been  many  instances  where  visas
were  granted  more  quickly  to  other  Soviet
wives  of  American  citizens.

Speculation. — Soviet  authorities  gave  Oswald
notice  a  month  and  a  half  in  advance  that  they
had  granted  him  an  exit  visa,  an  unprecedented
act  for  the  Soviet  Government.

Commission  finding. — The  Oswalds  were
notified  on  December  25,  1961,  that  their  re-
quests for  exit  visas  had  been  granted  by  Soviet
authorities.  Marina  Oswald  picked  up  her  visa,
valid  until  December  1,  1962,  on  January  11,
1962,  17  days  after  receiving  notice  that  it  was
available.  Oswald  did  not  pick  up  his  visa  untU
May  22.  The  Soviets  did  not  give  the  Oswalds
any  advance  notice;  the  visas  could  have  been
picked  up  immediately  had  the  Oswalds  so
desired.  Because  his  exit  visa  had  a  45-day
expiration  time  after  date  of  issuance,  Lee
Oswald  delayed  picking  it  up  untU  he  knew
when  he  was  leaving.  He  could  not  arrange  a
departure  date  untU  he  received  permission
from  the  Department  of  State  in  May  to  re-
turn to  the  United  States.


OSWALD'S  TRIP  TO  MEXICO  CITY

Oswald's  trip  to  Mexico  City  in  late  Septem-
ber and  early  October  1963,  less  than  2  months
before  he  assassinated  President  Kennedy,  has
provoked  speculation  that  it  was  related  in  some
way  to  a  conspiracy  to  murder  the  President.
Rumors  include  assertions  that  he  made  a
clandestine  flight  from  Mexico  to  Cuba  and
back  and  that  he  received  a  large  sum  of
money — usually  estimated  at  $5,000 — which
he  brought  back  to  Dallas  with  him.  The  Com-
mission has  no  credible  evidence  that  Oswald
went  to  Mexico  pursuant  to  a  plan  to  assassi-
nate President  Kennedy,  that  he  received  any
instructions  related  to  such  an  action  while
there,  or  that  he  received  large  sums  of  money
from  any  source  in  Mexico.

Speculation. — Oswald  could  not  have  re-
ceived an  American  passport  in  June  1963
within  24  hours  without  special  intervention  on
his  behalf.

Commission  finding. — Oswald's  passport  ap-
plication was  processed  routinely  by  the  De-
partment of  State.  No  person  or  agency  inter-
vened specially  on  his  behalf  to  speed  the
issuance  of  the  passport.  The  passports  of  24
other  persons,  on  the  same  list  sent  to  Wash-
ington from  New  Orleans,  were  authorized  at
the  same  time.  The  Passport  OflBce  of  the  De-
partment of  State  had  no  instructions  to  delay
issuance  of  or  to  deny  a  passport  to  Oswald.

Speculation. — ^The  Walter-McCarran  Act  spe-
cifically requires  anyone  who  has  attempted  to
renounce  his  U.S.  citizenship  to  file  an  affidavit
stating  why  he  should  receive  a  U.S.  passport.
Therefore,  Oswald  should  have  been  required
to  file  such  an  aflBdavit  before  receiving  his
passport  in  June  1963.

Commission  finding. — The  Internal  Security
Act  of  1950  (Walter-McCarran  Act)  contains
no  reference  to  an  affidavit  being  required  of  a
U.S.  citizen  who  has  attempted  to  expatriate
himself.

Speculation. — Oswald  did  not  have  money
for  his  trip  to  Mexico  in  September  1963.

Commission  finding. — An  analysis  of  Os-
wald's finances  by  the  Commission  indicates
that  he  had  sufficient  money  to  make  the  trip
to  and  from  Mexico  City.  There  is  no  evidence
that  he  received  any  assistance  in  financing  his
trip  to  Mexico.  The  total  cost  of  his  7-day  trip
has  been  reliably  estimated  at  less  than  $85.

5/?ecM/<2//on.— Oswald  was  accompanied  on
his  trip  to  Mexico  City  by  a  man  and  two
women.

Commission  finding. — Investigation  has  re-
vealed that  Oswald  traveled  alone  on  the  bus.
Fellow  passengers  on  the  bus  between  Houston
and  Mexico  City  have  stated  that  he  appeared
to  be  traveling  alone  and  that  they  had  not
previously  known  him.

Speculation. — While  in  Mexico,  Oswald  made
a  clandestine  flight  to  Havana  and  back.

Commission  finding. — The  Commission  has


281


found  no  evidence  that  Oswald  made  any  flight
to  Cuba  while  he  was  in  Mexico.  He  never  re-
ceived permission  from  the  Cuban  Government
to  enter  Cuba  nor  from  the  Mexican  Govern-
ment to  leave  Mexico  bound  for  Cuba.  A  con-
fidential check  of  the  Cuban  airline  in  Mexico
City  indicates  that  Oswald  never  appeared  at
its  office  there.

Speculation. — Oswald  came  back  from  Mex-
ico City  with  $5,000.

Commission  finding. — ^No  evidence  has  ever
been  supplied  or  obtained  to  support  this  allega-
tion. Oswald's  actions  in  Mexico  City  and  after
his  return  to  Dallas  lend  no  support  to  this
speculation.

Speculation. — On  November  27,  1963,  in  a
speech  at  the  University  of  Havana,  Fidel
Castro,  under  the  influence  of  liquor,  said
"The  first  time  that  Oswald  was  in  Cuba  *  *  *."
Castro  therefore  had  knowledge  that  Oswald
had  made  surreptitious  visits  to  Cuba.

Commission  finding. — Castro's  speeches  are
monitored  directly  by  the  U.S.  Information
Agency  as  he  delivers  them.  A  tape  of  this
speech  reveals  that  it  did  not  contain  the  al-
leged slip  of  the  tongue.  Castro  did  refer  to
Oswald's  visit  to  the  "Cuban  Embassy"  in
Mexico  which  he  immediately  corrected  to
"Cuban  consulate."  The  Commission  has  found
no  evidence  that  Oswald  had  made  surrepti-
tious visits  to  Cuba.


OSWALD  AND  U.S.  GOVERNMENT
AGENCIES

Rumors  and  speculations  that  Oswald  was  in
some  way  associated  with  or  used  by  agencies
of  the  U.S.  Government  grew  out  of  his  Rus-
sian period  and  his  investigation  by  the  FBI
after  his  return  to  the  United  States.  Insinua-
tions were  made  that  Oswald  had  been  a  CIA
agent  or  had  some  relationship  with  the  CIA
and  that  this  explained  the  supposed  ease  with
which  he  received  passports  and  visas.  Specu-
lation that  he  had  some  working  relationship
with  the  FBI  was  based  on  an  entry  in  Os-
wald's notebook  giving  the  name  and  tele-
phone number  of  an  agent  from  the  FBI  office
in  Dallas.  The  Directors  of  the  CIA  and  the
FBI  have  testified  before  the  Conmiission  that
Oswald  was  never  in  the  employ  of  their  agen-
cies in  any  capacity.  The  Commission  has  con-
cluded on  the  basis  of  its  own  investigations  of
the  files  of  Federal  agencies  that  Oswald  was
not  and  had  never  been  an  agent  of  any  agency
of  the  U.S.  Government  (aside  from  his  ser-
vice in  the  Marines)  and  was  not  and  had
never  been  used  by  any  U.S.  Government
agency  for  any  purpose.  The  FBI  was  inter-
ested in  him  as  a  former  defector  and  it  main-
tained a  file  on  him.

Speculation. — Oswald  was  an  informant  of
either  the  FBI  or  the  CIA.  He  was  recruited


by  an  agency  of  the  U.S.  Government  and  sent
to  Russia  in  1959.

Commission  finding. — Mrs.  Marguerite  Os-
wald frequently  expressed  the  opinion  that  her
son  was  such  an  agent,  but  she  stated  before
the  Commission  that  "I  cannot  prove  Lee  is  an
agent."  The  Directors  of  the  CIA  and  of  the
FBI  testified  before  the  Commission  that  Os-
wald was  never  employed  by  either  agency  or
used  by  either  agency  in  any  capacity.  Investi-
gation by  the  Commission  has  revealed  no
evidence  that  Oswald  was  ever  employed  by
either  the  FBI  or  CIA  in  any  capacity.

Speculation. — Oswald  told  Pauline  Bates,  a
public  stenographer  in  Fort  Worth,  Tex.,  in
June  1962,  that  he  had  become  a  "secret  agent"
of  the  U.S.  Government  and  that  he  was  soon
going  back  to  Russia  "for  Washington."

Commission  finding. — Miss  Bates  denied  a
newspaper  story  reporting  that  Oswald  had  told
her  that  he  was  working  for  the  U.S.  Depart-
ment of  State.  She  stated  that  she  had  assumed
incorrectly  that  he  was  working  with  the  De-
partment of  State  when  he  told  her  that  the
State  Department  had  told  him  in  1959  that
he  would  be  on  his  own  while  in  the  Soviet
Union.

Speculation. — The  FBI  tried  to  recruit  Os-
wald. An  FBI  agent's  name,  telephone  number,
and  automobile  Ucense  number  were  found
among  Oswald's  papers.

Commission  finding. — FBI  officials  have  testi-
fied that  they  had  never  tried  to  recruit  Os-
wald to  act  on  behalf  of  the  FBI  in  any  ca-
pacity. The  Commission's  investigation  corrobo-
rates this  testimony.  An  FBI  agent,  James  P.
Hosty,  Jr.,  had  given  his  name  and  telephone
number  to  Mrs.  Ruth  Paine  so  that  she  could
call  and  give  him  Oswald's  address  in  Dallas
when  she  learned  it.  Mrs.  Paine  and  Marina
Oswald  have  stated  that  Mrs.  Paine  gave  Os-
wald a  slip  of  paper  with  the  agent's  name  and
telephone  number  on  it.  Marina  Oswald  had
taken  down  the  license  number  of  Hosty's  car
on  one  of  his  visits  and  given  it  to  her  hus-
band.

Speculation. — Dallas  police  must  have  known
where  Oswald  was  living  in  the  city  because
Mrs.  Paine  had  given  the  address  of  Oswald's
room  on  North  Beckley  Avenue  to  the  FBI
some  time  before  the  assassination.

Commission  finding. — Mrs.  Paine  had  never
given  the  address  of  Oswald's  roominghouse
to  the  FBI,  nor  had  she  known  the  address
prior  to  the  assassination.  Therefore,  the  Dallas
police  could  not  have  learned  the  address  from
the  FBI  which  did  not  know  the  address  before
the  assassination.  The  Dallas  Police  did  not
know  that  Oswald  was  in  the  city  before  the
assassination.

Speculation. — It  has  been  FBI  policy  for  20
years  to  inform  employers  of  Communists  or
suspected  Communists  employed  by  them.  It
is  a  mystery,  therefore,  how  Oswald  retained
his  job  at  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository.


282


Commission  finding. — ^The  FBI  advised  the
Commission  that  it  has  never  been  its  policy
to  inform  employers  that  they  have  Com-
munists or  suspected  Communists  working  for
them  and  that  the  FBI  does  not  disseminate
internal  security  information  to  anyone  outside
the  executive  branch  of  the  U.S.  Government.
FBI  agents  had  no  contacts  with  Texas  School
Book  Depository  officials  until  after  the  assas-
sination.

Speculation. — Municipal  and  Federal  police
had  observed  Oswald  closely  for  some  time  but
had  not  regarded  him  as  a  potential  killer.

Commission  finding. — The  Dallas  police  had
not  been  aware  of  Oswald's  presence  in  the
city  before  the  assassination.  The  FBI  knew
that  Oswald  was  in  Dallas  from  an  interview
with  Mrs.  Paine,  but  no  FBI  agents  had  inter-
viewed him  there  before  the  assassination.  The
FBI  had  not  regarded  him  as  a  potential  killer.

Speculation. — ^The  FBI  probably  knew  that
Oswald  had  the  rifle  before  the  President's
murder  because  it  was  most  unlikely  that  it
could  have  traced  the  ownership  of  the  rifle
within  1  day  if  it  had  not  already  had  informa-
tion on  the  rifle.

Commission  finding. — ^The  FBI  successfuUy
traced  the  purchase  of  the  rifle  by  Oswald
within  24  hours  of  the  assassination.  It  had
had  no  previous  information  about  the  rifle.

Speculation. — ^The  FBI  interviewed  Oswald
10  days  before  the  assassination.

Commission  finding. — ^The  last  FBI  interview
with  Oswald,  before  the  assassination,  took
place  in  New  Orleans  in  August  1963,  when
he  asked  to  see  an  FBI  agent  after  his  arrest
by  police  for  disturbing  the  peace,  the  outcome
of  his  distribution  of  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  hand-
bills. Neither  Special  Agent  Hosty  nor  any
other  FBI  agent  saw  or  talked  with  Oswald
between  his  return  to  Dallas,  on  October  3,
and  November  22.  Hosty  did  interview  Mrs.
Paine  at  her  home  about  Oswald  on  November
1  and  5,  1963.  He  also  saw  Marina  Oswald
briefly  on  November  1  at  Mrs.  Paine's  house,
but  he  did  not  interview  her.


CONSPIRATORIAL  RELATIONSHIPS

Rumors  concerning  accomplices  and  plots
linked  Oswald  and  Ruby  with  each  other,  or
with  others,  including  Patrolman  J.  D.  Tippit,
Gen.  Edwin  A.  Walker,  and  Bernard  Weissman
of  the  nonexistent  American  Factfinding  Com-
mittee, in  a  conspiratorial  relationship.  The
Commission  made  intensive  inquiry  into  the
backgroimds  and  relationships  of  Oswald  and
Ruby  to  determine  whether  they  knew  each
other  or  were  involved  in  a  plot  of  any  kind
with  each  other  or  others.  It  was  unable  to
find  any  credible  evidence  to  support  the  ru-
mors linking  Oswald  and  Ruby  directly  or
through  others.  The  Commission  concluded
that  they  were  not  involved  in  a  conspiratorial


relationship  with  each  other  or  with  any  third
parties.

Speculation. — Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  Jack
Ruby,  and  Patrohnan  J.  D.  Tippit  lived  within
a  few  blocks  of  each  other.

Commission  finding. — Oswald's  room  was
1.3  miles  from  Ruby's  apartment  and  Tippit
lived  7  miles  away  from  Ruby.  Tippit's  resi-
dence was  about  7  miles  from  Oswald's  room.

Speculation. — Since  Oswald  did  not  have  the
money  to  repay  the  $435.61  he  had  received
from  the  Department  of  State  to  cover  part  of
the  expenses  of  his  return  from  Russia,  he
must  have  received  help  from  some  other
source.  Ruby  lent  Oswald  money  to  pay  back
the  loan  and  lent  him  small  amounts  of  money
thereafter.

Commission  finding. — ^The  Commission  has
no  credible  evidence  that  Oswald  received  any
money  from  Ruby  or  anyone  else  to  repay  his
State  Department  loan,  nor  that  he  received
small  amounts  of  money  from  Ruby  at  any
time.  An  exhaustive  analysis  of  Oswald's  in-
come and  expenditures,  made  for  the  Commis-
sion by  an  Internal  Revenue  Service  expert,
reveals  that  Oswald  had  sufficient  funds  to
make  the  State  Department  repayments  from
his  earnings.

Speculation. — Just  before  Oswald  was  shot
by  Ruby,  he  looked  directly  at  Ruby  in  ap-
parent recognition  of  him.

Commission  finding. — ^The  Commission  has
been  unable  to  establish  as  a  fact  any  kind  of
relationship  between  Ruby  and  Oswald  other
than  that  Oswald  was  Ruby's  victim.  The  Com-
mission has  examined  television  tapes  and
motion  picture  films  of  the  shooting  and  has
been  unable  to  discern  any  facial  expression
that  could  be  interpreted  to  signify  recognition
of  Ruby  or  anyone  else  in  the  basement  of  the
building.

Speculation. — ^The  Dallas  police  suspected
Oswald  and  Ruby  of  being  involved  in  an  at-
tack on  General  Walker  and  planned  to  arrest
the  two  when  the  FBI  intervened,  at  the  re-
quest of  Attorney  General  Robert  F.  Kennedy,
and  asked  the  police  not  to  do  so  for  reasons
of  state.

Commission  finding. — ^This  allegation  ap-
peared in  the  November  29,  1963,  issue  (ac-
tuaUy  printed  on  November  25  or  26)  of  a
German  weekly  newspaper,  Deutsche  National
Zeiting  und  Soldaten  Zeitung,  published  in
Munich.  The  allegation  later  appeared  in  the
National  Enquirer  of  May  17,  1964.  The  Com-
mission has  been  reliably  informed  that  the
statement  was  fabricated  by  an  editor  of  the
newspaper.  No  evidence  in  support  of  this
statement  has  ever  been  advanced  or  uncov-
ered. In  their  investigation  of  the  attack  on
General  Walker,  the  Dallas  police  uncovered
no  suspects  and  planned  no  arrests.  The  FBI
had  no  knowledge  that  Oswald  was  responsible
for  the  attack  until  Marina  Oswald  revealed
the  information  on  December  3,  1963.


283


Speculation. — Ruby  and  Oswald  were  seen
together  at  the  Carousel  Club.

Commission  finding. — All  assertions  that  Os-
wald was  seen  in  the  company  of  Ruby  or  of
anyone  else  at  the  Carousel  Club  have  been
investigated.  None  of  them  merits  any  cre-
dence.

Speculation. — Oswald  and  General  Walker
were  probably  acquainted  with  each  other  since
Oswald's  notebook  contained  Walker's  name
and  telephone  number.

Commission  finding. — Although  Oswald's
notebook  contained  Walker's  name  and  tele-
phone number  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
two  knew  each  other.  It  is  probable  that  this
information  was  inserted  at  the  time  that
Oswald  was  planning  his  attack  on  Walker.
General  Walker  stated  that  he  did  not  know
of  Oswald  before  the  assassination.

Speculation. — Patrolman  J.  D.  Tippit,  Ber-
nard Weissman,  and  Jack  Ruby  met  by  pre-
arrangement  on  November  14,  1963,  at  the
Carousel  Club.

Commission  finding. — Investigation  has  re-
vealed no  evidence  to  support  this  assertion.
Nor  is  there  credible  evidence  that  any  of  the
three  men  knew  each  other.

Speculation. — Ruby's  sister,  Mrs.  Eva  Grant,
said  that  Ruby  and  Tippit  were  "like  two
brothers."

Commission  finding. — Mrs.  Grant  has  denied
ever  making  this  statement  or  any  statement
like  it,  saying  it  was  untrue  and  without  foun-
dation. Ruby  was  acquainted  with  another
Dallas  policeman  named  Tippit,  but  this  was
G.  M.  Tippit  of  the  special  services  bureau  of
the  department,  not  the  Tippit  who  was  killed.

Speculation. — Jack  Ruby  was  one  of  the
most  notorious  of  Dallas  gangsters.

Commission  finding. — There  is  no  credible
evidence  that  Jack  Ruby  was  active  in  the
criminal  underworld.  Investigation  disclosed  no
one  in  either  Chicago  or  Dallas  who  had  any
knowledge  that  Ruby  was  associated  with
organized  criminal  activity.

Speculation. — ^The  shooting  in  Dallas  on
January  23,  1964,  of  Warren  A.  Reynolds,  who
witnessed  the  flight  of  Patrolman  Tippit's  slayer
on  November  22  and  followed  him  for  a  short
distance,  may  have  been  connected  in  some
way  with  the  assassination  of  President  Ken-
nedy and  the  slaying  of  Patrolman  Tippit.  A
man  arrested  for  the  attempt  on  Reynolds,
DarreU  Wayne  Gamer,  was  released  as  a  re-
sult, in  part,  of  testimony  by  Betty  (Nancy
Jane  Mooney)  MacDonald,  who  had  allegedly
worked  at  one  time  as  a  stripper  at  Jack  Ruby's
Carousel  Club.

Commission  finding. — This  rumor,  originally
publicized  by  a  newspaper  columnist  on  Feb-
ruary 23,  1964,  was  apparently  based  on  the
alleged  connection  between  Betty  MacDonald
and  the  Carousel  Club.  Investigation  revealed
no  evidence  that  she  had  ever  worked  at  the
Carousel  Club.  Employees  of  the  club  had  no


recollection  that  she  had  ever  worked  there.
Betty  MacDonald  was  arrested  and  charged
with  disturbing  the  peace  on  February  13,
1964.  After  being  placed  in  a  cell  at  the  Dallas
city  jail,  she  hanged  herself.  The  Commission
has  found  no  evidence  that  the  shooting  of
Warren  Reynolds  was  in  any  way  related  to
the  assassination  of  President  Kennedy  or  the
murder  of  Patrolman  Tippit.


OTHER  RUMORS  AND  SPECULATIONS

Many  rumors  and  speculations  difficult  to
place  in  the  categories  treated  above  also  re-
quired consideration  or  investigation  by  the
Commission.  In  some  way  or  other,  much  of
this  miscellany  was  related  to  theories  of  con-
spiracy involving  Oswald.  The  rest  pertained
to  peripheral  aspects  that  were  of  suflBcient
import  to  merit  attention.  The  Commission's
findings  are  set  forth  below.

Speculation. — Oswald  was  responsible  in
some  way  for  the  death  of  Marine  Pvt.  Martin
D.  Schrand.

Commission  finding. — ^This  rumor  was  men-
tioned by  at  least  one  of  Oswald's  fellow
Marines.  Private  Schrand  was  fatally  woimded
by  a  discharge  from  a  riot-type  shotgun  while
he  was  on  guard  duty  on  January  5,  1958,
near  the  carrier  pier,  U.S.  Naval  Air  Station,
Cubi  Point,  Republic  of  the  Philippines.  The
oflBcial  Marine  investigation  in  1958  found
that  Schrand's  death  was  the  result  of  an  acci-
dental discharge  of  his  gun  and  that  no  other
person  or  persons  were  involved  in  the  inci-
dent. The  rumor  that  Oswald  was  involved  in
Schrand's  death  in  some  way  may  have  had  its
origin  in  two  circumstances:  (1)  Oswald  was
stationed  at  Cubi  Point  at  the  time  of  Schrand's
death;  (2)  on  October  27,  1957,  while  sta-
tioned in  Japan,  Oswald  accidentally  shot  him-
self in  the  left  elbow  with  a  .22  derringer
that  he  owned.  The  Commission  has  found  no
evidence  that  Oswald  had  any  connection  with
the  fatal  shooting  of  Private  Schrand.

Speculation. — The  Texas  School  Book  De-
pository is  owned  and  operated  by  the  city  of
Dallas,  and  Oswald  was  therefore  a  municipal
employee.  Accordingly,  he  could  have  secured
his  job  at  the  Depository  only  if  someone  in
an  official  capacity  vouched  for  him.

Commission  finding. — ^The  Texas  School
Book  Depository  is  a  private  corporation  un-
connected with  the  city  of  Dallas.  Oswald
therefore  was  not  a  municipal  employee.  He
obtained  his  position  at  the  Depository  with
the  assistance  of  Mrs.  Ruth  Paine,  who  learned
of  a  possible  opening  from  a  neighbor  and
arranged  an  interview  for  him  with  Superin-
tendent Roy  S.  Truly  at  the  Depository.

Speculation. — Prior  to  the  assassination  Dal-
las police  searched  other  buildings  in  the  area
of  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  but  not
the  School  Book  Depository  itself.


284


Commission  finding. — The  Dallas  police  and
the  Secret  Service  both  notified  the  Com  mis-
sion  that,  other  than  the  Trade  Mart,  they  had
searched  no  buildings  along  the  route  of  the
President's  motorcade  or  elsewhere  in  Dallas
in  connection  with  the  President's  visit.  It  was
not  Secret  Service  practice  to  search  buildings
along  the  routes  of  motorcades.

Speculation. — Sheriff  E.  J.  Decker  of  Dallas
County  came  on  the  police  radio  at  12:25  p.m.
with  orders  to  calm  trouble  at  the  Texas  School
Book  Depository.

Commission  finding. — The  final  edition  of
the  Dallas  Times-Herald  of  November  22  (p.
1,  col.  1)  reported  that  "Sheriff  Decker  came
on  the  air  at  12:25  p.m."  and  stated:  "  'I  don't
know  what's  happened.  Take  every  available
man  from  the  jail  and  the  office  and  go  to  the
railroad  yards  off  Elm  near  the  triple  imder-
pass,'"  The  article  in  the  Times-Herald  did
not  mention  the  time  that  the  President  was
shot.  The  radio  log  of  the  Dallas  County
Sheriff's  Office  shows  that  Sheriff  Decker  came
on  the  air  at  40  seconds  after  12:30  p.m.  and
stated:  "Stand  by  me.  All  imits  and  officers
vicinity  of  station  report  to  the  railroad  track
area,  j\ist  north  of  Elm — Report  to  the  railroad
track  area,  just  north  of  Elm,"  The  radio  log
does  not  show  any  messages  by  Sheriff  Decker
between  12:20  p.m.  and  40  seconds  after
12:30  p.m.

Speculation. — PoHce  precautions  in  Dallas
on  November  22  included  surveillance  of  many
people,  among  them  some  who  did  no  more
than  speak  in  favor  of  school  integration.

Commission  finding. — The  Dallas  Police  De-
partment notified  the  Commission  that  on
November  22  it  had  no  one  under  surveillance
as  a  precaution  in  connection  with  President
Kennedy's  visit  except  at  the  Trade  Mart.  The
Commission  received  no  evidence  that  the  Dal-
las pohce  had  under  surveillance  people  who
spoke  in  favor  of  school  integration.

Speculation. — Oswald  was  seen  at  shooting
ranges  in  the  Dallas  area  practicing  firing  v-ith
a  rifle.

Commission  finding. — Marina  Oswald  stated
that  on  one  occasion  in  March  or  April  1963,
her  husband  told  her  that  he  was  going  to  prac-
tice firing  with  the  rifle.  Witnesses  have  testified
that  they  saw  Oswald  at  shooting  ranges  ici
the  Dallas  area  during  October  and  November
1963.  Investigation  has  failed  to  confirm  that
the  man  seen  by  these  witnesses  was  Oswald.

Speculation.— -Oswald  could  drive  a  car  and
was  seen  in  cars  at  various  places.

Commission  finding. — Oswald  did  not  have
a  driver's  license.  Marina  Oswald  and  Ruth
Pame  have  testified  that  he  could  not  drive  a
car,  and  there  is  no  confirmed  e\idence  to
establish  his  presence  at  any  location  as  the
driver  of  a  car.  Mrs.  Paine  did  give  Oswald
some  driving  lessons  and  he  did  drive  short
distances  on  these  occasions.

Speculation. — Oswald received money by


Western  Union  telegraph  from  time  to  time
for  several  months  before  the  assassination  of
President  Kennedy.

Commission  finding. — An  employee  in  the
Western  Union  main  office  in  Dallas,  C.  A.
Hamblen,  made  statements  that  he  remembered
seeing  Oswald  there  on  some  occasions  collect-
ing money  that  had  been  telegraphed  to  him.
In  his  testimony  before  the  Conmiission,  Ham-
blen was  unable  to  state  whether  or  not  the
person  he  had  seen  was  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.
Western  Union  officials  searched  their  records
in  Dallas  and  other  cities  for  the  period  from
June  through  November  1963  but  found  no
money  orders  payable  to  Lee  Oswald  or  to
any  of  his  known  aliases.  A  Western  Union
official  concluded  that  the  allegation  was  "a
figment  of  Mr.  Hamblen's  imagination."  The
Commission  has  found  no  evidence  to  con-
tradict this  conclusion.

Speculation. — On  his  way  back  from  Mexico
Cit>'  in  October  1963,  Oswald  stopped  in  Alice,
Tex.,  to  apply  for  a  job  at  the  local  radio
station.

Commission  finding. — This  rumor  apparently
originated  with  the  manager  of  radio  station
KOPY,  Alice,  who  stated  that  Oswald  visited
his  office  on  the  afternoon  of  October  4  for
about  25  minutes.  According  to  the  manager,
Oswald  was  driving  a  battered  1953  model
car  and  had  his  v.1fe  and  a  small  child  in  the
car  with  him.  Oswald  traveled  from  Mexico
City  to  Dallas  by  bus,  arriving  in  Dallas  on
the  afternoon  of  October  3.  The  bus  did  not
pass  through  Alice.  On  October  4,  Oswald
applied  for  t^'O  jobs  in  Dallas  and  then  spent
the  afternoon  and  night  with  his  wife  and
child  at  the  Paiae  residence  in  Indng.  Investi-
gation has  revealed  that  Oswald  did  not  own  a
car  and  there  is  no  convincing  evidence  that
he  could  drive  a  car.  Accordingly,  Oswald
could  not  have  been  in  Alice  on  October  4.
There  is  no  evidence  that  he  stopped  in  Alice
to  look  for  a  job  on  any  occasion.

Speculation. — Oswald  or  accomplices  had
made  arrangements  for  his  getaway  by  airplane
from  an  airfield  in  the  Dallas  area.

Commission  finding. — Investigation  of  such
claims  revealed  that  they  had  not  the  slightest
substance.  The  Commission  found  no  e^idence
that  Oswald  had  any  prearranged  plan  for
escape  after  the  assassination.

Speculation. — One  hundred  and  fift>'  dollars
was  found  in  the  dresser  of  Oswald's  room  at
1026  North  Beckley  Avenue  after  the  assassina-
tion.

Commission  finding. — No  money  was  foimd
in  Oswald's  room  after  the  assassination.  Os-
wald left  $170  in  the  room  occupied  by  his
wife  at  the  Paine  residence  in  Ir\ing.  At  the
time  of  his  arrest  Oswald  had  513.87  on  his
person.

Speculation. — After  Oswald's  arrest,  the  po-
lice found  in  his  room  seven  metal  file  boxes
filled  with  the  names  of  Castro  sympathizers.


285


Commission  finding. — ^The  Dallas  police  in-
ventories of  Oswald's  property  taken  from  his
room  at  1026  North  Beckley  Avenue  do  not
include  any  file  boxes.  A  number  of  small  file
boxes  listed  in  the  inventory  as  having  been
taken  from  the  Paine  residence  in  Irving  con-
tained letters,  pictures,  books  and  literature,
most  of  which  belonged  to  Ruth  Paine,  not  to
Oswald.  No  lists  of  names  of  Castro  sympa-
thizers were  found  among  these  effects.

Speculation. — Oswald's  letters  vary  so  greatly
in  quality  (spelling,  grammar,  sentence  struc-
ture) that  he  must  have  had  help  in  preparing
the  better  constructed  letters  or  someone  else
wrote  them  for  him.

Commission  finding. — There  is  no  evidence
that  anyone  in  the  United  States  helped  Os-
wald with  his  better  written  letters  or  that
anyone  else  wrote  his  letters  for  him.  His  wife
stated  that  he  would  write  many  drafts  of  his
more  important  letters.  His  mother  indicated
that  he  would  work  hard  over  the  drafts  of
some  of  his  letters.  It  is  clear  that  he  did  take
greater  pains  with  some  of  his  letters  than  with
others  and  that  the  contrasts  in  quality  were
accordingly  substantial.  It  is  also  clear  that
even  his  better  written  letters  contained  some
distinctive  elements  of  spelling,  grammar,  and
punctuation  that  were  common  to  his  poorer
efforts.  Oswald  wrote  in  his  diary  that  he  re-
ceived help  from  his  Intourist  Guide,  Rima
Shirokova,  in  the  preparation  of  his  letter  of
October  16,  1959,  to  the  Supreme  Soviet.

Speculation. — A  Negro  janitor  who  was  a
witness  to  the  shooting  and  was  supposed  to
be  able  to  identify  Oswald  as  the  killer  was
held  in  protective  custody  by  the  Dallas  police
until  he  could  appear  before  the  President's
Commission  on  the  Assassination  of  President
Kennedy.

Commission  finding. — Investigation  revealed
that  this  story  had  no  foundation  in  fact.  No
such  witness  was  kept  in  protective  custody  by
the  Dallas  police  for  appearance  before  the
Commission.  The  story  had  its  origin  in  a  news-
paper account  based  on  hearsay.

Speculation. — The  Secret  Service  incarcer-
ated Marina  Oswald  immediately  after  the
assassination.

Commission  finding. — Marina  Oswald  was
given  protection  by  the  Secret  Service  for  a
period  of  time  after  the  assassination.  She
had  freedom  to  communicate  with  others  at
anytime  she  desired,  to  go  where  she  pleased,
or  to  terminate  the  protection  at  any  time.

Speculation. — Mrs.  Marguerite  Oswald  was
shown  a  photograph  of  Jack  Ruby  by  an  FBI
agent  the  night  before  Ruby  killed  her  son.

Commission  finding. — On  the  night  of  No-
vember 23,  1963,  Special  Agent  Bardwell  D.
Odum  of  the  FBI  showed  Mrs.  Marguerite
Oswald a picture of a man to determine


whether  the  man  was  known  to  her.  Mrs.
Oswald  stated  subsequentiy  that  the  picture
was  of  Jack  Ruby.  The  Commission  has  ex-
amined a  copy  of  the  photograph  and  deter-
mined that  it  was  not  a  picture  of  Jack  Ruby.

Speculation. — The  son  of  the  only  witness
to  the  Tippit  slaying  was  arrested  after  talking
to  some  private  investigators  and  soon  plunged
to  his  death  from  an  unbarred  jail  window.

Commission  finding. — According  to  Mrs.
Helen  Markham,  one  of  the  witnesses  to  the
Tippit  slaying,  Mrs.  Marguerite  Oswald  and
two  men  who  claimed  to  be  reporters  from
Philadelphia  sought  to  interview  her  on  June
27,  1964.  Mrs.  Markham  did  not  wish  to  be
interviewed  and  put  them  off.  Afterward,  Mrs.
Markham's  son,  William  Edward  Markham,
talked  with  Mrs.  Oswald  and  the  men  about
the  Oswald  matter  and  the  shooting  of  Patrol-
man Tippit.  William  Edward  Markham  had
been  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  at  the  time  of  the  assas-
sination and  had  not  returned  to  Dallas  until
May  7,  1964.  He  had  no  personal  knowledge
of  the  shooting  of  Patrolman  Tippit.  On  June
30,  1964,  another  of  Mrs.  Markham's  sons,
James  Alfred  Markham,  was  arrested  at  Mrs.
Markham's  apartment  by  Dallas  Police  on  a
charge  of  burglary.  While  trying  to  escape,  he
fell  from  the  bathroom  of  the  apartment  to  a
concrete  driveway  about  20  feet  below.  He
was  taken  to  Parkland  Memorial  Hospital,
treated  for  injuries,  and  after  6^  hours  was
taken  to  jail.  As  of  July  31,  1964,  he  was  in
Dallas  County  Jail  awaiting  trial.  There  was
also  a  warrant  outstanding  against  him  for
parole  violation.

Speculation. — The  headquarters  detachment
of  the  U.S.  Army,  under  orders  from  [Secre-
tary of  Defense  Robert  S.]  McNamara's  ofl5ce,
began  to  rehearse  for  the  fimeral  more  than
a  week  before  the  assassination.

Commission  finding. — That  assertion  is  based
on  an  interview  with  U.S.  Army  Capt.  Richard
C.  Cloy  that  appeared  in  the  Jackson,  Miss.,
Clarion-Ledger  of  February  21,  1964.  The
newspaper  quotes  Captain  Cloy,  who  was  a
member  of  the  Army  unit  charged  with  con-
ducting funeral  ceremonials  in  honor  of  de-
ceased Chiefs  of  State,  as  having  said  that,
"we  were  in  a  state  of  readiness  and  had  just
finished  a  funeral  rehearsal  because  there  was
grave  concern  for  President  Hoover's  health.
But  we  never  expected  that  our  practice  was
preparing  us  for  President  Kennedy."

Speculation. — ^The  ship  in  which  Oswald
went  to  Europe  in  1959  stopped  in  Havana
on  the  way.

Commission  finding. — Oswald  boarded  the
SS  Marion  Lykes  in  New  Orleans  and  it  sailed
on  September  20,  1959.  It  docked  in  Le  Havre,
France,  on  October  8  with  only  one  previous
stop— at  another  French  port.  La  Pallice.


286


Appendix  Xlll
BIOGRAPHY  OF  LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD


EARLY  YEARS


Marguerite  Claverie,  the  mother  of  Lee  Har-
vey Oswald,  was  bom  in  New  Orleans  In  1907,
into  a  family  of  French  and  German  extrac-
tion. Her  mother  died  a  few  years  after  Mar-
guerite was  bom,  leaving  her  and  five  other
young  children  in  the  care  of  their  father,  a
streetcar  conductor.  Although  Marguerite  de-
scribes herself  as  "a  child  of  one  parent,"  she
recalls  being  "one  of  the  most  popular  young
ladies  in  the  [grammar]  school,"  and  thinks  of
her  childhood  as  a  "very  full  happy"  one.  Her
older  sister,  Mrs.  Lillian  Murret,  remembers
Marguerite  as  "a  very  prett>'  child,  a  very  beau-
tiful girl,"  as  does  a  former  acquaintance,  Clem
H.  Sehrt,  who  knew  the  Claveries.  The  family
was  poor  but,  according  to  Mrs.  Murret,  was  a
"happy  family  *  *  *  singing  all  the  time."
Marguerite  had  1  year  of  high  school.  Shortly
before  she  was  17,  she  went  to  work  as  a  recep-
tionist for  a  law  firm  in  New  Orleans.

In  August  1929,  while  she  was  still  working
at  the  law  firm.  Marguerite  married  Edward
John  Pic,  Jr.,  a  quiet  man  of  her  ov-n  age,  who
worked  as  a  clerk  for  T.  Smith  &  Son,  a  New
Orleans  stevedoring  company.  The  marriage
was  not  a  success,  and  by  the  summer  of  1931
she  and  Pic  were  separated.  Marguerite  was
then  3  months  pregnant;  she  told  her  family
that  Pic  did  not  want  any  children  and  refused
to  support  her.  Pic  ascribed  the  separation  sim-
ply to  their  inability  to  get  along  together.  A
boy  was  bom  on  January  17,  1932,  whom
Marguerite  named  John  Edward  Pic.  Pic  saw
his  son  occasionally  until  he  was  about  1  year
old;  after  that,  he  did  not  see  the  boy  again
but  contributed  to  his  support  until  he  was  18
years  old.

During  her  separation  from  her  first  hus-
band. Marguerite  saw  a  great  deal  of  Robert
Edward  Lee  Oswald,  an  insurance  premium
collector,  who  also  was  married  but  was  sepa-
rated from  his  wife.  In  1933,  Marguerite  was
divorced  from  Pic  and,  Oswald's  v^ife  also  hav-
ing obtained  a  divorce,  they  were  married  in  a
Lutheran  church  on  July  20.  Marguerite  has
described  the  period  of  her  marriage  to  Oswald
as  "the  only  happy  part"  of  her  life.  A  son
was  bora  on  April  7,  1934,  who  was  named  for
his  father;  Oswald  wanted  to  adopt  John  Pic,
but  his  mother  objected  on  the  ground  that
John's  father  might  cut  off  the  support  pay-
ments. In  1938,  the  Oswalds  purchased  a  new
house  on  Alvar  Street  for  $3,900,  in  what  John
remembered  as  "a  rather  nice  neighborhood."
The  house  was  across  the  street  from  the  Wil-
liam Frantz  School,  which  first  John  and  later
both  he  and  Robert,  Jr.,  attended.  On  Au-
gust 19,  1939,  little  more  than  a  year  after  the
Oswalds  bought  the  Alvar  Street  house,  Robert
Oswald  died  suddenly  of  a  heart  attack-


Two  months  later,  on  October  18,  1939,  a
second  son  was  bom.  He  was  named  Lee  after
his  father;  Harvey  was  his  paternal  grand-
mother's maiden  name.  For  a  while  after  her
husband's  death,  Mrs.  Oswald  remained  in  the
Alvar  Street  house  without  working;  she  prob-
ably lived  on  life  insurance  proceeds.  Sometime
in  1940,  she  rented  the  house  to  Dr.  Bruno  F.
Mancuso,  the  doctor  who  had  delivered  Lee.
(Dr.  Mancuso  continued  to  rent  the  house
until  1944,  when  Marguerite  obtained  a  judg-
ment of  possession  against  him.  She  sold  the
house  for  $6,500  to  the  First  Homestead  and
Savings  Association,  which  resold  it  to  Dr.
Mancuso. )  She  herself  moved  to  a  rented  house
at  1242  Congress  Street,  where  she  lived  for
about  half  a  year.  For  part  of  this  period  after
Oswald's  death,  the  two  older  boys  were  placed
in  the  Infant  Jesus  College,  a  Catholic  boarding
school  in  Algiers,  La.,  a  suburb  of  New  Orleans.
Neither  they  nor  their  mother  liked  this  ar-
rangement, which  John  thought  was  intended
to  save  money;  it  lasted  for  less  than  a  year,
after  which  the  boys  returned  to  the  school
Frantz  and  then  transferred  to  the  George
Washington  Elementary  School.

On  March  5,  1941,  Mrs.  Oswald  purchased
a  frame  house  at  1010  Bartholomew  Street,  for
$1,300.  According  to  John's  recollection,  the
neighborhood  was  not  as  pleasant  as  Alvar
Street;  the  house  had  a  backv-ard,  and  the  fam-
ily kept  a  dog  named  "Sunshine."  A  neighbor,
Mrs.  Viola  Peterman,  recalls  that  Mrs.  Oswald
kept  to  herself  but  appeared  to  be  "a  good
mother  to  her  children."  She  opened  a  shop  in
the  front  room,  where  she  sold  things  like  sew-
ing supplies  and  small  groceries.  Oswald's
Notion  Shop,  as  it  was  called,  failed  to  make
money,  and  on  Januan,'  16,  1942,  Mrs.  Oswald
sold  the  house  back  to  the  Third  District  Home
Association,  from  which  she  had  purchased  it,
for  a  profit  of  SB 00.

Probably  in  contemplation  of  the  sale  of  the
house,  Mrs,  Oswald  applied  in  December  1941
to  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Bethlehem  Orphan
As>'lum  Association  for  the  admission  of  her
t^i^'o  older  sons  to  the  orphan  as^'lum,  known  as
the  Bethlehem  Children's  Home;  she  stated  on
the  application  that  she  could  contribute  $20
per  month  to  their  maintenance  and  would  sup-
ply shoes  and  clothing.  She  had  inquired  also
about  Lee,  who  was  too  young  to  be  admitted,
John  and  Robert  were  accepted  and  entered
the  home  on  January'  3,  1942.

Mrs.  Oswald  moved  to  an  apartment  at  831
Pauline  Street,  and  returned  to  worL  In  De-
cember 1942,  she  listed  her  occupation  as  "tele-
phone operator";  this  may  be  the  job  she  held
at  the  Pittsburgh  Plate  Glass  Co.,  a  company
for  which  she  worked  at  some  point  during  this
period.  She  left  Lee  for  much  of  this  time  ^ith
his  aunt,  Mrs,  Murret,  who  thonght  him  a  good


287


looking,  friendly  child,  but  could  not  devote  a
great  deal  of  attention  to  him  because  she  had
five  children  of  her  own.  In  the  late  spring  of
1942,  Lee  was  watched  for  several  weeks  by
Mrs.  Thomas  Roach,  who  lived  with  her  hus-
band in  the  same  house  as  the  Oswalds.  Lee
evidently  did  not  get  along  with  Mrs.  Roach
who  told  the  next  occupant  of  the  house  that
Lee  was  a  bad,  unmanageable  child  who  threw
his  toy  gun  at  her.  Apparently  referring  to  the
Roaches,  Mrs.  Oswald  testified  that  she  had
once  hired  a  couple  to  care  for  Lee;  the  couple
neglected  him,  so  she  "put  them  out"  and  cared
for  Lee  herself  imtil  Mrs.  Murret  was  able  to
help  her  again.  Soon  after  the  incident  with
the  Roaches,  Mrs.  Oswald  moved  again,  this
time  to  111  Sherwood  Forest  Drive,  near  the
Murrets.

Mrs.  Murret  took  care  of  Lee  for  several
months  longer.  Near  Lee's  third  birthday,  Mrs.
Oswald  again  inquired  about  his  admission  into
the  Bethlehem  Children's  Home,  perhaps  be=
cause  a  disagreement  with  her  sister  made  it
impossible  to  leave  him  with  her  any  longer.
He  was  admitted  on  December  26.  On  his  ap-
plication, Mrs.  Oswald  agreed  to  contribute  $10
per  month  and  to  supply  shoes  and  clothing,  as
for  the  other  boys.

Lee  remained  in  the  home  for  about  13
months,  but  according  to  John's  testimony,  left
on  several  occasions  to  spend  short  periods  of
time  with  his  mother  or  the  Murrets.  John  and
Robert  have  pleasant  memories  of  the  home,
which  apparently  gave  the  children  a  good  deal
of  freedom.  Robert  described  it  as  nondenomi-
national  but  having  "a  Christian  atmosphere";
"it  might  have  been  just  a  Protestant  home."
Mrs.  Oswald  visited  them  regularly,  and  they
occasionally  left  the  home  to  visit  her  or  the
Murrets.

In  July  1943,  Mrs.  Oswald  was  hired  to  man-
age a  small  hosiery  store.  This  is  probably  the
store  to  which  she  referred  in  her  testimony  as
the  "Princess  Hosiery  Shop  on  Canal  Street,"
at  which,  she  testified,  she  was  left  by  herself
and  "in  6  days'  time  *  *  *  hired  four  girls."
Her  employer  remembers  her  as  a  neat,  attrac-
tive, and  hardworking  woman,  an  aggressive
person  who  would  make  a  good  manager.  She
was  not  good  with  figures,  however,  and  after
several  months  he  discharged  her.  At  about  this
same  time,  she  met  Edwin  A.  Ekdahl,  an  elec-
trical engineer  older  than  herself,  who  was  orig-
inally from  Boston  but  was  then  working  in  the
area.  They  saw  each  other  often.  Ekdahl  met
the  boys  and,  according  to  John's  testimony,
on  at  least  one  occasion,  they  all  spent  a  week-
end at  a  summer  resort  area  in  Covington,  La.

By  January  1944,  Mrs.  Oswald  and  Ekdahl
had  decided  to  marry.  She  withdrew  Lee  from
the  Children's  Home  and  moved  with  him  to
Dallas,  where  Ekdahl  expected  to  be  located.
They  planned  to  postpone  the  marriage  until
the  end  of  the  school  year  so  that  the  older
boys  could  complete  the  year  at  the  home  be-


fore they  left  it.  In  the  meantime,  she  would
care  for  Ekdahl,  who  was  recovering  from  a
serious  illness,  probably  a  heart  attack.  Mrs.
Oswald  has  testified  that  when  she  arrived  in
Dallas,  she  decided  that  she  did  not  want  to
marry  Ekdahl  after  all.  Using  part  of  the  pro-
ceeds from  the  sale  of  the  Alvar  Street  house,
she  purchased  a  house  at  4801  Victor  Street,
a  portion  of  which  she  rented.  In  Jime,  John
and  Robert  left  the  Children's  Home  and  joined
their  mother  in  Dallas.  They  entered  the  nearby
Davy  Crockett  Elementary  School  the  follow-
ing September.

Ekdahl  visited  Mrs.  Oswald  on  weekends  and
stayed  at  Victor  Street.  By  the  following  year
she  had  resolved  her  doubts  about  marrying
him,  influenced  in  part  by  his  substantial  in-
come and  perhaps  by  the  visit  some  time  earlier
of  his  sister,  who  favored  the  marriage  because
of  his  ill  health.  Explaining  that  she  expected
to  travel  a  great  deal,  Mrs.  Oswald  tried  unsuc-
cessfully to  return  the  older  boys  to  the  home
in  February  1945,  She  and  Ekdahl  were  mar-
ried in  May.  After  a  brief  honeymoon,  they
returned  to  Victor  Street.

Ekdahl  got  along  well  with  the  boys,  on  whom
he  lavished  much  attention.  John  testified  that
Ekdahl  treated  them  as  if  they  were  his  own
children  and  that  Lee  seemed  to  find  in  Ekdahl
"the  father  he  never  had";  John  recalled  that
on  one  occasion  he  told  Lee  that  Ekdahl  and
his  mother  had  become  reconciled  after  a  sepa-
ration, and  that  "this  seemed  to  really  elate
Lee,  this  made  him  really  happy  that  they  were
getting  back  together."

Because  Ekdahl's  business  required  him  to
make  frequent  trips,  in  September,  John  and
Robert  were  placed  in  the  Chamberlain-Hunt
Military  Academy  at  Port  Gibson,  Miss.;  their
mother  paid  the  tuition  herself,  using  the  pro-
ceeds from  the  sale  of  the  Alvar  Street  prop-
erty. They  remained  at  the  academy  for  the
next  3  years,  returning  home  only  for  vaca-
tions. Lee  accompanied  his  parents  on  their
travels.  Mrs.  Myrtle  Evans,  who  had  known
both  Marguerite  and  Ekdahl  before  their  mar-
riage, testified  that  Marguerite  insisted  on  keep-
ing Lee  with  her;  Mrs.  Evans  thought  that
Marguerite  was  "too  close"  to  Lee  and  "spoiled
him  to  death,"  which  hurt  her  marriage  to
Ekdahl.

Sometime  in  the  fall  after  John  and  Robert
were  at  boarding  school,  the  Ekdahls  moved  to
Benbrook,  a  suburb  of  Fort  Worth,  where  they
lived  on  Granbury  Road,  in  a  house  of  stone
or  brick,  set  on  a  large  plot  of  land.  Records  of
the  Benbrook  Common  School  show  Lee's  ad-
mission into  the  first  grade  on  October  31;  his
birth  date  is  incorrectly  given  as  July  9,  1939,
his  mother  presumably  having  given  that  date
to  satisfy  the  age  requirement.  On  February  8,
1946,  he  was  admitted  to  the  Harris  Hospital
in  Fort  Worth  with  "acute  mastoiditis."  A  mas-
toidectomy was  performed  without  complica-
tions, and  Lee  left  the  hospital  in  4  days.  (In


288


1955,  Lee  indicated  on  a  school  form  that  he
had  an  "abnormal  ear  drum  in  left  ear,"  pre-
sumably a  reference  to  the  mastoidectomy;  but
when  he  entered  the  Marines  1  year  later,  phys-
ical examination  disclosed  no  physical  defects.)

The  Ekdahls'  marriage  quickly  broke  down.
Before  they  had  been  married  a  year,  Mar-
guerite suspected  Ekdahl  of  infidelity.  She
thought  him  stingy,  and  there  were  frequent
arguments  about  his  insistence  that  she  account
for  her  expenditures  and  his  refusal  to  share
his  money  with  her.  In  the  summer  of  1946,
she  left  Ekdahl,  picked  up  John  and  Robert  at
Chamberlain-Hunt,  and  moved  with  the  boys
to  Covington,  La.,  where  they  lived  for  at  least
part  of  the  time  at  311  Vermont  Street.  Mrs.
Evans  described  them  at  Covington,  possibly
during  this  summer,  as  "reaUy  a  happy  family";
Lee  seemed  like  a  normal  boy  but  "kept  to  him-
self" and  seemed  not  "to  want  to  be  with  any
other  children."  The  separation  continued  after
the  two  boys  returned  to  boarding  school,  and
in  September  Lee  was  enrolled  in  the  Coving-
ton Elementary  School.  His  record  at  Benbrook
had  been  satisfactory — he  was  present  on  82
school  days  and  absent  on  15,  and  received  all
A's  and  B's — ^but  he  had  not  completed  the
work  of  the  first  grade,  in  which  he  was  en-
rolled for  a  second  time.

Lee  received  no  grades  at  the  Covington
School,  from  which  he  was  withdrawn  on  Janu-
ary 23,  1947,  because  his  parents,  now  recon-
ciled, were  moving  to  Fort  Worth,  where  they
lived  at  1505  Eighth  Avenue.  Four  days  later,
he  enrolled  in  the  Clayton  Public  School;  he
was  still  in  the  first  grade,  which  he  completed
in  May  with  B's  in  every  subject  except  physi-
cal education  and  health,  in  which  he  received
A's.  In  the  fall,  he  entered  the  second  grade  in
the  same  school,  but,  relations  between  his  par-
ents having  deteriorated  again,  was  withdrawn
before  any  grades  were  recorded.

After  the  move  to  Fort  Worth,  the  Ekdahls
continued  to  argue  frequently;  according  to
John,  "they  would  have  a  fight  about  every
other  day  and  he  would  leave  and  come  back."
That  summer.  Marguerite  obtained  what  she
regarded  as  proof  that  Ekdahl  was  having  some
sort  of  affair.  According  to  her  testimony,  a
neighbor  told  her  that  Ekdahl  had  been  hving
on  Eighth  Avenue  with  another  woman  while
she  was  in  Covington.  Then,  at  a  time  when
Ekdahl  was  supposed  to  be  out  of  town,  she
went  with  John  and  several  of  his  friends  to  an
apartment  in  Fort  Worth;  one  of  the  boys
posed  as  a  telegram  carrier,  and  when  the  door
opened  she  pushed  her  way  into  the  apartment
and  found  Ekdahl  in  his  shirt  sleeves  in  the
company  of  a  woman  in  a  negligee.

Despite  this  apparent  confirmation  of  her
suspicions,  Marguerite  continued  to  live  with
Ekdahl  until  January  1948.  In  January,  accord-
ing to  Ekdahl's  allegations  in  the  subsequent
divorce  proceedings,  she  "directed  *  *  *  Piim]
to  leave  the  home  immediately  and  never  to


return,"  which  he  did.  Ekdahl  filed  suit  for
divorce  in  March.  The  complaint  alleged  that
Marguerite  constantly  nagged  Ekdahl  and  ar-
gued "with  reference  to  money  matters,"  ac-
cused him  of  infidelity,  threw  things  at  him,
and  finally  ordered  him  out  of  the  house;  that
these  acts  were  unprovoked  by  Ekdahl's  con-
duct toward  her;  that  her  acts  endangered  his
already  impaired  health;  and  that  her  "excesses,
harsh  and  cruel  treatment  and  outrages"  toward
him  made  it  impossible  for  them  to  hve  to-
gether. She  denied  all  these  allegations.  After  a
trial,  at  which  John  testified  and,  he  thought,
Lee  was  called  to  the  stand  but  was  excused
without  testifying,  the  jury  found  on  special
issues  that  Marguerite  was  "guUty  of  excesses,
cruel  treatment,  or  outrages"  unprovoked  by
Ekdahl's  conduct.  On  June  24,  the  court  granted
the  divorce  and  approved  an  agreement  be-
tween the  parties  disposing  of  their  property
between  them  and  awarding  Marguerite  $1,500;
at  her  request,  the  divorce  restored  to  Mar-
guerite her  former  name,  Marguerite  C.  Oswald.

While  the  divorce  suit  was  pending.  Mar-
guerite moved  from  Eighth  Avenue  to  a  house
on  3300  Willing  Street,  next  to  railroad  tracks.
The  boys  found  her  there  in  May  when  they
returned  from  the  miUtary  academy;  for  John,
the  move  signified  that  they  "were  back  down
in  the  lower  class  again."  Lee's  withdrawal
from  the  Clayton  School  on  March  18,  1948,
probably  coincided  with  the  move  to  Willing
Street.  He  entered  the  Clark  Elementary  School
on  the  following  day,  and  in  June  completed
the  second  grade  with  a  record  mostly  of  B's
and  A's.  Philip  Vinson,  a  classmate  at  the  Clay-
ton School,  has  described  Lee  at  that  time  as
"a  quiet  t>'pe  of  kid,"  who  "didn't  make  a  lot
of  noise."  Lee  was  "stocky  and  well  built,"
which  made  other  boys  look  up  to  him  and
regard  him  as  the  leader  of  one  of  their  school-
yard "gangs."  Vinson  thought  that  Lee  was  not
a  bully  and  got  along  with  his  classmates,  but
had  the  impression  that  he  rarely  played  with
them  or  brought  them  home  after  school.

Shortly  after  the  divorce,  Mrs.  Oswald  pur-
chased a  small  house  in  Benbrook,  on  what  is
now  San  Saba  Street;  John  has  testified  that  it
had  a  single  bedroom,  in  which  Lee  slept  with
his  mother,  and  a  screened  porch  where  John
and  Robert  slept.  Mrs.  Oswald  worked  at  a
department  store  in  Fort  Worth,  and  left  the
three  boys  home  alone.  A  neighbor,  Mrs.  W.  H.
Bell,  has  stated  that  Lee  seemed  to  enjoy  being
by  himself  and  to  resent  discipline;  another
neighbor,  Otis  R.  Carlton,  stated  that  he  once
saw  Lee  chase  John  with  a  knife  and  throw  it
at  him,  an  incident  which,  Carlton  said,  their
mother  passed  off  as  a  "little  scuflSe."  At  the
end  of  the  summer,  Carlton  purchased  the
property.  He  stated  that  he  appraised  it  at
$2,750  at  Mrs.  Oswald's  request;  she  then  in-
sisted that  he  had  made  an  offer  to  purchase
at  that  price,  which  he  finally  agreed  to  do.

After  the  house  was  sold,  the  family  returned


289


to  Fort  Worth,  a  move  necessitated  by  Mrs.
Oswald's,  and  now  John's,  employment.  Mrs.
Oswald  bought  a  two-bedroom,  frame  house  at
7408  Ewing,  from  which  Robert  and  Lee  could
walk  to  school.  John,  who  was  then  16,  ob-
tained a  job  as  a  shoe  stockboy  at  Everybody's
Department  Store;  he  testified  that  he  wanted
to  finish  high  school  at  the  military  academy,
but  that  his  mother  advised  him  to  leave  school
and  help  to  support  the  family.  He  gave  her
$15  per  week  out  of  his  salary  of  $25.  Robert
returned  to  school.

Lee  entered  the  third  grade  at  the  Arlington
Heights  Elementary  School.  He  remained  at
Arlington  Heights  for  the  entire  school  year,
completing  the  third  grade  with  a  satisfactory
record,  which  included  A's  in  social  studies,
citizenship,  elementary  science,  art,  and  music,
and  a  D  in  spelling.  In  September  1949,  he
transferred  to  the  Ridglea  West  Elementary
School,  where  he  remained  for  the  next  3  years.
Lee's  record  at  Ridglea  is  not  remarkable  in
any  respect.  In  the  fourth  and  fifth  grades,  he
received  mostly  B's;  in  the  sixth  grade,  B's  and
C's  predominate.  He  received  D's  in  both  the
fifth  and  sixth  grades  in  spelling  and  arithmetic;
in  the  fourth  and  sixth  grades,  C's  are  recorded
for  Spanish,  which  may  account  for  his  rudi-
mentary familiarity  with  that  language  later  on.
In  the  fourth  grade  his  IQ  was  recorded  at  103;
on  achievement  tests  in  each  of  the  3  years,  he
twice  did  best  in  reading  and  twice  did  worst
in  spelling.

Lee  is  generally  characterized  as  an  unex-
ceptional but  rather  solitary  boy  during  these
years.  His  mother  worked  in  a  variety  of  jobs,
and,  according  to  her  own  testimony,  told  Lee
not  to  contact  her  at  work  except  in  an  emer-
gency. He  ordinarily  returned  home  alone  di-
rectly after  school,  in  obedience  to  his  mother's
instructions.  A  fourth  grade  teacher,  Mrs.
Clyde  I.  Livingston,  described  him  as  a  lonely
boy,  quiet  and  shy,  who  did  not  easUy  form
friendships  with  other  students.  But  Richard
W.  Garrett  has  stated  that  he  was  a  classmate
of  Lee  in  the  fourth  or  fifth  grade  and  found
him  easy  to  get  along  with;  he  recalled  playing
with  Lee  often  at  school  and  sometimes  walk-
ing home  together  with  him.  Mrs.  Livingston
recalled  that  at  Christmas  1949,  Lee  gave  her
a  puppy  and  afterward  came  to  her  home  to  see
the  puppy  and  talk  to  her  and  her  family.

Lee's  relationship  with  his  brothers  was  good
but  limited  by  the  difference  in  their  ages.  He
still  had  a  dog,  but  there  were  few  children  of
his  age  in  the  neighborhood,  and  he  appears  to
have  been  by  himself  after  school  most  of  the
time.  He  read  a  lot,  had  a  stamp  collection,  and
played  chess  and  Monopoly  with  his  brothers.
Mrs.  Murret  remembered  that  on  a  visit  to  her
home  in  New  Orleans,  Lee  refused  to  play  with
other  children  or  even  to  leave  the  house;  he
preferred  to  stay  indoors  and  read  (mostly
"funnybooks")  or  listen  to  the  radio.  After
several  weeks  with  the  Murrets,  Lee  wrote  to


his  mother  and  asked  her  to  come  for  him.
Hiram  Conway,  a  neighbor  on  Ewing  Street,
thought  Lee  was  an  intelligent  child,  who
picked  things  up  easily;  although  he  did  not
recall  many  specific  incidents  to  support  his
impressions,  Conway  regarded  Lee  as  "a  bad
kid,"  who  was  "quick  to  anger"  and  "mean
when  he  was  angry,  just  ornery."  John's  gen-
eral picture  of  Lee  in  these  years  is  that  of  "a
normal  healthy  robust  boy  who  would  get  in
fights  and  still  have  his  serious  moments."

John  returned  to  high  school  in  January
1949,  but  continued  to  work  part  time.  Early
in  1950,  he  entered  the  Coast  Guard.  Robert
left  school  after  John's  departure  and  went  to
work  full  time,  contributing  most  of  his  earn-
ings to  the  support  of  his  family.  He  returned
to  school  in  1951-52,  and  after  completing  his
junior  year  in  high  school,  joined  the  Marines
in  July  1952.  In  August,  Mrs.  Oswald  and  Lee
moved  to  New  York,  where  John  was  living
with  his  wife  and  a  very  young  baby  in  an
apartment  at  325  East  92d  Street;  the  apart-
ment belonged  to  John's  mother-in-law,  who
was  temporarily  away.  Mrs.  Oswald  has  ex-
plained that  with  Robert  gone  she  did  not  want
Lee  to  be  alone  while  she  worked  and  that  she
went  to  New  York  City  "not  as  a  venture,"  but
because  she  "had  family"  there.

The  visit  began  well.  John  testified  of  his
meeting  with  Lee:  "We  met  in  the  street  and
I  was  real  glad  to  see  him  and  he  was  real  glad
to  see  me.  We  were  real  good  friends."  He  took
about  a  week  of  leave  and  showed  Lee  the  city;
he  remembered  trips  to  the  Museum  of  Natural
History  and  Polk's  Hobby  Shop,  and  a  ride  on
the  Staten  Island  ferry.  But  when  it  became
obvious  that  his  mother  intended  to  stay,  the
atmosphere  changed.  Mrs.  Oswald  did  not  get
along  with  John's  wife,  with  whom  she  quar-
reled frequently.  There  was  difficulty  about  her
failure  to  contribute  anything  towards  her  own
and  Lee's  support.  According  to  John,  his  wife
liked  Lee  and  would  have  been  glad  to  have
him  alone  stay  with  them  but  felt  that  his
mother  set  Lee  against  her;  they  never  sug-
gested that  Lee  remain  with  them  since  they
knew  that  it  would  not  work  out.  The  visit
ended  when  Lee  threatened  Mrs.  Pic  with  a
pocket  knife  during  a  quarrel,  and  she  asked
Mrs.  Oswald  to  leave.  John  testified  that  during
this  same  quarrel  Lee  hit  his  mother,  who  ap-
peared to  have  lost  all  control  over  him.  The
incident  permanently  destroyed  the  good  rela-
tionship between  Lee  and  his  brother.

Mrs.  Oswald  and  Lee  moved  uptown  to  a
one-room  basement  apartment  in  the  Bronx,  at
1455  Sheridan  Avenue.  While  they  were  still
at  the  Pics,  he  had  been  enrolled  at  the  Trinity
Evangelical  Lutheran  School  on  Watson  Ave-
nue. He  was  withdrawn  on  September  26,  after
several  weeks  of  irregular  attendance,  and  4
days  later  enrolled  in  the  seventh  grade  of  Pub-
lic School  117,  a  junior  high  school.  Mrs.
Oswald  found  a  job  at  one  of  the  Lemer  Shops,


290


a  chain  of  dress  shops  for  which  she  had  worked
briefly  in  Fort  Worth  several  years  before.  In
January,  they  moved  again,  to  825  East  179th
Street,  and  a  few  weeks  later,  she  left  the  em-
ploy of  Lemer  Shops.  In  April,  she  was  work-
ing at  Martin's  Department  Store  in  Brooklyn,
where  she  earned  $45  per  week;  in  May,  she
went  to  work  for  a  chain  of  hosiery  shops,
with  which  she  remained  until  December.  Lee
was  registered  at  Public  School  117  until  Janu-
ary 16,  1953,  although  the  move  to  179th
Street,  which  took  him  out  of  that  school  dis-
trict, probably  took  place  before  that  date.  He
had  been  at  Public  School  117  for  64  school-
days, out  of  which  he  had  been  present  on  15
fuU  and  2  half  days;  he  had  received  failing
grades  in  most  of  his  courses.

Lee's  truancy  increased  after  he  moved;  he
was  now  located  in  the  school  district  of  Public
School  44  but  refused  to  go  to  school  there.
On  one  occasion  that  spring,  an  attendance
officer  located  Lee  at  the  Bronx  Zoo;  the  officer
testified  that  Lee  was  clean  and  well  dressed,
but  was  surly  and  referred  to  the  officer  as  a
"damned  Yankee."  Several  truancy  hearings
were  held  in  January,  at  the  first  of  which  at
least,  both  Mrs.  Oswald  and  Lee  evidently
failed  to  appear.  At  a  hearing  on  January  27,
by  which  time  it  was  known  that  Lee  was  liv-
ing in  the  Public  School  44  district,  it  was  de=
aided  to  commence  judicial  proceedings  if  his
truancy  continued.  Meanwhile,  on  January  16,
his  mother  called  the  Community  Service  So-
ciety, to  which  she  had  been  referred  by  the
Federation  of  Protestant  Welfare  Agencies,  and
asked  for  an  appointment  to  discuss  the  prob-
lem. She  mentioned  that  a  truancy  hearing  had
been  held  and  said  that  Lee  would  not  attend
school  despite  the  threat  of  oflBcial  action;  she
thought  that  his  behavior  was  due  to  difficulty
in  adjusting  to  his  new  environment.  An  ap-
pointment was  scheduled  for  January  30,  but
she  failed  to  appear,  and  the  case  was  closed
Sometime  in  February,  the  Pics  visited  the
Oswalds.  John  testified  that  his  mother  told
him  about  Lee's  truancy  and  asked  how  she
could  get  Lee  to  accept  psychiatric  aid.  Nothing
came  of  these  discussions.

On  March  12,  the  attendance  officer  in
charge  of  Lee's  case  filed  a  petition  in  court
which  alleged  that  Lee  had  been  "excessively
absent  from  school"  between  October  and  Janu-
ary, that  he  had  refused  to  register  at  Public
School  44  or  to  attend  school  there,  and  that
he  was  "beyond  the  control  of  his  mother  inso-
far as  school  attendance  is  concerned."  On  the
same  day,  Mrs.  Oswald  appeared  in  court  alone
and  informed  the  presiding  judge  that  Lee  re-
fused to  appear  in  court.  Evidently  impressed
by  the  proceedings,  however,  Lee  did  register
at  PubUc  School  44  on  March  23.  Nevertheless,
on  April  16,  Justice  Delany  declared  him  a
truant,  and  remanded  him  to  Youth  House
until  May  7  for  psychiatric  study.

In  accordance  with  the  regular  procedures  at


Youth  House,  Lee  took  a  series  of  tests  and
was  interviewed  by  a  staff  social  worker  and  a
probation  officer,  both  of  whom  interviewed
Mrs.  Oswald  as  well.  Their  findings,  discussed
more  fully  in  chapter  VII  of  the  Commission's
report,  indicated  that  Lee  was  a  withdrawn,
socially  maladjusted  boy,  whose  mother  did  not
interest  herself  sufficiently  in  his  welfare  and
had  failed  to  establish  a  close  relationship  with
him.  Mrs.  Oswald  visited  Lee  at  Youth  House
and  came  away  with  a  highly  unfavorable  im-
pression; she  regarded  it  as  unfit  for  her  son.
On  the  basis  of  all  the  test  results  and  reports
and  his  own  interview  with  Lee,  Dr.  Renatus
Hartogs,  the  chief  staff  psychiatrist,  recom-
mended that  Lee  be  placed  on  probation  with  a
requirement  that  he  seek  help  from  a  child
guidance  clinic,  and  that  his  mother  be  urged
to  contact  a  family  agency  for  help;  he  recom-
mended that  Lee  not  be  placed  in  an  institution
unless  treatment  during  probation  was  unsuc-
cessful.

Lee  returned  to  court  on  May  7.  He  and  his
mother  appeared  before  Justice  McClancy,  who
discussed  the  Youth  House  reports  with  them.
He  released  Lee  on  parole  until  September  24,
and  requested  that  a  referral  be  made  to  the
Community  Service  Society  for  treatment.  The
probation  officer  called  the  society  on  the  same
day  but  was  told  that  it  would  probably  not  be
able  to  take  the  case  because  of  its  already  full
case  load  and  the  intensive  treatment  which  Lee
was  likely  to  require;  it  confirmed  this  position
1  week  later  and  closed  the  case  on  May  31.
An  application  was  made  to  the  Salvation
Army  also,  which  turned  it  down  because  it
could  not  provide  the  needed  services.

During  the  few  weeks  of  school  which  re-
mained, Lee  attended  school  regularly,  and
completed  the  seventh  grade  with  low  but  pass-
ing marks  in  all  his  academic  subjects.  (He  re-
ceived a  faihng  mark  in  a  home  economics
course.)  His  conduct  was  generally  satisfactory
and  he  was  rated  outstanding  in  "Social-
Participation";  the  record  indicates  that  he  be-
longed to  a  model  airplane  club  and  had  a
special  interest  in  horseback  riding.  Robert
Oswald  visited  New  York  that  summer,  while
he  was  on  leave  from  the  Marines.  Lee  did  not
appear  to  him  to  be  unhappy  or  to  be  acting
abnormally,  nor  did  Robert  observe  that  rela-
tions between  Lee  and  his  mother  were  strained.
Lee's  truancy  the  previous  fall  and  winter  was
apparently  discussed  only  in  passing,  when  Mrs.
Oswald  mentioned  that  Lee  had  had  to  appear
before  a  judge.

On  September  14,  Lee  entered  the  eighth
grade  at  Public  School  44.  His  parole  was  due
to  end  10  days  later.  On  September  24,  how-
ever, Mrs.  Oswald  telephoned  the  probation
officer  and  advised  that  she  could  not  appear
in  court;  she  added  that  there  was  no  need  for
her  to  do  so,  since  Lee  was  attending  school
regularly  and  was  now  well  adjusted.  The  pa-
role was  extended  until  October  29,  before


291


which  date  the  school  was  to  submit  a  progress
report.  The  report  was  highly  unfavorable.  Al-
though Lee  was  attending  school  regularly,  his
conduct  was  unsatisfactory;  teachers  reported
that  he  refused  to  salute  the  flag,  did  little  work,
and  seemed  to  spend  most  of  his  time  "sailing
paper  planes  around  the  room."  On  October  29,
Mrs.  Oswald  again  telephoned  to  say  that  she
would  be  unable  to  appear.  Justice  Sicher  con-
tinued Lee's  parole  until  November  19  and
directed  the  probation  officer  to  make  a  referral
to  the  Berkshire  Industrial  Farm  or  Children's
Village.

Before  the  next  hearing,  Mrs.  Oswald  dis-
cussed Lee's  behavior  with  the  school  author-
ities, who  indicated  to  the  probation  oflBcer  that
Lee's  behavior  improved  considerably  after  her
visit  to  the  school.  He  did,  in  fact,  receive
passing  grades  in  most  of  his  subjects  in  the
first  marking  period.  His  report  also  contains
notations  by  his  teachers  that  he  was  "quick-
tempered," "constantly  losing  control,"  and
"getting  into  battles  with  others."  Both  Lee  and
his  mother  appeared  in  court  on  November  19.
Despite  Mrs.  Oswald's  request  that  Lee  be  dis-
charged, Justice  Sicher  stated  his  belief  that
Lee  needed  treatment,  and  continued  his  parole
until  January  28,  1954;  the  probation  oflBcer
was  directed  to  contact  the  Big  Brothers  coun-
seling service  in  the  meantime.

At  the  request  of  the  probation  oflficer,  the
Big  Brothers  oflBce  contacted  Mrs.  Oswald  in
December,  and  on  January  4  a  caseworker
visited  her  and  Lee  at  home.  The  caseworker
reported  that  he  was  cordially  received  but  was
told  by  Mrs.  Oswald  that  continued  counseUng
was  unnecessary;  she  pointed  out  to  him  that
Lee  now  belonged  to  the  West  Side  YMCA,
which  he  attended  every  Saturday.  The  case-
worker reported,  however,  that  Lee  was  plainly
"displeased  with  the  idea  of  being  forced  to
join  various  'Y'  organizations  about  which  he
cared  little."  Mrs.  Oswald  declared  her  inten-
tion to  return  to  New  Orleans  and  was  advised
to  obtain  Lee's  release  from  the  court's  juris-
diction before  she  left.  On  the  following  day,
she  called  the  probation  oflBcer,  who  was  away
on  vacation,  and  was  advised  by  his  oflBce  again
not  to  take  Lee  out  of  the  jurisdiction  without
the  court's  consent.  The  same  advice  was  re-
peated to  her  by  the  Big  Brothers  caseworker
on  January  6.  TTrrough  all  these  contacts,  Mrs.
Oswald  had  evidenced  reluctance  to  bring  Lee
into  court,  prompted  probably  by  fear  that  he
Would  be  retained  in  some  sort  of  custody  as
he  had  been  at  the  time  of  the  commitment  to
Youth  House.  Without  further  communication
to  the  court,  Mrs.  Oswald  and  Lee  returned  to
New  Orleans  sometime  before  January  10.  On
March  11,  the  court  dismissed  the  case.

In  New  Orleans,  Lee  and  his  mother  stayed
with  the  Murrets  at  757  French  Street  while
they  looked  for  an  apartment.  Lee  enrolled  in
the  eighth  grade  at  Beauregard  Junior  High
School  on  January  13  and  completed  the  school


year  without  apparent  diflficulty.  He  entered
the  ninth  grade  in  September  and  again  re-
ceived mediocre  but  acceptable  marks.  In  Oc-
tober 1954,  Lee  took  a  series  of  achievement
tests,  on  which  he  did  well  in  reading  and
vocabulary,  badly  in  mathematics.  At  the  end
of  the  school  year,  on  June  2,  1955,  he  filled
out  a  "personal  history."  He  indicated  that  the
subjects  which  he  Uked  best  were  civics,
science,  and  mathematics;  those  he  liked  least
were  English  and  art.  His  vocational  prefer-
ences were  listed  as  biology  and  mechanical
drawing;  his  plans  after  high  school,  however,
were  noted  as  "military  service"  and  "unde-
cided." He  said  that  reading  and  outdoor  sports
were  his  recreational  activities  and  that  he
liked  football  in  particular.  In  response  to  the
question  whether  he  had  "any  close  friends  in
this  school,"  he  wrote,  "no."

Lee  is  remembered  by  those  who  knew  him
in  New  Orleans  as  a  quiet,  solitary  boy  who
made  few  friends.  He  was  briefly  a  member  of
the  Civil  Air  Patrol,  and  considered  joining  an
organization  of  high  school  students  interested
in  astronomy;  occasionally,  he  played  pool  or
darts  with  his  friend,  Edward  Voebel.  Beyond
this,  he  seems  to  have  had  few  contacts  with
other  people.  He  read  a  lot,  starting  at  some
point  to  read  Commimist  literature  which  he
found  at  the  public  library;  he  walked  or  rode
a  bicycle,  sometimes  visiting  a  museum.  Except
in  his  relations  with  his  mother,  he  was  not  un-
usually argumentative  or  belligerent,  but  he
seems  not  to  have  avoided  fights  if  they  came;
they  did  come  fairly  frequently,  perhaps  in  part
because  of  his  aloofness  from  his  fellows  and
the  traces  of  a  northern  accent  in  his  speech.
His  only  close  friendship,  with  Voebel,  arose
when  Voebel  helped  him  tend  his  wounds  after
a  fight.  Friends  of  Mrs.  Oswald  thought  that  he
was  demanding  and  insolent  toward  her  and
that  she  had  no  control  over  him.

While  Lee  was  in  the  eighth  and  ninth
grades,  Mrs.  Oswald  worked  first  at  Burt's
Shoestore  and  then  at  the  Dolly  Shoe  Co.  One
of  her  employers  at  Dolly,  where  she  worked
as  a  cashier  and  salesclerk,  remembered  her  as
a  pleasant  person  and  a  good  worker.  At  her
request  the  company  hired  Lee  to  work  part
time;  he  worked  there,  mostly  on  Saturdays,
for  about  10  weeks  in  1955.  On  the  "personal
history"  record  which  he  filled  out  in  school,
he  stated  that  he  had  been  a  "retail  shoesale-
man";  but  his  employer  recalled  that  they  had
tried  to  train  him  as  a  salesman  without  success
and  that  he  had  in  fact  been  a  stockboy.

After  a  short  period  with  the  Murrets,  Mrs.
Oswald  and  Lee  had  moved  to  an  apartment
owned  by  Myrtle  Evans  at  1454  Saint  Mary
Street,  which  she  and  Mrs.  Murret  helped  to
furnish;  later  they  moved  to  a  less  expensive
apartment  in  the  same  building,  the  address  of
which  was  1452  Saint  Mary  Street.  Relations
between  Mrs.  Oswald  and  Mrs.  Evans  became
strained,  and  in  the  spring  of  1955  the  Oswalds


292


moved  to  a  new  apartment  at  126  Exchange
Place  in  the  French  Quarter.  Although  Lee
gave  the  Exchange  Place  address  on  a  school
form  at  the  end  of  the  ninth  grade,  the  school
authorities  had  apparently  not  been  advised  of
these  moves  earlier,  because  Mrs.  Oswald  did
not  want  Lee  to  be  transferred  from  Beaure-
gard, which  she  considered  a  good  school.  Dur-
ing the  summer  of  1955,  Robert  left  the  Marine
Corps  and  spent  a  week  with  his  mother  and
Lee  in  New  Orleans  before  moving  to  Fort
Worth;  he  found  Lee  unchanged.

That  fall,  Lee  entered  the  10th  grade  at  War-
ren Easton  High  School.  He  had  been  there  for
about  a  month  when  he  presented  to  the  school
authorities  a  note  written  by  himself  to  which
he  had  signed  his  mother's  name.  It  was  dated
October  7,  1955,  and  read:

To  whom  it  may  concern,

Becaus  we  are  moving  to  San  Diego
in  the  middle  of  this  month  Lee  must  quit
school  now.  Also,  please  send  by  him  any
papers  such  as  his  birth  certificate  that  you
may  have.  Thank  you.

Sincirely

Mrs.  M.  Oswald

He  dropped  out  of  school  a  few  days  later,
shortly  before  his  16th  birthday.  After  his
birthday,  he  tried  to  enlist  in  the  Marines,
using  a  false  affidavit  from  his  mother  that  he
was  17.  (Some  years  before,  John  Pic  had
joined  the  Marine  Corps  Reserve  by  means  of
his  mother's  false  affidavit  that  he  was  17.)  The
attempt  failed,  and,  according  to  his  mother's
testimony,  Lee  spent  the  next  year  reading  and
memorizing  the  "Marine  Manual,"  which  he
had  obtained  from  Robert  and  "living  to  when
he  is  age  17  to  join  the  Marines."  He  worked
for  the  rest  of  the  school  year.  Between  No-
vember 10  and  January  14,  he  was  a  messenger
boy  for  Gerald  F.  Tujague,  Inc.,  a  shipping
company,  where  he  earned  $130  per  month.
His  employer  remembers  him  as  a  quiet,  with-
drawn person.  In  January  he  worked  briefly  as
an  office  boy  for  J.  R.  Michels,  Inc.  For  several
months  thereafter,  he  was  a  messenger  for  the
Pfisterer  Dental  Laboratory.  His  military  rec-
ord subsequently  described  his  prior  civilian
jobs  as  follows:

Performed  various  clerical  duties  such  as
distributing  mail,  delivering  messages  &  an-
swering telephone.  Helped  file  records  &
operated  ditto,  letter  opening  &  sealing  ma-
chines.

Anticipating  that  Lee  would  join  the  Marines
as  soon  as  he  was  17,  Mrs.  Oswald  moved  in
July  1956  to  Fort  Worth,  where  she  took  an
apartment  at  4936  CoUinswood  for  herself,
Lee,  and  Robert.  In  September,  Lee  enrolled
in  the  10th  grade  at  the  Arlington  Heights
High  School  but  attended  classes  for  only  a
few  weeks.  He  dropped  out  of  school  on  Sep-
tember 28.  A  few  days  later,  he  wrote  the  fol-
lowing letter  to  the  Socialist  Party  of  America:


October  3,  1956
Dear  Sirs;

I  am  sixteen  years  of  age  and  would  like
more  information  about  your  youth  League,
I  would  Uke  to  know  if  there  is  a  branch  in
my  area,  how  to  join,  ect.,  I  am  a  Marxist,
and  have  been  studying  socialist  principles
for  well  over  fifteen  months  I  am  very  inter-
ested in  your  Y.P.S.L.
Sincerely

/s/ Lee  Oswald

Accompanying  the  letter  was  an  advertise-
ment coupon,  on  which  he  had  checked  the  box
requesting  information  about  the  Socialist  Party.

Lee  became  17  on  October  18.  He  enlisted
in  the  Marines  on  October  24.


MARINES

On  October  26,  1956,  Lee  Harvey  Oswald
reported  for  duty  at  the  Marine  Corps  Recruit
Depot  in  San  Diego,  Calif.,  where  he  was  as-
signed to  the  Second  Recruit  Training  Bat-
talion. He  was  68  inches  tall  and  weighed  135
poimds;  he  had  no  physical  defects.  On  Octo-
ber 30,  he  took  a  series  of  aptitude  tests,  on
which  he  scored  significantly  above  the  Marine
Corps  average  in  reading  and  vocabulary  and
significantly  below  the  average  in  tests  in  arith-
metic and  pattern  analysis.  His  composite  gen-
eral classification  score  was  105,  2  points  below
the  Corps  average.  He  scored  near  the  bottom
of  the  lowest  group  in  a  radio  code  test.  His
preference  of  duty  was  recorded  as  Aircraft
Maintenance  and  Repair,  the  duty  assignment
for  which  he  was  recommended.

While  he  was  at  San  Diego,  Oswald  was
trained  in  the  use  of  the  M-1  rifle.  His  prac-
tice scores  were  not  very  good,  but  when  his
company  fired  for  record  on  December  21,  he
scored  212,  2  points  above  the  score  necessary
to  qualify  as  a  "sharpshooter"  on  a  marksman/
sharpshooter/expert  scale.  He  did  not  do  nearly
as  well  when  he  fired  for  record  again  shortly
before  he  left  the  Marines.  He  practiced  also
with  a  riot  gun  and  a  .45-caliber  pistol  when
he  was  in  the  Marines  but  no  scores  were
recorded.

Oswald  was  given  a  4.4  rating  in  both  "con-
duct" and  "proficiency"  at  the  Recruit  Depot,
the  highest  possible  rating  being  5.0  and  an
average  rating  of  4.0  being  required  for  an
honorable  discharge.  On  January  18,  1957,  he
reported  to  Camp  Pendleton,  Calif.,  for  further
training  and  was  assigned  to  "A"  Company  of
the  First  Battalion,  Second  Infantry  Training
Regiment.  He  was  at  Pendleton  for  a  little
more  than  5  weeks,  at  the  end  of  which  he  was
rated  4.2  in  conduct  and  4.0  in  proficiency.
Allen  R.  Felde,  a  fellow  recruit  who  was  with
Oswald  at  San  Diego  and  Pendleton,  has  stated
that  Oswald  was  generally  unpopular  and  that
his  company  was  avoided  by  the  other  men.


293


When  his  squad  was  given  its  first  weekend
leave  from  Pendleton,  all  eight  men  took  a  cab
to  Tijuana,  Mexico.  Oswald  left  the  others  and
did  not  rejoin  them  until  it  was  time  to  return
to  camp.  Felde  said  that  this  practice  was  re-
peated on  other  trips  to  Los  Angeles;  Oswald
accompanied  the  men  on  the  bus  to  and  from
camp  but  did  not  stay  with  them  in  the  city.
On  February  27,  he  went  on  leave  for  2  weeks,
during  which  he  may  have  visited  his  mother
in  Fort  Worth.

On  March  18,  he  reported  to  the  Naval  Air
Technical  Training  Center  at  the  Naval  Air
Station  in  Jacksonville,  Fla.  For  the  next  6
weeks  he  attended  an  Aviation  Fundamental
School,  in  which  he  received  basic  instruction
in  his  specialty,  including  such  subjects  as  basic
radar  theory,  map  reading,  and  air  traffic  con-
trol procedures.  This  course,  as  well  as  his  next
training  assignment  at  Keesler  Air  Force  Base,
required  Oswald  to  deal  with  confidential  ma-
terial. He  was  granted  final  clearance  up  to  the
"confidential"  level  on  May  3,  "after  [a]  careful
check  of  local  records  had  disclosed  no  deroga-
tory data."  He  completed  the  course  on  the
same  day,  ranking  46th  in  a  class  of  54  stu-
dents. On  the  previous  day,  he  had  been  pro-
moted to  private,  first  class,  effective  May  1.
At  Jacksonville,  he  received  ratings  of  4.7  in
conduct  and  4.5  in  proficiency,  the  highest  rat-
ings he  ever  attained.

Oswald  left  for  Keesler  Air  Force  Base  in
Biloxi,  Miss.,  on  the  day  his  course  was  com-
pleted; he  traveled,  probably  by  overnight  train,
in  a  group  of  six  marines  led  by  Pfc.  Daniel  P.
Powers,  the  senior  marine  in  charge.  At  Keesler,
he  attended  the  Aircraft  Control  and  Warning
Operator  Course,  which  included  instruction  in
aircraft  surveillance  and  the  use  of  radar.  Pow-
ers was  not  sure  whether  he  had  met  Oswald
before  the  trip  to  Biloxi  but  remembers  him
there  as  "a  somewhat  younger  individual,  less
matured  than  the  other  boys,"  who  "was  nor-
mally outside  the  particular  group  of  marines
that  were  in  this  attachment  to  Keesler."  (Os-
wald was  in  fact  3  years  younger  than  Powers.)
Powers  testified  that  Oswald  had  the  nickname
"Ozzie  Rabbit."  Oswald  generally  stayed  to
himself,  often  reading;  he  did  not  play  cards  or
work  out  in  the  gym  with  the  others.  He  spent
his  weekends  alone,  away  from  the  base;  Pow-
ers thought  he  left  Biloxi  and  perhaps  went
"home"  to  New  Orleans,  less  than  100  miles
away.  He  finished  the  course  seventh  in  a  class
of  30  marines  on  June  17,  and  on  June  25,
was  given  an  MOS  (military  occupational  spe-
cialty) of  Aviation  Electronics  Operator.  On
June  20,  he  went  on  leave,  possibly  visiting  his
mother.  His  ratings  at  Keesler  were  4.2  in  con-
duct and  4.5  in  proficiency,  which  Powers
thought  was  "pretty  good."

On  July  9,  Oswald  reported  at  the  Marine
Corps  Air  Station  at  El  Toro,  Calif.,  near  Santa
Ana.  He  was  classified  as  a  replacement  trainee
and  attached  to  the  Fourth  Replacement  Bat-


talion. Six  weeks  later,  on  August  22,  he  de-
parted from  San  Diego  for  Yokosuka,  Japan,
on  board  the  U.S.S.  Bexar.  Powers  testified
that  while  on  board,  Oswald  taught  him  to  play
chess,  which  they  played  frequently,  some-
times for  more  than  4  hours  a  day.  Like  most
of  the  men  on  board,  Oswald  read  a  lot  from
the  books  which  were  available.  Powers  thought
he  read  "a  good  type  of  literature,"  remember-
ing in  particular  Whitman's  "Leaves  of  Grass."

The  Bexar  docked  at  Yokosuka  on  Septem-
ber 12.  Oswald  was  assigned  to  Marine  Air
Control  Squadron  No.  1  (MACS-1),  Marine
Air  Group  11,  1st  Marine  Aircraft  Wing,  based
at  Atsugi,  about  20  miles  west  of  Tokyo.  Os-
wald was  a  radar  operator  in  MACS-1,  which
had  less  than  100  men.  Its  function  was  to
direct  aircraft  to  their  targets  by  radar,  com-
municating with  the  pilots  by  radio.  The
squadron  had  also  the  duty  of  scouting  for  in-
coming foreign  aircraft,  such  as  straying  Rus-
sian or  Chinese  planes,  which  would  be  inter-
cepted by  American  planes.

On  October  27,  when  Oswald  opened  his
locker  to  remove  some  gear,  a  derringer  .22
caliber  pistol  fell  to  the  floor  and  discharged;
the  bullet  hit  him  in  the  left  elbow.  Paul  Ed-
ward Murphy,  a  fellow  marine  who  was  in  the
next  cubicle,  heard  the  shot,  rushed  in,  and
found  Oswald  sitting  on  the  locker  looking  at
his  arm;  without  emotion,  Oswald  said  to  Mur-
phy, "I  believe  I  shot  myself."  He  was  in  the
naval  hospital  at  Yokosuka  until  November  15.

The  Judge  Advocate  General  concluded  that
Oswald  had  "displayed  a  certain  degree  of  care-
lessness or  negligence"  by  storing  a  loaded
revolver  in  his  locker,  but  that  his  injury  was
incurred  "in  the  line  of  duty"  and  was  not  the
result  "of  his  own  misconduct."  He  was,  how-
ever, charged  with  possession  of  an  unregistered
privately  owned  weapon  in  violation  of  general
orders.  A  court-martial  followed  on  April  11,
1958,  when  Oswald's  unit  returned  from  ma-
neuvers, and  on  April  29  he  was  sentenced  to
be  confined  at  hard  labor  for  20  days,  to  forfeit
$25  per  month  for  2  months,  and  to  be  reduced
to  the  grade  of  private.  The  confinement  was
suspended  for  6  months,  after  which  that  por-
tion of  the  sentence  was  to  be  remitted.

Five  days  after  Oswald  left  the  hospital,
MACS-1  embarked  aboard  the  Terrell  County,
LST  1157,  for  maneuvers  in  the  Philippine
Islands  area.  According  to  Powers'  recollection,
the  squadron  was  expected  to  return  to  Atsugi
after  maneuvers  were  completed,  but  an  inter-
national crisis  developed;  since  another  opera-
tion was  scheduled  for  a  few  months  later,  the
squadron  debarked  at  Cubi  Point  (Subic  Bay)
in  the  Philippines  and  set  up  a  temporary  in-
stallation. WTiile  he  was  in  the  Philippines,
Oswald  passed  a  test  of  eligibility  for  the  rank
of  corporal;  in  a  semiannual  evaluation,  how-
ever, he  was  given  his  lowest  ratings  thus  far:
4.0  in  conduct  and  3.9  in  proficiency.  The  unit
participated  in  exercises  at  Corregidor,  from


294


which  it  sailed  for  Atsugi  on  March  7,  1958,
aboard  the  U.S.S.  Wexford  County,  LST  1 1 68.
The  Wexford  County  reached  Atsugi  11  days
later.

Oswald  was  court-martialed  a  second  time
on  June  27,  for  using  "provoking  words"  to  a
noncommissioned  officer  (a  sergeant)  on
June  20,  at  the  Bluebird  Cafe  in  Yamato,  and
assaulting  the  officer  by  pouring  a  drink  on
him.  The  findings  were  that  Oswald  spilled  the
drink  accidentally,  but  when  the  sergeant
shoved  him  away,  Oswald  invited  the  sergeant
outside  in  insulting  language.  Oswald  admitted
that  he  was  rather  drunk  and  had  invited  the
sergeant  outside  but  did  not  recall  insulting
him.  He  was  sentenced  to  be  confined  at  hard
labor  for  28  days  and  to  forfeit  $55;  in  addi-
tion, suspension  of  the  previous  sentence  of
confinement  was  withdrawn.  He  was  in  confine-
ment until  August  13.  Meanwhile,  a  previously
granted  extension  of  oversea  duty  was  can-
celed, and  he  was  given  ratings  of  1.9  in  con-
duct and  3.4  in  proficiency.

On  September  14,  Oswald  sailed  with  his
unit  for  the  South  China  Sea  area;  the  unit
was  at  Ping  Tung,  North  Taiwan  on  Septem-
ber 30,  and  returned  to  Atsugi  on  October  5.
On  October  6,  he.  was  transferred  out  of
MACS-1  and  put  on  general  duty,  in  antici-
pation of  his  return  to  the  United  States.  He
spent  several  days  thereafter  in  the  Atsugi  Sta-
tion Hospital.  On  October  31,  he  received  his
last  oversea  ratings:  4.0  in  both  conduct  and
proficiency.

Oswald  appears  generally  to  have  been  re-
garded by  his  fellows  overseas  as  an  intelligent
person  who  followed  orders  and  did  his  work
well,  but  who  complained  frequently.  He  did
not  associate  much  with  other  marines  and
continued  to  read  a  great  deal.  Paul  Murphy
testified  that  Oswald  could  speak  "a  little  Rus-
sian" while  he  was  overseas.  Powers  believed
that  Oswald  became  more  assertive  in  Japan
and  thought  that  he  might  have  had  a  Japanese
girl  friend.  He  departed  from  Yokosuka  on
board  the  USNS  Barrett  on  November  2,  and
arrived  in  San  Francisco  13  days  later.  On
November  19,  he  took  30  days'  leave.

On  December  22,  Oswald  was  assigned  to
Marine  Air  Control  Squadron  No.  9  (MACS-
9)  at  the  Marine  Corps  Air  Station  at  El  Toro,
where  he  had  been  briefly  before  he  went  over-
seas. He  was  one  of  about  seven  enlisted  men
and  three  oflScers  who  formed  a  "radar  crew,"
engaged  primarily  in  aircraft  surveillance.  This
work  probably  gave  him  access  to  certain  kinds
of  classified  material,  some  of  which,  such  as
aircraft  call  signs  and  radio  frequencies,  was
changed  after  his  defection  to  Russia.  For  part
of  his  time  at  El  Toro,  Oswald  may  have  been
assigned  to  clerical  or  janitorial  tasks  on  the
base.  Some  of  his  associates  believed  rumors,
incorrect  according  to  oflBcial  records,  that  he
had  lost  his  clearance  to  work  on  radar  crews;
one  recalled  hearing  that  Oswald  had  once  had


clearance  above  the  "confidential"  level  and
had  lost  it  because  he  "had  poured  beer  over  a
staff  NCO's  head  in  an  enlisted  club  in  Japan,
and  had  been  put  in  the  brig."

The  officer  in  command  of  the  radar  crew,
Lt.  John  E.  Donovan,  found  him  "competent
in  all  functions,"  and  observed  that  he  handled
himself  calmly  and  well  in  emergency  situa-
tions. Donovan  thought  Oswald  was  not  a
leader  but  that  he  performed  competently  on
occasions  when,  as  the  senior  man  present,  he
served  as  crew  chief.  TTiis  estimate  was  gen-
erally shared  by  his  fellows,  most  of  whom
thought  that  he  performed  his  assigned  duties
adequately  but  was  deficient  in  disciplinary
matters  and  such  things  as  barracks  inspection.
One  of  them  recalled  that  after  a  number  of
bad  inspections,  the  other  members  of  Oswald's
quonset  hut  complained  about  him  and  secured
his  transfer  to  another  hut.  He  was  thought  to
be  an  intelligent  person,  somewhat  better  edu-
cated and  more  intellectually  oriented  than
other  men  on  the  base.  A  few  of  the  men
thought  it  more  accurate  to  describe  him  as
someone  who  wanted  to  appear  intelligent.  He
had  a  pronounced  interest  in  world  affairs,  in
which  he  appears  to  have  been  better  informed
than  some  of  the  officers,  whose  lack  of  knowl-
edge amused  and  sometimes  irritated  him;  he
evidently  enjoyed  drawing  others,  especially
officers,  into  conversations  in  which  he  could
display  his  own  superior  knowledge.

It  seems  clear  from  the  various  recollections
of  those  who  knew  him  at  El  Toro  that  by  the
time  Oswald  returned  to  the  United  States,  he
no  longer  had  any  spirit  for  the  Marines;  the
attitudes  which  had  prompted  his  enlistment  as
soon  as  he  was  eligible  were  entirely  gone,  and
his  attention  had  turned  away  from  the  Marines
to  what  he  might  do  after  his  discharge.  While
no  one  was  able  to  predict  his  attempt  to  defect
to  Russia  within  a  month  after  he  left  the
Marines,  the  testimony  of  those  who  knew  him
at  El  Toro,  in  contrast  to  that  of  his  associates
in  Japan,  leaves  no  doubt  that  his  thoughts
were  occupied  increasingly  with  Russia  and
the  Russian  way  of  life.  He  had  studied  the
Russian  language  enough  by  February  25,
1959,  to  request  that  he  be  given  a  foreign
language  qualification  test;  his  rating  was
"poor"  in  all  parts  of  the  test.  Most  of  the
marines  who  knew  him  were  aware  that  he  was
studying  Russian;  one  of  them,  Henry  J,  Rous-
sel,  Jr.,  arranged  a  date  between  Lee  and  his
aunt,  Rosaleen  Quinn,  an  airline  stewardess
who  was  also  studying  Russian.  (Miss  Quinn
thought  that  Oswald  spoke  Russian  well  in  view
of  his  lack  of  formal  training;  she  found  the
evening  uninteresting,  Donovan,  with  whom
she  had  a  date  later,  testified  that  she  told  him
that  Oswald  was  "kind  of  an  oddball.")  He
read,  and  perhaps  subscribed  to,  a  newspaper,
possibly  printed  in  Russian,  which  his  associates
connected  with  his  Russian  bent.

Most  of  those  who  knew  him  were  able  to


295


recount  anecdotes  which  suggest  that  he  was
anxious  to  publicize  his  liking  for  things  Rus-
sian, sometimes  in  good  humor  and  sometimes
seriously.  Some  of  his  fellows  called  him
"Oswaldskovich,"  apparently  to  his  pleasure.
He  is  said  to  have  had  his  name  written  in  Rus-
sian on  one  of  his  jackets;  to  have  played
records  of  Russian  songs  "so  loud  that  one
could  hear  them  outside  the  barracks";  fre-
quently to  have  made  remarks  in  Russian  or
used  expressions  like  "da"  or  "nyet,"  or  ad-
dressed others  (and  been  addressed)  as  "Com-
rade"; to  have  come  over  and  said  jokingly,
"You  called?"  when  one  of  the  marines  played
a  particular  record  of  Russian  music.

Connected  with  this  Russophilia  was  an  in-
terest in  and  acceptance  of  Russian  political
views  and,  to  a  lesser  extent.  Communist
ideology.  Less  obvious  to  his  fellows  generally,
it  nevertheless  led  him  into  serious  discussions
with  some  of  them.  Donovan,  who  was  a  gradu-
ate of  the  School  of  Foreign  Service  of  George-
town University,  thought  Oswald  was  "truly
interested  in  international  affairs"  and  "very
well  versed,  at  least  on  the  superficial  facts  of  a
given  foreign  situation."  He  recalled  that  Os-
wald had  a  particular  interest  in  Latin  America
and  had  a  good  deal  of  information  about  Cuba
in  particular.  Oswald  expressed  sympathy  for
Castro  but,  according  to  Donovan,  "what  he
said  about  Castro  was  not  an  unpopular  belief
at  that  time."  Donovan  believed  that  Oswald
subscribed  to  the  Russian  newspaper — ^which
Donovan  thought  was  a  Communist  news-
paper— not  only  in  order  to  read  Russian  but
also  because  he  thought  it  "presented  a  very
different  and  perhaps  equally  just  side  of  the
international  affairs  in  comparison  with  the
United  States  newspapers."  Donovan  was  clear,
on  the  other  hand,  that  he  never  heard  Oswald
"in  any  way,  shape  or  form  confess  that  he  was
a  Communist,  or  that  he  ever  thought  about
being  a  Communist."

Private  Kerry  Thomley  described  himself  as
a  close  acquaintance,  but  not  a  good  friend,  of
Oswald,  whom  he  met  in  the  spring  of  1959;
he  later  wrote  an  unpublished  novel  in  which
he  drew  heavily  on  his  impressions  of  Oswald.
Thomley  generally  corroborates  Donovan's
testimony  but  thought  Oswald  definitely  be-
lieved that  "the  Marxist  morality  was  the  most
rational  morality  to  follow"  and  communism,
"the  best  system  in  the  world."  Thornley
thought  this  belief  was  "theoretical,"  a  "dis-
passionate appraisal"  which  did  not  indicate
"any  active  commitment  to  the  Communist
ends";  he  described  Oswald  as  "idle  in  his
admiration  for  communism."  He  recalled  dis-
cussions about  Marxism  in  which  Oswald
criticized  capitalism  and  praised  the  Soviet  eco-
nomic system.  Thomley  testified  that  his  associ-
ation with  Oswald  ended  when,  in  response  to
Oswald's  criticism  of  a  parade  in  which  they
both  had  to  march,  he  said  "Well,  comes  the
revolution  you  will  change  all  that."  Oswald,


he  said,  looked  at  him  "like  a  betrayed  Caesar"
and  walked  away.  Thomley  attributed  Oswald's
decision  to  go  to  Russia  to  a  growing  disil-
lusionment with  the  United  States,  especially  its
role  in  the  Far  East,  and  a  conviction  that  com-
munism would  eventually  prevail.  He  was  sur-
prised by  the  decision  but  expected  Oswald  to
adjust  to  Russian  life  and  remain  in  Russia
permanently.

Another  marine.  Nelson  Delgado,  met  Os-
wald soon  after  the  latter  arrived  at  El  Toro.
They  were  about  the  same  age  and  had  similar
interests;  Oswald  enjoyed  trying  to  speak  Span-
ish with  Delgado,  who  spoke  it  fluently.  Del-
gado regarded  him  as  a  "complete  believer  that
our  way  of  government  was  not  quite  right,"
but  did  not  think  he  was  a  Communist.  Their
discussions  were  concerned  more  with  Cuba
than  Russia.  They  both  favored  the  Castro  gov-
ernment and  talked — "dreaming,"  Delgado
said — about  joining  the  Cuban  Army  or  Gov-
ernment and  perhaps  leading  expwiitions  to
other  Caribbean  islands  to  "free  them  too."
Oswald  told  Delgado  that  he  was  in  touch  with
Cuban  diplomatic  officials  in  this  country;
which  Delgado  at  first  took  to  be  "one  of  his
*  *  *  lies,"  but  later  believed.

Oswald's  interest  in  Russia  and  developing
ideological  attachment  to  theoretical  commu-
nism apparently  dominated  his  stay  at  El  Toro.
He  was  still  withdrawn  from  most  of  his  fel-
lows, although  his  special  interests  appear  to
have  made  him  stand  out  more  there  than  he
had  at  other  posts  and  to  have  given  him  a
source  for  conversation  which  he  had  hitherto
lacked.  According  to  several  of  the  witnesses,
names  like  "Ozzie  Rabbit"  still  clung  to  him;
others  recalled  no  nickname  or  only  shortened
versions  of  his  real  name.  His  reading  acquired
direction;  books  like  "Das  Kapital"  and  Or-
well's "Animal  Farm"  and  "1984"  are  men-
tioned in  the  testimony  concerning  this  period.
He  played  chess;  according  to  one  of  his  op-
ponents he  chose  the  red  pieces,  expressing  a
preference  for  the  "Red  Army."  He  listened  to
classical  music.  For  a  short  time,  he  played  on
the  squadron  football  team.  According  to
Donovan,  who  coached  the  team,  Oswald  was
not  very  good;  he  lacked  team  spirit  and  often
tried  to  call  the  plays,  which  was  not  his  job.
Delgado  thought  Oswald  was  a  mediocre  player.
Donovan  did  not  know  whether  Oswald  quit
or  was  thrown  off  the  team.  He  spent  most
of  his  weekends  alone,  as  he  had  at  Keesler,
and  did  not  leave  the  post  as  often  as  the  other
men.  Delgado  once  rode  with  him  on  the  train
to  Los  Angeles  but  separated  from  him  there;
Oswald  returned  to  the  base  after  one  night.
Delgado  recalls  that  on  another  weekend  Os-
wald accepted  his  invitation  to  go  to  Tijuana;
they  stayed  there  for  one  night.

At  the  end  of  January  1959  and  at  the  end
of  July,  Oswald  was  given  his  semiannual  rat-
ings, scoring  4.0  in  conduct  both  times,  and
4.0  and  4.2  in  proficiency.  (The  July  ratings


296


were  repeated  in  September,  when  he  was
transferred  from  MACS-9  in  preparation  for
his  discharge.)  On  March  9,  he  was  promoted
as  of  March  1 ,  to  the  rank  of  private,  first  class,
for  the  second  time.  He  took  a  series  of  high
school  level  general  educational  development
tests  on  March  23  and  received  an  overall  rating
of  "satisfactory."  His  best  scores,  in  the  76th
and  79th  U.S.  percentiles,  were  in  English
composition  and  physical  sciences;  his  worst
was  English  literature,  in  which  he  placed  in
the  34th  percentile.

In  the  spring,  Oswald  applied  to  Albert
Schweitzer  College  in  Churwalden,  Switzerland,
for  admission  to  the  spring  term  in  1960;  the
application  is  dated  March  19.  Schweitzer  is  a
small  school,  which  specializes  in  courses  in
religion,  ethics,  science,  and  literature.  He
claimed  a  proficiency  in  Russian  equal  to  1
year  of  schooling  and  that  he  had  completed
high  school  by  correspondence  with  an  average
grade  of  85  percent.  He  listed  philosophy,
psychology,  ideology,  football,  baseball,  tennis
and  stamp-collecting  as  special  interests,  and
writing  short  stories  "on  contemporary  Ameri-
can life"  as  his  vocational  interest.  Jack  Lon-
don, Charles  Darwin,  and  Norman  Vincent
Peale  were  listed  as  favorite  authors.  He  claimed
membership  in  the  YMCA  and  the  "A.Y.H.
Association,"  and  said  that  he  had  participated
in  a  "student  body  movement  in  school"  for  the
control  of  juvenile  delinquency.  Asked  to  give
a  general  statement  of  his  reasons  for  wanting
to  attend  the  college,  he  wrote:

In  order  to  aquire  a  fuller  understanding
of  that  subject  which  interest  me  most.  Phi-
losophy. To  meet  with  Europeans  who  can
broaden  my  scope  of  understanding.  To
receive  formal  Education  by  Instructers  of
high  standing  and  character.  To  broaden  my
knowlege  of  German  and  to  live  in  a  healty
climate  and  Good  moral  atmosphere.

On  the  basis  of  these  representations,  Oswald's
application  was  approved  by  the  college.  He
enclosed  a  registration  fee  of  $25  in  a  letter
dated  June  19,  in  which  he  said  that  he  was
"looking  forward  to  a  fine  stay."  Few  of  the
other  marines  seem  to  have  known  about  this
application.  He  told  Delgado,  however,  that
he  planned  to  attend  a  Swiss  school  to  study
psychology,  and  Delgado  knew  that  some  ap-
plication had  been  made.  Another  marine,
Richard  Call,  also  knew  something  of  his
plans.

Oswald  was  obligated  to  serve  on  active  duty
until  December  7,  1959  fthe  date  having  been
adjusted  to  compensate  for  the  period  of  con-
finement). On  August  17,  he  submitted  a  re-
quest for  a  dependency  discharge,  on  the
ground  that  his  mother  needed  his  support.
The  request  was  accompanied  by  an  affidavit
of  Mrs.  Oswald  and  corroborating  affidavits
from  an  attorney,  a  doctor,  and  two  friends.


attesting  that  she  had  been  injured  at  work  in
December  1958,  and  was  unable  to  support
herself.  Oswald  had  previously  made  a  volun-
tary allotment  of  part  of  his  salary  to  his
mother,  under  which  arrangement  she  received
$40  in  August,  and  had  submitted  an  applica-
tion for  a  "Q"  allotment  (dependency  allow-
ance) in  her  behalf  of  $91.30;  one  payment  of
the  "Q"  allotment,  for  the  month  of  August,
was  made  in  September.  On  August  28,  the
Wing  Hardship  or  Dependency  Discharge
Board  recommended  that  Oswald's  request  for
a  discharge  be  approved;  approval  followed
shortly.  On  September  4,  he  was  transferred
from  MACS-9  to  the  H.  &  H.  Squadron,  and
on  September  11,  he  was  released  from  active
duty  and  transferred  to  the  Marine  Corps  Re-
serve, in  which  he  was  expected  to  serve  imtil
December  8,  1962.  He  was  assigned  to  the
Marine  Air  Reserve  Training  Command  at  the
Naval  Air  Station  in  Glenview,  111.

Almost  exactly  1  year  later,  on  September  1 3,
1960,  Oswald  was  given  an  "undesirable  dis-
charge" from  the  Marine  Corps  Reserve,  based


on:


reliable  information  which  indicated  that  he
had  renounced  his  U.S.  citizenship  with  the
intentions  of  becoming  a  permanent  citizen
of  the  Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics.
Further,  that  petitioner  brought  discredit  to
the  Marine  Corp>s  through  adverse  news-
paper publicity,  which  was  generated  by  the
foregoing  action,  and  had  thereby,  in  the
opinion  of  his  commanding  officer,  proved
himself  unfit  for  retention  in  the  naval
service.


SOVIET  UNION

On  September  4,  the  day  on  which  he  was
transferred  out  of  MACS-9  in  preparation  for
his  discharge,  Oswald  had  applied  for  a  pass-
port at  the  Superior  Court  of  Santa  Ana,  Calif.
His  application  stated  that  he  planned  to  leave
the  United  States  on  September  21  to  attend
the  Albert  Schweitzer  College  and  the  Uni-
versity of  Turku  in  Finland,  and  to  travel  in
Cuba,  the  Dominican  Republic,  England,
France,  Germany,  and  Russia.  The  passport
was  routinely  issued  6  days  later.

Oswald  went  directly  home  after  his  dis-
charge, and  arrived  in  Fort  Worth  by  Septem-
ber 14.  He  told  his  mother  that  he  intended
to  get  a  job  on  a  ship  or  possibly  in  the  "ex-
port-import business."  If  he  stayed  in  Fort
Worth,  he  said,  he  would  be  able  to  earn  only
about  $30  per  week;  on  a  ship,  he  would  earn
"big  money"  and  be  able  to  send  substantial
amounts  home.  Three  days  after  he  arrived  in
Fort  Worth,  he  left  for  New  Orleans.  While  he
was  in  Fort  Worth  he  had  registered  his  de-
pendency discharge  and  entry  into  the  Marine
Reserve  at  the  Fort  Worth  Selective  Service


297


Board,  and  visited  his  brother  Robert  and  his
family.  He  also  gave  his  mother  $100.

On  September  17,  Oswald  spoke  with  a  rep-
resentative of  Travel  Consultants,  Inc.,  a  New
Orleans  travel  bureau;  he  filled  out  a  "Pas-
senger Immigration  Questionnaire,"  on  which
he  gave  his  occupation  as  "shipping  export
agent"  and  said  that  he  would  be  abroad  for
2  months  on  a  pleasure  trip.  He  booked  pas-
sage from  New  Orleans  to  Le  Havre,  France,
on  a  freighter,  the  SS  Marion  Lykes,  scheduled
to  sail  on  September  18,  for  which  he  paid
$220.75.  On  the  evening  of  September  17,  he
registered  at  the  Liberty  Hotel.

The  Marion  Lykes  did  not  sail  until  the
early  morning  of  September  20.  Before  its
departure,  Oswald  wrote  his  mother  a  letter,
which  was  her  last  news  of  him  until  she  read
stories  of  his  defection  in  Fort  Worth  news-
papers:

Dear  Mother:

Well,  I  have  booked  passage  on  a  ship  to
Europe,  I  would  of  had  to  sooner  or  later
and  I  think  it's  best  I  go  now.  Just  remember
above  all  else  that  my  values  are  very  dif-
ferent from  Robert's  or  your's.  It  is  difficult
to  tell  you  how  I  feel.  Just  remember  this  is
what  I  must  do.  I  did  not  tell  you  about  my
plans  because  you  could  harly  be  expected
to  understand.

I  did  not  see  aunt  Lilian  while  I  was  here,
I  will  write  again  as  soon  as  I  land.

Lee

The  Marion  Lykes  carried  only  four  pas-
sengers. Oswald  shared  his  cabin  with  Billy
Joe  Lord,  a  young  man  who  had  just  gradu-
ated from  high  school  and  was  going  to  France
to  continue  his  education.  Lord  testified  that
he  and  Oswald  did  not  discuss  politics  but  did
have  a  few  amicable  religious  arguments,  in
which  Oswald  defended  atheism.  Oswald  was
"standoffish,"  but  told  Lord  generally  about  his
background,  mentioning  that  his  mother  worked
in  a  drugstore  in  Fort  Worth  and  that  he  was
bitter  about  the  low  wages  which  she  received.
He  told  Lord  that  he  intended  to  travel  in
Europe  and  possibly  to  attend  school  in  Sweden
or  Switzerland  if  he  had  sufficient  funds.  The
other  two  passengers  were  Lt.  Col.  and  Mrs.
George  B.  Church,  Jr.,  who  also  found  Os-
wald unfriendly  and  had  little  contact  with
him.  Oswald  told  them  that  he  had  not  liked
the  Marine  Corps  and  that  he  planned  to  study
in  Switzerland;  they  observed  some  "bitterness"
about  his  mother's  difficulties,  but  did  not  dis-
cuss this  with  him.  No  one  on  board  suspected
that  he  intended  to  defect  to  Russia.

Oswald  disembarked  at  Le  Havre  on  Oc-
tober 8.  He  left  for  England  that  same  day,
and  arrived  on  October  9.  He  told  English
customs  officials  in  Southampton  that  he  had
$700  and  planned  to  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom  for  1  week  before  proceeding  to  a


school  in  Switzerland.  But  on  the  same  day,
he  flew  to  Helsinki,  Finland,  where  he  regis-
tered at  the  Tomi  Hotel;  on  the  following  day,
he  moved  to  the  Klaus  Kurki  Hotel.

Oswald  probably  applied  for  a  visa  at  the
Russian  consulate  on  October  12,  his  first
business  day  in  Helsinki.  The  visa  was  issued
on  October  14.  It  was  valid  imtil  October  20
and  permitted  him  to  take  one  trip  of  not  more
than  6  days  to  the  Soviet  Union.  He  also
purchased  10  Soviet  "tourist  vouchers"  which
cost  $30  apiece.  He  left  Helsinki  by  train  on
the  following  day,  crossed  the  Finnish-Russian
border  at  Vainikkala,  and  arrived  in  Moscow
on  October  16.

He  was  met  at  the  Moscow  railroad  station
by  a  representative  of  "Intourist,"  the  state
tourist  agency,  and  taken  to  the  Hotel  Berlin,
where  he  registered  as  a  student.  On  the  same
day  he  met  the  Intourist  guide  assigned  to  him
during  his  stay  in  Russia,  a  young  woman  named
Rima  Shirokova.  They  went  sightseeing  the
next  day.  Almost  immediately  he  told  her  that
he  wanted  to  leave  the  United  States  and  be-
come a  citizen  of  the  Soviet  Union.  According
to  Oswald's  "Historic  Diary,"  she  later  told
him  that  she  had  reported  his  statement  to
Intourist  headquarters,  which  in  tmn  had  noti-
fied the  "Passport  and  Visa  Office"  (probably
the  Visa  and  Registration  Department  of  the
Ministry  of  Internal  Affairs,  the  MVD).  She
was  instructed  to  help  Oswald  prepare  a  letter
to  the  Supreme  Soviet  requesting  that  he  be
granted  citizenship.  Oswald  mailed  such  a  let-
ter that  same  day.  (The  "Historic  Diary"  is
Oswald's  handwritten  account  of  his  life  in
Russia.  The  earlier  entries  were  written  after
the  events  which  they  describe;  later,  in  Minsk,
he  probably  kept  a  contemporaneous  record
of  his  experiences.  The  Commission  has  used
the  diary,  which  Oswald  may  have  written  with
future  readers  in  mind,  only  as  Oswald's  record
of  his  private  life  and  personal  impressions  as
he  sought  to  present  them  and  has  relied  wher-
ever possible  on  official  documents,  correspond-
ence, and  the  testimony  of  witnesses.)

The  diary  records  that  when  Oswald  told
Rima  Shirokova  that  he  intended  to  defect  she
was  "flabbergassted,"  but  agreed  to  help.  She
was  "politly  sympathetic  but  uneasy"  when  he
told  her  that  he  wanted  to  defect  because  he
was  "a  Communist,  ect."  As  an  Intourist  guide,
Rima  toured  parts  of  Moscow  with  Oswald  in
the  next  few  days.  His  primary  concern,  how-
ever, appeared  to  be  his  effort  to  become  a
Soviet  citizen,  and  she  also  aided  him  in  his
dealings  with  the  Soviet  Government.  He
thought  that  Rima  felt  sorry  for  him  and  tried
to  be  a  friend  because  he  was  "someth.  new."
On  his  20th  birthday,  2  days  after  he  arrived  in
Russia,  she  gave  him  Dostoevski's  "The  Idiot,"
in  which  she  had  written:  "Dear  Lee,  Great
congratulations!  Let  all  your  dreams  come  truel
18.x  1959"

On  October  19,  Oswald  was  probably  inter-


298


viewed  in  his  hotel  room  by  a  man  named  Lev
Setyayev,  who  said  that  he  was  a  reporter  for
Radio  Moscow  seeking  statements  from  Ameri-
can tourists  about  their  impressions  of  Mos-
cow, but  who  was  probably  also  acting  for
the  KGB.  Two  years  later,  Oswald  told  officials
at  the  American  Embassy  that  he  had  made
a  few  routine  comments  to  Setyayev  of  no
political  significance.  The  interview  with  Set>'a-
yev  may,  however,  have  been  the  occasion  for
an  attempt  by  the  KGB,  in  accordance  with
regular  practice,  to  assess  Oswald  or  even  to
ehcit  compromising  statements  from  him;  the
interview  was  apparently  never  broadcast.  (As
discussed  in  ch.  VI  of  this  report,  the  Commis-
sion is  aware  that  many  of  the  Soviet  officials
with  whom  Oswald  came  into  contact  were
employees  of  the  KGB,  the  agency  which  has
primary  jurisdiction  for  the  treatment  of  de-
fectors.)

On  the  following  day,  Rima  Shirokova  told
him  that  the  "Pass,  and  Visa  Dept."  wanted
to  see  him,  and  on  the  morning  of  October  21,
he  was  interviewed  by  an  official  concerning
his  appUcation  for  citizenship.  The  official  of-
fered little  information  and  no  encouragement;
he  told  Oswald  only  that  he  would  check  to
see  if  the  visa  could  be  extended.  Oswald  re-
turned to  the  Hotel  Berlin.  That  afternoon,  he
was  notified  that  his  visa  had  expired  and  that
he  had  to  leave  Moscow  within  2  hours.

Oswald  reponded  to  the  unfavorable  de-
cision by  cutting  himself  above  his  left  wrist,
in  an  apparent  suicide  attempt.  Rima  Shirokova
found  him  unconscious  in  his  hotel  room  and
had  him  taken  to  the  Botkinskaya  Hospital.
His  diar\'  states:  "Poor  Rimmea  stays  by  my
side  as  interrpator  (my  Russian  is  still  very  bad)
far  into  the  night,  I  tell  her  'Go  home'  (my
mood  is  bad)  but  she  stays,  she  is  'my  friend.'  "

For  3  days  Oswald  was  confined  in  the
psychiatric  ward  of  the  hospital.  He  was  ex-
amined by  a  psychiatrist,  who  concluded  that
he  was  not  dangerous  to  other  people  and  could
be  transferred  to  the  "somatic"  department.
Hospital  records  containing  the  results  of  the
examination  state  that  Oswald  came  to  Russia
in  order  to  apply  for  citizenship,  and  that  "in
order  to  postpone  his  departure  he  inflicted
the  injurv'  upon  himself."  They  note  that  Os-
wald understood  some  Russian  and,  presumably
based  on  information  which  he  provided,  that
he  had  "graduated  from  a  technical  high  school
in  radio  technology'  and  radio  electronics."  The
record  states:  "He  claims  he  regrets  his  action.
After  recovering  he  intends  to  return  to  his
homeland."

Oswald  resented  being  in  the  psychiatric
ward  and  told  Rima  Shirokova  that  he  wanted
a  transfer.  She  visited  him  at  the  hospital
frequently  and  his  diary  records  that  "only
at  this  moment"  did  he  "notice  [that]  she  is
preety."  Another  entry  for  the  hospital  period
says:  "Afternoon  I  am  visited  by  Roza  Aga-
fonova  of  the  hotel  tourist  office,  who  askes


about  my  health,  very  beautiful,  excelant  Eng.,
very  merry  and  kind,  she  makes  me  ver>'  glad
to  be  aUve."  These  entries  reflect  an  attitude
gentler  and  friendlier  than  his  attitude  before
the  suicide  attempt,  when  he  seemed  to  be
coldly  concerned  only  with  his  status  in  Rus-
sia. Once  Oswald  was  out  of  the  psychiatric
ward,  he  found  the  hospital  more  pleasant.  The
new  ward,  which  he  shared  with  11  other
patients,  was  "airy,"  and  the  food  was  good.
His  only  complaint,  according  to  his  diary,
was  that  an  "elderly  American"  patient  was
distrustful  of  him  because  he  had  not  registered
at  the  American  Embassy  and  because  he  was
evasive  about  the  reasons  for  his  presence  in
Moscow  and  confinement  in  the  hospital.

He  was  released  from  the  hospital  on  Octo-
ber 28,  and,  accompanied  by  Rima  Shirokova,
was  driven  to  the  Hotel  Berlin  in  an  Intourist
car.  After  he  said  goodby  to  L>'udmila  Dmit-
rieva,  head  of  the  Intourist  office  at  the  Berlin,
and  to  Roza  Agafonova,  another  Intourist  em-
ployee at  the  hotel,  he  checked  out  of  the
Berlin  and  registered  at  the  Metropole,  a  large
hotel  under  the  same  administration  as  the
BerUn.  The  Government  had  undoubtedly  di-
rected him  to  make  the  change.  His  visa  had
expired  while  he  was  in  the  hospital,  and  his
presence  in  Russia  was  technically  illegal;  he
had  received  no  word  that  the  decision  that  he
must  leave  had  been  reversed.  Later  that  day,
however,  Rima  told  him  that  the  "Pass  and
Registration  Office"  wished  to  talk  to  him
about  his  future.  According  to  the  diary,  when
Oswald  appeared  at  the  office  he  was  asked
whether  he  still  wanted  to  become  a  Soviet
citizen  and  he  replied  that  he  did;  he  provided
his  Marine  Corps  discharge  papyers  for  identi-
fication. He  was  told  that  he  could  not  expect
a  decision  soon,  and  was  dismissed.  During
this  interview,  Oswald  was  apparently  ques-
tioned about  the  interview  which  preceded  his
hospitalization,  which  led  him  to  conclude  that
there  had  been  no  communication  between  the
two  sets  of  officials.  That  evening  he  met  Rima,
on  whom  he  vented  his  frustration  at  being
put  off  by  the  authorities.

Oswald  ate  only  once  on  the  following  day;
he  stayed  near  the  telephone,  fully  dressed  and
ready  to  leave  immediately  if  he  were  sum-
moned. He  remained  in  his  room  for  3  days,
which  seemed  to  him  "like  three  years,"  until
October  31,  when  he  decided  to  act.  He  met
Rima  Shirokova  at  noon  and  told  her  that  he
was  impatient,  but  did  not  say  what  he  planned
to  do;  she  cautioned  him  to  stay  in  his  room
"and  eat  well."  She  left  him  after  a  short
while  and,  a  few  minutes  later,  he  took  a  taxi
to  the  American  Embassy,  where  he  asked  to
see  the  consul.  (Commission  Exhibits  Nos.
24,  912,  913.)  When  the  receptionist  asked  him
first  to  sign  the  tourist  register,  he  laid  his
passport  on  the  desk  and  said  that  he  had
come  to  "dissolve  his  American  citizenship."
Richard  E.  Snyder,  the  Second  Secretary  and


299


senior  consular  official  was  summoned,  and  he
invited  Oswald  into  his  oflBce.

Oswald's  meeting  with  Snyder,  at  which
Snyder's  assistant,  John  A.  McVickar,  was  also
present,  is  more  fully  discussed  in  appendix
XV  to  the  Commission's  report.  Oswald  de-
clared that  he  wanted  to  renounce  his  Ameri-
can citizenship;  he  denounced  the  United
States  and  praised  the  Government  of  the  So-
viet Union.  Over  Oswald's  objections,  Snyder
sought  to  learn  something  of  Oswald's  motives
and  background  and  to  forestall  immediate
action.  Oswald  told  him  that  he  had  already
offered  to  tell  a  Soviet  oflacial  what  he  had
learned  as  a  radar  operator  in  the  Marines.
The  interview  ended  when  Snyder  told  Oswald
that  he  could  renounce  his  citizenship  on  the
following  Monday,  2  days  later,  if  he  would
appear  personally  to  do  so.  During  the  inter-
view, Oswald  handed  to  Snyder  a  note  which
suggests  that  he  had  studied  and  sought  to
comply  with  section  349  of  the  Immigration
and  Nationality  Act,  which  provides  for  loss  of
American  citizenship.  The  note  contains  para-
graphs which  read  Uke  inartistic  attempts  to
cast  oflf  citizenship  in  three  of  the  ways  speci-
fied by  the  statute.  The  attempts  failed  but
there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  they  were
sincere.  Snyder  has  testified  that  he  believed
that  Oswald  would  immediately  have  formally
renounced  his  citizenship  had  he  been  per-
mitted to  do  so.

The  interview  lasted  for  less  than  an  hour.
Oswald  returned  to  his  hotel  angry  about  the
delay  but  "elated"  by  the  "showdown"  and
sure  that  he  would  be  permitted  to  remain  after
his  "sign  of  *  *  *  faith"  in  the  Russians.  Soon
after  he  returned  to  the  hotel,  he  was  ap-
proached by  A.  I.  Goldberg,  a  reporter  for  the
Associated  Press,  whom  the  Embassy  had  told
about  Oswald's  actions.  Oswald  refused  to
speak  to  him.  He  answered  a  few  questions  for
two  other  reporters,  R.  J.  Korengold  and  Miss
Aline  Mosby,  but  again  refused  to  be  inter-
viewed. Thereafter,  the  news  services  made
repeated  imsuccessful  attempts  to  interview
him,  which  he  thought  was  an  indirect  form
of  pressure  from  the  Embassy  to  return  to  the
United  States.

On  the  day  after  Oswald's  meeting  with
Snyder,  his  family  read  in  the  newspapers
about  his  appearance  at  the  Embassy  and  tried
to  contact  him.  Mrs.  Oswald  testified  that  she
was  shocked  at  her  son's  decision  to  defect
but  respected  his  motives  for  doing  so;  later
she  suspected  that  he  had  been  forcibly  re-
moved to  Russia.  She  placed  a  telephone  call
to  him,  but  he  either  refused  to  speak  to  her
or  cut  her  off  very  quickly.  So  too,  on  No-
vember 2,  he  rejected  the  Embassy's  efforts  to
deliver  or  read  on  the  telephone  a  telegram
from  his  brother  Robert.  A  call  from  Robert
was  either  canceled  before  it  was  completed
or  was  refused.  Robert's  telegram,  along  with


a  message  asking  Oswald  to  contact  him  im-
mediately, which  Robert  had  asked  the  State
Department  to  deliver,  was  finally  sent  to
Oswald  from  the  Embassy  by  registered  mail.

A  few  days  later,  the  Embassy  received  a
letter  from  Oswald  dated  November  3  which
requested  that  his  citizenship  be  revoked.  The
letter  stated  that  he  had  appeared  at  the  Em-
bassy "for  the  purpose  of  signing  the  formal
papers  to  this  effect"  and  protested  against  the
"conduct  of  the  oflBcial"  who  had  refused  him
"this  legal  right."  Oswald  noted  that  his  ap-
plication for  Soviet  citizenship  was  pending  and
said  that  if  it  were  granted  he  would  ask  the
Soviet  Government  "to  lodge  a  formal  protest"
on  his  behalf.  The  Embassy  replied  on  Novem-
ber 9  that  Oswald  could  renounce  his  citizen-
ship by  appearing  at  the  Embassy  and  execut-
ing the  necessary  papers.

Oswald's  diary  describes  the  period  from
November  2  to  November  15,  during  which  he
continued  to  isolate  himself,  as  "days  of  utter
loneliness."  On  November  8,  he  wrote  to  his
brother:

Dear  Robert

Well,  what  shall  we  talk  about,  the  weather
perhaps?  Certainly  you  do  not  wish  me  to
speak  of  my  decision  to  remain  in  the  Soviet
Union  and  apply  for  citizenship  here,  since
Fm  afraid  you  would  not  be  able  to  com-
prehend my  my  reasons.  You  really  dont
know  anything  about  me.  Do  you  know  for
instance  that  I  have  waited  to  do  this  for
well  over  a  year,  do  you  know  that  I  *  *  *
[phrase  in  Russian]  speak  a  fair  amount  of
Russian  which  I  have  been  studing  for
many  months.

I  have  been  told  that  I  will  not  have  to
leave  the  Soviet  Union  if  I  do  not  care  to.
this  than  is  my  decision.  I  will  not  leave  this
country,  the  Soviet  Union,  under  any  con-
ditions, I  will  never  return  to  the  United
States  which  is  a  coimtry  I  hate.

Someday,  perhaps  soon,  and  than  again
perhaps  in  a  few  years,  I  wiU  become  a
citizen  of  the  Soviet  Union,  but  it  is  a  very
legal  process,  in  any  event,  I  will  not  have
to  leave  the  Soviet  Union  and  I  will  never
*  *  *  [word  missing].

I  recived  your  telegram  and  was  glad  to
hear  from  you,  only  one  word  bothered  me,
the  word  "mistake."  I  assume  you  mean  that
I  have  made  a  "mistake"  it  is  not  for  you
to  tell  me  that  you  cannot  imderstand  my
reasons  for  this  very  action.

I  will  not  speak  to  anyone  from  the
United  States  over  the  telephone  since  it  may
be  taped  by  the  Americans.

If  you  wish  to  corespond  with  me  you  can
write  to  the  below  address,  but  I  really  don't
see  what  we  could  take  about  if  you  want  to
send  me  money,  that  I  can  use,  but  I  do  not
expect  to  be  able  to  send  it  back.

Lee


300


Oswald's  statement  that  he  had  been  told  that
he  could  remain  in  Russia  was  not  true.  Ac-
cording to  his  diary,  he  was  not  told  until  later
that  he  could  remain  even  temporarily  in
Russia,  and  only  in  January  was  he  told  that
he  could  remain  indefinitely.  The  Embassy
tried  to  deliver  a  typed  copy  of  a  telegram
from  his  brother  John  on  November  9;  Os-
wald refused  to  answer  the  knock  on  his  door,
and  the  message  was  then  sent  to  him  by
registered  mail.

Toward  the  end  of  this  waiting  period,  prob-
ably on  November  13,  Aline  Mosby  succeeded
in  interviewing  Oswald.  A  reporter  for  United
Press  International,  she  had  called  him  on  the
telephone  and  was  told  to  come  right  over,
Oswald's  explanation  being  that  he  thought
she  might  "understand  and  be  friendly"  be-
cause she  was  a  woman.  She  was  the  first
person  who  was  not  a  Soviet  citizen  to  whom
he  granted  an  interview  since  his  meeting  with
Snyder  at  the  Embassy  on  October  31.  Miss
Mosby  found  him  polite  but  stiff;  she  said  that
he  seemed  full  of  confidence,  often  showing  a
"small  smile,  more  like  a  smirk,"  and  that  he
talked  almost  "non-stop."  Oswald  said  to  her
that  he  had  been  told  that  he  could  remain  in
the  Soviet  Union  and  that  job  possibilities  were
being  explored;  they  thought  it  probably  would
be  best,  he  said,  to  continue  his  education.  He
admitted  that  his  Russian  was  bad  but  was
confident  that  it  would  improve  rapidly.  He
based  his  dislike  for  the  United  States  on  his
observations  of  racial  prejudice  and  the  con-
trast between  "the  luxuries  of  Park  Avenue
and  workers'  lives  on  the  East  Side,"  and  men-
tioned his  mother's  poverty;  he  said  that  if  he
had  remained  in  the  United  States  he  too
would  have  become  either  a  capitalist  or  a
worker.  "One  way  or  another,"  he  said,  "I'd
lose  in  the  United  States.  In  my  own  mind,
even  if  I'd  be  exploiting  other  workers.  That's
why  I  chose  Marxist  ideology."

Oswald  told  his  interviewer  that  he  had  been
interested  in  Commimist  theory  since  he  was
15,  when  "an  old  lady"  in  New  York  handed
him  "a  pamphlet  about  saving  the  Rosenbergs."
But  when  Mosby  asked  if  he  were  a  member
of  the  Conamunist  Party  he  said  that  he  had
never  met  a  Communist  and  that  he  "might
have  seen"  one  only  once,  when  he  saw  that
"old  lady."  He  told  her  that  while  he  was  in
the  Marine  Corps  he  had  seen  American  im-
perialism in  action,  and  had  saved  $1,500  in
secret  preparation  for  his  defection  to  Russia.
His  only  apparent  regrets  concerned  his  family:
his  mother,  whom  he  had  not  told  of  his  plans,
and  his  brother,  who  might  lose  his  job  as  a
result  of  the  publicity.

The  interview  lasted  for  about  2  hours.
According  to  Oswald's  own  account,  he  ex-
acted a  promise  from  Miss  Mosby  that  she
would  show  him  the  story  before  publication
but  she  broke  the  promise;  he  found  the  pub-
lished story  to  contain  distortions  of  his  words.


Miss  Mosby's  notes  indicate  that  he  called  her
to  complain  of  the  distortions,  saying  in  par-
ticular that  his  family  had  not  been  "poverty-
stricken"  and  that  his  defection  was  not
prompted  by  personal  hardship  but  that  was
"a  matter  only  of  ideology."

According  to  the  diary,  Oswald  was  told
in  mid-November  that  he  could  remain  tem-
porarily in  Russia  "until  some  solution  was
found  with  what  to  do"  with  him.  Armed  with
this  "comforting  news,"  he  granted  a  second
interview,  again  to  a  woman,  on  November  1 6.
Miss  Priscilla  Johnson  of  the  North  American
Newspaper  Alliance  knocked  on  the  door  of
his  room  at  the  Metropole,  and  Oswald  agreed
to  come  to  her  room  at  the  hotel  that  evening.
This  interview  lasted  about  5  hours,  from
9  p.m.  until  about  2  in  the  morning.  During
the  interview  he  frequently  mentioned  the  fact
that  he  would  be  able  to  remain  in  Russia,
which  gave  him  great  pleasure,  but  he  also
showed  disappointment  about  the  diflBculties
standing  in  tiie  way  of  his  request  for  Soviet
citizenship.  He  repeated  most  of  the  informa-
tion he  had  given  Aline  Mosby  and  again
denied  having  been  a  member  of  the  Com-
munist Party  or  even  ever  having  seen  a
Conmiunist  in  the  United  States.  When  Miss
Johnson  asked  him  to  specify  some  of  the
socialist  writers  whose  works  he  had  read
during  the  past  5  years,  he  could  name  only
Marx  and  Engels;  the  only  title  he  could  recall
was  "Das  Kapital."  They  talked  for  a  long
while  about  Communist  economic  theory,
which  Miss  Johnson  thought  was  "his  lan-
guage"; she  became  convinced  that  his  knowl-
edge of  the  subject  was  very  superficial.  He
commented  that  the  Russians  treated  his  de-
fection as  a  "legal  formality,"  neither  encourag-
ing nor  discouraging  it.  When  she  suggested
that  if  he  really  wished  to  renounce  his  Ameri-
can citizenship  he  could  do  so  by  returning  to
the  Embassy,  he  said  that  he  would  "never  set
foot  in  the  Embassy  again,"  since  he  was  sure
that  he  would  be  given  the  "same  run-aroimd"
as  before.  He  seemed  to  Miss  Johnson  to  be
avoiding  effective  renunciation,  consciously  or
unconsciously,  in  order  to  preserve  his  right
to  reenter  the  United  States.

For  the  rest  of  the  year,  Oswald  seldom  left
his  hotel  room  where  he  had  arranged  to  take
his  meals,  except  perhaps  for  a  few  trips  to
museums.  He  spent  most  of  his  time  studying
Russian,  "8  hours  a  day"  his  diary  records.
The  routine  was  broken  only  by  another  inter-
view at  the  passport  office;  occasional  visits  from
Rima  Shirokova;  lessons  in  Russian  from  her
and  other  Intourist  guides;  and  a  New  Year's
visit  from  Roza  Agafonova,  who  gave  him  a
small  "Boratin"  clown  as  a  New  Year's  present.
He  replied  to  a  letter  from  Robert  in  a  letter
quoted  at  length  in  chapter  VII  of  this  report,
which  contains  his  most  bitter  statements
against  the  United  States.  Robert  received  a
third  letter  on  December  17,  in  which  Oswald


301


said  that  he  would  not  write  again  and  did  not
wish  Robert  to  write  to  him.  The  letter  con-
cluded:

I  am  starting  a  new  life  and  I  do  not  wish
to  have  anything  to  do  with  the  old  life.

I  hope  you  and  your  family  will  always  be
in  good  health.

Lee

His  mother  mailed  him  a  personal  check  for
$20  dated  December  18.  It  was  returned  to  her
on  January  5  with  the  notation  that  he  could
not  "use  this  check,  of  course";  he  asked  her
to  send  him  $20  in  cash  and  added  that  he  had
little  money  and  needed  "the  rest,"  presumably
a  reference  to  the  $100  he  had  given  her  in
September.  Mrs.  Oswald  later  sent  him  a  money
order  for  about  $25.

On  January  4,  Oswald  was  summoned  to  the
Soviet  Passport  Office  and  given  Identity  Docu-
ment for  Stateless  Persons  No.  311479.  He  was
told  that  he  was  being  sent  to  Minsk,  an  indus-
trial city  located  about  450  miles  southwest  of
Moscow  and  with  a  population  in  1959  of
about  510,000.  His  disappointment  that  he  had
not  been  granted  Soviet  citizenship  was  bal-
anced by  relief  that  the  uncertainty  was  ended;
he  told  Rima  Shirokova  that  he  was  happy.
On  the  following  day,  he  went  to  a  Govern-
ment agency  which  the  Russians  called  the
"Red  Cross";  it  gave  him  5,000  rubles  (about
500  new  rubles,  or  $500  at  the  official  exchange
rate).  He  used  2,200  rubles  to  pay  his  hotel
bill  and  150  rubles  to  purchase  a  railroad  ticket
to  Minsk.

Oswald  arrived  in  Minsk  on  January  7.  He  was
met  at  the  station  by  two  "Red  Cross"  workers
who  took  him  to  the  Hotel  Minsk.  Two  Intour-
ist  employees,  both  of  whom  spoke  excellent
English,  were  waiting  for  him.  One  of  them,  a
young  woman  named  Roza  Kuznetsova,  be-
came his  close  friend  and  attended  his  21st
birthday  party  in  October  1960.  (Commission
Exhibit  No.  2609.)  On  the  following  day,  Os-
wald met  the  "Mayor,"  who  welcomed  him  to
Minsk,  promised  him  a  rent-free  apartment,
and  warned  him  against  "uncultured  persons"
who  sometimes  insulted  foreigners.

Oswald  reported  for  work  at  the  Belonissian
Radio  and  Television  Factory  on  January  13.
Two  days  earlier  he  had  visited  the  factory  and
met  Alexander  Ziger,  a  Polish  Jew  who  had
emigrated  to  Argentina  in  1938  and  went  to
Russia  in  1955.  Ziger  was  a  department  head
at  the  factory;  he  spoke  English,  and  he  and  his
family  became  good  friends  of  Oswald  and  cor-
responded with  him  after  his  return  to  the
United  States.  The  factory,  a  major  producer
of  electronic  parts  and  systems,  employed  about
5,000  persons.  Oswald's  union  card  described
him  as  a  "metal  worker";  Marina  testified  that
he  fashioned  parts  on  a  lathe.  As  Oswald  later
described  it,  the  shop  in  which  he  worked,
called  the  "experimental  shop,"  employed  58


workers  and  5  foremen.  It  was  located  in  the
middle  part  of  the  factory  area  in  a  2-story
building  made  of  red  brick.  The  workday  began
at  8  o'clock  sharp.  Work  was  assigned  accord-
ing to  "pay  levels,"  which  were  numbered
from  one  to  five  plus  a  top  "master"  level.  A
worker  could  ask  to  be  tested  for  a  higher  level
at  any  time.

Oswald  had  hoped  to  continue  his  education
in  Russia,  and  was  disappointed  by  his  assign-
ment to  a  factory.  His  salary  varied  from  700
to  perhaps  as  high  as  900  rubles  per  month
($7O-$90).  Although  high  compared  with  the
salaries  of  certain  professional  groups  in  Rus-
sia, which  in  some  areas  have  not  grown  pro-
portionately with  the  wages  of  factory  workers,
his  salary  was  normal  for  his  type  of  work.  It
was  supplemented,  however,  by  700  rubles  per
month,  which  he  received  from  the  "Red
Cross,"  and,  according  to  Oswald,  his  total  in-
come was  about  equal  to  that  of  the  director  of
the  factory.  In  August  he  applied  for  member-
ship in  the  union;  he  became  a  dues-paying
member  in  September.

Undoubtedly  more  noteworthy  to  most  Rus-
sians than  his  extra  income  was  the  attractive
apartment  which  Oswald  was  given  in  March
1959.  It  was  a  small  flat  with  a  balcony  over-
looking the  river,  for  which  he  paid  only  60
rubles  a  month.  (Commission  Exhibit  No.
2606.)  Oswald  describes  it  in  his  diary  as  "a
Russian  dream."  Had  Oswald  been  a  Rus-
sian worker,  he  would  probably  have  had  to
wait  for  several  years  for  a  comparable  apart-
ment, and  would  have  been  given  one  even  then
only  if  he  had  a  family.  The  "Red  Cross"  sub-
sidy and  the  apartment  were  typical  of  the
favorable  treatment  which  the  Soviet  Union
has  given  defectors.

Oswald's  diary  records  that  he  enjoyed  his
first  months  in  Minsk.  His  work  at  the  factory
was  easy  and  his  coworkers  were  friendly  and
curious  about  life  in  the  United  States;  he  de-
clined an  invitation  to  speak  at  a  mass  meeting.
He  took  Roza  Kuznetsova,  his  interpreter  and
language  teacher,  to  the  theater,  a  movie,  or  an
opera  almost  every  night,  until  he  moved  into
his  apartment  and  temporarily  lost  contact  with
her.  He  wrote  in  his  diary,  "I'm  living  big  and
am  very  satisfied."  In  March  or  April,  he  met
Pavel  Golovachev,  a  coworker  at  the  factory,
whom  Oswald  described  as  intelligent  and
friendly  and  an  excellent  radio  technician.
(Commission  Exhibit  No.  2609.)  Oswald  helped
Golovachev  with  English.  They  became  friends,
and  corresponded  after  Oswald  returned  to  the
United  States  until  at  least  as  late  as  Septem-
ber 1963.

The  spring  and  summer  passed  easily  and
uneventfully.  There  were  picnics  and  drives  in
the  country,  which  Oswald  described  as  "green
beauty."  On  June  18,  he  obtained  a  hunting
license  and  soon  afterward  purchased  a  16-gage
single-barrel  shotgxm.  His  hunting  license  iden-
tifies him  as  "Aleksy  Harvey  Oswald."  (He  was


302


called  "Alec"  by  his  Russian  friends,  because
"Lee"  sounded  foreign  to  them  and  was  diffi-
cult for  them  to  pronounce.)  He  joined  a  local
chapter  of  the  Belorussian  Society  of  Hunters
and  Fishermen,  a  hunting  club  sponsored  by  his
factory,  and  hunted  for  small  game  in  the  farm
regions  around  Minsk  about  half  a  dozen  times
in  the  summer  and  fall.  The  hunters  spent  the
night  in  small  villages  and  often  left  their  bag
with  the  villagers;  Oswald  described  the  peasant
life  which  he  saw  as  crude  and  poor.  Sometime
in  June,  he  met  Ella  German,  a  worker  at  the
factory,  of  whom  he  later  said  he  "perhaps  fell
in  love  with  her  the  first  minute"  he  saw  her.
(Commission  Exhibit  No.  2609.)

At  the  same  time,  however,  the  first  signs  of
disillusionment  with  his  Russian  life  appeared.
He  noted  in  his  diary  that  he  felt  "uneasy  in-
side" after  a  friend  took  him  aside  at  a  party
and  advised  him  to  return  to  the  United  States.
Another  entry  compared  life  in  Minsk  with
military  life:

I  have  become  habituatated  to  a  small  cafe
which  is  where  I  dine  in  the  evening.  The
food  is  generaly  poor  and  always  eactly
the  same,  menue  in  any  cafe,  at  any  point
in  the  city.  The  food  is  cheap  and  I  don't
really  care  about  quiality  after  three  years
in  the  U.S.M.C.

In  an  entry  for  August-September,  he  wTote
that  he  was  becoming  "increasingly  concious
of  just  what  sort  of  a  sociaty"  he  lived  in.

He  spent  New  Year's  Day  at  the  home  of
Ella  German  and  her  family.  They  ate  and
drank  in  a  friendly  atmosphere,  and  he  was
"drunk  and  happy"  when  he  returned  home.
During  the  walk  back  to  his  apartment  he  de-
cided to  ask  EUa  to  marr>^  him.  On  the  follow-
ing night,  after  he  had  brought  her  home  from
the  movies,  he  proposed  on  her  doorstep.  She
rejected  him,  saying  that  she  did  not  love  him
and  that  she  was  afraid  to  marr\'  an  American.
She  said  that  the  Polish  intervention  in  the
1920's  had  led  to  the  arrest  of  all  people  in  the
Soviet  Union  of  Polish  origin  and  she  feared
that  something  similar  might  happen  to  Ameri-
cans some  day.  Oswald  was  "too  stunned  to
think,"  and  concluded  that  she  had  gone  out
with  him  only  because  she  was  envied  by  the
other  girls  for  ha\ing  an  American  as  an  escort.
But  in  one  of  the  entries  in  the  diary  he  ap-
pears to  have  attributed  her  failure  to  love  him
to  "a  state  of  fear  which  was  always  in  the
Soviet  Union."  His  affection  for  Ella  German
apparently  continued  for  some  time;  he  had  his
last  formal  date  with  her  in  February  and  re-
mained on  friendly  terms  with  her  as  long  as
he  was  in  Russia.

After  he  returned  to  the  United  States,  Os-
wald often  commented  on  Russian  life.  He  dis-
cussed the  Soviet  systems  of  public  education
and  medical  care.  He  observed  to  one  acquaint-
ance that  everyone  in  Russia  was  trained  to  do


something,  and  discussed  with  another  the  sys-
tem of  regular  wage  and  salary  increases.  His
most  frequent  criticisms  concerned  the  contrast
between  the  lives  of  ordinary  workers  and  the
lives  of  Communist  Party  members.  He  told  an
acquaintance  in  Dallas  that  the  working  class
in  the  Soviet  Union  made  just  about  enough  to
buy  clothing  and  food  and  that  only  party
members  could  afford  luxuries.  On  another  oc-
casion, he  remarked  that  if  he  had  had  as  much
money  as  some  of  the  "managers,"  he  could
have  visited  the  Black  Sea  resorts.  He  com-
plained about  the  lack  of  freedom  in  Russia;
the  lack  of  opportunity  to  travel;  inadequate
housing;  and  the  chronic  scarcity  of  food  prod-
ucts. To  one  acquaintance,  he  observed  that  the
party  members  were  all  "opportunists,"  who
"shouted  the  loudest  and  made  the  most  noise,"
but  who  were  interested  only  in  their  own
welfare.

He  expressed  similar  views  in  a  manuscript
which  he  worked  on  in  Russia  and  probably
intended  to  pubUsh;  soon  after  he  returned  to
the  United  States,  he  hired  a  stenographer  to
prepare  a  typed  draft  from  his  notes.  Oswald
described  the  manuscript,  which  amounted  to
50  typed  pages,  as  "a  look  into  the  lives  of
work-a-day  average  Russians."

The  manuscript  describes  the  factory  in
which  Oswald  worked  and  suggests  that  politi-
cal considerations  of  which  Oswald  disap-
proved dominated  its  operation.  He  attributed
the  lack  of  unemployment  to  the  shortage  of
labor-saving  machinery  and  the  heavy  load  of
bureaucracy,  which  kept  "tons  of  paper  work"
flowing  in  and  out  of  the  factory  and  required
a  high  for  em  an- worker  ratio.  In  addition,  he
wrote,  there  was  "a  small  army  of  examiners,
committees,  and  supply  checkers  and  the
quality-control  board."

He  described  life  in  Russia,  including  life  at
the  factory,  as  centered  around  the  "Kollective."
The  head  of  the  Kollective  in  his  shop.  Com-
rade Lebizen,  saw  to  it  that  ever>'one  main-
tained shop  discipline,  attended  party  meetings,
and  received  all  the  new  propaganda  as  it  came
out.  He  hung  the  walls  of  the  shop  with  signs
and  slogans  of  the  Communist  Party.  Meetings
of  the  Kollective  were  "so  numerous  as  to  be
staggering."  In  a  single  month,  there  were
scheduled  one  meeting  of  the  professional  un-
ion, four  political  information  meetings,  two
young  Communist  meetings,  one  meeting  of  the
production  committee  to  discuss  ways  of  im-
proving work,  two  Communist  Party  meetings,
four  meetings  of  the  "School  of  Communist
Labor,"  and  one  sports  meeting.  All  but  one  of
them  were  compulsory  for  Conmiunist  Party
members  and  all  but  three  were  compulsory
for  ever\'one.  (Marina  Oswald  testified  that  her
husband  did  not  attend  the  courses  in  Marxism
and  Leninism  given  in  the  factory  for  party
members  and  those  who  wished  to  become
party  members.)  They  were  scheduled  so  as
not  to  interfere  with  work,  and  lasted  any'where


303


from  10  minutes  to  2  hours.  Oswald  said  that
no  one  liked  the  meetings,  which  were  accepted
"philosophically";  at  the  political  meetings
especially,  everyone  paid  strict  attention,  and
party  members  were  posted  in  the  audience  to
watch  for  the  slightest  sign  that  anyone's  atten-
tion might  relax,  even  for  a  moment.

Oswald  wrote  that  the  "spontaneous"  demon-
strations on  Soviet  holidays  or  for  distinguished
visitors  were  almost  as  well  organized  as  the
Kollectivist  meetings  at  the  factory.  He  noted
that  elections  were  supervised  to  ensure  that
everyone  voted,  and  that  they  voted  for  the
candidates  of  the  Communist  Party.  The
manuscript  touches  on  other  aspects  of  Soviet
life — as  the  housing  shortage  and  the  corrup-
tion which  it  evoked,  the  "rest-homes"  where
workers  had  their  vacations,  television  and  the
omni-present  radio,  and  Russian  reading  habits.
This  writing  also  may  include  only  what  Os-
wald thought  might  be  acceptable.

On  January  4,  1961,  1  year  after  he  had
been  issued  his  "stateless"  residence  permit,
Oswald  was  summoned  to  the  passport  office  in
Minsk  and  asked  if  he  still  wanted  to  become
a  Soviet  citizen.  He  replied  that  he  did  not,
but  asked  that  his  residence  permit  be  extended
for  another  year.  The  entry  in  his  diary  for
January  4—31  reads:  "I  am  stating  to  recon-
sider my  disire  about  staying.  The  work  is  drab.
The  money  I  get  has  nowhere  to  be  spent.  No
nightclubs  or  bowling  allys,  no  places  of  recrea-
tion acept  the  trade  union  dances.  I  have  had
enough."

The  American  Embassy  in  Moscow  had  not
heard  from  Oswald  after  it  received  his  letter
of  November  3,  1959.  On  February  13,  1961,
it  received  an  undated  letter  from  him  which
had  been  mailed  in  Minsk  about  a  week  earlier.
He  asked  for  the  return  of  his  passport  and
stated  that  he  wanted  to  return  to  the  United
States  if  he  could  "come  to  some  agreement
[with  the  American  Government]  concerning
the  dropping  of  any  legal  proceedings"  against
him.  He  noted  that  he  had  not  become  a  Soviet
citizen  and  was  living  in  Russia  with  "nonper-
manent  type  papers  for  a  foreigner,"  and  said
that  he  did  not  appear  personally  because  he
could  not  leave  Minsk  without  permission.  The
letter  concluded:  "I  hope  that  in  recalling  the
responsibility  I  have  to  America  that  you  re-
member yours  in  doing  everything  you  can  to
help  me,  since  I  am  an  American  citizen."  In
this  letter,  Oswald  referred  to  a  previous  letter
which  he  said  had  gone  unanswered;  there  is
evidence  that  such  a  letter  was  never  sent.

The  Second  Secretary,  Richard  Snyder,  an-
swered on  February  28  that  Oswald  would  have
to  appear  at  the  Embassy  personally  to  discuss
his  return  to  the  United  States.  In  the  mean-
time, Oswald's  mother,  who  in  January  had
inquired  at  the  Department  of  State  about  his
whereabouts,  had  been  notified  of  his  letter.  A
second  letter  from  Oswald,  posted  on  March  5,
reached  the  Embassy  on  March  20;  it  reiterated


that  he  was  unable  to  leave  Minsk  without  per-
mission and  asked  that  "preliminary  inquiries
*  *  *  be  put  in  the  form  of  a  questionnaire"
and  sent  to  him.  His  diary  entry  for  this  period
records  his  "state  of  expectation  about  going
back  to  the  U.S.,"  and  adds  that  a  friend  had
approved  his  plans  but  warned  him  not  to  dis-
cuss them  with  others.  (The  Soviet  authorities
had  undoubtedly  intercepted  and  read  the  cor-
respondence between  Oswald  and  the  Embassy
and  knew  of  his  plans.  Soon  after  the  corre-
spondence began,  his  monthly  payments  from
the  "Red  Cross"  were  cut  off.)  Having  in-
formed Washington,  the  Embassy  wrote  to  Os-
wald on  March  24,  stating  again  that  he  would
have  to  come  to  Moscow.  Later,  the  Depart-
ment of  State  decided  that  Oswald's  passport
should  be  returned  to  him  only  if  he  appeared
at  the  Embassy  for  it  and  the  Embassy  was
satisfied,  after  exploring  the  matter  with  him,
that  he  had  not  renounced  his  citizenship.

Sometime  in  the  second  week  of  March,
Miss  Katherine  Mallory,  who  was  on  tour  in
Minsk  with  the  University  of  Michigan  sym-
phonic band,  found  herself  surrounded  by
curious  Russian  citizens.  A  young  man  who
identified  himself  as  a  Texan  and  former
marine  stepped  out  of  the  crowd  and  asked  if
she  needed  an  interpreter;  he  interpreted  for
her  for  the  next  15  or  20  minutes.  Later  he
told  her  that  he  despised  the  United  States  and
hoped  to  stay  in  Minsk  for  the  rest  of  his  life.
Miss  Mallory  is  unable  to  swear  that  her  inter-
preter was  Oswald,  but  is  personally  convinced
that  it  was  he.

A  few  days  later,  probably  on  March  17,
Oswald  attended  a  trade  union  dance  with  a
friend,  Erik  Titovyets,  at  the  Palace  of  Cul-
ture for  Professional  Workers  in  Minsk.  The
dance  followed  a  lecture  by  a  Russian  woman
who  had  recently  returned  from  a  trip  to  the
United  States.  Marina  Nikolayevna  Prusakova
arrived  too  late  to  hear  the  lecture  but  was  at
the  dance.  Oswald  noticed  her  and  asked
Yuriy  Merezhinskiy,  the  son  of  the  lecturer
and  a  friend  of  both  Oswald  and  Marina,  to
introduce  him  to  her.  Oswald  asked  her  to
dance.  According  to  the  diary,  they  liked  each
other  immediately  and  he  obtained  her  tele-
phone number  before  she  left.  Marina  testified
that  she  told  Oswald  that  she  might  see  him  at
another  dance,  but  did  not  give  him  her  tele-
phone number.  Oswald  was  smitten.

Marina  Prusakova  was  19  years  old  when
she  met  Oswald.  (Commission  Exhibit  No.
1395.)  She  was  bom  on  July  17,  1941,
at  Severodvinsk  (formerly  Molotovsk),  Ark-
hangel  Oblast',  Russia.  A  few  years  later,  her
mother,  Klavdiya  Vasilievna  Prusakova,  mar-
ried Aleksandr  Ivanovich  Medvedev,  who  be-
came the  only  father  Marina  knew.  While  she
was  still  a  young  girl,  Marina  went  to  Arkhan-
gel'sk,  Arkhangel  Oblast',  to  live  with  her  ma-
ternal grandparents,  Tatyana  Yakovlevna
Prusakova  and  VasUiy  Prusakov.  Her  grand-


304


father  died  when  Marina  was  about  4  years
old;  she  continued  to  live  with  her  grandmother
for  some  time.  When  she  was  not  more  than  7,
she  moved  to  Zguritva,  Moldavian  SSR  (for-
merly called  Bessarabia)  to  live  with  her
mother  and  stepfather,  who  was  an  electrical
worker.  In  1952,  the  family  moved  to  Lenin-
grad, where  her  stepfather  obtained  a  job  in  a
power  station.  Marina  testified  that  neither  he
nor  her  mother  was  a  member  of  the  Com-
munist Party.

In  Leningrad,  Marina  attended  the  Three
Himdred  and  Seventy-Fourth  Women's  SchooL
After  she  had  completed  the  seventh  grade  at
the  school  in  1955,  she  entered  the  Pharmacy
Teknikum  for  special  training,  which  she  had
requested  on  the  ground  that  her  mother  was
ill  and  Marina  might  need  to  have  a  specialty
in  order  to  support  herself.  While  she  was  at
the  Teknikum,  she  joined  the  Trade  Union  for
Medical  Workers  and,  in  her  last  year  there,
worked  part  time  in  the  Central  Pharmacy  in
Leningrad.  She  graduated  from  the  Teknikum
with  a  diploma  in  pharmacy  in  June  1959.

Marina's  mother  had  died  in  1957,  during
Marina's  second  year  at  the  Teknikum;  she
continued  to  live  with  her  stepfather,  but  had
little  contact  with  him.  She  testified  that  she
did  not  get  along  with  her  stepfather,  whom
she  displeased  by  her  fresh  conduct;  she  said
that  she  was  not  easily  disciplined  and  was  a
sourca  of  concern  to  him.  Because  of  the  fric-
tion between  them,  Marina  regarded  her  child-
hood as  an  unhappy  one.

After  her  graduation,  Marina  was  assigned
to  a  job  preparing  and  packing  orders  in  a
pharmaceutical  warehouse  in  Leningrad;  as  a
new  employee  she  had  the  right  to  leave  this
job  within  3  days  after  the  assignment,  and  she
did  so  after  the  first  day.  She  took  no  job  for
the  next  2  months,  at  the  end  of  which  she
went  to  live  in  Minsk  with  an  aimt  and  uncle,
the  Prusakovs,  who  had  no  children.  She  had
known  them  since  she  was  a  child  and  there
was  a  mutual  affection  between  her  and  them.
Her  uncle,  a  member  of  the  Communist  Party,
was  assigned  to  the  Ministry  of  Internal  Affairs
and  headed  the  local  bureau  concerned  with
lumber.  The  Prusakovs  had  one  of  the  best
apartments  in  a  building  reserved  for  MVD
employees.

Marina  was  18  when  she  arrived  in  Minsk.
She  had  had  boyfriends  in  Leningrad  but  was
not  interested  in  marriage.  In  October  1960
she  started  work  in  the  drug  section  of  the
Third  Clinical  Hospital  where  she  earned  about
450  rubles  per  month;  at  about  the  same  time
she  became  a  member  of  the  local  Komsomol,
the  Commimist  youth  organization.  Her  friends
were  mostly  students,  whose  social  life  con-
sisted of  meeting  in  cafes  to  sip  coffee,  read
newspapers,  gossip,  and  carry  on  disciissions.
The  group  of  friends  "ran  together,"  and
Marina  did  not  attach  herself  to  a  particular
boyfriend.  She  enjoyed  this  life,  which  she  had


been  leading  for  about  7  months  when  she  met
Oswald  at  the  dance  at  the  Palace  of  Culture
in  March  1961.

When  Marina  met  Oswald,  she  thought  he
was  from  one  of  the  Russian-speaking  Baltic
countries  because  he  spoke  with  an  accent;
later  that  same  evening  she  learned  that  he
was  an  American.  She  met  him  again  at
another  dance  a  week  later.  They  danced  to-
gether most  of  the  evening,  at  the  end  of  which
he  walked  home  with  her.  They  arranged  to
meet  again  the  following  week.  Before  the
scheduled  time,  Oswald  called  to  say  that  he
was  in  the  hospital  and  that  Marina  should
visit  him  there.  Medical  records  furnished  to
the  Commission  by  the  Russian  Government
show  that  Oswald  was  admitted  to  the  Clinical
Hospital — Ear,  Nose,  and  Throat  Division,  on
Thursday,  March  30,  1961.  Marina  visited  him
often,  taking  advantage  of  her  uniform  to  visit
him  outside  regular  visiting  hours,  which  were
only  on  Sunday.  On  Easter  Sunday,  the  first
Sunday  after  his  admission  to  the  hospital,  she
brought  him  an  Easter  egg.  On  a  subsequent
visit,  he  asked  her  to  be  his  fiancee,  and  she
agreed  to  consider  it.  He  left  the  hospital  on
April  11.

During  these  visits,  Marina  apparently  dis-
cussed with  Oswald  his  reasons  for  coming  to
Russia  and  his  current  status.  According  to  her
later  account,  he  told  her  that  he  had  sur-
rendered his  American  documents  to  the  Em-
bassy in  Moscow  and  had  told  American  offi-
cials that  he  did  not  intend  to  return  to  the
United  States.  He  did  not  say  definitely  that
he  was  no  longer  an  American  citizen,  but  said
in  answer  to  a  question  about  his  citizenship
that  he  could  not  return  to  the  United  States.

Oswald  visited  Marina  regularly  at  her  aunt
and  uncle's  apartment;  they  were  apparently
not  disturbed  by  the  fact  that  he  was  an  Amer-
ican and  did  not  disapprove  of  her  seeing  him.
He  continued  to  ask  her  to  marry  him  and,
according  to  her  recollection,  she  accepted  his
proposal  on  April  20;  Oswald's  diary  puts  the
date  5  days  earlier.  Marina  testified  that  she
believed  that  Oswald  could  not  return  to  the
United  States  when  she  agreed  to  marry  him,
and  that  she  had  not  married  him  in  hope  of
going  to  the  United  States.

After  filing  notice  of  their  intent  to  marry  at
the  registrar,  obtaining  the  special  consent
necessary  for  an  alien  to  marry  a  citizen,  and
waiting  the  usual  10  days,  they  were  married
on  April  30.  The  diary  entry  for  the  wedding
day  reads:

two  of  Marinas  girl  friends  act  as  brides-
maids. We  are  married.  At  her  aunts  home
we  have  a  dinner  reception  for  about  20
friends  and  neboribos  who  wish  us  happiness
(in  spite  of  my  origin  and  accept  [accent?]
which  was  in  general  rather  disquiting  to  any
Russian  since  for.  are  very  rare  in  the  soviet
Union  even  tourist.  After  an  evening  of  eat-


305


ing  and  drinking  in  which  *  *  *  [Marina's
uncle]  start;ed  a  fright  [fight?]  and  the  fuse
blow  on  an  overioaded  circite  we  take  our
leave  and  walk  the  15  minutes  to  our  home.
We  lived  near  each  other,  at  midnight  we
were  home.

They  both  took  3  days  oflf  from  their  jobs,
which  they  spent  in  Minsk.

Oswald  wrote  in  his  diary  for  May  1,  1  day
after  the  wedding:  "In  spite  of  fact  I  married
Marina  to  hurt  Ella  I  found  myself  in  love  with
Marina."  The  next  entry,  marked  simply
"May,"  reads  in  part:

The  trasistion  of  changing  full  love  from
Ella  to  Marina  was  very  painfull  esp.  as  I
saw  Ella  almost  every  day  at  the  factory  but
as  the  days  &  weeks  went  by  I  adjusted  more
and  more  [to]  my  wife  mentaly  *  *  *  She  is
maddly  in  love  with  me  from  the  very  start.
Boat  rides  on  Lake  Minsk  walks  through  the
parks  evening  at  home  or  at  Aunt  Valia's
place  mark  May."

And  in  June:  "A  continuence  of  May,  except
that;  we  draw  closer  and  closer,  and  I  think
very  little  now  of  Ella."

Sometime  within  the  first  month  or  two  after
they  were  married  Oswald  told  his  wife  that  he
was  anxious  to  return  to  the  United  States.  The
diary  says  that  he  told  her  "in  the  last  days"  of
June  and  that  she  was  "slightly  startled"  but
encouraged  him  to  do  as  he  wished.  Marina's
recollection  is  that  she  learned  of  his  plan  be-
tween May  and  July.  Embassy  records  show
that  Oswald  notified  the  Embassy  in  a  letter
received  on  May  25  that  he  was  married  and
his  wife  would  seek  to  accompany  him  to  the
United  States.  At  about  this  time,  the  Oswalds
began  to  make  inquiries  in  Soviet  offices  about
exit  visas.

While  these  preparations  were  being  made,
the  Oswalds  apparently  enjoyed  their  new  life.
They  ate  most  of  their  meals  in  cafes  or  at
restaurants  where  they  worked.  For  amuse-
ment, they  went  boating,  attended  the  opera,
concerts,  the  circus,  and  films;  occasionally,
they  gathered  with  a  group  of  friends  for  a
cooperative  meal  at  someone's  apartment.  His
Russian  improved,  but  he  retained  an  accent
and  never  learned  to  speak  grammatically  or  to
write  well.  He  read  the  English  language  edi-
tion of  the  Daily  Worker  and  books,  also  in
English,  on  Marxism  and  Leninism;  he  also
read  some  Russian  newspapers.

Before  he  married  Marina  (and  presumably
before  February,  when  he  had  begun  his  efforts
to  return  to  the  United  States)  Oswald  had
applied  for  admission  to  the  Patrice  Lumumba
Friendship  University  in  Moscow.  He  received
a  letter  dated  May  3  apologizing  for  the  delay
in  responding  to  his  application  and  turning  it
down  on  the  ground  that  the  university  had
been  established  exclusively  for  students  from


the  underdeveloped  countries  of  Asia,  Africa,
and  Latin  America.  Oswald  expressed  his  dis-
appointment at  having  been  turned  down  to
Marina.

Oswald  reopened  his  correspondence  with
his  family  on  May  5,  with  a  friendly  letter  to
his  brother  Robert.  He  said  nothing  about  his
contacts  with  the  American  Embassy,  but  men-
tioned that  he  had  married,  and  that  he  had  a
job  as  a  "metal-smith"  and  was  living  well.  He
asked  his  brother  for  their  mother's  address,
and  encouraged  him  to  come  to  Minsk  for  a
visit.  Robert  answered  the  letter  quickly.  On
May  31,  Oswald  wrote  again  and  expressed  his
pleasure  at  having  heard  from  Robert  after  so
long.  Apparently  in  response  to  an  offer  to
send  him  whatever  he  needed,  Oswald  wrote
that  he  needed  nothing  and  thanked  Robert  for
the  thought;  he  suggested,  however,  that
Marina  might  like  a  small  wedding  present.  At
the  end  of  the  letter  he  said  that  he  did  not
know  whether  he  would  ever  return  to  the
United  States;  he  said  that  before  he  could  re-
turn he  would  have  to  obtain  the  permission
of  the  Soviet  Union  for  him  and  Marina  to
leave  and  insure  that  no  charges  would  be
lodged  against  him  in  the  United  States.  In  this
letter,  he  mentioned  that  be  was  in  touch  with
the  Embassy  in  Moscow.  At  about  this  time,
Oswald  wrote  also  to  his  mother.

On  May  25,  the  Embassy  received  a  letter
mailed  in  Minsk  about  10  days  before,  in
which  Oswald  asked  for  assurances  that  he
would  not  be  prosecuted  if  he  returned  to  the
United  States,  and  informed  the  Embassy  that
he  had  married  a  Russian  woman  who  would
want  to  accompany  him.  The  Embassy  com-
mimicated  this  development  to  Washington  and
did  not  answer  Oswald  immediately.  In  addi-
tion, he  had  had  no  word  since  March  concern-
ing the  return  of  his  passport.  Impatient  for
action,  he  appeared  without  warning  at  the
Embassy  on  July  8;  it  was  a  Saturday  and  the
offices  were  closed.  He  used  the  house  tele-
phone to  reach  Snyder,  who  came  to  the  office,
talked  with  him  briefly,  and  suggested  that  he
return  on  the  following  Monday.  Oswald  called
Marina  and  asked  her  to  join  him  in  Moscow.
She  arrived  on  Sunday,  July  9,  and  they  took
a  room  at  the  Hotel  Berlin,  where  he  had
stayed  when  he  first  arrived  in  Russia.

Oswald  returned  to  the  Embassy  on  Monday.
Marina  waited  outside  during  his  interview
with  Snyder,  who  asked  to  see  Oswald's  Soviet
papers  and  questioned  him  closely  about  his
life  in  Russia  and  possible  expatriating  acts.
Oswald  stated  that  he  was  not  a  citizen  of  the
Soviet  Union  and  had  never  formally  applied
for  citizenship,  that  he  had  never  taken  an
oath  of  allegiance  to  the  Soviet  Union,  and
that  he  was  not  a  member  of  the  factory  trade
union  organization.  He  said  that  he  had  never
given  Soviet  officials  any  confidential  informa-
tion that  he  had  learned  in  the  Marines,  had
never  been  asked  to  give  such  information.


306


A  Selection  from  the  Exhibits


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  2113: Diagram  of  the  freeway  con-
vergence at  the  Triple  Underpass  in  Dallas.


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  900:  Photo  by  AP  photographer  James
W.  Altgens  showing  President  Kennedy  reacting  to  the  first  of  the  two
shots  which  hit  him.


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  350:  Cracked  windshield  of  presidential
limousine.


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  1303:  The  rifle  which  killed  President
Kennedy.


■■0«.r 1^


•K1.KUii5^


^


T9-19i^i^H^


r«g


9'i-


jt^rtjcjuir  rtMJsa  mora


rm0m  m^tJltm  m  f  *•


BT«B  Clr  feM «  rtW<«rf  #W MM  «/  «Mi«r}


•^


4


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.
791:  Osvsalds  application  for
post  office  box.


I


J^y9 ^^>a'^*^Cai^


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.
143:  The  pistol  which  killed  oflB-
cer  Tippit.


MICHAELIS  EXHIBIT  NO.  2:
Shipping  invoice  for  the  pistol.


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  887:  Photo  taken  during  reenactment
showing  rifle  with  camera  attached.


DISTANCE  TO  STATION  C

181.9  FT.

DISTANCE  TO  RIFLE  IN  WINDOW  218.0  FT.

ANGLE  TO  RIFLE  IN  WINDOW

18''0r

DISTANCE  TO  OVERPASS

307.1  FT.

ANGLE  TO  OVERPASS

0^44'

PHOTOGRAPH  THROUGH  RIFLE  SCOPE


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  902:  Photo  made  through  rifle  scope
in  reenactment  of  the  assassination.


WHEREABOUTS  OF
LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD

between

12:33  P.M.  and  1:50  P.M.

November  22, 1963

(ALL  TMES  ARE  APPROXIMATE)


i

W-Q-'E


OUT  OF  CAB

B«dctoy  Av*.

andr4Mly  St.

12:54


0.


AT  ROOMING  HOUSE

1026  North  B«ekl«y  Av«.

arriv*  1:00

■•av*  1:03


TEXAS  SCHOOL  ROOK

DEPOSITORY

L*av«  front  •ntronco

12:33


ON  BUS

Bm  St.  and  Murphy  St.

12:40


r  ^


/


^ $.'*^


Of  F  BUS

botwoon  Poydros  St.

and  Ujmar  St.

12:44


IN  CAB

Commorco  St.

orvd  Lamar  St.

12:48

KHTJr

Known  routes
Assumed  routes
— --  Motorcade  route

APPROXIMATE  DISTANCES

Tseo  TO  "ON  BUS.; o  w  mi

"ON  BUS"  TO  "OFF  BUSV 0  15  Ml

"OFF  BUS"  TO  "IN  CAB1-- 070  Ml

■IN  CAB"  TO  "OUT  OF  CAB" 2  40  Ml

"OUT  OF  CAB"  TO  ROOMING  HOUSL 0  30  Ml

ROOMING  HOUSE  TO  TIPPIT  KILLING  SITE -J  85  Ml

TIPPIT  KILLING  SITE  TO  JACKET 0  20  Ml

JACKET  TO  TEXAS  THEATER- _ -JIM  Ml


INSERT  A


TIPPIT  KILUNO  SITE
10th  St.  o«td  Potton  Av«
1:16


5

1


TEXAS  THEATER
231  Woft  J«ffonon  BUd.
arrivo  1:40
opprohondod  1:50


/


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  1 1 19-A:  Oswald's  movements  from  the
time  he  left  the  Depository  Building  until  his  arrest.


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  1301:  Southeast  corner  of  sixth  floor
of  Texas  School  Book  Depository  Building  showing  arrangement  of  car-
tons shortly  after  shots  were  fired.


APPROXIMATE LOCATION
OF WRAPPING-PAPER BAG


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  1302:  Approximate  location  of  wrap-
ping paper  bag  and  location  of  palm  print  on  carton  near  window.


I-
(/)

Z
O

D

o


i  KHOWH  ROUTE  OF  OSWALD


ELM  STREET


•  ASSUMED  ROUTE  OF  OSWALD


SCALE IM FEET


/v

/


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  1118:  Texas  School  Book  Depository
diagram  of  second  floor  showing  route  of  Oswald.


Endiiig


Island


cation


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  634-A:  Ridge  character-
istics used  by  experts  in  comparing  fingerprints.


Cotton


Viscose.


Wool.


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  665:  Textile  fibers.  Fibers  found
on  the  butt  plate  of  the  assassination  rifle  matched  those  on  Os-
wald's shirt.


LaWMTU0iN«l. ftlCTlOi*


Cno*ft Sccrtoti


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  666:  Diagram  of  a  hair.  Evidence
showed  hairs  matching  Oswald's  on  the  blanket  in  which  the  assas-
sination rifle  was  wrapped.


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  1968:  Location  of  eyewitnesses  to  the
movements  of  Oswald  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Tippit  killing.


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  558:  Bolt  face  of  the  C2766  rifle  which
showed  that  the  three  expended  cartridge  cases  found  near  the  window
in  the  Texas  School  Book  Depository  were  fired  from  that  rifle.


WELCOME  MR.  KENNEDin


TO  DALLAS...


•  •  •  ^  >^'  • '  M)  (^f^..;.d  by  .  ruc^M  iih*r*f  l"^..'  •H.mp* ♦♦«*»  ,»i  e<ti»ni  k.v.  |u4f  >U<.t.^  hr©  mor.  C.rt*»rv«*f*i Am«r.c.n« lo pwbl'C oWic.

•  •  •  ^  OM  T  »»,.*  ,j  .„  .eorto/riK  '  beo<n  t)>wn n.t  bK«uM  o*  P«d»'.l  h*«d««ti.  b«*  tVoy^ti  cofwa^.tfv.  .cenofn.c  .nd  bwi-*****  p'.ct-c.t

•  •  •  ^  >^'  ' '  *+^*  -'"  co«»i«ii.  to  g'ow  .nd  pro»p«r  ^.tpl*.  t**o^i  by  you  •"<*  yowf  .dminiitf.tio**  ♦«  p*A«liM  i*  (o* *t  '»o«-co»»<o'"«'»y  to N».  pto<^*..f.v»*  "

•  •  •  ^  Wll  T  i4u<  ,,,tc<ti  your  pkllo«.p*f  •"<(  polm.i  -n  I ?()0  c-^  ..II  do  u  •9«'ii  '"  I9t< ...on  nor.  amplMOcolly  *•"  bo<o»«.

•VIK.  l\ClNlNCL/T  ,  dvtpHe  confen+ionj  on  the  part  of  your  adminis+ratlon,  tKe  S+a*e  DBparfment,  th«  Mayor
of  Dallas,  the  Dallas  Gty  Council,  and  members  of  your  party,  we  free-thinking  and  America-thinking  citizens  of  Dallas
still  have,  through  a  Constitution  largely  ignored  by  you,  the  right  to  address  our  grievances,  to  question  you,  to  dis-
agree with  you,  and  to  criticize  you.

In  asserting  this  constitutional  right,  we  wish  to  ask  you  publicly  the  following  questions — indeed,  questions  of  paramount
importance  and  interest  to  all  free  peoples  everyvAere — which  we  trust  you  will  answer ...  in  public,  without  sophistry.
These  questions  are:


U/U  Y  is  Latin  America  turning  either  anti-American  or  Communistic,  or  both,  despite  increased  U.  S.  foreign  aid.  State
IH-SI-L  Department  policy,  ancf  your  own  Ivy-Tower  pronounce.-nents?

UfUY  do  you  say  we  have  built  a  "wall  of  freedom"  around  Cuba  when  there  is  no  freedom  in  Cuba  today?  Because
—SlUL  of  your  policy,  thousands  of  Cubans  have  been  Imprisoned,  are  starving  and  being  persecuted  —  with  thousands
already  murdered  and  thousands  more  awaiting  e«ecution  and,  in  addition,  the  entire  population  of  almost  7,000,000
Cubans  are  living  in  slavery.

UfllY  have  you  approved  the  sale  of  wheat  and  corn  to  our  enemies  when  you  know  the  Communist
EilUL  soldiers  "travel  on  their  stomachs"  just  as  ours  do?  Communist  soldiers  are  daily  wounding  and  or  killing
American .soldiers in Sou;t^ Viet  Nam.

UfllY  ^'^  you  host,  salute  and  entertain  Tito  —  Moscow's  Trojan  Horse  —  just  a  short  time  after  our  sworn
iiiLL  enemy,  Khrushchev,  embraced  the  Yugoslav  dictator  as  a  great  hero  and  leader  of  Communism?

yfUY  ^w«  you  urged  greater  aid,  comfort,  recognition,  and  understanding  for  Yugoslavia,  Poland,  Hungary,  and
' other  Communist  countries,  while  turning  your  back  on  the  pleas  of  Hungarian,  East  German,  Cuban  ana  other
anti-Communist  freedom  fighters?

UflJY  did  Cambodia  kick  the  U.S.  out  of  its  country  after  we  poured  nearly  400  Million  Dollars  of  aid  into  rts  ultra-
""' leftist  government?

UI||Y  ^'>  &US  Hall,  head  of  the  U.S.  Communist  Party  praised  almost  every  one  of  your  policies  and  announced  that
""  -  the  party  will  endorse  and  support  your  re-election  in  I9M?

UfllY  have  you  banned  the  showing  at  U.S.  military  bases  of  the  film  "Operation  Abolition" — the  movie  by  the  House
"*'  ' Committee  on  Un-American  Activities  exposing  Communism  in  America?

Ufl|Y  have  you  ordered  or  permitted  your  brother  Bobby,  the  Attorney  General,  to  go  soft  on  Communists,  fellow.
"**  '  travelers,  and  ultra-leftists  in  America,  while  permitting  him  to  persecute  loyal  Americans  who  criticiie  you,  your
administration,  and  your  leadership?

Uf|| Y  *re  you  in  favor  of  the  U.S.  continuing  to  give  economic  aid  to  Argentina,  in  spite  of  that  fact  that  Argentina  has
**"  * just  seized  almost  400  Million  Dollars  of  American  private  property?

UI||Y  ^'•s  the  Foreign  Poficy  of  the  United  States  degenerated  to  the  point  that  the  C.I.A.  is  arranging  coups  and  hav-
""  * ing  staunch  Anti-Communist  Allies  of  the  U.S.  bloodily  exterminated.


WHY


have you scrapped the Monroe Doctrine in favor of the "Spirit of Moscow"?


MR.  KENNEDY,  *%  citiiens  of  these  United  States  of  America,  we  DEMAND  answers  to  these  questions,  and  we  want
tti«m  NOW.

THE AMERICAN FACT-FINDING COMMITTEE

"An  unoff W>af«d  ontf  ooa-  perf  itan  group  of  cWi«rs  who  w/sA  truth"

BERNARD  WEISSMAN,
Chairman

P.O.  Bo«  1792  — Dallas  21,  T«m


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  1031:  Advertisement  in  the  Nov.  22
issue  of  the  Dallas  Morning  News.


PAPPAS  DEPOSITION EXHIBIT 1: Dallas  Morning  News  photo
showing  Jack  Ruby  about  to  kill  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.


t


MAIN  ST,


JAIL  OFFICE  AND  IMMEDIATE
VICINITY

BASEMENT,  DALLAS  POLICE  DEPARTMENT


JAIL
ELEV.


DOWN
RAMP


P


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  2177:  Routes  of  Oswald  and  Ruby  in
the  basement  and  immediate  vicinity  of  the  Dallas  Police  Departnient.


COMMISSION  EXHIBIT  NO.  2424:  Jack  Ruby,  at  right  in  the  back
row  wearing  dark  suit  and  horn-rimmed  glasses,  shown  at  a  press  con-
ference in  the  Dallas  police  station  the  night  of  the  assassination.


HOVL  OC.  1959
MOSCOW


'A  My


COMMISSION EXHIBIT  NO.

912:  Letter  mailed  by  Oswald
to  the  American  Embassy  in
Moscow.


and  "doubted"  that  he  would  have  done  so  had
he  been  asked.  Some  of  Oswald's  statements
during  this  interview  were  undoubtedly  false.
He  had  almost  certainly  applied  for  citizenship
in  the  Soviet  Union  and,  at  least  for  a  time,
been  disappointed  when  it  was  denied.  He  pos-
sessed a  membership  card  in  the  union  organi-
zation. In  addition,  his  assertion  to  Snyder  that
he  had  never  been  questioned  by  Soviet  author-
ities concerning  his  life  in  the  United  States  is
simply  unbelievable.

Oswald  showed  anxiety,  already  displayed  in
his  letters,  that  he  might  be  prosecuted  and
imprisoned  if  he  returned  to  the  United  States.
Snyder  told  him  informally  that  he  did  not
know  any  grounds  on  which  he  would  be  prose-
cuted but  that  he  could  give  no  assurances  in
this  regard.  Snyder  testified  that  Oswald  seemed
to  have  matured  while  he  was  in  Russia  and
did  not  show  the  bravado  and  arrogance  which
characterized  his  first  contacts  with  the  Em-
bassy. Oswald  told  him  that  he  had  "learned  a
hard  lesson  the  hard  way"  and  had  acquired  a
new  appreciation  of  the  United  States  and  the
meaning  of  freedom.

Since  Oswald's  passport  would  expire  on
September  10,  1961,  before  which  date  he
probably  would  not  be  able  to  obtain  Russian
exit  papers,  he  filled  out  an  application  for  its
renewal.  On  a  questionnaire  attached  to  the
application,  he  reiterated  his  oral  statements
that  he  had  obtained  only  a  residence  permit
in  the  Soviet  Union  and  was  stUl  an  American
national.  On  the  basis  of  Oswald's  written  and
oral  statements,  Snyder  concluded  that  he  had
not  expatriated  himself  and  returned  his  pass-
port, stamped  valid  only  for  direct  travel  to
the  United  States,  to  him.  Accompanied  by  his
wife,  Oswald  came  to  the  Embassy  again  cwi
the  following  day,  to  initiate  procedures  for  her
admission  to  the  United  States  as  an  immi-
grant; they  had  a  routine  interview  with
McVickar,  Snyder's  assistant.  Three  days  later,
they  returned  to  Minsk.

On  the  same  day,  Oswald  wrote  to  his
brother.  He  told  Robert  that  he  had  his  pass-
port again  and  that  he  and  Marina  were  doing
everything  possible  to  leave  the  Soviet  Union.
Apparently  referring  to  his  initial  reappearance
at  the  Embassy  in  quest  of  his  passport,  he
wrote:  "I  could  write  a  book  about  how  many
feeling  have  come  and  gone  since  that  day."
The  letter  closed  with  an  affectionate  greeting
to  his  brother  and  his  family.  The  letter's  tone
of  firm  purpose  to  return  to  the  United  States
in  the  face  of  heavy  odds  reflected  Oswald's
attitude  thereafter.

As  soon  as  they  returned  to  Minsk,  the  Os-
walds began  to  work  with  local  authorities  for
permission  to  leave  the  country.  His  diary  entry
for  July  16  through  August  20  reads,

We  have  found  out  which  blanks  and
certificates  are  nessceary  to  apply  for  a  exit
visa.  They  nimiber  about  20  papers;  birth


certificates,  affidavit,  photos,  ect.  On  Aug
20th  we  give  the  papers  out  they  say  it  will
be  3Vi  months  before  we  know  wheather
they  let  us  go  or  not.  In  the  meantime
Marina  has  had  to  stade  4  differant  meeting
at  the  place  of  work  held  by  her  boss's  at
the  direction  of  "someone"  by  phone.  The
Young  Comm.  leauge  headquttes  also  called
about  her  and  she  had  to  go  see  them  for
IV2  hours.  The  purpose  (expressed)  is  to
disuade  her  from  going  to  the  U.S.A.  Net
effect:  Make  her  more  stubborn  about  want-
ing to  go.  Marina  is  pregnet.  We  only  hope
that  the  visas  come  through  soon.

In  a  letter  dated  July  15,  he  reported  their
efforts  to  the  Embassy,  and  said  that  he  would
keep  it  informed  "as  to  the  overall  picture."
The  letter  mentioned  that  Marina  was  having
difficulties  at  work  because  of  her  decision  to
leave  but  added  that  such  "tactics"  were  "quite
useless"  and  that  Marina  had  "stood  up  well,
without  getting  into  trouble."  For  August  21
through  September  1,  the  diary  reads:

I  make  repeated  trips  to  the  passport  &
visa  office,  also  to  Ministry  of  For.  Affairs  in
Minsk,  also  Min.  of  Internal  Affairs,  all  of
which  have  a  say  in  the  granting  of  a  visa.
I  extrackted  promises  of  quick  attention  to
us.

For  September  through  October  18,  "No  word
from  Min.  ('They'll  call  us.')."

Marina  testified  that  when  the  news  of  her
visit  to  the  American  Embassy  in  July  reached
Minsk,  she  was  dropped  from  membership  in
"Komsomol,"  the  Communist  Youth  Organiza-
tion, and  that  "meetings  were  arranged"  at
which  "members  of  the  various  organizations"
attempted  to  dissuade  her  from  leaving  the
Soviet  Union.  Her  aunt  and  uncle  did  not  speak
to  her  for  "a  long  time."  Paul  Gregory,  to
whom  Marina  taught  Russian  in  the  United
States,  testified  that  she  once  referred  to  this
period  of  her  life  in  Minsk  as  "a  very  horrible
time."

Oswald  wrote  to  the  Embassy  again  on  Octo-
ber 4,  to  request  that  the  U.S.  Government
offici^y  intervene  to  facilitate  his  and  his
wife's  apfdications  for  exit  visas.  He  stated  that
there  had  been  "systematic  and  concerted  at-
tempts to  intimidate  [Marina]  *  *  *  into  with-
drawing her  application  for  a  visa"  which  had
resulted  in  her  being  hospitalized  for  a  5-day
period  on  September  22  for  "nervous  exhaus-
tion." Marina  has  denied  that  she  was  hospital-
ized for  a  nervous  disorder  and  he  made  no
mention  of  it  in  his  diary  or  letters  to  his
family;  he  probably  lied  to  the  Embassy.  The
Embassy  replied  to  his  letter  on  October  12,
saying  that  it  had  no  way  of  influencing  Soviet
conduct  on  such  matters  and  that  its  experience
had  been  that  action  on  applications  for  exit
visas  was  "seldom  taken  rapidly."


307


In  October  1961  Marina  took  her  annual
vacation.  She  and  Oswald  agreed  that  she
should  get  a  "change  of  scenery,"  and  she
spent  about  3  weeks  with  an  aunt  in  Khar'kov.
It  is  possible  that  they  were  not  getting  along
well  together  during  this  period.  A  diary  entry
after  her  return  indicates  that  they  were  having
some  quarrels  and  that  she  was  wavering  in  her
decision  to  go  to  the  United  States,  which  Os-
wald attributed  to  anxiety  about  their  applica-
tions for  visas  and  the  fact  that  she  was  preg-
nant; he  in  turn  dreaded  the  approach  of  the
"hard  Russian  winter."  He  noted  in  his  diary
that  he  was  lonely  while  she  was  gone,  but  that
he  and  his  friend  "Erich,"  presumably  Erik
Titovyets,  went  to  some  dances  and  other
public  amusements.  On  his  22nd  birthday  he
went  alone  to  see  his  favorite  opera,  "The
Queen  of  Spades."  Marina  sent  him  a  gold  and
silver  cup,  inscribed  "To  my  dear  husband  on
his  birthday,  18/x/6r'  and  other  gifts,  for
which  he  wrote  to  thank  her.  She  returned  on
November  12,  in  Oswald's  words,  "radient,
with  several  jars  of  preserses  for  me  from  her
aunt."

Sometime  after  Marina's  return  Oswald  ap-
plied for  an  interview  with  Col.  Nicolay  Ak-
senov,  an  oflBcial  in  the  local  MVD,  in  an  effort
to  expedite  their  application  for  exit  visas;  he
was  told  by  the  colonel's  subordinates  that  they
were  competent  to  handle  the  matter.  Oswald
then  insisted  that  Marina  seek  an  interview;
she  agreed  reluctantly.  The  interview  was
granted;  Marina  thought  that  this  might  have
been  due  to  the  fact  that  her  uncle  was  also  a
high-ranking  oflBcial  in  the  Minsk  MVD,  but
she  did  not  believe  that  he  would  personally
have  presumed  on  his  oflficial  position  to  obtain
special  treatment.  Colonel  Aksenov  questioned
her  about  her  reasons  for  wanting  to  go  to  the
United  States  and,  noticing  that  she  was  preg-
nant, suggested  that  she  at  least  delay  her  de-
partvu-e  so  that  her  child  could  be  born  in
Russia,  but  did  not  otherwise  try  to  discourage
her.  He  finally  told  her  that  there  were  many
others  seeking  visas  and  that  she  and  her  hus-
band would  have  to  wait  their  turn.

Throughout  this  period,  Oswald  continued
to  correspond  with  his  mother  and  brother.  His
letters  contained  the  usual  chatter  among  mem-
bers of  a  family  and  occasional  references  to
the  progress  of  the  visa  applications.  He  wrote
to  the  Embassy  on  November  1,  saying  that  if,
as  he  anticipated,  his  residence  permit  were
renewed  in  January  for  another  year,  it  would
be  over  his  protest.  On  November  13  the  Em-
bassy replied,  telling  Oswald  that  retention  of
his  Soviet  passport,  which  was  of  the  kind  is-
sued to  persons  considered  to  be  stateless,  or
an  extension  of  it,  would  not  prejudice  his
claim  to  American  citizenship.  The  letter  added
that  he  could  discuss  the  renewal  of  his  Amer-
ican passport  whenever  he  appeared  in  person
at  the  Embassy  to  do  so.


Late  in  December,  Oswald  wrote  a  letter  to
Senator  John  G.  Tower  of  Texas,  which  was
received  in  Washington  near  the  end  of  Janu-
ary. He  stated  that  he  was  an  American  citizen
and  that  the  Soviet  Government  refused  to  per-
mit him  and  his  wife  to  leave  the  Soviet  Union.
He  asked  Senator  Tower  to  raise  "the  question
of  holding  by  the  Soviet  Union  of  a  citizen  of
the  U.S.,  against  his  will  and  expressed  de-
sires." The  letter  was  referred  to  the  State  De-
partment and  no  further  action  concerning  it
was  taken.  On  December  25,  Marina  was  called
to  the  Soviet  Passport  OflBce  and  told  that  exit
visas  would  be  granted  to  her  and  her  husband;
she  was  surprised,  having  doubted  that  she
would  ever  be  permitted  to  leave.  Oswald  wrote
to  the  Embassy  on  December  27  that  they
would  be  given  visas  and  asked  that  his  pass-
port be  extended  without  another  trip  to  Mos-
cow; he  added,  however,  that  he  would  come  to
Moscow  if  this  would  expedite  the  processing
of  his  application.  In  his  diary,  he  wrote,  "It's
great  (I  think?)."  Before  the  year  ended,
Marina  went  on  maternity  leave  from  her  job.
They  spent  New  Year's  Eve  at  a  dinner  party
given  by  the  Zigers.

Oswald  wrote  to  his  mother  on  January  2,
1962,  and  told  her  that  he  and  his  wife  ex-
pected to  arrive  in  the  United  States  sometime
around  March.  He  asked  her  to  contact  the
local  Red  Cross  and  request  that  it  put  his  case
before  the  International  Rescue  Committee  or
some  other  group  which  aids  immigrants  to  the
United  States.  He  told  her  that  he  would  need
about  $800  and  that  she  should  insist  on  a  gift
rather  than  a  loan;  he  told  her  not  to  send  any
of  her  own  money.  Despite  his  instructions,  she
requested  a  loan  from  the  Red  Cross.  On
January  13,  Oswald  wrote  to  the  International
Rescue  Committee  himself;  he  asked  for  $800
with  which  to  purchase  two  tickets  from  Mos-
cow to  Texas.  He  wrote  to  the  Committee
again  on  January  26,  this  time  asking  for
$1,000.

In  the  meantime,  letters  of  Oswald  and  the
American  Embassy,  both  dated  January  5,
crossed  in  the  mail.  The  Embassy's  letter  sug-
gested that  since  there  might  be  difficulties  in
obtaining  an  American  visa  for  Marina,  he
consider  returning  alone  and  bringing  her  over
later.  He  replied  on  the  16th  that  he  would  not
leave  Russia  without  her.  In  his  letter,  Oswald
requested  that  the  U.S.  Government  loan  him
the  money  for  his  and  Marina's  airplane  tickets
or  arrange  a  loan  from  another  source.  The
Embassy  replied  on  January  15  that  Marina
had  not  yet  obtained  an  American  visa  and  that
no  evidence  had  yet  been  submitted  that  she
would  not  become  a  public  charge  in  the
United  States.  It  suggested  that  Oswald's
mother  or  some  other  close  relative  file  an
affidavit  of  support  in  Marina's  behalf.  Before
receiving  this  letter,  Oswald  wrote  out  such  a
document  himself  and  mailed  it  to  the  Embassy.

On  January  23,  after  receiving  the  Embassy's


308


letter,  he  wrote  that  his  own  aflBdavit  should
be  sufficient,  since  he  had  been  away  from  the
United  States  for  more  than  2  years  and  could
not  be  expected  to  obtain  an  affidavit  from
someone  else.  But  on  the  same  day,  he  wrote  to
his  mother  asking  that  she  file  an  affidavit  of
support  with  the  Immigration  and  Naturaliza-
tion Service.  On  January  24,  the  Embassy  ac-
knowledged receipt  of  his  affidavit,  but  again
suggested  that  he  obtain  one  from  someone
else.

Late  in  January,  Oswald  received  a  letter
from  his  mother  telling  him  that  he  had  been
given  a  dishonorable  discharge  from  the  Ma-
rines. (The  discharge  had  actually  been  "un-
desirable," a  less  derogatory  characterization.)
This  apparently  revived  his  fear  of  prosecution,
and  on  January  30,  he  wrote  to  his  brother  for
more  information.  On  the  same  day  he  wrote
also  to  John  B.  Connally,  Jr.,  then  Governor
of  Texas,  who  Oswald  believed  was  still  Secre-
tary of  Navy.  The  letter  read:

I  wish  to  call  your  attention  to  a  case
about  which  you  may  have  personal  knowl-
ege  since  you  are  a  resident  of  Ft.  Worth  as
I  am.

In  November  1959  an  event  was  well
publicated  in  the  Ft.  Worth  newspapers  con-
cerning a  person  who  had  gone  to  the  Soviet
Union  to  reside  for  a  short  time,  (much  in
the  same  way  E.  Hemingway  resided  in
Paris.)

This  person  in  answers  to  questions  put  to
him  by  reporteds  in  Moscow  criticized  cer-
tain facets  of  american  life.  The  story  was
blown  up  into  another  "turncoat"  sensation,
with  the  result  that  the  Navy  department
gave  this  person  a  belated  dishonourable
discharge,  although  he  had  received  an  hon-
ourable discharge  after  three  years  service
on  Sept.  11,  1959  at  El  Toro,  Marine  corps
base  in  California.

These  are  the  basic  facts  of  my  case.

I  have  and  allways  had  the  full  sanction
of  the  U.S.  Embassy,  Moscow  USSR,  and
hence  the  U.S.  goverment.  In  as  much  as
I  am  returning  to  the  U.S.A.  in  this  year
with  the  aid  of  the  U.S.  Embassy,  bring  with
me  my  family  (since  I  married  in  the  USSR)
I  shall  employ  all  means  to  right  this  gross
mistake  or  injustice  to  a  boni-fied  U.S.  citi-
zen and  ex-service  man.  The  U.S.  govern-
ment has  no  charges  or  complaints  against
me.  I  ask  you  to  look  into  this  case  and
take  the  neccessary  steps  to  repair  the  dam-
age done  to  me  and  my  family.  For  informa-
tion I  would  direct  you  to  consult  the  Amer-
ican Embassy,  Chikovski  St  19/21,  Moscow,
USSR.

Connally  referred  the  letter  to  the  Department
of  the  Navy,  which  sent  Oswald  a  letter  stating
that  the  Department  contemplated  no  change
in  the  undesirable  discharge. On  March  22,


Oswald  wrote  to  the  Department  insisting  that
his  discharge  be  given  a  further,  full  review.
The  Department  promptly  repUed  that  it  had
no  authority  to  hear  and  review  petitions  of
this  sort  and  referred  Oswald  to  the  Navy  Dis-
charge Review  Board.  Oswald  filled  out  the
enclosed  application  for  review  in  Minsk  but
did  not  mail  it  until  he  returned  to  the  United
States.

The  Department  of  State  had  notified  Os-
wald's mother  that  it  would  need  $900  to  make
the  travel  arrangements  for  her  son  and
daughter-in-law.  On  February  1,  Oswald  sent
his  mother  a  brief  letter  rejecting  her  sugges-
tion that  she  try  to  raise  money  by  telling  the
newspapers  about  his  financial  plight.  Five  days
later,  the  Embassy  wrote  to  Oswald  and  asked
him  to  make  formal  application  for  a  loan.
Oswald  wrote  to  his  mother  again  on  Febru-
ary 9,  reminding  her  to  file  an  affidavit  of  sup-
port and  asking  that  she  send  him  clippings
from  the  Fort  Worth  newspapers  about  his
defection  to  Russia,  a  request  which  he  later
repeated  to  his  brother.  He  told  her  that  he
wanted  to  know  what  had  been  written  about
him,  so  that  he  could  be  "forewarned."

Oswald  took  Marina  to  the  hospital  on  the
morning  of  February  15.  A  baby  girl  was  bom
at  about  10  a.m.  He  had  gone  on  to  the  factory
where  news  of  the  birth  awaited  him  on  his
arrival.  In  accordance  with  regular  hospital
practice,  he  did  not  see  the  baby  until  Marina
left  the  hospital.  He  was  excited  by  the  child,
who  was  named  "June  Lee"  in  accordance  with
the  Russian  custom  and  law  that  a  child's
second  name  must  be  the  father's  first  name  or
a  variation  of  it.  He  had  wanted  to  name  his
child  "June  Marina,"  and  protested  the  appli-
cation of  the  law  to  her,  since  he  had  a  United
States  passport.  His  diary  contains  the  wry
coment,  "Po-Russki."  His  coworkers  at  the  fac-
tory gave  the  Oswalds  "one  summer  blanket,
6  light  diapers,  4  warm  diapers,  2  chemises,  3
very  good  warm  chemises,  4  very  nice  suits  and
two  toys"  for  the  baby.  Marina  came  home  on
February  23.

There  was  less  urgency  about  the  departure
for  the  United  States  after  June  Lee  was  born.
Oswald  wrote  to  his  mother,  and  brother,  that
he  would  probably  not  arrive  for  several
months.  The  Embassy  received  a  letter  on
March  3,  in  which  Oswald  applied  for  a  loan
of  S800;  the  Embassy  replied  that  it  was  au-
thorized to  loan  him  only  $500.  It  had  in  the
meantime  decided  that  his  own  affidavit  of
support  for  Marina  would  be  sufficient  under
the  circumstances.  On  March  15,  he  received
notification  from  the  Immigration  and  Natural-
ization Service  that  Marina's  application  for  a
visa  had  been  approved.  By  March  28,  he  had
received  an  affidavit  of  support  in  Marina's  be-
half from  his  mother's  employer,  Byron  K.
Phillips,  which  he  filed  although  it  was  no
longer  necessary  to  do  so.  A  few  days  before,
Marina,  still  on  maternity  leave,  had  quit  her


309


job.  Discussion  with  the  Embassy  to  complete
financial  and  travel  arrangements  continued  in
April  and  May.  In  a  letter  to  Robert  on
April  12,  Oswald  wrote  that  only  "the  Ameri-
can side"  was  holding  up  their  departure,  but
added  that  the  winter  being  over,  he  didn't
"really  *  *  *  want  to  leave  until  the  beginning
of  fall,  since  the  spring  and  sunmier  *  *  *  [in
Russia]  are  so  nice."

On  May  10,  the  Embassy  wrote  that  every-
thing was  in  order  and  suggested  that  Oswald
come  to  the  Embassy  with  his  family  to  sign
the  final  papers.  At  his  request,  he  was  dis-
charged from  the  factory  on  about  May  18.
His  work  had  apparently  never  been  very  good.
Marina  testified  that  he  was  rather  lazy  and
resented  having  to  take  orders.  This  estimate  is
confirmed  by  a  report  of  the  plant  director  and
personnel  department  chief,  filed  on  Decem-
ber 11,  1961,  which  was  apparently  a  routine
assessment  of  his  work.  The  report  noted  that
he  did  not  "display  the  initiative  for  increasing
his  skill"  in  his  job,  that  he  was  "over-sensitive
*  *  *  to  remarks  from  the  foremen,  and  *  *  *
careless  in  his  work";  Oswald  took  "no  part  in
the  social  life  of  the  shop"  and  kept  "very
much  to  himself."

Oswald  picked  up  his  Soviet  exit  visa  on
May  22;  at  about  this  time,  he  also  had  an
interview  with  an  oflBcial  of  the  MVD  to  obtain
final  clearance  for  his  departm-e.  He  wrote  to
Robert  that  he  and  his  family  would  leave  for
Moscow  on  the  following  day  and  depart  for
England  10  to  14  days  later.  He  expected  to
cross  the  Atlantic  by  ship,  probably  docking  in
New  Orleans.  Returning  to  a  point  which  he
had  made  in  an  earlier  letter  to  his  mother,  he
commented  that  he  knew  from  the  newspaper
clippings  what  Robert  had  said  about  him  when
he  left  for  Russia;  he  thought  that  Robert  had
talked  too  much  at  that  time,  and  asked  that
Robert  say  nothing  to  the  newspapers  now.

The  Oswalds  arrived  in  Moscow  by  May  24
and  on  that  date  filled  out  various  documents
at  the  American  Embassy;  Marina  was  given
her  American  visa.  Final  arrangements  for
their  emigration  were  made  with  Soviet  oflBcials.
On  June  1,  Oswald  signed  a  promissory  note
at  the  Embassy  for  a  repatriation  loan  of
$435.71.  He  and  his  family  boarded  a  train  for
Holland,  which  passed  through  Minsk  that
night.  They  crossed  the  Soviet  frontier  at  Brest
on  June  2.  Two  days  later,  they  departed  from
Holland  on  the  SS  Maasdam.  Onboard  ship,
the  Oswalds  stayed  by  themselves;  Marina  testi-
fied that  she  did  not  often  go  on  deck  because
she  was  poorly  dressed  and  Oswald  was
ashamed  of  her.

Probably  while  he  was  on  board  the
Maasdam  Oswald  wrote  some  notes  on  ship
stationery,  which  appear  to  be  a  summary  of
what  he  thought  he  had  learned  by  living  under
both  the  capitalist  and  Communist  systems.
The  notes  reflect  his  imhappy  and  deepening
feeling  of  disillusionment  with  both  the  Soviet


Union  and  the  United  States.  Oswald  observed
that  although  reform  groups  may  oppose  the
government  in  power,  they  always  declare  that
they  are  for  their  people  and  their  country,
and  he  asked  what  "would  happen  if  somebody
was  to  stand  up  and  say  he  was  utterly  opposed
not  only  to  the  governments,  but  to  the  people,
too  the  entire  land  and  complete  foundations"
of  his  society.  He  condemned  existing  political
groups  and  proposed  the  formation  of  a  third
choice  between  commimism  and  capitalism,
neither  of  which  was  acceptable  to  him.  "I
have  lived,"  he  said,  "under  both  systems,  I
have  sought  the  answers  and  although  it  would
be  very  easy  to  dupe  myself  into  believing  one
system  is  better  than  the  other,  I  know  they  are
not."  In  these  notes,  he  acknowledged  that  his
"Red  Cross"  subsidy  had  been  paid  by  the
Soviet  Government  rather  than  the  inter-
national organization,  and  said,  "I  shall  never
sell  myself  intentionlly,  or  unintentionlly  to
anyone  again."  (Commission  Exhibit  No.  25.)
It  was  probably  also  onboard  ship  that  Os-
wald wrote  two  sets  of  answers  to  questions
which  he  anticipated  about  his  decision  to  go
to  Russia  and  later  to  return  to  the  United
States.  Although  the  sets  of  answers  are  some-
what similar,  but  the  tone  of  one  is  apologetic,
while  the  other  suggests  that  Oswald  went  to
Russia  to  study  the  Soviet  system,  but  remained
a  loyal  American  and  owed  no  apologies.

The  Maasdam  landed  at  Hoboken,  N.J.,  on
Jime  13.  The  Oswalds  were  met  by  Spas  T.
Raikin,  a  representative  of  the  Traveler's  Aid
Society,  which  had  been  contacted  by  the  De-
partment of  State;  Raikin  had  the  impression
that  Oswald  was  trying  to  avoid  meeting  any-
one. He  told  Raikin  that  he  had  only  $63  and
had  no  plans  either  for  that  night  or  for  travel
to  Fort  Worth,  and  accepted  the  society's  help,
accordiQg  to  Raikin,  "with  confidence  and  ap-
preciation." They  passed  through  the  unmigra-
tion  office  without  incident,  and  Raildn  helped
them  through  customs.

The  society  referred  the  Oswalds  to  the  New
York  City  Department  of  Welfare,  which
helped  them  find  a  room  at  the  Times  Square
Hotel.  Oswald  told  both  Raikin  and  representa-
tives of  the  welfare  department  that  he  had
been  a  marine  stationed  at  the  American  Em-
bassy in  Moscow,  had  married  a  Russian  girl,
renoimced  his  citizenship,  and  worked  in
Minsk;  he  soon  found  out,  he  said,  that  the
Russian  propaganda  was  inaccurate  but  had
not  been  able  to  obtain  an  exit  visa  for  his  wife
and  child  for  more  than  2  years.  He  said  also
that  he  had  paid  the  travel  expenses  himself.

The  welfare  department  called  Robert  Os-
wald's home  in  Fort  Worth.  His  wife  answered
and  said  that  they  would  help.  She  contacted
her  husband  who  sent  $200  immediately.  Os-
wald refused  to  accept  the  money  and  insisted
that  the  department  itself  should  pay  the  fare
to  Texas;  he  threatened  that  they  would  go  as
far  as  they  could  on  $63  and  rely  on  local


310


authorities  to  get  them  the  rest  of  the  way.  In
the  end  he  accepted  the  money.  On  the  after-
noon of  June  14,  the  Oswalds  left  New  York
by  plane  for  Fort  Worth.


FORT  WORTH,  DALLAS.  NEW  ORLEANS

Oswald  had  originally  indicated  that  he  and
his  family  would  stay  with  his  mother  in
Vernon,  Tex.  His  decision  to  stay  with  Robert
Oswald  in  Fort  Worth  apparently  had  been
prompted  by  his  brother's  invitation  in  a  letter
to  him  in  Russia.  Oswald  listed  only  his  brother
as  a  relative  on  an  "Intake  Interview"  form
which  he  prepared  for  the  New  York  Depart-
ment of  Welfare.

Robert  took  his  wife  and  children  to  Love
Field,  the  Dallas  airport,  to  meet  Lee  and
Marina  and  their  baby,  June  Lee.  He  testified
that  the  most  noticeable  change  in  his  brother's
appearance  was  that  he  had  become  rather
bald;  he  seemed  also  to  be  somewhat  thinner
than  he  had  been  in  1959.  Robert  thought  that
his  brother  had  picked  up  "something  of  an
accent"  but,  except  for  these  changes  was  "the
same  boy"  whom  he  had  known  before.  Lee
commented  on  the  absence  of  newspaper  re-
porters and  seemed  to  Robert  to  be  disap-
pointed that  none  had  appeared.  Later  on,  Lee
was  anxious  to  avoid  publicity.

Robert  drove  the  Oswalds  to  his  home  at
7313  Davenport  Street.  For  a  few  days,  Lee
seemed  tense,  but  the  brothers  got  along  well,
and  to  Robert  it  was  "more  or  less  *  *  *  [as  if
Lee]  had  not  been  to  Russia";  they  were  "just
together  again."  They  did  not  discuss  politics,
according  to  Robert  because  of  a  "tacit  agree-
ment" between  them.  Lee  indicated  to  his
brother  that  he  hoped  to  have  his  undesirable
discharge  from  the  Marines  corrected.  Robert
and  his  wife  "took  to  Marina  and  June,"  and
enjoyed  showing  Marina  "things  that  she  had
never  seen  before."  Marina  rested  and  took
care  of  her  baby,  and  when  she  could,  helped
in  the  household.  She  testified  that,  apart  from
a  trip  to  the  library,  Lee  spent  about  a  week
"merely  talking."

On  June  18,  4  days  after  he  arrived  in  Fort
Worth,  Oswald  went  to  the  oflBce  of  Mrs.
Pauline  Virginia  Bates,  a  public  stenographer
whose  name  he  had  found  in  the  telephone
directory,  and  asked  her  to  type  a  manuscript
from  the  "scraps  of  paper,"  on  which  he  had
recorded  his  impressions  of  the  Soviet  Union.
Intrigued  by  his  tale  that  he  had  just  returned
from  the  Soviet  Union  and  had  smuggled  his
notes  out  of  that  coimtry,  she  agreed  to  type
the  notes  for  $1  per  page  or  $2  an  hour,  50
cents  less  than  her  usual  hourly  rate.  On  that
day  and  the  succeeding  2  days,  Mrs.  Bates  spent
8  hours  typing  for  Oswald  while  he  remained
in  her  office  helping  her  with  the  notes  and
translating  portions  of  them  which  were  in  Rus-
sian. At  the  end  of  each  session  he  collected


his  notes  and  as  much  of  the  manuscript  as
she  had  done  and  took  them  away  with  him.
On  June  20,  he  gave  Mrs.  Bates  $10  for  the  10
completed  pages;  he  told  her  that  he  had  no
more  money  and  refused  to  accept  her  offer  to
postpone  payment  or  continue  the  work  for
nothing.

Oswald  told  Mrs.  Bates  that  there  was  an
engineer  in  Fort  Worth  who  wanted  to  help
him  publish  his  notes.  On  June  19,  he  had
called  Peter  Gregory,  a  petroleum  engineer
who  was  bom  in  Siberia  and  taught  Russian  at
the  Fort  Worth  Public  Library  as  a  "civic  enter-
prise." He  asked  if  Gregory  could  give  him  a
letter  testifying  to  his  ability  to  read  and  speak
Russian,  so  that  he  could  obtain  work  as  an
interpreter  or  translator.  Gregory  suggested
that  Oswald  come  to  his  office,  where  Gregory
opened  a  Russian  book  at  random  and  asked
Oswald  to  read  from  it.  Oswald  read  well,  and
Gregory  gave  him  the  letter  he  wanted.  Greg-
ory and  Oswald  had  lunch  together  and  dis-
cussed Oswald's  life  in  the  Soviet  Union,  but,
according  to  Gregory's  testimony,  nothing  was
said  about  publishiiig  Oswald's  manuscript.
About  a  week  later,  Gregory  and  his  son  Paul,
a  college  student,  visited  the  Oswalds  at  Robert
Oswald's  home  and  arranged  for  Marina  to
give  Paul  lessons  in  Russian  during  the  summer.

On  June  26,  Oswald  was  interviewed  by
FBI  agents  in  Fort  Worth.  One  of  the  agents
who  interviewed  him  described  him  as  tense
and  "drawn  up";  he  said  that  Oswald  "ex-
hibited an  arrogant  attitude  *  *  *  and  [was]
inclined  to  be  just  a  little  insolent."  Oswald  de-
clined to  say  why  he  had  gone  to  Russia,  saying
that  he  refused  to  "relive  the  past."  He  said
that  he  had  not  attempted  to  obtain  Soviet
citizenship,  had  not  been  approached  by  Soviet
officials  for  information  about  his  experiences
in  the  Marines,  and  had  not  offered  them  such
information.  Marina's  Soviet  passport  required
her  to  notify  the  Soviet  Embassy  in  Washing-
ton of  her  address  in  this  country,  and  Oswald
told  the  agents  that  he  planned  to  contact  the
Embassy  for  this  purpose  within  a  few  days.
He  promised  to  notify  the  FBI  if  he  were  con-
tacted by  Soviet  agents  "under  suspicious  cir-
cumstances or  otherwise."  Oswald  told  his
brother  about  the  interview,  saying  that  it  had
been  "just  fine."

Oswald  and  his  family  remained  with  Robert
for  about  a  month.  While  they  were  there  his
mother  moved  to  Fort  Worth  from  Crowell,
Tex.,  and,  sometime  in  July  they  moved  into
her  apartment  at  1501  West  Seventh  Street.
Mrs.  Oswald  testified  that  she  had  visited  them
at  Robert's  house  in  June  and  moved  to  Fort
Worth  because  she  thought  that  the  house  was
too  crowded  and  wanted  to  help  them.  Mrs.
Oswald  described  the  period  when  her  son  and
his  family  lived  with  her  as  "a  very  happy
month";  according  to  her  testimony,  she  and
her  son  and  daughter-in-law  got  along  well.  She
mentioned  that  she  not  only  helped  Marina


311


keep  house  and  care  for  the  baby  but  also  aided
her  son  in  his  efforts  to  find  employment.
Marina  testified,  however,  that  Lee  did  not  get
along  well  with  his  mother  and  that  he  decided
after  several  weeks  that  they  should  move  to
their  own  apartment.  He  did  not  file  a  change-
of-address  card  at  the  post  office  when  the
family  moved  to  West  Seventh  Street,  as  he  did
when  they  made  their  next  move,  so  he  may
have  contemplated  from  the  beginning  that
they  would  stay  with  his  mother  for  only  a
short  while.  Around  the  middle  of  August,  the
Oswalds  moved  to  a  one-bedroom  furnished
apartment  at  2703  Mercedes  Street,  for  which
they  paid  $59.50  in  advance  for  1  month's  rent.

In  the  third  week  in  July,  Oswald  had  ob-
tained a  job  as  a  sheet  met^  worker  with  the
Louv-R-Pak  Division  of  the  Leslie  Welding
Co.,  a  manufacturer  of  louvers  and  ventilators,
to  which  he  had  been  referred  by  the  Texas
Employment  Commission.  On  his  application
for  employment,  filled  out  several  days  before,
he  wrote  falsely  that  he  had  had  experience  as
a  sheet  metal  worker  and  machinist  in  the  Ma-
rines and  had  been  honorably  discharged.  He
usually  worked  8  or  9  hours  a  day,  for  which
he  was  paid  $1.25  an  hour.  Marina  testified
that  Oswald  did  not  like  his  work,  but  he  was
regarded  as  a  good  employee  and  remained
with  the  company  until  October,  when  he  quit.
On  the  job,  he  kept  to  himself  and  was  consid-
ered uncommunicative.

Mrs.  Oswald  visited  her  son  and  his  family
at  their  apartment  and  tried  to  help  them  get
settled;  she  testified  that  she  bought  some
clothes  for  Marina  and  a  highchair  for  the
baby  but  that  Oswald  told  her  that  he  did  not
want  her  to  buy  "things  for  his  wife  that  he
himself  could  not  buy."  Finally,  Oswald  ap-
parently decided  that  he  did  not  want  his
mother  to  visit  the  apartment  anymore  and  he
became  incensed  when  his  wife  permitted  her
to  visit  despite  his  instructions.  After  he  moved
to  Dallas  in  October,  Oswald  did  not  see  his
mother  or  communicate  with  her  in  any  way
until  she  came  to  see  him  after  the  assassina-
tion. Witnesses  have  described  the  Mercedes
Street  apartment  as  "decrepit"  and  very  poorly
furnished;  there  was  no  telephone  service.  Ac-
quaintances observed  that  Marina  and  the  baby
were  poorly  clothed,  that  the  Oswalds  had  little
food,  and  that  at  first  there  was  not  a  bed  for
the  baby.

On  August  16,  the  FBI  again  interviewed
Oswald.  This  interview  took  place  in  the  back
seat  of  a  car  in  front  of  his  home  and  covered
substantially  the  same  material  as  the  previous
interview.  Oswald  again  denied  having  made
any  deal  with  representatives  of  the  Soviet
Union.  He  protested  his  undesirable  discharge
from  the  Marines,  and  stated  that  his  wife  was
registered  at  the  Soviet  Embassy.  He  still  re-
fused to  discuss  why  he  had  gone  to  the  Soviet
Union,  but  he  was  less  hostile  than  he  had  been
during  the  previous  interview.  According  to  his


wife,  however,  he  was  very  upset  by  the  interest
the  FBI  showed  in  him.

The  Oswalds  became  acquainted  with  a  grow-
ing number  of  people  of  the  Russian-speaking
community  in  the  Dallas-Fort  Worth  area,  who
were  tied  together  socially  by  a  common  origin,
language,  and  religion.  The  group  was  not  re-
stricted to  people  from  Russia  but  was  com-
posed primarily  of  people  from  Eastern  Euro-
pean countries.  The  Oswalds'  initial  contact
with  this  group  was  through  Peter  Gregory.
Marina  gave  conversational  Russian  lessons  to
Paul  Gregory  2  days  a  week  during  August  and
early  September,  for  which  she  was  paid  $35.
Most  of  the  lessons  took  place  at  the  Mercedes
Street  apartment  and  Oswald  was  generally
present.  In  addition,  Paul  Gregory  occasionally
took  the  Oswalds  shopping;  after  they  became
friendly,  he  had  a  number  of  discussion  with
Oswald,  some  of  them  politically  oriented.

Sometime  aroimd  August  25,  Peter  Gregory
invited  the  Oswalds  and  several  members  of
the  Russian  community  to  his  house  for  diimer.
One  of  the  guests  was  George  Bouhe,  a  Dallas
accountant  and  a  leader  of  the  Russian  com-
munity. He  was  very  interested  in  meeting  and
conversing  with  Marina,  because  she  had  spent
much  of  her  life  in  Leningrad,  which  was  his
birthplace.  Also  present  was  Mrs.  Anna  Meller,
the  Russian-bom  wife  of  a  Dallas  department
store  employee.  Near  the  end  of  August,  the
Oswalds  met  Declan  Ford,  a  consulting  geolo-
gist in  the  Dallas  area,  and  his  Russian-bom
wife  at  Mrs.  Meller's  home.  The  Oswalds  were
also  introduced  to  Mrs.  Elena  Hall,  who  was
bom  in  Tehran,  Iran,  of  Russian  parentage.
She  worked  in  a  dental  laboratory  and  at  this
time  was  divorced  from  her  former  husband
John  Hall,  whom  she  subsequently  remarried.
In  order  to  obtain  dental  aid  for  Marina,
George  Bouhe  had  brought  her  to  Mrs.  Hall's
house.  In  early  September,  the  Oswalds  met
Alexander  Kleinlerer,  another  member  of  the
Russian  group,  who  was  then  courting  Mrs.
Hall.  Mrs.  Max  Clark  was  introduced  to
Marina  during  this  period  by  George  Bouhe
and  Anna  Meller.  Max  Clark  met  the  Oswalds
at  a  later  time.  At  about  the  same  time,  they
were  visited  by  George  De  Mohrenschildt,  a
petroleum  engineer  born  in  Russia,  who  had
heard  of  them  from  one  of  the  Russian-
speaking  group.  Later  on,  the  Oswalds  met  his
wife,  Jeanne,  and  his  daughter  and  son-in-law,
Gary  and  Alexandra  Taylor.

Most  of  the  members  of  the  Russian  com-
munity were  interested  in  the  Oswalds  not  only
because  they  needed  help,  but  also  because  they
could  provide  the  latest  information  about  what
was  happening  in  Russia.  Some  members  of  the
group  were  at  first  apprehensive  about  them
because  the  apparent  ease  with  which  they  had
left  Russia  seemed  suspicious.  Nevertheless,
many  of  the  group  provided  small  amounts  of
money,  groceries,  clothing,  and  furniture  for
the  Oswalds;  George  Bouhe,  Anna  Meller,  and


312


Elena  Hall  were  the  primary  contributors,  al-
though others  provided  help  in  the  form  of
transportation  and  groceries.  These  acquaint-
ances occasionally  visited  the  Oswalds,  and  the
Oswalds  in  turn  visited  some  of  them  in  Dallas.

It  was  evident  that  Oswald  did  not  appreciate
the  help  of  the  Russian  community.  At  least
once  he  flew  into  a  rage  and  shouted  that  he
did  not  need  any  of  the  things  that  people  were
giving  to  him.  Some  felt  that  he  resented  the
gifts  because  he  could  not  give  his  wife  what
Qie  others  were  providing;  he  apparently  was
critical  of  them  also  because  he  felt  that  they
were  overly  concerned  with  improving  them-
selves economically.

Oswald  became  increasingly  unpopular  with
his  Russian-speaking  acquaintances,  partly  be-
cause of  his  resentment  of  their  assistance.
Alexander  Kleinlerer  stated  that  none  of  them
care  for  Oswald  "because  of  his  political  phi-
losophy, his  criticism  of  the  United  States,  his
apparent  lack  of  interest  in  anyone  but  himself
and  because  of  his  treatment  of  Marina."  Some
of  them  believed  that  Oswald  was  mentally  dis-
turbed. However,  they  felt  sorry  for  Marina
and  the  child  and  continued  to  help.

On  a  weekend  afternoon  early  in  October,
the  Oswalds  were  visited  by  his  mother  and  a
number  of  people  from  the  Russian  commu-
nity, includmg  George  Bouhe,  Anna  Meller,
the  Halls,  the  De  Mohrenschildts,  and  the  Tay-
lors. Oswald  had  apparently  decided  to  look
for  a  new  job,  and  discussed  his  lack  of  job
prospects  and  the  fact  that  his  rent  was  over-
due. He  was  advised  to  seek  employment  in  the
Dallas  area.  Elena  Hall  invited  Marina  to  move
into  her  house  in  Fort  Worth  imtil  Oswald
foimd  a  job  in  Dallas.  She  accepted  the  pro-
posal, and  Mrs.  Hall  moved  Marina,  her
daughter  June,  and  the  Oswalds'  few  household
goods  in  a  pickup  truck  belonging  to  the  dental
laboratory  where  she  was  employed.

Oswald  worked  at  the  Leslie  Welding  Co.  on
Monday,  October  8,  but  failed  to  appear  on
the  following  day.  He  was  already  in  Dallas.
He  falsely  told  has  wife  that  he  had  been  dis-
charged, and  told  George  Bouhe  that  the  job
had  been  a  temporary  one.  Sometime  later,  the
company  received  an  undated  letter  from  him
stating  that  he  had  "moved  permanently  to
Dallas,"  and  asking  that  the  wages  due  him  be
forwarded  to  him  at  box  2915  in  Dallas.  He
did  not  tell  his  mother  that  he  was  leaving  Fort
Worth.

While  they  were  in  Fort  Worth,  the  Oswalds
were  having  marital  problems.  Several  people
noted  that  Marina  had  a  blackened  eye  when
they  visited  her  at  the  Mercedes  Street  apart-
ment. She  told  her  mother-in-law  and  George
Bouhe  that  her  husband  had  struck  her,  but
said  to  Anna  Meller  that  she  had  walked  into
a  door.  It  seems  clear  that  Oswald  had  in  fact
hit  her.  People  observed  friction  between  the
Oswalds  on  various  occasions,  although  their
disputes  became  more  apparent  later.  Marina


has  written  that  this  was  a  difficult  period  for
them  and  that  her  husband  was  "very  uritable"
and  sometimes  some  completely  trivial  thing
would  "drive  him  into  a  rage."

She  testified  that:

*  *  *  immediately  after  coming  to  the  United
States  Lee  changed.  I  did  not  know  him  as
such  a  man  in  Russia.  *  *  *  He  helped  me
as  before,  but  he  became  a  little  more  of  a
recluse  *  *  *  He  was  very  irritable,  some-
times for  a  trifle  *  *  *

She  has  denied,  however,  that  their  separation
was  the  result  of  quartels  between  them.

Marina  spent  the  first  few  weeks  after  Os-
wald's departure  at  Elena  Hall's  house  in  Fort
Worth,  except  for  a  brief  stay  at  Gary  Taylor's
house  in  Dadlas  after  one  of  her  appointments
at  the  Baylor  Dental  Clinic.  While  she  was  in
Dallas,  Mrs.  De  Mohrenschildt  brought  her  to
the  clinic  on  October  8,  October  10,  and  Octo-
ber 15;  George  Bouhe  had  given  Mrs.  De
Mohrenschildt  the  money  to  cover  the  expense
of  Marina's  dental  care.

Even  before  Oswald  went  to  Dallas,  some  of
his  acquaintances  were  helping  him  in  his  effort
to  find  a  job  there.  George  De  Mohrenschildt
directed  him  to  Samuel  B.  Ballen,  a  Dallas
financial  consultant,  but  no  employment  re-
sulted. George  Bouhe  recommended  that  Os-
wald go  to  the  Texas  Employment  Commission
in  Dallas;  and  Anna  Meller  had  her  husband
ask  Mrs.  Helen  Cunningham,  a  counselor  in
the  clerical  and  sales  division  of  the  Dallas
office  of  the  employment  commission,  to  help
Oswald  find  a  job.  Oswald  first  came  into  the
office  of  the  employment  commission  on  Octo-
ber 9.  He  was  reluctant  to  accept  industrial
employment,  and  was  placed  in  the  clerical
category  and  turned  over  to  Mrs.  Cunningham
for  counseling.  He  indicated  that  he  had  an
interest  in  writing.  The  results  of  general  apti-
tude tests  which  he  had  taken  at  the  Fort
Worth  employment  office  had  been  transmitted
to  the  Dallas  office,  and  indicated  that  he  had
some  aptitude  in  this  direction  and  for  clerical
work.  It  was  noted  on  his  application  form  that
he  had  "outstanding  verbal-clerical  potential."
He  demonstrated  ability  to  perform  many
skilled  and  semi-skilled  jobs,  and  there  was
some  indication  that  he  could  do  college  work.
Mrs.  Cunningham  gave  him  three  special  tests:
for  general  clerical  work,  work  as  an  insurance
claims  examiner,  and  drafting  work.  He  scored
high  on  all  three.  His  application  form  indi-
cated that  he  did  not  have  a  driver's  license,
and  noted:  "well-groomed  and  spoken,  business
suit,  alert  replies — expresses  self  extremely
well."  He  told  Mrs.  Cunningham  that  he  hoped
to  develop  qualffications  for  responsible  junior
executive  employment  by  a  work-study  pro-
gram at  a  local  college  but  that  this  must  be


313


delayed  because  of  his  immediate  financial
needs  and  responsibilities.

Mrs.  Cunningham  concluded  that  although
Oswald  would  be  classified  for  clerical  work,
she  should  try  to  get  him  any  available  job,
since  he  badly  needed  money.  He  was  referred
to  an  architect  for  an  opening  as  a  messenger
but  was  not  hired.  On  October  11,  he  was  re-
ferred to  Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall  Co.,  a  graphic
arts  company,  in  response  to  a  call  from  John
Graef,  head  of  the  photographic  department  of
the  company,  who  had  told  the  employment
commission  that  he  needed  a  photoprint  trainee.
Oswald  was  enthusiastic  about  his  prospects
and  apparently  made  a  good  impression;  Graef
picked  him  over  several  other  applicants.  On
the  following  day  he  began  working  in  his  new
position  as  a  trainee  making  prints  of  adver-
tising material.  He  worked  a  40-hour  week  at
approximately  $1.35  per  hour;  his  take-home
pay  varied  from  $49  to  $74  a  week.  According
to  his  wife,  "he  liked  his  work  very  much."

Oswald  moved  into  the  YMCA  on  Octo-
ber 15,  and  stayed  there  until  October  19,  pay-
ing $2.25  a  night.  He  had  used  the  Taylors'
address  and  telephone  number  as  a  place  where
he  could  be  reached,  but  on  October  9  had  also
rented  post  oflBce  box  2915  under  his  own
name  at  the  main  post  office  on  Ervay  Street.
On  October  10,  he  filed  a  change-of -address
form  indicating  that  mail  for  2703  Mercedes
Street  should  be  forwarded  to  the  box.  Marina
has  written  that  Oswald  wrote  her  letters  and
telephoned  her  during  the  separation.

On  October  16,  Mrs.  Hall  brought  Marina
and  June  to  Dallas  to  have  June  baptized.
Marina  apparently  did  this  surreptitiously,  be-
cause her  husband  opposed  baptism;  they  did
not  contact  him  in  Dallas,  but  left  birthday
gifts  for  him  at  the  Taylors.  Oswald  did  not
appear  very  disturbed  when  he  found  out  about
the  baptism.

Two  days  later,  Mrs.  Hall  had  an  automobile
accident  and  went  to  the  hospital,  where  she
remained  until  October  26;  Marina  remained
in  the  Hall  house.  Mrs.  Max  Clark  and  Alex-
ander Kleinlerer,  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Hall,
checked  up  to  make  sure  that  she  was  getting
along  without  too  much  trouble.  After  Oswald
left  the  YMCA  on  October  19,  he  moved  to  a
room  or  apartment  somewhere  in  Dallas,  which
has  not  been  located.  It  seems  likely,  however,
that  during  that  time  he  spent  several  weekends
with  Marina  at  the  Hall  house.

Four  days  after  Mrs.  Hall  returned  from  the
hospital,  she  left  for  New  York  to  visit  friends.
By  the  time  she  returned,  Marina  had  moved  to
a  three-room  apartment  at  604  Elsbeth  Street
in  Dallas,  which  Oswald  had  rented  on  Satur-
day, November  3;  the  landlady  stated  that  he
had  looked  at  the  apartment  about  a  week  be-
fore. The  monthly  rent  was  $68,  in  addition  to
which  he  had  to  pay  several  dollars  a  month
for  utilities.  He  paid  the  rent  plus  a  $5  deposit
on  November  3,  but  probably  spent  that  night


with  Marina  at  the  Hall  house.  On  Sunday  the
Taylors  helped  the  Oswalds  move  their  belong-
ings to  the  Elsbeth  Street  apartment  with  a
rented  trailer.  Oswald  had  asked  Kleinlerer  to
help  them  move,  and  Kleinlerer  also  was  pres-
ent when  they  departed.

Soon  after  the  Oswalds  were  reunited,  their
marital  difficulties  started  again.  While  they
were  moving  to  Elsbeth  Street,  Kleinlerer  no-
ticed that  Oswald  slapped  his  wife  for  not
having  the  zipper  on  her  dress  completely
closed.  They  argued  over  his  refusal  to  allow
her  to  smoke.  There  was  a  quarrel  also  when
he  told  the  landlady  that  Marina  was  from
Czechoslovakia;  he  was  angered  when  Marina,
who  disapproved  of  this  deception,  told  the
landlady  the  truth.

Although  several  people  tried  to  help  Marina
improve  her  scanty  knowledge  of  English,  Os-
wald discouraged  this,  perhaps  because  he
wanted  to  keep  up  his  Russian.  Some  witnesses
testified  that  she  commented  about  his  sexual
abilities.  He  apparently  continued  to  beat  her,
and  once  she  suggested  to  George  De  Mohren-
schildt  that  she  should  "get  away"  from  Oswald.
When  De  Mohrenschildt  criticized  Oswald's
conduct,  Oswald  replied,  "It  is  my  business."
Marina  testified  that  when  they  moved  into
the  Elsbeth  Street  apartment,  her  husband  be-
came "nervous  and  irritable"  and  was  very
angry  over  "trifles."  She  said  that  it  was  some-
times her  fault  that  he  beat  her,  for  example
when  she  wrote  to  an  old  boyfriend  in  Russia
that  she  wished  she  had  married  him;  the  letter
was  returned  for  postage  due,  and  Oswald
read  it.

Because  of  this  quarreling,  a  few  of  their
acquaintances  felt  that  Marina  would  be  better
off  alone.  George  Bouhe  offered  to  help  her  if
she  promised  to  leave  Oswald  permanently.
Finally,  in  early  November,  Marina,  helped  by
the  De  Mohrenschildts,  moved  into  Anna  Mel-
ler's  house  with  the  intention  not  to  return  to
Oswald.  He  was  apparently  quite  upset  and  did
not  want  Marina  to  leave  him.

Oswald  did  not  visit  his  wife  at  Anna  Mel-
ler's  house,  and  for  a  short  time  did  not  even
know  where  she  was.  According  to  Marina,  he
called  her  after  she  moved  and  they  met  at  De
MohrenschUdt's  house.  He  asked  her  to  return
home.  She  insisted  that  he  stop  quarreling  and
that  he  change  his  ways.  He  said  that  he  could
not  change.  Marina  would  not  agree  to  return
home  with  him  and  he  left.

Marina  was  uncomfortable  at  the  Meller
house,  where  there  was  very  little  room.  She
moved  to  Katherine  Ford's  house  where  she
apparently  stayed  from  November  11  to  17.
She  indicated  that  she  had  decided  never  to
return  to  her  husband;  it  was  Mrs.  Ford's  im-
pression that  Marina  was  going  to  stay  at  other
people's  houses  until  a  permanent  place  could
be  found  for  her.  When  Mr.  Ford  returned
from  a  business  trip  on  November  17,  Marina
and  June  moved  to  the  home  of  Mrs.  Frank


314


Ray,  where  they  spent  the  day.  Mrs.  Ray,  the
wife  of  a  Dallas  advertising  man,  was  also  of
Russian  origin.  Since  Mrs.  Ray  had  no  baby
bed,  Marina  returned  to  the  Fords  that  evening.
On  the  next  day,  however,  Marina  moved  her
belongings  to  the  Rays'  house.  That  same  day,
Oswald  called  and  asked  to  visit  his  wife,  whom
he  had  called  and  wTitten.  Mr.  Ray  picked  him
up  and  took  him  to  Marina.

Marina  testified  that  at  this  meeting  Oswald
professed  his  love  for  her.  She  stated:  "I  saw
him  cry  *  *  *  [he]  begged  me  to  come  back,
asked  my  forgiveness,  and  promised  that  he
would  try  to  improve,  if  only  I  would  come
back."  On  another  occasion  she  said:  "*  *  *
he  cried  and  you  know  a  woman's  heart — I
went  back  to  him.  He  said  he  didn't  care  to  live
if  I  did  not  return."  That  same  day  she  decided
to  return  to  him.  Mr.  Ray  packed  her  belong-
ings and  took  her  back  to  the  Elsbeth  Street
apartment.

Members  of  the  Russian  community  who
had  taken  care  of  Marina  so  that  she  would  not
have  to  live  with  Oswald  felt  that  their  efforts
had  been  in  vain.  George  Eouhe  was  so  irri-
tated that  he  never  again  tried  to  help  either
of  the  Oswalds.  Contacts  between  them  and
members  of  the  Russian  community  diminished
markedly.  Oswald  did  not  care  for  most  of
these  people  and  made  his  feelings  apparent.
Even  the  De  Mohrenschildts,  whom  he  liked
most,  saw  much  less  of  them.  Lydia  D>Tnitruk,
another  Russian  bom  woman  in  the  Dallas-
Fort  Worth  area,  testified  that  she  saw  the  Os-
walds on  only  one  occasion,  and  did  not  care  to
see  them  again.  She  drove  Marina  and  June,
who  had  a  high  fever,  to  the  hospital;  Oswald
told  the  hospital  that  he  was  unemployed  in
order  to  avoid  paying  for  Jime's  treatment  and
later  left  Mrs.  Dymitruk  without  thanking  her.
Mrs.  Ford  testified  that  Marina  had  told  her
that  she  contemplated  suicide  during  this  period
because  Oswald  was  treating  her  badly  and  she
had  no  friends;  she  felt  that  she  had  "no  way
out."  Marina  acknowledged  to  the  Commission
that  she  had  had  such  thoughts.

In  an  effort  to  renew  family  ties,  Robert
Oswald  wrote  to  Lee  and  John  Pic  on  Novem-
ber 17,  inviting  them  and  their  families  to
Thanksgiving  dinner.  Lee  accepted  the  invi-
tation. He  and  Marina  traveled  to  Fort  Worth
by  bus  on  Thanksgiving  Day,  and  John  Pic  and
Robert  met  them  at  the  station.  Pic  had  not
seen  his  half-brother  for  10  years.  He  observed,
as  many  others  have  also  attested,  that  Lee
seemed  to  be  a  good  father  and  to  take  an
active  interest  in  June.  After  dinner,  Marina
phoned  Paul  Gregory,  who  later  drove  the
Oswalds  to  his  house  for  sandwiches  and  then
took  them  to  the  bus  station  for  the  return  trip
to  Dallas.  Thereafter,  Robert  spoke  to  his
brother  once  by  telephone  and  received  a  post
card  and  a  letter  from  him,  but  he  eventiially
lost  contact  with  Lee  and  did  not  see  him  again
until  after  the  assassination.


Despite  his  disillusionment  with  Soviet  life,
Oswald  kept  up  his  interest  in  Russia.  He  wrote
to  the  Soviet  Embassy  in  Washington  for  in-
formation on  how  to  subscribe  to  Russian
periodicals  and  for  "any  periodicals  or  bulle-
tins which  you  may  put  out  for  the  benefit  of
your  citizens  living,  for  a  time,  in  the  U.S.A."
He  subsequently  subscribed  to  several  Russian
journals.  In  December  1962,  the  Soviet  Em-
bassy received  a  card  in  Russian,  signed  "Mari-
na and  Lee  Oswald,"  which  conveyed  New
Year's  greetings  and  wishes  for  "health,  success
and  all  of  the  best"  to  the  employees  at  the
Embassy.  The  Oswalds  continued  to  correspond
with  acquaintances  in  Russia.

Soon  after  his  return  to  this  country,  Oswald
had  started  to  correspond  with  the  Communist
Party,  U.S.A.,  and  the  Socialist  Workers  Party.
He  subscribed  to  the  Worker  in  August  1962.
He  wrote  for  additional  hterature  from  these
organizations,  and  attempted  to  join  the  Social-
ist Workers  Party,  which,  however,  had  no
branch  in  Texas.  He  sent  samples  of  his  photo-
graphic work  to  the  Socialist  Workers  Party,
the  Worker,  and  the  HaU-Davis  Defense  Com-
mittee, and  offered  to  aid  them  in  printing  and
photographic  work  in  connection  with  posters;
these  offers  were  not  accepted.

He  continued  to  read  a  great  deal  on  a  va-
riety of  subjects.  George  Bouhe  testified  that
Oswald's  fare  consisted  of  books  by  Marx,
Lenin,  "and  similar  things."  Marina  said  that
he  read  books  of  a  historical  nature,  including
H.  G.  Wells'  two  volume  "Outline  of  History,"
and  biographies  of  Hitler,  Kennedy,  and
Khrushchev.

Despite  the  Oswalds'  break  with  the  Russian
community,  De  Mohrenschildt,  knowing  that
they  would  be  alone  during  the  Christmas  sea-
son, asked  the  Fords  whether  he  could  bring
the  Oswalds  to  a  party  celebrating  the  Russian
Christmas  at  the  Fords'  home;  the  Fords  as-
sented. The  party  was  attended  by  many  mem-
bers of  the  Russian  community.  Oswald  spoke
at  length  with  Yaeko  Okui,  a  Japanese  woman
who  had  been  brought  to  the  party  by  Lev
Aronson,  first  ceUist  of  the  Dallas  Symphony
Orchestra;  she  told  Federal  investigators  that
she  never  saw  Oswald  again.  The  Oswalds  were
not  invited  to  three  other  Russian  Christmas
season  gatherings  which  occurred  during  the
next  few  days.

Marina  visited  the  De  Mohrenschildts  several
times  after  Christmas.  They  invited  both  Lee
and  Marina  to  a  small  dinner  party  in  Feb-
ruary 1963;  also  present  were  Everett  Glover,
a  chemist  employed  in  DaUas,  and  his  room-
mate Volkmar  Schmidt.  On  February  22,
Glover  had  a  gathering  at  his  house,  one  of  the
purposes  of  which  was  to  permit  his  friends,
many  of  whom  were  stud\ing  Russian,  to  meet
the  Oswalds.  They  were  the  objects  of  much
attention.  Marina  conversed  at  length  with  an-
other guest  named  Ruth  Paine,  who  had  re-
cently separated  from  her  husband,  Michael


315


Paine,  a  research  engineer  at  the  Bell  Heli-
copter plant  in  Fort  Worth.  Mrs.  Paine,  who
was  studying  Russian,  obtained  Marina's  ad-
dress and  shortly  thereafter  wrote  Marina  ask-
ing to  see  her.  Marina  responded  by  inviting
Mrs.  Paine  to  visit  her.

The  Oswalds  moved  out  of  their  Elsbeth
Street  apartment  on  March  3,  1963,  to  an  up-
stairs apartment  several  blocks  away  at  214
West  Neely  Street.  Oswald  inquired  about  the
apartment  in  response  to  a  "For  Rent"  sign;
the  rent  was  $60  per  month,  not  including
utilities.  They  moved  without  assistance,  carry-
ing their  belongings  in  their  hands  and  in  a  baby
stroller.  Marina  preferred  the  Neely  Street
apartment  because  it  had  a  porch  and  was,  she
felt,  more  suitable  for  June.

Aware  of  Oswald's  difficulties  in  obtaining
employment,  George  Bouhe  had  advised  him
as  early  as  October  1962  to  attend  a  night
school  in  Dallas.  On  January  14,  Oswald  en-
rolled in  a  typing  course  in  the  night  school  of
Crozier  Technical  High  School,  and  started
attending  on  January  28.  The  class  ran  from
6:15  to  7:15  p.m.  on  Mondays,  Tuesdays,  and
Thursdays.  Although  Oswald  reviewed  a  typing
textbook  at  home,  he  attended  the  course  ir-
regularly and  stopped  going  altogether  on  about
March  28.

Ruth  Paine  and  Marina  started  to  exchange
visits  in  March.  Mrs.  Paine  invited  the  Oswalds
for  dinner,  and  on  April  20  she  took  them  on  a
picnic.  When  Oswald  was  not  present,  the  two
women  frequently  discussed  their  respective
marital  problems,  and  Marina  disclosed  to  Mrs.
Paine  that  she  was  pregnant.  Marina  wrote  of
these  meetings:

One  day  we  were  invited  to  a  friend's
house,  where  I  met  Ruth  Paine,  who  was
studying  Russian  here  in  America  and
wanted  to  improve  her  conversational  knowl-
edge. We  began  to  see  each  other.  Ruth
would  come  to  see  me  with  her  children.
This  was  very  good  for  both  me  and  for
June.  She  was  growing  up  alone  and  be-
coming terribly  wild,  so  the  company  of
other  children  was  good  for  her.  Sometimes
we  went  out  on  picnics  at  a  nearby  lake.  Lee
loved  to  fish,  and  we  would  look  and  rejoice
if  he  caught  a  Uttle  fish.  Several  times  we
went  to  visit  Ruth  who  lived  in  Irving.

Using  the  name  of  A.  J.  Hidell,  Oswald  had
ordered  a  Smith  &  Wesson  .38  revolver  from
Los  Angeles  on  a  form  which  he  dated  Janu-
ary 27.  On  March  12,  he  ordered  a  rifle  from
Klein's  Sporting  Goods  in  Chicago  under  the
name  of  A.  Hidell.  Oswald  used  the  name
"Alek  James  Hidell"  on  identification  cards
which  he  probably  produced  at  Jaggars-Chiles-
StovaU.  One  of  his  fellow  employees  taught  him
various  photographic  techniques,  which  he
could  have  used  to  prepare  not  only  these  cards,


but  also  the  samples  of  his  work  which  he  sent
to  various  organizations.

Both  weapons  were  shipped  on  March  20.
Oswald  kept  the  rifle  in  a  small  storeroom  at
the  Neely  Street  apartment.  He  spent  long
periods  of  time  in  the  storeroom,  which  he  told
Marina  she  was  not  to  enter.  He  told  her  that
he  intended  to  use  the  rifle  for  hunting  and  that
he  practiced  with  it.  She  saw  him  leave  with  it
once,  and  clean  it  several  times.  He  also  posed
for  two  pictures,  taken  by  Marina  in  the  back-
yard of  the  Neely  apartment,  in  which  he  held
his  rifle  and  copies  of  the  Worker  and  the
Militant  and  the  revolver  was  strapped  to  his
belt.  He  gave  one  of  the  pictures  to  his  wife
and  asked  her  to  keep  it  for  June.

Over  the  weekend  of  March  9-10,  Oswald
photographed  the  alley  which  runs  behind  the
home  of  Gen.  Edwin  Walker,  and  probably  at
about  the  same  time  he  photographed  the  rear
of  Walker's  home  and  a  nearby  railroad  track
and  right-of-way.  He  prepared  and  studied  a
notebook  in  which  he  outlined  a  plan  to  shoot
General  Walker,  and  he  looked  at  bus  sched-
ules. He  went  to  the  Walker  residence  on  the
evening  of  April  6  or  7,  planning  to  make  his
attack.  However,  he  changed  his  plans,  hid
his  rifle  nearby,  and  determined  to  act  on  the
following  Wednesday,  April  10,  when  a  nearby
church  was  planning  a  meeting  which,  Oswald
reasoned,  would  create  a  diversion  that  would
help  him  escape.  On  Wednesday,  Oswald  left
a  note  for  Marina  telling  her  what  to  do  if
he  were  apprehended.  He  retrieved  his  rifle  and
fired  at  Walker,  but  the  bullet  narrowly  missed
Walker's  head.  Oswald  secreted  his  rifle  again
and  took  the  bus  home.

When  Oswald  told  Marina  what  he  had
done,  she  became  angry  and  made  him  promise
never  to  repeat  such  an  act.  She  testified  that
she  kept  his  letter,  intending  to  give  it  to  the
authorities  if  he  repeated  his  attempt.  He  told
Marina  that  he  was  sorry  he  had  missed
Walker  and  said  that  the  shooting  of  Walker
would  have  been  analogous  to  an  assassination
of  Hitler.  Several  days  later,  the  De  Mohren-
schildts  visited  the  Oswalds,  bringing  an  Easter
present  for  June.  During  the  visit,  Jeanne  De
Mohrenschildt  saw  the  rifle  and  told  her  hus-
band about  it.  Without  any  knowledge  of  the
truth,  De  Mohrenschildt  jokingly  intimated
that  Oswald  was  the  one  who  had  shot  at
Walker.  Oswald  apparently  concluded  that
Marina  had  told  De  Mohrenschildt  of  his  role
in  the  attempt  and  was  visibly  shaken.

On  April  6,  Oswald  was  dropped  by  Jaggars-
Chiles-Stovall  because,  in  his  supervisor's
opinion,  he  could  not  do  the  work,  although  he
was  trying;  in  addition,  he  did  not  get  along
with  his  fellow  employees.  The  fact  that  he
brought  a  Russian  newspaper  to  work  may
also  have  been  of  some  significance.  Marina
testified  that  her  husband,  who  had  always
worried  about  his  job  security  at  Jaggars-Chiles-


316


Stovall,  was  quite  upset  by  the  loss  of  his  job
since  he  had  Uked  the  work.

Oswald  again  resorted  to  the  Texas  Employ-
ment Commission.  On  April  8,  he  informed
the  Commission  that  he  was  seeking  employ-
ment but  was  referred  to  no  employers.  He
stated  that  he  had  been  laid  off  at  Jaggars-
Chiles-Stovall  "due  to  lack  of  work."  On  April
12,  he  made  a  claim  for  unemployment  bene-
fits; 4  days  later  the  commission  mailed  him
a  determination  disapproving  his  claim  because
of  insuflBcient  wage  credits.

For  a  while  after  the  Oswalds  moved  into
the  Neely  Street  apartment  they  got  along  well,
but  they  soon  began  to  quarrel.  Oswald  was
apparently  still  preventing  Marina  from  learn-
ing English,  and  there  is  some  indication  that
he  continued  to  beat  her.  Since  February,  he
had  been  urging  her  to  return  to  Russia.  Ma-
rina wrote  several  letters  to  the  Russian  Em-
bassy requesting  a  visa  to  return  to  Russia;
she  testified,  however,  that  Oswald  forced  her
to  write  them,  and  that  she  never  wanted  to
return  to  Russia.

When  Ruth  Paine  visited  the  Oswalds  at
their  apartment  on  April  24,  she  was  surprised
to  learn  that  Oswald  was  packed  and  ready  to
leave  for  New  Orleans  by  bus.  He  explained
that  he  had  been  unable  to  find  employment
in  or  around  Dallas,  and  that  Marina  had
suggested  that  he  go  to  New  Orleans  since  he
had  been  bom  there.  Marina  has  testified  that
the  real  reason  behind  her  suggestion  was  that
she  wanted  to  get  him  out  of  town  because
of  the  Walker  incident.  Mrs.  Paine  offered  to
drive  Marina  to  New  Orleans  at  a  later  date,
and  also  to  have  Marina  and  June  stay  with
her  rather  than  at  the  apartment  in  the  mean-
time. Oswald  helped  the  women  pack  Mrs.
Paine's  car,  and  the  two  women  moved  every-
thing from  the  Neely  Street  apartment  to  the
Paine  house  in  Irving.

When  he  arrived  at  the  bus  station  in  New
Orleans,  Oswald  telephoned  his  aunt,  Lillian
Murret,  to  ask  if  he  could  stay  at  her  home
at  757  French  Street  while  he  looked  for  em-
ployment. She  had  been  unaware  that  he  had
returned  from  Russia  or  that  he  was  married
and  had  a  child  and  was  surprised  to  hear
from  him.  She  said  that  she  did  not  have  room
to  accommodate  three  guests,  but  that  since
he  was  alone  he  was  welcome.

Oswald  had  been  bom  in  New  Orleans,  and
on  his  return  showed  great  interest  in  finding
out  what  had  happened  to  the  other  members
of  his  father's  family.  He  visited  the  cemetery
where  his  father  was  buried  and  called  all  the
Oswalds  in  the  telephone  book.  By  this  method
he  located  one  relative,  Mrs.  Hazel  Oswald  of
Metairie,  La.,  the  widow  of  William  Stout
Oswald,  his  father's  brother.  He  visited  her  at
her  home;  she  gave  him  a  picture  of  his  father
and  told  him  that  as  far  as  she  knew  the  rest
of  the  family  was  dead.

On  April  26,  Oswald  began  his  search  for


employment.  He  went  to  the  employment  office
of  the  Louisiana  Department  of  Labor  and
stated  that  he  was  qualified  as  a  commercial
photographer,  shipping  clerk,  or  "darkroom
man."  The  interviewer  noted  on  Oswald's  appli-
cation card:  "Will  travel  on  Umited  basis.  Will
relocate.  Min.  $1.25  hr.  Neat.  Suit.  Tie.  Polite."
Although  the  employment  commission  made  a
few  referrals,  Oswald  relied  primarily  upon
newspaper  advertisements,  and  applied  for  a
number  of  positions.  Mrs.  Murret  testified  that
he  would  spend  the  day  job  hunting,  return
to  her  home  for  supper,  watch  television,  and
go  to  bed.

On  April  29,  he  filed  a  request  for  reconsid-
eration of  the  employment  commission's  dis-
approval of  his  unemployment  compensation
claim.  His  complaint  that  he  had  not  been
credited  for  his  employment  at  Jaggars-Chiles-
StovaU  was  ruled  valid  on  May  8,  and  he  was
granted  maximum  benefits  of  $369,  payable
at  the  rate  of  $33  per  week.  He  filed  interstate
claims  on  May  7  and  15,  and  received  $33  in
response  to  the  latter;  the  former  claim  was
filed  before  the  expiration  of  the  prescribed
waiting  period.  Not  only  had  Oswald  in  fact
been  working  since  May  10,  but  he  included
on  his  claim  sheet,  as  concerns  with  which  he
had  sought  work,  fictitious  employers  and
employers  whom  he  apparently  had  not  con-
tacted.

Oswald  wrote  to  Marina:  "All  is  well.  I  am
living  with  Aunt  Lillian.  She  has  very  kindly
taken  us  in.  I  am  now  looking  for  work.  When
I  find  it  I  wUl  write  you."  And  on  May  3,  he
wrote  to  Marina  and  Ruth  Paine:  "Girls,  I  still
have  not  found  work,  but  I  receive  money  from
the  imemployment  office  in  the  amount  15  to
20  dollars.  They  were  mistaken  in  the  Dallas
office  when  they  refused  but  I  straightened
everything  out.  Uncle  'Dyuz'  offered  me  a  loan
of  $200.00  if  needed.  Great,  eh?!"

On  May  9,  responding  to  a  newspaper  ad-
vertisement, Oswald  completed  an  application
for  employment  with  William  B.  ReUy  Co.,
Inc.,  at  640  Magazine  Street,  an  enterprise
engaged  in  the  roasting,  grinding,  canning,
bagging,  and  sale  of  coffee.  On  his  application
form,  Oswald  Listed  as  references  in  addition
to  John  Murret,  "Sgt.  Robert  HideU"  and
"Lieut.  J.  Evans,"  both  apparently  fictitious
names.  His  application  was  approved  and  he
began  work  on  May  10,  at  the  rate  of  $1.50
per  hour.  His  task  was  the  lubrication  of  the
company's  machinery.  Oswald  did  not  enjoy
his  work,  and  told  his  wife  and  Mrs.  Paine
that  he  was  working  in  commercial  photog-
raphy.

Also  on  May  9,  Oswald  obtained  an  apart-
ment at  4905  Magazine  Street  with  the  help
of  Myrtle  Evans,  who  had  known  him  when
he  was  a  child.  The  rent  was  $65  a  month-
Oswald  moved  in  on  May  10,  after  telephoning
Marina  on  the  ninth  and  asking  her  to  come
to  New  Orleans.  Ruth  Paine  testified  that  the


317


invitation  elated  Marina:  "Papa  nas  lubet" —
"Daddy  loves  us,"  she  repeated  again  and
again.  Mrs.  Paine  drove  Marina  and  June  to
New  Orleans;  they  left  Dallas  on  May  10,
spent  the  night  in  Shreveport,  and  arrived  on
the  11th.  Mrs.  Paine  stayed  with  the  Oswalds
for  3  days;  the  three  of  them,  with  June  and
Mrs.  Paine's  children,  toured  the  French
Quarter.  On  May  14,  Mrs.  Paine  left  New
Orleans  to  return  to  her  home.

The  Murrets  and  the  Oswalds  exchanged
visits  from  time  to  time;  Marina  testified  that
the  Murrets  were  very  good  to  them.  Mrs.
Murret's  daughter,  Marilyn,  took  the  Oswalds
on  an  outing.  But,  according  to  Marina's
testimony,  aside  from  Ruth  Paine  and  Ruth
Kloepfer  and  her  daughters,  the  Murrets  were
the  only  social  visitors  the  Oswalds  had.  Ruth
Kloepfer  was  a  clerk  of  the  Quaker  Meeting
in  New  Orleans  whom  Ruth  Paine  had  written
in  the  hope  that  she  might  know  some  Russian-
speaking  people  who  could  visit  Marina.  Mrs.
Kloepfer  herself  visited  the  Oswalds  but  made
no  attempt  to  direct  any  Russian-speaking
people  to  them.

On  July  19,  Oswald  was  dismissed  by  Reily
because  of  ineflficiency  and  inattention  to  his
work.  He  had  spent  many  of  his  working  hours
next  door  at  the  Crescent  City  Garage,  where
he  read  gun  magazines  and  discussed  guns
with  one  of  the  owners,  Adrian  Alba.  On  the
following  Monday,  July  22,  Oswald  again
visited  the  Louisiana  employment  oflSce  to  seek
new  employment  and  file  a  claim  for  unem-
ployment compensation.  Thereafter,  he  col-
lected unemployment  compensation  weekly
and,  although  apparently  making  some  effort
to  obtain  another  job,  again  listed  a  number
of  fictitious  job  applications  on  his  unemploy-
ment compensation  claim  forms.  He  soon  gave
up  his  search  for  employment,  and  began  to
spend  his  days  at  home  reading.  He  received
another  setback  on  July  25,  when  he  was
notified  that  in  response  to  the  request  for
review  which  he  had  made  in  1962,  his  un-
desirable discharge  from  the  Marine  Corps  had
been  affirmed.

During  this  period,  Oswald  began  to  evi-
dence thoughts  of  returning  to  the  Soviet  Un-
ion or  going  to  Cuba.  On  Jime  24  he  applied
for  a  new  passport,  which  he  received  on  the
following  day.  Apparently  at  Oswald's  request,
Marina  wrote  to  the  Russian  Embassy,  ex-
pressing a  desire  to  return  to  Russia  and  indi-
cating that  she  would  be  accompanied  by  her
husband.  She  explained  that  she  wanted  to
return  because  of  family  problems,  including
the  impending  birth  of  her  second  child.  Ac-
companying her  letter  was  a  letter  written
by  Oswald  dated  July  1,  in  which  he  asked
the  Embassy  to  rush  an  entrance  visa  for  his
wife  and  requested  that  his  visa  be  considered
separately.  Marina  believed  that  Oswald  was
really  planning  to  go  only  to  Cuba.  She  testi-
fied that  "his  basic  desire  was  to  get  to  Cuba


by  any  means,  and  that  all  the  rest  of  it  was
window  dressing  for  that  purpose."

During  the  early  days  of  the  New  Orleans
period,  the  Oswalds'  marriage  was  more  har-
monious than  it  had  been  previously.  Marina
wrote:

*  *  *  our  family  life  in  New  Orleans  was
more  peaceful.  Lee  took  great  satisfaction
in  showing  me  the  city  where  he  was  born.
We  often  went  to  the  beach,  the  zoo,  and  the
park.  Lee  liked  to  go  and  hunt  crabs.  It  is
true,  that  he  was  not  very  pleased  with  his
job  *  *  *  We  did  not  have  very  much
money,  and  the  birth  of  a  new  child  involved
new  expenses  *  *  *  As  before,  Lee  spent  a
great  deal  of  time  reading.

Marina  testified,  however,  that  after  they  had
been  in  New  Orleans  for  a  while,  Oswald  be-
came depressed  and  that  she  once  found  him
alone  in  the  dark  crying.  She  wrote  to  Ruth
Paine  that  his  "love"  had  ceased  soon  after
Mrs.  Paine  had  left  New  Orleans.  Mrs.  Paine
testified,  however,  that  she  had  noticed  friction
between  the  Oswalds  before  she  left.  On
July  11,  Mrs.  Paine  wrote  Marina  that  if
Oswald  did  not  wish  to  live  with  her  any  more
and  preferred  that  she  return  to  the  Soviet
Union,  she  could  live  at  the  Paines'  house.
Although  Mrs.  Paine  had  long  entertained  this
idea,  this  was  the  first  time  she  explicitly  made
the  invitation.  She  renewed  the  invitation  on
July  12,  and  again  on  July  14;  she  attempted
to  overcome  any  feeling  which  Marina  might
have  that  she  would  be  a  burden  by  stating
that  Marina  could  help  with  the  housework
and  help  her  learn  Russian,  and  that  she  would
also  provide  a  tax  advantage.

Marina  replied  that  she  had  previously
raised  the  subject  of  a  separation  and  that  it
had  led  to  arguments.  She  stated  that  she  was
happy  and  that  for  a  considerable  period  of
time  Oswald  had  been  good  to  her.  She  at-
tributed this  improved  attitude  to  the  fact  that
he  was  anticipating  their  second  child.  Marina
turned  down  Mrs.  Paine's  invitation  but  said
that  she  would  take  advantage  of  it  if  things
became  worse.  Mrs.  Paine  replied  that  she  was
taking  a  trip  north  to  visit  her  parents  and
would  visit  Marina  in  New  Orleans  about  Sep-
tember 18.  She  also  suggested  that  Marina
come  to  her  house  for  the  birth  of  the  baby.

On  July  6,  Eugene  Murret,  a  cousin  of  Os-
wald who  was  studying  to  be  a  Jesuit  Priest
in  Mobile,  Ala.,  wrote  and  asked  if  Oswald
could  come  to  Mobile  and  speak  at  the  Jesuit
House  of  Studies  about  "contemporary  Russia
and  the  practice  of  Communism  there."  Oswald
accepted,  and  on  July  27  he  and  his  family,
joined  by  some  of  the  Murrets,  traveled  to
Mobile;  Charles  Murret  paid  the  expenses.
Oswald  spoke  concerning  his  observations  in
Russia  and  conducted  a  question  and  answer
period;  he  impressed  his  listeners  as  articulate.


318


He  indicated  that  he  had  become  disillusioned
during  his  stay  in  Russia,  and  that  in  his
opinion  the  best  political  system  would  be  one
which  combined  the  best  points  of  capitalism
and  communism.  While  he  left  his  listeners
with  the  impression  that  he  was  an  atheist,  he
avoided  a  direct  discussion  of  religion.  The
group  returned  to  New  Orleans  on  July  28.

In  late  May  and  early  June,  Oswald  had
apparently  begun  to  formulate  plans  for  creat-
ing a  New  Orleans  branch  of  the  Fair  Play  for
Cuba  Committee.  Using  the  name  "Lee  Os-
borne" he  ordered  a  number  of  printed  circu-
lars demanding  "Hands  off  Cuba"  in  large
letters,  and  application  forms  and  membership
cards  for  the  proposed  chapter.  On  August  5,
he  visited  a  store  managed  by  Carlos  Brin-
guier,  a  Cuban  refugee  and  avid  opponent  of
Castro  and  the  New  Orleans  delegate  of  the
Cuban  student  directorate.  Oswald  indicated  an
interest  in  joining  the  struggle  against  Castro.
He  told  Bringuier  that  he  had  been  a  marine
and  was  trained  in  guerrilla  warfare,  and  that
he  was  willing  not  only  to  train  Cubans  to  fight
Castro  but  also  to  jom  the  fight  himself.  The
next  day  Oswald  returned  to  the  store  and  left
his  "Guidebook  for  Marines"  for  Bringuier.

On  August  9,  Bringuier  saw  Oswald  passing
out  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  leaflets.  Bringuier  and
his  companions  became  angry  and  a  dispute
resulted.  Oswald  and  the  three  Cuban  exiles
were  arrested  for  disturbing  the  peace.  Oswald
spent  the  night  in  jail  and  was  interviewed  the
next  day  by  a  lieutenant  of  the  New  Orleans
Police  Department.  At  Oswald's  request,  an
FBI  agent  also  interviewed  him.  Oswald  main-
tained that  he  was  a  member  of  the  New
Orleans  branch  of  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba
Committee  which,  he  claimed,  had  35  mem-
bers. He  stated  also  that  he  had  been  in  touch
with  the  president  of  that  organization,  A.  J.
HideU.  Oswald  was  in  fact  the  only  member
of  the  "New  Orleans  branch,"  which  had  never
been  chartered  by  the  National  Fair  Play  for
Cuba  Committee.  Later  that  day  Oswald  was
released  on  bail,  and  2  days  later  he  pleaded
guilty  to  the  charges  against  him  and  paid  a
$10  fine.  The  charges  against  the  Cuban  exiles
were  dismissed.  Marina  testified  that  the  arrest
upset  Lee  and  that  he  "became  less  active,  he
cooled  off  a  little"  after  it.

On  August  16,  Oswald,  assisted  by  at  least
one  other  person  who  was  a  hired  helper,
again  passed  out  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  literature,
tMs  time  in  front  of  the  International  Trade
Mart.  That  night,  television  newscasts  ran
pictures  of  Oswald's  activities.  (This  hindered
Oswald's  subsequent  attempts  to  obtain  em-
ployment in  New  Orleans.)  Bringuier  sent  one
of  his  friends  to  Oswald's  home  to  pose  as  a
Castro  sympathizer  and  attempt  to  obtain  in-
formation about  Oswald,  but  Oswald  appar-
ently saw  through  the  ruse.

William  Stuckey,  a  radio  broadcaster  with
a  program  called  "Latin  Listening  Post,"  had


long  been  looking  for  a  member  of  the  Fair
Play  for  Cuba  Committee  to  appear  on  his
program.  He  learned  about  Oswald  from  Brin-
guier, and  visited  Oswald  on  August  17.  Later
that  day,  Stuckey  recorded  an  interview  with
Oswald  which  was  cut  to  about  5  minutes  and
played  back  on  the  show  that  evening.  Two
days  later,  Stuckey  asked  the  news  director  of
the  station  if  he  could  run  the  entire  tape,  but
the  director  felt  that  a  debate  with  a  local
opponent  of  Castro  would  be  of  greater  pubhc
interest.  Consequently,  Stuckey  arranged  for
a  debate  between  Oswald  and  Bringuier  on  a
25-minute  daily  public  affairs  program  called
"Conversation  Carte  Blanche,"  which  took
place  on  August  21.  Oswald  defended  the
Castro  regime  and  discussed  Marxism.  He  was
put  on  the  defensive  when  his  defection  to
Russia  was  brought  up,  and  Stuckey  later  testi-
fied that  he  thought  that  the  program  had
finished  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  in
New  Orleans.  However,  Stuckey  also  testified
that  Oswald  seemed  to  be  a  clean-cut  and  in-
telligent person  who  conducted  himself  very
well  during  the  interviews  and  debates.

Oswald  wrote  several  times  to  V.  T.  Lee,
then  national  director  of  the  Fair  Play  for
Cuba  Committee,  telling  him,  sometimes  in
exaggerated  terms,  of  his  activities.  He  wrote
also  to  the  Conamunist  Party  and  asked  whether,
in  view  of  his  prior  defection,  he  should  "con-
tinue to  fight,  handicapped  as  it  were,  by  *  *  *
[his]  past  record,  [and]  compete  with  anti-
progressive  forces,  above-ground  or  *  *  *
should  always  remain  in  the  backgroimd  i.e.,
underground."  The  Party  replied  that  "often
it  is  advisable  for  some  people  to  remain  in  the
background,  not  undergrovmd."  And  although
Oswald  wrote  four  letters  to  V.  T.  Lee  during
the  summer,  there  is  no  evidence  that  Oswald
heard  from  him  after  May  29.

Ruth  Paine  arrived  in  New  Orleans  on  Sep-
tember 20,  and  spent  three  nights  with  the
Oswalds.  During  this  stay,  Mrs.  Paine  found
relations  between  them  much  improved.  None-
theless, it  was  decided  that  Marina  would  go
back  with  her  to  Irving  for  the  birth  of  the
baby.  Marina  and  Mrs.  Paine  toured  Bourbon
Street  while  Oswald  stayed  home  and  did  some
packing  for  Marina's  return  to  Texas.  On
Sunday,  September  22,  Oswald  and  Mrs.  Paine
finished  loading  the  station  wagon  with  the
Oswalds'  household  belongings.


MEXICO  CITY

Marina  Oswald  testified  that  sometime  in
August  her  husband  first  told  her  of  his  plan
to  go  to  Mexico  and  from  there  to  Cuba,  where
he  planned  to  stay;  he  had  given  up  a  plan
to  hijack  an  airplane  and  fly  directly  to  Cuba,
which  plan  Marina  consistently  opposed.  On
September  17,  he  obtained  from  the  Mexican
consulate  general  in  New  Orleans  a  "Tourist


319


Card,"  FM-8  No.  24085,  good  for  one  journey
into  Mexico  for  no  longer  than  15  days.  Typed
in  the  blank,  "Appehdos  y  nombre,"  was  "Lee,
Harvey  Oswald,"  Totogrofo";  the  intended
destination  was  shown  as  Mexico  City.  (The
comma  between  "Lee"  and  "Harvey"  seems
to  have  been  an  error.)  On  the  application
Oswald  stated  that  he  was  employed  at  "640
Rampart";  he  was  in  fact  unemployed.  (Com-
mission Exhibits  Nos.  2478,  2481.)

Marina  and  June  departed  with  Mrs.  Ruth
Paine  for  Irving  on  the  morning  of  Septem-
ber 23.  Before  she  left,  Oswald  told  Marina
that  she  should  not  tell  anyone  about  his  im-
pending trip  to  Mexico.  Marina  kept  this  secret
until  after  the  assassination.  On  the  previous
day,  Oswald's  landlord  had  seen  Mrs.  Paine's
car  being  packed  and  had  asked  Oswald,  whose
rent  was  about  15  days  overdue,  whether  he
was  leaving.  Oswald  told  him  that  Marina  was
leaving  temporarily  but  that  he  would  remain-
A  neighbor  testified  that  on  the  evening  of
September  24,  he  saw  Oswald,  carrying  two
pieces  of  luggage,  hurriedly  leave  the  Maga-
zine Street  apartment  and  board  a  bus.  Though
uncertain  of  the  exact  date,  a  city  busdriver
recalls  that  at  the  same  time  of  day  and  at  the
same  location  he  picked  up  a  man  who  was
carrying  two  suitcases  of  different  sizes  and
helped  him  place  them  so  that  they  would  not
disturb  the  other  passengers.  The  driver  re-
members that  the  man  asked  directions  to  the
Greyhound  bus  station.  He  discharged  the  pas-
senger at  an  intersection  where  he  could  board
a  Canal  Street  car  and  transfer  to  another  bus
which  would  go  past  the  Greyhound  and  Con-
tinental Trailways  stations.  The  landlord  found
Oswald's  apartment  vacant  on  September  25.

Oswald  appears  to  have  taken  with  him  a
Spanish-English  dictionary;  his  address  book;
his  1963  passport  and  old  passport;  his  cor-
respondence with  the  Communist  Party  and
with  the  Soviet  Embassy  in  Washington,  some
of  which  was  in  Russian;  proof  of  his  marriage;
newspaper  clippings  concerning  his  arrest  and
his  interest  in  the  activities  of  the  Fair  Play
for  Ciiba  Committee  (activities  which,  Marina
testified,  he  had  undertaken  because  he  thought
that  they  would  help  him  when  he  got  to
Cuba);  evidence  that  he  was  the  "Director"
of  the  New  Orleans  chapter  of  the  Committee;
and  various  other  cards,  such  as  a  work  card,
which  he  had  obtained  in  Russia.  He  took  also
several  sheets  of  notepaper  on  which  he  had
written  a  summary  of  important  events  in  his
life  which  he  presumably  intended  to  call  to
the  attention  of  Cuban  and  Soviet  officials  in
Mexico  City  to  convince  them  to  let  him  enter
Cuba.  On  these  sheets  he  had  recorded  facts
about  his  Marine  service,  including  the  dates
of  his  enUstment  and  discharge,  the  places
where  he  had  served,  and  the  diplomas  that
he  had  received  from  military  school.  Recorded
also  were  notes  on  his  stay  in  the  Soviet  Union,
his  early  interest  in  Communist  Uterature,  his


ability  to  speak  Russian,  his  organization  of
the  New  Orleans  chapter  of  the  Fair  Play  for
Cuba  Committee,  his  contact  with  police  au-
thorities in  connection  with  his  work  for  the
Committee,  and  his  experience  in  "street  agita-
tion," as  a  "radio  speaker  and  lecturer,"  and
as  a  photographer.  The  two  pieces  of  luggage
which  Oswald  took  with  him  were  a  small,
blue,  zipper  bag  and  a  large,  olive-colored
bag,  both  made  of  cloth.  He  carried  the  smaller
bag  with  him  throughout  the  trip,  but,  at  least
from  Nuevo  Laredo  to  Mexico  City,  checked
the  larger  one  through  to  his  destination.

Oswald  remained  in  New  Orleans  until  Sep-
tember 25.  His  precise  whereabouts  on  the
night  of  September  24  are  uncertain,  but  in
view  of  his  limited  finances,  he  probably  re-
turned to  the  apartment  to  sleep  after  checking
his  luggage  at  a  bus  station  or  spent  the  night
at  an  inexpensive  hotel  or  roominghouse.  Some
time  after  5  a.  m.  on  September  25,  he  col-
lected a  Texas  unemployment  compensation
check  for  $33  at  his  New  Orleans  post  office
box.  He  cashed  the  check  between  8  a.m.  and
noon  at  a  store  about  six  blocks  from  his
apartment  on  Magazine  Street.  This  gave  him
about  $200  for  the  trip  to  Mexico.

He  left  New  Orleans  by  bus,  probably  on
Continental  Trailways  Bus  No.  5121,  departing
New  Orleans  at  12:20  p.m.  on  September  25,
and  scheduled  to  arrive  in  Houston  at  10:50
p.m.;  that  bus  is  the  only  one  on  which  Os-
wald could  have  left  New  Orleans  after  noon
on  September  25  and  arrived  in  Houston  before
midnight.  Sometime  in  the  evening  he  called
the  home  of  Horace  Elroy  Twiford,  a  member
of  the  Socialist  Labor  Party  who  had  received
Oswald's  name  from  the  party's  headquarters
in  New  York  and  sent  him  a  copy  of  its
official  publication,  the  "Weekly  People."  Mrs.
Twiford,  who  answered  the  telephone,  believes
that  the  call  was  made  locally,  before  10  p.m.
It  may  have  been  made  from  Beaumont  or
some  other  stop  on  the  route;  however,  in
view  of  the  bus  schedule,  it  probably  was  made
in  Houston  later  than  Mrs.  Twiford  remem-
bered. Oswald  told  Mrs.  Twiford  that  he  was
a  member  of  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Commit-
tee and  that  he  hoped  to  see  her  husband  for
a  few  hours  that  evening  before  he  flew  to
Mexico.  He  wanted  also  to  find  out  how  Twi-
ford had  obtained  his  name  and  address.  Mrs.
Twiford  told  Oswald  that  her  husband,  a
merchant  seaman,  was  at  sea  but  would  be
happy  to  see  him  at  some  other  time;  she  of-
fered to  take  a  message.  Oswald  said  that  he
could  not  await  her  husband's  return  because
he  was  flying  to  Mexico.  The  Twifords  have
stated  that  they  had  no  other  contact  with
Oswald.

An  employee  of  the  U.S.  Selective  Service
System  has  stated  that  an  individual  calling
himself  "Harvey  Oswald"  appeared  at  her  office
in  Austin,  Tex.,  immediately  after  lunch  on
September 25, and discussed with her the


320


possibility  of  rectifying  his  undesirable  dis-
charge from  the  Marine  Corps,  Despite  the
employee's  reputability  and  apparent  sincerity,
all  of  the  information  which  she  furnish«i
with  respect  to  Oswald's  appearance  and  con-
versation could  have  been  derived  from  news
media,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  by  the
time  she  told  the  FBI  her  story.  Other  persons
in  Austin  who,  according  to  the  employee's
testimony,  should  also  have  observed  Oswald
failed  to  corroborate  her  testimony.  No  other
evidence  tending  to  show  that  Oswald  was  in
Austin  at  this  time  has  been  discovered.

The  telephone  call  which  Oswald  made  to
the  Twifords  the  evening  of  September  25,
indicates  that  he  was  either  in  Houston  or  on
his  way  there  when  he  made  it,  since  the  pur-
pose of  the  call  was  to  make  an  appointment
to  see  Twiford  in  Houston  that  evening.  Os-
wald could  not  have  left  New  Orleans  on
September  25,  been  in  Austin  521  miles  away
by  early  afternoon,  and  returned  162  miles
to  Houston  by  night  unless  he  traveled  by  air;
airline  records  contain  no  indication  that  Os-
wald was  on  such  flights.  It  is  very  unlikely
that  he  had  with  him  enough  money  beyond
what  he  needed  for  the  trip  to  Mexico  City
to  take  such  flights,  and  the  poor  state  of  his
finances  at  this  time  plus  his  weU-established
frugality  make  it  extremely  unlikely  that  he
would  have  considered  it  worthwhile  to  do  so
even  if  he  could.  There  is  no  evidence  that
Oswald  was  in  such  a  hurry  to  reach  Mexico
that  he  would  have  felt  it  necessary  to  travel
by  airplane  rather  than  a  less  expensive  means
of  travel.  He  took  a  bus  from  Houston  to
Mexico  City,  lived  very  inexpensively  there,
and  took  a  bus  back  to  Dallas;  there  is  no
apparent  reason  why  he  would  have  interrupted
such  an  inexpensive  trip  to  fly  to  Austin  and
then  to  Houston.  He  told  a  passenger  whom
he  met  on  the  next  leg  of  his  trip  that  he  had
come  from  New  Orleans,  and  made  no  refer-
ence to  Austin.

On  September  26,  Oswald  boarded  Con-
tinental Trailways  bus  No.  5133  in  Houston
and  departed  at  2:35  a.m.  for  Laredo,  Tex.,
via  Corpus  Christi  and  Alice.  Two  British
tourists,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  John  B.  McFarland,  who
boarded  No.  5133  in  Houston,  noticed  Oswald
when  they  awoke  at  about  6  a.m.  Oswald  told
them  that  he  was  going  to  Cuba  via  Mexico
City,  and  they  inferred  from  conversation  with
him  that  he  had  left  New  Orleans  early  in  the
afternoon  of  September  25  and  that  h^  was
going  to  Cuba  via  Mexico  City.  He  said  also
that  he  was  secretary  of  the  New  Orleans
branch  of  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee
and  that  he  hoped  to  see  Fidel  Castro  in  Cuba.
The  bus  was  scheduled  to  arrive  in  Laredo  at
approximately  1:20  p.m.

Oswald  crossed  the  border  from  Laredo  to
Nuevo  Laredo,  Mexico,  between  1:30  and
2  p.m.  From  Nuevo  Laredo,  he  traveled  to
Mexico  City  aboard  bus  No.  5 1 6  of  the  Flecha


Roja  Bus  Line,  which  departed  at  2:15  p.m.
and  was  scheduled  to  arrive  in  Mexico  City  at
9:45  a.m.  on  the  following  day;  he  held  bag-
gage claim  check  No.  320435.  He  was  seen  on
the  bus  by  the  McFarlands  and  by  two  Austra-
lian girls  who  boarded  the  bus  on  the  evening
of  September  26  at  Monterrey.  He  occupied  the
seat  next  to  an  elderly  Englishman,  who  told
the  girls  that  the  young  man  sitting  next  to  him
apparently  had  been  to  Mexico  before.  The
man  next  to  Oswald  was  probably  Albert  Os-
borne, a  native  of  the  British  Isles  who  has
worked  as  an  itinerant  preacher  in  the  Southern
United  States  and  Mexico  for  many  years.  Os-
borne denied  that  he  sat  beside  Oswald;  but  in
view  of  his  inconsistent  and  untrue  responses
to  Federal  investigators  concerning  matters  not
direcdy  related  to  Oswald,  the  Commission
believes  that  his  denial  cannot  be  credited.  It
appeared  to  the  other  passengers  on  the  bus
that  Osborne  and  Oswald  had  not  previously
met;  extensive  investigation  has  revealed  no
other  contact  between  them.

In  the  course  of  the  20-hour  bus  trip,  Oswald
initiated  two  conversations  with  the  Australian
girls,  during  which  he  mentioned  his  visit  to
Russia  and  recommended  the  Hotel  Cuba  in
Mexico  City  as  a  "clean  and  cheap"  hotel;  he
told  them,  apparently  falsely,  that  he  had  stayed
there  on  previous  occasions.  He  said  that  when
he  had  seen  them  board  the  bus  with  their
heavy  suitcases,  he  had  been  under  the  impres-
sion that  they  were  Mexican  and  had  therefore
asked  the  man  next  to  him  how  to  say  "How
can  I  help  you?"  in  Spanish.  From  this  they
inferred  that  Oswald  did  not  speak  Spanish,  an
impression  which  is  shared  by  every  witness
who  met  Oswald  on  his  trip  and  is  supported
by  notations  which  he  made  on  documents  that
he  carried.  He  got  ofif  the  bus  at  every  stop
and  ate  large  meals,  always  eating  by  himself;
the  girls  thought  he  ate  so  much  because  he
could  not  make  himself  understood  in  Spanish
and  had  to  order  by  pointing  at  the  menu.  The
bus  arrived  in  Mexico  City  15  minutes  late,  at
10  a.m.  Oswald  left  the  bus  station  by  himself
and  had  no  known  further  contact  with  any  of
the  people  with  whom  he  had  spoken  on  the  bus.

Oswald  registered  at  the  Hotel  del  Comercio
within  an  hour  of  his  arrival  in  Mexico  City.
He  stayed  there  throughout  his  visit.  The  hotel,
located  not  far  from  the  commercial  heart  of
the  city  and  within  four  blocks  of  the  bus  sta-
tion, is  one  of  a  group  of  hotels  located  near
the  intercity  bus  terminals  and  has  perhaps  the
best  appearance  of  the  group.  It  is  known  by
personnel  in  other  hotels  that  the  owner  of  the
Hotel  del  Comercio  can  understand  and  speak
a  little  English.  Oswald  registered  as  "Lee,  Har-
vey Oswald,"  and  gave  his  occupation  as
"photo."  He  had  room  18  which  cost  $1.28
per  day.

After  he  had  registered,  Oswald  turned
promptly  to  the  task  of  obtaining  permission
to  enter  Cuba.  Mexican  officials  would  not  per-


321


mit  a  U.S.  citizen  without  a  Cuban  visa  to
board  a  plane  for  Cuba  even  if  he  had  an
American  passport,  but  would  permit  passage
if  he  had  a  visa  even  though  the  passport  pro-
scribed travel  to  Cuba.  Oswald  had  a  1963
American  passport  (stamped  invalid  for  travel
to  Cuba)  but  had  neither  a  regular  Cuban  visa
nor  an  intransit  visa  which  would  permit  a
short  stay  in  Cuba  on  his  way  to  Russia  or
some  other  country.  His  address  book  contained
the  telephone  number  and  address  of  a  Cuban
airline,  but  there  is  evidence  that  he  never
visited  its  office.

He  visited  the  Cuban  Embassy  on  Friday,
September  27  and  spoke  with  Senora  Silvia
Tirado  de  Duran,  a  Mexican  citizen  employed
there.  Senora  Duran  later  made  a  signed  state-
ment to  the  Mexican  police  that  Oswald:

*  *  *  applied  for  a  visa  to  Cuba  in  transit
to  Russia  and  based  his  application  on  his
presentation  of  his  passport  in  which  it  was
recorded  that  he  had  been  living  in  the  latter
country  for  a  period  of  three  years,  his  work
permit  from  that  same  country  written  in  the
Russian  language  and  letters  in  the  same  lan-
guage, as  well  as  proof  of  his  being  married
to  a  woman  of  Russian  nationality  and  being
the  apparent  Director  in  the  city  of  New
Orleans  of  the  organization  called  "Fair  Play
for  Cuba"  with  the  desire  that  he  should  be
accepted  as  a  "friend"  of  the  Cuban  Revo-
lution *  *  *.

He  apparently  also  stated  that  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Communist  Party  and  displayed
documents  which  he  claimed  to  be  evidence  of
his  membership.  He  said  that  he  intended  to  go
to  Cuba  on  September  30  and  to  remain  there
for  2  weeks,  or  longer  if  possible,  and  then  go
on  to  Russia.  Senora  Duran  took  down  the  rele-
vant date  and  filled  out  the  appropriate  appli-
cation. Oswald  left  the  Embassy  but  was  to
return  in  the  afternoon.

Then,  or  possibly  even  before  his  initial  visit
to  the  Cuban  Embassy  Oswald  went  to  the
Soviet  Embassy  where  he  spoke  with  either
Pavel  Antonovich  Yatskov  or  Valeriy  Vladi-
mirovich  Kostikov.  They  are  both  consular
ofl&cials  serving  also  as  agents  of  the  KGB.
Oswald  later  said  that  he  had  dealt  with
"Kostin,"  undoubtedly  a  reference  to  Kostikov.
He  was  unable  to  obtain  a  Soviet  visa  then.
Marina  said  that  the  officials  at  the  Soviet  Em-
bassy "refused  to  have  anything  to  do  with  him."

Oswald  returned  to  the  Cuban  Embassy  later
that  afternoon,  this  time  bringing  with  him
passport  photographs  which  he  may  have  ob-
tained in  the  United  States.  Senora  Duran  tele-
phoned the  Soviet  Embassy  to  inquire  about  the
status  of  Oswald's  Russian  visa  and  was  told
that  there  would  be  a  delay  of  about  4  months.
Oswald  became  "highly  agitated  and  angry,"
particularly  when  he  learned  that  he  could  not
obtain  an  intransit  visa  to  Cuba  before  he  ac-


quired a  Russian  visa.  Senora  Duran  called  the
Cuban  consul,  then  Eusibio  Azque,  to  speak  to
him.  The  discussion  between  Oswald  and
Azque  developed  into  a  heated  argument,  which
ended  when  Azque  told  Oswald  that  in  his
opinion  people  like  Oswald  were  harming  the
Cuban  Revolution  and  that  so  far  as  Azque
was  concerned,  he  would  not  give  Oswald  a
visa.  Senora  Duran  wrote  her  name  and  the
phone  number  of  the  Embassy  on  a  piece  of
paper  which  she  gave  to  Oswald  in  case  he
wished  to  contact  her  again.  He  copied  this
information  into  his  address  book.  Senora
Duran  forwarded  the  Cuban  visa  application
to  Havana;  the  Cuban  Ministry  of  Foreign
Affairs  replied  on  October  15  that  the  visa
could  be  issued  only  after  Oswald  had  obtained
a  Russian  visa.  (Commission  Exhibit  No.
2564.)

Oswald  contacted  the  Russian  and  Cuban
Embassies  again  during  his  stay  in  Mexico.  He
had  no  greater  success  than  he  had  before.
Marina  testified  that  when  he  returned  to  Texas,
he  was  convinced  that  his  trip  had  been  a  fail-
ure and  disappointed  at  having  been  unable  to
go  to  Cuba.  A  month  later,  in  a  painstakingly
composed  letter  to  the  Soviet  Embassy  in  Wash-
ington, Oswald  ascribed  his  failure  to  "a  gross
breach  of  regulations"  on  the  part  of  the  Cuban
Embassy.  "(5f  corse,"  he  wrote,  "the  Soviet  Em-
bassy was  not  at  fault,  they  were,  as  I  say
imprepared."

The  hotel  maid  said  that  Oswald  generally
was  gone  by  the  time  she  arrived  at  9  a.m.  The
night  watchman  said  he  usually  returned  at
about  midnight,  which  is  not  unusual,  in  view
of  the  late  hour  at  which  Mexico  City's  evening
activities  begin.  He  ate  several  lunches  at  a
small  restaurant  immediately  adjacent  to  the
hotel,  coming  to  the  restaurant  shortly  after
2  p.m.,  and  ordering  food  by  pointing  to  the
menu,  apparently  with  some  consideration  of
cost;  he  spent  between  40  and  48  cents  for  each
meal.  He  ate  the  soup  of  the  day,  rice,  and
either  meat  or  eggs,  but  refused  dessert  and
coffee;  the  waitress  concluded  that  Oswald  did
not  realize  that  the  items  which  he  refused
were  included  in  the  price  of  the  lunch.  He  was
seen  with  no  other  person  either  at  his  hotel  or
at  the  restaurant.  A  hotel  guest  stated  that  on
one  occasion  he  sat  down  at  a  table  with  Os-
wald because  there  was  no  empty  table  in  the
restaurant,  but  that  neither  spoke  to  the  other
because  of  the  language  barrier.

Although  the  Soviet  and  Cuban  Embassies
are  within  two  blocks  of  each  other,  they  are
some  distance  from  Oswald's  hotel.  He  must,
therefore,  have  traversed  a  substantial  portion
of  the  city  on  more  than  one  occasion.  Marina
testified  that  he  told  her  that  he  had  seen  a
bullfight,  which  would  normally  have  been  on
Sunday  afternoon,  and  that  he  had  visited
museums  and  done  some  sightseeing.  He  appar-
ently also  saw  one  or  more  motion  pictures,
either  American  with  Spanish  subtitles  or  Mexi-


322


can  with  English  subtitles.  From  notations  in
his  Spanish-English  dictionary  and  on  his  guide
map  of  Mexico  City,  it  appears  that  Oswald
intended  to  attend  a  jai  alai  game  but  he  almost
certainly  did  not  do  so.

He  purchased  several  postcards  depicting
bullfights  and  tourist  attractions,  which  he
brought  back  to  Marina.  She  had  told  him  be-
fore he  left  that  she  would  like  Mexican  silver
bracelets  as  a  souvenir,  and  he  brought  her  a
silver  bracelet  inscribed  with  her  name.  Marina
suspected,  almost  certainly  correctly,  that  the
bracelet,  of  Japanese  origin,  did  not  come  from
Mexico.  No  such  jewelry  is  known  to  be  sold
in  or  around  Mexico  City,  because  of  a  high
duty  but  the  bracelet  is  of  a  type  commonly
sold  in  5-and-lO-cent  stores  in  Dallas.  Oswald
did  not  buy  the  Mexican  phonograph  records
which  Marina  had  requested,  despite  the  nota-
tion, "records,"  which  he  had  placed  in  his
dictionary.

On  Monday,  September  30,  Oswald  began
to  prepare  for  his  return  to  the  United  States.
He  appeared  at  the  Agenda  de  Viages,  Trans-
portes  Chihuahuenses,  and  purchased  interna-
tional exchange  orders  costing  $20.30  for  travel
on  a  Transportes  del  Norte  bus  from  Mexico
City  to  Laredo  and  by  Greyhoimd  bus  directly
from  Laredo  to  DaUas.  The  travel  agency  made
a  reservation  for  him  on  Transportes  del  Norte
bus  No.  332,  departing  Mexico  City  at  8 :  30  a.m.
on  October  2.  The  seat,  No.  12,  was  reserved
in  the  name  of  the  travel  agency,  which  re-
corded the  reservation  in  the  name  of  "H.  O.
Lee."  The  employee  who  made  the  reservation
testified  that  he  probably  wrote  the  name  that
way  because  he  was  copying  from  Oswald's
tourist  card,  which  read  "Lee,  Harvey  Oswald."
(The  manifest  for  Transportes  Frontera  bus
No.  340,  leaving  Mexico  City  for  Monterrey
and  Nuevo  Lar»do  at  1  p.m.  on  Wednesday,
October  2,  1963,  contains  the  name  "Oswld"
[sic],  which  apparently  was  added  to  the  mani-
fest after  the  trip;  in  any  event,  Oswald  did
not  take  bus  340.)

On  October  1,  Oswald  paid  his  hotel  bill
through  that  night.  The  hotel  night  watchman
remembers  helping  Oswald  obtain  a  taxicab  at
about  6:30  or  7  on  the  following  morning.
Transportes  del  Norte  bus  No.  332  left  as
scheduled  at  about  8:30  a.m.;  at  Monterrey  the
passengers  were  shifted  to  a  relief  bus.  No.  373,
scheduled  to  depart  for  Laredo  at  10  p.m.  that
evening.  Fellow  passengers  recall  that  Oswald
was  pulled  off  the  bus  by  Mexican  oflBcials  at
the  border,  because  of  some  alleged  irregularity
in  his  Mexican  tourist  papers;  one  passenger
overheard  him  mumbling  complaints  about  the
Mexican  immigration  oflBcials  when  he  returned
to  the  bus.  They  remember  also  that  Oswald
was  hurriedly  "gulping"  down  a  banana  after
the  bus  reached  customs,  perhaps  because  he
believed  that  he  could  not  take  fruit  into  the
United  States.  (Marina  has  testified  that  her
husband liked bananas and frequently ate


them.)  One  of  the  passengers  testified  that  Os-
wald annoyed  him  by  keeping  his  overhead
light  on  to  read  after  10  p.m.  He  may  have
conversed  with  an  elderly  woman  on  the  bus,
but  he  was  not  traveling  with  her.

At  about  1:35  a.m.  on  October  3,  Oswald
crossed  the  International  Bridge  from  Nuevo
Laredo  into  Texas.  He  traveled  from  Laredo  to
Dallas  via  San  Antonio,  on  Greyhound  bus
No.  1265,  substantially  following  Interstate
Route  35  for  the  entire  trip  leaving  Laredo  at
3  a.m.  and  arriving  in  Dallas  at  about  2:20  p.nL
on  the  same  day.


DALLAS

Oswald  did  not  contact  his  wife  inmiediately
when  he  returned  to  DaUas.  He  went  to  the
oflBce  of  the  employment  commission,  where  he
filed  an  unemployment  compensation  claim
and  announced  that  he  was  again  looking  for
work.  He  spent  the  night  at  the  YMCA,  where
he  registered  as  a  serviceman  in  order  to  avoid
paying  the  membership  fee.  On  the  following
day,  he  applied  for  a  job  as  a  typesetter  trainee
at  the  Padgett  Printing  Co.  He  made  a  favor-
able impression  on  the  department  foreman,
but  the  plant  superintendent  called  Jaggars-
Chiles-Stovall  and  decided  not  to  hire  Oswald
because  of  the  unfavorable  responses  which  his
inquiries  produced.  Later  that  day,  Oswald
telephoned  Marina  and  asked  her  to  have  Mrs.
Paine  pick  him  up  in  Dallas.  Marina  refused,
and  he  hitchhik^l  out  to  the  Paine  home,
where  he  spent  part  or  all  of  the  weekend,
Marina  testified  that  although  her  husband
"changed  for  the  better"  and  treated  her  better
after  his  Mexican  trip,  she  did  not  want  to  live
with  him  because  she  was  pregnant  and  thought
it  would  be  better  "to  be  with  a  woman  who
spoke  English  and  Russian."  On  Monday,  Oc-
tober 7,  Mrs.  Paine  drove  Oswald  to  the  bus
station,  and  he  returned  to  Dallas  to  look  for
a  job  and  a  place  to  live.

Oswald  thought  that  the  YMCA  was  too
expensive  for  him,  and  intended  to  rent  a  room.
He  inquired  about  a  room  at  1026  North
Beckley,  where  he  lived  later,  but  on  October  7
there  were  no  vacancies.  He  next  responded  to
a  "For  Rent"  sign  at  a  rooming  house  at  621
Marsalis  Street.  He  obtained  a  room,  for  which
he  paid  the  weekly  rent  of  $7  in  advance,  and
moved  in  on  the  same  day.  He  immediately
resumed  his  job-hunting,  relying  partially  on
referrals  by  the  employment  commission.  He
spent  much  of  the  time  when  he  was  not  look-
ing for  work  in  his  room.  He  telephoned  his
wife  daily.  She  wrote:  "Lee  called  twice  a  day,
was  worried  about  my  health  and  about  June."
On  Friday,  Oswald  told  his  landlady,  Mrs.
Mary  Bledsoe,  that  he  was  going  to  Irving  for
the  weekend  but  would  retiim  the  following
week.  She  refused  to  rent  the  room  to  him  for
another  week  because  she  didn't  like  him.


323


Oswald  spent  the  weekend  of  October  12-13
at  Mrs.  Paine's  home,  during  which  time  she
gave  him  a  driving  lesson.  He  told  her  that  he
had  received  the  last  of  the  unemployment
checks  due  him,  and  that  it  had  been  smaller
than  the  previous  ones.  Mrs.  Paine  testified  that
Oswald  was  extremely  discouraged  because  his
wife  was  expecting  a  baby,  he  had  no  job  pros-
pects in  sight,  and  he  no  longer  had  any  source
of  income.

On  Monday,  Mrs.  Paine  drove  Oswald  into
Dallas,  since  she  had  other  business  there.  He
picked  up  his  bag  from  Mrs.  Bledsoe's  rooming-
house  and  later  that  day  rented  a  room  at
1026  North  Beckley  Avenue  from  Mrs,  A.  C.
Johnson  for  $8  a  week.  He  registered  as  O.  H.
Lee  and  moved  in  immediately.  Oswald  felt
that  this  room  was  more  comfortable  than  the
previous  one,  particularly  because  he  had  tele-
vision and  refrigerator  privileges.  He  appar-
ently continued  to  spend  most  of  his  evenings
in  his  room.  He  borrowed  books  from  the  li-
brary and  had  subscriptions  to  various  periodi-
cals, including  Time,  the  Worker,  the  Militant,
and  some  Russian  periodicals.

On  that  Monday,  Mrs.  Paine  mentioned  the
Oswalds'  financial  and  employment  problems  to
neighbors  whom  she  was  visiting.  Mrs.  Linnie
Mae  Randle,  who  was  also  present,  remarked
that  she  thought  that  her  younger  brother,  Buell
Wesley  Frazier,  who  worked  at  the  Texas
School  Book  Depository,  had  said  that  there
was  a  job  opening  there.  When  Marina  heard
of  this,  she  asked  Mrs.  Paine  to  call  the  Deposi-
tory to  see  if  there  was  an  opening.  Mrs.  Paine
called  Roy  S.  Truly,  superintendent  of  the  De-
pository, who  indicated  that  he  would  talk  to
Oswald  if  he  would  apply  in  person.  When
Oswald  telephoned  the  Paine  house  on  Monday
evening,  Mrs.  Paine  told  him  about  this  possi-
bility. On  the  next  day,  Oswald  was  interviewed
by  Truly  and  hired  in  a  temporary  capacity.
He  began  work  on  Wednesday,  October  1 6.  His
duties  were  to  fill  book  orders;  his  hours  were
8  a.m.  to  4:45  p.m.,  for  which  he  received
$1.25  an  hour.

Both  the  Oswalds  were  elated  with  the  new
job,  although  it  apparently  required  little  skill
or  experience  and  he  indicated  that  he  still
hoped  to  obtain  a  better  job.  He  did  a  satis-
factory job  at  the  Depository,  but  he  kept  to
himself  and  very  few  of  his  fellow  employees
got  to  know  him.

During  his  first  week  at  work,  Oswald  be-
came acquainted  with  Frazier,  with  whom  he
arranged  to  ride  to  Irving  on  weekends.  On
Friday,  October  18,  Frazier  drove  him  from
work  to  the  Paine  home;  since  it  was  his  birth-
day, Marina  and  Ruth  Paine  had  arranged  a
small  celebration.  On  Sunday,  he  stayed  with
June  and  the  Paine  children,  while  Mrs.  Paine
drove  Marina  to  Parkland  Hospital  where  she
gave  birth  to  a  second  daughter,  Rachel.  He
went  to  work  on  Monday,  but  that  evening


visited  Marina  in  the  hospital  and  spent  the
night  in  Irving.  Marina  wrote:

Monday  evening  Lee  visited  me  in  the  hos-
pital. He  was  very  happy  at  the  birth  of
another  daughter  and  even  wept  a  little.  He
said  that  two  daughters  were  better  for  each
other — two  sisters.  He  stayed  with  me  about
two  hours.

Oswald  returned  to  Dallas  the  next  morning.

Oswald  wrote  to  Arnold  Johnson  of  the
Communist  Party,  U.S.A.,  that  on  the  evening
of  October  23,  he  had  attended  an  "ultra  right"
meeting  headed  by  Gen,  Edwin  A.  Walker.
Two  evenings  later,  he  accompanied  Michael
Paine  to  a  meeting  of  the  American  Civil  Lib-
erties Union,  held  at  Southern  Methodist  Uni-
versity, At  this  meeting,  a  statement  was  made
to  the  effect  that  members  of  the  John  Birch
Society  should  not  be  considered  anti-Semitic;
Oswald  rose  and  stated  that  at  the  meeting
which  he  had  attended  2  days  earlier,  he  had
heard  a  number  of  anti-Semitic  and  anti-
Catholic  statements.  Later  in  the  evening,  Os-
wald became  involved  in  a  discussion  with
several  people,  including  Frank  Krystinik,  who
was  employed  with  Paine  at  the  BeU  Helicopter
plant.  During  this  conversation,  Oswald  ex-
pressed Marxist  views  and  declared  that  he  was
a  Marxist,  although  denying  that  he  was  a
Communist.  He  admitted  that  the  United  States
was  superior  to  the  Soviet  Union  in  the  area
of  civil  liberties  and  praised  President  Ken-
nedy for  his  work  in  that  connection.  Krystinik
testified  that  he  got  the  impression  that  Os-
wald did  not  fully  understand  the  views  he  was
expounding.

Throughout  that  week  Oswald  telephoned
his  wife  to  inquire  about  her  health  and  that  of
the  baby.  He  spent  the  weekend  at  the  Paine
home,  to  which  Marina  and  Rachel  had  re-
turned during  the  week.  On  Friday,  Novem-
ber 1,  he  obtained  post  office  box  No.  6225  at
the  Terminal  Annex  Post  Office  Station.  He
indicated  that  the  box  would  also  be  used  to
receive  mail  for  the  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Com-
mittee and  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union.
Once  again  he  spent  the  weekend  in  Irving.

Throughout  this  period,  the  FBI  had  been
aware  of  the  whereabouts  of  the  Oswalds.
There  was  a  record  in  the  Dallas  office  of  the
FBI  that  Oswald  subscribed  to  the  Worker,  en-
gaged in  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  Committee  activi-
ties and  had  traveled  to  Mexico.  An  FBI  agent
visited  the  Paine  home  on  November  1  and,
accompanied  by  another  agent,  again  on  No-
vember 5,  and  spoke  briefly  with  Mrs.  Paine.
On  neither  occasion  was  Oswald  present.  Ruth
Paine  noted  the  agent's  name  and  telephone
number  and,  in  accordance  with  her  husband's
instructions,  Marina  noted  the  license  number
of  the  agent's  automobile,  all  of  which  was  sub-
sequently reported  to  Oswald.  Both  Mrs.  Paine
and  Marina  testified  that  Oswald  was  troubled


324


by  the  FBI's  interest  in  him.  He  declared  that
the  FBI  was  "trying  to  inhibit"  his  activities,
and  wrote  the  Soviet  Embassy  in  Washington:

The  Federal  Bureu  of  Investigation  is  not
now  interested  in  my  activities  in  the  pro-
gressive organization  "Fair  Play  for  Cuba
Committee"  of  which  I  was  secretary  in  New
Orleans  (state  Louisiana)  since  I  no  longer
reside  in  that  state.  However,  the  F.B.I,  has
visted  us  here  in  Dallas,  Texas,  on  Novem-
ber 1st.  Agent  James  P.  Hasty  warned  me
that  if  I  engaged  in  F.P.C.C.  activities  in
Texas  the  F.B.I,  will  again  take  an  "interest"
in  me.

This  agent  also  'suggested'  to  Marina
Nichilayeva  that  she  could  remain  in  the
United  States  under  F.B.I,  'protection',  that
is,  she  could  defect  from  the  Soviet  Uion,
of  course,  I  and  my  wife  strongly  protested
these  tactics  by  the  notorious  F.B.I.

Please  inform  us  of  the  arrival  of  ovu"
Soviet  entrance  visa's  as  soon  as  they  come.
(Commission  Exhibit  15.)

Marina  testified  that  the  statements,  both  by
and  to  the  FBI  agents,  to  which  her  husband
referred  in  this  letter,  were  in  fact  never  made.

The  following  Friday,  November  8,  Oswald
as  usual  drove  to  the  Paine  house  with  Frazier.
On  Saturday  Mrs.  Paine  took  him  to  the  Texas
Drivers'  License  Examining  Station,  but  be-
cause it  was  an  election  day  the  station  was
closed.  Oswald  stayed  at  the  Paines  through
Monday,  November  11,  which  was  Veterans
Day.  During  the  weekend,  Mrs.  Paine  gave
Oswald  a  second  driving  lesson.

Oswald  did  not  go  to  Irving  on  the  next
weekend.  His  wife  had  asked  him  not  to  come
because  Michael  Paine,  with  whom  Oswald
did  not  get  along,  would  be  there  to  celebrate
his  daughter's  birthday.  Also,  she  felt  that  be-
cause he  had  stayed  for  3  days  the  preceding


weekend,  he  would  abuse  Mrs.  Paine's  hospi-
tality if  he  returned  so  soon.  Oswald  tele-
phoned Marina  on  Saturday  afternoon  and  said
that  he  had  returned  to  the  drivers'  license
examining  station  that  morning  but  had  not
waited  because  there  was  a  long  line.

On  Sunday,  November  17,  at  Marina's  re-
quest, Ruth  Paine  telephoned  Oswald  at  the
Beckley  Avenue  number,  which  he  had  given
to  Marina.  When  she  asked  for  him,  she  was
told  that  no  one  by  that  name  lived  at  the
addi'ess,  which  greatly  surprised  her.  On  the
next  day,  Oswald  telephoned  his  wife.  When
she  indicated  that  she  had  been  upset  by  the
fact  that  there  had  been  no  Lee  Oswald  at  the
number  which  she  had  asked  Mrs.  Paine  to  call,
Oswald  became  angry;  he  said  that  he  was
using  a  fictitious  name  and  that  she  should  not
have  called  the  Beckley  Avenue  number.  He
did  not  telephone  on  the  following  day,  which
was  unusual.

On  the  morning  of  Thursday,  November  21,
Oswald  asked  Frazier  to  take  him  to  Irving
when  he  went  home  that  evening,  saying  that
he  wanted  to  pick  up  some  curtain  rods.  His
arrival  was  a  surprise  because  he  generally
asked  Mrs.  Paine's  permission  before  arriving
for  a  visit.  The  women  thought  that  he  had
come  to  Irving  because  he  felt  badly  about
arguing  with  his  wife  about  the  use  of  the
fictitious  name.  He  said  that  he  was  lonely,  be-
cause he  had  not  come  the  preceding  weekend,
and  told  Marina  that  he  "wanted  to  make  his
peace"  with  her.  He  spent  the  time  before  din-
ner on  the  lawn  playing  with  his  daughter.
However,  when  he  attempted  to  talk  to  his  wife
she  would  not  answer,  which  upset  him.  He
asked  her  to  live  with  him  in  Dallas,  and  she
refused.  After  supper,  Oswald  watched  tele-
vision while  the  women  cleaned  the  house  and
prepared  their  children  for  bed.  He  retired
early  in  the  evening  at  about  9.


325


Appendix  XIV


ANALYSIS  OF  LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD'S  FINANCES
FROM  JUNE  13, 1962,  THROUGH  NOVEMBER  22, 1963


The  following  analysis  of  Lee  Harvey  Os-
wald's receipts  and  expenditures  for  the  period
June  13,  1962,  through  November  22,  1963,
contains  a  complete  record  of  all  funds  that  he
and  his  wife  are  reported  to  have  received  and
disbursed  from  all  known  sources.  It  also  con-
tains an  estimate  for  food,  clothing,  and  inci-
dental expenses,  which  include  telephone  calls,
money  order  and  check  cashing  fees,  postage,
local  transportation  costs,  personal  care  goods
and  services,  local  newspapers,  and  similar  small
items.  Oswald's  expenditures  for  food,  clothing.


and  incidentals  were  estimated  at  $100  per
month,  except  for  those  months  in  which  his
wife  and  children  resided  with  relatives  or
acquaintances.  The  estimate  reflects  Oswald's
frugal  living  habits  during  this  period,  as
described  in  chapter  VI  of  this  report.  The
Commission  has  been  advised  by  the  Bureau
of  Labor  Statistics  of  the  U.S.  Department  of
Labor  that  this  estimate  is  a  little  higher  than
would  be  normal  for  a  family  in  Oswald's  in-
come class  residing  in  the  southern  region  of  the
United  States.


LEE  HARVEY  OSWALD  RECEIPTS  AND  EXPENDITURES
JUNE  13,  1962,  TO  NOV.  22,  1963

June  1962:  Receipts Expenditures Balance

On  hand  on  arrival,  New  York  City $63.00

Received  from  Robert  Oswald  200.00

Received  from  Marguerite  Oswald  10.00

Transportation  in  New  York  City  $10.35

Plane  fare,  New  York  City  to  Dallas,  including

luggage  201.04

Hotel  bUl,  New  York  City 15.21

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses 5.00

Public  stenographer  10.00

Estimated  repayment,  Robert  Oswald 30.00

Total  273.00  271.60

Cash  on  hand,  June  30,  1962 $1.40

July  1962:

Net  salary 46.82

Estimated  repayment,  Robert  Oswald 10.00

Subscription  for  Time  magazine 3.87

Total  46.82  13.87

Cash  on  hand,  July  31,  1962 34.35

August  1962:

Net  salary 207.31

Repayment,  State  Department  loan 10.00

Estimated  repayment,  Robert  Oswald 50.00

Rent  and  utUities  71.50

Subscription  for  the  Worker 2.00

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses  75.00

Total  207.31  208.50

Cash  on  hand,  Aug.  31, 1962 33.16

September  1962:

Net  salary 187.59

Received  from  Paul  Gregory 35.00

Rent  and  utilities 71.50

Repayment,  State  Department  loan 9.71

Estimated  repayment,  Robert  Oswald 50.00

Subscription  for  the  Russian  humor  magazine

"KrokodU"  2.20

326


Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental Receipts Expenditures Balance

expenses 100.00

Total  222.59  233.41

Cash  on  hand.  Sept  30,  1962 22.34

October  1962:

Net  salary 228.22

Received  from  George  Bouhe 5.00

Repayment,  State  Department  loan 10.00

Rent,  room  in  YMCA 9.00

Post  oflBce  box  rental 4.50

Estimated  repayment,  Robert  Oswald 60.00

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses  50.00

Total  233.22  133.50

Cash  on  hand,  Oct  31,  1962 122.06

November  1962:

Net  salary 315.71

Rent 73.00

Rental  of  U-Haul  TraUer 5.00

Repayment,  State  Department  loan 10.00

Bus  fare,  Dallas  to  Fort  Worth  and  return 4.60

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses  50.00

Total  315.71  142.60

Cash  on  hand,  Nov.  30,  1962 295.17

December  1962:

Net  salary 243.13

Rent 68.00

Post  oflBce  box  rental  4.50

Repayment,  State  Department  loan 190.00

Subscription  for  the  Militant  1.00

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses 100.00

Total  243.13  363.50

Cash  on  hand,  Dec.  31,  1962 174.80

January  1963:

Net  salary 247.12

Rent  and  utilities  75.13

Repayment,  State  I>epartment  loan 206.00

Deposit,  Smith  &  Wesson  revolver  10.00

Fee  paid  Crozier  Tech  High  School 9.00

Subscription  for  Ogonek,  Agitator,  Sovetskaya

Belorussiya  13.20

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses 100.00

Total  247.12  413.33

Cash  on  hand,  Jan.  31,  1963 8.59

February  1963:

Net  salary 256.95

Rent  and  utilities  71.64

Subscription  for  the  Worker 7.00

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses 100-00

Total  256.95  178.64

Cash  on  hand,  Feb.  28,  1963 86.90

327


March  1963:  Receipts Expenditures Balance

Net  salary „ 327.55

Rent  and  utilities  78.76

Post  office  box  rental  4.50

Cost  of  rifle  21.45

Subscription  for  Time  magazine 3.82

Balance  due  on  revolver  and  freight  charge 21.22

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses 100.00

Total  327.55  229.75

Cash  on  hand,  Mar.  31,  1963 184.70

April  1963:

Net  salary 108.86

Income  Tax  refund  57.40

Rent  and  utilities  62.97

Bus  fare  from  Dallas  to  New  Orleans  13.85

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses 100.00

Total  166.26  176.82

Cash  on  hand,  Apr.  30,  1963 174.14

May  1963:

Net  salary 107.44

Unemployment  compensation  check 33.00

Rent  and  utilities  75.00

Subscription  for  the  MUitant 1.00

Dues  and  printing — Fair  Play  for  Cuba 9.00

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses  100.00

Total  140.44  185.00

Cash  on  hand,  May  31,  1963 129.58

June  1963:

Net  salary 216.00

Rent  and  utilities  67.85

Post  oflBce  box  rental 4.00

Printing — Fair  Play  for  Cuba 15.23

New  alien  registration  card 5.00

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses  100.00

Total  216.00  192.08

Cash  on  hand,  June  30,  1963 153.50

July  1963:

Net  salary 224.97

Rent  and  utilities  72.22

Printing — Fair  Play  for  Cuba 3.50

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses  100.00

Total  224.97  175.72

Cash  on  hand,  July  31,  1963 .TZZZ7 202.75

August  1963:

Unemployment  compensation  payments 165.00

Rent  and  utilities  73.54

Fine 10.00

Distribution,  Fair  Play  for  Cuba  circulars  2.00

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses  100.00

Total  165.00  185.54

Cash  on  hand,  Aug.  31,  1963 182.21

328


Sept.  1-24,  1963:  Receipts Expenditures Balance

Unemployment  compensation  payments 132.00

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses  100.00

Total  132.00 100.00

Cash  on  hand,  Sept.  24,  1963 214.21

Sept.  25-Oct.  2,  1963:
Mexican  trip:

Estimated  transportation  cost  50.55

Hotel  plus  estimated  food  cost  18.70

Estimated  cost  of  entertainment  and  mis-
cellaneous items  15.20

Total  84.45

Cash  on  hand,  Oct.  2,  1963 129.76

Oct  3-31,  1963:

Unemployment  compensation  payments 39.00

Net  salary  104.41

Rent,  rooms  and  YMCA 33.25

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses  75.00

Total  143.41  108.25

Cash  on  hand,  Oct.  31,  1963 164.92

Nov.  1-22,  1963:

Net  salary 104.41

Room  rent 24.00

Post  office  box  rental  3.00

American  CivU  Liberties  Union  dues 2.00

Bus  and  taxi  fares  Nov.  22,  1963 1.23

Estimated  cost  of  food,  clothing,  and  incidental

expenses "^^-QQ

Total  104.41  105.23

Cash  on  hand,  Nov.  22,  1963 164.10

Grand  total,  June  13,  1962-Nov.  22,  1963 3,665.89 3,501.79 164.10

Contents  of  Oswald's  wallet 170.00

Cash  taken  from  Oswald  when  arrested 13.87

Total  .^ 183.87


Appendix  XV

TRANSACTIONS  BETWEEN  LEE  HAR\Tr^  OSWALD  AND  >L\RLNA

OSWALD,  AND  THE  U.S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  STATE  ANT)

THE  LVrvnCRATION  ANT)  NATLTL4LIZATI0N  SERVICE

OF  THE  U.S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  JUSTICE


From  September  4,  1959,  when  he  applied
for  his  first  passport,  until  shortly  before  the
assassination,  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  had  numer-
ous dealings  with  the  U.S.  Department  of  State
in  Washington  and  with  the  American  Embassy
in  Moscow.  In  connection  with  Marina  Os-
wald's entry  into  the  United  States,  the  dealings
also  extended  to  the  Immigration  and  Natural-
ization Service  of  the  Department  of  Justice.


During  the  course  of  these  dealings,  the  De-
partment of  State  and  the  Immigration  and
Naturalization  Service  were  called  upon  to
decide  a  series  of  legal  and  administrative  ques-
tions which  arose  under  the  laws  of  this  coun-
try. In  order  to  determine  whether  Lee  Harvey
Oswald  or  his  wife  received  any  treatment  not
accorded  others  in  similar  positions,  the  Com-
mission has  examined  the  manner  in  which  the


329


transactions  with  the  Oswalds  were  handled
and  the  manner  in  which  the  relevant  legal
questions  were  resolved.  In  light  of  the  facts
then  available  and  the  applicable  statutes,  regu-
lations, and  practices  in  force  at  the  time,  the
Commission  has  found  no  indication  that  the
treatment  accorded  the  Oswalds  was  illegal  or
different  in  any  respect  from  the  treatment  that
other  persons  similarly  situated  would  have
received.


ISSUANCE  OF  PASSPORT  IN  1959

On  September  4,  1959,  while  on  active  duty
with  the  U.S.  Marine  Corps,  Oswald  applied
for  a  passport  before  a  clerk  of  the  superior
court  at  Santa  Ana,  Calif.  On  the  application
Oswald  stated  that  he  intended  to  leave  the
United  States  for  4  months  on  approximately
September  21,  1959,  by  ship  from  New  Or-
leans, La.,  and  that  the  purposes  of  his  trip
would  be  to  attend  the  Albert  Schweitzer  Col-
lege in  Switzerland  and  the  University  of  Turku
in  Finland,  and  to  visit  Cuba,  the  Dominican
Republic,  England,  France,  Switzerland,  Ger-
many, Finland  and  Russia  as  a  tourist.  With
the  application,  Oswald  submitted  a  statement
signed  by  a  Marine  oflBcer  that  he  was  to  be
discharged  from  the  Corps  on  September  11,
1959.  The  passport.  No.  1733242,  was  rou-
tinely issued  on  September  10,  1959.  At  the
time,  the  United  States  proscribed  travel  to
none  of  the  countries  named  in  Oswald's  appli-
cation.


OSWALD'S  ATTEMPTS  TO  RENOUNCE
HIS  U.S.  CITIZENSHIP

American  officials  in  Moscow  had  no  knowl-
edge that  Oswald  was  in  Russia  imtil  Octo-
ber 31,  1959,  more  than  2  weeks  after  he  had
arrived,  since  he  failed  to  register  at  the  U.S.
Embassy,  as  Americans  traveling  through  Rus-
sia normally  did.  However,  on  October  31,
1959,  a  Saturday,  Oswald  presented  himself  at
the  American  Embassy  in  Moscow.  He  placed
his  passport  on  the  receptionist's  desk  and  in-
formed her  that  he  had  come  to  "dissolve  his
American  citizenship."  She  immediately  sum-
moned the  consul,  Richard  E.  Snyder,  who
invited  Oswald  into  his  office.  In  the  room  with
Snyder  was  his  assistant,  John  A.  McVickar,
who  observed  what  ensued.  Snyder  recalled
Oswald  as  "neatly  and  very  presentably
dressed,"  but  he  also  remembered  his  arro-
gance. Oswald  seemed  to  "know  what  his  mis-
sion was.  He  took  charge,  in  a  sense,  of  the
conversation  right  from  the  beginning."

Oswald  stated  at  once  that  he  was  there  to
renounce  his  citizenship  and  that  "his  allegiance
was  to  the  Soviet  Union."  He  said  he  had  al-
ready appUed  for  Soviet  citizenship.  He  said
he  knew  the  provision  of  American  law  on  loss


of  citizenship  and  did  not  want  to  hear  them
reviewed  by  Snyder.  Having  taken  his  passport
back  from  the  receptionist,  Oswald  put  it  on
Snyder's  desk.  Snyder  noticed  that  Oswald  had
inked  out  the  portion  which  would  have  shown
his  address  in  the  United  States.  Oswald  also
presented  Snyder  with  a  note  which  he  had
prepared  in  advance,  which  reads:

I  Lee  Harey  Oswald  do  herby  request  that
my  present  citizenship  in  the  United  States
of  america,  be  revoked.

I  have  entered  the  Soviet  Union  for  the
express  purpose  of  appling  for  citizenship  in
the  Soviet  Union,  through  the  means  of
naturalization.

My  request  for  citizenship  is  now  pending
before  Suprem  Soviet  of  the  U.S.S.R.

I  take  these  steps  for  political  reasons.  My
request  for  the  revoking  of  my  American
citizenship  is  made  only  after  the  longest
and  most  serious  considerations.

I  affirm  that  my  allegiance  is  to  the  Union
of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics.

Oswald  told  Snyder  that  he  had  not  mentioned
his  intent  to  remain  in  the  Soviet  Union  to  the
Soviet  Embassy  in  Helsinki  at  the  time  he  had
applied  for  his  tourist  visa.  Oswald's  passport,
upon  which  his  Soviet  visa  was  stamped,  shows
that  by  the  31st  of  October  he  had  already
overstayed  his  visa,  despite  a  1-day  extension
which  he  had  received.

Oswald  gave  as  his  "principal  reason"  for
wanting  to  renounce  his  citizenship,  "I  am  a
Marxist."  He  stated  that  he  admired  the  system
and  policies  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  desired
to  serve  the  Soviet  State,  and  that  his  intent  to
defect  to  the  Soviet  Union  had  been  formed
long  before  he  was  discharged  from  the  Marine
Corps.  Shortly  after  the  interview,  Snyder  ob-
served that  Oswald  had  "displayed  all  the  airs
of  a  new  sophomore  partyliner."  At  one  point,
Oswald  alluded  to  hardships  endured  by  his
mother  as  a  "worker"  and  said  he  did  not  in-
tend to  let  this  happen  to  him.  He  stated  that
his  Marine  service  in  Okinawa  and  elsewhere
had  given  him  a  chance  "to  observe  American
imperialism,"  and  he  displayed  some  resent-
ment at  not  having  been  given  a  higher  rank  in
the  Marine  Corps.  Oswald  stated  to  Snyder  that
he  had  voluntarily  told  Soviet  officials  that  he
would  make  knovm  to  them  aU  information
concerning  the  Marine  Corps  and  his  specialty
therein,  radar  operation,  as  he  possessed.

Snyder  did  not  permit  Oswald  to  renounce
his  citizenship  at  that  time.  He  told  Oswald  that
his  renunciation  could  not  be  effected  on  a
Saturday,  but  that  if  he  would  return  on  a  day
when  the  Embassy  was  open  for  business,  the
transaction  could  then  be  completed.  Snyder
testified  that  his  real  reason  for  delaying  Os-
wald was  that  he  believed,  as  a  matter  of  sound
professional  practice,  that  no  one  should  be
permitted  to  renounce  his  American  citizenship


330


precipitously;  such  an  act  has  extremely  serious
consequences,  and,  once  accomplished,  it  is  ir-
revocable. Snyder  noticed  that  Oswald  was
young,  apparently  not  well  educated  and  obvi-
ously in  a  highly  emotional  state.  Snyder  testi-
fied: "particularly  in  the  case  of  a  minor,  I
could  not  imagine  myself  writing  out  the  re-
nunciation form,  and  having  him  sign  it,  on
the  spot,  without  making  him  leave  my  office
and  come  back  at  some  other  time,  even  if  it  is
only  a  few  hours  intervening."  Snyder's  deci-
sion was  also  influenced  by  his  familiarity  with
a  recent  unfavorable  incident  in  which  an
American  citizen  by  the  name  of  Petrulli  had
been  allowed  to  renounce  his  citizenship
hastily,  without  awareness  that  Petrulli  was
mentally  ill  at  the  time.  Snyder  was  able  to  per-
suade Oswald  to  tell  him  his  home  address  and
the  name  of  his  mother,  however,  by  saying
that  no  progress  on  his  renunciation  could  be
made  without  this  information.  The  State  De-
partment has  advised  that  Snyder's  treatment
of  Oswald  "was  in  line  *  *  *  with  the  general
policy  of  the  Department  to  discourage  expatri-
ation of  American  citizens."

The  same  day,  the  Embassy  sent  a  telegram
to  the  Department  of  State,  advising  that  Os-
wald had  appeared  there  is  an  attempt  to  re-
nounce his  American  citizenship,  and  setting
out  most  of  the  details  of  the  interview  with
Snyder.  Copies  were  irrmiediately  furnished  to
the  FBI  and  the  CIA.  The  telegram  was  fol-
lowed on  November  2,  1959,  by  an  Embassy
report  addressed  to  the  Department  of  State,
which  concluded:

*  *  *  in  view  of  the  Petrulli  case  and
other  considerations,  the  Embassy  proposes
to  delay  action  on  Oswald's  request  to  exe-
cute an  oath  of  renunciation  to  the  extent
dictated  by  developments  and  subject  to  the
Department's  advice.

Copies  of  this  memorandum  were  also  fur-
nished both  Federal  security  agencies.

After  having  received  the  telegram  of  Octo-
ber 31,  1959,  but  not  the  Embassy  Despatch
of  November  2,  1959,  the  State  Department  on
November  2,  1959,  sent  a  telegram  to  the
Moscow  Embassy  which  read  in  part:

If  Oswald  insists  on  renouncing  U.S.  citi-
zenship, Section  1999  Revised  Statutes  pre-
cludes Embassy  withholding  right  to  do  so
regardless  status  his  application  pending
Soviet  Government  and  final  action  taken
Petrulli  case.

This  telegram,  like  most  of  the  communications
from  the  Department  regarding  Oswald,  was
prepared  in  the  Passport  Office  and  cleared  by
the  OflBce  of  Eastern  European  Affairs  and  the
Office  of  Soviet  Union  Affairs.

Oswald  never  returned  to  the  Embassy.  On
November  6, 1959,  the  Embassy  received  a


handwritten  letter  from  Oswald  on  the  sta-
tionery of  the  Metropole  Hotel,  dated  Novem-
ber 3,  1959,  which  read:

I,  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  do  hereby  request
that  my  present  United  States  citizenship  be
revoked.

I  appeered  in  person,  at  the  consulate
oflBce  of  the  United  States  Embassy,  Mos-
cow, on  Oct.  31st,  for  the  purpose  of  signing
the  formal  papers  to  this  effect.  This  legal
right  I  was  refused  at  that  time.

I  wish  to  protest  against  this  action,  and
against  the  conduct  of  the  oflBcial  of  the
United  States  consular  service  who  acted  on
behalf  of  the  United  States  government.

My  application,  requesting  that  I  be  con-
sidered for  citizenship  in  the  Soviet  Union
is  now  pending  before  the  Surprem  Soviet
of  the  U.S.S.R.  .  In  the  event  of  acceptance,
I  will  request  my  government  to  lodge  a
formal  protest  regarding  this  incident.

The  Embassy  immediately  informed  the  De-
partment of  the  receipt  of  this  letter  and  ad-
vised that  it  intended  to  reply  to  Oswald  by
letter  telling  him  that,  if  he  wished,  he  could
appear  at  the  Embassy  on  any  normal  business
day  and  request  that  the  necessary  expatriation
documents  be  prepared.  On  the  same  day,
November  6,  the  Embassy  sent  Oswald  a  letter
so  advising  him.  From  then  until  November  30
the  Embassy  attempted  to  conmiunicate  with
Oswald  on  several  occasions  to  deliver  mes-
sages from  his  relatives  in  the  United  States
urging  him  to  reconsider,  but  he  refused  to
receive  the  messages  or  talk  to  anyone  from
the  Embassy.  The  messages  were  therefore  sent
to  him  by  registered  mail.

On  November  16,  1959,  Priscilla  Johnson,
an  American  newspaperwoman  stationed  in
Moscow,  interviewed  Oswald  at  the  Metropole
Hotel.  On  November  17,  1959,  she  informed
the  Embassy  of  her  interview,  and  the  informa-
tion was  recorded  in  a  file  memorandum.  Os-
wald told  Miss  Johnson  that  he  was  scheduled
to  leave  Moscow  within  a  few  days.  She
thought  that  Oswald  "may  have  purposely  not
carried  through  his  original  intent  to  renounce
[citizenship]  in  order  to  leave  a  crack  open."
The  Embassy  accordingly  informed  the  Depart-
ment of  State  about  2  weeks  later  that  Oswald
had  departed  from  the  Hotel  Metropole  within
the  last  few  days.  According  to  his  "Historic
Diary"  and  other  records  available  to  the  Com-
mission, however,  Oswald  probably  did  not  in
fact  leave  Moscow  for  Minsk  until  about  Janu-
ary 4,  1960.  Miss  Johnson's  report  of  her  inter-
view with  Oswald  was  the  last  information
about  him  which  the  U.S.  Goverrutnent  was  to
receive  until  February  13,  1961.

On  March  6,  1960,  Oswald's  mother  asked
Representative  James  C.  Wright,  Jr.,  of  Texas
to  help  her  locate  her  son.  The  Congressman
forwarded  her  inquiry  to  the  Department  of


331


State,  which  in  turn  sent  it  to  the  Embassy.  In
response,  the  Embassy  in  Moscow  informed
the  Department  on  March  28,  1960,  that  they
had  had  no  contact  with  Oswald  since  Novem-
ber 9,  1959.  The  Embassy  went  on  to  say  that
it  had  no  evidence  that  Oswald  had  expatriated
himself  "other  than  his  announced  intention  to
do  so."  It  believed,  therefore,  that  since  Oswald
was  presumably  still  an  American  citizen,  the
American  Government  could  properly  make  in-
quiry concerning  him  through  a  note  to  the
Soviet  Foreign  Office.  The  Embassy  went  on
to  suggest,  however,  that  it  would  be  preferable
if  Oswald's  mother  wrote  a  letter  to  her  son
which  could  then  be  forwarded  by  the  Depart-
ment to  the  Soviet  Government.

The  Department  replied  on  May  10,  1960,
that  no  action  should  be  taken  in  the  case
other  than  on  a  request  voluntarily  submitted
by  a  member  of  Oswald's  family.  On  June  22,
a  second  communication  was  dispatched,  ask-
ing whether  the  Embassy  had  been  able  to  con-
tact Oswald.  On  July  6,  1960,  the  Embassy
replied  that  it  had  received  no  further  com-
munication with  anyone  on  the  subject  of
Oswald  and  that  in  view  of  the  Department's
memorandum  of  May  10,  1960,  it  intended  to
take  no  further  action  in  the  matter.  Mrs.
Oswald  apparently  took  no  steps  to  follow  up
her  original  inquiry.

Under  the  procedures  in  effect  in  1960,  a
"refusal  sheet"  was  prepared  in  the  Department
of  State  Passport  Office  whenever  circum-
stances created  the  possibility  that  a  prospective
applicant  would  not  be  entitled  to  receive  an
American  passport.  The  records  section  of  the
Passport  Office,  on  the  basis  of  the  refusal
sheet,  would  prepare  what  was  known  as  a
lookout  card  and  file  it  in  the  lookout  file  in
the  Passport  Office.  Whenever  anyone  applied
for  a  passport  from  any  city  in  the  world,  his
application  was  immediately  forwarded  to  this
office,  and  his  name  and  date  of  birth  checked
against  the  lookout  file.  If  a  lookout  card  was
found,  appropriate  action,  including  possible
refusal  of  a  passport,  was  taken.  Passport  Office
procedures  also  provided  that  the  lookout  card
would  be  removed  from  a  prospective  appli-
cant's file  whenever  facts  warranted  an  unques-
tioned passport  grant.

On  March  25,  1960,  the  Passport  Office  had
made  up  a  "refusal  sheet"  on  Lee  Harvey  Os-
wald, typed  across  which  was  the  explanation
that  Oswald  "may  have  been  naturalized  in  the
Soviet  Union  or  otherwise  *  *  *  expatriated
himself."  An  Operations  Memorandum  stating
the  reasons  for  which  the  card  had  been  pre-
pared was  drawn  up  on  March  28  and  also  put
on  file  and  a  copy  sent  to  the  Embassy.  It  ad-
vised the  Embassy  to  take  no  further  action
on  the  Oswald  case  unless  it  came  into  posses-
sion of  evidence  upon  which  to  base  the  prepa-
ration of  a  certificate  of  loss  of  nationality.
Included  in  the  operations  memorandum  was
the  following:


An  appropriate  notice  has  been  placed  in
the  lookout  card  section  of  the  Passport
Office  in  the  event  that  Mr.  Oswald  should
apply  for  documentation  at  a  post  outside
the  Soviet  Union.

Despite  these  indications  that  a  lookout  card
was  prepared,  the  Department  of  State  on
May  18,  1964,  informed  the  Commission  that
"investigations,  to  date,  failed  to  reveal  any
other  indication  or  evidence  that  a  lookout  card
was  ever  prepared,  modified  or  removed."  No
such  card  was  ever  located,  and  certain  file
entries  indicate  that  such  a  card  was  never
prepared.

The  State  Department  has  advised  the  Com-
mission that  as  of  October  1959  the  Department
had  "developed  information  which  might  rea-
sonably have  caused  it  to  prepare  *  *  *  a  look-
out card  for  Lee  Harvey  Oswald."  The  Pass-
port Office  employee  who  prepared  the  refusal
sheet  for  Oswald  has  suggested  as  a  possible
explanation  of  the  failure  to  prepare  a  lookout
card  that  between  the  day  she  prepared  the
refusal  sheet  and  the  time  the  records  section
would  normally  have  prepared  the  lookout
card,  Oswald's  file  was  temporarily  pulled  from
its  place  because  the  Department  received  some
additional  correspondence  from  the  Embassy.
When  the  file  was  returned,  she  suggested,  it
may  have  been  assumed  that  the  card  had  al-
ready been  prepared.

Had  a  lookout  card  been  prepared  on  the
ground  of  possible  expatriation,  it  would  have
been  removed  and  destroyed  after  the  decision
was  made  in  1961  that  Oswald  had  not  expatri-
ated himself  and  thus  prior  to  the  time  that  he
applied  for  a  second  passport  in  June  1963.
Hence,  the  Department's  apparent  failure  to
prepare  a  lookout  card  on  Oswald  had  no  effect
on  its  future  actions.  As  of  February  20,  1964,
the  Department  issued  additional  regulations
regarding  the  manner  in  which  the  lookout  file
is  to  be  handled.  On  March  14,  1964,  a  cate-
gory was  established  for  returned  defectors,  so
that  these  persons  automatically  have  lookout
cards  in  their  files,  and  on  July  27,  1964,  the
Office  of  Security  of  the  Department  of  State
issued  a  procedural  study  of  the  lookout-card
system,  with  recommendations.


RETURN  AND  RENEWAL  OF  OSWALD'S
1959  PASSPORT

Negotiations  Between  Oswald  and  the
Embassy

On  February  1,  1961,  as  a  result  of  a  visit
by  Oswald's  mother  to  the  Department  of  State
on  January  25,  1961,  the  Department  sent  a
request  to  the  Moscow  Embassy  as  follows:

The  Embassy  is  requested  to  inform  the
[Soviet] Ministry of Foreign Affairs that


332


Mr.  Oswald's  mother  is  worried  as  to  his
present  safety,  and  is  anxious  to  hear  from
him.
The  inquiry  went  to  the  Embassy  by  diplomatic
pouch  and  was  received  in  Moscow  on  Feb-
ruary 10  or  11.  On  February  13,  before  the
Embassy  had  acted  on  the  Department's  re-
quest, the  Embassy  received  an  undated  letter
from  Oswald  postmarked  Minsk,  February  5.
The  letter  stated:

Since  I  have  not  received  a  reply  to  my
letter  of  December  1960,  I  am  writing  again
asking  that  you  consider  my  request  for  the
return  of  my  American  passport.

I  desire  to  return  to  the  United  States,
that  is  if  we  could  come  to  some  agreement
concerning  the  dropping  of  any  legal  pro-
ceedings against  me.  K  so,  than  I  would  be
free  to  ask  the  Russian  authorities  to  allow
me  to  leave.  K  I  could  show  them  my
American  passport,  I  am  of  the  opinion
they  would  give  me  an  exit  visa.

They  have  at  no  time  insisted  that  I  take
Russian  citizenship.  I  am  living  here  with
non-permanent  type  papers  for  a  foreigner.

I  cannot  leave  Minsk  without  permission,
therefore  I  am  writing  rather  than  calling
in  persoiL

I  hope  that  in  recalling  the  responsibility
I  have  to  america  that  you  remember  your's
in  doing  everything  you  can  to  help  me  since
I  am  an  american  citizen.

Despite  Oswald's  reference  to  his  letter  of
December  1960,  there  is  no  indication  that  he
had  written  to  the  Embassy  previously.  Fur-
thermore, his  diary  refers  to  his  February  1
letter  as  his  "first  request"  concerning  his
return  to  the  United  States.

On  February  28,  1961,  the  Embassy  wrote
Oswald  that  he  would  have  to  come  to  Moscow
to  discuss  the  passport  and  expatriation  mat-
ters. Then  on  March  20,  1961,  a  second  letter
from  Oswald,  dated  March  12,  was  received
by  the  Embassy.  It  read:

In  reply  to  your  recent  letter.  I  find  it
inconvenient  to  come  to  Moscow  for  the  sole
purpose  of  an  interview.

In  my  last  letter  I  believe  I  stated  that  I
caimot  leave  the  city  of  Minsk  without  per-
mission.

I  believe  there  exist  in  the  United  States
also  a  law  in  regards  to  resident  foreigners
from  Socialist  countries,  traveling  between
cities.

I  do  not  think  it  would  be  appropriate  for
me  to  request  to  leave  Minsk  in  order  to
visit  the  American  Embassy.  In  any  event,
the  granting  of  permission  is  a  long  drawn
out  affair,  and  I  find  that  there  is  a  hesita-
tion on  the  part  of  local  officials  to  even
start  the  process.

I  have  no  intention  of  abusing  my  position


here,  and  I  am  sure  you  would  not  want
me  to.

I  see  no  reasons  for  any  preliminary  in-
quiries not  to  be  put  in  the  form  of  a
questionnaire  and  sent  to  me.

I  understand  that  personal  interviews  un-
doubtedly make  to  work  of  the  Embassy
staff  lighter,  than  written  correspondence,
however,  in  some  cases  other  means  must
be  employed.

After  receiving  the  first  letter  postmarked
February  5,  the  Embassy  on  February  28
forwarded  a  despatch  to  the  Department  in-
forming it  of  Oswald's  letter  and  its  reply  to
Oswald.  At  that  time,  the  Embassy  also  in-
quired of  the  Department  whether  Oswald
would  be  subject  to  prosecution  on  any  grounds
if  he  should  return  to  the  United  States  and,  if
so,  whether  Oswald  should  be  so  informed.
The  Department  was  also  asked  whether  there
was  any  objection  to  returning  Oswald's  1959
passport  to  him  by  mail,  since  that  might
facilitate  his  application  for  a  Soviet  exit  visa.
Upon  receiving  Oswald's  March  20  letter,  the
Embassy  again  consulted  with  Washington.
The  Embassy  proposed  that  it  write  Oswald
repeating  that  he  must  come  to  Moscow  if  he
wanted  to  discuss  reentering  the  United  States
and  pointing  out  that  the  Soviet  government
did  not  object  to  such  visits  by  American  citi-
zens. Such  a  letter  was  mailed  to  Oswald  on
March  24.

In  the  meantime,  the  State  Department  was
considering  the  Embassy  despatch  of  Feb-
ruary 28,  1961.  Although  a  different  response
was  originally  recommended  by  a  staff  member
in  the  Passport  Office,  the  Department  in-
structed the  Embassy  on  April  13  that  for
security  reasons  Oswald's  passport  should  be
given  to  him  only  if  he  personally  appeared
at  the  Embassy  and  that  even  then  he  was  to
receive  the  document  only  after  a  fuU  investi-
gation had  been  made  and  the  Embassy  was
satisfied  that  he  had  not  renounced  his  Ameri-
can citizenship.  Also,  he  was  to  present  evi-
dence that  he  had  made  arrangements  to  depart
from  the  Soviet  Union  to  travel  to  the  United
States,  and  his  passport  was  to  be  stamped
valid  for  direct  return  to  the  United  States
only.  The  Department  also  told  the  Embassy
that  Oswald  could  not  be  advised  whether  or
not  he  would  be  prosecuted  for  any  possible
offenses  should  he  return  to  the  United  States.
Matters  remained  in  this  posture  for  over  a
month.  During  the  interim,  Oswald  met  and
married  Marina  Nikolaevna  Priisakova.

On  May  26,  1961,  the  Embassy  sent  a  des-
patch to  the  Department  advising  that  on
May  25,  1961,  it  had  received  a  letter  from
Oswald  postmarked  Moscow,  May  16,  1961.
In  his  latest  letter  Oswald  said  he  wanted  "to
make  it  clear  that  he  was  asking  for  full
guarantees  that  he  would  not  be  prosecuted
"under  any  circumstances"  should  he  return


333


that  if  the  Embassy  could  not  give  him  these
assurances,  he  would  "endeavor  to  use  my
relatives  in  the  United  States,  to  see  about
getting  something  done  in  Washington,"  He
also  informed  the  Embassy  that  he  was  married
to  a  Russian  woman  who  would  want  to  ac-
company him  back  to  his  native  country,  and
he  once  again  repeated  his  reluctance  to  come
to  Moscow.  The  Embassy  suggested  that  it
reply  to  Oswald  by  repeating  that  the  question
of  citizenship  could  only  be  made  on  the
basis  of  a  personal  interview,  and  by  advising
Oswald  of  the  requirements  and  procedures
pertaining  to  his  wife's  immigration.  The  des-
patch noted  that  Oswald's  letter  referred  to
his  present  Soviet  internal  passport  in  which
he  claimed  to  be  designated  as  "without  citizen-
ship," and  observed:  "It  would  appear  on  this
basis  that  Oswald  has  not  yet  expatriated  him-
self under  Section  349(a)(1)  of  the  Immigra-
tion and  NationaUty  Act."  The  Embassy  in-
quired whether  the  Department  considered
Oswald  entitled  "to  the  protection  of  the  United
States  Government  while  he  continues  to  re-
side abroad  under  present  circumstances  in  the
absence  of  reasonable  evidence  that  he  has
committed  an  expatriating  act?"

The  Department  answered  the  despatch
under  date  of  July  11,  1961.  It  said  that  it  was
not  entirely  clear  what  the  description  "with-
out citizenship"  means,  i.e.,  "whether  he  is
without  Soviet  citizenship  or  without  any  citi-
zenship." The  instructions  continued:

In  any  event  in  the  absence  of  evidence
showing  that  Mr.  Oswald  has  definitely  lost
United  States  citizenship  he  apparently  main-
tains that  technical  status.  Whether  he  is
entitled  to  the  protection  of  the  United
States  pending  any  further  developments
concerning  his  precise  status  is  a  matter
which  will  be  left  to  the  Embassy's  discre-
tion in  the  event  an  emergency  situation
should  arise.  In  a  situation  of  this  kind,  not
of  an  emergency  nature,  the  facts  should  be
submitted  to  the  Department.

It  is  noted  that  the  Embassy  intends  to
seek  the  Department's  prior  advice  before
granting  Mr.  Oswald  documentation  as  a
United  States  citizen  upon  any  application
he  may  submit.

The  Embassy's  careful  attention  to  the
involved  case  of  Mr.  Oswald  is  appreciated

* :*: *

However,  on  Saturday,  July  8,  1961,  before
the  Embassy  had  received  the  response  from
Washington,  Oswald  appeared  without  warning
at  the  Embassy  in  Moscow.  Snyder  came  down
to  meet  Oswald  after  Oswald  called  him  on  the
house  telephone,  and  after  a  brief  talk,  asked
Oswald  to  return  on  Monday,  July  10.  Later
that  day  Oswald  telephoned  his  wife  and  told
her  to  come  to  Moscow,  which  she  did  the
next  day.  Oswald  returned  alone  to  the  Ameri-


can Embassy  on  Monday,  where  Snyder  ques-
tioned him  about  his  life  in  Russia.  According
to  a  memorandum  which  Snyder  prepared
shortly  afterwards:

Twenty  months  of  the  realities  of  life  in
the  Soviet  Union  have  clearly  had  a  matur-
ing efifect  on  Oswald.  He  stated  frankly  that
he  learned  a  hard  lesson  the  hard  way  and
that  he  had  been  completely  relieved  about
his  illusions  about  the  Soviet  Union  *  *  *
Much  of  the  arrogance  and  bravado  which
characterized  him  on  his  first  visit  to  the
Embassy  appears  to  have  left  him.

Oswald  told  Snyder  that  despite  the  state-
ment he  had  given  him  in  October  1959,  he
had  never  applied  for  Soviet  citizenship,  but
only  for  permission  to  reside  in  the  Soviet
Union.  He  presented  his  Soviet  internal  pass-
port, which  described  him  as  without  citizen-
ship of  any  kind.  Oswald  said  that  he  had
been  employed  since  January  13,  1960,  as  a
metal  worker  in  the  research  shop  in  the
Byelorussian  Radio  and  Television  Factory  in
Minsk.  He  claimed  that  he  had  taken  no  oath
of  allegiance  of  any  kind,  and  that  he  had  not
been  required  to  sign  any  papers  in  connection
with  this  employment.  He  added  that  he  was
not  a  member  of  the  factory  trade  union  or-
ganization. Oswald  said  that  he  was  earning
90  rubles  ($90)  a  month  and  that  he  had
saved  about  200  rubles  ($200)  toward  travel
expenses  to  the  United  States.  He  denied  that
he  had  made  any  derogatory  statements  con-
cerning the  United  States  to  radio,  press,  or
TV  in  the  Soviet  Union,  and  he  denied  that
he  had  turned  over  any  information  to  the
Russians  as  he  had  threatened  to  do  in  the
1959  interview  with  Snyder.

During  the  course  of  the  interview  Oswald
filled  out  an  appUcation  for  renewal  of  his
American  passport.  The  renewal  application
was  required  since  Oswald's  existing  passport
would  expire  on  September  10,  1961,  and  it
was  extremely  unlikely  that  he  would  be  able
to  obtain  the  requisite  Soviet  departure  docu-
ments before  that  time.  The  renewal  application
contained  a  printed  statement  which  set  forth,
in  the  disjunctive,  a  series  of  acts  which,  if
committed  by  the  applicant,  would  either  auto-
matically disqualify  him  from  receiving  a  pass-
port on  the  ground  that  he  had  lost  his  Ameri-
can citizenship,  or  would  raise  a  question
whether  he  might  be  so  disquaUfied.  The
printed  statement  was  preceded  by  two  phrases,
"have,"  and,  "have  not,"  the  first  phrase  being
printed  directly  above  the  second.  One  carbon
copy  of  the  application  indicates  Oswald  signed
the  document  after  the  second  phrase,  "have
not,"  had  been  typed  over,  thereby  apparently
admitting  that  he  had  committed  one  or  more
of  the  acts  which  would  at  least  raise  a  ques-
tion as  to  whether  he  had  expatriated  himself.
Snyder  was  not  able  to  remember  with  cer-


334


tainty  to  which  of  the  acts  listed  on  the  state-
ment Oswald's  mark  was  intended  to  refer,
but  believed  it  may  have  been  to  "swearing
allegiance  to  a  foreign  state."  He  points  out
that  the  strikeout  of  "have  not"  may  also  have
been  a  clerical  error.  On  the  actual  signed
copy  of  the  application  kept  in  the  files  of  the
Moscow  Embassy,  which  is  not  a  carbon  copy
of  the  copy  sent  to  the  Department,  the  strike-
out is  sUghtly  above  the  "have";  therefore,
since  the  "have"  is  itself  printed  above  the
"have  not,"  the  strikeout  may  have  been  in-
tended to  obliterate  the  "have."

In  any  event,  Oswald  filled  out  the  supple-
mentary questionnaire  which  was  required  to
be  completed  if  the  applicant  admitted  he  had
performed  one  or  more  of  the  possibly  expatri-
ating acts.  He  signed  the  questionnaire  under
oath.  Snyder  testified  that  it  was  routine  for
any  kind  of  "problem  case"  to  fill  out  the
supplementary  questionnaire.  The  Passport  Of-
fice employee  who  processed  the  Oswald  case
in  Washington  testified  that  she  routinely  re-
garded the  questionnaire  rather  than  the  ap-
phcation  itself  as  the  controlling  document  for
expatriation  purposes,  so  that  she  probably  paid
no  attention  to  the  strikeout.

The  pertinent  questions  included  on  the
questionnaire,  with  Oswald's  answers,  read  as
follows:

2. (a)  Are  you  known  or  considered  in
your  community  to  be  a  national  of
the  country  in  which  you  are  re-
siding? No.  (Yes  or  No)
(b)  If  your  answer  to  2(a)  is  "No,"
explain  why  not.  On  my  document
for  residence  in  the  USSR  my  na-
tionality is  American.

3.(a)  Have  you  ever  sought  or  obtained
registration  as  a  national  of  a  foreign
country,  applied  for  or  obtained  a
passport,  certificate,  card  document
or  other  benefit  therefrom  in  which
you  were  described  as  a  national  of
a  country  other  than  the  United
States?  No.  (Yes  or  No)
(b)  If  yoiu-  answer  to  3(a)  is  "Yes,"
did  you  voluntarily  seek  or  claim
such  benefits?  (Yes  or  No)  If  "No,"
please  explain.

/  received  a  document  for  residence
in  the  USSR  but  I  am  described  as
being "Without citizenship."

4. (a)  Have  you  ever  informed  any  local
or  national  official  of  a  foreign  state
that  you  are  a  national  of  the  United
States?  No.  *  *  *
(b)  If  your  answer  to  4(a)  is  "No,"
explain  why  not.  On  my  document
for  residence  in  the  USSR,  my  na-
tionality is  American.

6. (a)  Have  you  ever  taken  an  oath  or
made  an  affirmation  or  other  formal
declaration  of  allegiance  to  a  foreign


*  *  *


state?  No.

8.  Have  you  ever  accepted,  served  in,
or  performed  the  duties  of  any  of-
fice, post  or  employment  under  the
government  of  a  foreign  state  or
political  subdivision  thereof?  No.
*  *  *  I  do  not  regard  factory  em-
ployment as  state  employment,  as  is
meant  in  the  question  above.

On  the  basis  of  these  answers,  and  on  the  basis
of  the  statements  Oswald  made  orally  during
the  interview,  Snyder  concluded  that  Oswald
had  not  lost  his  citizenship.  Snyder  therefore
handed  him  back  his  passport.  Pursuant  to
the  instructions  from  Washington,  it  was
stamped,  "This  passport  is  valid  only  for  direct
travel  to  the  United  States."

In  a  despatch  dated  July  11,  1961,  the
Embassy  informed  the  Department  of  State
of  its  conclusion  that  Oswald  had  not  lost  his
American  citizenship  and  requested  that,  if
Washington  agreed  with  the  conclusion,  "the
Embassy  be  authorized  to  renew  Oswald's  pass-
port at  its  discretion."  The  despatch,  with
which  Oswald's  application  and  supplemental
questionnaire  were  enclosed,  informed  the  De-
partment that  Oswald  was  questioned  at  length
at  the  Embassy  and  that  no  evidence  was  re-
vealed of  any  act  which  might  be  considered
as  having  caused  the  loss  of  his  American
citizenship.

The  Embassy  added  in  the  despatch —

It  is  our  intention  not  to  renew  it  [the  pass-
port] without  the  Department's  prior  ap-
proval of  the  enclosed  renewal  application,
and  then  only  upon  evidence  of  a  present
need  for  the  renewal  in  connection  with  his
efforts  to  return  to  the  United  States.

Oswald  appeared  at  the  Embassy  once  again
on  July  11,  1961,  this  time  accompanied  by
Marina,  in  order  to  complete  the  papers  neces-
sary to  obtain  permission  for  his  wife  to  enter
the  United  States.  In  a  letter  dated  July  16,
1961,  Oswald  informed  the  American  Em-
bassy about  his  and  Marina's  appUcation  to
the  Soviet  oflScials  for  permission  to  leave  Rus-
sia, and  described  the  harassment  which  Marina
was  allegedly  vmdergoing  because  of  her  at-
tempts to  leave  the  country.

Based  upon  Snyder's  recommendation  and
the  information  in  its  files,  the  Passport  Oflfice
on  August  18,  1961,  concluded  that  Oswald
had  not  expatriated  himself.  Therefore,  on  that
date,  the  Department  of  State  sent  a  despatch
to  the  Embassy  in  Moscow  stating  that  they
concurred  in  tiie  Embassy's  recommendation
of  July  11,  1961,  with  respect  to  Oswald's
citizenship:

We  concur  in  the  conclusion  of  the  Em-
bassy that  there  is  available  no  information
and/ or  evidence  to  show  that  Mr.  Oswald


335


has  expatriated  himself  under  the  pertinent
laws  of  the  United  States.

The  renewal  of  Mr.  Oswald's  passport,
issued  on  September  10,  1959,  is  authorized
upon  his  referenced  application  if  no  ad-
verse reason  is  known,  to  take  place  upon
his  presentation  of  evidence  that  he  needs
such  renewal  in  connection  with  his  efforts
to  return  to  the  United  States  as  indicated
in  the  final  sentence  on  page  2  of  Despatch
29.  As  requested  in  the  final  paragraph  of
the  Despatch  the  Embassy  may  perform  this
citizenship  function  for  Mr.  Oswald  at  its
discretion.

Any  passport  renewal  granted  to  Mr.  Os-
wald should  be  limited  to  his  passport  needs
and,  as  stated  in  the  second  paragraph  of
the  Department's  A-173,  April  13,  1961  his
passport  should  be  made  valid  for  direct
return  to  the  United  States.  The  additional
precaution  set  forth  in  the  same  paragraph
should  be  observed  and  his  passport  should
be  delivered  to  him  on  a  personal  basis  only.
When  available,  a  report  of  his  travel  data
should  be  submitted,  as  well  as  a  report  of
any  intervening  developments.

On  October  12,  1961,  the  Embassy  wrote
the  Department  to  inform  it  of  four  letters  it
had  received  from  Oswald  dated  July  15,
August  8,  and  October  4,  and  an  undated
letter  received  in  August.  With  reference  to
these  letters,  the  despatch  noted:

*  *  *  that  Oswald  is  having  diflBculty  in
obtaining  exit  visas  for  hirnself  and  his
Soviet  wife,  and  that  they  are  subject  to
increasing  harassment  in  Minsk.  In  replying
to  Oswald's  latest  letter,  the  Embassy  pointed
out  that  it  has  no  way  of  influencing  Soviet
action  on  exit  visas.  It  informed  him  that  the
question  of  his  passport  renewal  could  be
discussed  with  Mm  personally  at  the  Em-
bassy. In  answer  to  Oswald's  question,  the
Embassy  notified  him  that  the  petition  to
classify  his  wife's  status  had  not  yet  been
approved.

The  Department  on  December  28,  1961,  in-
formed the  Embassy  that  the  Passport  Office
approved  the  manner  of  the  Embassy's  reply
to  Mr.  Oswald  with  respect  "to  his  receiving
further  passport  facilities."  After  a  further
exchange  of  correspondence  between  Oswald
and  the  Embassy,  dealing  primarily  with  Os-
wald's difficulties  in  obtaining  the  necessary
Soviet  clearance,  his  impatience  in  receiving
American  approval  for  Marina's  entry  into
the  United  States,  and  his  efforts  to  obtain  a
repatriation  loan,  the  passport  problem  was
finally  concluded  on  May  24,  1962,  when  the
Embassy  renewed  Oswald's  passport  for  30
days,  stamped  it  vahd  for  direct  return  to  the
United  States  only  and  handed  it  to  him,  A


week  later  he  used  it  to  return  to  the  United
States.

The  decision  that  Oswald  was  entitled  to
a  new  passport  because  he  had  not  expatriated
himself  was  made  for  the  Embassy  by  the
consul,  Richard  E.  Snyder.  For  the  Depart-
ment it  was  made  initially  by  Miss  Bemice  L.
Waterman,  a  worker  in  the  Passport  Office  for
36  years,  and  was  then  approved  by  her  area
chief,  by  the  head  of  the  Foreign  Operations
Division,  and  by  the  Legal  Division  of  the
Passport  Office.  Snyder  and  Miss  Waterman
have  both  testified  that  they  reached  their
decisions  independently  and  without  influence
from  any  other  person.  The  Director  of  the
Passport  Office  and  the  Legal  Adviser  to  the
State  Department  both  stated  that  after  a
review  of  the  record  they  concluded  that  Os-
wald had  not  expatriated  himself  and  that
Snyder  and  Waterman,  therefore,  acted  cor-
rectly.

Legal  Justification  for  the  Return
and  Reissue  of  Oswald's  Passport

Since  he  was  bom  in  the  United  States,
Oswald  was  an  American  citizen.  However,
Congress  has  provided  that  by  performing  cer-
tain acts,  a  person  may  forfeit  his  American
citizenship.  Thus  Oswald  would  have  become
expatriated  while  in  Russia  if  he  obtained  natu-
ralization in  the  Soviet  Union,  renounced  U.S.
nationality,  took  an  oath  of  aUegiance  to  the
Soviet  Union,  or  voluntarily  worked  for  the
Soviet  Government  in  a  post  requiring  that  the
employee  take  an  oath  of  allegiance.

Naturalization  in  a  foreign  state. — Section
349(a)(1)  of  the  Immigration  and  Nationality
Act  of  1952  provides  that  a  U.S.  citizen  shaU
lose  his  nationality  by  "obtaining  naturalization
in  a  foreign  state  upon  his  own  appUcation
*  *  *."  Although  Oswald  applied  for  Soviet
citizenship,  he  never  received  it.  Thus,  Oswald
did  not  expatriate  himself  under  section  349
(a)(1).

Formal  renunciation  of  U.S.  nationality. —
Section  349(a)(6)  of  the  act  provides  that  a
U.S.  citizen  shall  lose  his  citizenship  by:

*  *  *  making  a  formal  renunciation  of  na-
tionality before  a  diplomatic  or  consular
officer  of  the  United  States  in  a  foreign
state,  in  such  form  as  may  be  prescribed  by
the  Secretary  of  State.

In  accordance  with  this  statute,  the  Secretary
has  promulgated  regulations  prescribing  the
manner  in  which  renunciation  is  to  be  effected.
The  regulations  provide,  among  other  things,
that  4  copies  of  the  renunciation  form  are  to  be
executed  and  the  original  and  one  copy  sent  to
the  Department.  The  Department  must  then
approve  the  form  and  advise  the  appropriate
consular  official,  who  may  then  furnish  a  copy
of  the  form  to  the  person  to  whom  it  relates.
The  form  itself  requires  the  person  to  subscribe


336


it  in  the  presence  of  a  consular  official,  and  it
must  also  be  signed  by  this  official.

Though  in  1959  Oswald  clearly  stated  to
officials  at  the  American  Embassy,  both  orally
and  in  writing,  that  he  desired  to  renounce  his
U.S.  citizenship,  he  at  no  time  took  the  steps
required  by  the  statute  and  regulations  to  effect
his  renunciation.  Oswald  did  not  execute  the
proper  forms,  he  did  not  sign  his  letter  of
October  31  or  November  3,  1959,  in  the  pres-
ence of  a  consular  official,  and  neither  letter
was  signed  by  such  an  official.  Because  section
349(a)(6)  in  terms  requires  compliance  with
the  form  prescribed  by  the  Secretary  of  State,
Oswald  did  not  expatriate  himself  under  that
section.

Oath  of  allegiance  to  a  foreign  state. — Sec-
tion 349(a)(2)  of  the  act  provides  that  a  U.S.
citizen  shall  lose  his  nationality  by:

*  *  *  taking  an  oath  or  making  an  affirma-
tion or  other  formal  declaration  of  allegiance
to  a  foreign  state  or  a  political  subdivision
thereof.

In  his  letter  of  October  31,  1959,  Oswald  wrote:
"I  affirm  that  my  allegiance  is  to  the  union  of
Soviet  Socialist  Republics."  Both  in  this  letter
and  in  his  letter  of  November  3,  1959,  he  stated
that  his  application  for  citizenship  in  the  Soviet
Union  was  pending  before  the  Supreme  Soviet
of  the  U.S.S.R.

Oswald's  letters  no  doubt  were  intended  to
express  allegiance  to  the  Soviet  Union  in  a  man-
ner inconsistent  with  continued  allegiance  to
the  United  States,  as  the  statute  has  been  held
to  require.  However,  since  1940,  it  has  been
well  established  that  in  order  for  an  oath  of
allegiance  to  a  foreign  state  to  work  an  expa-
triation from  the  United  States,  it  must  be
given  to  an  official  of  the  foreign  state,  and  not
to  a  party  unconnected  with  the  foreign  state.
This  requirement  can  be  viewed  as  a  necessary
corollary  of  the  broader,  but  less  clearly  estab-
lished, principle  that  the  oath  must  be  taken  in
accord  with  the  requirements  of  the  foreign
state.  Although  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  wrote  that
his  allegiance  was  to  the  Soviet  Union,  there  is
no  indication  that  he  had  ever  actually  taken
an  oath  or  declaration  or  that  any  such  oath
was  taken  before  an  official  of  the  Soviet  Gov-
ernment. He,  therefore,  did  not  expatriate  him-
self under  section  349(a)(2).

Employment  under  the  government  of  a  for-
eign state. — Section  349(a)  (4)  of  the  Immigra-
tion and  NationaUty  Act  of  1952  provides  that
a  U.S.  citizen  shall  lose  his  nationality  by:

(a)  accepting,  serving  in,  or  performing
the  duties  of  any  office,  post,  or  employment
under  the  government  of  a  foreign  state  or  a
political  subdivision  thereof,  if  he  has  or  ac-
quires the  nationality  of  such  foreign  state;
or  (b)  accepting,  serving  in,  or  performing
the  duties  of  any  office,  post  of  employment


under  the  government  of  a  foreign  state  or  a
political  subdivision  thereof,  for  which  office,
post,  or  employment  an  oath,  affirmation,  or
declaration  of  allegiance  is  required.  *  *  *

While  Oswald  was  employed  in  a  state-owned
factory  in  Minsk,  he  did  not  acquire  Russian
nationality,  and  there  is  no  indication  that  he
had  to  take  any  oath  when  he  obtained  this
employment.  Furthermore,  prior  judicial  de-
cisions indicate  that  merely  working  in  a  gov-
ernment-owned factory  does  not  result  in  ex-
patriation even  if  an  oath  was  required  to  be
taken  in  connection  with  such  employment.
Several  cases  decided  under  an  earlier  but  simi-
lar statutory  provision  held  that  where  a  person
took  a  government  job  in  order  to  subsist,  such
employment  was  considered  involuntary  since
it  was  based  on  economic  duress,  and  thus  it
did  not  result  in  expatriation.  Thus,  Oswald  did
not  expatriate  himself  under  section  349(a)  (4).
The  Commission  therefore  concludes  that
Lee  Harvey  Oswald  had  not  expatriated  him-
self by  any  acts  performed  between  October  1 6,
1959,  and  May  1962,  and  concurs  in  the  opin-
ion of  the  State  Department  that  his  passport
was  properly  returned  to  him  in  July  1961  and
properly  reissued  in  May  1962.


AUTHORIZATION  FOR

MARINA  OSWALD  TO  ENTER
THE  UNITED  STATES

Negotiations  Between  Oswald  and  the  Embassy

On  July  11,  1961,  Oswald  and  his  wife  ap-
peared at  the  Embassy  in  Moscow  before  John
A.  McVickar.  Together  they  executed  papers
to  set  in  motion  the  procedures  for  her  admit-
tance to  the  United  States  as  a  nonquota  immi-
grant under  the  provisions  applicable  to  the
wife  of  an  American  citizen.  The  interview  was
routine.  McVickar  asked  Marina  whether  she
was  a  member  of  any  Communist  organization
and  she  replied  that  she  was  a  member  of  the
Trade  Union  of  Medical  Workers  but  she  de-
nied she  was  or  ever  had  been  a  member  of  the
Komsomol,  the  Communist  youth  organization,
or  any  other  Communist  organization.  Marina
Oswald  has  since  admitted  to  the  Commission
that  at  one  time  she  was  a  member  of  The
Komsomol,  but  was  expelled,  according  to  her
testimony,  when  it  was  learned  that  she  in-
tended to  accompany  her  husband  to  the  United
States.  The  Embassy  forwarded  the  papers  per-
taining to  her  application  to  the  State  Depart-
ment on  August  28,  1961.

Marina  Oswald's  ability  to  obtain  a  nonquota
immigrant  visa  depended  on  the  favorable  reso-
lution of  3  questions.  First,  it  had  to  be  deter-
mined that  she  was  the  wife  of  an  American
citizen,  which  depended  on  whether  her  hus-
band had  expatriated  himself.  Second,  it  was
necessary  to  determine  that  she  was  not  and
had  not  been  affiliated  with  a  Communist  or-


337


ganization  on  other  than  an  involuntary  basis.
Third,  it  had  to  be  determined  that  she  was  not
likely  to  become  a  public  charge  after  she  was
admitted  to  the  United  States.  Section  243(g)
of  the  Immigration  and  Nationality  Act  pre-
sented a  fourth  issue.  This  section  of  the  act
prohibits  the  issuance  of  immigrant  visas  by
American  Consuls  stationed  in  coimtries  which
have  refused  to  accept  or  have  unduly  delayed
accepting  the  return  of  persons  sought  to  be
deported  from  the  United  States,  l^e  Soviet
Union  had  been  designated  as  such  a  country
in  1953.  However,  the  sanctions  of  section
243(g)  are  often  waived;  and  even  if  they  were
not  waived  in  Marina's  case,  she  could  obtain
her  visa  at  an  American  Embassy  in  some  other
country  on  her  way  from  the  Soviet  Union  to
the  United  States,  if  she  were  otherwise  entitled
to  the  visa.

In  a  despatch  dated  August  28,  1961,  the
Embassy  requested  from  the  Department  a
security  advisory  opinion  on  Marina  Oswald's
application  to  enter  the  United  States.  The  Em-
bassy wrote:

A  favorable  advisory  opinion  and  approval
of  *  *  *  [Mrs.  Oswald's]  petition  is  recom-
mended together  with  a  waiver  of  the  sanc-
tions imposed  by  section  243(g)  of  the  Act.

*  *  *

In  connection  with  her  employment  and
her  professional  training,  she  has  been  a
member  of  the  Soviet  Trade  Union  for  Med-
ical Workers  since  1957.  Such  membership

is  routinely  considered  to  be  involuntary.

*  *  *

The  Department  initiated  a  check  on  Marina
Oswald  with  the  CIA,  the  FBI,  the  Depart-
ment's own  OflSce  of  Security,  and  Passport
Office.  The  security  check  turned  up  no  deroga-
tory information  on  her,  so  that  in  early  Octo-
ber 1961  the  Department  cabled  Moscow  that
the  available  information  concerning  the  ap-
plicant established  her  eligibility  to  enter  the
country  as  a  nonquota  immigrant.

The  Department's  decision  assumed  that
prior  to  obtaining  her  visa  to  enter  the  United
States,  Marina  Oswald  would  provide  some
reasonable  assurance  that  she  was  not  likely
to  become  a  public  charge  after  she  had  ar-
rived there.  The  Department  later  encountered
some  difficulty  in  deciding  that  she  had  met  this
requirement.  She  knew  no  one  in  the  United
States  other  than  the  members  of  her  husband's
family,  and  they  lacked  the  means  to  furnish
any  substantial  financial  guarantees.  After  con-
siderable correspondence  on  the  matter  with
Oswald  and  with  the  Department,  the  Embassy
decided  to  accept  Oswald's  own  aflSdavit  to
support  his  wife  as  sufficient  assurance  that  she
would  not  become  a  public  charge.  The  Em-
bassy's reasons  were  set  forth  in  a  memoran-
dum dated  March  16,  1962:


It  appears  that  *  *  *  [Oswald]  can  find  no
one  in  the  United  States  who  is  able  and
willing  to  execute  an  affidavit  of  support  for
his  wife.  Furthermore,  Oswald  has  been  able
to  obtain  no  concrete  offer  of  employment  in
the  United  States.  On  the  other  hand,  he  is
trained  in  a  trade  which  should  make  him
readily  employable  and  he  and  his  family
will  be  able  to  live  with  his  mother  in  Texas
until  he  has  found  work  and  become  other-
wise settled.  Taking  into  consideration  the
latter  factors,  Oswald's  legal  obligation  to
support  his  wife,  and  the  unusual  circum-
stances of  the  case  which  make  it  difficult
for  Oswald  to  provide  the  usual  financial
evidence,  the  responsible  consular  officer
*  *  *  [is]  willing  to  accept  Oswald's  unsub-
stantiated affidavit  as  sufficient  to  overcome
the  public  charge  provisions  of  the  law.

The  necessity  of  relying  solely  upon  Oswald's
own  affidavit,  however,  was  eliminated  some-
what later  when  the  Department  received  an
affidavit  of  support  from  the  employer  of  Os-
wald's mother  in  Vernon,  Tex.

By  law  the  Attorney  General  must  also  pass
upon  an  applicant's  eligibiUty,  and  this  respon-
sibifity  has  been  delegated  to  the  District  Direc-
tors of  the  Immigration  and  Naturalization
Service.  The  machinery  to  get  approval  of  the
Immigration  and  NaturaUzation  Service  for
Marina  Oswald's  admission  to  the  United  States
was  set  in  motion  on  October  6,  1961.  On  that
date  the  Visa  Office  of  the  Department  of  State
sent  a  letter  to  the  District  Director  of  the
Immigration  and  Naturalization  Service  in
Dallas,  Tex.,  requesting  the  Service  to  take  ac-
tion on  her  immigrant  visa.  The  letter  trans-
mitted her  marriage  certificate,  a  check  for  $10
from  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  and  a  "Petition  to
Classify  Status  of  Afien  For  Issuance  of  Immi-
grant Visa."  The  petition  was  signed  by  Oswald
and  was  on  behalf  of  Marina,  asking  that  she
be  classified  in  "the  status  of  the  alien  bene-
ficiary for  issuance  of  an  immigrant  visa  as
*  *  *  the  spouse  of  the  United  States  citizen."
The  letter  from  the  Visa  Office  stated:

Mrs.  Oswald  has  been  the  object  of  an  in-
vestigation by  the  Department  and  has  been
found,  in  the  Department's  opinion,  not  in-
eligible to  secure  a  visa.

On  the  basis  of  this  communication,  the  Im-
migration and  Naturalization  Service  at  its
Dallas,  Tex.,  office  instituted  a  field  investiga-
tion on  Lee  Harvey  Oswald.  Routine  checks
with  the  Federal  security  agencies  and  with
local  law  enforcement  authorities  turned  up  no
new  derogatory  information,  and  no  evidence
was  uncovered  that  Oswald  was  ever  a  member
of  the  Communist  Party  or  other  subversive
groups.  A  record  check  was  made  in  New
Orleans,  La.,  and  a  birth  certificate  was  foimd


338


for  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  proving  that  he  was
an  American  citizen  by  birth.  On  October  17,
1961,  an  investigator  from  the  Dallas  office
interviewed  Oswald's  brother,  Robert,  who  ex-
pressed the  view  that  Lee  was  just  a  "mixed
up  kid"  who  had  emigrated  to  Russia  because
he  had  become  embittered,  possibly  over  some-
thing that  had  happened  while  he  was  in  the
Marine  Corps.

On  January  25,  1962,  the  results  of  the  field
investigation  in  Dallas  were  consolidated  in  a
report  which,  with  a  covering  memorandum,
was  sent  to  the  District  Director  of  the  Service
in  San  Antonio  the  next  day.  The  accompany-
ing memorandum  noted  that  the  immigrant  in-
spector who  processed  the  case  had  endorsed  it
"approved,"  but  the  author  of  the  memoran-
dum overruled  the  decision  of  the  inspector  on
the  grounds  that  the  sanctions  under  section
243(g)  should  not  be  waived.  The  reasons  for
denying  the  waiver  were  stated  as  follows:

01  [Operations  Instructions]  205.3,  as  you
know,  provides  that  the  District  Director
may  waive  sanctions  in  an  individual  meri-
torious case  for  a  beneficiary  of  a  petition
filed  by  a  reputable  relative  where  no  sub-
stantial derogatory  security  information  is
developed.  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  both  of
these  restrictions  are  present  in  this  case.

On  January  30,  1962,  the  District  Director  at
San  Antonio  affirmed  the  decision  of  the  Dallas
office,  including  the  decision  that  the  sanctions
imposed  under  section  243(g)  not  be  waived.
He  concluded  that  Oswald's  recent  statements
to  the  American  Embassy  in  Moscow  to  the
effect  that  he  had  learned  from  his  experiences
in  Russia  were  not  sufficient  to  relieve  the
doubts  which  were  raised  regarding  his  loyalty
to  the  United  States  by  the  arrogant,  anti-
American  statements  he  made  when  he  entered
Russia  in  1959.

San  Antonio  forwarded  its  decision  to  Wash-
ington in  a  letter  dated  January  31,  1962,  in
which  Marina  Oswald's  petition  and  all  the
aforementioned  memoranda  and  reports  were
included.  However,  because  Washington  had
previously  indicated  its  impatience  at  not  yet
having  received  anything  on  the  Oswald  case,
the  San  Antonio  office  also  telegraphed  its  deci-
sion to  Washington  about  a  week  later,  the
telegram  presumably  being  received  by  Wash-
ington before  the  letter  of  January  31.  The
Washington  copy  of  this  telegram  has  a  hand-
written note  on  the  lower  portion  which  indi-
cates that  on  February  12  an  officer  in  the  Visa
Office  of  the  State  Department  informed  the
Immigration  and  Naturalization  Service  by  tele-
phone: "Political  desk  of  opinion,  we're  better
off  with  subject  in  U.S.  than  in  Russia."

Nonetheless,  the  Washington  office  of  the
Service  concurred  in  the  field  decision  that  the
provisions  of  section  243(g) should  not  be


waived.  However,  the  Washington  office  pointed
out  that  the  correct  disposition  should  be  not
to  deny  the  visa  petition  as  the  field  offices  had
proposed,  but  to  grant  the  petition  and  indorse
it  to  read,  "Waiver  of  sanctions  imposed  under
section  243(g)  of  the  Act  is  not  authorized."

On  February  28,  1962,  the  Dallas  office  of
the  Immigration  and  Naturalization  Service
notified  the  Department  of  State  in  Washington
and  the  American  Embassy  in  Moscow  of  this
disposition.  The  communication  from  the  Dallas
office  noted  that  Oswald  "has  been  notified  at
his  Minsk,  Russia,  address  of  the  approval  of
the  petition  in  his  wife's  behalf."  Oswald  later
told  the  Embassy  that  he  had  received  the
notice  on  March  15.  On  March  9,  1962,  the
Department  of  State  also  notified  the  Embassy
in  Moscow  that  Oswald's  wife  was  entitled  to
nonquota  status  but  that  the  Immigration  and
Naturalization  Service  would  not  waive  sec-
tion 243(g)  of  the  Act.  The  Embassy  was  told
to  inform  Oswald  of  this  fact  if  he  asked  about
it.  The  memorandum  indicated  that  the  Em-
bassy might  suggest  that  Marina  could  proceed
to  some  other  country  to  file  her  visa  applica-
tion and  thus  avoid  the  sanction.

The  Moscow  Embassy  on  March  16,  1962,
asked  the  Embassy  at  Brussels  if  Mrs.  Oswald
could  obtain  her  visa  in  Brussels.  The  Brussels
Embassy  replied  affirmatively  and  said  a  visa
could  be  issued  to  Marina  within  2  or  3  days
of  her  arrival.  The  Marina  Oswald  file  accord-
ingly was  sent  to  the  Embassy  at  Brussels.

The  plan  to  obtain  the  visa  in  Belgium  was
rendered  unnecessary,  however,  when  the  Im-
migration and  Naturalization  Service  reversed
its  position  regarding  the  waiver  of  section
243(g).  On  March  16,  the  Soviet  desk  at  the
Department  of  State  took  initial  action  to  at-
tempt to  secure  such  a  change  by  sending  a
memorandum  to  the  Visa  Office  within  the  De-
partment, urging  that  the  Immigration  and
Naturalization  Service  be  asked  to  reconsider
its  decision.  According  to  this  memorandum:

SOV  believes  it  is  in  the  interest  of  the
U.S.  to  get  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  and  his
family  out  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  on  their
way  to  this  country  as  soon  as  possible.  An
unstable  character,  whose  actions  are  entirely
unpredictable,  Oswald  may  well  refuse  to
leave  the  USSR  or  subsequently  attempt  to
return  there  if  we  should  make  it  impossible
for  him  to  be  accompanied  from  Moscow  by
his  wife  and  child.

Such  action  on  our  part  also  would  per-
mit the  Soviet  Government  to  argue  that,
although  it  had  issued  an  exit  visa  to  Mrs.
Oswald  to  prevent  the  separation  of  a  family,
the  United  States  Government  had  imposed
a  forced  separation  by  refusing  to  issue  her
a  visa.  Obviously,  this  would  weaken  our
Embassy's  position  in  encouraging  positive


339


Soviet  action  in  other  cases  involving  Soviet
citizen  relatives  of  U.S.  citizens.

Soon  thereafter,  however,  the  Department  of
State  notified  its  Moscow  Embassy  that  the  de-
cision was  under  review  and  instructed  it  to
withhold  action  pending  the  outcome  of  the
reconsideration.

The  Visa  Office  first  contacted  the  Washing-
ton office  of  the  Immigration  and  Naturali-
zation Service  informally,  and  was  advised,
according  to  a  contemporaneous  notation:

*  *  *  that  case  had  been  carefully  con-
sidered and  decision  made  at  Assistant  or
Deputy  Associate  Commissioner  level.  There-
fore, although  not  wishing  to  comment  on
likelihood  of  reversal,  [INS  officer]  felt  that
any  letter  requesting  a  review  of  the  case
should  come  from  the  Director  or  Acting
Administrator.

On  March  27,  1962,  such  a  letter  was  written
from  an  acting  administrator  in  the  Depart-
ment of  State  to  the  Commissioner  of  Immigra-
tion and  Naturalization.  The  letter  read  in  part:

I  appreciate  the  difficulty  this  case  presents
for  your  Service,  because  of  Mr.  Oswald's
background,  and  the  fact  that  granting  a
waiver  of  the  sanction  makes  it  appear  that
this  Government  is  assisting  a  person  who  is
not  altogether  entitled  to  such  assistance.
However,  if  the  Embassy  at  Moscow  is  un-
able to  issue  Mrs.  Oswald  a  visa,  it  would
appear  that  she  and  indirectly  the  Oswalds'
newborn  child  are  being  punished  for  Mr.
Oswald's  earlier  indiscretions.  I  might  also
point  out  that  this  Government  has  advanced
Mr.  Oswald  a  loan  of  $500.00  for  repatria-
tion.

More  important,  however,  is  the  possi-
bility that  if  Mrs.  Oswald  is  not  issued  a
visa  by  the  Embassy,  the  Soviet  Government
will  be  in  a  position  to  claim  that  it  has  done
all  it  can  to  prevent  the  separation  of  the
family  by  issuing  Mrs.  Oswald  the  required
exit  permission,  but  that  this  Government  has
refused  to  issue  her  a  visa,  thus  preventing
her  from  accompanying  her  husband  and
child.  This  would  weaken  the  Embassy's  at-
tempts to  encourage  positive  action  by  the
Soviet  authorities  in  other  cases  involving
Soviet  relatives  of  United  States  citizens.

Because  of  these  considerations  and  be-
cause I  believe  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
the  United  States  to  have  Mr.  Oswald  depart
from  the  Soviet  Union  as  soon  as  possible,  I
request  that  the  section  243(g)  sanction  be
waived  in  Mrs.  Oswald's  case.

The  Immigration  and  Naturalization  Service
ultimately  reversed  its  original  position  and
granted  the  waiver  on  May  9,  1962.  The  letter


reversing  its  initial  decision  states  that  the  mat-
ter has  been  "carefully  reviewed  in  this  office"
and  that  "in  view  of  the  strong  representations"
made  in  the  letter  of  March  27,  the  sanctions
imposed  pursuant  to  section  243(g)  were
thereby  waived  in  behalf  of  Mrs.  Oswald.

Actually,  the  Office  of  Soviet  Affairs  had
informally  learned  on  May  8  that  the  May  9
letter  would  be  signed  by  the  Immigration  and
Naturalization  Service.  On  the  strength  of  the
assurance  that  a  written  reversal  would  be
forthcoming  immediately,  the  State  Department
quickly  telegraphed  the  Moscow  Embassy  re-
porting that  the  waiver  had  been  granted.
Marina  Oswald  completed  her  processing  when
she,  her  husband,  and  daughter  came  to  Mos-
cow in  May  1962  on  their  way  from  Minsk
to  the  United  States.

Legal  Justification  for  the  Decisions
Affecting  Marina  Oswald

Wife  of  a  citizen  of  the  United  States. —
Section  205  of  the  Immigration  and  Nationality
Act  of  1952  provides  for  the  admission  into
the  United  States  of  persons  married  to  Ameri-
can citizens.  Once  it  was  determined  that  Lee
Harvey  Oswald  was  bom  in  the  United  States
and  had  not  expatriated  himself,  his  American
citizenship  was  established.  Marina  Oswald  sub-
mitted a  marriage  certificate  to  show  that  she
was  his  wife.  This  requirement  was,  therefore,
satisfied.

Assurance  that  Marina  Oswald  would  not
become  a  public  charge. — Section  212(a)(15)
of  the  act  provides  that  aliens  will  not  be  ad-
mitted to  the  United  States  if,  in  the  opinion
of  the  responsible  Government  official,  they
"are  likely  at  any  time  to  become  public
charges."  The  pertinent  Department  of  State
regulations  provide  that  a  determination  to  ex-
clude an  alien  for  this  reason  must  be  "predi-
cated upon  circumstances  which  indicate  that
the  alien  will  probably  become  a  charge  upon
the  public  after  entry  into  the  United  States."

In  1962,  Oswald  was  22  years  old  and  in
good  health.  He  had  lived  in  the  United  States
for  17  years  before  joining  the  Marine  Corps
and  was,  therefore,  familiar  with  its  language
and  customs.  He  had  gained  job  experience  by
working  IVi  years  in  a  factory  which  produced
electronic  equipment.  Under  these  circum-
stances the  Department  was  not  unreasonable
in  concluding  dhiat  Oswald's  own  affidavit  that
he  would  support  his  wife  was  sufficient  assur-
ance that  she  was  not  likely  to  become  a  charge
upon  the  public  after  her  entry  into  the  United
States.  The  receipt  of  the  affidavit  from  Mar-
guerite Oswald's  employer  provided  a  possible
alternative  basis  for  reaching  this  decision,  but
since  a  favorable  ruling  had  already  been  made
on  the  basis  of  Oswald's  affidavit,  the  Embassy
had  no  reason  to  consider  the  sufficiency  of
the  second  affidavit.

Membership  in  a  Communist  organization. —


340


Under  section  212(a)  (28)  of  the  Immigration
and  Nationality  Act,  an  alien  will  not  be  ad-
mitted to  the  United  States  if  he  is  or  was  a
member  of,  or  affiliated  with,  a  Communist
organization  unless:

*  *  *  such  an  alien  establishes  to  the  satis-
faction of  the  consular  officer  when  applying
for  a  visa  and  the  consular  officer  finds  that
(i)  such  membership  or  application  is  or  was
involuntary,  or  is  or  was  solely  when  under
sixteen  years  of  age,  by  operation  of  law,  or
for  purposes  of  obtaining  employment,  food
rations,  or  other  essentials  of  living  and
where  necessary  for  such  purposes  *  *  *"

At  the  time  Marina  Oswald  applied  for  a
visa  she  was  a  member  of  the  Soviet  Trade
Union  for  Medical  Workers.  According  to  the
Department  of  State,  the

*  *  *  long-standing  interpretation  [of  the
statute]  concurred  in  by  the  State  and  Justice
Departments  [is]  that  membership  in  a  pro-
fessional organization  or  trade  union  behind
the  Iron  Curtain  is  considered  involuntary
unless  the  membership  is  accompanied  by
some  indication  of  voluntariness,  such  as  ac-
tive participation  in  the  organization's  activi-
ties or  holding  an  office  in  the  organization.

Since  there  was  no  evidence  that  Marina  Os-
wald actively  participated  in  the  union's  activi-
ties or  held  an  office  in  the  organization,  her
union  membership  was  properly  held  not  to
bar  her  admission  to  this  country.

Although  Marina  Oswald  declared  that  she
was  not  a  member  of  the  Komsomol  or  any
other  Communist  organization,  she  was  in  fact
a  member  of  the  Komsomol,  the  Communist
youth  organization.  If  this  fact  had  been  known
to  the  State  Department,  Marina  Oswald  would
not  necessarily  have  been  denied  a  visa,  al-
though a  careful  investigation  into  the  nature
of  the  membership  would  have  been  required.
However,  had  her  membership  in  the  Komso-
mol become  known  to  the  Department  after
her  denial  of  such  membership,  it  is  possible
that  she  would  have  been  excluded  from  the
United  States  on  the  ground  of  having  wiUfuUy
misrepresented  a  material  fact.

Judicial  decisions  are  not  in  agreement  as  to
what  constitutes  a  "material  fact"  such  that  its
intentional  misrepresentation  warrants  exclu-
sion of  the  alien.  Some  cases  indicate  that  a
misrepresentation  in  an  application  for  a  visa
involves  a  material  fact  even  if  the  alien  would
not  definitely  have  been  excluded  on  the  true
facts;  others  hold  that  a  misstatement  is  ma-
terial only  Lf  it  referred  to  such  facts  as  would
have  justified  refusing  the  visa  had  they  been
disclosed.  The  Visa  Office  of  the  Department  of
State  has  announced  that  it  applies  a  "rule  of
probability"  under  which  a  misstatement  will


be  deemed  material  only  if  it  concealed  facts
which  probably  would  have  resulted  in  a  de-
nial of  a  visa.

Waiver  of  the  provisions  of  section  243(g). —
Section  243(g)  of  the  Immigration  and  Na-
tionality Act  of  1952,  by  its  terms,  prevented
issuance  of  a  visa  to  Marina  Oswald  by  the
Moscow  Embassy.  The  section  provides  that
upon  notification  of  the  Secretary  of  State  by
the  Attorney  General  that  a  country  has  re-
fused or  unduly  delayed  the  acceptance  of  a
deportable  alien  from  the  United  States  who  is
a  subject  or  was  a  resident  of  that  country,
consular  officers  in  such  country  are  not  to
issue  visas  to  citizens  of  the  country.  The  sec-
tion had  been  invoked  against  Russia  on
May  26,  1953.  Nonetheless,  although  section
243(g)  does  not  contain  an  express  provision
for  waiver,  the  Justice  Department  has  con-
cluded that  the  Attorney  General  possesses
such  waiver  powers.  Pursuant  to  this  decision,
the  Department  has  granted  waivers  in  over
600  cases  from  the  Soviet  Union  since  1953.
The  waiver  procedures  followed  in  1962  were
prescribed  by  the  Immigration  and  Naturaliza-
tion Service.  The  relevant  provision  reads:

Before  adjudicating  a  petition  for  an  eligi-
ble beneficiary  residing  in  the  USSR,  Czech-
oslovakia or  Hungary,  against  which  sanc-
tions have  been  imposed,  the  district  director
shall  obtain  a  report  of  investigation  regard-
ing the  petitioner  which  shall  include  an
affiliation  of  a  subversive  nature  disclosed  by
a  neighborhood  investigation,  local  agency
records  and  responses  to  Form  G-135a.  *  *  *
If  no  substantial  derogatory  security  infor-
mation is  developed,  the  district  director  may
waive  the  sanctions  in  an  individual  merito-
rious case  for  a  beneficiary  of  a  petition  filed
by  a  reputable  relative  to  accord  statm  under
Section  101(a) (27) (A)  or  Section  203(a)
(2),  (3)  or  (4).  *  *  *  If  substantial  adverse
security  information  relating  to  the  petitioner
is  developed,  the  visa  petition  shall  be  proc-
essed on  its  merits  and  certified  to  the  re-
gional conmiissioner  for  determination
whether  the  sanctions  should  be  waived.  The
assistant  commissioner  shall  endorse  the  pe-
tition to  show  whether  the  Waiver  is  granted
or  denied,  and  forward  it  and  notify  the  ap-
propriate field  office  of  the  action  taken.
*  *  «

State  Department  regulations  are  much  less  ex-
plicit. The  State  Department's  visa  instructions
for  the  guidance  of  consular  officers  provide,
"The  sanctions  will  be  waived  only  in  individ-
ual meritorious  cases  in  behalf  of  a  beneficiary
of  a  petition  filed  by  a  reputable  relative  pur-
suant to  [sections]  of  the  act."

Because  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  signed  the  peti-
tion on  Marina's  behalf,  his  character  was  rele-
vant to  whether  the  sanctions  of  section  243(g)
could  be  waived  for  her.  The  file  on  Lee  Harvey


341


Oswald  which  was  maintained  by  the  Depart-
ment of  State  and  made  available  to  the  De-
partment of  Justice  for  purposes  of  passing  on
his  wife's  application  contained  the  facts  relat-
ing to  Oswald's  attempted  expatriation.  How-
ever, despite  the  derogatory  material  in  the
Oswald  file,  the  Immigration  and  Naturalization
Service  regulations  did  not  require  automatic
denial  of  the  waiver;  they  provided  only  that  if
adverse  security  information  were  developed,
"the  visa  petition  shall  be  processed  on  its
merits  and  certified  to  the  regional  commis-
sioner for  determination  whether  the  sanctions
should  be  waived."  This  procedure  was  fol-
lowed in  Marina's  case  and  the  factors  con-
sidered in  reaching  the  decision  do  not  appear
to  be  inappropriate.  The  State  Department  suc-
cessfully urged  that  the  original  decision  of  the
Immigration  and  Naturalization  Service  be  re-
versed because  this  would  be  in  the  best  inter-
ests of  future  United  States  dealings  with  the
Soviet  Union  on  behalf  of  American  citizens,
and  because  it  seemed  unfair  to  punish  Lee
Harvey  Oswald's  wife  and  baby  for  his  own
earlier  errors.  Prevention  of  the  separation  of
families  is  among  the  most  common  reasons
underlying  the  frequent  waivers  of  section
243(g).


OSWALD'S  LETTER  TO  SENATOR
TOWER

Sometime  shortly  before  January  26,  1962,
an  undated  letter  from  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was
received  in  the  office  of  the  U.S.  Senator  from
Texas,  John  G.  Tower.  The  letter  reads  as
follows :

My  name  is  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  22,  of
Fort  Worth  up  till  October  1959,  when  I
came  to  the  Soviet  Union  for  a  residenaul
stay.  I  took  a  residenual  document  for  a  non-
Soviet  person  living  for  a  time  in  the  USSR.
The  American  Embassy  in  Moscow  is  famil-
ier  with  my  case

Since  July  20th  1960,  I  have  unsuccess-
fully applied  for  a  Soviet  Exit  Visa  to  leave
this  country,  the  Soviets  refuse  to  permit  me
and  my  Soviet  wife,  (who  applied  at  the
U.S.  Embassy  Moscow,  July  8,  1960  for  im-
migration status  to  the  U.S.A.)  to  leave  the
Soviet  Union.  I  am  a  citizen  of  the  United
States  of  America  (passport  No.  1733242,
1959)  and  I  bessech  you.  Senator  Tower,  to
rise  the  question  of  holding  by  the  Soviet
Union  of  a  citizen  of  the  U.S.,  against  his
will  and  expressed  desires.

The  letter  was  read  in  Senator  Tower's  office
by  a  caseworker  on  his  staff.  According  to  the
caseworker  and  the  Senator's  press  secretary,
the  letter  was  forwarded  as  a  matter  of  routine


on  January  26  to  the  Assistant  Secretary  for
Congressional  Relations,  Department  of  State.
The  letter  was  forwarded  with  a  cover  letter,
machine  signed  by  the  Senator,  stating  that  he
did  "not  know  Oswald,  or  any  of  the  facts  con-
cerning his  reasons  for  visiting  the  Soviet
Union;  nor  what  action,  if  any,  this  Govern-
ment can  or  should  take  on  his  behalf."  The
cover  letter  pointed  out  that  Oswald's  inquiry
should  have  gone  to  the  executive  branch  of
the  Government  and  that  for  this  reason  the
Senator  was  forwarding  it  "for  whatever  action
the  Department  may  consider  appropriate."  On
February  1  an  officer  at  the  Department  of
State  telephoned  the  Senator's  office  and  spoke
briefly  with  the  caseworker  on  the  Oswald  case.
She  made  a  memorandum  of  the  call  which
notes,  "Senator  should  not  become  involved  in
such  case — therefore  State  will  report  to  us  the
course  which  they  follow  regarding  Lee  Harvey
Oswalt  [sic]."  About  a  week  later  the  Depart-
ment of  State  forwarded  to  Senator  Tower
copies  of  some  of  the  correspondence  which
the  Department  had  had  with  Oswald  and  in-
formed the  Senator  that  if  he  wished  to  be  kept
informed  on  further  developments  regarding
Oswald  he  could  contact  the  Department  of
State.  Neither  the  Senator  nor  any  member  of
his  staff  contacted  the  Department  again  nor
did  they  take  any  other  action  in  respect  to  the
matter.


THE  LOAN  FROM  THE  STATE
DEPARTMENT

In  a  letter  dated  January  5,  1962,  Oswald
said  that  he  would  like  to  make  arrangements
for  a  loan  from  the  Embassy  or  some  private
organization  for  part  of  the  airplane  fares.  The
Embassy  on  February  6,  1962,  replied  that  he
would  have  to  supply  certain  personal  and
financial  data.  The  letter  also  said  that  after
repatriation  he  would  not  be  furnished  a  pass-
port for  travel  abroad  until  he  had  repaid  the
money.

Between  February  6,  1962,  and  May  1,  1962,
Oswald  attempted  to  secure  a  loan  from  the
Red  Cross  and  the  International  Rescue  Com-
mittee in  the  United  States.  The  State  Depart-
ment on  February  1  wrote  Oswald's  mother  a
letter  asking  whether  she  could  advance  the
money.  Oswald  later  wrote  both  his  mother  and
the  Department  advising  each  that  his  mother
should  not  be  bothered  in  reference  to  the
loan.  Ultimately,  after  an  exchange  of  commu-
nications between  the  Embassy  and  Washing-
ton, the  Department  approved  a  loan  to  Oswald
for  passage  to  New  York  only,  directing  the
Embassy  to  "Keep  cost  minimum."  On  June  1
Oswald  signed  a  promissory  note  for  $435.71.

Statutory  authority  for  making  such  a  loan
was  conferred  by  title  5,  section  170(a),  of  the


342


U.S.  Code,  which  authorizes  the  Secretary
of  State  to  "make  expenditures,  from  such
amounts  as  may  be  specifically  appropriated
therefor,  for  unforeseen  emergencies  arising  in
the  diplomatic  and  consular  service."  Since
1947,  the  Department  of  State's  annual  appro-
priation act  has  included  a  sum  for  expenses
necessary  "to  enable  the  Secretary  of  State  to
meet  unforeseen  emergencies  arising  in  the
Diplomatic  and  Consular  Service.  *  *  *"  In
recent  years,  the  accompanying  reports  sub-
mitted by  the  Appropriations  Committee  of  the
House  of  Representatives  have  stated,  "These
funds  are  used  for  relief  and  repatriation  loans
to  the  U.S.  citizens  abroad  and  for  other  emer-
gencies of  the  Department."  Out  of  the  amount
appropriated  to  meet  unforeseen  emergencies
arising  in  the  Diplomatic  and  Consular  Service,
the  Secretary  of  State  has  annually  allotted  ap-
proximately $100,000  to  meet  the  expenses  of
indigent  U.S.  nationals,  including  those  in  the
Soviet  Union,  who  request  repatriation  loans.
From  1959  to  1963,  2,343  such  loans  were
granted.

Section  423.2-1  of  the  Department's  regula-
tions provides  that  repatriation  loans  may  be
granted  only  to  destitute  U.S.  nationals:

a..  Who  are  in  complete  and  unquestioned
possession  of  their  citizenship  rights;

b.  Who  are  entitled  to  receive  United
States  passports;

c.  Whose  loyalty  to  the  United  States
Government  is  beyond  question,  or  to  whom
the  provisions  of  Section  423. 1-2 (b)  apply.

Oswald  undoubtedly  satisfied  the  requirements
of  paragraphs  (a)  and  (b),  since  he  was  de-
termined to  have  been  a  U.S.  citizen  at  the  time
the  loan  was  granted  and  he  had  been  issued  a
passport  to  return  to  the  United  States.  There
is  a  serious  question  whether  he  could  have
qualified  under  the  first  clause  of  paragraph  (c).
The  Commission  is  of  the  opinion  that  in  its
application  of  this  clause  the  Department
should  exercise  great  care  in  determining
whether  an  applicant's  loyalty  to  the  U.S.  Gov-
ernment is  beyond  question,  particularly  in  the
case  of  a  defector  like  Oswald  who  has  ex-
pressed hostility  and  disloyalty  to  our  govern-
ment and  manifested  a  desire  to  renounce  his
citizenship.  The  Department  chose  instead  to
exercise  its  judgment  under  the  second  clause
of  paragraph  (c),  which  refers  to  section
423.1-2(b).  This  section  provides  that  loans  to
destitute  nationals  are  authorized  when:

b.  The  United  States  national  is  in  or  the
cause  of  a  situation  which  is  damaging  to
the  prestige  of  the  United  States  Government
or  which  constitutes  a  compelling  reason  for
extending  assistance  to  effect  his  return.

The  Department  decided  that  the  provisions  of
section  (b)  were  applicable  to  Oswald  because


his  "unstable  character  and  prior  criticism  of
the  United  States"  would  make  his  continued
presence  in  the  Soviet  Union  damaging  to  the
prestige  of  the  United  States.  In  acting  under
this  section,  the  Department  was  acting  within
its  competence  and  the  law.  As  required  by
another  section  of  the  regulations,  the  Depart-
ment sought  to  obtain  funds  for  the  Oswalds'
repatriation  from  private  sources — his  mother
and  the  International  Rescue  Committee — be-
fore using  Government  funds.

Regulations  further  provide  that  repatriation
loans  are  authorized  for  the  alien,  wife,  and
children  of  the  U.S.  national  receiving  a  re-
patriation loan  in  order  to  avoid  the  division
of  families.  However,  loans  are  limited.

To  the  minimum  amount  required  to  cover
transportation  and  subsistence  while  enroute
to  the  nearest  continental  United  States  port.
*  *  *  When  necessary,  loans  may  include:
expenses  incident  to  embarkation,  such  as
fees  for  documentation  and  minimum  sub-
sistence from  the  date  of  application  for  a
loan  to  the  date  of  departure  by  the  first
available  ship.  *  *  *  The  cost  of  transporta-
tion shall  be  limited  to  third-class  passage  by
ship.

Oswald's  loan  was  sufficient  to  cover  no  more
than  the  least  expensive  transportation  from
Moscow  to  New  York.  His  passport  was
stamped  as  valid  only  for  return  to  the  United
States.  Oswald  completed  all  necessary  forms
and  affidavits  to  obtain  the  loan.

According  to  its  own  procedures  the  Depart-
ment of  State  should  have  prepared  a  lookout
card  for  Oswald  in  June  1962  when  he  received
the  proceeds  of  the  loan.  The  promissory  note
which  he  signed  contained  a  provision  stating,

I  further  imderstand  and  agree  that  after
my  repatriation  I  will  not  be  furnished  a
passport  for  travel  abroad  imtil  my  obliga-
tion to  reimburse  the  Treasurer  of  the  United
States  is  liquidated.

However,  a  lookout  card  was  never  in  fact  pre-
pared. With  respect  to  this  failure  the  State
Department  has  informed  the  Commission  as
follows:

On  receipt  of  notice  of  the  loan  from  the
Embassy  in  Moscow,  the  Department's  pro-
cedures provided  that  Miss  Leola  B.  Burk-
head  of  the  Revenues  and  Receipts  Branch
of  the  Office  of  Finance  should  have  notified
the  Clearance  Section  in  the  Passport  Office
of  Oswald's  name,  date,  and  place  of  birth.
If  the  Passport  Office  received  only  the  name
and  not  the  date  and  place  of  birth  of  a
borrower,  it  would  not  have  prepared  a
lookout  card  under  its  established  procedures
because  of  lack  of  positive  identification.
(Among  the  Passport  Office's  file  of  millions


343


of  passport  applicants,  there  are,  of  course,
many  thousands  of  identical  names.)  Mr.
Richmond  C.  Reeley  was  the  Chief  of  the
Revenues  and  Receipts  Branch  of  the  OflBce
of  Finance  and  Mr.  Alexander  W.  Maxwell
was  Chief  of  the  Clearance  Section.  If  the
notice  was  received  in  the  Clearance  Section
it  would  have  been  delivered  to  the  Carding
Desk  for  preparation  of  a  lookout  card  on
Oswald.  It  appears,  however,  that  such  a
lookout  card  was  not  prepared.  It  may  have
been  that  the  Finance  Office  did  not  notify
the  Clearance  Section  of  Oswald's  loan.  One
reason  for  this  might  have  been  the  Finance
Office's  lack  of  information  concerning  Os-
wald's date  and  place  of  birth.  On  the  other
hand,  the  Finance  Office  may  have  notified
the  Clearance  Section  of  Oswald's  name
only,  in  which  case  this  Section  would  not
have  prepared  a  lookout  card  under  its  pro-
cedures. Since  Oswald  began  repaying  the
loan  in  installments  immediately  after  his
return  to  the  United  States,  it  is  also  possible
that  the  Office  of  Finance  decided  that  it  was
unnecessary  to  pursue  the  matter  further.  In
any  event,  Oswald's  loan  was  repaid  in  full
on  January  29,  1963,  five  months  prior  to
his  application  for  a  new  passport.


OSWALD'S  RETURN  TO  THE
UNITED  STATES  AND
REPAYMENT  OF  HIS  LOAN

On  June  1,  1962,  the  same  day  that  Oswald
received  his  loan  from  the  State  Department,
he  and  his  family  left  Moscow  by  train  destined
for  Rotterdam,  The  Netherlands.  They  boarded
the  SS  Maasdam  at  Rotterdam  on  June  4  and
arrived  in  New  York  on  June  13,  1962.  The
Embassy  sent  word  of  the  Oswalds'  departure
to  the  Department  of  State  in  Washington  on
May  31.  Consistent  with  its  prior  practice  of
keeping  the  Federal  security  agencies  informed
of  Oswald's  activity,  the  Department  notified
the  FBI.

Frederick  J.  Wiedersheim,  an  officer  of  the
Immigration  and  Naturalization  Service  in  New
York,  interviewed  the  Oswalds  upon  their  entry
into  the  United  States  at  Hoboken,  N.J.,  on
June  13,  1962,  but  made  no  written  report.
Mr.  Wiedersheim  recalled  that  he  asked  the  Os-
walds various  questions  which  would  determine
the  eligibility  of  both  Oswald  and  Marina  to
enter  the  United  States.  The  questions  included
whether  Oswald  had  expatriated  himself  and
whether  Marina  belonged  to  any  Communist
organization  which  would  bar  her  entry.  These
questions  were  answered  in  ways  which  did  not
appear  to  raise  any  problems  and  therefore  the
Oswalds  were  admitted.

After  his  reentry,  Oswald  repaid  his  loan
without  having  to  be  reminded  by  the  Depart-
ment to  do  so.  The  early  payments  were  very
small  because  he  first  repaid  the  approximately


$200  he  had  borrowed  from  his  brother  Robert
to  apply  against  the  expenses  of  his  travel  from
New  York  to  Fort  Worth,  Tex.  The  schedule
of  payments  is  as  follows:

Aug.  13,  1962 $10.00

Sept.  5,  1962 9.71

Oct.  10,  1962 10.00

Nov.  19,  1962 10.00

Dec.  11,  1962 190.00

Jan.  9,  1963 100.00

Jan.  29,  1963 106.00

Total 435.71


ISSUANCE  OF  A  PASSPORT
IN  JUNE  1963

On  June  24,  1963,  Oswald  applied  for  a  U.S.
passport  at  the  Passport  Office  in  New  Orleans,
La.  He  said  he  was  planning  to  visit  England,
France,  Holland,  U.S.S.R.,  Fmland,  Italy,  and
Poland,  and  that  he  intended  to  leave  the  coun-
try sometime  during  November  or  December
1963  by  ship  from  New  Orleans.  He  stated
further  that  he  was  married  to  a  person  bom
in  Russia  who  was  not  an  American  citizen.
For  occupation,  the  word  "Photographer"  was
inserted  on  the  application.

On  the  same  day  a  teletype  was  sent  to
Washington  containing  the  names  of  25  of  the
persons  who  applied  for  passports  on  that  date
in  New  Orleans,  Oswald's  name  among  them.
On  the  right  side  of  the  Washington  Passport
Office  copy  of  the  teletype  message,  approxi-
mately parallel  to  his  name,  are  the  letters,
"NO,"  written  in  red  pencil.  Oswald  was  issued
a  passport  on  June  25,  1963.

Since  there  was  no  lookout  card  on  Oswald,
the  passport  was  processed  routinely.  Twenty-
four  hours  is  the  usual  time  for  routinely
granted  passports  to  be  issued.  The  handwritten
notation,  "NO,"  which  appeared  beside  Os-
wald's name  on  the  list  of  applicants  from
New  Orleans,  is  a  symbol  for  the  New  Orleans
Passport  Office  that  is  routinely  placed  on  in-
coming teletype  messages  by  anyone  of  a  group
of  persons  in  the  teletype  section  of  the  Pass-
port Office.  No  one  looked  at  Oswald's  file  pre-
viously established  with  the  Department.  The
Department,  however,  has  informed  the  Com-
mission that  at  the  time  the  passport  was  issued
there  was  no  information  in  its  passport  or
security  files  which  would  have  permitted  it  to
deny  a  passport  to  Oswald.  No  lookout  card
should  have  been  in  the  file  based  upon  the
Moscow  Embassy's  memorandum  of  March  28,
1960,  which  drew  attention  to  Oswald's  inten-
tion to  expatriate  himself,  because  the  subse-
quent determination  that  Oswald  had  not  ex-
patriated himself  would  remove  expatriation  as
a  possible  ground  for  denying  him  a  passport.
And  by  January  29,  1963,  the  repatriation  loan
had  been  repaid,  so  a  lookout  card  should  not
have  been  in  the  file  on  that  basis.


344


Oswald  was  entitled  to  receive  a  passport  in
1963  unless  he  came  within  one  of  the  two  sta-
tutory provisions  authorizing  the  Secretary  of
State  to  refuse  to  issue  it.  Section  6  of  the
Subversive  Activities  Control  Act  of  1950,
which  has  recently  been  declared  unconstitu-
tional, then  provided:

*  *  *  it  shall  be  unlawful  for  any  member  of
[an  organization  required  to  register],  with
knowledge  or  notice  that  such  organization
is  so  registered  and  that  such  order  has  be-
come final — (1)  to  make  application  for
passport,  or  the  renewal  of  a  passport,  to  be
issued  or  renewed  by  or  under  the  authority
of  the  United  States;  or  (2)  to  use  or  attempt
to  use  any  such  passport.

Pursuant  to  section  6,  the  State  Department
promulgated  a  regulation  which  denied  pass-
ports to

*  *  *  any  individual  who  the  issuing  officer
knows  or  has  reason  to  believe  is  a  member
of  a  Communist  Organization  registered  or
required  to  be  registered  under  Section  7  of
the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Act  of
1950  as  amended.

Since  there  is  no  evidence  that  Lee  Harvey
Oswald  was  a  member  of  the  American  Com-
munist Party  or  any  other  organization  which
had  been  required  to  register  under  section  7
of  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Act,  a  pass-
port could  not  have  been  denied  him  under
section  6.

Section  215  of  the  Immigration  and  Nation-
ality Act  provides  that,  while  a  Presidential
proclamation  of  national  emergency  is  in  force,

*  *  *  it  shall,  except  as  otherwise  provided
by  the  President,  *  *  *  be  unlawful  for  any
citizen  of  the  United  States  to  depart  from
or  enter  *  *  *  the  United  States  unless  he
bears  a  valid  passport.

Because  a  proclamation  of  national  emergency
issued  by  President  Truman  during  the  Korean
war  had  not  been  revoked  by  1963,  the  Govern-
ment has  taken  the  position  that  the  statute
remains  in  force.  Pursuant  to  section  215,  the
State  Department  has  issued  regulations  setting
forth  the  circumstances  under  which  it  will
refuse  a  passport:

In  order  to  promote  and  safeguard  the
interests  of  the  United  States,  passport  facili-
ties, except  for  direct  and  immediate  return
to  the  United  States,  shall  be  refused  to  a
person  when  it  appears  to  the  satisfaction  of
the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  person's  ac-
tivity abroad  would:  (a)  violate  the  laws  of
the  United  States;  (b)  be  prejudicial  to  the
orderly  conduct  of  foreign  relations;  or  (c)


otherwise  be  prejudicial  to  the  interests  of
the  United  States.

The  State  Department  takes  the  position  that
its  authority  under  this  regulation  is  severely
limited.  In  a  report  submitted  to  the  Commis-
sion, the  Department  concluded  that  "there
were  no  grounds  consonant  with  the  passport
regulations  to  take  adverse  passport  action
against  Oswald  prior  to  November  22,  1963."
Although  Oswald's  statement  in  1959  that  he
would  furnish  the  Russians  with  information
he  had  obtained  in  the  Marine  Corps  may  have
indicated  that  he  would  disclose  classified  infor-
mation if  he  possessed  any  such  information,
there  was  no  indication  in  1963  that  he  had
any  valuable  information.  Moreover,  Oswald's
1959  statement  had  been  brought  to  the  atten-
tion of  the  Department  of  the  Navy  and  the
FBI  and  neither  organization  had  initiated
criminal  proceedings.  The  Department  there-
fore had  no  basis  for  concluding  that  Oswald's
1959  statement  was  anything  more  than  rash
talk.  And  the  State  Department's  files  contained
no  other  information  which  might  reasonably
have  led  it  to  expect  that  Oswald  would  violate
the  laws  of  the  United  States  when  he  went
abroad.

The  most  likely  ground  for  denying  Oswald
a  passport  in  1963,  however,  was  provided  by
subsection  (c)  of  the  regulation  quoted  above,
which  requires  the  denial  of  a  passport  when
the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  the  appli-
cant's "activity  abroad  would  *  *  *  otherwise
be  prejudicial  to  the  interests  of  the  United
States."  In  1957  the  State  Department  de-
scribed to  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Com-
mittee one  category  of  persons  to  whom  it
denied  passports  under  this  provision:

Persons  whose  previous  conduct  abroad
has  been  such  as  to  bring  discredit  on  the
United  States  and  cause  difficulty  for  other
Americans  (gave  bad  checks,  left  unpaid
debts,  had  difficulties  with  police,  etc.).

In  light  of  the  adverse  publicity  caused  the
United  States  by  Oswald's  prior  defection  to  the
Soviet  Union,  he  could  have  been  considered  a
person  "whose  previous  conduct  abroad  had
been  such  as  to  bring  discredit  on  the  United
States."  Indeed,  the  State  Department  itself  had
previously  been  of  the  opinion  that  Oswald's
continued  presence  in  Russia  was  damaging  to
the  prestige  of  the  United  States  because  of  his
unstable  character  and  prior  criticisms  of  the
United  States.

However,  in  1958  the  Supreme  Court  had
decided  two  cases  which  restricted  the  Secre-
tary of  State's  authority  to  deny  passports.  In
Kent  v.  Dulles  and  Dayton  v.  Dulles,  the  Su-
preme Court  invalidated  a  State  Department
regulation  permitting  the  denial  of  passports
to  Communists  and  to  those  "who  are  going
abroad  to  engage  in  activities  which  will  ad-
vance the  Communist  movement  for  the  pur-


345


pose,  knowingly  and  willfully  of  advancing  that
movement,"  on  the  ground  that  the  regulation
exceeded  the  authority  Congress  had  granted
the  Secretary.  The  Kent  opinion  stressed  the
importance  to  be  attached  to  an  individual's
ability  to  travel  beyond  the  borders  of  the
United  States:

The  right  to  travel  is  a  part  of  the  "lib-
erty" of  which  the  citizen  cannot  be  deprived
without  due  process  of  law  under  the  Fifth
Amendment  *  *  *  Freedom  of  movement
across  frontiers  in  either  direction,  and  inside
frontiers  as  well,  was  a  part  of  our  heritage.
Travel  abroad,  like  travel  within  the  country,
may  be  necessary  for  a  livelihood.  It  may  be
as  close  to  the  heart  of  the  individual  as  the
choice  of  what  he  eats,  or  wears,  or  reads.
Freedom  of  movement  is  basic  in  our  scheme
of  values.

The  Kent  opinion  also  suggested  that  grounds
relating  to  citizenship  and  allegiance  to  illegal
conduct  might  be  the  only  two  upon  which  the
Department  could  validly  deny  a  passport
application.

The  Department,  though  publicly  declaring
that  these  decisions  had  little  effect  upon  its
broadly  worded  regulation,  in  practice  denied
passports  only  in  limited  situations.  In  1963  the
Department  denied  passports  only  to  those  who
violated  the  Department's  travel  restrictions,  to
fugitives  from  justice,  to  those  involved  in
using  passports  fraudulently,  and  to  those  en-
gaged in  illegal  activity  abroad  or  in  conduct
directly  aflfecting  our  relations  with  a  particular
country.  Passports  were  granted  to  people  who
the  Department  might  have  anticipated  would
go  abroad  to  denounce  the  United  States,  and
to  a  prior  defector.  State  Department  oflBcials
believed  that  in  view  of  the  Supreme  Court
decisions,  the  Department  was  not  empowered
to  deny  anyone  a  passport  on  grounds  related
to  freedom  of  speech  or  to  political  association
and  beliefs.

Since  Oswald's  citizenship  was  not  in  ques-
tion and  since  there  was  no  indication  that  he
would  be  involved  in  illegal  activity  abroad,
the  only  grounds  upon  which  a  passport  might
have  been  denied  Oswald  would  have  fallen
within  the  area  of  speech  or  political  belief
and  association.  The  Commission  therefore
concludes  that  the  Department  was  justified  in
granting  a  passport  to  Oswald  on  June  25,
1963.


VISIT  TO  THE  RUSSIAN  EMBASSY
IN  MEXICO  CITY

In  October  1963,  the  Passport  Office  of  the
State  Department  received  a  report  from  the
Central  Intelligence  Agency  that  Oswald  had
visited  the  Soviet  Embassy  in  Mexico  City.  The
report said nothing about Oswald's having


visited  the  Cuban  Embassy  in  Mexico  City,  a
fact  which  was  not  known  imtil  after  the
assassination.  Upon  receipt  of  the  information
the  passport  file  on  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was
reviewed  by  the  Passport  Office.  The  CIA
communication  and  the  passport  file  were  read
by  an  attorney  and  a  supervisory  attorney  in
that  office  who  found  no  basis  for  revoking
Oswald's  passport  or  for  notifying  the  FBI  or
CIA  that  Oswald  had  been  issued  a  new  pass-
port in  June  1963.  The  Department  has  in-
formed the  Commission  that,  "since  the  report
indicated  no  groimds  for  determining  Oswald
was  ineligible  for  a  passport,  a  determination
was  made  that  no  action  by  the  passport  office
was  required."  Travel  to  Russia  was  not  pro-
scribed in  1963.  Moreover,  the  Soviet  Union
was  one  of  the  countries  Oswald  had  listed  on
his  passport  application.  Hence,  the  Commis-
sion agrees  that  Oswald's  taking  steps  to  enter
the  Soviet  Union  in  1963  was  not  a  sufficient
reason  to  revoke  his  passport.

Later,  on  November  14,  1963,  the  FBI  sent
the  Department  a  report  on  Oswald's  arrest  in
New  Orleans,  La.  during  August  in  connection
with  a  fistfi^t  in  which  he  became  engaged
when  passing  out  pamphlets  entitled  "Hands
Off  Cuba."  No  action  was  taken  on  the  basis  of
the  Bureau's  report.  The  Commission  agrees
that  this  incident  was  not  grounds  for  revoking
Oswald's  passport.


CONCLUSION

Investigation  of  Oswald's  complete  dealings
with  the  Department  of  State  and  the  Lnmi-
gration  and  Naturalization  Service  reveals  no
irregularity  suggesting  any  illegal  actions  or
impropriety  on  the  part  of  government  officials.
The  Commission  believes,  however,  that  in  ap-
plying its  own  regiilations  the  Department
should  in  all  cases  exercise  great  care  in  the
return  to  this  country  of  defectors  such  as
Oswald  who  have  evidenced  disloyalty  or  hos-
tility to  this  country  or  who  have  expressed  a
desire  to  renounce  their  U.S.  citizenship  and
that,  when  such  persons  are  returned,  pro-
cedures should  be  adopted  for  the  better  dis-
semination of  information  concerning  them  to
the  intelligence  agencies  of  the  Government.
The  operation  of  the  "lookout  card"  system
in  the  Department  of  State  was  obviously  de-
ficient, but  since  these  deficiencies  did  not
affect  Oswald  or  reflect  any  favoritism  or  im-
propriety, the  Commission  considers  them
beyond  the  scope  of  its  inquiry.

Especially  while  he  was  in  the  Soviet  Union,
Oswald's  manner  to  Goveniment  personnel  was
frequently  insulting  and  offensive.  As  one  1962
communication  between  the  Embassy  and  the
Department  of  State  observed,  "It  is  not  that
our  hearts  are  breaking  for  Oswald.  His  im-
pertinence knows  no  bounds."  Nonetheless,  the


346


oflScials  of  the  U.S.  Government  respected
Oswald  as  a  troubled  American  citizen  and
extended  to  him  the  services  and  assistance  for
which  the  agencies  of  government  have  been
created.  Though  Oswald  was  known  to  be
"an  unstable  character,  whose  actions  are
highly  unpredictable,"  there  was  no  reasonable
basis  in  1961  and  1962  for  suspecting  that
upon  his  readmittance  to  the  country  he  would


resort  to  violence  against  its  public  officials.
The  officers  of  the  Department  of  State  and
the  Immigration  and  Naturalization  Service,
acting  within  the  proper  limits  of  their  discre-
tion, concluded  that  Oswald's  return  to  the
United  States  was  in  the  best  interests  of  the
country;  it  is  only  from  the  vantage  of  the
present  that  the  tragic  irony  of  their  conclusion
emerges.


Appendix  XVI
A  BIOGRAPHY  OF  JACK  RUBY


In  this  appendix  the  Commission  presents  a
biography  of  Jack  Ruby.  Although  criminal
proceedings  involving  its  subject  are  pending
in  the  State  of  Texas,  the  Commission  has
decided  to  include  this  rather  detailed  account
of  Ruby's  life  and  activities  for  several  reasons.
Most  importantly,  the  Commission  beUeves  it
will  permit  a  better  evaluation  of  the  evidence
on  the  question  whether  Ruby  was  involved  in
any  conspiracy.  Furthermore,  the  Commission
believes  that  in  view  of  the  many  rumors  con-
cerning Ruby  the  public  interest  will  be  served
by  an  account  which  attempts  to  give  sufficient
material  to  provide  an  impression  of  his  char-
acter and  background.  The  Commission's  de-
sire not  to  interfere  in  the  pending  proceedings
involving  Ruby  necessarily  limits  the  scope  of
this  appendix,  which  does  not  purport  to  discuss
the  legal  issues  raised  during  Ruby's  trial  or
his  possible  motive  for  shooting  Oswald.


FAMILY  BACKGROUND

Jack  Ruby,  bom  Jacob  Rubenstein,  was  the
fifth  of  his  parents'  eight  living  children.  There
is  much  confusion  about  his  exact  birth  date.
School  records  report  it  as  June  23,  April  25,
March  13,  and,  possibly,  March  3,  1911.  Other
early  official  records  list  his  date  of  birth  as
April  21  and  April  26,  1911.  During  his  adult
life  the  date  Ruby  used  most  frequently  was
March  25,  1911.  His  driver's  license,  seized
following  his  arrest,  and  his  statements  to  the
FBI  on  November  24,  1963,  listed  this  date.
However,  the  police  arrest  report  for  Novem-
ber 24  gave  his  birth  date  as  March  19,  1911.
Since  the  recording  of  births  was  not  required
in  Chicago  prior  to  1915,  Ruby's  birth  may
never  have  been  officially  recorded.  No  sub-
stantial conffict  exists,  however,  about  whether
Jack  Ruby  was  bom  in  1911.

Ruby  has  one  older  brother  and  three  older
sisters.  The  oldest  children,  Hyman  and  Ann,
were  bom  shortly  after  the  tum  of  the  century,
before  their  parents  arrived  in  the  United
States.  The  other  children  were  born  in  Chi-
cago. Ruby's  sister  Marion  was  bom  in  June


1906  and  his  sister  Eva  in  March  1909.  Ruby
also  has  two  younger  brothers  and  a  younger
sister.  Sam  was  bom  in  December  1912,  Earl
in  April  1915.  The  youngest  child,  EUeen,  was
bom  in  July  1917.  At  least  one  and  possibly
two  other  children  died  during  infancy.

Jack  Ruby's  father,  Joseph  Rubenstein,  was
bom  in  1871  in  Sokolov,  a  small  town  near
Warsaw,  Poland,  then  under  the  rule  of  Czarist
Russia.  He  entered  the  Russian  artillery  in
1893.  There  he  learned  the  carpentry  trade,
which  had  been  practiced  by  his  father  and  at
least  one  brother  and  he  picked  up  the  habit
of  excessive  drinking  that  was  to  plague  him
for  the  rest  of  his  hfe.  While  in  the  army,  he
married  Jack's  mother,  Fannie  Turek  Rutkow-
ski;  the  marriage  was  arranged,  as  was  cus-
tomary, by  a  professional  matchmaker.  Ac-
cording to  his  oldest  son,  Joseph  Rubenstein
served  in  China,  Korea,  and  Siberia,  detesting
these  places  and  army  life.  Eventually,  in  1 898,
he  simply  "walked  away"  from  it  and  about  4
years  later  he  went  to  England  and  Canada,
entering  the  United  States  in  1903.

Settling  in  Chicago,  Joseph  Rubenstein
joined  the  carpenters  union  in  1904  and  re-
mained a  member  until  his  death  in  1958.  Al-
though he  worked  fairly  steadily  until  1928,
he  was  unemployed  during  the  last  30  years
of  his  life.  The  only  other  group  which  Joseph
Rubenstein  joined  consisted  of  fellow  immi-
grants from  Sokolov.  His  daughter  Eva  de-
scribed this  group  as  purely  social  and  com-
pletely nonpolitical.

Jack  Ruby's  mother,  Fannie  Rubenstein,
was  probably  bom  in  1875  near  Warsaw,
Poland.  She  followed  her  husband  to  the
United  States  in  1904  or  1905,  accompanied
by  her  children  Hyman  and  Aim.  An  illiterate
woman,  she  went  to  night  school  in  about
1920  to  learn  how  to  sign  her  name.  She
apparently  failed  in  this  endeavor,  however,
for  an  alien  registration  form,  filed  after  about
35  years  in  the  United  States,  was  signed  by
an  "X".  Although  she  apparently  leamed  some
English,  her  speech  was  predominantly  Yiddish,
the  primary  language  of  the  Rubenstein  house-
hold. Still,  Mrs.  Rubenstein  felt  strongly  that


347


her  children  required  an  education  in  order
to  better  themselves.  She  frequently  argued
about  this  with  her  husband,  who  had  received
little,  if  any,  formal  education  and  firmly  be-
lieved that  grammar  school  training  was  suffi-
cient for  his  children.


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  (1911-33)

In  1911,  when  Jack  Ruby  was  bom,  his  fam-
ily resided  near  14th  and  Newberry  Streets
in  Chicago,  the  first  in  a  series  of  Jewish
neighborhoods  in  which  the  Rubensteins  lived
during  his  childhood.  In  1916,  the  Rubensteins
lived  at  1232  Morgan  Street,  where  they  ap-
parently remained  until  1921.  This  was  the
fourth  residence  m  the  first  5  years  of  Jack
Ruby's  Ufe.  Earl  Ruby  described  one  typical
neighborhood  in  which  the  family  lived  as  a
"ghetto"  with  "pushcarts  on  the  streets."  His
sister  Eva  characterized  it  as  "below  the  middle
class  but  yet  it  wasn't  the  poorest  class."  The
family  generally  lived  near  Italian  sections,
where  there  were  frequent  fights  along  ethnic
lines.

The  Rubenstein  home  was  marked  by  con-
stant strife  and  the  parents  were  reported  to
have  occasionally  struck  each  other.  Between
1915  and  1921,  Joseph  Rubenstein  was  fre-
quently arrested  because  of  disorderly  conduct
and  assault  and  battery  charges,  some  filed  by
his  wife.  In  the  spring  of  1921,  Jack  Ruby's
parents  separated.  In  1937  Mrs.  Rubenstein
reported  that  she  had  desired  a  divorce  15
years  earlier,  but  her  husband  had  been  op-
posed to  it.  The  predominant  causes  of  the
separation  were  apparently  Joseph  Rubenstein's
excessive  drinking  and  Fannie  Rubenstein's
imcontroUable  temper.  She  resented  her  numer-
ous pregnancies,  believed  her  husband  to  be
unfaithful,  and  nagged  him  because  he  failed
to  make  enough  money.

Psychiatric  Report

Young  Jack  soon  showed  the  effects  of
parental  discord.  On  June  6,  1922,  at  the  age
of  11,  he  was  referred  to  the  Institute  for
Juvenile  Research  by  the  Jewish  Social  Service
Bureau.  The  reason  for  the  referral  was  "tru-
ancy and  incorrigible  at  home."  On  July  10,
1922,  the  institute  recommended  to  the  bureau
that  Jack  be  placed  in  a  new  environment
where  his  characteristics  might  be  understood
and  where  he  might  be  afforded  the  super-
vision and  recreation  that  would  end  his  in-
terest in  street  gangs.  In  March  1923,  the
institute  advised  the  bureau  that  "placement
in  a  home,  where  intelligent  supervision  and
discipline  can  be  given"  was  appropriate.

The  institute's  psychiatric  examination,  which
served  as  a  basis  for  these  recommendations,
took  place  in  1922,  prior  to  the  advent  of  many
techniques  and  theories  of  modem  psychiatry,
but  it  is  the  most  objective  evidence  of  Jack

348


Ruby's  childhood  character.  According  to  the
psychiatric  report.  Jack  was  "quick  tempered"
and  "disobedient."  He  frequently  disagreed
openly  with  his  mother,  whom  he  considered
an  inferior  person  with  whose  rules  he  did
not  have  to  comply.  Jack  told  the  institute's
interviewer  that  he  ran  away  from  home  be-
cause his  mother  lied  to  him  and  beat  him.
Although  Mrs.  Rubenstein  was  severe  with  her
children,  she  was  described  as  totally  incapable
of  coping  with  them  "because  of  their  de-
linquencies, i.e.,  principally  their  destructive
tendencies  and  disregard  for  other  people's
property."  His  mother's  "extreme  tempera-
ment" and  quarrelsomeness  were  cited  as  pos-
sible causes  of  Jack's  "bad  behavior."

Self -administered  questionnaires  revealed  that
Jack  felt  his  classmates  were  "picking"  on  him
and  that  he  could  not  get  along  with  his  friends.
They  also  indicated  that,  although  Jack  de-
scribed himself  as  a  good  ballplayer,  he  did
not  belong  to  any  clubs  and  was  not  a  member
of  any  athletic  teams.  Jack's  psychiatric  inter-
viewer reported:

He  could  give  no  other  good  reason  for
running  away  from  school  except  that  he
went  to  amusement  parks.  He  has  some  sex
knowledge  and  is  greatly  interested  in  sex
matters.  He  stated  that  the  boys  in  the  street
tell  him  about  these  things.  He  also  claims
that  he  can  lick  everyone  and  anybody  in
anything  he  wants  to  do.

The  interviewer  noted  that  during  "mental
tests"  he  reacted  quickly,  often  carelessly,  and
his  attention  was  apt  to  wander  so  that  he  had
to  be  reprimanded.

A  letter  recommending  the  boy's  placement
in  a  more  wholesome  environment  stated:

He  is  egocentric  and  expects  much  atten-
tion, but  is  unable  to  get  it  as  there  are  many
children  at  home.  His  behavior  is  further
colored  by  his  early  sex  experiences,  his
great  interest  [in  sex]  and  the  gang  situation
in  the  street.  From  a  superficial  examination
of  his  mother  who  was  here  with  him,  it  is
apparent  that  she  has  no  insight  into  his
problem,  and  she  is  thoroughly  inadequate
in  the  further  training  of  this  boy.

Recognizing  that  the  sketchiness  of  the  case
record  precluded  complete  diagnosis,  Dr.  Ray-
mond E.  Robertson,  currently  the  superinten-
dent of  the  institute,  reported  nonetheless  that
it  seems  "firmly  established  *  *  *  [that]  his
imstable  and  disorganized  home  could  not
provide  Jack  with  the  necessary  controls  and
discipline."

Placement  in  Foster  Homes

On  July  10,  1923,  a  dependency  hearing
involving  Jack,  his  younger  brothers  Sam  and
Earl,  and  his  sister  Eileen,  was  held  in  Chi-


cage's  juvenile  court.  The  petition  alleged  that
the  children  were  not  receiving  proper  parental
care.  They  had,  until  then,  been  in  their
mother's  custody,  living  on  Roosevelt  Road,  the
border  between  Jewish  and  Italian  districts.
The  juvenile  court  made  a  finding  of  depend-
ency. It  appointed  the  Jewish  Home  Finding
Society  guardian  with  the  right  to  place  the
children  in  foster  homes,  and  it  ordered  Joseph
Rubenstein  to  pay  the  court  clerk  $4  per  week
for  the  support  of  each  child.  On  November  24,
1924,  this  order  was  vacated,  which  apparently
signified  the  termination  of  the  guardianship
and  the  return  of  the  children  to  their  mother.
On  April  8,  1925,  the  case  was  continued
"generally,"  meaning  that  it  was  inactive  but
could  be  reactivated  if  the  court  so  desired.

Despite  court  records,  the  exact  circum-
stances and  length  of  time  that  Jack  Ruby  lived
away  from  home  are  not  entirely  clear.  Rec-
ords indicate  that  Jack,  Sam,  Earl,  and  Eileen
Rubenstein  were  wards  of  the  Jewish  Home
Finding  Society  "for  a  short  time  in  1922-23."
However,  Jack  and  Eileen  stated  they  spent
about  4  or  5  years  in  foster  homes.  Earl  testified
that  he  and  Sam  were  originally  sent  to  a  private
foster  home  and  then  lived  on  a  farm  for  a  little
more  than  a  year,  while  Jack  was  on  a  different
farm  "some  distance  away."  Subsequently  the
three  brothers  lived  together  in  another  foster
home.

Subsequent  Home  Life

When  Jack  Ruby  returned  to  his  family,  the
unit  was  still  disordered.  His  father  remained
apart  from  the  children  at  least  until  1936  and
perhaps  until  a  few  years  later.  Mrs.  Ruben-
stein's  inability  to  manage  her  home,  which  had
been  reported  by  the  Institute  for  Juvenile  Re-
search in  1922,  apparently  continued.  For  ex-
ample, in  1937  Marion  Rubenstein  observed
that  her  mother  "has  never  been  any  kind  of  a
housekeeper,  was  careless  with  money,  and
never  took  much  interest  in  the  children's  wel-
fare *  *  *  she  was  selfish,  jealous,  disagreeable,
and  never  cared  to  do  anything  in  the  home
but  lie  around  and  sleep."  Dr.  Hyman  I.  Ruben-
stein, the  son  of  Joseph  Rubenstein's  brother,
recalled  that  Jack  Ruby's  mother  ran  "an  ir-
regular household"  and  appeared  to  be  "a
rather  disturbed  person  of  poor  personal  ap-
pearance with  no  incentive  for  cleaning  or
cooking."

Mrs.  Rubenstein's  domestic  shortcomings
were  accompanied  by  symptoms  of  mental  dis-
ease. In  about  1913,  2  years  after  Jack  was
bom,  Mrs.  Rubenstein  began  to  develop  a
delusion  that  a  sticking  sensation  in  her  throat
was  caused  by  a  lodged  fishbone.  Each  month
Hyman,  her  oldest  child,  took  her  to  a  clinic.
And  each  month  the  examining  doctor,  finding
no  organic  cause  for  discomfort,  informed  her
that  there  was  nothing  in  her  throat  and  that
the  sensation  was  but  a  figment  of  her  imagina-
tion. According  to  Hyman,  this  practice  con-


tinued for  a  number  of  years  until  Mrs.  Ruben-
stein tired  of  it.

In  1927,  Mrs.  Rubenstein  once  again  began
to  visit  clinics  in  connection  with  her  fishbone
delusion.  Three  years  later,  a  thyroidectomy
was  performed,  but  she  subsequently  said  it
did  nothing  to  relieve  her  discomfort.  Accord-
ing to  the  Michael  Reese  Hospital,  whose  clinic
she  had  visited  since  1927,  Mrs.  Rubenstein
was  suffering  from  psychoneurosis  with  marked
anxiety  state.

By  order  of  the  county  court  of  Cook
County,  Mrs.  Rubenstein  was  committed  to
Elgin  State  Hospital  on  July  16,  1937.  She  was
paroled  on  October  17,  1937,  3  months  after
her  commitment.  On  January  3,  1938,  the  Chi-
cago State  Hospital  informed  Elgin  State  that
the  family  desired  that  she  be  readmitted  to  the
mental  hospital.  The  family  reported  that  she
was  uncooperative,  caused  constant  discord,
was  very  noisy,  and  used  obscene  language.  A
State  social  worker  observed  that  Mrs.  Ruben-
stein refused  ever  to  leave  the  house,  explain-
ing that  her  children  would  have  thrown  her
things  out  had  she  left.  Mrs.  Rubenstein  re-
buffed a  suggestion  by  the  social  worker  that
she  help  with  the  dishes  by  stating  that  she
would  do  nothing  as  long  as  her  "worthless"
husband  was  in  the  house.  She  was  readmitted
on  January  14,  1938.

Mrs.  Rubenstein  was  again  paroled  on
May  27,  1938,  and  was  discharged  as  "im-
proved" on  August  25,  1938.  She  stayed  in  an
apartment  with  Marion,  and  her  separation
from  the  rest  of  the  family  apparently  ended
most  of  the  difficulties.  Subsequently,  Jack
Ruby's  parents  were  apparently  reconciled,
since  their  alien  registration  forms,  filed  in  late
1940,  indicated  that  they  both  resided  at
Marion's  address.

Faimie  Rubenstein  was  admitted  to  Michael
Reese  Hospital  on  April  4,  1944,  as  a  result  of
a  heart  ailment.  Her  condition  was  complicated
by  an  attack  of  pneumonia  and  she  died  at  the
hospital  on  April  11,  1944.  Hyman  testified
that,  perhaps  because  she  favored  the  education
of  her  children  and  they  recognized  her  diffi-
culties in  rearing  them  during  a  turbulent  mar-
riage, they  all  remembered  Mrs.  Rubenstein
with  warmth  and  affection.  The  evidence  also
indicates  that  Jack,  notwithstanding  his  earlier
attitudes,  became  especially  fond  of  his  mother.
Following  his  wife's  death,  Joseph  Rubenstein
stayed  with  the  children  in  Chicago,  where  he
died  at  the  age  of  87,  on  December  24,  1958.

Education

Records  provided  by  the  Chicago  Board  of
Education  revealed  that  Jack  Ruby  attended
Smyth  Grammar  School  from  October  24,
1916,  through  the  1920-21  term,  completing
kindergarten  to  grade  4B.  He  repeated  the  third
grade.  During  the  1921-22  school  year  Jack
finished  the  fourth  grade  at  the  Clarke  School;
he  attended  Schley  School  for  the  1924-25


349


term,  when  he  completed  the  sixth  grade.
Ruby's  relationship  with  the  Institute  for  Juve-
nile Research  and  the  Jewish  Home  Finding
Society  may  explain  the  lack  of  academic  rec-
ords for  the  1922-23  and  1923-24  school
years.  While  there  is  some  uncertainty  about
Ruby's  education  subsequent  to  September
1925,  it  seems  likely  that  he  completed  the
eighth  grade  in  1927,  when  he  was  16.  Al-
though Jack  Ruby  and  others  have  stated  that
he  attended  at  least  1  year  of  high  school,  the
Chicago  Board  of  Education  could  not  locate
any  record  of  Ruby's  attending  Chicago  high
schools.  Considering  the  absence  of  academic
records  and  Jack's  apathetic  attitude  toward
school,  the  Commission  deems  it  unlikely  that
his  education  extended  into  high  school.

Records  of  the  Institute  for  Juvenile  Re-
search revealed  that,  as  of  June  1922,  Ruby
had  no  religious  education  outside  the  public
school  system.  However,  according  to  their
children.  Jack's  parents  made  some  effort  to
inculcate  in  them  a  desire  to  adhere  to  the
tenets  of  Orthodox  Judaism.  Jewish  dietary  and
festival  laws  were  observed  and  several  of  the
children  accompanied  Joseph  Rubenstein  to  the
synagogue.  Earl  Ruby  stated  that  all  the  boys
received  some  Hebrew  school  training  until  the
breakup  of  the  Rubenstein  home  in  1921.
However,  Hyman  Rubenstein  testified  that  the
instability  and  economic  necessities  of  the
household  and  the  children's  relationships  out-
side the  home  frustrated  the  religious  efforts  of
Ruby's  parents.

Activities

Bom  in  a  home  that  disintegrated  when  he
was  10  and  boasting  no  substantial  educational
background.  Jack  Ruby  early  found  himself  on
Chicago  streets  attempting  to  provide  for  him-
self and  other  members  of  his  family.  An  avid
sports  fan,  he,  together  with  many  of  his
friends,  "scalped"  tickets  to  various  sporting
events.  He  also  sold  numerous  novelty  items
and  knickknacks,  particularly  those  connected
with  professional  and  collegiate  athletics.  Even
in  his  youth,  Ruby  declined  to  work  on  a
steady  basis  for  someone  else.

According  to  his  brother  Hyman,  Jack
Ruby's  only  legal  difficulty  as  a  youth  resulted
from  an  altercation  with  a  policeman  about
ticket  scalping.  Hyman,  then  active  in  local
politics,  was  able  to  have  charges  arising  out  of
the  incident  dropped.  Ruby  has  indicated  that
during  the  depression  he  served  a  short  jaU
sentence  for  the  unauthorized  sale  of  copy-
righted sheet  music.

The  only  other  member  of  the  Rubenstein
family  who  appears  to  have  had  any  difficulty
with  the  law  while  a  youth  was  Hyman.  On
May  1,  1916,  Chicago's  juvenile  court  declared
Hyman  incorrigible,  a  term  covering  a  wide
range  of  misbehavior.  Because  of  the  absence
of  informative  court  records  and  the  lapse  of
time,  the  misconduct  that  occasioned  this  pro-


ceeding could  not  be  ascertained,  but  Hyman
is  not  known  to  have  encountered  subsequent
difficulty.  Some  of  Ruby's  childhood  friends
eventually  became  criminals;  however,  Hyman
Rubenstein,  his  sister  Mrs.  Eva  Grant,  and
virtually  all  of  Ruby's  friends  and  acquaint-
ances who  were  questioned  reported  that  he
was  not  involved  with  Chicago's  criminal  ele-
ment.

The  evidence  indicates  that  young  Jack  was
not  interested  in  political  affairs.  Hyman  was
the  only  Rubenstein  to  participate  actively  in
politics.  Sponsored  by  various  political  officials,
he  became  a  sidewalk  inspector  and  warehouse
investigator  for  8  years.  On  one  occasion,  he
obtained  a  permit  for  Jack  to  sell  novelties
from  a  pushcart  located  in  a  business  district
during  the  pre-Christmas  buying  rush.  Eventu-
ally the  complaints  of  enraged  businessmen  led
licensing  authorities  to  declare  that  a  mistake
had  been  made  and  to  revoke  Ruby's  permit.

Temperament

The  evidence  reveals  striking  differences  of
opinion  among  childhood  friends  and  acquaint-
ances of  Jack  Ruby  about  whether  he  possessed
violent  tendencies.  Many  persons  stated  that  he
was  mild  mannered,  quiet,  and  even  tempered.
Former  welterweight  champion  Barney  Ross,
whom  Jack  Ruby  idolized  from  the  inception
of  his  boxing  career,  stated  that  Ruby  was
"well  behaved,"  was  never  a  troublemaker,  and
was  never  involved  with  law-enforcement  agen-
cies. Another  friend,  who  became  a  successful
businessman  on  the  west  coast,  said  that,  as  a
youth.  Ruby  never  started  fights  even  though
he  was  adept  with  his  fists.  Other  friends  de-
clared that  he  would,  if  at  all  possible,  avoid
clashes.

But  many  other  friends  and  acquaintances
recalled  that  he  had  a  hot  temper  and  was
quickly  moved  to  violent  acts  or  words.  One
friend  explained  that  in  the  "tough"  Chicago
neighborhood  where  they  lived,  self-defense
was  vitally  important  and  added  that  Ruby  was
fully  capable  of  defending  himself.  Another
friend  described  Ruby  as  quick  tempered  and,
though  unlikely  to  pick  fights,  willing  to  accept
any  challenge  without  regard  to  the  odds
against  him.  Young  Jack  also  interfered  in
fights,  particularly  when  the  person  he  was
aiding  appeared  to  be  taking  a  severe  beating
or  in  a  disadvantageous  position.  Others  re-
ported that  he  had  the  reputation  of  being  a
good  street  brawler.  One  school  friend  recalled
that  when  Jack  argued  vehemently  about
sports,  he  occasionally  used  a  stick  or  other
available  weapon.  He  reported,  however,  that
after  Ruby's  anger  subsided,  he  reverted  to  his
normal,  likable  character.

From  early  childhood.  Jack  Ruby  was  called
"Sparky"  by  those  who  knew  him.  According
to  his  sister  Eva  Grant,  the  nickname  derived
from  the  way  Jack  wobbled  when  he  walked.
He  was  thought  to  resemble  the  slow-moving


350


horse  called  "Sparky"  or  "Sparkplug"  depicted
in  a  contemporary  comic  strip.  Mrs.  Grant
testified  that  her  brother  became  incensed  when
called  "Sparky"  and  that  from  the  time  he  was
about  8  years  old  he  would  strike  anyone  call-
ing him  by  that  name.  A  childhood  friend  also
recalled  that  Jack  hated  the  nickname  and
would  fight  when  called  by  it.  Mrs.  Grant  was
unsure  whether  the  nickname  "Sparky"  did  not
also  result  from  his  quick  reaction  to  the
taunts  of  young  friends.  Hyman  Rubenstein
thought  that  the  nickname  derived  from  Jack's
speed,  aggressiveness,  and  quick  thinking.  The
many  accounts  of  Ruby's  lightninglike  temper
lend  credence  to  the  theory,  widely  held,  that
his  nickname  was  cormected  with  his  volatility.


YOUNG  MANHOOD  (1933-43)

San  Francisco  (1933-37)

Jack  Ruby  reported  that  in  about  1933,  he
and  several  Chicago  friends  went  to  Los  An-
geles and,  shortly  thereafter,  to  San  Francisco.
Although  there  is  evidence  that  he  stayed  there
until  1938,  1939,  or  1940,  Ruby  stated  that  he
returned  to  Chicago  in  about  1937,  and  this
appears  to  have  been  the  case.  Eva  Grant  testi-
fied that  Ruby  went  to  the  west  coast  because
he  believed  employment  would  be  available
there.

Eva,  who  married  Hyman  Magid  in  Chicago
in  1930,  was  divorced  in  early  1934,  and  in
about  June  of  that  year  joined  her  brother  Jack
in  San  Francisco.  She  and  her  son,  Ronald,
shared  an  apartment  with  him.  In  1936,  Eva
married  Frank  Granovsky,  also  known  as
Frank  Grant,  in  San  Francisco,  and  Ruby
shared  a  four-room  apartment  with  them  and
Ronald  for  a  short  while.

Occupations  and  Activities

Ruby  stated  that  when  he  and  his  friends
arrived  in  Los  Angeles,  they  sold  a  handi-
capper's  tip  sheet  for  horseraces  at  Santa  Anita
racetrack  which  had  just  opened.  Eva  Grant
testified  that  Ruby  also  worked  as  a  singing
waiter  in  Los  Angeles,  but  made  very  little
money.

When  the  group  moved  to  San  Francisco,
Ruby  continued  to  sell  "tip"  sheets  at  Bay
Meadows  racetrack.  Subsequently,  he  became
a  door-to-door  salesman  of  subscriptions  to
San  Francisco  newspapers.  Although  there  is
some  evidence  that  he  ultimately  became  chief
of  his  crew  and  had  several  people  working
under  him,  other  reports  indicate  that  this  is
unlikely.  Eva  Grant  testified  that  she  also  sold
newspaper  subscriptions  but  was  less  proficient
than  her  brother  and  relied  upon  him  for  ad-
vice and  support.

Although  virtually  all  his  San  Francisco  ac-
quaintances knew  Jack  Ruby  as  "Sparky,"  there
is  no  evidence  that  he  engaged  in  violent  activ-
ities in  San  Francisco  or  was  reputed  to  possess


a  vicious  temper.  One  friend,  who  stated  that
he  resided  with  Ruby  and  Eva  for  about  a  year,
described  him  as  a  "well-mannered,  likable
individual  who  was  soft  spoken  and  meticulous
in  his  dress  and  appearance."  Another  friend
described  him  as  a  "clean-cut,  honest  kid,"  and
the  manager  of  a  crew  with  which  Ruby
worked  stated  that  he  had  a  good  reputation
and  appeared  to  be  an  "honest,  forthright  per-
son." The  crew  manager  reported  that  Ruby
associated  with  a  sports  crowd,  some  of  whose
members  were  involved  with  professional  box-
ing, but  not  with  criminals.  He  added  that
Ruby  had  a  personal  liking  for  law  enforce-
ment and  would  have  wanted  to  become  a
police  officer  had  he  been  larger  physically.

One  friend  reported  that  although  Ruby  al-
ways associated  with  Jewish  people,  he  never
exhibited  great  interest  in  religion.  Ruby  met
Virginia  Belasco,  granddaughter  of  the  promi-
nent playwright  and  actor,  David  Belasco,  in
about  1936  at  a  dance  at  the  Jewish  commu-
nity center  in  San  Francisco.  Miss  Belasco
stated  that  while  a  teenager  she  saw  Ruby  so-
cially on  several  occasions  between  1936  and
1941.  The  only  other  evidence  concerning
Ruby's  social  activities  while  in  San  Francisco
is  his  statement  to  his  long-time  girl  friend,
Alice  Nichols  of  Dallas,  that  while  in  San
Francisco  he  met  the  only  other  woman,  Vir-
ginia Fitzgerald  or  Fitzsimmons,  that  he  ever
considered  marrying.

Chicago  (1937-43)

Jack  Ruby  stated  that  following  his  return  to
Chicago,  he  was  unemployed  for  a  considerable
period.  However,  when  his  mother  was  ad-
mitted to  Elgin  State  Hospital  in  1937,  she  re-
ported that  he  was  employed  as  a  "traveling
salesman"  apparently  living  away  from  home.
Although  there  is  conflicting  evidence  about  his
ability  to  earn  a  comfortable  living,  he  appar-
ently was  able  to  maintain  a  normal  existence
and  required  no  financial  assistance  from  his
family  or  friends.  He  continued  to  be  a  so-
called  "hustler,"  scalping  tickets  and  buying
watches  and  other  small  items  for  resale  at
discount  prices.  One  of  his  closest  Chicago
friends  stated  that  Ruby's  sales  and  promotions
were  "shady"  but  "legitimate."

Labor  union  activities. — Ruby  reported  that
in  "about  1937"  he  became  active  in  Local
20467  of  the  Scrap  Iron  and  Junk  Handlers
Union.  At  this  time,  his  friend,  attorney  Leon
Cooke,  was  the  local's  financial  secretary.  Rec-
ords provided  by  the  Social  Security  Adminis-
tration indicate  that  Ruby  was  employed  by  the
union  from  late  1937  imtU  early  1940;  he
worked  as  a  union  organizer  and  negotiated
with  employers  on  its  behalf.

On  December  8,  1939,  the  union's  president,
John  Martin,  shot  Cooke,  who  died  of  gunshot
wounds  on  January  5,  1940;  Martin  was  subse-
quently acquitted  on  the  ground  of  self-defense.
Although  a  Jack  Rubenstein  is  mentioned  in


351


the  minutes  of  a  union  meeting  on  February  2,
1940,  and  Ruby  is  reported  to  have  said  after
Cooke's  death  that  he  wanted  to  "take  over"
the  union,  the  evidence  indicates  that  Ruby  was
so  upset  by  Cooke's  death  that  he  was  unable
to  devote  himself  further  to  union  activities
and  left  its  employ.  Ruby  reported  that  after
Cooke's  death  he  adopted  the  middle  name
"Leon,"  which  he  used  only  infrequently,  in
memory  of  his  friend.

Since  Ruby  was  the  ultimate  soiirce  of  all
but  one  of  these  accounts,  other  descriptions  of
Ruby's  separation  from  the  union  cannot  with
certainty  be  deemed  inaccurate.  These  reports
indicated  that  Ruby  might  have  been  forced
out  of  the  union  by  a  criminal  group,  or  might
have  left  because  he  lacked  the  emotional  sta-
bility necessary  for  successful  labor  negotia-
tions or  because  he  felt  he  was  not  earning
enough  money  with  the  union.

Although  the  AFL-CIO  investigated  the
ethical  practices  of  local  20467  in  1956,  placed
the  local  in  trusteeship,  and  suspended  Paul
Dorfman,  who  succeeded  Martin  and  Cooke,
there  is  no  evidence  that  Ruby's  union  activ-
ities were  connected  with  Chicago's  criminal
element.  Several  longtime  members  of  the
imion  reported  that  it  had  a  good  reputation
when  Ruby  was  affiliated  with  it  and  employers
who  negotiated  with  it  have  given  no  indication
that  it  had  criminal  connections.

Subsequent  employment. — In  1941,  Ruby
and  Harry  Epstein  organized  the  Spartan  Nov-
elty Co.,  a  small  firm  that  sold  in  various  north-
eastern States  small  cedar  chests  containing
candy  and  gambling  devices  known  as  punch-
boards.  Earl  Ruby  and  two  of  Jack  Ruby's
friends,  Martin  Gimpel  and  Martin  Shargol,
were  also  associated  in  this  venture.  The  group
had  no  fixed  addresses,  living  in  hotels.

Late  in  1941,  Jack  Ruby  returned  to  Chi-
cago, where  he  continued  his  punchboard  busi-
ness through  the  mails.  Following  the  Decem-
ber 7,  1941,  attack  on  Pearl  Harbor,  he  and
several  friends  decided  to  design  and  sell
plaques  commemorating  the  Day  of  Infamy.
However,  the  venture  was  impeded  by  Ruby's
perfectionistic  approach  to  details  of  design
which  resulted  in  numerous  production  delays.
By  the  time  Ruby's  copyrighted  plaque  was
finally  ready  for  sale,  the  market  was  flooded
with  similar  items.  At  about  this  time.  Ruby
also  sold  busts  of  Franklin  Delano  Roosevelt.
In  late  1942  and  1943,  Ruby  was  employed  by
the  Globe  Auto  Glass  Co.  and  Universal  Sales
Company.

Although  one  of  Ruby's  acquaintances  at  this
time  described  him  as  a  cuckoo  nut  on  the
subject  of  patriotism,  the  evidence  does  not
indicate  that  Ruby's  promotion  of  "Remember
Pearl  Harbor"  plaques  and  Roosevelt  busts  was
motivated  by  patriotic  or  political  considera-
tions. Rather,  the  sale  of  these  items  was,  to
Ruby,  just  another  commercial  venture,  but  he
might  also  have  considered  these  sales  "a  good


thing."  Numerous  friends  reported  that  Ruby
had  no  interest  in  political  affairs  during  this
period,  although  he  greatly  admired  President
Roosevelt.

Other  activities. — ^The  evidence  indicates  that
Ruby  led  a  normal  social  life  during  these
years.  Virginia  Belasco  stated  that  while  Ruby
was  selling  punchboards  in  New  York  during
November  1941,  he  entertained  her  each  week-
end. Other  reports  indicate  that  Ruby  fancied
himself  a  "ladies'  man,"  enjoyed  dancing,  al-
most always  had  female  accompaniment  and
was  "very  gentlemanly"  with  women.

Ruby,  with  several  friends,  frequently  at-
tempted to  disrupt  rallies  of  the  German-
American  Bund.  One  acquaintance  reported
that  Ruby  was  responsible  for  "cracking  a  few
heads"  of  Bimd  members.  Apparently  he  joined
in  this  activity  for  ethnic  rather  than  political
reasons.  The  young  men  in  the  group  were  not
organized  adherents  of  any  particular  political
creed,  but  were  poolhall  and  tavern  companions
from  Ruby's  Jewish  neighborhood  who  gath-
ered on  the  spur  of  the  moment  to  present  op-
position when  they  learned  that  the  pro-Nazi
and  anti-Semitic  Bund  movement  was  planning
a  meeting.  Hyman  Rubenstein  testified  that
Ruby  would  fight  with  any  person  making
derogatory  comments  about  his  ethnic  origins,
and  others  have  stated  that  Ruby  would  fight
with  anyone  he  suspected  of  pro-Nazi  or  anti-
Semitic  tendencies.

During  this  period  Ruby,  though  tempera-
mental, apparently  engaged  in  no  unusual  acts
of  violence.  However,  he  did  interfere  on  sev-
eral occasions  when  he  thought  someone  was
treated  unfairly.  A  friend  who  described  Ruby
as  "somewhat  overbearing  regarding  the  rights
and  feelings  of  others,"  reported  that  Ruby
fought  two  college  students  who  insulted  a
Negro  piano  player.  Another  friend  reported
that  Ruby  had  a  "bitter"  fight  with  a  man  who
was  abusing  an  older  woman.

Maintaining  his  friendship  with  Barney  Ross,
and  still  an  ardent  sports  fan,  Ruby  associated
with  various  figures  in  the  boxing  world  and
regularly  attended  the  fights  at  Marigold  Gar-
dens. He  frequented  the  Lawndale  Poolroom
and  Restaurant,  a  rallying  point  for  the  anti-
Bundists  and  chief  "hangout"  of  many  of
Ruby's  friends.  In  addition,  Ruby,  described  as
a  "health  nut"  who  earnestly  contended  that
he  could  hit  harder  than  Joe  Louis,  exercised
at  several  athletic  clubs.

Despite  Ruby's  participation  in  "shady"
financial  enterprises,  his  association  with  a
labor  union  subsequently  disciplined  by  the
AFL-CIO,  his  participation  in  violent  anti-
Bund  activities,  and  his  connection  with  a  pool-
room, the  evidence  falls  short  of  demonstrating
that  Ruby  was  significantly  affiliated  with  or-
ganized crime  in  Chicago.  Virtually  all  of
Ruby's  Chicago  friends  stated  he  had  no  close
connection  with  organized  crime.  In  addition,
unreliable as their reports may be, several


352


known  Chicago  criminals  have  denied  any  such
liaison.  The  Commission  finds  it  difficult  to
attach  credence  to  a  newspaper  reporter's  con-
trary statement  that  his  undisclosed  "syndicate
sources"  revealed  Ruby  was  connected  with
organized  crime  and  confidence  games.  Ruby
was  unquestionably  familiar,  if  not  friendly,
with  some  Chicago  criminals,  but  there  is  no
evidence  that  he  ever  participated  in  organized
criminal  activity.


MILITARY  ACTIVITIES  (1943^6)

In  September  1941,  Jack  Ruby  was  appar-
ently classified  1-A  and  declared  eligible  for
the  draft.  Subsequently  he  appeared  before  a
local  board  and  was  reclassified  1-H  or  3-A.
Between  August  31,  1941,  and  November  19,
1942,  when  it  was  abolished,  the  1-H  classifi-
cation applied  to  registrants  who  had  reached
their  28th  birthday  and  were,  therefore,  no
longer  liable  for  service.  The  3-A  deferment
applies  to  persons  whose  entry  into  military
service  presents  financial  hardship  to  depend-
ents. Because  of  the  length  of  time  involved
and  the  destruction  of  local  draft  board  records.
Ruby's  precise  status  or  the  reason  for  his  de-
ferment could  not  be  ascertained.  According  to
one  somewhat  unreliable  report,  Ruby,  imme-
diately prior  to  his  physical  examination,
feigned  a  hearing  disability  and  occasionally
wore  a  hearing  aid.  Hyman  Rubenstein,  who
testified  that  Jack  was  deferred  because  of  eco-
nomic hardship  since  he  was  "the  only  one
home,"  specifically  denied  the  truthfulness  of
this  allegation.  Early  in  1943,  Ruby  was  again
classified  1-A,  and,  following  an  unsuccessful
appearance  before  his  appeal  board,  he  was
inducted  into  the  U.S.  Army  Air  Forces  on
May  21,  1943.  Jack  was  the  last  of  the  Ruben-
stein brothers  to  enter  the  service.  Previously,
Earl  had  enlisted  in  the  Navy,  Sam  was  in
Army  Air  Force  Intelligence  and  Hyman  was
in  the  field  artillery.

Except  for  5  weeks  in  Farmingdale,  N.Y.,
Ruby  spent  his  military  days  at  various  air-
bases  in  the  South.  He  received  the  basic  train-
ing given  all  recruits  and  advanced  training
as  an  aircraft  mechanic.  On  August  2,  1943,
he  passed  marksmanship  tests  with  the  .30  cali-
ber carbine  and  the  .45  caliber  submachinegun,
but  failed  with  the  .30  caliber  rifle.  On  Febru-
ary 10,  1944,  he  earned  a  sharpshooter's  rating
for  his  firing  of  an  Ml  .30  caliber  carbine.
His  character  and  efficiency  ratings,  when  de-
termined, were  excellent.  After  attaining  the
rank  of  private  first  class  and  receiving  the
good  conduct  medal,  Ruby  was  honorably  dis-
charged on  February  21,  1946.

Two  persons  who  recalled  Ruby  while  he
was  in  tiie  Army  Air  Forces  asserted  that  he
was  extremely  sensitive  to  insulting  remarks
about  Jews.  When,  during  an  argument,  a  ser-
geant called  Ruby  a  "Jew  bastard,"  Ruby  re-


portedly attacked  him  and  beat  him  with  his
fists.

There  is  conflicting  evidence  about  the  zeal
with  which  Ruby  performed  his  military  duties.
One  associate  indicated  that  Ruby,  who  at  34
was  the  oldest  in  his  group,  always  worked
harder  than  the  others  to  prove  that  he  could
keep  up  with  them.  Another  recalled,  by  con-
trast, that  Ruby  had  "no  liking  for  work"  and
carefully  avoided  situations  requiring  him  to
dirty  his  hands.  However,  there  is  no  basis  in
the  record  for  the  inference  that  Ruby  was  in
any  way  anti-American.

Ruby  frequently  expressed  to  some  fellow
soldiers  his  high  regard  for  Franklin  Delano
Roosevelt.  Two  independent  sources  reported
that  he  cried  openly  when  informed  of  Roose-
velt's death  in  April  1945.  This  did  not  indicate
any  sudden  political  interest,  however,  since
none  of  his  known  military  associates  reported
such  an  interest,  and  Ruby's  admiration  for
President  Roosevelt  anteceded  his  military
days.

While  in  service.  Ruby  is  reported  to  have
continued  his  promotional  ventures.  One  per-
son recalled  that  in  1944,  Jack  received  punch-
boards  and  chocolates  from  someone  in  Chi-
cago and  peddled  these  items  through  the  base
to  make  extra  money.  This  person  also  indi-
cated that  Ruby  enjoyed  card  and  dice  games
in  or  near  the  barracks.


POSTWAR  CHICAGO  (1946-47)

Following  his  discharge  from  the  Army  Air
Forces  in  February  1946,  Jack  Ruby  returned
to  Chicago.  He  joined  his  three  brothers,  who
had  previously  been  discharged  from  the  serv-
ice, in  the  Earl  Products  Co.  Earl  Ruby  testified
that  he  was  the  sole  investor  in  the  enterprise,
but  each  brother  received  an  equal  ownership
interest  on  his  return  from  the  service.  The
company  manufactured  and  sold  small  cedar
chests  and  distributed  punchboards.  In  addi-
tion, it  made  aluminum  salt  and  pepper  shakers,
key  chains,  bottle  openers,  screwdrivers,  and
small  hammers.  Sam  supervised  the  manufac-
turing end  of  the  business,  while  Earl  managed
the  office  and  advertising.  Jack  was  in  charge
of  sales,  but  the  company  was  small  and  he  had
no  subordinates.

Because  insufficient  profits  led  to  frequent
arguments,  Hyman  soon  left  Earl  Products.
Jack,  who  stayed  with  the  company  through
most  of  1947,  had  many  disputes  with  his
brothers  because  he  insisted  on  selling  the  prod-
ucts of  other  companies,  such  as  costume
jewelry,  and  he  did  not  like  traveling  outside
the  Chicago  area.  Earl  and  Sam  finally  pur-
chased Jack's  interest,  paying  him  more  than
$14,000  in  cash.

Although  there  is  some  evidence  to  the  con-
trary, it  is  unlikely  that  Ruby  was  in  the  night-
club business  in  Chicago  during  the  postwar


353


period.  Many  who  have  reported  this  may  have
mistaken  him  for  Harry  Rubenstein,  who  was
convicted  of  manslaughter  and  operated  several
such  establishments.  None  of  Jack  Ruby's  close
friends  or  relatives  indicated  that  he  was  in  the
nightclub  business.

Following  his  return  from  the  Army,  Ruby
was  described  as  ready  to  fight  with  any  person
who  insulted  Jews  or  the  military.  Earl  Ruby
testified  that  on  one  occasion  in  1946,  Jack  re-
turned from  downtown  Chicago  with  his  suit
covered  with  blood.  He  explained  at  that  time
that  he  had  fought  with  a  person  who  had
called  him  a  "dirty  Jew  or  something  like  that."

Other  evidence  indicates  that  Ruby's  person-
ality was  not  substantially  changed  by  his  mili-
tary experience.  One  person  who  met  him  in
1947,  reported  that  Ruby  was  a  "fashionable"
dresser.  He  continued  to  be  described  as  soft
spoken,  although  he  was  also  known  as  hot-
tempered.  Ruby  worked  out  regularly  at  an
athletic  club,  and  one  friend  regarded  him  as  a
"Romeo,"  who  was  quite  successful  in  attract-
ing young  women.


DALLAS  (1947-62)

The  Move  to  Dallas

During  World  War  IT,  Ruby's  sister,  Eva
Grant,  visited  Dallas.  Having  operated  a  restau-
rant on  the  west  coast  and  considering  it  a
lucrative  business,  she  arranged,  near  the  end
of  1945,  to  lease  a  building  under  construction
in  Dallas,  which  she  ran  as  a  nightclub.  Part  of
the  financing  for  this  establishment,  the  Singa-
pore Supper  Club,  was  provided  by  her  broth-
ers. Jack  Ruby,  who  apparently  obtained  the
money  from  Earl  Products,  sent  $1,100  as  a
downpayment  on  the  lease.  Earl  contributed
about  $1,500,  and  Hyman  paid  for  more  than
$2,000  worth  of  equipment.

Before  she  opened  the  Singapore  in  1947,
Eva  Grant  engaged  in  the  sale  of  metal  prod-
ucts. In  that  year  she  met  Paul  Roland  Jones,
who  allegedly  was  seeking  customers  for  iron
pipe  and  whom  she  referred  to  Hyman  Ruben-
stein. Jones  had,  at  about  that  time,  been  con-
victed of  attempting  to  bribe  the  newly  elected
sheriff  of  Dallas.  On  October  24,  1947,  he  was
arrested  for  violating  Federal  narcotics  statutes.
Jack  Ruby  had  visited  Dallas  early  in  1947  to
help  Eva  Grant  manage  the  Singapore,  and
5  days  after  Jones'  arrest,  Jack  and  Hyman
Rubenstein  were  interrogated  in  Chicago  by
agents  of  the  Bureau  of  Narcotics.  The  brothers
admitted  knowing  Jones  but  denied  awareness
of  his  connection  with  narcotics.  During  the
2  years  in  which  Jones  was  appealing  his  con-
viction he  and  other  criminals  frequented  the
Singapore  Club,  then  operated  by  Jack  Ruby.

Intensive  investigation  to  determine  whether
Jack  Ruby  was  criminally  or  otherwise  con-
nected with  Jones'  narcotics  violation  leads  the
Commission  to  conclude  Ruby  probably  was


not  involved.  A  search  of  the  files  of  the  Bu-
reau of  Narcotics  disclosed  no  record  that
either  Hyman  or  Jack  had  been  prosecuted  by
Federal  authorities  in  1947.  Jack,  Hyman,  and
Eva  denied  participating  in  any  narcotics  ac-
tivities. Jones  and  his  coconspirators  also  denied
that  Jack  was  a  participant.  One  of  Jones'  con-
federates reported  after  the  shooting  of  Oswald
that  although  Jones  "propositioned"  the  two
brothers  concerning  narcotics,  they  refused  to
participate.  Moreover,  when  one  of  the  con-
spirators was  arrested  with  48  pounds  of  raw
opium  in  his  possession,  he  implicated  Jones
and  another  person,  both  of  whom  were  con-
victed, but  he  did  not  implicate  Jack  Ruby  or
his  brother.

Late  in  1947,  Ruby  established  permanent
residence  in  Dallas.  Shortly  after  shooting  Os-
wald, Ruby  stated  that  he  returned  to  Dallas
at  Eva  Grant's  request,  to  help  her  operate  the
Singapore  Supper  Club.  However,  on  Decem-
ber 21,  1963,  he  reported  that  although  asso-
ciation with  his  sister  had  been  the  purpose  of
his  initial  visit  to  Dallas,  he  returned  there
because  of  the  failure  of  his  "merchandising
deals"  in  Chicago.  These  factors,  in  conjunc-
tion with  his  separation  from  Earl  Products,
probably  motivated  Ruby's  move  to  Dallas.

A  different  reason  has  been  given  by  Steve
Guthrie,  former  sheriff  of  Dallas.  Guthrie  re-
ported that  shortly  after  his  election  as  sheriff
in  July  1946,  Paul  Roland  Jones,  representing
other  Chicago  criminals,  offered  him  a  substan-
tial amount  of  money  to  permit  them  to  move
in  and  manage  illegal  activities  in  Dallas.  Al-
though he  never  met  Ruby,  Guthrie  asserted
that  these  criminals  frequently  mentioned  that
Ruby  would  operate  a  "fabulous"  restaurant  as
a  front  for  gambling  activities.

Despite  its  source,  the  Commission  finds  it
difficult  to  accept  this  report.  A  member  of  the
Dallas  Pohce  Department,  Lt.  George  E.  But-
ler, who  was  present  during  virtually  all  the
conversations  between  Guthrie  and  Jones  and
who  performed  considerable  investigative  work
on  the  case,  stated  that  Ruby  was  not  involved
in  the  bribery  attempt  and  that  he  had  not
heard  of  Ruby  until  the  investigation  and  trial
of  Jones  had  been  completed.  He  explained
that  Ruby's  connection  with  the  case  stemmed
from  the  fact  that,  as  mentioned  previously,
Jones  and  other  criminals  frequented  the  Singa-
pore Supper  Club.  And  22  recordings  of  the
conversations  between  Guthrie,  Butler,  and
Jones  not  only  fail  to  mention  Ruby,  but  indi-
cate that  Jones  was  to  bring  from  outside  the
Dallas  area  only  one  confederate,  who  was  not
to  be  Jewish.

The  Change  of  Name

Sometime  in  1947,  Jack  Ruby's  brothers
Earl  and  Sam,  pursuant  to  a  joint  understand-
ing, legally  changed  their  names  from  Ruben-
stein to  Ruby.  Earl  testified  that  he  changed  his
name  because  everyone  called  him  Ruby  and


354


because  a  former  employer  advised  him  that  it
was  preferable  not  to  use  a  "Jewish  name"  on
mail  orders  for  Earl  Products.

On  December  30,  1947,  Jack  changed  his
name  to  Jack  L.  Ruby  by  securing  a  decree
from  the  68th  Judicial  District  Court  of  Dallas.
His  petition  alleged  that  he  sought  the  change
because  the  name  Rubenstein  was  misunder-
stood and  too  long  and  because  he  was  "well
known"  as  Jack  L.  Ruby.  The  Bureau  of  Narcot-
ics report  of  his  relationship  with  Paul  Roland
Jones  indicates  that  as  of  October  29,  1947,
Jack  was  known  as  Ruby;  however,  several  per-
sons in  Dallas  knew  him  as  Rubenstein.

Nightclub  Operations

Except  for  a  brief  period  in  about  1953,
when  Ruby  managed  the  Ervay  Theater,  a  mo-
tion picture  house,  the  operation  of  nightclubs
and  dancehalls  was  his  primary  source  of  in-
come, and  his  basic  interest  in  life  during  the
16  years  he  spent  in  Dallas  prior  to  shooting
Lee  Oswald.  When  Ruby  first  arrived  in  Dallas
in  1947,  he  and  Eva  Grant  jointly  managed
the  Singapore  Supper  Club.  Shortly  thereafter,
she  returned  to  the  west  coast.  Except  for  spo-
radic trips  to  Dallas,  she  remained  there  until
1959,  leaving  Ruby  a  power  of  attorney.  Ruby,
who  had  received  $14,000  from  the  sale  of  his
interest  in  Earl  Products,  invested  a  substantial
amount  in  the  club,  which  Mrs.  Grant  de-
scribed as  "too  nice  a  club  for  that  part  of
town."  Ruby  changed  the  Singapore's  name  to
the  Silver  Spur  Club.  It  was  operated  primarily
as  a  dancehall,  serving  beer  to  its  patrons.  In
about  1952,  Ruby  borrowed  $3,700  from  a
friend,  Ralph  Paul,  to  purchase  the  Bob  WiUs
Ranch  House  with  Martin  Gimpel,  a  former
associate  in  the  Spartan  Novelty  Co.  The
Ranch  House  was  run  as  a  western-type  night-
club.

With  two  establishments  to  run.  Ruby  expe-
rienced substantial  financial  reversals  in  1952.
He  abandoned  his  interest  in  the  Ranch  House
and,  on  July  1,  1952,  transferred  the  Silver
Spur  to  Gimpel  and  Willie  Epstein,  who  as-
sumed some  of  its  debts.  Disappointed  by  these
setbacks,  Ruby  stated  that  he  had  a  "mental
breakdown,"  and  "hibernated"  in  the  Cotton
Bowl  Hotel  in  Dallas  for  3  or  4  months,  declin-
ing to  see  his  friends.  StUl  depressed,  he  then
returned  to  Chicago,  apparently  intending  to
remain  there  permanently.  However,  he  stayed
only  6  weeks.  Gimpel  and  Epstein  were  anxious
to  be  rid  of  the  Silver  Spur  and  Ruby  once
again  became  its  owner.

In  1953,  Ruby  obtained  an  interest  in  the
Vegas  Club,  which  he  operated  with  Joe  Bonds
until  September  1953.  At  that  time  he  informed
Irving  Alkana,  who  had  retained  a  prior  owner-
ship interest,  that  he  was  unable  to  meet  his
obligations  with  respect  to  the  club.  Alkana
then  assumed  management  of  the  Vegas  until
June  19,  1954,  when,  following  numerous  dis-
agreements with  him,  he  sold  Ruby  his  interest.


Ruby  still  owned  the  Vegas  Club  at  the  time
of  his  arrest  on  November  24,  1963.  However,
when  Eva  Grant  returned  from  San  Francisco
in  1959,  she  assumed  management  of  the  club,
receiving  a  salary  but  no  ownership  interest.
The  Vegas,  which  occasionally  featured  strip-
tease acts,  employed  a  dance  band  and  served
beer,  wine,  soft  drinks,  and  some  prepared
foods.

In  1954,  Ruby's  Vegas  associate,  Joe  Bonds,
was  convicted  of  sodomy  and  sent  to  a  Texas
penitentiary  to  serve  an  8-year  sentence.  In
1955,  Ruby  sold  the  Silver  Spur  to  Roscoe
"Rocky"  Robinson;  however,  Robinson  could
not  obtain  a  license  to  operate  the  club  and  it
was  subsequently  closed.  For  a  few  months
during  this  period.  Ruby  also  operated  Her-
nando's Hideaway,  but  this  venture  proved
unsuccessful.

Sam  Ruby  testified  that  shortly  after  he  sold
his  interest  in  Earl  Products  in  mid-1955  and
moved  to  Dallas,  he  loaned  Jack  $5,500  to
enable  him  to  pay  Federal  excise  taxes  on  the
Vegas.  As  security  for  the  loan,  Sam  required
Jack  to  execute  a  bill  of  sale  of  the  Vegas.
Upon  Jack's  default  in  payment,  Sam  instituted
suit,  claiming  that  he  owned  the  Vegas  and
that  Jack  had  breached  his  promise  to  repur-
chase it.  The  case  was  ultimately  settled,  with
Jack  retaining  his  ownership  interest  in  the
club.

In  late  1959,  Jack  Ruby  became  a  partner  of
Joe  Slatin  in  establishing  the  Sovereign  Club,  a
private  club  that  was  apparently  permitted  by
Texas  law  to  sell  liquor  to  members.  Since
Slatin  was  troubled  about  Dallas  news  stories
describing  police  raids  on  a  private  club  that
permitted  gambling,  he  felt  he  needed  more
capital.  Ruby  invested  about  $6,000  which  he
borrowed  from  his  brother  Earl  and  perhaps
some  of  his  own  money.

The  Sovereign  was  described  as  a  "plush"
and  exclusive  club,  and  Ruby  was  apparently
very  anxious  to  attract  a  wealthy  "carriage"
trade.  The  venture  was  not  successful,  however.
The  two  men  could  not  work  together,  and
Slatin  withdrew  in  early  1960.  Ruby  turned  for
new  capital  to  Ralph  Paul,  who  had  operated
a  Dallas  club  with  Joe  Bonds.  Ruby  still  owed
Paul  $1,200  of  the  $3,700  loan  made  in  con-
nection with  the  Bob  Wills  Ranch  House,  but
Paul  advanced  him  another  $2,200,  which  al-
lowed him  to  pay  the  Sovereign's  rent  for  4
months.  Subsequently,  Ruby  spontaneously
gave  Paul  a  stock  certificate  representing  50
percent  of  the  equity  of  the  corporation  own-
ing the  club.  Ruby  told  Paul  that  if  the  venture
failed,  the  Sovereign's  fixtures  and  other  physi-
cal property  would  belong  to  Paul.

Experiencing  diflBculty  in  recruiting  sufficient
members,  Ruby  soon  found  himself  again  un-
able to  pay  the  Sovereign's  monthly  rent  of
$550.  Again  he  turned  to  Paul,  who  loaned  him
$1,650  on  the  condition  that  he  change  the
club's  method  of  operation.  Paul  insisted  that


355


Ruby  discontinue  club  memberships,  even
though  this  would  prevent  the  sale  of  liquor,
and  offer  striptease  shows  as  a  substitute  attrac-
tion. Ruby  agreed,  and  the  Sovereign's  name
was  changed  to  the  Carousel  Club.  It  became
one  of  three  downtown  Dallas  burlesque  clubs
and  served  champagne,  beer,  "setups"  and
pizza,  its  only  food.  The  Carousel  generally
employed  four  strippers,  a  master  of  cere-
monies, an  assistant  manager,  a  band,  three  or
four  waitresses,  and  a  porter  or  handyman.  Net
receipts  averaged  about  $5,000  per  month,
most  of  which  was  allocated  to  the  club's  pay-
roll. Late  in  1963,  Ruby  began  to  distribute
"permanent  passes"  to  the  Carousel;  however,
the  cards  were  apparently  designed  solely  for
publicity  and  did  not  affect  the  club's  legal
status.

Employee  Relationships

Ruby's  employees  displayed  a  wide  range  of
personal  reactions  to  him.  Those  associated
with  Ruby  long  enough  to  grow  accustomed
to  his  violent  temper  and  constant  threats  of
discharge  generally  portray  him  sympathetically.
They  reported  he  was  genuinely  interested  in
their  welfare  and  happiness.  In  addition,  many
former  employees  stated  that  he  was  a  pleasant
or  unobjectionable  employer.

There  is  also  considerable  evidence  that
Ruby  tended  to  dominate  his  employees,  fre-
quently resorted  to  violence  in  dealing  with
them,  publicly  embarrassed  them,  sometimes
attempted  to  cheat  them  of  their  pay,  and  de-
layed paying  their  salaries.  Other  employees
reported  Ruby  continually  harassed  his  help,
and  used  obscene  language  in  their  presence.
However  he  frequently  apologized,  sought  to
atone  for  his  many  temper  tantrums,  and  com-
pletely foreot  others.

One  of  the  manv  viol'^nt  incidents  that  were
reported  took  place  in  1950,  when  Ruby  struck
an  emnloyee  over  the  head  with  a  blackjack.
In  1951,  after  his  guitarist,  Willis  Dickerson,
told  Ruby  to  "go  to  hell,"  Ruby  knocked
Dickerson  to  the  ground,  then  pinned  him  to  a
wall  and  kicked  him  in  the  groin.  During  the
scuffle,  Dickerson  bit  Ruby's  finger  so  badly
that  the  top  half  of  Rubv's  left  index  finger
was  amputated.  In  approximately  1955,  Ruby
beat  one  of  his  musicians  with  brass  knuckles;
the  musician's  mouth  required  numerous
stitches.

During  1960,  Ruby  and  two  entertainers,
Breck  Wall  and  Joe  Peterson,  entered  into  an
agreement  that  the  performers  would  produce
and  star  in  a  revue  at  the  Sovereign  in  exchange
for  a  50-percent  interest  in  the  club.  After  per-
forming for  2  months,  the  entertainers  com-
plained that  they  had  received  neither  a  share
of  the  profits  nor  evidence  of  their  proprietary
interest.  Ruby  responded  by  hitting  Peterson
in  the  mouth,  knocking  out  a  tooth.  The  two
men  left  the  Sovereign's  employ,  but  they  sub-


sequently accepted  Ruby's  apology  and  resumed
their  friendship  with  him.

In  September  1962,  Frank  Ferraro,  the
Carousel's  handyman,  became  involved  in  a
dispute  at  a  nearby  bar.  Ruby  told  him  not  to
get  into  a  fight,  and  Ferraro  told  Ruby  to  mind
his  own  business.  Ruby  then  followed  Ferraro
to  another  club  and  beat  him  severely.  Ferraro
required  emergency  hospital  treatment  for  his
eye,  but  he  decided  not  to  press  charges  since
Ruby  paid  for  his  hospital  care.  In  March
1963,  during  an  argument  about  wages.  Ruby
threatened  to  throw  a  cigarette  girl  down  the
stairs  of  the  Carousel.

Ruby's  relationship  with  his  employees  com-
manded much  of  his  attention  during  the
months  preceding  the  assassination.  The  Carou-
sel's comparatively  high  turnover  rate  and
Ruby's  intense  desire  to  succeed  required  him
to  meet  numerous  prospective  employees,  pa-
trons, and  other  persons  who  might  help  im-
prove his  business.

Ruby  frequently  encountered  difficulties  with
the  American  Guild  of  Variety  Artists
(AGVA),  the  union  which  represented  Carou-
sel entertainers.  For  several  years,  starting  in
about  1961,  he  unsuccessfully  sought  modifi-
cation of  AGVA's  policy  permitting  "amateur"
strippers,  inexperienced  girls  paid  less  than
union-scale  wages,  to  perform  at  union  houses.
Ruby  apparently  believed  his  two  competitors,
the  Weinstein  brothers,  were  scheduling  ama-
teur shows  in  a  manner  calculated  to  destroy
his  business.  Ruby's  discontent  with  AGVA
grew  particularly  acute  during  the  late  summer
and  early  fall  of  1963  when,  in  addition  to
meeting  with  AGVA  officials,  he  called  upon
several  acquaintances,  including  known  crimi-
nals, who,  he  thought,  could  influence  AGVA
on  his  behalf.  Other  problems  with  AGVA
arose  because  of  his  policy  of  continuous
shows,  which  did  not  give  masters  of  cere-
monies enough  time  off,  and  his  alleged  use  of
AGVA  members  to  mingle  with  patrons  to  pro-
mote the  consumption  of  liquor.

In  June  1963,  Ruby  visited  New  Orleans,
where  he  obtained  the  services  of  a  stripper
known  as  "Jada,"  who  became  his  featured
performer.  Jada  and  Ruby  had  numerous  con-
tract disputes  and  he  was  concerned  about  her
high  salary,  recurrent  absenteeism,  and  dimin-
ishing drawing  power.  Moreover,  he  thought
that  Jada  had  deliberately  exceeded  even  the
Carousel's  liberal  standards  of  decency  in  order
to  cause  him  to  lose  his  license  or  to  obtain
publicity  for  herself.  On  several  occasions  Ruby
excitedly  turned  off  the  spotlights  during  her
act,  and  at  the  end  of  October  1963,  he  fired
her.  However,  after  Jada  sued  out  a  peace
bond,  she  apparently  recovered  a  week's  salary
from  Ruby.

In  addition  to  problems  with  its  star  stripper,
the  Carousel  was  required  to  employ  three  mas-
ters of  ceremonies  in  rapid  succession  following
the departure in  about  September 1963, of


356


Wally  Weston,  who  worked  there  about  15
months.  And  in  early  November,  the  band  that
had  played  at  the  Vegas  Club  for  about  8  years
left  the  Vegas  to  accept  the  offer  of  another
Dallas  club.

Financial  Data  and  Tax  Problems

Jack  Ruby's  pockets  and  the  trunk  of  his  car
served  as  his  bank.  With  a  few  exceptions,
Ruby  and  his  clubs  rarely  employed  bank  ac-
counts. Instead,  Ruby  carried  his  cash  with
him,  paying  the  bulk  of  his  expenses  and  debts
directly  out  of  club  receipts.

During  the  latter  half  of  1963,  the  Carousel,
the  Vegas,  and  Ruby  each  maintained  checking
accounts  at  the  Merchants  State  Bank  in  Dallas.
Balances  of  the  latter  two  accounts  never  ex-
ceeded $275.  In  July  1963,  the  Carousel's  ac-
count had  more  than  $500;  after  August  8,  its
maximum  balance  was  less  than  $300.  Between
May  31  and  November  24,  1963,  53  checks
were  drawn  on  the  three  accounts;  with  the
exception  of  one  check  for  $129.47,  all  were
for  less  than  $100.  He  generally  purchased
cashier's  checks  at  the  Merchants  State  Bank
to  pay  his  monthly  rental  of  $550  for  the
Carousel  and  $500  for  the  Vegas.  He  also  pur-
chased cashier's  checks  during  the  3  months
prior  to  the  assassination  to  pay  about  $1,500
to  the  Texas  State  treasurer,  $110  to  Temple
Shearith  Israel,  apparently  for  Jewish  high  holy
day  tickets,  and  $60  to  the  American  Society
of  Authors  and  Publishers.

Records  of  the  more  than  50  banking  insti-
tutions checked  during  the  investigation  of
Ruby's  financial  affairs  revealed  that  he  had
three  other  dormant  accounts,  aU  with  small
balances.  Two  safety  deposit  boxes  belonging
to  Ruby,  opened  by  Texas  officials  pursuant  to
search  warrants,  were  empty  and  unused  for
more  than  a  year  prior  to  the  assassination.
Although  Ruby  negotiated  several  loans  at  the
Merchants  State  Bank,  there  is  no  evidence
that  he  was  the  maker  or  co-maker  of  other
loans,  and,  after  investigation,  the  Dallas  Police
Department  found  no  record  that  Ruby  co-
signed  the  note  of  any  policeman  at  any  time.

Ruby's  financial  records  were  chaotic.  One
accountant  abandoned  efforts  to  prepare  in-
come tax  returns  and  other  financial  state-
ments because  of  the  boneless  disarray  of
Ruby's  data.  The  record  indicates  that  Ruby
was  frequently  weeks,  if  not  months,  late  in
filing  Federal  tax  forms  and  that  he  held  nu-
merous conferences  with  Internal  Revenue
agents  who  attempted  to  obtain  the  delinquent
statements.

Ruby  encountered  serious  difficulties  with
respect  to  State  franchise  and  Federal  excise
and  income  taxes.  The  Texas  charter  of  the
corporation  controlling  the  Sovereign  and
Carousel  clubs  was  canceled  in  1961,  because
Ruby  failed  to  pay  Texas  franchise  taxes.  And,
only  after  numerous  conferences,  did  Ruby  and
representatives  of  the  Internal  Revenue  Service


reach  agreements  on  installment  payments  of
various  Federal  tax  liabilities,  to  which  Ruby
more  or  less  adhered.

Ruby's  primary  difficulty  concerned  Federal
excise  taxes.  Advised  by  an  attorney  that  the
Vegas  Club,  a  dance  hall  providing  food,  was
not  subject  to  Federal  excise  taxes  because  it
was  not  a  "cabaret,"  Ruby  charged  Vegas  pa-
trons on  the  assumption  that  no  excise  taxes
were  due.  However,  his  attorney  reported,  when
Federal  courts  ruled  that  dance  halls  providing
"incidental"  food  were  subject  to  excise  taxes
as  "cabarets,"  Ruby  became  liable  to  the  Fed-
eral Government  for  more  than  6  years  of
taxes,  amounting,  with  interest,  to  almost  ex-
actly $40,000.

Ruby  also  fell  behind  on  his  p>ersonal  income
tax  payments.  At  the  time  of  his  arrest  he  owed
more  than  $4,400  for  1959  and  1960.  Remit-
tances accompanied  his  1961  and  1962  tax
forms,  the  latter  received  by  the  office  of  the
Dallas  EHstrict  Director  on  September  18,  1963.
The  following  table  summarizes  amounts  which
Ruby  reported  as  gross  and  net  income  from
the  Vegas  Club  from  1956  to  1962;  and  the
taxes  due:

Gross  Net

Year  income  income  Tax

1962 $41,462.77 $5,619.65  *$1,217.75

1961 40,411.00 6,255.29 *1,200.00

1960 44,482.41 9,703.90 2,221.39

1959 50,981.95 14,060.86 3,778.17

1958 37,755.65 3,274.64 586.52

1957 33,671.60 2,619.52  438.41

1956 30,695.27 7,437.01 1,527.10

*  Estimated
On  his  income  tax  forms.  Ruby  did  not  itemize
personal  deductions  and  claimed  only  his  own
exemption.  For  1962,  Ruby  reported  salary  in-
come of  $650  from  the  corporation  controlling
the  Carousel,  and  $900  for  1961.

Ruby  and  officers  of  the  Internal  Revenue
Service  frequently  discussed  methods  of  satisfy-
ing his  large  excise  and  income  tax  liability.  In
1960,  the  Government  filed  tax  liens  for  more
than  $20,000.  In  November  1962,  the  Govern-
ment rejected  Ruby's  offer  to  pay  $8,000  to
compromise  the  assessed  taxes  of  more  than
$20,000  because  he  had  not  filed  returns  for
other  Federal  taxes  and  had  not  paid  these
taxes  as  they  became  due.  These  other  taxes,
for  the  period  September  1959  through  June
1962,  amounted  to  an  additional  $20,000.  In
June  1963,  Ruby  submitted  an  offer  of  $3,000
to  compromise  aU  past  assessments;  the  offer
was  not  acted  upon  prior  to  November  24,  1963.

In  addition  to  nightclub  management  and
ownership.  Ruby  participated  in  numerous
other  commercial  ventures.  He  was  able  to  do
so  primarily  because  work  at  the  clubs  con-
sumed few  of  his  daytime  hours.  Many  of
Ruby's  ventures  related  to  show  business,  others
were  somewhat  speculative  promotions;  almost
all  ended  unsuccessfully.


357


While  operating  the  Silver  Spur  Club,  Ruby
sold  costume  jewelry  at  discount  rates,  and,  in
about  1951,  he  sold  sewing  machine  attach-
ments at  the  Texas  State  Fair.  Approximately
a  year  later,  he  managed  a  talented  young
Negro  boy,  "Little  Daddy"  Nelson.  The  boy
appeared  at  the  Silver  Spur,  the  Vegas  Club,
and  the  Bob  Wills  Ranch  House.  In  about  1953
or  1954,  Ruby  took  "Little  Daddy"  and  his
parents  to  Chicago  to  obtain  a  television  ap-
pearance for  him.  However,  shortly  after  their
arrival.  Ruby  was  confronted  by  a  second
woman  claiming  to  be  "Little  Daddy's"  mother.
Upon  advice  of  counsel,  Ruby  decided  to
abandon  the  venture.

In  1954,  Ruby  became  interested  in  the  sale
of  pizza  crusts  to  Dallas  restaurants.  He  is  also
reported  to  have  sold  an  arthritic  preparation
and  to  have  manufactured  and  sold  "Miniron,"
a  liquid  vitamin  formula.  In  about  1958  or
1959,  Ruby  attempted  to  build  and  sell  log
cabins  at  a  Texas  lake  resort.  In  early  1959,  he
investigated  the  possibility  of  selling  jeeps  to
Cuba.  He  is  also  reported  to  have  furnished
entertainment  for  a  Dallas  hotel,  to  have  pro-
moted records  for  musicians  and  to  have  sold
English  stainless  steel  razor  blades.

In  October  1963  Ruby  assisted  the  pro-
ducers of  a  carnival  show,  "How  Hollywood
Makes  Movies,"  appearing  at  the  Texas  State
Fair.  At  about  this  time  Ruby  also  sought  to
open  a  new  club  in  Dallas.  He  conferred  vdth
numerous  persons  and  placed  advertisements
in  Dallas  newspapers  in  an  attempt  to  obtain
financial  backing.  Assuming  that  he  would  be
occupied  by  the  new  club,  Ruby  offered  his
oldest  brother,  Hyman,  a  managerial  post  at  the
Carousel.  However,  Hyman,  who  had  recently
lost  his  sales  territory,  declined  the  offer  be-
cause he  felt  he  was  too  old  for  the  nightclub
business.

Ruby  unsuccessfully  attempted  to  sell  "tvdst-
boards,"  an  exercising  device  consisting  of  two
square  fiberboards  separated  by  ball  bearings.
Despite  the  contrary  advice  of  his  brother  Earl,
Jack  ordered  several  dozen  twistboards  and  had
2,000  promotional  flyers  published.  He  had  one
of  his  strippers  demonstrate  the  twistboards  at
the  Texas  Products  Show  during  the  first  week
of  November  1963.

Arrests  and  Violations

Between  1949  and  November  24,  1963,
Ruby  was  arrested  eight  times  by  the  Dallas
Police  Department.  The  dates,  charges,  and
dispositions  of  these  arrests  are  as  follows:
February  4,  1949,  Ruby  paid  a  $10  fine  for
disturbing  the  peace.  July  26,  1953,  Ruby  was
suspected  of  carrying  a  concealed  weapon;
however,  no  charges  were  filed  and  Ruby  was
released  on  the  same  day.  May  1,  1954,  Ruby
was  arrested  for  allegedly  carrying  a  concealed
weapon  and  violating  a  peace  bond;  again  no
charges  were  filed  and  Ruby  was  released  on
the  same  day.  December  5,  1954,  Ruby  was


arrested  for  allegedly  violating  State  liquor
laws  by  selling  liquor  after  hours;  the  complaint
was  dismissed  on  February  8,  1955.  June  21,
1959,  Ruby,  was  arrested  for  allegedly  per-
mitting dancing  after  hours;  the  complaint  was
dismissed  on  July  8,  1959.  August  21,  1960,
Ruby  was  again  arrested  for  allegedly  permit-
ting dancing  after  hours;  Ruby  posted  $25  bond
and  was  released  on  that  date.  February  12,
1963,  Ruby  was  arrested  on  a  charge  of  simple
assault;  he  was  found  not  guilty  February  27,
1963.  Finally,  on  March  14,  1963,  Ruby  was
arrested  for  allegedly  ignoring  traffic  sum-
monses; a  $35  bond  was  posted.

When  Ruby  applied  for  a  beer  license  in
March  1961,  he  reported  that  he  had  been
arrested  "about  four  or  five  times"  between
1947  and  1953.  Between  1950  and  1963,  he
received  20  tickets  for  motor  vehicle  viola-
tions, paying  four  $10  fines  and  three  of  $3.  In
1956  and  1959,  Ruby  was  placed  on  6  months'
probation  as  a  traffic  violator.

Ruby  was  also  frequently  suspended  by  the
Texas  Liquor  Control  Board.  In  August  1949,
when  he  was  operating  the  Silver  Spur,  he  was
suspended  for  5  days  on  a  charge  of  "Agents —
Moral  Turpitude."  In  1953  Ruby  received  a
5-day  suspension  because  of  an  obscene  show,
and,  in  1954,  a  10-day  suspension  for  allowing
a  drunkard  on  his  premises.  On  February  18,
1954,  he  was  suspended  for  5  days  because  of
an  obscene  striptease  act  at  the  Silver  Spur  and
for  the  consumption  of  alcoholic  beverages
during  prohibited  hours.  On  March  26,  1956,
Ruby  was  suspended  by  the  liquor  board  for  3
days  because  several  of  his  checks  were  dis-
honored. On  October  23,  1961,  he  received
another  3-day  suspension  because  an  agent
solicited  the  sale  of  alcoholic  beverages  for
consumption  on  licensed  premises.

Police  Associations

Although  the  precise  nature  of  his  relation-
ship to  members  of  the  Dallas  Police  Depart-
ment is  not  susceptible  of  conclusive  evaluation,
the  evidence  indicates  that  Ruby  was  keenly
interested  in  policemen  and  their  work.  Jesse
Curry,  chief  of  the  Dallas  Police  Department,
testified  that  no  more  than  25  to  50  of  Dallas'
almost  1,200  policemen  were  acquainted  with
Ruby.  However,  the  reports  of  present  and  past
members  of  the  Dallas  Police  Department  as
well  as  Ruby's  employees  and  acquaintances
indicate  that  Ruby's  police  friendships  were  far
more  widespread  than  those  of  the  average
citizen.

There  is  no  credible  evidence  that  Ruby
sought  special  favors  from  police  officers  or
attempted  to  bribe  them.  Although  there  is
considerable  evidence  that  Ruby  gave  police-
men reduced  rates,  declined  to  exact  any  cover
charge  from  them,  and  gave  them  free  coffee
and  soft  drinks,  this  hospitality  was  not  un-
usual for  a  Dallas  nightclub  operator.  Ruby's
personal  attachment  to  police  officers  is  demon-


358


strated  by  reports  that  he  attended  the  funeral
of  at  least  one  policeman  killed  in  action  and
staged  a  benefit  performance  for  the  widow
of  another.  Ruby  regarded  several  officers  as
personal  friends,  and  others  had  worked  for
him.  Finally,  at  least  one  policeman  regularly
dated,  and  eventually  married,  one  of  the
Carousel's  stripp>ers.

Underworld  Ties

From  the  time  that  Ruby  arrived  in  Dallas
in  1947,  he  was  friendly  with  numerous  under-
world figures.  One  of  his  earliest  Dallas  ac-
quaintances was  Paul  Roland  Jones,  who  was
convicted  of  attempting  to  bribe  the  sheriff
of  Dallas  and  engaging  in  the  sale  of  narcotics.
Joe  Bonds,  one  of  Ruby's  partners  in  the  Vegas
Club,  had  a  criminal  record.

Ruby,  who  enjoyed  card  playing  and  horse
racing,  was  friendly  with  several  professional
gamblers.  In  1959,  he  visited  Cuba  at  the  in-
vitation and  expense  of  Lewis  McWillie,  a
professional  gambler.  Alice  Nichols  reported
that  Ruby's  refusal  to  give  up  gambling  was
one  reason  why  she  never  seriously  considered
marrying  him.  When  Sidney  Seidband,  a  Dallas
gambler,  was  arrested  in  Oklahoma  City,  his
Ust  of  gambling  acquaintances  included  Jack
Ruby.  And  other  friends  of  Ruby  have  been
identified  as  gamblers.  Finally,  two  persons  of
questionable  reliability  have  reported  that
Ruby's  consent  was  necessary  before  gambling
or  narcotics  operations  could  be  launched  in
Dallas.

Based  on  its  evaluation  of  the  record,  how-
ever, the  Commission  believes  that  the  evi-
dence does  not  establish  a  significant  link
between  Ruby  and  organized  crime.  Both
State  and  Federal  officials  have  indicated  that
Ruby  was  not  affiliated  with  organized  criminal
activity.  And  numerous  persons  have  reported
that  Ruby  was  not  comiected  with  such  ac-
tivity.

Travels

Despite  reports  that  Ruby  visited  Havana,
Las  Vegas,  New  York,  Chicago,  Honolulu,
and  Mexican  border  towns,  most  of  his  time
subsequent  to  1947  was  spent  in  Dallas.  Some
of  his  travels,  including  his  efforts  in  behalf
of  "Little  Daddy"  Nelson  and  his  visit  to  New
Orleans  in  June  1963  have  been  discussed.
Ruby  stated  that  he  went  to  Chicago  in  1952,
in  1958  when  his  father  died,  and  in  August
1963  when  he  met  members  of  his  family  at
O'Hara  International  Airport  while  en  route
from  New  York  to  Dallas.  His  August  trip  to
New  York  motivated  by  his  difficulties  with
the  American  Guild  of  Variety  Artists  and  his
desire  to  obtain  talent,  has  been  completely
established  by  hotel  records.  Early  in  1963
Ruby  also  traveled  to  Wichita,  Kans.,  because
of  his  interest  in  stripper  Gail  Raven,  and  on
May  25,  1963,  he  apparently  registered  in  an
Oklahoma  motel.


Although  Ruby  denies  being  in  Las  Vegas
after  1937,  there  are  unsupported  rumors  that
he  was  in  that  city  in  late  1962,  and  the  early
part  of  November  1963.  Reports  that  he  was
in  Las  Vegas  during  the  weekend  prior  to  the
assassination  appear  similarly  unfounded.

There  is  some  uncertainty  about  Ruby's  trip
to  Havana,  Cuba,  in  1959.  The  evidence  indi-
cates that  he  accepted  an  invitation  from
gambler  Lewis  J.  McWillie,  who  subsequently
became  a  violent  anti-Castroite,  to  visit  Havana
at  McWillie's  expense.  Ruby  apparently  met
McWillie  in  about  1950,  when  McWillie  op-
erated a  Dallas  nightclub.  McWillie,  whom
Ruby  said  he  idolized,  supervised  gambling
activities  at  Havana's  Tropicana  Hotel  in  1959
and  later  was  employed  in  a  managerial  ca-
pacity in  a  Las  Vegas  gambling  establishment.
Ruby  testified  that  he  went  to  Havana  for  8
days  in  August  1959  and  left  because  he  was
not  interested  in  its  gambling  activities.  Mc-
Willie corroborated  this  story  except  that  he
stated  only  that  Ruby  visited  Havana  "some-
time in  1959."  Three  Chicagoans  reported
seeing  Ruby  in  Havana  during  the  Labor  Day
weekend  in  1959.  Meyer  Panitz,  an  acquaint-
ance of  McWillie,  reported  that  when  he  met
Ruby  in  Miami  during  the  "sunmier  of  1959"
Ruby  stated  that  he  was  returning  from  a
pleasure  trip  to  Cuba.  The  theory  that  the  trip
to  Havana  had  conspiratorial  implications  is
discussed  in  chapter  VI.  There  is  no  reliable
evidence  that  Ruby  went  to  Havana  subse-
quent to  September  1959.

Although  Ruby  denied  ever  being  in  Hawaii,
there  is  some  evidence  that  during  the  summer
of  1961  he  was  in  Honolulu  seeking  dancing
talent.  While  it  is  unlikely  that  Ruby  would
forget  a  trip  to  Honolulu  in  1961,  there  is
no  other  indication  that  such  a  trip,  if  it  oc-
curred, had  any  sinister  motives.


CHARACTER  AND  INTERESTS

Family  Relationships

As  mentioned  previously,  Eva  Grant  was  the
only  member  of  the  family  living  in  Dallas
when  Ruby  returned  to  that  city  in  late  1947.
In  1948,  she  returned  to  the  west  coast,  visiting
Dallas  sporadically  until  1959,  when  she  as-
sumed management  of  the  Vegas.  Despite
their  recurring  arguments,  during  which  they
sometimes  came  to  blows,  Ruby  was  closer  to
Eva  than  any  of  his  brothers  or  sisters.  In  the
summer  of  1963,  Eva  complained  bitterly  to
Ruby  because  he  gave  a  friend  about  $800
instead  of  paying  Vegas  Club  bills.  Eva,  citing
her  poor  health,  stated  that  she  should  be
hospitalized.  Ruby  rejoined  that  he  had  pro-
vided her  money  to  enter  a  hospital.  He  then
shoved  her,  causing  her  to  fall  back  about  8
feet  and  hurt  her  arm  and  shoulder.  At  this


359


point  Ruby  insisted  he  wanted  her  to  leave  the
Vegas  Club.

Ruby  frequently  told  Eva  to  submit  to  an
operation  and  in  early  November  1963  she
consented.  She  was  hospitalized  for  a  week,
leaving  about  November  13.  While  she  was
in  the  hospital,  Jack  called  Earl  and  Sam,  re-
questing them  to  convey  their  concern  to  Eva.
According  to  Eva,  Jack  visited  her  at  the  hos-
pital two  or  three  times  a  day.  He  kept  in
constant  touch  with  her  throughout  the  week-
end of  November  22.

Sam  Ruby  moved  to  Dallas  from  Chicago
in  July  1955,  after  selling  his  interest  in  the
Earl  Products  Co.  His  son's  asthma  and  Eva's
suggestion  that  he  work  as  a  builder  in  Dallas
prompted  the  move.  Apparently  as  a  result  of
difficulties  in  collecting  the  $5,500  Sam  loaned
Jack  in  1955  to  pay  Federal  excise  taxes.  Jack
and  Sam  were  never  particularly  close  to  each
other.  However,  Sam  entered  into  a  partner-
ship in  an  unsuccessful  ice  cream  business
with  Jack's  close  friend,  Ralph  Paul.  Jack
visited  Sam  and  his  family  occasionally,  es-
pecially on  Jewish  holidays,  and  from  time  to
time  they  spoke  to  each  other  by  telephone.

Jack  had  sporadic  contacts  with  his  brother
Earl,  who  remained  in  Chicago  until  about
1960,  when  he  moved  to  Detroit.  The  most
successful  of  the  brothers,  Earl  often  gave
Jack  business  advice  and  capital.  He  estimated,
perhaps  conservatively,  that,  when  arrested,
Jack  owed  him  $15,000.  The  evidence  also
indicates  that  Jack  borrowed  at  least  $1,000,
and  probably  more,  from  his  sister  Marion  in
Chicago.

Social  Relationships

There  have  been  statements  that  Ruby  was
a  homosexual.  The  available  evidence  does  not
support  the  allegation.  There  is  no  evidence  of
homosexuality  on  his  part;  Ruby  did  not  fre-
quent known  gathering  places  for  homosexuals,
many  of  the  reports  were  inherently  suspect
or  based  upon  questionable  or  inaccurate  prem-
ises, and  Ruby  and  most  of  his  associates  and
employees  denied  the  charge.  All  the  allega-
tions were  based  on  hearsay  or  derive  from
Ruby's  lisp  or  a  "feeling"  that  Ruby  was  a
"sissy,"  seemed  "weird,"  acted  effeminately,
and  sometimes  spoke  in  a  high-pitched  voice
when  angry.  Some  proceeded  upon  the  er-
roneous theory  that  Ruby  did  not  date  women.

For  the  better  part  of  11  years.  Ruby  dated
Mrs.  Alice  Reaves  Nichols,  a  blonde  divorcee,
4  years  younger  than  he.  Mrs.  Nichols,  secre-
tary to  a  Dallas  life  insurance  company  execu-
tive, testified  that  she  saw  Ruby  twice  a  week
between  1948  and  1956,  and  once  a  week
from  then  until  about  1959.  Ruby  discussed
marriage  with  Mrs.  Nichols,  but  Mrs.  Nichols
stated  that  while  dating  Ruby  she  was  seeing
other  men  and  he  was  taking  out  other  women.
Although  there  are  sharply  conflicting  reports
about  whether  Ruby  dated  women  who  worked


for  him,  the  record  indicates  that  Ruby  sought
and  enjoyed  feminine  company.

Affection  for  Dogs

Ruby  was  extremely  fond  of  dogs.  Numerous
persons  stated  that  he  was  constantly  accom-
panied by  several  of  the  dogs  he  owned.  Testi-
mony at  Ruby's  trial  in  March  1964  indicated
that  he  referred  to  his  dogs  as  his  "children."
He  also  became  extremely  incensed  when  he
witnessed  the  maltreatment  of  any  of  his  dogs.

Religious  Interests

Reared  in  the  Jewish  faith.  Jack  Ruby  was
not  especially  devout.  Rabbi  Hillel  Silverman,
whose  conservative  temple  Ruby  favored,  re-
ported that  when  Ruby's  father  died  in  1958,
Ruby  came  to  services  twice  daily  for  the  pre-
scribed period  of  11  months  to  recite  the
traditional  memorial  prayer.  Ruby  normally
attended  services  only  on  the  Jewish  high  holy
days  and  he  was  quite  unfamiliar  with  the
Hebrew  language.

Ruby  was  apparently  somewhat  sensitive  to
his  identity  as  a  Jew.  He  forbade  his  comedians
to  tell  stories  directed  at  Jews  or  Jewish  prac-
tices and,  on  several  occasions  after  1947,
he  fought  with  persons  making  derogatory
remarks  about  his  ethnic  origins.  The  evi-
dence also  indicates  that  he  was  deeply  upset
that  an  advertisement  insulting  President  Ken-
nedy appeared  above  a  Jewish-sounding  name.

Physical  Activities  and  Violence

While  in  Dallas,  Ruby  continued  attempts
to  keep  in  excellent  physical  condition.  He
frequently  exercised  at  the  YMCA,  the  Carou-
sel, and  his  apartment,  where  he  maintained  a
set  of  weights.  Ruby  was  extremely  concerned
about  his  weight  and  health,  including  his  bald-
ness, and  about  his  appearance  in  general.

Ruby's  concern  for  his  physical  well-being
was  partially  motivated  by  practical  considera-
tions, for  he  was  his  own  unofficial  club
bouncer.  On  about  15  occasions  since  1950,  he
beat  with  his  fists,  pistol  whipped,  or  black-
jacked patrons  who  became  unruly.  At  other
times,  he  ejected  troublesome  customers  with-
out a  beating,  in  many  instances,  justifiably.
However,  many  people  stated  that  he  employed
more  force  than  necessary,  particularly  because
he  often  ended  a  fracas  by  throwing  his  victim
down  the  stairs  of  the  Carousel.

Besides  acting  as  a  bouncer.  Ruby  on  numer-
ous other  occasions  severely  beat  people  who
were  not  club  patrons,  usually  employing  only
his  fists.  Several  of  these  episodes  have  been
discussed  in  connection  with  Ruby's  relation-
ship with  his  employees.  In  1951,  Ruby  at-
tacked a  man  who  had  called  him  a  "kike  Jew"
and  knocked  out  a  tooth.  At  about  that  time
Ruby  is  also  reported  to  have  knocked  a  man
down  from  behind  and  then  to  have  kicked
him  in  the  face.  In  about  1958,  Ruby  disarmed
a  man  who  had  drawn  a  gun  on  him  at  the


360


Vegas,  beat  him  almost  to  death,  put  the  gun
back  in  the  man's  pocket,  and  threw  him  down
the  stairs.  In  1958,  Ruby  reportedly  knocked
down  a  man  at  the  Vegas  who  was  6'3"  tall
and  weighed  230  pounds.  Ruby  was  approxi-
mately 5'9"  tall  and  weighed  about  175
pounds.  Ruby  then  made  the  man,  who  had
slapped  his  date,  crawl  out  of  the  club.  In  a
fight  at  the  Vegas,  reportedly  witnessed  by
policemen.  Ruby  severely  beat  a  heavyweight
boxer  who  had  threatened  him.

During  1962,  several  violent  episodes  oc-
curred. Ruby  beat  a  man  who  refused  to  pay
admission  or  leave  and  then  shoved  him  down
the  stairs.  He  "jostled"  a  woman  down  the
stairs  of  the  Carousel  and  struck  her  escort,
who  was  "much  smaller"  than  he.  On  one
occasion.  Ruby  picked  up  a  man  who  was
arguing  with  his  date,  knocked  him  to  the  floor,
cursed  him,  and  then  removed  him  from  the
Vegas.  When  a  cabdriver  entered  the  Carousel
and  inquired  about  a  patron  who  had  neglected
to  pay  his  fare,  Ruby  struck  the  cabdriver.

In  February  1963,  Ruby  badly  beat  Don
Tabon,  who  had  made  some  remarks  about
Ruby's  lady  companion,  injuring  Tabon's  eye.
Ruby  was  acquitted  of  a  charge  of  assault
and  Tabon  sought  no  monetary  relief  because
he  believed  Ruby  financially  incapable  of  satis-
fying any  resulting  judgment.  A  doctor  who
went  to  the  Carousel  several  times  between
August  and  November  1963,  stated  that  on
each  occasion  Ruby  ejected  someone  from  the
club.

Buddy  Turman,  a  prizefighter  and  Ruby's
friend,  stated  that  Ruby  "picked  his  shots."
According  to  Turman,  a  boimcer  at  the  Vegas
for  about  a  year,  Ruby's  victim  was  frequently
drunk,  female,  or  otherwise  incapable  of  suc-
cessfully resisting  Ruby's  attack.  The  evidence
indicates  that,  unlike  his  youthful  escapades,
Ruby  was  often  malicious.  He  frequently  felt
contrite,  however,  when  his  anger  had  passed


or  when  his  victim  was  an  old  acquaintance,
and  he  would  seek  to  make  amends  for  his
violent  temper.

With  two  exceptions,  there  is  no  evidence
that  Ruby  settled  disputes  with  firearms.  Shortly
before  Joe  Bonds'  conviction  in  1954,  Ruby  is
reported  to  have  chased  Bonds  with  a  pistol.
And,  Larry  Crafard  reported  that  about  a  week
before  the  assassination,  Ruby  told  him  to  get
Ruby's  gun  so  that  an  AGVA  official  and
former  employee,  Earl  Norman,  could  be
ejected.  Although  Ruby  did  not  often  use  his
gun,  it  was  frequently  accessible  when  he  was
carrying  large  amounts  of  money.

Generosity  to  Friends  and  the  Need  for
Recognition

While  Ruby  often  flared  up  and  acted  ag-
gressively, he  seemed  to  calm  down  or  forget
his  anger  quickly,  and  there  is  also  a  great
deal  of  evidence  that  he  was  extremely  gener-
ous to  his  friends.  He  loaned  money  to  them
and  apparently  cared  Uttle  whether  the  loans
would  be  repaid.  He  was  quick  to  offer  em-
ployment to  persons  desperately  in  need  of  a
job  and  he  lent  considerable  aid  to  persons
seeking  work  elsewhere.  Moreover,  when
friends  or  new  acquaintances  had  no  roof  over
their  heads.  Ruby's  apartment  was  frequently
theirs  to  share.

Ruby's  unusual  generosity  may  be  explained
in  part  by  his  extremely  emotional  reaction  to
persons  in  distress,  whdch  may  have  resulted
from  his  firsthand  familiarity  with  poverty,  and
by  his  unusual  craving  to  be  recognized  and
relied  upon.  Many  of  Ruby's  acquaintances
described  him  as  a  "publicity  hound,"  "glad
bander,"  and  "name  dropper,"  one  always
seeking  to  be  the  center  of  attention.  Appar-
ently the  "egocentrism"  of  his  youth  never  left
Ruby.  Yet,  frequently  he  sought  reassurance
from  persons  he  admired.


Appendix  XVII
POLYGRAPH  EXAMINATION  OF  JACK  RUBY


PRELIMINARY  ARRANGEMENTS

As  early  as  December  of  1963,  Jack  Ruby
expressed  his  desire  to  be  examined  with  a
polygraph,  truth  serum,  or  any  other  scientific
device  which  would  test  his  veracity.  The  at-
torneys who  defended  Ruby  in  the  State  crimi-
nal proceedings  in  Texas  agreed  that  he  should
take  a  polygraph  examination  to  test  any  con-
spiratorial connection  between  Ruby  and  Os-
wald. To  obtain  such  a  test.  Ruby's  defense
counsel  filed  motions  in  court  and  also  re-
quested that  the  FBI  administer  such  an  exami-
nation to  Ruby.  During  the  course  of  a  psychi-


atric examination  on  May  11,  1964,  Ruby  is
quoted  as  saying:  "I  want  to  tell  the  truth.  I
want  a  polygraph  *  *  *."  In  addition,  numer-
ous letters  were  written  to  the  President's
Commission  on  behalf  of  Ruby  requesting  a
polygraph  examination.

When  Ruby  testified  before  the  Conmiission
in  Dallas  County  Jail  on  June  7,  1964,  his  first
words  were  a  request  for  a  lie  detector  test.  The
Commission  hearing  commenced  with  the  fol-
lowing exchanges:

Mr.  JACK  RUBY.  Without  a  lie  detector
test  on  my  testimony,  my  verbal  statements


361


to  you,  how  do  you  know  if  I  am  telling  the
truth?

Mr.  TONAHILL  [Defense  Counsel].  Don't
worry  about  that,  Jack.

Mr.  RUBY.  Just  a  minute,  gentlemen.

Chief  Justice  WARREN.  You  wanted  to
ask  something,  did  you,  Mr.  Ruby?

Mr.  RUBY.  I  would  like  to  be  able  to  get
a  lie  detector  test  or  truth  serum  of  what
motivated  me  to  do  what  I  did  at  that  par-
ticular time,  and  it  seems  as  you  get  further
into  something,  even  though  you  know  what
you  did,  it  operates  against  you  somehow,
brain  washes  you,  that  you  are  weak  in  what
you  want  to  tell  the  truth  about  and  what
you  want  to  say  which  is  the  truth.

Now  Mr.  Warren,  I  don't  know  if  you
got  any  confidence  in  the  lie  detector  test
and  the  truth  serum,  and  so  on.

Chief  Justice  WARREN.  I  can't  tell  you
just  how  much  confidence  I  have  in  it,  be-
cause it  depends  so  much  on  who  is  taking
it,  and  so  forth.

But  I  will  say  this  to  you,  that  if  you  arid
your  counsel  want  any  kind  of  test,  I  will
arrange  it  for  you.  I  would  be  glad  to  do
that,  if  you  want  it.  I  wouldn't  suggest  a  lie
detector  test  to  testify  the  truth.

We  will  treat  you  just  the  same  as  we  do
any  other  witness,  but  if  you  want  such  a
test,  I  will  arrange  for  it.

Mr.  RUBY.  I  do  want  it.  Will  you  agree
to  that,  Joe?

Mr.  TONAHILL.  I  sure  do,  Jack.

Throughout  Ruby's  testimony  before  the  Com-
mission, he  repeated  his  request  on  numerous
occasions  that  he  be  given  an  opportunity  to
take  a  lie  detector  test.  Ruby's  insistence  on
taking  a  polygraph  examination  is  reflected
right  to  the  end  of  the  proceedings  where  in
the  very  last  portion  of  the  transcribed  hear-
ings Ruby  states:

Mr.  RUBY.  All  I  want  to  do  is  to  tell  the
truth,  and  the  only  way  you  can  know  it  is
by  the  polygraph,  as  that  is  the  only  way
you  can  know  it.

Chief  Justice  WARREN.  That  we  will  do
for  you.

Following  Ruby's  insistence  on  a  polygraph
test,  the  Commission  initiated  arrangements  to
have  the  FBI  conduct  such  an  examination.  A
detailed  set  of  questions  was  prepared  for  the
polygraph  examination,  which  was  set  for
July  16,  1964.  A  few  days  before  the  sched-
uled test,  the  Commission  was  informed  that
Ruby's  sister,  Eva  Grant,  and  his  counsel,  Joe
H.  TonahiU,  opposed  the  polygraph  on  the
ground  that  psychiatric  examinations  showed
that  his  mental  state  was  such  that  the  test
would  be  meaningless.

The  Commission  was  advised  that  Sol  Dann,
a  Detroit  attorney  representing  the  Ruby  fam-
ily, had  informed  the  Dallas  ofiBce  of  the  FBI


on  July  15,  1964,  that  a  polygraph  examination
would  affect  Ruby's  health  and  would  be  of
questionable  value  according  to  Dr.  Emanuel
Tanay,  a  Detroit  psychiatrist.  On  that  same
date,  Assistant  Counsel  Arlen  Specter  discussed
by  telephone  the  polygraph  examination  with
Defense  Counsel  Joe  H.  Tonahill,  who  ex-
pressed his  personal  opinion  that  a  polygraph
examination  should  be  administered  to  Ruby.
By  letter  dated  July  15,  1964,  Dallas  District
Attorney  Henry  Wade  requested  that  the  poly-
graph examination  cover  the  issue  of  premedi-
tation as  well  as  the  defensive  theories  in  the
case.

Against  this  background,  it  was  decided  that
a  representative  of  the  Commission  would
travel  to  Dallas  to  determine  whether  Jack
Ruby  wanted  to  take  the  polygraph  test.  Since
Ruby  had  had  frequent  changes  in  attorneys
and  because  he  was  presumed  to  be  sane,  the
final  decision  on  the  examination  was  his,  espe-
cially in  view  of  his  prior  personal  insistence  on
the  test.  In  the  jury  conference  room  at  the
Dallas  jail  on  July  18,  Assistant  Counsel  Arlen
Specter,  representing  the  Commission,  informed
Chief  Defense  Counsel  Clayton  Fowler,  co-
Counsel  Tonahill  and  Assistant  District  At-
torney William  F.  Alexander  that  the  Commis-
sion was  not  insisting  on  or  even  requesting
that  the  test  be  taken,  but  was  merely  ftilfiUing
its  commitment  to  make  the  examination  avail-
able. In  the  event  Ruby  had  changed  his  mind
and  would  so  state  for  the  record,  that  would
conclude  the  issue  as  far  as  the  Commission
was  concerned.

Chief  Defense  Counsel  Fowler  had  objected
to  the  test.  He  conferred  with  Jack  Ruby  in  his
cell  and  then  returned  stating  that  Ruby  in-
sisted on  taking  the  examination.  Mr.  Fowler
requested  that  (1)  Dr.  Tanay,  the  Detroit
psychiatrist,  be  present;  (2)  the  results  of  the
test  not  be  disclosed  other  than  to  the  Com-
mission; (3)  the  questions  to  be  asked  not  be
disclosed  to  the  District  Attorney's  office;  and
(4)  the  results  of  the  test  be  made  available  to
defense  counsel.  Sheriff  William  Decker  an-
nounced his  intention  to  have  Allan  L.  Sweatt,
his  chief  criminal  deputy  who  was  also  a  poly-
graph operator,  present  to  maintain  custody  of
Jack  Ruby  while  the  examination  was  being
administered.  Assistant  District  Attorney  Alex-
ander requested  a  list  of  questions,  a  copy  of
the  recording  made  by  the  polygraph  machine
and  a  copy  of  the  report  interpreting  the  test.
In  response  to  the  numerous  requests,  the  pro-
cedure was  determined  that  the  questions  to  be
asked  of  Ruby  would  be  discussed  in  a  pre-
liminary session  in  the  presence  of  defense
counsel,  the  assistant  district  attorney  and  Chief
Jailer  E.  L.  Holman,  who  was  to  replace
Sweatt.  The  assistant  district  attorney  would  not
be  present  when  Ruby  answered  the  questions,
but  Jailer  Holman  was  allowed  to  remain  to
retain  custody  of  Ruby.  No  commitment  was
made  on  behalf  of  the  Commission  as  to  what


362


disclosure  would  be  made  of  the  results  of  the
examination.  Since  Dr.  Tanay  was  not  in  Dallas
and  therefore  could  not  be  present,  arrange-
ments were  made  to  have  in  attendance  Dr.
William  R.  Beavers,  a  psychiatrist  who  had
previously  examined  and  evaluated  Ruby's
mental  state.

At  the  conclusion  of  the  lengthy  preliminary
proceedings.  Ruby  entered  the  jury  conference
room  at  2:23  p.m.  and  was  informed  that  the
Commission  was  prepared  to  fulfill  its  com-
mitment to  oflfer  him  a  polygraph  examination,
but  was  not  requesting  the  test.  On  behalf  of
the  Commission,  Assistant  Counsel  Specter
warned  Ruby  that  anything  he  said  could  be
used  against  him.  Chief  Defense  Counsel
Fowler  advised  Ruby  of  his  objections  to  the
examination.  Ruby  lien  stated  that  he  wanted
the  polygraph  examination  conducted  and  that
he  wanted  the  results  released  to  the  public  as
promptly  as  possible.  Special  Agent  Bell  P.
Herndon,  polygraph  operator  of  the  FBI,  ob-
tained a  written  "consent  to  interview  with
polygraph"  signed  by  Jack  Ruby.  Herndon  then
proceeded  to  administer  the  polygraph  exami-
nation by  breaking  the  questions  up  into  series
which  were  ordinarily  nine  questions  in  length
and  consisted  of  relevant  interrogatories  and
control  questions.

ADMINISTRATION  OF  THE  TEST

During  the  course  of  the  polygraph  examina-
tion Jack  Ruby  answered  the  relevant  questions
as  follows:

Q.  Did  you  know  Oswald  before  Novem-
ber 22,  1963?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  assist  Oswald  in  the  assassi-
nation?

A.  No.

Q.  Are  you  now  a  member  of  the  Com-
munist Party?

A.  No.

Q.  Have  you  ever  been  a  member  of  the
Communist  Party?

A.  No.

Q.  Are  you  now  a  member  of  any  group
that  advocates  the  violent  overthrow  of  the
United  States  Government?

A.  No.

Q.  Have  you  ever  been  a  member  of  any
group  that  advocates  violent  overthrow  of
the  United  States  Government?

A.  No.

Q.  Between  the  assassination  and  the
shooting,  did  anybody  you  know  tell  you
they  knew  Oswald?

A.  No.

Q.  Aside  from  anything  you  said  to
George  Senator  on  Sunday  morning,  did  you
ever  tell  anyone  else  that  you  intended  to
shoot  Oswald?

A.  No.


Q.  Did  you  shoot  Oswald  in  order  to
silence  him?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  first  decide  to  shoot  Oswald
on  Friday  night?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  first  decide  to  shoot  Oswald
on  Saturday  morning?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  first  decide  to  shoot  Oswald
on  Saturday  night?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  first  decide  to  shoot  Oswald
on  Sunday  Morning?

A.  Yes.

Q.  Were  you  on  the  sidewalk  at  the  time
Lieutenant  Pierce's  car  stopped  on  the  ramp
exit?

A.  Yes.

Q.  Did  you  enter  the  jail  by  walking
through  an  alleyway?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  walk  past  the  guard  at  the
time  Lieutenant  Pierce's  car  was  parked  on
the  ramp  exit?

A.  Yes.

Q.  Did  you  talk  with  any  Dallas  police
oflBcers  on  Sunday,  November  24,  prior  to
the  shooting  of  Oswald?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  see  the  armored  car  before  it
entered  the  basement?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  enter  the  police  department
through  a  door  at  the  rear  of  the  east  side  of
the  jail?

A.  No.

Q.  After  talking  to  Little  Lynn  did  you
hear  any  announcement  that  Oswald  was
about  to  be  moved?

A.  No.

Q.  Before  you  left  your  apartment  Sun-
day morning,  did  anyone  tell  you  the
armored  car  was  on  the  way  to  the  police
department?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  get  a  Wall  Street  Journal  at
the  Southwestern  Drug  Store  during  the
week  before  the  assassination?

A.  No.

Q.  Do  you  have  any  knowledge  of  a  Wall
Street  Journal  addressed  to  Mr.  J.  E.  Brad-
shaw?

A.  No.

Q.  To  your  knowledge,  did  any  of  your
friends  or  did  you  telephone  the  FBI  in
Dallas  between  2  or  3  a.m.  Sunday  morning?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  or  any  of  your  friends  to  your
knowledge  telephone  the  sheriff's  office  be-
tween 2  or  3  a.m.  Sunday  morning?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  go  to  the  Dallas  police  station
at  any  time  on  Friday,  November  22,  1963,
before  you  went  to  the  synagogue?


363


A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  go  to  the  synagogue  that  Fri-
day night?

A.  Yes.

Q.  Did  you  see  Oswald  in  the  Dallas  jail
on  Friday  night?

A.  Yes.

Q.  Did  you  have  a  gun  with  you  when
you  went  to  the  Friday  midnight  press  con-
ference at  the  jail?

A.  No.

Q.  Is  everything  you  told  the  Warren
Commission  the  entire  truth?

A.  Yes.

Q.  Have  you  ever  knowingly  attended  any
meetings  of  the  Communist  Party  or  any
other  group  that  advocates  violent  overthrow
of  the  Government?

A.  No.

Q.  Is  any  member  of  your  immediate
family  or  any  close  friend,  a  member  of  the
Communist  Party?

A.  No.

Q.  Is  any  member  of  your  immediate
family  or  any  close  friend  a  member  of  any
group  that  advocates  the  violent  overthrow
of  the  Government?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  any  close  friend  or  any  member
of  your  immediate  family  ever  attend  a
meeting  of  the  Communist  Party?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  any  close  friend  or  any  member
of  your  immediate  family  ever  attend  a
meeting  of  any  group  that  advocates  the
violent  overthrow  of  the  Government?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  ever  meet  Oswald  at  your  post
office  box?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  use  your  post  office  mailbox
to  do  any  business  with  Mexico  or  Cuba?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  do  business  with  Castro-Cuba?

A.  No.

Q.  Was  your  trip  to  Cuba  solely  for
pleasure?

A.  Yes.

Q.  Have  you  now  told  us  the  truth  con-
cerning why  you  carried  $2,200  in  cash  on
you?

A.  Yes.

Q.  Did  any  foreign  influence  cause  you  to
shoot  Oswald?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  shoot  Oswald  because  of  any
influence  of  the  underworld?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  shoot  Oswald  because  of  a
labor  union  influence?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  any  long-distance  telephone  calls
which  you  made  before  the  assassination  of
the  President  have  anything  to  do  with  the
assassination?


A.  No.

Q.  Did  any  of  your  long-distance  tele-
phone calls  concern  the  shooting  of  Oswald?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  shoot  Oswald  in  order  to  save
Mrs.  Kennedy  the  ordeal  of  a  trial?

A.  Yes.

Q.  Did  you  know  the  Tippit  that  was
killed?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  tell  the  truth  about  relaying
the  message  to  Ray  Brantley  to  get  McWillie
a  few  guns?

A.  Yes.

Q.  Did  you  go  to  the  assembly  room  on
Friday  night  to  get  the  telephone  number  of
KLIF?

A.  Yes.

Q.  Did  you  ever  meet  with  Oswald  and
Officer  Tippit  at  your  club?

A.  No.

Q.  Were  you  at  the  Parkland  Hospital  at
any  time  on  Friday?

A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  say  anything  when  you  shot
Oswald  other  than  what  you've  testified
about?

A.  No.

Q.  Have  members  of  your  family  been
physically  harmed  because  of  what  you  did?

A.  No.

Q.  Do  you  think  members  of  your  family
are  now  in  danger  because  of  what  you  did?

(No  response.)

Q.  Is  Mr.  Fowler  in  danger  because  he  is
defending  you?

(No  response.)

Q.  Did  "Blackie"  Hanson  speak  to  you
just  before  you  shot  Oswald?

A.  No.


INTERPRETATION  OF  THE  TEST

A  polygraph  examination  is  designed  to  de-
tect physiological  responses  to  stimuli  in  a
carefully  controlled  interrogation.  Such  re-
sponses may  accompany  and  indicate  decep-
tion. The  polygraph  instrument  derives  its  name
from  the  Greek  derivative  "poly"  meaning
many  and  the  word  "graph"  meaning  writings.
The  polygraph  chart  writings  consist  of  three
separate  markings  placed  on  a  graph  reflecting
three  separate  physiological  reactions.  A  rub-
ber tube  is  placed  around  the  subject's  chest  to
record  his  breathing  pattern  on  a  pneumo-
graph. That  device  records  the  respiratory  ratio
of  inhalation  and  exhalation  strokes.  The  sec-
ond component  is  called  a  galvanic  skin  re-
sponse which  consists  of  electrodes  placed  on
the  examinee's  fingers,  through  which  a  small
amount  of  electrical  current  is  passed  to  the
skin.  The  galvanometer  records  the  minute
changes  in  electrical  skin  response.  The  third
component  consists  of  a  cardiograph  which  is


364


a  tracing  obtained  by  attaching  a  pneumatic
cuff  around  the  left  arm  in  a  manner  very  simi-
lar to  an  apparatus  which  takes  blood  pressure.
When  the  cuff  is  inflated,  that  device  records
relative  blood  pressures  or  change  in  the  heart
rate.

From  those  testing  devices,  it  is  possible  to
measure  psychological  or  emotional  stress.  This
testing  device  is  the  product  of  observation  by
psychologists  and  physiologists  who  noted  cer-
tain physiological  responses  when  people  lie.
In  about  1920  law  enforcement  officials  with
psychological  and  physiological  training  initi-
ated the  development  of  the  instrument  to
serve  as  an  investigative  aid.

The  polygraph  may  record  responses  indica-
tive of  deception,  but  it  must  be  carefully  inter-
preted. The  relevant  questions,  as  to  which  the
interrogator  is  seeking  to  determine  whether
the  subject  is  falsifying,  are  compared  with
control  questions  where  the  examiner  obtains  a
known  indication  of  deception  or  some  ex-
pected emotional  response.  In  evaluating  the
polygraph,  due  consideration  must  be  given  to
the  fact  that  a  physiological  response  may  be
caused  by  factors  other  than  deception,  such  as
fear,  anxiety,  nervousness,  dislike,  and  other
emotions.  There  are  no  valid  statistics  as  to  the
reliability  of  the  polygraph.  FBI  Agent  Hem-
don  testified  that,  notwithstanding  the  absence
of  percentage  indicators  of  reliability,  an  in-
formed judgment  may  be  obtained  from  a  well-
qualified  examiner  on  the  indications  of  decep-
tion in  a  normal  person  under  appropriate
standards  of  administration.

Ordinarily  during  a  polygraph  examination
only  the  examiner  and  the  examinee  are  pres-
ent. It  is  the  practice  of  the  FBI,  however,  to
have  a  second  agent  present  to  take  notes.  It  is
normally  undesirable  to  have  other  people  pres-
ent during  the  polygraph  examination  because
the  examinee  may  react  emotionally  to  them.
Because  of  the  numerous  interested  parties  in-
volved in  Ruby's  polygraph  examination,  there
were  present  individuals  representing  the  Com-
mission and  the  Dallas  district  attorney,  as  well
as  two  defense  counsel,  two  FBI  agents,  the
chief  jailer,  the  psychiatrist,  and  the  court  re-
porter, although  the  assistant  district  attorney
and  one  defense  counsel  left  when  Ruby  was
actually  responding  to  questions  while  the  in-
strument was  activated.  Ruby  was  placed  in  a
position  where  there  was  a  minimum  of  dis-
traction for  him  during  the  test.  He  faced  a
wall  and  could  not  see  anyone  except  possibly
through  secondary  vision  from  the  side.  Agent
Hemdon  expressed  the  opinion  that  Ruby  was
not  affected  by  the  presence  of  the  people  in
the  room.

Answer  by  Ruby  to  certain  irrelevant  control
questions  suggested  an  attempt  to  deceive  on
those  questions.  For  example.  Ruby  answered
"No"  to  the  question  "While  in  the  service  did
you  receive  any  disciplinary  action?"  His  re-
action suggested  deception  in  his  answer.  Simi-


larly, Ruby's  negative  answer  to  the  query  "Did
you  ever  overcharge  a  customer?"  was  sugges-
tive of  deception.  Ruby  further  showed  an  emo-
tional response  to  other  control  questions  such
as  "Have  you  ever  been  known  by  another
name?"  "Are  you  married?"  'Have  you  ever
served  time  in  jail?"  "Are  your  parents  alive?"
"Other  than  what  you  told  me,  did  you  ever
hit  anyone  with  any  kind  of  a  weapon?"  Hem-
don concluded  that  the  absence  of  any  physio-
logical response  on  the  relevant  questions  indi-
cated that  there  was  no  deception.

An  accurate  evaluation  of  Ruby's  polygraph
examination  depends  on  whether  he  was  psy-
chotic. Since  a  psychotic  is  divorced  from  real-
ity, the  polygraph  tracings  could  not  be  logi-
cally interpreted  on  such  an  individual.  A
psychotic  person  might  believe  a  false  answer
was  tme  so  he  would  not  register  an  emotional
response  characteristic  of  deception  as  a  nor-
mal person  would.  If  a  person  is  so  mentally
disturbed  that  he  does  not  understand  the  na-
ture of  the  questions  or  the  substance  of  his
answers,  then  no  validity  can  be  attached  to
the  polygraph  examination.  Hemdon  stated
that  if  a  person,  on  the  other  hand,  was  in
touch  with  reality,  then  the  polygraph  exami-
nation could  be  interpreted  like  any  other  such
test.

Based  on  his  previous  contacts  with  Ruby
and  from  observing  him  during  the  entire  poly-
graph proceeding,  Dr.  William  R.  Beavers  testi-
fied as  follows:

In  the  greater  proportion  of  the  time  that
he  answered  the  questions,  I  felt  that  he  was
aware  of  the  questions  and  that  he  under-
stood them,  and  that  he  was  giving  answers
based  on  an  appreciation  of  reality.

Dr.  Beavers  further  stated  that  he  had  pre-
viously diagnosed  Ruby  as  a  "psychotic  de-
pressive."

Based  on  the  assumption  that  Ruby  was  a
"psychotic  depressive,"  Hemdon  testified:

There  would  be  no  validity  to  the  poly-
graph examination,  and  no  significance
should  be  placed  upon  the  polygraph  charts.

Considering  other  phases  of  Dr.  Beavers'  testi-
mony, Hemdon  stated:

Well,  based  on  the  h5^thesis  that  Ruby
was  mentally  competent  and  sound,  the
charts  could  be  interpreted,  and  if  those
conditions  are  fact,  the  charts  could  be
interpreted  to  indicate  that  there  was  no
area  of  deception  present  with  regard  to  his
response  to  the  relevant  questions  during
the  polygraph  examination.

In  stating  his  opinion  that  Ruby  was  in  touch
with  reality  and  understood  the  questions  and
answers,  Dr.  Beavers  excepted  two  questions


365


where  he  concluded  that  Ruby's  underlying
delusional  state  took  hold.  Those  questions
related  to  the  safety  of  Ruby's  family  and  his
defense  counsel.  While  in  the  preliminary  ses-
sion Ruby  had  answered  those  questions  by
stating  that  he  felt  his  family  and  defense
counsel  were  in  danger,  he  did  not  answer
either  question  when  the  polygraph  was  acti-
vated. Dr.  Beavers  interpreted  Ruby's  failure
to  answer  as  a  reflection  of  "internal  struggle
as  to  just  what  was  reality."  In  addition,  Dr.
Beavers  testified  that  the  test  was  not  injurious
to  Ruby's  mental  or  physical  condition.

Because  Ruby  not  only  volunteered  but  in-
sisted upon  taking  a  polygraph  examination,
the  Commission  agreed  to  the  examination.
FBI  Director  J.  Edgar  Hoover  commented  on
the  examination  as  follows:

It  should  be  pointed  out  that  the  poly-
graph, often  referred  to  as  "lie  detecto?'
is  not  in  fact  such  a  device.  The  instrument
is  designed  to  record  under  proper  stimuli
emotional  responses  in  the  form  of  physio-
logical variations  which  may  indicate  and
accompany deception. The  FBI  feels that


the  polygraph  technique  is  not  sufficiently
precise  to  permit  absolute  judgments  of  de-
ception or  truth  without  qualifications.  The
polygraph  technique  has  a  number  of  limi-
tations, one  of  which  relates  to  the  mental
fitness  and  condition  of  the  examinee  to  be
tested.

During  the  proceedings  at  Dallas,  Texas,
on  July  18,  1964,  Dr.  WUliam  R.  Beavers,
a  psychiatrist,  testified  that  he  would  gen-
erally describe  Jack  Ruby  as  a  "psychotic
depressive."  In  view  of  the  serious  question
raised  as  to  Ruby's  mental  condition,  no
significance  should  be  placed  on  the  poly-
graph examination  and  it  should  be  con-
sidered nonconclusive  as  the  charts  cannot
be  relied  upon.

Having  granted  Ruby's  request  for  the  ex-
amination, the  Commission  is  publishing  this
transcript  of  the  hearing  at  which  the  test
was  conducted  and  the  transcript  of  the  depo-
sition of  the  FBI  polygraph  operator  who
administered  the  test.  The  Commission  did
not  rely  on  the  results  of  this  examination  in
reaching  the  conclusions  stated  in  this  report


Appendix  XVIII

(This  appendix,  containing  footnote  references  to  volumes  of
testimony,  depositions,  exhibits  and  other  evidence  which
was  not  available  to  the  public  at  the  time  of  this  printing,  is
omitted.)


A FOOTNOTE

This  volume  is  a  transcript  of  the  report  of  The  President's  Commission  on  the  As-
sassination of  President  John  F.  Kennedy.  It  was  reproduced  from  the  official  text
printed  by  the  United  States  Government  Printing  Office  and  released  to  the  public
September  27,  1964.

Several  portions  of  the  text  have  been  omitted  either  because  of  their  comparatively
routine  interest  or  for  technical  reasons.  In  each  case  a  statement  of  what  material
has  been  omitted  appears  at  the  appropriate  place  in  the  text.  These  include  appendices
I,  II,  III,  IV,  VI,  VII,  XVIII  and  a  portion  of  appendix  VIII.  None  of  this  material
has  a  significant  bearing  on  the  Commission's  findings.  In  addition,  certain  exhibits,
mostly  photographs  of  poor  reproductive  quality,  have  been  omitted  for  technical  rea-
sons, and  parenthetical  references  to  them  have  been  edited  out  of  the  official  text.

As  indicated,  the  supplement  of  pictures  inserted  in  the  front  section  of  the  book  is
not  a  part  of  the  Commission's  report.  It  was  added  in  order  to  recall  more  vividly  the
tragic  four  days  which  made  the  report  necessary.

THE  ASSOCIATED  PRESS


366
