The Golden Colony; or, Victoria in 1854
George Henry Wathen, 1855
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The complete text of Wathen's 1855 Australian travels, with the Challicum bunyip turf-outline survey. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/goldencolonyorv00wathgoog). This 1855 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

Google

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I

ubjGoOglc

ubjGoOglc

ubjGoOglc

•iZi'l -r. IL

D„.„ab,GoOglc

ubjGoOglc

V.

ubjGoOglc

GOLDEN COLONY

YICTOMA IN 1854.

WITH REMARKS ON THE GEOLOGY OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOLD FIELDS.

GEORGE HENEY WATHEN,

LONDON:

LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS.

1855.

ZZ6. e. (^^ ,..., Google

bjGoogIc

PREFACE.

How difficult is it by mere reading to obtain any vivid
impression of a remote land, whoae climate, landscape, and
vegetation, are all unlike our own. The tables and returns
of the statist, however valuable in themselves, will here
render ub very little aid. The rough and rapid pencil of
the clever tourist may strike off truthful images of the
details, but cannot pretend to offer any picture of the
whole. On the other hand, general descriptiona are too
vague and shadowy to impress any life-like images on the
mental retina. Thus, on landing on a distant shore, your
first hour's ramble will often leave a more faithful, as well
as ineffaceable impression, than could have been obtained
by a paintul perusal of a score of volumes. These remarks
apply with more than ordinary force to our Antipodean
Colonies, where for thousands of years Nature has heW on
her course almost as free from the modifying influences of
human agency as in the long agea antecedent to man's
appearance on our world; those t^es whose records,
written on the rocks and the mountains, have been re-
vealed and read by Modern Geology.

But while all books treating on distant lands are sub-
ject to these inherent deficiencies, they may still be of
great value. If the images conveyed are less vivid, on the
other hand the information is, or ought to be, more
precise. Facts are collected, collated, and generalised ;

^dbyGoogle

and the aspect and condition of the country brought out
more distinctly by contrasting it with other lands. Be-
sides, all cannot be travellers; and the intending emigrant
will generally wish to learn something of the region about
to form his new home. ,

Ae regards the writer of this little work, his residence
at the mines and journeys through various parts of the
country have given him unusual facilities for acquiring
some general acquaintance with its landscape and its
geology, and of marking the various phases of colonial
life. He has also, and with the greatest interest, watched
first the discovery, and then the gradual development, of
those wonderful Gold Fields which have made Victoria
second only to India in the long Ibt of the colonial posses-
sions of Great Britain.

The illustrations are all from sketches taken on the
spot, and with more regard to truthfulness than to mere
pictorial effect. They were selected from the writer's
sketch-book as expressing the characteristic features of
Victorian landscape and geology, and the pursuits of the
mining population.

Important and very significant events Have been agi-
tating the public mind at Melbourne and at the Gold
Fields during the latter months of the past year. Intel-
ligence of these has reached England while the following
pages were passing through the press, and some notice
of them has been incorporated in the text ; so that the
volume may he regarded as a picture of the Golden
Colony at the end of the year 1854.

London,

Febltutr; 28. 1805.

^dbyGoogle

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER L

VlCTOftlA COriPAEED" WITH THE ADJACENT COLONIES Page 1

CHAPTER II.

tictoria.-^bied'8'Etb view of the oodntry.

Boundaries — Main tnount^n cbain of Australia — Higbest summit
— Mountain lone ofTictoria running East and Weat — Lowlands
along the coast — Lowlands North of mountains — The Murray
and ita affluents— Southern rivers — Port PWllip Bay — Gipps
Land — Scrubby solitudes — Western Port — Melbourne Plains —
The Western volcanic Plains— "Dead Men's G raves " — Domical
Lava Hills — Forests of Cape Otway — Country North of the
mount^n barrier — Creeks and water-boles — Navigation of tlje
Murray— The "Mallee-Scrub" - - - - S

CHAPTER lU.

TOWNS AMD TOWNSHIPS.

Approach to Melbourne — The Wharves — The City— Increase in
value of land — Restaurants — Fires frequent since the Gold
Epoch — Municipal loan — Water supply — Sandridge — The

A S

^dbyGoogle

n COHTUHTS.

fint Railwar — WilliamBtown ~ Electfic Tel^rqih-— The Har-
bour — Geelong— Kailwaj to Melbourne— Other towni — iDland
townahips --••-- Page 20

CHAPTER IV.

roPULATiOK aud social abfects.

Composite character of population — English feeling dominant —
Squatters — Melbourne i.TO«d — Chmlmas of 1851-2 — Diggera
and their hridea — Crisis of the Gold Fever — Frofpects of emi-
grants— "Kew chums" — Gold-brokers — Ilieir frauds — Public
amusements — The botanic garden — Literature — Franchiw con-
. ceded to schoulmaaters • - - • > 31

CHAPTER V.

THE DIGGINGS AND DIGGERS.

The Gold Country described— Chief Gold Fields — DiscoTery of Dew
Dig'giogS — Magical rise of a mining totrli — "Sly grog-shopa" —
Capture of bushrangers at Mae Ivor ~ Digging party on a journey
'—Thdr night camp in the forest — Arrival at Bendigo~"New
chums" journeying on foot — Scenes at Bendigo — The Golden
Point — Street of stores — Government Camp — Contrasla — Grand
scale of Gold Depogita—The White Hills— Nomenclature at the
Mines — The mining population — Mode of life — TheDifcger's Lay
— Scenes at the mines — Sunday— Mode of working — The Cradle
and " Long-Tom " - - - - . . 46

CHAPTER Vr.

THE DIGGINGS ARD DIOGEBS — Continued.

The earlier diggers — Forest Creek Post-office — "Missing friends" —
" Digger-hnnting"-— Discontent — Insecurity of property — " Night

^dbyGoogle

CONTESTS. vH

fossickers" — Deputation to the Governor— The "Diggers' League"
— GrieTsnces — Stnmp orators — Organised morement — Monster
meetings — CoDcessions of GoTernment — Recent riot atBallarat
— Difficulties orSir C. Holham ... Page 74

■ CHAPTER VII.

TRATELLINO IN THB BUSH.

Cape Otway forest— The "Hot Wind"— Black Thursdaj — Ashes
transported to great distances — Notes of a tour through the forrat

— Abandoned misuon station — Facilities for forming reservoirs- —
Camp in the Bash — The forest aAer the fires — Forcing a passage
— Magnificent growth of trees — Drearj night — Luxwriant v^-
tation — Wild sea-coaat —Carboniferous rocks — The forest on fire

— Return tbroogh the Coast Ranges — Coatrasts — Loutit Bay —
View of the coast at dajbreak — Return - • - 88

CHAPTER VHL

TBATSLLIMG IN THE BTJSn—COtttimied.

A Western Port Station — Australian Pyrenees — Through the
Forest — Sheepshearer's Hut — Natives — The Bunyip — A Home
on the Plains — Cruelty and kindness of tiie Natives • • 116

CHAPTER IX.

TiuTuxiNQ IN THE BOSH— continued.

A Hch Sqaatter's Hut-^Start for the Grampians — Ascent of Moun-
tain Pass — Wood splitters — Great Lava Plain — Granite Tore —
The Hopkins River — Oasis in the burnt-up plain — Intense heat
—Hut on fire — Start for Black'g SUtion — Night Bivouac in the
rocky wilds — Horses lost— Head Station — Pools on summits of
volcanic hills — Salt springs in the Plains — Fkok Mac Ivon

^dbyGoogle

Hfi CONTENTS.

DiootHOS TO Bbnbmo — Frozen Creek — Forest— Iron-bwk tree
indicative of Gold — Emerge on the Bendigo Vallej — Lava {jIsId
in the rainj senBon -^ IVavelling incident* — BirouRC on the
banks of &e Caorpftspe — Dangerous foi-d— Auatralian ferry- —
Drajs floated over ..... Page 127

CHAPTER X.

BDSHRANGEBS.

FaciUti«i for depredations —Habits of the Builirangers — Their
haunts — The Black Forest — " Sticking up " — Encounter with
ruffians — Obtuse police — Van Diemen's Land desperadoes —
Fourteen men tied up by two robbers — Their escape ta Victo-
ria — Extraordinary capture at Melbourne — Gold Escort Robbery

— Capturo of the robbers — Suicide of the approver - 1 38

CHAPTER Xr.

COHHBRCB ASD BET£NDE. — FRODUCE OF GOLD.

Period prior to the gold era — First effect of the discoveries — Re-
action and commercial activity — High prices — Fabulous advance
in rentB — Meagre supplies from Europe — Reactionary repletion

— Olher causes of depressed markets — Yet no commercial crisis —
And why not — Monetary phenomena — Extinction of the tallow
staple — Parallel facta in other gold countries — Maximum prices
at the mines — Increase in the capital of the country — In the
number of sniall capitalists — In exports and Imports — In revenue

— Annual produce of gold - - . - . iss

CHAPTER XH,

BELIGIOH AND EDCCATION.

Harmony of different sects — Slate grants — Churches and chapels —
The bishop and clergy — Fositlott of the Church of England in the

^dbyGoogle

CONTJiHTS- IX

ColwiieB — Endowment fund — Education —Public and private
Echtfols — State aid to education — Old system and new — Statiatica
of aehoola — New university — Public library - - Page 171

CHAPTER XIII.

CBIUE AND POLICE.

Population in general not vicious — Real cause of esceas of crime —
Expirees and conditionally-pardoned men — Frequency of daring
outrages — Demoralisation of tlie police force — Its reconstruction
— Decrease of crime — Horse- stealing — Curae of intemperance —
"Hocussing" — Deaths from drunkenness — Average consamption
of spirits — Crusade agunst iutemperance - • - 1 78

CHAPTER XIV.

HOW PUBLIC AFFAIRB ARE ADUINISTEBEI> IN THE COLONY,

The late Lieutenant-Governor — Victoria separated from New South
Walea — Paralyais of the Government during the Gold Fever —
Incapacity of Heads of Departmeots — Impolitic economy — Con-
vict constables — Spasmodic activity of GoTcrnment — Character of
men in office- - ' - - - - - 187

CHAPTER XV.

POUTICAI. AND SOCIAL QUESTIONS.

Comparative impotence of public opinion in the colonies — Illus-
trated by case of Transportation — England's treatment of her
colonies — New era of responMble Executives — Act to esclude
conditionally -pardoned convicta — Disallowed by the Crown —
Recent a^tation in &vour of a new Act — Question of Crown

. lands — Failure of Home legislation — Causes of failure — Succeea.
ful colonies not holhouse plants — The Australian aquatting-system

^dbyGoogle

It COKTENTS.

— ^Ita gradual development — Itg evil renilU — " Unlock the land* "
— Partial unelioration in land r^uUtions — The Ma^tia Chcrta or
the •quatteri — The qneatioR at iasne — Beat mode of deciding
on il Page 197

CHAPTER XVL

QBOLOOT OF THE VICTOBUN GOLD FIELDS.

Fhjsical Geographj of the Gold Districts — Gwnite — Melamorphic
rocki— Quartz vdni — Anriferoaa drift io gullies and on hill-tops —
The " White Hills " — Lava PtaioB —Their relative age — Extinct
volcaooes — Mount Ljell — Mount Aitkin — General coneluBiona
relative to the Gold Fields — Their resemblance to the auriferons
district of North Wales 219

CHAPTER XVIL

DISCOVEBT OF GOLD IN AOSTBALLi.

Existence of Gold in Australia predicted b; Geology — Discovery of
first rich Gold Field in New South Wales — la Victoria ~ First
workings at Mount Alexander — Gold occasioaallj met with at an
eariier period ...... 24S

Account of First Steam Voyage'up the Murray ; in Two Despatches
from the Lieutenant-Governor of South Australia to the Secretary
for the Colonies - - - - - - 251

State of ihe Labour Market at Melbourne in Oclolier, 1854 - 26t

^dbyGoogle

LIST OF ILIUSTRATIOKS.

Fbontispibce. — View of Volcanic Hills and PlaiD, North of the

Ballnrat Gold Field, looking South - to face titU'page.
IkmAL ViaNBTTB, — View from lloimt Miserj, near tbe Pjtreneea.
Platb n. — Sketch Map of Victoria, showiog the principal

GoIdKelds - - - to face page 9

„ III. — View on Campbell's Creek, near Forest
Creek, Mount Alexander. — Diggers
washing out the Gold - • - „ 71

„ IV. — View on Fryer's Creek, Mount Ales»nder,

illustratire of auriferous deposits - „ 228

„ v.— View of a Valley near the Rirer Coliban,

Mount Alexander District - - „ 234

LIST OF DIAGRAMS, ETC.

—Section of an auriferous gully - • Psgf

—The "Bunyip," as cut out on the turf

— Dlsgram illustrative of recent increase of colonial

wealth --.-..
—Diagram illustrative of recent increase of population -
—Map of psi't of Fryer's Creek Diggings
-Section through Fryer's Creek Diggings
—Section of an auriferous gully and adjacent hills
—Section of a river ravine in the Lava Plains west of

Melbourne .....

— Flan of summit of Mount Aitkin ...
— Section of summit of Mount Aitkin ...

^dbyGoogle

ubjGoOglc

THE

GOLDEN COLONY.

CHAPTER I.

VICTORIA COMPARED WITH THE ADJACENT COLONIES.

he
of
ips

remained almost unknown, and rarely visited, except by
ships despatched on expeditions of discovery by the mari-

DigmzedbyGoOgle

Z THE GOLDEN COLONY.

Hme powers of Europe. Situated in the midst of the great
world of waters that occu|He8 by for the larger part' of the
Southern Hemisphere, they seemed quietly biding their
tjme, till tiie great wave of civilisation, in its onward
course fix)m east to west, should reach their solitary
shores. The be^nning of the present century witnessed
the first ^gnals of its approach. The Anglo-Saxon race, —
the great modem pioneers of civiliscttion and Christianisa-
don in the Northern Hemisphere, — were destined by
Providence to the same work in the Southern ; and in a few
yeiu:8 busy hives ofEuropean industry had established them*
selves on the east, south, and west coasts of New Holland
(as it was then called), and in the neighbouring island of
Van Diemen's Land. First, Sydney was setded on the
eastern shores, as a penal settlement, and the capital of
the new colony of New South Wales. Next, Hobart Town
was founded in Van Diemen's Land. The Swan River
settlement followed on the western coast of Australia ; and
this alone may be said to have failed, having dragged on
a precarious e^stence up to the present time. Finally,
Adeliude and Melbourne were founded on the southern
coast ; the latter as the chief town of " Port Phillip," then
a dependency of the Sydney Government, but, since the
year 1851, erected into an independent colony.

On comparing these colonies with each other, we are
Btruck with these two facts : first, — Victoria, the most re-
cently established, has outstripped all the others in wealth,
commerce, and material prosperity; second, — of all the
Australasian colonies, Victoria alone has received no fos-
tering care from the mother country. Not one shilling
has been expended upon this colony, except what has been

^dbyGoogle

NATDBAL BESOUBCEB. 3

levied witbin it. Kay, more ; dunng its earlier jears, on
tlie plea of its being a dependent province of New South
Wales, large Bums were drafted from thia settlement, and
spent on the sister colony.

The chief cause of this unparalleled success mnst, doubt-
less, be referred to the extraordinary internal resources
and natural advantages which the country possesses. In-
deed, on few lands have these blessings been lavished with
so free a hand.

On looking at the map we first notice that Victoria is,
geographically, the centre of tlie Australian group ; Mel-
bourne being about midway between Sydney, Adelaide,
and Hobart Town, In regard to internal sources of wealth,
it has extensive tracts of fertile lands waiting and ready
for the plough, or, under a rough tillage, yielding the most
abundant harvests. It has its vast plains, admirably
adapted for pastoral pursuits, where millions of fine fieeced
aheep may roam and thrive, producing a wool highly
prized in the European markets, and affording a staple
export of enormous value. It has its gold mines of un-
equalled richness, both in quality and extent, and pro-
ducing a yearly yield such as eclipses those golden harvests
which prompted and followed the Spanish conquests in
South America, and excited the envy of all Europe. It
boasts, indeed, but one great navigable river ; but, by way
of compensation, it possesses extraordinary facilities for the
construction of r^lways. During a part of the year it i«
deficient in the supply of water; but then the structure of
the coimtry at once suggests and aids the formation of
artificial reservoirs, by means of damming up the valleys
and river channels. Lastly, it has a climate which, with

^dbyGoogle

4 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

much that ie dieagreeable, is etill one of the fineet in the
world, free &om the dampe and mists of Bogland ; and
where those pestilential exhalationa that hang treacherously
over some of the forest valleys of Italy are so wholly
unknown that you may live with perfect security on the
matgin of an extenMve awamp.

Thus the geographical position of this district, ita
natural resources, and its past history, all seem to point
it out as the central seat of civilisation and material great-
ness amongst the South Pacific colonies ; and if any
augury may he gathered from the past, great things are
written down for Victoria in the inscrutable Book of the
Future.

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTER II.

VICTOBIA. — BIBd'S-ETE VIEW OP THE COUNTET.

Boundaries — Main mountain chain of Australia — Highest Bummit
— Mountiun zone of Victoria running East and Weat — Lowlands
along the coast — Lowlands North of mountains — The Murray
and ita affluents — Southern rivers — Fort Phillip Bay — Gipps
Land — Scrubby solitudes — Weatem Port — Melbourne Plains —
The Western Tolcanic Plains — "Dead Men's Graves" — Domical
Lava Hills — Forests of Cape Otway — Country Nortb of the
mount^n barrier — Creeks and water-holes — Navigation of the
Murray — The "Mallee- Scrub,"

Eteet traveller knows that on arriving at a new dis-
trict, or in a lai^e city, the best method of obtaining a
general idea of the whole is to ascend a lofty tower, and
thence to take note of the leading features of the city, or
district, as they are mapped out far below. I propose to
adopt a similar plan. In attempting to convey to the reader
some general notion of the outward appearance and physi-
cal geography of Victoria, I would in imagination conduct
him to some highly elevated position, such as might be
attained by a balloon, and from this aerial point of view
would at first point out the most prominent features of
the country, — the great mountain chuns, pliuns, and
rivers. We will then explore the country somewhat
more in detail.

Victoria may be briefly described as the most southerly
of the group of Australian colonies, bounded on the west

^dbyGoogle

6 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

by the so-called " South Australia,"" on the east by New
South Wales, on the north by the unsettled territory of the
flame colony, on die south by the Pacific Ocean. It consieta
of Victoria Proper, and (xipps Land, east of the former.

From our imaginary position we should see, towards the
N. E., a great chain of lofty mount^na rieing at Mount
Kosciusko to the height of 6510 feet above the sea
level, t This is the moat remarkable feature, and the
culminating ridge of the island-continent of Australia, so
far as is known. It runs from N. E, to S. W., nearly paral-
lel to the coast, and is called the Australian Alps. To
the south it sends out its spurs and advanced posts to the
sea, rising into a bold mountain ridge at Wilson's Promon-
tory, the most southerly point of Australia. Gippa Land is
a maritime province shut in by this wall of mountmna on
the north and west, and thus cut off from the rest of the
colony. From this main chain a vast mountain zone
sweeps round inland and weatward to Portland Bay, at
the opposite extremity of the colony, dividing the whole
into two parts : firat, the lowlands stretching from the base
of the mountains to the sea ; second, the great northern
plains. This mountftin zone consists of many separate
and sometimes almost isolated ranges.

On the western side of Port PhiUip Bay, or nudway
along the coast line, it advances its spurs to the sea, and
here the granitic hill " Station Peak," rises with a long

* It may be well to remind the render that " South Australia" ia
not really the moat southerly of the Australian colonies. It was so
until Ticloria waa constituted an independent province. The sooner
this false nomenclature h mended the better.

f See Map of Victoria, p. 8.

^dbyGoogle

bird's-ete view of the COCNTBT. 7

Bweep out of the lava plain that borderB the bay. Hence
the lowlands south of the mountain barrier are subdivided
into three portions : first, GKppa Land, to the east ;
second, the tracts around Port Phillip and Western Port
Bays ; the third, more varied and broken, extends from
the Station Peak ranges westward to the neighbourhood
of Portland Bay. The northern slopes of the great inland
chain sink into a vast, boundless plain, scarcely varied by
any elevation. Through this expanse, equal in area,
according to the Governor of South Australia, to seven
Great Britains, winds the great river Murray with its
affluents, the Edward, the Murrumbidgee, the Goulbum,
the Loddon, and innumerable other less important and
more unpronounceable names. All the rivers which flow
north of tlie m^n ch^ (including most of the large
streams of the colony) ultimately meet in the Murray,
which, rising in New South Wdes, flows through Victoria,
and enters the sea in South Australia. Of the southern
rivers, the Yarra Yarra flows into Port Phillip Bay near
Melbourne : the Barwon approaches within a mile of the
bay at Geelong, but, bending ofi^, enters the aea a few
miles further along the coast. The Glenelg druns the
western district, and at its mouth forms the boundary
between Victoria and South Australia.

Even in this rapid survey we must devote a few words
to the Cape Otway country. On looking to the west of
Port Phillip Bay will be seen a broad, blunt promontory,
terminating in Cape Otway. This promontory is occu-
pied by hills of no great height, but broken up by deep
ravines, and densely covered with trees of almost incredible
dimensions. The forest covers the whole coast, and ex-

^dbyGoogle

8 THE GOLD£N COLONT.

tends down to within a quarter of a mile of the sea, some-
times to the bench itself. These dreary, inhospitable
ghores are usually the first land made by ships bound to
Melbourne, and are not calculated to brighten the antici-
pationa of the exile.

One of the most remarkable features in our bird's-eye
view of the colony is the great inland basin, or harbour,
about midway along the southern coast. Fort Phillip
Bay (as it is now called) which once gave its name to the
whole territory, is a magnificent harbour not second to
any in the world. It is circular, about fifty miles in
diameter, receding into bays and coves, sheltered by pro-
jecting headlands, and communicating with the open sea
by a channel about a mile wide. Here all the navies of
the world might safely ride at anchor. At the head of
the bay, or at its northern extremity, stands the infant
metropolis of the colony, Melbourne, with its 100,000
souls. At the western end, on a beautiful little bay that
may almost compare wilh Naples, is Geelong, which
boasts its 25,000 inhabitants. A narrow neck of land
separates Port Phillip Bay jrom another large marine
basin to the east, called Western Port Bay, nearly filled
by two lai^e isluids.

Having thus, from our imaginary station, noted down
the prominent features of the country, and got a skeleton
view of the whole, we may now descend to obtain a more
exact knowledge of the several parts.

Beginning at the east, we have Gipps Land. But of
Gipps Land there is little to be swd, because very little
is known, except to its few scattered inhabitants. The
representative of this district in (he Le^slative Council,

^dbyGoogle

ubjGoOglc

b, Go ogle

WE9TEKN PORT. 9

in moving for certtuu statistical returns, declared bis
belief that the Government knew notiiing of Gippe Land.

Alberton, the chief town, has a very indifferent har-
bour ; and this has proved an effectual bar to the advance
of the district. It is watered by numerous lai^e streams,
rising !n the lofty and broken ranges of the Australian
Alps to the north of the province. It is a land admirably
adapted for the grazing of cattle, wluch form its chief
export. The climate is humid. This is almost the sum
of our knowledge of Gipps Land.

Between Gipps Land and Western Port, passing west
along the coast, stretches a wild tract almost unknown,
made up of thick forest, tangled scrub, and impassable
swamp. Vast numbers of wild cattle, escaped trom the
herds of the settlers, roam these intricate solitudes, un-
molested and unclauned. If occasionally startled by the
rare sight of a lonely traveller, they dash off into the
heart of the forest. From this centre they may, perhaps,
in tbe course of years spread themselves over the whole
interior of Australia.

Western Port Bay is somewhat smaller than Port
Phillip. It is nearly encircled with mountmns which, on
the east, approach to within a mile or less of the coast
On the north they sweep off inland, but the intervening
country is occupied by a vast desolate swtuap, which re-
ceives their drainage. The ranges between this basin
and Gipps Land are broken, rugged, intricate — covered
with thick forest, the trees of which are netted together
by a tangled undergrowth of shrubs and hardy creepers ;
a dreadful country to the luckless traveller who is en-
tangled in its wild mazes. The enterprising and inde-

ed byGoOglc

10 THE OOLDBH COLONT.

fatigable Count Strzelecki, with a party of followers,
forced hie way tlirough thia wildemeBe from Gipps Land
to WeBtem Port, but almost perished in the attempt.
Having been compelled to abandon bis bi^g^e, he
arrived jaded, exhausted, and almost famished on the
setUements around Western Port Bay. These ranges
now bear his name.

Passing westward, we arrive at a more inviting country.
Here geutle undulating hills and pbuns, lightly timbered,
watered with creeks or brooks, and occasionally opening
into green glades and pl^s, offer many a pleasant site for
the settler's homestead, and fiimieh fine pasturage for his
flocks and herds. In the district north of Melbourne
a deep, rich, black soil, formed out of a decomposed lava,
invites the labours of the agriculturist, and ^ves him a
rich return. These fertile pltuns are free from timber, but
the surface is ofren encumbered with large blocks of lava,
which must first be removed before the land can be
traversed by the plough, AE the tracts now described are
shut in on the north by the great mountain bsrrier before
alluded to, which here constitutes several distinct ranges
of hills known as the Daiidenong, the Yarra, and the
Plenty r^iges. The lowlands, north of Melbourne, are
diversified by numerous picturesque isolated granite hills,
which at once enrich and vary the landscape, and form
delightful stations from whence the eye can sweep over the
neighbouring country, the view to the north being always
bounded by the dense forests that clothe and cap the
mountain barrier, while the waters of Port Phillip Bay
gleam far to the south.

Proceeding on our survey to the west, we reach a dis-

^dbyGoogle

THE MELBOURNE PLAIKS. U

trict wbicb, as highly characteristic of this part of Australia,
deserves a more elaborate description. There is always an
intimate connection between the geological phenomena of a
country and its physical geography, industrial pursuits,
and social condition. But nowhere is this connection
more remarkable than in Victoria. Of the entire country
it may he said that one half of it is the product of sub-
terranean igneous agency ; that is, that one half of the
surface is covered with igneous products. Victoria has
been the seat of an extraordinary, wide-spread, and intense
volcanic action, which, though now dormant, baa left
monuments of perhaps unexampled extent and grandeur.
Directly dependent upon these phenomena are all those
peculiarities of soil and surface which render this country
unequalled in its capabilities for the pursuits of the sheep
farmer. Another result of this same igneous action, the
proofs of which are more recondite though not less complete,
is the existence of those rich auriferous deposits which, for
a time, rendered Victoria the world's magnet, and, in the
course of two or three years, made Melbourne one of the
great commercial emporiums of the world. But to return
to our survey.

On the northern shore of Port Phillip Bay, and girt
round with mount^ns to the north and west, stretch the
Melbourne Pltuns, the seat of long extinct volcanic fires,
extending about thirty miles from east to west, and
twenty-five from the mountmna to the sea. TVe may
obtain a good panoramic view of the whole by ascending
Mount Aitkin, a lofty volcanic hill rising on the southern
skirts of the mountain chain, not very far from Mount
Macedon. The view from this elevation, at sunset, ie-one

^dbyGoogle

12 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

of the moflt impresaiTe in the colony, — I might almost eay
in the world; for I have seen the most celebrated Bcenes in
the Old World. The vast silent plain stretches far and
wide, here and there rising into rocky knolls, and chequered
with the shadows of pas^g clouds. In the midst rises
Mount Cotterell, a few hundred feet high, sweeping out of
the plain with a long low outline, like an ocean wave
ader a etorm : near to it is a smaller similar hill. In the
nuddle ground, or near the base of the mountains, several
isolated volcanic hills rise with sweeping outlines out of
the plain, terminating in craggy crests resemhUng the curl
of a breaking wave. To the west the phdn is shut in by
the bold granitic hills of Station Peak ; its southern mai^in
is washed hy the waters of Port PhiUip Bay, Here and
there are seen irregular black patches of timber. Dark
lines may be traced winding over the pbun : these are the
bands of trees and foliage that accompany the channels of
the rivers and creeks. If the latter are not thus fringed
by timber, their course cannot be traced, as they commonly
flow in deep clefte and ravines scooped out of the rocky
plain. The towers of Melbourne can be just descried on a
rise in the plain about twenty-five miles to the south-east.
A breatiiless silence reigns over the desolate expanse, and
an intense feeling of solitude moves the depths of the souL
Whoever has stood on one of the lonely eminences of the
Koman Campagna, and gazed upon that silent depopulated
waste, may better imagine the scene I have attempted to
describe ; its vast expanse, chequered with long-drawn
shadows, its delicate hues mellowing into the purple dis-
tance, and, above all, its unutterable solitude and silence.
This great plain is admirably adapted for depasturing

^dbyGoogle

VOLCANIC PLAIHS. 13

sheep. A large portion ia rough and rocky, where the
currenta of lava have not yet become coated over with
earth ; that part, however, which lies nearer the base of
the monnt^s has a fine light red soil.

Crossing the Analn, or Station Peak, Hills, westward,
we reach the confines of another immense volcanic or
trappean plain, extending almost uninterruptedly 200
miles from east to west, commencing near G-eelong. Out
of this expanse rise aeveral volcanic hills. Usually steep
and abrupt on one ade, and sweeping down to the plain
on the other, they resemble islands rising out of the ocean.
Mount Boninyong differs from these in rising, not out of
the phun, but out of the mountiun ranges, and in having a
distinctly marked crater. Mount Boninyong is close to
the rich Ballarat gold-field.

These volcanic pluns, so characteristic of the country,
are not dead levels, nor does their surface or soil present
one uniform character. Here and there they rise into
long, low, flattened ridges, — the summit often rough
and rocky. Extensive tracts are covered with rocky pro-
tuberances, or with large loose stones. Here the long
ridges and mounds are more marked, and are known as
" Stony Bises." Land of this kind was rated low by the
early settlers ; but it is now understood that for a sheep-
run it is second to none, the grass being sweet and the
soil dry, while the loose stones retain the moisture beneath
them during the sommer heats. Other tai^e tracts of the
pliuns are free from stones ; but the surface presents a
phenomenon peculiar, I believe, to this country, and not
very easy to explain. La^e flat areas, hnndreds or even
thousands of acres in extent, are covered with oval

^dbyGoogle

14 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

mounds and corresponding hollows, — resembling a vast
gravejard of giants. Such tracts are known as "Dead
Men's GraveBj"or "Bay of Biscay Land." Here the soil
ia a hard, stiff clay : during the runy season every hollow
is filled with water; but you may pass amongst them
by stepping from mound to mound. No trees will grow
here. In the winter these pl^ne become bleak, dreary
wastes: in the summer, parched and dry, they are scantily
covered with a meagre, withered, and worthless grass.

While describing these pWns, I ought to allude to what
the settlers have named " buck-shot." This is a kind of
black gravel, mingled with the soil to the depth of a few
inches, and consisting of small, irregular-shaped stones,
about the size of a pea or of a small bean. This, though
not universally diffased, is found over lai^e areas. It may
perhaps be a volcanic asb.

To the north of Mount Boninyong, and almost g^rt
round with rocky granite hilla and wooded ranges, is a
tract which, from the beauty of the scenery and the luxu-
riance of the vegetation, might well be called the garden
of Victoriik* Numerous donucal lava hills rise in purs, or
in groups, oat of this undulatipg park-like country, to the
height of two or three hundred feet Destitute of trees
and shrubs, hut clothed with the richest pasturage, they
stand out conspicuous and isolated, and have obtmned the
characteristic name of " Bald Hills." Below, the coimtry
is beautifiilly wooded with clumps and groves, leaving
green lawns and glades between. The soil, both on plun
and hill, is a reddbh or chocolate-coloured earth, formed
out of decomposing lava, fragments of which are seen on

• See Frontispiece.

byGoogle

GREAT MOUNTAIN BABRIER. 15

the faill-topB, red, cellular, and often curled up like pieces of
recent lava. From the summit of one of these I havecounted
no lees than twenty-four dmilar bald hills within a radius
of a few miles. 1 shall have more to say about them when
speaking of the geology of Victoria, in a future chapter.
They are at once bo common and so distinctive a feature of
the country, that " bald hills " are quite household words
in the vernacular of the country ; while the basalt of the
plains has become familiar under the name of "blue-stone."

Both the Melbourne plains and those to the north and
west of Geelong are shut in on the north by the great
east and west mountain barrier, forming several distinct
chains, and bearing separate names. One of the most con-
spicuous of those that encircle the plains of Melbourne is
Mount Macedon, which, towering up out of the lower
ranges with a steep escarpment, forms a marked feature
from the city and out at sea. More to the west is Mount
Blackwood, the highest point of a broken, mountfunous,
and almost impassable region. Proceeding westward,
the most remarkable elevations are Mount Misery, Mount
Cole (the converging point of the ranges of the Py-
renees), and Moimt William, the culminating point of
the Grampians.

Immediately contiguous to Geelong, are the Barrabool

Hills, of incon^derable extent, hut admirably adapted for

tillage ; the soil rich, and free from timber. A low bax of

- fertile hills separates this part of Port Phillip Bay from the

open ocean.

To the west of Cape Otway, the principal settlements on
the coast are Pprtland and Belfast, the latter being better
known as Port F&uy. Here are open roadsteads and

^dbyGoogle

16 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

Bmall douriBMng towns. I hare not visited this part of
the coLony^, and know but little of it. The land around
Port Fairy, however, is generally extolled as some of the
moat fertile in Victoria.

I have already alluded to Cape Otway and its forests-
Here the enormous gmn-trees tower up 300 feet high:
their colossal trunks are united by a tangled net-work of
underwood. The deep ravines are often bridged over by
lallen trees, which, felled by the wind and by bush-fires,
render it almost impossible to force a way through the
labyrinth. The climate is moist, like that of Westem Port,
and feme and fern-trees luxuriate in the dauk misty hollows
and watercourses. This wonderful forest is rarely traversed,
and almost unknown. To the settler it is valueless ; but,
aa an almost exhaustless depository of fuel, it may yet
prove of high importance to the colony.

We have now completed our rapid survey of the country
lying south of the mountain zone, which, running east and
west, ^ves a north and south drainage to this part of the
ooDtinent On crossing to the northern side of the water-
shed, the structure of the country becomes too complex to
admit of verbal description without great detaiL The
Mount Alexander ranges, the Pyrenees, and the Grampians
are the leading chfuns ; besides which, there are countless
inferior ranges and detached hills. The broad tracts in-
tervening between these m^n sedimentary chains are
occupied by plains of lava and basalt. Vast sheets of
lava, emitted apparently at numerous venta, appear to
have filled up all the ori^nal valleye, and flowed up into the
mountmns between the spurs, which now form promontories
and headlands. The flow of lava does not overlap the

^dbyGoogle

THE BIVBB MUKRAT. 17

flanks of the mouDtaiDS, but terminates abruptly Trith a
steep eacarpment, the intervening bollow between this and
the hill-aide generally forming the bed of a creek. There
are large tracts in which the fundamental rocks disappear
under a thick mass of stratified drift and alluvium. These,
as well as the mountains themselves, are covered with
forests The ranges are rocky and sterile, but the broad
green valleys which intersect them are well fitted for the
plough. Every valley has its creek or rivulet ; and though
these are commonly dried up during the summer months,
yet the chains of "water-holes" which they form along
their course generally furnish an unfailing supply of pure
water, and form the favourite points for the settler's
homestead.

A very large proportion of these mountain ranges con-
sist of slaty rocks, very similar to those of North Wales
and Cumberland, but differing from these in being inter-
sected by a countless number of veins of quartz, varying
from the thickness of a shilling to several feet io width.
'iihe hills are strewn over with fragments of such veins,
which sometimes form a white glistening gravel of quartz.
It is on the loner slopes of these wooded ranges, and
along the green flats of the valleys, that the gold digger
pliea his laborious trade ; for here lie buried the golden
treasures which have converted, sometimes in a single
week, what was a silent waste into a scene of laborious
industry.

To the north all these mountain ranges gradually sink
into the immeasurable pluns of the interior, through
which wind the Murray — the Miamssippi of Australia —
and its thousand tributary streams. This great river is

^dbyGoogle

18 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

supposed to be navigable na far as Albany, or 1900 mileB
from its mouth; it« importance, as the great natural
artery for the traffic of the interior of the continent, ia
only now beginning to be nnderstood. It is rather more
than twelve months since the first attempt was made on a
lai^e scale to ascertain its navigability. In September
and October, 1853, Captain Cadell, accompanied by Sir
Henry Young, tiie Lieutenant-Governor of South Aus-
tralia, ascended the river in a steamer of lO-horse power,
from near its mouth to 1 50 miles above Swan Hill, that is,
1450 miles in alL Sir H. Young details the results of
this voyage in two interesting despatches to the Colonial
Secretary, which will be found in the Appendix. At the
highest point that he reached, the Murray was 200 yards
wide and 3 fathoms deep. The Murrumbidgee river, a
great tributary to the Murray, Sir H. Young believes to
be navigable 700 miles from the junction. The navigation
of the entrance to the Murray from the sea is beset with
difficulties ; but these are obviated by a railway seven miles
in length, recently completed, connecting the river terminus
on the Lake Alexandrina with Port Elliot in Encounter
Bay. Captain Cadell's steamer brought down the first
cai^o of wool from the squatting stations on the river
banks; and the Lieutenant-Governor is sanguine that the
result of this successful voyage will be the establishment
of the Murray as the great highway of inland com-
munication to the three colonies, and especially to the Vic-
toria Gold Diggings ; and further, that, ere long, thriving
agricultural settlements will spring up along the alluvial
margin of the river.

At present these districts are stocked, though very in-

^dbyGoogle

THE "MALLKB 8CBUB." 19

adequately, with sheep. The grass ia burnt up during the
summer heate ; but when the pasturage is destroyed, the
sheep feed and fatten on a shrub called the " salt hush,"
which, by a benehccnt arrangement, is abundant in these
torrid tracts, though unknown or very rare to the south.
Lai^e areas are covered with the "mallee scrub," — a per-
plexed maze of dwarf forest of the mallee, with intervening
patches of open country. In the summer the "mallee
scrub " is wholly destitute of water, and woe betide the
traveller who then loses himself in its labyrinths. It is
said that the aborigines, in the extremity of thirst, extract
water from the root of a plant which grows here.

The temperature of the valley of the Murray is for
higher than that of the southern districts along the sea-
board, and even exceeds that of the Indian peninsula ; and
it is more than probable that Great Britain will here-
after be supplied from these now solitary wastes with a
large proportion of those tropical products for which she is
now dependent on foreign lauds, while her surplus popu-
lation may here for many ages find ample room to spread,
establish happy homes tuid well-filled barns, and actualise
the beautiful Hebrew ideal of domestic and social bliss,
every man " sitting under his own vine and under Us own
fig-tree."

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTEE III.

TOWKS AHD TOWM8HIF8.

Approach to Melbourne — Tb« Wharres — The City— Increase in
Talue of land — BesUursnta — Fire* Trequent BiDce the Gold
Epoch — Municipal loan — Water Buppl; — Sandridge — The
first Railway — WilliamBtown — Electric Telegraph — The Har-
bour — Geelong — Rulway to Melbourne — Other towns — Inland
townships.

At the northern extremity or head of Port Phillip Bay,
sheltered by a low rocky headland, lies Hohson's Bay, the
harbour of the capital of Victoria. Here the river Yarra
enters the sea, after winding for the last few milee of ita
course through a low, swampy delta. About eight or t«n
miles from the mouth, gently swelling hills rise out of the
alluvial plain. On these slopes, on tlte right bank, stajids
the city of Melbourne, at the distance of hardly more
than a mile from the sea in a direct line. Sailing up the
river, the stranger is struck with the peculiar and exotic
character of the " tea-tree scrub," or copae-Iike jungle, that
borders its hanks. Above the aboriginal scrub, how-
ever, appear the towers and public buildings of the Euro-
pean city, crowning the hill-tops and ascending their
sides. At length the low, thick jungle ceases, and you
land on the bustling wharf, piled up with merchandise,
crowded with porters, clerks, dealers, and hangers-on,
and lined with drays, whose owners are receiving their
loads. Between the wharf and the town a large open

^dbyGoogle

WHABTES OF H&LBOURNE. 2i

space ia covered with imported timber and vast stacks
of flooring-boarda. The river itself, which may be
here one-fourth the width of the Thames at London, ia
crowded with ooasling craft and lighters, discharging the
cargoes of the fleet of merchantmen which lies at anchor
in Hobson'a Bay, Higher up, the Yam is spanned by a
noble arch, connecting the city with the long, straggling
suburb of Prahran, and with the pretty village of St.
Kilda on the Bay, the favourite residence of the wealthier
citizens. Near the bridge stood the squalid tents of
" Canvass Town," now no more, which received the over-
flowing population of a city suddenly become too small for
its inhabitants.

On landing, the stranger is struck with the broad mac-
adamised roads, and the busy crowds and ceaseless tide of
traffic that roll through them. So much bustle and acti-
vity is, indeed, rarely witnessed in the " old country,"
except in London itself. On the wharves are huge piles of
timber, of bricks, compressed hay, bales, barrels, and cases
of all sizes. About eighteen months ago, before the recent
increase of wharf accommodation, and during the rainy
season, valuable property was often thrown into,and some-
times irretrievably lost in, the deep mud which hemmed
in the wooden platforms of the quays. It was Balaklava
anticipated.

On entering the town we find broad streets, crossing
each other at right angles, and bordered with well-filled
shops and massive stone stores, [nledup with miscellaneous
merchandise. The buildings are constructed of brick
stuccoed, or of the dark " bluestone " or basalt, quarried
in abundance near the city. The public buildings are not

^dbyGoogle

83 TUB GOLDEH COLOMT.

munificent, but reflect no discredit on a city of seventeen
yeara' growth. The churchea and chapels are numerous.
Several have been added since the sudden recent increase
of the population, consequent on the gold disooreries.
Previous to that period, numerous vacant plots broke the
continuity of the buildings, even in the naain street*
These, however, have now been generally filled with shops
and stores, while several new streets and euburbB have
spread off from "the rectangle which formed the original
site for the dty.

The increase in the value of land and houses in the
towns, and particularly in Melbourne, and the rents now
paid, are scarcely credible. Land, with old buildings upon
it, in Elizabeth Street, has been sold for 300/. per foot
frontage. An ironmonger's business in Collins Street,
with the premises and stock, sold for 35,000/. In the
principal streets, lOOOt per annum is not an extraordinary
rent for a houf>e and shop: 1500/., and even 2000/. a year
and upwards, is sometimes paid. A shop and dwelling
near the Post Office, in Bourke Street, is let for 2500/.
per annum. Rente are always paid in advance, either for
the week, month, or quarter, — a very salutary check on
the recklessness of adventurers without capibJ.

The hotels are numerous ; and a few of them are large
and commodious. The chief is the " Criterion," which has
lately been remodelled and goi^eously fitted up on the
American model.

The discovery of gold in Victoria forms the great epoch
in its history, to which all eveuts are " referred, as having
happened " before " or " after the gold." The changes
consequent on the sudden and immense acquisition of

byGoogle

LOAN AKD PUBLIC WOBKa 23

population and wealth have affected not only the outward
aspect of the capital, but also the social condition and
habits of the people. One new feature in the city is the
introduction of numerous handsome restaurants, so com-
mon all over the continent of Europe, though they have
never succeeded in England. Many of these are kept by
foreigners, — French, derman, and American, — and they
have almost superseded the old-fashioned " chop-house "
and " coffee-room."

By the provisions of a Building Act, founded on that
framed for London, the erection of wooden buildings i
prohibited within the limits of the city ; but a few old
wooden houses, built in the first years of the colony, may
still be seen in the main streets — the " antiquities " of Mel-
bourne. It is worthy of remark that fires, which were
very rare up to the gold era, have of late been both
frequent and destructive ; so that, had it not been for this
salutu'y provision, the city might, like San Erancisco, have
been more than once reduced to ashes. A new suburb,
called North Melbourne, consists chiefly of wooden houses ;
and here I have known one side of a street entirely con-
sumed in the space of half an hour-
Melbourne is still wholly without sewers and gas.
During the heavy storms the sur&ce-water rushes down
the central street like a river, which you must cross as
you can, by wading or by a temporary bridge. Outside
the town these torrents have scooped out deep channels
and ravines, which embarrass the traffic, and ctia only be
passed by bridges. These inconveniences will, however,
soon cease to exist. A public company, long since formed,
is about to supply the streets with gas, and the munici-

^dbyGoogle

24 THE GOLDEH COLONY.

polity are commencing a grand series of works of sanitary
and civic improvement, one of the chief of which will be a
system of sewerage. To carry out these works efficiently,
they have just effected a loan from certain London capi-
taliata of 500,000/.

At the same time Government le engaged upon a mag-
nificent scheme for supplying the city with water. An
immense reservoir, several hundred acres in extent, is now
being formed near the head of the river Plenty, about
twenty miles from Melbourne, from whence water is to
be conveyed to the city by iron pipes, which have just
been shipped from England. The reservoir is created
by damming up an open valley-basin. The contract for
constructing the dam amounted to nearly 100,0002^ As the
supply of water will be on the amplest and grandest scale,
we may hope to see a complete system of irrigation esta-
blished for the suburbs of the capital, the effect of which
would be magical; for what is now a dreary sandy desert
would tlien be clothed with fresh verdure and flowers.
Another benefit accruing from such a measure would be
the suppression or mitigation of one of the chief plagues
of the metropolis, namely, the whirling dust-clouds rused
by the hot wind from the arid grassless suburbs, and
blown through the streets and into every house and every
room in the city.

Sandndge, about a mile and a half from Meltioume, is a
thriving little town, on the shore of Hobson's Bay, where
it approaches nearest to the capital. Sandridge sprang
into existence with a rapidity unmatched even in Victoria.
In 1852, nothing was to be seen here but an hotel, a jetty,
and possibly two or three wooden houses, on a beach of

^dbyGoogle

BISE IN VALUE OF FHOFEBTT. 25

loose deep sand. In the following year you might have
seen a busy street, witli shops, stores, and refreshment
rooms, flagB flying, a crowded jetty, a throng of boats, and
all the bustle and life of a seaport. Sandridge is the
most convenient landing-place from the ships in the har-
bour ; and hence its sudden growth and prosperity was
but the necessary consequence of the rapid augmentation
of the shipping. The quick and progressive rise in the
value of property here is almost beyond belief. One
illustration of this will be enough. In the year 1852, at
a government land sale, a certain plot at Sandridge was
knocked down at what was then deemed the extravagant
price of 700Z. As usual at these sales, a deposit of 10 per
cent, was paid down, and the remainder of the purchase
money was to be handed over to the Treasury within one
month. The purchaser, however, thinking that he had
been induced to bid more than the land was worth, deter-
mined to ^ve up his purchase and sacrifice the amount
already paid. He did so ; and in October, 1S53, the same
lot was brought forward at another government land sale ;
but 80 greatly had the value of property at Sandridge
advanced during this interval, that the very same person
who had refiised to complete his purchase for 700/. now
bid for the same lot no less than 3400/, This siuu was
ptdd for one quarter of an acre, on a sandy beach.

Sandridge is connected with the capital by a railway,
which was to be opened in October last (1854), The
rails are run out into the sea on a long jetty ; and here it
is hoped the ships in the harbour may lie alongside and
discharge their cargoes. This will be the first nulway
opened in Australia. Formerly the beach was too much

^dbyGoogle

28 THE OOLDEH COLONY.

exposed to wind and wave to allow of vessels lying along-
side the jetty ; but now the multitude of ships at anchor
in the bay forma a kind of breakwater which protects the
shore.

Williamstown, on the opposite side of Hobson's Bay,
and sheltered by Qellibrand's Point, is also a floarishing
township. Here are government establishments of water-
police and customs, and from hence the shipping in the
harbour is supplied with fresh provisions. An electric
telegraph is in operation between Williamstown and Mel-
bourne, and is to be continued round Fort Phillip Bay to
the entrance from the open sea. Williamstown was
founded at the same time as Melbourne, and received the
royal name, while that of the then prime minister was given
to the new city on the Yarra. Natural advantages were,
however, almost all in fevour of Melbourne, — Williamstown
being situated on a rocky promontory, without wood,
fresh water, or cultivated land around it, its proximity to
the harbour being its sole advantage.

St. Kilda is a village on the coast, a mile beyond Sand-
ridge ; and a few miles further stands Brighton, another
favourite resort of the richer citizens of Melbourne.

Between Sandridge and Williamstown, a magnificent
fleet of several hundred merchantmen ride at Anchor in the
bay, comprising some of the lai^est, finest, and fastest ^ps
in the world, and presenting a scene which can scarcely be
matched elsewhere ; certainly nei&er at London nor Liver-
pool, where the shipping is shut up within the w^ls of
several separate docks, and where you have muddy
stagnant water and a murky atmosphere, instead of the
glancing crystal ware and bright blue sky of Port Phillip

byGoogle

KAILWAYS. 2?

Uay. Numerous boats and email Bteam-vesseU flit about
among the stately ships and great ocean steamers, while a
white hulk, with "Befkactoht Seamen" painted in
large capitals on her side, is calculated to arrest tlie atten-
tion of newly arrived sailors who may be meditating an
escape to the gold-fields.

A r^lway from Melbourne to Williamstown is now
being constructed; this is an offset from a much grander
scheme, namely, a line from the capital to the Mount
Alexander gold-field, a distance of seventy or eighty miles.
Whether, or when, the latter will be carried into execution
is doubtful ; those who have undertaken the work having
neither the requisite capital nor enterprise. Government
has, however, granted the land- along the whole line>
besides other privileges and guarantees. Such a grand
arterial line would be of inestimable value to the country.
It would immediately open up large tracts of cultivable
hind in the interior, which would supply the now meagre
markets of Melbourne. It would obviate an immense deal
of cruelty, and save the loss of many thousands of pounds
now thrown away every winter in the shape of bullocks
and hontes : for thousands of these poor beasts are annually
sacrificed in battling their way, urged by whip and goad,
through the oozy morasses and Sloughs of Despond, which
must be got through, somehow, by every team carrying
stores to the mines during the rainy season.

Geelong, the second town in the colony, stands on the
pleasant Bhoree of the beautiful Corio Bay, forming the
western extremity of Port Phillip Bay. In the rear of
the town, about a mile from the sea-beach, the river
Barwon, here deep and brood, rolls its waters towards the

^dbyGoogle

28 THE GOLBEN COLONY,

sea, BO that one end of the town faces the eea and the
other the river. Beyond the Barwon rise the steep graaay
slopes of the Barrabool Hills, admirably adapted for
husbandry, and already to a great extent under tillage.
From the summits of these hills the eye ranges over a
superb panorama. Beneath you, looking east, spread the
blue waters of Port Phillip Bay, with the noble sweep of
the granitic hill called Station Peak on the left, in its
outline and combination with the sea reminding the tra-
veller of Vesuvius as it shuts in the Bay of Naples. At
Point Henry, about six miles from Geeloug, are seen a
few large ships at anchor, being prevented from approach-
ing closer to the town by a submarine bar, which here
Btretches across the entrance to the inner bay. A hazy
outline of mountains can be descried beyond the bay, being
those to the north and east of Melbourne. Looking south
is seen the open ocean, separated from Port Phillip by a
narrow neck of land. On the opposite, or land side, lies
an open plain, through which the Barwon winds its way in
a deep-sunk rocky channel. Far beyond, on the horizon,
may be descried the isolated volcanic hills already noticed,
which rise like islands out of the immense Western Plains.
As there is no safe or commodious harbour west of this
point till we reach the adjacent colony of South Australia,
Geelong may be considered the natural outlet of the
whole western district of Victoria, embracing a lai^er ex-
tent of country than Melbourne itself. As there is good
anchorage almost close in to the shore, it would have sur-
passed Melbourne in facilities for loading and diachai^ng
ships, had it not been for the existence of the submarine
bar at Point Henry, which shuts out lai^e vessels from

^dbyGoogle

GBELONQ AND IT3 RAILWAYS. 29

the inner harbour. The channel through this bar is now
being deepened by a Bteam dredge, to admit of the passage
of lai^e ^ips ; and the inhabitants of Geelong, who have
long been working hard to get this work effected, are very
sanguine as to the results upon the commerce of their town,
which they delight to oelebrate as the "oonunercial pivot"
of Victoria.

Geelong is supposed to contain, including its straggling
suburbs along the shore, a population of about 25,000.
It has its municipal institutions, its daily paper, its courts
of justice, gaol, and hospital, two churches, and numerous
chapels. The streets are in part macadamised ; those
which are not so present in winter a dreadful slough of
stiff mud, through which ponderous drays and long teams
of jaded bullocks drag their heavy way. Such were all
the streets in the younger days of the town. Following
the example of the capital, the municipality of Crcelong
has just contracted a loan of 200,0007., to aid In carrying
out sanitary and other improvements.

A railway to connect Geelong with Melbourne is now
in rapid progress, the capital having been almost or wholly
subscribed. The distance is about 40 miles, and as the
line traverses the length of the Melbourne Plmns, there
are great facilities for construction. The directors hope
that it may be opened in 1855. Another line of rmlway
has been planned to the Ballarat gold-field, about fifty
miles north of Geelong ; but the execution of this project
is more doubtful. As the greater part of the capital for
these lines is furnished, directly or indirectly, from Geelong,
it may be presumed that the merchants and traders there
are opulent and enterprising.

^dbyGoogle

30 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

Besides the great landlocked bays of Port Phillip and
Western Port, Victoria has no good harbours along her
coast. Three small towns have, however, established them-
selyes oa the sea-hoard west of Port Phillip Bay, viz.,
Belfast, Wainambool, and Portland. These have shared
the general impulse consequent on the gold discoveries.
Their trade is chiefly carried on by coasting -Craft, though
a few ships have sailed direct from England to Portland.
Alberton is the chief town of tbe eastern province of
Gipps Land.

Numerous inland towmbipi are marked down on the
government maps of the colony. These have sometimes
no existence except on paper. Sometimes they possess
the rudiments of a town, in the shape of a small inn, a
hlackranith's forge, and perhaps a " Store," or genend de-
pository for all sorts of manufactured articles, groceries,
&C. &c Occasionally a strolling street of wooden
buildings has grown up around the original nucleus. On
the great line of road from Melbourne to the Mount
Alexander gold-fleld, these townships occur at intervals
of £ve or ten miles, and are of more consideration, gene-
rally contwning one or more hotels and a few shops. Some
of these will in a few years be thriving populous towns.

Dense masses of population are collected at the centres
of all the great Gold-fields. As soon as the Government
established townships at these places, and put up the land
for sale, it was bought up with avi^ty; and now the earlier
tents of the storekeepers and others not immediately
engaged in mining are being rapidly superseded by wooden
buildings, formed of planks and boards, or of rough lo^s
split up into tlaba.

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTER IV.

POPULATION AND SOCIAL ASPECTS.

Compoute character of population — EuglieL feeling dominant —
Squnttera — Melbourne crowil — Christmas of 1^1^ — Diggeis
and their brides — Crisis of the Gold Fever — Prospects of emi-
granls — "New chums" — Gold-brokers — Their frauds — Public
amusements — The botanic garden — Literature — Franchise con-
ceded to schoolmasters.

No country on earth can ^ow a population composed of
more heterogeneous elements than Victoria ; — English,
Scotch, Irish, Americans, French, Germans, Hindoos,
Negroes, Chinese, South Sea Islanders, New Zealanders,
Australian Aborigines,— and stiQ our list is not complete.
Fortunately for the public peace, all these coalesce and
fraternise in the most amicable manner. All are subject
to the same laws and enjoy the same privileges. No
nationalities are wounded, and none are prominently dia-
[J:ayed, unless it be on the occasion of certain anniversary
dinners, irben each of the three sections of the United
Kingdom meet their compatriots, and make speeches in
praise of their country and of themselves. Even the Irish
Boman Catholic here forgets bis antagonism to the
" Saxon." The Americans, abandoning or restraining
their own predilections and peculiar habits, become active
traders or quiet and indastrious mechanics, and, as snch.

^dbyGoogle

32 THE 60LDBN COLONY.

are umverBally liked and valued. The Chinese generally
arrive in companieB, hahited in their own costuoie, and &t
once start off to the diggings, where they have their full
share of sncceBs. The New Zealandere work quietly to-
gether in the same way. All individual national pecu-
liaritiee appear to be overshadowed by the dominant
English habits and English feelings. As a whole, the
colonists are thoroughly English. In spite of almost per-
petual and bitter complaints of the indifference and n^lect
of the mother country, of the misgovemment of Downing
Street, and of local maladministration, still the great bulk
of the people retain the warmest attachment to English
institutions, and feel tJiemselves, th^ hopes, and fears,
and affections, bound up in the destiny of that land which
they, in common talk, affectionately distinguish as " home."
How true this is, was strikingly manifested a few months
ago by the rapturous reception given to Sir Charles
Hotham, the new Lieutenant-Governor. They erected
triumphal arches, and conducted him, quite a stranger
among them, with unexpected honours to the Government
House. The same feeling of identity with England has
just been manifested in another way. We learn by a
late mail that the people of Melbourne have met to con-
cert measures for raising 20,000t in aid of the relatives
of those who might fall in the war with Russia.

This strong instinctive attachment to the mother coimtry
must not be referred to historic associations, still less to
abstract political feeUng. The real bond is much stronger
and more enduring. Early recollections of youth spent
among the green valleys and beautiful haunts of England
have twined themselves round the heart of the colonist, and

^dbyGoogle

SQUATTEB8 AND UEBCHAVTS. 33

there remun till death. RecoUections, too, of fnenda and
relatiTeB lefl behind are Btill fondly cherished j perhaps
long after those friends have ceased to remember the self-
made exile. England is still looked back to as a sort of
visionary paradise of delights ; and to be " going home "
ia reckoned as synonymous with all that is delectable.
All this is as true of the felon transported for his crimes
as of the educated and refined.

Previous to the gold era the population of Victoria
consisted. First, of the squatters or " setUerB," who had
divided the entire country among themselves aa " stations,"
or runs for pasturing sheep and cattle,— holding the same
as lessees of the Crown. These, by birth, wealth, and
education, formed the aristocracy of the land. Afew were
illiterate men, of low origin, but whose shrewdness and
industry had, during the early vicissitudes of the colony,
won for them opulence and large territory. By fiir the
larger portion, however, were the younger members of
I^nglish families of the middle and higher classes.

Secondly, there were the townspeople, including a few
rich merchants who exported the wool and tallow pro-
duced by the settlers, forwarded supplies to their stations
in the Bush, acted as their agents in town, often advanced
them money, and carried on the general import trade of
the colony.

Thirdly, there were the ^riculturists ; a class of small
farmers, carrying on their operations in a slovenly and
desultory way, and only supplying in part the require-
ments of the community, — the deficiency being made up
by the neighbouring colonies.

The servants of the settleTS, including shepherds, stock-

ed byGooglc

84 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

keepers, and others, formed a fourth class, known as
Buthmen.

The squatters, being virtually the territorial lords, of
course becsme the chief and dominant class. As they held
their lands at rents almost nominal compared widi the actual
Talue, it is not strange that a perpetual warfare was mtun-
tained agunst them by tlie unprivileged claeees or bulk
of the community. However, supported by Acte of Par-
liament and Orders in Council, and by their own wealth
and influence with the Qovemment, they 6rni!y heU their
own. Since the gold discoveries the squatter have in
some d^^ee been thrown into the shade by the sudden
creation of a new and commanding interest ; and as their
numerical importance, compared with other classes, has
tdso euSered diminution, the assault upon them, as a pri-
vil^ed minority, growing rich upon the property of the
state, has been carried on with redoubled ardour.

The crowd that moves up and down the streets of Mel-
bourne olFers no marked difference to that seen in the
streets of any lai^e town in England. There are, indeed,
none of the fashionable loungers of B^ent Street here ;
neither are there such close-packed living masses as jam up
Cheapside. Formerly, the broad " cabbt^e-tree " hats and
bushy beards of the settlers " in from the Bush " might
attract Uie notice of the newly arrived. A few years ^;o,
parties of " blackfeUows," wrapped in loose blanketa or
greasy opossum ruge, might now and then be seen moring
along the mun streets, accompanied perhaps by their
squalid "loubras" (wives), dressed in old dirty faded
gowns and cast-off battered bonnets. But these sights are
passed. The free and easy ebooting-coat and " cabbage-

^dbyGoogle

THB QOLD F£T£& OF 1851. 35

tree" have been Bupereeded by the more elaborate costume
of EuFopeao oitieB. As to the Aborigines, no one knows
what has become of them. They melt away before the
white man even when subjected to no ill-treatment, retire
further and further from the central seats of the intruders,
visit them less and less frequently, and at length dis-
appear.

During the Christmas of 1851-2, the Melbourne etreets
presented some curious scenes and strange social pheno-
mena. After the first snccessiul campugn at the gold-
fields, and under the fiush and excitement of sudden and
easily acquired wealth, the diggers returned to Melbourne
to " knock down" their money and have a holiday, before
they returned to Mount Alexander, where they were con-
fident they could as readily find " plenty more." The
streets, which had been almost deserted by the universal
rush to the gold-fields, were now gayer than ever ; and
shopkeepers, who had shut up their shops for want of
customers, now became busier than before. The " lucky
diners," chiefiy old bushmen and sailors, having their
pockets full of bank-notes, spent them with that reckless
wastefulness which distinguishes the class, and which
they cherish as a virtue. On arriving at Melbourne they
would often place their gold, or its produce in cash, in
the hands of the publican at whose house they put up,
and then drink and revel for days in a sty of sensual
delight, followed not unfrequeutly with the attendant
" horrors" and delirium tremens. Some amused them-
selves by marrying. Often the courtship lasted only a
few hours. The bride was then dressed out in all the
goi^ousness of costly brocaded silks and rainbow-coloured

^dbyGoogle

36 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

shawls and bonneta. They then hired a carriage, and made
the man drive them furiouBlj up and down the streets, to
the admiration of some and the terror of more. The gold
fever was at its height; the lower classes were intoxicated
with the prospect of boundless wealth, and the virions
with visions of a perpetual paradise of " pleasnre." In
the meantime the police force had become almost broken
up hj the general rush of the men to the gold>fields ; while
the upper classes, finding themselves in the midst of a
great social revolution, over which they had no control,
could not look forward to the unknown future without
some alarm.

This may be considered the crisis of the fever. From
that period the diggers have never again broken out
into such noisy recklessness. The streets have never again
been first deserted, and then filled with drunken revelry
and bacchanalian debauch. There has since been always
a double stream of adventurers, pasang from the city to
the mines, and from the mines to the city. The traders
have grown rich. The general commerce of the country
has continually augmented. At the mines gold has been
more difficult to get. The prizes in the lottery have been
fewer, and the blanks more numerous. The diggers have
grown more careful ; the price of skilled labour has gone
on increasing till it has become high enough to lure the
regular artistins from the chances of the lottery to resume
their proper avocations in the towns. Buildings, which
for a year were almost suspended, now progressed rapidly
in all directions. The educated classes resumed their due
weight in the community; and, since tiie period named,
the blwe-shirted digger has never agiun been the same

^dbyGoogle

INDTTCEMENTS TO EMI6BATE- 37

important and conspicuous personage in the city of Mel-
bourne.

One feature in the motley crowd of Melbourne may be
noticed as characteristic of the progrea^ve state of the
colony. Readily distinguishable from all others, you
may observe in Ae principal streets groups of men in
rusty faded shooting-coats and worn-out caps, evidently
strangers, and without any of that free-and-easy air which
marks the Australian colonist These are newly-arrived
emigrants, fresh landed in Hobson's Bay. Feeling alone
in a world of strangers, they become the more cordial
towards each other ; and they may be seen clustering round
the Shakspeare Hotel, in Elizabeth Street, as a sort of
rendezvous, warmly greeting each other, and mutually in-
quiring after the adventures and results of the first days'
ramble in the capital of the Promised Land.

And here a few words may properly be said relative to
the prospects of emigrants and the general inducements to
emigrate which Victoria and Australia have to offer.
These differ altogether according to the station, busi-
ness, and pursuits of the emigrant. The industrious me-
chanic, the sturdy labourer, — every one who has a strong
arm or a skilled right-hand, cannot fail to better his
condition immensely by transporting himself to these
shores. No sooner has he landed than he finds abun-
dance of wort, and employers ready to appreciate and
reward industry and handicraft skill. Nor is there any
fear that such will not continue to be the case for many
years to come: for while in England we enter upon
the labours of eight centuries of labour and thought, in
Australia we have everything to begin for ourselves, —

^dbyGoogle

88 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

roads, bridges, streets, public buildings, docks, r^wayB.
A large number of importaut public works are being just
commenced, wbich cannot be completed for years to come ;
and before these are finished, the requiremeuts of the ever
enlarging community will call for others. Besides, opu-
lence will here, ss elsewhere, delight in the creation of
sumptuous re^ideuces, gardens, and all the other appur-
tenances of modern life. As the colony, before its sudden
start to extraordinary prosperity, was always calling for
a loiter supply of labour, there \a no fear of any glut now,
under such very different circumstances, when the work
to be done is multiplied twenty-fold.

But among the mixed crowd of emigrants, there are
others whose prospects on landing are far less hopeful.
There are pale-faced clerks from London and Liverpool,
whose only implement is the pen: there are sons of poor
gentlemen in England, delicately brought up, and ao very
" well educated " that they know nothing which can be
turned to practical account, either in their native land or
in the new country. These exhibit all that helplessnefla
and poverty of resource which the old colonist associates
with the " new chum," a term by which all new comers
are half-<iontemptuously designated.* These are they who

• The feeliDgswith which a certain class of the "old colonists"
regard new comers is ridiculously exhibited in the following little
scene before the hustings at Melbourne : —

" Mr. Cocker, after some further interruption, was about proceed-
ing with his remarks, when a man, on the steps leading to the hnstlngs,
caused additional confusion bj his vociferations. He wanted to know
bow long Mr. Cocker had known Mr. Guthridge. lie was onlj a
' Dew chum,' and they would not hear him ; as for himself, he had
been here 22 years, and knew alt the candidates. The Major again

^dbyGoogle

THE " NEW CHUM." 39

write those lugabrious letters, abusive of everything
colonial, which sometimea appear in tlie EDglieh papers.
Indeed, their position on landing, without friends or
money, without strength in th^ arms or skill in their
hands, is sufficientlj forlorn and pitiable. A large propor-
tion at once start off for the diggings, and, finding them-
selves quite unfit for such work, after a short campaign,
return to Melbourne, disheartened and di^ustcd. But
many have neither the requisite funds, nor strength, nor
heart to try the digger's life, Mid determine to " get some-
thing " at Melbourne. They look over their bundle of
introductions, perhaps find some addressed to leading
merchanta of the city, and, with a beating heart, present
them. These letters probably lead to nothing, for the rich
man's own affairs occupy all his time ; and, besides, he is
pestered with similar letters every week from almost-for-
gotten acquaintances in the old country. The " new chum,"
mortified with his reception, but goaded on by the necessity
of supplying his daily wants, now casts about in quest of
employment, but can discover no vacancy which he is
qualified to fiU. Something, however, must be done ; and
when he discovers that half the people of the place are
engaged in occupations for which they were never in-
tended in England, he is encouraged to follow their ex-
ample. Some take to carpentering, and, after two or three
days' apprenticeship, advertise themselves in the papers as

interposed, and threatened to send tiie noiej individual to the lock-
up ; and this only produced the rejoinder of, 'John Thomaa, just
listen to me fur a moment: look at him' (alluding to Mr. Cocker);
' he is quite gre&n ; he has oolj been here eighteen months ; he has'nt
got the lime-juice off on him.' (Loud laughter.)"

^dbyGoogle

40 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

" rough oarpentera." Others try punting or paper-hang-
iag. The moat favourite course with those who can com-
mand a little capital is to turn carters. They purchase a
horse and dray, and carry goods from the wharves to
warehouses and elsewhere. There is a freedom, independ-
ence, and variety about this kind of life which renders it
often much more consonant to the buoyancy of youth than
the confinement and drudgery of the counting-house.
Among the throng of drays and draymen at the wharf
may be seen, dressed in rough blue serge shirt and wide-
awake hat, with whip in hand, more than one youth who
was once, and but a few months ago, a cherished member
of a refined English circle, and whose hands, now rough
and horny, seemed destined for other work than that of
moving heavy bales and cases. The life, however, is
healthy, profitable, and apparently not disagreeable to
those engaged in it.

When aU these resources i^, there is still one refuge
for the destitute — the roads. A man can always obt^
work here, and his earnings will vary from eight to
twenty shillings a day. Even this employment is not
found so distasteful as might be thought. What is
counted menial and humiliating in England ceases to be
so in a land where many of better condition are engaged
in it ; and it is not more degrading to use the pick and
shovel on the road than in the gold-digger's " hole." I
have seen little coteries of friends, evidently men of edu-
cation, working together breaking stones, while a rough-
bearded " lucky digger " has galloped gaily by, well
mounted, over the roads which the others were fonmng.
After a few months' work, however, the new chum has

^dbyGoogle

OOLD BBOKEBS. 41

acquireii some little stock of casb, increaeed pbyeical
strength, and some of that " colonial experience " of which
he heard so much on first landing, and the want of which
so often disqualified him for employment. Thus provided,
he leaves the roads, finds some other occupation more
congenial to his habits, becomes dovetailed into the com-
munity, and shares the advantages of the general progress
of the colony.

Any account of the people of Melbourne would be in-
complete without some notice of a class which has been
called into existence by the gold discoveries, — I mean
the gold-brokers. In the earlier days of gold-finding
their calling was a very lucrative one ; so lucrative, that
a host of competitors sprang up, and profits soon became
in consequence much reduced. The gold-broker carries
on his trade in a small shop in one of the chief streets.
On entering, you see on the counter three or four pMrs of
gold scales of different sizes ; also a large metallic tray, on
which he spreads the gold while blowing off the fordgn
matter and extracting minute particles of iron with the
magnet. There is also a hammer and a small iron block,
on which pieces of quartz containing gold are pulverised
in order to liberate the metaL A loaded revolver is
within readi behind him.

The di^er, having obtained his little leather bi^ of
gold, duly sealed and labelled, from the Government
Escort Office, takes it to the broker, — first asks the price
«f gold for the day, produces his bag, and then watches
the operation of cleaning, and blowing, and weighing.
He finally rec^ves a cheque for the amount.

Many of these brokers are Jews, and their shops are dis-

^dbyGoogle

42 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

tingaiBheii b; lai^e bowls of gold-dust and templing nuggets
exposed in tlie windows. Some of these of inferior note
have no very high reputation. The fecilities for fraudu-
lent practices are great, with little chance of detection, —
especially^ when dealing with obtuse and illiterate men.
The weights may be too heavy, or one arm of the beam a
trifle longer than the o&er; or, if both weights and
balance are correct, fraud may yet be effected by resorting
to some sleight-of-haad trickery. That such practices
are not un&eguent is generally believed ; and at least one
delinquent has been convicted, and b now expiating his
crimes by imprisonment with hard labour.

In other traffic it is the business of the seller to attract
to him the buyer ; but with gold the case is reversed, and
the buyer has to allure to him the seller. Thus in the
early days of the gold discoveries it became common to
see such notices as these stuck np in shops in Melbourne :
■ — " 5000 ounces of gold wanted;" " 10,000 ounces
wanted immediately, — highest price given." When there
was a difference of 25 per cent, between die London and
Melbourne prices, speculators were anxious to obtidn
and ship to London as much as their funds would allow ;
but now the banks have entered the market as purchasers,
and their competition has bo rused the price that the pur-
chaser of gold at Melbourne, for exportation, will often be
a loser by his venture.

Almost all the wealthier citizens have their homes ia
the suburban villages: some at St. Kilda, on the sea-
shore, two or three miles from Melbourne ; some on the
wooded slopes of the river Yarra ; some on one of the
smaller tributary streams, whose steep alluvial banks form

^dbyGoogle

PUBLIC AHUBEHENTS. 43

excellent sites for gardens. At about ten every morning,
standing on the bridge, you may see them trooping into
the town on sleek horses and in well-appointed dog-cart«.

If the people of Melbourne are e^er in pursuit of gain,
yet they do not make themselves slaves to the pursuit.
While active and energetic, they know nothing of that
aU-absorbing devotedness with which profeasional men in
London give themselves up to their own vocation. A pale
haggard face is hardly ever seen. The easy air and ex-
pression of the man very well-to-do in the world is much
more characteristic of the Melbourne citizen.

When first the gold " broke out " (to use the diggers'
phrase), the general excitement of all ranks, coupled
with the domestic embarrassments fix)m want of servants,
almost put an end to private convivial meetings. On the
other band, public dinners and pubUc balls have become
much more frequent and sumptuous. These are sometimes
attended by many hundreds, and two or three guineas is
no unoommon price for a ticket.

Public amusements partake of the anomalous character
of the community. They are almost wholly in the hands
of, and patronised by, the lower and working classes.
This applies to the theatre, to on equestrian circus in an
inuneose tent, and to numerous cheap concerts. The
cause of this is readily explained. Melbourne has always
a large iloating population of unlettered men, with plenty
of money, low vi<aoua tastes, and wholly debarred from
the attractions of domestic comfort, — their home being a
miserable, overcrowded, and dirty boarding-house. Snch
persons naturally resort in numbers to all places of pabiio
amusement ; and others, of more refined habits and nature,

^dbyGoogle

44 THE QOLDEN COLONT.

on fiadiDg that they are subjected to close proximity with
coarse brutality and disgusting sceues and sights, of courao
keep away. There is, however, a weekly concert, at-
tended by a smaller and selecter audience, where the
performances are very creditable, and the exertions of a
Mrs. Teatar, the prima donna of Melbourne, are duly
appreciated and loudly applauded.

The Botanic GUrden, on a beautifiil bend of the Yarni,
is a favourite resort of the citizens; and here annual
horticultural shows are held. Another garden on the
Yarra, formed on the model of the Cremome in London,
was opened for a time, hut it quickly degenerated to a
mere garden of Sunday debauchery ; whereupon the au-
thorities interfered, and the garden was closed.

Literature, ecienae, and art, can number but few votaries
among the people of Melbourne. Indeed, the universal
scramble for gold is of too exciting a kind to "«llow of
much of that thoughtful leisure which seems reqimte for
such pursuits. There is a Mechanics' Institution, chiefly
supported by the upper classes, and a weekly lecture is
delivered here ; but, except as a reading-room, the In-
stitute seems to have little life or vigour in it. Among
the many indirect beneflts, however, that have accrued to
the colony from the gold discoveries, is the arrival, amongst
the mixed multitude, of a few men of no inconuderable
scientific and literary attainments ; and their presence and
influence will doubtless soon tell upon the mass of the
community.

If literature and science are not sedulously cultivated,
thdr importance is at least appreciated in the abstract At
the beginning of 1854, 1 witnessed a curious manifestation

^dbyGoogle

8CHOOLHA6TBBS' FSANCHISE. io

of this feeUog in the Legislative CoancU of the colony.
That body waa then arranging the detmls of the act which
waa to call into exiBtence the new Colonial Parliament. On
the day alluded to, the clauses relating to the constitution
of the Upper House were under discussion ; and by one
of those clauses it was then enacted that the privil^e of
voting for members — which for this Upper House waa
much restricted — should be conceded to all authorised
schoolmasters. This was a singular homage to intellect by
a people supposed to be absorbed in the greed for gold.

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTER V.

THE DIGGINGS AKD DIGGERS.

The Gold Conntrj described— Chief Gold-Fields — Discorerj of new
Di^iDgs — Magical rise of a mining town — "SI; grog^sliops " —
Capture of buab rangers at Mac Ivor — Digging partj on a joumej
— Their night camp in the forest — Arrival at Bendigo — " Sew
Chums" journejing on foot — Scenes at Bendigo — The Golden
Point — Street of stores — Government Camps— Contrasts — Grand
scale of Gold Deposits — The Whit« Hills — Nomenclature at the
Mines — The mining population — Mode of life — The Digger's Lsj
—'Scenes at the mines — Sunday — Mode of working — The Cradle
and " Long-Tom."

In this chapter I wish to give the reader some idea of the
babita, niaaner of life, and labours of that Bingular nomadic
class which has sprung up during the last three years,
and spread itself over very large areas in the interior of
Australia, — sometimes concentrated in dense masses, and
sometimes scattered in str^gling groups over sequestered
valleys. I shall first attempt to describe the kind of
country in which their operations are carried on.

Im^ine extensive districts of hill and dale, — the hills
rocky, sterile, abounding with steep slopes, and entirely

^dbyGoogle

THE GOLD-FJELDB. 47

covered withai5ense, monotonous forest; the valleys, wide
as they descend into the lowlands, but contracting to
rocky gullies as they wind up into the heart of the moun-
tains. Swelling, rounded hills sometimes flank one side,
of the valley, in advance of the rocky acclivities of the
higher ranges behind ; and not unlrcqueutly these lower
hills are covered or created with ciuartz-gravel, glistening
white like chalk. The forest clothes the hills down to the
open grassy flats of meadow-land which form the bottoms ;
and through these flats winds the creeA or stream, in a sunken
channel, now expanding into a broad pool or " water-hole,"
and now contracting into a mere brook. Here and there
rocky headlfuids or spurs advance from the flanking hills
into the flats, force the creek to sweep off towards the
opposite bills, and perhaps cross its channel as rocky bars.
If the valley should prove highly auriferous, the rich
deposits will generally be found, flrst, along the rocky bed
of die creek, especially where crossed by a bar ; secondly,
on the sides and summits of the swelling hills flanking the
valley ; thirdly, in the gullies which branch off from the
main valley ; fourthly, on the alluvial flats, — not diffused
over their entire area, but following a deflnite line, or rather
forming a band which winds through the flat. In tJiis
case, the direction or course of the gold-bearing band has
no relation to that of the creek, and can only be deter-
mined by opening the ground. It appears, in fact, to be
nothing more than the orginal channel of the valley, formed
by the meeting of its opposite rocky slopes, before the beds
of clay and gravel whidi now fill the bottom had been de-
posited. (See Jig. 1.)

byGoogle

THE QOLDBN COLONT.

Fig. I. Sectkxi of an Aoriferoiu QuUj.

B.,Pr«i«itcr«k. c. Gold-lKuliir draoitt.

b. SIntMgddilR;— ilq^.grntli.Ae. d. Vertical iliiH.

The general character of the anriferouB country is ao
distinctly marked, that the eye of the most unobservant
soon becomes able to recognise it. The rocka are more
or less slaty ', they are almost or quite vertical ; and their
direction or strike is always nearly due north and south.
Indeed, so uniformly is this the case, that, if lost in a
forest you might make your way out simply by noting
the direction of the beds of rock.

There are vast tracts to which this description is appli-
cable ; but the spots yielding gold in abundance are, of
course, comparatively few. Of those known, the richest
were the first discovered, viz., the valleys of Forest Creek
and Fryer's Creek, near Mount Alexander ; the Bendigo
district; and Ballarat. (See General Map, p. 8.) These
still form the great centres of the mining population.*
The most important of the gold-fields since discovered are,

* F(»«at Creek and Frjer*B Creek are distant 70 miles N.N.W.
from lifelbonrDe. Bendigo ib 30 miles north from Forest Creek ;
and Ballarat is 50 miles N.K.W. from Geelong.

^dbyGoogle

THfi VAHIOUS GOLD-FIELDS. 49

the OvEN9 River, about 150 miles from Melbourne, on
the road to Sydney, — - a favourite resort during Buccessive
aummers, and scarcely second to any other gold district in
extent and population ; the Mac Ivor diggings, about 42
, miles N.E. from Forest Creek and 38 from Bendigo ; Cbbs-
wiCK Cbbek, north of Ballarat ; Modnt Kobong, and the
AvocA RiVEB, west of Bendigo, and verging on the plains
of the Murray. The last discovered, and one of the most
important at the present moment, is the valley of the
Avoca. These various gold-fielda range over an area of
about 24,000 square miles, being 240 miles in length from
east to west, and 100 miles in breadth. Of this area large
portions are, indeed, non-auriferous ; and of the reminder,
the greater part yields gold to such a limited extent that
it could not be profitably extracted. Sjill, as a whole, it
forms the richest gold-bearing region in the world, — hav-
ing produced the largest average yield to a given number
<if miners, and the lai^est nuggets, or lumps of gold; while
the gold produced is unequalled in purity, sometimes
yielding 98 or 99 per cent, of pure metal.

Kven on tlie spot it is often very difficult to learn when,
by whom, and in what manner, a new gold district is first
(discovered. When the yield of an old working begins to
fill, the diggers throw out small " prospecting " parties of
twos and threes, to explore promising localities. These
prospectors may occasionally make important discoveries t
but far more frequently they are the result of chance, or of
the desultory efforts of shepherds and other servants of the
settlers resident in the particular locality. It sometimes
happens that a digging party, travelling from one district
to another, Camp for a night in a viUley which they may

^dbyGoogle

50 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

think looks very promising. B^ng delayed here, perhaps,
by the loss of thmr horse, or acme other accident, they
sink a pit or " hole" in a " likely" spot The result may
prove not favourable enough to induce them to remun,
and they proceed on their way. Other partiee are subse-
quently struck with the same appearance, observe also the
pit, and sink another, and another. At length some one
etrikes a rich deposit. If so, it oannot long remain a
secret. A few dozens or scores are shortly at work on the
adjacent ground ; and if these, t00| are Buccessfiil, the news
spreads like wild-fire, and within a week all the roads and
tracks leading to tlie spot are covered with diggers and
their carts, on the way to the new Dorado — the naetit
being always by report the beat and richest. In a few
days the hille around the new working are dotted over
with white tents, the forest around them quickly dis-
appears, being felled for fire-wood. Government, on heai^
ing of the discovery, sends down a Commiasioner with a
body of horse and foot police. These establish a camp on
some central elevated position, and an irregular wide street
of tents springe up like magic in the valley below. There
are stores, large and small ; butchers' shopfl ; doctors* little
tents ; and innumerable refreshment booths, where, under
the guise of selling lemonade and home-made beer, an ex-
tensive illicit trade is carried on in vile adulterated and
often poisonous spirits. The blacksmith is always one of
the first on the ground, and presently extemporises a forge
out of a few loose stones or turf-eoda. Flags are flying
&om the stores and shops, and ^ve gtuety to the scene.
The union-jack floats proudly alwve the Government camp
on the lull, and military sentinels we on duty before the
gold-tent.

^dbyGoogle

8CENE8 AT NEW DIOGINGS. 51

Aa the diggers reEicli the spot they pitch their tenta on
the lower slopes of the hills or in the green flats. At
night their watch-fires gleam fer and wide, and from a
neighbouring height the place has the appearance of a
large town illuminated. A new gold-field is the fevourite
resort of horse-stealers, thieTes, and mifioreants of all hinds,
who, lost in the crowd and confusion, here find ample
opportuni'ciea for carrying on their nefarions practices.
Their common haunts are the " sly grog-shops," which
spring up like weeds on all sides. Here they rendezvous,
and concoct those deeds of darkness which have given the
colony such an unenviable fame. These grog-shops are
traps for the unwary, dens of iniquity, where the drugged
draught is administered ; and the victim, thus rendered in-
sensible and helpless, is stripped of every article of value.
Not a night passes without some act of depredation.
Horses are stolen, and ridden off to Melbourne, Geelong, or
to the nearest gold-field, and sold by auction. The roads
leading to the new divings become infested with bush-
rangers; stories of being "stuck up" (or robbed) are
more and more frequent; till at length a cartload of
ruffians, heavily handcuffed, is seen moving towards the
Government camp, well guarded hy mounted troopers,
and followed perhaps soon after by another guu^ed cart,
containing two or three guly dressed females. These are
the bushrangers and their women, who have been hunted
down and just captured by the troopers. And now for a
time the roads are safe."

* Snch was tbe tUte of things tu witnessed bj mjaelf at the Mw
Ivor diggingg about eighteen mcHitbs ago. But chuigea are bo rapid

^dbyGoogle

S2 THE GOLDEH COLONT.

No life can be more iodependeat and free tii&n that of
the Austmlian digger ; do traTelling more agreeable tlian

in tbe colonj, that poBsIblj matters mtj now be mnch mended.
(Jan. 1855.)

I subjoin the following characterislic extract from tbe correspond-
ence of B colonial journal, as giving a liTel; ^ketcb of a Boene at Mao
Iror. The date is Jan. 14. 1854.

The reader will be surprised at the distinction accorded to the
Duke of Newcastle, as FatroD of Australian Bushrangers ; but his
Grace, as Colonial Secretary, refuEcd her Majesty's assent to a
Colonial Bill, intended to prevent the landing of conditionally-par-
doned felons on the shores of Victoria, and hence the allnsion.

" Five Kewcastle pets, ready primed, loaded, and mounted, all
caught here this week in a heap. Huzzah ! What say ye, Measrs.
Stawell and Foster; will je come up soon to defend your precious
pets? You won't surely leave your poor devils alone and unde-
fended ? But lo the story.

" Our present Acting Chief Commissioner Willoughby, accom-
panied by Cadet-Lieutenant Symmonds, of thief-catching notoriety,
and one of the smartest yonng officers in the force, and also accom-
panied by a troop of mounted police, and in the rear a troop of foot
police, went out to-day on a license tonr through the divings. Tbe
officers, with their troops, had arrived at Argjle Giilly, when they
espied two mounted men sloping off very suspiciously into the bush
off tbe road. Our two officers gave chase to them at once, and in
coming close up espied in the distsnce three more mounted men,
pushing away out of sight too. Ctrcumslanoes became now t«o
apparent as to what these mounted men were ; and, after a smart
run for it, they were all gallantly headed up by young Symmonds,
and speedily captured, dismounted, and handcuffed. Every one of
them was found well armed, loaded, and capped, and their counte-
nances showed at once ;who was their uncle — the Duke of Newcastle,
bless him I One of them threatened to do fbr young Symmonds on
the first opportunity ; but I hope the magistrates will employ him
and the lot, for some years to come, for the benefit of tJieir country
and their own good morals. A general shout seemed to pervade the

^dbyGoogle

DIQSBaS ON A JOUBNET. 53

summer traveUing in the Bush ; carrying about with you
in your cart your tent, your larder, and all your domestic
appointments. Id choo^g a halting-place for the night
you have the whole country open to you, — no walls or
hedges to shut you in to a dusty turnpike road. You
drink from the clear running creek ; the soft green turf ia
your carpet; your tent your bedroom. Your horse, duly
hobbled, enjoys the fresh pastun^e around. The nearest
fallen tree supplies you with fuel for your evening fire.
It is this free out-of-door life, and the buoyancy of spirit
that goes with it, this exemption from all restraint, which
often allures men back to the diggings after some months'
artificial life in the towns.

A digging party consists of three or four partners or
mates; sometimes of a single family; perhaps of a father,
his eon and wife. The party being formed, the first thing
is to purchase a strong light cart and a staunch horse, such
as no depth of mud, no swamp, uid no steep will daunt.
On the appointed day the party assemble ; the cart is care-
fully packed, — the heavy tools and stores at the bottom, the
gold washing-tubs and tent above, and the blankets and
clothes of the party at the top. If there are (as is not un-
common) any women in the party, they are seated high
above all, forming the apex of the pyramid. The firying-
pan is stuck on to one side, and the camp-kettles hang

diggings as tliej were tnartihed down faaDdcuffed together through
the diggings to the camp, — Lieutenant Synnuonda following behind
with a loaded Colt's reToWer. These are the class of men that put
us to so much loss and anxiety, in stealing our horses and sticking

E 3

^dbyGoogle

54 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

jingling underneath. A white tarpaulin being spread over
the load) the women mount to their place, and the cart is
put in motion. The diggers, in rough serge shirts, walk
at the side. They have belts with laj^ pointed knives
stuck in them ; and some cany gnus. One goes to the
horse's head and carefully guides him through the mud-
holes, water-courses, and little gullies, which cut up the
outskirts of the town. Ae the sun sinke in the west they
seek for a good camping ground in the neighbourhood
of wood and water ; and of grass, unless the whole country
should be burnt up by the sun or the bush fires. A spot
having been selected, the party halt. The horse is taken
out and carefully tended. The tent is pitched ; and if the
clouds threaten rain, a trench is dug round the canvass.
Some go for water, others collect sticks. Presently a fire
is crackling and blazing, the camp-kettle is put on, the
evening meal of mutton, bread, and tea is quickly ready
and despatched ; after which the diggers gather round the
cheerful blazing logs, and pass the evening smoking and
chatting, discuss their plans and prospects, relate former
adventures and achievements ; and if an old bnshman should
be in the party, you may be sure he will regale them with
thrilling tales of hairbreadth escapes, attacks by bush-
rangers, and encounters with the blacks. At an early
hour they retire to the tent, or creep under the shelter of the
tarpaulin spread over the cart, and there sleep soundly on
their rude matrasses. The fire bums dimmer and dimmer,
and presently no sound disturbs the deep hush of silence
that reigns throughout the forest At break of day all
are again on the move. The dying embers of last night's
fire are raked together, — tlie morning meal prepared, — the

^dbyGoogle

ABBITAL AT XH£ KINE3. 55

horse brought in, uahobbled and fed, — the cart packed up,
and the party proceed. We will not follow them through
all the ups and downs, adventures and misadventures, of a
journey to the diggings, but will suppose them arrived at
length at their destination. Here they carefully select a
spot for thrar home. The only limit set upon thdr choice
is preoccupatiott by others. The great point is to obtain a .
ute near to wood and water. The latter may generally be
found at the bottom of old workings in the valley bottoms.
Afl regains wood, all the hill-sides near the older workings
have been totally cleared by the earlier diggers ; so that the
new party, to obtain fuel in abundance, must go back upon
the higher slopes, or retire into the lateral gullies. A site
having been selected, the teat is pitched, the cart drawn up
close alongude ; the horse is secured to the cart, for the
hills are too bare to be worth feeding on ; and besides, if
he were allowed to roam, he would no doubt be stolen.
Two of the party now sally out, each with a broad
American axe, and attack the nearest tree, making a deep
cutting on either side, till the stately trunk falls with an
echoing craeh, all its green foliage fresh upon it. The
boughs are lopped off and dr^ged to the little homestead ;
and presently a cheerful fire is blazing, and the new
comers begin to feel at home. They next visit the several
gulliet and Jiats ; learn what new " rushes " have taken
place ; hear that one flat has been abandoned because the
water filled the "holes" faster than the men could pump it
out ; that another gully has been deserted because the water-
holes were dried up and the " washing-stuff" would n't pay
to cart to the nearest creek ; that in such a flat the dig-

^dbyGoogle

56 THE OOLDEN COLOKr.

gera were " Bhepherdirig'" their holes till the dry weatheif
had set in ; that in Another they had just struck the
'*juggler"t J til** ™ Eagle- Hawk Gully parties were "pad-
dookiDg "t the old workinge ; that there had been a great
" rush" to Poverty Gully, but that nineteen holes in
twenty had proyed " Bhishars." §

After thus collecting all the floating mining news of
the place, they eventually choose their ground, mark out
a plot ten or sixteen feet square, and set to work with
pick and shovel, — always the American shovel, -which has
quito supplanted the English.

We have supposed that our dicing party were pro-
vided with horse and cart ; hut of course a large p^opol^-
tion are too poor for this. Some put their " swags" upon
a bullock-dray or cart, but others cannot aSbrd, or will
Hot pay, the required 15 6r 20 shillings; and you may
pass on the road troops of unhappy " new chums," limping
along under heavy loads, jadei} and footsore, yet compelled
to keep up with their party, or be left behind friendless,
lonely, and perhaps penniless. The sufferings of many
" who reached the colony with the first great wave of im-
migration can scarcely be conceived by the English reader.
I mean those especially who, landing at Melbourne during
the rainy months, proceeded at once to the mines. "Wlth-

* Watching. — Some of the muij new terms in the diggers' Toca«
hulary clearly indicate whence and by whom they were brought into
use. Of others it is impossible to give any account.

t The jugular vein.

\ That is, marking out and working lai^ areas ff ground abeady
once wrought.

g Blanks or failures.

^dbyGoogle

"NEW chums" and old BUSHMEN. 57

out any of the resources or powers of endurdnoe of the old
bushmeo, they started off quite ignorant of what they were
to encounter on the road. Borne down by their heavy
knapeacks or swags, they toiled during the day through
the deep, thick, sticky mud and black hog called roads, —
" crawhng like flies across a plate of treacle," — and at
night they lay down upon the reeking earth without fire,
and sometimes without shelter : while perhaps a party of
" old hands" might be camped close at band, lying dry and
snug in spite of the pelting rain and the mud, and with a
lai^e blazing fire in front, which they had succeeded In
kindling, though every twig and leaf were saturated with
the rains. No one can say how many perished under
tiiese hardships, or how many were cut off by £he dysen-
tery that often followed.

In order to give the reader a more lively impreauon of
the diggings and the diggers, I will take him to Bendigo*
that great Metropolis of the Mines, and attempt to photo-
graph some of the singular sights to be seen there. We
will suppose the season to be spring, about October, and
the time to be within two or three hours of sunset. We
have passed the rolling granite country around Mount
Alexander, and are now arrived at the base of a barrier
of steep rocky ranges, which here rise directly across the
road, and distinctly mark the commencement of the gold
country. The hUls are not lofty, but they rise with fine
sweeping outlines from the plain into bold isolated masses
against the sky ; and, like all the gold-bearing country,
they are covered witii forest to their very summits. The
road, by a steep ascent^ reaches a gap in the hills, oom-
tnanding a noble view to the south ; Mount Alexanderj

^dbyGoogle

58 THE OQLDBtl COLONT.

ike great granite nucleus of the central gold-fields, riung
detached out of undulating lowlands ; and shadowy plains
and misty mountain ranges far beyond. In the opjM>-
site direction you look over the dark forested ridges and
deep intervening hollows of the rich gold-field of Bendigo.
The gap in the hilla which we have now reached is but a
mere saddle, and we immediately descend by a steep
narrow gully, which, gradually widening, leads us to the
head of a iiur and fertile valley, with wooded slopes, green
gullies branching off right and left, and a wide flat alluTial
bottom, through which winds a creek, here and tiiere ex-
panding 80 as to form a chain of water-boles. This is
tie Bendigo Valley. After following it for a mile or
tvo, we see two or three tents on the margin of the creek,
— the first sign of an approach to this great hive of in-
dustry. As we advance, the tents, still scattered, beoome
more frequent, and at length the slopes and fiats are
studded with them ; and large patches of upturned yel-
lowish earth in the midst of the gteea^t, show that we
have reached the skirts of the dig^nge. On the banks
of the creek men are standing over tubs of auriferous
earth or " washing-stuff," which they work about with a
^>ade, occasionally tilting out the muddy water, and baling
in fresh from the creek. Presently the tents become as
thick ae houses in a town, and the road passes between rows
of large stores and shops and auction-rooms ; and beyond
and around are seen, instead of green fiats and grassy
gullies, vast level areas covered with gravel, clay, and
sand, and burrowed with innumerable gold-diners'
"holes." The creek here approaches dose to the road,
qnd on its oppoate bank you observe a sort of reef or bai*

^dbyGoogle

~ MBTROPOI.IS OF THE HINEB. 59

of red rock; all the earth has been removed firom the
protruding roeke, and every chink and crevice has been
carefully cleared out. Thia is the " Golden Point ; ^
and it is worthy of a pae»ng notice, for it was here,
towards the close of 1851, that gold was first found at
Bendigo. As the spot was conspicuous, and the precious
metal lay near the euriaoe and in the chinks in the rpck,
it was not likely long to elade research, when the cay of
gold was abroad in the land, and every shepherd and
stock-keeper was intent upon discoveiing it. This Golden
Bar was like those architectural capitals at Pompeii, which,
peering above the soil under which the <nty lay sepulchred,
hinted at the treasures which m^ht be brought to light
by digging around and beneath. Had this gold-bearing
bar not existed there, or had it been covered "up by tlie
alluvium of &e plain, the name of Bendigo might have
been still unknown, and the millions of ounces of gold
which it has yielded, and which now form no insigni-
ficant part of oar currency, might have remuned buried
deep in those recesses where it had quietly reposed for
ages, awuting the predestined period when Australia was
to receive a swarm from the old Anglo-Saxon hive.

Leaving the " Golden Point," the road has now the
creek on one side and a wide tract of deserted workings
on the other, stretching away out of sight down the
valley. After another mile it agun becomes a street of
tents, stores, and shops, behind which chaotic heaps of
gravel and clay still show that the entire valley faas been
turned up by the diggers. We have now reached the
centre of this great mining district On a lofty terrace
on the left, &ced with a steep green escarpment, is seen

^dbyGoogle

60 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

tbe Q-oTernment Camp and its tall fiag-staff and tinioa-
jack, sentinels on duty, ranges of extensive stabling, and
a mas^ve log-hut, 'serving as a lock-up. At the foot of
this terraced hill is the burying-^round, and, near it, the
Eendigo hospitaL Great wooden stores, auction-rooms,
and other buildings show that this spot has long been the
centre of a lai^e mining population. A stream of busy
life passes up and down the streets of Sandhurst (for the
place is now erected into a Grovemment township). There
are parties of newly arriTed diners with their high-piled
carts; travellers half enveloped in Hgh boots on travel-
soiled horses ; carte of earth going to the creek to Have
the gold washed out ; huge drays of merchandise, with
long teams of jaded bullocks, just in from a three or four
weeks' journey from Melbourne ; and diggers, with pick
and shovel on shoulder, trudging homeward from the day's
work. Contrasted with mud-soiled men and jaded beasts,
there is the lordly Gold-commissioner, with gold-laced
cap, mounted on his fine sleek steed, and with his two
attendant troopers in the rear.

For the next two or three miles the road passes through
an almost continuous street of stores and shops, while the
diggers' tents are perched on the slopes of the hills or in
the lateral gullies. The valley bottom is still covered
with gravel, and burrowed by countless pits and tunnels,
through which the creek has carved out a channeL

But a ride up the principal valley j^ves a very inade-
quate idea of the magnificent scale of the golden depodts
of Bendigo, and of the prodigious amount of human labour
spent in developing them, — an amotmt quadrupled by
the desultory nature of operations carried on by small in-

^dbyGoogle

dependent partiea of miners. If you aecend any com-
manding eminence, you discover that not only has the
entire bottom or floor of the main valley been turned up,
but that every lateral gully running up into the ranges
right and left has also been wrought, and sends down its tri-
butary yellow stream to meet the great river of diggings
that fills the breadth of the main valley. From hence, too,
you will observe, looking down the valley and on the right
of the creek, six or seven rounded hills, with rugged out-
lines, glistening white against the dark ranges behind.
These are the " 'M^hite Hills," well known to every Aus-
tralian digger. In outward aspect and mineral character
they are unique, and peculiar to Bendigo. As usual, the
richest happened to be attacked the first. While the
nature of their contents was still a mystery, a party of
diggers toiled patiently for several weeks in miking a shaft
through 60 or 70 feet, chiefiy of conglomerated drift of tJie
most obstinate hardness. They were rewarded at length
by discovering a rich depOMt of the precious metal lying
on the top of a bed of white " pipeclay," of unknown
depth ; through which they tunnelled, bringing down the
gold in profusion from the roof of their working. While
unking the shaft, th^ proceedings had been carefully
watched by many anxious to profit by the result ; and no
sooner waa this known than the adjoining ground was
marked off, shafts were sank, windlasses erected, and the
sommit of the hill soon became a busy hive of industry,
while immense mounds of white earth rose from its crest
and sides.

But the main valley is only a part of this great gold-
field. On the left or north of the creek, there m a

^dbyGoogle

6S THE GOLDEN COLOHT.

parallel series of seven large tributary gullies, some wrougbt
two or three mites in extent. On liie right or soutli of
the principal valley, two lateral gullies, debouching on the
main stream, and running up into the ranges till they meet,
present a coniiauous ch^n of working four miles long.
On the whole, the Bendigo district must include near a
hundred gullies and flats, extending over an area ten miles
long and five broad, and is doubtless without a rival in the
world for extent and richness of yield.

Every working in each gold-field has it name, and tltese
are often very odd and highly characteristic Some are
derived from the first workers there, as " American,"
" CaUfomian," " Canadian," and " New Chum'a Gully ;"
some from incidents occurring at or near them, — thus we
have Murdering Flat, Chok'em Flat, Dead Man's Gully,
White Horse Gully ; and many from the caprice of those
who first wrought Aere, as Peg-Leg Gully, Poverty
Gully, Grumble-Gut Gully. Eagle-Hawk Guliy, one of
the most famous, was so called from a digger having by
chance driven his pick into a nugget, which, when taken
out, was found to have thus acquired the shape of an
eagle-hawk's head. A rich gully at Ballarat got the
classical name of Eubeka ; and this (which many sup-
posed to be a native Australian word) became at last
quite popular, and was assumed by cofiee-^opa, boarding-
houses, &c

The mining population is ever fluctuating, its ranks
being constantly replenished by new comera ; while, on
the otiier hand, numbers are constantiy quitting them for
the ordinary avocations of (^culture and town life. In
the first feverish excitement, all classes rushed to Ballarat

^dbyGoogle

HININO FOPULA.TIOK. 63

and Mount Alexander. Shepherds and atock-keepere,
mechanics, tradesmen, and profeeBional men, — some for
gain, and some from force of example. I have heard of
military -officers, members of council, and clergymen, all
-working together. Some of the most fortunate of the
diggers were runaway sailors. Clever mechanics and
Tet«rau hushmen also carried off many of the beat prizes,
The gentlemen-diggers were, of course, tlie least sucoess-
fill, as being the least fit for the work; and they soon
returned to their proper callings, aad discovered that, after
all, the richest diggings were in the warehouses of Mel-
bourne. Others followed ; for the discomfort, privation,
and frequent disappointment were such as to make all glad
to quit the divings after the first twelve or eighteen
months' triaL Indeed, no one settles down to gold-mioing
as the busing of bis life ; and the settlers will tell you
that they now find at their annual sheep-shearing the very
same " old hands " as in former years, though these carried
off their full share of the first golden glut. At the present
moment, you would find that a very lai^e proportion of the
actual miners bad not been more than eighteen months in
the colony.

The life of the digger is simple, regular, and, on the
whole, healthy. Hin dress is a blue elastic vest, or
jeraey, like that worn by sailors, uid thick moleskiQ
trowsers. During winter he wears ah outer coarse serge
shirt He baa a plun leather belt, in which he carriea his
" fossicking " knife, used in pickiog out the gold from
holes and crevices. If obliged to stand in water at his
work, he cases his legs in a huge pair oT watertight boots.
Rising at daybreak, the party first prepare and despatch

^dbyGoogle

64 IHE GOLDEN COLONf.

their meal, and then sally out to theii " hole : " if dietanC,
they carry their dinner, never foi^etting the tin-pot for
making their tea. At sundown they return, bringing the
results of the day's work in a small ht^ or an old match-
box. Supper is prepared, and consiste, like the otJier
meals, of beef or mutton, bread, and tea. The gold
obtained during the day, having been carefully washed, is
now divided, or added to the general store, kept peilutps
in an old pickle-bottle, which must then be quietly
secreted under the earthem floor of the tent, or else-
where. The evening is spent in chatting, smoking, and
reading the '* Argus " or some of Chambers's publications,
over the rude fireplace of turf or stone which forms one
end of the tent or hut. At an early hour all are asleep
on their straw matrasses raised on rough frames, the legs
of which are stuck into the ground. A loaded pistol
generally forms part of the establishment, but is now
rarely needed.

The excited, bustling, battling life of the earlier diggers
is well struck off in the following lines, which appeared
during the first months of the gold discoveries : —

" SUCH IS LIFE ON TBIE FOREST CREEK,

" When the sun shoots forth hiB rosy beams,
At the earl J dawn of morning,
Up starts the digger from golden dreanu
A life of laziness scorning :
Digging here,
Cradling there,
Readily, merrily,
Cheerilj, stendilj,
Toiling hard for the gold we seek.
Such is life on the Forest Creek 1

^dbyGoogle

THE digger's lay.

" We first mark out a good large squnre,
On « likely spot of ground, Sir,
And ve Eay if gold tis anywhere,
'Tis here it ougbt to be found, Sir :

^dbyGoogle

66 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

Shovelling here,
Picking there.
Hardly toilJDg,
Sorely moiling,
Furlj earned is the gold we Beek,
Such is life on the Foreit Creek I

" When the ' apecka * at last begin to ihow.
Out comes the ready knife, Sir,
And cautioualy folloiTB the Tein below
With the precious nnggeU rife, Sir,
Peering here,
Poking there,
Softly, warily,
Scraping charily.
Hunting sharp for the gold we seek.
Such is life on the Forest Creek I

" With the setting ann our work is o'er,
And we homeward tradge our way, Sir,
And think of oar tail and sweat no more
As we count the gains of the day, Sir,
Weighing here,
DiTiding there.
Justly,' fairly,
Acstly squarely,
Sharing out the gold we seek.
Such is life on the Forest Creek ! "

Offiog to the large mfiision of the Vaa Diemen's
Land element tn the mining population during the first
months after the discovery of gold, the ear of every odo
resident at the diggings was at that time continually
assailed hy the most revolting, blasphemous, and obscene
language, and the eye shocked with brutal and savage
sights. But the brutality of half-drunken men was some-

^dbyGoogle

MALE AND FEMALE CONVICTS. 67

thing less hideous than the scurrilous rage and tiger-like
ferocity of intimate women. The female convict becomes
more thoroughly debased and shameless than the male.
In the case of some, the effect of penal life is euch that, in
expreseion of countenance, talk, and dress, they seem to
have nothing in common with their countrywomen, from
whose society and sympathies they are cut off,

The men, however, are bad enough. About two
montliB after the discovery of the rich gold-field of Forest
Creek, two diggers, who were camped not far from me at
the adjacent Fryer's Creek, after combining to rob their
other " mate " or partner of his ahare of their joint stock
of gold, resorted to a neighbouring " sly grog-shop," got
drunk, and, while returning to their tent, quarrelled over
the distribution of the plunder. After a storm of mutual
abuBe and blasphemy, one eeized a firebrand from their
fire, and was about to attack his comrade, when the latter
raised his miner's pick and drove it into the shoulder of
the other as deliberately aa if he had been made of solid
rock instead of flesh and blood. The man was not, how-
ever, struck down, and they prepared for a deadly fight,
when I persuaded one or two others to assist me in sepa-
rating them. Still, however, they cursed and defied each
other like fiends. At length the savage who had wounded
his mate tore down their little tent, and strode away with
whatever he pleased to take from the ruins of their home.
The third mate — a young, but heavy, sullen, and stupid-
looking fellow — was skulking inside the tent, and aeemed
afraid to face the two hardened villains who had conspired
to rob him. He went off in the vtun hope of obtaining
redress from the police authorities, who were quarteixKl

^dbyGoogle

bo THE GOLDEN COLONY.

some four milcB distant. Ae to l^e wounded man, we
pulled off his red jersey, and found the blood spirting
up from the wound on hia shoulder. We took him to our
camp, and Bome of my people bathed hU wound, and did
all they could for him. The poor wretch eeemed grateful ;
but when I attempted to extract from him where they had
obtained the grog which had kindled the quarrel, with a
keen cunning glance he replied, " They have been trea-
cherous to me, but I won't be treaoberous to them." He
thought, and truly, that I should take measures to have
the nest of iniquity rooted out, and the owners punished.

Such scenes are now quite unknown at the old centres
of the mining population, but may still be witnessed
among the motley crowda that invariably rush to every
newly-opened and popular gold-field. Sometimes the
comic and ridiculous is strangely mixed up with the hor-
rible. I happened to visit the Mac Ivor Di^pngs not
long after they were discovered in 1853, Thousands
were already collected. Many hundreds of tents dotted
the flats, and gullies, and rocky knolls; lai^e areas of
gold-bearing ground had already been torn up, and were
being still wrought. Busy parties were cradling and
" puddling " at the aide of the creek. As I rode along
the main road which passed right through this active
bustling scene I noticed a characteristic little drama dose
to the roadside. Two diggers, apparently just arrived on
the ground, were having high words together, while a
well-dressed young woman— who might have been the
wife of one and the sister of the other — stood by, trying
hard to reconcile them. Not, however, by tears or en-
treaties. Far otherwise. When high words grew to

^dbyGoogle

SUNDAY AT THE DIGCIMGS. 69

blowa, and a fight seemed imminent, the pacific young
lady seized upon a bucket of water whicli happened to

^dbyGoogle

70 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

ought to vary in size according to its nnmber : boweTer,
neither the digger nor the auUioritiee cany out this rule
very rigidly, except in caaee of dispute between adjacent
parties. When the site for working has been carefully
delected, the "clMm" of the party is marked out by a
peg placed at each comer. Whatever lies beneath that
area is the property oF the owners of the claim, but no
more; so that if your clium be upon an auriferous
quartz vein, unless it be quite Tertical^ at a certain
depth both quartz and gold pasa altogether out of your
" hole."" In the earlier days of the diggings it was
common to open a laige pit, and remove the gold Irom the
bottom. Now, however, the workings are in much
deeper deports than those first discovered, and there ia
more mining skill ; ao that, instead of the open pit, it is
customary to sink a square or round shaf^ 3 or 4 feet in
diameter down to the gold-bearing deposit or " bottom,"
and then to drive, or excavate horizontally, in search of
the precious metal, if there be none visible at the bottom
of the shaft. In Binking the shaft, the clay, gravel, && is
hoisted to the sur&ce either by a simple rope and bucket,
or by a windlass, or by a long lever. The latter is, I
believe, borrowed from California, but it exactly resembles
tie contrivance for rai^ng water from the Nile for pur-
poses of irrigation kuown as the shadoof or "pole and
bucket," as used at this day by the Egyptian peasant, and
by the ancient inhabitants of the valley of the Nile 3000
years ago, as proved by the monumental sculptures still
extant. The Australian apparatus is simply a long pole

* Woikiugs of tbis ktnJ are, however, ver; rare.

^dbyGoogle

ubjGoOglc

ubjGoOglc

AU8TBAL1AN GOLD-MINmO. 71

lied looaely to the top of a strong upright post. One end
of the pole is heavily weighted. The bucket is suspended
to the other end by a rope. On pulling down the rope
the bucket descenda to the bottom of the shaft, and, when
filled with earth, it is drawn up by the leverage of the
weighted end of the pole. The auriferous earth or
" washing-stuff," when brought to the surface, is carefully
piled up, the miner below having first picked out any
laige and conspicuous nuggets, and deposited them in his
little match-box. The " washing-stuflf" is now carted
down to the creek, or the nearest water-hole. If the
party have no cart of their own, the carting will cost
them from 5s. to 2/. or even 3^ a load, according to the
distance.

The method of washing the earth has been also much
modified by time and experience. At first, all was done
by the cradle or rocker, and the tin dish. In the first flush
of Ballarat I have seen, at the base of its " Golden Point,"
then bristling with diggers, a lai^e pool completely encir-
cled with cradles, amounting to some hundreds ; and from
afar their rocking was hke the sound of distant thunder.
But the cradle, though capable of sifting the gold from
gravel and light soil, was found very ill adapted to liberate
it from the stiff clays of the Victoria Gold-fields. The
diners now commonly use the " puddling-tub." This is
merely one-half of a porter cask. The tub is half filled
with the " washing-stuff;" water is baled in Irom the
creek, and the whole worked about with the spade, the
miner cutting up and turning over the clay till it gradually
is dissolved in the water; and as the water becomes
charged with earth it is poured from the tub, and a fresh

^dbyGoogle

72 THE OOLDEIf COLONT.

supply added. By this process, the clay and earth arc
gradually washed away, and nothing but clean gravel.
Band, and gold remains. The gold is now readily separated
from the gravel by means of a cradle, or simply by a tin
dish. In the latter case, the dish is held half immersed
obliquely in the water, and die gravel "gradually washed
away &om the gold, by the dexterous handling of the
dish. This " puddling-tub " is doubtless a very rude and
primitive contrivance, but it is well adapted to the habits
of the migratory digger, who probably visita several gold-
fielda during the course of a year, and carries his tub with
him.

The Califomian " Long-Tom " is a more efficient ap-
paratus than the last ; but it requires a running stream,
and therefore is only available at certain times and places.
It consists of a trough about 16 inches wide and 10 or 12
feet long, tilted so thiit water will flow rapidly down it
An iron grating, perforated with holes as large as a six-
pence, forms the lower end, and is tilted up in an opposite
direction to that of the trough, so that earth and stones,
washed down the trough, lodge on the grating. The head
of the trough must be constantly supplied with water,
either from a stream or by a pump ; and thus a smart cur-
vent is constantly pouring down the inclined trough. The
auriferous earth ie thrown in at the head, and as it is
washed down by the stream, it is worked about and turned
back with the spade ; the earth and clay are quickly dis-
solved and washed away by the stream ; and when the
clean gravel reaches the lower end, it is arrested by the
iron grating and removed with the shovel, while the gold
and sand fall through the perforations into a box placed

^dbyGoogle

THE "LONQ-TOM." 73

beneath, the contents of which must afterwardB be washed
to extract the gold. TMb method ib much more rapid than
the other, and is commonly used during the winter in re-
working old dig^ngs, or in extracting gold left in the

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTER VI.

THE DIGGINGS AND DIQQEBS — continued.

The eatlier diggers — Forest Creek PosUoffice — "Missing friends" —
" Digger-biuitiDg — Discontent — Inaecurity of property — " Night
fosnckera"— Deputa^on to the Governor — The " Diggers' Leigae "
— Griev&nces — Stump orators — Organised moyement — Monster
meetings — Concessions of GoTerument — Recent riot at Ballurat
—Difficulties of Sir C. Hotham.

I HATE now spoken of the diggings, and have noticed the
habite and labours of the miners. In conclusion, I have
to say a few words of their character and history aa a
separate class of the colonial community.

Here it is very necessary to draw a strong line of de-
marcation between the diggers, properly so called, and
those bands of ruffians who have ever haunted the mines,
and for whose crimes their victims, the diggers, are no
more responsible than are the people of Great Britain;
indeed, not so much, for these malefactors are the ex-
ported felons of England. They are regarded by the
genuine diggers very much as " native dogs " and wild
blacks are by the squatters — a public peat, to be hunted
down and exterminated.

When the wonderful discoveries of Ballarat and Mount
Alexander were blazed through the neighbouring colonies
in October of 1851, Van Diemen's Land and South Aus-
tralia (Adelwde) emptied their male population on the
shores of Victoria; — some thought, indeed, that the days

^dbyGoogle

PBIMITITE POST-OFFICE. 75

of Adelaide were numbered. The exodus was so sudden
(eepecially in South Australia) that the women were
generally left at their homes; their husbands were to
hurry to the golden scramble, and to write as soon as pos-
sible to their wives an account of their succese. But
alas I the Foet^iffice had shared in the general paralysis
which had seized every department pf the Government*,
caused at once by the want of hands and the sudden in-
crease of work. At this time, there was but one wretched
post-office at Mount Alexander, kept by a private, irre-
sponsible individual, in a tent. Here you might every
week have seen a crowd of sturdy, bearded, rough-clad
diggers : many had walked some weary miles from a dis-
tant gully on the same errand before, and that Beveral
times. After much crowding and battling, they make
their way up to the little hole in the tent where letters are
delivered, and ask for letters for such a one. Then there
is a long pause, while the man witliin is looking over a
number of greasy, unclassified letters. At length the
same oft-repeated chilling answer is given, " No letters
for that name to-day ; " and the anxious husband trudges
back i^ain, thinking as he goes of his distant home in the
Bush, and of her he left behind there; and concluding with
a bitter curse on the post-office and every one connected
with it.

From whatever cause, the South Australian strangers
complained that their letters never reached theuL And

* It ia onlj fair to state, tbat very great improvements have
recentlj been made in the admin iBtnitioa of the Colonial Post

^dbyGoogle

76 THE QOLDES COLOMY.

many, after long suspense, returned to their homes to
bring hack their wives to the gold-fields. But, in the
meantime, many of the latter, equally anxious and equally
unable to account for the silence of their lords, had started
to Victoria to seek them. It can readily be understood
what confusion, embarrassment, and distress this often led
to. The husband would perhaps be sailing out of the
harbour while the wife was entering it. At the diggings,
it is much more difficult to find any particular individual
than even in London ; for the t«nt3 are ranged without
order over a vast area; there is no* register of names, and
the occupants of one t«nt can never tell the name even of
their next neighbour. Failing some better mode of inter-
communication, trees of the forest were now converted into
advertidng stands. £very conspicuous trunk was covered
with notices, oflen ill-spelt, in which finends informed
friends how they might discover their abode ; and wives
notified to their distressed husbands that they had arrived,
and were in anxious search of them. In a walk through
the diggings you might see a hundred of these notices,
beginning with the formula "If this should meet the
eye of," &c. When the newspapers came to be circulated
at the mines, these advertisements were transferred to
their columns, and there they still form a very characteristic
feature, under the heading " Missing Friends." I subjoin
a few of these, as contributions to the early history of
Victoria. The first was copied verbatim from a tree near
Forest Creek : —

" If this should meet the eye of mj wife, or of ihe earlier who
brought her and my arUules from Melbourne, she will Had ma at

^dbyGoogle

LOST FKIENDS. 77

Saw Pit Gully — or if any person can give any iuformadon of the
same, they will greatly oblige

" Tlie Distressed Husband,

" John Baovn."
The following are from the "Argua" newspaper, pub-
liahed at Melbourne : —

"Mary, — Mrs, Stephen, by the Spitfire from Sydney, November
21st. It is no dream, and I am desolate. Ballarat, or office of this

"James Powle. — if this should meet your eye, your mother
Mrs. Hurbard would like to see you, as she ia not expected to
live ! address t« Little Bourke-street."

"Mr. Jackson, of ColHngwood, will oblige Ellen Barnliam by
letting her know if he can tell her where her husband is at present ;
address Ellen Barnham, 22, Collins-street."

"Laura Eeene, — If this should come under the notice of the above-
named lady, who is supposed to be in Melbourne, this is to inform
her that Henry Keene is at present at the tiendtgo diggings, and is
very anxious to hear from her. A letter addressed to the Post
Office, Sandhurst, Bendigo, will reach bim. Any information respect-
ing the above lady would be gladly received by the advertiser."

" Mary Barry M'Greath, from the county of Limerick, parish of
Rockhill, Ireland, wishes to hear from her two daughters Mary and
Bridget, who left Newcastle, Ireland, for Australia, in the year 184S.
Any infbnnatjon addressed to her at Natick, Massachusetts, U.S.A.
will be thankfiilly received."

" To Charles. — Charley — you will find a letter at the P n

Post Office for you ; am perfectly aware I deserve no forgiveness ;
would like to see you, if only once more ; will yon call f formerly
Apollo ; S. Jenny."

" If John Nelson Anstead, who was wrecked in the Monumental
City, and late of New York, will call at the Emerald Hill Hotel, be
will hear of his wife, jolt arrived."

^dbyGoogle

78 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

" If thit ahoold meet the eye of Sally Moylan, of Toona, Cunnty
Clare, she is requested to write to Michael Heffemaa."

" Should this meet the eye of Ur. Jonee, who left Hnll about
four years ago, he will greatly oblige by wri^Dg to those be foi^ot to

say good-bye to."

The diggers are hardy, active, cnterpnsing, and in-
duBtrlouB, patient under suffering, indifferent to political
strife, except in queetiom where they have a direct interest
at stake; very far from obscquiouB to public functionaries,
yet with all that instinctive venerEition for constituted
authority which distanguishes the Knglishman from the
American. Lieutenant-Colonel Valiant, who commanded
a military force at Bendigo during a period of great public
excitement, in a letter to the Colonial Secretary, says : —
" As a people, the diggers on the gold-fields are the moat
orderly and well-disposed body that I have ever seen in
any part of the world where I have had the honour of
serving Her Majesty : at the same time there are numbers
of very indifferent characters indeed, who, ae in other
countries, are always ready to seize a favourable oppor-
tunity to create disturbance for their own int^ous
purposes." * Yet, in spite of this respect for the powers
that be, they have, from various unhappy causes, been
almost perpetually embroiled with the local government :
sometimes the dispute was at the Ovens Diggings, some-
times at Ballarat, and then at Bendigo.

One of the most fruitful sources of discontent was the
method of collecting the gold revenue. When the first
discoveries were made at Ballarat, the Melbourne govern-

* Letter of LieutenanuCoIonel Valiant, laid on the table of the
Legislative Council, 18th October, 1853.

^dbyGoogle

COLLECTING LICENSE-PEES. 79

meat, following the example of that at Sydney, issued
regulations by which all miners were required to procure
a monthly HcenBC to dig for gold, and to pay 30». for the
same. But how was this tax to be enforced among a
migratory population, living in tents scattered through a
forest ? The mode adopted was, to send out armed bands of
police, who, coming down suddenly on a gully or flat, spread
themselves over it, demanding of every one his license.
A few mounted troopers formed part of tlie force, to cut
off defaulters who might attempt to fly. All who could
not produce their license were captured and marched off,
probably some miles, to the nearest magistrate, and, after
some detention, were either flned 51., or imprisoned for a
montli. Such a system necessarily led to great discootent
and irritation. At some of the gold-fields a curions plan
was hit upon for evading these inquisitorial visits. No
sooner was a party of police seen approaching than the
diggers nused the cry of " Joe I Joe 1 " The cry was
taken up, and presently the whole length of the gully
rang with the shout "Joe! Joel Joe!" and of course
tJi defaulters instantly made off for the depths of the
forest.

The diseatis&ction was exasperated by the method of
collecting the license-fee. The collector did not call on
the tax-payer, but the latter had to seek the collector.
The digger was compelled to walk from his own gully to
the Commissioner's camp, — distant, perhaps, several miles,
— and then often wait for hours under a fierce sun, while
a crowd of others, who had arrived before him, were
paying their 30a., or weighing out their half-ounce of
gold. Greater facilities were indeed subsequently offered

^dbyGoogle

80 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

for the payment of the fee, but the mode of entbrcing it
coDtinued the same. The diggers compl^ned loudly and
uDceasingly of these harsh and un-English measares.
" Firat you tax our labour," said they, " and then you
collect your tax at the point of the bayonet" The dielike
to the system was univerBal ; disputes were frequent, and
coUisiona between the police and diggers sometimes oc-
curred.

Another of the diggers' gricTances was the extreme in-
security of life and property on the mines. While the
police force were snugly housed at bead-quarters, in a
peaceable and orderly neighbourhood, the populous but
remote gulljea were the nightly scenes of deeds of robbery
and violence. Every evening men were knocked down
and brutally treated, or " stuck up" and robbed. Every
night horses were stolen, tents broken into, and "boles"
plundered of gold by the "night fosaickers," — miscreants
who watched for the richest holes during the day, marked
them, and plundered them at night. In October, 1852, at
a place called Moonlight Flat (near Eorest Creek), these
desperadoes had become so numerous and shameless, and
their outrages bo frequent, that the miners rose en matte
agtunst them. A public meeting was convened; blue-
shirted diggers made stirring appeals to their auditory; a
deputation was appointed to proceed instantly to Mel-
bourne, to remonstrate with the Government, and to
implore it to adopt energetic measures for extirpating the
"hordes of ruflSans" that infested their neighbourhood,
and the persons of many of whom were well known there.

In the early part of the year 1853 an arbitrary act of a
Sub-Inspector of Police elicited a sudden burst of popu-

^dbyGoogle

mOQEBS' LEAGOE. 81

lar indigiiation cloae to the Govemment Camp at Foreat
Creek. At ten o'clock one night three tenta were aeaailed
and diamantled by the police, and the owners sent adrift.
They were charged with having illicitly sold spirituous
liquors ; bnt this charge eventually fell to the ground,
and the soffererB were declared the victims of a cruel
tyranny, the perpetrators of which were held up to public
scorn and in&my. Some of the roost enthusiastic formed
themselves into a " Committee for defending the Rights
of the People," hastily called a "diggers' meeting," ha-
rangued the multitude from a cart on the rights and the
wrongs of the diggers, and demanded restitution to the
suflFerers, — which was ultimately conceded.

But all these demonstrations were merely local and
trandent. About the middle of 1853, however, a much
more serious and organised insuhordinatiou began to
manifest itself. This movement commenced at Bendigo,
hut the other mining districts soon joined it : a general
" Diggers' League" was formed, and a oonveniion held,
in which the several Gold Felds were represented by
delegates. The present agitation was excited by the old
grievance of the Licensing System. The general ill-will
which this had generated was like an old sore, unskilfully
healed, continually breaking forth into open discontent.

At the first outbreak of the gold discoveries the
monthly license-fee was fixed at 30i. Two or three
months later, however, the local executive, wishing
probably to repress the general rush to the mines, gave
notice that the fee was to be doubled. Upon this, the
diggers mustered in force at public meetings on the Gold
Fields, and showed such a sturdy front of re»stance that

^dbyGoogle

83 THE GOLDEN COLOITT.

the aothoridea preoipitatelj withdrew their impcJitio
meunre ; and the thirty-shilling license-fee renuuned in
ibrce, and its imposition was duly sanctioned hj an Act
of the Colonial Conn<nL

In the fint prolifiQ yield of the Gold Fields, when it
was DO uncommon thing for a party of four to divide
hundreds or even thousands of pounds after two or three
months' work, — when the prizes were many, and the blanks
few, — perhaps thirty shillings a month was not too much to
exact for a ticket in the lottery. But two short years
had witnessed a great change in gold^mning. The total
produce was declining, though the number of diggers was
on the increase. No more was heard of buckets of gold,
and monster noggete, and holes turning out a thoDsand
ounces. Stories of disappcnntment and disgust were much
more common. The majority, perhaps, got " fair wages,"
but vast numbers, instead of making a fortune, spent what
little they had, and left the Diggings for the towns
almost penniless. Most of the diners were, indeed, now
working upon those less productive parts of the old Gold
Fields, which had been neglected in the first scramble,—
the uiere leavings of the earlier diggers. Other districts
were being wrought; but they were not comparable to
Bendigo, Forest Creek, and Ballarat. In short, it was
indisputable that the average yield per man bad very
senmbly decreased. Yet the original license-fee was still
ligoroosly exacted, and enforced in the harsh and irritating
manner already described.

Had the mining population been now composed of the
same elements as it had been two years earlier, the spirit
of discontent would probably still have been mauifeeted

^dbyGoogle

8TDMP OBA.TOR8. 8.1

merely by individaal muimuriog, by maledictions on the
Ctovemment, loud and fierce, &nd by snodry letters in
tbe " Argus" newspaper, the general vent for the angry
feeling of the aggrieved. But among the mixed multitude
which had been attracted to the mineB, were some who had
been trained to political agitation in the old countj-y ; men
who much preferred the excitement and profit of stump-
oratory to the patient and often unproductive toil of gold
di^ng. As all were equal at the mines, taid there were
no commanding reputations already established, it was not
difficult to install tbemselvea as chiefs and representatives
of the people. Here was an excellent field for their
new vocation. On the one hand an unpopular Govern-
ment ; on tbe other vast masses of working men suffering
under real and substantial grievances. They began work
in earnest at Bendigo. They posted huge manuscript
placards on the trees and tents, calling a public meeting
of the diggers in a central spot, and close to the head-
quarters of the Government officials. There they
harangued the multitude in inflammatory terms, fluently
expatiating on the Bufferings of the diners, and the in-
justice and hardship of the licensing system. The Colonial
Government they stigmatised as imbecile and bound over
to the squatters; the local authorities as haughty and
tyrannicaL The diggers, they s^d, formed the most
important as well as numerous section of the community ;
all other classes thrived and grew opulent by their labours ;
yet they were despised, neglected, and trampled upon.
They were the most heavily taxed, yet they had no repre-
sentatives in the Legislative Council. While the digger
.paid QO less than 18^ a year for the privilege of working

^dbyGoogle

84 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

on his ten feet square, out of which he often got nothing,
the lordly squatter had his thousands of acres for the paltry
rent of 10?. or 20t a year. Then again, if the miner should
fail to pay the heavy impoet on the day it was due he was
treated as a criminal, and marched oif under an armed
escort to a distant spot. The diners had borne these
indignities too long and too patiently. Let them now
arise, show themselves worthy of the name of British free-
men, and, if necessary, repel force by force. Such was
the general tone of these orators, though many contented
themselves with recommending moral pressure to redress
their wrongs. The agitators, however, were not satisfied
with making speeches and getting up sudden bursts of
popular feeling, which, like the blaze of a rocket, might
pa?s and leave no trace behind. They organised a system
of concerted action, established a central committee and sub-
committees, brigaded the distant gullies, convoked monster
meetings, till at length things assumed such a formidable
aspect that Government concentrated every available soldier
in the colony at Bendigo, and made policemen do sentinel
duty at Melbourne. The new political leaders were de-
puted to proceed to Melbourne and obtain an interview with
the Lieutenant Governor, to solicit a reduction of the
■ license-fee. To Melbourne accordingly they went There
they were informed by his Excellency that the law must
be enforced, and they returned to Bendigo without obtain-
ing any promise or hope of redress. More monster meet-
ings were now held, and eventually the 1st of October
was fixed as a grand field-day, on which the deputies
should present ^emselves at the Government quarters,
offer for the license-fee a sum much less than the legal

^dbyGoogle

MONSTEB HEETINQ. 85

one, and, when that was refiiBed, express their determioEt*
tion to pay nothing more, and deliver themBelves up to
custody. On the day apj>ointed an immense multitude
aaaembled. As they marched hy, marshalled in ranks,
some fired defiant pistols towards the Government camp.
They halted within gun-shot of the Commiaaioners' tents,
and sent forward their deputation. Of course those in com-
mand refiised to make martyrs of the self-immolating depu-
ties, and they eventually evaded the dilemma in which the
diggers had attempted to place them by notifying that no
license-fee would he enforced that month : and before the
next had arrived, the Melbourne executive had proposed
and passed an enactment reducing the fee to H. for one
month, and a leas sum proportionately for three or six
months. Thus ended for the time the war of the licenses.
But the grievance of non-representation in the Legislative
Council remains and involves a problem not very easy of
solution, namely, this : — A large proportion of the com-
munity, intelligent and moderately wealthy, are yet with-
out any settled habitation, residing sometimes in one part
of the country and sometimes in another. How are they
to exercise the elective franchise ?

While these pages are passing through the press, in-
telligence has been received from Melbourne " that the
war of reprisals between the Government and the diggers,
after smoiddering for a twelvemonth, has again broken

• Of the date Oct 27. 1854.

^dbyGoogle

ee TOE GOLDEN COLONT.

out, sod with all ita foimer menacing chonctar. The
Bceofl is now at Ballarat. The immediate cause was the
murder of a man near a low public house well known aa the
rendezvous of thieves and miscreants. SuBpicioD lighted
on the pubhcan, one Bentley, a man of bod character;
but he was discharged by the coroner, being, ae the diners
supposed, shielded by those in authority. Subsequently,
ten of the jurors protested ag^nst the coroner's treatment
of the evidence, and called the inquest a caricature. The
case was now, on the demand of the populace, re-in-
vestigated by the m^strates. The suspected publican
pleaded an a/t^, and was again dischatged, thou^ the
evidence seemed to criminate him. The diggers now
assembled en masse 12,000 or 14,000 strong, deliberately
set fire to the public house, the police looking on help-
lessly, and then quietly returned to their tents. After
this riot the m^strates invited all well-disposed persons
to enroll themselves as special constables, but scarcely any
offered their services or showed any disposition to support
the authorities. This seemed the more remarkable be-
cause, at the Governor's recent visit to the mines, he had
been received with acclamations, which had been thought
to indicate the absence of all discontent. But since that
visit the pursuit and capture of uDhcensed diggers, " man-
hunting " or " digger-hunting " as the miners call it, had
been carried on with renewed activity, and had awakened
all the old exasperation i^ainst the government. While
this practice is enforced there never can be lasting tran-
quillity at the mines. Such oft-repeated outbreaks and
sudden kindhng of the fierce democracy of the miners
show beyond all question " something rotten in the state

^dbyGoogle

RIOI AT BALLABAf. 87

of Denmark." The Buepected murderer would, it is be-
lieved, have most certainly Buifered instant punishment
hy the mob if they could have found him. He has since
been once more apprehended and was to hare been tried
before the proper tribunaL

The local authorities arrested two persons as hanng
been implicated in the riot ; but they were bailed out and
carried off in triumph by an excited mob. Large sub-
scriptions were being made for tbeir defence, and two
able counsel secured. Such was tihe stato of affiurs when
the last mail left Melbourne. Sur Charles Hotham has no
light task before him in his vioeroyalty : the diners
arrayed agunst goverament — the landowners ^^nst ijie
squatters — and the whole colony ^^st tlie Colonial
Office in matters of the highest importance. Fortunately
he starta on his career with a large stock of popularity.

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTER VII.

TBATELLINO IN THE BUSH.

Cape Otwa; forest— The " Hot Wind "—Black Thursda)' — Asbea
traniported to great distanceB — Notes of a tour throngh the forest

— AbandoDed misuon station — Facilities for forraiiig reservoin —
Camp in the Bush — The forest after the firea — Forcing a psEsage
— MagDificent growth of trees — Dreary night — Luxuriant vege-
tatioD — Wild gea-coBst —Carboniferous rocks — The forest on fire

— Betnrn through the Coast Bangw — Contrasts — LontitBaj —
View of the coast at daybreak — Beturn.

In order to give the reader some idea of the scenes and
incidents of Australian travel, I shall here offer a few
extractB from my joiunals and noteS) written on the spot
or soon afterwards; such being always more fiuthful and
life-like than more elaborate accounts drawn up subse-
quently.

The first extract is a journal of a tour through a very
extraordinary and almost unknown district, and under very
uncommon circumstances ; so that it must not be regarded as
illustrative of what is seen every day in the " Bush." I
have already alluded to the wild country of the Cape Otway
Promontory ; to its steep shelving valleys, its beetling pre-
cipices, its dense forest of gigantic trees, its sun- proof shades
and tangled mazes : this is the district traversed. The
journey was commenced about a fortnight after this forest,
and indeed almost the entire colony, was desolated by the

^dbyGoogle

THE HOT 'WIND. 89

most terrific fires ever known in Tictoria, which oommitted
such ravages that the day (February 6. 1851) has ever since
been memorable in the annals of the colony under the
name of "Black Thursday. " "Bush firea" are very
common during Bmumer. They originate from the sprend
of a camp fire, from a lighted match carelessly thrown on
the dry grass, or some other accident. Once kindled, the
fire advances till it encounters a road or river, or is beaten
back by the wind. To avoid such dangers the settlers
bum a circle around their huta and homesteads; so that,
when the advancing fire reaches the burnt ring, it ceases
ft^m want of fueL These confiagrations generally occur
when the north or hot wind is blowing from that great
natural lumace, the central Australian desert

The hot wind is in fact the Simoom of Australia, and
results apparently from the same cause as that of Africa,
namely, rodiadon from the scorched lands of the interior.
It rarely lasts an entire day, and is always followed by the
cool south wind. Sometimes there is a mere momentary
pause between the gale from the north and that which
follows from the south. The approach of the hot wind
is indicated many hours before it arrives by a rapid fall of
the barometer. It usually commences between seven and
ten in the morning, and lasts till the afternoon, commonly
subsiding at sunset if not previously. During its pre-
valence the cloud of dust that hangs over Melbourne may
be seen from the mountains thirty miles distant. In winter
the north becomes a cool wind.

The fatal " Black Thmrsday " occurred after a long
season of heat and drought had rendered everything dry
and combustible. The hot wind blew a hurricane. The

^dbyGoogle

90 THE QOLDBM COLONY.

flames sirept far and wide, leaping over all ordinary barriers.
Every forest was on fire at once. Pirebraads were blown
over wide rivers and kindled new conflagrations oa the
opposite shores. During that day many hundred square
leagues were devastated by flames whi(^ travelled with
incre^Uble speed and resistless fury. The progress ot such
fires is exactly described by the vivid imagery of the Hebrew
Prophet : — " The land is as the Garden of *Eden before
them, and behind them a desolate wilderness." Houses,
homesteads, fences, implement, — all were destroyed.
Where oarts had stood, now were only seen two iron tires
lying on the ground. Crops and ricks were consumed, and
the whole country left a mere blackened waste. Many
persons were burnt to death ; others saved themselves by
striding in the " water-holes," or in the sea, and even
there were scorched; for the fires burnt down to the
water's edge. Shortly after this dreadful visitation X
visited what had been a snug farmhouse near Greeloug. It
was now a black wreck of roofiess walla. Gardens, vine-
yard, and stable were all destroyed. Camp-ovens, iron-
pots, and broken crockery were strewed about ; and, as a
sufferer sud to me, " all the property left might be carried
away in a wheelbarrow." In the stable were the remans
of a burnt horse. A dog and some poultry were the only
living things about the desolated place. The destructioa
of property on " Black Thursday " was immense, and
many of the small farmers lost the fruits of years of toil
and frugality. Whilst the flames were raging over a
thousand square leagues of forest, the gale carried the
finer cinders over the mountmns to Gipps Land, and
across .Bnss's Struts, entirely obscuring the sun ; so that

^dbyGoogle

"BLACK THUBBDAT." 91

in GippB Land, accoiding to many eye^witneoMB, it was
dark as night at three o'clock in the afternoon. But even
thiB wae not the limit to which traces of the fires extended.
According to credible witneeeee, fine charcoal dust fell on
board ships lying off Hew Zealand forty-eight hours after
the conflagration in Victoria. When we remember that
fine volcanic ashes were, during an eruption in the island
of Sumbawa in the Indian Ocean, transported by the wind
to the distance of 800 miles, we shall be more ready to
^ve credence to this statement* It was, then, about a fort-
night after the terrific " Black Thursday," that I started
on this tour through the forests of Cape Otway, accom-
panied by an intelligent friend, one of the oldest settlers
in the colony, now a large sheep-holder, and, what was
more important, an accomplished " busbman," who could
make his way over the country without sunj- stars, or
compass, and could light a fire though every twig and leaf
were saturated with rain. We had with us as guide
through the forest a wood-splitter, one of the few who
knew anything of the district, and who had followed his
calling at a little settlement on this part of the coast.

A few particulars relative to the physical geography of
the district traversed will throw light on the desultory
" Journal" which follows. A glance at the map will show
that the promontory of Cape Otway is a flat triangle,
with its blunt apex pointing southwards into the stormy
waters of the Pacific. Que main range of hills, forming
the backbone of the promontory, runs north and south,
and throws oif nimicrous lateral spurs, some of which,

* See Lyell's Priociples of Geologj, chap, xxviii.

^dbyGoogle

92 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

adTUDciiig into the sea, form rocky headlands, while the
interrening spaces become eaady bays or cotcb, having a
strip of flat, sandy, cultiyable land between the sea and
the hills, varying from 100 yards to a mile in width.
Previous to " Black Thnreday " the interior wae covered
with a dense forest, and impenetrable undergrowth or
scrub. The undergrowth was almost wholly destroyed
by the flres. The forest remained, blackened, charred,
and ravaged by the flames. Such a country is of course
unsuited for pastoral pursuits, and there is only one
station in the district ; this is near the lighthouse at the
Cape, which is the point first made by ships bound for
Melbourne. The most prominent of the headlands form
three shallow bays on the eastern coast: Loulit Bay to
the north, Addis Bay, and Apollo Bay to the south. The
south-east gales cause a tremendous swell to roll in on the
shore ; and the anchor^e is so insecure that the few craft
that traded there were ofl^n driven on shore. This wUd,
inhospitable, and rarely-visited coast is well pictured in
Byron's description of the Greek pirate's island : —
" It was a wild and breaker -beaten coast.

With cliffs above, and a brood sandy shore,

Guarded bj shoak and rocks as b j an host,

With here knd there a creek, whose aspect wore

A better welcome to the tempeat-tost ;

And rarely ceased the haughty billow's roar.

Save ou the dead long sammer days, which nuike
The outstretched ocean glitter like a take."
Probably, however, the " haughty billow's roar" never
ceases on the shores of Cape Otway.*

* Vast as u the extent of the Otway Forest, it dwiodles into a
grove compared with the wooded tracts in America. The foresla of

^dbyGoogle

CAPE OTWAT POKEST.

NOTES OF A TOUR IK CAPE OTWAT FOREST.*

February 20. \m\.— Thursday. Started from Dr. L.'s
on the Moorabool river for Seal's Inn. Our caravan in-
cluded L., myeelf, a Loutit Bay splitter for a guide, and
two packhorses. Crossed a naked, rocky lava plain to
Pollock's Ford, seven miles. Here we forded the Bar*
won, lefl Br^piet's vineyard and its purple dustera on
our left, and skirted the northern base of the Barrabool
Hills. Rounding them we now turned south, over a
plain alternately open and lightly timbered. Mount Gel-
librand and Mount Hesse lay before us to the right, —
probably the principal vents whence flowed the liquid lava
that filled up all the ancient valleys and hollows, and
advanced its fiery wave to' the very base of the Barrabool
Hills, which are now islanded in a sea of lava. Mount
Boniuyong, another centre of volcanio agency at some
remote period, was visible on the horizon to the north.
The plain under our feet was everywhere furrowed by
" Dead Men's Graves," and generally covered with the vol-
canic ash, apUy named by the settlers buckshot, and found
throughout the country on similar formations. Buckshot
is always imbedded in a sandy soil, sometimes several feet
thick. It is now a fortnight since the country was swept
by the fiery hurricane of " Black Thursday," and the young
grass is just touclung over with green the blackened plain.

tbe Amazona, in South America, called the Silmu, cover a region six
tinies as large as France, extending 1500 miles along the river, and
varjring in breadth from 3S0 to bOO miles.

* Ttieie Notes have alreadj appeared in an Australian Uagaiine.

^dbyGoogle

94 TBB GOLDEN COLONT.

The Cape Otw&j Bonges, thougb not 'visible, were indi-
cated by the thick bank of clouds hanging over the aouth-
weat horizon. We reached Beal's Inn at sundown; —
not a noisy, filthy, bng-infeeted hostelry, as might have
been expected froni some accounts of colonial inns, but as
clean and quiet and well-ordered a htde place as you
might wiah to meet with on a Derbyshire trout stream or
in a Welsh valley. Near the inn is a small church, lately
built, but not yet provided with a clergyman ; the colonial
demand in the caae of the Church of England being
greater than the snpply, and money being more readily
provided than men. This spot, dignified with the name
of Winohelsea, is twenty-five miles from Geelong on the
miun Colac Road, where it crosses the Barwon on a
timber bridge. There is the inn, the store, the station,
and the church, — the usual rudiments of a Victorian
town. Some bright future may, however, still be in
store for Winchelsea, when the Railwat shall penetrate
to the fastnesses of the Otway Forest, and ihe shrill
whistle of the laON Hobse shall startle the hereditary
tenants of its leafy mazes.

FtA. 21.— Started at eight. Followed the Barwon,
through open country : Mount Gellibrand, with it« low,
flattened outline, conspicuous on the right, the Cape Ot-
way Ranges stretching away on the left, clouds and mists
enveloping their summits. At Hopkins' Station (seven
miles) crossed the Barwon, here contracted into a mere
creek or brook, yet still a runmng stream, after all the
drought of the summer. Three or four miles further we
entered the outskirts of the ranges and followed up a rich
alluvial fiat, shut in on either side by hills, and sometimes

^dbyGoogle

ABAyDONED MISSION STATION. 95

flooded by the river. Large berda of cattle were browsing
here. Camped at middfly on a patch of pasturage near
tbe river which had escaped the general confl^ration. On
a rirang ground, at the head of this marshy valley, stood
what waa once the Wesleyan Mission Station, with its
garden of fruit trees, refreehing the eye amid the black-
ened waste. The Mission was a melancholy &ilnre, and
bas long been abandoned by the missionaries. Tbe blacks
could not even be persuaded to reside on ibe spot, much
less to embrace the tenets of our f^tb. ^Extermination,
not Christian! sation, appears to be written for the Austra-
lian tribes in the mysterious book of the future. Tbe
curse upon Ham is still traced in inefiaceable characters
upon bis posterity.

At this abandoned misraonary station we found a mother
with ber tax children, huddled together in a tent, near
the black ruins of her former borne, which had been de-
stroyed on the terrible Thursday, They were alone on
the spot when surrounded by the fire, and were compelled
to fly for their lives before and through tbe flames. Her
scorched bands still bore evident marks of the fire; every-
thing waa destroyed, and the apples roasted upon tbe
trees. Enei^, however, had not been crushed by mis-
fortune: a new slab but, erected since the flres, was
already well nigh ready for the family.

On leaving tbe Mission Station we entered another long
mnrshy valley, at a higher level than tbe former. Both
these baains might readUy, and at little coat, be dammed
up, and thus converted into magnificent reservoirs of
water, covering an area of maaj thousands of acres. The
advanti^es thus gained would be immense and various.

^dbyGoogle

Bo THE GOLDEN COLONT.

First, you would obtain a neTer-ftuliiig and strong cur-
rent &om hence to tlie sea, and the inhabitantB of Geelong
and residents on the Barwon would be supplied with pure
water during tiie longest droughts, iustead of the stagnant
unpuritieB from water-holes, redolent of the putrid car-
cases of bullocks. Second, large tracts of agricultural
and garden land might thus he irrigated, and its produce
thereby doubled or trebled. Third, these reserroirs, at a
considerable h^ght above the sear-level, would furnish a
very great amount of available water power. A chain of
mills might be set in motion as the stream advances down-
wards to its mout^ If nature has denied us the glorious
rivers of America, if we have no Ithinea or Danubes,
still she has granted us extraordinary capabilities of retain-
ing and busbandii^ our water supply.

After leaving the Mission station we soon entered upon
the skirts of the forest, here occasionally opening into
glades ; and three miles furtlier reached Mr. Koadknight's
station. This spot, though encircled by, yet escaped, the
flames, and offered some little herbage for our horses.
Knowing that we had hard work in store for next day, we
determined to push on two or ihree miles further, to the
extreme limit of the unburnt country. The Barwon here
runs through a reedy valley of deep alluvial mud, occa-
sionally widening \ia channel into a morass. Two miles
from the last station we crossed it for the ^burM time, aud
were now i^fun on the left bank. The valley was on all
sides shut in by gentle acclivities; forest timber alter-
nating with open glades; — no rocks nor predpices, nor
tumbling cascades, gave Alpine picturesqneness to the
sources of the Barwon. It was already past sundown.

^dbyGoogle

M18ADVENTUEE. 97

and we had reached the edge of the burnt forest. There
was some scanty feed for the horses, and excellent water
in the stream ; but it ran sunk in a deep ditch of eoft mud,
and was quite inaccessible to our quadrupeds, without
imminent peril of their being bogged. Water must be
somehow conveyed to them ; but how ? A hat or a saddle-
bag was the nearest approach to a bucket at our command.
After weighing the comparative advantages of these, we
hit upon another expedient, which proved highly success-
ftd. Unfolding part of our tent we converted it into a
bason, and filled it with water; — and the horses, after
some preliminary snorting, came up one by one and drank
freely, while we filled and refilled it from the stream.
This difficulty aurmoimted, another misadventure followed.
One of the pack-horses trotted off homewards; two others
followed the runaway, bearing away our knapsacks and
entire commissariat ; and presently we were in full pursuit,
through a thick tangled forest, and tbts in the deepening
twilight Nothing could be easier than to lose them in
a country so abounding with coverte; hut, luckily, the
whole troop were suddenly pulled up by a morass, into
which the leader plunged, and the others followed. Pre-
sently all were brought into our camp. And now the
tent was pitched, the fire crackled and blazed, and lighted
up the ancient trees. Pannikin-tea, supper, sleep, fol-
lowed in due order. The forest sank into its own deep
primeval silence ; the stars shone bright and serene over
our heads, while the Cross of the South, and the mys-
terious Magellanic clouds revolved round what Humboldt
calls ' the starless and desert Southern Pole.'

February 22nd. — The morning broke dull, misty.

^dbyGoogle

98 THE GOLDEH COLONT.

threatening. At 7 we were en route. Our oourBe lay
south-west. We began at once to ascend the first slopes
of the Cape Otway HiUs, leaving the Barwon on our left,
hid iu a thickly-wooded dell. We were now thirty-e^ht
or forty miles from the coast at Apollo Bay ; the whole
country between being a dense foreet, and all burnt to
within a few miles of the sea. As we ascended throagh
the thickening timber all view of distant hill or plwn was
shut out, — everything except the immediate forest fore-
ground. It soon began to drizzle, and continued raining
during the whole of this dismal lugubrious day of toil and
travel We were, in fact, not under a cloud, but in it.
At first a few reeds and ferns bordered our path; but
these soon disappeared, and of all the rich and cJiaracter-
istic vegetation that formed the under-growth of the forest
three weeks ago, no trace now remained except the burnt
stems or fronds of the fern-tree, which, instead of branch-
ing out like the feathery palm, hung down forlornly irota
the top of the trunk. Every green shrub had been de-
voured by the flame. On all sides were gigantic trees,
tall, and running up a hundred feet without throwing off
a single branch. The trunks were completely charred
externally, the flames having reached up about a hun-
dred feet, as they fed upon the undergrowth, but the
loftiest tops appeared to have escaped. The tops, how-
ever, were lost in cloud and mist, so that accurate obser-
vation was impossible. Nothing could be more desolate
and cheerless. It was too dreary, too monotonously wild
even for Salvator Bosa and his bandits. But the difficulties
in our path soon engrossed all attention. The traek, for-
merly well-deflned and easy, was now almost eflaced ; to

^dbyGoogle

THE PBIMEYAL FOBEST. 99

follow it waa out of the question, for it often lay beneath
a chaoa of huge fallen trunks and branches intertwined.
Often it became necessary to make a long detour to avoid
these prostrate Goliatha of the forest, whichj two or three
hundred feet long, would occasionally arch over a ravine,
and leave a passage beneath. Thus we had first to seek
the old track as a clue through the illimitable forest, and
next to discover where, by means of leaping, climbing,
and scrambling, the horses might find or make a way
through the labyrinth, their riders, of conrse, on foot.
The timber was so dense that the b^gage-horses had lite-
rally to force a passage through for their loads, sometimes
carrying away a tree in the effort. So long as they fol-
lowed close in Indian file, they would not falter or swerve,
but no sooner was the file broken than they wandered off
anywhere rather than face the great logs and tangled
branches that barred up the road. Our guide steered
through this misty maze very well," but knew nothing of
distance, all distinguishing objects and marks having been
destroyed or etSiced. The mist and rain increased the
general obscurity. We appeared, however, to be follow-
ing the zigzags of a sharp crest or saddle, with densely
timbered gullies and leafy abysses on either side — the
Valombrosas of Cape Otway.

The main point of interest in this wonderful forest is
the magnificent growth and almost incredible size of the
trees. Some that we roughly measured were fifty and
sixty feet in circumference five feet from the ground.
From thirty to forty feet was perhaps the average girth.
Even the lightwood tree grows to a height of a hundred
feet The lai^er trees are generally hollow near the

^dbyGoogle

100 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

Toote : eometimes the interior fonna a vast cave. They
stand etraght and erect as fir-trees, which gives the forest
an Alpine character. In some the exterior takes the
form of graceful Gothic mouldings, and reminds you of
the majestic piers of a Cathedral nave.* The colossal
limbs and roots, roughened by huge excrescences and
fantastically contorted, often assume the most grotesque
and bizarre forms. All the foliage is at the summit, and
thus enjoys the influences of light and sunshine and wind.
Who shall tell during how many centuries these patriarchs
of the forest have been attaining their enormous bulk?
Are they contemporaries of the venerable "cedar s^nts"
of Mount Lebanon? There was no voice of bird nor
chirp of insect; all animal life appeared to have perished
in the universally ra^ng flames. The wind whistled
through their branching tops, far, far over our head.
Occasionally was heard the distant crash of a falling trunk,
deep and low — the avalanche of the forest I

At nightfall we halted under the lee of a hill, totally
ignorant as to the actual distance from our deatioation.
The droppings from tlie trunk of a great gum tree supplied
us with water for our tea, strongly impregnated from its
source. Every twig was drenched; but after repeated
failures, a fire was kindled and soon lighted up the forest.
Our tent, begrimed with charcoal, was spread out on t^e wet

* I think there can be as little doubt that the old Gothic artista
really drew inspimtlan from such fiireet scenes, bb that the elaborate
theory of Sir James Hall and others (which would derive every
detail of Gothic Architecture from trees and twigs), has no founda-
tion except in their own fancy. They have run their analogiea
agrouud.

^dbyGoogle

DREAET NIGHT. 101

earth, and we lay down upon it before the fire on a slippery
steep, wet and miserable. My little terrier, wTiom we had
lost while making wuy through the forest, now came up,
wagging bia tful, and nestled in close to the blazing logs.
The horses, fa^ed and starved, were tied up near us. The
night was pitchy dark ; the rain pattered on the leaves ;
the wind moaned through the tree tops. It was the very
ideal of lonely dreariness.

Sunday 23r(i, — At length momingdawned, foggy, wet,
and triste as yesterday. By some mysterious mental para-
dox, some occult law of mind, in virtue of which harsh
and uncouth realities become suggestive of beautiful sights
and sounds, I awoke at daybreak with one of Moore's
sweetest melodies in my ear. Such incongruous associa-
tions occur too frequently to be attributed to chance, and
are too remarkable to be referred to ordinary causation.
But the present was neither time nor place for metaphysics.*
Tea was made, beef and bread swallowed, the horaes sad-
dled (while chewing and striving for burnt sticks), and we
were once more in motion. On, on we toiled, as yesterday,
making a mile, sometimes only half a mile, an hour ; now
turning to the right, now to the left, to find a practicable
passage. At length we rsached a streamlet running in soft

* Mr. Einglake, in Eothen, mentions that when travelling in the
desert one Suudaj' morning, seated on his camel, and wide awake,
the sun flaming above, and the hot sands dazzling beneath, be die-
tinctly heard the chime of his Tillage bells. The connection between
the Sundaj morning and the church bell» is sufficiently obvious : but
it is difficult to understand what there could be in a dripping forest,
a misty morning, and an expiring bush fire, to awaken in the memory
the echoes of " Flow on thou shining river."

,«b,Googlc

102 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

mud. Had the thirsty horses heeo allowed to drink, they
would have been hopelesdy bogged, bo they must clear it at
a leap. Soon after we passed a quagmire, fed by springe, aad
wetevenin the longest drought. We were now nearing the
coast, and looked out ansiously for the sea. Thought of
the Ten Thousand Greeks and the Spanish conquerors of
America, and of their feelings on first descrying the ocean.
At length we heard the roar of breakers, at first dull and
distant; then nearer and louder. Here the forest wan
merely singed, not burnt up : and presently we passed the
limits of devastation and entered a green alley cut
through the undergrowth, and walled in with most luxuri-
ant vegetation, plants, trees, and creepers, wholly unknown
in the ordinary forests of the country. Nothing could be
more striking and beautiful than this sudden contrast of
exuberant vegetable life to the bare, lifeless forest through
which we had been toiling the last two days. Never did
moss or lichen before appear so exquisitely perfect in form
and tint. The fern-tree spread out its green feathery fronds,
contrasted with the " ebon shades " beneath and beyond. A
delicate tendril grass climbed up into the trees, and hung
from branch to branch. Such had been the whole route
through the forest previous to the fires ! As we trotted
on, our hf^gard horses caught at reeds and ferns, freshened
by the eight of anything green, and seeming to understand
that grass was now at hand.

After five miles of these beautiful shrubberies, with
huge gums and stringybark trees shooting up out of them
three hundred feet over our heads, we descended to the
beach by the last glimmer of twilight. Old ocean wel-
comed us with his roar. A little stream was dietinguish-

^dbyGoogle

WILD SEA COAST. 103

able wending its way along tlie beach to the sea. A light
on the coast a mile distant ahowed the spot where the
" Mai^ret " lay stranded. Thirsty, weary, and footsore,
we rushed to the river] and, though close to the sea, found
it pure and sweet, more grateful than Falstaff's sack, or
Soyer's Nectar. Camped on a litde open platform, by a
shrubbery of blue gums.

Monday 24th, at daylight, opened our eyes on Apollo
Bay, sixteen miles from Cape Otway. A bold rocky
coast, densely forested hills, reaching down to within a
mile of the sea, — a heavy surf thundering in upon a
broad sandy beach, — a glassy stream running parallel to
the line of breakers, — such are the outlines of the scene,
wild and desolate, yet not without beauty, and abounding
with interest to the botanist and geologist

Here we remained two days, exploring the coast and
neighbourhood. The first thing that strikes you is the
great beauty, variety, and novel character of the vegeta-
tion. The blue gum (a beautiful shrub when young) is
abundant^ Scattering the aromatic fri^rance of its leaves
and crushed seeds, it reminds you of Milton's charming
lines,

" Now gentle galea,
FnnniQg their odoriferous wings, dbpense
Native perFumea, and whisper whence they stole
Those balmy spoils. As when to them who sail
Beyond the Cape of Horn, and now are past
Moxunbic, off at aea nortb-eaat winds blow
Sabeao odours from the spicy shore
Of Araby the Blest ; with mich delay
Well pleased, they slact their course, and many a league
Cheer'd with the grateful smell, Old Ocean smiles."

^dbyGoogle

104 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

In the thickets aad nndei^frowth of the forest is an end-
lesa variety of flowering ehruba and plants. Everything
indicates a humid climate, and vegetatJon pute on an
almost tropical luxuriance. Besides the river there is a
salt water inlet, abounding with fish and wild fowl: fish are
also oflen washed up on the beach.

The carboniferous strata crop out along the beacb and
form rocky headlands, presenting a series very similar to
that of Western Port aad Cape Patterson, but with fewer
traces of igneous action. In both we have a thick bed of
red and grey sandstone, overlying a succeasion of shales,
sandstones, and conglomerates, honeycombed and rough-
ened by the action of wind, water, and spray. There are
numerous thin seams and bunches of a friable black shale,
which has frequently been mistaken for coal, and more
than once shipped off for Geelong as such. The dif-
ference between the two, however, is obvious enough to
any but the most unpractised eye. About a mile soudi
of the reef that shuts in the Bay we found a seam of a jet
coal, about \^ inch thick, clean and light, of conchoidal
fracture, and of excellent quality, very similar to the
thickest and best of the seams at Cape Patterson. This
is the only seam of true coal that I noticed on the Cape
Otway coast ; and of the reiterated attempts to discover
a workable seam on tbis coast, not one has been under-
taken in its neighbourhood. In the mass of the sandstone
rock are numerous large balls or spherical concretions of
sofl friable sandstone in concentric coats, formed, perhaps,
by aggregation round a nucleus, like flints. The combined
action of the sea, the winds, and the river, has formed a
cultivable tract about a mile wide, at the foot of the

^dbyGoogle

CAPE OTWAY C0A8T. 105

forested hilU, This is separated from the beach by swell-
ing sand hummocks. The soil of these flats is very light
and sandy, and black from the admixture of particles of
charcoal. The soil of the forest appears poor but deep,
which may partly account for the giant growth of the
trees.

We did not attempt to reach the Cape, the fires having,
we were told, rendered the road almost impracticable.
For the first two miles the track lay through thick shrub-
beries and underwood, and these were succeeded by the
limitless barnt-up forest and scrub.

There were no fixed residents at Apollo Bay at this
time. A party of men were repairing the " Margaret"
cutt«r, lying on the beach. A gang of splitters had also
just arrived with their wives. Our guide had been living
here for a twelvemonth, when he was burnt out by the
fires of Thursday, and everything he had, destroyed. On
the beach was a stack of timber ready for shipment, which
had escaped the fiames.

February 2Qth. — (To Addis Bay, 14 miles.) Left camp
at half-past seven, and turned homewards. 0. had now
joined our party. The route lay along the coast. Some-
times we were trotting along the sands, sometimes scram-
bling over the rocks, and sometimes climbing up the steep
shaggy sides of the headlands, that, jutting out into the
sea, denied all passage round them. The hills are covered
with burnt timber and scrub. Occasionally a single shrub,
hanging over a cliff or gully, had escaped. The coal strata
continue along the coast, forming bluffs and rocky plat-
forms, scooped and fissured by the waves, and sometimes
honey-combed like the tracery of Saracenic windows.

^dbyGoogle

106 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

South of C^e Fatton there is a deep and lofty caTC in
the cliffa. Near Addia Bay the Bandstone abonnde with
hard siliceous balls. Where the spray has eaten away the
softer rock, these bttUs protrude from the cliffs like huge
eggs, growing out of eBch other.

We crossed three or four streams of fresh water, run-
ning on rocky beds. The first of these had that black
inky look often seen in mountain brooks: and being
uncommon in this country, the stream might be called
the " Blackwater." The sea view from the summit of
Cape Patton is magnificent, embracing the whole coasts
line of the two bays which it separates.

Addis Bay is smaller than Apollo Bay. Like that it
forms the embouchure of a main valley, and has ite running
stream and its little sandy fiat at the base of the hills.
These are still covered with the blackened skeletons of
trees. Here, Mr. Fisher, one of the most enterprising of
those who have attempted to establish a timber trade on
this coast, was residing previous to the fatal 6th of
February, when he witnessed the utter destruction of his
house, garden, fences, everything, narrowly escaping with
his life. Not a eoul was living here now ; but C, who
was on the spot at the time of the fires, described the
scene. Having, on the morning of Black Thursday, ob-
served that the forest was on fire in the distance, they took
the precaution of burning a girdle of timber around the Bay.
In the afiternoon, the wind shifting, three fires united
their fiunes, and came down on the settlers with reaiatless
fury, annihilating everything in their way. Mr. Fisher,
C, and another, Bed to the sea, and stood up to their
shoulders in the surf near a reef of rock, for three hours.

^dbyGoogle

FOBEST OK FIRE. 107

The flames, though coming, as he states, from the forest
three quarters of a mile iBstaat, scorched them as they
stood in the water, aad drove on far out to sea 1 We saw
a horse t3iat had had whiskere and eyebrows burnt off, yet
escaped. Clouds of charcoaJ-dnst and darkness added to
the horrors of this memorable day. All tbie had hap-
pened less than three weeks ago, yet nature was already
renewing her c^et of verdure ; the young grass peeping
up wherever the sand was mixed with a patch of charcoal
dust.

Near Addis Bay are some " workings in search of coal,"
lately undertaken by an ignorant man, under the auspices
and at the expense of the Melbourne Committee for Pre-
liminary Operations in search of coal, and certainly never
was public money more grossly squandered. Eight men
were at work for two or three months, and here were the
chief results of their labours — two pits, one about 5 feet
6 square and 10 feet deep ; the other 5 feet square, and
perhaps 20 feet deep 1 The first might have been dug by a
dngle workman in a day. "Water stood at the bottom of
the second, and seemed to have put an end to what ought
never to have been begun. Both tbe sites chosen for
these " coal-workings " and the mode of carrying iliem out
betray equal ignorance. Such blundering and waste of
public money, very common in the Colonies, suggests that,
in Victoria at least, Sheridan's saying that " Corpora-
tions have neither bodies to be kicked, nor souls to be
danmed," admits of wider application than he intended.

February 27th. — To Loutit Bay, twenty-five miles.
For the first eight miles, generally on a rough rocky beach.
Whilst taking a leap among sharp rocks, every horse was

^dbyGoogle

, 108 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

more or less cut. Id England, such places would be pro-
nounced impracticable, but tLia is a word which must here
be expunged from your travelling vocabulary. At the
eight-mile creek we halted for breakfast. Xear this spot,
a greenstone dyke breaks through the coal measures, and
jute out into the sea. From hence are conspicuous " The
Twins," a pair of conical hills, and near them Mount St.
Geoi^ •, forming the outwork of the promontory between
Loutit and Addis Bays, and one of the most remarkable
objects on this coast.

The track, which had only recently been opened, now
led inland through the forest; but it soon became evident
that it would be difficult or impoaaible to follow it ; the
fires had destroyed every trace of its direction. We began
by climbing a precipice of a hUl — a sort of steep staircase
with the steps left out, — the earth crumbling away under
the tread ; and stones, loosened by the leading horse, rolling
and pitching headlong down on those below : one of our
beasts, an elephantine pack-horse, plunged, fell, and had
well nigh rolled down into the sea ; but luckily the packs
fell off, and he recovered his footing. "We then carried
the packs to the summit of the hill, which is a rival in
difficulty, though inferior in fame, to a celebrated mule-
track on the mountain shores of the Gulf of Lepanto,
known emphatically as the " Kaka Scala" or " The Bad
St^rcase." At length we gained the crest of the sombre
forest range, and were rewarded with a glorious sea-view;
the deep blue of the ocean filled up the interstices of the

* Anotlier mountwn, near Cape Patton, bears this name in the
GoTemment Cbarta. I bare folloned the local nonieDclature, aa that
whic;L must eventuallv prevail.

^dbyGoogle

LIGHTS AND SHADOWS. 109

network of stems and branches, and melted into the softer
azure of the summer sky. These sudden and fitful con-
trasts and vicissitudes constitute one chief element of the
pleasure of travel. They are the lights and shadows of the
traveller's life. Such unlocked for glimpses of transcendent
beauty, in the midst of rude and rugged scenes, and vron
by toil, are enjoyed with keener relish, and leave a more
ineffaceable impress on the memory, than whole days of
continuous simshine and uncoutrasted beauty : as sudden
smiles have sometimes a strange sweetness on a counten-
ance habitually severe or sad.

Sevei'al hours were now spent in alternately losing and
recovering the track. At 4 p. M., we found ourselves on
a lofty crest, at the edge of a steep wooded valley, and
here agun were rewarded with one of those enchanting
scenes which for the while make you forget everything
else, and " lend to loneliness delight." The deep winding
gully opened down upon the coast, and let in a view of the
blue ocean. At the mouth of the valley rose conspicuous
the conical *' Twins," breaking the sea line. On its oppo-
Mte side lofty beetling crags reared themselves out of the
umbrageous mass below. The conical form of the Twins,
so rare in this country, recalls many a scene in the
Apennines, and the whole picture might be taken for a
mountain pass in Italy.

We now determined to give up all further attempts to
follow or find the track, and to steer direct through the
forest by compass. The eflfect of the fires was curiously
different here from what it was in the inland ranges.
In the latter, the trees were far larger, and oftener hollow,
and the fires appear to have raged more fiercely ; so that

byGoogle

110 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

huge fallen Ic^e, tmnka, and branches were matted into an
impadBable laby^rintlL In the coast ranges, on the contrary,
few trees had fallen ; but the undergrowth had been to-
tally annihilated ; so that the forest was now perrious in
all directions, — above you, burnt trunks and stems, — be-
neath, blackened earth without one blade of grass. The
only vegetation was a microscopic fiiagus, blood-red. Bird,
beast, and reptile appear to have alike perished.* Occa-
sionally we lighted on the carcase of some one of the
smaller animals. The smoke would, doubtless, have suffo-
cated them had they escaped the flames.

We traversed the valley, followed a long sharp ridge,
and descended into another deep delving valley, the
horses sliding rather than walking down its crumbling
sides : we were of course on foot. In the deep solitudes
of this rugged valley, where, probably, no white man had
ever before trod, we found a picturesque little strewnlet,
over-arched with trees, gurgling on over its rocky bed to-
wards the sea. We then crosaed another steep range, and
found another brook beyond it; — crossed a third ridge,
and came down to a third stream. Here, overtaken by
night, we were compelled to camp ; and onr jaded beasts
^ain to fast : for to make way through the forest with
its innumerable stumps by night was impossible. A huge
fire, salt beef, bacon and biscuit, duly followed, — tbenthe
outstretched tent, the saddle-pillow, the all-envelopiDg
opossum mg, and sleep such as only the weary know ; such
as sumptuous couches and beds of eider down cannot yield

* MillloDB of animals are atld to be sometimes destrojed bj casual
conflagratioiu on the Pampaa of Boii& America.

^dbyGoogle

LOUTIT BAr. lU

to your soft and Bilken voluptuary. C. had left us' half
an hour previously, hoping to make hia way out of the
foreet before nightfall, bnt was overtaken by darkneas.
We saw hia camp fire on the opposite hill aide, but he was
unable to return to na through the pitchy darkuess of the
forest, and so lay down, solitary, supperless, and, worst of
all, without water.

February 28rt. — Rose by starlight— started at 6 —
croaaedthebrookjwhereitwaa traversed byagreen stone dyke
— up the opposite steep — crossed another gully, and finally
deeceuded Xa the beach at Loutit Bay, reaching it about
8 A, M. Found we had gone too far inland. After bath-
ing in the creek on the beach, breakfasted in a thicket,
feasting on extempore-made " leather-jacAett," i.e., flour
and water cakes, thrown on the embers and baked ^ la
natureUe. Some wandering bullocks and the crowing of
cocks showed that we had returned to the haunts of
man.

Loutit Bay resembles ApoUo Bay, but though apparently
more sheltered it is said to be less safe. Both are hemmed
in by dense forest ranges and rocky headlands. Apollo
Bay has the advantage of good timber close at hand for
shipping ; at Loutit Bay it mnat be carted five miles. A
year ago eighty men were located here, splitting and saw-
ing ; but the hope of establishing an extensive trade was
suddenly extinguished by the two coasting craft then on
the atation going on shore in one day. Since then, a
single family has continued here, and have now a lat^e
contract for aupplying posts and rails to a wealthy land-
holder. A party of ahip-builders from Melbourne is just
arrived. The brook that comes down from the mount^ns.

^dbyGoogle

112 THB GOLDEN COLONT.

before debouching on the Bands, runs over a rocky bed
through a pretty wooded dell, (unlike the monotonous
troughs or nullahs of the Barwon, Weribee, &o.,) and the
leaves of the gum-trees, being scorched and aere from the
fire, gave to the whole quite an European autumnal air.
Passed a pleasant morning in these primeval groves.

" Here the rude aze, with beaTj Btroke,
Wm never heard the njmphs to dtunt,
Or fright them from their balloired hannt."

We started at 3 p.m., along the beach, northward
and homeward. We had now but one more steep spur
to traverse, which has received the poetic name of the
"Biff Hill." Its summit was clad with iron-bark trees-
Crossed another creek at its base, — then along the beach,
generally sandy, sometimes rocky, to Carter's Station.
Four miles before reaching it, examined two or three large
seams of shale and lignite, dipping to the south-east,
visible at a distance of some miles, like black bands
drawn along the sandy shore. These are well worth a
visit: the lignite exhibits the woody fibre perfectly pre-
served. Carter's Station is on a swampy flat, opening
upon the sea, and separated from it by sand dunes. Here
suddenly terminate the coal strata. The Otway ranges
bear away inland, and are succeeded by a new rock, and
a totally different vegetation on the coast. A hard, red
siliceous sandstone, underlying the coal measures, forms a
bold headland, with a detached outlier ; and scant herbage
succeeds the dense timber of the Otway Forest-
Poor Carter was one of the many sufferers from the

^dbyGoogle

WILD SEA-COAST. 113

fires : his hut and stacks were all destroyed. From heoce
to Loutit Bay is about twelve miles — to Geelong thirty-
four. Caoiped in a jungle of reeds.

February 29th.— rUp by starlight and walked to the top
of the aea-cliffs at dawn, and enjoyed the sight of the
morning breaking upon this silent, savage, solitary coast.
To the south lay a long stretch of sandy shore, and white
breakers, shut in by the " Big HilL" Beyond towered
Mount St. George ; and still more distant Cape Patton,
between Addis and Apollo Bays. To the north stretched
ano^er long line of coast and headlands. Massive, richly
tinctured clouds hung over the eastern horizon, catching
radiance from the aun, which was still beneath the sky
line of the ocean.

Once more en route for Geelong; and now, as Byron
says, " Being out of the mountains, my journal must be
as flat as my journey," though here we had not to com-
plain of many " tokens of insipid civilisation." The
first eight nules the track continues near the beach:
soil barren and sandy, with grass-trees. We then
descended to a creek, droning an open valley. Here, as
elsewhere in any break on the coast ranges, the land falls
away inland, having been raised and banked up by drift-
ing sand along tlie beach. At this point commenced a
new range of cliffs of red and yellow clays, which, falling
away in lai^e slices, leave yawning chasms and high
beetling bluffs. The road now turns inland. A few
miles further, the coarse red sandstone again crops out.
At 16th mile, reached Tate's Station. Here we were
once more in the ordinary Australian forest ; gum-trees,
with feathery pendulous foliage, banksias, Sic, sprinkled

^dbyGoogle

114 THK GOLDEN COLONY.

over a monotonous rolllDg country, with scant herbi^e,
strewed widi old bark. No water to be found, except in
a foul and filthy hole : so we were obliged to push on our
jaded heasta to Thomson's station within ten miles of
Geelong. A little beyond this an outcrop of rook showed
we were once more upon the volcanic country, upon one
of those wide-epread eheets of lava, which, poured forth
probably on the floor of the ancient ocean, now form
such a large portion of the country, and give to it its
peculiar pastoral capabilities. Beached Geelong, jaded,
footsore, and travei-tom, after having " bushed it" in
the c>pen air eight nights, and having been for ten
days surroonded by the devastation caused by the
terrible fiery tornado of the 6tli of February. Thus
ended our pilgrimage to the Forest of Cape Otway,
during which, though lasting but ten days, we had gone
through more toil, and encountered &r more difficulties,
than would be required io making the modem " Grand
Tour," including CouBtantinople, Cmto, and the Pyramids.
It has been mentioned that there are numerous streams
in this district, fed from the clouds that cluster round the
summits of the mountains. As many of theBe were run-
ning with a brisk current in February, after a summer
remarkable for heat and drought, we may conclude that
they would, during a great part of the- year, fumieh a
considerable amount of water power. It was the exist-
ence of such power in Lancashire and Gloucestemfaire,
that first caused those districts to become the great seats
of English manufactures ; and when, after steam had to a
great extent superseded water, it was found that the same
locahties contained vast supfdies of coal, they were enabled

^dbyGoogle

THE POBE8T IN THE FDTDEB. 115

still to preeerre the preeminence they had won. These
considerations, in conjunctaon with the fact that the Otway
Promontory cont^ne within it similar resourcee — water
and fuel — (the main elements of mechanical power), are
highly snggestJTe. They seem to point to a period when
these savage wilds shall become great manufacturing dis-
tricts; when valleys that never yet heard stroke of axe
shall be peopled with busy hives of artisans, and seats of
the commercial enterprise of the future Arkwrights of
Australia.

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTER VIII.

TEAVELLIKQ IM THE BUSH — continued.

A Weitern Port Station — Angtraliui Pyreneei — Through the
Forest — Sheepahearer'i Hut — Nfttitres— The BuDjip — A Home
on the Plains — Cmeltj and kindness of the Natives.

The following extntct from a letter refers to the Western
Fort diettict, east of Melbonme. The date is 1850. But
it most not be taken as a picture of Bquatter life througb-
oat Viotona at that period. This district, being more
wet and more wooded than llie colony generally, is leas
adapted for pastoral pureuite, and the stations are less
valuable in proportion. The wealthier squatters of the
central and western districto* bare made much further
advances in the domeHtic comfort of thw homes, and in
all the refinements of Europe&n life, as will be manifest
from a subsequent extract What now follows may be
regarded rattier as a sample of average Bush life in Yio-
toria ten years earlier, or three or four years after the
founding of the colony : —

* The name " Western Port " maj mislead the reader — as it is, in
fact, the touihtatlem part of the old colonj of Fort Philip.

^dbyGoogle

A WESTEBN POBT STATION. 117

.... Yoo are familiar with tlie word " BqbIi.'' Do
yon give it any definite meaning ?

" The Bush," when the word is used in the towns,
meRUB all the tminclosed and ancnltiTated country ; and
nearly the whole colony being in this state, it includes
nearly all,— heath, grassy plwns, thick foreet, open Windsoiv
like forest, and dense scrub and jungle ; the latter some-
times forming an impenetrable network of trees and shrubs
and interwoven oreepere, through which you must cut your
way. When in tiie country, " the Bush " means more
espeinally the forest The word itself has been borrowed
irom the Cape, and ie of Dutch origin. I have not for-
gotten your horror of Australian life. Your &ncy, how-
ever, cannot have outdone the truth in picturing the
rough, coarse, and aubsavage mode of existence common
in the district I have just been visiting. I believe, how-
ever, I have seen one of the worst samples of Bush life.
You used to talk of the hugger-mugger, Bervant-of-all-
work, two-pronged-fork kind of life that certain people
led. My dear J., such a way of living is refined, nay, is
sumptuous, compared with the squatter's rough life in the
Bush. I often thought that, spite of all the talk of the
poverty of the poor in England, many an English labour-
ing man would scorn to live as gentlemen contentedly live
here.

A " Station" consists of the master's hut, his servant's,
the stock-yard, paddock, &c The hut commonly consists
of two, perhaps three, small rooms. The whole would go
comfortably into your drawing-room, and not a tight fit.
The floor is plaster or mud ; waUs, of plank, or " wattle and
dab," — a kind of hurdle-work, rough plastered with mud ;

^dbyGoogle

11'8 THE GOLDEN OOLONT.

roof, of bark or shingling ; c^Iing, none. FartitionB go up
to the level of top walls, bo that, all being opon aboTe, what
■ia spoken in one room is audible throughout. Wben it
tuna, nun poura in under door, floor becomee muddy, and
you find your chair burying ita 1^ in the ground. I say
oh&ir, bnt don't think yon are always so lucky as to get a
^air. What there may be are entirely of wood. At one
end of the room is a huge recess for the wood fire. Smoke
passes up through a wooden or peat chimney. A gun is
slung up to the wall. There are also, perliaps, a score of
Trashy twls of the " native dog," Bomething between a wolf
-and a fox, over the chimney. A few greasy old volumes
may lie in one corner. There is a small window, witli
white calico stretched over it instead of glass. On each
side of the fire is a wooden couch, which serves, when
-needed, as a bed. In tiie bedroom are one or two
" stretdiers," i. e. bedsteads that fold up like cnmp^tools,
with canvass tops, on which you sleep. There is a tin
pot and a tin basin ; a dirty towel hangs up near, and an
old worn-out tootbhrush is stuck under tbe bark or
shingle roof j a dirty comb completes the toilette, — per-
haps, also, stuck under the roof.

There are no drawers, no cupboard, no shelves.
What can you do, then, with anything P Why, stick it
up under the roof. The squatters are, however, very
hospitable, and freely give the stranger the best they
have. This is fortunate ; for in many parts there are no
inns, and you are wholly dependent on the hospit^ity of
strangers. Thus, during the month I was absent from
Melbourne, I only slept once in an inn, the only one in
the district. I will try and give you some idea of the

^dbyGoogle

A WB8TEBN POET STATION. 119

manner of proceediog on amviag at a station. It ia the
last day before I return to Melbourne. The sun haa
been down half tui hour. I ride up to the huta ; a troop
of d<^ rush out and bark. Thia awakes up the colony ;
the maet«r opens his hut-door and comes forth, I dis-
monnt, and luk if he could kindly give me shelter for the
night; whereupon, he says he shall be happy to give me
of his beat, tiiough that is but rough. My mim takes
away the horses, and we enter the hut. Host haa a jovial
red face, and is habited in the coarse blue shirt common
in the Buah. He has been Bcat«d with another, roughly
clad, at a small wooden table, playing at cards. Tea is on
the table, — a coarse green tea, in universal use as the
cheapest, — in a huge tin pot. Stale bread and cold
meat (no butter) complete the repast There is no milk,
" because this is a sheep station;" and though he has,
perhaps, thousands of acres of pasturage, he does not '
think it worth the trouble to keep a cow for his own use.
Well, tea is over, and talk enaues ; and now it is proper
for me to tell my business in travelling this way, and I
mention my name, if I have not already done so ; but thia
ought to be done when first accosting the host. At
9 o'clock host retires to bed, in the inner room. While
talking afterwards to the other guest I discovered that he

was no other than the son of the Reverend of Surrey.

A few old broken vials on a shelf had already made me
guess that he wns a suTgeon. I occupy one conch ia
sitting-room and the other guest occupies the other.
Being a stranger, tft^t/ give me a pair of sheets. Once,
however, I had to sleep in the blankets, for there were
no sheets on the station. The fire (and you always have a

^dbyGoogle

120 THE OOI.DEIT COLONT,

fire in £be Bueh) continiies smouldering during the night.
The door is only secured by a rude latch ; or it may be left
open. One step across the threshold and you are in the wild
Bush. Above shine the heavenly host in their silence and
their beauty. The night passes in profound stdllness, but
st earliest dawn the cheerful " laugh " of the " laughing
jackasses" is heard in the neighbouring groves. The
laughing jackass, you must know, is a happy bird, and is
probably the only jackass that ever does laugh. Well,
morning comes. The blackbird sings cheerfully in the
forest. I get up first ; go into inner room. Host is fast
asleep. I wash in his tin basin, there being no other.
By the time I have done, host awakes and begins to get
up. I apologise for the liberty, &c., and offer to throw
away the dirty water. Host stops me, and, taking basin
out of my hand, throws water o» mud Jioor, observing,
that this is their method of MUing the fieas II! As host
sleeps in his blue day-shirt, and washes very cursorily, he
is presently dressed, and goes to look after his sheep,
which have been folded near the hut during the night.
Breakiast presently follows,— in the style of last night's
supper; and breakfast over, I am f^ain in the saddle,
with heavy saddle-bags and great coat rolled up on the
pummel.

The following extracts are from Notos of a Tour in the
Australian Pyrenees, in November, 1850: —

November 23. — After breakfast started with H. in his
dog-cart and tandem to Bum Bank and Cooper and
Thomson's Station. On reaching Bum Bank took

^dbyGoogle

ADSTBALIAN FYBENEBB. 121

" Major Mitchell's Line"* through the forest at the foot
of Mount Cole, the most remarkable of the Pyrenean
chuB. Run came on. Liuncbed al fresco : the horeee'
fore-feet were secured with the reins, and they were
allowed to graze. On neariug Mount Cole we left " the
Major's Line" to the right, grass-grown, but Btill diatinotly
tmceable, and made along sweep to avoid the creek and
thick forest at the base of the mount. Left the forest
and mount to the north, and now jolted roughly over
an open lava plain, furrowed by " Dead Men's Graves."
Held on, to avoid being bumped out of the d<^-cart.
Readied the station at sunset. C. was fresh from his
woolshed, where they were shearing; his dress bore
marks of dirty work. The squatters usually are the
active and energetic directors of their own establishments,
and hence their success. The new, spacious, and well-
biiilt woolshed of splitr-wood or slabs, contrasts with the
|HCturesque ruggedness of the old tumble-down building
of bark wMch it supersedes, hastily erected in the earlier
days of the colony. Every station now has its ' recent
improvements, — a woolshed (or shearing-house), a aheep-
wasfa, or a new house for the owner.

Scenes in the Forest. — On every side a labyrinth of
gum-trees, with silvery and mottled trunks and feathery
foliage, which offers no shade from the burning sun.
Here and there huge patriarchs of the forest, with
gnarled and twisted trunks and branches, in grotesque con-

• The track made by Major (now Sir Thomw) Mitcheil'B ex-
ploring party, wheo this part of the conntrj wae first TiNted by

^dbyGoogle

1S2 THE GOLDKN COLONT.

tortions. GigantJc treea, witli the heart and half the lower
part of the trunk hurnt away by bneh-fires, yet retain-
ing Aeir foliage green and flouriahing. Dead trees and
branches lie half hid in the high gran. The luxuriant
green of the masay foliage of the cherry-tree and the oak
oontrasta with the meagre and sombre foliage of the gam.
SomeiimeB charred and dead trunks sbretch right acroea
your road, and yon must wind round them. Now and
then you come upon a beautiful green glade, with a limpid
creek stealing through its grassy bank*. The deep haxy
purple of the distant mountjuna gleams throu^ the green
bnmches. For music, there is the harsh hooting of the
cockatoo and parrot, the monotonous clear note of the
bell-lrird near the oreeke, and, more rarely, a melodious
trill which reminds yon of the songsters of our own sweet
woodlands.

Sunday, November 24. — At Challicum. There is now
an encampment of the "mi-mis" of the Aborigines at
this station. The mi-mi is a booth or tent, made of loose
boughs, open in front, opposite the family fire, which is
«lo8e outside. The men are absent, but have left their
loubras (women) to demoralise the whitemen employed on
the station, who feed them well, and receive their recom-
pense. The natives will sell their wives for a night for a
jnece of tobacco. Being Sunday, the shearers were lying
asleep in the hut, or laraly loitering about. One told me
he had not been in a church for fourteen years. They
had no Bibles: would be glad to have some, they said.
I asked if they ever read. One replied, " Yes ; I have
just been reading about Parr's Life Pills." Bead a chapter
to them : attentive listeners.

^dbyGoogle

THE BDNYIP. 123

Noven^er 25. — With T. I visited the mi-mia of the
nativeB, and talked to the loubras about the traditions of
the Bunyip, an apocryphal moneter swd to have existed
once on a time in a neighbouring water-hole. It happened,
they said, " a long time ago," repeating the English words
with a peculiar musical cadence. They had no chronolt^y
more exact than this. Near the mi-mi camp waa a flag-
staff, bound round with red cloth : at the summit were
two small rods with streuners attached, and on the top of
the pole a hunch of feathers, indicating the authority of
their Queen, now on the Hopkins River. The women
were almost naked, very dirty, and quite indifferent to it
They tie a red band round tfaeif btadc Imr. Some wear
necklaces. One had a large hole pierced through the
cartilage of the nose to receive an ornament. One young
woman had a half-caSte child slung behind her in an
opoBBum-rug, and when it cried she dragged it round to
her breasts The doles Jar niente seems the height of their
bliss, as they lie stretched under the shadow of their
mi~mis. Occasionally they begin to chant, in a low mur-
mur, a national air, beating their stretched opossum-rugs
aa a drum accompaniment. They have no musical in-
struments.

After breakfast we drove to three large water-holes,
where, according to native tradition, the Bunyip was
taken and speared; as it lay dead on the grass its outline
was marked out, and the turf within the outline after-
wards removed. The shape of the cutting, now indistinct,
{b that of a bird, not a reptile (see^j^. 2.). I sketched
and measured it. Bunyipe are supposed by the natives
etill to exist in tlie deep water-holes of the creeks.

^dbyGoogle

THE GOLDEN COLONT.

Fig. 3. The Bunjip.

Went on to A. T. T.'e Station, blx miles. Here found
ft comfortable, well-fumislied house, overlooking a large
pool or water-hole, skirted with grotesque old gimi-treee.
The red volcanic soil makes an excellent garden; the
light porous lava from which it is formed disintegratfiS
under exposure to the air, it is said, in two years. Hot
wind again to-day, heralded, as usual, by the white mare't-
tail clouds, proving, by their reflex curl, the existence of
different currents in various strata of the mx.

How different are the stations in these parts from those
at Western Port I Here, are comfort, luxury, and even
elegance ; there, poverty, rudest fare, — mutton, damper,
and coarse hysonskin tea, — a mnd floor, and no ceiling.
All the squatters I have seen of late have been many
years in the colony, have worked hard, and are now
enjoying the frnits of their labours, only fearful that some
new enactment may vtrest their privileges or possessions
from them. They are commonly active, intelligent, and
well educated.

While at W.'s this morning, a man rode up (W. being

^dbyGoogle

CBDELTY AND KINDNESS OV NATIVES. 125

a ma^strate) to e&y tliat a black boy, who bad been living
on hia station sixteen miles off, had been decoyed away by
a party of natives, under the pretence that the Hopkins
River blacks were about to come and cut them all off.
Having succeeded in getting the boy away with them,
they struck him down with a blow on the head, cut open
his side, and cut out his kidney fat 1 The poor lad was
afterwards found, still alive, and was bandaged up I No
legal proceedings can be taken agiunst the murderers, be-
cause depositions by the natives are not admis^ble before
the tribunals.

This horrible deed was probably an act of vengeance
for the murder of one of their own people by a man of
the tribe to which the boy belonged. The slaughter of a
vicarious victim is quite common among the Aborigines.
They regard it as a solemn duty to the manes of a mur-
dered man to execute vengeance on some individual of the
tribe guilty of and reapongible for the miu^er: so that
their feuds ure interminable. Before many years, bow-
ever, both the natives and their feuds will be extinct and
forgotten. They are rapidly melting away. The cutting
out of the kidney fat while the victim is alive is an atro-
city of common occurrence, and apparentiy sanctioned by
superstitious feeling.

The following story of their kindness to their dead
shows in strong contrast to the above barbarity to the
unoffendiog living, and, amongst ten thousand other facta,
proves that the most depraved and darkened human souls
are still not utterly dark, but still retain some of the
gentler feelings of our common humanity. — A black died
at W.'s place, and was buried by his comrades in a

^dbyGoogle

186 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

swampy spot, hard hj. Some lamQ Kftervarde, iii the
rainy eeaaon, they came back to W. and aaid they must
remoTe tiie body, giving the following reason : ■ — " Too
much wet and miserable, Mr. Wright Too much oold."
Accordingly, they disinterred tiie body, placed it inalatge
hollow tree, some feet above the ground, and then care-
fully stopped up the hole witli bou^ and logs. We
visited the spot, and saw the living tcnnb of the dead
black, whose memory seemed still so carefully cherished
by his tribe. This seems sufficiently to prove that Aey do
not regu^ death as annihilation.

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTER IX.

TRAVELLING IN THE BUSH — continued.

A rich Squatter't Hat^Slart for the GrampiBns — AKsnt of Uonn-
laiuFaas — Wood splitters — Great Lava Plain— Granite Tors —
The Hopkins Biver — Oasis in the burnt-up plain — Intense heat
—Hut on fire — Start for Black's Station — Kight Bivouac in the
rocky wilds — Horses lost — Head Station — Pools on aummits of
volcanic hills — Salt springs in the Plains. — Fboh Mac Itok
DiGono* TO Bbkdicio — Frozen Creek— Forest — Iron-bark tree
iDdicative of Gold — Emei^e on the Bendigo Valle; — Lava plain
in the r^nj season — Travelling inddents — Bivouac on the
banks of the Campaspe ~ Dangerous ford — Australian ferry —
Drays floated over.

The foUoiring trsvelling not«s are from a Journal of a
tour through the district of the Grampiaos, aad the vast
Tolcanic pUuna to the south of that chun, — a region ad-
nurabl;^ adapted for the pureuite of Bbeep-farming, and
now meted out amongst a niunher of opulent aquattera,
many of whom have created comfortable, and even elegant,
homes for themselvea in the wilderness, with well-fur-
nished houses, and pleasant gardens stocked witli finiit
and vegetablcB.

December 4. — Reached W.'s, near the foot of tlie
Grampians. W. has been building a large brick house
these two years, and meuiwhile lives in a wretched slab
hut. On entering it, a piano (not yet unpacked) told tlie
presence of ladies } a great rocldug-horse that of ohUdireti.

^dbyGoogle

128 THK GOLDEH COLONT.

W. himself is an estliuBiast in meemeriBm, and tries it
every night on a rheumatic eerrant, bent down with
diiteaae ; hitherto tmsucceBsful, — certainly not &om want
of faith in the operator, who wae in a state of high ex-
citement, — indeed, much more affected by the process
than the patient, who seemed quiet, stolid, and unmoved
imder the mystic passes. This was the eighth night, and
W. devotes one hour a night to it The room I dept in
woe, like the rest of the house, formed of rough slabs
covered with matting. The canvass was Imnging forlornly
from the ceiling. "Windows were of calico instead of glass.
It seemed to be a etore-room, and cont^ed sacks, bales,
boilers, boxes, &c I was kept awake half the night by
the antics of a whole menagerie of pets. The front door
was open, and a pet lamb was running in and out, pawing
and scraping close to my head. Cats were promenading
about the joists and bark roof, and capering upon my bed.
Geese and poultry were scratching and fidgetting outside
the hut; and, at early dawn, the hoarse crowing of a
cock was the signal for a general chorus from all parts of
the homestead. The proprietor of this humble hut is a
wealthy squatter and owner of 25,000 sheep, worth pro-
bably 20,000t He bad many tales of his conflicts with
the blacks in earlier days.

December 5. — Started for the Grampians, eight or ten
miles distant Heat so oppressive that I stopped some
hours during the mid-day at C's station: found the
house empty and silent. In the afternoon ^ain off for
the mountains. We struck a wood-splitter's track, and
followed it up the mountain^pass. First, a geutte rise
through gum forest and scrub, then aacended a very steep

^dbyGoogle

ASCENT OP MOUNTAIN PASS. 12^

rocky gully. Near the eummit of the chain are lofty
precipiccB of white quartzose rock, deeply furrowed yerti-
caUy. The niouiitaiiis are covered with dense forest,
■which sometimes rmis up to the very top. At the crest
of the gully, a glorious view of mountain-peaks, umbra-
geous forest, and outstretched plain below. Here you
see how narrow and saw-like are the ridges of the spurs.
Another short ascent through stringy-bark forest leads to
the highest point of the pass. The road, white as snow
from the white quartz sand which covers it, winds through
a rich green undei^;rowth. Descended by a gentle slope,
and came presently to a spring. L. told me that there is
another at the summit of the mountain. Granite crops
out here and there near the head of the pass, forming, ap-
parently, the axis of the chtuD. The sun went down, and
we continued our descent six miles by starlight to Churn-
side's Station, where L., the superintendant, whom I had
casually met in the morning, was expectmg us, and gave
me a hospitable welcome. It was half-past eight when
we arrived, and men and horses were tired out with the
mountEun scramble. There are saw-pits on the summit of
the pass, and woodmen's tracks pierce the thick forest in
all directions. The best limber is always found on the
ranges, and they carry it hence thirty and forty miles.
The sawyers work by contract, and the purchaser carries
the timber by bis own teams. Thus the wood-spHtter
opens up roads through the mountcuns, and becomes the
pioneer of transit. There is great art in selecting trees
for the axe. The exterior often looks sound and healthy
while the heart is gone. When some of the top branches
are dead, th^ know that the trunk is decayed within.

^dbyGoogle

130 THE OOLDEH COLONY.

December 6. — Started at 7 for Blacfa Station. Made
for top of a elaty range diat here points down eouth, and
loBes itself in the great lava plain. A summit on thia
range it called *' Good Morning Bill Hill," from a black
thus named who was killed here. Further north is the
pyramidal Mount Ararat, the highest of the range. Six
miles further we came to the " Rocky Bangee," — low
hills crested by huge granite rocks, grown over with
lichens, and of moat grotesque and bizarre forms and dis-
position, — globose, conical, and shapeless, forming a sort
of " Cheese Ring." Two miles further S. S. E., another
granite hill rises out of the plain. Throughout the colony,
granite never appears to be very tax from the surface,
often cropping out in small patches tlirough rocks of very
different kinds and ^ea. Before reaching the Bocky
Bangea, we crossed the Hopkins Biver dryehod. To
the north-west extended the azure ja^ed chun of the
Grampians : Mount Cole and tlie Pyrenees were visible
1o the north-east. Descending die ranges, we now tra-
versed a wide stretch of monotonous lava plain, floored
and furrowed with Dead Men's Graves; the grass already
burnt up by the sun. The smoke of Bush fires —
the dread of the squatter — was seen in the distance.
Ten miles further, we reached T. T.'s Station, nestled
in a hollow, beside a fine broad, deep water-hole, skirted
with gnarled gum-trees, which, green and flourishing
by the water's edge, contrast delightfully with the arid,
dreary pUun which encircles them, as the desert does
the oasis. The sun was so hot to-day that the wax melted
out of my riding-whip as it lay on the ground. While
here, « hut caught fire, but was quickly extinguished.

^dbyGoogle

nlGHT BIVOUAC. 131

The house is comfortahle and well fiiniiBhed, and haa a
pleasant garden overhanging the beautiful pool or water-
hole, which forms part of Fiery Creek.

At 4.45 p. H. started for Black's Station to the eoiith-
east. Steered right across the pluu for a bald hill which
shuts out Mount Emu. It was a wild and dreary rolling
country, with hollows forming swamps in winter, and
further on became rocky. The sun went down: the brief
twilight waa rapidly waning, and our horses were knocked
up ; but no station or hut was visible : nothing but the
drear, bleak plain. At last we came upon a track, fol-
lowed it awhile, then left it, and again pursued our course.
A thin crescent moon was setting. We wandered on, lead-
ing our jaded horses, ever stumbling over the rocks that
OB all sides peeped up above the aiu^ace. At length we
were fairly lost in these rough, rocky, wildering wilds. It
seemed hopeless to continue roaming on in darkness, with-
out a clue to guide ua ou our way, so I halted. The
wind blew cold and sharp. We were without water. Cold,
hungry, and thirsty, I learnt that food, fire, and water are
the real necessariet of life. Bartiem, my servant, a quon-
dam convict, with something of the " gallows look," now
made a fire, and a breakwind of bou^a ; and afler eating
a last fragment of an old damper, I was soon asleep ou the
ground, by the fire, under an overbowering banksia,
wrapped in the warm folds of my opossum-rug. For a
night bivouac, there is nothing comparable to the opossum-
rug ; and it is perhaps the only good thing the white man
has borrowed from the black.

December 7. — Starting up at dawn, I found our
horses were off I B. had tethered one to a tuft of grass,

^dbyGoogle

132 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

and he had of course dipt his cable. The morning light
showed that we were on a Bolitary moorlimd, with valley-
like depreesioBB, and here and there rough, rocky rises. A
few stunted shrubs and deformed banksias consorted well
with the craggy nooke out of which they grew. We had
no track nor clue to guide us to a station; no living
thing was in eight ; and we had neither food nor water.
B. and I started together to seek the lost horses, eteering
for the Portland Koad, which we knew mnst be not far to
the south. After walking a mile and a half, we came
upon a flock and a hut The d(^a quickly espied us, and
sounded the alarm; and the shepherd came out in his
shirt. He told us we were a mile from Black's Station,
and gave us a drink of cold water ; and no trifling gifl it
was. We went on towards the station, and presently found
our horses quietly grazing in a grassy bottom. Having
Bucceeded in securing them, we returned to oar camping
place The sun now shone out, and promised another
scorching day. Went on to Black's : found him still in
bed. He got up, and I breakfasted with him. He has
formed a good garden, by removing tiie large blocks of
lava strewn on the stir&ce (some of which required ten
bullocks to move them), and then carting-in earth. He
says he has (what are rare in this country) six springs of
clear water on hia run ; and that the hills around him,
which are all volcanic, have each a basin on the summit,
without any outlet. This may probably account for the
springs, which would then be merely the rmn-water caught
in the cups or craters on the hills, and then percolating
through the crevices till it reached some vent at the sur-
face. In the great lava phuns and valleys salt springs

^dbyGoogle

FKOH HAG IVOB DIGGINGS TO BENDIOO. 133

are not uncommon, and they appear often to exist also in
the beds of those creeks which &ow through the volcanic
districts; for the wat«r frequently becomes braddsh in
the water-holes during the summer heats, when the flow
is much reduced or altc^ether ceases, and the water-holes,
therefore, become stagnant. However unpromising this
rocky country appears at first sight, there is, in fact, none
throughout the colony better adapted for sheep. The
rocks retain the moisture beneath them, and the soil is
much richer than it is in those volcanic pluns which, from
their wavy surfece, are known as " Bay of Biscay Land."
Black told me that the grasses grow more abundantly from
being pastured by sheep, but that many valuable kinds of
herbs and weeds are being gradually destroyed. He has
just sold his station for, I tiunk, 20,0OOA

The neirt extract refers to a journey from the Mac Ivor
Diggings to Bendigo in the winter of 1853. The distance
is only thirty six miles ; but from the continued runs the
country had become almost impassable, and we were
nearly four days on the road. The track passes first
along the green valley of the Mac Ivor Creek (which had
been frozen over one night during this month of June),
then traverses a forest, after which it emerges on one of
the open lava plains, so common in this country, and
crosses the Biver Campaspe, which, though eawly ford-
able during the summer; was now a broad, rushing river.
It then traverses a mixed country of forest, with grassy
glades and open patches of pasturage, and next enters on
the Ranges of the Bendigo gold district, wholly clothed

^dbyGoogle

134 THE OOLDEN COLONY.

with thick forest, in which the hard, ra^etl, iron-bark tree
is conspicuous. The Biimmit« of the ridges are mostly
coTored with white quartz gravel, and thie, as well as die
iron-bark, indicates that gold is not &r off. At lengdi
one of the singolar insulated White Hills of fieudigo
appears, with white mounds of upturned earth on its crest
and sides ; and presently yon emerge irom the forest on
the Crreat Yalley of Bendigo, shut in on the opposite eide
by steep, forested hills and grassy escarpments, with its
broad alluvial bottom burrowed by innumerable pits and
sliafls, and covered with the dug-up yellow earth. On
the lower slopes, and in the valley-bottom, are a thousand
snow-white tents, and here and there a line of waving
flags marks the stores along the main line of traffic

The following extract refers to our crossing the lava
plain and the River Campaspe : —

They talk of Corduroy Roads in America, but I should
like to show them a mile or two of this road. Tma^ne a
stony plain, the surface entirely covered with large
swampy holes filled with water, slush, and glutinous mud.
Then throw into these hollows a number of angular blocks
of stone, half-concealed by the muddy water, and you
have a very feint conception of our road. Now one wheel
is lifted high over one of these rocks, then plump it goes
down into the hole. The trial was too severe for the
wheels of my spring cart, and while plunging into one
very deep hole two of the spokes snapped. After wash-
ing off the clotted mud from the spokes to discover the
extent of the damage, we had then and there to unload
the cart, heavily laden, all in the mud, and to splice the
spokes ; then to re-load one-half, convey it to the further

byGoogle

LAVA PLAIN IS THE BAiST SEASON. 135

end of thia dreadful hog, retom again for the other half,
and, fimdly, convey our ill-fated ba^age, in three portiona,
down a steep hill to the brink of the swollen river — the
Campaspe, or, as the carriers call it, the " Campacity."
Here we pitched our tent, and camped for the night, close
to the stJ-eam, and near some other tents whose owners were
also w^ting to cross the river. I was standing by our
camp fire ; my man, wet and weary, had gone to rest. The
moon shone bright above. The camp was now ^ent and
the diggers asleep. A horseman rode up and asked if it
were poBsible to ford the river. I replied that I thought
not. I had just been walking down along the hanks to
the ford, which was a quarter of a mile lower. There the
fuU, rushing river foamed along, gleaming bright in the
moonlight: a little island divided it into two streams.

The passage looked anything but inviting. I had, too,
just before sunset, seen a cart driven over, and the horses
could barely keep their footing, while the cart was nearly
under water ; and, had not the driver known the crossing
well, all would have been submerged together. However,
the new comer said he was on an Important mission to
counter-order some drays loaded with stores for the Mao
Ivor Dig^gs, and very anxious to cross that night I
said that his employer could not expect him to peril his
life. He replied, that " Mr. Brown was a dreadful man"
At length off he rode to examine the ford himself. After
an interval, I heard him cantering up the opposite bank
of the river. Then followed some talk with a party
camped on the other dde opposite to us ; and, af^r another
long interval, as I lay in bed, I heard his horses' hoofs
clattering away, as he pursued hia moonlight journey

^dbyGoogle

138 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

through the Bush. Kext day I found he had had to twim
his horse over the river, the ford being impaaaable ; and,
having got well wetted (for in swimming the water goes
clean over the saddle), he had halted by the firet camp
fire he met with to strip and dry himseli*. So that this
" dreadful Mr. Brown," at any rate, gets his business
zealously executed. So many lives have been lost in
swimming horses over swollen rivers, that the old settlers
will now never attempt it, unless impelled by ui^nt
necessity.

Next morning beheld us and many others, horsemen,
pedestrians, carriers with drays and long teams of bullocks,
all anxious to cross the river. There were three ponder-
ous drays, clotted with mud, and heavily laden with flour
m sacks, and sugar in bags of matting, all coated with
mud, showing that the drays, which had been some months
on the road from Melbourne, had been more than once
boggedy and the goods turned out in l^e mire. Neither
flour nor sugar would be worth the carriage when it
reached the mines. The only means for transporting
both goods and men over the flooded river were a boat of
moderate size and a square, leaky punt, the seams of which
were open. But Australian diggers are not easily baffled.
Some sailors who chanced to be in the crowd that had
gathered round the ferry presently dragged the punt out
of the water, turned her over, bottom up, examined and
caulked the defective seams with a clasp knife and the
materials of an old rope. The punt was soon ready for
service, and loaded. There was but one man to work the
ferry ; so that of course all had to take care of themselves
and their goods, and get them over as they could. This

^dbyGoogle

CROaSING THE CAMPA8PE. 137

was gradually accomplislied amid some confuBion and a
vast deal of swearing, blasphemy, and rough jests- The
nver bank was steep, wet, slippery, and soon trodden into
mire ; and, as our baggage had to be first piled up on one
side, then ferried over, piled up on the opposite margin of
the stream, and finally carried up the bank, every article
got well smeared with mud. But the cart and horse
remun. How are they to get over ? Thus : the horse is
taken to the ford and swum over by the ferryman. The
empty cart is drawn down to the water's edge ; a large,
empty cask is lashed to the inside ; and the cart is then
launched backwud into the river, and, being buoyed up
by the cask, is pulled over by means of a rope drawn by a
man in the boat ; and finally dragged up the opposite bank
by half a score of hands tu^ng at the rope. Thus we
cross unbridged rivers in Australia; and thus we battle
down difficulties. What a stride between such a transit
over a river and that of a ndlway train, flying through the
aeiial tubes of the Britannia Bridge !

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTER X.

BU8HBANOEB8.

Fadlitiea tor depredAtiona — Habiu of ilie BnehrNigen — Tbeir
haunts — The Bkck Forest — " Sticking up " — Encounter with
Tuffiana — Obtuse police — Van Diemen's Land deaperadoea —
Fourteen men tied up by two robbers — Their escape to Victo-
ria — Extraordinary capture at Melbourne — Gold Escort Robbery
— Capture of the robbers — Suicide of the approver.

If the Auatroliaii roads in winter may be well likened to
those English roads of '200 years ago, out of which the
king's coach had to be dug bj the rustics, so may the
Austsralian bushranger be regarded as the legitimate re-
presentative of the traditionary highwayman, who levied
toll at Highgate, or stopped the post-boy and captured the
mail-bags in Epping Forest The real, living bushranger
is, however, more of a ruffian and less of a hero than our
ideal highwayman ; for time, like distance, softens down
the harsh and the coarse, and gives dignity to the ignoble.
Never, perhaps, did a country offer so tempting a field
to the public robber as Victoria during the first year or
two after the gold discovery. The interior was wild and
uninhabited, abounding with lonely forests. TraveUers
were numerous, and mostly carried money or gold ; for
none were poor. The roadside public-houses were d^y
the scenes of drunken revelry. The police were few and

^dbyGoogle

HABITS OP BUSHRANGEr.S, 139

untrained : and the mixed and Bcattered population at the
several diggings offered a ready asylum in case of pursuit.
Add t« aU this that, separated from Victoria by a mere
strut, was the depdt for the most accomplished villains of
Great Britain, and it needed no prophet to foresee that
the roads of the new gold country would very soon be
swarming with thieves and desperadoes. Many of this
class made their way to San Francisco firom Sydney a
few years earlier, and there the " Sydney men " soon
became infamous and hateful ; but a timely stop was put
to Uieir atrocities by the sharp, short work of Lynch law.
It never came to this in Australia; though at one time
matters Looked very threatening at the mines ; and X have
myself seen a ruffian, who had just shot a man, being
dragged along by an iniuriate crowd, many of whom
fiercely shouted " Hang him up 1"

The bushranger has no fixed abode. His favourite
resort is in the forest-roads leading to some newly-opened
divings. He has exteomve acquaintance among the
keepers of " sly gn^-shops," and can always find covert
and shelter in those rendezvous of vice and crime.
Having by a series of outn^ea in one locality awakened
the vigilance of the police, he cuts right across the country
to some distant di^^ngs, and is quickly lost in a crowd
where all are ignorant even of the names of their next
neighbours.

During the first year of the gold era they grew em-
boldened by success and impunity, and were not scrupu-
lous in appearing iu places of public reaorL ITie practised
eye of the di^er readily distinguishes the dress, air, and
behaviour of the regale bnahraager. Yon might see

^dbyGoogle

140 THE GOLDEN COLONf.

them, startiog on a campaign, on the great roada leading
out of Melbourne to the Mines. There are a pair of them,
well-mounted, and wrapped up in great coats and com-
forters ; they have a quiet, reeerved wr, and keep a Httle
aloof from the mwin line of traffic. They always go
armed with loaded reTolvera; but these are kept con-
cealed. They put up at night at the inns like other
travellers, ordering supper and beds, and duly paying
their bills in the morning. There ia a well-known house
called the " Bush Inn," on the road to Mount Alexander,
and near the skirts of tiie lonely " Black Forest," which
extends for miles over the ranges of Mount Macedon,
about forty miles from Melbourne. They resorted in
ench numbers to this inn, that the ostler told me he knew
a dozen of them, and could readily identiiy some of the
most notorious. While at the inn they never committed
violence, though they might, perhaps, quietly rob some of
the drunken diggers that were usually hanging about the
house, or sleeping under the verandah. I remember
witnessing the conetemation of one such on awaking and
finding his gold-b^ taken, and, a few yards o£f, pick-
ing up the top of the bag, which had been cut ofif* and
thrown away. The ^oomy " Black Forest " has been the
scene of many an outrage ; and no place could be conceived
more favourable to the marauder; for the country is
mountainous and densely wooded ; while close at hand are
the solitary, forested wilds of Mount Macedon, whither
the victim may be carried off and never heard of more till
the day of doom.

The bushranger, however, does not always travel on
horse. Some diBcovered a more easy'^iug mode of pro-

^dbyGoogle

ENCOUKTEB WITH EUPFIANS. 14!

eecating their trade. In the dead of night they carry
off a new spring-cart from the yard of a Melbourne tradea-
maa. Next morning they start on their trayele. Having
selected a Yictim on the public road, they drive right
across the path, seize the bridle, and present pistols.

In order to escape pursuit and capture, they frequently
tie up those whom they have robbed to a neighbouring
tree. There they must remain till liberated by some
chance passer-by. Sometimes they barbarously beat those
whom they have stopped and " stuck up," but who have
nothing worth stealing about them. On the other hand,
they will, if requested, sometimes give back a trinket or
a few shillings to one who pleads poverty.

There is anotlier and lower class of ruffians, who prowl
about the outskirts of the towns and divings on foot,
singly or in piurs. I once encountered two of them at
nightfall, near the Fryer's Creek Piggiogs, on a main
road in the forest, and about a quarter of a mile from the
tents of the diners, in one of the principal gullies. I
was on foot, alone, looking after two horses which I had
lost that morning. Two men in blue serge shirts sud-
denly appeared on the road, walking towards me, and
when within a few paces both presented pistols. One
was a tall, powerful fellow, with a grave, sullen, and de-
termined expression. He advanced with a pistol in each
hand. The other was smaller, and evidently rather
nervous at his work, as though it was new to him. He
did the bidding of the first. When within a yard they
paused, and told me to drop the riding-whip in my hand.
The tall, scowling ruffian stood calndy with a pistol in
each hand, pointed at and dose to my head. The other

^dbyGoogle

142 THE GOLDEM (X)LONT.

advanced, and having first felt to satiefy himself I had do
concealed pistol, proceeded to rifle my pockets. The only
object of value I had wae a gold Geneva watch, an old
companion of long Izavel by sea and land. The second
robber seemed much flurried, certainly far more so than I,
and was very anxious to be oft As I looked seardungly
on the &ce of the taller man, he swore a deep convict

oath that he would blow "my b- y brains out if I

looked at him." However, they offered no violence nor
other insult ; and having replied to my question, whether
Ihey had seen the lost horses, the second robber hurriedly
repeated " good night" three or four times, and both left
the road and plunged into the depths of the forest.
' It chanced that not long afterwards there was a horse-
race at these diggings, and among the crowds there
assembled I suddenly encountered the tall, sullen robber.
Being anxious to track him to his Ifur, where I thought I
might find my watch, I reported the case to the police on
the ground, and begged the officer to set some one to
watch the man. Soon ailer I was vexed to hear that
they had lost sight of him in the crowd. However, I
now went myself in quest among the thousands collected
on the valley-flat and on the encircling rocky hills ; nor
was it long before I recognised the muscnlar frame and
silent scowl of the robber, who was quietly seated on a
grassy slope overlooking the com-se, with a companion
whose countenance told plainly that he belonged to the
sune class of outcasts &om society. Two policemen were
now ordered to watch the man to lus home. It will
hardly be believed that, after a time, these astute oon«
stables returned together to their chief, to report that they

^dbyGoogle

VAN DIEMEN'S LAMD DESPERADOES. 143

Had watched their man till he had entered & certmu tent
which they could point out. A party was then despatched
to the tent in question, entered, and found that the bird
had flown.

It is no onconunon occurrence in the Australian colo-
nies for a lai^ number of shearers or others collected in
a hat in the country to be " stuck up," that ie, subdued and
bound, by two or three determined bushrangers. Fifteen
or ^t£en strong active men may be thaa treated, and
have been frequently. At first one is ready to conclude
either that they must have a private understanding with
the robbers or else be the veriest poltroons. T thought
BO myself till I had an account of one of these oSaire from
a man who had been one of a large party thus " stuck up"
by two very notorious bushrangers, the life and death of
whom would furnish materials for a romance. Their
names were Dalton and Kelly, and they will long be
famous in the annals of daring and outrage in Van Die-
men's Land. Dalton was a stout, power^ man, and
about thirty years of age at the time of the rencontre I
am about to describe. His accomplice, Kelly, was about
twenty-three years old. They were both prisoners of the
Crown in Van Diemen's Land. Dalton was transported
at an early age, and had for a time been confined in the
" Ocean HeU" of Norfolk Island, the gaol of the double-
damned convict ; but was afterwards taken back to Van
Diemen's Land. From the same infonuant I Icamt 8(»nc
particulars of their escape. They were confined in a
penal establishment on a strait or an arm of the sea, wide
enough, as it was thought, to preclude the possiblKty of
fii^t. Dalton, Kelly, and five or six other prisoners,

^dbyGoogle

144 TH£ GOLDEN COLONY.

however, weary of a wretched life, determined to riak
that life for liber^ ; and having one day eluded the vi^-
lance of their guaidB, attempted, though their legs were
weighed down with fetters, to swim to the opposite shore.
One after another their strength failed them ; they eank
and disappeared, till at length only Kelly and Dalton
survived. Kelly's strength was rapidly waning, when
Dalton called out to him, " Catch hold of me, Kelly I I
can swim another hour yet." When at last they hoth got
ea£e to land, Dalton excl^med, " Well, thank God, I shall
have one comrade at any rate."

They now quickly freed themaelves fttnn their irons,
procured arms, and, knowing that they would cert^nly
he hotly pursued, they at once started on a marauding
expedition, visitjng the neighhouring statjons in suoces-
sion, and pillaging each ; intending, eventually, to make
their way across Baas's Straits to Victoria. Dalton was a
very formidable fellow ; strong, active, and resolute, reck-
less of human life, and now rendered desperate by despair.
He was, too, a first-rate marksman, and " could stick np
a glass bottle." At least, so said my informant, who was
at that time a free servant on one of the stations at-
tacked by the bushrangers. What follows is in substance
his account of what happened on that occasion, and may
be taken as a sample of a class of outrages not very un-
common in Van Diemen's Land : —

" Kelly cune up to the hut, which was fiill of men. I
was standing at the door at the time, but did not know
who the man was. When he came close, he asked if I
had heard that the bushrangers were out- I answered,
' Yes, I kid.' Then he pointed his gun at me, and s^d,

^dbyGoogle

FOCBTEEN UBK TIED UP BT TWO BOBBEBS, t45

* I'm one of tliem. Go into the hut' I went in ; but,
on turning round, I saw one of my mates standing a^net
the hut in a comer, with another man standing over him,
covering him with his gun. This other was Dalton,
Kelly's mate. After I had gone into the hut, Kelly
stood at the open doorway, with his gun pointed at those
inside, swearing he would murder the first man who moved
an inch. There were about fourteen men in the hut.
Then he asked if there were any prisoners among them.
One man said that he was. Kelly then ordered him to
tie their arms tt^ther, one by one. While doing bo, one
man compbuned that he was being tied too tight; but
this only drew forth ano&er Tolley of oaths and threats
from Kelly. When all were secured, Kelly went out to
assist Dalton, who still stood over the man whom he had
pinned to the wall of the hut, threatening to shoot him if
he stirred. Kelly then tied up his hands, while Dalton
continued covering him with his gun. He was then
marched into the hut to join the others. And now Dalton
began walking up and down the but, haranguing his
prisoners. He'd no doubt, he said, that some of them
might be good and honest men, and some b y scoun-
drels. That for his part he wouldn't hurt a hair of any
good man's head, if he could help it. But he had been
forced to take to this sort of life. It wasn't his iault. He
had been lagged [transported] when only twelve yeara
old : had since then over and over again tried to obtun his
freedom by good conduct. But they woiddn't ^ve it
him, and it was useless to try any more by fiur means.
And he had now sworn to giun hia freedom, or lose his
life in the attempt. He didn't want to hurt any one.

^dbyGoogle

146 THE GOLDEN COLOHT.

What he wanted waa money ; and money he would have,
come what, come might. He'd ahow them presently
whether he was game or not He'd go into the Master's
house and bring out, single-handed, the man he wanted,
no matter how many he might find there. But let them
beware. If any man dared to move ot tried to escape, he
Bwore he'd scatter lue brains about the yard, and blow die
roof off his head."

Dalton now left the hut and went to the house of the
settler their master, which was close at hand. All this
time the household knew nothing of what had been pass-
ing in the hut. He entered, and went straight up to the
sittiug-room, where seTcral gentlemen and ladies hap-
pened to be collected. He opened the door, and delibe-
rately adranced with hie gun pointed at those within.
But a lady, who chanced to be beliind the door, on seeing
the levelled gun, slammed the door in the robber's face.
This was a timely diversion, and the signal for a general
scattering of those present.

The men in the hut were subsequently tried for col-
lusion with the bushraDgers. But when asked how they
could suffer two men to " stick up " so many, one replied
to the magistrate that, with their pennission, he would
hiniBelf " stick up" the whole Benoh. The free servants
were acquitted ; those of the party who were prisoners
of the Crown were sentenced to imprisonment; but, on
government being petitioned by their free mates, who
protested the innocence of all, tiiey were liberated.

After this the two bushrangers boldly carried on their
depredations, roaming about from station to station, gtick-
tTig up the men and robbing the masters ; while a large

^dbyGoogle

E3CAPE OF E0BBEE6 TO TICTOBIA. 147

party of the police were following on their track. One
day they came to a hut fiill of men, and, opening the door,
tried die old plan of intimidation by standing with loaded
double-barreled piece in the doorway, and threatening
with deep oaths to " drop " the first man of them who
moved hand or foot. But it happened that several of the
pursuing conatables were within the hut. One of them,
named Buckmaster, rushed towards D^ton. The robber
fired, and die conetable fell dead. Dalton still stood un-
moved in the doorway, with hie levelled gun, and calmly
eaid, "Ah, how d'ye like that? Now, then, I'm ready
for another!" Tbia coolness saved them both, and for
this time they escaped capture. But such an outrage on
one of their officers roused the gorenunent, A lai^e
reward was offered for the capture of the two bush-
rangers, and they were hunted through the island more
hotly than ever. JDriven to desperation, they seized upon
a whaleboat ; by threats pressed fonr boatmen into their
service, and actually compelled them to work the boat
across Bass's Struts to the opposite shores of Victono.
Here they safely landed on the solitary coast of Western
Port, and made their way up to Melbourne. News of the
escape of these fonnidable and blood-stained freebooters
had been immediately transmitted to the authorities of
Victoria, As they had left Van Diemen's Land in an open
whaleboat tiiere was no doubt but tiiat they would make
for the Western Port shores; and the Victoria police,
stimulated by the hope of a large reward, were keenly
looking out for two persons answering to the published
description of the robbers. The boatinen who had con-
veyed them across the Strut were seen and arrested at

^dbyGoogle

148. THE GOLD£!T COLONT.

DandeDOiig, between Western Port and the capital ; bat
no fiirtber trace of the bushrangera could be obtained.
The Melbourne newspapers furnish us with the conclusion
of the tragedy.

The following account of the capture of the chief of
these desperadoes, from the Melbourne '* Argns," is more
like a page from a romance than a passage in real life
It is one more instance of what appears like a special
Providence laying its resistless hand on a murderer at the
Tcry moment when he seemed to have secured his escape,
and dragging him forth to public justice. Wifliin four
hours afler his capture, Dalton would have been on board
a ship bound for England.

" Between eleven and twelve o'clock on Friday night,
Xlalton entered a cofifee-shop, in Bourke Street, in company
with a man who had engaged to put him on board the
Northumberland at daylight the next morning, from
Sandridge, and for which he was to pay 4/. This man,
we understand, was quite ignorant of the person he was
bargaining with. Dalton asked the proprietors of the
shop if they could change him some Van Dlemen's Land
notes for gold, as he was about to embark for England.
They could not do it, but a gentleman named Brice, for-
merly a cadet in the police force, suspecting all was not
right, said that he could, as he was a gold-broker, if
Dalton would only accompany him to his office. To this
Dalton consented, and placed three 201. and one lOZ.
notes of tlie Launceston bank in his hands. They then
left the shop together ; the night was extremely dark ;
the stranger, however, led the way, Dalton and the boat-
man following close behind. After proceeding some little"

^dbyGoogle

CAPTUBE AT UELBOUBHE. 149

way, they turried into Little Collina Street, and by the
back entrance, into the yard of the Police Court. Here
it was so dark that the outline of the building conld not
be dJBtinguiehed. The guide then shoved them tbe door
of bis alleged office, whioh was no other tban the clerk's
room of the Swaneton Street watchbouEe. The man at
the door was in plain clothes, and within were several of
the detective officers, and two watchbouee keepers at the
books, all, however, in private costume. Once In, Mr.
Brice stated that he had brought these men to ibe station
on suspicion of having come by the notes wrongfully.
Dalton at this time must have known where he was, but
made no observation beyond affirming that they were his,
and making some remarks relative to his being brought
there on so paltry an accusation. During this, he was
smoking a cigar, and behaving himself in a careless non-
chalant manner. Meanwhile, the detectives were making
use of their eyes, and seeing if the descriptions they pos-
sessed corresponded with the figure before them. The
watchhouse keeper finding that Mr. Brice had no charge
to prefer against him, returned Dalton his notes, who was
about to leave the office, when detectives Williams,
Murray, and Eason pounced upon him, and fixed him in a
comer. D^ton endeavoured to draw a pistol from his
belt, but was prevented and overpowered. Finding him-
self mastered, he said, ' You have got the reward of 500/.
My name is Dalton I' He then said, that if be hod only
seen the bars of the station-house window as he was enter-
ing, he would have sent a ball through his conductor. He
further said, that he had been in the Police Court that
morning, and had recolleoted going up a flight of steps

^dbyGoogle

150 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

which he did not eee that oi^t, as he had been led in the
back-waj, and had he but seen those et«pBf his guide
would have been a dead nian. He was then handcuffed
and searched, and two large horse-pistola heavily loaded
and capped, besides a small one, were taken from his belt :
he was then locked up. On Saturday morning he was
brought up before Dr. Greeves, J.P., at the District
Court, chained with the miirder of Joseph fiuckmaeter,
in Van Diemeu's Land. The articles found upon the
prisoner were then produced, and were as follows ; — Two
large horse-pistole, and one small one, all heavily loaded ;
two gold watches and guards, one of which was a lady's
watch, of most chaste worlananship, and to one of the
guards a gold locket was attached; a silver watch and
guard, two gold chfuns of a massive description, three
gold rings, a nugget of gold, eighty-nine sovereigns, and
two half-sovereigns, three 20/. notes and a lOf. note of
the Commercial Bank of Van Diemen's Land, 15s. in
silver, two leather bags, a purse with clasp, a steel stock-
buckle, a apecimen, a gold pencil-case with yellow topaz
at top, a ring in a caee set with diamonds, pearls, and
turquoises ; a gold seal, a short gold ch^n, with seal and
key attached, and two locks of hair, evidently to use as
moustaches."

The following evidence, by one of those who had en-
countered these robbers, gives a picture of bushranging
in Van Diemen's Land : — "I am a land surveyor, re-
siding in Melbourne. On the 30th of December I pro-
ceeded to Van Diemen's Land by the Clarence steamer.
On Thursday following, the 6th of January, I was on
horseback riding towards Avoca, and when about a

^dbyGoogle

BUSHBANGINQ 151

quarter of a mile from Duxborough's publiohouee, I was
stopped by the prisoner and another man. They were
both on horseback. These men rode up, and each prer
eented a double-barrelled gun on either side of my head.
The prisoner then exclaimed, * Who are you? and what
are you about ? We are the two buehrangers that you
have heard of being oat. We've shot two constablee this
morning ; and you must out with what you've got, or we
will as soon make^ou the third aa any one else !' I then
gave Dalton my purae, containing three 201. notes, issued
at Launceston, — but those produced are not the eajne;
eighteen sovereigns, and two or three shillings, a small
clasp purse, and a gold ring. When I gave the prisoner
the bag, I said, ' It is a very bard case for me to be left
on the road without money.' He replied, ' No, we will
not leave you without any,' and gave me two half-crowns
and a shilling. They then made me take the saddle and
bridle off my horse, and lead it 200 or 300 yards off
through a slip panel into a paddock. The men then said,
' We are now going to Captain Crear's. We don't wish
to shoot the horse, but don't want to be followed.' At
this they ^^oped off."

Daltqn seemed perfectly reckless, confessed to having
perpetrated, not only the murder for which he wae
arraigned, but other crimes, and said he wished that the
next morning was appointed for his execution.

Kelly, the other accomplice, was arrested the next day,
and both were sent back to Van Diemen's Land, tried,
and executed.

One of the most remarkable and daring outrages re-

^dbyGoogle

152 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

corded in tluB or any otber countrj was the attack on the
troop of the Crold ^Escort Company, while convoying gold
from the mineB to Melhoume, in July 1853. Shortly
afler the opening of the gold fields, Croremment eatsbliebed
a regular escort service between the principal diggings
and the capitaL Ae it seemed probable that this would
prove a lucrative buuness, a private company was
establi^ed to share with Government the work and the
gun. After subsisting for about a yeiy: it was dissolved.
A new Gompany arose upon its ruins, but wi^out much
prospect of success. In a country where hay is 40/. or
501. a ton, and a common labourer's wages are IQs. a day,
it may be conceived that the cost of maintaining efficient
escorts must be very considerable ; and the company soon
discovered that their expenditure exceeded their receipts.
They consequently practised the most rigid, and, as it
proved, most fatal economy, and reduced their armed
guard to four men and an officer in chaige,-^a number
.wholly inadequate for the safe convoy of thousands of
ounces of gold through wild forests, in a country swarm-
ing with thrice-convicted felons. However, a longinunu-
nity from attack had induced such a sense of complete
security, that it is now known that the troopers would
sometimes ride by the side of the gold cart with their car-
bines unloaded, never dreaming of the possibility of a aur-
prise. Among the many miscreants who prowled about
the Mac Ivor Diggings at this period were some who had
noticed the weakness of the guard, and their yet confident
sense of security ; and incited by the prospect of large
booty, they formed a conspiracy for waylaying and robbing
the Escort troop, whilst conveying the treasure to Mel-

^dbyGoogle

GOLD EBCOBT .BOBBEBT. 133

bourne. The spot selected for the attack wae in a forest
about ten miles from Mac Ivor. Here the robbers, six in
number, proceeded, one mormng in July ; and having
erected a mi-mi, or Bcreen of boughs, by the road-side,
they awiuted the arrival of the Escort troop. What then
followed wae thus deecribed, when the men were arrwgned
at the police court at Melbourne. The first extract is
&om the evidence of one of the troopers, and the second
that of one of the -robbers who had turned Queen's evi^
dence or approver.

** We were escorting gold and specie from Mac Ivor
to Kyneton, vtd tbe road to Melbourne. When we
reached about four miles on Mac Ivor side of the Mia
Mia Inn, I saw Sergeant Duins, who was then riding
in advance, motion with hie hand to the right wde of
the road.. I followed his motioD, and that moment we
received a volley of shots from a sort of miar-mia on the
side of the road. I was not shot down in the first in-
stance, and drawing my pistol, fired at a man, who fired
at me at the same time. I received hia discharge in the
neck, jaw, and' nose, and tumbled from my horse. When
on the ground I noticed two men, one on each wheel ; they
drew the boxes (contuuing the gold and specie) out of the
cart, when some other men lifted them up and conveyed
them into the Bush. Looking around, I saw Fooks, the
driver, and trooper Froaswater lying on the ground. I
asked them whether they were hurt, when Fooks replied,
* I am a dead man.' "

" When the approver wae introduced into Court, dark
and bitter ecowls of hate and vengeance were darted at
him by some of the prisoners j but he appeared compara-

nd byGooglc

IM THE GOLDEN COLONT.

tivelj unmoved, and gave the following evidence io a calm
and firm, thoagh low tone of voice : —

" My n«ne ia John Francis, and I arrived in Van Die-
men's Land under a sentence of ten yeara' transportation.
My sentence has not yet expired, but will in September,
On the 20th July last, I left the Mac Ivor in company with
George Francis (my brother), Geoi^e Wilson, George Mel-
ville, William Atkins, and Joseph Grey. I now recognise
Melville, Wilson, and Atkins, as three of the party named.
We went tliroiigh the bush from the Mac Ivor towards
the Mia Mia Inn, and stopped on the side of the road
a few miles from the inn alluded to. We soon after heard
the Private Escort coming up, and it was now between
ten and eleven in the morning. Previous to this we ar-
ranged a few branciies of trees, and placed two men behind,
the rest of them (and I) being stationed behind t^ees about
thirty yards higher up the road. I heard some person of
tiie Kscort cry halt, and on looking out, I saw some of
the troopers firing at the two men behind the branches.
We then, the rest of us, rushed down to their aseistonce.
We all challenged the Escort men to stand, when they
refused, and fired on us, when a general fight commenced.
I fired at the Escort troop and observed four of the
troopers wounded ; two of the latter escaped, and two of
OS, viz., myself and the prisoner Wilson, followed them,
calling upon them to surrender. They replied by shoots
ing at us, and galloping away. I and Wilson then went
down the road, and gathering up all the fire-arms we could
see, we followed Atkins, Melville, Grey, and George
Francis, who preceded us into the Bush, whither the boxes
of gold had been carried, and we then took the gold out

^dbyGoogle

QOLD SBCO£T BOBBfiST. 155

of the boxes. It was whilst I and Wilson were after the
two men t^t the gold had been removed £rom the oart.
Where the gold waa taken out of the boxes was some
200 yardfl from off the road into the budi, and afler doing
8o, we travelled about seven miles through the country
tltat day, and camped in the Bueh. We resumed our
route on iiie following morning, having first divided the
gold. We passed the second night by a river's side, on
Mollison's run, and continued our rout« in the same direc-
tion, always keeping the Bush and avoiding the road-
The next night we parsed in the Bush, near Kilmore, and
then on the Sunday morning we all left together for Mel-
bourne, but separated on coming to the Hooky Water
Holes, Grey and George Francia accompanying me into
Melbourne. That night we reached town, and proceeded
to my house at CoUiugwood Flat, where I saw Wilson
and Atkins, it being previously arranged that we were to
meet there. They remained at my house all night. On
the day before I was apprehended I saw the prisoner Mel-
ville, when he told me he was going to the Mauritius.
The last time I saw Grey, he said he was going to Adelaide.
The prisoner Wilson, I, and my brother were to have
started for Kngland in the Madagascar, and we had accord-
ingly engaged passages in that vessel. My wife and
George Francis's wife were to go with us. The confession
. was voluntary on my part, and there was no inducement
held out to me. After the confession, Captain Mac Mahon
told me that he would send me a free man from the colony,
with my wife. On arranging for this attack, we had re-
solved, if possible, not to take human life ; for we thought
we could get the gold without firing."

^dbyGoogle

156 THE OOLDEH COLONT.

T!ie perpetrators of thia robbery were convicted under
remarkable circumstances. Several peraons having been
arrested on euspicioQ by the detective police, one of them
named Francis, allured by the offer of a free pardon and
SOOi, reward, and a passage out of the colony ", confessed
his guilt, and turned Queen's evidence. But after having
identified and aided in capturing several of Ms accompUces,
he seems to have repented of his treachery, and made hia
escape. He was quickly recaptured, and for a short time
shut up in one cell with four of those against whom he
had offered evidence. During that joint confinement,
they doubtless heaped on the falae conspirator the bitterest
scorn and execration (and such men have a fiendish
eloquence of their own), and the unhappy wretch was so
overcome with hia own accumulated guilt and treachery,
that he took advantage of the momentary absence of his
guards (who had suffered him to retire to the closet,) to
cut his throat with a razor. His keepers, hearing a noise,
entered, and found the robber in hia death stm^les, wel-
tering in his blood. There now appeared no available
evidenoe againat the captured robbers ; but shortly afler-

* The following ia Francis's catalogue rauotmi of the robbers : —
George Francis (hiraself), John Francis, Joe Gray aliaa M'Nultjr
(who could be found at Tommj Coulon'a house, in Little Bourke
Street), another named BiUy, boarding at the house of the brother of
tiie proprietor of the Bush Inn ; Boh Harding (at M'Evoj'b tent,
opposite the Private Escort Companj, M'Itot) ; George Elston (a
fighting man, with one tooth out, to be found at M'lvor) { George
Uelville, George Wilson, two others, names unkQOwD, one of them
about twentj-Beven years of age, went by the name of " Little Billy, "
who lived with a woman niimed Kitty, down the road on the left hand
«de near the Bald Hill, Mlvor.

^dbyGoogle

GOVEBNMENT ESCORT 8BEVICE. 157

wards, the brother of the suicide, who wae alio &d accom-
plice, came forward aad offered to turn approver in his
brother's place.

Eventually, all were captured except one, and three
were executed. The booty taken by the robbers was
2000 ounces of gold, beddes specie. The afiair proved a
deathblow to the company, whose operatdons soon afteiv
wards ceased. The Govenuuent Escort Service is now
performed by soldiers of a foot re^ment of the line,
mounted and clothed for this special service. They ride
with drawn swords behind the tr^ of gold carta, and with
their scarlet shirte and long boots form a gay and pic-
turesque troop.

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTER XI.

COHMEBCE AND RETENUE. PRODUCE OF GOLD.

Period prior to the gold era — First effect of the di»oOTeries — He-
action and commercial activltj — High prices — Fabulous adf ance
,in rents — Meagre Bu[>plieti from Europe — Reactionary repletion

— Other cau^8 of depreased marketB — Yet no commercial crisis —
And whj not — Monetary phenomena — Extinction of the tallow
staple — ParaUel facts in other gold countrieB — Maximum prices
at the mines — Increase in the capital of the country — In the
number of email capitalists — In exports and imports — In revenue

— Annual produce of gold.

A VIEW of the commerce, revenue, and wealth of Mel-
bourne, during the last three or four years, shows some-
thing more than the commercial growth of a rising city-
It is, rather, youth starting up at a bound to the full
maturity of mMihood.

From the founding of the colony up to the year 1851,
when gold was discovered, Melbourne had made rapid
Btrides in commerce and population, interrupted only by
a period of about three years' depression and bankruptcy,
beginning in 1841. The first house was built in No-
vember 1835. In 1836, tbe population was 224 souls.
In 1850, the exports amounted to l,042,000t In 1853,
they exceeded 9 millions sterling.

Since the discovery of gold, in September 1851, the

^dbyGoogle

TRADE UNDER THE GOLD BBA. 159

c of the fiountry has passed through three phases :
sU^nation, exoeseive activity, anA depression.

DuriDg the first fever of exoltement caused by the
sudden glitter of the treasures of Ballarat, trade, as irell
as all other routine operatious, seemed suddenly paralysed.
Shops, warehouses, and ships were alike deserted. But
this quickly passed away. Before the end of the year
eonunerce revived to more than its wonted activity; and
from that time, continually increased in every depart-
ment, yielding, till the beginning of 1853, enormous
profits to all concerned in it. Then were seen the first
signs of a depression, which gradually extended till it
affected all kinds of merchandise. This period of lull has
continued till the present time, being merely the inevit-
able reaction upon the state of paroxysmal activity which
had preceded it.

In the j'car 1852, every thing conspired in raising
prices to an unprecedented height.

The markets were hare. The population was every
week augmenting, while the supplies bore a decreasing
ratio to the demand. The price of all labour and trans-
port had greatiy advanced and Continued advancing.
But, above all, the influx of gold was eo great and so
sudden that its value, in relation to other uiiclee, neces-
sarily declined.

In the meantime the gains by trade were eo large that
shops and warehouses were eagerly sought, and rente
rose higher and higher, till they had reached an almost
f tbulous standard. Thus it was no uncommon thing for a
piece of land in one of the main streets (with, perhaps, some
old wooden buildings on it), which had been leased for

^byGoogle

IfiO THE GOLDEN COLONT.

60i or 70/. a-year, to be now nnderiet for 10007. or
1500/. a-year. Another cause teiiJed to raise the value
of houses and lands. A vast number of persons by suc-
cessful mining had become small capitaUsta ; and very
many of these purchased land ; houses and land being
then almoat the sole mode of ioTestment in the colony.

It has been already said that, during 1852, the supplies
were very inadequate to the increasing demands. Every
day ships entered the harbour with a living freight of
consumers, either from Europe, America, or the adjacent
colonies. There was also an overland tide of immigrataoQ
from Adelaide on the west, and another from New South
Wales on the east. At the same time the native pro-
duce of the colony was on the decline, as farming had
been, to a great extent, neglected for gold-digging. Yet
the foreign supplies came in slowly and meagrely.
Probably the merchanta of England and America had
not forgotten the ruinous reaction in the commerce of
San Francisco (then but recent), when goods were left on
the wharves as not worth the cost of carting and ware-
housing. This period of scarcity was prolonged by the
non-arrival of several British ships which had long been
detained by contrary winds.

The r^terated reports of bare m^kets, increasing de-
mand, and immense profits, sometimes amounting to several
himdred per cent., at length roused the merchants of
England and America, and they now poured in their goods
in such overwhelming jHrofnaon as glutted the markets,
blocked up the wharves, and filled the warehouses to re-
pletion. But this wa« not the only source of supply.
The profits on commercial transactions had now become

byGoogle

MONBTABY TICISSITDDEa 161

So great, that all tha. v^tJiy retailers had turned im-
portcTB ; and if waa nothing remarkable to hear of a 8hoi>-
keeper in Colling Street having sent home orders to the
amount of 10,000/. To this must be added that abnoet
every newly-arriving colonist, smitten with the prospect
of enormous profits, bad invested what email capital he
could command in merchandise; all which now helped to
increase the general plethora.

Many of these email importers, in order to avoid the
high charges for warehousing, sold off their goods on
arrival for whatever they would bring. Other larger
speculators were compelled to sell even at a sacrifice, in
order to meet their engagements ; and these forced sales
not only depressed prices, but caused a general instability
in the markets.

It is remarkable that, during all this period, and up to
the present moment, there has been nothing like a com-
mercial crisis or panic, such as usually follows close on
the heels of a season of unusual prosperity and activity.
Something of the kind was confidently anticipated by
many at the close of 1853, especially by those who re-
membered the former antithesis of colonial wealth and
bankruptcy about ten years earlier, when many or most
of the Uien lai^e capitalists sank in the sweeping vortex
of ruin to rise no more. Yet nothing of the kind occurred.
There have been many email fMluree lately, but not one
among the first class of merchants and traders, — scarcely,
indeed, any serious embarrassment. This happy result
was doubtless partly owing to the prudence of the banks,
which had learnt a timely lesson during the preceding
period of ordeal . But it must be chiefly attributed to the

^dbyGoogle

16S THE GOLDEN COLOHT. -

cooBtsnt inBtix of gold. The mootlily acceBeion of nearly
ft million sterling to the wealth of the country giyes such
a buoyancy to the general proBperity ne not all the dead
weight of glutted marketa, high rente, and commercial
dulneBB can bear down or outweigh.

Nowhere, probably, will the economist find a more
interesting field for study than in the monetary hiatory
of Victoria during the last three years. Most of the
causes which affect the wealth and oommerce of a com-
munity are here seen in intense action ; and, consequently,
those immutable laws which regulate the rise and Ml of
prices, the balancing of supply and demand, the ebb and
flow of specie and bullion, and all other monetary phe-
nomena, may here be studied in distinct and unequivocal
working.

To enter into such speculations is beside my purpose
and beyond my ability ; but I may mention a few singular
facts: —

In 1852, many kinds of merchandise sold at Melbourne
at 1000 per cent, above the European price. In 1854,
some goods were sold oondderably under the English
prices.

In 1851, the price of gold at Melbourne was about 37.
per ounce. In 1854, the same gold was sold for 4/., —
that is within a fraction of the London price. In 1851-2,
the Home Government was petitioned to establish a mint
at Melbourne. In 1854, English sovereigns were being
largely export^ from Melbourne to London. In 1852,
the price of gold at Adelaide was several shillings per
ounce higher than at Melbourne. In 1854, the Melbourne
price rose above that of Adelaide ; the export to that city

^dbyGoogle

GOLD ACTIN0 UN PRICES. 163

ceased, tVi OTerland escort was diBfttttltinUed, ftnd the
Adelude Gh>Yenunent Aatey Office eloeedi

The bame oaoses which 00 iidmeiiBfely fthgmentdd the
comiberce of the colony entirely tatilhilated ttne t>f its
two staple produces, Tii., tfallow. The " boilii^-dowh "
eBtahliehmente were now cIoBed bad neglected ; Ah- thb
sheep were needed as food for the newly Arrived populai-
tioa, and their price had advanced frotH five shillings tt>
twenty shillingB a head.

It is instructive and intereattng to observe hoW, In
different ages and far distant countries, a sndden flood of
gold acts with the same higb-preeeure powet upon the
prices of food and all the products of labour. The history
of the Ural Gold Districts, of those of Central Europe, of
California, and of Australia, have all the dame results to
record. In Victoria, previous to the gold era, idmost all
articles, except garden produce, were sold at very moderate
prices. But tlienceforward eTcrythlng rapidly rose until
It had attfuned an increase often of two or three hundred
per cent, above the ori^nal price. In most cases this
rise was progressive through the first twelve or eighteen
months j till at last, at Melbourne, bay was sold tot 40/.
a ton. Meat rose fhtm 2d. a pound to 8d. ; butter from
l«. to 4«. ; potatoes from }d. to Qd. a pound. Eggs were
sold 6& a dosen ; milk at \t. a quart ; cabbies, 2s. 6d.
each. Krewood rose from 10*. to 3/. a load; 11. was and
is the conunon chaise Ibr shoeing a horse, and the same
for a night's stabling. At the Diggings prices were much
higher. During the winter of 1852, when the roads were
well nigh impassable, the cost of carriage to liendigo
(about 100 miles) rose to 1201 per ton ; and for a short

^dbyGoogle

164 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

time flour was add. there at the rate of upwards of 200/.
per ton, or 2*. a pound. The charge for ehoeing a horse
was SOs. or 40«. Salt was 1«. a pound ; potatoes Is. 6d. a
pound. I have paid at Bendigo 21. for one night's stabling
for mj horse in a rude shed. I^ow, however, thanks to
increased competition, the mines are well supplied, and
the retwl pnces of most of the necessaries of life are
scarcely higher iJian at Melbourne. During the earher
period the diggers were obliged to bake their own bread
or " damper " as they beat might, in a portable camp-oven,
or in a heap of hot ashes. One shrewd fellow, however,
a baker from Adelaide, resisting the allurements of the
gold lottery, started business in bis own line ; constructed
a rude oven near the Government Establishment at Forest
Creek, and supplied the neighbourhood with bread at his
own prices, for there was no other baker within twenty
nules of him ; and wi^ such effect did he ply his trade,
that in about a year and a half he sold his bakery, and
sent off some fifty pounds' weight of gold by the Overland
escort to Adel^de.

The money wealth of a community is well set forth by
the amount of balances and deposits in the hands of its
bankers > and the marvellously rapid strides of the colony
in material prosperity will be manifest from the following
tabular statement, showing the amount of deposits, and
number of depositors, at the time of the gold discovery,
and subsequently, up to January 1. 1854.*

* For diis statement I am chiefly indebted to some elaborate tables
hy Mr. Khull, gold broker at Melbourne, published in the " Mel-
bourne Argu^," Jan. 27. 1854.

^dbyGoogle

INCKBA8E IN WEALTH. 165

Banks or Victoeia.

Table showing Amount of Deposits and Balances and Number of

DepoMtors from the Time of the Gold Discovery to January 1.

PortheQuvtwHidlni

"us^ur

e:^:.?,[

'•Sc':C'"

£
644,484

about 79,000

December 31. 1831 -

823,709

6,000

„ 95,000

June 30. 1832 -

2,002,873

December 31. 1852 -

4,880,940

20,000

„ 173,000

June 30, 1B53 -

5,953,289

6,316,810

30,000

„ 235,000

But the sudden expansion in the capital of the colonists
between the era of the gold discovery in 1851, and the
beginning of 1854, will, perhaps, be more strikingly con-
veyed by the following diagrams. {Fiff. 3.)

Da

Fig. 3.

During the eanie period the population of the colony
had increased from about 79,000 to 235,000, which
numbers are proportionally represented by the following
.figures, {fig. 4.)

D^

D.

ubjGoOglc

166

THE OPLDEN COLONT.

It is msnifest that the popukt'ioo of the colony has
increased threefold, while during t^ie same period the aggre-
gate cafntal had advanced to tenfold its former amount.

At the close of 1851 every sixteenth individual had a
depomt or balance at the banke. At the close of 1653,
every ei^th man had. Thus not only had the aggregate
capital of the community been immensely augmented, but
the number of small ca|utalists had also increased much
faster than the population.

The following is a statement of the exports and imports
during the years 1838, 1850, \»5i, 1853.*

.«.

!»W.

.«.

lUI.

Exportof. -21,000
ImporteJ - - 71,000

£
1,042,000

745,000

7,451,540
4,067,742

£
9,080,574

lfi,842,637

The total imports for 1853 amount to upwards of
16,842,000/. This to a population of 200,000 gives an
average of no less than 79i per head; being nearly twice
that of the year preceding, or eight times as much as in
ordinary tames. No ponder then that the markets should
be glutted and trade dull.

Aooor^ng to a recent Custoais Ae^ (1654) the only
imported articles subject to duty, are ale, porter, and wine»

• On the authority of abstracts from official retnnu.
t The eiporta consist chieflj of gold and vool.
X The value of goods imported by British ships compared with that
by foreign ships is in the proportion of about 10 to 3.

^dbyGoogle

REyENCE. 167

spirits, tobacco, cigars, saaff, and coffee. AU other goods
are free,

Goverraneot attempted to obtwn a daty on the export
of gdd, but the measure was rejected by the L^islatiTe
Council.

The following is a statement of the revenue of the
colony during the yews 1850, 1851, 1852, and 1853: —

Rbybnub.

,».

»..

,„..

,„.

£
261,321

379,824

£
1,576,801

£
3,202,249

A large part of these amounts is obtained from the sale
of crown lands. The licenaes to dig for gold yielded in
1853, 660,838/.

OfBci^ returns of the actual produce of the revenue
during the first nine months of 1854 had been publi^ed
when the last mails left Melbourne. From these we may
calculate approximately tluit the total revenue of that year
ava^ble by the Government (iacludii^ one-half of the
land fimd*) will amoant to 2,392,OOO.t With, rach on
immense sum to a population of 250,000, it might be
thought that the Government, if not borne down by the
" embarraa des richesses," would at least have ample fimda
for the moot Uberal expenditure. Bub the almost ia-
etedible iiust i»y that wHb these imparalleled resouMes,

* The other moietj, or 746,000f., is applied to unmigration.
t See the " Melbourne Ai^tus" for Oct. 0. 1854.

^dbyGoogle

168 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

the Government and Legislature of Victoria have entailed
on themselveB at the end of tJie yew 1854, a deficit of ojte
million two hundred and eighty-^five thousand poundi f

The following table sbowa an approximate eatimate of
the gold rased in 1851, 1852, and 1853, and the amounts
actuaU7 exported, as obtained from official returns ; —

A,»«« product.

a™o.««,pohM.

1851 -

18S8 -
1853 -

345,146'

4,543,780}
3,090,342]

145,146t

1,974.9755
2,545,260l

The total produce of gold for 1853 is nearly 129 tona;
total value, at 4L per ounce, 12,361,368/., being upwards
of a million per month. Of this vast sum nearly the
whole ia divisihle among the miners themselves, as the
amount of paid labour on the gold-field is quite insig-
nificant.

From the most recent mails we learn that the total

• Westgarth's "Alinnte on the Progresa and Commerce of Vic-
toria," mbmilted to the Melbourne Chamber of Commerce, February,
1853.

t W. t M.

§ "Argus," Annual Summary, Januar; 26. 1854. The vast amounts
sent overland to Adelaide and New Soath Wales, us well as all that
-conveyed to England and elsewhere by passengers returning home,
are not included under the bead of exports, and hence the discre-
pancy between ibe amounts raited and those exported.

y EbuU's Gold Tables, "Argus," January 27. 1854.

^ "Argus," Annua] Summary, January 26. 1854.

^dbyGoogle

PRODUCE OP GOLD. 169.

nmount of gold shipfied from Victoria in the first nine
months of 1854 amounted to 1,653,999 ouncee, ^nst
1,831,468 shipped during the first nine months of 1853.
Hence we may coDclude that the produce of 1854 will be
nearly 222,000 ounces lesB than that of 1853, a deficiency
equivalent to 888,000/. The local papers refer this fall-
ing off to the fact that a Itarge part of the mining popula-
tion had settled down to ordinary industrial purBuits,
especially ^riculture ; and that much time had been lost
in migrating hither and thither, the diggers having been
allured by the reputation of newly-discovered gold-fields.
The average produce in October last was about 40,000
ounces a week. The colonists appear to be indulging in
extravagant anticipations of the treasures speedily to be
obtained from the quartz-veins (the matrix of the gold)
by the process of crushing — anticipations doomed pro-
bably to disappointment ; for although the Victorian veins
are some of the richest in the world, yet all history and
experience concur in teaching that the amount of gold
derivable from quartz-cruahing will never be comparable
to that drawn from the alluvial workings.

Average Gaijis by Gold Mining. — From the " Sta^
tistical Register" for 1853, published under ^e authority
of the Government of Victoria, we learn that the popula-
tion on the gold-fields during that year varied from
57,800 to 88,320. Assuming, then, that the avenge
mining population in 1653 amounted to 73,060 persons,
we have here some reliable data upon which to calculate
approximately the average earnings of the diners, these
earnings having hitherto been estimated by the wildest
guessing. At least 10 per cent, must he deducted for

^dbyGoogle

170 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

those Dot actually engaged in mining, comprinng store-
keepera and thdr eerrants, eatgeooa, shopkeepers and
otliers, and women and <^uldren. Tim would leave
65,754 as the nombv of working minen. Dividing,
then, the total prodnoe of gold fat tho year 1853, namely,
3,090,342 ounces, among thb number of diggen, we find
that each man will obtun -f^ths of an onnce weekly,
whioh, at 3L 18a, per oonee, is equivalent to SI Gs. Tt
must be remembered, howev«r, that no digger works
duiing the fif^-two weeks of the year, that much time is
lost in journeying to and from the mines, in visiting new
goldr-fi^da,, sod in recruiting at Melbourne, and that mnch
money is coasuned in hoFse^eeh, and by the waste and
wear involved in a life under canvass. To this most be
added, «e regards individnal prospects, A«b the ehances
are always considerable of a man's eamingB ialfing tar
short of tins average, which ia pcobabty above rsther than
under the truth.

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTER XII,

RELIGION AND EDDCATION.

Harmon; of difierent aeoti ^ State gnata ~ CInin;beti Mtd ehapds —
Tb« bishop and clergy — Position of the Cburch of England in tlie
Colonies — Eodowment fund — EducatioD — Public and private
schools — Sta}« ud h> education — Oldejstem and new — Statistica
of schools— Neir uiuTersity— PubKc iibrsrj.

The numereua seete into wfaiob the popoIaitioD of the three
kingdoiDS is divided hare all been tnvn^ituted to Australia,
and Appear there to &iunb«r about the etuoe proportjon of
adherents aa they da ia the, a^r^ate popiUatioB of the
British lales. Happily, however, for the peaoe of the
infaB* QoromuBity of Victoria, the epirtt of ecetarianism is
&r lees rife there than in t^ Old Country. At Mf^boome
the rarioua Proteetant gecte unite in the eamei religious and
philanthropic: andertakings, and meet on die; sanui iJat<-
fonuB. There ia, indeed, a strcaig line of dematcation
drawn between Frokestant ttnd iUman Catholaio.j bat even
here religious differences we oever seen nuirri]^ the haor-
mony of eodal life, and v^y Bwely- are niamfested in the
political arenik In this aa m many oth«r rospecta these
colonies are m<ve asumiltted t» the. United States thaa to
England. Old ^eTsse^s aod jealousies are. l^{% b<^iod at
borne, and with thes): th& ^cdnuony asd strife that, they
gave birth to.

^dbyGoogle

172 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

The State grants aid to all Christian denominations
willing to receive it. A total gum is fixed, and this is
apportioned among the various bodies according to their
relative numbers of adherents ; tliese mombera are deter-
mined by the Census returns. State aid to religion pro-
mises, however, to become a perpetual and fertile question
for a^tation and dispute. The English " Independents,"
and the members of the Scotch Free Church refuse to
accept such aid for themselves, and are unwilling that
others should enjoy what they reject Indeed they are
not the only persons ranged on this side of the question.
The Bishop of Melbourne declares himself willing to
relinquish all support from the public purse, rather thfui
continue to receive it in common with those whom he be-
lieves to be teachers of noxious error. The great majority,
however, of the members of his communion hold very dif-
ferent views: tley see that clergymen are often most
wanted by those who would be least willing to maintun
them. The question of State ud to a mixed population
professing various creeds, is perhaps, to an intelligent,
candid, and religious mind, one of the most difficult that
can be proposed for solution. At the b^inmng of the
year 1854 it formed the subject for several public meet-
ings at Melbourne, with the usual amount of noisy strife
of words and angry declamation.

■ At the end of 1852 there were forty-nine chtirches and
chapels in the colony, estimated to accommodate 16,000
persons. They belonged to the following bodies: —
Church of England, 13; Presbyterian,?; Wesleyans, 17;
Independents, 3 ; Baptists, 2 ; Koman Catholics, 6 ; Jews'
Synagogue, 1.

^dbyGoogle

CHUBCH OP BNGLABD. 173

There are now probably 20 churches belonging to the
EpiscopaUans. The other bodies have also increased their
chapels, though by no means in the same proportion.

Much of the harmony that prevails among the various
Christian communities is due to the moderation and
catholic charity of the eminent and remarkable individual
who now occupies the episcopal chair of Melbourne. The
Church of England in Victoria ie, indeed, peculiarly
happy in her Bishop. Dr. Perry combines all the quali-
ties that are required for the office of colonial bishop, an
office demanding the utmost prudence, sagacity, and zeaL
He is distinguished by attainments of the highest order,
great administrative wisdom, and a zeal tempered by dis-
cretion. The Dean of Melbourne is worthy of being
second to such a ohief. Eloquent and impulsive, trustful,
cordial, and devoted to his work. Of the inferior clergy
some have been originally trained to other pursuits, and
subsequently orduned in the colony; but the greater
number were educated for the sacred office at the English
Universities. As a body they certainly need fear no
comparison with the average of the clergy in England,
either in intellectual power or in Christian devotedness.
The Bishop is loved and revered by the members of his
own communion, and respected by all; and I think he is
the only public man in the country who has escaped public
censure. The clergy are always treated with respect, and
generally with an affectionate regard by their congrega-
tions. Their actual number is very inadequate to the
wants of the colony ; and firequent applications are made
from various parts of the country for a resident minister,
with offers to provide the requisite stipend. In fact, men

^dbyGoogle

174 THE OOLDEK COLONY.

are now needed muoli more tHad moneys Surely the
spirit of eTangelisation must be at a very low ebb unong
the clergy of our Anglican Church, or they would not,
could not, leave 80 proDueing a field to run to waste for
Trant of culture. What would Gregory the Great have
done in such a case i And what would have been the fate
of our island if the ecclesiastioe of those days had chosen
to settle down in the lap of ease in their beautiful Italy,
rather than face the unknown perils that tiwuted them in
their attempt to reduce our ferocious ancestors under the
mild sway of the Christian faith?

The position of the Church of England in Victoria and
the other Australian colonies, is a very auomnlous one.
The Bishop is appointed by, and dependent on, the Queen
as head of the State ; yet the State accords no exclusive
pecuniary lud or privileges to the Church. The Home
Government and Legislature regard the Colonial Church
as a portion of the Established Church, and legislate for it
accordingly. But the Colonial Government and Legisla-
ture recognise it merely as one of the many denominntiona
into which the people are divided, and amongst which its
favours arc to be impartially distributed. Thus the
Colonial Church is hampered by all the legislative em-
barrassments involved in a connection with the State,
without enjoying any of the material benefits that usunlly
Bprii^ from that connection. Snch a state of things can
scarcely be considered as more than provisional. Its con-
tinuance is indeed wholly dependent on the attachment
of the people themselves to the Established Church of
their native land.

A Conference of members of the Church met in Mel-

^dbyGoogle

acHOOLs. 175

bourne in 1651, under the presidency of tbe Bisbc^, uid
l(ud the foandation of a fund for die pemument endow-
ment of tlieir clergy. Subsequently, however, the grants
by the local le^slatore were eo much increaaed, as to
render any other endowment for the present superfluoug.

Here, aa everywhere else, the maae of the commoniiy
regard Beligion as part of the routine decencies of life,
and not much more; while with a flection, numerically
inugnificant, it is the dominating influence and ruling
principle. Wiilun tluB inner narrow circle you may
obaerre much more of that oneneas of heart and action
— that "attraction of cohesion," which lo remarkably dia*
tingnished the first centuries of Christiiinity from all eub-
eequent ages, — the unity of the Catacouss, not that of
the Vatican. TUb spirit develops itself in tea meetingt,
held for advancing certain specified objects of Christian
philanthropy. These are frequent, nod numerously at-
tended, — some of the leading men in the State oS^a
taking a prominent port in them.

fffttco/tctn.— Schools for the upper and middle claasea
are usually inferior to those of Ei^land. On the con-
trary, schools SiX tbe lower ranks, and such as receive ud
from die State, are often under much abler superintendence
than simiJar institutions in the old country. It is not
difficult to account for this. In a land where everything is
exorbitantly dear a private schoohnoater muit nec6Marily
possess some capital before he can even jm)vide a house
for hie pupils. Now there are not a few who JMned the
general rush to the new gold country poeseesed of con-
siderable attumnenta, but having very little cash. Such
being tha« disabled from opening a school on their own

^dbyGoogle

17S THE GOLDEN COLONY.

account, after ftuling at the minea, and tired of a deBultory
life of disappointment, are glad to take refuge in the
mastership of a parochial school, — a position which they
would probably have scorned at home.

Hitherto the State grants in aid of education have been
dispensed by two Boards which assisted in maintuning two
dilTerent classes of schools ; viz., one in which children of
all creeds meet in the same school, and receive the same
instruction ; and another in which each school belongs to
ac«ne one denomination, and to that exclu^vely. By a
recent Act, however, both of these have been, or are to
be, abolished, and the grants are to be made on the priu-
cnple acted upon by the Committee on Education of the
Privy Council in England ; viz., that aid be granted to
all schools indiscriminately, if placed imder the general
surveillance and direction of the Government Inspectors.
At the end of 1852, there were 115 schools in the colony.
The number of scholars was 7,841 ; viz., 4,322 boys, and
3,519 ^rls. The number of schools is probably doubled
at present, and that of scholars more than doubled.

If the people of Melbourne are not themselves sedulous
cultivators of literature and science, they are at least fully
alive to the value of such pursuits, and of their importance
to the dignity and welfare of the State. They are now
laying the foundation of an institution whose influence
may ere long be felt throughout the South Pacific. On
the 3rd of July last (1854) the foundation-stone of the
Melbourne University was laid by the new Lieutenant-
Governor, Sir Charles Hotham. The establishment is to
be on a scale commensurate with the opulence of the infant
metropolis. The University has been endowed by the

byGoogle

SCHOOLS. 177

Le^slative Coandil with large rereDueB. There are to
be at first four profeeaorshipe -with eakries of 1000/. a-year
each and a residence, — viz., one of the Greek and Latin
langni^ea and ancient history, one of natural science, one
of mathematics, and one of l<^c modem literature, and
politioal economy. A public library has also been eeta-
bliaJied, and 4000/. remitted to England for the puichaBe
of books.

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTER XIII.

CRIME AND POLICE.

PapidaUon in general not viclooa — Real csuh o( eaceM of crime —
Exfnrees sod conditioDallj-psrdoaed men — Frequencj of during
outrages — DemortliBation of the police force — Its reconatruction
— Decrease of crime — Horse-stealing — Curse of intemperance —
"Hocussing" — Deaths from dmnkennesa — Average consumption
of spirits — Crusade against intemperance.

DuEiNG the last three years Victoria has been ahnost as
remarkable for the number an<3 atrocity of its crimes as
for the yield of its Gold Fields. An idea has become
prevalent that, from the very nature of things, such a
concurrence might have been anticipated; that a land of
gold must almost necessarily become a laud of crime, and
that a rich Gold Field generates criminals as corruption
breeds maggots. A closer scrutiny, however, will clearly
show that the history of Victoria lends no support to this
theory. True it is that the annals of the colony since
1851 exhibit an appalling list of atrocious crimes; and
that, perhaps, never before had so small a community con-
tained so .many villains of the deepest dye. But it is not
less true that the great mass of the mining population are
aa industrious, moral, and well-conducted as the average
population of any country in Europe. The real cause of
the abundance of crime in Victoria is its proximity to
that sink of England's felony, that dreadful den of de-
pravity, — Van Diemen's Land. The communication with

=tibyGoogIe

EXCBSa OF ORIHE. 179

this devoted ielimd ie fVeqUent and rapid. Victoria is the
Land of Promise to the Van Diemen'e Ijand convict,
Expirees, or those whoso sentence has ran out, and cod-
ditionallj-pardoned men flock over hither, and are soon
lost in the crowd of Melbourne or of the Mines. Pri-
soners of the Ctowd, still under sentence, escape from
their guards, roam over the island, are hunted down by
the convict police, and at last, stained with blood and
steeped in crime, seize upon a whale-boat, cross the inter-
Tening strait, land upon the shores of Viotoria, and makc'
for the Mines, sometimes marking their course wltJi deeds
of blood. At first, everything in the new gold country
seemed to conspire to favour die perpetrafioii of crime.
At the Gold Pielde there was a »oattered population,
living in tnul tents, while almost every one ' possessed
more or less of the precious metal. Id the towns the
streets were dark, the suburbs were scattered and de-
tached. In the country, or " Bush," the diggers, migra-
ting irom district to district, or to and from the towns,
traversed roads which led over desolate pluns and through
mountainous lonesome forests. At the Mines the police
for some time consisted chiefly of raw recruits. In the
towns the force was almost worthless. Its ranks had
been supplied by expiree convicts from Van Diemen's
I/and; but these robbed the citizens whom ibey were
ptud to protect. With such a population, and under such
favouring circumstances, crime at length attained a finght-
ful univereaUty, and seemed at one time to threaten a
new Beign of Terror. Every day the naw^n^rs teemed
with tales of murder and robbery. There were murders
on the roads, robberies and outraged at the diggmgs and

^dbyGoogle

180 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

in the euborbs. In the very streets of the capital pereons
.were knocked down after nighttall and plundered. A
piratical attack was made on a ship lying in the harbour
laden with gold, and about 8000 ounces of gold taken
from her. The armed troop of an "Escort Company"
was attacked in the forest by eight desperadoes, the
troopers disabled and put to ilight, and the booty seized
imd distributed among the robbers. One bold ruffian
entered the office of a gold-broker during broad daylight,
pointed a revolver at his head, and demanded his treasure.
Another gold-broker was stopped, or " stuck up," whilst
one momiiig driving to his business from his house in a
suburban village. The gaols were crowded to overflow-
ing. Thirteen capitally convicted criminals were executed
at Melbourne in 1853, and Ave of them within a few
weeks. The expenditure for the maintenance of order,
the administering justice, and the suppression of crime, at
length amoimted to about 700,000/. per annum. In the
country travellers almost always carried arms. Indeed
the upper classes owed their comparative immunity from
assault chiefly to the fear inspired by their revolvers, and
to the greater facilities for robbing drunken diggers at
roadside public-houses. At length, when things were at
the worst, the colonists, moved by the instinct of self-
preservation, determined to stop this influx of Van Die-
men's Land prisoners, to whom they rightly attributed
nine-tenths of these outrages.

It had long been a custom with the Governors of Van
Diemen's Land to grant to prisoners of the Crown, after
serving part of their time, conditional pardons, by which
they were authorised to proceed to any place except back

^dbyGoogle

I>ISQttOi.in3ATION OF POLICE. 181

to the British lelea. Great numbera of this class vere
now pourii^ into Victoria, where, removed from the iron
rule to wMoli they had heen subjected in the Convict
Colony, they soon resumed their old practices. There
was no British law forbidding these men from crosang
over to Victoria ; but the L^slatire Council of the
Colony now passed a special enactment rendering it penal
for any individual of the class to set foot on their shores.
This was an extreme measure, but fully justified by the
urgency of the case.*

At the first flash of the gold discovery, in 1851, the
immediate effect of the general rush to the Diggings was a
scarcity of labour and a rise of wages. The police ibrce,
shoring in the general impulse that iirged all to try their
luck at the Mines, demanded increased pay, or, as an
alternative, threatened to resign. The Executive, swayed
by an impolitic economy, refused to rmse the men's wi^es
to the new standard of remuneration, alleging, without
proof or reason, that no increase would be snlBcient to
ret4un them in the force. . The men resigned accordingly,
and thus the Colonial Police became disoi^anised at the
very moment when it ought at any sacrifice to have been
kept up to its fiill efficiency. It was now attempted to
remedy the mischief by drafting over from Van Diemen's
Land prisoners who had fulfilled their sentence in whole
or in part. The old maxim, touching the "setting of
thieves to catch thieves," seemed to justify this proceeding ;
but, as already stated, it rather exasperated than cured
the evil; for the men in becomiiig constables did not
cease from being thieves.

• See Cliapter XV.

^dbyGoogle

182 THE CWLDEN COLONY.

At the b^iDiuDg of 1853, however, a great reform took
place in the Colonial Police ; the whole was reoi^aauaed on
a new model. Instead of being split into seTeral inde-
pendent departments, the entire force, now greatly aug-
mented, WH8 placed under a central administration, witli
one chief. The officers were all men of gentle birth and
some edaoatjon, and rose through a gradation of rank.
The men were well dad and housed, and pud after the
colonial standard of wages, the private receiving 10 shil-
lings a day. A new corps of cadets was formed as a
nursery for officers.

The results of the new system, which was established
almost r^ardlesB of cost, were soon visible. No longer
the midnight assassin prowled about the streets and
suburbs of the capital The older and more settled
mining districts were now secure from marauders. The
bushranger was rarely seen in the great lines of traffic,
though he still infested the remoter and newer digfpngs,
and lurked in the recesses of the forest. A detective
police was also organised, and proved highly efficient in
hunting out the veterans of crime. The young cadets
distinguished themselves by their bold enconntere with
the ruffians of the K»d. By the end of 1853 many of
the desperadoes, who had become emboldened by easy suc-
cess and continued impunity, were captured, convicted,
and either executed or condemned to the diain-gwig for
10, 20, or even 30 years. The Police Force of the Colony
is now highly efficient, and crime so rapidly abating, that
we learn from a It^wrt by the Acting Chief Justice that,
notwithstanding the great increase in population, the
actual number of convictions was thirteen less in 1853

^dbyGoogle

HORSG-STBALINO. 183

thAtt in 18513; while, ptob&bly, the difference in t}te
actaat atnaont of crime wae much greater, because, thanks
to the improved police, fewer ctiminald escaped detec-
tion add puniehment Still, however, the a^r^ate of
orJme 18 liightftiL In 1853, witlt an avenge population of
about 305,000, there were 453 convictiona out of 682 cases
tHed'* About one*fdurth, or 1 Id, of the convictioiis were
for horee-stealing. Probably the number of offences of fhi^
oIrbb aetuidly Committed were ten times aa numerous ; but
in such a country, and with so soattared a population, the
di£Sculties in conviction for tbia crime are only equalled by
tiie fiicilitiee for comniitting it. Wliole columns of the
newsf^pers were filled vith advertisements of horses lost
and stolen ; and 4t last, to check tlie growing eVil, auc-
tioneers wer« made legally responsible for t^e value of any
stolen horse they might selL Buch is still the Colonial
law ; and to protect themselves, the auctionefirg levy a
commisnoa of 10 per oent. on the seller of the horse.

If intcmperanoe is the parent of crime and misery in
England, in Victoria H is still more emphatically s6.
Even before (ha g(M era it was the datuning vice of the
Austraiiaa ctdonies. The shepherds and stock-keepers
would live without a murmur for months or years in their
solitary huts in the Bush on the simplest hte, tmd then
squander tlieir earnings in a debauch at the first pnblic-
house thej cttme to. There are authentic stories of these
mea flrderisg dozens of diampt^ne, pouring it out into a

• The Chief Jiutice states that, had the swne ratio of crime
existed in ISSS as in 1SS2, there would, owing to increased popu-
lation, h«Te been 1000 eases for trial instcnd of 6(13.

^dbyGoogle

L84 THG GOLDEN COLOirr.

btiekel, and then drinking it off out of their tin pannicans.
They were indeed proud of tliese sort of feata, and boasted
of Uiem. When such men suddenly and easily acquired
hundreds of pounds, of course they plunged more reck-
lessly than ever into the mire of eensualisuL At the
Diggings every gully and " flat" was infested with " sly
grog-tents," which eluded all the activity of the police, or,
if some were rooted out, others instantly sprang up in
their place. Licensed public-houses were not allowed at
the Mines ; and this seemed only to stimulate the illicit
traffic Many of the sly grog-ahops were mere dens of
ruffianism- — the rendezvous of bnehrangers, — kept by the
worst characters. If the unwary were entrapped into one
of these, — farewell hope The drugged potion is prepared
and administered ; the victim, senseless and powerless, is
robbed of everything, and then cast out into the recesses
of the forest, there at length to awake to a sort of dreamy
constuousness that he had been plundered. This is called
" hocusfong." Sometimes the brain is never fully restored.
A di^er, who was thus recently treated, has described
his sensations, in a letter to a Mend, which has been pub-
lished. He had lost himself in the Bush, and at last dis-
covered a solitary tent, which he entered with some mis-
^vings as to the character of those he might find there.
His worst anticipations were realised. Not without sus-
picion he began to drink what was offered to him. He
watched the result ; and, as the dreadful feeling began to
steal upon him, he at once rushed out of the tent, and
was pTursued by the robbers through the depths of the
forest The poison began to do its work; and as he
bounded from tree to tree his frenzied fancy pctured bis

^dbyGoogle

CUBSE OF INTBMPEBAHCE. 186

purauere as fiends fiercely huDting down their prey. . X'or
once, however, their viotjm escaped.

But it is in the towns that the accursed vice of intem-
perance reckons most of its victims. At Melbourne ahnost
every comer of every street ia a public-houBC. The " Ivioky
di^er" arrives at Melbourne for a "spell." Having got
hia gold from the Escort Office, he takes it to a broker and
converts it into cash, which he then deposits in the hands
of the' publican at whose house he has put up, — fearing to
retain it himself, lest he should be robbed during the night
by one of the many who occupy the same chamber as
himself, or in a drunken fit during the day. The publican
does not rob bis guest ; but he ruthlessly plies him with
ardent spirits. The man drinks, and drinks, and drinks
till be has outdrunk his gold; or perhaps, worse, — till he
is arrested by the horrors o{ delirium tremens. These
tragedies are not rare exceptional cases, but they are com-
monly occurring. The most melancholy coneideratioQ is,
that a lai^e class regard such bestial debaucheries aa
manly, if not heroic ; and will exuldngly t«U yoa bow, in
a few weeks, they made 50^ or 100^ at the di^^ings,
and "knocked it down" in a fortnight or month at Mel-
bourne. The class now referred to consists wholly of the
old "buahmen;" the new colonists — those attracted to
Victoria by the gold — are careful and frugal.

In the first half of 1853, there were no less than forty-
seven deaths from intemperance at Melbourne ; viz., eight
directly, and thirty-nine indirectly.* As regards lunacy,
we learn from Lord Shaftesbury, the Chairman of the
Commissioners of Lunacy in England, that here six-

* Vide Report ofCitj Coroner.

^dbyGoogle

18fl THE GOLDEN COLOKT.

tenilia of tlte caees arise f¥om intemperance. In Victoria,
then, we ma; conclude that the proportion inoreaBce with
the increased drankenness. Id a lecture by Dn Sisgle-
tOD, a phyacian at' Melbourne, tt is estimated ftpprost-
matelj from tbe Customs returns, that, during 1858, the
people of Victoria consumed no less than 1,1^^94
gallong of taints, and 1,432,615 g^one of wine, or about
two milliona wort)k of epiriU and wine for a population
averaging, perhaps, 210,000 souls I This would be'more
-than 9L eadb, for men, women, and children. Kot a dty
passes without a long list of convietione for drunkcomeu
at the Police Offices of the towns.

The mischief has of late assumed such an alanning
aspect, that several of the most enei^etio and philanthropic
of the coloniste have begnn a crusade agunst it in earnest.
Following the famous example of the State of Maine, tfae^
have formed a " Victoria lAqaot Law League," for ob-
taining penal enactments against the sale or importation
of apirituons liquors. It is of course easy to adduce
numerous objections to such a measure, — it would be
despotic and inqniratorial, — it would strike oat one of the
chief items of the State IleTenue,~^it would interfere
with the liberty of the subject. Yet, when the horrora of
the actual practice are fully iqtpreciated, — the death,
disease, and madness ; the crime, depravity, and d^rada'-
tion ; the unttdd amoant of domestjc wretchedness ; the
hopeless, helpleee slavery entuled on the victim,— let all
this be understood and felt, and it will be hud to say
what samfioe could be too costly which should ensure
the annihilation of this modem Moloch, at whose altar
are yearly immolated thousands of the bodies and im-
mortal souls of our fellow men.

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTER XIV.

HOW PUBLIC AFFAIB8 ABB ADMINISTEEED IH THE
COLONY.

The late Lieutenant-GoTernor — Victoria separated from New Sonth
Wales — FaralyaU of the GoTemmeut during the Gold Fever —
locapacitj of Heads of Departments — Impolitic eoouomj — Cod-
Tict constables — Spasmodic activity of Government — Character of

men in office.

It hae been the ringnlar fortune of the late Lientenant-
Goremor of Yictoiia to preside over the derelopment of a
state &om its first be^nning up to tiie point of expsnmoa
represented by a revenue of three milli(mB sterling a- year.
On a review of the history of the colony ance its founda-
tion to the present time, one i» struck wi^ the remarlcable
fact that, on the one hand, never before did a State make sneh
nuurellons strides in general progress and prosperity under
the administration of one individual; and, on the other,
never was Government assuled with a more continuous
discbai^e of bitter inveetive. To say that " all governors
of colonies are unpopular," is an easy but ui indMent and
nneatiefaetory way of ezphuning the phenomenon.

In ordinary times, all that is reqiured of a colonial
govenKKT is a fair share of administrative skill and sagacity.
But there are periods when the highest qualities of states-
manship are demanded ; tides in the national affurs whick

^dbyGoogle

188 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

must be taken at the flood. Victoria has been paseing
through one of these periods.

From the first founding of the colony in 1836, up to
the period of the gold discoveries in 1851, the Govern-
ment establishments had grown with the rapid growth of
the colony, and were now in a tolerable state of efficiency,
though there was room enough for administrative reforms.
Up to the year 1850 Victoria, under the name of Port
Phillip, had formed a district governed by a Superin-
tendent, dependent on the Sydney Government; but in
that year, it was erected into an independent colony, under
the name of the reigning sovereign, — an event celebrated
by festivities in the towns and bonfires on the mountain-
tope, from end to end of the country. It was fortunate
that this event preceded the gold diacoveries ; for all the
embarraesmentc of that period would have been much
augmented if the eeat of supreme government had been
distant 600 miles from Melbourne. Aa it was, the
Lieutenant-Governor of the new colony was thrown on
his own resources, and responsible only to the Colonial
Minister in London.

The social revolution that attended the gold era was soon
seen telling lamentably on every department of the Go-
vernment AIL the inferior officers and servants, — clerks,
policemen, boatmen, &c. threw up their posts. Their
places were either filled up by new and incompetent hands
or not supplied at all ; and at the very moment when tlie
country was passing through an eventful crisis, the Govern-
ment was left helpless and paralysed. After this had lasted
some months a change for the better commenced; and
reforms and ameliorations were gradually applied to every

^dbyGoogle

PABALT9IS OP GOVEBMMENT. 189

branch of the public service; so that in the year 1854
the administration of the colony was in a higher state of
efficiency than before the gold epoch.

At the beginning of 1852 Government became reduced
to a state of the moat humiliating helplessness. Its con-
stables were thieves, and a by-word for scorn at the Mines.
At Mount Alexander there was a population of thousands,
and yet the duties of die Postxiffice were there undertaken
by a private speculator. The Police at the Diggings,
though strong enough to exact the license-fees, were impo-
tent to repress crime. The Gold Escort Service was so
inefficiently performed that a Private Escort ConipaDy was
set on foot, and was soon distinguished for the superior
celerity of its operations as compared with those of the
Government. Everywhere, in every circle, the Govern-
ment was the mark of ridicule and invective, — from the
merchant at Melbourne to the shaggy digger at the Mines ;
and no wonder, because every one felt personal incon-
venience from an inefficient and ill-ordered public service.

In England public censure passes harmlessly over the
head of the Chief of the State and lights upon tiie advisers
of the Crown. This process is reversed in ibe Colonies.
All the una and shortHwmings of the subordinates are
vi^ted upon their superior, the Governor; so that many
and deep were the execrations now poured forth on Lieut.-
Govemor La Trobe. The acknowledged defects and defi-
dencies in the public service at tlus period have been often
excused by referring them to the difficulties of the times,
the scarcity of labour, the impossibility of finding at a
moment's notice fit persons to fiU the numerous posts that
had to be created. To the latter difficulty we can hardly

^dbyGoogle

190 THE GOLDEN COLONr.

Attribute too much weight, seeing that very many of the
new fonctionaiiea were necesfiarily strangers just arriving
in the colony, nntruned to their new duties, and un-
oceuetomed to colonial life. Still, however, it is clear
that such palliations and excuses for maladministration
cannot be urged beyond a certain limit ; and it mttet not
be forgotten that in spite of the difficulties of the times,
private eBtabliahments were all this time being doubled
and quadrupled, and their operations immensely extended.
As to scarcity of labour, there was never a time during
the gold mania when labour conld not be had by those
who would pay the maricet price for it ; and the resonreea
-of the Government were practically almost boundieSK

The I^eat. -Governor was himself distinguished by great
mental and personal activity, and devoted himself to his
public dudes. In the summer he was often at the Govern-
ment offices at six in the morning. He made frequent
visits of inspection to tbe country districts, and was now
at Geelong, now at BalUrat, and then at Mount Alexander,
travelling rapidly without state, accompanied by his Aide-
de-Camp or Secretary. Had all his officials been as
energetic as their chief, he wonld have escaped much
angry animadversion. But be oomnutted two great
errors. First, he filled some of the most important posts
in the Government with men of the most ordinary capacity,
— mere red tapists and slaves of routine ; being, unless
greatly belied, more anxious to secure in his coadjutors
men of pliant docility than of commanding talents.
Medioo^ty at the head of a department propagated itself
through all the subordinate grades, and hence slu^ishnesa
and ineffi(»ency and want of foresight characterised every

^dbyGooglc

INCAPACITT OV QOVEKNMENT OFFICIALS. 191

braqch of the public sflrrice, and miuufeBted itself in
vexatious delays and egregioua blunders to be rectified by
ezpenaiTe ozpedienta. The macbinery of Govenunent, aa
compared with tliat of private eatablishmenta, was more
slow, more oombroaB, and more costly. Tbus, for
instance, some hundreds of thousands were spent on a
miuD line of road to Mount Alexander. Tbia road
became the last resource of the laey and the helpless. All
who could get nothing else to do were received to work on
it, and all were paid uniform wages, however much or
little they performed. The indolence of " Government
ntffli" soon became proverbial, and the common mark of ridi-
cule to the laborious diggers as (hey journeyed up to the
Mines. I have heard of one of the road-overseers tellii^
his men " not to work too hard, for it was Govenuneat
work."* This at Iwigth was put sin end to. But while
vast sums were being expended on this line, the road
running through the heart of the great Bendigo Gold'
Field was allowed to run to ruin, and the drays of the
diggers to make thdr way through, or be wrecked in, the
deep mud holes and unbridged oreeks, close under the
eyes of the Government offioisla.

Between Kynetoa and Moont Alexander it was at-
tempted to oarry the new road aoroas a deep morass, which
h«n stretdied aoroas the line of traffic ; but so unsuccess-
fully, that part of it sank down aod disappeared, while the
remainder was impassable, and soon deserted. Another
aeotioB of the same road, sear the Bush Inn, shows the

* There ia a popuUr and significant digtinctiac vith Australian
operatives between "piece-work speed" (tbe quickest), "day-work
Speed," and " Government-Bpeed" (the sloveat).

^dbyGoogle

193 THB OOLDElf COLONY^ '

contrasted results of eimilar difficultieB encountered by
engineering skill ; for here a " dismal swamp," — the dread
of the carriere, and ahuoet impassable during winter to
those on foot, — has been crossed by a good macadamised
road; and the most difficult section of the line, baring
luckily fiiUen into skilfiU hands, has been the most suc-
cessfully executed.

The incapa<uty of the Heads of Departments was one
main source of the inefficnency of the Public service But
tiie general paralysis which seized every department
of Govermnent during the first feverish excitement of the
gold discoveries, must be referred to an erroneous impres-
eion or theory which then took possesraon of the Lieu-
tenant-Grovemor'e mind.

It is well known how suddenly the scale of wages rose
during the first few months of the gold era ; — the pay
even for unskilled labour advanced from two shillings a
day, to ten, twelve, and fifteen shillings. At the first
rush to the Divings Crovemment rused the pay of their
subordinate officers and men 50 and 75 per cent. The
Heads of Departments urged the necessity of a much greater
advance if the men were to be retained at their posts;
for the pay, as thus increased, still fell far short of the
current wages of the day. But the increase in the pay
already conceded, being commensurate with the increased
price of food, fiict, and house-rent, the Lieutenant-Gh)-
vemor unhappily persuaded himself tiuit it would be in
Yom to attempt, by further concessions, to keep men from
the Diggings. At this point "he tookhis stand;" and, as
he was satisfied that all efforts to keep up an efficient
force by liberal wages would be in vain, he resolved to

^dbyGoogle

FALSE BCONOUT. 193

make no effort. In a despatch to the Colonial Secretary
in January, 1852, the Lieutenant-Governor writes, —
" Having by the increase sanctioned, already reported,
conceded that which I think right and clearly defensible,
I have had to take my etand, and decline to j^ield to a
pressure, lees arising from causes above assigned than
from the excitement of the day. It is in v^ to pretend to
bid against the hopes and the expectations induced by the
results of the Grold Fields, I am aware that the increased
pTovicdon will leave many departments in an embarrassed
and imperfect condition, and that the greatest difficulty
will be experienced in induoing persons of proper quali-
fications to enter the service, even at the high rates of
remunerarion, comparatively speaking, now offered; but
I am perfectly sure that no concession or practical aug-
mentation of emolument would meet the views and wishes
of many of tbe Inferior classes of subordinate officers more
especially, or bribe them to retain their situations." Yet,
BO far was this opinion from being universal, that, at this
very time, the citizens of one of the wards of Melbourne,
on being requested to act as special constables, refused, on
the ground that " there was no want of good men for the
constabulary, if proper remuneration was afforded."

The most mischievous effects now followed. Almost
all the old trained hands threw up their places. Fifty-one
horse and foot constables resigned in one day. The
Survey Office was crippled when ita duties became most
onerous and important. The best hands were either
engaged on the Gold Fields or in private employ. The
State paid the worst wages, and was therefore the worst
served. Convict constables from Van Diemen's Land

^dbyGoogle

194 TBS QOLDEM COLONY.

were drafted into the thinned ranks of tlie police, lowered
itfl tone, disgraced the force, and robbed when occasion
offered. Nor was it till a more enlightened policj' was
adopted and adequate Temuneration ofi^red, that the
police and other departments reg^ned their efficiency.

During the last three years the action of the Govem-
meot of Victoria may be described as one of habitual
languor, varied occafiionally by spasmodic activity. An
evil ie allowed to gatiier head until public long-suffering
is exhausted, and a burst of public clamour elicited, and
then a desperate efibrt is made to remove the ground of
complunt at any cost Such was the case with that im-
portant institution which baa the hopes, fears, joys, and
sorrows of thousands in its hands — the Post-office. It«
inefficiency baa already been alluded to. At Melbourne,
long after the opening of the gold era, great crowds daily
collected round the solitary window where letters were
deliverable, and jostled and strove from mom till night for
access to the inapproachable hole in the wall; the weak
and the deUcate mixed up in the mStee with rugged
bearded diggers and " n^e mechanicals." There was no
attempt at any provisional amelioration of this crying evil.
It was not till 1853, that a vigorous effort was at length
made, a large iron building erected, and the present com-
plete and admirable oi^nisation introduced.*

* Some idea of die magnitude of the preBent operations of the
Melbourne Post-office may be gathered from the following Blate-
mentr — Onthe 12th of July last (1854) there were received, by the
English overland mail, 31,961 letters and 72,542 newspapers, in 230
boxes. By other ships 1450 letters, 1193 newspapers; and by inland
mails 4731 letteri and 1024 newspapera. Total received that day,

^dbyGoogle

REMONSTBANCE OF HUBCUAMT8. 195

Agun; owing to the immenBe increase in trade, the
wharves of Melbourne had become miaerably inadequate,
while the want of proper approachea over the abori^uid
Bwamp that etill bordered the quays greatly added to the
time, coBt, and difficulty of discharging veaseb. The
wfaarres were piled high with all aorta of merchandise, and
valuable goods were tlirown down into, and half sub-
merged in the adjacent swamp. At length, after a due
amount of forbearance, the merchants met, passed sundry
angry resolutions against the Government, and sent a
deputation to remonfitrate with the Crovemor; and, if he
refused, to offer to undertake the work themselves. At
length the authorities were roused out of their immobility,
and the "impossible" work of forming approaches was
set about in earnest, and quickly completed, but at a pro-
digious cost ; for it was now the midst of the rainy season,
and the new approaches were so urgently demanded, that
a carte blanche was given for their instant execution.

In private life Governor La Trobe was distinguished
by intelligence, extensive knowledge, high-minded recti-
tude, and unostentatious charity ; and his genial dis*
position and personal ajl&bility won him tiie regard of all
who held office under his rule. His memory will pro-
bably be more popular than his presence. Those whom
he employed in places of high trust, if not eminent for
mental power, were always of spotiess integrity, and often
of high moral worth; and this doubtless availed much in

38,162 letters, B36 registered, 74,759 newspapera. All the letteri
and nearly half the oewspapers nere delivered and forwarded on the
two following dajs. This return doea not incluJe the town letters.

ubjGoOglc

196 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

rajeing and maint^ing the moral tone of colonial soaetj.
Pia difficulties were great, and he was often ass^ed ffith
undeserved reproach and charges ae bitter as they were
tmfounded ; but he was too slow in seeking counsel out
of the official pale, too jealous of animadver^on, and too
ready to believe that all censure and oppo«tion must
«pring from corrupt, interested, or TindtctiTe motives.
The advent of his successor. Sir Charles Hotham, was
huled with enthusiasm. It will be curious to wateh his
career, and note how far the glowing anticipations of the
colonisto will be fulfilled.

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTER XV.

POLITICAL AND SOCIAL QUE8TI0MS.

Comparative impotence of public opinion in flie colonies — Itlus-
trat«d by case of Tranaportation — England's treatment of her
colonies — New era of rcBponwble EiecativeB — Act to exclude
conditionallj-pardoned conTicts — DiaaUowed faj the Crown —
Recent Bgitaljon in favour of a neir Act — Question of Croirn
lands — Failure of Home legislation — Caoeea of failure — Success-
ful colonies not hothouse plants— The Australian squatting-syBtem
— Its gradual development — Its evil results — "Unlock the lands"

. FarUal amelioration in land regulations — The Magna Charta of
the squatters — The quesUon at issue — Best mode of deeding
on it.

I AU not now going to enter into lengthy disqaeitionfi
relative to the subjects which form the heading of this
Chapter, because I know well that the English reader cares
almost as much about the politics of Japan as of the
colonies of England. It ie indeed of this very indifference
that the colonists complun so bitterly ; for its practical
effects are felt to be momentoiis and most pernicious.
They do not complain of being abandoned to themselves ;
but of this, that while the mother-country knows nothing
and cares nothing of the affairs of her colonies, she still
insists upon regulating those affairs. They ask that
England should either think of them more or else govern
them less. All this becomes very plain and palpable to

^dbyGoogle

198 THE 60LDGN COI^NT.

every one before he has landed a month on the Australian
shores. That ultimate tribunal to whose decisions all,
from the Imperial Parliament down to the humbleet vestry,
must bow in England, has iu Australia no direct jurisdic-
tion over the most important questions that can affect the
moral and material prosperity of the state. In the old
country, PUBLIC OPINION is like some of those mysterious
i^encies in nature, which, though they can neither be seen
nor handled, are yet ever present and ever active ; ordering,
adjusting, and balancing alt things ; governing the apple
in its fall, the ocean in its ebb and flow, and the {Janets in
their ceasbleaa march. But there is one department of the
state which hardly owns its sway, and that is the Colonial
Office. In the colonies, public opinion regulates all minor
matters, as it does here ; but o^er many of the moat im-
portant interests of the people it exercises no control, ex-
cept as it may be feebly echoed in England. Thus, for
instance, on the subject of transportation ; every man,
woman, and child in Victoria were united in execrating
the practice. In the neighbouring colonies the feeling
against it was almost as strong. The colonists petitioned,
remonstrated, argued, threatened to send back to Britain
a shij^oad of the worst malefactors they could find, as
Franklin proposed to send to Englaiid snakes for her con-
victs. But all in vain: atiU the maternal heart of
England continued to inflict on her expatriated diildren
the worst evil that one state can inflict on another —
worse than pmsoning the wells of water. She ruthlesaly
persisted in inoculating these young communities with the
poison of vice and depravity in its lowest and worst forms.
Year after year new shiploads of felons were dischai^ed

^dbyGoogle

TKANSPOBTATION. 199

upon the devoted ahores of Van Diemen'e Land, whence
they migrated, with or without penniaaion, to the adjacent
colonies, where a scattered population, much wealth, and
great difficulties iu the way of prosectition and conviction
offered every facility for their old pursuits. At length
public opinion in England became fairly directed to the
mouatroua evil ; and, thanks rather to the " Times " news-
paper and Mr. Robert Lowe than to the Colonial Minister,
transportation, the curae of Australia, received its doom.
But it will still be many a long year, if ever, before those
fair regions cease to exhibit the traces of that dreadful
scourge with which England, the humane and generous,
during half a century afflicted her helpless colonies. Had
an enlightened public opinion been brought to bear on iiie
subject at home, or bad the colonists themselves been per-
mitted to arbitrate on the vexed question, (and who had a
better right to do so?) the system could not have subsisted
a month.

On a general review of the history of the 'Rniish co-
lonies dnring the last 100 years, it is hardly too much to
say that, as Russia has been defined to be a despotism
limited by assassination, so the rule o€ our colonies has
been a despotism limited by rebellion. In proof we
might point to the United States, to Canada, to that
recent memorable passage in colonial hist<My,wben the
Cape colonists, as one man, indignantly and successfully
repelled the attempt to throw a shipload of convicts on
th^ shores.

A happier era has, howerer, dawned on the great
colonies of Britain in the South Pacific. En^ish
Ministers, tired of their own repeated t^ures in l^is-

^dbyGoogle

200 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

latwg for the antipodes, have at length accorded to the
coloniea the privilege of framing constitutions for them-
eelves ; and the colonists, during the last two years, have
beea exercising thdr new powers in a way which shows
that they were not unworthy of them. Representative
assemblies and responsible executives form the leading
features of those constitutions. The important question,
however, has still to be determined, — What are the limita-
tions to be placed on the exercise of colonial authority ;
and what powers are to be reserved to the Crown and
the Imperial Parliament?

In a previous Chapter I mentioned that the Legidative
Council of Victoria, alarmed at the frequency of the moat
atrocious outrages, had passed a stringent measure directed
ag^nst the class of " conditionally pardoned " prisoners of
the Crown, by whom many or most of these outrages
were known to have been perpetrated. The " conditional
pardon " was granted by the Governor of Van Diemen's
Xiand, and authorised the convict to proceed to any place
except back to Great Britain, whence he had been trans-
ported. Vast numbers of this class had been attracted to
Victoria by its gold, and the extraordinary facilities for
committing the worst crimes with impunity. It was
ascertained that by far the greater part of those convicted
at the criminal courts were Van Diemen's Land con-
victs. By the new Act, any conditionally pardoned con-
vict who should be found in Victoria was to be deemed
illegally at large, and subjected to imprisonment and hard
labour. The law did not affect those who held free
pardons.

Sir William Deuison, the Governor of Van Diemen's

^dbyGoogle

THE P&EBOGATIVE AND THE PEOPLE. 201

Land, nnder whose anthoriBation the conditionally par-
doned convict cliumed the right of choo^ng his remdence,
felt aggrieved by the new law, and compluned and remon-
strated to the Colonial Secretary. The Home Govern-
ment subsequently dieallowed it, ui^ng that such an
enactment derogated &om the Queen's prerogative of
pardon. But when the disallowance reached Victoria,
the colonists indignantly replied, that they could not have
their lives and properties sacrificed to constitutional
maxims. And so strong and unanimous was the public
feeling, that Lieutenant-Governor Ln Trobe allowed the
Act to remain in force till a remonstrance should have
been sent back to the Colonial Minister. However un-
constitutional the colonial statute might be, it was cleariy
vindicated and authorised by the first great law of self-
preservation.

By the very last mail we learn that this question is
ag^ engrossing the public mind at Melbourne. A de-
monstration has lately been made there, in the shape of a
monster meeting, at which some 12,000 of all classes
attended, to ui^e on the local government the re-enacl-
ment of the Bill of Exclusion, the term of which expired
in October last. The most perfect unanimity prevailed ;
indeed, there are not two opinions on the subject through-
out the country. The question resolves itself into this :
la the preKgative of the Crown to submit to a technical
limitation, or are the lives and properties of the people of
Victoria to be imperilled? Surely reason, justice, and
common sense have but one answer to give. If the
exercise of this prerogative of " mercy " must infallibly
prove the fruitful source of crime, and let loose new

^dbyGoogle

202 THE QOLDEir COLOHT.

hordes of ruffians upon a country already emarting
under tbe outrages of imported malefactors, for^o that
prert^tive, thoogb sanctioned by ten thoueand pre-
cedents from the days of the Nonnan Conqneror to our

Tbe question hss lately assumed a new and very sin-
gular phase. We learn by the latest mails (January, 1855)
that Sir Charles Hotham, the jweeent Goyemor of Victoria,
hoping to effect a compromise between the claims of the
Crown and the interests of bis colony, proposed a new
measure which would have authorised him to send Coui-
missi<wer8 to' tbe ports of Van Diemen's Land, to grant
passports to well conducted men of the class which had
received conditional pardons. But tbe colonists of Van
Diemen's liaad, alarmed and indignant at a measure which
threatened practically to sort their convict population, to
carry off all that was good to Victoria, and leave the dregs
of irreclaimable depravity behind, introduced a counter
measure into their Legislative Council, in virtue of which
Sir C. Hotham's Commissioners are to be seized aod im-
prisoned, and all who may aid them fined 100^ Tbe
squabble has, in fact, all the threatening aspect of the com-
mencement of inter-oolonial warfare. Van Diemen's
Xiand wants to distribute her thousands of felons over ^e
neighbouring colOTiies^ anywhere, so that she may get
rid of them ; just as we read of the inhabitants of a certain
city on tbe lower sieves of Mount Etna, who, when their
own town was threatened with destruction by an ad-
vancing stream of lava, broke down a barrier and diverted
the fiery current upon a neighbouring city ; and as tbe in-
habitants of this city were driven to take up arms in self-

^dbyGoogle

BECENT P0F13LAB DEMONSTBATION. 203

defence, so the people of Victoria resort to tiie most
strii^eot means in their power to dam out the threatened
flood of crime and depravity ; and then they are met by
the Crown lawyers and told that they must desist from
their oppoffltion, for if their country is ruined, their houeea
pillaged, their roads infested by ban^tti, and their very
language depraved, yet that all this is sanctioned by time-
honoured precedent, and demanded by the just claims of
the Soyal Prerogative ! These are some of the bitter
iruite of our long persistence in the unrighteous system of
transportation. So surely does political injustice lead to
administrative embarrassment.

The immediate cause of the late great popular demon-
stration was the receipt of a despatch from the Colonial
Secretary, Sir G. Grey, strongly disapproving of the Act
for the exclusion of conditionally pardoned men, and sug-
gesting to the Lieut,-Govemor that he should at «ice
grant free pardons to those convids who, under the clauses
of this Act, were sufllering under penal sentences in the
gaols of Victoria. The excitement was heightened by a
proposal which had been made by the Legislature of Van
Diemen's Land to liberate speedily the whole convict
population in that unhappy island ; which would prac-
tically amount to letting them loose on the Golden
Colony.

The X2,000 persons of all ranks who aseemUed at
Melbourne last October to avert tlie threatened calamity
offer sufficient proof of the unanimity of feeling pervading
the entire community. What that feeling was, and how
much this vast multitude were in earnest, is shown by
the reeolutiMis passed on that occa^on without erne

^dbyGoogle

204 THE GOLDEN COLOST.

Opposing voice.* How far the feelings of loyalty to the
Biitkh Crown are already compromiaed is indicated by

* These Regolutions irere ae follow : —

" 1. That this meetiog emphatically proteatB that the Sovereign of
the British renlms neither hath nor ought to have any right, prero-
gative, or power, warranting the letting loose in the colony of Victo-
ria of the convicted criminals of other countries or colonies.

" 2. That, as the certain effect of acting upon the suggestion of
the Secretary of State for the Colonies in his recent despatch would
render the Royal prerogative odious to the colonists, and would
seriously endanger the connection between this country and the
parent state, this meeting requests the Right Worshipful Chairman
to forward to the Lieutenant- Giovemor a copy of these resolutions,
and to urge upon His Excellency to refuse compliance with Sir
George Grey's suggestion, and to decline the responsibility of in-
flicting such an outrage upon the colony.

" 3. That the following petition to the Legislative Council, praying
that Honourable House to reject the Influx of Criminals' Bill, and to
repass the Convicts' Prevention Act, with such additional clauses as
may be necessary t4) prevent the admission of convicted criminals
from other colonies under any pretext, be now adopted, signed by the
Ch^man on behalf of the meeting, and that the Bight Worshipful
the Mayor be requested to present the petitJon in his place in the

" To the Hon. the Legislative Council of Victoria, in Council
assembled.

" The petition of the colonists of Victoria, in meeting assembled,

" Humbly showeth, — That your petitioners have learned with
feelings of deep indignation, that a despatch has been addressed to
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor, by the Eight Honourable
the Secretary of State for the Colonies, which proposes to deprive
the colonists of the protection of the Convicts' Prevention Act, and
under the pretext of encroachment upon the Eoyal prerogative,
suggests the letting loose upon the colony of a horde of daring ruffians,
now undergoing punishment according to law.

" That your petitioners emphatically protest that the Sovereign of

^dbyGoogle

POPULAR DEMONSTHATION. 205

the fact thftt one of the speakers, an eminent barrister at
Melbourne, and lately a member of the L^ielature, stud

the British Beatm neither bath nor ought to have anj right, prero-
gative, or power, warranting the letting loose in the colony of Victo-
ria of the conricted criminals of other countries or colonies.

" That your petitioners feel that the cturjing ont of Sir George
Grey's suggestions will r«nder the Royal prerogative odious to the
coloiiiste, and will seriously endanger the connection existing between
this colony and the parent Btate.

" That your petitioners consider the Convicts' Influx Bill now
before your House, a totally inefficient substitute for the Convicts'
Frevention Act, its machinery being too cumbrous to render it easily
workable, and the passport system it proposes to introduce being
altc^ther unsuited to a British community, and repugnant to the
principles of the British constitution.

" Tour petitioners, therefore, pray, that in order to the protection
of the colonbtB from further inundation with foreign crime, and in
vindication of your own right of freedom of legislation, yonr honour-
able House will reject the Convicts Influx Bill, and re-enaot the
Convicts' Frerention Act, with such additional clauses as will prevent
the introduction to Victoria of the convicted criminals of other
countries or colonies, on any pretext whatsoever.

" 4. That in the opinion of this meeting the conduct of Sir
WHliam Denison, in reference to the convict question, as particniariy
exemplified in his despatch to the Secretary of State, dated ISih
March, 1854, deserves the strongest reprobation, inasmnch as he has
not hesitated to seek a personal triumph at the expense of the legis-
lative independence, peace, and future prosperity of Victoria."

The Melbourne Argus concludes ila account of the meeting with
the following remarks : —

" Aa the densely packed masses began to move away, the proceed-
ings being now closed, three cheers were given lor the Queen. Such
a scene as that beheld from the rising ground in front of the Supreme
Court House during the meeting we never before witnessed. The
numbers of those present were varionsly estimated at from ten to
fourteen or fifteen thousand persons. When in the act of cheering.

^dbyGoogle

206 THE GOLDSaf COLONT.

" tli&t he had felt something like a hnroing bluah on
his cheek, on hearing the aDuouncement m the Lieut.-
Govemor'a addrees on opening Council, that the Queen
contemplated presenting the colony with her portrtut."

Never was a sentiment more universal or deep-fleated
in any people than that of hatred of the system of trans-
portation throughout the great Anstralian coloniea, and
eapecially in Victoria. They met in great public meet-
ings, appointed a delegate to England, raised a large fund
to carry out their object, many persons contributing each
1 00/. They at last banded fhemselves into a oommon Aus-
tralasian Anti-Transportation Le^ue. Yet the Anti-Trans-
portation movement in Australia was officially described
in Parliament as a great sham. The colonists, nettled at
such language, ask naturally, — If you treat all our popular
demonstrations, all our urgent appeals to the Queen's
Ministers and to the people of England, as a great sham,
what other means have we of proving that we are in grim
earnest, except that of resorting to physical force, and
taking up arms in self-defence?

In the House of Commons the other night, on Mr.
Roebuck's motion for a Committee of Inquiry as to the
State of the Army, Mr. Gladstone assured the House that
there was a tribunal even higher than that of Parliament
— that tribunal was pnBLic OPiNiOH.

L nnd earneBtnesB of everj one was very impreasive.
When a resolution was put, evcrj Hand weis raised ; those at a dis-
tance from the platform eagerly endeavouring to catch the Chairman's
words. The silence and unanimity at the moment of passing a reso-
lution struck us as being most imposing. The people now began to
leave the spot, and the streets were again thronged in the same
manner aa they were half an hour before the meeting commenced,"

^dbyGoogle

CEOWW LANDB. 207

A Britiah ootoDial community is made of the very eame
materials ae the English, yet in its case public opiaioa is
contemned, slighted, or scornfully ignored, — sometimes
till too late. The severance of the United States from
the mother country stands,- like a beacon in colonial his-
tory to vara all future ministere from arraying the pre-
rogative against the palpable rights and interests of
British colonists.

If any further argument were needed in deciding the
question now agitated, it would be found in the fact that
within a few months, under the new Constitution Act,
Victoria is to be governed by an Executive, responsible
to the Colonial Parliament Now, how could any Execu-
tive hope to carry on the government, in the face of the
oppceition of the entire community on a matter of such
vital importance ? *

In a new country, the lands of the State are the capital
of the state. The hope of obtwning some portion of them
is the mt^et which draws emigrants to its shores. The
sale of these lands supplies funds to the public exchequer.
The facilities or difficulties in obtaining a share of them,
check or retard the stream of emigration, and indirectly
regulate the rank, condition, and pursuits of the emigrants.
Thus the disposal of the waste lands is the question of
questions to a young colony, affecting its revenues, the
rapidity of its settlement, the pursuits of its people, and
the prosperity of all classes. At the same time it is a

• By the overland mail received while tbese pages are paBsing
through the preea we learn that Sir C. Hutbam has yielded to the
pnpular demands, and given the Eojal Assent to a new Convicts'
PrevenUon Act. (February, 18S5.)

^dbyGoogle

208 THE QOLDEK COLONY.

question invol^ng Buch intricate relations that it demanda
the largest experience and most comprehensive views, so
that one would have deemed it might wisely be left to the
legislation of the statesmen of the mother-country, as
requiring all their sagacity and fore^ght. It has been lefl
to their legislation, and what has been the actual result?
A question, in itself diMcult and complex, has been ren-
dered more obscure and embarrassed by partial legislation
founded on erroneous data ; by regulations crude yet com-
plicated, repeatedly patebed up to meet new requirements
and original defects ; by promiaea to particular classes,
never fulfilled, and yet never repudiated. Clashing in-
terests have been created, party strife and passion have
been kindled; the settlement of the country has been
obstructed, and all the difficulties of the local administra-
tion immensely enhanced. These are the actual fruits of
Home legislation on the waste lands of the Crown in
Victoria. The causes of this melancholy failure must be
attributed: — 1st, to the difficulty of obtaining at the dis-
tance of 16,000 miles, accurate data or comprehensive
views of a question in itself intricate, and involving con-
flicting interests ; 2ndly, to the absence of all historical
precedents calculated either to suggest plans or give warn-
ing of dangers ; and lastly, and perhaps chiefly, to the
perpetual changes at the Colonial Office, for no sooner has
a Minister mastered the bearings of the question, and ^
marked out his line of policy, than he is superseded by
another, who has to begin at the A B C of the matter, and
who in his turn yields his office to a third.

It is quite obvious that these perpetual mutations are
far more detremental to the efficiency of the Ministry to

^dbyGoogle

GOVERNMENT OS THE COLONIES. 20&

wbich ia committed the rule of numerous coloniea in &1I
porta of the world, where new interests are ever springing
up and requiring re-adjustment, than they can be to any
dep^iment of the Home administration. And this consi-
deration suggests that the administration of the coloniea
should be at least shared by a permanent Board of Con-
trol. The last four years have seen no less than ^ve
Cabinet Ministers succeBsively holding the destinies of our
colonies in their hands. To master the intricate questions
submitted to their final deeiwon would have demanded
more time than the whole of the brief tenure of office of
each of the Uat four of them. Hence matters affecting
the vital interests of the colony, perhaps to all future time,
must either be crudely and hurriedly patched up, and got
out of hand, or else staved off to a more convenient
season.

It is worth remarking that the most successful colonies
in the southern hemisphere are just those which haie
sprung up spontaneously, like hardy indigenous plants in
congenial soil ; while those which have been planted with
great care and cost, and afterwards forced like hothouse
plants, have proved signal failures. Witness, on the one
hand, Victoria, the first of British colonies, on which
Britain has expended — nothing; and on the other, the
colony of " Swan River," or the " Canterbury Settle-
ment," in New Zealand, — a contrast highly suggestira
and instructive. One may be aptly symbolised by
" the tree planted by the waters, that spreadeth out
her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat
Cometh, but her leaf shall be green, nnd shall not be
careful in the year of drought;" and the others by " the

^dbyGoogle

210 THE GOLDEN COLOMT.

heath in the deeert, that shall not see when good cometh ;
but shall iahalut the parched places in the wilderness,
in a salt land and not inhabited."

To retam to liie question the moat important to the
progress and prosperity of tbe Austraiian coloniee, — that
of the disposal of tbe Crown lands. When divested of
extraneous matter it may be stated in a few words. On
tbe founding of New South Wales, at the close of tiie last
centory, this portion of tbe Anetraliaa continent was
occupied by scattered migratory tribes of a degraded and
timid aboriginal race. They bad no fixed dwellings and
they cultivated no lands. It was soon discovered that tbe
climate and soil were admirably adapted for pastoral
pursuits. A breed of fine-wooUed sheep was obtained
and propagated. The sterile lands along tbe coast baring
been occupied, the settlers discovered a passage through
tbe defiles of the Blue Mountains, which rose like a wall
between them and the interior, and entered upon vast,
grassy, well-watered phuns beyond. The pastoral settle-
ment of the country thenceforward received a fresh im-
petus, and rapidly developed itself. The wool, too, not
only immensely increased in quantity but its v^ue began
to rise in the home-market. As the ancient Hebrew patri-
archs roamed over the plains and valleys of Palestine and
located themselves at their pleasure, so these early settlers,
having pushed beyond tbe then limits of settlement, ". took
up " just what lands they pleased, appropriatiDg as much
as, on the most liberal allowance, could be needed for
their flocks, asking leave of no man, and , only respecting
the claims of previous settlers. In this way many hun-
dred leagues of territory were soon occupied by a scanty

^dbyGoogle

THE SQUATTING DYNASTr. 211

European population. Tbe settlers, from the mode in
which they acquired possession, were called " Squatters ; "
a term which, to the English ear, may surest ideas of a
rugged, illiterate, gipsy-like class, but which, to the Austra-
Haii mind, recalls very different i^sociations, — the squat-
ters being really tlie great territonal lords of Atistralia.

In the earlier years of the squat^g dynasty every
man did what was right ia hi« own eyes. But as the
country came to be iully occupied, and the value of the
" stations " or "runs" became greatly increased, frequent
disputes necessarily arose between conflicting claimants
and neighbours ; for the boundaries of property were ill-
defined, and the only right to possesion was that of pre-
occnpancy. As a cure to tbia evil, " Crown Land Com-
missioners " were appointed by the local government, each
having a very extensive district assigned to hint These
were to adjust disputes, and arbitrate between rival claim-
ants. At the same time it was made compulsory on
every squatter to take ont a licence for the occupation of
his run. The proceeds of this tax or rent went primarily
to defray the expenses of the new establishment of com-
missioners ; and the latter were to issue the licences
yearly; 10/. beijig the cost of a licence. Every settler,
however large or small his run might be, paid the same
sum. This was the first step in legalising the squatters'
possession of the " waste lands of the Crown." It arose
out of tlie necesuties of the case, and was clearly intended
as a temporary measure, suited to the colony in its transi-
tional state of partial settlement, and to be superseded
when these " waste lands " should be required for tJie
orfinary pursuits of industry. This provi^onal measure

^dbyGoogle

212 THE GOLDEN COLOKr.

has, under various Bubseqaeot modifications, subsisted to
the present time. First, the rent to the Crown was
equalised by making the licence-fee proportionate to the
number of sheep depastured by the holder of the licence,
at the rate of 10/, for every 4000 sheep. This was an
evident improvement on the original measure. A more
important change was next made, involving large concea-
Biona to the equatter. The runs had gone on increasing
in value, and were bought and sold for considerable sums.
The rent was wholly disproportionate to the benefits re-
ceived, and the tenare being only for a single year, the
occupants naturally sought to acquire a more permanent
holding. Their representation s at length took effect with
the Home Government. Under the authority of an Act
of Parliament, Orders in Council were issued, authorising
the squatters to claim from the Colonial Executive leases
of their runs. All the lands of the colony were divided
into three classes, — tiie settled, or that around the towns^
the intermediate, and the umettkd, — the latter including
by far the lai^est part of the colony. In the unsettled
districts the leases were to be for fourteen years, in
the intermediate for eight years, while in the settled they
were to remtun, as before, for a single year. Provision
was also made for renewing the leases und^r certain
conditions. Another important point conceded to the
equatter was the right of purchasing 640 acres, or a less
quantity of his run, at the minimnm price of Crown land
in Australia, viz. 11. per acre.

This was the second great step in consolidating and
giving permanency to a practice which had first grown up
by chance, and had afterwards been recognised by govern-

ed byGoOglc

EVILS OP THE SQUATTING SYSTEM. 213

ment na a, provisioiial and transitional Arrangement. Ita
ill effects were soon visible. All who did not share the
benefits of this liberal grant felt themselves ^grieved by it.
The whole colony was split up into two classes. The first
consisted of the squatters, to whom these vast territorial
concessions had been made ; the other comprised the bulk
of the colonists, — but especially the land-owners, all of
whom had purchased their possessions, and most of them
at upwards of 17. an acre, which was the minimum price
of land. It was not, however, at first that the most
mischievous effects of the measure became mnnifest. The
equivocal wording of the Order in Cotmtal gave colour to"
the demands of some of the squatters that no part of their
runs should he sold, not even to meet the growing want of
agricultural Unds. In deference to these claims the lands
of the Interior were for a long time altogether withheld :
until very recently, they have been offered for sale only
to a most limited extent, altogether disproportionate to the
wants and wishes of the colonists. It is difficult duly to
estimate the evils resulting from this ni^ardliaess ia
placing the Crown land at the disposal of those wli»
would purchase it. The competition at the public land-,
sales was so great that the small capit:di8t was debarred
from obtaining any desirable allotment,' and. withdrew
from the contest Thus agriculture was checked, and the
permanent occupation of the country by au industrious
yeomanry seriously retarded, while encouragement was
^ven to land speculations and jobbing. The towns became'
overgrown and overcrowded ; and those who, under happier
oronmistanceB, would have invested their earnings in the
purchase of laud, now spent them in tlie haunts of in-

^dbyGoogle

214 THE 60LDBR COLOUT,

tetnpei-ance and vice. The squatters, bdng coneidercil the
cause of these evils, were assailed with all the bitterness of
party strife. Finally, the local government was so
placed between the two parties that every one of ita
acts WAS regarded by one or the other as unjust and
aggresave. Not could it escape from the dilemma by a
general revision of the Land Sales Regulations, for these
were beyond its jurisdiction.

In the neighbouring colony of South Australia a dif-
ferent practice has obtained, offering greater facilities to the
small capitalist for obtuning allotments of agricultural
lands. The result has been that South Austria not only
produces enough for her own oonsumption, bnt exports
her produce largely to the sister colony.

These cvile of the Victorian system have of late grown
80 great and so obvious that during the last two years the
cry of " Unlock the lands !" has resounded from end to end
of the country, — has become ^e watchword of political'
meetings, and even the theme of popular ballads, applauded
by enthusiastic audiences. " Unlock the lands I " cried
the Melbourne townsman, as he paid his half-crown for
a cabbage, or handed over two or three hundred pounds to
some " land-shark," for a few square yards of land in the
snbarbs. " Unlock the lands," echoed the gold-digger at
Bendigo, whose eye now scarcely ever beheld the green
produce of the garden, and who, weary of his gipsy-like,
hugger-mugger, hand-to-mouth mode of life, longed for a
hut and an acre which he might call his own. And then
he remembered that he paid 18/.* a year for digging on a

* XhU 3um vaa much reduced about a jear ago. It is now 61. a
year, or II. per month.

^dbyGoogle

COMPLAINTS OF THE DIGGEE8. 215

email juitch, with the chance of finding gold there, and
that to the opulent squatter was granted thousanda of
acres for lOZ, a year. And he adted if thia was even-
handed justice ? And nest inquired why a lai^e propor-
tion of the Colonial Legislature should be returned by
t^ese squatters, while the 80,000 colonists in the Crold
Fields should have not a semblance of representation in
&a.t assembly which levied the taxes and disposed of the
revenues 7 No marvel that such considerations created a
general discontent among the population at the mines,
which con^sted not of rude unlettered hinds, but com-
piised a full average share of thoughtful intelligence and
self-reapect.

During the last year (1854) tlie mischief has been much
abated. Country lands have been offered much more freely
for sale, and small allotments have bean sold iu the
neighbourhood of the mines. But why this delay of
three years in a measure so <^riousl7 demanded and
actually clamoured for by the miners themselves ? Why
diould a government, armed with immense revenues, be
so much slower than private individuals in overtaking and
ad^ting itself to the requirements of the new era in the
history of the colony ?

The squatters, who, with the lud of the Government
nominees, have hitherto cwnmanded a majority in ths
Legidative Assembly, are fighting hard to hold their own,
and demand the issue of the leases promised in 1847.
Their opponents (that is, the bulk of the colonists) de-
nounce this issue of their leases as grossly unjust and
impolitic In the meantime both parties anxiously await
the long-deferred decision of the authorities at home The

^dbyGoogle

216 THE OOLDBN COLOHT.

chief poitits' at issue are theee, — let., Sb&U the leaaes be
isBued or refused? 2iid. The squatter claime to hoM his
run iu entirety, or, if any portion be, sold, to receive com-
pensation fur the same. Shall this d^m be allowed?
The latter is obviously a most importAnt question. In
support of his claim, the squatter refers to the Magna
Ckarta of his class, the Orders in Council of 1847, which
declare that, during the continuance of the lease, no part
of the run can be sold to any other than the lesaee. But,
in reply, his opponent triumphantly points to these words
introduced into the same Order in Council as a saving
clause, and which would seem conclusive on the point: —
" That nothing in these Hegulatione, or in any lease to be
granted under the powers hereby vested in the Governor,
shall prevent the said Governor or officer for the timfe
hdng adminiBtering the government of the said colony,
from making grants or sales of any lands within the limits
of the run, or lands comprised in such lease, for public
purposes, or dispcraing of it in such other manner as for the
public interest may seem besti such lands as may be re-
quired for the sites of churches, schools, or parsonages ; or
for the construction of high roads, &c. &c. ; or for the use
or benefit of the aboriginal inhabitants of the country ; or.
for public buildipgs ; ot as places for the interment of the
dead ; or places for the recreation or amusement of the in-
habitants ; or any town or village ; or as the sites of public
quays or landing-places on the sea coast, &c. ; or for the
purpose of sinking shafts and diggings for coal, iron, &c ;
or for any other purposes of public defence, safety, utility,
convenience, or enjoyment, of for otherwise facilitdting the
improvement and settlement of the colont/."

^dbyGoogle

THE LAND QUESTION; 217

The truth appears to be thie : — tfie framers of the measure
never dreamt of bo rapid an expansion of the distant
colony they were legislating for; they conceived that the
lands of the interior would not for many years be required
for other than pastor^ pursuits.* They therefore a^eed
to grant leases of these lands to the then holders. But
anxious to guard against the possibility of this grant being
made prejudicial to the interests of the country at large,
they introduced the above saving clause, which they
deemed comprehensive enoogh to meet every possible
coD^geni^.

The whole question has now become involved with so
jnany intricate relations that, however decided, injustice
must be done to some. It would be more equitable and
wise to arbitrate, not on the technical grounds of verbal
interpretation, but on the pomprehenaivc principles of ab-
stract justice, founded on a general view of the entire
subject. As the colonists themselves are all more or less
interested parties, they ore disqualified from being fa'r
judges. The home authorities need ample and accurat«
data to enable them fitly to arbitrate. Perhaps the most
satisfactory course would, be to send out to the colony two
or three able commissioners, who should inquire and re-
port on the whole subject of the disposal of the Crown
lands ; and their report might afterwards be submitted to
a Select Committee of the House of Commons, and the
matter definitively set at rest.

The main question at issue between the squatters and
the colonists is not the only subject of dispute involved in

* It is commonly Boid tfaat the Order ia Council was founded upon
false Blatements made hj intereBtcd parties.

^dbyGoogle

218 THE GOLDEN COLOKT.

the consideration o£ this patchwork Code of Land Itegu-
latioQS. Other anomalira and indefensible proceedings are
legalised by these Regulations, and yet are so repugnant
to common sense that the Government sometimes refiises
to carry them out. Thus by one provision any huge
capitalist is empowered to select and purchase 20,000
acres of land within the Settled (or meet valnable) Dis-
tricts, at the rate of II. per acre. This Is a double injus-
tice, — let, to the State, — for these lands are worth much
more (perhaps ten times more) than If. per acre: 2ndly,
to the squatters who happen to be located on the lands
thus selected, and who in such ca^s are obliged to give
up possession to the purchaser, who then resells at ad-
vanced prices. These anomalies clearly show the necessity
for a general revision of the laws relating to tiie disposal
of the Crown lands iu Victoria.

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTEK XVI.

GEOLOGY OP THE TICTORJAN GOLD FIELDS.

Fb^'Eical Geograpb; of the Gold Districts — Granite — Metaroorpbic

rocks — Quartz yeins — Auriferoui drift in gullies and on hill-tops —
The "White Hills" —Lava Plains — Tbeir relative age — Extinct
Tolcanoes — Mount Ljell — Mount Aittin — General conclusions rela-
tive to the Gold Fields — Their resemblance to the auriferous dis-
trict of North Wales.

The gold districts of Victoiia, In the most comprehensive
sense, form a broad zone stretching right across the country
from east to west, and l^iog nearly midway between the
southern coast and the northern boundary line of the
colony. (See general map.) This region may be described
as hilly rather than mountainous. Fasaing through it in
almost any direction, the traveller comes alternately and
successiTely upon, 1. Isolated granite hills, lightly sprinkled
with scrubby timber. 2. Kocky ranges intersected by
steep glens and gullies, and covered with thick forest;
the gullies open upon river valleys, with grassy alluvial
" flats." 3. Monotonous flat or rolling country, covered
with gum-tree forests. 4. High table lands, destitute of
trees, and cleft by rocky fissures from one to two hundred
feet deep, through which run creeks or rivers. 5. Plains
of rich arable land, out of which rise rounded, or steep and

^dbyGoogle

220 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

rocky, isolated hills. Sucfa are the characteristic features
of the central or auriferous districtB of Victoria.

These several peculiarities of configuration, vegetation,
and external aspect are in each case to be referred to coinci-
dent differences of geological formation. So uuequivocal,
indeed, is the connection between the landscape of the
country and its geology, that you may confidently pro-
nounce upon the constituent rocks of a hill or range while
still distant from it. The extreme simplicity of the struc-
ture of the country renders this vastly easier than in a
region like our own England, where Kature has given us
an epitome of her world-wide volume of rocky records in
brief.

Having enumerated the several marked physical features
of the auriferous regions of Victoria, we may place the
coincident geological divisiona in a parallel column, and
describe them in the same order,

1. Granite occurs in detached mountwn masses of no
great extent or height, forming isolated hills (as Mount
Alexander), rising with a long sweep to a serrated crest.
Sometimes it forms one side of a hill while the slates
abutting on it form the other. On the flanks and summits
of such hills the granite rock protrudes in fantastic blocks,
pillars, and ** tors,"" or else peeps above the surface, fonn-
ingvast tabularmassea slightly rounded; this convexity does
not result from weathering, but from the spheroidal struc-
ture of the granite itself, which is then commonly coarse
grained, and peels off under atmospheric action in concen-
tric scales or coals, varying from a quarter of an inch to

• S«e the Tignette, p. 1.

^dbyGoogle

GEOLOSr OH' THE GOLD FIELDS. 221

five or BIX inclies in thicknesB. These hilla sometimes rise
out of an undulating granitic country, partially covered
witli the detritus of the adjacent mountains.

2. Metamorphic Rocks. — The moat remarkable features
of the gold-producing -regions are those chEuns of rough,
, rocky hills, densely wooded, and intersected with steep
gullies and ravines, distinguished by the colonists as the
" ranges." In the gold districts, these ranges always con-
sist of metamorphosed rocks, equivalenta of the Lower
Silurian and Sub-sUurian or Cambrian formataons io
England and Wales. The series con^rises clayslate,
micaceous schist, red and yellow sandstone, quartz con-
glomerat«, and other rocks. They occupy extensive
areas around the granitic centres aganst which they are
highly tilted. The structure and conditions of these
ancient crystalline rocks, as developed in the gold country
of Victoria, is singularly simple and uniform. The whole
are cleft into beds or bands by a system of cleavage joints,
running N. and S., and dipping nearly vertical. An ex-
traordinary uniformity of dip and strike reigns over very
lai^e areas, strikingly contrasted with the complex irregu-
larities observable in the contemporaneous strata of
Europe. This cleavage structure is so strongly marked
that it becomes difficult to determine the planes of strati-
fication ; and this difficulty is increased by the want of
good natural sections, and the general absence of fossils.
That these rooks are truly stratified is, however, proved
beyond donbt; first, by the existence of regular series of
broad beds of widely dlfiereut rocks, amongst which is a
conglomerate of coarse waterioom grains of quartz ; se-
cond, by the very recent discovery of some Lower Silurian

^dbyGoogle

232 THE GOLDEN COLOHT.

fosails, OB communicated in a letter by Mr. Selwyn to
Profesaor Kamsaj, and by him made pubUc in the laat
number of the " New Edinburgh Fhilosopbical Journal."
The strike and dip of the strata appear nearly to coincide
with that of the deavage joints.

The discovery of these fossils establishes the geolc^cal
age of the foimation, which previously had only been sur-
mised from its lithological resemblance to the synchronous
rocks of Korth Wales and Cumberland and from the
analogies of other gold districta. Mr. Selwyn has also
established the very interesting fact that the granite of
Mount Alexander sends out veins into these metamorphic
rock) at the line of contact ; proving that the granitic mass
has been molten since the deposition of the ecMstB.*

These ancient upraised and altered strata are more espe-
cially the sites of the rich gold deposits. The original
matrix of the gold seeniis to have been, without doubt,
wholly, or in great part, in the veins of quartz, whi<^
form their chief characteristic. These are very numerous,
traversing the country frbm north to south, and dipping
at a high angle. They vary from eighteen inches to six
feet in width, eometimes thinning out as they descend, or
uniting with other adjacent veins. They are traversed by
nearly vertical joints, parallel to the walla of the vein ;
sometimes by a reticulation of irregular joints running in
all directions. But besides these great lodes, the whole
mass of the rocks is intersected by a complete network of
smaller quartz veins, some not thicker than a wafer. These

* Mr. SeliTf n has Burvejred a portion of the Centr&l Gold Fields
for the GoTernment of Victoria, and is still engaged upon the work.

^dbyGoogle

GBOLOOr OF THE GOLD FIELDS. 223

run in all directions, and are bo numerous that a single
Bijuare yard of rock will scHuetimea present many of them.

It is well known that in most gold-bearing countries
the quartz veins grow poorer as you descend; and it ia
concluded that that portion of them which has disappeared
by denudation was much richer than what remains. I
have sought bat have never met with any evidence that
such is the case with those in Victoria. Two quartz
veins have been worked near Forest Creek ; but I could
not learn that these grew poorer as the miners got down
deeper : the reverse seemed to be rather the case.

3. Auriferous Drift. — The ancient metamorphic slates
and sandstones have undergone extenMve denudation since
the period when the country assumed its present general
configuration. This is manifest from the vast accumula-
tions of drift or alluvium in the existing valleys. The de-
tritus of this or some previous epoch has been spread out
over large areas around the higher hills, forming those
tracts of monotonous rolling forest country before described.
But these localities appear not to produce gold, or at least
not to be worth working. AH tbe rich deposits are found
in or heneath drifl accumulated in the valleys within the
limits of the ranges themselvesi

In short, the gold, after having been separated from its
matrix during the gradual process of denudation and dis-
integration, appears never to have travelled far, but to
have been deposited with the coarser detritus near the
parent rock where it was originally generated, and &om
which it was, by the gradual grinding down of the matrix,
slowly liberated. In its original position in situ, the gold
occurred in vertical veins of hard quartz plunging down

^dbyGoogle

22-1 THE OOLDEK COLOSV.

deep into the rocka, and only to be got at by the moat
laborious operationB of mining. In the gold alluviiuna
Nature has accompliehed this work for ue, and has spread
out her treasure in a nearly horizontal bed, beneath an
acoumttlation of drift, from whence it can in most coses
he obtmned with comparatively little labour ; though
indeed this drift is sometimes concreted into a mass harder
than granite, and of great depth, even to a hundred feet;
and often the richest prizes lie buried beneath the most
intractable rocks. Yet^ on the whole, Nature has done
more than three-fourths of the miner's work for him; has
broken up, ground down, and sorted the matrix, and con-
centrated the coDtfuned gold within a narrow Bpace ; and
thus much of the precious metal, which was scattered too
meagrely through its parent rock to he worth the labour
of extracting, is now avwlable for man's use.

This local drift, from whence is extracted nearly the
whole of the 100 tons of gold annually supplied &om Vic-
toria, occurs under three different conditions. (See Map,
jfiff. 5. p. 225.) First, filling the bottoms of the valleys
which intersect the auriferous " ranges." Where the
valley opens the surface of the alluvium spreads into a
fertile "flat." When the valley emerges from the rocky
defiles those fiats become continuous, and a quarter of a
mile or more in width.* Such accumulations are usually
from ten to forty feet deep. They consist of successive
beds, in pretty regular stratification, of red and yellow
clays, sand, and gravel of rolled pebbles of quartz and
slate, such as might be found in the channel of a modem

* The view, Rate III., is on one of these fists.

^dbyGoogle

O&OLOGT OF THE GOLD FIELDS.

Fig. S. Map of Part of Fryer's Creek Digg'iDgs, Mount Aleiander.
Scalt 2 incAei to a mile.

L^ Hill worklnii

Fig. 6. Section tram C to D on Map.

DigmzedbyGoOgle

226 THE GOLDEN COLONY.

Etrenm. The creek which at present drains the valley
carves its channel through the surface of the drift; but
the course of the actual creek has no relation whatever to
the line of deponit of gold, which lies beneath the drift in
the channel formed by the meeting of the opposite rocky
eides of the valley, either on a " bottom" of pipeclay, or
between the edges of the vertical slates.* (See ^(7. 1.
p. 48.) Secondly, in the bottoms of the lateral gullies
which fall into the main vallejs. The inclosing sides of
these gullies are often steep ; but they descend with a
gentle slope into the main valley.t There the drill has
much the same character aa in the flats, except that it is
harder and dryer, and the rounded and nater-wom pebbles
nre less common. The gold is here commonly found on
a "bottom" of pipechty. Thirdly, the goldn^rift forms
rounded hills flanking the main valleys (see Jig. 5., c.)
These hills, which have scarcely been noticed in published
accounts, are perhaps the most remarkable and interesting
ol^ects on the Victorian gold-fielde.

To the diners they have proved treasuries of mitold
wealth. To the geologists they stand as silent witnesses
to events which happened long anterior to the intro-

• When the diggers hme saak their BhsflB through the oyerljing
beds of the dritl in the vollej bottom, the; commoiilj meet with
springs which are often too powerful for their pumps and bncketi,
and eompel them to desist before they have proved the value of the

t In a well-worked valley, where every little gnlly hat been turned
np, the "diggings" as seen from a ccmmanding height have much
the character of streams, red nnd yellow, winding down the gullies,
meeting and expanding in the flatu, and sweeping round prominent
headlands of rock. This is shown in the view, Plate IV.

^dbyGoogle

GEOLOGY OF THE GOLD FIELDS,

227

duction of our race on the globe, yet At this moment
powerfully affecting the destinies of tiie southern hemi-
sphere and of maakind. They suggest interesting ques-
tions as to the circumBtances under which these golden
depofiits were accumulated, and of the agencies which
effected the va«t denudation of which, in the existence of
such great deposits, we have unequivocal proof We
might have expected to find the auriferous detritus lying
in tlie valleys and hollows ; but here we see it cresting
hills two or three hundred feet high. (Seej^. 7.)

7, Section ihrongh an AarifeToas gully, Ffyer'a Creek, shoving
tbe flanking hill* corered with the drift
Heighl iffhSb aboat 150 /ccL

a. Irrrgulirii ilraUSHl drin. e. Plpedar-

i. Goldbrd. d- SUlu, Sindit«i«, &c.

Some of these hills have acquired grest celebrity among
the diggers under the name of the "White IIilla"and
the " Red Hills." They are found at all the chief gold
fields in tlie central districts. The "Golden Point" at
Ballarat, the first rich deposit discovered in the colony, is
of this class. The first thing that strikes us ia the re-

^dbyGoogle

228 THE GOLDEN COLOKT.

mnrkable fact that tbej are always found on one side only
of the valley, viz. the south or ea«t eide. ThU ia the
case at Forest Creek, at Fryer's Creek, at Bendigo, and,
I believe, at Ballarat. They commonly stand at the
junction of tiie lateral gullies with the main valley, or at
tiie meeting of two valleys. They arc usually detatJied
on three sidee, and on the fourth unite with the rocky
slopes of the higher ranges in the rear or further back
from the valley. In fact, they occupy and nearly fill «p
what would otlterwise be a wide valley. But, as already
said, they are never found on more than one side of the
valley: on the opposite side, the rocky rangcB, covered
with Utile or no detrital matter, descend right into the
bottom, generally much more precipitously than on the
side of the gold-bearing hille.

On further examination of these singular elevations we
find that the actual depout of gold ia usually on the
flattish top of the hill (beneath the drift;), and on the
brow (see^jr. 7.), yet not all round the brow, but that it is
usually richest on those sides which lace and seem to look
up some opposite gully or some reach of the miun valley.
Thus the " Golden Point " at Ballarat stands at the
junction of the River Le%h with a large tributary gully,
and seems to look up the stream, which here nukes an
abrupt bend after uniting with the subordinate gully*,
this, aa well as the m^n valley having proved highly pro-

* The rich "Red Hill" at the junction of the Adelaide Gully with
Forest Creek is another case in point. So bIeo the hill on Frjer'a
Creek repreflented in Plate IV., which, however, is rith on the side
looking down the stream.

^dbyGoogle

!l

•a

I

bjGooglc

ubjGoOglc

GEOLOOT OF THE GOLD FIELDS. 229

ductive. The slopes of the bill beneath the crest eome-
times yield a crop of gold witbin a few inches of tbe sur-
face. The precious metal is tlien commonly mixed with
gravel, and reposes on a tbin bed of unctuous clay. But
tbe golden deposit is generally again met with beneath tbe
thick mass of drift in the gully below. The drift is thickest
at tbe top, becomes eballower on tbe slopes, and agun grows
deeper at tbe base, as shown in^^. 7. The beds compo^ng
it are everywhere conformable to the sur&ce.

There is a grand successioD of these bills along tbe
valley of Forest Creek. All of them have been worked,
and the summita are covered with tbe upturned earth.
On ascending to the higher bills from whence the eye
ranges over tbe entire valley, they form conspicuoua and
remarkable objects in the landscape, — isolated, now en-
tirely denuded of trees, with their bright yellow or white
capping strongly relieved by the dark forested bills behind
them, while a few white tents gleam on their summits
and slopes.

The base or nucleus of each of these hills is either a rocky
bar or promontory advanced out into the valley ftom tbe
ranges in tbe rear, or else a great mass of pipeclay. On
this foundation the bill is built up. On tbe summit the
drift is from fifteen to sixty or seventy feet in depth.
Here it is often very irregularly bedded, as though depo-
sited by a variable eddy or current, or on a beach.* It
consists of beds of compact red, yellow, and white clay,
with interstratified layers of quartz pebbles, and gravel con-

* This ia remarkabl; the case at the Golden Puint, BalUrat, where
the different colours of the clays, &c. render the fact conipicuoas.

^dbyGoogle

230 THE GOLDEN COLOKT.

creled into a very hard conglomerate by red ferruginoue
inatt«r or some other enveloping cement, which ao effect-
ually binds the whole together that, on being fractured,
the pebbles are cleft ae well as the matrix. SometimeB,
as at Ballorat, fragments or boulders of this red ferru-
ginouB conglomerate are found with gold largely difftisect
through their mass. Large boulders of quartz, rounded
by watery action, are sometimes found deep in the drift,
weighing several hundred- weight • ; but it is remarkable
that gold ie seldom or never met with in these boulders.

The existence of thick masses of irregularly stratified
drift with boulders on the tops of hills 200 or 300 feet high
demonstrates that the gold-bearing detritus is neither the
mere result of atmospheric disintegration, nor has been
deposited by insignificant streams such as now drain these
valleys.

Iliere is in the valley of Bendigo a series of six or
seven " "White Hills," similar, to those above described,
but distinguished by the abundance of quarts conglome-
rate and of rounded water-worn pebbles of quxrtz. The
stratified drift is about 60 feet deep, and beneath lies a
deposit of soft pipeclay with the lustre of satin, laminated
vertically, and of unknown depth. There is a similar.
' White Hill" at Forest Creek. Such hills may consist
of the detritus of quartz veins immediately adjacent They
generally yield very largely. The diggers have sunk shafts
through the pipeclay to a great depth in search of " a.
second bottom," but without success.

The great masses of pipeclay which so often underlie
the gold deposit on the hills and in the gullies form one

^dbyGoogle

GEOLOQT OF THE GOLD FIELDS. 231

of the most characteristic features of tJie Victorian (Sold
Fields. What are their real nature and origiD is an inter-
esting problem. The pipeclay appears to be iaterstratified
ia broad bands with the slates and sandstones, and has,
like them, a vertical cleavage. The most probable theory
seems to be, that such masses are a portion of the funda-
mental rooks, which have here been altered by local Plu-
tonic action. The gold is found in irregular patches, or
pockets, on the surface of the pipeclay. At Ballarat
the whole mass of drift and underlying pipeclay is tra-
versed by vertical fissures, or cracks, stained with femi-
^nous matter; and where these crossed the auriferous
stratum there was found a rich pocket of gold imbedded
in a bluish clay. This fact shows that the position of the
so-called alluvial gold must not be considered aa solely due
to the action of running water. If it had been, why should
it be a^r«gated around these vertical fissures ? Further :
in the quartz veins it occurs almost universally in strings,
threads, and small bunches. HoW| then, is it that in
these alluvial deposits we so constantly find it in lumps
or nuggets, varying from the size of a pea or bean up to
masses 130 lbs. in weight? We must seek for some other
agency capable of aggregating numerous small grains into
laige masses. The process ia probably analogous to that
by which flints and "balls" of ironstone are formed,*
The nuggets themselves have not the appearance of water-

• Much light is thrown upon this inicresling but obscure subject
by the experiments of Mr, David Forbee, recentlj detailed to the
Geological Society, in which he succeeded iu artificially foiiating
various rocks at » heat btdow that of fluidity.

^dbyGoogle

232 THE GOLDBN COLONY.

worn masses. SometimeB their surface is nunutely wrinkled
or chased.

4. Bataltie Lava, — In Victoria the trappean and vol-
canic formations merge into each other by snch imper-
ceptible gradfltionB that it is often difficult to define their
limits. When a deep section of a lava phun is lud bare
it will sometimes happen that the upper portion is vesicular,
while the lowest part of the mass is dense as an ancient
basalt, the intermediate portion exhibiting a character
between the two.

There are two kinds of lava plains in Victoria, and
both are found in dose proximity to the gold fields. In
one the surface consiste of a deep bed of rich black soil,
out of which rise rocky knolls and ridges of a black
vesicular lava, apparently protuberances in the original
surface of the molten rock.* In the other, the hard
basalt is covered with a thick stratum of tough clay,
yielding a scanty herbage. It is in the latter especially
that we find the remarkable undulations of surface called
"Dead Men's Graves,"! resembliug nothing so much as
the graves of a vast crowded cemetery. The origin of
these elevations and depreesiouB, covering large level areas,
is an interesting question. That they are connected with
volcanic or igneous action seems cert^n from their being
only found on such formations. That they do not result
from ordinary volcanic action is also certain, as they are,
in a world-wide view, rare phenomena. They are not
found on isolated lava hills, but may often be seen on the

* As BTO-jJid EjDetoD, north of Mount Macedon.
■)- S«3 paje]4.

^dbyGoogle

OEOLOGT OF THB GOLD FIELDS. 233

elopcB of valley B interaecting lava plains. In this case they
form parallel or diverging ridges, about ^ghteen inches
high (reminding yoo of a newly-mown field), all of which
follow the slope of the hillside, as streams of liquid matter
would have done. This fact seems to hint at a solution
of the enigma, and to suggest that the undulations and
ridges are due to some original inequaliries of surface,
and might he referable to the flow of floods of half-con-
gealed volcanic mud, .such as is known sometimes to
descend from Vesuvius, produced by water flowing over
and mixing with volcanic dust, and termed " lava d'acqua."
The rivers and creeks which traverse these pluns
usually run in deep ravines or troughs, exhibiting sec-
tions through the compact lava from 50 to 200 feet deep,
as shown in fig. 8. In a deep section the lower part of
the mass sometimes assumes a columnar structure.

Fig. 8. Section acroas the Valley of lie River Werribee i IraTei^og
the Lara Plains between Melbourne and Geelong.

The margins of such troughs are often somewhat higher
than the plain. This circumstance is readily ezphuned
if we attribute the origin of the fissure to an uplifting
movement from below, similar to that by which cracks
or fissures have been produced during modem earth-
quakes..

^dbyGoogle

234 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

When these baaaltic pluss are traversed by numeroiu
intersecting valleys they are resolved into flat-topped hills
with steep esoarpmenta. Plate V. exhibits this character
in a view of a picturesque valley near the river Colihan in
the Mount Alexander district

These vast tabular mafieea of lava extend over immense
areas, and lie upon rocks of different kindfi and ages.
They circle round the sedimentary ranges, advance up
between their spurs, and usually terminate abruptly with
a steep scarp, forming, with the slope of the mountains,
a' trough, which often serves as the channel of a stream.
The ateep scarp no doubt represents the abrupt termina-
tion of the advandng lava current, and is expluned by
focts observed in modem eruptions in other countries.

Age of the Lava Plaint. — The streams or rather sheets
of lava forming these plune are probably to be referred
to very different periods. That some are of a date sub-
sequent to the formation and deposit of the auriferous
drift might be inferred from several facts observable at
the line of junction. Thus sometimes the level of the
lava plain is higher than the lower slopes of atijaceot
meteinorphic hills covered with quartz gravel. In other
localities similar hills rise apparently from under the
margin of a sheet of lava. But these indirect proofa are
verified by a very recept letter from Mr. Selvvyn, who
states that the di^era are now actually in one place sink-
ing shafts through the lava down to the auriferous drift
beneath. It is certain then that streams of lava have
been discharged subsequently io the deposit of the auri-
ferous drift;

But it is equally cert^n that the date of other outbursts

^dbyGoOgk'

ubjGoOglc

ubjGoOglc

GEOLOGY 0¥ THE GOLD FIELDS. 235

ef lava was not only prior to the depoait of the auriferouB
drift, but also anterior t« the exiatence of those quartz Teine
out of whose detritus the drift ia in part formed. For
certain lava plains are intersected by masaive quartz Yeina,
Bimilar to those which run through the rich gold-fields, and
like those auriferous. Some of them at least yield the
precious metal; for ftom such were obttuned the first well
authenticated gold obtained in the colony. These were
worked in the spring of 1851, under the name of the
** Clunes Diggings,"* and proved tolerably productive,
even when wrought without any auxiliary mechanical
power.

5. Extinct Volcanoes. — But besides these plidns of hard,
atony lava and basalt, there is yet another and very different
volcanic formation adjacent to the gold-fielda. North of
the Ballarat district stretches a fertile undulating plain,
sprinkled with clumps and groves, out of which rise
numerous domical volcanic hill^, either quite isolated or in
pairs or groups, and from a mile to a mile and a half in
circuit (see Frontispiece). These hills appear to have
formed the volcanic vents of the district. The discharges
here consisted, not of dense lava as in the pl^ns, but of
scorife and streams of light vesicular lava of a chocolate
colour. Fragments almost as light as pumice lie on the
hills. Sometimes they are twisted and curled. The soil
of the hills and plain is a rich chocolate-coloured earth, and
is formed from the disintegration of similar ejected lava.

• Clunes Digpingi are on the Deep Creek, Dot very far from
Mount MUer; and tlie Pyrennees. There are four parallel veins here,
SO And 35 jards asunder ; the intervening i^paces are filled with a soft
laminated earthy rock.

^dbyGoogle

236 THE GOLDEN COLONT.

A few of the hills present braces of a vent on the summit.
One about 200 feet high, which I name<3 Mount Lyell
after the illuatrioua expounder of volcanic action, has a
smalt crater at the summit, which was stud to be fathom-
less, but which I found on descending it to be mot more
than fifty feet deep, consisting of an upper cup or crater
about fifteen feet in diameter, contracting suddenly into
a shaft or well thirty feet deep and three or four wide.
Both crater and well have rough, rocky, overhanging
sides, as though they bad been larger, but were in part
filled by a stream of lava flowing over and down them.
The lava is light and cellular, disintegrates rapidly, and
probably dates from no remote period, for part of the
original surface yet remains undecompoaed. A stream
of lava may be traced in its descent down the slope of
the hill by the protruding rocks. In the wall of the
crater there is a miniature trap dyke, about an inch
wide, filled with a hard lava like that of the plains. This
must have been injected from below, and have cooled
slowly under pressure.

The rich volcanic phun out of which these " bald bills"
rear themselves has numerous depresuons, wluch, in the
nuuy season, form shallow lakes or It^oons. There are
also two permanent lakes, the largest of which. Lake
Barrambeet, is some miles long. It is remarbible that the
bed of this lake was quite dry when the country was first
colonised in 1838. A lake, however, has probably long
existed here, for on the margin of the basin are cliffs of a
kind of tufa. In 1851, it was seven feet deep.

In the neighbourhood of Lake Barrambeet is the
isolated granite hill, Mount Misery ; and grouped round
its north-east base are several bald, domical, lava hills.

^dbyGoogle

OEOLOGT OF THE GOLD FIELDS. 237

fiimilar to those above described, standing like aatelUtee to
the majesty of the more imposing mase. This remarkable
disposition suggeata thnt the upheaval of the granite
mount^n and the volcanic discharge which gave birth to
the adjacent lava hills may both be referable to one deep-
seated elevatory power. At Mount Emu we have a vol-
canic vent breaking through a hill of granite, which ia
iteelf isolated in a vast sheet of basalt.

The volcanic district of Lake Barrambeet is continued
westwards almost uninterruptedly 200 miles ; but it soon
loses its peculiar features. Instead of park-like woodlands
and domical hills, we have then those monotonous, tree-
less plwns BO characteristic of this part of Australia ; and
out of the far-stretching piano rise numerous volcanic
hills, with long sweeping outlines and craggy crests, like
islands out of the sea-
Mount Boninyong, near Ballarat, an extinct volcano
rising out of the PaUeozoic strata, is unlike all these. It
has a distinctly marked crater, broken down on one side ;
the soil is very rich, and the hill and crat«r are covered
with a thick forest. Such examples are very unconunon
in the colony.

The volcanic hills which rise out of the skirts of the
great lava pl^ns generally present no traces of the former
existence of a crater at their summits, which consist of a
sharp craggy saddle with a steep escarpment on one side,
.usually the south or east. In general aspect and outline
they resemble Mount Badico&ni between Florence and
Borne. Mount Aitkin, on the northern skirts of the
great Melbourne Pl^ns, may be taken as a good ex-
ample. Mount Aitkin is perhaps 2000 feet high, and is

^dbyGoogle

338 TtlE GOLDEN COLONT.

the loftiest of the many extiact votcanoes which rise at
the base of the Mount Macedon chain enclosing the Mel-
bourne Plains on the north. It bears distinct traces of
tiie form and flow of the lava streams which once issued
from ita summit. The crest forms in plan a flat segment
of a circle. Here are several vents. Two etreame which
issned at the summit seem to have wound spirally down
the mountain, one stream circling round outside the
other, as shown in the plan and section annexed. (J'lys.
9 and 10.). The commencement of each stream forms a
cr^ (b) 12 or 14 feet Ugh, that being the height of the
stream above the aur&ce of the saddle. The ridge or
saddle does not appear to have formed part of the lip of a
once entire crater. It is now partially gmssed over as
well aa the ateep sides of the mount, and both are
roughened with rocky protuberances. The lava is red-
tlish, soft, vesicular, and disiutegrates rapidly into A rich
earth.

t have described the character and aspect of the
volcanic pluns at the foot of Mount Aitkin in Chapter II.
Mount Cott^rell, in tbe centre of the plun, has all the
character of a submarine volcano, rising to A height of a
few hundred feet with a very long sweep.

A general review of the facta observed at the Gold
fields of Victoria leads to the following concluuons :—

1. The concurrence of plutonic, metamorphic, and vol-
canic rocks, appears a necessary condition for the existence
of a rich gold-bearing district. The metamorphic rocks
must be of the earliest Paljeozoic period, or yet more
antuent, and be abundantly traversed with veins of

^dbyGoogle

QEOLOGY OT THE GOLD flELD?. 239

,tl

Fig. 9. Plan of the Suannil of Hoont Aitkia,

Iforlh a/ the Melbountt Ptain:

Pig. 10. Section on line a & in plan,
Tbe irrowi Indlals dtreclkm of Un Hnuni uid lull of tlia (roand.

D„.„ab,GoOglc

240 THE GOLDEN COLOKT.

quEtrtz. If the metamorphosm be incomplete the yield
will not be abundant.

2. The gold originally existed wholly or in great part
in the quartz veins, and has been liberated by denudation,
not mere atmoepheric dislnt^ration.

3. This denudation was effected, not by insignificant
streams such as now drain the auriferous valleys, but by
powerful currenta of water, capable of transporting boul-
ders of (Quartz two or three feet in diameter, and of deposit-
ing thick beds of drift on hills 300 feet high ; yet the same
system of vaUeys existed then as now. Such currents were
probably marine. They first carved out the valleys and then
deposited the detritus, abraded ii-om the adjacent rocks, in
the hollows; also on the advanced bars or reefs, thus form-
ing the alluvial bills which now border one side of the
valleys. The gold sank to the bottom of the drift (while
the latter was yet soft and porous), where it is now found,
but was occasionally intercepted by a bed of very tough clay,

4. The depoation of drift on the tope of the lateral hills
appears due to the eddies caused by the meeting of two
currents, and to the check occasioned by the rocky bars now
forming the nuclei of the hills. The gold is deposited on
that side which faced up or down the current, or on the
top of the bar. None is found towards the ranges In the
rear of these advanced posts.

5. The gold now found in the chinks and fissures of
rocky bars not covered with drift was similarly deposited ;
sometimes, perhaps, by the existing creek.

6. Some quartz veina are far richer than others. Ben-
digo and Forest Creek appear to have been enriched by
one set of veins, running in the same line, but cut off

^dbyGoogle

GEOLOGY OP THE GOLD FIELDS. 241

transversely by the granite of Mount Alexander. The
auriferous quartz ia of a cream colour, has a waxy lustre, is
interveined with a light greenish talcose (?) clay, and some-
times irregularly traversed by joints filled with a fer-
nipnous clay, yielding gold. Occasionally the gold is
concentrated within a thickness of a few inches on one
side of the vein, the remaining thickness being barren.
The main quartz veins are from 18 inches to 6 feet
tiiick. They occur both in the metamorphic rooks and in
the adjacent great sheets of basalt which encircle the
mountain ranges.

Resemblance to the auriferous rocks of North Wahs. —
There is a striking resemblance between the geological
character of the Palaeozoic districts of Victoria and that
of North Wales, the latter, too, having recently proved
auriferous to an extent not wholly insignificant. The
chief points of difference are, that North Wales has com-
paratively few quartz veins, no alluvial lulls bordering the
main valleys, no quartzose gravel on the mountains, and
no strictly volcanic products, though there is no lack of
ancient trappean rocks. It Is remarkable that the district
in which the Dol-y-frwynog Mine (by far the most pro-
ductive of any in North Wales) is situated presents yet
more shiking analo^es to the Victorian gold-bearing
Tocke. A particular spot on a steep rocky elope close to
the picturesque little river Afon-wen, which runs by the
Dol-y-frwynog Mine, is still known as " the ruins of red
gold," or " Merddyn Coch 'r aur."" It is a sort of mound

* This was first recorded bj ProfeBSor RaiuBay ia his pnper on this
district in the Journal of the Geological Society, Aug. 1S34.

^dbyGoogle

242 THE GOLDEN COLOKT.

or bank, and some tragmenta of charcoal lie at its base.
The yalley is at this point contracted into a gorge by an
advancing spur, which might have caught and ret^ned
the partideB of gold brought down by the stream ; bo that
it is not improlable that the old Welsh name preserved
the memory of an ancient alluvial working at this very
spot During the past year, 1854, several mines have
been opened for gold in the neighbourhood of Dolgelly.
The estuary valley of the Mawddach, between Dolgelly
and Barmouth, much resembles some of the open auri-
ferous valleys of Victoria, although in the Utter the
enclosing mountwis are not on so grand a scale. Eskdale,
in Cumberland, yet more closely approaches the character
of the larger valleys in the Victorian ranges.

^dbyGoogle

CHAPTEE XVII.

blSCOVBBY OF QOLD IN AIT8TBALIA.

Existence of Gold in Auatralia predicted by Geology — Discovery of
first rich Gold-field in New South Wales ~ In Victoria — First
workings at Mount Alexander — Gold occaaionallj met wich at an
earlier period.

The merit of a great invenlioii can rarely fee awarded
unequivocally and indisputably to one individual ; much
more frequently it is clamed by several ; and sucli is the
caae with the discovery of gold in Australia. As this
matter has been much diecusBed, a few words respecting
it may not be misplaced.

These claims are not all irreconcilable with each
other. Gold has, in fact, been discovered in Auatralia by
two different processes; first, inductivelt/, by generalisa-
tions on geological data collected in various parts of the
world ; second, practically, either by remarking a resem-
blance in the aspect of a certain tract in Kew South
Wales to auriferous districts iu California, or by lighting
on pieces of gold by mere chance.

To Sir Eoderick Murchison, the explorer of the Ural
gold regions, must be awarded the honour of having first
announced to Europe that gold ought to be, and probably
would be found in the local debris of what he called the

^dbyGoogle

244 THE GOLDEH COLONY.

AiiBtraliaa Cordillera. Sir Boderick's conclnsioQB were
drawn from the obaervations of Count Strzelecki in New
Soutli Wales and an examination of the ^cimens
brought home by the Count, illustrated and illuniined by
Sir Koderick's generaUsations from his own observations
in the Ural Mountuns. This announcement, made in
1844 to the Royal Geographical Society, is a striking
attestation to the uniformity of the operations of Nature
in different and distant regions of the globe, and to the
sagacity of the geologist whose prediction was thus
remarkably verified.

Previous to this, however, though unknown to Sir B.
Murchison, the Rev. W. B. Clarke, a geologist resident
at Sydney, had expressed his belief that gold existed in
considerable abundance in the scbists and quartzites of
New South Wales, and had actually procured in 1841 a
specimen from the basin of the river Macquarie, which
was exhibited to members of the Government at Sydney.

In the present case, however, the speculations of the
philosopher were not destined to be fruitful in great
results. Before a gold-field could really be opened it
was necessary not only to inform the colonists that gold
existed in the schists and quartzites, but to show where it
was, and how they were to get it ; and it was difficult, if
not impossible, for any one to do this who had not visited
and become iamiliar with actual workings elsewhere.
Thus we find Mr. Dana, an intelligent American geolo-
gist, crossing one of the richest affluents of the Sacramento
in 1841 without detecting gold, although he noticed the"
resemblance of the rocks there to those of gold-bearing
re^ons. Doubtless, had he been acquainted from actual

^dbyGoogle

DISCOVERT OP GOLD IN AUSTRALIA. 245

observatioH with the mode of its occurrence in other
similar auriferous tracts, he could have readily obtained
some of tJbe coveted metal from that now iamoue river.
But in Buch matters reading in the library is no equivalent
for working in the field,

The practical discovery and working of the rich gold
districts of Victoria was the last link in a chain of events,
the first of which happened in 1848, when the Califomian
miller espied the glittering particles in the new race he
had formed for his mill in the Sacramento valley. Science
bad enunciated the existence of gold deposits in Aus-
tralia; hut the pick and the prospecting pan were the
instruments destined to make them avEulable to the world,
and thus to revolutionise the Australian colonies; and
this was effected without any knowledge of geological
theories and speculatJone.

In the universal rush to the new-found treaaures of
California in 1848-9 Australia contributed its full share
of adventurers. Amongst those who sailed from Sydney
was Mr. £. H. Hai^reavea, whose name has since become
deservedly known to fame. Whilst at work at the Cali-
fomian diggings Mr. Hargreaves was struck with the re-
semblaaco which the auriferous country there bore to
cert^n districts be was familiar with in the neighbourhood
of Bathurst in New South Wales ; and he resolved at
some future day to test the truth of his surmise that gold
might be found there also. On arriving at Sydney on
his return he at once set about carrying tliis resolve into
execution ; and, as he says, amid the jeers and ridicule of
his friends, he procured a horse and other requisites, and
set out on his exploring journey. At length, armed with

^dbyGoogle

24fi THB QOLDBK COLOKT.

pick and prospecting pan, he reached the creek where he
determined to commence his search, and to his great
delight, in the very first pan of earth which he tried, after
duly washing sway ttie earth and gravel by ihe Califomian
method, he discovered a few particles of gold. He at
once proceeded to make known hiB Buccess to Ctovem-
ment ; and within a few weeks persons were troofdng
from all quarters to the new Dorado. The disoovery not
long after of the " hundredweight " of gold and quartz by
a native, nused the excitement to fever heat, and it now
spread like wildfire throughout the Australian colonies.

This was in the early part of the year 1851. Three or
four years previously a large piece of gold had been shown
at Melbourne, alleged to have been found in the Victorian
Pyrenees ; but the finder soon afterwards mysteriously die-
appeared, and the whole tale wore euch an apocryphal
mi that it was bard to determine what truth, if any, was
in it"

Of course this story was now resuscitated, and gave
rise to much speculation. Great was the eagerness to
find the precious metal in Victoria; and this was kept
alive and whetted by the febrioation of many tales of
its being discovered first in one locality, and, when that
proved to be a myth, then in another. In the country,
many a keen eye was examining everything that ghttered,
and not a tew employed themselves in hammering 03*
pieces of the many quartz veins that cropped out in

* The locality where this was eaid to hare been found, cftUed Daily
Hill, has since been irorked for gold with success. In the culonj of
South Australia gold bad also been foimd in Bmall quantises, some
years before the opening out of the rich Victorian depoaits.

^dbyGoogle

DI8COVBEY OF QOLD IH VICTOEIA. 247

the mountain ranges. The newspapers were filled with
pseudo-diBcoveries ; and sacks of glittering yellow mica
were carefully and secretly conveyed to Melbourne ; and
samples, with much mystery aa to the whereabouts of
the rich locality, were then placed in the hands of thoae
supposed to be learued in assaying, the inquirers bdog
pretty confident tliat their sacks were filled with gold
ore. These babbles burst one after another, and ihea
the truth began to reveai itself, and proved stranger than
fiction. In June, 1851, a settler on on the Deep Creek,
near the Pyrenees, proclaimed to the public the existence
of gold in a quartz vein on his run, called Clunes, which
had been discovered there two or three years earlier by
the former owner of the station, Mr. Campbell, who bad
communicated the fact to two or three others, by all of
whom it was carefully kept secret, lest a knowledge of
it should prove prejudicial to their interests as fiock-
masters. Between one and two hundred diggers soon
collected at this spot, and worked upon the veins with
some success. It is remarkable that this first opened gold-
v^ was not in the auriferous districts properly so called,
but traversed a moss of Imsalt; and there were no de-
posits of gold-bearing drift immediately adjacent, so that
it could never have attracted a large mining popula-
tion.

Not long after this a blackemitli resident at Boninyong,
seven miles from Ballarat, lighted upon gold near his
township. Diggers, witii cradle and tin dish, soon ga^
thered round the spot ; but this, too, proved not very pro-
ductive, and the miners, when threatened with the impo-
^tion of a Government licence fee, began to disperse, and

^dbyGoogle

24B THE GOLDEN COLONY.

thus evenluaUy discovered the rich bar at Ballamt, called
Golden Point

About the eame time that the blacksmith was making
his diecoTeries at Boninyong, a bullock-driver, who had
been employed on a station near Mount Alexander, while
exploring that district, hammer in hand, aad examining
every quartz vein that came in his way, at length was
rewarded by finding the object of his search in a ravine
not far from the afterwards renowned forest Creek. I
happened to be making a geological tour in that part of
the colony at the time, and my att«ntJoa was directed to
the new discovery by a settler who resided in its imme-
diate neighbourhood. With some difficulty I found out
the spot indicated. It was a wild, secluded little rocky
glen in the beu*t of the thickly wooded ranges on' the
west side of Mount Alexander. I found there two or
three tenta and a cradle. Two quartz veins had been
tried, and some fn^^ents which had been struck off with
a hammer, containing visible specs of gold, lay on the
ground near one of them. Nobody waa at work here, for
the men were gone to procure proviflions at the nearest
township, which waa about twenty miles off. Women
were taking care of the tents. Such were the feeble be-
ginnings of a movement which was destined shortly to
attract thousands to the Australian shores, to carry off the
surplusage of British labour, to give an impetus to the
trade of the world, and to be the grand agent in convey-
ing European civilisation into the lands of the South
Pacific This spot is now known as " Specimen Gully."
Similar quartz veins were abundant in the district : the
hills were white witii quartz gravel, and all the character-

ed byGoOglc

DISCOVEBT OF GOLD IN VICTORIA. 249

istic features of a gold-bearing country were preseot over
a lai^e area. I at once saw that the diacovery waa
probably pr^nant with great results, and forthwith com-
municated with the Lieutenant-Governor on the subject.
I afterwards met the man who had discovered the vein,
one Wylie, and asked what clue had guided him to it.
He replied that, having read in the newspapers that gold
was found in quartz, he had been going about tiux>ugh
the ranges, breaking off pieces from the quartz veins, till
he found one with gold in it.

This happened in the beginning of September 1861.
A few i)ersonH gradually gathered round the first party.
Some of these passed over into the neighbouring valley of
Forest Creek, to search there for auriferous veins; (for
they still conceived that gold was only to be found in
quartz ;) and, while trying the nature of a vein close to
the creek, they accidentally lighted upon an alluvial de-
posit, where, of course, the precious metal waa obt^ned
far more readily, as well as more abundantly, than by
breaking up the quartz veins. Within a month after this
discovery Forest Creek was alive with tigers, tents, and
cradles ; and, by the end of October some thonaands
were congregated there, and the banks of the stream
searched throughout almost the whole length of the valley
to its junction with Campbell's Creek. The first rich
bar at Ballarat had by this time been worked out ; and
now the road thence to Mount Alexander presented one
continuous stream of drays, carts, and pedestrians, laden
with their " swags," toiling along, allured by the glowing
accounts of the treasures tiiat were daily being discovered
at " The Mount" At tie end of October gold was

^dbyGoogle

850 THE QOLDEN COLONT.

found at Beodigo. And thus vithin four months from
the rocking of the first cradle, the three richest gold-fields
in Victoria and the world were discovered by ilie few
scattered dwellers in the Bush. The fiist account of the
geolc^ of the gold-fields of Victoria was given in a paper
by tiie author, transmitted to the Geological Society of
London, and published in the Society's Journal for
February, 1853.

Such are the chief facte connected with the history of
of the discovery of gold in Australia. But there axe
traditional stories of an earlier period which late events
seem to authenticate and explun : — how that many years
ago a convict in Kew South Wales, who had been star,
tioned up the country, was severely punished for having
a lump of gold in his possession, which he stated that he
had found, but which every one else then believed to
have been stolen sovereigns melted down; and how, too,
a certain shepherd, living near Bathurst, used, year by
year, to bring down to the capital pieces of gold, obtiuned
no one knew where, which he offered for sale to the
jewellers of ^dney, t^ng care never to divulge his
secret.

^dbyGoogle

APPENDIX.

Ttoo Despatches from Sir Heni-y Young, Lieutenant-
Governor of South Australia, to the Secretary for the
Colonies, giving an Account of tlie first Steam Voyage up
the River Murray, to a point 1450 Miles from the Sea.

" Od board the Lady AngosU Sletuner,

River Murraj', fhiin the wa distant 1300 iiule«.

Swan Hill, September 17. 18S3.

" Mj liorii Duke, — I haTe the hononr and f^tification of ac-
quainting your Grace that the project of the Bteam navigation of
the river Murray, the promotioD of nhich has never ceased to en-
gage mj attention since mj arrival in South Australia, haa thus far
been prosecuted with perfect success.

" The distance from the river Murray terminuB, near the sea, at
the-Goolna, in South Australia, to as far up as thb place, is now
ascert^ned to extend to an easily navigable course of 1300 miles.
The wool with which this Bteamer is now about to be laden is only
the commencement of a lai^e future carrying trade, benefieial to tie
greater part of the extensive continent of Australia, Under these
circomstancea, I beg leave to make known to your Grace the con-
clusions at which I have arrived, after personal observation, in regard
to the further measures it would be politic to adopt, in order to pro-
mote the colonisation of the vast basin of the Murray.

" I am the more strongly induced to make this communication to
your Grace without delay because of my conviction that the adoption
of similar raeaaures in the provinces of Victoria and New South Wales

^dbyGoogle

252 APPENDIX.

is calculated to impart to the plan for turning to profitable account
the great internal water eyatem of Anstralia, a unity and completeneea
which cannot fail to make it conduce to the greater prosperitj and
the more rapid progress of ench of its Beparat« colonies, as well as to
redound to the honour of Mer Majestj'a service, and the advantage
of our fellow countrymen in Great Britain. As respects measures
actually progressing towards coupletion, I have briefly to state that
the connection of the riTer Murray terminus, styleil the Goolvra (a
designation applied to it by the aborigines at Encounter Bay), with
the sea at Fort Elliot, will immediately be effected by an animal-
poner iron tramway of only seven miles in len^h. The tramway
connects the river at the Goolwa with Fort Elliot, and is lud on
jetties at both places. At Fort Elliot there are means of supplying
fresh water to the shipping, and the anchorage is furnished with
moorings for large ships. These improvements will have cost the
local Government 23,000^., in addition to 65002. which will probably
become payable from the same source as premiums for the introduc-
tion of river steamers.

"The observations which I personally made in 1850 of the suffi-
cient breadth and depth of the waters of the Murray, from the sea
across Lake Alexandrina, up to its junction with the river Darling,
were corroborated by Captain Cadell, in his adventurous and more
extended voyage from this spot to lie sea in 1852.

"I am at this tjme on board of the Lady Augusta steamer, of forfy
horse-power, having in tow alongside a barge called the Eureka.
Each vessel is 105 feet in length, with a united breadth of forty-two
feet ; and under Captain Cadell's able command and guidance, we have
found a most ample depth and width of water throughout the long
extent of course which we have just accomplished, without encoun-
tering any ' rapid ' or obstruction of any kind. The breadth of the
river has averaged 200 yards; the soundings not less than three
fathoms. After reaching the junction of the Wakool, 1 1SO miles from
the sea mouth, the bends of the Murray become more frequent and
sharp ; the width, but not the depth, decreases, and the snags require
more than ordinary attention.

" The banks of the river abound in timber, and our fuel has been
cut and taken on board on planks from the steamer, communicating

^dbyGoogle

APPENDIX, 253

with the land almost as conTenientlj and aeenrel; M if wharfs or
jettieB had existed. The average depth of channel through Lake
Alesandrioa was seven feet. Whether the river can be continuouslj
navigated at all times throughout the year u easilj as Bt the preseDt
season, ia a point to be resolved only after longer acquaintance with
the periodical changes to which it is subject ; but I have no reason to
question its navigability b; vessels propelled bj ateam during eight
months at least of every ordinary year. From present and previous
opportunities of observation and enquiry, I can bear testiiDony to the
great natural advantages possessed by the extensive tracts of lands
which are drained by the Murray river.

" Considering, therefore, the Importance of &dlitating the location
on ils banks of persons whose industrial pursuits would be promoted
in coQuectioD with the carrying trade of wool, and the return supplies
to the Etockowners; considering, too, most especially, the probabOity
that large nunbei's of British emigrants, whether intending in future
to settle in Victoria, Kew South Wales, or South Australia, are likely
to be attracted to the vast basin of the Murray when its navigability by
steamers shall become known, and it is found to be a most conveuieut
route to the gold-fielda, — I have come to the determination at once to
submit to my Executive Council, on my return to Adelaide, the expe-
diency of proclaiming the lands on both banks of the river within the
bounds of South Australia, to the extent of two miles, to be the
'Hundred of the Murray in South Australia.' Surveys of villages
wilt be made in select spots as traffic and population require, and
roads leading to and from the river will be reserved for public use,
and as means of access to the back lands; whiUt the alluvial flats,
subject at present to periodical inundation, may, by embankment, be
rendered perfectly available. These flats extend, on an average, from
about half a mile to three miles in depth ; and generally the banks
afford building sites of sufficient elevation to be beyond the reach of
floods. Under the arrangement above described, the lessees of the
waste lands (which are, in South Autjtrslia, open by law at all times to
purchasers by public auction) will sustun an abstraction from the
very large extent of their runs for pastoral purposes too insignificant
to be detrimental to their special pursuits, yet sufficient to give the
owners of small allotments the space of pasture necessary to the suste*

ubjGoOglc

254 APFBNDIS.

nance of tlie live rtock .indiapeDHble to their agrienltnral and dRiTj
pnrposet, and other object* of domestic atililj. llie location of a
population on the bu^ of the river will give to the squatters nnch
fadlities for obtaining labonren that the pastoral object* to which, for
manj generation* jet to come, the immenBe tracts of the back lands of
the Murray district are destined, maj be extended rather than re-
■tricted or interrupted bj the appropriation of the allavial margin of
the great river to the settlement of freeholders. I subjoin a list of the
reaervea already made bj the Government of Sjdnej ; it is probable
that other reserves have also latelj been made bj the Giovernment of
Melboome; for to both I took the libertj of suggesting that reserves
should be made at intervals of one hnndred miles apart, to afford faci-
lities for the promotion of villages at spot* Ukelj to be convenient
places of call for the river steamers. Bnt mj subseqaent observation
leads me to prefer the plan of continnoaa front^^ reserves along both
banks of the river, as necessary to the population which ma; be ex-
pected in futnre years to occnpj this district. I am led to suppose
that on the reserves in New South Wales and Victoria there is no
right of coDimon^e to the purchasers of allotments. The concession
of a commonage in the Hundred of the Murray in South Australia is,
however, a* I am advised, essential to the early colonisadon of the
banks of the river. The reserve* in Victoria and New South Wales
to which I have above alluded, are first, Moorona, forty miles south
of the junction of the Darling with the Murray ; Mborgiung, at the
junction of the Darling and the Murray; Gclgol Creek, Cottraiy,
JndalUd, Euston or Nowong, LakeTalla, Swawill, Tettam, Woimhy,
at the junction of the Murrumbidgee with the Murray; Balranatd,
on the Murrumbidgee ; Lake Waldarab, and Swan Hill. At all these
places the extent of the reserve is ample ; but I trust that the repeal
of the Land Sales Act of Parliament will not take place nntil af)er
reserves of water frontage throughout the entire course of the Mur-
ray shall have been made in Victoria and New South Wales, to secure
to intending British emigrant* the same facilities for settlement as are
thus proposed by me to be afforded to them in the cdony of South
Australia. Reserve* of water frontage on the banks of navigable
rivers, like reserves on the sea coast, are objects of Euch rccf^nisc
public utility,, that an omiesioa to create them would, I believe, be an

ubjGoOglc

AFPEHDIX. 255

exception to long establitbed custom ; and in tite case of lo immenK
a water Bjilem aa 'a the boaiii of the Murray, the omiMioD to make
Terj cDntinuoun reaervea of Trontage could Dot but be a lasting injorj
to Her Majesty's future subjects in Anstralia.

" Tbe riTer is much fuller than it was at this season three years
ago, when taj first voyage was made ; and fdvourably impressed, as I
then was, with its great extent and deptb of navigable course, my view
of the country adjacent to the banks was necessarily more circum-
scribed (from the little height of the small boat in which I then tra-
velled) thsn has been tbe inspection which I have now been enabled
to make, as well by land as also off the house or 'hurricane' deck with
wlucb this steamer is fDmished ; and I am happy to say that my early
jhvonrable impressions have been much extended and strengthened.

"The runs are generally reported to be capable of supporting double
the present number of sheep, now reckoned up to t^is place to exceed
400,000 on the Mnrray, exclusive of its nnmeroos affluents ; and the
facility for the transport of the wool, and the import of labour and other
supplies, which steam navigation of theriver will now afford, is naturally
regarded by the sheepowners as a strong and immediate inducement to
them to increase their flocks. Wool from the Murrumbidgee will be
shipped by the steamer this voyage. The Darling river, now stocked
with £0,000 sheep, is capable of feeding at least 2SO,000. Many ex-
tenuve tracts on the Mnrray and the Lachlan, now used by cattle,
will most probably in future be occupied by sheep ; and, on the whole,
I am confident that the produce of wool in Australia is about to be
very considerably and rapidly augmented by reason of the steam
navigation of which this voyage is the commencement. The trans-
port of wool to Melbonrne by land has hitherto been effected by a
long overland journey, occupying never less than three months, at a
heavy expense, and is made so nnsatisfactorilj and irregularly that
the wool-clip of one season is frequently compelled to remain over to
the next. The rec«pt of snpplies b equally dilatory ; and licensed
runs are left unused or are imperfectly slocked, and fresb occupancies
of land for pastord purposes are discouraged by impediments which
this steam navigation will remove. In several instances, tbe drays
despnlched to Melbourne with last year's clip have not yet come bai^
to the station with the return anpplies. Although it would nut be

^dbyGoogle

256 APPENDIX.

safe for strangeri to navignte tbe river Murray bj night, the cnnG-
dence which Captain Cadell's former erploration has given him haa
enabled him to pertevere in our present vojage occasionally even
amidst the darkness of moonlesB nights. We entered the Darling at
ita junction with the Murray, 700 miles from the Goolwa, at half-past
eleven o'clocli p.m., with full foresail and full speed of steam — an
auspicious event, perhaps uDpreeedented in the first exploration by
steam of a river with so prolonged a navigable course. Among Iha
forty-five who compose our number are Beveral well qualified to judge
of the extent and value of the navigation accomplished on the present
voyage. Their nationalities, professions, and interests are so various
that, being on this subject unanimous, their opinions may not unreason-
ably be considered conclusive. They comprise Engliah, Scotch, Irish,
and American, Three are membera of the Legislative Council of
South Australia ; two others are reporters of different Adelaide news-
papei-a ; some are familiar with the river navigation of the Untied
States and California ; one is an Adelaide merchant of experience
and intelligence ; another is an engineer of tbe name and, I believe,
family, of Napier, well known among the scientific construutors of
steam-engines. Tbe carpenter has been brought up in the workshops
of Vanderbiit, the eminent builder of steamers at Kew York; and,
lastly, Captain Cadell, who, stimulated by aid Irom the Local Govern-
ment of South Australia, is devoting bis valuable time and expe-
rience, and all his own pecuniary resources, to the steam navigation
of the Murray, appears to me to be singularly well qualified to cope
with this great enterprise, to appreciate its impoi-tance, and to give it
all the development it may require ; and my cordial wish and expec-
tation are, that bis exertions will prove no less remunerative to
himself than advantageous to the public interests. The quantity of
wool to be river -borne to the sea by Captain Cadell in 1 8J3, amounts
to 4000 bales of from 200 to 250 pounds weight each ; and there can
be no doubt of the exports of South Australia, the produce of the
river Murray, attaining in fLiture years a further considerable aug-
mentation. Besides the production of wool, it is very probable that
the cultivation of (he vine, of corn, and of maize could be carried on
in the district of the river Murray in localities adapted to these pro-
ducts ; whilst the flooded lands could be converted into rich meadows

^dbyGoogle

APPENDIX. 257

or be made to grow rice ; aai steam aaw-milb mjgbt be profitably
emplojed in rendering the red gum and pine timber available to be
Faded down for sale.

"The crewB of t^e Ladj Augusta and Eureka, beeideB Enropeana,
include three aborigines of South Australia, one native of CiiiDa, two
of India, and two South Sea Islanders.

"In conclusion, I beg to report that I have thought it right to
forward copies of this despatch to the Governors of New South Wales
and Victoria; and I address it to your Grace from hence, via Mel-
bourne, because it Is thus likely to meet with an earlier opportunity
for transmission than.jf it bad been postponed until roy return to
Adelaide, where I expect to be in the course of the oeit few w^ks.
■' H. E. F. YousG.

" His Grace the Duke of Newcastle."

» Adelidde, 15th October, 1853.

"My Lord Duke, — With reference to my despatch of the 17th
ultimo, I have the honour to state that the steam navigation of the
river Murray, described in that detpatch, was further continued to
Gana Warrah, 150 miles beytmd Swan Hill. At this pvnnt the depth
of water was three &thoms, and the breadth about 200 yards. From
hence the descent of the river was commenced, because so much wool
was already waiting transport, that Captain Cadell had no commercial
object in prolonging the voyage on this occauon, although his infor-
mation warranted the belief that the navigation conid be extended,
with equal safety, to Albury, within 400 miles of Sydney.

" The branch of the Murray called the Wakool was ascended for a
distance of sixty miles, and was found to average forty yards in
width, and the soundings were from two and a half to upwards of five
fathoma.

" Near Pood Boon, on the Wakool, there is a reef of sandstone,
but leaving a channel just large enough to admit the two vessels to
pass abreast in six feet of water, after which the water assumes its
average depth. The reef is capable of easy removal, and the agent
of the Royal Auslralian Bank or Company (owners of the station)

^dbyGoogle

258 ArpKNDix.

expreued his inteudun to effect ita remoTftl before the next visit of
tbe steamer. ' •

" The total extent of the navigaluon of the Muiraj proper, accom-
plished on this vojage, was 1450 miles ; that of its branch, the
Wakool, iiitj miles in addition. It is to be noted that very gene-
rally the river is so winding that the distance in a direct line bj land
maj be computed at less than half the distance bj water. Od tha
whole I am enabled to give it aa mj opinion that the Murray proper
la navigable from the Goolw* to Albury, that is, for a space of 1900
miles. Its branches and tributaries are the Wakool, the Luddon, tbe
CampBSpe, the Goulburn, the K^altie or Edward, the Tuppul, and
the Blllibong. The Murrumbidgee, from its juncUon with the Mur-
ray, has a navigation course of 700 miles to Gundagoi. The Darling
ti navigable in seasons of flood ; but to what distance is soon to be
ascertained, I trust, by Captwn CadcU.

" On the banks of (be above waters there cannot be leas than one
million and a half of sheep, and numerous herds of cattle and horses.
The runs are in all cases inadequately stocked, and much country,
especi^y on the Darliug, is not yet sUclted at all.'

" The timber and soil may be described as oonsjiting of two distinct
kinds. The timber is either of gum and the varieiies known as box
and peppermint on flooded or alluvial land, or of pines, either oa hilly
land or on land nerei mbject to inundation, and characterised by a
sandy or red loamy soil. The gum timber is fit far the heavier parts
of shipbuilding, and for dwelling or storehonaes. Sawmills may be
expected to convert this tjmber into boats and rafts adapte4 to the
river navigation, and into vessels (to be decked and sparred at the
Goolwa — the river terminus) for disposal in the neighbouiinf colo-
nies ; whilst the timber of rafts broken up at the Ooolwa would meet
with ready sale. It is also not improbable that the mineral wealth
known to exist on the Murray will hereafter afford dead weight for the
cargoes of wool to be shipped at Port Elliot A great passenger
traffic may be expected to the gold diggings, since they may be reached
by way of the Loddon, within thirty miles of Bendigo) and tbe Goul-
burn, Irom the Murray, more easily than from Melbourne.

" The route from Europe, fw Port Elliot and the Murray, avoiding
the dangerous navigation of Boss's Straltti and Fort Phillip Heads,

^dbyGoogle

APPKHDIX. 259

would be the most conTeoient route for emigrftnld, not ool/ to tbe
diggings, but b]bo to the interior of the three colonies — of South
Australia, Yictoria, and Sew South Wales,

" Ab respects the soil on the banks of the Murray, I would obserre
that the red loam j soil on which tlie pine timber flonrishea seems best
adapted for immediate cultivation of cereal products, and of the vine
and oliTe.

*< Fine regetables, melons, and pnmpfcins of enormous size are grown
in the little gardens of tbe squatters. Tito flooJed lands (inTariably
alternating with the red soil) require embankment to adept them to
cultivation, and, in their natural state, afford the finest pasture in
those seasons when the ieed for oattte and dieep is scarce on the back
lands. The river abounds in fish of several kinds, of which the Mur-
ray cod, weiglung sometimes seventy pounds, is not only the biggest
but the best. The mailaway, a species of cod, furnishes useful isin<
glass and good oil. Tbe lagoons and backwaters of the river teem
with crayfish, and are the resort of innumerable wild fowl.

" The aborigines are few in number and generally well conducted,
and also well disposed to undertake work for which they are fitted,
and are, to a considerable extent, actually employed in most of tbe
avocations usual on sheep and cattle stations.

" The climate is of the same snlubrious chsracter as that for which
the other more settled parts of this great continent are so justly cele-
brated. From the end of August to tbe I4th October instant, rain
fell on twenty<two days, and the mornings and evenings were rather
chilly, with heavy dew.

" As regards soil, climate, and other natural advantt^es, there can
be no donbt that the vast basin of the Murray, equal in area to seven
Great Britains, is well adapted to sustain a large popnladon ; whilst
In no part of the world can the extent and facility of internal com-
mnnication by water be surpassed.

. " The first townships now in connection with the navigation are
necessarily at the terminus of the river — the Goolwa; and at Fort
Elliot — its seaport in Encounter Bay. At the junctions of the rivers,
and at the highest points of their navigable waters, other townships
may be expected to spring up in the course of no distant time.

^dbyGoogle

260 APFENDIS.

" Hie ancborage fur river boats at the Goolira is between ^e north
sliore of the Murrs; and Bindmarsh Island, and formj a capaciolis
and perfecUj land-locked basin, with the depth of sixteen feet water
off the end of the jetty ; which jetty is connected with another at
Fort Elliot by an iron tram of seven miles, now on the point of com-
pletjon, over a dead level conntry ; thns conveniently obviating alto-
gether the dangers of the sea month of this important river.

" The Goolwa, in position and idiape affected by the configuration
of the opposite shore of Ukdmarsh Island, may be expected, IVom
its natural advantages, to progress, as the Crescent City of the Aus*
tralian MisBiscippi.

" On the 14th instant, I had the satisfaction of arriving alongside
the jetty at tbe Goolwa, with the first cargo of river-borne wool,
amouDtJng to 440 bales, the produce of the pastoral districts of the
rivers Murray, Darling, Mnrrumbidgee, and Wakool.

" An address was presented to me at the junction of the Murray
with the Darting, by such of the settlers on the river, is the colonies
of Victoria and Xew South Wales, as could conveniently commu-
nicate with each other at tbe time of my voyage. I annex a copy of
the address, as showing ihe appreciation of tbe value of the enterprise
of tbe local Government of South Australia by those who are the
earliest and moat immediately affected by it; and I trust that the
recognition of my exertions to promote the opening up of the navi-
gation and commerce of the great river Murray, now first snccesg-
fully accomplished, will be interesting to Her l&jesty's Government,
with whose sanction, despite conflicting local views, I have devot«d
myself to this important work for some years past

" H. B, P. YouBG.

" To His Grace the Duke of Newcastle."

^dbyGoogle

State of the Labour Market at Melbourne iti
October, 1854.

I lisTe referred in the text to the high priuea paid in Victoria for
skilled and other labour, and ezpreBsed an opinion that it is impro-
bable these prices will Eufier anj great redaction for eome time tn
come. Statements of a very different tendency have, however, re-
cently appeared in Engliah neirapapers, such as would lead the reader
to auppOBo that there was already a glut of labour In the Melbourne
market, and that the position of the artizan would shortly be Utile, if
at all, better there than in the old country.

The truth is. that owing to the immense increase in tbe domestic
and trade buildings of the two principal towns during the last two
years, and to the recent commercial depression, the excessive demand
for skilled labour has somewhat abat«d of late at Melbourne and Gee-
long. When we add to this the fact that the colony is rapidly out-
growing the abnormal state of feverish excitement which followed the
gold era, we need not wonder that the extravagant rates of 1852-53
hare suffered some little abatement, — an abatement in harmony with
the reduction in house-rent and the prices of the necessaries of life.
Tbe artizans of Melbourne, however, would not submit to this reduc-
tion without an effort, and they formed an association for the protec-
tion of their interests. Those who complained that they could get no
work, on being offered employment on the roads, at which they could
earn irom 10». to I5s. a day, said that they thought such work de-
grading to them i to which tbe President of the Government Road
Board replied that colonists, to be successful, must be prepared to
adapt themselves to the circumstances of the country; that no one had
worked harder with bis bands than he had ; and that had he dot done
so, he should not have then been in a position to address them. How-
ever, this check to the demand for labour, such aa it was, seems
already to have passed away ; and when it was found that some surplus
of labour existed at Melbourne and Geelong, the smaller towns, in
the coast and inland, lost no time in expressing their eagerness to
avwl tliem selves of it.

^dbyGoogle

2ba APPENDIX.

Ab it is higUj importetit, both to the coloauta of AuslrelU and tbe
■rtiraoB of Bngltnd, that correct impretaioiu relatiTe to this tubject
should be largelj difiiised, I make no ipology for appending a few ex-
tracts from the most recent adnces from Helboume touching the
state and prospects of the mechanic, and the condition of the labour
marlcet generallf at Melbonrne in the month of October, 1654. The
extracts which tallow are from the leading daUj paper of Melbourne,
the Argat, of October 27. 1854. The statements in this journat are
prepared with care, and are worthy of confidence : —

" MB[.BOnBFB bABODB HABEBT.

" Thunda;, 26th October, I8S4.

" The prices of labour, which have been fluctuating during the last
four or five weeks, appear now to have settled themselTes down to the
rates enumerated below. General emplojment has been slack, but Is
now somewhat more brivk. At this time of tite year hirings for the
buaj season of tbe agricultural trade niaj be said to commence. For
the skilled mechanic in all branches of the building trade, wages ap-
pear to have settled down to from 20*. to 25«. per day, and employ-
ment is decidedly more plentiful tbr both skilled and nnakilled
labour.

" FemsJe serrantB are more plentiful.

" With rations: — Married couples, without family, Ml. to lOOl.
per annum ; ditto, with family, 70l. to 751 ditto ; shepherds, 40l. to
45t ditto; hntkeepera, 301. to 35i. ditto; general useful serrants,
11 5$. per week ; bullock- drivers, on farms. If. lOi. to 2f. ditto ; ditto
for the roads, 21. to 3/. ditto ; Btockkeepers, SOI. to 7SL per annum ;
good farm labourers, M. to \l. 5s. per week; sheep-shearers, 20i. per
100; ditto washers, 25j. to30«. per 100; ploughmen, iL lOt.: gar-
deners, 7Bl.to 100/. per annum ; cooks, male, IJ. 10s. to 81. per week;
wwters, 1(. I0». to 11. 15*. ditto i grooms, 60t to 701. per annum.

" The weekly rations consist of lOlbs. flour, lOlbs. beef or mutton,
2 lbs. sugar, and j^lb. tea.

" Without rations : — Compositors, 2s. M. per thousand ; ditto 71. 7:
per week ; good bouse-carpenters, town work, \l. to It 5». per day ; ,
masons, \l. to 1/. 5«. ditto ; plasterers, ll. 5». to 12. 10*. ditto ; bridc-
Isyers, If. to U. 5s. ; woodsplitters and fencers, I3t. 6</. per load;

^dbyGoogle

APPEMDIX. 263

blacksmitliB, fur country w<a-k and shoeiag, If. per d&j ; labourers oo
the roads, with wood, water, and tent accommodation, lOf. per day.

" Seamen : — For London, for the run home, 251. toSOl. ; Calcutta,
201. to iSt. ; Callao, 20^ to 251. ; coasting, GL per month.

"Female Seirants: — Thorough aeirants, 30/. to 331. per annom ;
houBemaldg, 2M. to 251. ditto ; laundresBes, 4(tf. to 511. ditto ; nurse-
muds, 201. ditto ; cooks, 45L to 1001.

" In order to confirm the statements previoualy made as to tLe re-
lation of receipts and expenditure on the part of working men, we
have made inquiries as to the actual receipts and expenditore of those
eng^ed on railways and puhlic works of a similar deacription. The
wages are 10*. ti} 12«. per diem, the decided majority, perhaps three-
fourths of the whole, receiying the higher rate. The men lire in
tents free, wood and water costs nothing, and an ample supply of good
food, including fresh meat three times a day, need not exceed 15t.
per week. They can thtu lay by between 2t and 3f. weekly. This
calculation has reference to single men. But those who have wives
are in no worse position, as the services of females in cooking, washing,
mending, &c., are in great request. For labour of this description
there ia likely to be a great demand throughout the summer, and in-
deed for a twelvemonth to come.

" The state of the labour market may be ascertuned from the rates
of wages quoted, and from the following ' Wanteds' which have ap-
peared within these few days in the local papers : — ' SOO pick and
shovel men, 10s. to 12*. per day, t«at, tools, wood, and water;' <500
stonebreakere, 6*. to 10*. per yard, tents,' &c. Such advertisements
appear daily, and, taken in connection with the fact tiiat tolerable
workmen can break from two to three yards every day, indicate the
attainment of a really comfbrtable maintenance, and a respectable
weekly balance, at even this the least skilled and simplest kind of
labour."

^dbyGoogle

D,„u„ab,GoOglc

ubjGoOglc

ubjGoOglc

ubjGoOglc

ubjGoOglc
