FREEMASON'’s 
UAONITOR; 

OR, 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
OF 
MASONRY: 
IN TWO PARTS. 
PONG OO]—— 

By, ROYAL ARCH MASON, “ 
K, T.—K. of Mts. Se 

S$ OQ LFOOD — 
PAR Tx 
DOT oo— 

PRINTED at ALBANY, 
For SPENCER and WEBB, Market- Street. 
17 97» 

‘ 
; 

GP OPOXPOPSODOOODS OE 

Diftri@ of New-York. 

“ “S PE IT REMEMBERED, 
LS That on the Twelfth day of Sep- 
“SEES tember, in the twenty-fecond year of 

“=. the Independence of the United States 

of America, Spencer and Wess, of 
faid Diftri&, have depofited in this office the title of 
a book, the right of which they claim as proprietors, 
in the words following, viz. —** Tus FREEMASON® 
MONITOR, ox ILLUSTRATIONS or MA- 
SONRY, iw two parrs.”——In conformity te 
an a&t of Congrefs of the United States of America, 
entitled “ An ad for the encouragement of learning, 
by fecuring the copies‘of maps, charts, and books, to 
the authors and proprietors of fuch copies, during, 
the time therein mentioned.” 

EDWARD DUNSCOMB, 
Clerk of the Diftri& of New-ork,. 

e POD GSS VOSS DSS. 

PREFACE. 

MHE following work, although chiefly in- 

\ tended for the-ufe of the ancient and honor-: 

able fociety of: free: and:accepted Mafons, is, alfo. 

calculated:to. explain the.nature and defign of the 

Mafonic Inftitution, to thofe who may be defirous. 

of becoming acquainted ‘with its principles, whe- 

ther for the’ parpofe of initiation into the fociety - 
or afeeclp te the gratification of their curiolity. 

The obfervations. upon: the firft dae degrees,. 
are principally taken from. Prefton’s ‘* Wluftrations 

/. of “Mafonry,’. with fonie. neceflary ‘alterations, 

Mr, Prefton’s diftribution of the firlt leCture into. 
fix, thefecond into four, and:the third into twelve 
fections, not being agreeable to the prefent mode 
of working, they are arranged in this work. accord— 
ing to the general praCtice.. 

It 
Ax 

iL Ray 

PREFACE é 

Tt is prefumed, that all regular Lodges, and | 
Chapters, will find it a ufeful affiftant, and Mon- 
1ToR, inafmuch as it contains moft of the Charges, 
Prayers, and Scripture Paflages, made ufe of at 
our meetings ; and which are not otherwife to be 
found, without recourfe to feveral volumes} 
which often occafions much delay, produces many 
irregularities in their diftribution, - and may fome~ 
times caufé omiflions of much importance. 

oN, 

The whole are here digefted and arranged in 
fuch order, through the feveral degrees, from the. 
EnrereD APPRENTICE to the RoyaL ARcH 
Mason, that they will be eafily underftood ; and 
by a due attention to the feveral divifions, the: 
mode of working, ae well in atranyement as: 
matter; will become univerfally the fame... This 
defirable object will add much to the happinefs. 
and fatisfaftion of all good Mafons, and redound 
to the honour of the whole fraternity. 

September 26th, 1797. 

CONTENTS. 
ma nerercene SEO 
PoARealy al 
‘B-O" OK “1. 

Vindication of Mafonry, including a demon 
tration of its pa aca 

Sucr. I. Refle@ions on the® LS and prow 
portion difplayed in the works of Na- 
“ture, and on the harmony and affection 
hs which fubfitt among the various {pecics 

, 

‘ 

Y "of beings, of every peak and dendini- 
nation Page ¥ 7 
HI, Friendfhip confidered, onh the advan- 
3 tages refalting from: it 5 
JIL Origin of Mafonry, | amd its general» 
advantages 7 
Ve Mafonry confidered: under two'denom- : ‘ 
inations 10 

V. Government of the fraternity-explained 12 - 
VI. Reafon why. the fecrets of Mafonry 
"ought not to be publicly expofed ; and 
the importance‘of thofe fecrets demon- 

ftrated 
© VEL, Few focieties. exempted from cenfure. 
iz Irregularities of Mafons no argument- 
BBC againil the inftitation 

13: 

vr 
Vill. 

CONTENTS. 

VUI. Charity a6 diftinguifhing chara@er= — 
iftic of Mafons. Page 2 
IX. The difeernment difplayed hy Mafons 
in the proper choice of olgleéts ofcharity. 2 
X. Friendly sdmenitous eed * 26) 
Evtocium ~~ 

General Remarks : including am, Illuftration: of the Lec= 

tures; a particular defcription of the ancient ceremonies 5. 
and the charges of all the degrees. 

Sscr. I. General remarks. . Page 
Il. Ceremony of opening and clofing: a - 3 

Prayer at opening the Lodge {1 7 5. 
——~ at clofing the Lodge 4 
Charges and regulations for the: condu& 
and behaviour of Mafons. ; 
On the management: of the craft i in work. 
ing, to be rchearfed at opening the 

_ Lodge’ 
Laws for the government’ of the Lodge z 
'. Chargeon the behaviour of. Mafons, ‘to 
be rehearfed at clofing the Lodge 
e:, Iii. Remarks on-the Fiest. een t 
Firft fection 
s _ Declaration to be affented to by. every 5 
F candidate, i inan adjoining ee 
previous to initiation, + ae 
Form of propofition’ 
Prayer at initiation 
“Charge at initiation into the fief deg 
Second: Section. 

CONTENT S- 

Origin of mafonic hiero lyphics Page 52° - 
Third feGtion- . ee ibs 
Brotherly IoWe, relief and truth explained 53’ 

‘Cardinal virtues explained Se 
‘ Equality among Mafons exemplified SS. 
Str. IV. Remarks on the Srconp Lecture ya 
Firk fection SR 690 
Charge at initiation into the fecond- _ 
Ge eR SEC BE 6t 
Origin of orders in architeGture 64. 
Five orders explained 65° 
General remarks on the fenfes’ 69° 
Five fenfes explained, _ 70° 
. Moral advantages of Geometry 76° 
Mee! © Second feGtion NOR 98 
|... Seven liberal arts explained: - 19° ° 
ey The globes explained Fe.‘ 82 
Sicr. V. Remarks on the Tuirp Lecrire 84 
ne Firt feQion 85 

Prayer at initiation into the third degree ib. 
Charge at initiation into the third degree 86". 

Second fection : 88 
Srer. VI. Remarks on the fourth, of Mafter Mark 
ie fafon’s degree 89°. 

Charge to be read at opening the Lodge go’ 
Remarks on the fourth leGture eo SOx 
Fir fe&tion ib. 
Second fe&ibn 

z 
Charge on advancing to the fourth dégree 3) 
Charge to beread at clofing 95° 

‘Song fung at clofing, Mark Maflers 
Ais ‘ all appear” See 
Stet. VIL. OF the ancient ceremonics of the order 9& 
Form of application for a conftitution 99 
Ceremony of conftitution Tok 

Song. 

CONTENTS. 

Song in ‘Boker of Mafoory 
Anthem fung at an inftallation 
Geremony of confecration. 
—-—— of inflallation 
Ancient charges at do. from an ¢ is. 
~ General charges delivered at the : 
tution ofa Lodge 
‘Explanation of the vatious iaiptetnents 
Sons hoe which thoes ae 
uded 
Ceremony of laying a foundation ftone “1: 
Ceremony of dedication. LM: 
Ceremony. at funerals: yee 
Funeral fervice® 
Remarks on the fixth, or Mf Bed 
lent Mutters? “degree . 
Charge read at opening , 
Charge to a Hewiy a, ae Mott Bae 
.__ cellent Matter 
Charge at’ clofing” 
Obfervations ‘on the feventh or Royal 
Arch degree ors 
Charge at pei achapter 
Obfervations on the feventh aed 
Firft fe@ion — 
Prayer at exaltation 
Charges from Scripture’ 
fccond f pat . 
Hittory of the Tem ys oe 
Charge toa Ro rch son 
Prayer during: € ceremonies ” 
Clofirg,. 

’ 
| 

ty 
un 

: vats 

hy, i 
Ry 2: 

Wah 

CONTENTS. 

“Srcre VIL. Obfervations on the ordersof Knights 

Templars, and ‘Knights of Malta 

18r 

‘Ster. IX. Bacio silence orders of Knighthood 191 

BOOK Tit. 

‘Sketch of the hiftory of Mafonry in America 
‘Maflachufetts, St. John’s Grand Lodge 
Maffachufetts Grand Lodge 

| Mafonic union of the two Grand Lodges 

Pennfylvania 

_ ‘New-Hampthire ~ 

South-Carolina, Rhode-Ifland, Conne@iout 

New-York, Maryland 

. North-Carolina 

Nemo Nova-Scotia wtse 

«Chapters.of Royal Arch Mafons in America 
_ Maffachufetts 
- Conneéticut, New-York, Pennfylvania 
Virginia . 

Encampments of oa — 

—Scengoos— 

i, PART. II. 

| Becret Matter, 
‘Perfe& Matter, 
dlluftrious Secretary, 
_ ‘Provoft and Judge, 8 

- ‘Intendant of cor Buildiag, or Mafter in If acl 

193 

ib. 
196 
205 

_ 206 

209 
210 
21! 
212 
213 
214. 
ib. 
215 
216 
ih. 

220 
224 
226 
229 
235 

| «Bes Bai ights, or Knights of the Ninth Arch 232 

EleGed 

% St he y 

Mot Excellent Matter’ 8 Cael ge Ny 

CONTENTS. — 

_EkGed Grand Matter, or Ileftvious € 
Fifteen. 9 

sfillutteions Knights, or Sablinie tag 

Grand Mafter Archite&ts ; atk 

Knights of the Ninth Arch, or Royal Ake 

Pertestion, or Grand, Eleét, Perfeét and pts i 
* Mafon - rv 7afliek 6 Ape ie 

MASONIC SONG 

©Matter’s 

“Senior Warden’s _ Si aa ae 
Junior Warden’s. ni to A epee @ 
“Senior Warden °s Toaft ey ee 
*Feftival Song ©) 8 fo 
‘KnightsTemplar’s - 
“Royal Arch pene SSRI 4 
Origin of Mafonry Shee 

| : : Soe 3 
tex. SAWS. = 
“ - \ 5 “aH 
= 4) 
Ae t te ie 
Oe 
; sti iy 
beng ve io 

ILLUSTRATIONS: 

MASONRY. 

tS eee 
BOOK fr 

A VINDICATION OF MASONRY, INCLUDING 
A DEMONSTRATION OF ITS. EXCELLENCY. 
4 

SECTION I. 

RefleHions on the fymmetry-and proportion dif: 
ined an the fe} of Wile oe dn the iv 
mony and affection which fubfift among the 
various fpecies of beings af every “rank and 
denomination. 

HOEVER refle&ts on the objefls that 
furround him, will find abundant reafon 
to admire the works of Nature, and to adore ‘the 
all-fupremie Being who direéts fach aftonifhing 
‘operations : he will be convinced, that infinite 
Wifdom could alone defign, and infinite power 
‘@ecomplifh, fuch amazing works, s2 
Ly B Were 

2 ILLUSTRATIONS 

Were a man placed in a beautiful gardery 
would not his mind be affefted with the moft ex 
quifite delight, on a calmdurvey of its rich col» 
leGions ; Would not the groves, thé grottoes, the 
artful wilds, the flowery parterres, the opening. 
villos, the lofty caftades, the winding ftreams, 
the whole var iegated fcené, awaken his fenfibilis 
ty, and infpire his foul with the inoft exalted 
ideas ? When hewwbferved the delicate order, the 
nice fymmetry, and beautiful difpofition of every 
part, feemingly complete in itfelf, yet reflecting 

new? beauties on the other, and nothing wanted te 
make one beautiful whole, would not ‘his mind’ 

be agitated withthe moft bewitching fenfations, 

and the view of the delightful fcene naturally 

lead him’ to’ ‘admiré atid venerate. the be 
- genius of him, who contrived it ? 

If the produétions of art can fo forcibly im 3 

prefs the mind with admiration, with how much 
_ greater -aftonifhment, and revererice; muft we bes 
bold the operations of Nature ? On. every hand 

the prefents to-view. unbounded {cenes,of utility, 

and, delight, in, which divine. wifdom. is moft. 
frikingly confpicuous.. Such fcenes are indeed, 
too expanded for: the narrow. capacity of man td. 
cumprehend ; yet, whoever contemplates the gea., 

“tieral 

“OF MASONRY. 5 

neral fyftem, will eafily perceive, from the uni- 
formity of the’ plan, ‘ample traces of an’ origina 
fource, and be ‘naturally direfted to the firft caufe, 
the grand ‘author of exiftence, the fupreme go- 
vernor of the world, the one aig and op iepes 
éd beatity ! : 
“ Befide ‘all the pleafing profpe@s ‘that ever y= 
where furround us, and with which our fenfes aré 
every moment gratified ; befide’ the fymmetry, 
good order, and proportion, which appear in all 
the works of creation, there is fomething farther 
that attraéts the refleGing ‘mind, and draws its at- 
tention nearer to the Divinity—the univerfal har- 
_ mony and affe&tion which fubfifts among the dif- 
ferent f{pecies of beings, of every rank and deno- 
mination: Thefe are the cements of the rational 
worldyand by thefe alone does it fubfift, When 
they ceafe, nature muft be diffolved, and. man, 
the image .of his maker, and the chief of his 
works, be overwhelmed in the general chaos, 
On a careful examination we fhall find,-that in 
the-whole order of being, from the feraph which 
adores and burns, down to the meaneft infe@, all, 
according to their rank in the {cale of exiftence, 
have, more or lefs, implanted in them, the prin- 

cipal of affociation with others of the fame fpe- 
cies 

4 ILLUSTRATIONS | 

cies with themfelves. Even the moft inconfider. 
able animals are formed into different ranks and 
focieties for mutual benefit and proteftion. Need 
we name the careful ant, or the induftrious bee ; 
infeéts which the wifeft of men has recommended ~ 
as patterns of unwearied induftry and prudent 
forefight, ? When we farther purfue our remarks, 
we fhall find, that the innate principle of friend- 
thip increafes in proportion with the extenfion of 
our intelle€tual faculties ; and that the only cri- 
terion by which a judgment may be formed, ref- 
pe@ting the fupertority of one part of the animal 
creation above the other, muft be, by obferving 

. the degrees of kindnefs and good nature in which 
it excels. 

~-Tf fuch are the general principles which per- 
vade the whole creation, how forcibly muft thofe 
leffons predominate in the affemblies of mafons, 
where’ civilization and virtue, under the fanétion 
of feience and art, are ever Ete? zealoully ches 
rithed ? 

*S ogaca 

“ee. eatin 

POF MASONRY.!! ere. 
ishsvieb 3a2n BEL DP gills 
Friendfhi pc confi dered, ri the “advantages refulting 

Sit ro 
from. it, 

TO: fabjed can) more » properly » engage’ the 
attention, than'the humane and benevolent 

Rivalitions which, indulgent Nature has beftowed 
wpon. the rational {pecies. -T hefe are. replete with 
the happief effeéis, and afford to the mind the 
anoit; agreeable refleétions., . The breaft which is 
infpired with tender feelings, is naturally prompt- 
‘ed to a.reciprocal. intercourfe of. kind and gene- 
srous aftions....As human nature rifes in the feale 
sofithings, fo. do. the focial afféétions likewife arife. 
When», friendfhip is. firm. and lafting, we enjoy 
‘the higheft degree of. happinefs = but when it de- 
~clines, we experience an.equal, degree of pains 
Where friendfhip i is unknown, jealoufy and fuf- 
‘ picion’ prevail ;. but where virtue. is the cement, 

_ ottue pleafure muft be enjoyed. In every, breaft 

-there .cxiils,.apropenfity to friendly, a&ts, and 

-when.thofe are exerted, to, effect, they Feeeten e- 
“very temporal enjoyment ; and if they do not al- 

« ways totally remove, the difquietudes, they at leaft 
_ tend to,allay the calamities of life... 

| Friendihip 3 is, traced } terouaR the circle of pri- 
vate 

5 ILLUSTRATIONS 
vate connexions to the grand fyfiem of anivee etry 

benevolence, which no limits, can ve 
“and its influence extends to évery ‘branch of the 
human race. Adtuated by thefe fentiments, ez 
individual centers his happinefs inthe: ‘happ 
Of his neighbour, and a fixed and’ “perma 
‘union is eftablifhed ainong men. dw 2nondes i i 
“ Neverthelefs, though: friendthip, confidered as 
‘the fource of univerfal benevolence, is unlimited, 
it exerts its influence more or lefs powerfully” as 
‘the objeéis it favours are nearer or more remote, | 
“Hence the love of friends aid of ‘country ‘takes - 
‘the lead in our ‘affeétions, and gives: ‘rife to that | 
“true patrotifm, ‘which fires the foul with the mof 
generous flame, creates the beft and mofft difinter=. 
“efted virtue, and ‘ infpires that’ public: fpirit and 
‘heroic ardour which enables us to fupport agood 
-eaufe, and rifk our ‘lives in its defence. ef 4 
“Phis commendable ‘virtue’ crowns ‘the lover of 
“his country with unifading laurels, gives a luftre 
‘yo his aQions; and confecrates’ his naine"to porte.” 
“rity. “The warrior’s glory may confift in murder, 
and the rude ravage’ ‘of the defolating fword ; but 
“dhe blood of thoufands ‘wilh never ftain ‘the hands ~ 
of his country’ s friend, “His virtues ‘ate be gi” 

and of the “noblef” Kinds “Confcious integrity - 
fupports 

 210F: MASONRY ¢ a% 

fupports him againft, the.arm of power ;.an¥ 
fhould.he bleedyby tyrant-hands, he glorioufty 
dies a, martyr.in the caufe of liberty, and leaves 
. to. pofterity an everlafting monument of the greats 
 nefs.of his foul. 
 Friendthip not nbn appears divine. when | ems 
ployed in preferying the liberties of our country, 
‘but fhines with equal, fpendor in the. more trans 
guil, fcenes of life, Before it rifes_into the now 
ble flame. of patrotifin, aiming deftru&ion at the 
- heads. of. tyrants, thundering for therty, and 
courting danger i in. defence of rights ; ; we behold 
ity calm and moderate; burning with an even 
glow; im improving the. foft hours ,of peace, and 
heightening the relith for virtue. In thefe happy 

sed and the eben: hours of life els employed 

arte he 

- jn. the cultivation, of focial and polifhed man. 

che sh Supe tus 
Ai Be ex SECT. im 
ojos of oT and. its general advantages. 

soMes the commencement of the World, we 
’ «may trace the foundation of Mafonry. ‘Ever 

ince’ fymmetry ‘began, and harmony difplayed 
_ Sher charms, our Oxder has had a being. Dut- 
ee ing 

@ ILLUSTRATIONS 

ing many ages, and in many different: countries) 
it has flourifhed. No aft, no {eiénce “preceded 
it. ‘In the dark periods of antiquity; when'liters 
ature was in a low ftate, and the rude manners 
of our forefathers witheld from them’ that knows 
ledge we now fo amply fhare, Mafonty diffufed 
its influence. This fcience unveiled, arts arofe, 
civilization took place, and the progrefs of 
Knowledge and philofophy gradually “difpelled 
the gloom of ignorance and barbarifm.’ Govérn- 
ment being fettled, authority was given ‘to laws, — 
and the affemblies of the fraternity acquired the 
patronage of the great and the good, while the tes 
nets of the profeffion were attended with, un. 
bounded utility. ee 
Abftraéting from the pure viablaateos which arife 
from friendfhip fo, wifely conftituted as that 
which fubfifts among mafons, and which its 
fcarcely poflible that any circumftagce or occu. 
rence’can erafe, we find’that mafonry is a fcience 
confined to no particular country, but diffufed 
‘over the’ whole terreftrial globe. Wherever 
arts flourifh, there it flourifhes too.. ,Add to this, 
that by. fecrét and: inviolable figns, carefully pre- 
ferved among the fraternity throughout the world, 
Mafonry becomes an univerfal language. . Hence 

es many 

OF MASONRY. ‘S 

many advantages are gained: The diftant Chi. 
nefe, the wild Arab, and the Americam favage, 
will embrace a brother Briton ; and will know, 
that befide the commom ties of humanity, there is 
fill a ftrofger obligation to induce him to kind 
and friendly offices. The fpirit of the fulminat- 
ing prieft will be tamed ; and a moral brother, 
though of a different perfuafion, engage his 
efteem, Thus, through the influence of Mafon- 
ty, which is reconcilable to the beft policy, all 
thofe difputes which imbitter life,and four the 
tempers of men, are avoided; while the common 
good, the general defign of the hati is ee 
purfued- 
’ From fis view ofthe fyftem, its utility muft 
be fufficiently obvious. The univerfal principles 
of the art unite men of the moft oppofite tenets, 
of the moft diftant countries, and of the mof 
contradi@ory opinions, in one indiffoluble bond 
of affeftion, fo that in every nation a Mafon finds 
a friend, and in eyery climate a home. 

Such is the plan of our inftitution; hence, in 
all our Lodges, union is cemented by fincere . at- 
tachment, and pleafure reciprocally communica- 
ted in the cheerful obfervance of- every obliging 

office. Virtue, the grand objeé&t in . Mie W. lumi- 

nous 
N= 

ao ILLUSTRATIONS 

nous as the meridian:fun,, fhines refulgent 
mind, enlivens the heart, aren yeqee! cdo we 
ere warm pay aey-8 and cor 

tion.) . omnes 9% ei y 
f a3 t ; * ft a 

ATE SECT. WV. aa nike 
Mafonry confered: under too en ‘nites 

to Aa esa 
Yee is ‘underftood under two denog 
minations : it is operative, and. Speculative Pits 
By, the former, we allude toa proper, applic ation 
of 1 the ufeful , mules of. archite@ture,. wher nce. : 
firnftu, rs will active figure, firength, and | ut 
iad-wbence will sefulta due proportion, 2 4 
-- Juft corcefpondence in all its. parts. . By hee test 
’ ter, we learm to. fubdue the paflions, aét upon th Wi u 
{quare, keep a tongue of good report, . main 
sigh rand iprattife charitye..° L Sort wii ; 
< Speculative Mafonry i is fo. far i interwoven wit 

oi 
pay oe rational homage to the ‘Deity, sieht ae 
Once conftitutes our duty and our’ ‘happinefs. ” It iy 

Teads the contemplative to view with reverence i: 
and admiration the glorious works: of: the” eres 
ation- and. infpires him dian ‘the ‘moft Sees F 

al or MASONRY. - +“ 

Operative Mafonry furnifhes:us with dwellings, 
tap og fhelters from. the viciilitudes and 
inclemencies of feafons ; and while it difplays the 
effets of human) video: as well in the choice,’ 
as in the. arrangement, of the fundry materials of 
which an edifice is compofed, it demonftrates' 
that a fund of fcience and induftry is implanted: 
- in. man for the beft; and moft falutary, and he 
"agen purpofes. 
- The lapfe.of ‘time, the ruthlefs hand of igno: 
_ ance; and? the devaflations of war, have laid! 
‘wafte and-defiroyed many valuable monuments’ 
‘of antiquity, on which the utmoft exertions of 
_ human genius have been employed. Even the 
temple of SoLomon, {6 fpacious and: magnifi- 
cent, and conftrufted by fo many célebrated ara 
tifts, efcaped not the unfparing ravages of barbaw 
~ tous force. Free-mafonry, notwithftanding, ‘has 
Rill furvived. The attentive ear receives ‘the 
found from ‘the inflruétive tongue, and the facred 
inyfteries are fafely lodged: in the repofitory of} - 
faithful breafts. . Tools and'implements of archi- 
te@lure,: fymbols the moft expreffive! are feleéts 
‘sed by the. fraternity, to imprint‘on the memory 
wife and ferious truths: ; ‘and: thus, through a 
~ fucceffion of ages, are tranfmitted* unimpaired the ~ 
excellent tenets of their inftitution. 

Be hg Wins thd a Wh 6 he a i 

ya ILLUSTRATIONS 

‘and meritorious of each clafs.. Honour’ an 

_ due exértion of the rational ‘and intelle@ual pow 

Si Bo OE. Mandl. iol 
: me Gocernment of the Fraternity expla ime 

THE niode of government: obferved wre 
‘fraternity will beft explain the impor 

and give the, trueft, idea of the mature and < defigr ms 
of the mafonic fy ftem. hat aie 
_-There are ‘three Claffes of Mafons, middle dif. 
ferent appellations. The privileges of thefe 
claffes are. diftin&, and: particular means are 
alopted to preferve thofe priveleges to the je R 

bity are» recommendations to’ ‘the firft clafs 
which the praétice of virtue is enforced, a 
duties of morality inculcated, while the mind 
prepared. for regular and focial cénverfe, ir 
principlés of knowledge and philofophy. 
gence, affiduity, and application, aré qualificati 
for the fecond clafs; in which an accurate él 
dation of fcience, both in theory ‘and praéti 
given. Here human reafon is cultivated. 

ers and faculties; nice and difficult theories” : 
explained; new difcoveries produced, and tho 
already known. beautifully embellifhed.— 
the third clafs is compofed of a fele&t few, wh 

OF MASONRY. sag 

 tratfPand fidelity have diftinguithed, whom years 
and experience have improved,,. and. whom merit 
and abilities have entitled to preferment. ‘With 
them. the ancient landmarks of the Order are pre- | 
erved ; and from them we learn and praétife. the 
on ceflary and iuftruétive-leffons, which at once 
dignify the art, and qualify its. profeflors to illuf- 
trate» its excellence ‘and utility.:s9)° een fe 
|. This is ‘the @ftablithed ‘mode of the mafonic 
overninent: when the rules of the fyftem are ob- 
ed Mee shi judixaens arrangement, true 

ree: oe men, pofpitality prometeds abd 
raxded, and Sngenuity sveltiantnis va 
SEC so ws ; 
Brom vaks He Ryltis rooms svat Sno 
afons why the Jecrets of Mafonry oughtmot to 
peas expofed ; and: the importance of thofe 
_ feerets: demon ftrated. sidble ne Peete ;: 
OFF the fecrets of Mafoiiry are replete with fugh 
~~ ,advantage to mankind it may be afked, why 
“are they x not divulged for the general good of fo. 
- eiety. 2... To this it may be anfwered.; Were the - 
_ the privileges‘of Mafonry to be indifcriminatcly 
"aed the, defign of the inftitution would be 
verted 5 and being familiar, like many: other 

eds SES, important 
tant. 

4 coocras a 

important intatters, “would fon Tote net 
‘and fink into@ifregardi i 8" any eh 
’ It is a-weaknefs m huinany nature, that | men 
-generally more ‘charmed with novelty,“ han 
“real worth or intrinfit value of things. Thad 
merable teftimonies might: be adduced’ of this 
-truth.: Phe-operations of! Nature, however beal 
tiful, magnificent, and: ufeful, are ovetbooked) be 
-eaife common and:fatiliar: The fun sifes’ 
- fets, the fea flows and reflows,: rivers glide al 
their channels, trees and plants: we getate, men an 
bbeafts a, yet thefe being’ perpetually open + 
view, pafs unnoticed. In othoft; the? on E 
nifhing iochieidit9 260 Nukanextt ye erva 
on account of their familiarity, and excite not 
one fingle emotion, either in admiration of r 
- gieat'caufe, ‘or of gratitude for the: bleffinig 
ferved. Virthe herfelfis not exempted from 
unhappy bias in the conttitution of “te “hu 
dfram@, Novelty: influences al? Our® ieadngiae n 
«determinations. What is new, Gr ‘difficult in 
+ acquifition, however tHifling or infi gnificant 
“@ily “captivates ‘the ‘thaditiation, atid enfi 
\teinpotaty' admiration j While what i8fanti 
“éafily attained howévér' ndble of eviinerit 
wutilityy ie fute to be difvegarded f by the 
* the unthinking. 

tale 
POF MASONRY). ° 3 

yDid the particular. fecrets or peculiar forms 
prevalent among Mafons conftitute the effence of: 
the art, it, might be alledged that‘our amufements 
were trifling, and, our cerejnonies fuperficial. 
Rut this is not the cafe. Having their ufe, they 
are preferved; and from the recolleétion of the 
/ leffons they inculcate, the well informed Mafon 
derives inftru€tion. Drawing them toa near ine * 
_ fpeétion, he views them through a proper medi- 
um ; adverts»to. the circumftances. which gave 
‘them rife ; dwells upon the tenets they convey ; 3 
and finding them replete with ufeful information, 
adopts: them .as keys, to the privileges of his art, 
‘and prizes them as+facred... Thus convinced of 
: their propriety, he ‘eflirnbtes the value from their 
i "utility. eity 
@ Many perfons are deluded by their vague He HES 
_ pofition that our myfteries are merely nominal ; | 
i that the praétices eftablifhed among us are frivo- - 
lous’; and-that our ceremonies might be adopted, 
_or waved, at pleafure,“;On this falfe foundation, 
__ We have found them hurrying through all the de- 
grees, without adverting to the propriety of one 
” ftep they purfue, or poffefling’afingle’ qualifica- 
* _tiom-requifite for advancement. Pafling through 
% snag formalities, they have accepted — 3 

Oe Ne » 

her OL Mafonry with indifference, and when their pal ba 
_tronage rhas:been folicited; have’ aé¢epted’ or * 
aca with ealubanck, or cago them with: Base i 

x 

é ILLUSTRATIONS 

and affumed the govatnmeht sof: lodges, equally — 
unacquainted with tlie rules of fhe inflitution they 7 
pretended to fupport,- -or the nature of the ‘truft! 
repofed in them. The confequence.is obvious ‘gy 
anarchy and. confufion have enfued} ‘and the: fubs 
{tance has: been loft in the thadow. —Hence' men” 
eminent for. ability, for rank, and‘ for’ fortune, a7 ie ¢ 
have been ded to view theodiftinguifhed. honours > ‘ 

ly: conteriéa Phe? ancient! sangeet © 
bo 

. OF MASONRY, * 4p 

Order would be reftored, and the ception of 
; the fociety preferved.. : ; 

Such condu& alone can retreive our charaéter, 

TW prudent ations fhall diftinguith our title to 

’ ~ the honours of Mafonry, and regular deportment 

-_ difplay the influence and utility of our rules; the 

. world in general will not eafily be led ‘to recon- 

_cile the uniformity of our proceedings: with the 
_ tenets of our profeffion. ~ - 

SECTION VII. 

_ Few Societies exempted from cenfure. Irregulari- 
© ties of Majons no argument againft the gees ‘a 
tion. 

MONG the various focieties to which the ‘ 
are occafions and: inclinations of men have gi- 

. ven birth, few, if any, are wholly exempted from 
. cenfure, Friendthip, howeyer valuable in itfelf, 
and however univerfal its pretenfions, has feldom 

a/.) 

operated fo powerfully in general affociations, as 
to promote that-fincere attachment to the welfare 
"and profperity of each other, which is neceflary 
_ to conftitute true happinefs. This may be af- 
' cribed to fundry caufes, but to. none with more 
ah propriety, than to the reprehenfible motives 
which too frequently lead men toa pardcipaton, 

“Sie (8) 2 

48 ivst TONS 

“of eet hy heer ci pia: pal an “ate he i 
to oblige a a friend, or probably to “tog atl a ani : 
‘gular indulgence, we are induced’ to nix i in co 1 
“pany, is it furprifing ‘that'the 1 important duties of 
“fociety thould be” negletted, ‘and that, in 
~ quick circulation: of the cheerful glafs, our: ie 
~blek faculties’ fhould be gp buried: ith 1e 

“cup of ebriety P= “~’ 

is a truth to eta to” be ‘toncéaled:> hat the : 

have been jibes on to’ enrol ‘their names 
ours ‘records for mere purpofes of conviviali Fé 
~ Wvithout‘oride adverting 6 the’propricty of the meas 
~fure’ they” were’ about to adopt, or ingtiring 
* the nature Of’ the’ particular: ‘ehgagements to wh 

mea are —— By bie pe ete N 

\ panions. oN ‘genieral’ baci? oftat teal 
“Tefs indiference, has’ been ‘the ‘réfult! west hich: 6: 
“dua. But here’ ‘the ‘evil ‘flops: Roe!) Here 
fons, i norant of the true ‘delign of the: inftiti 
mse ly! without any “real ‘defe& >in ike 

f 

Sah 

SOF MA SONRY. i: Wrap 
‘morals, are induced to’ recommend others. of 
‘the fame caft to join the fociety for the fame pur- 
“pofe. Hence the mott valuable part of Mafonry 
“has been turned ‘into’ ridicule, and the diffipations 
“of a luxurious age have . buried an oblivion prin- 
‘ciples, that might have ‘dignified the moft exalted 

_ charaéters. 

- When we confider the multitude and yariety of 
»members-of ‘whieh the fociety of Mafons is com- 
 pofed, and the {mall number who are really con- 
 verfant with the ‘tenets of the inflitution, our 
‘ wonder will’ abate that fo few fhould be diftin- 
_ “guifhed-forexemplary lives. * From perfons who 
he are precipitately introduced into the myfteries of 
© Mafonry without: the requifite, qualifications, it 
_ “eannot be expeétedthat great regard will be paid 
> to'thie obfervance of duties. which, they, perceive 
. openly violated by their own initiation. Surely 

* not ; and:it is an incontrovertable truth, that fuch 
«is the unhappy bias in the dipofition of fome men, 
tis that ‘though’ the fairéft).and beft ideas were im- 
if “printed on the mind, they are:fo carelefs of their 
4 * own feputation: as to difregardetlie. moft inftyuc- 
“tive ‘leffons. We have reafon' to regret, that 
A pee’ perfons diftinguifhed. for. a, knowledge, in 
¢ art, -have-been induced _fometimes . to. violate 
the 

4 es 

_t wicked lives of men admitted.as an argumen 

“+ :Mafonry, that whatever imperfeétions may. 

20 ILLU STRATIONS 

the rules to which a pretended conformity d 
gained them applaufe. No fooner, have th 
been liberated from the ‘trammels, as they 
ceived, of a regular and virtuous condu&, in 
‘temporary government of a Lodge, than by 
“properly abufing the innocent and cheerful _ 
pait, they have become flaves to-vice and int 

_ “perance, and have not only difgraced themfelves, 

but refleGted. difhonour on the fraternity. — 
-fuch indifcretion, the beft of inftitutions has b 
“brought into contempt, and the more defery 
part of the community ‘has juftly conceived 
prejudice againft the fociety, of which it is 
cult to wipe off the impreflion. inner 
Though fome, however, may thus sraisiend 
- wife man will thence argue againft the intt 
* tion, or condemn the whole fraternity for the 
\ rors of a few miftaken individuals. Were 

. gaintt the religion which they profefs, chriftia 
~aitfelf, with all its beauties, might be _expofed t 
» cenfare.. Thus'much we may aver in, 2 favour 

* foutid among its profeffors, the inflitution co 
* tenances none. Thofe who violate the Jaws 

“OF MASONRY: ° © gx’? 
-odlium’ afd when mild ‘endeavours to reform? 
their lives aré found ineffe@ual, they ate expell." 
ed'thé Lodge, as unfit members of fociety. 
’ Vain, therefore, is ‘each idfe furmife againft the” 
- plan of Mafonry’; while its rules ‘are’ properly 
_ firpported, it willbe proof againft’ every attack-of - 
oftits moft ‘inveterate ‘inveterate enemies, ‘And 
men are not aware, that by decrying any laudas 
ble fy hen, they idérogate from the dignity of hu- 
man’ nature itfelf, and from ‘that good ‘ordériand® 
wife: difpofition™ of ‘things ‘which’ the’ alinighty ° 
\ Author’of thé’ world ‘has framed for the govern-° 
ment ‘of mankiad, ‘and’ eftabithed \4s' the ‘bafis‘of~ 
the moral” fyftem:- Leét'them -vecolleatf -thatg . 
- ffiendfhip and focial delights ‘can never:be:the 
=) “objet, of reproach; *Tliat that wifdom which® 
Fan “hoary Time has fanftified, can never be the ob-* 
jek of ridicule: > Whoever therefore” pretends ta. 
i afi! condemn, or-even’ to cenfure, whatshe doés notY 
ne comprehend, will, appear. equally mean:and :con-5 
smptible ; »dnd the: generous heart will. readily5 
pity the miftakeslof ignorant prefumption,: ' 
b saesh Se uSrB: rE: +Vi: * 
aca the di sles ifhing charatlerificc of Mofenssz 
ONHARITY is the chief of every. focial, ware, 
~~ <i diftinguithing charafteriftic isin 

ec, ILLUSTRATIONS 

our Order., This virtue includes a fupreme des. 
gree of love to the great Creator and Governor. 
of the univerfe, and an unlimited affeftion ta.the 
beings of his creation, of all chara&ters and of 
every denomination. This laf& duty is) forcibly - 
inculcated by the example of the Deity himfelfy 
who liberally difpenfes his beneficence to uns, 
numbered worlds. Wau 
“Itvis not particularly our province to enter into. 
a difquifition of every branch of this amiable virs~ 
tue ; we fhall only briefly ftate the happy. effeés.. 
of a benevolent difpofition towards mankind, and eat 
fhew that charity | exerted on proper objeéts is the” 
greatett pleafure man can poflibly enjoy... : 
-The*bounds .of the greateft nation, or the mont the 4 
extenfive-empire, . cannot circumferibe: the genes 
rofity ofa liberal mind, Men, in whatever fitue | a i 
ation they are placed; are ftill, in a great mea-j by 
fure, the fame... They are expofed to, imilar, — 
dangers :and misfortunes... They have not, wifes 
dem to forefee, or power to prevent, the evils i ines 
cident to human nature. They hang, as itwere, - 
in a perpetual fufpence between hope and fear, 
ficknefs and health, plenty and want. A mutual) i 
chain of dependence fubfifts throughout. the’ ) 
nial “creations ‘The whole human! fpecies _ 
a 

fe 

as ) erer se 

© OR MASONRY. § iby 

“Wierefore y proper “objeéis for the exercife of hi. 
“man charity. 
Beings ‘who partake of one common nature, 
“ought to be a€tuated ‘by the fame. motives and 
‘Gnterefts. Hence, to footh the unhappy, by fym- 
“pathizing with their misfortune, and to reftore 
“peace and tranquillity to agitated {pirits, conftitute 
“the general and great ends of the mafonic infti- 
“*aution! ‘This Kurnane, this generous difpofltion 
“Fires the breaft with many manly feelings, and 
enlivens that fpirit of compaflion, which is the 
glory of the huttan frame, and not only rivals, 
but outfhines, every other te the mind is ~ 
Rad ‘capable’ of enjoying. : 

t All ‘human paffio ons, when airetted by the fu. 
“'perior principles: Of reafon, tend to promote fore 
“ufeful purpofe ; ; but compaffion towards proper 
objedts, i is the moft beneficial of all the affeGtions, 

} “as fh ‘extends to’ greater numbers, and excites 
" ‘more ‘Tafting degrees of happinefs. 

~~ Poffeffed of this amiable, this godlike difpofi 1- 
“tion, Mafons ’ are fhocked at mifery under every 
form and appearance. When we behold an ob- 
“Jeet ining under the miferies of a diftreffed bo- 

“dy | be mind, the healing accents which flow 
“froit Gar tongues, alleviate oe of the anhap- 
fies, v 

2 ILLUSTRATIONS OF 

py fufferer, and make even adverfity, in its dif. 
“mal ftate, look gay. Our pity excited, we af- 
fuage grief, and cheerfully relieve diftrefs. 
“When a brother is in want, every heart is . prone ; 
“to ache; when he As hungry, we ‘feed him ; ze 
“when he is naked, we clothe him ; when. he is 
“in trouble, we fly with {peed to his relief. Thos 
“we confirm the propriety of the title we bear, and. Ht 
“dexponifirate to the world at large, that BROTH ER 
“among Malons i is fomething more that an empty 
“nae, ith 

4 Sak (C28) ek ae ua 
"The difcernment. difplayed ~ by. Ma ons in te 
roper chorce of objeéls.. of Charity. 
1t3 nut’ be acknowledged by the moft invete- 4 
fe rate enemies of Mafonry, that no fociety i is, 

*more remarkable for the prattice of charity, 0 

“any affociation of men more famed for, ‘Sous 
*efted ‘liberality. It cannot be faid that Mafons ; 
meet only. to indulge i in convivial mirth, while | 
‘the poor and needy, pine for relief, Their apaey. 

_ Merly contributions, exclulive of their private 
_fubf{criptions to relieve diftrefs, prove the cons 
trary They, are ever ready, in proportion t to their 
circuraftances, cheerfully, to contubnte to > alleyis 

at 

4. 
aes 

_—> "> 

OFYMASONRY, 25 
‘ate the misfortunes of their fellow-creatures ; but 
juftly confidering the variety of objets, whole 
feeming diftrefs the di€tates of Nature and the ties 
of Mafonry incline them to pity and tohare, 
they find it neceflary fometimes to inquire into 
the caufe of their misfortunes ; left a ntifcon- 
geeived-tendernefs of difpofition, or an impolitic 
generofity of heart, might prevent them from ma- 
king a a proper diftin€tion in the objects. ‘Though 
their hearts and ears are always open to the dif- 
treffes of the deferving poor, yet their charity is 
not to be mifapplied, or difpenfed with a pfo- 
fufe liberality on perfons who may ufe Mafonry ~ 

asa cloak to cover irdpe iors. Thofe he. are 

burdened - uneh a mtmcrous Ghspring, alu d who, 
through age, ficknefs, infirmity, or any anfores 
feen accident in life, are reduced to poverty and | 
want, paruoularly claim their attention, and fel- 
dom fail to experience the happy efleéts of their 
friendly. dffociations. To fuch objeéts, whofe 
fitaation is more “eafy to be conceived than ex- 
preffed, they are induced liberally to extend their 

- bounty. Hence they give convincing proofs 

of wifdom and difcernment ; for though their 
benevolence, like their laws, be unlimited, yet 
eri ahs their 
D 

£6 ILLUSTRATLONS 

their hearts glow principally with affeétion. {On 
ward the deferving part of mankind, 

From this view of the advantages refulting f from 
the profeffion of Mafonry, every candid and i ime 
partial mind muft acknowledge its fuperiority to 
the greater part of modern inftitutions ; and if 
the piéture here drawn be juft, it muft furely be 
no trifling acquifition to any. government, or 
fate, to have under its jurifdiétion, a fociety of 

- gwen, who are true patriots, loyal fubjeéts, pate 
rons of {cience, and friends to mankind. 

SECT. Ki 

i iendly admonitions, 
- AVING, in the explanation of the princi« 
ples of Mafonry, endeaveured to demon- 
firate its real excellence and utility, I hall cons — 

clude my obfervations. with a ‘few friendly ads 

monitions 5 conceiving that they will be favour~ 
ably received by my brethren, as they proceed 
from a fincere attachment to the intereft and res 
putation of the foci ictys 

Uleful knowledge is the great obje& by our 
defire § : with zeal then let us apply to the prac= 
tice of Mafonry. Let us recolle&, that the ways 
of wildans a are heautifuly and lead to pleafure. 

ik dee 

OF MASONRY... 27 

Knowledge is attained by degrees, and cannot 
every where be found. “Wifdom feeks the fecret 
fhade, the lonely cell defigned for contemplation. 
There enthroned fhe fits, delivering her facred 
oracles. There let us feek her, and purfue the 
real blifs. Though the paflage be difficult, the 
farther we trace it, the eafier it will become. 

If we are united, the fociety muft flourifh. 
Let all private animofities give place to peace 
and good fellowfhip. Uniting in one defign, let 
us be happy ourfelves, and contribute to the hap- 
pinefs of others.. By promoting ufeful arts, let 
our fuperiority and diftinGtion be marked ; let us 
cultivate the moral virtucs, and improve in all 
that is good and amiable ; let the Genius of Ma. 
fonry prefide over our condué, and under her 
fway let us a& with becoming dignity. On 
every occafion, let us preferve an elevation of 
inderftanding, a politenefs of manner, and an 
evennels of temper. Let our recreations be in~ 
‘mocerit, and purfued with moderation ; and ne- 
ver let us fuffer irregular indulgences to impair 

- gur faculties, or expofe our charaéter to derifion. 

Thus we fhall a& in conformity to our precepts, 
and fupport the name we have long borne, of be- 

ing a refpeftable, a regular, and an uniform, fo- 

yy 

4 

Nase 

28. ILLUSTRATION §; &e. 

BE UL Ow Ge KE as 
‘/MAsoNRy: comprehends" within’ its” civéle’ 
every'branelivof ufeful knowledge and learning,» 
and juftly..ftamps.an indeliable mark of pre-emi-\ 
ae On its genuine. profeffors, ite ee 

ance, ‘power, Hor fortune can béftow. — When - 
its rulesvare! ftridtly obferved, itlis'found to bear 
tyre foundation of tranquility.amidft the) various) — 

diiappointments. of lite; a friend that will 
decal SBA Gril oeinfak De oat arate : 
and ddverfity’s a’ bleffing that will remain’ with 
albtimes, ciréumflances and~placesyandeto Which! - 
abou ay iad oben other, earthly, coms, 
orts fink into difregard, PERL ia? 
Mafonry gives real ‘and intrinfie ex¢ellency td’ 
. stn, and. prep weshim' for the dutiesoffocial lifes 
a caligs,domeftic! flrife ; | it as,company infolix, — 
WS ADE BAY Sy VaCity Variety, ar enon 
Crate Pena ae yt ae it checks ie. 
partion, ‘and “employs ufefully the" moft a& 
fact |ties 5 andsin age, when ficknefs, imbecili 
and, difeafe, have benumbed every corporal eal 
and rendered thé union of foul.and body almoft 
intoférable, a réfleAion on the time fpent’in Ha. 
foniépurfwits will yield a -perpetmabcfund of 
comfortandpfatisfa&tions: | 4:0! Ip vives 
2 Such are the general advantages of Malgory a 
to énumerate them feperately, would be ah e a 
fefs: labour: it may be fufficient to obferve? that 
he«who is potfefled of this true {cience,. and jaétsy 
agreeable .to, the, character, he, hears, has witha 
Kimlelt the {pring and fupport ie ithe ur 

every fo igs 
Virtue ;' a fubjeét of contemplation, that at pee , 
the mind, ° and’ expands all “it# powers ;;astheme; 
that is inexhauflible, ever new, and always intern, | eit 
efting. ooh ie 
9 

oe 

[29 ] 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

OF 
MASONRY. 

WeSC 

BOOK II. 

GENERAL REMARKS: INCLUDING AN IL» 
“ LUSTRATION OF THE LECTURES ; A 
PARTICULAR DESCRIPTION OF THE AN- 
CIENT CEREMONIES ; AND THE CHAR- 
GES USED IN THE DIFFERENT DE- 

GREES, 
SECT. L 

General Remarks. 

Masons is an art equally ufeful and exe 
tenfive. In every art there isa mytftery, 
which requires a gradual progreffion of know- 
ledge’to arrive at any degree of perfe&tion in. it, 
Without much inftruftion, and more exercife, 
no man can be fkilful in any art; in like man- 
ner, without an affiduous application to the va- 
rious fubje&s treated in, the different lefures of | 
mafonry, no perfon can be fufficiently acquaint 

- @ with its true value. ; 
mies. D It 

go -ILLUSTRATIONS 

Jt muft not, however, be inferred from this. 
remark, that!perfons who ‘Jabour.undér the dif- 
advantages of a’ confined education, or- whofe 
{phere of life requires a more intenfe application 
to bufinefs ‘or ftudy, (are to bedifcotiraged in 

their indeavours to gain a knowledge of Mafon-_ ie 
ry. To qualify °anifidividial'to enjoy the bene- 
fits of the focicty, at large, onto partake of its 

privileges, it is not abfolutely., ‘neceflary thatyhe 
should be acquainted, v with all the,intricate; parts 
_of. the {eience... Thefe are only. intended forge 

.Giligent and afliduous. mafon, who, mayzhave ei 4 

.fure and, opportunity to indulge fuch purfuits, 
Though fome are more able than others, fome 
more eminent, fome. more ufeful, yet all, in their — 

See 

different {pheres, may prove advantageous to oN mere 

~community'y and-our ‘neceffities, .as well 
-conf{ciénces; bind’ as’ to Jove'one another. 

-thdvftrious'tradefman Certainly” roves "hinhfeliia 

“valuable member of fogiety, and worthy ofevery. 

chonotir thatwe eat corfer ; but as the natiitelef 

“every ‘man’s proteffion will’ not admit of that lei. 

“fi ire Which i is necéffary to qualify -him to become — 

“an expert } Mafon, itis highly ail! 
“ficial duties “6f a-lodge’fhowld be° éxe€ 
peion whofe education the scene 

OF MASONRY- gt 

able .them to, become adepts; as.it muft be al. 
lowed; that all who accept offices, and. exercife 
authority, fhould. be properly qualified to, dif. 
charge, the .tafk .affigned| them, with honour to 
themfelves,,.and credit to their fundry ftations— 
All men are not bleffed with the fame powers, 
morithé fame advantages|; all’ men therefore are 
_ mot, equally.) qualified, to: govern.—Mafonry:is 
avifelcalculated.to: fuit the different ‘tanks «and 
degrees.of men; as»every one, saccording® toy his 
AMation’and,,ability,, may, clafs; with»his sequal, 
Founded wmpon: the moft generous yprinciples, «it 
-admits»o¥ snow difquietude- among :its»profeffors |; 

~each ‘clafseis happy-in its) particular:affociation’s ° 
cand»when»all are metiin general:conventidny nei- 
-ther arrogance |/and: prefumption- appearson :the 
- oné)hand, snor,.diffidence! and, inability -on- the 
other: | The whole! unite one géneral,, plan, to 
«promote; that, endearing happinefs. which confti- 

tutes the. effence ofvcival fociety., soo bes atmo : 
ote $s slg hiae J o CPT. Tr. bist ed liiw yo 
hits 

evenly lof opening and. clofing a Lodge. 

regular affemblies of men, who are.con- 

venedsfor, wife-and., ufeful purpofes, . the com- 

: eer eesti oaaione 

companied, 

32 ILLUSTRATIONS 

companied with fome form. In every country 
of the world the pra€tice prevails, and is deemed 
effential. From the moft remote periods of an- ei 
tiquity it may be traced, and the refined improves — 
ments of modern times have not totally abolith- © 
ed it. ; cits 
Ceremonies, when fimply confidered, it is ~ 
true, are little more than yifionary delufions ; but 
their ‘effets are fometimes important.—When 
they imprefs awe and reverence on the mind, © 
and engage the attention, by external attraétion, 
to folemn rites, they are interefling objeés, 
Thefe purpofes are effeCted by judicious ceremo- 
nies, when regularly conduéted and properly ar- 
ranged On this ground they have received the — 
fanftion of the wifeft men in all ages, and con-— 
fequently could not efcape the notice of mafons, 
To begin well, is the moft likely means to end 
well: and itis judicioufly remarked, that when 
order and method are negleéted at the beginning, — 
they will be feldom found to take place at the 
end. ; 

The ceremony of opening and clofing a Lodge 
with folemnity and decorum, is therefore s at ui 

; ‘ 

nth 

r 

fally admitted among mafons; and though At 
‘mode in fome Lodges may vary, and in every 
g i x de “i iy fy 

» OF ‘MASONRY, 93 

degree muft vary, ftill.an uniformity in the: gens; 
eral, praétice prevails, in» every. lodge ; and the: 
variation (if any).is folely occafioned by a. want 

of method; which a. little application might ealily: 

TEMOVE. see 

Te,condu& , this’ ‘ceremony with bibpiteee 

’ ought; tobe the peculiar ftudy. of every. mafon.;; 
efpecially of thofe who. have the honor to rule:in 
our affemblies. + To perfons, who are thus digni-, 
ryeye is naturally direGied for propriety, 
of condua and behaviour ;..dnd from them, other. 
brethren,» who are lefs.,,informed, will, naturally 
expeét,to derivean example worthy of imitation.) 

_ From,a fhare jin this ceremony no: mafon can. 
- be.exempted.. Itis'@ general. concern, in which, 
all muft affifty This is ‘the: fir requeft of. the, 
_ mafter, and the prelude to all bufinefs.; No foon- 
er-has.it been fignified, than every. officer; ‘repairs 
to his ftation,<and the. brethren,rank saccording. to. 
their degrees»! The intent; of) the ; meeting» bes, 
comes the folé.objeét of attention, and the. mind, 
is:infenfibly diawn from thofe indifcximinate fubs, 
jeftssof: converfation, -whichiare apt to tiene on, 
our lefs {erious moment sy! sso» 9132 903 bak 

_ eThis:efle€taccomplithed,. our; care. is nis 
Nya reconaat avenues, of the. lodges and. the 

proper 

az asiaast: Bit 

34 ILLUSTRATIONS 

proper officers, whofe province it is to difcharge 

that duty, execute their truft with fidelity ; and 
by certain myftic forms, of no recent date, inti? 
mate that we may fafely proceed. To dete& 
_ impoftors among ourfelves, an adherence to or- 
der in the charaéter of mafons ‘enfues, and the 
lodge is cither opened or clofed in folemn form. 

At opening the lodge, two purpofes are wifely 

effefted : the mafter is reminded of the dignity’ 

of his chara@er, and the brethren of the homage 

atid veneration due from them in their fundry” 
ftations. Thefe are not the only advantages re. 

fulting from a due obfervance of this ceremony; 

alrevorential awe for the Deity is ineulcated, and 
the eye fixed on that obje&, from whofe radiant 
beams light only can be derived. Here we are’ 
taught to adore the God of Heaven and to fup-' 
plicate his protection on our well-meant éndeav-’ 

durs. The Mafter affumes his government in’ _ 

due form, and under him his Wardens ; who ac-! 
cepttheirtiult, after the cuftomary falutations, as’ 

difciples of one general patron. The brethren — 

then, with ong accord, unite in duty and refpe&, 
and the ceremony concludes. 3 
- At clofing the ladge, a fimilax form takes place, 

Here the lefs important duties of mafonry arenot 

OF MASONRY 25 
paffed over unobferved. Theneceflary degree of 

fubordination in the government of a lodge is 
peculiarly marked, while the proper tribute of 
gratitude is offered up to the beneficent Author of 
life, and his bleffing invoked, and extended to 
the whole fraternity. Each brother faithfully 
locks up the treafure which he has acquired, in 
his own fecret repofitory.; and pleafed with his 
reward, retires, untainted and uncontaminated, to ‘ 
enjoy, and diffeminate, among the private circle 
of his friends, the fruits of his labour and induf. 
try in the lodge. 
Thefe are faint outlines of a céreitiony which 
 uhiverfally prevails among maforis in every coun- 
"try, and diftinguifhes all their meetings. It is 
_ arranged as a general fetion in every degree, 
and takes the lead in all our illuftrations. 

A Prayer ufed at opening the Lodge. 

May the fa¥or of Heaven be upon this meets 
fing ; and as it is happily begun may it be con. 
du&ted with order and clofed. with harmony ! 
Amen- 

- 

A 

Lisee eae 
4h +>. a he 
SO5 3 
(ipa e Rees ae i 27 

ee 

i” 

A 

W 

¥ 

~ fucceeds the ‘opening, and precedes, the clo , 
- Of alodge. This was the conftant pradtice of 

ly proper to recommend it. 

fundry Vocations, live creditably, and conform 

36 ILLUSTRATIONS = 
ee 2) A Prayer ufed at clofing the tone 42! te 

eid 

May the ee of Heaven ref aie a 

‘Amen. 

- oy + a4 4 ve - ~ 4% 
Charges-and Regulations for the conduél ‘ane eh 
me i Ve ‘viour of pacha $51: “y 6 iy 4 

- ¥e h i", i” ‘ 
“A rehearfal of the ancient estes properl r 

our ancient brethren, and ought never to be 
leGted i in our regular affemblies. A reca 
tion of our duty, cannot be. difagreeable tot 
who are acquainted with it ; and to thofe 
know it not, fhould any fw be, it muft beh 

Ancient Charges. 

[To be rchearfed at opening the pes 
On the Management of ¢ the Craft in. aio 

# Mafont employ themfelves diligently inith 

with cheerfulnefs to the government of the cou ns ee 
try in which they refide, aan 

esa he srétides?™ 
matter knowing me caitied under- 
fakes the government of the lodge, and truly 
dil ences his tewards, giving to every brother 
ipprobation which he merits. 
craftsman whois appointed Warden of the 
r0 k under the Mafter, is true to Matter and 
fellows, _ carefully overfees the work, and his 
! rethren obey him. . 
The Mafter, Wardens, and brethren receive 
their r rewards juftly, are faithful, and carefully. 
nifh the work they begin, whether it be-in the 
firt or feéond degree ; but never put that work 
to the fir, which has been accuftomed to the 
cond degree. 
Neither envy nor cenfure is difcovered | among 
E fons. ‘No brother is fupplanted, or put out of | 
work, if he be capable to. finifh it; as no - 
if i man, who is not perfeétly killed in the original _ 
defig gn, can, with equal advantage to the matter, .. 
- fini Bt ‘the work begun by another. 

nieare the VES Cr anpall. Hon 15.105 oe 

38 ILLUSTRATIONS 

) "flow on each other. They behave courteoufl ; . 
- within and without the .lodge, and never defe er 
the matter till the werk’is finifhed. 

Ls 
- Laws for the government of. the Lodge. 
[To be. rehearfedat opening the Lodge. ] 

— 

“You are to fahite one another in a courteous. 
__~ manner, agreeably to the forms eftablifhed antong 
- ““mafons * ; you are freely to give fuch mutual 
+ 4iftru@tions as fhall be thought neceflary or ex- 
By = 
_ pedient, not being overfeen or overheard; with-— 
4 a out encroaching upon each other, or derogatin 

from that refpe& which is due to any gentleman Bs 

—_ >" 
yaaa) 

. nk as brethren on a a level, yét mafonry depri 
no man of the honour due to his rank or a 

a2 retider honour to whom it is due, and = 
vill. manners. : . 

“ Aeparate converlations A tcanerren ‘the wat 
or Wardens are not to be interrupted, or am 

ee ! brothe 

‘# Ina lodge, mafons meet as members of o ‘ f 
family 5 all prejudices, therefore, on account of rey 
aes gion, country, or private opinion, are removed 

«OF MASONRY. 39° 

brother {peaking to the mafter ; but due decorum 
is to be obferved, and a proper refpeét paid to 
the mafter, and prefiding officers. 

‘Thefe laws are to be ftriftly enforced, that 
harmony may be preferved, and the bufinefs of 
ae lodge be carried on with order and regular. 

Amen. So mote it be. 

elves with Soeocentanicdhs but you are care- 
y to avoid excefs. You are not to compel any” 
other to aft contrary to his pues or give 

‘ se dieourle, but at all times Ss fappen with 
; fou are to be cautions in your words and car. 

, that the moft aaa eek may no} 

ife an indi inanage it siplcai for the horton 
the cent. 

_ of our different affemblies ; but upon every 

fon, you are conten to examine him in fi 

are never to communicate to your famili 
friends, or acquaintan¢e, the private tranfaGtions _ 

cafion to confult your own honour, and the 
putation of the fraternity at large. 

You are to ftudy the prefervation of health 
avoiding irregularity and intemperance, that } 
families may not be see ed. and injured, 
yourfelyes difasicd from attenaing sip 
ceflary employments in life. : ; 

If a flranger apply in the charaéter of a 

map not be impofed upon by an ignorant: ‘fall - 
pretender, whom you are to rejeé& with con- 
tempt , and beware of giving him any fecret 

him ; ; if he be in want, you are without prejud 
30 oi him, or direé& him how he may be 

in to employment : : however, you are neve rc 
phearst to do Boyan your ability, only to pre . 

OF MASONRY, | ij 

‘fer a poor brother, -who is a good man and true, 

before any other perfon ir in the fame circum ftan- 
ces. 

Finally ;.Thefe rules }you are always to ob- 
ferve and enforce, and alfo the duties which 

have been communicated in the leéture ; culti- 

vating brotherly love, the foundation and cape- 
ftone, the cement and glory of this ancient fra- 
ternity ; avoiding, upon every occafion, wran- 

: gling and quarreling, flandering and backbiting ; 

not permitting others to flander honeft brethren, 
‘but defending their charaéters, and doing them 
good offices, as far as may be confiftent with 

your honor and fafety, but no farther. Hence 

all may fee the benign influence of mafonry, as 
all true mafons have done from the beginning of 
tee the world, and will do to the end of time. 

Amen. So mote it be. 

- 

S 1 Dyk Oya Bhs gt OY 
REMARKS on the First LECTURE. 

AVING illuftrated the ceremony of opens 

Sout --4 ing and clofing a Lodge, and inferted the 

| er and prayers ufually rehearfed in our re- 

gular affemblies on thefe occafions, we {hall now 
E 2 enter 

Se Pee Sere ewe 

Q 
1 

‘a ILLUSTRATIONS 

- which the feftion alludes. By thefe means the 
indufirious mafon will be inftruéted in the ‘regu- 

and be enabled with more eafe to acquire a A 

“adhe mind for a regular advancement in the prin 

imprinted on the memory by lively and fenfit 
_ images, to influence our gondué in the prope 

_confifts of general ‘heads, which, though thort 2 nd 

enter-on a difauiimon of the different Seétions | 
the Leétures appropriated to the three degrees 
Mafonry, giving a brief fummary of the whol 
and annexing’ to every Remark the particulars to. 

lar arrangement of the feftions in each leéture, ose 

knowledge of the Art. a 
The Firft LeGiure of Mafonry is divided 1 into 

- three fe&tions, and each feftion into different — 
claufes, . Virtue is painted in the moft beautiful — 
colours, and the duties of morality are enforced. i 

Jn it we are taught fuch ufeful leffons as prep: 

ciples of knowledge and philofophy. Thefe 

difcharge of the duties of focial life, 
The Firft Sedtion. 

The fir fe&tion in this lefure is fuited to all Ws 
eapacities, *and may and ought to be known by 
.every perfon who wifhes to rank as a mafon. Tt 

ee 
eee carry weight with “dip They not ont 
a ferv 

OF MASONRY. 4a 

ferve as marks of diftin@tion, but communicate ufe. 

ful and intereflting knowledge when they are du- 

ly invefligated. They qualify us to try and ex- 
amine the rights of.others to our privileges, while 
they prove ourfelves ; and as they induce us to 
inquire more minutely into other particulars of 

_ greater importance, they ferve as an introduétion 

_ to fubjeéts more amply explained in the follow- 

ing fe@tions. 
This feétion alfo makes us acquainted with the 

peculiar forms and. ceremonies at the initiation — 

of candidates into mafonry ; and convinces us, 
‘beyond the power of contradiction, of the pro. 

_ priety of our rites ; while it demonftrates to the 
_moft f-eptical and hefitating mind, their excel — 

lence and utility. 

As in this fe&tion we are taught the ceremony 
‘of initiation into the Order, the following particu. | 
Jars relative to that ceremony may be here intros 
duced with propriety, 

Declaration to be affented to by a Candidate, in ap 

adjoining apartment, previous to Initiation, 

* Do you ferioufly declare, upon your honour, 
before thefe gentlemen, that unbiaffed by 

at =h Ariends again your own inclination, and ‘unia- 

fluenced 

_ of the privileges of the fraternity ; and, in co 

: will cheerfully conform ta the rules of the 
Order,” 

en ee Ss 

is ILLUSTRATIONS 

fluenced by mercenary motives, you freely an 

voluntarily offer yourfelf a candidate for 
myfleries of Mafonry ?”—I do. ais? 
_-* Do you ferioufly declare, upon your, ho 

Do you ferioully sean, upon your h 
‘nour, before thefe gentlemen,that you will ch 
fully conform to all the ancient eftablithed ufa 
and cuftoms of the fraternity ; ;"=I do. , 

When the above declaration is made, t'.» Can 
didate is propofed in open lodge, in manner . 
lowing : 

*R, W. Matter and brethren, eB | 

« At the requeft of Mr. A. 'B. [mentionin 
his profefion and refidence} 1 propofe him tn fa 
as a proper Candidate for the myfteries of M 
fonry ; 1 recommend him, as worthy to partak 

Sequence of a declaration. of his intentions volun ‘i 
tarily made, and properly attefted, I believe he 

“OF MASONRY) 

ite: | A prayer ufed at the Initiation of a Candidate, 
— _ * Vouchfafe thine aid, Almighty Father of the 
| Univerte © this o our prefent convention ; and 

ay a true and faithful brother among us ! E- 
wie ae him with a competence of thy divine’ wif 
MAL dc he that, by the fecrets of our Art, he may be 

ety 

a lodge, juft before the ceremony of initias 
takes place, to inform the condidate of the — 
urpofe and defign of the inftitution ; to explain 
e nature of his folemn engagements ; and ina 
nanner peculiar to mafons alone, to require his 
cheerful acquiefcence to the duties of morality 
and virtue, and all the facred tenets of the Order. 
_ Further, this Seétion, by the reciprocal com- 
nunication of our marks of diftinétion, proves us 
be regular members of the Order ; and incul¥ 
cates thofe neceffary and infruétive duties, 
which at, once dignify our charafters in the ns > 
ble capacity of men and fe een - oe 

a6: ILLUSTRATIONS 
Charge at Taitiation imto the fo rft Pe ee 

. 

BROTHER, ~ 

ciples of Mafonry, I congratulate you on ) 

accepted into this ancient and_ honorable Order: 
ancient as having fubfifted from time immen °) 

it Yial ; and Soabiraiile, as tending, in every 
ticular, fo to render all men, who will be « 
formable to its precepts. No inftitution 

foundation ; nor were ever more excellent | 
and ufeful maxims laid down, than are incu 

Dick. ] 

There are three great duties which as a 2 
_ you are charged to inculcate, to God, your neig' 

* The paragraphs enclofed in brackets C] 
be occafionally omitted, if time will not adnnit’ 
eens the whole Charge. Pe 

eh eee ee ere OR Te 

* / 

“OF MASONRY gf 

bour and yourfelf. To God; in never mens 
tioning his name, but with that awe and rev«- 
rence which 1 is due from a creature to his crea- 

* unto you :—and to <yaustale ; in avoiding all. 
regularity and intemperance, which may impair 
ur faculties, or debafe the dignity of your pro- 
on. <A zealgus attachment to thefe duties 
il enfure public and private efteem. 

n in the ftate, you are to be a ee and peaceable 

mntry ; you are not to countenance difloyalty 
r rebellion, but patiently fubmit t6 legal author. © 
ity, and conform with cheerfulnefs to the governs 

ofe who imay artfully endeavour to infinuate 
elves into your efleem, with a view to bea. 
your. virtuous bearer or make you ye 

“Let 

honourable aétion ; but let your aE os 

"tunes, and {peedily relieves hisdiftrefs. se 

 ~.. iets LOG REET Ae 

haviour be regular and uniform, and you 
portment fuitable. to the aignity, of yee 
pte. if 

ble pleafure of contributing toward the relief 
our fellow- creafiires, is truly experienced by 
fons of a humane difpofition ; who are naturally 
excited, by fympathy to extend their aid in’ alle: 
viation of the miferies of others. This encoura- 
ges the generous mafonto diftribute his bounty 
with cheerfulnefs. Suppofing himfelf i in the fit 
uation of an unhappy fufferer, he liftens to his 

{339 

complaints with attention, bewails his. misfor. 

The next objéé of your attention is our exe 
lent Conftitutions: Thefe contain the hiftory 

mafonry from the catlielt fai and the day 

OMS I TOK AF “> * 

oF MASONRY. ig 49 

ch you may belong. There, as in all athens 

regular meetings of the fraternity, you are to be~’ 
ly have w with order and decorum, thatharmony may. 
_preferved, and. the ‘bufinefs. of mafonry. be. 
; operly conducted, ~ [The rules: of good man. , 
“ners you are not to | violate ; neither: are: you tO 
fe any unbecoming language, in derogation: of : 

ain any) difpute, about, religion ‘or! -politics,;, or) 
ave irreverently while the lodgeis engaged in ,_ 
at.is ferious and important, but you areto pay. 

0 ‘work in the art, that’ you may fooner be.» 
eee ticicin smelt | [ for eee own * 

have been received,] oh 5 ¢ti 20 bash 

meant that ‘mafonry fhould interfere with your 

offa vocations ; : ; for shofe are on no account 

be 1 negle€t efted ; n either are Piss to. Auffer your 
5 Ii 

7 $3! : J _ zeal” 

at. At your leifure hours, you are to ftudy 

. winced of its good effe&ls. 5, ioses dase 

so ILLUSTRATIONS 
Sa RASS Per 

zeal for the inftitution, to lead you into argument j 
with thofe who through ignorance, may ridi 

liberal arts and fciences ; and that you may 
prove in mafonic difquifitions, converfe with 

is 

well-informed brethren, who will be alway 

‘ftru&tion. aa: 
‘Finally ; “keep facred and inviolable the my: 
ries of the Order, as thefe are to diftinguifh y 
from the ret of the community, and mark your 
confequence among mafons. If, in the circle o he 
your acquaintance, you find a perfon defirous of 
béing initiated into mafonry, be particularly atten= 
tivé not to recommend him, unlefs you are con- 
 vinced he willconform to our rules ; that the: ho- 
nour, glory, and reputation of the inftitution-m 
be firmly eftablifhed, and the world at large ‘ 

1) Tie’ Second. Selfion. 

etrolent torhe 

pr 

reese TF 

ca wees. @ - 

“or MASONRY ‘Sy 

"company. >a faithful ‘obfervance Of our duty § ; it 
Cired at the’ fame time, certain particulars, 
“of which 6 our ignorance might lead ‘us into’ error 
anid which, as mafons, _ we are indifpenfably 
_ oud to know. 

# ‘To make a daily progrefs. in the Art, is ‘Our 
aoeateat duty, and exprefsly required by our gen- 

“eral laws. What end can be. more noble, than 

- the purfuit of virtue ? what motive more alluring, 
F ‘than the praftice of juftice ? or what inflru@ion 
"nore beneficial, than an accurate elucidation of 
fymbolical my fteries which tend to embellifh and 

oS pe ‘adorn the’ mind ? Every thing that~ ftrikes’ the 

: 
"| 

eye, more immediately engages the attention, and 
imprints on the memory ferious and folemn 

_ “truths; hence mafons, univ erfally adopting this 

method of inculcating the'tenets of their’ Order 
“by typical figtres and’ allegorical embleius, pre- 
yent'their myfteries'.rom ‘defcending into'the ° fa- 
‘miliar'reach of inattentive and unprepared ‘noy- 
ices, from whom they might not receive due ven- 
eration. : Toe eit 
sig Our. records inform us, that the vgs 
Cite mafons have ever correfponded ‘w 
thofe’of the Egyptian philofophets, to which a 
ra near. = Unwilling tocexpofe ‘their 
any fleries 

BF ALLUSTRATIONS 

.myfteries. to vulgar eyes, they concealed 
particular tencts, and principles. of polity, " 
_ hieroglyphical figures ; and expreffed. thei 
‘tions of governmient by figns and fymbols, 
they communicated to their Magi alo 
_ were bound by. oath not to reveal. them. 
Py thagorean fyftem feems' to have been ae 
-edona fimilar plan, vat many orders of far 
recent date. Matoory, however, is not only th 
# ever + fubfifted ; every | charaéter, Sie ey 
£ blem,, depified i ina Lodge, . has a on 

. The aiid Seltion. at : on ¢ 

‘The third fe&tion explains the nature an 
ciples. of our.conftitution, .and teaches snege . 

_ charge with propriety the :duties..of the. di 
departments which: we are ‘mominated | toi 
an.the goyenpment: of a ne leet 

- ous lose A pundual. 2 

says. 

(OF MASONRY. ate 

on pe duties of a Todge, we recommend ‘as ‘the 
moft ¢ effetual means to enable. him. to become 

matter oft it; anda diligent application to the 
truths i it demonftrates, will always incline him to 
improve by the example of the original patrons 
of the art... 
ig ‘This fe&tion, though the laft in rank, is not 
“the leaft confiderable in importance. It ftrength- 
ens thofe which precede, and enforces, in the 
mott engaging manner, a due regard to charaéter_ 
and behaviour i in public, as. well as in private 
life ; ; inthe lodge, as well as in the general coms 

iPass of fociety.. ' 
iy tl forcibly, inculcates the “moe ‘ahaa lef 
i tf fons. Brotherly love, vrelief, _and, truth, are 
themes, on which we here expatiate ; ; and the cars 
inal virtues efcape not our notice —By, the exer. 
: | cife of, brotherly love, we are taught to, regard 
_ the whole human fpecies as one family, the high 
the rich and poor 5, who, as created. by 

ae ¢ 

ighty Parent, and inhabitants of the fame 
rhe are to aid, fuppoxt, and proteét each, oth- 

. ne principle, mafonry _ unites) men of 
} , feet, and ¢ opinion, arn. conciliates ; 

p among thofe who might otherwife 
~ Frame 

Che Fe 

64 ILLUSTRATIONS 

i%s 

have remained at a perpetual diftance. —Relief i is ; 
the next tenet of our profeffion. To relieve. the 
diftreffed is a ‘duty incumbent on all men; “but 
particularly on mafons, who are linked wget. 
by an indiffoluble chainof fincere affe@tion, a 
- foothe the unhappy, to fympathize with thei 
misfortunes, to compaffionate their miferies, wd 
to reftore peace to their troubled ° minds, is | 
- grand aim we havein view. On this bafis, v alt 
eftablith our friendfhips, and form our connex 
ions. ---Truth i isa divine attribute, and the foun 
dation of every virtue. To be good and re 
the firft leffon we. are taught in mafonry 
this theme we contemplate, and by its dilates en eee 
acavour to regulate our conduét: hence, i influ-- 
enced by this principle, hypocrify and deceit ari ar 
unknown, fincerity and plain ‘dealing diftin puilh 
us, and the heart and a join im pI omo 
‘each otlier’s . pope po and rejoicing in cach 0 
profperity. Late.2 zach neta ata; (vt 
To this ilfuftration fucceeds an’ éx planitic <) 
the four cardinal ‘irtues---teimperance,, forti 
prudence, and julie’! 2. By’ the fir we 
~-firu€ed to govern’ the paffions, and eer 
defires. “The health of the neay and the | 
of the ‘pecies, are equally concerned in 

GF MASONRY. xg. 
ful pillsvance of it—By the fecond, awe ate 
_ taught to refit temptation, and encounter “danger 
" with fpirit and refolution. This virtue is equally 
ai ftant from rathnefs and cowardice } arid whoe 
ever poffeffes it, is feldom thaken, and never 
overthrown, by the ftorms that furround. him, 
‘By the third, we are inftruéted to regulate our 
condu& by the diGtates of reafon, and to judge 

~ and determine with propriety in the execution of 
“every thing that may tend to promote our pref- 
-ent or future well-being. On this virtue all the 
others depend ; ; it is therefore the chief jewel that 
“an adorn the human frame.--- Juftice isthe boun- 

t dary of right, and conttitutes the cement of civil 
fo iety. Without the exercife of this, virtue, unt. 

~ yerfal confufion would enfue ;. lawlefs force 
ee overcome the principles of equity, and fo- 
“‘gial intercourle, no longer. exitt As. _juftice, i in 

¥ great meafure conftitutes the real good. man, fo 
9 ae as, the ‘perpetual fudy, of the ac- 

omplithed ma fon, i cae tno. i botlzn > fod: 

3 ur. he illuftration of thefe virtues, is avian 
weer general obfervations on. the equality 
Wee Hered among mafons. ~An, our _aflemblies no 
aligement of behav vious is. is, difeovered. _As 

be Cee se fe ‘a 
eo ae uniformi y 
MY : 

oe 

ri) ILLUSTRATIONS 

aeioiie of opiniea, which is ufefulin pete 
cies, and pleafing in familiar life, univerfally 
prevails, flrengthens all. the. ties of friendthip, 
and equally promotes love and efteem. _Mafons 
are brethren by a double tic, and among brothers 
fhould exift no invidious diftin&ions, Though 
merit be always refpeéted, and honour rendered 
to whom it is due, the fame principles govern all. 
A king is reminded, that although'a crown may 
adorn his head, or a fceptre his hand, the blood 
in his veins is derived from the common parent 
of mankind, and is no better than that of the 
meaneft fubjeét. “The wifeft fenator, orthe moft 
fkilful artift, istaught, that equally with others, 
he is by nature expofed to infirmity and difeafe ;_ 
and that an unforefeen misfortune, or a difordered 
framie, may impair his faculties, and level him 
with the moft ignorant of his fpecies. This _ 
checks pride, and incites courtefy of behaviour. 
Men of itférior talents, or not placed by fortune 
in fuch exalted flations, are inftrufled td regard 
their” fuperiors with peculiar efteem, whien_ the 
Beliold’them, ‘divefted of pride, vanity, and ex- 
ternal grandeur, condefcending, in the badge of 
innocence and bond of tri¢ndfhip; to tace” wif. 

ze) PMA SONRY +: 

_dom, jena follow virtue, affifted by thofe, who 
. are of a a ‘rank beneath them. Virtue is true no- 
bility, and wifdom the channel by which. virtue 
is direéted and conveyed ; wifdom and virtue on- 
Ke aT Be 
; Vy eandiftinguith mafons, 
: alemsnchs is the arrangement of the digest: fees 
ions in the firft leGure, which, with the forms 
Lo doatal at the opening and. clofing of a lodge, 
pempenends the whole of the firft degree of ma- 
- fonry. This plan has the advantages of regulari- 
_ |ty to recommend it, the fupport of precedent and 
authority, and the, fanétion and refpeet which — 
; "low fsom antiquity... The whole is a regular 
of morality, conceived in a ftrain of in- 
1! i terefting allegory, which muft, unfold its beau 
i) i! i to ‘agg candid and indufirious i inquirer. 
| a 29 Io isowog nd? bashes t 
ae pefveryge 17S E CvBvod Wh 

ss 
t ty abstebive ti forts of? bak .obenead ¥ ahs 
“Yits ref ig 
Mm: that Rian RKS on the Susi 1 ‘Lecture, 
: 3 

aaa = 2 ae att te 
SN ONRY is is a ane {cience, and is 
t tl divided into different clafles or degrees, fi fot . 
a Prorat gular 2 advancement in, the . knowles e 
f itn ana * According t to ‘the progre s we 
make,. 

58 ILLUSTRATIONS 

«make, we limit or extend our inquiries’; and; ia - 

“ff 

~ proportion to our capacity, we attain to a lets’ or 
greater degree of perfeétidn. 

Mafonry includes within its circle almoft eve- 
ry branch of polite learning. ‘Under the veil ‘of 
“its myfteries, is comprehended a regular fyftem 
of fcience. . Many of its illuftrations, to thé’ con- 
fined genius, may appear unimpoytant; but the 
man of more enlarged faculties will perceive them 
to be, in the higheft degree, ufeful and intereft- 
ling: To pleafe the accomplifhed fcholar, and 
ingenious artift, mafonry is wifely planned ; and, 
‘in'the inveftigation of its: latent doétrines, the 
~philofopher and mathematician may Cryer 
equal delight and fatisfaétion. 

Ue 

To exhauft the various fubjeés of ‘vhielas $i 
treats, would tranfcend the powers of the bright- 

eft genius ; ftill, however, nearer approaches: to 
perfe&tion may be made, and the man of wifdom 
will not check the progrefs.of his abilities, tho* 
the tafk he attempts may at firft feem infurmount« 
able. Perfeverance and application remove each 

* difficulty as it occurs; every flep he ee 

* new pleafures open to his-view, and pooch 
* of the nobleft kind attend his refearcljes” 

: 
4 | 

f 

OF MASONRY... = ig, 

_ diligent purfuit of knowledge, the intelleftual 

- faculties are employed, in pepeine the glory of . 

God, and the good of man. . 
Such is the refult of every illuftration in ma~ 
fonry. -Reverence for the Deity, and gratitude, 
“for the bleffings of heaven, are inculcated. in evs. 
ery degree. This is the termination of our ine 
- quiries, and beyond thefe limits our capacities 
_ ¢annot reach, ~ 
The firft- degree is well calculated to enforée 
the duties of morality, and imprint on the mes} 
Mmory the nobleft principles which can adorn the 
human mind. It is therefore the’ beft intioduc- 

_ tion’to the fecond degree, which not only ex-* 
-‘terids the fame plan,” but comprehends a more 
ie fy lem of knowledge. Here ‘praétice 
and ‘theory’ join, in qualifying the ‘induftrious - 
- mafon to thare the pleafures which an advances 
ment in ‘the Art muft neceffarily afford. Lif. 
3 tening with attention to the wife opinions of ex= 
mit ‘perienced craftfmen on. important fubjeas, he 

gradually { familiarifes | his mind to ufeful inftruc« : 
i n, and is is “‘foon “enabled to ‘inveltigate truths of 
ent concern in a the general tranfaéhions of 

“we 

. *, j 
She 

Ba St ie « ei ge ts poy 

6 ILLUSTRATIONS 
From this fyftem proceeds a ‘rational am fe. 
ment } while: thé mental powers are “fully er "4 
‘ployed, the judgment i is properly exercifed, © 
fpirit of émulation’ prevails ; and all are induce Ww: 
to Vie, ‘Who fhall’ mo®ekcél if promoting ‘the ‘ 
valuable rules of the inftitation: 9 9") ol 2 

“The Firh SeHion. 

Aosta 

The firft fe€tion’ of the fecond degree adc. 

rately -elucidates the mode of introdu&tion’ inte 
- that particular. elafs ; and inftru@s’ the - dili 
craftfman how to proceed in the proper a 
‘ment of the | ceremonies tifed:on. the, occafi 

abd: convinces him. of the neceflity at pail ads. 
Hering to every. eftablithed ufage. of the Order 
Here he.is entrufted with particular tells, 0 
able him .to prove his title to the privilege 
this degree, while fatisfaftory reafons are giv 
for their origin. Many duties, which cer ent 
the firmeft union well-informed. brethren, a il. 
Inftrated in this feétion ; and an oppo unit = 
, given to make fuch advances i in sab Ee. i 

sive at 2 pun 

Th Tee eat 

\ 

OF MASONRY. . 6¢ 

The Kites of this feétion is abfoluicly 
feceffary for all craftfmen ; and as it recapitu- 
lates the ceremony of initiation, and contains 

. “many other ‘important’ particulars, no officer of 
a lodge fhould be unacquainted with it. 

Charge at Initiation into the Second Degree. 

ve ‘BRoTHER,- 
~ Being advanced to the fecond degree of mas 
 fenry: we congratulate you on your preferment. 
_ {The internal, and not the external, qualifica~ 
foe of aman, are what mafonry regards. As 
“you 3 increafe in knowledge, you will foprate t in 
focial intercourfe. 
waist “It is unneceffary to recapitulate the duties 
eS Tahich: as a mafon, you are bound to difcharge ; 
“iy! lhe enlarge on the neceflity of a ftri& adherence 
them, as your own experience ‘muft have ef- 
i) “tablifhed their value. It may, be fufficient to 
leteeve. ‘that] Your paft behaviour ‘and regular 
‘deportment have merited the honour which we 
: “have: now conferred ; and in your new chara&tery. 
§ ‘expelled that you will conform to the prin- 
ples of the Order, by’ fteadily perfevering in 
he pra étice of every commendable virtue. ~ ft 
G Y The 

*% 

. 

| : 

6 ILLUSTRATIONS 

‘from you a ferious deportment ; you are 

x 

A . 

The ftudy of the liberal arts [that val 
branch of education, which. tends fo effe€ 
to polifh and adorn the mind] is earneftly 
commended to your confideration ; efpecia 
the f{cience of geometry, which is eftablithed 
the bafis of our Art. [Geometry, or Mafe 
ry, Originally fynonymous terms, being ofa di. | 
vine and moral nature, is enriched with the moft 
ufeful knowledge ; while it proves the won 
ful properties of nature, it demonftrates the 
important truths of morality. ] 3 
The folemnity of our ceremonies req 

fore to be particularly attentive to your 
viour in our regular affemblies ; to ssh 

‘hold them in veneration. 
Our laws and regulations you are ftrenuoufly 
to fupport ; and be always ready to affift in ‘fee ‘ 
them duly executed. You are not to palliat 
aggravate, the offences of your brethren ; 3 but 
the Beatin of every hue againa yous 

+ 

OF MASONRY. 63 

In our private affemblies, as a craftfman, you 
-may offer your fentiments and opinions of fuch 
fubjeéts as are regularly introduced in the Lec- 
ture ; and by this privilege, you may improve 
‘your intelle&tual ‘powers ; qualify yourfelf to 
become an ufeful member of fociety ; and, like 
hy a fkilful brother, ftrive to excel in every thing 
that i is good and great. 
~ [All regular figns and fummonfes, \ given and 
Lisitive, you are duly to honour, and punétually 
i to obey ; inafmuch as they confift with our pro- _ 
_ feffed principles. You are to fupply the wants, 
and relieve the neceffities, of your brethren, to 
the utmoft of your power and ability : and on no 
_ actount are you to wrong them, orto fee thera 
wronged ; but apprife them of approaching dan- 
Ager, and view their intereft as infeparable from 
your. own, NituaSa 
_ Such is the. nature. of your ‘engagements. as 
acraftfman ; and to thefe duties you are hound 
: by the moft facred ties.] 
_ This feétion prefents an ample field for the 
s man of genius tor Y Ses tah Tt cutforily ve 

Be piains is requifite” aislinlaions for pielliemesi 
om each. | ine the explanation of our ufages, ma- 
ny 

“OR OO A 
64 ILLUSTRATIONS 
n> sitteas s 05, cofldié ie sobvieg aoe 
ny, remarks are ‘omeeaugell equally, ufeful t 
experienced jartift and the fage. moralift 
various opevations ofthe mind are “ony ‘ 
cas far)as they: will, admit. of elucidation, a 
fund. of extenfiyes {cience.is explored. th 
out: Here we,find. employment.,.for;Je 
hours, trace {cience from its original fource, 7 
drawing» the attention to the fum sof, “perfe, 
contemplate. with :admiration; on, the wo 
. works: of the ‘Creator. Geometry. is difplayed, 
_ with all its powers ‘and properties ; and) i thi 

difquifition! of this: f{ciencé; >the’ niind/ is fi 
with pleafure and delight,...Such Botliedy a 
‘of this fe&tion, that the mof judicious m 
" $n an attempt to’ explain’rit; as the ional 
érs are exerted to their utmoft ftretch,-in illv 
ting the beauties of nature, and demonftra 
the’ more important truths of morality. 
- 

@euigy JIL boy bn 7 oF 1 fy regnt isrt. 

“The ortlecs of acobitedine come pave con! i ‘Ab 
dchition in this: feGtion ; a brief defeription: o 
them may therefore not be improper. |<) ‘ 
~ By order inarchiteéture, i 18: meant. 2 fy 
al the members, proportions, and ornamen 

PL HE Ge eee a 
OF MASONRY. - és 
coluinns and pilatters ; or, it is a regular : arranges 
nt of the projeéting parts of a building, 
which, united ‘with thofe of a column, form a 
: beautiful, perfeét, and complete whole. From 
fhe firft formation of fociety, order in architeds : 
tl re may be traced. When the rigour of feafonr 
re liged men to. contrive fhelter from the incles’ 
mency of the weather, we learn that they | fuk 
nted trees on end, and then laid others aca 
fupport acovermg. The bands which cor’ 
efted thofe trees at top and bottom, is faid t 
as e given rife to the idea of the bafe and capiti: 
Muse ee ; and, from this fimple hint, nig 

1% 

; Tuscan i is the mot fiuaple and folid of 
the five orders, It was invented in Tufcany, 
Bi NG. whence it derives its name. Its columnis feyen 
thi) diameters high ; and its capital, bafe, and enta- 
ih blature have but few mouldings. The fimplicity 

is the moft ancient, and was invented by» 
' Gre 

a 
° 

66 pec dlapied 

“to that pillar i in its original fate. 

s ’ af y = 
gba: 

“tal, except mouldings ; though the Swede is 
tinguifhed by triglyphs and metopes, and the 
glyphs compofe the ornaments of the frie: 
The folid compofition of this order, gives: i 
preference, in ftru@ures. where ftrength, 
noble eg dpe are sigger is bgt ya 

folid bodies. In its irl j inyention it was r 
fimple. than in its prefent ftate. In after-tim 
when it began | to be adorned, it gained the nal 
of Doric ; for when it was conftru&ted in its 
“mitive au fi imple form, the name of Tufes 
_ conferred on ‘it. Henée the Tufcan pree 

the Doric i in rank, on account of; its refemb 

45 

. “Dhe lon uc bears a kind of mean propor 
ES the more folid and delicate orders, 
column is. nine: diameters high; its capi 
adorned with volutes, and its cornice has denti- 
cles. There is both delicacy and i ingenuity 
played in this pillar ; the invention of whi 

: Te erereTt veal 
OF MASONRY. 67 

attributed to the Ionians, as the famous temple 
of Diana at Ephefus was of this order. It is 
faid to have been formed after the model of an 
agreeable young woman, of an elegant fhape, 

‘dreffed in her hair ; as a contraft to the Doric 
order, which was formed after that of a ftrong | 
_-wobuft man. 

The CorINTHIAN, the richeft of the five 
orders, is deemed a mafter-piece of art, and was 
ey invented at Corinth by Callimachus. Its-column_ 

is ten diameters high, and its capital is adorned 
RY oo two rows of leaves, and eight volutes, which 

fuftain the abacus. The frieze is ‘ornamented 
rt “with curious devices, the cornice with denticles 

and modillions. This order is ufed in ely 
es fuperb. ftruGtures. 
eS _ Callimachus is faid to have taken the hint & 
the capitaljof this pillar from the following re. 
34h ~ markable circumftance. Accidentally’ pafling | 
by the tomb of a young lady, he perceived a 
_ bafket of toys, covered with a tile placed over an 
acanthus root, having*been ‘left. there by her 
nurfe, As the branches grew up, they encom. 
_palfed the bafket, till, arriving at the tile, they 
met with an obftru@tion, and bent downwards. 
Callimachus, ftruck with the objeét, fet about 
iunitating 

ip e 
wR A 4 

68 ILLUSTRATIONS 
$ arpses a 

imitating ys figure, ; the ba the. capil 
made to. reprefent. the balket; 5 the» Maa 

ns The Comrosirz is compounded ote other 
orders, and was contrived by the Romans. 
capital has the two rows of leaves of the Corin. 
thian, and volutes of the Ionic. Its. column | as 
the quarter. round as the Tufcan and, Doric or. 

“deniticles or fisaple BE Heealy ‘This pillar 
generally found in» buildings, sehexs ftrer sth, 
elegance, and beauty are difplayed. . » 
Ai he ancient and original orders of. are 
‘tire, revered by mafons, are no more than- 
the Doric, lonie, and. CoRINTHIAN. 
thefe: the Romans have added two, the Tufea a, 
“which they made plainer than the Dorie ; 
-the Compofite, which was more ornamental, 
not ‘more beautiful, ‘than the Corinthian. © 
firft three orders alone, however, fhew iny 
and particular chera€tér, and “eflentially — 
from each other : the two others have no 

flate ; and the Compofite is the. Corinthian ¢ 

8H (hat? A Ps *;s psy t Bey ; 
OF MASONRY. 6 
joniwroesd cat Mbt 

Behe Lwith the Ionic, To the Geeks, and not 

$9, the Romans, we are indebted for. what is : 
sedi and diftin& in architeQure. 
hele » obferyations are intended to induce the © 
“indul ifirious , craftfman to parfue , his tefearches 
ign the x ife and progrefs of architeéture, by cone 
‘ful ing t the works of earned. writers PT 
D pon the fubjeft. 
nd Ap analyfis of the human teenies is alfo a 
iif fi yen in this rape in which the five external 
i nfes particularly. claim attention. : 
7 ae ben, t thefe:topics are-propofed in our aifem: 
lies, we are not confined to any peculiar mode 
‘explanation ; every man being at liberty. to 
offer his fentiments. under proper “reftriGtions, 
h following thoughts on this important branch - 
‘of learning may, however, be ufeful : ‘ 
The { fenfes. we are to confider as ‘the gifts. of 

, cafoning faculty, yet, in the ule of them, ate 
ill fubje€& to reafon, Reafon, properly em- 
5) 10) yed,.. confirms _. the documents of Nature, 
wh ich 2 are always true. and wholefome : fhe dif. 
ting. iithes, the good from the bad ; _rejedts the lak 

wit ‘modefty, adheres to the firft with . Teverence. 
e objects of human knowledge are innume- 
rable ; 

ie 

70 ILLUSTRATIONS 

q* 
rable ; ; the iclaanelh by ‘whtcls this knowl 
3s s conveyed, are few. Among pred 

a not the leaft confiderable ; the ps : 
tween them, is obvious. In’ ‘the ‘teftimor ; 
Nature given by the fenfes,. as’ well as in bh 
teftimony | ‘given by information, things are | 
fied by figns, In one as well as the other 
mind either by original principles or by cu 
paffes from the fign to gs palate? ang b 

Ianguage, as well as Cid figns in our orig 
perceptions, have the fame fi ignification ‘in 
climates and nations, and the fkill of i interpre 
them, is not acquired, but innate. Es 
Having made thefe obfervations, we ‘hall 
ceed to give a brief defcription of the five fe 
- HEARING is that fenfe by which we di 
“guith founds, and aré capable of enjoying’ val 
: agreeable charms of mufic. By it we are er ; 
* bled to enjoy the pleafures of fociety, and re ee 
-“procally ‘to ‘communicate to each other, a oO 
thoughts and intentions, our purpofes an de 
. fires ; while our reafon is capable of exe 
utmoft power ; and energy. 

~ wethee as 644 Si ey 
a s 

> 
% 

_ OF MASONRY. 7 

hy The bite and beneficent Author of Nature 
; mended, by the’ formation of this fenfe, that. we 
Ahould be focial creatures, and receive the great- 
 efand moft important part.of our knowledge 
hy the information of others... For thefe purpofes 
_ We are endowed with hearing, that, by a proper 
exertion of our rational powers, our happinefs 
may be complete. 
» SEEING is that fenfe bes which we ‘diftin: 
faith obje&ts, and in an inftant of time, with. 

_ out change-of place or fituation, view armies in 

4 battle array, figures of the moft ftately flru@tures, 
and all the agreeable variety difplayed in. the - 
landfcape of nature. By this fenfe we find our 
_ Way in the pathlefs ocean, traverfe the globe of 
_ earth, determine its figure and dimenfions, and 
delineate any region or quarter of it. By it we mear 
_fure the planetary orbs,and make new difcoveries 
_ inthe {phere of the fixed ftars. Nay more: by it 
we perceive the tempers and difpofitions, the 
Ae paflions and affeftions, of our fellow creatures, | 
when they with moft to conceal: them, fo that 
though the tongue might be taught to lie and dif. 
i Hemble, the countenance would difplay the hy« 
_ pocrify to the difcerning eye. In fine, the rays 
“. aN which adminifter to this fenfe, are ~ 
. mo 

7 ILLUSTRATIONS 

Lai aftonifhing parts of the ssaaiad ed yee 
and’ render the “ye a peculiar objeet ‘of d 
tion. f albert. vil i , 

~ Of all the faculties, fight is the: nobleft. 
Rru€ture of the eye; and its “appuiter 
evince the’ admirable™ “contrivance! BY of Natu 

motions, while the variety difplayed in te 
of different animals, fuited to their feveral” ways 
of life, clearly demonftrates’ this die tob ; 
mafter-piece of Nature’s work.’ ache 
‘Feevine is that fenfe by which we diftin 
guifh the different qualities of bodies ;, fuck a 
heat’ ‘and cold, hardnefs_ and foftnefs, ro 
and {moothnefs, figure, folidity, motion, an 
tention 4 ‘which, by” means of certain co 
ing fetifations of tough, are prefented tor 
belief’ of thein i is invariably ‘conneéted ane 
éorréfponding funfations, by ah’ original 
| fhe of human nature, ses i ‘uanfeends 61 ou 
‘Sniquity.’ viet} ? ite BF th 4 
All knowledge ej our original per 
tions is got by experience, The conftancj 
ee s laws conneéts the # fe with the thing 

Etion which experience hath difcovered. 

$ mafons ns. : 

ze able Hodes, and indeed moft other bodies 

and ‘growth, a as in the ftate of fermentation. 
utrefaction. The volatile particles ‘proba. 
ach other, and catter themfe lyes in 

168 

drawn i into the noftrils along ‘with ‘the air, 

TO 307 

“ago SW 

ance of defign i in the great Creator’: s having 
ed t e or, an of fmell | in, | ‘the ‘infide of that 
» through which th the air cy pales in’ 

Oe 
Sg0 ste ifs hiebey be Sask sak 
ech wiStig oF a: ») TASTING, 

dy and we rely < on the continuance of ee 

via ‘0 of val fubritty re as as well i in ‘the fate o 

he means by which ‘all. bodies a are fmelled.— 
ce it is ‘evident, that there is “a imianifest * ap- “ 

5 J ~~ . = she - - » , ~ 
OF MASONRY.” 73° 

Thefe three fenfes, HEARING, “SEEING, and 
DITA? &, ; “re 
ING, are deemed peculiarly -effential 

d on 

» ra LLING is “that, fenfe by which © we ‘difline 
-guil Se the various ‘Kinds of which convey 
rent impreffions to the mind. Animal and 

e ak 
ir, till they mect with other bodies to ‘which . R 

‘bear: chemical affinity, with which they 
ad forn new concretes.. ‘Thefe eflavia. 

~S 

oy anol 

4 

~ 

74. ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Tastine enables us to make,a proper dif : 
tinGion in. the choice of our food. The organ im | 5 
of the fenfe guards the entrance of the aliment- 
ary canal, as that of fmell guards the entrance ay y 
the canal for refpiration. From the fituation of 
both thefe organs, it is plain, that they were in-, ie 
tended by nature to diftinguifh wholefome food _ ‘ 2% 
from that which is naufeous. Every thing ‘that. ihe 
enters into the Romach muft undergo the foru- 
tiny of tafling; and by it we are Capable of dit 
cerming the changes which the fame body, under- ‘ 
gocsin the different compofitions of art, i. ‘ty 
j chemiftry, pharmacy, &e. 

Smelling and tafting are infeparably connefted, 
and it is by the unnatural kind of life men com 
monly lead in fociety, that thefe fenfes are rene i 
dered lefs fit to perforrh their natural offices. i par 

The proper ufe of thele five fenfed enables bs eds 
to form juft and accurate ‘notions of the ‘operas on ‘J 
tions of nature ; and when we refle& on ‘the obs Kite: 
jeas with which our fenfes are gratified, we be- 

come confcious of them, and are enabled to. afer 

tend to them, tll they become familiar es. of . 
thought. © ap 
The fenfes, and indeed all the operations af fi 
the mind, are fo difficult te ynderftand, and to fi 
; analifey He 

i dy 

tah 
tne 
$ 

if 
H 
\¥ 
* 

ty MED: | ee 4) ' of 
A i MA s i) NR y. 95 
aii that ey mot {judicious may fail 3 in ae 

rapes Pint TRE UP mind i is : ultimately 

FIC Se i? di Sslapip Rages 

toes 
sled by th He e fen! es; when | that ws. difeated, 
cry teat chy its ‘virtue. ‘The fabric, 0! the 

toy SRS 

oe Bs well as. that of the body, i is curious and 

* 9 their feveral ends with “equal wifdom, and no 
ropriety, » than the organs Stat other. = “The 
gconceivable wifdom of an Almighty. Being i is 
q layed i in ‘the ‘frudlure ‘of the mind, sic iaes ex- 
te if its power over every “branch ° ‘Mfeience ; 

gat a theme “peculiarly wor Ys of 

tase 
ay 2 

ih ‘the. arts cand a] ee ave 

Coen 

; é Hor rage we aie 
Sth grees accel... I : ei oe 
the fubjedt on whi which Wes0 
revoperatn om a 
Wife se ee thi nl UNGAR 
orks—the way 0 she 

- the knowledge of Natur 

| fervation and saci our conflitution 
1) 

Seay 

we have a ftrong propenfity to trace particular 
és and obfervations to general ‘rules; ahd to 

thoferules*tovaccoint for othereebis-or - 

to 

7 eet HS! faculties of t the one are adapted r 

7 ILLUSTRATIONS 

fe direét us in the produ€tion of them. This 
_ cedure of the underftanding i is familiar to 3 
: © Buman ¢ creature in the common affairs of’ life, 2 and 

ae only. means by v which a any real difcov in 
uilofophy can be made. — Hh 

On the mind all our nowledge mutt gag a 
‘what, therefore can be a more - proper, fubje@ sfor or 
“the i inv gftigation of mafons ? By anatomica 
7 * fe&tion and | obfervation, we become as 
64 with the body 5 ; but i it is. iby, the anatom 
“mind alone we ite er its) powers a and principl sles. 
‘ "To fur up the whole of t this tranféenden nt 
: fare of God’s bounty to ‘man, we Be ai __that 
_ memory, imagination, talte, ” reafoning, mi 
™ perception; and all the. aétive } powers c of the for 
. prefent'a vat and ‘boundlefs. field for i ofophi. 
‘eal Aifquifition, ‘which | ter exceeds | hu in. 

_ quiry, and are peculiar my fteries known on y 
“Nature, and to Nature’s. God, to whom we od 
all are indebted for creation, _prefervation, and 
g every bleffing we enjoy. Soa ae pr 

t par ie OO egg OPe eth has. square vl 
mais Steg sont os rT ties if ord 8 ove ie 
_. | From. this theme we paoned ts illu ftrate the 
’ ~ moral advantages of Geometry ;..a dub 

tc} 

has 

ae Dafis.on. which the fuperftru@ture of: mafonry 
Rr ie 

is erected. By, geometry, we may. curioufly trace 

“molt concealed receffes. By it, we difcoyer the 
“power, the wifdom, and the goodnefs\, of the 

nt 

By it we difcover how the planets 

“fame Wives Artift, which roll pT the 

mitate the divine plan, and ftudy fymmetry and 
der, This gave rife to focicties, and birth “ta 
y ufeful art. The architeét began to defign, 
the’ 

d by experience ‘and time, have produéed 
$ which are the admiration of every age. 

Hea The 

~ 

; cae through her various windings, to/her_ 
grand. Artificer of the uniyerfe, and view with — 

oye Mi ge different ‘ainas and demonftrate 

; aay and are all condu&ted ide the fame 

i: atta pedpottions, firlt phic man to 

plans which he Izid down, being im. ° 

el 

rere 

7 
ae 

2 <ALLUSTRATIONS 

o/ @ toe yee The: Second Scion. heim 
The fecond feBtion of this degree has ‘recourfe . 
2: to"the origin of the inftitution, and views mafone 
‘ay ‘nfider two denominations, operative and Lee ‘ 
* lative, Thefe are feparately confidered, and the 
s»principles on which both ‘are founded, _ partict uy 
“ larly-explained: Their affinity is’ pointed — 
* by allegorical figures, and typical reprefentati 
‘Here the rife of our government, or divifion i 
i toclaffes, is examined; the difpofition of 
t “rulers, fupreme and fubordinate, is traced’ 
3% "aeators are affigned for the eftublifhment of - 
ee OF vir -prefent praftices. The progrefs aia 
Soi? architeBiure, particulafly in the reign ‘of S Sol ; 
+ pice, iS remarked ; the number of artifts em n- 
Sp oyed i in building the temple of Jerufalem, , 

~ the privileges which they enjoyed, are {ecified 4 
es 18 Bey s 
the period Aipulated for rewarding | merit is fixe 

and the. inimitable moral io which “that -ciccum i 
_fance alludes i is explained ; ‘the creation of _the r 
. world i is, deferibed, and many particulars recited, 
een which have been n,carefully preferved 

ope d and tranfmitted from one age toa 

“ by.gral,tradition. . In thort, this feétion..¢ 
; pa fore of valuable kaow dae, founded 

ABA YS re th; > Heiter e ba ; Sg? ang of: a : 
» <r. 2 &% KS ; 

OF MASONRY: ayy 

: fon and. facred record, both entertaining and in- 
. , firabtive. The, whole operates powerfully in ea- 
ng the veneration due to antiquity. 

2Circumftinces of great importance to the fra. 
terni are here particularifed, and many‘ tradi- 
= sonal tenets and cuftoms cond rmed id fegred 

lot es. are Pccabdered with, a) minute accuraty 5. 
Iyhere. the. accomplifhed Satan lay, agit 

rangement., The modé of rewarding merit is 
Oiated out; the marks of diflingtion, which 
i ere conferred on our ancient brethren, as the: 
* afouertes excellence, are. named; and the duties, 

_, 2s well as the privileges, - -of the firit branch of 
h cit male, offspring, defined. This fection alfo 
‘ ontains obfervations on the validity of our forms, 
a d concludes with ‘e moft powerful, mcentives 

ee tee yee Mion or nhoy 
BA very ts) xy < ay) Ati ol yeh ve 

din this feftion, it may nut therefore be im- 

per, tolinfert bere a:fhort'explinction of! fern. 
Grammar 

-_ 
ad 

. ‘ ye 

o * 

pith. lotances, which are claffed in a a regular 

ad ee i radtice of piety, and virtue. aS Setar s 

we 

"80 ILLUSTRATIONS — 

“words * according + to the idiom © or’ dialeat 

Be 
: 

{ 

4 

toes 

Pe ally i in the general knowledge ‘of things, ani ° 

& premifes laid down, admitted, or granted ; 

+ 
Gone 
--~ 

Grammar’ teaches" the proper iembened 

any particular people ; ‘and that excellence’ 
' pronunciation, which enables ‘us to fpeal 
“write a language with accuracy,” agreeably 
fon, and correé ufage. 
Rhetoric teaches us to -fpeak’ copioull 
‘fluently on any fubje&, not merely “with p 
ety/alone, but with all the advantages off 
and elegance ; wifely contriving to captivate 
hearer by flrength of argument and beauty of ¢ 
preffion, whether it be to intreat and exhe 1 
admonifh or applaud. big 
‘Logic téache’ us to guide our reafon dif or es 

-reét our enquiries after truth. It confifts of a 
regular train of argument, whence we infer, de- 
“duce, and conclude, according to 

in it aré employed; the faculties of conceivin 
judging, ee and difpofing ; all of whi 

. 
= 
ee 
o 
be] 
oy 
3 
7 
5 
2 
o 
was 
°o 
= 
-_ 
af 
‘ 
= 

re iacge teaches “ie powers er pro 
of numbers, which is varjoufly effected,. b 

oy OP-MASONR® 98 

indi g out any,certain number, whofe. relation 
ae fa another, is nea known or dif. 

ve tee PEL < 

fa re hi Riri treats of the powers asd. properties 

, os d thicknefs, are ‘confidered. By. this {cience, 
~ athe archite@t is enabled to conftru& his. plans, 
yooand execute bis defigns ; the. general. to. arrange 
his oldiers ; the engineer to, mark, out ground 
r encampments ;. the geographer to_ give us|the 

ned, to delineate the extent of feas, and 
Sify the divifions of empires, kingdoms jand 
aces. ; by it, alfo, the aflronomer is enabled 

metry is the foundation of ei ieesree th 
he root of the mathematics. ” 

ific teaches the art of forming -concords, fo 

° mipole delightful ‘harmony, by. a mathe. 

atical ‘and proportional arrangement of acute, 
‘av o and: mixed, founds, This art, by a (feries 

of experiments, is reduced .to a demonfirayve 

‘feience, 

18, tables, figures, and inflruments, By this | 
t, reafons and demonftrations are given, for. 

magnitudes in,general, where length, breadth, 

his pie Re _and.to oe the. duration . 

: fions of the world,, and.all, things) therein ~ 

82 PTLLUSTRATIONS 

fcience, ‘With refpe& to’ tones, and the ‘intervals 
ofvfound only. It inquires into ‘the nature Of mS 
concords and’ difcords, ahd’ enables us to find , 
out the proportion between them by numbers? 

Aftronomy is that divine art, by which “we ~ 
are taught to read the wifdom, ftrength, and 
beauty of the almighty Creator, in thofe facred 
pages, the celeftial hemifphere. “Affifted “by 
aftronomy, wé can obferve the motions, me 
the diftances, comprehend the magnitudes, and 
calculate the periods and eclipfes, of the heaven- 
ly bodiés.” By it, we learn the ufe of the globes, 
the 'fyftem’ of the* world,’ atid the prelitninary 
Taw of nature. While we are ‘employed: in “the 
ftudy’of this fciencé,’ we muft’ perctive. uniparal- 
leiled inftanices of wifdom afd» goodnefs, and thre” 
the Whole’ creation, trace the sisi Author ty 
“his works. 

ERAT Sede jot ‘st 

The doerinie of the fpheres i is included © in ‘the 
-° {tithe of ‘aftidnomy, and particularly confidered 
ity this fettion. 

The globes are two artificial fprericat ‘podies, 
Onithie cove (uitace OF Which” Ue bia 

a 

we 

OF MASONRY. 83 ve 

_ the. countries, feas, and various patts of the earthy, 
the face of the heavens, the planetary revolutions; 
and other i important particulars. The [phere, with 
the parts of the earth delineated on its furface, is 
called the terreffrial globe ; and that with the 
conftellations, and other heavenly bodies, the 
celeftial globe. Their principal ufe, befide ferv. 
Mig as maps to diftinguifh the outward ‘parts of 
_ the earth, and the fituation of ‘the fixed | flars, ig 
to illuffrate and explain the phenomena arifing 
from the annual revolution, andthe diurnal rota- 
tion, of the earth round its own axis. They aré 
the nobleft inftruments for improving the mind, 
and giving itthe moft diftin® idea of any problem 
‘. er propofition, ‘as weil as enabling it to folve the 
fame. Conterfiplating thefe ‘bodies, we are in- 
fpired with @due reverence for the Deity and his 
works, -and“ate’ induced to apply ‘with’ diligence 
and. attentidn to’ aftronomy, freopraphy, naviga- 
tions andthe arts: dependent on them, ‘by ‘which’ 
fociety ‘has béen’ fo much benefited, , 
Thus'end the two fé€iGns “of the fetond lec. 
“Xure, which, with the ceremony ufed at opening 
and’ clofing the Iddge, comprehend the whole of — 
the fetond degree of Mafonry. ThisleGlure con- , 
ae tains 

Bo YLLUSTRATYONS 
tains a regular fyfem of fcienice, dethow lice 

on the cleareft principles, and founded 0 on 
moft ftable foundation. . 

S E a T. V. 
REMARKS on the Turd Lecrone. 

iW treating with propricty on any fubjeb, i itis 
neceflary to obferve a regular courfe. In 
two, firft degrees of mafonry, we have recapit Hae 
ted: the contents of the feveral fe&tions, and fhoule 
willingly lave -purfued.the fame plan’ im the) a 
degree, did not the variety of particulars of vh 
itis compofed, render itimpoffible to give an_ 
“ftra& without,violatingthe laws of. mafonry.., 
may be fufficient to remark,-that, in, this ean! 
every circumftance that/refpeéts our. governm 
and the mode of.our proceedings either on priva 
or public .occafions, is fatisfaétorily explaiu 
Among the brethren of, thisdegree, the land t 
of the Order are preferved ;/and,from them tm “ 
be expeéted that fund. of information, which ¢9 
pert and ingenious craftfimen only. whofe 
Judgment has been ‘matured byy 
ence. Toa com te knowle se of Ul 
few” ‘arrive 5 “but it is an “infallik le 

ea 

(OF MASONRY: 6 
fho acquires by merit the mark of pre-eminence 

euit hich this degreé affords, will receive a reward 
_ which amply compenfates all his paft eet 
adiduiy. . 
"re a this clafs our rulers are felefted ; at hie 
ly pas thofe who are capable of giving in+ 
16 tion, that we can properly expect to receive its, 

a The Firft Sedtion.. 

he ceremény of initiation into the third de. 
ec, is particularly {pecified in this branch of the’ 
e, and here many other ufeful inftru@ions: 
given. . . 
“Sich is the impottance of this {e@tion, that we 
fafely declare, that the perfon whd is unac= 
ted with it, is ill qualified to a asa ruler: 
yernor of the work; 

Prayer a Initiation ivito the Third Depress ¢ 43 

O Lord, dire us to “know and ferve. thee 

prof er our laudable undertakings ; oe and 
as e increafe i in knowledge, we may 
ithprove in Virtue, and fill Farther promote “thy” 
bono and glory ! Ainem 

- er ort 

: a 

@ ILLUSTRATIONS 

atid tir} 2 dent 9c'esiee ad goto sn oF Gs 
i Charge at. Initiation into. the Third: Degrees 
9cn3 Port toe iis coke Bipiei) eM rts see 
Your zeal f for the inion of ma of n 
. progrets $0 you, bave made in anyday 
fledfaft conformity to. our ‘regulations, ‘at 
ed you o Out as a» proper objeét of our fwd . 
efteem. —~ Laas 
You are now botind’b “by hadby* fonour, aii gtas 
titude, ‘to be, faithful: to, your trufts . to-fupport the 
dignity of your charaéter on every vocation 5 ‘ 
to.enforce,. by precept and example, obedience > 
the tenets of the Order. Exemplary conduét 
expciied from .you;, to, convince the.world, 
merit,,is. the title, to.our privileges; and. that.on 
_you_our favours are not undefervedly. beftowed. 
ae the charaéter of a Mafter-mafon, YORE ¢ 3} 

inft a we a of fic lity, cate ev 
fee vicious weal 3, Coe reput ti 
of the fraternity. unfulliéd, mut be ¢ your: co 
RE 
care} ; and’ for this urpote,, it i is your provit 
to-'recommend to “your: inferiors, obedi ence an 
fubmiffion; to your equals, courtefy-and aff a 
ity. [to your fuperiors, kindnefs and conde! 
& r 

OF MASONRYir ®& 

- fion.. “Univerfal benevolence you: are always,to 
ynculcate; and,. by the regularity of your own 
behaviour, afford the beft example for the con- 
duét of others lefs informed. The ancient, land- 
marks of the ‘Order, entrufted to your care, you 
are carefully to preferve ; and while you caution 

the inexperienced againft’ a breach of fidelity, 
never fuffer them to be infringed, or countenance 

a deviation from the eftablifhed ufages . and cule 

toms of the fraternity. 
. a “Your virtue, honour, and reputation, are con- 
sh cerned i in fupporting, with.dignity, the refpett- 
able charaéter you now bear, bet no motive, 
<F therefore, make you {werye from, your duty, vio- 
late your vows, or betray your tru; but be true 
nd faithful, and imitate the example pf, that. cele- 

‘brated artift whom you haye this evening tepre- 
fented. Thus you will render ‘yourfelf deferving 
of the honour which we have conferred, and me- 

; rit the confidence that we have repofed. * 3 : 
: Sa mote it be. . 

rage, 7c ott $6 yrot nebors 

ie . The. beginning of this feétion ferves, as an. in+ 
- _ woduétion to the proceedings. of a Chapter: of 
fter- mafons, and illuftrates feveral points welk 
: own, to experienced craftfmen,’ It inveftigates 
jc Ns the: Eseremony of opening a — and recapitus 
a eae lates 

88 ILLUSTRATIONS 

lates the moft important cireumflances in the two ay 
preceding degrees.’ It recites the hiftorical tras 
ditions of the Order, and’ prefents to view a pe " 
ifhed pi€lure, of the utmoft pare Saior to- the 
fraternity. ye i) 

yo dhe caper Sellion, a 

The fecond fe&tion illuftrates. certain heron ‘a 
glyphical emblems, and inculcates many pail MS 
leffons,. to extend knowledge, and promote virtue, a 
This fe&tion is indifpenfably ‘neceffary to be 
underftood by every Mafter of a lodge. It treats 
of the government of the fociety, and the difpo- 
fition of our rulers. It illuftrates their qualifica~ . 
tions, and inchides the ceremony of inftallation in — 
the grand lodge, as well as private lodges. Tt 
_ comprehends the ceremonies of conftitution, con. 

; fecration, laying the foundation ftones of churches, we! 
chapels, palaces, hofpitals, &c.—alfo at dedica- res 
tions, arid at funerals, by a variety of particulars 
explanatory of thofe ceremonies, and concludes — 

by recapitulating the remarkable circumftances in 

all the three degrees, ‘and corroborates the whole, Ry 
by infallible teftimony. oP tee fei 

After thefe obfervations, little’ more ‘can oF 

ea ; 

wanted to encourage the zealous mafon to perfew 

Far ay 
« 

OFOMASONRY ©: 89> 

verelinshis refearches. , Whoever has traced the 

Att, ina regular progrefs, from the commence. ~ 
ment of the Firft to the conclufion of the Third), 
degree, according to the plan here laid down, will » 
_ have amaffed am ample ftore of ufeful! learning; - 
 and-muft refle&, with pleafure on the good effeéts } 
of his paft diligence and attention ;) while, by ap~ > 
__ Plying the whole to the general advantage: of fo- 
fie the’ ‘will obferve method in the proper dif» 
; _ tribution of what he has acquired, fecure to him- 

ob the veneration of mafons, and: the’ apes sags 

tion of all: good meni! {ns cue $ 
aS, nf of F ‘ 4 ce . *) 
al SECT. VI 
| Reaanxs. on the Taian or Mien tte; 
Mark Mason’s DRGERE > 

Tt 18 degree of Mafonry: was ‘not lefs afeful 
in. its original inflitution, nor is its effeas” 
be meficial to mankind, than thofe- which ad 
it, 
By the ditsehee of - this degree, the ‘operative 
: _ ™afon, at the ereftion of the ftately temple of 
f “4 “pe int was known and difftinguithed by the 
i an G id Ward len. , s 
Ue} 's223 = om eee “By oe, 

Ja 

go. ILLUSTRATIONS 

By its effeéts die diforder and confufion etal 
might otherwife have attended fo immenfe an saiie 
dertaking was completely prevented ; and not only 
the craftfmen themfelves, who were eighty thoue- a 
fand in number, but every part of their workman. 
thip, was difcriminated with, the greateft nicety, 
_ and the utmoft facility. If defe&s were found, 
by the help of this degree overfeers were enabled 
without difficulty to afcértain who was the fantegues 
workman ; thatthe deficiences might be asi 
without injuring the credit, or diminifhing the re=) ip 
ward of the induftrious and faithful of the craft.» 

Charge to be read at opening the Lodge. 

** Wherefore, brethren, lay afide all malice, . 
and guile, and hypocrifies, and envies, and alf 
evil {peakings.” oe 

“If fo be ye have tafted that the Lord i is 
cious, to whom coming ai unto a living flone, 
difallowed indeed of men, but chofen of God ar 
precious; ye. alfo, as living flones, be ye. b 
upa Spiritual ] houfe, an holy. priefthood, to Sa 
up facrifices : acceptable to God.” 

ss. 

iy 3 

Therefore, 3 alfo, it, is contained in the f feri 
tures, ‘Behold I Tay i in 1 Zion, fora a ad 4 
tigd ftone, a precious corner ftone, re fe fe 

i atio a 2 ts 

OF MASONRY... ° of. 

ation; ‘he that believeth fhall not make hafte te 
pais it over. Unto you, therefore, which believe, . 
itis an honour, and even to them which be dife- 

bedient, the ftone which the builder difallowed, . 
the fame i is made the head of the corner.” 
« Brethren, this is the will of God, that with, 
well. -doing ye put to filence the i ignorance of the. 

e. men. As free, and not ufing your liberty 
orac 

loak of malicioufnefs, but as the fervants of : 
God. . Honour all men, love the. brotherhood, 
. fear God. ” 

i REMARKS on the Fourtn Lecture, 
The Firft SeHions 

_ The firft fe€tion explains the manner of conves 

cating and opening a. Mafter Mark Lodge. It 

_teachés the duties of the refpe&tive: officers, and 

_ Tecapitulates the my ftic ceremony of introducing 

‘a candidate, olf seo bast ses 

In this fe&tion is exemplified the regularity and 

good order that was obferved. by the craftimen on 

~ Mount Libanus, «and in the plains and.quarties. of 
x dathah, and ends with a beautiful difplay of 

manner by which qne of the principal-events — 

“took place. 198983 > iit #) dasa 

The 

9 ILEUSTRATIONS 

- 
fy : » ? a4 : ? 
tH a . hs ‘ bash j 

- gvnilcd The Second ‘SefFione’ wove 1a 

fh the fecond feftion the Matter: Mark Mafon, 
is patticularly inftruéted in the hiftory of this de- 
gree, and the encreafed obligation he is under to 
ftretch forth his affifting hand to the relief of an 
indigent and worthy brother. : eat EP 
The diftinguifhing marks and charaCterifti Re 
are alfo explained and illuftrated in this feftion. - 1 
“In the courfe of the le€ture the following Pa 
of {cripture are recited, viz. 
Pfalm cxviii, 22.—The ftone which thé build. iy 
- ers ‘refufed, is- become the head “ftoné of the eor- 
ner, oe - ee 
Matt. xxi. 42.—Did ye never read in the — 
foripturesy the ftone ‘which the builders wie a ee 
is! become the head of the comer?) 99 908 fo" v3) 
) Markoxiis 1o.—And: haveo ye'not eae this 
fcripture ?. The ftone which the*builders rej ts 
. is become the head of the corner. och ibaa a 
b Luke xx) -+What? is this, “then, ‘that’ is _ F 
written, The ftone which the arcane rejeted 19 be 
become the head of the corner? OME 
As iv. 144—This is the fone’ which ae 
at nought, of you, builders, which wap t: 
heag of he corner, : it 

* 

OF MASONRY.’ . 

hag to be delivered when a Candidate is ahyenca 
to the Fourth Degree. 4 

tee Baoruen, si cae 

We congratulate you on having been thought wore 

"thy of being promoted to this honorable ‘degree of 

‘mafonry, Permit me to imprefs it on your mind, 

+ that your philanthropy, benevolence and charity, © 

fhould be commenfurate with your duties, which 
become more and more extenfive as you advance 
inmafonry.. 

_ The fituation to which you are now promoted 

__ will draw upon you not only the ferutinizing eyés 

Of the world at large, but thofe alfo of your breths 

¥en, on whom this degree of mafonry has not 

been conferred : all will be juftified in expefting 

‘your conduét and behaviour to be fuch as may 
with fafety be imitated. 

“In the honorable charafter of Mafter Mark 
Mafon, it is more particularly your duty to guide 
with caution each word ‘and a€tion ; endeavour to 

_ let your condu& in the world, as well as in the 
_ lodge and among your brethren, ‘be fuch as: may _ 

Oe ate. teft of the Grand Overfeer’s fquare;'that 

nay hot, hike the unfinished and imperfe& 
work 

‘ga ILLUS TRAT EONS 
work of the negligent and unfaithful of formes 
‘times, -be' rejefted. and ‘thrown afide, as. efit for 
the mafonic edifice, . ; 

While virtue is your ruling principle, my bro. 4 
ther, hope may always find arefidence in your 
bofom); for, fhould misfortunes.affail you, fhould | 
friends forfake you, hould envy traduce your 
good name, and,malice perfecute-you; fhould you 
be -defpifed by the proud, and treated with fcorm 

_ by the vainglorious, yet,may you have confidence, 
that arzong MafterMark Mafons yon will find @ 
friend who will adminifter relief to your diftreffes, — 
and comfort your affli@ions; ever bearing in 
mind, as a confolation under all: the frowns of 
fortune, and as encouragement to hope for better 1 y 
profpeéts,..that the ftone which the builders res 
je@ed, . poffeffing merits to them unknown — 

' became the chief ftone. of the corner. eaten 

Previous to the clofe of every meeting, ee fo. 
lowing. is. read : por 
Matthew: nxt, 1h iy 
For the kingdom of heaven is like. unto, amar. 
that.is.anjhoufholder, ‘which went, out early i in sha 
morning to: hire labourers into his; vineyard, | 
when he had agreed with. the labourers, for, a 
peo penny: 

OF MASONRY.! fr % 
ent out about the third hour, and faw others’ 

‘Go ye alfo into the vineyard,’ and’ whatfol* 
is right Iwill give you: © And they weit? 
irway. Again he went out about the fixth and’ 
. jin 1 hour, and did likewife. And about the: 
i oy hour, he went out, and found others 
flanding idle, and faith unto them, Why ftand- ye. 
her all ‘the day idle? ‘They fay unto him, be-. 
Cat 01 man ae hired us. He faith unto them, 

“that. fhall ye receive. So when even was 
ree the: lord of the vineyard ‘faith unto his flew- 
all the labourers, ‘and | give ‘them their hire,” 

came that? weré hired ‘about’ aie’ eleventh 
» they received. every man a penny. But 
en the firft came, they fuppofed that they fhould 
ve received moré, and they likewife received 
ry man a penny. And when’ they” had re- 
ved it, they murmured againft the good man of 

ur, and thou haft’made them equal unto us, 

anfwered one of'thiem, and’ faid; Friend, 1 
RF de 

ing idle im the market place, and {aid unto’ 

houte. Saying,” 'Phefe laff have wrought but — 

) have bore the burthen'and heat dfthe day. 

Seriny’a’day, he fent them into his vineyard: And 

a 
Fle Hen Clabes tind Sebel te> 

6, ILLUSTRATIONS ai 

do thee no wrong : did not thou agree with. 
for a) penny ? Take that thine is, and go thy way, 
' Lwill give unto this lat, even as untothee. — 
“not lawful for me to do what I will with min 
own? Is thine ¢ye evil becaufe I ain good ? So 
the laft hall be firft, and the firft la: for many 
may be called, but few thofen,” rk 

The ceremony of clofing a a lodge i ta tied gre ree, 
when Properly conduéed,. is peculiarly pleafi a 
Tt affifts in ‘Atrengthening the focial affeétior 
teaches us the duty we owe 0 our brethren i in ] 

FT ane 
oul NVOVD BST 

salt Raia eodh > ae 
Mark Matters, all appear |, 
Before the Chief Olerfeer, 

; © in. concert move; . uot yor 
Let him. your work infpel, op 
For the Chief Sect ere» 
‘Tf there isno defe&, 
> He will approve; 

4 

hate shatilostra ass Spun 
‘or your ‘fewatds prepare,’ ipod. W 
_ Join heart atid hand, 

ty ia ‘Each witht his mark’ in view, ott. oT? 
March with the juft’ ‘and ‘true, OR 
‘Wages to you are due; porte 1s ssl 
Beit your command, |” 

9 sh Ba 4 aR" 

sri tanto Solomon, .... By pes a 

f by: Our great Key. ftone 5°. 
De eb bearetiesttene aid fs te io 

hich raifes highythe fame,), ophock ¢ &. 

m9 rs, yonen iwi Ha OW. ahORgaa0 
open eee 
Ww rey 1s ser saeel ae 

ove, 
ett dildirg Yo 

piectersenta « % pre ms 
pt sO fh night hai. op Locraut ae 

<br tapon staat TOR Rass we 

Rear Sebo.l wil s not ob ios aa, 

98 THRU RAE Sie or 

Bsc refolved to form a New Lodge, mutt apy 

I TV. aa 
Now, to the praife-of ,thofey,. tod'T’ a 

Who triumph o'er the. foes, 
Of Mafon’s art 5. 34 nial i 
To the praife-worthy three, , = 
Who founded this degree, 
May all their virtues be, .. >.>) 
Deep i in our hearts. a vA. 
SE C7. VIL ert 
Of the ancient ‘Ceremonies of the Order, 
W* now proceed: to illuftrate’ the ancient cer 
emonies of the Order): particularly 
obferved at the conftitution’and “con {eerati 
a Lodge, with*the ‘Inftallation of officers ; 

for more general’ information, “flrall “occali nal! 
introduce the ufual charges delivered on thofe 
occafions. We fhall likewife annex an explana: 
tion of thé céremonies uufed at laying the. fo nda 
tion ftones of. public ftru@tures, at | the dedicat 0: 
of public halls, and < at, funerals, and clofe | 
part of the treatife with the funeral feryice. 

The manner of eonflituting a ‘Lodge, inoludi he 
Ceremony of Confecration, Ges » ~ 

ny number of _Mafter-mafons, not unde 

~ 
oe 
i apts 

‘s OF MASONRY: *) 9" 

n,* to the Grand ‘Lodge; fetting forth, 
* Fh aiuis, aré regulart mafons;’ and are’ at pref. 
¢ n t, or have been, ‘merhbers’‘of regular lodg-" 
‘ oe That, having the profpetity’ of ‘the frater. 
at‘heart, they are : willing to! exért ‘their bet 

; BOP 3: eeig Ql) (noltalele: taht ae gee psiirnes 
a pats be a Jb owe ; 

Meza! ae Ay 3 us ph toy 

z ry in, Scleaneh of which:.a.warrant to. * 
as a regular lodge is Granted, commenced only ;:! 
C4 mwas previous to. which time lodges. » 
yfronally convened, und empowered, by -in= « 
Dpeiibts cole inthe fraternity, at; large; to. » 
andad-under the direttion, of fome able varchi« « 
eis, and. their proceedings, being approved by the » 
jority of the brethrén convened in that- dif. 
e the lodge was held, were deemed:conftitution-- 
By Such an authority the Lodge of Antiquity in« 
manor kolds, and the authority of that lodge 
20 sansa eines ‘and etree tos t- 

ed into Mafoars ina Lantana: manner, 

by yithe Grand Lodge to att. 

ly to ie here oan, a Hi a the. i 

; bi. iby ipa: or. le, egal ott a) 

19, ILLUSTRATIONS 

* endeavours, to promote) and difflafe. the getailel 
* principles. of mafonry); That, for, the conven= 
‘ iency of their ref{pe&ive dwellings, and on othe — 
* er good reafons, they have agreed to form’a new, — 
* Lodge, to, be named ut That, im 
* confequence of this refolution, they pray fora 
‘ warrant of conftitution, to’ empower them to afa 
4 pane as a regular lodge, 0! iia 
. vat Lad X98 difehatige We 
: the duties of .Mafonry in a regulariand ‘conffitual! at 
* tional manner, according to the* original forms \)- 
* of the Order, and the laws of the: Grand Lodges. he 
« Phat they have Aominated” and odo!) recommend» i 
‘ A? Bu to be the fir Mafter, ‘and'C) (Dpto beekles 
‘ the firt Senior Warden; vend EF; a 
¢ Arlt Junior “Warden, of ‘the faid Lodge = Phat} 
‘ the prayer of the - petition being ‘granted, 1 ‘a 
* promife Mia coriformity to-all the mei 
« igws and regulations df -the Grand Lodge? 
This petition being’ fijied by-at. Feat feven reget ; 
aietn fois, and reeéminénded by a hodpeadjaah _ of 
cerit to. the place where the New \Lodgeuisito he 
held, is:delivered'to the Grand Secretary ; swhaw 
lays it before'the Grand Lodgeisis s/h os Qing 
If the petition meets the approbation of 4 & 
Grate Lage a Warrant i is ued ied ‘the Grand 

sph 2: “ade 

A 

OF MASONRY. 18% 
| Mafter appoints a day and hour for conttituting 
qed oi bie the New Lodge 5; and for inftall- 

“If the Grand Mafter, in perfon,) attends the 
| ee Fe eons, the Lodge is faid to be conftituted in 
ample form ; if the Deputy Grand Matter only, it 
_ is faid to be conftituted in due form; but if the 
4 peer of amhines the coneniony, is rened 4 ina 

Ceremony. of Conflitution. 

On the day and hour appointed, the Grand 
“Mafter and his Officers [or the Mafter and Officers 
‘of any private Lodge authorifed | by the Grand 

effion to the Lodge room. Silence being Pro- 
Said the Lodge i is opened by the Grand Mafter 
K2 [or 

: -Mafter for that purpofe] meet in a convenient 
; Tom 5 and being properly clothed, walk in pyo- : 

4 

i 
a 

and the following ode in honour of Mafonry fung 

Nor we lefs fam'd for every tie, 

- Love, truth, and friendfhip, and friendthip 

102 ILLUSTRATI ONS 

Mafonry. A prayer is repeated in due Fa | 

(Yune—Rule Britannia.} 

HEN earth’s foundation firft was laid, 

By the almighty Artift’s hand, r 

’Twas then our perfeét, our perfect laws we tc 
Eftablith’d by his {trict command. [made, 

CHORUS. 

That makes us ever great and free. 
In vain mankind for fhelter fought, 
In vain from place to place did roam, . 
Until from heaven, from heaven he was Ts ‘‘ 
To plan, to build, to fix his home,. 

Iluftrious hence we date our Art, 
And now in beauteous piles appear; 

‘Which fhall to endlefs, to endlefs time ee Pre 
' How worthy and how great we are. he 

By which the human thought is bound ; 3 i e: 

Join all our hearts and hands around, 

OF MASONRY. 103 

Our actions ftill by virtue bleft, 
And to our precepts ever true, 

The world admiring, admiring fhall requeft 

To learn, and our bright paths purfue. 

The Grand Matter, [or Mafter in. the Chair} is 
then informed by the Grand Secretary, for his 
locum tenens.] ‘That feveral brethren, duly in- 
‘ftructed in the myfteries of Mafonry, [naming 

: ‘ them} defire to be formed into a new Lodge, 

_. ©and that a warrant has been granted to them by 

‘the Grand Lodge for that purpofe, in confe- 

¢ quence of which they now attend as regular Ma- 
‘fons, that they may be inftalled in due form, 
* agreeable to the eftablifhed cuftom.’ The pe- 
tition is then read, and the warrant, or charter of — 
conftitution, granted in confequence of it. The 
Grand Mafter [or Matter inthe Chair] then takes 
the warrant in his hand, and requefts the brethren 
of the new Lodge publicly to fignity their appro- 

bation or difapprobation of the officers nominated 

in the warrant to prefide over them. This being 
fignified accordingly, the following anthem is 

_fung ; 

« BET 

104 ILLUSTRATIONS 

ET there be light |”? the Almighty Poles) Hee 

Refulgent ftreams from chaos broke, fal ‘A 

To illume the rifing earth ! ais i 

‘Well pleas’d the great Jehovah ftood, 

The Power Supreme pronounc’d it good, 

Ani gave the planets birth! 

In choral numbers Mafons join, 

‘To blefs and praife this light divine. 

Parent of light ! accept our praife ! 7 HAG, 
Who thed’ft on us thy brighteft rays, Mies at I 
The light that fills our minds = ae 2 ‘ 
By choice fele€ted, lo! we ftand, Ais ate Be 
By friendfhip join’d, a focial band ! iS Pale 
That love, that aid mankind | Sid ke i 

In choral numbers, &c. * tts 

yams 

.The widow’s tear, the orphan’s cry, ite a iy 

All wants our ready hands fupply, jee 
As far as power is given! 7 Segue 
‘The naked clothe, the pris’ner free, ae Bi 4 ‘5 

Thefe are thy works, fweet charity ! pity 

Reveal’d to us from. heaven | 
In choral numbers, &c. 

After which an oration on the nature and d fe H 
fign of Mafonry is delivered, 

aaa 

~ 

OFOMASONRY, 10B ps 
: Hasire oe oid: 16 i} ee hogs 
She Ceremony, of Confesrations ; hin, 

The Grand Matter, attended: by his officers, and | 

~ fome dignified clergyman, form themfelves in or-., ' 
der rqund the lodge, which is placed in the centre,,, » 

covered with white fatin, All devoutly kneeling, 

. iy the * preparatory prayer is rehearfed. The chap, ; 

; hain, or orator, produces his authority, * and being 

_ properly affited, ‘proceeds to confecrate. # olemn’” 

i ah mufic dignifies the;ceremony, while the cians 
_~ Preparations are made. The lodge is uncovered, 
Ny _and the firft.clayfe of the confecration prayer re-, 

hearfed,, all devoutly kneeling. , The refponfeis 
‘made, GLORY \ro, Gop on. wiGH. Incenfe is , 
__ feattered over the lodge, and. the grand honours of ‘is 

Be _ mafenry aregiven. The grand invocation is then 

if - confecration prayer is concluded, and the refponfe, 
repeated. as :before,. together withthe -honouts., 

Ah 8 

et ‘The lodgeji is. covered, and all rifing up, folemn; 

2 

_ pronounced, with the honours ; ;, after which the 

e 

_ mufiovis refumed, after which the bleflingis giyen,, » 

. ; 
i . and 
ot - LAR 
ities ay an Se 
aAlat “co 3S 3} ms ndorrorl | 55” iT 
Bhi Si NOTES. TIE a re i 
2) TT ieee ? 7 ‘ at ie 
patel * The 20 roll. setae? ap eae 
} OE 
% 
‘ 

horn ywine, and oil, are the elements of confe= 

nee 

ria 

Matter advances to. the Pedeftal, and f 
; the new lodge i in the following manner : f: in ae 

6 tute’ and form: you, “my good: brethren,” jest: 

10 ILLUSTR ATIONS 

and the refponfe made as before, accompanied 
with the ufual honours. - Ananthem {8 'fung, and, — 
thé brethren’of the new:lodge coming forwardydo 
homage to the sree Tapes and tlie éonfecration: 
endsw) a4 2itiw vcho? oitt iasedg i, 

The above ceremony ‘being finithed, the 2 

“In this my exalted charaftersto which the a 

* frages of my brethren. have raifed’ me, 1 invoke) y 
* the name of the’ mos'T HYG, to whom be glory } 
‘ and honour, that he: may be with you at your peasy 
* ginning ; and; by the divine aid} I now’ ‘conftis 

< Lodge of Free ‘and Accepted } Mafons. 
s Loupe d een n you to att, asa re! 

remony of inftallation fucceeds, poli? 
eens Mis theers's sh ie 
Ld - ad ~ : 

©F MASONRY.: 407 
er 0). "Ceremony of Inftallation. 

tthe Grand. Mafter* afks his Deputy, ‘ Whe- 

hi jai mer has,examinedthe mafter, nominated in the 

“ warrant, and finds him well: {killed in the. noble 

M ites Fieve andthe royal Art?’ The deputy anfwer- 

. ing in the affirmative,t by the Grand Mafter’s 

i} _vorder,, takes the candidate from among his fellows, 

and prefents him at the pedeftal; faying, * Moft 

_~ worfhipful “Grand ‘Mafter [or right worlhipful, 

as ithappens, ] I:prefent my worthy brother, A.B. 
 * to be inftalled Mafter of this new lodge. ‘I find 

~™ him to be of good morals, and of ‘great fkill, true 
| “and 'trufty ; arid as he is a lover of the whole fra- 

GD “* ternity, wherefoever -difperfed over the face of 
she earth, 1 doubt not that he will difcharge his 
rie a ‘with fidelity.’ 

Phe Grand Mafter then orders a furimary of 
de ‘ancient charges to be read by the Grand Secres 
me Soetpia fectetiry] to the mafter ele&. 

acts on sh [As 
Wis my b; ae ee 
NOTES, 
% Incthisyand other JSiiilar saleaaah, where the 
; ‘iron: Mafter is fpecified in aéling, may be under 
- food ainy mafter who performs t théceremony. = * ” 
+A private examination \i5. underftood to precede 

Wate thftallation of every officers 

SH 

<#8) ILUUSTRATEFONS 
bests the curious ‘reader ‘may: with to ‘esha th 
~Yanciént: charges that ‘were’ ufed ‘on'this éécal 
© we fhall‘here ‘infert them verbatim, as 
* contained iit a MS. in ‘polfeffion’ ‘of the’ I 
~ Antiquity —in “London, written in the 
Be the Sé¢ond? * ovate Seana 
W% # % © 0% Ad | furthermore, at diver 

‘* feinblies, have been ‘put’ and‘ \ordained diverle 
|S crafties by the beft advife of magiftrates and fel- 
* lows.) Zune 'unus ex feniorthus tent. tibrum, et ul 
| * ponent manum fuam fuper Jibrume 
-$ Every. man that.is a mafon take, good, heed *to 

_* thefe, scharges. (wee pray); . that, if-any me 
>? himfelfe.guilty of any of thefe. charges, 
‘may amend himfelfe, ;or principally for dread.o 

* God you that be charged to take good hee 

» * you keepe all thefe charges well, for it is a 
- ‘evil for aman to forf{wear himfelfe ‘upon a i 
i he ‘The firft charge i is, That yee fhail be. truer ie 
Fy | © God and the holy ‘chieeb, and to ufe no e 7 
“or herefie by your wnderftanding, and by wi 
* men’s teaching, 2aTOU 

» *Alfo, fecondly, yee fall be trueone: toanét t 
* (that is to-fay)» very. ‘mafon’ of the raft: 
* mafonallowed,\ye thall-doe to yes yee w 
“be done. soaps ite sinheas 

Thirdly, “And yee fhall keepe truly all'the 

nfell ‘that ought: !tonbe kept’ in the wey of 
Onhood, and all the courifell of the lodge or’ 
he chamber. \Alfo, (that yee’ fhall be? ‘no’ 
€ nor thieves to your knowledge free’: that 
fall’ be true to'the king, lord} or mafter that’ 
detvest ad: truly to fee and: work for his‘ad-" 

: ae 
i Of it: yt viel 

hig. t0}3 eetkort:* 

Fifthly, Yee fhall not take*your fellow’s' wife” 

nif 
put him to no difworhhiphis) ga.beg .°¢ St” 
ixthly, Yee fhall truely pay rac eee 

0, yee fhall doe no villany there, whereby’ 
sraft.or fcience may beflandeteds, 0. _< 
hefe be the charges general to every true’ 

ar mafons allowed ‘ or accepted.) 9) + 
* irl, That no mafon take, on him no ord’ s. 

have no flander) »).: Nee 

)OF MASONRY! fog 

Fourthly, Yee hall ‘call all*mafons puiareete 
WS; Or your brethren, and no’ otherinames): { * 

illany, nor deflower his daughter or fervant, 

¥ 

¢'.wherefGever, yee goe, to table or bord. — 

af nj both mafters and fellowes.’ a 
© Now will I rebearfe other Ringe ingle for 

' ‘Beemer ; . 

e, nor any other man’s, \unleffe he know oe ef: 
elf well ablé to. perform +he Adie ic tonite 

io Ro 

— < 

'. © Jefs than feaven yeares. And thatthe apprinti ; 
~ © be free- born, and of limbs whole as a man ought 
-£to be, and. no. baftard. And that no mafter or 

without he have occupation to occupy. sf or 
tae three fellows at thé leaft. 

. Sworke, -° 

110 ILLUSTRATIONS 

‘Secondly, Allfo, that no mafter take worke 

* but that he take reafonable pay for i itt; fo that * 
* the lord may be truly ferved,, and the matter to YL 
* live honeftly, and to pay his fellows truly. And f 
* that no mafter or fellow fupplant others of their 
‘worke; (that is to fay) that if he hath taken a 
* worke, or elfe ftand mafter of any worke, that 
‘he fhall not put him out, unlefs he be unable of 
‘ cunning to make an end of his worke. | 
* mafter ner fellowe fhall take no apprintice 

<a, 
ae 

* fellow take no allowance to be made mafon with. 
“out the affent of his fellows, at the leaft fix or 
* feaven- 
ae Thirdly, that-he that bé made ba able i 
‘ degrees ; that is, free-born, of a good kind: 

true, ‘and no bond{man, and that he have his right 

“limbs as a man ought to have. ae 
‘Fourthly, That a mafter take no apprintice 

 * Fifthly, That no mafter or fellow put awaya 
‘lord’s worke to tafke that ought to. be j 

>) 2 OPRIMASONRY:: das 
oF 2th ie wiht: That every mafter give pay to his 
“* fellows and fervants as they may deferve, foe 

_* that he .be not.defamed with falfe workeing. 
. Ard that n none flander another Rehicet his backe, 

at igs, That every mafter mafon doe rever- 
ence his elder ; and that a mafon be no common 

runlawfull plaies, through the which the fci- 
“ence and craft may be difhonoured or flandeted. 
- ‘ Ninthly, That no fellow goe into the town by 

“enight, ‘except he have a fellow with him, who 

! place. 
.* Tenthly, That every mafter saa fellow fhall 

come to the affemblie, if itt be within fifty miles 

. tof him, if he have any warning. And if hé have 
r ‘ trefpaffed againit the craft, to abide the award ot 
BSS * mafters and fellows. 

; ‘ “low. that hath trefpaffed againft the craft fhall 
* fiand to the corre@tion of other: mafters and fel- 
; * lows 

* . . y a 
* plaier at the cards, dice, or hazzard, nor at any 

é te ‘may beare him record that he was in an honeft 

- 

 ‘ Eleventhly, That every mafter mafon and fel- 2 

a2 ILLUSTRATIONS 

* lays to:make him accord 3 and! if* they 
* accord, to-go to the common dawi#ne ove 
~ *Twelfthly, That’a mafter or fellow mak 
©a>mould-ftone, {quare, nor rule, to’no lov 

‘nor let no lowen worke within their hades 
“without; to mould flone, 
\ ©Phirteenthly, ‘That ‘every: mafon receive 

‘ ‘ cherifh flrange fellowes when'they come. a 
* the countrie; and fet them on worke if they vill 
— * worke, -as the’ manner is); (that is tofay) 4 if the ’ 

*'mafon have any mould lone im his sized he. 
rig ‘thal: igi eae a mould ftone, and fett him on 

4 } fet hits with money unto oe next lodges. > 

-- ©" Fourteentlily, “That every, mafon teal doles 

8 phage! ‘his mafter for ‘his pays oS : 

: Fifteentily, That every mafter fhall: ar | 

« make'an’end’of his pisetos tafe OF or journey, whe “ai Hi 

stherfoe it be. 9° colle 29h sug! fa 

it Thefe'be’ all px ehcges ‘atid covenants that. 

+ olnghit” to be read atthe infNallmerit’of mater 

‘ making of a free-mafon or free-mafons. “Pheeal 

Ha “mighty Gol of Jacob, who ever have you’ an 

‘in me in his vial ck ‘ples as now and ever, 

vA HEA “py gia ws0tn td. geidiat0 > nt 0 asada 
tial ¥ : eT 

OF MASONRY. 413 

Lm sod I. You agree to be a good man and true, and 
¢ ‘frilly to obey the moral law. 
‘ Il. You agree to be a-peaceable fubje&, and 
‘ cheerfully to conform to the laws of the Fountry 
‘in which you refide. 
‘ IIL.. You promife not to be concerned in plots 
‘and. confpiracies againft government, but pa- 
_ ‘tiently to fubmit to the decifions of the fupreme 
(og legiflature. 
_ ‘IV. You agree to pay a proper refpeét to the 
i Saat magiftrate, to work diligently, live-credit- — 
: ‘ ably, and aét honourably by allymen: Ay 
*V. You agtee to hold in veneration the origi- 
ite nal rulers and patrons of the Order of Mafonry, _ 
‘and their regular fucceflors, fupreme.and fubor- 
»* dinate, according to their ftations ; and to fubmit 
‘to the awards and refolutions of your brethren in 
* general chapter convened, in every cafe, confift. 
‘ent with the conftitutions of the order. 
. ° * VI. You agree to avoid private piques and 
ns _ * quarrels, and to guard againft intemperance and 
excels, : 
* VII. You agree to be cautious in carriage ; and 
‘* behaviour, courteous to your baethren, and faith- 
‘ful to your lodge, + 
ae ‘Vil, You 
La . 

gis So 7, 

“my ILLUSTRATIONS 

‘Eos. .venbey gi promife to’refpe€t genuine ‘bret he 
‘ren, and. to difcountenahce ‘impoftors,. and “all 
“diffenters from the ‘original plan of sions 
- VEX. "You agree’ to ‘promote the’ general good 
‘ of fociety, to cultivate the focial lyatig ‘and 
Nptopagae the knowledge’ of thé art”)? 
‘On’ the Mafter Bleé fignifying ‘his af 
“thefel charges) the Secretary” proceeds “to "tea 
‘following regulations : .., serail 

oat “ht You sbi to pay eee to the Gr 

© when’ duly infldlied ; and’ friily to heh io 
ee Severy edi& of the Grand Lodge, or General Al 
-tfembly of Mafons,’ that is not! fubverfive’ of the” 
-foprinciples “arid ground work of Mafonry. re 
© toa admit'that! iti is’ not in the power 
ea any man,’ or body of men, ‘to make innov 
-“ in the Beay. of Mafonry.” 
OTN You promife a alae sicitahieted di the 
© cointiiittees and commufications ‘of - the Gh n 
Re age receiving’ proper notice } ; and'to pay 
* attention to all the duties of Mafonry,’ on 
ane occafions! ” Big: i i 
82 CEVE You admit’ that’ no new lodge. tein be 
‘ formed without permiffion of the Giada Loe ¥ 
ind’ di thata me-countenance, ype Bey to any irreg 

CCOF MASONRY! “ts 

4% sige ‘or f6 arly perfori clandeftinely iniiffated 
“therein, being’ inigo see aricient ‘charges of 
**theordér. 2) 00" iad 09 
Ls ©, You admit that no: eet can be regularly 
: ment made’ a mafor in, or admitted member of, any 
i “regula lodge, without prévious notice, and due 
s : enqui into his chara&ter. “5 
ae PAS VE ‘You: ‘agree ‘that no’ vifitors fhall be re. 
| beived into-your lodge without due examination, 
i, and producing proper vouchers of their haviig 
Dect i initiated ‘in. a regular lode.” 
r aS "Thefe are the regulations of the Grand Lodge 
8 Of'Freé arid Accepted Mafons.” . 
» The Grand"Mafter then addreffes. ne Matter 
Bett in the following manner: * Dey you ‘fubmit 
“ ‘to thofe charges, and ‘omite to fuppért Woke 
“alts regulations, as Mafters have done in all ages be- 
_ * fore you ?? T he new Mafter having fignified his 
* cordial fubmiflion as before, is regulagly inftalled,. 
i ae eats to his tuft, and invefted “with the badge of 
tale ° fice by the Grand Matter, who. sa falutes. him’: : 
ef ‘Brother A. B, in confequence of your cheerful 
ee Mg conformity” to the charges and regulations of the 
b fo ‘order, Tappoint you mafter of this new lodge, 
a not doubting of your care, fkill, and capacity.” 
~The warrant of confiitution 4 is then delivered ove er 

SON a 
ryt ey, 

oh, Shee aes 
— ren 

vg 

609 . ILLUSTRATIONS — 

Succeeding inflallation, 

: pohing the neceffary inftruction in “ihe import rtant 
| rite, we fhall here infert a few moral obfe érvations om 

to the new Mafter ; after which the holy 1 : 
the rule and line, the {quare and compaifles, ; he 
conttitutions, the minute book, the mallet, : the 
trowel, the chiffel, the ‘moveable jewels, and all 
the infignia of his different officers, are fepa rately 
_prefented to him, and charges {uirable; to each, 
delivered.* cing 

». [**The various implements of the profeffion 2 are 
‘emblematical of our conduét in life, and upon 
_this oceafion carefully enumerated. 4 a 

“ The Rule direéts, ‘that we fhould pun nO rally 
obferve our duty: prefs forwatd in the path of 
virtue, and, neither inclining to the right, nor to 
the left, in all our aétions Bites eternity in view. 

'“ The Line teaches, the criterion of moral re af 

fitude, to avoid pielegons in converfation ¢ and 

NOTE. yi 
aS 
* The fame ceremony and charges se attend. ever 

4) 

_ the inflruments of ma/fonry, -thus prefented to t 
_mafer of « @ lodge at inflallation, 

SFI MASONRY ap 

a6 dion ary to dife& our’ Ohiea to the Mg which 
; to immortality. neta ete 

without’ proper cement, and. that the per- 
of ‘a building muft depend onthe proper 
fition’ of that -cement;! fo Charity, ithe bond 

s and feparate, interefts, ithat, like. the radii of 
cle* which extend from the centre to ‘every 
the circumference, the ehh of uni. 

. the community: | - b. 

le and line, and to harmonife our conduét ; by 
rinciples ‘of mofality and wirtidel fi ioc TM 
Lhe Compaffes teach, tolimit our duty in.every” 

‘efpetted, and die regretted! +» ca es a 
Sangeeta demonftrates; that we. jens gchbil 
pm the! fame Rock, partake: ofithe fame nak 

tions 

he Trowel teaches, ‘that it can be- 

eGtion' and: focial union, | muft link feparate , 

re she Syuareteacis, to regulate our. eet 

ai ihre he fame hope: andaboughdiines . 

‘ " 
SE a a vin 

48 «ILLUSTRATIONS — 

tions among men are neceffary 40 preferve fubors 
ination, yet that no eminence of ftation: shee 

_ who is placed on the loweft {poke of oa 
wheel, may be entitled to our regard; becau 
time will come, and the wifeft knows not 
foon,, when all diftin&tions, but that of goodn eff 
fhall ceafe ; and death, the grand leveller of hu 
man greatnefs, reduce us to the fame ftate. a 

“ The Chiffel demonftrates, the advantag ge: ; 
difcipline and education. The mind,» like 
diamond, in its original ftate, is unpolifhed | bu 

as the effelts of the chiffel on the external” 03 

large field of matter and {pace, to difplay the fum- 
mit of human Rndogled gest our duty to Gods : 
man, vi 
-“ The Mallet teaches, to a of cicietoh 
and fmooth furfaces ; or, in other words, to-cor ef 
wregularities, and to reduce man to a proper! vel 
fo that, by quiet deportment, he may, in the fchool 
of difcipline, learn to be content. _ What tlie ma 
Tet is to the workman, enlightened reafon. is te 
ioe it curbs ambition, it depreffes envy 

pet aed 

1OF: MASONRY.) ig 

. modera es anger, and it encourages “6d difpoli- 

$3) whence arife that comely order, 

HM Wh ich ‘pothing earthly gives, or can deftroy, ' 
ie foul’s calm funfhine, and the heart-felt joy. a: 

' | The new Matter. is ther conduéted by the 

he ret is his becoming iAlahedpaaial firtt, 
» the Eiand Mafter ; : arid next, to all the officers: 

yee promife of fabjellion and obedience 
y the ufual congratulations in the different ee 
8 of ‘mafonty. 

This ceremony being concluded, the oe 
. Ma Q r orders the new Matter to enter imme- 
 diat ely upon the exercife of his office; in naming’ 
s wardens. They are conduéted to the pedettal, 

efented to the Grand Matet, and inftalled ; after 

; Brothet” 
eet Drege Sash 
Bhs. ‘ NOTE. : * 

n the Grand Majfter and his officers attend 

tute a new lodge, the D. G. Ma brug ma 

' * enfign of your office, t. Your, regular att 

os lodge, for the faithful difcharge of. the di 1 

© den of this lodge ; and I inveft you. wi 

400 «ILLUSTRATIONS — 

_-* Brother. C. D, you are appointed Se ior] 
* den of this lodge ; -and I inyeft you -wi 

‘am our ftated meetings 1s effentially ne 

* in the abfence of. the mafter you, are to, 

‘this lodge ; in his prefence you are toa 
* in, the government. of it. I firmly, rely. 

$ knowledge of mafonry, and ane 

¥ this important tuft.’ 
* Brother E. F, you, are appointed Junior \ 

. badge of your ofice.t To you is, ene 
. “examination of vifitors, and the introdu 
~ "ease Your rela and Bynes atte 

aeeth ‘NOTES. ag 
‘wefts the new ‘Mafer, tle Grand Wardens inde 

new Wades, ‘the Grand Treafurer a ‘and Grand ye 2 

tary inveft the Treafurer ;and Secretary, agi 
sete Stewards the Stewards. 

y Here Siee p its moral elena: : 

OF MASONRY: 10% 

_ The/Grand, Mafter then addreffes, the new 
DiWardens togethers 
_ + ‘ Brother Wardens, you are too ete members 
‘of our community, and too expert in the priaci- 
* ples: -of mafonry, to require ‘mucly information in 
_ ‘the duties of your refpettive offices : fuffice it 
bs “to mention, that I expe& what you have feen 
_ * praife-worthy: in others, you will, carefully im- 
. tate 5 and ,what in them may have appeared de-> 
-* feftive, you, will in yourfelves amend. ..Good 
“order and. regularity you muft. endeavour 
* to promote 3 for by a due regard to the laws ‘in 
_ Syourown condu&, you can only éexpeé obe- 
* dience to them from the other members.’ 
) The Wardens retire to their feats, and the Trea- 
' Turersis next \invefted.. The Secretary is then 
_ ealled-to the pedéftal, and invefted withithe jewel 
_ = ofthis office; upon which the Grand Mafter thus’ 
_ addyeffes him : 
_ *e© You are appointed; brother G. H, Secretary of ' 
f “this: lodges + Iteis» your -proviicé “to racord the 
“* minutes, fettle the accpunts, and iffuecout the 
_ *fummons»for regilar meetings. Your good in. 
__ *-clinations. to mafonry and. this lodge, I hope, 
__ * will.induce you to difcharge your office with fis 
Sdelity, and, iby fo doing, you will. merit the 
 * and applaufe of your brethren.’ ras 
GES, eM 38 M The 

rpp" ILLU STRATIONS | 

The Deacons are then named, and nse tps 
-on whith they are thus addrefled ‘2° 
© * Brothers I, K, and Li M; you ‘are ap) 
* Deacons of this lodge. — It is your provitice 
‘tendon the Mafter and Wardens, and t 
‘ their proxies in the alive duties of the 
‘fuch as in the reception of candidates in 
‘ different degrees of mafonry, atid in the’ im 
‘ate pradtice of our rites, “Thofe’ ‘columns, 

‘ badges of your office, I ehtruft to ‘your ¢ 4 
not doubting your vigilance and attention.”! i 
The Stewards: ate next’ called up, and in 
upon. which the following charge’ is’ deli re] 
them by the Grand Maftert 5 * 
* Brothers N..O, and Py Q; you are-app 

’ Stewside of this lodgt. The duties of y 
* fice are, to introduce vifitors, and fee rs: re 
‘ properly accommodated ; to colleét fubferiptions 
‘ and other fees, and keep an exaét account ¢ 
“lodge expences. Your regular and, early 
* dance’ will afford the beft — of your za aid 
‘ attachment:’ | ais: “sp 
The Tyler is then since and s th 

' inftrument of his office; with a fhort asain 
_ decafion ; after which the new Mafter # 
" dreffes the members of his Hs at large 

“not in office; as follows: , er 
fa Bee 

9 OF MASONRY: ~ 123 

.) (| BRETHREN, 
‘Such is the, mature of our confttation, ‘ik as 

4 «who are appointed toaflift me in tis government 
ho this lodge, are too well acquainted with the 
Priticiples of ‘mafonry, and the rules of good 
‘manners, to. extend the power with’ Which they 
: « are entrufted ; ; and’ you are too ’fenfible of the 
propriety of their appointment, and of too gener- 
_ ous difpofitions, to envy their preferment. From 
‘the knowledge I have of botli officers-and mem- 
- bers, I truft we fhall have but one aim, to pleafe 
* each other, and unite in the grand defign of be- 
‘ing happy, and of communicating happinefs.’ 
. The Grand Mafter then gives the brethren joy 
“GS officers, recommends harmony, and ex- 
reffes a with that the only contention in the lodge 
_™ay be, a generous emulation to vie in cultivating 
sen ae ana dhe thoiadi viltaaes Phe New. 

¢ Grand Secretary jg the New Lodge 
three times, with the honours of — Flour- 
if ) with horns each time. , 
* oe , ert Grand 

a I LUST RATI bee 

“Totty typ detent By ri 7 a. 
aa mony of conflitation. a Ay tot by 

$4iFteu? “ile, God faye the : King ake id 
_ HAIL. Masonry. divine ig | 
» dive Glory of ages thine, 9) > als ay 
Soo ty Leng may’ ft shou/eignt’ Sige 
~) Where’er thy Lodges ftand,.» «7 
' May they have great command, re 
’ - And always grace the land, 33; (esther fa 
ao os - tae'Thou Artdivine 1 < )jot act 

. "Great petty fill arife, Aes rr: i 
ale “And grace ‘the azure Ikies, yi pais sit 
C Great are thy fchemes 5 3 Be 
_Thy nobie Orders are. 3 oe A 
> ‘ Matchlefs beyond compares 
3 ; ae Art with thee can ake groan! 
Rect Thou Art divine. i diet 

HIG Shs ap ee “yee 
eC ‘iMicm, the atehitee,. $ ow ak been, 2a 
rea ids “Didall the Craft dire&t 9.5 6) coy nba 
1 How'they fhould: build 5: bith sees rm 
Sol’mon, great Ifr’els King, 4 aie 
> | Did -tnighty bleffings bring, ; 
ined And:left ussroom to fing, » « 4 
: ae Arthost ed tania da 
a3 are 

oe 
3 

x ‘BIBRA 
: a 

c- 

Ze (OF MASONRY, 

125 
» The lodge is then clofed with > the ufual folem- 

‘nial in thedifferentdegrees, by the Grand Mafter 

and his Officers. | > +) 
_eThis is the ufual-ceremony obferved by regular » 

- mafons atthe conftitution.of a New Lodge, which. 

the,Grand. Matter may abridge or extend at plea- ; 
fure:; but the material points are: on no account to 

_ beomitteds . The fame ceremony and: sthanges ate 

_tendevery fucceeding inftallation. «~ 

xt! 

woSa 

soy rek 

| oF. bs 

The Ceremony obferved at laying the Foundation” 

‘ Stones of Public Strufures.~ 

This ceremony is.conduéted by the Grand. Maf- 
ter and his Officers, affifted by the members of the 
Grand Lodge. When itis done byia Grand pri-_ 

Yate member, or inferior ;officer of any private 
lodge, i is admitted to join in the ceremony.: .. Pro- 
di vincial Grand. Mafters. are. authorifed to, execute 
as this truft in. their feveral provinces, accompanied 

by their Officers, and the Mafters and Wardens of 

. the regular lodges under their jurifdi€ion. The 
chief magiftrate, and other civil officers of the 
_ place where the huilding is to be erefted, gener- 

ally attend on abe eitieoa tion ‘The. ceremony is 

. thus condu&ed. > ‘sels k baged 

wt M 2 At 

i. ILLUSTRATIONS 

At the time appointed, the Grand Lodge iscon< | 

vened at fome convenient place approved aa | 
Grand Mafter, A band of martial muficis provide, 
ed, andthe brethren appear in the infignia of the | 
Order, elegantly dreffed, with white gloves and a 
prons. The lodge is opened by the Grand Matter, — 
and the rules for regulating’ the proceffion. toand 
from the place where the céremony isto be pers 
formed, are read by the Grand Secretary. The: 
neceffary cautions are then given from the chair, | 
and the lodge is adjourned ; after which the sii 

- fion fets out in the following order ; —_ 

Two Tylers, with drawn fwords 5 

Mulfic ; 

Ménibers of the Grand Lodge, two and two. ae 
A Tyler, in his uniform ; 1 aT i 
Paft Grand Stewards ; 4: og) Bat 
Grand Tyler ; * theta 
-'Prefent Grand Stewards, with white rods3. 
“Secretary of the Steward’s Lodge ; oi Bs oifet 
‘Wardens of the Steward’s Lodgé; GV. yf! 
Master of the Steward’s Lodge-;_ 7 
: Choirifters ; =~ * ee 
" Architeét ; 235i digit | 
« Swordbearer, with the fword of flatey = 
Grand Secretary, with his bag ; wht BG oy 
Grand Treafurer with his faf ;- pa " 4 

“OF MASIONRY. ; tay. 

_ The Bible,* Squareand Compaffes, on a crimfan 
. AOR carried'by the Mafter ofa ©, 
Lodge, fupported by two Stewards . 
bee os ©» with white rods ; eee 
bye) els) Grand Chaplain ; 
so Raft Grand Wardens; - 
- »> >). Raft Deputy Grand Mafters ; 

4 

a biabirisicss 4, Bait: Grandk Mafters j05/1 0 : 

Ka ‘ohelse Chief Magiftrate of the, places; 
; Grand Wardens ;..- 
' Deputy Grand Matter ; 
(The selaiticiss carried by the Mafter of ihe 
St owe oe woldeh Lodge st 
meh Granp, MasTER. ) 
-. Pwo Stewards clofe the proceffion.. .. | 

A triumphal” 
é , 

SE yep oeeae 
4) » bee , fi . 

“NOTES, 

Me | 
sat a When the bible is mentioned, it applies t to any 
a0k which is confidered to be the holy writings. 

> 

+ In allufion to che Conftitutions of the Order bea \ 
og originally vefted in that officer ; who is always * 

pi twidered as. the general Governor and Diretlor of ° 
the Fraternity, in cafe of the refignation® o or death wi 

Hie Grand — 

ited $2 
x PEL: 

a 

' "The Grand Treafurer then, by the Grand Mafter’s i 

‘an oration fuitable to the ‘occafion is. delivereds ; 

68 ILLUSTRATIONS — 

“A triumphal arch is ufually ereéted at the place 
bei: suru ryniamne ne ith pro 

ren. The proceflion paffes icity the ‘ket ik 
the brethren repaiting to their ftands, the Grand 
Matter and his officers take their places on a tem- 
porary platform, covered with'carpet.” ‘An odeon 
mafonry is fung. © ‘The Grand Mafter commands a 
filence, and” the. necelfary preparations are made 
for laying the Stone, on which is engraved” the 
year of Mafonry, the name, titles, &c. of the 
Grand °Mafter.: ‘The ftone i is raifed up, byron 4 
of an engine erefted for that purpofe, nae 
Grand Chaplain or Orator repeats a fhort pris int 

‘command, places under the ftone various forts of 
coin and medals of the prefent age. Solemn mus ihe 
fic is introduced, an-anthem fung, and the ftone 
let down into its place, and properly fixed; upon 
which the» Grand Mafter" defcends to the fta ne, 
and gives” three Knocks with his° mallet, © amidft — 
the acclamations of the {peétators. The Gre id 
Mafter then.delivers over to” the architeét the vas 
rious, implements. of “architeture,> intrufting him, 
with. the, faperintendence ‘and direétion, of 
work ;.after which he re-afcends.the platform, and 

: © OF | MASONRY! 499. 
sah fubfeription | is miade“ffor the work. 

ae bythe Grand: Treafurer. A A fing. in hohoat 
ee concludes: the ceremony; after which 
the proceflion returns to ther place »whencd it fet 
t, andthe lodge is’ clofed by the ‘Grand War © 

ists B oe blo SHVISHS SoeIReL .o110) 

mony ‘ob ered at “he DeRacee of efa, 
Halls.” 

} see day appointed for the célebiation of the | 
remony of dedication, the Grand Mafter and 
officers, accompanied by all the moe. 
e members of the Grand Lodge, ‘meet in a cons 
venient room adjoining to the place. where the ce-, 
m ony i Bek to be performed, “and the Grand Lodge 
D ened i in ample form in al the degrees of a 
ye "The order of procelfi on is read By the 
nd Secretary, ‘and a general charge refpeQting 
pre Say of behaviour given by. the Deputy Grand | 
 Mafter. . The lodge is them ‘adjourned, andthe “ 
Bein formed as follows? | 
: ‘haan with drawn {words ; 
_ : Mufies2 © Hist 
beinrek ne Grand Lodge, colon two 5 
ae Tylery in Std is 
Patt 

Ne 

ag0 -° ILLUSTRATIONS 

1 Paft Grad Steward? | iste ait Es 

21d 560% Grand Tyler; } nt Wee 

Prefent Grand Stewards, with white rod 32 tk 
Secretary of the Stewards’ Lodge; 
Wardens of the Stewards’, Lodge 5. Bi 

.)) Master of the Stewards’ Lodge 5. 1 had 

‘ Choirifters ; . 

One Brother carrying a gold pitcher, conta 

corn ; 

Two Brethren with filver pitchers _con 

wine and oil; 

eat inate i, "white fatin 5 
4 - Archite& ; : 
“Grand Swordbearer, with the {word off 
Grand Secretary, with his bag 
io, (Grand Treafurer, with his, Jat 
Bib ble, Square, and Compalfes,. ona crim 5 
i . cufhion, carried. by the Matter ofa] A 
mon fapported by two Stewards; 3 
es Grand Chaplain; 
Provincial. Grand Mafters;, 
Paft Grand Wardens; _ fe ore 
. Paft Deputy, Grand Matters; 
_ Paft Grand Mafters ; fet 
Chief Magiftrate. of the place.; é: 
; Two lange. lights; 9 - 

a2 

os 
re 

ib bens 

Si b.2 

FOF MasONRNES ag 

ae, | q 

wees. ¢ figl -as | P 4 4 ? : 
aa tS ME I Grand Wardens ; 
ee OS One large “light ; 

-Depiity “Grand Mafter ; 
ik Consintion Carried by the Mafler'of the oldeft 
Lodge ; ; 
GRAND MASTER. 
Two Stewards clofe the proceffion: 
Any ladies who attend are then introduced, and 
muficians repair to their ftation. On the pro~ 
on “reaching the Grand Mafter’s chair, the 
nd Officers are feparately proclaimed accords. 
Me to rank, as they arrive at that flation, and on 
pidesofna Malter’s beiig proclaimed, a grand 
mufic | is performed, which continues while 
f eee Bu made three times round the Hall, : 
cis ‘then placed in the center, on a crim-_ 
fon 1 velvet couch j and the Grafid Matter having 
ral en the chair, under a canopy of ftate, the Grand. 
ey icers, atid the Malteis and Wardens of the 
sodges, repair to the places previoufly prepared. 
fc their reception : : The three lights, and the gold 
and filvet pitchers, with the corn, wine and oil, . 
are placed on the Lodge, at the head of which 
tit ‘lands the pedeftal, with the Bible open, and. the, 
rt _ and. Compaffes laid thereon, with. the; 
Litution roll, ona crimfon velvet; cufhion, 

i | ate thus difpofed, an anthem js fung, 
au and 

and) THis atte OF rire “GREAT balk 

4 

:g2 «ILLUSTRATIONS 

and an exordium.on *Mafonry given ; pate which 

- the Archite& addreffes the: Grand Mafter in Ae ey 

elegant {peech, returns thanks for theyhonour ec n 
ferred on him, and furrenders up the implem nts 
which had been entrufted to. his care at laying 1 he ha 
foundation ftone, The Grand Mafter having ex- — 2 
preffed his approbation 0 of the Architeét's.condué 2 
an ode i in honour of mafonry is fung, accon 
nied by the band, after which the ladies 
for refrethment j, and fuch of the muficians 2 
not mafons retire, in order to entertain the le 1 
during their repatt. 

The. lo e ope tiled, ‘the buinel of mal 
is. refamed. “The G rand Secretary ‘fa 
Grand Mafter, that at 1s. the defign ‘of fe fae 
nity” to have the hall dedicated to Maloney 51 3. pe 
which he orders the Giand Officers. to afi i in th 
ceremony, during which ‘the Organ continues | ay- 
ing ¢ folemn mulic, “excepting only at the” ihters als 
of ‘Acdicatoee The Lodge i is Mindbvered, aid the 

afioh being made round it; “the Grane Ss 
Mitte? Havifig reathed the Eaft, te drigan is West) 

TO WioM BE ALL GLORY AND HONOUR," he # 
proclaims théthall “duly dedicated’ to Masonry i 
upon’ Which'the® chaplain’ fliews corn” over" th f ee f 
Lodgé! “The ona plays, andthe fendi 1 proce hd 

‘que 2 
bin, 

erty 

PORIMASONRY?:° -agg 

i s made round thé lodge, when, on the Grand 
Mafter’s arrival at. the Eaft, the»organ ‘is filent, 
and he declares the hall dedicated, as before, to 
7iRTUE; on which the Chaplain {prinkles. wine 
ot e lodge. ‘The organ plays, and the third pro- 
ais made round the. lodge, when, the Grand 
r having-reached. the Eaft, the mufic is filent, 
I the hall is dedicated to--UNIVERSAL BENE- 
LENCE; upon. which the Chaplain. dips his 
fingers in the oil, and. fprinkles it over the lodge’ 
at Seats dedication the Gtand honours are 
_ A folemn invocation is made to heaven, . 
anthem. fung 5 after which, the lodge is co- 
and.t the: Grand Matter. Tetires to, his, chair. 
he ladies being, returned; an ode for the occa« 
fi: sco app after, which, an ,oration is de. 
ed by the Grand Chaplain, which is fucceed- 
yan anthem. Donations for the charity are 
collected, the grand proceflion is refumed, 
2 a er marching three tines round the hall, pre+ 
eded by.the Tylers carrying the Lodge as at en-. 
ance, during “which the mufic continues to play. 
nd piece, the proceffion returns ta the place 
ence it fet out, where the laws of the order are. 
z fed, and the Grand Lodge is clofed in ample. 

ri n all the ea 
: The 

‘997 ILLUSTRATIONS 

oe Ceremony obferved at Funerals, according 7 
ancient Cuflom : with the; ab wt dot 
: cafion. 
No mafon can be interred seas the forr 
of the order, unlefs it be by his own {pe 
queft, communicated to the Mafter of th 
of which he died.a member; foreigners’ 
journers excepted; ‘nor unlefs he has-been 
vanced to'the third degree ‘of mafonry,: and’ 
this reftri@ion there can be no exception, 
crafts, or Mapieitices: are not entitled to” 
obfequies. hd 
- The mafter of a er having received 
of a Mafter mafon’s death, arid‘of his requeft 
be interred with the ceremonies of the erie 20 
the day and ‘hour for’thé funeral, and iffue: 
command | to fummon ‘the lodges if more-lodges” 
are expetted to attend, he muft make pay 
by the Grand’ ‘Seéretary’ ‘to the "Grand Minh 
his Deputy, ” to prefide ‘over fuch brethre mn 
‘other lodges as may afi’ in fotiing Wie’p 
fion, , who ate to be undér his diveQion or’ 
time; andall the brethren alah mutt be - 
perly clothed, - i Jb Galea 
-The aifpenttion being isbtatied: the: Mafter 
ey invite aS many ag as he? thinks pro 

Ty 
ick 
ee 

1 10M YA rA 

. » OF MASONRY, - 185, 

tnd the members of thofe. lodges may accompany 
| jotinen infor “r hut the whole ceremony 

nesens mourning, sath white aie" 
doves, and aprons, is moft fuitable. No 
fhould be diftinguithed with a jewel, unlefs 
officer of one of the lodges invited to at- 
form, and thé officers of the ‘lodges fhould 

cers of the lodge to whom the difpenfation 
anted, who are, moreover, to he diftinguithed 
white rods. 

hae The Funeral piesa eo 

The » brethren being. aifembled at. the houfe 
wi ere the body of the deceafed hes, the mafter of 
ne lodge “10. -which he. belonged opens the lodge 
‘third degree, with the ufual forms, and.an 
emis fung; »The:body being placed in the 
on a couch, and the coffin. in which it is 
<a : a 

amented with fafhes, and hatbands; as alfo. 

\436° - ILLUSTRATIONS 
laid being open, the mafter proceeds to the b ad 
of the corpfe, and the fervice begins. boa 
Master, ‘What man is he that liveth, a d 
‘fhall not fee death? fhall he: deliver his 
‘ from the hand of the grave 2) * 
~ * Man walketh ina vain fhadow, he hee 
Ps and cannot sien who: fhall pene hy 

} hie glory fhall not liana? after bin? 

~ * Naked he came ‘into the world, mid aid he 
¢ muftreturn :, the Lord gave, and the Lord ‘hath 
¢ wae away ; pore be the caries of she 

* our laft end be like his ! ! 
_ The brethren anfwer, Ai 
~ © God is our God for ever and ever;” ‘hen id 
4 be our 2 Sis even unto death Perr ; 

; a 

apon which he fey OO Bie OEE : salt | 
am Almighty Father! pia te tan we cor 

* the foul efour- inti’ brother’ 0» == 
Ass ee ea 

Ca 

: . OF MASONRY, 137 
td The ‘brethren anfwer three sini; giving Me 
grand: ‘honours each time, . 
i _ § The’ will of God is accomplifhed'’t fo be it.” 
_ The Mafter then repeats the following prayer : 
‘Mott glorious God! author of all good, and 
4 Sgivér of all mercy! pour down thy bleffings 
‘upon us, and ftrengthen our folemn engagements 
‘with the tics of fincere affeQion! May the pre- 
‘inffance of mortality remind.us of our’ ap- 

a ‘thee, the only refuge in time of need! that when 
e-awful moment fhall arrive, that we are about 
: "0 quit this tranfitory fcene, the enlivening prof- 
peat of thy: merey may difpel- the gloom of 

‘death; and after our departure hence in peace 
ay and in thy favour, we may be received into 
ae thine everlafting kingdom, to enjoy, in union 

a3 “"teward of a pious and virtuous life. Amen.’ 

ik An anthem’ being fung, the Mafter- retires to 
ot pedeftal, andthe ‘coffin is {hut up. An ora- 
_ ton, fuitable to the occafion,’ is delivered ; and 

the “Mafter recommending love and unity, the 

' proaching fate; and draw our attention toward 

‘wish the fouls of our departed’ friends, the jut 

aye 
Hh, ‘brethren j joi hands, and renew their pledged vows, 4 

2 a lodge is then adjourned, ‘and oe proceflion, 
foe place of interment, is formed ¢ 

~~ 

“pe 

Na 5 z € 

sgt, ILLUSTRATIONS =~ 

» The different-lodges rank according to femiot 
the j junior ‘preceding ; ; each lodge fomms-onet di 
ion, and the following order is obferved : 
The Tyler,, with his. fword ; A ie r , 

» .» The Stewards with white rods y thi i 
The Brethren, out of office, two and two 
The Secretary with a. roll; -. _ 
_ The Peasheckt, with his badge of. office fH 

H Senne and. Junior Wardens, hand in ha d; 
The Paftmafter ;-. . 
The Mafter 3. ; ee 
The pore to which the deceafed Brother 
pH ‘in the - following order; all : 
_ members having flowers or herbs. 

ie im their: hands 5 _ 
"¢ ‘Sapiens: 98 POR Tyler; 
ae Te, Stewards ; tia 
Masia Mufic [Drums muffled, and’ 
f covered. id sing HE 

i byes _ The Members of the Lodge's" Leth - 

“The Seaics: sans Joniose Wasdens rn 

so, {. The; Paftmafter; 4) 1) 

“The ie Hale Writing,. ona ‘cufhion, covered 

> sgblaghy cloth, carried by the oldeft ~~ 
Member of the. Lodge ; Kaze! 

G& ¥LS 

OER MASONRY): agp 

ae mts 4% ‘The Mafter.;... 4 
; di 5 ure Choirifters, finging an anthem 3 : 
The Clergyman ; : 

AEA the miignia psi 
a {words » crofled ;. 

A ee 
er 
a. 
- 
o 

Pall Bearers re 

OF Chief Mourner 5. . te 
Be Affiftanc Mourners ;, on 
_ Twos Stewards 5 $s : 
MRE A Tyler 5 3. 3 
tH One or two. lodges advance Se sas a ping mo. 
on begins, to the church yard, to prevent confuse 
, and make the: neceflary preparations. , The: 
i: bre tl ED 2 are not to defert their ranks, » ~er change 
places, but keep an, their different. departments. 
Vhen the prose arrives at the, gate of the 

= belonged, the, mourners, aed attendants 
br she rorpls., Balt till the members of. the’ other 

an “opening is made to receive them... They’ Me 
ance 0, the. giave ;- and the clergyman, and 
ficers of the aéting lodge taking their {tation at 

ie Readof the, grave, wath iehoelen on.each 
Roo? ~ Bde 

ago TLLU STRATI ONS 

- fide, and the mourners at the foot, thie fervice is 
refumed, ‘an ranthem fung, and the following e 
- hortation given an 
‘« Here we view a fisiting jtftande of the un- 

‘ certainty ‘of life, and the vanity of all hum y % 
‘ purfluits. The laf offices paid to the dead a re 
* only ‘ufeful as Ieétures to the living ; from th em 

K 
va Pd 

* we are to derive inftruétion, and confiderevery” 

* folemnity of this kind, as a ‘{ummons to prepare 
‘ for our apprdaching .diffolution. 
* Notwith{tanding the various mementos of mor- 
* tality with which we daily meet, 1 potwith ands 
‘ ing Death has eftablifhed his empire over all 
* works of nafure, yet, through fome unaccoun 
_ "able infatuation, we forget that we are born 
“edie. We: go on from one defign to anotl ic 
feo hope to hope, and ay out plans for the ems i 
* ployment of many years, till we are fudden jh 
* alarmed with ‘the approach of death, when e 
* leaft expe& him, and at an hour when we pros 
? bably conclude to be the meridian of our exi ae 
¥ ence. . aa 
1 * What are all the externals of raja, the pr 
gs of wealth, or charms of beauty, when nature 
paid her juft debt? Fix your eyes on the’ 
Bisene, and view life &ript-of her ormaments, 

‘ exp 

i >, -. 0 dow FOR Ue 

- OF ‘MASONRY. 14k 
a Ta * expofed im her natural meannefs ; you will then 

E Diab coll viticed! of the futility of thofe empty delu< 
of ‘fions. « In'the grave, all fallacies are deteé&eil, 

ri fall ranks! are levelled, and alt diftin&tions are 
“done ata 

a os Ea sie prefent example excite our moft feri- 
thi) Rte ‘thoughts, and firengthen our refolutions of 
' a *amehdinert. ‘AS life’ is uncertain, and all 
ee thy | purfuits. are vain, let us no longer poft- 
mié the ‘important concem of preparing for 
ernity 5 ; but embrace the happy moment, while’ 
_ ‘time and opportunity offer, to provide againft the 
_fgreat change, when all the pleafures of this world’ - 
| *ffiallceafe to’ delight, ‘and the refleAions ofa’ 
rte thats reayey ti comfort and confola~ 

LBS ~BRY ave $ tion,’ 

ye ILLUSTRATIONS. 

~ “let us fupplicate the divine grace, to enfui 

‘ ‘enabled fepotenny our 1 jouiney, ‘without 

2 § ‘trembling through thofe gloomy*manfions + 

" « that judgment will be prondéunced i in-our ° 

TES) vow 

‘tion. Thns our expeéiations will’ not. be fruf 
bps) nor we? hurried’ He! ct 

» * Leteus, while inthis’ flage mB! on 
bier wi ptopticty the. duighinars mage our pr 

‘our sitet 2 Then with. becoming all 

“favour of that eternal Being, whofe g 
3 and Kid know no bound; that heey 

‘or apprehenfion, to that far diftant — 
* whence no traveller returns. . By. the . 
“the divine countenance, we fhall. SW: 

‘all things:are forgotten; . and at the great. 
‘tremendaus day of trial_and retribution, w 
6, arraigned at the bar, of divin jutice, letus. 

“and that we fhall receiye our, reward, i in th 
* feffion- of an, immortal inheritance, wher 

* flows. in one continued ftzearn; and. no, x a 
* can check its courfe,” 

, 1 a 43 

Mai fer, and the ufual honours accompany: rites! 
| Masrse. * May we be ‘true: and. “see igs 
may we live and die in love !’ 
bl NSWER. ‘So moteitbe.’ ... aos 
Master. ‘. May we profefs what is (gouty 
pions always a€& agreeably to our athe oy Pa, 
: NsweR. ‘So moteitbe. _ 
siMaster. i May, the Lord, blefs u us, and wa 
Ne rus; and- may all our good intentions be 
_ * crowned with fuccefs)!’ i uated. ¢ 
Q) y: Answer. * So mote it be.” rs, 
a ar rhe Secretaries then advance, and throw aud 

Dae the + grave “with the whuah, formas while 

‘Glory be to Ged on’ ‘high ton teathe peace 4 
go od will towards sgl ; 

th, i, for evermore.’ taut 
e Mafter then concludes the ceremony at 
rave, in me ee words t 

ng. ‘ihe sheds: of free. and ‘scouted ma? 
atthe requeft of a brother on his. ata 
ey, his corpfe to the place of 
mentj;‘ and there to depofite « his remains 
with the ufual formalities, Tin 

24, ILLUSTRATIONS 

.* In conformity to this ufage, ‘and at thé 
be eee of our deceafed brothers whofe x 

pee his body to the earth wherice it came, 
* to offer up to his memory, beforé the-world 
* laft tribute of our ‘affection; ~ thereby” demon: 
* ftrating the fincerity of our pal efteem, 2 
* inviolable attachment to ee lati 0 
‘order, . 
+ With proper eats ‘therefore, “to the’ 
* lifhed cuftoms of the ‘country in’ which we 3 
* with due deference to our fuperiors- i in church 
. and fiate, ‘and with: unlimited good: ‘will, 
B. ‘mankind, we here appeat ‘clothed as 
and publicly ‘crave permiffion oto cexprels 0 ur 
* fubmiffion to peace and good government, 2 an d 
‘our with t6 ferve the interelts of mankind, Jn 
* vefted with the badgés of i immocence, “we 
‘bly bowsto-the ‘univerfal Parent; and (im 
*his bleffing on every: zealous’ endeavour. to rd 
_ Sambte peace aid gogd will,and pray bent per 
_ *everance in the principles of piety and virtu 
‘* The great Creator having been plealek gl ! 
* his mercy,’ t to:remove our worthy brothe: 
* the cares: ‘and troubles ee a ee exis 
ih 

SOF MASONRY 35 
“ ie ftate of eternal “duration; and thereby to. 
ken the: ‘chain by which 'we are united, man 
‘man: ‘may we, who furvive him, aiiticipate 
ir ap pproaching fate, and be more ‘Aréngly ce. 
ited in the ties of ution and friendfhip'; that, 
g the fhort {pace allotted to our prefent ex- 
lence, we may Wifely and wfefully émploy otir 
‘time ; andin'the reciprocal interdowrfé of kind © 
‘and Bicnly a&ts, mutually promote the welfare 
‘and happinefs of cach other. 

Unto the grave we refign the body of our de« 
eafed friend, there to remain until the general - 
‘refurreftion ; in favourable expe@tation thathis ~ 
+ mortal foul may then partake of joys which ~ 
*have been prepared for the righteous from the 
ginning of the world: And..may ‘Almighty . 
od, of his infinite goodnefs, at the grand tribu- 

ward Him, and all of us, and crown our hope 
with everlafting blifs in the expanded realms of a 
' boundlefs eternity ! This we beg, for the honour 
, 4 his name, to whom be glory, now and forever, 

“hus be fervice ends, and the ufual honours 

forin - 

o 

146 ILLUSTRATIONS, 

form to the place whence jit fet out, where i : 
ceffary duties are complied with, a pie aaa 
of mafonry is renewed. The infignia, ar 
ments, of the deceafed, if an officer ‘of a I 
. returned to the Matter, with the ufual cer 
after which the charges for regulating th 
of the: brethren are rehearfed, and the = 
ed in the third degree with a iin 

~ 

DP TPAC 
BOOK UL 

THE PRINCIPLES OF MASONRY EXPLAINED, 

SAS 8 Ofy kage & 

: 6th May, bass 
the at length, by the Fe of Mr. Collins, ; 

om I made saherdy for the reading of my 
aaa who i is become fo fond of TT é 

~ e t ‘ 
ah ~The 
- x ky a 

PSO ae 
te 
daria 

148 ILLUS TRATIONS : 

The MS. of wilitel this is a copy, appears to uw 
about 160 years old: yet (as yourlorgfhip will ob- 
ferve by the title) it is itfelfa copy of one yet 
more ancient by about 100 years : for the orig 
is faid to be the. hand-writing of K. He 
Where that prjnce had it, is at prefent an un 

(taken perhaps before the king) of fome one 0 
brotherhood: of niafons ; ite: whom he en 

“nority, and ‘bescato: th put a flop to toa perfea 
that had been raifed“againft them’: But 1m 
_ detain’ your lordthip. longer a sped ee 
site itfelf. « AE 

be admitted) the next time Ts go “to. 
that will be Ahortly. I am,, pet apt Sci 
ES My Lorp, AOE of fi. Fe 
eV Hit aves s moft ght & 
ee : And mol humble f es 
se ASEM ES LO 

ere 
ee ee te 

$ 4. pres 
"ys 23 Get 
- 

vT 

OF MASONRY. 449. 

ra ed the cap- Sone with rest joy, iti is demonttra- 
that none but thofe who had proved themfelves 
ps complete maftefs of their profeffion were 
ited t to this honour 5 j and indeed. the duties i in- 

i “The a paffage' of {cripture is rehearfed 
at opening, accompanied by folemn ceremonies : 

meBtTStoo no ras 

ee, PSALM xxiv. — 
“ The earth is. the Lord’s, and the fullnefs there- 
the world, and they hat dwell therein, For he 
founded i it upon the feas, and eftablifhed it 
. the floods. Who fhall afcend into the bill 
Bs Oe, Sette of 

Bae a | 
rs re Fd 

” as 
“150 ILLUS STRATIONS 
4/0 

of the Lord? and who fhall land i in his holy erate 
He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; 1 0. 
hath'not dift up +his foul unto vanity, nor 
deceitfully. He fhall receive the bleffing from 
the Lord, and righteoufnefs from the God of his 
falvation. This is the generation of them that feek 
him, that feek thy face, O Jacob. Selah. ‘Lift 
up your heads, O ye gates, and ‘be ye lift up, e 
everlafting doors, and the King of aod 

come in. Who is this King of glory? the L 
ftrong and mighty, the Lord, mighty in bai 
Lift up your heads, O ye gates, ever lift them 
ye everlafting doors, and the King of glo r 
‘come in. Who is this King of glory ? the Lo 
of hofts, he is the King of glory. Selah. ie 

*BROTHER, 

* 4 Your admittance to this degree of intbiney 
* a proof of the good opinion the brethren en 
* of your mafonic abilities. Let this confide 

* induce you to be careful of forfeiting, b 
*condu& and inattention to our rales, tha 
* which has. raifed you to the rank you m 
« fels, 

OF MASONRY, 151 

It is one of your great duties as a Moft Excel- 

- #Jent Mafter, to difpenfe light and truth to the 
uninformed mafon, and I need not remind you, 
_f of the impoffibility of complying with this obli- 
‘ gation without poffefling an accurate acquaint. 

TE 

: te ance with the le@ures of each degree. 

sary If you are not already completely converfant in 

eae 
yet 

_ -# all the degrees heretofore conferred on you,remems 
__ * ber, that an indulgence prompted by a'belief that 
 * you will apply yourfelf with double diligence to 

* make yourfelf perfeét, has induced the brethren. 

_-f to accept of you, 
* Let it therefore be your unremitting ftudy, to, 

* get fuch knowledge and information as may en- 

ue * able you to difcharge the important duty of Moft 

* Excellent Mafter, with honour to your. 

_ *felf, and fatisfaftion and advantage to the fra 

* ternity.’ 
The following paflage of feripture is readat 

iF slofing, accompanied with folemn ceremonies : 
2 Chron. vi, 13---21. ‘And Solomon kneel: - 

ed. down upon his knees before all the congrega- 

tion of Ifrael, and fpread forth his hands towards. 
ah _ heaven, and faid, O Lord: God of Ifrael, there is, 
eR RO God like thee in the heaven, nor in the earth 3. 
aN which keepelt coyenant, and fheweft mercy unto. 

thy, 

nae 

“862 ILLUSTRATIONS 

thy fervants, that walk before thee with all thei 
hearts: Thou which haft. kept with, thy. ferv. 
Daye my father, that which thou _ promifed 

ah 

yy 

$2) 243 

a 
filled it with thine hand as it. is this day. Ne we 
therefore, ( O Lord God of Ifrae! , Keep with t au} 

promifed him, faying, There, fhall not ‘fail thee 
man in my fight to fit upon. the throne. of Aad 5 i 
yet fo, that thy children take. heed to. their way | a a 
walk in my law, as thou, haft walked before if 

Helore to the prayer of thy eco and 
fupplication, 2: Lord my God, to hearken 

fore thee : That thine eyes may be open upon this 
“houfe day and night, upon the place whereof ¢ 

haft faid, that thou would put thy name the 
to hearken unto the prayer which thy. fervant 
eth towards this place. Hearken therefore 1 é 
the woziae of ba fervant, and of thy p 

22 Ae gare Se 

OF. MASONRY. «eB 

Hes, which they fhall, make asi this place : 
ax thou from thy. dwelling place, even from, 
Steere ; and when thou heareft, forgive,’ 

ak 

ee seeee — 

fi my It impreffes on. our minds the belief ar 

ore degree bese to ie ‘many cffentials ‘of 
‘the ‘craft, which were for the fpace of ‘470 years” 
buried i in darknefs: and without a kriowledge of 
‘which the niafonic charafter cannot be complete.” . 

Peatiive (F4: 
cals v 1. GO 

Phe following eee obferipune isi: read. at 
op ning : Seva olf 
2 The effilonians ili; 6---17.. * Ro: we com. 
-mandyou,. brethren, thatoye withdraw: yourfelves: 
m every brother that walketh diforderly: and” 
: “not after the tradition which ye received of use 
: ee Foriyourlélyes knowshow ye ought;stoy follow; us, 
for we: Dabangisioginlves not $sdidordealy among. 

= > GF YO. 

ae 3 ~ 
>: 

net 

ee). 24 

“454 ILLUSTRATIONS 

you. Neither did we eat ‘any man’s tea or 
nought, but wrought with labour and travel d 
and night, that we might not be chargeable to 
of you. Not becaufe we have not power, 
to make ourfelves an example unto you to fol ow 
us. For even when we were with you, this we com: 
manded.you, that if any” would not. work, nei her’ 
thould ye eat : For we hear there : are fome | 
: walk among you 1a ditenderts, working not at all, 
are buly-bodies. _ Now them ‘that are fuch, 
command and exhort, that with quietnefs they t 
i and, eat their own bread. ‘But ye, brethren, b 
_Mot weary in well doing. And if any obey noto 
word by this epiltle, note that man, and have 
company with him, that he: may be afhi dy 
count bim not as an enemy, but admonith hin 
a brother, Now the Lord of BSAC Hae 

mine own: hand) which is, the- token iat‘ 
epiftle : fo I write,’ a Mie 
ANG Ber wiVD th: OS Ste gen a eee 3 ig 
Ossenvartons on the: Seventh Lecrvi 

= ‘The Firft Seftion. i pia 

“The fir feGtion illuftrates the particule of th th 
cereinony of — ccc m ‘Royak Ar a- 
BIOy 

2 QF/MASONRY.; 355 

fe n fhould be, well verfed in this part of the lec. 
» as upon his acquaintance with it depends his 
! fulnefs. in the Chapter ; and without it, he will 
if be totaly unfit to fill, any kind of office, 

Pray i to be ‘made ufo of at the exaltation fs a 

| iu iy: ik Brother. 

a “Thou haft path US} re Lord our Goa, swith 
‘love; thou haft {pared us with great and’ 
ey SE cacsling patience, our Father and our King, for 
‘great name’s fake, and for our father’s fake, _ 
o trufted in‘thee, to whom thou didft teach the 
tatutes of life, that they might do after the’ fta- 
s of thy good pleafure witha perfect, heart; 
eee be thou merciful to us, O our Father! Merci- 
_ ful Father that fheweth mercy, have mercy upon 
Nitis s, we befeech thee, and put-underftanding into 
hearts, that we may underftand, be wife, hear, 
m, teach, keep, do, and perform allthe words 
of the doftrine of thy law in ‘love, and enlighten 
‘oO oo in thy commandments, and. caufe our - 
hearts to cleave to thy law, and unite them in the 
Ee, e@ and fear of thy 1 name, we will not be afhamed, 
0. ‘confounded, nér ftumble, for ever and. ever. 
« Becaufé we have trufted in thy HOLY,GREAT, 
FY) and TERRIBLE NAME, we will re- 
jeice, 

ays «so ILLUSTRATIONS 

~ ture every good Royal ‘Arch Mafon ‘is too wel 

a — 

~ -darknefs light” before themy and: <rodked 

_ flock of Jethro ‘his father in law, the prieft of 

joice and’ be ‘glad in thy falvation, and 
mercies, fe) Lord’ our God; “arid the ‘multi 
‘thy mercies fhall not forfake us forever : Hg l. 
And now’ make hafte and bring upon usab sf! 
fing, and peace. from the four- corners ‘of th 
earth ; for thou art a God that workelt alvation i 
and an chofen us out of every people aid Ie 
@uage } ard thot our King, ‘Has’ ciufed ‘us t 
cleave to thy great nante, in love'to praife thee, 
and to’ be united to thee, arid. to love thy. 
Bleffed art thou, O Lord God, who halt) 
thy people Ifrdel in love. > <9.) : 
‘The'application of the fattening’ texts. ook 

mnie with toneed any iuftration >) ve 
°Taiah sli; 46. “1 will bring the blind iby’ 

Way that 354 know not; I> will lead «them im 

paths that they have‘ not’ known? I willema 

ftraight: Thefe things will I’ do unto ‘them, an 
will tiot’ forfake, them.” alt or eyo img 
“Exodus * iti; 1 -+-6. . * Now * Mofés kep 

Midiani;"and-he led the lock to the back fide. of 
the defert,-and came to the mountain of God, even 
te 2 Horch. And the» angel of the Lord ,appe : 

oe 

OF MASONRY: 157° 
nt shim in a flame of fire out of the midft of a 
buth > and he looked, and behold, the buth burned 
‘fire; and the bufh was not confumed. And. 
fes faid, I will now turn afide, arfd. fee this 
t fight, why the buth is not burned, And when 
Lord faw that’ he turned afide to fee, God 
called unto him oiit of the midft of the buth, and 

aid, Mofes, Mofes. And he faid, Here am I. 
' phe faid, ‘Draw not nigh hither: put off thy 
s from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou 
tandett is holy ground. Moreover he faid, I ami 
} God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the 
God off Ifaac, andthe God of Jacob. _ And Mofes 
is face : for he was aftaid to look upon God.” . 
2 Chron. xxxvi. 11-+-20. “ Zedekiah was one 

k nd twenty years old, when he began to reign, and 
rei reigned eleven years in Jerufalem. And he did 
th at which was evil in the. fight of the Lord his 
¢ 4 and humbled not himfelf before Jeremiah ‘ 
the prophet, {peaking from the mouth of the Lord." 
And he alfo rebelled againft King Nebuchadnez- 3 
zar, who had made him {wear before God ; but he 
ed. his neck, and hardened his heart from 
ir unto the Lord God of Ifrael. a = : 

a5 

1538, ILLUSTRATIONS | 
** Moreovervall the. chief of the priefts, a 

inations of the heathen, and sellieed the hei 0 ¥ 
_ the Lord, which he had. hallowed in Jerufalem, 
And the Lord God of their fathers fent to them y 
his meffengers, rifing up betimes and fendi 
becaufe he had compaffion on his people, an anc 
his dwelling place. But. they mocked the 1 
_~ fengers of God, and defpifed his words, and | 
ufed his prophets, until the wrath of the J 
arofe againft his people, till there was no rem 
Therefore he brought upon them the King o! 
. Chaldees, who flew their young men with 
_+fword, in the houfe of their fanétuary, and had 
compaffion upon young man, or maiden, old 
or him that flooped for age : he gave them all in 
his hand. And all the veffels of ‘the houfe. 
God, great and fmall, and the treafures of 

a Oe eee 
ae ae 

tik Ani they gue the honfe of God, Y 
brake down the wall, of Jerufalem, and bin 
_ all the palaces thereof with fire, and deftroye : 
the goodly veffels ‘thereof, And then}. abate h 

OF MASONRY. 259 

z ie fons, until the reign of the kingdom of Perfia.”’ 

AM Ezra i, 1---3. _ ‘* Now in the firft year of 
ae ® Cyrus, king of Perfia, (that the word of the Lord 

; by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled) the 
\ Lord ftirred up the {pitit of Cyrus king of Perfia, 

. 
on he made a proclamation throughout all his 

i Soak of all his people ? his God be with him, and 
Tet him go up to Jerufalem which i is in ies and 

i Biealvs iii, 19--14. “ And Mofes faid unto God, 
aH B ehold, when I come unto the children of Hrael, 
and fhall fay unto them, The God of your fathers 

What is his name ? What fhall I fay unto them ? 
And God faid unto Mofes, lam tHat I am: 
And he faid, Thus fhalt thou fay unto the children 
: frac, I Amhath fent me unto you,” 

spent) }) ; Hiesdes 

_ Ton: where they were fervants to him and his — 

hath fent ‘me unto you ; and they fhall fay to me, - 

ee 

rt 
WOT ee SLEW AMS | 

* The Lord hath not appeared unto thee. And t 

~Andhe faid, A. rod. And he faid, Caft i it on the 

~-again as his other flefh. _ And it. fhall come 

the Voice of the firft fign, that they wall be 

+6 IULUSTRATIONS 

Exodus: iv, idbenens And Mofes anfwered, 
and faid, But behold, they will not believe 
nor hearken unto my voice: for they will 

Lord faid unto him,- W hat is that i in thine hand H 

ground ; and he cail it on the ground, and. bed 
‘came a ferpent; and Mofes fled from before it. 
And the Lord faid unto Moles, Put forth | 
‘hand, and take it by the tail. And he put 
his hand and caught’ it, andit became a ro 
his hand. ‘That they may believe that the | 
‘God of their fathefs,~ the God of Abraham 
God of Tfaac, and the God of Jacob, ha 
peared unto thee. 

« And the Lord faid furiheraioke unto 
Put now thine hand into thy bofom ;, and» he 
his hand into his bofom ; and when he took it 
behold, his hand‘was leprous as, fnow, «An 
faid, Put thine hand into thy bofom again: And 
he put his hand into his, bofom again, and plucked 
At out of his bofom, and behold; it was tun 

if they will not believe "thee, neither hear 

Me” Gy MASONRY: 4G 

P Bite: voice of the loage fign, And it fhall come 
bat _ to pafs, if they will not believe alfo thefe two 
— figns, neither hearken unto. thy voice, that thou 
Shalt take of the water of the river, and pour it 
upon the dry land: and the water, which thou 
takeft out of the river, fhall become blood upon 
a pee ary land.” ~ . 

‘ Haggai it, 12--9, 99,.. *‘In- the feyenth 
month i in the one and twentieth day of the month, 
came the word of the Lord by the prophet Haggai, 
aying, Speak now to Zerubbabel the fon of 
healtiel, governor of Judah, and to Jofhua the 
on of Jofedech, the high prieft, and to the refidue 
hi f the: people, faying, Who is left among you 
that faw this honfe in her firft glory ? and ‘how 

— parifon of it as nothing ? Yet now be ftrong, O 
~ Zerubbabel, faith the Lord, and be ftrong, O Jo- 
hita, fon of Jofedech the high prieft, and be 
: Strong all ye people of the land, faith the Lord,. 

hus eat the Lord of hofts, Yet once, it ie di 

and \ work: for I am with you, faith the Lord of” 
ri - hofts ; ; according to the word which I covenant. ; 
d with you geen ye came out of Egypt, oh IBY aes 
it remaineth among you: fear ye not.. se ° 

P.2 ~ “ll 

do ye fee it now ? is it not in your eyes in com- 

OP a a) ae 

ey 
Lode 

ae 

come, and I will fill this houfe with stony, aith 
the Lord of hofts. The filver is mine, and the — 
gold is mine, faith the Lord of hofts. The glo y 
of this latter houfe fhall be greater than of » ie 
former, faith the Lord of hofts : and in this place 
will I give peace, faith the Lord of hofts.” h 
“In that day, faith the Lord of hofts, will It te 

: thee, O Zerubbabel, my fervant, the fon of Sheal- 
‘tiel, faith the Lord, and will make thee as a fignet: 
“for I have chofen thee, faith the Lord of hofts.” 
Zechariah iv, 6---10. “ This is the word of he 
“Lord unto Zerubbabel, faying, Not by might nor 
power, but by my fpirit, faith the Lord of hofts. 
Who art thou, O great mountain ? before Zerub- 
babel thou fhalt become a plain, and he hall 
bring forth the head ftone thereof with fhoutjngs 
'erying, Grace, grace, unto it. Moréover th 
word of the Lord came unto me, faying, 7 

-fhalt know that the Lord of hofts hath a 
unto you. For who hath defpifed the day 

< eas 7 

OF MASONRY, 163 

 Hmall things ?. for they fhall rejoice, and fhall fee 
the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel with thofe 

ia Exodus vi, 2,3. “ And God fpake unto Mofes, 

“and faid unto him, I am the Lord: And I ap- 

peared unto Abraham, unto Ifaac, and unto Jacob 
_ by the name of God Almighty, but by my name, 
_ Jenova was I not known to them.” 

| John i, 1---5. ‘In the beginning was the 

_ Word, and the Word was with God, and the 
i HE Word was God. The fame was in the beginning — 
Hie with God. All things were made by him; . and 
ia: without him was not any thing made that was _ 
_ made. In him was life, andthe life was the light 

-ofmen. And the light fhineth in darknefs, and 

__ the darknefs comprehendeth it not. : 

Deuter. xxxi, 24---26, “ And it came to pafs 

' when Mofes had made an end of writing the words 
~ of this law in a book, until they were finifhed ; 
That: Mofes commanded the Levites which bare 

' the ark of the covenant of the Lord, faying, Take 
~ this book of the law, and put it in the fide of the 
~ ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, ‘that 
it ey be there for a witnefs again it thee.” “ie 

Exodus . 

ee the stop of the hill, with the rod of God int 

4 b is 
. 

164 ILLUSTRATIONS 

Exodus xxv, 21. .“ And thou thalt put d a e ' 
mercy feat above, upon the ark ; and in the ai rk 
thou fhalt put the teflimony that I fhall give thee. Hr 

Exodus xvi, 32---34. .‘ And Mofes faid, 
This is the thing which the Lord commandeth, 
- Fill an omer of the manna, to be kept for your 
neratiops ; that they may fee the bread where | 
" Thave fed you in the wildernefs, when I bro ght Bay. 
you forth from the land of Egypt. And M 2S 
faid nhto Aaron, take a pot and put an omer all 
~ ef manna therein, and lay it up before the L r 
- to be kept for your generations. As the Lord coms 
if manded Mofes, fo Aaron laid it oe beforeed the tef- 

“timony to be kept.” 
Numbers xvii, 10. “ And the Lord faid unt to 
* Mofes, bring Aaron’s rod again before the tefti 
mony, to be kept for a token.” isp 
Amos ix, 11. “In that day will I raifa up the 
tabernacle of David that 1s fallen, and clofe up# 
_ breaches thereof, and Iwill raife up his. ruins, 
f will build it asin the days of old.” 

~ Exodus xvii, 8---14. ‘‘ Then came Am: 
and fought with Ifrael, in | Rephidim. And 
5 fes faid unto Jofhua, choofe us out men, and go. 
ovt fight with Amalek : tomorrow I will ftan 

ox e 
per 

. OF MASONRY, 165 

and. So Jofhua did as Mofes had faid unto him, 
fought with Amalek : and Mofes, Aaron, and 
; Hur, went up to the top of the hill. And it came 
) pafs, when Mofes held up his hand, that Ifrael 
* » prevailed : : and when he let down his hand, Ama- 
lek prevailed. But Mofes’ hands were heavy, and 
they took a ftone and-put it under him, and he fat 
thereon ; and Aaron and Hur ftayed up his hands, 
aa the one on the one fide, and the other on the other 
i fide: ‘andhis hands were fteady untikthe going 
; down ofthe fun. And Jofhua difcomfited Ama_ 

ek and his people with the edge of the fword, 

nd the Lord faid unto Mofes,..Write this for.a 

Fhe Second Section. , 

Sa bis, Seftion’ contains much hiftorical infor- 
th septa Abbie beyond Na ited of 

I that rolpelity and happinefs ate the paving of, 
ety virtue and morality, | while difgrace and ruin fol- 
Sow the praétice of vice and immorality. "> 

eS We cannot better ilisftrate this feGtion, than by 

This 

166 ILLUSTRATIONS Pei 

This famous‘ fabric was. fituated on Mona 
Moriah, near the place where Abraham was z abou 
to offer up his fon Ifaac, and where, David. mel 
and appeafed the deftroying Angel. . It was! 
‘in the fourth year of the reign of Solomon th 
third after the death of David; four hundred 
‘eighty yeats after the paflage of the red fea, ia 
the fecond day of the month Zif, being the f 
month of the facred year which anfwers — 
21f of our April, in the year of the world 
and was carried on with fuch proigionss 
~ that it was finifhed, in ail its parts, in little 
‘than feven years, 

of Solomon, every sik of the building a whe- 
ther of ftone, brick, timber. or metal, 
-wrought and prepared before, they. were br 
‘to Jerufalem ; fo that the only tools made u 
jn ereéting the fabric, were wooden inftrum 
prepared for that purpofe. . The noife of the 
-the hammer, and every other tool of metal, 
confined to the Foreft of Lebanon: shoe 
timber was procured 5 and to Mount Libanus, ¢ 
_the plains and quarries of Zeredathab, whe 
flones were raifed, fquared, marked and ni mb 

M. 3029. Solomon dies, and the people 
ble and crown Rehoboam, King of all Ifrael. 
people by Jeroboam fue unto him fora ‘re« 
‘of fome grievances of which they-complain, 
hich Rehoboam returns a harfh and threaten- 
wer, and thereby alienates the hearts of 
f the tribes, who fall off from the houfe of © 
d, and eleé&t Jeroboam their king, by the flile © 
ing of Ifrael. Rehoboam reigns over the 

Me 

sof ise and Benjamin, with the title of if 

4 a prey to Salmanezar, 7, King of Affyria, 
in the feign of Hofea, King of Ifrael, be- 
d the city of Samaria, laid their country * 
Bs) and aeatly Eetipated their government, 

fabjcAion to the laws of the houfe of | i; 

\ 
$. 

ir deftrudtion. ee The. wy 

d whofe. impiety. and* efieminacy ended ae a 

came up againft Jerufalem, - and_ pillage 

and bringeth into the temple the golden ‘ 

i temple ;. and Hilkiah finds a copy of inet L be 
the law. 

_of gold, filver ve Rrine and the two braze i 

_ Feturns to Perfia.. 

2168 ILLUSTRATIONS | 

“The King. of. Judah: kept poffeffion’ | ° “th e ct 
dnd fmple of Jerafalem; until its" deftrustio ail ‘ 
A..M. 3033... This year, being the fift fifth . of 

iw 

Rehoboam’s. reign, Shifhak, King of | iy 

temple of all the holy veffels. 
A. M. 39063. Afa ;reftoreth the true wo: 

which he and his father had ie ier and 

cated. ee 
A.M. 3380. Jofiah gives reid to repa 

lars ; ‘thofe who efcape the {word -are ie 

aie the shat fk theréof to De an 

- A. My 3468. Cyrus becomes tial th 
Whole perton empire, eek the dealt of: Gamby 

OF MASONRY. 169 

- of Media, by contra& in marriage. This year 
ling iffues his famous edi&: “ Thus faith 

+ velfels which htebivbllaaniokcie had taken 
away from Jerufalem. -Agreeable to this edié 
4 Jews return to their own country. 

ial . M. 3469. This year (the Jews being re- 
a n te they appoint Levites to overfee the work 

CAA ae | 

; _. Charge toa newly exalted Companion, 

va “a CoMPANION, 

By the confent and afliftance of the members 

iis Chapter, you are now exalted to the fub- 
saree Penonbte sis hash of a woes Ke Arch Ma- 

1Q = ie 

Egyptians; ; thinking that: apie: vs could fab 

costes was preffed, advanced to his relief, with 

1470 ILLUSTRATIONS, 

Having attained. this degree you have arrived 
at the fummit and perfeétion of ancient mafonry 
and are confequently entitled to a full explana- 
tion of the facred myfteries of the order. ii 

i$ 
“Alier along fone of important events: babii, 

lig eit ddec rar king of Babylon, hav 7 
ing taken poffeffion of Jerufalem, and imprifone 
Jehoiachim, their king, elevated his uncle Zede-_ 
kiah to the throne, binding him by a folemn oath, 
neither to make innovations, or take part with the Dy 
Egyptians. + 
“At the end of eight years Zedekiah violated bis 
oath to Nebuchadnezzar, by taking part with the 

to. the fiege i Sd agti Pharaoh Scania how 

OF MASONRY, 19s: 

| 
ets hy view: of raifing the fiege.. Nebuchadnezzar has | 

ving intimation thereof, would not wait his ap- 
p, Papas but proceeded.to give him battle, and in 
one conteft droye him out of Syria. This cir- 
E ‘cumftance fufpended the fiege. 

In the ninth year of Zedekiah’s reign, the king 
a paiylon again befieged Jerufalem, with a large 

Mie - firength to_ conquer it; but the situs though en. 
feebled by famine and peftilence, did not yet yield, 

Fe. -oufly ; The Babylonians completed their works, 
having raifed towers all round the city, fo: as. to 

7 - Zedekiah, {eeing the; ‘ec enter the. ere 
Hi it -abfconded by a narrow pafs, to the defert, with 
ae his officers and: friends: But advice of this being 
"given to the Babylonians, they purfued themearly 
we the ee: and furrounded them near. Jericho, Sac e 
; where. 

Af ‘In the'eleventh year the fiege went on vigor- 

179 ILLUSTRATIONS 

where they were bound, and carried before the | 
king, who ordered his wives and children to be ; 
puttodeath in his fight ; and then ordered Zede- j 
Kiah’s eyes to be put out, and himfelf eer, i 
duéted in chains to Babylon. j! 
After this vitory, Nebuchadnezzar aifpatch- 
ed his principal officer, Nebuzaradan, to Je- 
rufalem, to ranfack and burn both palace and 
temple, to raze the city to the ground, and con- 
duét the captive inhabitants to Babylon; this — 
order he accordingly executed. Among the cap- 
tives were the following perfons of eminence: : 
Seraiah, the high prieft; Zephaniah, next in rank; 
the Secretary to the King, three principal reese 
‘of the temple ; feven of the kings chofen friends, _ 
and other perfons of diftin€tion. ad, 
In the feventieth year of the captivity of the 
Jews, and the firft of the reign of Cyrus, king of © 
Perfia, he iffued his famous ediét, purporting that 
the God adored by the Ifraelites, was the eternal 
Being through whofe bounty he enjoyed the regal 
dignity ; and that he had found himfelf honorably 
mentioned by the prophets of ancient date, as the 
perfon who fhould caufe Jerufalem to be rebuilt, 
and reftore the Hebrews to their former ftate of 
grandeur, and independency: he therefore 
gave 

we em, 

~ 

So bits i PS gees Sates 

) 76 Chem) FM TS Pe) eee Ae ee, 

1 
-ws; 

West dh 

OF MASONRY. 173 

gave orders for the releafe of the captives, with 
his permiffion to return to their own native coun, 
try, torebuild the city, and the houfe of the Lord. 

The principal people of thetribes of Judah, and 
Benjamin, with the priefts and levites, immedi- 
ately departed for Jerufalem ; but. many of. the 

Jews determined to remain.in Babylon, rather than 

 velinquihh the poffeflions sts had obtained in that 
city. 
4 _. The Jews who accepted ne propofal of Ryne 
4 _ for rebuilding the city and temple, applied them- 
 felyes with the greateft induftry to form the foun- 
dations thereof, but had made no.confiderable pro- 
_ -grefs, when application was made, by fome of the 
neighbouring nations, requefting the princes and 
4 governors, who had the direétion of the work, to 
_ ‘prevent further proceedings. The most dtrenuous 
__oppofers ofthe intended ftruéture were the \Chu- 
ray. thites, who refided on the other fide of the river, 
_ sand whom Salmanezar, King of. Affyria, hhadled 
_ to repeople Samaria, after he had eee My 
sraelites. 

Confiderable bribes and flattering, sar iiliag with. 
intjmations that awakened their jealoufy of the 
_- growing power.of the Jews, calling to mind.,their 
if “grandeur. and .pride.in former\times, prevailed. up- - 
aaa Qe on 

Nit 
Si 
1 
. 

174 ILLUSTRATIONS | 

on the princes atid’ rulers to negleé& the execution 
of the important undertaking. 

Cyrus being at this time engaged in a war againft 
the Maffagetes, was entirely unacquainted with Bt 
the fufpenfion of his commands ; he at length fe y 
a viétim to the rage of war, and the government 
was aflumed by his fon Cambyfes, who foon after 
his return from the conqueft of Egypt, died in the 
city of Damafcus, and the government was trauss 
ferred to the Magi, who held the adminiftration — 
one year; at the expiration of which period, Da 
rius, the fon of Hyftafpes, was advanced to the” 
throne by the feven Satrape, or the héads of the 

feven principal Perfian families, with the conte nt 
‘of the people. . 

From ancient hiftory, and the siaditione off 
anceftors, we learn, that at this time the Jews who 
had beeh the chofen people of God, had abandon. _ 
ed themfelves to the moft difgraceful felfifhnefs; — 
each one being ardently engaged in amaflingto 

—himfelf treafures, and procuring * enjoyments, | 
which had no end in view, beyond his ot 
perfonal gratification, : Cie 

Then came the word of the Lord by Hag goal, 
the prophet, faying, Is it time for you, O ye, | 

- +i 
ore 

OF MASONRY. 175 
wafte ? Now therefore, thus faith the’ Lord of 

-hofts, confider your ways ; ye have fown much 
_and bring in little ; ye eat, but ye have not enough ; 

. 
on 

fi 

3) 
“ if 
ae 

| uit 

it 

} _yedrink, but ye are not filled with drink ; ye 

. clothe yourfelves, but there is none warm;. and 

he that-earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into 

a bag with holes. Thus faith the Lord of hofts, 
Ney confider your ways, go up to the mountain, and 
__ bring wood, and build the houfe, and I will take 

sh pleafure i in it. 
“Then was ftirred up the fpirit of Haggai, the 
i. prophet ; of Jofhua the fon of Jofedech, the high 
prieft ; of Zerubbabel the fon of Shealtiel, and of 
_ all the remnant of the people; and they came and 
did work in the houfe of the Lord of hofts, their 
ny ' God. 
i It was at this time that fome of our moft facred 
andi important myfteries, which had long lain hid- 
Hi den in darknefs, and concealed from the craft, 
t were difcovered and brought to light, by our three 
is i firt Grand Mafters of the V. 

Thefe ape rites and ineftimable fecrets 

‘| 

we re exped and truft, they will be regarded i you 
But, with 

“y6 ILLUSTRARIONS 

with the fame veneration, and tranfimitted with the — 
_ fame {crupulous purity to your fucceffors. _ 
No one that refle&s on the ceremonies of 
ing admiffion into this facred place, but muft be 
forcibly ftruck with the important leffons vit ee 
they teach us, yar 
In the lower degrees of Mafonry we are 3 
cularly. inftru&ed. in the wifdom, firength 
heauty of morality, in this we are taught fecn 
and a veneration of Deity, with every . other 
tue, that can adorn human nature.—Her 
difcover the fource of all thofe virtues which 
have fo often been told it is our duty to pra 
Here we have every additional inducemen 
continue to the end, unweary in well doing. 
here we are bound to each other by themoft facr 
ties, not only to promote each others good, but 
alfo, to prevent every evil, its eer admonition is 
’ and reproof. am 
As it is our fixed Astetaitaten as well as ot ff 

OF MASONRY. ne 

les of our order, and fulfil the facred obligati- 
ns ofa Royal Arch Mafon., While fach are © 

jut lukewarmnels, iaticunion ok inepieedt but zeal, 
delity ed affection, wal be the diftinguithing 

3: 

bbs) 23 Bie Architeat of: Univerfal Nature, who, 
by thine Almighty Word, didft {peak into being 

the ¢ ftupendous Arch of Heaven, and for the in- 
ae and pleafure of thy rational creatures, 
‘og 

adorn us with greater and leffer lights 
sreby magnifying thy power,, and endearing thy RSS 
guornels a8 

innocence and his happinefs, thou didft fill 

ary 
ah 
aatees 
>; 

48 ILLUSTRATIONS 

unto him, the powers of reafoning, and cap 
of improvement and of pleafure. We thank 
that amidft the pains and calamities of our prek 

bled, and for all the lens we have de 
from it. We thank thee thou didft firl i in 
us to feek this fource of improvement ; and 
cularly that the few here affembled before 
have been favoured with new inducements, 
laid under new and ftronger obligations to vit- 
tue and holinefs. May thefe obligations, Ohb fs~ 
ed Father, have their full effe& upon us. Fes 
us, we pray thee, the true reverence of thy g 
mighty and terrible name. Infpire us with 

— and unfhaken refolution in our holy purfuit 5, 

‘ net Give us grace diligently to fearch thy word in the 
_ . Book of Nature, wherein the duties of our hi 

OF MASONRY. 179 

Ht} ‘May the folemnity of the ceremonies of our infti- 
tution be'duly impreffed on our minds, and have a ° 
lafting and happy effe& upon our lives. Oh thou 
Mi who didft aforetime appear unto - ‘thy fervant 
is Mofes in a flame of fire out of the midft of 
it " a obufh, enkindle we befeech ‘thee, ~in ‘each 
Hite our hearts a flame of devotion to thee, of love j 
to each other, and of charity to all mankind. May 
; allthy miracles and ‘mighty works fill us with the 
dread, and thy goodnefs imprefs us with the love 
Agee niga name, Rides aati to <i Lord be 

‘and night before thee as a facrifice of a fweet 
gots favour, well piecing unto thee. And 

CLOSING. 

_ 

" folded to us, and to praétice all thofe moral 
out of the Chapter which we are a 

the Mon Excellent High Prieft ; hie ei 

f§ By the ‘power of the Supreme High 
may we be pnetteds by his ftrength'may, v 

incited, fe pean the obligations he rs ned 
on us; to keep inviolably the myfteries h 

So. mote it gh Amen,” - nt : 
uy iD #°R z 7 sees) dt 

OF MASONRY. 18t 

| SECT. VIL 
OBSERVATIONS on THe ORDERS oF 
_ “ KNIGH' NS TEMPLARS, anp KNIGHTS 
OF MALTA. 
| -LTHOUGE: thefe-degrees: compofe no part 
of the fyftem of Mafonry, yet; as they are 

 potiat prefent’conferred on any but Mafons, and, 

" as ‘many encampments: are eftablifhed ‘in different 
i parts of the world, under the fandtion of Mafons” 
_ Bodges, ‘it gts not be unufeful to ae a fketch of 
their hiftory: - 
+ Accordiig to'the Abbe dé Vertot, the order of 
Knights of Malta, who were orignally called Hof 

aa ; pitallers of St.° Jolin, of Jerufalem, took’ its rife 

about the-year-1099 from which time’to the year 
__ 1118, their whole employment was works of cha-’ 
_ gityy and taking care of the fick. 
© Some’time after the eftablifhment ‘of this order, 
nine gentlemenfof whofé names two only remain on 
record,viz.Hugho dePaganis and Godfrey Adelman) 
_ formed a fociety to guard and protect the chriftian 
> pilgrims who travelled from abroad to yifit. the 

ie holy fepulchre. « 

: esa came - R Thefe 

ate, ILLUSTRATIONS 

Thefe men were encouraged by the Abbot of 
Jerufalem, who afligned them and their compan- 
4ons a place of retreat in a chriftian'church, called 
the church of the holy temple, from which they 
were called Templars, and nat from, the temple of 
Jerufalem : that haying been deftroyed by Titus 
Vefpafian,982 years before, the foclety, of ' Recaps 
_ was inftituted. 

The fociety increafed rapidly, and was much re- 
fpe€ted but had neither habit, order, or. mark, 
of diftin€tion, for the fpace of nine years, when 
pope Honorius II, at the requeft of Stephen, Pa- 
triarch of Jerufalem, laid down a rule and manner 
of life for them ; and ordained that they fhould be 
clothed in white ; to which garment pope Euge- . 
nius III. added. a red crofs, to be worn on the 
breaft, which they promifed by a folemn oath to 
obferve forever. 

Incited by the example of the Knights. Templars, 
about the year 1118 the Ho/pitallers alfo took up 
the profeflion of arms, in addition o their original 
charitable profeffion; accupying themfelves at 
one time in attending upon the fick, and at others 
‘in aéts of hoftility againft the Turks and . Saracens. 
_ At this time they took the name of Knights Hof- 
pitalleys. Bit 

GE'MASONRY. — 183! 
. Both Ordérs flourifhed and encreafed daily; but 
* that of the templars, though the youngeft ofthe 
two, having from its original eftablifiment been 
wholly employed in -the profeflion of arins, was’ by 
- many -efteemed ‘to be the: moft honourable; and 
therefore many noblemen, princes, and perfons ‘of 
the higheft diftinGtion; who thought«the férvice of 
” © tending the: fick too fervile an employment, enhter- ~ 
éd themfelves amongft the Knights Templars, iw 
preference to the other order:> 
* Both orders, for years, gerierally took the field 
together, and, as well by themfélves as in conjunc- 
tion: with the’ troops of the Crufades, ‘won 
many battles, and’ performed prodigies’ of valour. 
» ~The emulation, however, which fubfifted between 
- them often occafioned warm difputes, which rofe 
to fuch a height as produced frequent fkirmifhes 
betweer detached parties of the two orders. This 
occafioned the pope and the refpective “grand 
' mafters to interfere ; who in a great meafure fup- 
-~ preffed thefe quarrels 5 ; but the knights of the dif-- 
‘> ferent orders ever afterward: continued to view 
. each other with jealous eyes. 
Some time after theferdifficulties were. thus pat- 
' tially fupprefled, the Turks aflembled a great force 
3 : ; and. 

CADSP As AS De | 
tree 

134 ILLUSTRATIONS 

and drove the whole of the’chriftians out of Palefs 
tine. ‘The lait fortrefs they had-poffeflion of was — 
that of St. John d’ Acre, . This was long and brave- _ 
"ly defended by the Knights Templars-againft their — 
befiegers. The Turks, however; at laft forced 
three hundred knights, being all that -remained.of — 
the garrifon, to take refuge in a ftrong tower, to 
which alfo the women fled for fafety.. | The Turks — 
hereupon fet about undermining it,, which they 
in a fhort time fo effe€tually accomplithed, that the _ 
knights faw, in cafe they held out any longer, they u 
muft all inevitably perith. They therefore capitu- 
lated, ftipulating, among other things, .that the 
honour of their women fhould not _be :violated.— 
Upon this, the, tower being: opened the Turks 
marched in; but in.total breach of the terms. of 
capitulation, they immediately began to offer vio- 
lence to the women. ..The, enraged knights in- 
{tantly drew their fwords, hewed in pieces all the 
Turks who. had entered, fhut the gates. againft 
thofe which remained without, and refigned them- 
felves to inevitable death, . which’ they, foon met 
with, by the tower being undermined and thrown 
down upon their heads. 

After: 

. OF MASONRY. 185 

After this defeat, the two orders feund an af- 
‘fylum in the ifland of Cyprus; from whence, 
after fome time, the Knights Templars, finding 
their number fo diminiftied as to leave no hopes of 
effecting any thing towards the recovery of the 
holy land; without new crufades (which the chrif- 
tidn princes did not feem inclined to fet on foot) 
returned to their different commanders in the 
_ yarious parts of chriftendom. 

From this time the two orders féparated 3 the 
Knights Hofpitallers remained a while at Cyprus, 
from whence they afterwards went to Rhodes,.. 
and thence to, Malta; which. name they then. af- 
fumed... The Knights Templars difperfed them- 
felves‘thtoughout all Europe, but ftill enjoyed. 
ptincely revenues; and were extremely wealthy. 

Vertot fays, that Pope Boniface the 8th having 
engaged in a warm difpute with Philip, King of 
France, the two orders, as’ had .too frequently 
happened before, took oppofite fides. . The Knights. 
of Malta declared in favour of King Philip, whilft 
the Knights Templars ‘efpoufed the caufe. of the 
Pope. This conduct, Philip, partly from a revenge- 
- ful difpofition, and partly from the hope of getting - 
- poffeflion of the vaft wealth of the Knights, never 
R2- could. 

185 ILLUSTRATIONS 

could forgive ;_ but formed, thenceforward, the 

A 

defign of fupprefling the order, whenever a; PLOpER’ 
opportunity fhould offer. This, however, did not 

occur until after the.deceafe. of Pope Boniface. i 
Immediately on the death -of that, Pontiff, the 

Cardinals affembled to cleét his fucceffor ; but;party 

difputes ran’fo high in the conclave, that there 
feemed no probability of again. filling, the. Papal 

chair very fpeedily. At length, through the in- — 
trigues and machinations of the friends of Philip, i 

the Cardinals were all brought ,to confent, to the 

eleGtion of any prieft that, he fhould recommend 

. to them, 

This was the datling obje& the Monarchy hed in 
view: this being accomplifhed, he immediately 

_ fent for the archbifhop of Bourdeaux, whofe am- 
bition he knew had ro bounds, and who would 

hefitate at nothing to gratify it; and- communi- 
cated to him the power he had received of nomi- 

0 

nating a perfon to the Papal chair, and promifing it 

he fhould be the. perfon, on his engaging to per= 

form fix conditions. The . archbifhop greedily 
fnatched at the bait, and immediately took an oath 

“on the facrament to the faithful performance of - 

the conditions. Philip then laid open to him five 
rin : of 

OF MASONRY. 187 

~ of the conditions, but referved. the fixth until after; 
the archbifhop’s coronation as Pope; which foon 
_ took place in confequence ofthe recommendation, 
of the King, to the conclaye, and the new Pope 
took upon himfelf the name of Clement V. 
4 Vertot goes on.to fay, that a’ Templar, who was 
faid. to have apoftatized from the\Order, and.a citi- 
zen of Beziers, having been apprehended for. fome 
rime, and committed together .to.a dungeon, for 
want of a prieft, confefled cach other... That the 
“citizen having heard the Templar’s confeflion, in ; 
_order to fave his own life accufed the Order: to 
King Philip ; charging them on the authority of 
- what his fellow prifoner had told him, with idola- 

ah try, fodomy, robbery, and murder; adding, that 

the Knights Templars being fecretly Mahometans, 
each Knight, at his admiflion into.the order, was 
obliged to renounce Jefus Chrift, and to {pit on 
__ the crofs in token of his abhorrence of it. Philip, 
_on hearing thefe accufaiions, pardoned the citizen, © 
and difclofed to the Pope his fixth condition, which 
_ was the fuppreffion of the otder of Knights Tem- 
_plars. beers 
Not only every Knight Templar muft know. to 
2 certainty the abfulute falfehood. of thefe charges, 
2 but 

oe 

‘ 
‘ 

8% ILLUSTRATIONS 

‘but every unprejudiced reader of Vertot’s hiftory Lee ike 
$ ‘aut alfo perceive that the whole of their 2 ace 

fuppreffiig the order, and getting pofleffion 
their vaft.riches in his dominions. It is therefo 
ugipnong rio Ae ee ae 

pardon, wa¢ pee on to make a of f 
confeflion- having: been made to him me the ' 
api (i aah Hacdy: 
. The. hiftorian « onal to a “that in. 
-quence of this accufation; the Knights Tem 
in France, ‘arid other: parts of the Pope's’ domite 
ions were: imprifoned by his order, and put to’ tlie if 
tmoft exquifite tortures, to maké them cor fefs 
themfelves guilty They, however, bore | 
tortures with the moft heroic: fortitude, perl 
tothe laft in afferting their- own: innocence, and 
‘that.of their order: Pubes 3 bey nah 
In addition to thefe: proceedings, Pope Clement hee 

in the year 1312, iflued his bull for the ann ihi 
"tion of the order of Knights - Teimplats, wh ic h 
ee to be aubyplitier throughout” blbig co pun D 

a 

OE ‘MASONRY. 489 
bi-chriticndoni:. \He'at ‘the fanie: ‘time: gave “their 
; “pollen to the Knights of Malta,’ which ‘appro- 
piation of the: ‘Templars eftates was affented'to by 
oft of the foyereigns in Europe} and thete ‘is 
ow, extant, amongft the Englith ftatutes,-an aa 
yarlianient, whereby, after fetting forth thatthe ' 
er of © ‘Templars - “has been fuppreffled, their »pof- 
ons. in'England- are confirmed to the Knights. 
TI 3 9200: donee! oa ee ae 
nt Ire ca however, further iy, thatin Gesnatiy) 
the hiftorians of that nation relate, that Pope Cle- 
i ment, having fent his bull for abolithing the order. 
i e archbifhop of, Metey,. for him to, enforee, 
baPesints, tummoned sleds clergy together, 
it the publication might be made-with: greater 
Hae munity ;, and that, they were fiddenly. furprifed’ 
Bathe, entry. of. Wallgraffor Count Sauvage, one 
he principals of the. Order, attended: by twenty 
i, her bate dada armed, van: - in’ their: rea 
|The. Count Agdoied, ie was ‘not come: to “do 
vio ence to any body,’, but), having heard of = the 
againft his Order, came ‘to. infift' that’ the ap- 
/ which they. made from - that decree to the 
J Council’ and the fuccéflor of Clement, thould ° 
SRS Oa 3 be 

se 

190 ILLUSTRATIONS! 

_ be receiveds read, and publifiéd. » This he Pp fee 

_ fo warmly, - that. the; archbifhop, not thinkin 
_ proper:to refufe: men whom she faw armed, 
plied. He fent»thé appeal afterwards’ t 
_ Pope; who ‘ordered him ‘to’ have’ it examitied in 
- council’ of! his: provinee.’ Accordingly” 
-)pwas ‘called, andvaftera’ lengthy ‘trial, and 
Ain akan sleen which were. then ‘obferved, tht 
prars of that province-were. declared. inno 

_ the crimes wh ciegiavend then.» . 

» Although the: Templars-were thus’ deci: 
-nocent, itdoes not appear that‘ either their’ 

_ fions or their government, as'a diftingt: order, . 
reftored-; but that* their’ eftates’ in’ the’ C 

_ Empire were: divided: between: the. Knigh 

_ Malta and the- Teutonic Knights ;*to’ the 
which orders; many: Knights Templars -afte 

. joined themfelves,. This appears altogethe 
« bable from the following cireumftance, viz. 
- munqueftionable,, that the. habit, of the 
-. \Demplars was originally white; But we now, 
~ferve they diftinguifh themfelves by ‘the 
colouras the Knights of Malta, viz. lacks 
oe bate paniion be accounted for i in be iar ny 

‘3 

OF MASONRY. | apr 

SES Re EK.) oie opal 
‘ si9 . Me 
4E_order of Knrenrss of the Hoty Srrun-_ 
- CHRE was inftituted’in the year 1219.— 
uniform was:a red crofs, and their oath, to _ 
nd the Sepulchre of ‘Chrift; upon the ¢xtinc- 
of this -order,' many- -of creed oe ‘the 
isofMalta. > | St 
| Knicuts of Turons, or ALLEMAGNE, 
a white garment, with ablack crofs. 
aegis of CALATRAVA, a black garment ; 

. Kyicurs df! he Radibaiaving ho: 

2 ‘doable sole. 
: Knicwrs of the Morner of Curist, a 
red Sol refle&ted with gold. 

a ‘ , ‘ The 

garment with a black crofs.. aE Son. ‘ty HH 

ig2r, ILLUS TRATIONS 

The Knicuts of the Bann wore a band of three 
fingers width, faftenéd on the ieft fhoulder, and 
brought over the breaft, under the right arm. ; 

Ther Knicurs of the -ANNUNoFATION Off the) 
Vircin Mary .wore:ajcoliar made-cf plates of 
gold and filvery with a) pistuse of.the ihe 
pendant thereto, 

The, Kricurs of Sr. Ddaesitess worea wrk oft 
gold, woven like little fhells, and a pidture,of St), 
Michael. pendant, thereto. 

The Knicurs of; Sr. SrEPHEN wore a» black, 
garment, with a red, crofs. ; 

The Kyicuts of the Hoty . GHosr, wee 
dove,, on the ,middleyofa crofss 

All, thefe- orders of Knighthood: are but of alk 
day, compared to Free Mafonry, and fall far fhort 
of the beauty,.) hanmony;. univerfality; and utility 
of that noble inftitution. ° 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

8 2MOLT A 1793. 7 wie t 

ere utarto WwW sk Wi ht Sil it 

 ALLUST RATIONS | 

de pa 3 ae on : 

0 eb a 

ef TED . ONT 
ye IE ret e) Be tg t ae ew ti Rae 
it nn 
B 0 O K 0 Ae ee 

8 oF. am, al bas 8% or wasn a 

IN, AMERIC 

EEMASONS’ lodges i in America arene 
Bt Tecent tdate. ; Mersin we the beft infor- 

‘ehh wa i ‘bees Province of Soke sax 4 
“(MASS ACHUSETTS: | A 
“ss Jouy’s Seuren Lovee. Sat: 

ng in oon a warrant was os jeaa a: the : 
Salle S : Right 

Nea 

194 ILLUSTRATIONS 

Right Honorable and Moft Worthipful, Ax 
ny, Lord Vifcount Mowracur, Grand Matt 
Mafons in England, dated the 3oth of April, By 
appointing the Right Worhhipful weg 
Grand Mafter i in! North America, with fi ill 
“and authority to- lanpatelt his deputy; and 
mafonic officers neceflary for forming a 
Lodge ; and alfo to conftitute Rodgers of Fr 
Wiis sie Mafons, as often as ‘occafion thou 

hs ire. 

Flim Bs 

mp merow * Fabius 

In confequence SF this ora the Gr id 
_ Mafter opened a Grand Lodge in Botton, on th % 
* goth of July,’ 1733) in due® form; ° and -appointe 2 
the Right Woffhipful Andrew Belcher, ee geil g 
. Grand, Matter; the ‘Worfhipful Thomas Ken: e 
_and John Quann, Grand‘Wardens., Thus: formed, sh 
pop application sailt by Silly? Hier e i 

another by,,the maine ue the. Pet 7 Lodge ea 
cpbhsangs fame, Cueriag & io nepesied vs 

: hitiok 

(OF MASONRY. * 199. 

Since their-organization, this Grand Lodge have 
_ gtanted. Warranits; of sacrament ances to Lodges in. the 
a _ following placeds vizs . 

‘ Portfmouth, N, H.. 

Charlefton, S. C.. 
Antigua, RON 

f Newfoundlandy ‘“ 

Newport, R. I. 

Annapolis, . Maryland, 

_ New-Haven, 

Ste s 

a 

_ New-London, , 
_- Middletown, . 

- Crown. Point, ... 

Providence, Riotils 
Louifbourg, 

 Matter’s Lodge, R, - 
nae Quebeck, 
: Halifax, 

“Marblehead, | 
Norwich, ., 

Salem,, 
Virginia, 

urinam, q 

. St.Chriftopher’s,..-; 

Barbadoes, 
Elizabethtown, Maryl.. 
Hartford, 

Wetterly, 

Falmouth,- ; 
Pitt County, N, Ce 
Newburg, — ; 
St. John’s, News! - 

_ -Wallingsford, 

Nantucket,, 
Guilford, 

. Princeton, N, J. 

sds Car HS a 

MassacuvusErrs.. 

196, ILLUSTRATIONS 
MaAssicnustrrs .Granp Lovex. 2% 

In 1755 alnumber:of Brethren refiding in Bott 
who were Ancient Mafons, in confequence of aot 
petition to the Grand Lodge of Scotland, received 
a deputation, dated’ Nov. 30, 17525 from SitoLto 
Cuarves Doveras, Lgrd Aberdour, then Gra and 
Matter, conttituting’ them a regular Lodgé, under 
the. title’of Sri Andrews Lodge, NOv 8 to be 
holden at Boftor. 

This-eftablifhnient was difcouraged-and oppofed 
by the St. John’s!Grand Lodge, who thought their pet 
privileges infringed by the Grand Lodge of Scots - . 
land; they theteforé'refufed to have any saneieclite NM 
with St. Andrew’s Lodge, for feveral’yéars 

The profperous’ tate of St. Andrews: eas 
foon léd'its’ members® to make great exertions’ for 
the eftablifhment ofan ancient Grand Lodge; ih 
America ; which was foon effected in Boftony by — 
the affiftance of threé travelling Lodges, wee 
to the Britith army; Who were ftationed théteé: ° 

Dec. 27, 1769, The feftival of the Evangeélift 
was celebrated in due form. When the brethren 
were aflembled, a cofimiiffion from the Right 
Honorable and Moft Worfhipful Grorer, Earl - 

} EQe pA. : of 

Mere 

OF MASONRY! ih! 

of Dalhoufe, Grand Matter of Mafons i in Scotladd;” 

‘ dated ‘the goth of May, 1769, appointing waitin 

- Warten to be Grand Mafter.of Mafons in Bofton, 
and within one hundred miles of the fame, was - 
read, and heiwas, according to ancient ufage, duly ~ 

- inftalled into that office. The Grand Mafter then 
appointed and inflalled the other Grand Officers, 

_ and the Grand Lodge was at this time completely * 
organized. 

“Between this period and the year 1791, this 

_ Grand Lodge granted warrants of conftitution for - 
Lodges to be holden in the following Places, viz. 

Tyrean, Glocefter,, . One in the ftate ofN. a 
Maffachufetts, Boftony King Hiram’s, Darby,C. 

St. Peters, Newburyport, KingSolomon’s,Charlef- 

ea pata re Para 

Rerkfhire, Stockbridge, . (town, Maff. - 
Trinity, Lancatter, , _ Hampfhire Lodge, _ 
United States, Danvers. _ [Northampton, , 

sii; Warren, Machias, , RiGing Sun,Keene,N H. 

i - Unity, Ipfwich, : ~~ North Star, Manchefter, , : 

_-Effex, Salem, Friendfhip; Williamt... 
Friendthip, Bofton,.. Columbia, Norwich, | Hs 
PP RPL ae Frederick, Farmingtony:, 

shroesscri i 2303 Wathingtons, 

Beeb cit ti 

198 ILLUSTRATIONS 

Wathington, inthe army, Faithful, Charleftowms 

St. Patrick’s, Portfmouth, 

[N. Hamp. 

ae 

Colchefter, Connecticut, Dartmouth, Hanover, — 7 rhe 

Litchfield, ditto, 
Cornifh, in Vermont, . 

Harmonic, for 3. yeara. 
{in Bofton,. y 

In the year 1773, 2 commiffion’ was received) 

t 

wilt 
| 
ee 

OOOO Lendie dient) 

' from the Right Honorable:and Moft Worfhipful 

Patrick, Earl of Dumfries, Grand Matter of » 

Mafons in Scotland, dated. March 3, 17.72, ap- 
pointing the Right. Worthipful Jofeph ‘Warren, 

Efq. Grand Matter of - Mafons . for. the. bl 

of America. 
‘In 5775; the meetings of. the Grand I 

were fufpended, by. the town of Bofton cee a, i 

Sar o8. 
“At the battle of Ae Hill, on ‘the r7th of, 
June, ‘this year, Mafonry and th Grand ‘Lo 
met with a heavy lofs, in the death of Grand 
Matter Warrex, who was flain, contending for 
the liberties of his Country. 

‘Goon after the evacuation of Bofton by the Britith, 

army, and previous to any regular communication, 
the brethren, influenced by a pious regard to. the 
‘memory 

f 

OF MASONRY. 1099 

memory of the late Grand Mafter, were induced 

_ to fearch for his: body, which had been rudely and 
indifcriminately buried on the field of flaughter. 
They accordingly repaired. to: the place, and, -hy 

' direftion of a perfon who-was on the ground at the 
time of his burial, a {pot was found where the. 
oh had been recently turned up. Upon re- 
moving the turf, and opening the grave,» which 
was On the brow ofa hill, and adjacent:to a fmall_ 

. clutter of {prigs, the remains were difcovered, ina 
"mangled condition, but were cafily afcertained ;* 
tines. Eioute i in Potton : ics pelt tig by. a ites 

and refpectable number of Brethren, with the. late 
Grand Officers, attending i in proceffion, ‘they were 
carried to the ftone chapel, where an animated 
eulogium was delivered by Brother Perez, Morton, 
The body was then depofited in the filent vault, 
« without a fculptured ftone, to mark the fpot ; 

_ but a8 the whole earth is the fepulchre of illuf- 
tridus men, his fame, his glorious a€tions, are en- 

graven. 

NOTE. RE a 
# Bya an artificial tooth. 

ae: ILLUSTRATIONS 

graven.on the tablet of univetfal) seni enbranpaet 
and. will furvive marble monuments, or: local | in- 
{criptions.” > | - 

17775 March 8: The Brethren who had been 
difperfed in confequence of the war, being iageeé be 
generally colleéted, ‘they affembled to take into 
confideration the ftate of Mafonry.. Being de- 
prived of ‘their chief. by the melancholy-death of 
their Grand Mafter, as before mentioned, after. i. 
_due confideration, they proceeded ‘to ‘the form- 
ation of a Grahd Lodge, and eleéted and inftalled- 
thie Moft Worthipful Jofeph Webb, their Cot 
Mafters 

"1783, January 3, 3, @ committee was s appointed, Ns - 
to draught refolutions explanatory of the } power 
and authority of this Grand Lodge. . On the 24th, 
of June following, the committee ¢ reported ag fole. y 
lows, viz. 

scrapes PH tid 

6 The committee rc anngiiited tot sale into. Sonal i 
deration ‘the conduét of thofe Brethren who af-. Mi 
fame the powers and prerogatives of a Grandj zi i 
Lodge, on the ancient.eftablifhment, in this® place, ahi 
and examine the extentof their. Paeeai. |) and} | 
- purifdigtton,, 

OF MASONRY. 201 
jurifdidtion, together with the powers of any other 
ancient mafonic inftitution within the fame, beg 

leave to report the refult. of their examination, 
founded on the following faéts: viz. 

is That the commiffion from. the. Grand Lodge 

of Scotland grantéd to our late Grand. Maftet , 
_— Jofeph Warren; Efq. haviag died with. him and 
fe of, courfe his Deputy, whofe. appointment. was, 
> derived from Kis nomination, being no longer in 
3 Se they faw themfelves. without a head; 
_and_without a fingle Grand Officer; and’ of con- 
~ fequence i it was evident, that not only the Grand» 
Lodge, but all the. particular Lodges; under its, 
| _ jurifdition -mutt ceafe to affemble, the, Brethren — 
se the pennylefs go unaflitted, the Craft 
oe and ancient Mafonry be. extin& i in this 

is § a ies 

« Thati in. fais a of a femet ond from the: 
iN pete Grand, Odliters to the Mafters and Wardens: 
of. all the regular conftiruted: Lodges, a: gtand 
communication was held; to confult and advite on: 
3 fome means. to preferve the intercourfe. of the — 
: - Brethren, 

sé That 

ate Powe as 82S 

202, {LLUSTRATIONS — 

« That the political head of this coun rt 
deftroyed all connexion. and ee 
tween Are fubjetts of thefe States and the co 

the commands of the civil aati i: 
they refide ins the Brethren did affume an el 
ive fupremacy, and under it chofe a Grand M: 
atid Grand Officers, and ereéted a Grand | 
with independent powers and prerogatives, | 
- exercifed however on principles confiftent \ wi th 
fubordinate’ to'thé regulations pointed-o ut in 
conftitutions ‘of ancient Mafonry. mitt. 
'« That the’ reputation and utility ‘of the Craft, 
under their jurifdiGtion, has been moft es sively, 
diffufed, by the flourifhing ftate of urteen | lod 
conftituted by their authority, within a "ifioite 
riod than that in: which ¢hree:only received difp 
{ations under the former Grand Lodges) f 
© That in the hiftory of our Craft we find,’ that 
Scan thete’ are two oerand: asi ‘indep t 

BE +S 2 7 } 
“"OF MASONRY.) © 203) 

id spendent either of England or Scotland. It is 
Ke ear that the authority , of fome of their Grind 

4 “they would acknowledge | the head from whence 
"ey derived. 
he doings. of the pfefent, Grand Lod e were dic- 
t te d by principles of the cleareft neceflitys founded 
the | higheft reafon, and warranted by precedents 
‘the moft approved authority. 

© And they beg leave to recommend the follow- 

hl ofthe Craft, and the good of mankind, and 
17 acd in their proresgngs ae the: practice 

«6 I. te 
— 
. NOTE. S 
st See Calcut, ‘page f07. “Mafon’s Pocket Com- — 

" 

pos UBF ARGH 

_ known and called byt the name bid 

‘itis: ‘free and pony in its govern e 

vi Grand Lodge be. ‘conftrued to ex 
"the Commonwealth of Maffachufet 2 
~ of the United States where none other i is 

conftituted, « or ‘hall conftitute, eau. 

held 1 undet sat jurifai@ion of. the late Grau 

‘ 

Grand Matter in the Univerfe,. 

«II. That this Grand Loc 

fetts ( Grand Lodge of Ancient, ‘Malone oe ; 
“TIL. That the power and oe r F 

over fuch Lodges - only as this Grand Bh! has 

ist, dolephy Warren Efq. ane to return 4 

‘Grand Lodge ee 

‘OF MASONRY. 205. 

_Mafons, epuciot fuperior or Grand Officers, re- 
es ‘ceive dues, or do any thing which belongs to’ the 
‘powers or prerogatives of an ancient Grand Lodge, 

_ within any part of the Commonwealth of Mafla- 

- chufetts, the rightful and appropriated limits to 

which, the Ree ty of this Grand Lodge forever 
hereafter extends.” 

_. 1791, Dec. 5. A committee was appointed, 
agreeably to a-vote of the 2d of March, r787, 
to confer with the officers of St. John’s Grand 
Lodge, upon the fubje& of a compleat, Mafonic 
“ ‘union throughout this Commonwealth,” 

a On the sthof March, 1792, the committee 
fice : brought i in their report, and prefented a copy of 
t 2 the laws and conftitution, for aflociating and — 
i: uniting the two Grand Lodges, as agreed to by 
+o _ St: John’s Grand Lodge, which being read and 
. _ deliberately confidered, was unanimoufly ap- 

_ proved of. gt 

ik June 19, 1792. The officers and members of ~ 

the two Grand Lodges met in conjun@tion, agree~ » 
> ably to previous arrangements, and inftalled the 
~ Moft Worthipful John Cutler, Grand Mafter ; 

and refolved, That this Grand Lodge, organized — 
_--as aforefaid, fhall forever hereafter be known by 

SE SSS WE T the, 

206 ILLUSTRATIONS 

the name of The Gras Lodge of the Moft Ancien 
and. Honorable Society.of Free and Accepted Mafons shel 
Jor the Commonwealth of Maffachufeits. ak 
All the Ledges in this Commonwealth are now 
under the jurifdiction of | this .Grand Lodge, .ex- 
_ cept St-, Andrew’s Lodge of Bofton, who hold 
their meetings under the ancient warrant from 
Scotland. This warrant was granted to. Col, 
William Burbeck and others, on. the 13th Nov, 
1756, by Sholto, .: Charles, Douglas, Lord Aber- 
dour, then Grand Mafter of Mafons in Scotland, — 

SOT EO 

PENNSYLVANIA. 

On the. 24th of June, 1734, upon the petition . 
of feveral Brethren refiding jin Philadelphia, a war 
rant of conilitution was granted by the Grand. 
Lodge in Bofton,. for holding a Lodge in. that 
place 5 appointing the Right Worthipful Benjamin ; 
Franklin their fiett Mafter,; which is the beginning . 
of Mafonry.in- Pennfylvania. 

In 1786, the officers, ofthe, feveral Lodges in, 
Pennfylvania, affem bled; and ereCtedan independ= 
ent, Grand, Lodge. The) following is anvextrad. 
from .the warraats granted bythe, prefent, Grand. 

"3 Lodge 

OF MASONR’Y. 204 

“Lodge of Pennfylvania, in 1797, which will fully | 

‘fhew the origin and Sree eftablifhment of that 
body, viz. 

«* Whereas the Right Worfhipful Grand Bias 
of England did, by a Grand Warrant, under the. | 

“Seal of the faid Grand Lodge, beating date June 

2oth, 1764, A.L. 5764, appoint the R.."W. 

- ‘William Bell, Grand Mafter ; the Ri W. °Blaith-. 
- wait Jones, Deputy G. M. the R. W. David Hall, 
4S. G. W. andthe R.W. Hugh Lenox, J. G: W 
_ of a Grand Lodge to be holden in Pennfylvania. 

«¢ And whereas the Right Worthipful William 
Adcock, Efq. Grand Mafter; ‘the Right Wor- 
faipful Mr. Alexander. Rutherford, Deputy Grand” 

- Mafter; the Right Worthipful, Jonathan Bayatd 
Smith, Efq. Senior Grand Warden; the Right: 
- Worfhipful Mr. Jofeph Dean, Junior Grand War- 
den, legal fucceffors of the abovementioned Grand 
Officers, as by the Grand Lodge books may appear, . 4 
_ together with the Officers and Reprefentatives of 

a number of regular Lodges under their jurifdic- 
tion, duly appointed and fpecially authorized; as 

-alfo by and with the advice and confent of fexeral 
‘other Lodges, by their letters expreffed, did, at: - 
-aiGrand quarterly communication, holden in the 

Grand 

28 ILLUSTRATIONS 
Grand. Lodge room in the city of Philadelphta, 

on the 25th day of September, onethoufand feven — 

hundred and eighty-fix, after mature and ferious 
deliberation, ‘vnanimoufly refolve, «* That it is im- 
proper, that the Grand Lodge of Pennfylvania 

-fhould remain any longer under the authorityof — - 

any foreign Grand Lodge.” And the faid Grand 
Lodge did-then clofe, fine die. 

« And whereas all the Grand Officers of the faid 
fate Provincial Grand “Lodge, together with the 
officers and reprefentatives of a number of Lodges 
of Pennfylvania, did, on the faid 25th day of Sep- 

tember, 1786, meet in the room of the faid late 

Provincial Grand Lodge, and. according to the 
powers and authority to them entrufted, did form 

themfelves intoa grand convention of Mafons, to — 

deliberate on the proper method of forming a 
Grand Lodge, totallysindependent from all mt, 
jurifdition. 

‘«¢ And whereas the faid Grand Convention did 
then and there unanimoufly refolve, that the Lodges 
under the jurifdi€tion of the Grand Lodge of Penn- 

‘ fylvania, aforefaid, lately holden as Provincial 

Grand Lodge, under the authority of the Grand 

Lodge of England, fhould, and they did form 

themfelves ~ 

OF MASONRY. 269. 
themfelves into a Grand Lodge, to be called, The 

Grand Lodge of Pennfyloania and mafonie jurifdic- 
tion thereunto belonging, to be beld-in the faid city 

of Philadelphia.” 
The Grand Lodge of this State has ‘granted 

feventy-three warrants from the time of their eftab- 
Tithment to the prefent year, 1797. 

8482S -— 

Lyne .NEW-HAMPSHIRE. 

On the 24th of June, 1734, a warrant was: 
granted by the Right Worthipful St. Johw’s. 

Lodge in Bofton, on the petition of feveral. Bre- 

thren refiding at Portfmouth, for conftituting a 
Lodge in that place, by the name of “ The Holy 

“Lodge of St. John.” 

The Maffachufetts Grand Lodge fove granted 

‘warrants for holding Lodges in this State, in, the. 

following places, viz. 
St. Patrick’s Lodge, in Portfmouth, 
Rifing Sun Lodge, in Keene, | 
The Faithful Lodge, in Charleftown;:. 
Dartmouth Lodge, in Hanover. 

Ta. SOUTHS. 

a0 ILLUSTRATIONS 
SOUTH-CAROLINA. 

_ In the year 1735, fundry Brethren went from 
Bofton to Charlefton, in South-Carolina, where, ~ 

with the Brethren they found there, they formed 
a Lodge, from which fprung Mafonty in that State. 

> UF FOQ— * 

RHODE-ISLAND. 

December 27, 1749, a warrant was granted by 
the Right Worfhipful Grand Lodge in Bofton, — 
for conftituting a regular Lodge to be holden in 
Newport. , 

January 18, 1757, a warrant. was granted by 
the fame Graid Lodge, for holding a lodge in Pro- 
vidence. 

March 20, 1750, 2 Lodge of Mafter Mafons, | 
who had for fome time congregated at Newport, 
were, at their defire, confirmed in the privileges 
tofuch a Lodge appertaining. j 

OTS O—— : 

CONNECTICUT. 
The following Lodges in this State received their 

VIZ» 

‘warrants from S¢.. John’s Grand Lodge of Bofton, 

ae: 

OF MASONRY. art 

Hiram Lodge, New-Haven, Auguft 12, 17$0. 
New-London, Jan. 12, 1753. 
Middletown, February 4, 1754. 
Wallingsford, April 28, 1769. 
Guildford, July 10,: 177%. . 

The following Lodges received their warrants 

from the Maffachu/etts Grand Lodge, viz. fi 

Colchefter, January 12, 1781. 

Litchfield, May.22, 1781. 

Darby, January 3, 1783. 

Columbia Lodge, Norwich, July 23, 1785. 

Frederic Lodge, Farmington, Sept. 18, 1787+ 

nn 1% GQ —— 

MARYLAND. 
Auguft 12, 1750, The Right Worfhipful St. 
Ha John’s Grand Lodge in Bofton granted a warrant 
to conttitute a Lodge, to be holden at Annapolis, 
i" in this State. 
ee. PE OO— 

Ss NEW-YORK. 

"The following is a lift of the officers of the 
' ‘Grand Lodge of this State, eleéted on the firft 
4 
J 

ii in June, 1796. 
3 y in June, 179 =o 

aa- ILLUSTRATIONS. 

- The Moft Worthipful the Honorable Peter Ril 
Livingfton, Efg, Chancellor of the Staté, Grand 
Mafier, 

The Right Worfhipful Jacob. Morton,. E fq. . 
' Deputy Grand Mafter. _~ ~ 

The R.. W. James Scott, Efq. Senior Grand. 
Warden. 

The R. W.: Dewitt: Clinton, Eg). orion 
Grand ‘Warden. ; Wh 

The R. W. John Abrams, Grand Seeretary, _ if 
The R.'W. Martin Hoffinan, Efq. Grand Trea- 
_farer. 5 ae 
There are fixty-three Lodges within the jurif-' 
dition of this Grand Lodge ; eleven of which are 
in, the city of New-¥ork,, and three in the city of. 
caged! < 

OOH LIOO— 

NORTH-CAROLINA. | 

_O&tober 2, 1767. A difpenfation was graute js al 

by the Gratd Lodge in Bofton, to the Right 

Worfhipful Thomas Cooper, Mafter of Pitt-Coun-_ 
ty Lodge, -in North-Carolina, .conftituting him 
Deputy Grand Mafter ofthat: Province. » He was _ 
commiffioned with power, to. congregate all the - 
Brethren , 

SO GO o— 
VERMONT. 

is State, dated Novcnies 8, 1781." 

; January 19, 1785, The fame Grand Lodge 
granted a warrant for holding a Lodge in Man- 
_ehefter, by the name of the « North Star Lodge.” 
SPD EES @— 
NOVA-SCOTIA. 
in 1740, the Right Worfhipful Grand Lodge, 
holden at Bofton, granted a deputation for forming 
a Lodge at Annapolis, in Nova Scotia ; and. ap- 

de 
Pe 

-eftablifhed in moft of the States, but not 
been able to obtain correét information fr 
of them, in feafon for this publication, it p 
deferred. until the next paged 

. 

‘onarrens or ROYAL Seah 
ay eee 

“MASSACHUSETTS. 
~The oldeft pois of’ Royal ‘Arch Mafons. 

aie Bofton, in St. Andrew’s. se tee ae This Cl hap 
‘was firft formed “about the year 1764. 
- The officers for the year 1797 ate,” shi 
Benjamin Hurd, jun. M. bg H. Po 
Brother Soley, M.E. KK. : 
"Thomas Dakin, 'M.E.$, 9 0 7 
~ Brother William Woart, G. ‘Secretary. - 

_ There i is a Chapter. recently opened at . 
in this, State, i ni 

OR, <iateaasaitaba Na agg) 

CONNECTICUT. 
sis ‘State are five Chapters, viz. 

iddletown, 
wtown, - j 5 ARs a> ie 
Soe aed ihe x £37 A aes 

- “NEW-YORK. 
“Old Chapter,” in the city of New-York; _ 
~'Wathington, Chapter, ditto, 
‘Montgomery | Chapter, Stillwater, _ 

Temple Cha ter, “Albany, Feiss ute i 
— -Hudfon Chapter, Hudfon, fis 
= ‘Herkemer Chapter, Herkemer, 

ha 

-/PENNSYLVANIA. 
tees Chapters in this State have lately 
na og convocation £2) their officers, aad 

Royal 

ate ae 
tp? Pp 
 teeee et ah. 308 
sh “Ditto, 

Hi ENCAMPMENTS of KNIGHTS TEMPLARS, if 

ral Arch Cinter, No. 39 ‘Piladtphieg a 
52) } dittay. aa 
Ditto, 125 _ ditto, 
Ditto,, No. White Horfe, Chefter County, 
Ditto, No. Harrifburgh, yy 
_ Ditto, » No. Carlifle. 

VIRGINIA, rp 
Chapter of Royal Arch Mafons, amas hh 

Ditto, ‘ — Cabbin Point, ; 
StH — oh 

Grand Encampment, Philadelphia, 

Encampment No. 1, - Ditto, 

Ditto, «No. ditto, cll 
Ditto, No. — Harrifburgh, Bee ra 
Ditto, © No,* Carlile, do...<tthaie 
Ditto, No. ~ Stillwater, N.Y. 

Ditto, No. | City of New-York. 
athe Officers of this Encampment for 1796, wert, 
* Jacob Morton, Efq. Grand Mafter, ald 
= John Abrams, Generaliffimo, 
Martin Hoffman, Captain General. 

“3 Esaodoeescosied 
END OF PART IT. 
ata antes abe teehee 

THE 

_FREEMASON's. 
MONITOE& ; 

OR, 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
OF 

“MAS ONRY: 

IN TWO PARTS. 
Sr}. 
PART “TI. 
OS EE OO— 
CONTAINING, 

i AN ACCOUNT OF THE INEFFABLE 
‘ie DEGREES OF MASONRY. 
oh ga 

NTED at ALBANY, 
For SPENCER and WEBB, Market-Street. | 

4797s 

| ss * 

ND UGS! 

ate 

ig tins. 

? ; 

PRE PTAC #, 
Hapinnl 6 i aa 

PAE Ivérranve Decrets of Masonry; 

; ‘ f the Hiftory and Charges of which are con- 
_. tained in the following’ pages, are as ancient, (it 

ig ‘alledged) as ‘the time of king Solomon ; the 
proof of which, is probably known only to thofe 
who are profeflors of the degrees. 
‘« The general defign of this part. of the work, is 
to preferve the Hiftory and Charges of the feveral 
Ineffable Degrees from falling into oblivion ; 
with which they have .been long threatened, as 
well from the fmall number of ‘conventions of 
Mafons who poffefs them, as from the little atten~ 
tion that has been paid to their meetings of late 
‘years. See 
It will alfo ferve to convince Mafons who poflefs 
the Degrees treated of in the firft part of this work, 
that there is a total difference between thofe and 
the Ineffable Degrees ; for it is a-circumftance, 
neceflary to be known, that there is no part of 
_ thefe 

PREFACE, ~ rt 

thefe degrees, that have any refemblance to the i i 
fourth, fifth, fixth or feventh degrees beforementi- si 
oned, or that have any reference or allufion to 
any of the circumftances on which thofe degrees ats 
were founded. But notwithftanding this differ 
ence, it will clearly appear, from the account here 
given.of the Ineffable Degrees, that much ingenuity 
is difplayed in their formation ; that their defign 
is noble, benevolent and praifeworthy ; and, that 
the inftitution was intended for the glory of oe 

Deity and the good of mankind, 

SEPT, 1797. 

- ILLUSTRATIONS — 

iLLUSTRATIONS 

OF 

MASONRY. 

ane Obfervations on: the Degree of 
("SECRET MASTER. 
HE Lodge of Secret Matters is fpread with 

Black. \'The 'Mafter ‘reprefents Solomon, 
e6sintigit the Temple to ele& feven Experts. He 

is ftiled, Moft ‘Powerful. 

There is only one Warden, who is called Adoni- 
‘ram; after him who had the infpection of the 
‘workmanthip: done at Mount Libanus ; be: was , 
aid ‘Batt thade Geeret Mafter. | 

V2 ~ Solomor 

222 ILLUSTRATIONS 

Solomon holds a Sceptre in his hand, ftanding 

in the Eaft, before a triangular altar, upon which 

isa Crown, and fomé Olive and Lairel léaves.-- 

Adoniram, the Infpeétor ftands in the Weft. 

The firft officer is decorated with a blue ribbon, 
from:the right fhoulder tothe left hip, to which 
hangs a Triangle.» ‘Fhe fecond officer is decofated 
with a white ribbon, bordered “with black, ina 
triangular form ; an ivory Key ee there- 
from, with a figure of Z upon it, ~~ 

All the other Brethren are decorated in the 
fame manner, with white aprons and gloves, the 
{trings of the aprotis blacks, the flap of the apron 
is Blue with a golden Eye upon it. This Lodge 
fhould be enlightened by eighty-one candles, dif- 
tributed by nine times nine, 

A Candidate, after being Auriadly ers 
the Infpector, ,who mutt vouch, for -his qualifica~ 
tions, is thus addreffed by the My P. bat 
as Brother, . : i 

‘ You have hitherto only feen the thick veil that 

geal 

ngencisé 

- OF MASONRY. 223 

zeal, and-conftancy have gained you this favour I 

now grant you, of fhewing you our treafure, and 

introducing you into the holy and fecret place. 
He is then invefted with the ribbon, the crown 

~ of laurels and olives, by the M. P. who thus ad- 
dreffes him : 

My Brother, 

I receive you as fecret Mafter, and give you 
rank amongft the Levites ; this Laurel, the em- 
blem of victory, is to remind you of the conqueft 
‘you are to gain over your paflions.—The Olive is 
the fymbol of that Peace and Union, which ought 
“to reign amongft us.—It belongeth to you to de- 
ferye the favour, that you may he enabled, one day 
to arrive in the fecret place, to contemplate the 
pillar of Beauty. —I decorate you with the ivory” 

_ Key, huny to a white and Black ribbon, as a fym- 

bal of your fidelity, innocence and difcretion.— 
. The Apron and Gloves are to-be marks of the 
-candour of all S. M. in the number of which you 

“have deferved to be introduced. _ In this quality, 

‘my Brother, you are to become the faithful guar- 
dian of the 5.5. and I put you in the number of 
‘Seven, to be onc of the conductors of the works 
Reh ahi 

ag ILLUSTRATIONS 

Whioh ate raifing’ to\the DiWinity4eThe Bye upow 
your Aproiis "to femidd you to have’ a careful 
watch ovér the conduét of the Craft in’ ‘general. 

The Lodge is elofed by the Myfterious number 

PO EQ— * 

Obfervations on the Degree of ‘i 
~RPERFECT MASTER. 

HE Lodge of Perfe&t:Mafters is hung with 
Green-tapefiry,' on eight columns; four on 

each fide, placed at equal diftances ; tobe illamina~ 
ted with fixecen lights, placed ‘at the four cardinal 
points. A table before the Canopy’ covered “with 
Black.—The ‘R. ‘W. and refpedtable “Mafter re- 
prefents the noble Adoniram, being the firit that 
was. cleGted S. M. becaufe S.' ‘chofe hint the ‘firft 
of the Séven. ‘He commanded tke works of the 
Temple before H. ‘A. arrived at Jerufitem, and af. 
‘terwatds had the infpeétion of the works at ‘Mount 
Libanus.—He is decorated with the ornaments of 
Perfection, and is a Prince of Tetulalem, with 
‘thofe decorations.— He ocupies the place of S. in : 
the eatt under the Canopy. 

peas 

OF MASONRY. 225 

There is only one Warden, who reprefents 
Stockin, in the function of Infpector, with the orna- 
ments of his higheft Degrees, which he received in 

_ the Weft. 

The affiftants being at leaft Perfect Matters, 
‘ought to be decorated’ with a large green ribbon 
hung to the neck, with a jewel fufpended there- 
to, being a compafs extended to 60 Degrees, 

The Brethren all have aprons of white leather 

‘with green flaps; on the middle of the apron muft 

be embroidered a fquare ftone, furrounded by three 
_ gircles, with the letter P in..the center, Q 

After'a Candidate is duly examined in the pro- 
ficiency he has made in the foregoing degree, he is 
regularly introduced, and is thus addreffed by the 
MM. P.—My Brother, 

Itis my defire to draw you from your vicious 
‘life, and by the favor I have received from the moft 
powerful of kings, raife you to the degree of 
Perfed Mafter, on condition that you ftridtly ad- 
here to what fhall be prefented to you by our Laws. 

The 

226 ILLUSTRATIONS 

The ceremonies, &c. of ‘this degree, were origi- 

nally eftablithed as a grateful tribute of refpedt, te 

the memory of .a departed, worthy ‘Brother. 
The Lodge is clofed by four times four. 

—_Sottoo—_ 

Obfervations on the Degree of 
ILLUSTRIOUS SECRETARY. 

HE Lodge of I. S. is farts with black 
hangings, and reprefents the hall of audience _ 
of Solomon. It fhould be enlightened with 27 i] 
lights, in three candlefticks of nine beh each, 
placed. E..-W. and S. ; tiptoe eos 
This Lodge confifts of two verted only 3~who 
reprefent S. and H. K, of T. They are covered 
with blue mantles, lined with ermine, with crowns 
on their heads, fceptres in their hands, and feated 
at a table, on which are placed, two naked fwords - 
a roll of parchment, and a death’s head. - ae 
~All the reft of the Brethren are confidered only 
as Perfe&t Mafters, and are termed the® guards, 
They fhould have white Aprons,ined and emn- 
broidered with a blood pecs with ftrings of the 
fame ; 

OF MASONRY, Per 

. fame ; and ribbons of the fame colour round their 
necks, to which muft be fufpended, hanging on 
the breaft, a folid Triangle. 

CuarcE to a new made ItLustrrousSecrEraRy- 
My BrotrHer, 

I receive you an Illuftrious Secretary on your 
promife to be faithful to the order in which you 
have juft now entered. We hope, Brother, ‘that 
_ your fidelity will be proof to every trial; and that 
: _ this fword, with which we arm you, will defend 
you from the attacks of thofe, who may try to ex- 

tort from you thofe fecrets, which we are now 
abort to confer upon you. 

HISTORY: 

-. Solomon had agreed with the king of Tyre, in 
return for the naaterials taken from mount Leba- 
non, and thofe drawn from the quarries of Tyre, 
“made ufe of. in conftructing the Temple (in part 
_payment of which, he had already furnithed him 
‘with a meafure of Oil, Honey and Wheat) to have 

given him a Province in Galilea, of thirty Cities, 
immediately after the Temple was compleated. 

A year 

28 ILLUSTRATIONS ~- 
A year had elapfed’ before this was éomphed 

with on the part of Solomon's ' and when Hiram Bs 

the lands poor, the people rude, uncultivated, and 
of bad morals; and that the keeping of it would 
he,attended with}more expence: than profit. ‘He 
therefore. went in.perfon to Solonion, to, complain — 
of the-deceit. . Being arrived; he made his entry if 
through the guards, in the court, nate went haftily 
‘to the king’s apartment. fi 3 aul 3 

~The countenance of the king of Tyre was fo ‘ 
‘expreflive of anger, as he entered, one of Solomon's 
favourites, named Joabert petceived it, and appre 
henfive of the .confequence, followed him to the — 
door to liften.—H. obferving him ran and feized 
upon him, and delivered him into the cuftody of 
the guards ; however, by the interceffion of Sold. 
‘mon (who reprefented, that Joabert | was! of of ra 
thofe about the Temple, *mott attached. to him; | 
‘and - that his intentions could not have been evil) ui! 
Hiram agreed to pardon him; and before ‘they. 
parted, renewed their former friendfhip, and con 
cluded a treaty of perpetual alliance, which was 

figned 

— 

OF MASONRY. “229 

figned by them, and. to which hie was Iluftri- 
3 ous Secretary. > 

“This Lodge is clofed ye 3 times 9. 
OOO OS— 

' Obfervations on the Degree of 
PROVOST anp JUDGE. 

HIS Lodge is adorned with red, and lighted 
by five great lights ; one in each corner, and 

one in the center. The Mafter is placed in the 

Eatt, under a blue canopy, furrounded with ftars, 

and is ftiled, Thrice Illuftrious. He reprefents 
Tito Prince Harodim, the, eldeft of the P. M. and’ 
LS. firft grand Warden, and Infpector of the 
three hundred Archite&ts; whofe office was to 
draw plans for the workmen.— 

- After the Candidate is introduced in due form, 

the Mafter thus addrefles him : 

~Refpe&table Brother, 
It gives me joy, that I am now about to recom- 

-penfe your zeal and attachment to the inftitution 

of Mafonry, by appointing you Provoft and Judge, 
| Ww over 

best 2 

230 ILLUSTRATIONS 

over all the works of this Lodge; and, as we ate 
. well affured of your prudence and difcretion, we» 
without the leaft hefitation entruft you with a moft 
important Secret. We expeé you will do your 
duty in the degtee to whichyou will now be eli- 
vated, as you have done in thofe already taken.— 
He is then decorated: With a-golden key fufpend- _ 
ed by ared Ribbon, and an apron with a pocket in 

its center. 
~ 

_. The intention of Solomon i in forming this De- 
gree, was to ftrengthen the means of preferying c or- 
der among fuch a vaft number of craftfmen. Jo- 
abert being honoured with the intimate confidence 

_ of his king; received this new ‘mark of diftindtion, oH 

“Solomon firht created Tito, Prince Harodim, 

- Adoniradm,;*and “Abda his~ father, Provofts and. 

Judges, and gave them orders’to initiate Joabert, 
his favorite, into ‘the ‘fecret myfteries ‘of this de- 
gree; and to give him the keys of all the building, 

Lodge is. clofed at 4 and 1, 

Meee! 
“Obfervations 

> 

> MOF YM A'SIO.N'R ¥. 231 

pti Obfervations on the Degr ce of. 

INTENDANT or tue ‘BUILDINGS, or 
; MASTER 1n ISRAEL. 

THIS Lodge is decorated with red maa 

and illuminated with twenty-feven lights ; 

. dittributed by three times nine round the Lodge. 
» There mutt be alfo five other great lights on the 
Altar before the moft Puiffant, who reprefents So- 

Jomon, feated with a f{ceptre in his hand. 

s ci The firft Warden, called Infpegtor, reprefents 
the moft illuftrious Tito Harodim; fecond War- 
ay _reprefents Adoziram, the Son of Abda ; 3 all 

“the reft are ranged angularly. —The moft Puiffant, 

~ -andall the Brethren |, are decorated witha large red 

Ribbon, from the right fhoulder to the left-hip, to 

~ which is fufpended a triangle faftened by a’ fmall 
' green ribbor-On one fideof the: triangle are en- 

agraved the words, BencHorim, ACHARD, and. 

- Jacuinat ; on)the -reverfe, Jupea, Ky, Jea.— 

» Lhe Aprons are white, lined with red, and bordeér- 
~edwith green ;.in the centre,-a Star, with-nine 

-» points; above a ballance ; and on'the flap a trian- 

. gle with thefe letters B, A. I. on each angle. 

thet 

a 

iA. candidate, 
S 

_ : 

232 ILLUSTRATIONS 

A candidate, after being previoufly prepared, 
and having gone through the ceremonies, ‘is thus — 
addreffed :— . 

My Briers . 

Solomon, willing to carry to the higheft degree 
of perfe€tion the work he had begun in Jerufalem, 

. found it neceffary, from a circumftance with which 
you are acquainted, to employ the five chiefs of the 
five Orders of ‘Architecture ; and gave conimand 
over them to Tito, Adoniram, and Abda, his fa- . 
ther ; being well aflured that their zeal and abili- 
ties would be exerted to the utmoft; in bringing to _ 
perfection fo glorious a work.—In like manner, , 
we expect you will do all that lies in your power 

to promote the grand defign of Mafonry. 
“<) "The Lodge is clofed by 5, 7 and 15. 
OQ SOO 

“ Objervations on the Degree of 
_ELECTED KNIGHTS, or KNIGHTS oF THE 
NINTH ARCH; catrep A CHAPTER 
i ae Chapter reprefents the audience ghamber 
of Solomon, and is to be decorated with — 
white and red ‘hangings—the red with white 

flames. iG | “ae 

OF MASONRY. 233 

There are nine lights in the eaft, and eight in the 
weft. The Matter reprefents Solomon, feated in the 

~ eaft, with a table before him, covered with black, 

and is ftiled Moft Potent. 

There is only one Warden in the Weft, who re- 
prefents Stockin, with 7 brethren round him.—All 

- the brethren muft be dreffed in black, and their hats 

flapped, with a broad black ribbon from the. left 

_ fhoulder to the right hip, on the lower part of which » 
. are nine red rofes, four on each fide and one at the 
bottom, to which is fufpended a poinard. The 

aprons are white, lined with black, fpeckled with 
blood ; on the flap a bloody arm with a poinard, 
and on the area, a bloody arm holding PY the hay 
a bloody head. 

Near to the Lodge is a fmall, dark place, repre- : 

Oh fenting a cavern, in which is placed a lamp, a place 
; reprefenting a {pring with a bafon to hold water; and 

a table on which are laid a poinard, and a reprefen- 

__ tation of a bloody head, as juft fevered from the 

body. Near the table a large flone to fit on, and 
below the lamp in capital letters, VENGEANCE. 

WR HISTORY | 
i Seg W2 

234 «I ll 

HISTORY, OF THIS DEGREE, 

fis the reign of Solomon, feveral of the workmen 
had been guilty of fome crime of an» enormous na 

’ 
” ; 
; 

ture, and made their efcape from Jerufalem. A; 

great aflembly of Mafters had fet in. confultation on» f 
the beft means of difcovering and’ apprehending at 

them.” Their deliberations were interrupted by yor ut 4 

entranceof a ftranger;' ‘who demanded to fpeak 16 pel 
the King ‘in'private. “ Upon being admitted, he ace 

af 
Ay 

quainted’ Solomon ‘ ‘that he “had: difcovered’ viii 4 

Akirop,’ one of the traitors lay concealed’; and of. 
fered to’conduét thofe whom the king fhould’ pleafe 
to appoint, to go with him. ° This being communi- 

cated to theibrethrer one and all requefted to’ be . 

partakers in the vengeance due to the villain. So: 
Jomon checked theirjardour,declaring that only nine 
Should undertake the tafk ;, and to ayoid giving any | 
offence, ordered all thein names to beputinto.an urn, 
and that.the firft nine that fhould be drawn, fhould 
be. the perfons to accompany the ftranger, 

“Ae Break of day Joabert, ” Stockin, and feven 

a 

others, coridudtel by the flranger, travelled oa- . 

wards through ee. ey On the way, 
Joabert 

n 

me 
“ 

OFIMASONRY.: 235 

_Joabert found means to learn from the ftranger, 
“that the villain they were in ‘queft’ of had hidden 
hhimfelf in a cavern not far from the place where 
they then were ; he foon found the cavern land en- : 
tered i it alone, where, by the light of the lamp, he | 
- Aifcovered the villain afleep with a poinard at his 
eet. Enflamed at the fight, and- aCtua ed brian 
"impatient zeal, he immediately feized the ‘potard, 
and ftabbed him, firft‘in the head and then‘ fi the 
heart; he had only-time -to cry VENGEANCE 18 
i TAKEN, and expired. ‘When the other*@ight ar- 
rived and’had refrethed themfelves at the fpring,Jo- 
_ bert fevered the head fromthe body, and taking it 
in ‘one hand 'and his poinard i in the other, he with 
his brethren, returned to Jerufalem. Solomon was 
ia at firft very, much offended, ‘that Joabert had put 
St out of his power to take vengeance himfelf, ia 
‘ prefence of, and as‘a warning to, the reft of the 
_ workmen, to be faithful to their truft ; guy by. pro- 
per ‘interceflion was again reconciled. 
Joabert became highly favoured of Solomon, 
_ ‘who. conferred upon him, and. his eight com- 
= panions, the title of Elected Knights. 
Ou _-The es is clofed YY eight and one. 

ghgs at Obfervations 

236 ILLUSTRATIONS 
Olfervations on the Degree of — fi ei 
ELECTED GRAND MASTER, or ILLUS: 
TRIOUS ELECTED or FIFTEEN. 

8 eae Lodge reprefents Solomon’s apartment,, 
and is to be decorated in the fame manner — 
as that of the Nine Ele. "There are two vee 
ens ; the-fenior i is ealled Infpetor. 

This Lodge fhéuld confift of only fifteen mem= 
bers; but fhould there be more at a time of recep= 
tion, they muft attend in the anti-chamber. 

The apron peculiar to this degree is white, | and 
bordered with black; andon the flap, three heads — 
‘on {pikes in form of a triangle ; the jewel i@ the 
fame as that of the Nine Elec, only on that part ‘ 
of the black ribbon which crofles the breaft these 
fhould be the fame device as upon the apron. 

HISTORY. or ru1s DEGREE. 

About {jx months after the execution of the 
traitor mentioned in the preceding degree of elected 
Knight, Bengabee, an intendant of Solomon, in 
the country of Cheth, which was tributary to 
him, caufed diligent enguiry to be made if any 
‘ perfon had lately taken fhelter in thofe parts, who 
might 

OF MASONRY. 237 

‘tight be fuppofed to have fled from Jerufalem; . 
he publifhied at the fante time a particular deferip- 
~~ tion of all thofe traitors who had made their efcape ; 
fhortly after, he received information that feveral 
perfons an{wering his defcription had. lately arrived 
there, and, believing themfelves perfeetly fecure, 
had begun to work in the quatry of Bendaca, 

As foon as Solomoti was made acquainted with 
this cirmumflance, he wrote to Maacha, King of 
Cheth,. to aflift fh apprehending them; and to 

5 caufe them to be delivered to perfons that he , 

: fhould appoint, to fecure them, and have them 
brought to Jerufalem, to receive the e ‘paleaiiene 
due'to their crimes. 

Solomon then eleted fifteen Mafters, in whom 

: he could place the higheft’ confidence, and among 

~ whom were thofe who, had been in the cavern, and 

fent them in queft of the villians, and gave them 
an efcort of troops. Five days were’ {pent in the — 
fearch, when Terbal, who bore Solomon’s letter - 

to Morihaand Eleham, difcovered them, cutting 

ftone in the quarry ; they immediately’ feized 
~ them and-bound them in chains. _ When they - at-— 
$3 ' rived 

ag «SC '« LEBUSTRATIONS 

" s rived at Jernfalem;) they! were imprifoned, inj the 

e 

tower, of Achizer,.and the nextmorning a ipunifh+ 

~ ment. was, infli¢ted ; om .theny adequate. to . thet he 
| GBUBCS: i) aessuate 

Pees + 

iene lofed' by" 3 times? 5." 

ohn aaa aal 
ILLUSTRIOUS KNIGHTS, on SUBLIME 
Sain RNIGHTS ELECTED. ol aail 

HIS Lodge: iscalled a Grand. Chapter tt Solo. 
lomon prefides; and of courfe i is ta be,ggcor- 
_ated with a feeptre. In place, of. two wardens, 
there are a Grand. Inipestor, ar and Grand 2» Maley a 
Ceremonies.’ ois 4579 
The Jewel worn in this tae is a a Sword, 
intended to reprefent a fword of Juftice; hung: to 
a Jarge’ black ‘ribbon ; ‘on the part ‘crofling 
the’ bréaft, muft be an iitaméd heart 5 3 ‘which / is 
alfo tobe painted “on “the flap of the’ apron. ‘The 
Chapter’ is illuminated by twelve lights, 9 
HISTORY or rats DEGREE. 
After vengeanee had been f ully taken on ‘the trai- 
tors mentioned i in the foregoing degrees, Solomon 
nflituted’ ‘this, ‘both as a reward for the zeal and 

* integrity 

-OFOMASONRIY.. (1 239° 

rity ofithe:Grand’:Mafters éle& of fifteen’; 
ut alfo by their#preférment to’ make roonr for’ rai=’ 
g other wotthy brethren fromethelower degrees ” 
nthat of Grand Mafter ke of shes He wont 

As us Knights, and ave them command over the. 
: fe tribes," Te carga par ticular pogar for _ 
his order, aha iew wed them ie! precious, things, 
ia he tabertiacte,. ea uF 
ic Here follows ¢ iat names of the twelve Tiloftrious: 
hts Ae the tribes over which they Lee 
pred ided ; i—_— ‘ 
Jet ati Pa 0 apr tribe of ida 

ine ee “Benjamin. 

ey eters me he Simeon, 

hr ot 2b 1E9) $3 Tei ut 

- ne “Ephraim. 
fica? mit: ~ Manafies. 
‘pe wk ee “Zebulon, 
395) hovers 2 ogtes } 
eas Wiabncl pe, 
fing Toon rivet: te ate 
Toh er sete ia Sepa 
SF Edens att tate Reuben. 
dj SS icher 
fal fei 9 ig Tia 

‘ The 

240 ILLUSTRATIONS 

The illuftrious Knights gave an account to Soe 
lomon every day, of the-work that was done in the 
Temple, by their refpetive tribes, and received, 7 

P 

their pay. <> vd 

This Chapter is dlofed by 12. 09 
— OPO HF OQ]— 

Obfervations on. the Degree of ‘ 

GRAND MASTER ARCHITECTS. _ 
fe Chapter is painted white, with red 
flames 5 by which is fignified the purity of 

- 

heart and zeal, that fhould be the charaéteriftic of } 
every Grand Mafter Architeét. It muft have in 
it a delineation of the five orders of Archite€turé 5 

‘together with a Teprefentation of the North Star, 
with feven fmall ftars round it, which | fignify, 

that as the North ftar is a guide to mariners, for 

ought: virtue to be the guide of Grand Matter 
“.Architeéts.. The Jewel is a gold medal, on both 

fides of which are engraved the -five Orders of 

Architeture, fufpended by a: broad’ dark ftone ‘ 

coloured: ribbon, from the left thoulder to ‘the A 

right hip. 
Every Grand Mafter Architect muft be fugnithed 
with, a cafe of Mathematical Inftruments. 

ADDR 153 

‘OF MASONRY | ‘aigr: 

Bee eM: ot 0 

ADDRESS, To, ny _CANDIDATE ON, His AD- 
PPR Tio: THIS ghee 

Brother, 

iy: eT haye elevated-you to. this.degree,. from an ex- 
i ? pectation’ that you will fo apply yourfelf to geom-= 
etry, to whichyou-\ are\ now devoted, -as will pro- 
ei) cure you, knowledge. fufficient to take .away the 
‘ veil ‘from before your eyes, which ’ yet remains 
-: ‘there, and enable you to arrive at the Be and 
zh) fublime degree 

ti 

Se Drow bn 

Re MMET Wy 10 eor “ss HISTOR Mis, 4; . 
-*s Solomon -eftabliflied this degree with’ arview “of 

me) ee oflarchiteQure, for the inftruction 
_ of the Brethren \employed'in the Temple of God, 
and animating them to arrive. at perfection in the ~ 
| Row Art... He wasa Prince equally, famed for 
_ his jpftice, as for his:wifdom and jforefight, he 
‘es therefore defirous of rewarding thetalents and 
virtues of the faithful, in order to make them 
Haein: and fit to approach the throne of God. 
coming caft his eyes upon the’ chiefs of 
ae twelve tribes, as perfons extremely proper to 
att HE Be ee fulfil. 

og. ILLUSTRATIONS oe 

fulfil the promife made to Enoch, to Mofes and 
to David, that with great zeal, in fullnefs of time, 
the bowels of the earth :fhould.be.penetrated. 

‘ ‘This Chapter is clofed by 1 and 2. 

OHI GO— 

Obfervations on the Degree of» : to 
KNIGHTS. of THE NINTH ARCH, | 
“ROYAL ARCH. 

HIS Totes fhould be holden in a sits fedset - 
T place. A vault under ground would be 
moft proper, in the centre of the top of which 
there muft be atrap-door, for thé admiffion of 
candidates. Inthe middle below, there muft be 
a hollow triangular pedeftal, the fides of which are 
_ white $on the top mutt be fixed a hollow cubical — 
: triangle, made of oil cloth ; infidée of which mutt 
be placed a light, and on the top and fides muft 
be placed feveral Hebrew charaéters in letters of 
gold. 

>To forma Lodge of this Degree f ie ‘acide at 
anal mutt be prefent, pices 

rf. The 

Pe ih 

8 en hte akg Aaek lag oe 

ites 

OF MAS'IONRY.! | 243 

ift. The moft potent Grand Mafter, reprefent- 
ing Solomon in the eaft, feated in a chair of State, 

under a rich canopy, with a crown on his head, 

WOE MAR ED 7 

eS eS 
4 

and a fceptre in his hand. He is dreffed in royal 

“tobes of yellow, and-an ermined’ veftment of blue 

fattin, reaching to the elbows; a. broad purple 
ribbon from the right fhoulder to the left hina t to 
which i is hung a triangle of gold. 

2. The Grand Warden, reprefentinig the King 

of Tyre, on his left hand, feated as a ftranger, 
clothed in a purple robe, and a yellow veftment. 

3. The Grand Infpector, reprefenting G—- 
‘in the weft, with a drawn {word in his hand. 

4, The Grand Treafuret, teprefenting Toations, 
‘in a North, with a golden key to-his fifth button 
hole, and upon it the letters I, v, 1, L. dae? 
verbum intre Leonis. 

§- The Grand Secretary, reprefenting Stockin 
in the South. 

The four laft mentioned officers to be ornament- 

--ed with the fame ribbon and jewel as the M. P. 

-and to fit covered. The three laft to have. robes of | 
blue without veftments. 

No 

reyes 

24h ILLUSTRATIONS 

No perfon can be admitted to this, degree with- 
-eut having (previoufly. taken all the preceding de- 
grees. : n j * ® . ‘ sneer 3 

3} ait 

HISTORY ann CHARGE.or tais DEGREE. 
My worthy Brother, doen | 

“) Teis my intention at’ this time to give you a oe 

ad 

clearer account than you have yet been acquainted aa 

~with, of Mafonry:;' of which you at prefent isis 

“know the elements: 

In doing this it, will:be »neceflary to onteibate 
you fome circumftances ofvery remote antiquity. 

Bn nasip me 

defcent from Adam, and lived i in the fear and "ove 

of his ‘Maker 5 ‘God appeared to ‘himin a “vifion, v5, 

‘and thus deigned to {peak to him:' As thou : art 

‘defirous to know my name, attend, and it thall'be : 
revealed unto thee. Uvon this, a moutain feemed 

ito rife'to the ‘heavens, and Enoch was’ transferred 
to the top thereof, where he beheld. a’ triangular 

plate of gold, moft brilliantly enlightened, and | 

upon which were fome characters which :he te- 

»seived a. ftri& injunction never) to pronounce.—— 

ebiady he feemed to be lowered.perpendicu- — 
: 3 Bee il 

Enoch, the fon of Jared, ‘was the fixth fon jn 

in the mountain. 

OF MASONRY. 245 

farlyinto the bowels of the earth, through nine 
arches; in the ninth, or deepeft of which, he faw 
the fame brilliant plate b4aias was fhewn to him 

‘Enoch, being infpired by the Moft High, and 
in commemoration of this wonderful vifion, ‘built 
a temple under ground, in the fame fpot where 
it was fhewn to him, which like that confifted.of 

' mine arches, one above another; and dedicated 

the fame toGod. Methufaleh, the fon of Enoch, 
conftructed the building without being acquainted 
with his father’s motives. 
‘This happened in that part of the world which 

_swas afterwards called the land of Canaan, and 

fince known by the name of the Hely Land. 

Enoch, in imitation of what he had feen, caufed. 

F @ triangular plate af gold to be made, each fide 

of which was a cubit long; he enriched: it with 
the moft precious ftones, and encrufted the plate 

‘upon a ftone of Agate; of the fame form. He | 

then engraved upon it the fame ineffable characters 

which God had fhewn to him, and placed ition 

a triangular pedeftal of white. marble, which “he 

ess aa in the ninth, or deepeft arch. ead 
Bien Rast | When 

pe eee 
.7 

46 ILLUSTRATIONS 

When Enoch’s temple was completed, he\.res 
ceived. the following command, viz. Make, a 
* door of ftone, and. let there be a ring of iron 
therein, by which it may be occafionally raifed ; 
and let it be placed oyer the opening of the firft 
arch, that the facred matters. enclofed therein 
: may be preferved from the, univerfal deftruction 
now impending.” . And he did fo, and. none but 
Enoch knew of the precious treafure which the 
arches. contained; nor knew the right pronun- 
ciation of the great and facred name. 
And behold the wickednefs of mankind en- : 

_ereafed, more, and became grievous in the fight — 
of the Lord, and God . threatened to deftroy the vs 
whole world. Enoch perceiving. that the know- 
ledge of the arts was likely to be loft in the 
general. deftru€tion, and beifig defirous of prefery- 
ing the principles of the feiences, for the pofterity 
of thofe whom. Gad fhould be pleafed to fpare, 
he built two great pillars on the top of the higheft 
mountain, the one of brafs, to withftand water, 
the other of marble, to withftand fire; and he 
engraved on’ the marble pillar, hieroglyphics, figni+ 
fying that there was.a/moft. precious treafure con- 
c. senled in the arches under ground, which he had 

bie zt 

M Y. 
©.OF MASONRY. Ay 
dedicated to. God. . And he engraved on the piflar 

of brafs the principles of the liberal arts, particular ; 

ly of Mafonry. 

Methufaleh was the father of Lamecli,' who was 
the father of Noah, who was pious and’ good 
man, and beloved by God. And’ the Lord fpake 

‘unto Noah, faying, * Behold I will punifh the - 

fins of mankind with a general deluge; therefore 

buildan ark, capable of containing thyfelf and 

family, as alfoa pair of every living creature upon 

earth, and’ thofe only fhall be faved from the gen- 

_. eral deftruétion which I am about to infli@, forthe 
_ the iniquities of the people.” 

And God gave unto Noah a plan by which the 

ark was to be conftru€ted. Noah was one hund« ~~ 

red years in building the ark ; he was fix hundred _ 
years old when it was finifhed, and his fon Seth 
was ninety-nine. His father Lameth had died a 
_ fhort time before, aged 777 years. There was 
not at this time any of the ancient patriarchs living, 
fave Methufaleh,° the Grand father of Noah, who 
wasabout 969 years old, and it is fuppofed oat 

PEs he oe in the general ruin. a 

aT SR | 

248 ILLUSTRATIONS 

The ark being finifhed, Noah, agreeable to the 
inftructions he had received from the Moft High, 
went into it with his family, and took with him 
fuch things as he was commanded. » ~~ 

The flood took place.in the year of the world - 
1656, and deftreyed moft of the fuperb monu- 
_ ments of antiquity. The marble pillar of Enoch 
fellin the general deftruction 5 but by divine per- 
miflion, the pillar of krafs withftood the water, by 
which. means the ancient ftate of the liberal arts, 
and. particularl w Mafonry, has been handed down 
to us. 

We learn from holy writ, the hiftory of f fucceeds 
ing times, till the Ifratlites became flaves to the 
Egyptians ; 3 from which bondage they were freed 
_ - under the conduét of Mofes. The fame facred 

book informs us that Mofes was beloved of God, 

~ and that the Moft High fpoke to him on Mount 
Sinai. To Mofes God communicated his divine ~ 
law, written on two tables of ftone; with many 
_ promifes of a renewed alliance. He alfo gave 
him the tiue pronunciation of his facred name; 
which, he told him fhould be found by fome of 
_ his defcendants, engraved upon a plate of golds 
and 

) (OF (MASONRY. 249 

and) God gave a) ftrid-comnmand uato Motes; that 
~no one fhould pronounce hisfacred name; fo that 
in procefy of :time the true pronunciation was loft. 
* The fame divine: hiftory particularly: informs ts 
of the idifferent movements of the ‘Ifraelites, ‘until 
othey became poflefed of ‘the land-of promife; ‘and 
of the fuccécding!-events “until ‘the divine ‘Provi- 
_ dence was: pleafed to.give the fceptre to David ; 
who, though. fully determined to build .a. temple 
_ to the Moft High, could :never, begin, ‘its that 
¥ honour being referved: for: his fon.. . 

Solomon, being the wifeft of Princes, had iit 
in ‘remembrance -the ‘promife’ of God “to Mofes, 
iif “that fome of his defcendants, in ‘fulliiets" ‘Of time, 
' fhould difeover“his!‘holy name ;\ and ‘His' wifdom 
 infpired him to believe, that !thisecould not be 
> .atcomplifhed until, hethad, ereéted: and \confecrated 
Jaitemple.to: the living ‘God, in which he sree 
a depofitithe precious treafures. » : 

© Accordingly, Solomon began to® aa in’ ~ 
onith year-of his reign, agreeably toa plan given 
) to; him by:: David: ue ige “upon” Pe ark Ps 
Serene {ttt 

4 

4 

“ie . 

Ae es eee 

“gg00| ILLUSTRATIONS 

He chofe a {pot for this purpofe, the moft beats 
tiful and healthy in all Jerufalem, In digging for — 
a foundation they difcovered the ruins of an ancient 
edifice, amongft which they found a very confider- 
“able quantity of treafure, fuch as vafes of gold. and 
\ filver, urns, ‘marble, ‘tapeftry, jafper and agate : 
_columns, with anumber of precious ftones. *) 
All the treafures were colle€ted and carried to 
Solomon, who, upon deliberation, concluded them 
ito be the ruins of fome ancient temple ereéted 
“before the floods ‘and pofibly to the fervice of - 
idolatry ;. he therefore declined building) in that — 
fpot,: left the -worthip of the Deity fthould be 
profaned by the place. He then made choice of * 
_another place, where the temple was ereéted. 

| You have already been informed, that the Teni- 
iple of Solomon) was conftructed by the Craft; 
:butithere are fome particulars refpefting it with 
which you have not yet been made acquainted. © 

« Solomon caufed.a cavern. to be built. under the 
~Temple,. to which -he gave the name of the fecret 
_yault, _He exegted im this -vault @ large pillar of 
white marble, to fupport the S. S. and which, by 

infpiratiod, 

OF MASONRY. 2et 

infpiration, he called’ the pillar of beauty, from 
the beauty of the ark, which it fuftained. 

Thete. was ;a long, narrow defcent, which: 
Jed fromthe Palace: of ‘Solomon ‘to this” vault; 
through: nine. arches;: ‘in’ regular’ fucceffion ; ‘atid 
to this place he ufed to retire privately, in conis 
pany with H, of T. and H. A. when they had 
occafion to enter upon things of a'fecret andi ims 
portant nature. ey 23M 

» There were ‘none elfe then living, qualified’ to: 
enter this facred vault. One of their number 

being removed from them, difordered their fyf- ° 
tem fora time, and, as they were confulting in 
' what nanner to fupply: his abfence, | application’ 

was made to them by fome Intendants of .the: 
iy Building, Illuftrious Knights, and Grand Mafter 

Architects, who well knew there was a fecret place 
under the Temple, in which the King, é&c. before- 
mentioned, ufed. to meet, foliciting.the honour 
of being admitted there ;. to whom Solomon tes 
plied with an open -air, « My ‘Brethren, it cannot 
. now be granted.” 

: - Some days ‘after ‘this eindaib Tice, Solomort 2 
oe fon forthe: three Grand Mafter Architeéts, Joo 
> abert, i 

f aberty Stockin,' and G—,/and-direGted ehathiaabges 
and fearch once:mare} amongft the ancient ruins, ih 
where fo much: treafure; had béen)already:found, — Aili 
in, hopesjof difcovering *mores+s, They, accordingly! Bs 
departed, and one of them; namely G—, imeworks u 
ing. with the pick ax,,amongft the -rabbifh, came _ af 
to. the. large, iron ring, ‘which he immediately, — HE 
made; known. to ‘his, companionsy: who; all, con) rf 
cluded that it might lead to fome curiousidifcovery5) 
and), accordingly, they. worked: with» redoubled _ V5 be 
ardour, torclear laway the earth around it, which). fy. 
when they had:done, they foundyit fixedin'a large) 
ftone, perfeCtly fquare. - With: much difficulty: 
they, raifed ity when :the) moutly ‘of a a ‘and’ 
difmal-cayern appearedsi:! yo cota} obet Boe 
»G— propoledtothem: that ‘he would defcend? 
Acrope was accordingly given to’himy to facilitate 
his return, and:he defcended, and prefently found’ ' 
himfelf in ax:arched vault, :in the floor oftwhich 
was a fecret’ opening, ‘through which’ he® alfo"de- 
feended,: andriniike manner through’ a !third. 
Being now in the third vault, he found: there was 
an opening for defcending, ftill farther 5 ‘but bein 
afraid to purfue b his featch, he gaye, a, fignal, an 
“was, hoifted up by his two companions. 

i 
i 

OF MASONRY. 53 

Hie recounted to his companions what he had 
deen, and propofed to them to defcend by turns, 
. ‘ewhich they refufed ; upon this he determined to 
defcend again, and told them,’ that through every 
arch he pafled, he would gently fhake the rope. 
In this manner-he defcended from arch to arch, 
until -he was lowered-into the fixth arch ; when 
finding there was {till another opening, his heart 
failed him, and, giving the Signal, he was again 
(pulled up. 

He acquainted Joakert and Stockin with 
¢ ithe particulars of . his fecond - defcent, and 
Bs: now earneftly urged that one of them fhould go 
‘ down, as he-was very much fatigued ; but, terri- 
fied at:his relation, they both refufed. G— then 
receiving frefh courage, went dow: a third time, 
taking a lighted flambeay in his hand. When he 
i yhad defcended. into the) ninth: arch, a parcel of 
} tone and. mortar fuddenlyfell‘in, and extinguifhed 
i hislight ; 3) and he was immediately ftriick with the 
fight of a triangular: plate of gold, richly adorned 
swith precious ftones; the brilliancy of which 

_ ftruck him with admiration’ and aftonifhment. 

ont 

ie Again he gave the fignal, and was allifted in tee 
aleenilings gig 
Sark Op : : 4 

244 - ILLUSTRATIONS 

G— related to his two companions the whole x 
aftonifhing fcene he had been witnefs to;. and — 

they now being defirous of witneffing the difcovery, 
all concluded to go down together, by means of a 
* fealing rope ladder, "When they shad defcended 
into the ninth arch, Joabert and Stockin were 
ftruck with admiration and aftonifhment, in the 
fame manner as G— had been before them. 
After recovering themfelves, they examined the 

golden plate more particularly, and found it was _ 

encrufted by an agate ofa triangular form. “They 

alfo obferved certain charatters engraved thereon, 
of the meaning of which they » were then ignorant ; 3 

they therefore determined to carry the treafure to 

Solomon, and folicit the-honour of being admitted 
to the knowledge of this fublime myftery. 

Early in the morning they arrived at the apart>- 

ment of Solomon, who had the King of Tyre 
with him. To them they prefented the precious 
treafure theyhad found. When the two kings 
beheld it, they were ftruck. with amazement. 
Being recovered, they then examined the facred 
charaéters with attention, but would, not explain. 
them to the three Grand Mafter Architeéts.” So 
Jomon, told them that God had beftowed “upon 

2 - fhem 

~ 
7 

OF MASONRY. 255 

P) 

them a particular favour, in having permitted 
them to difcover the moft precious. jewels of 
Mafonry 5 by which he feemed to intimate theif of 
election, and as a reward for their zeal, conflancy 
and fidelity, he elegted them Knights of the uinth 
“Arch, afterwards called the Royal Arch. He 
further promifed them an explanation of the facred 
_ and myfterious name and charaéters on the golden 
plate, when it fhould be fixed in the place defigned 
- for it; and that he would then confer on them the 
moft fublime and myRerious degree of Royal 
Arch Mafonry, 

Solomon then explained to them, how the pro+ 
mife of God, . made to Noah, . Mofes, and. his 
father. David, was now accomplifhed. » That Pro- 
mife which affured them, that in. fullnefs of time 
his name fhould be difcovered, engraved upon a 
plate of gold; that they were bound to defend 
the facred characters, and that they were not at - 
liberty to pronounce the facred name. 

‘The Kings. informed the three. Knights, thas” 
that until that time they knew nothing of that 
word but by tradition, and that in the courfe of 
Af its being handed down, througha fucceffion of ages, — 
jt had been much corrupted ; but fince they were’ 

now 
rat 

256. ILLUSTRATIONS 

now in poffeflion of the true charaéters, he would 

foon give them the true pronunciation, to which’ 

‘honour they feemed to be fo juftly entitled, both . 

on account of perfonal merit, as alfo being ‘fo 
particularly cle&ted by the Almighty, to sie 
this great work. 

From the corruption of the fad name, fprung . 

the Juba of the Moors, the Jupiter of the Romans, 
and many others of a like nature. The true name 
is faid to have been vifible in the temple, at the 
time St. Jerome flourifhed,. written in the ancient 
Samaritan charaéters, and is ftill preferved i in the 
hearts of Sincere Mafons. 

‘The two Kings, accompanied / by the three . 

Knights, then’ took the facred treafure, ‘and de- 
Seended by the private way, through nine. arches, 
into the fecret vault: ‘Phey worked there together, 
and incrufted the golden plate upon the pedeftal of 
‘the pillar of beauty, happy in being employed i in 
fo glorious a-work. ‘The brilliancy of the plate 
and jewels were of themfeives fuifticient to give 
Tight to the place. 

| The two kings then changed the name of the 
place, from the /ecret to the facred vault 5 a place 
Radwh only to the Grand Elect and ‘Sublime. 
Matters, 

OF MASONRY.) 25; 

Mafters, which high degree they now conferred 
upon the three worthy Knights of the Royal. Arch, 
G—, Joabert, and Stockin, and explained.to them 
the facred charaéters engrayen upon the golden _ 
plate. 

The numberof the grand and fublime elected, 

. "were at fir three, and now confifted of five ; and 

continued fo until the Temple was completed and 
dedicated ; when King Solomon, asa reward for - 
their faithful fervices, admitted to this degree the 
twelve Grand Matters, who had faithfully prefided. 

over the twelve tribes; alfo one other Grand: 

Mafter Architeé&t. Nine ancient Grand Mafters, 
eminent for their virtue, were chofen Knights of 
the Royal Arch, and fhortly afterwards. were 
admitted to the fublime degree of Perfeétion. 

Whenever the laft mentioned Lodge was holden,. 
nine Knights of the Royal Arch tyled the-nine 
arches, which led ‘to the faered yault; the moft 

ancient, ftood in the arch next the vault, and fo.on. 

im regular progreffion; the youngeft- taking:his. 
fiation in the firft arch, which was. near to the 

private apartment of Solomon. None were fuf- 
fered to pafs, but thofe who proved themfelves © 
hast Set gash 

¥2 ee 

a8 ILLUSTR'ATIONS 

to be properly qualified, by giving the différent 
pafies. 

You have been informed in what manner the 
number of the Grand Eleét was augmented to 
twenty-feven, which is the cube of three ; they 
confifted of two Kings, three Knights of the Royal 
Arch, twelve Commanders of the twelve tribes, 
-nine eleéted Grand Matters, and one Grand 
Matter Architeét. 

. There. were liying at that time, 3568 other - 
‘ancient Mafters, who had wrought in conftruéting 
the Temple. Thefe began to be extremely jealoys 
of the pre-eminence fhewn to the twenty-five 
Brethren. They deputed therefore, a certain 
number to wait on King Solomon, with their 
compliments, to requeft that fimilar honours 
might be conferred on them. The King heard 
them with attention and with the ‘moft benign 
_air imaginable, gave them for anfwer, that the 
twenty-five Mafters were juftly entitled to the 
honours conferred on them, for their unceafing 
‘ardour, and inviolable fidelity jn the work that 
? had been committed to them, 

=; Go, 

4 

OF MASONRY. 259 

* Go, faid he, im peace, God may oneday permit; 
that you may be rewarded according to your 

o-deferts. 

Upon this, one of the Deputies, by no means 
fatisfied with this mild reply, turned round to: his 

_ companions faying (with an unbecoming degree of 

warmth) what occafion have we for an higher de- 

gree ? we know the word has been charged ; we 

can, travelas Mafters and receive pay as fuch. 
_ Solomon was much. moved at this, but would 

not rebuke them, but {poke in the following terms; 
The ancient members whom I have advanced 'to the 
‘degree of perfe€tion, have in a particular manner 

defe rved this favor from me. : 
‘They. have wrought hard in fheancient ruins,and ~ 
although the undertaking was difficult and full of 
horror, they penetrated into the bowels of the earth, 
from whence they brought an immenfe treafure to 
enrich and beautify the Temple of God ; go in fear, 

wait with patience, and ae to perfection by 
good works. 

The Deputies returned and made report of their 
“reception to the Mafters, who were aflémbled to. 
~hear it. Thefe Mafters, hafty and i impatient, in_ 
» their * gohan and of confequence vexed at the 

refufal 

20a ILLUSTRATIONS | 

refufal, determined, one and.all; to go to the ancient 
ruins, and. fearch under ground, with a view of ar- 
_Togating the merit, fo Beenaty for ae their 
defires. 

Accotdingly they departed next morning, and 
prefently after their arrival, difcovered the iron ring,. 
by means of which they raifed the fquare ftone, and: 
found the entrance into the atches. They immedi- 
ately prepared a ladder of topes, and defcended, 

with lighted flambeaux ; but tio foonér had thelaft — 

defcended, than the nine arches fell in upon them, 
‘and they were no more heard of. 

Solémon foon heard of this dreadful accident, 
and fent Joabert, Stockin & G---to inform them- 
felves more particularly of the matter.—They ac- 
cordingly departed at break of day, and upon their 
arrival, were perfectly aftonifhed at the ftrange ap- 
pearance of the place.—There were no remains of 

‘the arches to be féen; nor could they learn, that 

one fingle perfon of all thofe'who had defcended,. 
efcaped the deftruction. 

They examined the place with diligence, but 

_ found nothing of note, cxcept a few pieces of mare 

oe Bs upon. which were engraved certain. hiero- 
girphicts 

‘OF MASONRY. 26% 
élyphics ; thefe they carried! back with theni t6 Solo- 
mon, and relatéd what they hail feen. ‘The King 
fent for fome perfons | fkilled in hieroglyphick 
‘knowledge, and from their interpretation, was. 
fully affursd, that thofe pieces of marble were a part. 
of ‘the matble»pillar that had been ere€ted “by 
Enoch ;\ dnd therruins in which they ‘liad found'fo 
. muchitreafure, were thofe of the Temple which he’ 
shad confectated to Ged before the flood. © Solomon 
ordered the pieces'of marble to be carefully put to# 
gether, and depofted in the Sacred vault. 

. ‘afhng spe clofed by miyfterious Number. 

Dig Dusic Pato Re 

piRFECTION or GRAND, ELECT, PER: 
| * FECT axp SUBLIME MASON. 

BE, Lodge of Perfection; or,ultimate degree of 
Be ancient Mafonry, fhould reprefent:a fubteza- 
neous wault, ,painted.red, and.adorned with many 
colours, and.columns of a flamecolour. Behind the — 
Matter mutt be alight to fhine through a: triangu- a 
Jar fun}, and before him there muft be a pedeftal 
- appearing tobe broken. There.ought to be feyeral © 
othet lights, arranged numerically according. sit 
‘the different flages of Mafonry. 

‘The eo 

a62 ILLUSTRATIONS 

The moft perfect, grand, ele&,: and fublime 
Matter, in this Degree is to reprefent Solomon, 
feated in the Eaft, drefled in Royal robes, and hay- 
ing a crown and {ceptre placed on’a pedeftal before © 
him. The two Grand. Wardens are feated in the 
weft.—On the right hand of the Moft: Perfe&, 
fits the Grand Treafurer, having: a table before 

_ him, upon which muft be placed fome perfumes, 
with afmall filver hod, and’ a trowel of gold, On 
his lefthand fets the Grand Secretary, with’ a table 
alfo before him, on which ‘muft be: fever loaves of 
fhew bread, with’a ‘cup of red wine for libation, and 
alfo jewels for the candidates,at their reception. 

The jewels appertaining to this degree are 2 
‘crowned ‘compafs, exterided to go Degrees ; or, a. 
: Quadrant, a Sun in the centre ; and on the reverfe,: 
~ a blazing Star, ‘enclofing a triatigle, hung to a 
broad flame -colouréd ribbon,‘of a triangular form 
round the neck; andalfo, a Gold ‘ring with ‘this 
motto, Virtue unites what Death cannot part.” - 

The Apron muft be flamed with red, a blue rib- 
bon rourid the edge, and. the Jewel painted-on the _ 
flap: ‘The’ Brethren muft be dreffed in black, 
with {words in their hands. 

OF MASONRY. ‘ § 263 

“The paffage to the facred vault is long and’ nar= 
‘tow, shaving a lamp to give‘it light; itis guarded 
-bythree Brethren, with drawn fwords in their hands. 
The firft-ftands at the entrance, the fecond in the 
middle,and the third at the door of the facred vault. 

PRAYER at OPENING. 

Almighty and fovereign Archite& of heaven and 
earth, who by thy divine power doft ultimately 
fearch.the moft fecret recefles of ‘thought; purify 
Our-hearts by the facred fire of thy:love s guide us 
by thine unerring hand, in the path of virtue, and 
caftout of thy adorable-San@tuary all impiety and 
perverfenefs.; we befeech thee that our thoughts 

may be engaged in the grand work of our Perfec- 
tion, which when attained, will’be an’. ample re~’ 
-ward for our labour ; let peace and charity link us 
together ina pleafing union, and may this Lodge 
exhibit a faint refemblance of that happinefs which 
the elect will enjoy inthy Kingdom. Give usa 
Apirit of holy difcrimination, by which we may be 
able: to refufe the evil and chufe the good ; and alfo 
that | we may not be led aflray by thofe whowun- 
worthily affume the charaéter of the Grand Eleat. 
Finally, be pleafed to grant, that all our proceedings 
‘may tend to thy glory, and our own advancement 
in righteoufnefs ; blefs us and profper our works 
A! Lord. Amen, : Wher 

2644 ILLUSTRATIONS 

- When a Candidate is introduced, after .certain 
folemn forms, the Matter. of.the Ceremonies, fays 
‘¢ Timprefs you: my Brother,: with. -an- ardent: zeal 
for the honor of the Grand ‘Architeée of the Uni- 
verte 3 3 tothe end that you. may live always in his . 
adorable- prefence with a heart difpefed to every 
thing | that is pleafing to him, scat 

is 

The;, Mok. Perfea&: then cig the Candidate 
-. with the bread and. wine, faying, * Kat of - this 
bread; with me, anddrink of thefame cap, that 
we may learn thereby'to fuccour each other in time 
of need by a mutual love, and’ participation of what 
we poffefs.?. He then prefents to hima gold ring, 
daying; *¢ Receive. this ring, and let it be remem 
‘bered by you as a fymbol. of the. alliance you have 
now contracted with virtue and the virtuous. ¥ ou are 
meyer, my dear Brother, to part with it whilft you 
jive; ‘nor to bequeath it at your death, except to 
your wife, your eldeft-fon, or your neareft friend.” 
When this: part of the ceremony is ended, the 
brethren: ail partake of the bread and wine, and 
then make a bation, according ¢ to ancient ufage, 
as pradifed at. facrifices. t 
| have he 

yu ilies mS til 
* 

OF MASONRY. 265 

“o'—Phe Mott’ Perfe€t then decorates the candidate 
“according to the ‘oriaments of the order, “‘faying, 

_ «I now with thé greateft pléafure falute’ you, my 
* \ Brother, asa Grand Ele&t, Perfe&t and Sublime 
Mafon, which title T now confer on you, and gtace 
you with the fymbols' thereof.“ ‘Receive this 

__ ribbon, the triangular figure Of which, is emblen 
- atical of the divine triangle, { upon which was 
-.engraved by Enoch the holy name, jand which 
was. difcovered with the utmoft, difficulty. and 
danger, by thofe who knew not its value or mean 
ing.” . The crown upon your jewel is a fymbo},of 
the_ _royal otigin of this degree. The. compafs 

extended to 90 degrees, « denotes the extenfive know- 
ledge of the Grand Elea. f hefe jewels, fuf- 

: pended on your breaft, fhould make you, attentive 
to your duty and ftation.” 

CHARGE. 

a3 Thos, my venerable brother, by your unblania- 

ble condud, affiduity; conftancy and integrity, you 
have at laft attained the title of Grand, Eledt, Per- 
fe& and Sublime Mafon, which i is the fummit of 
Ancient’ Mafonry, and upon your arrival to ae Re 
i oft fincerely congratulate. you. 

Z I mut 

r. Si arate 

266 ILLUSTRATIONS 

2 mull carnefily recommend. to yousthe» ftzigteft 
care and. .circumipe Sunn in AlLyont condi thar 

? 

the fublime apy Leries of Hoprteet gh not Brae , 

ned or difgraced. q ool Bass ad 
As, to what, remains of completing your aye 
ledge j in, the ancient ftate of aiaade mal te 

it by perulBs to, the following... 1d yeaddit 

dw tobe Tl S3YRiO with oh: Yow fi tes 
When the* Temple! ‘of? ‘Jerufaiéin was “finithed, 
Yhe Mafons who’ were‘ employed in conftriséting 
vat ftately edifice,’ cranes immortal hono our — 
'THeir order" became more “uniformly ‘eftablithed 
and regulated than i had | been ‘before. ‘Their de. 
ligacy in ‘admitting « new ‘members of their order, 
brought it to a depree of fefpeet 3 3 as the merits ‘af 
“the candidate was the only thing they then paid at at 

tention to. With thefe prinéiples inflilled into their, 

minds, many of the Gratid Ele& left the’Temple af- 

ter its dedication, anddifperfed themfelyes among ~ 

the neighbouring kingdoms, inflruding , all who 
applied, and were found worthy, ; inthe: aii 
Degrees of Ancient Craft Mafenry,, . 

‘The Temple was Ainifhed in hey year, sae rs 

world 3000. 

{ : ; 

SOP MASONRY! Jey 
Thus far the wife King Of Irdel beltaved Ww ofth} 
‘of himfelf and: gained univerfal admiration ; but;’ 
in’ procéfs of time; when he had advanced in Years,” 
his ;underftanding became’ impaired ; a 
deaf, to\ tlie voice of the Lordy aiid’ was ftrangely! 
irregular ity his condu&. «= Proud of havitig ereQed 
an edifice to his miakerjand much intoxiedted with’ 
his great power, she plutiged® jnto’all mariner of 
ligencioufiiefs arid: debauchery, ‘uid profahed the 
‘Temple, :by offering that incenfe to the idol Mow 
loch,, which only fhould have: ape offered’ to the 
living Gods oini soit! of edad soo 
oy Phe Grand 'Elect: and Peifeét 2 atone) ft faw this, - 
and, were forely grieved); being fearful:that his: 
apoftacy would end. in; fome dreadful; confequen- 
ces, and perhaps. bring. upon them, their enemies; 
whont Solomon ‘had vainly and wantonly defied? 
The people copying the follies «and vices ‘of the 
King; became prouth dnd idolatrous, pias the 
true wor thip of God ‘for thattoP Taglspor2!! ) Jo 

As an adequate punifhinent ‘for this deledtion, 
* God infpired the heart of Nebuchadnezzar, king 
of Babylon, to take vengeance on the ‘Kingdom of 
eect “his prince fent an atmy, with Nebuzar- 

Shae adan, 

368. ILLUSTRATIONS 

adan, captain;of the guards, who entered Judah, ' 

with fire and fword, took and facked'the city of Je« 
rufalem ; razed its walls, and. deftroyed that fu- 
perb model of excellencey the Temple. ):'The:peos 
ple. were: carried captive to Babylon; and the con- 
querors carried with them. all the: veffels *of gold’ 
and, filver, | .8¢.' <This ‘happened: 470° sata 6 

-months and ten days: laftensits dédicatiom; ‘oo ° 

The Grand Ele&t who>werelat!Jerufalem: at this 
time, (exerted .themfelves with great bravery and 
fortitude in. its, defence,’ but without effect ;.for 

foon beholding the Temple falling into one general 

heap of ruin; they directed theirwhdle attention to 
the prefervation of the facred vault’ from’ injury, 
andthe golden’ Plate front being” difcovéred?” For 
this purpofe’ a party’ of thei ‘penetrated into the 
vaults and fearful that the facred'charaéters fhould 
be found sout, they defaced it, and broke down the 
tables.of gold; deterrhined that. in future no tract 
of thé facred. word .fhould. remain, exceptin the 
hearts of good mafons. are PAN Gig FOF 

‘When the, time ‘arrived that the chriftian Prin- 

‘ces entered into. a league to free the holy. land 
from the oppreflion of the infidels, the good. and 
virtuous 

ae, 

OF MASONRY. 269 

virtuous mafons, anxious for fo , ious an undertak- 
ing, voluntarily offered: their fervices to the con~ 
federateS, om condition that they fhould have a 
chief of their own election, which was granted ; ac- 
cordingly they accepted their -ftandard and de« 
parted. 

The valour and fortitude of thofe Ele@ted 
Knights was fuch, that they were admired by, and 
‘ took the lead of all the Princes of Jerufalem, who 
believing that their Myfteries infpired them with 
courage and fidelity to the caufe of virtue and reli- 
gion, became defirous of being initiated ; upofi 
being found worthy their defires were complied 
with, and thus the royal Art, meeting the appro-« 
bation of great and good men, became popular and 
honorable,and was diffufed to the worthy, through- 
out their various dominions, and has continued to 
f{pread, far and wide, through a fucceflion of ages, 
to the prefent day. 

EiPs><oe sere ac ocpcrc nares 
END OF PART IL 

HEOsrsrspoospararsrgnasB 

i fe bn 
waits ‘ih te 

~ yer 
i a VL “! 

MASONIC. SONGS, 

& UIBMOG < 

seen Vi A 

0 DS een £4 re 

| MOST EXCELLENT. MASTER’s SONG, 
Tati? Estibial ey] hi 
to be Sung when, oneds received into that Degree, 

LL hail ! to the morning 
g A That bids us rejoice 5 
he Temple’s, completed, | 
otis Hxalt high» each., yeice 5 
» “The Cape-Stone. is finith’d 
<9 Our, Labour is o’ers 
The, found, of the, Gavel 
Shall hail us no more. , 
‘To the power Almighty, who eyer has guided 
_ The tribes of old Ifrael, exalting their fame ; 
"To him who hath govern’d our hearts, undivided, 
Let’s fend forth our voices to praife his greatyname, 

aor 

Companions, afiemble 
On this joyful day, 
Th’ occafion is glorious, . 
The’ Key-Stone, to lay.5.; 
_ Bulfill’d: is the promife, 
By othe ANCIENT: OF) DA¥S}) <1) iy bok 
| ofMlo, bring forth the. .Cape-Stone, = hag 3 
With “fhouting and praife. 
FHATSAY Ceremonies. 

_ 
E 
) 
t 

272 MASONIC SONGS. 

Ceremonies. 
. ; i] 7 ’ , “~r 
'There’s no more occafion for Level or “Plam-tine 
For Trowel or Gavel, for Compafs or Square ;_ ; 
Our works are completed, the Ark fafely feated, 
And we fhall be greeted as workmen moft rare. 

Now thofe that are worthy, 
Our toils who have fhar’dy) 27-0 100) 
And prov’d themfelves pe 5% : 
Shali meet their reward. © © 97 Smee 
Their virtue and knowledge, 
Indufiry and fill, LR Ava 
Have our approbation, Aaeet igs 
Have gain‘d our good will. - tie 
We accept and receive them, moft excellent ‘matters, 
Invefted with honours, and power to!prefide 5 
Amongft worthy craftfmen, ‘wherever aflembled, 
The knowledge of Mafons to {pread “ a wide, 

— oon | 

ALMIGHTY Jener ats; 
. Defcend now, and fill. 
This Lodge with thy glory, 
“Our hearts with good will 5 
Prefide- at our bypriigas i 
Affit us to find : eeMOLtEN 
True pleafure in teathing 
Good will to matikind, 
Thy wispom infpired' the great inftitution, 
Thy srrencrn thall fuppoit'it, ’rill nature expire ; 
And when the Creation fhall’ fall-into’ ruin, 
its praury fhall rife sthrob gh’ the inidtt of the Fire ! 

oM ASTER’ 

“MASONIC SONG'S. 273 
MASTER’s SONG. 

‘ay [Tune—s Greenwich Penfioner.”’} 
_-§ YF SING the Mafons glory, 
Op Oe Whofe prying mind doth burn ; 
+ “Unto complete perfeétion, 
JTS -* Our myfteries to learn ; 
‘Not thofe who vifit Lodges 
‘To eat and dritik ‘their fill, 
ie Not thofe who at our meetings. 
; ‘Hear leétures ’gainft ‘their will : 
_ Gherus. But only thofe whofe pleafure 
Rie ‘e At every Lodge can be, 
__ I” improve themfelves by letures, 
ie ea In glorious Mafonry. 
eres ~~ “Hail glorious Mafonry 

- “The faithful worthy Brother, 
_. = Whofe heart can feel for grief; 
‘Whofe bofom with compaiflion 
Steps forth to its relief, . 
‘Whofe foul is ever ready, 

- Around him to diffufe 
The principles of Mafons, 

_ And guard them from abufe ; 
Ghorus. Thefe are thy fons, whofe pleafure, 

At every Lodge, will be; 

Se : T’ improve themfelves by lectures, 
ie . In glorious Mafonry. . 
(SRE: Hail! glorious Mafonry 1 
: 

was 

Se 

aj4 MAS ONIC SONGS, 

‘King Solomon, ovr patron, _ 
Tranfmitted this command, 

«¢ The faithful and praifeworthy, 
True light mutt cidade Pre 

And my defcendants, alfo, ih 

Who’'re feated inthe Zafy 
Have not fulfill’d their duty, 
". *Tilllight has-reach’d the Wf.” 

Chorus. « Therefore, our higheft pleafure 
At every Lodge, fhould be,’ 
“T? improve ourfelves by lectures, 
‘In glorious Mafonry. 
‘Hail! glorious Mafonry! 

‘My duty and my-ftation, 
As. Mafter in the chair, 
Obliges me to fummon 
Each Brother to prepare ; 
“That all may be enabled, 
5a By flow, though fure degrees, 
To anfwer in rotation,’ 
With honour and with eafe, 

(horus. Such are thy fons, whofe pleafure 
, At every Lodge will be, 
» improve themfelves by lectures, 
In glorious Mafonry. 
“Hail! * glorious Mafonry 4 

- MAS ONIC SONG S. 2n¢ 
SENIOR WARDEN’s SONG. 
. . Tune « When the hollow dram doth’ beat to bed.” 

Re HEN the Senior Warden, flanding in the Wet 
{ Calls us from our labour to partake of refty 
We unite, whilft he recites 
"The duties of a Mafon. 
On the level mect, 
On the fquare we part, 
_ So fays cach worthy Brother. 
This rule in view, 
We thus renew, 
Our friendfhip for each other,’ 

Bonus: When thie Senior, eo: 

When our work is over, implements fecure, 
Each returning homeward, with intentions pure, 
Our wives we kifs, give fweethearts blifs, — 
Which makes them both love Mafons ; 
And thus we may 
_ Enjoy each day 
At home, and at our meetings 5 - 
Our {weethearts cas’d, , 
Our wives well pleas’d, 
“Saluted with fuch greetings, 

Chorus, © ‘When the Senior, &c, tet 

JUNIOR 

- Ghorus. Thus we ever will, &c. 

236 MASONEC SONGS. 

JUNIOR WARDEN’s SONG. 
[Tume—* The way-worn Traveller.” f 

OW the Junior Warden calls us from our 

labours, ‘ 
Now the Sun is at meridian height, © 
We will merrily unite moft cheerily, 
With focial harmony new joys invite. 
One and all, at his call, ~ 
To the feaft repairing, 
All around joys refound, 
Each the pleafure fharing. 
Chorus. When the-Junior Warden; &e. 
Mirth and jollity, without frivolity, 
Pervade our meetings at the fettive board; 
Juttice, Temperance, F 
And Prudence govern us, : 
There’s nought but harmony amongft us heardy 
One and all, at the call, 6 
To. the feat repairing, 
All around joys refound, 
Each the pleafure fharing. 
Chorus. Mirth and jollity, &c. 

Thus we ever will enjoy the pleafant moments’ 
Giv’n unto us from the Mafter’s chair, 
"Till the Sun an hour has paft meridian, 
And then each Brother to his work repair, 
One and all hear the call, 
From the feaft repairing, 
All around gavels found, 
Each the labour fharing. 

SENIOR 

“™ 

MASONIC SONGS. 295 

SENIOR WARDEN’s TOAST. 

REEMASONS. all, 
Attend the call; 
“?Tis by command 
~ You all are warn’d, 
: To fill up a bumper and keep it at hand, 
: To drink to “© The Mother of Mafons.’’ 
Let each give the word to his Brother, 
Rey To prove that we love one another ; 
Let’s fill to the dame 
From whom we all came; 
And call her ‘* Of Mafons the Mother? 

Chorus. The Stewards have laid foundations, 
To prove that we love our relations ; 

ay, ~ . By toafting the Dame 

X ~ From whom ‘we all camé, 

: We'll call her “ The Mother of Mafons.’’ 

tn days of yore 
Freemafons bore 
‘ cv flak of wine, 
j ; Of mirth the fign, . 
And often they fill’d with the liquor divine, 
xh To drink to * The Mother of Mafons.” 
k Twas on thefe joyful occafions, 
4 ( All charg’d ftood firm to their ftations, 
xt Aind toafted the dame, from whom we all came, 
ove Repeating, “ The Mother of Mafons.? 

Chorus. The Stewards have laid, &ee > 

Aaz Se ea 

Piatt ake eee 7 

278 MASONI® SONGS. 

Be all prepar’d, 
Each, motion fquar’d, PAAR Ao 
' And at the nod, ~~. Miele 
With one accord, oh 
In ftriGeit rotation we'll-pafs round the word, 
Drink, Drink, to “ The Mother of Mafune.’” 
Have a care right and left, and@make ready, 
Be allin your exercife fleady; 
And fil! to the dame - 
From whom we all came,’ ; 
_ And toafther The Mother of Majons” 
Chorus. ‘Tha Stewards have laid, &c. vs Sigg 

sect Pecos 
NEW-YEAR, on FESTIVAL SONG. © 
By Brother J. Srumpsow. 

OME Brothers, let. us cheerful fing, 
‘Who can our arts difcover ? 
For friendthip, like a boiling. fpring, 
Flows conftant for each) other. 
Let’s crown the: feftival with mirths,: 
And hail the great myfterious birthy 
- ‘Phat adds fuch friendthip here on earth, 
Aé makes a faithful Brother. } 
While jarring difcords feparate 
The fimeft bands of unity, 
Of every clafs; of every ftate, 
Except it be Freemafonry 5 

MASONIC. SONGS. 279 

‘Our arts are form’d fo juft and -pure, 
They will from age to age endure, ° 
And in the bofom reft fecure, 

With all. that gain the myftery. 

Our manners we derive and wear, 
From actors we difcover ; 

Let’s cheerful hear him .in the chair, 
; And each proclaiming brother. 

And as we now begin the -year, 

Let love and friendthip, fill the ear, 

With cordial harmony -fincere, 

To every faithful Brother. 

The greateft.man found in the land; 

. Of this, or any other, © 

Will take a Brother by the hand, 

And bid him welcome hither. 

O may their fame in rapturés roll, 
And wide extend from pole to pole ; 
There’s no fuck friendthip forthe foul, 
No, not with one another. 

- ‘Where is an art with Mafons vie ? 
None—fay, the, wife, of every tongue >. 
Yet fo fecure, from thqught, or eye, 
And handed down from. fire to; fon, 
~ Now ket each celebrate: the. {train 
- That echoes with a Mafon’s name: 
And all as one falute the fame... 
Of our Grand Mafter WasuincTon. 

/ 

pes 3 : KNIGHT 

280 MASONIC SONGS. 
KNIGHT TEMPLAR’s SONG. 

O the Knight Templar’s awfuldome, 
Where glorious Knights in arms were drelt, 
Fil’d with furprife, I flowly came, ° 
With folemn jewels on my breait. 
A pilgrim to this houfé I came, 
With fandal, fearf, and ferip fo white, 
Thro’ rugged paths my feet were led, 
All this I bore to be a Knight. ~ 

With feeble arm I gently fmote 

At the Knight Templar’s mercy gate, 
What I beheld when it was ope’d 
Was fplendid, elegant and great... 
Twelve dazzling lights I quickly faw, 
All chofen for the crofs to fight 5. 

In one of them I found a flaw, 

And fpeedily put out that light. 

In regimentals did I drefs, 

Trimm’d with colours black and blue, 

A blazing ftar on the left breaft, 
Denotes a heart that’s always’ true. 

Let none the Templar’s name deny, 

As Peter did the pafs forfake, 

Your conduct {till preferve from blame, 
And keep your heads free from the ftake. 

Unite 

a 
ame 

MASONIC SONGS, 284. 

~ Unite your hearts and join your hands, 
In ev'ry folemn tie of love, 

United fhall each Templar ftand, 

The virtue of his caufe to prove, 
Until the world is loft in fire; 

- By order of the Trinity, 
The amazing world will ftill admire 
Our ftedfail love and unity. 

—SOSGGOOS— 

ROYAL ARCH SONG. 

_LMIGHTY Sire! our heavenly king, 
Before whofe facred name we bend. 
Accept the praifes which we fing, 
And to our humble prayer attend ! 
All hail great Architect divine ! 
This univerfal frame is thine- 

Thou who didft Perfia’s King command, 
A proclamation to extend, 

That Ifrael’s fons might quit his land, 
Their holy temple to attend. 

‘That facred place where three in one, 
- Compris’d thy comprehenfive name 
And where the bight meridian fun 
Was foon thy glory to proclaim. 

ORIGIN 

ati -MASONIC SONGS 

ORIGIN OF MASONRY. 
[Sung -to the tune King Solomon.} 
By Brother Bacow 

"ER time's great machine was in motiony 
Or light/had emitted a ray ; 
nwomb’d in the bowels of Chaos, 
All nature in embryo lay ; 
*Till the word of the Great Architefor 
Bid matter approach to the birth: 
Then his hand {pread the etherial d/ue curtainy 
And moulded-the folid-round earth. ~~ 
7 ring Chorids«. ; " 
From the chaos of mankind felected,: 
A qualified, fraternal band, 
By affection and honour cemented, 
The Ma/onic Order thall fiand- 

But ftill did a veil of thick darkneft 
‘The face of creation inveft'; 
Till the omnific word of the Jf 
Bid /ight to burft forth from the Haft r 
And inftant the Sua, in full {plendor, 
Obey’d the potential beheft ; 
And the Moon, in unclouded effulgence, 
Difplay’d her fair orb in the Weft 

Chorus. 

i 
ae 

’ "Then all the:bright orbs, and their fyftems, 

MASONIC SONGS. ~ 283 
Chorus. 

Bele&ed from darknefs and ign’rance, 

By myfteries deep and divine, 
dllumin’d by mental effulgence, 
The Mafonic Order thall.thine. 

Wn order the bright conftellations, - : 
Through fpace, ad infinitum: fhone 5 
Inftarr’d with its figns, the broad Zod’ac 
' Begirt: the fair heay’ns like a zone. 

Compofing one uniform whole, 

- Round their axis, and primary centers, 

In myftical motion did roll. 
Chorus. 

_ All taught’by the moft refin’d order, 

In one friendly circle to move ; 
And tending to one general ceater, 
The Lodge ftands cemented in /owe. 

‘The work thus ‘completed, the Mfu/es 
_ All harmony’s pow’rs did employ ; 
Aloud all the fons of God fhouted, 
And clapp’d ther pure hands with new joy 3 - 
‘Their goblets all charg’d with rich ne€ar, 
High rais'd in their hands when they fung, 
While with rounds to the grand Architeéor, 
The Arch through immenfity rung. 

Choruse 

384 MASONIC SONGS. 

Chorus. _ 
‘Then, brethren, charge! charge all your glaffes , 
. The fentiment echo along; 
Dnited, let’s join to commem’rate 
The harmony, mirth, and the fong. 

Hence, mar, taught geometry, motion, 
The mufical pow’ rs, fo divine ! 
_ The circle, the rules of proportion, 
bod thor and the wrerring line; 
n the face of rude unadorn’d nature, 
 Caus’d cities and temples to rife ; 
His darks plow’d the billowy waters ; 
His /ongs mounted up to the fkies. 

zs oe Chorus. 

Hail ! Mafonry—hail! which defcended, 
With mufic-and arts from on high; 
‘Thy exiftence, with thefe, thall be blended, 

Till arts and the mu/fes fhall die;
