A Voyage Towards the South Pole, Performed in the Years 1822-24
James Weddell, 1825
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Weddell's 1825 account — the sealing voyage that set the furthest-south record (74°S) and gave its name to the Weddell Sea. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/avoyagetowardss01weddgoog). This 1825 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


i 


N. 


? 


I 


^ 


.1 


I 


I 


r 


I* 

1' 


V. 


/ 


^ 


/ 
I 

I 


■^'^ 


.\'^ 


V\IpJa*u 


r 


A 

VOYAGE 

TOWARDS 

THE    SOUTH    POLE, 

PERFORMED   IN   THE   YEARS    1822-24. 
CONTAINING 

AN  EXAMINATION  OF  THE  ANTARCTIC   SEA, 

TO   THE   SEVENTY-FOUBTH  DEGREE   OF  LATITUDE: 
AND 

A  VISIT   TO  TIERRA  DEL  FUEGO, 

WITH  A  PARTICULAR  ACCOC7MT  OF  ^HE   INHABITANTS. 

TO   WHICH   IS    ADDEO, 
MUCH    USEFUL    INFORMATION   ON   THE   COASTING    NAVIGATION    OP 

CAPE  HORN,  AND  THE  ADJACENT  LANDS, 

WITH  CHARTS  OF  HARBOURS,  &c 


By  JAMES  WEDDELL,  Esg. 

MASTER  IN  THE  ROYAL  NAVY. 


lONDON:  /  '-• 

PRINTED   FOR  ;,    ;     f'll^^ 

LONGMAN,  HURST,  REES,  ORME,  BROWN,  AND  tiMREXiN^ 

PATFRNOSTER-ROW.  J        :     /^  :         /    , 

1825.        ■  --^--^^/^ 


•  •»  ,     •    •• 


•  '•• •  •  ' 


liOlTDON  : 

Prinied  by  A.  &  R.  Spottiswoode, 
New- Street  Square. 


r 


TO 
THE  RIGHT  HONOURABLE 

LORD  VISCOUNT  MJELVILLE,  K.T. 

FiaSI!  LORD   OF  THE   ADMIRALTY, 

ic.  ic.  ic. 


This  volume,  containing  the  Journal  of  a 
Voyage  in  the  Southern  Hemisphere,  and 
which  reached  a  higher  latitude  in  that 
quarter  than  was  ever  before  accomplished, 
is  [.  .th  His  Lordship's  fostering  permis- 
sion) respectfully  dedicated. 

When  the  writer,  a  Seaman,  views  the 
noble   exertions  made  under  His   Lord- 


IV  DEDICATION. 

ship's  administration  to  ascertain  the  Geo- 
graphy of  the  Northern  Polar  Circle,  he 
must  deem  it  at  once  a  debt  of  gratitude 
and  a  tribute  of  respect,  humbly  to  offer 
him  the  account  of  researches  pursued  at 
the  other  extremity  of  tte  Globe.    ' 

J.  WEDDELL. 


\ 


ERRATA, 

Page^i2.  line  7.  for  "  22<>0'59f  "  twd  "  2^$9^(f" 

16.  line  10.  from  bottom,  for  "  65**  16'  52^"  read  65^  82'  22^" 
31.  line  6.  from  bottom,  delete  '<  by'* 
45.  lines  8,  9.  /or  "  southerly"  read  **  northerly'* 
50.  line  7.  for  «'  58°  55' "  read  "  38<>  55'" 
59.  line  17.  for  «  20"  read  **  10'* 
65w  line  20.  for  "  35°  42'  45"  '*  rearf  «  48°  17'  15"  '* 
96.  line  4.  from  bottom,  for  **  up**  read  •<  of  *' 
121.  line  6.  /or  **  any"  read  <*  either" 
193.  line  11.  for  **  in  falmouth"  read  "  off  falmouth" 
193.  line  13.  from  bottom,, /or  "  Bamavel  Island,  and  near  Cape 
Horn.  I"  read  "  Barnavelt's  Island,  near  Cape  Horn, 
and  I" 
226.  line  4.  from  bottom, /or  «  in'*  read  "  off" 


i 


-1 


70 


I- 


» 


11.11    1 — TTir 


td 


A 

VOYAGE 


TQWARBS 


THE   SOUTH   POLE. 


CHAPTER  I. 

INTRODUCTION. 


Having  performed  a  voyage  of  investigation 
to  a  higher  southern  latitude  than  has  hitherto 
been  attained,  I  have  thought  that  it  might  be 
expedient,  more  especially  for  the  benefit  of 
hydrography,  to  make  public  the  principal  oc- 
currences of  that  voyage. 

Our  adventure  was  for  procuring  Fur-seal 
skins,  and  our  vessels  were  the  brig  Jane,  of 
Leith,  of  160  tons,  and  the  cutter  Beaufoy,  of 
London,  of  65  tons,  both  fitted  out  in  the  ordi- 
nary way,  and  provisioned  for  two  years.  The 
former,  with  a  crew  of  twenty-two  oflicers  and 
men,  was  under  my  own  command ;  the  latter, 
with  a  crew  of  thirteen,  was  commanded  by 
Mr.  Matthew  Brisbane. 

The  recent  discovery  of  New  South  Shetland 


2  INTRODUCTION. 

had  led  to  a  conjecture  that  Sandwich  I^and  was 
a  projecting  point  of  a  southern  continent,  or 
range  of  land  lying  east  and  west  behind  the 
islands  of  South  Shetland :  but  this  idea  I  found 
to  be  entirely  erroneous ;  —  as  I  sailed  between 
these  lands  to  the  latitude"  of  74°  15'  south,  and 
there  left  a  clear  and  navigable  sea. 

It  may  not  be  improper  to  preface  these  pages 
with  an  outline  of  the  investigations  which 
have  been  made  to  the  south  of  Cape  Horn,  and 
within  the  Antarctic  Circle,  prior  to  my  setting 
out  on  this  voyage. 

Many  navigators,  in  their  passage  round  Cape 
Horn,  had  reached  the  62nd  degree  of  south  lati- 
tude, but  always  too  far  to  the  westward  for  falUng 
in  with  the  range  of  South  Shetland,  till  in  the  year 
1818,  Mr.  William  Smith,  of  Blyth,  in  his  pas- 
sage from  Monte  Video  to  Valparaiso,  made, 
apparently  by  accident,  a  discovery  of  the  islands 
which  have  been  thus  named.  In  an  after  voy- 
age he  had  the  boldness  to  approach  closely, 
and  ascertained  this  mass  to  be  land ;  which  dis- 
covery, he,  with  the  honest  feeling  of  an 
Englishman,  reported  to  Captain  Sherifi^  the 
representative  of  his  king  at  Valparaiso. 

The  only  navigators  who  have,  to  our  know- 
ledge, explored  the  sea  within  the  Antarctic  Cir- 
cle, are  Captains  Cook  and  Fumeaux,  in  their 
second  voyage  which  was  towards  the  South 
Pole,  in  the  years  1773,  and  1774. 


INTRODUCTION.  D 

On  the  17th  of  January  1773>  Captain  Cook 
arrived  in  the  latitude  of  67''  15',  in  the  longitude 
of  39°  east.  Here  he  found  the  ice  in  field,  firm, 
and  continuing  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach 
from  the  mast-head. 

**  We  did  not  think  it  prudent,'*  says  he  (vide 
Cook's  Voyages),  **  to  persevere  in  a  southern 
"  direction,  as  that  kind  of  siimmer  which  this 
**  part  of  the  world  affords  was  now  half  spent, 
"  and  it  would  have  taken  much  time  to  have  gone 
**  round  the  ice,  supposing  it  to  be  practicable." 

On  the  2d  of  January  1774,  Captain  Cook 
again  arrived  within  the  Antartic  Sea,  and  having 
been  beset  with  ice  islands  and  loose  ice,  in  the 
latitude  of  68''  and  longitude  138°  west,  he  bore 
up  north-west,  and  re-crossed  the  Antarctic 
Circle,  steering  various  courses  to  the  north  and 
east,  and  then  to  the  south.  On  the  25th  of 
January  he  arrived  for  the  third  time  within  the 
Frozen  Zone;  and  on  the  30th  oi  January  had 
reached  the  latitude  of  7r  10' S.  He  again 
says,  "  As  we  could  not  go  any  farther  to  the 
"  south,  we  thought  it  advisable  to  tack,  and 
"  stand  back  to  the  north,  being  at  this  time  in 
«  latitude  71*^  10'  and  longitude  106**  54'  west; 
••  happily  for  us  we  had  tacked  in  good  time, 
"  for  we  had  no  sooner  done  it  than  a  thick  fog 
**  came  on,  which  would  have  been  highly  dan- 
"  gerous  when  we  feU  in  with  the  ice." 

B  2 


4  INTRODUCTION. 

Two  Russian  frigates,  employed  on  a  voyage 
t)f  discovery  in  the  year  1821,  penetrated,  as  it 
is  stated,  to  the  69th  degree  of  southlatitude,  but 
were  unable  to  proceed  farther.  The  particulars 
of  their  voyage  have  not  yet  been  made  public  in 
England. 

Not  expecting,  at  my  sailing  from  London, 
to  arrive  at  so  high  a  southern  latitude,  I  had 
not  supplied  myself  with  instruments  which 
would  have  enabled  me  to  extwid  my  observ- 
ations j  but  I  was  provided  with  all  those  in 
common  use  of  the  best  construction.  Of  chro- 
nometers, I  had  one  of  eight  days  (No.  820.) 
made  by  James  Murry ;  of  which  I  shall  speak 
in  another  place.  One  of  two  days  by  Muny 
and  Strachan,  (No.  403.)  One  of  24  hours  also 
made  by  Murry,  and  they  all  performed  suffi- 
ciently well  to  recommend  the  makers  for  their 
very  improved  mechanism  in  this  useful  art  My 
azimuth  compass  was  patent,  and,  as  well  as  the 
rest  of  my  compasses,  made  by  Mr.  Alexander, 
ofLeith. 

The  great  difference  found  in  the  variation  of 
the  needle  within  a  short  distance,  about  the 
latitude  of  70^  may  be  worthy,  of  remark,  and 
will  be  mentioned  in  the  journal  as  the  observ- 
ations were  made. 

Notwithstanding  the  inducement  to  which  I 
have  referred  at  the  beginning  of  this  introduc- 
tion, of  my  being  in  a  manner  bound  for  the 


INTKODUCTION.  5 

sake  of  the  science  of  hydrography,  to  record 
the  performance  of  this  unprecedented  voyage; 
I  should  nevertheless,  have  done  it  only  by 
means  of  an  official  letter  to  the  Honorable 
Commissioners  of  His  Majesty's  Navy,  had  not 
the  notices  of  foreign  and  unknown  matters  con* 
tained  in  my  notes,  appeared  so  interesting  that 
the  solicitations  of  my  friends,  (more  particui 
larly  of  my  co-owners  in  the  vessels  and  voy- 
age, John  Str^chan,  Esq.  of  Edinburgh,  and 
James  Mitchell,  Esq.  of  London,)  prevailed  with 
me  to  carry  my  information  to  the  press.  I  am 
further  persuaded  of  the  propriety  of  so  doing, 
from  my  having  had  nearly  two  months'  expe- 
rience of  the  navigation  in  the  immediate  neigh- 
bourhood of  Cape  Horn,  which  is  yet  but  little 
known :  for  although  the  cape  has  been  rounded 
times  almost  innumerable,  yet  this  has  always 
been  done  at  so  great  a  distance  from  the  land, 
that  no  accurate  accounts  of  its  coasts  and  har- 
bours could  be  obtained. 

A  familiar  knowledge  of  these  shores  must 
evidently  tend  tojessen  the  timidity  which  seizes 
the  minds  of  some  commanders  in  passing  this 
cape ;  and  an  acquaintance  with  the  ainchor- 
ageis  which  are  safe,  must  render  the  practice  of 
relinquishing  the  passage, ,  by  bearing  up  along 
the  east  coast  of  Patagonia,  during  adverse  gales, 
altogether  unnecessary. 

B  3  .  - 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

From  my  having  been  engaged  five  years,  in 
navigating  these  seas,  and  having  performed  a 
passage  of  26  degrees  of  longitude  dh-ect  to  the 
westward  about  the  parallel  of  Cape  Horn  during 
the  stormy  month  oiApriU  I  am  fully  acquainted 
with  the  perils  and  the  conveniences  of  this  navi- 
gation, and  can  offer  my  experience  with  the  con- 
fident expectation  of  its  being  found  useful. 

The  old  and  contradictory  accounts  which  have 
been  given  us  concerning  the  people  found  about 
the  Straits  of  Magellan,  and  the  coast  of  Patagonia, 
may  be  wondered  at ;  though  the  descriptions  by 
Commodore  Byron  of  the  enormous  size  of  these 
people,  seemed  to  confirm  all  preceding  state* 
ments* 

There  is  little  doubt  that  tall  and  stout  men 
Were  seen  on  the  coast  of  Patagonia  by  the 
voyagers;  but  it  is  more  than  probable  that  those 
with  whom  they  communicated  were  chiefs,  who 
were,  perhaps,  selected  on  account  of  their  sta- 
ture: for  on  no  part  of  the  coast  have  my  ofiicers, 
who  have  seen  many  of  the  Patagonians,  found 
people  generally,  nor  indeed  any  men  at  all,  of 
the  extraordinary  appearance  mentioned  by 
preceding  travellers. 

The  inhabitants  of  Tierra  del  Fuego  have  also 
been  spoken  of  as  if  they  were  beings  possessed 
of  little  more  than  smimal  instinct,  and  incapable 
of  being  instructed-     This  may,  perhaps,  be  the 


INTROaUCTION.  7 

case  J  —  arising  however,  out  of  the  peculiar  situ- 
ation in  which  they  are  placed.  Give  them  inter- 
course with  foreigners  and  they  will  improve  in 
understanding ;  for  I  have  found  them  to  be  not 
only  tractable  and  inoffensive,  biit  also,  in  many 
of  their  employments,  active  and  ingenious. 

The  civil  day  being  more  intelligible  to  gene- 
ral readers  than  that  called  the  sea  day,  I  shall 
use  the  former  in  the  following  journal.  The 
principal  incidents  related  may  be  found  to  cor- 
respond with  the  ship's  log-book,  to  the  truth  of 
which  the  chief  officer  of  the  Jane,  and  two  sea^- 
men  have  made  oath  before  the  commissioners  of 
his  Majesty's  customs. 

As  I  shall  have  frequqnt  occasion  in  the  course 
of  the  work  to  mention  facts  and  circumstances 
which  took  place  during  my  former  movements 
in  these  latitudes,  it  may  be  necessary  to  state 
here  that  th6  two  voyages  to  which  I  refer, 
were  performed  by  me  in  the  years  1819,  1820, 
and  1821 9  and  extended  to  various  parts  in  the 
southern  seas. 

It  may  be  farther  necessary  to  premise  that  if 
in  some  of  the  following  sheets  I  throw  out  an 
observation  or  reflection  on  the  subject  of  the 
voyage,  not  perhaps  strictly  philosophical  or 
scientific,  I  do  so  in  the  hope  that  it  may  yet  be 
of  a  nature  to  challenge  examination  and  lead  to 
more  just  conclusions  in  abler  hands. 

B    4i 


8 


CHAP.  II. 

m 

DEPARTURE  or  THE  JANE  AND  BEAUFOY  FROM  THE 
DOWNS. —- ARRIVAL  OF  THE  JANE  AT  MADEIRA.  —  PAS- 
SAGE TO  BONA  VISTA*  *-  TRANSACTIONS  THERE.  —  RE- 
MARKS ON  THE  ISLAND  AND  THE  INHABITANTS. — 
DEPARTURE  AND  PASSAGE  TO  FORT  ST.  ELENA.  —  PRO- 
CEEDINGS  THERE^   AND   DESCRIPTION   OF   THE   HARBOUR. 

On  the  17th  of  September  1822,  I  gave  Mr. 
Matthew  Brisbane  his  instructions,  and  at  five 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon  both  vessels  weighed, 
and  made  sail  out  of  the  Downs. 

We  had  the  wind  blowing  fresh  from  E.N.E., 
which  by  the  18th,  in  the  afternoon,  brought  us 
off  Portland.  At  4*"  P.M.  with  the  BiU  N.  J  E. 
by  compass,  distant  fourteen  miles,  I  took  sights 
of  the  sun  for  chronometers,  and  departure  for 
dead  reckoning.  The  breeze  continued  to  blow 
from  the  eastward,  and  steering  a  channel  course, 
darkness  soon  closed  from  our  contemplations 
the  view  of  our  beloved  country. 

As  I  had  directed  Mr.  Brisbane  to  separate, 

when  below  the  Bill  of  Portland,  and  to  proceed 

direct  to  the  Island  of  Bona  Vista,  while  I  was 
to. touch  at  Madeira,  by  the  way,  we  allowed  the 

Beaufoy  to  pass  out  of  sight  about  midnight. 

Nothing  worthy  of  remark  occurred  during 

our  passage  to  Madeira,  except  that  in  making 


ARRIVAL   A'f  JiONAVisTA.  /      9 

Porto  Santo,  I  found  that  we  had  experienced 
an  easterly  current  of  85  miles  in  ten  days. 

It  was  Friday  the  4th  of  October  before  we 
arrived  in  Funchal  Roads,  and  at  half  after  se- 
ven in  the  morning  I  took  sights  for  chronome- 
ters. The  longitude  deduced,  placed  Funchal 
centre  in  16"  52'  2S'\ 

By  the  5th  in  the  evening,  having  (by  the  kind 
assistance  of  John  Blandy,  Esq.  to  whom  I  had 
letters  of  introduction),  completed  my  business 
on  shore,  I  returned  on  board,  and  at  nine 
o'clock  made  all  sail  for  the  island  of  Bona  Vista, 
one  of  the  Cape  de  Verdes.  We  took  the  trade 
wind  at  N.E.  after  clearing  Funchal  Bay,  and 
carried  it,  blowing  steadily,  to  Bona  Vista,  where 
we  arrived  on  Monday  the  14th,  and  found  the 
Beaufoyi  with  several  small  American  and  Por- 
tuguese vessels,  at  anchor. 

Having  to  take  in  a  quantity  of  salt,  it 
was  immediately  set  about,  and  by  the  19th 
having  received  36  tons,  divided  in  the  two  ves- 
sels, and  being  in  all  other  respects  supplied  and 
ready  for  sea,  on  the  evening  of  the  iiOth  both 
vessels  weighed,  and  made  sail  to  the  southward. 

While  at  Bona  Vista,  I  dined  several  times  in 
company  with  the  Bishop  of  the  Cape  de  Verdes, 
who  usually  resides  at  St.  lago.  He  was  at  this 
pepod  making  his  triennial  visit,  and  with  his 
retinue  of  priests,  lived  at  the  house  of  Senhor 


XO  BONAVISTA. 

Manoel  Martins,  who  was  absent  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Cortes,  as  representative  of  the  Cape 
de  Verdes.  I  found  the  Bishop  a  man  of  agree- 
able address,  and  by  his  winning  manner  cal^u-^ 
lated  to  make  proselytes ;  indeed  he  attempted 
the  conversion  of  an  inmate  of  the  house,  an 
American  lady,  whose  child  he  had  baptized. 
She,  however,  with  the  common  attachment  that 
people  have  towards  the  faith  in  which  they 
have  been  bred,  repulsed  all  his  endeavours. 

The  greatest  respect  was  paid  to  this  holy  per- 
son by  the  principal  inhabitants  of  the  island ; 
and  great  deference  by  the  commonalty.  Forbear- 
ance, suavity  of  manners,  and  rigid  clerical  dis- 
cipline, appeared  conspicuously  in  his  character. 
When  he  rose  from  table  he  immediately  with- 
drew to  his  room  to  study,  and  was  seldom 
seen,  except  at  table. or  taking  a  short  evening 
walk,  during  which  he.  wag  usually  accompanied 
by  a  few  of  the  chief  people  of  the  Island. 
Some  of  his  priestly  retinue  were  not  quite  so 
precise;  for  I  could  discover  that  when  from 
under  the  eyp  of  the  Bishop,  they  were,  like  the 
laity,  fond  of  the  society  of  ladies,  and  open  to 
their  attractions. 

The,  common  people  of  these  islands,  are  for 
the  most  part,  intolerably  indolent,  and  hence 
proceeds .  their  miserable  way  of  living.  Their 
slaved)  of  whom  they  have  many,  are  made  to 


BOMAVI&TA.  11 

work  hard,  under  the  fear  of  the  whipj  for  al- 
though, amongst  all  other  nations,  the  Africans 
now  enjoy  a  share  of  freedom,  here  no  such 
blessing  is  afforded  them. 

Their  principal  occupation  is  making  salt,  and 
carrying  on  a  small  trade  with  the  neighbouring 
islands,  and  with  the  ships  that  call  here.  The 
town  of  English  Roads,  which  is  generally  called 
Bonavista,  contains  from  forty  to  fifty  houses  ; 
which,  excepting  about  half  a  dozen,  are  rudely 
constructed  of  wood  and  clay,  and  mostly  of 
negro-architecture.  The  colour  di  the  inhabit* 
ants  is  from  white  to  negro  jet,  comprehend- 
ing all  the  intermediate  shades ;  and  they  are  so 
intermarried,  slaves  excepted,  that  they  may  be 
said  to  be  but  one  family. 

About  three  miles  east  of  Bonavista,  lies  a 
town,  called  Nova  Cidade,  or  New  City,  where 
the  governor  used  to  reside.  It  contains  a  neat 
church,  and  about  100  buildings,  the  most  of 
which  are  huts.  The  Governor,  whom  I  found 
here  on  a  former  voyage,  spoke  good  English, 
and  was  extremely  polite  and  communicative. 
He  was  an  European,  and  a  colonel  in  the  Portu- 
guese regular  army  j  his  age  might  be  about  65, 
and  he  had  been  42  years  governor  of  Bonavista. 

He  informed  me  that  the  population  of  the 
island  was  about  3000,  and  that  nearly  300  of 
these  were  regular  troops.     The  soil,  he  said. 


12  BON  A  VIST  A. 

was  very  prolific,  when  the  rains  fell  at  the  usual 
seasons  and  were  copious ;  but  that  they  fre- 
quently suffered  much  from  want  of  rain,  and 
indeed  sometimes  of  good  drinking  water: 
hence  no  vessel  touching  here  can  expect  to 
procure  that  invaluable  article.  The  mean  of 
chronometers  gave  22°  0'  59''  for  the  longitude 
of  the  anchorage. 

Sea  stock  of  pigs,  goats,  sheep,  and  poultry 
may  be  had  here,  but  all  are  lean  and  of  an  in- 
ferior breed :  perhaps  the  best  place  for  stock  is 
St.  lago,  where  it  is  better  fed,  although  some- 
what dearer.  I  called  at  the  latter  on  my  last 
voyage,  and  waited  on  the  Governor,  who  was 
on  board  a  schooner  of  war,  at  anchor  in  the 
Bay.  He  was  dressed  in  a  general's  uniform, 
and  rather  a  good  looking  man.  On  my  telling 
him  that  my  object  was  to  procure  a  supply 
of  stock,  and  that  the  vessels  should  not  anchor, 
he  immediately  granted  permission  to  land,  at 
the  same,  time,  recommending  to  my  consider- 
ation the  poultry  yard  of  his  lady,  who,  he  as- 
sured me,  would  furnish  me  very  reasonably.  I 
was  a  good  deal  surprised  to  hear  that  a  gover- 
nor's lady  should  condescend  to  such  a  traffic, 
but.immediately  went  on  shore  and  proceeded  to 
the  palace.  The  door  was  guarded  by  a  soldier, 
who  refused  me  admittance ;  but  on  my  busi- 
ness, being  announced,  I  was  allowed  to  pass  by 


departure:  from  bonavista.  IS 

this  sentinel  and  two  others,  and  at  length  ar- 
rived  in  the  presence  of  the  lady*  I  found  her 
employed  in  getting  out  the  stock,  consisting  of 
pigs,,  turkeys,  and  fowls,  into  the  middle  of  the 
yard  for  inspection.  According  to  the  usual 
practice,  she  represented  them  as  being  fat  and 
cheap,  and  I  chose  a  number  of  turkies,  &c. 
wliich  were  sent  down  to  the  boat.  Our  bar- 
gain was  concluded  in  the  house,  over  a  glass  of 
wine,  and  she  politely  desired  her  son,  a  youth  of 
about  fourteen,  to  play  me  a  tune  on  the  guitar, 
which  he  did  with  peculiar  sweetness  ;  after  he 
had  finished  I  settled  for  my  purchase,  and  bade 
her  ladyship  good  day. 

Having  mentioned'  this  circumstance  as  ex- 
hibiting a  singular  union  of  rank  and  occupa- 
tion, if  not  of  pomp  and  avarice,  I  now  return 
to'my  narrative  by  observing,  that  having  weighed 
anchor  at  Bonavista,  we  carried  all  possible  sail 
to  the  southward. 

We  had  nothing  remarkable  until  the  21  &t  of 
October,  when  being  in  latitude  north  14  degrees, 
we  were  not  a  little  surprised  to  find  the  water 
up  to  the  cabin  deck ;  the  cause  was  soon  disco- 
vered to  be  a  leak  somewhere  in  the  counter; 
and  in  consequence  of  coals  being  stowed. in 
the  after-hold,  the  water  could  not  find  its  way 
forward.  We  immediately  hove  the  ship  to, 
brought  her  by  the  head,  and  finding  the  leak 


14  PORTUGUESE   SLATE-SHIP. 

in  the  counter  ends,  succeeded  in  stopping  it 
in  a  temporary  manner. 

An  account  of  cotnmon  occurrences  on  board 
a  merchant  vessel,  and  the  ship's  place  in  latitude 
or  lon^tude  over  so  obvious  a  track,  can  con- 
vey no  useful  or  interesting  information.  I 
shall  therefore  hurry  on  to  regions  less  fre- 
quented. 

On  the  23d  of  October^  in  the  latitude  of  eight 
degrees  north,  the  wind  became  light  and  vari- 
able, and  continued  so  till  we  reached  the  lati- 
tude of  five  degrees  north,  when  we  took  the 
S.E.  trade  wind.  On  the  7th  November  in  the 
longitude  of  30°  we  crossed  the  equator.  The 
trade  wind  being  far  southerly  we  passed  Cape 
St.  Augustine,  on  the  coast  of  Brazil,  within 
100  miles. 

On  the  I4th,  in  latitude  14*  S.,  we  closed 
with  a  Portuguese  schooner,  having  a  cargo  of 
slaves,  bound  to  Bahia,  and>  I  boarded  her.  My 
officers  were  seriously  impressed  with  the  idea 
of  making  her  a  prize ;  but  I  was  aware  that 
we  could  not  legally  do  so.  This  inability  I 
much  regretted,  as  we  were  of  sufficient  force 
to  have  relieved  250  fellow  creatures  from  a 
cruel  bondage.  The  men  slaves  were  stowed  in 
the  hold,  and  almost  suffocated  by  the  small- 
ness  of  the  place ;  the  women  and  children  were 
seated  on  the  lee-side  n  of  the  deck,   many  of 


ARRIVAL    OFF   PORT   VALDEES;  15 

them  shackled  by  the  feet  As  it  wad  out  of 
my  power  to  render  them  any  assistance,  much 
as  I  deplored  their  miserable  situation,  I  re- 
turned on  board  and  the  vessels  Separated. 

This  nefarious  traflSc  is  still  carried  on  by  the 
Portuguese,  to  a  considerable  extent  to  the  south- 
ward of  the  Equator,  in  spite  of  all  the  humane 
efforts  of  Great  Britain  to  put  an  end  to  it. 

As  far  as  the  latitude  of  24  degrees  south,  we 
had  the  wind  frequently  from  N.  W.  to  N.N.E. 
blowing  in  heavy  squalls,  with  thunder  and 
heavy  rain. 

At  this  season,  the  route  we  took  may  be  re* 
commended  for  a  quick  passage,  but,  for  the 
health  of  a  crew  entering  upon  a  long  voyage* 
the  coasting  passage  is  highly  injurious.  I  had 
one  man  at  the  point  of  death  by  an  attack  of 
tetantiSy  brought  on  by  his  exposure  to  heavy 
rains. 

We  continued  standing  to  the  southward  with 
the  Beaiifoy  in  company,  till  we  reached  the 
latitude  of  40' ;  we  then  steered  to  the  westward 
to  make  the  land  of  Patagonia. 

On  the  10th  oi  December  we  arrived  off  Port 
Valdees  lying  in  latitude  42^32"  I  sent  the 
chief  mate  to  sound  the  passage  into  the  harbour; 
but  finding  by  his  report,  that  there  was  only  two 
and  a  half  fathoms  at  low  water  in  mid-channel. 


16       ARRIVAL  AT  PORT  ST«^  ELBNA. 

and  that  the  tide  ran  rapidly  across  the  entrance, 
I  did  not  attempt  going  in  with  the  vessels. 

On  the  llth  in  the  morning,  we  made  sail 
along  the  coast  to  the  southward,  touching  at 
several  places  for  furs. 

On  the  19th,  we  put  into  Port  St.  Elena. 
Our  principal  business  here  was  to  stop  the  leak 
in  the  brigs'  counter  ;  in  doing  which,  in  order 
to  secure  the  counter  ends,  we  were  obliged  to 
unship  the  rudder  and  bring  the  vessel  two  feet 
down  by  the  head. 

The  following  day  I  sent  Mr.  Brisbane  with 
the  Beaufoy  to  examine  St.  George's  Bay  ;  and 
to  meet  me  on  the  28th,  off  Penguin  Island. 
On  the  26th,  our  business  being  completed, 
about  noon  we  put  to  sea. 

Port  St.  Elena  lies  in  latitude  44^  34'  16''  and 
longitude,  (by  mean  of  chronometers,  compared 
with  four  sets  of  lunar  observations  taken  eight 
days  previous,)  65''  16'  52''. 

The  bay  affords  good  shelter  from  S.  by  E.  via 
west,  to  E.  by  S. ;  and,  as  the  heavy  and  pre- 
vailing winds  are  between  these  points,  this 
place  may  well  be  recommended  to  stop  at  for  a 
few  days.  The  winds  are  seldom  from  South 
East  and  generally  light ;  and,  the  tide  running 
strong  across  the  entrance  of  the  bay,  the  sea, 
during  strong  S.E.  winds,  is  a  good  deal  cut  ofi. 

As  this  anchorage  is  the  most  easy  of  access 


0 


i 

^ 

n 

t^ 

1         ^ 

^       ^ 

m 

-^y         1 

1  i.- 
«4    ,! 

o 

^    "?:  . 

Pi 

^      .' 

QUANACOES.  17 

of  any  on  the  coast,  I  shall  annex  a  plan  of  it ; 
for  which  I  ran  a  base  line  of*  400  fathoms,  and 
took  angles.  In  the  valley  marked  A,  I  observed 
two  holes  which  had  been  dug  for  obtaining  fresh 
water,  but  what  they  now  contained  was  quite 
brackish ;  farther  up  this  valley,  about  half  a 
mile,  I  found  very  sweet  water,  but  not  in  quan- 
tity sufficient  to  supply  a  vessel  without  a  con- 
siderable  expense  of  time  and  labour. 

Guanacoes  are  here  very  numerous,  but  not 
easily  approached :  they  much  resemble  deer ; 
their  flesh  is  well  tasted,  and  they  are  large 
enough  to  make  them  an  object  of  consideration 
to  ships  touching  on  this  coast  in  want  of  refresh- 
ments* We  caught  one  which  when  cleaned 
weighed  1201b.  and  was,  to  my  taste,  yery  like 
well  fed  mutton.  The  difficulty  of  procuring 
these  animals  from  their  fleetness  and  watchful- 
ness is  such,  however,  that  they  cannot  be  taken 
hastily ;  but  must  be  entrapped  by  lurking  be- 
hind  bushes  about  their  watering  places  at  the 
dawn  of  the  morning..  Hares,  which  are  also  nu- 
merous  here,  are  much  larger  than  iii  other  coun- 
tries. The  tide  flows  at  the  full  and  change  at 
3^  SO',  and  rises  about  22  feet. 

On  the  30th  of  December^  in  latitude  47**  54' 
and  oflT  Penguin  Island,  in  the  afternoon,  amidst 
several  water-spouts,  which  are  so  dreaded  by 


18  l'aigle  shoal. 

many,  we  rejoined  the  Beaufoy,  and  made  sail 
to  the  southward. 

We  had  now  decidedly  taken  our  departure 
for  a  voyage  of  investigation  to  the  southward, 
and  though  we  were  a  month  later  than  I  had 
intended,  I  was  happy  that  we  had  made  the 
brig  comparatively  effective;  and  was  deter- 
mined, should  I  not  be  successful  at  the  South 
Orkneys,  to  prosecute  a  search  beyond  the  tracks 
of  former  navigators. 

I  had  given  Mr.  Brisbane  my  instructions  how 
to  act  in  the  event  of  separation,  and  we  now 
proceeded  to  the  southward  in  company. 

At  noon  of  the  2d  oi  January  1823,  we  were 
in  the  latitude  of  51^  55',  and  longitude  65*^7'  15'', 
and  this  being  the  latitude  assigned  to  the 
L'aigle  shoal,  discovered  in  1817  by  a  Captain 
Bristow,  I  hauled  up  N.E.  by  E.  ^  E.  in  order 
to  obtain  a  sight  of  it;  but  with  a  run  of  14 
miles,  and  a  view  of  10  from  the  mast  head,  I 
saw  nothing.  Had  it  been  accurately  laid  down  I 
ought  to  have  found  it.  This  shoal  must  be  very 
dangerous,  as  it  lies  in  midchannel  between  the 
Falkland  Islands  and  the  coast  of  Patagonia ; 
but  as  I  have  never  seen  it  I  cannot  describe  it. 
It  is  reported  to  be  a  patch  of  breakers  about 
300  yards  in  extent.  Mr.  Poole  places  it  in  lati- 
tude 51°  51',  and  longitude  64*^50',  which,  in 
my  opinion,  is  not  to  be   depended  on ;    and 


VIOLENT    GALES.  19 

therefore  ships  must  be  much  delayed  here  in 
waiting,  with  a  fair  wind,  for  daylight. 

At  8  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  Sd,  the 
wind  shifted  suddenly  from  W.N.W.  to  south, 
and  in  less  than  half  an  hour  we  were  brought 
to  under  a  close-reefed  main-topsail.  The  gale 
continued  with  great  violence,  and  with  a  most 
irregular  sea  till  the  evening  of  the  4th,  when  it 
moderated,  and  we  made  more  sail.  The  tem- 
perature of  the  elements  during  the  gale  was  of 
air  39''  30^  and  that  of  water  49"*  30'.  This  was 
surprisingly  low  for  midsummer,  and  the  lati- 
tude of  53  degrees  ;  but  when  we  consider  that 
a  south  wind  blows  over  the  frozen  land  of  Shet- 
land, the  temperature  of  the  air  must  of  conse- 
quence be  much  reduced  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Cape  Horn. 

'  On  the  6th  in  the  morning  the  wind  again 
freshened  at  S.  by  E,.  to  a  gale,  with  a  high  and 
irregular  sea,  which,  in  the  afternoon,  stove  two 
boats,  washed  away  part  of  the  bulwarks,  and 
carried  several  things  off  the  deck.  This  dis- 
tressing sea  was  no  doubt  produced  by  a  tide  or 
current,  as  we  were  not  more  than  100  miles 
S.E.  of  the  Falkland  Islands.  At  midnight  the 
weather  moderated  suddenly,  and  left  us  scarce 
wind  suflScient  to  keep  the  ship  steady. 

The  7th  being  fine  I  communicated  with  the 
Beaufoy,  and  was  happy  to  hear  they  were  all 
well,  and  had  met  with  no  accident. 

*c  2 


20  SOUTH    ORKNEYS. 

The  wind  continued  blowing  moderately  from 
S.  by  E.  to  S.S.  W.  with  passing  snow  squalls  j 
and  on  the  10th,  in  latitude  58%  we  saw  five  ice 
islands  and  an  appearance  of  land  in  the  N.£. ; 
but  as  I  had  cruised  over  that  spot  on  a  former 
voyage  I  gave  it  no  credit. 

On  the  1  Ith  at  noon  our  latitude  by  observ- 
ation was  59^  SYy  and  longitude  by  chronometers 
46°  1'.  The  temperature  of  the  air  was  38**,  and 
that  of  water  33^  Many  ice  islands  were  in 
sight  which  accounted  for  the  temperature  of. 
the  water  being  reduced. 

At  daylight  in  the  .morning  of  the  12th  we 
saw  some  pigeons^  and  at  6  o'clock  perceived 
the  east  end  of  the  islands  of  South  Orkneys  *, 
bearing  W.  by  S,,  distant  about  11  leagues.  We 
carried  all  possible  sail  to  get  under  the  land, 
but  the  wind  soon  became  light  and  left  us 
almost  at  the  mercy  of  a  heavy  swell,  in  the 
midst  of  ice  islands,  which  made  our  naviga- 
tion truly  hazardous.  At  8  o'clock  one  of 
the  eastern  islands,  which  from  its  figure  we 
named  Saddle  Island,  bore  S.  10  W.,  distant 
about  11  leagues. 

During  the  13th,   the  wind  was  light,   and 
from  the  N.N.W.,  which  in  this  region  generally 
►  brings  fog,  and  now  obliged  us  to  keep  an  of- 
fing.    At  10  o'clock  the  wind  shifted  to  S.E. 

*  Reported  by  vae  to  the  Commissioners  of  His  Majesty's 
Navy,  on  my  arrival  in  England,  in  1822. 


SOUTH    ORKNEYS.  ^  21 

with  clear  weather.  The  temperature  of  au*  was 
34%  that  of  water  33°.  At  daylight  of  the  14th 
we  saw  the  land  in  the  S.W.,  distant  about  10 
leagues ;  and  by  7  o'clock  we  were  within  one 
mile  of  the  shore. 

I  had  landed  on  these  islands  the  year  before ; 
but  having  a  loaded  ship,  and  no  second  vessel, 
I  was  obliged  to  relinquish  a  deliberate  examin- 
ation of  their  shores  for  that  season. 

Being  now  close  under  the  land,  I  sent  a  boat 
from  each  vessel  to  explore  them.  We  continued 
to  tack  the  vessels  about  in  a  bay,  which,  from 
Saddle  Island  forming  part  of  it,  we  called  Sad- 
dle Island  Bay.  The  ice  bergs,  which  form  in 
the  bays  in  winter,  aud  break  away  in  the  sum- 
mer, now  produced  so  much  drift  ice,  that  we 
had  frequently  to  work  ship  to  avoid  striking  it. 
This  coast  is,  if  possible,  more  terrific  in  appear- 
ance than  South  Shetland.  The  tops  of  the 
islands,  for  the  most  part,  terminate  in  craggy  tow- 
ering peaks,  and  look  not  unlike  the  mountain- 
tops  of  a  sunken  land.  The  loftiest  of  these 
summits,  towering  up  to  a  point,  I  denominated 
Noble's  Peak,  in  honour  of  an  esteemed  friend, 
Mr.  James  Noble,  orientalist,  Edinburgh.  This 
Peak,  in  a  clear  day,  may  be  seen  at  the  distance 
of  fifteen  leagues. 

On  the  14th  I  made  observations  for  settling 
the  latitude  and  longitude  of  Saddle  Island 

c  3 


22  SOUTH    ORKNEYS. 

The  latitude  of  its  centre  was  found  to  be 
60**  37'  50'",  and  longitude  by  means  of  three 
chronometers  44°  52'  45"  west  of  Greenwich. 
Two  of  these  chronometers  on  the  12th  agreed 
to  the  same  second,  and  the  third  differed  but 
1^'' ;  hence  it  may  be  presumed  that  the  situ- 
ation of  the  island  is  correctly  determined. 

On  the  15th  in  the  afternoon,  the  vessel  being 
close  in  shore  and  the  weather  settled,  I  landed 
on  the  south  side  of  the  Bay,  and  having  climbed 
a  mountain,  was  employed  in  taking  a  bird's- 
eye  view  of  the  country,  when  a  dense  fog 
set  in,  which  in  a  few  minutes  shut  the  vessels 
from  observation.  I  hiuried  down  to  the  boat, 
and  put  ofi)  hoping  to  get  sight  of  the  vessels 
before  losing  the  land ;  but  I  was  mistaken,  for 
we  soon  lost  the  one  without  obtaining  the 
other.  My  anxiety  for  the  safety  of  the  vessel 
lying  among  islands,  in  a  thick  fog,  was  great ; 
but  I  was  fortunately  soon  relieved  by  its  clear- 
ing  up,  and  allowing  me  to  get  on  board. 

Having  seen  some  sea-leopards  on  shore,  I 
sent '  the  second  mate  to  take  them,  who  soon 
returned  with  six  which  he  had  captured. 

This  creature  resembles  the  quadruped  of  the 
same  name  in  being  spotted.  The  drawing  of  one 
deposited  in  the  Edinburgh  Museum  is  annexed ; 
and  Professor  Jamieson  has  kindly  communicated 
to  me  a  description  of  the  animal.  He  considers  it 


3 


SEA-LEOPARDS.  23 

to  be  a  new  species  of  phoca,and  gives  it  the  follow- 
ing  distinguishing  characters : — Leopardine  seal, 
the  neck  long  and  tapering;  the  head  small;  the 
body  pale-greyish  above,yellowishbelow,and  back 
spotted  with  pale  white.  This  species  to  be  re- 
ferred to  the  division  Stenorhinque,  of  F.Cuvier; 
the  teeth,  however,  do  not  quite  agree  with  those 
of  his  Phoque  Septonyx,  nor  with  those  of  Sir  E. 
Home,  figured  in  PI.  xxix.  of  the  Philosophical 
Transactions  for  1822. 

In  the  evening  the  boats  returned,  having 
coasted  these  islands  for  fifty  miles.  They  had 
found  but  one  fur-seal,  and  some  sea-leopards,  the 
skins  of  which  they  brought  on  board.  This 
examination,  though  unsuccessful,  afforded  some 
hope,  as  the  seal  was  an  earnest  of  our  falling  in 
with  more :  I  therefore  hauled  off  the  shore,  to 
go  round  the  west  end  of  the  islands  for  a  fur- 
ther search.     ^ 

On  the  17th  the  wind  freshened  to  a  gale 
from  the  N.N.E.,  and  at  4  o'clock  in  the  after- 
noon we  saw  the  land  under  our  lee,  distant 
but  about  five  miles.  I  made  the  signal  of 
our  situation  to  the  Beaufoy,  and  carried  an 
oppressive  quantity  of  sail  to  keep  off  the  land : 
about  midnight,  however,  it  fortunately  moder- 
ated, and  the  wind  shifted  to  the  S.S.W.  We 
continued  plying  to  the  westward,  examining 
the  shores  as  we  passed ;  and  at  9  in^  the  morn- 

c  4 


24  SOUTH    ORKNEYS. 

ing  of  the  19th  we  saw  the  west  end,  bearing 
S.  W.  ^  W.,  and  straits  running  to  the  southward, 
which  I  called  Spencer  Straits,  in  honour  of  the 
Right  Honourable  C.  Spencer;  at  the  same  time 
bore  S.E.  by  S.  \  S. 

The  weather  being  frequently  foggy  and  the 
winds  light,  we  did  not  get  off  the  western  point 
till  noon  of  the  20th,  and  at  S  o'clock  I  settled 
the  latitude  of  this  Cape  to  be  60^  42'  S.,  and 
longitude  46°  23'  52'"  W. 

Not  finding  any  animals  in  this  quarter,  I  bore 
up  to  the  east,  to  examine  the  other  parts  of  the 
islands.  On  the  22d  in  the  morning  we  were 
within  six  miles  off  the  east  point,  which  I 
called  Cape  Dundas,  in  honour  of  the  illustrious 
family  of  that  name.  I  presently  despatched 
two  boats  to  explore  the  shores,  and  in  the 
meantime  made  observations  for  determining 
the  position  of  this  end  of  the  Archipelago. 

By  a  good  meridian  altitude  I  found  Cape 
Dundas  to  lie  in  latitude  60^  46'  30",  and,  by 
chronometers,  in  longitude  44°  35'  45'^  west  of 
Greenwich.  Two  miles  from  the  shore,  we 
sounded  on  a  bottom  of  dark-coloured  sand,  with 
58  fathoms  water.  About  the  Cape,  where  a 
little  soil  remained,  there  was  a  patch  of  short 
grass,  and  many  birds  assembled  round  it 

In  the  evening  the  boats  returned  with  two 
seals  and  ten  leopards*  skins.     They  had  inves- 


DEPARTURE  FROM  SOUTH  ORKNEYS.     25 

tigated  this  eastern  island  thoroughly,  and  as  we 
had  now  explored  the  whole  of  the  group  with- 
out attaining  our  object,  I  concluded  that  the 
seals  we  had  found  had  migrated  from  some  land, 
probably  not  very  distant.  My  officers  had  be- 
sides ascended  a  hill,  from  which  they  said  they 
had  seen  a  range  6f  land  lying  in  the  S.E.  As 
I  thought  it  probable  it  might  be  so,  we  stood 
in  that  direction,  but  on  the  2Sd,  in  the  morn- 
ing, we  were  undeceived,  for  the  supposed  land 
was  diiscovered  to  be  a  chain  of  immense  ice 
islands,  lying  E.N.E.  and  W.S. W.  We  made 
various  courses  to  the  southward,  and  pre- 
sently arrived  at  comparatively  clear  water. 
At  noon  our  latitude  by  account  was  61**  50', 
and  longitude  4*3*'.  The  wind  had  shifted  into 
the  N.W.  with  a  thick  fog,  on  which  we  hauled 
to  the  wind  to  the  N.E.  under  easy  sail.  In  the 
afternoon  the  wind  shifted  to  the  W.S.W.  and 
blew  a  gale,  with  strong  snow  squalls.  We 
stood  to  the  southward  wdth  little  sail,  and  about 
midnight  passed  through  a  cluster  of  ice  islands. 
In  the  morning  of  the  24th  the  wind  moderated, 
and  it  became  foggy,  and  we  hove  to.  In  order 
to  avoid  separation,  the  two  vessels  of  necessity 
sailed  very  closely, our  consort  keeping  constantly 
on  our  weather  quarter.  Our  latitude  at  noon, 
by  account,  was  62®  35':  the  weather  continued 
foggy,    with    short   intervals   of  comparatively 


26  BREATHING    OF    WHALES. 

clear  weather,  during  which  we  always  bore  up 
to  the  southward.  This  very  slow  manner  of 
sailing  was  teasing  and  unprofitable,  but  in  these 
fogs  it  was  risk  enough  to  drift  to  the  south- 
ward, lying  to.  In  the  evening,  indeed,  whilst 
enveloped  in  fog,  the  second  mate  called  to  me 
in  the  cabin,  that  breakers  were  close  under 
our  lee.  I  immediately  prepared  ship  to  ply 
to  windward,  but  not  seeing  the  broken  water 
again,  I  concluded  that  what  the  officer  saw  was 
the  breathing  of  whales ;  which  must,  indeed, 
have  been  the  case,  as  when  the  fog  cleared 
away  nothing  like  breakers  was  visible. 

On  27th  at  noon  we  had  reached  the  latitude  of 
64*"  58^  our  longitude  by  mean  of  chronometers 
was  39*  40' SO''.  The  variation  of  the  compass  at 
10  o'clock  in  the  forenoon,  by  azimuth,  was  10** 37' 
east.  The  temperature  of  air  in  the  shade  was  37% 
that  of  water  34^*;  but  in  the  rays  of  the  sun,  when 
clouded,  the  thermometer  rose  to  48  degrees.  The 
weather  being  here  so  much  more  settled  than  in 
the  lower  latitudes  of  60  and  61  degrees,  could 
we  but  find  land  with  produce,  I  had  little  doubt, 
but  that  in  three  or  four  weeks  both,  vessels  might 
have  had  their  cargoes  on  board.  As,  however, 
we  were  to  the  southward  of  South  Shetland,  I 
stood  back  to  the  northward,  considering  it  pro- 
bable that  land  might  be  found  between  the 
South  Orkneys  and  Sandwich  Land ;  and  as  the 


DEAD    WHAL£.  27 

summer  season  was  now  far  advanced,  it  was 
advisable  to  examine  those  lower  latitudes  while 
the  nights  were  yet  but  short,  •--*  since  darkness 
added  to  fog  makes  navigation  in  an  icy  sea  still 
more  dangerous* 

We  stood  to  the  northward  with  the  wind  be- 
tween S.E.  and  S.W.,  and  on  the  29th  at  noon 
our  latitude  at  observation  was  61**  18',  and  Ion- 
gitude  by  chronometers  40^  32'  15''.  The  tem- 
perature  of  air  was  34%  that  of  water  34%  Ice 
islands  were  our  constant  companions,  and  in- 
deed they  had  become  so  familiar  that  they 
were  little  dreaded. 

At  1 1  o*clock  at  night  we  passed  within  two 
ships*  length  of  an  object,  which  had  the  ap- 
pearance of  a  rock.  The  lead  was  immediately 
thrown  out,  but  finding  no  bottom,  we  continued 
lying  to,  till  the  chief  mate  ascertained  it  to  be 
a  dead  whale  very  much  swollen  :  such  objects, 
seen  imperfectly  in  the  night  are  often  alarming. 

We  carried  easy  sail  to  the  northward  with 
the  wind  westerly,  much  fog  and  falls  of  snow. 
On  the  1st  of  February^  at  noon,  our  latitude 
was  SS""  50',  longitude  38**  51'.  As  there  was  no 
sign  of  land  in  this  situation,  we  stood  to  the 
south-east,  making  an  angle  with  our  course,' 
coming  northward,  which  would  enable  us  to  see 
land  midway. 


28  RE>VARD    tOR  T>ISCOVERY    OF   LAND. 

I  had  offered  Or  gratuity  of  10/.  to  the  man 
who  should  first  discover  land.  This  proved 
the  cause  of  many  a  sore  disappointment ;  for 
many  of  the  seamen,  of  lively  and  sanguine 
imaginations,  were  never  at  a  loss  for  an  island. 
In  short,  fog  banks  out  of  number  were  reported 
for  land;  and  many,  in  fact,  had  so  much  that  ap- 
pearance,  that  nothing  short  of  standing  towards 
them  till  they  vanished  could  satisfy  us  as  to 
their  real  nature. 

In  the  morning  of  the  2d  the  wind  freshened 
W.S.W.  to  a  gale,  which  obliged  us  to  lie  to ; 
snow  squalls  were  frequent,  and  having  many  ice- 
islands  to  pass,  we  had  to  make  various  courses, 
and  changes  in  the  quantity  of  sail  on  the  vessels. 
I  carefully  avoided  the  tracks  of  Captains  Cook 
and  Furaeaux:  and  I  may  here  remark  how  nar- 
rowly Captain  Furneaux  in  the  Adventure,  in  De- 
cember 1773  and  January  1774-,  escaped  seeing 
South  Shetland  and  the  South  Orkneys.  He 
passed  within  45  miles  of  the  east  end  of  Shet- 
land and  75  miles  of  the  South  Orkneys  :  hence 
20  miles,  we  may  presume,  of  a  more  southerly 
course,  would  have  given  us  a  knowledge  of  South 
Shetland  50  years  ago. 

Running  east  in  this  latitude  of  from  60**  to 

6r  we  were  constantly  accompanied  by  all  the 

^    birds  common  in  these  latitudes.     Great  num- 


DISAPPOINTMENT    FROM   "BOG    BANK.  29 

bers  of  finned  and  hump-backed  whales  were 
also  seen ;  and  penguins  in  large  shoals,  having 
for  their  resting-place  some  ice  island. 

Being  determined  to  examine  these  latitudes 
thoroughly,  we  constantly  hauled  to  the  wind 
under  close-reefed  topsails  during  fogs  and  the 
darkest  part  of  the  night,  bearing  up  to  the  east- 
ward when  daylight  appeared.  On  the  4th  in 
the- morning  land  was  believed  to  be  seen  in  the 
N.E.,  resembling  an  island.  The  signal  to  that 
effect  was  made  to  our  consort,  and  we  carried 
all  sail  to  ascertain  the  fact ;  but  our  pleasing 
hopes  were  again  speedily  dispelled  by  our  illu- 
sive island  sinking  below  the  horizon.  We  re- 
turned to  our  former  easterly  course,  and  passed 
several  ice  islands,  lying  east  and  west.  In  fact, 
we  found  all  the  clusters  to  lie  in  that  direction, 
which  is  caused,  no  doubt,  by  the  prevalent 
westerly  winds  carrying  them  along  to  the  east- 
ward, and  spreading  them  in  proportion  to  their 
hold  of  the  water  and  the  surface  they  present 
above. 

By  the  evening  of  the  4th  we  were  within 
100  miles  of  Sandwich  Land,  and  within  such  a 
distance  of  the  track  of  Captain  Cook,  as  con- 
vinced  me  that  no  land  lay  between. 

Our  pursuit  of  land  here,  therefore,  was  now 
at  an  end,  but  I  conceived  it  probable  that  a  large 
tract  might  be  found  a  little  farther  south  than 


30  COLDS,    AGUES,    AND    RHEUMATISMS. 

we  had  yet  been.  I  accordingly  informed  Mr. 
Brisbane  of  my  intention  of  standing  to  the 
southward,  and  he,  with  a  boldness  which  greatly 
enhanced  the  respect  I  bore  him,  expressed  his 
willingness  to  push  our  research  in  that  direc- 
tion, though  we  had  been  hitherto  so  unsuc- 
cessful. 

The  weather  being  dark  and  foggy  we  stood 
to  the  southward  under  close-reefed  topsails  only. 
At  10  o'clock  the  following  morning  the  temper- 
ature of  air  was  37>  that  of  water  S6  degrees  ; 
our  latitude  at  noon,  by  observation,  was  61**  44^ 
and  longitude,  by  chronometers,  SI*"  13'  15''. 

From  having  had  a  long  course  of  dense  fogs  * 
and  fresh  gales,  the  decks  of  our  vessels  were 
constantiy  wet,  which  produced  amongst  our 
seamen  colds,  agues,  and  rheumatisms.  To  re- 
medy this  in  some  measure,  I  had  the  ship's 
cooking  stove  moved  below  for  their  comfort, 
and  good  fires  kept  for  drying  their  clothes ;  and 
by  attending  to  these  matters,  and  administering 
a  little  medicine,  their  complaints  were  soon  re- 
moved. 

I  had  allowed  them  three  wine-glasses  of  rum 
a  day  per  man,  since  we  were  in  these  seas ; 
and  their  allowance  of  beef  and  pork  was  one 
pound  and  a  quarter  a  man  per  day ;  five  pounds 
of  bread,  two  pints  of  flour,  three  of  peas,  and 
two  of  barley,  a  man  per  week.     These  allow- 


NARROW   ESCAPE.  31 

ances  in  a  cold  climate  were  rather  scanty,  but 
the  uncertainty  of  the  length  of  our  voyage  re- 
quired the  strictest  economy. 

During  the  6th  and  7th  wa  passed  many  ice 
islands,  one  of  which  I  estimated  to  be  two  miles 
in  length,  and  250  feet  high.  The  wind  pre- 
vailed between  W.S.W.  and  W.N.W.  with  foggy 
and  clear  weather  alternately.  At  noon  we  ob- 
served in  latitude  64**  15',  and  our  longitude  by 
chronometers  was  30''  46'.  The  variation  by 
azimuth  in  the  forenoon  was  8*  19'  easterly. 

At  10  o'^clock  at  night,  the  weather  being 
foggy,  we  narrowly  escaped  striking  an  ice  island 
in  passing.  We  hailed  our  consort,  but  she  was' 
so  close  to  our  stern  that  she  passed  also  very 
near  to  it.  The  temperature  of  air  at  8  o'clock 
in  the  evening  was  34'',  that  of  water  36^  In 
the  afternoon  of  the  9th,  the  fog  clearing  away, 
we  saw  an  appearance  of  land  in  the  N.  W. ;  but, 
after  the  usual  practice  of  pursuing  all  such  ap- 
pearances,  we  discovered  it  to  be  one  of  our  de- 
lusive attendants,  the  fog  banks.  The  wind 
now  shifted  to  south  and  blew  strong,  accom- 
panied by  with  snow  squalls. 

At  daylight  in  the  morning  of  the  10th  the 
chief  mate  reported  land  within  sight,  in  the 
shape  of  a  sugar  loaf;  as  soon  as  I  saw  it  I  be- 
lieved it  to  be  a  rock,  and  fully  expected  to  find 
terra  Jirma  a  short  distance  to  the  southward. 


32      DISAPPOINTMENT    FROM   AN    ICE    ISLAND. 

It  was  2  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  before  we 
reached  it;  and  not  till  then,  when  passing  within 
300  yards,  could  we  satisfy  ourselves  that  it  was 
not  land,  but  black  ice.  We  found  an  island  of 
clear  ice  lying  close,  and  detached  above  water, 
though  connected  below,  which  made  a  contrast 
of  colour  that  had  favoured  or  rather  completed 
the  deception.  In  short,  its  north  side  was  so 
thickly  incorporated  with  black  earth,  that  hardly 
any  person  at  a  distance  would  have  hesitated  to 
pronounce  it  a  rock.  This  was  a  new  disap- 
pointment, and  seriously  felt  by  several  of  our 
crew,  whose  hopes  of  having  an  immediate  re- 
ward for  their  patience  and  perseverance  were 
again  frustrated. 

The  wind  was  at  south  and  blowing  a  fresh 
gale,  with  which  we  might  have  gone  rapidly  to 
the  northward  j  but  the  circumstance  of  having 
seen  this  ice  island  so  loaded  with  earth,  encou- 
raged me  to  expect  that  it  had  disengaged  itself 
from  land  possessing  a  considerable  quantity  of 
soil ;  and  that  our  arrival  at  that  very  desirable 
object  might,  perhaps,  not  be  very  distant.  These 
impressions  induced  me  to  keep  our  wind,  and 
we  stood  to  the  S.W. 

I  may  here  remark  that  many  of  the.  doubtful 
rocks  laid  down  in  the  chart  of  the  North  At- 
lantic have  been  probably  objects  similar  to 
what  I  have  described;  and  still  remain  unas- 


NUMEROUS   ICB    ISLANDS.  33 

^rtained,  to  the  gr^at  annoyance  of  all  cautious 
navigators.  Our  latitude  at  noon  was  by  ac- 
count 66*^  26",  and  our  longitude  by  chronome- 
ters 32*  SH'.  The  temperature  of  air  was  3S* 
30',  that  of  water  34^ 

On  the  11th  in  the  morning  the  wind  shifted 
to  S.W.  by  S.,  and  we  stood  to  the  S.E.  At  noon 
our  latitude  by  observation  was  65°  32',  that  of 
account  65*^53';  and  the  chronometers  giving 
44  miles  more  westing  than  the  log.  We  had  in 
3  days  experienced  a  current  running  N.  64°  W. 
48  miles  :  the  difficulty,  however,  of  keeping  a 
correct  reckoning,  from  the  many  changes  made 
in  the  course  and  quantity  of  sail,  must  subject 
the  error  to  a  suspicion  of  arising  more  from  bad 
observation  than  from  a  real  current.  We  had 
evidently  been  set  to  the  northward  and  west- 
ward,  which  is  contrary  to  what  is  generally  the 
case,  as  the  current  almost  constantly  sets  to  the 
eastward.  In  the  afternoon  I  found  the  variation 
by  azimuth  12°  2'  east. 

During  the  12th  and  13th  we  had  the  wind 
from  S.S.W.,  and  we  stood  to  the  S.E.  Ice 
islands  were  niunerous,  and  on  the  14th  at  noon 
our  latitude  by  account  was  68°  28',  and  lon- 
gitude by  chronometers  29°  43'  15".  In  the 
afternoon,  with  the  ship's  head.S.S.W.  the  vari- 
ation  by  azimuth  was  8'  5'  east.  At  4  o^clock 
ice  islands  were  so  numerous  as  almost  to  prevent 

D 


84  P£T£R£LS    AND    WHALES. 

our  passing ;  sixty-six  were  counted  around  us, 
and  for  about  50  miles  to  the  south  we  had  sel- 
dom fewer  in  sight. 

On  the  X5th  at  noon  our  latitude  observed  was 
68°  44',  by  account  69%  this  difference  of  16 
miles  in  the  latitude  with  easting  given  by  chro- 
nometers, makes  a  current  in  4  days  of  N.  53**  E. 
37  miles.  In  the  forenoon,  with  the  ship's  head 
S.  by  W.,  I  took  a  set  of  azimuths,  which  to  my 
great  astonishment  gave  the  variation  but  1**  W 
east;  in  the  afternoon  I  took  a  second  set, 
which  gave  4°  58'.  As  I  had  taken  great  pains 
in  making  the  observations,  and  the  instruments 
were  good,  however  unaccountable  this  great 
difference  was,  I  could  not  do  otherwise  than 
abide  by  the  result. 

On  the  l6th  at  noon  our  latitude  by  account 
was  70''  26',  and  longitude  by  chronometers 
29°  58' ;  the  wind  was  moderate  from  the  west- 
ward, and  the  sea  tolerably  smooth.  Ice  islands 
had  almost  disappeared,  and  the  weather  be- 
came very  pleasant  Through  the  afternoon 
we  had  the  wind  fresh  from  the  N.E.,  and  we 
steered  S.W.  by  W. 

In  the  morning  of  the  17th  the  water  appear- 
ing discoloured,  we  hove  a  cast  of  the  lead,  but 
found  no  bottom.  A  great  number  of  birds  of 
the  blue  peterel  kind  were  about  us,  and  many 
bump  and  finned  back  w,hales, 


PETERELS    AND    WHALES,  S5 

In  the  morning  I  took  an  amplitude,  which 
gave  variation  12*"  24'  east  The  wind  had 
shifted  to  the  S.  E.  and  became  light.  Our  lati- 
tude at  noon  by  acqount  was  71^  34f\  and  longir 
tude  by  chronometers  SO""  12^  As  the  weather 
was  now  more  settled,  our  consort  sailed  wide,  in 
order  to  extend  our  view. 

On  the  18th  the  weather  was  remarkably  fine, 
and  the  wind  in  the  S.E.  Having  unfortunately 
broken  my  two  thermometers,  1  could  not  ex- 
actly ascertain  the  temperature,  but  it  was  cer- 
tainly  not  colder  than  we  had  found  it  in  De- 
cember (summer)  in  the  latitude  of  61^.  With 
the  ship's  head  S.  W.  by  S.  at  about  8**  3(y  in  the 
morning  I  took  a  set  of  azimuths,  which  gave 
variation  IS"*  23'  east  At  noon  our  latitude  by 
observation  was  72^  38',  by  account  7^  24'  J 
hence,  with  chn^ometer  difference  of  longitude, 
we  had  been  set  in  three  days  S.  62*^  W.,  distance 
SO  miles.  In  the  afternoon  I  took  a  long  set  of 
azimuths,  which  gave  variation  19°  58^.  This  in- 
crease in  so  short  a  distance  seemed  unsatisfacr 
tory ;  on  which  account  I  neglected  no  oppor- 
tunity of  making  observations  in  order  to  recon- 
cile these  irregularities.  I  had  all  the  compasses 
brought  upon  deck,  and  I  found  them  to  agree, 
but  rather  inactive  in  traversing. 

In  the  evening  we  had  many  whales  about  the 
$hip,  and  the   sea  was   literally   covered  witi} 

p  2 


36  NO   ICE   VISIBLE. 

birds  of  the  blue  peterel  kind.  Not  a  particle 
OF  ice  of  akt  description  was  to  be  seen. 
The  evening  was  mild  and  serene,  and  had  it  not 
been  for  the  reflection  that  probably  we  should 
have  obstacles  to  contend  with  in  our  passage 
northward,  through  the  ice,  our  situation  might 
have  been  envied.  The  wind  was  light  and 
eai^terly  during  the  night,  and  we  carried  all 
sail.  The  sun's  amplitude  in  the  morning  of  the 
19th  when  the  ship's  head  was  S.  by  E.  gave 
variation  15*  10'  east 

The  weather  being  pleasant,  our  carpenter 
was  employed  in  repairing  a  boat,  and  we  were 
enabled  to  make  several  repairs  on  the  sails  and 
rigging.  At  noon  our  latitude  by  obser\^ation 
was  73*  17'>  and  longitude  by  chrcmometers 
35*^  54*45".  In  the  evening,  by  several  sets  of 
amplitudes,  I  found  the  variatioa  to  be  but  5*  35' 
east.  About  midnight  it  fell  calm,  but  pre- 
sently a  breeze  sprang  up  from  the  S.W.  by  W., 
and  we  hauled  on  a  wind  S.  by  E. 

In  the  morning  of  the  20th  the  wind  shifted 
to  S.  by  W.  and  blew  a  fresh  breeze,  and  seeing 
a  clouded  horizon,  and  a  great  number  of  birds  in 
the  S.E.,  we  stood  in  that  direction.  At  10 
o^clock  in  the  forenoon,  when  the  ship's  head 
was  E.S.E.,  I  took  a  set  of  azimuths,  which  gave 
variation  11°  20^  east.  The  atmosphere  now  be- 
came very  clear,  and  nothing  like  land  was  to 


ICE    ISLANDlS.  37 

be  seen.  Three  ice  islands  were  in  sight  from 
the  deck,  ^nd  one  other  from  the  mast-head. 
On  one  we  perceived  a  great  number  of  penguins 
roosted.  Our  latitude  at  this  time,  20th  Fe- 
bruary, 1822,  was  74°  15',  and  longitude 
34°  16'  45" ;  the  wind  blowing  fresh  at  south, 
prevented,  what  I  most  desired,  our  making  far- 
ther progress  in  that  direction.  I  would  wil- 
lingly have  explored  the  S.  W.  quarter,  but  taking 
into  consideration  the  lateness  of  the  season,  and 
that  we  had  to  pass  homewards  through  1000 
miles  of  sea  strewed,  with  ice  islands,  with  long 
nights,  and  probably  attended  with  fogs,  I  could 
not  determine  otherwise  than  to  take  advantage 
of  this  favourable  wind  for  returning,. 

I  much  regretted  that  circumstances  had  not 
allowed  me  to  proceed  to  the  southward,  when 
in  the  latitude  of  65%  on  the  27th  of  January,  as 
I  should  then  have  had  sufficient  time  to  examine 
this  sea  to  my  satisfaction. 

Situated  however  as  I  actually  was,  my  atten-^ 
tion  was  naturally  roused  to  observe  any  pheno- 
mena which  might  be  considered  interesting  to 
science.  I  was  well  aware  that  the  making  of 
scientific  observations  in  this  unfrequented  part 
of  the  globe  was  a  very  desirable  object,  and  con- 
sequently the  more  lamented  my  not  being  well 
supplied  with  the  instruments  with  which  shipa 
fitted  out  for  discovery  are  generally  provided.. 

D  3 


88  OBSERVATIONS, 

ft 

As  the  ex^ct  longitude  of  the  ship  and  of 
harbours,  &c.  is  of  the  first  consideration^  I  had 
expended  240/.  in  the  purchase  of  three  chrono- 
meters ;  all  of  these  performed  remarkably  well, 
and,  in  particular,  one  of  eight  days,  (No.  820.) 
Murry,  London,  continued  regular  in  its  daily 
rate  of  gaining  through  an  unparalleled  trial  by 
repeated  shocks,  which  the  vessel  (but  slightly 
built)  sustained  during  a  month  among  field  ice. 
Such  perfection  in  this  most  useful  machine,  can- 
not be  too  much  appreciated  by  commanders  of 
fthips,  who,  by  assistance  of  so  pi^ecise  a  nature» 
can  easily  avoid  embarrassment  in  critical  situa^ 
tions,  where  many  lives  and  much  valuable  pro- 
perty frequently  depend  on  a  true  knowledge  of 
the  ship*s  place. 

The  laws  to  which  the  compass  seems  to  be 
subject  in  regard  to  its  variation  have  lately  un- 
dergone such  accurate  investigation  by  eminent 
individuals,  that  the  phenomena  attending  it  are 
npw,  in  a  great  degree,  ascertained. 

My  own  actilal  observations  with  regard  td 
the  variation,  are  inserted  at  the  end  of  the 
volumCii 

Those  which  I  made  about  the  latitude  of 
60  degrees,  are  corrected  for  local  attraction 
from  the  table  of  experiments  made  with  Mr. 
Barlow's  plate,  in  H.  M.  S.  Conway,  by  Cap- 
tain Basil   Hall,  and  by  Mr.  Foster;  but  the 


AUBORA    AUSTRALIS.  39 

observations  arrived  at  about  the  latitude  of 
70  degrees  cannot  be  reconciled,  as  to  quantity 
of  local  attraction,  with  the  theory  adopted  on 
the  subject ;  I  therefore  l^t  them  remain  at  the 
observed  results.  I  found  a  difference  of  from 
3  to  5  degrees  between  the  variation  taken  at  the 
binnacle  *and  that  on  the  main  hatches ;  and  I 
have  found  as  great  a  difference  when  the  ob- 
servations were  made,  even  on  the  same  spot,  an 
hour  apart.  In  fact,  it  appeared  evident  that  the 
magnetic  energy  of  the  earth  upon  the  needle 
was  much  diminished  when  far  to  the  south- 
ward; partly  arising,  no  doubt,  from  the  in- 
creased dip  or  diminution  of  horizontal  action  on 
the  needle,  which  must  be  attracted, in  an  in- 
creased degree  by  objects  immediately  about  it. 
This,  however,  cannot  be  altogether  decided  till 
a  more  satisfactory  theory  in  respect  to  the 
emanation  of  the  magnetic  influence  has  been 
demonstrated. 

The  Aurora  Australis,  which  Mr;/»ISQister  saw 
in  his  voyage  round  the  world  with  Captain  Cook 
in  the  year  1773, 1  particularly  looked  for  during 
the  time  the  sun  was  beneath  the  horizon,  which 
was  more  than  six  hours,  but  nothing  of  the  kind 
was  observable.  As  the  twilight,  however,  was 
never  out  of  the  sky,  that  might  be  the  cause  of 
its  not  being  visible. 

*d4 


40  FIELD    ICE. 

The  remarkable  and  ^distorted  appearances 
which  objects  and  the  horizon  itself  assume  by  re- 
fraction in  high  northern  latitudes,  occurred  here 
but  little  more  than  in  an  ordinary  \yay.  The 
water  spouted  by  whales  half  an  hour  after  sun- 
rise in  the  morning  of  the  19th  exhibited  an  in- 
creased refraction,  but  it  soon  disappeared. 

The  reason  of  this  phenomenon  not  existing 
as  singularly  in  the  south  as  it  does  in  correspond- 
ing northern  latitudes,  may  be  attributed  to  this 
sea  being  clear  of  field  ice. 

It  distinctly  appears  to  me,  that  the  conjecture 
of  Captain  Cook,  that  field  ice  is  formed  and  pro- 
ceeds from  land,  and  is  not  formed  in  the  open 
sea,  is  true.  He  latterly,  however,  changes  his 
opinion  from  having  found  ice  solid  in  field  in 
the  latitude  of  70  degrees  to  the  northward  of 
Bhering's  Straits.  But  I  think  it  likely  that  the 
ice  he  fell  in  with  there  proceeded  from  land  in 
the  north,  not  more  distant,  perhaps,  than  150 
miles^  No  person  can  doubt  the  probability  of 
my  conjecture,  when  it  is  remembered,  that  in  the 
latitude  of  74''  15'  south,  (which,  according  tQ  the 
received  opinion  of  former  navigators  that  the 
southern  hemisphere  is  proportionably  colder  by 
10  degrees  of  latitude  than  the  northern,  would 
be  equal  to  84°  15'  north)  I  found  a  sea  per- 
fectly  clear  of  field  ice  j  whereas  in  the  latitude 
of  ei"*  30',  at)out  100  miles  from  the  land,  I  was 


PHENOMENA    OF   THfi:   ISOUTH   ?OLK«  41 

beset  in  heavy  packed  ice.  As  in  that  situation 
we  could  not  see  the  land,  had  I  not  known  of  the 
existence  of  South  Shetland,  I  might  have  fallen 
into  the  commonly  received  error,  that  this  ice 
proceeded  continuously  from  the  South  Pole*  If, 
therefore,  no  land  exist  to  the  south  of  the  latitude 
at  which  I  arrived,  viz.  seventy-four  degrees,  fif- 
teen minutes,  — being  three  degrees  and  five  mi- 
nutes, or  214  geographical  miles  farther  south  than 
Captain  Cook,  or  any  preceding  navigator  reach- 
ed, how  is  it  possible  that  the  South  Pole  should 
not  be  more  attainable  than  the  North,  about 
which  we  know  there  lies  a  great  deal  of  land? 

The  excessive  cold  of  the  southern  bemis* 
phere  has  been  variously  accounted  for,  every 
philosopher  adopting  that  theory  which  best 
suited  his  own  hydrographical  system.  Saint 
Pierre  supposes  it  to  proceed  from  a  cupola 
of.  ice  surrounding  the  South  Pole,  and  stretch- 
ing far  northward.  We  have  now  better  dala 
to  go  upon;  for  though  great  exertions  were 
used  in  the  years  1773  and  1774  tp  discover 
the  terra  atcstralis  incognita  without  success,  yet 
we  find  there  is  a  range  of  land  lying  as  far 
north  as  the  latitude  of  61  degrees.  We  may 
also  conjecture,  without  much  fear  of  being  in 
the  wrong,  that  the  land  with  which  wf  are 
acquainted,  lying  in  latitude  of  61  degrees,  and 
in   longitude  54*  30',   namely,  the  east,  end  of 


42  DISCOVERY   A^NTICIFATED. 

South  Shetland,  stretches  to  the  W.S.  W.,  beyond 
the  longitude  in  which  Captain  Cook  penetrated 
to  the  latitude  of  71**  10',  It  is  this  land  which, 
no  doubt,  ought  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  source 
from  which  proceeds  the  excessive  cold  of  these 
regions.  The  temperature  of  air  and  water  in 
the  latitude  of  60  and  61  degrees,  I  have  men- 
tioned to  be  but  little  above  the  freezing  points 
The  cold  earthless  land,  and  its  immense  ice 
islands,  which  are  continually  separating  in  the 
summer,  and  are  made,  by  prevailing  westerly 
winds,  almost  to  girdle  the  earth,  is  evidently 
the  cause  of  the  very  low  temperature  which 
prevails* 

The  part  of  the  country  which  I  have  seen 
is  without  soil^  reared  in  columns  of  impenetrable 
rock,  inclosing  and  producing  large  masses  of  ice, 
even  in  the  low  latitude  of  60^  45'. 

It  is  certain  that  ice  islands  are  formed  only 
in  openings  or  recesses  of  land ;  and  field  ice,  I 
think,  is  not  readily  formed  in  a  deep  sea. 

On  soundings,  the  water  is  soon  cooled  down 
to  the  freezing  point ;  hence  field  ice  is  found 
at  the  distance  of  many  miles  from  any  shore. 
These  considerations  induce  me  to  conclude, 
that  from  having  but  three  ice  islands  in  sights 
in  lajHtude  ^4^''  degrees,  the  range  of  land,  of 
which  I  have  spoken,  does  not  extend  more 
southerly  than  the  73d  degree.     If  this  be  true, 


DISCOVERY    ANTICIPATED.  43 

and  if  there  be  no  more  land  to  the  southward, 
the  antarctic  polar  sea  may  be  found  less  icy 
than  is  imagined,  and  a  clear  field  of  discovery, 
even  to  the  South  Pole,  may  therefore  be  anti* 
cipatedi 


44 


CHAP.  III. 

ftfiTURlf  TO  THE  NORTHWARD.  —  NO  SOUTH  ICELAND  IN 
"THB  LATITUDE  LAID  DOWN  IN  CPAIMON  CHARTS.  —  SE- 
PARATION OF  THE  VESSELS.  —  PASSAGE  THROUGH  ICE 
ISLANDS.  —  ARRIVAL  OF  BOTH  SI^IPS  AT  SOUTH  GEOR- 
GIA. —  SOUTH  GEORGIA.  —  PENGUINS,  ANp  OTHER  OB- 
JECTS OF  NATURAL  HISTORY.  —  SAIL  AGAIN.  —  THE 
AURORA    ISLAND.  —  ARRIVE   AT  THE  FALKLAND  ISLES. 

Having  now  determined  on  returning,  I  made 
the  signal  to  our  consort  to  bear  up  and  steer 
N.  W.,  and  we  made  all  possible  sail. 

Our  crews  were  naturally  much  disappointed 
at  our  ill  success  in  not  finding  a  southern  land, 
as  their  interest  in  the  voyage  was  to  be  a  pro- 
portion of  tlie  cargo  procured.  In  order,  there* 
fore,  to  reanimate  them  by  acknowledging  their 
merit,  I  expressed  my  approbation  of  their  pa- 
tient and  orderly  behaviour,  and  informed  them 
that  they  were  now  to  the  southward  of  the  lati- 
tude to  which  any  former  navigator  had  pene- 
trated. Our  colours  were  hoisted,  and  a  gun  was 
fired,  and  both  crews  gave  three  cheers.  These 
indulgences,  with  an  allowance  of  grog,  dispelled 
their  gloom,  and  infused  a  hope  that  fortune 
might  yet  be  favourable. 

In  4ionour  of  our  most  gracious  Sovereign,  the 
name  of  King  George  the  Fourth's  sea  was  given 
to  this   hitherto  un visited  part  of  the   ocean* 


1. 


NORTHERLY    CURRENT.  4f5 

The  wind  continued  from  south  till  midnight, 
when  it  fell  calm.  In  the  morning  of  the  21st 
a  breeze  sprang  up  from  the  westward.  We  con- 
tinued  steering  N.W.,  under  as  much  canvass  as 
our  consort^s  slower  rate  of  sailing  would  admit, 
and  on  the  23d  at  noon,  we  had  returned  to  the 
latitude  of  71^  25'  by  observation,  and  71°  S8' 
by  account ;  hence  we  had  experienced  a  south- 
erly current  of  nearly  thirteen  miles  in  two  days. 
This  northerly  set  favours  the  theory  of  St.  Pierre, 
who  supposes  such  a  current  to  be  caused  by  the 
fusion  of  the  Polar  ices ;  but  if  it  exist  at  all, 
(since  it  may  have  been  merely  an  error  of  reck- 
oning,) it  is  certainly  too  small  to  effect  the  flux 
and  reflux  of  the  ocean.  In  order  to  give  a 
chance  of  ascertaining  the  general  current  in 
these  seas,  I  secured  a  bottle  well  with  the  cork, 
and  threw  it  overboard  with  a  notice  inclosed 
of  the  state  of  the  sea  in  latitude  74®,  &c.  The 
water  again  being  discoloured,  we  sounded  with 
240  fathoms  of  line,  but  got  no  bottom,  though 
I  am  of  opinion  it  would  have  been  obtained  at 
a  greater  length  of  line  i  but  as  we  had  no  more, 
nor  a  lead  sufficiently  heavy,  we  could  not  be 
so  experimental  as  I  wished.  Ice  islands  now 
became  more  numerous,  and  our  consort  took 
on  board  a  quantity  of  fallen  ice  for  water  for 
present  use.  In  the  afternoon  it  became  calm, 
and  I  tried  the  current  by  mooring  the  boat  in  the 


46  OBSERVATIONS. 

usual  way,  and  found  it  setting  to  the  N.E.  one- 
sixth  of  a  mile  per  hour.  At  6  p.m.  a  breeze 
sprang  up  from  N.N.E.,  and  we  made  sail  to  the 
westward.  The  winds  continued  northerly, 
sometimes  blowing  strong  with  snow,  till  the 
evening  of  the  26th,  when  we  had  anothet 
calm.  Our  latitude  at  noon  by  observation  was 
GT  SS\  and  longitude  by  chronometers  40''  2'. 
In  the  afternoon  I  took  a  set  of  azimuths,  which 
at  the  binnacle,  when  the  ship's  head  was  west, 
gave  variation  15*  58'  easterly.  In  the  forenoon 
I  observed  the  froth  of  the  sea  to  lie  S.E.  and 
N.  W.,  which,  by  the  observation  for  latitude  and 
longitude,  indicated  a  current  setting  to  the  S.E. 
iabout  one-eighth  of  a  mile  per  hour ;  at  ten  at 
pight  a  breeze  sprang  up  from  the  S.E.,  and  we 
made  sail.  The  27th,  being  fine  in  the  forenoon, 
I  took  a  set  of  azimuths  in  mid-ships,  when 
the  ship's  head  was  N.W.,  which  gave  variation 

In  the  afternoon,  when  the  ship's  head  was 
N.W.,  a  second  set  gave  only  11*"  00'  easterly. 
This  last  observation  was  taken  at  the  binnacle, 
but  the  ship's  local  attraction  was  not  suflScient 
to  account  for  the  great  difference  in  the  results. 
In  the  night  of  the  27th  the  wind  freshened  at 
south  with  snow  squalls,  and  we  steered  N.N.  W., 
carrying  as  much  sail  as  we  could  safely  navigate 
with  among  ice  islands.     On  the  28th  at  noon 


SMALL    ICE    ISLANDS.  ATf 

our  latitude  by  observation  was  65*"  2',  and  longi^ 
tude  by  chronometers  40^  45'.  We  had  now  little 
ice  in  sight,  in  comparison  with  what  appeared 
when  in  nearly  the  same  latitude  on  the  27th  of  Ja- 
nuary.  In  the  evening  we  hauled  up  N.  W,  by  W, 
to  look  into  the  longitude  of  45*.  The  first  of 
March  being  fine,  I  took  several  sets  of  azimuths, 
all  of  which  produced  nearly  the  same  result. 
Having  used  the  same  instruments,  and  the  ob-» 
servers  being  the  same  as  when  in  the  latitude  of 
67^  and  upwards,  I  was  persuaded  that  the  former 
differences  did  not  arise  from  inaccuracies  of  ob» 
servation,  but  rather  from  the  inactivity  or  in* 
sufiiciency  of  the  needle.  The  mean  of  azimu|;hs 
gave  variation  16*  31^  Our  latitude  at  noon  by 
observation  was  63*  29',  and  longitude  42*  41', 
On  the  2d  in  the  morning  it  blew  a  strong  breeze 
from  N.W,,  and  the  weather  was  foggy  5  in  the 
^emoon  it  cleared  up,  and  we  saw  an  appear., 
ance  of  land  in  theS.E.,  but  it  presently  vanished. 
At  midnight  the  wind  shifted  to  north,  and  blew 
a  gale  with  snow  squalls.  In  reaching  to  the 
westward  we  fell  in  with  many  small  ice  islands, 
and  we  wore  ship  to  the  N.E. ;  the  weather  com 
tinned  foggy  with  strong  gales  till  the  4th  in  the 
morning,  ^hen  it  moderated,  and  at  noon  we  had 
clear  weather.  Our  latitude  by  observation  being 
63*  21',  and  longitude  by  chronometers  45*  22', 
we  were  in  a  situation  to  have  seen  what  is  re» 


48  PARTING    OF    THE    SHIPS. 

presented  on  the  South  Atlantic  chart  in  common 
use,  as  South  Iceland,  but,  alas !  no  such  place 
exists. 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  any  men  should 
be  so  ill-advised  as  to  propagate  hydrographical 
falsehoods;  and  I  pity  those  who,  when  they 
meet  with  an  appearance  that  is  likely  to  throw 
some  light  on  the  state  of  the  globe,  are  led 
through  pusillanimity  to  forego  the  examination 
of  it.  But  the  extreme  reluctance  I  have  to  ex- 
cite  painful  feelings  any  where,  restrains  me  from 
dealing  that  just  censure  which  is  due  to  many 
of  my  fellow  seamen,  who,  by  negligence,  narrow 
views  of  pecuniary  interest,  or  timidity,  have 
omitted  many  practicable  investigations,  the 
want  of  which  continues  to  be  felt  by  the  nation, 
and  more  especially  by  merchants  and  ship- 
owners. 

During  the  night  of  the  5th,  the  weather  being 
foggy,  we  lost  sight  of  the  Beaufoy,  and  though 
we  made  several  tacks  we  were  then  unable  to 
regain  sight  of  her.  In  the  night  of  the  6th, 
the  wind  shifted  suddenly  from  N.N.  W.  to  S.  W., 
and  left  a  most  distressing  sea,  which  obliged  us 
to  heave  to :  at  daylight,  not  seeing  any  thing 
of  the  Beaufoy,  I  concluded  that  she  was  making 
the  best  of  her  way  to  South  Georgia,  the  place 
of  rendezvous.  I  was  uneasy  at  our  separation, 
for  although  I  had  full  confidence  in  the  care  and 


ICE   ISLANDS.  49 

ability  of  Mr.  Brisbane,  I  still  wished  to  have 
continued  my  attentions,  more  particularly  on 
account  of  our  being  among  ice  islands.  In  the 
morning  of  the  7th  it  blew  a  gale  from  S.W.  and 
this  being  a  favorable  wind  we  steered  N.  by  E. 
under  a  close-reefed  main  topsail,  reefed  fore- 
sail,  and  reefed  fore-top»mast  stay  sail,  with  which 
in  squalls  we  ran  at  the  rate  of  10  miles  per  hour. 
At  6  A.M.  we  were  under  the  necessity  of  work- 
ing through  a  cluster  of  ice  islands  which  having 
much  fallen  ice  about  them,  the  passage  was 
rendered  very  dangerous :  I  was,  according  to 
the  best  practice,  attempting  to  steer  to  windward 
of  most  of  them  ;  but  the  sea  nmning  too  high, 
we  were  obliged  to  keep  before  the  wind.  The 
chief  mate  was  stationed  in  the  foretop  to  look 
out  for  low  ice  in  the  hollow  of  the  sea ;  and  it 
was  only  by  strict  regard  to  the  helm,  and  the 
sails,  that  we  happily  got  through  without  an 
accident.  With  a  free  side  wind  an  ice  island 
should  be  passed  on  the  windward  side,  .as  by 
this  means  the  loose  ice,  which  always  drifts  far- 
thest, is  avoided. 

Though  this  gale  was  so  violent  as  to  produce 
a  sea  which  cleared  the  decks  of  almost  every 
moveable,  it  was  from  so  favourable  a  quarter 
for  sailing  homeward,  that  we  could  not  afford 
to  lay  to  through  the  night  on  account  of  ice ; 
but  kept  all  the  people  of  the  watch  looking  out 


60  SOUTH   OEOROIA. 

a-head ;  and  thus  we  passed  several  ice  islands 
without  danger. 

On  the  9th  in  the  morning,  the  wind  mode- 
rated and  shifted  into  the  N.N.W.  We  had 
made  during  the  last  gale  349  miles  of  distance, 
and  at  noon  our  latitude  by  observation,  was 
55''  21',  and  longitude  by  chronometers,  58*"  55' 
by  D.  R.  49°  12'.  We  were  now  far  enough 
north  to  be  relieved  from  the  fear  of  falling  in 
with  ice,  and  the  navigation  became  compara- 
tively easy. 

Up  to  the  12th  we  had  variable  winds  from 
the  northward  and  westward  accompanied  with 
thick  fog ;  and  at  8  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the 
weather  becoming  clear,  to  our  great  joy  we 
discovered  our  little  consort  in  the  N.W.,  and 
soon  after  we  communicated  and  found  aU  well. 
With  the  wind  blowing  strong  at  west,  we  steered 
to  the  northward  in  company  j  and  at  10  A.M. 
we  saw  the  island  of  South  Georgia,  bearing  N. 
by  W,  distant  about  9  or  10  miles.  Notwith- 
standing the  forbidding  appearance  of  this  land, 
every  one  I  believe,  in  the  two  vessels,  feasted 
his  eyes  upon  it ;  and  at  3  in  -the  afternoon 
both  ships  came  to  anchor  in  Adventure  Bay, 
(S.  W.  part  of  Georgia)  in  7  fathoms  water,  over 
a  bottom  of  strong  clay. 

Our  arrival  here,  though  it  was  not  a  country 
the  most  indulgent,  we  considered  to  be  a  very 


SOUTH    GEORGIA.  51 

happy  event.  Our  sailors  had  suffered  much 
from  cold  fogs  and  wet  during  the  two  monliis 
they  had  been  navigating  the  south ;  and  as  we 
had  been  nearly  5  months  under  sail,  the  appear* 
anjce  of  scurvy  (that  disease  so  fatally  attendant 
on  long  voyages)  was  to  be  dreaded.  Our  ves* 
sels  too,  were  so  much  weather  beaten,  that  they 
greatly  needed  refitting ;  so  that  taking  into  ac- 
count our  many  pressing  wants,  this  island, 
though  inhospitable,  was  capable  of  affording  us 
great  relief. 

Our  crews  here  fed  plenteously  on  greens 
which,  although  bitter,  are  very  salutary,  being 
an  excellent  antiscorbutic  :  with  regard  to  meat, 
we  were  supplied  With  young  albatrosses,  that  is 
to  say,  about  a  year  old :  the  flesh  of  these  is 
sweet,  but  not  sufficiently  firm  to  be  compared 
with  that  of  any  domestic  fowl. 

Our  harbour  duties,  and  a  search  upon  the 
island  for  animals  for  our  cargo  were  immediately 
commenced  and  carried  on  with  zeal,  although 
we  experienced  frequent  interruptions  from 
heavy  gales  which  were  now  prevalent ;  it  being 
near  the  time  of  the  autumnal  equinox  of  this 
hemisphere. 

I  took  opportunities  of  making  various  obser- 
vations  on  shore,  and  found  the  head  of  the  bay 
to  lye  in  latitude  54/"^'  48'',  and  in  longitude^,  by 
the  mean  of  two  of  the  best  of  my  chronometers 

E  2 


52  SOUTH    GEORGIA. 

38"*  8'  4".  The  variation  of  the  compass  at  the 
same  place, by  azimuth,  was  11*^  15' east.  The 
head  of  this  bay  being  surrounded  with  moun- 
tains, I  ascended  the  top  of  one  of  them  for  the 
purpose  of  taking  the  altitude  of  the  sun  when 
at  some  distance  from  the  meridian,  but  after 
planting  my  artificial  horizon,  I  was  surprised  to 
find,  that  although  .  there  was  not  a  breath  of 
wind,  and  every  thing  around  perfectly  still,  yet 
the  niercury.had  so  tremulous  a  motion,  that  I 
could  not  get  an  observation.  The  ground  was 
evidently  agitated  internally ;  though  it  was  only 
by  means  of  the  quicksilver,  that  I  could  detect 
it.. 

On  the  17th  of  April,  our  .harbour  business 
being  completed,  both  vessels  put  to  sea,  and 
with  the,  wind  at  east,  we  directed  our  course 
towards  the  Falkland  Islands. 

South  Georgia,  it  appears,  was  discovered  by  a 
Monsieur  La  Roche,  in  the  year  1 675.  It  was 
visited  by  a  vessel  called  the  Lyon  in  I756  j  but 
was  not  explored  till  Captain  Cook  did  so  in  the 
Resolution,  in  the  year  I77I. 

I  need .  not  remind  the  reader  of  the  great 
advantages  navigation,  and  geography  in  general, 
have  acquired  from  the  discoveries  and  inves- 
tigations of  that  able  navigator ;  but:  the  public 
may  not  be  aware  of  the  great  extent  to  which 


SEA    ELEPHANTS    AND    FUR   SEALS.  53 

his  researches  in  the  South,  in  particular,  have 
been  beneficial  to  Great  Britain. 

His  official  report  regarding  the  island  of  South 
-Georgia,  in  which  he  gave  an  account  of  the 
great  number  of  sea-elephants  (called  by  him 
sea-lions),  and  fur  seals,  found  on  the  shores, 
induced  several  enterprising  merchants  to  fit  out 
Vessels  to  take  them ;  the  elephants  for  their  oil, 
and  the  seals  for  their  skins.  These  animals  are 
now  almost  extinct  j  but  I  have  been  credibly 
informed  that,  since  the  year  in  which  they  were 
known  to  be  so  abundant,  not  less  than  20,000 
tons  of  the  sea-elephant  oil  has  been  procured 
for  the  London  market.  A  quantity  of  fur  seal- 
skins  were  usually  brought  along  with  a  cargo 
of  oil;  but  formerly  the  furriers  in  £ngland 
had  not  the  method  of  dressing  them,  on  which 
account  they  were  of  so  little  value,  as  to  be 
almost  neglected. 

At  the  same  time^  however,  the  Americans 
were  carrying  from  Georgia  cargoes  of  these 
skins  to  China,  where  they  frequently  obtained 
a  price  of  from  5  to  6  dollars  a-piece.  It  is  ge- 
nerally known  that  the  English  did  not  enjoy  the 
same  privilege  ;  by  which  means  the  Americans 
took  entirely  out  of  our  hands  this  valuable 
article  of  trade. 

The  number  of  skins  brought  from  off  Georgia 
by  ourselves  and  foreigners  cannot  be  estimated 

E  3 


54  ISLAND    OF    GEORGIA. 

at  fewer  than  1,200,000.  I  may  here  also  remark, 
that  the  Island  of  Desolation,  which  Captain  Cook 
likewise  visited,  and  first  made  known,  has  been 
a  source  of  scarcely  less  profit  than  the  island 
of  Georgia.  Hence,  it  may  be  presumed,  that 
during  the  time  these  two  islands  have  been 
resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of  trade,  more  than 
2000  tons  of  shipping,  and  from  two  to  three 
hundred  seamen  have  been  employed  annually  in 
this  trafiic. 

Having  thus  given  an  idea  of  the  value  of 
what  has  already  been  discovered  in  the  South 
Seas,  I  shall  say  something  of  the  island  of 
Georgia  as  to  its  extent  and  peculiarities. 

The  island  is  about  96  miles  long,  and  its 
mean  breadth  about  10.  It  is  so  indented  with 
bays,  that  in  several  places,  where  they  are  on 
opposite  sides,  they  are  so  deep  as  to  make  the 
distance  from  the  one  side  to  the  other  very 
small.  Near  the  west  end,  in  particular,  there  is 
a  neck  of  this  kind,  about  half  a  mile  broad,  ovei* 
which  boats  are  frequently  transported. 

Dalrjonple,  in  a  very  old  chart,  represents  this 
island  as  having  a  channel  quite  through  it; 
which  may  probably  have  been  the  case,  since, 
near  the  middle,  there  is  an  ice-berg,  which  seems 
to  run  from  side  to  side. 

The  tops  of  the  mountains  are  loflty,  and  per- 
petually covered  with  snow ;  but  in  the  valleys, 


IPENGUINS.  55 

during  th^  summer  season,  vegetation  is  rather 
abundant  Almost  the  only  natural  production 
of  the  soil  is  a  strong  bladed  grass,  the  length  of 
which  is  in  general  about  two  feet  j  it  grows 
in  tufts  on  mounds  three  or  four  feet  frqpi  the 
ground. 

No  land  quadruped^  are  found  here ;  birds 
and  amphibious  animals  are  the  only  inhabitants : 
—  of  the  bird  tribe,  the  king  penguin  is  the  most 
worthy  of  notice.  The  penguins  (or,  as  they 
ought  properly  to  be  called,  pinguins,  the  name 
being  evidently  derived  from  the  Latin  word 
pinguedOf  on  account  of  its  fatness,)  are  of 
a  very  gregarious  nature.  They  go  in  large 
flocks  along  the  shore,  erect,  and  with  a  wad- 
dling gait.  When  seen  through  a  hazy  atmo- 
sphere, they  may  l^e  not  inaptly  mistaken  for  a 
body  of  men  ;  and,  indeed.  Sir  John  Narbprough 
has  whimsically  likened  them  to  "  little  children 
standing  up  in  white  aprons.**  Those  which  he 
describes,  however,  were  a  very  diminutive  spe- 
cies in  comparison  with  the  king  pienguin,  the 
bird  to  which  I  refer. 

In  pride,  these  birds  are  perhaps  not  surpassed 
even  by  the  peacock,  to  which  in  beauty  of  plu- 
mage they  are  indeed  very  little  inferior, —  as  may 
be  seen  in  our  principal  museums.  During  the 
time  of  moulting,  they  seem  to  repel  each  other 
with  disgust,  on  account  of  the  ragged  state  of 

£   4 


56  PENGUINS. 

their  coats ;  but  as  they  arrive  at  the  maximum 
of  splendour  they  re-assemble,  and  no  one  who 
has  hot  completed  his  plumage  is  allowed  to  enter 
the  community.  Their  frequently  looking  down 
theiri^ont  and  sides  in  order  to  contemplate 
the  perfection  of  their  exterior  brilliancy,  and 
to  remove  any  speck  which  might  sully  it,  is 
truly  amusing  to  an  observer. 

About  the  beginning  of  January  they  pair, 
and  lay  their  eggs.  During  the  time  of  hatch- 
ing,  the  male  is  remarkably  assiduous,  so  that 
when  the  hen  has  occasion  to  go  off  to  feed  and 
wash,  the  egg  is  transported  to  him,  which  is  done 
by  placing  their  toes,  together,  and  rolling,  it 
from  the  one  to  the  other,  usiug  their  beaks  to 
place  it  properly.  As  they  have  no  nest,  it  is 
to  be  remarked,  that  the  egg  is  carried  between 
the  tail  and  legs,  where  the  female,  in  particular, 
has  a  cavity  for  the  purpose. 

The  hen  keeps  charge  of  her  young  nearly  a 
twelvemonth,  during  which  time  they  change 
and  complete  their  plumage ;  and  in  teaching 
them  to  swim,  the  mother  has  frequently  to  use 
some  artifice;  for  when  the  young  one  refuses 
to  take  the  water,  she  entices  it  to  the  side  of 
a  rock,  and  cunningly  pushes  it  in,  and  this  is 
repeated  until  it  takes  the  sea  of  its  own  accord. 
There  are  three  other  kinds  of  penguins,  all  of 
them  nearly  of  the  same  size,   but  little  more 


PENGUINS.  57 

than  half  the  bigness  of  thatwhich  I  have  described. 
Their  plumage  is  not  near  so  fine  but  they  walk 
erect,  and  are  of  the  same  form  with  the  king 
penguin.  The  names  by  which  they  are  dis- 
tinguished are,  the  macaroni,  the  jack-asjs,  and 
the  stone-cracker  penguin.  The  macaroni  is  so 
called  from  its  having  been  likened  to  a  fop  or 
macaroni,  though  I  must  confess  I  do  not  see 
the  similitude.  The  next  has  its  name  from  the 
noise  it  makes,  which  resembles  the  braying  of 
an  ass;  And  the  third  is  denominated  from  its 
pecking  or  cracking  stones  when  irritated.  All 
these  birds  have  a  practice  of  cunningly  steal- 
ing from  one  another,  during  the  time  of  nest- 
building,  the  materials  of  which  they  are  con- 
structed.  They  differ  from  the  king  penguin  in 
these  particulars,  and  also  in  having  nests, 
which  are  sometimes  in  the  sides  of  tussac 
mounds,  but  generally  on  the  side  of  a  hill, 
and  are  composed  of  a  few  sticks  and  stones. 
They  remain  with  their  young  but  four  mouths, 
viz.  from  January  to  April,  at  which  time  they 
take  them  off  shore  for  several  successive  days 
to  the  distance  of  four  or  five  miles  in  order 
to  accustom  them  to  the  water  j  and  when  they 
can  endure  it,  they  go  off  to  sea. 

The  Albatross  (the  Diomedia  of  ornithology) 
is  a  bird  which  has  been  often  seen  by  naviga- 
tors off  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  in  south- 


58  THE   ALBATROSS. 

el*n  latitudes,  and  has  been  frequently  describ- 
ed ;  but  as  the  species  abounds  in  the  island  of 
Georgia^  I  shall  record  some  observations  I  have 
made  in  regard  to  their  domestic  habits,  &c. 
A  full  grown  albatross  sometimes  measures 
16  or  17  feet  from  the  tip  of  one  wing  to 
the  tip  of  the  other  when  expanded ;  but  more 
commonly  they  average  about  12  feet.  These 
birds  are  so  abundantly  covered  with  feathers 
that,  when  plucked,  they  appear  not  above  one 
half  the  original  size,  and  our  astonishment  at 
their  apparent  magnitude  immediately  vanishes. 
I  have  found  them  when  cleaned,  to  weigh  from 
12  to  25  lb. 

There  is  something  humourously  remarkable 
in  their  way  of  mating ;  the  couple  approach 
one  another  with  great  apparent  ceremony, 
bringing  their  beaks  repeatedly  together,  swing- 
ing their  heads,  and  contemplating  each  other 
with  very  deliberate  attention.  Sometimes  this 
will  continue  for  two  hours  together,  and  to  a 
person  inclined  to  be  amused  the  whole  trans- 
action would  appear  not  unlike  one  of  our  own 
formal  courtships  in  pantomime.  They  have 
great  power .  in  their  beaks,  and,  when  on  the 
nest,  I  have  observed  them  defend  themselves 
for  half  an  hour  against  an  active  dog. 
Their  feet  are  webbed  and  remarkably  large, 
so  that  when  the  water  is  snK>oth  they  can  walk 


THE    NELLY.  59 

on  the  surface  with  hardly  any  assistance  from 
their  wings,  and  the  noise  of  their  tread  is 
heard  at  a  considerable  distance.  Their  eggs  are 
inferior  to  those  of  geese,  but  they  have  less 
yolk,  and  more  white  in  proportion  to  their  size, 
and  weigh  generally  one  pound  and  three  quar- 
ters. All  birds  of  the  albatross  and  gull  kind 
lay  their  eggs  in  October,  and,  when  new  laid 
they  are  a  great  source  of  refreshment. 

The  bird  next  in  size  found  here,  is  called 
by  sailors  a  Nelly;  it  is  of  the  peterel  kind, 
and  of  a  mixed  grey  and  brown  colour,  having, 
an  unpleasing  appearance  and  being  extremely 
voracious.  Their  fondness  for  blubber  often 
induces  them  to  eat  so  much  that  they  are 
unable  to  fly.  A  flock  of  perhaps  five  or  six 
hundred,  has  been  known  to  devour  20  tons  of 
the  sea  elephant  fat  in  six  or  eight  hours.  From 
this  appetite  for  oUy  food,  their  flesh  is  uneat- 
able, nor  are  their  eggs  so  good  as  those  of  the 
other  birds  I  have  mentioned. 

The  smaller  oceanic  birds  of  the  southern 
hemisphere  have,  for  the  most  part,  a  residence 
in  this  island ;  but  as  they  are  well  known  it  is 
unnecessary  to  enumerate  them. 

I  fear  that  in  the  description  of  these  animals 
I  have  been  tedious,  since  by  some  readers,  such 
remarks  may  be  considered  as  of  little  import- 
ance i  but  the  hints  which  the  peculiar  instincts 


60  THE    SHAG    ROCKS. 

of  these  creatures  furnished,  I  have  preferred 
to  a  minute  detail  of  their  dimensions  and  cor 
lours  with  which  the  public  are  already  well  ac 
quainted. 

Having  given  an  idea  of  the  value  of  Southern 
Discoveries  to  Great  Britain,  and  said  all  that  is 
necessary  of  the  animals  fallen  in  with,  I  shall 
return  to  the  journal  of  our  voyage. 

At  2  o'clock  on  the  lyth  of  April,  the  east  end 
of  Georgia  bore  N.E.  ^  N.  distant  about  14 
miles.  '  The  wind  freshened  at  south  and  pro- 
duced a  cross  and  disagreeable  sea:  on  the  18th 
the  wind  was  southerly,  and  the  weather  foggy 
which  prevented  my  getting  sight  of  the  shag 
rocks  as  I  had  intended.  They  are  represented 
as  situated  in  the  latitude  53"^  48',  and  longitude 
48^  25',  and  are  said  to  be  even  with  the  water, 
which  I  believe  not  to  be  the  case,  as  I  have 
been  credibly  informed,  that  they  appear  in  three 
pinnacles,  or  in  the  shape  of  sugs^r  loaves  60  or 
70  feet  high  with  a  reef  running  round  them. 
These  reefs,  I  presume,  have  given  rise  to  the 
supposed  existence  of  the  Aurora  Islands.  The 
Atrevida  Spanish  man  of  war  having  been  sent 
in  1796,  to  survey  what  are  called  the  Aiu-oras, 
probably  saw  these  rocks,  and  by  a  confused  con- 
currence of  circumstances,  the  commander  sup- 
posed he  had  discovered  three  islands,  which  were 
accordingly  officially  reported  to  the  Spanish 


THE   SHAG    ROCKS*  61 

government  These  islands  have  since  found  a 
place  in  our  charts  with  the  track  of  the  Atrevida 
round  them  ;  giving  credit  to  which  every  body 
has  been  led  to  believe  in  their  existence :  con- 
sequently as  they  lie  in  the  track  of  ships  bouiid 
round  Cape  Horn,  the  notion  must  be  a  great 
hindrance  to  navigation. 

An  instance  of  this,  appeared  in  the  case  of  a 
friend  of  mine,  who  informed  me  that  once  hav- 
ing had  to  lay  to  for  daylight  with  a  fair  wind  oh 
account  of  these  islands,  his  passage  round  the 
Cape  was  much  protracted. 

But  as  we  are  now  near  the  place  where  this 
supposed  Spanish  discovery  was^made,  it  may  not 
be  improper  to  give  an  account  of  a  search  I  my- 
self made  for  these  islands  in  my  first  voyage  in 
the  year  1820.  But  to  shew  how  undisputed  iHe 
authority  is  for  their  existence,  I  shall  first  insert 
a  translation  of  ofiicial  reports  from  the  Spanish^ 
relating  to  this  matter.     It  is  as  follows : 

EMracts  translated  from  the  publications  of  the 
Royal  Hydrographical  Society  of  Madrid^  pub- 
lished by  authority  in  1 809.  Memoriasegunda, 
t&moV.  p:5l,52. 

"  THE  AURORA  IStANDS. 

"  We  do  not  learn  that  they  ever  were  seen 
before  the  year  1762,  in  which  they  were  dis- 


63  AURORA   ISLANDS* 

covered  by  the  ship  Aurora  which  gave  them  her 
name.  In  1790  they  were  likewise  seen  again 
by  the  ship  Princess  belonging  to  the  Royal 
Philippine  Company,  Captain  Manuel  de  Oyar* 
vido  who  shewed  us  his  journal  in  Lima,  and 
gave  us  some  information  with  regard  to  their 
situation.  In  1794,  the  Corvette  Atrevida  went 
purposely  to  situate  them,  having  practised  in 
their  immediate  vicinity  from  the  21st  to  27th  of 
January  all  the  necessary  observations,  and  mea- 
sured by  chronometers,  the  difference  of  longi- 
tude between  these  islands,  and  the  port  of  Sole- 
dad  in  the  Maluinas  (or  Falkland  Isles).  The 
islands  are  three  j  they  are  very  nearly  in  the 
same  meridian ;  the  centre  one  is  rather  low,  and 
the  other  two,  may  be  seen  at  nine  leagues 
distance. 
"  Their  latitudes  and  longitudes  are  as  follows  : 

Latitude  ofthe  most  south-    ^     ^  n  o    i    n 

em  Island.  53  15  22  S. 

Longitude  west  of  Cadiz.    41  40  00  ^  q^ 

Long.  Cadis  and  Gr.  6  17  15       *      *  47  57  15 


Latitude  of  the  second  is- 
land or  the  low  one.  5S    2  40 

Longitude  West  of  Cadiz.  41  38  00  W.  Gr.  47  55  16 

Latitude  ofthe  third  island 
which  has  hitherto  been 
undiscovered)  and  there- 
fore called  New  Island.  52  37  24  S. 

Longitude  from  Cadiz.        41  26  00  ^ 

Reduced  toGr.  Long.  6  17  15   "^'^^r 

47  48  15  W. 


CRUIZE   OF   THE   ATREVIDA.  6S 

"  The  captain  of  thePrincess  says,  that  to  £,S.£. 
of  the  island,  most  to  the  south,  at  the  distance 
of  11  miles,  there  is  a  bank  or  shoal,  but  the  Cor- 
vette Atrevida,  which  made  various  efforts  to  find 
it,  could  not  discover  it,  and  only  saw  different 
banks  of  snow,  which,  at  some  distance,  ap- 
peared like  banks  or  shoals/* 

The  above  is  given  as  the  conclusive  testimony 
of  all  the  surveys ;  here  follow  certain  particu- 
lars less  known :  — 

Appendia:  to  the  above-mentioned  work,    vol.  1. 
p.  213.     Number  IV. 

"  An  account  of  the  campaign  or  cruize  of  the 
Corvette  Atrevida  from  the  time  of  her 
leaving  the  Maluii^as  in  January  1794,  in 
search  of  the  islands  Aurora,  until  ^her  ar- 
rival at  Montevideo  on  the  15th  February 
following. 

"  Having  finished  with  all  possible  exactness  the 
observations  we  had  to  make  in  Port  Soledad,  and 
having  embarked  the  instruments  and  whatever 
belonged  to  the  Corvettes,  it  was  determined  on 
the  10th  oi  January y  to  weigh  anchor  and  make 
sail.  The  wind  had  been  fresh  all  day  from 
S.W,,  but  it  calmed  towards  evening;  and  on 
endeavouring  to  raise  the  anchor  in  that  point  it 


C4i  CRUIZE   OiF   THE   ATREVIDA. 

was  found  so  tenaciously  embedded  that  the 
launch  suffered  much.  From  midnight  the  ne- 
cessary laboui*  was  continued,  and  at  daylight  we 
got  under  weigh,  the  boats  having  been  first 
taken  in. 

**  The  wind  at  the  time  was  west,  and  we  im- 
proved it  under  all  sail  to  the  E.S.E.  This 
cruise  (or  campaign)  had  for  its  only  object  to 
search  for  the  Aurora  Islands  (whose  position 
was  considered  as  uncertain),  from  12'  to  15'  of 
latitude,  and  7^  of  longitude,  according  to  the 
different  reckonings  of  the  navigators  who  had 
given  information  concerning  them.  We  took 
advantage  of  the  winds  sometimes  favourable, 
sometimes  contrary  to  our  course,  keeping  in  the 
parallel  of  53^®  and  with  prudent  precaution  de- 
termined to  lie  by  at  nights.  On  the  15th,  our  ob- 
servations and  the  sight  of  gulls  and  other  birds 
gave  us  indications  of  being  near  the  islands.  In 
these  lyings  to,  we  suffered  the  double  martyrdom 
of  losing  precious  time,  and  encountering  rollings 
and  a  cold  that  were  Insufferable  even  to  those 
who  had  just  experienced  the  intemperance  of 
Cape  Horn. 

"  At  day-break  on  the  1 6th,  we  saw  two  large 
banks  of  snow  or  ice  distance  5  miles  to  the  N.E. 
The  pyramidal  figure  would  not  have  failed  to 
have  flattered  our  hopes  if  their  proximity  had 
not  destroyed  the  illusion ;  latitude  63^40  the 


CBJJIZE  J  OF    THE  .  ATREVIDA. 


65 


parallel  of  the  islands  prevented  us  advancing  a 
mile,  without  a  clear  horizon, 

"  Until  the  18th,  in  the  morning,  continued  a 
fog :  the  wind  was  not  much,  but  the  sea  was  still 
very  cross.  The  observation  of  mid-day  was 
54**  ir  S.  of  latitude,  half  a  degree  south  of  the 
parallel  established  for  our  investigations.  We 
luffed  immediately,  to  gain  what  We  had  lost,  with 
every  possible  sail.  In  the  evening  we  dis- 
covered a  large  hummock  in  the  form  of  a  sugar- 
loaf  i  which  we  took  for  a  bank  of' snow.  AH 
the  next  day  and  night  the  fog  continued,  so 
that  we  could  not  distinguish  objects  at  half  a 
mile's  distance. 

"  On  the  gOth  in  the  evening,  after  some  hours 
of  calm,  and  variable  winds,  it  blew  from  the 
S.S.E.,  and  somewhat  cleared  away.  We  steered 
east,  and  on  the  21st,  at  mid-day,  found  our- 
selves in  latitude  53*40'  S.,  and  longitude 
42*  W;  Cadiz  (equal  to  longitude  35^42^45^' 
W.  Greenwich). 

"  At  5^  P.M.  we  perceived  to  the  northward, 
at  a  great  distance,  a  dark  lump,  which  appeared 
to  all  of  us  like  a  mountain  of  ice.  Notwithstand- 
ing, we  bore  away  for  it  under  a  press  of  sail ; 
and  when  we  were  near  it,  we  saw  distinctly  a 
great  mountain  in  the  form  of  a  pavilion  (or 
tent)    divided    vertically    into  two  parts;    the 

F 


66  CRUIZE    OF   THE   ATREVICA. 

eastern  extremity  whitCy  and  the  western  very 
dark  ;  on  which  latter  side  was  a  snowy  band  : 
—  and  we  also  noticed  some  breaks  in  the  dark 
streak. 

"  We  all  agreed  that  this  was  the  island ;  but 
we  saw  no  other,  and  none  of  the  circumstances 
agreed  ^dth  those  reported  of  the  Auroras.  • 


*  Extracts  from  some  of  those  voyages.  **  In  1762,  the  ship 
Aurora,  on  her  return  from  Lima,  saw  two  islands,  35  leagues 
to  the  W.  of  the  Maluinas,  according  to  account,  running 
N.  £•  and  S.  W.,  distant  2^  to  3  leagues.  The  eastern  was 
the  smallest,  and  had  a  reef  which  extended  towards  the 
other ;  leaving,  however,  a  clear  channel,  through  which  that 
ship  passed.*  The  western  had  5  to  6  miles  in  extent,  from 
N.  to  S.  On  their  inaccessible  sides,  they  could  not  per- 
ceive any  bays.  One  mile  to  the  north,  no  soundings  with 
120  fathoms.  The  observations  of  the  same  day  placed  it 
in  53**  15'  S.,  and  in  325°  22'  of  longitude  from  the  meridian 
of  Tenerifie,  corrected  to  the  sight  of  making  Ascension." 

«*  In  1769,  the  ship  San  Miguel  being  in  the  lat.  of  53°  27'  S., 
and  long.  318°  36'  from  Tenerifie,  saw  six  hummocks  of 
land  of  difierent  sizes  ;  and  thinking  them  to  be  the  islands 
Beauchene,  to  the  southward  of  the  Maluinas^  corrected  their 
reckoning,  and  afterwards  made  to  the  island  of  Ascension 
in  8°,  when  they  thought  themselves  in  the  meridian  of 
Trinidad,  or  Ascension  of  America.  So  enormous  a  dif- 
foence:o£  I6^f  made  them  suspect  thiCt:  they  had  been  the 
Auroras." 

**  In  1774,  the  ship  Aurora  saw  one  evening  a-head  several 
hummocks,  which  they  tfiought  to  be  banks  of  snow.  They 
continued  during  the  night  lying^to^  and  next  morning  saw 
them  again.  The  green  water  continuing,  and  several  birds 
which  they  had  seen  two  days  before,  they  approached  k, 


t^HUIZE    OF   THE    ATREVIDA.  6^ 

♦*  We  passed  within  one  mile  of  the  island, 
coasting  it  on  the  western  side ;  and,  from  that 
point,  it  presented  us  the  view  of  a  sharp  rock, 
trending  from  north  to  south.  The  southern 
part,  constantly  exposed  to  the  freezing  winds 
from  that  quarter,  was  covered  with  snow ;  and 
being  cut  perpendicularly  on  the  north-west 
side,  with  winds  much  more  temperate  and  moist, 
the  land  was  there  perfectly  discoverable.  From 
thence,  steering  S,  W.  we  lay  off  and  on  during 
the  night,  to  see  whether  the  observations 
of  the  next  day  could  be  made  under  happier 
circumstances. 

*'  At  daylight,  we  saw  another  island  at  a  great 
distance,  also  covered  with  snow,  but  not  so 
high  as  the  former  one.  At  d**  we  might  be 
distant  10  miles,  to  the  N.^  N.E.  (N.  b.  E.), 
and  the  first  was  seen  to  the  S.  E.,  distant  about 
8  mOes.    At  9^  we  lost  sight  of  it ;  and  although 


and  saw  that  it  was  an  island  stretching  from  N.W.  to  S.  E., 
about  3  leagues  in  length ;  and,  being  in  its  parallel,  they 
observed,  in  53^  38'  of  latitude,  and  by  estimation  in  longi- 
tude 326°  10'  from  Teneriffe.  To  the  E.  S.  E.  from  this 
island,  at  three  or  four  leagues'  di^imce,  they  saw  another, 
which  showed  a  heavy  surf,  and  which  they  estimated  to  be 
in  53^  42^  latitude,  and  326""  33'  longitude  from  Teneriffe. 
Two  other  vessels,  the  Pearl  in  1779,  and  the  Dolores 
in  1790,  saw  these  islands  also,  but  without  noticing  their 
position." 

F  2 


68  CrtOiZE    OF    THE    ATREVIDA. 

/the  wiftd  freshened  from  the  N.  W.    we  went 
round  it  without  effect;    because  the   cloud» 
not   haviitg   dissipated,    we  could  not. get  the 
latitude  at  meridian.    We,  nevertheless,  waited ; 
and  at  one  o'clock  had  an  altitude,    and  an- 
other at  three  o'clock,  by  which  we  concluded 
the  latitude  which  referred  to  the  islands  we 
had  seen,  and  the  longitude  calculated  by  the 
chronometers :  the  first  was  determined  to  be  in 
latitude  53°  15'  ^T  S.,  and  longitude  41  •*  4'0''W, 
of  Cadiz.     The  wind  was  now  at  S.  W.,  and  we 
hauled  to  the    southward,    seeking  in  higher 
latitudes  more  favourable  winds  to  get  to  the 
westward,  and  make  the  coast  of  Patagonia. 

"  On  the  24th  at  midday,  we  were  in  55*^.28' 
latitude  S. ;  and  as  we  did  not  meet  better  Minds, 
but  rougher  seas  and  most  intense  colds,  it  was 
resolved  to  lessen  the  latitude,  in  search  of  mor^ 
favourable  weather.  We  stood  to  the  northward, 
on  the  larboard  tack,  with  all  sail ;  and  on  the 
26th,  at  evening,  discovered  to  the  E.  ^N.E.  a 
white  lump,  which  at  first  appeared  to  us  a  field 
of  ice;  but  its  immobility  soon  convinced  us 
that  it  was  an  island.  It  is  a  large  rock,  making 
in  sharp  pinnacles,  but  formed  like  a  saddle-hill. 
The  N.  E.  was  covered  with  snow,  but  the  south* 
em  part,  being  perpendicular,  would  not  retain 
it.  At  a  mile  from  this  last  point,  there  ex- 
tended several   breakers,   terminating  in  small 


SEARCH    FOR   THE   AURORAS.  69 

islands.  We  coasted  along,  this  great  rock  at 
a .  regular  distance,  and  souiided  frequently, 
without  finding  bottom.  On  the  27th,  in  the 
morning,  we  had  good  observations  of  latitude 
and  longitude ;  which,  referred  to  the  said  island, 
placed. it  in  52*  3T  24'^  S.  latitude,  and  41"  26' 
longitude  west  of  Cadiz/^  ^ 

In  consequence  of  the  ci^edibility  of  these 
documents,  I  was  induced  to  make  a  strict  search 
for  these  islands ;  and  shall  now,  for  the  benefit 
of  navigation,  relate  the  circumstances  of  the 
investigation. 

Having  examined  the  daily  rates  of  my  chro- 
nometers in  the  harbour  of  St.  John's  in  Staten 
Land,  and  taken  on  board  a  supply  of  wood  and 
water,  we  weighed  anchor  on  the  27  th  of  Janu- 
ary, 1820,  and  made  sail  to  the  eastward.  At 
eight  o'clock  P.  M.  the  east  end  of  Staten  Land 
bore  S.  W.  by  W.,  distant  five  leagues.  During 
the  28th  and  29th,  the  wind  was  from  W.  N.  W. 
with  hazy  weather;  at  noon,  our  latitude  was 
53°  17',  and  longitude  55''  22'.  We  continued 
lirider  a  press  of  sail,  keeping  the  latitude  of 
53**  15'^  and  on  the  31st  we  had  fine  wea- 
ther with  the  wind  from  the  northward.  In 
the  forenoon  we  passed  some  kelp,  and  had 
several  birds  about  the  ship,  which  gave  me 
hopes  that  we   were   approaching  the   islands. 

F  3 


70  SEARCH    FOR    THE   AURORAS. 

Our  latitude,  at  noon,  by  observation  was 
52"  47'  S.,  and  longitude  by  chronometers 
48"  47'  W.,  and  by  D.  R.  48**  38'.  In  the  even- 
ing  I  observed  the  variation  of  the  compass  to 
be  IG""  11'.  At  seven  in  the  evening  we  had 
passed  over  the  (laid  down)  latitude  and  longi- 
tude of  these  islands,  without  observing  the  least 
appearance  of  land. «  We  obtained  and  continued 
in  the  parallel  of  latitude,  running  through  the 
place  assigned  to  them  till  we  arrived  in  the 
longitude  of  46*".  I  considered  this  allowance  for 
error  in  longitude  to  be  J)retty  ample ;  particularly 
since  the  Atrevida  sailed  from  Port  Soledad  in 
the  Falkland  Islands ;  from  which,  to  the  place 
for  our  investigation,  was  but  about  three  days' 
sail:  hence  her  common  reckoning  could  not 
have  erred  much,  and  she  had  chronometers 
which  should  have  been  nearly  exact.  These 
considerations  produced  in  my  mind  a  degree 
of  surprise ;  and  I  could  not,  at  that  moment, 
reconcile  toy  experience  with  the  facts  which 
had  been  asserted.  I  was  resolved,  however, 
not  to  abandon  the  object  of  my  pursuit,  without 
being  fully  satisfied  of  the  truth  or  falsity  of  this 
geographical  problem.  It  was  now  remarkably 
clear ;  and,  from  the  mast4iead,  land  of  common 
height  might  have  been  seen  at  the  distance  of 
eight  leagues ;  but  still,  nothing  of  the  Jdnd 
was  observed.      We  next  steered  S,  S.  E.  into 


SEARCH  FOR  THE  AURORAS.        71 

the  latitude  of  53**  1%  and  then  W.  by  S.,  in 
order  to  get  sight  of  the  southern  island  j  but 
in  vain  —  not  the  smallest  indication  of  land 
appeared.  On  the  2d,  it  blew  a  strbnggale  from 
the  N.N.  W.  with  thick  weather ;  and  we  hove 
to,  under  a  close-reefed  main-topsail,  sent  down 
the  top-gallant  yards,  and  struck  the  masts.  At 
noon  the  weather  cleared  up,  and  we  got  the 
meridian  altitude  of  the  sun,  which  gave  latitude 
52®  58',  and  our  longitude  by  chronometers  was 
48^6^  our  latitude  by  D.  R.  being  53"^  20'.  We 
had  experienced  a  northerly  current  of  22  miles, 
part  of  which  must  be  attributed  to  error  of 
reckoning. 

The  situation  for  the  middle  island  bore  now 
S.  83*^  E.,  distant  eight  miles.  We  had  a  clear 
view  of  6  or  7  leagues,  but  nothing  like  land  was 
to  be  seen.  The  only  chance  now  left  us  for 
finding  these  Auroras,  I  conceived,  was  by 
making  various  courses  between  the  latitudes 
of  53®  15'  and  52®  3?' ;  and  this  we  did,  till  we 
reached  the  longitude  by  chronometers  of  46°  29'. 
Having  all  this  time  seen  nothing  resem- 
bling land,  except  fog-banks  which  had  often 
given  us  severe  disappointment,  we  returned 
westward ;  and,  on  the  5th,  our  latitude  at  noon 
WEK5  52®  44',  and  longitude  by  chronometers 
48^  33'.     We  had  thus  again  passed  over  the 

F  4 


72  PROBABLE    CAUSES    OF    MISTAKE 

site  of  these  islands  to  no  purpose.  On  the  6th, 
our  latitude  by  observation  was  53^*  24',  and  lon- 
gitude by  chronometers  49"*  49'.  We  continued 
to  stand  to  the  westward  under  easy  sail,  with 
the  wind  northerly ;  and  on  the  7th,  our  latitude 
by  observation  was  53°  38',  and  longitude  by 
chronometers  5V  5\  Having  thus  diligently 
searched  through  the  supposed  situation  of  the 
Auroras,  I  concluded  that  the  discoverers  must 
have  been  misled  by  appearances ;  I  therefore 
considered  any  further  cruize  to  be  an  impro- 
vident waste  of  time ;  and,  to  the  gratification 
of  my  officers  and  crew,  directed  our  course  to 
the  Falkland  Islands. 

From  the  apparent  validity  of  the  printed  do- 
cuments setting,  forth  the  existence  of  the  Au- 
roras, I  was  naturally  led  to  consider  in  what 
way  those  Spanish  officers  could  have  fallen  into 
so  great  a  mistake.  There  are  two  ways  in 
which  it  might  be  accounted  for,  (with  men  un- 
accustomed to  traversing  cold  and  tempestuous 
seas,  encumbered  with  ice,)  and  into  which  they 
might  easily  fall  in  their  conclusions.  The  re- 
ports of  voyagers  previous  to  the  cruize  of  the 
Atrevida  are,  from  their  imperfect  knowledge  of 
the  science  of  navigation,  not  much  deserving  of 
attention.  The  investigation  performed  by  the 
Atrevida,  however,  is  certainly  a  matter  of  some 
consequence,  from  their  having  been  particularly 


OF    THE    SPANISH    NAVIGATORS.  J3 

instructed  to  ascertain  the  situation  of  these 
islands^  and  it  was  to  be  expected,  therefore,  that 
this  hydrographical  point  should  have  been  left 
undoubted. 

They  sailed  from  Port  Soledad  on  the  14th  of 
January,  having  chronometers  on  board,  a  cir- 
cumstance which  ought  to  have  insured  ac- 
curacy, and  proceeded  into  the  vicinity  of  the 
place  pointed  out  for  their  research.  On  the 
21st,  they  saw  an  island ;  which,  as  they  express 
it,  appeared  like  a  great  mountain,  in  the  form  of 
a  pavilion  or  tent  divided  vertically  into  two 
parts..  This  may  possibly  have  been  the  Shag 
Rocks,  which  lie  nearly  in  the  same  latitude, 
but  differ  six  degrees  in  longitude.  About  this 
time,  much  ice  was  found  drifting  from  the 
southward,  and  it  is  probable  that  it  had  formed 
round  the  base  of  these  rocks ;  and  the  peaks  ap- 
pearing  above,  clear  of  snow,  and  black,  would 
leave  no  doubt  of  that  part  being  land.  The 
ice  formed  on  the  south  side,  and  probably 
forced  on  this  reef  of  rocks,  might  be  taken  for  a 
range  of  land  covered  with  snow ;  and  upon  the 
same  data  it  m^y  be  presumed  that  what  they 
describe  as  the  second  island  was  an  ice-berg ; 
and  the  third,  which  is  described  as  having  been 
seen  on  the  27th,  was,  perhaps,  the  same  as  that 
which  was  seen  on  the  21st,  viz.  the  Shag  Rock^, 
with  the -appearance  of  the  base  altered  by  the 


74  KOK'KXISTENCE   OF  THE   AUBORAS. 

ice  having  shifted  its  positioiL  The  diflference 
of  longitude  between  the  Shag  Rocks  and  the 
place  assigned  to  the  Auroras  seems  hardly  to 
admit  of  my  conjecture  of  their  being  the  same ; 
but  it  is  well  known,  that  the  longitude  of  places, 
in  many  instances,  has  been  egregiously  misre- 
presented, from  assuming  different  meridians,  as 
also  from  typographical  and  various  other  mis- 
takes resulting  from  ignorance. 

The  only  other  way  in  which  a  reason  can  be 
advanced  to  account  for  the  fallacy  of  this  dis- 
covery is,  that  what  they  saw  were  all  ice-islands, 
incorporated  with  earth,  similar  to  the  one 
which  I  have  mentioned  having  seen  far  to  the 
southward. 

Having  thus  brought  to  a  conclusion,  what  I 
consider  a  subject  of*  interest  to  bydrographical 
science,  viz.  the  ascertaining  the  non-existence 
of  these  islands,  I  now  return  to  our  own  posi- 
tion, when  by  reason  of  foggy  weather  we  were 
unable  to  get  sight  of  the  Shag  Rocks. 

We  proceeded  to  the  westward  under  as  much 
sail  as  we  could  carry ;  but  the  wind  was  so  con- 
tinually shifting  between  S.W.  and  N.W.  thi^ 
we  made  but  little  progress ;  and  our  only  advan- 
tage was  obtained  by  tacking  as  the  wind  shifted, 
ftur  however  short  a  time.  The  fore-topsail  was 
almost  constantly  close-reefed,  and  frequently 
furled.    Our  consort  continued  in  company,  and 


LOSS    OF    BOWSPRIT.  ^^ 

we  neglected  no  opportunity  of  inaking  westing. 
On  the  22d  of  April,  our  latitude  by  observation 
was  54**  15',  and  longitude  by  chronometer* 
46^49',  byD.  R.  4?^  ir. 

During  the  2Sd  and  24th,  we  had  the  wind 
from  east  to  south  ;  but  at  noon  of  the  24th  it 
shifted  into  the  S.W.  The  weather  continued 
to  be  very  unsettled ;  and  the  wind  often  shifts 
ing,  and  continuing  to  blow  hard,  produced  a 
sea  so  irregular,  that  several  of  our  shrouds  and 
backstays  were  carried  away ;  and,  but  for  the 
precaution  I  had  taken,  of  having  equal  to  three 
additional  shrouds  on  a  side,  to  the  lower  masts, 
we  certainly  should  have  lost  them.  Sailing  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  supposed  Auroras, 
with  long  nights  and  heavy  gales,  would  have 
caused  great  anxiety  had  we  not  been  previously 
satisfied  of  their  non-existence  ;  and  I  certainly 
felt  gratified  at  deriving  this  benefit  from  the 
pains  I  had  formerly  taken  to  ascertain  that  cir- 
cumstance. 

On  the  3d,  at  noon,  it  blew  a  heavy  gale  at 
W.S.W.  and  we  lay  to.  In  the  afternoon  our  con- 
sort lost  her  bowsprit,  by  a  heavy  sea  passing  over 
it,  though  only  a  small  part  of  it  was  then  with- 
out the  bows.  We  fortunately  had  a  spar,  with 
which  we  supplied  her,  when  the  weather  became 
moderate. 

On  the  2d  of  May^  at  noon,  our  latitude  by 


76  ARRIVAL    AT   THE   FALKLANDS. 

observation  was  53*  44',  and  longitude  by  chro- 
Qometers  59*  27'»  and  by  D.  R.  61*  6'.  The 
weather  was  still  boisterous ;  but  every  interval, 
during  which  sail  could  be  made,  was  gladly 
embraced ;  and  the  following  day,  at  11  o'clock, 
we  saw  the  island  of  Beauchene,  bearing  N.W. 
by  W.  distant  5  leagues.  We  proceeded  to  the 
westward,  along  the  south  side  of  the  Falklands, 
and,  owing  to  a  succession  of  adverse  gales,  and 
a  strong  easterly  current,  we  did  not  get  into 
harbour  till  the  1 1th  of  May,  when  we  came  to 
anchor  in  New  Island,  at  the  west  end  of  the 
Falklands. 


77 


CHAR  IV. 

*  DEATH     OS     A     SEAMAN;     SUPERSTTTIONS.   —    FALKLAN0 
ISLANDS.  —  CAPTAIN     BARNARD's     NARRATIVE     OF     HIS 

SOLITARY     RESIDENCE   ON    NEW   ISLAND. LOSS   OF    THE 

CORVETTE  l'uRANIE.  —  MUTINY  ON  BOARD  THE  H«- 
ROIND.  —  FALKLAND  ISLANDS  TAKEN  POSSESSION  OF  BY 
CAPTAIN  JEWITT,  FOR  THE  PATRIOT  GOVERNMENT  OB* 
BUENOS   AYRES. 

My  intention  being  to  winter  here,  I  chose  an 
anchorage  in  Quaker  Harbour,  in  Swan  Island, 
for  our  winter  quarters,  struck  the  brig's  top- 
masts, and  made  her  secure  in  all  respects  against 
tlie  heavy  gales  which  might  be  expected.  The 
cutter  I  kept  efficient,  for  the  purpose  of  pursu- 
ing our  business. 

It  would  be  tedious  to  narrate  minutely  our 
daily  proceedings,  I  shall  therefore  mention  only 
what  particularly  occupied  my  attention. 

Our  cooper  and  carpenters  constructed  estab- 
lishments on  shore  for  carrying  on  their  respect- 
ive duties,  and  our  general  harbour  arrangements 
were  made.  I  was  particular  in  observing  the 
winds  and  weather,  as  I  was  quite  aware  that 
few  people  are  acquainted  with  the  nature  of 
this  climate.  An  abstract  of  these  observations  I 
shall  give  in  another  place. 

In  order  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  shortening 
the  voyage,  on  account  of  provisions,  I  reduced 


78  DEATH    OF   A    SEAMAN. 

each  man's  allowance,  in  both  vessels,  to  half  a 
pound  of  salt  meat  per  day  j  four  pounds  of  bread, 
one  pint  of  flour,  three  half  pints  of  oatmeal, 
and  the  same  of  peas,  for  each  man,  per  week. 
The  want  of  flesh  meat  was  made  up  with  what 
a  hunting  party  could  procure,  together  with 
the  geese  found  on  the  shores ;  which,  though 
excessively  fishy,  were  well  relished  with  a  keen 
appetite. 

On  the  18th  of  June,  on  returning  to  the  bfig, 
from  a  cruize  in  the  Beaufby,  I  received  the  dis- 
tressing information  of  a  man  having  died  in  my 
absence.  His  name  was  Francisco  Antonio  :  he 
was  a  native  of  Terciera,  one  of  the  western 
inlands.  It  appeared  jthat  John  Atkinson,  the  car- 
penter, had  done  every  thing  for  him  which  his 
incompetent  skill  in  physic,  though  prompted  by 
a  feeling  heart,  could  suggest ;  but  without  avail. 
The;  deceased  had  been  several  months  in  a  con- 
sumption, aiid  was  likewise  subject  to  cramp  in 
the  bowels ;  of  which  it  appeared  he  had  died. 
By  the  time  I  arrived,  he  had  been  dead  three 
days,  and  the  carpenter  had  prepared  a  coifin. 
The  ceremony  of  interment  now  only  remained, 
which  we  immediately  performed  in  Swan 
Island.  I  read  the  funeral  service  of  the  Eng- 
lish  church  over  the  body ;  and,  to  mark  out 
the  spot,  we  placed  a  board  at  the  head  of  the 
grave. 


SUPERSTITION    OF    SEAMEN.  79 

The  death  of  this  man  made  such  a  melan- 
choly impression  on  the  mind  of  the  coop^  in 
particular,  that  his  health  was  a  good  deal  im- 
paired.  He  had  been  about  the  deceased  during 
his  illness,  and  was  present  at  his  death }  and, 
having  only  the  company  of  the  carpenter  and 
a  boy,  in  an  uninhabited  country,  with  no  variety 
which  might  have  diverted  his  attention  from 
the  contemplation  of  so  mournful  an  event,  a 
weakness  of  mind  was  the  consequence.  Such 
feelings,  when  .they  produce  mental  imbecility, 
certainly  should  be  discouraged ;  but  they  are 
generally  preferable  to  a  careless  and  callous 
disregard  of  the  fate  of  others,  and  the  solemn 
consideration  of  futurity.  Our  dog,  too,  was  ob- 
served to  jump_  into  the  sleeping-cabin  of  the 
deceased,  and  to  exhibit  actions  which  were  con- 
sidered as  bearing  a  very  mysterious  significa- 
tion. Sailors  are  generally  believed  to  be  super- 
stitious ;  and  certainly  it  is  surprising  that  those 
men,  who  feel  undaunted  amidst  the  slaughter 
of  a  hard-fought  battle,  should  tremble  with  tbe 
opposite  extreme  of  cowardice  at  the  idea  of 
a  ghost  or  hobgoblin.  These  impressaons,  bo 
doubt,  take  their  rise  from  the  practice  of  sailors 
amusing  one  another  with  frightful  stories  on 
their  still  and  dark  night-watches. 

During  the  latter  end  of  Tieifyy.and  the  months 
of  August  and  Septemberf  we  had  several  heavjr 


80  FALKLAND    ISLANDS. 

gales  from  the  southward,  with  snow;  but  it 
seldom  remained  longer  on  the  ground  than 
twenty-four  hours,  except  on  the  tops  of  the 
highest  mountains. 

Finding  that  our  cargoes  could  not  be  completed 
here,  I  resolved  on  going  to  South  Shetland ;  and 
accordingly,  in  September,  we  refitted  both  vessels, 
and  moved  them  westward  12  miles,  to  New 
Island. 

On  the  7th  of*  October,  having  prepared,  but 
with  scanty  means,  for  a  southern  navigation, 
^e  weighed  the  anchors,  and  proceeded  towards 
South  Shetland. 

Having  spent  two  winters  among  the  Falkland 
Islands,  and  visited  nearly  all  their  harbours,  I 
may  venture  to  speak  of  them  with  the  expect- 
ation of  advancing  something  that  may  be  useful 
to  strangers. 

This  uninhabited  group,  which  is  now  gene- 
rally.known  by  the  name  of  the  Falkland  Islands, 
consists  of  nearly  ninety  islands,  lying  between  the 
latitude  of  51°  and  52**  45'  S.,  and  between  Ion* 
gitude  57°  20'  and  61**  40'  W.  Two  of  them  are 
of  considerable  extent,  and  these  (the  two  main 
islands,  from  which  the  others  take  their  name,) 
are  properly  called  the  East  and  West  Falklands. 
The  western  island  is  by  much  the  largest ;  but 
is  so  indented,  that  its  exact  size  cannot  be  easily 
ascertained.     Its  greatest  length,  from  N.  E.  to 


tH£  FALKLAND  ISLANDS.         81 

S.  W.  is  neariy  100  miles,  and  its  greatest  breadth 
about  50.  The  eastern  island,  the  length  of 
which  from  N.E.  to  SIW.  is  about  78  miles,  and 
its  greatest  breadth  47,  is  also  so  indented,  that 
in  one  plaee  two  bays  neariy  meet. 

Between  the  two  main  islands  the  sound  is  from 
7  to  12  miles  broad  ;  and  many  of  the  smaller 
islands  are  situated  in  it.  This  channel  is  navig- 
able for  ships  of  any  size,  and  by  attending  to 
the  best  chart,  which  is  that  of  Lieutenant  Ed- 
gar, it  may  be  passed  through  with  safety,  as  all 
the  dangers  are  there  laid  down.  I  cannot  omit 
this  opportunity  of  bearing  my  strongest  testi- 
mony to  the  accuracy  with  which  Lieutenant 
Edgar  has  delineated  the  coast  of  the  western 
main  island,  and  the  surrounding  small  ones  of 
this  group. 

Not  being  personally  acquainted  with  the  au- 
thor, I  am  induced  to  recommend  his  chart  en- 
tirely by  the  experience  I  have  had  of  its  great 
utility,  during  the  many  dark  and  stormy  nights 
which  I  have  passed  among  these  islands.  The 
harbours  in  this  sound  I  have  anchored  in,  and 
haye  found  them  commodious,  and,  indeed,  equal 
to  any  in  the  world.  On  the  northern  coast  of 
the  western  island  there  are  many  entrances ;  the 
principal  one  is  that  leading  to  Port  Egmont,  and 
which  may  be  seen  from  some  distance  at  sea. 

G 


82  THE   FALKLAND    ISLANDS. 

By  keeping  the  opening  about  S.E.  by  S.  (by 
compass),  it  may  be  sailed  into  without  risk. 

About  9  miles  N.N.W.  from  the  entrance  lie 
two  islets ;  by  passing  within  half  a  mile  of  the 
western  side  of  these  the  course  will  be  about 

The  English  settlement  was  made  at  this 
port,  but  certainly  the  site  was  ill  chosen. 
The  ruins  of  part  of  the  town  still  remain,  and 
stand  on  the  south  side  of  a  mountain  not  less 
than  600  feet  high.  The  settlers  had  extended 
their  gardens  seemingly  to  the  westward  of  this 
mountain,  but  during  the  winter  the  solar  rays 
must  have  been  almost  lost  to  them  throughout 
the  greater  part  of  the  day.  How  such  a  bleak 
and  unpropitious  situation  could  have  been  their 
choice,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  understand,  unless  it 
were  on  account  of  the  anchorage. 

The  harbour  is  spacious  even  to  a  fault ;  for 
its  enormous  size,  during  strong  winds,  renders 
the  communicaition  with  the  shore  inconvenient. 
The  best  anchorage  is  immediately  off  the  creek 
at  the  foot  of  the  ruins  bearing  N.N.  W.,  in  9 
fathoms  water,  about  three  fourths  of  a  mile  from 
the  shore.  Off  the  east  point  of  the  creek  runs 
a  reef  which  is  marked  out  by  the  kelp.  The 
bottom  here  is  so  tough,  that,  after  having  broke 
many  blocks  and  handspokes,  I  was  obliged  tor 


THE  FALKLAND  ISLANDS.         85 

heave  the  vessel  dose  down  at  low  Water,  and 
wait  for  the  tide  to  flow  the  anchor  out  of  the 
ground* 

The  best  watering  place  is  at  the  head  of  the 
creek,  arid  the  most  expeditious  and  convenient 
method  of  obtaining  water  is  to  fill  the  csraks  at 
low  water  mark,  and  raft  them  off  to  the  vessel. 
Fuel,  the  next  necessary  article,  may  be  obtained 
by  digging  peat,  about  a  hundred  yards  above 
the  top  of  the  creek  ;  but  it  requires  drying,  and 
is  not  so  good  as  is  to  be  found  at  some  other 
places. 

The  tide  flows  here  at  10  minutes  past  7 
o^clock  on  the  full  and  change  of  the  moon,  and 
-  rises  about  9  feet.  A  few  years  ago  refreshments 
were  plentiful  in  this  port,  as  there  were  many 
hogs,  which  had  been  left  by  the  settlers,  run- 
ning wild  on  Saunders*  Island ;  but  they  are  now 
nearly  extinct.  Upland  geese,  which  a  few  years 
ago  were  very  numerous,  are  riow  scarcely  to 
be  found ;  so  that  the  only  supplies  which  may 
be  expected  are  ducks  and  geese  which  feed 
on  fishy  substances  on  the  shores,  and  thus 
very  soon  become  nauseous  to  the  taste.  It  is 
proper  thus  to  mention  what  the  islands  are  capa- 
ble of  affording  now,  for  the  reports  of  several 
years  ago  do  not  apply  to  the  present  time. 
An  instance  of  this  occurred  in  the  case  of  a 
French  ship  which  arrived  at  Port  Egmont  in 

G  2 


84         THE  FALKLAND  ISLANOt. 

the  year  1820,  for  a  cargo  of  seal  skins  and  oil. 
The  captain  was  a  lieutenant  in  the  French  navy» 
and  his  ship  was  elegantly  and  expensively  fitted 
out.  It  appeared  that  the  voyage  was  projected 
upon  the  foundation  of  his  father  having,  forty- 
two  years  before,  been  at  this  port,  and  at  that 
time  found  the  beaches  lined  with  sea  elephants 
and  seals.  The  son  expected  the  same  to  be  still 
the  case;  but  as  none  were  to  be  found,  he 
abandoned  the  voyage,  with  great  loss,  no  doubt, 
to  his  employers. 

The  mistake  of  Commodore  Byron  as  to  the 
fecundity  of  the  seal  might  be  easily  fallen  into. 
He  says,  (vide  Byron's  Voyage.)  "  We  were  not 
surprized  at  meeting  with  such  a  great  number 
of  seals,  when  we  afterwards  found  that  they 
had  sometimes  18  or  more  at  a  litter.  Sea  lions 
of  a  prodigious  size  are  also  found  on  the  coast 
We  had  many  battles  with  this  amphibious  ani- 
mal, the  killing  one  of  which  was  frequently  an 
hour's  work  for  six  men." 

The  seal,  as  is  now  known,  brings  forth  ordi^ 
narily  not  more  than  one  at  a  time;  and  I  may 
remark  a  circumstance  which  might  cause  tibe 
commodore  to  fall  into  error  in  his  condusions 
on  this  subject.  The  disproportion  between  the 
large  male  and  female  seal  is  nearly  as  great  ^is 
between  a  cow  and  her  calf.  One  large  male, 
like  the  grand  seignor,  has  frequently  when  on 


THE   FALKLAND  >ISLANDS.  S3 

the  beach  from  15  to  20  females  under  his  im- 
mediate  dominion.  These,  from  their  compata- 
tivp  smallness,  might  by  the  commodore  be 
easily  taken  for  the  young,  and  the  male  for  the 
mother.  ' 

With  regard  to  the  killing  of  the  sea  lion  (pro- 
perly the  sea  elephanjt),  it  is  now  to  one  man, 
acquainted  with  the  practice,  the  work  of  three 
minutes;  but  without  stabbing  it  in  the  heart, 
or  breaking  its  brain,  the  feat  is  so  difficult  that 
probably  as  long  a  time  would  be  requisite  as  that 
mentioned  by  Byron. 

The  next  principal  anchorage  to  Port  Egmont 
is  West  Point  Harbour,  which  lief  at  the  western 
extremity  of  the  south  land  of  Berkeley's  Sound. 
The  chart  accurately  exhibits  two  passages  to 
this  anchorage ;  one  by  the  north,  the  other  by 
the  south.  The  Jason  Islands  lie  to  the  N.W., 
and  are  much  in  the  way  of  the  southern  iap- 
proach.  Strangers  should  be  careful  to  avoid 
these  islands  in  the  night  time,  or  in  unsettled 
weather,  as  the  tide  runs  so  strong  and  irregular 
through  them  as  to  render  a  ship  almost  un- 
manageable. The  south  passage  to  west  point 
harbour  is  easily  made  by  being  careful  when 
coming  from  the  westward  to  haul  close  round 
west  point  island,  so  as  to  enter  the  gut  or  chan- 
nel ;  by  neglecting  this  precaution,  with  the  wind 
from  the  westward,  you  may  fall  to  leeward  of 

G  3 


86  THE   FALKLAND    ISLANDS. 

the  passage,  and  find  it  difficult  to  work  out  of  the 
lee  bays,  into  which  there  is  frequently  a  heavy 
westerly  swell  rolling.     The  latitude  of  the  an* 
chorage  is  51**  24'  15'\  and  the  longitude  by  a 
number  of  deductions  from  celestial  obistervations 
and  chronometers  60^  36' 80''.     The  best  an- 
chorage is  abreaat  €3f£  a  small  cove  on  the  south 
side  of  the  harbour  in  five  fathoms,  over  a  bot- 
tom of  sand  and  mud.     The  velocity  of  the  tide 
is  scarcely  perceptible  in  this  situation,  though  it 
rises  about  9  feet  by  the  shore,  and  it  flows  on 
the  full  and  change  of  the  moon  at  30  minutes 
past  7  in  the  morning.     Water  may  be  procured 
at  the  top  of  the  cove ;  and  at  the  head  of  the 
harbour  there  is  also  a  water  run,  in  which  mul- 
lets may  be  caught  by  building  a  fish  wire.   This 
kind  of  refreshment    is  abundant   during  the 
spring  and  autumn  of  this  hemisphere,  both  here 
and  at  Beaver  Island,  as  also  at  Little  Port  Eg- 
mont,  a  bay  in  the  west  side  of  the  passage  to 
Port  Egmont.      Rock  ord  have  been  likewise 
caught  on  the  north  shore  of  Swan  Island,  but 
they  are  very  scarce.     West  Point  Island  has  a 
cove,  in  which  we  lay  during  two  winter  monllis 
in  1820 ;  but  it  is  not  large  enough  for  general 
convenience.     At  the  west  end  of  the  island  is  a 
rookery  (if  I  may  call  it  so)  of  the  small  alba^ 
tross,  which  in  October  affords  a  good  supply  of 
eggs.    Some  brush- wood  grows  around  the  cove, 


THE   FALKLAND    ISLANDS.  8? 

but  it  is  too  small  to  be  of  use,  even  as  fuel.  Iti 
coming  through  the  gut  from  the  southward 
with  the  ebb  tide,  which  runs  to  the  N.E.  with 
great  rapidity,  the  great  harbour  when  opened 
must  be  hastily  entered  to  avoid  being  swept  to 
the  northward  by  the  tide. 

From  the  south  entrance  of  the  gut,  north 
island  lies  S.  25°  W.  distant  22  miles.  New 
Island  I  consider  the  most  easy  of  access  of  any 
in  the  western  quarter.  Ship  Harbour,  which  is 
commodious,  lies  in  latitude  51°  42'  36'',  and 
longitude  6V  9'.  Though  by  difference  of  time 
from  Cape  Horn,  the  longitude  of  which  I  make 
by  lunar  observations  and  time-keepers  67**  13' 
45"  it  will  be  6r  15'.  The  mean  6V  9'  may, 
however,  be  nearer  the  trutlu  In  coming  from 
the  westward  in  the  latitude  of  51°  42',  New 
Island  may  be  (easily  distinguished  by  its  being 
the  most  northerly  large  island  of  that  cluster, 
and  by  two  small  islands  lying  at  the  north  end, 
called  Saddle  Island  and  North  Island :  between 
these,  and  the  north  end  of  New  Island,  is  a 
clear  passage  ;  but  in  strong  winds  the  tide  rip- 
pies  violently,  which,  however,  I  have  passed 
through  without  accident. 

Ship  Harbour  being  the  anchorage  in  this 
island  the  most  to  be  recommended^  I  shall,  ob- 
serve that  in  proceeding  to  it  with  a  strong  west- 
erly wind,  as  rounding  the  north  end  of  the 

G  4 


88  TH£   FAJLKLAND    ISLAND^! 

islanc},  the  sail  on  the  ship  should  be  particularly 
attended  to,  as  the  gusts  of  wind  off  the  high- 
land blow  with  great  violence.  With  the  wind 
at  S.W.  the  south  passage  may  be  chosen.  A 
cluster,  called  Seal  Rocks,  lie  off  the  south  end 
of  New  Island,  between  which  and  the  rocks  is 
the  best  passage,  and  by  keeping  without  the 
edge  off  the  kelp,  which  lies  off  a  short  distance 
ftom  the  end  of  the  Island,  there  is  no  danger. 
The  small  round  islands,  on  the  eastern  side  of 
New  Island,  have  good  channels  within,  arid 
between  them  Ship  Harbour  is  the  third  bay 
from  the  south,  and  may  be  easily  recognised, 
by  having  a  small  island,  which  I  called.  Ship 
Island,  in  it.  Behind  this  is  the  best  anchorage 
in  seven  fathoms  water,,  in  a  bottom  of  stiff  clay  ^ 
with  the  south  point  of  Ship  Island,  bearing 
S.E.,  covering  the  S.E.  point  of  the  bay.  The 
anchorage  is  perfectly  land  locked.  i 

The  want  of  wood  on  these  islands  would  be 
a  great  inconveniency,  were  it  not  that  good 
peat  is  very  abundant.  On  Ship  Island  it  is  in- 
^haustible  j  I  have  burnt  many  tons,  and  found 
it  ail  excellent  substitute  for  coal.  In  order  to 
get  it  dry,  it  is  necessary  to  puU  it  from  the  sides 
of  the  pit,  not  very  deep ;  and  as  there  are  seve- 
ral peat  holes,  by  working  them  alternately 
the  material  may  be  procured  in  a  state  fit  for 
use. 


THE   FALKLAND    ISLAN]>S.  89 

Good  water  may  be  obtained  at  a  sandy  beach 
abreast  of  the  anchorage;  but  the  well  from 
which  the  water  is  generally  taken  is  so  near  the 
beach,  that  high  tides  render  it  brackish.  Owing 
to  this  circumstance  we  found,  when  at  sea,  that 
several  of  our  casks  of  water  were  undrinkable. 
The  well  or  pool  might  with  little  trouble  be 
made  eight  or  ten  yards  higher  on  the  bank, 
and  the  water  be  passed  to  the  casks  with 
buckets. 

This  island  is  mountainous,  and  its  western 
sidt  presents  a  range  of  frightful  precipices,  one 
of  which  is  550  feet  above  the  sea,  which  in 
westerly  storms  beats  against  its  base  with  ex- 
traordinary violence.  The  eastern  side,  on  the 
contrary,  falls  doping  into  points  forming  bays. 
T4)e  length  of  the  island  is  from  north  to  south, 
about  seven  miles,  and  the  mean  breadth  about 
two  and  a  half. 

New  Island  is  remarkable  for  having  been  for 
two  years  the  solitary  residence  of  a  Captain 
J.  Barnard/an  American,  whose  vessel  was  run 
away  with  in  the  year  1814,  by  the  crew  of  an 
£nglish  ship,  which,  on  her  passage  irom  Port 
Jackson,  had  been  wrecked  on  the  south  side  of 
these  islands.  I  met  with  Captain  Barnard  in 
18S1,  at  the  place  of  his  exile,  and  his  conversa- 
tion naturally  turned  to  that  subject,  which,  be- 
ing interesting,  "  I  greedily  devoured.'*      A 


90  SOLITARY    RESIDENCE   OF 

particular  account  of  this  Residence  on  an  un- 
inhabited island  would  not  fail  of  being  consider- 
ed almost  as  wonderful  as  the  celebrated  fiction 
of  Robinson  Crusoe,  since  there  was  a  great 
similarity  in  their  situations.  The  principal  in- 
cidents attendant  upon  this  event  were  as  fol- 
lows :  Captain  Barnard  was  at  New  Island  with 
his  vessel  in  the  performance  of  a  voyage  for 
seal  furs,  and  when  on  the  south  side  of  the 
islands,  he  met  with  the  crew  of  the  wrecked 
English  ship.  Their  number  might  be  about  30, 
including  several  passengers,  some  of  whom 
were  ladies.  He  kindly  took  them  to  his  vessel, 
and  treated  them  with  all  the  hospitality  which 
their  destitute  situation  required.  Captain  Bar- 
nard was  from  America,  with  which  England 
was  then  at  war,  and  this  circumstance  created 
doubts  as  to  the  sincerity  of  their  friendly  inten- 
tions to  one  another,  though  he  had  promised 
to  land  them  on  his  passage  home  at  some  port 
in  the  Brazils^ 

Owing  to  the  additional  number  of  people, 
hunting  parties  were  frequently  sent  out  to  pro- 
cure supplies,  and  when  the  captain,  with  four 
of  his  people,  were  on  an  excursion  of  this  kind, 
the  wrecked  crew  cut  the  cable,  and  in  defiance 
of  the  Americans,  who  were  on  board,  ran  away 
with  the  ship  to  Rio  Janeiro ;  whence  they  pro- 
ceeded to  North  America. 


CAPTAIN    BARNARD.  91 

On  Captain  Barnard's  return  to  New  Inland, 
he  was  struck  with  astonishment  at  finding  his 
ship  carried  off,  as  he  had  never  suspected 
any  design  of  the  kind.  0n  reflection,  how- 
ever, he  soon  guessed  the  cause ;  as  it  was  quite 
apparent  lliat  the  fear  of  being  taken  to  Ame* 
rica,  where  they  would  become  prisoners  of  war, 
had  been  the  motive  to  the  commission  of  this- 
action,  which  was  a  bad  return  for  the  asylum 
Captain  Barnard  had  afforded  the  perpetrators 
of  it.  His  conduct  towards  them,  certainly,  did 
not  justify  their  entertaining  such  a  suspicion ; 
but  it  seems  they  chose  rather  to  act  dishonour- 
ably than  trust  to  his  protestations,  that  he  would 
land  them  in  the  Brazils* 

Nothing  in  the  way  of  supplies  having  been 
left  for  poor  Barnard  and  his  four  companions, 
of  which  evea  the  captors  of  his  ship  ought  to 
have  thought,  he  was  forced  to  consider  how 
they  were  to  subsist;  and  recollecting  that  lie 
had  planted  a  few  potatoes,  they  directed  their 
attention  \o  them,  and  in  the  course  of  the  se- 
cond season,  obtained  a  serviceable  supply.  They 
had  a  dog  which  now  and  then  caught  a  pig ; 
and  the  eggs  of  the  albatross,  which  were  stored 
at  the  proper  ^season,  with  potatoes,  formed  a 
substitute  for  bread,  and  the  skins  of  the  seals 
for  clothes.  They  built  a  house  of  stone,  still 
remaining   on   the   island,    which  was    strong 


9t  SOLITARY   RESIDENCE   OF 

enoagh  to  withstand  the  storms  of  winter,  and 
they  might  have  been  comparatively  happy,  but 
that  they  were  cut  off  from  their  relations  and 
friends,  without  any  immediate  prospect  (^  being 
removed  from  the  island. 

To  add  to  the  misfortunes  of  Captain  Barnard 
in  being  separated  from  his  wife  and  children, 
his  companions,  over  whom  he  exercised  no  au- 
thority, but  merely  dictated  what  he  considered 
was  for  their  mutual  advantage,  became  impa- 
tient even  of  this  mild  controul,  took  an  oppor- 
tunity to  steal  the  boat,  and  he  was  left  on  the 
island  alone.  After  being  thus  entirely  aban- 
doned, he  spent  the  time  in  preparing  clothes 
from  the  skin  of  the  seal,  and  in  collecting  food 
for  winter.  Once  or  twice  a  day  he  used  to 
ascend  a  hill,  from  which  there  was  a  wide  pro- 
spect of  the  ocean,  to  see  if  any  vessel  ap- 
proached; but  always  returned  disappointed 
and  forlorn,  — no  ship  was  to  be  observed.  The 
four  sailors,  in  the  meanwhile,  having  expe- 
rienced their  own  inability  to  provide  properly 
for  themselves,  returned  to  him  after  an  ab- 
sence of  some  months.  He  still  found  much 
difficulty  in  preserving  peace  among  his  com- 
,panions;  indeed  one  of  them  had  planned  his 
death,  but  fortunately  it  was  discovered  in 
time  to  be  prevented.  He  placed  this  man 
alone  with  some  provisions  on  a  small  island  in 


CAPTAIN    BARNARD.  9^' 

Quaker  harbour,  and  in  the  course  of  three 
weeks,  so  great  a.  change  was  made  on  his  mind, 
that  when  Captain  Barnard  took  him  o£^  he  was 
worn  down  with  reflection  on  his  crimes,  and 
truly  penitent. 

They  were  now  attentive  to  the  adidce  of 
their  commander,  and  tiie  above  mentioned 
offender  became  truly  religious  aiid  exemplary 
in  his  behaviour.  In  this  way  they  continued 
to  live,  occasionally  visiting  the  neighbouring 
island  in  search  of  provisions,  till  the  end  of  two 
years,  when  they  were  taken  off  in  the  month  <rf 
December  1815,  by  an  English  whaler  bound 
for  the  Pacific.  Captain  Barnard  informed  me, 
that  a  British  man  of  war  had  been  sent  ex- 
pressly from  Rio  Janeiro  to  take  them  o£^  but 
by  some  accident  the  vessel,  though  at  the 
islands,  did  not  fall  in  with  them. 

I  have  already  made  such  observations  on  the 
navigation  of  this  division  of  the  islands,  as  I 
considered  essentially  neceatary  for  the  direc- 
tion of  strangers,  as  well  as  for  general  inform- 
ation, and  I  shall  now  say  something  in  regard 
to  the  eastern  main  island.  The  principal 
port  has  many  names,  but  that  by  which  it  is 
generally,  known  is  Port  Louisa  at  the  head  of 
Berkeley -s  Sound.  It  is  situated  at  the  eastern 
extremity  of  the  island,  and  the  anchorage  is  off 
the  ruins  of  Saint  Louis,i  12  miles  from  the  en^ 


94  THE^  FALKLAND    ISLANDS; 

trance  of  the  sound.     The  remains  of  about  SO 
houses,  which  had    been  well   built,   are  still 
standing.     They  appear  to  have  been  erected 
by  Frendi  emigrants  from  St.  Maloes,  about  the 
year  I764.     These  industrious  and  enterprising 
people,    after   having  made  considerable  pro- 
gress in  fertilizing  the  ground,  were  displaced 
by  the  Spaniards,   who    claimed    the  islands. 
They  however,  partly  through  political  motives, 
that  it  might  not  be  of  consequence  enough  to 
become  a  bone  of  contention  and  involve  them 
with  other  powers,  or  probably  on  account  of 
their  having  vast  possessions  in  other  parts  of 
the  globe,  neglected  the  improvement  of  the 
country,  and  latterly  entirely  abandoned  it.     It 
is  matter  of  regret  that  these  French  emigrants 
were  not  allowed  to  remain,  as  a  settlement  at 
this  point  of  the  South  Atlantic  would  evidently 
afford  great  facilities  to  navigation.     The  exten- 
sive tracts  of  ground,  well  clothed  with  grass, 
and  the  quantity  of  fine  cattle  running  wild  on 
the  island,  are  sufficient  proofs  of  its  being  a 
country  that   might  be  settled  to  advantage. 
The  winters  are  mild,   the  temperature  being 
seldom  so  low  as  the  freezing  point     Several 
of  my  crew,  indeed,  went  without  stockings 
diiring  the  greater  part  of  the  winters  we  spent 
there.     The  south  wind,  however,  is  cold  and 
stormy,  but  it  is  not  frequent :  the  prevailing 


FRENCH, AND  SPANISH   POSSESSORS.  9S 

winds  are  between  S.W.  andN.W,,  which,  blow* 
ing  from  the  coast  of  Patagonia,  are  comfortably 
temperate. 

This  climate  appears  to  be  in  general  much 
more  temperative  now  than  it  was  forty  years 
ago,  the  cause  of  which  may  probably  be,  that 
immense  bodies  of  ice  were  then  annually  found 
in  the  latitude  of  50^.  This  ice,  passing  to  the 
northward,  between  the  Falkland  Islands  and 
South  Georgia,  would  necessarily  lower  the 
temperature  of  both  air  and  water,  and  con* 
sequeritly  an  unfavourable  opinion  of  the  climate 
was  produced* 

During  the  three  voyages  which  I  have  made 
in  these  seas,  I  have  never  seen  southern  ice 
drifting  to  the  northward  of  South  Georgia. 
Great  changes  must,  therefore,  have  taken  place 
in  the  south  polar  ice ;  but  this  I  leave  for  con- 
jecture, upon  the  data  which  the  appearance  of 
the  sea  at  the  utmost  southern  limit  of  my  voy- 
age affords. 

The  harbour  of  Port  Louis  lies  in  latitude 
51^  32^  and  longitude  58^  3' 30''.  The  entrance 
of  the  bay,  which  is  formed  on  one  side  by  the 
N.£.  point  of  the  main  island,  is  imioediately 
seen  on  approaching  within  a  few  miles ;  and  to 
Hog  Island,  about  seven  miles  up  the  bay,  the 
passage  is  quite  open.  On  drawing  near  this 
island,  two  lai^e  beds  of  kelp  will  be  observed. 


96  LOS$  OF   THE 

|[)etween  which  is  a  passage  running  about  W. 
by  N.  I  have  sounded  among  this  kelp,  and 
found  from  seven  to  ten  fathoms ;  but  as  there 
may  be  rocks  interspersed,  it  should  not  be 
passed  through  with  a  ship.  The  channel  to 
the  anchorage  off  the  ruins  may  be  seen,  by  re- 
ferring to  the  plan  which  I  took,  with  as  much 
accuracy  as  my  peculiar  circumstances  would 
allow* 

Off  the  N.E.  point  of  the  bay  there  is  a  ledge 
above  water,  called  the  volunteer  rocks,  and 
N.E.  by  E.,  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  from 
the  point,  lies  a  sunken  rock,  upon  which  a 
French  frigate  was  lost  in  February  1 820.  As  I 
was  among  the  islands  at  the  time,  and  on  the 
spot  soon  after  it  happened,  I  had  an  opportu- 
nity of  ascertaining  the  circumstances  attending 
this  disaster,  which  were  these :  — 

Commodore  Freycenet^  had  performed  a  voy- 
age of  science  almost  round  the  world,  and  after 
having  spent  nearly  three  years,  was  returning 
home,  when  this  distressing  accident  happened. 
It  appeared  that  the  abruptness  of  the  coast  had 
inspired  them  with  confidence  in  approaching  it ; 
and  they  had  incautiously  hauled  within  three 
quarters  of  a  mile  up  a  point  called  the  Volun- 
teer Rocks,  where  there  is  always  a  strong  ripple 
of  the  tide.  Being  near  high  water  at  the  time, 
the  break  over  the  rock  was  not  visible,  and  the 


CORVETTE    l'UHANIE.  97 

ship  struck  upon  this  point,  and  soon  beat  a  hole 
in  her  bottom.  She,  however,  presently  slid  off 
into  deep  water,  and  the  pumps  were  necessarily 
set  in  motion,  but  were  hot  sufficient  to  keep- 
her  free.  The  Commodore  hoped  to  save  his 
vessel  by  laying  her  on  the  ground  well  up  the 
bay,  and  had  actually  reached  a  sandy  beach, 
about  ten  miles  from  where  she  had  struck ;  but 
the  water  having  gained  over  the  mess-deck,  and 
the  tide  being  down,,  she  took  the  ground  in  such 
deep  water,  that  the  mess-deck  was  constantly 
covered,  which  cut  off  all  prospects  of  recover- 
ing her.  He  had  prudently  secured  a  quantity 
of  provisions,  while  sailing  up  the  bay ;  and  with 
these,  and  every  other  useful  moveable,  the  crew 
got  safe  to  land.  It  was  several  weeks  before 
they  knew  of  any  ship  being  at  the  island  j  and 
in  the  mean  time  they  had  commenced  building 
a  small  vessel  out  of  the  wreck. 

As  they  had  saved  but  about  two  months' 
provisions,  these  were  reserved  for  their  passage 
to  the  main ;  and  their  present  support  was  de- 
rived from  hunting  only.  Fortunately,it  is  oh  this 
maloon  or  island  that  bullocks  and  horses  are 
found  running  wild.  Of  both  these  they  shot 
many ;  but  as  there  were  I60  people  to  feed,  the» 
difficulty  of  taking  a  sufficient  number,  owing- 
to  their  fleetness,  caused  so  scanty  a  supply,  that* 
latterly  the  crew  was  reduced  to  feed  on  the  j^a 

H 


98  LOSS    OF   TH£ 

elephant,  penguins,  and  other  fishy  meats,  ex- 
tremely offensive  to  a  delicate  stomach.     They 
were  at  length  relieved  from  their  distressed 
situation  by  an  American  sloop,  which,  in  pass* 
ing,   saw  them,  and  went  to  their  assistance. 
The  ship  to  which  this  sloop  was  a  tender,  lay  at 
West  Point  harbour,  and  I,  at  the  same  time,  lay 
with  my  vessel  at  Port  Egmont.     The  French 
commodore  not  knowing  that  any  other  vessel 
Wfi^s  in  the  island^  sent  an  officer  in  the  sloop  to 
the  ship  at  West  Point,  to  treat  with  the  captain 
for  a  passage  in  his  vessel  to  the  main.     The 
sloop,  on  her  way,  passed  through,  and  anchored 
in  Port  Egmont,  and  the  master,  who  was  the 
chief  mate  of  the  ship,  came  on  board,  but  did 
not  mention  the  wreck,  or  that  he  had  a  French 
officer  along  with  him :  on  the  contrary,  he  cun- 
ningly prevented  this  officer  from  calling  upon 
me,  evidently  for  the  purpose  of  avoiding  com- 
petition in  getting  the  passage-freight  of  these 
unfortunate  people.     A  few  days  afterwards  I 
moved  the  Jane  up   to   West  Point  harbour, 
where  the  General  Knox  lay,  and  soon  learnt 
the  particulars  of  the  stranded  ship.  A  ^schooner, 
also  attached  to  the  General  Knox,  arriving  from 
the  wreck,  brought  the  news  of  a  patriot  ship, 
and  a  South  seaman,  homeward  bound,  having 
si;rrived  at  Port  Louis ;  and  as  secrecy  could  no 
longer  be  preserved,  and  the  schooner  was  to 


CORVETTE   L'aRANIE.  99 

return  to  Port  Louis,  I  immediately  procured  a 
passage  for  the  purpose  of  purchasing  provisions 
from  the  homeward-bound  whaler.  On  my  ar- 
rival at  Port  Louis,  I  found  the  two  ships  at  an- 
chor;  the  patriot  ship  was  named  the  Mercury  j 
the  whaler,  the  Sir  Andrew  Hammond,  com- 
manded  by  Captain  W.  Hales  —  with  this  gen- 
tleman I  took  up  my  quarters.  I  was  soon  in- 
formed that  the  French  commodore  had  nego- 
ciated  a  passage  with  the  captain  of  the  Mer- 
cury to  take  them  to  Buenos  Ayres.  What  the 
sum  was  I  never  learned  ;  but  Captain  Ome,  of 
the  American  ship,  had  for  himself  named 
20,000  dollars,  a  large  sum  from  people  in  dis- 
tress.  I  do  not,  however,  suspect  Captain  Orne 
of  a  want  of  sympathy  in  the  sufferings  of  others, 
for  I  respect  bim  much  for  many  virtues  he  pos- 
sesses, and  rather  attribute  his  apparent  extsor- 
tion  to  an  idea  of  the  ability  of  the  owners  to  be 
liberal. 

As  the  Commodore  was  now  informed  of  my 
vessel  being  in  the  islands,  in  order  to  remove 
any  impression  he  might  have  received  of  my 
indifference  as  to  his  situation,  in  not  having 
appeared  in  the  competition  for  his  relief^  1 
addressed  a  letter  to  him,  explaining  how  very 
lately  I  had  crome  to  the  knowledge  of  his  sito* 
fttion^  and  how  much  I  regretted  jtiot  having  had 

H  « 


100  LOSS' OF   THE 

it  in  my  power  to  offer  my  services  much,  ear- 
lier. He  sent  me  the  fpUowing  answer,  which  I 
annex,  in  order  to  show  that  my  backwardness 
arose,  not  from  inattention,  but  from  ignorance 
of  his  misfortune :  — 

"  Mahuines  Islands,  24rfA  AprU,  1820. 

"  Sir,  .■■■'■■ 

"  The  obliging,  but  unfortunately  too  late 
c^er,  which  you  vouchsafed  to  make  me,  by 
your  letter  of  this  day,  causes  me  to  regret,  most 
sensibly,  the  not  having  had  soonei:  an  under- 
standing with  you.  I  would  have  desired  above 
all  thijigs  to  have  negociated  with  the  captain  of 
an  English  vessel,  where  my  situation  required 
that  attention  to  which  others,  less  friends  of 
loyalty  and  science,  could  not  be  sensible.  I 
wish  not  to  know^  why  you  have  been  but  so 
lately  informed  of  the  dis^ister  which  befell  the 
Corvette  TUranie ;  probably.  Sir,  you  miay  dis- 
cover, without  much  difficulty,  what  sordid  ava- 
rice cofild  devise  to  keep  you  in  this  ignorance. 
In  short.  Sir,  I  am  on  the  point  of  sailing,  and 
it  i^  proper  that  I  should  foUow  the  course  which 
fortune  ha^  been  pleased  to  mark  out.; 
-.  ilVlwish,  Sir,  that  you  njay  realise  every  expect- 
atidn  that  yqu  have  formed,  and  .pr0cur6  those 
advantages  which  you  should  of  right  attain. 
Accept,  I  beg  of  you>  with  all  devotion,  those 


CORVETTE    L'uRANIE.  *         lOt 

assurances  of  distinguished  consideration,  with 
which  I  have  the  honot  to  be,. 
.    «  Sir, 
**  Your  very  humble 

"  And  very  obliged  Servant, 
"  (Signed)     L.  de  Freycenbt/* 

1  afterwards  had  a  conversation  with  Captain 
Freycenet,  in  his  state-room,  and  from  his  con- 
versation, which  was  in  English,  I  perceived 
that  he  was  much  affected  by  his  late  misfortunes; 
his  health,  no  doubt,  had  been  impaired  by  the 
inconveniences  with  which  he  had  to  struggle, 
and  the  aggravation  of  having  been  cast  on  shore 
after  a  long  and  fatiguing  voyage;  but  he  enjoyed 
the  sympathising  consolation  of  his  lady,  who  was 
young  and  very  agreeable.  I  dined  in  company 
with  them,  and  the  extreme  vivacity  of  Madame 
F.  seemed  well  to  accord  with  the  character^  of 
the  French  fair:  it  was  reported,^  that  in  the 
midst  of  the  greatest  danger  and  confusion,  she 
retained  a  most  surprising  firmness  and  compo^ 
sure  of  mind;  resembling  in  this,  according  to 
all  accounts,  the  unexampled  fortitude  of  many 
French  ladies  during  that  murderous  peridd  of 
tbe'FreiVch  Revolution, when  their  dearest  friends 
and  relations  were  torn  froto  thetn  by  merciless 
assassins.        '    \     '  o    ' 

-   The  -Commodore  generously   presented  'me 

H  3 


lOSr         .  FALKJUiND   ISLANDS 

with  a  small  vessel  which  he  had  made  here  firom 
the  ship's  launch,  with  a  bill  of  gift.  Captain 
Hales  supplied  them  with  bread,  and  several 
other  articles  they  required,  for  which,  however, 
the  purser  wished  to  pay  him  with  the  old  stores 
of  the  wreck ;  but  he  warmly  refused  any  re- 
compence,  and  wrote  the  commander  a  letter, 
stating,  that  he  would  consider  his  acceptance 
of  such  an  offer  to  be  an  act  of  meanness,  and 
observing  that  his  owners,  he  was  sure,  would 
highly  approve  of  any  assistance  he  might  ren- 
der, without  exacting  payment. 

At  length,  final  and  honorable  arrangements 
were  made,  and  Commodore  Freycenet  sailed 
with  his  officers  and  men  to  the  river  Plate^^ 
where  they  arrived  in  safety. 

To  return  to  our  remarks  on  these  islands. 

The  settlers,  when  they  abandoned  the  eastern 
island,left  behind  them  several  horses  and  horned 
cattle,  which  have  increased  so  much,  that  on 
going  a  few  miles  into  the  country  droves  of 
both  animals  may  be  seen.  I  have  taken  seve- 
ral of  the  bullocks  by  shooting  them.  They  are 
generally  ferocious,  and  will  attack  a  single  per- 
son ;  and  thus  those  who  hunt  them  are  enabled 
to  get  within  pistol-shot  of  them  by  the  follow- 
ing stratagem :  four  or  five  men  advance  in  a 
line  upon  the  animal,  and,  by  appearing  only  as 
one  person,  it  stands  ready  to  attack,  till  within 


CLAIMED    BY   J3UENOS   AYR£S.  10^ 

100  yards,  when  the  hunters  spread  themselves, 
and  fire,  endeavouring  to  shoot  the  bullock  either 
in  the  head  or  in  the  fore-shoulder.  The  horses 
will  also  attack  a  single  person,  and  their  mode 
of  doing  so,  is  by  forming  a  circle  round  him, 
and  prancing  upon  him ;  but  by  means  of  a  mus- 
ket they  may  be  readily  dispersed. 

Port  St.  Salvador  is  situated  about  half  way  on 
the  northern  side  of  the  eastern  main  island  ;  but 
as  it  is  difficult  of  access,  I  shall  not  particularise 
nor  recommend  it  as  a  place  of  anchorage  for 
strangers. 

While  lying  in  this  port  in  1820,  I  had  a  letter 
brought  me  from  the  commander  of  a  patriot 
national  fngate  of *30  guns,  then  at  anchor  in 
Port  Louis ;  and  to  convey  an  idea  of  the  kind  of 
claim  made  by  the  South  Americans  to  these 
islands,  I  shall  subjoin  his  letter,  with  some  ac-* 
count  of  his  proceedings  :  — 

"  National  Frigate  Heroind  at  Port  Soledad, 
*'  November  2. 1820. 

"  Sir, 
«*  1  have  the  honour  to  inform  you  of  the  cir- 
cumstance of  my  arrival  at  this  port,  commis- 
sioned by  the  supreme  government  of  the  United 
Provinces  of  South  America  to  take  possession 
of  these  islands  in  the  name  of  the  country  to 
which  they  naturally  appertain. 

•*  In  the  performance  of  this  duty,  it  is  my 
H  4 


I04f  FALKLAND   ISLANDS 

desire  to  act  towards  all  friendly  flags  with  the 
most  distinguished  justice  and  politeness. 

^*  A  principal  object  is  to  prevent  the  wanton 
destruction  of  the  sources  of  supply  to  those 
whose  necessities  compel  or  invite  them  to  visit 
the  islands,  and  to  aid  and  assist  such  as  require 
it  to  obtain  a  supply  with  the  least  trouble  and 
expense. 

"As  your  views  do  not  enter  into  contiraven* 
tion  or  competition  with  these  orders,  and  as  I 
think  mutual  advantage  may  result  from. a  per- 
sonal interview,  I  invite  you  to  pay  me  a  visit  on 
board  my  ship,  where  I  shall  be  happy  to  accom- 
modate you  during  your  pleasure. 

"I  would  also  beg  you,  so  far  as  comes  within 
your  sphere,  to  communicate  this  information  to 
other  British  subjects  in  this  vicinity.  I  -have 
the  honour  to  be, 

.    "  Sir  . 

"  Your  most  obedient  humble  Servant, 
"  (Signed)  Jewitt, 

"  Colonel  of  the  marine  of  the*  United  Pro- 
vinces of  South  America,  and  commander 
of  the  frigate  Heroind." 

The  following  morning  I  walked  over  a  disr 
tance  of  7  or  8  miles  to  Port  Loiiis,  where  the 
frigate  lay ;  and  finding  a  boat  on  shore,  ob- 
tained a  passage  on  board.     Captain  Jewitt  re- 


CLAIMED  BY  EUBNOS  AYRES.       105 

ceived  trie  with  great  politeness,  and  notwilJi- 
standing  the  mutilated  and  worn  out  state  of  his 
ship  and  crew,  he  assumed  an  air  of  pow^r  and 
authority  beyond  my  expectation.  He  told  me 
his  business  was  to  take  possession  of  the  Falk- 
land Islands  for  his  government,  and  that  ev^y 
thing  necessary  for  an  establishment  would  be 
procured  from  Buenos  Ayres  so  soon  as  he  could 
purchase  a  cutter,  of  which  there  were .  several 
among  the  islands.  It  evidently  appealed,  how-^ 
ever,  that  his  principal  business  was  to  refresh  his 
crew;  for  never,  since  the  time  of  Lord  Anton,: 
perhaps,  had  an  instance  occurred  wber^  the 
scurvy  had  been  so  destructive  to  a  ship?s  com- 
pany. Though  they  had  been  at  sea  about 
eight  months  only,  and  had  frequently  during 
that  time  been  supplied  with  vegetables  from  the 
Cape  de  Verds,  this  dreadful  disease  was  making 
rapid  progress  among  those  unfortunate  pec^le. 
The  patient  was  seized  first  about  the  knees,  and 
the  malady  rapidly  rising  to  the  stomach,  caused 
dissolution  in  36  or  40  hours.  During  the  first. days 
of  their  arrival  here,  they  died  to  the  number  of 
5  or  6  in  a  day.  I  was  glad  to  give  any  inform- 
ation in  regard  to  the  country,  which  might  be  the 
means  of  assisting  in  the  recovery  of  these  poor 
men;  and  by  the  use  offish,  wild  fowl,  and  indi- 
genous and  otlier  vegetabkst,  I  had  the  pleasure  of 
seeing  themi  soqn  become  convalescent.  The  side 


"  lOfl  MORTALITY    FROM    SCURVY. 

were  landed  at  the  ruins  of  the  town  of  St  Louis; 
and  though  there  were  no  roofs  to  the  houses, 
they  found  an  immense  oven  in  which  they  were 
well  sheltered  from  the  weather.  The  comple- 
ment of  men,  when  the  ship  sailed  from  Buenos 
Ayres  eight  months  before,  was  200  :  they  had 
not  now  more  than  SO  seamen  and  40  soldiers  fit 
to  do  duty;  50  had  been  put  on  board  a  prize, 
so  that  about  80  were  either  sick  or  had  died  of 
the  scurvj^ 

Understanding  that  I  could  conduct  his  ship 
up  the  sound,  for  hfe  was  then  6  miles  below  the 
proper  anchorage,  the  comniander  begged  the 
favour  of  me  to  move  her :  his  extreme  politeness 
required  some  return;  but  in  addition  to  that 
consideration,  I  saw  he  was  much  in  want  of 
men,  and  conceived  it  possible  that  if  I  were 
unaccommodating,  he  might  entice  my  crew,  or 
perhaps  force  them  into  his  service, — I  therefore 
determined  to  make  him  my  friend  by  exchang- 
ing  civilities. 

I  chose  the  time  for  proceeding  up  the  sound, 
and  the  anchors  were  weighed,  but  with  diffi- 
culty, the  officers  being  obliged  to  assist  at  the 
capstan.  I  at  length  brought  the  frigate  to  a  safe 
anchorage  off  the  ruins  of  St.  Louis.  The  day 
being  too  far  spent  to  reach  my  own  ship  before 
dark.  Captain  Jewitt  invited  me  to  remain  <m 
boaard  during  the  night     I  accepted  his  invita- 


NARRATIVE    OF    A    MUTINY.  10? 

turn;  and  during  the  course  of  the  evening  he 
gave  me  an  account  of  a  mutiny  which  had  hap- 
pened about  three  months  before,  when  they 
were  a  few  degrees  to  the  north  of  the  equator. 
The  circumstances  which  I  considered  inter- 
esting he  related  nearly  as  follows :  — The  neces- 
sity for  having  an  effective  crew,  and  the  impos- 
sibility of  getting  men  all  of  good  characters, 
bad  induced  him  to  take  some  out  of  the  com- 
mon prison.  Among  these  was  a  man  who  had 
attempted  the  capture  of  a  small  vessel  with 
specie  on  board,  lying  at  anchor  at  the  river 
Plata ;  but  the  night  being  dark,  he  had,  fortu-? 
nately  for  the  ow.nerof  the  money,  mistaken  the 
vessel,  and  got  on  board  a  national  schooner^ 
where  he  was  seized  and  committed  to  gaoL 
Captain  Jewitt  saw  that  this  man  was  a  bold, 
fearless  character,  but  persuaded  himself,  that, 
under  judicious  direction,  he  might  be  made  use- 
ful i  and  he  therefore  determined  to  take  him  as  a 
petty  officer,  though  the  governor  remonstrated 
with  him  on  the  subject,  and  impressed  on  his 
mind  that  the  prisoner  was  a  person  of  the  most 
abandoned  principles.  Captain  Jewitt  replied^ 
he  would  take  the  risk  ;  and  should  he  be  guilty 
of  mutiny,  he  would  shoot  him.  The  governor's 
anticipation  turned  out  to  be  correct,  as  will  ap- 
pear in  the  sequel.  They  had  been  at  sea  some 
time  without  any  dissatisfaction  appearing  among 


-108  NARRATIVE    OF   A    MUTINY* 

the  crew :  every  indulgence  the  service  would 
allow  of  was  granted  to  them  ;  and  the  officer 
takein  from  prison  the  captain  had  promoted  from 
time  to  time  till  now  he  held  the  rank  of  lieu- 
tenant. From  the  day  of  his  obtaining  this 
promotion,  the  commencement  of  the  mutiny 
might  be  dated.  This  villain,  by  being  in  closer 
intercourse  with  the  officers,  contaminated  the 
minds  of  some,^  and  thus  propagated  a  spirit  of 
insubordination  among  the  seamen ;  so  that  a 
plan  for  the  execution  of  the  most  horrid  mur- 
der was  formed,  which  was  prevented  by  a  very 
fortuitous  circumstance. 

On  the  night  of  the  19th  of  August,  Captain 
Jewitt  was  lying  in  his  cot  ruminating  on  the 
variety  of  characters  he  had  on  board,  when  his 
mind  became,  as  it  were,  providentially  excited  to 
the  necessity  of  being  vigilant  in  observing  the 
conduct  of  his  crew.  He  immediately  got  up,  put 
on  a  dark-coloured  cloak,  and,  unobserved,reacT^- 
ed  the  fore  part  of  the  gun-deck  oil  the  larboard 
side.  Here  the  lights  had  been  extinguished 
for  the, purpose  of  concealing  the  proceiedings  of 
the  conspirators  :  —  from .  the  opposite  side  he 
overheard  a  party  closely  iengaged  in  mutinous 
communications.  .  He  was  thunderstruck  at  dis- 
covering the.  cruel  and  inhuman  intentions  of 
these  ■  wretches  J.  but  when  he  understood  that 
at  midnight,  it  being  then  40  minutes  past  11, 


JSTARRATIVE    OP.A    MUTINY,  109 

the  stene  of  murder  was  to  comifQence,  and  that 
he  was  to  be  the  first  victim  of  their"  barbarity, 
by  stabbing  him  in  his  cot,  he  waited  to  hear  no 
more,  but  instantly  hurried  back  without  being 
perceived.  He  immediately  sent  for  the  cap- 
tain of  the  troops,  informed  him  of  the  state  of 
the  ship,  and  desired  him  to  have  the  soldiers 
under  arms  as  .speedily  as  possible.*  rAs  soon  as 
they,  were  reported  ready,  he  ordered  two  of  the 
officers,  whom  -he  suspected,  to  be  put  in  con- 
finement, and,  at  the  same  time,  called  the  sea- 
men on  deck.  The'  soldiers  were  drawn  up  on 
the  quarter-deck,  and  all  the  officers,  in  whom 
he  could  place  confidence,  were  under  arms.  . 

At  so 'sudden  a  discovery  of  their  horrid 
designs,  and  the  vigilant  appearance  pf  the  cap- 
tain's party,  the  mutineers  became  panic-3tfuck.' 
They,  however,  came 'aft,  and  Captain  J.  ac- 
cused them,  of  their  crime,  desiring  those  who 
werenot.imp^cated  immediately  to  cross  over  to; 
the  stai*boai:d  side.  A  murmuiring  took  place,  as 
if  they  intended  to  oppose ;  but  distriisting  rone 
another,  they  tacitly  suffered'  the  iing-leaders  to 
be  3ei?ied  and  secured  ini/ons.  Thus,;  by  the 
toere  accident;  of  Captain  Jewitt's,  having  gone' 
forward,  at  that. critical  moment,  and  overhearing 
thdrvillaiious plot,  a  dreadfurcpurse  of  ihurdeK 
was  piJevented. '  Subordination',  having  been  re^^' 
stored^  he  made  the:  neceSsaiy:  arrangements  for^ 


110  VAttUrrtfi   OF   A    MUTIMT. 

hoMgig  coortsonartial,  accordiDg  to  the  forms 
aCabiished  by  the  patriots  of  Buenos  Ayre^  by 
which  the  commander  of  a  ship  of  war  is  in« 
vested  with  the  power  of  life  and  deadi.  The 
evidence  which  was  here  adduced  implicated  so 
many  unsuspected  persons,  that  he  found  mercy 
incompatible  with  the  safety  of  the  ship,  and  the 
lives  of  the  innocent  It  appeared  that  their 
intention  was  to  destroy  all  those  who  might  be 
found  inimical  to  their  principal  design,  which 
was  to  hoist  black  colours  and  scour  the  seas  as 
pirates,  making  murder  their  principal  means  of 
safety. 

At  length,  after  the  most  deliberate  examin- 
ation of  the  evidence,  by  himself  and  the  officers 
of  the  ship.  Captain  Jewitt  was  under  the  dis- 
tressing necessity  of  pronouncing  sentence  of 
death  on  two  officers  and  two  seamen.  One  c£ 
the  officers  was  the  person  he  had  taken  out  of 
prison,  and  had  promoted.  On  the  day  appointed 
for  execution,  a  stage  was  erected  over  the  star- 
board cat-head,  and  these  four  unfortunate  men 
met  their  death  by  being  shot.  I  much  lamented, 
said Captam  Jewitt,  that. so  severe  an  example 
was  necessary,  and  had  I  been  a  disinterested 
spectator,  I  certainly  would  have  called  aloud 
for  their  pardon ;  but  my  peculiar  situation  would 
not  allow  the  foelings  of  compassion  to  influence 
me.     Here  he  finished  his  narration ;  and,  pre- 


NARRATIVE    OP   A   MUTINY.  Ill 

ftentiy,  the  death  of  his  first  lieutenant  was  re- 
ported, to  which  he  replied,  with  great  compo- 
sure, being  familiar  with  death  in  every  form, 
"  Very  well :  secure  his  effects."  This  deceased 
officer,  he  told  me,  was  passively  concerned  in 
the  mutiny;  but  he  spared  him  from  trial  on 
account  of  his  sickness. 

Captain  Jewitt,  with  great  politeness,  ordered 
a  cot  to  be  slung  for  me  on  the  larboard  side 
of  his  sleeping  cabin ;  and  when  we  retired,  I 
remarked  that  he  slept  in  his  trowsers,  with  a 
dirk  belted  round  him,  and  a  pair  of  pistols  over 
his  head.  As  I  was  not  provided  with  any  such 
weapons  of  defence,  I  had  only  to  trust  for 
safety  to  a  strict  observance  of  neutrality;  but 
the  ship  remained  in  peace,  and  I  slept  undis- 
turbed. 

In  a  few  days,  he  took  formal  possession  of 
these  islands  for  the  patriot  government  of 
Buenos  Ayres,  read  a  declaration  under  their 
colours,^  planted  on  a  port  in  ruins,  and.  fired  a 
salute  of  twenty-one  guns.  On  this  occasion 
the  officers  were  all  in  full  uniform,  being  ex- 
actly  that  of  our  navy,  which  but  ill  accorded 
with  the  dilapidated  state  of  the  ship ;  but  he 
was  wise  enough  to  calculate  the  effect  of  such 
parade^  upon  the  minds  of  the  masters  of.  ships 
who  were  in  the  islands;  and  as  he  had  laid 
ckim  to  the  wyeck  of  the  French  ship  be- 


11@  FALKLAND   ISLANDS; 

fore  mentioned)  to  th^  jentire  exclusion  of  several 
vessels  which  had  arrived,  bound  to  New  Shetland, 
he  was  aware  that  an  authoritative  appearance 
was  necessary*  In  fact  he  struck  such  a  terror  on 
the  minds  of  some  ship-masters,  lest  they  should 
be  captured  or  robbed,  that  one  of  them  proposed 
taking  up  arms  against  him ;  but  on  my  point- 
ing out  to  him  how  groundless  were  his  fears, 
and  introducing  him  to  Captain  Jewitt,  he  con- 
fessed his  mistake,  and  his  fears  subsided,  — On 
the  20th  of  Noveniber  I  sailed  from  Port  Louis, 
and  left  Captain  Jewitt  completing  his  repairs. 
I  have  since  learned  that  he  took  the  ship  to  the 
river  Plata,  and  that  he  is  now  in  the  Brazilian 
service. 


113 


CHAP.  V. 

HAIL  FROM  THE  FALKLANDS :  VOYAGE,  ICE  ISLANDS)  CUR- 
RENTS.—  DIFFICULT  NAVIGATION.  —  STORM  AND  DAN- 
GERS.  DIFFERENCE   BETWEEN   THE   ICE   IN   THE  NORTH- 

EltN     AND     SOUTHERN      HEMISPHERES SPERM     WHALE 

SEEN. SOUTH    SHETLANDS. 

Having  said  as  much  as  the  field  of  my  observ- 
ation allows  me,  in  the  description  of  these  islands, 
and  of  the  incidents  which  have  of  late  years 
tak^n  place  in  their  vicinity,  I  shall  now  return 
to  our  having  sailed  from  the  Falklands  on  the 
7th  of  October,  bound  to  South  Shetland. 

At  6  P.  M.  we  had  obtained  an  offing,  and 
Rodney's  Bluff  bore  N.E.  distance  about  seven 
leagues.  The  wind  continued  blowing  fresh 
from  the  north,  with  haze  tilj  the  morning  of 
the  1 1th,  when  it  shifted  suddenly  into  the  S.W. 
and  brought  clear  weather.  Our  latitude  at 
noon  by  observation  was  57°  27',  arid  longitude 
by  chronometers  GS""  by  D.R.  66°  1\  in  the  after* 
noon  the  wind  shifted  to  S.S.E.,  and  we  put 
about  to  the  S.W. 

At.  day-light  of  the  12th,  the  wind  had  shifled 
into  the  S.W.  and  blew  a  strong  gale:  at  day- 
light  of  the  13th,  the  gale  moderated,  leaving  a 


114  voyage:   IpB   ISLANDS. 

heavy  swell  from  the  westward ;  and  at  noon  we 
saw  an  ice-berg  in  the  S.W. 

On  the  14th,  the  wind  was  westerly  j  and  our 
latitude  at  noon  was  58*  6',  longitude  by  chro- 
nometers  62*^46',  and  by  account  65*^  24':  our 
consort  kept  her  station,  and  we  occasionally 
communicated. 

On  the  15th,  the  wind  was  easterly,  and  bli^w 
lightly  at  noon.  We  were  in  latitude  by  observ- 
ation 59°  1\  by  D.  R-  59''  16',  and  longitude  by 
chronometers  was  &&"  28',  and  by  account  66*"  42'. 
At  eight  A.M.,  of  the  l6th,  we  passed  an  ice 
island,  which  we  estimated  to  be  about  twa 
miles  in  length,  and,  during  the  night,  we. 
passed  seven  others.  I  was  much  surprised  at 
falling  in  with  these  as  in  my  two  former  pas- 
sages to  Shetland  we  had  not  seen  one.  At 
noon  the  weather  was  hazy,  and  in  the  after- 
noon,  with  the  wind  northerly,  a  thick  fog  set 
in.  At  3*30'  P.M.  we  were  astonished  to  find 
ourselves  upon  the  edge  of  field-ice,  and  close 
to  a  large  ice  island.  We  had  barely  room  te 
avoid  it,  the  cutter  hauling  one  way,  and  the 
brig  the  opposite,  by  which  means  we  escaped 
the  danger.  Our  latitude  was  now  61""  21',  and 
longitude  by  chronometers  64*^15';  hence,  the 
outer  edge  of  the  ice  was  ninety-five  miles  fitttn 
the  land.  As  I  thought  it  might  possibfy  be 
only  a  patch,  we  ran  along  the  edge  to  the 


ICE    CURRENT.  115 

£.N.E.  in  search  of  an  opening ;  but  after  run- 
ning twenty  miles,  and  finding  the  ice  every 
where  quite  compact,  at  10  P.M.  we  hauled  off 
to  the  N.N.  W. 

At  dayJight,  of  the  17th,  we  sailed  to  the 
southward,  and  in  making  the  ice  again,  we  dis- 
covered an  opening,  into  which  we  entered.  We 
passed  through  several  heavy  patches,  and  found 
our  latitude  at  noon  61*"  49',  and  longitude  by 
chronometers  61**  53',  by  D.R.  66**  38',  produc- 
ing a  dijBTerence  or  error  in  reckoning  of  l65 
miles  in  ten  days;  which,  after  allowing  one- 
fourth  for  error,  gives  an  easterly  current  of 
half  a  mile  per  hour  during  the  time  specified : 
but  it  had  not  run  equally.  As  the  current  was 
evidently  setting  strong  to  the  eastward,  I 
thought  that  the  western  edge  of  the  ice  might 
not  be  far  from  the  part  we  first  fell  in  with, 
as  at  that  time  it  was  so  fbggy^that  we  could  not 
see  farther  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  We  ac- 
cordingly made  the  appropriate  signal  to  the 
Beaufby,  and  plied  the  vessels  to  the  westward. 

During  the  18th  and  19th,  we  had  strong  and 
moderate  breezes,  alternately,  frpm  the  westward. 
In  the  morning  of  the  20th  the  wind  turned 
into  the  S.W.,  and  blew  a  fresh  gale,  which 
brought  us  under  close-reefed  topsails ;  we  con- 
tinued to  pass  along  the  edge  of  the  ice,  but 
c^d  find  no  opening. 

I  « 


116  VOYAGE. 

On  the  21st  the  wind  was  moderate,  and  ob- 
serving the  ice  to  have  slackened  considerably,  I 
was  hopeful  that  the  last  strong  wind  from  the 
southwest  had  driven  it  from  the  land,  leaving 
clear  water,  which  could  we  attain',  I  judged  we 
might  reach  an  anchorage.  I  was  mistaken  in 
my  conjecture,  for  we  had  not  penetrated /far 
when  we  found  the  ice  too  heavy  for  our  weak 
barks  to  displace,  and  we  were  obliged  to  use 
our  endeavour  to  return  to  clear  water  again. 
At  noon  we  saw  James  Island,  the  western 
island  of  the  group  bearing  S.  by  E.  by  which 
with  the  difference' of  latitude,  the  distance  was 
estimated  to  be  70  miles.  The  weather^  was 
remarkably  clear,  and  the  island  being  covered 
with  snow,  appeared  like  a  white  cloud  in  the 
horizon,  with  some  dark  streaks  running  verti- 
cally where  the  snow  had  been  inelted.         ,   • 

Through  the  night  of  the  21st,  not  being  able 
to  find  a  passage  to  clear  water,  we  were  under 
the  necessity  of  tacking  about  in  a  pool-  till  day- 
light.    The  extent  of  this  pool  was  about  a  mile 
and  a  half,  which  as  the  wind  was  strong  and  the 
night  very  dark,  we  found  small  enough.     The , 
ice  about  us  was   wha-t  .is?  called  packed,  i.  e.. 
broken  into  large  masses  in  contact  with  each, 
other ;    and  some  pieces  were  so  heavy  as  to 
make  our  running  against  them  as- dangerous  as; 
striking  upon  a  rock.    We  frequently  had  it  clbse . 


DIFFICULTIES.  117 

6n  board  before  we- could  perceive  it,  so  that^ 
in  fact,  it  would  have  been  safer  to  have  entered 
the  ice  the  preceding  evening,  and  have  lain  in 
it,  but  that  I  was  afraid  its  rolling  motion  would 
break  away  our  guard-boards.  At  day-light  we 
coasted  the  pool  for  an  opening,  without  success, 
and  we  had  only  the  choice  of  remaining,  or  of 
forcing  a  passage,  which  latter  we  immediately 
set  about,  under  all  sail,  and  by  keeping  the 
vessels'  heads  to  the  northward,  in  the  afternoon 
we  reached  clear  waten 

At  noon  our  latitude  by  observation  was 
6V  30\  and  longitude  by  chronometers  6V  7\ 
By  our  having  made  easting  since  noon  of  the 
day  before,  notwithstanding  we  had  made  20 
miles  .of  westing  by  the  log,  it  appeared  that 
while  lying  in  the  pool  during  the  night,  we  had 
been  carried  with  the  ice  rapidly  to  the  eastward. 
I  was  not  sorry  at  finding  this  to  be  the  case,  as 
it  afforded  the  prospect  of  reaching  an  anchorage 
to  the  westward  of  the  ice,  •  The  wind  continued 
westward,  and  we  searched  the  ice  for  an  open- 
ing, occasionally  passing  through  extensive  heavy 
patches.  '  .  •      . . 

In  the  morning  of  the  26th  the  wind  shifted 
to  north,  and  the  weather  became  foggy.  We 
had  now  got  to  the  westward  of  the  main  ice, 
and  at  8  A.M.  the  fog  clearing  away,  we  saw 
James  Island,  bearing  E.  by  S.  i  S.   distant  12 

I  S 


118  DIFFICULTI£«. 

leagues.  We  immediately  hauled  towards  an 
opening  in  the  western  part  of  the  group  which 
I  had  named  Boyd  Straits^  in  honor  of  Captain 
David  Boyd,  of  the  Royal  Navy.  We  soon, 
however,  found  ourselves  impeded  by  heavy 
compact  ice,  and  the  wind  freshened  from 
N.W,  to  such  a  degree  as  to  oblige  us  to  take 
in  the  foretop-sail,  and  it  was  with  difficulty  we 
obtained  an  offing. 

On  the  27th  the  winds  were  light,  and  the 
weather  foggy,  and  as  we  had  much  heavy  ice 
around,  with  a  great  westerly  swell,  our  situation 
was  hazardous.  At  midnight  the  wind  freshen- 
ed to  a  gale  at  west,  and  we  lay  to  with  the 
ship's  head  to  the  N.N.  W»  In  this  drift  we  fell 
in  with  many  ice  islands,  some  of  which  by  the 
heaviness  of  the  sea  around  us  were  rolling  with 
the  noise  of  an  earthquake. 

At  8  in  the  morning  of  the  £8th,  the  wind 
shifted  suddenly  into  the  S.  W.,  and  increased  to 
a  complete  hurricane.  I  was  glad  to  see  the 
Beaufoy  was  prepared  for  the  worst,  and  by  the 
advantage  which  a  cutter  possesses  over  a  square- 
rigged  vessel,  in  having  fore  and  aft  sails,  with 
comparative  little  bulk  aloft,  she  seemed  to  lie 
much  easier  than  we  did.  Our  main  topsail  was 
storm-reefed,  which  requiring  the  sheets  to  be 
eased  off  several  feet,  reduced  the  sail  to  the  size  of 
a  mere  napkin.  The  cold  was  intense,  and  in  con- 


STORM. 


li^ 


sequence  of  the  wind  having  shifted,  the  sea  rang- 
ed on  board  on  the  leeside,  sweepmg  every  thing 
before  it  A  whale-boat,  a^d  every  thing  move- 
able was  wished  off  deck,  and  an  accilmulated 
itaass  of  ice  was  ultimately  left  in  their  place. 
To  this  latter  circumstance,  alarming  as  it  ap- 
peared at  the  time,  may  perhaps  be  attributed, 
in  sorAe  measure,  our  preservation,  as  our  vessel 
was  no  doubt  greatly  assisted  by  this  binding  of 
ice  to  withstand  the  shocks  of  an  irregularly 
violent  sea.  This  I  concluded  to  arise  from  the 
cohesive  nature  of  ice,  which  by  almost  envelop- 
ing the  vessel,  prevented  the  fastenings  from 
being  distressed.  The  gale  continued  with  great 
violence  from  the  S.  W.  by  S.,  and  by  midnight 
the  sea  had  become  more  regulslr.  So  much  ice 
had  formed  in  the.  head,  and  on  the  fore-castle, 
that  the  vessel  rose  to  the  lea  but  sluggishly,  and 
the  fear  of  falling  in  with  ice,  kept  us  constantly 
oil  the  alarm.  In  still  water,  little,  or  no  ice  can 
be  formed  upon  the  hull ;  but  as  it  wafe  with  us 
in  this  instance,  there  was  no  part  six  feet  above 
the  deck  where  the  sea  water  did  not  reach, 
and  which  had  not  a  quantity  of  ice  upon  it. 

The  rudder  was  frozen  fast  in  the  trunk,  aiid 
but  for  the  little  sail  we  had  aloft,  \^hich  kept 
the  vessel  steady,  and  fortunately  was  new,  we 
should  in  all  probability  sodn  have  been  a  wreck. 
The  Beaufby  had   not  been  seen  for  several 

i4 


120     EFFECTS  OF  THE  GALE  AND  COLD^ 

hours;  and  indeed  we  could  have  rendered  no 
assistance  one  to  another,  although  we  had  been 
together,  and  the  occasion  ever  so  distressing. 
We  had  only  therefore  to  wait  with  patience  for 
the  approach  of  day-light,  and  to  confide  in  a 
merciful  Providence  for  our  preservation. 

On  the  morning  of  the  29th,  the  gale  mo- 
derated, and  we  were  rejoiced  to  see  from  the 
mast-head,  the  Beaufoy  in  the  S.S.W.  Many 
of  our  crew  were  hurt  in  the  early  part  of.  the 
gale,  by  being  thrown  down,  and  nearly  all  of 
them  were  frost-bitten.  They  had  been  above 
a  twelvemonth  from  home,  and  consequently 
their  clothes,  were  nearly  worn  out.  Several  of 
of  them  had  not  a  second  pair  of  stockings  or  a 
shirt  to  change  with ;  and  I  had  parted  with  every 
rag  I  could  spare  to  remedy  these  inconve- 
niences. Blankets  were  cut  up  to  make  stockings, 
and  the  pump  leather  had  been  used  to  mend 
shoes..  I  never,  during  my  experience  at  sea, 
have  seen  an  equal  degree  of  patience  and  firm- 
ness as  was  exhibited  by  these  seamen.  No  das- 
tardly request  to  reach  a  better  climate  was  ever 
hinted  at,  but  they  continued  in  the  strictest 
obedience  and  determination  to  make  light  of 
difficulties. 

In  the  course  of  the  forenoon  we  closed  with; 
the  Beaufoy,  and  I  was  glad  to  hear  that  they 
had  suffered  no  particular  damage  j  the  decks 


STRIKE    AGAINST    AN    ICE    ISLAND.  121 

had  been  full  of  water,  but  she  had  shipped 
much  less  than  the  brig  had  done.  At  noon,^ 
James  Island  bore  S.  ^  E.,  distant  about  sixty 
miles. 

Owing  to  not  having  found  ice  here  in  any 
considerable  quantity,  on  any  of  my  two  former 
voyages,  I  was  led  to  hope  that  it  would  speedily 
clear  away ;  and  was,  therefore,  determined  not 
to  relinquish  an  object,  when,  perhaps,  we  were 
on  the  point  of  attaining  it.  ... 

We  retained  an  oflShg,  in  order  to  repair  da- 
mages, sustained  in  the  late  hurricane,  and  to 
clear  the  ship  of  ice ;  which,  however,  we  could  ^ 
not  effectually  do,   as'  the  wind  continued  at 
south  south  west,  producing  keen  frost,  and,  on* 
the  SOth,  we  had  a  fresh  gale.     It  was  the  1st 
of  November  before  we  stood  in  again  for  the 
edge  of  the  ice ;  and,  though  I  fully  expected 
that  the  heavy  southerly  winds  had  driven  it 
from   the   shore,    I    soon   had    the   mortifying 
prospect  of  finding  it  as   compact  as  before, . 
though  the  edge  had  wasted  so  that  we  could' 
approach  several  miles  nearer  land. 

We  continued  about  this  situation  till  the  5th, 
in  the  morning,  when  we  were  roused  by  strik-- 
ing  against  a  small  island  of  ice.  ^  Many  of  these 
were  strewed  around  us,  and  we  had  been  sail- » 
ing  among  them,  during  the  night,  without  dif-  ^ 
ficulty ;  but  on  my  going  below  for  a  few  mi- 


122  ICE. 

nutes,  the  man  at  the  helm,  in  passing  one, 
became  confused,  or  misundersood  the  direc* 
tions  of  the  officer  of  the  deck,  and  put  the 
helm  the  ^rong  way,  by  which  the  ship  struck 
her  larboard  bow  i^ainst  the  mass,  with  so  much 
violence,  as  to  throw  the  people  out  of  their 
cabins.  I  was  on  deck  in  an  instant,  and  directed 
the  carpenter  to  sound  the  pump  well ;  and  in 
not  more  than  two  minutes  after  striking,  he 
reported  three  feet  water  in  the  hold.  I  ordered 
him  to  sound  a  second  time,  while  I  prepared 
to  make  a  signal  to  the  Beaufoy,  and  to  ply  the 
pumps.  Before,  however,  the  signal  could  be 
made,  he  confessed  that  he  had  been  mistaken 
in  his  first  soundings,  by  the  line  having  been 
wet,  and  that  we  had  only  the  usual  quantity 
of  waten  The  carpenter  insisted  on  the  vessel 
having  struck  the  ice  somewhere  forward  below 
water ;  but  as  there  was  no  additional  leakage, 
I  passed  the  event  into  the  list  of  defects,  and 
gave  it  no  farther  consideration.  The  effects  of 
this  blow  afterwards  appeared  to  have  been  of 
serious  concern,  for,  on  docking  the  vessel  in 
London,  a  plank  was  found  driven  between  two 
timbers  in  the  larboard  bilge. 

On  the  7th,  we  attained  within  the  distance 
of  eight  leagues  of  James  Island,  and  here  ibund 
the  ice  so  heavy  and  compact,  as  far  to  the 
southward  as  the  eye  could  reach,  that  we  were 


VOYACfi   CONTINUED.  123 

obliged  to  stand  again  to  the  northward.  Having, 
in  the  course  of  our  endeavours  to  obtain  a 
passage  through  the  ice,  struck  against  sevef al 
masses  with  great  violence ;  I  took  advantage  of 
this  comparatively  fine  day  to  lower  the  boat, 
and  examine  the  extent  of  the  damage  we  had 
sustained.  We  found  the  bends  considerably 
injured,  and  the  outer  part  of  the  stem  broken. 
The  swell  of  the  sea  did  not  permit  us  to  do 
any  thing  by  way  of  repairing  at  this  time, 
and,  as  we  made  but  little  mote  than  the  usual 
quantity  of  water,  we  felt  no  alarm  at  our 
situation. 

Towards  evening,  the  wind  &eshened  from 
the  N.  E.,  and  put  the  outer  part  of  the  ice  in 
motion  towards  the  west  j  we,  therefore,  stood 
to  the  N.  N.  W.  under  easy  sail,  to  prevent  our 
being  taken  by  it. 

During  the  8th  and  9th,  we  made  various 
efforts  to  open  a  passage  to  the  land,  but  without 
success. 

At  3  A.M.  of  the  10th,  James  Island  bore 
Si  i  E.  distant  about  40  miles.  At  1^  80'  P.  M. 
I  took  eleven  i^ights  of  distance  between  the  sun 
and  moon,  and  then  deduced  the  longitude  of 
the  east  end  of  James  Island  to  be  62^  16\  On 
the  11th,  as  the  ice  appeared  somewhat  thinner 
towards  the  E.  S.  E.,  I  thought  it  possible  that 
we  might  reach  the  anchorage  of  New  Plymouth 


lS4i  ICE    ISLANDS. 

Harbour ;  and  we  accordingly  niade  the  attempt, 
but  without  success,  as  we  had  not  penetrated 
more  than  seven  or  eight  miles  before  both  vessels 
became  immoveable.  The  cutter  having  come 
up  among  the  loose  ice  we  had  displaced,  ranged 
alongside.  We  had  now  forty  ice  islands  around 
us,  and  most  of  them  were  in  motion  from  under 
currents.  As  it  was  as  much  out  of  our  power 
to.return  as  to  go  forward,  we  furled  the  sails. 
My  attention  was  principally  directed  to  the 
movements  of  these  masses,  as  some  of  them^ 
were  going  westerly  to  windward,  and  the 
packed  ice  in  which  we  were  beset  had  an 
easterly  motion.  The  wind  was  strong  from  the 
S.  W.  -during  the  night,  but  it  made  no  apparent' 
change. in  the  disposition  of  the  ice.  In  the 
morning  of  the  12th,  we  had  closed  with  a  large 
ice  island,  and  in  spite  of  all  our  endeavours  to* 
avoid  it,  we  continued  approaching. 

At  10  o'clock,  it  was  witliin  two  ships'  length, ' 
and,  from  its  peculiar  shape,  threatened  to  over- 
whelm us ;  for  the  upper  part  of  the  side  nearest 
to  us,  which  was  abcmt  180  feet  high,  projected  • 
so  much   as  would    have  -  admitted   the  brig's 
masts  coming  in  contact  with  it  underneath,  and ' 
this  overhanging  part  was  cracked  from  the  top 
down  to  the   water-line.      From   both   vessels- 
being .  unavoidably  together,    both  were '  likely 
to  suffer  by  the  same  accident.    All  our  attempts 


DANGEROUS  SITUATION.         125 

to  heave  the  vessels  out  of  the  course  of  this 
danger  were    in  vain,   but  they  had  the  good 
eflPect  of  occupying  the  crews,   and  thus  with- 
drawing their  attention  from  their  perilous  situa- 
tion.    Within  half  an  hour,  I  had  the  appalling 
sight  of  the  overhanging  mass  immediately  over 
our  quarter-deck ;     with  the  fearful   sensation 
that,  if  our  masts  came  in  contact  with  it,  the 
projecting  part  would  fall  upon  us,  and  sink  both 
•vessels.     Our  escape  was  caused  solely  by  our 
having  a  large  floe  piece  of  ice  between  us  and 
the  ice  island,  which  prevented  our  masts  from 
touching  it.     The  packed  ice  separated  to  each 
side,  and  we  passed  round  the  north  corner.  The 
rolling  of  this  island  in  its  passage  had  produced 
a  slackness  in  the  other  ice,    of  which  I  was 
determined  to  take  advantage  for  returning,  and 
so  cast  off  the  cutter.     We  made  all  possible  sail, 
with  the  wind  at  S.  W. ;  and  continued  making 
progress  in  a  N.  E.  direction  till  the  evening, 
when  both  vessels  became  again  unmoveable. 
The  cutter  was  now  about  one  mile  astern,  and, 
indeed,  I  saw  that  it  was  necessary  for  our  safety 
to  be  at  a  short  distance  from  each  other,  that 
we  might  not  both  be  subject  to  the  same  acci- 
dent, as  would  have  been  the  case  when  under 
the  ice  island  before  mentioned. 

On  the  13th,   the  wind  was  light  from  the 
W.N.  W.,'  and  we  were  consequently  unable  to. 


126  DANGEROUS   NAVIGATION. 

make  any  way ;  but  on  the  morning  of  the  14th, 
it  freshened,  and  for  our  safety,  we  made  all  sail 
to  the  northward. 

At  4  A.  M.,  we  saw  rocks  astern  bearing 
St  S.  E.  distant  about  ten  miles,  which  we  judged 
to  be  about  Cape  Sherifil  In  the  afternoon,  we 
were  set  into  ice  of  the  most  dangerous  descrip- 
tion. Many  pieces  which  appeared  to  be  the 
bottoms  of  ice  islands  wer6  about  from  80  to 
100  feet  in  superficial  extent ;  and  as  they  were 
10  feet  above  water,  they  must  have  been  at 
least  40  feet  in  depth,  as  from  the  specific  gra- 
vity of  such  sort  of  blue  and  solid  ice,  we 
judged  that  about  30  feet  must  be  under  water. 
The  rolling  motion  of  several  of  these  pieces 
was  so  great,  tihat  had  one  of  them  taken  the 
side  of  the  ship  fairly  in  its  descent^  her  destruc- 
tion must  h^ve  been  inevitable. 

Among  them  there  were  narrow  openings, 
through  which  we  endeavoured  to  navigate ;  but 
in  passing  one  piece,  it  struck  us,  though  only 
with  a  corner,  on  the  starboard  side,  and  tore  down 
ourbulwarks  and  main-guard  board.  We  repaired 
the  wreck,  and  passed  through  two  or  three  miles 
of  this  kind  of  ice.  As  there  were  occasionaHy 
small  ponds,  in  which  the  vessel  acquired  con- 
siderable velocity,  the  evolutions  we  had  to  per- 
form kept  our  men  constantly  at  the  braoes  to 
back  and  fill  ^e  sails.    About  S  P.M«  we  had 


D4MAGES   AND   REPAIRS.  1^7 

reached  a  pool  about  one  mile  in  diameter,  though 
with  many  heavy  pieces  of  ice  floating  in  it. 
The  Beauf by  had  been  unavoidably  sent,  four  or 
five  miles  to  the  westward  of  us,  and  as  we  saw 
her  distinctly,  I  determined  to  wait  in  this  pool 
till  she  should  reach  us. 

During  the  15th,  the  water  being  smooth  here, 
I  further  examined  the  vessel's  bows  and  found 
three  of  the  binds  broken,  and  the  stem  much 
damaged  as  before  mentioned  We  made  re- 
pairs by  nailing  lead  and  plank  over  tarred  can- 
vass on  the  holes  and  cracks  which,  though  they 
did  not  materially  strengthen  the  vessel,  pre- 
vented leakage  in  the  meantime.  In  the  even- 
ing,  having  observed  the  cutter  to  be  fast  ap- 
proaching, we  entered  the  nearest  northern 
patch  of  ice,  and  at  half  past  four  of  the  morn- 
ing of  the  l6th  we  reached  clear  water,  and 
hove  to  under  the  edge  of  the  ice  for  the  arrival 
of  the  Beaufoy.  • 

I  was  much  rejoiced  at  having  one  vessel  out 
of  the  ice,  considering  all  dangers  in  an  open, 
sea,  as  of  no  moment  compared  with  those  we 
were  subject  to  in  such  weak  vessels,  having  only 
two  and  a  half  inch  plank  in  the  bottom,  among 
large  rolling  masses  of  ice. 

As  I  have  been  in  the  Greenland  seas,  and  am 
wdl  acquainted  with  the  natuie  and  danger  of 
that  navigation,  I  may  remark  that  sailing  among 


128  NORTHERN    AND    SOUTHERN    ICES. 

ice  in  these  southern  latitudes  is  attended  with 
much  greater  risk.  This  is  occasioned  by  a 
heavy  westerly  swell  which  keeps  the  ice  in  mo- 
tion, and  seldom  entirely  subsides.  The  vast 
expanse  of  ocean  to  the  westward  of  Shetland 
acted  upon  by  winds  prevailing  between  S;W. 
and  N.W.  is  the  cause  of  this  almost  constant 
swell,  .'and  as  the  heaviest  gales  come  from  be- 
tween these  points,  it  is  sometimes  of  a  moun- 
tainous description. 

At  two  in  the  afternoon,  the  Beaufoy  having 
joined  company,  we  stood  to  the  westward,  and 
at  4  o'clock  we  saw  a  sperm  whale,  which  confirms 
Mr.  Smith's  report  of  such  sort  of  whales  being 
found  on  this  coast,  as  stated  by  him  in  his 
account  of  South  Shetland. 

The  weather  being  now  more  settled,  we  low- 
ered our  boats,  and  set  out  in  pursuit  of  the 
whale,  but  did  not  succeed.  It  was  supposed 
that  the  fish  having  seen  the  copper  of  the  ves- 
sel, had  become  what  is  technically  called  gaU 
lied,  and  disappeared. 

At  9  P.  M.  on  the  l6th,  James  Island  bore 
S.E.  by  E.  distant  16  or  17  miles,  but  as  I  found 
the  ice  still  heavy  and  compact,  I  saw  no  pros- 
pect of  obtaining  anchorage  in  time  for  procur- 
ing  sea  elephants,  and  therefore  communicated 
with  the  Beaufoy,  and  with  the  wind  at  N.N.E. 


THE   SOUTH    SHETtAKDS.  129 

we  Stood  to  the  N.W.  on  our  passage  to  Cape 
Horn. 

As  the  South  Shetlands  are  not  yet  generally 
known,  and  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  ascer- 
taining some  particulars  in  regard  to  them  during 
three  voyages,  a  short  account  may  here  be  useful 
for  general  information ;  and  for  the  convenience 
of  navigators,  I  have  annexed  a  chart,  constructed 
from  observations  made  during  my  survey  of 
these  islands. 

The  discovery  of  this  Archipelago,  as  already 
mentioned,  was  made  by  Mr.  William  Smith, 
commander  of  the  brig  WUliam,  on  a  passage 
from  Monte  Video  to  Valparaiso  in  1819,  as 
is  stated  in  the  following  extract  from  that  ves- 
sel's  log  book. 

**  After  taking  our  departure,  from  Monte 
Video,  nothing  material  occurred  iintil  I  got 
into  the  latitude  of  Cape  Horn,  with  a /fair 
wind  to  go  to  the  westward,  and  steering  S.S.E. 
with  an  intention  to  make  the  island  again, 
and  continuing  this  course  for  a  few  days,  I,  to 
my  great  satisfaction,  discovered  land.  On  the 
15th  October,  at  6  p.m.,  in  latitude  62^  Sif  S;, 
and  longitude  60®  W.,  by  chronometers,  *  bear-s 
ing  S.E,  by  E^  about  three  leagues,  hazy  wea- 
ther, bore  up  and  sailed  towards  it.  At  four 
miles'   distance   sounded  in  40  fathoms,    fine 

K 


160  TUB,  «aUXV  SHSIXANDS* 

black  sand.  Island  bearing  £»  by  S.  to  S.£. 
by  E.,  sounded  in  60  fathoms,  same  bottom. 
Hauled  off  during  the  night  to  the  northward. 
At  day-light  stood  in  for  the  land  again,  at  three 
leagues  distance  from  the  body  of  islands. 
Sounded  again  95  fathoms,  fine  sand. 

"  October  18th.  Weather  clear  and  pleasant, 
saw  the  main  land  bearing  S.  S.K,  distance 
&om  the  island  about  three  leagues;  having 
ran  as  far  as  the  Cape,  we  found  the  land  trend 
off  to  the  N.E.,  coasting  to  the  eastward;  I 
sounded,  found  it  similar  to  the  former,  fine 
sand.  The  point  called  North  Foreland  K  by 
S. ;  hauled  in  for  it ;  got  the  island  to  bear 
W.N.W.  distance  half  a  league;  sounded  rc-p 
gular  from  W  to  35  fathoms,  good  bottom,  sand 
and  gravel.  Finding  the  weather  favourable, 
we  lowered  down  the  boat,  and  succeeded  in 
landing;  found  it  barren  and  covered  with 
snow;  seals  in  abundance.  The  boat  having 
returned,  and  being  secured,  we  made  sail  off 
shore  the  ensuing  night.  In  the  morning,  al* 
tered  the  course  so  as  to  reach  the  land  to  the 
southward  in  view.  At  H  A.  M.  the  North 
Foreland  bore  S*E.  by  E.  five  leagues  j  the  l«ad 
tiien  took  a  south-ej^terly  direction,  varying  to 
ikb  eastward ;  weather  llxick  ajid  s(]ually,  witb 
eoQw. 

"  I  thought  proper,  having  property  on  board* 


THE   SOUTH   SHSTLANDS.  ISl 

and  perhaps  deviating  from  tiie  insurance,  to 
haul  off  to  the  westward  on  my  intended  voy- 
age. Stormy,  variable  winds ;  made  Cape  Mil- 
Ian  ;  could  perceive  some  high  land  to  the  west- 
ward of  the  Cape,  stretching  in  a  south  west 
direction  j  the  weather  becoming  thick  and 
squally,  made  sail  to  the  westward.  Having 
sailed  150  miles  on  W.S.W.,  the  weather  mode- 
rating, saw  another  head-land  bearing  E.N.E., 
distance  10  leagues ;  very  high ;  observed,  lati- 
tude 6S^  59f  south,  longitude,  by  chronometers, 
63''40'  west;  named  this  South  Cape;  found 
the  land  to  extend  from  the  Cape  in  a  southerly 
direction*  Shaped  ray  course  for  Valparaiso, 
where  I  arrived  on  the  24th  November  after  a 
passage  of  60  days  from  Monte  Video. 

«  (Signed)  Wm.  Smith.*'* 

The  northern  range  of  South  Shetland  Islands 
lie  between  latitude  61 ""  and  68%  and  longitude 
6^  and  63%  and  consist  of  12  main  islands  and 
innumerable  rocks  above  water,  as  shown  in  the 
accompanying  chart.  Their  extent  was  first  aa^ 
certained  by  Mr.  Edward  Bamsfield,  then  master 
of  the  Frigate  Andromache,  who  was  sent  out  f<nr 
the  express  purpose  by  Captain  Sheriff  cmn- 

*  Accounts  ^  thii  diflcorery  were  originally  made  kMwn 
to  the  British  p»blie  in  the  Literary  Gaaset^e. 

K  2 


132  THE   SOUTH    SHETLANDS. 

mander  of  the  vfessel,  and  commodore  on  the 
western  coast  of  America. 

Mr.  Edward  Bamsileld  acted  with  great  bold- 
ness in  obtaining  a  knowledge  of  this  land ; :  but 
circumstances  did  not  admit  of  his  extending  or 
pursuing  his  observations,  so  as  to  give  a  par- 
ticular account  of  it.  To  his  valuable  remarks, 
however,  as  far  as ,  they  go,  i  I  have  added  my 
own,  which  corroborate  them,  togeliier  with  a 
particular  deHneation  of  the  coast.  > 

The  names  which  he  gave  the  different  headr 
lands,  &c.,  in  obedience  to  official  authority,  I 
have  retained ;  and,  in  a  more  extended  survey;! 
have  added  to  some  parts,-  names  from  peculia* 
rities  of  appearance  in  the  land,  and  to  othersj 
the  names  of  gentlemen  of  talent  and  enter^ 
prise.  I  began  my  observations  in  1820,  being 
the  first  vessel  fitted  out  from  England  which 
anchored  in  these  parts ;  and  have  been  happy, 
since  that  time,  in  imparting  the  knowledge  I 
possessed  to  persons  who  required  information 
for  liie  safety  of  their  ships  .and  lives  of  their 
crews.  From  having  done  so,  I  have  seen,  many 
of  my  communications  in  print,  which,  hoWi 
ever,  I  do  not  regret,  though  it  may  detract 
from  their  entii'e  novelty  now,  when  published 
by  myself. 

The  appearance  which  these  islands  woilild 
assume,  were  they  divested  of  icCj  would  be 


ObrimsT'. 


}g> 


fdr:^ 


i^iiQ 


,y 


partr  of-ffie  Choft', 


r  II A  i<  T 

(of    J 

Constructed  flxm  obecrvatknifi 

///a///r////ry///TlrU(KK  yOYAGKSf/f  f/ff  vc/rrs 

-  — /ir^a,:^/,:^'::^  X'Z'J. 

To  TUKSE  /SLnX/JS, 


^M 


JBm 


THE-  SOUTH    SHETIiANDS.  1^3 

very  different  from  what  they  at  present  exhibit. 
In  Smith's  Island,  an  ice-berg  runs .  through 
from  north  to  south;  indeed,  almost  all  of  them 
are  so  interspersed  and  intersected  with  ice- 
bergs, that  the  earthy,  or  rather  rocky,  parts  of 
the  country  are  much  smaller  in  bulk  than  would 
be  supposed  from  a  distant  view. 
.  The  highest,  and  most  forbidding  in  aspect,  is 
the  western  island,  which,  in  1820,  I  named 
James  Island,  as  I  was  the  first  who  landed 
upon  it.  The  highest  part  of  it  I  estimated  to 
be  nearly  2500  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea. 
The  whole  island  is  almost  inaccessible^  and 
constantly  covered  with  snow,  excepting  some 
perpendicular  rocks  which  will  not  retain  it. 

None  of  the  islands  afford  any  vegetation, 
save  a  short  straggling  grass,  which  is  found  in 
very  small  patches,  in  places  where  there  hap^ 
pens  to  be  a  little  soil.  This,  together  with  a 
moss,  similar  to  that  which  is  found  in  Iceland, 
appears  in  the  middle  of  January,,  at  which  time 
the  islands  are  partiisdly  clear  of  snow.  . 

To  the  eastward  of  Cape  Melville  is  Bridg- 
man's  Island,  which  is  evidently  volcanic^  as  in 
passing  it  in  the  year  1321,  within  200  yards,  I 
observed  smoke  issuing  through  the  fissures  of 
the  rock,  and  apparently  with  much  force.  The 
figure  of  this  island  is  nearly  round;  and  it  is 
about  one*eighth  of  a  mile  in  diameter,  and 

K  3 


134  THt  SOVTH   8BSTI.AMM; 

400  feet  high,  partaking  of  the  farm  of  a  si^ar* 
loaf.  There  are  several  good  harbours  in  these 
islands^  as  may  be  seen  by  referring  to  the 
chart* 

The  composition  of  the  rock»  which  forms 
the  Shetland  Islands,  appears  to  consist  of 
quartz,  with  disseminated  iron  pyrites ;  and  of 
quartz  in  prismatic  concretions,  copper  green, 
and  copper  pyrites. 

From  the  almost  total  want  of  vegetation  to 
subsist  upon,  there  cannot  be  a  single  terrestrial 
animal  in  these  islands ;  but  of  amphibious  crea*> 
tures,  there  are  several.  The  sea^elephant  was 
found  in  vast  numbers.  Of  these,  the  crews, 
undet  my  direction,  killed  upwards  of  2000^ 
.  The  fur*seals,  which  appear  to  he  found  only  in 
tbe  South  seas,  were  still  more  numerous.  Some 
sea»leopafds  have  also  been  seen.  As  the  pe- 
culiarities of  thesie  animals,  and  mai^  of  their 
instinctive  habits,  may  be  interesting,  I  shall 
describe  them. 

The  largest  is  the  sea^elephant.  The  male 
has  a  cartilaginous  substance^  extending  forward 
from  the  nose,  five  or  six  inches^  somewhat  re^ 
seaiUing  the  proboscis  of  the  common  elepbint; 
and  from  this  circumstance  has  obtained  the 
name. 

The  krgest  of  these  animals  wbich  I  have 
seen,  were  males,  not  less  than  twenty^foiu*  feet 


6£A   E&£PHA»T8«  1S5 

long,  and  fourteen  in  circumference :  the 
females  are  generally  about  one-third  less.  In 
form,  they  have  much  the  appearance  of  the 
common  seal,  with  which  most  people  are  ao- 
quainted,  and,  therefore,  a  particular  description 
wduld  be  superfluous ;  but  it  may  be  necessary 
4d  mention  those  habits  and  peculiarities  in 
which  they  differ.  • 

The  males  come  on  shore  about  the  end  of 
'  August  and  beginning  of  September ;  and  in  this 
month,  and  the  first  part  of  October,  they  are  fol- 
lowed by  the  females^  which,  being  with  young 
since  the  preceding  season,  choose  the  land  at 
this  time  for  the  purpose  of  parturition  and  pro- 
creation.    When  the  males  first  arrive,  the  fat 
of  three  or  four  of  them  will  make  a  ton  of  oil  j 
but  the  average  of  both  male  and  female  is 
about  seven  to  the  ton.     As  they  live,  while  on 
shore,  entirely  without  food,  by  the  middle  of 
December  they  have  become  very  lean  ;  and 
their  young  being  at  this  age  able  to  take  the 
water,  the  whole  of  the  breeding  herd  leave  the 
shores. 

A  second  herd  come  up  about  the  middle  of 
January,  for  the  purpose  of  renewing  their  coat 
of  hair ;  in  March,  a  herd  of  full-grown  males 
come  up,  for  the  same  purpose  j  and,  by  the 
md  c£  April,  every  kind  of  them  has  returned 
to  the  «ea* 

K   4 


136  TH£   SOUTH    SH£TLANDS; 

The  circumstance  of  these  animals  living  on 
shore,  for  a  period  of  not  less  than  two  months^ 
apparently  without  taking  food  of  any  descrip 
.tion»  may  certainly  be  considered  a  remarkable 
phenomenon  in  natural  economy.  That  they 
live  by  absorption  is  e^'ident,  —  that  is,  by  cOn- 
sutQing  the  substance  of  their  own  bodies ;  be- 
cause when  tliey  come  first  on  shore,  they  ajre 
•  excessively  fat,  and  when  they  return  to  the  sea, 
they  are  very  liean. 

Their  inactivity  and  extreme  lethargy  when 
on  shore,  is  astonishingly  contrasted  by  their 
sagacity  attd  agility  when  in  the  sea.  They  have 
b^n  known  to  keep  a  boat  from  landing,  by  in* 
tercepting  it  in  the  water,  when  the  crew  had  no 
fire  arms  ;  and  frequently,  when  one  is  pricked 
with  a  lance,  it  will  attack  the  boat  with  great 
ferocity. 

^  It  is  curious  to'remark,  that  the  sek-depiiant, 
when  lying  on  the  shore,  and  threatened  with 
death,  will  often. make  no  efifort  to  escape  into 
tlie  water,  but  lie  still  and  shed  tears,  merely 
raising  the  head  to  look  at  the  assailant ;  and, 
though  very  timid,  will  wait  with  composure  the 
club  or  the  lance  which  takes  its  life.  In  dose 
contact,  every  human  effort  would  be  of  little 
avail  for  the,  desti*uction  pf  this  animal,  unwieldy 
as  it  is,  were  it  to  rush  forward,  and  exert  the^ 
power  of  its  jaws ;  for  this,  indeed,  is  so  enor- 


FUK   SEALS.  137 

'mous,  that,  in  the  agony  of  death,  stones  are 
ground  to  powder  between  its  teeth. 

•  If  the  skull  be  indented  in  the  killing  of  a 
female  with  young,  the  indentation  is  found  also 
*upon  the  skull  of  the  young.  This  sympathy, 
which  has  been  denied  with  regard  to  the  human 
spedes  by  some  physiologists,  evidently  exists 
in  the  economy  of  this  animal. 

The  speciies  of  seal,  which  inhabits  these 
shores,  is  exclusively  the  fur-seal,  or  what  is 
called,  in  zoology,  Phoca  Falklandica,  the  Falk- 
land Island  seal.  This  species  has  been  distin- 
guished by  naturalists  for  its  peculiarity  of 
shape  ;  but  the  circumstance  of  its  possessing  a 
valuable  fur,  as  well  as  the  remarkable  habits 
of  the  animal,  have  riot  been  noticed  in  any 
description  of  the  seal  with  which  I  have  met. 

*  The  fur,  from  the  almost  genieral  use  to 
which  it  is  applied  in  the  manufacture  of  caps, 
must  be  well  known ;  and  it  is  therefore  unne- 
cessary to  describe  it  further,  than  merely  to 
observe,  that  after  the  hair  which  grows  through 
and  over  it  is  extracted,  its  natural  appearance 
is  of  a  fine  and  curly  brown. 

Nothing  in  this  class  of  animals,  and  more  par- 
ticularly  in  the  fur  seal  of  Shetland,  is  more  as- 
tonishing than  the  disproportion  in  the  size  of 
the  male  and  female.  A  large  grown  male, 
from  the  tip  of  the  nose  to  the  extremity  of  the 


188  THE    SOUTH    8HCTLANDS. 

tail,  is  six  feet  nine  inches,  whilst  the  female 
is  not  more  than  three  feet  and  a  half.  This 
class  of  males  is  hot,  however,  the  most  numer- 
ous, but  being  phyiHcally  the  most  powerful, 
they  keep  in  their  possession  all  the  females,  to 
the  exclusion  of  the  younger  branches ;  hence, 
at  the  time  of  parturition,  the  males  attending  the 
females  may  be  coi!nputed  to  be  as  one  to  twenty, 
which  shows  this  to  be,  perhaps,  the  most  poly- 
gamous of  large  animals. 

They  are  in  their  nature  completely  gregarious ; 
but  they  flock  together,  and  assemble  on  the 
coast  at  dijSerent  periods,  and  in  distinct  classes. 
The  males  of  the  largest  size  go  on  shore  about 
the  middle  of  November j  to  wait  the  arrival  of 
ihe  feknales,  which  of  necessity  must  soon  follow, 
for  tiie  purpose  of  bringing  forth  their  young. 
These,  in  the  early  part  of  December^  begin  to 
land;  and  they  are  no  sooner  out  of  the  water  thsui 
Aey  are  taken  possession  of  by  the  males,  who 
have  many  serious  battles  with  each  other,  in 
procuring  their  respective  seraglios ;  and,  by  a 
peculiar  instinct,  they  carefully  protect  the  fe- 
males under  their  charge  during  the  whole  period 
of  gestation. 

By  the  end  of  December^  all  the  female  seals 
have  accomplished  the  purpose  of  their  landing. 
The  time  of  gestation  may  be  considered  twelve 
irionths,  and  they  seldom  have  more  than  one  at 


a  time,  which  they  suckle  and  rear  apparently 
with  great  affection.  By  the  middle  of  February, 
Ae  yoimg  are  able  to  take  the  water,  and  after 
being  taught  to  swim  by  the  mother,  they 
abandon  them  on  the  shore,  where  they  remain 
till  their  coats  of  fur  and  hair  are  completed. 
During  the  latter  end  oi  February ,  what  are  calL 
ed  the  dog  seals  go  on  shore;  these^  are  the 
young  seals  of  the  two  preceding  years,  and 
such  males  as,  from  their  want  of  age  and 
strength,  are  not  allowed  to  attend  the  pregnant 
females. 

These  young  seals  come  on  shore  for  the  pur- 
pose  of  renewing  their  annual  coats,  which  be- 
ing done  by  the  end  of  April,  they  take  to  the 
water,  and  scarcely  any  are  seeA  on  shore  agsdn 
till  the  end  of  June,  when  some  young  males 
come  up  and  go  off  alternately. 

They  continue  to  do  this  for  six  or  seven 
weeks,  and  the  shores  are  then  again  abandoned 
till  the  end  of  August,  when  a  herd  of  small 
young  seals  of  both  sexes  come  on  shore  for 
about  five  or  six  weeks ;  —  soon  after,  they  retire 
to  the  water.  The  large  male  seals  take  up  their 
places  on  shore,  as  has '  been  before  described, 
which  completes  the  intercourse  all  clai^ses  have 
with  the  shore  during  the  whole  year. 

The  young  are  at  first  black,  in  a  few  weeks 
they  become  grey,  and  sOon  after  obtain  their 


140  THE   SOUTH   SHETLANDS  J 

coat  of  hair  and  fun  M.  Buffon  describes  the 
longevity  of  the  seal  to  be  even  so  great  as  a 
hundred  years.  *  I  have  estimated  the  female  seal 
to  be  in  general  at  its  full  growth  within  four 
years,  but  possibly  the  male  seal  is  much  longer, 
very  likely  five  or  six  years ;  and  some,  which  I 
have  contrasted  with  others  of  the  same  size, 
could  not,  from  their  very  old  appearance,  be  less 
than  thirty  years. 

When  these  Shetland  seals  were  first  visited, 
they  had  no  apprehension  of  danger,  from  meet- 
ing men ;  in  fact,  they  would  lie  still  while  their 
neighbours  were  killed,  and  skinned  j  but  latterly 
they  had  acquired  habits  for  counteracting  dan- 
ger, by  placing  themselves  on  rocks,  from  which 
they  could,  in  a  moment,  precipitate  themselves 
into  the  .water.  The  agiUty  of  this  creature  is 
much  greater  than,  from  their  appearance,  an 
observer  would  anticipate.  I  have  seen  them, 
indeed,  oflen  escape  from  men  running  fast  in 
pursuit  to  kill  them.  The  absurd  story,  that  seals 
in  general  defend  themselves  by  throwing  stones 
at  their  pursuers  with  their  tails,  may  be  explain- 
ed in  this  way ;  that  when  the  animal  is  chased 
on  a  stony  beach,  their  mode  of  propelling  them- 
selves is  by  drawing  their  hinder  flippers  for- 
ward, thereby  shortening  the  body,  and  project- 
ing themselves  from  the  tail,  which,  when  re- 
lieved by  the  ejSbrt  of  the  fore  flippers,  throws 


FJUa   SEALS.  141 

up  a  quantity  of  stones  to  the  distance  of  sohie 
yards. 

Their  senses  of  smell  and  hearing  are  acute^ 
and  in  instinct  they  are  little  inferior  to  the  dog ; 
that  is,  I  judge  their  sagacity  in  the  water  much 
exceeds  that  which  they  exhibit  on  the  shore;  for 
though  they  are  fitted  to  remain  a  certain  time 
on  liand,  their  natural  element  is  the  water.  In 
proof  of  their  docility,  I  may  mention  that  I  have 
reared  several  young  ones  from  three  or  four 
weeks  old,  to  the  age  of  two  months,  which  were 
so  tame  as  to  eat  out  of  the  hand  with  consider- 
able fondness  ;  but  by  some  accident  they  were 
allowed  to  fall  or  walk  overboard. 

These  fur  seals  may  be  distinguished  from  the 
hair  seals  of  this  hemisphere  by  their  being  ra- 
ther of  a  smaller  size,  and  having  the  nose  smaller 
and  more  pointed.  In  swimming  they  have  a 
jumping  motion  like  that  of  the  porpoise. 

The  quantity  of  seals  taken  off  these  islands, 
by  vessels  from  different  parts,  duritig  the  years 
1821  and  1822,  may  be  computed  at  320,000, 
and  the  quantity  of  sea^elephant  oil,  at  940  tons. 
This  valuable  animal,  the  fur  seal,  might,  by  a 
law  similar  to  ithat  which  restrains  fishermen  in 
the  size  of  the  mesh  of  their  net,  have  been 
spared  to  fender  annuially  100,000  furs,  for  many 
years  to  come.  This  would  have  followed  fronii 
not  killing  the  mothei^  till  the  young  were 


142  THE   SOUTH   8HETLANDS; 

able  to  take  tbe  water;  and  even  then,  only 
those  which  appeared  to  be  old,  together  with  a 
proportion  of  the  males,  thereby  diminishing 
their  total  number,  but  in  slow  progression.  This 
system  is  practised  at  the  river  of  Plata.  The  is*- 
land  of  Lobos,  in  the  mouth  of  that  river,  contains 
a  quantity  of  seals,  and  is  farmed  by  the  Govei> 
nor  of  Monte  Video,  under  certain  restrictions, 
that  the  hunters  shall  not  take  them  but  at  stated 
periods,  in  order  to  prevent  the  animals  from  be- 
ing exterminated.  The  system  of  extermination 
was  practised,  however,  at  Shetland ;  for  when- 
ever a  seal  reached  the  beach,  of  whatever  deno- 
mination, he  was  immediately  killed,  and  his  skin 
taken  ^  and  by  this  means,  at  the  end  of  the 
second  year,  the  animals  became  nearly  extinct ; 
the  young  having  lost  their  mothers  when  only 
three  or  four  days  old,  of  course  all  died,  which 
at  the  lowest  calculation  exceeded  100,000. 

I  have  mentioned  that  the  only  species  of  seal 
found  on  these  islands,  is  that  possessing  the  fqr; 
but  a  creature  was  reported  to  have  been  seen  by 
one  of  my  crew,  which,  according  to  his  account 
of  it,  must  have  been  a  non-descript. 

A  boat's  crew  were  employed  on  Hall  Island, 
and  the  man  who  saw  this  animal  was  left  cm 
one  nde  of  the  island  to  take  care  of  sotne  pro- 
duce, while  the  officers  and  the  rest  of  the  crew 
were  engaged  on  the  other  side. 


NOK*OS$CRIPT  AKIMALt  H& 

The  sailor  had  gone  to  bed,  and  about  fO 
o'clock  he  heard  a  noise  resembling  human  cries* 
and  as  day-light,  in  these  latitudes,  never  disap* 
pears  at  this  season,  he  rose,  and  looked  around, 
but  on  seeing  no  person,  he  returned  to  bed; 
presently  he  heard  the  noise  again,  and  rose  a 
second  time,  but  still  saw  nothing.  Conceiving, 
however,  the  possibility  of  a  boat  being  upset, 
and  that  some  of  the  crew  might  be  clinging  to 
some  detached  rocks,  he  walked  along  the  beach 
a  few  steps,  and  heard. the  noise  more  distinctly^ 
but  in  a  musical  strain. 

On  searching  around  he  saw  an  object  lyii^ 
on  a  rock,  a  dozen  yards  from  the  shore,  at  which 
he  was  somewhat  frightened.  The  face  and 
shoulders  appeared  of  human  form,  and  of  a  red* 
dish  colour ;  over  the  shoulders  hung  long  green 
hair ;  the  tail  resembled  that  of  the  seal,  but  the 
extremities  of  the  arms  he  could  not  see  dis- 
tinctly. The  creature  continued  to  make  a  musi* 
cal  noise  while  he  gazed  about  two  minutes,  and 
on  perceiving  him  it  disappeared  in  an  instant. 
Immediately  when  the  man  saw  his  officer^  he 
told  this  wilcj  tale,  the  trutili  of  which  was,  ot 
course,  doubted ;  but  to  add  weight  to  his  testi- 
mony,  (being  a  catholic)  he  made  a  cross  on  the 
sand,  which  he  kissed  in  form  of  making  oath  to 
1^  truth  of  his  statement* 

When  the  story  was  told  me,  I  ridiculed  it;  but. 


144  THE   SOUTH   SHETLANDS. 

by  way  of  diversion,  1  sent  for  the  sailor  who  saw 
this  non-descript  into  the  cabin,  smd  questioned 
him  respecting  it.  He  told  me  the  stoiy  as  I 
have  related  it,  and  in  so  clear  and  positive  a 
manner,  making  oath  as  to  the  truth,  that  I  con- 
cluded he  must  really  have  seen  the  animal  he 
described,  or  that  it  must  have  been  the  eiffects  of 
a  disturbed  imagination. 

The  small  species  of  penguins  are  here  abund- 
ant; and  of  sea  fowl,  the  following  may  be  enu- 
merated :  aglets  ;  Port  .Egmont  hens  j  white 
pigeons ;  the  grey  peterel,  called  by  sailors 
the  nelly ;  snowbirds ;  and,  on  the  coast,  I  have 
seen  blue  peterels. 

Several  pieces  of  wreck  have  been  seen  on  the 
western  islands,  and  apparently  of  the  scantling 
of  a  74  gun  ship,  which  makes  it  too  probable  that 
these  are  the  remains  of  a  Spanisk  ship  of  war  of 
that  rate,  which  has  been  missing  since  the  year 
1818,  when  she  was  on  her  passage  to  Lima. 

On  a  beach  in  the  principal  island^  which  I 
named  Smith's  Island,  in  honor  of  the  discoverer, 
were  found  a  quantity  of  seals*  bones,  which  ap- 
peared to  have  been  killed  some  years  before^ 
probably  to  sustain  the  life  of  some  ship-wrecked 
crew ;  suggesting  the  melancholy  reflection  that 
some  unfortunate  human  beings  had  ended  their; 
days  on  this  coast  In  the  year  1 820,  the  first  time? 
these  islands  were  viated  for  their  produce,  four 


DEPARTURE  FOR  TIERRA  DEL  FUEGO.   145 

ships  were  totally  lost.  Part  of  the  crews  of 
these  vessels  remained  duripg  the  winter  of 
1821,  but  notwithstanding  every  precaution  they 
could  take,  with  a  strong  house  and  ample  sup- 
plies, they  suffered  severely.  The  range  of  land 
which  lies  SO  leagues  to  the  south  of  the  northern 
cluster,  consists  of  islands,  and  has  been  visited 
for  produce,  but  has  not  been  accurately  des- 
cribed. It  can  seldom  be  approached  on  account 
of  ice,  and  the  mountains  are  constantly  covered 
\vith  snow. 

No  farther  circumstances  worthy  of  remark 
having  fallen  within  the  sphere  of  my  observ- 
ation on  these  inhospitable  shores,  I  shall  now 
return  to  the  situation  of  the  ship  on  the  evening 
of  the  l6th  of  November,  when  we  had  taken 
our  departure  from  these  islands,  bound  to 
Tierra  del  Fuego. 


146 


CHAR  VI. 

VOYAGE  TO  TISRRA  DEL  7UEOO.  —  CAPE  HORN.  —  THE 
natives;  their  visit,  manners,  &C. —  PUNISHMENT 
OF    A   THIEF,     AND    ITS    GOOD    EFFECT. NATIVE    DOGS.. 

—  THE   HABITS,   BEHAVIOUR,   &C.   OF   THE   FUEGIANS. — 
ISLANDS    OF    ST.    FRANCIS.  —  CHANGE    OF     ANCHORAGE. 

—  OTHER   TRIBES.  —  CANOE. STATE  OF   SOCIETY,   &C. 

— •  ISLANDS   OF  DIEGO   RAMIREZ.  —  LANGUAGE    OF     THE 

FUEGIANS     AND     CURIOUS    HEBREW   ANALOGIES. MUSIC 

AND     ITS     EFFECTS.  —  NEW     CLAY     CLOTHING.  —  NECK- 
LACES,   BASKETS,    BOWS.  —  ARRIVAL   OF   THE   BEAUFOY. 

—  FUEGIAN     SETTLEMENT.    —   VESSELS      SEPARATE.  

FACE     OF     THE     COUNTRY.  -—  EFFECT     OF     CLIMATE    ON 
THE  FUEGIAN  CHARACTER. 

The  wind  was  moderate  and  easterly  till  the 
18th  in  the  afternoon,  when  it  shifted  into  the 
S.W.  Our  latitude  at  noon  by  observation  was 
58**  44',  and  longitude  by  chronometers  66"*  1', 
by  D.R.  67®  27V  the  variation  at  4  P.M.  was 
27°  aO'.  On  the  20th  the  wind  shifted  into  the 
N.W.  quarter,  and  we  stood  to  the  W.S.  W.  On 
the  21st,  in  the  morning,  the  wind  again  shifting 
to  S.W.  we  tacked  to  the  northward,  and 
about  four  in  the  afternoon  we  saw  Cape  Horn, 
bearing  N.  by  W.  about  ten  leagues ;  in  this 
position  the  Cape  appears  conspicuous,  with 
the  hills  of  Hermit's  Island  just  above  the 
horizon.    See  Views  of  Land,  19-     Cape  Horn 


CAPE   HORN.  J  147 

is  Remarkable  for  its  truly  imposing  figure  and 
situation,  terminating  the  greatest  north  and 
south  extension  of  land  on  the^  globe.  The 
many  disasters  which  have  befallen  ships  off 
this  cape,  the  difficulty  of  getting  round  it  to 
the  westward,  and  above  all,  the  sufferings  of  the 
fleet  under  Lord  Anson,  and  in  the  expeditions 
of  Pizarro,  induce  people  to  consider  this  pro- 
montory with  more  than  common  interest. 

The  weather  proved  squally  and  unsettled 
through  the  night  of  the  23d,  and  we  retained 
an  offing.  At  day-light  the  wind  blew  strong 
from  S.S.W.,  and  we  bore  up  for  the  bay  of 
St.  Francis,  which  we  reached  by  two  o^clock  in 
the  aflfcernoon,  and  anchored  in  Wigwam  or  St. 
Martin's  Cove,  in  16  fathoms  water,  over  a  bot- 
tom of  sand  and  mud. 

On  the  25th  we  were  employed  in  wooding 
and  watering  the  vessels,  and  during  the  day  I 
made  observations  for  latitude,  longitude,  and 
variation.  On  the  south  side  of  the  harbour  is  a 
small  cavity  in  the  rock,  in  which  I  placed  the 
compass  for  taking  a  set  of  azimuths,  but  on  ob- 
serving the  sun  to  bear  N.  @9  W.  at  noon,  I  sus- 
pected the  rock  to  be  magnetic,  and  took  a 
portion  of  it  on  board  to  ascertain  the  fact.  I 
stripped  the  card  off  the  needle  in  order  to  make 
it  more  susceptible,  and  found  it,  as  I  expected, 
slightly  acted  upon  by  the  rock.     I  next  fixed 

L  2 


148  THE   FVE6IANS. 

thfe  place  for  observation  at  the  head  of  the  har- 
bour, where  there  was  probably  no  local  attract 
tion,  and  found  the  variation  to  be  2S''  4'  east :. 
the  latitude  in  the  same  situation  was  55"*  ^3^  37% 
and  the  longitude  by  chronometers  was.  67*" 
29' 45''. 

We  took  the  opportunity  of  being  in  port  to 
repair  farther  the  damage  the  vesseU  had  sus- 
tained by  the  ice,  though  we  were  not  at  leisure 
to  lighten  the  brig  as  much  as  was  required  for 
making  effectual  repairs. 

On  the  26th  the  weather  was  remarkably  fine,> 
and  the  wind  blew  lightly  between  S.S.W.  (by 
west),  and  N.N. W.  In  the  afternoon  the  Beau- 
foy  sailed^  to  examine  some  neighbouring  islands 
for  seal-furs.  She  had  not  passed  out  of  sight, 
when  to  my  astonishment  I  saw  two  native 
canoes  paddling  towards  us;  several  of  the 
l^rig's  crew  were  on  board  the  Beaufoy,  but  as  I. 
considered,  that  if  properly  treated,  nothing  hos- 
tUe  need  be  feared  from  the  strangers,  in  what^ 
ever  numbers  they  might  appear,  I  did  not  recal. 
them. 

It  was  not  long  before  the  Fuegians  arrived 
within  hearing;  and  soon  made  themselves 
known  by  a  singing  noise,  accompanied  with  a 
variety  of  gestures,  which  as  I  afterwards  learned 
were  symbols  of  friendship.  They  presently 
peddled  within  eight  or  ten  yards  of  the  ship. 


tllE   PUE6IAN   LADIES.  149 

tnd  I  desired  dur  men  to  make  iriendly  signs  to 
them  in  return,  conveying  a  wish  for  them  tb 
come  on  board ;  but  they  would  not  approach. 
Amazement  was  apparent  in  all  their  actions ;  and 
they  seemed  so  agitated  that,  for  a  full  quarter 
of  an  houri  they  continued  gabbling  without  the 
smallest  intermission.  At  length  their  wondeif 
at  our  persons  having  in  some  degree  subsided, 
they  paddled  fore  and  aft  about  the  ship,  and 
were  to  all  appearance  undecided  whether  tiie 
the  vessel  was  dead  or  alive  j  for  never  having 
seen  a  ship  before,  it  could  not  be  expected  that 
they  should  at  once  reason  from  the  analogy 
which  their  canoes  afforded.  Finally  having 
acquired  more  confidence  they  came  on  the 
starboard  side,  and  two  of  the  men  ventured  on 
board.  From  their  very  mii^erable  appearance, 
I  thought  the  best  office  I  could  do  them,  would 
be  to  give  them  something  to  eat  and  drink«  I 
therefore  had  beef,  bread,  ajad  wine  brought, 
and  helped  them  plentifully.  Of  the  be.ef  they 
eat  a  IHtle,  but  neither  the  good  Madeira  wine^ 
nor  the  bread  was  acceptable. 

I  soon  saw  that  they  were  particular  in  keq>- 
iiig  their  women  in  their  canoes,  at  which  I  was 
not  sorry,  as  from  the  jealous  diifiosition  of* 
savages  in  general,  it  was  advisable  for  us  to 
avoid  any  intercourse  with  their  wives.  I  did 
not,  however^  neglect  helping  the  ladies  to. a 

L-3 


iSQ  THS  natives'  astonishment. 

little  wine,  which  X  gave  them  in  a  japanned  cup  j 
and  this  utensil  uppeai^ed  so  marvellously  fine 
in  their  eyes,  that  they  spilled  the  wine  in  ex- 
amining it,  and  cunningly  retained  it.  I  did 
not  attempt  to  recover  the  cup,  as  I  thought 
they  were  certainly  in  want  of  it  for  drinking 
with ;  but  op  the  following  day  I  saw  it  in  about 
a  do2en  stripes  suspended  at  the  women's  necks* 

The  men  seemed  astonished  at  all  they  saw, 
and  every  kind  of  iron  work  attracted  their  at^ 
tention  more  than  any  thing  else — a  cast  iron  pot 
of  200  gallons  surprised  them  so  much,  that  they 
were  even  afraid  to  approach  it.  Perceiving  their 
fondness  for  this  metal,  and  having  a  quantity 
of  hoops  on  board,  I  gave  each  of  them  a  piece, 
with  which  they  were  quite  delighted ;  and  soon 
after  receiving  the  present  they  left  us,  and  re- 
paired to  their  wigwams,  which  were  situated  at 
the  head  pf  the  harbour.    , 

On  the  following  morning,'  the  27th,  by  suo- 
rise,  they  w^re  lying  off,  making  a  great  shout- 
ing, expressive  of  their  anxiety  to  see  us,  and 
to  get  on  board.  I  had  given  orders  that  they 
should  not  be  admitted  till  our  crew  were  called 
on  deck  in  the  pioming,  which  was  usually  at 
four  o'clock.  In  the  course  of  a  little  time  a 
third  canoe  was  seen  approaching,  which  our 
first  visitors  met  at  some  distance  from  the  ship ; 
and  by  their  coming  immediately  on  board  all 

5 


THE   MIRROR.  151 

together,  it  was  evident  that  the  latter  had  been 
informed  by  their  countrymen  of  the  friendly 
reception  they  had  met  with.  The  number  of 
our  present  visitors  was  twenty- two  men,  women, 
and  children,  and  now  that  they  had  acquired 
confidence  in  our  amicable  intentions,  they  be- 
came interesting  and  amusing.  1  gave  them  all 
in  turns  a  sight  of  the  cabin ;  and  the  bright  stove, 
and  the  looking-glass,  were  objects  that  pleased, 
them  greatly.  The  monkey  trick  of  looking  be- 
hind the  mirror  for  the  reflected  object  was  fre- 
quently practised  j  and  though  they  had  no  doubt 
often  seen  themselves  reflected  in  the  water,  yet 
having  never  before  observed  so  sudden  and  dis- 
tinct an  appearance,  their  intuitive  judgment  was 
not  sufficiently  acute  to  satisfy  them  of  the  simi- 
larity. 

Knowing  the  propensity  Indians  generally 
have  to  stealing,  a  watch  was  kept  over  them  j 
but  on  the  boatswain  returning  from  the  head  of 
the  harbour,  he  informed  me  that  they  had 
stripped  a  barrel  of  the  hoops.  An  adept  in  the 
art  of  pilfering  had  also  displayed  no  mean  talent 
in  stealing  an  iron  belaying  pin,  notwithstanding 
the  strictness  of  the  look-out. 

I  judged  it  proper  to  impress  them  with  an 
idea  of  the  offence  of  stealing  ;  and  accordingly 
placed  this  criminal  in  the  main  rigging,  and  gave 
him  a  smart  lash  with  a  cat  of  nine  tails,  making 

L  4 


152  SAWING   AMUSES   THR  NATIVES. 

him  understand  that  it  was  a  punishment  for  the 
crime  of  which  he  had  been  guilty.  This  gentle 
chastisement  had  the  desired  effect,  for  they  were 
ever  after  afraid  even  to  lift  a  piece  of  iron  with- 
out permission* 

On  the  27th  the  weather  was  fine  with  a  fresh 
breeze  from  the  S.W.  Our  carpenters  were 
employed  felling  trees,  and  sawing  them  into 
boards.  The  operation  of  sawing  amused  our 
friends,  the  Fuegians,  greatly,  and  their  attach* 
ment  to  the  saw  would  no  doubt  have  led  to  the 
stealing  of  it,  had  we  not  always  brought  it  on 
board  at  night.  This  day  only  men  and  boys 
came  on  board  j  the  cause  of  leaving  their  women 
behind  I  could  not  learn,  but  they  were  probably 
employed  in  some  domestic  concerns. 

Among  this  tribe  was  a  fine  grown  boy  of 
about  the  age  of  fourteen,  whom  I  .would  have 
liked  much  to  remain  with  us,  but  a^  soon  as  he 
understood  my  desire  he  returned  to  his  canoe, 
and  I  never  afterwards  could  persuade  him  to 
come  on  board. 

On  the  28th  the  wind  was  variable,  having 
gone  completely  round  the  compass,  and  blowing 
fresh.  This  morning  all  the  Fuegians  came 
along  side,  and  in  a  different  dress,  or  ratjber 
colouring,  for  the  women  had  changed  the  hue 
of  their  countenances  from  red  to  jet  black,  and 
the  men  were  decorated  with  red  and  white 


A  JfATIVE   DOG.  168 

fitreaks  ruiiDing  horizontaUy  across  the  face. 
Their  appearance  altogether  was  as  grotesque 
as  can  well  be  imagined ;  though  in  their  estima- 
tion it  was,  no  doubt,  considered  the  perfection 
0f  fashion.  In  the  early  part  of  our  acquaint- 
9Qce,  whenever  I  expressed  a  desire  for  any  of 
their  small  articles  they  gave  me  them  without 
any  return  ;  but  now  they  had  acquired  an  idea 
of  barter,  and  in  exchange  for  any  of  their  arti- 
cles  of  simple  manufacture,  they  demanded  some- 
thing bright,  such  as  buttons,  &c. ;  but  bits  of 
iron  hoops  were  particularly  objects  of  esteem, 
and  I  have  no  doubt,  but  in  this  trifle  they  con- 
<;eived  our  riches  to  consist. 

A  youth  of  engaging  features  whom  I  had  on 
board,  was  the  most  successful  in  this  traffic  j 
the  women  seemed  much  interested  with  him, 
though  I  am  at  a  loss  to  know  whether  they  were 
right  in  their  idea  of  his  sex,  as  with  them  the 
females  do  all  the  work,  and  this  youth  Was  here 
kept  in  constant  employment.  I  procured  st 
young  dog  from  them,  which  was  remarkable 
for  its  cunning;  they  have  only  one  kind  of 
this  animal,  .and  it  partakes  much  of  the  nature 
of  the  fox,  resembling  it  a  good  deal  about  th6 
head,and  beingnearly  the  size  of  the  terrier.  They 
^e  remarkably  fond  of  their  dogs  j  and  if  they 
bave  a«y  object  to  which  they  ascribe  supema- 
tutal  power^  it  may  possibly  bi^  to  them,  since 


154  PETTY    THEFTS   OF   THE   NATIVES. 

their  attention  to  them,  and  dependence  on  theni 
for  safety,  is  greater  than  could  be  expected. 

On  the  29th,  the  weather  was  fine,  and  the 
wind  from  W.S.W,  Early  in  the  morning,  the 
Beaufoy  arrived,  and  this  was  not  unobserved 
by  the  Fuegians,  who  immediately  went  on 
board,  where  they  were  kindly  received  by  the 
crew.  Curiosity  was  mutual,  and  the  sailors 
took  great  delight  in  friendly  intercourse  with 
them.  They  committed  several  petty  thefts  on 
board  the  Beaufoy;  and  one  in  particular  is 
worth  mentioning,  as  it  exhibits  in  a  remarkable 
degree  their  powers  of  imitation. 

A  sailor  had  given  a  Fuegian  a  tin  pot  full  of 
coffee,  which  he  drank,  and  was  using  all  his  art 
to  steal  the  pot.  The  sailor,  however,  recollect- 
ing after  a  while  that  the  pot  had  not  been  re- 
turned, applied  for  it,  but  whatever  words  he 
made  use  of  were  always  repeated  in  imi- 
tation by  the  Fuegian.  At  length,  he  became 
enraged  at  hearing  his  requests  reiterated,  and 
placing  himself  in  a  threatening  attitude,  in  an 
angry  tone,  he  said,  "  You  copper-coloured  ras- 
cal, where  is  my  tin  pot  ?"  The  Fuegian,  as- 
suming  the  same  attitude,  with  his  eyes  fixed  on 
the  sailor,  called  out,  "  You  copper-coloured 
rascal,  where  is  my  tin  pot?"  The  imitation 
was  so  perfect,  that  everyone  laughed,  except 
the  sailor,  who  proceeded  to  search  him,  and 


ATTEMPTED   ESCAPE.  155 

under  his  arm  he  found  the  article  missing. 
For  this  audacious  theft,  he  would  have  pu- 
nished the  mimic,  but  Mr,  Brisbane  interpose 
ing,  sent  him  into  his  canoe,  and  forbade  his 
bring  allowed  to  come  on  board  again. 

On  the  2d  of  December^  about  mid-day,  the 
Fuegians  were  seen  close  to  the  shore,  paddling 
their  canoes  out  of  harbour,  without  having 
previously  shown  any  intention  of  leaving  the 
place.  This  they  were,  no  doubt,  considering 
as  a  fortunate  escape,  for  notwithstanding  a  strict 
watch  had  been  kept  over  them,  during  their 
^tay  with  us,  I  had  reason  to  suspect  that 
they  had  stolen  several  small  articles,  and  were 
now  thinking  to  get  clear  off  with  their  booty. 
Instead  of  the  roar  which  they  generally  kept 
up,  not  a  voice  was  to  be  heard  amongst  them, 
and  the  canoes  were  so  close  to  the  shore,  that 
we  could  scarcely  discern  them.  I  immediately 
ordered  the  boat  to  be  manned,  and  put  off. 
The  Fuegians  were  now  paddling  with  all  their 
strength  to  get  beyond  our  reach,  but  in  vain ; 
we  soon  overtook  them,  and  they  looked  as  if 
they  expected  to  be  searched  for  stolen  goods ; 
but  they  were  not  a  little  sui-prised  when,  instead 
of  this,  I  presented  each  of  the  men  with  a  piece 
of  hoop,  and  each  of  the  women,  by  way  of  a 
medal,  with  a  brightened  halfpenny,  with  a  hole 
punched  for  a  string,  for  suspending  it  to  the  neck. 


156  THE   CUSTOMS   OP  THESE   SAVAGES  i 

They  were  very  grateful  for  these  trifles,  and  I 
took  farewell  of  them  with  a  hearty  shake  of 
the  hand.  Being  now  at  ease,  they  commenced 
their  usual  roar  and  paddled  off. 

Having  related  these  incidents  as  they  oc- 
curred, I  may,  with  propriety,  say  something  of 
the  impressions  I  received  as  to  the  character 
of  this  tribe. 

I  would  willingly,  for  the  honour  of  human 
nature,  raise  these  neglected  people  somewhat 
higher  in  the  scale  of  intellectual  estimation  than 
they  have  reached ;  but  I  must  acknowledge  their 
condition  to  be  that  of  the  lowest  of  mankind. 
At  this  age  of  the  world,  it  appears  almost  in- 
credible, and  certainly  disgraceful,  that  there 
should  still  exist  such  a  tractable  people  in 
almost  pristine  ignorance. 

As  I  found  nothing  of  foreign  manu&cture 
among  the  Fuegians,  it  may  be  reasonably  con- 
cluded that  we  were  their  first  visitors,  at  least 
of  the  present  generation.  The  savage  custom 
of  the  women,  doing  all  the  work,  prevail^  here  j 
they  paddle  the  canoes,  while  the  men  sit  at 
their  ease ;  they  gather  the  shell-fish  food,  rear 
the  children,  build  the  wigwams,  and,  in  short, 
perform  every  duty  that  requires  ex^rtion^ 
though  in  return,  however,  the  men  show  a 
good  deal  .of  affection  for  their  wives,  and  are 
careful  of  their  offspring.     An  instance  of  liieir 


THEIH   FORMS,   tEATURlSS,    AND   DR£SSES.     157 

parental  afiection  appeared  on  bccasfon  oi*  mj 
visiting  their  wigwams  one  morning  unexpect^ 
edly,  when,  supposing  that  I  had  come  on  shore 
to  steal  their  children,  they  infolded  them  in 
their  arms,  and  all  the  signs  of  amity  I  could 
express,  were  insufficient  to  induce  them  to  let 
them  go. 

The  stature  of  these  Fuegians  is  low.  I  mea- 
sured two  of  their  ordinary  sized  men,  and  found 
one  of  them  five  feet  four  inches,  and  the  other 
five  feet  five.  The  contour  of  their  faces,  and 
the  form  of  their  heads,  as  exhibited  in  thcj 
annexed  plate,  are  those  which  are  found  to  be 
peculiar  to  most  Indians  :  they  have  fiat  noses, 
small  eyes,  full  and  well  formed  chests,  small 
$rms ;  «**  their  legs  are  small  and  ill  shaped,  which' 
arises,  no  doubt,  from  the  custom  of  sitting  on 
their  calves,  in  which  situation  their  appearance 
is  truly  awkward. 

The  women  are  better  featured  than  the  men : 
many  of  their  faces  are  interesting,  and,  in  my 
opinion,  they  have  a  more  lively  sense  of  what' 
passes.  The  only  clothing  the  males  wear,  is  a 
skin  over  their  shoulders,  reaching  little  more 
than  half  way  down  the  back ;  some  have  not 
even  this  sorry  garment.  The  women  have 
generally  a  larger  skin  over  their  shoulders, 
and  are,  in  other  respects,  clothed  as  decency^ 
requires ;  and  even  the  youngest  of  their  lemale 


15&  THE   ISLANDS   OF   ST«  FRANCIS. 

children  have  the  same  covering,  which  evinces  a 
degree  of  modesty  seldom  found  amongst  untu- 
tored people. 

By  the  account  I  have  given  of  this  tribe,  the 
reader  will  be  able  to  form  a  general  idea  in  re- 
gard to  these  remote  Australians,  but  a  particu-* 
lar  relation  of  our  further  communications  with 
them  will  be  necessary  to  assist  him  in  forming 
just  conclusions ;  and  as  a  single  glance  is  not 
sufficient  to  enable  an  observer  to  decide  accu- 
rately, I  shall  describe  minutely  their  behaviour 
and  inclinations,  by  which  alone  a  true  estimate 
of  their  character  is  to  be  obtained. 

On  the  2d  of  December,  the  weather  being 
fine,  Captain  Brisbane  accompanied  me  in  a 
whale-boat  up  the  bay,  and  assisted  me  in  making 
observations  on  its  navigation.  From  a  consi* 
derable  height,  we  perceived  several  channels 
running  through  the  supposed  termination,  form- 
ing a  cluster  of  islands,  which,  being  separated 
from  the  main  islands  of  Tierra  del  Fuego,  by  a- 
navigable  strait,  may,  with  some  propriety,  be 
called  the  islands  of  St.  Francis,  after  the  name 
of  the  sound,  which  appears  to  have  been  first 
entered  in  the  year  1714. 

Having  sounded  a  safe  anchorage,  in  very 
smooth  water,  which  the  accompanying  chart 
exhibits,  we  returned  on  board. 

At  10  in  the  morning  of  the  3d,  we  weighed,: 


ILDEFONSOS   ISLANDS    AND   TURN   POINT.     '159 

and  both  vessels  proceeded  with  a  moderate 
breeze  from  N.E.  towards  the  islands  of  Ilde- 
fonsos.  At  6  P.M.,  Cape  Horn  bore  E.  ^  S. 
distance  six  leagues.  In  the  morning  of  the 
4th,  we  were  within  two  and  a  half  miles  of 
the  Ildefonsos,  and  each  vessel  sent  a  boat  on 
shore.  We  continued  off  these  islands,  with 
pleasant  weather  till  the  7th,  when  I  stood  over, 
with  the  Jane,  to  Tierra  del  Fuego,  a  distance  of 
sixteen  miles,  to  search  fpr  an  anchorage.  The 
principal  officers  being  absent,  I  sent  the  boat- 
swain, with  a  whale-boat,  among  some  islands 
which  were  likely  to  afford  what  I  sought.  He 
presently  returned  with  a  report,  of  having  foupd 
a  cove,  round  a  point,  which  I  called  Turn  Point, 
with  good  bottom,  in  which  several  vessels  might 
anchor.  On  this  we  made  all  sail  back  to  the 
Ildefonsos,  and  after  having  received  our  boats 
on  board,  with  a  quantity  of  fur  seal  skins,  both 
vessels  made  sail  to  Turn  Point.  It  was  12 
o'clock  before  we  reached  the  cove  in  which  we 
were  to  bring  up,  and^  it  being  dark,  I  desired 
the  boatswain  to  inform  me  when  he  thought  we 
were  within  a  proper  distance  to  drop  the  an- 
chor, as  we  could  see  the  land  but  imperfectly ; 
but  through  his  indistinct  recollection  of  the 
place  we  were  close  to  the  surf  on  the  beach 
before  he  gave  any  intimation,  and  it  was  only 
by  dropping  the  anchor  at  the  instant  our  situ- 


160  BLUNDER  COVE. 

ation  was  discerned,  though  with  the  topsail  at 
the  masthead,  that  we  were  prevented  from  go- 
ing on  the  rocks.  Fortunately  the  wind  was  light, 
.aiid  after  the  sails  were  taken  in,  by  means  of  a 
stream  anchor  laid  out,  we  moved  the  vessel  into 
safety.  I  was  angry  with  the  boatswain  for  his 
mismanagement,  and  that  he  might  improve  his 
judgment,  by  being  reminded  of  his  mistake,  I 
called  this  place  Blunder  Cove.  In  justice  to 
this  person,  however,  I  must  say,  he  was  a  good 
seaman,  and  well  disposed;  his  error  in  judg* 
ment  arose,  from  having  formed  an  opinion  of 
the  capacity  of  the  anchorage  from  a  boat; — for 
Instead  of  being  large  enough  for  several  vessels, 
there  was  scarcely  room  for  one.  The  altitude 
of  the  eye  above  the  horizon  is  frequently  very 
delusive  in  the  estimation  of  space,  if  the  angle 
under  which  objects  ai-e  seen  be  not  particularly 
attended  to.  The  Beauf by  had  anchored  a  little 
to  the  outside  of  us,  and  the  following  morn- 
ing, having  determined  on  sending  her  again 
to  Shetland,  arrangements  were  made  for  that 
purpose.  I  fully  expected  that  the  coast  would 
be  clear  of  ice,  by  the  time  she  would  arrive, 
which  would  be  within  a  few  days  of  mid- 
summer. 

As  I  did  not  consider  this  anchorage  conve- 
nient, I  went  in  a  whale-boat  in  search  of  one 
more  commodious ;  and  little  more  than  a  mile 


A  NBW:  TRIBE.  OF  FUEGIANS.  l6l  • 

to  the  easiXvard/  I  fbiind  one;  with'  a  clear 
bottom  of  sapd  and  mud  beneath  in  twenty 
&thoms  watei',  within  three  cables'  length  of  the 
shore.  We  were  taking»  the  depth  of  water  with 
the.  lead,  when  among  the  kelp  we  saw  four  ca- 
noes of  Fuegians.  They,  were  a  little  startled  at 
first  observing  us ;  but,  according  to  the  Fuegiaa 
mode  of  salutation,  they  soon  commenced  shout- 
ing, and  making  ludicrous  attitudes  expressive 
of  joy.  We  rowed  within  twelve  or  fourteen 
yards  of  them,  and  held  up  some  pieces  of  iron 
hoop,  which  caught  their  attention.  Like  our 
former  visitors,  jealousy,  or  particular  care  of 
their  women,  seemed  a  principal  consideration  j 
for  the  men  all  shifted  into  two  canoes,  and 
came  to  us,  leaving  the  women  behind.  We 
soon  inspired  them  with  confidence,  and  pointed 
out  the  vessels,  making  signs  to  them  to  follow 
us,  which  they  hurriedly  dirt,  bringing  their  wo- 
men with  them  J  and  as  the  men  on  this  occasion 
assisted  to  paddle  the  canoes,  they  were  almost 
able  to  keep  pace  with  our  whale-boat  against 
a  head-sea.  This  tribe  being  strangers,  and  of 
better  stature  than  those  we  had  formerly  met 
with,  new  interest  was  created  in  our  intercourse 
with  them.  From  the  astonishment  they  exhibited, 
and  from  their  not  having  the  smallest  article  of 
any  thing  foreign  with  them,I  am  inclined  to  think 
that^like  the  others,  they  had  never  seen  strangers 

M 


162  A   CAMOE   PURCHA8SD 

before.  They  possessed  a  variety  of  articles  of 
their  ownmanufacture,  for  which  we  gave  in 
exchange  some  thiqgs  ahnost  useless  to  us,  but 
very  interesting  to  them. 

Though  I  was  anxious  to  give  them  all  the 
things  we  could  spare,  which  might  be  of  value 
to  them,  bits  of  iron  hoop  I  knew  were  the  most 
useful,  as  the  only  material  for  cutting  which  they 
possessed  was  the  muscle-shell.  I  have  no  doubt 
that  the  articles  they  received  from  us  wiU,  for 
many  years  to  come,  bear  testimony  to  future 
visitors  of  our  friendly  intercourse. 

As  in  consequence  of  the  separation  of  the 
Beaufoy  we  should  be  left  with  but  two  boats,  I 
considered  that,  in  the  event  of  their  being  ab- 
sent, ouQ  of  the  Fuegian  canoes  might  be  use- 
ful, and  I,  therefore,  set  about  purchasing  a  new 
one  from  them.  As  it  appeared  to  have  cost  them 
much  labour  in  the  construction,  I  could  ndt 
but  be  liberal  in  my  oflFer,  and  I  presented  them 
with  two  full  barrel  hoops,  at  which  they  shouted 
for  joy,  and  in  less  than  five  minutes  the  family, 
with  all  itheir  utensils,  were  shifted  into  another 
canoe,  and  the  purchased  one  was  ready  for 
delivery.  I  ordered  it  to  be  hoisted  in,  and  was 
surprised  to  find  it  heavy ;  but  in  getting  it  on 
deck,  I  found  a  platform  of  clay,  the  whole 
length  of  the  bottom,  about  six  inches  deep: 
this  was  intended  as  ballast,  and  to  preserve  the 


AND  DlMCAlB^D.  l6d 

bottom  g^itist  the  fire^  which  they  constantly 
keep  in  the  clay.  The  length  of  tMs  canoe  was 
twelve  feet  four  inches^  and  at  the  broadest 
part  two  feet  two  inches  j  it  was  built  of  a  strong 
birch  bark,  which  appe^ed  broader  than  the 
trees  of  this  neighbourhood  afforded,  and  water 
probably  procured  from  the  interior.  Three 
pieces  composed-  the  whole  vessel,  one  piece 
ibniied  the  bottom,  and  two  the  sides ;  all  sewed 
together  with  tough  twigs.  The  ribs  or  timbers? 
were  of  a  semicircular  form,  and  placed  with 
their  flat  sides  downwards,  and  in  contact  with 
each  other,  in  a  vertical  form ;  so  that,  with  the 
cement  of  clay,  the  canoe  is  rendered  strong, 
and  capable  of  going  against  the  wind  at  a 
quick  rate.  The  internal  arrangement  of  com- 
partments seems  orderly.  The  fishing  utensils 
occupy  the  first  division ;  in  the  next  sits  the 
female,  who  uses  the  foremost  paddle :  the  third 
division  is  occupied  as  the  fire-place ;  the  fourth 
is  the  bailing  well,  where  the  water  is  collected 
to  be  thrown  out  ^  and  next  follows  the  place 
where  the  men  sit  j  in  the  fifth  division  sits  the 
female,  who  uses  the  afler  paddle;  and  last  of 
all  is  the  afler-locker,  in  which  they  keep  all 
their  valuables.  Their  spear  poles  are  gene- 
rally placed  projecting  over  the  stern. 

Having  secured  the  canoe  and  the  paddles,  I 
returned  to  the  contemplation  of  the  sellers, 

M  2 


l64f'  INSTANCES    OF   APPETITE, 

who,  I  was  glad  to  see,  were  quite  merry,  and' 
seemingly  happy  in  the  possession  of  the  hoops 
with  which  I  had  paid  them. 
■  Hunger  now  beginning  to  pinch  them,  they 
turned  their  Wtention  to  some  of  the  crew,  who 
were  employed  in  splitting  whale-boiie  blades 
for  making  brooms;  and  perceiving  the  gum 
upon  the  bone,  as  it  was  still  in  the  state^  in 
which  it  was  taken  from  the  whale,  they  .seized 
this  mucilaginous  substance,  and  eat  it.;most 
ravenously:  I  thought  this  an  instance  of;  de- 
praved appetite,  but  in  another,  part  of  the  ship 
was  one  still  more  disgusting.  They  were  here; 
gobbling  np;some  dirty  rancid  seal  fat,  which; 
had  been  lying  about  for  several  days.  I  was 
willing  that  they  should  get  something  to  satisfy . 
the  cravings  of  hunger^  but  this  way  of  doing  it 
was  intolerable,  and  I  obliged  them  to  desist. 
I  then  gave  them  some  young  seal,  and  some 
br^ead,  which  they  put  away  in  their  canoe  for  a 
future  occasion. 

•:  As  we  had  no  spirits  on  board,  I  offered  them 
wine,  and  pressed  them  to  take  some,  but,  like 
their  countrymen  at  Cape  Horn,  they  merely 
sipped  a  little,  seeming  not  to  like  it. 
.  The  common  missile  weapon  of  the  Fuegians 
is  the  sling,  which  is  made  of '  the  skin  of  the 
seal  or  otter.'  It  is  generally  about  three  feet 
long,   and  of  the  common  form :    the  strings 


THE   allNe    AND   THE   SPEAR,  l6S 

are  sometimes  made  of  small  gut,  handsomely 
plaited,  and  terminated  by  knots  of  ingenious 
workmanship.  Having  procured  some  of  these 
M'eapons ;  I  prevailed  on  one  of  the  most  intelli- 
gent natives  to  show  us  their  method  of  using 
them,  which  turned  out  to  be  exactly  like  pur 
own  J  for  Mn  Brisbane,  who  well  understood  the 
art,  used  the  sling  with  as  much  effect  as  the 
Fuegians,  at  which  they  were  a  good  deal  asto- 
nished. 

Their  principal  spear-heads  are  entirely  con- 
structed of  hard  bone,  and  are  about  seven  inches 
long,  finely  pointed,  with  a  barb  on  one  side 
four  inches  from  the  point.  They  have  an- 
other kind,  with*  one  side  filled  with  small 
barbs,  made  very  sharp.  These-  are  fixed  on  a 
wooden  pole,  straight  and  smoothly  finished, 
about  ten  feet  long.  To  the  bone  is  attached  a 
string  of  hide  of  various  lengths,  and  this  weapon 
they  use  in  the  capture  of  almost  every  thing 
they  pursue.  In  using  the  spear,  they  hold  it 
nearly  by  the  middle,  and  with  the  right  eye 
cast  along  it,  they  dart  it  with  great  precision. 

After  dinner  our  people,  before  they  went 
to  duty,  sought  a  little  amusement  with  the 
strangers ;  and  one  merry  fellow  of  our  crew 
commenced  singing  and  dancing,  at  which  the 
Fuegians  formed  a  circle  round  him,  and  imi-. 
tated  his  song  and  dance  ipost  minutely;  The 
M  3 


166      A   NATIVE   WRESTLES   WITH   A   SAILOB. 

circular  movement,  however,  presently  turned 
into  a  sort  of  play,  in  which  a  sailor  and  Fue- 
gian  were  endeavouring  to  throw  each  other. 
I  at  first  fully  expected  to  see  the  Fuegian  faU, 
but  I  was  mistaken ;  he  stood  so  firm,  that  it 
appeared  more  probable  that  our  sailor,  who 
was  a  stout  athletic  young  man  of  twenty-three, 
would  ultimately  be  thrown.  The  Fuegian  wag 
evidentiy  as  skilful  as  his  adversary,  but  several 
of  the  natives,  thinking  their  countryman  in 
danger,  flew  to  his  assistance,  and  I  was  then 
obliged  to  interfere  to  bring  them  to  order. 
The  Fuegian  seemed  to  enjoy  a  triumph,  at 
which  I  was  a  little  mortified,  as  their  obtaining 
an  idea  of  having  equal  strength  and  activity 
might  prove  dangerous  to  us.  I  could  not 
avoid  being  angry  with  our  sailor  for  his  inac- 
tivity, and  desired  him  in  future  never  to  con- 
tend with  them  in  that  way. 

I  was  anxious  to  discover  if  they  had  apy  ob- 
ject  of  divine  worship,  and  accordingly  called 
them  together  about  me,  and  read  a  chapter  in 
the  Bible ;  not  that  they  were  expected  to  un» 
derstand  what  was  read,  but  it  was  proper  to 
show  them  the  Bible,  and  to  read  it,  in  connec* 
tion  with  making  signs  of  death,  resurrection, 
and  supplication  to  heaven.  They  manifested 
no  understanding  of  my  meaning,  but  as  I  read 
and  m^de  signs,  they  imitated  me,  following  me 


NO   SIGNS   OF  RELIGION.  I67 

with  a  gabble  when  reading,  raising  and  lower- 
ing their  voices  as  I  did.  During  this  time, 
however,  they  appeared  perfectly  attentive,  look- 
ing me  steadfastly  in  the  face  with  evident  marks 
of  astonishment  One  of  them  held  his  ear 
down  to  the  book,  believing  that  it  spoke,  and 
another  wished  to  put  it  into  his  canoe:  in  shorty 
they  were  all  interested  in  the  book,  and  could 
they  have  made  proper  use  of  it  I  would  wil- 
lingly have  given  it  them. 

A  thief,  however,  was  not  wanting  in  this 
party;  for  having  brought  the  tinder-box  on 
deck,  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  how  they 
obtain  a  light,  a  Fuegian  adept  stole  the  steel. 
He  was  suspected,  and  on  being  searched  it  was 
found  under  his  arm.  I  sent  him  to  his  canoe 
with  threats  of  punishment,  which  he  well  un- 
derstood. 

They  procure  fire  by  rubbing  iron  pyrites  and 
a  flinty  stone  together,  and  catching  the  sparks 
in  a  dry  substance  resembling  moss,  which  is 
quickly  ignited. 

Our  sailors  had  given  the  Fuegians  all  the  old 
clothes  they  could  spare,  and  our  visitors  soon ' 
appeared  in  costume,  one  with  only  a  jacket  on, 
another  with  but  a  waistcoat,  and  a  third  in  his 
shirt :  they  were  all  so  clothed  in  patches  that 
they  made  a  most  amusing  appearance. 

ML  4 

J 


168  STATE   OF   SOCIETY. 

Nothing  like  a  chief'  could  ,  be  made  out 
among  them^  nor  did  they  seem  to  require  one 
for  the  peace  of  their  society ;  for  their  beha- 
viour to  one  another  was  most  a^Ssctionatei  and 
all  property  seemed  to  be  poss^^sed  in  common, 
though  each  of  them  appeared  strenuous  to 
obtain  it  from  us,  without  regarding  his  ne^h- 
bour,  probably  for  the  honour  attached  to  pro- 
curing any  thing,  or  the  novelty  of  first  posses- 
sion. The  philanthropic  principle  which  these 
people  ejchibit  towards  one  another,  and  their 
inofiensive  behaviour  to  strangers,  surely  entitles 
them  to  this  observation  in  their  favour,  that 
though  they  are  the  most  distant  from  civilized 
life,  owing  principally  to  local  circumstances, 
they  are  the  most  docile. and  tractable  of  any 
savages  we  are  acquainted  with,  and  no  doubt 
might,  therefore,  be  instructed  in  those  arts 
which  raise  man  above  the  brute. 

4 

On-  the  9th  of  December^  about  noon,  we 
weighed,  and  stood  to  sea, with  the  wind  atN.NiE. . 
The  Beauf by  proceeded  to  South.  Shetland,  and 
we  stood  under  the  east  side  of  the  Ildefonsos, 
These  are  so  small  as  scarcely  to  merit  the  name 
of  islands,  the  largest  being  not  more  than  a  quar- 
ter of  a  mile  long.  They  appear  as  two  in  a  S.E. 
or  N.  W.  bearing ;  but  the  northern  one  is  merely 
a  cluster  of  detached  rocks :  the  southern  island 
is  the  largest  and  highest,  and  contains  a  quan- 


THE   ISLANDS   DIEGO    RAMIREZ.  169 

tity  of  tussac  on  its  top,  and  sea-gull  rookeries. 
These  islands  have  no  beaches,  and  canoiily  be 
landed  on  when  the  water  is  very  smooth.  Be- 
tween them  is  a  channel  of  a  mile  wide,  which 
being  rocky  should  not  be  passed  through.  At 
various  opportunities  I  ascertained  the  longitude 
of  the  southern  islands  by  lunar  observations  and 
chronometers  to  be  69"*  16'  60'\  and  the  latitude. 
SS""  50'  3S'\  and  the  variation  at  five  miles*  dis- 
tance 26®  42'  easterly.  The  rock  of  which  they 
are  composed  is  trap  porphyry,  with  porphy- 
retic  lava,  and  they  wear  a  rugged  and  varied 
form,  as  may  be  seen  by  the  annexed  view. 

In  the  night  of  the'  9th  we  stood  towards  the 
islands  Diego  Ramirez,  and  at  ^  two  o'clock  in 
the  afternoon  of  the  10th  we  sent  two  boats  on 
shore.  These  islands  extetd  N.W.  and  S.E;  for 
a  space  of  about  four,  miles,  in  which  are  three 
principal  islands,  and  a  great  many  rocks  above 
water.  The  middle  island  is  the  largest,  and 
has  tussac  and  sea  gulls  upon  it,  but  no  water. 
The  latitude  observed  places  thesouth  point  in  - 
56"*  32M5^  and  by  chronometers  in  longitude - 
68*  24' 15''.  The  composition, of  the  rock  is 
porphyritic  lava — ^^  specimens  wiere  deposited  by 
me  in  the  Edit^burgh  Collegie  Museum,  and  ,des. 
cribed  by  professor  Jamieson,  which  show  that 
volcanic  action  has  been  preseat  in  the  formation; 


170  TIEBRA   DEL   FUfiGO. 

of  these  islands.  —  A  distant  view  of  them  is 
annexed. 

The  weather  continued  fine,  and  the  wind 
from  the  northward  and  eastward  till  eight  A.M. 
on  the  llth^  when  the  wind  freshened  at  S.E., 
and  by  the  time  we  had  taken  our  boats  on* 
board,  it  blew  hard^  and  we  bore  up  for  Tierra 
del  Fuego.  On  the  12th  we  came  to  anchor 
in  Clear  Bottom  Bay,  in  20  fathoms  water,  in 
coarse  sand  witli  mud  underneath.  During  ihe 
13th  and  14th  we  had  strong  gales  from  S.W. 
to  W.,  and  we  let  go  the  sheet  anchor,  and  rode 
a  strain  upon  it.  On  the  l6th  we  had  heavy 
rain,  and  the  wind  abated.  In  consequence  of 
the  badness  of  the  weather  our  Fuegian  friends 
did  not  visit  us ;  and  having  completed  our  har- 
bour duties,  on  the  19th  we  weighed  and  pnv 
ceeded  to  the  Ildefonsos.  We  continued  un- 
der  sail  pursuing  our  business  at  these  islands 
with  favourable  weather,  and  the  winds  generally 
between  W.S.W.  and  W.N.W.  through  the  day, 
and  northerly  during  the  night*  On  the  25th 
in  the  afternoon  I  was  surprised  to  see  the  Beau- 
toy  approach  us,  as  I  fully  anticipated  that  she 
would  have  obtained  anchorage  at  South  Shet- 
land. Captain  Brisbane  informed  me  that  the 
state  of  the  ice  on  the  coast  of  Shetland  was 
nearly  the  same  as  when  we  left  it  on  the  l6th 
of  November,  although  it  was  the  18th  of  De- 


INDIAN   COVE.  J7I 

eember  when  he  quitted  the  edge  of  the  ice. 
He  ran  40  miles  along  the  coast,  but  could  no- 
where approach  the  land.  The  ice,  too,  he  re- 
ported, was  of  that  heavy  blue  description  which 
was  likely  to  require  a  long  time  to  dissolve,  and 
he  therefore  gave  up  the  idea  of  waiting.  He 
also  informed  me,  that  having  split  his  sails 
the  day  before,  on  making  this  coast,  he  had  put 
into  a  harbour  which  was  very  commodious, 
situated  11  miles  up  a  sound,  which  I  afterwards 
called  New  Year's  Sound,  having  spent  New 
Year's  Day  in  it. 

A  smooth  anchorage  being  necessary  for  ex. 
amining  the  brig,  and  making  repairs,  we  bore 
.iip  for  New  Year's  Sound,  and  at  ten  o'clock  in 
the  morning  of  the  26th  we  came  to  anchor  in 
Indian  Cove,  so  named  from  a  tribe  of  Fuegians 
living  near  it 

Having  moored  the  vessels  in  the  south  cor- 
ner of  the  cove,  we  set  about  lightening  the  brig 
forward,  in  order  to  make  repairs.  I  was  not 
astonished  when  I  found  that  the  bows  of  the 
Jane  were  much  damaged^  as  the  shocks  that 
$he  had  received  by  unavoidably  running  against 
masses  of  ice  were  likely  to  have  been  even  more 
destructive. 

The  two  lower  streaks   of  the  wales*,  on 

♦  Strong  plankii  that  go  round  a  ship,  a  little  above 
her  water  line. 


17^         A    RENEWAL   OF   THE    INTERCOURSE 

the  bows,  on  the  larboard  side,  and  one  oft 
the  starboard  side,  were  found  broken.  The 
foremost  piece  of  the  stem  was  broken,  and  the 
plank  that  was  stove  under  water  was  providen- 
tially jammed  in  between  the  timbers  in  such  a 
way  as,  with  the  plank  we  had  nailed  over  it  oYi 
the  coast  of  South  Shetland,  to  have  admitted 
very  little  water.  The  fore  part  of  the.  vessel 
being  sufficiently  out  of  the  water  to  effect  the 
repairs,  the  carpenters  were  set  to  work. 

The  Fuegians  had  of  course  noticed  the  ships 
come  in,  as  their  settlement  was  on  an  island  at 
the  entrance  of  the  cove  j  but  as  they  had  seen 
only  the  cutter  before,  they  were  cautious  and 
slow  in  coming  to  the  brig.  They  presently 
approached,  however,  in  several  canoes,  shouting 
as  usual,  and  spreading  out  their  arms  apparently 
impressed  with  a  sensation  of  fear  and  joy.  I 
soon  enticed  them  on  board,  for  though  we  did 
not  understand  each  others'  language,  yet  inter- 
course with  them  afforded  me,  through  their 
actions,  a  melancholy  pleasure  in  observing  the 
gradation  of  human  understanding. 

Among  these  I  saw  several  with  a  cast  of  fea- 
tures differing  from  the  general  character  of 
Fuegians,  having  high  noses,  and  being  somewhat 
tallet  than  the  rest 

.    It  occurred  to  me  that  these  differences  of 
features  might  be  faint  traces  of  the  Spaniards,. 


^^ 


I       ^ 


^ 


V 


^ 


WITH   THE   FUEGIANS.  173 

who  made  a  settlement  in  the  straits  of  Magellan 
244  years  ago,  but  which  lasted  only  seven  years. 
The  ancestors  of  these  Fuegians  might  have 
been  in  intercourse  with  these-  Spaniards  at  that 
period ;  arid  those  Fuegians  I  have  mentioned  as 
difiering  in  features  may  have  descended  from 
that  connection.  This  seems  probable  from  their 
having  two  Spanish  yrords  danoa,  canoe,  and 
perroj  a  dog.  My  steward,  who  was  a  Spaniard, 
addressed  them  many  times,  but  could  never 
discover  their  having  any  other  words  of  Spanish. 
I  found  great  difficulty  in  acquiring  a  slight 
knowledge  of  their  language,  from  their  con.- 
tinually  riepeating  my  words  in  imitation ;  so 
that  I  am  not  quite  decided  as  to  the  meaning 
of  many  of  their  sounds,  and  shall  therefore  not 
attempt  to  describe  them  particularly. 


Sayam 

means 

Water. 

Abatish 

Woman. 

Sheyoo 

Approbation. 

Nosh 

Displeasure. 

And  in  most  of  their  words  it  may  be  observed 
that  the  sounds  S  and  Sh  predominate. 

These  words  which  I  have  mentioned  are 
found  tp  correspond  pretty  nearly  with  wouds  of 
similar .  meaning  in  the  Hebrew  langus^e.  Thus 
I  am;  informed  that  ^amtaems  sea  or  water,'  and 
pi^a,  woman,  in -Hebrew;   and  also  that. the 


174  DERIVATIOH  OF  TREIR  LANOUAGE. 

sounds  S  and  Sh  occur  perpetually  in  that  lanp- 
guage. 

The  words  canoUf  a  canoe,  and  perrOf  a  dog, 
which  I  have  mentioned  above  as  being  derived 
from  the  Spanish,  may  also  be  ultimately  re- 
ferred to  the  same  original ;  for  in  Hebrew,  canna 
means  a  hollow  reed  or  receptacle,  a  cane,  -^^ 
and  pera^  a  wild  animaL  These  and  many  other 
words,  originally  Hebrew,  which  are  to  be  found 
in  the  Spanish  language,,  can  be  easily  accounted 
for,  as  having  found  their  >vay  into  it  throu^ 
the  Arabic,  the  language  of  the  Moors  ^  but 
how  the  Fuegians  could  get  hold  of  Hebrew 
words  is  certainly  a  question  of  some  interest  to 
philologists. 

On  the  37th  I  sent  the  Beaufoy  to  the  island 
of  Diego  Ramdrez,  with  foiuisen  men  additicmal 
from  the  brig.  In  the  forenoon  about  forty 
Fuegians  came  on  board  and  amused  themselves 
in  various  ways.  A  boy  was  kept  constantly 
watching  them,  to  prevent  thieving  ;  but  from 
their  spreading  about  the  decks,  though  I  had 
every  valuable  moveable  put  below,  he  probably 
did  not  succeed  in  preventing  stealth. 

I  had  given  the  mas6  a  present  of  some  seal's 
fat,  and  young  seal,  IdUed  when  about  three 
weeks  old ;  but  one  of  them,  an  old  fellow  about 
60,  was  not  satisfied  with  this  donation,  and  stole 
a  young  seal  from  9  sailor,  w1k>  had  cleaned  it| 


PROPERTY  IN   COMMON.  175 

intendiiig  it  lor  his  own  dinner*  It  is  the  prac- 
tice of  the  Fuegians  to  laugh  at  being  detected 
in  a  theft ;  but  this  old  man,  on  being  discovered, 
was  much  alarmed,  and  went  to  his  canoe,  nor 
did  he  venture  from  the  settlement  until  he  un- 
derstood, at  my  seeing  him  there,  that  he  was 
taken  into  favour  again* 

This  tribe  were  clothed  in  a  similar  way  to 
those  of  their  countrymen  we  had  met  with  be- 
fore ;  they  had  only  a  skin  over  their  shoulders, 
and  several  of  them  were  quite  naked,  unless  red 
ochre  may  be  considered  a  covering,  for  of  that 
they  wore  a  complete  coat.  We  had  few  old 
clothes  to  spare,  having  been  liberal  to  our  first 
visitors ;  but  in  lieu  of  otter  skins,  which  I  pur- 
chased off  their  backs,  I  gave  each  of  them  a 
garment  of  some- description.  I  had  given  one 
of  them  a  white  flannel  shirt,  which  he  slipped 
on,  and  skipped  about  among  his  companions  in 
great  ecstasy.  This  shirt  being  in  high  estim-^ 
ation,  they  wore  it  by  turns  for  eight  or  ten 
minutes,  and  after  being  satisfied  with  it  in  this 
form,  they  tore  it  into  ribbons,  and  divided  it 
share  and  share  alike.  This  was  an  instmice  of 
their  holding  property  in  common. 

Having  occasion  to  fill  some  casks  with  water 
in  the  after  part  of  the  ship,  in  order  to  ^aise  her 
still  more  forward,  I  set  the  Fuegians  to  draw 
water,  and  after  being  shown  the  most  conve* 


176  DmLtOHTED   WITH   MUSIC. 

nient  way,  they  performed  it  with  as  much  expe-' 
dition  as  our  own  people.  I  also  employed  them  in 
pulling  aiid  haidihg,  when  we  required  strength, 
and  this  they  did  with  eagerness,  but  the  noise 
of  singing  to  each  pull  was  deafening:  after  hear* 
ing  one  of  our  sailors  singy  as  is  usual,they  thought 
that  it  was  to  be  imitated  also,  and  all  roared  to- 
gether in  unison.  The  women  and  little  chil- 
dren  remlained  in  the  canoes  close  alongside, 
and'  they  were  kept  amused  by  receiving  small 
presents  occasionally.  I  tried  what  effect  music 
would  have,  and  had  the  fiddle  played  to  them. 
It  seemed  to  please  them,  but  the  German  flute 
still  more,  and  vocal  music  more  than  either. 
The  women,  indeed,  were  in  ecstasy  at  hearing 
a  song  given  by  a  young  man  who  had  a  fine 
voice.  I  showed  them  some  sea  paintings,  which 
attracted  their  atteption,  though  only  for  a  mo- 
ment; but  I  remarked  those  of  the  most  glaring 
coloursretained  their  admirationlongest and  most. 
An  opportunity  offered,  our  visitors  of  chang- 
ing their  dress.  This  was  at  a  tub  of  dark  clay, 
which  we  had  brought  from  the  Falkland  Islands. 
They  soon  rubbed  on  a  complete  coat  of  it,  and 
were  highly  pleased  with  their,  new  costume. 
The  women,  too,  were  indulged  with  a  sUght 
rub;  when  the  day  became  dry,  however,  I 
fancy  they  found,  it  unpleasant,  as  they  all  soon 
rubbed  it  off  again.  . 


CURE   OF   SORE  EYES.  177 

Observing  one  of  them  with  sore  eyes,  I  made 
a  liniment,  and  washed  them.  He  evidently  per-^ 
ceived  my  intention,  and  I  believe  exipected  that 
he  was  to  be  cured  at  once ;  which  did  not,  of 
course,  take  place,  but,  by  washing  them  twice 
or  thrice  a  day,  in*  three  days  they  were  nearly 
well.  I  had  cut  the  hair  from  over  the  eyes  of 
this  man,  because  it  irritated  them;  and  his 
countrymen  thought  it  improved  the  appearance, 
and  came  to  me  to  have  theirs  cut  in  the  same 
way.  As  it  was  a  harmless  request  I  complied 
with  their  desire,  and,  to  amuse  them,  powdered 
them  with  flour.  The  ladies  were  quite  delighted 
with  this  head  dress,  but  I  found  it  too  expensive 
to  be  continued,  not  having  an  over-abundant 
supply  of  the  article  on  board. 

I  had  made  them  acquainted  with  the  destruc- 
tive effects  of  fire-arms,  and  at  the  report  of  a 
great  gun,  which  we  fired,  the  women  shrieked, 
and  the  men  were  appalled,  and  looked  at  the 
engine  with  a  vacant  gaze. 
'  I  observed  a  bold  and  cunning  fellow  among 
this  people,  whom  I  judged  to  be  the  appointed 
thief  of  this  tribe.    This  fellow,  having  found 
his  way  into  the  mmn-top,  was  trying  to  pull  off 
the  iron  work  about  it.     I  made  signs  to  him  to 
come  down,  but  he  paid  no  attention.     Having 
my  pistols  in  my  pocket,  I  pointed  one  at  him, 
merely  to  frighten  him  into  compliance,  and  he 

N 


178  INSOLENCE   OF   A   NATIVE. 

descended;  but  on  reaching  the  deck,  he  put 
on  a  revengeful  countenance,  and  threw  a  piece* 
of  rag  in  my  face.  As  I  was  determined  to  check 
this  insolence,  I  took  up  my  fowling-piece,  which 
was  at  hand,  and  presented  it ;  at  which  he  fled 
to  the  forepart  of  the  ship,  and  his  companions 
with  him,  shouting  for  fear.  The  women  joined 
in  the  howl  of  alarm ;  but  peace  was  soon  re- 
stored by  my  sending  the  offender  into  his  canoe, 
and  putting  my  fowling-piece  below.  I  intend* 
ed,  at  a  proper  opportunity,  to  make  this  fellow 
sensible  of  his  ill  behaviour,  but,  in  the  meantime, 
I  only  forbade  his  coming  on  board.  By  this 
little  misunderstanding  their  confidence  in  oiir 
friendly  consideration  for  them  was  shaken,  as 
they  retired  to  their  settlement  much  sooner  than 
usual. 

There  being  but  eight  of  us  in  number  on 
board,  two  of  whom  were  boys,  it  became  neces- 
sary, in  case  of  any  dangerously  offensive  beha^ 
viour  of  the  Fuegians,  that  we  should  be  armed, 
and  I  therefore  required  each  person  to  have  a 
cutlass,  and  a  musket  or  pistol  at  hand. 

In  the  morning  of  the  30th,  about  four  o'clock, 
between  forty  and  fifty  Fuegians,  jumped  On  board 
in  defiance  of  those  of  our  crew  who  were  on  deck* 
The  second  mate,  Mr.  Mathewson,taking  an  alarm, 
came  to  my  state-room,  saying  that  the  natives 
intended  to  take  possession  of  the  vessel.     His 


RELIGION.  179 

suspicions  were  rational,  but  his  fears  turned  out 
to  be  groundless ;  for,  on  my  going  up  with  my 
pistols  in  my  hand,  some  who  were  on  the  cabin 
stairs,  trying  to  get  below,  flew  up,  and  those 
on  deck  I  brought  imme(Hately  to  order.  It  is 
not  unlikely  that  a  skirmish  would  have  taken 
place  had  my  people  been  allowed  to  strike 
them,  for  a  little  irritation  would,  most  likely, 
have  roused  them  at  least  to  defence. 

Their  conduct  in  the  morning  had  been  ir- 
regular, but  I  took  no  further  notice  of  it,  after 
bringing  them  to  their  usual  course  of  inoffen- 
sive behaviour. 

In  the  middle  of  the  day  I  assembled  these 
people  together,  in  order  to  ascertain  if  they  had 
any  idea  of  a  future  state.  I  practised  the  same 
mode  of  enquiry  as  I  had  done  with  the  last 
tribe,  by  reading  out  of  the  Bible,  and  making 
signs  to  them.  I  certainly  observed  them  to 
have  a  solemn  feeling,  which  they  exhibited  by 
looking  each  other  in  the  face,  with  a  counte- 
nance expressive  of  extreme  wonder,  and  speak- 
ing to  one  another  in  a  low  tone  of  voice  ;  but, 
notwithstanding  these  appearances  of  a  religious 
principle,  I  could  discern  nothing  like  a  form  of 
worship  among  them. 

By  making  them  small  presents  at  various 
times,  I  procured  a  quantity  of  articles  of  their 
manufacture,  such  as  necklaces,  baskets,  bows 

N    2 


180      NECKLACES^  BASKETS^  BOWS. 

and  arrows.    These,  which  are  theh-  principal 
possessions,  I  shall  shortly  describe. 

Their  necklaces  are  very  ingeniously  put  to- 
gether, and  consist  of  small  shells  of  the  turbinat- 
ed genus^  possessing  a  beautiful  coloured  enamel. 
They  are  perforated  near  the  orifice,  and  are 
strung  together  on  a  cord  made  of  gut,  so  neatly 
plaited^  that,  though  it  is  only  the  thickness  of 
small  whip-cord,  it  contains  no  fewer  than  five 
strings,  so  exceedingly  small  that  it  creates  some 
wonder  how  they  can  perform  the  plaiting  by 
the  hand. 

Their  baskets  are  made  of  strong  grass,  and 
exhibit  considerable  skill  in  the  construction. 
The  grass  is  put  together  after  the  man- 
ner  of  weaving,  the  blades  being  worked  at 
right  angles,  and  over  the  top  is  a  handle 
equal  to  half  the  circumference  of  the  bas- 
ket. 

Their  bows  are  generally  about  three  feet 
eight  inches  long,  and  are  made  of  an  elastic 
wood  which  is  smooth  and  hard.  The  string  is 
of  seal-skin,  and  sometimes  of  gut  plaited:  the 
arrows  are  of  hard  wood,  and  finely  polished ; 
they  are  about  twenty-five  inches  in  length,  with 
a  sharp  triangular  flint  for  the  point,  fixed  into  a 
cleft  in  the  wood.  When  the  arrow  has  entered, 
the  shaft  may  be  drawn  out,  but  the  flint  re- 
mains. 


ARRIVAL   OF   THE   BEAUFOY.  181 

They  have  another  weapon,  consisting  of  a 
similar-shaped  flint,  inserted  in  a  handle  about 
nine  inches  long;  and  this  they  probably  use  as  a 
stiletto. 

I  am  not  aware  that  these  people  are  given  to 
war,  though  I  saw  three  of  this  tribe  with  scars 
on  their  bodies,  which  indicated  their  having  re- 
ceived woundst 

On  the  Slst  the  Beaufoy  arrived  with  a  quan« 
tity  of  seal-skins,  and  came  to  anchor.  Our 
carpenters  had  flow  completed  their  work. on  the 
bows  of  the  brig,  and  we  proceeded  to  stowing 
the  hold,  and  bringing  the  vessel  into  her  usual 
trim. 

As  I  can  duly  appreciate  the  nature  of  a  good 
shipwright,  it  is  but  justice  to  my  carpenter, 
J.  Aitkenson,  to  say  that  his  skiU  and  industry 
on  this  occasion,  of  repairing  serious  damages 
with  few  materials,  gave  me  great  satisfaction. 

Our  fiiends,  the  Fuegians,  came  again  on  board 
sioon  after  the  arrival  of  the  Beaufoy,  no  doubt 
expecting  a  feast  of  seal's  fat  and  flesh.  They 
were  not  disappointed,  for  Mr.  Brisbane  had 
brought  them  a  quantity,  and  it  was  shared  out 
among  them.  Our  people  were  busily  employed 
in  cutting  blubber  from  the  seal-skins,  when  the 
natives,  enticed  by  the  strippings  of  fat,  ex-» 
pressed  a  deske  to  assist.  .  I  allowed  them  to  do 

N  3 


182  THIBVERY. 

SO,  and  f bey  appeared  clever  at  the  bui&iness*  It 
was  soon  noticed,  lK)wever,  that  they  had  an- 
other intention  besides  that  of  dressing  the  skins ; 
for  one  fellow,  while  at  work,  had  hauled  a  skin, 
bit  and  bit,  under  his  arm,  in  a  most  dexterous 
mauner.  But  the  second  mate  had  observed  the 
theft,  aad  when  the  Fuegian  was  proceeding  to 
leave  the  ship,  made  him  deliver  up  his  prize,  at 
which  he  laughed  most  heartily,  though  on  my 
approaching  he  retired  to  his  canoe,  quite  aware 
that  he  had  offended  me. 

Their  knowledge  of  barter  had  evidently  in- 
creased their  spirit  for  thieving,  so  that  they 
would  now  steal  articles  from  the  cutter,  and 
endeavour  to  sell  them  at  the  brig  for  some 
things  they  liked  better,  and  vice  versa. 

As*  we  had  now  no  fears  of  being  overpower- 
ed by  numbers,  I  had  got  the  fellow  on  board, 
who  had  thrown  the  rag  in  my  face,  and  made 
him  understand  that  I  had  it  in  my  power 
to  punish  him  ;.  his  fears  and  humility,  however, 
procured  him  his  pardon,  and  he  continued  to 
behave  himself  properly. 

In  the  afternoon  Captain  ^l^isbane  accompa- 
nied me  to  the  settlement  I  had  signified  to 
theFuegians  that  we  intended  to  visit  them,  and 
they  i^ddled  home  before  us.  We  landed  at  a 
convenient  place,  and  were  met  by  a  party,  who 
conducted  us  to  the  town,  which  consisted  of 


FUEGIAN   SETTI/EMENT.  183 

but  a  few  wigwams,  slightly  constructed,  and 
containing  a  population  of  about  sixty. 

The  first  circumstance  that  struck  me  was  the 
absence  of  the  women  and  little  children:  it  was 
evident  that  on  our  approaching  they  had  sent 
them  into  the  woods,  and  had  lighted  fires  almost 
all  round  the  island.  This  appeaired,  in  part,  to 
be  an  efiusion  of  joy  at  our  visit;  but  it  also  seem- 
ed to  be  an  invitation  to  other  Fuegians,  as  two 
strange  canoes  came  to  us  from  the  upper  part 
of  the  sound.  In  one  of  the  wigwams  I  saw  a 
sea-gull,  perfectly  tame,  and  jumping  about, 
which  conveys  an  idea  of  their  affection  for  the 
lower  animals.  .  I  had  used  the  precaution  of 
having  our  boat  at  hand,  and  the  crew  armed, 
which  enabled  us  to  mix  among  them  without 
fear.  On  my  expressing  a  desire  for  muscles 
they  commenced  roasting  them  for  me,  and  vied 
with  each  other  in  bringing  me  the  best.  The 
old  man  whom  I  have  mentioned  as  having  stolen 
a  young  seal  appeared  here,  and  I  gave  him  to 
understand  that  he  was  forgiven.  To  amuse 
and  astonish  them  I  killed  two  sea-gulls  at  one 
discharge  of  my  fowling-piece,  at  which  they 
gazed  with  wonder,  particularly  the  strangers  j 
as  I  never  allowed  them  to  see  me  load  the  gun, 
but  after  firing  always  put  the  muzzle  to  my 
mouth,  at  which  they  generally  fled  back,  be- 
lieving that  I  loaded  it  by  speaking  into  it     I 

*  N  4 


184  PUEGIAN   SETTLEMENT* 

thought  it  proper  to  hide  from  them  the  nature 
and  management  of  fire-arms,  as  they  are  often 
found  dangerous  in  the  hands  of  barbarians. 

Our  people  were  mixing  among  them,  singing 
and  dancing,  but  on  two  of  our  crew  wishing  to 
go  into  the  woods,  the  natives  became  uneasy 
for  their  wives,  and  I  was  obliged  t^  interfere. 
This  forbearance  on  our  part  did  not,  however, 
meet  with  a  suitable  return;  for  one  of  the  Fue- 
gians  (mistaking  the  sex)  behaved  very  strangely 
to  a  young  man  of  our  party,  who  with  some 
difficulty  made  his  escape  to  the  boat. 

Our  curiosity  being  satisfied,  we  bade  them 
farewell  and  returned  on  board. 

I  saw  no  case  of  sickness  among  these  people ; 
none  lame,' except  one  man  who  had  the  palsy. 
As  far  as  I  had  an  opportunity  to  observe,  the 
proportion  of  women  is  about  two-thirds  that  of 
the  men  ;  and  with  respect  to  longevity,  includ- 
ing the  women,  they  may  be  said  to  contain  four 
classes.  The  oldest,  which  were  three  men,  by 
their  wrinkled  appearance  I  judged  to  be  from 
50  to  60  years  of  age ;  the  second  class  were 
twenty-fbur  individuals,  about  40 ;  the  third,  pf 
which  there  were  twenty-seven,  were  from  20 
to  30  J  and  the  rest,  being  youths,  girls,  and 
children,  were  twenty-six;  making  the  total 
mimber  of  this  tribe  to  consist  of  about  eighty 
persons. 


SET   ^IIt£  to   THE  WOODS.  185 

On  the  1st  ot  January  the  Fuegians  landed  at 
the  head  of  the  cove  and  set  fire  to  the  woods. 
As  the  smoke>  by  the  direction  of  the  wind, 
came  right  upon  us,  I  ordered  a  musket  to  be 
fired  over  their  heads,  to  make  them  desist 
They  paid  no  attention  to  this;  but  continued 
kindling  the  woods,  and  as  we  were  now  almost 
enveloped  in  smoke  I  was  determined  to  check 
them  efiectually,  and  therefore  fired  a  great  gun 
shotted  in  such  a  direction  as  to  be  perfectly 
cle^  of  them,  but  so  as  to  let  them  hear  the 
whistle  of  the  shot  On  hearing  this  and  the 
report  of  the  gun,  they  ran  precipitately  to 
their  canoes,  and  paddled  home  as  fast  as  pos* 
sible. 

'  1  was  at  a  loss  to  know,  in  this  instance,  what 
they  meant  by  setting  fire  to  the  woods,  as  they 
must  have  known  that  it  would  be  troublesome 
to  us,  and  I  considered  it  always  as  a  signal  of 
fiiendship  j  in  the  present  case,  however,  it  was 
an  actual  annoyance,  and  was  necessarily  put  a 
stop  to* 

The  following  morning  the  Fuegians  came  on 
board  without  taking  the  smallest  notice  of  the 
guns  that  had  been  fired,  and  conducted  them* 
selves  peaceably.  The  brig  being  ready  for  sea, 
at  10  we  weighed,  with  the  wind  at  west,  and 
proceeded  to  the  Di^go  Ramirez,  leaving  the 
Beaufoy  at  anchon     We  continued  under  sail 


186  V£S8E1L3    SEPARATE. 

off  these  Islands,  till  the  4th  in. the  morning, 
when  we  returned.  The  Fuegians,  seeing  us 
approach,  calculated  on  receiving  supplies,  and 
hurried  alongside.  The  vessel  being  und^r  sail, 
I  was  much  afraid  some  of  their  canoes  wouldr  be 
upset,  but  they  managed  them  surprisingly*  We 
must  have  had  nearly  the  whole  settlement  a;bout 
us,  together  with  some  strangers,  as  I  enumerated 
eleven  canoes,  each  containing  not  fewer  than 
seven  individuals*  I  made  a  signal  to  the  Beau- 
foy  for  a  boat,  and  Captain  Brisbane  came  on 
board.  He  informed  me  that  the  natives  had  be- 
haved themselves  in  a  very  orderly  manner,  and 
that  he  had  nothing  to  fear  from  being  left  alone 
with  them.  Our  business  requiring  that  the 
vessels  should  separate,  I  gave  him  his  instruc- 
tions, which  were,  to  remain  in  the  neighbour- 
hood till  the  20th,  to  proceed  then  to  the  Falk- 
la^id  Islands  and  South  Georgia,  and  to  rejoin 
me  in  the  month  of  March,  on  the  coast  of  Pata- 
gonia :  but  I  particularly  cautioned  him  not  to 
remain  among  the  natives  longer  than  he  found 
them  friendly.  Our  final  arrangements  being 
m^de,  we  took  a  last  farewell  of  the  natives, 
who  went  to  their  canoes  reluctantly,  and  we 
proceeded  to  the  eastward  for  .the  coast  of  Pa- 
tagonia. I  was  afterwards  glad  to  learn  from 
Captain  Brisbane,  that,  during  his  S:tay,  they 
behaved  in  a  quiet,  friendly  jnanner. 


FACE   OF   THE    COUNTRY.  1^ 

The  islands  of  Tierra  del  Fuego  extend  in 
length  about  360  miles,  from  east  to  west,  along 
the  Straits  of  Magellan ;  and  in  extreme  breadth, 
from  north  to  south,  about  160,  from  the  straits  to 
the  extremity  of  Cape  Horn. 

This  tract  of  country,  as  far  as  my  inform- 
ation goes,  contains  a  large  population,  par- 
ticularly towards  the  shores  of  the  Straits  of 
Magellan. 

Most  of  those  islands  are  studded  on  liie 
sides  with  a  small  beach  tree,  about  twenty-four 
feet  high,  and  eight  or  ten  inches  in  diameter. 
They  grow  so  crooked,  that  a  straight  trunk  more 
than  ten  or  twelve  feet  is  rarely  found.  I  built 
a  boat  of  this  wood,  however,  which  when  sea^ 
soned,  answered  the  purpose  very  well. 

In  the  interior  of  the  country  several  moun- 
tain tops  appear  constantly  covered  with  snow, 
though  I  do  not  consider  the  highest  to  be  more 
than  3000  feet 

The  great  length  of  day  in  the  summer  season 
has  an  enlivening  effect ;  and,  when  the  weather 
is  fine  and  the  water  smooth,  the  wildness  of  the 
scenery  is  quite  romantic. 

The  volcano,  which  has  been  seen  by  several 
persons,  in  passing  Cape  Horn,  was  not  at  this 
time  visible,  but  I  picked  up  a  quantity  of  vesi- 
cular  flaggy  lava,  which,  no  doubt,  had  been 
ejected  from  it. 


188  CLIMATE* 

Captain  Basil  Hall  saw  it  in  flame  during  his 
passage  round  Cape  Horn,  in  the  year  1822,  in 
His  Majesty's  ship  Conway;  and  in  1820,  when 
on  our  first  voyage,  in  the  month  of  January,  I 
saw  the  sky  much  reddened  over  Tierra  del 
Fuego,  which  I  supposed  at  the  time  was  pro- 
duced by  the  volcano.  The  climate  of  this  re- 
gion has  been  differently  described  by  persons 
who  have  passed  through  it,  and  I  doubt  not 
but  they  have  been  respectively  correct,  inaSf 
much  as  they  have  framed  their  report  from  the 
circumstances  of  weather  at  each  particular  time* 
The  fact  is,  that  much  depends  on  the  direction 
of  the  wind ;  since,  in  the  middle  of  summer, 
when  it  blows  strong  at  south,  proceeding  from 
the  icy  land  of  Shetland,  the  thermometer  will 
often  stand  so  low  as  38^;  and,  with  the  wind 
from  the  opposite  quarter,  liie  weather  is  fre- 
quently almost  as  fine  as  that  of  summer  in 
England. 

I  saw  no  quadrupeds,  except  dogs  and  otters, 
nor  do  I  think  there  are  any  others  to  the  south 
of  the  Straits  of  Magellan. 

In  conclusion  of  what  I  have  to  remark, 
regarding  these  Fuegians,  I  may  say,  I  never 
saw  men  whose  minds  ,were  so  unimproved ; 
and  though  they  may  possibly  be  defective 
in  mental  organisation,  as  has  been  assert- 
ed  by  some,  yet  there  is  little  doubt,   from 


MENTAL   CAPACITY.  ;  189 

their  tractableness,  that  their  condition  might 
be  easily  alleviated.  This  would  be  the  opinion 
of  the  philanthropic  author  of  the  following 
remark :  "  Any  general  character,  from  the  best, 
to  the  worst,  from  the  most  ignor^^nt  to  the  most 
enlightened,  may  be  given  to  any  community, 
even  to  the  world  at  large,  by  the  application 
of  proper  means,  which  means  are  to  a  great 
extent  at  the  command,  and  under,  the  controul,. 
of  those  who  have  influence  in  the  afiairs  of 
men.** 

Few  voyagers,  who  have  had  intercourse  with 
these  Fuegians,  have  been  backward  in  pronpunc-; 
ing  them  to  be  the  most  miserable  among  men, 
and  as  not  having  mental  capacity  for  instruc-; 
tion,  but  without  explaining  the  circumstances 
which  are,  probably,  the  cause  of  their  being  so. 
I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing,  that  their 
ignoi'ance  may  be  attributed  principally  to  local 
causes. 

It  is  not  likely  that  any  people,  who  have 
ever  enjoyed  the  advantage  of  improvements  for 
their  better  subsistence,  will  ever  forget  them.. 
Hence,  it  may  be  presumed,  that  the  ancestors 
of  these  tribes  were  in  the  same  state  of  ignotant 
imbecility  as  the  present  race,  unless  we  may. 
suppose,  that  they  were  driven  from  the  north 
of  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  and  coming  into  an 
unprolific    country,  which  did  not  afford  the 


19d  EFFECT    OF    CLIMATE 

means  of  continuing  their  acquired  £uts,  they 
gradually  ceased  to  remember  them. 

As  few  quadrupeds  are  found  upon  the  islands 
of  Tierra  del  Fuego,  the  natives  cannot  depend 
on  hunting  for  their  subsistence,  and  are  con- 
sequently obliged  to  have  recourse  to  fishing* 
This  last  occupation  compels  them  to  live  on 
the  s^a  coast,  where  the  coldness  and  gloom  of 
a  protracted  winter  seems  to  check  all  mental 
improvement. 

The  inclemency  of  the  climate,  too,  seems  to 
produce  upon  these  people  a  degree  of  inac- 
tivity,^ which,  together  with  the  inconveniency 
of  moving  from  place  to  place,  from  the  na- 
ture of  the  country,  may  produce  their  dimi- 
nutive stature  ;  for,  if  they  originally  migrated 
from  the  north  of  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  they 
must  have  been  a  more  athletic  race  of  men  : 
tho.  climate  and  the  peculiarities  of  their  situ- 
ation have  now,  probably,  exercised  all  their 
rigorous  effects  upon  the  inhabitants,  and  they 
have  arrived  at  a  stationary  character.  Had 
they  been  so  circumstanced  as  to  procure  a 
subsistence  by  hunting,  their  bodies  would, 
without  doubt,  have  been  more  vigorous,  and 
their  minds,  probably,  not  inferior  to  those  of 
other  savage  tribes. 

Nature  has  been  bountiful  in  providing  a 
most  inexhaustible   supply  of  shell-fish,   upon 


ON   THE   FUEGIAN    CHARACrE&r^  19^ 

which  they  principally  live  j  and  they  are  pro* 
cured  with  so  little  trouble,  that  no  ideas  are 
required  which' can  improve  the  reasoning  facul- 
ties. No  patience  or  perseverance  is  necessary^ 
like  that  exercised  by  savages,  who,  in  hunting, 
have  to  employ  reason  superior  to  the  instinc- 
tive cunning  of  the  animals  they  pursue.  The 
Fuegians'  food  lies  on  the  shores  of  different 
islands,  and  their  journeys  are  all  performed  in 
the  canoe;  so  that  being  cramped  in  sitting,  their 
legs  are  ill  formed,  and  the  females,  who  are  the 
keepers  of  the  canoe,  from  that  circumstance, 
are  worse  shaped  in  the  lower  extremities  than 
the  men. 

The  rugged  and  mountainous  country  of 
Tierra  del  Fuego,  which  faces  the  south,  offers 
no  inducement  to  agriculture,  nor  indeed  does 
it  admit  of  it ;  but,  towards  the  N.E.  of  these 
islands,  the  land  is  more  inviting,  and  the  cli- 
mate better. 

I  have  only  now  to  recommend  these  people, 
in  whom  I  have  taken  a  lively  interest,  to  the 
philanthropic  part  of  the  world,  as  presenting 
an  untouched  field  for  their  exertions  to  amelio- 
rate the  condition  of  their  fellow  men. 

True  humane  and  religious  charity  is  best  be- 
stowed on  those  who  most  need  our  help,  and  are 
willing  to  receive  it ;  and  this  is  certainly  the 


I9i  BESTITUTIOK  OF  THE   FU£6IANS(. 

case  with  these  Fuegians,  who,  of  all  uncivilised 
tribes  with  whom  we  are  acquainted,  seem  most 
destitute  of  every  thing  which  tends  to  tqjjls^ 
the  human  mind  to  exertion. 


w 


^\/v 


t 


193 


CHAP.  VII. 


OFF  CAPE  HORN.  —  TIERRA   DEL   FUEOO. —  TIDES:   NATIVES. 

—  THE  RIVER  6ALLEG0S  VISITED ;  AND  THE  SANTA  CRUZ. 

—  PRODUCE  OF  THE  COAST.  —  SEA  LIONS.  —  PATAGONIA. 
STRAITS  OF  MAGELLAN. — EARLY  DISCOVERERS.  —  STA- 
TURE OF  THE  INHABITANTS;  THEIR  MANNERS,  &C. — 
ATTEMPTS  DURING   THE    REIGN   OF   CHARLES  II.   TO  OPEN 

COMMUNICATIONS     WITH      THEM.  SOUTH      AMERICAN 

COASTS.  —  MONTE      VIDEO.  —  INHABITANTS. —  SPANISH 

...Zl  public    dinner.  —  PRICES    OF    HORSES    AND    BULLOCKS. 

n  —  HARBOUR      DANGEROUS.  —  SAIL     FOR      ENGLAND.   — 

^  ARRIVAL   IN   FALMOUTH. 

We  stood  to  the  N.E.  with  the  wind  from  S.E. 
I  by  S.,  and  on.  the  7th  in  the  afternoon  we  were 
Ej  off  Bamavel  Island,  and  near  Cape  Horn.  I 
sent  a  boat  on  shore.  Nothing  but  a  little  grass 
grows  on  the  island,  and  around  it  lie  several 
small  islets.  The  latitude  from  my  observation 
at  noon,  when  within  five  miles  and  a  half  of  the 
island,  gave  for  its  centre  55""  48'  16'^,  and  lon- 
gitude by  chronometers  66°  39'.  .  The  wind 
continued  from  the.S.E.,  and  at  day-light  we  saw 
the  land  in  the  N.N.  W.,  but,  by  reason  of  the 
weather  being  foggy,  we  could  not  perceive  the 
entrance  of  Straits  Le  Maire.  We  however  stood 
on,  and  at  nine  A.M;  the  fog  clearing  away,  I 
found  we  were  actually  in  the  straits,  with  the 

o 


194t  TIERRA   0£L   FU£GO« 

western  point  of  Staten  Land  bearing  E.  by  N, 
I  have  annexed  a  view  of  the  land  of  Tierra  del 
Fuego,  on  the  western  side  of  the  straits,  which, 
while  that  side  only  is  seen,  presents  a  gap  or 
valley :  which,  being  below  the  horizon,  might 
be  taken  by  a  stranger  for  the  southern  entrance 
of  the  straits,  thus  creating  a  mistake,  in  foggy 
weather  particularly,  which  would  lead  the  vessel 
into  danger. 

In  the  forenoon  we  saw  some  whales  close  in 
shore,  and  the  boata  were  sent  in  pursuit.  We 
stood  with  the  vessel  within  four  or  five  miles  off 
the  shore  of  Tierra  del  Fuego,  and  sounded  in  a 
depth  of  75  fathoms,  over  a  bottom  of  fine  sand. 
I  had  desired  the  chief  mate,  who  was  in  one  of 
the  boats,  to  examine  the  state  of  the  tide  on 
the  shore,  and  we  remained  lying  to,  with  the 
wind  at  S.S.E.  and  S.E.,  from  eleven  o'clock  till 
one,  when  the  boats  returned,  without  having 
succeeded  in  capturing  any  of  the  whales.  We 
had,  during  this  period,  drifted  to  the  southward 
against  a  fresh  breeze,  and  the  mate  informed 
me,  that  the  tide  had  been  falling  rapidly  during 
the  time  they  had  been  away,  and  that  when  they 
left  the  beach  it  was  about  low  water.  We  stood 
into  Success  Bay,  and  about  two  o'clock  the  tide 
changed,  and  swept  us  violently  to  the  north- 
ward, which  must  have  been  the  tide  of  flood  j 
and,  hence  by  calculation,  high  water,  at  the  full 


THE   FLOOD  I     NATIVES.  195 

-and  change  of  the  moon,  will  take  place  at  two 
o'clock. 

The  flood  has  always  been  supposed  to  run  to 
the  southward  through  the  straits,  but  according 
to  the  circumstances  I  have  described,  I  am  led 
to  believe  it  runs  to  the  northward ;  though  pro- 
bably its  continuing  to  run  to  the  northward 
through  the  straits  sometime  after  high  water  by 
the  shore,  may  have  led  to  erroneous  conclusions 
in  that  respect. 

Before  we  got  out  of  the  bay,  the  Fuegians  of 
these  straits  came  down  to  the  sea-side,  and  shout- 
ed at  the  full  stretch  of  their  lungs,  inviting  us 
to  land  ;  but  as  the  wind  was  fair,  and  night  ap- 
proaching, we  could  not  spare  time  to  comply 
with  their  wish.  I  was  sorry  it  was  not  conve- 
nient  to  have  communication  with  this  tribe,  as 
it  was  in  this  bay,  in  the  year  I769,  that  Captain 
Cook  visited  the  inhabitants ;  and  it  would  have 
been  agreeable  to  have  ascertained  whether,  from 
his  intercourse  with  them,  they  had  derived  per- 
manent improvement,  though  his  stay  amongst 
them  was  too  short  to  produce  any  great  result. 

Off  Cape  Saint  Diego  is  a  heavj  tide-rip  when 
the  wind  is  strong,  and  at  those  times  it  is  better 
to  avoid  passing  through  it  We  stood  to  the 
northward,  across  the  entrance  of  the  Straits  of 
Magellan,  and  on  the  north  side  the  land  ap- 
pears comparatively  low,  and  fit  for  agriculture. 

o  2 


196  THE    RIVER   GALLEGOS. 

We  coasted  Patagonia  to  the  northward,  pur- 
suing our  business  of  examining  the  shores  for 
fur  seals,  and  taking  black  whales,  as  oppor- 
tunities permitted;  and  on  the  13th,  having 
sought  in  vain  for  the  river  Gallegos,  we  came 
to  an  anchor,  in  eight  fathoms  water,  at  the 
distance  of  about  five  miles  from  the  land. 

Being  in  the  latitude  in  which  this  river  is  re- 
presented on  the  chart  of  Malespina,  I  landed  to 
examine  the  shore,  supposing  that  the  entrance 
might  beJand  locked  in  such  a  way  that  it  could 
not  be  seen  at  any  distance  from  the  shore.  I 
had  walked  four  of  five  miles  along  the  beach  to 
the  southward,  without  discovering  the  object  of 
my  search,  and  was  returning,  when  by  accident 
looking  over  a  bank,  the  situation  of  the  sought- 
for  river  appeared,  though  with  very  little  water 
in  it  This  mound  was  four  or  five  feet  above 
the  level  of  the  sea  at  high  water.  I  have 
little  doubt  but  the  river  was  open  at  the  time 
Malespina  gave  it  a  name,  and  must  since  that 
period,  1790,  have  been  nearly  dried  up,  by  the 
waters  having  been  diverted  from  the  original 
course,'  and  the  sea  having  rolled  in  the  bank 
into  its  entrance ;  or  that  at  the  time  the  river 
was  discovered,  there  was  in  the  mouth  of  it  a 
bar  or  bank,  which  did  not  then  appear  above 
water;  and  that  the  sea  has  since  receded  on 
the  eastern  coast  of  Patagonia,  leaving  the  bank 


SANTA  CRU2,  197 

dry.  Which  of  these  may  be  the  fact  is  not 
easy  to  decide ;  perhaps  both  the  causes  men- 
tioned may  have  contributed  to  the  change. 

On  the  14th,  in  the  afternoon,  the  wind 
freshened  to  a  brisk  gale,  and  we  allowed  the 
vessel  to  drive  with  the  anchor  on  the  ground, 
nearly  in  the  direction  of  the  coast :  at  dark  we 
hove  the  anchor  up,  and  lay  to.  The  weather 
proved  tolerably  fine,  and  the  winds  were  vari- 
able, often  light  from  the  S.E.,  and  we  occa-' 
sionally  anchored  to  facilitate  our  operations. 

On  the  24th  we  put  into  the  river  of  Santa  Cruz, 
for  the  purpose  of  making  some  alteration  on  the 
hold,  and  converting  some  blubber  into  oil.  The 
entrance,  of  this  river  cannot  be  seen  at  a  great 
distance,  as  the  land  which  lies  behind  covers  it. 
I  have  given  a  view  of  the  coast,  and  a  sketch  of 
the  fiver.  The  shore  on  the  left  side  going  in 
is  high,  whilst  that  on  the  right  is  quite  low. 
The  latitude  of  the  entrance  is  50°  12' 16"  S., 
and  longitude  68°  14'  SO"  W.  Directions  for 
sailing  into  it  are  added  in  the  Appendix. 

About  seven  miles  from  the  entrance  the  Santa. 
Cruz  falls  into  two  branches,  the  one  running  to- 
the  S.  W.,  the  other  to  the  N. W.  The  northern, 
which  is  by  much  the  itoallest,  I  penetrated  about 
twelve  miles,  which  was  very  near  its  source,  as 
the  water  was  quite  fresh,  aiid  the  strestm  became 
a  mere  brook.     That  branch  which  runs  to  the 

o  3 


198       PRODUCE  OF  THE  COAST. 

N. W.  is,  ftom  its  appearance,  of  some  extent ; 
and  I  should  not  wonder  if  it  communicates  with 
some  branch  from  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  as  the. 
water  at  our  anchorage,  at  the  lowest  tides, 
never  ran  fresh.  The  N.W.  river  being  very 
shallow,  the  procuring  of  good  water  is  attended 
with  some  delay,  as  it  must  be  taken  at  the  end 
of  the  ebb  of  the  tide,  when  there  is  not  depth 
enough  to  float  a  loaded  boat,  and  you  must 
therefore  wait  the  following  flood. 

No  large  wood  is  found  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  this  river.  On  the  eastern  shore  are  many 
bushes  bearing  a  small  black  berry,  little  less 
than  a  sloe,  which  when  ripe  is  pleasant  to 
the  taste,  and  highly  beneficial  as  an  antiscor- 
butic, of  which  we  took  advantage,  and  eat  great 
quantities  of  them.  I  saw  no  traces  of  inhabit- 
ants where  I  landed,  nor  land  animals,  except 
guanacoes,  of  which  there  were  many,  but  too 
timid  to  allow  us  to  approach  within  musket- 
shot.  Nearly  in  the  middle  of  the  main  river  is 
an  island,  which  is  called  Sea  Lion  Island,  from 
a  number  of  those  animals  residing  on  it.  This 
amphibious  creature,  of  the  seal  genus,  is  most 
properly  denominated  the  Sea  Lion,  from  its 
similarity  to  that  quadruped.*  The  face  is  not 
unlike  that  of  a  lion  ;  but  in  particular,  a  long 
main,  and  the  bold  and  fierce  front  which  it  pre- 
sents, when  standing  on  its  fore  flippers,  bear  a 


SEA   LIONS,      PXTAX^OiflA.  l99 

jaeat  resemblance  to  the  appearance  of  that  ant- 
maL  A  full  grown  sea  lion  measures  eleven  feet 
from  the  tip  of  the  nose  to  the  extremity  of  the 
tail,  and  eight  feet  in  circumference  j  and  differs 
from  the  ursine  seal  only  in  the  peculiarities  I 
have  mentioned.  They  may,  indeed,  be  con- 
sidered as  belonging  to  a  class  of  monsters  of 
the  seal  species.  They  resist  their  assailants 
with  great  ferocity,  but  their  capture  is  easily 
accompUshed  by  shooting  them  in  the  forehead. 

The  rise  of  the  tide  is  so  great  in  this  river, 
being  thirty-two  feet,  that  the  keel  of  the  largest 
ship  may  be  examined^  by  laying  her  on  the 
ground ;  and  there  is  sufficient  water  on  the  bar 
of  the  river  at  two-thirds  flood  of  spring  tides  for 
a  sliip  of  the  line.  This  circumstance  might  afford 
great  convenience  to  a  vessel  requiring  repairs  in 
the  bottom.  The  tide  flows  on  the  full  and  change 
of  the  moon  at  forty  minutes  pa?t  eight  in  the 
morning,  and  the  ebb  runs  four  miles  an  hour. 

We  had  passed  three  times  in  and  out  of  this 
river  by  the  17th  of  February,  when  we  took  our 
departure  for  the  Falkland  Islands. 

Little  is  yet  known,  of  the  portion  of  America 
south  of  the  latitude  of  42  degrees,  generally 
described  by  the  name  of  Patagonia.  That  part 
of  the  country  which  lies  on  the  western  side  of 
the  Andes,  towards  the  Island  of  Chiloe,  has  been 
colonized  by  the  Spaniards,  and  is  better  known. 

o  4t 


200  PATAGONIA* 

As  I  have  seen  much  of  the  coast  of  Patagonia, 
and  have  obtained  some  information  from  others 
concerning  the  country,  and ,  its  inhabitants,  I 
shall  give  „  a  brief  account  of  it. 

The. tract  of  country  alluded  to  is  bounded  on 
the  south  by  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  discovered 
in  the  year  1519,  by  Fernando  Magalhaen,  and 
called  by  us  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  in  the  lati- 
tude of  from  52  to  54  degrees  south. 
.  This  passage  to  the  Pacific  Ocean  was  consi- 
dered of  great  importance  by  the  Spaniards,  as 
they  at  first  believed  it  to  be  the  only  way,  sail- 
ing westward,  to  their  valuable  Peruvian  posses- 
sions, and  to  the  Phillippine  Islands.  These 
considerations  induced  them  to  make  a  settle- 
ment in  the  straits,  probably  with  a  view  of  com- 
manding.  the  passage,  to  the  exclusion  of 
foreigners,  and  to  facilitate  the  navigation  to 
their  own  ships.  ' 

.  They  chose,  in  1581,  a  situation  on  the  Pata-» 
gonian  side,  about  120  miles  from  the  eastern 
entrance  of  the  straits,  and  built  a  town,  which 
they  named  Philippville,  after  the  then  reigning 
king  of  Spain; 

The  inviting  riches  of  Peru,  Mexico,  and  the 
West  Indies,  however,  engrossed  all  spirit  of  en- 
terprize,  and  all  attention,  so  that  the  settlement 
of  Philippville  became  neglected,  and  in  1587, 
having  existed  but  seven  years,  its  inhabitants, 
who  at  the  beginning  were  400,  were  reduced, 


.  PATAGONIA.  201 

by  famine,  to  a  single  individual,  of  the  name 
of  Hernando. 

-  The  distinguished  navigatorj  Cavendish,  ar- 
rived at  this  place  in  the  year  1587,  and  found, 
this  unhappy  rtian,  the  only  one  reserved  to  tell 
the  painful  story  of  the  fate  of  bis  unfortunate 
companions.  -  Cavendish  took  him  on  board,  and 
to  perpetuate  the  melancholy  history  of  the  spot^ 
he  called  it  Port  Famine. 

From  the  report  given  of  the  enchanting  beau* 
ties  of  this  place  by  Commodore  Byron,  we  may 
suppose  that  there  was  a  want  of  industry  on  the 
part  of  the  inhabitants,  as  well  as  of  neglect  in 
the  government  of  Spain,  in  not  sending  supplies 
till  the  lands  could  be  cultivated,  and  grain 
brought  to  maturity. 

Commodore  Byron,  having  anchored  in  Port 
Famine  in  the  year  176^j  says,  "  The  next  day 
at  noon,  having  had  little  wind,  and  calms,  we 
anchored  in  Port  Famine,  close  to  the  shore,  and 
found  our  situation  very  safe  and  convenient  j 
wie  had  shelter  from  all  winds  esjcept  the  south 
east,  which  seldom  blows;  and  if  a  ship  should 
be  driven  ashore  in  the  bottom  of  the  bay,  she 
could  receive  no  damage,  for  it  is  all  fine  soft 
ground.  We  found  drift  wood  here,  sufficient 
to  have  furnished  a  thousand  sail,  so  that  we  had 
no  need  to  take  the  trouble  of  cutting  green^ 
The  water  of  Ledger  River  is  excellent,  but  the 
boats  cannot  get  in  till  about  two  hours  flood. 


S03  PATAOOmA* 

because  at  low  water,  it  is  very  shallow  for  about 
three  quarters  of  a  mile.     I  went  up  it  about  four 
miles  in  my  boat,  and  the  fallen  trees  then  ren- 
dered it  impossible  to  go  farther ;  I  found  it,  in- 
deed, not  only  difficult,  but  dangerous,  to  get  up 
thus  far.     The  stream  is  very  rapid,  and  many 
stumps  of  trees  lie  hidden  under  it;  one  of  these 
made  its  way  through  the  bottom  of  my  boat, 
and  in  an  instant  she  was  full  of  water.     We  got 
on  shore  as  well  as  we  could  j  and  afterwards, 
with  great  difficulty,  hauled  her  upon  the  side  of 
the  river :  here  we  contrived  to  stop  the  hole 
in  her  bottom,  so  as  that  we  made  a  shift  to  get 
her  down  to  the  river's  mouth,  where  she  was 
soon  properly  repaired  by  the  carpenter*     On 
each  side  of  this  river  there  are  the  fipest  trees 
I  ever  saw,  and  I  make  no  doubt  but  that  they 
would  supply  the  British  navy  with  the  finest 
masts  in  the  world.    Some  of  them  are  of  a  great 
height,  and  more  than  eight  feet  in  diameter, 
which  is  proportionably  more  than  eight  yards  in 
circumference,  so  that  four  men,  joining  hand  in 
hand,  could  not  compass  them.    Among  others, 
we  found  the  pepper  tree,  or  winter's  bark,  in 
great  plenty*      Among  these  woods,   notwith- 
standing  the  coldness  of  the  climate^  there  are 
innumerable  parrots,  and  other  birds  of  the  most 
beautiful  plumage.     I  shot,  every  day,  geese  and 
ducks  enough  to  serve  my  own  table,  and  sreveral 
others,  and  every  body  on  board  might  have  done 


PAtAGONIA.  ,     203 

the  same  :•  we  had,  indeed,  great  plenty  of  fresh 
provisions  of  all  kinds,  for  we  caught  as  much 
fish  every  day  as  served  the  companies  of  both 
ships.  As  I  was  much  on  shore  here,  I  tracked 
many  wild  beasts  in  the  sand,  but  never  saw  one; 
we  also  found  many  huts,  or  wigwams,  but  never 
met  with  an  Indian.  The  country  between  this 
fort,  and  Cape  Forward,  which  is  distant  about 
four  leagues,  is  extremely  fine ;  the  soil  appears 
to  be  very  good,  and  there  are  no  less  than  three 
pretty  large  rivers,  besides  several  brooks." 

The  terminating  point  of  this  continent  ap- 
pears to  have  been  discovered  by  two  Hol- 
landers, Jacob  Maire,  of  Amsterdam,  and  Cor- 
nelius Schouten,  of  Hoorn,  in  the  year  1516.^ 
The  straits  known  by  the  name  of  Le  Maire 
were  called  after  the  first  mentioned  navigator  j 
and  Horn,  the  present  name  of  the  Cape,  is  a 
corruption  of  Hoorn,  the  name  of  the  city  in 
Holland,  of  which  Cornelius  Schouten  was  a  na- 
tive. The  discovery  made  by  these  intrepid  men 
opened  a  new  way  into  the  Pacific,  which  took 
away  much  from  the  importance  of  the  Strait» 
of  Magellan,  and  they  have,  in  consequenccy 
since  that  time  been  little  frequented.  The  enor- 
mous stature  of  the  Patagonians,  as  described 
by  some  navigators,  who  have  passed  through 
the  straits,  is  a  matter  worthy  of  consideration, 
since   I  find  the  subject  spoken  of  by  reput* 


204  PATAGONIANS. 

able  authors  with  much  uncertainty:  this  in- 
duces me  to  lay  before  the  reader  what  inform- 
ation I  have  been  able  to  obtain  respecting  this 
doubtful  circumstance. 

I  have  received  particular  accounts  of  the. 
Patagonians  residing  in  the  Straits,  from  persons 
of  veracity,  who  have  lately  passed  through 
them }  and  the  natives  are  described  as  being  of 
ordinary  stature,  from  five  feet  five  inches  (the 
statiire  of  the  Fuegians,  from  whom  they  ai'e  but 
little  difierent),  to  six  feet.  From  the  circum- 
stance of  the  land  on  the  Patagonian  side  of  the 
straits  being  more  temperate,  and  less. mountain- 
ous than  that  of  Tierra  del  Fuego,  those  who 
live  on  that  side  take  more  land  exercise,  and  are 
somewhat  more  robust,  better  clothed,  and  go 
together  in  larger  tribes. 

These  people,  it  should  be  remembered,  are 
the  inhabitants  of  the  Straits  only ;  in  the  interior 
of  this  country,  which  is  of  vast  extent,  there 
may  be  men  of  Goliah-like  stature  j  but  we  can 
scarcely  suppose  them  of  the  size  described  by  a 
gentleman  who  was  on  shore  with  Commodore 
Byron,  at  his  interview  with  the  Patagonians,  in 
the  Straits  of  Magellan.  (Vide  Byron's  Voyage, 
vol.  ii.  pages  826 — 7.)  This  officer  says,  that 
"  when  they  were  ten  or  twelve  leagues  within 
the  straits,  they  saw,  through  their  glasses,  many 
people  on  shore  of  a  prodigious  size,  which  ex- 


PATAGONIANS.  205 

traordinary  magnitude  they  thought  to  be  a  de- 
ception, occasioned  by  the  haziness  of  the  atmos- 
phere, it  being  then  somewhat  foggy ;  but  on 
coming  near  the  land,  they  appeared  of  still 
greater  bulk,  and  made  amicable  signs  to  our 
people  to  come  on  shore.  That  when  the  ship 
sailed  on,  to  find  a  proper  place  of  landing,  they 
made  lamentations,  as  if  they  were  afraid  our 
people  were  going  off."  ^r 

He  also  says,  "  there  were  near  four  hundred 
of  them,  and  about  one-third  of  the  men  on 
horses,  not  much  larger  than  ours ;  and  that  they 
rode  with  their  knees  up  the  horses'  withers, 
having  no  stirrups ;  that  there  were  women,  and 
many  children,  whom  some  of  our  people  took 
up  in  their  arms  and  kissed,  which  the  Indians 
beheld  with  much  seeming  satisfaction.  ^  That 
by  way  of  affection  and  esteem  they  took  his 
hand  between  theirs,  and  patted  it;  and  th*at 
some  of  those  he  saw  were  ten  feet  high,  well 
proportioned,  and  well  featured  :  their  skins  were 
of  a  warm  copper  colour,  and  thfey  had  neither 
offensive  nor  defensive  weapons.  He  also  says, 
that  they  seemed  particularly  pleased  with  Lieu- 
tenant Gumming,  on  account  of  his  stature,  he 
being  six  feet  two  inches  high,  and  that  some  of 
them  patted  him  on  the  shoulders,  but  their  hands 
fell  with  such  force,  that  it  affected  his  whole 
frame.'* 


206  PATAGONIANS. 

I  have  hinted  in  another  place,  that  those  with 
whom  Commodore  Byron  communicated  were 
probably  chiefs ;  but  it  is  more  than  probable 
that  this  tribe,  of  whatever  size,  were  not  inhabit- 
ants of  the  shore,  but  of  the  interior,  and  from 
the  country  farther  to  the  northward,  and  of 
course  seldom,  perhaps  never,  on  the  shores  of 
the  Straits  when  any  vessels  touched  there  since 
that  time. 

Patagonians  farther  to  the  northward,  some- 
times come  down  in  the  summer  season,  and  have 
been  seen  by  my  officers,  who  described  them 
to  be  generally  about  six  feet  high,  well  propor- 
tioned, and  appearing,  upon  the  whole,  above 
the  ordinary  size.  Unlike  the  Fuegians,  they 
are  fond  of  spirituous  liquors  ;  but  they  resemble 
them  in  being  fond  of  toys,  and  every  kind  of 
hardware.  My  chief  mate  in  our  first  voyage,  in 
1819j  about  the  Bay  of  Saint  Mathias,  bought 
a  young  guanacoe,  from  a  Patagonian,  for  an 
old  knife.  He  described  this  man  to  be  of 
middle  statiu-e,  and  good  looking :  he  came  up 
to  the  boat's  crew  on  horsebackj  with  great  con- 
fidence J  alighted,  and  showed  the  officer  that  he 
had  taken  the  animal  with  a  sling. 

From  the  necessity  of  my  remaining  on  board 
while  under  sail,  on  the  coast,  I  had  not  oppor- 
tunities of  ascertaining  any  thing  in  particular  of 
the  native  habits,  which  are  no  doubt  materially 


PATAGONIANS,  207 

different  froin  those  of  the  tribes  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Buenos  Ayreg,  who,  by  intercourse  with 
the  Spaniards,  have  become  somewhat  assimilated 
to  European  manners, 

I  am,  upon  the  whole,  fuHy  of  opinion,  that  no 
men^  of  the  prodigious  stature  described  by  Com* 
Hk)dore  Byron,  eve^  appear  now  on  tibe  sea  coast, 
whatever  giants  there  may  be  in  the  interior  of 
the  country.  Port  Desire,  and  the  Bay  of  St.  Jo- 
seph^ are  places  at  which  tribes  of  Patagpnians 
have  been  seen  by  gentlemen  of  my  acquaint- 
ance»  whose  description  of  the  natives  accords 
with  what  I  have  stated  respecting  those  seen  by 
my  officers.  The  extent  of  country  inhabited 
by  the  native  Patagonians  only,  which  lies  to  the 
south  of  the  river  Negro,  (on  which  there  is  a  set- 
tlement of  a  few  Spaniards,)  may  be  estimated  at 
770  miles  in  length,  and  300  in  breadth,  or 
232,200  square  miles. 

A  knowledge  of  what  this  extent  of  country 
affords,  of  inhabitants,  and  commercial  produce, 
particularly  on  the  eastern  part  of  the  Andes, 
would  be  very  desirable,  as  an  advantageous 
traffic  might  possibly  be  opened  with  the  natives, 
who  may  be  more  numerous  than  is  supposed. 
Commodore  Anson  informs  us,  that  King  Charles 
the  Second  was  of  opinion  that  a  country 
contiguous  to  a  region  containing  such  store  of 
gold  aad  silver  as  Chili,  was  worthy  of  being 


208  PATAGONIA. 

examined  for  that  precious  ore,  independent  of 
opening  a  commerce  with  the  natives,  for  other 
productions. 

Induced  by  these  considerations  he  sent  out 
Sir  John  Narborough,  to  open  a  communication 
with  the  Patagonians,  and  to  ascertain  the  value 
qf  their  possessions*  However,  it  appears  that  he 
did  not  effect  either.  Commodore  Anson  says, 
(Voyage  p.  93.)  "  It  is  true  that  Sir  John  Nar- 
borough did  not  succeed  in  opening  this  com- 
merce, whicli  in  appearance  promised  so  many 
advantages  to  this  nation.  However,  his  disap- 
pointment was  merely  accidental,  and  his  trans- 
actions upon  that  coast,  besides  the  many  valu- 
able improvements  he  furnished  to  geography 
and  navigation,  are  rather  an  encouragement  for 
future  trials  of  this  kind,  than  any  objection 
against  them ;  his  principal  misfortune  being 
the  losing  company  of  a  small  bark,  which  at- 
tended him,  and  having  some  of  his  people  tre- 
panned, at  Baldivia.'*  -  . 

However,  it  appeared  by  the  precautions  and 
the  fears  of  the  Spa:niar(is,  that  they  were  fully 
convinced  of  the  practicability  of  the  scheme 
he  was  sent  to  execute,  and  extremely  alarmed 
at  the  apprehensions  of  its  consequences. 

It  is  said  that  his  majesty  King  Charles  II. 
was  so  prepossessed  with  hopes  of  the  advan- 
tages which  would  redound  from  this  expedition. 


SOOTH    AMERICAN    COASTS.  WO 

and  so  eager  to  be  informed  of  the  event  of  it,  that 
hearing  intelligence  of  Sir  John  Narborough's 
passing  through  the  Downs,  on  his  return,  he 
had  not  patience  to  attend  his  arrival  at  court, 
but  went  himself  in  his  barge  to  Gravesend  to 
meet  him." 

The  coasts  of  South  America  are  of  a  different 
description.  The  western  coast  is  rocky,  high, 
and  rugged,  containing  many  islands,  with  deep 
water  close  to  the  shores. 

The  eastern  falls  into  many  deep  and  fine 
bays,  with  beaches  reaching  nearly  the  whole 
length  of  the  line ;  and  the  water  deepens  so 
gradually,  that  at  the  distance  of  100  miles  from 
land,  there  is  not  more  than  a  sounding  of 
seventy  fathoms. 

The  shores,  which  present  a  pleasing  irregu- 
larity of  height,  consist  of  a  soil  of  brown  mould, 
something  resembling  ftiller's  earth,  and  impreg- 
nated with  saltpetre. 

In  many  places  on  the  coast  where  I  have 
walked  inland  a  few  miles,  I  have  found  the 
ground,  richly  clothed  with  grass,  and  the  interior 
country  presenting  a  beautiful  irregularity  of 
surface.  No  trees  are  seen  near  the  sea  from- 
the  river  of  Plate  to  the  shores  of  the  Straits  of 
Magellan,  where,  however,  they  are  abundant. 
Farther  inland,  however,  it  is  likely  that  there  are 
trees,  as  on  the  western  side  of  the  Andes,  in  the 


S^IO  THE   PQLE-CAT   AND    THE   JAGUAR. 

latitude  of  45°  the  woods  are  almost  impejf\fiw^< 
Tpi  the,  4ciorth  of  the  ^iver  Negro,  the  cowfst^y 
becofi^^s  level,  with  i;i^h  p^stujreit  9fi  w^^b 
g^^at  numbers  of  horses  and  1[)ullocksiJrun  w^. 
.  '^'he  animal  called  ^he  pole-;<^t  wa^  «^^  by 
my  crew  on  the  coast,  and  one  of  them  indeed 
emitted  tt^e  ajbominable  liquid  into  his  eyes,  which 
they  are  accustomed  to  do  in  the  way  of  defence : 
^nd  judging  by  the  noise  he  made,  it  must  have 
caused  him  great  pain. 

The  American  tiger,  cabled  by  the  Spaniards 
jaguar,  is  often  seen  on  the  coast.  They  have 
bj^en,  known  to  wander  around  a  boat  turned 
bottom  up  on  shore,  with  the  xirew  lying  under- 
neath, and  to  depart  without  showing  any  vora^ 
cious  inclination  after  prey.  , 
.  The  rivers,  in  thia  country  are  npt  inconsider- 
able, and  are  conveniently  spread  along  the 
coast,  from  latitude  39''  50' ;  six  may  be  enumei- 
ated  —  the  river  St  Joseph  j  Colorado,  or  Red 
River ;  river  Negro,  or  Black  River ;  Port  De- 
sire ;  Port  St  Julian  y  and  S^.  Gruz*  The 
four  last  mentioned  afJbrdi  aachorage,  two.  of 
them  for  large  vessels,  which  renders  this  country 
highly  valuable*  Having  thus  given  what  in- 
formation  I  have  by  my  own  observations  been 
able  to  procure  regarding  these  parts  and  their 
inhabitants,  as  also  statements  made  to  me  by 
gentlemen  of  veracity,  I  shall  dismiss  the  sub* 

t 


PASSAGE   TO    THE    FALKLAND    ISLANDS.     211 

ject,  and  return  to  our  passage  to  the  Falkland 
Islands. 

We  continued  within  view  of  land  till  the 
21st,  when  in  the  evening,  and  about  to  los(e  sight 
of  the  coast,  Coy  Bay  bore  S.S.  W.  distant  about 
five  leagues.  During  our  passage  to  the  Falk- 
land Islands,  we  had  fresh  gales  between  S.S.W. 
and  N.N.W.,  with  an  irregular  sea,  and  on  the 
25th  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning,  with  the  wind 
at  west,  and  the  weather  hazy,  we  saw  Cape 
Meredith,  bearing  N^N.E.,  about  three  leagues  j 
and  at  two  P.M.,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in 
Robertson's  Bay,  in  seven  fathoms  water.  Hav- 
ing examined  the  southern  shores  for  the  fur  seal, 
on  the  28th  the  wind  being  at  N.E.  and  the  wea- 
ther favourable,  we  weighed,  and  proceeded  to 
New  Island,  which  we  reached  on  the  2d  of 
March,  and  at  two  P.M.  anchored  in  Ship  Har- 
bour, in  seven  fathoms  water.  Having  observed 
smoke  on  the  north  end  of  the  island  as  we  ap- 
proached, I  thought  it  might  probably  be  in- 
tended by  some  shipwrecked  people  as  a  signal 
of  distress ;  but  it  turned  out  to  be  only  the 
burning  of  some  tussuck,  which  had  been  ignited 
some  months  before. 

On  the  6th  having  completed  our  sea  store  of 
water,  and  taken  a  quantity  of  peat  on  board  for 
fiiel,  we  weighed,  and  the  same  day  anchored  in 
West  Point  Harbour.     On  the  12th  we  proceed- 

p  2 


212  SPANISH    SHIPS    OF   WAR 

ed  to  Port  Egmont,  and  anchored  off  the  ruins 
in  nine  fathoms  water. 

On  the  15th,  in  the  morning,  I  was  surprised 
to  see  a  line  of  battle  ship  and  a  sloop  of  war 
coming  round  the  Point.  We  presently  ascer- 
tained by  their  colours  that  they  were  Spanish. 
I  hurried  on  board,  and  was  politely  received. 
I  pointed  out  the  most  eligible  anchorage ;  but 
they  chose  to  run  a  little  beyond  it,  by  which 
they  afterwards  drove,  and  caused  themselves  a 
great  deal  of  trouble.  The  ship  of  the  line  was 
the  Asia,  of  70  guns.  The  brig  was  the  Achilles, 
of  20  guns.  They  reported  themselves  from 
Lima,  which  I  afterwards,  from  a  number  of  con- 
curring circumstances,  discovered  to  be  false. 
My  boat's  crew  soon  ascertained  from  the  sailors, 
some  of  whom  spoke  good  English,  that  they 
were  but  ten  weeks  from  Cadiz ;  but  the  oflScers 
still  persisted  in  this  story  of  being  from  Lima, 
and  I  did  not  contradict  it  Their  anxiety  to 
obtain  information  respecting  the  navigation  of 
Straits  Le  Maire,  and  round  Cape  Horn,  was  of 
itself  enough  to  satisfy  me,  that  they  were  bound 
that  way. 

The  crew  of  this  ship,  I  understood,  including 
their  gunners  or  troops,  was  about  800  men ;  and 
the  brig  was  manned  with  150.  They  appeared 
in  all  respects  eflfective,  and  though  they  were 
not  so  expeditious  in  their  movements,  as  is  the 


AT   PORT   EGMONT.  213 

practice  in  our  navy,  they  were  indefatigable 
and  secure  in  their  operations.  Their  crews 
were  sent  on  shore  to  ramble  for  the  benefit  of 
their  health;  and  shooting  parties  soon  killed 
almost  every  bird  in  the  neighbourhood. 

On  the  I6th,  in  a  hard  gale  from  the  N.W.  the 
Asia  drove  to  a  distance  of  about  two  miles  from 
the  landing  place.  In  the  morning  of  the  17th 
it  moderated,  and  her  boats  went  on  shore,  but 
a  very  hard  gale  coming  on,  they  were  unable 
to  get  off. 

Being  engaged  by  the  officers  to  dine  on 
board  the  Asia,  and  having  two  of  them  on  board 
the  Jane  with  me,  I  took  the  opportunity  of 
showing  them  that  our  boats  could  go  against  a 
gale,  and  accordingly  manned  a  fine  whale  boat 
with  stout  men,  and  rowed  on  board  with  appa- 
rent ease* 

In  looking  over  their  charts,  I  observed  the 
Auroras  laid  down,  and  informed  them  that  np 
such  places  existed.  Of  this  they  would  not  be 
convinced,  insisting  that  the  Spanish  ship  of 
war  Atrevida  settled  their  situation  in  the  year 
1796,  as  I  have  before  mentioned.  The  com- 
modore supplied  us  with  some  naval  stores  of 
which  we  were  much  in  want,  and  I  sent  a  quan- 
tity of  oil  in  return.  He  appeared  to  be  about 
the  age  of  fifty,  and  seemed  to  possess  a  thorough 
knowledge  of  the  executive   duties  of  a  ship, 

p  3 


S14  PASSAGE    TO   PATAGONIA. 

even  to  the  minutest  operations^  as  I  observed 
him  correct  a  sailor  in  the  passing  a  seizing 
round  the  fore-stay.  He  politely  invited  me  to 
dine  with  him,  and  honored  me  by  particularly 
noticing  the  hazardous  voyage  we  had  performed, 
with  other  marks  of  respect,  which  evinced  a 
disposition  to  favor  and  promote  enterprise. 

I  took  an  opportunity  of  waiting  upon  the 
commander  of  the  brig,  who,  from  having  been 
sometime  a  prisoner  in  England,  spoke  very  good 
English.  He  took  me  through  the  mess  deck 
of  the  ship,  and  I  was  surprized  to  see  how  or- 
derly every  thing  appeared ;  in  short,  she  was 
little  different,  as.  to  the  internal  arrangement, 
from  our  own  sloops  of  war.  I  presume  this 
oflScer  had  noticed  the  system  observed  in  our 
navy,  and  had  established  it  in  his  own  vessel. 

On  the  19th  the  wind  being  southerly,  and 
the  weather  settled,  we  weighed,  and  proceeded 
again  towards  the  coast  of  Patagonia.  During 
our  passage,  we  had  strong  gales  from  the  south- 
ward, in  which  we  lost  two  boats  from  the  quar- 
ters. We  ran  under  a  close-reefed  maintop-sail, 
and  though  from  not  steering  well,  some  risk  was 
incurred,  we  continued  to  scud  before  the  wind. 
I  had  an  instance  of  the  danger  of  scudding  too 
long  during  my  passage  home  in  my  first  voy- 
age, in  the  year  1822.  Being  in  the  Bay  of 
Biscay,  in  the  month  of  March,  at  midnight. 


SHIP   LAID    ON   HER   BROADSIDE.  215 

with 'the  wind  at  west  blowing  a  heavy  gale; 
we  were  running  under  a  close-reefed  maintop- 
sail  iand  foretop-mast  staysail,  and  two  meri  were 
at  the  wheel,  one  of  whom  was  considered  an 
fexcellent  helmsman.  I  was  standing  on  deck, 
when  the  wind  freshened,  and  the  night  became 
so  dark,  that  only  the  foatn  of  the  sea  was  visi- 
ble. The  man  at  the  helm,  by  some  misraan- 
iagementi  put  it  the  wrong  way,  and  the  ship 
flew  to  the  wind  with  such  rapidity  as  laid 
her  on  her  broadside.  Two  sailors,  stationed  at 
the  maintop-sail  sheets,  at  my  desire  let  them 
go,  and  I  hastened  to  the  helm,  and  lashed  it  a 
weather,  though,  from  the  ship  lying  on  her  side, 
very  little  of  the  rudder  remained  in  the  water. 
The  foretop-mast  staysail  fortunately  being  new, 
did  not  give  way,  and  in  about  three  minutes, 
every  moment  of  which  I  expected  would  com- 
plete our  ruin,  the  ship  veered,  and  as  the  wind 
drew  aft  she  righted,  and  we  presently  hove 
to. 

In  our  passage  to  Patagonia,  however,  nothing 
more  serious  happened  than  losing  our  boats; 
and  on  the  23d  we  made  the  coast  off  Point 
Lobos,  in  the  latitude  of  44^,  the  rendezvous 
appointed  for  our  meeting  with  the  Beaufoy; 
but  not  finding  her,  I  concluded  that  the  strong 
southerly  winds  had  driven  her  to  the  northward, 
and  that  she  had,  in  consequence,  proceeded 

p  4 


dl6  MONTE  VIDEO. 

home.  We  ran  close  along  the  coast  to  the 
northward;  and  on  the  3d  of  April,  having 
sprung  a  leak,  and  being  in  the  mouth  of  the  river 
of  Plate,  we  put  into  Monte  Video. 

My  necessities  were  politely  attended  to  here 
by  the  house  of  Stewart  M'Call  and  Co.,  of 
which  James  Noble,  Esq.  is  executive  partner  j 
and  I  made  application  to  the  British  Consul, 
T.  S.  Hood,  Esq.,  for  a  survey  to  be  held  on  the 
Jane,  to  ascertain  her  defects.  Sir  Murray  Max- 
well, commodore  on  that  station,  and  in  com- 
mand of  the  Briton  frigate,  having  heard  of  the 
arrival  of  the  ships  of  war  at  the  Falkland 
Islands,  requested  to  see  me.  I  waited  on  him, 
and  described  them  to  be  Spanisli,  which  did 
away  with  a  conjecture  of  their  being  French  in 
the  character  of  Spaniards,  as  some  j^we^^e  of  that 
kind  was  possible;  and  as  several  French  ships  of 
war  were  in  these  seas,  their  movements  were 
narrowly  watched. 

Mr.  Hood,  the  British  Consul,  gave  the  ne- 
cessary instructions  for  the  survey,  which  being 
made,  the  requisite  repairs  were  entered  upon ; 
and  by  the  favor  of  Sir  Murray  Maxwell  in  send- 
ing  me  the  assistance  of  carpenters  from  his  ma- 
jesty's ship  Briton,  our  defects  were  soon  made 
good,  and  by  the  4th  of  May,  we  were  ready  for 
sea. 

Monte  Video,  a  place  generally  known,  is  a 


MONTE   VIDEO.  217 

walled  city,  situated  on  the  north  shore  of  the 
river  of  Plate,  about  seventy  miles  from  its  en- 
trance. This  city  was  taken  in  1823  from  the 
Portuguese  royalists  by  the  Brazilian  imperialists, 
who  now  possess  it.  The  present  military  go- 
vernor-general, Le  Core,  seems  to  be  a  person 
well  calculated  for  improving  the  circumstances 
of  the  country ;  but  the  experience  of  frequent 
invasions  and  revolutions  within  the  last  twenty 
years,  prevents  the  inhabitants  from  attending  to 
any  thing  that  cannot  be  quickly  turned  into 
money ;  hence  it  is,  that  houses  on  magnificent 
plans  are  left  unfinished,  and  many  for  several 
miles  without  the  walls,  are  allowed  to  remain 
in  a  state  of  ruin,  caused  by  the  desolation  of 
war.  Many  of  the  streets  are  so  broken  up  as  to 
be  almost  impassable.  The  whole  together  at  this 
time  presents  the  accumulated  wreck  of  a  series 
of  years,  agitated  by  almost  perpetual  civil  and 
foreign  contests.  The  rich,  as  may  be  expected, 
live  in  ease  and  authority,  without  however  being 
offensively  proud,  or  cruelly  severe,  as  masters. 
The  labouring  class  of  people  are  not  remark- 
able for  industry,  being  rather  addicted  to  idle- 
ness and  inebriety  ;  foreign  labourers  more  par- 
ticularly.  Three  days*  work  in  the  week,  on 
account  of  the  cheapness  of  provisions,  is  suflS- 
cient  to  support  them  during  the  other  four  days 
in  riot  and  dissipation ;  and  there  is  scarcely  any 


218  THE    LADIES    OF    MO^TE    VIDEO. 

European,  libwevet*  industrious  he  may  be  at  his 
arrival,  who  does  not  fdfl  Into  this  course  of  idle- 
ness. 

The  guachos,  or  countrymen,  who  come  occa- 
sionally into  town,  ^re  people  of  tall  stature,  wiA 
fuddy  complexions.  They  are  not  considered 
the  most  honest  class  of  men ;  and  they  have, 
perhaps,  committed  more  assassinations  than  any 
other. 

The  ladies  of  Motite  Video  are  generally  some- 
what below  the  middle  stature,  and  inclined  to 
belusty*  The  custom  of  wearing  small  shoes,  I 
presume,  has  made  them  clumsy  dbout  the  feet  j- 
but  the  beauty  of  their  faces  amply  compensates 
fin-  that  deformity.  The  contour  of  their  coun- 
tenances is  what  may  be  Called  Grecian,  with 
complexions  sallow  enough  to  take  off  the  cha^- 
racter  of  common-place  ruddiness  j  and  their 
expressive  black  eyes,  together  with  their  simple 
elegance  and  complacency  of  manner,  does  not 
fail  to  render  them  interesting. 

The  priesthood  of  this  place  appear  to  be 
dwindling  in  authority,  and  poverty  is  conspicu- 
ous  in  their  churches.  That  grandeur  which' 
the  internal  structure  of  their  sanctuaries  used  to 
present  in  this  quarter  of  the  globe,  is  now 
diminished  almost  to  the  bare  walls. 

The  English  merchants  are  a  respectable  body, 
and  lately  a  British  consul  has  been  appointed 


king's   BIllTtt-DAY.  219 

to  iattenj  to  their  interests.    These  gentlemen 
never  omit  celebrating  the  anniversary  of  his 
Britannic  Majesty*s  birth-day  with  a  public  din- 
ner.    I  was  so  fortunate  at  this  time  as  to  be  of 
the  party  at  this  annual  feast*     The  company 
sat  down  at  six  o*clock,  about  fifty  in  number. 
Sir  Murray  Maxwell,  the  British  Consul,  and 
several  Spanish  and  Portuguese  officers  of  high 
rank,  civil  and  military,  were  present.     By  eight 
o*clock  the  cloth  was  removed,  and  the  health 
of  His  Majesty,  King  George  the  Fourth,  was 
drunk.      To  this  the  Portuguese  band,    who 
were  placed  in  the  court  yard,  struck  up  the  air 
of  God  save  the  King,  and  at  the  same  moment 
the  Briton  frigate  discharged  a  quantity  of  rockets, 
and  fired  a  royal  salute.     The  coincidence  of 
these  feats,  which  had  been  previously  well  ar- 
ranged, was  so  complete  that  the  effect  was  ad- 
mirable.    The  Portuguese  band  had  been  taught 
the  music  of  Rule  Britannia,  which  they  played 
with  great  spirit;  and  the  bumpers  went  round 
to  appropriate  toasts.     The  Spanish  gentlemen, 
in  order  to  manifest  their  totab  disregard  of 
worldly  goods,  began  to  break  the  plates  and 
glasses,  as  if  they  had  been  of  no  value.     Every 
toast  was  accompanied  with  a  sacrifice  of  these 
articles ;  and  one  old  Spaniard  was  remarkable 
for  rubbing  two  desert  plates  together  at  every 
bumper,  and  throwing  them  over  his  shoulder ; 


mo  A    SPANISH 

on  which  Sir  Murray  Maxwell  facetiously  remark- 
ed, that  the  word  Plate  (the  name  of  the  river) 
must  be  derived  from  the  table  utensil  of  that 
name,  from  the  evident  pleasure  that  was  here 
taken  in  its  destruction.  As  the  evening  ad- 
vanced, the  company  fell  oiF  to  their  respective 
homes,  and  I  to  mine. 

A  Spanish  public  dinner  was  also  given  during 
my  stay,  to  which  I  was  invited  by  my  friend 
Mr.  Noble.  This  feast  exhibited  a  very  different 
figure  to  that  I  have  described.  The  dinner 
was  given  in  celebration  of  the  tranquil ,  estab- 
lishment of  the  new  government. 

We  were  to  dine  at  the  house  of  John  Dios 
de  Solis,  at  the  distance  of  about  seven  miles 
from  town;  and,  as  few  people  here  walk  far 
without  the  walls,  a  conveyance  was  provided, 
such  as  by  us  is  called  a  noddy,  having  but  two 
wheels  and  being  drawn  by  two  horses  a-breast, 
on  one  of  which  rode  the  driver.  In  this  vehicle 
six  of  us  were  seated,  and  travelled  at  the  risk 
of  being  overturned  a  hundred  times  by  the 
badness  of  the  roads.  The  country  in  this  direc- 
tion to  the  N.E.  appeared  to  be  in  a  very  broken 
state,  barren,  and  ftiU  of  deep  sand-holes.  This, 
however,  being  the  only  road  by  which  a  be- 
sieging army  could  approach  the  town,  this 
part  had  suffered  much  by  having  been  many 
times  occupied  by  the  enemy. 


PUBLIC   DINNER.  221 

About  two  o'clock,  we  arrived  at  the  house  of 
our  host,  andfound  the  company  assembled,anioiig 
whom  we  presently  took  our  seats  at  the  table, 
which  was  continued  through  two  rooms.  The 
party  consisted  partly  of  patriot  Spaniards,  with 
some  Americans,  French,  and  Portuguese,  alto- 
•gether  about  sixty  in  number.  The  dinner  was 
profusely  abundant ;  but  no  dish  appeared  very 
remarkable,  except  a  large  roast  of  beef  with  the 
hide  on.  This  mode  of  cooking  has  the  effect 
of  retaining  the  juice  of  the  meat,  and  from  the 
number  who  partook  of  it,  it  appeared  to  be  a 
favourite  viand.  The  wine,  of  which  there  was 
variety,  went  merrily  round  during  the  entertain- 
ment, and  by  the  time  the  cloth  was  removed,  the 
organs  of  articulation  had  become  so  volatile^ 
that  you  could  scarcely  hear  your  next  neigh- 
bour. Some  Spaniards,  who  were  less  clamo- 
rous, amused  themselves  with  shooting  little 
bread  balls  at  one  another  across  the  table,  and 
aiming  at  the  face.  This  amusement  was  an 
annoyance  to  me,  but  by  my  remaining  neutral, 
they  allowed  me  to  sit  in  peace.  Their  national 
toasts  were  drunk  in  quick  succession,  but  on 
their  vice-president  proposing  the  toast  of  "  Long 
live  King  Ferdinand  the  Seventh,**  nearly  the 
whole  company  dissented,  and  loaded  him  with 
a  torrent  of  abuse ;  to  which  he  replied  with 
so  much  acrimony,  that  the  table  of  expected 


^2  POLITICAL    DIFF£B£NC£S. 

frieadship  and  convivktlity  soon  pi*esented  a 
scene  of  the  most  inveterate  warfare.  The 
Vice-president  prudently,  however,  sat  in  silence 
for  a  few  minutes,  by  which  means  order  wias 
ifestored,  and  the  ofiended  party  vented  their 
rage  on  the  wine,  which  in  half  an  hour  was 
fs^t,  becoming  conqueror.  Glasses  and  plates 
flew  to  destruction,  and,  to  crown  the  whole,  an 
agile  Spaniard  mounted  the  table,  making  a 
variety  of  antics,,  which  so  destroyed  the  ec€>- 
nomy  of  it,  that  bo  further  hint  was  necessary 
to  advise  usr  ta  depart,  and  we  rose,  got  seated 
in  our  noddy,  and  drove  homewards*  Thus 
ended  the  dinner,  which  in  the  whole  bad  oc* 
cupied  not  more  than  two  hours  and  a  half. 

This  company,  as  far  as  I  could  understand, 
were  evidently  much  divided  in  politics :  all  pro^ 
hably  were  patriots^  but  i^  variously  modified,  as 
to  create  a  great  difference  of  opinion  ^  —  nor 
can  it  be  otherwise.  Ilie  diversity  of  interest, 
with  the  frequent  change  of  political  sentiment, 
which  a  change  of  government  induces,  renders 
them  fickle  and  inconsistent.  The  present  code 
of  laws,  however,  gives  the  inhabitants  more  satis- 
faction  than  any  hitherto  enacted :  the  murderer 
cannot  now,  as  formerly,  escape  death  by  the  pay- 
ment of  money,  or  by  sufifering  a  short  imprison- 
ment ;  and  in  other  cases,  the  present  governor  is 
rigidly  careful  to  protect  the  pecuniary  interests 


PRICES   or   liORJBiES    AND    Byi^LOCKS.        gS3 

and  personal  safety  of  the  eitizjens.  Thes^ 
amenctoaents,  with  the  firm  establishment  of  th^ 
Brazilian  governittent,  promise  fair  to  put  a» 
ead  tcx  tli,e  ravages  of  atiarchy. 

The  expwts  of  this  place  coiisfet,  principally, 
of  horses  and  bullocks,  hides  and  hwn^.  The^^ 
animals  have  much  diminished  in  number  within 
the  lajst  fifteen  years,  or  since  the  time  that  our 
troops  had  possession  of  the  place;  and  they 
have  consequently  risen  in  price.  A  mound  of 
the  boaes  of  horses  was  shown  me,  which  at  the. 
time  they  were  killed,  about  fifteen  years  ago, 
were  brought  to  the  slaughter-house  for  two 
shillings  a  head.  A  good  horse  now  costs  twa 
pounds  sterling.  Bullocks  are,  no  doubt,  still 
numerous  in  the  interior,  but  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  city,  they  are  scarce.  At  thi^  tiojje^ 
a  well  fed  bullock  costs  about  eighteen  dollars^ 
such  as  a  dozea  years  ago  was  killed  only  for  its 
hide  and  tallow.  Vegetables  are  exorbitantly 
d^iTy  and  every  thing  else  that  the  country  pro- 
duces is  increased  in  price  in  a  similar  proportion.. 

As  the  late  siege  of  Monte  Video  has  been, 
however,  partly  the  cause  of  this  diminution  of 
supplies,  two.  or  three  years  with  a  settled  go- 
vernment will  do.  much  in  restoring  the  plenty 
of  former  times. 

Little  need  be  said  of  the  harbour  of  Monite 
Video,  as  it  has  been  well  described  by  former 


224  HARBOUR   OF   MONTE  ViDEO 

visitors.  I  may  remark,  however,  that  it  affords 
so  little  shelter  from  south  to  west,  and  is  so 
shallow,  having  only  two  fathoms  at  a  mean 
state,  that  there  is  nothing  commodious  about  it 

A  vessel  drawing  twelve  or  thirteen  feet 
water,  is  seldom  afloat  in  what  may  be  called  the 
harbour,  though  the  bottom  is  of  mud,  in  which 
a  vessel  sits  without  receiving  damage;  but 
sometimes,  if  lying  across  the  harbour  when 
the  pamperos  sets  in,  it  is  caught  by  these 
hurricanes,  which  is,  if  not  injurious,  at  least  in- 
convenient 

These  winds,  blowing  from  the  south  west 
over  a  plain  nearly  reaching  the  foot  of  the 
Andes,  acquire  such  force,  that  they  fall  into 
the  river  of  Plate  and  harbour  of  Monte  Video 
with  so  great  violence,  that  the  best  anchors  and 
cables  are  requisite  for  the  securing  of  ships. 

The  several  dangerous  shoals  with  which  this 
river  is  bedded,  cause  the  navigation  to  Buenos 
Ayres  to  be  attended  with  danger.  Many  com- 
manders of  ships,  entering  with  a  fair  wind,  are 
often  induced  to  proceed  without  a  pilot,  and  by 
the  time  they  have  arrived  in  the  vicinity  of  dan- 
ger, the  wind  becomes  contrary,  and  the  weather 
unsettled,  and  not  being  acquainted  with  the  set 
of  the  currents,  they  ground  their  ships.  The 
lapse  of  a  short  time  frequently  makes  great  al- 
teration, in  the  facilities  afforded  to  this  pilot- 


EXTREMELY  DANGEROUS.        935 

gifound.  The  buoys  are  often  shifted  MW^jhfed 
away,  and  yoii  are  left  without  the  guide  of  bad- 
idsrks.  Banks  have  moved,  and  neither  the 
depth  of  the  river,  nor  the  set  of  the  currents 
are  accurately  known ;  all  of  which  uncertainties 
contribute  to  embarrass  those  even  of  long  ex- 
perience in  this  passage.  During  my  stay  of  a 
month  at  Monte  Video,  two  vessels  were  totally 
lost  in  the  river ;  and  one,  a  month  or  six  weeks 
before,  was  wrecked,  with  the  loss  of  several 
lives,  in  a  manner  truly  distressing,  as  they  died 
on  a  raft,  drifting  with  the  direction  of  the  wind 
and  current. 

On  the  mount  of  Monte  Video,  the  lanthorn^ 
which  is  nightly  lighted,  is  so  faint  as  scarcdy 
to  be  seen  at  the  harbour  anchorage :  it  is  there- 
fore of  little  use ;  but,  if  placed  on  the  Island 
of  Flores,  and  properly  attended  to,  it  would  be 
a  great  guidance  to  ships  passing  up  in  dark 
nights.  English  and  American  pilots  are  to  be 
had  at  Monte  Video,  but  they  get  so  little  en- 
couragement, that  they  never  put  to  sea  to  look 
out  for  ships. 

The  harbour  of  Maldonado  would  be  conve- 
nient  for  a  rendezvous  for  pilots,  being  near  the 
fair  way,  and  without  all  the  banks. 

Coidd  captains  be  brought  under  an  obligation 
to  take  pilots,  a  system  might  be  pursued  similar 
to  that  op  our  own  coasts,  and  in  other  parts  of 


296  PILOT   VESSELS   RECOMMENDED. 

the:  world,  by  establishing  two  pilot  vessels, 
(schooners  or  cutters  of  about  50  tons  each,)  to 
cruize  off  the  mouth  of  the  river,  with  ten  or 
twelve  pilots  on  board. 

I  have  given  these  hints  for  the  benefit  of  in- 
surers and  others  concerned  in  the  trade  to  the 
river  Plate,  to  whom  such  an  arrangement  would 
be  most  advautageous ;  leaving  it  to  themselves 
to  devise  how  it  could  be  made  obligatory  on 
captains  to  take  the  pilots.  Were  such  a  system 
established,  the  constant  employment  and  en- 
couragetnent  which  would  be  thereby  given  to 
the  pilots,  would  enable  them  to  reduce  their 
charges  much  below  what  they  are  at  present 

On  the  4th  of  May^  with  the  wind  at  W.S. W. 
w«  weighed  anchor,  and  after  waiting  upon  Sir 
Murray  Maxwell  on  board  his  own  ship,  we 
made  all  possible  sail  to  the  eastward.  We  met 
with  the  usual  winds  and  weather  on  our  passage 
home,  and  in  fifty-nine  days  from  our  sailing 
from  Monte  Video  arrived  in  Falmouth,  before 
the  packet  that  sailed  two  days  before  us.  We 
made  the  Land's  End  of  England,  after  an  ab- 
sence of  nearly  two  years. 


POSTSCRIPT. 


I  AM  aware  that  many  of  the  details  in  this 
volume  militate  considerably  against  the  prevail- 
ing conjectures  upon  those  regions  of  the  earth 
to  which  they  refer,  and  interfere,  in  some 
measure,  with  the  statements  of  former  navi- 
gators J  for  this,  if  any  apology  be  necessary,  I 
would  rather  make  it  here  than  to  have  inter- 
rupted the  work  in  its  progress  by  frequent  notes. 
And  it  seemed  more  becoming  in  one  who  has 
hitherto  had  so  little  leisure  for  the  profound 
study  of  geographical  literature,  to  confine  him- 
self almost  entirely  to  a  simple  account  of  what 
came  practically  under  his  own  observation, 
waiting  to  be  guided,  should  occasion  require  it, 
hereafter,  by  the  judgment  of  those,  whose 
province  it  is  to  mark  the  deficiencies  of  authors, 
and  point  out  what  is  really  worthy  of  public 
attention  for  its  novelty  or  truth. 

Recent  events  in  South  America  have  con- 
tributed to  throw  a  certain  degree  of  interest 
over  some  of  the  matters  mentioned  by  the  au- 
thor :  the  present  state  of  Monte  Video ;  the 
surrender  of  the  Asia  man  of  war,  and  it«  consort, 
to  the  Government  of  Mexico,  need  hardly  be 

particularized. 

Q  2 


APPENDIX. 


«s 


OBSERVATIONS 


ON   THE 


NAVIGATION  ROUND  CAPE  HORN,  &c 


]\1any  commanders  of  ships,  who  have  been  successful 
in  making  a  passage  round  Cape  Horn  to  the  west- 
ward, have  treated  with  unmerited  derision  the  accounts 
given  by  Commodore  Anson  of  this  navigation. 

I  am  quite  satisfied,  from  my  own  experience,  that 
the  month  of  March  might  be  productive  of  all  the  dis- 
tresses described  by  the  journalist.  Captain  Porter, 
who  passed  the  Cape  in  the  American  frigate  Essex,  in 
March  1814,  says,  ^^  Indeed  our  sufierings,  short  as 
has  been  our  passage,  have  been  so  great,  that  I  would 
advise  those,  bound  into  the  Pacific,  never  to  attempt ' 
the  passage  of  Cape  Horn,  if  they  can.  get  there  by  any 
other  route." 

The  difficulty,  however,  in  making  this  passage  is 
removed  by  choosing  the  proper  season,  which,  when 
attended  to,  must  at  least  save  much  time,  apd  wear  and 
tear  of  the  ship.  In  the  beginning'  of  November  the 
winds  b^in  to  draw  from  the  northward,  and  continue 

C  4 


2S1i  THE    NAVIGATION 

to  be  frequent  till  about  the  middle  of  February,  wheo 
they  shift  into  the  south-west  quarter;  during  these 
months  the  westerly  winds  are  not  hi8ting«  henoethe 
passage  may  be  easily  effected.  From  about  the  20th 
of  February  to  the  middle  of  May,  the  winds  are  gene- 
rally between  S.W«  and  N.W.,  and  blow  with  great 
violence.  During  this  interval,  no  ship  need  expect  to 
make  a  passage  round  the  Cape,  that  is  not  well  equip- 
ped in  every  respect.  From  the  middle  of  May  to  the 
end  of  June,  the  winds  prevail  from  the  eastward  with 
fine  weather.  During  these  six  weeks,  a  Vessel  may 
round  the  Cape  in  sight  of  the  Di^^o  Ramirez.  In 
July,  August,  September,  and  October,  the  winds  pre- 
vail again  between  S.W.  and  N. W. ;  but  August  and 
September  are  more  particularly  tempestuous.  In  re- 
gard to  the  route,  which  ships  should  take  round  the 
Cape,  much  depends  on  the  season  of  the  year,  as  re- 
lates to  the  force  of  the  prevailing  westerly  winds.  I 
prefer,  at  all  times,  passing  to  the  westward  of  the  Falk- 
land islands ;  and,  in  the  summer  season,  to  pass  througli 
Straits  Le  Maire,  as  It  saves  fifty  or  sixty  miles  of 
westing,  and  can  be  attended  with  no  rbk  if  you  have 
sufficient  day-light  to  see  to  run  back  through  the  Straits, 
in  the  event  of  being  caught  with  a  southerly  gale  at  the 
southern  entrance. 

Cape  Horn  lies  from  Cape  Good  Success  S.S.  W.  i 
W.  distant  thirty-one  leagues.  In  this  line  lies  Bama- 
velf  s  island.  If  intending  to  touch  at  an  anchoi^age 
about  Cape  Horn,  a  S.  by  W.  |  W.  course  through 
the  night,  will  but  well  avoid  the  indraught  which  some-, 
limes  sets  to  the  N.W.  among  the  islands,  at  the  en- 
trance of  Na^saire  Straits :  if  not  intending  to  go  intot 


ROUND   CAPE   HORN,    &C. .  235 

hurbouTj  a  south  course  from  Straits  Le  Maire  la  the 
south  of  Cape  Horn,  edging  to  the  westward,  and  passing 
the  Diego  Ramirez  on  the  south  side,  at  the  distiavce  of 
a  few  miles^  is  the  most  advisable  track.  Ships  work- 
ing tQ  the  westward,  off  the  Gape,  in  the  summer  season^ 
shouki  fitand  towards  the  shore  of  Tierra  del  Fuego  in 
the  evening,  when  the  wind  will  often  be  found  to  draw 
from  the  northward  off  the  land,  and  western  again  in 
ibe  morning. 

These  observations  refer  to  the  seasons  I  have  recom- 
mended for  passing  the  Cape,  but  during  those  montlis 
which  are  attended  with  the  most  violent  gales,  viz. 
March,  August,  and  September,  I  have  only  to  recom- 
mend 'the  advice  given  by  Commodore  Anson,  that  of 
standing  to  the  southward,  in  the  latitude  of  60^9  'wbi^re 
the  sea  is  more  regular,  and  the  winds  more  equal.  If» 
however^  a  ship  be  making  a  coasting  passage,  and 
i^buld  require  to  anchor,  the  following  instructions  may 
be  found  useful.  The  prominent  situation  of  Cape 
Horn  at  once  points  out  the  neighbouring  bay  of  Saint 
Francis,  in  which  are  two  harbours  perfectly  safe  for 
vessels  of  ahy  draught  of  water.  Their  approach  is  so 
easy  as  to  make  it  necessary  only  to  remark,  that  Wig- 
wam Cove  is  the  second  opening  on  the  west  side  of  the 
bay,  and  by  steering  along  the  western  shore  about  N.!^ 
by  ^.  it  will  be  easily  found. 

On  account  of  the  violent  gusts  that  blowout  of  the 
cove  in  westerly  gales,  a  vessel  had  better  anchor  at  the 
entrance,  where  is  twenty-one  fiithoms  water,  and  a 
bottom  of  sand  and  mud,  and  wait  an  o[^)ortunity  of 
kedging  into  the  cove,  till  South  Head  shuts  in  Cape 
Horn,  when  the  anchorage  will  be  perfectly  safe. 


2S4  THE    NAVIGATION 

The  seO(»id  harbour  in  this  bay  is  pointed  out  on  the 
ebart  by  the  name  of  MaKwell's  harbour.  The  entrance 
is  on  the  north  side,  between  Saddle  Island  and  Jerdan's 
Island;  but  is  so  narrow,  that  with  a  ccmtFary  wmd  a 
vessel  must  anchor  at  the  entrance,  and  kedge  to  her 
berth,  which  may  be  chosen  at  pleasure,  every  part  being 
perfectly  secure.  Here  the  water  is  so  smooth  that  repairs 
upon  a  ship  can  be  carried  on  with  great  convenience. 
Wood  is  abundant  on  the  south  side,  and  water  may  be 
obtaiqed  in  several  places. 

In  proceeding  westward  New  Year's  Sound  next  pre- 
^ents  itself.  In  this  sound  are  several  anchorages,  but 
Indifin  Cove  may  be  considered  the  most  commodious. 
Indian  Island  stands  at  the  mouth  of  the  cove,  and  bears 
from  Sanderson's  Island  at  the  entrance  of  the  sound 
W«N.W.,  sixteen  miles.  The  anchorage  in  this  cove 
is  at  the  upper  end,  in  the  south  comer,  in  fourteen  or 
fifteen  fathoms  water,  within  three  cables'  lengths  of  the 
shore ;  in  most  other  parts  the  ground  is  rocky,  and  the 
water  deep.  The  entrance  not  being  more  than  three-  . 
fifths  of  a  mile  broad,  a  large  vessel  in  working  against  a 
strong  S.W.  wind,  which  blows  out  of  thexove,  would 
require  to  be  worked  quickly  to  take  advantage  of  the 
flaws  of  wind  that  play  about  the  entrance.  The  shoals 
and  spots  of  foul  ground  are  indicated  by  kelp  about  them, 
and  should  consequently  be  avoided.  At  the  entrance 
of  the  cove  on  the  south  side  of  Mid^channel  are  two 
patches ;  in  the  inder  one  is  a  depth  of  three  fathoms, 
and  in  the  outer  one  eight.  The  tide  flows  on  the  full 
and  change  of  the  moon  at  fifty  minutes  past  three,  and 
rises  about  seven  feet.  Wood  and  ,water  are  abundant, 
and  can  be  conveniently  procured. 

10 


ROUND   CAPE   HORN,  &C. 

Clear  Bottom  Bay  is  an  anchorage  which,  by  being 
close  to  the  coasts  is  convenient  ibr' a  vessel  to  touch  at 
tor  wood  and  water ;  to  sail  .into  it  from  sea,  briiig  the 
east  II  Defonsos  S.  J  E.,  and  steer  N.  J  W.  for  Turn 
Point  About  a  mile  and  a  half  to  the  E.N.E.  of  this 
Point,  is  the  anchorage,  and  at  the  distance  of  three 
cables'  lengths  from  the  shore^  in  twenty-two  fathoms 
water,  in  a  bottom  of  sand  and  clay,  is  the  most  eligible 
berth. 

A  peculiar  shaped  land,  which  I  called  Leading  Moun- 
tiun,  on  the  west  side  of  Duff's  Bay,  may  be  seen  from  a 
distance  of  six  or  seven  miles  at  sea,  and  at  once  points 
out  the  entrance  of  the  bay.  A  view  of  this  mountain 
with  the  land  adjacent  is  annexed* 

The  soundings  round  the  Di%o  Ramirez  are  regular, 
and  at  the  distance  of  half  a  mile  irom  the  southern 
island.  On  the  east  side  is  a  .depth  of  thirty  fatlioms, 
with  a  bottom  of  fine  green  sand.  The  tides  here  are 
regular  when  the  wind3  are  moderate,  and  by  the  report 
of  my  officers,  who  were  several  days  on  the  kland,  it  is 
high  water  on  the  full  and  change  of  the  moon  at  two 
hours  fifteen  minutes,  and  rises  about  five  feet.  The 
tide  of  flood,  contrary  to  former  reports,  was  observed 
to  run  to  the  N.E.,  and  it  evidently  runs  to  the  eastward 
between  many  of  the  main  islands.  The  currents,  or 
those  streams  which  are  propelled  by  prevailing  winds^ 
interfere  so  much  with  the  natural  tendency  of  the  tide, 
that.great  doubt  is  created  in  regard  to  the  proper  direc- 
tion  of  it.  ^ 

Staten  Land  affords  several  harbours ;  that  of  St. 
John's,  on  the  north  side,  and  near  to  the  east  ^id,  is 
the  one  with  which  I  am  best  acquainted*     By  the  view 


236  THE   NAVIGATION 

of  tbe  land  which  I  have  subjoined^  the  entnmoe  of  the 
harbour  may  easily  be  found.  Shuck  tide  is  the  proper 
time  to  sail  in^  as  at  the  entrance,  which  b  nanow,  tbe^ 
winds  are  so  baffling  as  to  cause  some  risk  when  the 
tide  is  running  strong  across  the  passage.  The  haibcuit 
runs  up  to  the  W.S.W.  about  a  mile  and  a  quarter,  and 
the  anchorage  is  at  the  upper  end,  in  twelve  ialhoms,  ib 
a  muddy  bottom;  in  most  other  parts,  the  depdi  is 
twenty  fathoms,  and  rocky.  There  is  a  fiat  extending 
firom  die  head  of  the  hmrbour,  a  fiiU  cable's  length,  in 
which  a  smidl  vessel  might  be  laid  for  repairs. 

Wood  and  water  are  in  great  plenty,  close  to  the  shore. 
The  wood  is  much  of  the  same  description  as  that  fouiid 
on  Tierra  del  Fuego:  none  of  it  beiAg  large  enough  tot 
ship-building*  At  die  east  end  dt  the  island  is  a  very 
heavy  tide  rip,  and  when  the  wihd  is  stnttlg  it  idiould 
be  careiully  avoided. 

In  sailing  along  the  coast  of  Patagonia  to  the  soUth* 
ward  of  the  river  Santa  Cruz,  vessels  should  not  toA 
within  a  depth  of  ten  &thoms  water,  as  in  many  places 
exten3ive  ledges  of  rocks  lie  more  than  a  mile  from  tfad 
shore. 

The  river  of  Santa  Cruz  does  not  appear  from  a  great 
distim(»  at  sea,  but  c^n  of  course  be  easily  fbund  by  th^ 
latitude.  The  meeting  <^  tlie  tideis  have  throwzi  up  a 
bank  about  the  entrance,  on  which  at  low  water  thel:e  is 
but  two-fourths  of  a  fathom. 

On  the  south  point  of  the  entrance  lies  a  reef  of  rocks 
which  appear  at  low  water;  and  at  the  north  side  Of  the 
fair  way  is  a  shoal,  proceeding  from  the  bar,  which  pro- 
bably shifts. 


HOUND   CAPE   HORN9   &0.  S87 

The  leading  mark  into  the  river  is  a  bluff  in  the  nud 
die  of  the  entrance,  bearing  N.W.  by  W.  ^  W.  by 
ODQipass.  After  passing  the  pcnnts  of  the  entrance,  two 
^d^ytatiops  will  be  seen  on  the  south  shor^  and  in  the 
second  one  is  the  best  anchorage,  in  five  iathoms,  in  a 
lK>ltoni  of  gravel  and  clay*  All  the  ncHrth  side  of  the 
river  is  shoals,  and  much  of  it  dries  at  low  water.  The 
t||)e  of  flood  runs  to  the  northward  on  the  coast,  and  in 
strong  southerly  winds,  continues  to  run  two  hours  after 
it  is  high  water  by  the  shore. 


OBSERVATIONS   ON   THE   WINDS  AND   WEATHER. 

The  heaviest  and  most  lasting  gale  that  blows  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Cape  ^orn,  is  from  south,  occasion^ 
ally  shifting  a  point  or  two  each  way.  This  gale  X 
have  frequently  known  to  come  on  in  a  squall,  and  con«' 
tinue  in  the  tempestuous  months  to  blow  fr(»n  thirty- 
fyre  to  forty  hours  together.  The  southern  horisour 
filled,  with  rising  douds,  heiivy  and  white  in  a  blue 
sl^yi  is  a  sure  indication  of  a  lasting  gale,  with  snow 
squalls.  A  complete  calm  generally  follows  this  wind^ 
wliich,  however,  is  not  very  frequent  The  wind  at 
^st /invariably  rises  light,  and  gradually  increases  to 
a  strong  breeze;  but  when  it  veers  from  ^ast  to  souths 
east,  a  strong  gale  may  generally  be  expected  with  snow 
or  rain  squalls. 

A  north  gale  also  comes  on  gradually,  and  towards 
the  end,  which  is  generally  about  thirty  hours,  it  draws 
from  the  N.'W.  and  brings  rain,  and  presently  shifts 
into  the  south-west  without  ceasing  to  blow,  and  con-^ 


iSS  TH£   WINDS   AND   WEATHER. 

tinues  from  that  point  twelve  or  fifteen  hours.  All  gales 
are  of  shorter  duration  in  summer  than  in  winter;  and 
it  may  be  remarked,  that  a  vessel  may  anchor  any  where 
for  shelter  from  a  S.W.  wind,  without  the  fear  of  its 
shifting  to  the  northward;  but  the  contrary  muiit  be 
guarded  against,  as  the  wind  shifbs  from  N.  W.  to  S.W., 
continuing  to  blow  with  great  violence. 

In  the  most  windy  months  N.W.  gales  blow  with 
great  force,  when  they  rise  rapidly  near  that  point,  and 
generally  last  twelve  or  fourteen  hours.  To  the  south- 
west  of  Cape  Horn,  they  blow  with  less  violence,  but 
are  more  durable.  In  the  summer  season,  the  winds 
between  south-west  and  north*west  frequently  blow  in 
gusts  of  six  or  eight  'hours'  continuance,  at  the  strength 
of  a  brisk  gale ;  it  then  becomes  moderate,  and  the 
wind  inclines  to  the  northward. 

In  the  summer  I  have  observed  the  coincidence  of 
fine  weather  with  light  easterly  winds  at  the  time  of 
new  moon,  when  in  south  declination,  and  at  the  time 
of  full  moon,  to  blow  strong  from  the  northward.  There 
being  many  exceptions,  however,  to  the  natural  action 
of  the  wind,  produced  by  localities,  I  have  found  it 
impossible  to  systematise  the  indications  of  the  winds 
and  weather  satisfactorily.  We  must,  therefore,  rest 
contented  with  an  approximation  to  certainty  in  these 
matters. 


239 


«o 


s 


« to 

ob  '^ 

QO  O 
^  4- 


T 


11" 

s« 

00  ■* 

«o 

og4 

g| 

3 

s° 

«>^ 

on 

«o 

•"a 

§ 

S8 

ss 

S 

00  o 
•rs 

GO  09 

340 


1 
•iS 

S 


to 
g 

s 
a 

bo 


> 
o 


r-i  ^ 


i^e^ 


^^ 


QO  O 


O    I  O    I  X09    I      O     IQ    I 


I 


04 


S    Q^    lu 

§  ct  2? 


0) 

S 


o 

s 


US' 

o  2  S 

•§^« 
<5     H 


bo 


^  10  O  O  O  O  O       W30i'*t*       i^t* 


^ 


i-H  ^  0(5  lO  ^  to 
-*  «  '^  lO 


§q  CO  «  CO  ofi  «  «* 


a 

9 
CO 


^ 


GO  ;o  o      ^  o 
r-  00  00 

Hw  - 


CO  0^  »-•  • 


CO 


00  -H 

CO  o 

00 

Ph 

I 

pj 


IQ  00  CO 


t^ 


h3P4 


00< 


!u5  J§S88^ 


op  ^  -"^  wi  ;o  ^  r* 


goooooo 


I 


«0  ,-|.,-4 

og^  o 


5? 


SI 

"ss 

SK 

©4 1^ 

^^ 

^  I- 
I. 


I- 


•s-s 
SB 


•a 
i 

CO 

o 


241 


^c 

u 

*s 

• 

A 

o 

*x 

o 

g 

^ 

g 

^ 

O 

o 

•** 

'flS 

OS 

CO 

H 

;2; 

-a 


5- 

o 

a. 


§  -s 


o 


*o  o 


2g 

^S 

S>« 

2g 

£. 

Sg2 

5^ 

s 

coS 

*g' 

^S 

S2 

Mi 

^55 

»o 

^'S 

»{8 

^t^ 

04  Qq 

o 

(NO" 

•  f-<  1-4 

■o 

li 


4 


B 


1 


9 


s  s 
aw 

II 

•Si 
|i 


•< 
I 

•5 
§ 


■8 

S 


•s  . 

a 
o 

si 


» 


S4i2 


§ 


I 


o 


^ 


o 

CO 

o 


I 


lai 


o  o  o 


Is     SS8 


00  >o 


^2S 


to  ^ 


GO 


1 


CO  00  CO 

IQ  g  «0 


OO 


^§5      ISi 


00  « 


^  ^  T|< 


I         I 


2$ 


?5 


09  09 


g 

1 

J 

1-4 

2g 

59 

•* 

l3*9 

S8 

as 

22 « 

g» 

53 

S 

«*2 

j:2 

S- 

■S,o 

•-4 

MO 

oq  OO 

P4 

OO 

S55 

o« 

OSS 

1 

!S' 

s 

00 

•s 

ll 

i 

P^OO 

>« 

.O  Q 

.A 

!2   S 


1 


pa 


I 


-9 

S8 

^- 

55 

3 

2« 

00 

'-g 

s«» 

99 

s 

^* 

9«> 

55 

9 

09  00 

9i 

II 


I 


ts-a 


I 


1 1 


OO 


I 


§1 


III 


Mi 


I     I 

11 


-sfi 

8 II 

n 


i 


I 


± 


1143 


Is 


^  «  ^     <»; 


Pi 


I 

I' 


? 

& 


'5S 


OS* 


oo 


!2-  |; 


8 


*C  O       V)  O  V)       Q  t«5 


00  O 


•sJ 


^ 


I 


I 


Iss 

ss 

1^  l-l 

85 

"* 


O 


I 


S 


^8 

00  t- 

32 

1 

^2 

Ot* 

as 

8 

25^^ 

ss 

#.© 

«o 

t*^ 

■t  _ 

-^S« 

iSSS 

S 

a 

l?s 

^'S 

I 


l1 


I 


I 


J 


s 


2SS 


i<5  in       3 


244 


a 
o 

jI 

« 

CO 

•1 

•s 
•s 

I 

I 

1 


I 


<s 


§ 


g 


£2 


S 


^ 


SP 


u 


i 
I' 


S 


•co 


Y 


& 


% 


I 


l?g 

go 

-? 

8® 

S 

S« 

8  = 

S" 

S; 

^? 

ss 

SS 

8® 

8 

2 


§£ 

9* 

1^ 

5 

s*^ 

00  00 

s 

^0 

d?o 

b  00 

04 

1 

I 


Iff 


fH  f^  09 

"tiOO 


!§tS« 

o 

vif^to 

00 

OihO 

- 

I 


I 

J 


^8® 

82S 

S-{§ 

00  i-i©l 
OO  i-i  •-* 

s$% 

ijOO 

o^o 

$8S 

'^ 

"S-s 

1 

lis  ^ 

S45 


•s 

•5 


i 

•s 

§ 


•s 

1 

o  « 

I 


ta 


I 


O 
O 


III 


M^ 


l^i 


^i 


|fi| 


J 


T 


% 


I 


^ 


I 


Si 

00  fl 


1= 


tz 

$$ 

0« 

$S; 

as 

?*- 

5!g 

rH 

s?- 

«,o 

o«  o 

•■4 

2* 

« 

«o 

04  O 


!• 


«8  ** 

§1- 
PIS 


9 
8 


I. 


1^^ 


ii  ill 


'J' 


•a 

■a 
I 


82 

§oo 

SIS 

S"? 

S2 

s;2 

SS 

5!° 

58« 

0>0 

0>M 

^■5 


3  •  .       I 


•1 

go 


%i 


I 


?s« 

CO 

O»ovj 

«  IH  t-l 

•9 

SS5* 

^ 

SSiS 

2Si 

oo«  o 

!?5!? 

0^8 

8S$ 

^  00  »o 


a<s4 


K  3 


UGt 


CO 

O 

< 
> 

» 
o 


^1 


to 


1^1 


fn 


o 


III 


.1 


&00 

0  0>o 

000 

5??? 

S$2 

5?« 

|.oo 

050 

«iSR 

1 


! 

8 

I 
to 

! 

f 


^8 


d 


"  «  m 

882 

09  Gil 

00  CO 

000 

'=>2 

0 

■<5>0>0i 

0  0x0 

»oo 

8^ 

s 

r-OO 

Ofe-O 

t*^ 

00  JO 

JO 

? 

I 

.0 


I 


I 


•35    «  g 


g 

i 


iMn 


1 


S 

o 

§ 


.2 
CO 

O 

CO 

o 


ill 


I* 


l« 


|i-s| 


04 


CO 


1 


S2 

2S 

g 

50 

$. 

SS"* 

«>« 

S 

8* 

S 

22 

c» 

?® 

? 

00  A 


g 

0> 

5 

CD 

« 

00 

«<< 

0> 

00 

0> 

p 

I 


boo 

2S2 

s 

^  Q  to 
eo  ^  »-• 

sag 

s 

%%^ 

S£5 

? 

-Slo 


I- 


+ 


M 


'•I 


R    4r 


94S 


\t 


i' 


I 


H 


i 


b,- 


!?Sg     99 


bo.- 


2?. 
9S 


SS"||S 


01  d« 


I  i 


^  m  lA 
01  «$ 

CD  A  0> 


00  03  A 
00  00  00 


lO  o  v> 

«5  t^oo 


1 1 1 


1 1 


1 1 


1 1 


2  00 


00  i-l 
A  O 


10  <o 


;s 


6o 


a- 


00 

9 


r»  <o  ^ 


gSPSSS 

1^                              M 

5$ 

o 

^4 

03 

o   O 


s« 

s 

S5 

00 

M  00 

CI 

I 


24& 


iMi 


So' 


I 


b«>     0>^     Omj 

^?'  «:;  !S«5 


OQ  00       CO  00       CO  Oi 


b«c    q«o    qto 

^      0)0«       0409 


lo 


I.  I 


S 


I :  I 


I*  I 


*0  Vi 


I   04 


01  04     m  CO 

i  i 


?22 

3 

8 

s 

^"S 

s 

0) 

S 

s; 

gss; 

00 

« 

s 

•§ 


H 


f^^ 

V5  04 

"8 

S5 

$* 

S2 

9S 

S3 

2S 

§« 

00  W5 

3 

di't 

"S 

SS 

00 

r^«^ 

A 

Oi  <0 

04 

f-i  •-* 

«» 

0) 

S>tt 

04 

III 


00  «g 


I 


I 


I 


II 
f 


KS 

8S 

CO 

o>^ 

04 

I 

i 

Hi 


I 

<5 


350 


I 

s 


f 

s 
•a 

J 

■s 

bo 

a 


03 

o 


PI 


I 


I 


"S  ®  ■ 


g' 


boo 
www 


o  ooo  oo 

www www 


IO«0 


2®8S?S?S 

>  w  w  w  w  w  w 


1^5 

5  S  < 


o«  o  w  o  ^  to 

«5  «  W  «  W  ^ 


§  8  5 


i::m 


w^  •<> 


PI4  ^  t«  Q  W  <0 
•H  0«  W  10        1-1 

Q«  «  0«  04  W  W 


O  W5  o 

«  w  o5 


•OO  u»  o  »o  o 


Oi  Oi  Oi  Ot  Oi  Oi  Oi  Oi  Oi 


O  U)  o  *0«0  Vi 

'o  w  »o  <e  00  o5 

w  w  w  w  w  w 


q«o  q 

7  $$ 


)b 


<0<0(0<OCD<0<PV 


»0  fH  » 


)  <0  <0  <D  <0 


1 1. 


»<i  w  « 
I  ^  t>  c 

I    1-4   W  « 


to  W  00  A  O 


04  W 

I     Q«   W 

^  o 


»o  «©  i 

tQlO  W 

O  O  04 


W^  »0  ;0b»  fld 


o>  o  '^ 


Is:  Is  I 


4 
§ 


5?5 

o 

«OiO  W 


3 

5? 


IQ  04  «0 


'i? 

00  w 

'HOO 

V®'l  >0 


si 


i 


9Sl 


•$S8 


•I 

I 
I 

2 

a 

o 

s 

<«^ 

*Sb 

a 


0) 


60 

a 


<§ 


o 

> 
O 


A^' 


Ui 


i 


% 
^ 


pi 


i^f 


^  war  CO. 


wj  q  «j 

!>  W  08 

^o  o 


»Q  O  ^ 

tQ  t^  o5 

^  ^  ^ 


1 1. 


1 1 


1 12 

IT 

I  is; 

d  of5  ^ 

rH  »H  f-l 

i 


1 

5- 

O     X 

^ 

s 

^s 

o 

00 

t* 

"§ 

5i 

^ 

1 

1- 

3 

Q 

o> 

(D 

0^ 

(0 

•^ 

S; 

t 

0) 

«o 

r» 

0» 

a 

1* 

*Q  W  «  liO  W  »o 

ts  00  -H  1^  n  (o 


p;3^ 


H53 


«52 


I 


I 


i 


i' 


§ 

m 
pq 
O 


J 


s 


I 


I; 


*^ 


^ 


-3^ 


W5 


I 


9 


11 


^  J5  «o 

11  WJ  »H 


.11 
111 


5       S 


Ok 

§ 

^4 

59 

1 

i 

i 

01 

SS2 


I 


s 


l 


n 

^S 

sg 

S 

Ig* 

«  W3 

B 

-N  0) 

»-i 

«53 


«54 


I 


^ 
^ 


J 

lis 


« 

•3 


^ 


CO 

pq 
O 


boo 

^8? 


,i^o8 


^  Q  S 

w  «  « 


^0  ^  ^ 

04  00  04 
%  PN  ^ 

>«»  t^  r- 


I 


I 


$98 


,  ^  «  5$ 
boo 


1(5  Owj 

^  00  «« 


1 1. 


\  \, 


u 


a. 


Sl< 


^  to 
00?: 


ill 

"cui 


09 


»    2 


8 

s 

t2 

i^ 

^ 

i^ 

•» 

1^  I 


•   t*  o  < 


i-gl 


« «o  I* 

'^  CO  ri 


II 


d  $:  g 

ill 

"  e  „ 

ll1 

a  B-a 
wag, 

o3  g." 


4 


1 

J 

^8 

8 

^2 

1* 

S 

^  V5 


«4 


!>o 


3S 

32 

00 

O'OO 

« 

955 


111 


«o  O 


;o  00 

s 

I 


I 
I 


J 


1 
1 


I' 


'8 


8 10 


8* 


000 


SSI 


>  o  o 


o  m 


000 


olo  o  o 


CO  0)         w 


%< 


1 

1 

<» 

0> 

!!«» 

9 

^s 

28" 


i?S2 

? 

^  »o  00 

t«  00  »- 

t* 

I 

Is 


^ 


I 


«l 


%>  o 

X 


S5? 

S 

2g 

00 

$ 
s 


^fl       ^g2?8S5 


f 


a 


o>  11^  00  < 


8 

S 

s 

21 

8S® 

0$ 

8S 

goo 

S 

5 

$$$ 

e« 

5 

5:55? 

S$ 

!?^$ 

r;!? 

¥§* 

w 

S 

?? 

« 

•a 


•■  532|"| 


S5 


«56 


I 

I 

i 


I 


1 


J 


«0 


09 

g 

2 


09 

m 
o 


i 


i^ 


CO 

T 


I 


i> 


«S 


I, 


J 


IS 


T 


9) 

Js. 


^ 


V  « 

o 

00 

ho 

at 

58l2 


I 

I 


257 


^^ 

g    g 

1 

e 

«£  «M 

00  ^ 

s 

t 

1$ 

W5 

'2 

j» 

g 

1 

II 

<n 

•I 

8 

W5  « 

00 

g.o; 

a 

> 

S 

,:  « 

« 

1 

M 

•§ 

§-' 

S2 

^ 

M 


b  o  o  o  < 

fe  Wi  Mi  M  < 

«o  00  a  ^  < 


©I 


t^  00 


s 


1-3 


I 


bOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOOpOOOOO 

/<n       iO  V 

&000>pQQOO>0>0>0'-<QQ»^000»0  —  QQ 
5i<^vco^^^^oococo^5i<^^'rvvw'^^^^ 


►OOOOOQOO 


gs^ 

0>  1-4  00  0)  00 

iQ  » 

s 

TJ4  o^  ^  lo 

f-H 

sgg 

O  CO  «  00  "O 

<o 

»o 

OJ  ^ 

00 

•      1 

g 

^' 

' 

jg 

2 

41* 

1 

S  '       , 

g 

?    . ' 

•2 

♦» 

s  e^ 

'C 

From  W 
True  fro 
Variatioi 
Do. 
Do. 

i 

258 


s 


o 
c 
o 


s 


<0 

to 

a 

*'3 


CO 

12; 

O 

I—* 

H 
<! 
> 

o 


H 


I 


I 


I 


T 


g 


^ 


.5  <^  ^ 

«  s  3 

*  s  p 

•  "  a 

;^ 


00  0« 


«> 

C9    1 

O 

00 

^ 

00 

9i 

•^ 

^5  CI  o 

O 

00  ^  «o 

t-  t^  « 


00  O)  00 
t^  00  t^ 


I    O      Q> 

«  «  § 
«  ^  g 

If! 


S -'3 

W  w  §• 


15  a'5-- 


o  ^ 

•+ 


-*  o 

g® 

5° 

CO 

<0  Q 

00  -^ 

fi 


I 


3 

'5 


■259 


n 


oo  o  o' 


O  O 


I 


<=>8 

^ 

25  §! 

^ 

t- 

I 


tf 


eg" 


0>  09  g 


to  04 


o  o  o 


GO  QO  O) 
0«  01  09 


09 
O  OO 


o  o 


o  o  o 


00  09 


»i5  09  « 

«0   t-H    '«*« 


Jl 


31 


s 

s 

00 

o 

« 

o> 

« 

0> 

II    ^ 


gS!§ 

o 

r^  00  00 
t^  00  »- 

O 

« 

pSS«2§ 

®s 

Issasg 

o  o>, 

00  W) 

,• 

r-«    1^ 

»     ii 

.     .    &^ 

from  south 
from  soutb 
var.  easterl 

i  1 

H 

09  09  S 


«  8   I  8  eo  CO   I  eo  8 

e9< 


S    2 


o 

o«c 

o 

2 

s 

Oi  09 
Ol  CO 

f«4 

rrf 

CO 

s 

OS 

o 

s 

A     I 


SCO 


o 

B 

o 

§ 

na 

'So 

c 
o 

>-3 

o 


^3 

c 


CO 

o 

> 

w 

CO 

O 


^^1S 


Li 


I 


32^ 


25ci3 


So 


b  o  < 


W5  w  ^ 

CO  CO  00 


04  r-< 


%.0  Wi  «5 


b  10  c 
r^  CN  00 
'(f  us  vci 

"boo 


R  «^  o 
S  o  oi 


V  ^-  i> 


I   00  rf 


-4  N  «0 

il 

(N  <N  W 

S 

3 

«>  VI 

? 

§2 

-OS 

00 

O  O 

j-<  00 

04 

CO  55 


»0  xi< 


oo 


CO  CO 


CO  ^ 


o 


KO    ^ 

CO 

•-•=5: 

00 

1-^ 

^  CO 

(N 

^         ^  !2 


6  2 


S 


.-1  00 

■^  to 

CO  ■* 

J^2  " 

{O  l> 

CT> 

n  ^ 

t-H     00 

1-^ 

(N 

Tt^  lO  VS         Wi  W5 

Tt<  rji  ^        f-«  ^ 


l>  Oi  "^         Ci  ^ 
00  Tt<  ^         f-OO 


•-*,.  . 

Tt<    Tt«    ^ 

rf 

1 

W  00  CO 

CO 

CO 

(U 

JS    ' 

e 

3 

1 

.a 

fr 

•a 

> 

00  6  S 

J 

O 
1 

No.  40 
No.  82 
No.  35 

1 

«  c 

E  g 

hs 

hS 

Q 

261 


Si 

,8 


B 
o 

a 
o 
*■» 

Xi 
<3i 

n3 
3 
«» 

*5b 

o 

G 

s 


CO 

o 

e3 

> 

CO 

O 


^ . 

"T^ 

o-w 

>-. 

§< 

s,* 

Tf    Tt* 

'^2S 

'u,0~ 

flix: 

'^t' 

-Swsd 

Longitu 

Mean  of 

nomete 

Noo; 

o 

CO  CO 

^     «'* 

^■"S 

11 

|g 

►»«   ■ 

■     A  8 

-5 

»2| 

<o  «s 

0i 

'«« 

§ 

-•  CO 

Q 

2  2 

.          ^ 

1 

0^  OJ 

§ 

^ 

I-l  f-t 

o 

^ 

1 

-ujO 

^ 

wu5 

§ 

d 

Vt- 

^ 

III 

1* 

•31* 

1 

« 

•to 

Altitud 
of  the 
Sun's 

Centre, 

'i 

■  ^ 

g 

s 

^ 

r^ 

1 

s 

CO 

\,~ 

n 

IS 

^S 

A 

»-4 

-*  «o 

^ 

04  01 

& 

■g 

& 

s  3 


262 


^^ 

"T" 

;    5 

%> 

M 

^ 

^iu 

^ 

jjSJ  . 

^ 

I*^!! 

^^ 

Ill' 

l! 

III 

Latitude 

ration  at 
Noon.. 

00 

« 
o 

1 

*? 

i 

v 

1 

t. 

^ 

1 

^- 

o' 

fH 

,     55 

»-l 

1 

^ 

<o 

1 

6 

«* 

% 

»      1 

14s 
2  i^ 

CO 

o 

5 

Altitude 
of  the 
San*s 
Centxe. 

1 

k 

1 

3 

% 

%, 

CO 

8 

|h^ 

A 

•-« 

•^ 

;o 

s 

04 

-Su. 

1 

«  ^ 

SS 

1 

78 

1 
'5 

%o 

% 

t* 

1     • 

i  i  I 

o>  «o  r* 

Ok  00  <o 

A  Ok  Ok 


II 


a 

i 

I 

i 
I 

« 

01 

s. 


»  S 


^  t»  « 

00  <o  c« 


r-  00  00 


'B 


5® 


Si 

9r 


^» 

S2- 

s 

^•- 

WOO 

? 

rH 

^  Ok 

01 

1 


^m 


8S 


2.  <»  «  or>2    5  g 
r-  t»  r-  *•  t*  I**  *^ 


S 


s 

I 

1 


1^ 


o 


F  e*  t*  I        »' 


s  4 


264 


s 


0) 

o 
B 

o 
c 

2 

O 

a 


0) 


o 

H 
> 

O 


3^i 


^'4 


%> 


ll-Si 


I 


1o 

00 


w^ 

^ 

:n 

CO 

?d 

^* 

3sz; 

o 

r^ 

■^ 

r^ 

il 

CM 

& 

5 

p. 

0)  o 

Til 
til 


g,« 


feo 


2  ' 


«  CO  Ui 


•^  «o  00 

00  «>  0^ 


<C  00  ^  I  ^ 

»o«o  00  I  w 

•I   »0  r-«  I  ^ 

r-  00  00  I 


s 


5 

§ 


bo 
be 

Is 


oo 

o 

<0  rt* 

8 

?ll 

§ 

o  I 


^(i5 


'3 

6 
o 


•5 -5 

8 

s  9    c 

J^S  .2 

rom 
rom 
aria 

fefi  > 

»  00 

o 

«0  W5 

S2 

j^ 

|oo  o  o 

|j  N  oi    ^o  o» 
to«o;o        to 

S3 

00  00  to    CO  00 

SSS'-S 

ss 

8 

00 

S§2 

W5 

00 

s; 

CO 

o  o  o 

CO  CO  •o 

o  o  o  o  o 

"  ^     CO  00 

®§s§g® 

CO  CO  rj' 

«o  V  v> 

-H  CO    Tt*  ^  »o 

2SS2SS 

^ 


SUB3J\[ 


oo 


»o 

« 

00 

o> 

W5 

0< 

to 

0) 

Oi 

00  to  0> 
f-i  00  O) 


00  to  --^ 

t-  00  00 


« 

n 

$ 

^ 

from 
from 
varia 

»c  0« 

O  00 

00 

1- 

ss; 

0< 

s 


o 

to  lO  W5  to  V  w> 
C4  01  O)  0)  04  0^ 


s 


■  O  »0 


g<0  t-  t^ 

«o««  o« 


r*  to 

lO)  04 


O  O  O  OlO  o 


to  to  »^  *^  04  to 

09  04  04  04  104  Ol 


■ 

1 

aa 

i 

;§ 

-  "^ 

to 

?!52 

t* 

s; 

05 

0000 

S 

04  04 

si 

s 

?o 

o  o  o  o 

®gg®® 

<^S|®:SS¥ 

2 

%s^s 

ss 

01  01  04  04 

^gis; 

Ol04 

SiSSSS 

00 
04 

SS 

s 

:z: 


'zm 


a 
'So 

§ 

h4 


3' 


g 

< 

o 


-5     ** 
3      S 

I    § 


1^ 


I 


I 


il§, 


I 


S>= 


I 


^. 


<0 


b  00 


CM  W 


%< 


,  bfiC 


o 

O  O 


I 

B    cs  *j 

^- i       ^^ 

S   O   a,  vl     o  «  Q 

*      Q,       *• 

5^^S  .11 


« 

t- 

X 

&; 

l>- 

IS 

Oi 

•o 

t^ 

o> 

wi 

0^ 

0^ 

OJ 

s 

1 


§?s 

£$2 

^ 

ill 

i.E-3 

ill 

III 

■2  S 


3 
•5b 

e 


■3 


CO 

E   »o  ^ 

s  -^ 

^  o 


''I! 

.? 

«  00 

g 

« 

26'7 


III 


>  «    «  ^    ^ 


1 

.§ 

3 

f 

^ss«® 

§5? 

c 

Issss 

2§ 

g 

s 


268 


^ 

&i 

CM  ' 

©J 

(M 

<o 

'^ 

«5 

Oi 

•-< 

To  »  « 


1st. 
2d. 
3d. 

.§■ 

^ 

§ 

Variation 
Do. 
Do. 

-* 

3 


boo 


oooo 

•-•    rH    -*    CO 


»^  0>  O^  Oi  o 

ITS  WJ  »0  W>  5g 


o 

o 


o  o  o 


'9 


269 


i 

•s 

a 

a 

«£:  c{3 

CO 

00  ^ 

|o 

CO  S 

i 


58  J 


H 

b^-<O«t^»O00t*O(N 
QOIG0C0mi-i0O00Q0O>O) 

Longitude  by 

MeanofChro. 

nometerg  at 

Noon. 

boooijujooooo 

»0        W  «  »0  CO  «  W  1-1  W  »0 

3  < 

Latitude 
by  Observ- 
ation at 
Noon. 

<o       ^  v>  <o       «i  lO           »o 

1 

r-t^oooocoooooo>oo>o» 

1 

§ 

i 

U50»00»00»00»00»0 

1 

t 

»      W5  O  W5  O  W5  O  »fl  O  »0  O  W5 

W^»^i^o6d'-5oOTj5«of^ 

^  t^  t^  t^  t^  t*  t.  t-  t-  t^  ts. 

$ 

t^      t*.      I>               t» 

-^      eo      ^              w 

:llo,l„IJI^ 

to         f£>         Vi                      «0 

Altitude 
of  the 
Sun's  Cen- 
tra 

<b      ^      o              i^ 

s  s  ^       s 

i'  _ 

?   «  §       s 

1  I«lsl5l  1  U 

oc      n      ^               Ci 

it 

**    S    5    ■     r 
1  l^l«  |2|  1  is 

^             <0            t*                              -H 

1, 

oSoo^wstfJt^oooio-HcJ 

«70 


01 

o 


o  >» 


CJ 

^§S 

o 

3^ 

S§ 

g 

=:  + 

C« 

i<l 


s§?®  :2 


CO  CO  5^3 


S 


5S§S 

ill 


a 


-gc 


o 
o 


CO 

o 

U4 


s 

^1^ 

u 

c  ^ 

i? 

o  g 

>>^ 

«.g 

^   O 

cs  5 

©-« 

<»  s 

S  CO 

a  '& 

*hS 

Hg 

'CM 


>  O  CO 

.  ^  o 


^§■53 


.CO 

S  00 


c 
O 


CO 


li 


^ 


GO 

s| 


Q 


53  5$ 

?    ■ 

§51 

S2 

S§ 

CO 

2  + 

-^O) 

(^ 

s  s 


PS 


CO 

SS 

CO 

CM  CM 

1— «   rH 

§^, 

§? 

2  1 

0< 

.d 
u 


0) 

2 


CD    OS 

g  § 


O 


271 


I 


O 


CO 

s 

S 

o 


t3 
n3 


08 


H 

o 

"■a 

c 

08 

§ 

1^ 


4 


§ 


a> 


Si 

in 

1 

Easterly 
Easterly 

§ 

1-^ 

s 

^ 

.-H            I— < 

^  O^  Oi  GO  W5.I-H  OQOI>COr^OiOiO^OOOOOO'*'*Cp 


3 


tr3O»0C0C0C0*0O^CDi^O0000OW5Q0OOO 

'^J*  W5  .-I  ^  00  "-I  CM  r-l  CO  W>  GO  GO  ^  «*  00  lO 

<«        04  •-•  00  ^  CM  00  V5  "*  »0  CO ''J*  Wfc  05  CO        ^00^ 
00i-iO^Ui'^V5iOW5W>«5»OiOiOtO»O»OW5COCOCO 


CQ 


08 

QJ     O 


S 


01    c8 


,9  ^ 


13 

d 


jiH  O  ^  Ph  ai  CQ  J^  fi, 


Co    n<  K^ 


ipQ  S' 

•  s^  2.ai  2^5  fr'S.^ 

coOBa3Qc»'*dOc»J> 


O 

•s  g. 

p2 

^ 

boa? 

bJ        .« 

^H 

o 

s-a 

Madeira 
Bonavist 
Trinidad 
Patagoni 

i 

2 

oo 

COM 

272 


Si 


o 


a 

o 

1 

! 

o»gooooooooooooo 

q3 

2 

00                IC:  tJ<  CN                -1                ^         ^ 

tj 

1 

^  «  -^  S  «  o  Jr  to  a  4)  S  B  5  _  o 

C3 
CO 

' 

— 

278 


§ 

0^ 


Cm 

o 
o 

S 

S 


60 

O 


PQ 


1 

4id 

! 

t 

' 

-S 

* 

o 

CO 

^ 

ifi         vt         en    ^ 

{U            dJ            V    O 

o 

-3 

s    2  .si  . 

y 

-  •  S  •  <u  K  g  "  3 

di    (u    a> 
S     Q>     « 

&otu&S  tioS'^  2^-° 
£  £^  S^  S^  g,^ 

Under 
brees 
ghtbr 
oderat 
oderat 

^  i:  ^S  XI  k^  >  ^  o'tH 

^-^SSS 

1 

S.  by  E, 
S.S.W. 
South, 

South. 

s.s,w, 
s.s,w. 

boooooooo 

o 

ooo 

1 

1 

•1 

00 

s 

CO 

CO  '*  ;<fj 
00  00  OO 

J 

^1 
1^ 

ri 

^oooooooo 

o 

§°° 

H 

<J 

|5§§§S55:S^ 

Tf* 

CO  CD  CO 

.    00 

00  00  00 

V 

J3 

^H'-SS^^*'" 

O 

^^'s 

f' 

ISSg5§SS5S^^ 

^    5^§ 

1 

2§?5§«^g2§5 

5 

SS'^ 

1 

§ooooooO'«?<cot^xq5 

9 

9SJS2 

iO»0>OW5to»0«OiOW5 

^ 

CD  CO  CO 

s 

OO'^wS^i^OOOiOrH 

00 

2^S 

n 

l_ 

J 


w^  ■v^■r, 


274 


1                                                           <u 

1 

■3 

t                         ' 

1^ 

0 
a 

;§' 

.^ 

S.2J         §  "ts"^  ^ « 1  a 
-s^  .  .  ."S  «  -  s  ^  g  s  ^  a 

ED  jg     ta     N     N     M     N     QJ     N     ^  Xi     N      ?     jZ 

S^   q;  <w  (y   S  0  «  ^  Qi*"  Hi   ^    a 

^fl   ajc»(U^Qjt!iU»-   ttio   >^- 

* 

• 

f£-S-g-S-S-Sg-gi^:S.5rg 

otyoojojijajfuSajSo   bc^ 

1 

ft;p££fefr:fi^ci;^ga>-^ 

? 

1 

N.  by  W. 

E.S.E. 

S.W. 

N.  by  E. 

N.  by  N. 

West. 

W.S.W. 

S.W.  by  W. 

W.  by  S- 

W.  by  S. 

W.  by  N. 

West. 

South. 

1 

^ 

i 

H    h 

rt 

oooooooooooo   0 

s 

1 

1 

SSSSSS^Sgg^jg  t 

booooooooooo   0 

S 

u< 

<i 

^ 

K 

< 

Q?  ^  ^  ^-  CD  wi.^  '^  ^  0  o>  •#   vi 
orj  tfi  CO  00  ofi  crj  fif^  m  QTi -^ 'zo  ^    trt 

'O 

f  - 

^  c<i  ^  if< -^  of>oo  Qr>  w  55  (?i  55    or> 

1 

H 

1 

■                        J3 

0 

275 


O 

03 


■^ 

*53d 

o 
o 

>^ 

•s 

bo 

c 


0)      . 


O 
O 


o 

CO 

pq 
O 


ffl 

n 

3 

^1 
«>  s 

o 

o  ^ 
(0^ 

Observed  angular 

Distance  between 

the  Sun  and  Moon*5 

o 

Jt^  QC  QO  00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00 
QOODOOOOQOOOOOOOOOOOQO 

Moon's  ob- 
served Alti- 
tude U.L. 

26°     14' 
26      28 
26      34 

26  56 

27  8 
27      15 
27      23 
27      31 
27      43 

27  50 

28  0 

'3 

to 

Oi  go  X  00  OO  00  00  CO  t^i^  ^ 

a 

s 

c^l   5i  wi  ^    ^  0^  -* 

1 

1- 

o 

B 


a 

CI. 


•§ 


CO 

o 
o    • 

fc-§ 


^^1 


S! 


o 

.  o  . 

S 

".a 


27€ 


S 


3 
§ 


a 
2 


o  ••* 


^25 
O 

i 


CO 

O 

c» 
O 


-^^ — ■ ^         — — — "-"" 

■3 

i,| 

4-1      ^ 

^ 

OJ 

o 

fU 

^t5 
a 

^ 

1                            b 

c 

O     ,h 

^ 

s;. 

■^ 

Sr. 

A 

fNf. 

■S" 

'% 

1 

■* 

S 

^ 

I  angular 
between 
Moon's 
Limbs. 

111! 

Obsei 

Dista 

Sun; 

near 

OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO) 

•sob- 

Alti- 

U.L. 

o^Oioa>ocDOo^co 

00              '^  '^CM  ^         ^ 

Moon 
served 
tude 

W5W5iO'*^'*2'*2 

^S'-^2§g5S5 

■z^i 

o 

"T 

£§S5iotOW5»0»0»0»0^ 

i 

M  O)  C?1  -^  ^1  (7i  C^  0^-  *^ 

5 

.j:^     < 

^ 

<^trsr-QC0i"->c^-**^ 

Cr^CQt^^OOtfi^^^'^ 

&(MW^C^C^CM<M^ 

. 

Sg 

y  ^ 

Q 

^ 

1 


c 

CO 


^^* 

o^ 

oS 

>>^ 

•«g 

«5o 

-•S'^ 

.  •  eu 

•  • 

^^ 

QO 

OD 

U! 

^S 

• 

tf 

g.a> 

Q 

PE) 

fi-^ 

W 

2^ 

The  eastern  Island  of  the  Ildfonsos  (off  Ca 
[ndex  error  of  sextant  ^/  10^'.  sub.     Apparei 

g 

London  : 

Printed  by  A.  &  R.  Spottiswoode, 

New-  Street-  Square. 


IC 


J 


{  t4/^r  //or/^  .  i'ca 


276 


S 


3 

§ 

a 
3 


o  ••* 

so, 


S5 

o 

i 


O 
CO 

O 

c» 
O 


i 


4)    ^ 


I 


•g 


oSw 


W3   fe 


^  s 


I 


®2§ 

"^  -^  Qf^ 


O  QO  O  OO 
M  (M  i-H  I— I  O  Oi 


&» 


??>  5?  5?  5^  5?  ^ 


^.  CiOi 

QOOOOOOOOOOOOOCO 


0^  as  o 

00 


W5  W5  10 


O)  O  CO  O  CM  CO 
^  ^  Qq  ^        ^ 


^  ^  ^  ^  ^  00 


CO  00  •-• 


GO  CO  ^ 
iQ  lO  to 


-«»«   "*   Tf<    ^   '^    "*    , 

lO  W5  to  »0  »0  »0 


00  Lf>  r- 

CO  M  CO 


— f  ni  cj  ^  ctj  1^ 
01  »^  CT  eo  -^  [N 


Qc  cr,  '-r  s^  "^  JS 


an  CO  -^  ^  -* 


1 


c 

CO 

J5 


CO 
00 

C    03 

o  <i> 


^  I 

o 

CO 


l-H     CA 

C  '^^ 
u    O 


g 


H 


0) 


London : 

Printed  by  A.  &  R.  Spottiswoode, 

New-  Street-  Square. 


1 


\ 


/' 


La?, 


ntrance 


1 


\ 


i 


"     w 

!!  I 


NDV   14  1330 


i^ 


