Among the Primitive Bakongo (John H. Weeks, 1914)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/amongprimitiveba00week). Thirty years among the Bakongo of the lower Congo - nkisi fetishism, secret societies, and the religious life of the village, by a Baptist missionary.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

✓ 

3 , /(d . . 

X. 

PRINCETON. N. J. 

Purchased by the Mary Cheves Dulles Fund. 

Division HT650 

.W39 

Section. 

v''.' 

)■ 

AMONG THE PRIMITIVE BAKONGO 

Photo by 

A Hatekk Chief 

Rci>. A. Billin^ton 

The Hateke tribe occupies a part of Stanley Pool. This chief has a cowrie shell hat on his head, 
a brass collar round his neck, a whisk of buffalo hair in his hand— a kind of sceptre with which he 
emphasizes the important points in his talk, and is sittif|£ on a leopard’s skin which only chiefs may 
use. In front is a common china ornament he has bought at a trading house. 

MAR 16 1914 

AMONG THE 

PRIMITIVE BAKONGO 

A RECORD OF THIRTY YEARS’ CLOSE INTERCOURSE 
WITH THE BAKONGO AND OTHER TRIBES OF 
EQUATORIAL AFRICA, WITH A DESCRIP- 
TION OF THEIR HABITS, CUSTOMS 
RELIGIOUS BELIEFS 

BY 

JOHN H. WEEKS 

Correspondent to the Royal Anthropological 
Institute to the Folk-Lore Society 
Author of “Among Congo Cannibals,” dr’r. &^c. 

With 40 Illustrations £5* a Map 

PHILADELPHIA 

J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY 

LONDON : SEELEY, SERVICE 6- CO. LIMITED 
1914 

PREFACE 

The kindly reception given to a former work, Among 
Congo Cannibals, has encouraged the author to put in 
permanent form this record of the customs, habits, 
organisations, court life and its functionaries, which he has 
carefully noted during the thirty years that he has been more 
or less closely in touch with the peoples of the Lower 
Congo. 

The former work deals with a Riverine Tribe on the Upper 
Congo River ; but this book aims at giving a reflection of the 
Lower Congo native’s mind, a series of word photographs of 
his manner of life, his views regarding the various spirits by 
which he is surrounded and his method of controlling them ; 
and also reminiscences of the old King, who for thirty-two 
years reigned nominally over an extent of territory larger than 
Wales, but in reality only over a stretch of country the size of 
a small English county. The language spoken, Kisi-Kongo, at 
the capital, San Salvador, is known, with slight dialectical 
differences, throughout the whole of the nominal kingdom of 
Kongo, and in some parts even beyond its boundaries, and the 
people are designated Bakongo. 

The customs, &c., here described are in vogue over the 
whole of the Lower Congo, having regard, of course, to local 
colouring and conditions, e.g. the ingredients employed to 
make a charm in one place may not all be found in another 
locality, so they are replaced by other things ; and in one part 
of the country where gunpowder is easily procurable, and 
being mysterious in its action, it is largely used to rouse their 

VI 

PREFACE 

fetishes to activity, whereas in another part, where gunpowder 
is difficult to obtain, and consequently very expensive, the 
rattle and whistle, used vigorously, are employed as substitutes, 
while in other districts both gunpowder and whistles enter 
largely into their ritual. Again, in the sixteenth century the 
Portuguese Roman Catholics were dominant in San Salvador 
and its neighbourhood, and as a result in that district the cross 
(ekuluzu) is now often used as a charm, and the sign of the cross, 
made by the naked finger or with a piece of chalk, is frequently 
employed in the ceremonies of some cults of fetish men. 

The writer has no particular leaning towards any school of 
anthropologists, and has not written in suppoi’t of any party. 
He noted down his observations of native manners, &c., from 
sheer interest in the people amongst whom his life was cast, 
and from an earnest desire to understand them, their outlook 
on life, their thoughts respecting their environments, and their 
ideas of a future state ; and what he has seen and learned he 
has tried to put in clear, terse language before his readers. 

These pages are not a record of missionary incidents, but 
an account of native life in all its various complex stages from 
before birth to after death — the native’s work, fights, hunts, 
dances, games, stories, and loves; the diseases to which he is 
subject, the spirits he must cajole, and the struggles he en- 
counters through life. 

The writer trusts that the non-specialist will find in these 
pages such information as will help him to a fuller, and hence 
a juster, knowledge of the black man in his native life and 
home; and the anthropologist will find the facts with which 
to weave his theories of the human race. 

The author is much indebted to the Council of the Folk 
],ore Society for permission to use the articles contributed by 
him to their Quarterly Reviews ; and to the editor of The 
Treasury for a similar kindness respecting an article of his — 
an African River, that appeared in that magazine. His best 

PREFACE 

Vll 

thanks are also due to his colleagues, Revs, F. Oldrieve, W. 
Wooding, T. Lewis, R. H. C. Graham, S. Bowskill, and Dr. 
Mercier Gamble for their kind permission to use the photo- 
graphs bearing their names; and to Miss Hartland, Rev. 
J. L. Forfeitt, and Sir H. H. Johnston, G.C.M.G., for so 
willingly placing their collections of photographs at his service. 

JOHN H. WEEKS. 

CONTENTS 

CHAPTER I 

MY FIRST TRIP ON THE CONGO RIVER 

Arrival at Banana — Journey in the s.s. Livingstone — Steamer breaks 
down — Loses its propeller — Bargain with natives— Journey in 
canoe — Meet with hippopotami — Arrival at Musuku — First fever 
— Surrounding views of river and hills 

CHAPTER II 

JOURNEY TO SAN SALVADOR 

Start for San Salvador — Fitting out the caravan — Nature of the 
roads — Crossing streams and swamps — Native hospitality — Dew- 
laden grass — Welcome at San Salvador — Gift of a pig — 
Pleasant memories of the road — We were objects of interest 
en route — Night scenes in the villages — Discussions among 
carriers — Interesting conundrums for carriers .... 

CHAPTER m 

BAN SALVADOR 

The town of San Salvador — King different from chiefs — Visit to the 
King — His maze-like compound — Introduction to his majesty — 
An account of the King’s ruse — Rumours of his cruelty — His 
regard for Queen Victoria — Method of fighting for the throne — 
Supplants another King — Description of the dethroned King 

CHAPTER IV 

COURT ETIQUETTE AND NATIVE FUNCTIONARIES 

Ceremony of approaching the King — Wives of the King — King’s 
dress — Pages — Power — Court officers — Their names — Their 
duties — Nobles — Buying a title — Installation of a nobleman — 
Fee to King’s representative — Various titles of nobility — Their 

meaning — Native names 

ix 

PAGE 

17-23 

24-31 

32-38 

39-49 

X 

CONTENTS 

CHAPTER V 

REMINISCENCES OF DOM PEDRO V, KING OP KONGO 

King in mourning — King’s size — Receives a present — King dines 
with us — His conduct at table — His wives clear his plates — 
Hears of England — Private talks with King — His wives go on 
strike — Co-operation among his wives — Germans arrive at San 
Salvador — King refuses to see them — He hears of an old friend 
— Receives the members of the German Geographical Society — 
His death 

CHAPTER VI 

NATIVE GOVERNMENT AND DAWS 

Extent of the kingdom — Its rowdyism — Institution of a better con- 
dition— Promulgation of new laws — Punishment of homicides 
— Of thieves — They are fairly honest — Retaining a slave — Pro- 
cedure in court — Bribery — Dealing with quarrels — Slave able to 
free himself — Position of slave children — Debtor and creditor — 
Collecting debts — Mode of dealing with a tyrannical chief — 
Clubbing together — Some native palavers 

CHAPTER VII 

LANGUAGE, IDIOMS, AND PROVERBS 

Studying the language — Native interpreters — Their queer statements 
— Story of a snake — Character of native language — Its adjectives 
— Its verb forms — Its curious idioms — Its proverbs 

CHAPTER VIII 

NATIVE FOODS, DRINKS, AND MANUFACTURES 

Food stuffs — Manioc — Two kinds — Poisonous and non-poisonous — 
Methods of cooking — Making bread — Preparing flour — Soft 
puddings — Relishes and sauces — One meal a day — Man procures 
the meat or fish — Dividing food — Drinks — Palm wines — Beer — 
Malting — Making beer — Wine tapsters — Mats — Pots — Making 
threads for cloth 

CHAPTER IX 

THE SOCIAL LIFE OF THE FAMILY AND VILLAGE 

Arrangement of houses — Their sizes — Results of mother-right on 
family life — The clan and the family — Palm trees — Pawning a 
relative — Totemism — Position of chiefs — Their revenue — As 
judges — The chief’s successor — His heir — A woman chief . 

PAOE 

60-69 

60-73 

74-85 

86-93 

94-102 

CONTENTS 

XI 

CHAPTER X 

COXGO WOMEN AND THEIR WAYS 

Going to the farm — Women’s chatter — Coming from the farm — 
Their salutations — Women loom large in native life — The slave 
woman — Female characteristics — Barren women — Abortion — 
Marks of a good wife 

CHAPTER XI 

BIRTH AND CHILDHOOD 

The baby’s “ doctor” — Child’s toilet — Betrothal of baby-girls — Palm- 
frond and its uses — Dreaming about snakes — Rebirth in children 
— Meaning of names — Aversion to twins — What the girls do — 
The maternal uncle — Mode of frightening children . 

CHAPTER XII 

NATIVE AMUSEMENTS 

Boys love hockey — Moonlight games — Make-believe games — Pigeon 
game — “ Spider” — Peanut game — “Touch” — Game with ball — 
“Towns” — “Hunt the Slipper” — “Bull-roarer” — Gambling — 
Dances — Fetish dance — Fleecing a visitor — Conundrums — Jungle 
stories 

CHAPTER Xm 

COURTSHIP AND MARRIAGE 

Effect of mother-right on degrees of affinity — Treating for a wife — 
Counting the marriage money — Manner of sharing it — Breaking 
the engagement — Carrying off the bride — Marriage feast — 
Marriage oaths — Love philtre — Congo women a good investment 
— The slave wife — Polygamy and its effects .... 

CHAPTER XIV 

SALUTATIONS, BLESSINGS, AND CURSES 

Daily greetings — Farewells — Jocular salutations — Their answers — 
Paying homage to the King — Homage to a chief — Common 
salutations — Doubtful farewell blessings — Cursing a child — 
Removing a curse — Cursing a family — Insults . . . . 

PAGE 

103-110 

111-120 

121-140 

141-150 

151-157 

Xll 

CONTENTS 

CHAPTER XV 

A SECRET SOCIETY — COUNTRY-OF-THE-DEAD 

PAOE 

Reason for secret societies — Not puberty rites — Names of a secret 
society — Their meaning — Starting a lodge — Site of a lodge — 

Taking food to the dead — The secret language — Escaping from 
the lodge — Life in the lodge — Advantages to the medicine-man 
— New names for the initiated — Leaving the lodge — Supposed 
ignorance of the initiated — Their lawless conduct — The musical 
instrument used in the lodge 158-167 

CHAPTER XVI 

A GUILD, bachelor’s CLUB, AND CIRCUMCISION 

Black-mailed by a guild — Guild’s master of ceremonies — Rites at 
entrance to the guild — Dress of the initiated — Secret language 
— Advantages of membership — Bachelors’ club — Two modes of 
circumcision — Punishments in the lodge — Operation on girls — 
Suggested reason for modification in rites — Effect of over- 
lordship 168-177 

CHAPTER XVII 

BUSH BURNING AND HUNTING 

Scarcity of game — Bush burning, a long-standing custom — Method 
of burning the grass — Village rights and grass burning — Dangers 
to houses from sparks — The hunters’ patron — Making the hunting 
charm — Visiting grave of great hunter — Hunter’s medicine-man 
— An oblation of blood — Restoring luck — Division of the meat 
— Numerous accidents — Hunter’s dog — Rat-hunting — Respect 
for leopards 178-189 

CHAPTER XVIII 

WARFARE AND ITS USAGES 

Catalogued according to weapons — The flint-lock gun — Proclaiming 
war — Making the war charm — The village dance and fetish — 

Fight for the corpse — Making of peace — Blood brotherhood — 

Viewing a fight — Story of a fight — Surprised that a fighter was 
killed 190-198 

CHAPTER XIX 

MARKET DAYS AND TRADING 

The Congo man a keen trader — Four market days — The five great 
markets — Beads and brass rods — Depreciation of the currency 
— Keeping accounts — Market laws — Introduction of the chigoe 
— A trading charm — Etiquette of the road — Ivory — Curious 
native belief — Slaves — Matabixu — Factory interpreters — Method 
of exchange 199-213 

CONTENTS 

CHAPTER XX 

BLACK AND WHITE MAGIC 

Meaning of nganga — Of white art — Of black art — Methods of entering 
the cults — By initiation— By payment — By being imbued with 
fetish power — By passing the ordeal — Chief characteristics of 
medicine-men — Their power — Theory of black and white magic 
— The various witch-doctors — Their ceremonies— Their mode of 
working — They maintain the status quo 

CHAPTER XXI 

FETISHES AND CHARMS 

Widespread belief in charms — The charm bundle — Meaning of nkisi 
— As many fetishes as spirits — Contents of a bundle of charms 
— Charms for every possible purpose — Various sacrifices to 
fetishes — Luck charm — Lightning fetish — Names and functions 
of various fetishes — Horn charms — Talking shell — Scarecrows 
— Killing spirits 

CHAPTER XXII 

TABOOS, FIRST-FRUITS, AND OMENS 

Taboos {maintain the status quo — Inherited taboos — Personal taboos 
— Temporary taboos — Women’s taboos — Taboos relating to 
names — To days — To the mother-in-law — To the blacksmith — 
Results of breaking taboo — First-fruits — Planting — Omens 

CHAPTER XXIII 

DIAGNOSIS AND DIVINATION 

DiflBculty of diagnosing — Paucity of symptom-words — Pine work 
done by doctors — Two patients — Native “doctors” — Method of 
diagnosing — Treatment of a patient — Decide on witchcraft — 
Discovering the witch — Procuring the ordeal — Giving the ordeal 
— Various tests — Different kinds of divination .... 

CHAPTER XXIV 

DEATH AND BURIAL 

Fearless of death because of their superstitions — Fear of witchcraft 
— Desire for a grand funeral — Treatment of a corpse — Gathering 
goats, &c. — Sending out invitations — An account of Gazia — 
Grave-digging fees — Death of a chief — Death of an infant — 
Widows — Removing spells — Death by lightning — Suicide- 
Sorrow . . 

xiii 

PAOE 

214-231 

232-244 

245-263 

254-265 

266-275 

XIV 

CONTENTS 

CHAPTER XXV 

RELIGIOUS BELIEFS 

Supreme Being — The source of evil— Chalk and its power — The 
desire for grand funerals — Forest town of spirits — Sun and 
moon theory — As abode of spirits — Theories clash — Shooting 
stars as spirits — Degeneration of a spirit — Dreams as spirit 
journeys — No compound soul — Necessary beliefs — Sky as a 
ceiling — An attempt to reflect the native mind .... 

CHAPTER XXVI 

POT POURRI 

Paying a caravan — Attempt to bluff — The e^il eye — Charm against 
the evil eye — The “ to-morrow ” charm — Dislike to being counted 
— Origin of Are — The stars and their names — Water-sprites — 
Weave cloths — Have only one eye — Native rapacity — Reason for 
their greed — Description of the Congo River .... 

APPENDIX 

FAOE 

276-288 

289-304 

305-314 

INDEX . 

315-318 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

A Bateke Chief ..... 

Frontispiece 

Native Chief, Boma .... 

• 

PAGE 

20 

Suspension Bridge over the River Ambriz 

26 

Inscription on Rocks above Matadi . 

32 

Present King of Kongo in State 

40 

Approaching the King ceremoniously 

40 

State Robes of the King of Kongo . 

52 

Village in French Kongo . 

62 

Congo Nobles ..... 

70 

An Ancient Font .... 

70 

Making a Papyrus Mat 

88 

Palm-tree Climber '. 

96 

Lower Congo Woman and Child 

112 

Native Drummers .... 

122 

The Town Band ..... 

132 

Locust Eating a Mouse 

142 

The Nsambi. ..... 

160 

A Cat’s Cradle ..... 

160 

Members of the Nkimba Secret Society 

170 

A Hunting Fetish Drum . 

178 

Fetish Cross used in Hunting . 

188 

The Nsambi ..... 

188 

Ferry across the River Kevilu 

. 

. 

194 

XV 

XVI 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

PAGE 

Native Currency Church Collection .... 202 

Bread Fruit Tree ........ 210 

Witch Doctor and his Assistants ..... 216 

The Nlongo Custom, Zombo ...... 222 

Sleeping-sick Patients, San Salvador .... 228 

Basket-making ......... 228 

Fetishes and Charms, Lower Congo ..... 240 

Natural and Artificial Rattles ..... 250 

European Image ......... 260 

Native Fetish ......... 260 

Graves, Lower Congo ....... 268 

Tombs of the Kings of Kongo . . . . . .272 

Animal Fetish with Human Head 286 

Main Road near San Salvador ...... 286 

Lower Congo Pottery ....... 290 

Washing a Child ........ 290 

Bridge across a Swamp ....... 298 

AMONG THE PRIMITIVE 
BAKONGO 

CHAPTER I 

MY FIRST TRIP ON THE CONGO RIVER 

ON the 13th of January 1882 the s.s. Kinsembo steamed 
round Banana Point, and with much rattling of chains 
dropped her anchor in the brackish waters of Banana 
Creek. On the port side of our vessel was Banana — a narrow 
strip of sand gently lapped on the inner side by the tired 
waters that had travelled hundreds of weary miles from the 
far interior of Africa, here rushing impetuously over falls, 
there madly racing with “ white horses ” through the rapids ; 
here pushing their frothy, fuming way among the boulders and 
rocks that frequently, in the cataract regions, tried to impede 
their onward haste to the sea, and there purring by a shelving 
bank in a quiet bay or gurgling, like a happy child, over the 
pebbly shallows; but with it all ever hurrying of set purpose 
to the ocean. No wonder they were weary after their toilsome 
journey, and turned into the creek for a rest before renewing 
their travels on the bosom of the mighty Atlantic. 

Away to the stern of our steamer was the main current of 
the great river and its many full-grown tributaries sweeping 
with reddish-brown waters to the sea. The current by its 
volume and force discoloured the sea for over eighty miles 
from the river’s mouth, and when the tide turned it scarcely 
affected the onward rush of the river’s course. 

The spit of sand forming Banana was long and low, and 
was occupied as a receiving and distributing centre by several 

B 

18 

OUR LITTLE STEAMER 

trading houses that had their factories up the river and its 
numerous creeks, and stretching north and south along the 
sea coast. At that time the most powerful of these houses 
was the “ Dutch House,” at whose table over fifty white men 
sat daily, and whose coloured employes reached well into four 
figures. From the deck of the steamer we could look over the 
various houses and stores and see the Atlantic waves rolling up 
the low, shelving beach, so that Banana with its white roofs, 
its frangipanis, its oleanders, its maracujas, its low green 
shrubs, and its graceful cocoa-nut palms seemed, in its bright, 
sunlit beauty, to be sitting on the water. A pretty sight 
from the steamer, and all the more beautiful to us as for seven 
weeks we had been looking towards it as the object of our 
desires, and the starting-point of our African life and 
experiences. 

Not long after the anchor dropped, my old college friend. 
Ml’. Billington, came on board and offered me a passage in 
his mission launch, the Livingstone^ as far as our station at 
Musuku. The launch was not to start for a few days, but he 
invited me to stay with him at the mission-house until all was 
ready. I had been wondering how I was to reach Musuku, 
situated about 90 miles up the river, so I gladly accepted the 
proffered help. 

The Livingstone was a small steam launch about 50 feet 
long, 5 feet wide, and of very shallow draught. When she 
was fully laden with cargo for up-river stations, and supplied 
with coals and provisions for the journey, there was not much 
room to spare for the two white men who worked her, and the 
unfortunate passenger who in his ignorance had accepted a 
passage by her to his station. Through the comparatively 
quiet waters of Banana Creek the little launch made her way 
with holiday gaiety ; Bula Mbemba Point was rounded, and 
then came the struggle for every foot of the way. Whatever 
speed the Livingstone may have had on the Thames she lost 
it on the Congo, for in spite of her fussing and fuming, and 
the racing of her noisy engines, it was sunset before we reached 
Ponta de Lenha, a factory about 20 miles from Banana. 

A BROKEN ENGINE 

19 

By the afternoon of the second day we steamed into Boma, 
and enjoyed the hospitality of a French trading house. We 
were not sorry to stretch our legs on the short, wide road that 
ran by the river. The three of us who formed the passenger 
and crew of the launch more than crowded her carrying 
capacity. Where we sat down in the morning there we had 
to remain until we arrived at our stopping-place, for if we 
moved too freely, or changed our position too carelessly, the 
little steamer rocked ominously, and warned us of possible 
consequences. Every movement had to be well calculated, and 
when it was necessary for one to approach the provision box, 
or crawl along to a bit of engine beyond the engineer’s reach 
from his seat, another of us had to watch his movements and 
counteract his weight when the steamer wobbled. Just imagine 
sitting abaft the engines — the only place there was for accom- 
modation— with the heat from them coming full in your face, 
the tropical sun pouring down its fierce rays on and penetrat- 
ing through the thin awning above, and the water reflecting 
the heat on either side ! We had all the discomforts and none 
of the pleasures of a prolonged Turkish bath. 

On leaving Boma on the third morning out from Banana 
we fully anticipated arriving at Musuku in the early afternoon. 
But we had not gone many miles when “ crack ” went a bolt in 
the engine, and our little launch began to rock dangerously in 
the turbulent waters. We were negotiating a swiftly-running 
stretch of river, and the engineer, in trying to get more speed 
out of the engines, had overstrained them, with the result that 
a bolt gave way, and our little craft was turned about and 
carried down-river like a cork on the waves. At the right 
moment an anchor was thrown out, which gripped the rocky 
bottom and saved us from a catastrophe. 

Ransacking among the spare gear, the only bolt we could 
find was too large to fit into the place, so we took turn about 
in the broiling heat to file that bolt to a proper size. And all 
the time the launch was tugging at her anchor chain fit to 
snap it, and rocking and rolling in the treacherous current as 
though she would like to turn and lay for ever on her side at 

20 

IN SIGHT OF MUSUKU 

the bottom of the river, where engineers cease from troubling 
and weary steamers are at rest. 

As soon as possible we were again on our way up-river, 
the little launch fighting bravely for every inch of progress; 
and the giant, swirling, rushing current sometimes held her so 
tightly in its grip that she could not force her way round some 
jutting point that seemed exposed to the whole weight of the 
river. She would then cut across the river to the other side, 
where she would humbly creep up the quiet water, apologeti- 
cally take advantage of any up-current, and, coming in time to 
another sti’ong corner, she would remember her past experi- 
ences, and instead of fighting the strong water she would cross 
the river in search of less turbulent foes on the other side ; and 
thus for many a mile she worked her way modestly, but with 
much fretting and wheezing, up the great river that in after 
years was to play with ocean steamers on her bosom, and in 
spiteful moods to twirl them round and round like tops. 

By the middle of the afternoon we came in sight of 
Musuku, but between us and our landing-place was a great 
stretch of water called in the native tongue “ angry waters,” 
because of the noise they made in swirling and rushing down, 
constantly boiling and bubbling, suddenly making whirlpools 
in unlikely places, that gyrated with great momentum for 
a time, forming deep and ever-widening holes, and then 
mysteriously disappearing to reappear in another unexpected 
place. The one in charge of the steamer decided that, instead 
of crossing that great cauldron of seething water, it would be 
wiser to go up a quiet, narrow channel between the mainland 
and an island, and coming out above the madly whirling 
waters, cross in a calmer stretch of river, and thus gain our 
destination without further trouble. But no sooner did we 
turn up the quiet channel than a rock hidden beneath the 
water knocked off our propeller ; but there was sufficient way 
on the steamer to take us to the bank, and steering for some 
trees, we tied up to them as quickly as we touched them. 

Between us and Musuku was the island, and we wanted our 
friends at the station to know of our whereabouts, so at short 

h M, Shanu 

Native Chief, Boma 

The photo was taken twenty-five years ago in a village just behind Boma, which is now the 
capital of Belgian Congo. Fetishes are carved on the King*post, and around the post is a trench 
into which palm-wine and blood were poured as an offering to the fetishes on the post. The wide 
verandah was used for pala' ers. 

WE ENGAGE A CANOE 

21 

intervals we fired our guns and shouted, but as there was no 
response we decided that our people had not noticed our little 
launch when she came in sight of the station, and that they 
probably regarded our guns as the firing of some hippopotami 
hunters. 

Not long before sunset we saw two natives passing in a 
canoe on the opposite side of the channel in which we were 
wrecked. We called and beckoned to them, and they came 
alongside our little steamer and asked us what we wanted. 

We replied by asking them if they would take us to 
Musuku. 

“Yes,” they answered, “but what will you pay us.^” 

We said that we would give them eight handkerchiefs, and 
they, on seeing the bright, gaudy cloth with its grotesque 
patterns in red, black, yellow, &c., at once agreed to take us ; 
and being eager to handle such handsome pay, cried out : 

“ Get into our canoe at once, and we will paddle you to 
Musuku.” 

Well, that was a feat much easier to talk about than to 
accomplish by the inexperienced. The canoe was a “ dug-out ” 
— simply a tree that had been felled, shaped at the ends, 
rounded at the sides, and dug out in the middle. It oscillated 
dangerously, and as we entered the canoe it wobbled so badly 
that we expected every moment the light craft would turn 
turtle and precipitate us into the water, so we embarked very 
gingerly, and when we were seated along the bottom of the 
canoe, we bade the men to take their paddles. 

We had not proceeded more than a few hundred yards from 
our launch — which we now began to regard with affection, and 
as a very fortress of security compared to our unsteady canoe — 
when we saw on the bank ahead of us some five hippopotami 
making for the river. For two days we had been sitting with 
our guns to hand on the lookout for these creatures, and had 
not seen a single one ; and when we had no desire to meet them 
there were five too near to be pleasant. We shouted and 
made a noise, hoping to frighten them back to the bush, but in 
sheer hippo obstinacy they continued their course to the river. 

22 

MEET SOME HIPPOPOTAMI 

and plunged with much grunting and tremendous splashes into 
the water right in front of their noses, and in front of our 
canoe. What waves they made ! Eight tons of living, reckless 
flesh churning about in the neighbourhood of a frail bark give 
the occupants a peculiar flutter about the heart. We expected 
every moment to be lifted by one of the brutes and thi’own 
headlong into the river. Our men paddled hard to pass 
quickly the dangerous spot, and as our canoe bounded forward, 
one hippopotamus came snorting up on one side, and another 
came snorting up on the other side and stared at us with 
watery eyes a few fathoms off, but fortunately none came under 
us or at us, and after more than two hours of hard paddling we 
were not sorry to hear the bottom of the canoe grate on 
Musuku beach. The men received their eight handkerchiefs 
and went off delighted ; and we were heartily welcomed by 
Mr. Crudgington, who had charge of the B.M.S. Station at 
Musuku. After a day or so the “ captain ” returned to his 
steamer, and by the help of a sail and the current the launch 
returned to Banana. 

While at Musuku I had my first taste of malarial fever, the 
prelude to a very intimate acquaintance with that malady. My 
temperature on this first occasion rose to 106'4 ; and the 
discomforts of the fever, the disagreeable conditions in which I 
had to bear it, and the nauseating effects of the large doses of 
quinine that I was compelled to swallow, remain with me to 
this day. At that time quinine could only be bought loose at 
22^. per ounce. There were no tabloids, no coated pills, no 
ovoid gelatine capsules, nor any other form by which to render 
it more pleasant to a weak stomach. We tried it in con- 
densed milk, in coffee, in Liebig’s Extract, and in cigarette 
paper, but its bitterness could not be disguised. One in- 
ventive genius hit on the expedient of making the powder into 
pills with tinct. perchloride of iron. He certainly made pills 
that had no nauseating effect, for they would not dissolve in the 
stomach ; and it was seriously proposed to use the remainder 
in lieu of shot — they were hard enough. 

Musuku had not been occupied many months. The house. 

SITUATION OF MUSUKU 

23 

stores, and necessary offices were of bamboo walls and grass 
roofs. The ground was hard, and unsuitable for kitchen 
gardens. Huge boulders and stones of vai’ious sizes were 
strewn about the place, reflecting the heat, and rendering path- 
making almost impossible. The view from the station was 
magnificent. There in front was a vast stretch of boiling, 
bubbling, swirling water that narrowed into a channel, at the 
end of which the hills about Boma could be distinctly seen on 
a clear day. In the near distance were the high lands on the 
other side of the river; and looking up-river one could see 
Diamond Rock standing almost in the middle of the river, and 
the waters that flowed by a thousand towns in the far interior 
struck against it, and failing to tear it from its grip, eddied 
around it, and raging at its vain endeavour, passed on with 
increased fury. And away as a background to the rock were 
the hills of Noqui, that ran at such an angle that they appeared 
to landlock the river and turn it into a great lake ; and 
behind the station were hills that seemed to bar the way to 
the hinterland, and stand as sentinels over its hidden and 
fascinating mysteries. 

CHAPTER II 

JOURNEY TO SAN SALVADOR 

IT was arranged by my colleagues that I should commence 
my missionary life at San Salvador, the capital of the 
Kingdom of Kongo, which is situated eighty odd miles 
south-east of Musuku — about five days’ journey. As Mr. 
Hartland was returning to San Salvador to pack his belongings 
and settle his accounts prior to working on the main river, it 
was thought desirable, although I had not fully regained my 
strength after my first bout with malarial fever, that I should 
accompany him rather than take the journey alone. 

There were no vehicles of any kind on that road, so we had to 
use on the journey an animal well known as Shanks’ pony — 
a willing steed, but not always equal to the demands made upon 
it in such a country. There were neither hotels nor restaurants, 
consequently we had to take with us all the provisions, &c., 
we needed for the road. In one trunk we packed a few clothes, 
into another we put rice and tins of provisions, a third we 
filled with knives, looking-glasses, bells, beads, cloth, &c. — 
this was our purse, containing the money with which we were 
to pay our way : for if I had gone into a village and had 
offered a native woman a sovereign for a fowl she would have 
said, “ Here is a foolish white man offering me a brass button 
without holes for a fine fowl ! ” but when we presented a 
looking-glass or a knife, she was only too delighted to exchange 
her fowl for either of them, hence the need of taking a box of 
barter goods with us. We tied our blankets, mosquito curtain, 
camp-bedstead, and pillows in a bundle and wrapped a water- 
proof sheet round them to keep the things dry ; and in a bath 
we arranged our pots and pans, our kettle and frying-pan, our 
knives and forks, cups and saucers, and in fact all the articles 

NATURE OF THE PATHS 

25 

we required for cooking and eating our food. When these 
and various other loads had been prepared we called the carriers, 
who, placing them upon their heads or shoulders, started with 
us on the road to San Salvador. 

Now when a road is mentioned in England, we instantly 
think of a wide place upon which navvies have laboured, and 
over which steam rollers have passed, making them pleasant 
for travelling; but when we speak of a road on the Congo 
we mean a narrow path about eight or ten inches wide, winding 
like a narrow brownish ribbon in and out of the country, 
going over the tops of the hills and dipping down into the 
valleys, and losing itself in the sti-eams and swamps ; and 
the strong tropical rains have poured down on this track, 
washing the loose dirt out of it, leaving only the stones 
sticking up. For miles on either side of these narrow roads 
was tall, stout grass from ten to fifteen feet high, and the 
playful wind blowing the grass about interlocked it in such 
a clinging embrace that the traveller had to go with his arms 
up to force his way, and to keep the grass from cutting his 
face or poking into his eyes. 

More than once I had in my San Salvador journey a strong 
“ Kroo-boy,” a part of whose duty it was to carry me over the 
many streams and swamps that crossed the path. His name 
was Napoleon Bonaparte. I do not know how he came by 
the name ; but the first time I met him I asked him his name 
and he replied in “ Kroo-boy ” English, “ My name, Massa, be 
Napoleon Bonaparte.” Sometimes Napoleon would have me 
upon his shoulders, flying-angel fashion, in the middle of a 
river, and feeling the rush of water against his legs he would 
begin to quake and say, “ Massa, I no fit for carry you, I go 
let you fall;” and I would reply, “Napoleon, I fit for give 
you one cup of rice suppose you no drop me.” He would then 
carefully take a few more paces, and feeling the swirl of water 
more strongly about his legs, and the stones slipping beneath 
his feet, he would nervously call out in his curious English, 
“ Massa, Massa, I no fit, I bound for let you fall.” Napoleon 
often received from me the promise of two or three cups of 

26 

REACHING A VILLAGE 

rice to steady him, before he landed me high and dry upon 
the further bank. At times we were not so fortunate, then 
both of us went down into the water, and we congratulated 
ourselves when it was a stream, and not a nasty, muddy 
swamp. 

After climbing up and down steep hills, pushing through 
tall, entangled grass, traversing plateaus, and crossing streams, 
rivers, and swamps for four or five hours with the strong 
tropical sun pouring down his fierce rays upon us, we were 
glad to hear that the next village we reached was the place 
where we were to spend the night. Crossing a stream of 
sparkling water, and winding through some cassava farms, we 
entered the village, and our carriers, selecting the largest hut 
they could see, put down their loads outside of it, and went in 
search of the owner, and said to him, “ W e have brought some 
white men into your village, and their goods are now outside 
your door ; will you lend them your house for the night ? ” 

The native owner was very hospitable, and was quite 
willing to lend his house to the passing travellers ; so calling 
two or three of his wives he told them to sweep the house 
and hand it over to us. The woman came with their native- 
made brooms, and pushing together the rubbish of many days, 
they carried it away, and after removing their mats, saucepans, 
and anything else they would require for the night, they told 
us the hut was ready. A native after he has lent his hut does 
not care to enter it again until it is properly handed back, 
and should he need to do so through having forgotten some- 
thing he asks permission with many apologies. The hut 
lent was small, but it answered our purpose admirably. In 
the morning we returned our goods to their various bundles 
and boxes, leaving out a penny looking-glass and two yards of 
calico, which we presented to the owner of the house in acknow- 
ledgment of his courtesy to us ; and he on receiving the articles 
clapped his hands and made a little speech of thanks — the 
clapping of the hands was the usual part of the ordinary mode 
of thanking a person. 

I had always read about white men leading their caravans, 

SusPicNsiON Bridge over the River Ambriz 

1 

THE WET JUNGLE 

27 

and being now in a new country I placed myself at the head 
of the carriers, and pushed forward through the tall grass, 
which at 5.30 a.m. was heavy with dew, and as I forged 
through it shaking the grass, the dew fell on me in showers, 
and soon my helmet and clothes were soaking wet, and the 
water was quelching in my boots. The Congos have a proverb 
the translation of which runs thus; “Foolishness comes first 
and wisdom afterwards.” I had learned my lesson, so the next 
morning, instead of preceding the men, I stayed behind with 
my colleague until the last carrier had left our night’s quarters ; 
and the men thus going first knocked against the grass, shook 
off the dew, and left behind a comparatively dry road for us. 
And it made very little difference to the men, for they wore 
so little cloth that, half an hour after the sun rose above the 
hill-tops, they were absolutely dry, whereas we, with our 
superfluity of clothes, would have been more or less damp and 
uncomfortable most of the day. 

After five days of such-like travelling I was glad to have 
pointed to me from the top of a hill the mission station of San 
Salvador in the distance. As we approached the town we 
found that the people had heard of our coming, for they were 
lining either side of the naiTow road to give us a welcome. As 
we passed up between them they pushed back with their backs 
the tall grass to make a way for us, and shooting out their 
hands they gripped ours, saying : “ Kaiyisi Mundele ! Kaiyisi 
Mundele ! ” (Welcome white man ! Welcome white man !) We 
passed quickly between the greeting, excited lines of black 
folk and entered the mission-house, and the natives came 
crowding in behind us, and standing on tiptoe and with 
outstretched necks they peered over one another’s shoulders 
to stare at the new arrival : for a new white man to a central 
African town is like a circus to an English village — every one 
turns out to gaze at the sight ; and as they stood looking at 
me they passed remarks on my personal appearance, and 
selected my physical peculiarities for special attention. There 
were allusions to my youthful appearance, to my neck and 
nose, and the absence of a beard, &c. Of course I was unable 

28 

GENIAL NATIVES 

to understand them, but my colleagues were only too delighted 
to give a very literal translation of the observations none too 
quietly passed by the facetious onlookers. 

By and by the crowd parted, and I saw a couple of lads 
struggling bravely with a pig, which after much trouble they 
brought to me and said, “ The King has heard of the arrival 
of the new white man, and he does not want him to complain 
of hunger, so he has sent you this pig to remove your hunger 
after the long journey.” 

I looked down ruefully at the squalling, struggling pig, 
wondering what it was all about; but one of my colleagues 
translated the speech to me, answered it on my behalf, and 
accepted the dirty, squeaking animal in my name. I was a 
Londoner, and had never owned a pig in all my life before, 
and scarcely knew what to do with such a creature ; hence I was 
not sorry when two of the school lads removed it from the 
house, and promised to look after it, in the hope of one day 
eating a fair share of it. Two days after my arrival I went 
down with another fever, reaching a temperature of 106'5 ; but 
it is not my purpose to record fevers, and let me say once 
for all that the highest temperature I ever had during my 
long life on the Congo was 107‘4, and I had not the slightest 
ambition to go higher than that. 

Although the road was narrow, rough, and hilly, the 
swamps disgusting to eyes and nose, the streams numerous and 
very wet — especially when one fell into them, with all his clothes 
on, from the shoulders of a tall Kroo-boy — yet I have very 
pleasant memories of the various journeys I took in the early 
years over that road. For as I became acquainted with the 
language I found my personal lads and carriers no mean com- 
panions. Their ready sympathy when you fell into a stream ; 
their hearty, good-natured laughter at your and their own 
mi.shaps ; their genial chatter, the stories they told, the country 
gossip they recounted, and the conundrums they propounded, 
all helped to shorten the journey, and smooth the stony road. 

A day’s journey was from 15 to 20 miles, or from six to 
eight hours. The usual hour for starting was about 5.30 a.m., 

ALL THE TOWN AGOG 

29 

and by the time we halted for lunch between 11 and 12 a.m. 
the greater part of the journey for the day was over. What 
grateful rests they were beneath the pleasant shade of some 
trees by a gurgling, sparkling stream ! Down went the loads 
with a sigh of relief, and looping their cloths in their belts, 
the carriers went up-stream, and after carefully washing their 
hands and mouths, the men stooped and threw the water into 
their mouths with the fingers of the right hand, or putting 
their hands together, little finger to little finger, they dipped 
up the water, and drank it with their lips placed between the 
thumbs. Some of the carriers would be too exhausted to do 
more than drop their loads and stretch themselves on the 
ground, and these would beg for a drink from their stronger 
comrades — a request never refused, no matter how near or far 
the stream might be from the encampment. 

The town at which a white man and his caravan spent the 
night was always agog with excitement. There was the 
bartering for food, the haggling about the price of the cassava, 
the plantain, or the peanuts offered for sale, and the worth of 
the trade goods offered in exchange ; the interchange of news ; 
but the greatest of all interest to the local natives centred in 
the newly arrived white man. The inhabitants of the village 
formed a semi-circle round the front of his borrowed hut, and 
watched his every movement. He strips oflp his jacket, turns 
down the collar round his neck, and rolls up his shirt-sleeves 
preparatory to a wash; and there are audible remarks about 
the whiteness of his skin. They eye him critically at his 
toilet. “ What is that stuff he is rubbing on his hands ? ” asks 
one ignoramus. 

“ That,” replies a much-travelled man, “ is what they call 
soap (zabau, Portuguese sabdo); see what a lather it makes.” 
And there is much amused contempt in his tones as he gives 
the bit of information to the untravelled folk in his village. 

The ablutions are finished and the white man is now drying 
himself, and while two or three spectators are passing remarks 
on the using of so good a cloth (towel) for such a purpose, a 
woman on the outskirts of the ci*owd asks, “ Is that all he is 

30 CHATTER ROUND THE FIRES 

going to wash ? Why, we wash all over ! ” and there is disdain 
mingled with disappointment as she puts the question, and a 
suggestion that the white man is not so clean as he might be. 
The white man’s boy does not like the query in the tone, and 
as his honour is bound up with his master’s, he informs the 
crowd generally that his master baths regularly in his own 
town. The woman is answered, and the public receives an 
interesting item of information, which, by and by, is distri- 
buted among the neighbouring villages, and the white man’s 
reputation for cleanliness is saved. 

About 6 p.M. the sun has sunk to rest, and as the evening 
grows darker the fires along the village street burn brighter, 
and around each fire little crowds gather, the younger members 
of which pass the time in laughter and chatter, and the older 
ones talk over the day’s doings and the politics of the country- 
side. Outside the white man’s house is also a blazing fire, 
around which his personal boys and carriers are sitting. The 
white man has arranged with his capita (head carrier) where 
they are to lunch and sleep on the morrow. All the carriers 
have a say in the matter, for have they not to caiTy loads 
weighing from 50 lbs. to 70 lbs. each according to their pay ? 
And a caravan must not go faster than its slowest unit, or walk 
farther in a day than its weakest member can reach before 
sunset ; otherwise the white man may find himself at night 
minus his bed and mosquito curtain, or his case of provisions, 
which has happened more than once ; therefore a white man 
on the road does well to consult his men about the next day’s 
journey. 

One perennial theme of discussion among the carriers 
around the evening fire was the following query : If I send a 
boy to the market to buy some meat (mbiji), and there are 
fowls only for sale, should he buy a fowl, or return and say 
there is no meat at the market ? The party was sure to split 
on this question. There was no word for poultry in the 
language. Some would contend that fowl was meat (mbiji), 
others would insist that by meat was meant buffaloes, cattle, 
goats, sheep, antelopes, &c., and “ not things with feathers on 

CARRIERS’ TALK 

31 

them.” Their gesticulations were energetic, their voices raised, 
their tones threatening, and to one not used to them they 
appeared to be on the verge of a tremendous fight ; but some- 
one would advance an absurd argument, and they would all 
burst out laughing at him, adjourn the debate, and rolling 
themselves in their mats, they were soon grunting in sleep. 

Another conundrum often propounded and never answered 
to the satisfaction of all parties was thus stated : If there were 
an antelope grazing on a neighbouring hill, and one man 
pointed his finger at it and the animal dropped dead, and 
another man glanced at it and the creature fell dead, who was 
the stronger person of the two — the one who glanced or the one 
who pointed his finger.? The party would divide on this 
problem : some argued in favour of the one who looked and 
others backed up the one who pointed ; and as the white 
traveller never had the same gang of carriers twice, he would, 
among his changing sets of men, find these questions constantly 
recurring. They were about as profitable as the wearisome 
discussions of the old schoolmen as to “ How many angels can 
stand on the point of a needle F ” or “ Do angels in leaving one 
place and arriving at another have to pass through the inter- 
vening place ? ” 

The Congo Railway is a thin line connecting the Lower 
Congo at Matadi with the Upper Congo at Stanley Pool, and 
is of incalculable advantage to all the white men at and above 
Stanley Pool; but to reach our stations at San Salvador, 
Kibokolo, and Mabaya in Portuguese Congo the railway is of 
little or no help ; and the mode of travelling to San Salvador 
is much the same as it was thirty years ago. The tsetse fly 
forbids the use of horses, riding oxen, and mules ; and although 
we have introduced the donkey, its life is very precarious, and 
consequently the cost is almost prohibitive. 

CHAPTER III 

SAN SALVADOR 

The town of San Salvador is situated on a plateau 184<0 
feet above the sea. The stone ruins of a cathedral, 
a monastery, and a fortress bear silent witness to the 
days when Portuguese Roman Catholics were dominant during 
the sixteenth century, both in the town and the district round. 
Occasionally, when turning over the soil in our garden, we came 
across the broken pieces of old iron bombs, probable tokens of 
the exchange of doubtful courtesies that passed between the 
Portuguese and the Dutch, who in those far-off days contended 
for the supremacy of the African coasts and hinterlands.^ In 
these pages it is my purpose to give, as briefly as possible, an 
account of what I saw at San Salvador thirty years ago, and 
have observed since, of the system of government, and the 
election of King, nobles, and chiefs. 

An hour or so after my arrival at San Salvador in February 
1882, I received the compliments of the King, an expression of 
his goodwill, and a proof of his welcome in the shape of a pig, 
to which I have already referred.^ The pig was sent ostensibly 
“ to remove my hunger,” but so far as the hunger was con- 
cerned there was no need for the pig, for the chief of every 
town in which we slept, or even I’ested, during our five days’ 
journey, was desirous of presenting Mr. Hartland and myself 

' Those who desire to study the ancient Kingdom of Kongo should 
read Duarte Lopez’s account, written by Pigafetta in Rome, 1591, after a 
residence of twelve years in the country, and also the accounts of Bastian, 
Burton, Bentley, Grandy and others, who give more or less lengthy 
sketches of the history of the town, taken from the writings of the Portu- 
guese priests. See plate facing p. 32, and also Appendix, Note I, p. 305, 
for ancient marks on rocks. 

® See p. 28. 

32 

Inscrip HON on Rocks above Matadi 

KING’S NAME 

33 

with a goat “ to take away our hunger,” as they put it, but 
in reality to receive a return present, which was always expected 
to be two or three times the value of the goat. We often 
begged them to keep their goats, and, if that was not successful 
in damping their ardour “to remove our hunger,” we then 
told them of the smallness of the present they would receive 
as a return “ dash,” and that never failed. 

With the King, however, it was different. We had come 
to live in his town, and it would have been an insult to us 
if he had not recognised our arrival by the present of a pig — 
a goat from him to us would have been too common for the 
purpose of showing due respect. The opportunity was taken, 
when presents of this kind were made, to give good return 
“ dashes,” for we had our land free, we paid neither rent, 
taxes, or tribute to the King, and no levy was made on us for 
our use of the natives as workmen and carriers, beyond their 
ordinary pay ; and the King guarded our interests, and judged 
and punished all who robbed us if the circumstances demanded 
an appeal to him. It was, therefore, not only right, but wise, 
that we should recognise the King’s position, and his kindly 
attitude towards us, by showing generosity in our occasional 
presents to him. 

The day after our arrival my colleagues arranged for my 
presentation to Dom Pedro V, “ Ntotela, Ntinu a Kongo" i.e. 
Emperor, King of Congo, whose personal name was Eklo, and 
whose sobriquet, he afterwards informed me, was “ weni w' 
ezulu" or The great one of heaven.^ 

A short time before we were ready, we sent to ask an 
audience of the King, a ceremony never omitted even when we 
became more intimately acquainted with him. Our messenger 
soon returned to inform us that the King was willing to receive 
us. The pig given the day before was worth three or four 
pieces of cloth, but we selected ten pieces of what my colleagues 
thought he would like, and wrapped them in a piece of calico. 
A lad carried the bundle in front of us as we made our way 
to the centre of the town where the King’s enclosure was 

^ See Appendix, Note II, for a list of the Kings of Congo. 

c 

34 

CEREMONIAL VISIT 

situated. We passed between high grass fences to the “judg- 
ing place ” {mhaji a Tcongo) in the middle of the town, where 
a huge, wide-spreading tree was growing, beneath the shade 
of which all important palavers were held; and crossing this 
town square we came to the first entrance to the King’s 
enclosure (lumbu), which we found to be a miniature maze, 
as we had to negotiate four fences before we arrived at the 
central space where the King’s house stood. 

On entering the first opening in the fence we turned to the 
left, then to the right, then to the right again, and found 
another opening ; then by turning once to the right and twice 
to the left we worked our way back to a position near the 
first entrance, where we discovered the third doorway in the 
fence ; then turning to the left and again to the right there 
was the entrance leading into the courtyard immediately in 
front of the King’s house. There was a 5-feet pathway between 
the fences. At the last entrance we sent a lad to inform the 
King that we were now near his house. After waiting a few 
minutes we received permission to advance, and found ourselves 
in an open space about 15 by 20 yards, with the front door 
of the “ palace ” opposite us. The King’s house was large as 
native houses went, being about 18 feet wide by 25 feet long. 
The walls were of closely-fitting planks, and the roof of 
ordinary thatching-grass. Along one wall was a high, wide 
shelf covered with ewers, wash-hand basins, decanters, jugs, 
mugs, vases, and gaudily-painted china images — the profits of 
trading, and presents from chiefs and others. Beneath the 
shelf were various trunks, undoubtedly full of trade cloth and 
other treasures ; and I afterwards learned that the King’s bed- 
room was next to the reception-room, and beyond that the 
houses for his numerous wives. 

We found the King sitting on a wicker sofa, and after 
shaking hands with him and receiving his welcome we sat on 
three European chairs that had been placed for us in front of 
his majesty, and the lad put the bundle of cloth at our feet. 
A little conversation then ensued about our journey, health, 
and several small matters, then thanks were given for the pig 

KING’S GREED FOR CLOTH 

35 

sent “ to remove our hunger,” and my colleague, with a smile, 
made a sly reference to the King’s chronic “ hunger for cloth,” 
the return present was made, each piece of cloth being slowly 
turned over, the King meanwhile feasting his eyes on them and 
counting the pieces. He thanked us for our fine present, 
expressed his pleasure at seeing the new white man, hoped he 
would have good health, &c,, and, shaking hands again, we 
bade each other good-bye and departed. He was both hearty 
and dignified in his welcome and behaviour. 

On walking about the town I found that all the headmen 
had fences round their houses — not so elaborate as the King’s, 
but single fences with grass-covered gates, so that passers by 
could not spy upon their privacy. Each enclosure contained 
all the houses belonging to the headman owning the place — 
a house for himself, a house for each of his wives, houses for his 
slaves, and very often a visitor’s house. Children lived with 
their mothers, but when a boy reached the age of twelve he 
went to the bachelor’s house or club {nzo a toko, or nzo 
a mhongi). Ordinary folk had no enclosure ; their houses 
abutted the roads and paths, and all they did was open to 
the full view of any passer by. 

In 1859 the King of Kongo was known as the Marquis of 
Katende, and as such he visited the Portuguese to ask for 
priests to bury his predecessor and to crown himself as King.^ 
He was then “ a handsome, stout, middle-aged man, with a 
very much better caste of countenance than is usual among the 
Congos.”^ When I first met him in 1882 he was about 6 feet 
4 inches in height, very stout, being 60 inches round the waist, 
and his face badly pitted with the smallpox. He was un- 
gainly and awkward in his walk and movements by reason of 
his obesity ; he was crafty in his policy, cunning in his dealings 
with others, and always sharp enough to play one party off 
against another to his own advantage. He was good-humoured, 
enjoyed a joke even at his own expense, and was ever ready 
to give or take a proverb that half concealed a streak of 

* Monteiro’s Angola, vol. i. 211. 

“ Ibid. 217. 

36 RESTRAINING INFLUENCES 

raillery. Personally I have none but pleasant memories of 
him. 

There were many rumours of his cruelty and blood- 
thirstiness. He murdered his own mother in the following 
manner : He had a hole dug and put a mat over it, and then 

invited her to sit down, and when the mat gave way beneath 
her weight, and she fell into the hole, he stood by while she was 
buried alive by his orders. Since that time no one will sit on 
a mat without first looking under it or removing it to another 
place. Whatever he was previously, the desire to be well 
thought of by the white men living in his town, and, strange 
as it may seem, by Queen Victoria, had a restraining influence 
on him, and deterred him from committing many a cruel, 
savage deed. How frequently he asked me what Queen 
Victoria thought of him, and how often he begged me to 
write her on his behalf to send his greetings to her ! He 
never would believe that such a letter would not reach Her 
Gracious Majesty, and I never humoured him, as I had more 
than a suspicion that it was not a letter in reply that he 
desired but a rich present. Again and again he said to those 
who offended him, “ I would kill you but for the white men,” 
or, “ but for Queen Victoria.” He was a strange mixture of 
good and evil : full of desires for the right, and of strong, over- 
mastering inclinations to the wrong. He was superstitious to 
the last degree, his movements were controlled by omens, and 
he lived in constant fear of being bewitched. He had a stone 
given him by a priest, and he was told by the said priest that 
he was to lick the stone every morning, for he would not die 
until the stone was worn away by his tongue. He died on 
February 14, 1891, having reigned about thirty-two years. 

When a King of Kongo died it was the custom for the head- 
men of the town to say for many months that he was only ill. 
When the secret of his death could no longer be kept, it was 
announced, and the body was buried with due honours. There- 
upon the powerful chiefs of the surrounding district fought 
for the throne, and the strongest took it. 

The conqueror went to the town of the former King — San 

KING’S CRAFTINESS 

37 

Salvador, which was always neutral — with his family, relatives, 
followers, and slaves, and, taking possession of it, he sat in the 
King’s chair, appropriated his staff of office, and in fact became 
King. Of all his predecessor’s possessions the new King 
received only the staff* (mpangu), as it was the insignia of 
his kingship, and was regarded as the property of him who 
captured the royal office. It was believed that their kingship 
was bound up in the staff, and without its possession, although 
they might have all things else, they could not be King. The 
family and followers of the new King built their houses round 
his to support him in his new position. It is most probable 
that the death of the King was told immediately and secretly 
by friends at court to each powerful chief in the district, who 
at once prepared to fight for the throne ; and when they were 
ready for the struggle they gave intimation to the headmen 
at San Salvador that the King’s death should be announced. 

The old King, Dom Henrique Lunga, died in 1858, and 
Kiambu of Nkunga seized the capital, San Salvador, and 
installed himself as King. Elelo, Marquis of Katende, was a 
near relative of the deceased King, and made several attempts 
to capture the capital and throne, but his forces were too weak. 
He thereupon went to Bembe and asked the Portuguese, who 
were working some copper mines at that place, to send some 
priests to bury his predecessor (who, howevei-, had already been 
buried a considerable time), knowing well that they would be 
accompanied by a military force, which he hoped would establish 
him on the throne. His ruse succeeded. Soldiers were sent 
with the priests, and after a long series of fights Elelo, Marquis 
of Katende, was crowned King. The Portuguese occupied the 
country, rebuilt the fortress on the south-eastern edge of the 
plateau, remained for some seven years, and then abandoned 
the district. 

I frequently visited Kiambu, the man who was ousted out 
of his rightful kingdom by Elelo’s ruse. He was a man of fine 
presence, tall and dignified, but his mobile face was marred by 
wicked, devilish eyes. In the war with the Portuguese he is 
said, on good authority, to have killed a white soldier and 

38 THE DETHRONED KING 

eaten his liver ^ to indicate his hatred of the men — the white 
men, who had helped his conquered foe, Elelo, to drive him 
out of his capital. At the time I knew him he had one of his 
ow'n daughters living in his “ enclosure ” as his wife. He was 
condemned by all the natives for this act of incest, so repellent 
to them ; and his excuse was that she was so beautiful that she 
could not possibly be his daughter. 

Kiambu was never allowed in San Salvador, nor was he 
permitted to cross the small river that acted as a boundary to 
his land. Just on the outskirts of his town was a large native 
hut containing the dried corpse of a near relative. Six 
unmarried girls were appointed each month to guard the body, 
and keep the house clean; for he had been told by a native 
“ medicine man ” that he (Kiambu) would die the day after 
the corpse was buried, hence in 1883 the body had remained 
unburied for over twenty years, and it was not interred until 
after Kiambu died some years later. I have a suspicion that 
the cost of the funeral festivities, which are very great, had 
more to do with the body being left unburied than his super- 
stitious fears. 

' Some natives think that cannibalism was, at one time, common in 
the country, as there are traces of it yet to be found, in men drinking 
the blood and eating the livers of those they have killed in a fight, 
'fhis, however, is not a common custom, but it is sometimes done. 

CHAPTER IV 

COURT ETIQUETTE AND NATIVE FUNCTIONARIES 

There was much ceremony observed at the King’s court. 
No one approached him without first seeking his 
permission, and no one was allowed to sit on a chair in 
his presence except his own near relatives, such as sons and 
nephews ; and up to 1884 no native was permitted to own a 
European chair even for private use. 

Ordinary men approaching the King had to kneel three 
times, once just inside the last entrance to the King’s enclosure, 
then near the door of the “ palace,” and lastly, immediately in 
front of his majesty ; and the last time they knelt, they put 
the palms of their hands together, rubbed their little fingers 
in the dirt, and then transferred the dirt from their little 
fingers to their foreheads or temples and clapped their hands. 
This ceremony they repeated three times at the last kneeling- 
place ; and the King answered by putting the palms of his 
hand across each other with the fingers of the right hand well 
above the thumb and index finger of the left hand, and waving 
them. If the King did not answer thus, or if he thrust out 
his foot and waved his toes — which was an insult — the sooner 
the man retreated the better for him.^ 

If a man omitted to send or take the King a share of his 
trading profits he would not be favourably received, and might 
expect to see his majesty’s toes wave instead of his fingers. 
Well-to-do chiefs who failed to send him occasional presents 
were also coldly received, and the waving toes reminded them 
of their delinquencies. No written account was kept, but the 
King, like all natives, had a remarkable memory for what was 

^ See chapter on Salutations, &c., for a fuller description of paying 
homage to, or saluting, the King. 

39 

40 

KING EATS ALONE 

owing to him, and never forgot when a debt was to be paid, or 
a present was due. Chiefs and noblemen had to render 
homage to the King in the same manner as an ordinary man, 
but not every time they went into his presence. 

The King possessed twenty-five wives, who lived in an 
enclosure at the back of his house, each having her own hut. 
Most of them were either the daughters or sisters of headmen, 
or of chiefs of the neighbouring towns, and when walking about 
the town both men and women would stand aside respectfully 
to allow them to pass. No homage was paid to them, but they 
were always spoken to and of with much deference by the 
common people. Although the King had so many wives he 
had only three children by them. Living as I have done for 
thirty years in closest touch with the people, my observations 
lead me to hold most firmly the opinion that polygamy on the 
Congo neither conduces to large families, nor to morality.^ 

No one ate at the same table with the King, nor was 
anyone, except his nephews and counsellors {mhanda-mhanda^, 
allowed to sit at the same fire. I have been present more 
than once when his majesty has had a tickling in the thi-oat 
and has coughed and spluttered to free the passage. All 
present clapped their hands most vigorously, and when he 
expectorated the sputum was carried away by one of his wives, 
and it was either buried or burnt. 

In handing anything to, or receiving anything from the 
King the person always knelt, and put the palm of his left 
hand under his right arm just below the elbow, or if the article 
was too large for one hand then both hands, palms upward and 
slightly arched, were held out to offer or receive the proffered 
object. And in delivering a message to the King, or while 
receiving one from him, the messenger had also to kneel.^ 
It was very rarely that his majesty left his enclosure, but 
when he did six of the Dorns or headmen of his town carried 

^ See Among Congo Cannibals (Seeley, Service & Co.) by the author, 
pp. 134-139, for a fuller discussion on the effects of polygamy. 

^ This same ceremony was observed in handing things to or receiving 
things from chiefs, important men, and by children to their fathers. 

Photo by Dr. Merc:er Gamble 

Present King of Kongo in State 

Dom Manuel Martins Kiditu is the first King under the Portuguese Republic. He is here seated 
on his throne in the town square to change the chieftainship of Mputu from a man to a woman. He 
is receiving the Mputu people as shown in the picture below. 

Photo by Dr. Me ixier Gamble 

Approaching the King Ceremoniously 

The M^utu people were dissatisfied with the weak policy of their chief, so they asked the King to 
replace him by Dicina, a woman of strong character, the widow of a former chief. The crowd 
approaches only a few paces at a time, then they salute and the band p’ays. The chieftaines.s has 
a white band on her hat, and the man next to her on the left is the chief who is being deposed. 

KING’S STATE DRESS 

41 

him in a hammock, even if the distance was only one or two 
hundred yards — as from his “palace” to the mission station. 
He was so ponderous that he needed the combined strength of 
the six men — three at each end of the pole — to carry him with 
security and dignity. It was very fortunate for them that he 
did not often visit the town. 

On state occasions he dressed in the cast-ofF uniform of a 
general, or some other high officer, except the trousers, in which 
I never saw him ; but in place of the nether garments, he wore 
round his waist and hanging below his knees many yards of 
velvet, or other fine cloth ; a cockade and a sword completed 
his attire. In his boxes he had many such uniforms — the gifts 
of visitors to his town, and the result of trading. On other 
than ceremonial occasions one often found him squatting on 
the ground in his house, or on a mat in the courtyard, dressed 
in a dirty shirt of Oxford print and a loincloth of common 
trading print. 

Chiefs far and near sent their nephews to be brought up 
“ at the King’s knee,” i.e. at court, so as to learn its cere- 
monies, its etiquette in receiving visitors, and the best way of 
settling palavers. These pages waited on the King, were his 
messengers on ordinary occasions, ran his errands, and finished 
the food left after they had served him at table. Their uncles 
gave a premium to the King, according to their wealth and 
position, for taking their nephews (their heirs) ; and occasion- 
ally sent presents to them, a part of which found their way 
to the King’s boxes. These pages undoubtedly had many 
small perquisites from those who desired their good offices with 
the King. By the chatter of these lads and his councillors’ 
gossip he was kept well informed of everything that happened 
in the town, in the trading factories, and in the missions, 
Whenever the King sent a page to us with a message or a 
request the lad brought with him an article of the King’s 
attire as a guarantee that he came from his majesty. Once or 
twice they came without such a guarantee, and I sent them 
back for a proof that they had come from their master, and I 
heard no more about the matter. 

42 POWER OF LIFE AND DEATH 

The King had full power of life and death. He could kill 
a person without trial by simply appointing a man to shoot 
the one whose death he desired. This power he used prudently, 
for during my residence at San Salvador I heard of only two 
who were killed by the King’s orders, 'and they were lovers of the 
royal wives. A headman who was growing too rich and power- 
ful he would “ eat up ” on some pretext or other — generally a 
charge of witchcraft — but it had to be done cautiously. He had 
no army, so apart from his family, his immediate followers 
bound to him by personal interests, and his slaves, he was 
dependent on the goodwill of the people and their superstitious 
fears of him as the possessor of the great fetish. 

Attached to the court were several officers who performed 
various duties for the King. The following are their titles and 
functions ; 

The King, when I first knew him, was too old and too obese 
to travel with any degree of comfort to himself, or to his 
followers, over the rough and hilly roads to the towns of chiefs 
to be ennobled. Such a ceremony could take place in their towns 
only, so at the court there was an officer whose business it was to 
confer titles, as the representative of the King, on those to be 
distinguished. His official name was Kapitau, and for the cere- 
monies connected with the conferring of a title see page 45. 

Connected also with the court was an officer who theoreti- 
cally was supposed never to leave his master’s enclosure 
(lumbu), hence his name Nelumbu. He was a master of cere- 
monies, or a kind of chamberlain. Another officer carried 
messages from the King to the chiefs, and to towns, and when 
on such embassies he carried the King’s staff (mpangu) with 
him as a token of his authority and a proof that he had come 
from his majesty, hence his official title was Nempangu, which 
may be freely translated as Staff-bearer. Mbila means to 
summon, call out, and Nembila was the name of the King’s 
messenger who went to summon chiefs, important headmen, 
&c., to the royal presence, and to inform the people of his 
majesty’s wishes and commands. 

Another officer stayed about the King’s person to wait on 

VARIOUS COURT OFFICERS 

43 

him and to carry out such important orders as could not be 
entrusted to the pages who served the King. His title was 
NejinguzioTca, and literally meant : One who walks about, 
always on the move. Nehto was the lowest in rank about 
the court, and the word comes from loto, a spoon, and simply 
means Spoonhearer. 

The King had a number of counsellors (mbanda-mbanda), 
who were selected for their acuteness and wisdom, and were 
always chosen from among the people of San Salvador ; 
but the favourite officer was the Nemfilantu, for he was the 
most trusted of all his people, and acted as a kind of Premier, 
and the name means literally : One who holds or moves about 
the King’s head, or the one in whose lap the King puts his 
head. 

Attached to the court, but outside of it, was a man whose 
special duty it was to assess the tax on all trading caravans 
passing through the town, or travelling through the near 
district. He was to some extent responsible for the safe 
conduct of caravans through that part of the country of 
which the King was overlord. Of course the larger portions 
of the amounts thus collected found their way to the King’s 
treasury. The man who held this office in the early eighties 
was well known to me under the title of nobility called 
Mfutila. Now, mfutila is a payment to or for, and is from 
the verb ywta=to pay. It is probable that the title means: 
Officer of the King’s taxes, or The one who makes others pay. 

Among the chiefs of the town there were many who held 
titles of nobility. These titles were conferred by the King 
either for services rendered, or for money paid to him — more 
frequently the latter. The title became hereditary, and 
descended with the chieftainship of the town and the property 
to the rightful heir. 

A man, we will say, buys from the King the title of 
Tvlante for one slave and 5000 strings of blue pipe beads.^ 
If on his death his heir is not rich enough to support the 

^ This was the amount actually paid for it by the uncle of the present 
holder of the title. 

44 

RECEIVING A TITLE 

title, or does not cai’e to pay the expenses for the cere- 
monies connected with his installation, or for some other 
reason does not desire it, he can with the consent of the King 
sell it to another chief for a stated sum for that chiefs life 
time. When this “ life-buyer ” of the title dies, his heir cannot 
assume the title, unless he procures the permission of the 
family originally hdlding it, and for their consent he must 
pay ; and the King cannot confer it without the consent of 
the said family. In fact the title reverts to the family that 
originally bought it direct from the King, and the head of 
that family can resume it, or pass it on as a life title to 
another chief. This apparently applies only to certain titles 
of which there can only be one holder at any given time. 
There can only be one Tulante, and whenever this title is 
conferred, either on the proper heir to it, or on a life-buyer 
of it, the King always receives a large present from the 
recipient at the time of his installation into the ranks of 
nobles. 

The ceremony of installation is as follows : The title of 
Tulante is to be conferred on a chief whose name is Nlemvo ^ 
who has inherited the property, the chieftainship of the 
town, and the title from his uncle. On the death of the 
uncle Nlemvo, the heir, although he had an undisputed right 
to the title, yet could not assume it until it was properly 
conferred by the King, or his representative ; and Nlemvo 
himself did not ask for it until he had gathered sufficient 
cloth, goats, pigs, &c. to pay the necessary expenses of the 
ceremony. Thus a man might be entitled to a high rank, 
and yet be known only as mfumu Nlemvo = chief Nlemvo, 
or, as Ngudi a NTcama Nlemvo= Mother, or origin-of-a- 
hundred Nlemvo. The use, however, of Ngudi a NTcama 
before a name seems to point to the fact that the man is 
heir to a higher title. Ngudi a Nkama is often playfully 

' In the early eighties I was well acquainted with Nlemvo’s uncle, 
and often stayed in his town. Nlemvo, from whom I received these 
details, is still alive — a most intelligent man of about forty-five years 
of age. 

CEREMONY OF INSTALLATION 45 

prefixed to a person’s name, especially if he is pompous and 
bumptious in his gait and talk. 

Nlemvo having collected the necessary goods for the pay- 
ment of expenses, and the provisions for the feasts always 
observed on such occasions, and having also made all arrange- 
ments with the King, on the appointed day the Kapitau 
arrived at Nlemvo’s town, and was received and treated with 
due respect as the King’s representative. A good house was 
given to him for his accommodation, and a plentiful store of 
food was supplied to him. Nlemvo’s own clan, Le. his mother’s 
clan, was called, and any of his father’s clan who desired to be 
present were permitted to do so; but all other clans were 
strictly excluded from the ceremony. 

The crowd formed a large circle, in the centre of which a 
leopard’s skin was spread, and a chair placed on it. The 
Kapitau went up to Nlemvo, who was sitting among his people, 
and hooking the index finger of his right hand in the little 
finger of Nlemvo’s left hand, he led him up to the leopard’s 
skin, and walking him round it as far as the tail, told him to 
step over that, and then leading him to the front of the chair, 
he seated him in it, whereupon the crowd clapped the loosely- 
closed fists of their left hands with the palms of their right 
hands. 

When all was again quiet the Kapitau put on the candi- 
date’s head some lemba-lemba leaves, and wetting his hands 
with palm-wine he pressed the palms to Nlemvo’s temples, 
to his forehead and back of the head, to his shoulders, 
and to his knees ; this he did three times, and then pro- 
nounced a blessing : “ May you be blessed and lucky, and 
when you speak may your words be heard (obeyed) by the 
people.” ^ 

Then the Kapitau asked loudly three times : “ Do you 
know this man’s name ? ” and the crowd replied each time in 
the negative. Whereupon the Kapitau shouted : “ Origin-of- 
a-hundred Tulante waiting for the mercy (kindness) of 

^ Ovwa nsambu yo nialau, wavova diambu diwa wantu. 

46 CEREMONY OF INSTALLATION 

Almighty God,” 1 The people on hearing this rounded their 
mouths, and beat them with the extended fingers of their right 
hands, making thereby a long series of “ Wo ! wo ! wo ! ” 
Others fired guns and shouted. 

When quiet was restored, the Kapitau told the new noble 
to be good to his people, and turning to the crowd, he told 
them to obey their chief. He instructed the new Tulante 
never to carry anything when walking on the roads, or visiting, 
or going to the markets — in fact he was never again to carry 
anything like a boy, or common person, except his gun or 
stick ; and if he shot a bird or an animal he must not even 
carry the game he had killed. Should a person ever meet him 
carrying any article except his gun or walking-stick, the said 
person had the right to take it away from him, and either keep 
it for himself or sell it. Neither might the new noble ever beat 
his wife or wives, and if he did, he could be mulcted in a fine 
of fowls, or one goat ; and the new noble was never to gather 
firewood, or fetch water. A bracelet was then put on Nlemvo’s 
arm as a sign of his new and important title. 

Nlemvo gave the Kapitau and his assistant five pieces of 
cloth, one pig, and two goats ; and he sent to the King at San 
Salvador seventy pieces of cloth.^ The King was so satisfied 
with his present, that he sent a large velvet cloth worth 
twenty-five francs to the new Tulante. 

The new noble can now be appointed by the King to confer 
titles on others; he can also act as a judge in settling matters 
between persons, and quarrels between towns ; and for this 
judicial work he receives fees that eventually more than refund 
all the expenses incurred by the above ceremony of installation. 

The following are some of the titles of nobility : 

1. Tulante. The present holder of this title cannot give 
me its meaning. 

' NGUDI A NKAMA TULANTE N IN GAM ENA NKANETA 
NZAMBI A MPUNGU, DEZU. DEZU, untranslated in the text as it 
is redundant, is from Portuguese Deos. 

“ This was exactly the price given by Nlemvo, who personally gave 
me all the particulars. 

NAMES OF THE NOBLES 

47 

2. Ly})atabata=a. strong man, 

3. Katendi= one who must fight to the last, and never 
give in. This was the title of Elelo, Dom Pedro V, before he 
ascended the throne. There is a native saying that runs thus : 
“ The Katendi’s finger-nails must not be cut, or his clan will 
die out,” ^ i.e. he must always fight and never have his 
claws cut. 

4. Nkangampaha — a. strong man who disregards objections 
and difficulties, but goes straight on his way. This was the 
title of a former chief of Mpalabala town near Matadi whom 
I met several times : and although his town was over eighty 
miles from San Salvador yet he sent tribute periodically to 
the King. 

5. Mpidixipe, from the Portuguese Principe. This noble 
was sometimes Premier. The title is of modern introduction, 
probably dating from the early sixties, when the Portuguese 
set Elelo on the throne, and occupied the town for seven 
years. 

6. Mfutila='p9.yment to or for (see page 43). Assessor, 
and collector of taxes on caravans, &c. 

7. Kahata ; 8, Masaku ; 9, Nsaku ; 10, Sengele ,-11, Nkondi ; 
and 12, Nemwanda, are also titles of high rank, but their 
significance has been forgotten. It is possible that in ancient 
times, when the Kingdom of Kongo was at the zenith of its 
power and glory, the above titles belonged to men of high 
rank in the King’s household, or system of government, and as 
their^offices, through the breaking up of the kingdom, have 
dropped into desuetude, the meanings have become lost to 
the present holders of the titles. 

13. Nenkondo. When the exigencies of life demand that 
a new law be made or an old one revived, the chiefs of the 
district meet together and arrange what the new law shall 
be, what fine shall be inflicted for breaking it, and they also 
appoint a chief to administer it, to see that it is properly 
observed, and to follow with punishment the breaker of it. 
All fines received are periodically distributed among the chiefs 
* Katendi katendwa nzala o rnakanda mamene. 

48 NATIVES AND THEIR NAMES 

concerned, but the one appointed to administer the law retains 
a larger share than that given to an ordinary chief, for he 
has all the trouble of guarding the law and enforcing the 
fines. This administrator takes the title of Nenkondo. 

All the men and women of San Salvador and the im- 
mediate district have what they call a santu"" (from the 
Portuguese word, sancto), or as we should call it — a Christian 
name. This custom of having a santu^ is a survival of the 
days when the Roman Catholic Church was dominant in 
the land, and the converts were given a holy name when 
baptized into the Church. 

About the time of birth a native name is given to the boy. 
Sometimes it is whimsical and without any particular meaning, 
at other times it indicates the manner in which the child was 
born ; and in some instances the name marks a bit of family 
history, such as a time of sorrow, or comfort, or joy — much the 
same as the old scriptural names. Later in life, at the age 
of twelve or fourteen, the lad can take another name of his 
own choice, if he is dissatisfied with his birth-name, and allow 
his first name to be forgotten by disuse. While in their teens 
they select a santu, a Portuguese name Congoised, as Man- 
wele= Manuel, Nzwao= Joao= John, &c. ; and the women take 
Madia = Maria, &c. To these santus they prefix Dom and 
Donna respctively. In San Salvador and its neighbourhood 
everybody has a santu, but the farther you travel from San 
Salvador the less frequently is the santu found among the 
people. Although there is a native ceremony of baptism, yet 
it is not often observed, as anyone can change his or her 
name, and take a new one, or a santu, without following any 
rites, and thus save the medicine-man’s fee. 

Though the possession of Dom and Donna is so common, 
yet the use of them is somewhat restricted to the better class 
of natives, much the same as our use of Mr., Mrs., and Miss. 

1 The santu is given by a sponsor, or godfather, or godmother, and 
the child had to respect his godparent {ese dia njila ezulu = father of the 
road to heaven), and to do anything wrong to a sponsor is regarded as a 
crime. Godparents and godchildren could not marry. 

NATIVES AND THEIR NAMES 49 

Of some men the natives never spoke without calling them 
Dom^ and to others the natives never prefixed the Dom except 
when they desired to ingratiate themselves, or ask a special 
favour. What is said about the boy and the man, applies 
equally as well to girls and women. Men and women, boys 
and girls, on leaving the ndemho ^ secret society received new 
names which they could use or not as they pleased ; and all 
the men and lads initiated into the nkimba guild also received 
new names. Thus a man could possess five names, viz. his 
birth-name, his selected name, his santu, his ndembo, and his 
nkimba names. 

We had then in the San Salvador society, the King, the 
counsellors, the nobility, the chiefs of towns, the court officers, 
the Dorns and Donnas, the common people, and the slaves. 
San Salvador itself is known to the natives as Kongo, but to 
distinguish it from several other Kongos, e.g. Kongo dia 
Mpalabala and Kongo di’ Elemba, it is called Kongo dia 
Ntotela, i.e. the King’s Kongo, as it has from time immemorial 
been the residence of the King of the country. Sometimes 
it is called Kongo dia Ngunga, i.e. the Kongo of the Bell, 
probably because the Roman Catholic priests had formerly a 
large bell there, which was rung in connection with their 
services. 

^ On taking a ndembo name on initiation into the mysteries of this 
secret society the “doctor” of the society appointed a man to be re- 
garded as the father (ese dia elemba) of the new member. He was treated 
with much respect by his “ child.” 

D 

CHAPTER V 

REMINISCENCES OF DOM PEDRO V, 

KING OF KONGO 

OUR first introduction to the King was in February 1882. 

We then found him sitting on a wicker sofa in his 
“ palace,” a veritable Tichbourne for size. He was 
di’essed in a white straw hat, a very dirty white shirt, and a 
no less dirty cloth over his knees. He was mourning the 
death of one of his wives, hence his dirty, untidy appearance. 
She had been dead two months, and was left unburied while 
her brother procured the cloth, beads, &c., necessary to inter 
her with the pomp and ceremony suited to her position as 
a royal wife. During those two months the King had 
“ mourned,” i.e. he had neglected his personal appearance, 
wore old and dirty garments, and left his skin unoiled and 
undusted with camwood powder. The King, however, was 
usually clean in his attire and habits, and on great occasions 
could even be smart in his dress. At a great palaver that 
took place in March 1882 he was attired in the following 
manner. I quote from notes written at the time. He wore 
a loincloth of scarlet and black velvet, a clean white shirt, 
a black waistcoat with brass buttons, a scarlet cloth coat with 
tails, and a white straw hat. In his hand he held a six- 
chamber revolver (unloaded, for he had no cartridges) ; a man 
held a large umbrella of red and black velvet over his head ; 
and when he stepped forward to speak, his son, carrying a 
sword in its scabbard, walked behind him holding a very small 
red parasol over his head, vainly endeavouring to shade the 
moving mass of flesh. 

Having received many small acts of kindness from the 

King, I asked him one day in 1882 what personal present I 

60 

GIFT OF SOME SHIRTS 

51 

could make him, and he desired a shirt or two of strong 
material; and that they might fit him propeidy, he lent me 
an old shirt from which to take the measurements. He was 
of no mean stature and girth, as the following figures will 

prove, which I transcribe from my letter to the lady whom I 

asked to make the shirts : “ The shirts must have cuffs, collars, 
and fronts. The sizes are as follows : From shoulder to 

shoulder 2 ft. 11 in. Waist 5 ft. 8 in. in circumference. Arm- 
holes 23 in. Round the neck 20 in. Arm 1 ft. 3 in. not 

including the cuff, which is to be 5 in. long and 9 in. round. 

From top to bottom 3 ft. 6 in. 1 should tell you that the 
King is expei’t with his needle, and his twenty-five wives just as 
clever at farming. The folk are often asking what kind of 
work Queen Victoria does.” 

The lady wanted to know if 1 had made a mistake in the 
measurements ; but on being assured that they were correct, 
she set to work, and in due time the shirts arrived in San 
Salvador. The King frequently asked about the progress 
of those garments ; but he was too courteous to express in 
words what he must often have thought in his heart — that 
they were a long time coming. The old man was delighted 
to receive the present, and quickly donned one of the shirts, 
and finding it was a comfortable fit, and the w'ork satisfying 
his critical eye, he was neither slow nor meagre in his expres- 
sions of pleasure and gratitude ; and when, three years later, the 
lady, the maker of the shirts, arrived in his town, he accorded 
her a most hearty welcome, and thanked her personally for 
the trouble she had taken and the skill she had shown. 

Occasionally we invited him to dinner, and the jyiice de 
resistance was a sucking-pig, which in those days we could buy 
for a shilling’s worth of cloth or beads. Although his house 
was less than 400 yards away, he always came in his state 
hammock, carried by six of his headmen. Fortunately the 
, headmen were strong and in the prime of life, otherwise the 
King’s weight would have taxed them too much. The 
hammock was of native cotton, grown, dyed, and woven in a 
neighbouring village. It was covered with red cloth, adorned 

52 

KING AT DINNER 

with tassels and bells, and a canopy was arranged to shield the 
rider from the sun. As there were no clocks in the “ palace ” 
we asked our guest to come at sunset ; and no sooner was the 
sun below the horizon than we heard the shouts of the people 
as they accompanied the King’s hammock to the station. As 
he got near we could hear the tinkling of the ferret bells on 
the hammock, the hurried, heavy breathing of the hammock- 
carriers, and their short, sharp sentences of direction to each 
other. They were not at all sorry to lower the hammock at 
our door, where we stood ready to receive and welcome him, who, 
although black, had come in the most kingly manner he knew, 
and was certainly very dignified in most of his ways and words. 

The boys quickly put the dinner on the table, and the 
King eyed every" dish hungrily. I said to him one day when 
visiting him in his courtyard, and we were both in a joking 
mood, “ Do you knoAv what the poorer class of English boys 
do when they are invited to a feast ? ” 

“ No,” he said, and as he saw me hesitate he asked, “ Well, 
what do they do ? ” 

“ Why, they eat very little all day,” I replied, “ so as to 
have plenty of room for the feast.” 

The old man rolled with laughter, snapped his fingers, 
slapped his thighs, and tears came from his eyes as he said, 
“ Why, white man, that is what I do, but I did not know 
anybody else was cute enough to think of that ; but Mfumu 
Weekisi, I am smarter than those white boys, for I don’t eat 
anything all day when I am coming to take dinner with you 
at sunset.” After that I could understand the hungry look 
in his eyes as he watched the dishes put on the table ; and we 
always hurried the boys in their operations. 

Native provisions of all kinds were very cheap, and by 
sacrificing one or two tins of preserved goods we were generally 
successful, although lacking the help of a white lady, in work- 
ing out a menu of six or seven simple courses. Soup made 
of fowl and goat bones with odd bits of meat and seasoning; 
tin of fresh herrings baked or fried ; a roast fowl, stewed goat, 
roast sucking-pig, and baked rice pudding with stewed paw- 

Photo iy I\€7'. R. H. C. Graham 

Staie Robes of hie King of Kongo 

These robes and the silver sceptre were a present from the K ng of Portugal in 1888, when the first 
resident govern or went to reside in San Salvador. 'I’he robes, etc. , are State property and pass from 
the King to his .successor. This is MLenibe, Dorn Pedro VI. 

KING AT DINNER 53 

paws, were our dishes. Our drinks were limejuice made from 
fresh limes, and coffee grown in the district. 

I think I can see the old King now sitting on the other 
side of the wide table ; squatting on the ground immediately 
behind him is a row of five or six of his favourite wives; and 
standing against the wall are the six headmen who carried 
the hammock. The doors are crowded with gaping, curious 
natives talking in low whispers; the house-boys are moving 
noiselessly with naked feet over the beaten clay floor ; and the 
light from our small colza oil lamps, supplemented on this 
festive occasion by a couple of candles, throw their soft light 
over the table, but scarcely relieve the darkness beyond. And 
the white man sitting on one side of the table has the only 
white face in all that crowd of black figures. 

The King takes a few spoonfuls of soup and passes the rest 
down with a piece of bread to his waiting wives, who quickly 
and quietly finish them ; the fish he eats all up because it 
comes from the white man’s country, and his wives pout their 
disappointment. We give him a liberal share of fowl, but 
that is so common that after selecting the best pieces the rest 
is finished by his expectant wives; goat comes next, but is 
treated with as scant courtesy as that bestowed on the fowl ; 
and meanwhile the old man turns his eyes repeatedly towards 
the roasted pig. That at last is put before us, and we pile 
his plate with a liberal portion, which rapidly disappears, and 
all the time his wives are making mouths in the semi-darkness. 
He grunts assent to more when we ask him, and we again load 
his plate. Is not this the moment for which he has lived all 
the hours of that long day ? for he had heard that the white 
man has bought a pig for dinner. There is nothing that the 
white man does but he hears all about it a few minutes after- 
wards in his courtyard. 

A third time his plate is filled, but before he is half way 
through he is conquered, so with a sigh he hands the re- 
mainder to his longing wives. He plays with the rice pudding 
and stewed native fruit as much as to say, How can one eat 
such poor stuff after roast sucking-pig.? We hand down a 

54 KING TALKS ABOUT HIMSELF 

large dish of food to the wives ; and while we are drinking 
our coffee the headmen are clearing up the dishes, with the 
aid of house-boys, in the kitchen — the remnants of the feast 
are their perquisites, so that there is not a bone left that a 
dog would look at twice. 

Thi’ough the meal the King is too busy to talk much ; but 
directly eating is over his tongue is loosened, and he tells us 
of his travels about the country, of the fights by which he 
gained for himself the sobriquet of “ the great one of heaven,” 
and his earnest wish to send a letter to Queen Victoria. We 
on our part relate the wonders of our country, the size of our 
great cities, the number of our ships and soldiers, our coal, 
iron, and salt mines, the speed and comfort of railway travel- 
ing; the wealth, power and majesty of the great white Queen. 
His eyes and mouth would open widely in amazement, and, 
although he was too polite to ask me if I were lying, yet he 
often interrupted me to ask if I were telling the truth, and 
I have a dim suspicion that during our earlier acquaintance 
he thought I was a magnificent liar in talking about my 
country and Queen as I did. Of course his people when 
travelling about the country talked of him in exaggerated 
terms to the ignorant people in the distant villages. His 
twenty-five wives became a hundred, his three children were 
multiplied by ten or more, and everything he said and did 
was highly coloured. He had heard all about it, and thought 
that the white man was naturally doing the same for his 
Queen and country. 

He would petulantly ask why his country was not rich, 
great, and strong, and why they were so poor and foolish 
compared to white people. We would point out the baneful 
influence of the witch-doctors, and the way in which they 
had kept the people from making any progress, killing off 
as witches the most progressive men and the inventive geniuses 
of the country. We generally finished our conversations with 
a talk on Christianity, and not infrequently with family 
prayers. 

It was our custom to go every Sunday evening to conduct 

KING’S WIVES ON STRIKE 

55 

a short religious service in his courtyard. Sometimes he was 
alone except for a few personal attendants, at other times 
there would be from fifty to a hundred persons present ; but 
whether many or few, he always made me welcome, had a 
chair placed for me immediately in front of him so that we 
sat almost knee to knee, and would listen most attentively to 
all that was said. In his better moods I have seen the tears 
trickle down his cheeks as he recalled the murders, &c., of 
former years, and on our parting he would bid me come again 
quickly ; but in his harder moments I have seen his eyes flash 
murderous hate, and his face cloud with fiercest anger at some 
remark that touched him to the quick. For some reason he 
was very desirous of our good opinion, consequently he curbed 
his passion and controlled his savagery in a wonderful manner. 

I think he had an idea that we reported his sayings and doings 
to Queen Victoria, and he wished that she should hear only 
good about him. 

On more than one occasion I heard that the royal wives 
had gone out on strike by refusing, for the time being, to 
cook any food for his majesty. There was an understanding 
among them that whenever he was unreasonable in his treat- 
ment of one or more of them, the others took sides with 
them, and by refraining to cook or do anything for the old 
man they soon brought him to reason. At such times his 
diet was a few roasted pea-nuts, and that for not one meal 
only, but for two or three days. Being very stout, he was not 
able to chase his wives and beat them, for they soon ran 
beyond his reach ; he dared not send slaves to catch and 
handle freeborn women ; and his headmen preferred neither 
to help nor to interfere, for Congo women have nasty tempers 
and terrible tongues. 

One day I passed through his house to the women’s quarters 
behind, in search of him, and found his majesty in a towering 
passion, surrounded by about twenty of his wives. They were 
all clapping their hands — an action that always accompanied 
the begging of a favour — and beseeching him in pleading tones 
not to beat her ; and all the time so closely clustering round 

56 

TRYING TO PUNISH A WIFE 

him that they impeded his movements, rendering it impossible 
for him to catch the delinquent wife even if he had been 
more agile than he was. Each woman acted her part admir- 
ably, knowing that when she did something for which he 
wanted to flog her, the others would surround him and thus 
protect her. When, however, a general strike took place, 
it was impossible for one fat old man to beat twenty-five 
strapping women, almost every one of whom would have been 
more than a match for him in a fair fight — so his boys roasted 
for him a few pea-nuts, or a plantain, and in the meantime 
he threatened them with his fetish, and stored up a good 
appetite for the tasty dishes that were sure to come when 
reconciliation took place. 

In June 1884 the King suffered from a large sloughing 
ulcer, and I went twice a day to dress the place. Soon after 
commencing this bit of medical work on his majesty, he 
gave his permission for calling a great witch-doctor to discover 
the person who was bewitching the King ; but directly I heard 
of this I sent a message to my patient saying that “ if he 
proceeded with the witch palaver I would not again dress 
the sore.” He instantly stopped the witch-doctor and sent 
him and his people away ; and a few days later a headman, 
in thanking me for taking this action, said, “ If you had 
not been here someone would have been killed as a witch.” 

Some time before the above incident the King conceived 
the idea that much of the sickness prevalent in the town 
might be removed by paying more respect to a certain 
neglected fetish. He therefore selected some girls and placed 
them in a fetish house, where they remained for several weeks 
to attend upon and propitiate the fetish. During their stay 
in the fetish house they lived upon the uncooked blood of 
sucking-pigs and raw fowls, together with a few nuts and roots. 
They could not leave the house, and a man was not allowed 
to approach it : but they were waited upon by one or two 
old women. Just as this cex’emony was finished, and his 
majesty had rewarded the girls with good presents, his foot 
became very much swollen and painful, and every means they 

SOME GERMANS ARRIVE 

57 

took to cure it entirely failed. The old man became very 
angry with the fetish for serving him such a scurvy trick 
after paying away so much good money on its behalf. 

In December 1884, the members of a German Geographical 
Expedition arrived at San Salvador and stayed with us in the 
mission house. After the excitement of their arrival had 
abated, I went and asked the King to see them and to accord 
to them a fitting welcome, but he refused to see them. The 
Portuguese Padres had been before me, and had told the King 
that these white men had come to take his country, that they 
were Bulamatadi’s (Stanley’s) white men, and if he saw them it 
would be bad for him and his people. 

On returning to our house I told them what the King had 
said ; and our visitors were exceedingly vexed, because the 
Padres knew very well who and what they were — Germans 
travelling for the Berlin Geographical Society. Dr. Buthner 
then brought out a book written by a German traveller, 
Bastian, who visited San Salvador in 1861 or 1862, and read 
from it some incidents that happened at that time in which the 
King took part, and which they thought he would call to mind 
if I would tell him ; and they requested me to add that they 
were countrymen of the man who was so friendly with the 
King. 

I went to see the old King again, and said ; “ Do you 
remember a white man who came to see you about twenty- 
three years ago, and you and he made a feast for all the 
headmen in the town, and they all became so drunk that they 
fell about your courtyard Then you and he went with 
calabashes and pots of water and poured their contents over 
the drunken men while they were lying about on the ground.” 
I thought the old gentleman would have rolled off his big chair 
with laughter ; but on quietening down he asked, “ How did 
you hear of that ? Why, that white man was my very good 
friend ! ” I then told him how that white man went home and 
wrote a book, and put in it all about the King of Kongo, and 
that these white men who had just arrived were his country- 
men. When the King heard that he at once said he would 

58 RESULTS OF A LETTER 

see them ; and the next day he gave them a right royal 
reception. 

A few days after their visit to the King, Dr. Biithner showed 
me a letter published (some time in 1884) in a Belgian paper, 
Le Mouvement Geographique, in which the King of Kongo in a 
long preamble acknowledges His Majesty the King of Portugal 
as his liege lord, &c., &c. It was signed with the King’s mark, 
and witnessed by all the white men in San Salvador, except 
myself. I told the Germans that I had heard nothing of the 
letter although I was in San Salvador on the day on which it 
was written and signed, and that I doubted its authenticity. 
Happening to visit the King a day or so later, I took the said 
letter with me, and asked him about it. He was astonished 
when he heard the contents of the letter, and in great anger he 
arose from the big leather chair in which he was sitting, and 
said, “ My brother, the King of Portugal, sent me this chair as 
a present, and a short time after the head Padre brought me a 
letter to sign, saying it was a letter of thanks to the King of 
Portugal for this chair, and that is the only letter I ever signed 
my mark to, or ordered to be sent.” Poor old man ! in saying 
“ Thank you ” for a chair he had signed away the independence 
of his country : for the Portuguese used that letter as one of the 
arguments upon which they founded their claim to the ancient 
Kingdom of Kongo. 

The head Portuguese Padre, a Portuguese trader, and a 
French trader had signed the letter as witnesses to the King's 
mark. A few days after my interview with the King I met the 
French trader, and told him I had seen the said letter, that I 
was in the town on that date, and was surprised that I was not 
asked to sign the letter, for “ Am I not a white man ? ” The 
Frenchman excused himself by saying, “ W e did not ask you to 
witness the King’s mark because we felt sure you would not do 
it until the King thoroughly understood the real purport of 
the letter.” I thanked him for his estimate of my character, 
and gave him my view of the manner in which they had 
deceived and defrauded the King. One wonders how many 
treaties with African Kings have been gained by a like ruse. 

KING’S DEATH 

59 

On February 15, 1891, Dom Pedro V died of apoplexy, and 
in due time he was enshrouded in all the uniforms and ex- 
pensive clothes given to him by the King of Portugal. Then 
came out the cloths that had been hoarded for years, styles and 
patterns long forgotten, introduced by traders fifty and sixty 
years before, which had filtered up from the coast to the far 
interior. From all the wealth he had gathered through a long 
reign nothing was saved from the grave, and the cost of his 
funeral, except the royal coat and robe, and the silver ware, 
which were considered crown property — everything else was 
buried to enrich their late owner in the spirit land. 

CHAPTER VI 

NATIVE GOVERNMENT AND LAM^S 

WE learn from various sources that in the fifteenth and 
sixteenth centuries there was a strong native govern- 
ment that had its centre at San Salvador, and its cir- 
cumference touched Kabinda in the north, Angola in the south, 
the Sea in the west, and in the east it reached nearly to Stanley 
Pool, and away towards the Kasai, In the eighteenth century 
this powerful native state gradually broke to pieces. The 
divisions into which the kingdom had been divided, and which 
had formerly been ruled by the sons and nephews of the King 
of Kongo (San Salvador), separated themselves from the central 
authority, and became independent of all control. These 
provinces also, in course of time, crumpled up, until at last 
every chief became a law unto himself and to the people of 
his village. The strong raided the weak, the rowdy bullies 
oppressed the quiet, peaceable folk, carrying them olF to sell as 
slaves to the white men at the coast. Murders were common, 
and there was no one who cared to punish the murderers even 
if he had the power to do so. Anarchy reigned throughout 
the country, and men, women, and children were afraid to 
venture far from their towns and villages, for gangs of rascals 
were always on the prowl to snap up the undefended, who were 
at once sold from town to town until they found their way to 
the horrors of the slave hold on a white man’s ship. Not a 
person thus caught and treated as a slave but was the child, 
the mother, the brother, the sister, the father, or the husband 
of someone left to mourn bitterly in the far-away hinterland 
for those who would never return. 

In the early seventies of last century Besekele and Nkabi 

began a crusade against fetishes, charms, &c. ; and they 

60 

“CARPET” GOVERNMENT 

61 

also advocated some draconic laws to suppress the lawless- 
ness 1 then prevalent throughout the country. Their sugges- 
tions were accepted by village after village, and district after 
district ; and it was enacted that all murders and attempts to 
murder should be punished by the death of the culprit, no 
matter of what rank he might be; and even murder in self- 
defence should be punishable by death, and if a man struck his 
mother he should be buimt to death on the market ; that raids, 
violence, robbery, and kidnapping should be severely punished 
by the chiefs of the district. 

They instituted a system of government called the carpet 
(nkuwu), upon which a chief only may sit, and hence “ carpet ” 
became synonymous with lawful authority, and to “ spread 
the carpet ” {yala e nkuwu) was to assume lawful authority ; 
and to “destroy the carpet” (bangulu e nkuwu) was to 
break the law, to commit a serious offence, and to bring about 
a state of anarchy. For one of the peculiarities of this 
mode of government is this : that when the law, say, against 
robbery is broken, destroyed, it no longer exists — it is dead, 
and anarchy reigns until the law is mended, is brought back 
to life, i.e. until the culprit who destroyed the law has paid 
the fine ; hence the chiefs are forced to deal with cases 
quickly, and enforce payments of all fines at once, and thus 
restore the law, othex’^vise rascals would rob right and left 
on the plea that no law exists against robbery — it being 
dead, having been killed by the first thief who goes unjudged 
and unpunished. I have seen a whole district in tumult, and 
the chiefs and headmen hurrying to and fro to find and bring 
a law-breaker to judgment ; and meanwhile, they were fearful 
that some rogues would take advantage of the fact that that 
law was dead. 

To promulgate a law the following method is observed : 
The greatest chief in the district assembles the chiefs of the 
surrounding villages, and tells them of the necessity for a new 
law to punish certain crimes that are being committed ; he 
then informs them about the new law and its proposed 
penalties. If they agree to it, or to a modification of it, he 

62 

PUNISHMENT FOR MURDER 

kills two or three pigs and divides the flesh among them as a 
witness that they have consented to the new law and its 
penalties. They then appoint a nenJcondo (see page 47) to 
look after that law and to seek out the person who breaks it, 
and inflict the fine on him, which fine is eventually divided 
among the witnessing chiefs according to their status. The 
nenJcondo can demand aid of any chief while enforcing the 
law. 

After a law has been accepted the witnessing chiefs will 
adjourn to a cross road, and one of their number will state the 
law, and then lying on the ground he will rub his mouth in the 
dirt, and after striking his knees with the palms of his hands, 
he will invoke a curse, terrible in its nature, on the person 
who dares to break this law upon which the chiefs have just 
agreed. This has such a terrifying effect on the people that 
he will be a reckless fellow indeed who risks incurring the curse. 

We will deal first with cases of homicide. If for any reason 
a man desires to kill another, he must first call the neigh- 
bouring chiefs together, and tell them what he wants to do, 
and his reasons for wishing to kill the said man. If they 
consent he presents them with a pig or two to kill and divide 
among themselves as a proof of their consent, and a guarantee 
of their support should he afterwards be accused of murder. 
This seems to be the only legal way to execute a person who 
has made himself impossible in his district by his violence and 
rascality. 

The man who commits murder must be given up by his 
town and family if he has run to them for protection. He is 
tried by the chiefs, and, on being condemned, he is securely 
tied until the next market-day. The murderer is then taken 
to the crowded market and made drunk with palm wine ; then 
the chief man of the district dances round him with a sword, 
and flashing and waving it about the culprit’s head he makes 
a cut in the forehead, and on touching the prisoner for the 
third time, someone rushes out of the crowd, and cuts off the 
murderer’s head, and his body is burnt to ashes. By reducing 
the body to ashes they believe that they thereby destroy his 

Photo by Rev. R, L. Jennings 

Village in French Congo 

This well illustrates the hilly character of the Lower Congo, the kind of site often selected for a village, the sort of houses built, and the narrow 
path made by the natives always walking in single hie. The grass has been cleared from the path because it is near a village, but farther away the 
bush comes right up to the track. 

PUNISHMENT FOR MURDER 

63 

spirit, and thus prevent the spirit from seeking revenge by be- 
witching his executioners. 

If the murderer does not escape to his town, but runs else- 
where, then his family must hunt for him, and failing to 
capture him they must pay a fine of 20,000 strings of blue 
pipe beads. If the homicide is afterwards arrested and exe- 
cuted this heavy fine is not returned to the family, conse- 
quently a man does not run far unless he has a grudge against 
his family. 

Should, however, the man be caught before or soon after 
he runs away his family pays a fine varying from 2,000 to 5,000 
strings of beads, and on being proved guilty he forfeits his life 
in the manner already described. When captured the prisoner 
is handed over to the head chief of the district, and should 
the prisoner escape from him he is then entirety free from any 
further fear of capture or death. The family of the murdered 
man does not kill any member of the murderer’s family, but they 
receive a portion of the fine inflicted (nianga) for homicide. 

Should a free man kill a slave, he also forfeits his life. 
Mfumu Fofo, a chief near San Salvador, in pride killed his 
slave, and although he offered two slaves and a large sum of 
money they were refused, and he suffered the penalty of death. 
Mfumu Fofo’s body, however, was not burned, as is the custom 
with the corpses of those executed for murder, but it was 
given to his family for burial. 

Some years ago a certain chief ordered his slave to murder 
another chief, promising to protect him from punishment. The 
slave obeyed the order and killed his master’s enemy. But at 
the trial it came out that the chief had instigated his slave 
to commit the murder, so he was beheaded and burnt, and 
the slave was made drunk, put in an old house, and burnt to 
death. In districts far removed from San Salvador there 
exists the custom of giving and accepting substitutes to bear 
the death penalty. 

At one time accidental homicide was not regarded as any- 
thing but murder, and was treated accordingly ; but of recent 
years it has been recognised, and the man guilty of such an 

64 

DEALING WITH THIEVES 

unfortunate accident pays a small fine to the family of the de- 
ceased as compensation, and then goes to a certain kind of 
medicine-man ^ to be made docile and careful. 

In self-defence it is now permissible to take the life of a 
madman, but when possible a warning is sent to the family 
of the insane person to tell them to guard him more carefully, 
and if the family fail to do so the insane can be killed by any 
one whose life he threatens. Should the insane kill a person, 
the insane himself is not killed, but the family is forced to pay 
a ruinous fine for the blood shed. As these people have no 
asylums, and no chains for secui’ely tying madmen, it is very 
difficult for them to look properly after such, and thei-e is no 
doubt that the violently mad are often quietly poisoned, or 
removed by some other means. I have noticed that they 
suddenly disappear. 

A person who commits suicide is not always buried, but 
the corpse is thrown out into the bush to be eaten by wild 
beasts. Sometimes they are buried at the cross roads. 

There are many fetishes and charms whose aid is invoked 
to punish with foul diseases and death undiscovered thieves. 
Living as I have done for several years in closest touch with 
these Lower Congo natives, I can sincerely give them a character 
for honesty. There is a certain amount of pilfering of un- 
considered trifles ; but, in these later years, no cases of robbery 
from us. Among themselves in their ordinary town life they 
are fairly honest, and treating us, as they do, as belonging to 
themselves, they regard our goods with respect, and any who 
robbed us would be looked upon with contempt by his fellows. 
But there is no doubt that they thieve from other white men 
when they have the opportunity, and the goods belonging to 
strangers, black or white, are considered their special per- 
quisites if they can be appropriated with a fair chance of 
escaping detection and punishment.^ 

* Ngang’ a Lenihe, which see on p. 226. 

^ These remarks refer to ordinary natives, and not to Church members. 
A man or woman is expelled immediately from the Church for the slightest 
forgetfulness of the difference between meum et tuum. 

DEALING WITH THIEVES 

65 

This propensity for stealing is fully recognised by the 
traders, and to guard their goods they hire a native medicine- 
man to make a strong fetish for punishing thieves. This fetish 
is placed in a prominent position in their stores — generally 
opposite the door — and the store is more frequently known by 
the name of “ fetish” than by that of store. Now unless these 
fetishes I’eceive sacrifices of fowls and goats, i.e. unless their 
blood is poured periodically over them, the fetishes become 
powerless and inoperative, and every native knows and believes 
this, so although the fetish may restrain them for a time, yet 
after a few months, or even weeks, they will know it has no 
further power to work them any harm. On the other hand 
the native procures a fetish called ehunge to help him to 
successfully rob the trader, so after all they start level, one 
fetish counteracting the other. 

The convicted thief must return the stolen article, or its 
equivalent, and as much again on top ; and in addition he has 
to pay all the expenses of his trial. The receiver of stolen 
goods pays one half the fine ; but if a man unwittingly buys a 
stolen article at a fair market value, and has witnesses to the 
transaction, he is held guiltless, and retains the article, or his 
money is returned. 

A thief caught robbing a grave is either killed at once, and 
his (or her) blood poured over the grave as an oblation to the 
offended spirits, or else he is taken to the market and killed 
there. Sometimes the head is simply cut off on the market, 
and the carcass thrown into the bush or down a chasm ; at 
other times the culprit’s body is buried to the chin and ex- 
hibited thus at the market as an example to others, and 
towards evening his head is sliced off. The thing stolen may 
not be worth twopence ; but the family of the person buried 
whose grave has been robbed is terrified lest the irritated 
spirit owning the grave should angrily visit them with some 
dire witchcraft. 

To retain a runaway slave is considered a theft unless the 
slave “ eats the goat ” (which custom see, p. 72). If the escaped 
slave is held by folk of the same clan or a kindred clan to his 

E 

66 

PROCEDURE IN COURT 

owner, the chiefs will meet and order the slave to be returned ; 
and if this is not immediately done, the holder of the runaway 
slave is compelled to return him and pay another slave in 
addition as a fine. If, however, the slave has run away to 
another tribe the owner will inform the chiefs of the tribe con- 
cerning his escaped slave, and if he is not returned in a 
reasonable time reprisals are made on any of the goods and 
persons of the defaulting tribe. 

In a charge of theft the accuser speaks first and is followed 
by his witnesses, then the accused and his witnesses. Having 
heard the case the judges take the witnesses of both parties 
aside and cross-examine them closely. If the accused objects 
to the verdict the court is broken up, and each side selects its 
own judge, and they, sitting together, try the case, and from 
their verdict there is no appeal. Sometimes the defendant 
will put two slaves in the circle and say : “ If I am guilty take 
those slaves.” Now if the plaintiff cannot put two slaves by 
their side he loses the case. I have seen a third and a fourth 
slave put as a stake, but as the other side could put slave for 
slave, the case went on. If the plaintiff had failed to meet 
slave with slave he would have lost. It was a sheer bit of 
bluff on the part of the defendant. If either the plaintiff or 
the defendant declines to take any oath proposed by his op- 
ponent it is regarded as a proof of guilt, and the verdict is 
given accordingly. Beyond being driven from the judgment 
place there is no punishment for a perjured w'itness. 

Should a judge receive a bribe, and fail to secure a verdict 
for his client, he must return the bribe, and pay the fine 
inflicted on the briber — the loser of the case. Such a judge 
is called nempemb' ewungu, or the one who draws the whole 
affair o’^ himself. 

If two men quarrel and cut each other they both pay a 
fine to the nsi or country; but if one only is wounded the 
inflictor of the injury pays the fine. Should a man cut off 
another’s arm, or destroy an eye, the fine (nsiku) is given to the 
chiefs who made, administered, and enforced the law against 
this offence. None of it is given in compensation to the 

FINES FOR SMALLER OFFENCES 67 

injured man ; and if a pig is paid as the whole or part of the 
fine imposed, the wounded man receives a strip of meat from 
the belly part of the pig, the head is given to the offender, and 
the remainder is divided among the chiefs. Whenever a pig 
or a goat is paid as a fine the head of the animal goes to the 
person fined, and should he pay in francs, which is now 
frequently done, then two francs are returned as the “ pig’s 
head.” In 1909 I judged a case of forgery and fined the man 
ten francs, and when he paid the fine a few days later he 
asked for the “ pig’s head.” When a man falsely accuses 
another he must pay compensation to the accused. Their 
proverb runs: “ If you put your neighbour’s head in a plate, 
and it does not fit him, then the plate fits your head,” i.e. you 
are guilty of what you accuse him, and must therefore pay up. 

A stranger is entertained with house and food as long 
as he likes to stay, and on his leaving no presents are expected. 
I am afraid this is more theory than fact. If the visitor 
breaks the law he is driven away from the village, and if 
his clan is known to his entertainers they are asked to pay the 
damages. But when native traders sojourn in a town they 
are entertained, and on leaving they are expected to give 
presents to those from whom they have received hospitality. 

A slave, if he has a generous master, may free himself 
by giving one slave in payment for himself to his owner ; but 
as a rule two slaves — a male and a female — are demanded as 
compensation. For every thii-d, sixth, ninth, and so on, 
journey a slave makes to the “coast” for trading purposes 
with his master, he receives pay, and these sums thus earned 
are absolutely his own. He saves the money, trades with it, 
and thus lays the foundation of that personal wealth by means 
of which he is able to redeem himself. As a married slave he 
receives extra pay for the above journeys. 

The master has no rights over a slave’s house, and no real 
claims to sleep with his slave’s wife, although she is also his 
own slave ; but some masters disregard this rule, and as a 
consequence the slaves do not respect their masters’ wives. 
The descendants of slaves are slaves, but they are not sold 

68 

COLLECTING DEBTS 

as freely as those recently acquired by the family. Failing 
heirs the master inherits his slave’s property ; but if the slave 
has a family they take the goods of their slave father, and if 
they are wise they give their master a fair shai’e. 

The children of a slave father by a free mother are free 
born, for mother-right is the recognised rule on the Lower 
Congo ; but those by a free father and a slave mother are 
regarded as being above slaves, but below free men : for they 
have no family — their mother being a slave. When a female 
descendant of the family’s slaves is given as a wife to a man 
to replace a daughter who has died, a pi'esent is given with 
her, lest she be regarded as a slave by her husband ; and this 
present is called “ a purifying of the blood ” (nsukulu a mengd), 
and this removes the slave element in her, and she is hence- 
forth treated as a fi'ee woman. 

There were several ways of collecting debts, of which the 
following indicate the worst evils of the old system, a system 
which is still in vogue in remote districts : 

A creditor, too weak to enforce payment, transferred his 
credit to a stronger man, but not for more than the amount 
due. The new creditor then sent early one morning to the 
debtor’s town, and as he stepped from his house he was caught, 
tied, and carried away ; and if he could not pay the debt and 
an exorbitant sum as interest he was immediately sold into 
slavery. 

If B owed A a debt which the latter could not recover 
after much dunning, A would wait his time and catch some 
people belonging to B, and to one of them he would give 
a fowl and a “ hand ” of plantain, and send him to B with news 
of the capture. If B did not then pay his debt and interest A 
had the right to refund himself by selling his captives as 
slaves. If A did not send a fowl and a “ hand ” of plantain to 
the debtor, he put himself in the wrong for not giving due 
notice of his action, and thus laid himself open to prosecution 
and a heavy fine. If A found that he had tied up the wrong 
people he presented his captives with a pig as compensation 
and set them free. 

NATIVE PALAVER 

69 

Another, but a roundabout method of procuring the 
settlement of a debt is as follows : A, the creditor, is a weak 
man, and the debtor B is a strong man, who would retaliate on 
A if the latter captured his people ; but at the same time A 
wants his money and interest. A therefore ties up some 
people belonging to C, a very powerful man, and then sends C 
a fowl and a “ hand ” of plantain with a full explanation of 
the affair. Thereupon C goes to B and compels him to pay 
the debt with full interest, and what amount C likes on top to 
compensate himself and his people for their trouble and 
inconvenience. C would make no palaver with A, knowing he 
was well within his rights according to native custom. It 
would have been much cheaper for B to have settled with A 
rather than with C. 

A few years ago a chief, Mampuya of Kinkuzu, called on 
me at Wathen station to request that a teacher be sent to 
his town. He seemed a very quiet, gentlemanly sort of man, 
and I was very much surprised to hear that he had not always 
been so deferential and modest, as the following incident in 
his life will show : Mampuya at one time treated the people 
of his town in a very contemptuous fashion, and was always 
extorting, on one plea or another, fowls, goats, and barter 
goods from them. At last they could bear his extortions no 
longer, so one day they bound him securely, and putting him 
on a shelf in his own house, they made a fire under him and 
sprinkled a quantity of red pepper on it, and went out, 
shutting the door closely behind them. The pungent smoke 
filled the hut, and Mampuya sneezed tremendously, and would 
have died if sufficient pepper had been thrown on the fire. 
After a time they took him out of the smoke, and tied a stick 
across his chest to his extended arms with the intention of 
punishing still further; but he paid a fine and made many 
promises of better behaviour, which promises he has thought 
well to fulfil, for the sneezing cure is far from pleasant.^ The 
above treatment is also meted out to incorrigible pilferers and 
petty thieves. 

* From Congo Life and Folklore, by the author. Religious Tract Society. 

70 

BANKING AND CLUBBING 

Most chiefs inherit their positions from their brothers or 
uncles, but in one town I know, Kakongo, they elected a new 
chief every year. Jealousy was the cause of this departure 
from ordinary custom. If a chief is tyrannical the people are 
not allowed to escape to another town. They may “ teach ” 
a chief to rule wisely and treat his people properly by the 
above-mentioned pepper cure, but they may not desert him. 

They have a system of banking, or mutual help, called 
temo. Forty men, say, arrange to pay every certain market 
day an agreed sum, and the total on each market day is handed 
to one of their number to trade or do with as he pleases. 
Sometimes a number of young men will form such a club to 
find the marriage money for each in his turn. A failure to 
meet one’s liability when due has often involved the defaulting 
party in slavery, and was in the old days a fruitful source of 
slave supply. I have known ten lads (and workmen also) club 
thus together to give each Saturday their ration money to one 
of their number. The result was that for one week in the ten 
they lived like princes, and for the other nine weeks they 
either starved or begged. Against this custom of clubbing 
their rations we set our faces most strongly, but at times it 
was too well concealed for us to discover it. 

The following cases will clearly illustrate some points in 
native law : a pig belonging to the people of Lumweno, a 
town near Wathen, was killed by a Mansangi man on a 
farm belonging to the Mansangi people. The Lumweno 
folk demanded payment for the pig, but this was refused on 
the ground that any pigs found digging up cassava roots on 
a farm can be killed. After a time the Mansangi women went 
to work again on that particular farm, but their hoes were 
taken away by the Lumweno women, who were more numerous, 
and they claimed the land on the ground that a Lumweno 
pig had been killed on it and no compensation paid. The 
same evening the Mansangi chief sent a letter to the Lumweno 
chief. The messenger carried a gun, which was against native 
custom, and so the Lumweno people took the gun away from 
him, on the plea that “the messenger was bringing force into 

Congo Nobles 

The lad standing is a son of the late King, Dom Pedro V. The one with the 
sword is Dom Alvaro, a counsellor; and the other is the Kapitau who installed 
the nobles, see page 44. This photo was taken at St. Paul de Loando in the early 
eighties, when thej' were on an embassy to the Governor. 

Photo by Dr, Mercier Gatnhle 

An Ancient Font 

This was recently found near the ruins of the old cathedral, and probably dates 
back to the sixteenth century. 

NATIVE PALAVER 

71 

their town.” The chiefs of the district settled the palaver by 
fining the Lumweno people one pig (worth 325.) because they 
claimed land which did not belong to them, as the killing of 
a pig gave them no rights over the land on which it was 
killed ; they also fined the Mansangi people one goat (worth 
85.) because the messenger had no right to carry a gun when 
he went to deliver a letter. This took place in 1909. 

“ In June 1908 Mayaji, a chief in the neighbourhood of 
Wathen, accused Makuka, a small chief, of committing 
adultery with one of his wives, and giving him a venereal 
disease by giving her ‘medicine’ to put on her husband. 
Mayaji waited until Makuka visited his town, and without 
any proper trial he caught him, and, shutting him in a house, 
he threatened to burn him in it. Some of Makuka’s people, 
hearing of this, went to Mayaji’s town unarmed (to have taken 
arms would have put them in the wrong), to see if they could 
release their chief. Mayaji made an attack on them with 
sticks and knives, and severely wounded five of them. 

“ The whole country side deprecates Mayaji’s action, but 
before Makuka can fight Mayaji he must call the neighbouring 
chiefs together and lay his case before them, and if they 
consent to his fighting the other chief, he will give them some 
pigs to ensure their friendship and neutrality. They will see 
that no other chief goes to help Mayaji, or in that case they 
will take Makuka’s side. By his pig’s meat Makuka enters 
into an alliance with the consenting chiefs, and thus gains an 
open field and non-interference while he is fighting his enemy. 
It may take Makuka many months to collect the necessary 
pigs and lay in a stock of gunpowder ; and when all is ready 
war will be declared.” These notes were written at the time, 
but the fight never came off, as the affair was settled by a 
“ palaver.” 

To keep a runaway wife is also regarded as a theft. If a 
wife runs to her family, they may keep her for a week or two 
while her husband’s anger is cooling down ; but they must 
then return her with a goat, or three fowls, and some native 
bread (kwavga), as a peace offering to the husband, even 

72 

RUNAWAY WIFE 

though his ill-treatment may have caused her to leave him. If 
the woman absolutely refuses to return then the marriage 
money with large interest — from 300 to 500 per cent, — is re- 
funded to the man ; but if the husband is notoriously cruel, 
public opinion will force him to accept the marriage money 
without any interest whatever. 

The following incident came under my notice while living 
in San Salvador : I treated a woman for a severe cut on the 

shoulder, and on inquiry I found that she was the wife of a 
neighbouring chief, who, when asked by his wife for permission 
to visit another town, knocked her down and cut her with a 
knife. A man may beat his wife as much as he likes, but if he 
draws even a little blood he ;is liable to a heavy fine. This 
woman came to the King for pi’otection, and when she had been 
in the town two or three days, the King sent to the husband, 
demanding a heavy amount in beads, which the husband paid ; 
but when the King sought to return the woman she was not to 
be found, for she had escaped to another chief. As his majesty 
had taken up the matter, had received the fine, and the woman 
was in his charge, he had either to procure the return of the 
woman from the chief to whom she had fled, or compensate 
the husband with another woman in her place. The King, 
after some considerable trouble, and the payment of a part of 
his profits, was able to send the woman back to her husband. 
This law, however, makes a man guard and control his passions, 
and also deters folk from interfering in the quarrels of others. 
She was a free woman ; but if she had been a slave a few cuts 
more or less would not have troubled anyone. 

In connection with slaves there is a custom that somewhat 
ameliorates their condition by ensuring for them decent treat- 
ment and proper consideration. A slave badly treated by his 
master may run off to another, who will, he thinks, use him 
more kindly. On arrival before the selected chief he kneels 
before him and pays homage, saying, “ I have come to you 
because my master does many bad things to me. Will you 
accept of me ? " If the chief listens to him and decides to 
accept of him, he kills a goat, and they eat a portion of it 

THE “GOAT ” SLAVE 

73 

together. This is a token that the chief has agreed to 
accept him. Guns are fired and the people shout “Nkombo ! 
Nkombo!” (Goat! Goat!), and all the town is jubilant 
because of the event. 

On the next market day the chief takes him and shows him 
on the market as one who has eaten his goat, and is no longer 
a slave. The old master must accept the ordinary market 
value of his former slave : and he is not allowed to take him 
again, or buy him for any amount of money. The whilom 
slave takes his name from the ceremony of eating the goat, and 
is henceforth called Nkombo (Goat). He is not the slave 
of the man who gave him the goat, but is practically a free 
man. These “ Goats ” are very highly appreciated by chiefs, 
as they generally become very faithful followers of those with 
whom they have eaten the goat. Some chiefs buy costly charms 
for the purpose of attracting these “ Goats'” to them. 

CHAPTER VII 

LANGUAGE, IDIOMS, AND PROVERBS 

ON arriving at San Salvador in February 1882 we had 
placed in our hands a list of words that had so far 
been collected. The Mission was very young, scarcely 
more than two years old ; and much time had been spent in 
trying to open a road to Stanley Pool, strength had been ex- 
pended in establishing means of regular communication with 
a suitable base on the river, and with developing the trans- 
port. Besides, there had been frequent fevers, and death had 
not been idle, therefore it was not surprising that the number 
of words collected was veiy small, and many were incorrect ; 
that there were no grammar notes, and in fact very little to 
help a new arrival in learning the native language.^ 

We found, however, some headmen who knew Portuguese, 
and as a Portuguese Grammar and Dictionary were in those 
days a part of our outfit, and we had been employing the 
tedious seven weeks of our voyage in studying that language, 
we set to work to familiarise ourself more thoroughly with it, 
that we might use it as a medium for delivering the message 
we had gone so far to preach. If any of my readers have ever 
employed interpreters under the same conditions, i.e. both the 

^ The late Dr. Bentley was the linguist of the pioneer party, and to 
him all new words and their definitions, all grammar notes, &c., were 
given by his colleagues ; and at this time he had in his possession a good 
vocabulary of words, and many grammar notes, all in manuscript, which 
he afterwards embodied in his monumental work. Dictionary and Grammar 
of the Kongo Language, Trubner & Co., 1887. Dr. Bentley remained, until 
the time of his lamented death in 1905, the philologist and translator par 
excellence in the Lower Congo language ; but at the time of which the 
author writes. Dr. Bentley was living several days’ journey from San 
Salvador, and had all his MSS. with him. What he did for the Lower 
Congo language others have done for the various languages on the Upper 
Congo. 

74 

INTERPRETERS 

75 

speaker and the interpreter using a language not their own, 
they will appreciate our difficulty ; and when it is remembered 
that the interpreters were ignorant of the new ideas to be 
imparted, and were utterly indifferent to them, it will be 
obvious that our difficulties were greatly increased. No matter 
how warmly the words might well up from our own hearts, 
they lost their warmth, grip and force as they issued from the 
lips of our unsympathetic interpreters. 

By-and-by as we became better acquainted with the lan- 
guage, we discovered that our interpreters, who were native 
traders, often gave the congregation an account of their 
journeys to and from the “ coast,” their views respecting the 
manner in which the various white traders treated their native 
customers, and a comparison of the prices of trade goods at 
the different trading establishments. We remonstrated with 
them, and they readily admitted their delinquencies and glibly 
promised amendment; but the climax was reached when one 
Sunday morning the interpreter solemnly gave the audience 
an account of a wonderful snake that was “ nearly long enough 
to go all round the town.” It was a maiwellous story ! and we 
could see from the eyes and faces of the congregation that the 
details were most thrilling. We never used those Portuguese 
interpreters again ; but bent our minds more assiduously than 
ever to gain a proper knowledge of the people’s tongue. 

The Kisi-Kongo language, with more or less dialectical 
differences, is spoken over a very wide area, stretching from 
Loango in the north to Angola to the south, and from the 
sea coast to within twenty miles of Stanley Pool — probably 
co-extensive with the ancient Kingdom of Kongo. More than 
fourteen thousand root words have already been collected, and 
these with their derivatives give a working vocabulary con- 
taining between sixty and seventy thousand words, all ex- 
pressing some definite shade of meaning. That a people 
should employ such a large number of words is no small proof 
of their mental calibre, for it must be borne in mind that 
these words were in use^ or they would have been forgotten, 
as there has been no literature, until recently, in which to 
preserve them and keep alive their meanings. 

76 AN ALLITERATIVE LANGUAGE 

So much has been written and published on Bantu languages 
that the student who desires to probe deeply into the subject 
has now at his disposal such a number of books as would 
form, if collected, no mean library; we propose, therefore, 
only to give in a few paragraphs some of the salient points 
that will be of interest to the general reader. 

The late Dr. Bentley, in his introduction to his Dictionary 
and Grammar of the Kongo Language, gives a graphic descrip- 
tion of its reduction to writing, the discovery of the rules, 
all unconsciously employed, by which the natives speak their 
splendid language, and the difficulties he encountered. Kisi- 
Kongo, like all Bantu dialects, is alliterative in the construc- 
tion of its sentences, Le. that the prefix of the nominative 
noun of the sentence becomes the prefix of all the words 
dependent on it, e.g. : 

fcinkutu Hame A:iampwena A;iambote 

coat my large good 

Ariandombe Ariavididi ezono Arisolokele 

black it lost yesterday it has turned up. 

= My large, good, black coat which was lost yesterday 
has turned up. 

The singular prefix Ki of the first word, which is the 
nominative noun, becomes the initial prefix of the woi’ds 
in subjection to it. If it had been plural, it would have 
been yinkutu yame yampwena, &c. = coats my large, &c. 
Though difficult at first to master, and the cause of many 
ludicrous and annoying slips, yet it makes for clearness of 
meaning. 

There are fifteen classes of alliterative concord, and all 
the nouns in the language belong to one or other of these 
classes; and immediately the class to which a noun belongs 
is known, its pronominal prefixes, its possessive and demon- 
strative pronouns, &c., are easily constructed by the fixed 
rules of usage, and the plural form is also readily recognised. 
There are twenty-nine ways of saying good, bad, black, great, 
and every other adjective in the language, i.e. every adjective 
has a different singular or plural form according to the par- 

MANY ADJECTIVES 

77 

ticular class to which the noun that it qualifies belongs, e.g. 
dinkondo (plantain) is a noun of the eighth class, and “ good ” 
in that class is diamhote (plur. mambote), but luhu (mosquito) 
belongs to the eleventh class, and “ good ” in that class is 
luambote (plur. twambote); and thus through all the classifica- 
tions into which the nouns may be divided. The fifteenth 
class is the diminutive and has no plural, hence there are 
twenty-nine forms instead of thirty. 

The verb is very complicated, and to set it out with any 
clearness would demand more space than we can afford in 
a work that is not a grammar. Suffice it to say, that it is 
rich, flexible, and expressive; and that the finest shades of 
thought can be clearly indicated, and no practical difficulty 
has been experienced in translating the New Testament and 
other books, as the Pilgrim's Progress, into the language. It 
has an active (ba1ca=io catch), a passive {bakwa—io be 
caught), a middle voice (bakama=to get caught). It has a 
prepositional form (bakila= to catch for, or with), a causative 
{bakisa=^to cause to catch), a reciprocal ibakana=to catch 
one another), a repetitive (Jbakulula=to catch again and 
again), a reversive {bakiila=to uncatch = to let loose), a 
reflexive {kubaka=to catch oneself); and sometimes three 
or four of these forms are found in combination with a single 
verb, eg. kangijianisina=to cause to untie one another for, 
or with. 

The idiomatic use of many of its words and phrases make 
not only for picturesqueness of speech, but also afford an 
interesting glimpse of the native way of looking at things ; 
and the foreigner must master these idioms before he can hope 
to be clearly and easily understood by the people. The 
following are a few of their picture-words : the italics are 
literal translations of native words and sentences. If a person 
asks a question it is no use to say in Congo that you will 
think over it and give a reply in a day or two, for such words 
would not be understood ; but if you say that you will drink 
water, and will vomit the water in one or two days you will be 
immediately understood. To consider a matter is to drink 
water, and to give an answer is to vomit the water you are 

78 

IDIOMS 

supposed to have drunk. The verb to see takes the place of 
our verb to feel, hence they see hunger, see shame, see tiredness, 
see cold, &c. 

When speaking about the emotions and feelings various 
figures of speech are employed that are both forcible and 
expressive : the heart stands up when one is afraid ; to be 
contented is to have the heart levelled down, and to soothe or 
comfort a person is to knock down his heart, i.e. to level it down 
to where it should be. A person expresses his disappointment 
by saying that his heart is hent backwards ; to be determined 
about anything is to have the heart tied to the object; our 
colloquial phrase “ to be in a stew ” has its counterpart in the 
words that the heart has been put on the fire ; the heart stutters 
is the equivalent for vacillation ; to be perfectly frank, hiding 
nothing, is to cut open the heart; and to be sorry for one’s 
evil doings is to turn the heart round. 

There are also many interesting expressions used about 
anger, and a few examples will illustrate their aptness. To be 
sulky or sullen is to have anger insufikiently cooked; one with 
a hasty temper is said to pull out his anger ; and of a person 
who habitually loses his temper it is said, that he is a native of 
the town of Lose-your-temper. An eel {nsomvi) is supposed to 
possess a very small stomach which is quickly and easily filled, 
hence a person quick to anger is said to have th^ stomach of an eel. 

To have a pleasant outward appearance is spoken of as 
flattery of the eyes ; to be dumbfounded is to be tied up ; and 
to be unable to refute an argument finds expression in the 
phrase, You have drunk the palm-wine ; to talk incessantly is to 
cause wo7'ds to come in croiods, and one who contradicts himself 
talks in smears and blots ; a person who uses obscure language 
is said to have his words locked up, and evasion is to talk in 
halves. To support or agree to a matter is to push on the 
water bottle ; and to refuse utterly to give attention is to expel 
the request from the ears by shaking them violently and noisily 
as a dog or goat does : the word for this kind of absolute 
refusal is the same as that used to describe the flap, flap of the 
ears when a dog, or goat shakes its head violently to drive 
away the flies. 

IDIOMS 

79 

The feeling of weakness or cramp in the legs after an 
illness, is stated by the saying, My legs have been nibbled, as 
though a mouse had been at them ; a thoughtless action 
which involves great loss is likened to the wicJcedness of a fly 
that alights for a moment on a carcase, and thus causes it to 
go rotten very soon — a small action leading to irreparable 
consequences. To shame a person is to grind their self-respect 
into small pieces so that it will not cover them ; and to 
humiliate a person is to weed up their pride, and to weed up a 
person's anger is to conciliate him. 

A cross-eyed person is said to have his eyes ajar ; and the 
rays of light streaming from behind a dark cloud are the legs 
of the sun. Did you ask permission to be where you are f is a 
wise way of stating, “ I have as much right here as you ” ; and 
one who acquires a fashion, or conforms to a new condition of 
things is said to have swallowed them, they have become so 
much a part of himself. When an event takes place the 
reason for which is hidden, the perplexed person says. One and 
three, but there is something in the middle, i.e. there is a word 
missing, or the cause of these actions is obscure. 

Sometimes we come aci’oss puns, or a play upon words. The 
word for hunger (nzala) is the same as for finger-nails, and 
They gave me a good knife to cut my nails is used as the 
equivalent for, “ They gave me nice food to cut {satisfy) my 
hunger.” Again, the word for horns {mpaka) stands also for 
objection, and when two bullocks, brow to brow, are shifting 
their horns about to get a grip and thus push one another 
down, the identical phrase. To move the horns about, is used of 
two men having an argument — moving their objections about 
to floor each other in the discussion. 

The wit and wisdom of a people are often found in their 
proverbs — those crisp sayings expressed by one which crystallise 
the experience of the many. One writer calls them “the 
hob-nailed philosophy of the people ; ” and another says that 
“ proverbs are the daughters of daily experience.” An African 
tribe does not lack experiences because it is savage, and it 
speaks well for their intellectual acuteness that we find so 
numerous a progeny of such “daughters” existing in the 

80 

PROVERBS 

Lower Congo language. The probability is that many 
“daughters” have died at birth, for until missionaries went 
there the people were without a written language in which to 
preserve the offsprings of their fancy, or record the birth of a 
witty or pointed aphorism. 

A proverb loses much of its obviousness, and not a little 
of its terseness and force, by translation into another language ; 
and when the translation is made from an African language 
into a European one the difficulty is somewhat increased. 
The environment of the black man, his point of view, his 
habit of thought, and his superstitions, touching as they 
do every part of his life, all tend to make it anything but 
easy to place a white man in such a position that he w'ill at 
once appreciate the full flavour of some of the African pro- 
verbs. For this reason a large number of them will never be 
translated into any European tongue, as they would demand 
a long, close study of the black man’s life, and a clear under- 
standing of what is at the back of the black man’s mind, to 
appraise their wit and philosophy. Still there are some that 
are translatable, as they do not demand any special knowledge 
on the part of an English reader to catch their purport, or 
understand their teaching, and the following is an attempt to 
put a few of them on record in an English dress. 

A blustering, boastful, conceited man is wisely reminded 
that the cocks that crow have only come from eggs ; and when 
a man of no importance, a man who thinks far more of himself 
than other folk think of him, gets up in a palaver and gives 
utterance to “tall talk” until he has bored nearly everybody, 
a chief pointing at him will say, There is a little fowl trying to 
lay a big egg. I have seen this proverb used with crushing 
eftect, and it was many a day before the man ventured to 
speak again at a palaver. A shallow, foolish person who, al- 
though he is beaten in an argument, continues to speak for 
the sake of hearing himself talk, is told that he is like an onion 
leaf green and smooth outside but empty inside; and a man 
who knows he is wrong but will not accept the arguments of 
his opponents is said to be a sick man who refuses medicine 
because he feels that death is drawing near. But when a man 

PROVERBS 

81 

is defeated in a discussion, and has nothing more to say in 
his own defence, he uses the expression. You have shot me 
in the legs ; if it had been in the head I should run away, 
i.e. you have caught me this time; and when a person has 
no excuse to offer for a wrong done, he is said to be like a 
monkey that blows out its cheeks because it has nothing to say. 

Fussy, self-important folk, who desire more consideration 
than their position demands, are to be found in Africa as in 
other parts of the world. To such people the following plain 
question is put : You are a crab with only ten legs andyou want 
to travel in a hammock, but I am a millepede with a thousand 
legs ; in what shall I travel ? i.e. do not think so much of 
yourself when there are greater folk present. When a dis- 
agreeable, contentious person treats his friends badly, he is 
asked : The partridge is your enemy, and the cock is your enemy ; 
who will tell you of the approach of dawn f The people, having 
neither watches nor clocks, are dependent on these and other 
birds for heralding the coming dawn ; and the proverb means 
that if you make everybody an enemy who will help you in 
the hour of need. 

The principle that men should be first and boys after, or 
respect for elders, is inculcated by the phrase, The elders wear 
the cloth first, then the boys get the rags. And the young folk 
are exhorted not to laugh at a man who slips down, literally 
or otherwise, by the saying, A full-grown man may fall, for his 
beard is not made of props. A dissatisfied, restless boy is told 
that A silly mouse may leave its hole in anger, but that does not 
change it into a rat. When a lad is travelling with a caravan, 
and has been on the road some days, he begins to feel the pinch 
of hunger, through the scantiness of daily rations, and boylike 
he complains of his hunger ; but the elders of the party perti- 
nently ask him. Can you carry your house with you and leave your 
stomach at home ? No, one must have his stomach wherever he 
goes, therefore he must put up with the inconveniences of it. 
If a boy is punished for stealing, and he is tempted again soon 
after, he will reply to his tempter, A big toad can blow four 
trumpets, but the first one I blew made my eyes bulge out, i.e. a 
big rogue may be reckless, but a small one must think of the 

F 

82 

PROVERBS 

consequences — you remember what a punishment I suffered for 
stealing, I don’t want any more. 

“ When the cat is away the mice will play,” is expressed 
thus : When the leopard has left they eat his cubs, or. In the town 
that has no cat the mice play with the dogs' bells. “ He cut off 
his nose to spite his face ” is put in this form : He burnt his 
house in anger, and now he has nowhere to sleep. And our 
proverb of “There is many a slip between the cup and lip” 
has its fellow on the Congo in the saying that The pot that 
would have cooked the antelope is broken. The lesson of im- 
partiality is enforced thus : If twins are born to you don't despise 
the other of the two ; and the impossibility of doing two things 
at once is shown in that A dog has four legs yet it cannot walk 
in two roads, therefore you cannot expect me with only two 
legs to do what a dog with four never attempts. A load of 
salt on another man's head is easily carried, expounds a truth 
readily acknowledged by all, that we bear lightly the burdens 
carried by others ; and the evils of procrastination are well 
exemplified by the sayings, You waited until the sun rose before 
you pulled your blanket over you, and, Yoii set the trap after 
the rat had passed, i.e. you have postponed until it is too late 
what you should have done earlier. 

Gossiping is not encouraged, for it works as much harm 
there as here, consequently a person is told. If you receive a 
message deliver it, but if you are only told an affair leave it where 
you heard it. He is a talker who turns the king-post round is 
said of one whose word is not to be trusted, and such a one is 
also described as possessing two mouths. When a man is re- 
minded of a wrong he has committed, and goes off in wrath, some 
one will call after him. The bald-headed man leaves in anger 
(when told of his baldness), hut will he grow any hair where he 
goes ? i.e. will a man’s customs be changed because he leaves his 
friends in anger when told of some foolish or evil thing he has 
done ? 

A woman likes the meat, let her have the bones, i.e. a person 
who breaks the law should also bear the penalty — the one 
should go with the other. When a palm-nut is eaten it leaves 
a reddish-yellow smear of oil round the mouth, hence when a 

PROVERBS 

83 

pei’son suffers for the wrong doings of another, the proverb 
runs : The fish-eagle eats the palm-nuts but the lizard has the red- 
dish mouth; this refers to the Kolombo lizard, which has a reddish 
tinge round the mouth. He who cleared the long grass from 
the road opens the way for neoct comers, i.e. the one who first 
commits a wrong opens the way for those who come afterwards, 
and his action is the more worthy of condemnation. That 
judges should be merciful in dealing out justice is taught in 
the proverb. If a leopard gives birth to a palm-rat she does not 
eat it, i.e. you should have punished me for breaking your laws, 
but you should not have destroyed me, for I am born into your 
clan. When a person is convicted because he belongs to a clan 
other than that of which the judge happens to be a member, 
the folk standing round will say. In a court of fowls the cock- 
roach never wins his case, i.e. the verdict of one race or one 
clan concerning another is not altogether free from bias, and 
should be received with caution — the fowls always eat the cock- 
roaches when they see them. 

Foolishness in all its various aspects has its own set of 
proverbs to ridicule and condemn it. An utterly stupid person 
is likened to a blind man who puts rotten mits in a bag full of 
holes and then takes a dead road, i.e. a blind alley. What combi- 
nation of ideas thrown together can more fittingly describe a 
gross bungler ? About a man who is smitten with the appear- 
ance of a woman and pays the marriage money for her without 
knowing anything of her temper, or her ability as a cook or 
farm worker, the proverb is used. The mouth bought the pepper, 
but was surprised at the burning pain — the burning sensation 
that comes from eating peppers that are pretty to look at but 
are as hot as fire to the taste. When a man either through 
carelessness, deceit, or stupidity pretends, or does not know 
what he really should know, he is told. The hair belongs to your 
head, yet you don’t know when it was cut ojf. Our saying that a 
fool learns by experience is thus stated : The fool who wishes to be 
thought wise sets fire to the village grass, and so burns down the 
village ; and the phrase that the head drives, the legs go, indicates 
utter thoughtlessness. 

Should a person be disheartened in an undertaking and 

84 

PROVERBS 

wish to abandon it because of some small difficulty he has 
encountered, he is asked, If you are building a house and a nail 
breaks, do you stop building or change the nail ? That there is 
no royal road to learning is fully recognised even in Africa, as 
shown by the following proverb : Wisdom is not a medicine to be 
swallowed. The native huts are thatched with a special kind of 
grass, and everybody tries to procure it as long as possible, but 
sometimes, for various reasons, only short grass is to be found, 
and this lack of choice is used as a proverb equal in force to 
our English one, “Beggars must not be choosers,” and it is as 
follows : If you reject the short grass you will be lefi in the rain. 
When a prominent man in a village acts ungenerously towards 
a little man, the latter says. It is on a small place that one 
practises a new dance, i.e. It is well for you that you tried that 
trick on me, for if you had treated an equal in the same way he 
would have retaliated. 

The Congo folk are not so slow of wit as to pass unnoticed 
that universal trait of human nature that urges a man to humble 
himself in order to attain a desired end, which we often express 
in the phrase “ He stoops to conquer,” and they state it in the 
proverb. To enter a calabash the frog makes itself very small, but 
once inside it blows itself out so that you cannot expel it. 
This proverb was often used of the now defunct Congo Free 
State, which, in the early years of its existence, “ went about the 
country smiling, talking suavely, and giving presents on the 
slightest excuse, and afterwards turned round and oppressed 
the people ” — it got into the calabash and the people could not 
drive it out. The idea of substituting “ a sprat for a mackerel ” 
is embodied in the saying. When we have drunk palm-wine you 
are too smart in putting the bitter nut for the kola nut. The 
kola nut is rare, dear, and greatly prized as a pick-me-up after 
a bout of drinking, and there are other nuts just as bitter as 
the kola nut, but, lacking its medicinal properties, they are 
valueless as pick-me-ups ; and anyone conferring a small 
benefit in hope of gaining a great advantage, or anyone trading, 
&c., who tries to give an inferior article in place of a better is 
said to be giving a bitter nut (ngadiadia) as a substitute for 
the kola nut (makazu). 

PROVERBS 

85 

On the Lower Congo the leopard is the king of beasts, and 
is always spoken of with respect as lord, chief, &c., and the 
saying that When the leopard becomes poor he eats mud depicts 
a strong, important man reduced in circumstances, or weakened 
by disease, so that the “ small fry ” of the town trifle with him 
and treat him with contempt. A man may be masterful and 
much feax’ed outside his own house and family, or as a chief 
outside his own town, but among his kith and kin he may not 
be much esteemed, hence the pi’overb. The leopardJs cub does 
not respect his father's marks. An oily face is a sign of beauty, 
and the native words for father’s sister literally mean female- 
father, hence the force of the following proverb : The toad has 
an oily faoe in the presence of his father's sister, i.e. a person 
is always beautiful to his nearest relatives, and they are ever 
ready to excuse his faults and irregularities. 

Things are not always what they seem, and appearances 
are somewhat misleading. The man who walks through the 
village in an old cloth, with skin unoiled, and body rough 
for lack of the camwood cosmetic, may possibly be a man of 
importance in the place from whence he comes, for The garden 
egg possesses no clan, split it open and behold it is full of seeds, 
and consequently has a large family. A state officer may be 
insignificant to look at, and have only a few soldiers with him, 
but if you touch him you discover that he has the whole of 
the Government’s power behind him. 

The above proverbs and sayings are typical of many that 
are still untranslated which touch on every phase of human 
life, thought, and experience. Of course in village life these 
proverbs are applied in scores of different ways only slightly 
indicated in the above explanations, for every proverb lends 
itself to a variety of applications. We trust that in the un- 
folding of these proverbs the readers will recognise that these 
uncultured, backward people of the Congo possess some keen- 
ness of intellect, a power of observation, and a felicity of ex- 
pression that augur well for their future progress in civilisation. 

CHAPTER VIII 

NATIVE FOODS, DRINKS, AND MANUFACTURES 

WHAT do the Congo people eat?” is a question that 
has often been put to me while travelling about 
England ; and it would be easy to answer that 
cassava prepared in one of several different ways is the staple 
food for all the Lower Congo peoples, and of a large propor- 
tion of those who live on the Upper Congo; that palm 
kernels, peanuts, plantains, bananas, sweet potatoes, yams, 
and maize ai-e eaten as snacks through the day to allay their 
hunger until the evening meal is ready, which is the meal of 
the day ; that palm oil, pumpkin seeds, crushed red peppers 
with peanuts, and various leaves pounded, cooked, and mixed 
with palm oil serve as condiments or sauces to render their 
sour bread (kwangd), or cassava flour pudding more palatable 
and tasty. But I fear in answering thus the inquirer would 
gain very little information. 

“ What is cassava, and how is it prepared ? ” would be the 
next questions. The cassava plant is a native of South 
America, and has now penetrated to most tropical countries. 
It is very rich in nutritive properties, and tapioca and starch 
are two of its products so well known in all civilised lands. 
By the Brazilians it is known as mandioca, and it was pro- 
bably introduced into Congo by the Poi’tugese during the 
sixteenth century where it is known as madioka. Manioc and 
cassava are its alternate names in English, but the latter 
is the West Indian name for the tapioca made from the 
manioc roots. There are two kinds of manioc — the sweet or 
non-poisonous, and the bitter, which contains much hydro- 
cyanic or prussic acid in its milky juice. This poison, how- 
ever, is dissipated by heat in preparing the root for food. 

86 

PREPARING MANIOC FLOUR 87 

The bitter kind is the more popular because it yields the 
better results in cultivation. While the sweet sort is simply 
peeled and steamed and is then a good substitute for potatoes, 
the tubers of the bitter kind are soaked for a few days in 
pools, streams, or water-holes until they are soft. These 
water-holes smell so abominably from the constant soaking 
of the roots in them that white men lose all desire to sample 
the “ bread ” and puddings made from the roots that have 
been taken from them. 

After due soaking the roots are taken from the water- 
holes, peeled, cored, and kneaded well to the consistency of 
a smooth dough. Lumps of this dough about the size of a 
melon are enswathed in large leaves and thoroughly steamed 
until well cooked. Sometimes the dough is done into sausages 
of various sizes according to the custom of the locality, or 
into “ ropes ” from six to fifty feet in length, and about one 
and a half inches in diameter. These are also wound round 
with leaves and well steamed in large pots. Native bread 
(kwangd) prepared in this way will remain good for many 
days, and should the outside become mildewed, it can be 
trimmed and the inner part will be wholesome. These 
“ loaves ” vary in price considerably, but an average market 
rate is about 200 lbs. for 4^., and 4 lbs. are more than sufficient 
per diem for a full-grown man. 

In the preparation of the manioc flour, the roots, after 
being soaked, peeled, split, and cored, are spread on stones 
or small platforms in the sun until properly dry. The pieces 
are then laid on shelves over their house fires until friable, 
and thus they are easily pounded in a mortar, sifted through 
a fine native sieve, and the result is a clean, white flour. 
When the housewife desires a soft pudding, she puts a pot 
of water on the fire, and when it boils she gradually sprinkles 
the flour into the water, meanwhile stirring the mass slowly 
with a stick, and a luku pudding is the result. The eater 
breaks off a piece of this pudding, rolls it in his fingers, dips 
it into a soup or gravy, raises it, and lets it slip down his 
throat without any masticating, for if he attempts to bite 

88 

MODES OF COOKING 

it, the pudding will stick to his teeth like soft toffee. The 
hzvanga loaves are made for journeys ; but the hiku puddings 
are eaten fresh at their evening meals, and it is surprising 
the enormous quantities they can put away. The distended 
stomachs of native children are due to the coarseness and 
indigestibility of these puddings. 

If the housewife has neither fish nor meat with which to 
make gravy to ease down the pudding, she will pluck some 
manioc leaves, and finely mince them on a corrugated board, 
or toothed stick, and cook them with palm oil, and thus make 
a palatable dish in which to dip the pudding. Sometimes 
a dish of beans or pumpkin seeds is boiled until well mashed ; 
and these dishes are much appreciated, as they add considerable 
relish to their insipid pudding or sour bread. 

When a fairly well-to-do man is travelling he takes with 
him as a relish to eat with his Tcwanga bread, either white- 
bait sun-dried and pressed into cakes, or a relish made by 
crushing strong red peppers and peanuts together. A little 
of this goes a long way, and if it is not very filling, it tickles 
the palate, and gives a sense of warmth and comfort to the 
internal machinery. White ants also are caught in large 
numbers, and make a sauce which is greatly in favour with 
many. 

Their various modes of cooking are, stewing, steaming, 
boiling, grilling in the ashes (binding the meat or fish in 
leaves and dropping the bundle among the red-hot embers 
of the fire — the food is thoroughly cooked long before the 
leaves are burnt through, and foods treated in this way retain 
their full flavours ; it is really paper-bag cookery with leaves 
for paper); and lastly roasting by putting a spit through 
the article, and turning it over and over above a good fire. 
For the steaming process a large saucepan is placed on the 
fire and half filled with water, a strainer is fixed in the 
saucepan and the food arranged on it, some sections of plantain 
leaves are laid over the food, and a pot of the same size as 
the first is put over leaves and food, and pressed down until 
the rims of the two saucepans meet. 

^ it. 

PRINCIPAL MEAL 

89 

The people as a rule have only one meal a day, and that 
is not taken until just after sunset ^ — between 6.30 and 7 p.m.; 
but from the quantity of food that disappears on that occasion 
they make up apparently for lost time. During the day 
they stave off hunger with a roasted plantain and a few 
peanuts, or with a banana or two, or a piece of sugai’-cane, 
or a lump of native bread, &c. Sweet potatoes are regarded 
as very inferior food, in fact only fit for women. No one 
thinks that he (or she) has had a meal unless he sits down to 
a large lulcu pudding, and something to help it down. Carriers 
go for days on snacks, looking to their return to their own 
town, after the journey is over, for a proper meal. In the . 
early eighties the males of the family ate by themselves, and 
the females by themselves, and out of sight of the men. 
The men thought it beneath their dignity to eat with the 
women, so the women took what the men did not want and 
ate it alone. This custom in some districts is fast disap- 
pearing, and it is now no uncommon thing to see a man 
sitting in his house at the same table with his wife and 
children. 

It is the woman’s duty to provide all the vegetable food 
for herself, her children (if she has any), and partly keep her 
husband, should she be a member of a polygamist’s menage ; 
and her husband supplies the meat or fish. If there is neither 
to eat at the late dinner, the man cannot blame his wife ; 
he has simply failed to give them to her, and he must, 
therefore, content himself with the pudding and dish of oil 
and leaves, or any other appetiser his wife may concoct by 
her culinai'y art. The polygamist lives with each of his 
wives in turn for two or more days according to arrangement 
with them, and he then finds the meat or fish for the evening 
meal cooked by the wife with whom he is living; and he 
must be generous, as his wife for the time being expects her 
share of the dainty. 

Nothing comes amiss to the native in the way of eating. 
Goats, sheep, pigs, and fowls are domesticated ; and he is a 
poor man who cannot occasionally buy a little meat, or afford 

90 

VARIETY OF FLESH FOODS 

to feast on one of his own fowls. Elephants, buffaloes, ante- 
lopes, palm rats, field rats, and moles are shot or trapped in 
farms and forests. Hippopotami, monitors, and crocodiles are 
rare on the Lower Congo, but they are caught sometimes ; and 
fish abound in the streams. Snakes, river tortoises, white ants, 
locusts, grasshoppers, certain caterpillars, and palm -maggots 
are eaten with relish, and are regarded among the dainties of 
life. Hawks, kites, fish-eagles, pelicans, parrots, and monkeys 
are not despised ; but after a brief visit to the pot find their 
way to the mouths of the fortunate hunters. The menu is 
varied, and includes almost everything, for what one person 
under a taboo is prohibited from eating, another will eat with 
gusto. 

The natives are scrupulously careful in the division of food. 
When eating together from the same saucepans, each one is 
careful not to take more than his fair share, otherwise he will 
soon be known as a greedy fellow, and folk will avoid eating 
with him. If anything is to be divided among a certain 
number of people, one of them is appointed to divide the 
article — say a piece of meat — into equal parts according to the 
number of persons to be benefited; and all those who are to 
have a share of the meat take theirs first, and the divider 
takes the last share left, hence he is very careful that all the 
shares are as near alike as possible. This is a common practice 
among all the tribes with which I have mixed. 

Savages are often regarded as gluttons, but when it is 
remembered that they really have only one square meal a day ; 
that when on journeys they live in the poorest and scantiest 
fashion possible; that they go long periods without a good 
feed of meat ; it is not a matter of surprise that the evening 
meal is a large one, and that on some special occasions, such as 
a wedding or a funeral, they eat freely and expansively of the 
foods put before them. The natives think the white men are 
great eaters, because they sit down to at least three meals a 
day, whereas they only sit down to one. 

There is not a great variety of native drinks from which to 
select — there are only palm-wines {malavu\ and beer (mbamvu). 

PALM-WINES 

91 

Of the former there are various qualities and flavours 
according to the age, &c., of the palms from which the 
wine is collected. There is vialavu mansamba, which is pro- 
cured by cutting the base of the flower of the living palm 
(^Elects Guinceensis) and inserting a reed so that the rising sap 
percolates through the reed into a calabash fixed to the palm ; 
then there is malavu mesoka, which is got from the heart of 
the palm and not from the flower base ; then malavu mambulu, 
which is taken from a fallen palm by cutting a hole in the 
trunk, and the sap flows into this hole and is scooped out, but 
the supply is very short in duration, as the sap quickly dries 
up. When the wine is old and sour it is called dikaya; and 
when not more than twelve hours old it is malavu manswa or 
fresh wine. And the last kind of wine is malavu matombe, 
taken from the bamboo {Raphia viniferai), of which in some 
valleys there are large quantities growing. These wines, when 
drunk fresh and unfermented, are exceedingly refreshing ; but 
the natives prefer them fermented — and they generally are 
fizzing with fermentation by three or four o’clock in the after- 
noon, and then they are intoxicating. When the writer was 
living in San Salvador there was an oldish man who had several 
gin-bottles, holding rather less than a pint, and these he kept 
filled, and so arranged them that every evening he had one 
that was about a week old, and that was enough to make him 
thoroughly drunk and quarrelsome. He became such a 
nuisance with his shouting and squabbling that the King 
ordered him out of the town, and as the man was slow in 
obeying, he sent some of his people to pull the man’s house 
down and conduct him out of the town, which they did. 

Tapping the palms for wine is quite a trade by itself. It 
requires a special knowledge of palms, and great agility in 
climbing, which is accomplished by means of hoops that the 
tapster passes round the trunk of the palm-tree and around 
his own waist. The roughness of the trunk affords his naked 
feet a grip on the tree, and as he ascends he throws himself 
forward, raises the hoop a foot or two, falls back on the hoop, 
and lifts his feet a step or so. The whole procedure needs 

92 

MANUFACTURES 

care, or he will soon be slipping down the tree. I only know 
of two accidents in the districts in which I have lived — one 
man fell and was picked up dead ; and the other dislocated his 
shoulder, but I was able to set it again in a few minutes. 

The beer (mbamvu) is made from maize and manioc. The 
maize is malted by placing it on the ground, sprinkling it 
with water, and covering the heap with leaves until it sprouts. 
When the grain has thrown out rootlets about an inch long, 
it is dried by exposure to the strong sun for two or three days ; 
in this way it becomes sweet and properly-malted grain. The 
manioc is peeled and dried in the sun, and then the sun-dried 
manioc and the malted maize are pounded together in a mortar 
until thoroughly crushed. It is then mixed with a proper 
proportion of water, and the mash thus made is boiled for 
twelve hours, strained, and left to cool. It is sweet and not 
intoxicating, and this drink is called mulu ; but after three or 
four days it ferments, is intoxicating, sour, somewhat acid to 
the taste, and becomes the beer (mbamvu^ so largely sold on 
the markets. 

Mats {tuandu) of papyrus are made by peeling off’ strips 
of papyri, drying them in the sun, and threading them 
carefully on native-made twine; other mats {mateva) are 
woven from strips of palm frondlets, or the bark of a special 
kind of tree, and some of these mats have patterns of animals, 
and of various figures and designs in black, worked in them 
by dyeing some of the strips with a native dye. Water- 
bottles and pots of diff’erent sizes and shapes are made by the 
women, while the blacksmiths make hoes, axes, knives, &c. 
Shoulder bags and caps are knitted with twine; and I have 
seen them clean, spin, and wind cotton, and afterwards weave 
cloth and hammocks. The ordinary cloth of former times all 
over the country was a native woven cloth called mbadi. The 
threads were gathered from the leaves of new palm fronds. 
These leaves were stripped from the mid-rib and laid one by one 
flat on a smooth surface; the bottom end was held firmly by 
the finger and thumb of the left hand, with the right hand 
a knife was put on the leaflet, as near the holding-place as 

MANUFACTURES 

93 

possible, and then the leaflet was drawn steadily between the 
edge of the knife and the board. The skin was thus taken 
off the leaf, which was turned, and the operation repeated. In 
this way the thready fibres (mpusti) were left, and after being 
dried they were sold on the markets to the weavers of mbadi. 
On the introduction of pineapples a thread was manufactured 
from their leaves, and this thread is called mafuba, and the 
cloth woven with it mbadi za mafuba. The mbadi were woven 
on frames in pieces from twelve to fourteen inches wide and 
from fifteen to eighteen inches long, being limited only by the 
shortness of the threads, as they had no means of joining them 
together. Twenty-four of these small cloths sewn together 
made one full-sized cloth (nkuta) for a man of importance, 
less for an ordinary man, only one or two for a lad. The 
texture is so fine that a full-sized cloth will go into the space 
of a pint measure. These cloths are still made and worn in 
various parts, for as late as 1909 I was able to buy six of them, 
and could have had more; but European trade goods are 
gradually ousting the native manufactures, and the time is 
not far distant when they will be unprocurable. 

The blacksmith holds an honourable position among the 
natives ; his forge is regarded as somewhat of a sacred place, 
his fire mu.st be treated properly, and his anvil is the object 
of respect. There is thought to be something of magic in 
the skill with which the blacksmith works the iron, hence his 
position in village life. In the long ago he made the spears, 
the long knives, and arrow-heads for use in their warfare ; but 
the introduction of the gun, with its mysterious gunpowder 
and unseen bullets, has ousted the old fighting Aveapons, so 
that for more than a generation or two they have neither 
been made nor used throughout the Lower Congo. It is 
unfortunate that the introduction into the country of trade 
knives, hoes, guns, &c., has practically killed smithing as one 
of the skilled arts of the people, and the native blacksmith 
to-day is gradually passing away into what will soon be the 
forgotten past. 

CHAPTER] IX 

THE SOCIAL LIFE OF THE FAMILY 
AND VILLAGE 

IN San Salvador and the large towns in the neighbourhood, 
especially in those belonging to chiefs of importance, 
there is some pretence to regular streets or lanes running 
between the compounds (lumbu, plur. tumbu) of the head- 
men residing in them ; but in the smaller towns and villages, 
where no fences are erected around the chiefs’ houses, and 
consequently neither around the sets of houses belonging 
to their headmen, there is no attempt at regularity of build- 
ing, but the houses are put here or there to suit the whim 
and convenience of their owners. The slaves and wives of the 
owner of a compound keep not only the ground inside the 
fences weeded and swept, but also the lanes running round it ; 
and those whose houses are not enclosed in grass walls, but 
are abutting the roads, keep the spaces in front of their 
houses free from grass and rubbish, generally sweeping them 
every morning, so that the towns and villages usually possess 
a very neat appearance. There is no other law for this than 
public opinion, and the man whose part (belo) of the town 
(evatd) is untidy and neglected becomes the butt of his neigh- 
bours’jeers and gibes. The grass immediately at the back of 
his house may be high enough to cast its shadow on the roof, 
but the front and sides must be clean, weeded, and swept. 

The houses are of various sizes, from six feet wide by ten 
feet long, to an imitation of a white man’s house in length, 
breadth, height, and design. They are built mostly of grass 
tied securely on poles and mid-ribs of palm-fronds ; some are 
made of wattle and daub, colour-washed ; many are of planks ; 
and some may be seen of kiln-burnt bricks. It is not always 

the richest man who has the best house : but the most enter- 

94 

RESULTS OF MOTHER-RIGHT 95 

prising and energetic young men are building more permanent 
houses than their fathers, for much has been done in teaching 
carpentry, brick-making, brick-laying, &c. The houses, whether 
large or small, are very scantily furnished, and this is no great 
loss, for the natives delight in the open air, and use their 
houses mostly for storing their trade goods, for sheltering 
from the rains, and for sleeping. 

The law of mother-right is disastrous to the home and 
family life : for in a man’s household there are as many family 
interests as there are wives, as each wife, and any children she 
may have, is an important part of a family that has its centre 
outside her husband’s compound ; and the families thus repre- 
sented may be on friendly terms, or feuds may arise between 
them that turn the compound into an arena of snarling women, 
quarrelling among themselves, and abusing each other with 
tongues well trained in the art of vituperation. In these 
rows the petty meannesses, and the delinquencies of each family 
are well canvassed, the past history of the members of the 
various families are detailed with scornful and contemptuous 
comments, and woe betide the woman in whose family a recent 
charge of witchcraft has been proved by the ordeal, or one for 
whom a small amount of marriage money was paid — she will 
wish that she had never been born, and she has been known to 
commit suicide in the poignancy of her shame. The husband, 
for his own amusement, will sometimes start the blaze by 
making a disparaging remark about the family of an unloved 
wife to his favourite for the time being, and she will quickly 
repeat it, and the sparks catching the dry tinder, the fire will 
spread rapidly to others, while the man sits by chuckling and 
enjoying the personal abuse that his women-folk, without 
selection of words or phrases, are hurling at each other. Such 
is the household of a polygamist where mother-right is in 
vogue; but where there is polygamy with father- right the 
state of things is somewhat better ; still women are women all 
the country over, and several women tied to one man do not 
make for the harmonious working of family life. However, 
where father-right exists the husband is the centre of the 
family, the children belong to him, and the families of his 

96 

CLANS AND FAMILIES 

wives are not so much in evidence because they have no claim 
on the children, and therefore no reason to be considered in 
the household of the man who passes his position and property 
on to his own sons and daughters. I have lived for years, in 
each case, in close proximity to towns where these different 
customs — mother-right and father-right — were in full force, and 
I know that the women in the households of the former were 
more quarrelsome among themselves than those of the latter : 
for the latter household, centring as it did in the husband, 
there was more unity of family life, and greater community of 
interest. 

The difference between eTcanda (clan), and vumu (family, 
literally stomach, womb), is that elccmda is the name for all 
the families of a clan. The tree is the ekanda, and the 
branches are the vumu. The clan does not originate with the 
man, but has its origin only in the woman ; and it is the same 
with all the divisions of the clan into families — each division 
or sub-division starts from a woman. The clans and families 
intermix freely, but the members of a clan are responsible for, 
and help each other. The names of some of the clans are as 
follows: — Kilukene, Kivaxi, Ankanga, Kintumba, Nenlaza, 
Kinlaza. On account of blood relationship a Kinlaza man must 
not marry a Kinlaza woman — it would be regarded as incest, 
and if unknowingly it took place the marriage would be 
destroyed ; but as a guarantee for the proper treatment of 
their women it is customary, as already stated, for the women 
of one clan to marry the men of one other clan only. 

Some generations ago a woman, apparently of importance, 
gave birth to three daughters — Nkenoe, Ntumba, and Lukene. 
Each of these daughters became the head of a clan ; and all 
the grandchildren, and great-grandchildren of Nkenoe are 
called esi Kinhenge =i\xo?,e belonging to, or offsprings of, 
Nkenge; and thus with esi Kintumba, and esi Kilukene. After 
several generations other names are added to the clan-name 
in order to define the pedigree more clearly. Thus they say of 
one clan that they are esi Kintumha-Mvemba, showing that they 
have come from Ntumba through Mvemba ; and in the same way 
with esi Kinkenge-Nkumba and esi Kilukene- Miala, the descend- 

Photo hy Rev, F, Lewis 

Palm-Tree Climber 

In the stout cane hoop is a strong sHp-knot, which is easily undone, and quickly and securely 
re-fastened as the palm-tapster goes from tree to tree. When ascending a tree he throws himself 
forward, raises the hoop, takes a step or two, and repeats the operation. He taps the tree for palm- 
wine, and also cuts down the bunches of palm-nuts. 

CLANS AND FAMILIES 

97 

ants of Nkenoe through Nkumba, and the descendants of Lukene 
through Mi Ah A. In some instances three names are joined 
together, but it is most probable that after a time the first 
name is dropped, and the two last, and even only the last, 
retained and given as the name of a clan. Any subdivision of 
the above clans is called vumu (family) ; and every woman with 
children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren is considered 
to be the originator of a vumu, as all her descendants are 
looked upon as coming from her womb. Tbe children born of 
family slaves are frequently called grandchildren {nteholo); 
and when one of these “ grandchildren ” is given as a wife in 
exchange for a female member of the family, a present is given 
Avith her to “ wash her blood ” (nsukula menga), and thus 
remove the slave element, that she may be treated as a proper 
wife, and not as a slave. Her children will belong to 
tbe family of her owners, but will be called ana akwa Kin- 
children born of a freed woman of the Kinkenge clan, 
and not m Kinkenge =^c\a.i\&mQn. 

The names of towns often indicate the origin and position 
of their inhabitants, e.g. all branches of the Nsaku-Miala call 
their towns Vunda; but this must not be pushed too far, as 
some of the meanings have now lost their significance, eg. 
Kinganga towns were those whose inhabitants were believers in 
the priests (who called themselves nganga), and those who 
lived in the towns named Kolo were slaves of the priests. The 
meanings of both these names refer to the sixteenth century, 
when the Roman Catholic priests were all-powerful, and not to 
the present time, although the names continue to this day, 
pointing to the present dwellers in those towns as the probable 
descendants of tbe former believers, and slaves, of the priests. 

Palm trees and nsqfu trees (canuarensis) belong to the 
planter and to his heirs for ever, and they thus become 
inheritable property like wives and wealth. The palms and 
nsafa on an old town site belong to those who abandoned the 
site ; but this right at times falls into abeyance, and anyone is 
allowed to gather the fruit; if, however, a famine should come 
the real owners can forbid any person taking the fruit belonging 
to those trees, and they will enforce their rights by invoking 

G 

98 

REDEEMING A PAWN 

a curse, by means of a fetish, on those who steal from their 
trees. Brothers can disown and disinherit one another, and 
this largely accounts for the divisions {helo) in a town, and 
also for the number of small villages dotted about the country. 
The severance is absolute, and no help is rendered by one to 
the other in any quarrels, fights, and palavers that may arise. 
An uncle can also disown his nephew and thus keep him from 
inheriting his wealth and position. 

Sometimes a man is very hard pressed for money, or 
desires to raise some with which to start trading, hoping to be 
successful enough to repay in the near future. Such a 
borrower gives his creditor a nephew, or a brother, or a sister 
to hold as a pledge (nximbi). He is not permitted to give his 
own child, as he (or she) belongs to his mother’s family, and 
he has no control over him. When the borrower has collected 
enough to redeem the pawn, he takes the money, a calabash of 
palm wine, and a white fowl, or a white goat to his creditor. 
The money is paid, the wine is drunk, and the white fowl, or 
goat, is presented to the creditor. This white gift is called 
“ a being rubbed white ” (nJcuswa mpemba), for the man 
who holds the pledge rubs some chalk with his fingers by 
the side of the right ear of the pawn, and his redemption is 
completed, the chalk being a sign that he is clean, and there 
is nothing against him. If however, the borrower cannot 
collect sufficient money to redeem his pledge, he will take a 
calabash of palm wine and a goat to the lender and ask for the 
remainder of the price of the pawn he holds. Upon that 
being paid the goat is killed ; one half is divided among the 
witnesses to the transaction, and the other half is given to 
the creditor, and the pawn is no longer a free person but a 
slave belonging to the family of the purchaser. A pawn does 
not receive any pay from the person who holds him in pledge ; 
but he can work independently of his master, and can pay 
from his earnings the amount for which he was pledged, plus 
fifty per cent. ; and the master on receiving the total and 
interest must give a white goat to his former pledge “ to rub 
on the chalk,” as a token that he is free. 

Among the Upper Congo tribes it is possible to gauge 

TOTEMISM 

99 

approximately the proportion of slaves in a town by the 
tribal mark seen on the faces of the men and women, boys and 
girls — those having other marks than the tribal mark of the 
district are slaves ; but on the Lower Congo, where no tribal 
marks are used, it is more difficult to apportion the number 
of slaves to the population. As stated elsewhere, it is possible 
for a slave to redeem himself ; but it is very rarely done, for a 
slave has seldom the ambition or the desire to be free, or the 
care and forethought to save his money for such a purpose. 

A clan will combine against another clan to protect its 
members against being raided and carried off as slaves ; and in 
less important affairs the members of a family (vumu) will join 
together to help one of their number in any trouble, such as 
paying a debt or a fine. The goods of the whole family are 
to a certain extent held in common — this is the theory, but 
the person needing help must be a persona grata to the 
family before those possessing the means will have the money 
to give or lend. 

With regard to totemism, after very careful inquiries I have 
come to the conclusion that while at one time it may have 
been in force in this region, the only indication of such preva- 
lence still surviving is to be found in certain clan names of 
which up to the present I have been able to procure the 
following: esi kia ntu mia Nzenze =the people belonging to 
the heads of the mole-cricket. These are proud of their 
name because the mole-cricket (7izenze) always sticks up its 
head even when being cooked : but these same people hunt, 
cook, and eat the mole-cricket, esi KiMFUH7=the tortoise 
people ; and they catch and eat tortoise in common with others. 
ESI Kinasoa — the cowrie-shell people, who live in a town near 
Kitovola not far from Tumba railway station. It is quite 
possible that these names have nothing to do with a survival 
of totemism, but are simply clan names, and may even be 
sobriquets. There is nothing to hold the family and clan 
together but the recognition of a common origin from some 
female progenitor. 

A town comprises many families, and these are not 
necessarily of one clan, but may be representatives of several 

100 

CONGO CHIEFS 

clans who for various reasons find it convenient to live in that 
particular town. Palavers that are strictly family affairs are 
settled by the families concerned; and those that affect the 
well-being or otherwise of the whole town are dealt with by 
the heads of the families with the chief at the head of their 
council. In times of war all the families join together, under 
the chief, to repulse the common enemy ; and the chief on 
these occasions serves out the gunpowder and arranges the 
mode of fighting, either of attack or defence, and leads his 
men in the fight. He alone can sue for peace, and either 
accept or refuse the terms offered ; or, being victor, he can 
receive the “ white goat ” of peace offering from the conquered, 
and make blood brotherhood with the enemy. 

The Congo chief, especially as I knew him in the old days, 
was a quiet, dignified man, who knew his position, estimated 
himself highly, and received with proper pride the homage due 
to him from those who were of lower rank and birth. The 
homage he demanded from others, he willingly paid to the 
King, and to those nobles who were above him in rank. There 
was here and there a young, impetuous, reckless chief who for 
a time defied the conventions of his office, but he was soon 
brought to book, and was ultimately glad to submit to those 
rules that regulate the relationship between a chief and his 
people. With Belgium ruling over one part of the Lower 
Congo, and Portugal governing the other part, the position of 
a chief has been modified ; some of the older families have been 
supplanted, and others have been put in their places who are 
more amenable to the new state of affairs, or have ingratiated 
themselves with the white masters. I have known many chiefs, 
and regard with respect and kindly feeling not a few. 

The chiefs proper are the descendants of noble families; 
and each one is head of the people living in his town. He 
owns the ground upon which the town is built, the neighbour- 
ing plateaus, the farm lands, the woods, and the streams. 
During the time that the various families live in his town, they 
may hunt in the bush and forest, and cultivate the farm lands 
belonging to their chief, but on leaving the town to live else- 
where they have no further rights and privileges in those lands. 

POWERS OF A CHIEF 

101 

He allots to the women the ground necessary for their farms, 
shows them new farm sites when the old are exhausted 
(manuring has never been practised), and receives from each 
woman, in times of good harvest, a small portion of the pea- 
nut harvest of her farm. This tax is paid when there is a 
superabundance, but is neither recognised nor demanded in 
times of scarcity. A share of the palm wine gathered from 
the palm trees on his land is regularly given to him for the 
use of his household. He has a right to a portion of every 
animal slain within the limits of his territory, whether killed 
by his own people or by the folk of a neighbouring town — its 
death on his estate establishes for him a right to certain 
recognised portions. He receives a full share of all tolls paid 
for any bridges built by his people over neighbouring rivers, 
and a proportion of the fees paid by travellers — white and 
black — for being ferried in canoes by his people over rivers too 
wide to be spanned by such bridges as the natives can build. 
When a market is established on his ground he receives 
nothing for it ; but if a roadside market is opened on a main 
or caravan route that happens to run across his land, he 
receives a small toll in recognition of his rights. He also 
receives all fines inflicted for breaking any of the laws of his 
town, and a share of those fines that are levied upon those who 
break the laws of the district in which he lives. 

The Congo chief is the magistrate for his town or village. 
All quarrels between two or more of his people are submitted 
to him for arbitration ; and he either “ teaches ” the disputants, 
or inflicts a fine as the case demands. In complicated disputes 
his principal men advise him ; and when the trouble is between 
one of his own people and a person belonging to another town, 
then the two chiefs with their headmen judge the case. In 
quarrels involving whole villages, the overlord of the district 
sits as chief judge, while minor chiefs act as a kind of jury, or 
advisory council. Whilst undoubtedly there is a great deal of 
bribery, and false swearing, yet there are unwritten rules for re- 
gulating lawsuits. Moreover, the fines imposed are not arbitrary, 
the result of passion, or the whim of the moment, for when a law 
is promulgated the fine for breaking it is stated at the same time. 

102 

CHIEF’S SUCCESSOR 

If the chief is a great one, an overlord, having wide 
influence, he levies an ad valorem toll on all trading caravans 
passing through his district, and for this he guarantees pro- 
tection. He must be moderate in his demands, or the native 
traders will make a wide detour to avoid his territory ; but 
his demands on the white traveller are often anything but 
moderate and reasonable. 

On the chiefs death a brother, by the same mother, takes 
his position as chief, and failing a brother, then his nephew. 
Whilst the chieftainship goes to a brother, the property is 
inherited by the nephew — the eldest son of the eldest sister — 
and failing a nephew, then the brother or sister, by the same 
mother, succeeds to the estate of the deceased. Should there 
be none, the wealth is distributed equally among the members 
of his family. Neither a child nor a wife inherits anything. 
If the wife has lent the husband any money, as is often the 
case, that is refunded to her ; or if she has put some money 
into a trading scheme of her husband’s, that capital is paid 
back to her — she has in these loans a first claim on the estate. 
The property of the maternal aunt goes to her husband at her 
death ; and it is possible for the maternal uncle to will that his 
property should be divided among his brothers and sisters, by 
a declaration to this eft'ect before witnesses ; but if he has a 
pet nephew he wills all to him, and then on his decease the 
nephew winds up the corpse in the dead uncle’s personal estate 
of cloth, buries the body, and places his uncle’s crockery on his 
grave ; then he takes over the real estate of his late uncle’s 
slaves and wealth, and assumes the position of chief. When 
there is neither brother nor nephew to take the position of 
chief, then a sister, by the same mother, or a niece can become 
chief of the town with all its burdens and emoluments. I have 
known more than one woman who was a chieftess in their own 
rights ; but I have only met one acting as a chief, and I have 
cause to remember her, for when I visited her town, tired and 
hungry, she kept me waiting more than two hours while she 
dressed in her finest cloth, beads, and paint to receive me in 
proper style, and show me a house in which to rest and sleep 
during my sojourn in her town. 

CHAPTER X 

CONGO WOMEN AND THEIR WAYS 

AT any time between six and eight o’clock in the morning 
you can hear the rattle of brass anklets as the women 
and girls pass your bungalow to their farms. Poised 
on their heads are baskets, each containing, maybe, an empty 
calabash, or a hoe ; a few of the women have pipes in their 
mouths, and here and there a mother is carrying her baby 
tied on her back by an old cloth, or leading a toddling child 
by the hand. For the most part the women are silent, and 
the earlier the hour the less garrulous are they who compose 
the procession of farm workers. Similar streamlets are flowing 
from the town on all sides, for the farms lie in the valleys and 
on the sloping hill-sides in all directions round the town. 

Should you visit the farms during the morning or early 
afternoon you will see the women busily engaged in weeding 
the mounds of manioc, maize, and pumpkins, or hoeing and 
planting the manioc stems, or splitting the pumpkins and 
drying their seeds in the sun, or grubbing up the ground-nuts 
and spreading them to dry, according to the season of the 
year. Each woman works on her own farm ; but here and 
there, where two or three women have united their forces and 
are working together, you can hear that their tongues are 
as busy as their fingers. Their amours, of the present and 
the past, are more than hinted at, and to hear their boastful 
talk you would judge them to be the objects of numerous 
intrigues ; but their statements respecting such matters must 
be taken cum grano salts : or it may be that the latest witch- 
craft scandal is the subject, being canvassed with much 
freedom of expression, and with many phrases of surprise and 
invective ; or some woman is cursing with bitter tongue the 
thief who has robbed her farm, and she is neither choice in 

103 1 

104 

FRIENDLY DISPOSITION 

her language, nor reticent in her accusations ; and in a neigh- 
bouring farm a shrill voice can be heard denying the in- 
nuendoes, and replying to the insinuations in vehement terms 
and loud curses. Most mothers work with their babies tied 
on their backs, for there are too many rumours, true and false, 
of children being carried off by wild animals or killed by 
snakes, &c., to leave them under the shade of the tree, unless 
it happens to be quite close to the plot of land being worked. 

If 'you are walking out to the farms in the late afternoons, 
pushing your way through the tall grass that encircles the 
towns and villages, you will meet the women returning from 
the farms with baskets of food upon their heads, bundles 
of firewood in their arms, and calabashes of water tied on their 
backs, or, if they have babies on their backs, the water is 
balanced among the food in their baskets. They are laughing 
and chatting, for their tongues have been loosened by much 
exercise through the day ; and as they catch sight of your 
well-known white face, they facetiously greet you with 
“ Have you slept well, uncle ? ” or “ father ” or “ grand- 
father ? ” according to their age, or what they suppose yours 
to be. They are quite willing to crack a joke with you, and 
if you know their proverbs, or the niceties of their language, 
you will find them smart at repartee. They stand aside in 
the grass to let you pass along the narrow path, and each will 
give a greeting, or make an inquiry after your health, or 
throw out a laughing comment on your clothes or personal 
appearance as you go by ; but if you are a stranger their 
tongues are tied, and your passage will be a silent one. They 
will stand aside out of respect for your white face, and as 
you pass they turn their faces away, and look at you furtively 
out of the corners of their eyes. To the friendly white man 
whom they know their greetings are kindly and pleasant; but 
to the unfriendly white man they have nothing to say, and 
their averted faces are a “ cut-dead ” about which there is no 
mistake. 

The return of the women seems to rouse the town to life. 
The old, the young, and the sick, that have been drowsing in 

LIFE OF THE VILLAGE 

105 

the shade through the hot hours of the afternoon, come out 
of their cool hiding-places to greet the women, and scan with 
hungry, inquisitive eyes the contents of the baskets that are 
now on the ground ; and the men and boys, having returned 
from their work in the forests, or from hunting, or from the 
markets, add their voices and laughter to the noises of the 
reawakened town. Above the hum of talk can be heard the 
shouts of wrangling women, and two or three loud, shrill- 
voiced women abusing each other are quite sufficient to 
dominate all other sounds. If you walk across the town about 
sunset you will notice the men and elder lads busy finishing 
some mats, or building a house, or sitting about waiting for 
the evening meal, while the women and girls, for the most 
part, are engaged in various cooking operations, but occa- 
sionally you will see some old women shelling peanuts or crack- 
ing pumpkin seeds, and retailing the gossip culled from the 
market, farm, or village that they have visited during the day. 

Women loom large in Congo village and town life, and 
their position has both its advantages and disadvantages. 
There are women that stand out prominently as dominant 
factors in native life — women of a type that in other and 
civilised lands would be leaders of Society, centres of political 
intrigue, or the something around which would crystallise a 
special coterie, a cult, or a salon. They state their opinions 
freely and forcibly, they criticise unreservedly the actions of 
the men, and they express in no unmistakable terms their 
views of what should, or should not, be said and done in the 
“ palavers ” that are occupying the attention of the chief and 
headmen of the town — their words carry weight, and frequently 
turn the scale in favour of this or that course of action. 
Sometimes, being of noble family, they are present at the 
“ palaver ” ; but more often they speak loudly as they sit at 
the open-air fire, and when they speak every other sound is 
hushed, and their voices carry far on a still night, and the 
chief and the headmen hear and profit by the advice thrown 
on the night air ; and it is curious how many men at the next 
palaver hold similar views that jump with those that, a night 

106 THE SLAVE WOMAN 

or so before, were flung by a strong-minded woman at the 
stars. 

The free woman of ordinary intelligence, of average skill in 
farming and cooking, has in all things that pertain to women 
pretty much her own way; but the slave woman is the chattel 
of her owner, to be beaten without redress, to be abused with- 
out the power of replying, and to be passed from hand to hand 
without the opportunity of protesting against her fate. Any 
day she may be called upon, at the mei’e whim of a man, to 
give up her children, her village acquaintances, and her hard- 
worked farm, to start life afresh in a town both distant and 
strange. 

The Congo woman reflects as readily her temporary circum- 
stances as a river does the bright sunshine or the passing cloud. 
When in health, her farm yielding well, and her market 
transactions are profitable, her mouth is full of laughter ; hut 
the slightest ill-health, or the smallest reverse, and her spirits 
drop to zero, her face is drawn and smileless, and her temper 
uncertain. She will respond quickly to a kindness; but a 
supposed affront will arouse her bitterest resentment, and in 
her anger she will do and say things that will amaze the 
impartial onlooker, and astonish herself in calmer moments. 
She is swayed by various superstitions and omens, and is a 
great asset to the witch-doctor, and no small source of his 
wealth and prestige. She can be a bitter enemy and a faithful 
friend, and will fight tenaciously for the side upon which she 
arrays herself. She is very conservative in her outlook, and 
the status quo of her village and home life has no stauncher 
supporter ; but once win her to other views and there is no 
more self-sacrificing adhei'ent to be found anywhere, for she 
will give her time, her strength, and her money to promote 
that which she believes to be right, and neither sneers, nor 
ridicule, nor persecution will damp her ardour, or turn her 
from her purpose. 

In the heathen village she is encouraged by her mother, and 
taught by the customs of the place, that before betrothal, 
and even after she is bespoken, intercourse with the lads and 

BARREN WOMEN 

107 

bachelors is both legitimate and natural ; but when as a 
married woman she becomes enceinte she will suppress herself, 
control her passions, and treat men as utterly non-existent for 
three years or more. This she does on the supposition that it 
will be beneficial for her child, but it exhibits a power of self- 
control for which she receives little credit from members of a 
higher civilisation, who often ignorantly regard her as being 
little, if any, better than a mere animal. 

A barren woman on the Lower Congo is ridiculed by the 
women of her district, and is treated with scorn by her own 
family, for she has failed to add her quota to the maintenance 
of the clan. Her name is bandied from mouth to mouth in 
the village song, her life is rendered intolerable by the sneers of 
her neighbours, and suicide has not infrequently been the 
result of the treatment meted out to her. If, however, she can 
prove that her husband is to blame, she can procure a divorce 
from him, and he then becomes the butt of the village wits. 

On the Lower Congo mother-right has been in vogue for 
untold generations, and this has fostered the idea that it is the 
sole duty of a woman to give birth to children that her family 
may not die out, but rather rise in importance with the increase 
of its members. It is to enlarge her family that she was locmed 
to the man ; the children belong to her eldest brother, and it is 
her eldest son who will become heir to her brother’s property, 
and to his position also if there is no brother’s brother to take 
the place of the deceased. Wherever I have found mother- 
right in full force on the Congo, I have observed that the 
women keenly desire to bear children, and those customs are 
fostered and strengthened that maintain and meet this desire. 

When a barren woman has tried charms and fetishes of 
various kinds and they have failed her, she goes to the medicine- 
man {ngang' a nkau) who is at the head of the secret society 
called the country-of-the-dead (iixi-a-fwa, see p. 158) ; and he, 
having procured certain leaves the names of which are kept a 
profound secret, squeezes their juice into palm wine, which she 
drinks. She remains in the “ doctor’s ” town a considerable time. 
Or, if a lodge of this society is started in her district, she will 

108 

METHODS OF ABORTION 

enter it and spend many months there, during which she is 
supposed to die, and in due time she is restored to life with all 
her functions in a normal condition, i.e. fit to bear children. 
Or she may arrange with her husband for a strong, healthy 
man to visit her, and should she bear a child, her husband will 
regard it as his own and will treat it as such ; and the woman 
can claim a divorce if she wishes to leave the husband. 

After the above remarks it may seem strange that there 
should be various methods of procuring abortion ; yet there 
are times when a woman does not wish to be a mother, as 
when her hatred towards her husband more than counter- 
balances her longing for children : or, when she is desirous of 
shielding an illicit lover. It must be remembered that in a 
country where polygamy is recognised a large number of virile 
young women are often tied to an old man, hence when such 
wives stray from the paths of native virtue they will submit 
to such means as will hide their shame, protect the child from 
scorn, and save their lover from the payment of a heavy fine. 
They may go to a medicine-man, but this is not very probable, 
as such visits are soon noised abroad, and will in time reach 
the ears of the husband. They resort mostly to the juice of 
manioc leaves, or to a large dose of common salt, or to a 
small piece of nsele-nsele root, powdered and drunk with water 
or palm wine, or to eating manioc leaves that have been 
soaked in water for many days. The leaves are astringent, and 
the root causes severe diarrhoea. 

When an unmarried woman has a child, no fine is paid 
by the man, but the child is never allowed to call him father, 
although they may both be living in the same town. The 
child belongs to the woman’s family, is known to all as a 
“ child of adultery ” {mwan' a zumba), and is spoken of as such. 
The other children taunt him by saying, “ You have no father, 
you came from a tree.” In the Ngombe Lutete district the man 
has now to pay a fine for adultery. 

At one time it was the custom for women and girls to 
live apart periodically in a special house {nzo a manga) so 
as to isolate them from all contact and converse with men. 

SEPARATION HOUSES 

109 

When they stopped building these sepai’ation houses such 
women confined themselves to the more obscure part of the 
house {ngudi a nzo), and used their own door, in the back 
wall, for exit and entrance. During these times a woman 
is not permitted to cook her husband’s food, nor food for any 
male member of her family ; neither is she allowed to touch 
anything belonging to a man, nor return a man’s salutation. 
If she has to pass near where some men are sitting who are 
likely to give her the equivalent of “ Good morning,” or “ Good 
evening,” she deliberately puts her pipe in her mouth, and 
gripping it firmly with her teeth she makes it stick out straight 
in front of her, as a sign that she may not answer, for she is 
regarded as unclean. In a large number of towns and villages 
the women are counted unclean every morning until they 
have bathed ; and in these towns it is reckoned exceedingly 
bad taste for an unwashed woman to speak to a man — any 
man ; and many a woman has been thrashed for laxity in the 
observance of this rule. 

Some cases of incest are known, but it is very rare. When 
committed with a sister, or with a father’s wife, the punishment 
is either death or banishment. One of each kind came to my 
knowledge, and they were both banished from the town : one 
has not been heard of for thirty years, and the other has not 
been allowed to return to San Salvador for nearly twenty 
years. Sometimes, but rarely, a man commits this crime 
with his mother-in-law, while his wife is alive, and may want 
to take her as his wife after his wife — her daughter — is dead. 
This is not permitted, and the man is liable to be tied and 
whipped very severely ; and such a man would find it difficult 
to procure another wife in a district where he is known. 

Women who are enceinte have many whims and fancies, 
which their husbands do their best to supply. Tadpoles are 
much sought after and enjoyed by women in this condition, 
and they are also very fond of the red earth of ants’ nests. 

If a man is very hospitable and entertains many friends, 
his wife will perhaps be afraid that her husband will not eat 
sufficient food to satisfy himself, and if she is a good wife. 

110 

GOOD AND BAD WIVES 

caring for her husband, she reserves and hides an extra portion 
for him to be eaten after his visitors have gone. Such a 
woman is regarded as a paragon of thoughtfulness, as is also 
the other kind of woman who, when her husband is in diffi- 
culties with a creditor, will not allow herself to be induced to 
leave him for the creditor in payment of the debt owing, 
although her family gives its consent for her to do so, and 
even tries to persuade her. Such an opportunity is taken 
advantage of by too many women, for such marriages (Jongo 
hcampela) are somewhat common. 

CHAPTER XI 

BIRTH AND CHILDHOOD 

The Congo baby on the first day of its birth is nearly 
white, with a slight greyish tint in its skin, but every 
day it becomes darker, until in a few weeks it assumes 
the rich brown coffee colour of its parents. The Congo baby 
is surrounded with various charms, and is the object of many 
superstitious rites. In anticipation of its arrival a female 
“ doctor ” (called ngang a nkamba) is sent for, who pro- 
cures pieces of different kinds of fish and animals which she 
cooks together. Then she threads a necklace of beads with a 
univalve shell in the centre, and into this shell she puts a 
little chalk, a certain leaf, a pinch of salt, and a portion of 
the prepared stew. The prospective mother must pass her 
tongue every morning across the opening of the shell, to 
ensure an easy delivery of a healthy child used to all kinds of 
food. The expectant mother having received her charm, the 
“ doctor ” feeds her with some of the stewed fish and meats ; 
and then a curious custom follows, of the reason for which no 
one can inform me. A fowl is cooked and a leg of it is 
put on one side for the eldest child of the prospective mother 
(or, failing a child, for her sister or next nearest relation). 
The child must pretend to steal it, and as he runs away those 
members of the families who are present make a feint of 
catching him, and shout after him “ Thief ! Thief ! ” After 
the birth of a child the husband must not, and will not, go 
near the house for three weeks or a month. 

The new-born babe is washed with warm water ; and a 
woman, other than the mother, nurses the child for one day. 
When, however, the mother goes to the farm leaving her baby 

in the town, it is nursed in a friendly way by any woman who 

111 

112 BESPEAKING AN INFANT GIRL 

has a child of similar age. It is thought that if the child 
belonging to the friendly nurse is older, her milk will be too 
strong for the younger baby, and will cause it to vomit. As 
soon as the child is old enough it eats roasted cassava, or pea- 
nuts, which have been masticated first by the mother, and the 
child is not weaned until he is about three years old : a bitter 
decoction is then put on the breast to disgust the child. 

By the side of the fire in the house of a new-born child 
there is always a pot ^ of hot water, and the man, old or young, 
who drops the first bead into it any time during the first two 
days can claim the baby, if a girl, as his future wife. The 
bead must be dropped in within two days after the birth, and 
may be dropped in by a parent on behalf of a son. Only a 
member of those clans into which the girl may marry will 
attempt to establish a claim in this manner. Although the 
marriage money will not be paid until later, yet no one else 
will be allowed to marry her. A man of the wrong clan, 
or a stranger (though it is unlikely that a stranger will be 
able to enter the house) who puts the bead into the saucepan 
will have it returned to him ; but if there is neither kinship 
nor clan reason, nor any other real objection why the person 
dropping in the bead should not eventually marry the girl, he 
will bitterly resent the return of the bead as a gross insult. 
The saucepan, however, is well guarded during these two days, 
and only a very small percentage of the girls are bespoken in 
this manner. A bead given in this way is regarded as a gift 
to the girl, and enables the giver to set up 'an exclusive claim 
to her hand when she arrives at a marriageable age ; but when 
that time comes the man will have to pay the marriage money 
usually demanded for a girl of her position. Or, if that 
amount is placed at an absurdly high figure, and is conse- 
quently prohibitive, the man can claim the return of his 
“ gift,” and he can legally demand such a high rate of interest 
that a lawsuit may be necessary to settle the affair. 

The house in which a birth takes place is for the time 
being called Tcialakaji, a name that indicates that it is a 
* This special pot is called mansilxca. 

Rev. J. L. Forfeitt 

Lower Congo Woman and Child 

This is a typical Lower Congo woman. The upper front teeth are removed, which was a more 
common custom thirty years ago than now. The fringed cloth was, at one lime, the only article a 
woman wore, and it was tied round the waist exposing the right thigh. I he cloth was sewn by the 
men, and it was the duly of a good husband to give occasionally a new cloth to each of his wives. 

SAFEGUARDING A BABY 

113 

place where a child is being suckled. Immediately on the 
birth of the baby a new middle frond of a palm is cut, shaken 
out, and placed over the door to protect the infant from two 
kinds of dangers. Should a quarrel arise in the town, or an 
enemy attack the town, no one would dare to molest a house 
thus guarded by a palm frond ; and it warns off' those people 
who eat the animal which is taboo to the new baby’s family, 
for such must not enter the house : for example, if the taboo 
(in this instance called mpangii) of the child'’s family is 
hippopotamus meat, then any one who eats that animal must 
refrain from entering the house, or the child will become 
sickly, and perhaps die. In about a month the palm frond 
is removed, as the baby, by that time, is regarded as strong 
enough to be unaffected by such malign influences. Women 
sometimes suffocate their children, but unless this is done 
before the child cries, it is treated as murder and punished 
accordingly. 

If a woman, while enceinte, dreams of running water, snakes, 
or water-sprites {ximbi), she believes that her child will be 
an incarnation of a water-sprite. The sprites inhabit the 
streams, and the snakes live among the stones near the watei*- 
courses, hence to dream of snakes or running water is equiva- 
lent to dreaming of the water-sprites themselves. Therefore, 
directly such a child is born, a cloth is tied round it and no 
one is permitted to know its sex, except the “ doctor,'” until 
it receives its name. A few days after the birth of the child a 
particular kind of “ doctor is called, who starts a dance which 
lasts all night, and is accompanied with much drinking and 
drumming, and the firing of many guns if the family is suffici- 
ently wealthy. A bower of palm fronds is erected as a shelter 
for the father, mother, and baby ; and all the plates, dishes, 
and pots used during the accouchement are placed near the 
booth. At dawn the “ doctor ” takes a plate of palm wine, 
and, dipping some leaves in it, he sprinkles the baby, the 

^ Named ngan^ a nkisi. {Nkisi= fetish, charm, amulet.) This 
“doctor” is always called upon to perform his ceremony when there 
is anything unusual or abnormal about the birth of a child. 

H 

114 

A SPRITE CHILD 

mother, and the father, after which he asks the crowd three 
times if they know the child’s name. They answer, “ No, 
we do not know the name.” Thereupon, the “ doctor ” shouts 
out, “ It is Lombo.” At once the people make a noise by 
clapping the palms of their hands on their open mouths. 

The folk, on hearing the name Lombo, know that' the child 
is a girl, for if it were a boy its name would be Etoko ; and 
they also know from the name given that the mother has 
dreamed either of running water, or snakes, or water-sprites. 
The “ doctor ” receives a fee of one fowl, fifteeen strings of 
beads, and all the utensils that were placed near the booth at 
the commencement of the ceremonial dance. All the girls 
called Lombo and the boys named Etoko are supposed to be 
incarnations of water-sprites, or possess in some strange way 
the orenda, or nature, of the snake. 

When the child grows up, it receives presents from its 
relatives and neighbours on account of its sprite nature. The 
sprites are supposed to endow one thus born with various 
powers and fairy gifts, and hence the presents are given to 
Lombo and Etoko children to gain the good-will of these 
incarnations or favourites of the sprites. It is believed that 
they have the power, not only of imparting good luck, but also 
of inflicting many misfortunes ; and the presents are given to 
obtain the former and avert the latter from the givers ; and 
the whole of the “ christening ” ceremony is to make the sprite- 
child amenable to the ordinary rules of life. The lemha-lcmha 
leaves used in the ceremony are only employed by a “ doctor ” 
when something uncanny is to be counteracted in the person 
subjected to the rite, as in the case of a madman, a homicide, 
&c. These children become quickly aware of the deference 
paid to them by their families and neighbours, and they 
develop into arrogant little pests, as they find that their 
demands are not refused. 

Snakes are either under the special protection of the 
water-sprites, or are incai’nations of them, and, on account of 
this connection, snakes are not killed or hurt in a house where 
these sprite-children have been born ; and neither Lombo nor 

REBIRTH 

115 

Etoko children are allowed to kill snakes, lest they should 
murder one of their own kith and kin. They do not drive 
them from their houses, and the snakes, apparently conscious of 
their immunity, are very frequently found in the houses of 
men and women called Etoko and Lombo. Again, the most 
vulnerable part of a snake is its head, and people must not 
strike these sprite-children on the head. There is an indefin- 
able but clear connection in the native mind between the 
water-sprite, the snake, and the Lombo and Etoko children. 

It is believed that the only new thing about an infant is 
its body. The spirit or soul of the child is thought to be old, 
and to have belonged either to a deceased person, or to a 
living person, or, as stated above, to a water-sprite. For this 
belief they give two reasons. They notice that the child 
speaks at an early age of strange matters the mother has never 
taught it, and this they regard as the old soul talking in the new 
body ; and again, if the child is like a relative it is thought to 
have the soul of the person it resembles, and that person being 
now soulless will soon die. Hence in Congo, to say that a 
baby is like anyone, is not regarded as a compliment, and is 
anything but pleasing to that person, for you have observed 
what they have been trying to hide from themselves — the 
likeness, which proves that the child has their souls, and that 
they themselves will soon die. Neither may you say that the 
baby is “ fat ” (jnaji), for they think you want “ to eat it ” in 
spirit, and as a result the baby will quickly die ; nor may you 
praise it as a fine child, for the evil spirit {ndoTci) will hear 
you, and take it away, i.e. it will die; and for the same 
reason parents never count their children lest the evil spirit 
should hear them and remove one or more by death. You 
may speak of it as a “ stout ” (mpongo') child without giving 
any offence. 

A baby that presents its feet first at birth is always called 
Nsundi, no matter what its sex may be ; but a few years 
later, the above ceremony as for a sprite-child takes place, and 
a more suitable name is chosen by the boy or girl. A child 
born with six fingers is called Ngonga ; and should a 

116 CHILDREN AND THEIR NAMES 

woman bear a child a considerable time after the way with 
women has ceased, that child is known as Mavakala all through 
life. A child born with teeth is named Mavasavasa, and 
such an abnormal event is placed to the credit of a fetish 
power. The first child of twins is always called Nsimba, 
and the second Nzuji; and the first baby born by a mother 
after twins takes the name of Nlandu, and the second after 
twins that of Lukombo. An albino always takes the name 
of Ndundu, and is believed to be the incarnation of a water- 
sprite, and as such is supposed to possess much power. 
He is not worshipped but is greatly feared by the people, 
for he not only causes humpback and rheumatism, but he 
can also cure these and various other complaints and de- 
formities. When he dies his spirit does not go to the 
forest like the spirits of ordinary people, but returns to 
the water. A child born by the same mother after an 
albino, and having light eyes and skin, yet not a true 
albino, is named Lubela. Thus to hear these names is to 
know at once the birth-history of the person bearing them 
(see page 129 under the Ekinu dance for other names of a 
special character). 

Because of the extra trouble they entail, the Lower Congo 
women do not take kindly to twins, hence it is the general 
practice to starve one of them. When a twin is thus starved, 
or dies a natural death, a piece of wood is roughly carved to 
represent a child, and it is put with the living twin that it 
may not feel lonely. Should the second child die the image 
is buried with it. The corpse of a twin is placed on leaves 
and covered with a white cloth, and is buried at the cross 
roads like a suicide, or a man killed by lightning. It is re- 
garded as a hateful thing, and is buried in the most dishonour- 
able of all graves. 

A Congo mother is not long in washing and dressing her 
baby. She simply holds it over a saucepan of warm water, 
and throws the water over the kicking, screaming babe with 
her hand ; she then shakes off the superfluous water and the 
bathing is finished. The dress consists of a string of beads 

CHARMS FOR BABIES 

H7 

round the waist, and a few charms tied on various parts of 
the body. ITiese charms are to protect it from those diseases 
to which Congo babies are subject. There are horns and 
shells into which the “ doctor ” has put strange messes ; and 
there are beans, leaves, and twigs that are supposed to pre- 
serve the child from stomach-ache, convulsions, wind, and 
diarrhoea. Should the mother die the living child is buried 
with the corpse ; and very often the babies suck for hours at 
the dead breasts, before the time of burial arrives. The 
reason for this is, that no woman wants the trouble of bring- 
ing up a child which will, by and by, be claimed by the child’s 
own family ; and she will also be held responsible by the 
child’s family for anything that may happen to the baby 
while it is in her care. This is one of the by-products of 
mother-right. Their cruelty is more often the outcome of 
their superstitious fears, and of their clashing customs, than 
from a delight in causing pain and suffering. 

Some anxious mothers, after the birth of a child, send 
for a witch-doctor (jigang' a = traps), who brings 

with him a number of small, conical basket traps — hence the 
name of his order. These he carefully places all round the 
doors of the house to catch any evil spirits {ndohi) that may 
try to get into the house, and enter the child to kill it. The 
“ doctor ” looks at the traps every morning, and if he finds 
a cockroach or spider in any one of them, it is looked upon 
as a proof that he has caught an evil spirit in the very act 
of entering the house to harm the child. Evil spirits can 
disguise themselves in any convenient form, and the “ doctor” 
before setting the traps puts in something to attract the 
insects. If before birth a “ doctor ” says that the child’s hair 
is not to be cut until he comes, then they wait for him, and 
on his arrival he squeezes the juice of some leaves over the 
hair, and then cuts it. 

When a girl is old enough, i.e. about six or seven years of age, 
she helps her mother in the house, in cooking, and in farm work. 
She fetches the water from the nearest stream, which means 
from ten to forty minutes’ walk according to distance. Water 

118 THE GIRL HELPS HER MOTHER 

kept in the house all night is thrown away in the morning, 
hence the fetching of a fresh supply is a daily necessity, and in 
the dry season it often means a very cold journey, in the early 
morning, to an almost naked girl. On her return she sweeps 
the house, which is an easy task where there are no carpets to 
shake and no furniture to dust and polish — a broom is run 
over the earthen floor and it is finished. As a rule the fire 
is kept burning all night, for the heat warms the sleepers, and 
the smoke drives away the mosquitoes ; but should the fire 
go out it is the girl’s duty to relight it. This is not so easy 
as it appears ; for she must not take fire from another hearth 
lest she gives her family any disease from which the people 
are suffering from whom she procures the lighted stick to re- 
kindle her own fire. The introduction of matches has simpli- 
fied the process, but where such European luxuries have not 
yet penetrated the girl must use the flint and steel, or know 
for a certainty of a thoroughly healthy family from whose 
hearth she can take, without fear of evil consequences, a little 
fire to restart her own. 

After her morning duties, the girl takes her hoe, basket, 
and calabash and accompanies her mother to the farm, where 
she hoes, plants, weeds, and reaps according to the season, 
under her mother’s guidance; and in the evening she assists 
in cooking the evening meal, which is the principal one of the 
day. A thoughtless mother, who does not teach her daughter 
these various duties against the time she has a house and farm 
of her own, is condemned by all the village folk ; and a girl 
who neither cooks nor farms properly will bring a very low 
price in the marriage market ; and “ going cheap ” she is the 
butt of much ridicule, and the subject of taunts, jeers, and 
impromptu village songs. 

The girl remains under the protection of her mother 
until her marriage ; but should the mother die, she is sent to 
her maternal uncle, who becomes, her sole guardian and the 
arbiter of her fate. The girl’s mother, should she be alive, 
has much to say regarding the disposal of her daughter’s hand ; 
and the prospective bridegroom who does not conciliate her 

THE BOY AND HIS FATHER 119 

with small presents and thus seek to win her consent to the 
marriage, may succeed in winning his bride, but he will have 
in his mother-in-law a veritable vixen who will undermine his 
domestic peace by constantly trying to set her daughter against 
her husband. I have known of more than one separation be- 
tween husband and wife take place for no other reason than 
this. 

The boy is taught by the father to set traps for farm rats, 
wild animals, and birds; and he also teaches him to buy and 
sell on the markets, to trade, to carry loads, to build, to sew 
his own clothes, and to be able to sew his wife’s (or wives’) 
clothes too. The girls are not taught to sew, for the rough, 
hard hoeing of their farms soon stiffens their fingers, and renders 
them unfit to hold a needle. The son, if properly trained, 
visits the different towns and districts in the neighbourhood 
of his home, and becomes more or less expert in the matters 
that he should know as a man. 

When the lad is about fourteen or fifteen years old the 
boy’s maternal uncle brings a calabash of palm wine to the 
father and claims the lad. The father has no power to 
withhold him from going with his uncle, but the lad himself 
can refuse to go, and thus elect to remain under the tutelage 
of his father as long as he likes. Until the uncle comes with 
the palm wine the lad is under the protection of his father, 
who is responsible for him to the boy’s family, but on the 
boy going with the uncle, the father’s responsibility is ended. 

A father is not allowed to appropriate his children’s goods, 
nor may he take possession of any wealth they have inherited 
from their mother, nor can he take his wife’s money. If he 
is pressed for money he can borrow from his wife, if she is 
willing ; and very often they each put a certain amount of 
capital into a trading venture, and share accordingly ; and 
should the husband die first, the wife has priority of claim on 
his goods up to the amount lent, or the capital put into the 
trading concern. On the other hand, a woman can take the 
man’s (her husband’s) goods and need not repay the debt. 
Where mother-right exists the position of free women is in 

120 

FRIGHTENING CHILDREN 

some respects greatly in advance of those tribes where father- 
right is the rule. 

A father may prosecute his child, but a child is not per- 
mitted to institute a lawsuit against his father ; and for this 
reason there is a strong public feeling that a father should 
treat his children properly, as they have no redress. 

There is something very pleasing and lovable about Congo 
children. When they have once conquered their fear of our 
white faces and strange clothes, they become very trustful, 
confidential, and ever ready with a smile that is often winsome. 
Before they knew us they were constantly threatened with 
“ The white man is coming to take you away ” ; and many a 
child in Congoland has been frightened into obedience, or 
startled into quietness, by the horrible words, “ Here is the 
white man,” or “ I will give you to the white man,” and other 
phrases in which the white man looms as the bogey. Later 
on, in their teens, they become wilful, passionate, and difficult 
to manage, for the father exercises little or no control over 
them — they do not belong to him, and the mother is often 
weak and allows them to have their own way. As Christianity 
and civilisation bring better influences to bear on their home 
life, and effect more control over their hearts and lives, many 
of the repulsive lines now seen in the faces of the men and 
women — largely the result of wild, ungoverned passions — will 
be eliminated, and the pleasant faces of childhood and youth 
will be seen in later life, and even in old age. 

CHAPTER XII 

NATIVE AMUSEMENTS 

There is not a great variety of games known to the 
natives. Hockey is played all over the Lower Congo, 
and in recent years it has penetrated to some parts of 
the Upper River. The lads are intensely fond of the game, 
and no matter how long their journey has been, or heavy 
their loads, they will, a few minutes after arriving at a resting- 
place, look around for a suitable piece of ground, and finding 
it, they will start a game of hockey. At Wathen station, 
where a fine open space has been utilised as a playground, 
hockey is played on every available opportunity, and a great 
amount of energy is expended on the game. The boys cut 
their own sticks in the forest, and make their own rough 
wooden balls, and arrange sides as we do ; but there is little 
science in the game, as they do not care to keep to their places, 
but like running all over the field. On arriving at San 
Salvador in the early part of 1882 I found the boys of that 
generation just as keen on hockey as the lads of the present day. 

On moonlight nights they play a game called mbele. This 
is played by both sexes joining together, and to the beat of 
drums and singing. This game, however, led to so much 
adultery and its attendant “ palavers,” that when the Christian 
Church was formed, the native members desired that there 
should be rules to the effect : that no Church members 
should play mixed' mhele, i.e. the males should play by them- 
selves, and the women and girls by themselves in another part 
of tl\e town ; and that, as the drums badly excited them, 
causing them to lose all self-control, the game should be played 
without the beating of drums. The making of these rules 

has led to greater morality among those who observe them — 

121 

122 

MAKE-BELIEVE GAMES 

and they are very numerous ; and any Church member breaking 
them is disciplined by his fellow-members. 

The boys and gii-ls have their make-believe games, such as 
cooking, feasting, and marketing. It is pleasant to watch them 
on such occasions. How seriously they walk to their make- 
believe markets, and chaffer as they have seen their elders do, 
for the mock goods exposed for sale ! Then, outside some 
rudely erected toy hut, built by the boys, they cook their pre- 
tended food on fireless hearths in odd bits of broken saucepan 
rescued from the rubbish heap, and inviting their child friends, 
they sit down to eat their imaginary feast with much laughter, 
and probably with as much relish as the real ones. Perhaps 
they have raided their mothers’ baskets and shelves, and thus 
their imaginations are aided by a few real nuts, a piece of 
sugar cane, and a lump of native bread. 

Some of the boys have visited the State Station with their 
fathers or brothers, and have seen the soldiers drill ; and 
nothing will satisfy them but to drill the small fry of the 
village. There they are in a line marching along the village 
street with sticks for guns, an old kerosene tin for a drum, and 
three or four reeds for trumpets. How self-consciously they 
strut along, with what marvellous flourishes the instruments 
play ; but proudest of them all is he who drills them by 
shouting words that are neither French nor Congo, but are the 
nearest imitations he can produce to the sounds he heard on 
the white man’s parade-ground. He does not know what they 
mean, neither does his regiment, but they turn this way and 
that way and are boisterously happy. Sometimes with a few 
empty provision tins they will start a band, and jokingly 
serenade you, but a little salt will please them, and they will 
take themselves and their so-called music to another place, 
feeling well repaid by your small present — for salt is as much 
appreciated by Congo boys and girls as chocolates are by 
English children. Congo, however, is a toyless country, a land 
where children are not catered for ; but notwithstanding that 
the youngsters by their boisterous laughter and merry shouts 
seem to extract a great amount of joy out of life. 

“THE YOUNG PIGEON” 123 

For the names and movements of some of the games that 
follow I am indebted to Dr. Bentley.^ There is a game 
played by two children called, “ The Young Pigeon ” {mwan' 
eyembe). The left hands are held, and with the right hand 
each rubs his own ribs, whilst the supposed mother bird sings 
this little ditty : 

‘‘ O mwana a eyembe 
Kameneno nsala ko ; 

E lumbu kemenwa e nsala 

Ku mputu kekwenda 

O eyembe papa e papa.” 

The young pigeon 
Has not yet grown feathers ; 
The day when the feathers are 
grown 

To the white man’s country 
shall go 

The pigeon, flap, flap. 

The “young pigeon” coos an accompaniment, and when 
the song is finished, the players clap their right hands over and 
under the interlocked left hands, which are then separated, 
and each claps his own hands together and strikes his right 
thigh, after which they lock hands and commence again. 

There is another game called “ Spider ” {esanga ngungu), 
which is played by a number of children joining hands and 
dancing round a youngster (the spider) in the middle, who 
tries to seize one of the dancers by the leg and drag him 
down. The victim, as he is seized, cries out : “ Alas ! alas ! 
I have stepped on a thorn under the water.” 

Chorus of all the other dancers. Pull it out. 

Victim. I would have pulled it out, but my knife is blunt. 

Chorus. Try and go to sleep. 

Victim. I have repeatedly tried to sleep but failed. 

Chorus. Count your followers {i.e. think of those belonging 
to you). 

Victim. I have tried again and again- but they are so 
numerous they cannot be counted. 

Chorus. Try once more. 

Victim. I have a relative, Bukusu, the Bukusu who wears 

* Bentley’s Dictionary and Grammar of the Congo Language, p. 492. 
Triibner «fe Co., 1887. 

124 

NKENKA 

seven necklaces ; had he brought with him a pumpkin leaf 
mixed with a cabbage leaf it would have soothed it. 

The one caught proceeds to mention all the other dancers 
in the same way. (A knife is always used to extract a thorn 
from the sole of the feet, as the skin is very hard, and needs a 
sharp knife to cut the corneous skin round the thorn to get a 
grip of it.) 

A game called NJcenka is played by the boys and girls 
digging a hole (ezouhc) about twenty inches deep by about four 
inches in diameter. This is half filled with peanuts (jiguba), 
and then filled with earth well rammed in. The midrib (mbasd) 
of a palm frond is made into a fork (nsoma) with several 
prongs. The fork is driven through the dirt into the peanuts 
below, and if, on being pulled out, it has a peanut on it the 
fortunate driver wins all in the hole. Each player puts an 
equal portion of peanuts in the hole. 

The children hide a small, hard, brightly-coloured seed in 
one of five little heaps of sand or dust. The one whose turn 
it is to play has to level down four of the heaps, leaving intact 
the heap containing the seed. Should he succeed he has the 
privilege of hiding the seed. A tally of successful guesses is 
kept by making a mark {soneka e sinsu) with the finger on the 
ground. 

For lads there is a game of touch with the feet on all 
fours with the back undermost called Nkiendi. A large court 
is marked out on the ground, and the “hunters” {iikongoi) 
chase the “antelope” {nkayi), who is not allowed to run 
outside the court. The “hunters” run about on all fours 
with their faces uppermost ; and in this ridiculous manner 
they hurry around after the “ antelope,” who is the only one 
permitted to stand up. The hunters try to hem him in a 
corner ; but if the “ antelope ” to avoid capture runs out of 
the court, then they all get up on their legs and follow 
after him, and the one who catches him first and pretends to 
cut up the “antelope” takes his place in the court. It 
causes a great amount of laughter and excitement, as every 
“ hunter ” makes a pretended cut at the “ animal ” with shouts 

A BALL GAME 

125 

of “ The head for me,” “ A leg for me,” “ Some flesh for me.” 
They tumble on one another like a scrimmage in football. 
Sometimes a rule is made that there shall be no chasing 
beyond the court, and if the “ antelope ” breaks the bounds, 
the first “ hunter ” who sees him cries out, “ The antelope 
has broken loose,” and takes his place as “ antelope.” 

A number of players sit on the ground in a circle with 
their legs stretching before them. One of the players puts 
a ball {esomba) on his knees, and with one leg jerks the 
ball, and rolls it on to the knees of his neighbour. Should 
the ball fall to the ground, the player who thus fails to 
pass on the ball must go into the centre of the ring and 
dance for the amusement of the others. This game is called 
Dihulungu. 

When a fresh bean-pod is put out in the sun it will 
warp and turn over as it dries, and this has suggested the 
name for a game called Titi Ida luJcasa, or pod of a bean. 
The players form a ring, each grasping loosely with his right 
hand the left wrist of his neighbour. One of the players 
then lifts his right leg over his right arm as it holds the 
left arm of his neighbour, then he passes his left leg in the 
same way over his right arm. He now stands facing his 
two neighbours, his arms crossing at the back with the left 
arm uppermost; then by passing his left arm over his head, 
he turns round and assumes his former position in the circle. 
Each player does this in turn, and the clumsy become the 
butt of ridicule to the others. 

The fruits of the croton plant (Jatropha curcas) lend them- 
selves to a game named Vif a mbuta. A number of lads 
divide themselves into two sides, each player having a good 
supply of croton fruit, which are about the size of a chestnut. 
The sides stand about forty yards apart, and in the middle 
each builds its own “ town ” — little piles of croton fruit, 
four in a pile and one “ town ” for each side. They then 
take up their position at their own respective ends, and each 
side, with its store of crotons, pelts the “ town ” belonging to 
the other side, and when one “town” is knocked down they 

126 

“HUNT THE SLIPPER” 

rush on the losing side and throw crotons at them, and then 
the melee becomes general, and crotons are flying in all 
directions. As accidents often occur in the last rush the 
game is forbidden in some towns. 

A game somewhat similar to “Hunt the Slipper,” but 
called by the natives Nduku, is played thus : the players form 
two sides and sit in lines feet to feet. A cloth is thrown over 
the legs, and a small article is passed from one to another 
under the cloth, every one rummaging about as though pre- 
tending to pass it. A player on the opposite side challenges 
one on the playing side hy saying, “ Confess ” {funguna), and 
attention being given to him, the leader on the playing side 
asks, “ On whose head ? " (Jcu ntu a nani). And the person thus 
challenged guesses who has the article. If he is right the 
article is handed to his side, and it counts one game to his 
side. 

There is “ Blind Man’s Buff’” {Njimina), which is usually 
playedin the house; another kind of “Hunt the Slipper ’’(A^andi 
a ngongo), in which a palm-nut is passed round the ring of 
players, and the one in the centre pounces on the person who 
he thinks has it, and they change places if he is right. Then 
there is hopping the longest time (Nsongongo), and “ Touch ” 
{EJio). 

In a former work ^ the writer has given a full description 
of Mbele, a game which is very popular all over the Congo ; 
also of a hoop game [Lungungu) ; and of searching for a needle, 
directed by the playing of a Biti ; and the game of Loso, played 
with the canna seeds. 

There is a bull-roarer (Ngwingwingwe) made from a bamboo 
or a piece of wood. It is regarded only as a plaything. 
Women, and also men and children, put their hands over their 
faces when a person approaches who is twirling one of them, 
but this appears to be only from fear of the many accidents due 
to bullroarers coming off their strings, and flying into the faces 
of those who happen to be near. String games, or cats’ 

^ Congo Life and Folklore. John H. Weeks. Religious Tract Society, 
1911. 

GAMBLING GAMES 

127 

cradles are to be found, but they are not very common. “ Odds 
and Evens ” (called Mpinji, and also Nxibidi) is sometimes played 
— the odds are named one (Jcinwsi), and the evens, two (pole). 

There is a gambling game (Wadi) played by adults and 
young men, with eight discs (mpanza), either of calabash or 
crockery, having one side white and the other coloured. They 
are rattled in the hands and then thrown (the thrower is nte, 
the throw is t' e mpanza, for the discs to fall white side up is 
sengoTia, and coloured side up hukama). When the pieces are 
thrown, if even numbers turn white side up, 2, 4, 6 or 8, 
the player loses, and such a throw is called zole, and when 8 
whites turn up it is named Tcaya. When odd numbers or no 
white sides show, 0, 1, 3, 5, 7, the player wins. The winning 
throws have certain names. No whites is called mayembe 
(pigeons) ; 1 coloured is marig'a= snake’s sting, 3 or 5 coloured 
is = leopard, 7 coloured same as 1, manga. It is at this 

game the natives often lay heavy stakes, and sometimes slaves. 

There is another game called Kulvkuta, which is played in 
the same way as Wadi, but instead of money being staked, the 
loser has to eat an arranged number of chilli peppers, some- 
times as many as ten. Occasionally the players will stipulate 
that the pepper shall be rubbed in the eyes of the loser, a cruel 
arrangement, causing excruciating pain to the unfortunate 
loser. When a player has lost ten times in succession he is 
excused all further penalties. 

Every kind of event gives an occasion for a dance. If a 
serious illness excites general sympathy, and a desire to help, a 
dance is arranged, and the whole night is spent in gyrating 
round a drum. If there is to be a fight, a dance is started, 
and through the night they circle about a fetish image, calling 
upon it to work confusion and death among their enemies. If 
a victory is to be commemorated, the drums beat a joyful, 
defiant note, and, firing their guns and waving their knives, 
amid much laughter and covered with perspiration, they shake 
their bodies and try to excel each other in their antics. A 
birth, a death, a restoration from a severe illness, a return 
from a long journey, or the start for a joiu-ney, all demand a 

128 

DANCES 

dance ; and if there is no such ostensible reason, then they will 
find one, or dance for the mere love of it. They are danced 
into the world at their birth, and they are danced out of it at 
their death. 

Both married and single women participate in all the 
dances, except the hunting dance, which is only for men. As 
will be noted, some of the dances take place at night and 
continue until the dawn appears; such dances are usually in 
connection with their fetishes, and are danced through the 
night because the spirits are then abroad, against whom they 
are invoking the power of their fetishes. Other dances are for 
moonlight evenings, or for the glare of the bonfire, and others, 
such as the dance after a victory, are only performed during 
the daylight. 

All kinds of drums are used — long and short, ovoid, oblong, 
and round. They are either beaten by the hand, or with a 
stick, or vibrated by friction. The drum and the beat indicate 
the kind of dance, as particular drums are used for certain 
dances. To European eyes there is not much “ poetry of 
movement” about their dances. There is a raising of the 
shoulders, a wriggling of the buttocks, a quivering of the 
posterior, and a throwing up of the legs, with occasional jumps 
in the air. The movements are sometimes suggestive and 
obscene, and in one or two dances the opposite sexes embrace, 
such dances leading to much immorality. 

In their dances there are two formations — the circle, and 
opposite lines. In the former they dance round a drum or 
a fetish image, or both ; one or both being placed in the centre 
of an open space, and the men and women join, without any 
order, in clapping their hands, chanting a chorus, and shuffling 
one behind the other ; in the latter two lines are formed — one 
of men and the other of an equal number of women. The 
drum is placed at one end of the line, and all begin to clap, 
chant, shuffle, and wriggle together. A man then advances, 
dancing, and a woman from the opposite line advances a few 
paces, and they dance thus a few moments, usually a yard or 
so apart, but sometimes they approach nearer and strike their 

FETISH DANCES 

129 

abdomens together, then they retire, and others take their 
places, and so on right down the lines ; and thus they proceed 
over and over again. Those waiting for their turn to advance 
clap their hands, chant, and wriggle their bodies in a peculiar 
undulating movement until they shuffle towards their partners 
in the centre. 

The following are the names and particulars of various 
dances. In their chants and choruses so many obsolete words 
are used that the singers themselves do not know their meaning. 
They seem to have become mere nonsense phrases that fit the 
rhythm of the beaten drum. 

1. The Ekinu is a fetish dance which continues all night 
with much palm wine drinking. It is a circular dance, and is 
performed while the “ doctor ” {ngang' a lembe) is making 
medicine for his patient. The fetish is put in the middle of 
the circle, and the drum behind the patient. The drum is 
beaten, the rattle shaken, and the people sing a chorus which 
literally translated is: “Chalk which gave me life on the 
Ngoyo Road ” {hwvemba luampene o moyo o njela Ngoyoi). 
Ngoyo is a name for Kabinda, a country north of the Congo 
River, and this ceremony and song are said to have been 
introduced by a Kabinda “ doctor ” who visited this part of 
the country, but the original sense has been lost. 

If the Mbambi fetish is used the chorus sung is : “ Oh ! 
these storms, that Mbambi fetish ” (Ngwa e tembwa' yi mbambi 
yuna). Again the real meaning is lost, and perhaps some of 
the original words. As the drum is beaten the “ doctor ” 
drives the fetish power into the sick man, and he, being excited 
by the drumming, rattling, and singing, jumps on the nearest 
roof, tears handfuls of grass from it, and leaps on and off the 
roof like a madman. The “doctor” after a time drops the 
juices of certain leaves and stems on him to soothe and quieten 
him. The sick man is then supposed to get better, and having 
had the fetish power put into him, he himself becomes a 
“ doctor,” and can practise curing others. When a woman, in 
this manner, comes under the sway of the fetish power she 
becomes a female “ doctor,” and takes the name of nengudi. 

130 

FETISH DANCES 

This Ehinu dance is performed at the christening ceremony 
of a sprite child, when the doctor is called to remove the evil 
that may be in the child on account of its being an incarnation 
of a water-sprite (see page 113). 

There is also a similar dance and ceremony observed over 
girls with the names of NTcenge and Nsona, and boys with the 
names of LubaM and MbaM, but the reason for the performance 
of the ceremony is lost in their case. Nkenge and Nsona are the 
names of two market days, and are given to such girls as are 
born on those days. There must be something special about 
some of the four days of their week, as in some districts they 
never bury on either Nkenge or Konzo, but only on Nsona and 
Nlcandu. There are, therefore, children born on certain days 
who require an all-night dance to free them from some evil, 
and other days upon which the dead may not be buried. Have 
they lucky and unlucky days ? 

2. The Nloko dance, which means removing of witch power 

(from loka=to bewitch, and its reversive, lokola), is a circular 
one, and is performed for the following reasons : (a) If a 

person has been ill for a very long time, and one after another 
of the “ doctors ” has failed to cure him ; the various “ doctors ” 
then bring their fetish images, charms, and drums, all of which 
they place in the centre, and the adult men and women dance 
round them ; and after a time they form a procession and 
parade the streets of the village. These circular dances and 
parades continue alternately all through the night, and it is 
supposed that the sum total of all the strength of the fetishes 
present will destroy the witch who is retarding the recovery of 
the patient. The evil spirits being about at night, that is 
assumed to be the best time to deal with them. (6) As a war 
dance, i.e. before a fight begins and as it proceeds (see under 
Warfare, page 192). 

3. The Nsundi is danced in the daytime, or in the evening 
moonlight, by men and women, boys and girls. A very high 
drum is used, and the men wear skins, or cloths in imitation of 
skins, and these are thrown about by the knees and thighs of 
the wearers as they jump about in the dance. The dancer who 
swirls his skins about in the most approved fashion is praised 

FETISH DANCES 

131 

as the best performer, hence this dance is always executed in a 
good light. The formation is in two lines one opposite the 
other. 

4. The Etutu is a very old dance, and in it the friction drum 
was used, but is now reserved for the “ witch-finder ” ; besides 
the friction drum, some drums and reed pipes or whistles 
formed the band. Now a large drum with a big hole in the 
bottom, to make it sound well, is employed instead of the 
friction drum. The dancers carry long sticks in their hands, 
with bells, or anything that jingles, fixed to the top ends. It 
is danced by a line of men and a line of women, who work their 
shoulders as well as their legs. This dance is also known by 
three other names. Through the skin head of the friction drum 
(dingwiti) is a strong cord knotted at the end to keep it from 
being pulled through, and at the other end is a smooth stick. 
The fingers are wetted and the stick drawn through them, and 
the drum head vibrates, giving out a peculiar note as the stick 
slips through the fingers. A similar dance to this is the Lu- 
ngondongo, but with a different beat on the drum and another 
chorus for chanting. 

5. To the outsider the Sala dance is the most interesting of 

all the native dances, for this reason, if for no other, that it 
shows the oneness of human vanity all the world over. A 
medium drum is used, and the formation is in two lines, one of 
each sex. They make up songs about one another, and the 
dance often ends in a general ^aca^. In this dance the follow- 
ing exhibition of pride frequently takes place ; During the 
dance the chief or important man arrives, and someone not 
belonging to his family or town goes to the drum, and by 
beating carries on a conversation with himself — asking ques- 
tions and replying to them. Thus he begins : “ Welcome to you. 
Chief A. Are you quite well.?” “lam quite well,” replies 
the drummer. “ Have you come a long way ? ” “ No, only 

from my town.” “ Are you very rich “ Yes, I have plenty 
of wives, slaves, pigs, goats, cloth, and beads. I am so rich 
that I do not know how rich I really am. I do not know what 
to do with my wealth. It fills my bags, boxes, and houses.” 
“Have you much money with you.?” “Yes, my shoulder- 

132 

FLEECING A VISITOR 

bags and bundles are full.” “ Give me some of it, as you are 
so rich,” and so on in fulsome flattery. The foolish chief, in 
the vanity and pride of the moment, and to win the admiration 
of those present, will hand over a sum equal to fifteen or 
twenty shillings, or more — a large amount for these people. 

After this, one of the men who came with Chief A will 
then go to the drum and carry on a similar conversation about 
the chief of the town, or some other chief present (hut not his 
own chief), and draw money out of him. If the largesse is 
mean and disappoints the drummer, tap, tap will go the drum 
and a song on stinginess will be beaten out and words will 
be bandied about from side to side ; and what started as an 
innocent dance will end in a general row, and bad blood 
will be engendered for many a day to come. But, if the 
gift is generous, fulsome praise and honeyed flattery will be 
beaten on the drum, and everybody will be pleased. 

Some time ago a band of players and dancers went from 
Vianga to Matadi (both these towns are in the Ngombe Lutete 
district near Wathen) to entertain Chief Dimbu and his folk. 
The Vianga folk had an idea that they would be meanly treated, 
so they laid their plans accordingly. They called a prominent 
Matadi player, and arranged with him to praise the Vianga 
people in the usual way, and one of the Vianga men would 
give him twenty francs, which amount he was to return in 
considei’ation of a percentage of what the IMatadi chief would 
give. The plan worked well for the Vianga players and their 
accomplice, for Chief Dimbu, seeing twenty francs given, felt 
compelled to surpass that, and eventually handed over thirty 
francs to the Vianga dancers. This was not the first time that a 
plot of this kind was arranged and carried to a successful issue. 

6. The Boela is a circular dance to the beating of a medium- 
sized drum. The cloth worn for it is first held under the 
armpits, then the belt is tied tightly round the waist, and the 
upper part of the cloth is allowed to fall in folds. 7. The 
Nsanga is danced after a fight in which no one has been either 
killed or wounded. There is no formation of circles or lines, 
but just a crowd of folk who shout, wave knives, and fire oft* 
guns to the sounding beat of a big drum. 8. The Madhimha 

E- 

0-5 

o ^ 

CONUNDRUMS 

133 

is a circular dance performed to the playing of the marimba 
only. 9. The Nkongo or hunter’s dance is mentioned under 
hunting (on page 182). 

10. The Ngom' a nkanu, as its name indicates, is danced at 
the talking of big palavers. At a great palaver the advocates 
or orators, who state the cases for their clients, speak for many 
hours, and to give them an occasional rest, and to revive the 
flagging interest of the onlookers, a drum is beaten and a 
woman dances for ten or fifteen minutes. Ejieta is the 
finishing-oft' movement in a line dance, and means to go round 
for a turn or two in a circle as a wind-up to the dance.^ 

On dark nights when dancing is not desii’ed, or on cold, 
rainy days when the folk wish to sit around their fires, they 
pass the time in asking conundrums of each other. The word 
for a riddle is ngwala, and this is also the word for gin ; and 
in the giving, receiving, &c. of a conundrum there is a play on 
the double meaning of the word. The person who desii’es to 
propound a conundrum starts thus : 

Ngwala yeye=\i&ve is gin, i.e. here is a riddle. 

Ta e ngwala— out the gin, i.e. let us have the 
riddle (or twasa e ngwala^hx'mg the gin). 

If the people asked cannot state the answer, they say to 
the propounder of the riddle : Nua e ngwala=dv'mk. the gin, 
i.e. give us the answer, for we cannot guess it. 

It will be obvious that for a proper appreciation of the 
force of their conundrums it is necessary to have a knowledge 
of their customs, and especially of their language, consequently 
one cannot give moi’e than two or three examples of such as 
are easily explained. The phrases in italics are the conun- 
drums and their answers : 1 . You can open the basket of a 
water-sprite., hut you cannot shut it. Answer : Palm-nut, when 
once broken it cannot be mended. 2. My mother made a farm 
cmd threw up two heaps. Answer ; Sun and moon. 3. A little 
branch but a hundred pigeons feed on it. Answer : Market, 

' Other names for dances are : Ntuta, Kinkubula, Nkomho, Makuta, 
Ngwinda, Nzoko, and Manyanga, but these are more or less modifications of 
those already mentioned, or mere local names for dances with a slightly 
different movement. 

134 

JUNGLE STORIES 

which is small in size but has a lot of people on it. 4. They 
are not by the same mother but their names are aliTce. Answer : 
Lunguba-nguba ( = small wild peanuts), and nguba ( = ordinary 
cultivated peanuts). 5. A dead twig carries that which has life. 
Answer: Wine-gatherer's hoop, by which he walks, or climbs, 
up the palm tree. 

Another amusement for around the fire is the telling of 
jungle stories in which animals speak and act as human beings, 
and express the wisdom and craftiness of the tribe in word and 
deed. These stories are told with much dramatic action, and 
the movements of the animals speaking are often imitated. 
In the book ^ already referred to, the writer has given an 
account of the stories, and examples of forty of them ; and as 
an illustration of them he transcribes one of them here, 

“ I. How THE Sparrow set the Elephant and the Crocodile 

TO PULL AGAINST EACH OTHER 

“ While the Elephant was searching for food one day he 
happened to pass near a Sparrow’s nest, and accidentally knock- 
ing against the branch, he nearly threw the eggs to the ground. 
The Sparrow thereupon said to the Elephant : 

‘“You walk very proudly, and not looking where you are 
going ; you nearly upset my nest. If you come this w'ay again 
I will tie you up.’ 

“‘Truly you are a little bird,’ the Elephant laughingly 
replied, ‘ and are you able to tie up me — an Elephant ’ 

“ ‘ Indeed,’ the Sparrow answered him, ‘ if you come this 
way to-morrow, I will bind you.’ 

“ ‘ All right,’ said the Elephant. ‘ I will now pass on, and 
will come back here to-morrow to look upon the strength of a 
Sparrow.’ So the Elephant went his way, and the Sparrow 
flew off' to bathe in a neighbouring river. 

“ On reaching the river, and finding a Crocodile asleep at 
her favourite bathing-place, the Sparrow said : ‘ Wake up ! 
this is my bathing-place, and if you come here again, I will 
tie you up.’ 

' Congo Life and Folklore, pp. 361-463. John H. Weeks. Religious 
Tract Society, 1911. 

JUNGLE STORIES 135 

“ ‘ Can a little Sparrow like you tie up a Crocodile ? ’ the 
Crocodile asked her. 

“ ‘ It is true what I tell you,’ retorted the Sparrow, ‘ and 
if you return here to-morrow I will fasten you up.’ 

« ‘ Very well,’ replied the Crocodile, ‘ I will come to- 
morrow to see what you can do.’ And with that the Crocodile 
floated away, and the Sparrow returned to her nest. 

“ The next day the Sparrow, seeing the Elephant coming, said 
to him, ‘ Yesterday I told you not to come this way again, because 
you endangered my nest. Now I will tie you I warned you.’ 

“ ‘ All right,” said the Elephant. ‘ I want to see what a 
little thing like yon can do.’ 

“ The Sparrow then brought a strong vine rope, and putting 
it round the neck of the Elephant, she said to him, ‘ Wait a 
moment while I go and have a drink of water, and then you 
will see how strong I am.’ To which the Elephant replied, 
‘ Go and drink plenty of water, for to-day I want to see what 
a Sparrow can do.’ So the Sparrow went and found the 
Crocodile basking in the sun on the river’s bank. 

“ ‘ Oh ! you are here again,’ she said. ‘ I will tie you up 
as I warned you yesterday, because you do not listen to what 
you are told.’ ‘Very well,’ sneered the Crocodile, ‘ come and 
tie me up and I will see what strength you have.’ 

“ The Sparrow took the other end of the rope and tied 
it round the Crocodile, and said, ‘ Wait a moment, I will go 
a little higher up the hill and pull.’ So away she flew up the 
hill on to a tree, and from there she cried out, ‘ Pull Elephant, 
pull Crocodile. It is I, the Sparrow.’ So the Elephant pulled, 
and the Crocodile pulled, and each thought he was pulling 
against the Sparrow ; not knowing they were pulling against 
each other. All day long they pulled, until the evening, but 
neither outpulled the other. And during the whole day the 
Sparrow was crying out, ‘ Pull, Elephant, you have the strength ; 
pull harder. Elephant.’ And in the same way she addressed 
the Crocodile. 

“ At last the Crocodile said, ‘ Friend Sparrow, I cannot 
pull any more ; come and unfasten me, and I will never come 
to your bathing-place again.’ 

136 

JUNGLE STORIES 

“ ‘ Wait a little while,’ replied the Sparrow ; ‘ I am going 
up to my village.’ And the Elephant said as she drew 
near, ‘ Now I know you are very strong. Please come and 
undo me, and I will never come again to shake your nest.’ 
So the Sparrow loosened the Elephant, and then went and 
removed the rope from the Crocodile’s neck ; and from that 
time the SpaiTow has never been ti’oubled by either the 
Elephant or the Crocodile.” 

The following three stories have not been published before, 
and are illustrative of native thought. There are probably 
no true gazelles in Africa, but the name gazelle is more sug- 
gestive of the small, gentle, timid creature called by the natives 
nsexi than the name antelope would be, hence I have used 
gazelle as a translation of the word nsexi. 

II. The Gazelle punishes the Leopard for Greediness 

One day the Gazelle and the Leopard went for a walk 
through a forest in search of palm-grubs. As they were 
passing down one of the paths they saw a fine bunch of 
palm-nuts, and the Leopard said, “Friend Gazelle, wait here 
while I climb the tree and cut down the nuts.” 

With his strong, sharp claws the Leopard soon mounted 
the palm tree and found there three bunches of ripe nuts, but 
instead of cutting them down, he sat on a frond and began to 
eat them. 

By and by the Gazelle shouted out, “ Throw me down 
some of the nuts.” And to this request the Leopard replied, 
“ When I am eating palm-nuts I cannot hear anything.” 

The Gazelle waited a little time, and then called out again. 
“ Please throw me some of the nuts, for I have hoofs and 
cannot climb a tree like you.” But the Leopard ate on greedily, 
and took no notice of his friend’s request. 

The Gazelle went and gathered some firewood and grass, 
and made a large fire at the bottom of the palm tree. In a 
short time, the Leopard cried out, “ Uncle Gazelle, put out 
your fire ; the heat and smoke are choking me.” The Gazelle, 
however, answered him, .saying, “ When I am warming myself 

JUNGLE STORIES 

137 

by the fire I cannot hear anything ” ; and he threw some more 
wood and grass on the fire. The Leopard, choking, lost his grip 
on the tree, and fell to the ground dead. The Gazelle returned 
to the town and took possession of all the Leopard’s goods. 

III. n L'he Gazelle and the Leopard go to 
Market together 

One day the Leopard found a market where peanuts were 
in great demand, and the price given allowed of a large profit. 
But this market was always held very early in the morning, 
and there was a law that anyone who brought charcoal on to 
the market would be put to death. The Leopard returned at 
once to his town, and bought up a large quantity of peanuts, 
which he tied into a load ready for carrying to the market. 
When all was ready he asked the Antelope (mpalanga) to 
go with him, and upon the Antelope consenting to do so, the 
Leopard collected a lot of charcoal and tied it up in a bundle 
to resemble the load of peanuts. 

The next morning the Leopard gave the heavy load of 
peanuts to the Antelope, and carried the light load of charcoal 
himself. That night they reached the town quite near to the 
market, where the people gave them a large quantity of palm 
wine to drink. The Leopard said, “ Friend Antelope, we 
will drink all the palm wine, and then we shall sleep well.” 
And he supplied his friend with wine, but took very little 
himself. At last they went into the house to sleep, and when 
the Leopard saw that the Antelope was fast asleep, he changed 
the loads, putting his own in place of the Antelope’s. 

In the morning they started early for the market, each 
picking up his load from the places they had put them over- 
night. On reaching the market the Leopard opened out his 
peanuts and quickly sold them. While he was selling them 
the Antelope wanted to open out his bundle also, but the 
Leopard stopped him, saying, “ Wait until I have sold mine, 
then sell yours.” 

By and by the Antelope opened his bundle and out fell the 
charcoal. Directly the people on the market saw the charcoal 
they ran on the Antelope, tied him up, and prepared to kill 

138 

JUNGLE STORIES 

him. The Leopard said to them, “ You will give me the 
head, for it belongs to me.” The head was cut off and given to 
the Leopard, who after eating it returned to his town. When 
he arrived there they asked him, “ Where is your companion 
who went with you to the market ? ” “ He got stealing on the 

market,” replied the Leopard, “ and the people killed him.” 
Each time the Leopard visited the market he returned with- 
out his companion, for he played the same trick on everyone, 
until at last all in the town were afraid to go with him. One 
day the Leopard went to the Gazelle, and said to him, “ Uncle 
Gazelle, will you go with me to sell peanuts at the market.^” 

“ No,” replied the Gazelle, “ for I have plenty of work 
to do.” 

The Leopard, however, would not take his refusal, but said, 
“Please, Uncle Gazelle, go with me, and we shall be back in two 
or three days, and you can then finish your work.” So the 
Gazelle promised to accompany the Leopard to the market. 

When they started the Leopard gave the Gazelle the 
bundle of peanuts to carry, and at first he would not carry 
them, but wanted the other load. The Leopard, however, 
assured him that his load was too heavy for him -to carry, and 
they began their journey. About noon they reached a stream, 
and the Gazelle proposed that they should have a swim. The 
bundles were put down by the side of the road, and they went 
along the bank of the stream, and found a good pool. 

The Gazelle said, “ Uncle Leopard, I am going to dive into 
the water ; you count and see how long I am under the water.” 
“ All right, I will count,” replied the Leopard. The'Gazelle 
dived, and then walked along under the water to where the 
bundles were placed, and undoing the Leopard’s load, he saw 
the charcoal in it; quickly tying it up again he returned to 
where he had left the Leopard. “ Oh ! Oh ! ” said the Leopard, 
“ you know how to dive.” 

They reached the town where they were to sleep, and 
the people welcomed them, and gave them plenty of palm 
wine. “ Uncle Gazelle,” said the Leopard, “ let us drink it 
all, and then we shall sleep soundly.” “ Very well,” replied the 
Gazelle; and they each pretended to drink deeply, and at 

JUNGLE STORIES 

139 

sunset they ate their food and went into the house to sleep. 
In a very little time the Gazelle snored loudly, and the 
Leopard, hearing the snores, got up and changed the bundles ; 
but the Gazelle saw him out of his half-shut eyes. He waited 
a long time until he was sure the Leopard was asleep, and then 
he changed the bundles again. 

In the morning they awoke early and went to the market, 
the Leopard thinking all the time that the Gazelle had the 
bundle of charcoal. On arriving at the market the Gazelle 
opened his bundle at once and sold all his peanuts. When 
the Leopard saw the peanuts he commenced to quake with 
fear, and did not want to open his bundle ; but the people 
wished for peanuts so badly that they insisted on him opening 
his load, and selling his peanuts. They said, “ Why do you 
bring peanuts to market, and then want to carry them away 
again ? ” and in anger they took the bundle from him and 
opened it, and out fell the charcoal. They jumped on the 
Leopard, tied him up, cut off his head, and gave it to the 
Gazelle, who then returned to his town, and told the people 
there all that had happened to him on the road, and how the 
Leopard had been the cause of many of their friends being 
killed at the market because of his treacherous trick ; and 
they all rejoiced at the Leopard’s death. 

IV. The Monkey and the Leopard’s Daughter 

There was once in the forest a Leopard, whose daughter 
was the most beautiful in all the country. She was a good 
hunter, very fleet of foot, and her marks were very bright and 
clear. All the animals wished to marry her, but the old 
Leopard wanted to keep her skill for himself; he therefore 
refused all offers for his daughter, until the animals all came 
to him and insisted that he should set a test, and let the 
winner marry the daughter. 

The Leopard then divided some land into equal-sized 
patches, and said that his daughter should be the wife of the 
one who could eat everything green in a patch between the 
sunrise and sunset of one day. 

On the appointed day all the animals gathered to watch 

140 

JUNGLE STORIES 

the one who desired to try first for the beautiful Leopard. 
The first to make the attempt was a small Antelope, but he 
tripped round the patch, and ate daintily the youngest and 
tenderest tips only of the shoots ; and by the end of the day 
no one could see that any animal had been feeding on it. 

The next to try was a Goat, and though he could eat 
almost anything, even he failed to clear the patch. Then 
came the wild Pig, and he ate very greedily and made a big 
clearance along one side of the patch. He ate and grunted 
until he could not stand, and then he laid down and ate, 
but he had to stop before the patch was cleai-ed. The Elephant 
then took his turn, and although he could tear up the grass by 
the roots, he also failed to eat everything green on his patch. 

The animals were going away in anger from the old 
Leopard, who was jeering them because they had failed to win 
his daughter, when a little blue-faced Monkey sprang forward 
and said, “Please, Uncle Leopard, let me try.” All the 
animals forgot their anger, and began to laugh at the Monkey 
for thinking he could succeed where they had all failed. The 
Leopard, however, consented to his having a try for the great 
prize. “ I am always a thirsty little animal,” said the Monkey, 
“ so to-morrow when I am eating my patch you will let me go 
and drink water .^” He looked so small, and it seemed so 
impossible for him to win, that they assented to his request. 

Next morning the crowd of animals gathered to see the 
Monkey eat ; but during the night the Monkey had gone 
through the forest collecting all his friends and relatives, and 
hiding them near the place of trial. As the sun rose the 
Monkey began to eat his patch, and after a time he went off to 
the stream for a drink, and one of his friends took his place in 
the patch. This continued all day long — as soon as one 
Monkey was full he went to drink water, and another took his 
place, and as the sun was getting very near to the ground the 
Monkey ate the last blades of grass and leaves, and was pro- 
claimed the winner of the beautiful Leopard as his wife. He 
married her and took her away to his town. 

CHAPTER XIII 

COURTSHIP AND MARRIAGE ^ 

The young man in search of a wife must observe certain 
customs regulating his choice. He must not marry any 
of his father’s wives ; or his sister ; or his maternal 
cousins ; or his maternal nieces ; or the children of his sister ; 
or his wife’s sister, either before or after his wife’s death ; or 
his mother-in-law ; or his niece’s step-mother ; or his step- 
sister, for by the marriage of his father with his step-sister’s 
mother they have become brother and sister ; or his own 
children. Among those not within the degree of prohibition 
are second cousins, and the daughter of his daughter, and the 
reason for the latter is that she belongs to her mother’s family 
and not to his family. Where father-right exists the degrees 
of affinity and prohibition are very similar to our own ; but 
where mother-right is strictly observed, as on the Lower 
Congo, the degrees of affinity are closer and more extensive on 
the mother’s side than on the father’s. The maternal relative 
he must not marry, he is allowed to marry, if she is only a 
paternal one. There is no hard and fast rule, but it is 
generally understood that the sons and daughters of one clan 
should marry the daughters and sons of one other clan only, 
and not intermarry with several different clans. By thus inter- 
marrying within the limits of one clan they think better 
treatment is ensured for the women of each clan. 

Observing the above limitations, the young man who wants 
to marry is not restricted in his choice to the women of his 
own town or clan, but is free to select whom he likes. Having 
set his heart on a certain girl, he is not allowed to speak to 
her, or offer her any presents ; but to gain her, the first thing 

See Appendix, Note III, p. 306, for list of kinship terms. 

Ill 

142 

THE UNCLE 

he has to do is to take a calabash of palm wine to the girl’s 
maternal uncle (ngudi a nkazi), and mention to him the desire 
of his heart. Should the uncle listen favourably to his suit, 
he thanks the young man for the wine, and drinks it ; but this 
does not pledge him in any way to give him his niece in 
marriage, it is simply a sign of goodwill. Having drunk the 
wine, the uncle sets food and drink before the young man, and 
without giving him a decided answer, he tells him to return on 
a stated day. 

On the appointed day the young man, carrying more palm 
wine, revisits the girl’s uncle, who having drunk the wine states 
whether he is willing or not for him to marry his niece. 
Should he be willing he informs the aspirant to his niece’s 
hand that he wants, as marriage money, 100, 200, or more 
packets of blue pipe beads, according to the position of the 
girl’s family and the suitor’s wealth (in a packet there are 
one hundred strings of one hundred beads each, costing about 
two shillings).^ This is a guarantee that the girl will be properly 
ti’eated. The word to marry is sompa— to borrow, to hire, 
and this is the essence of the contract ; the man borrows or 
hires the woman, and in return for the use of the woman he 
lends, on his part, a certain amount of money to the woman’s 
family. One of the results of such a contract is that their in- 
terests are rarely identical. The amount demanded as marriage 
money is often haggled over and reduced ; but she is a proud 
girl for whom a larger sum than usual is paid. 

The man now counts over such wealth as he has in hand, 
applies to his family to help him, and sets about trading, 
working, &c. to make up the deficiency ; and when some 
months later the uncle is informed that the marriage money 
is ready, either in beads or their equivalent in goats, pigs, 
powder, cloth, &c., he takes some palm wine and goes to the 

‘ About 1855 Nlemvo’s father paid only fifty-five small, oval-shaped, 
red beads for his wife (Nlemvo’s mother). Such heads were then very 
scarce and dear, but are now only worth ten a penny. In 1883 a woman 
cost about thirty pieces of cloth, worth 2s. 6d. invoice price, and 6». at 
San Salvador. 

Lent by Rev.J. L. For/eiti 

Locust Eatint; a Mouse 

The locusts had swept the district of Ngangila clean of vegetation, and then becoming hungry 
they starred on insects, etc., and this locust was found with a mouse in its mandibles. I'he original 
is in the Hritish Museum. 

THE MARRIAGE MONEY 

143 

young man’s town to count the marriage money. This is not 
done without much chaffering about the value in beads of the 
goats, pigs, &c., but being satisfactorily accomplished a day is 
fixed for introducing the girl’s father to his future son-in-law ; 
and on that occasion both the uncle and the father take cala- 
bashes of palm wine to the suitor, who, calling his friends as 
witnesses, they all drink first the uncle’s wine, and then the 
father’s, after which the marriage money is paid, and the 
father, receiving his small portion, drops entirely out of all 
subsequent proceedings. So far as the uncle, the father, and 
the intending bridegroom are concerned the marriage arrange- 
ments are completed ; but they cannot be consummated until 
the mother gives her consent. If the mother thinks that the 
girl is not old enough, i.e. that her daughter’s breasts are not 
properly formed, she withholds her permission. The girl may 
cook and take food to her intended husband, but if he commits 
fornication with her, without the consent of her family, he 
forfeits all the money he has paid on her account, and no chief 
will take his side to justify or help him. The people use a 
proverb respecting this kind of fornication : “ The sugar- 
canes are rotten at the roots,” ix. the man is bad at heart. 

The man seeking to marry soon, finds it wise to conciliate 
the girl’s mother, and gain her consent with small presents, 
and much show of respectful deference ; otherwise, although he 
will eventually receive the girl for whom he has paid the 
marriage money, he will have in his mother-in-law a termagant 
whose spiteful tongue will quickly destroy his domestic peace, 
for by her constant nagging she will set her daughter against 
him. While investigating domestic quarrels I have again and 
again traced them to the mother-in-law, and then by further 
inquiry it has come to light that the primary cause was that 
the man was disrespectful to his future mother-in-law, and had 
not recognised her by small, dutiful gifts. 

A woman is not permitted to break her engagement of 
marriage with a man. Should she, after betrothal, exhibit a 
strong desire to resist the wishes of her family, they will tie 
her up and send her bound to her husband. If, however, she 

144 THE FIANCEE 

wins them over, they can break off the engagement by return- 
ing the marriage money, and by paying one or two pigs as a 
fine. Should the man desire to break off negotiations, he must 
forfeit what he has paid on account, and also pay a fine of a 
pig or goat, according to his circumstances, to the chief of the 
girl’s town. In the San Salvador district there were two girls 
who were betrothed to be married to two men in the neigh- 
bourhood. When the giiTs mother was dying she called her 
son, their brother, and told him that if ever he left the district 
he was to take his sisters with him. By and by he wanted to 
live in the Ngombe Lutete district, about five day’s journey 
from his home, so he called the two men and offered to return 
the marriage money they had paid, but as they refused to ac- 
cept it he had to obtain two other women and give them to 
the men as substitutes for his sisters, and with each woman he 
gave a pig, which was called “ changing the name.” 

Just before marriage the man will ask his fiancee how 
many men she has been with since her betrothal. The number 
of men before her engagement does not count. She may deny 
that she has slept with any, but no one will believe her, and, 
if she persists in the denial, he will threaten to test her by the 
“ ordeal of the bracelet ” (see page 264). She will then confess 
that she has been, say, with five men. The man, thereupon, 
goes to the girl’s family and complains that they have not 
looked properly after her, for their daughter confesses that she 
has slept with five different men, whose names are So-and-so. 
The family calls these men, and if they acknowledge the truth- 
fulness of the girl’s statement they are mulct in a fine ranging 
from five to twenty-five shillings in beads or their equivalent. 
If they repudiate the charge as false they are compelled, by 
public opinion, to drink the “ nkasa ” ordeal, and thus prove 
their innocence. In charges of this kind a woman’s word is 
always taken before a man’s ; and there is no redress for the 
man under such an accusation except to take the ordeal, and if 
it pi'oves him guiltless, he can claim heavy compensation from 
his accusers. 

Among fairly well-to-do and rich families there is genei*ally 

THE WEDDING FEAST 

145 

a pretence of taking the wife by force. When all is settled the 
bridegroom goes on the appointed day with a few of his male 
friends to the bride’s town ; and as they draw near they fire 
guns, shout, and make as great a noise as possible. This is an 
indication of the bridegroom’s importance, and a method of 
honouring the bride. On arrival at the girl’s house there is 
a sham struggle, and at last the girl is carried off kicking, 
screaming, and protesting. This is what is called carrying, or 
lifting the woman {nata nkento). On reaching his own town, 
the bridegroom tells the young men to fetch the drums and 
plenty of palm wine. The festivities last from two days to a 
week, according to the wealth of the bridegroom ; great crowds 
gather, much wine is drunk, many goats and pigs are killed and 
eaten, and there is a frequent firing of guns. The bride goes 
without food on the day before her marriage ; and the new wife 
must not eat in the presence of her husband for three or four 
months ; and even after this time has passed a woman rarely 
eats before her husband, but takes her food round the corner 
out of sight of the male members of her family, and eats it 
either by herself, or with the other women and girls, and the 
male children that are not old enough to eat with the men. 
In fact men and youths consider it beneath their dignity to eat 
with women and girls. 

When the festivities are over, and the guests have gone, 
the elders meet and give the girl into jthe hands of the new 
husband, and they instruct them both in the presence of 
witnesses. To the woman, they say : “You are to respect 
your husband and his family, and you are to behave properly 
in your house.” Then turning to the man they say: “You 

are to respect your wife and her family ; you must not speak 
harshly to her, nor treat her as a slave, nor stamp on her 
things, nor tread her beneath your feet.” And speaking again 
to the woman, they continue thus: “And you woman, you 
have never had thieving or witch-palavers in the past, continue 
without them, and conduct yourselves properly towards each 
other.” 

Thereupon the man goes to one of the witnesses, and taking 

K 

146 

THE CEREMONY 

him by the wrist, he rubs a bullet on the palm of the witness’s 
hand, and says : “ I have heard all the words spoken, and if I 
destroy the marriage, may I die by this bullet.” The woman 
also takes the same oath. When this ceremony is completed 
the elders enter the house of the newly-married couple to 
arrange the hearthstones, and to teach the bride concerning 
her duties as a wife ; and also to see if the bridegroom is able 
to consummate the marriage ; and should he be unable, the 
marriage is broken off and the money returned. Sometimes, 
on account of the shame, the marriage is not dissolved, but the 
husband finds a suitable young man and permits him to have 
intercourse with his wife, and should there be a child it is 
treated by the husband as his own. After instructing the bride 
and her husband the girl’s relatives are sent ofi' with all due 
respect and with suitable presents. When the wife gives birth 
to a child the father at once informs her family. It must be 
remembered that where mother-right prevails the whole purpose 
of the marriage arrangements is to increase the woman’s family, 
not the man’s, and anything that helps to the attainment of this 
object is sanctioned, and, on the other hand, everything that 
stands in the way is used as a reason for bi’eaking off the marriage. 

The above describes the ordinary course that the marriage 
negotiations take when a girl either likes the man, or, thinking 
that one man is as good as another, treats the affair with 
indifference. A man can generally tell whether or not he is 
acceptable to the woman upon whom he has set his heart ; but 
should he have any doubt on the matter, or if he is desirous of 
an intrigue with a married woman, he goes to a medicine-man 
(of the mbumba order; mbumba—secT&t, mystery, magic), and 
buys a love philtre. The medicine-man takes a bit of fowl’s 
claw, a piece of a certain shrub, a part of a particular kind of 
water reed that has a I'oot with a turpentine odour {nsaku- 
nsaku), a piece of a large Calabar-like bean (ngongo), and some 
seeds of a small gourd ; these ingredients he pounds and mixes 
well together, and puts into a bottle of palm wine and hands 
to his client, who takes the first opportunity of giving a portion 
secretly to the woman whose love he desires. If she drinks it, 

POLYGAMY 

147 

she will leave all to follow the man who paid for its prepara- 
tion. The women have no love-philtre to attract the love of 
the men they want. 

A man may marry as many women as he can find the 
marriage money for. By marrying several women he expects 
to receive some profit from his share of his daughters’ marriage 
monies ; and as will be seen below, the wife is always worth 
another woman, if she dies, or the money paid for her, and then 
if she has daughters there is a share of their marriage money ; 
so a man in marrying stands to gain considerably, and lose 
nothing. While the man can have as many women as he can 
afford, the woman, however, can have only one man; and if 
another man commits adultery with her, he has to pay a heavy 
fine to her husband. Around San Salvador the husband keeps 
the fine ; but in other parts the fine is divided between the 
husband and his relatives. If the woman is sterile the man can 
return her, and he receives either another woman from her 
family, or his marriage money is returned. Mutual recrimina- 
tions on this subject is the cause of much unhappiness among 
the maiTied folk on the Lower Congo ; but on the Upper 
Congo, where father-right is the rule and other views of child- 
bearing prevail, the matter is treated with indifference. 

A woman on the Congo is the best gilt-edged security in 
which a man can invest his surplus wealth. Pigs, goats, and 
fowls may die, slaves run away, speculations in trading expedi- 
tions may prove a failure, and thus he loses his money ; but he 
rarely if ever loses the money he has invested in a wife. 
Should she die he takes a calabash of palm wine and going to 
her family, %.e. to her maternal uncle’s family, he informs them 
of the death, and demands another wife in the place of the 
deceased. If the family has not another woman free for this 
purpose then the marriage money must be returned in full ; 
but in making up the sum the woman’s father does not return 
the share he received, and the amount is collected without his 
help. Arising out of this custom is a proverb running thus 
“ The father ‘ eats ’ the money, but the uncle pays it,” i.e. One 
has the pleasure, but another bears the trouble. 

148 

A LOAN 

Should, however, the husband die first, his family takes the 
woman and she becomes the wife of one of his brothers ; if she 
afterwards dies the one who has her for wife goes with a calabash 
of palm wine to her maternal uncle, and asks for another wife, 
or failing that the marriage money, paid by the deceased 
brother, must be returned in full. This woman, or her 
marriage money, is the inheritance he has received from his 
dead brother. A second woman can be demanded on the death 
of the first, and a third woman on the death of the second, but 
after the third woman dies all further claims die wdth her. 
Of course, if the money is returned in full on the death of the 
first wife, the contract is finished. The reason for these 
demands is that the children of the wife do not belong to the 
husband, but to the wife’s family, and he has been breeding 
children to increase another family than his own. He has 
lent his money simply as a guarantee of good treatment of the 
woman loaned to him, and from her death it is apparent that 
she was not a sound article, therefore she must be replaced, or 
the goods lent on her returned in full. If afterwards it is proved 
that she died by witchcraft, that is not his affair ; she and her 
family should have protected her properly by charms, and the 
employment of an efficient witch-doctor. A husband is not 
responsible for keeping his wife in good health ; he neither pays 
for her charms, her medicines, or her “doctor’s” bill. She 
does not belong to him, but is only loaned to rear children 
for her family. This aspect of the marital relationship is 
apparent from the following custom : When a woman be- 
comes emeinte her family forbids all further intercourse with 
her until she has weaned the child — a period of three or four 
years — and then they take a calabash of wine to the husband, 
and renew their permission. They believe that intercourse 
during this period will harm the child, and dry up the supply 
of milk, so that the baby will die from lack of proper nourish- 
ment. 

When a slave woman, whose owner belongs to one clan, is 
married into another clan, she and her children do not belong 
to the latter clan, for, it is said, “ The clan name is not sold 

SLAVE WOMEN 

149 

with the fee paid for the woman.” At any time the children 
can return to their mother’s owner’s clan, and take up their 
privileges of clanship. Such childi-en are called ana akwa 
Kinlaza {Kinlaza being the name of the clan) ; but children born 
of a free woman of the Kinlaza clan are known as esi Kinlaza. 
Just as a free woman’s children belong to her brother, so a 
slave woman’s offspring — when she is married and not sold — 
belongs to her master, who occupies in regard to her the same 
position as a brother to a free woman. 

A suckling baby is not charged for when its slave mother 
is sold. If the price of a slave woman is 70^. and she has a 
babe at her breast no extra money is given for her. “ You 
cannot buy a woman’s milk ” is the reason given for not paying 
any extra price. When the child is old enough, it may return 
to its father if it likes, but the father has no claim upon the 
child. The same rule is observed in the selling of sheep, pigs, 
and goats with suckling young ; no extra sum is charged, but 
a man having such for sale would wait until the young one was 
old enough to leave its mother. The child of a slave mother, 
even by a free father, is a slave, and goes with the property ; 
but the offspring of a free woman by a slave father is free, and 
shares any property, because the family is counted through the 
mother. 

Is there much, or any, happiness in these polygamous 
marriages? I have watched them closely for many years, I 
have frequently in my capacity of impartial adviser had to 
listen to the stories of their domestic discords, and recurring 
quarrels, and for one really happy union there are ninety-nine 
unhappy ones. There is in many cases a passion for a time, 
but it quickly burns out, and then the man and woman are 
fortunate if they can tolerate each other, and cross one another’s 
path in the family round without constant bickering and 
nagging. When one or the other is meek and submissive the 
union remains in force until death severs the bonds ; but when 
both the man and the woman are strong-willed and obstinate 
the tolerant spirit disappears, and a snarling, cat-and-dog life 
is the result. Where the woman’s family has money to spare 

150 

UNHAPPY MARRIAGES 

they step in, and paying back the marriage money with an 
extra sum as interest, they release the woman from her miser- 
able position. As a rule, in these marriages, there is no affec- 
tion to begin with, and generally a lack of that mutual respect 
that might help them to bear with one another, hence in ninety- 
nine of these marriages out of a hundred there is an absence of 
all that we understand by domestic felicity. They are ignorant 
of anything better, and the majority of the women and the 
men stolidly accept things as they are concerning their marital 
relationship. The Christian Church, however, has introduced 
monogamy as a rule of membership, and this has opened up a 
new vista to the Congo women ; and as they have looked 
upon the life of these monogamous homes, there has been re- 
vealed to them the vision of a happier home life, and a 
pleasanter marital relationship. 

In a former work,^ I fully discuss the relation of polygamy 
to morality and child-bearing, and it is not necessary to repeat 
here about the Lower Congo people what I there stated while 
writing of the Upper Congo, for I then had the people as a 
whole in mind ; but since writing that work, I have come 
across Junod’s book,^ and I find from his careful and extensive 
study of polygamy among the Thonga tribe he fully confirms 
my view that polygamy does not tend to morality, nor does it 
make for large families. 

* See Among Congo Cannibals, p. 134 et seq., published by Seeley, 
Service & Co., for a full discussion of this question. 

^ Life of a South African Tribe, p. 273, by Henri A. Junod. 

I 

CHAPTER XIV 

SALUTATIONS, BLESSINGS, AND CURSES 

The Congo people are very punctilious in their greetings 
of each other, and any carelessness either in saluting or 
responding is considered rude and discourteous in the 
extreme, and is consequently resented. To greet is monana — 
to see one another, or Tcayisa=io welcome. 

On meeting the question is asked, “ Have you slept ? ” 
{plele kwaku e and the answer is, “ I have slept” (ndele 
kwame) ; or, “ Have you eaten ? ” (odidi kwaku e f), and the 
suitable answer is, “ I have eaten ” {ndidi kwame). The tone 
and emphasis put on the interrogative particle e indicates the 
amount of goodwill and friendliness existing between the 
persons thus greeting. Sometimes the equivalent of “ good ” 
(kwambote) is introduced into both the question and answer, 
but it scarcely takes the place of the amount of feeling that 
can be put into the e of interrogation. Occasionally as a greet- 
ing, especially to white folk, a mongrel “Good morning” is 
heard expressed thus, “ Morning good ” (mene mene ambote) ; 
but it is not so natural and pleasing as the proper native greet- 
ings, and is not encouraged by those who desire to maintain 
all that is best in native customs and ways. 

On parting, those leaving say, “ Abide well ” {sola kiabiza), 
and those staying behind respond, “ Go well ” (wenda kiabiza) ; 
but women on bidding adieu to men and to women use in the 
place of kiabiza a word (miangana) that means prettiness, smart- 
ness, niceness. Hence their way of saying “ Abide well,” and 
“ Go well ” is sala miangana, and nda miangana. Those who 
are leaving the village for a journey, or returning to their 
homes in another village, go round to their friends and ac- 
quaintances to bid them farewell (kanina), and those whose 

151 

152 

SALUTATIONS 

friends are leaving “ send them straight ” (xindiJca), and if 
they are desirous of showing special courtesy to the departing 
ones they escort them on the road {Jila mu njila). If it is 
evening, the farewell phrase is, “ Remain, and sleep well ” {sala^ 
leha Jciabiza), and the response is, “ Go, and sleep well ” (wenda, 
leka kiabiza). To sleep well is regarded as a sign of good 
health, and to eat is also an indication of the same. 

Men on returning from a journey, or on a visit to the town, 
are greeted with “ We welcome you” (tukayisi), or “ We bless 
you” (tusambwidi), and the reply is a very respectful, “Yes, 
sir ” (ingeta, or inga). Sometimes the greeting will be, “ We see 
each other ” {tumonana), when each person will clap three times. 
No answer is given to a greeting that is considered to be im- 
pertinent. When strangers or young friends pass one another 
on the road a jocular greeting is given, which is equal to 
“ Divide up, give something” (nukayd), and is a joking way of 
saying, “ Stand and deliver.” To this there are several answers, 
such as, “ I have nothing in my bag or I would give it to you ” ; 
or, “ If you eat an antelope save me the skin.” To a jocular 
use of “ We bless you” (tusambwidi) the equally joking answer 
is given, “ I am on the tip of a palm frond”; and a laughing 
reply to a woman’s greeting of, “ We wish you prettiness ” 
(tumiangana) is, “ I have not anointed myself with palm oil, 
or I might look pretty.” 

When an ordinary man goes into the presence of the King 
of Kongo, he kneels on the ground at three points, at the en- 
trance to the courtyard, at the door of the “ palace,” and im- 
mediately in front of the King inside the house. The King 
can see each of the former positions from his seat in the palace. 
At the last place the man claps (sakila nkoji) four times. The 
first clap (bimba mbimbu) is to call attention to himself and 
to the fact that he is about to render homage (kunda) to his 
majesty. He then puts the palms of his hands together, rubs 
his two little fingers on the ground (xika o ntoto), and with 
them makes a dirt mark (sono) on his forehead, temples, nose or 
lips, and claps his hands three times ; this ceremony he repeats 
three times. And to each series of three claps the King re- 

AT COURT 

153 

spends by laying his right hand across the palm of his left, 
palm to palm, so that the four fingers of the right hand are well 
above the side of the left hand, and those four fingers he waves 
to and fro. This indicates the acceptance of the homage 
{tambula e hensawu) by the King ; but if the man has displeased 
him in some small way, or is a mere nohody, the King will 
simply extend one hand and wave the fingers in a careless, in- 
different fashion. The man, receiving such disrespectful notice 
of his homage, will carefully review his actions to find out 
wherein he has offended his majesty, and he will perhaps re- 
member that he made certain profits on a trading journey, or a 
business transaction, and had forgotten to send the King a share 
— the matter is quickly and wisely remedied. Should the King 
for some big reason resent the homage being paid to him, he 
will thrust out his foot and move his toes as a sign of his anger, 
and for the man who sees the King’s toes move instead of his 
fingers, the sooner he removes himself out of the King’s pre- 
sence, and the greater distance he goes, the better it will be for 
his health, unless he is able to send an exceedingly large present 
to appease the wrath of the King.^ 

Slaves and very common people will go through the form 
of paying homage at each of the three places at which they 
kneel as they approach the King ; and even an ordinary man 
will do it, if he thinks that by this extra show of servility he 
can ingratiate himself with the King. Chiefs and nobles will 
sometimes make a perfunctory show of paying homage by a 
kind of bow as they approach him, and then sitting down in 
front of him and rubbing their fingers in the dirt and clapping. 
His near relatives will sit down and simply clap. His wives 
according to their position, and the degree in which they are 
in his favour, will be more or less ceremonious in the observance 
of the rites of homage. 

When an ordinary man salutes a chief, he performs the 
above ceremony twice only, and the chief answers twice in the 
same manner as the King. To a high noble, who is not the 

' This method of paying homage to the King is mentioned very briefly 
in the chapter on Court Etiquette and Native Functionaries.” 

154 

COMMON SALUTATIONS 

chief of a village or town, the ceremony is observed once only. 
Near relatives of the King may sit on seats, chairs, &c., in his 
presence, but all others must sit on the ground : mats or skins 
are allowed, but nothing that will raise them above the earth. 
Thirty years ago the King would not permit a man to own a 
European chair for use in his own house in the town ; a man 
who exchanged a goat for one with a trader he threatened to 
accuse of witchcraft unless he got rid of the chair, which he 
accordingly did. 

When equals and relatives meet, they clap once only to 
each other, slightly stooping as they do so. It should be 
stated that a native clap is different from our clapping — they 
slightly arch the hands and bring them together across each 
other so that the top of the right thumb is at the base of the 
left thumb, the concussion of the air thus enclosed giving a 
different sound to our smacking when we clap our hands. 
Strangers meeting simply clap hands to each other; and I 
have seen the following salutation between acquaintances : the 
men met and deliberately sat down, they clapped to each other, 
crossed their hands so that the right and left hands of each 
took the right and left hands of the other, they raised^ their 
hands and dropped them loosely. This clapping and touching 
of hands they solemnly repeated three times, and then began 
to talk. 

On saying good-bye to each other, they pretend to spit on 
the forehead and hands of the departing one, and on some 
grass, which after being spat upon, they stick in the hair of 
the beloved one leaving them. The former is to bring good 
luck, and the grass is to keep away evil spirits. 

There are two kinds of spitting: 1. Taulwila nsamhu is to 
spit a blessing, or to express f£ blessing by pretending to spit 
on the beloved one, as a parent on a child, &c. When this is 
done the one who blesses says, “ May you possess all that a 
person should have, may you have blessings and good luck, and 
may your words find favour with the people.” (Ovwa Muma 
kiavwidi muntu^ ovwa nsamhu yo malau^ wata diamhu ditonda 
muntu). This form of blessing is greatly valued by children. 

BIDDING FAREWELL 

155 

but it is not lightly given by the parent. 2. Taulwila mete 
is to expectorate saliva at anyone, and being equal to a curse 
it is bitterly resented by the person spat upon. 

When a number of people are leaving a town to build 
elsewhere, or to live in another village, the folk remaining wish 
them good health, good journey, luck, &c., and finish by 
saying, “ Do not any of you return to bewdtch us.” Those 
leaving reciprocate the good wishes, and wind up with the 
remark, “ Do not any of you follow us to bewitch us.” And 
when a caravan is starting on a trading expedition, the members 
of it say to those left in the town, “ Good health, and let no 
one follow us to give us bad luck in trading,” and those left 
behind reply, “ Good journey, and do not any of you return to 
bewitch us, or carry us to sell to the white trader.” The idea 
underlying these requests is that a living person who is a 
witch (ndoki) can visit a place by his evil spirit (nkwiya), 
and take a person away by witchcraft. The spirit {nkwiya) 
can leave its possessor for evil purposes when he is either asleep 
or awake, and can travel any distance to accomplish its object. 
The shell (evuvu) of the person is left behind while his spirit 
takes the journey. The people in the town, or belonging to 
the caravan, will see the shell — the body, the semblance of the 
man who is a witch — with them, and acting like a human 
being, yet his spirit, they believe, has gone on its evil errand. 
Hence these requests to each other not to be followed and be 
bewitched. 

To curse (^siba) a child or a near relative who is very bad, 
obstinate, or self-willed, the curser cuts off a piece of his own 
cloth, wraps some of his hair in it, and burning the little 
bundle, he says, “ You shall never have children, or you shall 
never become rich.” The children are terribly afraid of these 
curses, and every cut, accident, illness, or bit of bad luck is 
placed to the credit of the curse. Perhaps after a time the 
boy (or girl) alters his conduct, and becoming more amenable 
to his father’s wishes, he expresses a desire to have the curse 
removed. The father puts three small heaps of dust on each 
knee, and as the child kneels down before him, the father says. 

156 

CURSES 

“ I forgive you ; I did not curse you in my heart, but only with 
my tongue, and now from this time have many and strong 
children, and become rich.” The lad shakes or blows off each 
heap of dust from the knees, and the curse is removed. Should 
the father die before the lad wishes to have the curse removed 
he seeks out a namesake of his father, with whom the latter 
was on friendly terms, and taking a fowl to him, he asks him to 
remove the curse, which he does in the way described as though 
he were the father. 

Should a girl want to marry a man of whom her family 
does not approve, or refuses to marry one whom they think 
suitable, and persists in her opposition to their wishes, they 
put a cur.se on her (dia e kandu—eaX a refusal), which is an 
absolute and final refusal to agree with her wishes, and a ban 
or interdiction on her desires ; and such an one is called the 
child of the curse {mwarC a kandu). And here again every bit 
of misfortune that may befall she puts down to the curse that 
is on her. Lads who desire to take a course in opposition to 
their parent’s wishes are also banned by the same curse. We 
have had boys in our Wathen school who have had two or 
three small illnesses, or some nasty knocks while playing at 
hockey (such cuts and wounds were common to all the lads 
playing), who have come to us and said that they were 
“ children of the curse ” as they had come to school against 
the expressed wishes of their parents, and that they would not 
be well, or they would not escape the whacks at hockey, until 
they had returned home, and gained their families’ consent to 
attend school. The same super.stition prevails among adults 
who are persisting in a course opposed either to their family or 
to the wishes of the village folk. 

The most solemn way of cursing a family, a clan, or a town, 
and of promulgating a law is that curse {kandu) pronounced 
at the junction of two roads, and confirmed by rubbing the 
mouth in the dust, and striking the knees with one’s hands. 
No one will risk the terrible misfortune that will follow the 
breaking of a law thus proclaimed ; and any family, clan, or 
town thus cursed will tremble until they either procure its 

A GRAVE INSULT 157 

removal, or secure the services of a great medicine-man to 
nullify its effect. 

To hit or kick against another’s foot in passing, if in- 
tentional, is equal to a curse, and will cause a bad quarrel ; but 
if it is done accidentally the man asks for pardon, and will turn 
round and lightly touch the foot again, to undo, or nullify the 
curse. Hence a person in walking out of a sitting crowd will 
be most careful to avoid, if at all possible, stepping over the 
legs or feet of others. To place one’s hand on the shoulder ot 
another person while rising is also resented as an insult. The 
showing of the sole of the foot to a person is considered ex- 
tremely rude, and to touch another with the sole of the foot is 
bitterly resented. For showing the sole of the feet when sitting 
before a great chief, people have been beaten, enslaved, and 
even killed. Visitors who have been sitting in a town must 
not brush the dust and dirt off' their clothes until they get 
outside the town, as such an action is regarded as putting a 
curse on the town. Among adults, both men and women, 
reviling, abusing, cursing and swearing are very common — the 
women being especially glib with their tongues, and there is a 
wide vocabulary at their disposal. Among boys and girls the 
most common curse is, “ Cry for mother,” which means, “ May 
your mother die and give you cause for mourning.” I have 
seen small hoys maddened by the repetition of such a curse, 
and in their rage they have rushed at hoys twice their size in 
an attempt to fight them for uttering such things about their 
mother. 

CHAPTER XV 

A SECRET SOCIETY— COUNTRY-OF-THE-DEAD 

The raison d'etre for the Congo secret societies is lost in 
the dim and distant past. It may be that they were 
started to hold in check some tyrannical chiefs who 
were oppressing the people, or to give mutual protection to 
their members from the exactions of an upstart class of nobles 
who wished to grind down the common people, or to afford 
their members mutual support against charges of witchcraft 
and the evil designs of witch-doctors, or to rid the country of 
witches, who were regarded as the cause of death, disease, and 
troubles ; or it may be they were organised to render aid to 
their members in their travels about the country for trade and 
other purposes, like some of our present-day guilds in Europe. 
On the other hand, they may have originated from a desire to 
oppress rather than to resist oppression, from a wish to extort 
money from non-members, and to levy illegal tolls on trade 
caravans — as the nkimha guild used to do; or to gain an 
oppoi’tunity to satisfy lustful passions — which opportunity they 
certainly had in the ndenibo society. 

There was cohesion amongst the members of the various 
branches of a society; but not between the members of the 
different societies. Membership in one guild gave no privi- 
leges in another guild. The members of each society were 
called nganga, or “ the knowing ones.” Sometimes there w'as a 
veneer of mystery spread over their actions, their languages, 
and their rites and ceremonies, and in some cases a good deal 
of fetish palaver. With their mysteries I do not think they 
deceived any but themselves, and, if the uninitiated natives 
accepted their statements and recognised their privileges, it was 
from fear and not from faith. The spread of missionary 

158 

NAMES OF THE SOCIETY 

159 

teaching and education, and the opening up of the country by 
the influx of so many white men, have given a fatal death-thrust 
to these guilds, so that one seldom hears of them now, whereas 
twenty-five years ago they were a fruitful subject of con- 
versation. 

It is stated by some travellers that the ndembo and 
nkimha secret societies have to do with circumcision, or 
puberty rites ; but after a careful investigation over a lengthy 
period, and many conversations with members of those guilds, 
I have not found that they have anything to do with either of 
them. 

The first secret is known as either ndembo, or nkita, or 
nsi a fwa. Ndembo is probably a derivative of the verb 
lemba, which means to deliver fx’om the influence of evil 
and from the spells of sorcery. It will be seen that those who 
enter ndembo do so to escape from an epidemic of sickness, or 
to cure themselves of some malformation, or disease, or to have 
their functions restored to a normal condition that will enable 
them to give birth to children. Nkita is a fetish that is re- 
sponsible for all crooked and deformed things. Any abnormal 
event, such as a child being born by presenting its feet first, 
is put to the credit of nkita. Nkita is the power in the 
lodge that can remove deformities, and as infecundity is re- 
garded as abnormal and a deformity, the sterile person, man or 
woman, has only to enter the ndembo lodge to have the disgrace 
removed. This is done by giving the initiated a new body. 
And the third name used for this society is nsi a fwa, and 
means the country-of-the-dead, because those who were initiated 
into it were supposed to die, and remain dead for a period 
varying from six months to three years. 

The ndembo guild was very widespread throughout the 
Lower Congo, but I never met with it anywhere on the Upper 
River. To start a branch of this Society it was necessary to 
have an albino (or some hair of an albino), who, whether a child, 
lad, or an adult, was the acknowledged fetish head of it. 
Failing an albino then the hair of such was procured, and the 
part was supposed to have the magical powers of the whole, or, 

160 REASONS FOR STARTING A LODGE 

to state it, perhaps, more fairly, the presence of the albino’s 
hair in the lodge was to the natives a guarantee that the magi- 
cal, curative powers of the albino were really present. The 
doctors of the nTcau order were at the head of the lodges be- 
longing to this secret society. 

The ostensible reason for starting a ndembo society in a 
district was an epidemic of sickness, and the idea was to go into 
the ndembo lodge to die and after an indefinite period to be 
resurrected with a new body not liable to the disease then 
troubling the country side. A dearth of children was also 
another cogent reason for starting a ndembo society ; and it was 
believed that good luck in having children would attend those 
who entered and “died ndembo.” But the underlying idea 
was the same, Le. to get a “ new body ” that would be healthy 
and perform its functions in a normal manner. 

The lodge (vela) was always located in a large, dense forest, 
and the entrance to it was a properly-made gate of planks 
painted yellow, blue, and I’ed. The site selected was stockaded 
with palings to keep out intruders, and was within easy access 
of water. The uninitiated might walk on the public road 
across the forest, but if they were found on the bye-paths or 
hunting in the forest, they were caught, flogged, and heavily 
fined, and sometimes killed. The uninitiated were not allowed 
to look upon those who were said to “ die ndembo,” and there- 
fore when the initiated were going about the forest outside the 
lodge, or were on their way to a neighbouring stream, a drum 
was beaten to keep the common folk away, and to warn off all 
possible Peeping Toms. 

When the lodge was ready to receive those who desired 
to enter it, a witch-doctor (nganga) gave the sign, and the 
person to be initiated fell in some public place — such as a 
market or the centre of the town — and feigned death, A funeral 
cloth was then spread over him or her, and he was carried 
to the entrance (mpanzu) of the stockade, and the “ doctors ” 
themselves carried the novice into the lodge or collection of 
huts. The novice was then said to have “ died ndembo.” 
When the novice fell to the ground the “doctor” beat the 
earth round the “ dead ” with plantain stalks, chanted incanta- 

Photo by Rev. h\ Oldrieve 

The Nsambi 

This is the only musical instrument allowed in the “ lodge ”oi the 
secret society of the Country-of-the-dead, when the supposed dead 
engage in their dances. 

Lent by A Cat’S CrADLE P Starr 

Prof. Starr colltcted over sixty different designs in cats’ cradles among the Congo tribes. The 
above is a Lower Congo one known as ihe Ghosts’ beds. 

MEMBERS SUPPOSED TO DIE 161 

tions, fired off guns, and danced about in a most fantastic 
fashion. This undoubtedly excited the emotionally inclined 
persons present, and one after another would fall in pretended 
death, and sometimes hysteria was induced that resulted in 
some falling into a true cataleptic state. Young people and 
adults of both sexes would drop, feigning death, to the number 
of 50, 60, 100, or more until the lodge was full. Those ac- 
quainted with the emotional, impressionable nature of the 
negro will have no difficulty in recalling similar instances of 
widespread hysteria at so-called revivals in the West Indies, 
and exhibited also in voodooism. 

In the lodge the inhabitants were supposed to die, and 
their bodies to decompose until of each body only one bone 
remained, and of those particular bones the “ doctors ” had to 
take the greatest possible care. The people who had relatives 
in the lodge had to take a fair quantity of food every day or 
two to feed, so it was said, the “ doctors ” who turned the 
bodies as they decayed, and guarded the various bones after the 
flesh had rotted away. If the relatives had neglected to take 
food, but were members of a powerful family, i.e. a family able 
to avenge foul play, then their relative in the lodge had a 
special “ resurrection ” all to himself, or herself, and was 
returned to the town and specially instructed by the “ doctor ” 
in the things he should know, and the secrecy to be observed. 
If the neglected one, however, belonged to a small, weak 
family, he or she was taken away and sold in some distant 
market or town, and as a consequent fear of this possibility 
those having relatives in the ndembo lodge were very careful 
to contribute a fair share of food to the common stock. 

“ No cloths are worn in the lodge, for ‘ there is no shame 
in ndembo’’; the bodies of the novices are rubbed with red 
ochre, arnatto red, or powdered camwood. Both sexes live 
together, and the grossest immoralities are practised ; in this 
respect, however, some districts are worse than others, but the 
King of Kongo, long before missionaries went to his town, had 
prohibited the custom in and around San Salvador, as too vile 
to be permitted ; and for the same reason it is not allowed in 
some other places. 

L 

162 

THE SECRET LANGUAGE 

“ In the lodge an attempt is made to teach a secret language. 
The vocabulary is small, and very feeble in ingenuity. Some 
articles are called by fancy names, many being very simple in 
construction: the eye is called nembweno = ihe lord of sight; 
the ear nengwila=^\hQ lord of hearing. Many words are ob- 
scured by adding a prefix ne to them, with Iwa at the end of 
the word: nediambulxva — diarribu=Si. word, or palaver. A few 
fancy verbs are substituted for the commonest actions, as 
yalala for Tcwenda—io go,”^ and so forth. 

“ Kizengi is the name for the language of the ndembo 
society. Where there is no special word the ordinary Congo 
word is preceded by the syllable ne, and when it is desired 
further to hide it Iwa is added, e.g. he diambu ho mbazi tuhwenda, 
i.e. ‘ all right, we will go to-morrow,’ appears thus : he nedi- 
ambulwa ne ho ne hiayi hia nengundu yalala tuhwenda ne 
ngyalala.""^ Then follows a list of thirty or forty words and 
their meanings. I may say that during my investigations I 
have checked these observations of Dr. Bentley and found them 
correct. 

If a person tried to run away from the lodge he (or she) 
was brought back and the escapade was forgiven once ; but if 
he attempted it a second time he was taken away to some far- 
distant town by night and sold as a slave. A goatskin was 
put over the head of the unfortunate one, so that he might not 
be recognised if they had to pass a town or market during the 
day, or if they met his relatives on the road. The “ doctors ” 
gave out that the “ ghosts ” (rnatombola) had taken him away, 
and although they had searched the forest thoroughly they 
could not discover his body. When a person really died in 
the lodge his relatives were also told that the “ghosts” had 
stolen the person’s body, or the bone that repi’esented the body.® 

When a woman was encienfe before entering the lodge, or 

‘ Bentley, Pioneering on the Congo, vol. i. p. 286 ; 1900. 

^ Bentley, Appendix to the Dictionary and Grammar of the Congo 
Language, 1896. 

“ My friend. Dr. Mercier Gamble, has two spikes that were used for 
driving up the nostrils of those who tried to escape from the lodge. 
This was resorted to when selling the runaway as a slave was too risky 
to attempt. 

GROSS LIFE OF THE LODGE 163 

became so while in there, and eventually gave birth to a child, 
they could perceive the illogic of a “ dead woman ” giving 
birth to a baby, so to remove that difficulty they said, “ The 
child broke through the stomach of the woman directly she 
‘ died,’ ” and to prove their assertion they showed a large scar on 
the woman’s stomach. This scar was made by putting some 
gunpowder on the stomach and exploding it. The burn gave 
a large cicatrix which lent colour to their story. 

The life lived in the lodge by tbe men and women, and 
boys and girls, was a purely animal one, in whch they gave full 
license to their lowest passions. Obscene dances were encour- 
aged by the “ doctors,” and the sexes were allowed to mix as 
freely as their woi’st passions prompted. On account of the 
gross immoralities practised, these places at times excited the 
better class of people to rise against them and clear them out 
of their districts. I came across one lodge in 1883 about half 
a day’s journey south of San Salvador. It was in a dense part 
of the forest, with a gaudily-painted entrance about 200 yards 
from the path. 

As the fee for entering or “dying ndembo” was small, 
only one fowl per person, and on leaving 100 strings of blue 
beads (the fowl and beads were worth in all about three 
shillings), the advantages to the “doctors” for starting and 
running such a place are not at first apparent. A certain 
amount of trouble and outlay wei’e necessary, at least in 
commencing a lodge. A few huts had to be built for the first 
batch of novices, even if the later arrivals built the rest. 
There was the stockade to erect, and the planks and pigments 
for the gateway to be paid for by some one. The “ ndembo 
doctor” had to have subordinate “doctors” or assistants to 
help him in looking after the initiated, and to guard them 
from escaping, &c. I think the following are among some of 
the possible advantages accruing to the “ doctor,” the albino, 
and the assistants from instituting a ndembo lodge : the folk 
took good supplies of food to their relatives who had “ died 
ndembo”; and the “ doctor” and his helpers had the pick of 
the food for themselves, as they were the only ones who could 
go where the food was deposited. They had free quarters as 

164 

MEDICINE MAN’S PROFITS 

long as the lodge lasted, which might be six months or three 
years. The surplus food was sold on the market, and they 
shared the money. Any uninitiated persons caught near the 
stockade or on the bypaths of the forest Avere fined heavily ; 
and any novices who repeatedly tried to escape were sold as 
slaves, and very probably others who did not ti-y to get away 
were sold to enrich the “ doctor” and his accomplices — it was 
so easy to say that the “ghosts” had taken such persons. 
Then, again, as the novices feigned death very often on the 
markets, and had on their best clothes and ornaments when 
they entered the lodge, and as they lived in nakedness in the 
lodge, and were supplied with new clothes by their friends when 
the time came for their “ resuri'ection,” their clothes and orna- 
ments became the perquisites of the “doctor ’’and his assist- 
ants. Lastly, all those who had been under the “ doctor ” in 
the lodge most probably became his clients and called for his 
aid whenever they were sick, &c., after leaving the lodge, and 
in that way he built up a profitable business connection. 

“ Ndembo, under the spell of which they had passed, is 
considered to be a powerful fetish ; twisted roots and singular 
distortions of plant life are the symbol of ndembo — hunch- 
back, club-foot, and other malformations, are attributed to 
ndembo. At times ndembo is spoken of as being something 
more than a fetish ; it is said that he haunts certain woods as 
a demon, and I have been warned not to go into those woods, 
lest I too should suffer at the hands of the demon.”* 

Those initiated into this secret society receive new names, 
which they retain for life, for they are of a very complimentary 
character — implying fair, beautiful, light-skinned, &c. There 
are certain names peculiar to this society, and there are others 
that are never used. While living in the lodge a member may 
not be accused of witchcraft, nor is he supposed to be suscep- 
tible to the witchcraft of others. But when the members have 
left the lodge and are living in the town, they are in the same 
position as other people as regards witchcraft. This accords 
with the ordinary practice, that no absentee from a town can 
be charged with witchcraft. 

* Bentley, Pioneering on the Congo, vol. i. p. 287. 

PROCESSION OF THE INITIATED 165 

As already stated, the duration of a lodge is very indefinite 
— from three or six months to two or three years. It must be 
remembered that the lodge is started to counteract an epidemic 
of sickness, and when the epidemic has passed away there is 
no longer any ostensible reason for its continuance, and there- 
fore a day for the “ resurrection ” is fixed by the “ doctor.” 
Again, the food supply may fall off for various reasons : the 
epidemic having passed, the folk refrain from taking food to 
the lodge, and thus they give a hint to the “ doctor ” to 
“ resurrect ” their relatives ; or too many novices may be taken 
by the “ ghosts,” and those outside stop the supplies and thus 
close the place; or the relatives of the novices may, after a 
few months, become weary of travelling long distances every 
day or two with heavy baskets of food and bunches of plantain, 
so the general supplies become indifferent and irregular, and the 
“doctor” takes the hint and appoints the “resurrection” day. 

Parents and relatives pay the fee of 100 strings of beads 
each for those belonging to them in the lodge, and send fine 
clothes for them to wear, and camwood powder to redden their 
skins as a sign of beauty. It is announced well in advance 
that at a certain market, in the neighbourhood of the lodge, the 
initiates, now called knowing ones, will appear. The whole 
country-side assembles to witness the sight, to welcome and 
receive their relatives “ back to life.” By and by the sound 
of music is heard, and the procession approaches ; all the in- 
dividuals in it are dressed in bright, showy clothes, skins well 
dusted with camwood powder, and with tassels of palm fibre 
dangling from their arms. The procession marches round the 
market-place with stolid, indifferent faces. In the crowd 
parents recognise their children in the procession, and boys 
and girls point out their sisters and brothers, and excitedly 
call out their names ; but not a face in the procession lights up 
with recognition, not a muscle moves to express delight, for 
these “ resui’rected ” ones are not supposed to know anything 
of their former life, or relatives and friends. Any one showing 
feeling or recognition is liable to a flogging, or a heavy fine, or 
in some cases even death. They have been well schooled for 
this hour, so the procession solemnly passes round the crowd. 

166 IGNORANCE OF THE INITIATED 

There may be in the throng a mother or a sister, not seen 
perhaps for a year or more, but no sign must be made. Some 
scan the gathering for faces that are absent, for faces that will 
never appear again on the market-place, and the sorrow of death 
and bereavement pierces the heart of the initiated one in the 
procession, but no tear must fall, and no I’elaxation of the face be 
shown. At last the march round is finished, and the “ doctors ” 
introduce the “ resurrected ” ones to their relatives and friends. 

Those who “ die ndembo ” are supposed not to know any- 
thing, or anybody they knew previous to their entrance into 
the lodge. They pretend not to know their parents, or their 
brothers and sisters, or their relatives, friends, and former 
acquaintances. Their mother tongue is new to them, and 
their town, houses, roads, &c. are all supposed to be wiped clean 
from their minds. The “doctors” introduce them to their 
parents, families, &c., tell them the names of the various people 
about them, show them about their towns, point out to them 
the various paths — “ this one to the river where you get water, 
this to the forest, this to the farm, and these to the different 
markets,” and so on ; and they also teach them the names of 
the articles about the house and village, and their uses. A 
heavy punishment is laid upon those who in a careless, forgetful 
moment show that they know anything or anyone not brought 
to their notice by one of the “ doctors.” Sometimes the punish- 
ment is a severe beating, and at other times the fine of a fowl, 
or a goat, or a pig is inflicted, and even death threatened and, 
I believe, it has been actually visited upon those who by negli- 
gence divulged the secrets of the society. 

After leaving the lodge the initiated are accompanied, for 
a time, by one of the “ doctors.” They demand gifts of the 
people they meet, want everything they see, act like children 
or lunatics, and try to seize the thing they desire, and, if it 
is refused, will attempt to beat or even kill the person who 
refuses them. If the “doctor” is with them he will stop 
them at once, not allowing them to go to extremes, for he is 
responsible for their actions while with them. If, however, 
the “ doctor ” is not with them the person attacked may defend 
himself with any weapon he has to hand. These initiated folk. 

LAWLESSNESS OF THE INITIATED 167 

who have only recently left the lodge, are supposed to be 
children just “resurrected,” not knowing any better. They 
are irresponsible, and not accountable for their actions. So 
well do they play their part that food has to be masticated 
for them, and they have to be fed like babies. This pretended 
irresponsibity opens the door for many abuses. Two or three 
of these ndembo folk may meet an unarmed, uninitiated person 
and rob him, giving a part of the proceeds of their robbery 
to the “ doctor ” for vanishing at the convenient moment. 
Quite recently I was speaking to a man who was thus attacked 
near San Salvador by two ndembo folk, but he was able to beat 
them off. The “ doctor ” demanded a fine from him for beating 
them, but he refused to pay it, and put in a counter-claim 
against the “ doctor ” because he was drinking in the town 
instead of looking after his people. He did not receive com- 
pensation, but neither did he hear any more about the fine. 

After a short time the excitement of the “ resurrection ” 
and the interest in the resurrected ones passes away, and they 
are expected to know better, and are dealt with according to 
the laws of the district if they play any more tricks. 

In the lodges drum and horn trumpets ai’e not allowed, for 
it would be somewhat absurd to play such instruments to the 
“ dead.” But when the inmates of the lodges desire to dance, 
a comparatively quiet instrument called nsambi is used. It is 
harp-like in tone, and is played with a small piece of splinter. 
The accompanying sketch was made from a small one in my 
possession. The music would not be heard very far in the forest, 
but it served the purpose of giving time to the dancers. This 
musical instrument must never be seen by the uninitiated. The 
strings are called minza, and are made by scraping down the 
hard outer bark or casing of the palm tree. The player is named 
nembimbi. When any of the novices left the lodge for fetching 
firewood, water, &c. a drum was beaten to warn the uninitiated 
not to enter the forest, but the drum was never taken inside the 
stockade. In the Ngombe Lutete district the ndembo society 
goes by the name of Tdmpasi, and in the Zombo district east of 
San Salvador, there are many obscene things done as the proces- 
sion marches round the market-place on the “ resurrection ” day. 

CHAPTER XVI 

A GUILD, BACHELOR’S CLUB, AND 
CIRCUMCISION 

WHEN at Mpalabala, a town near Matadi, in 1889 I 
had ray first sight of the nkimba — a secret society for 
males only. I then saw six of the brotherhood in 
their queer dress quite near to the house in which I was stay- 
ing, and heard their strange trill mingled with yells, screams, 
and the rustling of their grass skirts. On one occasion I had 
to pay them black mail for permission to pass with my carriers. 
This I should not have done had not my carriers been returning 
by the same route a few days later without me, when they 
would have had to face alone the full vengeance of the guild, 
so for their sakes I submitted to be fleeced. 

Dr. Bentley in his Pioneering on the Congo, vol. i. page 
282, has the following account of the nkimba guild, which as it 
contains nearly all the information I have gathered, I tran- 
scribe in full. One or two other items of importance that I 
have gained deal with a mode of entrance to the lodge, and the 
“ doctor ” who presides over it. At the head of every lodge 
was a “doctor” of the ebaku order, who superintended the 
spinning of the novices who wished to be initiated into the 
nkimba mysteries. Ebaku means an old man, an elder, and 
it was his duty to look after the novices while they were in the 
lodge, and to teach them the arts of the guild, the way to make 
the peculiar trill of the guild, and the secret language. And 
when the novice was ready to enter the lodge, this “ doctor ” 
spun him round and round until he became giddy and fell un- 
conscious to the ground, and in that state he was carried|into 

the lodge. This was the most common method of stupefying 

168 

THE FEE AND DRESS 

169 

the candidate, and not by the administration of a drug, which 
was the exception. The “ doctor ” also taught his pupils how 
to make their skirts of palm frond or dried grass on the hoops. 

To quote Dr. Bentley: “The nkimha custom appears to 
have been introduced from the coast in comparatively recent 
times, and spread up the Congo for some two hundred miles, 
and for some fifty miles south of it. Its professed object is 
the suppression of witchcraft, and the catching of witches. It 
resembles Freemasonry in many respects, and like its European 
cousin, delights in enshrouding itself in mystery. 

“ The initiatory fee is two dollars’ worth of cloth and two 
fowls. This paid, the novice presents himself at a ‘home’ in 
the jungle away from the town. He is given a drug which 
stupefies him, and when he recovers consciousness he is in the 
‘ home.’ He finds his fellow nkimba wearing a crinoline of 
palm frondlets, and their bodies whitened with pipeclay. No 
one is allowed to speak the local dialect, a made-up language 
of their own being spoken ; and the novice who ventures to 
speak anything else is soundly beaten. The secret language is 
fairly well developed ; many of the words are modifications of 
Kongo words, others are very different. The grammatical 
rules of Kongo are very closely followed. A nkimba friend at 
Stanley Pool, finding that I knew some words, enabled me to 
complete a list of about 200. He was far from home, so he 
ventured to break the rule of the guild ; had it been known, it 
would have cost him his life, for the secret is very closely kept. 
Five words and a sentence will suffice for an example of the 
character of the secret language. 

English. 

Kongo. 

Nkimba. 

A feather 

Lnsala 

Lusambtva 

To give 

Vana 

Jana 

To go 

Kjvenda 

Diomva 

Animal fit for food 

Mbizi 

Nkubuzi 

Maize 

Masa 

Nzimvu (perhaps from 
«ge7rti;o = the beard 
of maize). 

170 SUPPOSED OCCUPATION 

English. Fetch us some water to drink. 

Kongo. Bong' o maza twanua Tcweto. 

Nkimba. Diafila ngoliimzca tutefa Icuhwefo. 

“ Only males are admitted to the guild. They live apart 
for a period varying from six months to two years, and in this 
time they thoroughly learn the secret language. They always 
wear their distinctive dress and paint ; and in the daytime 
they wander in the woods and jungle, where they are supposed 
to dig for roots, and learn the botany of charms and spells. 
Sometimes they hang about the main roads and molest pas- 
sengers, beating them with sticks ; hence when their strange 
trill call is heard, everyone runs away and hides. They are 
much feared by the uninitiated, and in the early days of our 
transport they were a trouble to our carriers. If they catch 
any one, there must be no resistance to robbery, or a severe 
beating and heavy fine will be the result. At night they rush 
yelling about the town and neighbourhood, pretending to 
hunt for witches, and woe betide the common native caught 
outside his house. The simple people rejoice that there 
is such an active police against witches, maladies, and all 
misfortunes. 

“ When the period of initiation is over, the nkimba becomes 
a full brother (mbwamvu anjata), and returns to ordinary 
life. His brother nkimbas help him in trade, travel, and 
difficulties, and many advantages accrue to him. It is a clique 
which hangs well together; in this the guild is much like 
Freemasonry. So far so good ; but there is another side to it: 
it is a gross imposition, and its effect is to bind a man more 
closely to superstition and heathen custom, any attack upon 
which is an attack upon his craft and guild. It is a good 
thing that it is now dying out, and that nkimbas are seldom 
seen in many parts where once they were common ; but in old 
times the custom had its uses in checking the greed and 
violence of chiefs, and establishing a helpful brotherhood among 
a wild and wicked people. At the same time, the guild could 
become a tyranny, and in some places it sought to monopolise 

Members of the NKimba Secret Society 

MEMBERS’ POWER 

171 

trade. The first opening up of the country seemed to spread 
the guild ; but now that there is so much security in the land, 
it has become unnecessary, and is fast becoming obsolete. The 
nkimba mystery has nothing to do with circumcision, as some 
have said.” 

The following passage, also from Bentley’s Pioneering on the 
Congo, vol. i. p. 451, is interesting as showing the widespread 
influence of the nkimha guild when it was in full force ; 

“ The next day Messrs. Comber and Hartland went up to 
the Vunda towns on the hills. As they drew near, the natives 
came in force to attack them. Comber shouted to them to 
come and talk. Their only reply was ‘ Go away ! ’ He told 
them he wanted to build on the headland ; but they would not 
hear of it. ‘ Go away ! go away ! ’ was all that they would say. 
Comber did not like to take ‘ No ’ for an answer, and began to 
walk towards them. They spread out and prepared for a 
serious attack. Just as things began to be critical, a man of 
Manteke, who had been engaged by Comber, ran forward 
towards the people. He was a nkimba, and uttered the strange 
trill of the guild. Guns were lowered, and they gathered 
round him, for more than half the warriors were brother 
nkimbas. By the nkimba's influence hostilities at once ceased, 
and the natives, on finding that the white men could talk their 
language and wished to do them no harm, gave permission 
for the building of the station on the site desired by the 
missionaries.” 

The nzo a mbongi, or nzo a toko, was a house for lads 
and unmarried men, or bachelor’s club. Boys, on reaching 
the age of twelve, had to live in such a house, whether cir- 
cumcised or not, and, if uncircumcised, had to take the next 
opportunity of submitting to the rite. The small boys fagged 
for the big ones, fetching firewood and water and keeping the 
place clean. If they refused to do this work, their faces 
were tied up, and they were not allowed to sit near the fire, or 
to join in the talk of the others. The boys were permitted to 
hold conversation with their mothers, sisters, and families, but, 
on receiving their share of the family food, they had to take it 

172 

BACHELORS’ HOUSE 

to the men’s house and eat it there. Boys went from these 
houses to the circumcision lodge, and returned after the lodge 
was bi-oken up at the end of the season. There was no special 
teaching beyond listening to the talk of the older, unmarried 
men. The boys had not to reveal what they saw there. Un- 
betrothed girls visited the house in the dark by arrangement 
with the young men, but were not allowed to talk about the 
secrets of the place. Many of those who lived in the house did 
not know who came and went in the dark. The unbetrothed 
girls from an early age up to puberty had free ingress to these 
houses at night, and their parents encouraged them to go, as it 
“ showed they had proper desires, and later in life they would 
bear children.” Thirty years ago such club-houses were to 
be found in all the large villages, but since the spread of 
Christianity they have passed away. Not only have Christian 
parents set their faces against the continuance of these 
bachelor clubs as a part of their village life ; but heathen 
parents also helped to put them down, for they noticed that as 
monogamy displaced polygamy the man who could only marry 
one wife desired her to be as pure as he could obtain her, and 
the girls belonging to villages where such club-houses existed 
were at a discount and were left unsought in marriage. 

There are two modes of circumcision followed — that in 
vogue around San Salvador, and that observed by the people 
in and around Ngombe Lutete. It may be that there are 
various other modifications in other districts. We will 
describe the San Salvador customs first. 

A large house or lodge {vela) is built in the centre of the 
group of towns from which the boys are to come upon whom 
the rite is to be performed. It is built by the men of the 
district on some exposed hill, separated from any one town, but 
not far from a stream. When all is ready, the lads are received 
by the “ doctor,” who is a recognised member of the eseka, or 
lubwiku order. If the former the lodge is called eseka (prob- 
ably from seka=to sharpen), and, if the latter, it is called 
lubwiku. Both establishments may be running in the same 
neighbourhood simultaneously, and the number of lads who go 

THE RITE IS COMPULSORY 173 

to either place depends on the fame and popularity of the 
“ doctor ” practising there. The time for performing the rite 
is the cold season — May to October. The boys while in the 
lodge are supplied with food by their mothers and relatives, 
and the “ doctor ” and his assistants maintain themselves out 
of the provisions taken to the lads ; thus he and his people have 
free quarters for five months. The fee paid for the operation 
is five strings of blue pipe beads for each boy, costing in London 
twopence, but worth about sixpence in San Salvador. 

Should any lads be unwilling to go, they are taken by force 
and carried to the lodge by their relatives, but such force is 
rarely necessary, as most of the lads willingly submit themselves 
to the rite, and those that are not very willing to bear the 
pain are laughed into submission by the jeers of their com- 
panions. On being circumcised every boy has a new name given 
to him, which they can retain after they leave the lodge if they 
so desire. Some admire their new names so much that they 
keep them, while others, who receive what they consider to be 
ugly names, relinquish them directly they leave the lodge. 
One boy is told off to look after the fire and to take care that 
it never goes out. The foreskins are simply buried, and the 
wounds are washed daily. There are certain restrictions placed 
upon the lads, for they are not allowed to see their mothers, 
sisters, or any women and girls during the months they are in 
the lodge. The fire must never go out, and there must not be 
any fights, rows, or quarrels between them while in the lodge. 
Neither guns nor knives are permitted in the lodge, and all 
charms and fetishes must be left outside. 

Should the fire go out the mother of the boy who had the 
care of it has to pay a fine of one fowl ; and anyone who takes 
a knife, a gun, or a charm into the lodges renders his mother 
liable to the same fine. When the penalty is incurred, and is 
not forthcoming at once, the “ doctor ” and the lads living in 
the lodge go between 11 and 12 o’clock one night and sit 
outside the mother’s or relative’s house, and drum and sing 
until the fine is paid. But, if after four or five hours of 
drumming and chanting the fine is not brought to the “ doctor,” 

174 

PUNISHMENTS 

he threatens to break up the lodge, and leave all the lads on 
the offender’s hands, to attend to their wounds, &c. This 
threat, however, is always effective. 

Should any of the boys in the lodge fight among themselves, 
their punishment is to sit in the stream during the night. 
The “ doctor,” the assistants, and the lads sit on the bank 
singing and drumming, and the shivering lads in the water 
have to take up the chorus. Sometimes the quarrelsome boys 
are led to the top of a bleak hill, and being stripped, they are 
made to lie in a nude condition on the cold, damp ground. 
The nights during the cold season are extremely chilly and the 
dews are very heavy, and there is no doubt that some boys 
have died, and others have suffered all their lives, as the result 
of these stupid punishments. 

Boys enter the lodge at different times during the season, 
but all leave together ; and when the time arrives for aban- 
doning it, quite a fair is held. Parents and friends come from 
all the surrounding villages, decked in their best clothes and 
ornaments, to welcome back their sons to home and village life. 
Guns are fired, trumpets blown, and drums beaten, and singing 
and dancing are well in evidence on these festive occasions. 

About the eseTca “ doctor” there is no fetish idea associated 
— with him it is a simple, surgical operation ; but about the 
elongo, kumbi, and luhwiku “ doctors ” there is much fetish 
ceremony, and powerful fetishes are supposed to help them in 
their operations. For example, when the luhwiku lodge is burnt 
down at the end of the season the “ doctor ” is tied to the 
centre post of the house, but by the aid of his strong fetishes 
he escapes unhurt from the burning house. The only reason I 
have ever had given me for practising this rite, is that the 
women pi*efer those men who have observed it, and will not 
marry those who are uncii’cumcised. In some districts a man 
who has not submitted to this ceremony is not allow'ed to sit 
down with other men, hence the practice is universal in those 
places. 

Around Ngombe Lutete, which is due north of San Salvador, 
the practice is by no means general. The operation is some- 

SECOND METHOD OF OPERATING 175 

times performed two or three weeks after birth, sometimes at 
the age of ten or twelve, and in other cases even at the age of 
twenty. The kumhi doctor performs the operation, and charges 
each boy two brass rods. While the lad is undergoing it, he 
must not be seen by the women, and when circumcised, he must 
not, for a certain time, go into the kitchen or place where the 
women do their cooking, i.e. he must not associate with women 
and girls. When the operation is over, the boy digs a hole 
about eighteen inches in diameter, and about the same in depth. 
He then procures some large, hard-skin beans, and makes them 
very hot in the fire ; these are put into the hole, and the boy 
lies across the hole above the hot beans, and is steamed for 
some time, after which he goes oft' to wash in a stream. Some 
grass stems are then burnt, and the ashes rubbed on the wound, 
and he thereupon enters his house and waits until he is well, 
when he puts on a new cloth and the affair is finished. 

In the Zombo country, east of San Salvador, the ceremonies 
and restrictions observed are very similar to those around the 
King’s capital of San Salvador, with these modifications, that 
the Zombo lads live in the lodge for a year or more ; they 
observe many fetish ceremonies, and are not allowed to speak 
to anyone, or to eat anything outside the lodge, during the 
whole time ; there is much dancing, and the nights are made 
hideous with wild music ; and on special occasions they put on 
masks of various shapes, and go dancing, into the towns and 
market-places, and ask for money of the women, who, when they 
find the yelling, screaming, grotesque figures gesticulating 
about them, are frightened into satisfying their demands. 

I find that some operation is also performed on girls, but 
my informants cannot tell me what it is, as it is a well-pre- 
served secret between the kumhi “doctors ’’and the srirls. All 

o 

they can tell is that the house is built on a platform, as the 
girls are not permitted to touch the ground, and in this house 
the girls live, sing, and dance for some three or four months. 
The kumhi “doctor” visits them occasionally to instruct them 
in marital matters ; and they are attended to by the women of 
the village. The girls think, and are taught by their mothers 

176 

OPERATION ON GIRLS 

and the women generally to believe, that unless they undergo 
this operation or ceremony they will have no children. 

In the books of old traveller-^, who have written on the 
Lower Congo, one often comes across the phrase casa de tinta, 
or nzo a tinta, i.e. house of paint, and they refer to the vile 
customs and immoralities practised in these “ paint houses,” 
It is probable that these writei’s refer either to the ndembo 
lodge, the gateway to which is very gaudily painted, or to the 
ktcmbi house where the girls go, and where they daub them- 
selves with red camwood powder. Their description of the 
vile practices pursued in the “paint house” would well fit 
either the one or the other ; but I am rather inclined to think, 
for several reasons, that they had the kumbi house in their 
minds when they wrote. 

Around San Salvador, in the area that is influenced by the 
court of the King of Kongo, and throughout which he exercises 
his power as overlord, it is very noticeable that the ceremonies 
relating to the ndembo secret society, and to the rites of cir- 
cumcision, are more elaborate than in the districts far removed 
from the court. It may be that in the old days the same 
elaboration was to be found throughout the whole Kingdom of 
Kongo ; but as the area of the King’s effective rule shrunk, the 
ritual became more lax, until now, in those parts where the 
King is only a shadow without substance, and a name without 
force, only a few shreds of ceremony remain. Or the reason 
for this ditterence may be that where the King, or some great 
chief, exercises a strong overlordship there is more cohesion 
among the people and a greater sense of .security, hence in the 
San Salvador and Zombo districts it is possible to have a joint 
lodge with its restrictions, rules, and ceremonies, for a large 
area ; whereas in the Ngombe Lutete district, where the ]ieople 
are broken up into very small groups under petty chiefs, there 
are no common lodges for the candidates of circumcision. 

In relation to this overlordship of the King of Kongo, it is 
worthy of note that the nkimha guild was ineffective in the San 
Salvador districts, for the King levied a toll on all caravans 
passing through his dominion, and in i-eturn he protected them 

MODIFICATIONS IN CEREMONIES 177 

from being fleeced by others in that area ; hence the nkimba 
guild never gained ground around San Salvador, but was 
powerful in those districts where small chiefs were always 
bickering and fighting each other. I would suggest that 
elaborate ceremonies in primitive secret societies, witchcraft 
palavers, &c., are either the result of, or in response to, an 
elaborate court ceremony ; and that for their continuance there 
must be a certain amount of security and cohesion among the 
people. Is it not possible that the fluctuations in the peace 
and cohesion of a tribe have affected considerably their customs 
and modified the ceremonies with which they are observed, and 
that the institutions of primitive peoples for these reasons have 
not that permanency with which they are often credited 

M 

CHAPTER XVII 

BUSH BURNING AND HUNTING 

By August, towards the end of the long rainless season, 
the tall jungle grass is dry and ready to burn ; and it is 
during this time of grass burning that one form of 
hunting is pursued throughout the Lower Congo. It is most 
probable . that their method of combining hunting with bush 
burning accounts for the comparative scarcity of large game 
throughout this part of Africa. When one recalls the de- 
scriptions of those who have hunted in South Africa, we are 
inclined to say that this part of West Africa is lacking in 
animal life, yet such an assertion would not be quite accurate. 
I have travelled on foot over 2,000 miles up and down the 
Lower Congo, and I have seen only one antelope, and the foot- 
marks of a few elephants ; and the native hunters I have known 
have not been very successful, considering the amount of energy 
and time they have devoted to the pursuit of game. On the 
other hand, I have heard occasionally of herds of elephants, 
and rumours of herds of buffaloes have reached my ears, and 
the natives have the names for bush pigs and many species of 
antelopes; but notwithstanding all this I should not recom- 
mend the Lower Congo to a keen sportsman, for the guns of 
the natives and the periodical bush burning have, at least, 
made the animals exceedingly shy, if not scarce. 

When the custom of bush burning first commenced, will 
probably never be known; but there are evidences that the 
annual bush fires have been in vogue for several generations, 
for when I arrived on the Congo in 1882, it was a thoroughly 
and properly organised affair with its rules and laws well recog- 
nised throughout the country for regulating it. The rainy 
season is from the middle of October to the middle of May — 

178 

oogd/e^q^ 

$ 

i 

Drawing hy Rev. F. Longhand 

A Hunting Fetish Drum 

This drum was used in making “ medicine ” at the beginning of the hunting season, The body of the antelope ” is hollow, and forms the drum. 
The solid stick gives a deep note, and the split one sharp rattling notes, when rubbed along the back. The original is in the British Museum. 

OWNERSHIP OF LAND 

179 

a few days more or less. There is a short dry season in 
January and the torrential downpours are in March and April. 
December is the hottest month in the year, the temperature 
often being 105° in the shade ; and June is the coldest month 
in the whole twelve, the thermometer frequently showing 65° 
in the shade. During a storm the temperature sometimes falls 
20 or 25 degrees in less than two hours. 

The whole of the land is owned by one or other of the 
chiefs, and the boundary of one chiefs property is the begin- 
ning of the next chiefs estate. Streams are good lines of 
demarcation, and when these are absent, or not convenient, 
then gashes are cut in the paths to mark off the confines of 
one chiefs land from another. Forests are the common 
property of those chiefs whose boundaries touch them, and in 
those forests such chiefs and their peoples have rights of hunt- 
ing, the gathering of firewood, and the felling of timber for 
house building. 

Each chief suits his own convenience for firing the grass 
belonging to him ; but if there is a possibility of his grass 
setting fire to the bush belonging to another chief, then the 
natives of both towns meet and agree on a day for burning 
those stretches of bush land which are contiguous to each other. 
To disregard this law is to court a war in which the offending 
party, being entirely in the wrong, will lack the sympathy of 
the neighbouring chiefs. 

When the time for grass burning di-aws near the people 
select a morning when the vegetation is limp with heavy dew ; 
and they break and push down the grass all round the town for 
one or two hundred yards, taking care to bend the grass so that 
the stalks point outward from the houses. Another suitable 
morning is chosen, and then this belt of broken-down grass is 
carefully fired. The men have branches to control and, if 
necessary, to beat out the flames should the adjacent unbroken 
grass catch fire. This belt round the town having been burnt, 
the people feel that their homes are secure from the onrush of 
the flames when the time comes for firins: the bush. 

The grass-burning season is a great time for the people 

180 METHOD OF GRASS BURNING 

The men clean, oil, and load their guns, the lads procure 
knives, the boys cut heavy sticks and borrow spare hoes, and 
even the girls and women are all excitement in anticipation of 
the various species of rats they will capture in their holes. The 
grass is anything from six to fifteen feet high, and many of the 
stalks are as thick as one’s fingers; and as there has been no 
rain since the middle of May, the grass is withered, and dry, 
and when the sun has licked off the dews, it is as ready to 
take fire as tinder. 

One morning when the wind is blowing from the town, the 
hunters take their places along the sides of the strip of bush 
to be burnt. The grass is fired, and any animals — antelopes, 
wild pigs, buffaloes, or palm rats — that may be concealed in the 
tall grass run helter-skelter from the rushing, crackling flames, 
and as they pass near the hunters they are fired at by them. 
Fish-eagles, kites, and hawks circle above the flames to pounce 
upon any snakes, rats, or lizards that are driven from their 
hiding-places; and before the ground has time to cool again, 
after the fire has passed, the women, girls, and boys are swarm- 
ing over it hunting for rat-holes, so that they may dig them 
out, and feast on these much-prized delicacies. 

During the grass-burning season the air is filled with smoke ; 
you taste smoke, smell smoke, breathe smoke, and the eyes often 
smart with smoke. The smoke ascends in great clouds, and 
hanging like a pall, it hides the sun for days, and gives the sky 
a dull, monotonous appearance that wearies and irritates you. 
Sometimes for two or three days there is no wind to stir the 
murky air, and it becomes heavy and vitiated, and you long for 
a stinging tornado or a torrent of rain to purify the nauseous 
atmosphere. When there is a slight breeze, and it blows from 
the direction of the fire across your station, it comes laden 
with charred pieces of grass, which are carried into your house 
through the doors, windows, and ventilators, and the housewife 
finds her furniture quickly covered with burnt grass. At night 
it is a grand sight to see the hills in the distance outlined in 
living flames; and when the thick grasses are burning they 
generate such an amount of steam in their stalks that causes 
them to explode with loud, gun-like reports, and the force of 

HUNTING MONTHS 

181 

the explosions sends the burning grass hurrying through the 
night air like flaming rockets. More than once I have had to 
put lads on the grass roofs of our houses, to throw offj or stamp 
out, the burning grass as it fell on them. This season is always 
an anxious time where there are grass roofs, for the wind may 
veer at any moment, and the sparks that were falling harmlessly 
in the bush far away on the other side of the fire, may be swung 
round and dropped on the place containing your household 
treasures, and destroy all that you have of home in the great 
wilderness.^ 

Hunting proper (called veta in some districts and wela in 
othei's) begins in September and ends in November. During 
these months the grass is short, because by the end of August 
the old, tall grass has been burnt to the ground, and the new 
grass has not reached any height. At the beginning of the 
hunting season the hunters call a medicine-man [ngang' a 
nkongo), who possesses a hunting fetish, for him to make a 
suitable charm which will give them good luck in killing all 
j kinds of game ; and the charm he then supplies is supposed to 

I be effective for a whole year. For the making of the proper 

charm the “ doctor ” needs various ingredients, such as a piece 
of camwood, some special leaves, the new sprouts of the nianga 
grass, some parrot's feathers, a few cowrie shells, a little wood 
ash, the foreleg of a bat, some red peppers, and some small 
shot. He cuts all these up in small pieces, and having 
thoroughly mixed them, he fills some small antelopes’ horns 
! with the strange compound, and securing their ends with 
rubber he hands one to each hunter. 

When a famous hunter dies, the natives are very careful 
to mark the position of his grave; and to ensure its being 
properly remembered, the hair of the renowned man is cut off 
and buried near the grave with a large stone on top to indicate 
the position. When such a hunter is lying on his deathbed 
j a thread is drawn from his native-made cloth (mbadi, made 
■ from palm fibre), and tied round the forehead or arms of a 
4 young man chosen for the purpose, who from that time is 

* We had one station burnt to the ground by one of these bush fires 
in the early history of our nnission. 

182 

HUNTING CHARM 

known as the advocate {Jdmpovela=\^e one who speaks to 
another on behalf of someone else). This “advocate” may 
maiTy only one wife, whom he must never beat or he will lose 
his power; but should he want more than one woman, the 
exti’a ones are called “lovers” (makangu), and never wives 
{nkaza). This may be a survival of a Portuguese Catholic 
idea that a certain amount of holiness was required for the 
proper exercise of a priest’s functions. 

When the hunters have finished making their charms they 
next visit the grave of a great hunter. There was one such 
grave just outside San Salvador, and I often saw them at this 
ceremony, and rumours of their success in hunting sometimes 
came to me. The “ advocate ” goes first and kneels with his 
face towards the hunters, and his back to the grave. The 
hunters then approach him slowly, stopping every few steps to 
clap their hands ; and on reaching the kneeling advocate, they 
spread themselves out and dance round the grave to the “ rub, 
rub ” of the antelope drum (see plate, page 178). They have 
brought with them a calabash of palm wine, which they place 
on the ground and their guns alongside. The “advocate” 
then turns towards the grave, and, shaking his rattle, he prays 
thus: “You are blind but your ears are not deaf. Oh ears, 
hear well ! we have come to you, we come kneeling. While 
you lived in the town, you ate and you drank, now we who are 
left die of hunger; give us male and female animals.” 

A man then raises the calabash of palm wine to his shoulder, 
and the “ advocate,” standing in front of him, makes the sign 
of the cross, and then taking a cup of the wine he pours it out 
on the grave as an oblation to the renowned hunter to whom 
he has prayed. The remainder of the wine is drunk by the 
hunters sitting in a circle round the grave. When the palm 
wine is finished the “advocate” rubs a little of the earth 
moistened with the oblatory wine on the forehead and temples 
of each hunter to give them cunning in tracking the animals; 
on the forearms and wrists to give steadiness of aim ; on the 

* la the native language the words are as follows : Wafwa kia meso, 
kwafwa kia viatu ko, o mala nkelo! Twizidi ku lumbu, twizidi kufu- 
kamena, ova wakala oku ‘vata, dia wadidenge, nua wanumweiwnge, owau 
twasala fwa langala ; se utukuyila nkento ye mbakala. 

HUNTING CHARM 

183 

knees and insteps to give them swiftness in chasing their game. 
After giving these magical powers to the hunters he takes each 
gun and rubs across the butt, and draws his fingers up the 
butt, and, on reaching the barrel, he snaps his fingers, and 
hands the charmed gun to its owner, who on taking it claps his 
hands, jumps in the air, and, holding the gun in front of him, 
he walks backwards a little, facing the grave, and sits down 
and waits for the others. When all have been through this 
ceremony they fire a salute, sing in praise of the deceased hunter, 
rub the antelope drum, and drink more palm wine. These 
hunters from this time until they kill an animal must abstain 
from all intercourse with women, or the magic will not work. 

When they go hunting they either take their horns of 
“ medicine ” with them, each carrying his own under his belt, 
or they wet the rubber stopper and rub the butt of their guns 
with a little of the moisture. When a party of hunters has 
been successful in killing an antelope the blood is caught in the 
animal’s bladder and carried to the “ advocate,” who brings out 
of his house a cross, such as is shown, page 189, and sticks it 
in the ground near the great hunter’s grave at which the cere- 
monies above described w'ere observed. The blood is poured 
over the cross as an oblation to the deceased hunter who has 
heard their request and given them such success. The little 
hole in the middle of the cross is called the “ heart,” and in it 
the successful bullet is put, and the hole filled with blood. 
The cross is always well cared for in the house of the “ advo- 
cate ” ; and he also has charge of the “ antelope ” drum ^ used 
for making the hunting charm at the beginning of the season. 
The body of the “antelope” is hollow, and forms the drum. 
The skin, which is that of the harness antelope, is tightly 
drawn over the drum, and the hair is removed from the skin 
along the opening in the back of the figure, making it vibrate 
more easily when the notched bamboo is rubbed by either stick. 
The solid stick gives a deep note when rubbed hard along the 
back, and the split bamboo gives sharp, rattling notes. The 
knees in the original animal drum are, as shown in the plate, 

‘ A drum of this description the writer brought from Congo,’ and it 
is now in the British Museum. 

184 

GRATITUDE FOR SUCCESS 

at the back of the front legs instead of in the front — a mistake 
of the native workman. Such a drum is always a part of the 
“ advocate’s ” outfit. 

Having poured the blood over the cross placed near the 
grave, the hunters repeat the following words: “We thank 
you for sending us such a fine animal, and hope you will repeat 
the favour.” Only the blood of antelopes is offered in this 
manner. Some of the blood is rubbed on their fetish charms, 
and the end of the tail is stuck in the wall, over the doorway 
of the house belonging to the fortunate hunter. We shall see 
later the reason for thus taking care of this part of the animal. 

The man who fires first at an antelope as it rushes past, 
looks to see if any blood has fallen, or any hairs. If there is 
no sign of blood or hairs, then he has not killed it, although 
he may have mortally wounded it ; if, when the next man fires, 
the animal drops it belongs to him. Should there be any 
dispute as to whether the animal was killed by the first shot 
or the second, the one who is positive and overrides all argu- 
ment must take the heart of the antelope and eat it (not raw) ; 
then if his shot really killed the animal all is well, but, if not, 
the eating of the heart will destroy his hunting skill ( = his 
kinkongo). Many a man has relinquished his claim to an 
animal for fear of thus spoiling his luck. If two or more men 
fire simultaneously at an animal and kill it, they divide the 
flesh between them and give the heart to the dogs. At San 
Salvador the hunter eats the heart of the animal he is sure he 
has killed, but in the Ngombe Lutete district the heart is 
given to the hunter’s father. 

If the man who ate the heart of the antelope whose death- 
.shot he disputed with another hunter becomes unsuccessful in 
his next ventures, he takes a fowl to the other man who claimed 
to have killed the animal, and gives it to him, and that is called 
“ paying back the heart.” It is really a tacit acknowledgment 
that the other man shot it ; and on giving the fowl, the skill 
or luck is supposed to return. In the district where the heart 
is given to the hunter’s father, if afterwards he becomes a bad 
shot, he tells his father of his lack of success, and the father 
chews some red camwood, and expectorates the blood-coloured 

DIVIDING THE ANTELOPE 185 

saliva, and that is regarded as “ giving back the heart,” and 
the hunter thus regains his luck. 

When an antelope is killed, the hunters spread some grass 
on the ground and the animal is laid on it. The successful 
hunter puts the butt of his gun to his shoulder, and the muzzle 
on the carcass, thus signifying his right to it. A cross-cut 
is made on the stomach of the animal, and the hunter puts his 
fingers three times in the blood and to his upper lip, then 
another three times, and rubs some blood on his gun each time. 
The antelope is removed, and the hunter, putting his gun under 
the grass, turns it over. The animal must not be divided until 
this rite is performed, or the hunter will lose his skill. The 
animal is thus divided : the kidneys and the pieces from 
along each side of the backbone are given to the chief of the 
town ; one hind leg is given to the men left in the town, and 
they share their portions with their wives ; one shoulder is 
divided among the hunters ; the heart is given to the father of 
the successful hunter, if it is the custom of the district to do so ; 
and the rest belongs to the man who killed it. If, however, the 
animal has been slain on land belonging to another chief, i.e. 
not on ground owned by the hunters’ chief, then one leg is 
given to him in recognition of his rights over that part of the 
country. When an “ advocate ” kills an antelope he must give 
the loins to his wife, otherwise he will lose his power of impart- 
ing good luck to those hunters who seek his help. 

It sometimes happens that a hunter has a run of very bad 
luck, and misses every animal that crosses his path. He may 
have “ paid back a heart ” and is still unsuccessful ; he at last 
goes to a medicine-man {ngang' a nkongo), who makes three 
plaits of nine pieces of grass in each plait. He then asks for 
a piece of the last bird or animal his client killed. A man 
always keeps a feather or a claw of the last bird he shot, or 
the tail or hoof of the last animal he killed ; and that is why 
these various odds and ends are stuck in the front wall of his 
house. At any time he may repeatedly miss his game, and 
need a bit of the last thing he shot to restore his luck. So 
we will suppose that our unsuccessful hunter, who desires to 
regain his luck, takes a claw of a hawk to the “ doctor ” 

as a 

186 

RENEWING THE CHARM 

part of the last trophy of his gun. The “ doctor ” puts the claw 
on the ground and arranges three heaps of loose gunpowder 
round it, and chalks a cross near the powder and on the butt 
of the hunter’s gun. The “ doctor ” then explodes the powder ; 
and putting a little gunpowder into the gun, he hands it to 
the hunter, who standing a few feet away fires at the claw, and 
if it is blown away then his hunting skill has returned to him. 
The “ doctor ” takes the gun, and putting his finger in the dirt 
where the claw was, he rubs a little of the earth three times 
on the hunter’s lips, and the fourth time he runs his fingers up 
the gun and snaps them. He now loosens the plaits of grass 
and shakes them about the gun that it may fire properly 
through the grass. The hunter claps his hands, takes his gun, 
and jumping in the air, he goes his way after paying his fee. 

During the hunting season gun accidents are very common. 
A man hears a rustle in the grass, and thinking it is an animal, 
fires, and finds when too late that he has severely wounded a 
fellow-hunter. At one time death or slavery was the punish- 
ment for such an accident; but now the firer of the gun is 
mulct in a very heavy fine. The punishments meted out for 
such injuries have always depended largely on the importance 
of the person wounded, and the position of the one responsible 
for the accident. The guns often burst, from the excessive 
amount of powder used, causing considerable damage to the 
firer ; and in fact, scarcely a hunting season passes without 
some cases coming to one or other of our hospitals. Loaded 
guns are sometimes placed near the tracks of animals, so that 
when the animal passes it touches a string and shoots itself. 
The one who fixes the gun in such a position should give full 
particulars to all concerned, and although this is done, yet 
accidents happen and legs are badly wounded with slugs — often 
bits of twisted brass wire, which poison the wounds and cause 
great mischief. Such casualties have caused many big palavers, 
and feuds between families that have lasted many a year. 

There is a special medicine-man {ngang' a ngani) for 
the dogs, so as to make them good hunters. The Congo 
breed of dogs is exceedingly poor, for no new blood was in- 
troduced for generations, and thus their cui-s deteriorated 

THE HUNTER’S DOG 

187 

through constant inter-breeding in a very limited area. The 
Congo dogs have short hair, stand up-ears, long noses, and are 
very cowardly. When a man wants his dog to love and follow 
him, he washes his feet and armpits in water, and gives the 
water to the dog to drink, and then, it is said, it will 
track him anywhere and for any distance. But when a man 
desires that his dog should be a good hunter, he calls the 
above-mentioned “ doctor,” who takes some chalk, the head of 
a viper, various leaves, and mint, which he mixes and makes 
into a bundle. A small portion of this he puts into a leaf 
twisted into a funnel, and catching a wasp, he presses its juice 
into the funnel, and putting in a little palm wine, he squeezes 
the moisture from this mixture into the dog’s nose, and behold, 
it is a good hunter and tracker of animals. Wooden bells are 
tied round the necks of dogs while hunting, that the hunters 
may know of their whereabouts in the bush, and not fii*e at 
them in mistake for game. 

The following incident, which occurred in the Ngombe 
Lutete district in May 1908, well illustrates their superstitions 
regarding dogs. A good hunting dog was missing, and after 
two days’ seaixh it was found dead in the bush, and was at 
once buried. A day or so after the men went hunting, but 
their dogs seemed spiritless, indifferent in their search for 
game, and not at all keen of scent (the grass is very high and 
the bush thick at this season); so the hunters thought that 
the spirit of the dead dog was affecting the living dogs, because 
they had buried it with so little ceremony, and the only way to 
increase the interest of the living dogs in their work was to 
appease and comfort the spirit of the dead dog that they had 
buried so unceremoniously. The hunters went and surrounded 
the deceased dog’s grave, and solemnly fired volley after volley 
until they considered that they had propitiated the dead dog’s 
spirit. The usual mode, however, of burying a good hunting 
dog, is to wrap it in the skin of an antelope it has killed, and 
inter it at a cross road, and not in the bush. 

During the few veeks that the grass remains short, the 
village boys go farm-rat hunting — these farm-rats are pretty 
little brown creatures with black stripes. They live on nuts 

188 

BOWS AND ARROWS 

and roots, and their flesh is delicious, as I know from experi- 
ence. My boys often during this season came from the farms 
with a dozen or twenty of these farm-rats apiece in their 
baskets; and being very short of food, they persuaded me to 
try some. Their habits are clean and their food wholesome, 
but their name and looks prejudiced me against them ; that 
I’epugnance, however, once overcome, I am afraid that the 
boys at times regretted their powers of persuasion, for I often 
had a meal from their catch. The same may be said for a 
species of mole-rat, and the large palm-rat — they are good 
eating. No self-respecting boy would eat the dirty, common 
house-rat. They often told me that the lazy boys who did eat 
them got a scalp disease that affected the growth of the hair 
on the head, causing the hair to become tufty, like a badly- 
kept lawn, i.e. with little tufts of hair, and the scalp showing 
between ; and certainly I knew one boy who ate house-rats and 
had a head of hair of that description. 

Several boys with their miniature bows and arrows, and 
their small conical traps, would go together to the farms, and, 
finding the rat tracks, they would place their traps in them. 
Then making a wide detour, they would enclose a large space 
of an acre or two, and walk in, kicking the grass and shouting. 
The startled rats would make for their runs ; but these little 
creatures have a way of running and stopping for a moment, 
and this habit is so well known by the boys that they walk in 
with their arrows fitted to their bows ready to fire, and directly 
a rat pauses, a dozen or more arrows are let loose at it, and the 
owner of that arrow which pierces a vital part claims the spoil. 
Should the rat escape the arrows, it darts along its track into 
the basket trap, which is built after the manner of the toy 
known as a Siamese link, and if the rat once enters it, the more 
it struggles the firmer it is held. 

The boys make a fetish from pieces of wood about three 
inches long, to bring them good luck in rat and squirrel 
hunting. Such a charm is called nambwa. A boy takes from 
three to six pieces of wood of exactly the same length, and 
cuts notches in them which must correspond. These he hangs 
by a string round his neck, or at his girdle; and he pours a 

T 

When an antelope has been killed, the fatal bullet is put in the hole as 
shown, and blood is poured over it as an offering. The original is in the 
British Museum. 

Drawing by 

The Nsambi 

Rev. F. Longland 

The only instrument allowed in the secret society’s “lodge” to which the initiated may dance. 
It is a hollow case laced together, with stout canes to draw the strings taut. The strings are made 
by scraping strips of palm bark to the required thinness. 

RESPECT FOR LEOPARDS 189 

little of the blood of every rat and squirrel he kills on to this 
nambwa charm as a thank-offering for his success. 

Leopards are regarded with great respect, for they work 
considerable havoc among the goats and sheep, and they are 
not averse to visiting the fowl-houses and levying a heavy toll. 
People also are taken by them, hence there is much jubilation 
when a leopard is killed. The fortunate hunter has it carried 
through the towns of his district, and the principal chiefs give 
him presents as a recognition of his bravery — each trying, accord- 
ing to his wealth, to outvie the others in generosity. When 
it is known which chief has made the largest gift to the lucky 
hunter, that chief goes and puts his foot on the leopard, and thus 
establishes a claim to its skin, and this act is greeted with much 
firing of guns, beating of drums, and dancing round the prostrate 
beast. Until this ceremony of treading on the animal has been 
observed it cannot be skinned. The leopard after it is slain 
is always spoken of as “lord,” “chief” (jnfumu). 

After the skinned carcass has been returned to the hunter’s 
town, two or three days are spent in festivities, accompanied 
with gun firing, drum beating, and the chanting of songs, in 
honour of the “ slayer of the chief ” {mvondi a mfumu) ; and 
much palm wine is drunk. The carcass is eaten by those who 
care to feast upon it ; but many abstain from eating it, for 
fear of having spots come out on their skins similar to leopard 
spots. To take or sell a leopard skin outside the district in which 
it is killed would be resented as an insult and cause a fight. 

While I was in the Ngombe Lutete district in 1908 a 
leopard was killed, and the carcass was carried to the old and 
real chief of the district (Mpiodi of Nkondi), who gave the 
hunter the largest donation, viz. 60 francs in silver; another 
chief gave one tin of gunpowder and two European rugs, 
worth in all 22 francs ; another gave 15 francs, and several gave 
10 francs each. As there were, however, three important chiefs 
who gave good presents, the skin was divided, and a piece 
presented to each. In the San Salvador district the old custom 
is still maintained, and no modification such as this is per- 
mitted ; but petty local jealousy was the cause of this alteration 
of the custom in a district where there is no great overlord. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

WARFARE AND ITS USAGES 

IN dealing with this aspect of the native’s life, I scarcely 
know how to classify him — as brave or cowardly. It may 
be best to catalogue him according to the weapon he uses 
in the fight. The Lower Congo man with his flint-lock gun is 
ridiculous, and is to be regarded more as a joke than condemned 
as a coward ; but the Upper Congo man with his spear against 
spear can render such a good account of himself that we would 
rather have him on our side than arrayed against us. I have 
seen the native make war with both kinds of weapons, and I 
would prefer to fight twenty natives with guns than two armed 
with spears. 

The spear is wielded by the Upper Congo men (only a tribe 
here and there uses the bow and arrow) ; but the flint-lock 
gun is the only fighting weapon used in warfai’e by the Lower 
Congo people, and it is about the latter that we are writing. 
According to an ancient sixteenth-century account, the 
weapons of the Lower Congo warrior at that time consisted of 
bows, arrows, axes, swords, spears, daggers, and shields; but 
these have been entirely superseded by paltry, cheap, flint-lock 
guns, introduced by traders, the barrels of which, in most 
cases, have been fashioned out of old gas-piping, and frequently 
do more damage to the person firing them than to the one at 
whom they are fired. The stock and fixings are in keeping 
with the barrel. The powder used is generally adulterated, and 
is warranted to make more noise and smoke than do damage — 
such powder has little carrying power, and less penetrating 
force. The bullets are bits of twisted brass wire, broken iron 
ore, stones, or pieces of metal broken small enough to go down 
the barrel. 

190 

THE CONGO GUN 

191 

When the gun is loaded for firing, the fighter does not 
press the butt into his right shoulder and look along the 
barrel as he takes aim ; but he holds the butt of the gun 
against the palm of his half-extended right hand, and, without 
taking aim, he pulls the trigger with a finger of his left hand. 
By this mode of firing he guards his eyes from the sparks of 
the powder as it flashes in the pan, and his head from being 
blown off should the barrel burst from the excessive charge of 
powder forced into the barrel ; but the aim being unsteady and 
uncertain, the object fired at is more secure than the objects in 
its immediate vicinity. The Congo gun will not carry more 
than about fifty yards, but the combatants, when firing, stand 
about a hundred yards from each other, and the result gener- 
ally is an almost bloodless war. 1 have known over two 
hundred men fight thirty-two, and after these unequal sides had 
fired at each other for two and a half days, one man was struck 
on the ankle by a spent plug, which penetrated the flesh so 
slightly that I was able to remove it with my pen-knife. 

The King at San Salvador can proclaim war with a town 
without consulting anyone, even his head-men ; but a chief in 
his district who wants to fight another chief must gain the 
permission of the King first, and then the consent of the 
district chief ; and to ensure their neutrality he presents a pig 
to the King, and a larger or smaller portion of a pig to the 
other chiefs according to their status. Chiefs living in distant 
localities would not consult the King, but only the chiefs of 
their districts, and divide the pig, or pigs, among them. A new 
palm-frond shaken out, and put in a prominent place on a 
house or on a town, is used by a person or a town to indicate 
absolute neutrality in any local war, and ensures respect by the 
antagonists. 

On the declaration of war between two towns, a strong 
charm is made by the medicine-man killing a frog which he 
burns with the twigs taken from three special trees (the lem- 
banzau, the hlo, and the mfilu), and the ashes of these four 
things are made into a paste by the addition of some water. 
This paste is put into small snail shells, one of which is given 

192 

WAR CHARMS 

as a charm to each fighting man. The men then walk round 
one of the above-named trees, and on returning to the town 
some palm wine is mixed with the paste remaining in the 
saucepan in which it was compounded, and all drink of it. 
After each man has drunk a little of this concoction, the 
medicine-man takes the pot down to the road leading to the 
town which is to be attacked, and stands it in the road. 
Every fighting man who proposes to go to the war must jump 
over the saucepan, and if one stumbles, or touches it with his 
foot, he is compelled to remain at home, for the omen shows 
that if he goes to the fight he will be killed. The frog is used 
in compounding this charm, because the natives have noticed 
that the frog’s heart “ lives ” (i.e. pulsates) for some time after 
it is taken from the body — an evidence of that tenacity of life 
which they hope will be imparted to them. During the whole 
period of the war the men are not allowed to have any inter- 
course with women, or the charm will be nullified. 

In another district other means are used, as follows : they 
send for a medicine-man (of the elemba order),^ who takes 
some palm wine in a wooden plate or bowl, and, dipping his 
fingers in the wine, he touches the lips of the fighters with the 
front, the back, and then the front again of his fingers ; and 
tells them that they must neither look back, nor enter a house, 
but go right away to the fight ; hence this ceremony is per- 
formed immediately before they set out for the enemy’s 
town. This particular charm places them under a spell, so 
that they have no need to fear any possibility of harm or 
danger. 

The men, women, and children who remain at home procure 
the 7izaji fetish (said to cause lightning), or the mbambi fetish 
(able to give a horrible disease), or the mbanzangola fetish 
(wooden image able to give severe pain), whichever they can 
borrow, or, the one in which they have the gi’eatest faith; and 
they dance the nhlco dance to remove or destroy any witch- 

’ iewfca = soothe, appease, remove evil spells, and is a protective 
charm from violent death by an enemy. = violent death — the 

war fetish used to kill the enemy. Each has its own fetish-man. 

THE KILLED 

193 

craft that may be employed against their friends in the fight; 
and as they gyrate round and round the fetish they shout : 
“ You fetish, you must kill anyone who is bewitching our fight- 
ing men.” For it must be remembered that any man killed in 
a fight does not die by bullet or knife, but by witchcraft. 

Should a man happen to be killed during the attack, the 
fight rages round the corpse for its possession, and often in 
fighting for the body several others are killed by knives and 
sticks used at close quarters. If the corpse falls into the enemy’s 
hands, they cut off the head, and, after soaking it in water 
until the skull is cleaned of all flesh, they fix it on a pole and 
place it at the entrance to the victor’s town, or in a prominent 
position on a hill — as an emblem of shame to the conquered. 
Sometimes the skull is cleaned and used by the victor as a 
drinking cup. The reason why they fight so fiercely for the 
body is that, if the head is cut off, the spirit of the slaughtered 
man will haunt, and by witchcraft kill, not the man who slew 
him, but the members of his own family. Thus, on the one 
hand, they fight to preserve the body intact so as not to have 
the vengeance of the spirit falling on them as a family, and on 
the other hand they strive to mutilate the enemy’s body that 
his family may be done to death by the spirit owning the head- 
less body. On returning victorious from a fight there is much 
dancing and firing of guns. 

Sometimes the towns fighting will exhaust their stock of 
gunpowder before either side has gained any advantage over 
the other. A truce is then made for two or three months while 
they lay in another supply, and on the appointed day they will 
start firing again at each other, I have known this to happen 
more than once, and in those localities gunpowder has advanced 
in price. At other times they have agreed to postpone the 
commencement of a fight until each side has a good supply of 
powder, and this also has sent up the price of powder through- 
out the district. 

When two towns, A and B, are fighting, and it is noticed 
that B, the smaller of the two, is losing, then the neighbour- 
ing friendly chiefs will advise the chief of B to sue for peace 

N 

194 

SUING FOR PEACE 

with a white goat {nkombo a maboko). Should he agree to 
this proposal, a white goat is bought, and one of the chiefs 
carries it on his shoulders to the scene of the fighting, the chief 
of B leading the way by walking immediately in front of the 
one carrying the goat. On drawing near to the fighting place 
they call out loudly, “ Peace ! Peace ! Peace ! ” {Luve ! Luve ! 
Luve!). And upon hearing those words the fighters must 
stop at once. The chief of B takes the goat, and kneeling 
before the chief of A, he says, “ I do not want to fight.” The 
chief of A must accept the goat, and there is no more fighting 
until the case has been arbitrated upon properly by the local 
chiefs. 

If it is an unconditional peace, not to be followed either by 
a lawsuit or by arbitration, a medicine-man is sent for who 
brings with him some stalks, leaves, and palm wine. He squeezes 
the juice out of the stalks and leaves into the palm wine and 
mixes them ; and then dipping the leaves in the mixture, he 
touches the two chiefs with the liquid and sprinkles the rest 
among the fighters and inhabitants of the two towns who are 
present, and thus peace is established. 

The making of blood-brotherhood after a bad quarrel, or 
after a fight between towns, is performed as follows : If it is a 

quarrel the two opponents, if a war, the chiefs of the towns 
fighting, have a little blood taken from each of them, and each 
drinks the blood taken from the other ; then two needles are 
solemnly buried, and a lasting peace is thus made, and the 
whilom enemies become staunch friends and brothers — more 
than that, they are one, for have they not each other’s blood in 
their bodies.!^ It may be that the burying of the needles is a 
remnant of “ the burying of the hatchet.” 

In September 1882 1 was tramping about, with seven men 
and some lads as carriers, in the Madimba district, south of San 
Salvador ; and on Friday, September 29, I left Sengene with 
the intention of sleeping at Mputu, and then turning off to 
spend a few days in Mbangu before starting home to San 
Salvador. However, we had not left Sengene far behind when 
we heard that two towns were fighting right in our path. We 

Lent by 

Rev. J. L, Forfeiti 

IFerry Across the River Kwilu 

These dug-out canoes are used for crossing rivers too wide to bridge and too deep to ford. Both 
natives and white men pay a small toll for the convenience. 

AN UNPLEASANT EXPERIENCE 195 

. changed our road, but on reaching the next town, the folk 
called out to one of my carriers, “ Lema, Lema, your town is 
fighting, and if you go on you will be killed.” 

Resolving, if possible, to carry out our pi’ogramme, I changed 
my carrier, but we had not proceeded very far when we met 
some men who said to my carriers (who were all San Salvador 
men, except the carrier, Lema, whom we had left behind), 
“ Don't go that road ; the King has sent some men to fight, and 
if the enemy see you they wiU try to shoot some of you.” 

My carriers were heavily laden and unarmed, so to force 
them forward, with the probability of meeting armed enemies, 
would have been extremely unfair to the men. There was 
nothing for it but to return to San Salvador by a roundabout 
way, so as to avoid an attack being made on my carriers. There 
were six towns fighting one, and knowing the combatants well 
I had not the slightest fear that they would interfere with me ; 
but I was anxious about my men. 

In the town where we heard the news that the King had 
sent a few men to the fight, we w'ere able to procure a guide 
to take us by a circuitous track to San Salvador, as the proper 
road ran right among the towns that were fighting. There 
was no slow walking now ; not a single man lagged behind, 
each man pressing on the heels of the next in front. It was 
not a pleasant walk, for the guide stopped frequently and 
raised his hand for silence while he listened for any rustling in 
the tall grass through which we could not see a dozen feet. 
Then the guide loaded his gun ready for an emergency, and 
after that he stopped often to look to the priming, and on we 
would go again — pushing our way through the thick, entangled 
grass. 

For an hour and a half we walked to the firing of the 
combatants as we made the detour to give them a wide berth ; 
and at one place, from the top of a high hill, we could see the 
fighting in the valley below. They were formed in two 
opposite lines, each being well covered by trees, boulders, &c. 
We could see a man loading his gun, then he walked forward, 
pointed his gun in the direction of the enemy, and fired, after 

196 AN UNPLEASANT EXPERIENCE 

which he hurried back to cover; then another went and 
repeated the former’s action, and so on up and down the line. 
The lines were more than two hundred yards apart, and no 
fighter went in close enough to the other side for his gun to 
send a bullet among the enemy. The grass hid them from one 
another, and the only chance of damage was for two men to 
meet accidentally in the space between the lines, when they had 
gone forward to fire ; but apparently they listened too carefully 
for every rustle in the grass. The surprise to me is, not that 
there are so few killed in their fights, but that anyone is killed. 
I stood looking for some time, and although many guns were 
fired and there was plenty of flashes, smoke, and noise, not a 
single fighter fell, and we heard afterwards not a solitary wound 
was inflicted. 

In that walk we had to break our way through bush and 
jungle to elude any of the enemy who might remember that we 
had San Salvador men in our caravan, and that we were behind 
them and unarmed. We all reached San Salvador in the late 
afternoon, nothing the worse for our adventure than a good 
appetite and badly blistered feet. 

What was the reason for this fight ? It was not until some 
time after that I heard all the particulars, and they are inter- 
esting, as illustrating the native mode of thought and action in 
these matters. 

Tulante Bidi was the chief of Lemvo, a town about fifteen 
miles south of San Salvador. About 1880 Bidi’s nephew, 
Nlemvo, became the personal boy of a missionary living at 
San Salvador, who some time later brought him to England, 
but not without first receiving permission from the King. 
When Bidi heard that his nephew had left for England, he 
accused the King of selling him to the white man, and despaired 
of ever seeing his nephew again. The King, however, assured 
him that it was all right, that he was responsible for the lad, and 
would see that he returned in due time. Bidi had to comfort 
himself with this assurance, and knowing the King as he did, 
and being ignorant and superstitious about the white man, it was 
not much consolation that he received from the King’s words. 

A CASUS BELLI 

197 

Months passed by and the grass-burning season arrived, 
and as Bidi wanted to burn a patch of bush that lay along the 
boundary of his own land and that belonging to another chief, 
he, according to custom, sent word to the said chief, and 
arranged to meet him and his people at a certain time on a 
stated day, that the hunters of both towns might burn the 
grass together, and jointly hunt the animals driven out by the 
fire. Bidi and his people arrived at the appointed place, but 
no Kimpanza people were there, and after waiting a consider- 
able time Bidi and his men started back for their town. They 
had not proceeded very far on their way when the other chief 
arrived, and, without waiting or calling, he fired the bush. 
This was both an unlawful and discourteous act. 

On seeing the smoke, Bidi and his men returned and asked 
why they had fired the bush without them, and had so insult- 
ingly broken the custom of the country. The Kimpanza people 
asked him who he was, and what could he do, and twitted him 
with having his nephew taken away by the white man ; that he, 
a chief, had sold his nephew for cloth. No sooner did Bidi hear 
this taunt than he ordered his men to fire on the others. There 
was a fight, but no one was killed. The Kimpanza people told 
the King, who gave them permission to fight, and told them to 
“ go and fetch the ridge-pole of Bidi’s house.” To take the 
ridge-pole of the chiefs house against whom you are fighting 
is something like capturing the standard in an English battle. 
This the Kimpanza people tried to do but failed, although 
several towns joined their side, and only one other town took 
Bidi’s side. 

The skirmishing lasted some weeks, and then a man on Bidi’s 
side was killed, and that stopped the fight. The man killed 
was a slave, and his owner said, “ How is it my slave was killed 
and no one else? Surely he was bewitched.” And he accused 
Bidi of bewitching him, and Bidi would have had to drink the 
ordeal ; but the slain man was a slave, and no free man or chief 
takes the ordeal on account of the death of a slave ; conse- 
quently the owner could not press the accusation. 

Some months after the fighting was over Bidi’s nepheiv, 

198 

A CASUS BELLI 

Nlemvo, returned to San Salvador from England. The King 
treated him well, but said that, on account of Bidi’s complaint 
and attitude, Nlemvo could not proceed to his uncle’s town 
until the uncle had paid him a girl slave, and five thousand 
strings of blue pipe beads. In the meantime Bidi had died, 
and his brother, who succeeded him, had to pay the slave, and 
Nlemvo paid the beads, and thus ended a fight that for several 
weeks embroiled and disturbed a district the size of a small 
English county. 

CHAPTER XIX 

MARKET DAYS AND TRADING 

IT is acknowledged by all who know him that the Congo 
native is a born trader. He is ever keen to drive a bargain 
to his own advantage, and unwearying in his pursuit of 
profits. Those who do not know him misjudge him as lazy, 
but I doubt vei’y much if his accusers would take his long 
journeys and carry his heavy loads to procure the wherewithal 
to meet his obligations as a man, a father, and a husband. 
After long trading journeys he has his holiday — his rest-time, 
in which to recuperate himself from the starving diet of the road, 
and the strain of carrying up and down hills a very heavy load ; 
but he must work to meet his expenses. And besides, every 
native is ambitious to have a grand funeral, one that will be 
the talk of the country-side for many a day to come. With that 
ever in view, he attends the markets far and wide, and when 
he has gathered sufficient produce he takes the long, toilsome 
journey to the “ coast ” to dispose of his goods to the white 
traders. No one accuses the members of the Stock Exchange, 
or the shopkeepers of the Strand, of laziness, because they do 
not till the earth to grow wheat or cabbages ; neither should 
the black man be charged with idleness because he is not 
always found with a hoe in his hand. There are both lazy and 
industrious men to be found among the natives, and the latter 
are in the majority. 

Native traders, having collected articles of trade, such as 
goats, pigs, sheep, various kinds of farm produce, palm wine, 
slaves, and manufactured goods, take them to the markets, 
which are four in number, viz. Konzo, Nkenge, Nsona, and 
Nkandu, these have given their names to the four days 
that comprise the Congo week.^ All the markets held on a 

^ See Appendix, Note IV, p. 308, “Times and Seasons.” 

199 

200 

MARKET DAYS 

certain day all over the Lower Congo are called Konzo, and all 
the markets held the next day are named Nkenge. These 
markets are all held in different places, e.g. all the Konzo 
markets are held on different sites from all the markets held on 
the three successive days. These market-places are so arranged 
that one in four will be within two or three miles (sometimes 
much closer) of a town, the next day’s market may be ten miles 
away from the first town, but near some other town or towns, 
and the next from fifteen to twenty miles, and the next perhaps 
twenty-five miles away from the first town. Thus every village 
throughout the whole of Lower Congo has at least one market 
during the week within a reasonable distance of its doors. If, 
many years ago, a family moved into a part of the country far 
distant from all the markets, then they established one on a 
neutral site, and tried to make it popular to induce others to 
attend it; and on whatever day they started it, it took the 
name of all the other markets held on that day, and came in 
its proper order. 

Besides the market-day name as mentioned above, the 
natives often affix to them the name of a prominent town or 
place near which they are held, to distinguish them from all the 
other markets of that name held on that day, e.g. Nsona 
Ngungu is the Nsona market held near the town of Ngungu ; 
and the Nsona Kiyenji is held near the town of Kiyenji. 
Thus, if a man of Ngombe Lutete district said that he was 
going to Nsona, everyone would know that he was going to 
visit the nearest market of that name ; but if he stated that he 
was going to Nsona Ngungu, they would know at once that he 
intended walking thirty miles across country to trade on the 
market of that name, near the Thysville railway station. 
Again, some of these markets are more famous than others 
for certain articles that are always to be found for sale on 
them. For instance, at one Nkenge you can always be sure of 
finding pigs for sale, hence those trading in pigs consequently 
travel to that particular Nkenge ; another Nkenge will be noted 
for pots, pipes, water-bottles, and various kinds of pottery ; a 
certain Nsona will be famous for the amount of trade cloth. 

FIVE GREAT MARKETS 

201 

and another for the quantity of gunpowder always for sale ; 
but although at these markets there may be large quantities 
of the one article for which the market is noted, yet there will 
also be food, &c., for sale. Other markets are very general in 
their character, having a little of everything exposed for sale 
— sugar-cane, cassava roots, cassava flour, native bread, cloths, 
knives, flint-lock guns, pots, baskets, tobacco, sweet potatoes, 
yams, dried meats, fowls, trinkets, necklaces, &c. &c. 

There are also five great markets that are held every eight 
days, not on the same but on the successive eighth days. These 
are named Nkenge Nkila, which is held in French Congo, just 
north of the main river ; Konzo Makwekwe, held in Ngombe 
Lutete district; Konzo Kikandikila, held about three days 
south of Wathen mission station ; Konzo Kinsuka, near the 
boundary of the Portuguese and Belgian Congos ; and NTcenge 
Elembelo, not far from San Salvador. There is thus a line of 
these great markets, the gathering-places of large crowds of 
people from very wide areas, held every eighth day, sti’etching 
from San Salvador right through the country, and crossing the 
river into what is now known as French Congo ; and it is very 
probable that they run south to Angola, and well north into 
Landana, i.e. that they are only limited by the boundaries of 
the old Kingdom of Kongo, which formerly included both those 
places ; and it may be that they also run east and west. In 
the old days these eighth-day markets were the chief places for 
native-made cloth (mbadi), and for the fibre {mpusti) employed 
in its manufacture. 

Before the coming of the white man the articles used for 
bartering purposes on the markets were : native cloth (tika 
yamhadi), made in very small pieces from two to three inches 
wide and from six to eight inches long ; native-made knives 
{inbele za mfudila) ; hoes (nsengo), and various other small things 
made by hand. After the arrival of the white man the currency 
changed to red beads (mbembe), thick black beads (matadi 
mankolo), and blue glass beads {nzimbu za ndombe — or nzimbu 
for short). The latter are so freely and plentifully used that 
they are really the equivalent for money, and the standard of 

202 

ARTICLES FOR BARTER 

all prices, especially around San Salvador, In the Ngombe 
Lutete district brass rods vrere more popular than beads, and 
thus became the currency, the medium of barter, and the 
standard of prices. Thirty odd years ago the brass rod then 
in use was twenty-seven inches long, but now it is scarcely five 
inches. Those who came into the possession of a number 
of brass rods cut a half inch off* each, so as to procure for 
nothing the brass for his or her ornaments, and then passed 
the shortened rods into circulation, and others cut off pieces 
for the same purpose. Suddenly they awoke to the fact that 
there was not so much brass in their rods — that they were short ; 
but there were so many in circulation that they agreed to take 
the short rods by giving, and receiving, an increased number 
for the cloth or goats, &c,, for sale. The process of shortening 
still went on, together with the consequent giving of an in- 
creased number for an article, so that now the rod is as short 
as it can get without entirely vanishing altogether. Thirty 
years ago a good fowl could be bought for two or three rods ; 
but a hundred and fifty would now be given of the very small 
rods for the same size fowl. Along with the shortening of the 
rod has also been the pouring into the country, by many 
steamers, of hundreds, if not thousands, of tons of the brass 
wire used for cutting into rods, and this factor has also helped 
to increase the cost of native produce, and decrease the buying 
power of brass rods. In fact, brass rods, and, in a minor de- 
gree, blue pipe beads, are a drug in the market, and the white 
man, who only has these kinds of money in his store, will 
either have to starve, or give such prices for his food that he 
will find the cost of living in a first-class European hotel 
much cheaper. He must have now all kinds of good cloth, 
clothes, enamel ware, trinkets, jewellery, in fact, a multiple 
store in miniature to supply the demand : and if he ha| some- 
thing the native wants, and no other trader has it, he can de- 
mand almost any price in reason. European money is gradually 
gaining ground, and in the near future will probably supplant 
this present mode of barter. 

Before the arrival of missionaries, the natives did not know 

}' koto by the Author 

Native Currency— Church Collection, Lower Congo 

20 boxes of matches ; 2 eggs ; 200 gun-caps ; i rug ; i umbrella ; i tin of gunpowder ; i calabash of gunpowder ; 2 pieces of cloth ; 1 bottle of 
kerosine ; 15 francs (cash) ; and 3373 short brass rods. The whole represents 8931 brass rods (Congo money), or 19s. 6d. English money. 

ACCOUNTS 

203 

any way of writing down their business transactions. All ac- 
counts respecting debits and credits were retained in the 
memory ; and as their memories were sometimes at fault, 
especially in regard to what they owed to others, there were 
frequently bitter quarrels and fights among them, which often 
led to lawsuits and big “ palavers.” One way of helping the 
memory was to tie knots in a piece of twine. A man on a 
journey would tie a knot in a piece of string for every day he 
was on the road, and thus know for certain at the end of his 
travels how many days he had been en route. If two or more 
men wished to meet on a certain day, say, fifteen days hence, 
they would each take a piece of string and tie fifteen knots in 
it, and as each day passed they would cut oft‘ a knot, until at 
last they would see that the appointed day had arrived. For 
counting months, or native weeks, i.e. sets of four market days, 
they would cut notches in a stick — a notch for every month, or 
every week, as the case might be. For counting tens, pieces of 
grass or palm-nuts or pellets of clay were used, whichever 
might be handy at the time of counting; but sometimes a 
mark with the finger was made on the ground. Our ordinary 
old English tally was known and used, i,e. notches cut across a 
piece of wood, and then the wood split down the middle, each 
of the two parties concerned in the transaction it recorded, 
taking one-half of the tally stick. In counting tens, they 
counted three, then two, and put those together to make five ; 
then another three and a two, and, putting those together, 
they pushed them over to the other five and thus made a ten ; 
and having made a series of tens they counted them in threes 
and twos, and fives to make the ten tens, i.e. a hundred — a 
clumsy method, but it was necessary in order to check each 
other’s counting. 

There is, and has been for many years, a firmly-established 
law that no force of any kind, under any circumstances, shall 
be used on the markets — no raiding, no thieving of goods, and 
no capturing of people — that is, that the market-place must be 
regarded as absolutely neutral ground. At one time not a 
single weapon of any description was allowed within the 

204 

JIGGERS 

boundaries of the markets. The infi-ingement of any of these 
rules brought down on the offender the vengeance of the whole 
country-side. There are traditions of such offenders, but their 
punishment was such as to deter others from following in their 
footsteps. Sometimes rowdy, reckless rascals would meet small 
unprotected parties on the way to market, and would rob them 
of their goods, and even steal some of the people and sell them 
on a distant market or at the “ coast.” 

When the white men had built their stations, or factories, 
at the “ coast ” (and coast here means not only the sea shore, but 
also the banks of the River Congo from the Noqui to Matadi), 
the natives took peanuts, palm kernels, ivory and slaves to 
them in exchange for salt, gunpowder, flint-lock guns, trade 
cloth, &c. ; and about 1877 they started the rubber trade. It 
was about that time that the chigoe ^ (or jigger) appeared : for 
apparently it was brought to the district of San Salvador from 
the sea coast by those who had travelled there with rubber for 
sale. It was then called “ the insect beneath the skin ” {ntanda), 
and as they noticed that these insects hopped about after they 
came from under the skin, they called them the bounding or 
jumping insect {ntand' a ndangxca) ; and they have always asso- 
ciated them with rubber, which bounces about. It is now more 
commonly known by the natives as dede. It is the Pidex 
penetrans. 

When a caravan of native traders is ready to start for the 
white man’s trading factory, they call a luck-giving medicine- 
man. The medicine-man of this particular cult has a luck- 
giving bag of charms, containing pieces of leopard’s skin, 
hyaena’s skin, lion’s skin, and, in fact, a piece of the skin of 
every strong animal he could procure, and also some albino’s 
hair. The name for this charm is mpungu, which means mighty, 
all-powerful ; and sometimes these things were put into an image 
{sole—Si figure with grass tied round its neck, knotted back 
and front) as being more easy to carry. This medicine-man is 
supposed to have the power of making his customers to be 
specially favoured by women, slaves, and also by his family and 
’ See Appendix, Note p. 309, “ The Chigoe.” 

A POWERFUL CHARM 

205 

friends, and very fortunate in trading. Those people who by 
us are regarded as being the special favourites of Dame Fortune 
are, in this part of Congo, thought to be in possession of this 
bag of charms or the image containing them. 

The price for this charm is one slave, and as only rich 
people can afford to give that price, the idea is consequently 
fostered that such a fetish really gives good luck to its happy 
owner. This medicine-man can not only impart good luck to 
his clients, but, if paid, he can remove good luck from his 
client’s enemies, and overwhelm them with misfortune ; he has 
only to tap on the image, and hold it up and down three times 
and hang it outside his house, and away its spirit will fly to 
ruin the person against whom it has been invoked. 

On the arrival of this medicine-man he sits down in the 
middle of the caravan, which stands round him with their loads 
I tied ready for the journey, and puts the image in front of him. 
He speaks to the fetish image, telling it to give the traders 
good luck on the road, and at the trading factory. A man 
then takes a fowl by the head, and the medicine-man holds it 
I by the body, cuts off its head, and allows the blood to drop on 
I the image. This is to appease and refresh the fetish power in 
the image. The fowl is then cooked, and divided among the 
, traders who are going on the journey, for them to eat. This 
fowl is cooked and eaten in the open air, and during and after 
this ceremony no one must go into a house or turn back from 
the road. The fowl having been eaten, the medicine-man 
places a shell containing very small bits of everything in the 
bag of charms, and this he puts in the road leading out of the 
town by which the caravan will travel to the “ coast.” Every 
I person in the caravan — man or woman, boy or girl — must step 
over this shell, and if anyone touches it with his foot he is not 
allowed to proceed, for according to the omen he will die on 
i the journey ; and after stepping over the shell no member of 
the party must look back or he will destroy his luck. Some, 
in order to keep the powerful luck-giving fetish in a good 
humour, sacrifice a goat to it every month, whether they go on 
a journey or not. The blood is poured over the image, and 

206 ON PASSING THROUGH A VILLAGE 

the flesh is eaten by the trader and his family, for it must not be 
sold — only a comparatively rich man can afford such an offering. 

The members of a cai*avan when passing through a town 
must not let their sticks touch the ground, or they will destroy 
the luck of the town, and thus lay themselves open to a heavy 
fine. To avoid this most carriers put their staffs across their 
right shoulders and under the end of their loads, which are 
usually carried through a town or village on their left shoulders. 
The carriers while travelling in the open country or bush hitch 
up their cloths to their girdles, thus exposing their thighs, to 
give greater freedom in the moving of their legs, but on passing 
through a village or town they must drop their cloths out of re- 
spect for the people, and for the sake of decency, otherwise they 
will be taken to the chiePs house and beaten. Neither may 
carriers when passing through a town carry their loads on their 
heads, as that would be resented by the inhabitants of the 
town as the height of haughtiness and pride, and ai’ousing 
the anger of the people, would result in a fight and the imposi- 
sion of a heavy fine. 

While en route to the trading factory, the above customs 
have to be carefully observed, and in addition payments are 
made for the use of bridges crossing unfordable rivers, and for 
the ferrying canoes employed in taking the caravan over deep, 
wide rivers. When passing through the principal towns of 
the districts, or the country belonging to a great overlord, a 
toll must be paid to ensure protection. On payment of the 
tax, the chief receiving it is responsible for the safety of the 
caravan ; and the tax is fixed according to the number of the 
carriers in the caravan, and the value of the goods they carry. 
Rubber and ivory pay a heavier tax than peanuts and palm- 
kernels. The tax must be reasonable, or otherwise native traders 
will make wide detours to avoid exorbitant chiefs. The Zombo 
tradei’s, paying toll to the King of Kongo at San Salvador, 
travelled with their produce as far as Noqui, a matter of ten days’ 
journey ; but as a rule a caravan rarely went more than six or 
seven days from home, and if there was a white trader within 
that limit so much the more pi’ofitable to them, and the better 
selection of trade goods from which to choose ; but if there 

IVORY 

207 

were no white traders within the sphere of safe travelling, then 
they sold their goods to other native traders, who carried them 
nearer the coast, and thus the produce of Central Africa filtered 
through more than one middle-man to the white traders for 
shipment to Europe. And as each middle-man received a 
profit out of the transaction, it was to their interest to keep 
the white man from penetrating through to the interior of the 
country and dealing direct with the natives. The belt of 
middle-men round Africa have done much to keep it a closed 
and unknown continent — their profits were in danger. 

In the old days some trade was done in ivory, but not much, 
as it was thought that the person who sold ivory, sold in the 
hollow part of the tusk the spirit of the people of his town. 
If a man took a tusk to the “ coast,” and while he was away 
a person died in the town, the trader on his return was accused 
of witchcraft, and had to take the ordeal, although it was, and 
is, the usual custom not to charge an absentee with bewitching 
any person in his village. A powerful chief sold ivory in spite 
of this superstition, but even he was careful not to sell large 
quantities for fear of public opinion, and the above consequences 
of the oi’deal. 

During the rainy season of 1883 and 1884 not much rain 
fell on the towns and farms behind Noqui and Ango-ango ; 
and the folk of that district said that those caiTying ivory 
through their country to the white traders at the above places, 
were carrying in the cavities of the tusks the bodies of dead 
people to sell to the traders, and the said dead bodies destroyed 
their luck, and consequently they had no rains. They stopped 
all trade between the hinterland and the trading factories at 
the above places. The wi-iter was on the road between San 
Salvador and Noqui, travelling towards the latter place, when 
his carriers heard that the Noqui people had caught a native 
trader taking ivory to a trading-house for sale. They took the 
ivory away, and cut the unfortunate man’s mouth literally from 
ear to ear. The writer’s carriers were so alarmed at this that 
he had to make a wide detour and pass through Mpalapala to 
reach his friends at Tunduwa station. This shutting of the 
road continued so long, and injured trade so much, that the 

208 

A STRANGE BELIEF 

traders of Noqui and Ango-ango joined forces, marched on the 
towns and burnt them down. One white trader was killed in 
the fight, but the road was eventually opened again. 

The writer, while living at San Salvador, was visited by some 
Zombo natives, and after much persuasion he induced some of 
the bolder ones to enter his house. One of the first things 
they did was to look carefully round the walls of the rooms. 
On questioning them, we learned from them and others that 
they were looking for the shelves upon which we were supposed 
to store dead bodies until we had an opportunity of sending 
them for shipment to the “ coast ” ; and their idea was that we, 
as well as white traders dealing in ivory, bought the dead 
bodies of the natives, and sent them to Europe, where, by some 
means, they were resuscitated, and worked for us as slaves. 
Hence their fear to enter, their close scrutiny of the walls for 
storing shelves, and their surprise at seeing no dead bodies. 
The fact of our being missionaries did not allay their suspicions ; 
and the other fact, that we never traded in ivory or anything 
else, nor ever sent anything to the “ coast,” did not allay their 
fears. They regarded us with greater dread, as they thought we 
were so subtle as to hide our real reason for living there — the 
buying of dead bodies, under a show of kindness and goodness. It 
took a weary time to disarm suspicion, and gain their confidence. 

With x’egard to rubber, the natives at first did not know 
that it was of any value, and consequently they were slow to 
use it as an article of trade, although there were numerous 
vines in the forests. They thought it was of no commercial 
value ; but as soon as they found it was saleable, they tapped 
the vines, boiled the sap, and carried it, at first secretly, to the 
trader. The reason for this secrecy was that those who intro- 
duce any new article of trade. See. have had to pay for their 
cleverness by becoming the objects of a suspicion that often 
ended in a charge of witchcraft and death. There is a rumour 
that the man who first discovered palm wine forfeited his life 
as a witch ; and there is a district well known to the writer where 
gum copal was found to have a commercial value, but through 
superstitious fear a prohibition was put on its sale by the chiefs 
and the majority of the people, and the man who discovered its 

SLAVES 

209 

value was threatened with the ordeal if he persisted in selling 
any more. Since then education and enlightenment have spread 
in that district, and the more progressive folk would disregard 
the prohibition, but unfortunately they ax’e afraid to sell it in 
any quantities lest the authorities should hear of it, and demand 
the ai’ticle in part payment of their taxes, and their last state 
thus become worse than their first. Other articles of great 
commercial value like cotton, and an oil-giving seed {Sesamum 
Indicum), have been suppressed for the same reason; but we sin- 
cerely hope that the Belgian Government by the wiser methods 
they have introduced (wiser and better than those that prevailed 
under the disastrous regime of the now defunct Congo Free 
State), will so win the confidence of the people that they will 
fully reveal the resources of their country, and co-operate with 
one another in the development of them for the benefit of all. 

Besides selling ivory and rubber, slaves were also sold to 
the white traders, especially at the sea coast. Those sold as 
slaves varied in character, age, and sex. Inveterate thieves, 
men who committed adultery and could not pay the fine 
imposed, lawless rascals who broke the laws of their districts 
and were too poor to pay their fines, folk kidnapped while 
going to or from a market, those who tried to escape from the 
secret society, those too weak to resist the tyranny of the 
strong bully, found their way to the trading houses as chattels 
of barter. A family would also sell one of its members to 
clear itself of debt, and a bankrupt would be carried off to 
clear himself of debt by the sale of his body. Sometimes these 
debts were not legitimate ones in the sense of being a proper 
business transaction between two persons for, say, a thousand 
brass rods, equal with interest to forty or fifty shillings ; but 
a mean advantage taken of a tenjporary difficulty, e.g. a man 
one day wanted ten brass rods to finish a purchase. He 
borrowed the rods, and the lender might hate the man, and 
sell him within a day or two as a slave, or he might transfer 
the debt to an enemy with the same evil result — slavery for 
life for the sake of ten brass rods ; and it has been done for 
even two brass rods — worth a penny. Those who were proved 
by the ordeal to be guilty of witchcraft, and those who were 

o 

210 

ARTICLES OF BARTER 

murderers, could not be sold as slaves, nor could they be re- 
deemed at any price by their families — they had taken life 
and must pay a life. 

On the arrival of the cai’avan at the trading factory, and the 
price for the produce having been agreed upon, the “ money ” 
the native traders received comprised the following articles : 
salt (mungwa\ cloth {nlele), plates (malo7iga), dishes and basins 
(mbasmga), mugs, cups, and glasses (kopo), gunpowder (tiya 
twa mptdu=vfh.ite man’s fire), &c. Guns (mata) were sometimes 
bought; those with short barrels were called lung' e kicvibi, and 
those with long ones nkombo—goaX, probably because they cost 
the price of a goat. In a trader’s store there were more than 
sixty different articles of barter, and in these days the number 
has greatly increased, as has already been mentioned. 

In the old days (and only recently has the custom ceased) 
the white man gave to all trading caravans a demijohn (large 
or small, according to the amount of produce sold) of gin or 
rum as a present. It may be interesting to note hei’e the 
derivation of a word that has now travelled all over the 
country, and is used as an equivalent for present, free gift, tip, 
bakshish, &c., viz. matabixu. It is made up of two Portuguese 
words — rnatar, to kill, and bicha, a serpent or snake. It was 
the practice of the Portuguese trader to give a customer a tot 
of rum to kill, as they phrased it, the serpent or snake, i.e. a 
biting in the stomach. By and by this word was applied to 
any make- weight given on the top of an agreed price, and 
hence to a present, gift, or tip, in recognition of little services 
rendered. 

Attached to each trading house is an interpreter {linguis- 
tere), who is engaged and paid by the manager of the factory 
to act as a medium between himself and the native traders. 
Living in the villages near trading centres like Noqui, San 
Salvador, &c., are trade brokers (also called linguisteres), who 
make long journeys into the hinterland, where hy their presents 
to various native traders and chiefs they work up a connection 
among them. I have known one such broker to give away 
between 150 and 200 pieces of cloth, besides all the cost of his 
caravan in food and pay, in the hope that he might sell for 

I 

I 

rhoto by 

Bread Fruit Tri e 

These, like many other fruit trees, are of comparatively recent introduction into the country. Tlie native.; appreciate them now as 

much as the white men. 

THE FACTORY INTERPRETER 211 

them when they came with produce for sale to the white 
traders in his part of the country. 

The factory interpreter receives a monthly wage from his 
master, and he is expected to use all his persuasive powers with 
the native traders to induce them to sell their produce to his 
employer only, and his master will give him an extra com- 
mission if he is successful ; and he can also draw something 
fi’om the deal by representing to the native that the white 
trader has offered less than he really has. The interpreters 
often entertain prospective customers of their masters, and not 
infrequently give the members of the caravan a demijohn of 
palm wine to gain their goodwill. Among the interpreters, 
and also among the brokers, there is keen rivalry for the 
opportunity of acting as the medium of the deal — the inter- 
preter fighting to keep his lucrative position by introducing 
the trade to his own employer, and the broker trying to 
procure the business that he might recoup himself for his heavy 
outlay. The white traders never appear on the scene until 
the native enters his compound or his store with the produce 
for sale ; but it is more than probable that they were pulling 
the strings through their touts to draw the trade to their own 
particular factory; and I must say, that from all the accounts 
I have heard both from native and white traders about each 
other, they never used other than legitimate means. 

The native trader and the carriers loaded with his pro- 
duce arrive at the Noqui, and he is met by the broker who has 
visited his town in the interior, and who, by his presents and 
glibness of tongue, has received the promise to act as his 
salesman, as his intermediary with the white trader. The 
broker conducts his client to the white trader, and a conversa- 
tion such as the following will take place — the white trader 
and the broker talking Portuguese to one another, and the 
broker and native trader talking only in the Congo language : 

Broker to white man : “ How much for these tusks ? ” 

They are carefully examined and weighed, and then the 
white man replies to the broker : “ I will give 400 pieces of 

cloth for them ” (a piece of cloth, invoice pi’ice, costs from 
1^. Qd. to that is about the price of a standard piece of a 

212 NATIVE TRADER AND BROKER 

certain quality of 12 yards to the piece, probably the first 
kind introduced by the early traders). 

Broker to native : “ He will give you 180 pieces.” 

Native to broker : “ That is not enough, I want 450 pieces.” 
Broker to white man : “ They want 500 pieces.” 

White man ; “ No, that is far too much, I will pay 420.” 
Broker to native : “ The white man says that he will give 
you 210 pieces.” 

After more haggling the white man reaches his limit of 
450 pieces ; and after much talking, lasting perhaps a whole 
day, the native trader brings down his price to 360 pieces, and 
the broker works his up gradually to that amount. This 
chaffering may last three or four days, but the price being 
now agreed upon, the broker tells the white man to pay them 
360 pieces, which he does in articles from his store : a case of 
beads may equal eight pieces, a common gun one piece, a better 
gun three pieces, a fine cloth four pieces, a demijohn of rum four 
pieces, a case of a dozen bottles of gin ^ two pieces, and so they 
work through the whole of the 360 pieces, taking out looking- 
glasses, gunpowder, cloths of various patterns and qualities. 
The native trader takes these goods back to his own locality 
and sells them retail on the various markets in buying small 
quantities of produce, at a profit of from 100 to 150 or more 
per cent. He must be a smart man to remember the cost of 
the ivory, the expenses of his journeys to and from the “ coast,” 
the value of the goods he is taking to sell in his own district, 
and many other things, such as food for his carriers en route, 
taxes to the chiefs through whose towns he has passed, and 
tolls for bridges and canoes, or he will have a loss instead of a 
profit at the end. Having sold his ivory, he sells his rubber, 
peanuts, &c. in much the same way — the broker always leaving 
a margin for himself. 

After the native trader has left with his caravan, the 
broker takes the difference between the highest prices 
mentioned by the white man for the produce, and the actual 
prices paid to the native trader, which, in the above illustra- 

' For some years now spirits have not been carried for sale to the 
natives beyond the Mpozo River, three miles from Matadi. 

CURRENCY 

213 

tion, on the ivory alone is ninety pieces, and on the whole of 
the business done may reach 156 pieces. This helps to refund 
him for his disbursements among his clients, for the expenses 
of his journeys, and for his trouble. 

Sometimes the native trader wants more than the broker 
can afford to give, and he will go off to another white man and 
use another broker, or that white trader’s interpreter, who, 
having given him little or nothing by way of presents, can, 
therefore, agree to give him a higher price for his produce. 
The native trader is ’cute enough to work one broker against 
another. Sometimes the broker himself will recognise that 
the white man is not offering a fair price, or that he has not a 
good assortment of goods in his store, or that their prices are 
higher than those at the stores of other traders, and he will 
take his client to another white man’s factory. 

This system of trading has already died out in some districts, 
and is fast disappearing in others ; and in another generation 
it will become obsolete, and that is one of the reasons why I 
have described it in such detail. Men now are often paid in 
francs for their work on the railway, at the Government offices, 
and by the traders and others ; and with these francs they can 
buy, in the many shops that have been opened, the articles 
they desire. Such shops will also accept produce, and will pay 
for it either in francs or trade goods. On the markets francs 
and half francs are accepted in payment, but the copper coins 
— from five centimes upwards — for some reason, are not 
acceptable to the natives ; and for small purchases, brass rods 
and beads hold their own. At all mission stations, no pro- 
duce— ivory, rubber, &c. — for export is accepted, neither is 
money in any form taken, but the barter goods are used for 
buying fowls, goats, and native foods of every kind, for paying 
carriers, and workmen. They are not there as traders to buy 
and export produce; but use barter goods in lieu of money, to 
meet their household and station expenses; and they are in- 
creasingly using francs to meet those demands, which find their 
way to the shops of legitimate traders ; and they will be glad 
when francs altogether supplant the clumsy, time-wasting 
method of buying by barter. 

CHAPTER XX 

BLACK AND WHITE MAGIC ^ 

The word nganga covers a wide range of meanings, 
such as medicine-man, sorcerer, exorcist, witch-finder, 
wizard, fetish-priest, witch-doctor, diviner, fetish- 
man, &c., but not one nganga exercises all these functions. 
The term is also applied to those persons who have been 
initiated into the mysteries of the secret societies, and may 
then be translated as the Tcnowing ones, but such initiates rarely 
act as medicine-men : and it is not necessary for a proper 
nganga to be a member of either of these societies. Each 
expert works in his own particular line, and rarely takes a 
case outside of it ; and it will be seen from the names of the 
various medicine-men, that their functions are usually well 
defined. There are about fifty different classes or orders of 
medicine-men, and some of them are referred to in the various 
chapters dealing with different phases of native life, and in 
those places their names are given and their operations are 
described, hence only those medicine-men not already mentioned 
will be found in this chapter. 

Most of the medicine-men are engaged in what might be 
called the “ white art ” in magic and divination, e.g. they use 
their supposed skill in attempting to free the people from the 
malign influence of evil spirits, and to cure various diseases. 
It would be surprising if, during generations of practice, they 
had not found some remedies for some of the diseases they are 
constantly treating. There is a great amount of faith-cure of 
persons suffering from neurotic and imaginary disorders, who 

^ This chapter should be read in conjunction with the chapter on 
“ Relif?ious Beliefs ” in Among Congo Cannibals, pp. 246-260, by those who 
desire the full account of Congo fetishism and medicine-men. The 
chapters are complementary. 

214 

WHITE MAGIC 

215 

pay “ doctors ” to dance and chant around them ; and cures 
are often effected by change of scene ; a person living in the 
same village month after month, attending the same markets, 
seeing always the same small circle of acquaintances, becomes 
poorly, out of health, &c., and goes off to a medicine-mau 
living at a village some hours’ journey away, and remains there 
for a month or six weeks, with the result that they feel better 
for the change, and return home in improved health. One 
should be chary of condemning wholesale all the methods em- 
ployed by the natives for curing themselves of their ailments 
and diseases. It will be seen that most of the medicine-men 
can use their fetishes and charms in what we may call the 
“black art,” i.e. they can employ their supposed skill in 
bringing evil and disease on the enemies of their clients. 

Men and women on becoming ngangas do not take new 
personal names, except those belonging to the secret society of 
the “ Country-of-the-dead,” and they are always called nkau ; 
and those desiring to engage in the profession of the witch- 
doctor enter the different orders by various doors. 

By initiation. The witch-finder, the most powerful and 
wealthy order among the ngangas, has an assistant (esarnba), 
but before he can be a fully-recognised witch-finder he must 
learn all the tricks of his master, and it takes a clever and 
sharp-witted fellow to do that. Besides being cunning, he 
must be fearless — afraid of nothing and nobody, for his life 
will often be threatened by tho.se whom he accuses of witch- 
craft. When the time comes for the assistant to receive full 
power, his master puts his fetish in the centre of a circle, and 
his drum near to his pupil. He beats on his drum, shakes his 
rattle, and tries to drive his fetish power into his assistant. 
If the pupil sits stolidly taking no notice of the drum-beating 
and rattle-shaking, the master says his assistant is not fit to 
be a witch-doctor; but if the pupil sways to and fro to the 
rhythm of the beaten drum, jumps about like a madman, and 
does all kinds of stupid things — as they suppose under the 
influence of the fetish power that has entered him — he is 
pronounced a fully-initiated witch-doctor, being now possessed 

216 METHOD OF ENTERING A CULT 

by the fetish power of his master, from whom he has already 
learned the secret of his tricks. 

By payment to a ngang' a mbambi (see page 223) of one 
thousand strings of blue pipe beads and a fowl, after recovery 
from an infectious disease by means of the fetish image belong- 
ing to this particular “ doctor.” In return for the fee special 
instruction is given in the “medicines” used, and method of 
procedure. If, however, the patient is clever enough to 
recognise the herbs, &c., given to him, and to imitate the 
ceremonies, he may set up as a “ doctor ” of this order without 
the payment of any fee. 

By being imbued with fetish power in the ekimi dance. 
This is a fetish dance during which the “ doctor ” tries to drive 
into his patient or into his pupil the fetish powex'. For this 
particular dance see page 129. 

By passing successfully the ordeal for witchcraft. In 
March 1909 I met a man who had formerly been a witch- 
finder {ngang' a ngombo). He had been accused four times of 
being a witch, and each time he had vomited after drinking the 
ordeal infusion, thus proving his innocence. After the fourth 
ordeal he informed his friends that he himself would begin 
business as a witch-finder; and he became in much request, and 
was never again himself accused. On one occasion he was 
chased by an accused person who threatened to shoot him ; 
but his principal professional difficulty was to find unerringly 
the grave of the person killed by a witch. If death is believed 
to be due to witchcraft, no trace is left of the grave, and the 
pointing out of the place of interment is regarded as the crucial 
test of the occult powers of this kind of witch-doctor. 

The profession is therefore open to any shrewd, artful, and 
energetic person, either rich or poor, bond or free, and is not 
confined to either sex. As a rule, the witch-doctor is a lithe 
and active person, for it is often necessary to dance for hours 
to excite the crowd to the required pitch; he has restless, 
sharp eyes that jump from face to face of the spectators; he 
has an acute knowledge of human nature, and knows almost 
instinctively what will please the surrounding throng of on- 

Lent by Miss Hartland 

Witch-doctor and his Assistants 

The witch-doctor himself is weirdly decorated with charms, skins, feathers, and chalk. One 
assistant has a rattle, and the other a small ivory trumpet, and to the sound of these instruments 
the witch-doctor dances when in search of the witch responsible for the illness of his client, or the 
death of a person. 

POWER OF THE WITCH-DOCTOR 217 

lookers ; but his face becomes after a time ugly, repulsive, and 
the canvas upon which cruelty, chicanery, hatred, and all devilish 
passions are portrayed with repellent accuracy. 

When performing, blue, red, white, yellow, and any other 
colour he can procure are plastered in patches, lines, and circles 
upon his face and the other exposed parts of his body ; thick 
circles of white surround the eyes, a patch of red across the 
forehead, broad stripes of yellow are drawn down the cheeks, 
bands of red, white, or yellow run down the arms and across the 
chest, and spots of blue and other colours are put on promiscu- 
ously to fill up, according to no rule other than his own crude 
taste, and the colours available. His dress consists of the 
softened skins of wild animals, either whole or in strips, feathers 
of birds, dried fibres and leaves, ornaments of leopard, crocodile, 
or rat’s teeth, small tinkling bells, rattling seedpods, and any- 
thing else that is unusual and wearable. The effect attained is 
extremely grotesque, but to the native these things are the 
proper paraphernalia of a witch-doctor and a sign of his power. 
To inspire the native with awe and fear this get-up is absolutely 
necessary, for, if a witch-doctor arrived at the scene of his 
operations in the ordinary garb of a native, he would be scouted 
and turned out of the town. 

The witch-doctor is the arbiter of life and death, for not 
only is the victim he selects led away to drink the ordeal, but 
so implicitly do the people believe in him that, when he says 
that his patient will die, this invariably happens, as the friends 
begin at once to prepare for the funeral, and instead of feeding 
the patient they dig his grave and send to call his relatives to 
the obsequies. The medicine-man has said that he will die, so 
what is the use of wasting time and good food on him ? 

'ITie witch-doctor is consulted about a child before birth, at 
birth, and throughout its childhood and youth, during illness 
to drive away the evil spirits causing the sickness, after the 
death of a first wife to purify the widower, after death to dis- 
cover the witch who caused it, and at burial to ensure that the 
deceased will not return to trouble the family. Even after 
death and burial the spirit of the departed one can be controlled 

218 WITCH-DOCTOR AND TABOO 

by the medicine-man, and destroyed by him if it does not 
behave itself decently. 

The witch-doctor puts the native under taboo, and removes 
it at the proper time ; he makes the hunting, trading, and war 
“ medicine ” to ensure good luck ; he brings the rain when there 
is a drought, or stops it when the fields are being inundated 
with abnormal storms ; he makes the fetish for the caravan to 
carry on the road that will soften the heart of the white trader, 
so that he will give a good price for the produce offered for 
sale ; he also makes the charms that will protect a whole town, 
or an individual, or an animal. There is no condition of life 
that he is unable to affect either for good or evil, and his 
services must not be despised or some dread catastrophe will 
follow. Such are the pretensions of the Congo witch-doctor, 
and over the natives he wields tyrannical power. 

There are two terms that contain the whole theory and 
practice of the Lower Congo medicine-man’s black and white 
art. When a man has been injured by a known or unknown 
enemy and wishes to inflict on him disease, misfortune, or 
death, he selects a medicine-man who possesses a fetish that has 
control over certain diseases, and pays him a fee to loTca e likisi, 
i.e. to curse anyone by the aid of a charm or fetish. The fetish 
is beaten with a stick, raised in the air three times, and held 
head downwards three times near the ground, told what to do, 
and then hung up outside the invoker’s house, and the spirit of 
the fetish flies off' to obey its orders. This is the simple modus 
operandi followed by all medicine-men, who invoke their fetishes 
to use their various powers against the enemies of their 
customers. Any ordinary man who owns a fetish can curse an 
enemy with it by performing the same ceremony ; and if a man 
has not a fetish of his own powerful enough to satisfy his hatred, 
and does not want the expense of engaging a medicine-man, he 
can, for a smajl sum, borrow for a short time a strong fetish, 
and with it curse his enemy. When this ceremony is performed, 
it is not necessai'y to mention a name, but simply “ the thief 
who stole my goods,” or “ my enemy who sent me bad luck,” or 
“ the one who bewitches me with this bad disease,” as the case 

BLACK AND WHITE ART 219 

may be ; and this is the whole science of the Congo medicine- 
man’s “ black art.” 

Nearly all diseases, bad luck, misfortune, sorrow, and death 
are caused by witchcraft, i.e. by some one using a fetish to curse 
{loTca e nkisi) a person or a member of his, or her, family. 
For example, if a piece of cloth is stolen, the owner pays a 
medicine-man to curse the unknown thief. Should the thief 
hear of it, and through fear of the curse return the cloth, he 
will pay the owner compensation, and will ask the medicine- 
man to soothe or appease the fetish, and thus remove its curse 
(lembola e nki^) from working against him. Suppose the thief 
does not hear that the robbed man has paid a witch-doctor to 
curse him, or he hears of it, but feels so secure in his disbelief 
in fetishes, or has such faith in the protective power of hisjown 
charm, that he retains the cloth, then the spell will work either 
against him, or against one of his family. Hence when a man is 
suffering from a disease, no one knows whether that disease is the 
result of a curse invoked on his own evil doings, or on a member 
of his family, who has injured some one so badly that they 
have paid to have the curse invoked that has brought the 
disease. 

A robbed man will sometimes fee the “ lion doctor ” (p. 227 
infra) to curse the unknown thief with severe lung trouble ; by 
and by a man in the neighbourhood is troubled with a chest 
complaint, and, all other remedies failing, he asks the “lion 
doctor ” to use his good offices with the “ lion ” fetish to 
appease and soothe it so that the curse may be removed, and 
he may be cured. From the native point of view it is evident 
that either the sick man himself, or else one of his family, is 
the thief, or why does the man suffer from such a complaint ? 
The same medicine-man practises his black magic to invoke his 
fetish {loka e nkisi) to cui’se a man with a disease, and he uses 
his white magic to soothe his fetish {lembola e nkisi) to remove 
the curse, i.e. cure the man ; and he thus draws pay from both 
parties. Hence to invoke malignant powers against an enemy, 
and to soothe and appease the said powers on behalf of a client 
by various rites and ceremonies so that they will remove the 

220 MAKING A VILLAGE FETISH 

curse, are the opposite arts of the same medicine man, and he 
employs the same fetish for both purposes. 

Some of the medicine-men in the following list are common 
to the whole of the Lower Congo, others are known only in 
certain localities, and others are known by one name in one 
district, and another title in another part of the country. It 
will be observed that some are apparently more beneficent than 
malignant in their operations, but it may be stated as an axiom 
that the more malignant a medicine-man can be for evil, the 
more beneficent and powerful he can be in removing curses and 
thus curing diseases. The powerful fetishes that give the worst 
complaints are also supposed to be able to cure them when 
properly appeased by rites and ceremonies. 

One of the most popular medicine-men is he who goes by 
the name of ngang' a zumbi — the luck-giving medicine-man. 
Should a town desire to have good luck in health, in trading, 
in breeding animals, and success in its rivalry with other 
towns in hunting, farming, &c., the inhabitants contribute 
towards feeing a luck-giving medicine-man to make for them a 
strong town charm {nkind' a evata). On the arrival of the 
medicine-man with his bag of charms, a plain post of a certain 
kind of wood (lembanzav) is procured, and a hole is cut in the 
top. Into this hole some of the zumbi charm is put, and a 
piece of palm gossamer is tied over it. A hole is then dug in 
the ground just outside the town by the side of the road which 
the women pass when fetching water from the stream. A goat 
is killed, and its head is put in the hole and the fetish stick is 
placed on it, as it is supposed to preserve the stick from the 
attacks of the white ant. The earth is rammed tightly round 
the stick, and the goat’s blood is poured over the hole in the 
stick, thus bathing the charms in blood. The town charm is 
now complete and ready to work, but there is one prohibition 
that must be scrupulously observed — nothing tied in a bundle 
may enter the town, or the charm will become non-effective. 
Women returning with fire-wood must untie the bundle before 
reaching the “ town charm ” ; men with bundles of grass for 
thatching must unfasten them ; carriers with loads must loosen 

FETISH FOWL 

221 

the cords, or make a wide detour; and people must remove 
their girdles or belt. No sacrifice is offered regularly to this 
charm, but, should some misfortune happen to the town or 
people, they refresh or renew the energies of the charm by 
pouring some more blood over it. Sometimes the fetish post 
is placed in the centre of the town. 

A man will invest, sometimes, in a zumbi charm for his own 
exclusive use. The fee, however, is so extravagantly large that 
only rich men can pay it, and hence the idea of its power to 
bring riches to its owner is fostered. The zumbi charm is at 
times put into a fowl, a goat, or a pig, and such a fowl or 
animal is never sold or killed, and it is never stolen, as no one 
will dare to steal the fetish belonging to another person. 
Male animals only are invested with this zumbi power, and 
when the animal grows old the power is transferred to another. 

There is to be found in the towns what are called zumbi 
fowls [nsum a zumbi) ; and the possessor of such a charm 
selects a fine healthy cock and gives it a portion of the zumbi 
charm to swallow. That fowl then becomes his fetish, and he 
treats it as such. No one is allowed to beat it, or offend it by 
driving it away, and it is respected like a chief. The zumbi fowl 
tells its owner of coming events, such as danger to the town or 
to himself, and by its crow it also foretells the future ; and in 
that way brings luck to its owner, as only he can understand the 
information given by its crow, and is thus able to take advan- 
tage of it. When the fowl becomes old the zumbi charm is 
given to another,'and the first one is killed and eaten by its owner. 
Drums and rattles are used for driving the zumbi power into a 
person, but the fowl simply swallows a piece of the charm. 

The zumbi is a bundle of charms, or an image into which 
some of the charms have been put, or a fowl, or animal as 
indicated above. The power of this charm is derived from the 
great mpungu charm ; and the fowl of zumbi, fowl of the image 
{sole), and the fowl of the mpungu are all the same in their 
operations, getting their powers, however, originally from the 
last — all-powerful, mighty. 

Another very powerful medicine-man is he of the nzaji 

222 

LIGHTNING FETISH 

{ngang' a nzaji) fetish. Thunder is supposed to be made by 
this fetish, which also has the lightning under its control ; and 
both lightning and a thunderbolt are known by the name of 
the “ dog of the nzaji ” {mbw' a nzaji). This fetish is repre- 
sented by an image, and is believed to have tremendous power. 
When a person has been robbed, and cannot discover the thief, 
he sends for the medicine-man of this particular cult, who 
brings his wooden image, and asks each suspected person if he 
or she has stolen the article. If they all deny the theft, he 
then goes outside the house and taps several times on the 
stomach of the image, and after raising it and lowering it three 
times, the nzaji is thus incited to strike the thief with lightning 
on the first possible opportunity. 

The fear of this curse is so great that a thief will return 
the stolen article, secretly if possible, or openly rather than 
risk so terrible a punishment. The nzaji curse is then nullified 
in the following way : the person or family under the ban 
tells the medicine-man to bring his image, and he pours some 
palm wine into the hole in the stomach of the image, stirs the 
wine well, and gives it to the person or persons to drink. This 
drinking of the mixture {nua mbozo) renders the participants 
immune from death by lightning, and from a skin disease 
called the fire of God {tiya twa Nzambi), which is supposed to 
be given by this fetish to those who are under its ban. 

Should several members of a family die either by lightning 
or become affected by the skin disease, the family goes through 
the ceremony of marrying the nzaji fetish into the family, or 
one of its members becomes a fetish-man of this cult, and thus 
the whole family comes under the benign influence or protec- 
tion of the nzaji (this is called tuntuka nzaji). It is believed 
that if the fetish is brought into close kinship or intimate re- 
lationship by one or other of these ceremonies, that it will 
have pity on its family, and no other member will suffer from 
its curse. It must be remembered that, when the nzaji curse 
is put on a thief, the thiers family is included in that curse ; 
and if the family has a strong suspicion that one of its members 
is the thief, they try to protect themselves in the above 

£ E 

c 

a.iS 

V c 
bJO o 
■o s 

•g s 

n c 
5 c 

t) 5 

T3 > 

MARRYING A FETISH 223 

manner, and undoubtedly the thief often pi’otects himself by 
taking advantage of the antidote to the curse. 

The fetish-man of another cult {ngang' a mbambi) owns an 
image that gives and cures deep-seated ulcers (mbad). Some 
time ago a man living in a town near San Salvador had some 
of these ulcers which the medicine-men could not heal although 
many were engaged for that purpose. They said that they 
were caused by the mbambi fetish, and to cure the man it was 
necessary to marry the fetish into the sick man’s family, when 
it would take pity on him. The fetish-man of this particular 
cult was sent for, and on arrival he placed his drum in the 
centre of the crowd that had collected in the middle of the 
town. A boy and girl were selected to represent the family. 
The girl was put on the ground with her back supported by 
the drum, and the fetish man beat away at his drum until the 
girl swayed to and fro with the rhythm of the beating; then, 
of a sudden, she jumped up and ran to a house opposite, 
climbed over it, and as she went, pulled out, in her frenzy, 
handfuls of grass. Her actions showed that she was under the 
spell of the fetish, which had taken possession of her. The 
same operation was repeated on the boy,^ but, being too young 
to know what was expected of him, he sat stolidly still, and at 
last was replaced by an older boy, who very quickly re-enacted 
the girl’s performances. The mbambi fetish was then regarded 
as a member of the clan, and was expected to withdraw his 
displeasure from his “ relative.” The patient, however, was 
never cured of his disease, and died a short time after the 
above ceremony. 

There are evil spirits (likwiya) that cause diseases, bad 
luck, and death, therefore it is necessai’y to have a fetish-man 
(ngang' a nkwiya) who can control, punish and even destroy 
them should there be occasion to do so : for the evil spirit 
(nkwiya) is that by which the witch (ndoki) is possessed. It is 
the business of the medicine-man of this cult to ascertain what 
spirit it is that is troubling the sick man or the unfortunate 
family, and then he tries to drive it away by cursing, threaten- 
* This boy, now a man, related this incident to me. 

224 

CURSING A SPIRIT 

ing, and firing his gun at it, and, as a last resort, he digs up 
the body of the deceased person whose evil spirit is accused of 
being the cause of the illness or epidemic and burns itd By 
burning the body it is believed that the spirit is effectually de- 
stroyed, but this is done only when the evil spirit of the person 
is persistent in its attacks on the health and comfort of the 
individual or family. Before employing such extreme measures 
they will often call in a fetish-man of another class (ngang' 
a bitodi), who calls on the spirits, and tries to persuade or 
exhort them to leave the sick man alone. Sometimes he will 
chase the said spirits out of the town, and, getting them near 
the bush, he will fire his gun repeatedly at them to drive them 
away. Being something of a ventriloquist, he has the trick of 
throwing his voice in different directions, answering himself in 
assumed tones, and keeping up conversations with the evil spirits; 
and, as the natives hear these different voices talking in mumbling 
sentences, they think this medicine-man is well worth his fee. 

Chest and lung complaints are very common, so they 
have a medicine-man {ngang' a munkanda) of the traps to 
deal with them. He has a bundle of charms and some small 
traps. The bundle contains powdered chalk, palm nuts, and 
small garden eggs, and on the outside are various leaves, herbs, 
and six small traps. If the person suffering from a chest 
complaint spits blood, the medicine-man takes some leaves and 
some chalk powder, crushes them together, and after adding 
a little palm wine, he gives the mixture to his patient to 
drink. Then he puts several of the traps {nhanda) about the 
door of the sick person’s house, or room, having first put a 
little fowl’s blood or some sweet herbs in them to attract 
insects, spiders, cockroaches, &c. 

In the morning he looks to see if anything has entered the 
traps, and if he finds a cockroach is right at the end of one of 
them, he knows that the witch belongs to a distant branch of 
the family, and without any compunction he crushes the cock- 
roach, believing that the sickness will now pass from his patient 
to the witch represented by the cockroach, and his patient will 
* See p. 243 for other methods of dealing with the spirits of the dead. 

CATCHING A WITCH 

225 

now get better. If, however, the cockroach is only half way up 
the trap, he knows the witch is of very near kinship to his 
patient, and, as he does not want to pass the sickness on to a 
near relative, he warns the cockroach and lets it go. Should 
a cockroach be found in the trap next morning, he believes it 
is the same one (or, if it is a spider, that it has only changed 
its form) ; he will either warn it and threaten it more strongly 
and let it go, or he will keep it shut up a few days without 
food, and will watch to see if a near relative of the patient 
becomes thin {i.e. dying through having his soul so imprisoned 
in the trap that it cannot return to the body), and, if no one 
becomes thin and ill, he will vehemently threaten the witch in 
the insect and let it go. Should he find an insect in the trap 
on the third morning, he kills it at once, as it is evident that 
the witch is very persistent and should be punished. It is 
immaterial if the insect is found in a different trap each time. 

When the medicine-man squeezes the insect in the trap, 
someone else gets the illness of the patient, and, as this is the 
only way to catch this complaint, it is evident that the first 
patient received it by trying to bewitch some one else. This 
is supposed to be the only way in which this lung trouble is 
imparted and cured. It is interesting to note that witches can 
travel about disguised as insects, and that the folk they repre- 
sent suffer in proportion to the suffering inflicted on the insects. 
In this fetish-man we have the black and white art operating 
at one and the same time — in curing and giving a complaint. 

The most powerful and most feared of all the fetishes in 
the catalogue belongs to the medicine-man who has the 
mhanzangola fetish. It is a wooden image, and is always 
retained in the possession of the witch-doctor, as it is too 
powex’ful to pass into the hands of a layman, A private 
person can buy other fetishes, but no private individual may 
own a mhanzangola fetish. If a person desires to cause pain, 
disease, or death to another, he goes to a medicine-man of 
this fetish order, and, having paid a fee, he drives in a nail or 
knife where he wants his enemy to feel the pain. A knife-stab 
in a vital part means a painful death to the man’s enemy ; a 

p 

226 

A POWERFUL FETISH 

nail in the shoulder, elbow, or knee means excruciating agony 
in one or other of those joints, and indicates that the man 
does not want to kill his enemy, but only wishes him to have 
rheumatism, abscesses, or such minor ailments. These fetish 
images are often found stuck over with nails, knives, and other 
sharp instruments. This is probably the only fetish image in 
connection with which there is no “ white art ” practised — it is 
neither a protective fetish nor a curative one, but is always 
used to inflict pain. On the other hand, I have heard that the 
nails, &c., driven into this image are offerings for benefits 
received ; and it is possible that someone suffering from pain in 
a part of his body has driven in a nail in a corresponding part 
of the image, to pass on the pain to an enemy whom he may 
think sent it to him, hence he may regard such a nail as an 
offering for a benefit he hoped to receive. 

Dropsy of the stomach is to be found occasionally, and a 
person suflering from such a complaint sends for the medicine- 
man of the masaku cult, who on his arrival calls together 
the relatives of his patient, and to some of them he gives light 
branches, to others rattles, and to one of them the fetish image 
masaku. The fetish-man puts the drum by the side of his 
patient, and while he is playing it, the relative who has the 
image beats it and calls on it to cure the patient, and punish 
those who are causing the disease by their witchcraft ; those 
with the rattles shake them vigorously, and those with the 
branches beat the body of the sick man. After keeping up 
this performance for some time, the medicine-man leads them 
outside the town, and the branches are all heaped together 
and left. He then procures some sweet-smelling herbs and 
boils them in a large pot, which is put under the patient; a 
large blanket is put over the man and the saucepan, and thus 
the sick man takes a vapour bath and perspires freely. This 
process is repeated many times. 

The word lemba means to tame, soothe, make gentle, and 
the fetish-man of this order {ngang' a lembe) is called upon to 
ratify unconditional peace between towns and chiefs that have 
been at war (see chapter on Warfare). If a man has accidentally 
killed another, he has to pay compensation to the family of the 

CURING INSANITY 

227 

deceased ; and then the homicide is taken to this kind of 
medicine-man, who procures a saucepan of palm wine and 
presses into it the juice of certain stems and leaves. He then 
dips his hands into the mixture, and puts the palms of his wet 
hands to the forehead and back of the homicide’s head, then to 
his temples, and lastly on all the joints of his body. This 
makes the homicide gentle and careful {olemhamene). Should 
a hunter happen to kill his dog, he must go to this medicine- 
man and pass through this ceremony, or next time he will kill 
a man. No one will hunt with him unless he observes this rite. 

The medicine-man also treats any cases of madness. The 
patient is well tied with ropes and taken to him carrying a 
lighted stick and a fowl on his head. The medicine-man takes 
five branches of five different trees, dips them in water, and 
repeatedly strikes the patient with them, saying, “ Evil spirit, 
come out of him” {nkw'iya vaika mima yandi). He then 
takes the lighted stick from the head of the insane person, 
and plunges it in water, and as the fire goes out so the 
bad spirit goes out of the man. Thereupon the fetish-man 
cuts the ropes and hands the madman back to his family. 
When a madman “ runs amok ” his family are told, and if they 
do not fetch him and look after him properly he is killed ; but 
in the old days it was usual to kill quickly a hopelessly insane 
person. The fetish man who treats such cases as these is called 
ngang' a madness. 

We have already given one method of dealing with chest 
complaints (page 224), but there is another medicine-man 
(ngang' a «^oii = lion) who has the reputation of curing the 
more severe forms of lung complaints, such as pleurisy, pneu- 
monia, &c., and a person suffering from a disease of this kind 
goes to, or sends for, a doctor of this class, who cuts a long, 
thin, exposed rootlet of a tree, and binds it tightly round 
the patient’s chest. The “ doctor ” then searches for a bunch 
of palm-nuts on a palm tree that has never been cut before for 
palm-nuts, and, having found the first-fruits of the palm tree, 
he takes some of the nuts and teai’s the oily fibre off with his 
teeth — a knife must not be used — meanwhile walking round 
the palm tree. Two of the nuts, freed of their oily fibre, are 

228 TREATING SLEEPING-SICKNESS 

hung from the rootlet round the man’s chest, one near each 
breast, and then the oil from the fibre is pressed out, mixed 
with palm wine, and rubbed well into the patient’s chest. 

There are many cases of sleeping-sickness ; and the patient 
suffering from this terrible complaint goes to the medicine-man 
for sleeping-sickness {ngang' a manimha), who gives him a purge, 
and then something hot to drink with pepper mixed in it. 
Sometimes he drops pepper-juice in the patient’s eyes to 
keep him awake, and lets blood every four days. He also 
scarifies the back and legs, and rubs in a mixture of limejuice 
and gunpowder, and stands the patient for a short time in the 
sun. Very often a low state of health exhibits some of the 
symptoms of sleeping-sickness, and such cases are helped by 
any course of medicine in which the suflPerer has faith, and 
these so-called cures foster the belief of the people in the 
power of this kind of “ doctor ” to relieve and cure real cases of 
sleeping-sickness. Although I have watched carefully I have 
never known him to cure a patient who, beyond all doubt, had 
the di'ead complaint. 

When a married couple have lost their children by death 
they send for the manga fetish-man, and on his arrival, the 
woman holds a “ hand ” of plantain on her head with the right 
hand, and to her left hand a rope is tied, and she is led by a 
man who cries out, “ I have a person for sale.” The fetish- 
man says, “ Bring the woman here and I will buy her that she 
may bear children.” The seller demands 3,000 strings of beads, 
and the medicine-man pays three single beads, and takes the 
woman, whereupon he throws away the plantain, saying, 
“ Remove these plantains, for they are the reason why she does 
not bear healthy children, because she is carrying them on her 
head.” He cuts the rope and a feast is made, after which he 
puts a taboo on her, and the ceremony is finished. This manga 
fetish-man does for the people in the Ngombe Lutete district 
what the moko “ doctor ” practises around San Salvador (see 
page 2.59). 

The medicine-man who owns the mpmgo fetish prepares in 
saucepans some protective charms which work by making an 
enemy forget his evil intentions. Should a person want to rob 

Photo hy Dr. Mercier Gattible 

Sleeping-sick Patients, San Salvador 

'J'he patients are set to build their own house, where they live while under treatment. The 
picture well illustrates the materials, and the methods, of erecting an ordinary native house. 

Photo by Mercier Cavibie 

Basket Making 

'I be Congo women are skilful basket makers. They prepare their own materials, and 
often work designs in red and black. These, like the above house builders, are sleeping- 
sick patients. It is always wise to keep such patients busy. 

THIEF’S FETISH 

229 

another under his very eyes, he uses the charm prepared and 
sold by this medicine-man, and under its spell he enters a 
person’s house, and either he or an accomplice engages the victim 
in an interesting conversation, so that he becomes forgetful of 
all else, and in that state of oblivion he is easily robbed. 

Any person suffering through ill-health from lack of energy 
sends for the nkonzo ( = nervous energy) medicine-man, or for 
the malunga ( = smithy, forge) medicine-man, who rubs two 
pieces of iron down the legs and arms three times; he then 
takes some green grass and rubs it into shreds, and puts some 
fire in the middle, and some sweet herbs on the live embers. 
He blows on it until there is a good smoke, and then passes 
the smoking herbs three times round the legs of the patient as 
he, or she, stands astride. When a woman is in birthpangs 
and has not sufficient strength, they seat her on two stones 
and perform the above operation. This fetish comes from the 
smithy, and consequently no one will steal from a forge or he 
will lose his nervous energy. 

The medicine-man with the ngundu fetish attempts to cure 
hernia with fomentations of hot leaves, purgatives, and palm 
wine mixed with certain juices. The ngoMla medicine-man pos- 
sesses an image that has power to discover thieves, and recover 
stolen property. It gives the thieves any and every kind of lung 
trouble, from which they cannot be cured until they have made 
restitution for the robbery. And the ehunze medicine-man 
attends a person with fits, apoplexy, or the ague shivers of fevers. 
He makes a leaf funnel and squeezing the juices of certain 
leaves into it, he drops the mixture into the eyes. The manmga 
medicine-man owns a fetish that causes a man to become very 
thin and weak, and it is also supposed to cure the complaint. 

The rain-stopping medicine-man (ngang' a lukandu) has a 
small bundle of “ medicines ” (which bundle is called lukandu). 
which he places on the ground and surrounds with several 
small heaps of gunpowder. He shakes his rattle, explodes the 
powder, and blows his whistle three times, and then the rain 
will neither be so frequent nor so abundant. The rainbow is 
one of the signs of the effective working of this med'cine-man ; 
and when the people see it they think the charm is successful. 

230 

RUNNING WATER 

and the rain will not fall again for some time. Should these 
means, however, not succeed, salt is put on the fire ; but this 
last charm must be used with great care, for it may entirely 
stop the rain for the rest of the rainy season, so it is used only 
when other means have failed. The medicine-man, on the day 
that he is going to invoke the power of this charm, must neither 
drink water nor wash himself. To cause rain to come after a 
long drought, the fetish-man takes certain leaves (lulemba-lemba), 
and puts them into a stream and dives under the water, and 
when he returns to the surface the rain will soon fall. 

In the ceremony of the last medicine-man that we shall 
mention there is an echo of the old Scottish belief that spirits, 
&c., will not cross water, as illustrated in Burns’ Tam o' Shanter. 
This medicine-man {ngang' a maladi), when a person has re- 
covered from certain serious sicknesses, as dropsy, sleeping- 
sickness, &c., brings his fetish, which originally came from the 
Baladi country (in French Congo), and removes from the patient 
the taboo of “ not crossing the road ” that was imposed on the 
sick man while ill. He takes his patient to a cross road, draws a 
chalk mark on the road, digs a trench, puts water into it, and he 
takes the patient, by interlocking the little fingers of the right 
hands, and helps him over the water three times. The taboo is 
removed, and the sickness is not able to follow the man across the 
water. Should a woman give birth to sickly children that quickly 
die, the same ceremony is performed, and the complaint from 
which she was suffering that caused the death of her children 
will not follow her across the little stream of running water. 

It will be observed that in this list of medicine-men, and 
from those mentioned in the various chapters dealing with 
other aspects of native life, that there is a fetish-man for 
every known disease, and also one for every possible emergency 
of life. The native is afraid to take a single important step in 
any direction from birth to death without first consulting the 
medicine-men, and invoking the aid of their fetishes. When a 
man is not helped by one, he, as a rule, does not blame him, 
but thinks that the diagnosis is wrong, and that the disease, or 
misfortune, is not under the control of his particular fetish. 
His faith, however, in the medicine-men is unaffected, so he 

FETISH-MAN’S POWER 231 

simply changes one fetish-man for another, hoping that the 
new one will have a fetish to meet his case. 

It will be observed that in the ceremonies of some fetish- 
men white magic is more evident than black, and in others that 
black magic is more prominent than white, and that nearly 
every one practises both the black and white art by the 
invocation of the same fetish in a slightly different way ; by 
dealing with his fetish in one way he invokes it to curse a 
person with disease and misfortune, and by following another 
mode of procedure he tries to soothe and appease his fetish, 
that it may in a good humour give his client the health and 
good luck that he desires. 

In the early years of the Baptist Mission on the Congo, the 
natives had little or no faith in our medicines, because we ad- 
ministered them in a simple and straight-forward way. If we 
had had recourse to trickery we might have made large sums 
for our mission funds, but, although our medical knowledge was 
very limited, and we had no doctors for very long among us, yet 
our remedies have so gained in favour that at one station alone 
(Wathen) a sum of nearly £S0 is taken annually for medicines, 
and natives come long distances to be treated in our hospitals. 
Medicine is not given to those whom we know can afford to pay 
for it. 

The fetish-men have largely maintained the continuity of 
native customs, for, when baffled in curing a person, they have 
frequently put their failure at the door of a broken taboo, or a 
slighted “ country custom ” ; they are also largely responsible 
for crushing any inventive genius the people have shown by 
putting public calamities, such as an epidemic of sickness, to 
the account of any inventor who might be known at the time ; 
and they have hindered all progress by charging with witch- 
craft anyone who was more skilful in work, or more energetic 
and shrewd in trading, than his neighbours. The fear of being 
charged with witchcraft has been so great and continuous that it 
has hampered and destroyed every attempt at advancement, and 
nullified every progressive step, and there was little hope of the 
native attaining any position in civilisation, or any betterment 
of his conditions of life, until he lost faith in his fetish-men. 

CHAPTER XXI 

FETISHES AND CHARMS 

Not many years ago the belief in fetishes, charms, and 
amulets was widespread throughout the whole of the 
Lower Congo. Everyone had his or her charm worn 
somewhere about the body, or carefully guarded in basket or 
box, or hanging from a rafter of the house; and some had 
several charms for various purposes. Many of the more wealthy 
had their special charms and fetish images, for which they paid 
large sums, to which they offered periodic sacrifices, and by 
which they were supposed to have gained their wealth, and 
their favourable positions in the localities in which they lived. 
In many large districts these charms no longer possess their 
former power to influence the life and thought of all the people, 
or even the majority; but the Lower Congo, i.e. the country 
between Stanley Pool and the sea coast, is so immense, that 
there are still large areas untouched by white men, where faith 
in fetishes and charms which, a generation ago, was common to 
the whole country, continues to linger, and will for many a day 
to come ; and in the districts where the white man and his 
teaching are dominant factors in the life of the natives, there 
are some who still cling to their charms and believe in their 
power. A superstitious belief in charms, amulets, mascots, &c., 
is most difficult to eradicate: it is hydra-headed in its virility 
and numerous manifestations. 

Every medicine-man has a bundle of charms {ebunda dm 
mfuhC), which by .some is kept intact, but most of them put a 
portion of this charm bundle into an image (teke), and the 
image having received a bit of all the charms in the bundle into 
its head or stomach, it (the portion of charms) becomes the 
brains, the intelligence (nkirida) of the image which is thus 
transformed into a Fetish (nkisi). Each medicine-man has his 

232 

THE FETISH 

233 

own special mixture of charms which he puts into his own 
image, which he calls by a name that distinguishes his particular 
cult from those of all other medicine-men, and the name by 
which his order and his fetish are known indicates the diseases, 
&c., which he is supposed to control. In a large district there 
may be one, two, or more members of each order of witch-doctors 
operating. 

The word nkisi means an image, a horn, a shell, and in fact 
it is a generic term applied to anything into which a medicine- 
man has put a little bit of every charm in his bundle ; and it is 
not an effective nkisi until it has passed through his hands. 
He uses certain ceremonies, and incantations, and an article 
that could formerly be kicked from place to place becomes a 
powerful fetish, that can protect a pig, a man, a cai’avan of 
traders, or a whole village ; and as these medicine-men are well 
paid for making them, a large part of their wealth is derived 
from manufacturing them. A wooden image that may be 
bought for a yard or two of common calico, can be made into a 
strong fetish that will cost the buyer forty or fifty yards, or 
even the price of a slave. 

The charms in the bundles ai-e composed of such articles as 
those among which the spirits delight to live, or upon which 
they like to feed ; portions of the charms from the bundles, 
with the same object of pleasing the spirit, are put into images, 
horns, &c., so as to induce the spirits to enter and abide in 
them, and thus come under the control of the witch-doctor who 
owns the bundle or image, and be obedient to his behests ; and 
the buyer of a strong fetish is supposed to have a similar con- 
trolling power over the spirit that it pleases. 

The witch-doctor of every fetish cult can give and cure a 
disease, or ensure certain good or bad luck, hence there are as 
many witch-doctors with their fetishes as there are spirits to be 
appeased and controlled ; and when a new disease appears, or a 
new calamity is to be averted, a new cult of witch-doctors 
comes into existence, with new fetish power to control the spirit 
that is responsible for it. Sometimes a witch-doctor will come 
forward with a fetish of such pretensions that he claims to 

234 CONTENTS OF CHARM-BUNDLE 

supersede all other cults and their fetishes, and render the 
exercise of their powers unnecessary ; but their day is as brief 
as their arrogant pretensions are great, and as the fraud is 
quicky discovered they soon pass into oblivion, leaving the 
older and less pretentious orders more firmly established than 
ever : e.g. some few years ago a witch-doctor visited the towns 
round San Salvador with a new power, called the “ divine fetish” 
(nkisi a Iciniambe), and promised that all who confessed their 
witchcraft, i.e. all the evil they had in their hearts against any- 
one, and paid him to perform certain rites, should never die. 
He and his assistants reaped a rich harvest for a short time, but 
when their clients died like others, the bubble burst, and that 
particular cult and its fetish dropped into disfavour and neglect. 

Here are the contents of a charm bundle opened by my 
friend, the late Dr. Bentley ; “ It is an open bag, 7x4 in., with 
shoulder-straps, cleverly made of cotton, and appears to be a 
succession of button-hole stitching, one row on another; it is 
like close crochet-work. There is a neat zigzag pattern on it, 
and the bag is quite a work of art. It has been often smeared 
with blood, and there are one or two mud-like patches on it of 
chewed kola-nut. What with blood and kola-nut, it is a filthy 
article. A monkey’s tail is attached to it. Inside is a bundle 
wrapped in palm-fibre cloth. We draw it out carefully, for it 
is full of a pungent white aromatic powder. After sneezing and 
coughing, we proceed with our examination. The powder is 
dry pipe-clay mixed with pepper. There is found in it a small 
goat’s horn, stuffed with pipe-clay, in which a small brown nut 
shines. The point of the horn is boi’ed, and three loom-knots 
of palm-fibre hang as a tassel. Next, some feathers from the 
breast and wing of a guinea-fowl ; two small bags and cuttings 
of leopard skin, a small dried chameleon, some wing-cases of a 
stag beetle, a small antelope’s horn, some Musa nuts, some tre- 
foil coils of cane, a palm thorn, some beads, chips of ironstone, 
a scarab beetle, two tiny round pebbles, and a blue Jaquirity 
bean. The powder and ‘ mysteries ’ would fill a tumbler.” ^ 

1 Pioneering on the Congo, by W. H. Bentley, p. 257. Religious Tract 
Society, 1900. 

CHARMS OF VARIOUS POWERS 235 

The nkisi (fetishes, charms) are made to meet every con- 
ceivable contingency. They have them for making a thief 
invisible so that he may steal with impunity, and also for de- 
tecting such thieves ; for procuring the advantage in trading 
transactions ; for making children obedient, and dogs faithful 
and good hunters; for guarding a farm, and helping a person 
secretly to rob a farm ; for aiding one to kill his enemy, at 
the same time protecting him from his murderous assaults ; 
for giving children, or keeping a person from having a child : 
for preserving a person on the road, the river, or in the town, 
as well as to bring bad luck to others on their journeys; for 
making a gun fire straight, and the guns of others aim 
crookedly. There is no good wish a native may have for his 
own advantage, but what he can buy a rikisi to aid him in its 
attainment, and there is no evil desire that he may have for 
the misfortune, sickness, and death of his neighbours, foes, and 
relatives but what he can procure a nkisi to accomplish them. 

If a nkisi fails to perform its office, it must either have a 
sacrifice offered to it, or have its power renewed by the witch- 
doctor who first made it, or by a member of the same cult, i.e. 
it is either sulky because it has been neglected, or it is weak 
from loss of power. The sacrifice removes the sulkiness and 
restores it to good humour, and the witch-doctor restores its 
power. When it is desirable to wake up a nkisi, it is beaten 
with a stick, then put on the ground and surrounded by 
several small heaps of gunpowder which are exploded, a whistle 
is blown vigorously, and the nkisi is held over the smoke, and 
thus becomes alert to perform its particular functions. 

I do not think that there is any idea of worship when a 
sacrifice (kimenga) is made to a fetish, and certainly no prayers 
are offered with the sacrifice. The root idea is that in some 
way the sacrifice renews the power in the fetish image, or 
bundle of charms. It refreshes the fetish, and enables it to 
perform more effectively its office of protector of its owner, 
punisher of his enemies, and imparter of good fortune. A 
fowl or a goat is killed, and its blood is poured over the image 
or charm ; for these sacrifices are made not only to images, 

236 

SACRIFICES TO FETISHES 

but also to bundles of charms. Sometimes the toe of a fowl is 
cut and the blood is allowed to fall on the fetish, and even the 
toe of a frog is cut, and used as a sacrifice. If the fetish is to 
be kept up to its full power, the sacrifice should be made 
regularly, e.g. at every new moon, or on certain market days, 
and the larger the favours expected the more costly must be 
the sacrifice. The fetish receiving only the drippings from a 
fowl’s or a fi’og’s toe cannot be expected to confer large 
favours. At the same time some rikisi can only impart small 
favours, and consequently it would be waste to give them large 
sacrifices, such as a fowl or goat. Other fetishes, owned by 
wealthy men, give great good fortune, and their rich owners 
can afford to offer goats and fowl and expect large favours in 
return. The flesh of a sacrifice must not be sold, but eaten 
by the man who offers it and the members of his clan. Sunset 
is the usual time for offering the sacrifice, and the person who 
kills and offers it turns his face towards the sun. A pig is 
never offered as a sacrifice, although they are more plentiful 
than goats. My informants could not guess the reason for 
this restriction ; but I think it is probably reckoned unclean, 
for the planter of the pumpkin seeds is not allowed to eat it, 
just before and during the season for planting them. 

The following is a list of their fetishes, charms, and 
amulets; and in drawing up the catalogue I shall avoid as 
much as possible repeating what has been written on the subject 
in the chapter on Black and White Magic — in that chapter 
you have the operators, and in this, the tools, or means by 
which they are supposed to do their work. Or it may be 
stated in another way : that these are the names of the spirits 
that like to dwell and feed on the ingredients put into these 
fetishes and charms and thus come under the control of the 
persons owning the fetishes, each of which possess their names. 
The fact that there may be in use simultaneously 1,000 charms 
of one particular name, as there are many fetish-men of each cult 
living in different parts of the country, should be no difficulty in 
accepting this suggestion, for the spirits may be either ubiquitous, 
or there may be a large number of each order of spirits. 

THE LUCK CHARM 

237 

The mpungtc bundle contains pieces of the skins of every 
strong animal obtainable, and some albino’s hair, which is sup- 
posed to be a very powerful charm. As this bundle is rather 
awkward to carry about, pieces of all the contents of the charm 
bundle are put into a hole in the head of an image, which then 
becomes a sole fetish, able to make its possessor acceptable to 
people with whom he comes into contact, either as traveller, 
trader, master, or lover. A person whom we regard as the 
special protege of Dame Fortune, they think has a sole fetish 
The price of one of the fetishes is a slave, and a goat must be 
sacrificed to it every new moon. The animal is held over the 
image, its throat is cut, and the blood is allowed to flow over 
the fetish. 

There is an image that goes by the name of nzaji that 
causes the lightning, and strikes with lightning those who have 
oftended its clients. It also imparts and cures skin diseases 
(see page 221) ; but the most usual purpose to which it is put 
is to tame slaves and bind them to their masters. A little 
palm wine is put into a hole in the stomach of the image, and 
mixed with herbal charms ; then the slaves are brought, and 
each gives a promise not to run away, or leave his or her 
master under any circumstances without permission. They 
each drink a little palm wine that has been mixed in the fetish 
image, and after that they will not dare to escape for fear of 
being struck by lightning, or being infected with a terrible 
skin disease. 

When a person wants to steal he takes an ehunze fetish 
image, and placing it on the ground, he makes four small heaps 
of gunpower round it, and says, “ Close So-and-so’s eyes that he 
may not see, and his mind that he may not know.” Then he 
explodes the powder, whistles with a small horn, and starts on 
his stealing expedition, believing that he will not be detected. 
Nevertheless, he uses all his cunning to avoid being seen. This 
fetish is used to steal from white and black alike, either by 
direct robbery, or causing the victim to pay twice for the same 
article. The word ehunze means a sickness something like 
apoplexy, and the medicine-man of the ehunze order gives and 

1 

238 

ALBINO’S HAIR 

cures this disease. It is most probable that a thief uses this 
kind of fetish for his purpose, that his victim may become 
helpless to guard his property, or recognise the thief. Another 
charm patronised by thieves is the ehunge bundle, which is 
supposed to render their actions invisible to the onlookers. 
Jugglers and witch-doctors employ it for the same purpose, 
that their methods of performing their tricks may not be ob- 
served by their patrons. It is also supposed to make the 
fighters in a war invulnerable through causing them to be 
invisible to the enemy. To counteract these charms, and to 
protect property, a pad (munkata) of old native cloth is twisted 
and placed on the article to be guarded, and the thief who then 
takes anything thus protected will suffer from swollen fingers. 

The hairs of an albino are sold as very powerful charms, 
and will fetch fancy prices when they are scarce, as they enter 
largely into the ingredients of numerous charms; and if the 
witch-doctor who starts the secret society of the Country-of- 
the-dead cannot procure an albino to live in the lodge, he must 
have some of an albino’s hair, or there will be no effective charm 
to induce his clients to join the society. An ordinai-y person 
always buries his hair cuttings and nail-parings, for if an enemy 
procui’es them he can make with them a powerful charm (called 
nkisi a kmdoki) that will cause sickness or death to the person 
who formerly owned them. After the charm is made a few 
hairs and nail-parings are put in the food or drink, and death 
quickly follows. 

A person who has swollen feet and arms, or a backache, 
goes to a man or woman who has been initiated into the great 
secret society of the Country-of-the-dead, and buys a special 
charm (Jeke) made of black plantain seeds (Strelitzia), which are 
threaded on a string and tied round the affected part. But if 
an uninitiated person uses this charm without having bought it 
of a member of the secret society, instead of curing the com- 
plaint it will become worse. These seeds are mixed with, or 
put round, other charms to intensify their powers. 

The mpindi image is carved with a large scrotal hernia 
(rnpiki), which it causes in those who come under its malignant 

PROTECTING FRUIT TREES 239 

spell. It is used as a charm to keep people from crossing a 
farm, and it is then represented by a hoe handle stuck in the 
ground, with some manioc cores in a piece of old basket tied 
to it. Any person crossing a farm thus protected will become 
subject to this complaint, but for obvious reasons women are 
not affected by this charm. For protecting fruit trees, farm 
produce, food left in the house, the signs of a curse (kandu) are 
used. Anything will answer the purpose, and it gives any kind 
of sickness to the thief who disregards it ; e.g. a hoe handle 
stuck in the ground with some manioc cores tied to it will 
make the thief very thin and ill. A stick with colours daubed 
on it will cause the fai*m thief to have a large swelling (goitre) on 
the neck ; or if the thief is a woman, and is enceinte at the time 
of stealing, her child will be badly formed. An old basket 
hung in a fruit tree, or against a door, will give backache to 
the thief, or cause him or her to become sterile. A stone 
hung in a little palm-basket with some creepers twisted round 
it, and suspended from a nsafu fruit tree, will give the person 
who steals from it, or even attempts to climb the tree, a severe 
form of hernia. If a person is called away from his meal, he 
will pretend to spit on it, and no one will dare to touch the 
food while he is away. These various things are not charms 
in themselves, but are tokens, or warnings (like “ Trespassers 
willjbe Prosecuted”) put up by the owners of the goods, to 
inform the thief that a curse is on those things, and what kind 
of complaint he will get if he risks the curse. They consider it 
unfair to put a curse on the stealing of an article and not 
indicate it in some way. 

Horn charms seem to be used in three ways ; (a) carried as 
ordinary amulets ; (b) occasionally, or regularly, licked by the 
owner to give him the qualities of the animals and “ medicines,” 
portions of which have been rammed into it by the medicine- 
man; (c) the plug is removed, and the finger having been 
wetted and rubbed on the “ medicine ” in the horn, what- 
ever adheres to it is smeared on gun, knife, &c. to make it 
powerful in accomplishing its purpose. The “ medicines ” in 
(a) may be a mixture of all sorts; in (b) are pieces of meat, 

240 

THE SMITHY IS SACRED 

fish, vegetables, chalk, &c.; and in (c) are pieces of the skins of 
strong and fierce animals, and powerful vegetable poisons. 

When a man or woman desires a child they take either a 
red bead, or a string of blue pipe beads, and put it round the 
neck of an image called madia ( — maria), which is in the Roman 
Catholic Church (called by the natives nzo a house of 

fetishes) which is in San Salvador, or else go to one of their 
medicine-men, or to the lodge of the secret society of the 
Country-of-the-dead. A charm made of anything, and worn 
about the body to preserve the wearer from evil spirits, mis- 
fortune, or sickness, is named nkandikilwa, and the crosses, 
metal discs, little pictures, &c., given by Roman Catholic 
priests to be worn by the native adherents of their faith 
are also called by the same name. 

The general term for both male and female images is teke. 
It is thought to have been introduced by the Bateke people, 
who are clever in wood-carving. It is easy to recognise the 
district from which an image comes, or the locality in which 
it has been used as a fetish, because the carver generally 
imitates in the making of the image the salient characteristics 
of his clan, as mode of hair, dress, or beard, &c. The native 
smithy is considered a sacred place, and if anyone steals from 
it, he will either contract hernia, or become ill and strength- 
less ; and should a person so far forget himself as to sit on 
the anvil he will get swollen legs for his thoughtlessness. The 
nkonzo charm is taken from the smithy. It consists of two pieces 
of iron, some shredded grass, a live ember, and some sweet- 
smelling hei’bs, and they are supposed to have the power to 
restore to health a person who is weak from any cause. 

If a child is suffering from fever, the mother will make a 
few small incisions on the left side of the child, and catching 
a toad (kiwula), she slightly cuts it, and rubs the cuts of the 
toad on the incisions she has made in the child’s side so that 
the blood of child and toad intermingle. The toad is released, 
and if it dies the child will also die ; sometimes a chicken is 
used instead of a toad. A sick man takes a fowl, cuts its toe, 
and licks the blood — he takes the life of the fowl into himself. 

By permission Oj the Baptist Missionary Society 

Fetishes and Charms, Lower Con(;o 

The images are fetishes of various powers ; the dagger ha? a fetish image as a handle ; the horns 
contain charms for helping hunters; the small bundles are amulets ; and the necklace, composed 
of odds and ends, is powerful to protect the wearer from all harm. One image has “strong 
medicine ” sealed in its stomach ; and whoever drinks wine from the hole in the stomach of the big 
fetish, is protected from its curse. 

/SOS 

TALKING SHELL 

241 

The fowl is tied up and fed until the man is well, but if the 
fowl dies the man will die. A person must never spit into the 
fire, or he will suffer from a sickness in which the blood 
becomes thin, the hair turns red, and he will suffer from dropsy 
of the stomach. A leaf from the ngindu-ngindu tree is so 
powerful that it will counteract the evil influences of all charms 
and fetishes; and should a medicine-man find a leaf of this 
tree in his house he will have to reinvigorate all his charms, 
for the presence of this leaf nullifies them and renders them 
useless. 

The charm used by the molco medicine-man, by which he 
ascertains the disease of his patient and the best means of 
curing it, is a bundle tied up in native cloth, and suspended in 
a net, and from the middle of the bundle protrudes the long, 
strong beak of a heron. The stock-in-trade of another 
medicine-man is a univalve shell (nkodia) with some small stones 
in it, and over the opening of the shell is a plaster of clay with 
two fowl’s feathers sticking in it. The owner shakes the shell 
so that the rattling of the stones is heard by all present, and 
then he puts the shell to his ear, and it tells him the disease 
of his patient and the best means of curing it, or whether or 
not the accused person has committed the adultery with 
which he is charged, or the name of the thief who has robbed 
his client. 

The hollow bag of a mushroom {diya) is worn round the 
neck as an amulet to keep the wearer from forgetting, i.e. it 
is a charm against a bad memory ; and a shell with charms in 
it, called Icimbaji-mhaji ( = “ to-morrow ”) , is employed to 
cause your enemy to put off’ his evil intentions towards you 
until to-morrow, and as to-morrow never comes you are thus 
able to escape his malice. There is a fetish that causes the 
stoutest person to become a skeleton no matter how much he 
may eat; another that imparts pneumonia, pleurisy, and other 
chest complaints ; another that causes scrofula ; another that 
is supposed to give deep-seated ulcers. There is also a fetish 
image by the power of which love-philtres are made ; and 
another that gives asthma, bronchitis, &c. The mpongo pot 

a 

242 

SCARECROWS 

is a saucepan partly filled with water and placed in the bush 
near the entrance to a town as a protective fetish. The 
medicine-man when he prepares this charm puts something 
into the water to make it fizz, and the folk think it is very 
powerful because “ the water boils without fire.” It is employed 
to make an enemy forget to do evil to those who are protected 
by it. There are thirty other different fetish images and 
charms of various powers, and used for a large variety of 
purposes; but as many of them are incidentally mentioned 
in other chapters it is not necessary to repeat the informa- 
tion here. 

Just as we use scarecrows (kakungii) in England, so the 
people do on the Congo, and these are often mistaken for 
charms. Four faces are roughly carved on pieces of wood, and 
put, one at each corner of a peanut field, to frighten away 
antelopes. To drive away predatory birds, the feathers of 
birds are scattered about, and bunches of feathers are tied to 
strings so that they wave to and fro in the breeze. To keep 
monkeys away from the farms, the owners paint the near trees 
with various bright colours; and in some farms bunches of 
grass are tied to resemble a man, and to make the resemblance 
stronger, an old gun or a piece of wood roughly carved to 
represent a gun is put over the shoulder of this straw figure, 
which is called mama— fool. 

Fetishes can be hired at so much per day. A man is sick 
and thinks that a certain fetish will do him good, so he sends 
a fee to its owner, and the fetish is brought and fixed near the 
patient, who then looks at it, talks to it, and asks it to use its 
power to cure him. The fetish must be returned next day or 
another day’s hire sent, for the fetish will not benefit the man 
unless it is his property. If the fee is a fowl then when the 
fowl is killed its blood is poured over the fetish image or 
bundle. If the person sent to hire a fetish happens to fall in 
the road while he is carrying it, then he must lie there until the 
medicine-man who owned the fetish comes and picks him and 
the fetish up from the ground. For this mishap he must pay 
a goat to the medicine-man to restore the fetish to its former 

KILLING SPIRITS 243 

dignity and prestige, and the blood of that goat, when killed, 
is poured over the degraded fetish. 

I want to close this chapter by giving other methods of 
destroying the spirits of the dead besides burning them. About 
1905 a native of a town in the Ngombe Lutete district had an 
abscess on his cheek, which after a time broke and healed ; but 
some four or five months later another abscess stai’ted on his 
left side. A native doctor was called who gave him many 
purges, anointed him with “ medicines,” and let out a quantity 
of blood by cupping. In 1908 the man became again so ill, 
that the medicine-man was called, and after he had studied the 
case, he said the man would die because the spirit (jikwiyd) of 
his wife’s first husband was in him doing him to death on 
account of his having mamed his (spirit’s) widow. The 
woman’s family was very angry at this diagnosis, for they 
said, “ No one will marry her for fear of being bewitched by 
the spirits of her two former husbands.” 

A week later the man died, and most of the people left the 
town from fear that deceased’s own spirit, and the other spirit 
that possessed him, would bewitch them. A great witch-doctor 
was sent for, as it was thought that only one at the head of 
his profession could deal with such an important case. This 
man came with all his paraphernalia and cut four short reeds. 
These he filled with gunpowder, and buried two of them at 
the foot, and the other two at the head, of the spirit-possessed 
man’s grave. He then solemnly assured the people that these 
“ four guns ” would shoot the spirits, so there was no need to 
fear them. To make the matter doubly sure he put small 
packets of native red peppers on all the roads leading to the 
town, as all evilly-disposed spirits have a great horror of red 
pepper, and will not come near it. 

This burying of pretend-guns in the grave ot the person 
whose spirit is to be killed is a very common trick, and is 
worked for all that it is worth ; but it is necessary to ring the 
changes occasionally by performing a trick that requires a 
little more elaboration. The witch-doctor has been called to 
a family suffering from much and frequent illness, and the 

244 

KILLING SPIRITS 

sentence of extinction has been passed on the spirit of a 
deceased member of the family. 

On the appointed day the witch-doctor takes his loaded 
gun, accompanied by many members of the family and several 
neighbours, to the grave of the man with the evilly-disposed spirit. 
He lays his gun near the grave, and taking a hoe he begins to 
dig down to the corpse. When all present have been worked 
up to the necessary pitch by the patter of the witch-doctor he 
suddenly throws down his hoe, and screams out that the witch 
is coming out of the grave. Immediately on hearing such a 
cry the people run helter-skelter in all directions, not daring 
to look round ; the “ doctor ” takes out from a fold in his cloth 
a fowl’s bladder filled with blood, which he has prepared for 
the purpose, and quickly squeezing out the blood into the hole 
he fires his gun, and then calls on the people to return, assur- 
ing them that it is now all right. They flock back that they 
may see the blood as a proof that he has destroyed the witch 
(ndoki). After this evidence of his prowess has been shown to 
all, the grave is filled again, and the family is supposed to 
regain its normal state of health. On one occasion one of our 
school lads remained behind, unnoticed by the witch-doctor, 
and saw the whole affair, and denounced the trick to his family 
and neighbours, and the “ doctor ” was glad to escape with his 
life ; and this was how we came to know the way they carry 
out this method of killing a spirit. 

CHAPTER XXII 

TABOOS, FIRST-FRUITS, AND OMENS 

There is scarcely a food but what is taboo to some one — 
vegetable, animal, poultry, or insects ; and in regard to 
conduct, taboo is largely responsible for the conservatism 
of the people ; it maintains the status quo, and threatens with 
misfortune anyone who departs from it. Taboos may be divided 
into two classes — the inherited taboo (mpangu), and the 
personal taboo (nlongo): the former is always permanent, while 
the latter is often temporary. In some districts the word 
konko (= prohibition, command, law) is used more freely than 
mpangu, and one often hears in relation to some taboo that it 
is the “ prohibition of the father ” {konko kia ‘se). 

The inherited taboo passes from father to son — it is about 
the only thing that the sons inherit from their father ; and so 
long as the daughters form a part of their father’s household, 
or remain unmarried, they must observe it, but when they 
marry they generally drop their father’s taboo, and follow that 
of their husband’s, i.e. the one he has inherited from his father. 

Sometimes the father will tell his child of this taboo ; but 
in most cases, when the woman is near her confinement, a 
medicine-man is called, who orders a feast, which is eaten by 
the same clan only as the woman ; and the medicine-man, 
knowing the taboo {mpangu) of the child’s father, says that the 
child is not to eat certain things, mentioning the taboos that 
the father inherited, and thus passing them on to his child. 
Henceforth to the child they become tabooed things {lekwa ya 
mpangu), and to fail in the strict observance of this interdiction 
means dire consequences to the child — either a bad disease ora 
great misfortune, or an illness that will be sure to end in death. 
In one family, the inherited taboo is not to eat any wild 

245 

246 

INHERITED TABOOS 

animal or fish with spots on it, such as the striped antelope, 
civet cats, leopards, shrimps, &c., and the penalty for breaking 
this taboo is a very bad skin disease — a form of leprosy. The 
idea here was to avoid any flesh foods with spots on it, or spots 
would break out on the eater’s body. The inherited taboo of 
another lad is not to eat hippopotamus flesh, or yams, the 
penalty being elephantiasis ; not to eat crayfish, the penalty 
being a skin disease on the hand ; not to eat raw palm-nuts, 
the penalty being an outbreak of scald head ; not to eat a 
fish with opal eyes (the nlumbu), the penalty for so doing being 
ophthalmia and loss of eyelashes; not to eat the great bull 
frog (ezunda), or the eyes would bulge out like the frog’s. 
Here the penalties are in accord with the broken prohibitions ; 
— eating hippopotamus causes elephantiasis, or legs like the 
legs of a hippopotamus ; eating a fish with opal eyes — very 
uncommon on the Lower Congo — causes bad eyes ; and eating 
the frog causes bulging eyes. These animals which are their 
inherited taboos do not act as omens to them, neither do they 
regard them with respect ; for they will help to kill them — they 
only have “ not to eat them ” for fear of the penalties. I have 
spoken to some who have told me that “ there are no such 
prohibitions ” in their families ; and another well-informed man 
told me that anyone could eat things prohibited by his inherited 
taboo without evil consequences, if he ate them fearlessly, and 
did not boast about what he had done, i.e. if he thought they 
would not hurt him, had no conscience in the matter, and 
did not let the ever-listening spirits hear that he had broken 
his taboo. 

The individual, or personal taboo (nlongo) is not inherited, 
but is sometimes lifelong, and at other times it is to be observed 
for a short period only. It means, “ medicine, poison, fetish,” 
and hence taboo. Its restrictions are quite empirical, and are 
made according to the whimsical fancies of whatever “doctor” 
may be called in to treat the patient. 

When a person is ill, the medicine-man says that the patient 
is not to eat a certain kind of food, and for ever after that the 
prohibited thing is taboo {nlongo) to him. To eat it is to 

TEMPORARY TABOOS 

247 

break the protective spell and incur a return of the complaint. 
The article prohibited is quite arbitrary, there being no 
relation whatever between the forbidden thing and the disease ; 
e.g. I knew a native woman who was troubled with fits, and 
the “ doctor ” told her she was never to look in a looking-glass 
or gaze at her reflection in a stream. In one or two cases I 
know, the men are not to eat any form of cassava throughout 
the whole of their lives, which is like prohibiting an English- 
man from eating flour in any form, whether as bread, pastry, 
pudding, &c. A looking-glass is taboo to a child, for if it 
looks into one, it will start in its sleep and have bad dreams. 

Sometimes the taboo (nlongo) is only for, say, six months, 
and then the “doctor” removes it and receives his fee. At 
times it is put on an unborn babe, and is to remain on it until 
its hair is cut and its nails trimmed, and when the time comes 
the “ doctor ” is sent for to cut the hair and nails, and take 
away the taboo. In some cases the taboo is placed on a child 
until it marries, or until it has a child, or until it gives birth 
to both a boy and a girl. The taboo may be the snout of a pig, 
or the whole of pig meat ; the head of a goat, or every part of 
a goat ; certain kinds of fish, or one or two kinds of vegetables. 

In some parts the fetish taboo (nZong’o) and the interdiction 
(konko) are equivalent, while in other districts the konko carries 
with it the idea of prohibition, command, or regulation made 
by a chief, or a medicine-man, and can thus be, on the one 
hand, a taboo for the benefit of the whole town over which 
the chief rules, when it is equal to a command or law, and on 
the other hand a taboo put by a “ doctor ” on a person for his 
benefit. Sometimes, through much sickness in a town, or on 
account of bad luck experienced by the inhabitants of the town, 
or on account of drought, or because many pigs or goats have 
died, or the animals and fowls will not breed properly, the 
whole town is placed under certain restrictions, such as “ that 
nothing tied up is to be carried into or through the town,” and 
consequently all bundles and parcels must be undone outside 
the town and carried loosely into it ; or the restriction may be 
that no water is to be carried into the town on the head of any 

248 

TABOOS ON WOMEN 

person, and thus every woman as she draws near to the town 
takes her water-bottle from its well-poised position on her head, 
and carries it in her arms. Such restrictions are removed when 
they are supposed to have served their purpose. In the case of 
the temporary taboos the “ doctor ” does not receive his fee 
until he goes and removes them from his patients. 

In the district of Ngombe Lutete the women will not eat 
the cat-fish or baghre {ngola) for fear of barrenness, and for 
the same reason the women around San Salvador will eat no 
birds except the African partridge {ngumbe) and the guinea- 
fowl {nkelele) until they have given birth to a boy and a girl. 
Another taboo (called nkamba), usually forbidding the eating 
of one of the siluroids or, occasionally, goat’s flesh, may be laid 
on a woman for a time only, e.g. until a child is born or weaned, 
or until both a boy and a girl have been born. When children 
of a married couple have died in succession, a medicine-man 
will recommend that the influence of the fetish power of zcumba 
should be invoked, and a ceremony (described on page 228) is 
performed. This is followed by a feast, in which the couple 
eat some goat, pork, fish, and eels, and afterwards certain foods 
are tabooed to both the man and woman. The first child 
born to them after the invocation of this particular fetish 
power is always named Wumba. For a month after confine- 
ment it is taboo (nlongo) for the woman to cook for a man, or 
to touch a man, or anything belonging to him ; even her 
husband’s food must not be cooked in her house. 

During the “ honeymoon ” the new bride must not mention 
her husband’s name, but after that period is over she may use 
his Portuguese name (santu). As a rule, however, in address- 
ing their husbands, the women do not use either the native 
name or the santu, but just say “ E ngeye” (=0 you). There 
is no punishment if they do mention his native name during 
the “honeymoon,” beyond the fact that other women regard 
them with surprise, talk about them, and consider them lacking 
in proper modesty. The name of the dead is tabooed, and is 
therefore never mentioned, but if it is necessary to refer to the 
deceased one, they call him "“old what’s his name” {nTculu 

THE MOTHER-IN-LAW 

249 

nengandi) or “ old Peter ” (nkulu Mpetelo), or “ of the name of 
Peter ” (ejina dia Mpetelo). Any photographs of the deceased 
are torn up, all signs of him removed from the house, and 
every effort is made to forget him. In the native week there 
are four days, each day having a name denoting the markets 
held on that day, and on two of these days {Nkenge and Konzo) 
it is taboo for them to bury the dead. Whether these days 
are bad for the deceased, because of being unfavourable to a 
good reception in the spirit town, or unlucky for the mourners, 
we do not know, as the reason for the prohibition is entirely 
forgotten. 

It is taboo for a man to speak to his mother-in-law, but if 
it is necessary for them to hold communication, a messenger 
must be employed. Should a man meet his mother-in-law in 
the road by accident no fine is inflicted, but if he sees her 
coming and does not attempt to evade her by going into the 
bush, or round the houses, then public opinion will so strongly 
condemn him that he will be compelled to send her a goat and 
an apology. A man must respect his mother-in-law, and the 
natives say that the only way he can do that is never to speak 
to her, look at her, or be in her company. I have asked 
several old and intelligent men the reason for this prohibition, 
and the invariable answer has been, “ My wife came from her 
womb”; but my own opinion is that the restriction put on all 
communications between them, and so stringently enforced, is 
in order to avoid all possibility of incest. 

The forge of a native blacksmith is considered sacred by 
the people, and they never steal from it. If any one did so he 
would be punished by contracting a severe form of hernia 
(mpiki) ; and if any one so far forgot himself as to sit on the 
anvil, his legs would become swollen. On the other hand, a 
blacksmith must not charge for mending a hoe, or for putting 
a new handle to a hoe; hut he may receive an offering of not 
more than one string of common blue pipe beads. 

These examples only illustrate a tithe of the taboos to be 
found among the people ; for the lives of the natives are affected 
and largely regulated by taboos, which must not be lightly 

250 

BREAKING THE TABOO 

pooh-poohed, as their health, good luck, and happiness are 
assured by their observance, or imperilled by their disregard of 
them. The taboos are the “ Thou shalt nots ” of the native 
religion. Is a man suffering from a disease or a series of mis- 
fortunes ? then consciously or unconsciously he has broken one 
of the “ Thou shalt nots,” and uncleanness, moral impurity, sin 
if you like, has followed on the breaking of the taboo, and 
as a result punishment has ensued. “ Whoso breaketh an hedge, 
a serpent shall bite him,” is recognised by these primitive 
people as being as true to-day as it was when uttered in ancient 
times. 

How can the man free himself from the trouble that he 
regards as a punishment, because either he himself, or one of 
his family, has broken a taboo, or otherwise offended the spirits ? 
He selects and fees the medicine-man whom he thinks has the 
ability to put him right with the powers that be, by performing 
certain rites and ceremonies; and if he recovers his normal 
condition, then he is fortunate in his first selection of the 
medium for the readjustment ; but if the trouble is not removed, 
he then goes to other medicine-men in search of relief, i.e. in 
the hope of finding the one who will be able to appease the 
particular power that has been offended by the breaking of the 
taboo, or some other overt act of his. 

A parent can bless his children by strictly observing the 
taboo (mpangu), or he can curse them by breaking it ; e.g. if 
the taboo is not to eat hippopotamus flesh, or yams, the father 
who observes it is supposed to pass on to his children an 
immunity from elephantiasis; but if he break that taboo then 
he curses his children by rendering them liable to that particular 
disease, which is the penalty for breaking that taboo. So 
careful are they to keep this taboo that they will not risk 
bi’eaking it by eating yams, solely because, I think, the name 
for yams {kzoa nguvu) is similar to the name for hippopo- 
tamus (nguvu). 

A clear distinction must be kept in mind between the 
troubles that come on a person from breaking a taboo, and 
those that arise from witchcraft; and the difference is often 

MEDICINE-MEN AND TABOOS 251 

difficult to trace, because the native is ever reluctant to admit 
of his ovrn guilt, and that he is suffering the penal consequences 
of “ breaking through the hedge,” but is always ready to place 
his sufferings to the credit of witchcraft — i.e. that someone else 
is wicked, not he ; but that point, whether witchcraft or a 
broken taboo is the cause of the complaint, is usually decided 
by the medicine-man himself. 

How did the taboo originate? Well, so far as Congo is 
concerned, I think the various medicine-men are responsible for 
the taboos, because by them they leave a loophole of reasonable 
excuse for their failures to effect a cure — so and so has not 
happened as it should because a taboo has been disregarded, or 
something has been done that should not have been done, or 
left undone that should have been done; and the native is 
satisfied with the reason, and is willing to pay the fee to have 
the matter set right. 

The following is an example of how the status quo is main- 
tained. In 1909 a man named Kiala of Wombe was ill with a 
severe cough and bad chest, and on the complaint growing 
worse, a medicine-man of the hitodi cult was called in to dis- 
cover what retarded the patient’s recovery. On arrival the 
“ doctor ” took his fetish and locked himself in a house. He 
told the people they would see the house shake as they heard 
the voices of the spirits {nkwiya) talking to him. The bitodi 
fetish spoke and the spirits answered, and the voices of young 
and old men, of young and old women, were heard in conversation. 
After a long consultation between the fetish and the spirits, 
the medicine-man came out and said, “ When the brother of 
the sick man married, he did not give any palm wine to his 
wife’s family, and consequently this sickness has come as a 
punishment for breaking a country custom.” The spirit 
(nkwiya) also stated through the “ doctor,” “ One or two of 
the three sisters of the sick man was a witch (ndoki), and they 
all three must bless the patient, so as to remove the evil influ- 
ence.” The breaking of the country custom by a brother 
caused the sickness, and the witchcraft of a sister kept Kiala 
from getting well. The sisters one by one took their sick 

252 

FIRST-FRUITS 

brother’s right hand, and, having pretended to spit on it, said, 
“ May you have blessings and good fortune ” (Ovw' e nsavibu yo 
malawu). The medicine-man in this case, to prove his power, 
heated a matchet red-hot three times, and licked it each time. 
He received as a fee for his services an amount equal to twenty- 
four shillings. 

First-fniits and Planting. — Of the first farm produce of 
the season of maize, peanuts, and beans, one of each is thrown 
towards the rising sun. The practice is to eat one and throw 
one, saying, “We are eating them for ever, or from year to 
year ” ( Tudianga zo (or mo) yaniu mvu ya mvu). There is a 
somewhat similar custom respecting the first tooth that comes 
out of a child. It is thrown towards the rising sun, with the 
words, “ Bring me a new tooth when you come again,” and at 
the same time a piece of charcoal is thrown towards the west, 
with the formula, “ Take away my old tooth, I do not want it 
again.” At San Salvador a lad gives his first rat, or his first 
bird, to his father, his mother, or his uncle. And the first of 
almost everything is given by the recipient to a member of his 
family, as fii'st payment received for work, &c. 

Women must remain chaste while planting pumpkin and 
calabash seeds, and they must wash their hands before touching 
the seeds. Neither may they eat pig-meat during the planting 
of these particular seeds. If a woman does not observe these 
taboos, she must not plant the seeds, or the crop will be a 
failure ; she may make the holes, and her baby girl, or another 
who has obeyed the restrictions, can drop in the seed and cover 
them over. They never cook pumpkin leaves with palm oil, as 
they believe that their mouths and noses would rot away (from 
lupus) after eating the mixture. The leaves are cooked and 
eaten by themselves without any ill effect. 

Omens are, in some instances, another form of taboo, i.e. a 
taboo on certain actions which, if done, will bring trouble on 
the doer of them, or upon the person to whom they are done. 
To strike the foot {ta esakuba) .against anything is regarded as 
very unfortunate. If it is done on the road it is thought to be a 
very bad omen,and when it happens, men on a journey will return 

OMENS 

253 

to the nearest town and start again a few hours later, or the 
next day. Some turn round and strike the object again with 
the foot to remove or undo the evil effects of the first striking. 
A man knocking his foot on the way to a hunt will turn back, 
for he knows he will have no success. Men going to fight 
another town have to jump over the saucepan of the medicine- 
man, and if one of them strikes his foot against it he is forcibly 
restrained from going to the fight, for he will be killed. To 
step over a person’s body or legs will cause ill-luck to that 
person, and is most carefully avoided, for the man passing out 
of a crowd of sitting men will shuffle his feet along the ground, 
and thus avoid lifting them, so as not be charged with bringing 
bad luck on anyone. Should he inadvertently step over any- 
one, he stands still with his legs astride, and the other man 
crawls between them, and undoes the evil effect. A cock 
crowing at the wrong hour is killed because it is an omen of 
some ill-fortune. From 8 p.m. to 1 a.m. is regarded as an ill- 
omened time for crowing. If the blue plantain-eater {ntoyo) 
chirps near a man’s house early in the morning, it is a sign of 
death. 

CHAPTER XXIII 

DIAGNOSIS AND DIVINATION 

The greatest difficulty experienced by medical men prac- 
tising their healing art among such primitive peoples as 
are found on the Congo, and in other parts of Africa, is 
to extract from their patients a clear description of the symp- 
toms of the complaint from which they are suffering. For 
untold generations the people have expected their medicine-men, 
unaided by any examination or close questioning of the patients, 
to discover their diseases and prescribe for them. It is their 
business to do so, and their success or failure in this particular 
is a test of the genuineness of their claim to pose as medicine- 
men. The natives, therefore could not understand the white 
doctor looking at the tongue, feeling the pulse, sounding the 
chest, listening for the heart murmurs, &c. Their first attitude 
was that of suspicion of his ability to heal, and utter contempt 
for his methods ; but these gave way to a tacit acknowledgment 
of benefits received, and later to a keen appreciation of his 
abilities, and such admiration for his marvellous powers, that 
some of them wonder why white folk are silly enough to die 
when they have such wonderful medicine-men at their com- 
mand. 

There was not only this suspicion about the white doctor 
and his medicine, and extreme shyness in describing their 
symptoms; but there was also a great paucity of symptom- 
words. To “ have a head,” or “ have a stomach,” or “ have an 
arm,” were about the only native phrases for all kinds of pains 
in the part mentioned, arising from any and every cause. 
When they were without pain they scarcely recognised the 
existence of their bodies, and it was the medicine-man’s duty 
to find out why any particular member of their body, where 

254 

AVERSION TO EXAMINATION 255 

the pain was located, should obtrude itself on their notice. All 
that the patient had to do was to send for the medicine-man 
and he did the i-est — even to guessing the position of the 
complaint and its nature. 

The aversion of the natives to an examination of any kind, 
their ignorance of physiology, their inability to note their 
symptoms, and the lack of useful words descriptive of their 
pains, &c., were great hindrances to a proper diagnosis of their 
maladies, and also frequently an obstacle to a successful treat- 
ment of them ; but in spite of these disabilities European 
doctors have made great strides in relieving native suffering, 
disarming their suspicions, destroying their superstitions, and 
winning the confidence and entire faith of the people. No 
body of men has done more to raise the status of the white 
man in the opinion of the natives than the doctors, of what- 
ever nationality, who have so ungrudgingly devoted their time, 
their skill, their health, and, in some cases, their lives for the 
alleviation of pain, the saving of life, and the hygienic better- 
ment of the natives of the Congo. 

The writer has had no medical training, but in the early 
eighties he found at San Salvador a good stock of simple 
medicines, and a supply of medical works, the former belonging 
to the mission — which has always recognised that the souls of 
the people are in bodies that need, at times, medical treatment ^ 
— and the latter to a colleague who had gone to another station. 
Although he had no special training, he thought that whatever 
he did in the way of doctoring would be better than what the 
natives could do for themselves, and with that idea he treated 
all who came to him, and had special hours for dispensary 
work. 

One afternoon a chief entered the house, and requested 
medicine for his stomach. 

“ What is the matter with your stomach ? ” I asked. 

“ Oh, I ‘ have a stomach,’ and it wants medicine,” was the 
reply ; and in spite of many questions, put in various ways, 
nothing more could be elicited from our supposed patient, and 
1 See Appendix, Note VI, p. 311, for list of native diseases. 

256 A CURIOUS REQUEST 

we felt in a quandary. At last in desperation we threw open 
the doors of the medicine cabinet, containing some fifty bottles 
of different kinds of drugs, and told him to help himself to 
whichever he liked. 

The array of bottles surprised him, and it dawned upon 
him that he might possibly take the wrong one and poison 
himself, and he stated his difficulty. 

“ If you won’t tell me,” I said, “ what is the matter with 
your stomach, how can I give you the right remedy ? " 

He then confessed that he did not exactly want the medicine 
just then. “ But the fact is,” he said, “ I am on the way to a 
big feast, and I thought if I had some of your medicine to drink 
when I got there it would help me to eat plenty, plenty with- 
out any pain coming in my stomach, for I have heard that your 
medicine is very wonderful.” 

I expressed my sympathy with the object he had in 
view, and advised him to come after the feast, which he did, 
and swallowed the nauseous draught of Epsom salts with a 
very wry face. We never had any more requests of that 
kind. 

One evening a man came to me with the statement, “ I have 
a chest.” We listened to his breathing, &c., and came to the 
conclusion, rightly or wrongly, that he had a touch of pleurisy. 
I administered a fly blister, and told the man to go to bed. 
Early next morning he came running into my house, and said, 
“ White man, look where the evil spirit has come out.” As 
the pain was gone and there was a blister on his chest, he 
thought that the evil spirit had been pulled out by the white 
man’s strong medicine. These are illustrations of the way in 
which our medicines were regarded — as a kind of magic ; and 
although the European doctors and their drugs have ousted 
the native witch-doctors with their incantations and ceremonies 
from many districts, they are still supreme in many parts 
where white men and their medicines have not yet penetrated — 
places where the following methods are still as much in vogue 
as they were all over the Congo twenty years ago. 

The general practitioner {ngang' a wuka) among the native 

GENERAL PRACTITIONER 

257 

“ doctors ” deals in simples,’ decoctions, and charms for curing 
their patients. His name, wtika, means to cure or heal ; and he 
undoubtedly knows something about medicinal herbs that is 
really helpful, and in so far as he administers these there is no 
quackery about his practice. This “ doctor ” {ngang' a moTcoi) 
decides whether his patient is troubled by an ordinary sickness, 
or by an evil spirit, or by witchcraft. Whatever his distinctive 
name (mo/fo=arms) may have meant, it has now lost its sig- 
nificance. This “doctor” is more frequently a woman than 
a man ; and her bag of tricks is either a bundle or a box of 
charms. The witch-finder’s (ngang' a ngombo = guesser) special 
function is to point out the witch (ndoki) who has caused the 
death of the deceased on whose behalf he is engaged. This 
“doctor” is sometimes, but rarely, engaged to discover the 
witch who is troubling a sick man, especially if the said patient 
is influential and wealthy — a chief of importance. Usually, 
however, he is not sent for until the person is dead ; and he 
must not belong to the same family or clan as the deceased. 
These three “ doctors ” must always find their way to the 
village and to the house of a patient without guidance or in- 
struction, and they must also discover the sickness from which 
their patients are suffering, or the cause of death, without asking 
a single direct question. 

When a person arrives at the village of the wuka doctor, 
and asks him to go and see a woman who, for example, has a 
very bad abscess in her right leg, the “ doctor ” sends his assist- 
ant on ahead to find out where the sick woman is living. 
Having ascertained the house, the assistant puts a certain leaf 
on the roads leading from outside the town, where the “ doctor ” 
will enter, up towards the house. Near the house he places 
twigs, and although the people see the assistant putting these 
marks on the paths, they pretend to express great surprise 
when the “ doctor ” walks right up to his patient’s house with- 
out any apparent guidance. 

The “ doctor ” in diagnosing a case must not ask any direct 
questions, but he meets that difficulty as follows: he asks a 

* See Appendix, Note VII, p. 312, for catalogue of native remedies. 

R 

258 

NATIVE DIAGNOSING 

series of very indirect questions, and if those present say Ndungu 
he knows he is on the wrong tack ; but'if they answer Otuamu, 
he knows he is on the right one, and the more excitedly they say 
the word the nearer he knows he is to the truth. Hence he 
starts somewhat in this way : 

“ There are such things as pains in the stomach.” 

“ Ndungu^ quietly say the people sitting a circle or semi- 
circle about the “ doctor.” 

“ Sometimes there are backaches, headaches, and pains in 
the chest.” 

“ Ndungu,’’'' is said very coldly by the crowd. 

The “ doctor ” knows he is on the wrong tack, but still 
he has managed to narrow the circle of affected parts, so he 
begins again. 

“ There are such things as severe pains and aches in the 
arms and legs.” 

“ Otuama,'" respond the deluded folk. 

He now knows that the affected part is either an arm or a 
leg, and he continues to narrow it down thus until at last he 
says, “Ah, the right leg is bad.” The people excitedly shout 
Otuama,’’’’ snap their fingers, and look at the “doctor” with 
awe-filled eyes. 

The “ doctor ” now knows that it is the right leg that 
has to be treated. What are the most common complaints 
of the leg.? Rheumatism, boils, cuts, sprains, and abscesses. 
So he starts off’ to discover the malady and its location on 
the leg, and the people respond “ Ndungu ” coldly when he 
misses his guess, or excitedly shout “ Otuama ” as by this 
cunning process he narrows the circle smaller and smaller, 
until at last, to their astonishment, he says, “ The woman is 
suffering from a bad abscess on the inside part of her right 
leg.” 

The people think that such a clever man, who has found 
out all about the disease without being told, is just the man 
to cure the complaint. He is consequently engaged at once 
and well paid. The “doctor” then for the first time sees his 
patient, and without any examination of the abscess he applies 

DREAMING ABOUT A COMPLAINT 259 

a poultice, gives some simple medicine to drink, and receiving 
his fee departs for his town. 

Supposing that after due time the woman becomes worse 
rather than better, her family decides that the charms of the 
first “ doctor ” were not powerful enough to effect a cure, or 
there may be a difference of opinion, some arguing that it is a 
case of witchcraft. To decide that point a red bead that has 
been worn by the sick woman is carried to the village of the 
molio doctor, who puts it under her pillow at night and dreams 
about the complaint of the patient who sent it — she may have 
three or four beads from as many sick people. In the morning 
she tells the messenger the cause of the illness, and the treat- 
ment to be followed. She is very wary in her diagnosis, so as 
to leave an opening for the introduction of witchcraft should 
it be necessary to do so. 

Should the patient not recover after calling in another 
wuka “doctor,” but a series of abscesses break out, then the 
family send for the moko “ doctor ” to come. The messenger 
pays her one fowl and 500 strings of beads — as the case is 
serious the fee is high — and she receives another fowl on her 
arrival in the patient’s town. This “doctor” conducts an 
inquiry similar to the one sketched above, and, after due con- 
sideration, states if the woman is suffering from natural causes, 
or from witchcraft. Should she say there is no special witch- 
craft in the case, another wuka “ doctor ” is engaged ; but 
should she declare that witchcraft is at work, the family will 
fee another doctor (see ngang' a nkwiya, page 223) who will go 
through the town night after night calling on the witch to 
desist from its evil practices or it will certainly be punished ; 
and he will also threaten the said witch with all kinds of curses 
and imprecations. As this sort of witch (nxingi) is supposed 
to be working through a human medium, the curses, &c., are to 
frighten the person who is allowing herself (or himself) to be 
used as the medium. 

If the moko “ doctor ” says that it is an evil spirit that is 
troubling the woman and retarding her recovery, her relatives 
resort to a witch-doctor whose special business it is to appease 

260 DRIVING AWAY EVIL SPIRITS 

spirits by sacrifices, or frighten them away by threats, by firing 
guns at them, and making hideous noises. Many a time in 
the years gone by have I heard these witch-doctors, or some 
relatives of the sick person, go through the town in the dead 
of the night, beating an iron bell and calling on the witch to 
leave the sick woman alone, or means would be taken to dis- 
cover and punish it if the woman died. I have also seen them 
rushing about, shouting, howling, screeching, and firing guns in 
the air to drive away the evil spirit that was distressing the 
sick one. If, in spite of all these efforts, the woman continues 
ill, or becomes worse, her relatives will take her secretly, as a 
last chance, out of the house in the dead of the night, and 
quietly carry her to another town. By this means they hope 
to cheat the witch or evil spirit by taking the victim secretly 
beyond its ken, and consequently beyond its malign influence. 
They think that the knowledge of the witch, and also of the 
evil spirit, is very limited, and the area of its power very 
circumscribed. Whenever I missed a sick person from the 
town I never inquired too closely about their whereabouts, for 
if the person interrogated knew, he would not dare to reveal 
where the sick one had gone, lest the witch should hear and 
follow. 

Should the woman die notwithstanding all these efforts then 
the family meets and discusses the whole affair. If the molco 
“doctor” said that the abscesses were due to natural causes, or 
that the woman was troubled by an evil spirit, nothing more 
can be done save to bury the body and have the usual wailing 
over it, with the ordinary funeral festivities. But, if the moTco 
“doctor” declared that the woman was under the spell of 
witchcraft, the witch-finder is called to investigate the matter, 
and search for the witch. 

The witch-finder has an assistant who spends a day or two 
in the deceased woman’s town, ferreting out her past life, mode 
of living, habits, and tempei’ — quarrelsome or otherwise. All 
the information thus gathered he passes on to his master, who, 
primed with the facts, and with the road marked out with 
leaves and twigs, walks right straight through the town to his 

w 2 - 
o c 

Si 

t 

>4 

X 

. w 

r 

Cc; {d 
^3h 

2 V.2 
a M S 

w 2 0) 

v> 

-S‘e 

■2 oS 

«'5" 

i_ 

a 

V 

5 C 3 
c3 bfl 

)3 S 

Ert o 
flj !/) I** 

ij 

rt (fl *5 

.2 >> wi 

'-a i'S 3 
^c!|S 

U *U cj 

SEARCHING FOR THE WITCH 261 

client’s house. A ring is formed, and the witch-finder, who 
may be a man or a woman, dances and chants to the beat of 
drums, puts question after question, and is answered by the 
people with Ndungti or Otuama as he guesses rightly or wrongly 
about the woman’s ways. Presently he elicits that she recently 
had a very bad quarrel with someone, then he discovers it was 
with a man — perhaps her brother, or son, or husband, or a 
distant relative. By crafty questions he narrows the circle, the 
people, all excitement, really helping him, and at last he declares 
it is such and such a person ; and the whole crowd is astonished 
that they had never thought of him before as a monster who 
had used witchcraft to do the person to death. If they had 
only thought for a moment, it could assuredly have been no 
one else but he who is denounced by the witch-finder. This 
man has now finished his part, so he takes his liberal fee and 
departs. As a rule he receives his fee and sends it away before 
he begins, for the accused does not always take the charge of 
witchcraft quietly, but will sometimes go for his gun to shoot 
the witch-finder, who therefore hurries quickly from the town. 

Sometimes two, and even three, persons are implicated in 
the charge of witchcraft, and then it is necessary to ascertain 
which of them is the real witch that should take the ordeal. 
To determine that, the witch-finder takes two or three small 
boys, one to represent each suspected adult, and gives a small 
quantity of the ordeal to each of them and watches the result. 
If the symptoms shown by one or two of the boys are such as 
to warrant him, he will then accuse the person or persons they 
represent of witchcraft, and they will have to take the ordeal in 
the proper way. And if neither of the boys exhibits any signs 
of witchcraft, then some others will be suspected, and their 
representatives will be appointed to take the ordeal. Only 
members of the same family can bewitch one another, and only 
lads of the same family as the deceased are used as tests, and 
they are well paid for their trouble. After making his declara- 
tion of the witch, or discovering the witch by the aid of the 
lads, the witch-finder goes away. It is not his business to 
administer the ordeal. 

262 RIVALRY OF NATIVE DOCTORS 

The witch-finder does not always declare that it is a person 
who is guilty of the witchcraft, or of “ having eaten the de- 
ceased ” ; but sometimes he accuses a fetish {nkisi), or a spirit, 
of having eaten the person, and if the latter he overrides the 
assertion of the moko “ doctor,” who may have stated that an 
evil spirit was not the cause of the death. I found the different 
orders of “ doctors ” often contradicted each other, whether from 
rivalry, jealousy, or self-conceit it was at times difficult to say. 
Sometimes those in a locality would work well together and 
corroborate each other’s diagnosis, and in other parts they would 
not, or all would make a set against one of their number and 
belittle him. As the ordeal cannot be given to a fetish, or to a 
spirit, a “ doctor ” whose speciality it is to deal with these 
super-human powers is sent for that he may appease the spirit, 
or remove the evil influence of the fetish from the family. 

On the accusation of a person of witchcraft the nkasa 
“doctor” is called to administer the ordeal. The ordeal {nkasa) is 
the poisonous bark of a tree pounded fine and sometimes mixed 
with water, and at other times placed in the mouth of the accused 
and washed down with palm wine. The nkasa tree is never 
cut for any other purpose except the procuring of a portion of 
its bark for the ordeal ceremony. The ordeal-giver (called 
ngang' a ngoV a nkasa) is the only person who is supposed to 
cut this tree, and when he does so he must use a certain formula, 
for the natives believe that this tree has a spirit, hence its use 
as an ordeal for the discovery of witchcraft. It is not the 
medicinal properties of the bark that affect the stomach of him 
who takes it, but the spirit in the tree that reveals, or other- 
wise, the witchcraft in the person receiving it. The ordeal 
“ doctor ” on going to the tree says, “ I wish to procure a 
portion of your bark, and if the person for whom I am cutting 
it is really a witch, let my matchet bend when I strike you ; 
but if he is not let my matchet enter you, and the wind stop 
blowing.” It often happens that the air is very still, not a leaf 
stirring, for two or three hours before a storm, and this still- 
ness of the air is credited to the above cause — that someone, 
somewhere, is cutting the ordeal ti’ee. Although the omens 

SIGNS OF GUILT 

263 

may be in favour of the person accused of witchcraft, the ordeal- 
giver proceeds with the administration of the ordeal ; and the 
results are not infrequently quite contrary to the omens, but 
their belief is unaffected by such a contretemps. 

Having procured the ordeal, the “ doctor,” accompanied by 
many people, takes the accused to the bare top of a hill, where 
they build a hut of palm fronds, and hanging fronds in the 
doorway, they tie a lath across the middle of the hut. The 
ordeal-giver pushes a stone towards the accused, on which 
twenty-seven small heaps of ordeal have been put : he grinds 
each heap to powder, and takes one lot after the other and 
feeds the accused person with them. During this process the 
accused must spread out his hands, and he is not allowed to 
touch anything. After swallowing the ordeal the “ doctor ” puts 
a curse on him, the curse that if he is a witch he will die by the 
ordeal. 

Should the accused vomit three times he is given a fourth 
dose, and if he vomits that he proves beyond all doubt that he 
is not a witch. The people lead him back to the town singing 
songs in his praise, and, dressing him in fine clothes, they thus 
show their gladness that he has so successfully stood the test 
and proved himself innocent of the charge of witchcraft. He 
can then mulct his accuser in a very heavy fine. But if the 
accused does not vomit, or if he vomits and there are signs of 
blood or green matter in it, or if he has bad diarrhoea, they 
know that he is a witch. He is brought out of the hut and 
killed, and his body is left on the hill-top, to be devoured by 
wild beasts, eagles, and crows. 

Should the accused person be very obnoxious to the people 
generally, and they are set on killing him, they will put him 
to several severe tests, although he may have vomited properly 
according to their custom. The effect of the ordeal is to daze 
the person who has taken it, and to deaden his wits. They 
will test him thus : procuring twigs of six different trees, they 
will throw one after the other at him in quick succession, re- 
quiring him to mention at once the name of each tree from 
which the twig was taken. Should he be successful, they will 

264 

DIVINATION 

point to various ants running about the ground in front of 
him, and ask him to give their names ; and after passing this 
test, he is called upon to name the butterflies and birds as they 
sail by, and should he fail in any single trial, he is pronounced 
a witch, and pays the penalty with his life, for a witch is the 
most hated thing in all Congoland. 

The administering of the ordeal bark (called hau Tcia nkasa 
= divination by the nkasa tree) is not only used for discovering 
a witch or proving an accused person innocent of the charge of 
witchcraft ; but it is also employed in serious accusations of 
theft, and for bad cases of adultery when guilt is denied. It 
is then given by a divination “doctor” {ngang' a bate) in small 
doses in the town, or the outskirts, and if the accused re- 
tains the ordeal he is guiltless of the charge, and can demand 
compensation from his accusers, but if he vomits he pays the 
imposed fines for his crime, and the matter ends. For lying, 
petty thefts, and ordinary cases of adultery there are other 
tests — seven in number, applied by the divination “ doctor.” 
There is the trial by hot knife {ban kia mbele). The knife is 
made hot, and is passed three times over the skin of the leg, 
or once down the side of the leg by the calf, once over the arm, 
and once down the cheek. If the person is not burnt, he is 
innocent. 

Then there is the boiling oil test (ban kia maji). The 
accused must put his hand and arm in a vessel of boiling palm 
oil three times, and bring out each time a piece of native bread 
(jezvanga). If he is not scalded, he is guiltless of the charge 
brought against him. The “doctor” procures some bark 
of the baobab-tree, and pressing the juice out of it, he rubs it 
on the hand and arm of any accused person who will pay him 
for it, and he can then dip his ai-m in with impunity. If the 
accused will not pay the “ doctor ” his price, he rubs on some 
other decoction which is not protective. The bracelet test {bau 
kia nkangu) is the same as the previous one, except that a 
bracelet is put into the oil instead of the bread. The bracelet 
is used when a woman or girl is being tried, the bread when a 
man or boy. The accused woman must not only bring out the 

DIVINATION 265 

bracelet but also put it on her arm. If uninjured she is in- 
nocent of the charge. 

In divination by knotted grass {ban Icia mienje), several 
pieces of grass are cut, and one piece is knotted at one end. 
The knotted piece is put with the others, and all the ends are 
held loosely in the closed fist. The accused has to pull out all 
the pieces, and leave the knotted one in the fist, or he is guilty. 
A large bean {nkandi) is used by the witch-finder in his search 
for the witch. He twists two pieces of string together, and, 
having bored a hole through the bean, he passes the twisted 
string through it. He then holds the string in a perpendicular 
position, and says to the bean, “If it is a woman who is the 
witch in this affair, then drop down the string; but if it is a 
man then go up the string.” This divination he uses for his 
own benefit as a guide as to whom he should accuse, when he 
is uncertain. 

There is also a bead test (bau kia mbiya). A blue pipe 
glass bead about f inch long and J inch thick, with broken, 
jagged ends, is put between the upper eyelid and the eyeball. 
It is left in that position a few minutes, and if the accused can 
bear the pain until the “ doctor ” takes the bead out, he is 
innocent of the charge. If the pain is unbearable and the 
bead is removed before the “ doctor ” gives the word it is a 
sign of guilt. The hot water test {bau kia maza ma tiya) is 
much the same as the boiling oil test. 

The “ doctor ” is expected to stand all these tests himself 
without suffering any inconvenience. Unless he is prepared to 
undergo each ordeal (except taking the nkasa) before the ac- 
cused, he is regarded with very little respect, and would soon 
lose his practice. Undoubtedly they know of juices, &c. that 
help them to bear these tests successfully, and they are willing 
to sell their knowledge to any accused person who cares to pay 
the price. 

CHAPTER XXIV 

DEATH AND BURIAL 

The natives have very little fear of death. By that 
statement it is not meant that they are courageous in 
war, and court death by their reckless bravery; but 
believing that they are immortal until bewitched, they give 
little or no thought to death, and rarely talk about the possi- 
bility of their own or anyone’s death. Among them, all other 
folk are liable to the evil machinations of witchcraft but 
themselves. No shot will touch them, no crocodile will hurt 
them, and no disease will kill them, unless the bullet, the 
crocodile, or the complaint has some witchcraft about it. 
Hence a man is restrained by force from going to a fight if the 
omen is against him ; or he will swim a river infested with 
crocodiles, believing that they will not touch him ; or he will 
crowd unnecessarily into the house of a small-pox patient, 
feeling secure in the power of his fetish to counteract all 
witchcraft and protect him from all diseases. What the 
natives fear above all things is witchcraft, and in that fear 
they live and move and pass their existence. 

On the other hand, contradictory as it may seem, the strong 
incentive among the people to industry, to travel, and to trade, 
is not so much to procure the money with which to buy food 
(their wives supply them with that), but to hoard enough 
cloth, &c. for a grand funeral that will be the talk of the 
district ; for they believe that the grander their funeral the 
better will be their reception in the spirit land. The strong 
desire they have for children springs from the same motive — 
sons to bury them properly and daughters to cry for them. 
They prefer daughters to sons, for there is not only the 

portion of their marriage money, but they cry longer and better 

266 

DEATH OF A MAN 

267 

than boys and men. They cannot but know that all who 
have preceded them have died, and although they place those 
deaths at the door of witchcraft, they must feel that their own 
turn to be bewitched will eventually come, hence their prepara- 
tions for a great funeral. 

When a person dies, it is the custom for the women 
belonging to the deceased’s family to gather from the sur- 
rounding towns and villages to assist at the mourning. For 
this purpose they will neglect their farms, children, and 
husbands, and will crowd into the house where the corpse is 
lying, and there sit day after day giving unasked advice to the 
chief mourner and praising the dead in songs and chants. So 
fond are they of the excitement of attending a funeral, that 
they will rake up a relationship to the dead, and failing in 
that, they will say, “Well, he (or she) is a relative of my 
particular friend.” Men, to show sorrow, will give cloth to 
wind round the body for the burial ; but the women to express 
their sympathy wail and rub mud on their bodies, and both 
male and female mourners go unkempt for many days, and 
even months. 

If it is a man who is dead, one of his wives sleeps on a mat 
close by the corpse, which is so arranged on a mat that the 
fluids of the body drain into a basin. The woman runs her 
finger frequently over the corpse to press out the moisture; 
she must empty the basin when full, and when she goes to eat 
she is not allowed to wash her hands. This process she repeats 
until the body is perfectly shrivelled up. Should she exhibit 
any natural reluctance to performing these offices for the dead, 
she is urged on by the other women present, and reminded by 
them that he was a good husband who treated her well, and 
supplied her with good cloth, &c. The man must operate in 
the same way on the body of his deceased wife, if she is a 
woman of any importance ; and to fail in rendering these last 
rites to the dead is to cover oneself with shame, and be accused 
of heartlessness. 

After the fluids have drained from the body, the corpse is 
placed on a shelf, a fire is lit beneath it, and it is thoroughly 

268 

COSTLY FUNERALS 

smoke-dried. The corpse is sometimes kept for two, three, or 
more years before it is buried. When for some reason it is not 
advisable to keep the body in the house, a hole is dug, the 
corpse is tied up in a mat, and the bundle is suspended from a 
pole laid across the hole. Sticks and palm fronds are laid over 
the hole, and earth is thrown over all to keep the smell down. 
There the body remains until the family is able to bury it 
properly. 

The burial of an important man is very costly. For many 
months the family sends to all the markets, far and near, to 
buy all the fowls, goats, and pigs that can be obtained at a 
reasonable price. Having purchased sufficient, the invitations 
are sent out, and every invitation must be accompanied by a 
present of varying value, from one fowl to two goats, according 
to the position of the person invited. Each person thus invited 
takes with him as many wives, slaves, and followers as he can, 
for the greater his retinue the more important he is in the 
estimation of others. Only forty or fifty persons may really be 
invited, but those who will attend, as their followers, may 
number several hundreds, and they are all fed for three or four 
days at the expense of the deceased’s family. Every person 
invited to the funeral gives a present of trade goods, cloths, &c. 
“ to wind round the body,” according to his rank and standing 
in the district ; and although the articles thus presented to the 
sorrowing family may be twice the value of the goats sent with 
the invitation, yet they will not pay for the pigs, &c., eaten 
and the palm wine drunk during the funeral festivities. I 
remember the case of a headman at San Salvador whose sister 
was married to the King; when she died, Dom Miguel had to 
bury her as a queen should be buried ; and the expenses were 
so great, and the goods given “ to wind round the body ” were 
so small in comparison, that he was financially ruined for life ; 
although he worked hard as a blacksmith, and was a keen 
trader, he never really disentangled himself from the debts thus 
incurred. 

On the afternoon of January 12, 1883, I went to Mputu 
(between seventy and eighty minutes’ walk south-east of San 

Photo hy Rev. F. Oldrieve 

Graves, Lower Congo 

I. The grave of a wealthy man. The jugs, mugs, basins, etc., were bought of traders. 2. Hut 
built oyer the grave of an important chief. Goods are displayed on a table— notice the figure 
decorations. 3. Grave of a poor man— broken umbrella, a cloth and a few bottles. The spirits of 
these things are supposed to go to their former owners in the spirit land. 

FUNERAL OF GAZIA 

269 

Salvador) to attend the funeral of a man who had died about 
thirteen years before I received the invitation to be present at 
his interment. Nearly a thousand persons were present at 
the ceremony, which after the first day became a series of wild, 
drunken orgies. This man Gazia was the slave of the chief 
of Mputu. In his early life he had visited St. Paul de Loando, 
where he had gained some knowledge of the Portuguese 
language, and also some insight into the ceremonies and rites 
of the Roman Catholic Church. On returning to Mputu he 
taught Portuguese there, and at San Salvador, and acted also 
as a sort of priest. As a teacher he was successful, for in 
1878 (when our mission began), there were many natives who 
could talk Portuguese. As a priest the following seems to 
have been his practice : at certain times of the year the natives 
took to Gazia’s fetish house (nzo a nkisi), in his enclosure, 
baskets of various kinds of foods, and when the house was full 
of these offerings Gazia then prayed to the fetish on behalf 
of the people, and as his fee he took the offerings made to the 
fetish. 

Gazia became so rich that his wealth aroused the cupidity 
of the chief, his master, who accused him of witchcraft; and 
to escape this charge he fled to the King at San Salvador, and 
became a kind of secretary, or adviser to him in his dealings 
with the Portuguese. When Gazia died the King had the 
body well dried, and bound round with twice its bulk in cloth, 
and sent it to his former master in Mputu to be properly 
buried. The body, swathed in its huge quantity of trade cloth, 
was placed in a house specially built, while the unfortunate 
master, who feared to disobey the king, gathered goats, pigs, 
sheep, &c., for a seides of feasts worthy the burial of so gi’eat 
a man. The master was not over quick in burying his slave ; 
but Gazia had left a huge amount of wealth, and the master 
was not only desirous of meeting the King's wishes, but he was 
anxious to appease the spirit of his whilom slave by burying 
him in grand style ; and besides, if he played loosely with the 
wealth of a dead man, others might rob him when he was dead, 
and his status in the spirit land would be disagreeably affected. 

270 

BURIAL 

The fee for digging a grave is a fowl for each of the two 
or three diggers. If a person dies while visiting a town, his 
people have to pay a pig for the right of burial in the land 
belonging to the town ; but should the corpse be taken away, 
a pig must be paid to the people of every town through which 
it is carried. This has the effect of reducine the risks of 

o 

catching infectious diseases, as the bearers, to avoid such heavy 
fees, will take a body to its native village by wide detours 
instead of over the usual paths. The body is, however, 
allowed to pass free if it is that of a man killed by a wild 
animal, or the remains of a wotnan who died in childbirth. 

The head is always buried towards the rising sun, and the 
feet towards the setting sun, and the funeral takes place at 
sunset, for the following reason Every morning the men and 
lads leave their towns to work in the forests, or to visit and 
trade with neighbouring towns and villages, or to attend the 
markets ; and the women and girls go to work on their forms, 
or take their goods for sale to the different markets, con- 
sequently not many people are left in the towns between sunrise 
and 4 or 5 o’clock in the afternoons — only the small children, 
the aged and the sick. By 5 o’clock the inhabitants are back 
in their towns, and any person arriving about that time is sure 
to find the people at home, and will receive a welcome from 
them, whereas earlier in the day he would find an almost 
empty town. They think that the spirit town is conducted on 
very much the same lines as their mundane ones, and if they 
bury their deceased relative during the morning or early after- 
noon there will be very few, if any, folk to welcome him to the 
spirit town, hence they bury their dead about sunset. The 
body is taken out by the ordinary door of the house, and 
prepared for burial outside. While the body of a deceased 
father is being wrapped round and round with cloth, four yards 
of the burial cloth are torn off and given to each child, and that 
cloth is for “ mourning for the father” {mvindu a e^e=dirt for 
the father, i.e. putting on dirt for the father) ; and those four 
yards each are all that the children inherit, no matter how 
wealthy their father might be. 

DEATH OF A CHIEF 

271 

An ordinary person’s body is carried more or less direct 
to the grave from the house; but a chiefs body is carried over 
all the paths of the town, before the fronts of all the houses, 
for his spirit to say good-bye to everybody in the town. The 
owner of each house has to fire a salute as the corpse passes. 
Sometimes the men carrying the corpse pretend that it will 
not leave the town, and a sham struggle ensues between them 
and the body to get it to the burial-place. 

Makitu, a great chief of the Ngombe Lutete district, died 
and was buried in 1898. His coffin rested on three pieces of 
ivory cut from one tusk which he had saved for many years 
for this purpose. One loaded gun was buried with him, so 
that, when he arrived in the “ spirit forest,” he could shoot 
the witch (ndoki) who had caused his death. The family 
intended to bury two women and one man alive in the grave, 
but this was prevented by the missionaries who were living 
close by : however, it is still uncertain whether one woman, who 
was missed about the time of the funeral, was not actually 
buried with the corpse. As regards the ivory and other 
things put in the grave, and on it also, the natives believe 
that only the shell (evuvu), or semblance is left there. If any 
pei-son removed the ivory and succeeded in selling it, he would 
thus prove himself to be a witch, since he was able to convert 
the semblance into real ivory. Similarly, if a person took a 
plate, a bottle, or a mug, from a grave and was able to use 
it, this would be regarded as an undeniable proof that he was 
a witch. Such a thief would in the old days have been killed 
immediately, and his, or her, blood poured on the grave to 
appease the robbed and wrathful spirit. In the olden times 
slaves were killed, and their blood poured on the graves of their 
master ; and slaves and wives also w'ere buried in his grave to 
accompany their master, and husband, on his lonely road to 
the “ spirit town ” in the great and mysterious forest. 

When a chief died in French Congo, just on the other side 
of the river from the Ngombe Lutete district, in November 
1908, his coffin, made by a native carpenter of my acquaint- 
ance, measured 12 feet by 3 feet 6 inches, and was 4 feet deep. 

272 

WIDOWS 

As he had no heirs, all his trade goods and various kinds of 
property, except enough to pay his funeral expenses, were 
heaped on the body, or rammed into the coffin. A native 
brickmaker and bricklayer, whom I knew well, received an 
order to make three thousand bricks to build a vault and floor 
the grave. This flooring of the grave was intended to avert 
the sinking of the body into the earth, which is thought to 
happen when the earth sinks on a grave. Sometimes huts are 
built over the grave, and articles are arranged on tables ; at 
other times the things are placed on the grave, unprotected by 
any covering, but these things are generally broken, i.e. killed, 
that their spirits may go to their former owner in the spirit town. 

A baby is always buried near the house of its mother, never 
in the bush. They think that if the child is not buried thus, 
its mother will be unlucky and never have any more children. 
Perhaps the burying of the child near its parent’s house helps 
to keep alive the maternal instinct, which results in the be- 
reaved mother bearing another child. 

Those who dig a grave must go straight to running water 
and wash themselves all over; and those who have handled the 
body, prepai’ing it for burial, must wash their hands and arms. 
Those who dug the grave or touched the corpse cross their 
outstretched arms until they have washed. It is a sign that 
they are unclean, and no one will want to approach them or 
salute them until they have purified themselves. 

If it is the woman’s Jirst husband who has died, she must 
take his bed, and one or two articles he commonly used, to a 
running stream. The bed is put in the middle of the stream, 
and the articles placed on it. The woman washes herself well 
in the stream, and afterwards sits on the bed. The medicine-man 
goes to her and dips her three times in the water, and dresses 
her. Then the bed and articles are broken, and the pieces 
thrown down-stream to float away. She is now led out of the 
stream, and a raw egg is broken and given to her to swallow. 
A toad is killed and some of its blood is rubbed on her lips, and 
a fowl is killed and hung by the roadside. These sacrifices having 
been made to the spirit of the departed one, she is free to 

Tombs of the Kings of Kongo 

BREAKING SPELLS 

273 

return to her town. On arriving there, she sits on the ground 
and stretches her legs before her, and her deceased husband’s 
brother steps over them. She is now purified, and will be free 
to marry when the time of her widowhood is completed. This 
period of mourning or widowhood lasts from one to two years, 
according to the importance of her husband in the town and 
district. These ceremonies are not observed after the death of 
any but the first husband, and then they must be strictly 
carried out to the very letter, or no other man will desire to 
mai’ry her. 

For a man who has lost his first wife, a somewhat elaborate 
ceremony is gone through. He must call a certain kind of 
medicine-man (the ngang' a lifiwalakazi^), who gives him a 
raw egg to swallow. The bereaved husband then enters his 
house, and for six days comes out only at night. He may sleep 
only on a palm-basket, i.e. a basket made by roughly plaiting 
two palm fronds together. At dawn on the seventh day the 
male relatives of the deceased woman arrive to escort him to a 
running stream, carrying with him his basket bed. On arrival 
at the stream, one of the relatives takes the bed and throws it 
into the water, scrapes his tongue, shaves him, pares his nails, 
makes three cuts on his arm, and finally immerses him three 
times in the river, to “ wash away the death.” The widower 
then returns to the town, and a cock and hen are killed and 
cooked, and eaten by the relatives of the deceased — the males 
eating the cock, and the females the hen. The greatest care 
must be taken not to break a single bone of either fowl. 
Palm wine is plentifully drunk, and the bereaved is rubbed 
with oil and camwood powder. 

At sundown the bones of the fowls are collected and tied 
in a palm leaflet, and buried at the base of a young palm tree. 
From those who are present the medicine-man selects the men 
and women who have never been bereaved of husband or wife, 
and these have to tread in the earth firmly over the buried 
fowl bones. Those who thus tread in the bones have a taboo 

^ lAifwalakazi is probably lufwa lua {n) kazi, from lufwa (=yu>a=to 
die) death, lua = ot, nkazi = v/i{Q and husband. 

274 

SUICIDE 

put upon them that they are not to eat palm nuts or anything 
made from them, until a child is born to each of them. A 
pumpkin seed is added to the charms already worn by the 
widower, and three fibre cloths, dyed black, are put about his 
waist, and thus all the evil spells are broken. The man need 
not wait a year or two, as the widow does, but can marry as 
soon as the wife is buried and the above rites are performed. 
He must observe them, as otherwise no woman would dare to 
marry him. When he returned to the town his deceased wife’s 
sister stepped over his outstretched legs. The medicine-man 
receives as his fee a demijohn or large bottle of palm wine, 
and from fifty to one hundred strings of blue pipe beads. 

A person killed by lightning is buried at the cross roads, as 
he (or she) is supposed to have been slain by the nzaji^ fetish, 
how controls the lightning. In fact all those persons who are 
killed in one way or another by this fetish are treated in the 
same way, e.g. a man who bleeds from the mouth and nose 
(probably due to the bursting of a bloodvessel) is said to be 
killed by the nzaji fetish, and his corpse is put into a gi’ave by 
the roadside, and two stakes are driven into him — one through 
the chest, and the other through the stomach. The man who 
has a skin disease called “the fire of God” {tiya twa Nzambi), 
in which the skin puckers up and blisters as though burnt, is 
thought to be under the ban of the nzaji fetish, and when he 
dies he is buried at, or near, a cross road. The diseases, and 
death by lightning, inflicted by the nzaji fetish are especially 
for stealing, but not solely for this crime ; and a person who 
dies by lightning, or by a nzaji sickness, is regarded as a very 
bad person, and his body must not be buried with those 
belonging to respectable folk. 

Suicide was not common, but occasionally we heard of a 
man or woman taking his or her life, and such were buried at 
cross roads or thrown into the bush. The following case came 
under my notice : a man living at Nkondo, a village in the 
Ngombe Lutete district, was very ill, in fact near to death, and 
did not desire to leave his property — trade goods, cloths, guns, 

' See Description of Fetishes, p. 222. 

INSINCERE GRIEF 

275 

gunpowder, &c. — to his relatives, for he regarded them with 
much hatred. So he made up his mind to burn down the 
house containing his goods. He waited for an opportunity, 
and one night when five persons — thi'ee adults and two children 
— were sleeping in the house, he locked the door, set fire to the 
structure, and rolled himself in his blanket to await the end. 
The dry grass of the hut burned like tinder, and the powder, 
catching fire, caused a tremendous explosion. Only one man 
escaped. The family of the two children demanded, and 
received, compensation for their death from the suicide’s family. 
The adults who were killed belonged to his family. Whatever 
the reason for his grievance against his family, he had a terrible 
revenge. He was buried without any ceremony, as a suicide, 
at the cross roads. 

As we have watched the dancing, drinking, gun-firing, and 
have listened to the drumming and chanting of the mournful 
dirges, we have asked ourselves again and again. Is there any 
real sorrow for the death of the person whose obsequies are filling 
the village with hideous noises.? and as we have looked on the 
perspiring dancers, and the crowd of boozing, feasting men and 
women, bent on enjoying themselves, and eagerly getting as 
much amusement as they could out of the passing event, we 
have had to answer, No, that is not true grief ; but when we 
have peered into the hut, or gone to the back of it, and seen 
two or three woe-begone, huddled figures with their tear-stained 
faces, we have forgotten the laughing, joking crowd, we have 
become suddenly deaf to the songs and chants of the profes- 
sional mourners, for here is sorrow as true and sincere as ever 
pierced the hearts of those with white skins; and our heart 
going out to them in sympathy, we have removed our helmet 
and sat down to mourn with the mourners, and our sympathy 
has never been refused. 

CHAPTER XXV 

RELIGIOUS BELIEFS! 

The name for a Supreme Being (Nzambi) is known all 
over the Lower Congo, and indeed among all the tribes 
throughout the Avatershed of the Congo River ; but the 
knowledge concerning Him is very vague. He is regarded as 
the principal creator of the world and all living creatures ; and 
it is thought that after His work of creation He withdrew 
Himself, and, since then. He has taken little, if any further 
interest in the world and its inhabitants. He is spoken of 
among the natives as being strong, rich, and good — so good 
that He will not hurt them, hence no sacrifices are offered to 
Him, no prayers to Him ever pass their lips, and they never 
worship Him. As the Supreme One He is very remote from 
them, unconcerned in their welfare, and harmless, therefore 
they consider that there is no need for them to trouble about 
Him. We never found an atheist among them, but their 
theism is of a very hazy quality. 

Nkadi a Mpemba ® is thought to be the source and fount of 
all evil, and it is said that it lives with the witches {ndoki), 
and that all the witchcraft really comes from this power; in 
fact, in some districts Nkadi a Mpemba and ndoki are inter- 
changeable terms. This power is more feared than Nzambi, 
and because of its cruel, malignant nature it is necessai'y to 

* This chapter should be read in conjunction with the chapter on 
“ Religious Beliefs ” in the author’s book Among Congo Cannibals, pp. 
24G--260. That chapter and this one are complementary to each other. 

* I have avoided the use of the word devil as a translation of this 
name as it connotes too much in our language. Perhaps demon would 
be a fairly good equivalent for this name for the source of evil, but it 
is a demon that can be soothed, appeased, and helpful to those who know 
how to deal with it. 

276 

USE OF CHALK 

277 

appease it. All their fetishes, charms, medicine-men, together 
with their sacrifices of fowls and goats, are either to circumvent 
this influence, or to appease it in such a way as to gain its 
goodwill. The word nkadi means that power that is regarded 
as the origin and fount of all evil, and rnpemha means chalk. 
Now chalk is used largely in the making of their charms, and 
it is rubhed on the bodies of the medicine-men when they are 
performing their ceremonies and incantations. Sometimes the 
whole face is covered with it, and broad bands are drawn 
down the arms and across the chest. Is this word for the origin 
of evil simply the evil inflmnce of the chalk, i.e. the evil power 
that covers itself with chalk as a sign that it is the chief of all 
evil powers ? Or is it that power which freely uses chalk as a 
charm to make itself more powerful in bewitching folk ? 
Those who desire to counteract its evil influence, or win its 
favour, use chalk as a pai’t of their charm-making, and also as 
a part of their decoration while working their spells. It is the 
custom to employ a bit of a fetish charm to remove the malig- 
nant influence of the same fetish, and a part of a person — hair, 
nail-parings, saliva, &c. — to procure a controlling influence for 
good or evil over them ; and do the medicine-men use chalk 
in their charms and on their persons, to gain power over this 
origin and source of all evil, the Nkadi a Mpemba ? It is very 
probable that the Congo man’s devil is one whitened with chalk, 
i.e. a white devil. Certainly a black face thus whitened is very 
hideous, and is enough to strike terror to the heart of any 
native. 

The natives never try to recall the spirit of a dead person, 
but they ask why it left them. They give the departing one 
messages to carry to their deceased relatives in the great forest 
town where the dead are supposed to congregate. On the 
other hand, when a person sneezes, another sitting by says, 
“ Come quickly ” {sazuka) ; and when a baby sneezes the 
mother calls out, “Come back quickly”; for they think that 
the spirit leaves the body in sneezing, and they thus enjoin 
its immediate return. The spirit of the deceased is supposed 
to hover about, or in, the corpse until it is buried ; and some- 

278 REASON FOR GRAND FUNERALS 

times through the swelling of the body, from putrefaction, the 
strings and bands round it crack and break. When the 
mourners hear these noises they rush helter-skelter out of the 
hut in great alarm, thinking that the spirit is about to raise 
the person again to life, thus indicating that the spirit is 
believed to be in or near the unburied corpse. 

The grand funeral is to satisfy the departed spirit that it 
is properly respected, and to please it, that it may not return 
to bewitch with sickness, misfortune, and death those who are 
left behind. The man while alive, and his spirit when he is 
dead, desire above all things a grand entrance into the spirit 
world — plenty of gun-firing, shouting, trumpet-blowing, and 
women musically wailing, so that the spirits will say (to put it 
in the words of a native), “ Hullo, who is this coming, about 
whom they are making so much noise”; and they will gather 
to see who it is and welcome the spirit. Thus the status of 
the departed one in the next world depends on his family 
burying him grandly, and their comfort in this world depends 
on burying with the corpse, and expending on the funeral 
festivities, that portion of the deceased’s wealth which he set 
aside for this specific purpose, otherwise he will return to 
haunt them with witchcraft in one or other of its many forms. 

It is generally believed that when a person dies his spirit 
goes to reside in a great, mysterious forest ; and if it is the 
spirit of a bad person then it becomes an evil spirit {nkwiyd) : 
and it is commonly believed that in this forest the spirits 
have a great town, where they eat, drink, marry, continue 
their family and clan relationships, and act as in their 
former earthly life. The spirit (mwanda) is able to leave the 
forest and visit the mundane towns. The spirit, however, that 
visits the former scenes of its life on earth, only to work havoc 
on the living membei’s of its family, is considered to be a bad 
spirit (rikwiyd),, as good spirits never leave their forest abode to 
wander about troubling the living. The living are unable to 
visit this forest town, as they do not know the road, which only 
the dead can find and follow. 

Running conjointly with this view is another which is held 

SPIRITS GO TO SUN OR MOON 279 

by many, and sometimes both views are accepted by one and 
the same person : that the sun is the place of punishment for 
bad spirits. When a native wants to punish a child he puts 
it to stand in the strong sun, and men and women are often 
tied in the scorching sun as a penalty for wrong doing. The 
moon is supposed to be the place where good spirits converse 
(moJca) with one another. After death they say there is a 
branching of the roads {mavamba ma njila), one leading to the 
sun and the other to the moon. The spirits of bad folk 
always take the former, and those of the good take the latter 
road. When there is a halo round the sun they point to it 
as a proof that a “judgment court” (mbaji a nkanu) is being 
held there, and the punishment allotted to the bad is being 
confirmed {sikidiswa) by the Supreme Being (Nzambi); and 
should this halo appear about the time of a death the relatives 
of the deceased will wail long and loudly because their de- 
parted one has gone to be punished ; and I have known 
women return from their farms when they have seen a halo 
round the sun : for the thought of the punishment being in- 
flicted on the known or unknown dead was too much for 
them and thoroughly unnerved them. But when the circle 
is seen round the moon the “judgment court” is being held 
there, and the reward is being confirmed to the good, and the 
family that has buried a deceased relative about that time is 
very happy ; and the lunar halo is also accounted for by the 
good spirits sitting in crowds holding a palaver, or conversing. 
Shooting stars and comets are regarded as bad spirits (matom- 
bola), and they can fall on people and entering them change 
them into witches (ndoki); and in this they are sometimes 
thought to be bad spirits that have broken away from the sun. 
We shall refer later to this kind of spirit. 

It will be observed that the sun and moon theory, as the 
places of punishment and reward, is opposed to their beliefs 
concerning the great spirit town in the forests described above. 
I am inclined to believe that the sun and moon theory may be 
a corruption of ancient Roman Catholic teaching on purgatory, 
&c., and that the spirit town in the forest is the original native 

280 

CO-EXISTING THEORIES 

belief. Sometimes a curious mixture of both ideas will be 
found co-existing in the native mind ; e.g. if, as often happens, 
there is no halo round either the sun or the moon for many 
weeks, the persons buried during that time are regarded as 
neither very good nor very bad, and are therefore believed to 
have gone, not to the sun or the moon, but to the forest spirit- 
town ; and it is the spirits of such that are supposed to be 
sometimes reincarnated in their infants. While there is a very 
general belief in reincarnation of the soul (this is referred to 
more fully in the chapter on Birth and Childhood), there is no 
idea of resurrection to be found among them ; but there is also 
a strong and wide belief in the continuity and personal identity 
of the spirit after death. 

But it is possible for the living to destroy the spirit of the 
dead, and this is done when a spirit {mwanda) becomes an evil 
spirit [nkwiya) that bewitches those members of its family who 
are still living on the earth. When the family of a dead and 
buried man has much and frequent sickness and misfortune, 
and all other means having failed to cure them or bring better 
luck, they dig up the corpse and burn it, thinking that its 
spirit is a witch that is desirous of malevolently catching the 
members of its family and taking them to the forest town. By 
burning the corpse they think the spirit is destroyed,^ and an 
end put to its evil machinations. It is not supposed that the 
witch killed, cooked, and ate its victim, but that it took its 
victim for a reason of its own to the spirit town. These evil 
spirits operate through the living on the living, and the ordeal 
is given to persons suspected of witchcraft to discover if such 
spirits are operating through them. Their anger is first against 
the evil spirit (nkzviya), and then against the medium (ndoki), 
and their desire is to kill the medium so as to drive the spirit 
back to its dark, forest abode. It is possible for a person to 
be a medium and not know it, and the purpose of the ordeal is 
to find out whether or not the accused person is being used as 
such. The plea of ignorance will not save the detected witch 

1 See p. 243 for other methods of destroying the spirits of the dead 
that are accused of witchcraft by the medicine-men. 

SHOOTING STARS AS SPIRITS 281 

from death, because if a person can unconsciously be used once, 
he will on another occasion become the medium of another, or 
the same, evil spirit. Besides, who among a people with such 
uncontrolled passions and such lax principles has not wished 
at one time or other for the death of this or that member of 
their family, and thus become a suitable medium through whom 
the evil spirit {nkwiya) could operate ? 

The shooting stars {nienie) are believed to be spirits 
(matombola) travelling or playing about in the sky, and anyone 
seeing them will rush into his house from fear of one of them 
falling on and entering him. Mothers will not allow their 
children to remain out of the house when there are shooting 
stars about, lest one of them should enter her child. The 
word matombola comes from tomba = to ascend, and it is thought 
that these spirits have ascended from the graves — mouse-holes 
are regarded as their exits. Having ascended from the graves, 
they are now looking out for bodies into which they can enter, 
and entering they become evil spirits (nkwiya), and the source 
of various kinds of witchcraft; and as no one wants to be a 
witch they get out of the way of shooting stars as quickly as 
possible. These matombola do not confine themselves to 
shooting stars, but wander in the forest and enter folk by other 
means, hence we hear of them, in the account of the secret 
society of the Country-of-the-dead, as taking away some of its 
members (see page 162). They also come out of the graves to 
steal fowls, &c., and cause other kinds of mischief. 

We have then the spirit (mwanda) that hovers about the 
deceased until buried, and then goes off to the forest town of 
spirits, or either to the sun or to the moon, and can become 
an evil spirit (nkwiya) working witchcraft through a medium 
(ndoki); and the spirits (matombola) that come from graves, 
and show themselves to be evil spirits (nkwiya) by entering 
folk ; and the person who is possessed by either of these kinds 
of spirits becomes a witch (ndoki) who causes sickness, ill- 
fortune, and death. Believing as they do that by burning the 
body the spirit is destroyed, one is surprised that they do not 
burn every corpse, and thus not only save the trouble of 

282 

A NEW FETISH 

burying, and the waste of the enormous wealth put in the graves, 
but also end ninety per cent, of their witchcraft that is supposed 
to be rampant through the evil machinations of bad spirits. 
This they probably would do, but annihilation is utterly re- 
pugnant to them, for they know that the measure they meted 
out to others would also be meted out to them on death, hence 
they refrain from burning a body, or trying in other ways to 
kill the spirit, until such extreme measures have been ordered 
by a witch-doctor. 

There is an earnest desire on the part of the natives to live 
for ever in this world ; and to obtain this end they are willing 
to try the suggestions of any pretender who comes along with 
a plausible tongue. The following incident well illustrates 
their desire for life. It is taken from Dr. Bentley’s Appendix 
to the Dictionary and Grammar of the Kongo Language, page 
848, under the word Kinyamhi: “In the year 1885 there 
appeared in Kongo people from Luanda, or thereabouts, telling 
the following story ; a man caught a fish, and was proceeding 
to kill it, when the fish begged him not to do so, for anyone 
drinking the water which came from its mouth, or in which it 
had remained for any time, would never die by fair means or 
from natural causes ; only by witchcraft could their death be 
accomplished. This water was hawked about the country, and 
believed in very .thoroughly by great numbers, even in San 
Salvador itself. It really promised very little when the firm 
native belief in witchcraft is remembered ; it was nevertheless 
a great success as a means of duping the ignorant, foolish 
people. When it was seen that the purchasers died like 
ordinary mortals the traffic ceased.” 

It is thought that in dreams the spirit {mwanda) of the 
dreamer leaves the body and visits the persons and places seen 
in the dream. Should they, while asleep and dreaming, see any 
one, they think that that person’s spirit has left its body to 
visit them, and they regard the person thus seen as a witch 
who has come to squeeze {jina) the life out of them while asleep. 
Hence, if a man has a nightmare in which he dreams that 
someone tries to choke him, he will grunt, snort, and waken 

NO COMPOUND SOUL 

283 

with a start, pei’suaded that he has been attacked by a witch. 
Sometimes in a nightmare they see curious shapes, and for this 
power they employ the words fna and bolota, which mean that 
the witch (ndoki) has ti’ansformed itself into some weird form, 
and sitting on a beam of its victim’s house, it sings and gloats 
over its sleeping prey ; it brings the influence of its black art, 
the working of its spell, the squeezing out, the throttling, of 
its victim’s life, the “ eating of his heart,” and all the horrors 
of bewitchment. Sick persons, after dreaming that they 
have seen a person whom they recognise, will accuse him of 
witchcraft, and such a charge has often led to the ordeal and 
death. To avoid dreams, i.e. to keep their spirit from wander- 
ing about at night, they will take a piece of lighted wood, and 
spitting on it three times, they wave it three times round the 
head and throw it beyond their feet as they lie on their bed, 
believing that the dream will be buried beneath the ashes of 
the burning wood. 

I do not think that these people believe in what is called a 
“ compound soul,” or dual spirit, “ one element of which leaves 
the body during dreams, and the other ,only leaves at death.” 
Any native will tell you he has a body (nito), life (moyo), and 
a spirit, or soul (mwanda). It is the mwanda that is supposed 
to leave the body during dreams, but during the dream time 
the person has life, i.e. the moyo remains with him. Life (moyo) 
is always used as the antithesis of death (mfwa). Trees, vege- 
tables, and animals have moyo while alive, and when dead, 
they say as we do, “ The life is gone ” (moyo ukatuJcidi). Only 
the nkasa tree, the bark of which is used for the ordeal, is 
believed to have a spirit (mwanda), and only very tame dogs 
and pigs, that follow their masters about, and come at their 
slightest call, are said to have a spirit (mwanda) ; and I there- 
fore think that moyo is simply life, or the principle of life, and 
is not to be regarded as one element of the “ compound soul.” 

With regard to the beliefs of the people, there are as many 
variations in their statements as there are individuals. Having 
no fixed standard, no written creed, no catechism, no court of 
appeal in matters of faith and practice, evei’yone is a law 

284 

NECESSARY BELIEFS 

unto himself. There is, however, one thing in which all natives 
must believe, viz. an occult power called loka, to bewitch, the 
person possessing it being the witch, or ndoki. This power is 
always malignant, and the supposed possessor of it is always 
hunted to death ; and the ordeal test by rikasa bark is firmly 
believed to be the most sure way of discovering the witchcraft 
in the witch. For a person to scout the idea of there being 
such a power as hka, and to sneer at the ordeal being able to 
detect the witch, is to prove beyond doubt that he himself is 
a witch, and the sooner he is killed and out of the way the 
better it will be for the community. 

The belief in witchcraft affects their whole life, and touches 
them socially at a hundred different points. It regulates their 
actions, modifies their mode of thought and speech, controls 
their conduct towards each other, causes cruelty and callous- 
ness in a people not naturally cruel, and sets the various 
members of a family against each other. A man may believe 
any theory he likes about creation, about the Supreme Being, 
and about the abode of the departed spirits ; but he must 
believe in witches and their power for evil, and must in unmis- 
takable terms give expression to that belief, or be accused of 
witchcraft himself. A man may be a devoted believer in 
charms and fetishes, he may decorate his person, his house, his 
children, his pigs, his goats, and his dogs wdth as many charms 
as he can afford to buy, or he may leave all the charms and 
fetishes severely alone, and no one will think the better or 
worse of him ; but he must believe in witchcraft, and in witches 
and their horrible power, or his life will be made wretched with 
accusations of witchcraft. But for witchcraft no one would 
die, and the earnest longing of all right-minded men and 
w omen is to clear it out of the country by killing every detected 
witch. This hunting out the witch, this tracking down of the 
evil thing, is open to all kinds of abuses, affording many oppor- 
tunities to chiefs, to medicine-men, and to others to clear an 
enemy out of the way ; nevertheless at the bottom of it all is 
the desire to end that which is causing deaths daily and filling 
the land with sorrow and tears. Belief in witchcraft and in 

NECESSARY BELIEFS 

285 

witches is interwoven into the very fibre of every Congo- speak- 
ing man and woman, and the person who does not believe in 
them is a monster, a witch, to be killed without scruple at the 
earliest opportunity. 

Another essential tenet of native faith is a firm belief in 
the nJcasa ordeal, and that it has such detective power that an 
accused person taking it is either honoured or cruelly murdered, 
according to the effect the drug has on his stomach in causing 
vomiting or otherwise. The man who expresses his doubts 
about the effectiveness of this ordeal does so at the risk of his 
life. 

A man may believe or disbelieve in medicine-men and 
witch-doctors without dire consequences necessarily resulting 
from his scepticism ; he may snub a witch-doctor and talk 
slightingly of his charms, his fetishes, and his power ; he may 
pass one by to call in a distant medicine-man, and suffer no 
inconvenience from his sneering attitude towards one or twenty 
of the fetish-men ; but he must believe in witchcraft and the 
ordeal. The village witch-doctor is seldom, if ever, engaged 
by the natives of the village in which he lives. They know 
too much about him to waste their money on him. They see 
him repairing his charms and fetishes from the depredations of 
rats, cockroaches, and white ants ; they know his fetish power 
and his charms are unable to keep him, his wives, his children, 
or even his goats, pigs, and dogs in good health ; so they flout 
him and send for the medicine-man of another village of whom 
they know little or nothing. Therefore a faith in all witch- 
doctors is not a necessary part of their creed. 

Their fetishes are very numerous, but no one man believes 
in them all. Each native has his own particular few, which he 
regards with awe and respect, sprinkles with fowl’s or goat’s 
blood, and patronises in a general sort of way. All others 
he regards with more or less contempt. If everyone had firm 
faith in everybody else’s fetishes as well as in his own the 
Congo would be a paradise. There would be no lying, no 
thieving, no adultery, &c., for there are many fetishes to expose 
liars, thieves, and adulterers, and it is because they have no faith 

286 

RUMOUR OF A FLOOD 

in those fetishes that untruthfulness, robbery, and immorality 
abound. It would be extremely difficult to find a person, man 
or woman, who has not been guilty of all three. On the other 
hand, there are fetishes to preserve the thief and liar from 
detection, and fetishes to preserve the doer of every kind of 
evil from exposure and its consequences. If a man thieves and 
is not found out, well, his fetish is powerful and helps him ; 
if he is caught, well, the other man has the stronger fetish. 
Thus a man must believe in witches, witchcraft, and the ordeal, 
but he is not bound to believe in every kind of fetish or charm, 
though he generally pins his faith to a few ; neither is he forced 
to receive all witch-doctors at their own valuation, but he 
believes one here and there has the power to which he lays 
claim. 

The natives have no theory about the origin of things, not 
even legends of the ancient ones who gave birth to their fore- 
fathers and were the originators of their tribes and clans. 

The sun and moon once met together, they say, and the 
sun plastered some mud over a part of the moon, and thus 
covered up some of the light, and that is why a portion of the 
moon is often in shadow. When this meeting took place there 
was a flood, and the ancient people put their porridge (luku) 
sticks to their backs and turned into monkeys. The present 
race of people is a new creation. Another statement is that 
when the flood came the men turned into monkeys, and the 
women into lizards ; and the monkey’s tail is the man’s gun. 
One would think from this that the transformation took place, 
in their opinion, in very recent times ; but the Congo native 
has no legend concerning the introduction of the gun into 
their country, nor any rumoui’s of the time when hunting and 
fighting were carried on with spears, shields, bows and arrows, 
and knives. 

The sky is supposed to be like the ceiling of a house, and 
that far away there are posts supporting this ceiling ; and lads 
who have travelled to England are frequently asked if they 
have seen the pillars that support the sky. Above the sky, or 
this ceiling, is a river which frequently wears away its bed and 

Photo by Rev. F. Oldrieve 

Animal Fetish with Human Head 

Fetishes are usually made to represent men or women; but this one has the 
body of an animal and the head of a man — a most uncommon form. Found in 
Ngombe Lutete district. 

Photo by Dr. Mei'Cier Gamble 

Main Road near San Salvador 

A white umbrella is standing among the grass in the narrow road. This is 
the kind of bush grass through which the traveller must push his way when passing 
across the country. The bush grass is fired every season for hunting purposes. 

BELIEFS SET IN ORDER 

287 

comes through in the form of rain. The thunder is the voice 
of the great fetish called Nzaji, and the lightening is Nzaji 
itself. The sun sets every evening in the sea, but during the 
night, while they are sleeping, it steals back to the east ready 
to rise in the morning. 

The native pure and simple is the plaything of omens, warn- 
ings, dreams, auguries, and suchlike prognostications of good 
and evil. He may occasionally be inclined to disregard them, 
but he is not allowed to do so by his friends. If the omen is 
against him, and he will not take warning, his comrades and 
relatives will use physical force to save him from himself. If 
the omen indicates that he will be killed in the coming fight, 
or die on the trading expedition, and he wishes in spite of the 
augury to go, his friends will securely tie him with ropes and 
lock him in a house to keep him from disobeying the omen. 

The native is thei’efore influenced by belief in the following 
various powers, arranged in the order of their importance : 
1. Witches, witchcraft, and all kinds of evil spirits. 2. Ordeal- 
taking to discover the witch, or to test a serious accusation of 
any kind. 3. Taboo, and the evil results of disregarding its 
prohibitions. 4. Divination by various methods. 5. Omens, 
good and bad. 6. Ngangas, i.e. medicine-men, witch-doctors, 
wizards, &c. 7. Fetishes and charms. About these seven things 
there are fairly definite and almost fixed ideas generally ac- 
cepted by the people ; but when you come to other matters 
you find a veritable “ olla podrida ” of ideas, chaotic in the 
extreme, and impossible to reduce to any systematic order. The 
same person will tell you at different times that the departed 
spirit goes to a mysterious forest, or to the moon or to the sun, 
or it remains in the grave, or wanders about the sky as a shooting 
star. There is no coherence in their beliefs, and their ideas 
about cosmogony are very nebulous ; and although they believe 
in punishment after death, yet their faith in this is so hazy that 
it has lost all deterrent power. If in these paragraphs a lack 
of logical unity is observed, it must be put to the debit of the 
native mind, and that lack of unity really represents the mistiness 
of their views. 

288 

BELIEFS SET IN ORDER 

From the preceding paragraphs the reader can gather what 
a Lower Congo native must believe in order to live a quiet, 
unpersecuted life, and also those matters about which he may 
show utter indifference without any risk of being regarded as 
a monster worthy of death. 

In this statement of native beliefs I have tried to reflect the 
native mind. It would have been possible to have left out 
ideas here and there, and to have arranged the rest in such a 
manner that they would have dove-tailed beautifully, but in so 
doing I should have given my view of the religious beliefs of 
the natives, not a faithful account of theirs. There is, how- 
ever, a unanimity of belief among all Congo tribes, both on the 
Upper and Lower Congo, on the following points: a belief in 
a Supreme Being ; a knowledge of right and wrong ; a firm 
conviction in the continuance and identity of a person’s spirit 
after death ; a belief in punishment after death ; a hazy belief in 
rebirth in infants, but no knowledge of a resurrection. 

CHAPTER XXVI 

POT POURRI 

UNDER this heading we desire to relate a number of 
customs, superstitions, and incidents that, for various 
reasons, have not been included in the previous chapters ; 
but which we hope will throw further light on the black man, 
and his strange ways, and his peculiar outlook on life. 

I transcribe an excerpt from a letter that I wrote in Aug. 
1882, when I was alone at San Salvador, and quite new to the 
people. “ On August 1, from 10 to 12.30 fifty carriers arrived, 
their names were taken down, their loads carefully examined 
to see that they had not been opened en route, and stored in 
their several places. After mid-day ‘ chop,’ it was my sorrow- 
ful duty to pay them the amount due for carrying the loads 
from Musuku to our station — a five days’ journey. They had 
each to receive about the value of 3^. 6d. or and there is no 
small fuss when they receive their pay. Imagine the dining- 
room in our house ; on the table is a display of a dozen 
varieties of trade cloths, over the back of the wicker sofa are 
six or seven different kinds of old soldiers’ coats of various sizes, 
shapes, and colours, and on another table are beads, knives, 
looking-glasses, and other articles of barter, for we have brought 
out of our stores samples of everything we have in stock — 
specimens of all our ‘money’; and I am seated near by with 
a list of the carriers’ names in my hand. 

“ I call out several names, and at last some one responds 
and enters the house, and the door is closed on him. I tell 
him the prices of the cloths, &c. He looks around him for a 
few minutes, and walks deliberately out of the house without 
receiving his pay, but as he goes he mutters that the cloth is 
bad and dear ; yet my predecessors have used similar cloths 

289 T 

290 

PAYING CARRIERS 

for the last four years, and have given the same quantity per 
load as I am offering. Can you imagine fifty men all trying to 
be heard at once, all acting as though they were mad with rage, 
gesticulating wildly, all asking outrageous prices, all wanting 
twice the amount agreed upon, and demanding it with threats 
thrown out in the loudest voices. Finding, however, that they 
exhaust themselves, and I concede nothing, they quieten down, 
and when there is a lull in the Bahel, I call another name, the 
owner of which steps into the house. He is a facetious young 
man, a dandy, and wishes for a soldier’s coat. He tries first 
one and then another until he has handled all of them, wasting 
the time while there are fifty men clamouring for pay outside 
the door. I lose patience with him, and calling on him to take 
one quickly or go without, he picks up one and leaves the place. 

“ Now that one has taken his pay they all desire to be paid 
at once, consequently they answer quickly to their names, choose 
their cloth without delay, and leave the house. Before they 
went down for a load they knew what cloths we had, their 
prices, &c., or they would not have gone for a load, and on the 
road they talk about the kind of cloth they are going to draw. 
There are some who have not decided what to take, and they 
aggravate the white man by turning over all the cloths, like 
thoughtless women in a draper’s shop. There are others who 
want to be paid before their turn, so they would crowd into the 
house every time the door was open, and have to be driven 
out to await their turn. At last they are all paid and gone. 
Now if I were to send next week to these men and say that I 
wanted fifty carriers, most, if not all, would go down to the 
river again, and bringing up another load each, they would 
repeat over again what I have tried to describe above.” 

I found afterwards that on their way back to San Salvador, 
knowing that I was but a young man, and finding that I was 
alone (my colleague having left to visit another part of the 
country), they decided to try to bluff me into paying more 
per load ; but failing, their efforts in that direction gradually 
wore away, and they would at last come one after the other, 
quickly take their pay, and go, greeting me with a “ Stop well” 

Lent by Sir H. Johnston^ G.C.M.G* 

Lower Congo Pottery 

These large pots are used for palm-wine and native beer. No wheel is employed when moulding 
the pots. After drying they are fired, and some are glazed, while hot, with gum copal. 

Photo by Rev, J. S, Bowskill 

Washing a Child 

When the village is far from a stream, and water is scarce, the child is seated in a bowl and 
water poured over it from a calabash. If an infant is to be washed, it is held by one hand, and 
water, from a saucepan, is thrown over it with the other hand. 

THE EVIL EYE 

291 

{sala kiambote) as they left the house. I have found it wisest 
to state a fair price for work, for cariying, and for fowls, goats, 
&c., and not alter it ; and when the natives know that you 
have only “ one mouth,” they will either accept your price, or 
leave without worrying you half a day to give another penny 
for the article. You may very occasionally lose something that 
you want, but you will save much time, and temper, and con- 
siderably increase the number of your real working hours. 

The “ evil eye ” is supposed to receive its power from a 
fetish called ezau (from zaula=to scoop away). A woman 
whom I knew in the Ngombe Lutete district, who was not ready 
to gather the peanuts from her farm, successfully objected to 
the other women gathering their peanuts, although they were 
quite ripe for harvesting, lest they put the “ evil eye ” (ezau) on 
her patch, and thus destroyed the possibility of a good yield. 
She believed that they had the power, by using the “ evil eye,” 
to draw the nuts underground from her field to theirs; and 
they also think that the “ evil eye ” can draw cloth, &c., out of 
one house to another, or by the use of it the owner of the “ evil 
eye ” can put a ban on the goods of others, and thus become 
rich by their misfortunes. 

The ingredients of the “ evil eye ” charm are known only to 
the maker and user, and the possession of such a charm is, of 
course, a secret, as those thought to be in possession of one are 
quickly accused of witchcraft. The possessor of such a charm 
can even call away the soul of an enemy, and the soulless one 
will soon die. A very similar fetish to the “ evil eye ” is that 
of mbambudi (from bambula=i to deflect, to transfer in a 
mysterious way) ; and the owner of this fetish is supposed to 
have the power of causing farm produce to leave an enemy’s 
farm and go to that belonging to the owner of this charm, or 
client of the medicine-man of this cult {ngang' a mbambudi). 
Fruit is also mysteriously stripped from the enemy’s tree, and 
made to hang from the trees of others. Ti’ade goods can be 
spirited from one house to another; and anyone known to 
possess this charm on him is not allowed to stay or sleep in a 
strange town, as the people fear its power. This and the “ evil 

292 

THE EVIL EYE 

eye” fetish are both nullified by using the “to-morrow” 
(JcimbaJi-mbaji) charm. This charm is made by the medicine- 
man ingang' a himbaji-mbctji) by putting various herbs into a uni- 
valve shell. When a person feels under the power of the “ evil 
eye,” she sends for the medicine-man who owns a strong “ to- 
morrow ” fetish to make her a protective charm, which he does 
by ramming the herbs into a shell, and killing a fowl, and putting 
some of its blood into the shell, he marks a cross on it with 
chalk, and then placing it on the ground with eight heaps of 
gunpowder round it, he then explodes the powder, blows his 
whistle vigorously, and thus arouses the charm to work effec- 
tively. Sometimes by a trick he makes the shell move along 
the path, to the astonishment of all present. After this any- 
one who desires to do harm to the person under the protection 
of this charm always puts off committing the evil until to- 
morrow, and thus the charm-protected person is never hurt, as 
to-morrow never comes. 

It is considered extremely unlucky for a woman to count 
her children one, two, three, and so on, for the evil spirits will 
hear and take some of them away by death. The people 
themselves do not like to be counted ; for they fear that 
counting will draw to them the attention of the evil spirits, and 
as a result of the counting some of them will soon die. In 
1908 the Congo State officials, desiring to number the people 
for the purpose of levying a tax, sent an officer with soldiers to 
count them. The natives wouH have resisted the officer, but 
he had too many soldiers with him ; and it is not improbable 
that fights have taken place between whites and blacks in other 
parts of Africa, not that they resisted the taxation, but because 
they objected to be counted for fear the spirits would hear and 
kill them. 

In the early eighties matches were scarcely known in the 
Congo hinterland, but flint and steel were in common use 
throughout the country. These were probably introduced by 
the early Portuguese. Before the introduction of flint and 
steel {ebindwa), there is a rumour that two pieces of wood were 
rubbed together to produce fire; and before that there is a 

ORIGIN OF FIRE 

293 

legend that fire came first from above by lightning striking a 
tree and setting it on fire. People will not go near a tree that 
has been struck by lightning, and if the tree happens to be 
near the road, anyone who passes it will stop and tie a single 
bow every time he or she goes along that road. A mother 
will put the grass into the hand of her child while she ties the 
bow. This is to avert some indefinable evil that will fall on 
them should they omit the observance of this rite. When 
palm trees and nsaju fruit trees are struck by lightning, no 
one will eat again of their fruits, and the same applies to any 
fruit trees. It may be that the tree struck by lightning is 
supposed to be under the special ban of the nzaji fetish, or 
has done something to be worthy of its punishment, hence 
those who can avoid the tree, and those w^ho have to pass near 
the ns:<yi-cursed tree tie a single bow to avert a like misfortune 
from falling upon themselves.^ There is another native legend 
that once there was no fire on the earth, and a man sent a 
jackal, which at that time was tame and lived in the villages, 
to where the sun sets to bring some fire from it, but the jackal 
found so many good things there that he never returned again 
to the abode of man. The natives say among themselves that 
far away to the north are whole tribes who know nothing 
about fire, and eat their food uncooked and their meat raw ; 
but they themselves have never seen such folk — they have only 
heard about them in their talks around the evening fire. 

The three stars in Orion’s belt are called, “the dog, the 
palm-rat, and chief hunter ” (mbwa, yo nziji^yo nkongwa-mhwa) ; 
and about these three stars, the children sing : “ The Hunter 
follows his Dog, the Dog follows the Palm-rat, the Palm-rat 
goes near to the Hunter, the Hunter to whom the Gun is 
fixed, the Gun it kills it.” Venus is named “the wife of the 

^ If the lightning has burnt the grass, and not touched a tree, the 
passer-by must tie a knot in the nearest untouched grass, or a single 
bow. At such places hundreds of knots and bows will be seen. A 
knotted string is put round the arm of the woman to ward off the curse 
against child-bearing. Knots are supposed to have power to guard 
against bad luck. 

294 

WATER-SPRITES 

moon ” (NTcaz' a Ngonde) ; and the Pleiades are regarded as 
“the caretakers who guard the rain” (Ndundalunda zalunda 
mvula). It is thought that the rain comes from the Pleiades, 
and if, at the beginning of the rainy season, this constellation 
is clearly seen, the natives expect a good rainy season, i.e. 
sufficient rain for their farms without a superabundance. 

The water-sprites (ximbi) have the credit for keeping the 
water good and fit to drink. These sprites are said, by those 
who pretend to have seen them, to have short, little bodies 
which are of a whitish colour. They are responsible for 
fissures, chasms, and landslips ; and are said to travel in the 
whirlwinds and great storms. Formerly, when a white person 
died in the Ngombe Lutete district, the natives said that the 
sprites that inhabit the local streams did not like the white 
people, and that was the reason why so many of them died. 
As snakes are to be found frequently among the stones along 
the banks of rivers and streams, they are, therefore, regarded 
as being under the special protection of these sprites, and are 
sometimes said to be incarnations of them. The water-sprites, 
according to some of the stories told about them, are thought 
to possess powers very similar to those with which we endow 
our fairies. 

A large number of natives still believe that we white folk 
do not weave our cloth, but that the sea-sprites (ximbi ya mbu) 
weave it for us beneath the waves : and that we have found an 
opening leading to their oceanic factoi-y, and, whenever we 
need cloth, the captain of a steamer goes to this hole (ntumpd) 
and rings a bell ; and the sprites, without showing themselves, 
push up the end of a piece of cloth, and the captain’s men pull 
on it, one, two, three, or more days until he has all he I’equires. 
He then throws in, as payment, a few dead bodies of black 
people he has bought from those bad native traders who have 
bewitched their people and sold them to the wffiite men, who 
buy them for this purpose ; and he then steams back to land ; 
meanwhile the captain’s men cut and fold the cloth into pieces, 
and bind it in bales. Those thrown into the sprite-hole 
become the slaves of the sprites, making things for them and 

NATIVE GREED 

295 

doing menial work. Enamel-ware, cutlery, &c. are not manu- 
factured by white people, but are the products of black men 
spirited away to the countries of the white men, where they 
are held in dire slavery and forced to make these things. It 
has been often pointed out to me that cloths are too finely woven 
to be the work of white men with two eyes, but are made by 
the sea-sprites, who, having only one eye, have the sight- 
power of two concentrated in it, and are consequently able 
to weave these fine textures. 

In books of travel Congo chiefs are generally held up as 
rapacious, greedy, and extortionate in their demands on the 
white men who pass their way — and such accounts have much 
truth on their side. I do not desire to excuse the greedy 
rapacity exhibited, but I should like to state fairly the reason 
for their insatiable demands on the white travellers who fall 
into their clutches. All the white men seen by natives appear 
to be most inordinately rich, and even a comparatively poor 
white man is wealthy in their eyes. Until recently, every 
white man on the Congo was connected with a trading com- 
pany, the railway, a missionary society, or the Government, and 
the riches belonging to the body corporate that they repre- 
sented were credited as owned, more or less, by the poorest 
member of their staff. They saw a white man write a letter, 
and in return bales of cloth, boxes of barter goods, and cases 
of provisions arrived. They knew nothing of payments made 
in the home countries. They observed the cause — a letter, and 
the result — the arrival of unlimited wealth. 

From whence came such riches ? Why, those sea-sprites 
weave their cloths, and they can procure as much as they care 
to pull up from the sea ; and their resurrected relatives are 
slaving for the white man, making all kinds of things for him in 
this country, therefore they tried to get as [much as they could 
out of the white man they happened to have in their district or 
village. 

Is it any wonder that the chiefs and people hated the white 
man until they came to know him better.? And, believing 
what they did — and a large number still hold the above views 

296 DISCOVERY OF THE CONGO RIVER 

— about the ease with which we procured our barter goods, 
the surprise is, not that they asked so much, but that they 
demanded so little ! On the continent of Europe the English 
“milords” are mulct in many ways because they are so gener- 
ally regarded as being very rich ; and in Africa the chiefs have 
tried to mulct all white men because of their supposed 
enormous wealth gained so easily, and by such wicked means. 

On the West Coast, a few degrees south of the Equator, 
the waters of the second largest river in Africa, and the sixth 
longest in the world, empty themselves into the Atlantic. 
The volume flowing from the seven-niiles-wide mouth ^ of the 
Congo is so great that for over eighty miles the sea is coloured 
a brownish hue to the eye, and is brackish to the taste. The 
impetuous force of the strong current is such that only a slight 
appreciable difference is observed between high and low tide. 

Three thousand miles away, in South Central Africa, the 
Congo is daily born not many miles from the sources of the 
Nile, and receiving tribute from the innumerable rivers of its 
more than a million and a half square miles of territory, it 
gains in depth and force as it proceeds in its ever-onward rush 
to the ocean. It is estimated that more than ten thousand 
miles of tributary rivers feed the mighty stream. And more 
than one of those tributaries can easily outi’ival the Thames in 
length, width and volume. 

Dom Diogo Cam first discovered the Congo in 1482, and> 
greatly daring, sailed his vessel up the mysterious river for 
more than a hundred miles, and left his mark, only recently 
discovered, on the rocks above Matadi. One would like to 
have a detailed record of the impressions of the first white man 
to do battle with the current of the Lower Congo — a current 
which four hundred years later was to play with ocean steamers, 
and, if not persuadingly coerced, was to twist them about like 
corks ; but besides the strong current there were jagged rocks, 
sand-banks, and shallows (on which more than one steamer was 
to come to grief) which were very difficult for a vessel dependent 
The estuary of the Congo is 15 miles. 

STANLEY AND THE CONGO RIVER 297 

on the wind that rarely blows up-river until the afternoon, 
and often fails when most needed. 

Nearly a hundred years ago, in 1816, Captain Tuckey sailed 
up the Congo as far as Diogo Cam, and there encountering the 
Yelala Rapids, he and his party travelled overland a few miles, 
only to meet such disaster and death as rendered the expedition 
impossible. Others followed — like Owen, Hunt, and Richard 
Burton ; but none solved the problem of whence it came, or what 
tribes peopled its banks. The cataract region, stretching from 
Matadi to Kintamo Falls, a distance of over two hundred 
miles, made it impracticable either to sail or steam into the 
interior ; and the rugged, hilly, almost mountainous country, 
peopled with wild savages, rendered it impossible for any^but a 
small army to penetrate its secrets. 

Meanwhile, far away in the interior of the country, the 
great and gentle Livingstone was, in his many journeyings, 
crossing and recrossing its sources ; and while recuperating his 
toil-worn frame on the Lualaba he more than half guessed that 
the waters flowing at his feet broke their land bounds on the 
western coast under the well-known name of. Congo. There 
was an attempt, unfortunately abortive, to call the river by his 
name — a name truly worthy of the great river, and a river also 
worthy of the great name of Livingstone — a fitting memorial 
of all he did and suffered for Africa. 

In 1877 H. M. Stanley, having entered Africa on the east, 
and making his dramatic reappearance on the west coast, set at 
rest for ever the problem of the Congo waterway. Since his 
day scarcely a square mile, certainly no square mile of impor- 
tance, of the Congo’s vast watershed has been left untraversed 
by a white man. Many reputations have been made in this 
work of exploration, and a few lost ; and the toll in life and 
money has been enormous ; but the map that we knew in our 
youth as the easiest to draw at school because of its great blank 
spaces is shunned to-day by school lads because of the intricacy 
of its river systems and the peculiarities of its numerous place- 
names. 

Why was this great river ever called the Congo ? In a copy 

298 

NAMES OF THE RIVER 

of an old map in our possession dated 1591 it is named Rio de 
Congo, perhaps on account of it flowing through the ancient 
Kingdom of Congo ; but the Portuguese poet Camoens, in his 
Lusiads, canto v. 13, calls it the Zaire : 

“ There lies the Congo Kingdom great and strong. 

Already led by us to Christian ways ; 

Where flows the Zaire, river clear and long, 

A stream unseen by men of ancient days.” 

This same word Zaire is but a softening of the native name 
Nzadi, which obtains to this day, and simply means “the 
river,” in contradistinction to all other rivers and streams, 
which have separate names to distinguish them from each other 
and the river — the Nzadi. By the natives of the estuary it is 
called Mwanza ; by the Bakongo folk it is known as Nzadi ; 
by the Bateke it is spoken of as Njali — only another way of 
saying Nzadi ; by the Bobangi just above Stanley Pool it is 
called Ebali ; and the tribes from there to Stanley Falls know 
it as Loi, and all these various names mean nothing more than 
river. It is possible that beyond the Falls its various titles in 
the different dialects may still point to it as the river par 
excellence.^ in native talk. 

The writer has a thirty years’ acquaintance with the Congo 
River. He has watched its many and varying moods, seen it 
smiling in the tropical sunshine with the kindly breezes ruffling 
its laughing face into pleasant ripples; and he has seen it 
frowning in its anger with the fierce tornados lashing it into 
furious rage. He has had an early breakfast and, entering a 
rowing-boat, has glided with exhilarating swiftness down mid- 
steam, and reached Banana, a hundred miles away, long before 
sunset ; but it has taken five long, hard days with sail and oar 
to stem the current up-river to his home. There, by the jutting 
bank, abreast of Diamond Rock, with twelve strong Bangalas 
at the oars, his boat again and again has been driven back, 
baffled and beaten, when another few yards would have put it 
in the quiet up-current just round the point. “Fall back, 
massa; when we done rest we fit for try once more,” the 

I 

By permission o/ 

Bridgk across a Swamp 

In many of the valleys the water collects forming large swamps. These are s 
this rough fashion. The sticks are bound together by vine ropes. This swamp i 
Salvador. 

Rev. J . L. Forfcitt 

>melimes bridged in 
on the road to San 

“HELL’S CAULDRON” 

299 

perspiring Bangalas have said, well knowing and fully appreci- 
ating the fact that to fail now meant many extra hours in 
rowing across river and working up the other side. 

So we have “ fallen back ” and rested more than once, only 
to acknowledge ourselves defeated later, and then, like whipped 
beasts, we have slunk across the river and were carried by the 
rushing current two or three miles down-stream before we could 
touch the other bank. Sometimes we conquered, and directly 
we had made sure of our victory we have shouted, laughed, and 
shaken hands with each other in very exuberance of feelings. 

There, off Tunduwa Point, is what is now called “ Hell’s 
Cauldron,” perhaps a more appropriate name than the Portu- 
guese one of “ Bocco de Inferno,” where the water is constantly 
seething and bubbling with whirlpools like a boiling pot. 
There are several currents running at cross purposes in that 
“ Cauldron ” ; and steamers of the largest tonnage must go 
cannily or they will be twirled about like toy boats. This has 
happened more than once, and who can be surprised at it ? — 
for there in that narrow half-a-mile channel off Tunduwa 
Point more than 10,000 miles of rivers are pushing their 
hurried way to the sea with a ten-knot current, which striking 
too full the bows of the unwary steamer, turn it round with 
irresistible force. 

What sly, treacherous whirlpools there are between the 
Yelala Falls and Boma ! These whirlpools are constantly 
changing, here one minute, and, closing as suddenly as they 
open, they start, for no apparent reason, at another place. The 
water just in front of your boat looks oily and peaceful, when 
swiftly and without warning, a whirlpools opens under the very 
bows of your boat, and the boat slips down the opening — what 
an incalculable way down it seems to go ! And you who are 
sitting in the stern, are thrown together in a heap. Fortunately 
the whirlpool closes as quickly as it opened, and your frail boat 
rights itself; and although you laugh it off yet your racing 
pulse indicates the shock you have received. 

There, in mid-stream, just above Matadi, while crossing from 
Vivi in a twelve-oared boat, we had a whirlpool open immedi- 

300 

A FICKLE RIVER 

ately beneath our keel that turned us round and round with 
ever-increasing momentum, and with every rotation the water 
rose higher and higher, and just as we thought the next turn 
or two would surely engulf us, the whirlpool filled and we were 
riding safely on the bubbling waters. There was no laughter 
then ; it was hushed by the almost audible beating of our hearts, 
as we fully realised how near we had been to the unseen and 
the eternal. 

How fickle was the river ! That you had rowed yesterday 
with comparative ease from Tunduwa to Matadi was no 
guarantee that to-day you will be able to accomplish the same 
journey in the same time; for, meanwhile, there has been a 
tremendous downpour of tropical rain — a very deluge, and the 
river above Tunduwa Point has risen eight or even twelve feet, 
and the places where yesterday you encountered a feeble re- 
sistance will to-day contend every foot of the way, and you 
will be lucky if you do not have to put your men ashore and 
be towed, if possible, inch by inch round the strongest corners. 
These are not fanciful imaginings but real experiences. 

That half-mile passage, formed by Tunduwa Point on the 
south bank and a jutting point above the “Cauldron” on the 
north bank, restrains any great increase of water from flowing 
too rapidly aw'ay ; hence traders. State officials, and railway 
folk must ever reckon with these sudden rises — a full river and 
a tropical downpour, then the waters will be in their stores and 
gurgling with playful glee among the pillars supporting their 
bungalows and leaping over the railway lines. 

The writer was living on the hill overlooking the “Cauldron” 
when Captain Murray brought the first ocean steamer s.s. 
Lualaba in 1890 (or was it in 1889 ?) up to Matadi with bunt- 
ing flying. It was considered a great feat, the bringing of that 
1800-ton steamer past Boma to Matadi. On that day Matadi 
was enfite. There was a champagne dinner, we heard, with 
many speeches and much congratulation of the captain, accom- 
panied with a purse of gold, and, later, a pair of binoculars, 
which last two items were more welcome to the captain than 
all the verbosity of champagne speech. Since that day \ve 

FLOATING ISLANDS 

301 

have seen three and four 5000-ton steamers lying at the Port 
of Matadi, thus linking the interior of wild, savage Africa with 
the wealth and civilisation of Europe. 

From the long, hill-embroidered channel, just above Boma, 
the river widens out into shallows, and the water runs in 
smooth oiliness to the sea undisturbed by boiling, noisy whirl- 
pools ; and from Stanley Pool to Stanley Falls, a distance of 
eleven hundred miles, the river continually broadens and 
narrows ; but in all that long stretch, with the exception of a 
mile or two at Kwa mouth, there are no strong corners to 
negotiate and no treacherous whirlpools to disturb the peace of 
mind of those who travel in canoes and boats ; but there are 
snags to entrap the unwary. 

The river, periodically rising and falling, and often whipped 
into large waves by the storm winds, undermines long stretches 
of bank, then there is a huge landslip. The earth is quickly 
washed away, and the top soil of vegetable deposit, with its 
entanglement of grass and undergrowth of brushwood, is carried 
down-river, and it is wise for vessels, large and small, to give 
such floating islands a wide berth. When they pass near to 
the villages the boys swim out to them, and the first to land 
on them will, with much laughter and boisterousness, play 
“ King of the Castle ” until stronger lads deprive them of their 
kingdom. Trees undermined by the water topple down into 
the river, and while the smaller ones float away the larger ones 
remain, and when at high water the strong, jagged branches 
are covered they become a menace to the voyagers — canoes split 
on them, steel boats are badly dented, and more than one 
steamer has had holes knocked through them, or the blades of 
their paddle-wheels broken to splinters. 

Many tribes make their homes along the banks of the main 
river and its tributaries. It is said that as many as 200 dialects 
of the Bantu language are spoken in the Congo watershed. 
That is only conjecture ; for there is much to be done before 
this, or any other, number can be stated with certainty. The 
tribes on the main river vary considerably, from the gentle 
Lokeles of the Stanley Falls district, the timid and peaceable 

302 TIMBER AND ANIMAL LIFE 

folk of Bopoto, to the fierce, war-loving Bangala cannibals- 
But all are amenable to kindness, ready to be taught in school 
or workshop, and, greatly appreciating the comforts that 
European barter goods bring to them, they are willing to work 
laboriously for them when there is a reasonable guarantee that 
they will receive and enjoy the fruits of their toil. 

There is enough timber growing on the banks of the Upper 
Congo and its many rivers to supply Europe for many a year 
to come. Mahogany of rich dark grain ; red camwood that 
takes a beautiful polish ; yellow wood called by the natives in 
one district munke ( = egg) because its rich yellow is like the 
yolk of an egg ; iron- wood that resists the stoutest nail and 
quickly takes the edge from any tool ; cedars of huge girth, 
from which the natives have made their large canoes; the 
ambash, or cork wood, which the natives use for making their 
light stools, and the floats for their fish nets ; and many others, 
too numerous to mention here, not forgetting the various kinds 
of palms that abound everywhere. 

Nor are these forests devoid of life. Occasionally the 
leopards creep from them in the early hours of the morning 
and carry off any native goats or dogs that are moving about 
before daybreak ; buffaloes, elephants, and antelopes graze in 
their open glades, and shelter from the storms in their dark 
corridors ; monitors, 9 feet long, and pythons, 25 feet long, 
have been killed not far from the banks. The anthropoid apes 
wander in some districts, and the phosphorescence that some- 
times appears on decaying vegetation is pointed to with awe 
by the natives as the “ ape’s fire.” Wild bush-pigs frequently 
tear through the forest, and they are not too timid to attack 
their hunters, as many bad wounds prove ; but their flesh needs 
sharp, strong teeth and much patience to extract any nutri- 
ment. Monkeys of various colours and sizes populate the 
trees, and with quietness of movement and quick accuracy of 
aim the traveller by canoe or boat can keep his crew in monkey- 
meat for many a day, and, should his own supplies run short, 
stewed monkey is not to be despised. 

In the late afternoon the discordant cries of numerous 

RIVER ABOUNDS IN FISH 

303 

parrots are heard as they fly above the tree-tops out of gun 
reach ; but if you are fortunate you will catch them eax'lier in 
the day, and a breakfast or dinner of parrots’ breasts is some- 
thing to remember. The vain, silly plantain-eaters, preening 
their gaudy plumage, and pridefully screeching out their own 
names ^ from the low branches of the overhanging trees, fall 
such easy prey to the gun that one is almost ashamed to shoot 
them ; and guinea-fowls, which give good sport, are to be found 
in forest glades and native farms, and its flesh, white and 
delicious, is the best we have tasted in the poultry line. Fish- 
ing-eagles and fishing-vultures, hawks, kites, and falcons, 
demand the skill of the sportsman to bring them down. In 
the old days, before there were many steamers or many guns 
on the Upper Congo, there were frequent opportunities of 
sport while gliding in canoe or boat down the main channels 
of the river; but now the constant repassing of many noisy 
steamers, and the foolish firing from the steamers’ decks at 
every living thing, when there is absolutely no prospect of 
picking up the game, killed or wounded, has driven the 
monkeys, birds, hippopotami, &c,, into the quiet, narrow side 
channels and creeks which are'only navigable in canoes or small 
boats. 

The river abounds in a great variety of fish. Some are 
extremely bony, others are coarse eating, but many are of a 
delicate flavour, leaving nothing to be desired except a good 
appetite to enjoy them properly. Space would fail merely to 
name hundreds of species that have been examined and tabu- 
lated. There is the electric fish {Mahpterurm electricus), that 
many natives will not eat because of its supposed magical 
powers ; a small, handsomely marked, self-inflating fish {Tetrodon 
mbu), which has the appearance of an ordinary fish in its 
normal condition, but on being irritated blows itself out and 
is then covered with spines. This is probably its means of 
protection, for in the gullet of a larger fish it could swell out, 
and its enemy must either choke or expel it. Another fish 

1 'ITie natives call this bird Lukulukoko. Its notes are, Kulu ! Kulu ! 
Kulukoko ! hence the people say, “ It is always talking about itself.” 

304 

NOT A BEAUTIFUL RIVER 

{Anabas Weeksii^) belongs to the family of climbing perches; 
and the pretty fish {Polypterus Weeksii'^) “belongs to that 
group of fishes which are the nearest living representatives to 
the type that in long-past ages was developing in the direction 
of an amphibian five-toed creature.” Then there is the mud- 
fish {Protopterus Dolloi) which is partly fish and partly reptile, 
and passes the dry season encased in mud, and in a torpid 
condition. 

This African river, only a few hundred miles shorter than 
the great Nile, possesses here and there small stretches of 
charming scenery, but taking it as a whole it cannot, even by 
its best friends, be called a beautiful river ; for there are 
hundreds of miles of monotonous vistas — a line of trees and 
a line of water ad nauseam. But its waters abound in fish, 
its banks are clothed with huge forests of magnificent trees, 
and inhabited by teeming animal life ; the tribes that people 
the countries through which it flows are interesting, approach- 
able, and readily receptive of European ideas ; and there is al- 
ways the malarial fever to break the monotony of life when 
everything else fails to attract, or palls to the taste. 

^ These, and several other fish, are named after the writer of the 
article, and the fish sent by him and others are in the Natural History 
Museum, Cromwell Road, London. 

APPENDIX 

NOTE I 

ON ANCIENT MARKS FOUND ON ROCKS 
ABOVE MATADI 

The following is by Ed. Heawood, M.A., librarian of the Royal 
Geographical Society, and was written by him as a footnote to a 
paper read by the Rev. Thomas Lewis and published in the 
Geographical Journal ior June I9O8 : “The principal part of the 
inscription, immediately to the right of the royal arms and cross, 
may be read thus : ‘ Aqy chegaram os navios do estratiey (.^) do 
Rey Dom Joam ho seg° de Portugall : D° Caao : P° Ans P° 
Dacosta.’ (‘Hither arrived the ships of the [fleet i*] of King 
Dom Joam the Second of Portugal. Diogo Cao : Pedro Anes 
Pedro da Costa.') More to the right appear other names, mostly 
in a contracted form, among which the following may be made 
out: Alvaro Pirez, Pero Escolar, Joao de Santiago, Joao Alves, 
Diogo Pinero (or Pinheiro), Gonzales Alvares, Antam. Of the above 
companions of Cao, Joao de Santiago and Joao Alves are stated by 
Barros (Dec. I., book iii., chap, iv.) to have sailed in the subsequent 
voyage of Bartholomew Dias, while a Gonzales Alvares was, accord- 
ing to the same authority (Dec. I., book iv., chap, iii.), master of 
the S. Gabriel in Vasco da Gama’s first voyage, in which Pero Escolar 
also took part as pilot on board the Berrio {ibid., chap. ii.). Mr. 
Ravenstein points out that a Pedro Anes was pilot in 1503 (Sousa 
Viterbo: Frabalhos nauticos dos Portugueses, vol. i., p. 39)> while a 
Pero Annes was in Malacca in 1510. Also that a friar, by 
name Antonio, was left behind in San Salvador in 1491.” 

NOTE II 

NAMES OF THE KINGS OF KONGO 

About two years before he died Dom Pedro V gave to my 
colleague. Dr. Bentley, a list of six kings who preceded him on 
the throne. It is not possible to state with any certainty the 
commencement of the reign of the first king ; but allowing an 
average reign of twenty years to each, it takes the first king back 
to 1738 — this, however, is no more than a guess. 

306 

APPENDIX 

1. Nezuji. 2. Ndondiki ( = Henrique). 3. Kafivasa. 4. Ndonga- 
lazia ( = Dom Garcia) Nenkanga Mvemba. 5. Ndondele. 6. A^o- 
ndidiki. 6. N^dom Pedro V, Elelo, who is the one mentioned in 
these pages. He began to reign in 1858, and died on February 
15, 1891> having reigned thirty-two years. Dom Pedro was suc- 
ceeded by his only direct nephew, Dom Alvaro Agwa Rosada. 
The nearest after him in the old King’s line was a boy, Lelo, but 
he was in the Protestant school, so the Residente sent him to the 
coast to be educated. He has never been brought back, “and (in 
1913) is now postmaster somewhere in Angola.” Dom Alvaro 
was followed by Dom Henerique Nteye Kenge, who was only a 
Regent (supposed to be Guarde Cadeira for young Lelo) ; but 
when Kenge died Mbemba became Dom Pedro VI, who was a 
member of the same clan as Pedro V, but the relationship is hard 
to trace. The Portuguese Residente passed over one of known 
relationship and chose this Mbemba, one of doubtful origin, as he 
served his purpose better. He died a few years ago, and was 
succeeded by the present King, Dom Manuel Martino Kiditu, who 
is known to the present Portuguese republican authorities as Chefe 
Indigena, but to the people as Ntotela = king. Since 1888 a 
Portuguese Residente has lived in San Salvador, and he has 
modified the method of making a king since the death of Pedro V 
in 1891. 

NOTE III 

LIST OF KINSHIP TERMS 

Father .... 

. Ese, tata 
. ^ Ngwa, nengwa 

when addres 

Mother .... 

Brother, elder . 

. Mpangi. 

Brother, younger 

. Mbunji. 

Sister .... 

. Nsanga. 

Sister, elder 

. Mpangi. 

Sister, younger 

. Mbunji. 

Husband 

. Nkaza. 

Wife .... 

. Nkaza. 

Son 

. Mwan ' eyakala. 

Daughter .... 

. Mwana ankento. 

Father's father . 

. Nkaka kise 

Father’s mother 

. Ngudi kise. 

Mother’s father 

. Nkaka. 

■ngudi, yaga. 

* Tata is also a term of respect used by slaves to masters, by wives to 
husbands, as well as by sons to their fathers. ^Ngwa and -ngudi are 
generally descriptive of maternal relatives. ^Kise (from ese = father) is 
for paternal relationship. 

APPENDIX 

307 

Mother’s mother 
Father’s brother 
Father’s sister . 

Mother’s brother 
Mother’s sister 
Father’s brother’s wife 
Father’s sister’s husband . 
Mother’s brother’s wife 
Mother’s sister’s husband 
Father’s brother’s son 
Father’s brother’s daughter 
Father’s sister’s son . 
Father’s sister’s daughter . 
Mother’s brother’s son 
Mother’s brother's daughter 
Mother’s sister’s son 
Mother’s sister’s daughter 
Son’s son .... 
Son’s daughter . 

Daughter’s son . 

Daughter’s daughter 
Wife’s father . 

^Vife’s mother . 

Wife’s brother . 

Wife’s sister 
Wife’s sister’s husband 
Husband’s father 
Husband’s mother . 
Husband’s brother . 
Husband’s sister 
Husband’s brother’s wife . 

. Nkaka. 

. Tata. 

. Tata. 

. Ngudi- or ngwa-nkaji. 

. Ngwa, eyaya, or Tigudi, 

. Ngudi. 

. Mpangi, or tata. 

. Nzadi. 

. Ese, tata. 

. Mpangi a kise. 

. Mpangi a kise. 

. Mwana a kise. 

. Mwana a kise. 

. Mwana. 

. Mwana. 

. Ngudi mpangi. 

. Ngudi mpangi. 

. Ntekelo. 

. Ntekelo. 

. Ntekelo. 

. Ntekelo. 

. Ko, and ko-njitu. 

. Ko-njitu. 

. Nkweji. 

. Nzadi. 

. Mpangi. 

. Ko, njitu, and tata, ese. 
. Ngudi. 

. Nzadi. 

. Nzadi or nkweji. 

. Mpangi. 

This list of kinship terms was given to me by a man of good 
intelligence, but it would not be accepted by all the natives, for 
both on the Upper and Lower Congo I have found the same 
difficulty in procuring a list of terms that would satisfy all, or even 
be accepted by the same person six months afterwards ; and this 
arises not from a desire to deceive, but is rather illustrative of the 
vagueness of the terms used to describe the relationship. 

It must be remembered that all relationship is on the mother’s 
side, and with the exception of the father, no paternal relationship 
has any force. The maternal relatives in a general sort of way, 
both male and female, are called mothers (ngudi) or elders (mhuta 
from huta = to beget) ; and the other wives of one’s father are 
ngudi zansakila ( = minor or junior mothers). The children of your 
maternal uncle are spoken of as yours, and you are spoken of as 
their father ; buti the children of your maternal aunts, no matter 
how old you are, or young they may be, regard you as their child. 
The word for family is yitu, and for a relative is yutu. In the 
neighbourhood of San Salvador wi6m«;7 = younger brother, and 
ffijjaagi = elder brother; but in the Ngombe Lutete district mpangi 

308 

APPENDIX 

is used for both younger and elder brother. Nsanga is the word 
employed for sister, but there are no distinct words for elder and 
younger sisters ; however, mhunji and mpangi are used as a rule in 
speaking of one’s sisters, as the sex would be known to the person 
to whom you are speaking, or mhunji a nkenlo, or mpangi a nkenio 
might be used to one ignorant of the members of your family. 
Nkento means female. 

NOTE IV 

TIMES AND SEASONS 

Besides the four names for their markets, viz. Konzo, Nkenge, 
Nsona, and Nkandu, which have given their names to the four days 
of the Congo week, there are names for various seasons that divide 
the year into eight parts, viz. 

Sivu, the cold season at the beginning of the dry season, com- 
mencing about May 15. 

Mbangala, the dry season, little or no dew, July to middle of 
October. 

Mpiaza, grass-burning season, latter part of July, August, and 
September. 

Masanza, early light rains, latter part of October, November, 
and December. 

Nkianza, short dry season, most of January and early part of 
February. 

Kundi, nsafu fruit season, end of February to May. 

Kintombo, heavy rains. March and April. 

Nkiela, time when the rains cease, from beginning to middle 
of May. 

It will be noticed that these overlap each other somewhat, but 
they are near enough for a primitive folk who are not particular 
to a day or a week in their reckoning. 

Nlungi Konzo means this day (Congo) week, i.e. next Kongo 
market day ; and Konzo mole = two complete sets of markets, i.e. 
eight days. This time or season next year is nlungi Sivu, or using 
the name of the season at the time of speaking. When speaking 
of years the word Sivu is sometimes used, but more often mvu = 
season, and to make it more sure mvu amputu = white man’s year. 
The European week is gradually displacing the Congo week, and 
names for the seven days are : Sunday, humingu (Portug. Domingo)', 
this is often used for week, and tumingu tuole •= two weeks ; 
Monday, Kiezole or Kiasekunda (Portug. segunda = second ; 

Tuesday, = third ; Wednesday, = fourth; Thursday, 

Kietanu = fifth ; Friday, Kiesamhanu = sixth ; Saturday, Satade 

APPENDIX 

309 

(Eng.), but more often Kiansabalu (Portug. Sabado). The word 
lumbu ( = day) is understood before each term. A large number of 
natives are using European calendars and learning the names of 
the months, and use them in their transactions with the white 
men in writing letters, agreements, &c. 

NOTE V 

THE CHIGOE OR JIGGER 

In the early sixties of last century a sailing vessel from a South 
American port put into St. Paul de Loando on the south-west 
coast of Africa. The vessel was in ballast, but on receiving the 
offer of profitable freight, the captain was about to throw the 
ballast into the sea, when he received peremptory orders from the 
port authorities, not to throw the ballast overboard, but to dis- 
charge it on a sandspit in the harbour. That unfortunate order 
has caused unparalleled inconvenience to many thousands of people, 
and death to some few; and will continue to inflict suffering on 
many generations yet unborn, who, in days to come, will tread 
the roads, the market-places, and dusty squares of Equatorial 
Africa. 

That sailing vessel had picked up its ballast from the Brazilian 
coast, and consequently it was impregnated with chigoes {Pulex 
penetrans), an insect that looks and hops like a flea, the female of 
which burrows into any handy flesh in which to lay its eggs. 
From St. Paul de Loando the pests have gradually spread by the 
trade routes to San Salvador in Portuguese Congo, and from thence 
over the whole of the Lower Congo. Over the trade routes they 
travelled in the feet of the natives, and in the loads they carried 
on their heads and shoulders. In later years they found their 
way by canoe, boat, and steamer to the towns lining the banks 
of the Upper Congo, and in more recent years to South-east 
Africa, from whence they have been carried to India by native 
troops returning home after service in British East and South 
Africa. When they first arrived in San Salvador they were called 
rubber {ntandandangwa) because the rubber traders brought them 
from the coast, and the insects bounded about like rubber. 

The female chigoe is not over particular in her choice of a 
“ nest ” for her eggs, so long as it is fleshy. Hence the paws of 
dogs are full of chigoe sacs, and that animal spends its spare 
moments in biting its paws, not only to allay the itching, but 
in the hope of pulling out the irritating things ; and there is no 
greater kindness a person can show a dog than that of extracting 

310 

APPENDIX 

these pests from its feet. The combs and wattles of fowls are 
generally full of chigoes, and also the feet and snouts of pigs. 
They also find their way into the fingers, elbows, and buttocks of 
ci-awling children, as well as into the feet of adults. 

The female chigoe burrows under the skin, and she rapidly 
swells as her abdomen is full of eggs, and as the eggs mature the 
sac formed round them increases in size to that of a large pea, 
when it bursts, throwing out the eggs into the fine dust of the 
village paths and market-places. There in the hot sun they hatch 
quickly, and soon the dry dust is full of bounding chigoes, that 
cling to the legs of the passer-by, be he white or black, and find- 
ing their way to the feet, they explore first round the toe-nails 
for a suitable place to enter, and failing that they extend their 
search to other parts of the feet. If the one upon whom they 
alight, in their blind jumps about the open space, happens to 
be a white man, then they use their best endeavour to find an 
entrance between the laces of the boots, or by some other way, 
to the toes of the unfortunate person, where they set up a most 
persistent itching. 

When the itching begins, it is wise to call the best chigoe 
boy ” on the station, and giving him a clean needle, let him hunt 
among the toes until he locates the creature and carefully pulls it 
out. Then dip the eye of the needle in pure carbolic and insert 
it into the chigoe hole, thus thoroughly cauterising it. Should 
the sac have formed to any size, the boy will loosen the scarf-skin 
around it until he is able to extract the sac whole and unbroken ; 
and then the place must be cleansed with carbolic, or bad ulcers 
may come, or blood-poisoning, which has caused more than one 
death. Whatever the phrase, “ You be jiggered ” may mean in 
England, in Africa it is about the worst thing you can wish 
anyone. 

In those parts of Congo — from one to two degrees north and 
south of the Equator — where there is more or less rain all the year 
round, the chigoes are not so plentiful ; but farther south of the 
Equator, where there is a dry season of fully five months, the 
chigoes have every opportunity of breeding in quantities in the 
fine dust, and cause annoyance to everybody. Chigoes not only 
enter the flesh, but where, through laziness or carelessness, they 
are allowed to burrow in all the toes, they give off" a most offensive 
odour, which, on very hot days, becomes almost unbearable. A 
decoction of tobacco water, about a pint to a pail of water, sprinkled 
every morning during the dry season over the living-house floor, 
the school-house, or the store before sweeping, will drive out any 
chigoes lurking in the dust, and will thus render those places 
more tolerable. If the floors are of boards then the tobacco water 
can be put in the water with which the floors are washed, with 
beneficial results. 

APPENDIX 

811 

NOTE VI 

NATIVE DISEASES 

In the chapter dealing with Black and White Magic many of the 
diseases from which the people suffer are there mentioned in 
describing what the witch-doctors are supposed to cure. Like 
other members of the human family, the natives suffer from aches 
in various parts of the body, ulcers, pimples, rashes, soreness of 
gums, toothache, colds, coughs, catarrh, sprains, sympathetic 
buboes, various kinds of sores, &c., the children from diarrhoea, 
convulsions, fits and fevers from teething, &c. But the more 
serious complaints that trouble them are as follows : 

Inflammation of the spleeu 
Goitre 
Craw-craw 
Ophthalmia 
Intestinal worms (species of 
ascaris) 

Bladder worm . 

Scrotal hernia . 

Hematuric fever 
Fever, ague 
Boil, a gathering 
Large abscess . 

Squamous afiFections 
Stye in the eye 
Scald-head 
Dysentery 
Constipation 
Yaws, in children 

Bekele. 

Dingadinga. 

Kinkwada. 

Ebumbulu. 

Edxongololo, meta, nioka a moyo. 
Kinsukulu. 

Edungu, mpiki, nkukulu. 

Kaji. 

Mvuka. 

Evumbu. 

Etuza. 

Kwiji. 

Luntujia. 

Mbanda. 

Makulu. 

MJinga. 

Mata, nkuba, nkubi. 

Venereal nodes and sores, mbadi ; and this same word is used by 
the natives to describe elephantiasis and polypus, and seems 
to indicate any excrescent growth. 

Niangi. 

Evola. 

Nkankatu. 

Nswengenia. 

Ekomongo. 

Luvati — T\\) where the pain is 
felt. 

Ntonji. 

Waji wambunduna, mild form, 
not contagious. 

Smallpox, xika: been several epidemics during last thirty-five 
years. I caught it in 1889 somewhat severely, while attend- 
ing the natives. 

Epilepsy 
Paralysis ..... 
Scarlet fever .... 
Asthma with much wheezing . 
Dyspnoea, painful breathing 
Chest complaints, pleurisy, &c. 

Beri-beri 

Leprosy 

312 APPENDIX 

Sore throat .... 
Rodent ulcer that destroys the 
nose (lupus exedens) . 
Blisters between toes 

Vertigo 

Protruding navel, umbilical 
hernia, very common 
Sleeping-sickness 
Scrofula . . . . . 

Dropsy 

Madness 

Whitlow 

Sores on soles of feet 

Albino 

Blindness . . . 

Deafness 

Dumb person .... 
Baldness . . . . . 

Stammerer . . . . 

Kwayala. 

Matamba. 

Niania. 

Zunga. 

Ekumba. 

Manimba. 

Ebunze. 

Sulu. 

Lau. 

Balu. 

Nzeko. 

Ndundu, very uncommon. 
Umpofo, very uncommon. 

Fvia matu = Aea.A ears. Total 
deafness is very rare. 

Ebaba. 

Vandu. 

Nlokoso, nkokomi. 

NOTE VII 

A LIST OF NATIVE REMEDIES 

The following are the names of native remedies known to and 
used by many before they apply to witch-doctors to perform their 
ceremonies. This list I procured from an intelligent native, 
about forty-five years old, who often used them on his family and 
neighbours without requiring any fee, and he had quite a reputa- 
tion for “ home remedies.” 

1. Nsele-nsele, a root, good as a purge. Clean the root, take 
the skin, and crush it into a powder and dry ; take enough to 
cover a sixpence. It is very bitter and strong. Chewing the 
leaves is good for diarrhoea ; also masticated leaves put on a cut 
stops the blood. An infusion of the astringent is good as a 
medicinal bath. This is also used as an abortive when taken as 
a purgative. 

2. Nkenge a kiasa, a poisonous shrub. Take the bark of the 
root and rub into a paste, and apply to painful place. As a 
poultice it is used for drawing out blood, &c., much the same as 
a blister. 

3. Nsunzu, a big tree. Take skin of root and boil. The 
mouth is washed several times a day with the liquor for sores in 
the mouth. 

4. Mwindu, small tree. Take bark of tree (very red when 
cut), bruise it, and soak all night and drink the water in the 
morning. Good for dysentery. 

APPENDIX 313 

5. Mbota (lonchocarptis). Take leaves and boil them. Drink 
half a glass of the liquid for killing intestinal worms. 

6. Ntundulu (guinea grain). Take roots, pound and soak all 
night in water. For dysentery, for any aversion to food, and also 
a wash for inflamed eyes. 

7. Sakrva. Very big tree. Take bark, crush it, soak all night, 
and drink a glass each morning for dysentery. 

8. Mbangu-mbangu. Take bark of tree, pound, soak, and drink 
every morning a glass for diarrhoea; and for pains in the back 
(nsaicu) through weakness. Rub into a paste with oil to make an 
ointment, and rub on body for weakness or general debility. It 
has a smell like turpentine. 

9. Ntontosi (Briophyllum calycinuni), or ''tree of life.” Press 
the juice of some leaves into a twisted-leaf funnel and a little 
water, for washing out bad ears. 

10. Nguba-ampuiu. Tree bearing a nut. Take piece of nut, 
pound, and mix with salt and pepper or an egg. It gripes and 
purges. 

11. Mamau (limes). Leaves for intestinal worms. For an 
adult take ten leaves, pound, and mix with water ; drink the clear 
liquor, which is very effective. The juice of the fruit mixed with 
powdered iron-stone and soot, well boiled and stirred and applied 
to yaws, said to be very good. This second preparation is called 
Kongo a nkela. 

12. Luasu, shrub with thick leaves and yellow flower like a 
daisy. Leaves are good for yaws in babies. Leaves pounded or 
burnt and mixed with water as a wash for sore gums, but No. 3 
is better. 

13. Dimbuzu. Creeper. Crush the leaves, boil in water, and 
drink half a glass every morning, or take as a clyster for diarrhoea, 
or pains in the stomach. 

1 4. Mavolo ( = charcoal), used for indigestion and bad breath. 
A very old remedy. 

15. Dinioka-nioka ( = little snake). Take a small quantity of 
the juice of the leaves for intestinal worms. 

16. Mwanji a lolo (called kienga in Ngome Lutete). Take root, 
bruise, and boil. Drink some of the bitter juice. Good for 
stomach-ache, also a good diuretic, and is used by the natives for 
inflammation of the bladder {kaji). Sometimes they boil three 
roots together, nsunzu, nlulu, and lolo. 

17. Diza {Euphorbia). Used as a purgative, but very dangerous. 

18. Ndondo-londo. Strong creeper. The skin of the root is 
chewed for diarrhoea, and for sore throat. 

19. Kintamba, shrub with tuberous roots. Extract juice from 
roots by pounding and mix oil with it, and rub on painful place. 
For a person lacking an appetite, pound and boil the root and 
drink the liquor. 

314 

APPENDIX 

20. Ngadiadia, big tree bearing a large pod containing a nut. 
Masticate a piece of the nut for stomach-ache. 

21. Nanazi, unripe pineapple, good for an outbreak of rash on 
the skin called kintuntu (perhaps measles). Sometimes imripe 
pineapples and manioc leaves are crushed together and rubbed 
on the body for this rash. 

22. Lulongololo, very thin marsh withy. The roots are boiled 
and liquor used as a purgative. 

23. Ndiadia, thick grass with nodes. The pith from the heart 
of new grass is put on a fresh cut. It is painful, but the cut heals 
quickly. This pith is also used as food. 

24. Ewele-wele, marsh grass with sharp edges. Pound the stem 
and boil. Drunk as an aperient, or used as an enema for clearing 
out the bowels. 

25. Sama — brown ants’ nest. Eaten by pregnant women, also 
by children for intestinal worms ; and is used also by men for very 
bad diarrhoea. 

26. Luvemba = chalk, mixed with salt and worn in a horn round 
a mother’s neck, and, if her infant vomits, she frequently licks 
the chalk in the horn. Chalk and worm-casts are mixed and used 
by medicine-men for dropsy {kibwaka). 

27. Lengo-lengo, a small tree. A decoction of the bark is good 
for scald-head. 

28. Elonga = ha.th.. To give a patient a medicinal bath, a 
hole is dug in the floor of the house and the sides are plastered 
with mud, and lined with plantain leaves. The hot water is 
poured into this hole, with medicinal leaves, &c., and the patient 
sits in it, or over it, with a large cloth or blanket over him and 
the hole “ to keep the medicine in.” 

Cupping (sumika) is practised very freely ; and they know the 
use of the clyster {tuba). 

INDEX 

Abortion, methods of, 108 
Accidental homicide, 63 
“ Advocate,” hunters’, 182 

— keeps the drum and cross, 183 
AflSnity, degrees of, 141 

Albino head of secret society, 159 
Albino’s hair as a charm, 238 
Antelope, dividing an, 185 ; eating 
the heart of an, 184 ; killing an, 184 

Baby, customs relating to the, 111 

— given with slave mother, 149 

— talking about the, 115 

— washing and dressing the, 116 

— betrothing a, 112 
Bachelor’s house or club, 171 
Banking clubs, 70 
Bastian, 57 

Beer, native, 90 
Belief, order of, 287 
Beliefs, religious, 276 
Bentley, Dr., 74 
Berlin Geographical Society, 57 
Blacksmith, position of, 93 
Blessings, various, 154 
Blood brotherhood, 194 
Boma, 19, 23 

Boy and his father, 120; taught by 
his father, 119; uncle claims him, 
119 

Breach of promise, bow treated, 143 
Bribe, taking a, 66 
Bridal feast, 145 

Bride, catechising the, 144 ; pretence 
of capturing the, 145 
Bridegroom catechises the bride be- 
fore marriage, 144 

— takes marriage oath, 145 
Brass rods, shortening of, 202 
Brokers, native, 210 

Bull-roarer, 126 

Buried at cross roads, those, 273 

— at sunset, reason for being, 270 
Bush burning, effect on animal life, 

178 

— customs relating to, 179 

Cabbiebs, discussions among, 30 

— paying, 289 

Ceremonies, court influence on, 176 
Chalk and its use, 277 
Charms, various, 232 ; to assist thieves 
65 ; for barren women, 107 ; of 
Albino’s hair, 238 ; love philtre, 
107 ; for hunters, 181, 183; for rat 
catching, 188; for war, 191; for 
trading, 204 ; for every requirement, 
235 

— bundle, contents of, 232, 234 

— horn, 239 

— sacrifices to, 235 

Chief, dignity, 100 ; of noble family, 
100 ; owns the land, 101 ; as magis- 
trate, 101 ; revenue of, 102 ; in- 
herits position, 70; his heir, 102; 
pepper cure for bad, 69 
Chieftess, 102 
Chigoe (or jigger), 204, 309 
Children, lovable, 120 ; rebirth in, 115 
Circumcision, ceremonies of, 172 
Clan, the, 96, 99 
Cloth, weaving, 92 
Club, bachelors’, 171 
Clubs, banking, 70 
Conundrums, 133 
Cooking, methods of, 88 
Counting, aversion to, 292 

— modes of, 203 
Country-of-the-dead, 158 
Court etiquette, 39 

316 

316 

INDEX 

Court procedure in law, 66 
Courtship, 141 
Cross as a charm, 183 
Currency, 213 
Curses, various, 155 

Dances, various, 127 
Days of week, or market, 199 

— unlucky, 130 

Dead, treatment of the, 267 
Debts, collecting, 68 
Degrees of affinity, 141 
Devil, native, 276 
Diagnosing, difficulty of, 254 

— native method of, 257 
Divination, various methods, 264 
Divorce procurable, 107 

Dogs, hunting, 186 ; burial of, 187 
Dreaming of snakes, 113 
Dreams, spirit travels in, 282 
Drinks, palm wine and beer, 90 
Dutch Trading House, 18 

Evil-eye, 291 

Evil-spirits, 223, 280 

driving out, 227 

killing, 223, 242, 280 

shooting stars as, 281 

Family, the, 96; many quarrels in 
the, 95 

Fetishes, names and functions of 
various, 232-241 

— hiring of, 242 

— sacrifices to, 235 

Fevers and quinine, 22, 28 

Fight, reasons for a, 196; watching 
a, 194 

Fire, origin of, 293 

First-fruits, 252 

Food, native, 86 ; women procure 
vegetable, 89 ; careful in division 
of, 90 

Forest town of spirits, 278 

Funeral, feast, 268 ; reason for grand, 
278 

Games, “Antelope,” 124; ball, 125; 
cats’ cradles, 126; with croton 
fruit, 125 ; gambling, 127 ; hockey, 
121 ; “ Hunt the slipper,” 126 ; 
make - believe games, 122 ; with 
peanuts, 124 ; “ Spider,” 123 ; 

“ Young pigeon,” 123 
Geographical Society of Berlin, 57 
Girls help their mothers, 118 

— operation on, 175 
Grass heavy with dew, 27 
Grave, fee for digging, 270 

— size of chief’s, 271 
Greed, reasons for native, 295 
Greetings by women, 104, 151 
Guild for men, secret, 168 
Gun accidents, 186 

Haik of famous hunter, 181 

— of albino, 238 
Hippopotami in river, 21 
Hiring a fetish, 242 

Homage to the King, paying, 39, 152 
Homicide, punishment for, 62; ac- 
cidental, 63 
Horn charms, 239 

Hospitality to natives, 67 ; to white 
men, 26 

Houses, size of, 94 
Hunters’ “ advocate,” 182 ; charm, 
181, 183; dance, 182; prayer to 
great, 182 

Hunting customs, 181 ; rat, 187 

Idioms, curious native, 77 
Incest, known but rare, 108 
Inheritance, laws of, 70, 102 
Insanity, treatment for, 227 
Installation of noble, 44 ; cost of, 46 
Insults, various, 157 
Interpreters, native, 74; tell of a 
snake, 75 ; linguisteres, 210 
Ivory, superstitions about, 207 

Jigger (or chigoe), 204, 309 
Journey to San Salvador, 24 
Judge taking a bribe, 66 

INDEX 

317 

King, sends a pig, 28 ; visit to the, 
32 ; present to, 33 ; name of, 33 ; 
his house, 34, 50; history of the, 
35 ; the death of a, 36, 37 ; ruse 
to gain the throne, 37 ; court of 
the, 39 ; rendering homage to the, 
39, 152 ; his wives, 40 ; counsellors, 
40; ofiBcers of the, 42, shirts for 
the, 51 ; comes to dinner, 51 ; goes 
hungry all day, 52; wives go on 
strike, 55 ; tries to beat a wife, 
56 ; deceived by the white men, 
58 ; dies, 59 
— a dethroned, 37 
Kingdom of Kongo, 60, 75 

“carpet” government of, 61 

Kings, list of the, 305 

Language, Kisi-Kongo, 75 ; allitera- 
tive, 76 ; many concords, 76 ; its 
verbs, 77 ; curious idioms, 77 ; its 
proverbs, 79 

Languages, secret, 162, 169 
Laws, promulgation of, 47, 62 
Leopard, respect for, 189 ; skin of, 
189 

Linguisteres (interpreters), 210 
Livingstone, attempt to caU the 
river, 297 

“ Livingstone ” steam launch, 18 ; 
breaks down, 19; loses its pro- 
peller, 20 
Love philtre, 146 

Madmen, 64 ; treatment of, 226 

Magic, black and white, 214 ; theory 
of, 218 

Markets, names of, 199, 201 ; articles 
at, 201 

Marriage and courtship, 141 ; money, 
142 ; vows, 145 ; polygamous, not 
happy, 149 

Matabixu, meaning of, 210 

Mat making, 92 

Motherhood, customs relating to. 111 

Mother-in-law, 143, 249 

Mother-right, the cause of quarrels 
95 ; fosters certain customs, 107 ; 
babies abandoned a by-product of, 
117 

Murder, punishment for, 62 
Musuku, 19, 20 

Names, ordinary, 48 ; scmtu, 48 ; with 
Dom and Dorma, 48 ; of towns, 97 ; 
of children, 114, 115, 130 
Native on cleanliness of white man, 
29 

“ Napoleon Bonaparte,” 25 
Noble, installation of, 44 

Omens, 252 

Ordeal bark, procuring the, 262 ; 
giving the, 262 

Palavers, 70, 71, 72 
Palm-trees, ownership in, 97 
Palm-wine, as a drink, 90; super- 
stition about, 208 
Pawn, redeeming a, 98 
Peace, suing for, 193 
Pepper cure for bad chief, 69 ; for 
stealing, 69 

Pig, present of a, 28, 32 
Polygamy, 147, 149, 150 
Prayer to great hunter, 182 
Proverbs, native, 79 

Quarrels, judging, 67 ; mother- 
right cause of family, 95 
Queen Victoria, 36, 51, 54, 55 

Railway, Congo, 31 
Rain-doctors, 229 
Rebirth in children, 115 
Religious beliefs, 276 
River Congo, first journey up the, 
17 ; description of the, 296 
Roads, narrow and rough, 25, 28 
Roman Catholics, 32, 48, 58, 240 
Rubber, superstitions about, 208 

Sacrifices to charms and fetishes, 
235 

Salutations, various, 151 _ 

1 San Salvador, 24, 32, 48, 57, 60, 94 

318 

INDEX 

San Salvador, our arrival at, 27 ; Portu- 
guese at, 32, 48 ; native society at, 49 
Santu name, 48 
Scarecrows, 242 

Secret societies, country-of-the-dead, 
107, 158; nkimba, 168; languages 
of, 162, 169 

Slave, can redeem himself, 67 ; master 
no claim on slave’s wife, 67 ; status 
of children, 68, 97 ; runs to a chief, 
72 ; proportion of, 99 ; in relation 
to the clan, 148 ; trading in, 209 
Sleeping sickness, treatment of, 228 
Sneezing, 277 

Social life, 94 ; society at San Salva- 
dor, 49 . 

Spirits, not recalled, 277 ; go to forest 
town, 278 ; go to sun or moon, 
279 

— evil, 223, 280 ; shooting stars as, 
281 ; driving out evil, 227 ; killing 
evil, 223, 243, 280 

Sprites, water-, 113 ; sprite child, 113 ; 
treatment of sprite children, 114; 
weave cloth, 294 ; keep the water 
good, 294 ; sea-sprites, 294 
Stars, names of, 293 ; shooting stars 
as spirits, 281 

Stealing, 64 ; penalties of, 65 ; fetish 
against, 65 ; fetishes for, 65 ; pep- 
per cure for, 69 
Stories, jungle, 134 
Suicide, 64 

Supreme Being, name for, 276 

Taboos, the baby’s, 113 ; put on by 
“ doctor,” 218 ; permanent, 245 ; 
personal, 246 ; “ Thou shalt nots,’’ 
250 ; origin of, 251 ; various kinds, 
245 

Tally sticks, 203 
Throne, fight for the, 36 

Totemism, 99 

Towns, names of, 97 ; clean, 94 ; 

made up of families, 99 
Trader, native, 199 ; conduct of, en. 

route, 206 ; paying toll. 206 
Trading, charm, 204; methods of, 
211 ; goods, 210 
Twins, treatment of, 116 

Uncle’s position in relation to mar- 
riage of his niece, 141 

Wak, customs relating to, 190 ; guns 
versus spears, 190; declaration of, 
191 ; charm, 191 ; fetish, 192 ; fight- 
ing for the corpse, 193 ; reasons for 
a, 196 ; suing for peace, 193 
Water-sprites, 113 ; children of, 1131 
weave cloth, 204 ; sea-sprites, 294 
White man, native on cleanliness of, 
29 

White men, superstitions about, 208 
Widow, purifying, 272 
Widower, purifying the, 272 
Wife, runaway, 71, 72 
Witch-doctors, initiation of, 215 ; 
power of, 217 ; responsible for 
status quo, 231 ; various orders, 
107, 111, 113, 117, 181, 186, 186, 
192, 204, 219-231, 257-266, 291- 
292 

Women, going to farms, 103; their 
talk, 103 ; their greetings, 104 ; 
salutations, 151 ; important in 
village and town, 105 ; their tem- 
perament, 106 ; charm for barren, 
107 ; barren are ridiculed, 107 ; 
can procure a divorce, 107 ; child 
of unmarried, 108 ; during certain 
periods live apart, 108 ; have 
whims, 109 ; gilt-edged security, 
147 ; a loan only, 142, 148 

Printed by Ballanttne, Hanson 6* Co. 
at Paul’s Work, Eklinburgh 

[Votihia 

J- 

A^anve 

/•■'fa>ti»f 

•JCu/«ty*7&/» 

f, 

Jl ,ifr^ 

rhtiQal H'lpul* 

Sayo' 

'^uA'U MO/ 

Uhft* 

L 

i‘c*r)iani]i> Pit 

C 

Uliht o 

'S"n^'<' • 
Knmtfu 

n^iie 
But, I 

'k” %‘un. 
JtieailHi 

J’oho 

Ihnf'rn 

trr* Pultinili, 

/u6lVl 

l>l4/>« 

^Omt/ 

'■>7''TfTi«lrl. 

’ Varomt) 

JZnr 

“ «^*‘**^*^ Mapttitn, 

mha y 

Cttinpu 

^okonartam 

‘ M' T^/ub.. 
dhua* ^ 

BunUfL. / 

Bakwama • 

Bahi Bf 
J\n> PeinJt 

2a/» fltuiMiiit^i. 
• RtA 

Monxbt 

IVinr^i I ^Ar 

HroiiuTi 

"t^m/i/14/o jy 

■ S' Jolm { 

thrijcui 0 

Btt^uJti . 

L . Yor 

.b^k,{hX 

Yxinfnnm 

I'aak uf 
'Tknma* 

■' St,shnt,tlin 

)qijjIliatviUt 

Ei^iittttn- 

HiOtoi, 

J rfo# BntOA 

Tt^ii-ttilt 

tn • £ 

i^i: urtWdiiBl 

Ini/eruif 

Pian-lo 

Lfjfokt 

Vu-fihpiht 

I,«»t,«uri”'Ul'’ 
‘ ff-ir- 

itomhfi 

/■««/ ^ 

4l-h/ii»tlr 

',uk/>Mii 

6bio»n^» 

'Simiio^ 

vZoMK^O 

Lokiuubi 

(uun-k 

^wayolti 

i{ ,i' c 

B,u..lr ^, >,.„.■ •• 

j 'hjfkjL '. ’ 

/ Sr^irilj 

Sfiakup. 

ttanithu 

» nZat /F 

Huhtiltn 

^a»itnbn 'X/,, 
'- ■ ® JB 

Nvapgauf-'*’ 

W'’-— Ri-axsn^ 

iiiibnndti 

I.oaii«{oXrrwj(» 
Blu.kr* • 

'^m kii 

Jtas>iai>ai4i 

^konpo 

^piihuniui 

'A't/iwi 

JfuAoZzi^ 

dnihntrttr I ^ 
.V»/«u/a' 

Hiiiuk' H 
***VwA^ 

.•i PAOLO oi LOANDi^ 

I'nlmJmnfuu P* 

^ffniphti £iijii I 

I khBiUuku 

•lAAr . 

fph Billt 

Miirtf/fi 

flotui. 

tfUtrr>^lA 

■ Jlr^ocottu 

Brmhi 

Xovo R<Hloa<li) I 

irA../n>«^ J 

8JALKH 

Katurnl Sc«lr 1 VVXCMUMti) Wn MUm to aii Iiidt 
M»W» tW> 1 Jetr»» 

TotrtmrTa ** 

ICAz/b-J 

J I 

M^ndti I 

N«*U]!nH 

B** ^ 

^alAlUIyl/o 

■ ‘KalnitJ* 

C C V L A 

H .A S t 

th<*hutA 

kakoi 

^u/faU 

•Ct'htny 

MAP FOR AMONG THE PRIMITIVE BAKONGO. 

Skrliy. Servick frCo.. T.imitbo, 38 Great Rpsj^kli. SriiKicr. laO.NDOV. 

V 

H. 

4 V 

» I' 

i t 

t' 

i 

1
