Collectanea Hermetica

EDITED BY

W. WYNN WESTCOTT, M.B., D.P.H.


VOLUME VI II.

EGYPTIAN MAGIC


BA


s. s. n. d.


'O A-at=

body


The

Human

Kai = tji



Sahu= astral farm


%=. Te t =Zet

j tf = spiritual
form.


r ,~ The four farms of

'Xaibt- Bai e = spirit.

' aura, the 9 ✓prv
sphere of radiation


±JJ ^8/ instinctive ey

^ x executant .AM- . .

Ihe Illuminated one



A i b »

will, heart



Hammemit'
The unborn
Soul.


The Parts of a Human Being.


CONTENTS.


PAGK.

The Parts ok a Human Bkinu ... ... j

The Rationale of Egyptian Magic ... ... 3

Sixty-fourth Chapter of the “ Book of the Dead " 17

Magical Papyrus of Harris ... ... 22

Theory^ of Supernatural apparition by Baron


Textor de Ravist ... ... ...

Legend of Ra and Isis ... ... ... 30

Instances of Magic from Egyptian Tales ... 35

Gnostic Magic ... ... ... ... 37

Royal and Divine Formula-: ... ... 30

Gnostic Philosophy and Formula- ... ... 45

A Gnostic Papyrus ... ... ... 4<S

A Summary tracing the Resemblances between

/


Egyptian and Gnostic Magic


THE PARTS OF A HUMAN BEING.


Determinative.

A Fish -
A Mummy and a Seal =
An Upright Snake

A Fan -

The Forepart of a [
Lion - - J

A Vessel with !
Ears as Handles j

The Upraised Hands

A Hawk, Heron or I

Ram - - )

The Bennu Bird -
The Radiating Sun


Egyptian Name.


Equivalent in English.


= Khat or Kat
- Saliu
= Tet or Zet -

= Khaibt


Hati -


A ib or Ab -


Kai or Ka -
Ba or Bale


Body, Corpse.

Elemental Body, Astral Body.

Spiritual Body, Soul.

( Radiations of the Sahu ; the Sphere or Aura,
{ Emanation, Odour, etc.

| Executant, Human heredity, Habit, Instinct.

[ The Will, similar to the animal Will, but
containing within it the germs of the Spirit
j and Human Ego, in the form of an Egg and
( a concave receptacle,

The Individuality, the Human Ego.

f The penetrating Mind, the link with the
i Divine.


- KhouKhu,orYckh


The Magical powers. The Shining one.
Augoeides of Greek philosophy.


The


Hammemit


f The Unborn Soul; apparently a separate
( emanation of the Solar Light.


Sec Frontispiece.


Egyptian Magic.


By S. S. D. D.


The study of Magic, which has now fallen into disre-
pute was, among the Egyptians, regarded with a vene-
ration hardly accorded to the highest Philosophy in
modern times.

To the Ancient Egyptians the most eminent man was
he who had by hard training gained supremacy over the
Elements, from which his own body and the Manifested
World were alike formed ; one whose Will had risen
Phcenix-like from the ashes of his desires ; one whose
Intuition, cleansed from the stains of material illusion,
was a clear mirror in which he could perceive the Past,
the Present and the Future.

The Kings and Priests of Egypt were the elect of
those who had studied with success in the “ School of
Wisdom,” a Philosophical Aristocracy ; they were
chosen because they were not only wise, but could use
their wisdom. They could give strength to the armies
of the nation and they had the means of transmitting
their power ; for the Staff of the “ King-Initiate ” held so
strong a magical potency, that, with it in his hand, the
leader of armies became as mighty as Pharaoh himself.

The King- Priests gave forth an exoteric religion to
the people, by which to guide their footsteps until they
had reached that stage of development (it may have



2


been only after repeated failures, incarnation after incar-
nation), when they also might join the ranks of the
initiated: yet it appears extremely probable that the
whole Egyptian population was allowed a certain par-
ticipation in the Mysteries ; for the tests of a candidate
before Initiation were of such a nature that none but
human beings developed to a considerable degree of per-
fection could hope to stand them.

There is every reason to suppose that only those who
had received some grade of initiation were mummified ;
for it is certain that, in the eyes of the Egyptians,
mummification effectually prevented reincarnation. Re-
incarnation was necessary to imperfect souls, to those
who had failed to pass the tests of initiation ; but for
those who had the Will and the capacity to enter the
Secret Adytum, there was seldom necessity for that
liberation of the soul which is said to be effected by the
destruction of the body.

The body of the Initiate was therefore preserved after
death as a species of Talisman or material basis for the
manifestation of the Soul upon earth.

In studying Egyptian Magic one has at once a
thoroughly scientific satisfaction. One is troubled with
no vague theories, but receives precise practical details ;
we observe that every square inch of the Upper and
Under Worlds is mapped out. The strength that such
a system inherently contains was proved by the long
duration of the archaic Egyptian civilization.

The first principles of Egyptian Magic were based on
an elaborate system of correspondences depending on
the formula that, the evolution of what is material follows
the type and symbol of the emanation of the spiritual ;
that spirit and matter are opposite faces of the self-
same mystery.* The Egyptian Adepts regarded the
conceptions of the mind, the aspirations of the soul, the
words of the mouth and the functions of the body, as

* See Westcott on Kabalah, in Lucifer , May, 1893, p. 204, and
Tyndall, Belfast Address.



3


possessing analogies from which a complete system of
rules of life and death could be constructed. Moreover
they looked upon each body, or manifested being, as the
material basis of a long vista of immaterial entities func-
tioning as Spirit, Soul and Mind in the Formative, Crea-
tive and Archetypal Worlds.

Included in this volume is a list of standard works
upon the subject of “ Egyptian Beliefs,” for the use of
those who have not studied the modern theories on the
subject ; so there is no need to enter here into details
which can easily be found elsewhere. I shall therefore
at once state the ideas which my study of ancient lore
has led me to formulate, without waiting to quote the
hypotheses set forth by our leading Egyptologists.

In the first place we have hitherto written of man as
composed of soul and body ; but the Initiated Egyptians
regarded themselves as being far from simply soul
and body. They gave names to several human facul-
ties, and postulated for each a possibility of separate
existence.

The Khat, Kat, or Body, was only a vehicle or
material basis for the operations of the Ego upon this
plane of human earth-life.

In considering the Egyptian philosophy of the Life
Cycle, let us start from the beginning ; according to
the obelisk of Queen Hatshepsu, a human Hammemit or
Primal Entity circled round the sun for a period of One
Hundred and Twenty Years before incarnation. During
this period certain cosmic and elemental forces would be
more powerful than others ; these environing the Primal
Entity would give it a certain characteristic bias, and
guide it in the choice of the means and moment of incar-
nation. In the meantime the reflections of the higher
elemental forces affecting the Primal Entity would be at
work in the material world. These reflections would
bias the human parents in like manner. When the natal
epoch arrived the Great Mother-Force, symbolized by
the vulture holding the Seal, imprinted upon the Primal



4


Entity the symbols dominant at the selected moment ;
and this is the rationale of the Astrological horoscope.

The human mother had in the meantime become the
centre of elemental forces that formulated an illusive
attraction around her. This is the formulation of the
Sahu, or the Astral body of the future human being,
under the magic of the natural elemental forces. For
the plainest woman, for a time, becomes beautiful in the
eyes of her lover. No sooner, however, is the co-opera-
tion of the parent forces accomplished than the Sahu
hastily attaches itself to the vitalized germ and remains
with it as an invisible pattern towards which solid matter
gravitating forms the material body. This operation
of the Sahu accounts for the vision which some clair-
voyants have perceived in regard to the Vegetable
Kingdom, of an astral plant -form attached to seeds or
grains before they are sown in the ground.

The elemental body then having concentrated round
the vitalized ovum, leaves the human mother in her
natural state, stripped of the illusive beauty it had im-
parted to her : and she does not, or should not, regain
her specially attractive power until she has done her
part by the human being she is about to foster.

We see then that the unborn child is prepared for its
emergence into life by the parents who contribute the
principle called by the Egyptians the Hati or “whole
heart.” That is, the Seat of the Inherited instincts
racial and individual ; including such functions as
digestion, hearing, seeing, smelling, and so on. In one
word the Hati is the heredity. It is clothed by a body
formulated by elemental forces, the Sahu. The Sahu,
or astral body, both before and after conception, pos-
sessed that power of radiation which formed the sphere
of attraction round the human mother, which was sealed
by the great Vulture- Mother-Force at the time of con-
ception, and was withdrawn instantly to form the sphere
or aura of the future human being — this is called the
Khaibt, or radiating aura.



3


At the moment of birth the “ Ego" joins the body,
and there are extant many pictures (dating from the
period of the highest Egyptian civilization) which show
the birth of great princes ; in these the double forms of
the Celestially and Terrestrially generated bodies are
recognisable. This is to say the circling Hammemit
now throws off an emanation which is called the Ka or
double of the new-born child, and this forms its link
with the earthly body by means of another principle,
the Ab. The Hati is ahvays spoken of in Egyptian
texts as associated with the Ab or Heart. Just as we,
in our conversation, often confuse and combine our
instinct and will. Will is a quality latent in every
animal ; it can in man be developed and cultivated until
it becomes Free Will. In the same way the Ab (will)
or Red Vessel of the Heart is represented in the Book of
the Dead as containing an egg, and a concave germ :
when this concave germ is developed by cultivation the
real life and full development of the Ego could begin :
that is to say the Ka could progress in its celestial
evolution, just as the body could progress in its terres-
trial evolution.

Of course in thousands of cases the celestial body was
restricted ; the fatal moment of conception loaded the ter-
restrial being (composed of the Sahu, Hati, and Ab within
the Kab or material body) with chains of destiny too
strong for him to break through. And the Ka or Ego had
to return to the Hammemit in the Place of Spirits and
await the time when it might again have a chance of
regenerating matter Astral and Material, and become of
the number of these “ Shining Ones,” who are set like
Jewels in the Diadem of the Lord of Spirit and Life,
made One.

In this conception we have at once the explanation
of the dogma regarding the sacrifice of self to self.
For the Ka or Ego can only grow and become
potent through ardent and patient perseverance and
struggle.



6

“ Three days 1 hung upon the Cross, my Self a
Sacrifice unto myself,” says the God of the Eddas.

“ Ich bin nichts in mir. Ichts in dir, und leben in
deinem Ichts aus Nichts, lebe du doch in mir, und
bringe mich aus dem Ichts in dir,” said the German
Mystic.

The Man who cannot “ be Himself” must be melted
down in the casting-ladle of Phtha. The artist-crafts-
man of the Gods will disperse the elemental material
which in its present combination cannot, and will not,
be regenerated ; he bides his time for a happier moment
of operation.

We have Christ enunciating this doctrine in the
parable of the Talents, St. Luke, xix. 26, “ Unto every
one which hath shall be given, and from him that hath
not, even that he hath shall be taken away from him.”

This old Egyptian Doctrine is to be discovered again
in Matthew Arnold’s sonnet on “ Immortality : ”

“ No, no, the energy of life may be
Kept on beyond the grave, but not begun,

And he who flagged not in the earthly strife
From strength to strength advancing, only be
His soul well knit and all his battles won,

Mounts, and that hardly, to eternal life.”

Having dwelt for some period on that dark side of
the Egyptian Faith which dooms the impotent soul to
extinction ; I will proceed to discuss the career opened
before those who, taking the reins of the chariot of life
in their own hands, guide the elemental forces which
are linked to that vehicle, safe to the desirable goal.

The seeds placed within the heart or Ab may now be
considered as symbolising the powers of Thought and
Will : these once set in action by Theurgic practices or
self-devotion to the highest aspiration of the conscious
being produce a curious result. Remembering that in
the representations of the Ab the principles are reversed
as though reflected in a vessel of blood — the concave



germ being uppermost. We can then see that the
two ends of the concave mass stretch round and form a
receptacle for the egg : this symbolises a more quintes-
sential influx from the primal entity or Hammemit
descending upon the upstretched arms of the Ka in the
form of the Hawk or Baie. The Cultivation of Thought
and Will is again shown by the uplifted hands in the
hieroglyph which represents the Ka : and the attitude
of aspiration enables it to formulate a resting-place for
the piercing, penetrating spirit, the Baie. This latter
principle is represented in four ways ; by a hawk
crowned, or the Horus Baie ; by a human-headed
hawk ; by a Bennu bird or by a ram. The Baie (spirit)
can operate through the egg-like principle contained in
the Ab and the Ka (human Ego) through the concave
principle.

These four hieroglyphs used for the word Baie showed
distinct orders or genera of souls ; for instance, the
hawk-soul is only represented as resting upon the Ka of
the King or Queen. It is called the Royal .Soul. The
human-headed hawk hovers over the mummies of great
initiates and doubtless represents the soul after the in-
carnation had ceased ; its human head is the symbol of
the quintessence of the human individuality which the
bird bears to the Abode of Blessed Souls.

The Baie represented by the ram would be the pro-
gressive, penetrating power which breaks down barriers
and enables the energised human soul to pass into
regions, the guardians of which could hold their own
against meeker enquiry.

The Bennu bird also is remarkable for transfixing and
piercing its prey. There is considerable difficulty about
this hieroglyph ; if it represents the phoenix as it has
been commonly supposed to do, it would be easy to
understand that it was the symbol of a soul belonging to
a more complex range of being, only to be evolved
through a long series of labours on the part of its human
counterpart ; but if it is simply a form of a common



hernshaw I should take it as implying a milder and less
fiery nature in the soul.

The ram head is often placed on the stone scarabaeus
(symbol of self-creation) which replaces the heart in the
body of a mummy ; representing what the mediaeval
mystics meant when they talked of the “ Stone of the
Wise.” That is, the Will which had become self-
creative and was united eternally to its celestial, pro-
gressive, penetrative faculty. The consecrated Will and
purified Thought of the true Magus.

In the first Egyptian Room at the British Museum a
painting, said to be of Queen Hatshepset, who lived
about b.c. 1600, is hung on the walls (the Queen’s name
has been painted out and that of Thothmes III. sub-
stituted), she is making perfume offerings ; this picture is
reproduced from an obelisk now fallen, which was set up
by this Queen at Karnak. A print of this painting is
reproduced in the English translation of Wiedemann’s
Immortality of the Soul.

Here we have a representation of a fully initiated
ruler. Her Divine Powers are represented on her
head-dress by the feathers of the Celestial and Terres-
trial Truth ; the orb of the Sun ; the two Goddesses
ruling the commencement and the fruition, represented
by the horned and orbed urseii, symbols of beauty, life,
and fierce protective motherhood ; the ram’s horns of
all-penetrating potency ; the nemess with the fiery ser-
pent of prophecy and protection upright before her face.

Above the figure of the Queen is the Mother- vulture;
at once the avenging, protective, and intuitive emissary
of Maut the Mother of all things ; holding the Seal
composed of a ring and a plate engraved with the
symbols of the birth-presiding forces which gave a name
of power to the Queen.

Behind her is her Ka or real Ego ; the hands, lifted
in aspiration above the head, enclose the rectangular
parallelogram representing the Portal of Wisdom in
which is written the Horus or heroic Name which



according to Egyptian dogma was to be won by the
Theurgic rites of Initiation. On it is seated the Royal
Horus Baie. In the hands of the Ka is the Staff or
Magical Wand which, rightly understood, was a means
of transmitting the Royal Power to such of her subjects
as she selected to carry out her Will.

Proclus in T imams book v.,page 330 says, speaking of
the Baie, Spirit:

“ Her seeds are hurled into the realms of generation ;
and she must purify herself from circumjacent fluctua-
tions of matter. For she contains two-fold powers, one
leading to generation the other from generation to true
being. The one leads her round the Genesiurgic, the
other round the intellectual circle.”

In this way we come to the consideration of the
magical Power of the Soul : called by the Egyptians the
Yekh, Khou or Shining One. We find in nearly all the
Magical Tales that it was through the initiative of the
Khou that really magical acts were performed. M.
Chabas in his supplement to the Harris Magical
Papyrus gives many instances of the good and evil
uses made of the Khou.

One entered the body of a princess who was obsessed
for a long period, until it was cast out by means of the
health-giving Divinity.

It was the Khou which had been degraded that be-
came a demon and the torturer of mankind. The fate
of such was to sacrifice the negatively evil, those who
had neglected their opportunities ; but the evil Khous
could not themselves be annihilated. An evil immor-
tality awaited the great evil-doer or destroyer among
mankind; just as a beautiful immortality awaited the
Shining Ones who had added to the beauty of life in
their mortal days. Between these extremes of beauty
and destruction lay the impotent and the ignorant,
whose blindness doomed them to annihilation.

The beatitude of the Justified Khou was by no means
purely contemplative. The inscription on the obelisk



of Queen Hatshepsu (sometimes spelled Hatshepset)
speaks of them as holding converse with the un-
generated souls during the one hundred and twenty
years that the latter circle round the Sun. They had
the power to take all imaginable forms, or to move
hither and thither as they pleased.

We find in the Ritual of the Dead elaborate formulas
for the assistance of the Khou of the deceased. The
Justified Khou was obliged to pass many tests ; it had
to cultivate the gardens of heaven, destroy monsters,
take on certain obligatory forms, escort the Gods in their
Heaven-traversing ships, take part in the ceaseless
struggle between the two contending forces, cross burn-
ing and desolate zones, suffer in, the regions of hunger,
thirst, and terror, submit to proofs; reply to questions,
and pass the armed and hideous Deity who guarded the
Portals of Wisdom.

Now, if an Egyptian failed in standing such tests as
these, in the ceremony of his initiation, he was regarded
as a man liable to become an evil Khou if his power was
developed : and in their Wisdom the Priests rejected him
and left him in that ignorance which led to oblivion and
the annihilation of the incarnating Ego. Not only this,
but if he, by underhand means, found out magical for-
mulas and was able to use them effectively, the punish-
ment was death.

Details of this kind are given in the supplement to M.
Chabas’ translation of the Harris Magical Papyrus. The
period was that of Rameses III . Compare this quotation :

“ Hai, the evil man, was a shepherd. He had
said •

“ ‘ Oh ! that I might have a book of spells that
would give me resistless power.’

“ He obtained a book of the Formulas of Rameses-
Meri-Amen, the Great God, his royal Master.
By the Divine Powers of these, he enchanted
men. He obtained a deep vault furnished



with implements. He made waxen images
of men, and love-charms. And then he per-
petrated all the horrors that his heart con-
ceived.”

Now on the face of the matter it is very easy to see
that a great part of Egyptian Magic lay in a species of
Hypnotism, called by later magicians, Enchantment,
Fascination, and so forth. Anybody with intelligence
and charm can hypnotise an innocent person that
interests him, but such a practice is derogatory both to
fascinator and fascinated, even when it takes place in
matters of ordinary passional life. How much more so
when it leads to debauchery of the soul. In this way we
perceive the possibility of an Uninitiate successfully
performing the spells he had discovered.

Rituals or Ceremonies now simply regarded as a waste
of time by those who have to assist at their celebration,
had a potent effect when the symbolism of each action
was fully recognised, and when the imagination was
extended and ultra-sensitive, and the Will concentrated
firmly and repeatedly, on the object to be accomplished.
The Ka of the Ritualist was thus at high tension acting
upon its counterpart the concave germ in the As (heart)
or vessel of conscious desire ; this reacts upon the Hati
(Instinctive habit) or unconscious executant. The whole
human Ego then being in a state of theurgic excitation
the Baie (spirit) descended and the whole being became
a luminous Khou or Shining Body of super-human
potency, the Augoeides of the Greek Mystics.

This glittering being established in the midst of the Sah u
(Elemental Body) then by its radiation can awake cor-
responding potencies in nature. For this purpose the
Khaibt was used as a link between the Ego and the
non- Ego, and the spiritual body or Zet was established.

When this condition was brought about, a man
became in the eyes of the Egyptians, Osirified. That is
to say, a Microprosopus, or Perfect copy of the Macro-
prosopus. But he who, ignorant and unpurified, per-



12


formed these rites, became the habitation of an illusive
and fatal force, ever dragging him down to the deep
abysses of blind potency.

We may now perceive dimly how the Egyptians
conceived the seed of the Tree of Life-Eternal to be
implanted in the heart of each man or woman born on
earth ; how it can wither and fade ; how it can be
cultivated until the man becomes either an Evil Demon
or a God.

To the high initiate there was no question of choice
in this matter. He knew that the heart turned inward
on itself was a very poor alternative for that expansion
of being that belongs to the development of the whole
latent Divine Powers of the Microprosopus. In other
words, the perfect formulation of the Osiris soul, the
Holy Spirit of the Divine, made manifest and eternal.

Now the Egyptians had elaborated a marvellous
system of symbolism. The forms of the universal
powers or Gods, stood, each complete, behind a human
or animal mask ; his Divinity symbolized by his head-
dress, his powers by his Staff and the Symbol of Life
which he bore in his hands. MM. Chabas and Textor
de Ravisi have told us that the most potent magical
formula was the identification of the Ritualist with the
God whose power he was invoking. So increasing him-
self to an immeasurable greatness he leapt beyond all
bodies, and transcending time became eternity. He
became higher than all height, lower than all depth.
He knew himself part of the great chain of Creation at
once unbegotten, young, old, dead. He felt within him-
self latent, unfolding faculties, and retained the memory
of experiences gained in time long past and dead. His
feet to-day stood in the place that yesterday his eye
could scarcely see, and beyond him in the Invisible
was his next day’s resting place.

In the sixty-fourth chapter of the Book of the Dead ,
dating back to the lVth dynasty about 3733 b.c., the
rubric tells us that :



l 3


“ If this chapter is known the person is made
triumphant upon earth, and in the nether
world, and he performeth all things that are
done by the living. This composition is a
secret — not to be seen or looked at. Recite
the chapter when sanctified and pure, not
approaching women, not eating goats’ flesh
or fish.”

The text contains the following passages :

“ I am Yesterday, To-day and To-morrow, for 1
am born again and again. I am That Whose
Force is unmanifest and nourisheth the
Dwellers in the West. I am the Guider in
the East. The Lord of the Two Faces Who
seeth by His own Light. The Lord of Re-
surrections Who cometh forth from the
Dusk and Whose Birth is from the House of
Death.

“ Ye Two Divine Hawks upon your stations ;
Watchers of the Material World ; ye who go
with the bier to its eternal home, and ye who
conduct the Ship of the Sun ; advancing
onwards from the highest Heaven to the
place of the Sarcophagus.

“ This is the Lord of the Shrine which standeth
in the centre of the Earth, He is in me ; and
I am in Him.

“ Mine is the radiance in which Phtha floateth
over His Firmament.

“ Oh ! Sun Who smileth gladly, and whose heart
is delighted with the perfect Order of this
day as thou enterest into Heaven and comest
forth in the East : the Ancients and those
Who are gone before, acclaim thee !

“ Let thy paths be made pleasant for me.



' 4


‘ Let thy ways be made wide for me to traverse
the earth and the expanse of Heaven.
Shine Thou upon me, O penetrating power,
as I draw near to the Divine Words my ears
shall hear in the Abodes of the West. Let
no pollution of that which brought me forth
be upon me. Deliver me, protect me from
him who closeth His Eyes at twilight and
bringeth to an end in darkness. (The
annihilator.)

1 I am He Who bursteth the Bonds. Utter-
most Extension is my Name. I bring to its
fulness the Force which is hidden within
me.

1 1 am He Who cometh forth as One Who
breaketh open the Gates : and Everlasting
is the Daylight wdiich His Will hath created.
I know (have power over) the Deep Waters,
is my Name.

1 l shine forth as the Lord of Life and the
glorious Law of Light.

• • • • •

‘ I come as the Ambassador of the Lord of
Lords to avenge the cause of Osiris in this
Place. Let the Eye consume its tears. 1
am the Guide to the House of Him Who
dwelleth in His Treasures.

* • • • •

‘ I travel on high, I tread upon the Firmament,
I raise a flame with the lightning which mine
eye hath made, and I fly forward towards
the Splendours of the Glorified in the pre-
sence of the Sun, who daily giveth Life to
every man who walketh about the habitations
of the earth.



'5


“Oh! thou who leapest forth! Conductor of
the Shades and the glorified Ones from the
earth ! Let the fair path to the Western
Abodes, which is made in behalf of those
who faint, and for the restoration of those
who are in pain, be granted unto me.

“ Blessed are they who see the bourne. Beauti-
ful is the God of the motionless heart, who
restoreth Peace to the Torrent.

“Behold! there cometh forth the Lord of Lite,
Osiris, Thy support who abideth day and
night.

“ I fly up to heaven and I alight upon earth and
mine eye turneth back towards the traces of
my footsteps. I am the offspring of yester-
day. The caverns of the earth have given
me birth, and I am revealed at my appointed
time.”

This is the Triumphant Death-Song of the Initiated
Egyptian. To Him the Life beyond the grave — the
abodes of the West— opened a wider range of activity.
To him Initiation meant the hastening of the Time of
Ripened Power when he might become One with the
Great God of Humanity, Osiris ; slain that he might
rise again, perfected through suffering, glorified through
humiliation.

This was the highest work of magic, the Spiritual
Alchemy or the Transmutation from human Force to
Divine Potency. As is said by the great Iamblichus, in
section iv., chapter ii., of The Mysteries:

“The Priest who invokes is a man; but when
he commands powers it is because through
arcane symbols, he, in a certain respect, is
invested with the sacred Form of the Gods.”

Iamblichus also tells us that the daimon or elemental



1 6

ruler is received at the hour of birth. It is a personifi-
cation of the Symbol imprinted on the Sahu or Ele-
mental body ; and its action may be defined as that of
Fate or Destiny. Its forces are drawn from the whole
world, and it is established in the Sahu before the soul
descends into generation. He says further :

“ And when the soul has received Him as her
leader the Daimon immediately presides over
the soul, gives completion to its lives, and
binds it to body when it descends. He like-
wise governs the common animal of the soul
(the Sahu) and directs its peculiar life, and
imparts to us the principles of all our thought
and reasonings. We also perform such things
as he suggests to our intellect, and he con-
tinues to govern us till, through sacerdotal
theurgy, we obtain a God for the inspective
guardian and leader of the soul. For then
the Daimon either yields or delivers his
government to a more excellent nature, or is
subjected to him as contributing to his
guardianship, or in some other way is minis-
trant to him as to his Lord.”

When this takes place, and the body, sealed by
destiny, is made subject, by initiation, to the Divine
Powers, it may well be symbolised by the Ka supporting
the Baie on the portal of initiation. The Lower Self
being sacrificed to the Higher Self. The Osiris Man is
established, as in the symbols in which the Osiris is re-
presented by the Tat or Symbol of Stability. Then,
and then only, is the question of Sacrifice for others to be
considered. And the Osiris may plunge once again into
matter ; once again making use of his mummied form
to seek and to save that which was lost.

Mild saintliness was by no means the ideal of the
Egyptian Priesthood. Intense practical interest in the
life of their country, and the ennobling of natural func-



I?


tions, drew a sharp contrast between them and the
ascetics of India and Christendom. “ Whatever your
hand findeth to do do it with your might,” is a text that
may well have come down to us from Ancient Egypt.
The generative processes of Nature were honoured by
them at special festivals — but at the same time the
degradation of natural functions by excess was sternly
reprimanded.

The Laws of Moses were to a great extent derived
from the Laws of Ancient Egypt, and whatever else may
be said of them they certainly tend to sanitary condi-
tions, and length of life, individual and racial.

Now we know that with the Jews Magic was prac-
tised in the Sanctuary, but denounced by the Priesthood ;
it was only when Saul found the Sacred Oracles of the
Urim and Thummim deaf to his questions that he con-
sulted a mistress of the Aub or Astral Light. — i Samuel
xxviii. v. 7.

So in Egypt we find side by side with the high
Theurgic mysteries (of which a good idea may be
formed from the writings of Iamblichus), a more mate-
rial development of Magical Art. At the Leyden
Museum there is a large collection of magical formulae
of late date ; but the best specimen now at hand is the
hieratic Papyrus of Harris probably dating back to the
XVIIIth Dynasty. It contains twenty-two formulas
which may be divided into three parts ; the first including
Songs addressed to Shu, to the Five Great Gods of Her-
mopolis, and to Ammon-Ra, of which I here give a trans-
lation, as follows :



THE BOOK OF SONGS POWERFUL AGAINST
THE INHABITANTS OF THE WATERS.


I.

Hymn to Shu.

Hail to thee Child of Ra, First-born, Flesh of his
Flesh. By Him hast thou been tried since thy birth.
Valorous One, Lord of the Transformations, overthrow-
ing the impious each day. At the Breath of Thy Mouth
the Ship rejoices, the vessel is made glad : for they per-
ceive Shu, Son of Ra, triumph over his enemies and
strike the impure with his spear. He pilots the Sun to
the heights of the Heavens from the dawning of each
day. Tefnut rests upon his head. She darts out her
flames against his enemies and behold they are not.
Formed by Ra, endowed with greatness, inheritor of his
father’s Throne, His Powers expand and are one with
the Powers of Ra.

II.

(The origin attributed to this papyrus is the usual
source by which revelations were conveyed to the Egyp-
tians.)

He (Shu) wrote this book for the library in which are
the writings of the Lord of Hermopolis at the Southern
Abode of Harmachus : in the Pylon of the Palace of
Hermonthis. And he placed it sculptured and engraved
under the feet of Ra Harmachus.

III.

Hymn to Shu.

Hail to thee, Son of Ra, Begotten by Tmu, self-created
without substance. Thou art the Very Lord of the two-



*9


fold Truth. The Master Who commands the Gods.
Thou guidest the sight of thy Father Ra. All honour
unto thee who with thine own hands hast directed the
inclinations of the Gods.

The furies of the great Goddess are calmed by Thee.
By the Fire of His Will He draws forth His Strength
and all the Gods fear His Face. He is King of the
Heights and of the Depths of the Land of Shu, Son of
Ra, Life Pure and Strong. The God of the morning of
Time. Formed of the substance of the Sun in Hermon-
this to overcome the enemies of his Father. Thou
sailest peaceably in the bark, the boatmen are filled with
joy. All the Gods Invoke Thee, and give thee praise
when they hear Thy Name. Thou art more mysterious
than the Gods, Thou art twice great in thy Name of
Shu, Son of Ra.

IV.

Adjuration to the Crocodile.

Stop Crocodile Mako, Son of Satem, I am An-Hur,
Great Master of the sword.

Litany to Shu.

1. Greater and Vaster than the Gods art Thou in
Thy Name of the Great Goddess.

2. Thy twofold plume out-tops the Heavens in Thy
Name of the God Who raises up the Two-fold Plume.

3. Thou sustainest Thyself upon Thy Shield in Thy
Name of the God that is established upon his shield.

4. From Thy Throne Thou guidest the Upper
Heavens in thy name of An-Hur.

5. Thou destroyest the Storm, thou illuminatest the
desolation in thy Name of the God Who destroyeth the
Storm.

6. Thou exorcisest the Crocodile risen from the
Abyss, in Thy Name of God Who exorciseth Crocodiles.



20


y. Thou hast thy spear which shall pierce the heads
of the impious in Thy Name of the Horned God.

8 . Thou smitest those who approach in thy Name
of Smiting with the Double Horns.

9. Thy Forms are vaster than the Gods in thy
Name of Chief God of the City of Tenu.

10. The Sun came forth when thou earnest forth in
thy Name of Shu son of Ra.

11. Thou seizest thy spear and attackest the impious
in thy Name of Horus Tenu.

12. Thou destroyest the iniquity of the world on the
earth in thy Name of the Dwelling place of the Sun.

13. Thou massacrest the Asiatics and the Sati, in
thy Name of First-born child.

14. Thy Name is more powerful than the Gods in
thy Name of God Seated in the centre of thy ship.

15. The Force of Youth given to thy nostrils extends
to the limits of the Thebaid, in thy Name of P'irst-born
Child.

16. Thou strikest the heads of the impious in thy
Name of Lord of the Sacrifices.

17. Thou makest the Bark to sail with a favourable
Wind in Thy Name of the Goddess Maat.

18. Oh ! being who has formulated his own body !

19. Oh ! only Lord proceeding from Noun !

20. Oh ! Divine substance self-created !

21. Oh! God Who has made the substance that is
within Him !

22. Oh ! God who has formulated His Father and
made fertile His Mother !


V.

Hail to ye, oh ! Five Great Gods, come from Hermo-
polis, ye who. are not in heaven, who are not on earth,
and who shine not in any light. Come to me. Test
thou the river for me. Bind that which dwells therein.
Let not that which swims, pass. Shut the mouths, shut
the mouths, make fast the jaws, make fast the jaws.



21


As the sword is fixed in the scabbard when the earth is
lightened from the east as the edge of the swords of the
great Goddesses, Anata and Astate are concealed.
They conceive and bring not forth. They are sealed by
the Gods. They have been created by Set. They are
overcome by that which is above and which brings forth
Good.


VI.

Adoration of Ammon Ra Harmachis, who created
himself who possessed the earth from the beginning,
composed by the Divine Cynocephali of the God Put-
Api, in order to adore the Majesty of the August God
Ammon-Put-To when he shines on the Noun which is
the Goddess Nu. These words are to be said over
water and earth.

Hail to Thee the Holy One Who hast formed thyself,
Vast in Thy Measure, Illimitable, Divine Chief rejoicing
in the power of creating himself. Vast and Flaming
Serpents of Wisdom, Strength Supreme and Mysterious
Form. Invisible Spirit. Author of His Unconquerable
Power, King of the Higher and the Lower Land, Ammon
Ra. Perfect and forceful Light. Created from Him-
self! Twofold Horizon. Hawk of the East. Brilliant.
Illuminating. Blazing forth. Intelligence more intel-
lectual than the Gods. Thou art hidden in the great
Ammon. In thy transformation thou revolvest in the
solar disk. God, Totnen, Vaster than the Gods. Thou
vvast old and art born again. Wanderer of the Cen-
turies. Ammon eternal in all things. Thou, the God
whose thought begat the World.

(Adjuration against all inhabitants of Water.) Come
unto me Strong and vigorous Life of the Gods. Destroy
the perils which surround me, from the plants which are
in the waters. Let them be for me like pebbles upon
the earth. Let the dangers disappear as hunger dis-
appears in a fruitful land.



Hymn to Ammon-Ra, said by the Divine Cynocephali
of the God Put-Api-To. In the great adoration of the
God who is in the midst of the Waters, whose bones are of
silver, and flesh of gold, and behind whose head is the
true Lapis Lazuli.

The Divine Cynocephali say :

Oh Ammon hidden in the centre of his eye, spirit which
shines in the sacred eye, adoration to the Holy Trans-
formers, to those which are not known ! brilliant are his
forms veiled in a blaze of Light. Mystery of Mysteries,
Concealed mystery ; Hail to thee in the midst of the
heavens. Thou, who art Truth, hast brought forth the
gods. The Signs of Truth are in thy mysterious sanc-
tuary. By thee is thy mother Meron made to shine.
Thou puttest forth illuminating rays. Thou surroundest
the earth with thy light until thou returnest unto the
mountain which is in the Country of Aker. Thou art
adored in the waters. The fertile earth adores thee.
When thy cortege passes to the hidden mountain the
wild animal rises in his lair, the spirits of the east praise
thee, they fear the light of thy disk. The spirits of the
Khenac acclaim thee when thy Light shines in their
faces. Thou traversest another heaven over which
thine enemy may not pass. The fire of thy heat attacks
the monster Ha-her. The fish Teshtu guard the waters
around thy bark. Thou orderest the dwelling of the
monster Oun-ti, which Nub-ti strikes with his sword.
This is the God who seized the heaven and the earth in
his tempest. His virtue is powerful to destroy his
enemy. His spear is the instrument of death for the
monster Oubn-ro. Suddenly seizing him he holds him
down ; he makes himself master of him and forces him
to re-enter his abode ; then he devours his eyes and
therein is his triumph ; then is the monster devoured by
a burning flame ; from the head to the feet all his mem-
bers burn in its heat. Thou bringest thy servants to



the haven with a favourable wind. Under thee, the
winds find peace. Thy bark rejoices, thy paths are
enlarged, because thou hast overcome the ways of the
author of evil.

Sail, wandering stars ! Sail on shining stars ; ye who
wander with the winds ! For thou art resting in the
bosom of the sky, thy mother embraces thee ; when thou
comest unto the western horizon, the earth holds up
his arms to receive thee. Thou who art worshipped by
all existing things !

Adjuration against Lions, Crocodiles and

Reptiles.

Come unto me, oh Lord of the Gods ! Make the
lions of Meru to depart. The crocodiles going up from
the river and the sting of the venomous reptiles creeping
from their holes ! Stop Mako, Crocodile, Son of Set !
Swim not, use not thy limbs, open not thy jaws ! May
the water become an ardent fire before thee, thou whom
the Thirty Seven Gods have formed. Who wast bound
by the great serpent of the Sun and who wast bound
with great chains of metal before the bark of Ra.
Protect me, Ammon, fertilizer of the substance of thy
being.

Say this over an image of Ammon in the form of the
God with Four Rams’ Heads, painted on a plaque of
white clay, a crocodile under his feet, divine cynocephali
making adoration on the right hand and on the left.

The second part of this papyrus consists of formulas
to enchant and protect the reciter from water monsters.
In all these the great formula of protection is the As-
sumption of the Form of some God ; Khem, Shu, or
Anubis as the case may be.

It would appear that the crocodile held in Ancient
Egypt the same position as the Dweller of the Threshold
did in the mind of the author of Zanoni. Something ter-
rible was to assail those who ventured into the fluidic



realms of the invisible ; the Nile and the crocodiles
therein are the symbols of the River of Phantasy full of
delusions that must be traversed by the aspiring Soul.

The last three chapters of the Harris papyrus contain
interesting formulae. One is a Ritual of Banishment to
be performed in the South, North, West, and East, with
the formulation of a guardian in the shape of a dog that
was to be terrible to all attacking forces. The transla-
tion is as follows :

“Arise, Dog of Evil, that I may instruct thee in thy
present duties. Thou art imprisoned. Confess thou that
it is so. Horus it is who has given this commandment.
Let thy face be terrible as the storm-parted sky. Let
thy jaws close pitilessly. Make sacrifice as the God
Her-Shafi. Massacre as the Goddess Anata. May thy
hair stand up like rods of fire. Be thou great as Horus
and terrible as Set. Equally to the South, to the North,
to the West and to the East. The whole land belongs
unto thee. Nothing shall stop thee, while thou settest
thy face in my defence ; while thou settest thy face
against savage beasts ; while thou settest thy face to
protect my paths, opposing thyself to the enemy. I
bestow upon thee the power of banishing, of becoming
noiseless and invisible. For thou art my guardian,
courageous and terrible.”

The next formula is similar, but specifies exactly the
dangers feared by a sleeper, which are to be guarded
against by the Watcher.

The last formula is a list of names, of which no ex-
planation is offered by M. Chabas, and regarding which
we may bear in mind the injunction, “ Change not
barbarous names of evocation.”*

Baron Textor de Ravisi on page 286 of the Memoir of
the Congress of French Orientalists held at St. Etienne,
1875, defines the different kinds of supernatural appari-
tions described by the Egyptians.

“ Before the entire resurrection of the body,” he says.

* See Chaldean Oracles, edited by Wynn Westcott, page 47.



“ the justified Ka could, if it chose, re-animate the body
of the dead. Such apparitions usually menace some
evil doer, give injunctions, or predict death.”

Such be it remembered would be also the constitution
of the vampire, when the corpse is said to be found fresh
as the day when it was laid in its tomb. Ravisi defines
manifestations which are visible but intangible ; of
which the head is distinctly seen, but of which the limbs
are vaporous, to be composed of the Ka and the Zet.
Their nature is sweet and consolatory. The manifesta-
tions which resemble the bodily form of the deceased,
but are intangible, are composed of the Ka and the
Sahu. They are generally terrifying. Manifestations
of the Ab and the Hati re-united in the Zet (Spiritual
body) are only visible to the spiritual senses. Manifes-
tations of the image of the mortal procured through a
medium are due to the Khaibt alone, and have none of
the individuality of the Ka in them.

An initiated King received four names ; the second of
which was the Ka name. Now to know the secret
name or Ren of a man meant in the eyes of the
Egyptians the knowledge of the most powerful means
of influencing that man ; it could be used as a means of
exercising his personal qualities through the power of his
name. We know that the Jews never called their God by
His Name except for some sacred purpose, and this was
probably a tradition derived from Egypt through Moses.

The greatest merit was attributed to the Son who
made his father’s name to live ; for this meant that the
Dead man’s Ka survived, was invoked, received offerings,
and heard his glory or his virtues sung by his
successors.

Now we find in the following legend that the “ Ren "
or True Name was a secret to be gained by those who
wished for the knowledge of the most powerful formulae,
just as in Christian belief the Word is the Child of God,
the Manifestor of Life Eternal, and at the name of Jesus
every knee must bow.



THE LEGEND OF RA AND ISIS.


Date XXth Dynasty.

Now Isis was a Woman knowing Words of Magical
Power, her heart was weary of multitudes of men, and
she chose the multitude of Gods, but above all the
multitude of the Shining Ones. And she meditated in
her heart and said “ Might not I, also, by means of the
names of Shining Power become as the Sun God in
Heaven ? ”

Now Ra and His Cycle of Powers were established
every day in the Abodes of the Horizon. Ancient was
the Divine One and his Mouth dropped forth water.
The water fell upon the earth, dew from his lips fell
upon the ground. Isis kneaded this with the earth, and
made it in the form of a serpent of power divine and in
the image of a dart. She placed it not before her fore-
head, but left it lying in the path that the will of the
great God had placed between his two domains. The
God of Power crowned and holy was followed by the
Gods of the twofold abodes life, strength and health.

Now Ra proceeded as was his daily wont.

Its being shone forth from the sacred serpent ; the
fire of life shot from its body, and the dweller among the
cedars was prostrated. Then Ra the God of gods
opened his mouth, and the cry of his might, life, strength,
and well-being reached up to heaven. The Company
of Gods cried out : “ What is it ? ” and again the Gods
said “ What is it ? ” But Ra found no voice with which
to answer. His teeth chattered, his limbs trembled, the
poison flowed through his veins, as the Nile God flows
in his course. Then the might of the God confirmed his
will and he cried out to those in his train :

“Come unto me, ye who proceeded from me. Ye
powers that came forth from me let the Creative Form



be told that I am wounded by a deadly thing. My heart
knowethit. Mine eyes have not seen it. My hand hath
not fashioned it. I know not who hath made this thing. I
have not tasted pain like unto it. No pain is like unto it.
I am a prince, son of a prince created by a god. I am
the Mighty Son of the Mighty, Strength of my Father is
my name. I am of many names and of many forms, the
Divine Image of my Being is in every god. I have
been heralded by Tmu and Horus, the formulators of
the Formless. My Father and Mother gave me my
name as an infant, it was concealed in my body so that
the enchanter might not gain power over me by his
enchantments. I had come forth from my abode to
see the world I had fashioned, and was passing over my
creation when I was stricken by I know not what. Is
it Fire ? Is it Water ? My heart is full of Fire, my
limbs tremble, my flesh is seized as with an ague.

“ I pray you let my divine offspring be brought to me.
Light is in their Words, Wisdom is in their mouths,
their powers reach unto heaven.”

His cries brought his divine children unto him. Isis
came with her words of Light ; the Breath of Life w T as
in her mouth ; and her disease-destroying incantations,
her words giving life to silent hearts. She said :

“Oh! Divine Father, what is this? What is it?
A serpent hath made thee fear, one of thy darts hath
lifted up its head against thee, it shall be overthrown by
words of beneficent power. I will make it depart from
the sight of thine eyes.”

The holy God opened his mouth, saying :

“ I was passing along the path which divideth my
twofold dominion, wishing in my heart to behold my
creation. I was stung by a serpent, I saw it not. Is
it Fire ? Is it Water ? I am colder than Water, I am
hotter than Fire. My limbs sweat. I tremble. My
eye dims. I cannot see the heaven ; sweat rises on my
face as in the time of sorrow.”

Said Isis unto Ra :



28


“ Oh tell me thy name, oh my divine Father, for Life
is in the Power of thy name.’'

Said Ra :

“ I am the maker of heaven and earth, supporting the
mountains, creating what existeth thereon. I am the
maker of water, bringing forth the floods, making fruitful
the Universe, giving increase. I am the Maker of
Heaven and have made beautiful the horizon. I have
given the spirit of the Gods a place therein. I am he,
who when he openeth his eyes, bringeth forth light, and
when he closeth his eyes, bringeth forth darkness. I am
the Nile God whose name the Gods know not, bringing
about the inundation with my word. I am the Maker of
hours, the Creator of days. I am the opener of the
yearly festival, the creator of rushing water, the maker
of living fire. I cause the abodes of delight to be built.
I am Kephera in the darkness, Ra in the midday, and
Tmu in the evening.”

But the poison was not driven out of its course, the
great God found no peace ; so Isis said unto Ra :

“ Thou hast not told me thy name. Oh, tell it unto
me and the poison shall depart, for life is in the Power
of thy name.”

The poison burned with burnings, it was stronger
than flames of fire; the majesty of Ra spake and said :

“ I give myself to be searched out by Isis, my name
shall pass from my body into her body.”

The Divine One was hidden from the Gods, wide
(void) was his seat in the Ship of millions of years.
When the time had come for the passing forth of his
heart she said unto her son Horus :

“ Let him swear by the Divine Life to give unto me
his divine eyes.”

Thus was taken the name of the Great God. Isis the
Mighty One of Enchantments said :

“ Depart Poison. Pass forth from Ra. Oh, Eye of
Horus, come forth from the God and shine without his
mouth. I, even I, have worked. I banish the poison



2 9


to be dispersed upon the earth. It hath been overcome.
Verily the name of the Great God hath been taken from
him. May Ra Live. May the poison die. May the
poison die and may Ra live. May Main son of Mainthe
live. May the Poison die.”

Thus said the Mighty Isis, Mistress of the Gods,
who knew Ra by his own name.


Such is the Legend of Ra and Isis. Its incidents are
known to us in the old tale of Merlin and the Witch
Vivien. It is obviously a sun-myth, being, of course,
an allegory of an eclipse of the Sun. In ancient
symbolism the head and tail of a Dragon or Serpent
represented the places of Solar and Lunar eclipse in
the Zodiac. It is well known that the moment of
eclipse has ever been felt to be fraught with sinister
occult power.

Of the name of Ra it is interesting to learn that he
is credited with no less than seven Baies and Fourteen
Kas, each with its own name, corresponding to different
attributes such as, Wealth, stability, majesty, glory,
might, victory, and so forth, similar to the Qabalistic
Sephiroth, or Emanations of Deity.

Each man’s Ka could at the death of the body enter
into any image or picture or magical implement prepared
for its reception. In the “ Story of Setna,” a demotic
papyrus now in the Ghizeh Museum, and translated by
Professor Flinders Petrie, in his second series of Egyp-
tian tales, it is written :

“ Now in the Tomb was Na-Nefer-Ka-Ptah and
with him was the Ka of his wife Ahura, for
though she was buried at Koptos, her Ka
dwelt at Memphis with her husband whom
she loved.”

That is to say it dwelt in a statue prepared for its
reception. Now it seems exceedingly probable that as
the mummy was the material basis for the Sahu and



3 °


Khaibt, so the mummy-case with its painted present-
ment of the living person was the material basis for the
preservation of the Ka of a low grade initiate or the Khu
of a fully-equipped Adept.

I append some quotations from the Booh of the Dead in
which the various parts of the human being are specially
mentioned.

Chapter XXX.

Ab of mine which is that of my mother. Hati of my
coming into being. Thou art my Ka (Ego), who art in
my Khat (Body). The artist who formeth and
stengtheneth my limbs.

Chapter XXVI.

I know my Ab (Will) I have gained power over my
Hati (Instincts) ; I have gained power to do what
pleaseth my Ka (Ego).

Chapter LXXXIX.

A Prayer to Annitu that the Baie (Spirit) may be re-
united to the Khat (Body).

Behold ! Grant that the Baie (Spirit) of Osiris may
come forth. May he see his Khat (Material Body) ;
may he rest upon his Sahu (Astral form) ; May his Zet
(Spiritual Body) never be destroyed.

Chapter XCI.

Is an Address to the Spirit of Spirits saying :

He maketh a Path for the Khou (Illuminated One) for
the Baie (Spirit) of Osiris. ... I am furnished
forth (or enrobed, armed). I am an armed Khou, I have
made my way to the place where Ra and Hathor
dwell.

Chapter XCII.

The Path of Baiu (Spirits) is opened. My soul seeth
it. The Great God within the Boat of Ra, the Light of



3 1


Souls, is my Soul. Let not my Baie be imprisoned.
Let not my Khaibt be enchained. Let Paths be opened
for my Baie and my Khaibt (Radiation). . . . Thy

Ab is with thee.


Chapter XLVI.

O ye recent offspring of Shu, who is possessor of his
diadem at sunrise, dawn after dawn ; oh ye future gene-
rations of men. (This Chapter is addressed to the Un-
born Ones or Hammemit.)


Professor Flinders Petrie gives several instances of
Magical practices in the Egyptian tales translated by
him. In the first one dating from the fourth dynasty,
Uba-Aner said :

“ Bring me my casket of ebony and electrum.’'
Whereupon he fashioned a crocodile of wax, seven fingers
long. When cast in the water it became seven cubits
long, swallowed the enemy and eventually disappeared
on receiving permission to do so.

In Baufras Tale the chief reciter spake his magic words
and divided the waters ; having found what he desired
he spake again and the waters returned to their place.

In Hovdedefs Tale the description of a magician is
given :

“ He eats five hundred loaves of bread and a side of
beef, and drinks a hundred draughts of beer unto this
day ! He knows howto restore the head that is smitten
off. He knows how to cause the lion to follow him,
trailing his halter upon the ground. He knows the
designs of the Abodes of Thoth. The majesty of Upper
and Lower Egypt has long sought for the Designs of
the Abodes of Thoth in order that he might have them
copied on the Walls of his Pyramid. (There is an alter-
native suggestion that this may mean his horoscope.)
For the magical ceremony the old magician required his
books, and the assistance of his youths. The king asked



32


him if he knew the number of the designs of the Abodes
of Thoth. He replied, ‘ I know not their number, but I
know where they are.’ ‘ Where is that ? ’ ‘ In a chest

of whetstone in a chamber named the plan-room in
Heliopolis and they are kept in this chest.’ ” A search
was instituted, but the last part of the papyrus recording
the details, is missing.

In the Story of Bata self-mutilation enabled him to
draw out his Hati (Human heredity) and place it on
the topmost flower of an acacia tree, so that he could not
be killed unless the tree were cut down. When this
happened his Hati was found in a seed ; which, being
placed in a cup of water grew, and his body reviving, he
drank the water. Then he changed into a sacred Bull,
which was eventually sacrificed ; two drops of its blood
fell upon the ground, these contained the Hati of Bata.
They grew into a couple of persea trees, these were cut
down, but a shaving from one of them was swallowed
by his faithless wife, and she brought forth a child, in
which Bata was reincarnated.

In the Story of Ahum, the Book of Thoth is described
as follows : — “ He wrote it with his own hands and it
will bring a man to the Gods. To read two pages en-
ables you to enchant the heaven, the earth, the abyss,
the mountains and the sea ; you shall know what the
birds of the sky and the crawling things are saying ;
you shall see the fishes of the deep, for a divine power is
there to bring them out of the depth. And when the
second page is read, if you are in the world of ghosts,
you will grow again in the shape you were on earth.
You will see the sun shining in the sky, with all the
gods, and the full moon.” The book was concealed in
the middle of the river at Koptos, in an iron box; with
inner enclosing boxes of bronze, sycamore, ivory and
ebony, silver and gold, and it was guarded by snakes
and scorpions. Where the book was, there was light.
When it was taken away, darkness reigned.

A funeral stele quoted in the Harris Magical Papyrus,



page 167, gives the history of a princess reported to be
obsessed by a Khou. The royal scribe has not power
enough to drive out this evil demon. The God Chons
finally delivered her. The God performed a health-
giving ceremony and the Khou retired peaceably, but
was not deprived of its inherent faculty of occupying
another body at pleasure. The same story informs us
that in the Holy Place of the Temples secret books were
kept (under the charge of special agents) which the
Pharaoh consulted when in difficulties. M. Chabas
gathers that the living might come to the help of the
Khou in its life beyond the tomb, by means of mystical
formulae pronounced under favourable circumstances,
and with amulets or symbolic figures. The Khous on
their side could manifest to the living, they could haunt
or obsess a human being, and the living could only de-
fend themselves with the aid of formulas, talismans or
divine images.

In a papyrus before alluded to and quoted by M. Chabas,
Hai the Shepherd obtained the book of magical formulas
belonging to his royal master, and he managed by the
process called “ Neter Paut” or joining himself to a God
Form, to procure the power of enchanting or fascinating
men. He made images of Menh, which may mean wax
or some more occult preparation. He made charms and
telesmas to provoke love. He practised these things
really and made them all to the horror of the Divine
Ones. He paralysed a man’s hand, and by means of a
slave did things which the King did not alkw even the
Master of His house to perform. “ He spoke, and said
such and such a thing should be produced, he operated,
and it was produced.”

Here we have vague hints of possible magical formulas,
but we must come down to much later times to find
the relics of the more practical written details of magic
as practised by the Ancient Egyptians. For of old they
were carefully preserved from the profane.

There is, however, a fragment taken from a papyrus



34


preserved in the British Museum, No. XLVI (Greek),
and there is also in the Leyden Museum a demotic
papyrus with a Greek version, of which Leemans gives
the following summary of contents : —

1. Magical ceremonies, performed by means of love

considered as a great thaumaturgic power.

2. Receipt for a remedy ; by one Hermerius.

3. Receipt for happiness and good fortune.

4. Receipt by Agathodes, to produce a dream.

5. Receipt to procure a dream.

6. Receipt to preserve a dream.

7. Receipt for consulting a Deity.

8. Receipt for checking a man’s anger.

9. Invocation of a Deity.

10. Receipt to procure dreams.

11 and 12. Receipt to procure rust upon gold.

13. To make a ring having the property of making

every enterprise succeed, and of bringing good
fortune.

14. Description of a similar ring.

15. The sphere of Democritus for prognosticating by

calculation the recovery or death of a sick
person.

16. A means of separation : a formula to cause separ-

ation between husband and wife, or other
persons.

[7. Formula for causing sleepless nights to a person
until he dies. This section is embellished with
a drawing of an Egyptian Deity.

[8. A charm to make oneself beloved, and always
have friends.

19. Explanations of certain mystical names of plants
and other objects.

These works which appear to have been found at
Thebes are attributed by Reuvens to some gnostic of
the Marcosian school of the Third or Fourth Century of
our era.

Professor Goodwin says that the magicians of this



35


period invoked by the powers of Moses, the God of
Abraham, the Gods of Egypt, Persia, and Greece.
They identify Gods and Daimons of all known myths.
Their fundamental ideas seem to be derived from the
old Egyptian religion, and he considers that the authors
of these papyri may have been priests of Isis or Serapis,
practising the particular kind of theurgy criticised by
Porphyry, and defended by Iamblichus, who writing in
reply to Porphyry says : — that he considers the world
to be under the care of a host of daimons, who super-
intend the operations of nature, and that the priest or
magician, duly initiated, becomes incorporated with the
Divine and over-ruling powers of the Universe, so as to
acquire a certain authority over these subordinate
ministers. He mentions that the Chaldean magicians,
whose invocations are addressed to the Gods alone, used
no threats ; while the Egyptians occasionally do so, but
only towards the Daimons. With regard to the formulae
he says that the Egyptians and Assyrians being sacred
nations, a peculiar sanctity is attached to their languages
which make them an appropriate medium for communi-
cation with the Deity. He also says that the Divine
Names in use among these peoples having been handed
down from remote antiquity, and preserved inviolate and
immutable, have therefore a peculiar affinity with the
immutable Gods.

The Egyptians invented and carried out unques-
tionably the best working system of national life as
national life ever yet formulated. The power and duration
of their civilisation prove this beyond doubt. The glory
of their nation continued very nearly five times as long as
the glory of any other nation excepting only that of the
persistent Chinese. The science of Egypt was Applied
Science, in the strictest sense of the word. No vague
dreamings found a part in their metaphysics. For
physics and metaphysics alike were made use of. Every
department of thought, idea and imagination were as
clearly mapped out in the minds of an initiated



Egyptian, as were the nomes (divisions) and towns of
his own country. What is more, exact correspondences
were as far as possible established between his country,
his body, his soul, his mind, and the realms of idea,
creation and formulation.

The Ancient Egyptian did not adopt the extreme
doctrine of original sin, but certainly did not consider
that all men were born free and equal. As far as can
be ascertained there was no strict system of caste among
the Egyptians ; an aristocracy governed, but each
individual of that aristocracy had to submit to such
severe physical, intellectual and spiritual tests that only
great natures could pass through them. A system of
consecration and purification of a very real and very
practical nature was the path to distinction among the
elect of Ancient Egypt. The Egyptians of the time of
lamblichus blame their forefathers for the materiality
of their religion ; but its very materiality made it so
much the more potent. Religion was a real force when
it had behind it an initiated king and an adept priest-
hood.

The Pharaoh united in himself the powers of the
North and of the South ; of the Delta and the Said ; of
the Red Crown and the White Crown ; of the Papyrus
and the Lotus ; of Horus and of Set ; and of Ptah and
of Ammon. Maspero gives on the 46th page of his
book on Egypt the following address to the King,
which no doubt acted by a species of Hypnotic sugges-
tion and tended to exalt the Kinghood of the King when
recited by the faithful : —

“ Thou resemblest Ra in all that thou doest. There-
fore the wishes of thy heart are always fulfilled. If
thou desirest a thing during the night, at dawn it is
already there. If thou sayest, Come up on the moun-
tains, the celestial water shall flow at thy word. For
thou art Ra incarnate and Khephera created in the flesh.
Thou art the living Image of thy Father, Tmu; and
Lord of the City of the Sun. The God who commands



37


is in thy month. The God of Wisdom is in thy heart ;
thy tongue is the sanctuary of truth, a God sits upon
thy lips, thy words are accomplished every day, and the
wish of thy heart realises itself like that of Phtha when
he creates his works. Since thou art eternal, every-
thing acts according to thy designs and everything obeys
thy words.”

Again we have the following Salutation to Pharaoh
awakened.

“ Turn thy face to me oh rising sun, which lighteneth
the world with thy beauty, disk sparkling amongst men
that drivest away the darkness of Egypt. Thou resem-
blest thy father when he rises in heaven, and thy rays
penetrate into all parts of the earth. There is no place
deprived of thy beauty, for thy words rule the destinies
of all lands. When thou art resting in thy palace, thou
hearest all that is said in every country, for thou hast
millions of ears. Thine eye is more brilliant than any
star in heaven, and more piercing than the sun ; if any
one speak, even if the mouth that speaketh be within
the walls of a house, its words reach thine ear. If any-
hidden action be committed thine eye perceives it. O !
King gracious Lord, who givest to all the breath of
life.”

I now quote the following hymn to give some idea of
the attributes assigned to the Great Gods.

Hymn to Phtha-Tanen.

“ Hail to thee, oh Phtha-tanen, great God who con-
cealeth his form . . . thou art watching when at

rest, the father of all fathers, and of all gods .
watcher who traversest the endless ages of eternity ; the
heaven was uncreated, uncreated was the earth, the
water flowed not thou hast formulated the earth, thou
hast united thy limbs, thou hast counted thy members.
What thou hast found apart thou hast put into its
place. Oh ! God, Architect of the World, Thou art
without a Father, Begotten by thine Own Growth ;



38


Thou art without a Mother, being born by reflection of
thyself. Thou drivest away the darkness by the beams
of thine Eyes. Thou ascendest into the Zenith of
Heaven ; and thou comest down even as thou wentest
up. When Thou art a dweller in the Infernal
World, Thy knees are above the earth, and Thy Head
is in the Upper Sky, Thou sustainest the substances
which thou hast made. It is by thine own strength that
thou movest ; Thou art raised up by the might of thine
own arms, thou weighest upon thyself kept firm by the
mystery which is in thee. The roaring of thy voice is in
the clouds ; thy breath is on the mountain tops ; the
waters of thy inundation cover the lofty trees of every
region . . Heaven and earth obey the command

which thou hast given . . . Thou restest and it is

Night ; when thine Eyes shine forth we are illuminated;
Oh ! let us give glory to the God Who hast raised up
the sky, and who causest his disk to float over the
bosom of Mut. Who hath made Gods and men and all
their generations. . . Thou the babe who is brought

forth daily. Oh thou Ancient One Who has reached
the limits of Time ; Thou Immovable One Who
traverseth every Path ; the Height which cannot be
attained.”



39


THE GNOSTIC MAGIC OF EGYPT.


Having given quotations which illustrate the various
aspects of Magic as it was taught and practised at the
best period of Ancient Egypt, we may now pass on to
the consideration of the later forms of the higher magic
existing in Alexandria during the second and third cen-
turies of our era. Mr. G. R. S. Mead has given us a
translation of the Pistis Sophia which is regarded as the
most precious and perfect relic of the followers of the
Gnosis; as this volume is now in circulation I shall not
allude to it further ; but I propose to give considerable
extracts from a Coptic papyrus of much the same date,
which was found by Mr. Bruce in Upper Egypt : it has
never before been translated into English.

The magical words and formulae of this papyrus give
some idea of the kind of sounds understood by initiates
to be concealed under such symbols as the “IHVH”
of the Hebrews, and the Hieroglyphic word groups of
the Egyptians. Unfortunately we can never discover
the secrets of the Egyptian vowels through the study of
Hieroglyphs for the consonants alone are noted, as in
Hebrew ; and no system analogous to pointing was
adopted by the later Egyptians. It is only then in the
study of Coptic papyri that we can hope to discover
some traces of the real ancient pronunciation of Magical
Names.

This Coptic text resembles the dialect of the Said.
Woide the original transcriber declares the origin of the
papyrus to be Theban. But M. E. Amelineau considers
that the original work was written in Greek. The date



4 o


is probably the second or third century of our era.
Basilides and Valentinus, the two greatest Egyptian
Gnostics, did all they could to gain adherents in Egypt
and probably produced several works of the kind. I
have given a translation of the most interesting parts of
the papyrus, and will here remark that the greater part
of it consists of Sigils, Keys and numbers, and the names
of watchers and guardians, which at once remind the
student of the Book of the Dead , notably of the eigh-
teenth chapter in which the formulas of the various
localities have to be known ; also of the hundred and
forty-sixth chapter treating of the twenty-one Pylons
(gates) with their guardians and watchers ; and, finally,
of the hundred and forty-seventh chapter giving the
names of the door-keepers, the watchers, and the
heralds.

In these portions we have a distinct analogy with the
Egyptian Esoteric Methods of Initiation. But the
present ignorance of the real way in which to use
“Secret Formulas” makes these portions of ancient
Gnostic tracts uninteresting to the generality of occult
students. For this reason one formula only will be
given as an example ; this specimen is general in
its nature, but it is one of which it was said that “if per-
formed with arcane knowledge, it would suffice to open
all the gates, unto which the soul could aspire.”

Let us first, however, consider the essential principles
of Gnosticism, which are briefly as follows

First — A denial of the dogma of a personal supreme
God, and the assertion of a Supreme Divine Essence,
consisting of the purest Light, and pervading that
boundless space of perfected matter which the Greeks
called the Pleroma. This Light called into existence
the Great Father and the Great Mother whose children
were the .Eons or God-spirits. That is to say from the
Supreme issues the Nous or Divine Mind ; and thence
successive emanations, each less sublime than the pre-
ceding. The Divine Life in each becoming less intense



U


until the boundary of the Pleroma, or the Fulness of
God is reached. From thence there comes into being a
taint of imperfection, an abortive and defective evolu-
tion, the source of materiality and the origin of a created
universe, illuminated by the Divine, but far removed
from its infinitude and perfection. (The Little Thought
of the text quoted below.)

Now the Gnostics considered that the actual ruler
and fashioner of this created universe and its beings
good and evil, was the Demiurgos, a power issuant from
Sophia or Wisdom. By some it was said that the
desire of souls for progression caused the origin of a
Universe in which they might evolve and rise to the
divine.

The Gnostics definitely believed in the theory of
Cycles of Ascent and return in the evolutionary progress
of worlds, ages, and man ; the ascents and descents of
the soul ; the pre-existence of all human souls now in
worldly life and the surety that all souls that desire the
highest must descend to matter and be born of it. They
were the Philosophical Christians.

The Rule of the Christian Church however fell into
the hands of those who encouraged an emotional religion,
destitute of philosophy ; whose members should be bound
together by personal ties of human sympathy with an
exalted sufferer and preacher, rather than by an intellec-
tual acceptance of high truth.

The Gnostics dissented from the creed then being
defined, on the ground of the inferiority of the Hero
worship of Christ, to the spiritual knowledge of the
supernal mind, which they considered He taught.

The Gnostics were almost universally deeply imbued
with the doctrines of Socrates and Plato ; and a religion
of emotion and reverence, combined with moral plati-
tudes, did not seem to them of a sublimity sufficiently
intense to be worthy to replace the Religious Mysteries
of Egypt, India, and Persia, the Theocracy of the Jews,
or the sublime truths hidden in the myths of Greece.



4 2


The Gnostic doctors were men who before all had
received Hellenic culture. Their systems prove that
they knew the works of the philosophers and had
united them with the purely oriental ideas flowing from
the ancient religions of Egypt, Chaldea, Persia and India.
Their aim was to amalgamate the ideas of the East and
the Philosophy of the Greeks with the inborn potency of
the Christian faith.

The important formulas of the Three Baptisms I have
given in full, so that the student may observe the link
they create between the Magical Ceremonies of Initia-
tion and the sacraments of the Roman and especially the
Greek Christian Church. For in the ceremonies of the
Greek Church there is an even closer adherence to the
formulas of ancient wisdom than is found in the Roman
Church.

A chart of the Pleroma is given by Valentinus, which
may be described as follows :

First, is the Point, the Monad. (The Great Deep.)

Then the Triangle, the union of the point with the line.
(The great Deep, Mind, and Truth.)

Then the Square, two vertical and two horizontal lines.
(The Word, The Life, Man and the Assembly.)

Finally, the Pentagram and Hexad which with their
reflected emanations count as ten and twelve, these
together form the twenty-eight emanations or ideas of the
Divine mind.

The Pleroma is bounded by a circumference emana-
ting from the point or Monad, this is called the Horus or
boundary, Stauros or cross, and Metascheus or partici-
pator.

Without this circumference is the emanation of the
“Sophia” sometimes called the “abortion,” sometimes
as in our text the “ Little Thought,” wTich is the uni-
verse as we know it.

I will end this introduction with one quotation from
the Pistis Sophia :

“ The spirit of the Saviour was moved in him,



43


and he cried, ‘ How long shall I bear with
you ? how long shall I suffer you ? Do ye
still not know, and are ye ignorant ? Know
ye not and do ye not understand, that ye are
all Angels, and all Archangels, and Gods and
Lords, and all Rulers. . . . That ye are

from all ; of yourselves and in yourselves in
turn, from one mass, and one matter, and one
essence.’ ”



44


Extracts from the Gnostic Papyrus.


[Discovered by Bruce, and Preserved in the Bodleian Library.)


The words in italics commencing each paragraph are merely
a short summary of the contents.

The Book of the Knowledge of the Invisible. — Jesus,
Lord of Life, He Who knoweth the Truth, spake and
said : “ I have loved you, I have desired Life for you.”

This is the Book of the knowledge of the Divine In-
visibility, according to the mystery hidden in the Book
which guides the chosen people, hidden in the Peace of
the Life of the Father, by means of the Saviour. He
bought the souls that can receive this Word of Life,
risen above all Life, by the knowledge of Jesus, Lord of
life. He descended from His Father in the H£on of
Light, in the fulness of the Pleroma (Perfect Nature),
in the Knowledge which is the only real being, and
which Jesus taught to His Apostles, saying :

“ I give thee the Wisdom in which is contained all
knowledge.”

Jesus, Lord of Life, spake and said to His Dis-
ciples :

“ Happy are those who crucify the World, and whom
the world hath not crucified.”

The Apostles replied to Him with one voice, say-
ing : —

“ Teach us how we may crucify the world, to the end
that it shall not crucify us ; that we shall neither be lost
nor our lives wasted away.’’



45


Jesus, the JLord of Life, answered them and said : —
“He who crucifies the world is he who keeps my word,
who fulfils the Will of Him who has sent me.”

The Apostles answered unto him and said : —

“ Speak, Lord, so that we may hear Thee. We have
followed Thee with our whole hearts ; we have left
father, mother, pastures, and fields ; we have abandoned
riches and royal greatness, we have followed Thee that
Thou mightest teach us the Life of the Father who has
sent Thee.”

Jesus, the Lord of Life, replied and said : —

“The Life of my Father is this, that you should
receive the gift of the Spirit, that your souls should cease
to be weighed down, by means of that which I am about
to say to you, to the end that you may fulfil my Word
and be saved from the Arkhon (Ruler) of this Aeon and
his eternal illusion. But you, you my Disciples, hasten
to receive my Words with a firm belief, treasure them
in your hearts so that the Arkhon of the H£on, he who
has no part in me, may not overcome you, so that you
also, oh ! my Apostles, may accomplish my words,
through me. It is I Who have made you free to the
end that you may live in holy liberty in which there
shall be no stain ; and as the Paraclete (Holy Spirit) has
been purified, so may you also be sanctified through the
Paraclete.”

All the Apostles, Matthew and John, Philip, Bar-
tholomew, and James replied with one voice : —

“ Oh, Jesus, Lord of Life, from whom virtue floweth
upon those who have obtained Thy Wisdom and Thy
Likeness, who illuminatest by Thyself Light which is in
the Light, which hath illuminated our hearts so that we
can receive the Light of Life; the Word of Truth;
which, by the Understanding, teacheth us all the know-
ledge hidden in the Lord of Life ! ”

Jesus, the Lord of Life said :

“Happy is the man who has known these things,
who has brought down Heaven unto the Earth, who



has taken the Earth and raised it to the Heavens, so
that they are no longer divided ! ”

The Apostles replied and said :

“Jesus, Lord of Life, tell us how we can make the
Heavens to descend, for we have followed Thee in order
that Thou mayest show us the Light of Truth.”

Jesus, the Lord of Life, answered and said :

Of the Invisible Word. — “The Word was in Heaven
before the Cosmos existed. If you know my Word you
may make Heaven descend upon Earth, so that it may
abide in you. Heaven is the Invisible Word of the
Father ; if you know it you have the Power to bring it
down unto you. As to the Earth, I will show you how
you may raise it unto Heaven, for the Earth which
rises to Heaven is that which hears the Word of
Wisdom, which has ceased to be a terrestrial spirit and
has become celestial.” . . .

Of the Image of the Pleroma. The Monad , or point . —
The Image of the Pleroma is that in which we live and
die. It is the Abode of the Father, the Garment of
the Son, and the Strength of the Mother. It is the
first Father of all things; it is the First Eternal One;
it is the King of those whom no man can approach ; it
is that in which all things are lost ; it is that which hath
in Itself the form of all things; it is the abode which
knoweth itself, which is born from itself ; it is the abyss
of all things ; it is the greatness and truth which is in
the abyss ; it is that which gave birth to the Pleroma
and which died for it. They have given it no name, for
it is unnameable. The first source, which, in the future,
shall be in all places. The First Sound comprehending
all sounds that shall ever be heard. It is that of which
the members form countless myriads of Powers, each
contained in each.

Of the Father , the Demiurgus , the Creative God. The
Line , or duad.— The Second Abode is that which is
called the Demiurgus, Father, Word, Source, Nous,
Man, Eternal, Infinite. It is the Column; it is the



47


Watcher; it is the Father of all things; it is He on
Whose head the TEons form a radiant Crown ; the
Exterior Worlds cannot tell the Fulness of His Counte-
nance ; they are ever seeking its Light ; because His
Word has reached them, they desire to see Him. The
Light of His Eyes penetrates the abodes of the Exterior
Pleroma, and His Word goes forth from His Mouth ;
it reaches both those who inhabit the Heavens, and
those who dwell in the abyss. The Hairs of His Head
are equal in number to the Hidden Worlds ; the Forms
of His Countenance are the types of the TEons, the
Locks of His Beard are the Number of the Exterior
Worlds ; the Spreading of His Hands is the Manifesta-
tion of the Cross : the Extension on the Cross is the
Ennead. That which is on the Right, and on the Left,
is the Seed of the Cross, it is the Elusive Being. It is
the Father ; it is the Spring, which sounds in the
Silence ; it is that which we are ever seeking ; it is the
Father from whom shineth the Monad like a Spark of
Light. It is that which contains all things in the
radiance of its splendour. They have received Know-
ledge, Life, Hope, Peace, Faith, the Second Birth, and
the Seal ; this is the Ennead which has come forth from
the Father, without beginning; He who is his own
Father and His Own Mother ; the Twelve Abysses
which the Pleroma surrounds.

The Twelve Abysses . — The First Abyss is the Universal
Spring, from which all Springs come forth.

The Second Abyss is the Universal Wisdom, from
which all Wisdoms come forth.

The Third Abyss is the Universal Mystery, from
which all Mysteries come forth.

The Fourth Abyss is the Universal Knowledge, from
which all Knowledge comes forth.

The Fifth Abyss is the Universal Purity, from which
all Purity comes forth.

The Sixth Abyss is that Silence which contains all
Silence.



The Seventh Abyss is the Primal Essence, from which
all Essence comes forth.

The Eighth Abyss is the Forefather, whence exist all
Forefathers.

The Ninth Abyss is the Father of all, and the creator
of his own Being, He in Whom is all paternity, Who is
himself alone Father of all.

The Tenth Abyss is the All-Powerful One, whence all
Powers emanate.

The Eleventh Abyss is the First Invisible One, whence
comes all Invisibility.

The Twelfth Abyss is the Truth whence comes all
Truth. Truth which is over all things, the Image of
the Father, the End of all things, the Mother of all the
.Eons, that which surroundeth all the Abysses.

Of the Monad and the Demiuvgus . — This is the Monad
which is unknowable and which no man hath known ;
that hath no Symbol ; all Symbols are in it, it is blessed
from generation to generation. This is the Ineffable
Father, inconceivable, unthinkable, motionless. This is
that to which all things have become similar ; they rejoice,
they are filled with happiness, they bring forth myriads
and myriads of Eons in joy, for they have rejoiced with
the Father. These are the worlds in which the Stayros
(Cross) was manifested, and Man came forth from his
incorporeal members; this is the Father, the Root of all
Being, whose members have emanated from Him.
From the Father all names exist, as the Ineffable, Incor-
ruptible, Invisible, Uncompounded, Solitary, Powerful,
Omnipotent, there are all Names hidden in the Silence ;
they are hidden in the Father. This is He whom all
the Manifest Worlds see like stars in the Firmament of
Night. As men desire to see the Sun, so the Manifest
Worlds desire to see the cause of the Mystery which
surrounds them. This is He who has ever given life to
the Eons ; it is by His Word that they exist. The Holy
Pleroma exists through His Word. This is the Father,
the Second Demiurgos ; it is by the Breath of His



49


Mouth that the Pronoia (that which designs or knows
beforehand) conceived the idea of those who have not yet
come into existence. They shall exist by His Will for
He has ordered that all things shall exist. He created
the Holy Pleroma in this way.

Description of the Four Watch Towers of the Universe . — At
the Four Watch Towers of the Pleroma are Four
Monads, one Monad at each Watch Tower, and Six
Defenders at each Gate ; in all twenty-four Defenders
and twenty-four myriads of Powers at each Gate. Nine
enneads at each Gate, ten decads at each Gate, twelve
dodecads at each Gate, five pentads of power at each
Gate ; a Watcher with three faces, one inborn face, one
true face, and one ineffable face at each gate ; one of
these faces looks outward to the face of the Manifest
/Eons, the other looks in towards the Setheys (hidden
place), the third looks upward ; in each monad is the
Mntshere (the power of bringing forth, emanation), there
is found aphredon (without heart), with the twelve
Christs there is the great Ancestor, also Adam, the
Adam of Light, with his three hundred ./Eons, there is
the perfect mind. They border on another abyss of
immortality; the ineffable face of the Watcher looking
upwards to the Holy of Holies, which is the Infinite,
Chief of the Holy Place. This Chief has two faces,
one looking towards the Place of the Abyss, and the
other towards the abode of the Watcher, who has been
named the Server.

The Abyss of Light . — There is an abyss called Light or
that which gives Light ; in this Abyss is hidden the only
Begotten one. He made manifest the Three Powers,
He is the Power of Powers. He is Indivisible, and can
never separate from himself. All things are open unto
him, because with Him is the Power.

Of another Abyss . — There is also another Place which
has been called an Abyss, where there are three Pater-
nities. The First is the abode of Kalypto, this is the
Hidden God. In the Second , there are five trees and in



50


the midst thereof is a Tablet. One Word, The only
begotten or Monogenes, is on this Tablet, the Twelve
Faces of the Mind of all things ; and the Prayers of
all beings are placed before Him. The Pleroma re-
joices because of Him for he has manifested Himself.
It is He to whom the Invisible has shown its mystery ;
it is through Him that Man has come forth. In the
Third, Paternity is the Silence, and the fountain which
the Twelve Christs contemplate, seeing themselves
reflected therein. In it also is Agape (Love) and the
Nous (mind) of the Pleroma, and the most holy Pam-
metor (mother of all) whence has come the Ennead
whose Names are Protia, Pantia, Pangenia, Doxo-
phania, Doxogenia, Doxokrateia, Arsenogenia, Loia,
Ioyel. This is the First Unknowable One, the Mother
of the Ennead which completes the Decad emanating
from the Monad of the Unknowable.

The Incommensurate Abyss. — There is another Vaster
Abode in which is hidden a great treasure which sur-
rounds the Pleroma, this is the Incommensurate Abyss,
where is a tablet on which are gathered together Three
Powers ; One Solitary, One Unknowable, and One
Infinite. In the midst of which is a Mntshere (sonship),
which is called Christ, the Glorifier ; This is He Who
glorifies each one and imprints upon Him the Seal of the
Father. Who leads all into the vEon of the First
Father Who alone Is, He by Whom all exists, and
without Whom nothing is.

Abyss of Setheys , the hidden place . — After this is the
Abyss of Setheys. This is that, in which are all things
surrounding the Twelve Paternities, in the midst of
which it dwells. Each Paternity has three Faces. As
a Whole they form the number thirty-six. These are
they from which the Manifest Ones have received their
Seals and Characters, and this is why they have ever
received Glory.

There are still Twelve others who surround its Head
and who themselves are crowned. They radiate on the



5 1

worlds which surround them because of the Light of the
only begotten which is hidden within Him, and which is
sought by all.

Of the Nature of the Only Begotten. — This is He, the
True God, the Only Begotten, the All, the /Eons of the
Pleroma know that it is by Him that they have become
Gods, and they have become holy in this Name. This
is He of whom John hath said : In the beginning was
the Word and the Word was in God, and the Word was
God, without whom nothing exists, and what He hath
brought forth is Life. This is the Only Begotten Who
abode in the monad, who dwelt in it as in a city, and it
is the Monad who like a thought is in the Setheys
(hidden place) and the Setheys is throned in the Temple
like a King, and is God. This is the Word of the
Demiurgos which commanded the Pleroma to operate ;
this is the mind of the Demiurgos according to the Law of
God the Father; Him that all Creation imploreth as its
God and its Lord ; unto whom all that is, is in submission.

The Adoration of the Pleroma of the Only Begotten. — The
Pleroma (the Perfect Nature) adores Him for His
Beauty and His Goodness ; those who are in the
Pleroma form His Crown ; those who are without are
under His Feet, and those who are in the midst thereof
surround Him. Blessing Him and saying: — “Holy,
Holy, Holy, Aaa, Fee, Eee, Ooo, Yyy, 066,” That is to
say, “ Thou art the Living, among the Living ; thou art
Holy, among the Holy Ones ; thou art among those that
are ; thou art Father among the Fathers; thou art God
among the Gods ; thou art Lord among the Lords ;
thou art Eons among the .Eons.”

And He blessed them and said :

“ Thou art the abode ; it is thou who dwellest in the
abode.”

And He blessed them and said to the Son who is
hidden within Him :

“ Thou art, Thou art, oh ! only begotten, Light and
Life and Grace.”



52


Of the Pure Type . — Then Setheys (hidden one) sent to-
wards the Invisible a Spark ; it burned and became a Light
for the whole Temple of the Pleroma, and they saw by
the Light of the Spark, and they rejoiced, and they
sang myriads and myriads of Glorifications in honour
of the Setheys, in honour of the Spark of Light, which
had become manifest ; seeing that in it was the Image of
them all : and they represented the Spark unto them-
selves as an Illuminated Man of Truth. They named
Him Pantomorphe (having all forms) and Pure One;
they named Him Asaleytos (tranquil) and all the
Tvons called him Pantodynamos (omnipotent). He is
the Server of the ^Lons, and He serves the Pleroma.

And the Indivisible One sent forth the Spark from the
Pleroma, and the Three Thunders descended into the
Place of the Self-born, and they saw the grace of the
vEons, the Light which had been given unto them, and
they rejoiced over that which came forth to them.
Then were opened the Firmaments, and the Light
descended even unto the lowest depths, and towards
those who were without form and without likeness.
And it was thus that they acquired the likeness of the
Light. Some among them rejoiced that the Light had
come unto them and that they had become rich. Others
wept for they had become poor, and for that which had
been taken away. It was thus that the Grace which
went forth was received.

This is why it was imprisoned. Glory was given to
the iLons which had received the Spark, and Guardians
were sent to them who are Gamanel, Etrempsoykhos,
and Agramas. They bring succour to those who have
believed in the Light of the Spark.

Of the Twelve Fountains and the Twelve Paternities . —
And in the Abode of the Indivisible are Twelve Foun-
tains, above whom are Twelve Paternities who environ
the Indivisible, as do these Abysses or these Firma-
ments, forming a Crown above the Indivisible, in which
is found all species of Life, all the Creatures of the



53


Three Thunders of the Akhoretos (established one),
of the Infinite, of the Ineffable, of the Silence, of the
Unknown, of the Solitary, of the Acaleytos (flux and
reflux), of the Protophanes (first light), of the Self-Born,
of the Truth ; all these are in Him. In Him are all
Creatures, all Knowledge, all Power ; in Him all have
received the Light, all mind is manifested.

Of the Crown of Three Hundred and Sixty -five Radia-
tions. — This is the Crown that the Father of the Pleroma
has placed upon the Indivisible, and it contains three
hundred and sixty-five varieties shining and filling the
Pleroma with a Perfect and Incorruptible Light. This
is the Crown for which all the Immortals cry aloud ; and
by it and in it they become invisible until the Day of
Joy, those who were first manifested by the Will of the
Unknowable, that is to say Protia, Pantia, Pangenia,
and those who are with them. After this, all the Invisi-
ble Hsons receive from Him their Crown, so that they
may go out towards the Invisibles who received their
Crown in the Crown of the Invisible, and the Pleroma
receives its Perfection from the Incorruptible.

This is why those of them who have taken a body pray,
desiring to abandon the body, in order to receive the Crown
which is reserved for them in the Incorruptible HDon,
and this is the Invisible who was first Hion before that
which had rejoiced in the blessings which are above all
blessings. The Ennead is composed of twelve Enneads,
and in its centre is a place called the Generating Sub-
stance of the Gods, this is the Substance of which it is
said “ He who useth this substance shall be filled with
bread and his borders shall be enlarged.” And also :
“ The Master of the field which has been cultivated
possesses all good.” And all these powers which are in
the substance which engenders the gods have received
the Crown. It is because of the Crown which is upon
their head that they know if the Paralemptor (creative
force) have gone forth from the Indivisible or not.

Of the Universal Mother . — From them is the Universal



54


Mother in whom are seven Wisdoms, Nine Enneads,
Ten Decads, and in the midst of whom is a great
Kanoyn (Centre of equilibrium) ; a great Invisible One
stands above with a Great Inborn One, a great
Akhoretos (Established one), which have three faces ;
and Prayer, Benediction and the Hymn of the Creatures
are placed upon this Kanoyn which is in the midst of
the Universal Mother, and the Wisdoms and the
Enneads and the Decads. And these stood upright
upon the Kanoyn made perfect by the fruit of the .Eons,
those who have decreed that the Hidden only begotten
in the Indivisible should be with them, and the Powers
around Him say :

Hymn of the Powers surrounding the Only Begotten One.
— “ It is through Thee that we are glorified and by thee
we see the Father of the Pleroma Aaaooo and the
Mother of all blessings ; She is hidden within all things
and is the thought of all the Eons, the Ennoia (Concep-
tion or idea) of all the Gods and all the Lords ; She is
the knowledge of all the Invisible Ones and her Reflec-
tion is the Mother of all the Akhoretos (Established
ones), the Power of the Infinite. It is because of Thy
Reflection, Oh, only begotten that we see thee, that we
hasten to thee, that we hold to thee, that we receive the
Incorruptible Crown ; that which is known by itself.
Glory unto Thee, Oh, only begotten for ever.” And
all of them said “ Amen ” together ; and they became
a body luminous, which traversed the Eons of the In-
divisible until they came to the only begotten who is in
the Monad, the Abode of tranquillity and Solitude, and
they received grace from the only begotten, that is to say
from his Christhood, and the Crown Eternal. This is
the Father of all the Sparks of Light, the Chief of all
Immortal Bodies, that which is the Cause of the Resur-
rection of the Body.

The Incommensurate Abyss and the Five Powers , Love ,
Plope, Faith , Knowledge and Peace . — And in the midst of
the Incommensurate Abyss are Five Powers called by



these Ineffable Names: — The first is Agape (Love), and
from it proceeds all love ; the second is Elpis (Hope),
and through it we hope in the Only-Begotten Son of
God ; the third is Pistis (Faith), it is through it we
believe the mysteries of the Ineffable ; the fourth is
Gnosis (Knowledge) ; through her we know the First
Father through Whom we exist, the Mystery of Silence
which speaks before all things ; which is hidden ; the
First Monad, through which the Pleroma became Sub-
stance ; upon the head of this mystery the Three
hundred and Sixty- Five Substances form a Crown like
the Hair of Man, and the Temple of the Pleroma is like
the ground under His Feet ; this is the gate of God.
The fifth is Eirene (Peace), and through it Peace is
given to all, those who are without and those who are
within, because it is in her all things are created, the
Incommensurable Abyss, that in which subsist Three
hundred and Sixty- Five Paternities through whom we
obtain the divisions of the Year.

The Whole Pleroma was troubled, the Abyss and all that
was therein was moved, they hastened away toward the
JEon of the Mother. The Mystery gave commandment
that the veils of the iEons should be withdrawn until
the Watcher had once more established them, and the
Watcher established the HLons once more as it is
written :

“ He has established the Earth and she shall not be
moved.”

Also :

“ The Earth is dissolved, and all that was upon her.”

Then the Triple Power went forth, the Son was
hidden within Him and the Crown of Confirmation was
upon His Head, making myriads and myriads of Glories
and they cried :

“ Make straight the way of the Lord and Receive the
Grace of God : all your /Eons shall be filled with the
Grace of the Only Begotten Son and the Holy Father,
and perfected it shall stand above the Incommensurable



Abyss. In Him is found all perfection and from His
plenitude we have received Grace.”

T he Establishment of the Incommensurate A byss. — Then the
iEon was confirmed and no longer trembled : and the
Father confirmed it that it feared no more, and the iEon
of the Mother was filled with those who until then had
been hidden within the First Father, from whom came
the mystery, in order that His Son might re-establish
the Pleroma in knowledge which should enclose the
Pleroma.

The Emanation of the Word. — Then Setheys (hidden
place) sent forth a Demiurgos Word having with it
a cloud of Powers with crowns upon their heads, throw-
ing out rays, and the brilliance of their bodies made them
manifest. The Word which went forth from their
Mouths was Eternal Life, and the Light which went
from their Eyes was its resting-place ; the movement of
their hands showed the Path towards the Place whence
they came ; the Extension of their hands gives stability ;
the hearing of their ears is the perception which is in
their Hearts ; their union is the re-union of Israel ; their
comprehension of themselves is the contemplation of the
Word ; the number of their fingers is the number of
which it is written : —

“ Those who count the multitude of the Stars, and
who give them each their name.”

And the union of the Demiurgos Word was with
those who came forth from the trembling which had
been, and they became one and the same thing as it is
written : —

“ They have become one and the same in the only
One.”

Then the Demiurgos Word became a powerful God,
Lord, Saviour, Christ, King, Good, Father, Mother. It
is He of whom the Work was Good. He was glorified,
and became Father for those who believed in him ; he
became Law in the Aphrodonia and Powerful.

The Great Mother and her order. — The All-Established-



57


One went forth ; she had a crown upon her head and she
placed it upon those who believed. And the Virgin-
Mother, the Power of the ./Eons, the Hierarchy of its
Worlds was according to the order of the Interior Place.
She established in herself the Brilliance of the Light
after the Type of the Monad ; she established the Kata-
lyptos (judgments) which surrounded her ; she estab-
lished the Propator (Great Ancestor) according to the
Type of the Indivisible and the twelve Christs which
surrounded them ; having crowns on their heads and a seal
of glory in their right hands ; Love was in the midst of
them, a Face of the Triple Force in the Fountain and a
Kanoyn (place of rest) which the Twelve Paternities sur-
rounded, in which was hidden a mntshere (procreative
force). She established the Self-Father according to the
Type of the Ennead without a symbol, she gave him power
over the Father who begot him, she crowned him with
all Glory, she gave him Love, Peace, Truth, and my-
riads of Powers, in order that he might gather together
those who had been dispersed by the trembling which
had taken place at the moment when he came forth with

J° y -

As to the Lord of the Pleroma Who had the Power of
Life and Death, she established the First-begotten son,
after the Type of the Triple Force, she gave Him Nine
times an Ennead ; she gave Him ten times five Decads,
in order that he should have the Force to fight out the
combat imposed upon him, and she gave him the first-
fruits of the mntshere (creative force) which was in her.
He had the power to become the Triple Force, and He
received the promise of mntshere, promise which was
given to the Pleroma for His sake ; He accepted the
combat which was entrusted to Him, and he made all
that was pure in matter to rise ; he made a world, an
7Eon, a City ; this is the World that is called Incorrup-
tibility and Jerusalem. It is also called the New Earth
and Autoteles (complete in itself) ; and also without
King. This Earth is the Earth which brings forth the



Gods ; an Earth-nourishing Life ; this is she that the
Great Mother commanded to be established ; this is why
the Mother placed the orders of the hierarchies in this
Earth, she has established there the Pronoia (Foresight)
and Love. This is the Earth of which it is written : —

“ Earth which drinks rain a multitude of times.”

That is to say which multiplies the Light in her
thousands and thousands of times from her going forth
to her return, that is to say that for which man is called
sensible. It is formed and created according to the type
of this earth : and this it is that the Protogenitor (First-
begetter) has himself saved from dispersion.

Because of this the Father of all those in the Pleroma
has sent a crown on which is set forth the names of all
those in the Pleroma.

Of the Crown. — This is the Crown of which it is
written : —

“ It was given to Solomon on the day of the Exalta-
tion of his heart.”

The First Monad sent him an ineffable garment which
was all Light, all Life, all Love, all Hope, all Faith, all
Wisdom, all Understanding, all Truth, all Peace, all
Evidence, all Universal Mother, all-universal mystery,
all Universal Fountain, all universal perfection . . .

The whole Pleroma is in it, and it is that in which the
Pleroma is manifested, and all things are known to her.
She gave all Light from her ineffable Light .
she gave them a veil which envelopes them on all sides
. . . she divided them according to hierarchies.

Then that which was separated from that which was
not, and that which was not was the evil which mani-
fested as matter, and the Garment of Power separated
that which existed from that which did not exist.

The Order of the really existing ones. — She called that
which existed Aionios, and that which did not exist
Hyle. She gave a law to those who exist, and she
made the Mother the ruler. She gave Ten iEons, each
with a myriad of Powers, a monad and an Ennead in



59


each ./Eon. She placed in her a ray from the Universal
Mother, and she gave her the Power to be invisible, that
no man might see her. She established within her a
great Kanoyn (place of equilibrium) over which were
three powers, an Unbegotten, Asaleytos (tranquillity)
and Purity. She gave her twelve other Powers crowned
and surrounding her. And Seven Strat elates (Leaders
of armies), which have the seal of the all-perfect, and
they have upon their heads a crown of twelve diamonds
which come from Adam, the Man of Diamond.

The Establishment of the First Father . — She established
the Protopator (First Father) in her .Eons; she gave
him the Power of the Paternity and of obedience ; she
gave him a crown of twelve kinds, and a Power of triple
force, which is Pantodynamos (First power), and she
gave him the mntshere (power of emanation), and
thousands of glories and the power of Life and Death.
The Power which was given to the Propator was called
Protophanes (First light) because it was that which
was first manifested ; it was called unbegotten, because
no one had created it ; it was called also ineffable and
nameless. Also Autogenes (self-generated) and also
Autoteletos (complete in itself) because it manifested
by its own will. Also Autodoxastos (self-effulgent), be-
cause it manifested itself with the glories which were
within it ; also Invisible because it was hidden. She
gave it also another Power, that of making Light appear,
that which one calls Holy ; it is the Protia, that is, the
first ; it is called Pantia, that is, that in which all things
are ; also Pangenia, that which has brought forth all
things; also Doxogenia, that which has brought forth glory;
also Doxophania, that which has manifested glory, also
Doxokrateia, because it rules glory, also Arsenogenia,
because she brings forth sons, also Loia, meaning God
with us, also Ioyel, meaning God Eternal, who has com-
manded that the Powers should appear, also Paneia, of
which the meaning is Manifestation. The angel which
appears with them is that of the glories named Doxo-



6o


genes and Doxophanes, of which the interpretation is
that which begets glory and which manifests glory,
because it is one of these glories which stand round the
great power named Doxokrator, because in its manifes-
tation it has dominion over the great glories. Such are
the powers which were given to the Propator placed in
the /Eon of the mother, to him were given myriads of
glories, angels, Archangels, liturgies, to the end that he
should serve material things. He was given power over
all things. He made a great /Eon, and placed within it
a great Pleroma, a great Temple, and all the Powers
that he had taken, that he had placed in Himself, and
He rejoiced with them and He brought forth his
creations once more according to the order of the E'ather
given in silence, who had sent these riches to him, and
the crown of the Paternity was given to him because he
had made it Father of that which existed after Him.

Then he cried saying :

“My children that I bring forth anew in order that
Christ should be formed in you.”

Also :

“ I am ready to stand up with a Holy Virgin before
Christ the Bridegroom.”

But when He had seen the grace which the Hidden
Father had given to Him, he wished to turn the Pleroma
towards the Father Whose Will it was that the Pleroma
should turn towards Him.

And when the Mother saw all the splendours which
were given to her propator, she rejoiced greatly, she
exulted, that is why she said :

“ My Heart is rejoiced and My Voice is exalted.”

The rejoicing of the Great Mother . — Then she cried to-
wards the Infinite Power which stood near the /Eon of
the Father, this great Power of Glory, this which among
the glories is called Thrice Begotten. This is also called
Trigenes also Harmes. She also took that which is
hidden in all places, in order that it might send her the
Mother of that which is withdrawn ; the Hidden Father



6 1


sent the mystery which is round about all the /Eons and
the Glories which formed the Crown of the Panteles,
that is to say, of the Perfect One, so that it should put
it upon the head of the Hidden Indivisible, Incorrupti-
ble and Unbegotten, with the Great Powers of their
Company called Arsenogenia, which fill all the /Eons of
Glory. Thus did the Pleroma receive from Him the
Crown.

The B finger into being of himself is established . — Then she
established Auto-Pator Father and Eternal ; she gave
to him the /E on of the Hidden in which all things are in
the form of Kinds, Figures, Images, Forms, Interroga-
tions, Differences and Variations, that which counts and
that which is counted, that which thinks and that which
is thought. She made of it a garment covering all that
was contained therein so that it might give to him that
asks. She gave it Ten Powers, Nine Enneads, Five
/Eons, and Phoster (Lights) and gave Him Power over
all Hidden Things, so that He might give Grace to
those who had fought, who had left behind them matter,
and who had hastened towards the /Eon of Autopa-
tor ; they had claimed the promise which had been
spoken : —

“ Those who abandon Father, Mother, Brother, Sister,
Wife, Children, Riches, who take up their Cross and
follow Me, they shall receive the promises that I have
promised to them, and I will give them the mystery of
the Hidden Father because they have fulfilled the pur-
pose of their being and have flown before that which
pursued them with injustice.”

He gave them Glory, Joy, Exaltation, Happiness,
Peace, Hope, Faith, Love, and Truth which cannot
change. This is the Ennead with which he rewards
those who fly from matter. They become happy, they
become perfect, they know God and Truth, they under-
stand the mystery which has operated in mankind, why
he was manifested, in order that they might live they
were made blind, and because of Him the Word was



62


manifested that he might know it, that they who take up
the Cross should become God and should become perfect.

The First Begotten is established . — Then the Mother
established the ProtogennetSr as Her Son. She gave
Him Power, she gave him armies of angels and arch-
angels and Twelve Powers ; she gave him a garment in
which all bodies should exist, bodies of Fire, Water, Air,
Earth, Wind, Angels, Archangels, Powers, Forces,
Gods, Lords, in a word all bodies so that nothing should
prevent him from rising to the heights or descending to
the depths of the Noun. This is the Protogenitor (First
Begetter), that which is without and that which is within
hath promised all things which please Him and He
discerns what is in all matter and He broodeth over Her
like a bird spreading its Wings over its Eggs. It is
thus that the Protogennetor acted towards matter and
He made myriads and myriads of Ideas to ascend.
When matter was warm, it produced a multitude of
Powers, it grew like a plant, and divided them accord-
ing to Type and Idea ; so it gave them a Law of Life to
glorify God, to bless Him, to seek Whom He was and
what he was, so that they might behold with wonder
the place from whence they came, seeing how narrow
and sad it was and that they could not return but that
they should go to that which had given them a law, and
which had caused them to come forth from the shadows
of matter, which was their Mother. He said to them :

“ Let there be Light.”

For they did not know whether Light existed or not.
Then he gave them commandment that they should not
destroy themselves, and He left them to go towards the
abode of the Mother of the Pleroma, to the Propator,
and the Self-Father, in order that they should surpass
those who had gone forth from matter. And the Mother
of the Pleroma, the Propator, and the Self-Father, and
the Progennetor, and the Powers of the ^Eon of the
Mother raised up a great Hymn blessing the One Alone,
and saying to him :



6 3


These all having been established raise a Hymn of Praise.
— “ Thou art the Only Infinite, Thou art the only Abyss,
Thou art the only Unknown, it is Thee that all have
sought and have not found, for no man may know Thee
against Thy Will and no man may bless Thee against thy
Will, Thy Will alone. It is Thy Will alone which is an
Abode for thee, for nothing can be an Abode for thee
since thou art the abode of all things. I invoke thee
that thou shouldst give a hierarchy to those of the
world and that thou shouldst dispose the seeds thereof
according to Thy Will ; let us not be saddened, for
nothing has yet been made sad by thee. No man
knoweth Thy Design. All those that are without and
those that are within have need of Thee, for Thou art
the only Akhoretos (Established one), Thou art the only
Indivisible, Thou art the Only Anousios (One without
mind), Thou art the only one who hath given a Symbol
to thy creatures, and who hath made them manifest
from Thyself, Thou art the Demiurgos of that which is
not yet manifested, for these things that Thou knowest
alone and that we know not, can only be shown to us
by thee when we invoke Thee because of them, in order
that thou mayest make them plain to our comprehension,
for Thou alone canst do so. Thou alone hast risen unto
the Hidden Worlds, so that they may know thee, thou
hast made them able to know thee for Thou hast given
them birth from thy incorporeal body, and thou hast
produced man from the emanation of thy mind, in a
Dianoia (Discursive thought) and a perfect thought ; It
is a man, produced by the mind, to whom thought gave
form. It is Thou Who hast given all blessings to man,
and he wears them as a garment ; they are both a
covering and a safeguard. It is man that the Pleroma
has desired to know. Thou alone hast ordered that
Man should be manifested in order that thou shouldst
be known through him. Thou hast produced him and
hast appeared according to Thy Will. Thee I invoke
Oh 1 Father of all Paternity, Lord of all Lords, I entreat



6 4


thee to give hierarchy to my ideas and to my seed, that
I may rejoice in Thy Name and thy virtue, oh! Only
Monarch, Only Immutable One. Give me virtue that I
may make known unto my offspring that thou art their
Saviour.”

And when the Mother had finished praying unto the
Infinite, the Unknowable, that which filled the Pleroma
and which gave them eternal life, he heard her and
those who are with her, those which belong to her and
he sent to them a power from Mankind, that which
their hearts desired.

The Manifestation . — And the Infinite sent forth the
Infinite Spark, all the /Eons praised it in the places
where they were hidden before they were manifested
from without the Infinite Father, whence also the
Pleroma was manifested, and that which was hidden
within it. The Powers of the hidden /Eons followed
her until they were manifested and they became the
Temple of the Pleroma. She hid herself among the
Powers who had gone forth from the Hidden Place, she
made of them a World and she placed it within the
Temple. Then the Powers of the Pleroma saw her and
they loved her. She blessed them with ineffable hymns
not to be spoken by the Tongue of Man ; hymns worthy
to be meditated in the inmost heart. She received their
hymn and she made of it a veil surrounding their worlds
like a wall, and she departed towards the limits of the
Mother of the Pleroma, and she stood above the Uni-
versal /Eon. The Pleroma was moved in the presence
of the Lord of the Universe, the /Eon was troubled and
breathed not, for it had seen what it could not under-
stand.

The Lord of Glory tvas Enthroned . — The Lord of glory
was enthroned ; and he parted matter into two parts and
into two places, and he fixed the limits of each, and he
instructed them that they had proceeded from the only
Father and the Only Mother ; to those who hastened to
him and adored him he gave a place on the right and he



6 5


gave them the gift of Life Eternal and Immortality.
He named the place on the right side of Him, the Earth
of Life, and the place on the Left Side of Him the
Earth of Death, and that on the right the Earth of
Light, that on the Left the Earth of Shadows ; that
on the right the earth of repose, that on the left the
earth of sorrow ; he placed limits between them and
veils that they should not behold one another ; and he
gave numberless glories to those who had adored him,
and he made them Lords over those who had resisted
and were opposed to him. He disposed the earth on his
right hand unto numerous habitations, and he placed it
in each hierarchy, each .Eon, each World, each Heaven,
each firmament, in the Heavens, in every place, in every
Khorema. He gave them laws, he gave them command-
ment, saying :

“ Keep my words and I will give you Life Eternal, I
will send you powers, I will establish powerful spirits
within you, and I will give you such power as you desire ;
none shall be able to prevent you doing that which you
will ; you shall produce yEons, Worlds and Heavens, to
the end that the Spirits of the Intellectual Spheres may
come and abide with you ; you shall become Gods ;
you shall know that you have come forth from God ; and
you shall see God in yourselves ; He will dwell in your
fiEon.”

These Words the Lord of the Pleroma having spoken,
he retired from them and hid himself away. And those
who were produced from matter rejoiced that their
thought had been accomplished ; and they made glad
because they had gone forth from the narrow and sad
place ; and they prayed the Hidden Mystery, saying :

Prayer of those who were produced from matter . — “ Give
unto us the Power to create for ourselves y£ons, and the
Worlds that thou hast spoken of, Lord, as thou hast
sworn unto thy servants, for thou alone art immovable,
thou art the only Infinite, the only Akhoretos (established
one), thou art the only unbegotten, born from thyself.



66


self-generated, thou art the Akaleytos, and the Unknow-
able, thou art the Silence, the Love, and the Fountain
of the Pleroma ; thou alone art the Immaterial ; thou
alone hast no soil nor stain ; Ineffable in thy generation ;
Inconceivable in thy manifestation. Hear me, then, Oh
Incorruptible Father, Immortal Father, God of the Hidden
Being, only Light and Life, only Invisible, only Indivisible,
only Amiantos (undefiled) , only Alampetos (concealed one) ,
Primal Being. Nothing was before thou wast. Listen
to this prayer, which we offer to those which are hidden.
Hear us ; send us Incorporeal Spirits that they may
dwell with us, and teach us what thou hast promised ;
that they may dwell in us, and that we may become
their habitation, for it is thy will that it should be so ;
so let it be. Dispose our work and establish it according
to thy will, and according to the disposition of the
hidden fiEons dispose of us as thou wilt ; for we are
thine.”

Answer to the Prayer. — And he heard their voice, and
he sent them powers capable of discernment, knowing the
disposition of the Hidden /Eons ; he sent them according
to the disposition of that which is hidden ; he established
the hierarchy according to the hierarchies of that which
is above, and according to the secret disposition. They
began from the lowest even unto the highest, in order
that the instructions should unite them to their com-
panions. He created the aerial regions as a place of
habitation for those who had gone forth, where they
might dwell until those who were beneath them had
become established ; then he created the Abode of Truth ;
within the Centre of this, the Abode of Repentance ;
within that, the Antitype of Aerodios (air gods) ; within
that, the Antitype of the Auto-genes (Self-born) ; in
this place Purification was performed in the name of
Auto-genes, which is God over them ; and Powers are
placed here upon the Source of the Waters of Life.
These are the names of power which are set over the
Waters of Life, Michar and Micheu, and they are purified



67


in the name of Barpharangos. Within these are the
/Eons of Wisdom, and again Absolute Truth, and the
Pistis Sofia abides there, also the Proontos, Jesus,
Lord of Life, Aerodios, and his Twelve TEons. There
are placed Cella5, Eleinos, Zogenethles, Selmelhke, and
the Auto-genes of the /Eons.



68


The Book of the Grand Words of each Mystery.

Jesus said unto His disciples gathered round about
Him : to the Twelve, and the Holy Women that were
with them : —

Of the A Eon of Treasure . — “Gather round me, O my
Disciples, men and women, so that I may tell you the
mysteries of the Eon of Treasure hidden in the In-
visible God, which no man knoweth ; and if you per-
form them the Eons of the Invisible God will not be
able to rise up against you, for they are great mysteries
of the Holy of Holies. If you perform them the
Arkhons (Rulers) of the Eons cannot resist them nor
torture you ; but the Paralemptes (Creative force) of the
Eon of Treasure can draw the soul from the body, so
that it can traverse all the Eons and the abode of the
Invisible God, and lead it unto the Eon of Treasure.
And all conscious or unconscious sin shall be wiped out ;
a pure light shall be evolved ; and the soul passing from
world to world shall rest in it until it arrives at the Eon
of Treasure. Then it shall pass into the Sanctuary of
the Guardians of the .Eon of Treasure ; beyond this
to the Sanctuary of the three Amen; beyond this to
the Sanctuary of Gemini ; beyond this to the Sanctuary
of the Three Thunders ; beyond this to the Sanctuary
of the Five Trees; beyond this to the Sanctuary of the
Seven Voices ; beyond this into the Abode which is in
the Sanctuary. This is the Abode of Akhoretos (Esta-
blished one) of the Eon of Treasure. And all these
hierarchies will give you their Seals and their Mysteries,
because your soul shall have received the mystery
before being drawn forth from the body.”



bg

When he had finished these words he spake, and
said to them:

Of Keeping Secret the Mysteries . — “ The Mysteries
which I give unto you, treasure them in your hearts,
and give them unto no man who is unworthy ; neither
to Father, nor Mother, nor brother, nor sister, nor unto
thy kindred, neither for food, nor for drink, nor for lust,
nor for gold, nor for silver, nor for any of the goods of
this World ; treasure them, give them unto no man for
gold, give them unto no unholy woman, nor to any man
who believes in the eighty-two * rulers, or to those who
serve them. Reveal them not unto those w T ho serve the
eighth power of the great Arkhon. Those are they
who delight in foulness. We know the Truth and we
worship the Truth. But the God of these is an evil
God. Listen unto me and I will instruct you as to the
disposition of this God. He is the Third Power of the
Great Arkhon. His name is Tarikhthas, Son of
Sabaoth Adamas : he is the enemy of the Kingdom of
Heaven ; his face is featureless, his teeth stand out
from his mouth, and behind him is the face of a lion.
Beware, and give not our mysteries unto those who
believe in him ; tell them not unto such men, neither
the Abode of the Treasure nor those who dwell therein,
for it is this Turn which the Immutable God hath
formulated.

“Tell not, except to those who are worthy, the
mysteries of the Avon of Treasure ; they are beyond the
World; beyond all things, and their Gods, and their
Divinities; let not the mysteries be profaned, for those
who belong to them are the children of Light, hearing
one another, obeying one another, children of the AEon
of Treasure.

“ Behold what I tell you on the subject of these
mysteries. Now, therefore, since you have left your
fathers, your mothers, your brothers, and the whole

* This may be read twelve.



70


world, to follow me, since you have accomplished all
the Commandments that I have given unto you ; listen
unto the mysteries.

“Verily, verily, I say unto you, I will give you the
mysteries of the Twelve Divine flEons, and of their
Paralemptor (creative force), and the manner of invok-
ing them so as to enter into their abodes. I will also
give unto you the mysteries of the Divine Invisibility,
and of their Paralemptor. After that I will teach you
the mystery of those in the midst, and their Paralemp-
tor. Then I will give you the mystery of those upon
the Right Hand, and their Paralemptor.

Of the Three Baptisms . — “But before this I must give
you the Three Baptisms ; the Baptism of Water, the
Baptism of Fire, the Baptism of the Holy Spirit, and
I will give unto you the mystery of exorcising the evil
influences of the Arkhons ; and after that I will give
you the Sanctifying Grace of the Breath of Life
(Ruach Elohim). And before all things, command
those on whom you bestow these mysteries not to swear
falsely, nor to swear at all, neither to commit fornica-
tion, nor adultery, nor theft, nor to covet silver or
gold, nor to take in vain the Names of the Arkhons,
nor of their Angels; let them not be fraudulent, nor
evil speaking, nor lying, nor slandering ; but let their
yes mean yes, and their no, no ; in a word, let them
observe the Holy Commandments.”

The disciples humble themselves . — And it came to pass
that when Jesus had finished saying these things unto
his disciples they were filled with a great sorrow ; and
they threw themselves at His Feet weeping and crying
out. They said unto Him :

“ Lord, why hast thou said unto us, I will give thee
the mystery of Treasure ? ”

But His Heart was troubled because of His Disci-
ples, for they had abandoned all things and had followed
him for twelve years, keeping the commandments which
he had given them ; and he replied unto them, saying :



7 1


Of the Forgiveness of Sins . — “Verily I say unto you, I
will make known unto you the Mysteries of the
Treasure and the Guardians of the Three Gates of the
/Eon of Treasure and all the mysteries which I have
mentioned unto you. Verily, I will give them unto you,
I command you to perform the mystery of the Five
Trees, the Mystery of the Seven Voices, and the
Mystery of the Great Name, which is the Supreme
Treasure surrounding the Ton of Treasure ; for he who
performs these, needs no other mystery of the kingdom
of Light unless it be the Mystery of the Remission of
Sins. It is necessary that He who believes in the
Kingdom of Treasure should perform the mystery of the
Remission of Sins that he may be purified, and the sins
that he has committed be wiped out so that he may
become a pure light and may enter into the Treasure of
Treasures. And I say unto you while they are yet
upon earth they shall inherit the Kingdom of God, for
their part is in the /Eon of Treasure; they are Immortal
Gods ; and when those who have received the mystery
of the Remission of Sins go forth from their bodies all
the ./Eons fly before them, they hide themselves in the
West, in the region which is on the left, because of the
Glory of the Soul who has received the mystery of the
Remission of Sins. And their souls shall come unto
the gate of the Avon of Treasure, and the Guardian of
the Gates shall open unto them.

Of the other Mysteries . — “ When they have arrived at
the Hierarchies of Treasure other hierarchies shall seal
them with their seals, shall give unto them the Grand
Name of their Mysteries, and shall make them enter
into their Sanctuaries. Thus shall they pass through
the hierarchies of the Five Trees, the Seven Voices, the
Apator, the Tripneymatos, the Ieoy, Sige, or the Silence.
I will also give you all Mysteries, and you shall be made
perfect in the mysteries of the Kingdom of Treasure,
and you shall be called Sons of the Pleroma, perfect in
all mysteries.”



72


And it came to pass that Jesus said unto his Dis-
ciples : —

“ Come unto me and receive the Three Baptisms
before I tell you the Mystery of the Arkhons.”

And the men and women gathered together around
him. Jesus said unto them :

“Go unto Galilee; find a man or a woman whose
iniquity is pardoned, that is to say one who has begun to
live a pure life. Take two vessels of wine from the
hands of such an one, and bring me branches of a vine.”

The Baptism of Water . — The disciples brought the
wine, and the branches of vine. Then Jesus disposed
an offering for sacrifice ; he placed a cup of wine to the
left and to the right of the offering, he placed juniper
berries upon the offering with dried cinnamon, and
spikenard; he made his disciples clothe themselves in
garments of linen, and put in their mouths roots of the
herb cynocephalus. He placed in their two hands the
number of the Seven Voices which is 9,879, he also
placed in their hands the Solar herb. He placed His
disciples before the offering, and Jesus stood on the
other side of it. He spread a linen cloth, and placed
upon it a cup of wine, and pieces of bread equal in
number to his disciples, He put branches of olive upon
the place of the offering, and He crowned them with
wreaths of olive. Jesus marked His disciple with this Seal :


73


of which the interpretation is Eezozaz, and the Name
Sazapharas. Jesus with His disciples went to the
Four Quarters. He gave them commandment each to
place their feet by the side of his neighbours’. He
prayed and said :

“Ioazazeth Azaze Asazeth, Amen, Amen, Amen :
Eiazei Eaizei Kheth Zaeth Zaeth Amen, Amen,
Amen, Abrazazaza Baozazzaz Zazzoos Amen, Amen,
Amen ; Azaakhazarakha Zarakha Zareatho Zarba-
thoz Zaraei Zaraei Zaraei Azarakha Kharza
Barkha Thazath Thazath, Thazath, Amen, Amen,
Amen. Hear me, oh my Father, Father of all pater-
nity, the infinite who abides in the JEon of Trea-
sure whence come the five parastates serving the seven
Virgins of Treasure, propitious to the Baptism of
Life, and of whom the ineffable names are — Astrapa,
Tephoiode, Ontonios, Sinetos, Lakhon, Politanos,
Opakis, Paidros, Odontokhoos, Diaktios, Knesion,
Dromos, Eyidenos, Polypaidos, Entropon, may they
come to baptize my disciples with the waters of Life
from the Seven Virgins of Treasure, may they grant
them remission of sins, purify their iniquities, and write
their names in the Book of the Kingdom of Life. And
if thou hearest me, if thou takest pity on my disciples, if
thou inscribest their names in the Book of the Inheritance
of the Kingdom of Light, if thou wilt remit their sins, if
thou wilt wash out their iniquities, grant us our prayer
and permit the Zorokothora to bring the water of the
baptism of Life, and place it in one of these cups of wine.”

And in a moment the miracle which Jesus had
desired took place : the wine which was on the right of
the sacrifice was changed into water. The disciples
came before Jesus who baptized them, gave them of the
sacrifice and sealed them with this Seal :


O



74


The Disciples rejoiced with a great joy because their
sins had been remitted, their iniquities covered, and their
names inscribed as heirs of the Kingdom of Light ; for
they had been baptised in the Waters of Life from the
Seven Virgins of Treasure, and they had received the
sacred and holy seal. And it came to pass that Jesus
continued to speak and said unto his disciples : —

The Baptism of Five . — “ Bring me branches of vine,
that you may receive the baptism of fire.”

And the disciples brought him branches of vine which
he placed upon the incense : he put myrrh upon it, he
added incense of Lebanon, lentisk of mastic, Spikenard,
Juniper flow r ers, turpentine and gum. He spread on the
place of the offering a linen cloth, and placed thereon a
cup of wine, and pieces of bread equal in number to his
disciples, and they were again clothed in linen garments
and crowned with the herb called vervain of Osiris, and
He put in their mouths the herb called cynocephalus,
and in their two hands the number of the Seven Voices
which was 9,879. He also gave into their hands the herb
marigold. He put bunches of the same flowers beneath
their feet and placed before them the aromatic incense
which he had prepared. He gave them commandment
to place their feet each by the side of his neighbours’.
And He stood on the other side of the Incense and sealed
them with this seal :


75

of which the name is Thezaeez and the interpretation
Zozaez. Jesus turned himself to the Four Quarters
with his Disciples and prayed saying : —

“ Hear me, oh my Father, Father of all Paternity,
Infinite Light, render these my disciples worthy to re-
ceive the Baptism of Fire, forgive their sins, purify the
iniquities which they have committed consciously or uncon-
sciously, those which they have committed from their
childhood even unto this day, their thoughtless words,
their evil speech, their false witness, their thefts, their lies,
their deceitful calumnies, their fornications, their adul-
teries, their covetousness, their avarice, and all the sins
that they may have committed, efface them, purify them
from them, and let the Zorokothora come in secret and
bring them the Water of the Baptism of Fire of the
Virgin of Treasure : Hear me, oh my Father ; I invoke
thy Incorruptible Names hidden in the TEons for ever.
Azarakaza Aamathkratitath Ioioio Zamen Zamen
Zamen Iaoth Iaoth Iaoth Phaoph Phaoph Phaoph
Khioephozpe Khenobinyth Zarlai Lazarlai Laizai,
Amen Amen ; Zazizayah Nebeoynisph Phamoy Pha-
moy Phamoy Amoynai Amoynai Amoynai Amen Amen
Amen Zazazazi Etazaza Zothazazaza. Hear me, my
Father, Father of all paternities, Infinite Light, I in-
voke thy Incorruptible Name which is in the JEon of
Light that Zorokothora should send the Water of the
Fiery Baptism from the Virgin of Light to the end that
I may baptise my disciples. Hear me again, oh my
Father, Father of all Paternity, Infinite Light, that the
Virgin of Light may come, that she may baptise my
disciples with Fire, that she may pardon their sins,
purify their iniquities, for I invoke thy Incorruptible
Name which is Zothooza Thoithazazzaoth Amen
Amen Amen. Hear me also, Oh Virgin of Light, oh
Judge of Truth, forgive the sins of my disciples ; and if,
oh my Father, thou blottest out their iniquities, may
they be written down heirs of the Kingdom of Light, and
to this end perform a miracle upon these censers of
sweet smelling perfume.”



7 ^

And in a moment the miracle occurred. And Jesus
baptised His disciples and gave them sacrifice, and he
sealed their foreheads with the seal of the Virgin of
Light. And the disciples rejoiced that they had received
the baptism of Fire, and the Seal for the remission of
sins, and their names were inscribed as heirs of the
Kingdom of Light. Behold the Seal :



And it came to pass that Jesus said unto his Disciples:

“ Now you, having received the baptism of water and
the baptism of Fire, come unto me that you may receive
the baptism of the Holy Spirit.”

Baptism of the Holy Spirit . — He placed the perfumes of
the baptism of the Spirit in their places, and over them
branches of olive, of juniper, and cinnamon, of dried
saffron, mastic gum, cinnamum, myrrh, and balm
with honey. He put two cups of wine to the right and
left of the perfume, besides loaves of bread, equal in
number to his disciples. Jesus marked his disciples
with this seal :


77


the name of which is Zakzoza and the interpretation
Thozonoz. And it came to pass when they were
marked with the seal, Jesus standing behind the per-
fumes, disposed his disciples in front of them ; they were
clothed in garments of linen ; the number of the mystery
ofthe seven Voices was in their two hands, it is g, 879. Jesus
spake and said, “ Hear me, oh my Father, Father of all
Paternity, Infinite Light, I invoke thee by the Incor-
ruptible names of the TEon of Light Zazazaoy, Zoth-
zazoth, Thozaxazoth, Kenoybinye, Athaeey, Ozeo-
zaeoz, Kromblath. Hear me, oh my Father, Father
of all Paternities, Infinite Light, for I invoke the
Incorruptible names of the TEon of Light. Take away
the sins of my disciples, cleanse them from the iniquities
which they have committed knowingly or unknowingly,
the evil which they have committed from their infancy
even unto this day ; write their names in the Book of the
Inheritance of the Kingdom of Light. If Thou takest
away their sins, if Thou purifiest their iniquities, if Thou
writest their names in the book of the inheritance of the
Kingdom of Light, grant, oh my Father, a miracle.”

And even as he spoke the miracle took place upon the
offering. And he baptised all his disciples with the
baptism of the Holy Spirit. They partook of the offer-
ing, and he marked their foreheads with the seal of the
Seven Virgins of Light to the end that their names
should be written in the inheritance of the Kingdom of
Light. And the Disciples rejoiced with a great joy, that
they had received the baptism of the Holy Spirit and
the Seal which took away sin and purified iniquity, for
their names had been written in the Inheritance of the
Kingdom of Light.

Behold the seal :


78


And when Jesus had performed this mystery, all his
disciples stood clothed in garments of linen, crowned
with morsyne, a branch of the Cretan Cynocephalus
upon their mouths, and mugwort in their two hands.
Their feet were placed one against the other, and they
turned towards the four quarters of the World.

And it came about that Jesus disposed the perfumes
in the manner necessary for the performance of the
mystery of the deliverance of his disciples from the evil
desires of the Arkhons. He placed a censer upon the
androsace. He took branches of vine, juniper, cinna-
mon-leaves, and sweet flag, also loadstone, agate stone,
and incense. He clothed his disciples in garments of
linen, he crowned them with mugwort, and placed
incense in their mouths ; he put the number of the First
Amen into one of their hands, and he placed their feet side
by side standing before the perfumes. Jesus marked his
disciples with this seal :



of which the true name is Zezeoiazoz and the interpre-
tation is Zozozai. When Jesus had marked his disciples
with this seal, he took his place on the other side of the
perfumes and he prayed, saying: — “Hear me, oh my
Father, Father of all Paternities, Infinite Light, for I



79


invoke thee in the incorruptible names of the /Eon of
Light Nereter, Zophoner, Zoilthozoybao, Xoybao,
Amen, Amen, Amen. Hear me, oh! my Father, may
the Sabaoth Adamos and all the Arkhons come forth and
take away the iniquities of my disciples.” When he
had uttered these words, having turned unto the four
quarters of the World with his disciples, he imprinted
upon them the mark of the Second Amen which is this :

(> .

of which the true name is Zalozakoz, and the interpre-
tation Zkhozozo. And when Jesus had finished ; even
at that moment the Arkhons took away their iniquities
from the disciples ; and these rejoiced with a great joy
that the iniquity of the Arkhons had ceased in them.
And when the iniquity of the Arkhons no longer existed
in them, the disciples who followed Jesus became im-
mortal in all the places that they entered.

Jesus said unto his disciples :

“ I will give you the word of Power in all places of
which I have given you the mystery, the baptisms, the
offerings, the seals, the Paralemptor, and the number,
the Names of Truth and the Words of Power, also the
manner in which it is necessary to invoke them so that
you may enter into their hidden places. I will give you
the Words of Power and the numbers. Hear me now
in order that I may speak unto you of the going forth of
your soul, since I have revealed these mysteries, their
seals, and their numbers. When thou goest forth from
thy body and performest the mysteries of all the ./Eons
and those which are in them, they shall fly before you
until you come to the Six Great /Eons. They shall fly
to the west and to the left hand. When you have come
to the Six /Eons you will be stopped until you have re-
ceived the mystery of the remission of sins, for this is


So


the great mystery which is in the EEon of the Holy of
Holies, and giveth health to the soul. He who has re-
ceived this mystery shall surpass all gods and all lords
and all Htons which are the Twelve Htons of the In-
visible God, because this is the Great Mystery of the
Immutable One who is in the .-Eon of the Holy of
Holies. This is why all men who believe in the Son of
Light must receive the mystery of the remission of sins.

. And when all the iEons have fled before you
the Light of the Purifying Avon will purify the twelfth
EEon, so that all thy ways may be illuminated, and the
flEon of Light may manifest, that you may behold the
heavens from afar and the Paths of Light.

When you have received these mysteries, and you go
hither and thither, having gone forth from the body you
will become a pure Light, and you will journey even
unto the iEon of Light.”

Jesus then described unto his disciples the nature of
the EEons of Light.

And His disciples said unto Jesus :

“ Oh, Lord, why do all these habitations exist, or
rather the Fatherhood which is in them ? Why do they
exist with the hierarchies which they contain ? Why
do they exist, and why do we exist ? ”

Jesus answered them and said :

“ These things exist by reason of a Little Thought
which is without the Father. He has not drawn it
towards himself ; he has drawn unto himself all things
saving only this Little Thought which is still without,
and is not part of Him : I shone forth in this Little
Thought ; I sprang forth like a jet of water ; I turned
myself towards it ; I shone forth in it ; it brought me
forth ; I am the first of those who came forth from it ; I
am its Image and its likeness, now that I am come
forth. I am in its presence. Again the Little Thought
shone forth, it cried with another cry which was the
second : this cry was heard in all the worlds, and then
the second Emanation came forth ; in its turn the second



8 1


emanation went forth itself and followed those of its own
likeness ; it existed in all the worlds which had gone
forth following their own likenesses. The little Thought
had brought forth all these worlds. Again it cried with
a third cry, and moved the emanation towards the virtue
of the .Eons, and all the princes of the world came into
existence and were in their respective worlds from the
first even unto the last. My Father Himself gave
movement unto these chiefs ; one by one did he bring
forth the twelve emanations and distributed them into
the worlds from the first unto the last of all the
Treasures. Oh, my Disciples, I have shown you the
holy places of these Abodes, and the hierarchies thereof
in order that you might follow me into all the habitations
that I may enter into, in order that you may serve me
in all the places that I go into in order that I may call
you my Disciples. Now then when you enter these
places say the Names which I have taught you, with
the seal with which you must sign yourselves ; speak the
name of the Seal and hold the number in your hand ;
and the guardians, the hierarchies and the firmaments
will show you the way by which you may enter into the
place of their paternity, and you will enter into the In-
terior even until you come unto the world of the God of
Truth that is to say the Perfection of Treasures which I
have made known unto you.”

Then the Disciples of Christ said unto him :

“ Lord, when we said, Give us a name which shall
suffice for all the worlds, you answered us and said,
When I have passed through all the worlds and have
brought you forth from them, then I will tell it unto you.
Now behold we have traversed all the worlds and we
have seen all that they contain ; you have taught us
their names and the names of their seals, and their
numbers so that they shall open before us from the first
even unto the last ; teach us then that Name of which
you have spoken in order that we may speak it in all the
worlds of the Eons, and that they may open before us.”



82


‘Then Jesus said unto them :

Hear ye then and I will tell you, guard it in your
heart.”

Then they said :

“ Is this the Great Name of your Father, who existed
from the Beginning, or of one greater ? ”

And the Christ said :

•‘No, but it is the Name of the Great Force which is
in all worlds. If you speak the word, all the Worlds
must submit. Those which are in the y£ons from the
first to the last, even unto the Treasure of the God of
Truth. The Guardians, the Hierarchies, and the Firma-
ments shall open before you ; this is the name which I
tell unto you :

Aaaooozorazazzzaieozazaeeeiiizaieozoakhoeoooytho-

EZAOZAEZEEEZZEEZAOZAKHOZAEKHEYEITYXAALETHYKH.

“ This is the Name which you must speak in the interior
world; the Name of the God of Truth is an exterior
world. Live then in the exterior world, pronounce this
name, mark yourself with the seal



83


of which the Name is zzeeookhaaaezaza. Say it and
take in your hands the number zonstth. When you
have arrived at your destination, pronounce this name,
say it first, then turn towards the four quarters of the
Holy Place, make the sign of the Seal, say the name of
which you hold the number in your hands.”

This is as much as it seems necessary to quote of
the Gnostic papyrus.

In conclusion I will point out that to man destiny is
often represented by his own fatal instincts ; instincts
which mislead him on every possible occasion. Guided
by them the drowning man throws up his hands ; the
angry man clenches his fists, tightens up his muscles and
becomes inarticulate ; the young gather the fruits of life
before they are ripe ; the old shut themselves away from
the flow of life and die of stagnation. Perverted instinct
is the curse of the human race.

Now the seat of instinct is the heart, according to all
ancient systems, and in the 125th Chapter of the Book of
the Dead , the vessel of the heart was weighed in the
balance against a feather or image of truth, that is to
say, against the power of perception.

To the Egyptians of old the cultivation of discernment
was the aim of life, the want of it was a deadly sin in
their eyes, and ended in the annihilation of the indivi-
duality. To gain perception of Truth, and so guide these
fatal instincts, was the object of initiation. From the
first step even, the Aspirant was taught to look upon
himself as the centre of a universe of instinctive force,
made on the pattern of the vast universe of which he
formed a microscopic portion. Over him brooded the
wings of the invisible — his pleroma filled with the
attributes of his divinity, as the universe is filled with the
rays of the light-givers. Daily the initiate studied the
names, and meditated on the inward significance of the
sounds and forms symbolizing the habitations of the
.Eons of the Absolute within this pleroma. And to



8 4


carry the correspondences further, the capitals of the
nomes of Egypt each represented a station in the Divine
Hierarchy (compare the eighteenth chapter of the Book
of the Dead). Gods also were assigned to the twenty-one
parts of the human body (compare the forty-second
chapter of the Book of the Dead). It is in the persistence
of these ideas that we get one strong link between the
ancient Egyptians and the Gnostics. They both also
believed in the efficacy of fixed thought and the repeated
word. The continual assertion of the virtues and powers
of the King, for instance, was not mere flattery, but was
believed to really induce virtues and powers in the
monarch. By the same means the priests gained power
by the identification of themselves with the types of
natural forces, known to us as gods. The conviction
that must accompany the assertions of innocence made
in the Judgment Hall of Truth, answered very nearly to
the later doctrine of the forgiveness of sins by faith.
This may also be compared to the initiation into the
mystery of the forgiveness of sins mentioned above in the
quotations from the Bruce Papyrus.

The first necessity of the study of Magic among the
Egyptians was the cultivation of all the faculties dormant
in human nature. For they considered human power
was only limited by weakness of will, and poverty of
imagination. The Will-Energy, and Imaginative-
thought, are often symbolised by fire and water, and the
power of the spirit by air the Qabalistic Ruach. These
are the divine Trinity of Father, Mother and Son
(sometimes called Heaven, Earth and Mankind). The
three Baptisms of the Bruce Papyrus bear a distinct
analogy to the gifts of air, water and fire described in
the Book of the Dead , chapters liv.-lxiii.

Finally the Magic of the Egyptians was founded on
an elaborate scheme of the universe ; and the interaction
of natural forces was most carefully observed and studied.
Of course it seems absurd to us to make a mystery of
the real length of the year, or of the fact that the sun



85


was the central body of the universe, or of the power of
a man of vital force to hypnotise or mesmerise a feebler
formulation of the chaos from which he himself and the
whole universe is evolved. But for the priesthood of
Egypt the knowledge of these facts included the convic-
tion of the deep significance of their analogies, and of
the powers such knowledge gave. At the same
time we must remember that these men and women
were Practical Rulers, bent on keeping the power that
they held ; and had they possessed the secret of dynamite
they would certainly not have revealed it to the
multitude.

Such was the Magic of Egypt during forty centuries
of greatness, and now what remains ? Let us look to
Shelley for our answer. He tells us :

I met a traveller from an antique land
Who said : “ Two vast and trunkless legs of stone
Stand in the desert. Near them on the sand,

Half sunk a shattered visage lies, whose frown
And wrinkled lip and sneer of cold command,

Tell that its sculptor well those passions read
Which yet survive, stamped on these lifeless things,

The hand that mocked them and the heart that fed.

And on the pedestal these words appear.

‘ My name is Ozymandias, King of kings ;

Look on my works, ye mighty, and despair ! '

Nothing beside remains. Round the decay
Of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare,

The lone and level sands stretch far away.'


THE END,
