COLLECTANEA HERMETICA


EDITED BY


DR. WYNN WESTCOTT,
S.M. of the Soc. Ros. in Ang., Master of the Quatuoy Coronati Lodge.


VOLUME III.
A Short Enquiry concerning the
HERMETIC ART
A LOVER OF PHILALETHES.


LONDON, 1714.


PREFACE BY


NON OMNIS MORIAR


—


An INTRODUCTION TO ALCHEMY
anp NOTES psy S.S. D. D.


NOTE BY THE EDITOR OF THE
SERIES.


THE first volume of the Collectanea Hermetica has been well
received; indeed the Hermetic Arcanum of Jean d’ Espagnet
could not fail to interest Alchymic students. There could be
no doubt that the second volume of the series, The Divine
Pymander, of Hermes Trismegistus, would also secure an even
greater distribution. In now issuing a reprint of the Short
Enquiry concerning the Hermetic Art, by A lover of Philalethes,
with a Preface by ‘*Non omnis Moriar,” and an ‘ Intro-
duction to Alchymy,” by my friend, S. S. D. D., great
confidence is felt that this third volume will be equally


successful.


W. Wywn Westcott, M.B., D.P.H.


PREFACE.


THERE is great reason to believe that this Enquiry into the
Hermetic Art, first published in 1714, led to the composition
of the still more extended and more spiritually conceived
volume, the Suggestive Enquiry into the Hermetic Mystery and
Alchemy, which was published anonymously in 1850. This
latter volume, which has for many years been unprocurable,
and whieh cannot yet be reprinted by any one unless with the.
consent of the survivor of the two authors, is an almost com-
plete review of Alchymy on the spiritual plane.

The volume before us has a distinct reference to the science
of Alchymy referred to the plane of human improvement,
although it is also definitely concerned with the equally
possible, though almost incredible power of transmuta-
tion upon the material plane.

This Short Enquiry was written with especial reference to
the Kabalistic work, now almost unprocurable, the Asch
Mezareph, which is a tractate connecting physical alchymy
with the Kabalah— so well known to refer to divine, human
and cosmic conceptions; and which system of philosophy
has been so very largely used by the late Madame Blavatsky
to support and corroborate the wonderful system of human
and universal genesis partly unveiled in her great work, The
Secret Doctrine of the adepts of the Eastern World. With her
wonderful intuition she perceived that the published and still
extant Kabalistic treatises were but debased copies of the
more true Chaldee Hebrew doctrine; for she indeed was
never entirely initiated into either of the branches of the still
extant Kabalistic and Hermetic secret societies. From the
Eastern Light which had dawned upon her so generously, she
could indeed criticise, but could never fully comprehend the
nature of Kabalistic illumination.

Dr. Anna Kingsford, the other eminent modern Theosophist
or seeker after the true conception of the Divine, although
but slightly familiar with the Indian school of thought, was
somewhat fully in communion with the doctrines called
Hermetic—or by collateral descent,—Rosicrucian.


6


The anonymous author of this Short Enquiry was definitely
a Rosicrucian adept, and although his common name has not
transpired, yet his identity was known to the initiated occul-
tists of his day, and the records of his progress inscribed in
the unpublished roll of his branch of the Rosicrucian
fraternity.

The Suggestive Enquiry chose instead of Aisch Mezareph, two
other ancient discourses upon Alchymy as the text for its in-
struction; these were the “ Aureus, or Golden Tractate of
Hermes,” and the “ Six Keys of Eudoxus,” which formed one
of three portions of the famous Hermetic Triumph, the other
two fragments being named the “ War of the Knights,” and
the “ Discourse of Eudoxus and Pyrophilus.”’ The earliest
edition, known to me, of these curious tracts, is the French
translation of “ Limojon de Saint Didier,” dated 1699; besides
this, there is still procurable the English version of 1723.

It is intended to reproduce these curious essays in succes-
sion to the isch Mezareph, which is already in preparation,
and which is certain to interest all true students of the occult
sciences, because it points out the analogies between alchy-
mic tenets and the allegorical explanation of many passages
in the Old Testament of the Hebrews.

In order to assist fellow students in their investigations, I
have added here a summary of the Short Enquiry, and have
prevailed upon the learned Soror S. S. D. D., to contri-
bute an “Introduction to Alchymy,” which will be found
pregnant with meaning by those who have the divine afflatus,
although to the ordinary reader, who takes up an Hermetic
book only from curiosity, her essay will need to be studied
with the closest attention.


SUMMARY.


THE anonymous author commences with a definition of
Alchymy, and proceeds to argue that there must be a sound
basis for the science because so many authors of different
eras and widely separated countries have all agreed upon the
essentials of the doctrine and of the art, and that in many
instances almost identical results have been described by
adepts wholly unknown to each other, although contem-
poraneous. He very properly urges that the decision of the
truth or error of these doctrines can only be rightly judged by
other persons who have actually investigated these researches,
and the negative evidence of those who have failed, and the


7


judgment of those who have not searched for themselves, is
not any criterion by which such intricate forms of philosophy
should be estimated. He further insists that the great learn-
ing and lives of pious zeal of many of those who gained suc-
cess in alchymy should demand an à priori confidence in the
tenets they demonstrated and sought to unfold. Leaving for
the time the thread of the argument, he regrets the failures
and wasted energies of many who, in defiance of the warnings
of true adepts, and in disregard of the conditions which they
laid down as essential to success, yet intruded themselves
upon this psycho-spiritual path. He points out especially
three requirements which were always insisted upon as
necessary to attainment of the summum bonum, vtz., a vir-
tuous life, pure and unsullied by sensual enjoyment from birth
to the time of trial, a certain freedom from ordinary social
and business liabilities, and the inherent power to compre-
hend the language of sy mbol and allegory.

He then warmly supports the alleged necessity for the use
by alchymists of symbolism and illustration rather than the
plain language of exoteric science ; remarking most truly that
to the pupil who has in himself the power to succeed, the light
of intuitive perception will surely dawn, and that so will he be
enabled to appreciate the ideals intended to be conveyed, and
at the same time will acknowledge the wisdom of such re-
veiling as is present in the works of the true adepts.

The Enquiry then passing superficially to the Assiatic or
material plane, yet at all times preserving the actual scheme
of spiritual manifestation, considers the grand doctrine of con-
trast, alluding to the essential differences between Perfect and
Imperfect metals, and thus introduces the ideal of the Triune.
There are three principles of manifestation and of matter, and
even three processes of transmutation. The Universal
Solvent or bond of union is then considered, the snowy
splendour of Unity standing between the two contrasted
forces which form the Dyad. (See the Sepher Yetzivah.) This
subject is largely commented upon, and allusion is made to
the Process even upon the plane of matter, requiring a ‘“ Means
Mineral” between the two material forms. Many illustra-
tions are then given, notably the doctrines of Sir George
Ripley, a Canon of Bridlington, famous alike as a churchman
and as a chemist, who formulated the ideal of the Green
Lion as a type of the third element-—the Means—by which
alone could the extremes be knit in perfect association.

Returning once more to the help of the student, the
Enquiry recommends that such as mean to succeed should


8


study not only one real master in his published works, but
several; because each author took care that by one book
alone the whole secret could not be learned; and that this
was not only to stimulate research and cultivate the intuition,
but also lest any unworthy person should obtain so great an
acquisition as transmutation, which could be misused as well
as turned to good account.

Our author then becomes discursive and suggestive and
elucidates (or reveils) the meaning and intention of several
symbols and paraphrases, such as the terms * Doves of Diana”’
and the Caduceus of Hermes, and some of the Kabalistic
allegories such as the story of Naaman, Elisha and Gehazi.

Becoming still more useful to the learner, our author reverts
tothe requirements and aims of students, telling them plainly
that the Great Secret is almost unattainable by study alone,
and that a Master is needed, and that a Master will be forth-
coming to him or her who has the inherent faculty of culture
upon the Alchymic basis ; and finally he ends his discourse
by encouraging the learner in his efforts by showing the
analogies between the seed of gold reproducing gold, and the
grain of wheat by which alone is a crop of Wheat to be ob-
tained. The Solar heat of nature in her working to produce
a crop for man’s needs and benefit, is also a type of the
Hidden Fire by which the alchymist is able to separate the
impure from the pure, and to produce the mystic gold from
amongst the dross of worldly mind and common matter.

In conclusion, he states, that although the adepts made
such free use of allegory, symbol and simile in order to dis-
guise their secret, yet if a man’s intuition do but take a firm
grasp of one of them, the mystery of a whole series unfolds
itself, and the discovery of matters, means and process is
achieved, alike on the material plane, and in that higher
world where we find Rest in God alone.


N. O. M.; R.R. et A.C.


AN INTRODUCTION TO ALCHEMY.


By S. S. D. D.


RITERS on Alchemy are in the habit of making
so many prefatory remarks on their own account,
that their books stand in very little need of preface;
unless indeed, the Editor undertakes to reveal the
secrets which the Author is so careful to conceal. I
must at once say I am not prepared to do this, but to
one thing, I can with advantage call your attention,
which is that the study of Alchemy, above all other
branches of Occult science, demonstrates the value of
Analogy in our search after the real meaning of the
mysteries of man and his relation to the Universe. The
process of transmutation, which displays a series of
colours, recalls the Religion of the Egyptians, sym-
bolising as it did, the blackness of night, the rainbow
colours of dawn, the whiteness of noon, and the red
glow of evening. The first stage of this symbolism
alludes to the blackness of ignorance, the chaotic dark-
ness of men who reject the keys to the secret of the
Universe, which are to be found in the rainbow colours;
to the vibrations of sound, to scents, tastes, feelings,
and subtle psychicalimpressions. When a man’s mind
begins to grasp the order and relation of such sense
impressions as these, he bids fair to pass from the dark-
ness of ignorance to the white light of wisdom, and
perhaps eventually to attain tothe imperial purple which
clothes the elect.
To do this he must, within himself, possess the divine
gift of wonder ; for it is through this faculty that he raises


IO


himself above the cares of life. The man whose curiosity
carries him from the contemplation of the manifestation
to the contemplation of its causes, is the man whose
instincts are preparing him toundertakethe Great Work.

Content is fatal; the man who is content with any-
thing, who does not feel in his most successful moments,
during the most sacred earthly joys, a keen sense of
want and disappointment, can never hope to find the
Stone of the Wise—true wisdom and perfect happiness.

The happy are sufficiently rare, however, for me to
hope that few of my readers will be deterred from the
study of Alchemy by what I have said. We have all
been taught to look with horror upon Medusa’s head,
with the serpents twisting round its face, the terror
of which turned all to stone who gazed upon it. But
we must, if we would learn the secret wisdom of the
ages, learn to long for a glance from those wonderful
eyes, which will bestow upon us the gift of indifference
to personal joys and sorrows. For the wise man must
be as a precious stone; a centre of light to all that
approach him ; giving joy to others, because he contains
the image of the highest joy in himself; desiring nothing
from the world, drawing his inspiration from the supernal
light—that ‘‘ Wisdom Goddess” who wears the serpent
crowned head upon her shield.

Well has Robert Fludd said, “4 Be ye changed from
dead stones into living philosophical stones. Be equal
with God. Ye hear all these things but ye believe not.
Oh miserable mortals, who do so anxiously run after
your own ruin.”

Then the philosopher points out the futility of the
ordinary man of petty aims and weak will, never gain-
ing the goal of the higher, or for the matter of that, the
lower Alchemy.

« Oh thou miserable one, wilt thou be more happy ?

Oh thou proud one, wilt thou be elevated above the
circles of this world ?

Oh thou ambitious one, wilt thou command in
Heaven above this earth, and thy dark body ?


II


Oh ye unworthy, will ye perform all miracles ?

Know ye rejected ones, of what nature it is, before
ye seek it.”

So it comes to the old, old teaching, GNoTHI SEAUTON,
Know thyself; until by deep thought and medita-
tion, words have become more than words to thee;
until thou hast analyzed them, separated them, trans-
posed them into every conceivabie form, and finally
extracted from them, their quintessence and spiritual
meaning, thou wilt understand no word that the ancient
philosophers speak to thee.

Take now the loose meaning attached to such a word
as imagination; in these materialistic days it has
become synonymous with extravagant fancy, if not with
lying: but hear what Paracelsus says of imagination as


an occult manifestation of power: ‘ Man has a visible
and invisible workshop. The visible one is his body,
the invisible one hisimagination. . . . The imagina-


tion is a sun in the soul of man acting in its own sphere,
as the sun in our system acts on the earth. Wherever
the latter shines, germs planted in the soil grow, and
vegetation springs up; the imagination acts in a
similar manner in the soul, and calls forms of life into
existence. . . The Spirit is the master, imagination
the tool; and the body the plastic material. Imagina-
tion is the power by which the will forms sidereal en-
tities out of thoughts, it can produce and cure disease.”’

Perhaps this passage will give new light to those who
have lately treated this faculty with such contempt, in
dealing with the subject of hypnotism.

In truth, Imagination is the power of forming images
in our minds. It is the development and intensification
of an idea, which first exists, is then conceived passively
in the thought sphere; then the mind (perceiving the
idea can be used) brings desire into play, which is de-
veloped into an act of Will, and this converts the passive
conception of the idea into an active Imagination. So
begins the magical process, the rest it is not for me to
divulge.


12


I will only add on this subject the saying of Eliphaz
Levi, that, ‘‘ The first matter of the Magnum Opus is
both within and about us, and the intelligent will, which
assimilates light, directs the operations of substantial
form, and only employschemistry as a very secondary
instrument.”

The Suggestive Enquiry, published a century later than
the work under our consideration, points out the method
which should be employed in the exhaustive analysis of
the nature of man, so necessary to the completion of the
great work. He says :—

‘‘ Metempsychosis takes the human identity (or con-
sciousness) from animal existence to the ethereal ele-
ments of its original formation.”

That is, in thinking inwardly with calm and philoso-
phic mind we can pass from the manifested life we see
and feel, to the motive power of that life; and finally to
the cause of the motive power; from the mundane to
the supra-mundane ; from the intellectual to the intelli-
gible ; from the earth to the firmament; from water to
the fiery rays of heat emerging from the central light
which is the source of all things.

The same book continues, “ These elements are
the universal fundamentals of nature: only in the
Human form can they attain that supremacy of reason
which returns to its first cause.”

Reason is the light which guides us. Let me hasten
to add how necessary it is to distinguish between the
false reason, and the Heavenly Reason which we per-
ceive when intuition is purified ; and we rise above the
lower passions. The false reason is merely an image
set up by our unbalanced forces to justify us in evil
doing. Well has it been said, that when we find our-
selves seeking to justify ourselves by giving reasons for
our actions, we have been doing something we are
secretly ashamed of.

True Reason is the clear light descending upon us
from that which is above all pretence. It was a com-
munion with this faculty, that Saint Thomas a Kempis


13


desired when he told those who would detain him, he
must leave them, as one was waiting for him inhis cell.
False reason seeks to justify itself with much argument;
Pure Reason knows Truth, and can afford to be silent.

So continues the Suggestive Enquiry “In the
Human form only is it possible to comprehend the
Divine form; when it has done so by a triplicate growth
of Light in the understanding consciously allied, it
emanates a fourth form, truthful, godlike, being the ex-
press image of its person magically portrayed.”

I think I have said enough to show that the
Alchemist undertakes no light task. I can hold out no
hope of success to those who still retain an absorbing
interest in the world. Jn the world Adepts may be, but
not of it. Alchemy is a jealous mistress, she demands
from pupils no less than life; for her sake you must
perform the twelve labours of Hercules; for her you
must descend into Hell, for her sake you must ascend
into Heaven. You must have strength and patience,
nothing must terrify you, the joys of Nirvana must
not tempt you; having chosen your work, you must
to this end purify yourself from perishable desires,
and bring down the light of the shining ones, that it
may radiate upon you here on earth. This is the work
of the Alchemist; his true ideal is also the highest
ideal of Eastern Theosophy; to choose a life that shall
bring him in touch with the sorrows of his race rather
than accept the Nirvana open to him; and like other
Saviours of the world, to remain manifested as a
living link between the supernal and terrestrial natures.


S. S. D. D.—R. R. et A.C.


A SHORT ENQUIRY CONCERNING THE
HERMETIC. ART.


HIS Art, of bringing all Imperfect Metals to Perfec-

tion, hath been asserted for Truth, by Men of

almost every Degree, in most Ages of the World; many
of whose Books are extant.

They have declared, that they have made and
possessed this great Treasure, which not only brings all
Imperfect Metals to the Perfection of Sol and Luna’
{according to the Quality of the Medicine), but healeth
all manner of Diseases 1n Human Bodies, even renew-
ing Youth and prolonging Life.

Those Authors, from Age to Age, have justified one
another’s Testimony‘; alledging, as a farther Proof of
the Art, that all that have understood it, have written
most agreeingly of it, though contemporary, and un-
known to one another in Person, or by Writing.

How far these Men’s Writings have obtain’d, a very
little Enquiry may serve; for most men look upon these
(Alchymic) Books only as Cunningly-devised Fables,
and the Art itself as altogether impossible.’

To which the (Alchymic) Authors answer, That it is
not Lawful, nor Commendable to reprobate an Art, by
Judges who are ignorant of its Laws as well as the
Facts; and that the Ignorant Negative of such, is by
no means sufficient to set aside the Affirmative Know-
ledge of so many Men of Unquestionable Credit, Piety,
and Virtue,—supported by Arguments and Circuin-
stances of Uncontestible Force.

From which, together with the Excellency of the


15


Things themselves (viz., Long Life and Riches, vide the
“« Way to Bliss ”*), many have been induced to believe
and seek after this Art.

Tis the Melancholy View that I have taken of these
Men, that have occasioned the putting my own
Thoughts into the Order you find them, hoping no
Master will be offended, nor any Inquirer displeased.

When I compare, I say, the variety of these Men’s
Fortunes, Capacities and other Qualifications, with
those the Philosophers have laid down for men like to
succeed, it fills me with Pity, and makes me almost
tremble to rehearse the words of Norton,} viz. :—


«That of a Million hardly three,
Were e’er ordain’d for Alchymy.”


O sad Tidings to such Men! whose impair’d Healths,
injured Fortunes and barren Practice, renders them
more unfit every day than other, and instead of attain-
ing that which should crown their Labours with success,
are at length in danger of denying, if not cursing the Art
itself.

I would pretty thoroughly enquire from whence this
ill success, which attends the generality of Enquirers,
proceeds, and accordingly shall mention a few chief
Impediments,* in my Opinion.

First; But few of those that seek this Art, are
qualified according to the Philosophers for attaining it ;
for they assert, That to find it requires the whole Man;}
as well as that, when found, it possesses him: Also that
it is never found of any by Chance or by accidental
Tryals, and casual Experiments; and that unless the


* An anonymous Alchymic Essay, written in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, published by Elias Ashmole, 1658; this famous anti-
quary also issued Alchymic books under the title of “James Hasolle,
Qui est Mercurtophilus Anglicus.”

+ Author of Crede Mihi or The Ordinall of Alchymy, written about


1477-
+ See The Hermetic Arcanum of Espagnet, paragraph 4.


16


Mind* be kindled with a Beam of Divine Light, it will
not be able to penetrate this most hidden Science.

These with many more Cautions, are plentifully set
down in their Books, on purpose to inform and reform a
great many Persons too rashly concern’d in these
things; and yet how few take their Advice! under-
taking this Study with much less than half the Man;
constantly trying Experiments that have no Authority
but their own idle Fancy; and consequently have
Minds, in respect to this Science, as dark as Midnight.

Then add to these an almost Insuperable Difficulty,
(hard enough to be overcome by those that can spare
even the whole Man and are very cautious in their
Practice, as having a pretty good Understanding of
Natural Things in general, and of the Mineral Kingdom
in particular) and that is the Subtilty of Stile so peculiar
to Hermetick Philosophers.

Of this they often warn us, telling us also, that if it
were not for this, they could not disclose, and at the
same time hide their Secret. And though this be a
Paradox, that at the same time they give light, they
darken, yet they affirm it for Truth, with many other
things hard enough to be understood; which yet must
be understood before any one can profit by them,
witness Geber,} Sendivo,* &c.

Also Norton has given a hint of this mysterious way
of writing,’ and which indeed sufficiently shews that it
will obscure, whether we can discern its Instruction or
not, viz. :—-


“ If you consider how the Parts of Works
Be out of Order set by the Old Clerks.”


* The Adept, like the poet, is born not made.
| Geber, the Arab alchemist, died about 740 A.D., his real name
was Abu Musa Jafar al Sofi.
+ Michael Sendivogius lived about 1636, was the editor of the
Dialogue between Mercury, Nature and the Alchemist, and other works de-
signed if not completed by his Master, Alexander Seton.


17


This breaking to pieces of the several Works, makes
it almost impossible for a Tyro to make their Writings
Tally ; any one part not being rightly apply‘d, the whole
is incompleat.

Another tells us he has done this, by mixing Unusual
Candor with Philosophical Subtilties, in such a manner
as would render their Secret safe, tho’ openly told; Nor
is he wanting to admonish his Reader to be cautious in
these things, viz. :—


« Yet beware,
That thou mistake not; for I do aver,
A mingled Doctrine these Lines do declare;
For both ways in this Book of mine do claim a share:
Learn to distinguish every Sentence well,
And know to what Work it doth appertain.
This is great Skill, which few, as I can tell,
By all their Reading, yet could e’er attain;
And yet of Theory, this is the main.”


Wherefore ’tis obvious, there is no possibility of
success, ‘till it be learned to which Work their Sayings
relate; which indeed is not easie, and is the top of
Theory ; nor can any speed upon any other, tho’ never
so finely spun, or fondly embraced.

And though Philosophers do sometimes affirm their
Matters to be many, and their Works also; yet they
very often, with equal Authority and Truth, assert the
contrary ; Artephius * saith :—

«Tho we say in many places, take this, and take
“that; yet we mean, that it behoveth thee to take OnE
“ THING? For these things are so set down by the
‘“envious Philosophers to deceive the Unwary. Do’st
“« thou, Fool, believe, that we do openly teach the Secret
“of Secrets? And do’st thou take our Words according
“to the literal Sound? Know assuredly, he that takes
“the Words of other Philosophers according to the


* Lived about 1160, A.D. ; he wrote two works, On the Philosopher's
Stone and The Art of Prolonging Life: they were published in Paris
in 1657.


18


“ordinary Signification and Sound of them, he doth
“already wander in the midst of the Labyrinth, having
“lost Ariadne’s Thread,” and hath as good as appointed
“ his money to Perdition.”

By means of these seeming Contradictions, bolder
steps have been taken by some of them in discovering
this Art, than otherwise they would have done, and even
some have dared to imitate, nay, so much as to repeat.

From hence I infer, That as much has been commu-
nicated to the World as can be expected, or that God
will yet suffer to be discover’d by Writing. For this
Art is declared, by those that have knowingly written
of it, to be under his immediate Protection. Likewise
that those that come to the Knowledge of it, shall ad-
miringly wonder at its Preservation; and that which
will augment their wonder, will be, that so slender a
Vail secures it; and which God makes a sufficient
Guard against all the Attacks made by the unworthy.
Vide Sendivo, etc.

Likewise, that as soon as any one discerns’ the Inten-
tion of the Philosophers, from the seeming Sense of the
Letter, the dark Night of Ignorance will fly away, and
a glorious Morning of Light and Knowledge will break
forth: When Diana® will unveil herself, Bathing in
that most pleasant Fountain so much sought.

And that he will find himself in the High Road of
Nature which is that Secret Way of Philosophers,”
viz., most easie, delightful and speedy; in which are no
Storms, no Heterogeneities, nor any Fire, but the gentle
one of Generation.

Norton asserts, That there are but few clerks that
comprehend this Work, it being truly Philosophical.
And he saith, That in this Work you must not begin
with Quicksilver? and Metals, as if in another Work
you might ; which other Work, he adds, if it be done in


* Ariadne, daughter of Minos, King of Crete, furnished to Theseus
a thread by which to pass through the Labyrinth, and so reach the
Minotaur, for the purpose of slaying it.


19


three Years, would be a blessed Chance, and which
belongs to great Men; advising poor Men not to meddle
with it, for that Errors in it may be committed above a
Hundred ways; that it is a Work of Pain and Labour,
as well as full of Perils.

That these things are so, we are sorrowfully confirm’d,
by a Modern Author, as is so well known by many.
Intvo-A pert.”

Now as their Works differ, so their Waters* or
Mercuries differ also ; for if you would calcine a perfect
Metal, it must be done with Mercury; but if you would
dissolve an imperfect Body (which is in the way to Perfec-
tion) it must be done with Mercurial Water, which is the
Dew or Rain Water of Philosophers.

The perfect Body” is calcin’d witha gross Humidity,
and by a tedious Labour; but the imperfect Body is
dissolved and purified in a much more subtile Mercury,
by an easie Fire and little Toil.

And tho’ this subtile Menstruum be the Mercury of
the imperfect Body, yet it will (for a certain purpose)
dissolve Sol, as warm water dissolves Ice, and will make
its Body a mere Spirit.

This is the Fountain} of Chymical or Hermetick
Philosophy, concerning which it is said—

“ He that exactly knows the Magistery of this Water,
“ no Words, or Secrets of Philosophers, Sayings, Writ-
“ings or Enigmas, will be concealed from him. And
“further, that it is stupendous in its Virtues, and the
“things out of which it is immediately drawn, are most
“ secret above all others; also the means of extracting
«it most wonderful. In the Knowledge of which, all
“their Fires, Weights and Regimens lie hid.”

The same Author affirms, that none can imagine its


* By Ejirenzus Philalethes, whose name is unknown; The
Open Entrance to the Shut Palace of the King, first published at
Amsterdam, 1668 ; a masterly work of very great interest.


+ See Bernard of Treves: the Fountain was a symbol specially
used by him.


20


Splendour, except they see it, and then you will think
you look upon a certain Celestial Body. Believe me,
saith he, I have seen this Snowy Splendor.

Sendivo not only confirms the same in Words to this
effect, viz., Believe me, for I beheld it, that that Water
was as white as Snow, but adds, from whence it was
drawn, viz., From the Beams of the Sun and Moon.”

Nor is this said by him only, but by many more; I
shall instance a few.

Artephius asserts, That ’tis drawn from the Beams of
the Sun and Moon, yea, that this dissolving Water is
the Soul of the Sun and Moon, their moist Fire, and the
only Agent in the World for this Art.

The author of Arcanum Hermetica,* saith, “ Let thy
“ Mercury draw its Original from both these Lights.”

Flamel, speaking of the Sun and Moon, saith, ‘‘ They
“are of a Mercurial Source, and Sulphurous Original.”

Another, viz., the Author of The Way to Bliss, saith :

« That as the Sun is the Father of all things, and the
“ Moon his Wife the Mother, (for he sends not down
“these begetting Beams immediately, but through the
“ Belly of the Moon)and this double Spirit is carrv’d in
“a Wind and Spirit into the Earth,} to be made up
“and nourished.”

Which double Spirit or Flame, Geber calls the imme-
diate Matter ot Metals.

You very well know, that Hermes himself, as well
as most of his Followers, agree in these things; and ’tis
our Business to observe wherein they do agree.
Arnold? says, ‘In our Impertect Metal, there are the
« Sun, and Moon in Virtue and near Power.” The
Philosophick Work begins with this Heavenly Mer-
cury, and an imperfect Body purified.


* Jean d’Espagnet : see Volume I. of the Collectanea.
+ Compare the Emerald Tablet of Hermes Tristmegitos.


* Arnold of Villanova, born 1245, a physician, a professor at the
University of Barcelona.


2I


“There is a pure Matter” (saith another) ‘“ which is
“the Matter of Gold, containing in itself the Heat that
“giveth Increase.” (Fire of Generation.) This is
lock’d under thick Folds in common Gold; nor is it to
be extracted, but by a strong and tedious Decoction,
which is a Work liable to many Errors, and hath
always occasioned those that wrought in it to complain
of the length and trouble of it. But in the other Work.
the Body is soon dissolved, by a sweet and kindly Bath,
or moist Fire.”

As the former Path requires much Pain and Patience
to effect the Work, so this requires great Skill and
Application to find it out, it being deeply concealed.
The Masters of these Secrets do also affirm, that these
Works (which are all one in the Beginning) may be con-
join’d, and made their grand Medicine. And I have
been informed, that the way of making them one is but
slenderly hid. For should they but change some Words
(which they affect to use in order to conceal it) of one®
Syllable, and sometimes of two, for others of three, and
sometimes of four or more, it would not be difficult, for
a Tyro, to conceive it. And the Reason given for this
slender Covering is, that if any one should discern it,
and yet be ignorant of the means of both it would be of
little avail; and that if he knew the means, he could
not long remain ignorant of the Practice. So that the
Knowledge of the Means seems absolutely necessary in
the first place.

These Norton calls his “ Means Mineral,” which, he
saith, are no other than Magnetia* and Litharge} her
Brother. And he asserts that to clarifie them is the
foulest Work of all.

And though he makes these means two, yet he tells
you how they differ, viz., as a Mother from her Child,
or as a Male from a Female: Which we see brings his


* Magnesia, is the oxide of the metal Magnesium, in modern
chemistry; this is not what is referred to.


+ Litharge, is an impure oxide of lead; this is not here intended.


22


to the general Doctrine of Philosophers, viz., Agent and
Patient, which seems to be their one intention, what-
ever Skill they use to perplex their Sayings.

Litharge, he says, is a subtil Earth, brown, ruddy,
and not bright.

“ Old Fathers called it a thing of vile price,
For it is nought Worth by way of Merchandise ;
No man that findeth it would bear it away,
No more than they would an Ounce of Clay.’

He likewise saith, it is not to be sold in all Christian
Ground, but thou must be fain to make it.

Magnetia is fair and bright, known by few, and is
found in High Places as well as in Low and called by
Plato, Tztanos ; these are the Materials to make Elixir ;
and addeth :—


‘‘ This Secret never was before this Day
So truly shewed, take it for your Prey.”


Now to apply these things to the Doctrine of Philoso-
phers; Litharge must be their Brass or Philosophical
Sol; Magnetia must be understood to be their Subtil
Humidity, or Philosophical Mercury ; which is Living
and not only so, but Inlivening; Clean and not only
so, but cleansing; Volatile, and not only so, but
Volatilizing, even the most fixed Body of Sol; and is the
Radical Moisture of Metals.

How this is attained, is worthy our Inquiry, and
whether they agree in the manner of preparing it, as
well as from whence it is to be drawn, viz., From the
Sun and Moon; for it seems it must have the Influences
of both.

But to collect these Virtues requires a Mean, as
Ripley* hath it, speaking of the Green Lion,™,

‘“ He is the mean, the Sun and Moon between, ete.”

Also the Author of “ Hunting the Green Lion ’’} saith,


* Sir George Ripley, Canon of Bridlington, lived about r49o.


+ Name of author unknown. This is a short essay which has
been attributed to Lully or his friend Cremer of Westminster.


23


“ The Lion is the Priest, the Sun and Moon the Wed;
Yet they were both born in the Priest’s Bed.”


By which Green Lion another saith, “ All Philoso-
‘‘phers understand Green Gold, multiplicable, sper-
‘“matick, and not yet perfected by Nature; Or
« Assa Foetida, because in the very first of this
“Operation or Distillation, a white Fume with a
‘stinking smell exhales.” It was by this strong scent
that Flammel knew this Subject.

That this agrees with the rest of the Philosophers, I
need not enlarge to shew, it being well known to them
who read their Books.

This Distillation, Hermes, as well as many others,
declares must be made bya gentle Fire, by little and
little, with great Discretion, lest the thick be mixed
with the thin, the subtile with the gross, or the foul
with that which is clean. Lully* is very famous for his
witty Description of this Operatiou, under the Figure of
Distilling of Wine, which he sometimes also calls Juice
of Lunaria, from which he extracts the Sweat with a
gentle Fire, in the form of a white Water.

This is also called by other Names, as Adrop,
Saturn,” Brass, Leprous Gold, and Imperfect Body;
and which they all agree lies in great Obscurity, satur-
nine and foul, in the making of which there is a great
Stink ; that ‘tis not fixed, a Medium between a Metal,
anda Mineral partaking of the Nature of both, and
very crude, containing an Argent vive, which is the
Basis and Ground-work of their precious Medicine.
And thus, saith the Philosopher, you will come to under-
stand how Saturn contains the greatest Secret in this
Art. Thisis ‘“ The Golden Branch, so much conceal’d,
«which all the Groves with Shadows overcast and
s gloomy Vallies hide, and which will follow none, but
«him that knows Dame Venus’s Birds and him to whom
«of Doves a lucky Pair,” &c.—Arcanum Hermetica.+


* Raymond Lully, a Spanish priest, died in 1314, on the coast of
Africa, being stoned to death by Mohammedans.


+ Jean d'Espagnet, see paragraph 15 of the Hermetic Arcanum.


24


The Masters of this Science agree with one Voice in
this, viz., That this Matter must be exactly purified,
and dissolved into an Argent vive, of such Virtues as
are nowhere else possible to be found.

This is performed by a wonderful Cohobation ; the
Number of which Cohobations are much varied: But
in this they all agree, that there must be so many, till a
total Dissolution and perfect Purity be known.

The time of doing this, some will have it, is hinted in
Arcanum Hermetice where ’tis said, “ Cause the Dragon to
“drink Three times the Magical Number Seven, until
“ being drunk, he put off his hideous Garment.’’*

Thus, I say, Three times Seven is Twenty-One,
which some will interpret Days, and to which some
other Philosophers seem to agree; but whether these
are One and Twenty Days or Cohobations, he will
rightly determine, who shall be blessed with the Know-
ledge of their * Light bringing Venus, and Horned
Diana.”—Arcanum Hermetice.

Likewise the Philosophers agree in the Virtues of this
Water, viz., that as it partakes of the Natures of both
Sexes, so it acts the part of both, viz., Dissolving and
Congealing. For they assert, That it will Congeal
itself into a Lunar or a Solar Nature, (according to the
design of the Workman) without any addition whatso-
ever.

There are also some Cautions given concerning Pro-
portion in Compounding the Imperfect Body, as wellas
with relation to its Dissolution; for that in case of
undue Weight or Measure, the Virtue will be much
diminished, if not altogether spoiled. But if a due
Proportion be observed, and a proper Fire given, the
true Sign will follow.

The true Union between the imperfect Leprous Body,
and its Water, they have deeply conceal’d, as the
Philosophers own, and Searchers find ; because as they
say, the rest is so easie in the Work of Generation,


* See paragraph 52 of the Hermetic Arcanum.


25


that ‘tis hardly to be missed, by one that hath attain’d
their wonderful Mercury, so united and purified.

Concerning which, they have declared, they have
given such hints as are sufficient to an enlightened
Mind; and that none shall ever dare to do it more
openly, without a Curse from God.

But all have not done it with the same Candor, nor
by the same Similes and Enigmas; The New Light*
under that of Chalibs; The Way to Bliss, by that of the
Witty Fire of Hermes, and so of the rest, Norton
says i—


“ Bacon | did it darkly, in his Three Letters all;
But Raimond } better in his Art general.”

And since the Readers can expect no better Account
from me, concerning the Means and Medium of this
Wonderful Union, than the Philosophers have learnt in
their Books, I must refer them for more ample Satis-
faction and Information therein. For, as Norton
saith :—


“ Trust not therefore to Reading of one Book,
But in many Authors’ Works ye may look.
Liber librum aperit, saith Arnold the great Clerk ;
Anaxagoras f said the same for his Work,
Who that slothful is in many Books to see,
Such one in Practice, prompt shall never be.”


The Reason he gives for thus Reading and Comparing
many Books, is, that


“ Every each of them taught but one point, or twain,
Whereby his Fellows were made certain,
How that he was to them a Brother,
For every of them understood each other.”


I have mentioned Norton the more, because it appears


* Novum Lumen Chymicum, by Seton and Sendivogius.
+ Bacon, lived about 1270.
+ Raymond Lully.
“| A Greek philosopher of the Ionic School, born 500 B.C


26


to me, that he and his Contemporary Ripley, have
written very Learnedly of this Art, and wonderful
Agreeingly, through both writ near the same time, and
very probably one in England and the other abroad;
and for ought I can meet with, were not known to one
another at that time. Nor can one suppose that Norton
had seen Ripley’s Compound of Alchimy, since it was
written but six years before his Ordinal. Books of that
kind especially, did not in those days come abroad
quickly : Nor doth Norton, when he reckons up some
that had written excellently of Proportion, take any
notice of Ripley, who beyond all question hath in that
excell’d.

This Harmony in Authors, that have written of the
Art at the same time, and unknown one to another, a
Modern Adept of the same Nation with the two before
mentioned, has brought as a convincing Argument
(among others) to prove its Being; and which, with me,
has great Weight, and seems to serve his purpose.

This Author has profess’d to have outdone all that
went before him, discovering such things, he says, as
the World was barren enough before, yet his Disciples
have much complain‘d of their ill success; notwithstand-
ing they have seemed to understand him more fully
than the other Philosophers, insomuch that many have
concluded his way of proceeding in this Art to be dif-
ferent from many of theirs. Nay, at length some have
so ill rewarded his Candor, as to charge him with being
ignorant of those things he so solemnly professeth to be
true, and of which his Accusers are unworthy.

It seems he foresaw his Readers would thus miscon-
strue his Writings, and therefore he here and there
scatters some necessary Cautions for those that would
receive them.

‘‘ Nor let any expect,” saith he, ‘‘ Comfortable Doc-
“ trine in our Books, who know not the true Keys, by
«which our Matter is brought forth from Darkness into
“the Light: For verily tho’ we write for the Inlightening
‘a true Son of Art, yet also for the fatal Blinding of all


27


“such Owls and Bats, who cannot behold the Light of
“the Sun, nor can endure the Splendor of our Moon. To
“such we propound rare Tricks, suiting to their sordid
“Fancy: To the Covetous, an easie way without Ex-
“pence: To the Hasty, Rash and Unstable, multiplicity
“of Distillations.

“In the World our Writings shall prove like a curious
“ edged Knife ;* to some they shall carve out Dainties, to
“others they shall serve only to cut their Fingers. ’Tis
“the Sign of an Owl,” to be blinder, by how much the
“ Sun shines brighter.—If thou wilt be heedless, thou
‘‘may’st sooner stumble at our Books, than at any thou
“didst ever read in thy Life. . . Take this from one
“that knows best the Sense of what he has written;
“where we speak most plainly, there be most circum-
“spect, (for we do not go about to betray the Secrets of
‘‘Nature) especially in those places which seem to give
“« Receipts so plain as you would desire, suspect either
“a Metaphor, or else be sure that something is sup-
“ pressed which thou wilt hardly find (without Inspira-
“ tion) of thyself; yet to a Son of Art, we have written
“that which never heretofore was by any reveal’d.”

I might add many more Cautions of other Authors,
as well as of this, concerning the Difficulties which
attend the Reading of their Books; and had not men-
tion’d what I have, but that it appear’d the more neces-
sary to mention some of this Author’s because almost
every Body has taken up an Opinion, that he is more
easily understood than the rest; but how profitably,
themselves may judge.

We should not be just to ourselves, if we should be
ignorant that when any of them have made a Discovery
of this or the other Part of the Work, they have not
Balanced it with such Obscurities which are not easily
discerned; especially by the Unwary.

And therefore if the Students in this Art, and par-
ticularly of this Author’s Works, dtd believe the


* Compare, ‘‘I come not to send peace, but a sword.”


28


Philosophers had Cunning equal to their Skill and
would but take the Advice given by them, they would
not have room to Censure the Philosophers but them-
selves.

For what could anyone have said, more to have
deter’d Inquirers from rash Conclusions, either in
Theory or Practice, than this Author has done? viz.,
‘‘ Venture not,” saith he, ‘to practice barely upon my
« Words: For know that what I have only hinted, is far
“more than what I have discever’d; and what I have
‘« declared to thy first Apprehension, most openly, hath
‘yet its lurking Serpent under the green leaves; I
“mean some hidden thing, which thou oughtest to
“« understand; which thou, being Cocksure at first Blush,
«wilt neglect.”

The fond Notion which Men have entertained, of
understanding this Author’s Writing more perfectly or
easier than the rest of the Masters is to me an Argu-
ment of his great skill in that peculiar way of Writing,
which the Hermetick Philosophers profess and value
themselves upon, viz., to be able openly to show the
Art tothe Sons of it, and yet secure it from the un-
worthy.

That this is true, all their Writings shew; for some
of them have learn’d the Art from Books as they own;
which could not be, if it were not taught in them.
These indeed are very few in comparison to those that
Learn it not, though they read the same Books,
but not the same things in them. As this
Author hath again excellently described such men,
viz., “Some I know will serve my Book, as they
“have served others; out of it they will read their own
« Phantastick Processes, which I never dreamt of, nor
“yet are they in Nature. Though we write in English,
« yet our Matter will be as hard as Greek to some, who
« will think they understand us well, when they miscon-
‘«strue our Meaning most perversely. Nor is it imagin-
“able, that they who are Fools in Nature, should be
« wise in our Books, which are Testimonies to Nature.”


29


As this Author hath profess’d an extraordinary
esteem for Ripley, and (in many things) has imitated
his Candour, yet he has so manifestly compounded it
with the Craft of Norton, that it is hard to distinguish
them, and which well deserves the Cautions he hath
given, and his Readers’ Care therein.

He has in his Books led us some part of the way
under such Philosophical Vails, as have been pretty
easily seen through by most that read them with Appli-
cation; who no sooner discover some of his Metaphors,
but overcome with joy, and exalted with an Opinion of
their own Abilities, presently cry out, we have found !
we have found! And what have they found? Why
their way into a Labyrinth.*

For at the end of this short Walk, he hath set up
one Metaphor, harder to be understood than all the
rest, viz., The Doves of Diana. This stands at the
Entrance into a great Labyrinth, in which are abun-
dance of Inquirers rambling at this day; many of them
undiscerned by one another.

I have taken severa) Turns in it myself, wherein one
shall meet with very few; for ’tis so large, and almost
every one taking a different Path, that they seldom
meet.

But finding it a very melancholy Place, I resolved to
get out of it, and rather content myself to walk in the
little Garden before the Entrance, wherein many things
tho’ not all, were orderly to be seen. Choosing rather
to stay there, and contemplate on the Metaphor set up,
than venture again into the Wilderness; in which I
heard the Noise and Voices of several strange and
devouring Creatures, (some of which I had with diffi-
culty escaped) every one, almost, having a differing
Sound.

As this Author seems to have design’d a full stop at
the Pillar he hath caused to be erected, and to prevent


* There is aportion of the Royal Arch Ceremony of Freemasonry
which seems related to this symbolism.—S.A.


30


Travellers running unawares into that dangerous and
dark Wilderness, caused this Inscription to be put
upon it, vtz., “ Learn what Diana’s Doves are, which
«doth vanquish the Lion by asswaging him; I say, the
“ green Lion, which is indeed the Babylonian Dragon,
« Killing all things with his poison. Then at length learn
“to know the Caducean Rod of Mercury, with which he
“works wonders;” etc. Therefore I will not step one
Step farther without a Guide, for I dread going again
into the Labyrinth.

This guide must be a very wise Man, indued with
singular Gifts; for he must not only tell me the Inter-
pretation, butthe Dream itself; and by this I may judge
of his Ability.

For, as Kelly saith, “Let no Man lead, unless he
“knows the Way.”

Therefore let none mistake my Inquiring the Way,
for a Teaching of it. If any do, and suffer by it, they
must blame themselves, not me; for I am Inquiring,
I say, not Teaching the Way. Masters cannot be de-
ceived, but Searchers may.

We do not find this Enigma of Doves so frequently
used as many others, and which also are very difficult
to be understood. These figures, I conceive, spring from
a Root of Knowledge and Learning, far above the
Vulgar’s Reach: For, is not this Art, saith one, Caba-
listical, and full of Mysteries? So one of these Masters,
well versed in Rabinical Learning, has told us what the
name of a Dove doth signifie, as well as what it doth
not, viz. :—“ The Name of a Dove” is never apply’d to
‘ Metals themselves (which ought to be well observed by
“« Inquirers, many having erred after this manner) but
«the ministering and preparing Natures. And that he
“that understands the Nature of the Burnt Offering (for
‘¢ Purification) will not take Turtles themselves, but two
«young Pigeons (which are the Off-spring) or Sons of
“the Dove.”

And this Secret Pair he rather appropriates to Nogah
(Venus) which is the Fifth amongst the Planets ; so the


31


Author of Arcanum Hermitice calls them the Birds of
Venus. Tho’ this Cabalist applies the name ot Dove
to Diana also.”

In the History of Natuval Things, saith he :—“ Luna
“is called the Medicine for the White”; because she
“hath received a Whitening Splendor from the Sun,
«which, by a like shining, illustrates and converts into
«her own Nature all the Earth—that is the imperfect
“« Metals: And that place of Isaiah xxx. 26, may be
‘‘mystically understood of this, because the Work being
“ finished, she hath got a Solar Splendor.“ But in that
“state, the place in Canticles vi., 9,”, belongs to her.
“ But by the same Name the Matter of the Work is
« called; and so indeed, like to the Horned Moon, she is
«an the first State of Consistence; and like the full
« Moon in the last state of Fluidity and Purity.”

In another Place he hath this Passage, speaking of
two Birds, which place, I make no doubt, but the
Author of Introit. Apert. had well considered, if not
drawn his early Knowledge from, and of Argent vive,
which he calls a Leopard, Water not wetting, and
Jordan of the Wise Man, etc. ‘And he shall have
‘four Wings of a Bird upon his Back; the four Wings
“are of two Birds, which exasperate% this Beast with
“ their feathers, to the intent he may enter and fight the
« Lion and the Bear. And Power was given him over
“them, that he may overcome them, and extract their
“glutinous Blood. Of all these is made one Fourth
« Beast, which is frightful and terrible and very strong.
««,, Eating and breaking to pieces himself and others; ..
« Treading the residue under his Feet.””

This Guide I think may be depended upon, having
given Demonstration of his Ability, by telling not only
the Interpretation, but the Original figure itself.

More I have not met with in my Inquiry, therefore no
more can be expected from me concerning this great
Stumbling-block, at which so many fall into Error.


* A delightful example of mystification. N.O M.


32


From. these things ‘tis very evident, to me, that this
Art cannot be found by never so many casual Tryals,
or Experiments, without a real Knowledge, as Sendivo
has written, viz.: “ Know for certain also, that this
“« Art is not placed in Fortune, or casual Invention, but
‘Cin real Science; and that there is but this one Matter
“in the World, by which, and of which, the Philo-
‘‘sopher’s Stone is made, viz., the Mercury of the
“ Philsophers.’”

Out of what this is made, he teaches in his Trea-
tise of Sulphur, as well as elsewhere. This is that
Mercury, saith another, which the returning Sun diffus-
eth everywhere in the Month of March, or House of
Aries; from whence also the Sulphur is to be sought.
Which Sulphur, in this Work, saith Sendivo, is indeed
instead of the Male; but the Mercury instead of the
Female; of the Composition and Acting of these two,
are generated the Mercuries of Philosophers. For as
they havea double Sulphur, so they have a double
Mercury, viz., For the White and for the Red: Which
is but seldom, and then very cautiously hinted; and
these Mercuries differ, both in Colour and Quality,
as may be easily gathered from their Books, by careful
Readers.

The Author of Intro. Apert. indeed hath taught, that
there are two Mercuries to the White, used in two
different Works; Asserting that the Acuation of the
Mercury for Sol Vulgar, must differ from that of Philo-
sophical Sol. And further, If (saith he) ‘ you shall in
« your Decoction of Sol Vulgar, use the same Mercury
“which is used in our Sol (tho’ both flow from the
“same Root in general) and apply that Regimen of Heat
«which the Wise Men in their Books have apply’a to
“our Stone, thou art, without all doubt, in an Erron-
“eous Way: And that is the great Labyrinth in which
“almost all young Practitioners are ensnared. For there
«is scarce one Philosopher, who in his Writings does not
“touch both ways.”

In this, we may say of him, he hath not fallen short


33


of any of them: For he has so interwoven one Work
with another, one Regimen with another (by way of
Balance, as I said before, for Discoveries) that little
less than the Knowledge of all in Theory, will prevent
our falling into constant Error, in some of these parti-
culars; even after the Field in general is known: and
which happened to himself as he confesses, and which
I shall mention, as it falls in my Inquiry.

These (with many more) are the Difficulties which
the Inquirers after this Art have to incounter with;
and which, one would think, should rather deter, than
encourage, many Men from pursuing it as they do:
especially considering the adverse Fortune that attends
most Men, who prosecute this Study to their dying day;
finishing their Lives in Ignorance and Despair. This
Melancholy Prospect, I say, should leave such a
deep Impression upon us, as to make us more cautiously
meddle with this rare and difficult Philosophy; which
without a Master or the special Favour of God, is never
attain’d. As the Author of the New Light informs us,
viz., that unless God reveal it by a good Wit, or Friend,
‘tis hardly known.

By the last most commonly, by the first most rarely.
For as he adds, “ Tho Lully was a man ofa subtile
“Wit, yet if he had not received the Art from Arnoldus,
“certainly he had been like those which find it with
“difficulty ; and Arnoldus also received it from a Friend:
“« Every Art and Science is easie to a Master, but not to
“a Scholar.”

Therefore this Art is easie to none, tho’ of never so
quick a Wit and Parts, but to those that know it only.

The Cabalist, I have before mentioned, hath lively
prefigured, wise and good Men by Elisha; and the
foolish Pretenders of this Art, by Gehazi, who was
indeed Servant to Elisha; but to what purpose, the
History of them, inthe Second Book of Kings, sheweth.

Elisha an Example of Natural Wisdom, and a
Despiser of Riches: He knew how to correct and make
wholesome Poisonous Waters, and to multiply Treasure


34


beyond the common Course of Nature: He could cure
the worst Infirmities, nay, even raise the Dead: He
knew how and when to blind and open the Eyes of In-
quirers, also to punish Mockers, and even make Iron to
swim; yea, his very Remains were efficacious after he
was dead.

Gehazi labour’d in vain, and remain’d a Servant for
ever ; never qualified to be a Master, notwithstanding
he had the Advantage of conversing with so great a one:
He was Covetous, a Lyar and Deceiver; a Prattler,
boasting of other Men’s Deeds; Conceited and Hasty,
thinking he sufficiently understood his Master, when he
bids him take his Staff, and lay it upon the Dead Child,
presently enterprising, though with an Heterogeneous
Matter, and so able to effect nothing not discerning the
Law of Nature; but Elisha apply’da living Homogenous
Agent, and then the Dead was raised. And instead of
a double Portion of his Master’s Knowledge (which
Elisha desired and obtained by his Master Elijah)
Gehazi got a Leprosie, as the Reward of his Doings.

A great deal might be observed from this History of
Elisha and Gehazi, who are Notable Examples of Wise
and Good Men, and their Reverse, viz., Foolish and
Profane; the last may talk, as Gehazi did, of procuring
the supernatural Son of the Wise Man, but without
being able to effect it; no more can his Successors,
which are not a few even at this Day, who not only
succeed him in Qualifications but Success.

The Philosophersagree with one Voice, that one worthy
of this Science must be strictly Virtuous, leading a holy
Life, or God will not prosper him: He must have a
competent Understanding, or he will not be able to
conceive: He must be Diligent and Laborious, or he
will not be able to work out what he conceives; and he
must be private or he will not quietly enjoy that which
he works out. To these must be added Patience and
Leisure, together with a Competent Fortune; which is
the more necessary in this Study, because it requires, as
is already said the whole Man to find out the means,


35


and then a careful Application is absolutely necessary
to accomplish the Work.

The Philosophers, you very well know, take the
liberty of seemingly contradicting themselves, and one
another: Sometimes asserting the Work to be very
easie ; other times that ‘tis very difficult or hard. One
while, that ’tis short; then again that ‘tis very tedious.
Again, that ‘tis done with little Expense, and an easie
Labour; then complaining of the charge and Toil.
Sometimes affirming their Matter to be but one only
thing, other times that ’tis compounded of several.
One while the Work is to be done with a gentle Fire,
another time that ’tis not perform’d without a strong.
Then again, that ’tis equal, and of the same degree; and
yet that ’tis daily increased.

These are the Difficulties with many more that might
be named which Inquirers lie under. And yet the
Philosophers affirm, they all vanish when the Key of
this Art is once attain’d, which is the Chalibs of Philo-
sophers. No longer will a Tyro relish a false Writer,
or be to seek to reconcile the true. For that as soon as
the first Gate is opened, all the rest will fly open of
themselves.

I fear many will be displeased and say, these difficul-
ties are too well known to us already, we want rather to
be told how we shall overcome ’em, than have them
repeated tous. To these I answer, in the Philosopher’s
Words, Expound the Philosopher’s Writings according
to Nature and not to Fancy. Now they say, their
stone is nothing else but Gold digested to the highest
degree of purity and subtile Fixity. Many consent to
this but will plead, that common Gold is not meant.
In answer to which I shall add, let them read Sendivo
on the Elements of Fire, The Way to Bliss, and others,
and consider the Extensibility, Permanency and Purity
of the Gold there spoken of. And also let them con-
sider whether ‘tis not such Gold they would produce by
this Art, as is called common Gold. Then if it be com-
mon Gold you would produce, whether common Gold


36


be not the Natural Body for such a Production; as
common Man is of producing its own Kind; common
Wheat, of Wheat ; and so throughout whole Nature.

Common Wheat in a Barn, is as dead as common
Gold in a chest; tho’ both these have a Life, t.e., of
Existence, and Power to increase their Kind; which
Life must die, before the Power is brought to Action ;
and when this is done, they are properly called living
Gold, and living Wheat, and not before.

Now, how comes Wheat to be so, we are pretty
well appriz’d, viz., tis sown in its proper Vessel, the
Earth ; it is moistened with its proper Humidity and is
digested by its proper Heat, and so it grows and
increases.

And if we are to take Nature for our Example, Gold
must be proceeded with after the same manner ; tho’
the Vessel, the Humidity and Heat differ, for a Metal
and for a Vegetable, yet both are liable to the Deficien-
cies and Excess of these things.

For if Wheat hath not a Matrix duly qualified, or
hath too much or too little Humidity, and so of Heat, it
wili succeed accordingly. And so must the other, if
Nature be the same in the one as in the other, as no
doubt she is; or to what purpose are we so often re-
commended to the Consideration of Nature. Sendivo
bids us follow Nature; waving the many Subtilties of
the Philosophers, written to amuse the Unskilful
Inquirers.

To conclude on this Head, if every Multiplication is
from Seed; that the Perfection of every thing is its
attaining a Seminal Virtue; and that nothing has this,
which is imperfect of its Kind: Then it will follow, that
if there be a Seminal Virtue in Metals, and that all of
them are of the same Nature, the Seminal Virtue (that
is the power of Multiplying) can be no where but in the
most Perfect, which is Gold; vide Ars Metallica.

As these things are consonant to Nature, Sound
Reason and the Doctrine of Philosophers, even the


37


most envious, I, for my part,shall make them my rule in
my Inquiry : Others may do as they please.

And as the Author of the Way to Bliss has not only
told us (among many others) where the Seed of Gold
lies, viz., in Gold; but how it lies, viz., This Seed of
Gold is his whole Body loosened and softened in his
own Water; there is all your stuff and Preparation.
So he hath also, with the same Candor, shewed us the
Water in which it dies, and with which ‘tis raised.
Where speaking of the Affinity that is known between
Goldand Quicksilver (in common Uses) which hecalls the
grand Mother of the Stone, and Spring of all her Good-
ness: Wherefore, says he, ‘ When this fine and clean
« Body of Quicksilver is made, by Nature and Art, yet
‘« much finer and clearer, and again, as much more pierc-
«ing and spiritual, and able to perform it; how much
«more readily will she run to her like, and devour it, the
« clean, fine and spiritual, that is the Quicksilverypart of
“the Metal. And if she do devour it, then it cannot be
‘lost, but must needs go into a better Nature, even the
« Nature we desire.”

This, he says, is done by the well-ordering the witty
Fire of Hermes, “that here is all the Hardness, here
«all the World is blinded all the rest is easie. Search
“then this rare kind of Heat; for here is all the Cun-
“ning ; this is the Key of all; this makes the Seeds and
‘“bringeth forth: Search wisely, and where it is, in the
« midst of Heaven and Earth for it is in the midst of
“both these places, and yet but one indeed ; it is Earthy,
“yet Watery, Airy, and very Fiery, etc. Headds, Let
“the dew of this starry blood beat about the Womb,
‘sand your seed shall joy and prosper. Muse and conject
“well upon my Words, you that are fit and skilled in
‘‘Nature, for this is a very Natural Heat; and yet all
“the World is blinded. Nay indeed, if a Man would
«read little, and think much upon the ways of Nature,
«he might easilie hit this Art; and before that,
never.”

Thus the witty Author, according to the Custom of


38


all Philosophers, brought us to a full stop, and left us
to consider Nature, in order to remove the Remora*
that so often stops Inquirers in their career.

‘Twas from the Excellency and Virtue of this Fire,
no doubt, that the Cabalist I have before mentioned in-
tituled his wonderful Book, Asch Mezareph,+ or Purifying
Faire.

This Fire has lain hid from many, a long time after
they knew the Field in general, where the Seed was to
be Sown. The fiery Furnace of Philosophers, says one
of them, lay hid from me long; but after I knew this,
and how it was fitted to its proper Vessel, after a few
days I beheld the admirable Brightness of our Water,
which being seen, I could not but be amazed.

So Pontanus seems surprised atthe wonderful Effects
of this Fire, for want of the Knowledge of which he had
erred so long and often; and tells us whoinform’d him of
it, vtz., Artephius,” whose Book is extant, and read by
most Inquirers, tho’ not with the same success ; some
interpreting his Sayings one way, and some another ;
but few according to the true Sense and Meaning.
Whence they have erred and will always err, unless
they learn it better ; the way to learn it, is but just told
above, by the Author of The Way to Bliss, which agrees
with the Way Pontanus prescribes, vrz., They that
should read Geber, and all other Philosophers, never so
long, could not comprehend it, because that Fire is
found by deep and profound Meditation only ; and then
it may be gather’d from Books, and not before.

We must not only have the Knowledge of this Fire ;
but, as we are often told, the true Measure of it to its
Furnace; both which seem to be remote from the Eyes
of the Vulgar: When this is known, the Difficulties
that attend the Radical Dissolution of the close and
fixed Body of Gold vanish. And before this can be
done, this stout fixed Body must be Calcined, and re-


* Query, hindrance.
+ To be reprinted in a future volume of this series.


39


duced into as fine a Calx as possible, which is often
hinted by Philosophers, but with a design to conceal it.
Geber witnesses, that everything Calcined is of easier
Solution, because the Parts of the Calcined Body, more
subtilated by Fire, are more easily mixed with Water,
and turned into Water. Without this previous Calcina-
tion, no Solution is found.

Therefore no wonder so many fail in their Attempts,
to dissolve Gold in a Generative Way, by working on
its Compact and Gross Body; For as the gross Bodies
of Sol and Luna are not fit for Dissolution, but only
their altered and unctuous Calxes; so Mercury, in its
gross Body, is not able to do this, but in its altered
more subtile and spiritual Nature; and drawn from its
Vitriolick Caverns, acuated with its pure salt and pierc-
ing Sulphur, which then overcomes all things, even
itself. For it not only dissolves Sol and Luna into its
own Nature. but coagulates itself into theirs, true and
fixed, by a proper Heat only.

Some may say, All these are so fully taught already,
that a bare repeating of them is of no use.

That they are taught already, by the Masters of this
Science themselves, is my warrant for repeating of ’em ;
and if you have already Learn’d these things, you have
no Reason to be uneasie; if you have not, tis your ad-
vantage to be put in mind of them, even by an Inquirer.

Sad experience sheweth, that but very few of the past
or present Searchers, learn those things which they
often brag the Philosophers have taught: But at length
to cover their own Ignorance, they fall into Arrogance,
and blame the Philosophers for hiding of them; as is
observed by (the never too much to be admired) Candid
Ripley; who, in return, only modestly reproves them,
Thus :—

« All Philosophers record and say the same;
But simple Searchers putteth them in blame,
Saying, they hide it; But they are Blameworthy,
Who are no Clerks and meddle with Philosophy.”


Here this good Man, in few words, justifies the true


40


Philosophers, and lays the blame where it ought, vtz.,
on the Unskilful Medlers with Philosophy.

What tho’ he has conceal’d the Key of the Art
under his green Lion, as others have done under the
Doves, Chalibs, secret Fire, etc., some under one
figure, some under another, which best answered their
purpose, viz., Concealing the Art from the Unworthy.
What they have done towards Discovering of it to
the Deserving, merits the greatest Acknowledgements,
not Censure from Inquirers to whom they declare they
are not indebted.

Nor do I affirm, that all these different Terms are
synonymous, that behoves the Inquirer to satisfy
himself in, from their Writing, whether they are or can
be deemed so.

I have ventur’d to call the Green Lion of Ripley
the Key of the Work, because his Expositor has as
good as called it so. “ Learn then,” says he, ‘to
“know this Green Lion, and its Preparation, which
‘is all in all the Art; it’s the only Knot; untye it,
“and you are as good as Master: For whatever then
‘‘remains, is but to know the outward Regimen of the
“ Fire, for to help on Nature’s Internal Work.”

And the same Author has expressly called the
Chalibs so, viz., I will tell thee (if thou wilt conceive)
it is called Chalibs, by the Author of the New Light ;*
and it is the true Principle of the Work, the true Key
(as it may be handled) of unlocking the most hidden
Secrets of Philosophers.

Again our Chalibs is the true Key of our work, with-
out which the Fire of the Lamp could not be, by any
Art, kindled. Which he further describes thus, viz.,
It is the Minera of Gold, a Spirit very pure, beyond
others, etc.

Sendivogius calls this Matter, as well by the Name
of Magnet, as Chalibs, tz., To speak more plainly,
says he, ’tis our Magnet, which, in our foregoing


* Sendivogius.


4I


Treatises, I called Chalibs, or Steel. The Air generates
this Magnet, and the Magnet generates or makes out
Air to appear and come forth: I have here intirely
shewed thee the Truth.

This Author has comprized in few Words what the
Author of Intro. Apert. has divided into Three Chapters,
viz., Chalibs, Magnet, and Air; all which he has Con-
centrated in a Fourth, viz., Chaos. The Earth, says
he, is a heavy Body, the Matrix of Minerals, because
it keeps them occultly in itself; altho’ it brings to light
Trees and animals. The Heaven is that wherein the
great Lights, together with the Stars, are rowled about ;
and it sends down its Virtues through the Air into
inferior things.

When he has gone thus far, he, in Imitation of
Sendivogius’s Skill and Candor, adds, But in the
Beginning, all being confounded together, made a
Chaos.

Behold! I have faithfully opened to you the Truth ;
for our Chaos, etc.

O the Harmony and Skill, as well as Candor of these
two great Masters! Beg of God that he would make
you Discerners and Partakers of these things. Nor let
me forget most candid Ripley, who exactly corresponds
with these, viz.:

“ For as of one Mass was made all thing

Right; so must in our Practice be.

In Philosophers Books therefore, who lifts to see,
Our Stone is called the less World One and Three:
Magnesia also ot Sulphur, and Mercury,
Proportionate by Nature most perfectly.”

Thus we see Ripley’s One Mass, Philalethes’s Chaos,
and Sendivogius’s Matter of the Antient Philosophers,
are the same; containing Three, viz., Magnet, Chalibs,
Air, or Magnesia, Sulphur and Mercury: which also
are called by abundanceof other Names in Philosophers’
Books, e.g., Artephius speaking of the Compound,
Magnesia, says, That ’tis compounded,” like a Man of
Body, Soul and Spirit; which he thus expounds, vtz.,


42


‘For the Body is the fixed Earth of the Sun, which is
“ more than most fine, ponderously lifted up by the force
“of our Divine Water: The Soul is the Tincture of the
“Sun and Moon, proceeding from the Conjunction or
“« Communication of these two: But the Spirit is the
« Mineral Virtue of the Two Bodies and the Water, which
“carries the Soul, etc. Again, the Spirit therefore
“ pierceth, the Body fixeth, the Soul coupleth, coloureth
«and whiteneth. Of these three united together, is our
“Stone made; that is, of the Sun, and Moon,and Mer-
‘“cury. Flammel says he could easily give very clear
“Comparisons and Expositions of this Body, Soul and
‘Spirit: But then he must of necessity speak things
“which God reserves to reveal unto them that fear and
«love him, and consequently ought not to be written ” ;
yet he is not wanting to concur with Artephius, in
calling them the Sun, Moon and Mercury, and agree-
ing exactly with him in his Exposition.

It would be as it were endless, and indeed needless, to
recite all the different Expressions used by Philosophers,
who confirm and constantly maintain this Doctrine of
Trinity in Unity, under various Modes of Speech, and
hard-to-be-understood Similes.

But to keep a little to that of the Green Lion, which
is worth our Enquiry: Ripley speaking of its Blood,
asserts this Secret to be hid by all Philosophers, vz. :


“The said Menstrual is (I say to thee in counsel)
The Blood of our Green Lion, and not of Vitriol:
Dame Venus can the Truth of this thee tell
At the beginning, to Counsel if thou her call.

This Secret is hid by Philosophers great and small.
Which blood drawn out of the Green Lion,
For lack of Heat, had not perfect Digestion.”’


So the Author of Arcanum Herymetice saith, the most
precious Substance is Venus, the Hermaphrodite of the
Antients, glorious (or powerful) in both Sexes.

The Author of Æsch Mezareph, speaking of Venus.
under the Names Nogah and Hod, which is a necessary
Instrument to promote the Metalick Splendor, says, It


43


has more a part of a Male, than Female; and speaking
of the Green Lion, he saith, Which, I pray thee, do not
think is called so from any other Cause but its Colour:
For unless thy Matter shall be green, not only in that
immediate State before ’tis reduced into Water, but also
after the Water of Gold is made of it. Why ’tis called
a Lion, is hinted by another, viz., Having Power to
overcome, and reduce Bodies to their first Matter, and
to make fixed things volatile and spiritual; whence ’tis
fitly called a Lion.

Some there are who derive the Name Green from the
Rawness or Unripeness of the Subject, and not from
the Colour, viz. :—

‘Whose Colour doubtless is not so,
And that your Wisdom do well know ;
But our Lion wanting Maturity,


Is called Green, from Unripeness, trust me.”
The Hunting of the Green Lion.
Another says :—
“For it is because of its transcendent Force
It hath, and for the Rawness of its Source,
Of which the like is no where to be seen,
That it of them is named their Lion green.
Our subject is no ways malleable ;
It is metalline, and its Colour sable.”
Sophic Feast.

These are some more of the seeming Contradictions,
which Philosophers warn us not to be deceived with,
but to learn to Reconcile. These Difficulties are to be
overcome by Meditation only.

Now, let us try whether, or how far, ’tis possible to
Reconcile these Contradictions concerning the Green
Lion. The Cabalist (much admired by me) says, the
Matter is actually green, both before ’tis dissolved and
afterwards also: This doth not deny, but confirm, that
tis spoke of, and considered, in divers States; and then
it may not be absurd to suppose, that it may be, and is,
described by one in one state and degree of Perfection,
and by others in another: By one in its Impurity; by


44


another in its Passage from thence to its Purity (for
Ripley says ‘tis unclean); and by a third when ’tis
Purified. For as Matters, when more or less pure or
mature, are of a different Texture, so they also differ
in Colour. And ’tis in this Sense, I make no doubt the
Philosophers are to be understood, not only with relation
to this Subject, but ’Tis not therefore every Matter
which is foul or green (as Vitriol is, which Ripley says,
Fools take to be their Green Lion) that intitles it to
this wonderful Name; no, but it must have all the other
Virtues and Powers in it, that are assigned by Philoso-
phers: Which thing hes very obscure, and seemingly
base, but it is, in its Purity and exalted Virtue, their
Subject of Wonders. To produce which, this fond
Minera, they tell us, must be dissolved and exactly
purified, in a pure Homogeneal Water, which is its own
Blood, as White as Milk; which Name some have
rather imposed. This Leprous Body, Sendivo and
others have called Saturn, and Saturn’s Child; and
what some have called Blood and Milk, he calls Urine.
Thus the Masters of this Science take the liberty to
express themselves by different Similes, in order to dis-
guise their Secret, which a mental man will discover
and improve by, as soon as he shali discern any one of
their Intentions; the rest follow in course, tho’ varied
ever so many ways, as they themselves testifie.
What some have called Blood, Wine, &c., the Author
of the Learned Sophics Feast calls fiery Water, &c., viz. :5
‘“Their Lion green they suffer’d him to prey
On Cadmus Sociates; and when the Fray
Was over, they with Dian’s charms him ty’d
Aud made him under Waters to abide,
And washed him clean; and after gave him Wings
To fly, much like a Dragon, whose sharp springs
Of fiery Water, the only way was found
To cause Apollo his Harp-strings to sound.
This is the true Nymph’s Bath, which we did try,
And proved to be the Wise Men’s Mercury.”


Here all Doubts and Difficulties end, when this is


45


attain’d; so with it I shall finish this Inquiry: Having
shewed my Fellow Inquirers, in what manner I have
been enchain’d in it; concluding in the Words of the
aforesaid Author, viz. :


“ Happy are they, who shall not miss to find
The new uprising Sun :*
More happy they, who, with renewed Mind,
In God find Rest alone.”


NOTES BY S.S.D.D.


1. Hermetic; alluding to Hermes Trismegistos: a
mythical Magus who has given his name to many
treatises on western Occultism and Alchemy. The
names of Hiram King of Tyre, Chiram abif and Hermes
have been counterchanged; and the Kabalistic Key
applied to the name throws some light on the actual
meaning of the Alchemical process,—taking the Hebrew
lettering Cu I R M, we get the falling dew containing
that principle of life reproduction—nitrogen, working
in darkness upon the perfectable body. Also an expert
may here discern an allusion to the wonderful power of
chlorine on gold. The merest tyro in chemistry knows
the famous Aqua Regia of the ancients was a cunningly
manufactured liquor bearing a close resemblance to the
fluid obtained by the mixture of Nitric acid and Hydro-
chloric acid.

2. Art—The Hermetic Science being the Ethical
side of Western Occultism; the Hermetic art may be
regarded as the practical application of the same on all
planes, from those of pure reason and exalted conscious-
ness through those of human life down to the most
material; from the regeneration and purification of the
soul, to the regeneration and purification of the baser
metals.

3. Lo the perfection of So: and Luna.—These words are
much in favour with masters of the mysteries who are
desirous of hiding their meaning. They are used in a
hundred different ways, signifying active and passive;
male and female; sudden rapid vibration, and solid
resisting substance; gold, and silver; red rust of iron;
blue vitriol, z.e., sulphate of copper, green sulpate of iron,
and sulphide of antimony. Throughout the Alchemic
processes they have been used to denote the force and the
substance; the transmutor and the transmuted. And
wise is he whose solar power has the penetrating force
to discern the truth in the lunar shades with which he
is surrounded.


47


4. Have justified one another's testimony.— Here we have
a ray of hope, for those who have read many alchemical
treatises will find that there are startling agreements in
the teachings of some of the best works, such as those
of Clavius, Rosenstein, Becker, Ponia and others who
give more practical directions than vague writers like
Geber, Bacon and Flamel.

5. The Art altogether impossible.—The position taken up
is natural enough. No man could with reasonable hope
of success, hope to transform a fully grown elm tree
into an oak, just as impossible would it seem to trans-
mute a lump of copper into a lump of gold. But the
Alchemists did not assert this to be possible, until both
metals were reduced to one original basic substance,
which they call Hylé and which we call Protyle in the
mineral, or Protoplasm in the animal world. It was under
these circumstances that they asserted transmutation
to be possible; and it is in this relation we find the
deep significance of the mystical death and resurrections
of Osiris, Buddha and Christ. “Unless ye be born
again ye cannot enter into the kingdom of perfection; ”
Unless the imperfect metal is destroyed, it cannot rise
again into perfection. See also Eugenius Philalethes
in his tract called Euphrates or the Waters of the East,
printed in 1655.

6. The chief wmpediments.—Three out of a million men,
says Norton, may be ordained for Alchemy. Now some
light may be thrown on the true nature of the Art by
this statement. It isno common gift that is needed, and
without delay of argument I may safely assert that the
proportions mentioned points at once to the fact that
only persons of genius can hope to attain the perfection
of this Art of Arts. It is the Art of living in the divine
light ; the Art of knowing, the Art of ‘being one” with
the highest universal consciousness. No talent will
give insight to the man who is unable to bring about
this regeneration of his soul; no labour will avail him
who has shut out the life of the universe from his little
life. The man of genius, the divine artificer of his soul


48


must make himself, and know himself to be, one with
the least of created things, and then and then only will
he know what it is to be one with the Creator.

7. This mysterious way of writing. —For the guidance of
those who propose to study ancient and medieval
writers on Alchemy, I may say that the work naturally
divides itself into three parts; and each of these into
three processes, decoction, distillation, cohobation. The
first part is the preparation of the Body or matter; the
second is preparation of the soul or medium; and the
third is preparation of the spirit or active principle.
Take the three principles of the Alchemists, being the
time honoured veils under which truth has been hid.
Call the body—sulphur, the soul—salt, and the spirit—
mercury. Purify each separately, then must these three
become one; they must rise ; they must fall; they must
circulate in the vessel. And this is the fourth work.
This is simple enough and is the mere ordinary process
of subliming with heat, cohobating the separated parts,
and subliming again until the body becomes spiritual,
the spirit become corporified, the impure becomes pure,
and nothing is wasted, but all is found in its right place,
and the perfection or right proportion is attained.

8. Take one thing.—]Just as on the human plane you
take the one man ; and reduce him in thought down to the
cell unit, so the alchemists reduced their one substance
to its simplest form, and found things all latent therein.

g. That is, as soon as anyone develops his power of
intuition, of reading between the lines, and of under-
standing the oriental passion of allegory that permeates
mystical and religious writers, the meaning of many
statements, utterly absurd if interpreted literally, will
appear plain to the enlightened mind.

10. Diana.—The moon goddess, answering to what
has of late been called the astral body or aura; the
sensitive radiations of which convey impressions to our
bodily sense organs. The Fountain alludes to the uni-
versal source of life and light with which it is the object
of the occult student to bring his astral life into touch.


49


11. The Secret Way of Philosophers.—The philosophers
know well enough that the first study for mankind is
Man; to know thyself is to know nature. To become
an adept of power is to possess the key of all the secrets
of nature because you possess the key to your own nature.

12. The above explains why in this work we do not
begin with quicksilver.

13. This is the first practical remark, on the subject
of metals, in the treatise. It may here be noted that com-
mon quicksilver dissolves into a liquid resembling water
in appearance if mixed with a proportion of one to ten
of nitric acid.

14. The perfect body.—Gold undergoes a considerable
change when mixed with mercury. The imperfect body
mercury can be reduced to subtil water with nitric acid.

15. Very well describes the ordinary corrosive sub-
limate of commerce.

16. It may here be noted that the sign of Mercury
combines the lunar and solar symbols.

17. Moist five describes nothing in nature more
accurately than the liquid acids of commerce; but let
the student be warned that many authors expressly
deny that this is the real meaning of the term.

18. See what is said previously of the words Sol and
Luna, note 3.

tg. There is an elaborate treatise called “The Privy
Seal of Secrets, which upon pain of damnation is not
unadvisedly to be broken up nor revealed to any but
with great care and many cautions.” Circa 1680, in
which it is asserted that “the first matter of the philoso-
phers is a lutinous or clayey substance.”

19a. The Green Lion.—I here reprint an ancient
receipt for the manufacture of this mystic animal, or of
his prototype :—

R. Sea salt; purify by dissolving it in dew; expose
it to the beams of the moon, uncovered in a wide basin ;
cover it with a glass cover and leave it in the rays of
the sun; this repeat during forty nights and days. Put
it into a large high glass body; imbibe gradually with


50


very strong and clear distilled vinegar, until it is
thoroughly diluted, close it, and set it to putrefy for two
or three days ina gentle heat. Distil this per alembic
in a sand bath, and the spirit of the vinegar will come
over; when the green oil comes, change the receiver
quickly. Pour back the distilled vinegar and leave it to
putrefy, you will then obtain more green oil by again
distilling.

20. “To make Sphera Saturni Paracelsi. Take
salt petre, 2 ounces; potass. carb. 1 ounce; Reg. Aut.
Mast 44 ounces; tartar in crystals, 1 ounce: common
salt half an ounce; pulverise separately and mix to-
gether. Put the whole into a large crucible and let
it melt gently ina wind furnace. Stir with a red hot
tobacco pipe and unite ingredients well, pour into an
iron cone and you will find your treasure at the bottom.”

21. “The Gods made blind (or mad) him whom
they doom to destruction.” Quem Deus vult perdere prius
dementat

22. Dove in Hebrew is I U N H, pronounced Yoneh,
and by Gematria=10+6+50+5=71=8; this multi-
plied by 2 (the 2 doves)=16 which again can be reduced
to 7,the number of Venus. Doves also being birds
signify thé sublimed metal, that is the part which flies
upwards under the influence of heat.

23. Luna in Hebrew IRCH, pronounced Yaraich.

24. Isaiah xxx. 26. ‘Moreover the light of the
moon shall be as the light of the sun, etc.”

25. ‘My dove my undefiled is but one.”

26. The four wings of two birds; taking this Leopard
to be Mercury in its aspects of Corrosive Sublimate,
which a century or two back was made by dissolving
quicksilver in Aqua fortis, z.¢., nitric acid, and uniting
it with sea salt, containing hydrochloric acid ; it is pos-
sible to understand the two birds as signifying nitrogen
and chlorine gas, which with heat would doubtless
“« exasperate the beast.”

27. The original of these scattered quotations will
be found in the Latin Kabbalah Denudata of Knorr von


51


Rosenroth, the Asch Mezaveph of which is to be repub-
lished in this series. This Alchemical portion of the
work, the Asch Mezareph ov Refining Five, is given by
Eliphaz Levi in the Clef des Mysteres in disjointed para-
graphs, and he asserts it to be the book of Abraham the
Jew, which revealed so much to Nicholas Flamel, and
he exemplifies his explanations of its immey meaning with
Flamel’s well-known plates.

28. The Mercury of the Philosophers, Now though the
Alchemists did use Mercury, as is proved by Norton’s
list of materials, yet one thing is asserted by them over
and over again, and that is, that the ‘“ Mercury of the
Philosophers ” is not Quicksilver. The passage alluded
to, in the Asch Mezaveph, but not quoted, as the
« Treatise on Sulphur,’ is as follows: ‘* For that
sulphur of gold and iron whose extraction is taught by
many and is easy; also of gold, iron, and copper, also
of gold, iron, copper, and antimony, which are gathered
together by vinegar after fulmination out of the
lixivium, being changed into a red oil with a moist
Hydrargyrum do tinge silver.”

29. The words alluded to by Pontanus are in the
third chapter of the Secret Book of Artephius. “ Anti-
monium est de partibus Saturni, et in omnibus modis
habet naturam ejus. Antimonium Saturni, convenit
Soli.” See Salmon’s edition.

30. Compare Note 7.

31. Our author finishes up with a poem which a
learned friend of mine would call “ As clear as mud.”
However, I will make an effort to throw light upon
some of the riddles it propounds. We have seen the
green lion may be taken to mean a certain corrosive fluid
concocted from sea salt and other ingredients, this must
be mixed with the Martial Cadmus and the medicine of
purification or Diana. In this mixture sea salt must be
used, because it contains the universal Lunar mercury
or first Ens of Mercury. Ferrous sulphate or cuprous
sulphate shouid be added to introduce the mercury of
copper or iron into the resulting sublimate, indicated by


52


the wings alluded to in the text. The whole alludes to
the making of Sal Alembroth, which contains the secret
fire and stirs up matter to action.

32. The New Uprising Sun of course alludes to the
material work of gold-making, and the author finishes
up by a commendation of the happier state of those who
find Rest in God alone. In this connection I may quote
fromthe Suggestive Enquiry, printed half a century ago :—
‘¢What imagination is strong or hardy enough to glance
into the full faith? To be the understanding of that
Light of which all nature is the efflux. To move one
with the First Mover and be his will.—Increase thy-
self into an immeasurable greatness, leaping beyond
ail bodies, and transcending time, become Eternity,
and thou shalt understand God. If thou canst be-
come higher than all height, lower than all depth,
thou shalt comprehend in thyself the qualities of all
creatures. Conceive likewise that thou can’st at once
be everywhere. Learn to know thyself, not yet
begotten, young, old, dead, the things after death
and all of these together, else thou canst not yet
understand God. But if thou hast shut up thy soul,
blinding it, fettering it, saying 1 understand nothing,
I can do nothing. I am afraid of the sea; I cannot
climb up into Heaven; I know not who Iam; I cannot
tell what I shall be; What hast thou to do with God ?
It is the greatest evil not to know that there is a God-
power latent in man.”

By the “ I AM ” is signified, in the Kabalah, the sub-
jective unity of all; the affrmation that there is one
Fountain from which all nature flows. The knowledge
of this Identity with nature in its first substance is the
source of miracles due to the magical accords of colours,
numbers, harmonies and planetary circulations, and all
manifestation of vibration. The visible springs from
the Invisible. ‘‘ Human power is limited only by the
poverty of its Imagination and the pettiness of its
Will.”

S. S. D. D.—R. R. et A. C.
