COLLECTANEA HERMETICA


EDITED BY
W. WYNN WESTCOTT, M.B.,
Supreme Magus of the Rosicrucian Society.


VOLUME VII.


EUPHRATES
OR THE
WATERS OF THE EAST
By EUGENIUS PHILALETHES.


1655.


WAITH А COMMENTARY BY


Sy or De


EDITOR’S PREFACE.


My friend S. S. D. D. has contributed a Commentary to
this very curious and highly mystical tract, which was
written by that eminent Rosicrucian Adept, Thomas Vaughan,
and published by him under the pseudonym of Eugenius
Philalethes. Тһе seriously minded mystical student will
find much to instruct and interest in the learned comments
with which this edition is enriched.

The Paragraphs of the original work have been numbered
for convenience of reference, and the new notes and com-
ments have been placed after each numbered portion.

It must be borne in mind that there is an essential differ-
ence between the meaning of the word “ element ” as used by
Vaughan, and the modern scientific meaning of the word.

For the ancient and medizval philosophers knew nothing
of our modern theory of chemical elements; their view of the
common origin of matter not recognizing such definite and
independent substances.

The word “ Element ” as used by the learned at the period
when “ Euphrates ” was penned, meant rather a “state ” of
matter, such as the hot, cold, moist and dry natures; or the
solid, liquid, gaseous or ethereal conditions; or the stationary,
slow, quick or instantaneous processes of change.

No alteration has been made in the text of Vaughan’s
work except in the mode of spelling of a few words, the
omission of italics and the correction of misprints.

It is intended to issue shortly the ‘“ Lumen de Lumine ” of
the same author, these two volumes will be found to be
mutually explanatory.


W. Wynn WESTCOTT.


EUPHRATES,


Or THE Waters oF THE East ;


BEING A SHORT DISCOURSE OF THAT SECRET FOUNTAIN,
WHOSE WATER FLOWS FROM FIRE; AND CARRIES


IN ІТ THE BEAMS OF THE SUN AND Moon.


By EUGENIUS PHILALETHES


SADITH, EX. Lis. Sacro. Dixir Deus, Cujus NOMEN


SANCTIFICETUR: “ FECIMUS EX AQUA OMNEM Кем.”


LONDON:


PRINTED FOR ROBERT BOULTER AT THE TURK's HEAD IN CORNHILL
OVER AGAINST THE ROYALL EXCHANGE, 1655.


TO THE READER.


I науе Reader, (and I suppose it 15 not unknown to
thee) within these few years, in several little Tracts
delivered my Judgement of Philosophie, I say of
Philosophie, for Alchymie in the common acceptation,
and as it is a torture of Metals, I did never believe,
much less did I study it. In this print, my books
being perused will give thee evidence; for there [I refer
thee to a subject that is universal, that is the founda-
tion of all Nature, that is the matter whereof all things
are made, and wherewith being made are nourished.
This I presume can be no metal, and therefore as I
ever disclaimed Alchimie in the vulgar sense, so I
thought fit to let the Alchimists know it, least in the
perusal of my Writings they should fix a construction
to some passages, which cannot suit with the Judge-
ment of their Author. Hence thou mayest see what
my conceptions were, when І began to write, and now
I must tell thee they are still the same, nor hath my
long experience weakened them at all, but invincibly
confirmed them. But to acquaint thee how ingenuous
I am, I freely confess, that in my practise I waved my
own principles, for having miscarried in my first
attempts, I laid aside the true subject, and was content
to follow their Noise, who will hear nothing but
Metals. What a drudge I have been in this school,
for three years together, I will not here tell thee, it
was well that I quitted it at last, and walk’d again
into that clear light, which I had foolishly forsaken. I
ever conceived that in metals there were great secrets,
provided they be first reduc’d by a proper dissolvent,


8


but to seek that Dissolvent, or the matter whereof it
is made, in Metals, is not only Error but Madness. I
have for the Truths sake, and to justify my innocent
and former Discourses, added to them this little piece ;
which perhaps is such, and hath in it so much, as the
World hath not yet seen published. It is not indeed
the tenth part of what I had first design’d, but some
sober Considerations made me forbear, as my sudden
and abrupt Close will inform thee. However, what I
now reserve, as to the Philosophical Mysteries may be
imparted hereafter in our Meteorologie; and for the
Theological, we shall draw them up for our own
private use in our Philosophia Gratiae. I have little
more to say, but if it may add anything to thy content,
І can assure thee here is nothing affirm’d, but what 15
the fruit of my own experience. I can truly say of
my own, for with much labour have I wrung it out of
the Earth, nor had I any to instruct me; for I was
never so fortunate as to meet with one man, who had
the ability to contribute to me in this kind. I would
not have thee build mountains on the Foundation I
have here laid, not especially those of Gold; But if
thou dost build Physick upon it, then have I hew’d
thee the Rock and the Basis of that famous art, which
is so much profest, and so little understood; here thou
shalt find the true subject of it demonstrated, and if
thou art not very dull, sufficiently discovered; Here
God himself and the Word of God leads thee to it;
Here the Light shews thee Light, and here hast thou
that Testimony of I[amblicus, and the Aegyptian
Records cleared namely, that God sometimes delivered
to the ancient Priests and Prophets a certain matter,
per beata spectacula, and communicated it for the use of
Man. I shall conclude with this Admonition ; if thou
would’st know Nature, take heed of Antimonie and the
common metalls; seek onely that very first mixture of
elements, which Nature makes in the great world;
seek it I say, whil’st it is fresh and new, and having


9


found it, conceal it. As for the use of it, seek not that
altogether in Books, but rather beg it at the Hands of
God, for it is properly his gift, and never man аата
to it, without a clear and sensible assistance from
above; Neglect not my Advice in this, though it may
seem ridiculous to those that are overwise and have the
mercies of God in derision. Many men live in this
World without God; they have no Visits from him,
and therefore laugh at those that seek him, but much
more at those that have found him. St. Paul gloried
in his Revelations, but he that will do so now shall be
number’d among Ranters and Anabaptists. But let
not these things divert thee, if thou servest God, thou
servest a good Master, and he will not keep back thy
Wages. Farewell in Christ Jesus.
Е.Р.


ІО


OF THE ADDRESS TO THE


READER.
By S. S. D. D.


Let no man take up this book in the hope of finding it to
contain a treatise on the transmutation of metals. It is
rather a very profitable study of the philosophy of nature
and a guide to the attainment of that perfection of mind and
body. which has been called by some, the achievement of
Adeptship.

Thomas Vaughan, who wrote under the name of Eugenius.
Philalethes, the lover of truth, published this work in 1655.
At a time when the struggles between Puritans and Catholics
had reached an acute stage. Ata time when it was dangerous
to write openly, and when man was still supposed to be the
end of Creation. Spinoza was writing his exposure of the
ignorance of Bible commentators and of the vulgar interpre-
tation of the Scriptures; Hume’s famous essay on miracles
was still unthought of; Nature was degraded as the enemy of
God much in the same way as Woman was looked upon as the
temptress of Man.

Luther’s demand that the ‘‘ sacred oracles”’ should be placed
in the hands of the unlearned, while it exposed the restric-
tions of the Priestly teaching was still doing as much harm as
good. For without much learning, the words of the Jewish
scriptures may be twisted into enough contradictory dogmas
to furnish the battle cries of opposing sects till the end of
time.

It is impossible to understand the Old Testament while we
are ignorant of the esoteric construction put upon it by the
Jews; and this key to its secret meaning is given in the
Oabalah. That Thomas Vaughan was а Qabalist there is no
doubt; but he dared not openly acknowledge the fact; so


ІІ


that we shall find him frequently speaking іп a manner that
obliges him to excuse himself to the learned and acknowledge
that he writes thus “for the sake of those with weak con-
sciences.”

Our author says that he treats of a “ subject which is uni-
versal;” that is to say, of a subject which has its analogies on
all planes, a subject “ which is the foundation of all nature.”

Now the Foundation was the special name used by English
Oabalists to translate the word Jesod, which is the Ninth
Sephira, or absolute emanation of the manifesting God: and
the waters of the fourth river of Eden, Phrath or Euphrates,
flow down through the foundation of life into the visible
universe.

The Egyptians, in whose secret archives we find the origin
of much of the Oabalah, considered the human principle,
or Chaibt, which they represented hieroglyphically by an
open fan, to imply the emanation known to moderns as the
odour, or the Aura, or the sympathetic or antipathetic in-
fluence of one being upon another.

In like manner we may think of the Sephira Jesod as not
only a symbol of generative force, but also of this subtle
emanation acting and reacting upon all creation ; some of the
results of which are tides, tempests, affinities, love, friend-
ship ; which is in fact the foundation alike of the relationship
of a being to its parts, and of one being to another.

This odour or aura is especially noticeable in vegetable life.
It is found that the essential oil existing in the outer cells of
the petals is the source of the perfume of a flower, the lower
surfaces containing ѓаппіп ‘апа colouring matter. Now the
first action of the Foundation of life is to emit an odorous
sphere or aura or emanation of influence. From the inter-
action of this with the Ruach or spirit, the material body is
formulated from the elements. The seed being the magnet
of attraction as we shall see expressed later on in the text of
this work.


12


Thomas Vaughan’s next sentence confirms us in the con-
clusion that the ideas he associates with the word Foundation
are strictly Qabalistic, “ That is the matter whereof all things
are made, and wherewith being made they are nourished.”

Now there is no doubt that in whatever form we may take
our food, whether as beef, rice, or green food, it is alike re-
solved by digestion and termentation into a milky emulsion
in which will be found the essential oils of the various
ingredients we have eaten, and that occurs before it can in
any way be said to nourish us.

Again Metals can be acted upon by ferments of an acid
nature and so changed into their higher form or tincture, but
without the aid of the external elementary substance they
are in themselves incapable of regeneration.

Having said thus much in words intended to puzzle the
untrained scholar, our author closes his introduction abruptly,
advising the student to apply himself to physic, or the regener-
ation of his own nature rather than to the making of gold.

With a final warning against metals and an exhortation to
scek only the first mixture of elements which nature makes,
he closes his introduction.

I may here remark that atter fermentation or putretaction,
an amount of a volatile oil far exceeding in quantity the
original essential oil of a natural substance can be extracted
from it by the usual processes of distillation, etc.

Fermentation in this sense was one of the most important
processes known to the ancients.

We may I think gather that the essential oil and compre-
hend with it the perfume or aura, was the physical basis of
life in the eyes of the ancients. Death, putrefaction or fer-
mentation sets free large quantities of this essence which
when treated by the wise, may effect the regeneration of a
particular body. Bringing about by art in a short time what
nature would have effected slowly.


13


EUPHRATES, ETC.


PARAGRAPH I.


Іт is written in those living Oracles, which we have
received, and believe, that there is an

Rev. ch xvi 30861 of the Waters: and this seems to be
Vv. 5. spoken in a general sense, as if the Angel
there mentioned had been President of all

that Element. Elsewhere we find an Angel limited to
a more particular Charge, as that which descended at
a certain season, and stirred the Waters in

John, ch. v. the Pool of Bethesda. Nor is it indeed any-


v.4- thing strange that Angels should visit and
move that Element, on which the Spirit of
God did move in the beginning. I cite not these


places, as if they were pertinent to my pur-

Gen. ch, ], pose, or made altogether for it, though I
Vv. 2. know they make nothing against it; but I
cite them as Generals, to show that God is
conversant with matter, though he be not tied to it,
and this is all my design. Notwithstanding

I know, that Prince Avicen, hath numbered

Lib. de. An. St. John the Evangelist among the Chymists:
dict. t. And certainly if some passages in the Reve-


lation were urged, and that no farther than


14


their own sense would carry them, it would be some-
what difficult to repel his opinion. Surely I am one
that thinks very honourably of Nature, and if I avoid
such Disputes as these, it is because I would not offend
weak Consciences. For there are a people, who though
they dare not think the Majesty of God was dimin-
ished, in that he made the World, yet they dare think,
the Majesty of His Word is much vilified, if it be
applied to what he hath made. An Opinion, truly,
that carries in it a most dangerous Blasphemy ;
namely that God’s Word and God’s Work should be
such different things, that the one must needs disgrace
the other. I must confess I am much to seek, what
Scripture shall be applied to, and whom it

Mark i. was written for if not for us, and for our
У-17 instruction ; for if they that are whole (as
our Saviour testifies) have no need of a
Phisician, then did God cause Scripture to be written,
neither for himself, nor for his Angels, but it was
written for those creatures, who having lost the first
estate, were since fallen into corruption. Now then
if scripture was written for us, it concerns us much to
know what use we shall make of it, and this we may
gather from the different conditions of Man before and
after his Fall. Before his fall, Man was a glorious Creature,
having received from God Immortality, and perfect
Knowledge ; but in and after his Fall, he exchanged
immortality for death, and knowledge for ignorance.
Now as to our redemption from this fall, we may not


15


(in respect of Death) expect it in this world, God
having decreed, that all men should once die; But for our
ignorance, we may and ought to put off in this life, for-
asmuch as without the Knowledge of God, no man
can be saved: for,it is both the Cause and the Earnest
of our future immortality. It remains then that our
ignorance must be put off in part, even in this life,
before we can put off our mortality; and certainly to
this end was Scripture written; namely that by it we
might attain to the knowledge of God, and return to
him from whom we were fallen. And here let no man
be angry with me, if I ask how Scripture teacheth us
to know God? Doth it only tell us there is a God,
and leave all the rest to our discretion: Doth it (that
I may speak my mind) teach us to know God by his
Works, or without his Works? If by his Works then
by Natural things, for they are his Works, and none
other, if without his Works, I desire to know what manner
of teaching that is,for I cannot yet find it. If they say
it is by Inspiration, I say too that God can teach us so,
but Scripture cannot; for certainly Scripture never in-
spired any man, though itcameitselfby inspiration. But
ifit be replied, that in Scripture we have the testimonies
of men inspired, I say this Answer is beside my Ques-
tion; for І speak not here of the bare Authority or
Testimony of Scripture, but I speak of that Doctrine,
by which it proves what it testifies, for with such Doc-
trine the Scripture abounds. Sure I am, that Moses
proves God by his Creation, and God proves himself to


16


Moses by Transmutation of his Rod into a Serpent,
and of the serpent into a Rod. And to the Egyptians
he gives more terrible Demonstrations of his Power
and Sovereignty in Nature, by turning their Rivers
into Blood, and the Dust of their Land into Lice, by a
Murrain of Beasts, by Blains and Boils, and the death
of their first-born. By the fever plague of Frogs,
Locusts, Hail, Fire, Thunder, and Darkness ; all which
were but great natural works, by which he proved his
Godhead, as himself hath said. And the
Exod. ch. vii, Aegyptians shall know that I am the Lord,
У 5. when І stretch forth my hand upon Aegypt.
When he reveals himself to Cyrus, he does it
not by a simple affirmation that he is God, but he proves
himself to be such by the World that he hath made.
І am the Lord (saith he) and there is none else; there
is no God besides me; I girded thee,
Isaiah xlv. though thou hast not known me, I formed
the Light, and create Darkness, I make
Peace, and create Evil. I the Lord do all these
things. І have made the earth, and created Man upon
it. I even my hands have stretched out the Heavens,
and all their Host have I commanded. Let any man
read those Majestic and Philosophical Expostulations
between God and Job; or in a word, let
Job. ch. him read over both Testaments and he shall
xxxviii, v. find, if he reads attentively, that Scripture
39: 4% 41 all the way, makes use of nature, and hath
indeed discovered such natural Mysteries as


17


are not to be found in апу of the Philosophers; and
this shall appear in the following Discourse. For my
own part, I fear not to say, that Nature is so much the
business of Scripture, that to me, the Spirit of God, in
those sacred Oracles, seems not only to mind the
Restitution of Man in particular, but even the Re-
demption of Nature in general. We must not there-
fore confine this Restitution to our own Species, unless
we can confine corruption to it withal, which doubt-
less we cannot do; for it is evident that Corruption
hath not onely Seiz’d upon Man, but on the World
also for man’s sake. If it be true then that man hath
a Saviour, it is also as true, that the whole Creation
hath the same; God having reconciled all things to
himself in Christ Jesus. And if it be true, that we
look for the Redemption of our Bodies, and a New
man; It is equally true, that we look for a new
Heaven, and a new Earth, wherein dwelleth righteous-
ness; for it is not man alone, that is to be Renewed at
the general Restauration, but even the world, as well
as man, as it is written: Behold! I make

Rev. ch., all things New. I speak not this to dis-
xxi. v. 5. parage man, or to match any other creature
with him: for I know he is principal in the
Kestauration, as he was in the Fall, the Corruption
that succeeded in the Elements, being but a Chain,
that this prisoner drags after him: but I speak this to
show, that God minds the Restitution of Nature in
general, and not man alone, who though he be the


18


noblest part, yet certainly is but a small part of Nature.
Is scripture then misapplied, much less vilified, when
it is applied to the object of Salvation, namely to
Nature, for that is it, which God would save, and
redeeme from the present Deprivations, to which it is
subject: verily, when I read Scripture, I can find
nothing in it, but what concerns Nature and Natural
things: for where it mentions Regeneration, Ilumina-
tion, and Grace, or any other spiritual gift, it doth it
not precisely, but in order to Nature, for what signifies
all this, but a new influence of Spirit, descending from
God to assist Nature, and to free us from those Corrup-
tions, wherewith of a long time we have been opprest ?
I suppose it will not be denied, but God is more Meta-
physical, than any Scripture can be and yet in the
work of salvation, it were great impiety to separate
God and Nature, for then God would have nothing to
save nor indeed to work upon. How much more
absurd is it in the Ministry of Salvation to separate
Scripture and Nature, for to whom I beseech you doth
Scripture speak? Nay, to whom is Salvation minis-
ter’d, if Nature be taken away? І doubt not but man
stands in nature, not above it, and let the School-men
resolve him into what parts they please, all those parts
will be found natural, since God alone is truly Meta-
physical. I would gladly learn of our Adversaries,
how they came first to know, that Nature is Corrupted ;
for if Scripture taught them this physical truth, why
may it not teach them more? but that Scripture taught


19


them, is altogether undeniable; Let us fancy а Phy-
sician of such Abilities, as to state the true tempera-
ment of his patient, and wherein his Disease hath
disordered it. Doth he not this to good purpose ?
Questionless, he doth: and to no less purpose is it in
my opinion, for the spirit of God, whose patient nature
is, to give us in Scripture a Character of Nature,
which certainly he hath done in all points, whether we
look to the past, present, or future Complexion of the
World. For my own part, І have this assurance of
Philosophy, that all the Mysteries of Nature consist in
the knowledge of that Corruption, which is mention’d
in Scripture, and which succeeded the Fall: namely
to know what it is, and where it resides principally:
as also to know what Substance that is, which resists
it most, and rewards it, as being most free from it, for
in these two consist the Advantages of life and death.
To be short, Experience, and Reason grounded there-
upon. Ihave taught me, that Philosophy and Divinity
are but one, and the same science: but man hath dealt
with knowledge, as he doth with Rivers, and Wells,
which being drawn into several pipes are made to run
several ways, and by this accident come at last to
have several names. We see that God in his work,
hath united spirit and matter, visibles and invisibles,
and out of the union of spiritual, and natural substances
riseth a perfect compound, whose very nature, and
Being consistsinthat union. How then is it possible to
demonstrate the Nature of that Compound by a divided


20


Theory of Spirit by itself and matter by itself? for if the
nature of a Compound consists in the Composition of
Spirit and matter, then must not we seek that Nature
in their separation, but in their mixture and Tempera-
ture, and in their mutual mixt Actions and Passions.
Besides: who hath ever seen a spirit without matter,
or matter without spirit, that he should be able to give
us a true Theory of both principles in their simplicity ?
Certainly, no man living. It is just so in Divinity, for
if by evasion we confine Divinity to God in the abstract,
who (say I) hath even known him so? Or, who hath
received such a Theology from him, and hath not all
this while delivered it unto us? Verily, if we consider
God in the abstract, and as he is in himself, we can
say nothing of him positively, but we may some-
thing negatively, as Dionysius hath done, that is to
say, we may affirm what he is not, but we cannot
affirm what he is. Ви if by Divinity, we under-
stand the Doctrine of Salvation, as it is laid down in
scripture, then verily it is a mixed Doctrine, involving
both God and Nature. And here I doubt not to
afirme That the Mystery of Salvation can never be
fully understood without Philosophy, not in its just
latitude, as it is an Application of God to Nature, and
a Conversion of Nature to God, in which two Motions
and their Means, all spiritual and natural knowledge
is comprehended.


21


COMMENTS UPON THE FIRST PARAGRAPH.


“Апа I heard the Angel of the Waters say, Thou art
righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be,
because thou hast judged thus.” (Rev. xiv. 5).

Here we find at once our author falling in with the “ weak
consciences ” he expected to deal with, and for the moment
taking the literal meaning of the sacred oracles.

“For an angel went down at a certain season into the
pool and troubled the water.” (St. John v. 4.)

“Апа the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the
waters.” (Сеп. 1. 2.)

Then he circumstantially states his opinion that God’s
Work does not disgrace God’s Word, and his object is “ Ёо
show that God is conversant with matter though he be not
tied to it.” It is curious to note that Professor Tyndal in
his famous Belfast Address to the British Association for the
Advancement of Science made an almost identical appeal to
his audience saying :—

“ Spirit and matter have ever been presented to us in the
rudest contrast, the one as all noble, the other as all-vile.
Supposing that, instead of having the foregoing antithesis
of spirit and matter presented to our youthful minds,
we had been taught to regard them as equally worthy
and equally wonderful ; to consider them ав two
opposite faces of the self-same mystery. . . . . Look-
ing at matter not as brute matter but as the living
garment of God; do you not think the law of relativity
might have had an outcome different from its present one.
Without this total Revolution of the notions now prevalent,
the Evolution hypothises must stand condemned (for what
is the core, the essence of this hypothesis? Strip it naked


22


and you stand face to face with the notion that not the more
ignoble forms of animalcule but the human body, the human
mind itself, emotion, intellect, will, and all their phenomena
were once latent in a fiery cloud); but in many profoundly
thoughtful minds such a revolution has already taken place.
They degrade neither member of the mysterious duality
referred to, but they exalt one of them from its abasement,
and repeal the divorce hitherto existing between both. In
substance, if not in words, their position as regards the
relation of spirit and matter is; ‘What God hath joined
together let not man put asunder.’ ”

It is necessary in this place to make a slight digression on
the nature of God according to the Ancients. ‘ The
Egyptians recognised a divinity only in those cases where
they perceived a fixed law either of permanence or change.
The Earth abides, so do the Heavens, Days, Months,
Seasons; these show a regularity which was called Maat.
The Gods are called possessors of Maat or subsisting
through Maat. Truth and Justice are but forms of Maat
applied to human action” (Renouf, Introduction to the
Papyrus of Ant). Beyond these the Egyptians believed in the
Unnameable One. He whose throne the plumes of Amen’s
headdress barely touch. (The Hebrew root Amen, AMN,
signifies stability.)

Among the Jews, the “ Jehovah” holy as He was, existed
only as the manifesting deity taking form in the world of
matter as the holy living creatures, the forces of heat,
moisture, cold and dryness; or on another plane developing
as spirit, soul, mind and matter. But the real Being of
Deity was called “ Ehyeh,” the “ I am that I am,” and behind
Him was the Potential Being or Ain Soph Aur. For it is
written “ His is the Mind, Theirs are the powers.”

In the same wey Brahma the Universe separated its body
into two halves; Viraj, the spiritual, intelligent nature, and
Vach or the manifest expression of the eternal divine Idea-


23


tion. But this was not the same as the Great Brahm, or
“ Great Breath ” breathing out for millions of years, and
again breathing in for the same period, becoming alternately
manifest and unmanifest. So far we have spoken of the
Macrocosmic God or Macroprosopus. Of the Microprosopus;
the Microcosmic God of the New Testament, He through
whom we can approach the vast ideal which the human
brain is too small to grasp, we need not here speak further.

I must now deal shortly with the occult meaning of the
Fall. The Fall means more especially—fallen into generation
or corruptibility. When Isis let loose Typhon after his
imprisonment by Horus, her enraged son destroyed her
royal diadem and cut off her lead, but Thoth—in one sense
the moon god, replaced it by a cow’s head. That is to say,
when in the course of cosmic evolution Primeval chaos seemed
to return as ruler of night and winter, the child of the spirit
moving on the waters of creation laid low the glorious mother
who had borne him. She. became the Nature Goddess of
the earth the symbol of fruitfulness, the sacred cow, the
increaser of harvest. Henceforth the processes of change
became recognised as gods or ‘fixed laws;” death and
corruption which for a time seem like annihilation, being
some of these.

Of the teaching of the Qabalah on the Fall I have опу
room to quote the following paragraph from S. L. Macgregor
Mathers’ Introduction to the Kabaiah Unveiled.

“ The first two letters of Jehovah I and H are the father
and mother of Місгорговорпв ” (or the supernal Adam)
“апа the H final is hisbride”’ (or Eve). “ But in these forms
is expressed the equilibrium of severity and mercy. Mercy
being masuline and severity feminine. Excess of Mercy is
merely weakness, but Excess of Severity calls forth the
evil and oppressive force which is symbolised by Leviathan.
Wherefore it is said ‘ Behind the shoulders of the Bride, the
Serpent rears his head.’ Of the Bride” (the cow-headed


24


Isis) “not the Supernal Mother” (Isis crowned with the
Royal diadem) “ for she bruises the head of the Serpent.”

The serpent is the centripetal force, ever seeking to pene-
trate paradise, and “ thereby constricting the efflux of divine
radiation,” which is centrifugal. The Adam QOadmon’s
exchange of the Garden of Eden for knowledge and death,
must be taken to mean the exchange of uncreated thought
into differentiation and evolution, resulting finally in the
creation of a material universe.

On this subject inuch may be learnt from the first book of
the Divine Pymander, published in this series; in the Seven-
teenth book it is written :—

“ Moreover the things that are made are visible, but He is
invisibile; and for this cause he maketh them, that he may be
visible ; and therefore he maketh them always.”

So we see that the Eternal one being defined, saw a reflec-
tion of himself; and the love he bore his image emanated as
a third form, the Supernal Mother who aspireth to the
Wisdom which is beyond. Sois the Supernal triad formed.

In like manner the Holy Triad, reflected and defined,
became the throne whereon the holy deific form was seated,
and the Hexagram of the Macroprosopus was reflected unto
the Heart of the Microprosopus.

And in this sense are to be understood the words written
оп the mummy case of Panehemisis, “Тһе heart ot Man is
his own God.”

Around the image in the sanctuary of our hearts is the
firmament and the powers, and below are the Kerubim or
Living Creatures.

In his book entitled Lumen de Lumine, our author laments
the separation that has taken place between the Elemental,
Celestial, and Spiritual Sciences, for he says, these three
are branches of one tree.

“ Out of one universal root, the Chaos, grew all specified
natures and their individuals.”


25

I must deal shortly with the nature of Chaos as understood
by the ancients, because in the present volume our author
evades any definite explanation of it.

Chaos, the Abyss or “ Great Deep ” was personified among
the Egyptians by Neith; the only one containing all—with-
out form or sex, giving birth to itself without fecundation.
She was adored under the form of a Virgin Mother. She is
the Father-Mother, the immaculate Virgin. She is called
the Lady of the Sycamore, and is represented as dispersing
the waters of the Tree of Life. She is the Bythos of the
Gnostics, The One of the Neoplatonists, The All of the
German Mctaphysicians, the Anaita of Assyria.

Now from this root or chaos sprang all manifestations,
divine, celestial, and elemental, and these three are one, and
if separated from each other are like the dead branches cut
from the parent stem.

For some pages our author dwells on the exoteric meaning
of the scriptures in a manner that concerns the modern
thinker very little. But we must bear in memory the intoler-
ance and bigotry that prevailed at the period, and that
twenty years later Spinoza forfeited all worldly advantages
by asserting that the vulgar interpretation of the Sacred
Oracles had led to much error.

However, Thomas Vaughan having paid his tribute to
“weak consciences,” touches us all when he says, “ God
minds the Restitution of Nature in general, and not of Man
alone, . . . . who is but a small part of nature. Re-
generation, Illumination and Grace, signify a new influence
of Spirit. If God and Nature be one, how much more shall
man and nature be опе.”

Emerson has said in this relation, “ Indeed we are but
Shadows we are not endowed with real life and all that
seems most real about us is but the thinnest substance of a
dream, till the heart be touched by nature. That touch
creates us: then we begin to be; thereby we are beings of
reality and inheritors of eternity.”


26


We acknowledge nature to be corrupt, but by the know-
ledge of that corruption is to be solved the riddle of the
Universe.

The union of spirit and nature gives rise to a perfect com-
pound, The Light of wisdom united by philosophy to expe-
riment makes the perfect artist or creative adept.

Philosophy or the passion for wisdom stimulates the
intellect, as religion stimulates the emotions: these passions
or expansions of the Ego carry it beyond the limits of its own
being, and tend to merge it in the all being. Here the cen-
trifugal or redeeming force is free to act, and the constric-
tions of matter cease. When the Passions of the Emotions
and the Intellect are set free, the Experience of Elemental
Nature can be judged with safety. This then is the Esoteric
meaning of the “ Unity with God.” “I am in my father, and
уе in me, and І in you.” (St. John x. 14-20.) Compare
again, “ His is the mind, theirs аге the powers ” of the Chal-
dean Oracles. For the perfect man stands between the finest
ether and the coarsest matter, and his spirit must penetrate
all.

For the world, religion means, as Cardinal Newman puts
it, “the knowledge of God, of His will, and of our duties
towards Him.” Separating Him as а formal notion from His
works, cutting Him off as a branch from the Tree of Life of
which He is the very root and being. Therefore to the ini-
tiated it is no blasphemy to say that such religion is a vanity
and vexation of spirit.

The world holds many half evolved personalities who have
to live and learn much before they can be conscious of the
latent complexities of their own natures. Their hour has not
yet come. But for the more fully developed,—life daily
sounds undreamed of harmonies. Just asin modern music
the most acute emotion is produced by subtle changes of
key, so the human being in passing from one aspect to
another of a highly complex existence intensifies and en-


27


riches his being with experiences, undreamed of by the
undeveloped man, just as little as, by the masters of the
simple harmonies of ancient music.

Our author’s first paragraph ends with the clear statement
that without philosophy, or the passion for wisdom, salvation
cannot be understood. Again he pleads for the union of the
divine, the celestial, and the natural; for he says the very
nature of the highest existence is the union and synthesis of
the diverse products of differentiation.

Can we not dimly comprehend from this principle how it
is that each day of Brahma (or manifestation of the Universe)
enriches and beautifies the night of his repose; how Nirvana
becomes more and more exquisite in its subtle harmonies, as
beings are prepared for it by finer and finer complexities
and variations of parts.


PARAGRAPH II.


To speak then of God without Nature, is more than
we can do, for we have not known him so, and to speak
of Nature without God, is more than we may do, for
we should rob God of his Glory, and attribute those
Effects to Nature, which belong properly to God, and
to the spirit of God, which worksin Nature. We shall
therefore use a mean form of speech, between these
extremes, and this form the Scriptures have taught us,
for the Prophets and Apostles, have used no other.
Let not any man therefore be offended, if in this
Discourse we shall use Scripture to prove Philosophy,
and Philosophy to prove Divinity, for of a truth our


28


knowledge is such, that our Divinity is not without
Nature nor our Philosophy without God. Notwith-
standing, I dare not think but most men will repine at
this course, though I cannot think, wherefore they
should, for when I joyne Scripture and Philosophy, I
do but join God and Nature, an union certainly
approved of by God, though it be condemned of men.
But this perverse ignorance, how bold soever it be, I
shall not quarrel with, for besides Scripture, I have
other grounds, that have brought me very fairely, and
soberly to this Discourse.


COMMENTS UPON THE SECOND PARAGRAPH.


This is a recapitulation ot the general principle that God
and Nature,—Scripture and Philosophy—are to be joined
together and not separated from each other in our minds.


РАКАСКАРН Illl.


I have sojourn’d now for some years, in this great
Fabric, which the fortunate call their World: and
certainly I have spent my time like a Traveller, not to
purchase it, but to observe it. There is scarce anything
іп it, but hath given me an occasion of some thoughts ;
but that which took me up much, and soon, was the
continuall action of fire upon water. This Speculation
(I know not how) surpris’d my first youth, long before
I saw the University, and certainly Nature, whose


29


pupil I was, had even then awaken’d many notions in
me, which I met with afterwards, in the Platonic
Philosophy. I will not forbear to write, how I had
then fancied a certain practice on water, out of which,
even in those childish dayes, I expected wonders: but
certainly neither gold, nor silver, for I did not so much
as think of them, nor of any such covetous artifice.
This Consideration of my self, when I was a Child,
has made me since examine Children, namely, what
thoughts they had of these elements, we see about us,
and I found thus much by them, that Nature in her
simplicity, is much more wise, than some men are with
their acquired parts, and Sophistry, of a truth I thought
my self bound to prove all things, that I might attain
to my lawful desires, but least you think, I have only
conversed with children I shall confess, І have con-
vers’d with children and Fools too: that is, as І
interpret it, with Children and Men, for these last are
not in all things, as wise as the first. A Child, I suppose,
in puris Naturalibus,

Before education alters him, and ferments him, is a
Subject hath not been much consider’d, for men respect
him not, till he is company for them, and then indeed
they spoil him. Notwithstanding I should think, by
what I have read, that the natural disposition of
Children, before it is corrupted with Customs and
Manners, is one of these things, about which the
Antient Philosophers have busyied themselves even to
some curiosity. 1 shall not here express what I have


30


found by my own experience, for this is a point of
foresight, and a ground by which wise men have


attained to a certain Knowledge of Morals, as well as
Naturals.


PARAGRAPH IV.


But to return from this Digression, to the Principles
first proposed, namely Fire and Water, І shall borrow
my entrane into this discourse, from my famous
Country-man Rice of Chester, who speaking of this Art,
delivers himself thus.

Ars hoec (saith he), de Philosophia occulta est;
est de illa parte Philosophiae quae Meteora tractat ;
Loquitur enim, haec Ars non solum de elevatione et
depressione Elementorum, sed etiam Elementatorum.
Scias H ОС, quia magnum secretum est.


PARAGRAPH V.


These words, if the Mysteries they involve and
relate to were distinctly laid down, would make an
endless Discourse; for they contain all that Nature
doth: and all that art can do. Ви that we may in
some order, and as far as Conscience will permit, ex-
press what they signifie: We do first say, That God
is the principal and sole Author of all things, who by
his Word and Spirit hath form’d and manifested those
things we see, and even those things which at present
we cannot see. As for the matter whereof he formed


31


them, it being a substance pre-existent, not only to us,
but to the world itself, most men may think the know-
ledge of it impossible, for how shall we know a thing
that was so long before us, and which is not now extant
with us, nor ever was (in their opinion) since the
creation? To this objection, which at first sight may
seem invincible, we shall return an answer that shall
break 14; for we will show how and by what means,
we came to know this matter, and not only to know it,
but after long labours to see it, handle it, and taste it.
It is evidence enough that every Individual (suppose
man himself) is made of a seed, and this seed when the
body is perfected, appears no more, for it is altered and
transformed to a body. However that self-same body
does afterwards yield a seed which is the very same in
nature with that original first seed whereof the body
was made. I presume then, that he that would know
the generation of man, needs not look back so far as
Adam to know the first seed, for if Nature still affords
the hke, what needs that fruit less retrogradation? It
is even so with the world, for it was originally made of
a seed, of a seminal viscous humidity or water, but
that seed (as we have said in our Aphorisms) disap-
peared in the Creation, for the Spirit of God that
moved upon it transformed it, and made the world of it.
Howsoever that very world doth now yield and bring
forth out of its own body a secondary seed, which is the
very same in essence and substance with that primitive
general seed whereof the world was made. And if any


32


man shal] ask what use nature makes of this general
seed, and wherefore she yields it; I answer, that it is
not to make another world of it, but to maintain that
world with it which is made already. For God
Almighty hath so decreed that his creatures are
nourished with the very same matter whereof they
were formed, and in this is verified that maxim which
otherwise would be most false: Ex iisdem nutrimur,
ex quibus constamus.

We seek not much whence our own nutriment comes,
nor that of beasts, for both provisions are obvious.
But what is that which feeds Grass, Herbs, Corn and
all sorts of trees with their fruits? What is it that
restores and supplies the earth, when these copious and
innumerous products have for the greatest part of the
year lived sucking on her breasts and almost exhausted
her? Iam afraid they will speak as they think and
affirm it is water, but what skilful assertors they аге
shall appear hereafter.


COMMENTS UPON THE FIFTH PARAGRAPH.


Thomas Vaughan begins by defining the creative deity as
the formulator and manifestor of the visible world. He
pictures him as an artificer working upon pre-existent sub-
stance. Ав | have already pointed out, this idea is that of the
Jehovah of the Jews in relation to the Ehyeh and Ain Suph
Aur. This latter principle must, however, be regarded by us
at present as the Divine Neith or Chaos, also explained in
the notes on the first paragraph. This fundamental virgin
substance is only to be understood, says Vaughan, by the
study of seeds.


33


Now if we cut open any moderate-sized seed, we shall find
an outer covering, two masses of starchy matter, and a root
or radicle.

In the root we have the image of the One from whom
spring the many ; in the two halves the positive and negative
nourishing or preserving principles ; and in the coat or cover
the constricting force without which manifest form is im-
possible, but which must be overcome for growth to take
place.

The seed planted in the ground becomes a sugary fceculent
mass, and in the midst of putrefaction and fermentation the
new living being grows and becomes manifest. The study
of embryology takes us a long way towards the solution of
the mystery of life. We start with the protyle or protoplasm
of modern science, we trace the beginnings of a human being
through stages akin to the mollusc, the fish, the reptile, and
the monkey. This protyle or secondary chaos, which so
much resembles the Hyle or sediment of the waters of creation
is most evident to the unscientific mind in the scum of a
stagnant pool.

M. Pasteur has shewn us that the air is full of microscopic
life, that it can be found everywhere, from the bloom of a
peach to the liver of a pig; that it can be taken thence and
made to germinate in any gelatine, syrup, or glycerine basis;
that the white corpuscles of blood are minute living organisms,
capable of being oxygenated, and that they, like gold, become
red in the process. This is no doubt a materialistic transla-
tion of our author’s meaning ; but the evolution of the highest
is similar to the evolution of the lowest, as is taught us by
the Emerald Tablet of Hermes.

All my researches lead me to consider that the great
mystery of the origin of life consists almost entirely of a
measure of temperature. Life is latent everywhere; it
merely awaits the time in the cooling of a world that is
appropriate to its manifestation. Let us at the same time


34


bear in mind the Qabalistic and mystical interpretation of the
“ Foundation,” and its connection with the emanations of the
microcosm.


PARAGRAPH УІ.


Certainly, even that which we eat ourselves, and
beasts also, proceeds all of it from the same fountain,
but before it comes to us it is altered, for animals feed
on particulars, but vegetables abstract this sperm
immediately in its heavenly universal form. Notwith-
standing I would not have this so understood, as if this
seed did serve only to nourish, for many things are
made of it, and especially that subterraneous family of
minerals and metals. For this thing is not water,
otherwise than to the sight, but a coagulable fat
humidity, or a mixture of fire, air and pure earth, over-
cast indeed with water, and therefore not seen of any
nor known but to few. In vegetables it oftentimes
appears, for they feed not as some think, on water, but
on this seminal viscosity that is hid in the water.
This indeed they attract at the roots, and from thence
it ascends to the branches, but sometimes it happens by
the way to break out at the bark where meeting with
cold air, itsubsists and congeals toa gum. This congela-
tion is not sudden but requires some small time, for if
you find while it is fresh it is of an exceedingly subtle
moisture, but glutinous for it will spin into strings as
small as any hair, and had it passed up to the branches,
it had been formed, in time, to a plum or cherry.


35


This happens to it by cold, and above ground, but in
the bowels of the earth it is congealed by a sulphureous
heat into metals and if the place of its congelation be
pure, then into a bright metal, for this sperm is im-
pregnated with light, and is full of the star fire, from
whence all metals have their lustre. The same might
be said of pearls and precious stones, this starry seed
being the Mother of the all, for when it is mineralised
by itself and without any faeculent mixture, then,
Vomit igniculos suos

it sheds and shoots its fires, and hath so much of
heaven that if we did not know the conspiracy we
should wonder how it could love the earth. Let us
now in a few words resume what we have said, and the
rather, because we would explain our method, for we
intend to follow Raymond Lullie, who in the fifth
chapter of his testament hath laid down a certain figure,
which fully answers to those words we have formerly
cited out of Rhaesus Cestrensis.


COMMENTS UPON THE SIXTH PARAGRAPH.


This calls attention to the fact that difference of circum-
stance alone congeals the prima materia into metals, vege-
tables, or animals. We know very well that between the
lowest forms of animal and vegetable life, between the small
water fungi and the hydra or amceba there is very little to
choose; in fact, if we look upon the brain of an animal as
corresponding to the root of a tree, we shall find extraordinary
similarities even in the more complex developments of the
two great kingdoms. Minerals, on the other hand, are
created and formulated at such high temperatures, and are


36


so much more durable that it is not at once obvious to us that
the principle of evolution is the same.

The Arabians called the prima materia, “ Halicali,” from
Hali—summum, апа Calop—bonum; but the Latin Authors
corruptly write it Sal Alkali. This summum bonum is the
Catholic receptacle of spirits, it is blessed and impregnated
with Light from above, and was therefore styled by Magi-
cians--Domus Signata, plena Luminis Divinitatis.


ParaGrapyw VII.


We have already mentioned two principles, God and
Nature, or God and the created world, for that third
principle or chaos that was pre-existent to the world,
we shall speak of no more, but in lieu of it, we shall
have recourse to the secondary sperm or chaos that
now is, and comes out of the visible world, for we will
ground our discourse upon nothing but what is visible,
and in the front of it we place the Divine Majesty who
is the sole central Eternal Principle and Architect of
all.


COMMIENTS UPON THE SEVENTH PARAGRAPH.


Here we find our author distinctly associates his Chaos
with that which is behind Kether—the first emanation of
Deity; God with Chokmah or the Abba of the Kabalists ;
Nature with Binah or the Aima or Mother, the third emana-
tion. Or we may put it thus; from the Chaos or Neith
sprang God or the Father, and Nature or the Mother; from
their union sprang the secondary Chaos or first reflected
triangle. Thus completing the Hexad of the Macrocosm.


38


РАВАСКАРН VIII.


This Figure is Raymond Lullie’s, and in the centre
of it you see the first Hyle, or matter whereof the
world was made. In this Hyle (saith Raymond) all
the Elements and all natural Principles, as well as
Means and Extremes, were mingled potentially,

in forma confusa Aquae ;
and this primitive Spermatic ocean filled all that space
which we now attribute to the air, for (saith he)
Attingebat usque ad circulum Lunarem.

Out of this central Hyle (with which we have now
done) did rise all those Principles and Bodies which
you find written in the circumference of the Figure and
here begins our Philosophy.


PARAGRAPH IX.


In the first place over the Hyle, you see the Elements
of the visible created world, whose parts are commonly
called Elements, namely Earth, Water, Air and
Heaven, for there is no other fire but that Ignis fatuus,
which Aristotle kindled under the Moon. From the
elements on the right hand, by rarefaction and resolu-
tion of their substance, you see derived another Princi-
ple, namely Vapores Elementorum the Vapours of the
Elements or the clouds, in which vapours the inferior
and superior Natures meet and are there married, and
out of their mixture results that secondary Sperm or


39


Chaos Philosophical, which we look for. Next to the
clouds or vapours of the elements, you will find in the
figure a third Principle Aqua Clara, namely a clear
water, which proceeds immediately from the clouds.

Et illa est Res (saith Lullie) argento vive vivo magis
propinqua, quae quidem reperitur supra terram currens,
fluens.

The fourth Principle, which Nature immediately
generates by congelation out of the substance or
viscosity or the Aqueous universal Mercury is the
glassy Azoth, which is a certain fiery sulphureous
masculine Minera ; and this is gold philosophical, the
sulphor, the earth, and the Male, as the viscous Water
is the Mercury and the female. The rest of the Prin-
ciples which are ranged in the Figure, are artificial
Principles, and cannot be known or manifested without
art, excepting the seventh and last Principle, which is
either gold or silver, for these are perfect metals and
Ferments that specify the medicine which of itself is
universal, and reduce it to a particular disposition and
effect. Thus far we thought fit to deal plainly with
you, and for the practice part of this Figure, we shall
wave it, for we had rather speak nothing than to speak
that we cannot be understood. I daresay there are
some writers who rejoice in their own riddles, and take
a special pleasure to multiply those difficulties which
are numerous enough already. For my part I shall
not put you to a trial of wit, you may take the rest
from their author, and thus expose you to no other


40


hazard, but what I have been formerly exposed to
myself. We shall now again return to our theory and
to make our entrance we say, that fire begins every
motion, and motion begins generation. For if the
Elements or parts of this material world did all of
them stand in suis terminis (on their own bases)
such a cessation would produce nothing. To prevent
this, the Almighty God placed in the heart of the
world, namely in the earth (as he did in the heart of
every other creature) a fire-life which Paracelsus calls
the Archaeus and Sendivow the Central Sun. This
Fire, lest it should consume its own body the earth, he
hath overcast with a thick, oily saltish water, which we
call the sea, for sea water, (as we have tried) not to
speak of its salt, is full of a sulphureous volatile fatness,
which doth not quench fire like the common water, but
feeds it. The like Providence we see in the bodies of
animals whose heat or life is tempered with a sulphure-
ous, saltish moisture, namely with blood, and the
blood with the breath, as the sea is with wind and air.
Over this Archaeus, or central fire, God hath placed
in his heaven the sun and the stars, as he hath placed
the head and the eyes over the heart. For between
Man and the world there is nosmall accord, and he that
knows not the one can never know the other. We may
observe also, that the wind passeth between the
inferior and superior Fires, that is between the cen-
tral and celestial sun, and in man the breath hath all
its liberty and motion between the heart and the eyes,


41


that is between the fire and the light that isin us. We
feel moreover in man and the world, a most even
correspondency of effects, for as the blood, even so the
sea hath a constant pulse or agitation, both spirits
stirring and working alike in their bodies. Nor ought
we to neglect another consideration, That the light of
the world is in the superior parts of it, namely in the
sun and stars, but the original fire from whence these
sparks fly upwards appears not, but lives imprisoned in
the earth, even so certainly, all the brightness of man
isin his face, for there he sheds his light at the eyes,
but the first source of it, namely that fire which isat
the heart, is no more seen than that which is in the
earth. Only this we may say, that both these im-
prisoned forces are manifested to reason by the same
effects, namely by the pulse, that the one causeth in the
blood and the other in the sea, to which may be added
that transpiration or evaporation of humours, which
both these spirits produce alike in their several bodies.
And that we may further prove that these terms of
Archaeus and Sol Centralis are not vain words, let us
but consider what a strong heat is required to this
sublimation of vapours and exhalations, for it is not
simple water that is driven upwards, but abundance of
salt and oil together with the water. If any man thinks
the sun can do this, I must tell him he knows not the
operations of the sun, nor for what use it serves in
nature. The sun serves only to dry up the superfluous
humidity which the night leaves behind her on the out-


42


side of things, for this makes all vegetables cold and
flaccid, hinders their digestion and maturity. But the
sun with a clear heat, taking off that extraneous
moisture, forwards their concoction, and helps to ripen
that which is raw. This must be done with a most
gentle heat, not with such as shall make the earth to
smoke and extract clouds from it, for this would not
bring things to a maturity, but rather burn and calcine
them. We know that if we stand long in the sun we
shall grow faint, and common fire will not burn in the
light of it, for the sun, which 16 the true element of fire,
attracts it, so that by degrees it goes off and forsakes
his fuel. But if you convey the fire out of the sun, then
it will more strongly apply to the fuel and unite itself
to it апа burn it. It is just so with the earth, for while
the heat of the sun is present the heat of the earth is
more busy with the sun than with its own body. For
as Sendevow hath well written, In superficie Terrae
Radii radiis junguntur.

In the face of the earth the beams of both luminaries
meet, and there is such a conspiracy between fire and
fire that the central breaking forth to meet the celestial
suffers a kind of extasy and doth not much mind his
own body. Give me leave to speak thus, for there is
such an affinity between these two, that they had
rather join with one another than with any third nature,
but that is it which cannot but be in part and by way
of influence, God having confined the one to the centre,
and the other tothe circumference. I could demonstrate


43


this sympathy by a most noble magnetism, which I
have seen to my admiration, between the sun and
sweet oil, or rather the fire and soul of Nitre, and here
І shall tell you that the earth is full of nitre, nay I must
affirm that pure earth is nothing else but Nitre, whose
belly is full of wind, air and fire, and which differs no
more from heaven than the root of а tree that lodgeth
in the dirt, doth from the branches of it that grow in
the sunshine. This attraction of fire by fire is the true
cause why the heat of the earth is so weak in summer,
and so strong in winter, for in the winter when the sun
is absent, the central fire keeps altogether within the
earth, and being irritated by an hostile invasion of cold,
heats the waters much more vigorously, so that exhala-
tions and clouds are far more copious in the winter than
they are in the summer, which could not be if the sun
were the cause of them. Add to this, that an outward
dry heat, as that of the sun is, falling immediately on
the earth, must needs burn the earth before it can
make it smoke, but an inward fire, that is mingled with
the moisture of the earth, cannot burn, be it never so
intense, for it is qualified with the water, and tempered
to a moist heat, and without doubt such a fire may
very naturally resolve some parts of the earth, and
cause them to exhale as our own inward heat, being
moisened with the blood, makes us sweat without any
violence. To reduce all this to a Corrollary we say
that in the winter God seals the face of the earth with
frost and cold, as a man would seal a glass, and this is


44


to keep in the congelative Spermatic Humidity, which
otherwise might ascend with the more crude vapours
that break out copiously at that time and filling the
sphere of the air take іп, like so many sponges, the
celestial vital influences. For we must know, that
nature begins to impregnate the earth about the end of
autumn, and continues it all winter, the fiery, subtle
influx of the heavens being then condensed by the cold
and moisture of the moon, who is regent all the winter
and elevated above the sun. This you may see in snow,
which falls in hard frost, which being taken up while
it 1s fresh, and digested ina Blind Glass in ashes for
twenty-four hours, if then you open the glass whilst
the solution is warm, you shall perceive in the breath
of the water all the odours of the world, and certainly
far more pleasant than they are in the flowers at May.
Look into the bottom of the glass and you shall find
there a fat grey slime, not unlike to Castile soap,
separate the phlegm from it by a soft distillation in
balneo, and put the residue in a Boltshead well
stopped, in a dry heat of ashes, keep it then warm for
an hour or two, and suddenly the glass will fly to pieces,
for the wind, the life or spirit, is not well fetled in the
body. Here you may see the first attempts of nature,
but if you know how to work upon the water you shall
tind greater things than I have told you.


45


COMMENTS UPON THE NINTH PARAGRAPH.


Our author calls the elements, Earth. Water. Air, and
Heaven or Fiery Water.

From these by digestion and sublimation the gases,
vapours, and clouds are derived. This is what in ordinary
occult language is called the firmament, the Yetziratic or
formative world.

From this is distilled a clear water of the nature of wine
or alcohol.

By congelation is obtained a fiery sulphurous substance
as wine becomes acid vinegar by exposure to a certain heat,
this acetate will run into an oily burning gum or glass when
duly concentrated.

Vitriol vapour and Паша sulphur are not dealt with in this
volume.

I will now supply a scale of attribution and analogies be-
tween the Macrocosm and the Microcosm.

The sun and moon are allotted by Cornelius Agrippa to
the eyes, as being the lights of the greater and lesser worlds.

The other planets to the nostrils, mouth, and ears.

These, then, typify the parts of the Spiritual Consciousness
or divine in man.

The lungs аге the seat of the firmament, and in them cir-
culates the air we breathe.

The heart, the central fire, the Archeus. The blood with
its constant pulse, the sea full of sulphurous volatile fatness.

Our author next points out that the interior heat is greatest
when the light is latent.

He then says clearly that Pure Earth is Nitre, better
known to us as saltpetre—a white powder which attracts
moisture, and by eliminating the mineral potash forms nitric
acid, one ofthe most corrosive acids that we have. (Of course
I need not point out that another proportion of oxygen ала


46


nitrogen gives us the ordinary air we breathe. Не then
shows that the latent heat contained in snow will, if her-
metically sealed, cause a glass to break more rapidly than
the latent heat in ordinary water.


PARAGRAPH X.


The Magnesia then (as Sendivow hath written) is
generated in winter, and not without reason, for then
the heat of the earth is strongest, and best able to
digest the nutriment that comes down from heaven, and
concoct it to a viscous Sperme. But in the spring and
summer seasons, when the sun hath chased off the frost,
and the central and celestial luminaries have, by their
mutual mixture and conflux of beams, relaxed and
dilated the pores of the earth, then there is a way made
for the Sperme to ascend more freely, which subliming
upwards is attracted and sublimated by the vegetable
Kingdom, whose immediate aliment it is.


COMMENTS ON THE TENTH PARAGRAPH.


The sap restrained by the cold of winter doubtless accumu-
lates force proportionate to the strength of its prison walls.
Like an arrow released it flies further, according to the
weight of the bow which propels it.


47


PARAGRAPH ХІ.


To return then to those first words of Rhesus
Cestrensis, we say, this Sperm is made of the vapours
or clouds, and the vapours are made by elevation and
depression of elements, and not only of the elements,
but (as he saith) of elementates also, that is of bodies
compounded of the elements, and this bears a double
sense. For we must know that the earth is charged
with many particular natures, as minerals of all sorts
and cadaverous reliques, for our bodies also lodge in the
earth when the Spirit of Life hath left them. All these,
as well as the earth itself, suffer a rarefaction, and reso-
lution of substance, for into these vapours, saith
Raymond Lully, Omnia corpora elementata resolvan-
tur ad intrandum, novam generationem [all elementary
bodies are resolved, when a further new development is
to take place].

This puts me in mind of an opinion І have read some-
times in the Cabalists; namely that this bulk or body
we have attained to by attraction and transmutation
of nutriment, riseth not in the resurrection, but out of
that seminal particle, which originally attracting the
nutriment, did overcast itself therewith, there shall
spring another new body, and this seminal particle (say
they) lurketh somewhere in the bones, not in that part
which moulders into dust. Of a truth we see that
bones are very permanent and lasting, and this Joseph


48


was not ignorant of, when dying in Egypt,

Gen. ch.], he gave that charge to his brethren, Ye
v.25. shall carry up my bones from hence. We
know that the Israelites were bondmen in

Egypt near four hundred years after Joseph’s death,
yet all that time his bones were not consumed, but were
carried away to the Land of Canaan, as it is written,
And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, for he
had straightly sworn the Children of Israel, saying,
God will surely visit you, you shall carry up my bones
hence with you. Certainly if we judge rightly, we
must confess that this seminal particle is our only
original fundamental matter, the rest being but an
accretion that comes from the extraneous substance of
meat and drink. What loss is it then if we lay by this
corrupt accretion or access of matter, for cannot He that
made us at first of the seminal particle, make us of it
again? From this opinion St. Paul, in my judgement,
abhors not, in that speech of his to the Corinthians,
where he would show them the manner of the Resur-
rection, and with what bodies the dead rise. Thou fool
(saith he) that which thou sowest, is not quickened
except it die, and that which thou sowest, thou sowest
not that body which shall be, but bare grain, it may
chance of wheat or some other grain, but God giveth it
a body as it hath pleased him, and to every seed a body
which is proper for it, for so signifieth the original.
And here you that are angry readers, let me be excused,


for I deliver this not as my own sentiment, but as the


49


tradition of the Jews, who were sometimes а very
learned people, and knew more of the mysteries of God
and nature than any other nation whatsoever. But to
begin again where we left, you must know that when
the central Sun sublimes the vapours, those vapours
partake not only of the nature of the Earth and Water,
but of divers other particular minerals whereof the earth
and water are full.


COMMENTS UPON THE ELEVENTH PARAGRAPH.


Vaughan here returns to Mr. Rice, of Chester, or Rhesus
Cestrensis, whose Latin aphorism was quoted in the third
paragraph, and deals with the meaning of the word elemen-
tates or secondary elements, which are generated in the same
manner as simple elements by the application of a gentle
heat and moisture.

Then our author is reminded of the association of the re-
incarnating ego with the os coccygis by the Jews; after a
lengthy digression on this subject, he hints that particular
minerals are to be regenerated in the same way as universal
elements; we presume he wishes to point out thatin the same
way as simple life is generated, so a complex being can also
be regenerated.

It is worthy of note that phosphorus discovered by Brand
in 1669, is prepared from bones, and has many properties in
common with the secret fire of the Alchemists.


50
PARAGRAPH XII.


To make this more clear, the vapours properly so
called, rise from the sea, and from all fresh waters.
These partake of the substance and qualities of such
minerals as are in the water, some of them being
bituminous, some saltish, some mercurial and all of
them moist and phlegmatic. On the contrary, those
exhalations that come from the earth are dry, for the
earth is more hot and mineral than the water. These
fiery earth fumes meeting with the cold vapours of the
water, oftentimes produce most terrible tempests, some
of these being nitrous, some arsenical, some sulphurous
and all hot, and some by reason of their copious sulphur,
inflammable. Both these, I mean the earthly exhalations
and the watery vapour, meet in that vast circulatory
of the air, where their contrary complexions of heat and
cold are mingled together like agent and patient, or
sulphur and mercury, and the particular Natures and
Vapours which they acquired from the minerals, are
resolved by the wind, and totally reduced into general
principles. It is strange to consider what a powerful
resolving faculty there is in wind or air, for wind is no
other thing than air stirred, and that by fire, as we feel
in man, that the motion of the breath is caused by heat,
as well as that of the blood, both proceeding from the
same hot principle of life. So certainly the life of the
world causeth wind or a commotion in the air as well
as a flux in the sea, for both these are seas, and have


5I


their fluxes, as we shall prove elsewhere more fully.
Air then, as we have said, resolves all things, and
especially wind, for it resolves all salts into water, and
if this solution be distilled, we shall find some part of
the salt reduced into fresh water. As for the residue,
if it be exposed to the wind, it will resolve again, and
you may distil it the second time. In a word, if you
repeat this process, you will bring the whole body of
the salt into a volatile fresh water, nothing different
from the common either in sight or taste. And here
you must not think your salt is lost, for if you know
how to congeal the water, you will find it again, but so
altered from what it was, that you will wonder to seeit.
This practice, if well understood, sufficientiy declares
the nature of air; but he that knows where to find con-
gealed air, and can dissolve it by heat to a viscous
water, he hath attained to something that is excellent.
Much more I could say of this wonderful and spiritual
element, whose penetrating, resolving faculty I have
sometimes contemplated in this following and simple
experiment. Common quicksilver hath a miraculous
union of parts, and of all compounds is the strongest
excepting gold; for if you distil it by retort a hundred
times, it will be quicksilver still notwithstanding all
those reiterated rarefactions of his body. But if you
take а thousand weight of it, and vapour them away but
once in the open air, it will never come to quicksilver
again ; for the fumes will be lifted up to the wind, where
they will suffer a total dissolution, and will come down


52


as mere rain-water. This is the very reason why also
the vapours of the elements are lifted up to the middle
region of the air; for there the wind is most cold, and
hath most liberty, and in no other place can their
resolution, which Nature intends, be perfected. This
if understood, is a most noble secret of Nature: nor was
Job ignorant of it, when complaining of the decays of
his own body, he delivered himself thus.
OH ae «Thou lifteth me up to the wind, Thou
“22. causeth me to ride upon it, and dissolveth
my substance.”


COMMENTS UPON THE TWELFTH PARAGRAPH.


Vaughan points out that the vapours of the sea are bitu-
minous, saltish, mercurial, moist and phlegmatic. The exhala-
tions of the carth are hot and mineral, nitrous, arsenical,
sulphurous; and in the air all these things are mixed together
and resolved.

He then points out that salts tend to liquefy if left in
moist air. That quicksilver volatilizes, and on being divided
into minute particles loses its identity in the atmosphere ;
but itis to be presumed that it merely turns into an oxide of
mercury and falls to the earth,as many other matters do
under the corrosive influence of oxygen.


Равасвағри NIII.


We have hitherto shown you how fire rarefies all
things, and how wind and air resolve them yet further


53


than fire, as we have exemplified in quick-

Anima Silver. And this is it we have delivered
Magica elsewhere in more envious terms, namely
that Circumferences dilate, and Centres

contract; That superiors dissolve, and inferiors coagulate;
That we should make use of an indeterminate Agent,
till we can find a determinate one. For true it is, that
the mercurial dissolving faculty 1s in the air, and in
airy things; and the sulphureous congealing virtue is
in the earth, that 1s to say, in some mineral natures
and substances which God hath hid in the earth. Take
therefore water of air, which is a great dissolvent, and
ferment it with earth, and on the contrary, earth with
water ; or to speak more obscurely, ferment mercury
with sulphur, and sulphur with mercury. And know
that this congenial faculty is much adjuvated by heat ;
especially in such places where the sperm cannot exhale,
and where the heat is temperate; but if the place be
open, and the heat excessive, then it dissipates. It
remains now that we speak something of the two passive
material elements, namely of earth and water ; for these
are the bodies that suffer by fire, and whose parts are


perpetually regenerated by a circular rarefaction, and
condensation.


COMMENTS UPON THE THIRTEENTH PARAGRAPH.


The action of Fire tends to overcome what we call the
gravitation of matter. The action of air is to transmute or
oxgyenize matter. To congeal and coagulate gravitation
and magnetism must be brought to bear on the substance.


54


PARAGRAPH XIV.


It is the advice of the Brothers of the R. C. that those
who would be proficients in this art should study the
elements and their operation before they seek after the
tinctures of metals. It is to be wished indeed that
men would do so, for then we should not have so many
broilers, and so few philosophers. But here it may be
questioned, who is he that studies the elements for any
such end as to observe and imitate their operations?
For in the Universities, we study them only to attain
to a false book theory, whereof no use can be made
but quacking, disputing, and making a noise. Verily
the doctrine of the Schoolmen hath allayed and per-
verted even that desire of knowledge which God
planted іп man. For the traditions we receive there,
coming from our superiors, carry with them the awe of
the tutor, and this breeds in us an opinion of their
certainty; so that a University man cannot in all his
lifetime, attain to so much reason and confidence as to
look beyond his lesson. 1 have often wondered that
any sober spirits can think Aristotle's philosophy
perfect, when it consists in mere words without any
further effects; for of a truth the falsity and insuffi-
ciency of a mere notional knowledge is so apparent
that no wise man will assert it. This is best known to
the physicians, who when they have been initiated in
this whirligig, are forced at last to leave it, and to
assume new principles, if they will be such as their


55


profession requires they should be. Aristotle will very
gravely tell us: Ubi definit Philosophus, ibi incipit
Medicus; But I admire what assistance a physician
can receive from this philosopher, whose science tells
us: Scientia non est particularium; for without
particulars a physician can do nothing. But in good
earnest, did not Aristotle's science (if he had any)
arise from particulars, or did it descend immediately
from universals? If from universals, how came he to
be acquainted with them? did he know the genus,
before he knew the species, or the species before the
individuals? I think not; he knew the individual
first, and having observed his nature and propriety, he
applied that to the whole species; or to speak sense,
to all individuals of that kind: and this application
made that knowledge general, which at first was
particular, as being deduced from a particular object.
This is true, and Aristotle will tell us so, though
he give himself the lie; for elsewhere he affirms,
Nihil esse in intellectu, quod поп fuit prius in
sensu. Which if it be true then “Scientia non est par-
ticularium”’ is false. But I have done with him at
present, and for my own part I have learnt long ago
not of Aristotle but of Roger Bacon, Quod communia
pauci sunt valoris, nec proprie sequenda, nisi propter
particularia. And this is evident in all practices and
professions that conduce anything to the benefit of
man. For Nature herself hath imprinted the Universal
notions and conceptions in every soul, whether learned


56


or unlearned, so that we need not study Universals,
and this our Friar had observed; for saith he. In
communibus Animi conceptionibus vulgus concordat
cum sapientibus ; in particularibus vero, et propiis errat
et discordat. And for this very reason, he condemns
Aristotle and Galen. Quia in cominunibus et univer-
salibus se occupaverunt, et perducti sunt ad senectu-
tem, vitam consumentes in pejoribus et vulgatis, nec
vias ad haec secreta magna perceperunt. Let not us
do as those Hebrews did, though in this very point the
greatest part of the world follows them. Let us
rather follow where Nature ieads; for the having im-
pressed these Universals in our mind, hath not done it
in vain, but to the end we should apply them to out-
ward sensible particulars, and so attain to a true
experimental knowledge, which in this life is our only
crown and perfection. Ifa man should rest in the
bare theory of husbandry, and only read Virgil’s
Georgics, never putting his hand to the plough, I
suppose this theory could not help him to his daily
bread: and if we rest in the notions and names of
things never touching the things themselves, we are
like to produce no effects, nor to cure any diseases,
without which performances philosophy is useless, and
not to be numbered amongst our necessities. But how
false this is, God knows and man also may know it if
he considers but those two obstructions of life, sick-
ness and poverty. But they are not only effects that
are wanting to Aristotle’s philosophy but even his


57
theory is for the most part false, and where it 15 true,
it is so slight and superficial that it doth not further us
at all. Heis none of our auxiliaries who believes it,
but the very Remora to all natural discoveries, and he
hath for many ages, not only obstructed but extin-
guished the Truth. Much might be said of this fellow
and his ignorance, which is not more gross than per-
verse: I omit to speak of his Atheism and eminency of
his malice, which was not only destructive to the Fane
of the old Philosophers, whose books this scribbler
burned, but even to the happiness and progress of
posterity whom he robbed of those more ancient, more


excellent and invaluable monuments.


COMMENTS UPON THE FOURTEENTH
PARAGRAPH.


Study, search, think, and experiment for yourselves. So
only can you find the light that will make your particular life
a living reality. To accept a ready-made belief blindly is to
commit mental апа moral suicide. You must slay the delu-
sions, the constrictive forces by which you find yourself sur-
rounded when you start on your search for light. You must
fight and conquer the dragons of habit and custom which
stultify your spiritual consciousness; kill them and wash
yourself in their blood, like the heroes of old. You must fail,
and fall, and then rise again; you must strip yourself of all
idolatrous shams, until you find the vivifying idea or light
which shall render your life fruitful. Басһ man or woman
must do this for him or herself, This is the teaching of the
Brothers of the Rosy Cross, and it is the only living truth,
for it has no finality; and the Nemesis of all reformers is
finality.


58


But this truth has never more than half dawned upon the
world ; the leader of each wave of evolution looks upon those
who went before him as having erred. But the Heroic Man
is always right for the time he lives in. Dante was right in
the age when Catholicism was a living force; Shakespere
was right when feudalism was a living force. So Luther was
right when only the husk of a religion was left, and Cromwell
was in the right when the belief in the divine right of kings
had died out in his race.

When we have found the constructive faith that has the
inherent force to carry us onwards, we shall be right. But
what that is, only the heart of each man can tell him.

In the midst of the Renaissance, through the Reformation,
and Civil Wars. and after the narrowing fights of the
schoolnen. Bacon called on all men to weigh and consider
for themselves.

Vaughan was echoing this cry when he hurled abuse at
the critic and exalted the artist and craftsman. for Aristotle
must ever be the type of the former, as Plato is the type of
the latter.

But we must not forget in reading the works of Vaughan,
that the dawn of experimental science had scarcely appeared
when they were written. For much that is a commonplace
to us, would have been considered a miracle at that time;
and we must appreciate the vigour of his intellect when we
find him saying so much in 1655 that is still being said by
those who have thought out for themselves a complete theory
of life based upon a clear knowledge of its possibilities and
its limitations. Nota little of Vaughan’s wisdom might be
well accepted by those who study the metaphysical side of
lite; but who disdain to put in practice any of the theories
they are so busy in promulgating.

For, as he says, “ without effect, Philosophy is useless and
not to be numbered among our necessities.”


59


PARAGRAPH XV.


I have digressed thus far to correct this scabby
sheep, who hath spoiled a numerous flock; and the
rather, because of a late creeping attempt of some of
his friends, who acknowledge him their Dictator, and
the father of their human wisdom, and such indeed he
is. But when they tell us, who write against him, that
we do but restore old heresies, when indeed we oppose
an atheist, and one that denied the creation of the
world, and the dear immortality of our souls: they
must give us leave to be a little angry with them, since
we must lay the heretic at their doors, for they are the
men that maintain him. In the mean time, if they are
in earnest and think us guilty of any heresy, let them
publicly show wherein, and we shall not fail to give
them an account of our sense and their misinterpreta-
tions. For our part, we had not troubled them at this

time had not one of them darkly and

T. P. timorously signified, that we teach a new

physic, new philosophy, and new divinity.

To whom I shall return no answer but this: that before

he undertakes to judge what philosophy or divinity is

new, he should first endeavour to understand the old.

But this is a step out of my way, and that I may
return.


PARAGRAPH XVI.


I shall now resume my discourse on Earth and
Water. and those sure are sensible substances, not
Universals and chimeras, such as the Peripatetics fancy,
when they couple Nature and Nothing.


PARAGRAPH ХУІІ.


By earth, I understand not this impure faeculent
body, on which we tread, but a more simple pure
element, namely, the natural central salt nitre. This
salt is fixed or permanent in the fire, and it is the
sulphur of Nature, by which she retains and congeals
her mercury. When these two meet, I mean the pure
earth and the water, then the earth thickens the water,
and on the contrary, the water subtilates the earth, and
from these two there riseth a third thing, not so thick
as earth, not so thin as water, but of a mean, viscous
complexion, and this is called mercury, which is
nothing else but a composition of water and salt. For
we must know, that these two are the prime materials
of Nature, without which she can make no sperm or
seed; nor is that all, for when the seed is made, it will
never grow to a body, nor can it be resolved and dis-
posed to a further generation, unless these two are
present and also co-operate with it. This we may see all


the year round by a frequent and daily experience, for


61


when it rains, this heavenly water meets with the
nitre that isin the earth, and dissolves it, and the nitre
with his acrimony sharpens the water, so that this
nitrous water fertilises all the seeds that are in the
ground; and thus solution is the key of generation, not
only in our art but in Nature also, which is the art of
God. We need not speak much more of the earth, for
these few words, if rightly understood, are sufficient,
and carry in them a deeper sense than an ordinary
reader will perceive. I know there is another Solar
Oriental Earth, which is all golden and sulphurous and
yet is not gold, but a base contemptible thing that costs.
nothing, for it may be had for the taking up. This is
the earth of Aethiopia, that hath all colours in it: this
is that Androdamas of Democritus, the green Duenech
and Sulphur that never touched the fire, which if it be
resolved, then it is our glassy Azoth, or vitriol of Venus.
philosophical.


COMMENTS ON THE SEVENTEENTH PARAGRAPH.


By earth our author understands nitre, salt-petre, etc. It
may be suggestive to point out that in all alchemical receipts
we find nitre and sea-salt (symbolised by a circle divided by
a vertical or a horizontal line respectively), as the two essen-
tial constituents of the materia magica. And that aqua
regia or the acid which alone can resolve gold, is made of a
mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acids.

The Solar Oriental Earth is probably orpiment or some
mixture of antimony, for although pure antimony is of little


62


nse in transmutation there is no doubt that it contains,
under certain conditions, native properties not to be found
in other substances.


PARAGRAPH XVIIL


This is enough as to the nature of the earth, and now
we will speak of the water. This element is the
deferent, or Vehiculum of all influences whatsoever : for
what efflux so ever it be that proceeds from the terres-
trial centre, the same ascends and is carried up in her
to the air. Andon the contrary all that comes from
Heaven descends in her to the earth, for in her belly
the inferior and superior natures meet and mingle, nor
can they be manifested without a singular artifice.
Hence it 1s that whatsoever is pure in the earth, all
that she receives from the water: and here I mean such
pure substances as are called by the philosophers
Decomposita; for the eagle leaves her egg, that is to
say, the water leaves her Limosity in the earth, and
this limosity is connected into nitre, and to other
innumerous minerals. We have formerly told you of
two suns or fires, the celestial and the central. Now
both these dispense their effluxions, or influences, and
they meet in the vapour of the water; for the Vulcan,
or earthly sun, makes the water ascend to the region of
the air, and here the water is spread under the superior
fires, for she is exposed to the eye of the sun, and to
the pointed ejaculations of all the fixed stars and


63


planets, and this in a naked, rarefied, opened body. The
air, ofa truth, isthat temple, where inferiors are married
to their superiors ; for to this place the heavenly light
descends, and is united to the aereal oleous humidity,
which is hid in the belly of the water; this light being
hotter than the water, makes her turgid and vital, and
increaseth her seminal viscous moisture; so that she is
ready to depose her sperm or limosity, were she but
united to her proper male. But this cannot be unless
she returns to her own country, I mean the earth, for
here the collastrum, or male resides. To this purpose
she descends hither again, and immediately the male
lays hold upon her, and his Негу sulphureous substance
unites to her hmosity. And here observe that this
sulphur is the father in all metallic generations, for
he gives the masculine fiery soul, and the water gives
the body, namely, the lmosity or heavenly aqueous
nitre, whereof the body, by coagulation is made. We
must know, moreover, that in this sulphur there is an
impure extraneous heat, which gnaws and corrodes
this watery Venus, endeavouring toturn her to an impure
sulphur, such as his own body is; but this cannot be,
because of the heavenly seed or light hid in the aqueous
nitre, which will permit no such thing, for as soon as
the sulphureous terrestrial heat begins to work, so soon
it awakes and stirs up the heavenly light, which, being
now fortified with the masculine tincture, or pure fire
of the sulphur, begins to work on its own body, namely,
on the aqueous nitre, and separates from it, the feculent


64


extraneous parts of the sulphur, and so remains by
itself a bright celestial metalline body. Observe then,
that the tincture or soul of the sulphur cannot be
regenerated in its own impure body, but it must forsake
that dark and earthy carcase, and put on a new purified
body before it can be united to the light of Heaven.
This new body springs out of the water, for the water
brought it down from Heaven, and certainly by water
and spirit we must be all regenerated; which made
some learned divines affirm that the element of water
was not cured, but only that of the earth. Nor can
І here omit the doctrine of St. John, who makes the
water one of those three witnesses which attest God
here on earth. And much to this purpose is that
speech of St. Paul: How that God in times past
suffered all nations to walk in their own ways, but
nevertheless (saith he), he left not himself without a
witness, inasmuch as he gave them rain from Heaven,
etc.

The benedictions or blessings that descend from God,
are not a form of words, like the benedictions of men ;
they are all spirit and essence, and their Deferents are

natural visible substances, and these are the

Gen. blessings which the Patriarch wished to his
son: ‘God give thee of the dew of Heaven

from above, and of the fatness of the earth from
beneath.” Не was not ignorant of those blessings,
which the God of Nature had enclosed in those natural
things; and therefore He saith in the same place:


65


“ The smell of my son is like the smell of a field, which
the Lord hath blessed.” And St. Paul in his epistle to
the Hebrews tells us: “ That the earth, which drinketh
in the rain, that cometh oft upon it, receiveth blessing
from God: but that which beareth thorns and briars is
rejected and nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be
burnt.”


COMMENTS UPON THE EIGHTEENTH PARAGRAPH.


The whole of this paragraph is worthy of the most attentive
study, and may be interpreted on all planes, with advantage
to the student of occultism. Taking for instance the


Natural. ; Philosophical. Religious


Passion (expansion) | Fire The flash of an idea Enthusiasm,impulse
Intuition (instinct) Water Creative imagination Aspiration
(Nourishing the idea)
Vehicle (the medium) | Air | Formulative intelligence | Emotional energy
(The word)
The nourisher (the | Earth : The completed work Complete commun-
manifestor) i ion


The three alchemical principles may be taken as the
principles of centrifugal, centripetal and circulatory motion ;
or as corroding, penetrating, and preserving, according to
the commonly understood characteristics of sulphur, mercury
and salt.


66


PARAGRAPH XIX.


But to explain what this blessing is, we remember
we have written elsewhere, that water is of

Anthrop. a double complexion, circumferential and
central. In the circumference she is crude,

volatile and phlegmatic ; but in the centre she is better
concocted, viscous, aereal, and fiery. This central part
is soft and saltish, outwardly white and lunar, but in-
wardly red and solar, nor can it be well extracted
without a lunar or solar magnet, whose proper element
it is, and with which it has a wonderful sympathy.
Hence that obscure saying of the philosophers, who
when they describe unto us their mercury, give it this
character as most natural, Quod adhaeret corporibus.
That it adheres to the bodies or metals. And as
Pythagoras saith in the Turba, Suum absque igne con-
sequitur socium. And therefore it is written in the
same book, Magna est propinquitas inter magnesiam
et ferrum. We see indeed by a vulgar experience, that
if any ordinary stone stands long but in common water
there sticks to it a certain limosity, which the water
deposeth. But notwithstanding all this, and all they
say, we must needs affirm, that even their mercury
adheres not to the vulgar metals; and in this word
mercury, as in all other terms, they are not a little
ambiguous and subtle. There is indeed a mystery of
theirs in water, and a knotty one, with which many


67


learned men have been gravelled; and now since we
have mentioned it, we care not much if we speak
soberly of it.


PARAGRAPH ХХ,


There is nothing so frequent, and indeed nothing so
considerable in their books as fire and water, but the
reciprocal and confused use of both terms, puzzles
much, as when they tell us that their water is their
fire. Of this they have written so strangely, that I have
sometimes been angry with them; but amongst them
all, I found one had a good will to satisfy me. This
author confessed he miscarried two hundred times, not-
withstanding his knowledge of the true matter, and this
because he did not know the fire or agent by which the
matter is altered. These misfortunes of his own moved
him it seems, to a commiseration of posterity; but I
must needs affirm he hath taken his liberty, and
expressed his own mind after his own way. ‘Our fire
(saith he) is mineral, equal, continual; it vapours not
unless the heat be too great ; it participates of sulphur;
it dissolves, calcines, and congeals all; it is artificial to
find, and not chargeable, and it is taken elsewhere than
from the matter.” To all this he adds that at last,
whereof he would have us take notice. ‘This fire
(saith he) is not altered or transmuted with the matter.”
He thought certainly he had spoken enough, and truly
so he hath but it is to such as know it already.


68


COMMENTS UPON THE TWENTIETH PARAGRAPH.


Deals with the nature of philosophical fire, that it is moist
and invisible as the heat of a hot-bed or forcing-house; ог a
humid, tepid fire, blood warm.

There are different degrees of heat for the black, white,
and red stages of the work, but the first must be gentle and
moist. Here again we have the symbolism of thought and
gentle melancholy, purity, and finally practical power.


PARAGRAPH ХХІ,


For my own part I have found a certain mineral
stinking water, which partakes of the nature of sulphur,
and whose preparation is artificial, which is not of the
essential parts of the matter, but accidental and extra-
neous, which vapours not unless it be overheated, which
dissolves, calcines, and congeals all, but is not con-
gealed; for it is expelled at last by the fire of nature,
and goes offin windy fumes. This menstruous sulphu-
reous fire against nature hath taught me how natural
our work is; for it doth that here, which common
water doth in the great world. In this respect it is
called of some philosophers phlegma, ros, aqua
nubium; not certainly that it is such, and therefore let
us not deceive ourselves with misconstructions. He
that would know the reason of those terms, let him
take this account from a most learned philosopher.
Aqua Nubium vocatur (saith he) quia distillata, est


69


velus ros Maii, tenuissimarum partium. Est quoque
eadem aqua acetum acerrimum, quod corpus fecit
merum spiritum. Ut enim acetum diversarum quali-
tatum est, nempe ut in profundum penetret, et astrin-
gat, sit haec aqua solvit, et coagulat, non autem
coagulatur, quia non est de subjecto proprio. Thus
much as to the terms, and now let us return to the
thing itself. I said this fire effects that in the glass
which common water doth in the great world; for as
this phlegmatic element coagulates not, nor is it at all
diminished, notwithstanding that infinite number of
individuals which Nature still produceth, even so it is
so in our work; for our water also alters not, though
the matter be altered in her belly, and our very princi-
ples generated there, namely, sulphur and mercury
philosophical. Nor should any man wonder that I
afirm common water to be incoagulable by heat at
least, for in this I speak not unadvisedly. I know
there are in water some natures coagulable, but they
are not parts of the water, but are other elements ; nor
will I deny but some phlegm, nay, a very great quan-
tity, and sometimes all, may be retained by mixture
with other natures, and seem to be coagulated into
stones, and those sometimes transparent; but coagula-
tion in this sense, namely, by mixture of parts, as in
meal and water, I mind not; but by coagulation I
understand a transmutation of the substance of mere
water into earth or air, and this in simple water cannot
be. I know there is a water, that of itself, without all


7O


extraneous additions will coagulate in a soft heat toa
fusible salt more precious than gold; but this is not any
water that the eye sees, but another invisible humidity,
which is indeed everywhere, sed non videtur (saith
Sendivow) donec artifici placeat. This might satisfy
as to this point, but I will add something more, lest
I speak without reason, especially to those, who are
not willing to allow others a better judgments than
they have themselves.


COMMENTS UPON THE TWENTY-FIRST
PARAGRAPH.


Deals with the putrefying agent as a centrifugal energy,
for until the elements have fallen out among themselves the
celestial influence cannot descend.

Until we are conscious of our present imperfections, we
cannot receive the perfecting influence.


PARAGRAPH XXII.


The commerce that is maintained between Heaven
and earth by the ascent and volatility of water may
sufficiently inform us of what dangerous consequence,
the coagulation of this element would be. It is im-
probable then that the wise god of Nature should make
that humidity coagulable, whose very use and office
requires it should be otherwise; for if in the essence
of water, as it is simple water, there were an astrin-


7I


gent congealing taculty, it would by degrees attain to a
total fixation, and then there could be no further
generation, either of sperms or bodies; reason for it is
this, if the water were fixed there would be no vapour
or cloud, and there being no vapour there could be no
sperm, for the elements cannot meet to make the sperm
but in a vapour. For example, the earth cannot
ascend, unless the water be first rarefied, for in the
belly of the water is the earth carried up: and if the
earth ascends not, having put off her gross body and
being subtilated and purged with the water, then will
not the air incorporate with it, for the moisture of the
water introduceth the air into the rarefied and dissolved
earth. And here again as the water reconciled the air
to the earth, so doth the air reconcile the water to the
fire, as if it would requite one courtesy with another;
for the air with its unctuosity and fatness introduceth
the fire unto the water, the fire following the air, and
sticking to it as to its fuel and element. It remains
now, that we observe, that the vapour of the water
was the locus or matrix, wherein the other three ele-
ments did meet, and without which they had never
come together; for this vapour was the deferend that
carried up the pure virgin earth to be married to the
sun and the moon, and now again she brings her down
in her belly impregnated with the milk of the one and
the blood of the other, namely, with air and fire, which
principles are predominant in those two superior lumi-
naries. But some wise ones, they argue and tell me,


72


that this vapour being thus impregnated may now be
coagulated, and fixed, by help of those hot principles
of air and fire. То this I answer that the viscous
seminal part of the water may, but the phlegm never,
and I will show as much by example. When this
vapour is fully impregnated it stays no longer in that
region, but returns presently to the earth from which it
ascended. But how doth it return? But

Lumen де Certainly not in a violent stormy precipita-
lumine. tion like rain, but as I have written else-
where, it steals down invisibly and silently ;

even if it be a vapour, such as І speak of, In quo est
imaginatum semen astrale certi ponderis, then it is
neither heard of nor seen till а long time after. But
to proceed in what I have promised to do, I shall
instance in common dew: for dew hath in it some small
dose of the star fire. We see therefore that this
humidity comes down silently, for its enclosed fire
keeps it rarefied in the form of air, and will not suffer
it to condense to water at that height as the vapour of
rain doth, but when it is descended near the earth it
mingles with other crude vapours, and borrowing from
them a great quantity of phlegm settles at last into
drops. But before we go any further let us here


consider those words of the son of Sirach. ‘ Look
(saith he) on all the works of the Most High, and
there are two and two, one against the other.” In this


he agrees with that little fragment which goes under
the name of Moses, where God teacheth him thus.


73


Scias, quod unicuique Creaturae, et compar, et con-
trarium creavi. I will not peremptorily affirm that
Moses is the author of this piece, or that God
taught him in those very words, but I affirm that
those words express the truth of God, and point at
some great mysteries of His wisdom. Nor will I here
omit a circumstance, namely, that this piece hath
in it some Hebrew words, and this proves that the
author was a Jew if not Moses. But to pass by the
author and come to the sense; І say that God created
water to oppose it to the earth, and this appears by
their different complexions and qualities; for the earth
is gross and solid, the water, subtil and fluid; and the
earth hath in her the coagulating, astringent power, as
the water hath partly in it the softening dissolving
faculty. The earth then shuts up herself and in herself
the fire so that there can be no generation or vegeta-
tion, unless the earth be opened, that the fire may be
at liberty to work. This we may see in a grain of corn,
where the astringent earthly faculty hath bound up all
the other elements, and terminated them to a dry com-
pacted body. Now this body,as long as it is dry, or as
Our Saviour saith, as long as it abideth alone; that is
to say as long as it is without water, so long it can bear
no fruit ; but if it falls into the ground and dies, that is
to say, if it be dissolved there by the humidity of
Heaven (for death is but dissolution) then it will bring
forth much fruit, as Our Saviour testifieth. It 15 the
water then that dissolves, and life followeth the disso-


74


lution ; for no sooner is the body opened, but the spirit
stirs in it, perceiving in the dissolvent or dewy water,
another spirit, to which he desires to be united. This
spirit is the air enclosed in the dew or water, which air
is called in the philosopher’s books Aqua maris nostri,
aqua vitae manus non madefaciens. But who will
believe that there is a dry water hid in the moist ?
certainly few: and this Sendivow tells us of some
Sophisters of his acquaintance. Noncredebant aquam
esse іп mari nostro, et tamen philosophi videri volebant.
І have myself known many such philosophers, and
of whom I say the very same. But to return to our
business; it is called aqua vitae, because this air
involves іп itself a fire, which is life Universal: not yet
specified, and therefore it agrees with all particular
lives, and is amicable to all kinds of creatures.

Now the particular specified fire, or life of the grain,
which is the vegetable magnet, attracts to himself the
universal fire or life, which is hid in the water, and
with the fire he attracts the air which is the vestiment
or body of the fire, called by the Platonics, currus
Anima, and sometimes Nimbus ignis descendentis.
Here then is the ground upon which the whole mystery
of natural augmentation and multiplication is built;
for the body of the grain of corn is augmented with the
aliment of air, not simple but decomponded, which air
is carried in the water, and isa kind of volatile sweet
salt; but the fire or life of the grain, is fortified with
the universal fire, and this fire is involved in the air, as


75


the air is in the water. And here we may observe that
it is not water only that conduces to the generation or
regeneration of things, but water and fire; that is
water and spirit, or water that hath life in it and
this, if rightly understood, is a great manuduction to
divinity.


COMMENTS UPON THE TWENTY-SECOND
PARAGRAPH.


It is not the vehicle that coagulates, but the matter
borne in the vehicle. Here it will be well to remember the
Qabalistic definitions of the parts of the Soul. The Earth
or The Nephesh is the aura or lower astral. The Water or
The Neshamah is the throne of the spirit. The Fire or The
Chiah,and Neshamah form the Wheels and the Throne of the
Incarnating Ego (Yechidah) or the real spirit of the Triple
Fire. While the air, or the human Ego, is the meeting place
of the other forces.


PARAGRAPH XXIII.


To conclude, the sum of all we would say is this, the
roots and seeds of all vegetables are traced in the
earth, in the midst of this dewy fountain, as a lamp is
placed in the midst of oil; and the fire or life of the
seeds attracts to itself the abryssach or leffa, I mean
the juice or gum of the water, as the fire of a lamp
attracts the oil that is round about it. Now when all
the air is drawn out of the water then the traction


76


ceaseth, and concoction or transmutation begins, but if
the crude water, which was the vehiculum of the air
stays with the seeds, then it hinders concoction, and
therefore the sun and the archeus jointly expel her, so
that she takes wing and returns to the region of the
air, where again she fills her belly with that starry
milk, and then descends as before. This is the reason
why there is in nature such a vicissitude of showers
and sunshine, for the showers bring down the aereal
nutriment, and when the plants have attracted it, then
the sunshine calls up the crude water, which otherwise
would hinder digestion and coagulation. This then is
the trade that common water drives, but if she could be
coagulated, this trade would cease, and all life would
cease with it. I have for many years looked upon
her as on a bird that flies to her nest, and from it
again, feeding her young ones, and fetching food for
them. Now is this a new fancy of mine, for some
learned men considered as much before; in which
respect that milky moisture which is found in her
crystal breasts is called by some of them Lac vola-
tilium, the milk of birds, and they have left it written,
that birds do bring their stone unto them.


PARAGRAPH XNIV.


To make an end, observe that there is a great differ-
ence between this common water, and our chymical
ater or fire, mentioned formerly out of Pontanus, for


77


our water helps coagulation and this hinders it. For
if the phlegm, or crude spirit stays with the air, the air
will never congeal; and therefore said Sendivow,
omnis aqua congelatur calido, si est sine spiritu, and
thus have I demonstrated my position, namely that


common water is not congealable.


PARAGRAPH XXV.


Nothing now remains, not is there anything hinders,
but that we may safely and infallibly conclude, that
simple crude water feeds nothing; but the gum of
congealable part of it feeds all things; for this is the
astral balsam and the elemental, radical humidity,
which being compounded of inferiors and superiors, is
a restorative both of spirits and bodies. This is the
general vital element which God Himself provides for
all His creatures, and which is yearly produced and
manifested in the elements, by the invisible operation
of his spirit, that works all in all. This hath in it the
whole anatomy of Heaven and earth, whose belly is
full of light and life, and when it enters into these
lower parts of the world, it overcasts them with a
certain virility, makes them break forth into flowers,
and presents us with something that is very like to the
paradise we have lost. In a word this is no human
confection, but a thing prepared by the Divine Spirit ;


78


nor is it made for vegetables only, but for man also,
whom God did sometimes feed with it. This the
Scripture tells us, whose authority is above Aristotle
and Galen; for thus I read in Exod. “Апа

Chap. xvi. it came to pass that at even, the quails came
13.1415. up and covered the camp, and in the morn-
ing the dew lay round about the host. And
when the dew that lay was gone up, behold upon the
face of the wilderness there lay around small thing, as
small as the hoar frost on the ground, and when the
children of Israel saw it, they said опе to another, it 15
manna; for they wist not what it was, and Moses said
unto them ‘this is the bread which the Lord hath given
’” Every child knows that dew settles into
round drops; and here Moses tells us that when the
phlegmatic humidity was gone up, the congelative part
that stayed behind, was a round small thing, for it
retained still the figure of the drop, in whose belly it
was hid. This coagulative partis oleous and fusible,
and with this also the Scripture accords, telling us,
that when the sun waxed hot, it melted. It is with all


you to eat.


of a most facile quick alteration, and therefore easily
transmutable or convertible into any form; and for
this reason Moses charged the people to leave none of
it till the morning ; but some of them (saith the text) left
of it till the morning, and it bred worms and stank;
whence we may gather, that it is in some degree
animal. We feel then that the Spirit of God is still
busy with water, and to this hour moves not only upon


79


it but in it, nor do I doubt but this is the ground of
that deep question, which amongst many others God
proposed to Job. “ Hath the rain a father,
Chap.xxxviii, ОС Who hath begotten the drops of dew ?” it
v. 28. 15 worth our observation that the children

of Israel, when they saw this thing (though

they knew it not) said one to another: it is Manna; for
what argues this, but that Manna (as the words im-
ports) was some secret gift of God, which they knew
not, but had formerly heard of by tradition from their
fathers; and perhaps by such a description as Hermes
gives it in the Zaradi, namely, that it ascends from the
earth to Heaven and descends again from Heaven to
the earth; and this might make them call it Manna,
because it descended with the dew. I question not
but Moses knew it well, though the common people
wist not what it was; for the golden calf could not be
burned to powder with common fire, but with the fire
of the altar, which was not that of the kitchen. This
is plain out of the Machabees, where it is written, that
this fire was hid in a pit, and that for many years it
was there kept safe during the captivity. But who is
so mad as to hide common fire in a pit, and to expect
he shall find it there many years after? is it not the
best course to quench it, and rather drown it in a well
than bury it ina pit. We doubt not for our part, but
this fire was far different from the common, and this
the text also tells us, for when it was brought out of
the pit it was not fire, but a thick water. The truth


80


is that this mystery belonged to the Jewish
Magia Church: the priests and prophets having
Adamioa received it from the patriarchs, I mean
from Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
they from Noah, and all of them from Adam, as we
have proved elsewhere. These indeed were the men
that planted the world, and instructed posterity: and
these and none other must be those ancient and first
philosophers, whom Zadith calls Avos Mundi, some of
whose terms are cited by him.


COMMENTS UPON THE TWENTY-FIFTH
PARAGRAPH.


But the gum or jelly of water feeds all things. Manna is а
translation of the Hebrew word Man, meaning occultly the
mixture of the upper and lower waters; the waters of crea-
tion in the chariot of the waters of the floods.

The fire that was hid in the pit, the fire of the altar, may,
of course, have been any inflammable spirit or oil, such ав
spirits of wine, petroleum or a preparation of phosphorus,
limelight or even an application of electrical force. But
there is a deeper meaning to be looked for in the passage
quoted from Maccabees.

This paragraph ends with an apology for the Jews, whom,
it must remembered, were at this time, still looked upon with
loathing by the Christians.


PARAGRAPH XXVI.


We shall now (before we make an end) repeat all we
have said and that in a few words, such as shall be


81


agreeable to Nature and to the parts of the world as
they have been manifested to us by experience.

We have certainly found, that there is nothing above
but the very same is also here beneath, but in a more
gross material complexion; for God hath ordained,
that the gross and corpulent sperm of inferiors, should
afford a body to the animating and subtle influx of
their superiors. Now God hath decreed no union of
sperms but of such as proceed from bodies that are of
the same nature and kind, for his own word bears him
witness that he hates confusion or a mixture of seeds
that are different or ot a diverse kind. Not unadvisably

then did the priests, or (as Proclus tells us,

Levit. xix, the founders of the ancient priesthood
7,19. affirm, Coelum esse in Terra sed modo
Terrestri, et Terram esse in Coelo sed modo

Coelesti; for otherwise they could not be of a kind.
We say therefore, that in this universe, there are four
luminaries, whereof two are coelestial and two are
central. The celestial are the sun and moon, and they
are known to all the world; the central indeed are not
known, and therefore not believed, for the one is over-
cast with earth, and the other with water. In the
centre then of the earth, there is hid a fire, which is of
Nature solar, but more gross than that which is in the
sun; and in the belly of the water, there is carried
a viscous gross air, of a menstrous lunar nature, but
not so bright and subtle as that which is in the moon.
To be short, the central sun casts into the belly of the


82


water a masculine hot salt; and the water receiving it,
adds to it her seminal feminine limosity, and carries it
upon her wings into the region of the air. Thus we
see how the material part of the seed is made, and now
to this body of it the heaven gives life, the moon giving
it spirit, and the sun giving it soul; and thus are the
four lunaries brought together, the superior contribu-
ting that to the seed, which is subtle and vital; and the
inferior that which is corpulent and material. This
seed is carried invisibly in the belly of the wind, and it
is manifested in water, І say in water as clear as crystal,
and out of water it must be drawn, for there is not
under heaven, any other body where it may be found.
I have sought it myself in the common metals, in quick-
silver, in antimone, and in regulus of antimony also in
regulus of Mars, Venus, and Saturn, and of all the
bodies; but I lost my labour, for I sought it where
it was not. All these errors did I run into after I had
known true matter; for having mis-carried in my first
attempts upon it, I left it as a thing untractable; and
this tergiversation of mine, brought me many incon-
veniences. I conceived indeed, that a vitriol made of
those four imperfect bodies, antimony, lead and copper
might be that glassy Azoth of Lullie, whose spirit or
water, he has so magnified in his testament,


COMMENTS UPON THE TWENTY-SIXTH
PARAGRAPH.


We now come to the connecting link between the parts of
this volume. We have here a series of actual quotations
from the Emerald Tablet of Chiram Trismegistus, or as he
is commonly called, Hermes.

Of the four luminaries I may here quote a passage from
our author’s book called Lumen de Lumine.

“< It is most certain that no Astrabolism takes place with-
out some grievous corruption and alteration in the Patient,
for Nature works not but in loose moyst discomposed Elements.
When the Elements fall out among themselves, the Celestial
Fire reconciles them and generates some new Form, seeing
the old one could consist no longer. . . . The body must
be reduced to sperm, which receives the Impress of the
Stars, and must immediately be exposed to the fire of
Nature.’ . . . When she had thus said she took out two
Miraculous Medals. I did not conceive there was in Nature
such glorious substances, she called them the Saphirics of
the Sunand Moon.”

The sun and the moon are the Ccelestial luminaries, but
the central ones are a fire hidden in the earth or nitre, and
an airy lunar nature in the water.

These two mixed natures are known to us as the desires
of the flesh and the phantasies of the imagination: in their
transmutation by consecration of the desires and purifica-
tion of the thoughts, lies the pathway to wisdom.

The will and the imagination of an adept are symbolised
by the Urim and Thummim of the High Priest; with this key
read the paragraph carefully, and it will give you food for
much profitable reflection.


84


PARAGRAPH XXVII.


This indeed clinks finely, and may so swell a young
head as to make him turn poet, and like the Delphic
devil, tell a lie in heroics. No less obstructive to me
was that speech of Parmenides, in the Turba. ‘“ Aes
aut plumbum, pro pinguedine vel nigredine, et stannum
pro liquefactione sumite.” What can this signify at
first sight but Antimony ? and what can this stannum,
that comes from it by liquefaction be, but Regulus.

This made me labour for a long time on this feculent
and unprofitable body, supposing ofa truth, that Regulus
of antimony was white lead or tin philosophical. But
that we be not deceived, all these parables relate to
another mineral, and not to common antimony,

which the Turba condemns in these words.

Cambain Notandum est quod invidi lapidem anti-

Turba. monium nuncupârunt. Note (saith Cambar)

or observe that the envious call the
stone antimony. But what the envious call it,
that certainly it is not and Basil Valentine in his
Currus Triumphalis, which he hath written in the
praise of antimony, tells us: non tantum illi a Deo
concessum est ut in, vel ex Antimonio inventatur
Mercurius philosophicus, primum Ens, Argentum
vivum, et aqua prima metallorum perfectorum, ex qua
sit magnus lapis antiquorum philosophorum, sed hoc
primum Ensin Alio Minerali invenitur, in quo metal-
lica ratione operatio altior est, quam stibii. And the


85


same Basil a little afterwards, speaking of Stella
martis, delivers himself thus: Plerique putarunt hanc
stellam esse materiam veram lapidis philosophorum,
cogitantes se veraciter hoc imaginari, quia natura stel-
lam hanc sponte sua formavit; Ego vero nego; hi viri,
Regia via relicta, per avias rapes, ubi Ibices habitant, et
predatrices Aves nidificant, iter instituunt; non id de-
betur huic stelle, ut materia sit lapidis nobilissimi, licet
іп ео latet medicina optima. It remains then, reader that,
we lay aside ali common metals, as gold, silver, copper,
iron, tin, lead, antimony and quicksilver. For if we
seek the sperm in any of these, we shall never find it,
because we seek it in metallis vulgi, in quibus non est,
as Sendivow hath told us. We must therefore seek
another body, which is not common, nor is it made by
mixture or otherwise, of any metal that is common ;
but is a certain black sulphur made by nature, and
which never touched the fire. This is that body
whereof Albertus Magnus has thus written: Datur in
Rerum natura corpus metallicum quoddam, facilis solu-
tionis, facilisque putrefactionis, si praeparationem ejus
nosti, felix Medicus eris. And after him, his disciple
Thomas Aquinas speaking of the same minera, cites
these notable words out of another philosopher; est
quaedam species metalli, quam gens nunquam invenit.
This is the metal we must seek for and it is hard to
find, because we must not dig to come at it, for if we
know where it is, we need no more but stoop and take
it up gratis. Yet it 15 neither Glauber’s antimony, nor


86
common lead, nor is it a flintstone, not the marle of
Peter Faber, who after he had wearied himself, and
deceived his readers with discourses of antimony, and
sublimate with salts of common metals, sulphur at last
in this Clod, or Marga as he calls it. But to pass by
these fooleries and come to a conclusion: I say that
this black sulphur is the male, which being found, we
are in the next place to seek the female; and here
observe, that God Almighty hath in particular bodies
made no differences of sexes, but only in the animal
kingdom, for in vegetables and minerals there is no
such thing. We see that in grains of corn (suppose of
wheat) there is no division into males and females, for
the truth is they are all males, and God hath allowed
them no female but the universal one, namely water,
whose viscous general seed joining with the particular
seed and spirit that is in the grain, is therewith fer-
mented and congealed into the same nature with the
grain itself, and so propagates and multiplies corn:
even so it is in metals, for every one of them is mascu-
line, sulphureous, choleric, nor hath God ordained that
any of them should propagate and multiply the other
either naturally or artificially though we deny not but
that they may be multiplied by help of that seed,
wherein God hath placed the blessing of multiplication.
In metals then, there is no distinction or differences of
sexes, so that out of them it is impossible to extract
masculine and feminine sperms, for such cannot be
extracted but from bodies that are male or female,


87


which metals are not, for if they were, they would pro-
pagate without art, God having so ordained it. It is
plain then, that metals (being not male and female)
breed within themselves no seed, and by consequence
cannot give which they have not; for the truth is, the
seed whereof they spring, is that general seed of the
elements, namely a certain humidity, which appears
(as Sendivow tells us) in forma aquae pinguis, that is
in the form of a fat water. This water is their seed,
their mother and their female, for of this they were
originally made, and if in this they be again resolved
then the child will attract the mother to it, and convert
her totally to his own nature; and on the contrary, the
spirit of the mother will multiply the spirit of the child
and exalt it to a perfection more than ordinary. This
is the way, and besides it there is none; for there is no
water under Heaven, from what bodies soever it be
extracted, that hath in it the multiplying virtue, but
this one water which God hath blessed. Апа here,
though I seem to speak indifferently of metals, yet do
not I: mind the common, for their spirits have been
mortified in the fire. Take therefore our sulphur which
never touched the fire, and whose whole life is whole in
Him: join this living male to a living female, for in
this (as I have elsewhere intimated) lies all the mystery,
namely in the union of a particular spirit to

Anima the universal, by which means Nature is
Magica. strangely exalted and multiplied. Labour
therefore to unite these two substantially


88


and thoroughly, and thou canst not miss, if thou
knowest the applications; for suffer me to tell thee a
secret; that the application of actives to passives, 1
mean the manner of it, is the greatest difficulty in all
the art. Farewell reader, and enjoy these my labours
which I freely communicate to thee: not I assure thee
out of any design, for I seek not my own glory but that
of God and thy benefit.


COMMENTS UPON THE TWENTY-SEVENTH
PARAGRAPH.


This points out that the only means of multiplying metallic
natures is to apply their sulphurous nature to the universal
feminine fat water; the oxide or tincture of a metal if dealt
with according to art witha careful adjustment of tempera-
ture, may then be treated as a ferment.

But as I have said from the beginning, the author is too
vague for us to derive any clue to practical alchemy from his
work, and I will content myself by pointing out that the
human passions, Pride, Envy, Anger, Sloth, Avarice, Glut-
tony, Lust, have long been associated with the seven gross
metals, and that the oxidised metals may be regarded as
symbolic of their saving virtues, Humility, Love, Patience,
Fortitude, Compassion, Temperance and Chastity.

The Union of a particular to a universal exalts and multi-
plies strongly. Here is the final lesson then. Let us recognise
that only the merging of our human wills with the Universal
Will can result in hastening the day of our perfection. It
we labour against the World’s Will we shall fail, and our
work will vanish from off the face of the earth,


SHORT APPENDIX BY WAY
OF ADMONITION ТО THE READER.


It was not my intention to add anything unto what
has been already written: but when I reflect on those
vexations I have endured myself in the pursuit of this
science, I begin to think I have not said enough. To
be a little more plain, know reader, that whosoever
seeks the philosopher’s mercury in metals, of what kind
soever they be, is already out of the way: for that
philosophic mercury so much talked of, is a water, and
in metal, water there is none; for the sulphur hath not
only congealed it there, but hath withal dried it up.
This is evident in common quicksilver and antimony,
which of all metalline bodies, are the most crude, and
yet as crude as they are, their water is exsiccated by
their fire ; for if we force them into a fume, that fume
settles not to a liquid spirit, but into dried flowers.
This made the philosophers seek a more crude mineral
whose fume was moist, and would settle into water, as
being not yet mastered by the sulphur. Such there
was none but the mother of mercury, or the first matter,


GO


whereof Nature makes the common mercury, and this
also they call quicksilver, and a viscous water, for
such it is. In this minera the mercurial vapour was
not so dry, but it would settle into water, and with this
water, they dissolve the metalline bodies; for the moist
fume of this minera reduced the metalline dry fumes,
so that both turned into one water, and this called
mercury philosophical, and duplicated mercury. In
this point I need not say more, and if they be not
wilfully blind, here is light enough for our metal-
mongers, and especially for those confident roasters of
antimony, who over the smoke of that drug dream of
mysteries, as if they were transported into a certain
capnonancy. Гог my part I deny not but antimony
may be reduced toa mercurial water, though I know
not to what purpose, for neither our mercury nor our
tincture riseth from it, if Basil Valentine may be believed.
True it is, that the philosophers use it, but as a mere
instrument that goes off again, and so they use even
kitchen fire, but it is not their matter or subject, and
much less is it common gold, as some ignorants would
have it. There is indeed another antimony, which is
our sulphur, and the subject of the whole art ; but this
is so hard to find, and when it is found, so hard to
prepare, that it had almost cast me into despair. How-
soever if thou dost seriously consider what I have
written, and what hath fallen from me in some places
with as much purpose as caution, then verily neither
the thing itself not the preparation of it can be hid from


QI


thee. To make an end, know that the philosophers
have two mercuries or waters, the first and second,
their first is the spirit of our antimony and here under-
stand me rightly; their second is that of mercury and
Venus philosophical, and this of itself is all sufficient ;
but to shorten time, the philosophers ferment it with
common gold. І have now spoken more than discre-
tion can well allow of, but the sense of those difficulties
I have met withal, have carried me thus far. Howso-
ever be thou cautious in thy construction, lest the name
of antimony deceive thee, for so thou mayest run into a
fruitless expense of time and substance. This is all I
have to say, and now what use to make of it is іп thy
power; if thou canst believe, it is well; if not, forbear
from this art altogether, or thou wilt live to punish thy
own incredulity.


COMMENTS UPON THE APPENDIX.


I will end as I began by saying, I have read many Alchemical
Treatises, but never one of less use to the practical Alchemist,
than this. At the same time I have come across few occult
works that have helped me morein my search for the secrets
of these Great Adepts—who are the Masters of our Race.

S. S. D. D.


“ Alas, Alas, that all men should possess the Master-soul,
be one with the World-soul, and that possessing it, the
Master-soul should so little avail them.”


The Book of Golden Precepts.


VINIS.
